D. L. Ashliman's Home Page Professor D. L. Ashliman retired May 1, 2000, from the University of Pittsburgh He now conducts his folklore research from southern Utah. He can be contacted at ashliman at hotmail dot com. (Use traditional e-mail punctuation and spacing.) WWW sites Folklinks: Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites . Folktexts: A Library of Folktales, Folklore, Fairy Tales, and Mythology . Germany Discovers America. An annotated bibliography [in progress] of German-American travel narratives, 1800-1918. Monographs Fairy Lore: A Handbook . Westport (Connecticut), New York, and London: Greenwood Press, 2005. ISBN 0-313-33349-1. 229 pages. Folk and Fairy Tales: A Handbook . Westport (Connecticut), New York, and London: Greenwood Press, 2004. ISBN 0-31332810-2. 256 pages. Aesop's Fables . Edited and with an introduction and notes by D. L. Ashliman. Translated by V. S. Vernon Jones. Illustrations by Arthur Rackham. New York: Barnes & Noble Classics, 2003. ISBN 1-59308-062-X. xxxiv, 269 pp. Voices from the Past: The Cycle of Life in Indo-European Folktales , second edition, expanded and revised. Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company, 1995. ISBN 0-7872-1503-1. 495 pages. First edition 1993. Once upon a Time: The Story of European Folktales . Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, External Studies Program, 1994. 235 pages. A Guide to Folktales in the English Language: Based on the Aarne-Thompson Classification System . Bibliographies and Indexes in World Literature , vol. 11. Westport (Connecticut), New York, and London: Greenwood Press, 1987. ISBN 0-313-25961-5. xvi, 384 pages. Designated as an "outstanding reference source" by the American Library Association. Ph.D. dissertation: The American West in Nineteenth-Century German Literature . Rutgers University, 1969. Dissertation Abstracts 2959-A. University Microfilms, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Order number 7000572. v, 288 pp. Recent Articles Archetypes and Motifs in Folklore and Literature: a Handbook . Edited by Jane Garry and Hasan El-Shamy. Armonk (New York) and London: M. E. Sharpe, 2005. "Origins of Inequality," pp. 50-56. "Tabu: Forbidden Chambers," pp. 118-21. "Magic Invulnerability," pp. 154-59. "Wishes," pp. 172-77. "Water Spirits," pp. 210-16. "Identity Tests," pp. 235-42. "Contests Won by Deception," pp. 273-77. "Thief Escapes Detection," pp. 278-82. "Entrance into Girl's (Man's) Room (Bed) by Trick," pp. 289-94. "Step Relatives," pp. 362-67. "Cruel Parents," pp. 391-97. "Cruel Spouses," pp. 398-403. "Incest," pp. 432-41. The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Folktales and Fairy Tales . 3 vols. Edited by Donald Haase. Westport (Connecticut) and London: Greenwood Press, 2008. "Age," pp. 20-21. "Brothers," pp. 140-42. "Chain Tale," p. 176. "Clergy," pp. 215-17. "Cumulative Tale," p. 245. "Editing, Editors," p. 288. "Family," pp. 327-29. "Father," pp. 334-36. "Magic Object," pp. 598-99. "Marriage," pp. 605-607. "Nonsense Tale," pp. 679-80. "Prince," pp. 770-71. "Princess," pp. 771-73. "Punishment and Reward," pp. 786-90. "Soldier," pp. 890-91. "Spinning," pp. 912-16. "Tailor," pp. 936-37. "Twins," p. 999. "Unfinished Tale," pp. 1002-1003. Guest Professorships Universität Augsburg , Germany (1992, 1996, 1997, 1998, 2006). Education University of Utah , B.A. Rutgers University , M.A., Ph.D. Georg-August Universität , Göttingen, Germany. Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität , Bonn, Germany. Updated November 3, 2019. Folklinks: Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites Folklinks Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites © 1996-2020 compiled by D. L. Ashliman as a companion to Folk and Fairy Tales: A Handbook Greenwood Press Linked sites will open in a new window. Return to this page by closing the targeted window. Return to Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Contents Search Engines . Encyclopedias and General Reference Works . Research Libraries . Electronic Text Indexes . Directories of Electronic Text Sites (All Subjects) . Directories of Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites . Libraries of Electronic Texts . General Fairy-Tale Sites . Individual Stories and Types . Film and Fairy Tales . Storytelling . For Children, Parents, and Teachers . Organizations and Journals . Foreign-Language Sites . Danish/Norwegian Dutch French German Russian Turkish Search Engines The best tool for Internet research is not a comprehensive list of favorite sites, but rather a repertory of a few efficient search engines and reliable indexes, together with a basic understanding of how to use them. The starting place for almost any Internet search is Google . This site's use of keywords is simple and efficient. Word groups set off by quotation marks are treated as single units. Thus the search term "fairy tales" will find only web sites containing that phrase, but not the same words appearing separately. The keywords "little mermaid" copenhagen will find sites containing Copenhagen and Little Mermaid in any order, but Little Mermaid must appear as an unbroken phrase. Google, like most search engines, is not case sensitive; lower-case letters can substitute for upper-case ones, and vice versa. Although Google is very thorough, one can usually locate further sites by conducting the same search with additional engines. The following are proven performers: Excite . Lycos . Teoma . Webcrawler . Yahoo! . Return to the table of contents . Encyclopedias and General Reference Works Folktale and fairy-tale researchers should not overlook general encyclopedias as sources for basic information about authors, collectors, movements, genres, and the like. The user-generated Internet encyclopedia Wikipedia contains a wealth of information and is generally reliable. Return to the table of contents . Research Libraries Online catalogs of large libraries are excellent sources of bibliographic information about published folktale books. However, please note that these catalogs do not provide access to the books themselves. The following electronic catalogs are well designed and provide information about immense collections: COPAC , a union catalog combining the resources the largest university libraries in the United Kingdom and Ireland plus the British Library. Library of Congress . Of special interest at the Library of Congress is the Folklife Sourcebook . Indiana University Libraries . One of the world's largest folklore collections. Melvyl , the online catalog of the University of California Libraries. Return to the table of contents . Electronic Text Indexes Thousands of books and shorter pieces, many of them relevant to folk and fairy-tale studies, are available gratis on the Internet as electronic texts. The most comprehensive index of such texts in English is the University of Pennsylvania's Online Books , which currently lists over 20,000 titles. It also includes links to numerous foreign-language electronic libraries. To assist in finding a desired text among their thousands of listed titles, Online Books includes a number of search tools. Two hints for browsing: Search for the word fairy, folk, folktale, folktales, tale, or tales in the title field . Note that the search function uses only whole words, so a search for tale will not find a title with the plural form tales. Browse in the subject-matter section under the Library of Congress classification GR , folklore. The Online Books data base is also available through the World eBook Library , which includes links to a large number of reference works (dictionaries, multilingual dictionaries, thesauri, encyclopedias), academic libraries worldwide, and other research tools. The Digital Book Index combines and integrates the free books listed through Online Books with commercial titles available for a fee. The subject-matter search tool is very useful. A search under the category "folklore, myths, legends, fables" yielded over 100 titles. This site requires a sign-on procedure, but its use is without charge. Return to the table of contents . Libraries of Electronic Texts Each of following electronic text libraries contains a substantial collection of works relating to folk and fairy tales. Arthur's Classic Novels includes numerous traditional and literary fairy tales, mostly borrowed from other Internet sites then attractively reformatted. The Baldwin Project , according to its mission statement, brings yesterday's classics to today's children. It currently lists nearly 2,000 stories, many of them folk and fairy tales. The site is indexed by grade level, genre (including fables, fairy tales, and legends), book title, and other categories. The texts are handsomely formatted and easy to read. Bartleby.com is one of the pioneering electronic text sites. Its strong points include a very useful search mechanism, a large collection of integrated reference works, plus a good assortment of carefully edited classics. Bibliomania lists more than 2,000 classic texts. Children's Books Online (the Rosetta Project) is a large collection of illustrated children's books, mostly from the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The books are reproduced as single-page, full-color image files, resulting in accurate and appealing replicas of the originals. An added attraction are the text-file translations of many of the stories into various languages. ClassicReader.com contains books and short stories by more than 200 authors. The children's section includes numerous collections of traditional fairy tales, and the short-story section contains many literary fairy tales. The Electronic Text Center at the University of Virginia is a pioneer in the editing and distribution of electronic texts in various formats. Included in the section for young readers are many folk and fairy-tale related items. Folktexts , compiled and edited by D. L. Ashliman, University of Pittsburgh, offers a variety of folklore and mythology texts, arranged in groups of closely related stories. The Hockliffe Project is centered around the Hockliffe Collection of early British children's books held by De Montfort University in Leicester and Bedford, England. The books are scanned into image files, rather than text files, yielding exact replicas of each page. The Kellscraft Studio specializes in illustrated books from the period 1890-1920, including many fairy-tale collections. Take special notice of two books beautifully illustrated by Blanche McManus: The True Mother Goose and Told in the Twilight. The Perseus Digital Library , sponsored by Tufts University, is an extensive and well-engineered site combining images, texts, and scholarship. The principal fields represented are Greek and Roman civilization and the English Renaissance. Of special interest to students of folktales are the fables of Phaedrus. Project Gutenberg , begun in 1971, is the Internet's oldest producer of free electronic books, and with over 6,000 online books is among the largest. With the help of many volunteers the library is expanding at the rate of about one new book per day. Project Gutenberg's text-only and easily downloadable files are among the most carefully scanned and proof-read digital texts available. Sacred Text Archive . This remarkable site's name does not say it all. In addition to housing the scriptures of many religions, it contains mythology and folklore texts from around the world. Each of the following topics, selected from a list at the lower left side of the site's index page, yields a number of folklore texts: African, Americana, Australia, Buddhism, Celtic, Egyptian, England, Greek/Roman, Hinduism, Judaism, Legends/Sagas (includes the Thousand and One Nights ), Native American, Pacific, and Tolkien. Return to the table of contents . General Fairy-Tale Sites Fairy Tales, Folk Tales, and Mythology WebRing . A collection of sites linked into a ring. SurLaLune Fairy Tale Pages is an attractive, extensive, and well-organized site maintained by Heidi Anne Heiner. Included are essays, illustrations, annotated texts, links to outside sites, and a discussion bulletin board. Return to the table of contents . Individual Stories and Types Cinderella: A Bibliography . A thorough and scholarly annotated bibliography of texts, analogues, criticism, modern versions, parodies -- ranging from ancient folklore through recent popular culture, modern scholarship and pornographic films. Organized by Russell A. Peck, University of Rochester. Cinderella . A selection of folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 510A and related stories about persecuted heroines, edited by D. L. Ashliman. The Annotated Cinderella , from the SurLaLune Fairy Tales by Heidi Anne Heiner. Noodleheads . The wisdom of fools in folktales. Return to the table of contents . Film and Fairy Tales A good place to begin research on the use of fairy-tale topics in film and television is the Internet Movie Database . Tom Davenport is an American filmmaker who has created a successful series of short films placing familiar Grimm fairy tales in settings from the American south. Return to the table of contents . Storytelling Storyteller.net . A center for news, essays, texts, and contacts for storytellers. Return to the table of contents . For Children, Parents, and Teachers Andersen Fairy Tales , in English or French. Animated Tall Tales , featuring the exploits of Paul Bunyan. Grimm Fairy Tales , in English or French. Myths, Folktales, and Fairy Tales , resources for teachers of grades 1-8, sponsored by Scholastic, Inc. Internet Public Library: Story Hour , sponsored by the University of Michigan. Return to the table of contents . Organizations and Journals American Folklife Center . at the Library of Congress. American Folklore Society . Folklore Fellows at the Kalevala Institute of the University of Turku, Finland. An important contribution of this organization is its ongoing monograph series Folklore Fellows' Communications , established in 1910. Folklore Society (UK) . Founded in 1878, this is one of the first organizations in the world devoted to the study of traditional culture. Marvels & Tales , a journal of fairy-tale studies. Modern Language Association of America . Founded in 1883, this organization promotes the study of languages and literature. Return to the table of contents . Foreign-Language Sites Danish/Norwegian H. C. Andersen . Links to Andersen's works in Danish. This site is sponsored by the Royal Library (det Kongelige Bibliotek) of Denmark. H. C. Andersen-Centret . A treasure trove of information from the H. C. Andersen Center in Odense, Denmark. Click the British flag for an English-language version of this site. Norske Folkeeventyr , the Norwegian texts of 152 tales by Asbjørnsen and Moe, sponsored by Project Runeberg. Return to the table of contents . Dutch Vlaamse Volksverhalenbank . A collection of Flemish folk legends. Return to the table of contents . French A la découverte de Jean de La Fontaine . Annotated texts of La Fontaine's fables, plus much supplementary information. Contes de Perrault . Texts of ten fairy tales by Charles Perrault. Il était une fois... Les contes de fées . A very attractive, well engineered, and authoritative fairy-tale study, sponsored by the Bibliothèque nationale de France. Les contes de Madame d'Aulnoy . A biography of Marie-Cathérine le Jumel de Barneville de la Motte, Comtesse d' Aulnoy, plus the texts of twelve of her tales. Return to the table of contents . German Europäische Märchengesellschaft . The European Fairy-Tale Society. Märchenlexikon , edited by Kurt Derungs. Projekt Gutenberg-DE . A massive German-language site sponsored by the news magazine Der Spiegel and containing thousands of electronic texts. Folk and fairy tale collections within the Projekt Gutenberg-DE include: Brüder Grimm . Fabel . Märchen . Sage, Legende, Überlieferung . Sagen.at . A large collection of legends and folktales, mostly from Austria, edited by Wolfgang Morscher, University of Innsbruck. Return to the table of contents . Russian Russian Folklore . Return to the table of contents . Turkish Uysal-Walker Archive of Turkish Oral Narrative , Texas Tech University. An immense collection of Turkish folklore, including many tales translated into English. Return to the table of contents . Revised October 27, 2020. Abducted by Aliens Abducted by Aliens Edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2024 The aliens in the legends that follow are not those from outer space, but rather underground people from our own earth: fairies, trolls, elves, and the like. Contents The Recovered Bride (Ireland). Taken by the Good People (Ireland). Twenty Years with the Good People (Ireland). Jamie Freel and the Young Lady (Ireland). Kidnappers (Ireland). Ethna the Bride (Ireland). Ned the Jockey (Wales). The Old Man and the Fairies (Wales). A Visit to Fairyland (Wales). Four Years in Faery (Isle of Man). The Lost Wife of Ballaleece (Isle of Man). On Fairies (England). The Lost Child (England). Thomas of Erceldoune (Scotland). Tamlane (Scotland). The Fairies' Hill (Scotland). The Stolen Lady (Scotland). Touching the Elements (Shetland Islands). The Aged Bride (Denmark). The Troll in Mæhred (Denmark). The Sea Nymph (Sweden). Link to another collection of legends about humans who are spirited away by underground people: Midwife (or Godparent, or Nurse) for the Elves . Changelings. Links to sites dealing with fairy children substituted for abducted human babies. Changelings: An Essay by D. L. Ashliman . Changeling Legends from the British Isles . Stories from England, Wales, the Isle of Man, Scotland, and Ireland. German Changeling Legends . Stories from German-speaking countries. Scandinavian Changeling Legends . Stories from Denmark, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Recovered Bride Ireland There was a marriage in the townland of Curragraigue. After the usual festivities, and when the guests were left to themselves, and were drinking to the prosperity of the bride and bridegroom, they were startled by the appearance of the man himself rushing into the room with anguish in his looks. "Oh!" cried he, "Margaret is carried away by the fairies, I'm sure. The girls were not left the room for half a minute when I went in, and there is no more sign of her there than if she never was born." Great consternation prevailed, great search was made, but no Margaret was to be found. After a night and day spent in misery, the poor bridegroom laid down to take some rest. In a while he seemed to himself to awake from a troubled dream, and look out into the room. The moon was shining in through the window, and in the middle of the slanting rays stood Margaret in her white bridal clothes. He thought to speak and leap out of the bed, but his tongue was without utterance, and his limbs unable to move. "Do not be disturbed, dear husband," said the appearance; "I am now in the power of the fairies, but if you only have courage and prudence we may be soon happy with each other again. Next Friday will be May-eve, and the whole court will ride out of the old fort after midnight. I must be there along with the rest. Sprinkle a circle with holy water, and have a black-hafted knife with you. If you have courage to pull me off the horse, and draw me into the ring, all they can do will be useless. You must have some food for me every night on the dresser, for if I taste one mouthful with them, I will be lost to you forever. The fairies got power over me because I was only thinking of you, and did not prepare myself as I ought for the sacrament. I made a bad confession, and now I am suffering for it. Don't forget what I have said." "Oh, no, my darling," cried he, recovering his speech, but by the time he had slipped out of bed, there was no living soul in the room but himself. Till Friday night the poor young husband spent a desolate time. The food was left on the dresser over night, and it rejoiced all hearts to find it vanished by morning. A little before midnight he was at the entrance of the old rath. He formed the circle, took his station within it, and kept the black-hafted knife ready for service. At times he was nervously afraid of losing his dear wife, and at others burning with impatience for the struggle. At last the old fort with its dark high bushy fences cutting against the sky, was in a moment replaced by a palace and its court. A thousand lights flashed from the windows and lofty hall entrance; numerous torches were brandished by attendants stationed round the courtyard; and a numerous cavalcade of richly attired ladies and gentlemen was moving in the direction of the gate where he found himself standing. As they rode by him laughing and jesting, he could not tell whether they were aware of his presence or not. He looked intent at each countenance as it approached, but it was some time before he caught sight of the dear face and figure borne along on a milk-white steed. She recognized him well enough, and her features now broke into a smile -- now expressed deep anxiety. She was unable for the throng to guide the animal close to the ring of power; so he suddenly rushed out of his bounds, seized her in his arms, and lifted her off. Cries of rage and fury arose on every side; they were hemmed in, and weapons were directed at his head and breast to terrify him. He seemed to be inspired with superhuman courage and force, and wielding the powerful knife he soon cleared a space round him, all seeming dismayed by the sight of the weapon. He lost no time, but drew his wife within the ring, within which none of the myriads round dared to enter. Shouts of derision and defiance continued to fill the air for some time, but the expedition could not be delayed. As the end of the procession filed past the gate and the circle within which the mortal pair held each other determinedly clasped, darkness and silence fell on the old rath and the fields round it, and the rescued bride and her lover breathed freely. We will not detain the sensitive reader on the happy walk home, on the joy that hailed their arrival, and on all the eager gossip that occupied the townland and the five that surround it for a month after the happy rescue. Source (books.google.com): Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 111-113 . Source (Internet Archive): Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 111-113 . Patrick Kennedy's explanation of the word rath : The remains of the earthen fort of one of the small chiefs of old days. They are erroneously called "Danes' forts." ( p. 100 ) Return to the table of contents . Taken by the Good People Ireland I was serving my time to the cattle trade, with a man the name of Lynch -- God be good to him! I suppose I was no more than twelve years of age at the time. 'Twas a very out of the way place and mountainy. Well, not far from my master's house there was a family of the Brogans. 'Twas the will of God that Mrs. Brogan took sick, and there was a baby born, but the poor woman died. Well, the sister, a younger girl than the woman that died, came to nurse the child. After some time she began to look very delicate and uneasy. The naghbours were beginning to talk amongs themselves about her, and it came to Brogan's ears, and, begor, it made him vexed. So he asked the sister what was up with her. "Well, John," says she, "I did not like to tell you, but Ellie" -- that was the name of the dead woman -- "comes every night, and takes the baby and nurses it, and goes away without a word." "By my word," says John, "she is not dead at all, but taken, and I will watch her to-night." Good enough, he remained up, and about 12 o'clock in she came, and he put his arms around her, but as he said, felt no substance. "You can't keep me now," says she, "for I'm married agin; but if you come to the Bottle Hill field to-morrow night, there will be about 40 of us goin' t'words Blarney, and we will all be on horses, with our husbands. All the horses will be white, and I and my man will be last. Bring a hazel stick woud [with] you and strike the horse on the right side, and I will fall off. Just as I fall, ketch me with all your might. You will know my man, for he is the only one of them that has a red head." Well, he went, and he must have a great heart, for on they come, gallopin' like mad. Just as the man with the red head's horse came he stood one-side and struck. She fell and he gripped her like iron. Well, such a hullabaloo as there was, was never heard, and all the other men makin' game of the red-headed man. Well, he brought her home, and they lived for years after, and had a good family, and were the happiest people around the place. I often see some of her children; of course they are all married now, and gone here and there, but that's as true as my name is Tim Brosnan. Source (Internet Archive): "Folk-Tales from County Limerick collected by Miss D. Knox," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, & Custom (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1917), v. 28, pp. 218-219 . Knox's source: Told by Tim Brosnan, Dungeagan, County Kerry. I have retained Knox's spelling. Return to the table of contents . Twenty Years with the Good People Ireland I had a gran'uncle, he was a shoemaker; he was only about 3 or 4 months married. I'm up to fourscore now. Well, God rest all their souls, for they are all gone, I hope to a better world! Well, sir, he says to his wife, and a purty girl she was, as I hear um say, -- the fortune wasn't very big but 'twould buy him a good bit of leather, and I might tell you, 'twas all brogues that was worn at the time, and faith, you should be big before you would get them same. Howisever, he started one day for Limerick would [with] and ass and car, to bring home leather and other little things he wanted. He did not return that night or the next, nor the next. Begor, the wife and some frinds went to Limerick next day, but no trace of the husband could be found. I forgot to tell you that the third morning after he was gone the wife rose very early, and there at the dure [door] was the ass and car. The whole country was searched, up high and low down, but no trace. Weeks, monts and years came and went, but he never turned up. Now the wife kept on a little business, sellin' nick-nacks to support herself, and a son, that grew to be a fine strapping man, as I hear um say, the picture of his father. Now, sir, the boy was in or about twenty, when one day, himself and his mother were atin' their dinner, whin in comes a man and says, "God save ye!" "And you too," says the mother. "Will you ate a spud, sir?" says she. He rached for the spud, and in doin' so the sleeve of his coat shortned as he reached out his hand. He had a mole on his wrist and she see it, and her husband had one in the same spot. "Good God!" says she, "are you John M'Namara?" -- for that was his name. "I am," says he, "and your husband, and that's my son, but I can't tell you for some time where I was since I left you. But some time I might have the power, but not now." Well, lo and behold you, in a week's time he started to work, and the boots he made were a surprise to the whole country round, and I believe he lived for nine or ten years ater that, but he never tould her or any one where he was, but of course everbody knew that 'twas wood [with] the good people. Source: "Folk-Tales from County Limerick collected by Miss D. Knox," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, & Custom (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1917), v. 28, pp. 215-216 . Knox's source: Told by John Kelly, Cooraclare?, County Clare. I have retained Knox's spelling. Return to the table of contents . Jamie Freel and the Young Lady: A Donegal Tale Ireland Down in Fannet, in times gone by, lived Jamie Freel and his mother. Jamie was the widow's sole support; his strong arm worked for her untiringly, and as each Saturday night came round, he poured his wages into her lap, thanking her dutifully for the halfpence which she returned him for tobacco. He was extolled by his neighbours as the best son ever known or heard of. But he had neighbours, of whose opinion he was ignorant -- neighbours who lived pretty close to him, whom he had never seen, who are, indeed, rarely seen by mortals, except on May eves and Halloweens. An old ruined castle, about a quarter of a mile from his cabin, was said to be the abode of the "wee folk." Every Halloween were the ancient windows lighted up, and passers-by saw little figures flitting to and fro inside the building, while they heard the music of pipes and flutes. It was well known that fairy revels took place; but nobody had the courage to intrude on them. Jamie had often watched the little figures from a distance, and listened to the charming music, wondering what the inside of the castle was like; but one Halloween he got up and took his cap, saying to his mother, "I'm awa' to the castle to seek my fortune." "What!" cried she, "would you venture there? you that's the poor widow's one son! Dinna be sae venturesome an' foolitch, Jamie! They'll kill you, an' then what'll come o' me?" "Never fear, mother; nae harm 'ill happen me, but I maun gae." He set out, and as he crossed the potato field, came in sight of the castle, whose windows were ablaze with light, that seemed to turn the russet leaves, still clinging to the crab tree branches, into gold. Halting in the grove at one side of the ruin, he listened to the elfin revelry, and the laughter and singing made him all the more determined to proceed. Numbers of little people, the largest about the size of a child of five years old, were dancing to the music of flutes and fiddles, while others drank and feasted. "Welcome, Jamie Freel! welcome, welcome, Jamie!" cried the company, perceiving their visitor. The word "Welcome" was caught up and repeated by every voice in the castle. Time flew, and Jamie was enjoying himself very much, when his hosts said, "We're going to ride to Dublin tonight to steal a young lady. Will you come too, Jamie Freel?" "Ay, that will I!" cried the rash youth, thirsting for adventure. A troop of horses stood at the door. Jamie mounted, and his steed rose with him into the air. He was presently flying over his mother's cottage, surrounded by the elfin troop, and on and on they went, over bold mountains, over little hills, over the deep Lough Swilley, over towns and cottages, when people were burning nuts, and eating apples, and keeping merry Halloween. It seemed to Jamie that they flew all round Ireland before they got to Dublin. "This is Derry," said the fairies, flying over the cathedral spire; and what was said by one voice was repeated by all the rest, till fifty little voices were crying out, "Deny! Derry! Derry!" In like manner was Jamie informed as they passed over each town on the rout, and at length he heard the silvery voices cry, "Dublin! Dublin!" It was no mean dwelling that was to be honoured by the fairy visit, but one of the finest houses in Stephen's Green. The troop dismounted near a window, and Jamie saw a beautiful face, on a pillow in a splendid bed. He saw the young lady lifted and carried away, while the stick which was dropped in her place on the bed took her exact form. The lady was placed before one rider and carried a short way, then given another, and the names of the towns were cried out as before. They were approaching home. Jamie heard "Rathmullan," "Milford," "Tamney," and then he knew they were near his own house. "You've all had your turn at carrying the young lady," said he. "Why wouldn't I get her for a wee piece?" "Ay, Jamie," replied they, pleasantly, "you may take your turn at carrying her, to be sure." Holding his prize very tightly, he dropped down near his mother's door. "Jamie Freel, Jamie Freel! is that the way you treat us?" cried they, and they too dropped down near the door. Jamie held fast, though he knew not what he was holding, for the little folk turned the lady into all sorts of strange shapes. At one moment she was a black dog, barking and trying to bite; at another, a glowing bar of iron, which yet had no heat; then, again, a sack of wool. But still Jamie held her, and the baffled elves were turning away, when a tiny woman, the smallest of the party, exclaimed, "Jamie Freel has her awa' frae us, but he sall hae nae gude o' her, for I'll mak' her deaf and dumb," and she threw something over the young girl. While they rode off disappointed, Jamie lifted the latch and went in. "Jamie, man!" cried "his mother, "you've been awa' all night; what have they done on you?" "Naething bad, mother; I ha' the very best of gude luck. Here's a beautiful young lady I ha' brought you for company. "Bless us an' save us!" exclaimed the mother, and for some minutes she was so astonished that she could not think of anything else to say. Jamie told his story of the night's adventure, ending, by saying, "Surely you wouldna have allowed me to let her gang with them to be lost forever?" "But a lady , Jamie! How can a lady eat we'er poor diet, and live in we'er poor way? I ax you that, you foolitch fellow?" "Weel, mother, sure it's better for her to be here nor over yonder," and he pointed in the direction of the castle. Meanwhile, the deaf and dumb girl shivered in her light clothing, stepping close to the humble turf fire. "Poor crathur, she's quare and handsome! Nae wonder they set their hearts on her," said the old woman, gazing at her guest with pity and admiration. "We maun dress her first; but what, in the name o' fortune, hae I fit for the likes o' her to wear?" She went to her press in "the room," and took out her Sunday gown of brown drugget; she then opened a drawer, and drew forth a pair of white stockings, a long snowy garment of fine linen, and a cap, her "dead dress," as she called it. These articles of attire had long been ready for a certain triste ceremony, in which she would some day fill the chief part, and only saw the light occasionally, when they were hung out to air; but she was willing to give even these to the fair trembling visitor, who was turning in dumb sorrow and wonder from her to Jamie, and from Jamie back to her. The poor girl suffered herself to be dressed, and then sat down on a "creepie" in the chimney corner, and buried her face in her hands. "What'll we do to keep up a lady like thou?" cried the old woman. "I'll work for you both, mother," replied the son. "An' how could a lady live on we'er poor diet?" she repeated. "I'll work for her," was all Jamie's answer. He kept his word. The young lady was very sad for a long time, and tears stole down her cheeks many an evening while the old woman spun by the fire, and Jamie made salmon nets, an accomplishment lately acquired by him, in hopes of adding to the comfort of his guest. But she was always gentle, and tried to smile when she perceived them looking at her; and by degrees she adapted herself to their ways and mode of life. It was not very long before she began to feed the pig, mash potatoes and meal for the fowls, and knit blue worsted socks. So a year passed, and Halloween came round again. "Mother," said Jamie, taking down his cap, "I'm off to the ould castle to seek my fortune." "Are you mad, Jamie?" cried his mother, in terror; "sure they'll kill you this time for what you done on them last year." Jamie made light of her fears and went his way. As he reached the crab tree grove, he saw bright lights in the castle windows as before, and heard loud talking. Creeping under the window, he heard the wee folk say, "That was a poor trick Jamie Freel played us this night last year, when he stole the nice young lady from us." "Ay," said the tiny woman, "an' I punished him for it, for there she sits, a dumb image by his hearth; but he does na' know that three drops out o' this glass I hold in my hand wad gie her her hearing and her speeches back again." Jamie's heart beat fast as he entered the hall. Again he was greeted by a chorus of welcomes from the company: "Here comes Jamie Freel! welcome, welcome, Jamie!" As soon as the tumult subsided, the little woman said, "You be to drink our health, Jamie, out o' this glass in my hand." Jamie snatched the glass from her and darted to the door. He never knew how he reached his cabin, but he arrived there breathless, and sank on a stove by the fire. "You're kilt surely this time, my poor boy," said his mother. "No, indeed, better luck than ever this time!" and he gave the lady three drops of the liquid that still remained at the bottom of the glass, notwithstanding his mad race over the potato field. The lady began to speak, and her first words were words of thanks to Jamie. The three inmates of the cabin had so much to say to one another, that long after cock-crow, when the fairy music had quite ceased, they were talking round the fire. "Jamie," said the lady, "be pleased to get me paper and pen and ink, that I may write to my father, and tell him what has become of me." She wrote, but weeks passed, and she received no answer. Again and again she wrote, and still no answer. At length she said, "You must come with me to Dublin, Jamie, to find my father." "I ha' no money to hire a car for you," he replied, "an' how can you travel to Dublin on your foot?" But she implored him so much that he consented to set out with her, and walk all the way from Fannet to Dublin. It was not as easy as the fairy journey; but at last they rang the bell at the door of the house in Stephen's Green. "Tell my father that his daughter is here," said she to the servant who opened the door. "The gentleman that lives here has no daughter, my girl. He had one, but she died better nor a year ago." "Do you not know me, Sullivan?" "No, poor girl, I do not." "Let me see the gentleman. I only ask to see him." "Well, that's not much to ax; we'll see what can be done." In a few moments the lady's father came to the door. "Dear father," said she, "don't you know me?" "How dare you call me your father?" cried the old gentleman, angrily. "You are an impostor. I have no daughter." "Look in my face, father, and surely you'll remember me." "My daughter is dead and buried. She died a long, long time ago." The old gentleman's voice changed from anger to sorrow. "You can go," he concluded. "Stop, dear father, till you look at this ring on my finger. Look at your name and mine engraved on it." "It certainly is my daughter's ring; but I do not know how you came by it. I fear in no honest way." "Call my mother, she will be sure to know me," said the poor girl, who, by this time, was crying bitterly. "My poor wife is beginning to forget her sorrow. She seldom speaks of her daughter now. Why should I renew her grief by reminding her of her loss?" But the young lady persevered, till at last the mother was sent for. "Mother," she began, when the old lady came to the door, "don't you know your daughter?" "I have no daughter; my daughter died and was buried a long, long time ago." "Only look in my face, and surely you'll know me." The old lady shook her head. "You have all forgotten me; but look at this mole on my neck. Surely, mother, you know me now?" "Yes, yes," said the mother, " my Gracie had a mole on her neck like that; but then I saw her in her coffin, and saw the lid shut down upon her." It became Jamie's turn to speak, and he gave the history of the fairy journey, of the theft of the young lady, of the figure he had seen laid in its place, of her life with his mother in Fannet, of last Halloween, and of the three drops that had released her from her enchantment. She took up the story when he paused, and told how kind the mother and son had been to her. The parents could not make enough of Jamie. They treated him with every distinction, and when he expressed his wish to return to Fannet, said they did not know what to do to show their gratitude. But an awkward complication arose. The daughter would not let him go without her. "If Jamie goes, I'll go too," she said. "He saved me from the fairies, and has worked for me ever since. If it had not been for him, dear father and mother, you would never have seen me again. If he goes, I'll go too." This being her resolution, the old gentleman said that Jamie should become his son-in-law. The mother was brought from Fannet in a coach and four, and there was a splendid wedding. They all lived together in the grand Dublin house, and Jamie was heir to untold wealth at his father-in-law's death. Source (books.google.com): William Butler Yeats, Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry (London: Walter Scott, 1888), pp. 52-59 . Source (Internet Archive): William Butler Yeats, Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry (London: Walter Scott, 1888), pp. 52-59 . Yeats's source: "Miss Letitia Maclintock." Return to the table of contents . Kidnappers Ireland A little north of the town of Sligo, on the southern side of Ben Bulben, some hundreds of feet above the plain, is a small white square in the limestone. No mortal has ever touched it with his hand; no sheep or goat has ever browsed grass beside it. There is no more inaccessible place upon the earth, and few more encircled by awe to the deep considering. It is the door of faery-land. In the middle of night it swings open, and the unearthly troop rushes out. All night the gay rabble sweep to and fro across the land, invisible to all, unless perhaps where, in some more than commonly "gentle" place -- Drumcliff or Drum-a-hair -- the night-capped heads of faery-doctors may be thrust from their doors to see what mischief the "gentry" are doing. To their trained eyes and ears the fields are covered by red-hatted riders, and the air is full of shrill voices -- a sound like whistling, as an ancient Scottish seer has recorded, and wholly different from the talk of the angels, who "speak much in the throat, like the Irish," as Lilly, the astrologer, has wisely said. If there be a new-born baby or new-wed bride in the neighbourhood, the night-capped "doctors" will peer with more than common care, for the unearthly troop do not always return empty-handed. Sometimes a new-wed bride or a new-born baby goes with them into their mountains; the door swings to behind, and the new-born or the new-wed moves henceforth in the bloodless land of Faery; happy enough, but doomed to melt out at the last judgment like bright vapour, for the soul cannot live without sorrow. Through this door of white stone, and the other doors of that land where geabheadh tu an sonas aer pighin ("you can buy joy for a penny"), have gone kings, queens, and princes, but so greatly has the power of Faery dwindled, that there are none but peasants in these sad chronicles of mine. Somewhere about the beginning of last century appeared at the western corner of Market Street, Sligo, where the butcher's shop now is, not a palace, as in Keats's Lamia , but an apothecary's shop, ruled over by a certain unaccountable Dr. Opendon. Where he came from, none ever knew. There also was in Sligo, in those days, a woman, Ormsby by name, whose husband had fallen mysteriously sick. The doctors could make nothing of him. Nothing seemed wrong with him, yet weaker and weaker he grew. Away went the wife to Dr. Opendon. She was shown into the shop parlour. A black cat was sitting straight up before the fire. She had just time to see that the side-board was covered with fruit, and to say to herself, "Fruit must be wholesome when the doctor has so much," before Dr. Opendon came in. He was dressed all in black, the same as the cat, and his wife walked behind him dressed in black likewise. She gave him a guinea, and got a little bottle in return. Her husband recovered that time. Meanwhile the black doctor cured many people; but one day a rich patient died, and cat, wife, and doctor all vanished the night after. In a year the man Ormsby fell sick once more. Now he was a good-looking man, and his wife felt sure the "gentry" were coveting him. She went and called on the "faery-doctor" at Cairnsfoot. As soon as he had heard her tale, he went behind the back door and began muttering, muttering, muttering -- making spells. Her husband got well this time also. But after a while he sickened again, the fatal third time, and away went she once more to Cairnsfoot, and out went the faery-doctor behind his back door and began muttering, but soon he came in and told her it was no use -- her husband would die; and sure enough the man died, and ever after when she spoke of him Mrs. Ormsby shook her head saying she knew well where he was, and it wasn't in heaven or hell or purgatory either. She probably believed that a log of wood was left behind in his place, but so bewitched that it seemed the dead body of her husband. She is dead now herself, but many still living remember her. She was, I believe, for a time a servant or else a kind of pensioner of some relations of my own. Sometimes those who are carried off are allowed after many years -- seven usually -- a final glimpse of their friends. Many years ago a woman vanished suddenly from a Sligo garden where she was walking with her husband. When her son, who was then a baby, had grown up he received word in some way, not handed down, that his mother was glamoured by faeries, and imprisoned for the time in a house in Glasgow and longing to see him. Glasgow in those days of sailing-ships seemed to the peasant mind almost over the edge of the known world, yet he, being a dutiful son, started away. For a long time he walked the streets of Glasgow; at last down in a cellar he saw his mother working. She was happy, she said, and had the best of good eating, and would he not eat? and therewith laid all kinds of food on the table; but he, knowing well that she was trying to cast on him the glamour by giving him faery food, that she might keep him with her, refused and came home to his people in Sligo. Some five miles southward of Sligo is a gloomy and tree-bordered pond, a great gathering-place of water-fowl, called, because of its form, the Heart Lake. It is haunted by stranger things than heron, snipe, or wild duck. Out of this lake, as from the white square stone in Ben Bulben, issues an unearthly troop. Once men began to drain it; suddenly one of them raised a cry that he saw his house in flames. They turned round, and every man there saw his own cottage burning. They hurried home to find it was but faery glamour. To this hour on the border of the lake is shown a half-dug trench -- the signet of their impiety. A little way from this lake I heard a beautiful and mournful history of faery kidnapping. I heard it from a little old woman in a white cap, who sings to herself in Gaelic, and moves from one foot to the other as though she remembered the dancing of her youth. A young man going at nightfall to the house of his just married bride, met in the way a jolly company, and with them his bride. They were faeries, and had stolen her as a wife for the chief of their band. To him they seemed only a company of merry mortals. His bride, when she saw her old love, bade him welcome, but was most fearful lest he should eat the faery food, and so be glamoured out of the earth into that bloodless dim nation, wherefore she set him down to play cards with three of the cavalcade; and he played on, realizing nothing until he saw the chief of the band carrying his bride away in his arms. Immediately he started up, and knew that they were faeries; for slowly all that jolly company melted into shadow and night. He hurried to the house of his beloved. As he drew near came to him the cry of the keeners. She had died some time before he came. Some noteless Gaelic poet had made this into a forgotten ballad, some odd verses of which my white-capped friend remembered and sang for me. Sometimes one hears of stolen people acting as good genii to the living, as in this tale, heard also close by the haunted pond, of John Kirwan of Castle Hacket. The Kirwans are a family much rumoured of in peasant stories, and believed to be he descendants of a man and a spirit. They have ever been famous for beauty, and I have read that the mother of the present Lord Cloncurry was of their tribe. John Kirwan was a great horse-racing man, and once landed in Liverpool with a fine horse, going racing somewhere in middle England. That evening, as he walked by the docks, a slip of a boy came up and asked where he was stabling his horse. In such and such a place, he answered. "Don't put him there," said the slip of a boy; "that stable will be burnt to-night" He took his horse else-where, and sure enough the stable was burnt down. Next day the boy came and asked as reward to ride as his jockey in the coming race, and then was gone. The race-time came round. At the last moment the boy ran forward and mounted, saying, "If I strike him with the whip in my left hand I will lose, but if in my right hand bet all you are worth." For, said Paddy Flynn, who told me the tale, "the left arm is good for nothing. I might go on making the sign of the cross with it, and all that, come Christmas, and a Banshee, or such like, would no more mind than if it was that broom." Well, the slip of a boy struck the horse with his right hand, and John Kirwan cleared the field out. When the race was over, "What can I do for you now?" said he. "Nothing but this," said the boy: "my mother has a cottage on your land -- they stole me from the cradle. Be good to her, John Kirwan, and wherever your horses go I will watch that no ill follows them; but you will never see me more." With that he made himself air, and vanished. Sometimes animals are carried off -- apparently drowned animals more than others. In Claremorris, Galway, Paddy Flynn told me, lived a poor widow with one cow and its calf. The cow fell into the river, and was washed away. There was a man thereabouts who went to a red-haired woman -- for such are supposed to be wise in these things -- and she told him to take the calf down to the edge of the river, and hide himself and watch. He did as she had told him, and as evening came on the calf began to low, and after a while the cow came along the edge of the river and commenced suckling it. Then, as he had been told, he caught the cow's tail. Away they went at a great pace, across hedges and ditches, till they came to a royalty (a name for the little circular ditches, commonly called raths or forts, that Ireland is covered with since Pagan times). Therein he saw walking or sitting all the people who had died out of his village in his time. A woman was sitting on the edge with a child on her knees, and she called out to him to mind what the red-haired woman had told him, and he remembered she had said, "Bleed the cow." So he stuck his knife into the cow and drew blood. That broke the spell, and he was able to turn her homeward. "Do not forget the spancel," said the woman with the child on her knees; "take the inside one." There were three spancels on a bush; he took one, and the cow was driven safely home to the widow. There is hardly a valley or mountainside where folk cannot tell you of some one pillaged from amongst them. Two or three miles from the Heart Lake lives an old woman who was stolen away in her youth. After seven years she was brought home again for some reason or other, but she had no toes left. She had danced them off. Many near the white stone door in Ben Bulben have been stolen away. It is far easier to be sensible in cities than in many country places I could tell you of. When one walks on those grey roads at evening by the scented elder-bushes of the white cottages, watching the faint mountains gathering the clouds upon their heads, one all too readily discovers, beyond the thin cobweb veil of the senses, those creatures, the goblins, hurrying from the white square stone door to the north, or from the Heart Lake in the south. Footnote I have since heard that it was not the Kirwans, but their predecessors at Castle Hacket, the Hackets themselves, I think, who were descended from a man and a spirit, and were notable for beauty. I imagine that the mother of Lord Cloncurry was descended from the Hackets. It may well be that all through these stories the name of Kirwan has taken the place of the older name. Legend mixes everything together in her cauldron. Source (books.google.com): William Butler Yeats, The Celtic Twilight (London: A. H. Bullen, 1902), pp. 117-29 . Source (Internet Archive): William Butler Yeats, The Celtic Twilight (London: A. H. Bullen, 1902), pp. 117-29 . Return to the table of contents . Ethna the Bride Ireland The fairies, as we know, are greatly attracted by the beauty of mortal women, and Finvarra the king employs his numerous sprites to find out and carry off when possible the prettiest girls and brides in the country. These are spirited away by enchantment to his fairy palace at Knockma in Tuam, where they remain under a fairy spell, forgetting all about the earthly life and soothed to passive enjoyment, as in a sweet dream, by the soft low melody of the fairy music, which has the power to lull the hearer into a trance of ecstasy. There was once a great lord in that part of the country who had a beautiful wife called Ethna, the loveliest bride in all the land. And her husband was so proud of her that day after day he had festivals in her honour; and from morning till night his castle was filled with lords and ladies, and nothing but music and dancing and feasting and hunting and pleasure was thought of. One evening while the feast was merriest, and Ethna floated through the dance in her robe of silver gossamer clasped with jewels, more bright and beautiful than the stars in heaven, she suddenly let go the hand of her partner and sank to the floor in a faint. They carried her to her room, where she lay long quite insensible; but towards the morning she woke up and declared that she had passed the night in a beautiful palace, and was so happy that she longed to sleep again and go there in her dreams. And they watched by her all day, but when the shades of evening fell dark on the castle, low music was heard at her window, and Ethna again fell into a deep trance from which nothing could rouse her. Then her old nurse was set to watch her; but the woman grew weary in the silence and fell asleep, and never awoke till the sun had risen. And when she looked towards the bed, she saw to her horror that the young bride had disappeared. The whole household was roused up at once, and search made everywhere, but no trace of her could be found in all the castle, nor in the gardens, nor in the park. Her husband sent messengers in every direction, but to no purpose -- no one had seen her; no sign of her could be found, living or dead. Then the young lord mounted his swiftest steed and galloped right off to Knockma, to question Finvarra, the fairy king, if he could give any tidings of the bride, or direct him where to search for her; for he and Finvarra were friends, and many a good keg of Spanish wine had been left outside the window of the castle at night for the fairies to carry away, by order of the young lord. But he little dreamed now that Finvarra himself was the traitor; so he galloped on like mad till he reached Knockma, the hill of the fairies. And as he stopped to rest his horse by the fairy rath, he heard voices in the air above him, and one said, "Right glad is Finvarra now, for he has the beautiful bride in his palace at last; and never more will she see her husband's face." "Yet," answered another, "if he dig down through the hill to the centre of the earth, he would find his bride; but the work is hard and the way is difficult, and Finvarra has more power than any mortal man." "That is yet to be seen," exclaimed the young lord. "Neither fairy, nor devil, nor Finvarra himself shall stand between me and my fair young wife;" and on the instant he sent word by his servants to gather together all the workmen and labourers of the country round with their spades and pickaxes, to dig through the hill till they came to the fairy palace. And the workmen came, a great crowd of them, and they dug through the hill all that day till a great deep trench was made down to the very centre. Then at sunset they left off for the night; but next morning when they assembled again to continue their work, behold, all the clay was put back again into the trench, and the hill looked as if never a spade had touched it -- for so Finvarra had ordered; and he was powerful over earth and air and sea. But the young lord had a brave heart, and he made the men go on with the work; and the trench was dug again, wide and deep into the centre of the hill. And this went on for three days, but always with the same result, for the clay was put back again each night and the hill looked the same as before, and they were no nearer to the fairy palace. Then the young lord was ready to die for rage and grief, but suddenly he heard a voice near him like a whisper in the air, and the words it said were these: "Sprinkle the earth you have dug up with salt, and your work will be safe." On this new life came into his heart, and lie sent word through all the country to gather salt from the people; and the clay was sprinkled with it that night, when the men had left off their work at the hill. Next morning they all rose up early in great anxiety to see what had happened, and there to their great joy was the trench all safe, just as they had left it, and all the earth round it was untouched. Then the young lord knew he had power over Finvarra, and he bade the men work on with a good heart, for they would soon reach the fairy palace now in the centre of the hill. So by the next day a great glen was cut right through deep down to the middle of the earth, and they could hear the fairy music if they put their ear close to the ground, and voices were heard round them in the air. "See now," said one, "Finvarra is sad, for if one of those mortal men strike a blow on the fairy palace with their spades, it will crumble to dust, and fade away like the mist." "Then let Finvarra give up the bride," said another, "and we shall be safe." On which the voice of Finvarra himself was heard, clear like the note of a silver bugle through the hill. "Stop your work," he said. "Oh, men of earth, lay down your spades, and at sunset the bride shall be given back to her husband. I, Finvarra, have spoken." Then the young lord bade them stop the work, and lay down their spades till the sun went down. And at sunset he mounted his great chestnut steed and rode to the head of the glen, and watched and waited; and just as the red light flushed all the sky, lie saw his wife coming along the path in her robe of silver gossamer, more beautiful than ever; and he sprang from the saddle and lifted her up before him, and rode away like the storm wind back to the castle. And there they laid Ethna on her bed; but she closed her eyes and spake no word. So day after day passed, and still she never spake or smiled, but seemed like one in a trance. And great sorrow fell upon every one, for they feared she had eaten of the fairy food, and that the enchantment would never be btoken. So her husband was very miserable. But one evening as he was riding home late, he heard voices in the air, and one of them said, "It is now a year and a day since the young lord brought home his beautiful wife from Finvarra; but what good is she to him? She is speechless and like one dead; for her spirit is with the fairies though her form is there beside him." Then another voice answered, "And so she will remain unless the spell is broken. He must unloose the girdle from her waist that is fastened with an enchanted pin, and burn the girdle with fire, and throw the ashes before the door, and bury the enchanted pin in the earth; then will her spirit come back from Fairyland, and she will once more speak and have true life." Hearing this the young lord at once set spurs to his horse, and on reaching the castle hastened to the room where Ethna lay on her couch silent and beautiful like a waxen figure. Then, being determined to test the truth of the spirit voices, he untied the girdle, and after much difficulty extracted the enchanted pin from the folds. But still Ethna spoke no word; then he took the girdle and burned it with fire, and strewed the ashes before the door, and he buried the enchanted pin in a deep hole in the earth, under a fairy thorn, that no hand might disturb the spot. After which he returned to his young wife, who smiled as she looked at him, aud held forth her hand. Great was his joy to see the soul coming back to the beautiful form, and he raised her up and kissed her; and speech and memory came back to her at that moment, and all her former life, just as if it had never been broken or interrupted; but the year that her spirit had passed in Fairyland seemed to her but as a dream of the night, from which she had just awoke. After this Finvarra made no further efforts to carry her off; but the deep cut in the hill remains to this day, and is called "The Fairy's Glen." So no one can doubt the truth of the story as here narrated. Source (books.google.com): Lady [Jane Francesca Elgee] Wilde. Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland (Boston: Ticknor and Company, 1888), pp. 42-45 . Source (Internet Archive): Lady [Jane Francesca Elgee] Wilde, Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland (London: Ward and Downey, 1888), pp. 42-45 . Link to additional Sleeping Beauty stories. Return to the table of contents . Ned the Jockey Wales One Edward Jones, or "Ned the Jockey", as he was familiarly called, resided, within the memory of the writer, in one of the roadside cottages a short distance from Llanidloes, on the Newtown Road. While returning home late one evening, it was his fate to fall in with a troop of fairies, who were not pleased to have their gambols disturbed by a mortal. Requesting him to depart, they politely offered him the choice of three means of locomotion, viz., being carried off by a "high wind, middle wind, or low wind." The jockey soon made up his mind, and elected to make his trip through the air by the assistance of a high wind. No sooner had he given his decision, than he found himself whisked high up into the air, and his senses completely bewildered by the rapidity of his flight; he did not recover himself again till he came in contact with the earth, being suddenly dropped in the middle of a garden near Ty Gough, on the Bryndu Road, many miles distant from the spot whence he started on his aerial journey. Ned, when relating this story, would vouch for its genuineness in the most solemn manner, and the person who narrated it to the writer brought forward, as a proof of its truth, "that there was not the slightest trace of any person going into the garden while Ned was found in the middle of it." The ultimate fate of the hero of the above incident was extremely melancholy. Returning home inebriated one night, he appears to have mistaken his road, and walked into the Severn, just below the Long Bridge, where his body was found next morning. Source (books.google.com): Edward Hamer, "Parochial Account of Llanidloes: Chapter 10, Folk-Lore," Collections Historical and Archaeological Relating to Montgomeryshire and Its Borders . Issued by the Lowys-Land Club for the use of its members. Vol. 10. (London: Printed for the Club by Thomas Richards, 1877), p. 247 . Return to the table of contents . The Old Man and the Fairies Wales Many years ago the Welsh mountains were full of fairies. People used to go by moonlight to see them dancing, for they knew where they would dance by seeing green rings in the grass. There was an old man living in those days who used to frequent the fairs that were held across the mountains. One day he was crossing the mountains to a fair, and when he got to a lonely valley he sat down, for he was tired, and he dropped off to sleep, and his bag fell down by his side. When he was sound asleep the fairies came and carried him off, bag and all, and took him under the earth, and when he awoke he found himself in a great palace of gold, full of fairies dancing and singing. And they took him and showed him everything, the splendid gold room and gardens, and they kept dancing round him until he fell asleep. When he was asleep they carried him back to the same spot where they had found him, and when he awoke he thought he had been dreaming, so he looked for his bag, and got hold of it, but he could hardly lift it. When he opened it he found it was nearly filled with gold. He managed to pick it up, and turning round, he went home. When he got home, his wife Kaddy said, "What's to do, why haven't you been to the fair?" "I've got something here," he said, and showed his wife the gold. "Why, where did you get that?" But he wouldn't tell her. Since she was curious, like all women, she kept worrying him all night -- for he'd put the money in a box under the bed -- so he told her about the fairies. Next morning, when he awoke, he thought he'd go to the fair and buy a lot of things, and he went to the box to get some of the gold, but found it full of cockle-shells. Source (books.google.com): P. H. Emerson, Welsh Fairy-Tales and Other Stories . (London: D. Nutt, 1894), pp. 15-16 . Source (Internet Archive): P. H. Emerson, Welsh Fairy-Tales and Other Stories (London: D. Nutt, 1894), pp. 15-16 . Return to the table of contents . A Visit to Fairyland Wales One bright moonlight night, while on his way to Clogwyn y Gwin to see his sweetheart, one of the sons of Llwyn On, in Nant y Bettws, saw a group of fairies carousing and dancing to their heart's content, on a field by Llyn Cawellyn. He went and stood not far from them, and by degrees he was drawn, by the charming sweetness of their music, and by the nimble and lively manner of their sport, until he was right within their circle. Soon there fell upon him a certain charm, which made everything around him strange to him, and he found himself in one of the most beautiful countries he had ever seen, where everyone spent his time in nothing but joy and mirth. He had been there for seven years, and yet everything was but as a dream of the night; but he remembered the message on which he had set out, and his heart longed for his sweetheart. He therefore asked permission to return home, which was given him together with a whole host of companions to lead to his own country; and all of a sudden he found himself, as if awaking out of a dream, on the meadow on which the fairies were carrying on their sport. He then turned his face homeward, but when he reached there all was changed: his parents were dead, his brothers and sisters could not recognize him, and his sweetheart was married to another. At the thought of such changes he broke his heart, and died in less than a week after his return. Source (books.google.com): D. E. Jenkins, Bedd Gelert: Its Facts, Fairies, and Folk-Lore . (Portmadoc: Llewelyn Jenkins, 1899), pp. 173-74 . Source (Internet Archive): D. E. Jenkins, Bedd Gelert: Its Facts, Fairies, and Folk-Lore (Portmadoc: Llewelyn Jenkins, 1899), pp. 173-74 . Return to the table of contents . Four Years in Faery Isle of Man Like the Welsh fairies, the Manx ones take men away with them and detain them for years. Thus a Kirk Andreas man was absent from his people for four years, which he spent with the fairies. He could not tell how he returned, but it seemed as if, having been unconscious, he woke up at last in this world. The other world, however, in which he was for the four years was not far away, as he could see what his brothers and the rest of the family were doing every day, although they could not see him. To prove this, he mentioned to them how they were occupied on such and such a day, and, among other things, how they took their corn on a particular day to Ramsey. He reminded them also of their having heard a sudden sharp crack as they were passing by a thorn bush he named, and how they were so startled that one of them would have run back home. He asked them if they remembered that, and they said they did, only too well. He then explained to them the meaning of the noise, namely, that one of the fairies with whom he had been galloping the whole time was about to let fly an arrow at his brothers, but that as he was going to do this, he (the missing brother) raised a plate and intercepted the arrow: that was the sharp noise they had heard. Such was the account he had to give of his sojourn in Faery. Source (books.google.com): John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx , vol. 1 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1901), pp. 290-91 . Source (Internet Archive): John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx , vol. 1 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1901), pp. 290-91 . Rhys does not give a title to this account. Return to the table of contents . The Lost Wife of Ballaleece Isle of Man One time the Farmer of Ballaleece married a beautiful young wife, and they were thinking the world of one another. But before long she disappeared. Some persons said that she was dead and others that she was taken by the Little People. Ballaleece mourned for her with a heavy heart and looked for her from Point of Ayr to the Calf; but in the end, not finding her, he married another wife. This one was not beautiful, but there was some money at her. Soon after the marriage his first wife appeared to Ballaleece one night, and said to him, "My man, my man, I was taken away by the Little People, and I live with them near to you. I can be set free if you will but do what I tell you." "Tell me quick," said Ballaleece. "We'll be riding through Ballaleece barn at midnight on Friday," said she. "We'll be going in on one door and out on another. I'll be riding behind one of the men on horseback. You'll sweep the barn clean, and mind there is not one straw left on the floor. Catch hold of my bridle rein, hold it fast, and I shall be free." When the night came Ballaleece took a besom and swept the barn floor so clean that not one speck was left on it. Then he waited in the dark. At midnight the barn doors opened wide, sweet music was heard, and in through the open door came a fine company of Little People, in green jackets and red caps, riding fine horses. On the last horse, sitting behind a Little Fellow, Ballaleece saw his first wife as pretty as a picture, and as young as when she left him. He seized hold of her bridle rein, but he was shaken from side to side like a leaf on a tree, and he was not able to hold her. As she went out through the door she stretched out her right hand and pointed to a bushel in the corner of the barn, and called out in a sad voice, "There's been a straw put under the bushel for that reason you couldn't hold me, and you've done with me for ever!" The second wife had heard what had passed and had hidden the straw, and turned the bushel upside down so that it would not be seen. The young wife was never heard of any more. Source (Internet Archive): Sophia Morrison, Manx Fairy Tales , (London: David Nutt, 1911), pp. 75-77 . Return to the table of contents . On Fairies England Another Part of this Conversation generally turns upon Fairies . These, they tell you, have frequently been heard and seen, nay that there are some still living who were stolen away by them, and confined seven Years. According to the Description they give of them, who pretend to have seen them, they are in the Shape of Men, exceeding little: They are always clad in Green, and frequent the Woods and Fields; when they make Cakes (which is a Work they have been often heard at) they are very noisy; and when they have done, they are full of Mirth and Pastime. But generally they dance in Moon-Light when Mortals are asleep, and not capable of seeing them, as may be observed on the following Morn; their dancing Places being very distinguishable. For as they dance Hand in Hand, and so make a Circle in their Dance, so next Day there will be seen Rings and Circles on the Grass. Now in all this there is really nothing, but an old fabulous Story, which has been handed down even to our Days from the Times of Heathenism , of a certain Sort of Beings called Lamiæ, which were esteemed so mischievous and cruel, as to take away young Children and slay them. These, together with the the Fauns , the Gods of the Woods , seem to have formed the Notion of Fairies. Source (books.google.com): John Brand, Observations on Popular Antiquities: Including the Whole of Mr. [Henry] Bourne's Antiquitates Vulgares , with Addenda to Every Chapter of That Work , (Newcastle upon Tyne: Printed by T. Saint, for J. Johnson, 1777), pp. 107-108 . Source (Internet Archive): John Brand, Observations on Popular Antiquities: Including the Whole of Mr. [Henry] Bourne's Antiquitates Vulgares , with Addenda to Every Chapter of That Work, (London: Printed for William Baynes, 1810), pp. 107-108 . Link to an article about Lamia , the child-eating daemon from Greek mythology. Return to the table of contents . The Lost Child England In the little hamlet of Treonike, in the parish of St. Allen, has long lingered the story of a lost child, who was subsequently found. All the stories agree in referring the abduction of the child to supernatural agency, and in some cases it is referred to the "Small People or Piskies," -- in others to less amiable spiritual creatures. Mr. Hals [See Davies Gilbert's Parochial History of Cornwall ] has given one version of this story, which differs in some respects from the tale as I heard it, from an old woman some thirty years since, who then lived in this parish. Her tale was to the following effect. It was a lovely evening, and the little boy was gathering flowers in the fields, near a wood. The child was charmed by hearing some beautiful music, which he at first mistook for the song of birds; but, being a sharp boy, he was not long deceived, and he went towards the wood to ascertain from whence the melodious sounds came. When he reached the verge of the wood, the music was of so exquisite a character, that he was compelled to follow the sound, which appeared to travel before him. Lured in this way, the boy penetrated to the dark center of the grove, and here, meeting with some difficulties, owing to the thick growth of underwood, he paused, and began to think of returning. The music, however, became more ravishing than before, and some invisible being appeared to crush down all the low and tangled plants, thus forming for him a passage, over which he passed without any difficulty. At length he found himself on the edge of a small lake, and, greatly to his astonishment, the darkness of night was around him, but the heavens were thick with stars. The music ceased, and, wearied with his wanderings, the boy fell asleep on a bed of ferns. He related, on his restoration to his parents, that he was taken by a beautiful lady through palaces of the most gorgeous description. Pillars of glass supported arches which glistened with every color, and these were hung with crystals far exceeding anything which were ever seen in the caverns of a Cornish mine. It is, however, stated that many days passed away before the child was found by his friends, and that at length he was discovered one lovely morning sleeping on the bed of ferns, on which he was supposed to have fallen asleep on the first adventurous evening. There was no reason given by the narrator why the boy was "spirited away" in the first instance, or why he was returned. Her impression was, that some sprites, pleased with the child's innocence and beauty, had entranced him. That when asleep he had been carried through the waters to the fairy abodes beneath them; and she felt assured that a child so treated would be kept under the especial guardianship of the sprites for ever afterwards. Of this, however, tradition leaves us in ignorance. Source (books.google.com): Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , first series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 72-74 . Source (Internet Archive): Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , first series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 72-74 . Return to the table of contents . Thomas of Erceldoune Scotland The story [of Thomas of Erceldoune] is interesting and beautifully told, and, as one of the oldest fairy legends, may well be quoted in this place. Thomas of Erceldoune, in Lauderdale, called the Rhymer, on account of his producing a poetical romance on the subject of Tristrem and Yseult, which is curious as the earliest specimen of English verse known to exist, flourished in the reign of Alexander III of Scotland. Like other men of talent of the period, Thomas was suspected of magic. He was said also to have the gift of prophecy, which was accounted for in the following peculiar manner, referring entirely to the Elfin superstition. As True Thomas (we give him the epithet by anticipation) lay on Huntly Bank, a place on the descent of the Eildon Hills, which raise their triple crest above the celebrated monastery of Melrose, he saw a lady so extremely beautiful that he imagined it must be the Virgin Mary herself. Her appointments, however, were those rather of an Amazon or goddess of the woods. Her steed was of the highest beauty and spirit, and at his mane hung thirty silver bells and nine, which made music to the wind as she paced along: Her saddle was of royal bone (ivory), laid over with orfeverie , i. e. goldsmith's work: Her stirrups, her dress, all corresponded with her extreme beauty and the magnificence of her array. The fair huntress had her bow in hand, and her arrows at her belt. She led three greyhounds in a leash, and three raches, or hounds of scent, followed her closely. She rejected and disclaimed the homage which Thomas desired to pay to her; so that, passing from one extremity to the other, Thomas became as bold as he had at first been humble. The lady warns him that he must become her slave, if he should prosecute his suit towards her in the manner he proposes. Before their interview terminates, the appearance of the beautiful lady is changed into that of the most hideous hag in existence; one side is blighted and wasted, as if by palsy; one eye drops from her head; her colour, as clear as the virgin silver, is now of a dun leaden hue. A witch from the spital or almshouse would have been a goddess in comparison to the late beautiful huntress. Hideous as she was, Thomas's irregular desires had placed him under the control of this hag, and when she bade him take leave of sun, and of the leaf that grew on tree, he felt himself under the necessity of obeying her. A cavern received them, in which, following his frightful guide, he for three days travelled in darkness, sometimes hearing the booming of a distant ocean, sometimes walking through rivers of blood, which crossed their subterranean path. At length they emerged into daylight, in a most beautiful orchard. Thomas, almost fainting for want of food, stretches out his hand towards the goodly fruit which hangs around him, but is forbidden by his conductress, who informs him these are the fatal apples which were the cause of the fall of man. He perceives also that his guide had no sooner entered this mysterious ground, and breathed its magic air, than she was revived in beauty, equipage, and splendour, as fair or fairer than he had first seen her on the mountain. She then commands him to lay his head upon her knee, and proceeds to explain to him the character of the country. "Yonder right-hand path," she says, "conveys the spirits of the blest to paradise; yon downward and well-worn way leads sinful souls to the place of everlasting punishment; the third road, by yonder dark brake, conducts to the milder place of pain, from which prayer and mass may release offenders. But see you yet a fourth road, sweeping along the plain to yonder splendid castle? Yonder is the road to Elfland, to which we are now bound. The lord of the castle is king of the country, and I am his queen. But, Thomas, I would rather be drawn with wild horses, than he should know what hath passed between you and me. Therefore, when we enter yonder castle, observe strict silence, and answer no question that is asked at you, and I will account for your silence by saying I took your speech when I brought you from middle earth." Having thus instructed her lover, they journeyed on to the castle, and entering by the kitchen, found themselves in the midst of such a festive scene as might become the mansion of a great feudal lord or prince. Thirty carcasses of deer were lying on the massive kitchen board, under the hands of numerous cooks, who toiled to cut them up and dress them, while the gigantic greyhounds which had taken the spoil lay lapping the blood, and enjoying the sight of the slain game. They came next to the royal hall, where the king received his loving consort without censure or suspicion. Knights and ladies, dancing by threes (reels, perhaps), occupied the floor of the hall, and Thomas, the fatigues of his journey from the Eildon hills forgotten, went forward and joined in the revelry. After a period, however, which seemed to him a very short one, the queen spoke with him apart, and bade him prepare to return to his own country. "Now," said the queen, "how long think you that you have been here?" "Certes, fair lady," answered Thomas, "not above these seven days." "You are deceived," answered the queen. "You have been seven years in this castle; and it is full time you were gone. Know, Thomas, that the fiend of hell will come to this castle tomorrow to demand his tribute, and so handsome a man as you will attract his eye. For all the world would I not suffer you to be betrayed to such a fate; therefore up, and let us be going." These terrible news reconciled Thomas to his departure from Elfin land, and the queen was not long in placing him upon Huntly Bank, where the birds were singing. She took a tender leave of him, and to ensure his reputation, bestowed on him the tongue which could not lie. Thomas in vain objected to this inconvenient and involuntary adhesion to veracity, which would make him, as he thought, unfit for church or for market, for king's court or for lady's bower. But all his remonstrances were disregarded by the lady, and Thomas the Rhymer, whenever the discourse turned on the future, gained the credit of a prophet whether he would or not; for he could say nothing but what was sure to come to pass. Source (books.google.com): Sir Walter Scott, Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft (London: John Murray, 1830), pp. 132-35 . Source (Internet Archive): Sir Walter Scott, Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft (London: John Murray, 1830), pp. 132-35 . Return to the table of contents . Tamlane Scotland Young Tamlane was son of Earl Murray, and Burd Janet was daughter of Dunbar, Earl of March. And when they were young they loved one another and plighted their troth. But when the time came near for their marrying, Tamlane disappeared, and none knew what had become of him. Many, many days after he had disappeared, Burd Janet was wandering in Carterhaugh Wood, though she had been warned not to go there. And as she wandered she plucked the flowers from the bushes. She came at last to a bush of broom and began plucking it. She had not taken more than three flowerets when by her side up started young Tamlane. "Where come ye from, Tamlane, Tamlane?" Burd Janet said. "And why have you been away so long?" "From Elfland I come," said young Tamlane. "The Queen of Elfland has made me her knight." "But how did you get there, Tamlane?" said Burd Janet. "I was a-hunting one day, and as I rode widershins round yon hill, a deep drowsiness fell upon me, and when I awoke, behold! I was in Elfland. Fair is that land and gay, and fain would I stop but for thee and one other thing. Every seven years the Elves pay their tithe to the Nether world, and for all the Queen makes much of me, I fear it is myself that will be the tithe." "Oh can you not be saved? Tell me if aught I can do will save you, Tamlane?" "One only thing is there for my safety. Tomorrow night is Hallowe'en, and the fairy court will then ride through England and Scotland, and if you would borrow me from Elfland you must take your stand by Miles Cross between twelve and one o' the night, and with holy water in your hand you must cast a compass all around you." "But how shall I know you, Tamlane," quoth Burd Janet, "amid so many knights I've ne'er seen before?" "The first court of Elves that come by let pass, let pass. The next court you shall pay reverence to, but do naught nor say aught. But the third court that comes by is the chief court of them, and at the head rides the Queen of all Elfland. And by her side I shall ride upon a milk-white steed with a star in my crown; they give me this honour as being a christened knight. Watch my hands, Janet, the right one will be gloved but the left one will be bare, and by that token you will know me." "But how to save you, Tamlane?" quoth Burd Janet. "You must spring upon me suddenly, and I will fall to the ground. Then seize me quick, and whatever change befall me, for they will exercise all their magic on me, cling hold to me till they turn me into red-hot iron. Then cast me into this pool and I will be turned back into a mother-naked man. Cast then your green mantle over me, and I shall be yours, and be of the world again." So Burd Janet promised to do all for Tamlane, and next night at midnight she took her stand by Miles Cross and cast a compass round her with holy water. Soon there came riding by the Elfin court, first over the mound went a troop on black steeds, and then another troop on brown. But in the third court, all on milk-white steeds, she saw the Queen of Elfland and by her side a knight with a star in his crown with right hand gloved and the left bare. Then she knew this was her own Tamlane, and springing forward she seized the bridle of the milk-white steed and pulled its rider down. And as soon as he had touched the ground she let go the bridle and seized him in her arms. "He's won, he's won amongst us all," shrieked out the eldritch crew, and all came around her and tried their spells on young Tamlane. First they turned him in Janet's arms like frozen ice, then into a huge flame of roaring fire. Then, again, the fire vanished and an adder was skipping through her arms, but still she held on; and then they turned him into a snake that reared up as if to bite her, and yet she held on. Then suddenly a dove was struggling in her arms, and almost flew away. Then they turned him into a swan, but all was in vain, till at last he was changed into a red-hot glaive, and this she cast into a well of water and then he turned back into a mother-naked man. She quickly cast her green mantle over him, and young Tamlane was Burd Janet's for ever. Then sang the Queen of Elfland as the court turned away and began to resume its march. She that has borrowed young Tamlane Has gotten a stately groom, She's taken away my bonniest knight Left nothing in his room. But had I known, Tamlane, Tamlane, A lady would borrow thee, I'd hae ta'en out thy two grey eyne, Put in two eyne of tree. Had I but known, Tamlane, Tamlane, Before we came from home, I'd hae ta'en out thy heart o' flesh, Put in a heart of stone. Had I but had the wit yestreen That I have got today, I'd paid the Fiend seven times his teind Ere you'd been won away. And then the Elfin court rode away, and Burd Janet and young Tamlane went their way homewards and were soon after married after young Tamlane had again been sained by the holy water and made Christian once more. Source (books.google.com): Joseph Jacobs, More English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 159-62 . Source (Internet Archive): Joseph Jacobs, More English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 159-62 . Jacob's source: Sir Walter Scott, "The Young Tamlane," Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border , vol. 2 (Kelso: James Ballantyne, 1802), pp. 228-43 . Additional related ballads are found in The English and Scottish Popular Ballads collected by Francis James Child ( no. 39, "Tam Lin" ). In English and Scottish ballads Tamlane is known by various names, for example: Tam Lane, Tam Lin, Tam-a-Line, Tamlene, Thomas, Tom Line, Thom of Lin, Tomlin. Return to the table of contents . The Fairies' Hill Scotland There is a green hill above Kintraw, known as the Fairies' Hill, of which the following story is told. Many years ago, the wife of the farmer at Kintraw fell ill and died, leaving two or three young children. The Sunday after the funeral the farmer and his servants went to church, leaving the children at home in charge of the eldest, a girl of about ten years of age. On the farmer's return the children told him their mother had been to see them, and had combed their hair and dressed them. As they still persisted in their statement after being remonstrated with, they were punished for telling what was not true. The following Sunday the same thing occurred again. The father now told the children, if their mother came again, they were in inquire of her why she came. Next Sunday, when she reappeared, the eldest child put her father's question to her, when the mother told them she had been carried off by the "Good People" ( Daione Sìth ), and could only get away for an hour or two on Sundays, and should her coffin be opened it would be found to contain only a withered leaf. The farmer, much perplexed, went to the minister for advice, who scoffed at the idea of any supernatural connection with the children's story, ridiculed the existence of "Good People," and would not allow the coffin to be opened. The matter was therefore allowed to rest. But, some little time after, the minister, who had gone to Lochgilphead for the day, was found lying dead near the Fairies' Hill, a victim, many people thought, to the indignation of the Fairy world he had laughed at. Source (books.google.com): Lord Archibald Campbell, Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition , Argyllshire Series, vol. 1 (London: David Nutt, 1889), pp. 71-72 . Source (Internet Archive): Lord Archibald Campbell, Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition , Argyllshire Series, vol. 1 (London: David Nutt, 1889), pp. 71-72 . Campbell's source: Mrs. Annie Thorpe née Miss MacDougall of Lunga, Ardbecknish, Lochow. Return to the table of contents . The Stolen Lady Scotland John Roy, who lived in Glenbroun, in the parish of Abernethy, being out one night on the hills in search of his cattle, met a troop of fairies, who seemed to have got a prize of some sort or other. Recollecting that the fairies are obliged to exchange whatever they may have with any one who offers them anything, however low in value, for it, he flung his bonnet to them, crying Shuis slo slumus sheen ( i.e ., mine is yours and yours is mine). The fairies dropped their booty, which proved to be a Sassenach (English) lady whom the dwellers of Shian of Coir-laggac had carried away from her own country, leaving a stock in her place which, of course, died and was buried. John brought her home, and she lived for many years in his house. "It happened, however, in the course of time," said the Gaelic narrator, "that the new king found it necessary to make the great roads through these countries by means of soldiers, for the purpose of letting coaches and carriages pass to the northern cities; and those soldiers had officers and commanders in the same way as our fighting army have now. Those soldiers were never great favorites in these countries, particularly during the time that our kings were alive; and consequently it was no easy matter for them, either officers or men, to procure for themselves comfortable quarters." But John Roy would not keep up the national animosity to the cottan dearg (red-coats), and he offered a residence in his house to a Saxon captain and his son. When there they could not take their eyes off the English lady, and the son remarked to his father what a strong likeness she bore to his deceased mother. The father replied that he too had been struck with the resemblance, and said he could almost fancy she was his wife. He then mentioned her name and those of some persons connected with them. The lady by these words at once recognized her husband and son, and honest John Roy had the satisfaction of reuniting the long-separated husband and wife, and receiving their most grateful acknowledgments. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), pp. 391-92 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), pp. 391-92 . Return to the table of contents . Touching the Elements Shetland Islands A fiddler belonging to Yell was waylaid and carried off by the trows while on his way to supply music to a Halloween gathering that was being held in a neighboring district. After playing for some considerable time he was allowed to depart, and immediately proceeded homewards. When he came to his house, however, he saw with amazement that the roof was off, the walls decayed and crumbling into ruins, and the floor grown over with rank grass. He questioned the neighbors, but they were utter strangers to him and could cast no glimmer of light on the remarkable situation. The place had been in that ruinous condition all their time, they said. He sought out the oldest inhabitant, but even he had no recollection of anyone staying in the place, but he did remember hearing a tale to the effect that at one time the guidman [master] of that house had mysteriously disappeared, and never returned. It was commonly supposed that the hill-folk had taken him. The fiddler, of course, knew no one, and had nowhere to go, and when the old man asked him to spend the night at his house, he very gladly accepted the invitation. It so happened that the following day was Sacrament Sunday, and they both went to church. The fiddler asked to be permitted to communicate. This request was granted, but no sooner did he touch the "elements" [bread and wine of the Eucharist] than he crumbled into dust. Source: John Nicolson, Some Folk-Tales and Legends of Shetland (Edinburgh: Thomas Allan and Sons, 1920), p. 14. Yell is one of the Shetland Islands, just north of Mainland, the largest island in the chain. Return to the table of contents . The Aged Bride Denmark At a marriage at Nörre-Broby near Odense, the bride during a dance left the apartment and walked without reflection towards a mount in the adjacent field, where at the same time there were dancing and merriment among the elf-folk. On reaching the mount, she saw that it was standing on red pillars, and at the same moment an elf came and presented to her a cup of wine. She took the cup, and having emptied it, suffered herself to join in a dance. When the dance was ended she bethought herself of her husband and hastened home. Here it appeared to her that everything in and about the place was changed, and on entering the village, she recognized neither house nor farm, and heard nothing of the noisy mirth of the wedding. At length she found herself standing before her husband's dwelling, but on entering saw no one whom she knew, and no one who knew her. One old woman only, on hearing the bride's lamentation, exclaimed, "Is it then you, who a hundred years ago disappeared at my grandfather's brother's wedding?" At these words the aged bride fell down and instantly expired. Source (books.google.com): Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Supterstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), p. 138 . Source (Internet Archive): Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Supterstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), p. 138 . Return to the table of contents . The Troll in Mæhred Denmark In Mæhred, by Præstø, a blacksmith was standing one evening at his forge, and as he hammered, he heard great crying and lamenting outside. He looked out through the door and saw that a troll was driving a pregnant woman in front of him and shouting repeatedly: "A little further! A little further!" Then the blacksmith jumped up with his glowing iron and held it between the troll and the woman. The Troll had to let the woman go, whereupon he took flight. The blacksmith then took care of the woman, who soon gave birth to two sons. Then he went to her husband, thinking that he would find him sad and concerned. However, entering the main room, he found a woman in the shape of the wife lying in bed. Immediately seeing what had happened, he took his ax and struck the head of the witch who was lying there in bed. At first the man lamented the murder of his wife, but then the blacksmith brought back to him back his rightful wife and the two newborn boys. Source (books.google.com): J. M. Thiele, "Trolden i Mæhred," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2, (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), p. 209-210 . Source (Internet Archive): J. M. Thiele, "Trolden i Mæhred," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2, (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), p. 209-210 . In this accout the trolls have exchanged a pregnant human woman for a woman of their own kind. In most changeling legends the underground people steal a human baby, leaving one of their own offspring in its place. Return to the table of contents . The Sea Nymph Sweden (Gotland) One night a number of fishermen quartered themselves in a hut by a fishing village on the northwest shores of an island. After they had gone to bed, and while they were yet awake, they saw a white, dew-besprinkled woman's hand reaching in through the door. They well understood that their visitor was a sea nymph, who sought their destruction, and feigned unconsciousness of her presence. The following day their number was added to by the coming of a young, courageous and newly married man from Kinnar, in Lummelund. When they related to him their adventure of the night before, he made fun of their being afraid to take a beautiful woman by the hand, and boasted that if he had been present he would not have neglected to grasp the proffered hand. That evening when they laid themselves down in the same room, the late arrival with them, the door opened again, and a plump, white woman's arm, with a most beautiful hand, reached in over the sleepers. The young man arose from his bed, approached the door and seized the outstretched hand, impelled, perhaps, more by the fear of his comrades scoffing at his boasted bravery, than by any desire for a closer acquaintance with the strange visitor. Immediately his comrades witnessed him drawn noiselessly out through the door, which closed softly after him. They thought he would return soon, but when morning approached and he did not appear, they set out in search of him. Far and near the search was pursued, but without success. His disappearance was complete. Three years passed and nothing had been heard of the missing man. His young wife, who had mourned him all this time as dead, was finally persuaded to marry another. On the evening of the wedding day, while the mirth was at its highest, a stranger entered the cottage. Upon closer observation some of the guests thought they recognized the bride's former husband. The utmost surprise and commotion followed. In answer to the inquiries of those present as to where he came from and where he had been, he related that it was a sea nymph whose hand he had taken that night when he left the fisherman's hut; and that he was dragged by her down into the sea. In her pearly halls he forgot his wife, parents, and all that was loved by him until the morning of that day, when the sea nymph exclaimed, "There will be a dusting out in Kinnar this evening." Then his senses immediately returned, and, with anxiety, he asked, "Then it is my wife who is to be the bride?" The sea nymph replied in the affirmative. At his urgent request, she allowed him to come up to see his wife as a bride, stipulating that when he arrived at the house he should not enter. When he came and saw her adorned with garland and crown he could, nevertheless, not resist the desire to enter. Then came a tempest and took away half the roof of the house, whereupon the man fell sick and three days later died. Source (books.google.com): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 75-76 . Source (Internet Archive): Herman Hofbert, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 75-76 . Link to this tale in Swedish: Herman Hofberg, "Kinnaren i Lummelund," Svenska Folksägner (Stockholm: Fr. Skoglunds Förlag, 1882), pp. 61-62 . Link to additional Water Spirit Legends . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 2, 2024. Advice Well Taken: Folktales of Type 910B Advice Well Taken Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 910B edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2013-2022 Contents The Three Advices (Ireland, T. Crofton Croker). The Three Advices Which the King with the Red Soles Gave to His Son (Ireland, Patrick Kennedy). The Highlander Takes Three Advices from the English Farmer (Scotland, Cuthbert Bede [pseudonym for Eward Bradley]). The Three Admonitions (Italy, Thomas Frederick Crane). The Prince Who Acquired Wisdom (India, Cecil Henry Bompas). Three Pieces of Advice (Jamaica, Martha Warren Beckwith). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Three Advices Ireland The stories current among the Irish peasantry are not very remarkable for the inculcation of any moral lesson, although numberless are the legends related of pious and "good people," the saints and fairies. The following tale of the Three Advices is the only one of a moral character which I remember to have heard. It was told to me by a professional storyteller, whose diction I have endeavored to preserve, although his soubriquet of "Paddreen Trelah" or Paddy the Vagabond, from his wandering life, was not a particularly appropriate title for a moralist. The tale is certainly very ancient, and has probably found its way into Ireland from Wales, as it appears to be an amplification of a Bardic "Triad of Wisdom." There once came, what of late has happened so often in Ireland, a hard year. When the crops failed, there was beggary and misfortune from one end of the island to the other. At that time many poor people had to quit the country from want of employment, and through the high price of provisions. Among others, John Carson was under the necessity of going over to England, to try if he could get work; and of leaving his wife and family behind him, begging for a bite and a sup up and down, and trusting to the charity of good Christians. John was a smart young fellow, handy at any work, from the hay field to the stable, and willing to earn the bread he ate; and he was soon engaged by a gentleman. The English are mighty strict upon Irish servants; he was to have twelve guineas a year wages, but the money was not to be paid until the end of the year, and he was to forfeit the entire twelve guineas in the lump, if he misconducted himself in any way within the twelve months. John Carson was to be sure upon his best behavior, and conducted himself in every particular so well for the whole time, there was no faulting him late or early, and the wages were fairly his. The term of his agreement being expired, he determined on returning home, notwithstanding his master, who had a great regard for him, pressed him to remain, and asked him if he had any reason to be dissatisfied with his treatment. "No reason in life, sir," said John; "you've been a good master and a kind master to me; the Lord spare you over your family; but I left a wife and two small children of my own at home, after me in Ireland, and your honor would never wish to keep me from them entirely, the wife and the children." "Well, John," said the gentleman, "you have earned your twelve guineas, and you have been, in every respect, so good a servant, that, if you are agreeable, I intend giving you what is worth the twelve guineas ten times over, in place of your wages. But you shall have your choice. Will you take what I offer, on my word"? John saw no reason to think that his master was jesting with him, or was insincere in making the offer; and, therefore, after a slight consideration, told him that he agreed to take for his wages whatever he would advise, whether it was the twelve guineas or not. "Then listen attentively to my words," said the gentleman. "First, I would teach you this: Never to take a by-road when you have the highway. Secondly: Take heed not to lodge in the house where an old man is married to a young woman. And thirdly: Remember that honesty the best policy. These are the three advices I would pay you with; and they are in value far beyond any gold; however, here is a guinea for your traveling charges, and two cakes, one of which you must give to your wife, and the other you must not eat yourself until you have done so, and I charge you to be careful of them." It was not without some reluctance on the part of John Carson that he was made to accept mere words for wages, or could be persuaded that they were more precious than golden guineas. His faith in his master was, however, so strong, that he at length became satisfied. John set out for Ireland the next morning early; but he had not proceeded far, before he overtook two pedlars who were traveling the same way. He entered into conversation with them, and found them a pair of merry fellows, who proved excellent company on the road. Now it happened, towards the end of their day's journey, when they were all tired with walking, that they came to a wood, through which there was a path that shortened the distance to the town they were going towards, by two miles. The pedlars advised John to go with them through the wood; but he refused to leave the highway, telling them, at the same time, he would meet them again at a certain house in the town where travelers put up. John was willing to try the worth of the advice which his master had given him, and he arrived in safety, and took up his quarters at the appointed place. While he was eating his supper, an old man came hobbling into the kitchen, and gave orders about different matters there, and then went out again. John would have taken no particular notice of this, but immediately after, a young woman, young enough to be the old man's daughter, came in, and gave orders exactly the contrary of what the old man had given, calling him, at the same time, such as old fool, and old dotard, and so on. When she was gone, John inquired who the old man was. "He is the landlord," said the servant; "and, heaven help him! A dog's life has he led since he married his last wife." "What," said John, with surprise, "is that young woman the landlord's wife? I see I must not remain in this house tonight;" and, tired as he was, he got up to leave it, but went no further than the door before he met the two pedlars, all cut and bleeding, coming in, for they had been robbed and almost murdered in the wood. John was very sorry to see them in that condition, and advised them not to lodge in the house, telling them, with a significant nod that all was not right there; but the poor pedlars were so weary and so bruised, that they would stop where they were, and disregarded the advice. Rather than remain in the house, John retired to the stable, and laid himself down upon a bundle of straw, where he slept soundly for some time. About the middle of the night, he heard two persons come into the stable, and on listening to their conversation, discovered that it was the landlady and a man, laying a plan how to murder her husband. In the morning John renewed his journey; but at the next town he came to, he was told that the landlord in the town he had left had been murdered and that two pedlars, whose clothes were found all covered with blood, had been taken up for the crime, and were going to be hanged. John, without mentioning what he had overheard to any person, determined to save the pedlars if possible, and so returned, in order to intend their trial. On going into the court, he saw the two men at bar, and the young woman and the man whose voice he had heard in the stable, swearing their innocent lives away. But the judge allowed him to give his evidence, and he told every particular of what had occurred. The man and the young woman instantly confessed their guilt; the poor pedlars were at once acquitted; and the judge ordered a large reward to be paid to John Carson, as through his means the real murderers were brought to justice. John proceeded towards home, fully convinced of the value of two of the advices which his master had given him. On arriving at his cabin he found his wife and children rejoicing over a purse full of gold, which the eldest boy had picked up on the road that morning. Whilst he was away they had endured all the miseries which the wretched families of those who go over to seek work in England are exposed to. With precarious food, without a bed to lie down on, or a roof to shelter them, they had wandered through the country, seeking food from door to door of a starving population; and when a single potato was bestowed, showering down blessings and thanks on the giver, not in the set phrases of the mendicant, but in the burst of eloquence too fervid not to gush direct from the heart. Those only who have seen a family of such beggars as I describe, can fancy the joy with which the poor woman welcomed her husband back, and informed him of the purse full of gold. "And where did Mick my boy, find it," inquired John Carson. "It was the young squire, for certain, who dropped it," said his wife, "for he rode down the road this morning, and was leaping his horse in the very gap where Micky picked it up; but sure, John, he has money enough, besides, and never the halfpenny have I to buy my poor childer a bit to eat this blessed night." "Never mind that," said John. "Do as I bid you, and take up the purse at once to the big house, and ask for the young squire. I have two cakes which I brought every step of the way with me from England, and they will do for the children's supper. I ought surely to remember, as good right I have, what my master told me for my twelvemonths' wages, seeing I never, as yet, found what he said to be wrong!" "And what did he say," inquired the wife. "That honesty is the best policy," answered John. "'Tis very well; and 'tis mighty easy for them to say so that have never been sore tempted by distress and famine to say otherwise, but your bidding is enough for me, John." Straightways she went to the big house, and inquired for the young squire; but she was denied the liberty to speak to him. "You must tell me your business, honest woman," said the servant, with a head all powdered and frizzled like a cauliflower, and who had on a coat covered with gold and silver lace and buttons, and everything in the world. "If you knew but all," said she, "I am an honest woman, for I've brought a purse full of gold to the young master; for surely it is his; as nobody else could have so much money." "Let me see it," said the servant. "Ay, it's all right. I'll take care of it. You need not trouble yourself any more about the matter;" and so saying, he slapped the door in her face. When she returned, her husband produced the two cakes which his master gave him on parting; and breaking one to divide between his children, how was he astonished to find six guineas, in it; and when he took the other and broke it, he found as many more. He then remembered the words of his generous master, who desired him to give one of the cakes to his wife, and not to eat the other himself until that time; and this was the way his master took to conceal his wages, lest he should have been robbed, or have lost the money on the road. The following day, as John was standing near his cabin door and turning over in his own mind what he should do with his money, the young squire came riding down the road. John pulled off his hat, for he had not forgotten his manners through the means of traveling to foreign parts, and then made so bold as to inquire if his honor had got the purse he lost. "Why, it is true enough, my good fellow," said the squire, "I did lose my purse yesterday, and I hope you were lucky enough to find it; for if that is your cabin, you seem to be very poor, and shall keep it as a reward for your honesty." "Then the servant at the big house never gave it to you last night, after taking it from Nance -- she's my wife, your honor -- and telling her it was all right?" "Oh, I must look into this business," said the squire. "Did you say your wife, my poor man, gave my purse to a servant -- to what servant?" "I can't tell his name rightly," said John, "because I don't know it; but never trust Nance's eye again if she can't point him out to your honor, if so your honor is desirous of knowing." "Then do you and Nance, as you call her, come up to the hall this evening, and I'll inquire into the matter, I promise you." So saying, the squire rode off. John and his wife went up accordingly in the evening, and he gave a small rap with the big knocker at the great door. The door was opened by a grand servant, who, without hearing what the poor people had to say, exclaimed, "Oh, go! -- go! what business can you have here?" and shut the door. John's wife burst out a crying. "There," said she, so sobbing as if her heart would break. "I knew that would be the end of it." But John had not been in old England merely to get his twelve guineas packed in two cakes. "No," said he, firmly; "right is right, and I'll see the end of it." So he sat himself down on the steps of the door, determined not to go until he had seen the young squire, and as it happened, it was not long before he came out. "I have been expecting you for some time, John," said he; "come in and bring your wife in;" and he made them go before him into the house. Immediately he directed all the servants to come up stairs; and such an army of them as there was! It was a real sight to see them. "Which of you," said the young squire, without making further words, "which of you all did this honest woman give my purse to?" but there was no answer. "Well I suppose she must be mistaken, unless she can tell herself." John's wife at once pointed her finger towards the head footman; "there he is," said she, "if all the world were in the fore -- clergyman, magistrate, judge, jury and all. There he is, and I am ready to take my bible-oath to him. There he is who told me it was all right when he took the purse, and slammed the door in my face, without as much as thank ye for it." The conscious footman turned pale. "What is this I hear?" said his master. "If this woman gave you my purse, William, why did you not give it to me?" The servant stammered out a denial; but his master insisted on his being searched, and the purse was found in his pocket. "John," said the gentleman, turning round, "you shall be no loser by this affair. Here are ten guineas for you; go home now, but I will not forget your wife's honesty." Within a month John Carson was settled in a nice new-slated house, which the squire had furnished and made ready for him. What with his wages, and the reward he got from the judge, and the ten guineas for returning the purse, he was well to do in the world, and was soon able to stock a little farm, where he lived respected all his days. On his deathbed, he gave his children the very three advices which his master had given him on parting: Never to take a by-road when they could follow the highway. Never to lodge in a house where an old man was married to a young woman. And, above all, to remember that honesty is the best policy. Source: T. Crofton Croker, "The Three Advices: An Irish Moral Tale," Chambers's Edinburgh Journal , vol. 4, no. 173 (May 23, 1835), pp. 131-32 . The same story is found in The Rural Repository , vol. 12-13, new series (Hudson, New York: William B. Stoddard, 1835-36), pp. 107-108 . Return to the table of contents . The Three Advices Which the King with the Red Soles Gave to His Son Ireland When the chief of the Bonna Dearriga was on his deathbed he gave his son three counsels, and said misfortune would attend him if he did not follow them. The first was never to bring home a beast from a fair after having been offered a fair price for it; the second, never to call in ragged clothes on a friend when he wanted a favor from him; the third not to marry a wife with whose family he was not well acquainted. The name of the young chief was Illan, called Don, from his brown hair, and the first thing he set about doing after the funeral, was to test the wisdom of his father's counsels. So he went to the fair of Tailtean [now Telltown in Meath] with a fine mare of his, and rode up and down. He asked twenty gold rings for his beast, but the highest bid he got was only nineteen. To work out his design he would not abate a screpal , but rode home on her back in the evening. He could have readily crossed a ford that lay in his way near home; for sheer devilment he leaped the river higher up, where the banks on both sides were steep. The poor beast stumbled as she came near the edge, and was flung head foremost into the rocky bed, and killed. He was pitched forward, but his fall was broken by some shrubs that were growing in the face of the opposite bank. He was as sorry for the poor mare as any young fellow, fond of horses and dogs, could be. When he got home he sent a giolla to take off the animal's two forelegs at the knee, and these he hung up in the great hall of his dun, having first had them properly dried and prepared. Next day he repaired again to the fair, and got into conversation with a rich chief of Oriel, whose handsome daughter had come to the meeting to purchase some cows. Illan offered his services, as he knew most of the bodachs and the bodachs' wives who were there for the object of selling. A word to them from the handsome and popular young chief, and good bargains were given to the lady. So pleased was her father, ay and she too, with this civility that he forthwith received an invitation to hunt and fish at the northern rath, and very willingly he accepted it. So he returned home in a very pleasant state of mind, and was anxious that this second experiment should succeed better than the first. The visit was paid, and in the mornings there were pleasant walks in the woods with the young lady, while her little brother and sister were chasing one another through the trees, and the hunting and fishing went on afterwards, and there were feasts of venison, and wild boar, and drinking of wine and mead in the evenings, and stories in verse recited by bards, and sometimes moonlight walks on the ramparts of the fort, and at last marriage was proposed and accepted. One morning as Illan was musing on the happiness that was before him, an attendant on his promised bride walked into his room. "Great must be your surprise, O Illan Don," said she, "at this my visit, but my respect for you will not allow me to see you fall into the pit that is gaping for you. Your affianced bride is an unchaste woman. You have remarked the deformed Fergus Rua, who plays on the small clarsech, and is the possessor of thrice fifty stories. He often attends in her room late in the evening to play soft music to her, and to put her to sleep with this soft music and his stories of the Danaan druids. Who would suspect the weak deformed creature, or the young lady of noble birth? By your hand, O Illan of the brown hair, if you marry her, you will bring disgrace on yourself and your clan. You do not trust my words! Then trust to your own senses. She would most willingly break off all connection with the lame wretch since she first laid eyes on you, but he has sworn to expose her before you and her father. When the household is at rest this night, wait at the entrance of the passage that leads to the women's apartments. I will meet you there. Tomorrow morning you will require no one's advice for your direction." Before the sun tinged the purple clouds, next morning, Illan was crossing the outer moat of the lios, and lying behind him on the back of his trusty steed, was some long object carefully folded in skins. "Tell your honored chief," said he to the attendant who was conducting him, "that I am obliged on a sudden to depart, and that I request him by his regard for me to return my visit a fortnight hence, and to bring his fair daughter with him." On he rode, and muttered from time to time, "Oh, had I slain the guilty pair, it would be a well merited death! the deformed wretch! the weak lost woman! Now for the third trial!" Illan had a married sister, whose rath was about twelve of our miles distant from his. To her home he repaired next day, changing clothes with a beggar whom he met on the road. When he arrived, he found that they were at dinner, and several neighboring families with them in the great hall. "Tell my sister," said he to a giolla who was lounging at the door, "that I wish to speak with her." "Who is your sister?" said the other in an insolent tone, for he did not recognize the young chief in his beggar's dress. "Who should she be but the Bhan a Teagh , you rascal!" The fellow began to laugh, but the open palm of the irritated young man coming like a sledge stroke on his cheek, dashed him on the ground, and set him a-roaring. "Oh, what has caused this confusion?" said the lady of the house, coming out from the hall. "I," said her brother, "punishing your giolla's disrespect." "Oh, brother, what has reduced you to such a condition?" "An attack on my house, and a creagh made on my lands in my absence. I have neither gold nor silver vessels in my dun, nor rich cloaks, nor ornaments, nor arms for my followers. My cattle have been driven from my lands, and all as I was on a visit at the house of my intended bride. You must come to my relief; you will have to send cattle to my ravaged fields, gold and silver vessels, and ornaments and furs, and rich clothes to my house, to enable me to receive my bride and her father in a few days." "Poor dear Illan!" she answered, "my heart bleeds for you. I fear I cannot aid you, nor can I ask you to join our company within in these rags. But you must be hungry; stay here till I send you some refreshment." She quitted him, and did not return again, but an attendant came out with a griddle cake in one hand, and a porringer with some Danish beer in it in the other. Illan carried them away to the spot where he had quitted the beggar, and gave him the bread, and made him drink the beer. Then changing clothes with him, he rewarded him, and returned home, bearing the porringer as a trophy. On the day appointed with the father of his affianced, there were assembled in Illan's hall, his sister, his sister's husband, his affianced, her father, and some others. When an opportunity offered after meat and bread, and wine had gone the way of all food, Illan addressed his guests: "Friends and relations, I am about confessing some of my faults before you, and hope you will be bettered by the hearing. My dying father charged me never to refuse a fair offer for horse, cow, or sheep, at a fair. For refusing a trifle less than I asked for my noble mare, there was nothing left to me but those bits of her forelegs you see hanging by the wall. He advised me never to put on an air of want when soliciting a favor. I begged help of my sister for a pretended need, and because I had nothing better than a beggar's cloak on me, I got nothing for my suit but the porringer that you see dangling by the poor remains of my mare. I wooed a strange lady to be my wife, contrary to my dying father's injunction, and after seeming to listen favorably to my suit, she at last said I should be satisfied with the crutches of her lame and deformed harper: there they are!" The sister blushed, and was ready to sink through the floor for shame. The bride was in a much more wretched state, and would have fainted, but it was not the fashion of the day. Her father stormed, and said this was but a subterfuge on the part of Illan. He deferred to her pleasure, but though torn with anguish for the loss of the young chief's love and respect, she took the blame on herself. The next morning saw the rath without a visitor; but within a quarter of a year, the kind faced, though not beautiful daughter of a neighboring Duine Uasal (gentleman) made the fort cheerful by her presence. Illan had known her since they were children. He was long aware of her excellent qualities, but had never thought of her as a wife till the morning after his speech. He was fonder of her a month after his marriage than he was on the marriage morning, and much fonder when a year had gone by, and presented his house with an heir. Source: Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 73-77 . Return to the table of contents . The Highlander Takes Three Advices from the English Farmer Scotland In one of the glens of Cantire there lived a young and loving pair who were blessed with one child, a fine healthy lad. They strove hard to provide themselves with the necessaries of life; but their croft was sterile and their crops scanty: and, after many bitter and serious consultations, it was agreed that they should separate for a season, with the hope to make their circumstances better, and that the wife should shift for herself and the lad, and that the husband should travel in search of a situation where he would have food and wages. Their separation was painful; but they comforted themselves with the promise to be true to each other, and to meet again in better circumstances. The husband had an aversion to become a soldier; so he sailed to Greenock, and from thence made his way into England, and traveled on until he met with a worthy farmer, with whom he agreed to work. The bargain was made by signs, for the highlander had no English; but after a time they came to understand each other quite well, and the highlander learned a little English. His master respected his servant very much; and the servant was steady, honest, and industrious in his service. Time passed on, year after year; and every year the highlander left his wages in his master's hands, until he had a pretty round sum to take. At length he prepared to return home to Cantire; and his master laid down all his wages on the table, and said, "Whether will you lift all your money, or take three advices in its place?" The highlander replied, "Sir, your advices were always good to me, and I think it better to take them than to lift the money." So the master took away the money, and gave him these three advices: I. When you are going home keep on the high way, and take no by-way. II. Lodge not in any house in which you see an old man and his young wife. III. Do nothing rashly until you have well considered what you will do. Besides these three advices, the English farmer gave the highlander sufficient money to carry him home; and he also gave him a loaf, which he was not to break until he could eat it with his wife and son. Then they bade farewell. After traveling several miles the highlander overtook a peddler, who was on his way to Scotland; so they agreed to keep company with one another, and to lodge at a certain town that same night: but as they were traveling quite agreeably, they came upon a by-way which was a great length shorter than the high road, and the peddler proposed that they should take it; but the highlander would not, for he thought of his master's first advice. Then the peddler said that he was tired with his burthen, and that he would take the short by-way, and wait until his companion had come forward. So they went each their way, and the highlander kept to the high-way until he had come to the place appointed. There he found the peddler weeping, and without his pack, for he had been robbed in the by-way. So this was the benefit that the highlander got by following the first advice of the English farmer. Then they walked on together to the town, the peddler weeping for the loss of his pack, and saying that he knew where they would get good lodgings. But, when they got to the house, the highlander saw an old man and a young wife; so he would not lodge there, for he remembered his master's second advice. But the peddler remained in the house, and the highlander crept into a coal-house in the entry. At midnight he felt some one coming in at the door, and, after remaining a short time, going out again; but, as he passed him in the dark, the highlander, with his knife, cut a bit from the wing of his coat, and kept it. In the morning the cry of murder was heard, and it was found that the old man who kept the house had been killed. The authorities of the town came and saw the dead body, and found the peddler sleeping in a room; and when they searched his pockets, there was a bloody knife found in them; and as he had no pack or money, they concluded he was a false peddler, and had murdered the old man to get his wealth. So the peddler was apprehended and condemned to be hanged; and the highlander accompanied him to the scaffold, and observed among the crowd a young man walking with the young wife of the murdered man; and the young man's coat was of the same color as the swatch he had cut from it in the coal-house in the entry. "Hang me!" said the highlander, "if you pair are not the murderers." So they were apprehended, and acknowledged their crime, and were hanged; and the peddler was set at liberty. And this was the benefit that was got from the High lander following the second advice of the English farmer. It was midnight when the highlander got back home. He rapped at the door, and his wife got up, and recognized her husband, and lighted a candle. Upon that, the highlander saw a fine young man lying in the bed; and he was purposing to step up and kill him, apprehensive that another had taken his place. But he thought on his master's advice, and said, "Who is yon man?" "It is our son!" said his wife. "He came home from his service last evening, and slept in that bed." "I should have slain him but for the master!" said the highlander. So this was the benefit he got from following the third advice of the English farmer. The highlander's joy was now at its height. His son arose from the bed; more peats were put on, and a large fire kindled; and the highlander then sought a knife to cut the loaf that he had carried all the way from England. With the first slice he found silver money; and when he had cut all the loaf, he found therein all the wages that would have been paid him by his master. So the highlander got the money and the three advices also; and with the money he stocked a farm and lived comfortably till the end of his days. Source: Cuthbert Bede [pseudonym for Edward Bradley], The White Wife: With Other Stories, Supernatural, Romantic, and Legendary (London: Sampson Low, Son, and Marston, 1865), pp. 141-46 . Return to the table of contents . The Three Admonitions Italy A man once left his country to go to foreign parts, and there entered the service of an abbot. After he had spent some time in faithful service, he desired to see his wife and native land. He said to the abbot, "Sir, I have served you thus long, but now I wish to return to my country." "Yes, my son," said the abbot, " but before departing I must give you the three hundred ounces [nearly 13 francs] that I have put together for you. Will you be satisfied with three admonitions, or with the three hundred ounces?" The servant answered, "I will be satisfied with the three admonitions." "Then listen. First: When you change the old road for the new, you will find troubles which you have not looked for. Second: See much and say little. Third: Think over a thing before you do it, for a thing deliberated is very fine. Take this loaf of bread and break it when you are truly happy." The good man departed, and on his journey met other travelers. These said to him, "We are going to take the by-way. Will you come with us?" But he remembering the three admonitions of his master answered, "No, my friends, I will keep on this road." When he had gone half way, bang! bang! he heard some shots. "What was that, my sons?" The robbers had killed his companions. "I have gained the first hundred ounces!" he said, and continued his journey. On his way he arrived at an inn as hungry as a dog and called for something to eat. A large dish of meat was brought which seemed to say, "Eat me, eat me!" He stuck his fork in it and turned it over, and was frightened out of his wits, for it was human flesh! He wanted to ask the meaning of such food and give the innkeeper a lecture, but just then he thought, "See much and say little;" so he remained silent. The innkeeper came, he settled his bill, and took leave. But the innkeeper stopped him and said, "Bravo, bravo! you have saved your life. All those who have questioned me about my food have been soundly beaten, killed, and nicely cooked." "I have gained the second hundred ounces," said the good man, who did not think his skin was safe until then. When he reached his own country he remembered his house, saw the door ajar and slipped in. He looked about and saw no one, only in the middle of the room was a table, well set with two glasses, two forks, two seats, service for two. "How is this?" he said. "I left my wife alone and here I find things arranged for two. There is some trouble." So he hid himself under the bed to see what went on. A moment after he saw his wife enter, who had gone out a short time before for a pitcher of water. A little after he saw a sprucely dressed young priest come in and seat himself at the table. "Ah, is that he?" and he was on the point of coming forth and giving him a sound beating; but there came to his mind the final admonition of the abbot: "Think over a thing before you do it, for a thing deliberated is very fine;" and he refrained. He saw them both sit down at the table, but before eating his wife turned to the young priest and said: "My son, let us say our accustomed Paternoster for your father." When he heard this he came from under the bed crying and laughing for joy, and embraced and kissed them both so that it was affecting to see him. Then he remembered the loaf his master had given him and told him to eat in his happiness; he broke the loaf and there fell on the table all the three hundred ounces, which the master had secretly put in the loaf. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales , (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 41, pp. 157-59 . Return to the table of contents . The Prince Who Acquired Wisdom India There was once a raja who had an only son and the raja was always urging his son to learn to read and write in order that when he came to his kingdom he might manage well and be able to decide disputes that were brought to him for judgment; but the boy paid no heed to his father's advice and continued to neglect his lessons. At last when he was grown up, the prince saw that his father was right and he resolved to go away to foreign countries to acquire wisdom; so he set off without telling anyone but his wife, and he took with him a purse of money and three pieces of gold. After traveling a long time, he one day saw a man plowing in a field and he went and got some tobacco from him and asked him whether there were any wise men living in that neighborhood. "What do you want with wise men?" asked the plowman. The prince said that he was traveling to get wisdom. The plowman said that he would give him instruction if he were paid. Then the prince promised to give him one gold piece for each piece of wisdom. The plowman agreed and said. "Listen attentively! My first maxim is this: You are the son of a raja; whenever you go to visit a friend or one of your subjects and they offer you a bedstead, or stool, or mat to sit on, do not sit down at once but move the stool or mat a little to one side; this is one maxim: give me my gold coin." So the prince paid him. Then the plowman said, "The second maxim is this: You are the son of a raja; whenever you go to bathe, do not bathe at the common bathing place, but at a place by yourself; give me my coin," and the prince did so. Then he continued, " My third maxim is this: You are the son of a raja; when men come to you for advice or to have a dispute decided, listen to what the majority of those present say and do not follow your own fancy, now pay me;" and the prince gave him his last gold coin, and said that he had no more. "Well," said the plowman, "Your lesson is finished, but still I will give you one more piece of advice free and it is this: You are the son of a raja; restrain your anger, if anything you see or hear makes you angry, still do not at once take action; hear the explanation and weigh it well, then if you find cause you can give rein to your anger and if not, let the offender off!" After this the prince set his face homewards as he had spent all his money; and he began to repent of having spent his gold pieces on advice that seemed worthless. However on his way he turned into a bazaar to buy some food and the shopkeepers on all sides called out, "Buy, buy," so he went to a shop and the shopkeeper invited him to sit on a rug; he was just about to do so when he remembered the maxim of his instructor and pulled the rug to one side; and when he did so he saw that it had been spread over the mouth of a well and that if he had sat on it he would have been killed; so he began to believe in the wisdom of his teacher. Then he went on his way and on the road he turned aside to a tank to bathe, and remembering the maxim of his teacher he did not bathe at the common place but went to a place apart; then having eaten his lunch he continued his journey, but he had not gone far when he found that he had left his purse behind, so he turned back and found it lying at the place where he had put down his things when he bathed; thereupon he applauded the wisdom of his teacher, for if he had bathed at the common bathing place, someone would have seen the purse and have taken it away. When evening came on he turned into a village and asked the headman to let him sleep in his verandah, and there was already one other traveler sleeping there and in the morning it was found that the traveler had died in his sleep. Then the headman consulted the villagers and they decided that there was nothing to be done but to throw away the body, and that as the prince was also a traveler he should do it. At first he refused to touch the corpse as he was the son of a raja, but the villagers insisted and then he bethought himself of the maxim that he should not act contrary to the general opinion; so he yielded and dragged away the body, and threw it into a ravine. Before leaving it he remembered that it was proper to remove the clothes, and when he began to do so he found round the waist of the body a roll of coin; so he took this and was glad that he had followed the advice of his teacher. That evening he reached the boundary of his own territory and decided to press on home although it was dark; at midnight he reached the palace and without arousing anyone went to the door of his wife's room. Outside the door he saw a pair of shoes and a sword; at the sight he became wild with rage and drawing the sword he called out, "Who is in my room?" As a matter of fact the prince's wife had got the prince's little sister to sleep with her, and when the girl heard the prince's voice she got up to leave; but when she opened the door and saw the prince standing with the drawn sword she drew back in fear; she told him who she was and explained that they had put the shoes and sword at the door to prevent anyone else from entering; but in his wrath the prince would not listen and called to her to come out and be killed. Then she took off her cloth and showed it to him through the crack of the door and at the sight of this he was convinced; then he reflected on the advice of his teacher and repented, because he had nearly killed his sister through not restraining his wrath. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 14, pp. 53-56 . Return to the table of contents . Three Pieces of Advice Jamaica Der is a man; he married; he got t'ree chil'ren, he became poor. He said to his wife, "I goin' to look somet'ing to do." She said, "Yes, me dear husban'." He went an' walk one hundred mile. When he got to a pen de master said, "You little too late; I jus' got a butcher dis mo'ning." He walk anodder one hundred mile an' when he go he succeed a butcher. He was doin' his work one year, never drew no money -- one hundred pound a year. When de year was up, de missis said to him, "Out of you money an' t'ree advice, which one you rather?" He said, "I rather de t'ree advice." She give him one revolver an' give him a loaf of bread an' give him some money to serve him on de way; was not to touch de bread till him get home. De t'ree advice -- "Not to forsake de bridge which you cross; not to interfere in politics; you mustn't in haste in temper." An' him tek his journey. When he was going, he went to tek anodder road; he remember de first advice, mustn't forsake de bridge which he cross. He go on a little furder. He saw some people beatin' one dead man; he went to call to dem, but he remember de second advice. He pass. When he go on till he saw his home, he saw his wife an' his chil'ren an' a man walkin' side on side. He took de revolver to shoot de man, he remember de t'ird advice; de missis said, "You mus' not haste in temper," an' he put it by. When he went on a little furder, it was his wife bredder hear dat de husband was not at home, so come to look for his sister. When dey goin' in de house he began to tell how many mile he went, an' he say to his wife, "De missis gave me t'ree advice, out of me money which of dem I rather; I said I rather de t'ree advice, and she give me dis loaf of bread; not to cut it till I reach home, but she give me my pocket-money." De wife said, "What about de t'ree advice an' lef yo' money!" De husband said, "I can't help it." De chil'ren cry out, "Papa, cut de bread! Papa, cut de bread!" Tek de knife, an' after him cut de bread, de one hundred pound scatter out upon de table. So de t'ree advice, if he turn a different road he never will see home. De second advice, doze people was beating de dead man, if him was to call to 'em, dem people would destroy him. An' de t'ird advice, he would shoot his own bredder-in-law. Source (Internet Archive): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 122, pp. 155-56 . Source (Sacred Texts): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 122, pp. 155-56 . Beckwith's informant: Richard Morgan, Santa Cruz Mountains. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 27, 2022. Aesop's Children Aesop's Children A selection of fables depicting the relationship between children and adults edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2011 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Crab and His Mother An old crab said to her son, "Why do you walk sideways like that, my son? You ought to walk straight." The young crab replied, "Show me how, dear mother, and I'll follow your example." The old crab tried, but tried in vain, and then saw how foolish she had been to find fault with her child. Example is better than precept. The Farmer and His Sons A farmer, being at death's door, and desiring to impart to his sons a secret of much moment, called them round him and said, "My sons, I am shortly about to die; I would have you know, therefore, that in my vineyard there lies a hidden treasure. Dig, and you will find it." As soon as their father was dead, the sons took spade and fork and turned up the soil of the vineyard over and over again, in their search for the treasure which they supposed to lie buried there. They found none, however; but the vines, after so thorough a digging, produced a crop such as had never before been seen. Jupiter and the Monkey Jupiter issued a proclamation to all the beasts, and offered a prize to the one who, in his judgment, produced the most beautiful offspring. Among the rest came the monkey, carrying a baby monkey in her arms, a hairless, flat-nosed little fright. When they saw it, the gods all burst into peal on peal of laughter. But the monkey hugged her little one to her, and said, "Jupiter may give the prize to whomsoever he likes. But I shall always think my baby the most beautiful of them all." Father and Sons A certain man had several sons who were always quarreling with one another, and, try as he might, he could not get them to live together in harmony. So he determined to convince them of their folly by the following means. Bidding them fetch a bundle of sticks, he invited each in turn to break it across his knee. All tried and all failed. And then he undid the bundle, and handed them the sticks one by one, when they had no difficulty at all in breaking them. "There, my boys," said he, "united you will be more than a match for your enemies. But if you quarrel and separate, your weakness will put you at the mercy of those who attack you." Union is strength. The Boy Bathing A boy was bathing in a river and got out of his depth, and was in great danger of being drowned. A man who was passing along a road heard his cries for help, and went to the riverside and began to scold him for being so careless as to get into deep water, but made no attempt to help him. "Oh, sir," cried the boy, "please help me first and scold me afterwards." Give assistance, not advice, in a crisis. The Boy and the Nettles A boy was gathering berries from a hedge when his hand was stung by a nettle. Smarting with the pain, he ran to tell his mother, and said to her between his sobs, "I only touched it ever so lightly, mother." "That's just why you got stung, my son," she said. "If you had grasped it firmly, it wouldn't have hurt you in the least." The Boy and the Filberts A boy put his hand into a jar of filberts, and grasped as many as his fist could possibly hold. But when he tried to pull it out again, he found he couldn't do so, for the neck of the jar was too small to allow of the passage of so large a handful. Unwilling to lose his nuts but unable to withdraw his hand, he burst into tears. A bystander, who saw where the trouble lay, said to him, "Come, my boy, don't be so greedy. Be content with half the amount, and you'll be able to get your hand out without difficulty." Do not attempt too much at once. The Fawn and His Mother A hind said to her fawn, who was now well grown and strong, "My son, nature has given you a powerful body and a stout pair of horns, and I can't think why you are such a coward as to run away from the hounds." Just then they both heard the sound of a pack in full cry, but at a considerable distance. "You stay where you are," said the Hind. "Never mind me." And with that she ran off as fast as her legs could carry her. The Ox and the Frog Two little frogs were playing about at the edge of a pool when an ox came down to the water to drink, and by accident trod on one of them and crushed the life out of him. When the old frog missed him, she asked his brother where he was. "He is dead, mother," said the little frog; "an enormous big creature with four legs came to our pool this morning and trampled him down in the mud." "Enormous, was he? Was he as big as this?" said the frog, puffing herself out to look as big as possible. "Oh! yes, much bigger," was the answer. The Frog puffed herself out still more. "Was he as big as this?" said she. "Oh! yes, yes, mother, MUCH bigger," said the little frog. And yet again she puffed and puffed herself out till she was almost as round as a ball. "As big as...?" she began -- but then she burst. The Wolf, the Mother, and Her Child A hungry wolf was prowling about in search of food. By and by, attracted by the cries of a child, he came to a cottage. As he crouched beneath the window, he heard the mother say to the child, "Stop crying, do, or I'll throw you to the Wolf." Thinking she really meant what she said, he waited there a long time in the expectation of satisfying his hunger. In the evening he heard the mother fondling her child and saying, "If the naughty Wolf comes, he shan't get my little one. Daddy will kill him." The wolf got up in much disgust and walked away. "As for the people in that house," said he to himself, "you can't believe a word they say." The Lioness and the Vixen A lioness and a vixen were talking together about their young, as mothers will, and saying how healthy and well-grown they were, and what beautiful coats they had, and how they were the image of their parents. "My litter of cubs is a joy to see," said the fox; and then she added, rather maliciously, "But I notice you never have more than one." "No," said the lioness grimly, "but that one's a lion." Quality, not quantity. The Miller, His Son, and Their Ass A miller, accompanied by his young son, was driving his ass to market in hopes of finding a purchaser for him. On the road they met a troop of girls, laughing and talking, who exclaimed, "Did you ever see such a pair of fools? To be trudging along the dusty road when they might be riding!" The miller thought there was sense in what they said; so he made his son mount the ass, and himself walked at the side. Presently they met some of his old cronies, who greeted them and said, "You'll spoil that son of yours, letting him ride while you toil along on foot! Make him walk, young lazybones! It'll do him all the good in the world." The miller followed their advice, and took his son's place on the back of the ass while the boy trudged along behind. They had not gone far when they overtook a party of women and children, and the miller heard them say, "What a selfish old man! He himself rides in comfort, but lets his poor little boy follow as best he can on his own legs!" So he made his son get up behind him. Further along the road they met some travelers, who asked the miller whether the ass he was riding was his own property, or a beast hired for the occasion. He replied that it was his own, and that he was taking it to market to sell. "Good heavens!" said they, "with a load like that the poor beast will be so exhausted by the time he gets there that no one will look at him. Why, you'd do better to carry him!" "Anything to please you," said the old man, "we can but try." So they got off, tied the ass's legs together with a rope and slung him on a pole, and at last reached the town, carrying him between them. This was so absurd a sight that the people ran out in crowds to laugh at it, and chaffed the father and son unmercifully, some even calling them lunatics. They had then got to a bridge over the river, where the ass, frightened by the noise and his unusual situation, kicked and struggled till he broke the ropes that bound him, and fell into the water and was drowned. Whereupon the unfortunate miller, vexed and ashamed, made the best of his way home again, convinced that in trying to please all he had pleased none, and had lost his ass into the bargain. Brother and Sister A certain man had two children, a boy and a girl; and the boy was as good-looking as the girl was plain. One day, as they were playing together in their mother's chamber, they chanced upon a mirror and saw their own features for the first time. The boy saw what a handsome fellow he was, and began to boast to his sister about his good looks. She, on her part, was ready to cry with vexation when she was aware of her plainness, and took his remarks as an insult to herself. Running to her father, she told him of her brother's conceit, and accused him of meddling with his mother's things. He laughed and kissed them both, and said, "My children, learn from now onwards to make a good use of the glass. You, my boy, strive to be as good as it shows you to be handsome; and you, my girl, resolve to make up for the plainness of your features by the sweetness of your disposition." The Bull and the Calf A full-grown bull was struggling to force his huge bulk through the narrow entrance to a cow-house where his stall was, when a young calf came up and said to him, "If you'll step aside a moment, I'll show you the way to get through." The bull turned upon him an amused look. "I knew that way," said he, "before you were born." The Father and His Daughters A man had two daughters, one of whom he gave in marriage to a gardener, and the other to a potter. After a time he thought he would go and see how they were getting on; and first he went to the gardener's wife. He asked her how she was, and how things were going with herself and her husband. She replied that on the whole they were doing very well. "But," she continued, "I do wish we could have some good heavy rain. The garden wants it badly." Then he went on to the potter's wife and made the same inquiries of her. She replied that she and her husband had nothing to complain of. "But," she went on, "I do wish we could have some nice dry weather, to dry the pottery." Her father looked at her with a humorous expression on his face. "You want dry weather," he said, "and your sister wants rain. I was going to ask in my prayers that your wishes should be granted; but now it strikes me I had better not refer to the subject." Source for the above fables: Aesop's Fables , translated by V. S. Vernon Jones, edited by D. L. Ashliman (New York: Barnes and Noble, 2003). This translation was first published in 1912. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 5, 2011. Old Folks in Aesop's Fables Old Folks in Aesop's Fables Selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2006 Contents The Mischievous Dog The Mice in Council The Old Woman and the Doctor The Crab and His Mother The Old Lion The Peasant and the Apple Tree The Mice and the Weasels The Ass and the Old Peasant The Old Woman and the Wine Jar The Oxen and the Butchers The Old Hound The Charger and the Miller The Man and His Two Mistresses The Miller, His Son, and Their Ass The Man, the Horse, the Ox, and the Dog The Wolves, the Sheep, and the Ram The Swan The Old Man and Death The Sick Lion The Bundle of Sticks The Cat and the Mice The Bald Knight Death and Cupid The Hunted Beaver The Farmer and His Sons The Sick Stag The Two Rats The Old Trout, the Young Trout, and the Salmon Links to related sites Sources: Fables 1-18: Aesop's Fables . Translated by V. S. Vernon Jones. London: Heinemann, 1912. Fables 19-20: The Fables of Aesop . Edited by Joseph Jacobs. London and New York: Macmillan, 1894. Fables 21-28: The Fables of Aesop . Based on the texts of L'Estrange and Croxall. New York and Boston: Books, Inc., n.d. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Mischievous Dog There was once a dog who used to snap at people and bite them without any provocation, and who was a great nuisance to everyone who came to his master's house. So his master fastened a bell round his neck to warn people of his presence. The dog was very proud of the bell, and strutted about tinkling it with immense satisfaction. But an old dog came up to him and said, "The fewer airs you give yourself the better, my friend. You don't think, do you, that your bell was given you as a reward of merit? On the contrary, it is a badge of disgrace." Moral: Notoriety is often mistaken for fame. Return to the table of contents . The Mice in Council Once upon a time all the mice met together in council and discussed the best means of securing themselves against the attacks of the cat. After several suggestions had been debated, a mouse of some standing and experience got up and said, "I think I have hit upon a plan which will ensure our safety in the future, provided you approve and carry it out. It is that we should fasten a bell round the neck of our enemy the cat, which will by its tinkling warn us of her approach." This proposal was warmly applauded, and it had been already decided to adopt it, when an old mouse got upon his feet and said, "I agree with you all that the plan before us is an admirable one. But may I ask who is going to bell the cat?" Return to the table of contents . The Old Woman and the Doctor An old woman became almost totally blind from a disease of the eyes, and, after consulting a doctor, made an agreement with him in the presence of witnesses that she should pay him a high fee if he cured her, while if he failed he was to receive nothing. The doctor accordingly prescribed a course of treatment, and every time he paid her a visit he took away with him some article out of the house, until at last, when he visited her for the last time, and the cure was complete, there was nothing left. When the old woman saw that the house was empty she refused to pay him his fee; and, after repeated refusals on her part, he sued her before the magistrates for payment of her debt. On being brought into court she was ready with her defense. "The claimant," said she, "has stated the facts about our agreement correctly. I undertook to pay him a fee if he cured me, and he, on his part, promised to charge nothing if he failed. Now, he says I am cured. But I say that I am blinder than ever, and I can prove what I say. When my eyes were bad I could at any rate see well enough to be aware that my house contained a certain amount of furniture and other things. But now, when according to him I am cured, I am entirely unable to see anything there at all." Return to the table of contents . The Crab and His Mother An old crab said to her son, "Why do you walk sideways like that, my son? You ought to walk straight." The young crab replied, "Show me how, dear mother, and I'll follow your example." The old crab tried, but tried in vain, and then saw how foolish she had been to find fault with her child. Moral: Example is better than precept. Return to the table of contents . The Old Lion A lion, enfeebled by age and no longer able to procure food for himself by force, determined to do so by cunning. Betaking himself to a cave, he lay down inside and feigned to be sick; and whenever any of the other animals entered to inquire after his health, he sprang upon them and devoured them. Many lost their lives in this way, till one day a fox called at the cave, and, having a suspicion of the truth, addressed the lion from outside instead of going in, and asked him how he did. He replied that he was in a very bad way. "But," said he, "why do you stand outside? Pray come in." "I should have done so," answered the fox, "if I hadn't noticed that all the footprints point towards the cave and none the other way." Return to the table of contents . The Peasant and the Apple Tree A peasant had an apple tree growing in his garden, which bore no fruit, but merely served to provide a shelter from the heat for the sparrows and grasshoppers which sat and chirped in its branches. Disappointed at its barrenness he determined to cut it down, and went and fetched his ax for the purpose. But when the sparrows and the grasshoppers saw what he was about to do, they begged him to spare it, and said to him, "If you destroy the tree we shall have to seek shelter elsewhere, and you will no longer have our merry chirping to enliven your work in the garden." He, however, refused to listen to them, and set to work with a will to cut through the trunk. A few strokes showed that it was hollow inside and contained a swarm of bees and a large store of honey. Delighted with his find he threw down his ax, saying, "The old tree is worth keeping after all." Moral: Utility is most men's test of worth. Return to the table of contents . The Mice and the Weasels There was war between the mice and the weasels, in which the mice always got the worst of it, numbers of them being killed and eaten by the weasels. So they called a council of war, in which an old mouse got up and said, "It's no wonder we are always beaten, for we have no generals to plan our battles and direct our movements in the field." Acting on his advice, they chose the biggest mice to be their leaders, and these, in order to be distinguished from the rank and file, provided themselves with helmets bearing large plumes of straw. They then led out the mice to battle, confident of victory; but they were defeated as usual, and were soon scampering as fast as they could to their holes. All made their way to safety without difficulty except the leaders, who were so hampered by the badges of their rank that they could not get into their holes, and fell easy victims to their pursuers. Moral: Greatness carries its own penalties. Return to the table of contents . The Ass and the Old Peasant An old peasant was sitting in a meadow watching his ass, which was grazing close by, when all of a sudden he caught sight of armed men stealthily approaching. He jumped up in a moment, and begged the ass to fly with him as fast as he could, "Or else," said he, "we shall both be captured by the enemy." But the ass just looked round lazily and said, "And if so, do you think they'll make me carry heavier loads than I have to now?" "No," said his master. "Oh, well, then," said the ass, "I don't mind if they do take me, for I shan't be any worse off." Return to the table of contents . The Old Woman and the Wine Jar An old woman picked up an empty wine jar which had once contained a rare and costly wine, and which still retained some traces of its exquisite bouquet. She raised it to her nose and sniffed at it again and again. "Ah," she cried, "how delicious must have been the liquid which has left behind so ravishing a smell." Return to the table of contents . The Oxen and the Butchers Once upon a time the oxen determined to be revenged upon the butchers for the havoc they wrought in their ranks, and plotted to put them to death on a given day. They were all gathered together discussing how best to carry out the plan, and the more violent of them were engaged in sharpening their horns for the fray, when an old ox got up upon his feet and said, "My brothers, you have good reason, I know, to hate these butchers, but, at any rate, they understand their trade and do what they have to do without causing unnecessary pain. But if we kill them, others, who have no experience, will be set to slaughter us, and will by their bungling inflict great sufferings upon us. For you may be sure that even though all the butchers perish, mankind will never go without their beef." Return to the table of contents . The Old Hound A hound who had served his master well for years, and had run down many a quarry in his time, began to lose his strength and speed owing to age. One day, when out hunting, his master started a powerful wild boar and set the hound at him. The latter seized the beast by the ear, but his teeth were gone and he could not retain his hold; so the boar escaped. His master began to scold him severely, but the hound interrupted him with these words, "My will is as strong as ever, master, but my body is old and feeble. You ought to honor me for what I have been instead of abusing me for what I am." Return to the table of contents . The Charger and the Miller A horse who had been used to carry his rider into battle felt himself growing old and chose to work in a mill instead. He now no longer found himself stepping out proudly to the beating of the drums, but was compelled to slave away all day grinding the corn. Bewailing his hard lot, he said one day to the miller, "Ah me! I was once a splendid war horse gaily caparisoned, and attended by a groom whose sole duty was to see to my wants. How different is my present condition! I wish I had never given up the battlefield for the mill." The miller replied with asperity, "It's no use your regretting the past. Fortune has many ups and downs. You must just take them as they come." Return to the table of contents . The Man and His Two Mistresses A man of middle age, whose hair was turning grey, had two mistresses, an old woman and a young one. The elder of the two didn't like having a lover who looked so much younger than herself; so, whenever he came to see her, she used to pull the dark hairs out of his head to make him look old. The younger, on the other hand, didn't like him to look so much older than herself, and took every opportunity of pulling out the grey hairs, to make him look young. Between them, they left not a hair in his head, and he became perfectly bald. Return to the table of contents . The Miller, His Son, and Their Ass A miller, accompanied by his young son, was driving his ass to market in hopes of finding a purchaser for him. On the road they met a troop of girls, laughing and talking, who exclaimed, "Did you ever see such a pair of fools? To be trudging along the dusty road when they might be riding!" The miller thought there was sense in what they said; so he made his son mount the ass, and himself walked at the side. Presently they met some of his old cronies, who greeted them and said, "You'll spoil that son of yours, letting him ride while you toil along on foot! Make him walk, young lazybones! It'll do him all the good in the world." The miller followed their advice, and took his son's place on the back of the ass, while the boy trudged along behind. They had not gone far when they overtook a party of women and children, and the miller heard them say, "What a selfish old man! He himself rides in comfort, but lets his poor little boy follow as best he can on his own legs!" So he made his son get up behind him. Further along the road they met some travelers, who asked the miller whether the ass he was riding was his own property, or a beast hired for the occasion. He replied that it was his own, and that he was taking it to market to sell. "Good heavens!" said they. "With a load like that the poor beast will be so exhausted by the time he gets there that no one will look at him. Why, you'd do better to carry him!" "Anything to please you," said the old man. "We can but try." So they got off, tied the ass's legs together with a rope and slung him on a pole, and at last reached the town, carrying him between them. This was so absurd a sight that the people ran out in crowds to laugh at it, and chaffed the father and son unmercifully, some even calling them lunatics. They had then got to a bridge over the river, where the ass, frightened by the noise and his unusual situation, kicked and struggled till he broke the ropes that bound him, and fell into the water and was drowned. Whereupon the unfortunate miller, vexed and ashamed, made the best of his way home again, convinced that in trying to please all, he had pleased none, and had lost his ass into the bargain. Return to the table of contents . The Man, the Horse, the Ox, and the Dog One winter's day during a severe storm a horse, an ox, and a dog came and begged for shelter in the house of a man. He readily admitted them, and, as they were cold and wet, he lit a fire for their comfort; and he put oats before the horse, and hay before the ox, while he fed the dog with the remains of his own dinner. When the storm abated, and they were about to depart, they determined to show their gratitude in the following way. They divided the life of man among them, and each endowed one part of it with the qualities which were peculiarly his own. The horse took youth, and hence young men are high-mettled and impatient of restraint; the ox took middle age, and accordingly men in middle life are steady and hard-working; while the dog took old age, which is the reason why old men are so often peevish and ill-tempered, and, like dogs, attached chiefly to those who look to their comfort, while they are disposed to snap at those who are unfamiliar or distasteful to them. Return to the table of contents . The Wolves, the Sheep, and the Ram The wolves sent a deputation to the sheep with proposals for a lasting peace between them, on condition of their giving up the sheepdogs to instant death. The foolish sheep agreed to the terms; but an old ram, whose years had brought him wisdom, interfered and said, "How can we expect to live at peace with you? Why, even with the dogs at hand to protect us, we are never secure from your murderous attacks!" Return to the table of contents . The Swan The swan is said to sing but once in its life -- when it knows that it is about to die. A certain man who had heard of the song of the swan one day saw one of these birds for sale in the market, and bought it and took it home with him. A few days later he had some friends to dinner, and produced the swan, and bade it sing for their entertainment; but the swan remained silent. In course of time, when it was growing old, it became aware of its approaching end and broke into a sweet, sad song. When its owner heard it, he said angrily, "If the creature only sings when it is about to die, what a fool I was that day I wanted to hear its song! I ought to have wrung its neck instead of merely inviting it to sing." Return to the table of contents . The Old Man and Death An old man cut himself a bundle of sticks in a wood and started to carry them home. He had a long way to go, and was tired out before he had got much more than halfway. Casting his burden on the ground, he called upon Death to come and release him from his life of toil. The words were scarcely out of his mouth when, much to his dismay, Death stood before him and professed his readiness to serve him. He was almost frightened out of his wits, but he had enough presence of mind to stammer out, "Good sir, if you'd be so kind, pray help me up with my burden again." Return to the table of contents . The Sick Lion A lion had come to the end of his days and lay sick unto death at the mouth of his cave, gasping for breath. The animals, his subjects, came round him and drew nearer as he grew more and more helpless. When they saw him on the point of death they thought to themselves, "Now is the time to pay off old grudges." So the boar came up and drove at him with his tusks; then a bull gored him with his horns; still the lion lay helpless before them: so the ass, feeling quite safe from danger, came up, and turning his tail to the lion kicked up his heels into his face. "This is a double death," growled the lion. Moral: Only cowards insult dying majesty. Return to the table of contents . The Bundle of Sticks An old man on the point of death summoned his sons around him to give them some parting advice. He ordered his servants to bring in a faggot of sticks, and said to his eldest son, "Break it." The son strained and strained, but with all his efforts was unable to break the bundle. The other sons also tried, but none of them was successful. "Untie the faggots," said the father, "and each of you take a stick." When they had done so, he called out to them, "Now, break," and each stick was easily broken. "You see my meaning," said their father. Moral: Union gives strength. Return to the table of contents . The Cat and the Mice A certain house was much infested by mice. The owner brought home a cat, a famous mouser, who soon made such havoc among the little folk that those who were left stayed closely in the upper shelves. Then the cat grew hungry and thin, and, driven by her wit's end, hung by her hind legs to a peg in the wall and pretended to be dead in order that the mice would no longer be afraid to come near her. An old mouse came to the edge of the shelf, and, seeing through the trick, cried out, "Ah ha, Mrs. Pussy! We should not come near you, even if your skin were stuffed with straw." Moral: Old birds are not to be caught with chaff. Return to the table of contents . The Bald Knight A certain knight, who wore a wig to conceal his baldness, was out hunting one day. A sudden gust of wind carried away his wig and showed his bald pate. His friends all laughed heartily at the odd figure he made, but the old fellow, so far from being put out, laughed as heartily as any of them. "Is it any wonder," said he, "that another man's hair shouldn't keep on my head when my own wouldn't stay there?" Moral: Every event has its reason. Return to the table of contents . Death and Cupid Cupid, one sultry summer's noon, tired with play and faint with heat, went into a cool grotto to repose himself. This happened to be the cave of Death. He threw himself carelessly down upon the floor, and his quiver turning upside down, all the arrows fell out and mingled with those of Death, which lay scattered about the place. When he awoke he gathered them up as well as he could; but they were so intermingled that although he knew the proper number to take, he could not rightly distinguish his own. Hence he took up some of the arrows which belonged to Death, and left some of his. This is the reason why that we now and then see the hearts of the old and decrepit transfixed with the bolts of Love; and with great grief and surprise sometimes see youth and beauty smitten with the darts of Death. Moral: Death and Love strike unexpectedly. Return to the table of contents . The Hunted Beaver The stones of the beaver was once thought to be of use in medicine, and the animal was often hunted on that account. A shrewd old fellow of the race, being hard pressed by the dogs, and knowing well why they were after him, had the resolution and the presence of mind to bite off his stones and leave them behind him, and thus escaped with his life. Moral: The skin is nearer than the cloak. Return to the table of contents . The Farmer and His Sons A certain farmer, lying at the point of death, called his sons around him, and gave into their charge his fields and vineyards, telling them that a treasure lay hidden somewhere in them, within a foot of the surface of the ground. His sons thought he spoke of money which he had hidden, and after he was buried, they dug most industriously all over the estate, but found nothing. The soil being so well loosened, however, the succeeding crops were of unequalled richness, and the sons then found out what their father had in view in telling them to dig for hidden treasure. Moral: Industry is fortune's right hand. Return to the table of contents . The Sick Stag A stag, whose joints had become stiff with old age, was at great pains to get together a large heap of fodder -- enough, as he thought, to last him for the remainder of his days. He stretched himself out upon it, and, now dozing, now nibbling, made up his mind to wait quietly for the end. He had always been of a gay and lively turn, and had made in his time many friends. These now came in great numbers to see him and wish him farewell. While engaged in friendly talk over past adventures and old times, what more natural than that they should help themselves to a little of the food which seemed so plentifully stored around? The end of the matter was, that the poor stag died not so much of sickness or of old age as for sheer want of the food which his friends had eaten for him. Moral: Thoughtless friends bring more hurt than profit. Return to the table of contents . The Two Rats A cunning old rat discovered in his rounds a most tempting piece of cheese, which was placed in a trap. But being well aware that if he touched it he would be caught, he slyly sought one of his young friends, and, under the mask of friendship, informed him of the prize. "I cannot use it myself," said he, "for I have just made a hearty meal." The inexperienced youngster thanked him with gratitude for the news, and heedlessly sprang upon the tempting bait; on which the trap closed and instantly destroyed him. his companion, being now quite secure, quietly ate up the cheese. Moral: Do not listen to every passer-by. Return to the table of contents . The Old Trout, the Young Trout, and the Salmon A fisherman, in the month of May, stood angling on the bank of a river with an artificial fly. He threw his bait with so much art that a young trout was rushing towards it, when she was prevented by her mother. "Stop, child!" said she. "Never be too hasty where there is a possibility of danger. Take due time to consider, before you risk an action that may be fatal. How do you know whether that is indeed a fly, or the snare of an enemy? Let someone else make the experiment before you. If it be a fly, he will very probably elude the first attack, and then the second may be made if not with success, at least with safety." She had no sooner uttered this caution than a salmon seized upon the pretended fly, and was captured. Moral: Do not rush into a strange position. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Aging and Death in Folklore . Bald Stories: Folktales about Hairless Men . Revised December 1, 2006. Aging and Death in Folklore Aging and Death in Folklore by D. L. Ashliman © 1997-2021 Return to folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Aging: realism and resignation expressed in proverbs Distrust of old people in folklore Widowhood Caring for old people Euthanasia and geronticide Sacrificing one's grandmother The old woman in the chest Disposing of the corpse: a legend that is still alive Why old people are no longer put to death Gaining care by trickery Grandchildren come to their grandparents' aid When enlightened self interest fails Inevitability of senility and death Stages of life No one wants to die Death's approach should surprise no one Attempts to trick Death Death trivialized Death as punishment Excessive grief Death as a divine release Related Links Aging: realism and resignation expressed in proverbs For most pre-industrial cultures, life's last chapter has been a bitter one. Surviving folklore reflects widespread resignation as to the inevitability of impoverishment, sexual impotence, failing health and vitality, and the loss of family and community status. No one expected the impossible. Such euphemisms as "golden years" and "senior citizens" did not exist. You cannot teach an old dog new tricks. There is no fool like an old fool. An old man who takes a young wife invites Death to the wedding. Nothing good will come from an old man who still wants to dance. For an old man to marry is like wanting to harvest in the wintertime. Old people can dye their hair, but they can't change their backs. Age is poverty. Age is a troublesome guest. Age is a sickness from which everyone must die. Youth rises, age falls. A young wife is an old man's dispatch horse to the grave. A young woman with an old husband is a wife by day and a widow by night. A woman's beauty, an echo in the forest, and a rainbow all quickly disappear. When the old cow dances, her claws rattle. When the wolf grows old, the crows ride him. Source: Wander, Deutsches Sprichwörter-Lexikon, vol. 1, cols. 55, 58-60; Simrock, Die deutschen Sprichwörter, pp. 281, 614; Jente, Proverbia Communia , nos. 28, 102. These proverbs reflect a chapter of life that most of us would prefer to ignore. We do not like to be reminded of our own mortality, and in today's world, institutions such as hospitals, hospices, retirement centers, and funeral homes (euphemisms abound in the language of death!) shield us from the worst of the Grim Reaper's ravages. We cope, or so it might seem, by pretending that death does not exist. The foolish man thinks he'll live forever if he stays away from war, but old age shows him no mercy though the spears spare him. ... Cattle die, kinsmen die, one day you die yourself; I know one thing that never dies -- the dead man's reputation. Source: Poems of the Elder Edda , translated by Patricia Terry, pp. 13, 21 It has not always been so. In the religion of the ancient north, even the gods were mortal. For example, Balder -- the Norse god of light and joy, and the son of Odin and Frigga -- was killed by a spear of mistletoe (according to Snorri Sturluson) or by a magic sword (according to Saxo Grammaticus). His death, we read in The Prose Edda, "was the greatest misfortune ever to befall gods and men." Other Nordic gods were also vulnerable. Loki, the infamous trickster, challenged the mighty Thor to wrestle his aged foster-mother, an old crone named Elli. Much to Thor's chagrin, the old woman beat him, but -- as Loki later explained -- the trickster had temporarily placed Thor under the spell of old age, and "there never has been, nor ever will be anyone (if he grows old enough to become aged), who is not tripped up by old age." In fact, none of the deities will be spared. According to Norse mythology, all the gods will be killed by the forces of evil on the day of Ragnarök (also known as the Götterdämmerung -- "Twilight of the Gods" -- perhaps best known now through Richard Wagner's opera). Our ancestors coped, from the evidence of mythology and folklore, by directly confronting the debilitation of age and the inevitability of death. Distrust of old people in folklore In spite of the numerous tales and proverbs celebrating the wisdom of old people and promoting their care, folklore is replete with reflections of a basic distrust of age. Various demonic personages, notably changelings and the devil himself, can be rendered powerless by tricking them into revealing their age. More significantly, in pre-industrial Europe superstitions abound that cast suspicion at old people, especially women. Proverbs and popular superstitions state the claim succinctly: If the devil can't come himself, he sends an old woman. It is not good if one goes out in the morning and encounters an old woman. He who walks between two old women early in the morning shall have only bad luck the rest of the day. To meet old women first thing in the morning means bad luck; young people, good luck. Many men would rather let themselves be beaten to death, than to pass between two old women. A person on his way to an important undertaking will have bad luck if he encounters an old woman. Encountering a young girl will bring him good luck. Source: Wander, Deutsches Sprichwörter-Lexikon , vol. 4, col. 1105. Simrock, Die deutschen Sprichwörter , p. 554; Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie , vol. 3, items 58, 380, 791, 938, 1015. Further, the sinister nature of old women is reflected in numerous folktales, for example: An old woman, promised a pair of shoes by the devil if she could bring discord to a happily married couple, told the wife that she could increase her husband's love by cutting a few hairs from his chin. She then told the husband that his wife was plotting to cut his throat while he slept. The man pretended to sleep. Seeing his wife silently approaching with a razor, he struck her dead with a stick. Source: Retold from "An Old Woman Sows Discord," Ranke, Folktales of Germany , no. 66. Type 1353. Such tales help explain the widespread superstition, documented above, that if the first person you saw in the morning was an old woman, you would have bad luck. A curious variant on this view is the belief that meeting a virgin or a priest first thing in the morning also would bring bad luck, whereas meeting a whore would bring good fortune. Germans formerly believed that old people had the power to attract vitality from young people, but this -- of course -- came at the expense of the latter. The fear of oldsters (especially females) is further reflected in the fairy tales of many countries, where old women (even those who at first appear to be helpful and kindly) frequently turn out to be sinister witches. Even in those instances where an old person helps the hero or heroine, the aid is often suspicious, and the old person rarely shares in the reward. Sources: Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie, vol. 3, p. 440, item 177. Bächtold-Stäubli, Handwörterbuch des deutschen Aberglaubens, vol. 1, col. 324. Widowhood For a selection of folktales featuring widows who are too eager to remarry following the death of their husbands, see the following file: Widows in (Short-Lived) Mourning . Folktales of Aarne-Thompson types 65, 1350, 1352*, and 1510. Caring for old people Resignation Widely distributed proverbs express with obvious irony and apparent acceptance the view that parents cannot necessarily expect the same care in their age that they earlier tendered to their children: One father can better nourish ten children than ten children can nourish one father. Parents love their children more than do children their parents. The old man saves, his son is a spendthrift. Good deeds are wasted on old men and on rogues. Age pipes and youth dances. The parents' death is often the children's good fortune. Source: Wander, Deutsches Sprichwörter-Lexikon, vol. 1, cols. 54, 56, 58, 63, 1507. If the mother looks after the child, both smile. If the child looks after the mother, both cry. (Jewish proverb, heard in Pittsburgh, June 1998) This pessimistic view is also reflected in animal fables: A raven was carrying his chicks, one at a time, from an island to the mainland. In mid flight he asked the first, "Who will carry me when I am old and can no longer fly?" "I will," answered the young raven, but the father did not believe him, and dropped him into the sea. The same question was put to the second chick. He too replied, "I will carry you when you are old," and the father also let him fall into the sea. The last chick received the same question, but he answered, "Father, you will have to fend for yourself when you are old, because by then I will have my own family to care for." "You speak the truth," said the father raven, and carried the chick to safety. Source: Retold from Tolstoy's Fourth Reader (1872). This tale, type 244C*, is found primarily in Eastern European and Yiddish folklore. Other examples include: "A Fable of a Bird and Her Chicks," Weinreich, Yiddish Folktales , no. 12; and "The Partridge and Her Young," Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories , no. 95. Euthanasia and geronticide Europe Every culture has its own folk medicine: rituals, practices, and preparations believed to cure illness and preserve good health. However, not all health related rituals are directed at the patient's recovery. For example, numerous European superstitions -- still extant in the nineteenth century, and possibly later -- claimed to help the mortally ill die faster and easier. From a purely medical perspective these were harmless acts. Removing roof tiles or simply opening windows was widely believed to speed death by giving the departing soul an easier exit. Similarly, some advised filling every hollow space in the house, thus denying the reluctant soul a hiding place. Other acts -- for example, taking away a dying person's pillow, cutting a scrap from one's clothing, or not allowing one to clinch one's thumb in one's fist -- were more intrusive, but still relatively harmless. Sources: Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie , vol. 3, p. 448, no. 439; p. 457, no. 664; p. 459, no. 721; p. 472, no. 992; p. 474, no. 1053. Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (1880), vol. 2, p. 89, nos. 273-276. Kuhn Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen (1859), vol. 1, p. 47, no. 126. However innocent these moves, their intent was clear to all concerned, and without doubt they sometimes may have set the stage for more aggressive acts. Such symbolic responses not only reflect a resignation with the inevitability of death, but they also claim -- indirectly but still clearly -- that it is the survivors' prerogative to assist the natural process of dying when it becomes evident that the time is right. Ancient Europeans had little sympathy for the infirm. To "die at the right time" was not a value first invented by Nietzsche's Zarathustra. Jacob Grimm, in his German Legal Antiquities, lists numerous examples of lethal acts against the aged in pre-Christian Germany. Suicide, self-sacrifice in battle, abandonment, and outright execution are among the solutions applied by our European forebears to those who lived too long. Sources: Nietzsche, Thus Spoke Zarathustra, pt. 1, ch. 21. Grimm, Deutsche Rechtsaltertümer, vol. 1, pp. 669-675. On the other hand, folklore not only contains survivals of these primitive lethal acts against the aged, but it also celebrates old people's wisdom and calls for their continuing care. This ambiguity reflects a fragility in the relationship between the generations that his been with humankind throughout all of recorded history. Hanns Bächthold-Stäubli explains this apparent cultural contradiction by giving a double definition of the word "old." In the more primitive stages, he claims, "old" designated people between 35 and 60 years of age, and these indeed were given special status and privilege. However, once a person became senile and could no longer contribute to family and society, he was pushed from his position of honor, and even executed or abandoned. Source: Handwörterbuch des deutschen Aberglaubens , vol. 1, col. 328. In times of war, forced migration, or famine the temptation to do away the weakest members of a group would be especially great. A saga contains the following description of a famine in Iceland in the 10th century (circumstances which, coincidentally, led to the Norsemen's colonization of Greenland and their discovery of America, some 500 years before Columbus): "Men ate ravens and foxes, and many loathsome thinges were eaten which should not be eaten, and some men had the old and helpless killed and thrown over the cliffs." Source: As quoted in Jacqueline Simpson, Everyday Life in the Viking Age (New York: Dorset Press, 1987), p. 40. One of the Grimms' German Legends (no. 454) tells how, in the eighth century, a community fleeing from enemy soldiers buried one of their old women alive to keep her from being taken captive. They carried out the fateful task while chanting "Creep under, creep under, the world is too sorrowful for you; you can no longer follow the commotion." In their commentary to this legend, the Grimms document two additional instances of ritualistic killing of the aged. In each of the Grimms' three examples the geronticide was accompanied by a ritualistic chant, which suggests that these had, to at least some extent, not only legitimized, but also formalized the killing of their aged. Karl Haupt, writing in the mid nineteenth century, gives a particularly dramatic (and relatively recent) example of socially sanctioned European geronticide in Lausitz, a region in today's Southeast Germany. Himself a German, Haupt is quick to emphasize that this shameful custom was practiced by Slavic groups living in this region. His account follows: During heathen times the Sorbian Wends of Lausitz practiced the shameful and gruesome custom of ridding themselves of their old people who were no longer able to contribute. When , a father would be struck dead by his own son A son would strike his own father dead when he became old and incompetent, or he would throw him into water, or he would push him over a high cliff. Indeed, there are many examples of this, even after the advent of Christianity. For example: Herr Levin von Schulenburg, a high official in Altmark, was traveling among the Wends in about 1580 when he saw an old man being led away by several people. "Where are you going with the old man?" he asked, and received the answer, "To God!" They were going to sacrifice him to God, because he was no longer able to earn his own sustenance. When the official grasped what was happening, he forced them to turn the old man over to him. He took him home with him and hired him as a gatekeeper, a position that he held for twenty additional years. Source: Karl Haupt, Sagenbuch der Lausitz , Zweiter Theil (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1863), p. 9. As a final survival of this gruesome custom, Haupt cites a Wendish ritualistic folk song, apparently still being sung as late as the mid nineteenth century: Old man, go to sleep! Young man, find a wife! Throw stones at the old man, And apples at the young ones; Old man, go to sleep! Young man, find a wife! Source: Haupt, p. 10. Karl Haupt's source is Leopold Haupt and J. E. Schmaler, Volkslieder der Wenden in der Ober- und Niederlausitz (Grimma, 1841), vol. 2, p. 94. The German text of the song follows: Schlaf, Alter, ein! Junger du mußt frei'n! Nach dem Alten mit den Steinen, Nach den Jungen mit den Äpfeln; Schlaf, Alter ein! Junger du mußt frei'n! Other primitive cultures Abandonment of the sick or the aged by primitive peoples, especially those with a nomadic culture, is well documented and reflects the harshness of life endured by many of our forebears. An Eskimo story, for example, can begin, in a matter-of-fact tone: "One Winter there was an old woman who was left behind ... with only a few insects to eat." Similarly, a Chiricahua Indian myth tells how tribal members concluded that a certain old woman was "good for nothing" and hence decided to abandon her. Alone, she wept to the Mountain Spirits, and they performed a ceremony that cured her of her ailments. She returned to her people and shared with them the healing ceremony, which became a part of their culture. The myth thus explains the origin of a certain healing ritual, but it does not directly criticize the practice of abandoning an old, infirm tribal member to certain death. Sources: Lawrence Millman, A Kayak Full of Ghosts: Eskimo Tales (Santa Barbara: Capra Press, 1987), p. 184. Margot Astrov, American Indian Prose and Poetry (New York: Capricorn), pp. 211-212. See also Harry Hoijer, Chiricahua and Mescalero Apache Texts, The University of Chicago Publications in Anthropology, Linguistic Series. (Chicago, 1938), p. 33. Sacrificing one's grandmother One of the crassest examples of disregard for the aged is found in many folk versions of the medieval jest "Unibos." (type 1535). An episode frequently contained in this immensely popular tale describes how the hero-trickster unremorsefully sacrifices his aging mother or grandmother. Asbjørnsen's and Moe's " Big Peter and Little Peter ," summarized below, is typical: There were two adult brothers, both named Peter, one rich and one poor. Wealthy Big Peter maliciously killed his poor brother's only calf. Little Peter skinned the animal and then went from farm to farm trying to sell the hide, but never with success. Overtaken by nightfall, he gained lodging from a farmer's wife, who -- as Little Peter soon discovered -- was "making merry" with the village priest while her husband was away. The farmer unexpectedly returned, and the priest hid himself in a chest. Armed with this information and his own quick wit, Little Peter traded his calf skin for the chest and then extorted a small fortune from the captive priest. Back at home, Little Peter showed his rich brother the unbelievable sum that he had received for the hide. Big Peter, filled with greed and envy, immediately slaughtered all of his own cattle and rushed to market with the hides, but instead of wealth, he found only ridicule and scorn. He returned home, swearing to strike his brother dead that very night. Little Peter heard the threat and saved himself by changing sleeping places with his old mother. Thus, when Big Peter tried to carried out his threat against his brother, he chopped off his old mother's head instead. Little Peter then hatched a plan to use the old woman's corpse to further enrich himself. He put her body on a sledge, balanced the severed head on her neck, and dragged her to market where he set her up as an apple seller. Her first customer was a quick-tempered fellow who, insulted because she would not respond to his questions, gave her a slap, literally knocking her head off. Little Peter, by now quite good at extortion, collected a substantial sum from the would-be apple buyer in return for not reporting him to the authorities. As if this were not enough, Little Peter returned home and showed Big Peter the money their old mother's body had brought at the market. The greedy brother, we are told, had an old stepmother, and he killed her outright, taking the body to market hoping for a similarly high price. But instead of money, he received only scorn and threats of arrest. Other tricks follow, tricks that ultimately cost Big Peter and his wife their lives and leave Little Peter a wealthy man. Source: East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon, pp. 336-345. This story of primitive justice offers no apologies or regrets for the fact that the hero not only tricks the villain into killing innocent people -- his wife and stepmother -- but also quite consciously sacrifices his own innocent old mother for his own well being. Note: Another example of a type 1535 tale containing the episode of the intentionally sacrificed old mother or grandmother (here called a "great grandmother," presumably to emphasize her advanced age, and hence her dispensability): "Der Schelm von Mols" ("The Trickster from Mols" -- Denmark), Bødker, Dänische Volksmärchen, no. 23. In some tales of this type the grandmother's murder is repressed. The storyteller lets her die of natural causes or accidentally, but the hero still uses her corpse to extort money from others. Examples: " Little Claus and Big Claus ," Andersen, Complete Fairy Tales and Stories, no. 2; "Master Sly" (Luxemburg), Bødker, Hole, and D'Aronco, European Folk Tales , pp. 99-102. In still other versions, the trickster hero uses his wife in a similar fashion. For example, in "The Peasant Pewit," (Ranke, Folktales of Germany, no. 51) the little peasant, threatened by enemies, exchanges clothing with his wife, thus tricking them into killing her instead of him. The old woman in the chest Only slightly less crass, applying twentieth-century standards, than Little Peter's mortal exploitation of his old mother is the tale of the woman in the chest (type 1536A), also a story of how a poor man becomes wealthy at the hands of a rich man, using an innocent old woman (usually the hero's own mother) as a sacrificial pawn. The Chilean version "The Miserly Rich Man and the Unlucky Poor Man" is typical of versions found throughout Europe and beyond. A rich man suspects, with justification, that his poor brother is stealing food from him. To gain evidence, he puts his old mother into a chest, which he asks the poor man to safeguard for a few days. From her hiding place the old woman does indeed hear her poor son boasting about stealing a cow from his rich brother. Startled, she breaks her silence, and the poor man opens up the chest. Upon discovering the spy, the poor man jams a great chunk of hot meat and a piece of bread into her mouth, and she chokes to death. The rich brother reclaims his chest and finds his dead mother inside. Not knowing how she died and obviously fearing any official investigation, he takes the body to his brother and pays him a substantial sum to bury it. The poor man takes the money, but only pretends to bury the corpse, using it instead to extort more and more money from his miserly brother. Source: Pino-Saavedra, Folktales of Chile, no. 45. Additional examples: "Die Geschichte von der Metzelsuppue," ("The Story of the Meat Soup" -- Swabia), Zaunert, Deutsche Märchen seit Grimm, no. 23; "The Artful Lad" (Sweden), Booss, Scandinavian Folk and Fairy Tales, pp. 208-220; "The Woman in the Chest," Ranke, Folktales of Germany, no. 52; "Wie ein Frau dreimal beerdigt wurde" ("How a Woman Was Buried Three Times" -- Ukraine), Mykytiuk, Ukrainische Märchen, no. 35; "Die gestohlene Sau" ("The Stolen Sow" -- Austria), Haiding, Märchen aus Oberösterreich, no. 19. Tales of type 1535 and 1536A thus turn the hostility felt by members of different socio-economic classes and different generations toward each other into morbid jokes. Freud, in his famous essay Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious (chapter 3, section 3) noted that a common function of jokes is to provide verbal outlets for "brutal hostility, forbidden by law." Anecdotes of the types discussed above playfully depict the killing of old people and the use of their corpses for the betterment of their offspring. These tales thus continue to reflect feelings of hostility toward the aged long after civilization has developed safeguards against the literal killing of people deemed too old to be of further use. Disposing of the corpse: a legend that is still alive These stories not only turn the exploitation of the old into a joke, they also make light of problems encountered by the survivors in disposing of the corpse. These tales thus reflect the attitude that an old person can, at the same time, be both an expendable resource and a troublesome burden. This latter feature has given rise to an entire family of tales generically called "Disposing of the Corpse" (type 1536). An Icelandic version entitled "The Woman that Was Killed Four Times" is particularly revealing. It relates how a woman killed her old mother-in-law (who lived with her and her husband) and then set the body in a kneeling position over her husband's treasure chest. The husband thinks the "intruder" is a burglar and stabs her. Recognizing the corpse as his own mother, he enlists his wife's help to dispose of the body. The younger woman twice again sets up similar tricks. Thus, she can rid herself of her aging mother-in-law only after she has had her "killed" four times. Source: "Die viermal getötete Frau," Schier, Märchen aus Island, no. 43." The image of the aging parent as a troublesome burden is only thinly veiled behind the curtain of slapstick in these tales. And indeed, similar motifs are still extant in the active folklore of the twentieth century. "Disposing of Grandmother's Corpse" is still a popular theme in European and American folktales. Note: Jan Harold Brunvand gives numerous examples, with interpretations, of this and related urban legends in The Vanishing Hitchhiker, ch. 5. See also Alan Dundes, "On the Psychology of Legend," in American Folk Legend; A Symposium, Wayland D. Hand, ed. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1971), pp. 33-36. The legend was built into the popular film National Lampoon's Vacation starring Chevy Chase. "The Stolen Corpse," collected in 1963 in England is typical of versions told throughout Europe and America. This story, like most of its counterparts, claims to be true. Its pedigree, following the tradition of legends, is established in the tale's opening sentence: "This story was told me by my cousin, who had heard it from a friend in Leeds, about a couple whom he knew, who went for a camping holiday in Spain with their car." The account, retold below, continues: They took his stepmother with them, and the old woman died one night in her tent. Not knowing how to deal with the foreign bureaucracy, they rolled the corpse up in a tent and tied it to the roof of their car. However, at their first coffee stop someone stole the car. Thus they returned to England without their car and without the stepmother. However, they were unable to prove her death for their inheritance. Source: Briggs and Tongue, Folktales of England, no. 48. The "stolen corpse" legends are exemplary in their economy. The burden (perceived or real) of an old person, nearly always a woman, on her family is concentrated into a single symbolic event, their inconvenience at having to deal with her corpse while on a family vacation. The problem always has the same solution -- theft. Here is poetic justice: The antisocial elements that normally cause us anxiety and grief at last bring us relief, and they in turn will have to answer the embarrassing and potentially threatening questions about the corpse in their luggage. However, getting rid of the old dependent does have a price: the family car and tangled legalities concerning her will and insurance. Why old people are no longer put to death Although "geronticide" as a linguistic expression is not nearly as common as "infanticide," survivals of such a practice occur in the folktales of many lands, classified as type 981 and generically called " The Killing of Old Men ," as the intended victims of these legend-like tales are nearly always male. Such stories, in the tradition of believed legends around the world, typically open with a sparse matter-of-factness, describing the purposeful killing of old people as if everyone knew that such acts were formerly necessary for the survival of the community. However, as these stories usually make clear, these views were selfishly short-sighted. The following tale from the Ukraine is typical: Once it was so on earth that the old people were killed. When a person got old they take him and kill him. "He is old," they say, "what good is he? Why should we feed him bread for nothing?" However, one son had pity on his father and instead of killing him, as required by law, he hid him in the cellar and continued to feed him. A famine came to the land and the people ate all the stored grain, even that which had been set aside for seed. The old father, seeing the great need, told the son to thresh the straw from their roof and to plant the seed thus gleaned. The son did as he was advised, and the seed grew immediately, miraculously yielding a quick and bountiful harvest. Everyone saw that it was the old man's wisdom and God's blessing that brought the unexpected crop, and from that time forth people have been allowed to die their own death. Source: "Why Today People Die Their Own Death" (type 981, Mykytiuk, Ukrainische Märchen, no. 30). This story, which has universal social utility, is told around the world. European, African, and Asian versions differ with respect to the nature of the problem solved by the old man, but the moral of the story remains constant: Take care of your old people. Their knowledge, wisdom, and experience are an invaluable resource for the next generation. Notes: For additional examples of type 981 tales see "The King and the Thief" (Lithuania), Range, Litauische Volksmärchen, no. 57; Folk-Lore , vol. 29, pp. 238 ff.; M. Gaster, "The Killing of the Khazar Kings" (Romania) Folk-Lore , vol. 30 (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1919), pp. 136-139; "Killing of the Old Men" (Romania) Folk-Lore , vol. 32 (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1921), pp. 213-215; "The Mountain Where Old People Were Abandoned" (Seki, Folktales of Japan, no. 53); "An Old Man's Wisdom Saves the Kingdom" (Arewa, Northern East Africa, p. 180). For a study of this tale type see Paudler, Die Volkserzählung von der Abschaffung der Altentötung. Proverbs, too, extol the wisdom of age and admonish youth to honor it: Age before beauty. An old man can see backward better than a young one can see forward. If an old man lacks knowledge, at least he has experience. There is wisdom in age. Age deserves honor. He who does not honor age does not deserve age. It is good to grow old in a place where age is honored. Even bad parents deserve our thanks. With old men take counsel. Old men should be honored. An old man can be outrun but not outcounseled. Sources: Wander, Deutsches Sprichwörter-Lexikon, vol. 1, cols. 55, 56, 62, 1503; Jente, Proverbia Communia , nos. 181, 182, 525. Those who fail to give the honor and respect due to their elders cannot expect the approbation of fate, a belief dramatically, illustrated in "The Old Man and the Three Young Men," one of La Fontaine's best known versified fables: An Old Man, planting a tree, was met By three joyous youths of the village near, Who cried, "It is dotage a tree to set At your years, sir, for it will not bear, Unless you reach Methuselah's age: To build a tomb were much more sage; But why, in any case, burden your days With care for other people's enjoyment? 'Tis for you to repent of your evil ways: To care for the future is our employment!" Then the aged man replies -- "All slowly grows, but quickly dies. It matters not if then or now You die or I; we all must bow, Soon, soon, before the destinies. And tell me which of you, I pray, Is sure to see another day? Or whether e'en the youngest shall Survive this moment's interval? My great grandchildren, ages hence, Shall bless this tree's benevolence. And if you seek to make it plain That pleasing others is no gain, I, for my part, truly say I taste this tree's ripe fruit to-day, And hope to do so often yet. Nor should I be surprised to see -- Though, truly, with sincere regret -- The sunrise gild you tombstones three." These words were stern but bitter truths: For one of these adventurous youths, Intent to seek a distant land, Was drowned, just as he left the strand; The second, filled with martial zeal, Bore weapons for the common weal, And in a battle met the lot Of falling by a random shot. The third one from a tree-top fell, And broke his neck. -- The Old Sage, then, Weeping for the three Young Men, Upon their tomb wrote what I tell. Source: La Fontaine, Book 11, Fable 8. Gaining care by trickery Proverbial wisdom notwithstanding, old people do not always gain the respect and the care that they deserve. Where ethics and morality fail, trickery is justified. In folktales there is no trickier fox than an old fox. The fox's cousin, faced with destruction, can also be clever. Old animals trick their masters Animal fables, one of the oldest and most honored genres of folklore, have been used for centuries to expose social injustice and to promote ethical behavior. A younger generation's care for the aged is a topic that has not gone unnoticed in this genre. The fables often exhibit a cynical view, suggesting that a younger person's moral sensitivity may not be sufficient in causing him or her to care for older individuals. A certain amount of trickery and deception may be required, but -- taking the tales at face value -- in this case the ends do indeed justify the means. Especially if you are the old person whose life is thus preserved. A farmer intended to shoot a faithful dog, now too old to be of use. But the dog's friend the wolf had a plan. Accordingly, he seized the master's child; the dog pursued and with a pretended struggle rescued the child. The grateful farmer now promised to keep the old dog as long as he lived. Source: Retold from " Old Sultan " (Grimm, Tales, no. 48, type 101). For additional tales of this type (from Germany, Bohemia, Russia, and Japan) see Old Dogs Learn New Tricks . Another, even better known, story about old animals who make a good life for themselves through trickery is " The Bremen Town Musicians ": A donkey, a dog, a cat, and a rooster had all grown old and feared for their lives, so they set out for Bremen, where they hoped to become town musicians. That night they came to a house in the woods. Seeing a band of robbers inside, they devised a plan to drive the villains away. The donkey placed his forefeet on the window ledge, the dog mounted the donkey, the cat climbed on the dog's back, and the rooster perched on the cat's head. Then each began to sing. The terrified robbers fled, and the four musicians stayed there from then on. Source: Type 130, retold from Grimm, no. 27. For numerous additional variants see Ashliman, A Guide to Folktales, p. 28, and Animals in Exile , folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 130. Significantly, the aging and threatened animals in this famous tale do not even seek refuge with their own people and in their own community. The rural society symbolically reflected in this fable has no safety net for those too old to further contribute. But there is always the hope greener grass on the other side of the fence, the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow, the pie in the sky. The dispossessed farm animals know what the country has to offer them: poverty and death. They, like multitudes of their real-life human counterparts, can hope that the city will be kinder to them. Bremen, residence of bishops, center of trade, and gateway to the world surely can provide opportunity, even for old people whose only resources are naive faith and a willingness to sing for their supper. The inventor of this fable wisely did not allow the dispossessed animals to find their way to the city, where -- by any realistic standards -- their dreams would have been cruelly shattered. This is not a cautionary tale, preaching exemplary behavior to the aged. This is a fable of fantasy escape, and our heroes find a safe haven in a remote corner of the forest, far from Bremen. Note: The good citizens of Bremen seem to have lost sight of this detail. One of the city's most photographed attractions is Gerhard Marcks's statue of the four animal musicians located in the courtyard of the Pfarrkirche Unserer Lieben Frauen in the center of the city. We are apparently little bothered by the fact that their security comes at the expense of another marginalized group, the robbers. We assume, if -- indeed -- we give such ethical details a second thought, that the robbers, like the witch in the Grimms' " Hansel and Gretel ," the ogre in Perrault's " Little Thumb ," and countless other sinister forest dwellers, came by their wealth dishonorably, and that it is hence legitimate booty for our (temporarily) disadvantaged heroes and heroines. The old father's pretended treasure An old man, thinking himself near death, divided his property among his sons. But he did not die, and his sons treated their now impoverished father cruelly. To correct this, he obtained four bags full of gravel, and pretended they contained money he had received in payment of an old debt. Hoping for an added inheritance, the sons immediately became attentive to his every need, making every effort to please him until the day he died. Source: Retold from "How the Wicked Sons Were Duped" (type 982, Jacobs, Indian Fairy Tales, p. 221. For additional tales of this type from India, Sri Lanka, Germany, and England see Ungrateful Heirs: Folktales of Type 982 . Grandchildren come to their grandparents' aid The man with the pretended treasure, Old Sultan, and the would-be Bremen musicians ensured their well being in old age through blunt trickery. Another group of stories brings justice to helpless oldsters by awakening a sense of enlightened self interest in the younger generation. The story of "Half a Blanket" is typical: A man had a father who had grown too old to do anything but eat and smoke, so the man decided to send him away with nothing but a blanket. "Just give him half a blanket," said the man's son from his cradle, "then I'll have half to give you when you grow old and I send you away." Upon hearing this, the man quickly reconsidered and allowed his old father to remain after all. Type 980. Retold from Glassie, Irish Folktales, no. 24. A variation on this story, a Hispanic version from the American Southwest, carries the same message, adding the warning between the lines about giving a woman unbridled authority in household matters. The tale starts with the explanation that "in the old days it was not unusual to find several generations living together in one home," then continues: A woman disliked her old father-in-law who lived with her family, and she insisted he be removed to a small room outside the house. One winter day the old man, who was suffering from hunger and cold, asked his grandson to bring him a blanket. The boy found a rug and asked his father to cut it in half for the grandfather. "Take the whole rug," the father said. "No," replied the boy. "I must save half for you for when you are as old as grandfather." The man quickly restored his old father to a warm room in the house, and from that time on he took care of his needs and visited him every day. Retold from "The Boy and His Grandfather," Maestas and Anaya, Cuentos: Tales from the Hispanic Southwest , pp. 115-117. Type 980. The story of the grandfather who is denied his customary place at the family table contains the same lesson of enlightened self interest: An old man spilled his soup and let food dribble from his mouth, so his son made him sit behind the stove and eat from a wooden bowl. One day the man saw his own son, a boy of four, carving a piece of wood. "This is a bowl for you to eat from when you are old," he explained. He immediately restored the old grandfather to his former place at the table. Source: Retold from The Old Grandfather and His Grandson (type 980, Grimm, no. 78). For additional tales of this type see Old Grandfathers and Their Grandsons . When enlightened self interest fails We all know individuals who knowingly engage in behavior that will ultimately hurt them: the person with poor health habits, with a fiery temper, etc. The knowledge that cruel or self-indulging acts will with time prove costly, unfortunately, does not assure ethical behavior. The following tale of generational abuse illustrates this sad observation: A man in the prime of life abused his aging father; he would strike him and even drag him out of the house by his hair. When he too became old his son treated him the same way. One day the son dragged him out the door and onto the street. "You go too far!" cried the old man. "I never dragged my old father beyond the gate." Source: Retold from "Turn About Is Fair Play" (type 980, Pourrat, Treasury of French Tales, p. 163). There is, of course, always the threat of divine punishment, should a person fail to live up to his or her family and social obligations. And God, if we can believe the evidence of folktales, does indeed move in mysterious ways, his wonders to perform: A man, about to eat a roasted chicken, saw his aged father coming, and hid the bird so he would not have to share it. After the old man left, the son resumed eating, but the chicken became a toad and jumped into his face, and it stayed there for the rest of his life. Source: Retold from The Ungrateful Son (type 980D, Grimm, no. 145). The Grimms' source was Johann Pauli, Schimpf und Ernst (1522), ch. 437. An Eskimo variation, heard in Nain, Labrador, and East Greenland, is even crasser: An old woman, blind, and lame, asked her daughter for a drink of water. The young woman, tired of tending her old mother, gave her a bowl of her own urine. The old woman drank it, and then asked: "Which would you prefer as a lover, a louse or a sea scorpion?" "A sea scorpion," laughed the daughter, whereupon the old woman proceeded to pull sea scorpions from the daughter's vagina, one after another, until she fell over dead. Source: Retold from "Old Age" (similar to type 980D), Millman, A Kayak Full of Ghosts , p. 192. The inevitability of senility and death "And they lived happily ever after," popular wisdom notwithstanding, is not the standard ending for European folktales. English fairy tales, it is true, often end with this formula, but stories from continental Europe rarely promise their heroes and heroines everlasting life. If their future life is mentioned at all, it will most likely be with a generality such as "and they lived happily until they died," or possibly with the absurdly safe promise that "if they have not died, they are still alive." Continental European folktales neither promise their leading characters life without end nor do they treat death as a taboo, to be mentioned only with euphemisms and with great caution. Death is as much a part of life in European folktales as are birth, marriage, and parenting. Like these other events, it can be painless (even fulfilling) or wrought with conflict and grief. There is probably more folklore emanating from mortals' response to dying and death than any other human experience. Mythology, religion, civilization, and science all offer their explanations and their aid to the dying and to the survivors, and we want more. Folklore too has added its voice in helping us to cope with the inevitable and ultimately the unexplainable final chapter. Young men may die, old men must die. Seventy years is the span of our life, eighty if our strength holds; the hurrying years are labor and sorrow, so quickly they pass and are forgotten. Sources: Jente, Proverbia Communia , no. 122 (p. 141). Simrock, Die deutschen Sprichwörter, p. 281. Psalms 90:10. Stages of life From Shakespeare's As You Like It (act 2, scene 7): All the world's a stage, And all the men and women merely players: They have their exits and their entrances; And one man in his time plays many parts, His acts being seven ages. At first the infant, Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms. Then the whining school-boy, with his satchel And shining morning face, creeping like snail Unwillingly to school. And then the lover, Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier, Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard, Jealous in honor, sudden and quick in quarrel, Seeking the bubble reputation Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice, In fair round belly with good capon lined, With eyes severe and beard of formal cut, Full of wise saws and modern instances; And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts Into the lean and slipper'd pantaloon, With spectacles on nose and pouch on side, His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice, Turning again toward childish treble, pipes And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all, That ends this strange eventful history, Is second childishness and mere oblivion, Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing. The Grimms' "The Duration of Life," a tale collected from a peasant in his field in 1840, presents the same pessimistic outcome, but adds a playful teleological explanation: When God created the world he gave the ass, the dog, the monkey, and man each a life-span of thirty years. The ass, knowing that his was to be a hard existence, asked for a shorter life. God had mercy and took away eighteen years. The dog and the monkey similarly thought their prescribed lives too long, and God reduced them respectively by twelve and ten years. Man, however, considered the thirty years assigned to him to be too brief, and he petitioned for a longer life. Accordingly, God gave him the years not wanted by the ass, the dog, and the monkey. Thus man lives seventy years. The first thirty are his human years, and they quickly disappear. Here he is healthy and happy; he works with pleasure, and enjoys his existence. The ass's eighteen years follow. Here one burden after the other is laid on him; he carries the grain that feeds others, and his faithful service is rewarded with kicks and blows. Then come the dog's twelve years, and he lies in the corner growling, no longer having teeth with which to bite. And when this time is past, the monkey's ten years conclude. Now man is weak headed and foolish; he does silly things and becomes a laughingstock for children. Source: Retold from " The Duration of Life ," Grimm, no. 176, type 173 (also categorized as type 828). Other versions include: "Man's Years," Daly, Aesop without Morals, no. 105; "The Span of Man's Life," Noy, Folktales of Israel, no. 26. For more tales of this type see Stages of Life: Folktales of Type 173 . No one wants to die An old woodcutter, too weary to pick up his load of sticks, exclaimed: "I wish that Death would take me!" Even as he spoke, Death appeared, but seeing him, the old man changed his mind. Now his only request was: "Would you help me lift this load to my shoulders?" Source: Retold from " The Old Man and Death ," Jacobs, The Fables of Aesop, no. 69, type 845. Death's approach should surprise no one Death promised a man that he would not take him without first sending messengers. The man's youth soon passed and he became miserable. One day Death arrived, but the man refused to follow him, because the promised messengers had not yet appeared. Death responded: "Have you not been sick? Have you not experienced dizziness, ringing in your ears, toothache, and blurred vision? These were my messengers." The man, at last recognizing the truth, quietly yielded and went away. Source: Retold from Death's Messengers , Grimm, no. 177, type 335. This was a popular plot for the medieval writers of jests and fables. Lutz Röhrich gives twelve variants in his Erzählungen des späten Mittelalters und ihr Weiterleben in Literatur und Volksdichtung bis zur Gegenwart, vol. 1, pp. 80-92. Attempts to trick death One of mankind's most persistent dreams is to postpone death. Folktales describe many such attempts, cloaked in a variety of symbolic garbs. They rarely succeed, not even in the fantasy world of the magic tale. The widespread story of "Godfather Death," retold below in a Swedish version, is typical: A poor man with a large family could find no one to be godfather for his latest son. Finally Death appeared, and the poor man chose him, saying: "You make no distinction between high and low." Years later, on the godson's wedding night, Death called him from his bed and took him to a cave where countless candles were burning. "Whose light is that?" asked the godson, pointing to a candle that was flickering out. "Your own," answered the godfather. The godson pleaded with Death to put a new candle in his holder, but the godfather did not answer. The light flickered and went out and the godson fell down dead. We find from this that you can neither persuade nor cheat Death. Source: Retold from Thompson, 100 Favorite Folktales, no. 18, type 332. Similar tales include "The Godfather" (Grimm, no. 42) and "Godfather Death" (Grimm, no. 44). See Godfather Death: Tales of Aarne-Thompson Type 332 . Although death cannot be avoided permanently, there are many folktales that describe temporary respites. The story of the blacksmith who tricked death (sometimes identified as "the devil") is one of the most popular folktales in Europe: The Lord granted a smith three wishes, and the latter chose a pear tree that would detain anyone who climbed into it, an easy chair that would hold anyone who sat in it, and a bag that would imprison anyone who climbed into it. The devil came to get the smith, and the smith invited him to help himself to some fruit from his pear tree. The devil climbed into the tree and was stuck there. The smith would not release him until he promised to give the smith four more years of life. When the time was up the devil returned, but he made the mistake of sitting in the smith's magic chair, and he had to promise four more years before the smith would release him. On the devil's third visit, the smith tricked him into his bag, and then beat the bag with his hammer until the devil promised to leave him alone. Later the smith got to thinking that he had perhaps acted unwisely, and he knocked on the gate of hell to make amends. However the devil would have nothing to do with him, so the smith found his way to heaven. He got there just as St. Peter was letting someone in, and the gate was still ajar. The smith made a rush, and if he didn't get in, then I don't know what became of him. Source: Retold from "The Master-Smith," type 330 (Asbjørnsen and Moe, East o' the Sun, p. 105.) For additional variations on this very popular theme see Ashliman, A Guide to Folktales, pp. 73-75 From a theological perspective, possibly the most interesting aspect of this tale is the cavalier attitude that it demonstrates about agreements made with the devil. The devil of these folktales is not the cunning, sinister, wicked, nearly omnipotent being of traditional religion, but is instead a bungling fool, and one who can be outwitted by a clever mortal. This is not an unusual situation in folktales. In fact, even St. Peter is frequently portrayed as a fool, both in his role as keeper of the gate to heaven and as a contrast to his much wiser companion Jesus. Death trivialized Death has become one of the great taboos of the twentieth century. At the most basic level, the level of sustenance, we do our best to hide from ourselves (and certainly from our children) the harsh facts about fried chicken, hamburgers, and bacon. A pet, too old and frail to live much longer, is "put to sleep." At the human level, we are even more isolated from the one final act that we must all experience. Few people die at home. Funeral "homes" turn the act of mourning a "departed" loved one into a sanitized reunion of family and friends. The deceased are not "dead," they have merely "passed on." Euphemisms proliferate. It has not always been so. Our forebears, young and old alike, frequently witnessed the slaughter of animals (or their capture by predators), and they were not spared the reality of human death. They could not avoid this reality, but they could laugh at it. Laughter is one of humankind's most basic defense mechanisms. Even in the face of death, we can show our resolve and demonstrate our last bastion of control by doing the unexpected: laughing. Gallows humor, in one form or another, permeates pre-industrial European folklore, even making its way into children's nursery tales and rhymes. Indeed, some critics have claimed that traditional nursery rhymes are preoccupied with death and violence and have hence urged that they be rewritten for a more humane and enlightened era. Consider the following catalog of horrors ostensibly found in traditional children's rhymes by Geoffrey Handley-Taylor, writing in 1952: The average collection of 200 traditional nursery rhymes contains approximately 100 rhymes which personify all that is glorious and ideal for the child. Unfortunately, the remaining 100 rhymes harbor unsavory elements. The incidents listed below occur in the average collection and may be accepted as a reasonably conservative estimate based on a general survey of this type of literature. 8 allusions to murder (unclassified), 2 cases of choking to death, 1 case of cutting a human being in half, 1 case of decapitation, 1 case of death by squeezing, 1 case of death by shriveling, 1 case of death by starvation, 1 case of boiling to death, 1 case of death by hanging, 1 case of death by drowning, 4 cases of killing domestic animals, 1 case of body snatching, 21 cases of death (unclassified), 7 cases relating to the severing of limbs, 1 case of the desire to have a limb severed, 2 cases of self-inflicted injury, 4 cases relating to the breaking of limbs, 1 allusion to a bleeding heart, 1 case of devouring human flesh, 5 threats of death, 1 case of kidnapping, 12 cases of torment and cruelty to human beings and animals, 8 cases of whipping and lashing, 3 allusions to blood, 14 cases of stealing and general dishonesty, 15 allusions to maimed human beings and animals, 1 allusion to undertakers, 2 allusions to graves, 23 cases of physical violence (unclassified), 1 case of lunacy, 16 allusions to misery and sorrow, 1 case of drunkenness, 4 cases of cursing, 1 allusion to marriage as a form of death, 1 case of scorning the blind, 1 case of scorning prayer, 9 cases of children being lost or abandoned, 2 cases of house burning, 9 allusions to poverty and want, 5 allusions to quarreling, 2 cases of unlawful imprisonment, 2 cases of racial discrimination. Expressions of fear, weeping, moans of anguish, biting, pain and evidence of supreme selfishness may be found in almost every other page. Source: As quoted by Baring-Gould, The Annotated Mother Goose, pp. 20-21. Nursery rhymes have no monopoly on such tragedies. The following tales are known, in many variations, throughout Europe: The death of the little hen The little hen choked on a nut. The cock ran to seek help, but when he returned, the hen had already died. Six mice pulled her funeral carriage, but they slipped into a stream and drowned. The little cock dug her a grave; then he sat down and mourned until he died. Source: " The Death of the Little Hen " (type 2021, Grimm, no. 80). For additional examples see Ashliman, A Guide to Folktales, pp. 311-312. An animal mourns the death of a spouse A flea and a louse were brewing beer. The louse fell in and was killed. A door, a broom, a cart, an ash pile, a tree, and a girl all joined the flea in mourning the louse's death. Then a spring broke loose and drowned all the mourners. Source: Little Louse and Little Flea , (type 2022, Grimm, no. 30). For additional examples see Mourning the Death of a Spouse: Chain Tales of Aarne-Thompson Type 2022 and Ashliman, A Guide to Folktales, p. 312 The fleeing pancake A pancake rolled out the door and down the road. Many animals tried to stop it, but it rolled past them all. A pig offered to carry it across a brook. The pancake agreed, and the pig swallowed it in one gulp. Source: "The Pancake" (type 2025, Norway, Thompson, 100 Favorite Folktales, no. 100). For additional examples see The Runaway Pancake: Folktales of Aarne-Thompson Type 2025 and Ashliman, A Guide to Folktales, pp. 312-313 The day the sky fell in An acorn fell upon Chicken-licken's head, and she thought that the sky had fallen, so she set off to tell the king. On the way she was joined by Hen-len, Cock-lock, Duck-luck, Drake-lake, Goose-loose, Gander-lander, Turkey-lurkey, and finally Fox-lox. Fox-lox offered to show them the way, but instead he took them to his den, where he and his young ones ate up poor Chicken-licken, Hen-len, Cock-lock, Duck-luck, Drake-lake, Goose-loose, Gander-lander, and Turkey-lurkey, and they never saw the king to tell him that the sky had fallen! Death as punishment Bogeys, hobgoblins, and bugbears An unusual (at least for twentieth-century taste) statue stands guard at in Bern, Switzerland. High on a pedestal at the Kornhausplatz , in the center of the old city, stands an ogre, der Chindlifrässer, surrounded by terrified children. He has captured a half dozen children. They are in his pockets and arms, all awaiting the fate of the one whose head he has taken entirely into his mouth. Since about 1545 this statue has graphically warned Swiss children of the potentially dire consequences of disobedience. Note: The Swiss children frightened by this bogey included, I presume, my grandfather Johann Aeschlimann (1868-1943) and my wife's great-grandparents Jacob Spori (1847-1903) and Magdalena Röschi Spori (1851-1900). For an account of the legendary background of this statue see Ernst Ludwig Rochholz, Schweizersagen aus dem Aargau (Aarau: Sauerländer, 1856), vol. 2, p. 209. The Swiss are, course, not alone in their use of such primitive psychological pedagogy. Bächtold-Stäubli, in the index to his Handwörterbuch des deutschen Aberglaubens, lists no fewer than twenty-eight different spirits who punish bad German children, often fatally. England too has its share of bogeys, hobgoblins, and bugbears, one of whom carries the German-sounding name Menschikoff: Baby, baby, naughty baby, Hush! you squalling thing, I say; Peace this instant! peace! or maybe Menschikoff will pass this way. Baby, baby, he's a giant, Black and tall as Rouen's steeple, Sups and dines and lives reliant Every day on naughty people. Baby, baby, if he hears you As he gallops past the house, Limb from limb at once he'll tear you Just as pussy tears a mouse. And he'll beat you, beat you, beat you, And he'll beat you all to pap; And he'll eat you, eat you, eat you, Gobble you, gobble you, snap! snap! snap! Note: "Menschikoff" is probably a corruption of "Menschenkopf" (human head). In some versions of this poem the ogre is named "Wellington" or "Bonaparte." Source: Eliza Gutch and Mabel Peacock, County Folk-Lore , vol. 5: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning Lincolnshire (London: Folk-Fore Society, 1908), pp. 383-384. Naughty or disobedient children often meet tragic ends in fairy tales. The Germans have a descriptive word for this sub-genre of cautionary tales: Schreckmärchen (scare-tales) . One of the most famous of such stories is the tale of "Little Red Riding Hood" who in many versions -- including the classical telling by Perrault -- does not survive her encounter with the wolf. She disobeys her mother, leaves the straight and narrow path, gets into bed with an unprincipled male, and pays for her indiscretion with her life. Unlike Perrault, the Grimms let their "Little Red-Cap" escape, but not all disobedient children in their collection get a second chance: A little girl went to see Frau Trude, although her parents told her not to. On the steps she saw a black man. Frau Trude said it was a charcoal burner. Then she saw a green man. "He was a hunter," said Frau Trude. Then there was a blood-red man. "He was a butcher," was the explanation. Finally the girl said, "When I saw you through the window, it looked like the devil with a head of fire." Frau Trude answered by turning the girl into a block of wood, which she threw into the fire. Source: Retold from Frau Trude (Grimm, no. 43, type 334). The girl who spoke to the wolf (in Perrault's account) and the girl who visited Frau Trude were adequately warned by their parents but still yielded to temptations that, as it turned out, were fatal. The wolf and the witch in these two stories are believable symbols of real threats to children in any era. The children relaxed their guard and were destroyed by the evils that well-meaning adults had warned them about. In some stories, however, it is not evil per se that takes the disobedient child, but God himself: There was once a child that was stubborn and did not do what his mother wanted. For this reason God was displeased with him and caused him to fall ill, and no doctor could help him, and in a short time he lay on his deathbed. He was buried in a grave and covered with earth, but his little arm came forth and reached up, and it didn't help when they put it back in and put fresh earth over it, for the little arm always came out again. So the mother herself had to go to the grave and beat the little arm with a switch, and as soon as she had done that, it withdrew, and the child finally came to peace beneath the ground. Source: Literal translation of The Willful Child (Grimm, no. 117, type 779). The Grimms derived this story from an oral tradition of miracle stories, legends whose credibility was reinforced both by theology and by sacred relics. For example: In the church at Lunow, three quarters of a mile from Oderberg, there is a chopped off, dried up hand on display. It is clenched into a fist and holds a switch between its fingers. It comes from a son who in a godless manner had once struck his father. God himself punished him, for when he died and was buried, his hand emerged from the grave. However often they reburied it, it always reappeared. Finally they beat it with a switch, thinking that it would then return to beneath the earth, but that did not help. Therefore they chopped off the hand, put the switch in its fist, and placed it in the church at Lunow as an eternal warning to godless children. Source: Hand wächst aus dem Grabe" (Kuhn and Schwartz, Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche , pp. 44-45, no. 46). Essentially the same story describes the origin of a withered-hand relic on display in the village church at Groß-Redensleben, one hour from Seehausen ("Die Hand auf dem Grabe," Temme, Die Volkssagen der Altmark , pp. 48-49, no. 56). According to Temme, this legend also was told frequently in Szamaiten and in Poland. What can one say about stories so flagrantly cruel? For good or for bad, literary, cultural, and theological traditions have taught us that it is good when a wicked person dies (countless evildoers meet violent ends in folktales, and we shed no tears in sympathy). But can any reasonable person of today see justice in punishment, both before and after death, meted out to the "godless" children in the above tales? Excessive grief The Grimms' sentimental, legend-like tale "The Burial Shirt" reflects the belief that excessive mourning would prevent a deceased person from resting in peace: A mother had a little boy of seven years who was so attractive and good-natured that no one could look at him without liking him, and he was dearer to her than anything else in the world. Now it happened that he suddenly became ill, and God called him home. The mother could find no solace, and she cried day and night. However, soon after his burial, the child began to appear every night at those places where he had sat and played while still alive. When the mother cried, he cried as well, but when morning came he had disappeared. The mother did not cease crying, and one night he appeared with the white shirt in which he had been laid into his coffin, and with the little wreath on his head, he sat down on the bed at her feet and said, "Oh, mother, please stop crying, or I will not be able to fall asleep in my coffin, because my burial shirt will not dry out from your tears that keep falling on it." This startled the mother, and she stopped crying. The next night the child came once again. He had a little light in his hand and said, "See, my shirt is almost dry, and I will be able to rest in my grave." Then the mother surrendered her grief to God and bore it with patience and peace, and the child did not come again, but slept in he little bed beneath the earth. Source: The Burial Shirt (Grimm, no. 109). That this belief was not limited to unnamed characters in admittedly fictional tales is evidenced by the following account from northern England: An old woman still living (1854) in Piersebridge, who mourned with inordinate grief for a length of time the loss of a favorite daughter, asserts that she was visited by the spirit of her departed child, and earnestly exhorted not to disturb her peaceful repose by unnecessary lamentations and repinings at the will of God; and from that time she never grieved more. Events of this kind were common a century ago. Source: The Denham Tracts , vol. 2, pp. 58-59. For more tales of this type see The Death of a Child: Folktales about Excessive Mourning . Death as a divine release Death, of course, is not always looked upon as punishment. In fact, in many religious stories virtuous people (often children) are "called home," frequently under miraculous circumstances. For these blessed individuals, death is a divine release from the sorrows of this world. Once there was a poor woman who had two children. The youngest one had to go into the forest every day to find wood. Once a little child helped him gather the wood, carried it to the house, and then disappeared. The child told his mother about the helper, but she didn't believe him. One day the helper child brought a rose and told the child that when the rose was in full blossom he would come again. The mother put the rose into some water. One morning the child did not get up; the mother went to his bed and found him lying there dead. On that same morning the rose came into full blossom. Source: Retold from The Rose (Grimm, Children's Legends, no. 3). For similar accounts of foretold deaths, see Grimm, German Legends, nos. 263-267. Religious legends are told throughout the world, and those describing premonitions and forewarnings of impending death are particularly widespread and persistent. Such accounts spontaneously emerge at solemn family gatherings, then disappear when the mood brightens. They surface again when needed -- unrehearsed at other sober occasions, or sophisticatedly refined in universal myths and in the great tragedies of world literature. At their primeval level, these accounts describe only modest miracles: the opening of a flower, the appearance of a bird, the dream of a departed loved one, or perhaps nothing more portentous than an uncanny feeling. They do not claim the power to change the course of human destiny, nor do they offer explanations to life's unfathomed mysteries. Instead, they are expressions of faith in continuity and of hope for justice, even at times when it is painfully evident that, on this earth at least, we do not live happily ever after. Related Links Old Folks in Aesop's Fables . Death in Folk & Fairy Tales by Terri Windling. Return to: Table of Contents D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 6, 2021. Air Castles: Folktales of Type 1430 Air Castles folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1430 about daydreams of wealth and fame translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2022 Contents The Broken Pot (India, The Panchatantra ). The Poor Man and the Flask of Oil (India, Bidpai). The Story of the Devotee Who Spilt the Jar of Honey and Oil (India / Persia). What Happened to the Ascetic When He Lost His Honey and Oil ( Kalilah and Dimnah ). The Daydreamer (India, Cecil Henry Bompas). Sheik Chilli (India, Alice Elizabeth Dracott). The Fakir and His Jar of Butter ( 1001 Nights ). The Barber's Tale of His Fifth Brother ( 1001 Nights ). Day-Dreaming ( 1001 Nights , retold by Joseph Jacobs). The Milkmaid and Her Pail (Aesop). Story of an Old Woman, Carrying Milk to Market in an Earthen Vessel (France, Jacques de Vitry). What Happened to a Woman Called Truhana (Spain, Prince Don Juan Manuel). The Dairywoman and the Pot of Milk (France, Jean de La Fontaine). Lazy Heinz (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Lean Lisa (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Buttermilk Jack (England, Thomas Hughes). Story (Ireland, The Schools' Collection ). Air Castles (Denmark, Evald Tang Kristensen). Great Expectations (Denmark, Evald Tang Kristensen). The Egg (Denmark, Jens Kamp). The Lad and the Fox (Sweden, Gabriel Djurklou). The Peasant and the Cucumbers (Russia, Leo Tolstoy). The Milkmaid and Her Bucket (USA, Ambrose Bierce). Link to The $30,000 Bequest (Mark Twain). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Broken Pot The Panchatantra In a certain place there lived a Brahman by the name of Svabhâvakripana, which means "luckless by his very nature." By begging he acquired a quantity of rice gruel, and after he had eaten what he wanted, there was still a potful left. He hung this pot on a nail in the wall above his bed. As night progressed, he could not take his eyes from the pot. All the while he was thinking: This pot is filled to overflowing with rice gruel. If a famine should come to the land, then I could sell it for a hundred pieces of silver. Then I could buy a pair of goats. They have kids every six months, so I would soon have an entire herd of goats. Then I would trade the goats for cattle. As soon as the cows had calved, I would sell the calves. Then I would trade the cattle for buffalo. And the buffalo for horses. And when the horses foaled, I would own many horses. From their sale I would gain a large amount of gold. With this gold I would buy a house with four buildings in a rectangle. Then a Brahman would enter my house and give me a very beautiful girl with a large dowry for my wife. She will give birth to a son, and I will give him the name Somasarman. When he is old enough to be bounced on my knee, I will take a book, sit in the horse stall, and read. In the meantime, Somasarman will see me and want to be bounced on my knee. He will climb down from his mother's lap and walk toward me, coming close to the horses hooves. Then, filled with anger, I will shout at my wife, "Take the child! Take the child!" But she, busy with her housework, will not hear me. So I will jump up and give her a kick! And, buried in his thoughts, he struck out with his foot, breaking the pot, and painting himself white with the rice gruel that had been in it. Therefore I say: He who dreams about unrealistic projects for the future will have the same fate as Somasarman's father: He will find himself lying there painted white with rice gruel. Source: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen , translated from the Sanskrit into German by Theodor Benfey, vol. 2 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), book 5, story 9, pp. 345-46 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman, © 1998. One of India's most influential contributions to world literature, The Panchatantra (also spelled Pañcatantra or Pañca-tantra ) consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled, in their current form, between the third and fifth centuries AD. The German Sanskrit scholar Johannes Hertel (1872-1955) believed that the original collection was compiled in Kashmir about 200 BC, and that at this time many of the stories were already ancient. The work's self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes the Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai (also spelled Pilpay), which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of the Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced European fabulists. Link to a selection of tales from The Panchatantra . Link to Arthur W. Ryder's English translation of the Panchatantra . Return to the table of contents . The Poor Man and the Flask of Oil Bidpai There was once a poor man, who lived in a house next to a wealthy merchant who sold oil and honey. As the merchant was a kind neighbor, he one day sent a flask of oil to the poor man. The poor man was delighted, and put it carefully away on the top shelf. One evening, as he was gazing at it, he said half aloud, "I wonder how much oil there is in that bottle. There is a large quantity. If I should sell it, I could buy five sheep. Every year I should have lambs, and before long I should own a flock. Then I should sell some of the sheep, and be rich enough to marry a wife. Perhaps we might have a son. And what a fine boy he would be! So tall, strong, and obedient! But if he should disobey me," and he raised the staff which he held in his hand, "I should punish him thus!" And he swung the staff over his head and brought it heavily to the ground, knocking, as he did so, the flask off the shelf so that the oil ran over him from head to foot. Source: The Tortoise and the Geese and other Fables of Bidpai , retold by Maude Barrows Dutton (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1908), pp. 8-9. Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Devotee Who Spilt the Jar of Honey and Oil India/Persia They have related that a pious man had a house in the vicinity of a merchant, and lived happily through favor of his neighborly kindness. The merchant continually sold honey and oil, and made his profits by that traffic in unctuous and sweet commodities. Inasmuch as the pious man lived a blameless life, and ever sowed in the field of his guileless heart the seed of the love of God, the merchant reposed implicit confidence in him, and took the supply of his wants upon himself. And in this very thing is the use of riches: to win over the hearts of the poor, and to raise up a perpetual provision from perishable wealth. The merchant, too, considering the opportunity of doing good a blessing, sent every day somewhat from the stock, in the buying and selling of which he was occupied, for the support of the devotee. The latter used somewhat of this and stored up the rest in a corner. In a short time a jar was filled by these means. One day the pious man looked into that jar, and thought thus to himself, "Well, now! What quantity of honey and oil is collected in this vessel?" At last he conjectured ten mans to be there, and said: If I can sell these for ten dirhams, I can buy for that sum five ewes, and these five will each have young every six months, and each will have two lambs. Thus in a year there will be twenty-five, and in ten years from their progeny there will be herds upon herds. So by these means I shall have an abundant supply, and will sell some, and lay in a handsome stock of furniture, and wed a wife of a noble family. After nine months, I shall have a son born to me, who will study science and polite manners. However, when the weakness of infancy is exchanged for the strength of youth, and that graceful cypress grows up in the garden of manhood, it is probable that he may transgress my orders, and begin to be refractory, and in that case it will be necessary for me to correct him, and I will do so with this very staff which I hold in my hand. He then lifted up his staff, and was so immersed in thought, that, fancying the head and neck of his rebellious son before him, he brought down the staff, and struck it on the jar of honey and oil. It happened that the jar was placed on a shelf, beneath which he sat with it facing him. As soon as his staff reached the jar, it broke it, and let out the honey and oil all over the head and face and vest and hair of the pious man. Source: The Anvár-i Suhailí; or, The Lights of Canopus, Being the Persion Version of The Fables of Pilpay , translated by Edward B. Eastwick (Hertford: Stephen Austin, 1854), p. 409 . Return to the table of contents . What Happened to the Ascetic When He Lost His Honey and Oil Kalilah and Dimnah It is said that an ascetic derived his nourishment from a king, that is, the governor of a town, every day so much oil and so much honey. And whatever he had remaining, he used to pour into an earthenware vessel which he hung on a peg above the bedstead on which he slept. One day while sleeping on the bedstead, with the earthenware vessel full of oil and honey, he began to say within himself: If I sold this honey and oil, I might sell it for a dinar and with the dinar I might buy ten she-goats, and after five months they would have young, and after a lapse of five years these would have young and their number would become very large, and I should buy two yoke of oxen and a cow, and I should sow my fields and reap much corn and amass much oil, and I should buy a certain number of servants and maid-servants, and when I had taken to myself a wife of beautiful appearance and she had borne me a handsome son, I should instruct him and he would be secretary to the king. Now in his hand, was a staff, and while he was saying these things, he kept brandishing the staff with his hand, and struck the earthenware vessel with it and broke it, whereupon the oil and honey ran down on his head as he slept. So all his plans came to naught, and he was confounded. Source: Kalilah and Dimnah; or, The Fables of Bidpai : Being an account of their literary history, with an English translationof the later Syriac version of the same, by I. G. N. Keith-Falconer (Cambridge: At the University Press, 1885), p. 170 . Return to the table of contents . The Daydreamer India, Henry Cecil Bompas Once an oil man was going to market with his pots of oil arranged on a flat basket, and he engaged a Santal for two annas to carry the basket. And as he went along, the Santal thought: With one anna I will buy food and with the other I will buy chickens, and the chickens will grow up and multiply, and then I will sell some of the fowls and eggs, and with the money I will buy goats. And when the goats increase, I will sell some and buy cows, and then I will exchange some of the calves for she-buffaloes, and when the buffaloes breed, I will sell some and buy land and start cultivation, and then I will marry and have children, and I will hurry back from my work in the fields, and my wife will bring me water, and I will have a rest, and my children will say to me, "Father, be quick and wash your hands for dinner," but I will shake my head and say, 'No, no, not yet!" And as he thought about it he really shook his head, and the basket fell to the ground, and all the pots of oil were smashed. Then the oil man abused him and said that he must pay two rupees for the oil and one anna for the pots. But the Santal said that he had lost much more than that, and the oil man asked him how that could be, and the Santal explained how with his wages he was going to get fowls and then goats and then oxen and buffaloes and land, and how he came to spill the basket, and at that the oil man roared with laughter and said, "Well, I have made up the account, and I find that our losses are equal, so we will cry quits." And so saying they went their ways laughing. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 39, pp. 140-141 . From Bompas' preface: "The Santals are a Munda tribe, a branch of that aboriginal element which probably entered India from the northeast. At the present day they inhabit the eastern outskirts of the Chutia Nagpore plateau." Return to the table of contents . Sheik Chilli India, Alice Elizabeth Dracott The hero of this story was one day walking along with a vessel of oil upon his head. As he walked he kept thinking of the future: I will sell the oil, and with the money I shall buy a goat, and then I shall sell the kids, and then I shall buy a cow, and sell the milk, till I get a large sum of money; then I shall buy a pair of buffaloes, and a field, and plough the field, and gain more money, and build myself a house, and marry a wife, and have many sons and daughters. And when my wife comes to call me to dinner, I'll say: "Dhur, away! I'll come when I think fit!" And with that he held up his head suddenly, and away fell the chattie with the oil, and it was all spilt. This upset Sheik Chilli so much that he began to yell: "I have lost my goats, I have lost my cows, I have lost my buffaloes, and my house, and my wife and children." That such dire calamity should befall a man caused great pity, so the bystanders took Sheik Chilli to the Rajah, who asked him how it had all happened. When he heard the story he laughed, and said: "This boy has a good heart, let him be given a reward to compensate him for the loss of his oil." Source: Alice Elizabeth Dracott, Simla Village Tales; or, Folk Tales from the Himalayas (London: John Murray, 1906), pp. 68-69 . Return to the table of contents . The Fakir and His Jar of Butter The 1001 Nights A fakir abode once with one of the nobles of a certain town, who made him a daily allowance of three scones and a little clarified butter and honey. Now such butter was dear in those parts and the devotee laid all that came to him together in a jar he had, till he filled it and hung it up over his head for safekeeping. One night, as he sat on his bed staff in hand, he fell a-musing upon the butter and the greatness of its price and said in himself: I sell all this butter I have accumulated and with the proceeds buy a ewe. The first year she will bear a male lamb and a female and the second a female and a male and these in their turn will bear other males and other females. The males I will sell and buy with them bulls and cows, which will also increase and multiply; after which I will purchase a piece of land and plant a garden therein and build thereon a fine palace. Moreover, I will purchase robes and raiment and slaves and slave-girls, and then hold a wedding exceeding all that have ever been seen. I will slaughter cattle and make rich meats and confections and assemble all the musicians and mimes and performers and invite rich and poor to the celebration. Lastly I will go in to my bride, after her unveiling and enjoy her beauty and loveliness. In due time my wife will bear me a boy, and I shall rejoice in him and make banquets in his honor and rear him daintily and teach him philosophy and mathematics and polite letters, so that I shall make his name renowned among men and glory in him among the assemblies of the learned; and I will bid him do good and he shall not contradict me, and I will forbid him from lewdness and iniquity and exhort him to piety and the practice of righteousness; and, I will bestow on him rich and goodly gifts. I will reward his obedience with rich gifts, but if I should ever see him incline to disobedience, I will come down on him with this staff. So saying, he raised his hand to beat his son, but the staff hit the jar of butter hanging above his head, and broke it. The shards fell upon him, and the butter ran down upon his head, his beard, his clothes, and his bed. Source: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night , translated by Richard F. Burton, vol. 9 (Benares: Printed by the Kamashastra Society for private subscribers only, 1885), pp. 40-41 . Revised and abridged by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Return to the table of contents . The Barber's Tale of His Fifth Brother 1001 Nights When our father died, he left each of us one hundred dirhams. My fifth brother invested his inheritance in glassware, hoping to resell it at a handsome profit. He exhibited the glassware on a large tray, then fell to musing: These pieces will bring me two hundred dirhams, which I can use to buy more glass, which I will then sell for four hundred dirhams. With this money I can buy more glass and other merchandise to sell, and so on and so on until I have amassed a hundred thousand dirhams. Then I will purchase a fine house with slaves and eunuchs, and when my capital has grown to a hundred thousand dinars, I will demand to marry the Prime Minister's eldest daughter, and if he refuses consent, I will take her by force. On my wedding night I will don my finest attire and seat myself on a cushion of gold brocade to receive my bride. She will present herself in her most beautiful clothing, lovely as the full moon, but I will not even glance at her until her attendants kiss the ground before me and beg me to look at her, and then I will cast at her one single glance. When they leave us alone I will neither look at her nor speak to her, but will show my contempt by lying beside her with my face to the wall. Presently her mother will come into the chamber and beg of me, "Please, my lord, your handmaid longs for your favor." I will give no answer. Then she will kiss my feet and say, "My lord, my daughter is truly a beautiful maid who has never before been with a man. Do speak to her and soothe her mind and spirit." Then she will bring a cup of wine, hand it to her daughter, saying, "Take this to your lord." I will say nothing, leaning back so that she may see in me a sultan and a mighty man. She will say to me, "My lord, do not refuse to take this cup from the hand of your servant." I will say nothing, and she will insist, "You must drink it," and press the cup to my lips. Then I will shake my fist in her face and kick her with my foot. With that he struck out, catching the tray of glassware with his foot. It crashed to the ground and everything broke to pieces, and thus my brother lost both his capital and his profit. Source: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night , translated from the Arabic by Richard F. Burton, reprinted from the original edition and edited by Leonard C. Smithers, vol. 1 (London: H. S. Nichols and Company , 1894), pp. 309-312 . Revised and abridged by D. L. Ashliman, © 1998. Return to the table of contents . Day-Dreaming The 1001 Nights Now there was once a man at Bagdad who had seven sons, and when he died he left to each of them one hundred dirhams; and his fifth son, called Alnaschar the Babbler, invested all this money in some glassware, and, putting it in a big tray, from which to show and sell it, he sat down on a raised bench, at the foot of a wall, against which he leant back, placing the tray on the ground in front of him. As he sat he began day-dreaming and said to himself: I have laid out a hundred dirhams on this glass. Now I will surely sell it for two hundred, and with it I will buy more glass and sell that for four hundred; nor will I cease to buy and sell till I become master of much wealth. With this I will buy all kinds of merchandise and jewels and perfumes and gain great profit on them till, God willing, I will make my capital a hundred thousand dinars or two million dirhams. Then I will buy a handsome house, together with slaves and horses and trappings of gold, and eat and drink, nor will there be a singing girl in the city but I will have her to sing to me. This he said looking at the tray before him with glassware worth a hundred dirhams. Then he continued: When I have amassed a hundred thousand dinars I will send out marriage-brokers to demand for me in marriage the hand of the Vizier's daughter, for I hear that she is perfect in beauty and of surpassing grace. I will give her a dowry of a thousand dinars, and if her father consent, 'tis well; if not, I will take her by force, in spite of him. When I return home, I will buy ten little slaves and clothes for myself such as are worn by kings and sultans and get a saddle of gold, set thick with precious jewels. Then I will mount and parade the city, with slaves before and behind me, while the people will salute me and call down blessings upon me: after which I will go to the Vizier, the girl's father, with slaves behind and before me, as well as on either hand. When the Vizier sees me, he will rise and seating me in his own place, sit down below me, because I am his son-in-law. Now I will have with me two slaves with purses, in each a thousand dinars, and I will give him the thousand dinars of the dowry and make him a present of another thousand dinars so that he may recognize my nobility and generosity and greatness of mind and the littleness of the world in my eyes; and for every ten words he will say to me, I will answer him only two. Then I will return to my house, and if anyone come to me on the bride's part, I will make him a present of money and clothe him in a robe of honor; but if he bring me a present I will return it to him and will not accept it so that they may know how great of soul I am. After a while Alnaschar continued: Then I will command them to bring the Vizier's daughter to me in state and will get ready my house in fine condition to receive her. When the time of the unveiling of the bride is come, I will put on my richest clothes and sit down on a couch of brocaded silk, leaning on a cushion and turning my eyes neither to the right nor to the left, to show the haughtiness of my mind and the seriousness of my character. My bride shall stand before me like the full moon, in her robes and ornaments, and I, out of my pride and my disdain, will not look at her, till all who are present shall say to me: "O my lord, thy wife and thy handmaid stands before thee; deign to look upon her, for standing is irksome to her." And they will kiss the earth before me many times, whereupon I will lift my eyes and give one glance at her, then bend down my head again. Then they will carry her to the bride-chamber, and meanwhile I will rise and change my clothes for a richer suit. When they bring in the bride for the second time, I will not look at her till they have implored me several times, when I will glance at her and bow down my head; nor will I cease doing thus, till they have made an end of parading and displaying her. Then I will order one of my slaves to fetch a purse, and, giving it to the tire-women, command them to lead her to the bride-chamber. When they leave me alone with the bride, I will not look at her or speak to her, but will sit by her with averted face, that she may say I am high of soul. Presently her mother will come to me and kiss my head and hands and say to me: "O my lord, look on thy handmaid, for she longs for thy favor, and heal her spirit." But I will give her no answer; and when she sees this, she will come and kiss my feet and say, "O my lord, verily my daughter is a beautiful girl, who has never seen man; and if thou show her this aversion, her heart will break; so do thou be gracious to her and speak to her." Then she will rise and fetch a cup of wine, and her daughter will take it and come to me; but I will leave her standing before me, while I recline upon a cushion of cloth of gold, and will not look at her to show the haughtiness of my heart, so that she will think me to be a sultan of exceeding dignity and will say to me: "O my lord, for God's sake, do not refuse to take the cup from thy servant's hand, for indeed I am thy handmaid." But I will not speak to her, and she will press me, saying: "Needs must thou drink it," and put it to my lips. Then I will shake my fist in her face and spurn her with my foot thus. So saying, he gave a kick with his foot and knocked over the tray of glass, which fell over to the ground, and all that was in it was broken. Source: Joseph Jacobs, Europa's Fairy Book (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), no. 15, pp. 110-14 . Note by Jacobs: I have given the story of the barber's fifth brother from the Arabian Nights as another example of the rare instances of tales that have become current among the folk, but which can be definitely traced to literary sources, though possibly, in the far-off past, it was a folk tale arising in the East. The various stages by which the story came into Europe have been traced by Benfey in the introduction to his edition of Pantschatantra , § 209, and after him by Max Mueller in his essay "On the Migration of Fables" ( Chips from a German Workshop , iv., 145-209; it was thus a chip from another German's workshop). It came to Europe before the Arabian Nights and became popular in La Fontaine's fable of Perrette who counted her chickens before they were hatched, as the popular phrase puts it. In such a case one can only give a reproduction of the literary source , and it is a problem which of the various forms which appear in the folk books should be chosen. I have selected that from the Thousand and One Nights because I have given elsewhere the story of Perrette (Jacobs, Æsop's Fables , no. 45), and did not care to repeat it in this place. I have made my version a sort of composite from those of Mr. Payne and Sir Richard Burton, and have made the few changes necessary to fit the tale to youthful minds. It is from the quasi-literary spread of stories like this that the claim for an Oriental origin of all folk tales has received its chief strength, and it was necessary, therefore, to include one or two of them in Europa's Fairy Book (Androcles is another). But the mode of transmission is quite different and definitely traceable and, for the most part, the tales remain entirely unchanged; whereas, in the true folk tale, the popular storytellers exercised their choice, modifying incidents and giving local color. ( pp. 243-44 ) Return to the table of contents . The Milkmaid and Her Pail Aesop A farmer's daughter had been out to milk the cows, and was returning to the dairy carrying her pail of milk upon her head. As she walked along, she fell a-musing after this fashion: The milk in this pail will provide me with cream, which I will make into butter and take to market to sell. With the money I will buy a number of eggs, and these, when hatched, will produce chickens, and by and by I shall have quite a large poultry yard. Then I shall sell some of my fowls, and with the money which they will bring in I will buy myself a new gown, which I shall wear when I go to the fair; and all the young fellows will admire it, and come and make love to me, but I shall toss my head and have nothing to say to them. Forgetting all about the pail, and suiting the action to the word, she tossed her head. Down went the pail, all the milk was spilled, and all her fine castles in the air vanished in a moment! Moral: Do not count your chickens before they are hatched. Source: Æsop's Fables , translated by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: W. Heinemann; New York: Doubleday, Page and Company, 1916), pp. 25-26 . Return to the table of contents . Story of an Old Woman, Carrying Milk to Market in an Earthen Vessel. Jacques de Vitry An old woman, while carrying milk to market in an earthen vessel, began to consider in what way she could become rich. Reflecting that she might sell her milk for three pence ( obolos ), she thought she would buy with them a young hen, from whose eggs she would get many chickens, which she would sell and buy a pig. This she would fatten and sell and buy a foal, which she would rear until it was suitable to ride. And she began to say to herself, "I shall ride that horse and lead it to pasture and say to it, 'Io! Io!'" While she was thinking of these things she began to move her feet and heels as if she had spurs on them, clapped her hands for joy, so that by the motion of her feet and the clapping of her hands she broke the pitcher, and the milk was spilled on the ground, and she was left with nothing in her hands. Source: Jacques de Vitry The Exempla; Or, Illustrative Stories from the Sermones Vulgares , edited by Thomas Frederick Crane (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1890), no. 51, pp. 154-55 . Crane considers the above tale to be "the oldest European version of this famous fable." Jacques de Vitry was born in central France between about 1160 and 1170, and died in Rome in 1240. Return to the table of contents . What Happened to a Woman Called Truhana Spain, Prince Don Juan Manuel A woman named Truhana, who was not very rich, went one day to market, carrying on her head a jar of honey. Along the road she was calculating how she could sell the honey and buy eggs, these eggs would produce chickens, and with the produce of the sale of these latter she would buy lambs; and in this way was calculating how she would become richer than her neighbors, and looked forward with anxiety to well marrying her sons and daughters, and how she would go through the streets, accompanied by her sons and daughters-in-law, and how the people would say what a fortunate woman she was to become so rich, having been so very poor. Under the influence of these pleasurable thoughts, she laughed heartily; when, suddenly striking the jar with her hand, it fell to the ground and was broken. Seeing this, she was in great grief at being so suddenly deprived of all her flattering anticipations; for, having fixed all her thoughts upon an illusion, she lost that which was real. Source: Prince Don Juan Manuel Count Lucanor; or, The Fifty Pleasant Stories of Patronio: The Tales of the "Spanish Boccaccio" , first done into English by James York, 1868 (London: Gibbings and Company, 1899), no. 28, pp. 147-49 . This book ( Libro de los ejemplos del conde Lucanor y de Patronio ) was first written in 1335. Don Juan Manuel, Prince of Villena, was born in 1282 and died in 1348. Return to the table of contents . The Dairywoman and the Pot of Milk France, Jean de La Fontaine A pot of milk upon her cushion'd crown, Good Peggy hasten'd to the market town; Short clad and light, with speed she went, Not fearing any accident; Indeed, to be the nimbler tripper, Her dress that day, The truth to say, Was simple petticoat and slipper. And, thus bedight, Good Peggy, light, -- Her gains already counted, -- Laid out the cash At single dash, Which to a hundred eggs amounted. Three nests she made, Which, by the aid Of diligence and care were hatch'd. "To raise the chicks, I'll easy fix," Said she, "beside our cottage thatch'd. The fox must get More cunning yet, Or leave enough to buy a pig. With little care And any fare, He'll grow quite fat and big; And then the price Will be so nice, For which the pork will sell! 'Twill go quite hard But in our yard I'll bring a cow and calf to dwell -- A calf to frisk among the flock!" The thought made Peggy do the same; And down at once the milk-pot came, And perish'd with the shock. Calf, cow, and pig, and chicks, adieu! Your mistress' face is sad to view; She gives a tear to fortune spilt; Then with the downcast look of guilt Home to her husband empty goes, Somewhat in danger of his blows. Who buildeth not, sometimes, in air His cots, or seats, or castles fair? From kings to dairywomen, -- all, -- The wise, the foolish, great and small, -- Each thinks his waking dream the best. Some flattering error fills the breast: The world with all its wealth is ours, Its honors, dames, and loveliest bowers. Instinct with valor, when alone, I hurl the monarch from his throne; The people, glad to see him dead, Elect me monarch in his stead, And diadems rain on my head. Some accident then calls me back, And I'm no more than simple Jack. Jean de La Fontaine, The Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright (London: George Bell and Sons, 1888), book 7, fable 10, pp. 159-60 . Link to this fable in French: La laitière et le pot au lait . Jean de La Fontaine was born in 1621 and died in 1695. His Fables were first published in several volumes between 1668 and 1694. Return to the table of contents . Lazy Heinz Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Heinz was lazy, and although he had nothing else to do but to drive his goat out to the pasture every day, he nevertheless groaned every evening when he returned home after finishing his day's work. "It is in truth a heavy burden," he said, "and a tiresome job, to drive such a goat out to the field year in and year out until late in the fall. If I could only lie down and sleep at it! But no, I must keep my eyes open so it won't damage the young trees, or force its way through the hedge into a garden, or even run away altogether. How can I get some rest and enjoy life?" He sat down, collected his thoughts, and considered how he could lift this burden from his shoulders. For a long time his thoughts led to nothing, but suddenly it was as if scales were removed from his eyes. "I know what I will do," he shouted. "I will marry Fat Trina. She too has a goat, and she can drive mine out with hers, and then I shall no longer have to torment myself." So Heinz got up, set his weary limbs into motion, and walked across the street, for it was no further than that, to where Fat Trina's parents lived, and asked for the hand in marriage of their industrious and virtuous daughter. Her parents did not think about it for long. "Birds of a feather, flock together," they thought, and gave their consent. So Fat Trina became Heinz's wife, and drove out both of the goats. Heinz now enjoyed life, having no work to rest from, but his own laziness. He went out with her only now and then, saying, "I'm doing this so that afterwards I will enjoy resting more. Otherwise I shall lose all feeling for it." However, Fat Trina was no less lazy. "Dear Heinz," she said one day, "why should we make our lives so miserable, ruining the best days of our youth, when there is no need for it? The two goats disturb our best sleep every morning with their bleating. Wouldn't it be better for us to give them to our neighbor, who will give us a beehive for them? We will put the beehive in a sunny place behind the house, and then not give it any more thought. Bees do not have to be taken care of, nor driven into the field. They fly out and find their way home again by themselves, and they collect honey without any effort at all on our part." "You have spoken like a sensible woman," replied Heinz. "We will carry out your proposal without delay. And furthermore, honey tastes better and is more nourishing than goat's milk, and it keeps longer too." The neighbor willingly gave them a beehive for the two goats. The bees flew tirelessly in and out from early morning until late evening, filling the hive with the best honey. Thus that fall-time, Heinz was able to take out a whole jugful. They placed the jug on a shelf on their bedroom wall. Fearing that it might be stolen, or that the mice might get into it, Trina brought in a stout hazel stick and put it beside her bed, so that she would be able to reach it without having to get up, and then from her place in bed drive away the uninvited guests. Lazy Heinz did not like to get out of bed before noon. "He who rises early," he would say, "wastes his wealth." One morning when he was still lying in the feathers in broad daylight, resting from his long sleep, he said to his wife, "Women are fond of sweets, and you have been snacking on the honey. It would be better for us to exchange it for a goose with a young gosling, before you eat it all up." "But not before we have a child to take care of them." replied Trina. Am I to torment myself with the young geese, wasting all my energy on them for no reason?" "Do you think," said Heinz, "that the boy will tend geese? Nowadays children no longer obey. They do just as they please, because they think that they are smarter than their parents, just like that servant who was supposed to look for the cow and chased after three blackbirds." "Oh," replied Trina, "he will get it if he does not do what I say. I will take a stick and tan his hide with more blows than can be counted." "See here, Heinz," she shouted in her fervor, seizing the stick that she intended to use to drive away the mice. "See here! This is how I will beat him." She struck forth, unfortunately hitting the jug of honey above the bed. The jug struck against the wall and fell down in pieces. The fine honey flowed out onto the floor. "There lies the goose with the young gosling," said Heinz. "And they do not need to be tended. But it is lucky that the jug did not fall on my head. We have every reason to be satisfied with our fate." Then noticing that there was still some honey in one of the pieces of the jug, he reached out for it, saying quite happily, "Wife, let us enjoy the leftovers, and then we will rest a little from the fright we have had. What does it matter if we get up a little later than usual? The day will be long enough." "Yes," answered Trina, "there is always time enough. You know, the snail was once invited to a wedding and started on his way, but arrived at the child's baptism. In front of the house it fell over the fence, and said, 'Haste makes waste.'" Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der faule Heinz," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 164, pp. 313-15 . I have followed the Grimms' seventh and final edition (1857). This tale was added to their collection in the third edition (1837). Translation © 2001 by D. L. Ashliman. Link to a separate file containing only the tale Lazy Heinz . Return to the table of contents . Lean Lisa Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Lean Lisa was not at all like Lazy Heinz and Fat Trina, who would not allow anything to disturb their rest. She burned herself out from morning until evening and loaded so much work on her husband, Lanky Lenz, that it was harder for him than for a donkey loaded with three sacks. But it was all for naught. They had nothing, and they got nothing. One evening she was lying in bed, too tired to move a muscle but still unable to fall asleep, when she poked her husband in the side with her elbow and said, "Lenz, listen to what I just thought of. If I were to find a florin, and you were to give me another one, then I'd borrow yet another one, and you'd give me still another one, and then I would take the four florins and buy a young cow." The man agreed. "I don't know," he said, "where I'm to get that florin I'm supposed to give you, but after you have the money to buy a cow, it will be a good thing." Then he added, "I'm looking forward to the time after the cow calves, so I can have some good refreshing milk to drink." "The milk is not for you," said the woman. "We will let the calf suck, so it will grow large and fat, and we can sell it for a good price." "Of course," said the man, "but it won't hurt anything if we take a little milk." "Who taught you about cows?" said the woman. "I won't allow it, whether it will hurt anything or not. You can stand on your head, but you won't get a single drop of milk. Lanky Lenz, just because you are always hungry, you think that you can devour everything that my hard work brings in." "Woman," said the man, "be quiet, or I'll plant one on the side of your face." "What!" she cried. "Are you threatening me! You glutton! You good-for-nothing! You lazybones!" She was reaching for his hair, but Lanky Lenz raised himself up, took hold of both her skinny arms with one hand, then pushed her head into the pillow with the other one. He held her there and let her scold until she fell asleep from exhaustion. The next morning when she woke up, I do not know whether she continued to quarrel, or whether she went out to look for the florin that she wanted to find. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die hagere Liese," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 168, pp. 332-33 . I have followed the Grimms' seventh and final edition (1857). This tale was added to their collection in the fourth edition (1840). Translation © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. Link to a separate file containing only the tale Lean Lisa . Return to the table of contents . Buttermilk Jack England, Thomas Hughes Ther wur an owld 'oman as had but one son, And thay lived together as you med zee; And they'd nought but an owld hen as wanted to sett, Yet somehow a landlord he fain would be. Oh, I've been and begged me some buttermilk, mother, Off of an owld 'oman as has girt store; And I shall well rewarded be, Vor she's g'in me haf a gallon or mwore. Oh mother, my buttermilk I will sell, And all for a penny as you med zee; And with my penny then I will buy eggs, Vor I shall have seven for my penney. Oh mother, I'll set them all under our hen, And seven cock chickens might chance for to be; But seven cock chickens or seven cap hens, There'll be seven half-crownds for me. Oh, I'll go carry them to market, mother, And nothing but vine volk shall I zee; And with my money then I will buy land, Zo as a landlord I med be. "Oh my dear zon, wilt thee know me, When thee hast gotten great store of wealth?" "Oh, my dear mother, how shall I know thee, When I shall hardly know my own self?" With that the owld 'oman she flew in a passion, And dashed her son Jack up agin the wall, And his head caught the shelf where the buttermilk stood, So down came the buttermilk, pitcher and all. Zo aal you as has got an old hen for to sett, Both by night and by day mind you has her well watched, Lest you should be like unto Buttermilk Jack, To reckon your chickens before thay are hatched. Source: Thomas Hughes The Scouring of the White Horse; or, The Long Vacation Ramble of a London Clerk (Cambridge and London: Macmillan and Company, 1859), pp. 171-72 . According to the narrator, this song was sung at a country fair "by a queer little man, with a twisted face, and a lurcher dog between his knees." Thomas Hughes, best known for his novel Tom Brown's School Days (1857), was born in 1822 and died in 1896. Return to the table of contents . Story Ireland Once upon a time there was a very poor woman and her son living together. The son was a young lad of eleven or twelve years. One day however the young fellow got a present of a chicken from some of the neighbours, and he was delighted. He ran home and the mother was delighted too. "Oh Johnny," she says, "that's great, now the chicken will lay eggs and we'll hatch the eggs and when the chickens come out we'll sell them. Then we'll buy a suck pig and when we sell that we'll get a little calf. We won't feel it growing up, and we can sell it and buy a nice little pony." "Oh, yes, Mother," says the lad, "and I'll ride him." "Indeed you won't, you young ruffian, you won't to break his back." And she gave the son a slap in the ear. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Westmeath >> Lower Warren, p. 246 . Told in school district. Collector: Liam F. Cox, Warren Lower, Co. Westmeath. The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Air Castles Denmark A poor girl sat and wove in Haverslev. When she had woven a piece of cloth for the lady at Torstedlund, she received her payment plus a little bonus, including a whole jug of milk. She made her way homeward, and when she came to the Tollevase Bridge she sat down to rest. Here she began to take stock of all the good things she had received from the lady, and what she would do with them. She would make cheese from the milk, which she would sell and buy a hen. The hen would lay eggs and hatch chicks. These she would sell and buy a sheep. She would sell the sheep's wool. The sheep would have lambs, which would grow old and have more lambs as well. Now she would have enough money to buy a cow, and then more cows. Finally she would buy a large farm and get married and have two sons. One would be named Thor and the other one Bøje. One of them would live at Torstedlund and the other one at Nørlund. "But then the cursed farmworkers would come and complain to me about my bad children." They would angrily say to her: "How in the devil can we deal with what Thor and Bøje are doing!" This so outraged her that she struck out with her stick, hitting the milk jug and breaking it to pieces. Now all of her glorious things lay there on the ground. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Luftslottene," Æventyr fra Jylland: Tredje Samling (Copenhagen: Karl Schønberg, 1895), no. 68, p. 368 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Luftslottene," Æventyr fra Jylland: Tredje Samling (Copenhagen: Karl Schønberg, 1895), no. 68, p. 368 . Tang Kristensen's source: "C. Brøgger, Revnkilde." Return to the table of contents . Great Expectations Denmark There was an old woman who went begging for milk with two jars. At the Lundergaard farm she got them both full. On her way home she got tired and sat down on a hill that lies southeast of the Lundergaard field. She sat there wondering what she would do with the milk when she got home. Finally she decided that she would put the milk to good use by making cheese from it. She would then sell the cheese a buy a hen that could hatch chicks. The hen should produce fourteen chicks -- that wasn't too much to expect. She would then sell the chicks and buy a goose, and it would produce fourteen goslings. When she sold them she would buy a sheep. It would have two lambs, and she thought she would be able to get a cow for the three of them. She would milk the cow for almost a whole year, and this would bring in so much money that she could gradually buy a larger herd, and it would multiply so much for her, that eventually she would be able to buy the Lundergaard farm. "But this is the most important thing: The peasants will come and want to borrow grain from me; but I won't do that, because then I could easily lose all my fortune." In her eagerness to save her fortune she smashed the jars together. They broke into pieces and spilled all the milk. So you see, now she was poorer than before. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Gode Beregninger," Fra Bindestue og Kølle: Jyske Folkeæventyr , vol. 1 (Copenhagen: N. C. Rom, 1896), no. 30, p. 163 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Gode Beregninger," Fra Bindestue og Kølle: Jyske Folkeæventyr , vol. 1 (Copenhagen: N. C. Rom, 1896), no. 30, p. 163 . Return to the table of contents . The Egg Denmark Once there was a poor woman who went out into a field with her son to gather bunches of yarrow flowers along the hedgerows. She had knitted a white cap for the boy, and he wanted to have it dyed. As they walked along a hedgerow, the boy found an egg that a duck had laid there. "Oh, mother, mother!" cried the boy. "Can I have a scrambled egg?" "You should have the cat, you should," replied the mother. "Do you think that you can live on the fat of the land like the gentry? No, we will put that egg in grandmother's bed. She will hatch it, and a duckling will come out of it." "But mother, who will take care of the duckling?" asked the boy. "You will have to, my boy. You have nothing better to do. This egg will turn into a duck, and it too will lay eggs." "Yes, mother, but what if it turns into a drake?" "Don't talk nonsense, boy. It will be a female duck, and it will lay eggs, a whole dozen, and it will hatch them and produce many ducklings." "Yes, mother, but I'll get tired of looking after all of those ducklings, I will!" "Don't say that, boy. Who else would look after them? When the ducklings get big and fat, we'll sell them and buy a goose, a really big goose, you see, and it too will lay eggs. Then we'll get goslings, and for them we'll get a sheep, and the sheep will have a lamb. We can mate two sheep, and then we'll have whole herd of sheep. Then we'll buy a cow. It will have a calf, and then we'll have two cows. We'll sell them, and then we'll buy a colt -- --." "Oh, mother, mother, can I ride the colt?" "Ride! Who do you think that you are? To the devil with you!" cried the mother, and she slapped the boy under his ear, causing him to drop the egg, and it shattered into pieces. Source (books.google.com): Jens Kamp, "Ægget," Danske Folkeæventyr: Samlede fra Folkemunde , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: Jakob H. Mansas Forlag, 1891), no. 14, pp. 148-49 . Kamp's source: "Told by Bricklayer Johansen's wife, Køng, Funen." Return to the table of contents . The Lad and the Fox Sweden There was once upon a time a little lad, who was on his way to church, and when he came to a clearing in the forest he caught sight of a fox, who was lying on the top of a big stone fast asleep, so that the fox did not know the lad had seen him. "If I kill that fox," said the lad, taking a heavy stone in his fist, "and sell the skin, I shall get money for it, and with that money I shall buy some rye, and that rye I shall sow in father's cornfield at home. When the people who are on their way to church pass by my field of rye they'll say, 'Oh, what splendid rye that lad has got!' Then I shall say to them, 'I say, keep away from my rye!' But they won't heed me. Then I shall shout to them, 'I say, keep away from my rye!' But still they won't take any notice of me. Then I shall scream with all my might, 'Keep away from my rye!' and then they'll listen to me." But the lad screamed so loudly that the fox woke up and made off at once for the forest, so that the lad did not even get as much as a handful of his hair. No, it's best always to take what you can reach, for of undone deeds you should never screech, as the saying goes. Source: Gabriel Djurklou, Fairy Tales from the Swedish , translated by H. L. Brækstad (London: William Heinemann, 1901), pp. 85-86 . Nils Gabriel Djurklou was born in 1829 and died in 1904. Return to the table of contents . The Peasant and the Cucumbers Leo Tolstoy A peasant once went to the gardener's, to steal cucumbers. He crept up to the cucumbers, and thought, "I will carry off a bag of cucumbers, which I will sell; with the money I will buy a hen. The hen will lay eggs, hatch them, and raise a lot of chicks. I will feed the chicks and sell them; then I will buy me a young sow, and she will bear a lot of pigs. I will sell the pigs, and buy me a mare; the mare will foal me some colts. I will raise the colts, and sell them. I will buy me a house, and start a garden. In the garden I will sow cucumbers, and will not let them be stolen, but will keep a sharp watch on them. I will hire watchmen, and put them in the cucumber patch, while I myself will come on them, unawares, and shout, 'Oh, there, keep a sharp lookout!'" And this he shouted as loud as he could. The watchmen heard it, and they rushed out and beat the peasant. Source: Leo Tolstoy, Fables for Children; Stories for Children; Natural Science Stories , translated by Leo Wiener (London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1904), p. 40 . Leo Tolstoy was born in 1828 and died in 1910. Return to the table of contents . The Milkmaid and Her Bucket Ambrose Bierce A senator fell to musing as follows: "With the money which I shall get for my vote in favour of the bill to subsidise cat-ranches, I can buy a kit of burglar's tools and open a bank. The profit of that enterprise will enable me to obtain a long, low, black schooner, raise a death's-head flag and engage in commerce on the high seas. From my gains in that business I can pay for the presidency, which at $50,000 a year will give me in four years --" but it took him so long to make the calculation that the bill to subsidise cat-ranches passed without his vote, and he was compelled to return to his constituents an honest man, tormented with a clean conscience. Source: Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), p. 192 . The American satirist Ambrose Bierce was born in 1842 and died about 1914. He was last seen in Chihuahua, Mexico. Return to the table of contents . Return to: the table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 16, 2022. Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves from the 1001 Nights Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves from the 1001 Nights edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009-2013 Contents The Forty Thieves (retold by Andrew Lang). Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves (translated by Richard F. Burton). Links to related sites . The Forty Thieves Retold by Andrew Lang In a town in Persia there dwelt two brothers, one named Cassim, the other Ali Baba. Cassim was married to a rich wife and lived in plenty, while Ali Baba had to maintain his wife and children by cutting wood in a neighboring forest and selling it in the town. One day, when Ali Baba was in the forest, he saw a troop of men on horseback, coming toward him in a cloud of dust. He was afraid they were robbers, and climbed into a tree for safety. When they came up to him and dismounted, he counted forty of them. They unbridled their horses and tied them to trees. The finest man among them, whom Ali Baba took to be their captain, went a little way among some bushes, and said, "Open, Sesame!" so plainly that Ali Baba heard him. A door opened in the rocks, and having made the troop go in, he followed them, and the door shut again of itself. They stayed some time inside, and Ali Baba, fearing they might come out and catch him, was forced to sit patiently in the tree. At last the door opened again, and the Forty Thieves came out. As the Captain went in last he came out first, and made them all pass by him; he then closed the door, saying, "Shut, Sesame!" Every man bridled his horse and mounted, the Captain put himself at their head, and they returned as they came. Then Ali Baba climbed down and went to the door concealed among the bushes, and said, "Open, Sesame!" and it flew open. Ali Baba, who expected a dull, dismal place, was greatly surprised to find it large and well lighted, hollowed by the hand of man in the form of a vault, which received the light from an opening in the ceiling. He saw rich bales of merchandise -- silk, stuff-brocades, all piled together, and gold and silver in heaps, and money in leather purses. He went in and the door shut behind him. He did not look at the silver, but brought out as many bags of gold as he thought his asses, which were browsing outside, could carry, loaded them with the bags, and hid it all with fagots. Using the words, "Shut, Sesame!" he closed the door and went home. Then he drove his asses into the yard, shut the gates, carried the money-bags to his wife, and emptied them out before her. He bade her keep the secret, and he would go and bury the gold. "Let me first measure it," said his wife. "I will go borrow a measure of someone, while you dig the hole." So she ran to the wife of Cassim and borrowed a measure. Knowing Ali Baba's poverty, the sister was curious to find out what sort of grain his wife wished to measure, and artfully put some suet at the bottom of the measure. Ali Baba's wife went home and set the measure on the heap of gold, and filled it and emptied it often, to her great content. She then carried it back to her sister, without noticing that a piece of gold was sticking to it, which Cassim's wife perceived directly her back was turned. She grew very curious, and said to Cassim when he came home, "Cassim, your brother is richer than you. He does not count his money, he measures it." He begged her to explain this riddle, which she did by showing him the piece of money and telling him where she found it. Then Cassim grew so envious that he could not sleep, and went to his brother in the morning before sunrise. "Ali Baba," he said, showing him the gold piece, "you pretend to be poor and yet you measure gold." By this Ali Baba perceived that through his wife's folly Cassim and his wife knew their secret, so he confessed all and offered Cassim a share. "That I expect," said Cassim; "but I must know where to find the treasure, otherwise I will discover all, and you will lose all." Ali Baba, more out of kindness than fear, told him of the cave, and the very words to use. Cassim left Ali Baba, meaning to be beforehand with him and get the treasure for himself. He rose early next morning, and set out with ten mules loaded with great chests. He soon found the place, and the door in the rock. He said, "Open, Sesame!" and the door opened and shut behind him. He could have feasted his eyes all day on the treasures, but he now hastened to gather together as much of it as possible; but when he was ready to go he could not remember what to say for thinking of his great riches. Instead of "Sesame," he said, "Open, Barley!" and the door remained fast. He named several different sorts of grain, all but the right one, and the door still stuck fast. He was so frightened at the danger he was in that he had as much forgotten the word as if he had never heard it. About noon the robbers returned to their cave, and saw Cassim's mules roving about with great chests on their backs. This gave them the alarm; they drew their sabers, and went to the door, which opened on their Captain's saying, "Open, Sesame!" Cassim, who had heard the trampling of their horses' feet, resolved to sell his life dearly, so when the door opened he leaped out and threw the Captain down. In vain, however, for the robbers with their sabers soon killed him. On entering the cave they saw all the bags laid ready, and could not imagine how anyone had got in without knowing their secret. They cut Cassim's body into four quarters, and nailed them up inside the cave, in order to frighten anyone who should venture in, and went away in search of more treasure. As night drew on Cassim's wife grew very uneasy, and ran to her brother-in-law, and told him where her husband had gone. Ali Baba did his best to comfort her, and set out to the forest in search of Cassim. The first thing he saw on entering the cave was his dead brother. Full of horror, he put the body on one of his asses, and bags of gold on the other two, and, covering all with some fagots, returned home. He drove the two asses laden with gold into his own yard, and led the other to Cassim's house. The door was opened by the slave Morgiana, whom he knew to be both brave and cunning. Unloading the ass, he said to her, "This is the body of your master, who has been murdered, but whom we must bury as though he had died in his bed. I will speak with you again, but now tell your mistress I am come." The wife of Cassim, on learning the fate of her husband, broke out into cries and tears, but Ali Baba offered to take her to live with him and his wife if she would promise to keep his counsel and leave everything to Morgiana; whereupon she agreed, and dried her eyes. Morgiana, meanwhile, sought an apothecary and asked him for some lozenges. "My poor master," she said, "can neither eat nor speak, and no one knows what his distemper is." She carried home the lozenges and returned next day weeping, and asked for an essence only given to those just about to die. Thus, in the evening, no one was surprised to hear the wretched shrieks and cries of Cassim's wife and Morgiana, telling everyone that Cassim was dead. The day after Morgiana went to an old cobbler near the gates of the town who opened his stall early, put a piece of gold in his hand, and bade him follow her with his needle and thread. Having bound his eyes with a handkerchief, she took him to the room where the body lay, pulled off the bandage, and bade him sew the quarters together, after which she covered his eyes again and led him home. Then they buried Cassim, and Morgiana his slave followed him to the grave, weeping and tearing her hair, while Cassim's wife stayed at home uttering lamentable cries. Next day she went to live with Ali Baba, who gave Cassim's shop to his eldest son. The Forty Thieves, on their return to the cave, were much astonished to find Cassim's body gone and some of their money-bags. "We are certainly discovered," said the Captain, "and shall be undone if we cannot find out who it is that knows our secret. Two men must have known it; we have killed one, we must now find the other. To this end one of you who is bold and artful must go into the city dressed as a traveler, and discover whom we have killed, and whether men talk of the strange manner of his death. If the messenger fails he must lose his life, lest we be betrayed." One of the thieves started up and offered to do this, and after the rest had highly commended him for his bravery he disguised himself, and happened to enter the town at daybreak, just by Baba Mustapha's stall. The thief bade him good-day, saying, "Honest man, how can you possibly see to stitch at your age?" "Old as I am," replied the cobbler, "I have very good eyes, and will you believe me when I tell you that I sewed a dead body together in a place where I had less light than I have now." The robber was overjoyed at his good fortune, and, giving him a piece of gold, desired to be shown the house where he stitched up the dead body. At first Mustapha refused, saying that he had been blindfolded; but when the robber gave him another piece of gold he began to think he might remember the turnings if blindfolded as before. This means succeeded; the robber partly led him, and was partly guided by him, right in front of Cassim's house, the door of which the robber marked with a piece of chalk. Then, well pleased, he bade farewell to Baba Mustapha and returned to the forest. By and by Morgiana, going out, saw the mark the robber had made, quickly guessed that some mischief was brewing, and fetching a piece of chalk marked two or three doors on each side, without saying anything to her master or mistress. The thief, meantime, told his comrades of his discovery. The Captain thanked him, and bade him show him the house he had marked. But when they came to it they saw that five or six of the houses were chalked in the same manner. The guide was so confounded that he knew not what answer to make, and when they returned he was at once beheaded for having failed. Another robber was dispatched, and, having won over Baba Mustapha, marked the house in red chalk; but Morgiana being again too clever for them, the second messenger was put to death also. The Captain now resolved to go himself, but, wiser than the others, he did not mark the house, but looked at it so closely that he could not fail to remember it. He returned, and ordered his men to go into the neighboring villages and buy nineteen mules, and thirty-eight leather jars, all empty except one, which was full of oil. The Captain put one of his men, fully armed, into each, rubbing the outside of the jars with oil from the full vessel. Then the nineteen mules were loaded with thirty-seven robbers in jars, and the jar of oil, and reached the town by dusk. The Captain stopped his mules in front of Ali Baba's house, and said to Ali Baba, who was sitting outside for coolness, "I have brought some oil from a distance to sell at tomorrow's market, but it is now so late that I know not where to pass the night, unless you will do me the favor to take me in." Though Ali Baba had seen the Captain of the robbers in the forest, he did not recognize him in the disguise of an oil merchant. He bade him welcome, opened his gates for the mules to enter, and went to Morgiana to bid her prepare a bed and supper for his guest. He brought the stranger into his hall, and after they had supped went again to speak to Morgiana in the kitchen, while the Captain went into the yard under pretense of seeing after his mules, but really to tell his men what to do. Beginning at the first jar and ending at the last, he said to each man, "As soon as I throw some stones from the window of the chamber where I lie, cut the jars open with your knives and come out, and I will be with you in a trice." He returned to the house, and Morgiana led him to his chamber. She then told Abdallah, her fellow slave, to set on the pot to make some broth for her master, who had gone to bed. Meanwhile her lamp went out, and she had no more oil in the house. "Do not be uneasy," said Abdallah; "go into the yard and take some out of one of those jars." Morgiana thanked him for his advice, took the oil pot, and went into the yard. When she came to the first jar the robber inside said softly, "Is it time?" Any other slave but Morgiana, on finding a man in the jar instead of the oil she wanted, would have screamed and made a noise; but she, knowing the danger her master was in, bethought herself of a plan, and answered quietly, "Not yet, but presently." She went to all the jars, giving the same answer, till she came to the jar of oil. She now saw that her master, thinking to entertain an oil merchant, had let thirty-eight robbers into his house. She filled her oil pot, went back to the kitchen, and, having lit her lamp, went again to the oil jar and filled a large kettle full of oil. When it boiled she went and poured enough oil into every jar to stifle and kill the robber inside. When this brave deed was done she went back to the kitchen, put out the fire and the lamp, and waited to see what would happen. In a quarter of an hour the Captain of the robbers awoke, got up, and opened the window. As all seemed quiet, he threw down some little pebbles which hit the jars. He listened, and as none of his men seemed to stir he grew uneasy, and went down into the yard. On going to the first jar and saying, "Are you asleep?" he smelt the hot boiled oil, and knew at once that his plot to murder Ali Baba and his household had been discovered. He found all the gang was dead, and, missing the oil out of the last jar, became aware of the manner of their death. He then forced the lock of a door leading into a garden, and climbing over several walls made his escape. Morgiana heard and saw all this, and, rejoicing at her success, went to bed and fell asleep. At daybreak Ali Baba arose, and, seeing the oil jars still there, asked why the merchant had not gone with his mules. Morgiana bade him look in the first jar and see if there was any oil. Seeing a man, he started back in terror. "Have no fear," said Morgiana; "the man cannot harm you; he is dead." Ali Baba, when he had recovered somewhat from his astonishment, asked what had become of the merchant. "Merchant!" said she, "he is no more a merchant than I am!" and she told him the whole story, assuring him that it was a plot of the robbers of the forest, of whom only three were left, and that the white and red chalk marks had something to do with it. Ali Baba at once gave Morgiana her freedom, saying that he owed her his life. They then buried the bodies in Ali Baba's garden, while the mules were sold in the market by his slaves. The Captain returned to his lonely cave, which seemed frightful to him without his lost companions, and firmly resolved to avenge them by killing Ali Baba. He dressed himself carefully, and went into the town, where he took lodgings in an inn. In the course of a great many journeys to the forest he carried away many rich stuffs and much fine linen, and set up a shop opposite that of Ali Baba's son. He called himself Cogia Hassan, and as he was both civil and well dressed he soon made friends with Ali Baba's son, and through him with Ali Baba, whom he was continually asking to sup with him. Ali Baba, wishing to return his kindness, invited him into his house and received him smiling, thanking him for his kindness to his son. When the merchant was about to take his leave Ali Baba stopped him, saying, "Where are you going, sir, in such haste? Will you not stay and sup with me?" The merchant refused, saying that he had a reason; and, on Ali Baba's asking him what that was, he replied, "It is, sir, that I can eat no victuals that have any salt in them." "If that is all," said Ali Baba, "let me tell you that there shall be no salt in either the meat or the bread that we eat to-night." He went to give this order to Morgiana, who was much surprised. "Who is this man," she said, "who eats no salt with his meat?" "He is an honest man, Morgiana," returned her master; "therefore do as I bid you." But she could not withstand a desire to see this strange man, so she helped Abdallah to carry up the dishes, and saw in a moment that Cogia Hassan was the robber Captain, and carried a dagger under his garment. "I am not surprised," she said to herself, "that this wicked man, who intends to kill my master, will eat no salt with him; but I will hinder his plans." She sent up the supper by Abdallah, while she made ready for one of the boldest acts that could be thought on. When the dessert had been served, Cogia Hassan was left alone with Ali Baba and his son, whom he thought to make drunk and then to murder them. Morgiana, meanwhile, put on a headdress like a dancing-girl's, and clasped a girdle round her waist, from which hung a dagger with a silver hilt, and said to Abdallah, "Take your tabor, and let us go and divert our master and his guest." Abdallah took his tabor and played before Morgiana until they came to the door, where Abdallah stopped playing and Morgiana made a low courtesy. "Come in, Morgiana," said Ali Baba, "and let Cogia Hassan see what you can do"; and, turning to Cogia Hassan, he said, "She's my slave and my housekeeper." Cogia Hassan was by no means pleased, for he feared that his chance of killing Ali Baba was gone for the present; but he pretended great eagerness to see Morgiana, and Abdallah began to play and Morgiana to dance. After she had performed several dances she drew her dagger and made passes with it, sometimes pointing it at her own breast, sometimes at her master's, as if it were part of the dance. Suddenly, out of breath, she snatched the tabor from Abdallah with her left hand, and, holding the dagger in her right hand, held out the tabor to her master. Ali Baba and his son put a piece of gold into it, and Cogia Hassan, seeing that she was coming to him, pulled out his purse to make her a present, but while he was putting his hand into it Morgiana plunged the dagger into his heart. "Unhappy girl!" cried Ali Baba and his son, "what have you done to ruin us?" "It was to preserve you, master, not to ruin you," answered Morgiana. "See here," opening the false merchant's garment and showing the dagger; "see what an enemy you have entertained! Remember, he would eat no salt with you, and what more would you have? Look at him! he is both the false oil merchant and the Captain of the Forty Thieves." Ali Baba was so grateful to Morgiana for thus saving his life that he offered her to his son in marriage, who readily consented, and a few days after the wedding was celebrated with greatest splendor. At the end of a year Ali Baba, hearing nothing of the two remaining robbers, judged they were dead, and set out to the cave. The door opened on his saying, "Open Sesame!" He went in, and saw that nobody had been there since the Captain left it. He brought away as much gold as he could carry, and returned to town. He told his son the secret of the cave, which his son handed down in his turn, so the children and grandchildren of Ali Baba were rich to the end of their lives. Source: Andrew Lang, The Blue Fairy Book , 5th edition (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1891), pp. 242-50 . The three principal episodes in this story fit the following folktale classifications: Discovery of the magic treasure cave: Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 676. Death of the intruder (Kasim) and the subsequent removal of his corpse: type 950. Assassination of the thieves hidden in the oil containers: 954. Return to the table of contents . Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves Translated by Richard F. Burton In days of yore and in times and tides long gone before there dwelt in a certain town of Persia two brothers one named Kasim and the other Ali Baba, who at their father's demise had divided the little wealth he had left to them with equitable division, and had lost no time in wasting and spending it all. The elder, however, presently took to himself a wife, the daughter of an opulent merchant; so that when his father-in-law fared to the mercy of Almighty Allah, he became owner of a large shop filled with rare goods and costly wares and of a storehouse stocked with precious stuffs; likewise of much gold that was buried in the ground. Thus was he known throughout the city as a substantial man. But the woman whom Ali Baba had married was poor and needy; they lived, therefore, in a mean hovel and Ali Baba eked out a scanty livelihood by the sale of fuel which he daily collected in the jungle and carried about the town to the Bazar upon his three asses. Now it chanced one day that Ali Baba had cut dead branches and dry fuel sufficient for his need, and had placed the load upon his beasts when suddenly he espied a dust-cloud spireing high in air to his right and moving rapidly towards him; and when he closely considered it he descried a troop of horsemen riding on amain and about to reach him. At this sight he was sore alarmed, and fearing lest perchance they were a band of bandits who would slay him and drive off his donkeys, in his affright he began to run; but forasmuch as they were near hand and he could not escape from out the forest, he drove his animals laden with the fuel into a bye-way of the bushes and swarmed up a thick trunk of a huge tree to hide himself therein; and he sat upon a branch whence he could descry everything beneath him whilst none below could catch a glimpse of him above; and that tree grew close beside a rock which towered high above-head. The horsemen, young, active, and doughty riders, came close up to the rock-face and all dismounted; whereat Ali Baba took good note of them and soon he was fully persuaded by their mien and demeanour that they were a troop of highwaymen who, having fallen upon a caravan had despoiled it and carried off the spoil and brought their booty to this place with intent of concealing it safely in some cache. Moreover he observed that they were forty in number. Ali Baba saw the robbers, as soon as they came under the tree, each unbridle his horse and hobble it; then all took off their saddle-bags which proved to be full of gold and silver. The man who seemed to be the captain presently pushed forwards, load on shoulder, through thorns and thickets, till he came up to a certain spot where he uttered these strange words, "Open, O Simsim I" and forthwith appeared a wide doorway in the face of the rock. The robbers went in and last of all their Chief and then the portal shut of itself. Long while they stayed within the cave whilst Ali Baba was constrained to abide perched upon the tree, reflecting that if he came down peradventure the band might issue forth that very moment and seize him and slay him. At last he had determined to mount one of the horses and driving on his asses to return townwards, when suddenly the portal flew open. The robber-chief was first to issue forth; then, standing at the entrance, he saw and counted his men as they came out, and lastly he spake the magical words, "Shut, O Simsim!" whereat the door closed of itself. When all had passed muster and review, each slung on his saddle-bags and bridled his own horse and as soon as ready they rode off, led by the leader, in the direction whence they came. Ali Baba remained still perched on the tree and watched their departure; nor would he descend until what time they were clean gone out of sight, lest perchance one of them return and look around and descry him. Then he thought within himself, "I too will try the virtue of those magical words and see if at my bidding the door will open and close." So he called out aloud, "Open, O Simsim!" And no sooner had he spoken than straightway the portal flew open and he entered within. He saw a large cavern and a vaulted, in height equalling the stature of a full-grown man and it was hewn in the live stone and lighted up with light that came through air-holes and bullseyes in the upper surface of the rock which formed the roof. He had expected to find naught save outer gloom in this robbers' den, and he was surprised to see the whole room filled with bales of all manner stuffs, and heaped up from sole to ceiling with camel-loads of silks and brocades and embroidered cloths and mounds on mounds of vari-coloured carpetings; besides which he espied coins golden and silvern without measure or account, some piled upon the ground and others bound in leathern bags and sacks. Seeing these goods and moneys in such abundance, Ali Baba determined in his mind that not during a few years only but for many generations thieves must have stored their gains and spoils in this place. When he stood within the cave, its door had closed upon him, yet he was not dismayed since, he had kept in memory the magical words; and he took no heed of the precious stuffs around him, but applied himself only and wholly to the sacks of Ashrafis. Of these he carried out as many as he judged sufficient burthen for the beasts; then he loaded them upon his animals, and covered this plunder with sticks and fuel, so none might discern the bags, but might think that he was carrying home his usual ware. Lastly he called out, "Shut, O Simsim!" and forthwith the door closed, for the spell so wrought that whensoever any entered the cave, its portal shut of itself behind him; and, as he issued therefrom, the same would neither open nor close again till he had pronounced the words, "Shut, O Simsim!" Presently, having laden his asses Ali Baba urged them before him with all speed to the city and reaching home he drove them into the yard; and, shutting close the outer door, took down first the sticks and fuel and after the bags of gold which he carried in to his wife. She felt them and finding them full of coin suspected that Ali Baba had been robbing and fell to berating and blaming him for that he should do so ill a thing. Then quoth Ali Baba to his wife: "Indeed I am no robber but rather do thou rejoice with me at our good fortune." Hereupon he told her of his adventure and began to pour the gold from the bags in heaps before her, and her sight was dazzled by the sheen and her heart delighted at his recital and adventures. Then she began counting the gold, whereat quoth Ali Baba, "O silly woman, how long wilt thou continue turning over the coin? Now let me dig a hole wherein to hide this treasure that none may know its secret." Quoth she, "Right is thy rede! still would I weigh the moneys and have some inkling of their amount;" and he replied, "As thou pleasest, but see thou tell no man." So she went off in haste to Kasim's home to borrow weights and scales wherewith she might balance the Ashrafis and make some reckoning of their value; and when she could not find Kaim she said to his wife, "Lend me, I pray thee, thy scales for a moment." Replied her sister-in-law, "Hast thou need of the bigger balance or the smaller?" and the other rejoined, "I need not the large scales, give me the little;" and her sister-in-law cried, "Stay here a moment whilst I look about and find thy want." With this pretext Kasim's wife went aside and secretly smeared wax and suet over the pan of the balance, that she might know what thing it was Ali Baba's wife would weigh, for she made sure that whatso it be some bit thereof would stick to the wax and fat. So the woman took this opportunity to satisfy her curiosity, and Ali Baba's wife suspecting naught thereof carried home the scales and began to weigh the gold, whilst Ali Baba ceased not digging; and, when the money was weighed, they twain stowed it into the hole which they carefully filled up with earth. Then the good wife took back the scales to her kinswoman, all unknowing that an Ashrafi had adhered to the cup of the scales; but when Kasim's wife espied the gold coin she fumed with envy and wrath, saying to herself, "So ho! they borrowed my balance to weigh out Ashrafis?" and she marvelled greatly whence so poor a man as Ali Baba had gotten such store of wealth that he should be obliged to weigh it with a pair of scales. Now after long pondering the matter, when her husband returned home at eventide, she said to him, "O man, thou deemest thyself a wight of wealth and substance, but lo, thy brother Ali Baba is an Emir by the side of thee and richer far than thou art. He hath such heaps of gold that he must needs weigh his moneys with scales, whilst thou, forsooth, art satisfied to count thy coin." "Whence knowe'st thou this?" asked Kasim, and in answer his wife related all anent the pair of scales and how she found an Ashrafi stuck to them, and shewed him the gold coin which bore the mark and superscription of some ancient king. No sleep had Kasim all that night by reason of his envy and jealousy and covetise; and next morning he rose betimes and going to Ali Baba said, "O my brother, to all appearance thou art poor and needy; but in effect thou hast a store of wealth so abundant that perforce thou must weigh thy gold with scales." Quoth Ali Baba, "What is this thou sayest? I understand thee not; make clear thy purport;" and quoth Kasim with ready rage, "Feign not that thou art ignorant of what I say and think not to deceive me." Then showing him the Ashrafi he cried, "Thousands of gold coins such as these thou hast put by; and meanwhile my wife found this one stuck to the cup of the scales." Then Ali Baba understood how both Kasim and his wife knew that he had store of Ashrafis, and said in his mind that it would not avail him to keep the matter hidden, but would rather cause ill-will and mischief; and thus he was induced to tell his brother every whit concerning the bandits and also of the treasure trove in the cave. When he had heard the story, Kasim exclaimed, "I would fain learn of thee the certainty of the place where them foundest the moneys; also the magical words whereby the door opened and closed; and I forewarn thee an thou tell me not the whole truth, I will give notice of those Ashrafis to the Wali; then shalt thou forfeit all thy wealth and be disgraced and thrown into gaol." Thereupon Ali Baba told him his tale not forgetting the magical words; and Kasim who kept careful heed of all these matters next day set out, driving ten mules he had hired, and readily found the place which Ali Baba had described to him. And when he came to the aforesaid rock and to the tree whereon Ali Baba had hidden himself, and he had made sure of the door he cried in great joy, "Open, O Simsim!" The portal yawned wide at once and Kasim went within and saw the piles of jewels and treasures lying ranged all around; and, as soon as he stood amongst them the door shut after him as wont to do. He walked about in ecstasy marvelling at the treasures, and when weary of admiration he gathered together bags of Ashrafis, a sufficient load for his ten mules, and placed them by the entrance in readiness to be carried outside and set upon the beasts. But by the will of Allah Almighty he had clean forgotten the cabalistic words and cried out, "Open, O Barley!" whereat the door refused to move. Astonished and confused beyond measure he named the names of all manner of grains save sesame, which had slipped from his memory as though he had never heard the word; whereat in his dire distress he heeded not the Ashrafis that lay heaped at the entrance and paced to and fro, backwards and forwards, within the cave sorely puzzled and perplexed. The wealth whose sight had erewhile filled his heart with joy and gladness was now the cause of bitter grief and sadness. Kasini gave up all hope of the life which he by his greed and envy had so sore imperilled. It came to pass that at noontide the robbers, returning by that way, saw from afar some mules standing beside the entrance and much they marvelled at what had brought the beasts to that place; for, inasmuch as Kasim by mischance had failed to tether or hobble them, they had strayed about the jungle and were browsing hither and thither. However, the thieves paid scant regard to the estrays nor cared they to secure them, but only wondered by what means they had wandered so far from the town. Then, reaching the cave the Captain and his troop dismounted and going up to the door repeated the formula and at once it flew open. Now Kasim had heard from within the cave the horse-hooves drawing nigh and yet nigher; and he fell down to the ground in a fit of fear never doubting that it was the clatter of the banditti who would slaughter him without fail. Howbeit he presently took heart of grace and at the moment when the door flew open he rushed out hoping to make good his escape. But the unhappy ran full tilt against the Captain who stood in front of the band, and felled him to the ground; whereupon a robber standing near his chief at once bared his brand and with one cut clave Kasim clean in twain. Thereupon the robbers rushed into the cavern, and put back as they were before the bags of Ashrafis which Kasim had heaped up at the doorway ready for taking away; nor recked they aught of those which Ali Baba had removed, so dazed and amazed were they to discover by what means the strange man had effected an entrance. All knew that it was not possible for any to drop through the skylights so tall and steep was the rock's face, withal slippery of ascent; and also that none could enter by the portal unless he knew the magical words whereby to open it. However they presently quartered the dead body of Kasim and hung it to the door within the cavern, two parts to the right jamb and as many to the left that the sight might be a warning of approaching doom for all who dared enter the cave. Then coming out they closed the hoard door and rode away upon their wonted work. Now when night fell and Kasim came not home, his wife waxed uneasy in mind and running round to Ali Baba said, "O my brother, Kasim hath not returned: thou knowest whither he went, and sore I fear me some misfortune hath betided him." Ali Baba also divined that a mishap had happened to prevent his return; not the less, however, he strove to comfort his sister-in-law with words of cheer and said, "O wife of my brother, Kasim haply exerciseth discretion and, avoiding the city, cometh by a roundabout road and will be here anon. This, I do believe, is the reason why he tarrieth." Thereupon comforted in spirit Kasim's wife fared homewards and sat awaiting her husband's return; but when half the night was spent and still he came not, she was as one distraught. She feared to cry aloud for her grief, lest haply the neighbours hearing her should come and learn the secret; so she wept in silence and upbraiding herself fell to thinking, "Wherefore did I disclose this secret to him and beget envy and jealousy of Ali Baba? this be the fruit thereof and hence the disaster that hath come down upon me." She spent the rest of the night in bitter tears and early on the morrow hied in hottest hurry to Ali Baba and prayed that he would go forth in quest of his brother; so he strove to console her and straightway set out with his asses for the forest. Presently, reaching the rock he wondered to see stains of blood freshly shed and not finding his brother or the ten mules he forefelt a calamity from so evil a sign. He then went to the door and saving, "Open, O Simsim!" he pushed in and saw the dead body of Kasim, two parts hanging to the right, and the rest to the left of the entrance. Albeit he was affrighted beyond measure of affright he wrapped the quarters in two cloths and laid them upon one of his asses, hiding them carefully with sticks and fuel that none might see them. Then he placed the bags of gold upon the two other animals and likewise covered them most carefully; and, when all was made ready he closed the cave-door with the magical words, and set him forth wending homewards with all ward and watchfulness. The asses with the load of Ashrafis he made over to his wife and bade her bury the bags with diligence; but he told her not the condition in which he had come upon his brother Kasim, Then he went with the other ass, to wit, the beast whereon was laid the corpse to the widow's house and knocked gently at the door. Now Kasim had a slave-girl shrewd and sharp-witted, Morgiana hight. She as softly undid the bolt and admitted Ali Baba and the ass into the courtyard of the house, when he let down the body from the beast's back and said, "O Morgiana, haste thee and make thee ready to perform the rites for the burial of thy lord: I now go to tell the tidings to thy mistress and I will quickly return to help thee in this matter." At that instant Kasim's widow seeing her brother-in-law, exclaimed, "O Ali Baba, what news bringest thou of my spouse? Alas, I see grief tokens written upon thy countenance. Say quickly what hath happened." Then he recounted to her how it had fared with her husband and how he had been slain by the robbers and in what wise he had brought home the dead body. Ali Baba pursued: "O my lady, what was to happen hath happened, but it behoveth us to keep this matter secret, for that our lives depend upon privacy." She wept with sore weeping and made answer, "It hath fared with my husband according to the fiat of Fate; and now for thy safety's sake I give thee my word to keep the affair concealed." He replied, "Naught can avail when Allah hath decreed. Rest thee in patience; until the days of thy widowhood be accomplisht; after which time I will take thee to wife, and thou shalt live in comfort and happiness; and fear not lest my first spouse vex thee or show aught of jealousy, for that she is kindly and tender of heart." The widow lamenting her loss noisily, cried, "Be it as e'en thou please." Then Ali Baba farewelled her, weeping and wailing for her husband; and joining Morgiana took counsel with her how to manage the burial of his brother. So, after much consultation and many warnings, he left the slave-girl and departed home driving his ass before him. As soon as Ali Baba had fared forth Morgiana went quickly to a druggist's shop; and, that she might the better dissemble with him and not make known the matter, she asked of him a drug often administered to men when diseased with dangerous distemper. He gave it saying, "Who is there in thy house that lieth so ill as to require this medicine?" and said she, "My Master Kasim is sick well nigh unto death: for many days he hath nor spoken nor tasted aught of food, so that almost we despair of his life." Next day Morgiana went again and asked the druggist for more of medicine and essences such as are adhibited to the sick when at door of death, that the moribund may haply rally before the last breath. The man gave the potion and she taking it sighed aloud and wept, saying, "I fear me he may not have strength to drink this draught: methinks all will be over with him ere I return to the house." Meanwhile Ali Baba was anxiously awaiting to hear sounds of wailing and lamentation in Kasim's home that he might at such signal hasten thither and take part in the ceremonies of the funeral. Early on the second day Morgiana went with veiled face to one Baba Mustafa, a tailor well shotten in years whose craft was to make shrouds and cerecloths; and as soon as she saw him open his shop she gave him a gold piece and said, "Do thou bind a bandage over thine eyes and come along with me." Mustafa made as though he would not go, whereat Morgiana placed a second gold coin in his palm and entreated him to accompany her. The tailor presently consented for greed of gain, so tying a kerchief tightly over his eyes she led him by the hand to the house wherein lay the dead body of her master. Then, taking off the bandage in the darkened room she bade him sew together the quarters of the corpse, limb to its limb; and, casting a cloth upon the body, said to the tailor, "Make haste and sew a shroud according to the size of this dead man and I will give thee therefor yet another ducat." Baba Mustafa quickly made the cere cloth of fitting length and breadth, and Morgiana paid him the promised Ashrafi; then once more bandaging his eyes led him back to the place whence she had brought him. After this she returned hurriedly home and with the help of Ali Baba washed the body, in warm water and donning the shroud lay the corpse upon a clean place ready for burial. This done Morgiana went to the mosque and gave notice to an Imam that a funeral was awaiting the mourners in a certain household, and prayed that he would come to read the prayers for the dead; and the Imam went back with her. Then four neighbours took up the bier and bore it on tneir shoulders and fared forth with the Imam and others who were wont to give assistance at such obsequies. After the funeral prayers were ended four other men carried off the coffin; and Morgiana walked before it bare of head, striking her breast and weeping and wailing with exceeding loud lament, whilst Ali Baba and the neighbours came behind. In such order they entered the cemetery and buried him; then, leaving him to Munkar and Nakir -- the Questioners of the Dead -- all wended their ways. Presently the women of the quarter, according to the custom of the city, gathered together in the house of mourning and sat an hour with Kasim's widow comforting and condoling, presently leaving her somewhat resigned and cheered. Ali Baba stayed forty days at home in ceremonial lamentation for the loss of his brother; so none within the town save himself and his wife (Kasim's widow) and Morgiana knew aught about the secret. And when the forty days of mourning were ended Ali Baba removed to his own quarters all the property belonging to the deceased and openly married the widow; then he appointed his nephew, his brother's eldest son, who had lived a long time with a wealthy merchant and was perfect of knowledge in all matters of trade, such as selling and buying, to take charge of the defunct's shop and to carry on the business. It so chanced one day when the robbers, as was their wont, came to the treasurecave that they marvelled exceedingly to find nor sign nor trace of Kasim's body whilst they observed that much of gold had been carried off. Quoth the Captain, "Now it behoveth us to make enquiry in this matter; else shall we suffer much of loss arid this our treasure, which we and our forefathers have amassed during the course of many years, will little by little be wasted and spoiled." Hereto all assented and with single mind agreed that he whom they had slain had knowledge of the magical words whereby the door was made to open; moreover that some one beside him had cognizance of the spell and had carried off the body, and also much of gold; wherefore they needs must make diligent research and find out who the man ever might be. They then took counsel and determined that one amongst them, who should be sagacious and deft of wit, must don the dress of some merchant from foreign parts; then, repairing to the city he must go about from quarter to quarter and from street to street, and learn if any townsman had lately died and if so where he wont to dwell, that with this clue they might be enabled to find the wight they sought. Hereat said one of the robbers, "Grant me leave that I fare and find out such tidings in the town and bring thee word anon; and if I fail of my purpose I hold my life in forfeit." Accordingly that bandit, after disguising himself by dress, pushed at night into the town and next morning early he repaired to the market-square and saw that none of the shops had yet been opened, save only that of Baba Mustafa the tailor, who thread and needle in hand sat upon his working-stool. The thief bade him good day and said, "'Tis yet dark: how canst thou see to sew?" Said the tailor, "I perceive thou art a stranger. Despite my years my eyesight is so keen that only yesterday I sewed together a dead body whilst sitting in a room quite darkened." Quoth the bandit thereupon to himself, "I shall get somewhat of my want from this snip;" and to secure a further clue he asked, "Meseemeth thou wouldst jest with me and thou meanest that a cerecloth for a corpse was stitched by thee and that thy business is to sew shrouds." Answered the tailor, "It mattereth not to thee: question me no more questions." Thereupon the robber placed an Ashrafi in his hand and continued, "I desire not to discover aught thou hidest, albeit my breast like every honest man's is the grave of secrets; and this only would I learn of thee, in what house didst thou do that job? Canst thou direct me thither, or thyself conduct me thereto?" The tailor took the gold with greed and cried, "I have not seen with my own eyes the way to that house. A certain bondswoman led me to a place which I know right well and there she bandaged my eyes and guided me to some tenement and lastly carried me into a darkened room where lay the dead body dismembered. Then she unbound the kerchief and bade me sew together first the corpse and then the shroud, which having done she again blindfolded me and led me back to the stead whence she had brought me and left me there. Thou seest then I am not able to tell thee where thou shalt find the house." Quoth the robber, "Albeit thou knowest not the dwelling whereof thou speakest, still canst thou take me to the place where thou wast blindfolded; then I will bind a kerchief over thine eyes and lead thee as thou wast led: on this wise perchance thou mayest hit upon the site. An thou wilt do this favour by me, see here another golden ducat is thine." Thereupon the bandit slipped a second Ashrafi into the tailor's palm, and Baba Mustafa thrust it with the first into his pocket; then, leaving his shop as it was, he walked to the place where Morgiana had tied the kerchief around his eyes, and with him went the robber who, after binding on the bandage, led him by the hand. Baba Mustafa, who was clever and keen-witted, presently striking the street whereby he had fared with the handmaid, walked on counting step by step; then, halting suddenly, he said, "Thus far I came with her;" and the twain stopped in front of Kasim's house wherein now dwelt his brother Ali Baba. The robber then made marks with white chalk upon the door to the end that he might readily find it at some future time, and removing the bandage from the tailor's eyes said, "O Baba Mustafa, I thank thee for this favour: and Almighty Allah guerdon thee for thy goodness. Tell me now, I pray thee, who dwelleth in yonder house?" Quoth he, "In very sooth I wot not, for I have little knowledge concerning this quarter of the city;" and the bandit, understanding that he could find no further clue from the tailor, dismissed him to his shop with abundant thanks, and hastened back to the tryst-place in the jungle where the band awaited his coming. Not long after it so fortuned that Morgiana, going out upon some errand, marvelled exceedingly at seeing the chalk-marks showing white in the door; she stood awhile deep in thought and presently divined that some enemy had made the signs that he might recognize the house and play some sleight upon her lord. She therefore chalked the doors of all her neighbours in like manner and kept the matter secret, never entrusting it or to master or to mistress. Meanwhile the robber told his comrades his tale of adventure and how he had found the clue; so the Captain and with him all the band went one after other by different ways till they entered the city ; and he who had placed the mark on Ali Baba's door accompanied the Chief to point out the place. He conducted him straightway to the house and shewing the sign exclaimed, "Here dwelleth he of whom we are in search!" But when the Captain looked around him he saw that all the dwellings bore chalk-marks after like fashion and he wondered saying, "By what manner of means knowest thou which house of all these houses that bear similar signs is that whereof thou spakest?" Hereat the robber-guide was confounded beyond measure of confusion, and could make no answer; then with an oath he cried, "I did assuredly set a sign upon a door, but I know not whence came all the marks upon the other entrances; nor can I say for a surety which it was I chalked." Thereupon the Captain returned to the market-place and said to his men, "We have toiled and laboured in vain, nor have we found the house we went forth to seek. Return we now to the forest our rendezvous: I also will fare thither." Then all trooped off and assembled together within the treasure-cave; and, when the robbers had all met, the Captain judged him worthy of punishment who had spoken falsely and had led them through the city to no purpose. So he imprisoned him in presence of them all; and then said he, "To him amongst you will I show special favour who shall go to town and bring me intelligence whereby we may lay hands upon the plunderer of our property." Hereat another of the company came forward and said, "I am ready to go and enquire into the case, and 'tis I who will bring thee to thy wish." The Captain after giving him presents and promises despatched him upon his errand; and by the decree of Destiny which none may gainsay, this second robber went first to the house of Baba Mustafa the tailor, as had done the thief who had foregone him. In like manner he also persuaded the snip with gifts of golden coin that he be led hoodwinked and thus too he was guided to Ali Baba's door. Here noting the work of his predecessor, he affixed to the jamb a mark with red chalk the better to distinguish it from the others whereon still showed the white. Then hied he back in stealth to his company; but Morgiana on her part also descried the red sign on the entrance and with subtle forethought marked all the others after the same fashion; nor told she any what she had done. Meanwhile the bandit rejoined his band and vauntingly said, "O our Captain, I have found the house and thereon put a mark whereby I shall distinguish it clearly from all its neighbours." The Captain despatched another of his men to the city and he found the place, but, as aforetime, when the troop repaired thither they saw each and every house marked with signs of red chalk. So they returned disappointed and the Captain, waxing displeased exceedingly and distraught, clapped also this spy into gaol. Then said the chief to himself, "Two men have failed in their endeavour and have met their rightful meed of punishment; and I trow that none other of my band will essay to follow up their research; so I myself will go and find the house of this wight." Accordingly he fared along and aided by the tailor Baba Mustafa, who had gained much gain of golden pieces in this matter, he hit upon the house of Ali Baba; and here he made no outward show or sign, but marked it on the tablet of his heart and impressed the picture upon the page of his memory. Then returning to the jungle he said to his men, "I have full cognizance of the place and have limned it clearly in my mind ; so now there will be no difficulty in finding it. Go forth straightways and buy me and bring hither nineteen mules together with one large leathern jar of mustard oil and seven and thirty vessels of the same kind clean empty. Without me and the two locked up in gaol ye number thirty-seven souls; so I will stow you away armed and accoutred each within his jar and will load two upon each mule, and upon the nineteenth mule there shall be a man in an empty jar on one side, and on the other the jar full of oil. I for my part, in guise of an oil-merchant, will drive the mules into the town, arriving at the house by night, and will ask permission of its master to tarry there until morning. After this we shall seek occasion during the dark hours to rise up and fall upon him and slay him." Furthermore the Captain spake saying, "When we have made an end of trim we shall recover the gold and treasure whereof he robbed us and bring it back upon the mules." This counsel pleased the robbers who went forthwith and purchased mules and huge leathern jars, and did as the Captain had bidden them. And after a delay of three days shortly before nightfall they arose; and over-smearing all the jars with oil of mustard, each hid him inside an empty vessel. The Chief then disguised himself in trader's gear and placed the jars upon the nineteen mules; to wit, the thirty-seven vessels in each of which lay a robber armed and accoutred, and the one that was full of oil. This done, he drove the beasts before him and presently he reached Ali Baba's place at nightfall; when it chanced that the house-master was strolling after supper to and fro in front of his home. The Captain saluted him with the salam and said, "I come from such and such a village with oil; and ofttimes have I been here a-selling oil, but now to my grief I have arrived too late and I am sore troubled and perplexed as to where I shall spend the night. An thou have pity on me I pray thee grant that I tarry here in thy courtyard and ease the mules by taking down the jars and giving the beasts somewhat of fodder." Albeit Ali Baba had heard the Captain's voice when perched upon the tree and had seen him enter the cave, yet by reason of the disguise he knew him not for the leader of the thieves, and granted his request with hearty welcome and gave him full license to halt there for the night. He then pointed out an empty shed wherein to tether the mules, and bade one of the slave-boys go fetch grain and water. He also gave orders to the slave-girl Morgiana saying, "A guest hath come hither and tarrieth here to-night. Do thou busy thyself with all speed about his supper and make ready the guestbed for him." Presently, when the Captain had let down all the jars and had fed and watered his mules, Ali Baba received him with all courtesy and kindness, and summoning Morgiana said in his presence, "See thou fail not in service of this our stranger nor suffer him to lack for aught. To-morrow early I would fare to the Hammam and bathe; so do thou give my slave-boy Abdullah a suit of clean white clothes which I may put on after washing; moreover make thee ready a somewhat of broth overnight that I may drink it after my return home." Replied she, "I will have all in readiness as thou hast bidden." So Ali Baba retired to his rest, and the Captain, having supped, repaired to the shed and saw that all the mules had their food and drink for the night. The Captain, after seeing to the mules and the jars which Ali Baba and his household held to be full of oil, finding utter privacy, whispered to his men who were in ambush, "This night at midnight when ye hear my voice, do you quickly open with your sharp knives the leathern jars from top to bottom and issue forth without delay." Then passing through the kitchen he reached the chamber wherein a bed had been dispread for him, Morgiana showing the way with a lamp. Quoth she, "An thou need aught beside I pray thee command this thy slave who is ever ready to obey thy say!" He made answer, "Naught else need I;" then, putting out the light, he lay him down on the bed to sleep awhile ere the time came to rouse his men and finish off the work. Meanwhile Morgiana did as her master had bidden her: she first took out a suit of clean white clothes and made it over to Abdullah who had not yet gone to rest; then she placed the pipkin upon the hearth to boil the broth and blew the fire till it burnt briskly. After a short delay she needs must see an the broth be boiling, but by that time all the lamps had gone out and she found that the oil was spent and that nowhere could she get a light. The slave-boy Abdullah observed that she was troubled and perplexed hereat, and quoth he to her, "Why make so much ado? In yonder shed are many jars of oil: go now and take as much soever as thou listest." Morgiana gave thanks to him for his suggestion; and Abdullah, who was lying at his ease in the hall, went off to sleep so that he might wake betimes and serve Ali Baba in the bath. So the handmaiden rose and with oil-can in hand walked to the shed where stood the leathern jars all ranged in rows. Now, as she drew nigh unto one of the vessels, the thief who was hidden therein hearing the tread of footsteps bethought him that it was of his Captain whose summons he awaited; so he whispered, "Is it now time for us to sally forth?" Morgiana started back affrighted at the sound of human accents; but, inasmuch as she was bold and ready of wit, she replied, "The time is not yet come," and said to herself, "These jars are not full of oil and herein I perceive a manner of mystery. Haply the oil merchant hatcheth some treacherous plot against my lord; so Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate, protect us from his snares!" Wherefore she answered in a voice made like to the Captain's, "Not yet, the time is not come." Then she went to the next jar and returned the same reply to him who was within, and so on to all the vessels one by one. Then said she in herself, "Laud to the Lord! my master took this fellow in believing him to be an oil-merchant, but lo, he hath admitted a band of robbers, who only await the signal to fall upon him and plunder the place and do him die." Then passed she on to the furthest jar and finding it brimming with oil, filled her can, and returning to the kitchen, trimmed the lamp and lit the wicks; then, bringing forth a large cauldron, she set it upon the fire, and filling it with oil from out the jar heaped wood upon the hearth and fanned it to a fierce flame the readier to boil its contents. When this was done she baled it out in potfuls and poured it seething hot into the leathern vessels one by one while the thieves unable to escape were scalded to death and every jar contained a corpse. Thus did this slave-girl by her subtle wit make a clean end of all noiselessly and unknown even to the dwellers m the house. Now when she had satisfied herself that each and every of the men had been slain, she went back to the kitchen and shutting to the door sat brewing Ali Baba's broth. Scarce had an hour passed before the Captain woke from sleep; and, opening wide his window, saw that all was dark and silent; so he clapped his hands as a signal for his men to come forth but not a sound was heard in return. After awhile he clapped again and called aloud but got no answer; and when he cried out a third time without reply he was perplexed and went out to the shed wherein stood the jars. He thought to himself, "Perchance all are fallen asleep whenas the time for action is now at hand, so I must e'en awaken them without stay or delay." Then approaching the nearest jar he was startled by a smell of oil and seething flesh; and touching it outside he felt it reeking hot; then going to the others one by one, he found all in like condition. Hereat he knew for a surety the fate which had betided his band and, fearing for his own safety, he clomb on to the wall, and thence dropping into a garden made his escape in high dudgeon and sore disappointment. Morgiana awaited awhile to see the Captain return from the shed but he came not; whereat she knew that he had scaled the wall and had taken to flight, for that the street-door was double-locked; and the thieves being all disposed of on this wise Morgiana laid her down to sleep in perfect solace and ease of mind. When two hours of darkness yet remained, Ali Baba awoke and went to the Hammam knowing naught of the night-adventure, for the gallant slave-girl had not aroused him, nor indeed had she deemed such action expedient, because had she sought an opportunity of reporting to him her plan, she might haply have lost her chance and spoiled the project. The sun was high over the horizon when Ali Baba walked back from the Baths; and he marvelled exceedingly to see the jars still standing under the shed and said, "How cometh it that he, the oil-merchant my guest, hath not carried to the market his mules and jars of oil?" Ali Baba presently asked Morgiana what had befallen the oil-merchant his guest whom he had placed under her charge; and she answered, "Allah Almighty vouchsafe to thee six score years and ten of safety! I will tell thee in privacy of this merchant." So Ali Baba went apart with his slave-girl, who taking him without the house first locked the court-door; then showing him a jar she said, "Prithee look into this and see if within there be oil or aught else." Thereupon peering inside it he perceived a man at which sight he cried aloud and fain would have fled in his fright. Quoth Morgiana, "Fear him not, this man hath no longer the force to work thee harm, he lieth dead and stone-dead." Hearing such words of comfort and reassurance Ali Baba asked, "O Morgiana, what evils have we escaped and by what means hath this wretch become the quarry of Fate?" She answered "Alhamdolillah -- Praise be to Almighty Allah! -- I will inform thee fully of the case; but hush thee, speak not aloud, lest haply the neighbours learn the secret and it end in our confusion. Look now into all the jars, one by one from first to last." So Ali Baba examined them severally and found in each a man fully armed and accoutred and all lay scalded to death. Hereat speechless for sheer amazement he stared at the jars, but presently recovering himself he asked, "And where is he, the oil-merchant?" Answered she, "Of him also I will inform thee. The villain was no trader but a traitorous assassin whose honied words would have ensnared thee to thy doom; and now I will tell thee what he was and what hath happened; but, meanwhile thou art fresh from the Hammam and thou shouldst first drink somewhat of this broth for thy stomach's and thy health's sake." So Ali Baba went within and Morgiana served up the mess; after which quoth her master, "I fain would hear this wondrous story: prithee tell it to me and set my heart at ease." Hereat the handmaid fell to relating whatso had betided in these words: O my master, when thou badest me boil the broth and retiredst to rest, thy slave in obedience to thy command took out a suit of clean white clothes and gave it to the boy Abdullah; then kindled the fire and set on the broth. As soon as it was ready I had need to light a lamp so that I might see to skim it, but all the oil was spent, and, learning this I told my want to the slave-boy Abdullah, who advised me to draw somewhat from the jars which stood under the shed. Accordingly, I took a can and went to the first vessel when suddenly I heard a voice within whisper with all caution, "Is it now time for us to sally forth?" I was amazed thereat and judged that the pretended merchant had laid some plot to slay thee; so I replied, "The time is not yet come." Then I went to the second jar and heard another voice to which I made the like answer, and so on with all of them. I now was certified that these men awaited only some signal from their Chief whom thou didst take to guest within thy walls supposing him to be a merchant in oil; and that after thou receivedst him hospitably the miscreant had brought these men to murther thee and to plunder thy good and spoil thy house. But I gave him no opportunity to win his wish. The last jar I found full of oil and taking somewhat therefrom I lit the lamp; then, putting a large cauldron upon the fire, I filled it up with oil which I brought from the jar and made a fierce blaze under it; and, when the contents were seething hot, I took out sundry cansful with intent to scald them all to death, and going to each jar in due order, I poured within them one by one boiling oil. On this wise having destroyed them utterly, I returned to the kitchen and having extinguished the lamps stood by the window watching what might happen, and how that false merchant would act next. Not long after I had taken my station, the robber-captain awoke and ofttimes signalled to his thieves. Then getting no reply he came downstairs and went out to the jars, and finding that all his men were slain he fled through the darkness I know not whither. So when he had clean disappeared I was assured that, the door being double-locked, he had scaled the wall and dropped into the garden and made his escape. Then with my heart at rest I slept. And Morgiana, after telling her story to her master, presently added, "This is the whole truth I have related to thee. For some days indeed have I had inkling of such matter, but withheld it from thee deeming it inexpedient to risk the chance of its meeting the neighbours' ears; now, however, there is no help but to tell thee thereof. One day as I came to the house-door I espied thereon a white chalk-mark, and on the next day a red sign beside the white. I knew not the intent wherewith the marks were made, nevertheless I set others upon the entrances of sundry neighbours, judging that some enemy had done this deed whereby to encompass my master's destruction. Therefore I made the marks on all the other doors in such perfect conformity with those I found, that it would be hard to distinguish amongst them." Morgiana continued to Ali Baba: "Judge now and see if these signs and all this villainy be not the work of the bandits of the forest, who marked our house that on such wise they might know it again. Of these forty thieves there yet remain two others concerning whose case I know naught; so beware of them, but chiefly of the third remaining robber, their Captain, who fled hence alive. Take good heed and be thou cautious of him, for, shouldst thou fall into his hands, he will in no wise spare thee but will surely murther thee. I will do all that lieth in me to save from hurt and harm thy life and property, nor shall thy slave be found wanting in any service to my lord." Hearing these words Ali Baba rejoiced with exceeding joyance and said to her, "I am well pleased with thee for this thy conduct ; and say me what wouldst thou have me do in thy behalf; I shall not fail to remember thy brave deed so long as breath in me remaineth." Quoth she, "It behoveth us before all things forthright to bury these bodies in the ground, that so the secret be not known to any one." Hereupon Ali Baba took with him his slave-boy Abdullah into the garden and there under a tree they dug for the corpses of the thieves a deep pit in size proportionate to its conterits, and they dragged, the bodies (having carried off their weapons) to the fosse and threw them in; then, covering up the remains of the seven and thirty robbers they made the ground appear level and clean as it wont to be. They also hid the leathern jars and the gear and arms and presently Ali Baba sent the mules by ones and twos to the bazar and sold them all with the able aid of his slave-boy Abdullah. Thus the matter wras hushed up nor did it reach the ears of any; however, Ali Baba ceased not to be ill at ease lest haply the Captain or the surviving two robbers should wreak their vengeance on his head. He kept himself private with all caution and took heed that none learn a word of what had happened and of the wealth which he had carried off from the bandits' cave. Meanwhile the Captain of the thieves having escaped with his life, fled to the forest in hot wrath and sore irk of mind; and his senses were scattered and the colour of his visage vanished like ascending smoke. Then he thought the matter over again and again, and at last he firmly resolved that he needs must take the life of Ali Baba, else he would lose all the treasure which his enemy, by knowledge of the magical words, would take away and turn to his own use. Furthermore, he determined that he would undertake the business single-handed; and, that after getting rid of Ali Baba, he would gather together another band of banditti and would pursue his career of brigandage, as indeed his forbears had done for many generations. So he lay down to rest that night, and rising early in the morning donned a dress of suitable appearance; then going to the city alighted at a caravanserai, thinking to himself, "Doubtless the murther of so many men hath reached the Wali's ears, and Ali Baba hath been seized and brought to justice, and his house is levelled and his good is confiscated. The townfolk must surely have heard tidings of these matters." So he straightway asked of the keeper of the Khan, "What strange things have happened in the city during the last few days?" and the other told him all that he had seen and heard, but the Captain could not learn a whit of that which most concerned him. Hereby he understood that Ali Baba was ware and wise, and that he had not only carried away such store of treasure but he had also destroyed so many lives and withal had come off scatheless; furthermore, that he himself must needs have all his wits alert not to fall into the hands of his foe and perish. With this resolve the Captain hired a shop in the Bazar, whither he bore whole bales of the finest stuffs and goodly merchandise from his forest treasure-house; and presently he took his seat within the store and fell to doing merchant's business. By chance his place fronted the booth of the defunct Kasim where his son, Ali Baba's nephew, now traded; and the Captain, who called himself Khwajah Hasan soon formed acquaintance and friendship with the shopkeepers around about him and treated all with profuse civilities, but he was especially gracious and cordial to the son of Kasim, a handsome youth and a well-dressed, and ofttimes he would sit and chat with him for a long while. A few days after it chanced that Ali Baba, as he was sometime wont to do, came to see his nephew, whom he found sitting in his shop. The Captain saw and recognised him at sight and one morning he asked the young man, saying, "Prithee tell me, who is he that ever and anon cometh to thee at thy place of sale?" whereto the youth made answer, "He is my uncle, the brother of my father." Whereupon the Captain showed him yet greater favour and affection the better to deceive him for his own devices, and gave him presents and made him sit at meat with him and fed him with the daintiest of dishes. Presently Ali Baba's nephew bethought him it was only right and proper that he also should invite the merchant to supper, but whereas his own house was small, and he was straitened for room and could not make a show of splendour, as did Khwajah Hasan, he took counsel with his uncle on the matter. Ali Baba replied to his nephew: "Thou sayest well: it behoveth thee to entreat thy friend in fairest fashion even as he hath entreated thee. On the morrow, which is Friday, shut thy shop as do all merchants of repute; then, after the early meal, take Khwajah Hasan to smell the air,and as thou walkest lead him hither unawares; meanwhile I will give orders that Morgiana shall make ready for his coming the best of viands and all necessaries for a feast. Trouble not thyself on any wise, but leave the matter in my hands." Accordingly on the next day, to wit, Friday, the nephew of Ali Baba took Khwajah Hasan to walk about the garden; and, as they were returning he led him by the street wherein his uncle dwelt. When they came to the house, the youth stopped at the door and knocking said, "O my lord, this is my second home: my uncle hath heard much of thee and of thy goodness mewards and desireth with exceeding desire to see thee; so, shouldst thou consent to enter and visit him, I shall be truly glad and thankful to thee." Albeit Khwajah Hasan rejoiced in heart that he had thus found means whereby he might have access to his enemy's house and household, and although he hoped soon to attain his end by treachery, yet he hesitated to enter in and stood to make his excuses and walk away. But when the door was opened by the slave-porter, Ali Baba's nephew seized his companion's hand and after abundant persuasion led him in, whereat he entered with great show of cheerfulness as though much pleased and honoured. The housemaster received him with all favour and worship and asked him of his welfare, and said to him, "O my lord, I am obliged and thankful to thee for that thou hast shewn favour to the son of my brother and I perceive that thou regardest him with an affection even fonder than my own." Khwajah Hasan replied with pleasant words and said, "Thy nephew vastly taketh my fancy and in him I am well pleased, for that although young in years yet he hath been endued by Allah with much of wisdom." Thus they twain conversed with friendly conversation and presently the guest rose to depart and said, "O my lord, thy slave must now farewell thee; but on some future day Inshallah he will again wait upon thee," Ali Baba, however, would not let him leave and asked, "Whither wendest thou, my friend ? I would invite thee to my table and I pray thee sit at meat with us and after hie thee home in peace. Perchance the dishes are not as delicate as those whereof thou art wont to eat, still deign grant me this request I pray thee and refresh thyself with my victual." Quoth Khwajah Hasan, "O my lord I am beholden to thee for thy gracious invitation, and with pleasure would I sit at meat with thee, but for a special reason must I needs excuse myself; suffer me therefore to depart for I may not tarry longer nor accept thy gracious offer." Hereto the host made reply, "I pray thee, O my lord, tell me what may be the reason so urgent and weighty?" And Khwajah Hasan answered, "The cause is this: I must not, by order of the physician, who cured me lately of my complaint, eat aught of food prepared with salt." Quoth Ali Baba, "An this be all, deprive me not, I pray thee, of the honour thy company will confer upon me: as the meats are not yet cooked, I will forbid the kitchener to make use of any salt. Tarry here awhile and I will return anon to thee." So saying Ali Baba went in to Morgiana and bade her not put salt into any one of the dishes; and she, while busied with her cooking, fell to marvelling greatly at such order and asked her master, "Who is he that eateth meat wherein is no salt?" He answered, "What to thee mattereth it who he may be? Only do thou my bidding." She rejoined, "'Tis well: all shall be as thou wishest;" but in mind she wondered at the man who made such strange request and desired much to look upon him. Wherefore, when all the meats were ready for serving up, she helped the slave-boy Abdullah to spread the table and set on the meal; and no sooner did she see Khwajah Hasan than she knew who he was, albeit he had disguised himself in the dress of a stranger merchant; furthermore, when she eyed him attentively she espied a dagger hidden under his robe. "So ho!" quoth she to herself, "this is the cause why the villain eateth not of salt, for that he seeketh an opportunity to slay my master whose mortal enemy he is; howbeit I will be beforehand with him and despatch him ere he find a chance to harm my lord." Morgiana, having spread a white cloth upon the table and served up the meal, went back to the kitchen and thought out her plot against the robber-Captain. Now when Ali Baba and Khwajah Hasan had eaten their sufficiency, the slave-boy Abdullah brought Morgiana word to serve the dessert, and she cleared the table and set on fruit fresh and dried in salvers, then she placed by the side of Ali Baba a small tripod for three cups with a flagon of wine, and lastly she went off with the slave-boy Abdullah into another room, as though she would herself eat supper. Then Khwajah Hasan, that is, the Captain of the robbers, perceiving that the coast was clear, exulted mightily saying to himself, "The time hath come for me to take full vengeance; with one thrust of my dagger I will despatch this fellow, then escape across the garden and wend my ways. His nephew will not adventure to stay my hand, for an he do but move a finger or toe with that intent another stab will settle his earthly account. Still must I wait awhile until the slave-boy and the cook-maid shall have eaten and lain down to rest them in the kitchen." Morgiana, however, watched him wistfully and divining his purpose said in her mind, "I must not allow this villain advantage over my lord, but by some means I must make void his project and at once put an end to the life of him." Accordingly, the trusty slave-girl changed her dress with all haste and donned such clothes as dancers wear; she veiled her face with a costly kerchief; around her head she bound a fine turband, and about her middle she tied a waist-cloth worked with gold and silver wherein she stuck a dagger, whose hilt was rich in filigree and jewelry. Thus disguised she said to the slave-boy Abdullah, "Take now thy tambourine that we may play and sing and dance in honour of our master's guest." So he did her bidding and the twain went into the room, the lad playing and the lass following. Then, making a low congee, they asked leave to perform and disport and play; and Ali Baba gave permission, saying, "Dance now and do your best that this our guest may be mirthful and merry." Quoth Khwajah Hasan, "O my lord, thou dost indeed provide much pleasant entertainment." Then the slave-boy Abdullah standing by began to strike the tambourine whilst Morgiana rose up and showed her perfect art and pleased them vastly with graceful steps and sportive motion; and suddenly drawing the poniard from her belt she brandished it and paced from side to side, a spectacle which pleased them most of all. At times also she stood before them, now clapping the sharp-edged dagger under her armpit and then setting it against her breast. Lastly she took the tambourine from the slave-boy Abdullah, and still holding the poniard in her right she went round for largesse as is the custom amongst merry-makers. First she stood before Ali Baba who threw a gold coin into the tambourine, and his nephew likewise put in an Ashrafi; then Khwajah Hasan, seeing her about to approach him, fell to pulling out his purse, when she heartened her heart and quick as the blinding leven she plunged the dagger into his vitals, and forthwith the miscreant fell back stone-dead. Ali Baba was dismayed and cried in his wrath, "O unhappy, what is this deed thou hast done to bring about my ruin!" But she replied, "Nay, O my lord, rather to save thee and not to cause thee harm have I slain this man: loosen his garments and see what thou wilt discover thereunder." So Ali Baba searched the dead man's dress and found concealed therein a dagger. Then said Morgiana, "This wretch was thy deadly enemy. Consider him well: he is none other than the oil merchant, the Captain of the band of robbers. Whenas he came hither with intent to take thy life, he would not eat thy salt; and when thou toldest me that he wished not any in the meat I suspected him and at first sight I was assured that he would surely do thee die; Almighty Allah be praised 'tis even as I thought." Then Ali Babi lavished upon her thanks and expressions of gratitude, saying, "Lo, these two times hast thou saved me from his hand," and falling upon her neck he cried, "See thou art free, and as reward for this thy fealty I have wedded thee to my nephew." Then turning to the youth he said, "Do as I bid thee and thou shalt prosper. I would that thou marry Morgiana, who is a model of duty and loyalty: thou seest now yon Khwajah Hasan sought thy friendship only that he might find opportunity to take my life, but this maiden with her good sense and her wisdom hath slain him and saved us." Ali Baba's nephew straightway consented to marry Morgiana. After which the three, raising the dead body bore it forth with all heed and vigilance and privily buried it in the garden, and for many years no one knew aught thereof. In due time Ali Baba married his brother's son to Morgiana with great pomp, and spread a bride-feast in most sumptuous fashion for his friends and neighbours, and made merry with them and enjoyed singing and all manner of dancing and amusements. He prospered in every undertaking and Time smiled upon him and a new source of wealth was opened to him. For fear of the thieves he had not once visited the jungle-cave wherein lay the treasure, since the day he had carried forth the corpse of his brother Kasim. But some time after, he mounted his hackney one morning and journeyed thither, with all care and caution, till finding no signs of man or horse, and reassured in his mind he ventured to draw near the door. Then alighting from his beast he tied it up to a tree, and going to the entrance pronounced the words which he had not forgotten, "Open, O Simsim!" Hereat, as was its wont, the door flew open, and entering thereby he saw the goods and hoard of gold and silver untouched and lying as he had left them. So he felt assured that not one of all the thieves remained alive, and, that save himself there was not a soul who knew the secret of the place. At once he bound in his saddlecloth a load of Ashrafis such as his horse could bear and brought it home; and in after days he showed the hoard to his sons and sons' sons and taught them how the door could be caused to open and shut. Thus Ali Baba and his household lived all their lives in wealth and joyance in that city where erst he had been a pauper, and by the blessing of that secret treasure he rose to high degree and dignities. Source: Richard F. Burton, Supplemental Nights to the Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night , Shammar edition, vol. 4 (Printed by the Burton Club for private subscribers only, [1886]), pp. 369-402 . Another copy: Richard F. Burton, Supplemental Nights to the Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night , Shammar edition, vol. 3 (Benares: Printed by the Kamashastra Society for private subscribers only, 1887), pp. 369-402 . The three principal episodes in this story fit the following folktale classifications: Discovery of the magic treasure cave: Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 676. Death of the intruder (Kasim) and the subsequent removal of his corpse: type 950. Assassination of the thieves hidden in the oil containers: type 954. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Simeli Mountain , a tale of type 676, as recorded by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm in their Children's and Household Tales (no. 142). Additional folktales of type 676: Open Sesame! Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 3, 2013. Amleth, Prince of Denmark Amleth, Prince of Denmark From the Gesta Danorum of Saxo Grammaticus Edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1997-2011 The account that follows was written about 1185 but is based on older oral tradition. It describes the same players and events that were immortalized by William Shakespeare in his The Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark , written about 1600. The following table lists a few of Shakespeare's characters with their approximate counterparts in Saxo's account. William Shakespeare Saxo Grammaticus Hamlet, Prince of Denmark Amleth, Prince of Denmark Hamlet's father Horwendil Gertrude Gurutha, daughter of Rorik King Claudius Feng Ophelia An unnamed "fair woman" Polonius An unnamed evesdropper Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Two unnamed retainers of Feng Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Amleth, Prince of Denmark Horwendil, King of Denmark, married Gurutha, the daughter of Rorik, and she bore him a son, whom they named Amleth. Horwendil's good fortune stung his brother Feng with jealousy, so that the latter resolved treacherously to waylay his brother, thus showing that goodness is not safe even from those of a man's own house. And behold when a chance came to murder him, his bloody hand sated the deadly passion of his soul. Then he took the wife of the brother he had butchered, capping unnatural murder with incest. For whoso yields to one iniquity, speedily falls an easier victim to the next, the first being an incentive to the second. Also the man veiled the monstrosity of his deed with such hardihood of cunning, that he made up a mock pretense of goodwill to excuse his crime, and glossed over fratricide with a show of righteousness. Gerutha, said he, though so gentle that she would do no man the slightest hurt, had been visited with her husband's extremest hate; and it was all to save her that he had slain his brother; for he thought it shameful that a lady so meek and unrancorous should suffer the heavy disdain of her husband. Nor did his smooth words fail in their intent; for at courts, where fools are sometimes favored and backbiters preferred, a lie lacks not credit. Nor did Feng keep from shameful embraces the hands that had slain a brother; pursuing with equal guilt both of his wicked and impious deeds. Amleth beheld all this, but feared lest too shrewd a behavior might make his uncle suspect him. So he chose to feign dullness, and pretend an utter lack of wits. This cunning course not only concealed his intelligence but ensured his safety. Every day he remained in his mother's house utterly listless and unclean, flinging himself on the ground and bespattering his person with foul and filthy dirt. His discolored face and visage smutched with slime denoted foolish and grotesque madness. All he said was of a piece with these follies; all he did savored of utter lethargy. In a word, you would not have thought him a man at all, but some absurd abortion due to a mad fit of destiny. He used at times to sit over the fire, and, raking up the embers with his hands, to fashion wooden crooks, and harden them in the fire, shaping at their tips certain barbs, to make them hold more tightly to their fastenings. When asked what he was about, he said that he was preparing sharp javelins to avenge his father. This answer was not a little scoffed at, all men deriding his idle and ridiculous pursuit; but the thing helped his purpose afterwards. Now it was his craft in this matter that first awakened in the deeper observers a suspicion of his cunning. For his skill in a trifling art betokened the hidden talent of the craftsman; nor could they believe the spirit dull where the hand had acquired so cunning a workmanship. Lastly, he always watched with the most punctual care over his pile of stakes that he had pointed in the fire. Some people, therefore, declared that his mind was quick enough, and fancied that he only played the simpleton in order to hide his understanding, and veiled some deep purpose under a cunning feint. His wiliness (said these) would be most readily detected, if a fair woman were put in his way in some secluded place, who would provoke his mind to the temptations of love; all man's natural temper being too blindly amorous to be artfully dissembled, and this passion being also too impetuous to be checked by cunning. Therefore, if his lethargy were feigned, he would seize the opportunity, and yield straightway to violent delights. Some men were commissioned to draw the young man in his rides into a remote part of the forest, and there assail him with a temptation of this nature. Among these chanced to be a foster-brother of Amleth, who had not ceased to have regard to their common nurture; and who esteemed his present orders less than the memory of their past fellowship. He attended Amleth among his appointed train, being anxious not to entrap, but to warn him; and was persuaded that he would suffer the worst if he showed the slightest glimpse of sound reason, and above all if he did the act of love openly. This was also plain enough to Amleth himself. For when he was bidden mount his horse, he deliberately set himself in such a fashion that he turned his back to the neck and faced about, fronting the tail; which he proceeded to encompass with the reins, just as if on that side he would check the horse in its furious pace. By this cunning thought he eluded the trick, and overcame the treachery of his uncle. The reinless steed galloping on, with the rider directing its tail, was ludicrous enough to behold. Amleth went on, and a wolf crossed his path amid the thicket. When his companions told him that a young colt had met him, he retorted, that in Feng's stud there were too few of that kind fighting. This was a gentle but witty fashion of invoking a curse upon his uncle's riches. When they averred that he had given a cunning answer, he answered that he had spoken deliberately: for he was loath to be thought prone to lying about any matter, and wished to be held a stranger to falsehood; and accordingly he mingled craft and candor in such wise that, though his words did lack truth, yet there was nothing to betoken the truth and betray how far his keenness went. Again, as he passed along the beach, his companions found the rudder of a ship which had been wrecked, and said they had discovered a huge knife. "This" said he, "was the right thing to carve such a huge ham;" by which he really meant the sea, to whose infinitude, he thought, this enormous rudder matched. Also, as they passed the sandhills, and bade him look at the meal, meaning the sand, he replied that it had been ground small by the hoary tempests of the ocean. His companions praising his answer, he said that he had spoken it wittingly. Then they purposely left him, that he might pluck up more courage to practice wantonness. The woman whom his uncle had dispatched met him in a dark spot, as though she had crossed him by chance; and he took her and would have ravished her, had not his foster-brother, by a secret device, given him an inkling of the trap. For this man, while pondering the fittest way to play privily the prompter's part, and forestall the young man's hazardous lewdness, found a straw on the ground and fastened it underneath the tail of a gadfly that was flying past; which he then drove towards the particular quarter where he knew Amleth to be: an act which served the unwary price exceedingly well. The token was interpreted as shrewdly as it had been sent. For Amleth saw the gadfly, espied with curiosity the straw which it wore embedded in its tail, and perceived that it was a secret warning to beware of treachery. Alarmed, scenting a trap, and fain to possess his desire in greater safety, he caught up the woman in his arms and dragged her off to a distant and impenetrable fen. Moreover, when they had lain together, he conjured her earnestly to disclose the matter to none, and the promise of silence was accorded as heartily as it was asked. For both of them had been under the same fostering in their childhood; and this early rearing in common had brought Amleth and the girl into great intimacy. So, when he had returned home, they all jeeringly asked him whether he had given way to love, and he avowed that he had ravished the maid. When he was next asked where he did it, and what had been is pillow, he said that he had rested upon the hoof of a beast of burden, upon a cockscomb, and also upon a ceiling. For, when he was starting into temptation, he had gathered fragments of all these things, in order to avoid lying. And though his jest did not take aught of the truth out of the story, the answer was greeting with shouts of merriment from the bystanders. The maiden, too, when questioned on the matter, declared that he had done no such thing; and her denial was the more readily credited when it was found that the escort had not witnessed the deed. Then he who had marked the gadfly in order to give a hint, wishing to show Amleth that to his trick he owed his salvation, observed that latterly he had been singly devoted to Amleth. The young man's reply was apt. Not to seem forgetful of his informant's service, he said that he had seen a certain thing bearing a straw flit by suddenly, wearing a stalk of chaff fixed on its hinder parts. The cleverness of this speech, which made the rest split with laughter, rejoiced the heart of Amleth's friend. Thus all were worsted, and none could open the secret lock of the young man's wisdom. But a friend of Feng, gifted more with assurance than judgment, declared that the unfathomable cunning of such a mind could not be detected by any vulgar plot, for the man's obstinacy was so great that it ought not to be assailed with any mild measures; there were many sides to his wiliness, and it ought not to be entrapped by any one method. Accordingly, said he, his own profounder acuteness had hit on a more delicate way, which was well fitted to be put in practice, and would effectually discover what they desired to know. Feng was purposely to absent himself, pretending affairs of great import. Amleth should be closeted alone with his mother in her chamber; but a man should first be commissioned to place himself in a concealed part of the room and listen heedfully to what they talked about. For if the son had any wits at all he would not hesitate to speak out in the hearing of his mother, or fear to trust himself to the fidelity of her who bore him. The speaker, loath to seem readier to devise than to carry out the plot, zealously proffered himself as the agent of the eavesdropping. Feng rejoiced at the scheme, and departed on pretense of a long journey. Now he who had given up this counsel repaired privily to the room where Amleth was shut up with his mother, and lay down skulking in the straw. But Amleth had his antidote for the treachery. Afraid of being overheard by some eavesdropper, he at first resorted to his usual imbecile ways, and crowed like a noisy cock, beating his arms together to mimic the flapping of wings. Then he mounted the straw and began to swing his body and jump again and again, wishing to try if aught lurked there in hiding. Feeling a lump beneath his feet, he drove his sword into the spot, and impaled him who lay hid. Then he dragged him from his concealment and slew him. Then, cutting his body into morsels, he seethed it in boiling water, and flung it through the mouth of an open sewer for the swine to eat, bestrewing the stinking mire with his hapless limbs. Having in this wise eluded the snare, he went back to the room. Then his mother set up a great wailing and began to lament her son's folly to his face; but he said: "Most infamous of women! dost thou seek with such lying lamentations to hide thy most heavy guilt? Wantoning like a harlot, thou hast entered a wicked and abominable state of wedlock, embracing with incestuous bosom thy husband's slayer, and wheedling with filthy lures of blandishment him who had slain the father of thy son. This, forsooth, is the way that the mares couple with the vanquishers of their mates; for brute beasts are naturally incited to pair indiscriminately; and it would seem that thou, like them, hast clean forgot thy first husband. As for me, not idly do I wear the mask of folly; for I doubt not that he who destroyed his brother will riot as ruthlessly in the blood of his kindred. Therefore it is better to choose the garb of dullness than that of sense, and to borrow some protection from a show of utter frenzy. Yet the passion to avenge my father still burns in my heart; but I am watching the chances, I await the fitting hour. There is a place for all things; against so merciless and dark a spirit must be used the deeper devices of the mind. And thou, who hadst been better employed in lamenting thine own disgrace, know it is superfluity to bewail my witlessness; thou shouldst weep for the blemish in thine own mind, not for that in another's. On the rest see thou keep silence." With such reproaches he rent the heart of his mother and redeemed her to walk in the ways of virtue; teaching her to set the fires of the past above the seductions of the present. When Feng returned, nowhere could he find the man who had suggested the treacherous espial; he searched for him long and carefully, but none said they had seen him anywhere. Amleth, among others, was asked in jest if he had come on any trace of him, and replied that the man had gone to the sewer, but had fallen through its bottom and been stifled by the floods of filth, and that he had then been devoured by the swine that came up all about that place. This speech was flouted by those who heard; for it seemed senseless, though really it expressly avowed the truth. Feng now suspected that his stepson was certainly full of guile, and desired to make way with him, but durst not do the deed for fear of the displeasure, not only of Amleth's grandsire Rorik, but also of his own wife. So he thought that the King of Britain should be employed to slay him, so that another could do the deed, and he be able to feign innocence. Thus, desirous to hide his cruelty, he chose rather to besmirch his friend than to bring disgrace on his own head. Amleth, on departing, gave secret orders to his mother to hang the hall with knotted tapestry, and to perform pretended obsequies for him a year thence; promising that he would then return. Two retainers of Feng then accompanied him, bearing a letter graven on wood--a kind of letter enjoined the king of the Britons to put to death the youth who was sent over to him. While they were reposing, Amleth searched their coffers, found the letter, and read the instructions therein. Whereupon he erased all the writing on the surface, substituted fresh characters, and so, changing the purport of the instructions, shifted his own doom upon his companions. Nor was he satisfied with removing from himself the sentence of death and passing the peril on to others, but added and entreaty that the King of Britain would grant his daughter in marriage to a youth of great judgment whom he was sending to him. Under this was falsely marked the signature of Feng. Now when they had reached Britain, the envoys went to the king, and proffered him the letter which they supposed was an implement of destruction to one another, but which really betokened death to themselves. The king dissembled the truth, and entreated them hospitably and kindly. Then Amleth scouted all the splendor of the royal banquet like vulgar viands, and abstaining very strangely, rejected that plenteous feast, refraining from the drink even as from the banquet. All marveled that a youth and a foreigner should disdain the carefully cooked dainties of the royal board and the luxurious banquet provided, as if it were some peasant's relish. So, when the revel broke up, and the king was dismissing his friends to rest, he had a man sent into the sleeping-room to listen secretly, in order that he might hear the midnight conversation of his guests. Now, when Amleth's companions asked him why he had refrained from the feast of yestereve, as if it were poison, he answered that the bread was flecked with blood and tainted; that there was a tang of iron in the liquor; while the meats of the feast reeked of the stench of a human carcass, and were infected by a kind of smack of the odor of the charnel. He further said that the king had the eyes of a slave, and that the queen had in three ways shown the behavior of a bondmaid. This he reviled with insulting invective not so much the feast as its givers. And presently his companions, taunting him with his old defect of wits, began to flout him with many saucy jeers, because he blamed and caviled at seemly and worthy things, and because he attacked thus ignobly and illustrious king and a lady of so refined a behavior, bespattering with the shamefullest abuse those who merited all praise. All this the king heard from his retainer; and declared that he who could say such things had either more than mortal wisdom or more than mortal folly; in these few words fathoming the full depth of Amleth's penetration. Then he summoned his steward and asked him whence he had procured the bread. The steward declared that it had been made by the king's own baker. The king asked where the corn had grown of which it was made, and whether any sign was to be found there of human carnage? The other answered, that not far off was a field, covered with the ancient bones of slaughtered men, and still bearing plainly all the signs of ancient carnage; and that he had himself planted this field with grain in springtide, thinking it more fruitful than the rest, and hoping for plenteous abundance; and so, for aught he knew, the bread had caught some evil savor from this bloodshed. The king, on hearing this, surmised that Amleth had spoken truly, and took the pains to learn also what had been the source of the lard. The other declared that his hogs had, through negligence, strayed from keeping, and battened on the rotten carcass of a robber, and that perchance their pork had thus come to have something of a corrupt smack. The king, finding that Amleth's judgment was right in this thing also, asked of what liquor the steward had mixed the drink? Hearing that it had been brewed of water and meal, he had the spot of the spring pointed out to him, and set to digging deep down; and there he found, rusted away, several swords, the tang whereof it was thought had tainted the waters. Others relate that Amleth blamed the drink because, while quaffing it, he had detected some bees that had fed in the paunch of a dead man; and that the taint, which had formerly been imparted to the combs, had reappeared in the taste. The king, seeing that Amleth had rightly given the causes of the taste he had found so faulty, and learning that the ignoble eyes wherewith Amleth had reproached him concerned some stain upon his birth, had a secret interview with his mother and asked her who his father had really been. She said she had submitted to no man but the king. But when he threatened that he would have the truth out of her by a trial, he was told that he was the offspring of a slave. By the evidence of the avowal thus extorted he understood the whole mystery of the reproach upon his origin. Abashed as he was with shame for his low estate, he was so ravished with the young man's cleverness, that he asked him why he had aspersed the queen with the reproach that she had demeaned herself like a slave? But while resenting that the courtliness of his wife had been accused in the midnight gossip of a guest, he found that her mother had been a bondmaid. For Amleth said he had noted in her three blemishes showing the demeanor of a slave; first, she had muffled her head in her mantle as bondmaids do; next, that she had gathered up her gown for walking; and thirdly, that she had first picked out with a splinter, and then chewed up the remnant of food that stuck in the crevices between her teeth. Further, he mentioned that the king's mother had been brought into slavery from captivity, lest she should seem servile only in her habits, yet not in her birth. Then the king adored the wisdom of Amleth as though it were inspired, and gave him his daughter to wife; accepting his bare word as though it were a witness from the skies. Moreover, in order to fulfill the bidding of his friend, he hanged Amleth's companions on the morrow. Amleth, feigning offense, treated this piece of kindness as a grievance, and received from the king, as compensation, some gold, which he afterwards melted in the fire, and secretly caused to be poured into some hollowed sticks. When he had passed a whole year with the king he obtained to make a journey, and returned to his own land, carrying away of all his princely wealth and state only the sticks which held the gold. On reaching Jutland, he exchanged his present attire for his ancient demeanor, which he had adopted for righteous ends, purposely assuming an aspect of absurdity. Covered with filth, he entered the banquet-room where is own obsequies were being held, and struck all men utterly aghast, rumor having falsely noised abroad his death. At last terror melted into mirth, and the guests jeered and taunted one another, that he whose last rites they were celebrating as though he were dead, should appear in the flesh. When he was asked concerning his comrades, he pointed to the sticks he was carrying, and said, "Here is both the one and the other." This he observed with equal truth and pleasantry; for his speech, though most thought it idle, yet departed not from the truth; for it pointed at the weregild of the slain as though it were themselves. Thereon, wishing to bring the company into a gayer mood, he joined the cupbearers, and diligently did the office of plying the drink. Then, to prevent his loose dress hampering his walk, he girded his sword upon his side, and purposely drawing it several times, pricked his fingers with its point. The bystanders accordingly had both sword and scabbard riveted across with an iron nail. Then, to smooth the way more safely to his plot, he went to the lords and plied them heavily with draught upon draught, and drenched them all so deep in wine, that their feet were made feeble with drunkenness, and they turned to rest within the palace, making their bed where they had reveled. Then he saw they were in a fit state for his plots, and thought that here was a chance offered to do his purpose. So he took out of his bosom the stakes he had long ago prepared, and went into the building, where the ground lay covered with the bodies of the nobles wheezing off their sleep and their debauch. Then, cutting away its supports, he brought down the hanging his mother had knitted, which covered the inner as well as the outer walls of the hall. This he flung upon the snorers, and then applying the crooked stakes, he knotted and bound them up in such insoluble intricacy, that not one of the men beneath, however hard he might struggle, could contrive to rise. After this he set fire to the palace. The flames spread, scattering the conflagration far and wide. It enveloped the whole dwelling, destroyed the palace, and burnt them all while they were either buried in deep sleep of vainly striving to arise. Then he went to the chamber of Feng, who had before this been conducted by his train into his pavilion; plucked up a sword that chanced to be hanging to the bed, and planted his own in its place. Then, awakening his uncle, he told him that his nobles were perishing in the flames, and that Amleth was here, armed with his old crooks to help him, and thirsting to exact the vengeance, now long overdue, for his father's murder. Feng, on hearing this, leapt from his couch, but was cut down while, deprived of his own sword, he strove in vain to draw the strange one. O valiant Amleth, and worthy of immortal fame, who being shrewdly armed with a feint of folly, covered a wisdom too high for human wit under a marvelous disguise of silliness! and not only found in his subtlety means to protect his own safety, but also by its guidance found opportunity to avenge his father. By this skillful defense of himself, and strenuous revenge for his parent, he has left it doubtful whether we are to think more of his wit or his bravery. Amleth, when he had accomplished the slaughter of his stepfather, feared to expose his deed to the fickle judgment of his countrymen, and thought it well to lie in hiding till he had learnt what way the mob of the uncouth populace was tending. So the whole neighborhood, who had watched the blaze during the night, and in the morning desired to know the cause of the fire they had seen, perceived the royal palace fallen in ashes; and, on searching through its ruins, which were yet warm, found only some shapeless remains of burnt corpses. For the devouring flame had consumed everything so utterly, that not a single token was left to inform them of the cause of such a disaster. Also they saw the body of Feng lying pierced by the sword, amid his blood-stained raiment. Some were seized with open anger, others with grief, and some with secret delight. One party bewailed the death of their leader, the other gave thanks that the tyranny of the fratricide was now laid at rest. Thus the occurrence of the king's slaughter was greeted by the beholders with diverse minds. Amleth, finding the people so quiet, made bold to leave his hiding. Summoning those in whom he knew the memory of his father to be fast-rooted, he went to the assembly and there made a speech after this manner: Nobles! Let not any who are troubled by the piteous end of Horwendil be troubled by the sight of this disaster before you: be not ye, I say, troubled, who have remained loyal to your king and duteous to your father. Behold the corpse, not of a prince, but of a fratricide. Indeed, it was a sorrier sight when ye saw our prince lying lamentably butchered by a most infamous fratricide--brother, let me not call him. With your own compassionating eyes ye have beheld the mangled limbs of Horwendil; they have seen his body done to death with many wounds. Surely that most abominable butcher only deprived his king of life that he might despoil his country of freedom! The hand that slew him made you slaves. Who then so mad as to choose Feng the cruel before Horwendil the righteous? Remember how benignantly Horwendil fostered you, how justly he dealt with you, how kindly he loved you. Remember how you lost the mildest of princes and justest of fathers, while in his place was put a tyrant and an assassin set up; how your rights were confiscated; how everything was plague-stricken; how the country was stained with infamies; how the yoke was planted on your necks, and how your free will was forfeited! And now all this is over; for ye see the criminal stifled in his own crimes, the slayer of his kin punished for his misdoings. What man of but ordinary wit, beholding it, would account this kindness a wrong? What sane man could be sorry that the crime has recoiled upon the culprit? Who could lament the killing of a most savage executioner? or bewail the righteous death of most cruel despot? Ye behold the doer of the deed; he is before you. Yea, I own that I have taken vengeance for my country and my father. Your hands were equally bound to the task which mine fulfilled. What it would have beseemed you to accomplish with me, I achieved alone. Nor had I any partner in so glorious a deed, or the service of any man to help me. Not that I forget that you would have helped this work, had I asked you; for doubtless you have remained loyal to your king and loving to your prince. But I chose that the wicked should be punished without imperiling you; I thought that others need not set their shoulders to the burden when I deemed mine strong enough to bear it. Therefore I consumed all the others to ashes, and left only the trunk of Feng for your hands to burn, so that on this at least you may wreak all your longing for a righteous vengeance. Now haste up speedily, heap the pyre, burn up the body of the wicked, consume away his guilty limbs, scatter his sinful ashes, strew broadcast his ruthless dust: let no urn or barrow enclose the abominable remnants of his bones. Let no trace of his fratricide remain; let there be no spot in his own land for his tainted limbs; let no neighborhood suck infection from him; let not sea nor soil be defiled by harboring his accursed carcass. I have done the rest; this one loyal duty is left for you. These must be the tyrant's obsequies, this the funeral procession of the fratricide. It is not seemly that he who stripped his country of her freedom should have his ashes covered by his country's earth. Besides, why tell again my own sorrows? Why count over my troubles? Why weave the thread of my miseries anew? Ye know them more fully than I myself. I, pursued to the death by my stepfather, scorned by my mother, spat upon by friends, have passed my years in pitiable wise, and my days in adversity; and my insecure life has teemed with fear and perils. In fine, I passed every season of my age wretchedly and in extreme calamity. Often in your secret murmurings together you have sighed over my lack of wits: there was none (you said) to avenge the father, none to punish the fratricide. And in this I found a secret testimony of your love; for I saw that the memory of the King's murder had not yet faded from your minds. Whose breast is so hard that it can be softened by no fellow-feeling for what I have felt? Who is so stiff and stony, that he is swayed by no compassion for my griefs? Ye whose hands are clean of the blood of Horwendil, pity your fosterling, be moved by my calamities. Pity also my stricken mother, and rejoice with me that the infamy of her who was once your queen is quenched. For this weak woman had to bear a two-fold weight of ignominy, embracing one who was her husband's brother and murderer. Therefore, to hide my purpose of revenge and to veil my wit, I counterfeited a listless bearing; I feigned dullness; I planned a stratagem; and now you can see with your own eyes whether it has succeeded, whether it has achieved its purpose to the full; I am content to leave you to judge so great a matter. It is your turn: trample under foot the ashes of the murderer! Disdain the dust of him who slew his brother, and defiled his brother's queen with infamous desecration, who outraged his sovereign and treasonably assailed his majesty, who brought the sharpest tyranny upon you, stole your freedom, and crowned fratricide with incest. I have been the agent of this just vengeance; I have burned for this righteous retribution: uphold me with a high-born spirit; pay me the homage that you owe me; warm me with your kindly looks. It is I who have wiped off my country's shame; I who have quenched my mother's dishonor; I who have beaten back oppression; I who have put to death the murderer; I who have baffled the artful hand of my uncle with retorted arts. Were he living, each new day would have multiplied his crimes. I resented the wrong done to father and to fatherland: I slew him who was governing you outrageously and more hardly than it beseemed men. Acknowledge my service, honor my wit, give me the throne if I have earned it; for you have in me one who has done you a mighty service, and who is no degenerate heir to his father's power; no fratricide, but the lawful successor to the throne; and a dutiful avenger of the crime of murder. You have me to thank for the recovery of the blessings of freedom, for release from the power of him who vexed you, for relief from the oppressor's yoke, for shaking off the sway of the murderer, for trampling the despot's scepter under foot. It is I who have stripped you of slavery, and clothed you with freedom; I have restored your height of fortune, and given you your glory back; I have deposed the despot and triumphed over the butcher. In your hands is the reward: you know what I have done for you: and from your righteousness I ask my wage. Every heart had been moved while the young man thus spoke; he affected some to compassion, and some even to tears. When the lamentation ceased, he was appointed king by prompt general acclaim. For one and all rested the greatest hopes on his wisdom, since he had devised the whole of such an achievement with the deepest cunning, and accomplished it with the most astonishing contrivance. Many could have been seen marveling how he had concealed so subtle a plan over so long a space of time. After these deeds in Denmark he equipped three vessels lavishly, and went back to Britain to see his wife and her father. He had also enrolled in his service the flower of the warriors, and arrayed them very choicely, wishing to have everything now magnificently appointed, even as of old he had always worn contemptible gear, and to change all his old devotion to poverty for outlay on luxury. He also had a shield made for him, whereon the whole series of his exploits, beginning with his earliest youth, was painted in exquisite designs. This he bore as a record of his deeds of prowess, and gained great increase of fame thereby. Here were to be seen depicted the slaying of Horwendil; the fratricide and incest of Feng; the infamous uncle, the whimsical nephew; the shapes of the hooked stakes; the stepfather suspecting, the stepson dissembling; the various temptations offered, and the woman brought to beguile him; the gaping wolf; the finding of the rudder; the passing of the sand; the entering of the wood; the putting of the straw through the gadfly; the warning of the maiden after the escort was eluded. And likewise could be seen the picture of the palace; the queen there with her son; the slaying of the eavesdropper; and how, after being killed, he was boiled down, and so dropped into the sewer, and so thrown out to the swine; how his limbs were strewn in the mud, and so left for the beasts to finish. Also it could be seen how Amleth surprised the secret of his sleeping attendants, how he erased the letters, and put new characters in their places; how he disdained the banquet and scorned the drink; how he condemned the face of the king and taxed the queen with faulty behavior. There was also represented the hanging of the envoys, and the young man's wedding; then the voyage back to Denmark; the festive celebration of the funeral rites. Amleth, in answer to questions, pointing to the sticks in place of his attendants, acting as cup-bearer, and purposely drawing his sword and pricking his fingers; the sword riveted through, the swelling cheers of the banquet, the dance growing fast and furious; the hangings flung upon the sleepers, then fastened with the interlacing crooks, and wrapped tightly round them as they slumbered; the brand set to the mansion, the burning of the guests, the royal palace consumed with fire and tottering down; the visit to the sleeping-room of Feng, the theft of his sword, the useless one set in its place; and the king slain with his own sword's point by his stepson's hand. All this was there, painted upon Amleth's battle-shield by a careful craftsman in the choicest of handiwork; he copied truth in his figures, and embodied real deeds in his outlines. Moreover, Amleth's followers, to increase the splendor of their presence, wore shields which were gilt over. The King of Britain received them very graciously, and treated them with costly and royal pomp. During the feast he asked anxiously whether Feng was alive and prosperous. His son-in-law told him that the man of whose welfare he was vainly inquiring had perished by the sword. With a flood of questions he tried to find out who had slain Feng, and learnt that the messenger of his death was likewise its author. And when the king heard this, he was secretly aghast, because he found that an old promise to avenge Feng now devolved upon himself. For Feng and he had determined of old, by a mutual compact, that one of them should act as the avenger of the other. Thus the king was drawn one way by his love for his daughter and his affection for his son-in-law, another way by his regard for his friend, and moreover by his strict oath and the sanctity of their mutual declarations, which it was impious to violate. At last he slighted the ties of kinship, and sworn faith prevailed. His heart turned to vengeance, and he put the sanctity of his oath before family bonds. But since it was thought sin to wrong the holy ties of hospitality, he preferred to execute his revenge by the hand of another, wishing to mask his secret crime with a show of innocence. So he veiled his treachery with attentions, and hid his intent to harm under a show of zealous goodwill. His queen having lately died of illness, he requested Amleth to undertake the mission of making him a fresh match, saying that he was highly delighted with his extraordinary shrewdness. He declared that there was a certain queen reigning in Scotland, whom he vehemently desired to marry. Now he knew that she was not only unwedded by reason of her chastity, but that in the cruelty of her arrogance she had always loathed her wooers, and had inflicted on her lovers the uttermost punishment, so that not one out of all the multitude was to be found who has not paid for his insolence with his life. Perilous this commission was, Amleth started, never shrinking to obey the duty imposed on him, but trusting partly in his own servants, and partly in the attendants of the king. He entered Scotland, and, when quite close to the abode of the queen, he went into a meadow by the wayside to rest his horses. Pleased by the look of the spot, he thought of resting--the pleasant prattle of the stream exciting a desire to sleep--and posted men to keep watch some way off. The queen on hearing of this, sent out ten warriors to spy on the approach of the foreigners and their equipment. One of these, being quick-witted, slipped past the sentries, pertinaciously made his way up, and took away the shield, which Amleth had chanced to set at his head before he slept, so gently that he did not ruffle his slumbers, though he was lying upon it, nor awaken one man of all that troop; for he wished to assure his mistress not only by report but by some token. With equal address he filched the letter entrusted to Amleth from the coffer in which it was kept. When these things were brought to the queen, she scanned the shield narrowly, and from the notes appended made out the whole argument. Then she knew that here was the man who, trusting his own nicely-calculated scheme, had avenged on his uncle the murder of his father. She also looked at the letter containing the suit for her hand, and rubbed out all the writing; for wedlock with the old she utterly abhorred, and desired the embraces of young men. But she wrote in its place a commission purporting to be sent from the King of Britain to herself, signed like the other with his name and title, wherein she pretended that she was asked to marry the bearer. Moreover, she included an account of the deeds of which she had learnt from Amleth's shield, so that one would have thought the shield confirmed the letter, while the letter explained the shield. Then she told the same spies whom she had employed before to take the shield back, and put the letter in its place again; playing the very trick on Amleth which, as she had learnt, he had himself used in outwitting his companions. Amleth, meanwhile, who found that his shield had been filched from under his head, deliberately shut his eyes and cunningly feigned sleep, hoping to regain by pretended what he had lost by real slumbers. For he thought that the success of his one attempt would incline the spy to deceive him a second time. And he was not mistaken. For as the spy came up stealthily, and wanted to put back the shield and the writing in their old place, Amleth leapt up, seized him, and detained him in bonds. Then he roused his retinue, and went to the abode of the queen. As representing his father-in-law, he greeted her, and handed her the writing, sealed with the king's seal. The queen who was named Hermutrude, took and read it, and spoke most warmly of Amleth's diligence and shrewdness, saying that Feng had deserved his punishment, and that the unfathomable wit of Amleth had accomplished a deed past all human estimation; seeing that not only had his impenetrable depth devised a mode of revenging his father's death and his mother's adultery, but it had further, by his notable deeds of prowess, seized the kingdom of the man whom he had found constantly plotting against him. She marveled therefore that a man of such instructed mind could have made the one slip of a mistaken marriage; for though his renown almost rose above mortality, he seemed to have stumbled into an obscure and ignoble match. For the parents of his wife had been slaves, though good luck had graced them with the honors of royalty. Now (said she), when looking for a wife, a wise man must reckon the luster of her birth and not of her beauty. Therefore if he were to seek a match in a proper spirit, he should weigh the ancestry, and not be smitten by the looks; for though looks were a lure to temptation, yet their empty bedizenment had tarnished the white simplicity of many a man. Now there was a woman, as nobly born as himself, whom he could take. She herself, whose means were not poor nor her birth lowly, was worthy his embraces, since he did not surpass her in royal wealth nor outshine her in the honor of his ancestors. Indeed she was a queen, and but that her sex gainsaid it, might be deemed a king; nay (and this is yet truer), whomsoever she thought worthy of her bed was at once a king, and she yielded her kingdom with herself. Thus her scepter and her hand went together. It was no mean favor for such a woman to offer her love, who in the case of other men had always followed her refusal with the sword. Therefore she pressed him to transfer his wooing, to make over to her his marriage vows, and to learn to prefer birth to beauty. So saying, she fell upon him with a close embrace. Amleth was overjoyed at the gracious speech of the maiden, fell to kissing back, and returned her close embrace, protesting that the maiden's wish was his own. Then a banquet was held, friends bidden, the chief nobles gathered, and the marriage rites performed. When they were accomplished, he went back to Britain with his bride, a strong band of Scots being told to follow close behind, the he might have its help against the diverse treacheries in his path. As he was returning, the daughter of the King of Britain, to whom he was still married, met him. Though she complained that she was slighted by the wrong of having a paramour put over her, yet, she said, it would be unworthy for her to hate him as an adulterer more than she loved him as a husband; nor would she so far shrink from her lord as to bring herself to hide in silence the guile which she knew was intended against him. For she had a son as a pledge of their marriage, and regard for him, if nothing else, must have inclined his mother to the affection of a wife. "He", she said, "may hate the supplanter of his mother, I will love her; no disaster shall put out my flame for thee; no ill-will shall quench it, or prevent me from exposing the malignant designs against thee, or from revealing the snares I have detected. Bethink thee, then, that thou must beware of thy father-in-law, for thou hast thyself reaped the harvest of thy mission, foiled the wishes of him who sent thee, and with willful trespass seized over all the fruit for thyself." By this speech she showed herself more inclined to love her husband than her father. While she thus spoke, the King of Britain came up and embraced his son-in-law closely, but with little love, and welcomed him with a banquet, to hide his intended guile under a show of generosity. But Amleth, having learnt the deceit, dissembled his fear, took a retinue of two hundred horsemen, put on an under-shirt [of mail], and complied with the invitation, preferring the peril of falling in with the king's deceit to the shame of hanging back. So much heed for honor did he think that he must take in all things. As he rode up close, the king attacked him just under the porch of the folding doors, and would have thrust him through with his javelin, but that the hard shirt of mail threw off the blade. Amleth received a slight wound, and went to the spot where he had bidden the Scottish warriors wait on duty. He then sent back to the king his new wife's spy, whom he had captured. This man was to bear witness that he had secretly taken from the coffer where it was kept the letter which was meant for his mistress, and thus was to make the whole blame recoil on Hermutrude, by this studied excuse absolving Amleth from the charge of treachery. The king without tarrying pursued Amleth hotly as he fled, and deprived him of his forces. So Amleth, on the morrow, wishing to fight for dear life, and utterly despairing of his powers of resistance, tried to increase his apparent numbers. He put stakes under some of the dead bodies of his comrades to prop them up, set others on horseback like living men, and tied others to neighboring stones, not taking off any of their armor, and dressing them in due order of line and wedge, just as if they were about to engage. The wing composed of the dead was as thick as the troop of the living. It was an amazing spectacle this, of dead men dragged out to battle, and corpses mustered to fight. The plan served him well, for the very figures of the dead men showed like a vast array as the sunbeams struck them. For those dead and senseless shapes restored the original number of the army so well, that the mass might have been unthinned by the slaughter of yesterday. The Britons, terrified at the spectacle, fled before fighting, conquered by the dead men whom they had overcome in life. I cannot tell whether to think more of the cunning or of the good fortune of this victory The Danes came down on the king as he was tardily making off, and killed him. Amleth, triumphant, made a great plundering, seized the spoils of Britain, and went back with his wives to his own land. Meanwhile Rorik had died, and Wiglek, who had come to the throne, had harassed Amleth's mother with all manner of insolence and stripped her of her royal wealth, complaining that her son had usurped the kingdom of Jutland and defrauded the King of Leire, who had the sole privilege of giving away and taking away the rights of high offices. This treatment Amleth took with such forbearance as apparently to return kindness for slander, for he presented Wiglek with the riches of his spoils. But afterwards he seized a chance of taking vengeance, attacked him, subdued him, and from a cover became an open foe. Fialler, the governor of Skanne and Zealand, sent envoys to challenge Amleth to a war. Amleth, with his marvelous shrewdness, saw that he was tossed between two difficulties, one of which involved disgrace and the other danger. For he knew that if he took up the challenge he was threatened with the peril of his life, while to shrink from it would disgrace his reputation as a soldier. Yet in that spirit ever fixed on deeds of prowess the desire to save his honor won the day. Dread of disaster was blunted by more vehement thirst for glory; he would not tarnish the unblemished luster of his fame by timidly skulking from his fate. Also he saw that there is almost as wide a gap between a mean life and a noble death as that which is acknowledged between honor and disgrace themselves. Yet he was enchained by such love for Hermutrude, that he was more deeply concerned in his mind about her future widowhood than about his own death, and cast about very zealously how he could decide on some second husband for her before the opening of the war. Hermutrude, therefore, declared that she had the courage of a man, and promised that she would not forsake him even on the field, saying that the woman who dreaded to be untied with her lord in death was abominable. But she kept this rare promise ill; for when Amleth had been slain by Wiglek in battle in Jutland, she yielded herself up unasked to be the conqueror's spoil and bride. Thus all vows of women are loosed by change of fortune and melted by the drifting of time; the faith of their soul rests on a slippery foothold, and is weakened by casual chances; glib in promises, and as sluggish in performance, all manner of lustful promptings enslave it, and it bounds away with panting and precipitate desire, forgetful of old things, in the ever hot pursuit after something. So ended Amleth. Had fortune been as kind to him as nature, he would have equaled the gods in glory, and surpassed the labors of Hercules by his deeds of prowess. A plain in Jutland is to be found, famous for his name and burial-place. Wiglek's administration of the kingdom was long and peaceful. Source: The First Nine Books of the Danish History of Saxo Grammaticus , translated by Oliver Elton (London: David Nutt, 1894), books 3-4, pp. 106-130 . Translation slightly revised. Gesta Danorum , the multi-volume work from which this account was taken, was written about 1185. Saxo Grammaticus, the author-compiler, was born about 1150 and died about 1220. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 19, 2011. Androcles and the Lion: Tales of Type 156 Androcles and the Lion and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 156 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2009 Contents Androcles (Aesop). The Slave and the Lion (Aesop). Androcles and the Lion (Joseph Jacobs). The Lion and the Saint [Saint Jerome] (Andrew Lang). Of the Remembrance of Benefits ( Gesta Romanorum ). The Lion and the Thorn (Ambrose Bierce). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Androcles Aesop A slave named Androcles once escaped from his master and fled to the forest. As he was wandering about there he came upon a lion lying down moaning and groaning. At first he turned to flee, but finding that the lion did not pursue him, he turned back and went up to him. As he came near, the lion put out his paw, which was all swollen and bleeding, and Androcles found that a huge thorn had got into it, and was causing all the pain. He pulled out the thorn and bound up the paw of the lion, who was soon able to rise and lick the hand of Androcles like a dog. Then the lion took Androcles to his cave, and every day used to bring him meat from which to live. But shortly afterwards both Androcles and the lion were captured, and the slave was sentenced to be thrown to the lion, after the latter had been kept without food for several days. The emperor and all his court came to see the spectacle, and Androcles was led out into the middle of the arena. Soon the lion was let loose from his den, and rushed bounding and roaring towards his victim. But as soon as he came near to Androcles he recognized his friend, and fawned upon him, and licked his hands like a friendly dog. The emperor, surprised at this, summoned Androcles to him, who told him the whole story. Whereupon the slave was pardoned and freed, and the lion let loose to his native forest. Moral: Gratitude is the sign of noble souls. Source: The Fables of Æsop , selected, told anew, and their history traced by Joseph Jacobs (London: Macmillan and Company, 1902), no. 23, pp. 60-61 . First published 1894. Return to the table of contents . The Slave and the Lion Aesop A slave ran away from his master, by whom he had been most cruelly treated, and, in order to avoid capture, betook himself into the desert. As he wandered about in search of food and shelter, he came to a cave, which he entered and found to by unoccupied. Really, however, it was a lion's den, and almost immediately, to the horror of the wretched fugitive, the lion himself appeared. The man gave himself up for lost. But, to his utter astonishment, the lion, instead of springing upon him, came and fawned upon him, at the same time whining and lifting up his paw. Observing it to be much swollen and inflamed, he examined it and found a large thorn embedded in the ball of the foot. He accordingly removed it and dressed the wound as well as he could. And in course of time it healed up completely. The lion's gratitude was unbounded. He looked upon the man as his friend, and they shared the cave for some time together. A day came, however, when the slave began to long for the society of his follow men, and he bade farewell to the lion and returned to the town. Here he was presently recognized and carried off in chains to his former master, who resolved to make an example of him, and ordered that he should be thrown to the beasts at the next public spectacle in the theater. On the fatal day the beasts were loosed into the arena, and among the rest a lion of huge bulk and ferocious aspect. And then the wretched slave was cast in among them. What was the amazement of the spectators, when the lion after one glance bounded up to him and lay down at his feet with every expression of affection and delight! It was his old friend of the cave! The audience clamored that the slave's life should be spared. And the governor of the town, marveling at such gratitude and fidelity in a beast, decreed that both should receive their liberty. Source: Æsop's Fables , translated by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: W. Heinemann, 1912), pp. 31-32. Return to the table of contents . Androcles and the Lion Joseph Jacobs It happened in the old days at Rome that a slave named Androcles escaped from his master and fled into the forest, and he wandered there for a long time until he was weary and well nigh spent with hunger and despair. Just then he heard a lion near him moaning and groaning and at times roaring terribly. Tired as he was Androcles rose up and rushed away, as he thought, from the lion; but as he made his way through the bushes he stumbled over the root of a tree and fell down lamed, and when he tried to get up there he saw the lion coming towards him, limping on three feet and holding his forepaw in front of him. Poor Androcles was in despair; he had not strength to rise and run away, and there was the lion coming upon him. But when the great beast came up to him instead of attacking him it kept on moaning and groaning and looking at Androcles, who saw that the lion was holding out his right paw, which was covered with blood and much swollen. Looking more closely at it Androcles saw a great big thorn pressed into the paw, which was the cause of all the lion's trouble. Plucking up courage he seized hold of the thorn and drew it out of the lion's paw, who roared with pain when the thorn came out, but soon after found such relief from it that he fawned upon Androcles and showed, in every way that he knew, to whom he owed the relief. Instead of eating him up he brought him a young deer that he had slain, and Androcles managed to make a meal from it. For some time the lion continued to bring the game he had killed to Androcles, who became quite fond of the huge beast. But one day a number of soldiers came marching through the forest and found Androcles, and as he could not explain what he was doing they took him prisoner and brought him back to the town from which he had fled. Here his master soon found him and brought him before the authorities, and he was condemned to death because he had fled from his master. Now it used to be the custom to throw murderers and other criminals to the lions in a huge circus, so that while the criminals were punished the public could enjoy the spectacle of a combat between them and the wild beasts. So Androcles was condemned to be thrown to the lions, and on the appointed day he was led forth into the Arena and left there alone with only a spear to protect him from the lion. The Emperor was in the royal box that day and gave the signal for the lion to come out and attack Androcles. But when it came out of its cage and got near Androcles, what do you think it did? Instead of jumping upon him it fawned upon him and stroked him with its paw and made no attempt to do him any harm. It was of course the lion which Androcles had met in the forest. The Emperor, surprised at seeing such a strange behavior in so cruel a beast, summoned Androcles to him and asked him how it happened that this particular lion had lost all its cruelty of disposition. So Androcles told the Emperor all that had happened to him and how the lion was showing its gratitude for his having relieved it of the thorn. Thereupon the Emperor pardoned Androcles and ordered his master to set him free, while the lion was taken back into the forest and let loose to enjoy liberty once more. Source: Joseph Jacobs, Europa's Fairy Book (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, © 1916), pp. 107-109 . This book was also published under the title European Folk and Fairy Tales . Jacobs' story is a reconstruction from various historical sources. In 1912 George Bernard Shaw created a delightful, if irreverent, play, Androcles and the Lion from the traditional tale. Return to the table of contents . The Lion and the Saint Andrew Lang If you should have the opportunity of seeing any large picture gallery abroad, or our own National Gallery in London, you will be very likely to come across some picture by one or other "old master" representing an old man, with a long beard, sometimes reading or writing in a study, sometimes kneeling in a bare desert-place; but wherever he may be, or whatever he may be doing, there is almost always a lion with him. The old man with the beard is St. Jerome, who lived fifteen hundred years ago, and I want now to tell you why a lion generally appears in any picture of him. At one time of his life, St. Jerome lived in a monastery he had founded at Bethlehem. One day he and some of his monks were sitting to enjoy the cool of the evening at the gate of the monastery when a big lion suddenly appeared walking up to them. The monks were horribly frightened, and scampered off as fast as they could to take refuge indoors; but St. Jerome had noticed that as the lion walked he limped as though in pain, and the Saint, who always tried to help those in trouble, waited to see what he could do for the poor animal. The lion came near, and when he was quite close he held up one paw and looked plaintively at the men. St. Jerome fearlessly took the paw on his lap, and, on examining it, found a large thorn, which he pulled out, binding up the injured limb. The wound was rather a bad one, but St. Jerome kept the lion with him and nursed him carefully till he was quite well again. The lion was so grateful, and became so much attached to his kind doctor, that he would not leave him, but stayed on in the monastery. Now, in this house no one, from the highest to the lowest, man or beast, was allowed to lead an idle life. It was not easy to find employment for a lion; but at length a daily task was found for him. This was to guard and watch over the ass, who each day carried in the firewood which was cut and gathered in the forest. The lion and ass became great friends, and no doubt the ass felt much comfort in having such a powerful protector. But it happened, on one very hot summer's day, that whilst the ass was at pasture the lion fell asleep. Some merchants were passing that way and seeing the ass grazing quietly, and apparently alone, they stole her and carried her off with them. In due time the lion awoke; but when he looked for the ass she was not to be seen. In vain he roamed about, seeking everywhere; he could not find her; and when evening came he had to return to the monastery alone, and with his head and tail drooping to show how ashamed he felt. As he could not speak to explain matters, St. Jerome feared that he had not been able to resist the temptation to eat raw flesh once more, and that he had devoured the poor ass. He therefore ordered that the lion should perform the daily task of his missing companion, and carry the firewood instead of her. The lion meekly submitted, and allowed the load of faggots to be tied on his back, and carried them safely home. As soon as he was unloaded he would run about for some time, still hoping to find the ass. One day, as he was hunting about in this fashion, he saw a caravan coming along with a string of camels. The camels, as was usual in some places, were led by an ass, and to the lion's joy he recognised his lost friend. He instantly fell on the caravan, and, without hurting any of the camels, succeeded in frightening them all so completely that he had no difficulty in driving them into the monastery where St. Jerome met them. The merchants, much alarmed, confessed their theft, and St. Jerome forgave them, and was very kind to them; but the ass, of course, returned to her former owners. And the lion was much petted and praised for his goodness and cleverness, and lived with St. Jerome till the end of his life. Source: Andrew Lang, The Red Book of Animal Stories (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1899), pp. 138-42 . Link to a painting of Saint Jerome by Niccolò Antonio Colantonio. Return to the table of contents . Of the Remembrance of Benefits Gesta Romanorum There was a knight who devoted much of his time to hunting. It happened one day, as he was pursuing this diversion, that he was met by a lame lion, who showed him his foot. The knight dismounted, and drew from it a sharp thorn; and then applied an unguent to the wound, which speedily healed it. A while after this, the king of the country hunted in the same wood, and caught that lion, and held him captive for many years. Now, the knight, having offended the king, fled from his anger to the very forest in which he had been accustomed to hunt. There he betook himself to plunder, and spoiled and slew a multitude of travelers. But the king's sufferance was exhausted; he sent out an army, captured, and condemned him to be delivered to a fasting lion. The knight was accordingly thrown into a pit, and remained in terrified expectation of the hour when he should be devoured. But the lion, considering him attentively, and remembering his former friend, fawned upon him; and remained seven days with him destitute of food. When this reached the ears of the king, he was struck with wonder, and directed the knight to be taken from the pit. "Friend," said he, "by what means have you been able to render the lion harmless?" "As I once rode along the forest, my lord, that lion met me lame. I extracted from his foot a large thorn, and afterward healed the wound, and therefore he has spared me." "Well," returned the king, "since the lion has spared you, I will for this time ratify your pardon. Study to amend your life." The knight gave thanks to the king, and ever afterwards conducted himself with all propriety. He lived to a good old age, and ended his days in peace. Application: My beloved, the knight is the world; the lame lion is the human race; the thorn, original sin, drawn out by baptism. The pit represents penitence, whence safety is derived. Source: Gesta Romanorum , translated by Charles Swan, revised and corrected by Wynnard Hooper (London: George Bell and Sons, 1906), no. 104, pp. 180-81 . The Gesta Romanorum or "Deeds of the Romans" is a collection of some 283 legends and fables. Created as a collection ca. 1330 in England, it served as a source of stories and plots for many of Europe's greatest writers. Return to the table of contents . The Lion and the Thorn Ambrose Bierce A lion roaming through the forest, got a thorn in his foot, and, meeting a shepherd, asked him to remove it. The shepherd did so, and the lion, having just surfeited himself on another shepherd, went away without harming him. Some time afterward the shepherd was condemned on a false accusation to be cast to the lions in the amphitheater. When they were about to devour him, one of them said, "This is the man who removed the thorn from my foot." Hearing this, the others honorably abstained, and the claimant ate the shepherd all himself. Source: Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), pp. 170-71 . Link to an article about Ambrose Bierce . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised July 13, 2009. Animal Brides: Folktales of Type 402 Animal Brides folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 402 and related stories translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2020 Contents Chonguita the Monkey Wife (Philippines) The Dog Bride (India) The Cat Who Became a Queen (India) The Mouse Maiden (Sri Lanka) The Frog's Skin (Georgia) The Tsarevna Frog (Russia) The Frog (Austria/Italy) The Frog's Bridegroom (Germany) Doll i' the Grass (Norway) The She-Wolf (Croatia) Links to additional tales about animal brides Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Animal Brides and Animal Bridegrooms : an index page of folktales about marriage with a beast. Chonguita the Monkey Wife Philippines There was a king who had three sons, named Pedro, Diego, and Juan. One day the king ordered these three gentlemen to set out from the kingdom and seek their fortunes. The three brothers took different directions, but before they separated they agreed to meet in a certain place in the forest. After walking for many days, Don Juan met an old man on the road. This old man gave Don Juan bread, and told him to go to a palace which was a mile away. "But as you enter the gate," said the old man, "you must divide the bread which I have given you among the monkeys which are guarding the gate to the palace; otherwise you will not be able to enter." Don Juan took the bread; and when he reached the palace, he did as the old man had advised him. After entering the gate, he saw a big monkey. Frightened at the sight of the animal, Don Juan was about to run away, when the animal called to him, and said, "Don Juan, I know that your purpose in coming here was to find your fortune; and at this very moment my daughter Chonguita will marry you." The archbishop of the monkeys was called, and Don Juan and Chonguita were married without delay. A few days afterwards Don Juan asked permission from his wife to go to the place where he and his brothers had agreed to meet. When Chonguita's mother heard that Don Juan was going away, she said to him, "If you are going away, take Chonguita with you." Although Don Juan was ashamed to go with Chonguita because she was a monkey, he was forced to take her, and they set out together. When Don Juan met his two brothers and their beautiful wives at the appointed place, he could not say a word. Don Diego, noticing the gloomy appearance of his brother, said, "What is the matter with you? Where is your wife, Don Juan?" Don Juan sadly replied, "Here she is." "Where?" asked Don Pedro. "Behind me," replied Don Juan. When Don Pedro and Don Diego saw the monkey, they were very much surprised. "Oh!" exclaimed Don Pedro. "What happened to you? Did you lose your head?" Don Juan could say nothing to this question. At last, however, he broke out, "Let us go home! Our father must be waiting for us." So saying, Don Juan turned around and began the journey. Don Pedro and Don Diego, together with their wives, followed Don Juan. Chonguita walked by her husband's side. When the return of the three brothers was announced to the king, the monarch hastened to meet them on the stairs. Upon learning that one of his sons had married a monkey, the king fainted; but after he had recovered his senses, he said to himself, "This misfortune is God's will. I must therefore bear it with patience." The king then assigned a house to each couple to live in. But the more the king thought of it, the greater appeared to be the disgrace that his youngest son had brought on the family. So one day he called his three sons together, and said to them, "Tell your wives that I want each one of them to make me an embroidered coat. The one who fails to do this within three days will be put to death." Now, the king issued this order in the hope that Chonguita would be put to death, because he thought that she would not be able to make the coat; but his hope was disappointed. On the third day his daughters-in-law presented to him the coats that they had made, and the one embroidered by Chonguita was the prettiest of all. Still anxious to get rid of the monkey wife, the king next ordered his daughters-in-law to embroider a cap for him in two days, under penalty of death in case of failure. The caps were all done on time. At last, thinking of no other way by which he could accomplish his end, the king summoned his three daughters-in-law, and said, "The husband of the one who shall be able to draw the prettiest picture on the walls of my chamber within three days shall succeed me on the throne." At the end of the three days the pictures were finished. When the king went to inspect them, he found that Chonguita's was by far the prettiest, and so Don Juan was crowned king. A great feast was held in the palace in honor of the new king. In the midst of the festivities Don Juan became very angry with his wife for insisting that he dance with her, and he hurled her against the wall. At this brutal action the hall suddenly became dark; but after a while it became bright again, and Chonguita had been transformed into a beautiful woman. Source: Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 29, pp. 244-246. Copyright 1921 by the American Folk-Lore Society. Fansler's source: "Narrated by Pilar Ejercito, a Tagalog from Pagsanjan, Laguna. She heard the story from her aunt, who had heard it when she was still a little girl." Fansler entitles this story simply "Chonguita." For comparison, follow this link to a collection of tales about Monkey Bridegrooms. Return to the table of contents . The Dog Bride India Once upon a time there was a youth who used to herd buffaloes; and as he watched his animals graze he noticed that exactly at noon every day a she-dog used to make its way to a ravine, in which there were some pools of water. This made him curious and he wondered to whom it belonged and what it did in the ravine. So he decided to watch, and one day when the dog came he hid himself and saw that when it got to the water, it shed its dog skin, and out stepped a beautiful maiden and began to bathe. And when she had finished bathing she put on the skin and became a dog again, and went off to the village. The herdboy followed her and watched into what house she entered, and he inquired to whom the house belonged. Having found out all about it, he went back to his work. That year the herdboy's father and mother decided that it was time for him to marry and began to look about for a wife for him. But he announced that he had made up his mind to have a dog for his wife, and he would never marry a human girl. Everyone laughed at him for such an extraordinary idea, but he could not be moved. So at last they concluded that he must really have the soul of a dog in him, and that it was best to let him have his own way. So his father and mother asked him whether there was any particular dog he would like to have for his bride, and then he gave the name of the man into whose house he had tracked the dog that he had seen going to the ravine. The master of the dog laughed at the idea that anyone should wish to marry her, and gladly accepted a bride's price for her. So a day was fixed for the wedding and the booth built for the ceremony, and the bridegroom's party went to the bride's house, and the marriage took place in due form, and the bride was escorted to her husband's house. Every night when her husband was asleep, the bride used to come out of the dog's skin and go out of the house. And when her husband found out this, he one night only pretended to go to sleep and lay watching her. And when she was about to leave the room he jumped up and caught hold of her and seizing the dog skin, threw it into the fire, where it was burnt to ashes. So his bride remained a woman, but she was of more than human beauty. This soon became known in the village, and everyone congratulated the herdboy on his wisdom in marrying a dog. Now the herdboy had a friend named Jitu, and when Jitu saw what a prize his friend had got, he thought that he could not do better than marry a dog himself. His relations made no objection, and a bride was selected, and the marriage took place, but when they were putting vermilion on the bride's forehead she began to growl; but in spite of her growling they dragged her to the bridegroom's house, and forcibly anointed her with oil and turmeric. But when the bride's party set off home, the dog broke loose and ran after them. Then everyone shouted to Jitu to run after his bride and bring her back, but she only growled and bit at him, so that he had at last to give it up. Then everyone laughed at him so much that he was too ashamed to speak, and two or three days later he hanged himself. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 85, pp. 254-256. From the preface: "The Santals are a Munda tribe, a branch of that aboriginal element which probably entered India from the northeast. At the present day they inhabit the eastern outskirts of the Chutia Nagpore plateau.... The Santal Parganas is a district 4800 square miles in area, lying about 150 miles north of Calcutta." Return to the table of contents . The Cat Who Became a Queen India "Ah me! Ah me! What availeth my marriage with all these women? Never a son has the Deity vouchsafed me. Must I die, and my name be altogether forgotten in the land?" Thus soliloquized one of the greatest monarchs that ever reigned in Kashmir, and then went to his zanána [the apartment where his wives lived], and threatened his numerous wives with banishment if they did not bear him a son within the next year. The women prayed most earnestly to the god Shiva to help them to fulfil the king's desire, and waited most anxiously for several months, hoping against hope, till at last they knew that it was all in vain, and that they must dissemble matters if they wished to remain in the royal household. Accordingly, on an appointed time, word was sent to the king that one of his wives was enciente , and a little while afterwards the news was spread abroad that a little princess was born. But this, as we have said, was not so. Nothing of the kind had happened. The truth was, that a cat had given birth to a lot of kittens, one of which had been appropriated by the king's wives. When his majesty heard the news he was exceedingly glad, and ordered the child to be brought to him -- a very natural request, which the king's wives had anticipated, and therefore were quite prepared with a reply. "Go and tell the king," said they to the messenger, "that the Brahmans have declared that the child must not be seen by her father until she is married." Thus the matter was hushed for a time. Constantly did the king inquire after his daughter, and received wonderful accounts of her beauty and cleverness; so that his joy was great. Of course he would like to have had a son, but since the Deity had not condescended to fulfil his desire, he comforted himself with the thought of marrying his daughter to some person worthy of her, and capable of ruling the country after him. Accordingly, at the proper time he commissioned his counselors to find a suitable match for his daughter. A clever, good, and handsome prince was soon found, and arrangements for the marriage were quickly concluded. What were the king's wives to do now? It was of no use for them to attempt to carry on their deceit any longer. The bridegroom would come and would wish to see his wife, and the king, too, would expect to see her. "Better," said they, "that we send for this prince and reveal everything to him, and take our chance of the rest. Never mind the king. Some answer can be made to satisfy him for a while." So they sent for the prince and told him everything, having previously made him swear that he would keep the secret, and not reveal it even to his father or mother. The marriage was celebrated in grand style, as became such great and wealthy kings, and the king was easily prevailed on to allow the palanquin containing the bride to leave the palace without looking at her. The cat only was in the palanquin, which reached the prince's country in safety. The prince took great care of the animal, which he kept locked up in his own private room, and would not allow anyone, not even his mother, to enter it. One day, however, while the prince was away, his mother thought that she would go and speak to her daughter-in-law from outside the door. "O daughter-in-law," she cried, "I am very sorry that you are shut up in this room and not permitted to see anybody. It must be very dull for you. However, I am going out today; so you can leave the room without fear of seeing anyone. Will you come out?" The cat understood everything, and wept much, just like a human being. Oh those bitter tears! They pierced the mother's heart, so that she determined to speak very strictly to her son on the matter as soon as he should return. They also reached the ears of Párvatí [the wife of Shiva], who at once went to her lord and entreated him to have mercy on the poor helpless cat. "Tell her," said Shiva, "to rub some oil over her fur, and she will became a beautiful woman. She will find the oil in the room where she now is." Párvatí lost no time in disclosing this glad news to the cat, who quickly rubbed the oil over its body, and was changed into the most lovely woman that ever lived. But she left a little spot on one of her shoulders which remained covered with cat's fur, lest her husband should suspect some trickery and deny her. In the evening the prince returned and saw his beautiful wife, and was delighted. Then all anxiety as to what he should reply to his mother's earnest solicitations fled. She had only to see the happy, smiling, beautiful bride to know that her fears were altogether needless. In a few weeks the prince, accompanied by his wife, visited his father-in-law, who, of course, believed the princess to be his own daughter, and was glad beyond measure. His wives too rejoiced, because their prayer had been heard and their lives saved. In due time the king settled his country on the prince, who eventually ruled over both countries, his father's and his father-in-law's, and thus became the most illustrious and wealthy monarch in the world. Source: J. Hinton Knowles, Folk-Tales of Kashmir (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, and Company, 1893), pp. 8-10. Return to the table of contents . The Mouse Maiden Sri Lanka There are a king and a queen of a certain city, and there is a daughter of the queen. They asked permission to summon the daughter to go in marriage to the prince of another city. The king said, "Ha," so they came from that city to summon the king's princess. After coming, they told the bride to come out of her chamber in order to eat the rice of the wedding feast. The queen said, "She is eating cooked rice in the house." Then they told her to come out in order to dress her in the robes sent by the bridegroom. The queen said, "She is putting on robes in her chamber." Then they told her to come out in order to go to the bridegroom's city. So the queen told two persons to come, and, having put a female mouseling in an incense box, brought it, and gave it into the hands of the two persons, and said, "Take this, and until seven days have gone by, do not open the mouth of the box." Having taken it to the city, when they opened the mouth of the box after seven days, a mouse sprang out, and hid itself among the cooking pots. There was also a servant girl at the prince's house. The girl apportioned and gave cooked rice and vegetable curry to the prince, and covered up the cooking pots containing the rest of the food. Then the mouseling came and, having taken and eaten some of the cooked rice and vegetables, covered up the cooking pots, and went again among the pots. On the following day the same thing occurred. The prince said to the girl, "Does the mouseling eat the cooked rice? Look and come back." The girl, having gone and looked, came back and said, "She has eaten the cooked rice, and covered the cooking pots, and has gone." The prince said, "Go also, and eat rice, and come back." So the girl went and ate rice, and returned. Next day the prince said, "I am going to cut paddy (growing rice). Remain at the house, and in the evening place the articles for cooking near the hearth." Then the prince went. Afterwards, in the evening, the girl placed the things for cooking near the hearth, and went out of the way. The mouseling came, and cooked, and placed the food ready, and again went behind the pots. After evening had come, that girl apportioned and gave the rice to the prince. The prince ate, and told the girl, "Go also, and eat rice, and come back." So the girl went and ate rice, and, having covered the cooking pots, came to the place where the prince was. Then the mouseling came and ate rice, and covered up the pots. After that, she said to the other mice, "Let us go and cut the paddy," and, collecting a great number of mice, cut all the paddy, and again returned to the house, and stayed among the pots. Next day when the prince went to the rice field to cut the paddy, all had been cut. Afterwards the prince came back, and, saying "Let us go and collect and stack the paddy," collected the men, and stacked it, and threshed it by trampling it with buffaloes. Then they went and called the women, and, having got rid of the chaff in the wind, brought the paddy home. After they had brought it, the prince went near the place where the cooking pots were stored, at which the mouseling was hidden, and said, "Having pounded this paddy to remove the husk, and cooked rice, let us go to your village to present it to your parents as the first-fruits." The mouseling said, "I will not. You go." So the prince told the girl to pound the paddy and cook rice, and having done this she gave it to the prince. The prince took the package of cooked rice, and went to the mouseling's village, and gave it to the mouseling's mother. The queen asked at the hand of the prince, "Where is the girl?" The prince said, "She refused to come." The queen said, "Go back to the city, and, having placed the articles for cooking near the hearth, get hid, and stay in the house." After the prince returned to the city, he did as she had told him. The mouseling, having come out, took off her mouse jacket, and, assuming her shape as a girl, put on other clothes. While she was preparing to cook, the prince took the mouse jacket and burnt it. Afterwards, when the girl went to the place where the mouse jacket had been, and looked for it, it was not there. Then she looked in the hearth, and saw that there was one sleeve in it. While she was there weeping and weeping, the prince came forward and said, "Your mother told me to burn the mouse jacket." So the mouseling became the princess again, and the prince and princess remained there. Source: H. Parker, Village Folk Tales of Ceylon (London: Luzac and Company, 1910), no. 54, pp. 295-298. Parker's source: A tom-tom beater from the Northwestern province. Punctuation revised by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Frog's Skin Georgia There were once three brothers who wished to marry. They said, "Let us each shoot an arrow, and each shall take his wife from the place where the arrow falls." They shot their arrows; those of the two elder brothers fell on noblemen's houses, while the youngest brother's arrow fell in a lake. The two elder brothers led home their noble wives, and the youngest went to the shore of the lake. He saw a frog creep out of the lake and sit down upon a stone. He took it up and carried it back to the house. All the brothers came home with what fate had given them; the elder brothers with the noble maidens, and the youngest with a frog. The brothers went out to work. The wives prepared the dinner and attended to all their household duties. The frog sat by the fire croaking, and its eyes glittered. Thus they lived together a long time in love and harmony. At last the sisters-in-law wearied of the sight of the frog. When they swept the house, they threw out the frog with the dust. If the youngest brother found it, he took it up in his hand; if not, the frog would leap back to its place by the fire and begin to croak. The noble sisters did not like this, and said to their husbands, "Drive this frog out, and get a real wife for your brother." Every day the brothers bothered the youngest. He replied, saying, "This frog is certainly my fate. I am worthy of no better. I must be faithful to it." His sisters-in-law persisted in telling their husbands that the brother and his frog must be sent away, and at last they agreed. The young brother was now left quite desolate. There was no one to make his food, no one to stand watching at the door. For a short time a neighboring woman came to wait upon him, but she had not time, so he was left alone. The man became very melancholy. Once when he was thinking sadly of his loneliness, he went to work. When he had finished his day's labor, he went home. He looked into his house and was struck with amazement. The sideboard was well replenished; in one place was spread a cloth, and on the cloth were many different kinds of tempting dishes. He looked and saw the frog in its place croaking. He said to himself that his sisters-in-law must have done this for him, and went to his work again. He was out all day working, and when he came home he always found everything prepared for him. Once he said to himself, "I will see for once who is this unseen benefactor, who comes to do good to me and look after me." That day he stayed at home; he seated himself on the roof of the house and watched. In a short time the frog leaped out of the fireplace, jumped over to the doors, and all around the room. Seeing no one there, it went back and took off the frog's skin, put it near the fire, and came forth a beautiful maiden, fair as the sun; so lovely was she that the man could not imagine anything prettier. In the twinkling of an eye she had tidied everything, prepared the food, and cooked it. When everything was ready, she went to the fire, put on the skin again, and began to croak. When the man saw this he was very much astonished; he rejoiced exceedingly that God had granted him such happiness. He descended from the roof, went in, caressed his frog tenderly, and then sat down to his tasty supper. The next day the man hid himself in the place where he had been the day before. The frog, having satisfied itself that nobody was there, stripped off its skin and began its good work. This time the man stole silently into the house, seized the frog's skin in his hand and threw it into the fire. When the maiden saw this she entreated him, she wept, and she said, "Do not burn it, or you shall surely be destroyed," but the man had burned it in a moment. "Now, if your happiness be turned to misery, it is not my fault," said the sorrow-stricken woman. In a very short time the whole countryside knew that the man who had a frog now possessed in its place a lovely woman, who had come to him from heaven. The lord of the country heard of this, and wished to take her from him. He called the beautiful woman's husband to him and said, "Sow a barnful of wheat in a day, or give me your wife." When he had spoken thus, the man was obliged to consent, and he went home melancholy. When he went in he told his wife what had taken place. She reproached him, saying, "I told you what would happen if you did burn the skin, and you did not heed me; but I will not blame you. Be not sad; go in the morning to the edge of the lake from which I came, and call out, 'Mother and Father! I pray you, lend me your swift bullocks.' Lead them away with you, and the bullocks will in one day plow the fields and sow the grain." The husband did this. He went to the edge of the lake and called out, "Mother and Father! I entreat you, lend me your swift bullocks today." There came forth from the lake such a team of oxen as was never seen on sea or land. The youth drove the bullocks away, came to his lord's field, and plowed and sowed them in one day. His lord was very much surprised. He did not know if there was anything impossible to this man, whose wife he wanted. He called him a second time, and said, "Go and gather up the wheat you have sown, that not a grain may be wanting, and that the barn may be full. If you do not do this, your wife is mine." "This is impossible," said the man to himself. He went home to his wife, who again reproached him, and then said, "Go to the lake's edge and ask for the jackdaws." The husband went to the edge of the lake and called out, "Mother and Father! I beg you to lend me your jackdaws today." From the lake came forth flocks of jackdaws; they flew to the plowed ground, each gathered up a seed and put it into the barn. The lord came and cried out, "There is one seed short; I know each one, and one is missing." At that moment a jackdaw's caw was heard; it came with the missing seed, but owing to a lame foot it was a little late. The lord was very angry that even the impossible was possible to this man, and could not think what to give him to do. He puzzled his brain until he thought of the following plan. He called the man and said to him, "My mother, who died in this village, took with her a ring. If you go to the other world and bring that ring back to me, it is well; if not, I shall take away your wife." The man said to himself, "This is quite impossible." He went home and complained to his wife. She reproached him, and then said, "Go to the lake and ask for the ram." The husband went to the lake and called out, "Mother and Father! Give me your ram today, I pray you." From the lake there came forth a ram with twisted horns; from its mouth issued a flame of fire. It said to the man, "Mount on my back!" The man sat down, and, quick as lightning, the ram descended towards the lower regions. It went on and shot like an arrow through the earth. They traveled on, and saw in one place a man and woman sitting on a bullock's skin, which was not big enough for them, and they were like to fall off. The man called out to them, "What can be the meaning of this, that this bullock skin is not big enough for two people?" They said, "We have seen many pass by like you, but none has returned. When you come back we shall answer your question." They went on their way and saw a man and woman sitting on an ax handle, and they were not afraid of falling. The man called out to them, "Are you not afraid of falling from the handle of an ax?" They said to him, "We have seen many pass by like you, but none has returned. When you come back we shall answer your question." They went on their way again, until they came to a place where they saw a priest feeding cattle. This priest had such a long beard that it spread over the ground, and the cattle, instead of eating grass, fed on the priest's beard, and he could not prevent it. The man called out, "Priest, what is the meaning of this? Why is your beard pasture for these cattle?" The priest replied, "I have seen many pass by like you, but none has returned. When you come back I shall answer your question." They journeyed on again until they came to a place where they saw nothing but boiling pitch, and a flame came forth from it -- and this was hell. The ram said, "Sit firmly on my back, for we must pass through this fire." The man held fast. The ram gave a leap, and they escaped through the fire unhurt. There they saw a melancholy woman seated on a golden throne. She said; "What is it, my child? What troubles you? What has brought you here?" He told her everything that had happened to him. She said, "I must punish this very wicked child of mine, and you must take him a casket from me." She gave him a casket, and said, "Whatever you do, do not open this casket yourself. Take it with you, give it to your lord, and run quickly away from him." The man took the casket and went away. He came to the place where the priest was feeding the cattle. The priest said, "I promised you an answer. Hearken unto my words: In life I loved nothing but myself; I cared for nothing else. My flocks I fed on other pastures than my own, and the neighboring cattle died of starvation. Now I am paying the penalty." Then he went on to the place where the man and woman were sitting on the handle of the ax. They said, "We promised you an answer. Hearken unto our words: We loved each other too well on earth, and it is the same with us here." Then he came to the two seated on the bullock skin, which was not big enough for them. They said, "We promised you an answer. Hearken unto our words: We despised each other in life, and we equally despise each other here." At last the man came up on earth, descended from the ram, and went to his lord. He gave him the casket and quickly ran away. The lord opened the casket, and there came forth fire, which swallowed him up. Our brother was thus victorious over his enemy, and no one took his wife from him. They lived lovingly together, and blessed God as their deliverer. Source: Marjory Wardrop, Georgian Folk Tales (London, 1894), pp. 15-21. Return to the table of contents . The Tsarevna Frog Russia In old, old Russian tsarstvo, I do not know when, there lived a sovereign prince with the princess his wife. They had three sons, all of them young, and such brave fellows that no pen could describe them. The youngest had the name of Ivan Tsarevitch. One day their father said to his sons: ''My dear boys, take each of you an arrow, draw your strong bow and let your arrow fly; in whatever court it falls, in that court there will be a wife for you." The arrow of the oldest Tsarevitch fell on a boyar-house just in front of the terem where women live; the arrow of the second Tsarevitch flew to the red porch of a rich merchant, and on the porch there stood a sweet girl, the merchant's daughter. The youngest, the brave Tsarevitch Ivan, had the ill luck to send his arrow into the midst of a swamp, where it was caught by a croaking frog. Ivan Tsarevitch came to his father: "How can I marry the frog?" complained the son. "Is she my equal? Certainly she is not." "Never mind, "replied his father. "You have to marry the frog, for such is evidently your destiny." Thus the brothers were married: the oldest to a young boyarishnia, a nobleman's child; the second to the merchant's beautiful daughter, and the youngest, Tsarevitch Ivan, to a croaking frog. After a while the sovereign prince called his three sons and said to them: "Have each of your wives bake a loaf of bread by tomorrow morning." Ivan returned home. There was no smile on his face, and his brow was clouded. "C-r-o-a-k! C-r-o-a-k! Dear husband of mine, Tsarevitch Ivan, why so sad?" gently asked the frog. ''Was there anything disagreeable in the palace?" "Disagreeable indeed," answered Ivan Tsarevitch; "the Tsar, my father, wants you to bake a loaf of white bread by tomorrow." "Do not worry, Tsarevitch. Go to bed; the morning hour is a better adviser than the dark evening." The Tsarevitch, taking his wife's advice, went to sleep. Then the frog threw off her frog skin and turned into a beautiful, sweet girl, Vassilissa by name. She now stepped out on the porch and called aloud: "Nurses and waitresses, come to me at once and prepare a loaf of white bread for tomorrow morning, a loaf exactly like those I used to eat in my royal father's palace." In the morning Tsarevitch Ivan awoke with the crowing cocks, and you know the cocks and chickens are never late. Yet the loaf was already made, and so fine it was that nobody could even describe it, for only in fairyland one finds such marvelous loaves. It was adorned all about with pretty figures, with towns and fortresses on each side, and within it was white as snow and light as a feather. The Tsar father was pleased and the Tsarevitch received his special thanks. "Now there is another task," said the Tsar smilingly. "Have each of your wives weave a rug by tomorrow." Tsarevitch Ivan came back to his home. There was no smile on his face and his brow was clouded. "C-r-o-a-k! C-r-o-a-k! Dear Tsarevitch Ivan, my husband and master, why so troubled again? Was not father pleased?" ''How can I be otherwise? The Tsar, my father, has ordered a rug by tomorrow." "Do not worry, Tsarevitch. Go to bed; go to sleep. The morning hour will bring help." Again the frog turned into Vassilissa, the wise maiden, and again she called aloud: "Dear nurses and faithful waitresses, come to me for new work. Weave a silk rug like the one I used to sit upon in the palace of the king, my father." Once said, quickly done. When the cocks began their early "cock-a-doodle-doo," Tsarevitch Ivan awoke, and lo! there lay the most beautiful silk rug before him, a rug that no one could begin to describe. Threads of silver and gold were interwoven among bright-colored silken ones, and the rug was too beautiful for anything but to admire. The Tsar father was pleased, thanked his son Ivan, and issued a new order. He now wished to see the three wives of his handsome sons, and they were to present their brides on the next day. The Tsarevitch Ivan returned home. Cloudy was his brow, more cloudy than before. "C-r-o-a-k! C-r-o-a-k! Tsarevitch, my dear husband and master, why so sad ? Hast thou heard anything unpleasant at the palace?" "Unpleasant enough, indeed! My father, the Tsar, ordered all of us to present our wives to him. Now tell me, how could I dare go with thee?" "It is not so bad after all, and could be much worse," answered the frog, gently croaking. "Thou shalt go alone and I will follow thee. When thou hearest a noise, a great noise, do not be afraid; simply say: 'There is my miserable froggy coming in her miserable box.'" The two elder brothers arrived first with their wives, beautiful, bright, and cheerful, and dressed in rich garments. Both the happy bridegrooms made fun of the Tsarevitch Ivan. "Why alone, brother?" they laughingly said to him. "Why didst thou not bring thy wife along with thee? Was there no rag to cover her? Where couldst thou have gotten such a beauty? We are ready to wager that in all the swamps in the dominion of our father it would be hard to find another one like her." And they laughed and laughed. Lo! what a noise! The palace trembled, the guests were all frightened. Tsarevitch Ivan alone remained quiet and said: ''No danger; it is my froggy coming in her box." To the red porch came flying a golden carriage drawn by six splendid white horses, and Vassilissa, beautiful beyond all description, gently reached her hand to her husband. He led her with him to the heavy oak tables, which were covered with snow-white linen and loaded with many wonderful dishes such as are known and eaten only in the land of fairies and never anywhere else. The guests were eating and chatting gaily. Vassilissa drank some wine, and what was left in the tumbler she poured into her left sleeve. She ate some of the fried swan, and the bones she threw into her right sleeve. The wives of the two elder brothers watched her and did exactly the same. When the long, hearty dinner was over, the guests began dancing and singing. The beautiful Vassilissa came forward, as bright as a star, bowed to her sovereign, bowed to the honorable guests and danced with her husband, the happy Tsarevitch Ivan. While dancing, Vassilissa waved her left sleeve and a pretty lake appeared in the midst of the hall and cooled the air. She waved her right sleeve and white swans swam on the water. The Tsar, the guests, the servants, even the gray cat sitting in the corner, all were amazed and wondered at the beautiful Vassilissa. Her two sisters-in-law alone envied her. When their turn came to dance, they also waved their left sleeves as Vassilissa had done, and, oh, wonder! they sprinkled wine all around. They waved their right sleeves, and instead of swans the bones flew in the face of the Tsar father. The Tsar grew very angry and bade them leave the palace. In the meantime Ivan Tsarevitch watched a moment to slip away unseen. He ran home, found the frog skin, and burned it in the fire. Vassilissa, when she came back, searched for the skin, and when she could not find it her beautiful face grew sad and her bright eyes filled with tears. She said to Tsarevitch Ivan, her husband: ''Oh, dear Tsarevitch, what hast thou done? There was but a short time left for me to wear the ugly frog skin. The moment was near when we could have been happy together forever. Now I must bid thee goodbye. Look for me in a faraway country to which no one knows the roads, at the palace of Kostshei the Deathless;" and Vassilissa turned into a white swan and flew away through the window. Tsarevitch Ivan wept bitterly. Then he prayed to the almighty God, and making the sign of the cross northward, southward, eastward, and westward, he went on a mysterious journey. No one knows how long his journey was, but one day he met an old, old man. He bowed to the old man, who said: "Good-day, brave fellow. What art thou searching for, and whither art thou going?" Tsarevitch Ivan answered sincerely, telling all about his misfortune without hiding anything. ''And why didst thou burn the frog skin? It was wrong to do so. Listen now to me. Vassilissa was born wiser than her own father, and as he envied his daughter's wisdom he condemned her to be a frog for three long years. But I pity thee and want to help thee. Here is a magic ball. In whatever direction this ball rolls, follow without fear." Ivan Tsarevitch thanked the good old man, and followed his new guide, the ball. Long, very long, was his road. One day in a wide, flowery field he met a bear, a big Russian bear. Ivan Tsarevitch took his bow and was ready to shoot the bear. "Do not kill me, kind Tsarevitch," said the bear. "Who knows but that I maybe useful to thee?" And Ivan did not shoot the bear. Above in the sunny air there flew a duck, a lovely white duck. Again the Tsarevitch drew his bow to shoot it. But the duck said to him: "Do not kill me, good Tsarevitch. I certainly shall be useful to thee some day." And this time he obeyed the command of the duck and passed by. Continuing his way he saw a blinking hare. The Tsarevitch prepared an arrow to shoot it, but the gray, blinking hare said: "Do not kill me, brave Tsarevitch. I shall prove myself grateful to thee in a very short time." The Tsarevitch did not shoot the hare, but passed by. He walked farther and farther after the rolling ball, and came to the deep blue sea. On the sand there lay a fish. I do not remember the name of the fish, but it was a big fish, almost dying on the dry sand. " O Tsarevitch Ivan!" prayed the fish, "have mercy upon me and push me back into the cool sea." The Tsarevitch did so, and walked along the shore. The ball, rolling all the time, brought Ivan to a hut, a queer, tiny hut standing on tiny hen's feet. "Izboushka! Izboushka!" -- for so in Russia do they name small huts -- "Izboushka, I want thee to turn thy front to me," cried Ivan, and lo! the tiny hut turned its front at once. Ivan stepped in and saw a witch, one of the ugliest witches he could imagine. "Ho! Ivan Tsarevitch! What brings thee here?" was his greeting from the witch. "O, thou old mischief!" shouted Ivan with anger. "Is it the way in holy Russia to ask questions before the tired guest gets something to eat, something to drink, and some hot water to wash the dust off?" Baba Yaga, the witch, gave the Tsarevitch plenty to eat and drink, besides hot water to wash the dust off. Tsarevitch Ivan felt refreshed. Soon he became talkative, and related the wonderful story of his marriage. He told how he had lost his dear wife, and that his only desire was to find her. "I know all about it," answered the witch. "She is now at the palace of Kostshei the Deathless, and thou must understand that Kostshei is terrible. He watches her day and night and no one can ever conquer him. His death depends on a magic needle. That needle is within a hare; that hare is within a large trunk; that trunk is hidden in the branches of an old oak tree; and that oak tree is watched by Kostshei as closely as Vassilissa herself, which means closer than any treasure he has." Then the witch told Ivan Tsarevitch how and where to find the oak tree. Ivan hastily went to the place. But when he perceived the oak tree he was much discouraged, not knowing what to do or how to begin the work. Lo and behold! that old acquaintance of his, the Russian bear, came running along, approached the tree, uprooted it, and the trunk fell and broke. A hare jumped out of the trunk and began to run fast; but another hare, Ivan's friend, came running after, caught it and tore it to pieces. Out of the hare there flew a duck, a gray one which flew very high and was almost invisible, but the beautiful white duck followed the bird and struck its gray enemy, which lost an egg. That egg fell into the deep sea. Ivan meanwhile was anxiously watching his faithful friends helping him. But when the egg disappeared in the blue waters he could not help weeping. All of a sudden a big fish came swimming up, the same fish he had saved, and brought the egg in his mouth. How happy Ivan was when he took it! He broke it and found the needle inside, the magic needle upon which everything depended. At the same moment Kostshei lost his strength and power forever. Ivan Tsarevitch entered his vast dominions, killed him with the magic needle, and in one of the palaces found his own dear wife, his beautiful Vassilissa. He took her home and they were very happy ever after. Source: Verra Xenophontovna Kalamatiano de Blumenthal, Folk Tales from the Russian (Chicago, New York, and London: Rand, McNally and Compnay, 1903), pp. 13-26 . Type 402, "The Animal Bride"; followed by type 302, "The Giant Whose Heart Was in an Egg." Return to the table of contents . The Frog Austria/Italy A man and a woman had no children, although they would have given their lives to have some. They prayed for offspring, under any conditions. It appeared that heaven had mercy on them, but when the time came, the newborn was a female frog. Not letting themselves be distracted, the man and the woman raised her. They taught her music and all kinds of skills. Above all else the frog loved to sing, and she trained her voice and her range until one would think she was the best singer from the city. Other people had not seen the frog and thought indeed that she was an unknown singer and could not explain why she did not perform in public. One day the king's son passed by the house and heard the frog singing. He stopped and listened for a long time. He immediately fell in love with the unknown singer and approached her father with a request for permission to see her and speak with her, but the father refused. The prince heard her sing again and fell even more deeply in love with her. He demanded that her father give her to him in marriage. The father replied that he would have to ask his daughter. The frog agreed under the conditions that she be taken to the royal castle in an enclosed carriage and that she be allowed to enter the bridal chamber without being seen. The prince, his curiosity even more aroused, accepted the conditions. On the appointed day the frog rode to the royal castle in a tightly enclosed carriage and made her way to the splendid bridal chamber without being seen. She hid herself in one of the two beds that were there. The prince came that evening and was astonished when he could not find his bride. Disappointed, he went to bed. At midnight the frog crept out of the cushions and onto the prince's breast. Half asleep, he took the frog into his hand and threw her to the floor. She hopped angrily down the steps and home. The next morning the prince was sorry that he had thrown the frog to the floor, and he became sad and melancholy. Some time later he went back to the house. Hearing singing, he fell madly in love and began courting his bride anew. The frog accepted, this time without setting any conditions. She made a little carriage out of cardboard, hitched a rooster to it, and drove it herself to the royal castle. Three fairies were standing in the road. One of them had swallowed a fishbone, which stuck in her throat and was causing her great pain. When the three of them saw the frog driving by in her little carriage and cracking her whip so merrily, they all laughed out with joy. The fishbone dislodged itself from the one fairy's throat, freeing her suddenly of her pain. They approached the frog, and the first one said, "I will give you a beautiful carriage with horses and servants!" And in an instant a carriage was there with horses and servants in beautiful livery. Then the second one said, "I will give you expensive clothes and gold and silver!" And in an instant it was all there, gleaming and shimmering, and it was such a joy. Then came the third fairy, the one who had been freed of the fishbone by laughing, and she said, "I will transform you!" In that instant the frog became a beautiful maiden. She graciously thanked the three kind fairies and drove happily to the royal castle and to her jubilant and joyful wedding. Source: Christian Schneller, Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol: Ein Beitrag zur deutschen Sagenkunde (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), no. 29, pp. 82-84. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Copyright 1999. Return to the table of contents . The Frog's Bridegroom Germany Once upon a time there was a father who had three sons. He sent two of them out to find brides for themselves, but the third one, stupid Hansl, was to stay home and feed the animals. He was not satisfied with this, so the father finally said, "Just go. You can look for a bride too." So Hansl left, and he came to a great forest. On the other side of the forest there was a pond. A frog was sitting on the pond's bank, and it asked, "Now there, Hansl, where are you going?" "Oh, I'm looking for a bride!" "Marry me!" said the frog, and this was all right with Hansl, because he did not know where he might find a bride. The frog jumped into the pond, and Hansl went back home. His brothers were already there, and they wanted to know if the fool had found a bride. "Yes," said Hansl, "I have one already!" The next day the father gave each one a bundle of flax, saying, "I will give the house to the one of you whose bride can spin the most beautiful yarn in three days." Then each one left, including Hansl. The frog was again sitting on the bank of the pond. "Now there, bridegroom, where are you going?" "To you. Can you spin?" "Yes," said the frog. Just tie the flax onto my back." Hansl did this, and the frog jumped into the pond. One strand of flax was sticking out below and the other one above. "Too bad about the flax. It's gone," thought Hans, and he sadly went back home. But nonetheless, on the third day he returned to the pond. The frog was again sitting on the bank, and it asked, "Now there, bridegroom, where are you going?" "Have you spun?" "Yes," said the frog, hopped into the pond, and returned with a skein of yarn that was more beautifully spun than any other. Hans was happy, and he joyfully ran back home, and he did indeed have the most beautiful yarn. The brothers complained, and then the father said, "I will give the house to the one of you who brings home the most beautiful bride." The brothers left once again, but this time Hansl took a water jug with him. The other two wanted to know, "Why are you taking a water jug with you?" "To put my bride in." The two laughed, "He must have some beautiful bride!" The frog was already sitting next to the pond. "Now there, bridegroom, where are you going?" "Today I am coming for you!" Then the frog jumped into the pond and came back with three keys. "Go up there," it said. "There is a castle up there. One of these three keys unlocks the living room, one unlocks the stall, and one unlocks the carriage house. In the living room there are three robes: a red one, a green one, and a white one. In the stall there are two white horses, two black ones, and two brown ones. In the carriage house are three coaches: one of gold, one of silver, and one of glass. In each place you can take what you want." Once in the castle Hansl first tried on the red robe, but he did not like it: "It makes me look like a butcher." He did not like the green one either: "It makes me look like a hunter." The white one suited him well. Then he went to the stall and took the brown horses. In the carriage house he first wanted to take the golden coach, but it was too lordly for him. The silver one was too heavy, so he took the glass one. He hitched up the brown horses and drove to the pond. A beautiful young woman was standing there. She said, "You have redeemed me. If you had taken the best thing in each place then I would have had to remain a frog. And the great forest is a fruit orchard, and the pond is a rose garden. All this belongs to you. Let your brothers have the house. You can marry anyone you want to." "No, you must come with me, so that my father and my brothers can see you." So she rode off with him. The father and the brothers were amazed when they saw Hansl with the beautiful young woman in the coach. But she suddenly disappeared and flew into the air as a white dove. Hansl gave the house to his brothers. He married a woman from his estate and was very happy. And if he hasn't died, then he still must be alive. Source: Gustav Jungbauer, Böhmerwald-Märchen (Passau, 1923), no. 1. Translated by by D. L. Ashliman. Copyright 1999. Return to the table of contents . Doll i' the Grass Norway Once on a time there was a king who had twelve sons. When they were grown big he told them they must go out into the world and win themselves wives, but these wives must each be able to spin, and weave, and sew a shirt in one day, else he wouldn't have them for daughters-in-law. To each he gave a horse and a new suit of mail, and they went out into the world to look after their brides; but when they had gone a bit of the way, they said they wouldn't have Boots, their youngest brother, with them. He wasn't fit for anything. Well, Boots had to stay behind, and he didn't know what to do or whither to turn; and so he grew so downcast, he got off his horse, and sat down in the tall grass to weep. But when he had sat a little while, one of the tufts in the grass began to stir and move, and out of it came a little white thing, and when it came nearer, Boots saw it was a charming little lassie, only such a tiny bit of a thing. So the lassie went up to him, and asked if he would come down below and see "Doll i' the Grass." Yes, he'd be very happy; and so he went. Now, when he got down, there sat Doll i' the Grass on a chair. She was so lovely and so smart, and she asked Boots wither he was going, and what was his business. So he told her how there were twelve brothers of them, and how the king had given them horse and mail, and said they must each go out into the world and find them a wife who could spin, and weave, and sew a shirt in a day. "But if you'll only say at once you'll be my wife, I'll not go a step farther," said Boots to Doll i' the Grass. Well, she was willing enough, and so she made haste and span, and wove, and sewed the shirt, but it was so tiny, tiny little. It wasn't longer than so ---- long. So Boots set off home with it, but when he brought it out he was almost ashamed, it was so small. Still the king said he should have her, and so Boots set off, glad and happy to fetch his little sweetheart. So when he got to Doll i' the Grass, he wished to take her up before him on his horse; but she wouldn't have that, for she said she would sit and drive along in a silver spoon, and that she had two small white horses to draw her. So off they set, he on his horse and she on her silver spoon, and the two horses that drew her were two tiny white mice. But Boots always kept the other side of the road, he was so afraid lest he should ride over her, she was so little. So when they had gone a bit of the way, they came to a great piece of water. Here Boots' horse got frightened, and shied across the road and upset the spoon, and Doll i' the Grass tumbled into the water. Then Boots got so sorrowful, because he didn't know how to get her out again. But in a little while up came a merman with her, and now she was as well and full grown as other men and women, and far lovelier than she had been before. So he took her up before him on his horse, and rode home. When Boots got home all his brothers had come back, each with his sweetheart, but these were all so ugly, and foul, and wicked, that they had done nothing but fight with one another on the way home, and on their heads they had a kind of hat that was daubed over with tar and soot, and so the rain had run down off the hats onto their faces, till they got far uglier and nastier than they had been before. When his brothers saw Boots and his sweetheart, they were all as jealous as jealous could be of her; but the king was so overjoyed with them both, that he drove all the others away, and so boots held his wedding feat with Doll i' the Grass, and after that they lived well and happily together a long, long time, and if they're not dead, why they're alive still. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: David Douglas, 1888), pp. 374-376. This tale differs from others in this group in that the "creature" discovered by the hero in his search for a bride is not a creepy, crawly thing, but rather a beautiful -- but diminutive -- human (or possibly elfin) female. However, in all other aspects this story follows the outline of a traditional type 402 folktale. Link to the above tale in Norwegian: Dukken i gresset av Peter Christen Asbjørnsen og Jørgen Moe. Return to the table of contents . The She-Wolf Croatia There was an enchanted mill, so that no one could stay there, because a she-wolf always haunted it. A soldier went once into the mill to sleep. He made a fire in the parlor, went up into the garret above, bored a hole with an auger in the floor, and peeped down into the parlor. A she-wolf came in and looked about the mill to see whether she could find anything to eat. She found nothing, and then went to the fire, and said, "Skin down! Skin down! Skin down!" She raised herself upon her hind-legs, and her skin fell down. She took the skin, and hung it on a peg, and out of the wolf came a damsel. The damsel went to the fire, and fell asleep there. He came down from the garret, took the skin, nailed it fast to the mill-wheel, then came into the mill, shouted over her, and said, "Good morning, damsel! How do you do? She began to scream, "Skin on me! Skin on me! Skin on me!" But the skin could not come down, for it was fast nailed. The pair married and had two children. As soon as the elder son got to know that his mother was a wolf, he said to her, "Mamma! Mamma! I have heard that you are a wolf." His mother replied, "What nonsense are you talking! How can you say that I am a wolf?" The father of the two children went one day into the field to plow, and his son said, "Papa, let me, too, go with you." His father said, "Come." When they had come to the field, the son asked his father, "Papa, is it true that our mother is a wolf?" The father said, "It is." The son inquired, "And where is her skin?" His father said, "There it is, on the mill-wheel." No sooner had the son got home, than he said at once to his mother, "Mamma! Mamma! You are a wolf! I know where your skin is." His mother asked him, "Where is my skin?" He said, "There, on the mill-wheel." His mother said to him, "Thank you, sonny, for rescuing me." Then she went away, and was never heard of more. Source: A. H. Wratislaw, Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources (London: Elliot Stock, 1889), pp. 290-291. The motif of the stolen skin is also found in many tales from the Swan Maiden and the Mermaid Wife groups. "The She-Wolf" is, of course, a variant of the many werewolf legends that exist throughout Europe. Link to additional werewolf legends . Return to the table of contents. Links to additional tales about animal brides The Three Feathers (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Children's and Household Tales, no. 63). The German text of the above tale: Die drei Federn von den Brüdern Grimm. This is a text from the Projekt Gutenberg-DE. The Poor Miller's Boy and the Cat (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Children's and Household Tales, no. 106). The German text of the above tale: Der arme Müllerbursch und das Kätzchen von den Brüdern Grimm. This is a text from the Projekt Gutenberg-DE. The Frog (Italy). This link will take you to Andrew Lang's The Violet Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1901) at the University of Virginia's electronic text center. Oisin in Tir na n-Og . Oisin (also spelled Ossian), the legendary Celtic hero and poet, marries a princess who through a Druidic spell has been cursed with the head of a pig. Return to: The table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Animal Brides and Animal Bridegrooms : an index page of folktales about marriage with a beast. Revised January 5, 2020. American Indian Animal Brides and Bridegrooms Animal Brides and Animal Bridegrooms Tales Told by North American Indians selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2003 Contents The Bear Who Married a Woman (Tsimshian). The Girl Who Married the Crow (Thompson [Ntlakyapamuk]). The Woman Who Became a Horse (Thompson [Ntlakyapamuk]). The Woman Who Became a Horse (Skidi Pawnee). The Bear Woman (Okanagon). The Fish Man (Salish). The Man Who Married a Bear (Nez Percé). Of the Woman Who Loved a Serpent Who Lived in a Lake (Passamaquoddy). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Bear Who Married a Woman Tsimshian Once upon a time there lived a widow of the tribe of the Gispaxlâ'ts. Many men tried to marry her daughter, but she declined them all. The mother said, "When a man comes to marry you, feel of the palms of his hands. If they are soft, decline him. If they are rough, accept him." She meant that she wanted to have for a son-in-law a man skillful in building canoes. Her daughter obeyed her commands and refused the wooings of all young men. One night a youth came to her bed. The palms of his hands were very rough, and therefore she accepted his suit. Early in the morning, however, he had suddenly disappeared, even before she had seen him. When her mother arose early in the morning and went out, she found a halibut on the beach in front of the house, although it was midwinter. The following evening the young man came back, but disappeared again before the dawn of the day. In the morning the widow found a seal in front of the house. Thus they lived for some time. The young woman never saw the face of her husband; but every morning she found an animal on the beach, every day a larger one. Thus the widow came to be very rich. She was anxious to see her son-in-law, and one day she waited until he arrived. Suddenly she saw a red bear emerge from the water. He carried a whale on each side, and put them down on the beach. As soon as he noticed that he was observed, he was transformed into a rock, which may be seen up to this day. He was a supernatural being of the sea. Source: Franz Boas, Tsimshian Mythology (Washington, DC: United States Government Printing Office, 1916), p. 19. The Tsmimshian Indians are native to the coastal regions of British Columbia and southern Alaska. Return to the table of contents . The Girl Who Married the Crow Thompson (Ntlakyapamuk) A girl belonging to a village of four underground lodges near Lytton refused all suitors who had come from Spences Bridge, Nicola, Kamloops, and Lillooet, although they brought as marriage gifts robes, dentalia , and other valuables. Her parents and the chief of the village were angry with her for refusing so many good suitors. Therefore she became sad, and would have committed suicide had not her brothers talked kindly with her. One morning, when she had gone to the river to bathe and to draw water for the house, she thought, "I wish a man from far away would come and take me!" Crow-Man, who lived at the mouth of the river, heard her. He said, "A pretty girl far away wants a husband. I wish I could go to her!" At once a man appeared to him and said, "I will help you, if you will do as I direct you. You must shut your eyes and pray to me, and I shall grant your desire. Now begin!" Crow-Man knelt down and prayed that he might be enabled to go to the girl. His eyes closed while he was praying. Then his helper told him to open his eyes and look at himself. He saw that he had been transformed into a crow, with wings and with black feathers all over his body. He was afraid, and remained silent. His helper told him that he would not be a crow always, but only for the journey to the girl. He said, "Now, fly up the river! And early in the morning you will see a girl bathing near four underground lodges. She is the wife that you desire!" It was springtime, when crows come up the river. Three mornings the girl had repeated her supplication for a husband. Early the fourth morning she went to the accustomed place, put down her bark water baskets, took off her clothes, and went to bathe. She had just made her supplication when a crow came up the river and passed close to her head. She called him nasty names and said, "Why do you fly so close to my head, you black ugly bird? You will blind me with the dirt of your feet." It was Crow-Man, who was acting under the instructions of his helper. He flew past out of sight, alighted on the ground, shut his eyes, and prayed. When he opened his eyes, he was a man again. He walked back to where the girl was washing herself in the water, and sat down on her clothes. Presently she saw him, and asked him to leave. She pleaded with him to go away, but he paid no heed. When she had asked him four times, he replied, "If you will become my wife, I will release your clothes." She assented, saying, "You must be my husband, for you have seen my naked body." Crow-Man shut his eyes and prayed. When he opened them again, a large beaverskin robe was there, and a dugout cedar canoe. He gave the robe to his wife. They embarked in the canoe and went downstream. As the girl did not return, the people looked for her. They found her clothes and the water baskets, and thought that she had drowned herself. She lived in her husband's country for a while, and bore a son to him. When the boy was growing up, he wished to see his grandparents. Every day he asked for them. Finally his parents determined to take him to see them. They went up the river in a canoe loaded with presents of many kinds, and eventually reached Lytton. They moored their canoe at the watering place. The weather was warm, and the woman's parents were living in a mat tent. Her younger sister came down to draw water and discovered them. She went back with the news; and the parents cleaned their house, and made ready to receive their son-in-law. He gave his father-in-law all the presents, and the people danced to welcome them. He made up his mind to live there and became an adopted member of the tribe. Source: Franz Boas, Folk-Tales of Salishan and Sahaptin Tribes = Memoirs of the American Folk-Lore Society , vol. 11 (Lancaster and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1917), pp. 30-32. This tale was collected by James A. Teit. The place names mentioned in this legend (Lytton, Spences Bridge, Nicola, Kamloops, and Lillooet) are all in southern British Columbia. Lytton is at the junction of the Thompson and Fraser rivers. Return to the table of contents . The Woman Who Became a Horse Thompson (Ntlakyapamuk) A chief had many horses, and among them a stallion which his wife often rode. The woman and stallion became enamoured of each other and cohabited. The woman grew careless of her household duties and always wanted to look after the horses. When the people moved camp, and the horses were brought in, it was noticed that the stallion made right for the woman and sniffed about her as stallions do with mares. After this she was watched. When her husband learned the truth, he shot the stallion. The woman cried and would not go to bed. At daybreak she was gone, no one knew where. About a year after this it was discovered that she had gone off with some wild horses. One day when the people were traveling over a large open place they saw a band of horses, and the woman among them. She had partly changed into a horse. Her pubic hair had grown so long that it resembled a tail. She also had much hair on her body, and the hair of her head had grown to resemble a horse's mane. Her arms and legs had also changed considerably; but her face was still human, and bore some resemblance to her original self. The chief sent some young men to chase her. All the wild horses ran away, but she could not run so fast as they, and was run down and lassoed. She was brought into her husband's lodge; and the people watched her for some time, trying to tame her, but she continued to act and whinny like a horse. At last they let her free. The following year they saw her again. She had become almost entirely horse, and had a colt by her side. She had many children afterwards. Source: Franz Boas, Folk-Tales of Salishan and Sahaptin Tribes = Memoirs of the American Folk-Lore Society , vol. 11 (Lancaster and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1917), p. 53. This tale was collected by James A. Teit. A note by Teit about his source: "The narrator said he thought there was a little more to this story, but he did not remember it. He said the story was common to both the Thompson and the Okanagon. He had first heart it himself from an Okanagon over fifty years ago; but it was probably in vogue among the Thompson before that, although he had not heard it. Return to the table of contents . The Woman Who Became a Horse Skidi Pawnee There was a village, and the men decided to go on a warpath. So these men started, and they journeyed for several days toward the south. They came to a thickly wooded country. They found wild horses, and among them was a spotted pony. One man caught the spotted pony and took care of it. He took it home, and instructed his wife to look after it, as if it were their chief. This she did, and, further, she liked the horse very much. She took it where there was good grass. In the winter time she cut young cottonwood shoots for it, so that the horse was always fat. In the night, if it was stormy, she pulled a lot of dry grass, and when she put the blanket over the horse and tied it up, she stuffed the grass under the blanket, so the horse never got cold. It was always fine and sleek. One summer evening she went to where she had tied the horse, and she met a fine-looking man, who had on a buffalo robe with a spotted horse pictured on it. She liked him; he smelt finely. She followed him until they came to where the horse had been, and the man said, "You went with me. It is I who was a horse." She was glad, for she liked the horse. For several years they were together, and the woman gave birth, and it was a spotted pony. When the pony was born, the woman found she had a tail like that of a horse. She also had long hair. When the colt sucked, the woman stood up. For several years they roamed about, and had more ponies, all spotted. At home the man mourned for his lost wife. He could not make out why should go off. People went on a hunt many years afterward, and they came across these spotted ponies. People did not care to attack them, for among them was a strange looking animal. But, as they came across them now and then, they decided to catch them. They were hard to catch, but at last they caught them, all but the woman, for she could run fast; but as they caught her children, she gave in and was caught. People said, "This is the woman who was lost." And some said, "No, it is not." Her husband was sent for, and he recognized her. He took his bow and arrows out and shot her dead, for he did not like to see her with the horse's tail. The other spotted ponies were kept, and as they increased, they were spotted. So the people had many spotted ponies. Source: George A. Dorsey, Traditions of the Skidi Pawnee = Memoirs of the American Folk-Lore Society , vol. 8 (Boston and New York: Published for the American Folk-Lore Society by Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1904), pp. 294-295. Return to the table of contents . The Bear Woman Okanagon It was late fall, and people were in the mountains hunting. Six people were living together: a man and his wife, his parents, and his two sisters. One day when out hunting, the man came on a patch of lily roots. On his return home he said to his wife, "I saw a fine patch of large lilies. Tomorrow morning we shall move there and stay for a few days, so that you can dig them." They set up a lodge near the place. And on the following morning early, on his way to hunt, he showed his wife the place and left her there to dig. In the afternoon a large grizzly bear appeared at the place. The woman was intent on her work and did not notice the bear until he was close to her. He said to her, "I want you to be my wife." She agreed, for she knew he would kill her if she refused. He took her on his back and carried her to his house. Towards evening the hunter returned carrying a load of deer meat. His wife was not there. He thought, "She is late and will come soon." He roasted meat for both of them. He ate, and then took his bow and arrows and went in search of his wife. He saw where she had been digging roots. He called, but received no answer. It grew dark, and he returned to his camp. He could not sleep. At daybreak he went out again. He saw the tracks of the grizzly bear going away, but no tracks of his wife leaving the spot. He thought she might have gone to his parents' camp, or the bear might have killed her, but he saw neither her tracks nor signs of a struggle with the bear. He went to the camp. His father told him that she had not arrived. He related what he had seen, and his father said, "The grizzly bear has not killed her. He has married her." The man could neither sleep nor eat. At last the fourth night he slept, for he was very tired. His wife appeared to him in a dream and said, "The grizzly has taken me." She told him where the bear's house was. She said, "Every morning at daybreak he takes me to dig roots at a certain place. If you are strong, you can kill him; but he is very fierce and endowed with magic power. You must fix your arrows as I direct you, and sit where I tell you. I have prepared a hiding place for you, where you may sit on a boulder. Prepare medicine to wash me with, for otherwise, when the bear dies, I shall die too through his power. If he kills you, I shall kill myself. Get young fir-tops and konêlps [ veratrum californicum , durand], and soak them in water. With these you must rub me. Prepare one arrow by rubbing it with fat of snakes, and the other arrow anoint with rattlesnake poison. Sit down on the rock in the place that I have prepared; and on the fourth morning, when I bring the bear past close to the rock, shoot him in the throat." The hunter prepared everything as directed. He made two new arrows with detachable foreshafts. He made them very carefully, and put good stone heads on them. He searched for snakes, and anointed the foreshafts of his arrows and the points. Early in the morning he was at the place indicated. The grizzly bear's house was a cave in a cliff, and at daybreak the man saw the smoke from his fire coming out through a hole in the top of the cliff. Soon he saw his wife and the bear emerge from the entrance. Her face was painted, and she carried her root digger. She dug roots, and the bear gathered them. The man returned home and told what he had seen to his father, who said, "I have a strong guardian spirit, and I shall protect you. Do not be afraid. Act according the directions your wife has given to you in your dream, and kill the bear." On the fourth morning at daybreak he was sitting on the rock. His wife and the bear drew near. She was digging in circles, and the grizzly bear followed her. When she made the fourth circle, she passed quite close to the rock. He aimed an arrow at his wife, and she cried, "Husbands never kill their wives!" He lowered his bow and laughed. The bear stood up and was angry. He abused the woman, calling her bad names. Just then he was close to the rock. The hunter spoke to him, and the bear turned to look at the hunter, who shot him right in the throat. The grizzly bear tried to pull out the arrow, but could remove only the shaft. He rushed at the hunter, but could not reach him. The hunter shot his second arrow with such great force that the shaft fell off. The bear fell over and died. Then his wife swooned, and would have died through the bear's power, had not her husband rubbed her with fir-tops and veratrum . She revived and stood up. She said, "I warn you not to have connection with me. The influence of the bear is still over me. Build a lodge of fir brush for me some distance away from the people. Let your sisters feed me, and wash me with fir and veratrum leaves. You may speak to me from a distance. Next spring, when the snow is almost gone, I shall be your wife again." In the spring she washed at a stream, using hot water, and her sisters-in-law rubbed her with fir boughs. The hunter also washed. Then she went into his lodge, and lived with him as before. Source: Franz Boas, Folk-Tales of Salishan and Sahaptin Tribes = Memoirs of the American Folk-Lore Society , vol. 11 (Lancaster and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1917), pp. 90-92. This tale was collected by James A. Teit. The Okanagon tribe belongs to the Salish group. Their territory included present-day British Columbia, northern Washington and Idaho, and western Montana. Return to the table of contents . The Fish-Man Salish Somewhere near the mouth of the Fraser River lived a girl who had refused all suitors. After a while a man came to visit her, and lay with her at night. The girl said to him, "You must stay until daylight, and show yourself to my parents." He answered, "No, I am too poor. Your people would not like me." As he continued to come every night, the girl told her parents, and they were very angry. Then Fish-Man caused the sea to recede for many miles from the village. He let all the freshwater streams dry up, and no rain fall. The animals became thirsty, and left the country. The people could get no fish, no game, and no water to drink. The girl told the people, "My lover has done this, because you were wroth with him and refused him." Then the people made a long walk of planks over the mud to the edge of the sea. At the end of this they built a large platform of planks, which they covered with mats. They heaped many woolen blankets on it. Then they dressed the girl in a fine robe, combed and oiled her hair, painted her face, and put down on her head. Then they placed her on the top of the blankets and left her there. At once the sky became overcast, rain fell, the springs burst out, the streams ran, and the sea came in. The people watched until the sea rose, and floated the platform with the blankets. They saw a man climb up beside the girl They stood up; and the girl called, "Now all is well. I shall visit you soon." Night came on, and they saw them no more. In two days she came back, and told the people, "I live below the sea, in the fish country. The houses there are just the same as here, and the people live in the same way." She returned again with her husband bringing presents of fish. She said, "Henceforth people here shall always be able to catch plenty of fish." Once more she came to show them her newly born child. After that she returned to the sea, and was never seen again. Source: Franz Boas, Folk-Tales of Salishan and Sahaptin Tribes = Memoirs of the American Folk-Lore Society , vol. 11 (Lancaster and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1917), p. 131. This tale was collected by James A. Teit. A note by Teit concerning his source: "This myth ... I collected at Hope [on the Fraser River], where interior influence is rather strong. Similar versions are said to be current among the Spuzzum Indians. The narrator was an old man who could speak some Thompson. The Fraser River flows through British Columbia, Canada, into the Strait of Georgia at the site of present-day Vancouver. Return to the table of contents . The Man Who Married a Bear Nez Percé A man name Five-Times-Surrounded-in-War (Pákatamápaütx) lived with his father at Asotin, and in the spring of the year the youth would go away from home and lose himself till fall. He would tell no one where he had been. Now, he really was accustomed to go up the Little Salmon (Hune'he) branch of the Grande Ronde River to fish for salmon. It was the second year that he went there that this thing happened. A bear girl lived just below the forks of Asotin Creek, and from that place she used to go over onto the Little Salmon, where Five-Times-Surrounded-in-War had a camp made of boughs. One day, after fishing, he was lying in his camp not quite asleep. He heard the noise of someone walking in the woods. He heard the noise of walking go all around the camp. The grizzly-bear girl was afraid to go near the man, and soon she went away and left him Next morning he tried to track her; and while he could see the tracks in the grass, he could not tell what it was that made them. Next day the youth hunted deer in order to have dried meat for the winter; and that evening the grizzly-bear girl, dressed up as a human being, came into his camp. Five-Times-Surrounded-in-War had just finished his supper when he heard the footfalls, and, looking out into the forest, he saw a fine girl come into the open. He wondered if this person was what he had heard the night before. He asked the girl to tell him what she wanted, and she came and sat down beside him. The youth was bashful and could not talk to her, although she was a pretty girl. Then he said, "Where are you camping?" And she told him that three days before she had come from the forks of Asotin Creek. "I came to see you, and to find out whether or not you would marry me." Now, Five-Times-Surrounded-in-War did not know of anyone who lived above the mouth of Asotin Creek, and for that reason he told the girl he would take home his meat and salmon and return in ten days. So the girl went back to the forks of Asotin Creek, and the youth to the mouth of the stream with his meat. Then they returned and met; and the youth fell deeply in love with the girl, and married her. So they lived in his camp until she said to him, "Now we will go to my home." And when they arrived, he saw that she had a fine supply of winter food -- dried salmon, dried meat, camas, kaus , sanitx , serviceberries, and huckleberries. But what most surprised him was that they went into a hole in the ground, because then he knew she must be a bear. It grew late in the fall, and they had to stay in the cave, for the girl could not go out. In the dead of winter they were still in the cave when the snow began to settle and harden. One night, near midnight, when both were asleep in their beds, the grizzly-bear girl dreamed, and roared out in her sleep. She told her husband to build a fire and make a light. Then the grizzly-bear girl sang a song, and blood came running from her mouth. She said, "This blood you see coming from my mouth is not my blood. It is the blood of men. Down at the mouth of Asotin Creek the hunters are making ready for a bear hunt. They have observed this cave, and five hunters are coming here to see if a bear is in it." The grizzly-bear girl in her sleep knew that the hunters were making ready. Next morning the five hunters went up to that place, and that same morning the grizzly-bear girl donned a different dress from what she usually wore, a dress that was painted red. She told her husband, "Soon after the sun leaves the earth, these hunters will be here, and then I will do my killing." They arrived, and Five-Times-Surrounded-in-War heard them talking. He heard them say that something must be living in the cave. When the first hunter came to the door of the cave, the grizzly-bear girl rushed out and killed him. Then the four other hunters went home and told the news, and ten hunters made ready to come up and kill the bear. They camped close by for the night. About midnight the grizzly-bear girl had another dream. She sang a song, and told her husband, "I will leave you as soon as the sun is up. This blood you see coming out of my mouth is my own blood. The hunters are close by, and will soon be here." Soon the youth could hear the hunters talking. Then they took a pole and hung an empty garment near the mouth of the cave, and the bear rushed out at this decoy. When she turned to go back, they fired, and killed her. The youth in the cave heard the hunters say, "Watch out! There must be another one in the cave." So he decided he would go out; and when he came into the light, the hunters recognized him. He went home with them and told the story. This was the year before the French trappers came, and Five-Times-Surrounded-in-War went away with them. In a year he returned, and after that he disappeared. Source: Franz Boas, Folk-Tales of Salishan and Sahaptin Tribes = Memoirs of the American Folk-Lore Society , vol. 11 (Lancaster and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1917), pp. 198-200. This tale was collected by Herbert J. Spinden. According to Spinden, "this is supposed to be a true tale of recent times, and not a myth." Asotin Creek is in southeastern Washington. It flows into the Snake River near Lewiston, Idaho. The Grande Ronde River is mostly in northeastern Oregon and also flows into the Snake River. Return to the table of contents . Of the Woman Who Loved a Serpent Who Lived in a Lake Passamaquoddy Of old times. There was a very beautiful woman. She turned the heads of all the men. She married, and her husband died very soon after, but she immediately took another. Within a single year she had five husbands, and these were the cleverest and handsomest and bravest in the tribe. And then she married again. This, the sixth, was such a silent man that he passed for a fool. But he was wiser than people thought. He came to believe, by thinking it over, that this woman had some strange secret. He resolved to find it out. So he watched her all the time. He kept his eye on her by night and by day. It was summer, and she proposed to go into the woods to pick berries, and to camp there. By and by, when they were in the forest, she suggested that he should go on to the spot where they intended to remain and build a wigwam. He said that he would do so. But he went a little way into the woods and watched her. As soon as she believed that he was gone, she rose and walked rapidly onwards. He followed her, unseen. She went on, till, in a deep, wild place among the rocks, she came to a pond. She sat down and sang a song. A great foam, or froth, rose to the surface of the water. Then in the foam appeared the tail of a serpent. The creature was of immense size. The woman, who had laid aside all her garments, embraced the serpent, which twined around her, enveloping all her limbs and body in his folds. The husband watched it all. He now understood that, the venom of the serpent having entered the woman, she had saved her life by transferring it to others, who died. He went on to the camping ground and built a wigwam. He made up two beds. He built a fire. His wife came. She was earnest that there should be only a single bed. He sternly bade her lie by herself. She was afraid of him. She laid down and went to sleep. He arose three times during the night to replenish the fire. Every time he called her, and there was no answer. In the morning he shook her. She was dead. She had died by the poison of the serpent. They sunk her in the pond where the snake lived. Source: Charles G. Leland, The Algonquin Legends of New England; or, Myths and Folk Lore of the Micmac, Passamaquoddy, and Penobscot Tribes (Boston: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1884), pp. 273-274. The Passamaquoddy Indians formerly occupied an area between present-day Maine and New Brunswick. Today they live primarily in Maine. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 19, 2013. The Ant and the Grasshopper The Ant and the Grasshopper fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 280A, Perry Index number 373, and similar stories about work, reward, and charity, compiled and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2016-2018 Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise: Which having no guide, overseer, or ruler, provideth her meat in the summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest. Proverbs 6:6-8 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Fable of the Ant and of the Sygalle [Cigala, Grasshopper] (Aesop, Caxton, 1484). An Ant and a Grasshopper (Anianus, L'Estrange, 1692). An Ant Formerly a Man (Aesop, L'Estrange, 1692). The Ant and the Grasshopper (Aesop, Croxall, 1775). The Ant and the Grasshopper (Aesop, Bewick, 1818). The Ant and the Grasshopper (Aesop, James, 1848). The Ant and the Grasshopper (Aesop, Jacobs, 1894). The Grasshopper and the Ants (Aesop, Jones, 1912). The Grasshopper and the Ant (La Fontaine, 1668). The Grasshopper and the Ant (Ambrose Bierce, 1899). The Ants and the Grasshopper (Ambrose Bierce, 1899). The Story of the Little Red Hen (USA, 1874). Links to related sites . The Fable of the Ant and of the Sygalle [Cigala, Grasshopper] Aesop (Caxton, 1484) It is good to purveye him self in the somer season of such thynges / wherof he shall myster and have nede in wynter season / As thow mayst see by this present fable / of the sygalle / whiche in the wynter tyme went and demaunded of the ant somme of her Corne for to ete / And thenne the ant sayd to the sygall / what hast thow done al the somer last passed / And the sygalle ansuerd / I have songe / And after sayd the ante to her / of my corne shallt not thou nonef have / and yf thow hast songe alle the somer / danse now in wynter / And therfore there is one tyme for to doo some labour and werk / And one tyme for to have rest / For he that werketh not he doth no good / shal have ofte at his teeth grete cold and lacke at his nede / Source (books.google.com): The Fables of Aesop , as first printed by William Caxton in 1484 with those of Avian, Alfonso, and Poggio, now again edited and induced by Joseph Jacobs. Vol. 2: Text and Glossary (London: David Nutt, 1889), no. 17, p. 123 . Source (Internet Archive): The Fables of Aesop , as first printed by William Caxton in 1484 with those of Avian, Alfonso, and Poggio, now again edited and induced by Joseph Jacobs. Vol. 2: Text and Glossary (London: David Nutt, 1889), no. 17, p. 123 . Return to the table of contents . An Ant and a Grasshopper Anianus (L'Estrange, 1692) As the ants were airing their provisions one winter, up comes a hungry grasshopper to 'em, and begs a charity. They told him that he should have wrought in summer, if he would not have wanted in winter. "Well," says the grasshopper, "but I was not idle neither; for I sung out the whole season." "Nay then," said they, "you shall e'en do well to make a merry year on't, and dance in winter to the tune that you sung in summer." The moral: A life of sloth is the life of a brute; but action and industry is the bus'ness of a great, a wife, and a good man. Reflexion: Here's a reproof to men of sensuality, and pleasure. The moral preaches industry, and beats down sloth, and shews that after-wit is nothing worth. It must be an industrious youth that provides against the inconveniencies, and necessities of old age; and he that fools away the one, must either beg or starve in the other. "Go to the ant thou sluggard," says the wise-man, which in few words summs up the moral of this fable. 'Tis hard to say of laziness, or luxury, whether it be the more scandalous, or the more dangerous evil. The very soul of the slothful, does effectually but lie drowzing in his body, and the whole man is totally given up to his senses: whereas the profit and the comfort of industry, is substantial, firm, and lasting; the blessings of security and plenty go along with it, and it is never out of season. What's the grasshopper's entertainment now, but a summer's song? A vain and an empty pleasure? Let it be understood, however, that we are not to pass avarice upon the world under the title of good husbandry, and thrift, and under that cover to extinguish charity by not distributing the fruits of it. We are in the first place, to consult our own necessities, but we are then to consider in the second place that the necessities of our neighbours have a Christian right to a part of what we have to spare. For the common offices of humanity are as much duties of self-preservation, as what every individual contributes to its own well-being. It is, in short, the great interest and obligation of particulars, to advance the good of the community. The stress of this moral lies upon the preference of honest labour to idleness; and the refusal of relief, on the one hand, is intended only for a reproof to the inconsiderate loss of opportunity on the other. This does not hinder yet, but that the ants, out of their abundance, ought to have reliev'd the grasshopper in her distress, though 'twas her own fault that brought her to't. For if one man's faults could discharge another man of his duty, there would be no longer any place left for the common offices of society. To conclude, we have our failings, every mother's child of us, and the improvidence of my neighbour must not make me inhumane. The ant did well to reprove the grasshopper for her slothfulness; but she did ill then to refuse her a charity in her distress. Source (Internet Archive): Roger L'Estrange Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and Reflections (London: Printed for R. Sare, et al., 1692), no. 217, p. 189 . Source (books.google.com): Roger L'Estrange Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and Reflections (London: Printed for R. Sare, et al., 1699), no. 217, p. 197 . L'Estrange attributes this fable to Anianus [Avianus], a Latin fable writer who lived about 400 AD. Link the text of this fable in Latin: De Formica et Cicada . Return to the table of contents . An Ant Formerly a Man Aesop (L'Estrange, 1692) The ant, or pismire, was formerly a husbandman that secretly filch'd away his neighbour's goods and corn and stor'd all up in his own barn. He drew a general curse upon his head for't, and Jupiter, as a punishment, and for the credit of mankind, turn'd him into a pismire; but this change of shape wrought no alteration, either of mind or of manners; for he keeps the same humour and nature to this very day. The Moral: That which some call good husbandry, industry, and providence, others call raking, avarice, and oppression: So that the vertue and the vice in many cases are hardly distinguishable but by the name. Source (Internet Archive): Roger L'Estrange Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and Reflections (London: Printed for R. Sare, et al., 1692), no. 188, p. 158 . Source (books.google.com): Roger L'Estrange Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and Reflections (London: Printed for R. Sare, et al., 1699), no. 188, p. 166 . This fable is number 166 in the Perry Index , and is not included in most collections of Aesopic fables. Return to the table of contents . The Ant and the Grasshopper Aesop (Croxall, 1775) In the winter season, a commonwealth of ants was busily employed in the management and preservation of their corn; which they exposed to the air, in heaps, round about the avenues of their little country habitation. A grasshopper, who had chanced to outlive the summer, and was ready to starve with cold and hunger, approached them with great humility, and begged that they would relieve his necessity, with one grain of wheat or rye. One of the ants asked him, how he had disposed of his time in summer, that he had not taken pains, and laid in a stock, as they had done. "Alas, gentlemen," says he, "I passed away the time merrily and pleasantly, in drinking, singing, and dancing, and never once thought of winter." "If that be the case," replied the ant, laughing, "all I have to say is, that they who drink, sing, and dance in summer, must starve in winter." The Application: As summer is the season of the year in which the industrious and laborious husbandman gathers and lays up such fruits as may supply his necessities in winter; so youth and manhood are the times of life which we should employ and bestow in laying in such a stock of all kind of necessaries, as many suffice for the craving demands of helpless old age. Yet notwithstanding the truth of this, there are many of those which we call rational creatures, who live in a method quite opposite to it, and make it their business to squander away in a profuse prodigality, whatever they get in their younger days: as if the infirmity of age would require so supplies to support it; or, at least, would find them administered to it in some miraculous way. From this fable we learn the admirable lesson, never to lose any present opportunity of providing against the future evils and accidents of life. While health and the flower and vigour of our age remain firm and entire, let us lay them out to the best advantage; that when the latter days take hold of us, and spoil us of our strength and abilities, we may have a store moderately sufficient to subsist upon, which we laid up in the morning of our age. Source: Fables of Æsop and Others , translated into English with instructive applications, and a print before each fable, by Samuel Croxall, tenth edition, carefully revised and improved (London: Printed for W. Strahan et al., 1775), no. 121, pp. 205-206 . Return to the table of contents . The Ant and the Grasshopper Aesop (Bewick, 1818) A commonwealth of ants, having, after a busy summer, provided everything for their wants in the winter, were about shutting themselves up for that dreary season, when a grasshopper in great distress, and in dread of perishing with cold and hunger, approached their avenues, and with great humility begged they would relieve his wants, and permit him to take shelter in any corner of their comfortable mansion. One of the ants asked him how he had disposed of his time in summer, that he had not taken pains and laid in a stock, as they had done. "Alas! my friends," says he, "I passed away the time merrily and pleasantly, in drinking, singing, and dancing, and never once thought of winter. "If that be the case," replied the ant, "all I have to say is this: that they who drink, sing, and dance in the summer, run a great risk of starving in the winter." Application: As summer is the season in which the industrious laborious husbandman lays up his supplies for the winter, so youth and manhood are the times of life which we should employ in laying in such a stock as may suffice for helpless old age; yet there are many whom we call rational creatures, who squander away in a profuse prodigality, whatever they get in their younger days, as if the infirmity of age would require no supplies to support it, or at least would find them administered to it in some miraculous way. From this fable we learn this admirable lesson, never to lose the present opportunity of fairly and honestly providing against the future evils and accidents of life; and while health and the vigour of our faculties remain firm and entire, to lay them out to the best advantage; so that when age and infirmities despoil us of our strength and abilities, we may not have to bewail that we have neglected to provide for the wants of our latter days: for it should always be remembered, that "a youth of revels breeds an age of care," and that temperance in youth lays the foundation of health and comfort for old age. Source (Internet Archive): The Fables of Aesop and Others , with designs on wood, by Thomas Bewick (Newcastle: Printed by R. Walker for T. Bewick and Son, 1818), pp. 307-308 . Source (books.google.com): The Fables of Aesop and Others , with designs on wood, by Thomas Bewick (Newcastle: Printed by R. Walker for T. Bewick and Son, 1818), pp. 307-308 . Return to the table of contents . The Ant and the Grasshopper Aesop, James, 1848 On a cold frosty day an ant was dragging out some of the corn which he had laid up in summer time, to dry it. A grasshopper, half-perished with hunger, besought the ant to give him a morsel of it to preserve his life. "What were you doing," said the ant, "this last summer?" "Oh," said the grasshopper, "I was not idle. I kept singing all the summer long." Said the ant, laughing and shutting up his granary, "Since you could sing all summer, you may dance all winter." Winter finds out what summer lays by. Source (Internet Archive): Æsop's Fables: A New Version, Chiefly from Original Sources , by Thomas James, with more than 100 illustrations designed by John Tenniel (London: John Murray, 1848), fable 12, p. 12 . Source (books.google.com): Æsop's Fables: A New Version, Chiefly from Original Sources , by Thomas James, with more than 100 illustrations designed by John Tenniel (London: John Murray, 1848), fable 12, p. 12 . Return to the table of contents . The Ant and the Grasshopper Aesop (Jacobs, 1894) In a field one summer's day a grasshopper was hopping about, chirping and singing to its heart's content. An ant passed by, bearing along with great toil an ear of corn he was taking to the nest. "Why not come and chat with me," said the grasshopper, "instead of toiling and moiling in that way?" "I am helping to lay up food for the winter," said the ant, "and recommend you to do the same." "Why bother about winter?" said the grasshopper. "We have got plenty of food at present." But the ant went on its way and continued its toil. When the winter came the grasshopper had no food, and found itself dying of hunger, while it saw the ants distributing every day corn and grain from the stores they had collected in the summer. Then the grasshopper knew: It is best to prepare for the days of necessity. Source (Internet Archive): The Fables of Æsop , selected, and told anew, and their history traced by Joseph Jacobs (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), pp. 86-87 . Source (books.google.com): The Fables of Æsop , selected, and told anew, and their history traced by Joseph Jacobs (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), pp. 86-87 . Return to the table of contents . The Grasshopper and the Ants Aesop (Jones, 1912) One fine day in winter some ants were busy drying their store of corn, which had got rather damp during a long spell of rain. Presently up came a grasshopper and begged them to spare her a few grains, "For," she said, "I'm simply starving." The ants stopped work for a moment, though this was against their principles. "May we ask," said they, "what you were doing with yourself all last summer? Why didn't you collect a store of food for the winter?" "The fact is," replied the grasshopper, "I was so busy singing that I hadn't the time." "If you spent the summer singing," replied the ants, "you can't do better than spend the winter dancing." And they chuckled and went on with their work. Source (Internet Archive): Æsop's Fables , a new translation by V. S. Vernon Jones, with an introduction by G. K. Chesterton and illustrations by Arthur Rackham (London: William Heinemann; New York: Doubleday, Page, and Company, 1916), p. 125 . First published in 1912. Source (books.google.com): Æsop's Fables , a new translation by V. S. Vernon Jones, with an introduction by G. K. Chesterton and illustrations by Arthur Rackham (London: William Heinemann; New York: Doubleday, Page, and Company, 1916), p. 125 . First published in 1912. Return to the table of contents . The Grasshopper and the Ant Jean de La Fontaine A grasshopper gay Sang the summer away, And found herself poor By the winter's first roar. Of meat or of bread, Not a morsel she had! So a begging she went, To her neighbour the ant, For the loan of some wheat, Which would serve her to eat, Till the season came round. "I will pay you," she saith, "On an animal's faith, Double weight in the pound Ere the harvest be bound." The ant is a friend (And here she might mend) Little given to lend. "How spent you the summer?" Quoth she, looking shame At the borrowing dame. "Night and day to each comer I sang, if you please." "You sang! I'm at ease; For 'tis plain at a glance, Now, ma'am, you must dance." Source (books.google.com): Jean de La Fontaine The Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright. A new edition with notes by J. W. M. Gibbs (London: George Bell and Sons, 1888), book 1, fable 1, p. 2 . Source (Internet Archive): Jean de La Fontaine Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright. Fourth edition (Boston: Sanborn, Carter, and Bazin, 1856), book 1, fable 1, pp. 47-48, p. 2 . Link to this fable in the original French: "La cigale et la fourmi," Fables de La Fontaine (Tours: Alfred Mame et fils, 1864), livre 1, fable 1, pp. 3-5 . The first collection of La Fontaine's fables was published in 1668. Return to the table of contents . The Grasshopper and the Ant Ambrose Bierce One day in winter a hungry grasshopper applied to an ant for some of the food which they had stored. "Why," said the ant, "did you not store up some food for yourself, instead of singing all the time?" "So I did," said the grasshopper. "So I did; but you fellows broke in and carried it all away." Source (Internet Archive): Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), p. 165 . Source (books.google.com): Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), p. 165 . Return to the table of contents . The Ants and the Grasshopper Ambrose Bierce Some members of a legislature were making schedules of their wealth at the end of the session, when an honest miner came along and asked them to divide with him. The members of the legislature inquired: "Why did you not acquire property of your own?" " Because," replied the honest miner, "I was so busy digging out gold that I had no leisure to lay up something worth while." Then the members of the legislature derided him, saying: "If you waste your time in profitless amusement, you cannot, of course, expect to share the rewards of industry." Source (Internet Archive): Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), p. 188 . Source (books.google.com): Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), p. 188 . Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Little Red Hen Children's Story, USA About twenty-five years ago my mother told me the story of the little red hen. She told it often to me at that time; but I have never heard it since. So I shall try to tell it to you now from memory: There was once a little red hen. She was scratching near the barn one day, when she found a grain of wheat. She said, "Who will plant this wheat?" The rat said, "I won't." The cat said, "I won't." The dog said, "I won't." The duck said, "I won't." And the pig said, "I won't." The little red hen said, "I will, then." So she planted the grain of wheat. After the wheat grew up and was ripe, the little red hen said, "Who will reap this wheat?" The rat said, "I won't." The cat said, "I won't." The dog said, "I won't." The duck said, "I won't." And the pig said, "I won't." The little red hen said, "I will, then." So she reaped the wheat. Then she said, "Who will take this wheat to mill to be ground into flour?" The rat said, "I won't." The cat said, "I won't." The dog said, "I won't." The duck said, "I won't." And the pig said, "I won't." The little red hen said, "I will, then." So she took the wheat to mill. When she came back with the flour, she said, "Who will make this into bread?" The rat said, "I won't." The cat said, "I won't." The dog said, "I won't." The duck said, "I won't." And the pig said, "I won't." The little red hen said, "I will, then." So she made it into bread. Then she said, "Who will bake this bread?" The rat said, "I won't." The cat said, "I won't." The dog said, "I won't." The duck said, "I won't." And the pig said, "I won't." The little red hen said, "I will, then." When the bread was baked, the little red hen said, "Who will eat this bread?" The rat said, "I WILL." The cat said, "I WILL." The dog said, "I WILL." The duck said, "I WILL." And the pig said, "I WILL." The little red hen said, "No, you WON'T, for I am going to do that myself." And she picked up the bread and ran off with it. Source: Mary Mapes Dodge, editor, St. Nicholas , vol. 1, no. 11 (September 1874), pp. 680-81 . Link to another version of this story: "The Little Red Hen and the Grain of Wheat: An English Folk Tale," In the Nursery of My Bookhouse , edited by Olive Beaupré Miller (Chicago: The Bookhouse for Children Publishers, 1920), pp. 60-63 . Link to a book version of this story: The Little Red Hen: An Old English Folk Tale , retold and illustrated by Florence White Williams (Chicago, Akron, and New York: The Saalfield Publishing Company, 1918). Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Wikipedia article: The Ant and the Grasshopper . Wikipedia article: The Little Red Hen . Perry Index of fables credited to Aesop. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 11, 2018. Arthur, Legendary King of Britain: Excerpts from his life story Arthur, Legendary King of Britain Excerpts from his life story as recorded by Geoffrey of Monmouth, Sir Thomas Malory, and Others assembled by D. L. Ashliman © 2010-2020 Editions used: The British History of Geoffrey of Monmouth , translated from the Latin by A. Thompson; a new edition revised and corrected by J. A. Giles (London: James Bohn, 1842). Written in Latin under the title Historia Regum Britanniae ; completed about 1136. Sir Thomas Malory, Le Morte d'Arthur , edited by John Rhys, vol. 1 (London: J. M. Dent and Sons, 1906). First published in 1485 by William Caxton. Sir Thomas Malory, Le Morte d'Arthur , edited by John Rhys, vol. 2 (London: J. M. Dent and Sons, 1906). First published in 1485 by William Caxton. Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Idyls of the King (Boston: Ticknor and Fields, 1866). Contents Arthur's Conception and Birth . Arthur Is Chosen King . Arthur Gets the Sword Excalibur from the Lady of the Lake . Arthur Marries Guinevere . Arthur Kills a Giant at Mont-Saint-Michel . Mordred's Treachery . Arthur's Death . Arthur's Conception and Birth Geoffrey of Monmouth After this victory [over a Saxon army led by Octa and Eosa] Uther [King of Britain] repaired to the city of Alclud, where he settled the affairs of that province, and restored peace everywhere. He also made a progress round all the countries of the Scots, and tamed the fierceness of that rebellious people, by such a strict administration of justice, as none of his predecessors had exercised before, so that in his time offenders were everywhere under great terror, since they were sure of being punished without mercy. At last, when he had established peace in the northern provinces, he went to London, and commanded Octa and Eosa to be kept in prison there. The Easter following he ordered all the nobility of the kingdom to meet him at that city, in order to celebrate that great festival; in honour of which he designed to wear his crown. The summons was everywhere obeyed, and there was a great concourse from all cities to celebrate the day. So the king observed the festival with great solemnity, as he had designed, and very joyfully entertained his nobility, of whom there was a very great muster, with their wives and daughters, suitably to the magnificence of the banquet prepared for them. And having been received with joy by the king, they also expressed the same in their deportment before him. Among the rest was present Gorlois, duke of Cornwall, with his wife Igerna, the greatest beauty in all Britain. No sooner had the king cast his eyes upon her among the rest of the ladies, than he fell passionately in love with her, and little regarding the rest, made her the subject of all his thoughts. She was the only lady that he continually served with fresh dishes, and to whom he sent golden cups by his confidants; on her he bestowed all his smiles, and to her addressed all his discourse. The husband, discovering this, fell into a great rage, and retired from the court without taking leave; nor was there any body that could stop him, while he was under fear of losing the chief object of his delight. Uther, therefore, in great wrath commanded him to return back to court, to make him satisfaction for this affront. But Gorlois refused to obey; upon which the king was highly incensed, and swore he would destroy his country, if he did not speedily compound for his offence. Accordingly, without delay, while their anger was hot against each other, the king got together a great army, and marched into Cornwall, the cities and towns whereof he set on fire. But Gorlois durst not engage with him, on account of the inferiority of his numbers; and thought it a wiser course to fortify his towns, till he could get succour from Ireland. And as he was under more concern for his wife than himself, he put her into the town of Tintagel, upon the seashore, which he looked upon as a place of great safety. But he himself entered the castle of Dimilioc, to prevent their being both at once involved in the same danger, if any should happen. The king, informed of this, went to the town where Gorlois was, which he besieged, and shut up all the avenues to it. A whole week was now past, when, retaining in mind his love to Igerna, he said to one of his confidants, named Ulfin de Ricaradoch: "My passion for Igerna is such that I can neither have ease of mind, nor health of body, till I obtain her; and if you cannot assist me with your advice how to accomplish my desire, the inward torments I endure will kill me." "Who can advise you in this matter," said Ulfin, "when no force will enable us to have access to her in the town of Tintagel? For it is situated upon the sea, and on every side surrounded by it; and there is but one entrance into it, and that through a straight rock, which three men shall be able to defend against the whole power of the kingdom. Notwithstanding, if the prophet Merlin would in earnest set about this attempt, I am of opinion, you might with his advice obtain your wishes." The king readily believed what he was so well inclined to, and ordered Merlin, who was also come to the siege, to be called. Merlin, therefore, being introduced into the king's presence, was commanded to give his advice, how the king might accomplish his desire with respect to Igerna. And he, finding the great anguish of the king, was moved by such excessive love, and said, "To accomplish your desire, you must make use of such arts as have not been heard of in your time. I know how, by the force of my medicines, to give you the exact likeness of Gorlois, so that in all respects you shall seem to be no other than himself. If you will therefore obey my prescriptions, I will metamorphize you into the true semblance of Gorlois, and Ulfin into Jordan of Tintagel, his familiar friend; and I myself, being transformed into another shape, will make the third in the adventure; and in this disguise you may go safely to the town where Igerna is, and have admittance to her." The king complied with the proposal, and acted with great caution in this affair; and when he had committed the care of the siege to his intimate friends, underwent the medical applications of Merlin, by whom he was transformed into the likeness of Gorlois; as was Ulfin also into Jordan, and Merlin himself into Bricel; so that nobody could see any remains now of their former likeness. They then set forward on their way to Tintagel, at which they arrived in the evening twilight, and forthwith signified to the porter, that the consul was come; upon which the gates were opened, and the men let in. For what room could there be for suspicion, when Gorlois himself seemed to be there present? The king therefore stayed that night with Igerna and had the full enjoyment of her, for she was deceived with the false disguise which he had put on, and the artful and amorous discourses wherewith he entertained her. He told her he had left his own place besieged, purely to provide for the safety of her dear self, and the town she was in; so that believing all that he said, she refused him nothing which he desired. The same night therefore she conceived of most renowned Arthur, whose heroic and wonderful actions have justly rendered his name famous to posterity. In the meantime, as soon as the king's absence was discovered at the siege, his army unadvisedly made an assault upon the walls, and provoked the besieged count to a battle, who himself also, acting as inconsiderately as they, sallied forth with his men, thinking with such a small handful to oppose a powerful army, but happened to be killed in the very first brunt of the fight, and had all his men routed. The town also was taken; but all the riches of it were not shared equally among the besiegers, but every one greedily took what he could get, according as fortune or his own strength favoured him. After this bold attempt, came messengers to Igerna, with the news both of the duke's death, and of the event of the siege. But when they saw the king in the likeness of the consul, sitting close by her, they were struck with shame and astonishment at his safe arrival there, whom they had left dead at the siege; for they were wholly ignorant of the miracles which Merlin had wrought with his medicines. The king therefore smiled at the news, and embracing the countess, said to her, "Your own eyes may convince you that I am not dead, but alive. But notwithstanding, the destruction of the town, and the slaughter of my men, is what very much grieves me; so that there is reason to fear the king's coming upon us, and taking us in this place. To prevent which, I will go out to meet him, and make my peace with him, for fear of a worse disaster." Accordingly, as soon as he was out of the town, he went to his army, and having put off the disguise of Gorlois, was now Uther Pendragon again. When he had a full relation made to him how matters had succeeded, he was sorry for the death of Gorlois, but rejoiced that Igerna was now at liberty to marry again. Then he returned to the town of Tintagel, which he took, and in it, what he impatiently wished for, Igerna herself. After this they continued to live together with much affection for each other, and had a son and daughter, whose names were Arthur and Anne. Source: Geoffrey of Monmouth, book 8, ch. 19-20, pp. 167-71 . These events are also recorded in Sir Thomas Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur , book 1, ch. 1-3 . Malory gives Arthur's mother the name Igraine. Malory makes no mention of Arthur's sister Anne [also spelled Anna], but in succeeding chapters he does discuss Arthur's sister Morgan le Fay. Return to the table of contents . Alfred, Lord Tennyson Yea, one, a bard; of whom my father said, Full many a noble war-song had he sung, Ev'n in the presence of an enemy's fleet, Between the steep cliff and the coming wave; And many a mystic lay of life and death Had chanted on the smoky mountain-stops, When round him bent the spirits of the hills, With all their dewy hair blown back like flame: So said my father -- and that night the bard Sang Arthur's glorious wars, and sang the King As wellnigh more than man, and rail'd at those Who call'd him the false son of Gorloïs: For there was no man knew from whence he came; But after tempest, when the long wave broke All down the thundering shores of Bude and Bos, There came a day as still as heaven, and then They found a naked child upon the sands Of dark Dundagil by the Cornish sea; And that was Arthur; and they foster'd him Till he by miracle was approven king. Source: Alfred, Lord Tennyson, "Guinevere," Idyls of the King , pp. 163-64 . Return to the table of contents . Arthur Is Chosen King Sir Thomas Malory Then within two years King Uther fell sick of a great malady.... Then Merlin said aloud unto King Uther, "Sir, shall your son Arthur be king after your days, of this realm with all the appurtenance?" Then Uther Pendragon turned him, and said in hearing of them all, "I give him God's blessing and mine, and bid him pray for my soul, and righteously and worshipfully that he claim the crown upon forfeiture of my blessing." And therewith he yielded up the ghost, and then was he interred [at Stonehenge] as longed to a king. Wherefore the queen, fair Igraine, made great sorrow, and all the barons. Then stood the realm in great jeopardy long while, for every lord that was mighty of men made him strong, and many weened to have been king. Then Merlin went to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and counselled him for to send for all the lords of the realm, and all the gentlemen of arms, that they should to London come by Christmas, upon pain of cursing; and for this cause, that Jesus, that was born on that night, that he would of his great mercy show some miracle, as he was come to be king of mankind, for to show some miracle who should be rightways king of this realm. So the Archbishop, by the advice of Merlin, sent for all the lords and gentlemen of arms that they should come by Christmas even unto London. And many of them made them clean of their life, that their prayer might be the more acceptable unto God. So in the greatest church of London, whether it were Paul's or not, the French book maketh no mention, all the estates were long or day in the church for to pray. And when matins and the first mass was done, there was seen in the churchyard, against the high altar, a great stone four square, like unto a marble stone, and in midst thereof was like an anvil of steel a foot on high, and therein stuck a fair sword naked by the point, and letters there were written in gold about the sword that said thus: "Whoso pulleth out this sword of this stone and anvil, is rightwise king born of all England." Then the people marvelled, and told it to the Archbishop. "I command," said the Archbishop, "that ye keep you within your church, and pray unto God still; that no man touch the sword till the high mass be all done." So when all masses were done all the lords went to behold the stone and the sword. And when they saw the scripture, some assayed; such as would have been king. But none might stir the sword nor move it. "He is not here," said the Archbishop, "that shall achieve the sword, but doubt not God will make him known. But this is my counsel," said the Archbishop, "that we let purvey ten knights, men of good fame, and they to keep this sword." So it was ordained, and then there was made a cry, that every man should essay that would, for to win the sword. And upon New Year's Day the barons let make a jousts and a tournament, that all knights that would joust or tourney there might play, and all this was ordained for to keep the lords and the commons together, for the Archbishop trusted that God would make him known that should win the sword. So upon New Year's Day, when the service was done, the barons rode unto the field, some to joust and some to tourney, and so it happened that Sir Ector, that had great livelihood about London, rode unto the jousts, and with him rode Sir Kay his son, and young Arthur that was his nourished brother; and Sir Kay was made knight at All Hallowmass afore. So as they rode to the joustsward, Sir Kay had lost his sword, for he had left it at his father's lodging, and so he prayed young Arthur for to ride for his sword. "I will well," said Arthur, and rode fast after the sword, and when he came home, the lady and all were out to see the jousting. Then was Arthur wroth, and said to himself, "I will ride to the churchyard, and take the sword with me that sticketh in the stone, for my brother Sir Kay shall not be without a sword this day." So when he came to the churchyard, Sir Arthur alit and tied his horse to the stile, and so he went to the tent, and found no knights there, for they were at jousting; and so he handled the sword by the handles, and lightly and fiercely pulled it out of the stone, and took his horse and rode his way until he came to his brother Sir Kay, and delivered him the sword. And as soon as Sir Kay saw the sword, he wist well it was the sword of the stone, and so he rode to his father Sir Ector, and said, "Sir, lo here is the sword of the stone, wherefore I must be king of this land." When Sir Ector beheld the sword, he returned again and came to the church, and there they alit all three, and went into the church. And anon he made Sir Kay to swear upon a book how he came to that sword. "Sir," said Sir Kay, "by my brother Arthur, for he brought it to me." "How gat ye this sword?" said Sir Ector to Arthur. "Sir, I will tell you. When I came home for my brother's sword, I found nobody at home to deliver me his sword, and so I thought my brother Sir Kay should not be swordless, and so I came hither eagerly and pulled it out of the stone without any pain." "Found ye any knights about this sword?" said Sir Ector. "Nay," said Arthur. "Now," said Sir Ector to Arthur, "I understand ye must be king of this land." "Wherefore I," said Arthur, "and for what cause?" "Sir," said Ector, "for God will have it so, for there should never man have drawn out this sword, but he that shall be rightways king of this land. Now let me see whether ye can put the sword there as it was, and pull it out again." "That is no mastery," said Arthur, and so he put it in the stone, therewithal Sir Ector essayed to pull out the sword and failed. "Now assay," said Sir Ector unto Sir Kay. And anon he pulled at the sword with all his might, but it would not be. "Now shall ye essay," said Sir Ector to Arthur. "I will well," said Arthur, and pulled it out easily. And therewithal Sir Ector knelt down to the earth, and Sir Kay. "Alas," said Arthur, "my own dear father and brother, why kneel ye to me?" Nay, nay, my lord Arthur, it is not so, I was never your father nor of your blood, but I wot well ye are of an higher blood than I weened ye were." And then Sir Ector told him all, how he was bitaken him for to nourish him, and by whose commandment, and by Merlin's deliverance. Then Arthur made great doole when he understood that Sir Ector was not his father. "Sir," said Ector unto Arthur, "will ye be my good and gracious lord when ye are king?" "Else were I to blame," said Arthur, "for ye are the man in the world that I am most beholden to, and my good lady and mother your wife, that as well as her own hath fostered me and kept. And if ever it be God's will that I be king as ye say, ye shall desire of me what I may do, and I shall not fail you, God forbid I should fail you." "Sir," said Sir Ector, "I will ask no more of you, but that ye will make my son, your foster brother, Sir Kay, seneschal of all your lands." "That shall be done," said Arthur, and more, by the faith of my body, that never man shall have that office but he, while he and I live." Therewithal they went unto the Archbishop, and told him how the sword was achieved, and by whom; and on Twelfth-day all the barons came thither, and to essay to take the sword, who that would essay. But there afore them all, there might none take it out but Arthur; wherefore there were many lords wroth, and said it was great shame unto them all and the realm, to be overgoverned with a boy of no high blood born, and so they fell out at that time that it was put off till Candlemas, and then all the barons should meet there again; but always the ten knights were ordained to watch the sword day and night, and so they set a pavilion over the stone and the sword, and five always watched. So at Candlemas many more great lords came thither for to have won the sword, but there might none prevail. And right as Arthur did at Christmas, he did at Candlemas, and pulled out the sword easily, whereof the barons were sore agrieved and put it off in delay till the high feast of Easter. And as Arthur sped before, so did he at Easter, yet there were some of the great lords had indignation that Arthur should be king, and put it off in a delay till the feast of Pentecost. Then the Archbishop of Canterbury by Merlyn's providence let purvey then of the best knights that they might get, and such knights as Uther Pendragon loved best and most trusted in his days. And such knights were put about Arthur as Sir Baudwin of Britain, Sir Kay, Sir Ulfius, Sir Brastias. All these with many other, were always about Arthur, day and night, till the feast of Pentecost. And at the feast of Pentecost all manner of men essayed to pull at the sword that would essay, but none might prevail but Arthur, and pulled it out afore all the lords and commons that were there, wherefore all the commons cried at once, "We will have Arthur unto our king, we will put him no more in delay, for we all see that it is God's will that he shall be our king, and who that holdeth against it, we will slay him." And therewith they all kneeled at once, both rich and poor, and cried Arthur mercy because they had delayed him so long, and Arthur forgave them, and took the sword between both his hands, and offered it upon the altar where the Archbishop was, and so was he made knight of the best man that was there. And so anon was the coronation made. And there was he sworn unto his lords and the commons for to be a true king, to stand with true justice from thenceforth the days of this life. Also then he made all lords that held of the crown to come in, and to do service as they ought to do. And many complaints were made unto Sir Arthur of great wrongs that were done since the death of King Uther, of many lands that were bereaved lords, knights, ladies, and gentlemen. Wherefore King Arthur made the lands to be given again unto them that owned them. When this was done, that the king had stablished all the countries about London, then he let make Sir Kay seneschal of England; and Sir Baudwin of Britain was made constable; and Sir Ulfius was made chamberlain; and Sir Brastias was made warden to wait upon the north from Trent forwards, for it was that time the most part the king's enemies. But within few years after, Arthur won all the north, Scotland, and all that were under their obeissance. Also Wales, a part of it held against Arthur, but he overcame them all, as he did the remnant, through the noble prowess of himself and his knights of the Round Table. Source: Sir Thomas Malory, book 1, ch. 4-7, pp. 9-14 . According to Geoffrey of Monmouth ( book 8, ch. 24, p. 175 ), King Uther was buried within the "Giant's Dance," also known as the "Giant's Ring," or more familiarly, "Stonehenge." Geoffrey of Monmouth also tells how Merlin transported the Giant's Dance [Stonehenge] from Ireland to Britain ) to serve as a memorial to British princes killed by the Angles and Saxons. Note that the sword featured here is not the famous Excalibur, which Arthur receives in a later episode. Return to the table of contents . Arthur Gets the Sword Excalibur from the Lady of the Lake Sir Thomas Malory Right so the king [Arthur] and he [Merlin] departed, and went unto an hermit that was a good man and a great leech. So the hermit searched all his wounds and gave him good salves; so the king was there three days, and then were his wounds well amended that he might ride and go, and so departed. And as they rode, Arthur said, "I have no sword." [It had been broken into two pieces in a recent battle.] "No force," said Merlin. "Hereby is a sword that shall be yours, an I may." So they rode till they came to a lake, the which was a fair water and broad, and in the midst of the lake Arthur was ware of an arm clothed in white samite, that held a fair sword in that hand. "Lo!" said Merlin, "Yonder is that sword that I spake of." With that they saw a damosel going upon the lake. "What damosel is that?" said Arthur. "That is the Lady of the Lake," said Merlin; "and within that lake is a rock, and therein is as fair a place as any on earth, and richly beseen; and this damosel will come to you anon, and then speak ye fair to her that she will give you that sword." Anon withal came the damosel unto Arthur, and saluted him, and he her again. "Damosel," said Arthur, "what sword is that, that yonder the arm holdeth above the water? I would it were mine, for I have no sword." "Sir Arthur, king," said the damosel, "that sword is mine, and if ye will give me a gift when I ask it you, ye shall have it." "By my faith," said Arthur, "I will give you what gift ye will ask." "Well! said the damosel, go ye into yonder barge, and row yourself to the sword, and take it and the scabbard with you, and I will ask my gift when I see my time." So Sir Arthur and Merlin alit and tied their horses to two trees, and so they went into the ship, and when they came to the sword that the hand held, Sir Arthur took it up by the handles, and took it with him, and the arm and the hand went under the water. ... Then Sir Arthur looked on the sword, and liked it passing well. "Whether liketh you better," said Merlin, "the sword or the scabbard?" "Me liketh better the sword," said Arthur. "Ye are more unwise," said Merlin, "for the scabbard is worth ten of the swords, for whiles ye have the scabbard upon you, ye shall never lose no blood be ye never so sore wounded, therefore keep well the scabbard always with you." Source: Sir Thomas Malory, book 1, ch. 25, pp. 42-44 . Geoffrey of Monmouth calls this sword Caliburnus , a Latinized form of Excalubur . Return to the table of contents . Arthur Marries Guinevere The Account of Geoffrey of Monmouth At length, when the whole country was reduced [restored] by him [Arthur] to its ancient state, he took to wife Guanhumara [Guinevere], descended from a noble family of Romans, who was educated under Duke Cador, and in beauty surpassed all the women of the island. Source: Geoffrey of Monmouth, book 9, ch. 9, p. 186 . The Account of Sir Thomas Malory In the beginning of Arthur, after he was chosen king by adventure and by grace; for the most part of the barons knew not that he was Uther Pendragon's son, but as Merlin made it openly known. But yet many kings and lords held great war against him for that cause, but well Arthur overcame them all, for the most part the days of his life he was ruled much by the counsel of Merlin. So it fell on a time King Arthur said unto Merlin, "My barons will let me have no rest, but needs I must take a wife, and I will none take but by thy counsel and by thine advice." "It is well done," said Merlin, "that ye take a wife, for a man of your bounty and noblesse should not be without a wife. Now is there any that ye love more than another?" "Yea," said King Arthur, "I love Guenever [Guinevere] the king's daughter, Leodegrance of the land of Cameliard, the which holdeth in his house the Table Round that ye told he had of my father Uther. And this damosel is the most valiant and fairest lady that I know living, or yet that ever I could find." "Sir," said Merlin, "as of her beauty and fairness she is one of the fairest on live, but, an ye loved her not so well as ye do, I should find you a damosel of beauty and of goodness that should like you and please you, an your heart were not set; but there as a man's heart is set, he will be loth to return." "That is truth," said King Arthur. But Merlin warned the king covertly that Guenever was not wholesome for him to take to wife, for he warned him that Launcelot should love her, and she him again.... Then Merlin desired of the king for to have men with him that should enquire of Guenever, and so the king granted him, and Merlin went forth unto King Leodegrance of Cameliard, and told him of the desire of the king that he would have unto his wife Guenever his daughter. "That is to me," said King Leodegrance, "the best tidings that ever I heard, that so worthy a king of prowess and noblesse will wed my daughter. And as for my lands, I will give him, wist I it might please him, but he hath lands enow, him needeth none, but I shall send him a gift shall please him much more, for I shall give him the Table Round, the which Uther Pendragon gave me, and when it is full complete, there is an hundred knights and fifty. And as for an hundred good knights I have myself, but I fawte fifty, for so many have been slain in my days." And so Leodegrance delivered his daughter Guenever unto Merlin, and the Table Round with the hundred knights, and so they rode freshly, with great royalty, what by water and what by land, till that they came nigh unto London. Source: Malory, book 3, ch. 1, pp. 71-72 . Arthur's wife's name is variously given as Guenever , Guinevere , and the Latinized form Guanhumara . The modern English form is Jennifer . Return to the table of contents . Arthur Kills a Giant at Mont-Saint-Michel Geoffrey of Monmouth In the meantime Arthur had news brought him, that a giant of monstrous size was come from the shores of Spain, and had forcibly taken away Helena, the niece of Duke Hoel, from her guard, and fled with her to the top of that which is now called Michael's Mount [Mont-Saint-Michel in Normandy]; and that the soldiers of the country who pursued him were able to do nothing against him. For whether they attacked him by sea or land, he either overturned their ships with vast rocks, or killed them with several sorts of darts, besides many of them that he took and devoured half alive. The next night, therefore, at the second hour, Arthur, taking along with him Caius the sewer, and Bedver the butler, went out privately from the camp, and hastened towards the mountain. For being a man of undaunted courage, he did not care to lead his army against such monsters; both because he could in this manner animate his men by his own example, and also because he was alone sufficient to deal with them. As soon as they came near the mountain, they saw a fire burning upon the top of it, and another on a lesser mountain, that was not far from it. And being in doubt upon which of them the giant dwelt, they sent away Bedver to know the certainty of the matter. So he, finding a boat, sailed over in it first to the lesser mountain, to which he could in no other way have access, because it was situated in the sea. When he had begun to climb up to the top of it, he was at first frightened with a dismal howling cry of a woman from above, and imagined the monster to be there; but quickly rousing up his courage, he drew his sword, and having reached the top, found nothing but the fire which he had before seen at a distance. He discovered also a grave newly made, and an old woman weeping and howling by it, who at the sight of him instantly cried out in words interrupted with sighs, "O, unhappy man, what misfortune brings you to this place? O the inexpressible tortures of death that you must suffer! I pity you, I pity you, because the detestable monster will this night destroy the flower of your youth. For that most wicked and odious giant, who brought the duke's niece, whom I have just now buried here, and me, her nurse, along with her into this mountain, will come and immediately murder you in a most cruel manner. O deplorable fate! This most illustrious princess, sinking under the fear her tender heart conceived, while the foul monster would have embraced her, fainted away and expired. And when he could not satiate his brutish lust upon her, who was the very soul, joy, and happiness of my life, being enraged at the disappointment of his bestial desire, he forcibly committed a rape upon me, who (let God and my old age witness) abhorred his embraces. Fly, dear sir, fly, for fear he may come, as he usually does, to lie with me, and finding you here most barbarously butcher you." Bedver, moved at what she said, as much as it is possible for human nature to be, endeavoured with kind words to assuage her grief, and to comfort her with the promise of speedy help; and then returned back to Arthur, and gave him an account of what he had met with. Arthur very much lamented the damsel's sad fate, and ordered his companions to leave him to deal with him alone; unless there was an absolute necessity, and then they were to come in boldly to his assistance. From hence they went directly to the next mountain, leaving their horses with their armour-bearers, and ascended to the top, Arthur leading the way. The deformed savage was then by the fire, with his face besmeared with the clotted blood of swine, part of which he had already devoured, and was roasting the remainder upon spits by the fire. But at the sight of them, whose appearance was a surprise to him, he hastened to his club, which two strong men could hardly lift from the ground. Upon this the king drew his sword, and guarding himself with his shield, ran with all his speed to prevent his getting it. But the other, who was not ignorant of his design, had by this time snatched it up, and gave the king such a terrible blow upon his shield, that he made the shores ring with the noise, and perfectly stunned the king's ears with it. Arthur, fired with rage at this, lifted up his sword, and gave him a wound in the forehead, which was not indeed mortal, but yet such as made the blood gush out over his face and eyes, and so blinded him; for he had partly warded off the stroke from his forehead with his club, and prevented its being fatal. However, his loss of sight, by reason of the blood flowing over his eyes, made him exert himself with greater fury, and like an enraged boar against a hunting-spear, so did he rush in against Arthur's sword, and grasping him about the waist, forced him down upon his knees. But Arthur, nothing daunted, slipped out of his hands, and so bestirred himself with his sword, that he gave the giant no respite till he had struck it up to the very back through his skull. At this the hideous monster raised a dreadful roar, and like an oak torn up from the roots by the winds, so did he make the ground resound with his fall. Arthur, bursting out into a fit of laughter at the sight, commanded Bedver to cut off his head, and give it to one of the armour-bearers, who was to carry it to the camp, and there expose it to public view, but with orders for the spectators of this combat to keep silence.... After this victory, they returned at the second watch of the night to the camp with the head; to see which there was a great concourse of people, all extolling this wonderful exploit of Arthur, by which he had freed the country from a most destructive and voracious monster. But Hoel, in great grief for the loss of his niece, commanded a mausoleum to be built over her body in the mountain where she was buried, which, taking the damsel's name, is called Helena's Tomb to this day. Source: Geoffrey of Monmouth, book 10, ch. 3, pp. 205-208 . Return to the table of contents . Mordred's Treachery . The Account of Geoffrey of Monmouth Arthur, after he had completed his victory [over a Roman army], gave orders for separating the bodies of his nobility from those of the enemy, and preparing a pompous funeral for them; and that, when ready, they should be carried to the abbeys of their respective countries, there to be honourably buried. ... At the beginning of the following summer, as he was on his march towards Rome, and was beginning to pass the Alps, he had news brought him that his nephew Modred [Mordred], to whose care he had entrusted Britain, had by tyrannical and treasonable practices set the crown upon his own head; and that Queen Guanhumara [Guinevere], in violation of her first marriage, had wickedly married him. Source: Geoffrey of Monmouth, book 10, ch. 13, pp. 224-25 . The Account of Sir Thomas Malory As Sir Mordred was ruler of all England [commissioned by Arthur to rule in the latter's absence], he did do make letters as though that they came from beyond the sea, and the letters specified that King Arthur was slain in battle with Sir Launcelot. Wherefore Sir Mordred made a parliament, and called the lords together, and there he made them to choose him king; and so was he crowned at Canterbury, and held a feast there fifteen days; and afterward he drew him unto Winchester, and there he took the Queen Guenever, and said plainly that he would wed her which was his uncle's wife and his father's wife. And so he made ready for the feast, and a day prefixed that they should be wedded; wherefore Queen Guenever was passing heavy. But she durst not discover her heart, but spake fair, and agreed to Sir Mordred's will. Then she desired of Sir Mordred for to go to London, to buy all manner of things that longed unto the wedding. And by cause of her fair speech Sir Mordred trusted her well enough, and gave her leave to go. And so when she came to London she took the Tower of London, and suddenly in all haste possible she stuffed it with all manner of victual, and well garnished it with men, and so kept it. Then when Sir Mordred wist and understood how he was beguiled, he was passing wroth out of measure. And a short tale for to make, he went and laid a mighty siege about the Tower of London, and made many great assaults thereat, and threw many great engines unto them, and shot great guns. But all might not prevail Sir Mordred, for Queen Guenever would never for fair speech nor for foul, would never trust to come in his hands again. Then came the Bishop of Canterbury, the which was a noble clerk and an holy man, and thus he said to Sir Mordred: "Sir, what will ye do? Will ye first displease God and sithen shame yourself, and all knighthood? Is not King Arthur your uncle, no farther but your mother's brother, and on her himself King Arthur begat you upon his own sister, therefore how may you wed your father's wife? Sir," said the noble clerk, "leave this opinion or I shall curse you with book and bell and candle." "Do thou thy worst," said Sir Mordred, "wit thou well I shall defy thee." "Sir," said the Bishop, "and wit you well I shall not fear me to do that me ought to do. Also where ye noise where my lord Arthur is slain, and that is not so, and therefore ye will make a foul work in this land." "Peace, thou false priest," said Sir Mordred, "for an thou chafe me any more I shall make strike off thy head." So the Bishop departed and did the cursing in the most orgulist wise that might be done. And then Sir Mordred sought the Bishop of Canterbury, for to have slain him. Then the Bishop fled, and took part of his goods with him, and went nigh unto Glastonbury; and there he was as priest hermit in a chapel, and lived in poverty and in holy prayers, for well he understood that mischievous war was at hand. Then Sir Mordred sought on Queen Guenever by letters and sondes, and by fair means and foul means, for to have her to come out of the Tower of London; but all this availed not, for she answered him shortly, openly and privily, that she had lever slay herself than to be married with him. Then came word to Sir Mordred that King Arthur had araised the siege for Sir Launcelot, and he was coming homeward with a great host, to be avenged upon Sir Mordred; wherefore Sir Mordred made write writs to all the barony of this land, and much people drew to him. For then was the common voice among them that with Arthur was none other life but war and strife, and with Sir Mordred was great joy and bliss. Thus was Sir Arthur depraved, and evil said of. And many there were that King Arthur had made up of nought, and given them lands, might not then say him a good word. Lo ye all Englishmen, see ye not what a mischief here was! for he that was the most king and knight of the world, and most loved the fellowship of noble knights, and by him they were all upholden, now might not these Englishmen hold them content with him. Lo thus was the old custom and usage of this land; and also men say that we of this land have not yet lost nor forgotten that custom and usage. Alas, this is a great default of us Englishmen, for there may no thing please us no term. And so fared the people at that time, they were better pleased with Sir Mordred than they were with King Arthur; and much people drew unto Sir Mordred, and said they would abide with him for better and for worse. And so Sir Mordred drew with a great host to Dover, for there he heard say that Sir Arthur would arrive, and so he thought to beat his own father from his lands; and the most part of all England held with Sir Mordred, the people were so new fangle. Source: Sir Thomas Malory, book 21, ch. 1, pp. 379-81 . Mordred is variously known as Mordred, Modred, Medraut, or Medrod. The confusion as to whether Arthur is Mordred's uncle or his father is clarified in the above account: as the offspring of an incestuous relationship between Arthur and Arthur's sister, Mordred is at the same time Arthur's son and Arthur's nephew. Return to the table of contents . Arthur's Death The Account of Geoffrey of Monmouth As soon, therefore, as the report of this flagrant wickedness [Mordred's act of treason] reached him, he immediately desisted from his enterprise against Leo, king of the Romans; and having sent away Hoel, duke of the Armoricans, with the army of Gaul, to restore peace in those parts, returned back with speed to Britain, attended only by the kings of the islands, and their armies. But the wicked traitor, Modred, had sent Cheldric, the Saxon leader, into Germany, there to raise all the forces he could find, and return with all speed; and in consideration of this service, had promised him all that part of the island, which reaches from the Humber to Scotland, and whatever Hengist and Horsus had possessed of Kent in the time of Vortegirn. So that he, in obedience to his commands, had arrived with eight hundred ships filled with pagan soldiers, and had entered into covenant to obey the traitor as his sovereign; who had also drawn to his assistance the Scots, Picts, Irish, and all others whom he knew to be enemies to his uncle. His whole army, taking pagans and Christians together, amounted to eighty thousand men; with the help of whom he met Arthur just after his landing at the port of Rutupi, and joining battle with him, made a very great slaughter of his men. For the same day fell Augusel, king of Albania [Scotland], and Walgan, the king's nephew, with innumerable others. Augusel was succeeded in his kingdom by Eventus, his brother Urian's son, who afterwards performed many famous exploits in those wars. After they had at last, with much difficulty, got ashore, they paid back the slaughter, and put Modred and his army to flight. For, by long practice in war, they had learned an excellent way of ordering their forces; which was so managed, that while their foot were employed either in an assault or upon the defensive, the horse would come in at full speed obliquely, break through the enemy's ranks, and so force them to flee. Nevertheless, this perjured usurper got his forces together again, and the night following entered Winchester. As soon as Queen Guanhumara heard this, Queen Guanshe, she immediately, despairing of success, fled from York to the City of Legions, where she resolved to lead a chaste life among the nuns in the church of Julius the Martyr, and enter herself one of their order. But Arthur, whose anger was now much more inflamed, upon the loss of so many hundreds of his fellow soldiers, after he had buried his slain, went on the third day to the city, and there besieged the traitor, who, notwithstanding, was unwilling to desist from his enterprise, but used all methods to encourage his adherents, and marching out with his troops prepared to fight his uncle. In the battle that followed hereupon, great numbers lost their lives on both sides; but at last Modred's army suffered most, so that he was forced to quit the field shamefully. From hence he made a precipitate flight, and, without taking any care for the burial of his slain, marched in haste towards Cornwall. Arthur, being inwardly grieved that he should so often escape, forthwith pursued him into that country as far as the river Cambula, where the other was expecting his coming. And Modred, as he was the boldest of men, arid always the quickest at making an attack, immediately placed his troops in order, resolving either to conquer or die, rather than continue his flight any longer. He had yet remaining with him sixty thousand men, out of whom he composed three bodies, which contained each of them six thousand six hundred and sixty-six men; but all the rest he joined in one body; and having assigned to each of the other parties their leaders, he took the command of this upon himself. After he had made this disposition of his forces, he endeavoured to animate them, and promised them the estates of their enemies if they came off with victory. Arthur, on the other side, also marshalled his army, which he divided into nine square companies, with a right and left wing; and having appointed to each of them their commanders, exhorted them to make a total rout of those robbers and perjured villains, who, being brought over into the island from foreign countries at the instance of the arch-traitor, were attempting to rob them of all their honours. He likewise told them that a mixed army composed of barbarous people of so many different countries, and who were all raw soldiers and inexperienced in war, would never be able to stand against such brave veteran troops as they were, provided they did their duty. After this encouragement given by each general to his fellow soldiers, the battle on a sudden began with great fury; wherein it would be as well grievous as tedious to relate the slaughter, the cruel havoc, and the excess of fury that was to be seen on both sides. In this manner they spent a good part of the day, till Arthur at last made a push with his company, consisting of six thousand six hundred and sixty-six men, against that in which he knew Modred was; and having opened a way with their swords, they pierced quite through it, and made a grievous slaughter. For in this assault fell the wicked traitor himself, and many thousands with him. But notwithstanding the loss of him, the rest did not flee, but running together from all parts of the field, maintained their ground with an undaunted courage. The fight now grew more furious than ever, and proved fatal to almost all the commanders and their forces. For on Modred's side fell Cheldric, Elasius, Egbrict, and Bunignus, Saxons; Gillapatric, Gillamor, Gistafel, and Gillarius, Irish; also the Scots and Picts, with almost all their leaders; on Arthur's side, Olbrict, king of Norway; Aschillius, king of Dacia; Cador Limenic Cassibellaun, with many thousands of others, as well Britons as foreigners, that he had brought with him. And even the renowned King Arthur himself was mortally wounded; and being carried thence to the isle of Avallon to be cured of his wounds, he gave up the crown of Britain to his kinsman Constantine, the son of Cador, duke of Cornwall, in the five hundred and forty-second year of our Lord's incarnation. Source: Geoffrey of Monmouth, book 11, ch. 1-2, pp. 226-30 . Return to the table of contents . The Account of Sir Thomas Malory And so as Sir Mordred was at Dover with his host, there came King Arthur with a great navy of ships, and galleys, and carracks. And there was Sir Mordred ready awaiting upon his landing, to let his own father to land upon the land that he was king over. Then there was launching of great boats and small, and full of noble men of arms; and there was much slaughter of gentle knights, and many a full bold baron was laid full low, on both parties. But King Arthur was so courageous that there might no manner of knights let him to land, and his knights fiercely followed him; and so they landed maugre Sir Mordred and all his power, and put Sir Mordred aback, that he fled and all his people. So when this battle was done, King Arthur let bury his people that were dead. ... And then the king let search all the towns for his knights that were slain, and interred them; and salved them with soft salves that so sore were wounded. Then much people drew unto King Arthur. And then they said that Sir Mordred warred upon King Arthur with wrong. And then King Arthur drew him with his host down by the seaside westward toward Salisbury; and there was a day assigned betwixt King Arthur and Sir Mordred, that they should meet upon a down beside Salisbury, and not far from the seaside; and this day was assigned on a Monday after Trinity Sunday, whereof King Arthur was passing glad, that he might be avenged upon Sir Mordred. ... Then were they condescended that King Arthur and Sir Mordred should meet betwixt both their hosts, and every each of them should bring fourteen persons; and they came with this word unto Arthur. Then said he: "I am glad that this is done." And so he went into the field. And when Arthur should depart, he warned all his host that an they see any sword drawn: "Look ye come on fiercely, and slay that traitor, Sir Mordred, for I in no wise trust him." In likewise Sir Mordred warned his host that: "An ye see any sword drawn, look that ye come on fiercely, and so slay all that ever before you standeth; for in no wise I will not trust for this treaty, for I know well my father will be avenged on me." And so they met as their appointment was, and so they were agreed and accorded thoroughly; and wine was fetched, and they drank. Right soon came an adder out of a little heath bush, and it stung a knight on the foot. And when the knight felt him stung, he looked down and saw the adder, and then he drew his sword to slay the adder, and thought of none other harm. And when the host on both parties saw that sword drawn, then they blew beamous, trumpets, and horns, and shouted grimly. And so both hosts dressed them together. And King Arthur took his horse, and said: "Alas this unhappy day!" and so rode to his party. And Sir Mordred in likewise. And never was there seen a more dolefuller battle in no Christian land; for there was but rushing and riding, foining and striking, and many a grim word was there spoken either to other, and many a deadly stroke. But ever King Arthur rode throughout the battle of Sir Mordred many times, and did full nobly as a noble king should, and at all times he fainted never; and Sir Mordred that day put him in devoir, and in great peril. And thus they fought all the long day, and never stinted till the noble knights were laid to the cold earth; and ever they fought still till it was near night, and by that time was there an hundred thousand laid dead upon the down. Then was Arthur wood wroth out of measure, when he saw his people so slain from him. Then the king looked about him, and then was he ware, of all his host and of all his good knights, were left no more on live but two knights; that one was Sir Lucan the Butler, and his brotner Sir Bedivere, and they were full sore wounded. "Jesu mercy," said the king, "where are all my noble knights become? Alas that ever I should see this doleful day, for now," said Arthur, "I am come to mine end. But would to God that I wist where were that traitor Sir Mordred, that hath caused all this mischief." Then was King Arthur ware where Sir Mordred leaned upon his sword among a great heap of dead men. "Now give me my spear," said Arthur unto Sir Lucan, "for yonder I have espied the traitor that all this woe hath wrought." ... "Tide me death, betide me life," saith the king, "now I see him yonder alone he shall never escape mine hands, for at a better avail shall I never have him." "God speed you well," said Sir Bedivere. Then, the king gat his spear in both his hands, and ran toward Sir Mordred, crying: "Traitor, now is thy death day come." And when Sir Mordred heard Sir Arthur, he ran until him with his sword drawn in his hand. And there King Arthur smote Sir Mordred under the shield, with a foin of his spear, throughout the body, more than a fathom. And when Sir Mordred felt that he had his death wound he thrust himself with the might that he had up to the bur of King Arthur's spear. And right so he smote his father Arthur, with his sword holden in both his hands, on the side of the head, that the sword pierced the helmet and the brain pan, and therewithal Sir Mordred fell stark dead to the earth; and the noble Arthur fell in a swoon to the earth, and there he swooned ofttimes. And Sir Lucan the Butler and Sir Bedivere ofttimes heave him up. And so weakly they led him betwixt them both, to a little chapel not far from the seaside. And when the king was there he thought him well eased. ... "My time hieth fast," said the king. "Therefore," said Arthur unto Sir Bedivere, "take thou Excalibur, my good sword, and go with it to yonder water side, and when thou comest there I charge thee throw my sword in that water, and come again and tell me what thou there seest." "My lord," said Bedivere, "your commandment shall be done, and lightly bring you word again." So Sir Bedivere departed, and by the way he beheld that noble sword, that the pommel and the haft was all of precious stones; and then he said to himself: "If I throw this rich sword in the water, thereof shall never come good, but harm and loss." And then Sir Bedivere hid Excalibur under a tree. And so, as soon as he might, he came again unto the king, and said he had been at the water, and had thrown the sword in the water. "What saw thou there?" said the king. "Sir," he said, "I saw nothing but waves and winds." "That is untruly said of thee," said the king, "therefore go thou lightly again, and do my commandment; as thou art to me lief and dear, spare not, but throw it in." Then Sir Bedivere returned again, and took the sword in his hand; and then him thought sin and shame to throw away that noble sword, and so efte he hid the sword, and returned again, and told to the king that he had been at the water, and done his commandment. "What saw thou there?" said the king. "Sir, he said, I saw nothing but the waters wappe and waves wanne." "Ah, traitor untrue," said King Arthur, "now hast thou betrayed me twice. Who would have weened that, thou that hast been to me so lief and dear? And thou art named a noble knight, and would betray me for the richness of the sword. But now go again lightly, for thy long tarrying putteth me in great jeopardy of my life, for I have taken cold. And but if thou do now as I bid thee, if ever I may see thee, I shall slay thee with mine own hands; for thou wouldst for my rich sword see me dead." Then Sir Bedivere departed, and went to the sword, and lightly took it up, and went to the water side; and there he bound the girdle about the hilts, and then he threw the sword as far into the water, as he might; and there came an arm and an hand above the water and met it, and caught it, and so shook it thrice and brandished, and then vanished away the hand with the sword in the water. So Sir Bedivere came again to the king, and told him what he saw. "Alas," said the king, "help me hence, for I dread me I have tarried over long." Then Sir Bedivere took the king upon his back, and so went with him to that water side. And when they were at the water side, even fast by the bank hoved a little barge with many fair ladies in it, and among them all was a queen, and all they had black hoods, and all they wept and shrieked when they saw King Arthur. "Now put me into the barge," said the king. And so he did softly; and there received him three queens with great mourning; and so they set them down, and in one of their laps King Arthur laid his head. And then that queen said: "Ah, dear brother, why have ye tarried so long from me? Alas, this wound on your head hath caught over-much cold." And so then they rowed from the land, and Sir Bedivere beheld all those ladies go from him. Then Sir Bedivere cried: "Ah my lord Arthur, what shall become of me, now ye go from me and leave me here alone among mine enemies?" "Comfort thyself, said the king, and do as well as thou mayest, for in me is no trust for to trust in; for I will into the vale of Avilion [Avalon] to heal me of my grievous wound; and if thou hear never more of me, pray for my soul." But ever the queens and ladies wept and shrieked, that it was pity to hear. And as soon as Sir Bedivere had lost the sight of the barge, he wept and wailed, and so took the forest; and so he went all that night, and in the morning he was ware betwixt two holts hoar, of a chapel and an hermitage. Then was Sir Bedivere glad, and thither he went; and when he came into the chapel, he saw where lay an hermit grovelling on all four, there fast by a tomb was new graven. When the hermit saw Sir Bedivere he knew him well, for he was but little tofore Bishop of Canterbury, that Sir Mordred flemed. "Sir," said Bedivere, "what man is there interred that ye pray so fast for?" "Fair son," said the hermit, "I wot not verily, but by deeming. But this night, at midnight, here came a number of ladies, and brought hither a dead corpse, and prayed me to bury him; and here they offered an hundred tapers, and they gave me an hundred besants." "Alas," said Sir Bedivere, "that was my lord King Arthur, that here lieth buried in this chapel." Then Sir Bedivere swooned; and when he awoke he prayed the hermit he might abide with him still there, to live with fasting and prayers. "For from hence will I never go, said Sir Bedivere, by my will, but all the days of my life here to pray for my lord Arthur." "Ye are welcome to me, said the hermit, for I know ye better than ye ween that I do. Ye are the bold Bedivere, and the full noble duke, Sir Lucan the Butler, was your brother." Then Sir Bedivere told the hermit all as ye have heard tofore. So there bode Sir Bedivere with the hermit that was tofore Bishop of Canterbury, and there Sir Bedivere put upon him poor clothes, and served the hermit full lowly in fasting and in prayers. Thus of Arthur I find never more written in books that be authorised, nor more of the very certainty of his death heard I never read, but thus was he led away in a ship wherein were three queens; that one was King Arthur's sister, Queen Morgan le Fay; the other was the Queen of Northgalis; the third was the Queen of the Waste Lands. Also there was Nimue, the chief lady of the lake, that had wedded Pelleas the good knight; and this lady had done much for King Arthur, for she would never suffer Sir Pelleas to be in no place where he should be in danger of his life; and so he lived to the uttermost of his days with her in great rest. More of the death of King Arthur could I never find, but that ladies brought him to his burials; and such one was buried there, that the hermit bare witness that sometime was Bishop of Canterbury, but yet the hermit knew not in certain that he was verily the body of King Arthur: for this tale Sir Bedivere, knight of the Table Round, made it to be written. Yet some men say in many parts of England that King Arthur is not dead, but had by the will of our Lord Jesu into another place; and men say that he shall come again, and he shall win the holy cross. I will not say it shall be so, but rather I will say, here in this world he changed his life. But many men say that there is written upon his tomb this verse: Hic jacet Arturus Rex, quondam Rex que futurus. [Here lies Arthur, the once and future king.] Thus leave I here Sir Bedivere with the hermit, that dwelled that time in a chapel beside Glastonbury, and there was his hermitage. And so they lived in their prayers, and fastings, and great abstinence. And when Queen Guenever [Guinevere] understood that King Arthur was slain, and all the noble knights, Sir Mordred and all the remnant, then the queen stole away, and five ladies with her, and so she went to Almesbury; and there she let make herself a nun, and ware white clothes and black, and great penance she took, as ever did sinful lady in this land, and never creature could make her merry; but lived in fasting, prayers, and alms-deeds, that all manner of people marvelled how virtuously she was changed. Source: Sir Thomas Malory, book 21, ch. 2-7, pp. 381-91 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 11, 2020. Bald Stories: Folktales about Hairless Men Bald Stories folktales about hairless men translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2020 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents A Man and Two Wives (Aesop--L'Estrange). The Man and His Two Wives (Aesop--Jacobs). The Middle-Aged Man between Two Ages and His Two Mistresses (Jean de La Fontaine). A Horse-Man's Wig Blown Off (Avianus). The Bald Man and the Fly (Aesop). The Pedant, the Bald Man, and the Barber . (Europe). The Foolish Bald Man and the Fool Who Pelted Him (India). The Bald Man and the Hair-Restorer (India). How Saint Peter Lost His Hair (Germany). Old Hanrahan (Ireland). How Come Mr. Buzzard to Have a Bald Head (African-American). A Man and Two Wives Aesop It was now Cuckow-Time and a Certain Middle-Ag'd Man , that was Half-Gray, Half-Brown, took a fancy to Marry Two Wives, of an Age One under Another, and Happy was the Woman that could please him Best. They took Mighty Care of him to All manner of Purposes, and still as they were Combing the Good Man's Head, they'd be Picking out here and there a Hair to make it all of a Colour. The Matronly Wife, she Pluck'd out All the Brown Hairs, and the Younger the White : So that they left the Man in in Conclusion no better than a Bald Buzzard betwixt them. The Moral 'Tis a much Harder Thing to Please Two Wives then Two Masters; and He's a Bold Man that offers at it. Source: Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists (London: R. Sare et al, , 1692), no. 141, pp. 128-29 . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1394. Return to the table of contents . The Man and His Two Wives Aesop In the old days, when men were allowed to have many wives, a middle-aged man had one wife that was old and one that was young; each loved him very much, and desired to see him like herself. Now the man's hair was turning grey, which the young wife did not like, as it made him look too old for her husband. So every night she used to comb his hair and pull out the white ones. But the elder wife saw her husband growing grey with great pleasure, for she did not like to be mistaken for his mother. So every morning she used to arrange his hair and pull out as many of the black ones as she could. In consequence the man soon found himself entirely bald. Yield to all and you will soon have nothing to yield. Source: Joseph Jacobs, The Fables of Æsop (London and New York: Macmillian and Company, 1894), no. 45, pp. 106-107 . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1394. Return to the table of contents . The Middle-Aged Man between Two Ages and His Two Mistresses Jean de La Fontaine A man advanced in life, And getting into grey, Thought it high time in his decay To dream about a wife. He had enough in cash and houses, Therefore a choice of charming spouses. All strove to please him, Some too did tease him; On which our lover checked his new propension, No trifle was success in his intention. Two widows o'er his heart did most prevail. The one still fresh, the other rather stale; But she by pretty arts repaid What nature in her had decayed. They smiled, they joked, they entertained him; Sometimes they pleased, sometimes they pained him, For as so lovingly they courted, Too freely with his locks they sported, That is, they dressed his hair. Each to her fancy trimmed his bust; The older lady for her share Plucked from it the remaining black. Her buxom rival thought it then but just The grey and white locks to attack: In fine, they dressed and plundered so, The head was bald and white as snow. He now found out their wicked pranks -- "Ladies," he said, "ten thousand thanks; With head so bare I yet can boast That I have rather gained than lost; For either bride, I see, would rule Me, her poor sheep, her slave, her tool. All farther favours I refuse -- From Hymen I have had no news. Bald heads, my queens, are not the go; I thank you for the lesson though." Source: Jean de La Fontaine (1621-95), The Fables of La Fontaine , translated mainly by R. Thomson (London: J. C. Nimmo and Bain, 1884), book 1, fable 17, pp. 31-32 . Link to the text of this fable in French: L'homme entre deux ages, et ses deux maîtresses . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1394. Return to the table of contents . A Horse-Man's Wig Blown Off Avianus There was a horse-man had a cap on with a false head of hair tack'd to'it. There comes a puff of wind, and blows off cap and wig together. The people made sport, he saw, with his bald crown, and so very fairly he put in with them to laugh for company. "Why, gentlemen," says he, "would you have me keep other people's hair better than I did my own?" The Moral: Many a man would be extreamly ridiculous, if he did not spoil the jest by playing upon himself first. Source: Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists: With Morals and Reflections , 6th edition (London: Printed for R. Sare et al., 1714), fable 228, p. 247 . L'Estrange attributes this fable to Anianus [Avianus]. Other editors attribute it to Aesop. Return to the table of contents . The Bald Man and the Fly Aesop There was once a bald man who sat down after work on a hot summer's day. A fly came up a kept buzzing about his bald pate, and stinging him from time to time. The man aimed a blow at his little enemy, but -- whack -- his palm came on his head instead. Again the fly tormented him, but this time the man was wiser and said: " You will only injure youself if you take notice of despicable enemies. " Source: Joseph Jacobs, The Fables of Æsop: Selected, Told Anew, and Their History Traced (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), p. 47 . Similar to Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1586. Return to the table of contents . The Pedant, the Bald Man, and the Barber Europe The following jest is spread -- mutatis mutandis -- over all Europe: A pedant, a bald man, and a barber, making a journey in company, agreed to watch in turn during the night. It was the barber's watch first. He propped up the sleeping pedant, and shaved his head, and when his time came, awoke him. When the pedant felt his head bare, "What a fool is this barber," he cried, "for he has roused the bald man instead of me!" Source: W. A. Clouston, The Book of Noodles: Stories of Simpletons; or, Fools and Their Follies (New York: A. C. Armstrong and Son, 1888), p. 6 . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1284. Return to the table of contents . The Foolish Bald Man and the Fool Who Pelted Him India There was a certain bald man with a head like a copper pot. Once on a time a young man, who, being hungry, had gathered wood-apples, as he was coming along his path, saw him sitting at the foot of a tree. In fun he hit him. on the head with a wood-apple; the bald man took it patiently and said nothing to him. Then he hit his head with all the rest of the wood-apples that he had, throwing them at him one after another, and the bald man remained silent, even though the blood flowed. So the foolish young fellow had to go home hungry without his wood-apples, which he had broken to pieces in his useless and childish pastime of pelting the bald man; and the foolish bald man went home with his head streaming with blood, saying to himself; "Why should I not submit to being pelted with such delicious wood-apples?" And everybody there laughed, when they saw him with his head covered with blood, looking like the diadem with which he had been crowned king of fools. Thus you see that foolish persons become the objects of ridicule in the world, and do not succeed in their objects; but wise persons are honoured. Source (books.google.com): Somadeva Bhatta, The Kathá Sarit Ságara; or, Ocean of the Streams of Story , translated from the original Sanskrit by C. H. Tawney, vol. 2 (Calcutta: Printed by J. W. Thomas at the Baptist Mission Press, 1884), p. 47 . Source (Internet Archive): Somadeva Bhatta, The Kathá Sarit Ságara; or, Ocean of the Streams of Story , translated from the original Sanskrit by C. H. Tawney, vol. 2 (Calcutta: Printed by J. W. Thomas at the Baptist Mission Press, 1884), p. 47 . The Kathá Sarit Ságara (also spelled Kathasaritsagara ) is a collection of Indian tales compiled and retold in the 11th century by a Brahmin named Somadeva Bhatta. Return to the table of contents . The Bald Man and the Hair-Restorer India There was a bald man, with a head like a copper pot. And he, being a fool, was ashamed because, though a rich man in the world, he had no hair on his head. Then a rogue, who lived upon others, came to him and said, "There is a physician who knows a drug that will produce hair." When he heard it, he said, "If you bring him to me, I will give wealth to you and to that physician also." When he said this, the rogue for a long time devoured his substance, and brought to that simpleton a doctor who was a rogue also. And after the doctor too had long lived at his expense, he one day removed his head-dress designedly, and shewed him his bald head. In spite of that, the blockhead, without considering, asked him for a drug which would produce hair, then the physician said to him, "Since I am bald myself, how can I produce hair in others? It was in order to explain this to you, that I showed you my bald head. But out on you! You do not understand even now." With these words the physician went away. So, you see, rogues perpetually make sport of fools. Source (books.google.com): Somadeva Bhatta, The Kathá Sarit Ságara; or, Ocean of the Streams of Story , translated from the original Sanskrit by C. H. Tawney, vol. 2 (Calcutta: Printed by J. W. Thomas at the Baptist Mission Press, 1884), p. 55 . Source (Internet Archive): Somadeva Bhatta, The Kathá Sarit Ságara; or, Ocean of the Streams of Story , translated from the original Sanskrit by C. H. Tawney, vol. 2 (Calcutta: Printed by J. W. Thomas at the Baptist Mission Press, 1884), p. 55 . The Kathá Sarit Ságara (also spelled Kathasaritsagara ) is a collection of Indian tales compiled and retold in the 11th century by a Brahmin named Somadeva Bhatta. Return to the table of contents . How Saint Peter Lost His Hair Germany Everyone knows that Saint Peter is entirely bald, except for a single lock of hair in front that falls over his forehead, but most people do not know the following story that explains how this came to be. While he and Christ were traveling together they came to a farmhouse where the farmwife was just cooking up some large yeast pancakes in grease. According to others it was noodles. Saint Peter entered the house to beg for some pancakes, while the Lord waited outside. The farmwife was a good-hearted woman, and she gave Peter three pancakes, fresh from the pan. But Peter was selfish, and in order to gain an advantage when the pancakes were divided up, he quickly hid one of them in his cap, then put it on his head. He pretended that he had received only two pancakes, one of which he gave to the Lord. The pancake under his cap was still hot, and it began to burn Peter terribly on the head, but he could not do anything about it; he just had to bear the pain. Later, when he took off his cap, he discovered that the hot pancake had burned into his head a large bald spot, which remained with him as long as he lived. Only the lock of hair that had protruded from the front of his cap was spared. Thus Saint Peter's bald head has one lock of hair in front. Source: Karl Reiser, Sagen, Gebräuche und Sprichwörter des Allgäus , vol. 1 (Kempten: Verlag der Jos. Kösel'schen Buchhandlung, 1895), p. 356 . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 774J. Comical folktales about Jesus and Peter are very common in Europe, with Jesus playing the "straight man," and Peter providing the burlesque humor. The individual episodes in these stories are classified as type 774A through 774P in the Aarne-Thompson-Uther system. Return to the table of contents . Old Hanrahan Ireland Old Hanrahan one time went to the forth that's in front of his house and cut a bush, and he a fresh man enough. And next morning he hadn't a blade of hair on his head -- not a blade. And he had to buy a wig and wear it for the rest of his life. I remember him and the wig well. And it was some years after that that Delane, the father of the great cricketer, was passing by that way, and the water had risen and he strayed off the road into it. And as he got farther and farther in, till he was covered to better than his waist, he heard the voice of his wife crying, "Go on, John, go on farther." And he called out, "These are John Hanrahan's faeries that took the hair off him." "And what did you do then?" they asked when he got safe to the house, and was telling this. And he said, "I turned my coat inside out, and after that they troubled me no more, and so I got safe to the road again." But no one ever had luck that meddled with a forth, so it's always said. Source (books.google.com): Lady Gregory, Visions and Beliefs in the West of Ireland , with two essays and notes by W. B. Yeats, series 2 (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1920), p. 227 . Source (Internet Archive): Lady Gregory, Visions and Beliefs in the West of Ireland , with two essays and notes by W. B. Yeats, series 2 (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1920), p. 227 . Lady Gregory's source: "John Mangan." The "forths" featured in this story are also known as a " fairy forts " or "raths." These are remnants ruins of ancient structures thought to be inhabited by fairies. Return to the table of contents . How Come Mr. Buzzard to Have a Bald Head African-American One day, in the old times, Ann Nancy [Anansi] started out to find a good place for to build her house; she walk on till she find a break in a nice damp rock, and she set down to rest, and take 'servation of the points to throw her threads. Presently, she hear a great floppin' of wings, and the old Mr. Buzzard come flying down and light on the rock, with a big piece of meat in he mouth. Ann Nancy, she scroon in the rock and look out, and she hear Mr. Buzzard say, "Good safe, good safe, come down, come down," and sure 'nough, when he say it three times, a safe come down, and Mr. Buzzard, he open the door and put in he meat and say, "Good safe, good safe, go up, go up," and it go up aright, and Mr. Buzzard fly away. Then Ann Nancy, she set and study 'bout it, 'cause she done see the safe was full of all the good things she ever hear of, and it come across her mind to call it and see if it come down; so she say, like Mr. Buzzard, "Good safe, good safe, come down, come down," and sure 'nough, when she say it three times, down it come, and she open the door and step in, and she say, "Good safe, good safe, go up, go up," and up she go, and she eat her fill, and have a fine time. Directly she hear a voice say, "Good safe, good safe, come down, come down," and the safe start down, and Ann Nancy, she so scared, she don't know what to do, but she say soft and quickly, "Good safe, go up," and it stop, and go up a little, but Mr. Buzzard say, "Good safe, come down, come down," and down it start, and poor Ann Nancy whisper quick, "Go up, good safe, go up," and it go back. And so they go for a long time, only Mr. Buzzard can't hear Ann Nancy, 'cause she whisper soft to the safe, and he cock he eye in 'stonishment to see the old safe bob up and down, like it gone 'stracted. So they keep on, "Good safe, good safe, come down," "Good safe, good safe, go up," till poor Ann Nancy's brain get 'fused, and she make a slip and say, "Good safe, come down," and down it come. Mr. Buzzard, he open the do', and there he find Ann Nancy, and he say, "Oh you poor mis'rable creeter," and he just 'bout to eat her up, when poor Ann Nancy, she begged so hard, and compliment his fine presence, and compare how he sail in the clouds while she 'bliged to crawl in the dirt, till he that proudful and set up he feel mighty pardoning spirit, and he let her go. But Ann Nancy ain't got no gratitude in her mind; she feel she looked down on by all the creeters, and it sour her mind and temper. She ain't gwine forget anybody what cross her path, no, that she don't, and while she spin her house she just study constant how she gwine get the best of every creeter. She knew Mr. Buzzard's weak point am he stomach, and one day she make it out dat she make a dining, and 'vite Mr. Buzzard and Miss Buzzard and the children. Ann Nancy, she know how to set out a-dining for sure, and when they all done got sot down to the table, and she mighty busy passing the hot coffee to Mr. Buzzard and the little Buzzards, she have a powerful big pot of scalding water ready, and she slop it all over poor old Mr. Buzzard's head, and the poor old man go bald-headed from that day. And he don't forget it on Ann Nancy, 'cause you see she de onliest creeter on the top side the earth what Mr. Buzzard don't eat. Source: Emma M. Backus, "Animal Tales from North Carolina," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 11 (1898), pp. 288-89 . Anansi (known in this tale as Ann Nancy) is a spider-like trickster featured in many folktales from West Africa and from the Caribbean Islands. The charm that summons the magic safe is reminiscent of the "Open Sesame" command in folktales of type 676, most famously Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 8, 2020. The Bear Trainer and His Cat The Bear Trainer and His Cat folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1161 (also categorized as migratory legends of Christiansen type 6015) translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2020 Contents Peer Gynt and the Trolls (Norway). The Cat on the Dovrefjell (Norway). The Cat of Norrhult (Sweden). The Troll and the Bear (Denmark). The Kobold and the Polar Bear (Germany). The Cat Mill (Germany). The Water Nix in the Oil Mill near Frauendorf (Germany). The Water-Man (Moravia). Kelpie and the Boar (Scotland). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Peer Gynt and the Trolls Norway In the olden days there lived in Kvam a hunter, whose name was Peer Gynt, and who was always roaming about in the mountains after bears and elks, for in those days there were more forests on the mountains than there are now, and consequently plenty of wild beasts.... Shortly before Christmas, Peer set out again on another expedition. He had heard of a farm on Dovrefell which was invaded by such a number of trolls every Christmas Eve that the people on the farm had to move out, and get shelter at some of their neighbors. He was anxious to go there, for he had a great fancy to come across the trolls again. He dressed himself in some old ragged clothes, and took a tame white bear, which he had, with him, as well as an awl, some pitch, and twine. When he came to the farm he went in and asked for lodgings. "God help us!" said the farmer; " we can't give you any lodgings. We have to clear out of the house ourselves soon and look for lodgings, for every Christmas Eve we have the trolls here." But Peer thought he should be able to clear the trolls out -- he had done such a thing before; and then he got leave to stay, and a pig's skin into the bargain. The bear lay down behind the fireplace, and Peer took out his awl, and pitch, and twine, and began making a big, big shoe, which it took the whole pig's skin to make. He put a strong rope in for laces, that he might pull the shoe tightly together, and, finally, he armed himself with a couple of handspikes. Shortly he heard the trolls coming. They had a fiddler with them, and some began dancing, while others fell to eating the Christmas fare on the table -- some fried bacon, and some fried frogs and toads, and other nasty things which they had brought with them. During this some of the trolls found the shoe Peer had made. They thought it must belong to a very big foot. They all wanted to try it on at once, so they put a foot each into it; but Peer made haste and tightened the rope, took one of the handspikes and fastened the rope round it, and got them at last securely tied up in the shoe. Just then the bear put his nose out from behind the fireplace, where he was lying, and smelt they were frying something. "Will you have a sausage, pussy?" said one of the trolls, and threw a hot frog right into the bear's jaw. "Scratch them, pussy!" said Peer The bear got so angry that he rushed at the trolls and scratched them all over, while Peer took the other handspike and hammered away at them as if he wanted to beat their brains out. The trolls had to clear out at last, but Peer stayed and enjoyed himself with all the Christmas fare the whole week. After that the trolls were not heard of there for many years. Some years afterwards, about Christmastime, the farmer was out in the forest cutting wood for the holidays, when a troll came up to him and shouted: "Have you got that big pussy of yours, yet?" "Oh, yes, she is at home behind the fireplace," said the farmer; "and she has got seven kittens all bigger and larger than herself." "We'll never come to you any more, then," said the troll. Source: Peter Christian Asbjørnsen, Folk and Fairy Tales , translated by H. L. Brækstad (New York: A. C. Armstrong and Son, 1883), pp. 149-50 . Bræksted's source: Peter Christian Asbjørnsen, Norske Huldreeventyr og Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Christiania [Oslo]: Forlagt af C. A. Dybwad, 1848), pp. 77-84 . Bræksted anglicizes the hero's name to Peter Gynt , but I have chosen to retain the Norwegian (and more familiar) form: Peer Gynt . Return to the table of contents . The Cat on the Dovrefjell Norway Once upon a time there was a man up in Finnmark who had caught a large white bear, which he was going to take to the King of Denmark. It so happened that he came to the Dovrefjell on Christmas Eve. He went to a cottage where a man lived whose name was Halvor, and he asked the man for lodging for himself and his white bear. "God bless us!" said the man, "but we can't give anyone lodging just now, for every Christmas Eve the house is so full of trolls that we are forced to move out, and we'll have no shelter over our own heads, to say nothing of providing for anyone else." "Oh?" said the man, "If that's all, you can very well let me use your house. My bear can sleep under the stove here, and I can sleep in the storeroom." Well, he begged so hard, that at last he got permission to stay there. The people of the house moved out, but before they went, everything was made ready for the trolls. The table was set with cream porridge and fish and sausages and everything else that was good, just as for any other grand feast. When everything was ready, in came the trolls. Some were large, and some were small. Some had long tails, and some had no tails at all. And some had long, long noses. They ate and drank and tasted everything. Then one of the troll youngsters saw the white bear lying under the stove, so he took a piece of sausage, stuck it onto a fork, and went and poked it against the white bear's nose, burning it. Then he shrieked, "Kitty, do you want some sausage?" The white bear rose up and growled, and then chased the whole pack of them out, both large and small. A year later Halvor was out in the woods at midday of Christmas Eve, gathering wood for the holidays, for he expected the trolls again. As he was chopping, he heard a voice shouting from the woods, "Halvor! Halvor!" "Yes?" said Halvor. "Do you still have that big cat?" "Yes," said Halvor. "She's lying at home under the stove, and what's more, she now has seven kittens, far bigger and fiercer than she is herself." "Then, we'll never come to your place again," shouted the troll in the woods, and since that time the trolls have never eaten their Yule porridge with Halvor on the Dovrefjell." Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Kjetta på Dovre , Norske Folkeeventyr (1852). I used the following translation: "The Cat on the Dovrefell," Popular Tales from the Norse , 2nd edition, translated by George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), pp. 103-104 . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Finnmark is the northernmost county in Norway. The Dovrefjell (sometimes spelled Dovrefell in English) is a mountain range in central Norway. Return to the table of contents . The Cat of Norrhult Sweden On the estate of Norrhult, in the parish of Rumskulla, the people in olden times were very much troubled by trolls and ghosts. The disturbances finally became so unbearable that they were compelled to desert house and home, and seek an asylum with their neighbors. One old man was left behind, and he, because he was so feeble that he could not move with the rest. Some time thereafter, there came one evening a man having with him a bear, and asked for lodgings for himself and companion. The old man consented, but expressed doubts about his guest being able to endure the disturbances that were likely to occur during the night. The stranger replied that he was not afraid of noises, and laid himself down, with his bear, near the old man's bed. Only a few hours had passed, when a multitude of trolls came into the hut and began their usual clatter. Some of them built the fire in the fireplace, others set the kettle upon the fire, and others again put into the kettle a mess of filth, such as lizards, frogs, worms, etc. When the mess was cooked, the table was laid, and the trolls sat down to the repast. One of them threw a worm to the bear, and said, "Will you have a fish, kitty?" Another went to the bear-keeper and asked him if he would not have some of their food. At this the latter let loose the bear, which struck about him so lustily that soon the whole swarm was flying through the door. Some time after, the door was again opened, and a troll with mouth so large that it filled the whole opening peeked in. "Sic him!" said the bear-keeper, and the bear soon hunted him away also. In the morning the stranger gathered the people of the village around him and directed them to raise a cross upon the estate, and to engrave a prayer on Cross Mountain, where the trolls dwelt, and they would be freed from their troublesome visitors. Seven years later a resident of Norrhult went to Norrköping. On his way home he met a man who asked him where he came from, and, upon being informed, claimed to be a neighbor, and invited the peasant to ride with him on his black horse Away they went at a lively trot along the road, the peasant supposed, but in fact high up in the air. When it became quite dark the horse stumbled so that the peasant came near falling off. "It is well you were able to hold on," said the horseman. "That was the point of the steeple of Linköping's cathedral that the horse stumbled against. Listen!" continued he. "Seven years ago I visited Norrhult. You then had a vicious cat there. Is it still alive?" "Yes, truly, and many more," said the peasant. After a time the rider checked his horse and bade the peasant dismount. When the latter looked around him he found himself at Cross Mountain, near his home. Some time later another troll came to the peasant's cottage and asked if that great savage cat still lived. "Look out!" said the peasant. "She is lying there by the oven, and has seven young ones, all worse than she." "Oh!" cried the troll, and rushed for the door. From that time no trolls have ever visited Norrhult. Source: Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 126-128 . This legend is from Östergötland, a province in southeastern Sweden. Note by Hofberg: "Not longer than thirty years ago a cross, said to be the one raised on this occasion, was still standing in Norrhult." Return to the table of contents . The Troll and the Bear Norway In Højegaard in old days no one could stay over Christmas Eve. All the folk had to go down to the old farm in Rønnebæk, which has long been given up, and stay there till Christmas morning, for every Christmas Eve there came an ugly troll from Dragehøi, with a sackful of toads on his back, which he roasted at the fire in the sitting room, and ate one after another; but if any one ventured to stay there over night, he might be prepared to be torn in pieces by the troll. One time, just as the folk were leaving the farm, there came a man who went about with a bear, exhibiting it. They told him why they had to leave, and advised him also to get away from there; but the man begged to be allowed to stay overnight, and as he was bent on doing so they finally gave him leave. Towards evening, the troll came with his sack on his back, sat down by the fire, opened it and pulled out the one toad after the other, took each by a hind leg and held it over the fire till it was roasted, and then swallowed it. So one toad after the other went into him for some time, till he began to be satisfied. Then he turned to the man, and said, "What's your dog's name?" "Toad," said the man. The troll took a toad, roasted it, and held it out to the bear, saying, "Toad shall have a toad," but the bear growled, and began to rise. "Yes," said the man to the troll, "just you take care, and not make him angry, or he'll tear you in pieces." The troll looked quite frightened, and asked, "Have you any more like him?" "Yes," said the man, "this one has five young ones, which are lying outside on the baking oven." The troll made haste to tie up the toads he had left in the sack, threw it on his back, and went out at the door in a hurry. Next morning, when the people of the farm came home, the man was lying all right in the bed, and the bear beside the fire, both quite comfortable. When the man told them how he had got on, they were very glad, and bade him come again next Christmas Eve, which he did, but the troll did not come, and has never shown himself there since. Source: William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples (London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), pp. 65-66 . Return to the table of contents . The Kobold and the Polar Bear Germany The king of Norway sends a polar bear ( wazzerber ) as a gift to the king of Denmark. The bear and its leader have just landed in Denmark when night overtakes them and they hasten on to a house by the roadside. The Norseman explains to the fanner that the bear is not a dangerous monster and asks quarters for the night. This request the farmer would gladly grant, but he confesses that he has no power over his homestead after nightfall, for a malicious kobold ( schretel ) drives him and his cattle away each evening. The stranger declares his reliance on God, and repeats his request, to which the host gives unwilling assent. Well supplied with food, man and bear prepare to spend the night in the bakery. While both are asleep a red-capped kobold scarcely three spans long comes up to the fire and begins to roast some meat on an iron spit. Jealously it eyes the interlopers, particularly the bear, until passion so overcomes it that it strikes the bear on the back of the head. The bear snarls but makes no move. When the meat drips fat the schretel deals another blow and the bear "turns the other cheek." Finally, when the chop sizzles with the heat, the little fellow raises spit and all high above his head and brings it down on the bear's mouth. Then the bear does not prove to be so lazy after all, and the scuffle begins in earnest. For some time neither side has an advantage, but ultimately the kobold is obliged to give in. All the while the bear's master has been watching the melee from a safe retreat in the oven, and even when the disturber of the peace has fled he does not venture forth. On the morrow the householder inquires somewhat anxiously about the health of his visitors, and before they go on learns the events of the night. Later that morning when the farmer has gone out into the field to plow, the disheveled kobold comes running up to him with the query: "Is your big cat still alive?" With ready wit the farmer grasps the situation, and assures the kobold that the "old cat" in addition to being alive is now the mother of five young ones. Thereupon the kobold flees forever, and since then the farmer and his family have lived happily in the farmhouse. Source: Archer Taylor, "Schrätel und Wasserbär," Modern Philology , vol. 17, no. 6 (October 1919), pp. 305-306 . Taylor's source: an anonymous Middle High German story, probably drawn from Scandinavian sources. Return to the table of contents . The Cat Mill Germany There is a mill called the Cat Mill near Schwanditz in the vicinity of Altenburg. This is how it received its name. In times past, a kobold frequented a hill above the mill, and every evening he would enter the mill and demand a certain measure of beer, which he then drank. Once a bear trainer was spending the night in the mill with his bears. The kobold arrived, jumping onto first one and then onto another one of the bears, when they turned on him and mauled him terribly. Injured, he was barely able to escape. He did not return to the mill, and one day, looking down from the hilltop, he saw the miller and asked, "Miller, do you still have those mean cats?" And that is how the mill came to be known as the Cat Mill. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräche aus Meklenburg, Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), p. 203 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman © 2013. The supernatural creature whom I have called a kobold (a generic term) is identified by Kuhn and Schwartz as a Bieresel (beer-donkey), a spook in German folklore that would assume the form of an animal, then come into a tavern or other establishment and drink the guests' beer. Return to the table of contents . The Water Nix in the Oil Mill near Frauendorf Germany Ages ago a water nix would bring fish to the so-called Oil Mill located at Frauendorf Manor on a channel of the River Spree near Cottbus. The nix would ask the miller to cook the fish, after which the nix would eat them right at the mill. With time these uncanny visits came to annoy the miller, but he never dared to turn down his uninvited visitor's requests. However, the time came when fate freed him from the nix. One evening a bear trainer came to Frauendorf with his tamed bear and asked the miller for a night's lodging. The latter, a good-hearted man, did not refuse him. To keep it from harming anyone, the bear was chained up behind the table in the main room. Not long afterward the nix entered the mill with a catch of fish. With the miller's permission he cooked them, and then sat down next to the bear behind the table and began to eat them. The hungry bear could not resist the tempting smell of the tasty meal, and wasted no time in helping himself from the nix's plate. This angered the nix, who struck at the bear's paws with his spoon. The bear let this happen a few times, but when the blows became more painful, he became furious. He grabbed the nix and crushed him terribly, until the bear trainer jumped up and rescued the nearly dead nix from the beast's claws. The nix ran quickly out the door, jumped into the water, and was not seen again for a whole year. At the end of this time, the miller was one day working near his waterway, when the nix, wearing his red cap, suddenly emerged from the water, greeted the miller, then asked with a whining voice, "Master miller, do you still have that large cat?" The miller, fearing that the nix wanted to take up his regular visits again, quickly answered, "Yes, she is lying behind the stove, and she has ninety-nine young ones!" To this the nix replied, "I'll never again come to your place!" Then he disappeared beneath the water and was never seen there again. Source: Karl Haupt, "Der Wassernix und der Bär in der Oelmühle bei Freuendorf," Sagenbuch der Lausitz , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1862), no. 49, pp. 52-53 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Return to the table of contents . The Water-Man Moravia A bear trainer with his dancing bear once came to an isolated mill and asked the miller to take them in for the night, as there was no village far and wide, and night was already falling. "I would be glad to take you in," said the miller, "if you are not afraid, for a water-man comes into the mill every night and plays pranks on anyone sleeping or even just passing time in the grinding room, and I don't have room for you anywhere else." "What sort of pranks?" asked the bear trainer. "Just practical jokes," replied the miller, "but they make the people who come to the mill angry, and they won't come back. I've lost a lot of customers because of this. Once he smeared pitch on someone's boot soles, so that he stuck to the floor when he stood up. He poured water into someone else's boots, or sprinkled bran in their hair. He sewed another person's pockets shut. Once he even put someone who was sleeping in the mill into a sack and hung it on a beam, and more such pranks." "If that's all there is, it won' bother me," said the bear trainer. "I'll stay." So the miller put a bundle of straw on the floor for him, and the man lay down with the bear at his side, and they slept until twelve o'clock. The trainer was awakened by the bear's roaring. He jumped up and saw the bear wrestling with the water-man. The latter had never seen a bear before, and when he took hold of the bear's fur, the bear held him tightly with his paws. The trainer quickly went to the mill and started it running. Then he grabbed the water-man by his feet. The bear held him up, and thus they set him on the millstone and held him there, in spite of his cries, until half of his behind had been ground away. Then they let him go, and went back to sleep. Early the next morning the miller came out and was amazed that both of them were sleeping so soundly. When the trainer woke up he told the miller about their last night's adventure, at which the miller had to laugh until he held his belly. As they parted, the miller gave presents to the bear trainer, and invited him to stay with him the next time he came that way. Then he lit his pipe and lay down contentedly near the window. A little dwarf came up to him. He was wearing yellow trousers, a bright-red vest, a green jacket, and a blue cap. He said to the smoker, "Miller, do you still have that big cat?" "Yes," said the latter, "I still have her." "Farewell then. You'll never see me again," he said, and trotted away. Source: Marie Kosch, "Vom Wassermann," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Mähren (Kremsier: Druck und Commissionsverlag Heinrich Gusek, 1899), no. 1, pp. 103-104. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Moravia, a traditional kingdom and region in central Europe with mixed Slavic and German populations, was incorporated in the twentieth century into Czechoslovakia, and subsequently into the Czech Republic. Return to the table of contents . The Kelpie and the Boar Scotland A miller was annoyed by a kelpie entering his mill during night and playing havoc among the grain and meal. One night he shut up in the mill his boar, for a miller generally kept a good many pigs and a breeding sow or two. As usual kelpie entered the mill. The boar stood on his defence, and fought the kelpie. Next night the creature appeared at the miller's window, and called to him, "Is there a chattie i' the mill the nicht?" "Aye, there is a chattie i' the mill, an will be for ever mair," was the answer. Kelpie returned no more to the mill. Source: Walter Gregor, "Kelpie Stories from the North of Scotland," The Folk-Lore Journal , vol. 1, part 9 (September 1883), p. 293 . The kelpie is a demonic "water horse" featured in many Scottish and Irish superstitions and folktales. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 4, 2020. Bearskin, and other tales of type 361 Bearskin and other folktales of type 361 in which a man gains a fortune and a beautiful bride by entering into a pact with the devil translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2023 Contents Bearskin (Hans Jakob Christoph von Grimmelshausen). Devil Greenjacket (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Bearskin (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Go to the Devil (Germany -- Lower Lusatia). The Devil as Partner (Switzerland). Hell's Gatekeeper (Austria). Two for One (Italy). The Bear Man (Denmark). Never-Wash (Russia). Don Giovanni de la Fortuna (Sicily). The Reward of Kindness (Philippines). The King's Tabernacle (Wales). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Bearskin Hans Jakob Christoph von Grimmelshausen In the year 1396 when Sigismundus, the former King of Hungary, was defeated by the Turkish emperor Celapino, a German soldier deserted his regiment in the thick of battle and took refuge in the woods. The foes of war were soon replaced by the enemies cold, thirst, and hunger. With nowhere to turn for help, he was about to surrender to the powers of despair, when without warning an awful spirit appeared before him. He offered the poor soldier great wealth, if he would but serve this uncanny master for seven years. Seeing no other escape from his misery, the soldier agreed. The terms of the pact were quickly stated: For seven years the soldier was to wear only a bearskin robe, both day and night. He was to say no prayers. Neither comb nor shears were to touch his hair and beard. He was not to wash, nor cut his nails, nor blow his nose, nor even wipe his behind. In return, the spirit would provide him with tobacco, food, drink, and an endless supply of money. The soldier, who by his very nature was not especially fond of either prayers or of cleanliness, entered into the agreement. He took lodgings in a village inn, and discovered soon enough that his great wealth was ample compensation for his strange looks and ill smell. A nobleman frequented this inn. Impressed by Bearskin's lavish and generous expenditures, he presented him with a proposal. "I have three beautiful daughters," he said. "If the terms are right, you may choose any one of them for a bride." Bearskin named a sum that was acceptable to the nobleman, and the two set forth to the palace to make the selection. The two older daughters made no attempt to hide their repugnance of the strange suitor, but the youngest unhesitatingly accepted her father's will. Bearskin formalized the betrothal by removing a ring from his own finger and twisting it into two pieces. One piece he gave to his future bride; the other he kept. Saying that soon he would return, he departed. The seven years were nearly finished, so a short time later Bearskin did indeed come back for his bride. Now freshly bathed, neatly shorn, elegantly dressed, and riding in a luxurious carriage, he was a suitor worthy of a princess. Identifying himself with his half of the twisted ring, he claimed his bride. Beside themselves with envy, and furious that they had squandered their rights to this handsome nobleman, one of the bride's older sisters hanged herself from a tree and the other one drowned herself in a well. Thus the devil gained two souls for the one that he had lost. Source: Abstracted from Hans Jakob Christoph von Grimmelshausen, "Vom Ursprung des Namens Bärnhäuter" (1670). I used this edition: Hans Jacob Christoph von Grimmelshausen, Simplicianische Schriften , edited by Julius Tittmann, vol. 1 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1877), pp. 247-53 . Return to the table of contents . Devil Greenjacket Germany There were three brothers, and the older ones always held the youngest one back. When they wanted to go out into the world, they said to him: "We don't need you. You can make your way alone." Thus they left him, and he had to wander on by himself. He came to a large heath and was very hungry. He sat down under a ring of trees and cried. Suddenly he heard a roar, and looking up he saw the devil approaching him. He was wearing a green coat and had horse-hooves for feet. He spoke to the boy: "What is wrong with you? Why are you crying?" The boy complained to him of his distress and said: "My brothers have abandoned me." Then the devil spoke: "I will help you. Put on this green coat. It has pockets that are always full of money. You can reach into them whenever you want; but in return I ask that you do not wash yourself, nor comb your hair, nor pray for seven years. If you die during these seven years, you are mine, but if you stay alive, you will be free and rich for the rest of your life." The boy's plight made him agree to the devil's conditions. He put on the devil's green coat, put his hand in the pocket, and it was full of money. He now went forth into the world wearing the green coat. The first year was good, for with his money he could pay for anything he wanted, and he was still considered quite a human being. It got worse the second year, when his hair had grown so long that no one could recognize him; and no one wanted to take him in because he looked so hideous. And the longer it got, the worse it got for him. However, he gave money everywhere to the poor so that they would pray for him that he would not die during the seven years and thus fall into the devil's hands. In his fourth year Greenjacket came to an inn where the innkeeper did not want to take him. However, he pulled out a lot of money and paid in advance, so he finally got a room. That evening he heard loud moaning in the next room, so he went in and found an old man sitting there who was crying because he had a great debt at the inn and had no money to pay for it. Hence they had detained him until he would be able to pay. Hearing this Greenjacket said: "If that's all it's about, I've got enough money. I'll pay your debt." And thus he set the old man free. Now the old man had three beautiful daughters. He said to Greenjacket that he should go home with him and choose one of them as a wife for a reward. So he went with him, but when they got home and the eldest daughter saw the man in the green coat, she cried out that she would never marry such a dreadful man, who was no longer human and looked like a bear. The second daughter ran away as well, saying the she would rather go out into the wide, wide world. However, the youngest daughter said: "Father dear, because you promised it, and he helped you in your time of need, I will be obedient to you." Then Greenjacket took a ring from his finger and broke it in two and gave her one half and kept the other for himself. Inside her half he wrote his name, and in his half he wrote hers He told her to keep her half of the ring. He stayed with her for a while and then said: "Now I have to say good-bye. I'll be away for three years. Be faithful to me for that long, then I'll come back, and we'll have our wedding. If I haven't returned in three years then you'll be free, because I will have died; but pray for me that God might grant me life." During the three years the two older sisters made fun of the youngest, saying that she would have to take a bear for a husband instead of a decent man. But the youngest one remained silent, thinking: "You must obey your father, come what may." Meanwhile Greenjacket went about in the world. He often reached into his pocket and bought for his bride the most beautiful thing he could see. Furthermore, he did nothing but good wherever he could, and he gave money to the poor to pray for him. God showed him grace, and he remained alive and healthy until the three years had elapsed. When the time was up, he went out again to the heath and sat under the ring of trees. Once again he heared a poweful roar, and the devil approached growling evilly. He threw down the old coat down and demanded the green one. The youth happily stripped it off and handed it back to the devil. Now he was free and rich forever. Then he went home, cleaned himself up and dressed up, and went off to his bride. When he came to the gate, the father met him. The youth greeted him and said he was the bridegroom, but the father did not recognize him, and would not believe him. So he went up to the bride, who did not want to believe him either. Finally he asked her if she still had her half of the ring. She said yes and fetched it. He pulled out his own half, and they fit together. Thus it was certain that he must be her bridegroom. Seeing that he now was a handsome man, she rejoiced and loved him, and they were married. The two sisters who had passed up their own good fortune were so angry that on the wedding day the one drowned herself and the other hanged herself. That evening someone knocked and growled at the door. The bridegroom opened it, and it was the devil in the green coat, who said: "You see, I now have two souls for the one of yours!" Source (Wikisource): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Teufel Grürock," Kinder-und Haus-Märchen , gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm, vol. 2 (Berlin: In der Realschulbuchhandlung, 1815), no. 15, pp. 99-103 . Return to the table of contents . The Grimms' source: The Haxthausen family and story by Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen (ca. 1622-1676) entitled " Vom Ursprung des Namens Bärnhäuter ," first published in 1670. The Grimms substantially revised the tale with the fifth edition (1843) , also giving it a new title "Der Bärenhäuter." Bearskin Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once upon a time there was a young fellow who enlisted as a soldier, conducted himself bravely, and was always at the very front when it was raining bullets. As long as the war lasted all went well, but when peace was made he was dismissed, and the captain said he could go wherever he wanted to. His parents were dead, and he had no longer a home, so he went to his brothers and asked them to support him until there was another war. The brothers, however, were hardhearted and said, "What can we do with you? We have no work for you. See that you go and make a living for yourself." The soldier had nothing left but his gun, so, putting it on his shoulder, he went forth into the world. He came to a large heath, on which nothing was to be seen but a circle of trees. Filled with sorrow, he sat down beneath them and thought about his fate. "I have no money," he thought, "and the only trade I have learned is that of making war, and now that they have made peace they can no longer use me, so I see that I shall starve." Suddenly he heard a rustling sound, and when he looked around, a strange man was standing before him. He wore a green jacket and looked quite stately, but he had a hideous horse's foot. "I know what you are in need of," said the man. "You shall have money and property, as much as you, with all your might, can squander away, but first I must know if you are fearless, so that I won't be giving away my money for nothing." "A soldier and fear -- how can those go together?" he answered, "You can put me to the test." "Very well," answered the man, "look behind you." The soldier turned around and saw a large growling bear running towards him. "Aha," shouted the soldier, "I'll tickle your nose until you lose your desire for growling." Then taking aim at the bear, he shot it in the snout, and it fell down motionless. "I see quite well," said the stranger, "that you do not lack for courage, but there is one more condition that you will have to fulfill." "If it does not endanger my salvation," answered the soldier, who knew quite well who was standing before him. "Otherwise I'll have nothing to do with it." "You'll see about that for yourself," answered Greenjacket. "For the next seven years you are neither to wash yourself, nor comb your beard and hair, nor cut your nails, nor say the Lord's prayer. I will give you a jacket and a cloak, which you must wear during this time. If you die during these seven years, you are mine. If you stay alive, you are free, and rich as well, for all the rest of your life." The soldier thought about his desperate situation, and having faced death so often before, he decided to risk it now as well, and he entered into the agreement. The devil took off his green jacket and gave it to the soldier, saying, "Whenever you wear this jacket and reach into its pocket, you will find a handful of money." Then he pulled the skin off the bear and said, "This shall be your cloak, and your bed as well, for you are to sleep on it, and you are not allowed to lie in any other bed. Because of your clothing you shall you be called Bearskin." With that the devil disappeared. The soldier put on the jacket, immediately reached into the pocket, and found that the promise was really true. Then he put on the bearskin and went forth into the world. He did whatever he pleased, refraining from nothing that did him good and his money harm. During the first year his appearance was still acceptable, but during the second he looked like a monster. His hair covered nearly his entire face. His beard looked like a piece of coarse felt cloth. His fingers had claws, and his face was so covered with dirt that if someone had planted cress on it, it would have grown. Everyone who saw him ran away. However, because everywhere he went he gave money to the poor to pray that he might not die during the seven years, and because he paid well for everything, he always found shelter. In the fourth year he arrived an inn. The innkeeper would not let him enter, refusing even to let him have a place in the stable because he was afraid he would frighten the horses. However, when Bearskin reached into his pocket and pulled out a handful of ducats, the innkeeper softened and gave him a room in an outbuilding. Bearskin, however, had to promise not to let himself be seen, lest the inn should get a bad name. One evening Bearskin was sitting alone, wishing with all his heart that the seven years were over, he heard a loud moaning in a neighboring room. He had a compassionate heart, so he opened the door and saw an old man weeping bitterly and striking his hands together above his head. Bearskin went nearer, but the man jumped to his feet and tried to run away. At last, hearing a human voice, the man let Bearskin talk to him, and with friendly words Bearskin succeeded in getting the old man to reveal the cause of his grief. Slowly but surely the old man had lost his wealth, and now he and his daughters would have to starve. He was so poor that he could not pay the innkeeper and was to be sent to prison. "If that is your only problem," said Bearskin, "I have money enough." He called for the innkeeper and paid him, and then put a bag full of gold into the poor man's pocket. When the old man saw that he was freed from all his troubles he did not know how to show his gratitude. "Come with me," he said to Bearskin. "My daughters are all miracles of beauty. Choose one of them for your wife. When she hears what you have done for me she will not refuse you. You do look a little strange, to be sure, but she will put you in order again." This pleased Bearskin well, and he went with the old man. When the oldest daughter saw him she was so terrified at his face that she screamed and ran away. The second one stood still and looked at him from head to foot, but then she said, "How can I accept a husband who no longer has a human form? The shaved bear that once was here and passed itself off for a man pleased me far better. At least it was wearing a hussar's fur and white gloves. If ugliness were his only flaw, I could get used to him." The youngest one, however, said, "Father, dear, he must be a good man to have helped you out of your trouble. If you promised him a bride for doing so, your word must be kept." It was a pity that Bearskin's face was covered with dirt and hair, for otherwise they would have seen how his heart laughed within his body when he heard these words. He took a ring from his finger, broke it in two, and gave her one half. He kept the other half himself. He then wrote his name inside her half, and her name inside his. He asked her to take good care of her piece. Then he took leave saying, "I must wander about for three more years. If I do not return at that time you are free, for I shall be dead. But ask God to preserve my life." The poor bride-to-be dressed herself entirely in black, and when she thought about her future bridegroom, tears came into her eyes. From her sisters she received nothing but contempt and scorn. "Be careful," said the oldest. "If you give him your hand, he will hit you with his claws." "Beware," said the second. "Bears like sweet things, and if he takes a liking to you, he will eat you up." "You must always do what he wants you to," continued the oldest, "or he will begin to growl." And the second added, "But the wedding will be merry, for bears dance well." The bride-to-be said nothing and did not let them irritate her. Bearskin, however, traveled about the world from one place to another, did good wherever he could, and gave generously to the poor that they might pray for him. Finally, at dawn on the last day of the seven years, he went once more out to the heath, and seated himself beneath the circle of trees. Before long the wind began to howl, and the devil stood before him, looking at him angrily. He threw Bearskin's old jacket to him and demanded the return of his own green one. "We haven't gotten that far yet," answered Bearskin. "First of all you have to clean me up." Whether the devil wanted to or not, he had to fetch water and wash off Bearskin, comb his hair, and cut his nails. After this he looked like a brave soldier and was much better looking than he had ever been before. When the devil was safely gone Bearskin was quite lighthearted. He went into the town, purchased a splendid velvet jacket, seated himself in a carriage drawn by four white horses, and drove to his bride's house. No one recognized him. The father took him for a distinguished colonel and led him into the room where his daughters were sitting. He was given a seat between the two oldest ones. They poured wine for him, served him the finest things to eat, and thought that they had never seen a more handsome man in all the world. The bride-to-be, however, sat across from him in her black dress without raising her eyes or speaking a word. Finally he asked the father if he would give him one of his daughters for a wife, whereupon the two oldest ones jumped up and ran into their bedrooms to put on splendid dresses, for each of them thought that she was the chosen one. As soon as he was alone with his bride-to-be, the stranger brought out his half of the ring and dropped it into a glass of wine, which he handed across the table to her. She took the wine, but when she had drunk it and found the half ring lying at the bottom, her heart began to beat. She took the other half, which she wore on a ribbon around her neck, put them together, and saw that the two pieces matched perfectly. Then he said, "I am your betrothed bridegroom, whom you saw as Bearskin. Through God's grace I have regained my human form and have become clean again." He went to her, embraced her, and gave her a kiss. In the meantime the two sisters came back in full dress. When they saw that the youngest sister had received the handsome man, and heard that he was Bearskin, they ran out filled with anger and rage. One of them drowned herself in the well. The other hanged herself on a tree. That evening, someone knocked at the door, and when the bridegroom opened it, it was the devil in his green jacket, who said, "You see, I now have two souls for the one of yours." Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Bärenhäuter," Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales), 7th edition, vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 101, pp. 81-86 . The Grimms' source: The Haxthausen family and story by Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen (ca. 1622-1676) entitled "Vom Ursprung des Namens Bärnhäuter," first published in 1670. The Grimms first published this tale under the title "Der Teufel Grünrock" (Devil Greenjacket) in the first edition of their Kinder- und Hausmärchen, vol. 2 (1815), no. 15. They substantially revised the tale with their fifth edition (1843). Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002. Return to the table of contents . Go to the Devil Germany (Lower Lusatia) Once upon a time there was a peasant who had a lazy son and his name was Hans. His father must have been very angry with him, for one day he sent him away, saying: "Go to the devil." Hans went on his way and came into a large forest. He hadn't gone much further when suddenly a man dressed in a hunter's jacket came up to him and asked where he was going. Hans said: "Well, I don't know myself. My father sent me to the devil." Then the man said: "I am the devil. If you will serve me for three years, I will bring you good fortune, but you must not wash yourself for three years, nor cut your beard, hair, or nails for three years." Hans was thinking about this when the devil said: "Don' be afraid. You will do well in my service." So Hans agreed. The devil then gave Hans money and sent him on his was. One day Hans came to an inn. The innkeeper said: "I cannot allow such a fellow as you to stay here." Hans begged fervently to be allowed to spend the the night there, but the innkeeper said: "No, that's not possible. Today a large card party is coming here, and they are all fine gentlemen." Hans said: "I will sit quietly behind the chimney. Nobody will see me there." Then the innkeeper said: "Well, for all I care you can stay here. " Hans crawled behind the chimney. Soon afterward, several gentlemen came and sat down to play cards. After an hour one of them had lost nearly all of his money, and he said to himself: "If the devil took that, then he will probably take the rest as well." He went out the door. Hans came out quietly from behind the chimney, ran after the stranger, and said: "Don't be so discouraged. I'll help you." When the man looked at him, he wanted to run away, because Hans looked so very wild, but Hans said: "Don't be so stupid. Here's some money; you'll win with it." The man took the money and went back into the room. Not only did he win back his lost money, but everyone else's as well. When everyone had finally gone, Hans ran after the man and said: "I have helped you, now you should give me a small reward for it. I would like to marry your youngest daughter." This request made the man's hair stand on end, but after a while he said: "Yes, you may do so. Just come with me." When both had gone a distance from the village, they came to a stately castle which belonged to the man. He lived there with his three daughters. When they saw the father with his guest, they wanted to run away. Hans said: "I am going to marry one of you. Just don't run away." With that the father persuaded the youngest to come over to Hans and shake his hand. She approached fearfully and shook hands with the stranger. Hans said: "I'll be back in three weeks, and then we'll have our wedding." In three weeks the three years during which Hans had served the devil would be over, and then, as the devil had said, he should be happy. The older sisters now ridiculed the youngest, calling her the devil's bride. The day before the three years were up, the devil came to the slovenly Hans and gave him an enormous amount of money, a carriage with two beautiful horses, and a little bottle of magic ointment. Then the devil said: "I'll visit you one more time, on your wedding day, but after that I won't come back." Then he disappeared. The next day Hans went to a large lake to bathe in it, because he wanted to get married soon. On the way he met a poor shepherd. He asked him to cut off his nails and shave his beard, but the shepherd ran away as fast as he could. Then Hans met a blacksmith and he asked him to do the same thing. The blacksmith thought: "He looks like the devil's cousin, but I can deal with him." He took Hans into the forge, picked up a large pair of tongs and used them to pinch off the long devil-claws. Then he took a large pair of sheep-shears and shaved Hans's beard with them, and then cut the hair on his head. Afterward Hans smeared himself with his magic ointment. He immediately became a handsome young man. He then climbed into his carriage and drove to his bride at the castle. The lord of the castle and his daughters were amazed when they saw the fine gentleman getting out of the carriage. The next day was the wedding, and the older sisters were now very angry because of their youngest sister's good fortune. On the wedding night, when Hans was about to go to bed, the devil knocked on the window and said: "Hans, do you have yours?" I have the other two." And so it was. At the end of the wedding the two older sisters had been so envious of their sister's good fortune that they had hanged themselves. Source (books.google.com): Edmund Veckenstedt, Wendische Sagen, Märchen und abergläubische Gebräuche (Graz: Verlag von Leuschner und Lubensky, 1880), pp. 65-68 . Source (Internet Archive): Edmund Veckenstedt, Wendische Sagen, Märchen und abergläubische Gebräuche (Graz: Verlag von Leuschner und Lubensky, 1880), pp. 65-68 . This story was collected near the town of Vetschau in Lower Lusatia (Niederlausitz), Brandenburg, Germany. Return to the table of contents . The Devil as Partner Switzerland One evening a traveling journeyman came to an inn, and because he had been strenuously walking for several days in a row, he decided to rest a few days. It didn't bother him that his purse would not cover his costs. The innkeeper got wind of this, and one evening he said, "My good friend, you are now well rested. Be so good as to be on your way early in the morning. Here is the bill for what you owe me." This brought both chills and fever to journeyman, who asked the innkeeper if he at least could not wait until tomorrow to be paid. "Tomorrow," he said, "is one more day." "Good," said the innkeeper, "but be careful that you don't end up in the Black Tower Inn. Around here that's where folks stay who eat and drink more than their purses will cover." As soon as the innkeeper had left, the journeyman threw himself onto his bed, but fear and worry kept him awake the entire night. Then suddenly a black figure approached his bed, and the journeyman recognized him as the devil for sure. He said, "Fear not, my dear companion, if you'll provide the sausage, I'll bring the drinks. Lend me a hand, and I'll help you out of your predicament." "Doing what?" asked the journeyman. "Just stay here in this inn for seven years," said the devil. "I'll keep you out of debt and provide you with everything you need. Afterward you'll be even better off, and you'll have money like the leaves on trees. In return for this you must neither wash yourself, nor comb your hair, nor cut your hair or nails." "That job is worth the pay," thought the journeyman, and he entered the agreement without further hesitation. When the innkeeper appeared the next morning, the journeyman paid him every last penny that was due, and he still had a good surplus for future bills. The journeyman stayed at the inn for years and days, spending money as though it were sand on the beach. But he became as wild as the night, and no one wanted to look at him. One fine morning a merchant who lived nearby came to the inn. He had three strikingly beautiful daughters. He had come to tell his sorrows to the innkeeper, for he had badly miscalculated in a business deal and did not know how he was going to get out of the difficulty. "Listen," said the innkeeper. "There's help for you here. A strange fellow has been living upstairs in my rented room for more than six years now. He lets himself go completely, and looks as bad as sin, but he has money like hay, and is a free-spender. Give him a try. Anyway, I've long noticed that he often stares at your house. Who knows, perhaps he's got his eye on one of your daughters. This advice made good sense to the merchant. He went upstairs to the journeyman, and the two of them soon struck a deal. The journeyman would pay the merchant's debts, and the merchant would give one of his daughters to the journeyman in marriage. However, when they went to the three daughters, and the father explained the situation to them, the oldest one ran away, crying out, "Phooey, father! What sort of a monster is this that you've brought home? I'd sooner jump into water than to marry him." The second daughter did no better. She cried out, "Phooey, father! What sort of a creature is this that you've brought home? I'd sooner hang myself than to marry him." But the third and youngest daughter said, "He must be a good man, father, if he wants to rescue you. I'll take him." She turned her eyes to the floor and did not look at him, but he took a great liking to her, and the wedding was set. The seven years that the devil had demanded were now past. On the morning of the wedding day a splendid coach, sparkling with gold and precious stones, drove up to the merchant's house. Out jumped the journeyman, who had now become a fine young nobleman. The bride breathed a sigh of relief, and there was endless rejoicing. The wedding party went to the church in a long procession, for the merchant and the innkeeper had invited all their relatives. Only the happy bride's two older sisters did not participate. They angrily took their own lives, the one at the end of a rope, the other in water. And as the bridegroom was leaving the church, he saw the devil again, the first time in seven years. He was sitting on a roof, laughing with satisfaction, and saying: Partner, I did better than you, You got one, and I got two. Source: Otto Sutermeister, "Der Teufel als Schwager," Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus der Schweiz (Aarau: Sauerländer, 1873), no. 27, pp. 83-86 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Return to the table of contents . Hell's Gatekeeper Austria There was a very filthy boy who would never let himself be washed, always walking around with an unclean face. No amount of warning or pleading did any good, so every day the filthy one became more filthy. Now when people are very dirty and go about unwashed the evil one gains power over them. Many have painfully and bitterly experienced this, repenting too late. That is what happened to this boy. He suddenly disappeared. They saw neither hide nor hair of him, and no one knew what had become of him. Seven years passed since his disappearance, and he had nearly been forgotten when he suddenly showed up again. He had changed and aged so much that his closest acquaintances could scarcely recognize him. His skin color was now entirely black and his hair was very shaggy. Furthermore he was very quiet, saying almost nothing. But he did talk about one thing, especially to children. He told them that he had come under the power of the devil because of his refusal to wash, and that he had been forced to serve as a gatekeeper to Hell. Thus he had seen everyone who had gone through this fiery gate during this time, and there had been so many that he couldn't account for them all. Rich and noble, poor and lowly, men and women had to go past this gatekeeper, and he thanked God that he himself did not have to enter there and that his time of service was only seven years. He now resolved to wash himself thoroughly and never let himself become dirty. He faithfully kept this resolution, for he did not want to become Hell's gatekeeper once again and see the damned ones pass by him. Source: Ignaz Vincenz Zingerle and Joseph Zingerle, "Der höllische Thorwartl," Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1852), no. 7, pp. 41-42 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2013. This cautionary tale presents a contrary view to the one presented by the other stories in this group. Return to the table of contents . Two for One Italy A poor boy left his parents' house, where he had nothing to eat, and went out into the world. As he wandered down the road, thinking about his misery, he met a noble gentleman who spoke to him and asked where he was going. "How would I know?" replied the lad. "I am as poor as a stone. I am trying my luck in the world. There are great gentlemen, as surely you are one, and with one of them I hope to find mercy or a position. "You are quite right," said the gentleman. "I can and will help you, but only under one condition: All your life you shall have money and gold as much as you wish; but you must neither shave nor wash for three years and three days. Furthermore, you must know right now that I am the devil. If you wash or shave just one hour before the three years and three days are up, you are mine. Do you agree to this?" The boy didn't think twice before he said yes. Now he always had money in his pocket, and he lived merrily on the fat of the land, throwing gold and coins about as though they were sand. He moved from town to town. In the meantime his beard grew and his face looked like you-know-what. However, he had money and whoever has money finds merry friends and a good reception everywhere. A little bit of cleanliness inside and out is not important for such easy-going comrades. After two years had passed he thought about looking for a wife. He got to know three beautiful but poor sisters, went there, and brought them valuable presents. Finally he proposed to the eldest, but she was very indignant and said: "How can you come to me with such a request, you dirty swine? You make me sick even when I look at you from afar!" When he said he was rich and had all the money that she could ever want, she cursed him even more and then left him. He did not fare any better with the second sister either. On the other hand, the youngest sister thought to herself: "He may be unclean, but he has plenty of money," and she did not reject him out-of-hand. Finally she even promised to marry him. The two older sisters were very angry with her and scolded her every day; but she consoled herself with the gifts he brought her and let her sisters and the people say whatever they wanted to. Once he brought her a jewelry box but forbade her to open it. She overcame her curiosity and locked the box in the drawer of her cabinet. Finally the three years and three days were up. He washed. himself with soap and had his beard shaved off. How good he felt when he was rid of the constant tingling and itching, and even better: he now had enough money for the rest of his life! He now went back to the three sisters, who did not recognize him. When he talked intimately with the youngest and spoke about their upcoming marriage, she got angry and said: "Who are you that you can talk to me like that? I already have a groom!" "That's me!" he replied, laughing. When she did not want to believe him, he reminded her of the jewelry box and told her exactly what was in it. So she fetched it and found everything as he had said. Now she was very happy, and a few days later the wedding took place. Now the reader may think that the devil has thus been cheated out of a soul, and be happy about this. However, the old arch rascal is not always as stupid as one might think. Actually he calculates more cleverly and slyly we give him credit for. This time he doubled down on his wager. You see, the two older sisters of the happy bride wailed bitterly that they themselves had so crudely pushed away their own good fortune. Unable to deal with their anger and gall, on the wedding night they went up into the attic of the house and hanged themselves. At that same hour the devil appeared in front of the window of the bridal chamber and called out to the bridegroom: "You thought I had been cheated out of your poor soul, but now I got two for one!" With that shout he carried the two souls in his firey claws away through the air. Source (books.google.com): Christian Schneller, "Zwei für Eine (Due per una)," Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), no. 33, pp. 90-92 . Source (Internet Archive): Christian Schneller, "Zwei für Eine (Due per una)," Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), no. 33, pp. 90-92 . Return to the table of contents . The Bear Man Denmark There was an old soldier who had served his required time. He was finally discharged and could go wherever he wanted to go. He had neither home nor relatives, and he had long since given up any wish to do farm work. He went on his way, wondering what he should do next. He came first to some brush and then into some woods. Looking at the trees he thought that it might be best if he simply were to hang himself. He looked at the trees to see if one would serve for hanging. Then a man came up to him and he asked him why he looked so concerned. The soldier told him who he was, what was troubling him, and what he was planning to do. "It would be best if I just hanged myself," he said. "You shouldn't do that," said the stranger. "Hanging oneself is not a pleasant thing. Instead, you can come into sevice with me." He did not know how to respond, so he asked, "Just who are you?" "Have you not heard of the devil?" For that is who he was. "Of course, but I have no desire to serve him." The devil said: "Well, I won't demand any real work from you. For seven years you just have to do what I tell you to do, and during that time I will pay you with money. Turn around." The soldier turned around, and a few steps from him there was a huge bear. He brought his gun to his cheek. It was loaded with a bullet, and he shot the bear dead. "You are a brave one," said the devil. "You have no fear, and I like that." The devil immediately skinned the bear. He kneaded the skin and rubbed it between his hands until would have been ready to send to a tanner. He folded the skin, set it down, and then said: "Well, what do you say? Can we make a deal?" "Let me hear the conditions," said the soldier. "There must be conditions for such an agreement." "Yes," said the devil, "there are conditions. If you want to enter into my service you first must take off all your clothes and then sew yourself into this bearskin. You must wear it for seven years, and during that time you may neither wash, nor comb your hair, nor cut your hair or beard or your nails, and you must not pray the Lord's Prayer. If you succeed at this, then I shall give you a purse that you can never empty. You may use the money however you want. You may drink and play cards. In short, use the money for anything and everything. But if you violate the prohibitions that I have mentioned to you, just once, then you must belong to me. If, on the other hand, you stick to it, then when the seven years have passed you shall be free." "I agree to this," said the soldier. "Then you take off your clothes." The devil then sewed the soldier into the bearskin, saying: "We shall meet here again in exactly seven years, and not one minute later." The devil went away, and the soldier stood there in his new suit of clothes. He looked at himself and thought, what a terrible person he had become. It was difficult for him, especially at first, to be with people or to approach them to get any food, because everyone who saw him was afraid of him. He went to the very poorest people, because they were the ones he could best talk to. Having a purse that could not be emptied, he always gave money to these poor people, and then they understood that he was not as bad as he appeared. When they got to know him, they gave him food, and he gave them money -- much more than the food was actually worth. "I ask for nothing else from you," he said, "but do please pray the Lord's Prayer for me." Rumors of this man spread far and wide, and the only name that he was given was the bear man. He continued to travel around and traveled through the country and came to all the poor people. Many also came to see him. He traveled like this for four years, and now over half the time had passed. He spent money only for his daily bread and a few times for an overnight bed. He gladly slept in a cowshed or a workers' shelter. He also gave away some money. It happened that one day he came to an inn in a remote area. Not wanting to go any further that day, he entered and wanted to stay. He asked the innkeeper if he could stay there. "Yes," he replied, "if you can be happy in the workers' shelter or in an outdoor shed." He bought himself a simple meal, and then the innkeeper showed him where he was to sleep. His space was next to a stable where there were horses. Between the boards he could clearly hear what was being said in the stable. An old man was complaing bitterly to a stable-boy about his plight. He was terrible poor because the innkeeper had lent him seven hundred thalers, and he now had to pay it back. No one else would lend him any money, so he would have to sell the house where he lived. He did not know where he would go from there. The stable-boy asked: "Can't you talk the innkeeper into giving you more time? He has plenty of money." "I have talked with him, but it did no good. I will have to move out." With that the bear man got up, opened the stable door and stepped inside. The others were frightened, for they did not know that he was sleeping next door. "Please excuse me for disturbing you, but I heard that you are in need of money. I would like to help you." They looked at him. The poor man looked into his eyes. His eyes looked good, although the rest of him looked terrible. "Where do you live?" asked the bear man. The poor man told him that he lived not far from the inn. "I shall come tomorrow and give you the money." The poor man was in such great need that he agreed to this offer. The bear man went back to his room and lay down. The next morning he got something to eat, paid what he owed, and then went out to find the man. He was standing outside the house chopping sticks into pieces for firewood. The bear man greeted him: "Here I am, just as I promised last night." The poor man invited him in. This man had three daughters: The two oldest were weaving and the third was spinning. The father said to them: "Here is the man who promised me money last night. Can you serve him something to eat?" "Oh no," said the bear man. "I ate and drank at the inn." He then opened his purse and gave him all that was owed to the innkeeper, all to the last shilling. We should probably have some papers drawn up," said the poor man. "No, no! I am giving you the money." "The man could not believe that he would not have to repay the money. "Are those your daughters, the three girls?" "Yes, they are." "Then you have enough to serve you well. You could easily let me have one of them. I have no wife and am thinking of getting married sometime." "Yes, I could do that, but it must be a matter of choice whether one of them wants you." "Yes, of course it must be voluntary," said the bear man. He then turned to the girls. No, the two oldest girls did not want to have anything to do with him. They were quite sure of that. But the youngest over there by the spinning wheel shyly and bashfully said to her father: "Yes, I will take him because of how he has helped you. He must be a good man, otherwise he wouldn not have given you so much money." The bear man did not quite hear what she had said, but the father told him. "Yes, but I do not want to have you today, my girl. I shall come back three years from today. During that time I can change, and you can too. It could be that we would not recognize each other. I have a ring here. I will break it in two. You get one piece, and I the other. Then when we meet, we can recognize each other by the two pieces, because they must fit together." She took her piece of the ring. "Because you are now my little sweetheart," he said further, "will you say the Lord's Prayer for me every morning when you get up and every evening when you go to bed?" Yes, she would do this, from the bottom of her heart. He then said farewell, and the poor man thanked him for helping him. The bear man also asked him to pray the Lord's Prayer for him. Then the bear man left. The two girls teased the youngest one about the sweetheart that she had for herself. She consoled herself that it could not be a bad person who wanted to have someone pray for him. The three years passed. The bear man showed up on time, and the devil came to him. The bear man said: "I have done what we agreed to." "Yes," the devil had to say. "However, you wasted my money by doing good and giving it to the poor. I did not tell you to do that." "But you did not forbid me from doing so," said the bear man. "I forgot to do so," replied the devil. "But you have done something much worse. You have endlessly stormed the Kingdom of Heaven with the Lord's Prayer by having others pray for you. I would not have allowed that." "But you did not forbid me from doing so," said the bear man. "I forgot to do so," replied the devil. "Now you have to take that bearskin off from me and clean me up," said the soldier. "And then we shall be finished with each other." The devil had to do just that, but he was very angry. Now that he was freed from the devil, he had to act differently. He already had taken a great deal of money from his purse and had given it to one person or another who had promised to keep it for him until he returned for it. Then he went where some of his money was. He bought decent clothes, and had himself groomed to look like an honorable person. He also bought himself a beautiful carriage and a team of good horses. Now he wanted to go to his sweetheart. He drove up there, and the old man, her father, was standing outside. The father could not recognize him. The soldier bid him good day and asked if he could get a bucket of water for his horses, for he had driven a long way, and he also wanted some fodder for them, and something to eat for himself. "The inn is not that far from here, but we can give you what you need." Yes, he would like that, and he went inside. The girls were weaving and spinning as normal. Then the father asked them to prepare some food for the stranger. "He is a handsome man," said the two older sisters to each other, and they went to get the food. The youngest girl remained seated. Then they set a table for him. "Are these your daughters, all three?" asked the stranger. Yes they were. "You have all three still at home. It is strange you haven't married them off yet. Aren't they engaged?" "Only the youngest," said the father. "That is strange. How long has she been engaged?" "Oh, it's been three years today." "Has her sweetheart not been here since then?" "No. We have neither heard from him, nor has he come himself." "He must have changed a lot in that time," said the soldier. "You wouldn't recognize him if he came now, would you?" "Oh yes, I believe that I would recognize him," said the girl. "He will come for sure." "How will you recognize him then?" "I have half a ring," she said, "and he has the other half. He broke it in two before he left. "Then it can't be anyone but me," said the soldier, "because I have half of the ring." She then came forward with the other half, and they fit together perfectly. Now she was so happy that she almost fainted. She put her arms around his neck and kissed him, and he was also happy with her. The two other sisters sulked. There was no need to wait any longer. They should have their wedding as soon as possible. They went to the pastor and made the arrangements. There was no end to the anger of the older sisters. On the evening of the wedding they went out and did not return. When it was bedtime, the groom went just outside of the house. The devil came and laughed in his face, saying: "You see, I was not cheated after all. I got two instead of one." The soldier did indeed recognize his face, but wondered about what he had said. In the morning they missed the sisters. They looked for them, and it didn't take long before they found them. They had hanged themselves side by side in two trees close to the house. The bear man then bought some more land for the place, and he lived there with his wife and her old father. (Told by Housewife Ane Marie Nielsdatter, Egsgaard Mark, Ringive Parish, Vejle County.) Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Björnemanden," Fästskrift till H. F. Feilberg (Copenhagen: Gyldendalske Boghandel, 1911), pp. 456-65 . Tang Kristensen's source: Ane Marie Nielsdatter. Link to another version of this tale (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Björnemanden," Skattegraveren (September 15, 1887), pp. 97-101 . Tang Kristen's source: Kristen Nielsen. Return to the table of contents . Never-Wash Russia Once upon a time there was a soldier who had served through three campaigns, but had never earned as much as an addled egg, and was then put on the retired list. Then, as he went on the road marching on and on, he became tired and sat down by a lake. And, as he rested, he began thinking things out, "Where shall I now betake myself, and how shall I feed myself, and how the devil shall I enter into any service?" As soon as he had spoken these words a little devil rose up at once in front of him and said, "Hail, soldier, what do you wish? Did you just now not say that you wished to become one of our servants? Why, soldier, come up and be hired; we will pay you well." "What is the work?" "Oh, the work is easy enough: for fifteen years you must not shave, you must not have your hair cut, you must not blow your nose, and you must not change your garb. If you serve this service, then we will go to the king, who has three daughters. Two of them are mine, but the third shall be yours." "Very well," said the soldier, "I will undertake the contract; but I require in return to get anything my soul hankers after." "It shall be so; be at peace; we shall not be in default." "Well, let it befall at once. Carry me at once into the capital and give me a pile of money; you know yourself how little of these goods a soldier ever gets." So the little devil dashed into the lake, got out a pile of gold, and instantaneously carried the soldier into the great city, and all at once he was there! "What a fool I have been!" said the soldier. "I have not done any service, no work, and I now have the money!" So he took a room, never cut his hair, never shaved, never wiped his nose, never changed his garb, and he lived on and grew wealthy, so wealthy he did not know what to do with his money. What was he to do with his silver and gold? "Oh, very well, I will start helping the poor; possibly they may pray for my soul." So the soldier began distributing alms to the needy, to the right and to the left, and he still had money over, however much he gave away! His fame spread over the whole kingdom, came to the ears of all. So the soldier lived for fourteen years, and on the fifteenth year the tsar's exchequer gave out. So he summoned the soldier. So the soldier came to him unwashed, unshaved, uncombed, with his nose unwiped and his dress unchanged. "Health, your majesty!" "Listen, soldier. You, they say, are good to all folks; will you lend me some money? I have not enough to pay my troops. If you will I will make you a general at once." "No, your Majesty, I do not wish to be a general; but if you will do me a favor, give me one of your daughters as my wife, and you shall have as much money as you wish for the Treasury." So the king began to think. He was very fond of his daughters, but still he could not do anything whatsoever without money. "Well," he said, "I agree. Have a portrait taken of yourself; I will show it to my daughters and ask which of them will take you." So the soldier returned, had the portrait painted, which was feature for feature, unshaved, unwashed, uncombed, his nose unwiped, and in his old garb, and sent it to the tsar. Now, the tsar had three daughters, and the father summoned them and showed them the soldier's portrait. He said to the eldest, "Will you go and marry him? He will redeem me from very great embarrassment." The tsarevna saw what a monstrous animal had been painted, with tangled hair, uncut nails and unwiped nose. "I certainly won't!" she said, " I would sooner go to the devil." And from somewhere or other the devil appeared, stood behind her with pen and paper, heard what she said, and entered her soul on his register. Then the father asked the next daughter, "Will you go and marry the soldier? " "What! I would rather remain a maiden; I would rather tie myself up with the devil than go with him." So the devil went and inscribed her soul as well. Then the father asked his youngest daughter, and she answered, "Evidently this must be my lot. I will go and marry him and see what God shall give." Then the tsar was very blithe at this, and he went and told the soldier to make ready for the betrothal, and he sent him twelve carts to carry the money away. Then the soldier made use of his devil. "There are twelve carts; pile them all high at once with gold." So the devil ran into the lake and the unholy ones set to work. Some of them brought up one sack, some two, and they soon filled the carts and sent them to the tsar, into his palace. Then the tsar looked, and now summoned the soldier to him every day, sat with him at one table, and ate and drank with him. When they got ready for the marriage the term of fifteen years was over. So he called the little devil and said, "Now my service is over. Turn me into a youth." So the devil cut him up into little bits, threw them into a cauldron, and began to brew him -- brewed him, washed him and collected all his bones, one by one, in the proper way, every bone with every bone, every joint with every joint, every nerve with every nerve. Then he sprinkled them with the water of life, and the soldier arose, such a fine young man as no tale can tell and no pen can write. He then married the youngest tsarevna, and they began to live a merry life of good. I was at the wedding. I drank mead and beer. They also had wine, and I drank it to the very dregs. But the little devil ran back into the lake, for his elder hauled him over the coals to answer for what he had done with the soldier. "He has served out his period faithfully and honorably: he has never once shaved himself, nor cut his hair, nor wiped his nose, nor changed his clothes." Then the elder was very angry. He said, "In fifteen years you were not able to corrupt the soldier! Was all the money given in vain? What sort of a devil will you be after this?" And he had him thrown into the burning pitch. "Oh no, please, grandfather," said the grandson, " I have lost the soldier's soul, but I have gained two others." " What?" "Look: the soldier thought of marrying a tsarevna; the two elder daughters both declined and said they would rather marry a devil than the soldier. So there they are, and they belong to us." So the grandfather devil approved what the grandson imp had done, and set him free. "Yes," he said, "you know your business very well indeed." Source: Alexander Afanasyev, Russian Folk-Tales , translated by Leonard A. Magnus (New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1916), pp. 311-14 . The great Russian folktale collector's name is also anglicized as Aleksandr Afanas'ev. Return to the table of contents . Don Giovanni de la Fortuna Sicily There was once a man whose name was Don Giovanni de la Fortuna, and he lived in a beautiful house that his father had built, and spent a great deal of money. Indeed, he spent so much that very soon there was none left, and Don Giovanni, instead of being a rich man with everything he could wish for, was forced to put on the dress of a pilgrim, and to wander from place to place begging his bread. One day he was walking down a broad road when he was stopped by a handsome man he had never seen before, who, little as Don Giovanni knew it, was the devil himself. "Would you like to be rich," asked the devil, "and to lead a pleasant life?" "Yes, of course I should," replied the Don. "Well, here is a purse. Take it and say to it, 'Dear purse, give me some money,' and you will get as much as you can want. But the charm will only work if you promise to remain three years, three months, and three days without washing and without combing and without shaving your beard or changing your clothes. If you do all this faithfully, when the time is up you shall keep the purse for yourself, and I will let you off any other conditions." Now Don Giovanni was a man who never troubled his head about the future. He did not once think how very uncomfortable he should be all those three years, but only that he should be able, by means of the purse, to have all sorts of things he had been obliged to do without. So he joyfully put the purse in his pocket and went on his way. He soon began to ask for money for the mere pleasure of it, and there was always as much as he needed. For a little while he even forgot to notice how dirty he was getting, but this did not last long, for his hair became matted with dirt and hung over his eyes, and his pilgrim's dress was a mass of horrible rags and tatters. He was in this state when, one morning, he happened to be passing a fine palace; and, as the sun was shining bright and warm, he sat down on the steps and tried to shake off some of the dust which he had picked up on the road. But in a few minutes a maid saw him, and said to her master, "I pray you sir, to drive away that beggar who is sitting on the steps, or he will fill the whole house with his dirt." So the master went out and called from some distance off, for he was really afraid to go near the man, "You filthy beggar, leave my house at once!" "You need not be so rude," said Don Giovanni; "I am not a beggar, and if I chose, I could force you and your wife to leave your house." "What is that you can do?" laughed the gentleman. "Will you sell me your house?" asked Don Giovanni. "I will buy it from you on the spot." "Oh, the dirty creature is quite mad!" thought the gentleman. "I shall just accept his offer for a joke." And aloud he said, "All right. Follow me, and we will go to a lawyer and get him to make a contract." And Don Giovanni followed him, and an agreement was drawn up by which the house was to be sold at once, and a large sum of money paid down in eight days. Then the Don want to an inn, where he hired two rooms, and, standing in one of them, said to his purse, "Dear purse, fill this room with gold." And when the eight days were up it was so full you could not have put in another sovereign. When the owner of the house came to take away his money Don Giovanni led him into the room and said, "There, just pocket what you want." The gentleman stared with open mouth at the astonishing sight. But he had given his word to sell the house, so he took his money, as he was told, and went away with his wife to look for some place to live in. And Don Giovanni left the inn and dwelt in the beautiful rooms, where his rags and dirt looked sadly out of place. And every day these got worse and worse. By and by the fame of his riches reached the ears of the king, and, as he himself was always in need of money, he sent for Don Giovanni, as he wished to borrow a large sum. Don Giovanni readily agreed to lend him what he wanted, and sent next day a huge wagon laden with sacks of gold. "Who can he be?" thought the king to himself. "Why, he is much richer than I!" The king took as much as he had need of, then ordered the rest to be returned to Don Giovanni, who refused to receive it, saying, "Tell his majesty I am much hurt at his proposal. I shall certainly not take back that handful of gold, and, if he declines to accept it, keep it yourself." The servant departed and delivered the message, and the king wondered more than ever how anyone could be so rich. At last he spoke to the queen, "Dear wife, this man has done me a great service, and has, besides, behaved like a gentleman in not allowing me to send back the money. I wish to give him the hand of our eldest daughter." The queen was quite pleased at this idea, and again a messenger was sent to Don Giovanni, offering him the hand of the eldest princess. "His majesty is too good," he replied. "I can only humbly accept the honor." The messenger took back this answer, but a second time returned with the request that Don Giovanni would present them with his picture, so that they might know what sort of a person to expect. But when it came, and the princess saw the horrible figure, she screamed out, "What! Marry this dirty beggar? Never, never!" "Ah, child," answered the king, "how could I ever guess that the rich Don Giovanni would ever look like that? But I have passed my royal word, and I cannot break it, so there is no help for you." "No, father, you may cut off my head, if you choose, but marry that horrible beggar -- I never will!" And the queen took her part, and reproached her husband bitterly for wishing his daughter to marry a creature like that. Then the youngest daughter spoke, "Dear father, do not look so sad. As you have given your word, I will marry Don Giovanni." The king fell on her neck, and thanked her and kissed her, but the queen and the elder girl had nothing for her but laughs and jeers. So it was settled, and then the king bade one of his lords go to Don Giovanni and ask him when the wedding day was to be, so that the princess might make ready. "Let it be in two months," answered Don Giovanni, for the time was nearly up that the devil had fixed, and he wanted a whole month to himself to wash off the dirt of the past three years. The very minute that the compact with the devil had come to an end his beard was shaved, his hair was cut, and his rags were burned, and day and night he lay in a bath of clear warm water. At length he felt he was clean again, and he put on splendid clothes, and hired a beautiful ship, and arrived in state at the king's palace. The whole of the royal family came down to the ship to receive him, and the whole way the queen and the elder princess teased the sister about the dirty husband she was going to have. But when they saw how handsome he really was their hearts were filled with envy and anger, so that their eyes were blinded, and they fell over into the sea and were drowned. And the youngest daughter rejoiced in the good luck that had come to her, and they had a splendid wedding when the days of mourning for her mother and sister were ended. Soon after, the old king died, and Don Giovanni became king. And he was rich and happy to the end of his days, for he loved his wife, and his purse always gave him money. Source: Andrew Lang, The Pink Fairy Book (New York, London, and Bombay: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1897), pp. 356-360 . Lang's source: Laura Gonzenbach, Sicilianische Märchen: Aus dem Volksmund gesammelt , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Engelmann, 1870), no. 72, pp. 89-93 . Return to the table of contents . The Reward of Kindness Philippines In a certain town there once lived a couple who had never had a child. They had been married for nearly five years, and were very anxious for a son. The name of the wife was Clara; and of the man, Philip. One cloudy night in December, while they were talking by the window of their house, Clara said to her husband that she was going to pray the novena [nine consecutive days of praying], so that heaven would give them a child. "I would even let my son serve the devil, if he would but give us a son!" As her husband was willing that she should pray the novena , Clara began the next day her fervent devotions to the Virgin Mary. She went to church every afternoon for nine days. She carried a small prayer book with her, and prayed until six o'clock every evening. At last she finished her novenario , but no child was born to them, and the couple was disappointed. A month had passed, when, to their great happiness, Clara gave birth to a son. The child they nicknamed Idó. Idó was greatly cherished by his parents, for he was their only child; but he did not care much to stay at home. He early began to show a fondness for travelling abroad, and was always to be found in the dense woods on the outskirts of the town. One afternoon, when the family was gathered together around a small table, talking, a knock was heard at the door. "Come in!" said Philip. "No, I just want to talk with your wife," answered a hoarse voice from without. Clara, trembling, opened the door, and, to her great surprise, she saw standing there a man who looked like a bear. "A devil, a devil!" she exclaimed. But the devil pacified her, and said, "Clara, I have come here to get your son you promised me a long time ago. Now that the day has come when your son can be of some service to me, will you deny your promise?" Clara could make no reply at first. She merely called her son; and when he came, she said to the devil, "Here is my son. Take him, since he is yours." Idó, who was at this time about seventeen years old, was not frightened by the devil. "Come," said the devil, "and be my follower!" At first Idó refused. But he finally consented to go, because of his mother's promise. The devil now took Idó to his cave, far away outside the town. He tried in many ways to tempt Idó, but was unable to do so, because Idó was a youth of strong character. Finally the devil decided to exchange clothes with him. Idó was obliged to put on the bear-like clothes of the devil and to give him his own soldier suit. Then the devil produced a large bag full of money, and said to Idó, "Take this money and go traveling about the world for seven years. If you live to the end of that time, and spend this money only in doing good, I will set you free. If, however, you spend the money extravagantly, you will have to go to hell with me." When had said these words, he disappeared. Idó now began his wanderings from town to town. Whenever people saw him, they were afraid of him, and would refuse to give him shelter; but Idó would give them money from his bag, and then they would gather about him and be kind to him. After many years he happened to come to a town where he saw an old woman summoned before a court of justice. She was accused of owing a sum of money, but was unable to pay her debt and the fine imposed on her. When Idó paid her fine for her and thus released her from prison, the woman could hardly express her gratitude. As most of the other people about were afraid of Idó and he had no place to sleep, this woman decided to take him home with her. Now, this old woman had three daughters. When she reached home with the bear-like man, she called her eldest daughter, and said, "Now, my daughter, here is a man who delivered me from prison. As I can do nothing to reward him for his great kindness, I want you to take him for your husband." The daughter replied, "Mother, why have you brought this ugly man here? No, I cannot marry him. I can find a better husband." On hearing this harsh reply, the mother could not say a word. She called her second daughter, and explained her wishes to her; but the younger daughter refused, just as her sister had refused, and she made fun of the man. The mother was very much disappointed, but she was unable to persuade her daughters to marry her benefactor. Finally she determined to try her youngest daughter. When the daughter heard her mother's request, she said, "Mother, if to have me marry this man is the only way by which you can repay him for his kindness, I'll gladly marry him." The mother was very much pleased, but the two older daughters were very angry with their sister. The mother told the man of the decision of her youngest daughter, and a contract was signed between them. But before they were married, the bear-like man asked permission from the girl to be absent for one more year to finish his duty. She consented to his going, and gave him half her ring as a memento. At the end of the year, which was the last of his seven years' wandering, the bear-like man went to the devil, and told him that he had finished his duty. The devil said, "You have beaten me. Now that you have performed your seven years' wandering, and have spent the money honestly, let us exchange clothes again!" So the man received back his soldier-like suit, which made him look like a knight, and the devil took back his bearskin. Then the man returned to Clara's house. When his arrival was announced to the family, the two older daughters dressed themselves in their best, for they thought that he was a suitor come to see them. But when the man showed the ring and asked for the hand of Clara's youngest daughter, the two nearly died with vexation, while the youngest daughter was very happy. Source: Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 22, pp. 207-209 . Fansler's source: "Narrated by Elisa Cordero, a Tagalog from Pagsanjan, La Laguna, who heard the story from a Tagalog friend." Note: The narrator names both the hero's mother and his mother-in-law "Clara," probably an unintended oversight. Return to the table of contents . The King's Tabernacle Wales K___ Park, August 4th, 1828. Yesterday I took a very agreeable ride of some twenty miles on an untireable horse of iny host's; for distances disappear before the excellence of the horses and of the roads. I must tell you all I saw. I rode first to the small town of St. Asaph to look at the cathedral, which is adorned with a beautiful window of modern painted glass. Many coats of arms were extremely well executed, and the artist had the good sense to avoid the cominon error of endeavouring to represent objects not suited to his art, which requires masses of colour and no delicate and floating shades. To obtain a more perfect knowledge of the country, I ascended the tower. At a distance of about twelve miles I espied a church-like building on the summit of a high mountain, and asked the clerk what it was. He replied, in broken English, that it was "the king's tabernacle," and that whoever would pass seven years without washing himself, cutting his nails, or shaving his beard, would be allowed to live there; and at the expiration of the seventh year he would have a right to go to London, where the king must give him a pension and make him a "gentleman." The man believed this wild story implicitly, aud swore to its truth: "Voila ce que c'est que la foi [That is what faith is]." I inquired afterwards the true state of the affair, and heard the origin of this history; namely, that the building was erected by the province, or "county," to commemorate the jubilee of the last king's reign, and had stood empty ever since; but that a wag had advertised a considerable reward in the newspapers, to any man who would fulfil the above-named conditions. The common people had mixed up this strange ordeal with the "tabernacle" of King George III. Source (books.google.com): Hermann Pückler-Muskau, Tour in England, Ireland, and France in the Years 1826, 1827, 1828, and 1829 (Philadelphia: Carey, Lea, and Blanchard, 1833), letter 28, p. 318 . Source (Internet Archive): Hermann Pückler-Muskau, Tour in England, Ireland, and France in the Years 1826, 1827, 1828, and 1829 (Philadelphia: Carey, Lea, and Blanchard, 1833), letter 28, p. 318 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 20, 2023. Beauty and the Beast: Folktales of Type 425C Beauty and the Beast folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 425C translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2016 Contents Links open in new windows. Beauty and the Beast (Reconstructed from various European sources by Joseph Jacobs). Link to Beauty and the Beast (France, Jeanne-Marie LePrince de Beaumont). This is the classic version of the story, first published in 1757. Link to The Story of the Beauty and the Beast (France, Gabrielle-Suzanne Barbot de Villeneuve -- as translated by J. R. Planché in Four and Twenty Fairy Tales: Selected from Those of Perrault and Other Popular Writers [London: G. Routledge and Company, 1858], pp. 225-325 ). Link to Beauty and the Beast (France, Gabrielle-Suzanne Barbot de Villeneuve -- as abridged and retold by Andrew Lang in The Blue Fairy Book , 5th edition [London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1891], pp. 100-119 ). The Small-Tooth Dog (England, Sidney Oldall Addy). Rose (Irish-American). The Summer and Winter Garden (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Link to The Singing, Springing Lark (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Clinking Clanking Lowesleaf (Germany, Carl and Theodor Colshorn). The Little Nut Twig (Germany, Ludwig Bechstein). Little Broomstick (Germany, Ludwig Bechstein). Link to The Enchanted Frog (Germany, Carl and Theodor Colshorn). Beauty and the Horse (Denmark, J. Christian Bay). The Singing Rose (Austria, Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle). The Bear Prince (Switzerland, Otto Sutermeister). Beauty and the Beast (Basque). Zelinda and the Monster (Italy, Thomas Frederick Crane). The Snake-Prince (Greece, Lucy M. J. Garnett). The Enchanted Tsarévich (Russia, Alexander Afanasyev). The Fairy Serpent (China, Adele M. Fielde). Links to related sites. Additional tales . External sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Beauty and the Beast Joseph Jacobs There was once a merchant that had three daughters, and he loved them better than himself. Now it happened that he had to go a long journey to buy some goods, and when he was just starting he said to them, "What shall I bring you back, my dears?" And the eldest daughter asked to have a necklace; and the second daughter wished to have a gold chain; but the youngest daughter said, "Bring back yourself, papa, and that is what I want the most." "Nonsense, child," said her father, "you must say something that I may remember to bring back for you." "So," she said, "then bring me back a rose, father." Well, the merchant went on his journey and did his business and bought a pearl necklace for his eldest daughter, and a gold chain for his second daughter; but he knew it was no use getting a rose for the youngest while he was so far away because it would fade before he got home. So he made up his mind he would get a rose for her the day he got near his house. When all his merchanting was done he rode off home and forgot all about the rose till he was near his house; then he suddenly remembered what he had promised his youngest daughter, and looked about to see if he could find a rose. Near where he had stopped he saw a great garden, and getting off his horse he wandered about in it till he found a lovely rosebush; and he plucked the most beautiful rose he could see on it. At that moment he heard a crash like thunder, and looking around he saw a huge monster -- two tusks in his mouth and fiery eyes surrounded by bristles, and horns coming out of its head and spreading over its back. "Mortal," said the beast, "who told you you might pluck my roses?" "Please, sir," said the merchant in fear and terror for his life, "I promised my daughter to bring her home a rose and forgot about it till the last moment, and then I saw your beautiful garden and thought you would not miss a single rose, or else I would have asked your permission." "Thieving is thieving," said the beast, "whether it be a rose or a diamond; your life is forfeit." The merchant fell on his knees and begged for his life for the sake of his three daughters who had none but him to support them. "Well, mortal, well," said the beast, "I grant your life on one condition: Seven days from now you must bring this youngest daughter of yours, for whose sake you have broken into my garden, and leave her here in your stead. Otherwise swear that you will return and place yourself at my disposal." So the merchant swore, and taking his rose mounted his horse and rode home. As soon as he got into his house his daughters came rushing round him, clapping their hands and showing their joy in every way, and soon he gave the necklace to his eldest daughter, the chain to his second daughter, and then he gave the rose to his youngest, and as he gave it he sighed. "Oh, thank you, father," they all cried. But the youngest said, "Why did you sigh so deeply when you gave me my rose?" "Later on I will tell you," said the merchant. So for several days they lived happily together, though the merchant wandered about gloomy and sad, and nothing his daughters could do would cheer him up till at last he took his youngest daughter aside and said to her, "Bella, do you love your father?" "Of course I do, father, of course I do." "Well, now you have a chance of showing it"; and then he told her of all that had occurred with the beast when he got the rose for her. Bella was very sad, as you can well think, and then she said, "Oh, father, it was all on account of me that you fell into the power of this beast; so I will go with you to him; perhaps he will do me no harm; but even if he does -- better harm to me than evil to my dear father." So next day the merchant took Bella behind him on his horse, as was the custom in those days, and rode off to the dwelling of the beast. And when he got there and they alighted from his horse the doors of the house opened, and what do you think they saw there! Nothing. So they went up the steps and went through the hall, and went into the dining room, and there they saw a table spread with all manner of beautiful glasses and plates and dishes and napery, with plenty to eat upon it. So they waited and they waited, thinking that the owner of the house would appear, till at last the merchant said, "Let's sit down and see what will happen then." And when they sat down invisible hands passed them things to eat and to drink, and they ate and drank to their heart's content. And when they arose from the table it arose too and disappeared through the door as if it were being carried by invisible servants. Suddenly there appeared before them the beast who said to the merchant, "Is this your youngest daughter?" And when he had said that it was, he said, "Is she willing to stop here with me?" And then he looked at Bella who said, in a trembling voice, "Yes, sir." "Well, no harm shall befall you." With that he led the merchant down to his horse and told him he might come that day each week to visit his daughter. Then the beast returned to Bella and said to her, "This house with all that therein is is yours; if you desire aught, clap your hands and say the word and it shall be brought unto you." And with that he made a sort of bow and went away. So Bella lived on in the home with the beast and was waited on by invisible servants and had whatever she liked to eat and to drink; but she soon got tired of the solitude and, next day, when the beast came to her, though he looked so terrible, she had been so well treated that she had lost a great deal of her terror of him. So they spoke together about the garden and about the house and about her father's business and about all manner of things, so that Bella lost altogether her fear of the beast. Shortly afterwards her father came to see her and found her quite happy, and he felt much less dread of her fate at the hands of the beast. So it went on for many days, Bella seeing and talking to the beast every day, till she got quite to like him, until one day the beast did not come at his usual time, just after the midday meal, and Bella quite missed him. So she wandered about the garden trying to find him, calling out his name, but received no reply. At last she came to the rosebush from which her father had plucked the rose, and there, under it, what do you think she saw! There was the beast lying huddled up without any life or motion. Then Bella was sorry indeed and remembered all the kindness that the beast had shown her; and she threw herself down by it and said, "Oh, Beast, Beast, why did you die? I was getting to love you so much." No sooner had she said this than the hide of the beast split in two and out came the most handsome young prince who told her that he had been enchanted by a magician and that he could not recover his natural form unless a maiden should, of her own accord, declare that she loved him. Thereupon the prince sent for the merchant and his daughters, and he was married to Bella, and they all lived happy together ever afterwards. Source: Joseph Jacobs, Europa's Fairy Book [also published under the title European Folk and Fairy Tales ] (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), no. 5, pp. 34-41 . Reconstructed from various European sources. Return to the table of contents . The Small-Tooth Dog England Once upon a time there was a merchant who traveled about the world a great deal. On one of his journeys thieves attacked him, and they would have taken both his life and his money if a large dog had not come to his rescue and driven the thieves away. When the dog had driven the thieves away he took the merchant to his house, which was a very handsome one, and dressed his wounds and nursed him till he was well. As soon as he was able to travel the merchant began his journey home, but before starting he told the dog how grateful he was for his kindness, and asked him what reward he could offer in return, and he said he would not refuse to give the most precious thing he had. And so the merchant said to the dog, "Will you accept a fish I have that can speak twelve languages?" "No," said the dog, "I will not." "Or a goose that lays golden eggs?" "No," said the dog, "I will not." "Or a mirror in which you can see what anybody is thinking about?" "No," said the dog, "I will not." "Then what will you have?" said the merchant. "I will have none of such presents," said the dog; "but let me fetch your daughter, and bring her to my house." When the merchant heard this he was grieved, but what he had promised had to be done, so he said to the dog, "You can come and fetch my daughter after I have been home for a week." So at the end of the week, the dog came to the merchant's house to fetch his daughter, but when he got there he stayed outside the door, and would not go in. But the merchant's daughter did as her father told her, and came out of the house dressed for a journey and ready to go with the dog. When the dog saw her he looked pleased, and said, "Jump on my back, and I will take you away to my house." So she mounted on the dog's back, and away they went at a great pace, until they reached the dog's house, which was many miles off. But after she had been a month at the dog's house she began to mope and cry. "What are you crying for?" said the dog. "Because I want to go back to my father," she said. The dog said, "If you will promise me that you will not stay there more than three days I will take you there. But first of all," said he, "what do you call me?" "A great, foul, small-tooth dog," said she. "Then," said he, "I will not let you go." But she cried so pitifully that he promised again to take her home. "But before we start," he said, "tell me what you call me." "Oh," she said, "your name is Sweet-as-a-Honeycomb." "Jump on my back," said he, "and I'll take you home." So he trotted away with her on his back for forty miles, when they came to a stile. "And what do you call me?" said he, before they got over the stile. Thinking she was safe on her way, the girl said, "A great, foul, small-tooth dog." But when she said this, he did not jump over the stile, but turned right round again at once, and galloped back to his own house with the girl on his back. Another week went by, and again the girl wept so bitterly that the dog promised to take her to her father's house. So the girl got on the dog's back again, and they reached the first stile, as before, and the dog stopped and said, "And what do you call me?" "Sweet-as-a-Honeycomb," she replied. So the dog leaped over the stile, and they went on for twenty miles until they came to another stile. "And what do you call me?" said the dog with a wag of his tail. She was thinking more of her father and her own house than of the dog, so she answered, "A great, foul, small-tooth dog." Then the dog was in a great rage, and he turned right round about, and galloped back to his own house as before. After she had cried for another week, the dog promised again to take her back to her father's house. So she mounted upon his back once more, and when they got to the first stile, the dog said, "And what do you call me?" "Sweet-as-a-Honeycomb," she said. So the dog jumped over the stile, and away they went -- for now the girl made up her mind to say the most loving things she could think of -- until they reached her father's house. When they got to the door of the merchant's house, the dog said, "And what do you call me?" Just at that moment the girl forgot the loving things she meant to say and began, "A great --," but the dog began to turn, and she got fast hold of the door latch, and was going to say "foul," when she saw how grieved the dog looked and remembered how good and patient he had been with her, so she said, "Sweeter-than-a-Honeycomb." When she had said this she thought the dog would have been content and have galloped away, but instead of that he suddenly stood upon his hind legs, and with his forelegs he pulled off his dog's head and tossed it high in the air. His hairy coat dropped off, and there stood the handsomest young man in the world, with the finest and smallest teeth you ever saw. Of course they were married, and lived together happily. Source: Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales and Other Traditional Remains: Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby, and Nottingham (London: David Nutt; Sheffield: Pawson and Brailsford, 1895), no. 1, pp. 1-4 . Return to the table of contents . Rose Irish-American Once upon a time there was a widower with one daughter, and he married a widow with two daughters, each of whom was older than his own daughter Rose. The two elder daughters were all for balls and parties. Little Rose had to do all the work, and when they went to a party she was obliged to help them dress, brush, and comb their hair, and never was allowed to go herself. She never complained, but was very kind to her father, and always prepared his meals. Once it was necessary for him to go on a long journey. He asked each of his daughters what he should bring them for a present. The elder daughters wanted silk dresses, jewelry, and all that was rare. Little Rose stood by, not saying a word. Her father asked: "Little Rose, what can I bring for you?" "Nothing, father, but a rose." And she kissed her father, and bade him good-by. "Rose, I shall bring you a rose, the very prettiest I can get, if it should cost me my life." After he got to his journey's end, he came to a splendid palace. The house was empty, but all in order. His breakfast was ready, but he could see no one. He stayed all night, in the morning went into the garden, and oh, the beautiful rose! After he plucked the rose, and had gone a few steps, a great lion met him, frothing at the mouth, and told him, "For this rose you shall die." The father said that he had a very beautiful daughter at home, whose name was Rose, and that, as he was leaving, he promised to bring her a rose; and he pleaded, "If you will only let me go home to my little daughter to bid her farewell." So the lion let him go home, on condition that he was to return. And as he came home Rose was looking out of the window and saw her father coming, and ran to meet him. "Why," said she, "father, what makes you look so sad?" "Nothing, my child, except that I have plucked a rose, and for this rose I must die." "No, father, you shall not go back and die for the rose, but I will go back and ask to have you pardoned." So she went to the palace. As she entered it seemed to her that everything which her eyes fell on seemed to say, "Welcome, Beauty, here!" Even on her cup and saucer, and on every piece of furniture in her chamber were the words, "Welcome, Beauty, here!" She went out to find the lion, and said that she had come to ask him to forgive her father, and that the rose was for her. But the lion said he would not do it unless she would promise to be his wife. Her father was very dear to her, yet she did not like to marry a lion. The lion gave her a beautiful gold ring, and told her that whenever she wanted to see her father she was to lay the ring on her table before going to sleep, and wish to see her father, and she would be at home in the morning. Her father was now getting old, and she grieved for him. At night she laid her ring on the table, at the same time making a wish that she would like to see her father. The next morning she found herself with her father, whom she found much changed. His hair had turned white from grief at the thought of losing his Rose, or having her marry the lion. That night she laid her ring on the table, and wished herself back at the palace. The palace was more beautiful than before, and the table all ready. On every plate were the words, "Welcome, Beauty, here!" On the first morning she went out into the garden. The poor lion was lying very sick, and she looked at him. "Oh, I cannot bear to see my poor lion die; what am I to do?" Finally, she said that she could not bear it any longer, and she called out, "I will be your wife." With this a beautiful young prince stood before her. So they were married, and he sent for her father, and the stepsisters who had been so cruel to her were made servants to stand at the post of the gate before the palace, and all the people were happy. Source: W. W. Newell, "English Folk-Tales in America Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 2, no. 6 (July - September, 1889), pp. 213-14 . Newell's source: "Obtained in Cambridge, Mass., from the recitation of Mary Brown, who heard it in New Brunswick from a woman of Irish extraction, born in the province." Return to the table of contents . The Summer and Winter Garden Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm A merchant was planning to go to a fair, so he asked his three daughters what he should bring back for them. The oldest one said, "A beautiful dress." The second, "A pair of pretty shoes." The third, "A rose." To find a rose would be difficult, for it was the middle of winter, but because the youngest daughter was the most beautiful, and because she took great pleasure in flowers, the father said that he would do his best to find her one. The merchant was now on his homeward trip. He had a splendid dress for the oldest daughter, a pair of beautiful shoes for the second one, but he had not been able to get a rose for the third one. Whenever he had entered a garden looking for roses, the people just laughed at him, asking him if he believed that roses grew in the snow. He was very sad about this, and as he was thinking about what he might bring his dearest child, he came to a castle. It had an adjoining garden where it was half summer and half winter. On the one side the most beautiful flowers were blossoming -- large and small. On the other side everything was bare and covered with deep snow. The man climbed from his horse. He was overjoyed to see an entire hedge full of roses on the summer side. He approached it, picked one of them, and then rode off. He had already ridden some distance when he heard something running and panting behind him. Turning around, he saw a large black beast, that called out, "Give me back my rose, or I'll kill you! Give me back my rose, or I'll kill you!" The man said, "Please let me have the rose. I am supposed to bring one home for my daughter, the most beautiful daughter in the world." "For all I care, but then give me your beautiful daughter for a wife!" In order to get rid of the beast, the man said yes, thinking that he would not come to claim her. However, the beast shouted back to him, "In eight days I will come and get my bride." So the merchant brought each daughter what she had wanted, and each one was delighted, especially the youngest with her rose. Eight days later the three sisters were sitting together at the table when something came stepping heavily up the stairs to the door. "Open up! Open up!" it shouted. They opened the door, and were terrified when a large black beast stepped inside. "Because my bride did not come to me, and the time is up, I will fetch her myself." With that he went to the youngest daughter and grabbed hold of her. She began to scream, but it did not help. She had to go away with him. And when the father came home, his dearest child had been taken away. The black beast carried the beautiful maiden to his castle where everything was beautiful and wonderful. Musicians were playing there, and below there was the garden, half summer and half winter, and the beast did everything to make her happy, fulfilling even her unspoken desires. They ate together, and she had to scoop up his food for him, for otherwise he would not have eaten. She was dear to the beast, and finally she grew very fond of him. One day she said to him, "I am afraid, and don't know why. It seems to me that my father or one of my sisters is sick. Couldn't I see them just once?" So the beast led her to a mirror and said, "Look inside." She looked into the mirror, and it was as though she were at home. She saw her living room and her father. He really was sick, from a broken heart, because he held himself guilty that his dearest child had been taken away by a wild beast and surely had been eaten up. If he could know how well off she was, then he would not be so sad. She also saw her two sisters sitting on the bed and crying. Her heart was heavy because of all this, and she asked the beast to allow her to go home for a few days. The beast refused for a long time, but she grieved so much that he finally had pity on her and said, "Go to your father, but promise me that you will be back here in eight days." She promised, and as she was leaving, he called out again, "Do not stay longer than eight days." When she arrived home her father was overjoyed to see her once again, but sickness and grief had already eaten away at his heart so much that he could not regain his health, and within a few days he died. Because of her sadness, she could think of nothing else. Her father was buried, and she went to the funeral. The sisters cried together, and consoled one another, and when her thoughts finally turned to her dear beast, the eight days were long past. She became frightened, and it seemed to her that he too was sick. She set forth immediately and returned to his castle. When she arrived there everything was still and sad inside. The musicians were not playing. Black cloth hung everywhere. The garden was entirely in winter and covered with snow. She looked for the beast, but he was not there. She looked everywhere, but could not find him. Then she was doubly sad, and did not know how to console herself. She sadly went into the garden where she saw a pile of cabbage heads. They were old and rotten, and she pushed them aside. After turning over a few of them she saw her dear beast. He was lying beneath them and was dead. She quickly fetched some water and poured it over him without stopping. Then he jumped up and was instantly transformed into a handsome prince. They got married, and the musicians began to play again, and the summer side of the garden appeared in its splendor, and the black cloth was all ripped down, and together they lived happily ever after. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, " Von dem Sommer- und Wintergarten ," Kinder- und Hausmärchen (1812), vol. 1, no. 68. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. "The Summer and Winter Garden" was replaced in the Grimms' collection by "The Singing, Springing Lark," Kinder- und Hausmärchen (1814), vol. 2, no. 2. Since 1819 "The Singing, Springing Lark" has carried the KHM number 88. Link to the Grimm brothers' The Singing, Springing Lark . Return to the table of contents . The Clinking Clanking Lowesleaf Germany Once upon a time there was a king who had three daughters. The youngest was his pride and joy. One day he wanted to go to the fair to buy something, and he asked his three daughters what he should bring home for them. The first one asked for a golden spinning wheel. The second one a golden yarn reel, and the third one a clinking clanking lowesleaf. The king promised to bring these things and rode away. At the fair he bought the golden spinning wheel and the golden yarn reel, but no one had a clinking clanking lowesleaf for sale. He looked everywhere, but could not find one. This saddened him, because the youngest daughter was the joy of his life, and he wanted to please her ever so much. As he sorrowfully made his way homeward, he came to a great, great forest and to a large birch tree. Under the birch tree there lay a large black poodle dog. Because the king looked so sad, the dog asked him what was the matter. "Oh," answered the king, "I was supposed to bring a clinking clanking lowesleaf to my youngest daughter, whom I love above anything else, but I cannot find one anywhere, and that is why I am so sad." "I can help you," said the poodle. "The clinking clanking lowesleaf grows in this tree. If a year and a day from now you will give me that which first greets you upon your arrival home today, then you can have it." At first the king did not want to agree, but he thought about it long and hard, then said to himself, "What could it be but our dog? Go ahead and make the promise." And he made the promise. The poodle wagged his tail, climbed up into the birch, broke off the leaf with his frizzy-haired paw, and gave it to the king, saying, "You had better keep your word, or you will wish that you had!" The king repeated his promise, took the leaf, and rode on joyfully. As he approached home, his youngest daughter jumped out with joy to greet him. The king was horrified. His heart was so filled with grief that he pushed her aside. She started to cry, thinking, "What does this mean, that father is pushing me away?" and she went inside and complained to her mother. Soon the king came in. He gave the oldest girl the golden spinning wheel, the middle one the golden yarn reel, and the youngest one the clinking clanking lowesleaf, and he was quiet and sad. Then the queen asked him was wrong with him, and why he had pushed the youngest daughter away; but he said nothing. He grieved the entire year. He lamented and mourned and became thin and pale, so concerned was he. Whenever the queen asked him what was wrong, he only shook his head or walked away. Finally, when the year was nearly at its end, he could not longer keep still, and he told her about his misfortune, and thought that his wife would die of shock. She too was horrified, but she soon took hold of herself and said, "You men don't think of anything! After all, don't we have the goose herder's daughter? Let's dress her up and give her to the poodle. A stupid poodle will never know the difference." The day arrived, and they dressed up the goose girl in their youngest daughter's clothes until she looked just perfect. They had scarcely finished when they heard a bark outside, and a scratching sound at the gate. They looked out, and sure enough, it was the large black poodle dog. They wondered who had taught him to count. After all, a year has more than three hundred days, and even a human can lose count, to say nothing of a dog! But he had not lost count. He had come to take away the princess. The king and queen greeted him in a friendly manner, then led him outside to the goose girl. He wagged his tail and pawed at her, then he lay down on his belly and said, Sit upon my tail, And I'll take you away! She sat down on him, and he took off across the heath. Soon they came to a great, great forest. When they came to the large birch tree, the poodle stopped to rest a while, for it was a hot day, and it was cool and shady here. Around and about there were many daisies [called Gänseblümchen -- goose flowers -- in German] poking up their white heads from the beautiful grass, and the girl thought about her parents, and sighed, "Oh, if only my father were here. He could graze the geese so nicely here in this beautiful, lush meadow." The poodle stood up, shook himself, and said, "Just what kind of a girl are you?" "I am a goose girl, and my father tends geese," she answered. She would have liked to say what the queen had told her to say, but it was impossible for anyone to tell a lie under this tree. She could not, and she could not. He jumped up abruptly, looked at her threateningly, and said, "You are not the right one. I have no use for you:" Sit upon my tail, And I'll take you away! They were not far from the king's house, when the queen saw them and realized which way the wind was blowing. Therefore she took the broom binder's daughter, dressed her up in even more beautiful clothes. When the poodle arrived and made nasty threats, she brought the broom girl out to him, saying, "This is the right girl!" "We shall see," responded the poodle dog. The queen became very uneasy, and the king's throat tightened, but the poodle wagged his tail and scratched, then lay down on his belly, saying, Sit upon my tail, And I'll take you away! The broom girl sat down on him, and he took off across the heath. Soon they too came to the great forest and to the large birch tree. As they sat there resting, the girl thought about her parents, and sighed, "Oh, if only my father were here. He could make brooms so easily, for here there are masses of thin twigs!" The poodle stood up, shook himself, and said, "Just what kind of a girl are you?" She wanted to lie, for the queen had ordered her to, and she was a very strict mistress, but she could not, because she was under this tree, and she answered, "I am a broom girl, and my father makes brooms." He jumped up as though he were mad, looked at her threateningly, and said, "You are not the right one. I have no use for you:" Sit upon my tail, And I'll take you away! They approached the king's house, and the king and queen, who had been steadily looking out the window, began to moan and cry, especially the king, for the youngest daughter was the apple of his eye. The court officials cried and sobbed as well, and there was nothing but mourning everywhere. But it was to no avail. The poodle arrived and said, "This time give me the right girl, or you will wish that you had!" He spoke with such a frightful voice and made such angry gestures, that everyone's heart stood still, and their skin shuddered. Then they led out the youngest daughter, dressed in white, and as pale as snow. It was as though the moon had just come out from behind dark clouds. The poodle knew that she was the right one, and said with a caressing voice, Sit upon my tail, And I'll take you away! He ran much more gently this time, and did not stop in the great forest under the birch tree, but hurried deeper and deeper into the woods until they finally reached a small house, where he quietly lay the princess, who had fallen asleep, onto a soft bed. She slumbered on and dreamed about her parents, and about the strange ride, and she laughed and cried in her sleep. The poodle lay down in his hut and kept watch over the little house and the princess. When she awoke the next morning and found herself soul alone, she cried and grieved and wanted to run away, but she could not, because the house was enchanted. It let people enter, but no one could leave. There was plenty there to eat and drink, everything that even a princess could desire, but she did not want anything and did not take a single bite. She could neither see nor hear the poodle, but the birds sang wonderfully. There were deer grazing around and about, and they looked at the princess with their large eyes. The morning wind curled her golden locks and poured fresh color over her face. The princess sighed and said, "Oh, if only someone were here, even if it were the most miserable, dirty beggar woman. I would kiss her and hug her and love her and honor her!" "Is that true?" screeched a harsh voice close behind her, startling the princess. She looked around, and there stood a bleary-eyed woman as old as the hills. She glared at the princess and said, "You called for a beggar woman, and a beggar woman is here! In the future do not despise beggar women. Now listen well! The poodle dog is an enchanted prince, this hut an enchanted castle, the forest an enchanted city, and all the animals enchanted people. If you are a genuine princess and are also kind to poor people, then you can redeem them all and become rich and happy. The poodle goes away every morning, because he has to, and every evening he returns home, because he wants to. At midnight he pulls off his rough hide and becomes an ordinary man. If he knocks on your bedroom door, do not let him in, however much he asks and begs, not the first night, not the second night, and especially not the third night. During the third night, after he has tired himself out talking and has fallen asleep, take the hide, make a large fire, and burn it. But first lock your bedroom door securely, so that he cannot get in, and do not open it when he scratches on the door, if you cherish your life. And on your wedding day say three times, don't forget it now, say three times: Old tongues, Old lungs! and I will see you again." The princess took very careful notice of everything, and the old woman disappeared. The first night the prince asked and begged her to open her door, but she answered, "No, I'll not do it," and she did not do it. The second night he asked her even more sweetly, but she did not answer at all. She buried her head in her pillow, and she did not open the door. The third night he asked her so touchingly and sang such beautiful melodies to her, that she wanted to jump up and open the door for him, but fortunately she remembered the old woman and her mother and father. She pulled the bedcovers over her head, and did not open the door. Complaining, the prince walked away, but she did not hear him leave. While he slept she built up the fire, crept out on tiptoe, picked up the rough hide from the corner where the poodle always put it, barred the bedroom door, and threw it into the flames. The poodle jumped up howling, gnawed and clawed at the door, threatened, begged, growled, and howled again. But she did not open the door, and he could not open the door, however fiercely he threw himself against it. The fire flamed up brightly one last time, and there was an enormous bang, as if heaven and hell had exploded. Standing before her was the most handsome prince in the world. The hut was now a magnificent castle, the forest a great city full of palaces, and the animals were all kinds of people. At their wedding ceremony, the prince and the princess were seated at the table with the old king and the old queen and the two sisters and many rich and important people, when the bride called out three times, Old tongues, Old lungs! and the tattered old woman came in. The old queen scolded, and the two princesses scolded, and they wanted to chase her away, but the young queen stood up and let the old woman sit down at her place, eat from her plate, and drink from her goblet. When the old woman had eaten and drunk her fill, she looked at the old queen and the evil daughters, and they became crooked and lame. But she blessed the young queen, and she became seven times more beautiful, and no one ever saw or heard from the old woman again. Source: Carl and Theodor Colshorn, "Vom klinkesklanken Lowesblatt ," Märchen und Sagen aus Hannover (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Ruempler, 1854), no. 20, pp. 64-69. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Return to the table of contents . The Little Nut Twig Germany Once upon a time there was a rich merchant whose business required him to travel abroad. Taking leave, he said to his three daughters, "Dear daughters, I would like to have something nice for you when I return. What should I bring home for you?" The oldest one said, "Father dear, a beautiful pearl necklace for me!" The second one said, "I would like a finger ring with a diamond stone." The youngest one cuddled up to her father and whispered, "Daddy, a pretty green nut twig for me." "Good, my dear daughters," said the merchant, "I will remember. Farewell." The merchant traveled far and purchased many goods, but he also faithfully remembered his daughters' wishes. To please his eldest he had packed a costly pearl necklace into his baggage, and he had also purchased an equally valuable diamond ring for the middle daughter. But, however much he tried, he could not find a green nut twig. For this reason he went on foot a good distance on his homeward journey. His way led him in large part through the woods, and he hoped thus finally to find a nut twig. However, he did not succeed, and the good father became very depressed that he had not been able to fulfill the harmless request of his youngest and dearest child. Finally, as he was sadly making his way down a path that led through a dark forest and next to a dense thicket, his hat rubbed against a twig, and it made a sound like hailstones falling on it. Looking up he saw that it was a pretty green nut twig, from which was hanging a cluster of golden nuts. The man was delighted. He reached his hand up and plucked the magnificent twig. But in that same instant, a wild bear shot out from the thicket and stood up on his back paws, growling fiercely, as though he were about to tear the merchant to pieces. With a terrible voice he bellowed, "Why did you pick my nut twig, you? Why? I will eat you up!" Shaking and trembling with fear the merchant said, "Dear bear, don't eat me. Let me go on my way with the little nut twig. I'll give you a large ham and many sausages for it!" But the bear bellowed again, "Keep your ham and your sausages! I will not eat you, only if you will promise to give me the first thing that meets you upon your arrival home." The merchant gladly agreed to this, for he recalled how his poodle usually ran out to greet him, and he would gladly sacrifice the poodle in order to save his own life. Following a crude handshake the bear lumbered back into the thicket. The merchant, breathing a sigh of relief, went hurriedly and happily on his way. The golden nut twig decorated the merchant's had splendidly as he hurried homeward. Filled with joy, the youngest girl ran to greet her dear father. The poodle followed her with bold leaps. The oldest daughters and the mother were not quite so fast to step out the door and greet home-comer. The merchant was horrified to see that the first one to greet him was his youngest daughter. Concerned and saddened, he withdrew from the happy child's embrace, and -- following the initial greetings -- told them all that had happened with the nut twig. They all cried and were very sad, but the youngest daughter showed the most courage, and she resolved to fulfill her father's promise. The mother soon thought up a good plan. She said, "Dear ones, let's not be afraid. If the bear should come to hold you to your promise, dear husband, instead of giving him our youngest daughter, let's give him the herdsman's daughter. He will be satisfied with her." This proposal was accepted. The daughters were happy once again, and they were very pleased with their beautiful presents. The youngest one always kept her nut twig with her, and she soon forgot the bear and her father's promise. But one day a dark carriage rattled through the street and up to the front of the merchant's house. The ugly bear climbed out and walked into the house growling. He went up to the startled man and asked that his promise be fulfilled. Quickly and secretly they fetched the herdsman's daughter, who was very ugly, dressed her in good clothes, and put her in the bear's carriage. The journey began. Once outside the town, the bear laid his wild shaggy head in the shepherd girl's lap and growled, Tussle me, scuffle me Soft and gentle, behind my ears, Or I will eat you, skin and bone The girl began to do so, but she did not do it the way the bear wanted her to, and he realized that he had been deceived. He was about to eat the disguised shepherd girl, but in her fright she quickly fled from the carriage. Then the bear rode back to the merchant's house and, with terrible threats, demanded the right bride. So the dear maiden had to come forward, and -- following a bitterly sorrowful farewell -- she rode away with the ugly bridegroom. Once outside the town, he laid his coarse head in the girl's lap and growled again, Tussle me, scuffle me Soft and gentle, behind my ears, Or I will eat you, skin and bone And the girl did just that, and she did it so softly that it pacified him, and his terrible bearish expression became friendly. Gradually the bear's poor bride began to gain some trust toward him. The journey did not last long, for the carriage traveled extremely fast, like a windstorm through the air. They soon came to a very dark forest, and the carriage suddenly stopped in front of a dark and yawning cave. This was where the bear lived. Oh, how the girl trembled! The bear embraced her with his claw-arms and said to her with a friendly growl, "This is where you will live, my little bride; and you will be happy, as long as you behave yourself here, otherwise my wild animals will tear you apart." As soon as they had gone a few steps inside the dark cave, he unlocked an iron door and stepped with his bride into a room that was filled with poisonous worms. They hissed at them rapaciously. The bear growled into his little bride's ear, Do not look around! Neither right nor left, Straight ahead, and you'll be safe! Then the girl did indeed walk through the room without looking around, and all the while not a single worm stirred or moved. And in this manner they went through ten more rooms, and the last one was filled with the most terrible creatures: dragons and snakes, toads swollen with poison, basilisks and lindorms. And in each room the bear growled, Do not look around! Neither right nor left, Straight ahead, and you'll be safe! The girl trembled and quaked with fear, like the leaves of an aspen, but she remained steadfast and did not look around, neither right nor left. When the door to the twelfth room opened up, a glistening stream of light shone toward the two of them. The most beautiful music sounded from within, and everywhere there were cries of joy. Before the bride could comprehend this -- she was still trembling from seeing such horrible things, and now this surprising loveliness -- there was a terrible clap of thunder, and she thought that earth and heaven were breaking apart. It was soon quiet once again. The forest, the cave, the poisonous animals, and the bear had all disappeared. In their place stood a splendid castle with rooms decorated in gold and with beautifully dressed servants. And the bear had been transformed into a handsome young man. He was the prince of this magnificent castle, and he pressed his little bride to his heart, thanking her a thousand times that she had redeemed him and his servants -- the wild animals -- from their enchantment. She was now a high and wealthy princess, but she always wore the beautiful nut twig on her breast. It never wilted, and she especially liked to wear it, because it had been the key to her good fortune. Her parents and sisters were soon informed of this happy turn of events. The bear prince had them brought to the castle, where they lived in splendid happiness forever after. Source: Ludwig Bechstein, "Das Nusszweiglein," Deutsches Märchenbuch , 5th edition (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1847), pp. 81-85 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Ludwig Bechstein (1801-1860) was Germany's most widely read collector and editor of folktales during the nineteenth century, his popularity within Germany at that time surpassing that of his more scholarly contemporaries, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. Return to the table of contents . Little Broomstick Germany There was once a merchant who had three daughters. The two older ones were proud and haughty. The younger one, however, was well behaved and modest, although her beauty greatly surpassed that of her sisters. She dressed simply, and thus unconsciously enhanced her beauty more than her sisters were able to do with the most expensive clothing and jewelry. Nettchen, that was the name of the merchant's youngest daughter, had a dear girlfriend who was very poor, but equally beautiful and virtuous. She was a broom binder's daughter, and was for this reason was called Little Broomstick by young and old alike. Both girls were of one heart and one soul. They entrusted one another with their little secrets, and between them all class distinctions fell by the wayside. This angered the older sisters greatly, but Nettchen let them scold, and loved her Little Broomstick nonetheless. Once the merchant was planning a long journey, although the season was already very advanced. He asked his daughters if they had a wish as to what he should bring home to them. The oldest one said, "Bring me a golden necklace!" The second, "Bring me a pair of earrings that are so beautiful that all women be envious of me because of them!" The youngest said that she had no wish, because her father, in his goodness, had already given her everything. But the merchant insisted, so she answered with a smile, "Then bring me three roses growing on one stem." She was convinced that her father would not be able to find such a present in the middle of winter. He kissed her for her modesty and set forth on his journey. He was on his way home when he remembered the presents that he was supposed to get for his daughters. He soon found a golden necklace and a pair of splendid earrings, but not so the three roses for Nettchen. The father had just decided to buy some other valuable present for his darling, when suddenly -- to his surprise -- he came upon a green area. He stepped through a wide gateway and found himself in a large, blossoming garden adjacent to a splendid castle. Outside everything was covered with snow, but in the garden the trees were in blossom, nightingales were singing in the bushes, and finally he even saw a blossoming rosebush, and on one of its branches were three of the most beautiful half-open buds. Elated, he thought that now he would be able to fulfill Nettchen's wish, and he broke off the branch. He had scarcely done so when an enormous beast with a long ugly snout, ears hanging down, and a shaggy coat and tail appeared before him and laid his long sharp claws on his shoulder. The merchant was deathly frightened, and even worse when the beast began to speak, threatening him with death for his misdeed. The merchant begged, telling him why he wanted the roses, whereupon the beast answered, "Your youngest daughter must be a true pearl of her sex. Very well, if you will promise to give her to me as a wife in seven months, then you shall live and return to your people." As terrified as the merchant was at this proposal, his fear nevertheless led him to make the promise, thinking that he would be able to trick the monster. The merchant returned to his people and distributed the presents. However, he was sad and melancholy, and they noticed that he was carrying a great burden in his heart. Nettchen asked him to tell her what was troubling him, but he only gave her excuses. He told the secret only to the two older daughters, who wickedly took pleasure in the situation. So that the father could keep his eyes on her, Nettchen was almost never allowed to leave the house. Only Little Broomstick came to visit her from time to time. One day -- the seventh month had just passed -- she and Little Broomstick were again together when a carriage stopped before the house. A servant, gesturing silently, handed a note to the merchant. On it were written the words, "Fulfill your promise!" The merchant was terrified, but he collected himself and asked Little Broomstick to come to him. The girl came, expecting nothing bad. The merchant pointed at her. She was lifted into the carriage, and away they went in a thundering gallop. However, the beast recognized the deception as soon as Little Broomstick was brought before him, and he ordered the girl to go home immediately and bring back the right one. The carriage stopped again before the merchant's house, and when Little Broomstick stepped out, Nettchen fell around her neck with friendly greetings. But then she was picked up and shoved into the carriage, which drove away with its booty as fast as an arrow. Nettchen was very frightened, but she soon collected herself. Inside the strange, beautiful castle she was received with honor, although with silent gestures, and she no longer felt concerned. Silent servants brought her the most delicious things to eat and showed her to a bedroom, where a blinding white canopy bed invited her to rest. After saying her prayers, she surrendered to the arms of sleep. When she awoke she saw to her fright that a disgusting shaggy monster lay next to her. But it was lying there still and quiet, so she left it alone. Then it left, and she had time to think about her adventure. The ugly beast gradually became her sleeping companion, and she grew less and less afraid of him. He cuddled up to her, and she stroked his shaggy coat and even allowed him to touch her lips with his long, cold snout. This had gone on for four weeks when one night the beast did not come to her. Nettchen could not sleep for worry and concern about what might have happened to the beast, whom she had become quite fond of. The next morning she was walking in the garden when she saw the beast lying all stretched out on the bank of a pond that served as a bath. He did not move a limb and showed every sign of being dead. A bitter pain penetrated her breast, and she cried over the death of the poor beast. But her tears had scarcely started to flow when the monster was transformed into a handsome youth. He stood up before her, pressed her hand to his breast, and said, "You have redeemed me from a terrible curse. My father wanted me to marry a woman whom I did not love. I refused steadfastly, and in his anger, my father had a sorceress transform me into a monster. The transformation was to last until an innocent virgin would fall in love with me in spite of my ugly form, and would cry tears on my behalf. You with your heart of an angel have done just that, and I cannot thank you enough. If you will become my wife, I will repay with love what you have done for me." Nettchen extended him her hand, and they were married. Then the deathly quiet castle awoke in a hustle and bustle. Joy ruled everywhere, and the newlyweds lived in bliss. Now the young wife had been given the requirement that she not return to her father's house for one year. However, she obtained a mirror in which she could see everything that was happening in her family circle. Nettchen looked into the mirror often, and she saw her father in his sorrow, although her sisters were cheerful and gay. She observed Little Broomstick as well, and how she mourned for her lost girlfriend. She did not look into the mirror for some time, and when she returned to it, she saw her father on his deathbed and her sisters in the next room making merry with their friends. This saddened the good sister, and she confided her sorrow with her husband. He comforted her, saying, "Your father will not die. In my garden there is a plant whose sap can call back the fleeing life-spirits. The year is nearly over. Then we will fetch your father, and you will not have to be separated from him any longer." Nettchen was pleased with this, and as soon as the year had passed, the husband and wife and their magnificent entourage journeyed to Nettchen's home city. The two older sisters nearly burst with envy and anger, while the father's joy brought back his health, so that evil turned to good. The sap restored his full strength and wellbeing. Little Broomstick too was overjoyed, and Nettchen was her old girlfriend once again. She and the merchant accompanied them back to the prince's castle. Nettchen had a forgiving heart, and however much she had been hurt by her sisters, she wanted to share her good fortune with them. Therefore she invited them to visit her, and showed them all her wealth. However, the splendor angered the sisters, and they resolved to kill their happy sister. Once when they were in the bath, they forced Nettchen under the water, and she drowned. They had scarcely done this when a tall female figure rose up before them and glared at them with angry eyes. She touched the dead woman with a wand, and she came back to life. "I am the sorceress who once transformed the prince," said the tall figure. I have noted your good heart and taken you under my protection. These miserable ones killed you. Now I leave their fate in your hands!" Nettchen begged for mercy for them, but the sorceress shook her head and said, "They must die, for you will never be safe from their malice, and as soon as they have been punished, my power will cease." "Then do with them what you will!" sobbed Nettchen. "Let them be transformed into columns and remain such until a man falls in love with them, and that will never happen." She touched the sisters with her hand, and they were immediately transformed into two stone columns, which to this day are still standing in the garden of the splendid castle, for it has not yet occurred to any man that he should fall in love with cold, heartless stones. The good Little Broomstick remained Nettchen's most faithful girlfriend. She still shares her good fortune with her, if in the meantime the two of them have not died. Source: Ludwig Bechstein, "Besenstielchen," Deutsches Märchenbuch , 5th edition (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1847), pp. 228-32 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Ludwig Bechstein (1801-1860) was Germany's most widely read collector and editor of folktales during the nineteenth century, his popularity within Germany at that time surpassing that of his more scholarly contemporaries, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. Return to the table of contents . Beauty and the Horse Denmark There was once a merchant whose business was so immense that he was the wealthiest tradesman known. He had three daughters, one of whom was named Beauty. One day the merchant received word from friends far away, informing him of the failure of one of his connections, and he at once prepared himself for a journey to that place. The two older daughters asked him to buy all sorts of finery and dresses for them, but Beauty asked for nothing at all. When the merchant left, these two girls had rubbed their eyes with onions in order to look as if they were sorry to bid him good-bye; but Beauty needed no such artifice; her tears were quite natural. So the merchant went away, and in due time arrived at the place where the tradesman of whom he had heard the bad news was living. But instead of obtaining money, as he hoped, he was kicked and beaten so violently that it seems a great wonder he came away without losing his life. Of course he had now nothing to do but return, so he mounted his horse and turned homeward. Towards evening he unfortunately lost his way, and when it became quite dark he knew no better than to ride in the direction of a light which was shining from a distance. At length he reached a beautiful little palace, but although it was lighted, there seemed to be no one at home. After a while he found a shelter and food for his horse -- pure oats, and nothing else. The animal might well dance for joy, for both man and beast were well-nigh exhausted from the long ride. When the horse had been provided for, the master stepped into the palace. There a light was burning, and a table was laid for one person, but no one was to be seen. As the merchant was tired, he sat down without invitation, and ate a hearty supper. A fine bed was there, too, and when he had eaten enough he stretched himself among the pillows and enjoyed a good night's rest. The next morning everything appeared as on the evening before. The horse was well supplied, and as breakfast was ready on the table, the merchant seated himself, doing justice to the good meal. At he was now ready to leave, he thought it might be well to look over the premises, and glancing into the garden he perceived some exquisite flowers. He went down, intending to carry some of them home with him as a present for Beauty; but no sooner had he touched them than a horse came running towards him as fast as it could trot, saying, "You thoughtless man; I was good to you last night, I gave you shelter and provisions, and now you would even take with you the most beautiful flowers in my garden." The merchant immediately begged pardon, saying that he had intended the flowers as a gift for Beauty, his daughter. "Have you several daughters?" asked the horse. "Yes, I have three, and Beauty is the youngest one," he replied. "Now you must promise me," said the horse, "that you will give me the daughter whose name is Beauty; if you refuse, I will take your life." Well, the merchant did not wish to lose his life, so he promised to bring his daughter to the palace, whereupon the horse disappeared among the trees, and the man rode home. As soon as he reached his house, the two older daughters came out and asked him for the fine things which they were expecting. But Beauty came and bid him welcome. He produced the flowers and gave them to her, saying, "These are for you, but they cost your life," and he then told her how he had been obliged to make the fatal promise to the horse, in order to save his life. Beauty at once said, "I am willing to follow you, father, and am always glad to help you." They started on their journey, and soon arrived at the palace. As before, no one was to be seen, but the merchant found food for his horses and a good stable The table was also laid for two persons, and there were two beds. Having done justice to the supper, father and daughter retired and slept soundly. When they awoke the next morning, they found breakfast ready for both, ate heartily, and having exchanged many loving and tender words, they separated, the father riding away. We will let him proceed, and see what occurred at the palace. Shortly before dinnertime the horse arrived. He came into the room and said, "Welcome, Beauty!" She did not feel very glad, and had all she could do in keeping her tears back. "You shall do nothing but walk around in these rooms and in the garden," continued the horse. "Your meals are provided for. I shall come home every day at noon; at other times you must not expect me." Time passed, and Beauty felt so lonely that she often longed for noon, when the horse came home, and she could talk with him. She gradually came to look at him more and more kindly; but one thing caused her great distress, namely, that she had no news from her father. One day she mentioned this to the horse. "Yes," said he, "I understand that very well. In the large room you will find a mirror in which you can see all that you are thinking of." She was happy to learn this, and went straight into the room where the mirror was hanging. As soon as she thought of her father, her old home was visible in the glass, and she noticed how he was sitting in his chair with a sorrowful expression upon his countenance, while his two daughters were singing and dancing. Beauty felt sorry over this state of affairs, and the next day she told the horse what she had seen. "Your father is sorry, I suppose," said the horse, " because he has lost you. He will soon feel better, however." But on the next day, when Beauty consulted the mirror, her father looked pale and ill, like one who is deadly sick; both of her sisters were dressed for a ball, and neither of them seemed to care for the weak man. Beauty burst into tears, and when the horse came home, asking what ailed her, she told him of the bad state of affairs, wishing that he would allow her to return and nurse her poor father during his illness. "If you will promise to come back," said the horse, "you may return and stay for three days; but under no condition must you break your word." Beauty told him she would come back in three days. "Tonight," resumed the horse, "before going to bed, you must place the mirror under your pillow, saying, 'I wish to be home tomorrow.' Then your wish will be fulfilled. When you desire to return, you must do likewise." The next morning, when Beauty awoke, she was at her old home. Her father became so glad to see her again that he at once felt a great deal better. She cared so well for him that the next day he was able to be up, and on the third day he was almost well. As he wished her to stay with him a few days longer, she complied, thinking that no harm would come from it. On the third day after, however, when she looked into the mirror, she saw the horse stretched on the ground in front of the bench which was her favorite seat in the garden. She now felt that it would be impossible for her to remain longer, hence in the evening, before going to bed, she placed the mirror under her pillow, saying: "I wish to be at the palace tomorrow morning." She promptly awoke in the palace the following morning, and hurrying into the garden she found the horse so very sick that he could not stand on his legs. Beauty knelt down and asked him to forgive her for staying away longer than she had promised. The horse asked her if she could not persuade herself to stay with him all her life, but she answered that it would seem very singular to live with a horse all her lifetime. The poor animal now sighed so deeply that she took pity on him and said, fearing that he might die then and there, that she would always stay with him and never leave him. As soon as she had made this promise, the horse vanished, and a beautiful young prince stood before her. He seized her hand and asked whether she was not sorry for the promise she had made. No, she said, she would rather stay with him now than when he was in the shape of a horse. He now told her that both he and the whole land had been enchanted by his wicked stepmother, who had converted him into a horse, and told him that only when a beautiful young girl would promise to stay with him, in his altered shape, would the enchantment be over. He wanted to marry Beauty, and live in the palace which belonged to him. So they sent for her father to take up his residence with them, and now the marriage was performed and celebrated in a splendid manner. They lived long and happily together, the prince and his Beauty. Source: J. Christian Bay, Danish Fairy and Folk Tales (New York and London: Harper and Brothers, 1899), pp. 14-20 . Bay's sources for this collection: Svend Grundtvig, E. T. Kristensen, Ingvor Bondesen, and L. Budde. Return to the table of contents . The Singing Rose Austria A king had three daughters. They were more beautiful than the young women of today, and each had passed her sixteenth year of life. The king thought about making one of his daughters queen, but he did not know which one he should select over the other two. One day he summoned all three and said to them, "My dear children, I am now old and frail, and every day is a gift. Before I die, I would like to bring everything in my realm into order and name one of you as the heir to my kingdom. Now go out into the wide world, and the one of you who brings back a singing rose shall inherit my throne, and she shall be queen over the entire land." When the three daughters had heard this, they tearfully took leave of their old father, then -- trusting their luck -- set forth for foreign lands, each taking a different path. It happened that the youngest and most beautiful of them had to go through a dark pine forest. All kinds of birds were singing at the same time. It was wonderful to listen to them. It began to get dark, the birds flew to their nests, and after a while it became quiet as a mouse. Then suddenly a bright, beautiful, loud tone sounded forth, such as the princess had never heard before, neither from birds nor from humans, and she immediately thought, "That can only be the singing rose." She hurried on in the direction that the marvelous sounds seemed to be coming from. She had not walked long before she saw a large, old-fashioned castle on a cliff. She eagerly climbed up to the castle and pulled several times on the latch. Finally the gate opened with a creaking sound, and an old man with a long, ice-gray beard looked out. "What is your wish?" he grumpily asked the startled maiden. "I would like a singing rose," she answered. "Do you have such a thing in your garden?" "Yes indeed," answered the old man. "What will you take for it, if I could get it from you?" "You need give me nothing for the singing rose. You can have it today, but as payment, I will come to you in seven years and bring you back with me to this, my castle." "Just bring me quickly the valuable flower," shouted the maiden joyfully, for she was thinking only about the singing rose and the kingdom, but not about what would happen after seven years. The old man went back into the castle, and returned soon with a full, glowing rose. It was singing so beautifully that the maiden's heart jumped for joy. She eagerly reached out her hand for it, and as soon as she had the flower in her hands she ran down the mountain like a deer. The old man called after her with a serious voice, "I will see you in seven years!" The maiden wandered the entire night through the dark woods with her rose. Her pleasure in the singing flower and the inherited kingdom caused her to forget all fear. The rose sang without pause the entire way; and the louder and more beautifully it sang, the faster the princess hurried on toward her homeland. She arrived home and told her father everything that had happened to her, and the rose sang beautifully. Immeasurable joy ruled in the castle, and the king gave one celebration after the other. Soon the two older sisters returned. They had found nothing, and had had to return home empty handed. And now the youngest daughter, who had brought back the rose, became queen, although the old father continued to rule. The royal family lived beautiful, joyful days. Day after day and year after year slipped by. Finally the seventh year came to an end, and on the first day of the eighth year the old man from the castle appeared before the king and demanded from him the one of his daughter who had brought home the singing rose. The king presented to him his oldest daughter, but the old man rejected her, shaking his head and growling, "She is not the right one." When the king saw that he could not get away with deception, he -- with a bleeding heart -- turned over the youngest and dearest of his children. The princess now had to go with the grumbling graybeard to his castle, from which she had once obtained the singing rose. The beautiful maiden was very sad, for she had no one there except for her old master. Day after day she sorrowfully thought about her father and her sisters. In the castle there were other pleasures in abundance, but they did not comfort her, for she did not have the company of her loved ones. Her thoughts were always in her homeland. Further, all the doors and chests in the castle were locked, and the old man did not let her have access to a single key. One day she learned -- God knows from where! -- that her oldest sister was to marry a neighboring prince, and that the wedding would take place in a few days. Disquieted, she went to the old man and asked him for permission to attend her sister's wedding. "Just go!" growled the old man. "But I am telling you in advance, do not laugh once during the entire wedding day. If you disobey my order, I will tear you into a thousand pieces. I myself will continually be by your side, and if you as much as open your mouth to laugh, it will be over with you. Take notice!" The princess thought that this would be easy to follow, and on the announced day she appeared with the old graybeard at her sister's wedding. Joy ruled in the king's castle when they saw the long missing queen returning. She was very happy and took advantage of the day, but she did not forget the old man's order, and she did not once open her mouth to laugh. That evening she had to take leave from her loved ones, and she sadly returned to the lonely castle with her companion. Her time of monotony began once again, and the poor princess was always glad when a day finally ended. Then the rumor came to her ears that the other sister would marry soon. This disquieted her again, and she asked the old man if she could not attend her second sister's wedding. "Just go!" growled the old man." But this time you are not allowed to speak a single word the entire day. I will go with you again and observe you vigilantly. The princess thought that this would be easy to follow, and on the announced day she appeared with the old graybeard at her sister's wedding. Joy ruled in the king's castle when they saw the long missing queen returning. Everyone ran out to meet her. They greeted her and welcomed her and asked her about everything. But she pretended that she could not talk, and did not allow a single sound to escape from her beautiful lips. But this time she did not keep up her courage as well as she had the last time, and that evening when everyone was talking together until it was humming like a beehive, a little word slipped out. The old man quickly jumped up, took her by the hand, and led her out of the hall and back to his lonely castle. Here the princess had other things in great abundance, but she greatly missed the company of her loved ones, and everything seemed terribly monotonous to her. One day when she was sadly walking through the garden where the rose had previously blossomed and sung, the old man came to her and said with a serious expression, "Your majesty, if tomorrow while it is striking twelve you will cut off my head in three blows, then everything that you find in the castle will be yours, and you will be free forever!" The princess took heart from the old man's speech and decided to attempt the risky deed. The next day -- it was Saturday -- the old man appeared a little before twelve o'clock and uncovered his neck. She drew the sword that she had hung about her waist, and as the castle clock struck one she swung the sword once, then quickly again two more times. The old man's head rolled away on the floor. But behold! Instead of blood, a key fell from the head. It opened all the chests and doors in the entire castle. There the princess found many, many precious things, and she was rich and free forever. Source: Source: Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle, "Die singende Rose," Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1852), no. 30, pp. 183-88 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Return to the table of contents . The Bear Prince Switzerland A merchant once wanted to go to market. He asked his three daughters what he should bring home for them. The oldest one said, "I would like pearls and precious stones." "You can buy a sky-blue dress for me," said the middle one. But the youngest one said, "Nothing in the world would be dearer to me than a grape." Once at the market, the merchant saw as many pearls and precious stones as he could possibly want. And he soon purchased a sky-blue dress as well. But as for a grape, he could not find one anywhere at the market. This saddened him greatly, because he loved his youngest daughter most of all. Buried thus in his thoughts, he was making his way toward home when a little dwarf stepped before him. He asked, "Why are you so sad?" "Oh," answered the merchant, "I was supposed to bring home a grape for my youngest daughter, but I was not able to find one anywhere at the market." The dwarf said, "Just take a few steps into that meadow down there, and you will come to a large vineyard. A white bear will be there. He will growl fiercely when you approach, but don't let that frighten you. You'll get a grape after all." So the merchant went down into the meadow, and it happened just as the dwarf had said. A white bear was keeping guard at the vineyard, and he growled at the merchant when he was still a long way off. "What do you want here?" "Be so good," said the merchant, "and let me take a grape for my youngest daughter, just a single one." "You cannot have one," said the bear, "unless you promise to give me that which will first greet you upon your arrival home." The merchant did not think long about this before accepting the bear's terms. Then he was permitted to take a grape, and he happily made his way toward home. Upon his arrival home, the youngest daughter ran out to meet him, for she -- more than anyone else -- had missed him, and she could hardly wait to see him. Seeing the grape in his hand, she threw her arms around his neck and could scarcely contain herself for joy. But the father was overcome with sorrow, and he could not tell anyone why. Every day he expected the white bear to come and demand from him his dearest child. When exactly one year had passed since he taken the grape from the vineyard, the bear did indeed trot up, confronted the merchant, and said, "Now give me that which first greeted you upon your arrival home, or I'll eat you." The merchant had not lost all of his senses, and he said, "Take my dog. He jumped right out the door when he saw me coming." But the bear began to growl loudly and said, "He is not the right one. If you don't keep your promise, I'll eat you." Then the merchant said, "So just take the apple tree in front of the house. That was the first thing that I met." But the bear growled even stronger and said, "That is not the right one. If you don't keep your promise immediately, I'll eat you." Nothing more would help. The merchant had to surrender his youngest daughter. When she came out, a coach drove up. The bear led her inside, sat down next to her, and away they went. After a while the coach stopped in the courtyard of a castle, and the bear led the daughter into the castle and welcomed her. This was his home, he said, and from now on she would be his wife. He gave her everything that her heart could desire, so that with time it no longer occurred to her that her husband was a bear. There were just two things that seemed strange to her: Why did the bear insist on having no lights at nighttime, and why did he always feel so cold? After she had been with him for some time he asked her, "Do you know how long you have been here?" "No," she said, "I haven't been thinking about time at all." "All the better," said the bear. "It's been exactly one year. Get ready for a journey, for we must visit your father once again." She did so with great joy, and after arriving at her father's she told him all about her life in the castle. Afterward, when she was taking leave from him, he secretly gave her some matches that the bear was not supposed to see. But the bear did see them, and he growled angrily, "Stop that, or I'll eat you." Then he took his wife back to the castle, and they lived there together as before. Some time later the bear said, "Do you know how long you have been here?" "No," she said, "I don't notice the time." "All the better," said the bear. "You have been here exactly two years. Get ready for a journey. It is time for us to visit your father once again." She did it once again, and everything happened as the first time. But when she visited her father the third time, the bear failed to see that her father secretly gave her some matches. After arriving back at the castle, she could hardly wait for night to come when the bear was sleeping next to her in bed. Silently she struck a light and was startled with amazement and joy, for next to her was lying a handsome youth with a golden crown on his head. He smiled at her and said, "Many thanks for redeeming me. You were the wife of an enchanted prince. Now we can celebrate our wedding properly, for now I am the king of this land." With that the entire castle came alive. Servants and attendants came from all sides, wishing good luck to the king and the queen. Source: Otto Sutermeister, "Der Bärenprinz," Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus der Schweiz (Aarau: H. R. Sauerländer, 1873), no. 37, pp. 112-15 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Return to the table of contents . Beauty and the Beast Basque As there are many in the world in its state now, there was a king who had three daughters. He used continually to bring handsome presents to his two elder daughters, but did not pay any attention at all to his youngest daughter, and yet she was the prettiest and most amiable. The king kept going from fair to fair, and from feast to feast, and from everywhere he used to bring something for the two eldest daughters. One day, when he was going to a feast, he said to his youngest daughter, "I never bring anything home for you; tell me then what you want and you shall have it." She said to her father, "And I do not want anything." "Yes, yes, I am going to bring you something." "Very well then, bring me a flower." He goes off, and is busy buying and buying; for one a hat, for the other a beautiful piece of stuff for a dress, and for the first again a shawl; and he was returning home, when in passing before a beautiful castle, he sees a garden quite full of flowers, and he says to himself, "What! I was going home without a flower for my daughter; here I shall have plenty of them." He takes some then, and as soon, as he has done so, a voice says to him, "Who gave you permission to take that flower? As you have three daughters, if you do not bring me one of them before the year be finished, you shall be burnt wherever you are -- you, and your whole kingdom." The king goes off home. He gives his elder daughters their presents, and her nosegay to the youngest. She thanks her father. After a certain time this king became sad. His eldest daughter said to him, "What is the matter with you ?" He says to her, "If one of my daughters will not go to such a spot before the end of the year, I shall be burned." His eldest daughter answers him, "Be burned if you like; as for me, I shall not go. I have no wish at all to go there. Settle it with the others." The second also asks him, "You seem very sad, papa; what is the matter with you?" He told her how he is bound to send one of his daughters to such a place before the end of the year, otherwise he should be burned. This one too says to him, "Manage your own business as you like, but do not reckon upon me." The youngest, after some days, said to him, "What is the matter with you, my father, that you are so sad? Has someone done you some hurt?" He said to her, "When I went to get your nosegay, a voice said to me, 'I must have one of your daughters before the year be completed,' and now I do not knew what I must do. It told me that I shall be burned." This daughter said to him, "My father, do not be troubled about it. I will go." And she sets out immediately in a carriage. She arrives at the castle and goes in, and she hears music and sounds of rejoicing everywhere, and yet she did not see anyone. She finds her chocolate ready (in the morning), and her dinner the same. She goes to bed, and still she does not see anyone. The next morning a voice says to her, "Shut your eyes; I wish to place my head on your knees for a moment." "Come, come; I am not afraid." There appears then an enormous serpent. Without intending it, the young lady could not help giving a little shudder. An instant after the serpent went away; and the young lady lived very happily, without lacking anything. One day the voice asked her if she did not wish to go home. She answers, "I am very happy here. I have no longing for it." "Yes, if you like, you may go for three days." He gives her a ring, and says to her, "If that changes colour, I shall be ill, and if it turns to blood, I shall be in great misery." The young lady sets out for her father's house. Her father was very glad (to see her). Her sisters said to her, "You must be happy there. You are prettier than you were before. With whom do you live there?" She told them, "With a serpent." They would not believe her. The three days flew by like a dream, and she forgot her serpent. The fourth day she looked at her ring, and she saw that it was changed. She rubs it with her finger, and it begins to bleed. Seeing that she goes running to her father, and says to him that she is going. She arrives at the castle, and finds everything sad. The music will not play -- everything was shut up. She called the serpent (his name was Azor, and hers Fifine). She kept on calling and crying out to him, but Azor appeared nowhere. After having searched the whole house, after having taken off her shoes, she goes to the garden, and there too she cries out. She finds a corner of the earth in the garden quite frozen, and immediately she makes a great fire over this spot, and there Azor comes out, and he says to her, "You had forgotten me, then. If you had not made this fire, it would have been all up with me." Fifine said to him, "Yes, I had forgotten you, but the ring made me think of you." Azor said to her, "I knew what was going to happen; that is why I gave you the ring." And coming into the house, she finds it as before, all full of rejoicings -- the music was playing on all sides. Some days after that Azor said to her, "You must marry me." Fifine gives no answer. He asks her again like that three times, and still she remained silent, silent. The whole house becomes sad again. She has no more her meals ready. Again Azor asks her if she will marry him. Still she does not answer, and she remains like that in darkness several days without eating anything, and she said to herself, "Whatever it shall cost me I must say yes." When the serpent asks her again, "Will you marry me?" she answers, "Not with the serpent, but with the man." As soon as she had said that the music begins as before. Azor says to her that she must go to her father's house and get all things ready that are necessary, and they will marry the next day. The young lady goes as he had told her. She says to her father that she is going to be married to the serpent tomorrow, (and asks him) if he will prepare everything for that. The father consents, but he is vexed. Her sisters, too, ask her whom she is going to marry, and they are astounded at hearing that it is with a serpent. Fifine goes back again, and Azor says to her, "Which would you prefer, from the house to the church, serpent, or from the church to the house, serpent?" Fifine says to him, "From the house to the church, serpent." Azor says to her, "I, too." A beautiful carriage comes to the door. The serpent gets in, and Fifine places herself at his side, and when they arrive at the king's house the serpent says to her, "Shut the doors and the curtains, that nobody may see." Fifine says to him, "But they will see you as you get down." "No matter; shut them all the same." She goes to her father. Her father comes with all his court to fetch the serpent. He opens the door, and who is astonished ? Why, everybody. Instead of a serpent there is a charming young man; and they all go to the church. When they come out there is a grand dinner at the king's, but the bridegroom says to his wife, "Today we must not make a feast at all. We have a great business to do in the house; we will come another day for the feast." She told that to her father, and they go on to their house. When they are come there her husband brings her in a large basket a serpent's skin, and says to her, "You will make a great fire, and when you hear the first stroke of midnight you will throw this serpent's skin into the fire. That must be burnt up, and you must throw the ashes out of window before the last stroke of twelve has ceased striking. If you do not do that I shall be wretched forever." The lady says to him, "Certainly; I will do everything that I can to succeed." She begins before midnight to make the fire. As soon as she heard the first stroke she throws the serpent's skin on the fire, and takes two spits and stirs the fire, and moves about the skin and burns it, till ten strokes have gone. Then she takes a shovel, and throws the ashes outside as the last twelfth stroke is ending. Then a terrible voice says, "I curse your cleverness, and what you have just done." At the same time her husband comes in. He did not know where he was for joy. He kisses her, and does not know how to tell his wife what great good she has done him. "Now I do not fear anything. If you had not done as I told you, I should have been enchanted for twenty-one years more. Now it is all over, and we will go at our ease tomorrow to your father's house for the wedding feast." They go the next day and enjoy themselves very much. They return to their palace to take away the handsomest things, because they did not wish to stop any more in that corner of the mountain. They load all their valuable things in carts and waggons, and go to live with the king. This young lady has four children, two boys and two girls, and as her sisters were very jealous of her, their father sent them out of the house. The king gave his crown to his son-in-law, who was already a son of a king. As they had lived well, they died well too. Source: Wentworth Webster, Basque Legends , 2nd edition (London: Griffith and Farran, 1879), pp. 167-72 . Webster's source: Estefanella Hirigaray. Return to the table of contents . Zelinda and the Monster Italy There was once a poor man who had three daughters; and as the youngest was the fairest and most civil, and had the best disposition, her other two sisters envied her with a deadly envy, although her father, on the contrary, loved her dearly. It happened that in a neighboring town, in the month of January, there was a great fair, and that poor man was obliged to go there to lay in the provisions necessary for the support of his family; and before departing he asked his three daughters if they would like some small presents in proportion, you understand, to his means. Rosina wished a dress, Marietta asked him for a shawl, but Zelinda was satisfied with a handsome rose. The poor man set out on his journey early the next day, and when he arrived at the fair quickly bought what he needed, and afterward easily found Rosina's dress and Marietta's shawl; but at that season he could not find a rose for his Zelinda, although he took great pains in looking everywhere for one. However, anxious to please his dear Zelinda, he took the first road he came to, and after journeying a while arrived at a handsome garden enclosed by high walls; but as the gate was partly open he entered softly. He found the garden filled with every kind of flowers and plants, and in a corner was a tall rosebush full of beautiful rosebuds. Wherever he looked no living soul appeared from whom he might ask a rose as a gift or for money, so the poor man, without thinking, stretched out his hand, and picked a rose for his Zelinda. Mercy! Scarcely had he pulled the flower from the stalk when there arose a great noise, and flames darted from the earth, and all at once there appeared a terrible monster with the figure of a dragon, and hissed with all his might, and cried out, enraged at that poor Christian, "Rash man! what have you done? Now you must die at once, for you have had the audacity to touch and destroy my rosebush." The poor man, more than half dead with terror, began to weep and beg for mercy on his knees, asking pardon for the fault he had committed, and told why he had picked the rose; and then he added, "Let me depart; I have a family, and if I am killed they will go to destruction" But the monster, more wicked than ever, responded, "Listen; one must die. Either bring me the girl that asked for the rose or I will kill you this very moment." It was impossible to move him by prayers or lamentations; the monster persisted in his decision, and did not let the poor man go until he had sworn to bring him there in the garden his daughter Zelinda. Imagine how downhearted that poor man returned home! He gave his oldest daughters their presents and Zelinda her rose; but his face was distorted and as white as though he had arisen from the dead; so that the girls, in terror, asked him what had happened and whether he had met with any misfortune. They were urgent, and at last the poor man, weeping bitterly, related the misfortunes of that unhappy journey and on what condition he had been able finally to return home. "In short," he exclaimed, "either Zelinda or I must be eaten alive by the monster." Then the two sisters emptied the vials of their wrath on Zelinda. "Just see," they said, "that affected, capricious girl! She shall go to the monster! She who wanted roses at this season. No, indeed! Papa must stay with us. The stupid creature!" At all these taunts Zelinda, without growing angry, simply said, "It is right that the one who has caused the misfortune should pay for it. I will go to the monster's. Yes, Papa, take me to the garden, and the Lord's will be done." The next day Zelinda and her sorrowful father began their journey and at nightfall arrived at the garden gate. When they entered they saw as usual no one, but they beheld a lordly palace all lighted and the doors wide open. When the two travelers entered the vestibule, suddenly four marble statues, with lighted torches in their hands, descended from their pedestals, and accompanied them up the stairs to a large hall where a table was lavishly spread. The travelers, who were very hungry, sat down and began to eat without ceremony; and when they had finished, the same statues conducted them to two handsome chambers for the night. Zelinda and her father were so weary that they slept like dormice all night. At daybreak Zelinda and her father arose, and were served with everything for breakfast by invisible hands. Then they descended to the garden, and began to seek the monster. When they came to the rosebush he appeared in all his frightful ugliness. Zelinda, on seeing him, became pale with fear, and her limbs trembled, but the monster regarded her attentively with his great fiery eyes, and afterward said to the poor man, "Very well; you have kept your word, and I am satisfied. Now depart and leave me alone here with the young girl." At this command the old man thought he should die; and Zelinda, too, stood there half stupefied and her eyes full of tears; but entreaties were of no avail; the monster remained as obdurate as a stone, and the poor man was obliged to depart, leaving his dear Zelinda in the monster's power. When the monster was alone with Zelinda he began to caress her, and make loving speeches to her, and managed to appear quite civil. There was no danger of his forgetting her, and he saw that she wanted nothing, and every day, talking with her in the garden, he asked her, "Do you love me, Zelinda? Will you be my wife?" The young girl always answered him in the same way, "I like you, sir, but I will never be your wife." Then the monster appeared very sorrowful, and redoubled his caresses and attentions, and, sighing deeply, said, "But you see, Zelinda, if you should marry me wonderful things would happen. What they are I cannot tell you until you will be my wife." Zelinda, although in her heart not dissatisfied with that beautiful place and with being treated like a queen, still did not feel at all like marrying the monster, because he was too ugly and looked like a beast, and always answered his requests in the same manner. One day, however, the monster called Zelinda in haste, and said, "Listen, Zelinda; if you do not consent to marry me it is fated that your father must die. He is ill and near the end of his life, and you will not be able even to see him again. See whether I am telling you the truth." And, drawing out an enchanted mirror, the monster showed Zelinda her father on his deathbed. At that spectacle Zelinda, in despair and half mad with grief, cried, "Oh, save my father, for mercy's sake! Let me be able to embrace him once more before he dies. Yes, yes, I promise you I will be your faithful and constant wife, and that without delay. But save my father from death." Scarcely had Zelinda uttered these words when suddenly the monster was transformed into a very handsome youth. Zelinda was astounded by this unexpected change, and the young man took her by the hand, and said, "Know, dear Zelinda, that I am the son of the King of the Oranges. An old witch, touching me, changed me into the terrible monster I was, and condemned me to be hidden in this rosebush until a beautiful girl consented to become my wife." Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 2, pp. 7-11 . Return to the table of contents . The Snake-Prince Greece Scarlet thread, spun on the wheel, Twisting on the twirling reel, Like the dancers turn and spin, While I now my tale begin! Once upon a time there was a merchant, and he traded "all the way to Bagdad," as the saying is. He had twelve ships which sailed to foreign countries, and he had besides three pretty daughters. Well, as time went on, luck turned against the merchant. His wife died; one by one he lost his ships; and every year he became poorer and poorer. At last he had lost all his property with the exception of one farm, and he went to live there with his daughters. As they had now no money to hire laborers, the merchant told the girls that they must set to and work on the farm in order that they might gain a living. "We cannot do farm work," replied the two eldest, tossing their heads. "We are not accustomed to it." But the youngest, whose name was Rosa, loved her father very dearly; and she at once prepared to do as he wished. So she set to with a will, and digged in the garden, and raked, and planted; and when the fruits and vegetables were grown, she rose early in the morning to gather them for her father to carry to market. Time passed, and after many months tidings came to the merchant that three of his belated ships had come into port laden with costly goods, when he immediately prepared to go to the city. But before mounting his horse, he asked his daughters what each desired as a present. The two eldest begged for fine silken gowns; but when he asked the youngest, she said, "I want nothing, papa mine, now that I see you released from your poverty." And when her father pressed her, she said, "Well, then, papa mine, bring me a rose, a beautiful, sweet-smelling damask rose." So the merchant set off for the port, and landed his goods. In twelve days' time he had sold them all save the two silken gowns which he had kept for his daughters; but he had found no rose for the youngest. As he was riding home to his farm, it began to rain so heavily that when they came to the open gateway of a house by the wayside, his horse trotted through it into the courtyard. There was no one about, so he put the horse in the stable, and went up to the house. The door stood wide open, so he walked in and sate himself down on a seat in the hall. At once he found by his side coffee and sweetmeats, and a long pipe filled with fragrant tobacco, without his seeing who had brought them. Presently the rain ceased, and the merchant arose and went from chamber to chamber to seek the host and thank him for the shelter and entertainment. Finding no one, however, he was going forth to take his beast from the stable and continue his journey, when, as he crossed the courtyard, he caught sight of a bush of damask roses which had three blossoms on one stem. No sooner, however, had he stretched out his hand and plucked them than there appeared at his feet a snake, who said, "Ah, thankless man! After I have opened my doors to save thee from the storm, canst not see a rose or two without desiring and plucking them?" "I sought through the chambers to find the host and say a "Thank you" to him, but found him not," the merchant replied. "Listen to me," then said the snake. "Thou hast three daughters, and thou must bring me the youngest. Think not to thyself that I am only a snake, and cannot come and find thee if thou dost not my bidding." The poor man asked how many days' grace he would give him; and he granted him forty days. At last he got home to his house; his daughters gathered round him; and when the two eldest had got their gowns he gave the roses to the youngest, and then sat down weeping. "What is the matter, papa mine, that you weep?" she asked, anxiously. Then, as the merchant related his adventure, Rosa's sisters began to reproach her, and point their fingers at her, saying, "Wretched girl that thou art! A gown was not good enough for thee, but thou must have a damask rose, forsooth, that the snake might come and destroy us!" When her father had also told them of the forty days' grace, Rosa went to her chamber and wrote down the date; and she did not seem at all troubled, though her sisters were continually reproaching her. On the thirty-eighth day she went to her father and said, "Papa mine, saddle now the horse so that we may go where I am invited." "Can I take thee, my darling child, to the snake who will destroy thee?" cried the unhappy man. "The snake will not destroy me, if I do his bidding," replied Rosa. "What ill-will can he have against me? Arise, and let us be gone." She bade farewell to her sisters; she and her father set out on their journey, and on the fortieth day they arrived at the snake's abode. The gate was open, as before, and when the merchant had stabled his horse he led his daughter into the house, and they sate them down. Soon came coffee and sweets, as before, without anyone being seen; and in a little while the snake appeared and said to the merchant, "So thou hast done my bidding and brought thy daughter?" "Yea, I have brought her, as I promised," he replied; and when he had kissed and embraced his daughter, he mounted his horse and rode home again. But in a few days he fell ill with grief and took to his bed. So the poor girl was left alone with the snake. And it became the snake's custom, every day when she was taking her coffee after dinner, to climb into her lap and ask her, "Wilt thou take me for thy husband?" And she would reply, "But I am afraid of thee." And she was very sad and lonely because her father did not come to see her as he had promised. Well, one day, as she was sitting at the table, it suddenly opened before her and disclosed a mirror in which all the world was reflected; and, when she saw in it her father lying ill in bed, she began to weep and tear her hair. The snake, who was in the garden, hearing her cries and her breast-beatings, hurried to her and asked, "What ails thee, my Rose?" "See in the mirror," she cried, "how my father lies nigh unto death!" Then said the snake, "Open the table drawer and thou wilt find a ring. Put it on thy finger, and tell me how many days thou wilt be absent?" "I will come back," she replied, "as soon as my father recovers." "Well, I will give thee thirty-one days' leave. If thou come one day later, thou wilt find me dead on some mound in the garden." "Do thyself no harm," said the girl. "When my leave has expired I will return to thee." The snake ordered supper to be served, and when she had eaten, he said, "Put the ring on thy tongue, and thou wilt find thyself at home in thy chamber." Rosa lay down, put the ring on her tongue, and closed her eyes. Her father's servants, passing the door of her chamber, heard her breathing, and ran to tell their young mistresses, who hastened in and found her asleep on her bed. The maiden awoke, and when she found that she was indeed at home again she praised God. Her father was rejoiced to see his Rosa again, and asked her many questions about her life with the snake. When she told him what the snake had said to her every day at dinner time, and that she had replied, "But I am afraid of thee," he said to her, "My daughter dear, the next time he asks thee that question, do thou answer, "Yea, I will take thee!" and we shall see what will hap." And she promised to say this. Her sisters, however, tried to persuade her not to go back, so that the snake might die and they would be rid of him. But Rosa was indignant, and replied, "How could I leave my beast to die, who have received such help from him?" So she remained with her father, whose joy she was, for as many days as she had leave. Then, bidding him and her sisters farewell, she lay down on her bed, put the ring in her mouth, and went back to the snake. When he saw her, he said, "Ah, thou hast come back to me, my Rose!" And after dinner, when coffee was served, and he lay in her lap as before and asked, "Wilt thou take me for thy husband?" she replied, "Yea, I will take thee!" When she had said these words the snake's skin fell off him, and he became a handsome prince. And the table again opened and all the world was seen therein. Then Rosa asked him what manner of man he was, and how he had become a snake. And he told her how that he had fallen under the spell of an enchantress who had changed him into a snake, and had doomed him to retain that shape until he should find a maiden who would consent to marry him. "But now," he said, "I will return to my kingdom. Thy father and sisters shall be conveyed thither, and then we will hold our wedding." So they were married, and the prince made his father-in-law his grand vizier. And we will leave them well, and return and find them better -- God be praised! Source: Lucy M. J. Garnett, Greek Wonder Tales (London: Adam and Charles Black, 1913), , no. 11, pp. 180-88 . Return to the table of contents . The Enchanted Tsarévich Russia Once upon a time there was a merchant who had three daughters. It so happened he had one day to go to strange countries to buy wares, and so he asked his daughters, "What shall I bring you from beyond the seas?" The eldest asked for a new coat, and the next one also asked for a new coat; but the youngest one only took a sheet of paper and sketched a flower on it. "Bring me, bátyushka [father], a flower like this!" So the merchant went and made a long journey to foreign kingdoms, but he could never see such a flower. So he came back home, and he saw on his way a splendid lofty palace with watchtowers, turrets, and a garden. He went a walk in the garden, and you cannot imagine how many trees he saw and flowers, every flower fairer than the other flowers. And then he looked and he saw a single one like the one which his daughter had sketched. "Oh," he said, "I will tear off and bring this to my beloved daughter; evidently there is nobody here to watch me." So he ran up and broke it off, and as soon as he had done it, in that very instant a boisterous wind arose and thunder thundered, and a fearful monster stood in front of him, a formless, winged snake with three heads. "How dared you play the master in my garden!" cried the snake to the merchant. "Why have you broken off a blossom?" The merchant was frightened, fell on his knees and besought pardon. "Very well," said the snake, "I will forgive you, but on condition that whoever meets you first, when you reach home, you must give me for all eternity; and, if you deceive me, do not forget, nobody can ever hide himself from me. I shall find you wherever you are." The merchant agreed to the condition and came back home. And the youngest daughter saw him from the window and ran out to meet him. Then the merchant hung his head, looked at his beloved daughter, and began to shed bitter tears. "What is the matter with you? Why are you weeping, bátyushka ?" He gave her the blossom and told what had befallen him. "Do not grieve, bátyushka ," said the youngest daughter. "It is God's gift. Perhaps I shall fare well. Take me to the snake." So the father took her away, set her in the palace, bade farewell, and set out home. Then the fair maiden, the daughter of the merchant, went in the different rooms, and beheld everywhere gold and velvet; but no one was there to be seen, not a single human soul. Time went by and went by, and the fair damsel became hungry and thought, "Oh, if I could only have something to eat!" But before ever she had thought, in front of her stood a table, and on the table were dishes and drinks and refreshments. The only thing that was not there was birds' milk. Then she sat down to the table, drank and ate, got up, and it had all vanished. Darkness now came on, and the merchant's daughter went into the bedroom, wishing to lie down and sleep. Then a boisterous wind rustled round and the three- headed snake appeared in front of her. "Hail, fair maiden! Put my bed outside this door!" So the fair maiden put the bed outside the door and herself lay on the bedstead. She awoke in the morning, and again in the entire house there was not a single soul to be seen. And it all went well with her. Whatever she wished for appeared on the spot. In the evening the snake flew to her and ordered, "Now, fair maiden, put my bed next to your bedstead." She then laid it next to her bedstead, and the night went by, and the maiden awoke, and again there was never a soul in the palace. And for the third time the snake came in the evening and said, "Now, fair maiden, I am going to lie with you in the bedstead." The merchant's daughter was fearfully afraid of lying on a single bed with such a formless monster. But she could not help herself, so she strengthened her heart and lay down with him. In the morning the serpent said to her, "If you are now weary, fair maiden, go to your father and your sisters. Spend a day with them, and in the evening come back to me. But see to it that you are not late. If you are one single minute late I shall die of grief." "No, I shall not be late," said the maiden, the merchant's daughter, and descended the steps; there was a barouche ready for her, and she sat down. That very instant she arrived at her father's courtyard. Then the father saw, welcomed, kissed her, and asked her, "How has God been dealing with you, my beloved daughter ? Has it been well with you?" "Very well, father!" And she started telling of all the wealth there was in the palace, how the snake loved her, how whatever she only thought of was in that instant fulfilled. The sisters heard, and did not know what to do out of sheer envy. Now the day was ebbing away, and the fair maiden made ready to go back, and was bidding farewell to her father and her sisters, saying, "This is the time I must go back. I was bidden keep to my term." But the envious sisters rubbed onions on their eyes and made as though they were weeping: "Do not go away, sister; stay until tomorrow." She was very sorry for her sisters, and stayed one day more. In the morning she bade farewell to them all and went to the palace. When she arrived it was as empty as before. She went into the garden, and she saw the serpent lying dead in the pond! He had thrown himself for sheer grief into the water. "Oh, my God, what have I done!" cried out the fair maiden, and she wept bitter tears, ran. up to the pond, hauled the snake out of the water, embraced one head and kissed it with all her might. And the snake trembled, and in a minute turned into a good youth. "I thank you, fair maiden," he said. "You have saved me from the greatest misfortune. I am no snake, but an enchanted prince." Then they went back to the merchant's house, were betrothed, lived long, and lived for good and happy things. Source: Leonard A. Magnus, Russian Folk-Tales (New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1916), pp. 283-86 . Magnus' source is the great collection of Alexander Afanasyev (1826-1871). Return to the table of contents . The Fairy Serpent China Once there was a man who had three daughters, of whom he was devotedly fond. They were skilful in embroidery; and he used every day on his way home from work to gather some flowers for them to use as patterns. One day when he found no flowers along his route homeward he went into the woods to look for wild blossoms, and he unwittingly invaded the domain of a fairy serpent, that coiled around him, held him tightly, and railed at him for having entered his garden. The man excused himself, saying that he came merely to get a few flowers for his daughters, who would be sorely disappointed were he to go home without his usual gift to them. The snake asked him the number, the names, and the ages of his daughters, and then refused to let him go unless he promised one of them in marriage to him. The poor man tried every argument he could think of to induce the snake to release him upon easier terms, but the reptile would accept no other ransom. At last the father, dreading greater evil to his daughters should they be deprived of his protection, gave the required promise and went home. He could eat no supper, however, for he knew the power of fairies to afflict those who offend them, and he was full of anxiety concerning the misfortunes that must overwhelm his whole family should the compact be disregarded. Some days passed; his daughters carefully prepared his meals, and affectionately besought him to eat them, but he would not come to the table. He was always plunged in sorrowful meditation. They conferred among themselves as to the cause of his uncommon behavior, and, having decided that one of them must have displeased him, they agreed to try to find out which one it might be, by going separately, each in turn, to urge him to eat. The eldest went, expressed her distress at his loss of appetite, and urged him to partake of food. He replied that he would do so if she would for his sake marry the snake to whom he had promised a wife. She bluntly refused to carry out her father's contract, and left him in deeper trouble than before. The second daughter then went to beg him to take food, received the same reply, and likewise declined meeting the engagement he had made. The youngest daughter then went and entreated him to eat, heard his story, and at once declared that, if he would care for his own health properly, she would become the bride of the serpent. The father therefore took his meals again, the days sped without bringing calamity, and the welfare of the family for a time seemed secure. But one morning, as the girls were sitting at their embroidery, a wasp flew into the room and sang: "Buzz! I buzz and come the faster; Who will wed the snake, my master? Whenever the wasp alighted the girls prodded him with their needles, and followed him up so closely that he had to flee for his life. The next morning two wasps came, singing the same refrain; the third morning three wasps came; and the number of wasps increased day by day, until the girls could no longer put them to rout, nor endure their stings. Then the youngest said that, in order to relieve the family of the buzzing plague, she would go to her uncanny bridegroom. The wasps accompanied her on the road, and guided her into the woods where the fairy serpent awaited her in a palace that he had built for her reception. There were spacious rooms with carved furniture inlaid with precious stones, chests full of silken fabrics, caskets of jade, and jewels of gold. The snake had beautiful eyes and a musical voice; but his skin was warty, and the girl shuddered at the thought of daily seeing him about. After the wedding supper, at which the two sat alone, the girl told her spouse that she appreciated the excellence of all that he had provided for her, and that she should perform all her domestic duties exactly. For many days she kept the house neat, cooked the food, and made all things pleasant for her repulsive bridegroom. He doted upon her, and pined whenever she was out of his sight. So heedful was he of her wishes and her welfare, that she grew to like his companionship, and to feel a great lonesomeness whenever he was absent. Having no help in her household work, she was, one day, on finding the well dried up, obliged to go into the forest in search of water, which she finally discovered and toilsomely brought back from a distant spring. On returning she found the snake dying of thirst, and in her eagerness to save his life she grasped and plunged him into the water, from which he rose transformed, a strong and handsome man. He had been the subject of wicked enchantment, from which her dutiful quest and gracious pity set him free. Thereafter she often with her admirable husband visited her old home and carried gifts to those who were less happy than she. Source: Adele M. Fielde, Chinese Nights Entertainment (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1893), pp. 45-41 . Fielde's source: "These tales have been heard or overheard by the writer, as they were told in the Swatow vernacular, by persons who could not read." Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Additional tales about animal brides and bridegrooms Animal Brides . Tales of type 402. Animal Brides and Animal Bridegrooms: Tales Told by North American Indians . Beauty and the Beast , by Jeanne-Marie LePrince de Beaumont. Cupid and Psyche , by Lucius Apuleius. East of the Sun and West of the Moon . A classic animal bridegroom tale from the Norwegian collection of Asbjørnsen and Moe. Frog Kings . Folktales of type 440 about slimy suitors. The Frog King; or, Iron Heinrich by the Brothers Grimm . A comparison of the versions of 1812 and 1857. Hog Bridegrooms . Tales of type 441. Monkey Bridegrooms . Folktales from India, The Philippines, and French Louisiana). The Singing, Springing Lark , by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. Snake and Serpent Husbands . Folktales of type 433C and related stories. External sites Beauty and the Beast , an article from Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Return to the table of contents . Revised February 16, 2016. The Bell of Justice: Tales of type 207C The Bell of Justice folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 207C selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2013 Contents Of the Vicissitude of Everything Good, and Especially of a Right Justice ( Gesta Romanorum ). The Emperor Charlemagne and the Serpent (Switzerland). The Bell of Atri (Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Tales of a Wayside Inn ). The Dumb Plaintiff (Germany). Links to additional retellings of this tale: James Baldwin, "The Bell of Atri," Fifty Famous Stories Retold (New York: American Book Company, 1896), pp. 69-75 . Joel H. Metcalf, "The Bell of Atri," World Stories (Boston: Unitarian Sunday-School Society, 1909), no. 14, pp. 44-46 . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Of the Vicissitude of Everything Good, and Especially of a Right Justice Gesta Romanorum The Emperor Theodosius had the misfortune to lose his sight. He put up a bell in his palace; and the law was, that whoever had any suit to make should pull the string with his own hands. When the bell rang, a judge, appointed to this end, descended and administered justice. It chanced that a serpent made her nest immediately under the bell-rope, and in due time brought forth young. When they were old enough, one day she conducted them forth to enjoy the fresh air beyond the city. Now, while the serpent was absent, a toad entered and occupied her nest. When, therefore, the former returned with her young, she found the toad in possession, and instantly began an attack. But the latter baffled her attempts, and obstinately maintained his station. The serpent, perceiving her inability to eject the intruder, coiled her tail around the bell-rope, and forcibly rang the bell; as though she had said, "Descend, judge, and give me justice; for the toad has wrongfully seized my nest." The judge, hearing the bell, descended; but not seeing anyone, returned. The serpent, finding her design abortive, once more sounded the alarm. The judge again appeared, and upon this occasion, seeing the serpent attached to the bell-rope, and the toad in possession of her nest, declared the whole circumstance to the emperor. "Go down, my lord," said the latter, "and not only drive away the toad, but kill him; let the serpent possess her right." All which was done. On a subsequent day, as the king lay in his bed, the serpent entered the bedchamber carrying a precious stone in her mouth. The servants, perceiving this, informed the emperor, who gave directions that they should not harm it; "for," added he, "it will do me no injury." The serpent, gliding along, ascended the bed, and approaching the emperor's eyes, let the stone fall upon them, and immediately left the room. No sooner, however, had the stone touched the eyes than their sight was completely restored. Infinitely rejoiced at what had happened, the emperor made inquiry after the serpent, but it was not heard of again. He carefully treasured this invaluable stone, and ended his days in peace. Application My beloved, the emperor is any worldly-minded man who is blind to spiritual affairs. The bell is the tongue of a preacher; the cord is the Bible. The serpent is a wise confessor, who brings forth young -- that is, good works. But prelates and confessors are often timid and negligent, and follow earthly more than heavenly matters; and then the toad, which is the devil, occupies their place. The serpent carries a stone -- and the confessor the Sacred Writings, which alone are able to give sight to the blind. Source: Gesta Romanorum , translated from the Latin by Charles Swan, revised and corrected by Wynnard Hooper (London: George Bell and Sons, 1906), no. 105, pp. 182-83 . The Gesta Romanorum ( Deeds of the Romans ) is a collection of tales compiled about 1300 and intended for the use of Christian preachers. Link to a retold version of this tale: Horace Elisha Scudder, "The Bell of Justice," The Book of Legends: Told Over Again (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1899), pp. 16-17 . Return to the table of contents . The Emperor Charlemagne and the Serpent Switzerland Zürich, the old Roman Turicum, on either side of the Limmat at the point where it flows out of the green-hued lake, is the capital of the canton of the same name, and noted alike for the beauty of its situation and for its famous university. In the days of the early Christian persecution, Felix and Regula, the patron saints of Zürich, were beheaded near this town. Strange to relate, though, immediately after the execution, both martyrs picked up their severed heads, tucked them under their arms, and stalked off to the spot where the minster now stands, where they wound up their marvelous performances by burying themselves comfortably! On the spot where they suffered martyrdom Charlemagne erected a memorial pillar, above which he hung a bell, saying that it could be rung by anyone who had been wronged, and that they should receive immediate justice. During one of his visits to Zürich, Charlemagne took up his abode in the Choristers' House, and while he sat there at table one day he suddenly heard a loud peal from the bell of justice. He immediately dispatched a servant to see what wrong had been done, and was greatly annoyed when the man reported that careful search had failed to reveal the presence of any living creature. A few moments later the bell rang again, but when the servant once more announced that no one was there, the emperor bade his guards hide near the pillar, and seize the miscreant who dared to pull the bell of justice in mere fun. Before long the bell sounded a third time, and a few moments later the guards rushed into the emperor's presence with faces blanched with fear, to report that a snake had coiled itself around the pillar, and seizing the rope in its teeth, tugged until the bell rang forth loud and clear. The emperor immediately rose from table, saying he must see this phenomenon with his own eyes, and followed by all his court went down to the pillar. As he drew near, the snake came forward to meet him, and rising upon its coiled tail, bowed low before the monarch in evident recognition of his exalted station. Then, dropping down to the earth once more, it crept away, turning from time to time, and making signs as if to invite the emperor to follow. The serpent's actions were so eloquent that Charlemagne, understanding them, obediently followed it down to the edge of the water, where, parting the reeds, the snake showed him its nest, in which sat an enormous toad. Charlemagne now bade his guards seize and kill the intruder, and when the snake had bowed its thanks and contentedly coiled itself around its eggs, he went back to his interrupted meal, loudly praising the bell by means of which even dumb animals could appeal for justice. The next day, while the emperor again sat at dinner, the guards rushed in breathlessly to announce the coming of the strange snake. Charlemagne quickly bade them stand aside and not try to hinder the reptile, which now crawled into the room where he sat, climbed upon the table, did obeisance to the emperor, and delicately lifting the cover of his drinking cup, dropped into it a jewel of fabulous price. Then, replacing the cover of the vessel, the snake bowed low again, and creeping down, left the cloister to return to its nest by the lake. According to one version of this legend, Charlemagne set this precious stone in a ring which he gave to his wife, Frastrada. Unknown to him, however, the stone had the magic power of fixing his affections upon its wearer. When the queen, therefore, thought she was about to die, she slipped the ring into her mouth to prevent its falling into the hands of some rival. For eighteen years Charlemagne refused to part with his wife's body, and carried it with him wherever he went. But at the end of that time his minister Turpin discovered the secret of his infatuation, and obtaining possession of the magic stone, soon saw all Charlemagne's affections fixed upon him. As the emperor's devotion proved somewhat of a bore to the old minister, he tried to get rid of the spell by casting the ring into the mineral springs at Aix-la-Chapelle. While out hunting the next day, Charlemagne urged his steed to drink of that water, and when the animal hastily withdrew its foot and refused to approach the pool again, the emperor dismounted to investigate the cause. Touching the imprint of the horse's hoof, Charlemagne discovered that the mud was very warm, for he was near the hottest of these thermal springs. While resting near that pool, he was seized with such an affection for the spot that he soon founded there his capital of Aix-la-Chapelle. In memory of the horse which guided him hither, the Cathedral was built in the shape of a horseshoe, and as Charlemagne could not endure the thought of ever leaving this enchanted neighborhood, he left orders to bury him in the minster of Aix-la-Chapelle. On the spot where Charlemagne's famous bell once hung, at Zurich, stands the Wasserkirche, which now contains a large library with valuable and interesting manuscripts. Charlemagne's great-grandson Louis II. often visited Zürich, where his two pious daughters induced him to build a convent and the Frauenmünster. It is said that the place for these buildings was staked out by angel hands, and that the stakes were connected by a silken string of the finest make. This rope was hung above the altar of the new church, where it remained until the Reformation. It was then removed with many other relics, and served for years as ordinary bell-rope in a private house. The king's daughters, who both became abbesses, long dwelt at Baldern Castle, whence, however, they went down to the Frauenmünster whenever the bell rang for prayers. They even attended the midnight services there, and when it was very dark a stately stag invariably walked before them carrying a flaming torch between its antlers. Source: H. A. Guerber Legends of Switzerland (New York: Dodd, Mean, and Company, 1905), pp. 248-52 . Guerber's probably source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Kaiser und die Schlange," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 2 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1818), no. 453, pp. 130-32 . In later editions this legend is given the number 459. Return to the table of contents . The Bell of Atri Henry Wadsworth Longfellow At Atri in Abruzzo, a small town Of ancient Roman date, but scant renown, One of those little places that have run Half up the hill, beneath a blazing sun, And then sat down to rest, as if to say, "I climb no farther upward, come what may," -- The Re Giovanni, now unknown to fame, So many monarchs since have borne the name, Had a great bell hung in the market-place, Beneath a roof, projecting some small space By way of shelter from the sun and rain. Then rode he through the streets with all his train, And, with the blast of trumpets loud and long, Made proclamation, that whenever wrong Was done to any man, he should but ring The great bell in the square, and he, the King, Would cause the Syndic to decide thereon. Such was the proclamation of King John. How swift the happy days in Atri sped, What wrongs were righted, need not here be said. Suffice it that, as all things must decay, The hempen rope at length was worn away, Unraveled at the end, and, strand by strand, Loosened and wasted in the ringer's hand, Till one, who noted this in passing by, Mended the rope with braids of briony, So that the leaves and tendrils of the vine Hung like a votive garland at a shrine. By chance it happened that in Atri dwelt A knight, with spur on heel and sword in belt, Who loved to hunt the wild-boar in the woods, Who loved his falcons with their crimson hoods, Who loved his hounds and horses, and all sports And prodigalities of camps and courts; -- Loved, or had loved them; for at last, grown old, His only passion was the love of gold. He sold his horses, sold his hawks and hounds, Rented his vineyards and his garden-grounds Kept but one steed, his favorite steed of all, To starve and shiver in a naked stall, And day by day sat brooding in his chair, Devising plans how best to hoard and spare. At length he said: "What is the use or need To keep at my own cost this lazy steed, Eating his head off in my stables here, When rents are low and provender is dear? Let him go feed upon the public ways; I want him only for the holidays." So the old steed was turned into the heat; Of the long, lonely, silent, shadeless street; And wandered in suburban lanes forlorn, Barked at by dogs, and torn by brier and thorn. One afternoon, as in that sultry clime It is the custom in the summer time, With bolted doors and window-shutters closed, The inhabitants of Atri slept or dozed; When suddenly upon their senses fell The loud alarm of the accusing bell! The Syndic started from his deep repose, Turned on his couch, and listened, and then rose And donned his robes, and with reluctant pace Went panting forth into the market-place, Where the great bell upon its cross-beams swung, Reiterating with persistent tongue, In half-articulate jargon, the old song: "Some one hath done a wrong, hath done a wrong!" But ere he reached the belfry's light arcade He saw, or thought he saw, beneath its shade, No shape of human form of woman born, But a poor steed dejected and forlorn, Who with uplifted head and eager eye Was tugging at the vines of briony. "Domeneddio!" cried the Syndic straight, "This is the Knight of Atri's steed of state! He calls for justice, being sore distressed, And pleads his cause as loudly as the best." Meanwhile from street and land a noisy crowd Had rolled together like a summer cloud, And told the story of the wretched beast In five-and-twenty different ways at least, With much gesticulation and appeal To heathen gods, in their excessive zeal. The Knight was called and questioned; in reply Did not confess the fact, did not deny; Treated the matter as a pleasant jest, And set at naught the Syndic and the rest, Maintaining, in an angry undertone, That he should do what pleased him with his own. And thereupon the Syndic gravely read The proclamation of the King; then said: "Pride goeth forth on horseback grand and gay, But cometh back on foot, and begs its way; Fame is the fragrance of heroic deeds, Of flowers of chivalry and not of weeds! These are familiar proverbs; but I fear They never yet have reached your knightly ear. What fair renown, what honor, what repute Can come to you from starving this poor brute? He who serves well and speaks not, merits more Than they who clamor loudest at the door. Therefore the law decrees that as this steed Served you in youth, henceforth you shall take heed To comfort his old age, and to provide Shelter in stall, and food and field beside." The Knight withdrew abashed; the people all Led home the steed in triumph to his stall. The King heard and approved, and laughed in glee, And cried aloud: "Right well it pleaseth me! Church-bells at best but ring us to the door; But go not in to mass; my bell doth more: It cometh into court and pleads the cause Of creatures dumb and unknown to the laws; And this shall make, in every Christian clime, The Bell of Atri famous for all time." Source: Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Tales of a Wayside Inn (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, [1915]), pp. 137-41 . "The Bell of Atri" is "The Sicilian's Tale" from part two of Tales of a Wayside Inn . Part one of this book was first published in 1863 and part two in 1872. The book follows a storytelling tradition dating back most prominently to Chaucer and Boccaccio in which wayfarers entertain one another by telling tales. Link to additional folklore ballads by Longfellow . Return to the table of contents . The Dumb Plaintiff Germany The story of "The Bell of Atri," which Longfellow has so charmingly told in his Tales of a Wayside Inn, is said to have originated in Eckhardtsberg near Breisach. In early days, when the ruins now crowning the hill were part of a strong fortress, the lord of Eckhardtsberg, wishing to render justice to all men, placed a bell in his tower. He fastened to it a long piece of rope which hung outside the gate, within easy reach of every hand, and bade all those who wished redress to ring it loudly, promising to grant them an immediate hearing. One day the bell pealed loudly, and when in answer to its call the lord of Eckhardtsberg, followed by all his retainers, came out to hear the complaint, he was surprised to find a poor old horse, which, urged by hunger, was trying to chew the end of the hempen rope. One of the bystanders immediately recognized the horse as belonging to a neighboring knight. For many a year the horse had been his favorite steed, had borne him safely through many a fight, but now that it was old and useless the cruel master had turned it out to seek pasture along the highway, where it found but scant subsistence. The lord of Eckhardtsberg, seeing the animal's sorry plight, and hearing how faithfully it had served its master in the days of its youth, declared that in return for its former services it should now be treated with respect, and condemned the unfeeling, avaricious owner to give it a place in his stable and plenty of food as long as it lived. Source: H. A. Guerber Legends of the Rhine , 3rd ed. (New York: A. S. Barnes and Company, 1899), pp. 308-309 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 19, 2013. Sunken Bells: Legends of Type 7070 Sunken Bells Legends of Christiansen Type 7070 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2013-2025 Contents Bomere Pool (1) (Shropshire). Bomere Pool (2) (Shropshire). Kentsham Bell (Herefordshire). The Mermaid of Marden (Herefordshire). The Bells of Forrabury Church (Cornwall). The Bosham Bell (Sussex). The Whitby Abbey Bells (Yorkshire). Whitby: Submarine Bells (Yorkshire). The Buried Chime (Yorkshire). A Legend of Semewater (Yorkshire). Simmerwater [Semerwater] (Yorkshire). The Bells of Brinkburn (1) (Northumberland). The Bells of Brinkburn (2) (Northumberland). Rostherne Mere (Cheshire). A Legend of Rostherne Mere (Cheshire). The Sunken City (Austria / Italy). The Sunken Bell in Lake Wörthersee (Austria). The Wishing Bell of Bled (Slovenia). The Legend of the Sunken Bell (Slovenia). The Legend of Bled Castle (Slovenia). The Legend of the Sunken Bell (Slovenia). The Legend of the Sunken Bell (Slovenia). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. England Bomere Pool (1) Shropshire Many years ago, a village stood in the hollow which is now filled up by the mere. But the inhabitants were a wicked race, who mocked at God and His priest. They turned back to the idolatrous practices of their fathers, and worshipped Thor and Woden; they scorned to bend the knee, save in mockery, to the White Christ who had died to save their souls. The old priest earnestly warned them that God would punish such wickedness as theirs by some sudden judgment, but they laughed him to scorn. They fastened fish-bones to the skirt of his cassock, and set the children to pelt him with mud and stones. The holy man was not dismayed at this; nay, he renewed his entreaties and warnings, so that some few turned from their evil ways and worshipped with him in the little chapel which stood on the bank of a rivulet that flowed down from the mere on the hill-side. The rains fell that December in immense quantities. The mere was swollen beyond its unsual limits, and all the hollows in the hills were filled to overflowing. One day when the old priest was on the hill-side gathering fuel, he noticed that the barrier of peat, earth, and stones, which prevented the mere from flowing into the valley, was apparently giving way before the mass of water above. He hurried down to the village and besought the men to come up and cut a channel for the discharge of the superfluous waters of the mere. They only greeted his proposal with shouts of derision, and told him to go and mind his prayers, and not spoil their feast with his croaking and his kill-joy presence. These heathen were then keeping their winter festival with great revelry. It fell on Christmas Eve. The same night the aged priest summoned his few faithful ones to attend at the midnight mass, which ushered in the feast of our Saviour's Nativity. The night was stormy, and the rain fell in torrents, yet this did not prevent the little flock from coming to the chapel. The old servant of God had already begun the holy sacrifice, when a roar was heard in the upper part of the valley. The server was just ringing the Sanctus bell which hung in the bell-cot, when a flood of water dashed into the church, and rapidly rose till it put out the altar-lights. In a few moments more, the whole building was washed away, and the mere, which had burst its mountain barrier, occupied the hollow in which the village had stood. Men say that if you sail over the mere on Christmas Eve, just after midnight, you may hear the Sanctus bell tolling. Source (books.google.com): Charlotte Sophia Burne, Shropshire Folk-Lore: A Sheaf of Gleanings , from the collections of Georgina F. Jackson (London: Trübner and Company, 1883), pp. 64-65 . Source (Internet Archive): Charlotte Sophia Burne, Shropshire Folk-Lore: A Sheaf of Gleanings , from the collections of Georgina F. Jackson (London: Trübner and Company, 1883), pp. 64-65 . Burne's source: "A clergyman, a native of that neighbourhood, who had been familiar with it [the legend] in his boyhood." Return to the table of contents . Bomere Pool (2) Shropshire In the days of the Roman empire, when Uriconium was standing, a very wicked city stood where we now see Bomere Pool. The inhabitants had turned back from Christianity to heathenism, and though God sent one of the Roman soldiers to be a prophet to them, like Jonah to Nineveh, they would not repent. Far from that, they ill-used and persecuted the preacher. Only the daughter of the governor remained constant to the faith. She listened gladly to the Christian's teaching, and he on his part loved her, and would have had her to be his wife. But no such happy lot was in store for the faithful pair. On the following Easter eve, sudden destruction came upon the city. The distant Caradoc sent forth flames of fire, and at the same time the city was overwhelmed by a tremendous flood, while the sun in the heavens danced for joy, and the cattle in the stalls knelt in thanksgiving that God had not permitted such wickedness to go unpunished. But the Christian warrior was saved from the flood, and he took a boat and rowed over the waters, seeking for his betrothed, but all in vain. His boat was overturned, and he too was drowned in the depths of the mere. Yet whenever Easter eve falls on the same day as it did that year, the form of the Roman warrior may be seen again, rowing across Bomere in search of his lost love, while the church bells are heard ringing far in the depths below. Source (books.google.com): Charlotte Sophia Burne, Shropshire Folk-Lore: A Sheaf of Gleanings , from the collections of Georgina F. Jackson (London: Trübner and Company, 1883), pp. 65-66 . Source (Internet Archive): Charlotte Sophia Burne, Shropshire Folk-Lore: A Sheaf of Gleanings , from the collections of Georgina F. Jackson (London: Trübner and Company, 1883), pp. 65-66 . Burne's source: "Related to me by a lady in the parish of Condover, 1881." Note by Burne: The peasant version of the legend is probably that given by Mr. Wright, who says that the village which once occupied the site of Bomere "was submerged as a punishment for the irreligion of the principal farmer in the place, who persisted in cutting his grain on Sunday. It is said that at intervals glimpses of houses and buildings have been seen in the depths of the waters, and that children have been heard crying below, and especially that the church bells have been heard ringing on Sunday mornings." -- Coll. Arch. , vol. 1, part 1. Return to the table of contents . Kentsham Bell Herefordshire Great Tom of Kentsham was the greatest bell ever brought to England, but it never reached Kentsham safely, nor hung in any English tower. Where Kentsham is I cannot tell you, but long, long ago the good folk of the place determined to have a larger and finer bell in their steeple than any other parish could boast. At that time there was a famous bell foundry abroad, where all the greatest bells were cast, and thither the Kentsham people sent to order their famous bell, and thither too sent many others who wanted greater bells than could be cast in England. And so it came to pass at length that Great Tom of Lincoln, and Great Tom of York, and Great Tom of Christchurch, and Great Tom of Kentsham, were all founded at the same time, and all embarked on board the same vessel, and carried safely to the shore of dear old England. Then they set about landing them, and this was anxious work, but little by little it was done, and Tom of Lincoln, Tom of York, Tom of Christchurch, were safely laid on English ground. And then came the turn of Tom of Kentsham, which was the greatest Tom of all. Little by little they raised him, and prepared to draw him to the shore; but just in the midst of the work the captain grew so anxious and excited that he swore an oath. That very moment the ropes which held the bell snapped in two, and Great Tom of Kentsham slid over the ship's side into the water, and rolled away to the bottom of the sea. Then the people went to the cunning man and asked him what they should do. And he said, "Take six yoke of white milch-kine, which have never borne the yoke, and take fresh withy bands which have never been used before, and let no man speak a word either good or bad till the bell is at the top of the hill." So they took six yoke of white milch-kine, which had never borne the yoke, and harnessed them with fresh withy-bands which had never been used, and bound these to the bell as it lay in the shallow water, and long it was ere they could move it. But still the kine struggled and pulled, and the withy-bands held firm, and at last the bell was on dry ground. Slowly, slowly they drew it up the hill, moaning and groaning with unearthly sounds as it went; slowly, slowly, and no one spoke, and they nearly reached the top of the hill. Now the captain had been wild with grief when he saw that he had caused his precious freight to be lost in the waters just as they had reached the shore; and, when he beheld it recovered again and so nearly placed in safety, he could not contain his joy, but sang out merrily: In spite of all the devils in hell We have got to land old Kentsham Bell. Instantly the withy bands broke in the midst, and the bell bounded back again down the sloping hillside, rolling over and over, faster and faster, with unearthly clanging, till it sank far away in the very depths of the sea. And no man has ever seen it since, but many have heard it tolling beneath the waves, and if you go there you may hear it too. Source (books.google.com): Charlotte S. Burne, "Two Folk-Tales from Herefordshire," The Folk-Lore Journal , vol. 2, part 1 (January 1884), pp. 20-22 . Return to the table of contents . The Mermaid of Marden Herefordshire In former times Marden Church stood close to the river, and by some mischance one of the bells was allowed to fall into it. It was immediately seized by a mermaid, who carried it to the bottom and held it there so fast that any number of horses could not move it. The people of the parish were told how to recover it, by wise men, according to some; others say the bell itself gave directions from the bottom of the river. A team of twelve white freemartins, i.e., heifers, was to be obtained and attached to the bell with yokes of the sacred yew tree, and bands of "wittern," or, in some versions, the drivers' goads were to be of witty or wittern (mountain ash). The bell was to be drawn out in perfect silence; it was successfully raised to the edge of the river with the mermaid inside fast asleep. In his excitement a driver, forgetting that silence was all-important, called out: In spite of all the devils in hell, Now we'll land Marden's great bell. This woke the mermaid, who darted back into the river, taking the bell with her, ringing: If it had not been For your wittern bands (or witty goads), And your yew tree pin, I'd have had your twelve freemartins in. So Marden folks have never had their bell back from the bottom of the river to this day, and sometimes it may still be heard ringing, echoing the bells of the church. It lies in a deep clear pool. Source (HathiTrust): Ella Mary Leather, The Folk-Lore of Herefordshire: Collected from Oral and Printed Sources (Hereford: Jakeman and Carver; London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1912), pp. 168-69 . Leather's source: "Communicated by Mr. Galliers, of King's Pyon, and completed from other oral versions." Return to the table of contents . The Bells of Forrabury Church Cornwall In days long ago, the inhabitants of the parish of Forrabury -- which does not cover a square mile, but which now includes the chief part of the town of Boscastle and its harbour -- resolved to have a peal of bells which should rival those of the neighbouring church of Tintagel, which are said to have rung merrily at the marriage, and tolled solemnly at the death, of Arthur. The bells were cast; the bells were blessed; and the bells were shipped for Forrabury. Few voyages were more favourable; and the ship glided, with a fair wind, along the northern shores of Cornwall, waiting for the tide to carry her safely into the harbour of Bottreaux. The vesper bells rang out at Tintagel; and the pilot, when he heard the blessed sound, devoutly crossed himself, and bending his knee, thanked God for the safe and quick voyage which they had made. The captain laughed at the superstition of the pilot, as he called it, and swore that they had only to thank themselves for the speedy voyage, and that, with his arm at the helm, and his judgment to guide them, they should soon have a happy landing. The pilot checked this profane speech; but the wicked captain -- and he swore more impiously than ever that all was due to himself and his men -- laughed to scorn the pilot's prayer. "May God forgive you!" was the pilot's reply. Those who are familiar with the northern shores of Cornwall will know that sometimes a huge wave, generated by some mysterious power in the wide Atlantic, will roll on, overpowering everything by its weight and force. While yet the captain's oaths were heard, and while the inhabitants on the shore were looking out from the cliffs, expecting, within an hour, to see the vessel, charged with their bells, safe in their harbour, one of these vast swellings of the ocean was seen. Onward came the grand billow in all the terror of its might. The ship rose not upon the waters as it came onward. She was overwhelmed, and sank in an instant close to the land. As the vessel sank, the bells were heard tolling with a muffled sound, as if ringing the death-knell of the ship and sailors, of whom the good pilot alone escaped with life. When storms are coming, and only then, the bells of Forrabury, with their dull, muffled sound, are heard from, beneath the heaving sea, a warning to the wicked; and the tower has remained to this day silent. Source (books.google.com): Robert Hunt Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , 3rd edition, revised and enlarged (London: Chatto and Windus, 1881), pp. 438-39 . Source (Internet Archive): Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , second series (London: John Camden, 1865), pp. 247-48 . Return to the table of contents . The Bosham Bell Sussex In the days of the Northmen, a party of pirates came up the creek [to Bosham] in search of pillage. They plundered the inhabitants, sacked the church, and carried off the tenor bell of the monastery. Having put their spoil on board, they dropped down the channel with the ebbing tide; but by the intervention of St. Nicholas the bell refused to remain in such wicked hands, and sank through the deck and the hold of the vessel to the bottom of a great hole in Bosham channel, known to this day as the "Bell Hole," to the great consternation of the heathen marauders. It is still the belief of the good folk of Bosham that though the bell is deep down in the water, it has not lost its power of resonance, and that whenever a sturdy peal is rung out from the church tower, the lost tenor chimes in with her sister bells, and those standing at the brink of the "Bell Hole " can distinctly hear the whole octave peal. Source (books.google.com): Mark Antony Lower, A Compendious History of Sussex: Topographical, Archaeological and Anecdotical , vol. 1 (Lewes: George P. Bacon; London: John Sussell Smith; Brighton: W. J. Smith, 1870), p. 67 . Source (Internet Archive): Mark Antony Lower, A Compendious History of Sussex: Topographical, Archaeological and Anecdotical , vol. 1 (Lewes: George P. Bacon; London: John Sussell Smith; Brighton: W. J. Smith, 1870), p. 67 . Return to the table of contents . The Whitby Abbey Bells England The abbey was suppressed in 1539 A.D., and shortly afterwards dismantled. The bells were sold, and were to be conveyed by ship to London. They were duly placed on board, and, amid the lamentation of the people, the sails were unfurled and the anchor weighed. But, lo! the vessel refused to bear away its sacred burden. A short distance it moved out into the bay, and then -- on the beautiful, calm summer evening -- it quietly sank beneath the waves; and there under the waters, at a spot within sight of the abbey ruins, the bells still remain, and are still heard occasionally, by the superstitious, rung by invisible hands. Source: Thomas Parkinson Yorkshire Legends and Traditions (London: Elliot Stock, 1888), p. 29 . Return to the table of contents . Whitby: Submarine Bells Yorkshire A favourite story told in connection with the [Whitby] abbey is one concerning its bells. It runs thus: The magnificent peal excited the cupidity of some sea-roving freebooter, and landing with a sufficient force, he extracted the bells from the sacred building and conveyed them on board his vessel. This desecration was however, not suffered to go unpunished, for ere the vessel had gone many miles she struck and foundered a short distance from a projecting ridge of rock called the "Black Nab." As a fitting conclusion to this we are told, that he who dares on Halloween to spend some time on the rock, and call his sweetheart's name, will hear it echoed by the breeze, accompanied with the ringing of marriage bells from the sunken chime. -- Horne, . Variant: The abbey was suppressed in 1539 A.D., and shortly afterwards dismantled. The bells were sold and were to be conveyed by ship to London. They were duly placed on board, and, amid the lamentation of the people, the sails were unfurled and the anchor weighed. But lo! the vessel refused to bear its sacred burden. A short distance it moved out into the bay, and then -- on the beautiful, calm summer evening -- it quietly sank beneath the waves; and there under the waters, at a spot within sight of the abbey ruins, the bells still remain, and are still heard occasionally by the superstitious, rung by invisible hands. -- Parkinson, 1st S., p. 29. Source (books.google.com): Eliza Gutch, County Folk-Lore . Vol. 2: Printed Extracts, no. 4. Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the North Riding of Yorkshire, York, and the Ainsty (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1901), pp. 39-40 . Source (Internet Archive): Eliza Gutch, County Folk-Lore . Vol. 2: Printed Extracts, no. 4. Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the North Riding of Yorkshire, York, and the Ainsty (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1901), pp. 39-40 . Return to the table of contents . The Buried Chime Susan K. Phillips Under the cliffs at Whitby, when the great tides landward flow, Under the cliffs at Whitby, when the great winds landward blow, When the long billows heavily roll o'er the harbour bar, And the blue waves flash to silver 'mid the seaweeds on the Scar, When the low thunder of the surf calls down the hollow shore, And 'mid the caves at Kettleness the baffled breakers roar; Under the cliffs at Whitby, whoso will stand alone, Where, in the shadow of the Nab, the eddies swirl and moan, When, to the pulses of the deep, the flood-tide rising swells, Will hear, amid its monotone, the clash of hidden bells. Up from the heart of ocean the mellow music peals, Where the sunlight makes his golden path, and the sea-mew flits and wheels. For many a chequered century, untired by flying time, The bells, no human fingers touch, have rung their hidden chime, Since the gallant ship that brought them, for the abbey on the height, Struck and foundered in the offing, with her sacred goal in sight. And the man who dares on Hallowe'en on the Black Nab to watch, Till the rose-light on St. Hilda's shrine the midnight moonbeams catch, And calls his sweetheart by her name, as, o'er the sleeping seas, The echo of the buried bells comes floating on the breeze, 'Ere another moon on Hallowe'en her eerie rays has shed, Will hear his wedding peal ring out from the church-tower on the Head. Source (books.google.com): Susan K. Phillips, On the Seaboard and Other Poems , 2nd edition (London: Macmillan and Company, 1879), pp. 22-24 . Source (Internet Archive): Susan K. Phillips, On the Seaboard and Other Poems (London: Macmillan and Company, 1878), pp. 20-21 . Return to the table of contents . A Legend of Semerwater North Yorkshire One day a poor and aged man Passed through the thriving city And meekly ask'd of those he saw For food and rest in pity. But all so cold their hearts had grown, With cares and fashions splendid, The homeless passed on alone Faint, worn, and unbefriended. * * * * * * * Outside the town a cottage stood, The house of shepherd Malcolm, Who took him in and gave him food, And rest, and warmth, and welcome. Next morning, standing at the door, He looked towards the city, And raised his hand and murmured o'er The words of this strange ditty: Semerwater rise! Semerwater sink! And bury the town all, save the house Where they gave me meat and drink. * * * * * * * And still, when boating on the lake When sunset clouds are glowing, The roofs and spires may yet be seen Beneath the blue waves showing. And as the calm of evening falls, No sound from landward bringing Soft music heard from hidden bells Deep 'neath the waters ringing. The origin of the curious legend concerning Semmerdale no one seems to know, yet it is very probable some calamity in the shape of a landslip or a convulsion of nature has taken place here, causing disaster to people dwelling on its banks. The legend says: Near the beginning of the Christian era there stood a fair city on the site of the present lake, at that time only a mountain rivulet. One cold winter's day there wandered through its streets an angel in the guise of a poor venerable man, scant of clothing, hungry, and with no money in his scrip wherewith to buy food and raiment. In vain he begged for food and shelter, but no one gave relief. Passing along the east side of the vale, just without the bounds of the city, stood a small hut, the dwelling place of an aged couple, too lowly, the legend says, to be allowed to dwell within the precincts of the city. To this humble dwelling came the beggar, but even before he told of his hunger the good dame placed milk, cheese and bread before him. After satisfying his appetite he bestowed on the kind couple a blessing. Beneath their roof he found shelter for the night, and next morning, after again thanking the aged people, he spread his hands to the proud oity and pronounced the following malediction: "Semmerwater rise! Semmerwater sink!" etc. Then the earth made a hissing noise, the stream grew into a large lake, and the city was no more. Yet unto this day the natives tell us that the roofs of the buried city are ofttimes seen deep down in the limpid waters. They also point to a hut still standing on the south side of the lake as the dwelling place of the aged couple who so generously relieved the stranger. Source (books.google.com): Edmund Bogg, From Edenvale to the Plains of York: A Thousand Miles in the Valleys of the Nidd and Yore (Leeds: Edmund Bogg; York: John Sampson, [1884]), pp. 213-215 . Source (Internet Archive): Edmund Bogg, From Edenvale to the Plains of York: A Thousand Miles in the Valleys of the Nidd and Yore (Leeds: Edmund Bogg; York: John Sampson, [1884]), pp. 213-215 . Return to the table of contents . Simmerwater [Semerwater] Yorkshire There is an old legend connected with Simmerwater, of which the following is the substance: Previous to the year of grace 45, there existed a large and populous city, which stood upon the exact spot now occupied by the lake, then but a small mountain rivulet. To this city, a wayfarer, who is variously said to have been an angel, St. Paul, Joseph of Arimathea, or Our Saviour himself in the form of a poor old man, came, and solicited in vain the alms of every citizen. Being scornfully repulsed by all, the stranger took his course eastward, down the vale, to the hut or cottage of an aged couple, poor and mean, and there he readily obtained the best morsels the house afforded, viz., a little bowl of milk, some cheese, and an oaten cake. Beneath their roof was his dormitory for the night, and on the morrow he bestowed on them his blessing. Being ready to depart, he turned his face to the west -- to the "Sodom of Wensleydale" -- and uttered his malediction against the ill-fated city: Simmer-water rise, Simmer-water sink, And swallow all the town save this lisle house, Where they gave me meat and drink. No sooner was the sentence uttered than it was executed; the earth made a hissing noise, the stream overflowed its bounds, and the city was no more. The poor charitable couple soon became the richest people in the vale, and the blessing descended to their children's children for many generations. -- Whellan, vol. ii., p. 403, note. Unto this day the natives tell us that the roofs of the buried city are ofttimes seen deep down in the limpid waters. They also point to a hut still standing on the south side of the lake as the dwelling place of the aged couple who so generously relieved the stranger. And as the calm of evening falls No sound from landward bringing, Soft music's heard from hidden bells >br> Deep 'neath the waters ringing. --Bogg (3), p. 215, and p. 214. Source (books.google.com): Eliza Gutch, County Folk-Lore . Vol. 2: Printed Extracts, no. 4. Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the North Riding of Yorkshire, York, and the Ainsty (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1901), pp. 37-38 . Source (Internet Archive): Eliza Gutch, County Folk-Lore . Vol. 2: Printed Extracts, no. 4. Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the North Riding of Yorkshire, York, and the Ainsty (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1901), pp. 37-38 . Return to the table of contents . The Bells of Brinkburn (1) Northumberland The bell tower [of Brinkburn Priory] looks down upon the Bell-Pool, a very deep part of the Coquet, lying concealed beneath the thick foliage of the native trees that jut out from the interstices of the lofty craggy heights impending over either side. Tradition says that into this pool the bells were thrown in a time of danger in order to place them beyond the reach of the invading Scots. It is still a favourite amusement among the young swimmers of the neighbourhood, to dive for the bells of Brinkburn, and there it is fully and generally believed that when the bells are found other treasures will be recovered with them. Source (books.google.com): William Howitt, Visits to Remarkable Places: Old Halls, Battle Fields, and Scenes Illustrative of Striking Passages in History and Poetry, Chiefly in the Counties of Durham and Northumberland , second series (London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, 1842), p. 526, footnote . Source (Internet Archive): William Howitt, Visits to Remarkable Places: Old Halls, Battle Fields, and Scenes Illustrative of Striking Passages in History and Poetry, Chiefly in the Counties of Durham and Northumberland , second series (London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, 1842), p. 526, footnote . Return to the table of contents . The Bells of Brinkburn (2) Northumberland Centuries ago one of the priors of Brinkburn presented the bells of that building to the priory of Durham. They had been the pride of the secluded sanctuary on the Coquet, for their tones were possessed of great power combined with sweetness, and many tempting offers had Durham made to secure them, but hitherto to no purpose. But she prevailed at length, and the bells so coveted were removed from the tower and dispatched on horseback on their way to Durham under the care of some monks. They journeyed till they reached the River Font, which, owing to a quantity of rain having fallen, was much swelled. However, they prepared to ford it; but when the horses reached the middle of the stream the bells by some means fell, or, according to the popular belief, were removed from the backs of the horses by miraculous interposition, and sank to the bottom. Owing either to the dangerous state of the stream or from the bells being unwilling to be removed, the exertions of the monks to recover them proved unavailing; so they returned to Brinkburn and reported the disaster. But the Brinkburn prior, determined not to be baffled, sent forthwith a messenger to Durham to request the presence of his brother prior, and both ecclesiasties then proceeded with a full attendance to liberate the imprisoned bells; and lo! the superior abilities of high church functionaries over humble monks was manifest to everyone; for they had no sooner ridden into the stream than the bells were lifted with ease; and, being conveyed to Durham, were lodged there in safety. To this day it is a saying in Coquetdale that "Brinkburn bells are heard at Durham;" and Wallis, in his History of Northumberland , assures us that the bells of Brinkburn were removed to the cathedral on the banks of the Wear. Still there are doubters. Walter White, in 1859, says: "The deep pool where the bells were lost is still to bo seen in the river" [Coquet] (13); and Mr. Wilson is positive that some years ago "a fragment of the bell was found buried at the root of a tree on the hill on the opposite side of the river" (14). Of the bells, William Howitt, in his Visit to Remarkable Places, etc. , p. 525, note, says: "The bell tower looks down upon the Bell Pool, a very deep part of the Coquet, lying concealed beneath the thick foliage of the native trees that jut out from the interstices of the lofty, craggy heights, impending over either side. Tradition says that into this pool the bells were thrown in a time of danger in order to place them beyond the reach of the invading Scots. It is still a favourite amusement among the young swimmers of the neighbourhood to dive for the bells of Brinkburn, and then it is generally believed that when the bells are found other treasures will be recovered with them." Source: The Denham Tracts: A Collection of Folklore by Michael Aislabie Denham , edited by James Hardy, vol. 2 (London: Published for the Folklore Society by David Nutt, 1895), pp. 132-33 . Return to the table of contents . Rostherne Mere Cheshire Just to the north of Knutsford lies Rostherne with its mere, one of a small chain of meres, which stretch, a puzzle for geologists, from the basin of the Weaver to that of the little river Bollin. This village of Rostherne is altogether charming, with an ancient church and a few scattered houses in a rich secluded valley. The church has noble monuments to the proud family that has lived for centuries here in dignified seclusion, and the graveyard with its mouldering heaps slopes steeply down towards the little lake -- the last a thing quite unexpected here in Cheshire, which is not a lake county at all, and is very still, and peaceful, but melancholy looking, shaded with high and thickly wooded banks, where an everlasting silence seems to reign. Something about the lake in its solitary seclusion seems to have struck the popular imagination. The story goes, that when the church bells were first brought to Rostherne, one of the bells could not in any way be got into the church tower, but, breaking away from ropes and levers, rolled down the steep slope towards the mere, and went on rolling and rolling till it splashed right into the lake, where it was lost in the fathomless abyss. Fathomless indeed is the mere, according to popular estimation, and undoubtedly very deep; a depth of over a hundred feet has been actually measured, and that, for a bit of a mere like Rostherne, is a pretty good record. Now when the bell got to the bottom of the mere, if it has a bottom, it might reasonably have expected to rest there in peace, but that would be to reckon without the mermaids, notoriously addicted to bell-ringing. Sea nymphs hourly ring his knell, Hark! now I hear them -- ding dong bell. But how should mermaids get into Rostherne Mere? Well, the story goes that there exists, between Rostherne and the sea, an underground channel, and that every year on Easter morn a mermaid works her way through and rings the bell that lies at the bottom of the mere, so that those who get up early enough may hear it. The connection of the bell with Easter seems to class the legend with those children's stories, which are suggested by the customs of the old faith. For from Good Friday to Easter Sunday the bells are altogether silent, and when children, wondering, ask "What has become of the bells?" they are told "They are gone to Rome to be blessed, but are coming back on Easter morn;" and so it turns out when at daybreak upon the hallowed morn, the children hear the joyous peal. Source (books.google.com): All the Year Round: A Weekly Journal , conducted by Charles Dickens, new series, vol. 32, no. 766 (August 4, 1883), p. 176 . Source (Internet Archive): All the Year Round: A Weekly Journal , conducted by Charles Dickens, new series, vol. 32, no. 766 (August 4, 1883), p. 176 . Return to the table of contents . A Legend of Rostherne Mere Egerton Leigh Merrily, merrily rang the bells, The bells o'er Rostherne mere, The tale of joy their soft echo tells E'en Bowden heights may hear. At Rostherne church long, long ago, Repairs some workmen make, When, as they laboured cheerily oh, They felt the tower shake. As the tower shook, the largest bell Was riven from its place, And eke loud clattering down it fell, And rolling 'gan apace. Down the steep cliff-like bank it rolled That frowns above the mere, Through the fragrant birch and lindens old, At length the lake drew near. It stopped at the brink; hard strove the men To force it up the crag, Back to the tower to strain again Oh 'twas a weary drag! A sulky labourer madly cried, "Oh, would the Devil had you!" But scarce he'd spoke when the bell belied To the wave downwards flew. But first in its headlong course it crushed Th' unlucky wight who swore, Then down the wild crag madly rushed; They never saw it more. Sunk in the depths of that mere profound To which there's bottom none, And as it sank a dull gurgling sound Just to the surface won. Now sadly, oh! sadly moans the peal, And mourns that fatal hour; They seem o'er the bell to ring a knell That fell from Rostherne tower. Source (books.google.com): Egerton Leigh, Ballads and Legends of Cheshire (London: Longmans and Company, 1867), pp. 278-79 . Source (Internet Archive): Egerton Leigh, Ballads and Legends of Cheshire (London: Longmans and Company, 1867), pp. 278-79 . Return to the table of contents . Austria / Italy The Sunken City Austria / Italy At the location of Partschins (Italian: Parcines ) there once stood a great town. Next to the Töll (Italian Tel ) Canal, there stood a proud castle. The last knight, who lived there in luxury, was so hard-hearted that he almost let his elderly father in Rabland (Italian Rablà ) die of starvation. One day the young knight held his wedding, and there was drinking and dancing until late into the night. When the revelry was at its height, the canal banks burst, buried the town, and swept the castle away. Old coins have often been found on the heath that partly covers the old town. In the middle of the heath there still lies the large stone beneath which the great bell of the sunken town is buried. Every hundred years the devil rings it on a Thursday night to mark his fear of Christ. About a hundred years ago, farmers were digging for this bell. They had almost lifted it out of the ground and were rejoicing at their discovery when suddenly two witches appeared before them. They kicked the bell with their feet, and said: Down into the ground With never a sound! Then it sank even deeper into the earth. The large stone covered it, so that no one could ever bring it back to the surface. Source (books.google.com): Ignaz Vinzenz Zingerle, "Untergegangene Stadt," Sagen aus Tirol , 2nd edition (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1891), no. 626, p. 355 . Source (Internet Archive): Ignaz Vinzenz Zingerle, "Untergegangene Stadt," Sagen aus Tirol , 2nd edition (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1891), no. 626, p. 355 . Return to the table of contents . The Sunken Bell in Lake Wörthersee Austria On the eastern shore of Lake Wörthersee stands Loretto Castle, named after the Chapel of Maria Loretto. It is said that a large, magnificent organ once stood there. Once it had to be dismantled and part of it sent to Maria Saal. As the organ was being removed, the church bell rang. The bell was so upset at the loss of the organ that it tore itself free from the bell rope and fell into the lake. Even today the bell is said to lie wedged between two large rocks on the dark floor of the lake. A large crab sits on it guarding it. Despite repeated attempts, it has not yet been brought back above the surface of the lake. A diver once dove down and saw the enormous crab. He was so frightened that he immediately let himself be pulled back to the surface. He then prophesied that the city of Klagenfurt would one day be flooded by the waters of Lake Wörthersee. In Ferlach, legend has it that a farmer in the Rosental Valley, whose name is mentioned, will one day have a cow that will give birth to twin bulls. When they are ready serve as draft animals, it will be their task to fetch the bell and pull it up to Matzenberg Mountain. Source (books.google.com): Georg Graber, "Der Wörthersee," Sagen aus Kärnten (Leipzig: Dieterich'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1914), no. 362, p. 266 . Source (Internet Archive): Georg Graber, " Der Wörthersee," Sagen aus Kärnten (Leipzig: Dieterich'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1921), no. 362, p. 266 . Return to the table of contents . Slovenia The Wishing Bell of Bled Slovenia After the death of her husband the lady of Bled castle donated a bell to the small church Our Lady of the Lake on Bled Island. On the way, the bell fell into the lake and disappeared without a trace. The locals were deeply saddened, as they viewed the loss as a harbinger of great misfortune. To comfort the pious people of Bled, the Holy Father in Rome sent the little church a new bell with the special blessing that whoever pulled its rope would have all their wishes fulfilled. Since then, the church Our Lady of the Lake has been eagerly visited by Friulians and Slovenians from the coastal region. The famous bell hangs on a column near the last pew. The believer rings three times and makes a wish, which is granted within a year. The bell that sank into the lake is heard ringing whenever disaster is imminent. One winter day, when its sound was heard from the frozen lake, the children were warned not to go out onto the ice. Some of them disobeyed, fell through, and drowned. According to another tradition, with clear weather one can see three church bells in Lake Bled that disappeared during a great storm flood, and one can also hear their ringing. Source (books.google.com): Anton von Mailly, "Das Wünschglöcklein von Veldes," Sagen aus Friaul und den Julischen Alpen (Leipzig: Dieterich'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1922), no. 88, pp. 72-73 . Source (Internet Archive): Anton von Mailly, "Das Wünschglöcklein von Veldes," Sagen aus Friaul und den Julischen Alpen (Leipzig: Dieterich'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1922), no. 88, pp. 72-73 . Return to the table of contents . The Legend of the Sunken Bell Slovenia Every year at Lake Bled, Slovenia, divers go on a quest to recover the bell that ended up on the bottom of the lake, in front of a crowd of numerous visitors cheering them on from the lake shore. According to the legend, around the year 1500, the lord of Lake Bled at the time, Hartman Kreigh, disappeared. People said that he may have been killed by robbers and his body was thrown into the lake. At the Bled Castle, Poliksena, his young wife, also known as the lady of the lake, mourned him. In her inconsolable sadness, she collected all of the gold and silver that she and her husband kept in the castle, and then she ordered that this treasure be melted down and turned into a bell for the chapel on the island of Lake Bled, so that the bell would toll in remembrance of her husband. However, when the bell was being transported to the island, a storm broke out and the boat sank together with the boatmen and its precious bell. The desperate widow sold all her property after this accident. She offered the proceeds for the construction of a new church on the island, then she left Bled and lived the rest of her life in a convent in Rome, as a nun. After her death, when the Pope heard her story, including her misfortune and her good deeds during her life as a nun, he ordered that a new bell be made and placed in the steeple of the church on Bled Island. It is said that the bell was given to the island by the Pope himself, and that he said that anyone that rings the bell three times and believes in God, his or her wish would come true. It seems that it still has special powers today, so visitors and many newlyweds ring the bell in hopes of fulfilling their own wishes. Legend has it that the bell that sank to the bottom of lake still occasionally rings, and today sometimes, on a dark night it seems you can hear the sunken bell ringing from the depths of the lake! In order to show that the bell is still in the lake, divers recover it from the water at a special event that takes place every year, on Christmas Day. Source: The Legend of the Sunken Bell . Accessed November 2025. Return to the table of contents . The Legend of Bled Castle Slovenia Around 1500 AD the administrator of Bled Castle was Hartman Kreigh, who was not a kind master. Peasants complained about the encroachment on their rights and brutal oppression to the bishop and the king. One day Kreigh disappeared without a trace. There were rumours that he had been killed by robbers. For all we know, peasants may have taken the justice into their own hands, but nothing was ever proven. In short, Kreigh was never to be seen again. His wife Poliksena, who also ruled with a firm hand, squeezing the last dime from her subordinates, grieved for him deeply. In her grief, the widow collected all the gold and silver she had stored in her chests. She used it to have a bell cast for the chapel on the Bled Island. When the boatmen were taking the bell to the island, a storm broke out, sinking the boat, the boatmen and the bell. From time to time, the sunken bell can still be heard ringing from the depths of the lake. Devastated, Poliksena left the castle and went to a convent in Rome. When the Pope heard her sad story, he had a new bell made and sent it to the island. Source: The Legend of Bled Castle . Accessed November 2025. Return to the table of contents . The Legend of the Sunken Bell Slovenia Every year on the 25th of December people gather around Lake Bled to witness the sinking of the bell. In complete darkness the luminous bell slowly sinks into the lake creating a truly magical spectacle. This tradition celebrates an old, sad Slovenian legend. Once, robbers killed an honorable man, and his body was thrown into Lake Bled. His grieving widow who lived in the castle near the lake, to honor her beloved husband, ordered a big bell to be made from all the gold and silver she owned. But due to a huge storm, the boat that carried the bell sank into the lake. The widow could not take it. She sold all her belongings and, with this money, paid for the construction of a new church. And then she left Bled and became a nun in Rome. Long after her death, the Pope heard the sad story of her life and gave the order to make the new bell. To this day, it is believed that the bell, presented to the island by the Pope himself, still has a special power. Newlyweds ring it in the hope that their wishes will come true. Legend has it that the bell, which sank to the bottom of Lake Bled, still rings occasionally. To show that it is still in the lake, divers lift it out of the water during a special event taking place on Christmas Day. So, pay your respects to the true virtuous widow of Bled Lake and witness the spellbinding spectacle of the sinking bell. Nestled in the Julian Alps, Lake Bled is a serene oasis of natural beauty. Visitors can row to the iconic island in the lake's center or explore lush forest trails nearby, immersing themselves in the peaceful, enchanting atmosphere. Source: Legend of the Sunken Bell 2025 in Slovenia . Accessed November 2025. Return to the table of contents . The Legend of the Sunken Bell Slovenia The legend of the sunken bell tells a story about the noble lady Poliksena, who, while grieving for her husband, collected all her gold and silver and used it to cast a bell for the chapel on Bled Island. But, while the bell was being transported to the island, a storm came over the lake and sunk the boat carrying the bell. The sad widow left Bled and went to a convent in Rome. When the Pope heard her story, he ordered that a new bell be made and placed in the steeple of the church on Bled Island. And this bell is said to have special powers. Source: The Legend of the Sunken Bell . Accessed November 2025. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 12, 2025. Beowulf: A Summary in English Prose Beowulf a summary in English prose by D. L. Ashliman © 2010 Contents Prologue Part One: Beowulf and Grendel Part Two: Beowulf and Grendel's Mother Part Three: Beowulf and the Dragon Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Prologue Listen! We have heard of the glory of the kings who ruled the Danes in olden times. Scyld Scefing often drove enemy warriors from their mead-hall benches, although he himself had once been a destitute foundling. In spite of this he came to prosper. With time all the neighboring tribes served him and paid him tribute. That was a good king! Scyld died at the fated time. Following his wishes, his body was placed on a well-outfitted ship, laden with treasures and weapons. Then his kinsmen let the sea bear him away. No one on earth knows who received that ship's cargo. Part One: Beowulf and Grendel 1 Following Scyld's death the kingship of the Danes passed to Scyld's son Beowulf [not the hero of this epic], then in turn to his son Healfdene, then to his son Hrothgar. Each of these successors proved to be a venerable leader. I have heard tell how Hrothgar had a great mead-hall built. It was larger and grander than any such hall that anyone had ever heard of. He named the great hall Heorot. Here, with great ceremony, he dispensed lavish gifts to young and old, thus giving thanks for his own victories and prosperity. Not long afterward the hall's merriment was brought to an end by a grim foe named Grendel, who haunted marshes and moors, fens and heath. This wretched being, along with monsters, elves, sea-beasts, and giants, was a descendent of Cain, whom the Lord had banished from mankind for the slaying of Abel. 2 Grendel attacked during the night. Following an evening of mead drinking, the Danish warriors were fast asleep. Grendel seized thirty of them, then carried them back to his lair. At dawn the survivors discovered their great loss. They saw the monster's tracks leading away from Heorot, but it was too late to save his victims. These loathsome attacks continued for twelve winters. Night after night Grendel haunted the misty moors, pursuing his victims. Nor was anyone safe in Heorot, where he attacked at will. Many of the grief-stricken Danes, seeing no other source of help, returned to their old heathen faith. Woe unto him who thus rejects the Lord. 3 Tidings of Grendel's attacks reached the country of the Geats. Beowulf, a thane of Hygelac, King of the Geats, heard of Grendel's deeds and resolved to come to the Danes' rescue. No one faulted him for this decision. He was a proven hero. Beowulf had a ship outfitted for the journey, then chose fifteen warriors to accompany him. A skilled mariner pointed out the landmarks to them. Driven by the wind, the ship sped across the waves. On the second day the sailors caught sight of gleaming cliffs and broad headlands. They went ashore and secured their ship. A Danish guard saw them from the cliff as they came ashore with their shields and weapons. This thane of Hrothgar approached them on horseback. Waving his spear he challenged them with these words: "What warriors are you, sailing your great ship along the ocean-paths? I am a member of the coastguard, charged with protecting the Danish land. Never have I seen a band of warriors try to land here more openly than you have done. Who is your brave leader, and what is his lineage?" 4 Beowulf answered: "We are of the Geatish kin, Hygelac's hearth-companions. I am the son of a noble prince named Ecgtheow. We have come to serve the mighty lord of the Danes. We have heard that some secret destroyer causes great terror among the Scyldings on dark nights. I intend to help Hrothgar overcome this foe." The coastguardsman pointed the way to Heorot, then returned to his post. Beowulf and his men hurried onward. The boar-images glistened above the cheek-guards on their helmets. 5 The street was paved with stones. The men followed this path to the great hall. Leaning their shields against the wall, they sat down upon the benches [outside the hall]. A warrior asked the heroes about their lineage: "Where have you come from, with your shields, war-shirts, visored helmets, and spears. I am Hrothgar's servant and herald. Never before have I seen such a band of strangers in such a courageous mood." Beowulf answered: "We are table-companions of Hygelac. Beowulf is my name. I will reveal my errand to the son of Healfdene, your great king, if you will take us to him." Wulfgar (that was the herald's name) quickly went to Hrothgar, now old and white-haired. Wulfgar spoke: "Geatish warriors have arrived here from across the sea. They call their chieftain Beowulf. They have requested to speak with you." 6 Hrothgar spoke: "I knew Beowulf when he was a child. His father was called Ecgtheow, and he has come as a loyal friend. Moreover, seafarers have reported here that Beowulf is strong in battle. The grip of his hand is said to have the strength of thirty men. Bid him and his band of kinsmen welcome among the Danish people. Wulfgar came to the door of the hall and announced from within: "My victorious lord bids me say that he knows your noble lineage. You are welcome here. You may come inside to Hrothgar, wearing your armor and helmets, but leave your spears outside until after you have spoken." Beowulf approached Hrothgar, then spoke: "Hail to thee, Hrothgar! In my native land I learned of Grendel's deeds. Seafarers report that this great hall is useless for all men after nightfall. Knowing my great strength, my people urged me to come to your aid. They have seen me return from battle stained with the blood of my foes. I have destroyed a race of giants and have slain sea-beasts by night. Now I have come to cleanse Heorot of the evil that has come upon it. Furthermore, I have learned that Grendel, the giant monster, has no fear of weapons, so I will fight him with my bare hands, without sword or shield. If I fail, have no concern about my burial; Grendel will devour my corpse. Do, however, send my chainmail back to Hygelac. It is the best of armor, inherited from Hrethel [Beowulf's grandfather], and the work of Weland [a legendary smith]. 7 Hrothgar replied: "We thank you for coming to our defense. It is with sorrow that I tell what shame and grief Grendel has caused. Many of my best warriors have fallen victim to his horrid clutch. Often my warriors have boastfully vowed while drinking their ale to take vengeance, but the next morning the mead-hall has been stained with their blood. Join us now in a feast and share with my men how you plan to achieve victory." In the mead-hall a bench was made ready for the Geats. Mead was served. A bard sang with a clear voice. The assembled warriors rejoiced, Geats and Danes alike. 8 However, one of the Danes, Unferth by name, was jealous of the attention given to Beowulf, and seeking to stir up a quarrel he spoke: "Are you the Beowulf who foolishly challenged Breca to a swimming contest, risking your lives in the deep water? No one could turn you away from the foolhardy venture, and the two of you swam out into the ocean. For seven nights the two of you battled the waters, but he had the greater strength, and he outlasted you. The waves drove him ashore on the coast of Norway, and he was proclaimed the winner. I expect even worse results for you with your contest against Grendel." Beowulf answered: "Unferth, my friend, in your drunkenness you have said much about my adventure with Breca. Now I will tell the truth of what happened. When we were still boys Breca and I had boasted that one day we would test our strength at sea; and we did as we had spoken in our youth. To defend ourselves against whales we swam carrying naked swords in our hands. Neither of us could gain an advantage over the other one, and thus we swam together for five nights, until finally the cold waves drove us apart. The sea-fish grew angry, but my shirt of chainmail protected me. An evil monster dragged me to the bottom, but I was able to stab the creature with the point of my sword, and then dispatched him with my hand." 9 Beowulf continued: "Other evil creatures attacked me, but I killed them all with my sword. Never again would they hinder seafarers. With the morning light the waves were stilled. Destiny had not doomed me to die. Instead, I had slain nine sea monsters with my sword. I escaped from all these perils, and the current finally carried me to the land of the Finns. Unferth, I have never heard of such exploits on your part. No, neither you nor Breca has ever performed so goodly. If you were as fierce in battle as you claim to be, the heath monster Grendel would not have been so successful in his attacks against the Danish people. He kills and feasts without fear of the Danes, but I will show him the strength and courage of the Geats. After that whoever will may drink mead in this great hall without fear." The gray-haired king rejoiced in these words; he trusted in Beowulf for help. Laughter and joyous words rang throughout the hall. 10 That night Beowulf and his kinsmen-in-arms kept watch in the great hall. Trusting in his own strength and in the Lord's favor, he took off his chainmail and helmet, and gave his sword to a thane for safekeeping. All the watchmen save one fell asleep. Beowulf waited and watched. 11 Grendel drew near from the moorland beneath the misty hillsides. Heorot's door, although secured with fire-hardened bands, opened at his first touch. In the hall he saw many sleeping warriors, and he laughed in his heart. Thinking to kill each one, he hoped for a bountiful feast. The mighty kinsman of Hygelac was watching to see how the foe would attack. Suddenly the monster seized a sleeping thane, tore him to pieces, then drank his blood and devoured his corpse. He stepped nearer to Beowulf, clutching at him with his claw, but the great warrior took hold of Grendel's arm with great strength. Never before had this master of evil encountered such human strength. He tried to flee into the darkness, but he could not break Beowulf's powerful grip. Grendel's fingers finally burst and bled. The two opponents wrestled madly. The hall echoed with the sound of their battle. It was a wonder that the building did not fall to the ground. As I have heard men tell, their struggles tore many a mead-bench from its base. 12 Beowulf's warriors drew their swords, hoping to protect the life of their lord, but when they plunged into the fight they soon discovered that their blades were useless against this foul destroyer. By a spell Grendel had protected himself against all weapons. But nonetheless, this day he was doomed to die a wretched death. A gaping wound appeared on his shoulder, and mortally wounded, he fled, full knowing that the appointed number of his days had now come. The lord of the Geats had made good his earlier boast. The Danes' affliction was now at an end. Rejoicing, the warrior threw down a token of his victory: the whole claw and arm of Grendel. 13 As I have heard, warriors from near and far assembled at Heorot to behold the foe's tracks, which lead to the Mere of Water Demons. Its waters were seething with blood, and its waves were mingled with gore. There in the depths he gave up his heathen soul to Hel [Loki's daughter, and the ruler of the realm of the dead]. With rejoicing the warrior returned to Heorot and to a great celebration. One of the king's thanes who knew old tales without number, cleverly composed a new story, a truthful tale, narrating Beowulf's adventure. He also told everything that he had heard of the mighty Sigemund, the son of Wælsing [Volsung], including exploits of which the son of men knew nothing, save Fitala [Sinfiötli], his nephew and comrade. Sigemund's great fame carried forth beyond his death, for he had slain the dragon who kept guard over the treasure. In his daring exploits he was by far the most famed of adventurers among the nations. 14 Hrothgar went to the hall, beheld Grendel's arm, and spoke: "Praise God for this miracle. Through his power a man has achieved that which we ourselves were unable to do. Praise be to the woman who gave birth to this man. Beowulf, henceforth I shall love you like a son." Then Beowulf, son of Ecgtheow, spoke, recounting the details of his battle with Grendel. Unferth, too, was present, but he made no more boastful speeches, now having seen the monster's dismembered hand with its steel-like claws. 15 Strait away Heorot was adorned for a great feast. A large crowd gathered there in celebration. There the son of Healfdene gave to Beowulf many lavish gifts, including a golden ensign, a helmet, a coat of chainmail, a mighty sword, and eight horses with golden bridles. 16 Moreover, Hrothgar bestowed precious heirlooms upon each man who had crossed the sea with Beowulf. The celebration continued with singing and music. The harp was struck, and the king's bard presented the oft-sung Lay of King Finn. 17 After the gleeman had finished singing Wealhtheow [Hrothgar's wife] came forth. She presented her king with a golden cup, saying: "Be gracious toward the Geats and mindful of gifts. Be generous while you may." 18 Thereupon many additional precious gifts were brought to Beowulf, including two armlets, rings, armor, and the greatest collar that I have ever heard tell of since Hama carried away the necklace of the Brisings. "Receive this collar with joy, and prosper well, dear Beowulf," said Wealhtheow. The celebration then continued with food and wine. When evening fell Hrothgar returned to his lodgings. The guards, as they had often done before, cleared the benches and covered them with bedding and pillows. Doomed to death, one of the revelers laid himself down to rest with his comrades. Part Two: Grendel's Mother 19 They fell asleep, but one paid dearly for his rest. Although the old foe was dead, there lived an avenger: Grendel's mother. This woman-monster brooded over her woes. A descendant of Cain, she too lived in the wilderness removed from the joys of men. She came to Heorot determined to seek revenge for the death of her son. Hastily she clutched one of the heroes in his sleep, a favorite thane of Hrothgar. Then retrieving Grendel's arm she retreated to her lair. Beowulf was not there, for he had been given another lodging place. Awakened, the warriors in the hall sounded the alarm. 20 Hrothgar mourned the murder of Æschere, his thane. He sensed who had done the evil deed, for he had heard from people dwelling in the countryside of two night-stalkers of the marshes and moors, one like unto a woman, the other in the image of a miscreated man. They were said to dwell among the wolf-haunted slopes, savage fen-paths, and wind-swept cliffs where mountain streams fall, shrouded in the mists of the headlands. Not far from there is a mere. Trees hang over its waters, and at night-time can be seen a dreadful wonder: fire on the flood. No man knows its depth. He addressed Beowulf: "Once again help rests with you alone. Seek out this savage and cheerless spot, if you dare. I will reward you with great treasure, as I did before, if you succeed in getting there alive." 21 Beowulf replied: "Sorrow not. It is better for a man to avenge his friend than to mourn exceedingly. Each of us will one day reach the end of worldly life. Therefore let him who may, win glory before he dies. That is a warrior's greatest boon at life's end. Now let us follow the tracks of Grendel's mother. I promise you, she shall not escape." The old man jumped up, thanking God for Beowulf's words. Accompanied by a troop of warriors they followed the foe's tracks over steep and rocky slopes, over sheer cliffs, and past many a sea-monster's haunt. Suddenly they came upon a mere, overhung with a cheerless wood. And there, to their disgust and dismay, they discovered Æschere's head. Below, the mere's waters seethed with blood and gore. The troop sat down. They saw serpents and dragons swimming in the water and sea-monsters lying along the headland-slopes. They sounded the battle horn, and the creatures sped away, but not before Beowulf killed one of them with his bow and arrow. Then Beowulf, taking no thought for his own life, put on his armor of chainmail and his helmet, fitted with boar figures so that no sword could bite it. He picked up the sword, Hrunting by name, that Unferth had lent him. One of the greatest among ancient treasures, its iron blade was stained with poison and hardened with the blood of battle. 22 Taking leave of Hrothgar, Beowulf set forth into the mere. It took the better part of a day before he sighted the bottom. The blood-thirsty monster who had lived there for a hundred seasons [fifty years] soon discovered his presence, and she seized the warrior with her horrid claws. His ringed armor protected him, and she did him no harm, but she did drag him into her dwelling. The hero saw that he was in a hall where the water could do him no harm. He attacked the mighty mere-woman, the she-wolf of the deep, with his sword, but he found that he could not wound her with it. Throwing the famous sword to the ground, he again trusted in his strength. He seized Grendel's mother by the shoulder and threw her to the floor. She fought back fiercely, causing him to stumble and fall. She sat on him and stabbed at him with her dagger, but again his coat of chainmail protected him. Finally he regained his feet. 23 Then he saw hanging on the wall an old sword from the age of giants. It was the choicest of weapons, but it was a sword for giants, too heavy for any man to carry into battle. Still, the great hero seized the hilt and savagely struck out at the monster. The blow caught her at the neck and sliced off her doomed head. Suddenly light filled the place, and the victorious warrior looked about. He saw Grendel's body. As a final act of vengeance, Beowulf cut off his lifeless head. On shore Hrothgar and his men were watching the mere. Seeing the troubled waves mingled with blood, they feared that the sea-wolf had torn Beowulf to pieces. At the ninth hour of the day the Danes returned to their homes, but the Geats, Beowulf's comrades-in-arms, remained there sick at heart. Meanwhile the sword in Beowulf's hand began to waste away. Drenched in blood, it melted away like an icicle at winter's end. Beowulf saw great treasures there in the hall, but all that he took away was Grendel's head and the hilt of the sword, its blade having wasted away. He swam to the surface, and his valiant thanes rejoiced in seeing him safe and sound. They returned to Heorot, bearing Grendel's head upon a spear. 24 Beowulf spoke to King Hrothgar: "Behold this token of victory. I nearly perished, for the great sword Hrunting proved ineffective in my struggle against the fiend, but at last I saw an old and mighty sword hanging on the wall, and with this sword I slew the enemy. Her blood melted the great sword's blade, but the hilt I have carried away as a sign that henceforth your men may sleep peacefully in Heorot." With these words Beowulf presented to King Hrothgar the hilt, the ancient work of giants, created before the flood destroyed the giant race. Its guard was of shining gold, graven correctly with runic letters and brightly adorned with snakes. 25 King Hrothgar spoke: "Dear Beowulf, best of men, keep yourself from arrogance and envy. You are now at the peak of your power, but with age your strength will wane, and with time death will overcome you." The next morning Beowulf announced his desire to return to his own homeland. With kind thanks he returned the sword Hrunting to Unferth, generously praising the ancient weapon. He was a man of noble spirit! 26 Beowulf spoke to King Hrothgar: "We seafarers now return to our King Hygelac. You have been good to us. If, beyond the waters, I learn that you are again in need, I will forthwith return with a thousand warriors to help you." Hrothgar answered: "Because of you there will always be peace between our people, the Geats and the Danes. Feuds and strife from the past are now behind us." Then the aged king, unable to contain his grief at Beowulf's parting, gave the hero additional treasures. He was a king blameless in every way until old age robbed him of his strength. 27 As the warriors approached the sea they were kindly greeted by the coastguardsman. They loaded their horses, armor, and treasures aboard their ship, and before departing Beowulf gave the guard an heirloom sword bound with gold. They steered the ship into deep water, then hoisted a cloth sail. The ship groaned, and the wind drove them across the waters, always on course, until at last they saw the familiar headlands and cliffs of their homeland. The harbor guard, who had long looked out to sea for his beloved countrymen, moored their ship with ropes, securing it from the waves. 28-30 King Hygelac greeted the returning hero ceremoniously. Burning with curiosity about the latter's adventures, he asked: "How did you fare on your journey to help the Danes?" "My battle with Grendel is already known to many," replied Beowulf. Then he recounted in detail his entire adventure: his arrival at Heorot, his hand-to-hand fight with Grendel, his slaying of the monster's mother at the bottom of the mere, and his reward of great treasures at the hand of King Hrothgar. 31 Beowulf concluded his account by praising the generosity of King Hrothgar. "He followed courtly custom," said the hero. "He withheld nothing that was my due; and I wish now to give to you, my king, the great treasures that he gave me as a reward." Beowulf then had the arms and treasures brought forth, and he told the story behind each heirloom. King Hygelac responded by presenting to Beowulf Hrethel's sword, a famous heirloom. Furthermore, he gave him seven thousand hides of land and a hall. Then he named him prince and successor to his own throne. At Hygelac's death Beowulf became king. He ruled wisely for fifty winters, and then a reign of terror visited the land of the Geats. Part Three: Beowulf and the Dragon 32 A great treasure lay hidden in an upland barrow, but all those who had buried it died before bequesting it to their surviving kin. As they are wont to do, a malicious dragon found the hoard and assumed possession of it. For three hundred winters he jealously guarded the treasure. Then one day a thief broke into the dragon's hoard and stole a golden cup. He was not a willful thief, but rather a runaway slave who had escaped a cruel master. Discovering the treasure by chance, the thief took a golden cup, hoping to pacify his master with it. Discovering his loss, the flaming dragon emerged from his lair to seek revenge. 33 The monster spewed forth flames and destroyed many dwellings by fire, including Beowulf's home, the best of halls. 34-35 Once again facing a life-and-death conflict with a superhuman foe, Beowulf reminisced about the contests and victories of his earlier life. Ever mindful of a king's duty toward his people, he vowed: "In the days of my youth I ventured on many battles; and even now will I, aged guardian of my people, challenge this destroyer, if he will come forth from his den to meet me." Beowulf advanced to the dragon's lair alone, trusting in his single strength. That is no coward's way. With a clear voice he challenged the serpent to appear. The evil beast's breath emerged from the rocks. The earth quaked, and the serpent appeared. The lord of the Geats swung his shield against the awful foe, then struck at him with his ancestral sword, but to no avail. The blade failed to penetrate. This was to be no pleasant journey for Beowulf: he was now doomed to leave this earth forever against his will, the fate of all men. Before long the two fighters confronted one another again. The serpent plucked up his courage and renewed his attack. Beowulf's companions had all fled into the woods to save their lives. Only one of them came to his lord's aid. 36 The lone brave companion was a beloved warrior named Wiglaf. Seeing his threatened lord, Wiglaf remembered the many benefits that Beowulf had given him in the past. He picked up his sword and shield and advanced through the deadly fumes to help his lord. "Beloved Beowulf," he said, "in your youth you swore that you would not let your fame decline as long as you lived. You must now defend your life with all your might. I shall help you!" Hearing these words, the dragon attacked a second time. The serpent's flaming breath burned Wiglaf's shield to ashes, so the young warrior was forced to seek refuge behind his kinsman's shield. Beowulf, intent on glory, drove his sword Naegling into the dragon's head. So fierce was the blow that it shattered the blade. As I have heard, Beowulf's hand was so strong, that no sword could withstand his full strength. The fiery dragon attacked a third time, seizing Beowulf by the neck with his sharp teeth. The hero's blood flowed forth in streams. 37 I have heard how Wiglaf showed unceasing courage and skill in the king's great need. The young hero instead of attacking the dragon's head aimed his sword blows a little lower, wounding the beast such that the fire began to wane. Beowulf recovered somewhat, and drawing his short sword he cut the serpent in two. Thus they struck down the foe. Together the two noble kinsmen destroyed him, but this was the king's last hour of victory, his final worldly deed. The wound that the dragon had given Beowulf began to burn and swell. Knowing that his appointed days on earth were now at an end, Beowulf spoke: "Fifty winters have I ruled this people, during which time no neighboring king has dared to attack us. At home I have accepted my fate. I have sought no quarrels and have sworn no false oaths. In all this I can take joy, although I now suffer from fatal wounds." Beowulf further asked Wiglaf to seek out the dragon's treasure and describe it to him, thus giving him comfort knowing about this part of the legacy he was leaving to his country. 38 I have heard how Wiglaf descended into the barrow where he saw the great hoard: jewels, gold, cups, vessels, and arm-rings. Filling his arms with treasures, Wiglaf rushed back to his king. He found him bleeding and near death. Seeing the treasure, Beowulf spoke: "I give thanks that I was able to gain these precious things for my people before I died. I have paid for this treasure hoard with my aged life. You must now fulfill the needs of the people with it. I can no longer be here. After my body has been burned have the warriors build a memorial mound for me on a coastal promontory. Seafarers will call it Beowulf's Mound. " The generous king then gave the young warrior his golden neck-piece, his helmet, his ring, and his coat of chainmail, then told him to enjoy them well. "You are now the last of our kin," he said to Wiglaf. Fate has taken away all my kinsmen. I must follow them." These were the old king's final words. His soul departed to seek the reward of the righteous. 39 It greatly grieved the young warrior to see his beloved one lying lifeless on the ground. His slayer lay there too, defeated and dead. No longer would this serpent rule over treasure hoards. No more would he whirl through the air at midnight. As I have heard, very few men in the world had ever withstood the venomous blasts from such a foe. Beowulf had won the dragon's hoard, but he had paid for his share of this wealth with his life. Not long afterward the cowards who had fled into the woods returned. Ten in number, they shamefully came to where the old man lay. They looked upon Wiglaf who was trying to revive his lord with water, but to no avail. Wiglaf addressed the traitors: "You stand there wearing chainmail and carrying the finest arms, all given to you by our king, but in his hour of distress, you all abandoned him. Henceforth you shall all be deprived of the landowners' privileges formerly bestowed upon you." 40-41 Wiglaf ordered that the battle's outcome be announced in the stronghold. A band of mourners proceeded to the place where their beloved king had fallen. They first came upon the loathsome beast, all scorched with flames. He was fifty feet long. The creature who had at nighttime frolicked through the air now lay lifeless on the sand. Never again would he return to his barrow. Nearby stood golden bowls, cups, dishes, and precious swords, rusty and decayed as if they had lain in the earth's bosom for a thousand winters. A spell had been cast upon that vast hoard, the gold of men of old, that no one could enter the treasure-house unless God himself so willed it. 42 Wiglaf summoned together seven of the king's best thanes, himself the eighth, and together they entered the dragon's lair. They loaded gold of every sort and beyond measure upon a wagon and carried it away with them. They pushed the dragon's body over the cliff into the sea and let the waves carry it away. The Geatish people prepared a magnificent pyre for their great king. Mourning warriors laid their beloved lord in its midst, then kindled the funeral fire. Wood smoke ascended, black above the flames. The roar of the fire mingled with the sound of weeping, until at last the body was consumed. Heaven swallowed the smoke. A Geatish woman sang a sad lament for Beowulf, expressing fear of evil days ahead. The Geatish people made a mound upon the cliff. It was high and broad, and could be seen from afar by seafaring men. They built a wall around the fire's ashes, the famous Warrior's Beacon . Within the mound they put the rings, jewels, and adornments that the warriors had taken from the hoard. Thus they returned the treasure to the earth, where it still remains, as useless to men now as it was in times of old. Twelve warriors, sons of princes, rode about the mound, praising their hero's courage and his mighty deeds. Thus the Geatish people mourned their fallen lord. They said that he was a mighty king, the mildest and kindest of men, most kind to his people, and most desirous of praise. Beowulf was composed by an unnamed English poet sometime between about 700 A.D. and 800 A.D. These dates, based on internal contextual and linguistic evidence, are not universally accepted by scholars. The later date is based on the premise that the Viking raids on England beginning with the sacking of the monasteries at Lindisfarne and Jarrow in the 790s made it unlikely that following these and subsequent attacks an English poet would create a work praising the virtues of Danes or other Northmen. As known today, this poem survives in a single manuscript, written by two different scribes in about 1000 A.D. This manuscript is housed in the British Library. I have based this summary on the following translation: Beowulf , translated out of the Old English by Chauncey Brewster Tinker. Revised edition (New York: Newson and Company, 1912). Link to a text of Beowulf in the original Old English: Beowulf , herausgegeben von Alfred Holder (Freiburg im Breisgau: Verlag von J. C. B. Mohr, 1899). This text was edited by a German scholar. Annotations are in German, but the text is the original Old English. Link to the Wikipedia article on Beowulf . Link to Dragon Slayers: An Index Page . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 26, 2010. Big Peter and Little Peter Big Peter and Little Peter Norway Once there were two brothers, both named Peter; the older one was called Big Peter, and the younger one Little Peter. When their father died, Big Peter took over the farm and found himself a wealthy wife. Little Peter, however, stayed at home with his mother, and lived from her pension until he came of age. Then he received his inheritance, and Big Peter said that he could stay in the old house no longer, living from his mother. It would be better for him to go out into the world and do something for himself. Little Peter agreed; so he bought himself a fine horse and a load of butter and cheese, and set off to the town. With the money he got for his goods he bought brandy and other drinks, and as soon as he arrived home, he threw a great feast, inviting all of his relatives and acquaintances. They in turn invited him for drinking and merrymaking. Thus he lived in fun and frolic so long as his money lasted. But when his last farthing was spent, and Little Peter found himself sitting high and dry, he went back home again to his old mother, and there he had nothing but one calf. When spring came he turned out the calf and let it graze on Big Peter's meadow. But this made Big Peter angry, and he struck the calf, killing it. Little Peter skinned the calf, and hung the hide up in the bathroom until it was thoroughly dry; then he rolled it up, stuffed it into a sack, and went about the area trying to sell it; but wherever he went, people only laughed at him, saying that they had no need of smoked calfskin. After walking a long way, he came to a farm, where he asked for a night's lodging. "No," said the old woman of the house, "I can't give you lodging, for my husband is at the hut in the upper pasture, and I'm alone in the house. You will have to ask for shelter at the next farm; but if they won't take you in, you may come back, because you can't spend the night out of doors." As Peter passed by the living-room window, he saw that there was a priest in there, whom the woman was entertaining. She was serving him ale and brandy, and a large bowl of custard. But just as the priest had sat down to eat and drink, the husband came back home. The woman heard him in the hallway, and she was not slow; she put the bowl of custard under the fireplace mantel, the ale and brandy into the cellar, and as for the priest, she locked him inside a large chest that was there. Little Peter was standing outside the whole time and saw everything. As soon as the husband had entered, Little Peter went to the door and asked if he might have a night's lodging. "Yes," said the man, "you can stay here," and he asked Little Peter to sit down at the table and eat. Little Peter sat down, taking his calfskin with him, which he laid under his feet. When they had sat a while, Little Peter began to step on the skin. "What are you saying now? Can't you be quiet?" said Little Peter. "Who are you talking to?" asked the man. "Oh," answered Little Peter, "it's only the fortuneteller that I have here in my calfskin." "And what does she foretell?" asked the man. "Why, she says that there is a bowl of custard under the fireplace mantel," said Little Peter. "Her prediction is wrong," answered the man. "We haven't had custard in this house for a year and a day." But Peter asked him to take a look; he did so and found the custard. So they proceeded to enjoy it, but just as they were eating, Peter stepped on the calfskin again. "Hush!" he said, "can't you hold your mouth?" "What is the fortuneteller saying now?" asked the man. "Oh, she says there is probably some ale and brandy just under the cellar door," answered Peter. "Well, if she never predicted wrong in her life, she's predicting wrong now," said the man. "Ale and brandy! We have never had such things in the house!" "Just take a look," said Peter. The man did so, and there, sure enough, he found the drinks, and was very pleased indeed. "How much did you pay for that fortuneteller?" said the man, "for I must have her, whatever you ask for her." "I inherited her from my father, and never thought that she was worth much," answered Peter. "Of course, I am not eager to part with her, but you may have her nonetheless, if you'll give me that old chest in the living room." "The chest is locked and the key is lost," cried the old woman. "Then I'll take it without the key," said Peter, and he and the man quickly struck the bargain. Peter got a rope instead of the key. The man helped him load the chest onto his back, and off he stumbled with it. After he had walked a while, he came to a bridge. Beneath the bridge ran a raging stream, foaming, gurgling, and roaring until the bridge shook. "That brandy, that brandy!" said Peter. Now I can tell that I've had too much. Why should I be dragging this chest about? If I hadn't been drunk and crazy, I would not have traded my fortuneteller for it. But now this chest is going into the river, and quickly!" And with that he began to untie the rope. "Au! Au! For God's sake save me. It is the priest that you have in the chest," screamed someone from inside. "That must be the devil himself," said Peter, "and he wants to make me believe he has become a priest; but whether he claims to be a priest or a sexton, into the river he goes!" "Oh, no! Oh no! I am in truth the parish priest. I was visiting the woman for her soul's health, but her husband is rough and wild, so she had to hide me in the chest. I have a silver watch and a gold watch with me. You can have them both, and eight hundred dollars beside, if you will only let me out," cried the priest. "Oh, no!" said Peter. "Is it really your reverence after all?" With that he picked up a stone, and knocked the lid of the chest into pieces. The priest got out and ran home to his parsonage quickly and lightly, for he no longer had his watches and money to weigh him down. Then Little Peter went home and said to Big Peter, "Today at the market there was a good price for calfskins." "What did you get for your shabby one?" asked Big Peter. "Shabby as it was, I got eight hundred dollars for it, but those from larger and fatter calves were bringing twice as much," said Little Peter, and showed his money. "It is good that you told me this," answered Big Peter. He then slaughtered all his cows and calves, and set off to town with their skins and hides. When he arrived at the market, and the tanners asked what he wanted for his hides, Big Peter said "eight hundred dollars for the small ones, and more for the big ones." But they all laughed at him and made fun of him, and said he should not have come there, that he could get a better bargain at the madhouse. Thus he soon found out that Little Peter had tricked him. But when he got home again he was not very gentle; he swore and cursed, threatening to strike Little Peter dead that very night. Little Peter stood and listened to all this. After he had gone to bed with his mother, and the night had worn on a little, he asked her to change sides with him, saying that he was cold and that it would be warmer next to the wall. Yes, she did that, and a little later Big Peter came with an ax in his hand, crept up to the bedside, and with one blow chopped off his mother's head. The next morning, Little Peter went into Big Peter's room. "Heaven help you," he said. "You have chopped our mother's head off. The sheriff will not be pleased to hear that you are paying mother's pension in this way." Then Big Peter became terribly frightened, and he begged Little Peter, for God's sake, to say nothing about what he knew. If he would only keep still, he should have eight hundred dollars. Well, Little Peter swept up the money; set his mother's head on her body again; put her on a sled, and pulled her to market. There he set her up with an apple basket on each arm, and an apple in each hand. By and by a skipper came walking along; he thought she was a market woman, and asked if she had apples to sell, and how many he might have for a penny. But the old woman did not answer. So the skipper asked again. No! She said nothing. "How many may I have for a penny?" he cried the third time, but the old woman sat there, as though she neither saw nor heard him. Then the skipper flew into a rage and slapped her, causing her head to roll across the marketplace. At that moment, Little Peter came running. Weeping and wailing, and threatened to make trouble for the skipper, for having killed his old mother. "Dear friend, keep still about what you know," said the skipper, "and I'll give you eight hundred dollars," and thus they made a deal. When Little Peter got home again, he said to Big Peter, "Old women were bringing a good price at the market today; I got eight hundred dollars for our mother," and he showed him the money. "It is good that I came to know this," said Big Peter. He had an old mother-in-law, and he killed her, and then set forth to sell her. But when people heard how he was trying to sell dead bodies, they wanted to hand him over to the sheriff, and it was all he could do to escape. When Big Peter arrived home again, he was so angry with Little Peter, that he threatened to strike him dead there and then, without mercy. "Yes, indeed" said Little Peter, "we must all go this way, and between today and tomorrow there is only the night. But if I must set off now, I've only one thing to ask; put me into that sack that's hanging over there, and carry me to the river." Big Peter had nothing against that; he stuffed him into the sack, and set off. But he hadn't gone far before it came into his mind that he had forgotten something which he had to go back and fetch; meanwhile, he set the sack down by the side of the road. Just then came a man driving a big flock of fine sheep, To the Kingdom of Heaven, to Paradise. To the Kingdom of Heaven, to Paradise! cried out Little Peter from inside the sack, and he kept mumbling and muttering the same words over and over. "May I not go with you?" asked the man with the sheep. "Of course you may," said Little Peter. "Just untie the sack, and trade places with me, and you'll get there enough. I can wait until next time. But you must keep on calling out what I was saying, or you'll not go to the right place." Then the man untied the sack, and took Little Peter's place. Peter tied the sack up again, and the man began to cry out, To the Kingdom of Heaven, to Paradise. To the Kingdom of Heaven, to Paradise! and repeated the saying over and over again. After Peter got him positioned in the sack, he wasn't slow; off he went with the flock of sheep, making a broad turn. Meantime, Big Peter, returned, took the sack on his shoulders, and carried it to the river, and all the while he went, the shepherd sat inside crying: To the Kingdom of Heaven, to Paradise! "Yes, indeed! Now try now to find the way for yourself," said Big Peter, and with that he tossed him out into the stream. When Big Peter had done that, and was going back home, he met his brother, who was driving the flock of sheep before him. Big Peter could hardly believe his eyes, and asked how Little Peter had gotten out of the river, and where he had found the fine flock of sheep. "That was an act of brotherly love that you did for me when you threw me into the river," answered Little Peter. I sank right down to the bottom like a stone, and there I saw flocks of sheep, believe me. Down there they go about by the thousands; each flock is finer than the others. And just see what splendid wool they have!" That is good of you to tell me that, said Big Peter. Then he ran home to his wife; made her come with him to the river; crept into a sack, and asked her to quickly tie it up, and throw him over the bridge. "I'm going after a flock of sheep," he said. "If I stay too long, it's because I can't manage the flock by myself; then you'll have to jump in and help me." "Well, don't stay too long," said his wife, "for I am looking forward to those sheep." She stood there and waited a while, but then she thought that her husband couldn't gather the flock together, and so she jumped in after him. Now Little Peter was rid of them all, and he inherited their farm and fields, and horses and tools too; and besides, he had money enough to buy cattle as well. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Store-Per og Vesle-Per , Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiania [Oslo], 1842-1852), translated by George Webb Dasent (1859). Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman . © 2001. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1535. This classical trickster story, known generically as "Unibos" (One-Ox), is told around the world. It was especially popular among the writers of renaissance jest books. Related links Little Claus and Big Claus , a type 1535 tale by Hans Christian Andersen. The text of this story in the original Danish: Lille Claus og store Claus . The Little Peasant , a type 1535 tale from the Grimm brothers' Children's and Household Tales (no. 61). The text of this story in the original German: Das Bürle . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 5, 2020. Bird's Three Precepts: Folktales of type 150 The Bird's Three Precepts folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 150 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000 Contents Of Hearing Good Counsel ( Gesta Romanorum ). The Three Proverbs (Poland). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Of Hearing Good Counsel Gesta Romanorum An archer, catching a little bird called a nightingale, was about to put her to death. But, being gifted with language, she said to him, "What will it advantage you to kill me? I cannot satisfy your appetite. Let me go, and I will give you three rules, from which you will derive great benefit, if you follow them accurately." Astonished at hearing the bird speak, he promised her liberty on the conditions she had stated. "Hear, then," said she. "Never attempt impossibilities. Secondly, do not lament an irrecoverable loss. Thirdly, do not credit things that are incredible. If you keep these three maxims with wisdom, they will infinitely profit you." The man, faithful to his promise, let the bird escape. Winging her flight through the air, she commenced a most exquisite song, and, having finished, said to the archer, "You are a silly fellow, and have today lost a great treasure. There is in my bowels a pearl bigger than the egg of an ostrich." Full of vexation at her escape, he immediately spread his nets and endeavored to take her a second time, but she eluded his art. "Come into my house, sweet bird," said he, "and I will show you every kindness. I will feed you with my own hands, and permit you to fly abroad at pleasure." The nightingale answered, "Now I am certain you are a fool, and pay no regard to the counsel I gave you: 'Regret not what is irrecoverable.' You cannot take me again, yet you have spread your snares for that purpose. Moreover, you believe that my bowels contain a pearl larger than the egg of an ostrich, when I myself am nothing near that size! You are a fool, and a fool you will always remain." With this consolatory assurance she flew away. The man returned sorrowfully to his own house, but never again obtained a sight of the nightingale. Application: My beloved, the archer is any Christian. The nightingale is Christ, and man attempts to kill him as often as he sins. Source: Gesta Romanorum , translated by Charles Swan (London: George Bell and Sons, 1877), no. 167, pp. 318-319. The Gesta Romanorum or "Deeds of the Romans" is a collection of some 283 legends and fables. Created as a collection ca. 1330 in England, it served as a source of stories and plots for many of Europe's greatest writers. The anonymous collectors and editors, most likely monks, concluded each tale with a so-called "application," thus attempting to place each story within Christian moral context. Return to the table of contents . The Three Proverbs Poland A rich man was once walking about in his garden. He was cheerful and happy. Suddenly he noticed a small bird that had been captured in a small net. He took hold of it and was more than a little surprised when it began to speak, saying, "Give me my freedom, dear man! Of what use is it to you to lock me in a cage? Looking at me will not please you, for I do not have beautiful feathers. I cannot entertain you, for I do not sing like other birds. And I cannot provide you with nourishment. I am much too small for that. But I will tell you three wise teachings if you will give my freedom." The master of the garden looked at the little creature and said, "If you do not sing then of course you cannot entertain me. Let me hear your wisdom, and if it teaches me anything, I will give you your freedom." Then the little bird said, "First: Do not grieve over things that have already happened. Second: Do not wish for that which is unattainable. Third: Do not believe in that which cannot be possible." Then the master of the garden said, "You have indeed taught me something. I will give you your freedom." Letting the bird fly away, he thought seriously about its words. Then he heard it laughing quietly. Its voice came from a tree where the bird was sitting. "Why are you laughing so cheerfully?" shouted the man. "About my easily won freedom," answered the bird, "and more than that, about the foolishness of humans who believe they are smarter than all other creatures. If you had been smarter, only just as smart as I am, then you would now be the richest man." "How would that have been possible?" asked the master of the garden. The bird replied, "If, instead of giving me my freedom, you had kept me, for in my body I have a diamond the size of a hen's egg." The man stood there as though he were petrified. After recovering from the surprise, he began to speak, "You think that you are happy because I gave you your freedom. But summer will soon be over and winter with its storms will arrive. The brooks will freeze over, and you will not be able to find a single drop of water to quench your thirst. The fields will be covered with snow, and you will not find anything to eat. But I will give you a warm place where you can freely fly around, and you can have as much water and bread as you want. Come down, and I will show you that you are better off with me than with your freedom." Thus spoke the master of the garden, but the little bird laughed louder than before, making the man even angrier. "You are still laughing?" asked the man. "Of course," replied the bird. "See, you gave me my freedom on account of the teachings that I gave you, and now you are so foolish that you do not take the teachings to heart. I earned my freedom fairly, but you forgot my teachings after only a few minutes. You should not grieve over things that have already happened, but still you are grieving that you gave me my freedom. You should not wish for things that you cannot obtain, and yet you want me, for whom freedom is my whole life, to voluntarily enter a prison. You should not believe that which is impossible, and yet you believe that I am carrying about inside my body a diamond as large as a hen's egg, although I myself am only half the size of a hen's egg." And with that the bird flew away. Source: Otto Knoop, "Die drei Sprüche," Ostmärkische Sagen, Märchen und Erzählungen (Lissa: Oskar Eulitz' Verlag, 1909), no. 72, pp. 147-149. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 19, 2013. The Birthmarks of the Princess The Birthmarks of the Princess folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 850 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2016-2024 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Swineherd Who Married a Princess (Europe). Three Little Red Pigs (Denmark). The Princess's Birthmarks (Denmark). The Pig-Boy and the Princess (Germany). The Nobleman's Daughter and the Shepherd (Germany). Three Golden Hairs (Wendish). Many Things Can Be Achieved through Beautiful Clothes (Slavic). The Emperor's Daughter and the Swineherd (Slavic). The Shepherd and the King's Daughter (Serbia). The Enchanted Lambs (Russia). The Youngest Prince and the Youngest Princess (Hungary). The Rivals (Bukovina). Dshahan and the Three Pigs (Malta). The Pearl Queen (Germany). The Swineherd (Hans Christian Andersen). Link to The Clever Little Tailor (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). This link opens in a new window. Additional type 850 tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Swineherd Who Married a Princess Europe Once upon a time in a distant kingdom there was a simple peasant lad who herded swine in a forest next to the king's castle. One of his pigs was smarter than all the rest, and the swineherd taught him how to stand on his hind legs and dance. A swineherd does get lonely, as you must know, alone in the woods with only his animals for company, and he must have been very pleased with himself that he had taught a pig to dance. One warm summer's day the princess was out walking in the shady woods, and she came upon the swineherd, just as his pig had finished dancing a jig. "Oh, please make him dance once again," asked the princess, ever so courteously, for she had never before seen a pig dance. "Only if you will lift your skirts to your knees," answered the swineherd. The princess could see no harm in this, so she lifted her skirts to her knees, and sure enough, the swineherd's pig danced a merry jig. "That was too short," said the princess. "Can't he dance some more?" "Only if you lift your skirts to your waist," said the swineherd. The princess hesitated, but again she could see no harm in his request, so she lifted her skirts to her waist, and the pig danced another merry jig. She still had not had enough and asked, again ever so politely, if the pig couldn't dance just one more time. It was such a cheerful thing to see! "Only if you lift your skirts to your neck," said the swineherd. "To my neck?" she asked. "To your neck!" he replied. Now not even a princess can see a dancing pig every day, so she lifted her skirts to her neck, and the swineherd's pig danced his very best. Some time later the king decided that it was time for the princess to marry, and because she was the most beautiful maiden in all the land, suitors came from near and far. The king could not choose from the many princes and noblemen who came courting his daughter. Finally he decreed that to win the princess's hand in marriage a suitor would have to describe her secret birthmark. You see, from the day the princess was born she had had a birthmark on her belly, a dainty little spot from which grew three fine golden hairs. The swineherd soon learned of the proclamation, and went to the castle at once, because, of course, he had seen the mark with the three golden hairs on the day that the princess had lifted her skirts in order to make his pig dance. Now a king's word is a king's word, and even though he did not relish giving his daughter to a simple swineherd, he had to do as he had promised. After all, the swineherd was able to describe the birthmark ever so correctly, down to the last golden hair. But the story is not yet done, for one of the princes who had come to court the princess offered the princess's lady-in-waiting a bag of gold if she would just describe to him her mistress's birthmark. The faithless servant took the gold and told the unworthy prince what he wanted to know. When the deceitful prince presented himself to the king and described the princess's birthmark ever so accurately, the king, at first, did not know what to do. But then he struck upon a plan. "Let the princess decide herself!" he proclaimed. She and the two suitors shall spend the night together in the princess's bed. At sunrise I will look in on them, and the one she is facing shall be her husband. When the swineherd learned of the king's decree, he made plans for the night. First he put a large clump of chocolate (some say that it was marzipan) into his pocket. Then he secretly dropped an herb into the false prince's evening soup, an herb that would summon nature's call quickly and surely. That night the swineherd, the deceitful prince, and the beautiful princess all lay down in her large bed; the king locked the door behind them; and they closed their eyes. Then suddenly the false prince jumped up with a start and ran to the door, but it was locked. "I have to also!" said the swineherd, jumping out of bed. "What can we do? We're locked in!" cried the prince. "We'll have to do it on the floor." said the swineherd. Then each man deposited something on the floor: the swineherd his clump of chocolate, and the prince --, well, some things are better left unsaid. "Now we are in trouble!" said the swineherd. "When the king discovers what we've done, he'll have us killed!" "What can we do?" asked the terrified prince. "We've no choice," answered the swineherd. "We'll have to eat it." Thus the swineherd ate his clump of chocolate, and the false prince ate ----, well, again, some things are better left unsaid. They returned to the sleeping princess's bed, one on one side of her and one on the other. With time the princess turned toward the prince and breathed in deeply, but then she gasped and quickly turned the other way. At sunrise the king looked in on them and found the princess contentedly asleep with her face nearly touching that of the swineherd. And that is how a simple swineherd came to marry a princess. Retold from various European sources. Return to the table of contents . Three Little Red Pigs Denmark Once upon a time there was an old woman who lived in a little hut and had only a single cow. She also had a boy, who was her grandson. He was a little scamp who behaved very strangely. Once she was in great distress and need, so she told the boy to go to market with the cow and sell it. He set off with the cow, but before he arrived in the town where the market was, he was met by an old woman who asked him many questions. At last she said: "I like you, my boy, and I will make you a good offer. Let me have the cow! I really don't have any money, but instead I'll give you something that is much better." Then she let the boy see what she was carrying in her apron. It was three little pigs. They were so small and so cute. They were quite pink and with little curls on their tails. They were very nice to look at. And then she set them down on the ground, took out a little flute, and began to play it. Then the three little red pigs danced and waved their tails. It was a great pleasure to watch them. "Do you see now, my nice boy!" said the woman. "I will give you all three of them for your one old boring cow, and also include the flute in the bargain. I know that you can make good use of this exchange." The boy thought so too, and they made the exchange. He took off his jacket and put the three little pigs in it. It would be a shame if they would have to walk all the way home. He put the flute in his hat, and then he ran home as fast as he could to show his grandmother. She would probably be very happy with what he had gotten for the cow. She cried and scolded, and it didn't help when he let the pigs dance for her. She said that the boy was crazy and that he had ruined her, the poor old woman. But he said that she should not carry on so. She should know that he had made a very good bargain. In the big manor house there lived a rich gentleman with his wife. They had an only child, an exceedingly beautiful daughter. She was the same age as the boy, only fifteen years old, but she was already a very fine lady. The next day, when the boy knew that the gentleman and his wife had gone away on a visit for several days, and that the daughter was alone at home, he took his pigs and went up to the house. Outside of her windows he played his flute and let the pigs dance. The maiden came to the window and looked out. The little pigs delighted her. She went out to him and said that she would like to have one of them. What would it cost? They could not be bought with money, but he would give her one of them if she allowed him to pat her on the cheek, and if she would give him some food to take home to his old grandmother. The boy was ragged, and his hands were not at all clean; so the maiden really did not want him to pat her fine cheeks. But she wanted the little pig so badly that finally she offered her cheek and let him pat it. And then she gave him a good load of food to take home. Arriving at home, he was very proud of what he had gotten for the one pig. "Yes, that is good enough," said the grandmother, "but when it is all gone, what will we then have to live on?" "Just never mind!" said the boy. "I will take care of everything." The next morning he went again to the maiden's windows with the other two pigs. He played the flute, and they danced even more beautifull than they had done before. The maiden came down to watch the dance. She had not been able to get her one pig to dance at all, and she thought it would probably dance if it had a partner, so she should get one more pig. She asked if he would not sell her one of the two. He said that he would probably let her have one more; all that he asked was that she would let him kiss her. He was otherwise a nice boy, if he only had been a little cleaner, but he was filthy, and he had recently eaten bread with fat. The little maiden was very reluctant to let him kiss her, but she had a strong desire for the pig. "Yes, all right!" she said, and the boy gave her a good smack in the middle of her little red mouth. Furthermore, he got some food to take home to his grandmother. "Now you can see," he said, "what I have gotten for the second pig." She said that this was all well and good, but that in the end they would have nothing left. "Don't worry about that," said the boy, "I will take care of everything." On the morning of the third day, he went again outside the maiden's windows with his last pig. He played on the flute, and the pig jumped and jumped around him like it was completely crazy. The little noble maiden came out and looked at it. She had not been able to get her two pigs to dance. She then thought that she must get the third one as well. Then, seeing the flute, she thought that it must be what set the little pigs' legs in motion. She then asked the boy if he would not sell her the third pig, and the flute with it. The boy said that he would gladly give her them both, if she would just lay her head in his lap. The boy's clothes were dirty and ragged, and the maiden did not want to get her beautiful black hair messed up. But, if she were to get what she wanted, she would have to give the boy what he wanted. So she laid her head in his lap. He ran his fingers through her hair and paid close attention to what he saw: There was a golden hair and a silver hair and a hair that was quite white. Afterward he took more food back home home to his grandmother, but he no longer had any pigs or the flute. He showed his grandmother what he had gotten for his third pig. She said, as she had done before, that now they had nothing. But the boy said that he would take care of everything. Before all the food was gone for the boy and his grandmother, the gentleman and his wife came back home. And now the gentleman got the idea that he wanted to marry his daughter off to the one who could tell three hidden characteristics that she had on her. Many young gentlemen flocked together from all corners. One guessed one thing, and another guessed something else; but no one guessed the right thing. The boy had also heard about this, and he too went to the manor house. He ran outside the windows and sang: "I know what I'm going to say. I know what I'm going to say." The maiden stood and listened to him, and she did not like what she heard. She threw some money out of the window to him and said: "Go away, you naughty boy!" He picked up the money and put it in his hat. But then he immediately started singing as before: "I know what I'm going to say. I know what I'm going to say." The maiden was very afraid that she would have to marry this poor ragged boy, so she threw more money out to him and said: "Oh, go away, you bad boy! I can't bear to listen to your whining." He picked up the money and put it in his hat and began again: "I know what I'm going to say. Yes! I know what I'm going to say!" She again threw more money out to him and told him to go away. But he continued to sing as before. He tried several times to get into the manor house, but he was turned away by the servants every time. They did not want such a ragged youth in there. There now came a young nobleman who also wanted to try his luck. He noticed the boy and heard what he was singing. He asked him: "What do you know?" "The secret characteristics of the gentleman's daughter," said the boy. "Tell them to me!" said the young nobleman. "I will pay you well." "Yes, I'll tell you what you have to say to them," said the boy, "but you'll have to take me inside. I can stand on your boots, and you can throw your cape over me. That way I can get in with you, and then you'll see." It went well: The boy stood on the nobleman's boots and crouched under his wide cloak. The nobleman looked legitimate at first, and no one noticed anything wrong, and the boy slipped into the living room, where the gentlemen were still standing guessing. No one had found the right answer. Then the boy shouted from beneath the cloak: "The maiden has a golden hair and a silver hair and a white hair on her head." "That's right!" said the father. Then the boy jumped out from his hiding place and said that he had won the maiden. With that he swung his red hat so that all the money rolled out onto the floor. This startled the father, for he had never intended such a son-in-law. But he could not go back on his word. Then he said: "Where did you get this money?" "That is what the maiden gave me to keep quiet," said the boy. "What?" said the father. "Then you must tell me the whole story." Yes, the boy began at the beginning: with the cow and the three little red pigs, and about the first pig that he sold the gentleman's daughter, and what he got for it, and then about the second pig, and what he got for it. When the gentleman heard that he had received a kiss for it, he did not want to hear any more of the story. Then he turned to his daughter and said: "If you have kissed him, then must marry him!" And so it happened: The two got married, and they remained very good friends all of their days. Source (books.google.com): Svend Grundtvig, "Tre smaa røde Grise," Danske Folkeæventyr (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1878), no. 8, pp. 105-111 . Source (Internet Archive): Svend Grundtvig, "Tre smaa røde Grise," Danske Folkeæventyr (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1878), no. 8, pp. 105-111 . Return to the table of contents . The Princess's Birthmarks Denmark There was a band of robbers who had their hideaway dug into a large mountain. Their captain had a son who was born there, but when he was grown, he did not want to stay with them, because he did not like their dealings, so his father allowed him to leave and seek work as an honest man. On saying farewell, his father gave him a wallet and a golden box, things to remind him of his home. Some time later he found work with a squire to look after the sheep. On the squire's farm was a mound where the sheep were not allowed to graze for fear that a wild troll might capture them. On his first morning the new shepherd drove the sheep to the mound, then sat down to eat his lunch. The troll suddenly appeared and asked for some of his lunch, and the shepherd gave him half. Then the troll said, "Because you have shared your lunch with me, all will go well with your sheep." Thus every day the lad went to the mound and shared his lunch with the troll, and in return the troll showed him the best places to graze the sheep. One day the troll said to the lad, "If you will continue to serve here until you are eighteen, I'll help you." The boy agreed to this and served four more years (he was fourteen when he started there). When the time came for him to leave, the troll said, "You should now go to the king's castle and take service there as a swineherd. I'll give you this flute, and whenever you blow into it the pigs will dance ever so nicely. The lad thanked him and went on his way. The king had nine pigs, and the lad took them into the woods. On returning to the castle with them he blew into the flute, and the pigs jumped about and danced ever so beautifully. Now the princess saw the dancing pigs from her bedroom window, and she wanted to have one of them. The next day she secretly went into the woods and asked the swineherd if his pigs could indeed dance. "Yes," he replied. "Do you want to see them dance?" He blew into the flute, and the pigs danced. "Will you sell me one of the pigs?" "I can do that," he said. "How much will it cost? But it must be a pig that can dance." In payment he asked only to see her garters. This displeased the princess, but the swineherd would accept nothing else, so in the end she lifted up her skirts, and he gave her one of the pigs. Back at the castle she sent for her musicians, but for all their skill they could not make the pig dance. All the pig would do was to squeal and scream. So the next day she returned to the woods and complained to the swineherd. "Your pig must have been too lonely to dance," explained the swineherd. "You should buy another pig." "Yes, but what will I have to pay for this one?" She would have to show him her breasts. So she undid her bodice and let him look, and he saw that she had two silver hairs below her left armpit and one golden hair below her right armpit. Thus she got the second pig, but upon returning to the castle it too would not dance. So the next day she went once again into the woods to complain to the swineherd. "I can give you a dancing pig," he promised, "but first you must show me your bare arms." By now she was used to such requests, so she rolled up her sleeves. He saw that on her left arm was a blood-red spot as large as a ducat. It was a birthmark that she had been born with. So she got the third pig and returned home with it, but it too refused to dance, however much her musicians played and drummed. That evening when the lad returned to the castle with his six pigs the king noticed that three were missing, and because the swineherd could not explain how they had disappeared, the king dismissed him forthwith. Now in those same days the king issued a proclamation throughout the realm that whoever might guess the princess's birthmarks could have her in marriage. Many suitors arrived on the appointed day. The king saw them one by one, but none guessed right. All the while the swineherd was hiding behind a door where he could hear everything. One of the suitors was a good-looking student, and he pumped the swineherd for an answer to the riddle. "I guess she has two silver hairs beneath right armpit and a gold hair beneath her left armpit," replied the swineherd, so when the student presented himself, this is the answer that he gave. "Not true!" shouted the swineherd. "She has a gold hair beneath her right armpit and two silver hairs beneath her left armpit." "Hold your tongue, boy!" said the king, who liked the good-looking student. "Just what are you saying?" "What I say is true!" said the swineherd, and it turned out that he was right. The king then asked the student, "Can you tell me on which arm the princess has a birthmark?" "Her right arm." "Not true!" shouted the swineherd. On her left arm is a red mark the size of a ducat. Her arm was examined, and everyone in the hall said, "The boy is right." Nonetheless, the king refused to accept the swineherd, and instead he set an additional task. That night each suitor would go to bed on either side of the princess, the one she was facing the next morning would be the winner. Before bedtime the king gave a feast for the judges and some of the suitors. The student thought himself in seventh heaven, for he was sure that he would win the princess, and thus he drank until he was quite drunk. But the swineherd was not so foolish. Finally the three went to bed, and the bedroom door was locked behind them. The princess turned to face the student, for she favored him. Now before bedtime the swineherd had purchased a bag of prunes and raisins, and as he lay there he munched on them. In the night the student became ill from his overeating and overdrinking. Needing to vomit, he tried to go outside, but the door was locked, so he had to puke in the corner. When he returned to bed the princess smelled his breath, and it was so foul that she turned toward the swineherd, whose breath smelled much better. They all slept until daybreak, and when the king looked in on them she was facing the swineherd. Thus the case was settled. Nothing more could be said against the swineherd. "Now that you have won the contest," said the king, "tell us about your possessions." The boy told him of the wallet and the golden box. These were his entire inheritance, and he had not opened them since leaving home. The king wanted to see them, and opening the wallet he saw photographs of the lad's father and mother, and he recognized the father as his own twin brother. When their father had died they had battled each other over the kingdom. The loser had escaped into the woods and had become the leader of a band of robbers. Then they opened the golden box, and it contained a rich inheritance. The wallet was given to the king, for he had often thought about his brother and longed for him. Now he knew that he was still alive. Of course the lad should marry the princess, and their wedding was soon celebrated. He received half the kingdom at once, along with a dowry, and when the king died he received the second half as well. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Prinsessens Mærker," Jyske Folkeminder: Især fra Hammerum Herred , Femte Samling, (Copenhagen: Konrad Jørgensen, 1881), no. 12, pp. 89-95 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Prinsessens Mærker," Jyske Folkeminder: Især fra Hammerum Herred , Femte Samling, (Copenhagen: Konrad Jørgensen, 1881), no. 12, pp. 89-95 . Return to the table of contents . The Pig-Boy and the Princess Germany, Wilhelm Busch Once there was a pig-boy who bought a flute and three colorful little piglets to amuse himself. With time and energy he taught the piglets to stand on two legs and dance very nicely to the tune of the flute. They could dance the gallop, waltzes, and -- in short -- all the popular dances of the land. Whenever he drove his herd out into the woods and camped there he would take out his flute and play a cheerful tune, and as soon as he blew into the flute the three piglets immediately began to dance, jumping around him so merrily that it was a welcome break from the loneliness of the forest. Now it happened that one day he drove the pigs near the royal princess's summer palace. He lay down beneath an oak tree in the warm sunshine and had his piglets dance to his flute. The princess saw this from her window, and she thought that they were so cute and funny that at once she sent her maid down to the lad to ask him if he wouldn't sell her one of the piglets. "Greetings from the princess," said the maid to the lad. "She would like to know if one of your lovely colorful piglets would be for sale. "They're not for sale," said the lad, "but one can be earned. Just tell your princess that if I may sleep one night in the same bed with her chambermaid, I would be happy to give her one of my piglets." The maid returned to the princess with this message, and the princess wanted one of the cute little piglets so badly that she let the lad have his way. After receiving the piglet she bought herself a flute to make it dance, but it would not dance. She played the most beautiful dance tunes that she knew, petted the animal, and stroked it, but it would not dance. "Oh, dear," said the princess. "The little animal won't dance, because it doesn't have a playmate. I'll have to see if I cannot get one for him." She was very sad that her little piglet would not dance. The next day the lad was once again tending his animals near the castle. The princess sent to him a second time, asking if one of his two piglets were not for sale. "Not for sale," said the lad once again. "But it can be earned. If I may sleep a second night in the same bed with the princess's chambermaid, then I'll give the princess one of the piglets. Nothing else will do." The princess, who wanted the piglet ever so badly, let the lad have his way. Later, after she had the second piglet, she brought the two together, took out her flute, and played many lovely tunes, but the piglets did not dance. Now she concluded that the problem was with the flute, so she waited impatiently until the lad came back to see if she could not get the third piglet as well as the flute from him. The lad did indeed come back the next day. He lay down beneath the oak tree in the warm sunshine and had his piglet dance to his flute: the gallop, waltzes, and -- in short -- all the dances that were popular in the country. The princess sent to him and asked if the third piglet, together with the flute, were for sale. "Not for sale," said the lad once again. "But they can be earned. If tonight I may sleep with the princess in her bed, then I will give her my piglet, together with the flute." When the princess heard this, it was a little too much for her, but she wanted the piglet and the flute so badly that she asked if it wouldn't be all the same if he could sleep yet another night with the chambermaid in her bed. "No!" answered the lad. "Only the princess will do. If she won't agree, it's all right with me. I'll just keep my piglet and my flute." Thus the princess saw that there was no other way. She had to let the lad do what he wanted to do. Now she had all three of the colorful little piglets together, and they danced ever so cheerfully to the sound of the flute: the gallop, waltzes, and -- in short -- all the dances that were popular in the country. This delighted the princes so much that she never grew tired of playing for the little animals. On the other hand, now that the lad no longer had his piglets and his flutes, he was no longer happy in these parts, so he set forth into the wide world. Now it happened that soon afterward the king proclaimed far and wide that whoever would be able to guess what kind of birthmark the princess had on her body could have her as a wife, be he rich or poor, nobleman or commoner. However, anyone who attempted, but guessed wrong, would lose his head, and thus his life. When the pig-boy heard this news he immediately set forth toward home, thinking that he would be able to solve the riddle. Underway he met up with a priest who asked him where he had come from, where he was going, and what sort of business was taking him there. "I am going to the king's court," replied the lad, "to see if I can't guess the princess's birthmark." The priest said, "Do you already know something about it, my son? Otherwise you'll likely lose your head and thus your young life." "I don't know for sure," said the lad, "but one thing is certain: The princess has three hairs on one side of her body." Hearing this, the priest thought that now that he that knew the answer he would seek the prize for himself by getting ahead of the boy if at all possible. "I am seeking the same goal as you are, my son," he said to the boy. "If it's all right with you, let's walk on together." The lad agreed, and together they made their way to the royal court. They announced themselves to the king, and as soon as he realized why they had come he sent for the executioner who made ready his bare sword. "So!" said the king. "Let us begin. The priest can be first, and then the pig-boy. Reverend sir, what kind of birthmark does my daughter have on her body?" The cunning priest, happy that his turn came first, quickly spoke out: "Three hairs on one side!" "Right!" said the king, "but, my dear sir, on which side? And how long are they? And how thick are they? And what do they look like?" The priest, not knowing what to say, just stood there with his mouth hanging open. "Listen up, priest!" said the king. "Rightfully you would now be made shorter by one head, but because you guessed at least something right your life will be spared this time." Then he turned to the pig-boy and said, "Now, my lad, it's your turn to guess. What is the birthmark that my daughter has on her body?" "Three hairs on one side." "Right, my son! But on which side?" "On her left side." "Right! But how long are they? And how thick are they? And what do they look like?" "With all respect, your majesty, they are as long and as thick as knitting needles, and they are -- I think -- gold colored." "Right, my son," cried the king. "You have guessed correctly, and have rightfully won the princess." Thus the priest had to go on his way shamefully, but the pig-boy married the beautiful princess. Source (Internet Archive): Wilhelm Busch, "Der Schweinejunge und die Prinzessin," Ut ôler Welt: Volksmärchen, Sagen, Volkslieder und Reime (Munich: Lothar Joachim Verlag, 1910), no. 39, pp. 104-106 . Source (books.google.com): Wilhelm Busch, "Der Schweinejunge und die Prinzessin," Aus alter Zeit: Volksmärchen und Sagen , (Hamburg: mach-mir-ein-ebook.de, 2014), not paginated . Return to the table of contents . The Nobleman's Daughter and the Shepherd Germany In a village between Eisenberg and Naumburg there lived a nobleman's daughter. Nothing pleased her. One day she saw two dancing sows that a shepherd had obtained from a little gray man. To get one of these pigs -- for the dancing sows finally made her happy -- she had shown the shepherd her birthmark, namely a golden hair on her right breast. Now she declared that she would marry whatever man could guess her birthmark, then herd three hundred hares, and finally say something true that no one else knew about. Our shepherd already knew about her birthmark, so he volunteered to herd the three hundred hares. They were counted out to him, but he had scarcely gone into the open with them when they all scampered away from him. However, the little gray man gave him a flute, and when he blew into it every last one of the hares came running back to him. Now first the nobleman's daughter, then her mother, and finally her father -- all in disguise -- came to the shepherd to beg a hare from him. And each got one for a very high price, but when the shepherd blew into his flute the hares broke loose and ran back to him. Thus only the third task remained. The suitors were all invited to a gathering, but none of them, however noble they all were, was able to tell an unknown truth. Finally the shepherd rose from his seat in the back of the hall and began to relate what price he had received for the sale of the hares. This was all terribly embarrassing for the noble maiden and her parents, so they finally declared the shepherd the winner, and he married the nobleman's daughter. Source (books.google.com): Robert Eisel, "Die Edelmannstochter und der Schafknecht," Sagenbuch des Voigtlandes (Gera: Verlag von C. B. Griesbach, 1871), no. 561, pp. 215-16 . Source (Internet Archive): Robert Eisel, "Die Edelmannstochter und der Schafknecht," Sagenbuch des Voigtlandes (Gera: Verlag von C. B. Griesbach, 1871), no. 561, pp. 215-16 . The hare-herding episode is classified as a type 570 folktale . Return to the table of contents . Three Golden Hairs Wendish In former times there was a peasant in a village. At that time they grazed pigs in a common pasture. The peasant had a servant boy eleven or twelve years old who tended the pigs and piglets. One day a ragman came to him with a wooden flute. The one sow had six piglets, and the ragman said, "I will trade this wooden flute to you for three of your six piglets. If you blow on the flute your piglets will dance to the tune." The boy did not want to do this, fearing that his master, the peasant, would scold him and beat him. To that the ragman said, "You can tell your master that you'll give up your wages for the piglets. It is possible that you'll gain much more with the flute than your lost wages." When the boy returned home with the pigs the peasant asked him, "Where are the three piglets?" "I traded them to the ragman for this flute. He said that the piglets will dance if I play the flute." The peasant was about to beat the boy, but the latter told him to take the value of the missing piglets from his wages. Early the next morning the boy let the sow and the three piglets out into the farmyard and began to blow on the flute. To the amazement of the peasant the piglets danced. Never in his lifetime had he heard of piglets that could dance. He was now satisfied with the situation. From then on the boy tended sows and piglets in the pasture, playing a little piece on the flute, to which the piglets danced. The people who came by saw the dancing piglets, and they became famous in the entire village and also in other villages as well. Now it happened that a young lady in the village heard about the dancing piglets. Early one morning she went out to the boy and asked to buy one of the piglets. The boy was not allowed to sell one without asking his master. The peasant said, "You can sell them if you get a good price." Happily the boy went back out to the pasture. "The young lady asked, "What will you take for one of the piglets?" "One hundred thalers, and then you'll have to lift your skirts up to your knees." At first she did not want to do this, but finally she did lift her skirts up to her knees. "This boy knows a lot," she thought. Then the young lady took her piglet home with her and put it in the stall. The pig-girl was to keep watch over it and report when it began to dance. A whole day passed, but the piglet did not dance. The young lady thought, "If I had two of them, then they would dance for sure." So she went to the boy and asked how much a second piglet would cost. "Two hundred thalers, and lift your skirts up to your waist." She did not want to do this, but the boy said, "I'll not sell the piglet for any other price." She thought, "This boy knows how to shame a girl," but she did what he asked, then gave him two hundred thalers, and took the piglet home with her. She thought that the two piglets would dance, but they did not. On the third day she went once again to the boy and said that it was not true, that the piglets could dance; but the boy said that they could indeed. So then she thought that if she had all three they would dance, and she asked how much the boy wanted for the third piglet. He said, "Three hundred thalers, and lift your skirt above your navel." She did not want to do this, and thought about it for a long time, but finally she gave in. Now the young lady had an unusual mark: three golden hairs above her navel. When she returned home and had all three piglets together, she thought that they would dance. But they did not dance. So she sent a messenger to the boy, complaining that he had cheated her. The boy insisted, however, that they had danced for him. Then the peasant said, "Send the wooden flute to the young lady. We received a good price for the piglets." So the boy gave the flute to the messenger, and asked him to tell the young lady to play a while on it, and then the piglets would dance for sure. When the young lady blew on the flute the pigs danced, and she was very happy, for no one else had pigs like these. And she sent a generous tip to the boy. Some months later the young lady announced that she wanted to marry. She would give a feast and invite all the young gentlemen. She proclaimed that she would marry the one who could guess what her unusual mark was. On the appointed day all the suitors sat around the table eating and drinking. The boy had heard about this, and he sneaked into a corner. Beforehand he supplied himself with some peppermint drops, thinking that no one would offer him anything to eat. After dinner the guessing began, but no one could identify the young lady's mark. A half-hour pause was declared to give everyone time to think. They continued with the guessing, but no one was right. And after a third round of guessing, still no one succeeded. Finally the boy shouted out, "I know what the young lady's mark is!" "Out with it! What is it?" said everyone. "She has three golden hairs above her navel." Then they asked the young lady if this was true. She had to admit that it was so, but she did not want to marry the boy instead of one of the young gentlemen. Then they had to decide how to settle the dispute. One said one thing; another said something else, and finally they decided to -------- Now I am not allowed to say what happened next, but in the end the boy did indeed get the young lady, and he became her gentleman. Source (books.google.com): Wilibald von Schulenburg, "Die drei goldenen Haare," Wendische Volkssagen und Gebräuche aus dem Spreewald (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1880), pp. 66-69 . Source (Internet Archive): Wilibald von Schulenburg, "Die drei goldenen Haare," Wendische Volkssagen und Gebräuche aus dem Spreewald (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1880), pp. 66-69 . Return to the table of contents . Many Things Can Be Achieved through Beautiful Clothes Slavic Once an emperor had an only daughter of extraordinary beauty, and out of arrogance he let it be announced throughout the world: If a young man were found who could guess the special birthmark and the place of it on the girl, he would give her to him as his wife and, moreover, half of his realm. However, whoever failed to do so would be transformed into a lamb or be beheaded. The news of this miracle spread throughout the world, and thousands of suitors from all over the world came to ask for the princess's hand in marriage. But it was all in vain. Countless numbers of them were transformed into lambs, and additional countless numbers were beheaded. This news also reached the ears of a young man who, although poor by birth, was nevertheless clever and knowledgeable. His desire to possess the beautiful girl and half the realm soon became so intense that he decided to call on the girl. He did not intend to court her straight away, but rather to first see her and then question her about certain matters. When he arrived at the imperial court, what wonders he saw! Lambs of all kinds swarmed around him, God knows how many there were. They rose up around him, hopping and jumping in a pitiful way, apparently trying to warn him and to dissuade him from his intentions, lest he too be turned into a lamb. Furthermore, the beheaded heads, which were planted one after the other on poles, all began to shed tears. At this sight he shuddered and wanted to flee quickly, when a monster of a man appeared before him at the gate. He was completely wrapped in a blood-red robe, with wings, and one eye in the middle of his forehead. He shouted at him: "Stop! Where are you going? Turn back? Otherwise you are lost!" So he went back and presented himself to the emperor's daughter, who was already expecting him. She said to him: "Have you too come to take me home as your wife?" "No, Imperial Highness, but because I heard that you intend to get married when the opportunity arises, I have come to ask you whether you need any more wedding clothing." "What kind of clothes do you have for sale?" she asked. He replied: "I have underpants made of marble, a chemise made of dew, a headscarf in which the threads are made of sun rays, but the lining is from the moon and stars. I also have shoes made of the purest gold, which are neither sewn or forged. So tell me, do you want to buy these items or not? All you have to do is to give me the order, and I'll bring them to you. However, I want to make one condition: When you try on these clothes piece by piece, I don't want anyone else to be present, apart from the two of us. If you like the clothes, we can easily reach an agreement. If you don't like them, I will not offer them to anyone else, but instead will set them aside and keep them for my own bride." The emperor's daughter fell into the trap and gave him the order to bring the specified items of clothing. And he actually brought them to her. God knows where he found them and how he came into possession of them, but he did keep his word. They locked themselves in a room. First of all she pulled on the underpants. He watched her closely to see if he would be able to find a birthmark somewhere on her legs. Then, to his good fortune, he saw a little gold star on her right knee. He did not allow any change in his appearance to betray himself, but he did think quietly to himself: "Good luck to me, today and forever!" Then the emperor's maiden put on the chemise and gradually the other items, while he watched careful whether or not there were other birthmarks. The clothes fit her perfectly. She now agreed with him about the price and paid him at once. He pocketed his money and took leave from her. He returned a few days later, having dressed himself in the most beautiful clothes that could be bought, to ask the emperor for his daughter's hand in marriage. When he was received by the emperor, he said: "Oh, you mighty emperor! I have come to marry your daughter. Don't make any excuses, just give her to me." "Good," replied the emperor, "but do you know how you have to ask for my daughter's hand in marriage? Be careful, if you don't guess her birthmark, you're lost, but if you do guess, she's yours and half of my realm as well!" He bowed to the emperor and said: "We're in luck, O Emperor and my father-in-law! If that is the case, then she is mine. She has a little star on the crook of her right knee." The emperor was not a little surprised as to how he knew this, but there was no way out. He had to agree, and the young man was married to the princess. When the emperor started to allocate half of the realm to him, his new son-in-law to him: "I would be happy to give back to you my half of your realm if you are prepared to restore these poor souls to their former condition!" The emperor replied that this was not in his power, but rather was in the hands of his daughter, who, he said, is now your wife. So he turned to his wife with this request, whereupon she told him: "Just prick the vein below the star on my leg, and each lamb will need only to taste the blood with the tip of its tongue in order to give it back its human form. With this they all can become human beings as they were before." He followed this instruction and after they all had returned to their human form, he invited them as wedding guests. Then he went home with his bride amidst singing and jubilation, and there he entertained everyone wonderfully with food and drink. Finally, one after another they began the journey back to their homelands. But he stayed behind with his young wife, and only God knows what fate they will experience later in life. We cannot imagine what it will be. Source (books.google.com): Friedrich Salomon Krauss, "Durch schöne Kleider läßt sich so Manches erreichen," Sagen und Märchen der Südslaven , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich, 1883), no. 101, pp. 458-61 . Source (Internet Archive): Friedrich Salomon Krauss, "Durch schöne Kleider läßt sich so Manches erreichen," Sagen und Märchen der Südslaven , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich, 1883), no. 101, pp. 458-61 . Return to the table of contents . The Emperor's Daughter and the Swineherd Slavic Once upon a time there was an emperor who had a daughter with three birthmarks on her body: on her forehead one shaped like a star, on her bosom one shaped like the sun, and on her knee one shaped like the moon. When she reached the age of marriage she said to her father that she would marry only the man who could guess what her birthmarks were, be he the poorest man in the world, even a beggar. If he could guess her birthmarks, she would marry him. This proclamation was made to the whole world, and many emperors and kings sought her hand, but none could guess what the birthmarks were. One day she was walking with her maidens-in-waiting when they met a poor lad who was tending a sow with three suckling piglets. Seeing the cute piglets, she stepped aside from the other maidens and approached the swineherd, who was standing near the sow, and asked him, "Would you give me one of the sow's piglets?" "Yes, and as payment you will only have to loosen your veil so I can see your face." Suspecting nothing, the emperor's daughter uncovered her face, and the swineherd saw the birthmark on her forehead. He then caught a piglet and handed it to her. She returned home happily, accompanied by the other maidens. When in the evening the swineherd drove the sow with two piglets home, his father accosted him with curse words: "Where is the other piglet? Damn you!" Not wanting to admit what had happened, he said that he had taken a nap and that the piglet had disappeared while he was asleep. Meanwhile the emperor's daughter showed the piglet that she had won to her father and mother, and it was so cute that they both fell in love with it immediately. They told their daughter that it would be good if she could get another one, to which she answered that the swineherd had two more. Thus the next day she again went out with her maidens-in-waiting, found the swineherd, and asked for another piglet. The lad agreed, on the condition that she would let him see her bosom. She immediately undid her bodice, and after he had seen the birthmark on her breast he gave her the second piglet. The delighted princess hurried home with the piglet, and the swineherd returned to his home with the sow and only one piglet. His father scolded him even more severely than before. On the third day the princess went out once again and asked the swineherd for the third piglet. He promised it to her if she would uncover her legs and let him see her knees. This she did, and after seeing the birthmark he gave her the third piglet. Then she returned to her home, and he to his; and his parents scolded him all the more severely. Some time later the lad asked his mother to bake a flatbread, roast a chicken, fill a bottle with wine, and prepare a bunch of basil for him. She did this, then put it all into a knapsack. He threw the knapsack over his shoulders and went on his way, saying to his mother as he left, "Mother, I'm going to the emperor's daughter to guess her birthmarks. Perhaps I'll be lucky, and with God's help will guess them." His mother replied, "Oh, my child, we will never be so lucky!" To which he said, "I have hope, if God is willing." Thus he made his way to the emperor's court, where a Turk had arrived, also wanting to guess the princess's birthmarks. Both were taken before the princess, and the Turk said to the swineherd, "My friend, you speak first. I already know what I am going to say." With this the lad began: "Maiden, do you have a star on your forehead?" These words had barely escaped his lips when the Turk said, "My goodness, we have the same thoughts!" The maiden took off her veil and said to the lad, "You guessed right. Continue. What kind of birthmark do I have on my breast?" The youth answered: "A sun." And the Turk interrupted, "So help me, I was about to say the same thing." The maiden uncovered her breast and said to the youth, "You were right on that one as well. Now tell me, what do I have on my knee?" The youth: "A moon." The Turk: "By my holy faith, what will we do now? I knew that as well." Thus there was confusion as to who should get the maiden. She, of course preferred the Turk, who was a handsome, well-dressed young man, whereas the swineherd was standing there in tattered clothes. Finally it was decided that the two of them should spend the night with the maiden. Whoever she was facing the next morning would be the winner. That evening they all went to bed, and the maiden turned to face the Turk. Then the swineherd got up and went outside. The princess said to the Turk, "Follow him, and whatever he does, you should do as well." Once outside, the swineherd squatted down in the dark, took the flatbread, the roasted chicken, and the wine out of his knapsack, then began to eat and drink. In the darkness, the Turk thought that he saw the swineherd doing that which even the emperor has to get out his saddle to do, so he too squatted down and strained until he had relieved himself. Meanwhile the Turk noticed that the swineherd was eating something, and thinking that he was eating his own dung, the Turk began to eat what he himself had just left on the ground. After eating all he wanted, the swineherd rubbed the basil over his face. Thinking that the swineherd was rubbing filth on his face, the Turk did the same thing with rest of his own dung. With this the two of them returned to the princess: one at her one side, the other at her other side. Once again the maiden turned to face the Turk, but unable to stand the stink of the dung, she immediately turned toward the swineherd, who smelled like basil. When they looked in on her in the morning she was still facing him. The swineherd remained at court as the emperor's son-in-law. He sent for his father and mother, and they all lived there happily until they died. Source (books.google.com): Friedrich S. Krauss, Sagen und Märchern der Südslaven: Zum großen Teil aus ungedruckten Quellen , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich, 1884), no. 131, pp. 302-306 . Source (Internet Archive): Friedrich S. Krauss, Sagen und Märchern der Südslaven: Zum großen Teil aus ungedruckten Quellen , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich, 1884), no. 131, pp. 302-306 . Return to the table of contents . The Shepherd and the King's Daughter Serbia A long time ago there lived a poor woman, who possessed nothing in the world except one son and four lambs. The boy took the lambs out to graze every morning, and brought them home every night. One day it happened that the lambs were grazing in a field not far from the summer palace of the king, and the king's daughter came out to the young shepherd and asked him to give her one of them. The boy refused, saying, "I cannot give you one, for my mother will scold me if I do, as we have nothing in the world except these four lambs." The princess, however, had taken so great a fancy for a lamb that she would not be refused, and at last said, "Only let me have this one and I will give you any price you like to ask." The boy, seeing that the princess would not go away without a lamb, considered a little how he could get rid of her, and then he told her that he would give her one if she would show him one of her shoulders. To his great surprise the princess, without any hesitation, pushed her mantle aside and showed him her bare white arm, and he noticed that on the shoulder there was a mark like a star. He was obliged now to give her one of his lambs, and when he went home in the evening he told his mother that he had fallen asleep at noon, and that when he awoke, one of the lambs had vanished, and he could not find it anywhere. Then his mother scolded him very much, saying, "I see you will bring me to the beggar's staff with your carelessness! Tomorrow you must take these three lambs out to graze very early, and look well about for the lost one. And if you don't find it you had better never let me set eyes on you again." At dawn the next day the boy took the three lambs to graze in the same field, and sat down to consider how he could get back the lamb he had lost. At noon, when no one was about, the king's daughter came out of the palace and said to him, "Young shepherd, give me another lamb, and ask what you please in return." But the boy answered, "No! I dare not give you another; I have suffered enough for the one I gave you yesterday! So please go and bring me my lamb back." This the princess refused to do, and said, "It is quite useless to speak of such a thing. But tell me, did you notice anything particular on my shoulder?" The youth answered, "Yes, I saw a star!" "Ah!" exclaimed the princess; "for that you can never pay me enough, and yet you want your lamb back!" So they almost quarreled, for the king's daughter persisted in begging him to give her another lamb, and the young shepherd insisted that she should bring him the first one back again. At last, seeing there was no end to her begging, the boy said, "Well! I will give you one if you uncover before me your other shoulder." This the princess did instantly, and he noticed that she had the mark of a star on that arm also. In this way he lost a second lamb; and when the evening came he went home very sadly, feeling sure his mother would scold him. And so she did, far more than at the first time, calling him ill names and threatening to beat him. The boy was really sorry that he had given way to the princess's pleas, but he could not help it now. Next day, again, the princess came to him and begged so hard and so long for a third lamb that he became impatient, and, thinking to shame her, said he would give her one if she showed him her neck. To his great surprise, however, the king's daughter at once let her mantle fall, and he saw that she had the mark of a crescent on her throat. So the poor boy lost a third lamb, and hardly dared go home to his mother at night with the one lamb left them. Indeed the poor old woman was so angry at her son's carelessness in losing one lamb after another whilst he slept -- for he did not dare to tell her the truth about the princess -- that she cursed him as "a good-for-nothing who would bring her to beggary." Notwithstanding all his mother's reproaches and threats the boy could not refuse the princess the next day when she came out to ask for the fourth lamb. However, he tried to get her to go away a long time, and not until quite tired out with her begging, did he exclaim, "Well, I will give you the lamb if you will show me your breast!" Then the princess pushed her robe aside, and the boy noticed that she had the mark of a sun on her bosom. In this way the young shepherd lost all the four lambs, and he lived a long time with his mother in great poverty. A long, long time afterwards the king sent out a proclamation that he intended to let his daughter marry, and would give her to that man who could tell him what particular birthmarks she had about her. The young shepherd heard this proclamation, and when he went home in the evening he said to his mother, "Mother, I intend to go to the king's palace tomorrow, so get me my best linen ready." "And what do you want in the king's palace?" asked the poor old woman wondering. "I intend, God helping me, to marry the king's daughter," replied the young man boldly. "Oh! you had better give up that fancy," cried the mother. "It will be better for you to go and work and gain a piaster than to go, like a fly without a head, dreaming about things that are as high as the sky above you." But the young man would not be persuaded, and went the next day to the king's palace. Before going out of the hut, however, he said to his anxious old mother, "Good-bye, mother." He had not walked very far before a gipsy met him, and asked, "Where are you going, my young man?" "I am going to the king's palace," answered the youth, "and I mean, God helping me, to marry the king's daughter." "But, my dear comrade," said the gipsy, keeping near him, "how can you really expect that she will marry you, when you are so poor? Only a shepherd!" "Eh!" returned the young man; "but I know what birthmarks she has, and the king has sent out a proclamation that whoever guesses these shall have her for his wife." "If it is so," rejoined the cunning gipsy, "I myself will also go to the palace with you." The young man was glad to have company on the road, and so he and the gipsy travelled on together until they came to the residence of the king. When they came to the palace they found a large number of people who had come to "try their luck," and guess what birthmarks the princess had. But it was lost time, for every one of them, after going past the king and guessing "by good luck" at the marks of the princess, was obliged to go away, having lost his time and gained nothing. At length the turn came for the young shepherd to pass before the king, and the gipsy kept close to him to hear what he would say. So the youth stepped before the king and said, "The princess has a star on each shoulder, and a crescent on the throat." At this moment the gipsy shouted loudly, "Look there! That is just what I was going to say!" "Be quiet!" said the young shepherd; "or, if you really know what other marks she has, speak out." "No, no!" cried the gipsy, "Go on, go on! When you have done, I will speak what I know!" Then the youth turned again to the king and continued, "The princess has the mark of a sun on her bosom." "That is exactly what I was going to say!" cried the gipsy, coming up quickly; "She has the mark of a sun on her breast." Now the king was exceeding surprised, and confessed to his counsellors that the young shepherd had really guessed the truth. But as neither the king nor the counsellors at all liked the idea of the princess marrying a poor shepherd, they consulted how they could get rid of him without giving the lie to the king's proclamation. At length it was decided that his majesty should say, "As both the shepherd and the gipsy have guessed the princess's birthmarks, I cannot justly decide which of them should marry her. But I will give to each of them seventy piasters, and they must both go and trade with this money for a year. At the end of the year, that one which brings back the most money shall have the princess for his wife." The young shepherd and the gipsy, having received the money, went off in opposite directions to seek their fortunes. After having travelled about some time the shepherd stopped one night to rest in the hut of an old woman, who was even poorer than his own mother. As he sat with the old woman in the hut that evening, the lad thought he might just as well ask her advice as to the best way to invest his capital of seventy piasters, so he said, "I have seventy piasters to trade with, can you tell me some good way in which I may employ them profitably?" The old woman considered the matter for some time before she answered, and then said, "Tomorrow is market day in the next city; go there yourself, and when a man brings a very poor cow for sale, go up and try to buy it. The cow will be of many different colors, but very thin and ill fed; but you must buy her at whatever price the man asks for her. When you have bought her, bring her here at once." The young man agreed to follow the old woman's counsel, and so next day he went to the city and really found there a man who had brought a poor, but variously colored, cow to sell. Many people wished to buy the cow, but the young man outbid them all, and at length offered all his seventy piasters for her. So he got the cow, and drove it to the hut where he had passed the night. When the old woman came out to see who was coming, he called out to her, "Now, my old mother, I have bought the cow, and what shall we do with her? She has cost me all my capital!" The old woman answered at once, "Kill the cow, my son, and cut it in pieces." "But how will that bring me back my money with profit?" asked the young shepherd, hesitating whether he should follow her advice or no. "Don't be afraid, my son, but do as I say," returned the old woman. Accordingly he did as she advised him, killed the cow and cut her into pieces. This done, he asked again, "And now, what shall I do?" The old woman said quietly, "Well, now we will eat the meat, and the suet we will melt down and put into a pot to keep for some other occasion." The shepherd did not at all like this proposal, for he could not see what return he could hope to get for such an investment of his capital. However, he thought within himself, "Well, since I have been foolish enough to follow her counsel on the two former occasions, I may as well follow it also this third time." So he remained with the old woman many days, until the last piece of meat had been eaten up. When, however, he thought over all that had happened, he grew very sad, and, seeing no sign of anything better, said one morning to the old woman reproachfully, "Now you see by following your counsel I have spent all the king's money, and am now a ruined man!" "Don't be afraid, my son," said the old woman. "You can now take that pot of suet with you and go to a certain country where all the people are suffering from a strange disease, and there you can sell for a good deal of money your suet, for it has the power to cure them." The poor shepherd was very glad at hearing this, and next morning took the pot of suet on his shoulder and started on his journey. After he had travelled many, many days, he came to a strange-looking country, and, going a little farther, he discovered that the old woman had told the truth. All the citizens, from the poorest beggar to the king himself were suffering from a disease that no doctor had been able to cure. However, the shepherd's suet performed miracles, and in short order the sufferers were again all healthy and vigorous. The grateful king responded to the shepherd's miracle with the promise, "Only ask! I will give you whatever you wish, even if it be my throne!" "I thank your Majesty very humbly for offering me your throne, but I don't want it," replied the shepherd; "but if you will give me three ships full of gold and silver, and some good sailors to manage the ships, and some good soldiers and cannons to defend them against the pirates, I shall think myself more than repaid, and I will send you back the ships and cannons when the gold and silver are landed safely in my country." Then the king at once gave the necessary orders, and in a very few days his servants came to report to him that the ships were then filled with gold and silver, and that the cannons were ready loaded and posted for action, and all the sailors and soldiers prepared to fight if any sea-robber came in their way. Then the young shepherd took a courteous leave of the king, and of all those other people who were so thankful to him for having cured them of their illness. He now went on board one of the ships, very glad to go back to his own country, and the two other ships full of gold and silver followed the first one across the seas. After having sailed a long time the three ships reached at last the coast of the kingdom where the king was waiting, daily expecting the return of the gipsy and shepherd to claim his daughter. The shepherd let his ships lie quietly in the harbor one day, and then, noticing much tumult and disturbance in the city, went ashore to see what had happened. There he found a great crowd, and on asking some of the people what they were going to do, they told him that they were going to hang a gipsy who had come to the city with seventy piasters capital, and who had not only spent all his money in drinking and reveling, but had even got into debt for seventy other piasters which he was quite unable to pay, and that this was the reason they were about to hang him. In a few moments the hangman appeared, leading the gipsy, who was no other than the very man who had tried to cheat the shepherd out of the princess. The young shepherd recognized his rival at once, and, going near him, said, "What is this, my old friend? Have you really come to this?" The instant the gipsy saw the shepherd he stopped and began to whine and wail, begging him to save him from the gibbet, and he would be his faithful servant all his life. "As for the princess," he added cunningly, "I have given her up a long time ago, and don't care for anything if only my life is spared." Then the young shepherd was sorry for the poor trembling, whining wretch, and offered to pay the debt for the gipsy if the people would let him off. So they agreed to this, and the young man not only paid the seventy piasters the gipsy owed, but bought him besides a suit of good clothes as well as a carriage and a pair of fine horses. Then he left him and went back to his ships, and they sailed on slowly along the coast towards the king's residence. Now when the gipsy had dressed himself out smartly in his fine new clothes, he got into his carriage and drove off quickly to the king's palace. Arrived there, he left his carriage and horses in the courtyard, and went at once to the presence of the king, whom he addressed thus: "Your majesty knows it is not yet quite a year since you gave me seventy piasters to trade with, and see! I come back already handsomely dressed, and have a fine carriage with a pair of beautiful horses below in the yard. As for the young shepherd, I have heard that he has not only spent all your majesty's money in rioting, but that he had also got in debt, for which he has been hung. So it is no use waiting for him! Let us keep my wedding at once!" The king did not fancy the gipsy for his son-in-law, and was thinking what he could say to put him off a little time, when, looking by chance through his window, he saw three strange-looking ships sailing slowly towards the shore. At this he exclaimed, "I see some foreign visitors are coming to visit me, and I shall have enough to do to receive them with due honors, so we must put off the marriage for some days, at least!" But the gipsy pressed the king more and more to let him marry the princess at once; he was even bold enough to tell his Majesty that he could not wait any longer, and that the wedding would be all over in an hour. The king, however, refused to hear anything of this; so the gipsy, seeing that his plan had failed, went out from the presence of the king in great anger. A few hours later the three strange-looking ships dropped their anchors just opposite the palace, and the young shepherd, landing, came into the presence of the king, who was greatly astonished to see him alive, and still more astonished to hear that in return for his seventy piasters he had brought three vessels full of gold and silver. The king was now very well content to accept him as his son-in-law, and told him, in the course of conversation, what the gipsy had said about his having gone in debt and been hung. Then the young shepherd told his Majesty how he had found the gipsy, and had saved his life by paying his debt for him. The king was exceedingly angry, and ordered his servants to go after the gipsy and bring him at once into his presence. The servants looked about and around the palace on all sides, but nowhere could they find any trace of the gipsy. Then the king commanded that some of them should go in search of him without delay, and armed men were speedily scattered over the whole country, so that at last he was caught, and brought before the king, who condemned him to be hung for having so shamefully tried to injure the man who had saved his life and treated him so generously, and for having, at the same time, attempted to cheat the king. The young shepherd spent a few days in the palace, telling the king all the things he had seen abroad, and then, all preparations having been made, he was married to the princess, with great pomp and rejoicings. Then the king with his daughter and son-in-law lived for a great many years very happily. Source (books.google.com): Serbian Folk-Lore , translated from the Serbian by Elodie L. Mijatovich, 2nd edition (Columbus Printing, Publishing, and Advertising Company, 1899), pp. 165-79 . Source (Internet Archive): Serbian Folk-Lore , translated from the Serbian by Elodie L. Mijatovich, 2nd edition (Columbus Printing, Publishing, and Advertising Company, 1899), pp. 165-79 . Editor's note: I have substantially shortened the episode describing the hero's miraculous healing of an entire kingdom. Return to the table of contents . The Enchanted Lambs Russia An emperor once had an only daughter of surpassing beauty. In his pride he caused it to be sounded abroad through all the world that the youth who should guess the position of a certain mole on the maiden's person should have her for his wife, and the half of his empire besides. But those who did not guess right should be transformed into lambs. This wonderful news spread over the whole world, so that wooers by thousands came from all lands to sue for the princess's hand. But all in vain. A countless number of them were changed into lambs. The news came also to the ears of a youth who was as poor as a church mouse, but who was as sharp as a needle for all that. His desire to possess the beautiful maiden and half the empire grew so strong that he decided to try his fortune; not, however, by suing at once for the maiden's hand, but by seeing her first and asking her something. Arrived at the emperor's court, what wonders does he see! Lambs of all kinds pressed around him. God only knows how many there were. They swarmed about him, a pitiful sight and a warning example that might well turn him from his project. He would have gone back, but at the gate was a monster of a man, wrapped in a blood-red mantle, with wings, and an eye in the middle of his forehead, who cried out in a commanding voice, "Halt! Where are you going? Go back, or you are lost!" So he went back and caused himself to be announced to the emperor's daughter, who was already waiting for him. She said to him, "Did you come to get me for your wife?" He answered, "No, Imperial Highness; but as I understood that you were thinking of marrying at the first favorable opportunity, I come to ask you if you need more bridal clothes." "What kind of clothes have you to offer?" she asked. He answered, "I have a skirt of marble, a bodice of dew, a head-dress of threads made from the sun's rays, with a clasp of the moon and stars; then I have shoes of pure gold which were neither sewed nor made by a smith. So, tell me, do you wish to buy these things or not? You have but to command, and I will bring them to you, but only on one condition. When you try these things on, piece by piece, there shall be no one present but only us two. If they fit we shall soon come to terms; if not, I will never offer them to another soul, but will lay them aside and keep them for my own bride." The princess agreed to this condition and gave him the order to bring the garments. And, really, he brought them to her. God only knows where he found them and how he came to possess them; it is enough for us to know that he kept his word. They shut themselves up in a room, and first she tried on the skirt, while he watched narrowly to see if by chance he could discover the mole. To his joy he saw it under her right knee -- a little golden star; but not the slightest change in his face betrayed his discovery. He only thought in his heart, "It is well for me today and for all time!" Then the princess tried on the bodice and all the other things, and they fitted her as if she had been poured into them. They agreed as to the price; she paid it on the spot; he packed up his gold and departed. After a few days, having dressed himself in the finest suit that could be bought for money, he came back to sue for the hand of the emperor's daughter. When he appeared before the emperor he said, "Worthy emperor, I come to woo your daughter. Make no objections; give her to me!" "Good!" answered the emperor; "but do you know how my daughter's hand is won? Take good care, for if you do not guess the mole you are lost; but if you do guess it she will be yours, and the half of my empire into the bargain." The youth bowed to the emperor and said, "My greetings, O emperor and father-in-law! If that is the case she is mine. She has a little star under the right knee." The emperor was not a little surprised that he could know this, but there was nothing for it but to yield, and so the youth was married to the princess. When the emperor proceeded to give him the half of his empire the new-made son-in-law said to him, "I willingly leave this half of your empire to you if you are ready to restore these poor souls to their former condition." The emperor answered that this was no longer in his power, but lay in the hands of his daughter, "who now," he added, is your wife." So he turned to his wife with this request, and she answered: "Cut the vein under the famous mole. Let every lamb touch the end of its tongue to the blood and moisten its underlip with it, and they will all be changed to men and live as before." He did as she directed, and when the lambs had all assumed the forms of men again they were invited as wedding guests. Thus the youth took the maiden home amid song and chime of bells, and there he treated everybody royally to meat and drink, until finally they took their homeward way. But he stayed there with his young wife, and God knows what fortunes they met with in life that are all forgotten now. "I am sorry you have forgotten anything, grandmother," said the little boy. "It is not dark yet, and I wanted a longer story." "It is not I who forgot," answered the grandmother. "I remember every word as it was told to me." "It must have been your great-grandmother," observed the little boy. " I wish she had had a better memory." Source (books.google.com): Louise Seymour Houghton The Russian Grandmother's Wonder Tales (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1913), pp. 253-59 . Source (Internet Archive): Louise Seymour Houghton The Russian Grandmother's Wonder Tales (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1906), pp. 253-59 . Return to the table of contents . The Youngest Prince and the Youngest Princess Hungary There was once, I don't know where, an old petticoat a hundred years old, and in this petticoat a tuck, in which I found the following story. There was once a king who had seven sons and seven daughters. He was in great trouble where to find princesses of royal blood as wives for his sons and princes as husbands for his daughters. At last the idea struck him that the seven sons should marry the seven daughters. They all consented to their father's wish with the exception of the youngest son and daughter. "Well, if you won't," said the father, "I will give you your inheritance and you can go and try your fortune, and get married as best you can." The two children went, and came to a strange land, where they were overtaken by darkness in a wood. They chose a bushy tree for their resting place, whose leafy boughs bent down to the ground and afforded shelter. When they woke next morning, the girl told her brother that she had dreamt that there was a town not far off, where a king lived who had been ill for a long time, and thousands upon thousands of doctors had failed to cure him. He again dreamt that an old man with snow-white hair told him that the tree under which they slept gave water. In this water the king was to be bathed, and he would be cured. They at once examined the tree, and from a crack in the bark sap as clear as crystal was dripping; they filled their flasks with the fluid and continued their journey. When they reached the outskirts of the forest, they saw a town in front of them. Having arrived there they went into an inn to find out whether their dream was true, and asked the host what the news was in the town; he, in his conversation, mentioned the illness of the king, and the many unsuccessful attempts of men to cure him, and that he had strict orders, under a heavy penalty, to report at once every doctor that came to his inn. "I also am a doctor," said the prince, "and this youth is my assistant," he continued, pointing to his sister, who was dressed in male attire. The innkeeper at once reported them, and they went to court to try their remedy on the king. The king's body was covered with sores, and the doctor bathed his hand with the juice of the tree. To his great joy, the king discovered next morning that the place which had been bathed was visibly improving; he therefore, the very same night, sent a huge wooden vessel on a cart to the tree, to bring him sufficient water for a bath. After a few baths the king actually recovered; and the doctor, having received a handsome present, requested a favor of the king, viz., to pay him a visit and to do him the honor of dining with him. The king cordially granted the request, and the prince received him with great splendor in his spacious apartments, which were decorated with a lavishness becoming a sovereign. As the king found the doctor alone, he inquired after his assistant, and at this moment a charming pretty girl stepped from one of the side rooms, whom the king at once recognized as the doctor's assistant. The strangers now related to him their story, and the king became more affable, especially towards the pretty assistant, who at once gained possession of his heart and soul, and the short acquaintance ended with a wedding. The prince, not forgetting the object of his journey, started soon after the wedding festivities were over. He passed on till he came to the boundary of the king's realm, and then went on as far as the capital of the next country. He was riding about the streets on a fine horse, when he heard a voice coming from a window close by, "Hum, you, too, won't get on without me," and looking in the direction from which the voice came, he discovered an old man looking out of the window. He didn't take any notice of the voice, but went on; and, having arrived at an inn, made sundry inquiries, when he was told that adventurous young men in this town might either meet with great fortune or with a great misfortune; because the king had a daughter whom no one had as yet seen, with the exception of her old nurse. The girl had three marks on her, and whoever found out what they were, and where they were, would become her husband; but whosoever undertook the task and failed, would be impaled, and that already ninety-nine young fellows had died in this manner. Upon hearing this, it became clear to the prince what the meaning of the old man's saying was; he thought, that no doubt the old man took him for another adventurer, and the thought struck him that the old man must be acquainted with the secret, and that it would be advantageous to make his acquaintance. He found a plea at once; the old man was a goldsmith, and, as the prince had lost the rowel of his golden spur on the road, he called on him, and, having come to terms about the spur, the prince inquired of him about the princess, and the old man's tale tallied with that of the innkeeper. After a short reflection, the prince told the old man who he was, and, with a look full of meaning, inquired if the goldsmith could help him in case he tried his luck. "For a good sum with pleasure," replied the goldsmith. "You shall have it," said the prince; "but tell me how, and I will give you this purse on account." The old man, seeing that there was good opportunity for gain, said, "I will construct a silver horse in which you can conceal yourself, and I will expose it for sale in the market. I am almost sure that no one will buy it but someone attached to the royal court, and if once you get in there, you can get out of the horse by a secret opening and go back whenever you like and, I think, you will succeed." And so it happened; on the following market day a splendid silver horse was exhibited in the vicinity of the royal palace. There were a good many admirers, but on account of the great price there was no buyer, till at last a person belonging to the royal court enquired the price; after a few moments he returned and bought the horse for the king, who presented it to his daughter, and thus the prince managed to get into the chamber of the princess, which was the most difficult of all things, and he listened amidst fear and joy to the silvery voice of the pretty girl, who amused herself with the horse -- which ran on wheels -- and called it her dear pet. Evening drew on, and the mysterious girl went to rest; everything became quiet, and only her old nurse was sitting up not far from her bed; but about midnight she, too, fell asleep. Hearing that she was fast asleep, the prince got out of the horse and approached the girl's bed, holding his breath, and found the mark of the sun shining on the girl's forehead, the moon on the right breast, and three stars on the left. Having found out the three secret marks, the prince was about to retire to his hiding place when the princess woke. She tried to scream, but at an imploring gesture of the youth she kept silence. The girl could not take her eyes off the handsome prince, who related to her how and for what reason he had dared to come. The girl, being tired of her long seclusion, consented to his scheme, and they secretly plotted how the prince should get out of the palace; whereupon he went back to his hiding place. In accord with the plot, next morning the girl broke one of the horse's ears off, and it was sent back to the goldsmith's to be repaired, and the prince was thus able to leave his dangerous position. Having again splendidly remunerated the goldsmith, he returned to his new brother-in-law, so that he might come back with a splendid suite and royal pomp, and appear as a king to try his fortune. The prince returned with many magnificently clad knights and splendid horses, and reported himself to the king, and informed him by message that he was anxious to try his luck for the possession of his daughter. The king was very much pleased with the appearance of the youth, and therefore kindly admonished him not to risk his life, but the prince seemed quite confident, and insisted on carrying out his wishes; so a day was fixed for carrying out the task. The people streamed out to the place where the trial was to take place, like as to a huge festival. And all pitied the handsome youth, and had sad misgivings as to his fate. The king granted three days to those who tried their fortune, and three guesses. On the first and second day, in order not to betray the plot, and in order to increase the éclat the prince guessed wrongly on purpose; but on the third day, when everyone was convinced that he must die, he disclosed in a loud voice the secret marks of the princess. The king declared them to be right, and the prince was led to his future wife, amidst the cheers of the multitude and the joyous strains of the band. The king ordered immense wedding festivities all over the town, and resigned his throne in favor of his son-in-law, who reigned happy for many years after! Source (books.google.com): Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, The Folk-Tales of the Magyars: Collected by Kriza, Erdélyi, Pap, and Others (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 27, pp. 137-41 . Source (Internet Archive): Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, The Folk-Tales of the Magyars: Collected by Kriza, Erdélyi, Pap, and Others (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 27, pp. 137-41 . Return to the table of contents . The Rivals Bukovina Once there was an emperor's daughter who had a moon-shaped mark on her forehead, a moon-shaped mark on her breast, and one on her back shaped like the stars. The emperor proclaimed throughout the kingdom that whatever man could describe these marks could take her in marriage. Now another emperor's son was her lover, and he knew the marks. At the same time there was a swineherd who tended a sow with twelve golden piglets in the forest. The princess saw the piglets and asked the lad to sell one of them to her. "They are not for sale," he replied, "but if you will lift your skirts to your knees, I will give one of them to you." She looked around, making sure that no one else could see, then lifted her skirts to her knees. The lad gave her a piglet. The emperor was delighted with the little animal, for never before had he seen a golden piglet. The next morning the princess went into the woods again, wanting to buy another piglet. "They are not for sale," said the swineherd, but if you will lift your skirts to your waist, I will give one of them to you." She did what he wanted, and took the second piglet back to the castle. The emperor was even happier with the new piglet than before. The third morning the princess returned to the woods, but the swineherd would not sell her a another piglet. "But," he said, "if you will take off your shift and turn around in front of me three times, I will give you another piglet." The princess did what he wanted, and the swineherd was able to see the sun on her forehead, the moon on her breast, and the stars on her back. The princess returned to the castle with her prize, and the emperor rejoiced with the new golden piglet. He now set the time for the great contest to guess his daughter's birthmarks. One of the suitors was another emperor's son. This prince was her lover, and he knew the marks. In the end, both the swineherd and the prince identified the marks. To settle the matter, the ministers declared that for one night the two rivals and the princess should all three sleep together in one bed. Whoever the princess was embracing the following morning would win her hand in marriage. The swineherd hid a snack in his nightshirt: bread, fruit, and sweets. In the night he began to eat the sweets, and the princess said, "I'm hungry, what are you eating?" "I'm eating my lips." "Give me some." So he gave here some of his sweets, which she ate, saying, "Oh, they are sweet!" The prince heard this and replied, "Mine are still sweeter," upon which he took out a knife, cut off his own lips, and handed them to the princess. She threw them onto the floor. Next the swineherd gave the princess some fruit, claiming that it was his nose. "Oh, how sweet!" said the princess. "Mine is still sweeter," replied the emperor's son, then cut off his own nose and handed it to the princess. Immediately she threw it onto the floor. Finally the swineherd gave the princess some bread, saying that it was his ears. As before the prince cut off his own ears and handed them to the princess, who threw them onto the floor. The prince bled to death, and the princess pushed him out of the bed onto the floor, then took the swineherd into her arms. The next morning the swineherd and the princess were found embracing one another. They dressed the swineherd in clothes befitting an emperor, then he and the princess were joined together in marriage. Source (Internet Archive): Franz Miklosich, "Die Nebenbuhler," Märchen und Lieder der Zigeuner der Bukowina , no. 7, pp. 29-30 . This is part 4 of Über die Mundarten und die Wanderungen der Zigeuner Europa's (Vienna: Karl Gerold's Sohn, 1874). The text is in Bukovina Romani dialect with an interlinear Latin translation. Bukovina is a historical region located in present-day Romania and Ukraine. Summarized by D. L. Ashliman, © 2016. Return to the table of contents . Dshahan and the Three Pigs Malta In Dshahan's time pigs were very expensive animals. His mother owned three pigs, each one fatter than the others and all beautifully washed. One day, while his mother was away, Dshahan took a pig and drove it to the market, where he praised it loudly. Finally the princess's servants came and said: "Come with us, we'll buy the pig." Dshahan went with them and climbed the stairs, but when the princess wanted to pay him, he said: "I don't want any money, I just want to see you from your knees down!" The princess wanted to drive him away, but her maid persuaded her to allow Dshahan to see her foot and her leg up to the knee. Back at home his mother scolded him terribly, but he replied: "Mother, we still have two pigs and everything will be fine with the third one." However, his mother was very angry about her son's stupidity, and she did not want to hear anything more from him. On the next market day Dshahan went forth again the same story. The princess's servants heard him. They went and determined that the pig he had brought to market today was far more beautiful than the other one. They reported this to the princess, and she summoned Dshahan and severely scolded him for his deception. He replied: "Yes, this pig has only just now become so beautiful! It used to be uglier than the other one." Then the princess calmed down and asked the price. He replied: "I don't ask for any money. This pig is the most beautiful one on earth. I only want to see you from your knees up to your navel." The princess pushed him away angrily, but her maid approached her and said: "I don't see any problem. I'll show you what to do. Look!" Then the maid showed herself to Dshahan. So the princess allowed herself to do what Dshahan had requested. Now the princess had a birthmark overgrown with hair, and no one knew anything about it. Dshahan made note of it. The princess laughed at him, the deceived fool, for not wanting anything more from her. And then she sent him away. Back at home his mother screamed and carried on as if she were possessed. Nonetheless, he recounted his adventure with joy and replied to his mother, who was screaming and demanding money: "I don't have any money. But I know what will bring us good fortune!" In short, he did the same thing with the third pig. He praised it loudly, and the maid persuaded the princess to buy it. But the princess said: "He only wants to mock us. He said that the other two were so wonderfully beautiful that no third could surpass them in beauty." In the end the maid brought Dshahan and the pig up to the princess, and she was so delighted with the animal that she didn't want to part with it. She asked Dshahan to tell her the price. But he demanded: "I only want to see you from the navel up." Then the princess became angry and shouted: "You vulgar, cheeky person! How can you ask such a thing from me?" But he insisted saying: "I'll not take anything from you. Instead, my eyes will give you something. But as you wish." The maid came up and showed the princess how simple the matter was. So the princess undressed and showed herself to Dshahan, who looked closely at her. Then he went home. His mother wanted to kill him in her anger. But he laughed and consoled her for the future. After a while the king wanted to marry off his daughter, so he issued a proclamation that said: "Whoever knows where my daughter has a birthmark and can describe it exactly, he shall have her as his wife!" Many came, and Dshahan bought a new robe and came as well. When the princess saw him coming across the square, she sent her maid to meet him and give him a purse full of gold pieces so that he would not go to the king. She was angry and frightened at the same time. He took the money, gave it to his mother, and paid for the first pig. This happened twice more, and he thus paid his mother generously for the lost pigs. But the last time, after the proclamation had been made, Dshahan went to court in the clothes of a knight and presented himself before the king. An officer came up to him and said: "What's new, Dshahan? What brings you here? Do you know the princess's secret?" Jahan was annoyed and said that he really wanted to see the king. Then the cunning officer went behind and listened to everything, and then he repeated everything that Dshahan had said. Dshahan quietly said: "The king's daughter has a gourd-shaped birthmark between her hip bone and her knee. The officer repeated this, but the king told him to be quiet. Then Dshahan said quietly to the king: "No, it is a bell-shaped mark below her navel." The officer repeated this loudly, whereupon the king forbade him to say anything else. Finally Dshahan said: "Your Majesty, there is a birthmark on her thigh covered in dark hair." So the king had to give the princess to him, since Jahan had used just ten words to describe the birthmark, as the proclamation had prescribed. Source (books.google.com): Albert Wesselski, Italiänischer Volks- und Herrenwitze: Fazetien und Schwänke aus drei Jahrhunderten (Munich: Georg Müller Verlag, 1912), pp. 288-93 . Wesselski's source: An unpublished Maltese folktale from Bertha Ilg. Return to the table of contents . The Pearl Queen Germany, Ludwig Bechstein At certain times every year an unearthly beautiful maiden was seen on the seashore not far from a peaceful village inhabited mostly by fishing people. She came in a beautiful little ship which appeared to have been constructed from pure brightly colored pearls. No one knew where she came from or where she went when she disappeared. The good fishing people were very fond of her, especially the children, because at every visit she would scatter a quantity of pearls onto the bank, and then motion to them that they should gather them up. The little ones busied themselves gathering up the pearls, delighted at their glistening colors. Then the fishing people -- men and women -- brought the pearl queen a something to eat: fish, bread, and good wine. The lovely maiden was friendly toward them all, ate a few bites and drank a little wine. When the beautiful stranger was expected to come ashore, princes and noblemen from foreign lands would often arrive, hoping to see the beautiful maiden, and perhaps to gain her hand in marriage, for it was said far and wide that she possessed earthly wealth equal to her physical beauty. However, they all left disappointed. The noble maiden demanded from each suitor that he fulfill three tasks that she gave him. Until now these tasks had been too difficult. No one had been able to fulfill them, so all the noble suitors had had to depart saddened and ashamed. The maiden's first task was to guess what color her hair was, for she always kept her head fully covered with a thick shawl. No one had guessed correctly, although they had named all the colors: black, red, blond, brown, white, green, gray, and blue. The second task was to put the maiden's necklace around one's own neck. If the glistening peals then turned cloudy it was an evil sign, causing the maiden to weep. Her tears turned to bright pearls and affixed themselves to the necklace. When she put the necklace back around her own neck the pearls again glistened brilliantly and marvelously. The third task was to guess what the maiden wore next to her breast. No one was able to guess. Thus no one gained the maiden's favor, nor her hand in marriage, even if he were the wealthiest prince. She remained a mystery. All attempts failed to discover more about her and her homeland. When her little ship of pearls left shore it quickly disappeared from sight. However, at certain times she appeared again, was as friendly and lovely as before, and scattered pearls on the bank. A little boy was there whom she favored more than all the other children. She would take him into her arms and squeeze him warmly. The boy loved the beautiful, gracious lady as well. However, when he grew older he became shy and bashful, no longer daring to gather the pearls. In any event, he was mostly at sea fishing with his father. The maiden had gone ashore several times without seeing her dear fisher-boy. This saddened her, for in her heart she had chosen this handsome youth, hoping that one day he would be able to solve the three tasks, and then follow her to the beautiful Isle of Pearls, her homeland. When she again came ashore without seeing her beloved fisher-lad, after casting off from land she resolved to return that same evening and to invisibly approach him. After the golden moon had risen, mirroring itself in the water, the little ship of pearls landed again on the familiar shore. Her beloved was now sound asleep in his little hut. The lovely maiden stepped into his little room and bent silently over the sleeping lad, who had only moss for a mattress. She took off her necklace and hung it around the lad's neck. When the pearls remained as bright and clear as before, great joy streamed through her loving heart! She gently kissed her beloved and left. She returned every evening, each time hanging the pearls around the lad's neck, and they always remained bright and glistening. The lad was also in love with the beautiful pearl queen, but was too shy and modest to openly approach her. One night while she was at the youth's bedside he awoke, but remained still, so she thought that he was asleep. Again she took the string of pearls from her neck, hung it around his neck, then wept warm tears onto his cheeks. Taking the shawl from her head, she used it to wipe away the tears. The youth saw that her hair was golden . Then she pulled aside her breast-cloth, and he saw a glistening mirror on her breast that softly and beautifully reflected his own image. Upon leaving she became sad, for she knew that if the string of pearls became cloudy even a single time on her beloved's neck, that she would never again be able to approach him. The time came when the beautiful pearl queen again came ashore near the fishing village. In her customary manner she scattered pearls for the happy children. This time many princes and noblemen had arrived in order to court the wealthy and beautiful princess. The fisher-lad was there as well, standing at the rear. He gathered courage and approached the suitors. His turn came at last, after all the others had failed and shamefully stepped aside. He modestly advanced and asked for the three tasks. Glowing with pleasure the maiden gave them to him, then cast a secret and pleading glance toward heaven, praying that her beloved youth would be able to solve them. The handsome fisher-lad bowed respectfully before the lovely maiden and said: "Oh, your hair must be golden." In that instant the shawl fell from her head, and her golden locks flowed down. Then the happy maiden hung the string of pearls around the youth's neck, and they remained pure and glistening. The fisher-lad spoke again: "And your breast must be a clear, beautiful mirror, noble maiden!" And that instant her breast-cloth fell to the ground, revealing the clear mirror on the maiden's breast. The mirror reflected a beautiful, gentle image: that of the youth. A jubilant cheer and joyful music sounded forth from the ship of pearls, and a circle of beautiful women and radiant men came forth from the ship. They led the blessed couple back aboard, and the ship glided away to the magical Isle of Pearls, now the homeland of the lovely bride and the fisher lad. And they never, never returned. Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Bechstein, "Die Perlenkönigin Deutsches Märchenbuch (Leipzig: Georg Wigand's Verlag, 1846), pp. 202-205 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludwig Bechstein, "Die Perlenkönigin Deutsches Märchenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1847), pp. 194-97 . Bechstein's source, as stated in the above editions: "Oral, from Franken." Walter Scherf gives Wilhelmine Mylius as Bechstein's immediate source. -- Ludwig Bechstein, Sämtliche Märchen (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1983), p. 837. Return to the table of contents . The Swineherd Hans Christian Andersen There was once a poor prince; he had only a tiny kingdom, but it was big enough to allow him to marry, and he was bent upon marrying. Now, it certainly was rather bold of him to say to the emperor's daughter, "Will you have me?" He did, however, venture to say so, for his name was known far and wide; and there were hundreds of princesses who would have said "Yes," and "Thank you, kindly," but see if she would! Just let us hear about it. A rose tree grew on the grave of the prince's father, it was such a beautiful rose tree. It only bloomed every fifth year, and then only bore one blossom; but what a rose that was! By merely smelling it one forgot all one's cares and sorrows. He also had a nightingale which sang as if every lovely melody in the world dwelt in its little throat. This rose and this nightingale were to be given to the princess, so they were put into great silver caskets and sent to her. The emperor had them carried before him into the great hall where the princess was playing house with her ladies-in-waiting. They had nothing else to do. When she saw the caskets with the gifts she clapped her hands with delight! "If only it were a little kitten!" said she, -- but there was the lovely rose. "Oh, how exquisitely it is made!" said all the ladies-in-waiting. "It is more than beautiful," said the emperor. "It is nice." But the princess touched it, and then she was ready to cry. "Fie, papa!" she said. "It is not artificial. It is a real one!" "Fie!" said all the ladies-in-waiting. "It is a real one!" "Well, let us see what there is in the other casket, before we get angry," said the emperor, and out came the nightingale. It sang so beautifully that at first no one could find anything to say against it. " Superbe! Charmant! " said the ladies-in-waiting, for they all spoke French, each one worse than the others. "How that bird reminds me of our late empress's musical box," said an old courtier. " Ah, yes, they are the same tunes, and the same beautiful performance." "So they are," said the emperor, and he cried like a little child. "I should hardly think it could be a real one," said the princess. "Yes, it is a real one," said those who had brought it. "Oh, let that bird fly away then," said the princess, and she would not hear of allowing the prince to come. But the prince was not to be crushed. He stained his face brown and black, and, pressing his cap over his eyes, he knocked at the door. "Good morning, emperor," said he; "can I be taken into service in the palace?" "Well, there are so many wishing to do that," said the emperor; "but let me see! -- Yes, I need somebody to look after the pigs, for we have so many of them." So the prince was made imperial swineherd. A horrid little room was given him near the pig-sties, and here he had to live. He sat busily at work all day, and by the evening he had made a beautiful little cooking pot. It had bells all round it and when the pot boiled they tinkled delightfully and played the old tune: Ach du lieber Augustin, Alles ist weg, weg, weg! But the greatest charm of all about it was, that by holding one's finger in the steam one could immediately smell all the dinners that were being cooked at every stove in the town. Now this was a very different matter from a rose. The princess came walking along with all her ladies-in-waiting, and when she heard the tune she stopped and looked pleased, for she herself could play its melody on the piano, but only with one finger. "Why, that is my song," she said. "This must be a cultivated swineherd. Go and ask him what the instrument costs." So one of the ladies-in-waiting had to go into his room, but she put clogs on first. "How much do you want for the pot," she asked. "I must have ten kisses from the princess," said the swineherd. "Heaven preserve us!" said the lady. "I won't take less," said the swineherd. "Well, what does he say?" asked the princess. "I really cannot tell you," said the lady-in-waiting. "It is so shocking." "Then you must whisper it." And she whispered it. "He is a wretch!" said the princess, and went away at once. But she had only gone a little way when she heard the bells tinkling beautifully: Ach du lieber Augustin. "Go and ask him if he will take ten kisses from the ladies-in-waiting." "No, thank you," said the swineherd. "Ten kisses from the princess, or I keep my pot." "How tiresome it is," said the princess. "Then you will have to stand round me, so that no one may see." So the ladies-in-waiting stood round her and spread out their skirts while the swineherd took his ten kisses, and then the pot was hers. What a delight it was to them. The pot was kept on the boil day and night. They knew what was cooking on every stove in the town, from the chamberlain's to the shoemaker's. The ladies-in-waiting danced about and clapped their hands. "We know who has sweet soup and pancakes for dinner, and who has cutlets. How amusing it is." "Highly interesting," said the mistress of the robes. "Yes, but hold your tongues, for I am the emperor's daughter." "Heaven preserve us!" they all said. The swineherd -- that is to say, the prince, only nobody knew that he was not a real swineherd -- did not let the day pass in idleness, and he now constructed a rattle. When it was swung round it played all the waltzes, gallops and jig tunes which have ever been heard since the creation of the world. "But this is superbe !" said the princess, as she walked by. "I have never heard finer compositions. Go and ask him what the instrument costs, but let us have no more kissing." "He wants a hundred kisses from the princess!" said the lady-in-waiting. "I think he is mad!" said the princess, and she went away, but she had not gone far when she stopped. "One must encourage art," she said; "I am the emperor's daughter. Tell him he can have ten kisses, the same as yesterday, and he can take the others from the ladies-in-waiting." "But we don't like that at all," said the ladies. "Oh, nonsense! If I can kiss him you can do the same. Remember that I pay your wages as well as give you board and lodging." So the lady-in-waiting had to go again. "A hundred kisses from the princess, or let each keep his own." "Stand in front of me," said she, and all the ladies stood round, while he kissed her. "Whatever is the meaning of that crowd round the pig-sties?" said the emperor as he stepped out onto the balcony; he rubbed his eyes and put on his spectacles. "Why it is the ladies-in-waiting, what game are they up to? I must go and see!" So he pulled up the heels of his slippers for they were shoes which he had trodden down. Bless us, what a hurry he was in! When he got into the yard, he walked very softly and the ladies were so busy counting the kisses, so that there should be fair play, and neither too few nor too many kisses, that they never heard the emperor. He stood on tiptoe. "What is all this?" he said when he saw what was going on, and he hit them on the head with his slipper just as the swineherd was taking the eighty-sixth kiss. "Out you go!" said the emperor, for he was furious, and both the princess and the prince were put out of his realm. There she stood crying, and the swineherd scolded, and the rain poured down in torrents. "Oh, miserable creature that I am! If only I had accepted the handsome prince. Oh, how unhappy I am!" The swineherd went behind a tree, wiped the black and brown stain from his face, and threw away his ugly clothes. Then he stepped out dressed as a prince. He was so handsome that the princess could not help curtseying to him. "I am come to despise you," he said. "You would not have an honorable prince, you could not prize the rose or the nightingale, but you would kiss the swineherd for a trumpery musical box! As you have made your bed, so must you lie upon it!" Then he went back into his own little kingdom and shut and locked, the door. So she had to stand outside and sing in earnest: Ach du lieber Augustin Alles ist weg, weg, weg! Source (books.google.com): Hans Christian Andersen Fairy Tales from Hans Christian Andersen , third edition (London: J. M. Dent and Company; New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1907), pp. 355-60 . Source (Internet Archive): Hans Christian Andersen Fairy Tales from Hans Christian Andersen , third edition (London: J. M. Dent and Company; New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1907), pp. 355-60 . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. © 2016. Link to the text in Danish: Svinedrengen (1842) . Note by Andersen concerning his source for this story: "The Swineherd" has a few traits in common with an old Danish folktale that I heard as a child. It was, however, too indecent to be repeated. ( H. C. Andersens Samlede Skrifter , vol. 15 [Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1880], p. 299) . Return to the table of contents . Additional type 850 tales Copyrighted stories, not in the public domain Abrahams, Roger D. "Golden Breasts, Diamond Navel, Chain of Gold." Afro-American Folktales: Tales from Black Traditions in the New World . New York: Pantheon Books, 1985. Pp. 223-29. Afanas'ev, Aleksandr. "The Self-Playing Gusla." Russian Fairy Tales. Translated by Norbert Guterman. New York: Pantheon Books, 1975. Pp. 211-13. Dorson, Richard M. "The Swineherd Who Married a Princess" (Germany). Folktales Told around the World . Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1975. Pp. 87-90. Herskovits, Melville J., and Frances S. Herskovits, "Riddling for the Princess," Suriname Folk-Lore: Columbia University Contributions to Anthropology , vol. 27. New York: Columbia University Press, 1936. Pp. 401-413. Pino-Saavedra, Yolando. "The Simple Lad and the Three Little Pigs," Folktales of Chile. Translated by Rockwell Gray. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1968. No. 32, pp. 165-68. Ranke, Kurt. "The Swineherd Who Married a Princess." Folktales of Germany. Translated by Lotte Baumann. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966. No. 46, pp. 121-24. Weinreich, Beatrice Silverman. "The King's Lost Daughter." Yiddish Folktales. Translated by Leonard Wolf. New York: Pantheon Books, 1988. No. 39, pp. 112-14. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 4, 2024. Black School: Legends of Type 3000 The Black School migratory legends of Christiansen type 3000 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2011 Contents The Black School (Iceland). Black Airt (Scotland). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Black School Iceland Once upon a time there existed somewhere in the world, nobody knows where, a school which was called the Black School. There the pupils learned witchcraft and all sorts of ancient arts. Wherever this school was, it was somewhere below ground, and was held in a strong room which, as it had no window, was eternally dark and changeless. There was no teacher either, but everything was learnt from books with fiery letters, which could be read quite easily in the dark. Never were the pupils allowed to go out into the open air or see the daylight during the whole time they stayed there, which was from five to seven years. By then they had gained a thorough and perfect knowledge of the sciences to be learnt. A shaggy gray hand came through the wall every day with the pupils' meals, and when they had finished eating and drinking took back the horns and platters. But one of the rules of the school was, that the owner should keep for himself that one of the students who should leave the school the last every year. And, considering that it was pretty well known among the pupils that the devil himself was the master, you may fancy what a scramble there was at each year's end, everybody doing his best to avoid being last to leave the school. It happened once that three Icelanders went to this school, by the name of Sæmundur the Learned, Kálfur Arnason, and Hálfdán Eldjárnsson; and as they all arrived at the same time, they were all supposed to leave at the same time. Sæmundur declared himself willing to be the last of them, at which the others were much lightened in mind. So he threw over himself a large mantle, leaving the sleeves loose and the fastenings free. A staircase led from the school to the upper world, and when Sæmundur was about to mount this the devil grasped at him and said, "You are mine!" But Sæmundur slipped out of this mantle and made off with all speed, leaving the devil the empty cloak. However, just as he left the school the heavy iron door was slammed suddenly to, and wounded Sæmundur on the heels. Then he said, "That was pretty close upon my heels," which words have since passed into a proverb. The Sæmundur contrived to escape from the Black School, with his companions, scot-free. Some people relate, that, when Sæmundur came into the doorway, the sun shone upon him and threw his shadow onto the opposite wall. And as the devil stretched out his hand to grapple with him, Sæmundur said, "I am not the last. Do you not see who follows me?" So the devil seized the shadow, mistaking it for a man, and Sæmundur escaped with a blow on his heels from the iron door. But from that hour he was always shadowless, for whatever the devil took, he never gave back again. Source: Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 226-28 . Sæmundur the Learned (1054-1133) was Iceland's first great scholar. His name is often given without its grammatical ending, Sæmund, or spelled without the ligature æ, Saemund. Return to the table of contents . Black Airt Scotland "Black Airt" was firmly believed in [in the north-east of Scotland]. If the proficients in this science did not make a compact with Satan, they were very much in communion with him. He was regarded as the fountain from which it sprang. It was looked upon as a kind of wisdom by which men came to be able to know the hidden essence of things, the virtues of herbs for cure or poison, to have power over nature in many of her workings, power to cure disease, to guard against witches and fairies, to remove their spells, to discover thieves, and even to see into the future. Under the teaching they got, some of the students reached a high degree of expertness, and became a match for the devil himself in cunning, and were even able to outwit him. Spain and Italy, particularly Italy, were the countries in which the science was most flourishing, and in which it was taught most efficiently, and thither all, who wished to become adepts in it, went. Its study was carried on in dark rooms under famous teachers; and, on leaving the classrooms, the students had to pass through a long black passage at the end of which stood the prince of darkness watching to catch the last one. No sooner had the last word of the professor's lecture been spoken than out rushed the students, and made for the light pell-mell through the black passage shouting, "Deel tack the hinmost!" The devil, on one occasion, clutched at a student. He met one who was more than a match for him. The student called out, "There is another behind me!" His sable majesty looked first to this side, and then to that. He saw what seemed a man. He rushed upon it and seized it. It was the student's shadow. Ever after the student was shadowless. Source: Walter Gregor, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the North-East of Scotland (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1881), p. 73 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Targets open in new windows. The Woman Who Had No Shadow , a folktale from Scandinavia about a woman who lost her shadow through a sinister pact. Peter Schlemihls wundersame Geschichte , a literary fairy tale (in the German language) by Adelbert von Chamisso (1781-1838). The hero of this tale exchanges his shadow for a purse that never runs out of money. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 4, 2011. The Blind Men and the Elephant: Folktales of Type 1317 The Blind Men and the Elephant Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 1317 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2014 Contents The Blind Men and the Elephant ( The Udāna ). On the Blind Men and the Affair of the Elephant (Sanai, The Enclosed Garden of the Truth ). All Faiths Lead to God: Four Blind Men and an Elephant (Ramakrishna). The Blind Men and the Elephant: A Hindoo Fable (John Godfrey Saxe). The King and the Elephants (Leo Tolstoy). Link to a Buddhist parable from the Jataka Tales illustrating a similar moral: The People Who Saw the Judas Tree . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Blind Men and the Elephant The Udāna Thus have I heard: On a certain occasion, the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi, in the Jetavana, the garden of Anathapindika. Now at that time a large number of Samanas, Brahmanas and wandering monks of various heretical sects, holding a variety of views, doubters on many points, having many diverse aspirations, and recourse to that which relates to various heresies, entered Savatthi for alms. Some of these Samanas and Brahmanas held that the world is eternal and contended that this view was true and every other false. Some said: "The world is not eternal." Some said: "The world is finite." Some said: "The world is infinite." Some said: "The soul and the body are identical." Some said: "The soul and the body are not identical." Some said: "The Perfect One continues to exist after death." Some said: "The Perfect One does not continue to exist after death." Some said: "The Perfect One exists and does not exist after death." Some said: "The Perfect One neither exists nor does not exist after death." Each contending their view was true and every other false. These quarrelsome, pugnacious, cavilling monks wounded one another with sharp words (lit. mouth-javelins) declaiming: "Such is the truth, such is not the truth: the truth is not such, such is the truth." And a number of Bhikkhus [monks], robing themselves in the forenoon and taking their alms-bowls and tunics, entered Savatthi for alms and when they had returned from their rounds and finished their meal, they went to where the Blessed One was and drawing near, they saluted the Blessed One and sat down apart, and while thus sitting they said to the Blessed One: "Just now, Sire, a large number of Samanas and Brahmanas and wandering monks holding various heresies entered Savatthi for alms, and they are disputing among themselves, saying: 'This is the truth, such is not the truth etc. [as above. Transl. ]'" "These heretical monks, O Bhikkhus, are blind, eyeless, they know not what is right, they know not what is wrong, they know not what is true, they know not what is false. These monks not perceiving what is right, not perceiving what is wrong, not perceiving what is true, not perceiving what is false, become disputatious, saying: 'such is the truth, such is not the truth etc. [as above. Transl. ]'" In former times, O Bhikkhus, there was a King in this town of Savatthi. And the King, O Bhikkhus, called a man to him and said: "Go, thou, and collect all the men born blind in Savatthi and bring them here." "Be it so, Lord'' said that man in assent to the King and he went to Savatthi and he brought all the men born blind in Savatthi to where the King was and drawing near he said to the King: "Lord, all the men blind from their birth in Savatthi are present." "Pray, then, bring an elephant before them." "Be it so, Lord" said that man in assent to the King and he brought an elephant into the presence of the blind men and said: "This, O blind men, is an elephant." To some of the blind men he presented the head of the elephant, saying, "Such, O blind men, is an elephant." To some he presented the body, saying: "such is an elephant." To some he presented the feet, saying: "Such is an elephant." To some he presented the back, saying: "Such is an elephant." To some he presented the tail, saying : "Such is an elephant." To some he presented the hairy tuft of the tail, saying: 'Such is an elephant.' The show-man, O Bhikkhus, having presented the elephant to these blind ones, went to where the King was and drawing near said to the King: "The elephant, Lord, has been brought before the blind men, do now as seems fit." And the King went to where the blind men were, and drawing near said to them: "Do you now know what an elephant is like?" "Assuredly, Lord; we now know what an elephant is like." "Tell me then, O blind men, what an elephant is like." And those blind men, O Bhikkhus, who had felt the head of the elephant, said: "An elephant, Sir, is like a large round jar. Those who had felt its ears, said: "It is like a winnowing basket." Those who had felt its tusks, said: "It is like a plough-share." Those who had felt its trunk, said: "It is like a plough." Those who had felt its body, said: "It is like a granary." Those who had felt its feet, said: "It is like a pillar." Those who had felt its back, said: "It is like a mortar." Those who had felt its tail, said: "It is a like a pestle." Those who had felt the tuft of its tail, said: "It is like a broom." And they all fought amongst themselves with their fists, declaring, "Such is an elephant, such is not elephant, an elephant is not like that, it is like this." And the King, O Bhikkhus, was highly delighted. In exactly the same way, O Bhikkhus, do these heretical people, blind and without insight, dispute among themselves saying "This doctrine is true, every other is false." And the Blessed One in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance: Well is it known that some Samanas and Brahmanas, Who attach themselves to methods of analysis, And perceiving only one side of a case, Disagree with one another. Source: The Udāna; or, The Solemn Utterrances of the Buddha , translated from the Pali by D. M. Strong (London: Luzac and Company, 1902), pp. 93-96 . Another translation: "Blind Men and Elephant: Avoid Vain Wrangling," Buddhist Parables , translated from the original Pali by Eugene Watson Burlingame (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1922), no. 22, pp. 75-77 . Return to the table of contents . On the Blind Men and the Affair of the Elephant Sanai, The Enclosed Garden of the Truth There was a great city in the country of Ghur, in which all the people were blind. A certain king passed by that place, bringing his army and pitching his camp on the plain. He had a large and magnificent elephant to minister to his pomp and excite awe, and to attack in battle. A desire arose among the people to see this monstrous elephant, and a number of the blind, like fools, visited it, every one running in his haste to find out its shape and form. They came, and being without the sight of their eyes groped about it with their hands; each of them by touching one member obtained a notion of some one part; each one got a conception of an impossible object, and fully believed his fancy true. When they returned to the people of the city, the others gathered round them, all expectant, so misguided and deluded were they. They asked about the appearance and shape of the elephant, and what they told all listened to. One asked him whose hand had come upon its ear about the elephant; he said, "It is a huge and formidable object, broad and rough and spreading, like a carpet." And he whose hand had come upon its trunk said, "I have found out about it; it is straight and hollow in the middle like a pipe, a terrible thing and an instrument of destruction." And he who had felt the thick hard legs of the elephant said, "As I have it in mind, its form is straight like a planed pillar." Every one had seen some one of its parts, and all had seen it wrongly. No mind knew the whole. Knowledge is never the companion of the blind. All, like fools deceived, fancied absurdities. Men know not the Divine essence; into this subject the philosophers may not enter. Source: Sanai, The first book of the Hadiqatu'l-Haqiqat; or, The Enclosed Garden of the Truth of the Hakim Abu'l-Majd Majdud Sana'i of Ghazna , edited and translated by J. Stephenson (Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press, 1910), p. 13 . The book is also known as The Walled Garden of Truth . Sanai lived in Ghazni (now Afghanistan) between about 1080 and 1131 or 1141. Return to the table of contents . All Faiths Lead to God: Four Blind Men and an Elephant Ramakrishna Four blind men went to see an elephant. One who touched its leg said, "The elephant is like a pillar." The second who touched the trunk said, "The elephant is like a thick club." The third touched the belly, and thought it to be like a big jar. The fourth who felt the ears, concluded that the elephant was like a winnowing fan. They then began to dispute amongst themselves as to the ?gure of the animal they had touched. A passer-by hearing them quarrel, said, "What is it this you are disputing about?" Then they stated the question and asked him to arbitrate. He said, "Not one of you knows the real elephant. As a whole, it is neither like a pillar, nor a jar, nor a winnowing fan, nor a club. But its legs are like pillars, its belly like a big jar, its ears like a winnowing fan, and its trunk like a thick club. The elephant itself is a combination of all these." In exactly the same manner do men quarrel among themselves about religion, each having seen some different aspect of the Deity. Source: Sri Ramakrishna's Teachings , part 1, first edition (Lohaghat P. O., Dt. Almora, Himalayas: 1916), no. 398, p. 127 . Another source: The Gospel of Ramakrishna , authorized edition (New York: Vedanta Society, 1907), pp. 28-29 . Ramakrishna (1836-1886) was an influential Indian mystic. Return to the table of contents . The Blind Men and the Elephant: A Hindoo Fable John Godfrey Saxe I. It was six men of Indostan To learning much inclined, Who went to see the Elephant (Though all of them were blind), That each by observation Might satisfy his mind. II. The First approached the Elephant, And happening to fall Against his broad and sturdy side, At once began to bawl: "God bless me! -- but the Elephant Is very like a wall!" III. The Second , feeling of the tusk, Cried: "Ho! -- what have we here So very round and smooth and sharp? To me 't is mighty clear This wonder of an Elephant Is very like a spear!" IV. The Third approached the animal, And happening to take The squirming trunk within his hands, Thus boldly up and spake: "I see," quoth he, "the Elephant Is very like a snake!" V. The Fourth reached out his eager hand, And felt about the knee. "What most this wondrous beast is like Is mighty plain," quoth he; "'T is clear enough the Elephant Is very like a tree!" VI. The Fifth , who chanced to touch the ear, Said: "E'en the blindest man Can tell what this resembles most; Deny the fact who can, This marvel of an Elephant Is very like a fan!" VII. The Sixth no sooner had begun About the beast to grope, Than, seizing on the swinging tail That fell within his scope, "I see," quoth he, "the Elephant Is very like a rope!" VIII. And so these men of Indostan Disputed loud and long, Each in his own opinion Exceeding stiff and strong, Though each was partly in the right, And all were in the wrong. MORAL. So, oft in theologic wars The disputants, I ween, Rail on in utter ignorance Of what each other mean, And prate about an Elephant Not one of them has seen! Source: The Poems of John Godfrey Saxe , complete in one volume (Boston: James R. Osgood and Company, 1876), pp. 259-61 . The American poet John Godfrey Saxe (1816-87) introduced the Indian parable "The Blind Men and the Elephant" to western readers with this famous poem. Return to the table of contents . The King and the Elephants Leo Tolstoy An Indian king ordered all the blind people to be assembled, and when they came, he ordered that all the elephants be shown to them. The blind men went to the stable and began to feel the Elephants. One felt a leg, another a tail, a third the stump of a tail, a fourth a belly, a fifth a back, a sixth the ears, a seventh the tusks, and an eighth a trunk. Then the king called the blind men, and asked them: "What are my Elephants like?" One blind man said: "Your elephants are like posts." He had felt the legs. Another blind man said: "They are like bath brooms." He had felt the end of the tail. A third said: "They are like branches." He had felt the tail stump. The one who had touched a belly said: "The elephants are like a clod of earth." The one who had touched the sides said: "They are like a wall." The one who had touched a back said: "They are like a mound." The one who had touched the ears said: "They are like a mortar." The one who had touched the tusks said: "They are like horns." The one who had touched the trunk said that they were like a stout rope. And all the Blind Men began to dispute and to quarrel. Source: Lev [Leo] Tolstoy, Fables for Children ... , translated from the Russian and edited by Leo Wiener (London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1904), p. 28 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 11, 2014. Blood Brothers The Blood Brothers a European folktale retold by D. L. Ashliman © 2012 Once upon a time a fisherman caught a fish that said to him, "If you will set me free, I will grant you any wish." Now more than anything else, the fisherman wanted to have a child with his wife, so he made this wish, and turned the fish loose. Before swimming away, the fish said, "Cast your net again, and give your next catch to your wife to eat." The fisherman did as he was told. His next cast netted him one little fish, which he took home with him. His wife ate the flesh. His dog ate the insides. And his horse ate the bones. Some time later his wife gave birth to twin boys; the dog had a litter of two pups; and the horse foaled with two colts. The twin boys gave their parents much pleasure, but with time the older brother became restless, and wanted to seek his fortune abroad. He left a bottle of clear white wine with his younger twin, saying, "All will be well with me as long as the wine is white. But if it ever turns red, I will be in need of your help." With that he took leave of his brother and of his parents, mounted the older twin horse, and, accompanied by the older twin dog, set forth into the world. After a long journey he came to a kingdom that was being ravished by a terrible dragon. The king had promised his daughter's hand in marriage to whatever man succeeded in killing the dragon. The twin tracked the dragon to its lair, then engaged him in battle. The fight was long and hard, but the brave twin finally prevailed, and the dragon lay dead at his feat. As proof that he had killed the beast, he cut out its tongue, then set out for the castle to claim the princess as his reward. Now the king had a steward who happened to come upon the dead dragon soon after the twin left. He decided to claim the kill for himself, cut off the dragon's head, and took a shortcut to the castle. The king was delighted to see the dragon's head, and he arranged for the wedding between the steward and the princess to take place immediately. The twin arrived just as the festivities were starting. Seeing that another man was unfairly claiming his prize, he said, "It is a strange dragon that has no tongue." "Of course the dragon has a tongue," said the steward, opening the dragon's mouth. But the tongue was not there. "The dragon had a tongue when I killed it," answered the twin, "and here it is." With this he produced the dragon's tongue. The king now saw that the steward had lied, and had him cast into a dark dungeon. The festivities continued, but this time with the twin as hero and bridegroom. The twin and the princess lived happily for some time, but after a while he became restless again. He announced that he wanted to go hunting in a nearby forest, named the Forest of No Return. His young wife asked him not to go, but his spirit of adventure prevailed. Soon after entering the Forest of No Return, the twin met an old woman, who, unknown to him, was a wicked witch. "Good day, young sir," she said. He began to return the greeting, but had scarcely opened his mouth when she cast a spell on him, turning him to stone. Meanwhile, back at the fisherman's cottage, the younger twin examined the bottle of wine every day. Its clear white color let him know that his older brother was well. One day, however, the wine turned blood red, and the younger brother knew that his twin was in need. He took leave of his parents, mounted the younger twin horse, and, accompanied by the younger twin dog, set forth into the world to find his older brother. After a long journey he came to the kingdom where his twin brother had killed the dragon. Everyone thought that he was their new prince, and he was escorted to the castle with honor. "I thought that you would never come back from the Forest of No Return," said the princess tenderly. However, to her dismay and surprise, instead of returning her love, that night he laid his sword between them in their bed. Early the next morning the younger twin set forth for the Forest of No Return. Soon after entering this forest, he met the old witch. "Good day, young sir," she said. Sensing her evil design, he said not a word, but leaped on her and pinned her to the ground. Holding his sword to her neck, he shouted, "lead me to my brother, or die at once!" The witch, fearing for her life, led the young twin to his petrified brother. She anointed the stone with salve, and he returned to life. Overjoyed, the two brothers made they way back toward the castle. On their way, each one told the other of his adventures. When it was the younger brother's turn to speak, he told of how the white wine had turned to blood red, how he had found his way to the castle, how he had slept with the princess.... He was not able finish his sentence. The older twin, hearing that his brother had slept with his wife, drew his sword and cut off his head. When the older twin arrived at the castle, he was received by his wife with love. "At last you are yourself!" she said. "Not like the last time you were here, when you put a sword between us in bed." The older twin now knew that he had unjustly killed his brother. He rushed back to the place where his body lay. Fortunately, he still had some of the witch's salve, and with it he anointed the dead man's wounds, placed the head back on the body, and brought his brother back to life. Together they returned to the castle, where they lived happily ever after. Retold from various sources. This tale is told throughout the Indo-European cultural area. Aarne-Thomspon-Uther type 303. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 6, 2012. The Blue Light by the Grimm Brothers: A Comparison of the Versions of 1815 and 1857 The Blue Light Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm a comparison of the versions of 1815 and 1857 compiled and translated by D. L. Ashliman © 2008 First edition, 1815 Final edition, 1857 The Blue Light The Blue Light Once upon a time there was a king who had a soldier as a servant. Once upon a time there was a soldier who had served the king loyally for many long years. When he became old and useless, the king sent him away, giving him nothing. When the war was over and the soldier could no longer serve because of the many wounds he had received, the king said to him, "You can go home now. I no longer need you. There will be no more money for you, because wages are only for those who earn them." Because he did not know how he could earn a living, he sadly walked the whole day long, coming to a forest in the evening. Because the soldier did not know how he could earn a living, he sadly walked the whole day long, until he came to a forest in the evening. After walking a little while he saw a light. As darkness fell he saw a light. He approached it and came to a little house, where a witch lived. He approached it and came to a little house, where a witch lived. He asked for a night's shelter and a little to eat and drink, but she refused him. "Give me a night's shelter and a little to eat and drink," he said to her, "otherwise I will perish." Finally she said, "But I will have pity and take you in after all. However, tomorrow you must dig up my entire garden." "Oho!" she answered. "Who gives anything to a runaway soldier? But I will have pity and take you in after all, if you will do what I ask of you." "What do you want?" asked the soldier. "For you to dig up my garden tomorrow." The soldier promised and was taken in. The next day he hoed up the witch's garden. The work lasted until evening, and then she wanted to send him away. The soldier agreed, and the next day he worked with all his might, but could not finish before evening. But he said, "I am so tired. Let me stay one more night here." At first she refused, but finally she agreed, if the next day he would split a stack of wood. "I see," said the witch, "that you can do no more work today. I will take you in for one more night if tomorrow you will cut up and split a stack of wood for me." The second day the soldier chopped the wood, and by evening he had worked so hard that he could not continue on his way, so he asked for a third night. The soldier took the entire day to do this, and that evening the witch proposed that he remain a third night. In return, the next day he was to get the blue light from her well. "Tomorrow I have only a small task for you. Behind my house there is a dry well into which my light has fallen. It burns blue and never goes out. I want you to get it for me." Then the witch led him to a well and tied him to a long rope, with which she lowered down. The next day the old woman led him to the well and lowered him down it in a basket. He found the blue light and gave the sign that she should pull him up again. He found the blue light and gave a sign that she should pull him up again. And she did pull him up, but when he was at the edge, so close that they could touch each other's hands, she wanted to have the light, and then to let him fall back down. And she did pull him up, but when he was close to the edge, she wanted to take the blue light from him. But he sensed her evil thoughts, and said, "No, I shall not give you the light until I am standing on the ground with my feet." "No," he said, sensing her evil thoughts, "I shall not give you the light until I am standing on the ground with both feet." Then the witch became angry and pushed him, together with the light, down into the well, and walked away Then the witch became furious, let him fall back into the well, and walked away. The soldier, down there in the dark, damp morass, was sad, for his end was near. The poor soldier fell to the damp floor without being injured. The blue light continued to burn, but how could that help him? He saw that would not be able to escape death. He sadly sat there for a while. Then he touched his pipe with his hand. It was still half full, and he thought, "Have one last pleasure, and smoke it empty." So he lit it with the blue light and began to smoke. Then he happened to reach into his pocket and found his tobacco pipe, which was still half full. "This will be your last pleasure," he thought, pulled it out, lit it with the blue light, and began to smoke. After the fumes had wafted about somewhat, a little black dwarf came up to him and asked, "Master, what do you command? I must serve you in every way." After the fumes had wafted about the cavern, suddenly there stood before him a little black dwarf, who said, "Master, what do you command?" "Above all else, help me out of this well." "Why should I command you?" replied the bewildered soldier. "I must do everything that you demand," said the dwarf." "Good," said the soldier, "then first help me out of this well." So the black dwarf took him by the hand and led him out, and they took the blue light with them. The dwarf took him by the hand and led him through an underground passage, and he did not forget to take the blue light with him. Along the way he showed him the treasures that the witch had collected and hidden there, and the soldier took as much gold as he could carry. When they were above ground, the soldier said, "Now strike the witch dead for me." As soon as the dwarf had done that, he showed him the witch's treasures and gold, which the soldier loaded up and took with him. When he was above ground, he said to the dwarf, "Now go and bind the old witch and take her to the judge." Not long afterward she came riding by on a tomcat as fast as the wind and screaming horribly. And not long after that the dwarf was back. "It is all taken care of," he said. "The witch is hanging on the gallows." Then the dwarf said, "If you need me, just light your pipe with the blue light." "Master, what do you command now?" "Nothing at the moment," answered the soldier. "You can go home, but be ready when I call you." "It is only necessary," said the dwarf, "for you to light your pipe with the blue light, and I will be with you." With that he disappeared before his very eyes. After that the solder went to the city and moved into the best inn. He had beautiful clothes made for himself and furnished his room magnificently. The soldier returned to the city from which he had come. He moved into the best inn and had beautiful clothes made for himself. Then he told the innkeeper to furnish his room as luxuriously as possible. When it was finished he summoned the black dwarf and said, "The king sent me away to starve, because I was no longer able to serve him. Bring his daughter to me this evening. She shall wait on me and do whatever I tell her to do." When it was finished he summoned the black dwarf and said, "I served the king loyally, but he sent me away to starve. For this I now want revenge." "What am I to do?" asked the little man. "Late this evening, when the king's daughter is lying in bed, bring her here to me in her sleep. She shall do maid service for me." The dwarf said, "That is a dangerous thing." The dwarf said, "That is an easy thing for me, but a dangerous thing for you. If you are found out, it will not go well for you." But still he went and got the king's daughter from her bed and brought her in her sleep to the soldier. She had to obey him and do whatever he wanted. In the morning before the cock crowed, the dwarf carried her back. At the strike of twelve the door opened, and the dwarf carried the king's daughter in. "Aha, is that you?" cried the soldier. "Get to work now! Go fetch the broom and sweep the room." When she was finished he called her to his chair, stuck his feet out at her, and said, "Pull off my boots," then threw them in her face, and she had to pick them up and clean them and make them shine. She did everything that he ordered her to do, without resisting, silently, and with half-closed eyes. At the first cock's crow, the dwarf carried her to the royal palace and back to her bed. After she had gotten up, she said to her father, "Last night I had an amazing dream. It was as though I were taken away, and became a soldier's maid, and had to wait on him." The next morning, after the king's daughter had gotten up, she went to her father and told him that she had had an amazing dream. "I was carried away through the streets as fast as lightning and taken to a soldier's room. I had to serve as his maid and wait on him and do common work, sweep the room, and clean his boots. It was only a dream, but still I am as tired as if I had really done it all." Then the king said, "Fill your pocket with peas and make a hole in it. The dream could be true, then they will fall out and leave a track on the street. "The dream could have been true," said the king. "I will give you some advice. Fill your pocket with peas, then make a small hole in your pocket. If you are carried away again, they will fall out and leave a track on the street." So she did just that, but the dwarf had heard what her father had advised her. As the king was thus speaking, the dwarf was invisibly standing nearby and heard everything. When evening came and the soldier told the dwarf to get the king's daughter once again, the dwarf scattered peas throughout the whole city, and the few that fell out of her pocket did not leave a track. That night when he once again carried the sleeping princess through the streets, a few peas did indeed fall out of her pocket, but they did not leave a track, because the cunning dwarf had already scattered peas in all the streets. And once again the king's daughter had to do maid service until the cock crowed. People spent the entire next day gathering peas. The next morning the king sent his people out to look for the track, but it was to no end, for in all the streets there were poor children gathering peas and saying, "Last night it rained peas." Once again the princess told her father what had happened to her, and he said, "Keep one shoe on and secretly hide it where you are." "We must think of something else," said the king. "Leave your shoes on when you go to bed, and before you return from there, hide one of them. I will be sure to find it." The black dwarf overheard this, and when the soldier again wanted the king's daughter brought to him, the dwarf said to him, "I can no longer help you. If you are caught, it will be your downfall." The black dwarf overheard this proposal, and that evening when the soldier again wanted the king's daughter brought to him, the dwarf advised him against this, saying that he had no way to protect him against such trickery. If the shoe were to be found in his room, it would not go well with him. But the soldier insisted. "Then get yourself outside the city gate early tomorrow morning," said the dwarf, "as soon as I have carried her away." "Do what I tell you," replied the soldier, and for a third night the king's daughter had to work like a maid. Now the princess kept one shoe on and hid it in the soldier's bed. But before she was carried back, she hid a shoe under the bed. The next morning, after she was again with her father, he had the entire city searched for the shoe, and it was found in the soldier's room. The next morning the king had the entire city searched for the shoe, and it was found in the soldier's room. The soldier had fled, but they soon overtook him and threw him into a secure prison. The soldier himself, following the little man's request, was already outside the city gate, but they soon overtook him and threw him into prison. There he sat in bonds and chains, and in his haste to flee, he had forgotten to take along his most valuable things: the blue light and the gold. He had only one ducat. In his haste, he had forgotten to take along his most valuable things: the blue light and the gold. He had only one ducat in his pocket. Standing sadly at the window of his prison, he saw a comrade walking by. Standing at the window of his prison and weighted down with chains, he saw one of his comrades walking by. He called out to him, saying, "If you will bring me the little bundle that I left at the inn, I'll give you a ducat." He knocked on the glass, and as he walked by, he said, "Be so good and bring me the little bundle that I left at the inn. I'll give you a ducat for it." So for the ducat he went and brought him the blue light and the gold. The comrade ran forth and brought back the desired things. The prisoner immediately lit his pipe and summoned the black dwarf, As soon as the soldier was alone again, he lit his pipe and summoned the black dwarf. who said to him, "Have no fear. Go peacefully to the court and let everything happen, but take the blue light with you. "Have no fear," he said to his master. "Just go where they lead you, and let everything happen, but take the blue light with you." Then he was tried and sentenced to be hanged on the gallows. The next day the soldier was tried, and although he had done nothing wrong, the judge still sentenced him to death. As he was being led out, he asked the king for a wish. As he was being led out, he asked the king for one last wish. "What sort of a wish?" asked the latter. "What sort of a wish?" asked the king. "That I might smoke one more pipe on the way." "That I might smoke one more pipe on the way." "You can smoke three, if you want to," said the king. "You can smoke three," answered the king, "but do not think that I will let you live." Then he pulled out his pipe and lit it with the little blue flame. Then the soldier pulled out his pipe and lit it with the blue light. The black dwarf stepped immediately before him. As soon as a few rings of smoke had risen, the dwarf was standing there. "Strike everyone dead for me," said the soldier, "and the king into three pieces." He had a cudgel in his hand and said, "What does my master command?" "Strike the false judges and their henchmen to the ground for me. And don't spare the king either, who has treated me so badly." Thus the dwarf set forth and struck dead the people all around. Then the dwarf took off like lightning, zip-zap, back and forth, and everyone he even touched with his cudgel fell to the ground and did not dare to move. The king begged for mercy, and in order to save his life, he gave to the soldier his kingdom as well as his daughter for a wife. The king became afraid. He begged for mercy, and in order to save his life, he gave to the soldier his kingdom as well as his daughter for a wife. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Das blaue Licht," Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Berlin, 1815), vol. 2, no. 30. Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Das blaue Licht," Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Berlin, 1857), no. 116. "The Blue Light" is the classic European version of an Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 562 tale, which ultimately derives from "Aladdin and His Magic Lamp" from the 1001 Nights (type 561). Links to related sites The Blue Light by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. A file containing the version of 1857 alone. Das blaue Licht (1815) . The German-language text of the version of 1815. Das blaue Licht (1857) . The German-language text of the version of 1857. Additional folktales of type 562 . The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales). The Grimm Brothers' Home Page . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 12, 2008. The Blue Light: Folktales of Type 562 The Blue Light Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 562 edited and/or translated by D. L. Ashliman © 2008-2016 Contents The Blue Light (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Deserter with the Tinderbox (Austria, J. R. Bünker). The Iron Man (Germany, August Ey). The Three Dogs (Germany, Georg Schambach and Wilhelm Müller). The Soldier and the Tinderbox (Germany, Wilhelm Busch). The Giants and the Tinderbox (Germany, Heinrich Pröhle). The Transverse Flute (Germany, Carl and Theodor Colshorn). The Tinderbox (Denmark, Hans Christian Andersen). Lars, My Lad! (Sweden, G. Djurklo). Sir Buzz (India, Flora Annie Steel). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Blue Light Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once upon a time there was a soldier who had served the king loyally for many long years. When the war was over and the soldier could no longer serve because of the many wounds he had received, the king said to him, "You can go home now. I no longer need you. There will be no more money for you, because wages are only for those who earn them." Because the soldier did not know how he could earn a living, he sadly walked the whole day long, until he came to a forest in the evening. As darkness fell he saw a light. He approached it and came to a little house, where a witch lived. "Give me a night's shelter and a little to eat and drink," he said to her, "otherwise I will perish." "Oho!" she answered. "Who gives anything to a runaway soldier? But I will have pity and take you in after all, if you will do what I ask of you." "What do you want?" asked the soldier. "For you to dig up my garden tomorrow." The soldier agreed, and the next day he worked with all his might, but could not finish before evening. "I see," said the witch, "that you can do no more work today. I will take you in for one more night if tomorrow you will cut up and split a stack of wood for me." The soldier took the entire day to do this, and that evening the witch proposed that he remain a third night. "Tomorrow I have only a small task for you. Behind my house there is a dry well into which my light has fallen. It burns blue and never goes out. I want you to get it for me." The next day the old woman led him to the well and lowered him down it in a basket. He found the blue light and gave a sign that she should pull him up again. And she did pull him up, but when he was close to the edge, she wanted to take the blue light from him. "No," he said, sensing her evil thoughts, "I shall not give you the light until I am standing on the ground with both feet." Then the witch became furious, let him fall back into the well, and walked away. The poor soldier fell to the damp floor without being injured. The blue light continued to burn, but how could that help him? He saw that would not be able to escape death. He sadly sat there for a while. Then he happened to reach into his pocket and found his tobacco pipe, which was still half full. "This will be your last pleasure," he thought, pulled it out, lit it with the blue light, and began to smoke. After the fumes had wafted about the cavern, suddenly there stood before him a little black dwarf, who said, "Master, what do you command?" "Why should I command you?" replied the bewildered soldier. "I must do everything that you demand," said the dwarf." "Good," said the soldier, "then first help me out of this well." The dwarf took him by the hand and led him through an underground passage, and he did not forget to take the blue light with him. Along the way he showed him the treasures that the witch had collected and hidden there, and the soldier took as much gold as he could carry. When he was above ground, he said to the dwarf, "Now go and bind the old witch and take her to the judge." Not long afterward she came riding by on a tomcat as fast as the wind and screaming horribly. And not long after that the dwarf was back. "It is all taken care of," he said. "The witch is hanging on the gallows. Master, what do you command now?" "Nothing at the moment," answered the soldier. "You can go home, but be ready when I call you." "It is only necessary," said the dwarf, "for you to light your pipe with the blue light, and I will be with you." With that he disappeared before his very eyes. The soldier returned to the city from which he had come. He moved into the best inn and had beautiful clothes made for himself. Then he told the innkeeper to furnish his room as luxuriously as possible. When it was finished he summoned the black dwarf and said, "I served the king loyally, but he sent me away to starve. For this I now want revenge." "What am I to do?" asked the little man. "Late this evening, when the king's daughter is lying in bed, bring her here to me in her sleep. She shall do maid service for me." The dwarf said, "That is an easy thing for me, but a dangerous thing for you. If you are found out, it will not go well for you." At the strike of twelve the door opened, and the dwarf carried the king's daughter in. "Aha, is that you?" cried the soldier. "Get to work now! Go fetch the broom and sweep the room." When she was finished he called her to his chair, stuck his feet out at her, and said, "Pull off my boots," then threw them in her face, and she had to pick them up and clean them and make them shine. She did everything that he ordered her to do, without resisting, silently, and with half-closed eyes. At the first cock's crow, the dwarf carried her to the royal palace and back to her bed. The next morning, after the king's daughter had gotten up, she went to her father and told him that she had had an amazing dream. "I was carried away through the streets as fast as lightning and taken to a soldier's room. I had to serve as his maid and wait on him and do common work, sweep the room, and clean his boots. It was only a dream, but still I am as tired as if I had really done it all." "The dream could have been true," said the king. "I will give you some advice. Fill your pocket with peas, then make a small hole in your pocket. If you are carried away again, they will fall out and leave a track on the street." As the king was thus speaking, the dwarf was invisibly standing nearby and heard everything. That night when he once again carried the sleeping princess through the streets, a few peas did indeed fall out of her pocket, but they did not leave a track, because the cunning dwarf had already scattered peas in all the streets. And once again the king's daughter had to do maid service until the cock crowed. The next morning the king sent his people out to look for the track, but it was to no end, for in all the streets there were poor children gathering peas and saying, "Last night it rained peas." "We must think of something else," said the king. "Leave your shoes on when you go to bed, and before you return from there, hide one of them. I will be sure to find it." The black dwarf overheard this proposal, and that evening when the soldier again wanted the king's daughter brought to him, the dwarf advised him against this, saying that he had no way to protect him against such trickery. If the shoe were to be found in his room, it would not go well with him. "Do what I tell you," replied the soldier, and for a third night the king's daughter had to work like a maid. But before she was carried back, she hid a shoe under the bed. The next morning the king had the entire city searched for the shoe, and it was found in the soldier's room. The soldier himself, following the little man's request, was already outside the city gate, but they soon overtook him and threw him into prison. In his haste, he had forgotten to take along his most valuable things: the blue light and the gold. He had only one ducat in his pocket. Standing at the window of his prison and weighted down with chains, he saw one of his comrades walking by. He knocked on the glass, and as he walked by, he said, "Be so good and bring me the little bundle that I left at the inn. I'll give you a ducat for it." The comrade ran forth and brought back the desired things. As soon as the soldier was alone again, he lit his pipe and summoned the black dwarf. "Have no fear," he said to his master. "Just go where they lead you, and let everything happen, but take the blue light with you." The next day the soldier was tried, and although he had done nothing wrong, the judge still sentenced him to death. As he was being led out, he asked the king for one last wish. "What sort of a wish?" asked the king. "That I might smoke one more pipe on the way." "You can smoke three," answered the king, "but do not think that I will let you live." Then the soldier pulled out his pipe and lit it with the blue light. As soon as a few rings of smoke had risen, the dwarf was standing there. He had a cudgel in his hand and said, "What does my master command?" "Strike the false judges and their henchmen to the ground for me. And don't spare the king either, who has treated me so badly." Then the dwarf took off like lightning, zip-zap, back and forth, and everyone he even touched with his cudgel fell to the ground and did not dare to move. The king became afraid. He begged for mercy, and in order to save his life, he gave to the soldier his kingdom as well as his daughter for a wife. < Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Das blaue Licht," Kinder und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , 7th edition, vol. 2 (Göttingen: verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 116, pp. 150-54 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. This tale, in a somewhat simpler version, was introduced to the Grimms' Kinder- und Hausmärchen in 1815 (1st ed., vol. 2, no. 30). Link to this version: Das blaue Licht (1815) . Link to a file containing only an English translation of the 1857 version: The Blue Light (1857) . Link to a file containing a side-by-side comparison of the versions of 1815 and 1857: The Blue Light (1815 and 1857) . Return to the table of contents . The Deserter with the Tinderbox Austria Once it happened that in the night an ordinary soldier deserted. He came to a great forest, and in the middle of the woods he met a sorceress. "You," she said, "come with me." She led him to a hollow tree, a thick one. "Climb this tree," she said. "Higher up there is a hole. Climb down into it. At the bottom you'll find a room where a dog is sitting on a chest. You must pick him up and set him on the floor. You can take as much money as you want from the chest, but then set the dog back where you found him. On the table there is a tinderbox. Put it in your pocket as well." He did what she had told him to do and climbed down into the hole. Entering the room, he saw the dog seated on the chest. Its eyes were as large as a fist. "See here," said the soldier, "you are a good fellow. You won't do anything to me!" He lifted the dog into his arms then set him on the floor. He opened the chest, which was filled with copper coins, and he filled his pockets with them. Then he closed the chest and set the dog back on it. He went into the second room, where there also was a light burning. He again saw a dog sitting on a chest, as in the first room, and this dog had eyes just as large as the first one. "See here," he said, "you won't do anything to me. The first one didn't do anything to me." He picked this one up as well and set him down away from the chest. He opened it, and it was filled with silver coins. He emptied out his pockets and filled them with the silver coins. Then he closed the chest and put the dog back on it. Then he went into the third room. There a dog was sitting on a chest as well, and he was as large as the first two. "Oh," said the soldier, "I see that you three are good comrades. You won't do anything to me either." He picked him up and set him on the floor. This chest was filled with gold ducats. He emptied out the silver coins and filled his pockets with ducats. Then he picked up the dog, placed him back on the chest, then returned to the tree. When he had climbed halfway up, the old woman asked, "Do you have the tinderbox?" So he climbed back down, for he had left the tinderbox in the third room where he had filled his pockets with ducats. It was there on the table, and he put it into his pocket. He made his way back up the tree to the outside, but the old woman had disappeared. He never saw her again. He came to an inn where a baptism was being celebrated. There he took off his uniform and bought civilians' clothes for himself. He lived very well. He traveled about for nearly an entire year, finally coming to a royal city. There he took quarters in an inn. Gradually he spent all the money that he had. He owed large sum to the innkeeper. One night at bedtime he had nothing to strike a light with. There was usually something at hand, but not this time. He picked up the tinderbox, and struck one spark, when suddenly the three dogs appeared in his room. "What is your wish?" they all three asked. "Oh, I no longer have any money. Could you kindly bring me a chestful? "You can always have as much money as you want from us," said the dogs, and disappeared. Thus he outfitted himself as a cavalier. One day he was out walking when the princess came riding by in her carriage. That evening he struck a spark with his tinderbox, and the three dogs appeared. "Give us a command!" they said. "Bring the princess to me in her sleep!" In an instant she was there in his bed, and the dogs disappeared. Before daybreak he called the three dogs with his tinderbox, and they carried the princess back to her own bed. And thus he had her brought to him every night for two weeks. Then she said to her father, the king, "For two weeks now I have been with this man every night at the inn." The king summoned the soldier and asked the princess if he were the man. She said, "Yes, he's the one." "How can you take my child to bed with you every night?" asked the king. "Because she gives me pleasure," said the soldier. The king had him thrown into prison, where he stayed for eight days with only bread and water. He was sentenced to die on the gallows. On the ninth day he was brought to a room in the castle where he was put on display for three days. Unfortunately he did not have his tinderbox with him, so he could not help himself. Happily, on the second day a servant from the inn where he had been sleeping came to get a look at him. The soldier said to him, "You, bring my tinderbox to me. It is in the pocket of the coat hanging on the wall." The servant returned with the tinderbox, and the soldier said to him, "You can have the chest filled with gold and everything else that is in the room." On the third day the king called up three hundred men who surrounded the soldier then took him to the gallows. Arriving there, the soldier said to the king, "Every condemned person is granted three last wishes." Then he reached into his pocket and rubbed against the tinderbox. The three dogs were suddenly there. The soldier said, "Take them and tear them apart." And they tore the three hundred soldiers to pieces. The king begged for mercy, asking the soldier to spare him. He said, "I give you my princess in marriage, and you can become king as well." Three days later they celebrated their wedding, and the three dogs sat at the table next to the soldier. Each of the dogs had a napkin, a fork, and a knife, just like the humans. After the meal the three dogs told him to call on them whenever he might need them. Then they disappeared. They were always available to him and helped him both in war and in peace. Source: J. R. Bünker, "Ta Tesantea' mit ta' Zintmaschin," Zeitschrift für österreichische Volkskunde , vol. 4 (1898), no. 24, pp. 189-91 . Bünker's source: Tobias Kern, an illiterate streetcleaner, born in 1831 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2016. Return to the table of contents . The Iron Man Germany A soldier had long served his king. He had been valiant and brave and hence had received many wounds. When the war was over he had to go back where he came from to see if he could not beg a little bread for himself. Such a cripple could not work, and at that time there were no pensions. He went from village to village and from town to town, barely getting by. Once he had to pass through a great forest, for at that time there were many large forests. He lost his way and had to eat roots and berries until finally he came to a charcoal burner who took him in and friendlily gave him shelter. The soldier liked it there in the solitude, and he and the charcoal burner became right good friends. He carried wood for the charcoal burner and helped him with everything he had to do. In the twilight of evening they both complained about their sorrows and told one another about their past. One day the charcoal burner said, "Listen, friend, you are daring and brave. You can bring good fortune to both of us if you will only follow my advice. Not far from here there is a deep shaft where enormous treasures are buried. Are you willing to let me lower you down on a rope? Just bring me a bundle of candles; you can keep everything else that you bring up. You'll see that we shall have enough." The soldier immediately agreed. The following morning the charcoal burner took a long rope, and they both went to the shaft. One, two, three, the soldier had the rope around his body, and the charcoal burner lowered him into the hole. Down at the bottom the soldier undid the rope, struck a light, and found a tunnel, which he followed until he came to an iron door that was closed with many bars. He opened it and entered a large hall that was entirely illuminated by a silver chandelier. It was as bright as day. In the middle a large iron man was seated on a throne with three chests standing nearby. However, they were locked shut. Above the door was hanging the bundle of candles. First of all the soldier reached for the candles; the man saw this, but did not move. Then the soldier went to one of the chests, which earlier had not been open, and behold, it was filled with shiny silver coins. He quickly filled his pockets. Then the second chest sprang open, and the most beautiful and largest gold pieces shone forth. He threw the silver coins back into their chest and filled his pockets with gold. He was scarcely finished when the third chest opened itself, in which the most valuable precious stones and pearls were glistening. He set the gold aside and filled his pockets with pearls and diamonds. The man did not move. The soldier left, and the iron man did not move. At the shaft the soldier tied the rope around his body again, then tugged, and he was pulled up. Above he gave the charcoal burner the candles and showed him his treasures. Both were delighted, and they retired. The next morning the charcoal burner was dead. What was the soldier to do? He took his treasures, including the candles, and with his staff in hand went forth into the wide world. He soon came out of the forest, then made his way to a large city where for a long time he lived gloriously and happily, thinking that his riches would have no end. But they did come to an end, and he did not have even enough money to buy oil for his lamp. Then he thought of the candles that he had brought from the shaft. He took one of them, lit it, and in that instant the iron man stood before him, asking him what he should do. The soldier now knew how things stood, and he told him to bring him a sack full of gold. In an instant he had the gold, the candle went out, and the man had disappeared. Now he had whatever he needed, and when anything was gone the iron man had to come and bring something new. From there the soldier traveled to the city where the king lived, whom he had served. Here he heard that the king's daughter was wonderfully beautiful, but that no one was allowed to see her. Having nothing better to do, and already leading an elegant life, the idea came to him that he wanted to see the princess. Therefore one evening at ten o'clock he lit his candle. The iron man entered his door and asked what he wished. "Bring the king's daughter from the castle here to me." The mighty servant disappeared, and a short time later was back with the princess. Now the soldier made the daughter pay for what her father had done to him. She had to wait on him, clean his boots, sweep the floors, etc. In short, she had to do the duties of an ordinary maid. The next morning before daybreak the iron man carried her back to her bedroom in the castle. When she awoke she went to her father and told him that she did not know if it had actually happened, or if she had only dreamed that she had been taken to a soldier's room and been forced to serve him. Looking at his daughter, the king saw a black spot on her face. Then he perceived that it could have been so, and said that this evening she should put a piece of chalk in her pocket, and that she should draw a line and a cross on the front door of the house where she was taken, so that they would be able to find the house again. This she did. However, the iron man noticed, and drew a line and a cross on every front door in the city. The next morning she again told her father what had happened to her. The king ordered his people to find the house where a line and a cross had been drawn. They returned without success, because this sign was on every house. The king became angry and ordered his soldiers to encircle the entire castle so that not even a mouse could enter or leave. And he posted a strong guard before his daughter's bedroom door. But nonetheless that evening she was taken away again, for no one could see the iron man. The next morning she again told of her experience, and that she had received a rough slap from the soldier that evening. The finger marks could still be seen on her cheek. This was too much for the king, and he quietly said into his daughter's ear, making three crosses at the same time, that this evening she should put on his gold ring and put it under the soldier's bed. This she did. "Oh," she said the next morning. "Last night he soldier beat me terribly because I refused to serve him properly." Then the king ordered that every house in the city be searched for the soldier and the hidden ring. When they found the ring under a bed they were to bring the man who owned the bed to him. Before long the ring was found in the soldier's room, for he had not noticed that the princess had hidden it. Our soldier was condemned to the gallows, and his execution day was set. He had three days to prepare for his death. During this time he had the opportunity to send a messenger to his home for the candles. The messenger brought them, and now the iron man had to come and rescue the soldier. The iron man said, "Wait until you are standing on the board beneath the gallows. Then you can have one last wish that will have to be granted to you. You have your candle; light it and I'll be there. I will do what I have to do. No one I touch will ever again have a headache." And that is what happened. The soldier was happy and cheerful, which caused the prison guard to wonder more than a little. He ate and drank and slept so peacefully, as though he did not know that he was about to die. When he was finally standing on the board, and the hangman was about to tie the latest fashion in neckties on him, the soldier said, "Wait, it's not yet time for that. I still have a request that you will surely grant me." "Yes," said the king, who had also come with his daughter, so that she could see what would happen to the scoundrel who had so abused her. "Yes, the request shall be granted to you, if it is not an unreasonable one." "I only want to light my candle and see it burning one more time." "That can happen," said the king. So the candle was lit, and immediately the iron man was there with a thick cudgel. He first struck the hangman dead and then the people standing nearby, mowing them down viciously. The king took fright as the iron man moved closer and closer with his cudgel. He called out to the soldier, asking him to order the iron man to stop, and promising that soldier that he could have the princess as a wife. With that the soldier blew out the candle, and the iron man disappeared. The soldier received his wife, and now had the unlimited respect of everyone, even his father-in-law. And if the king ever resisted, the soldier had only to say, "So, should the iron man come?" Then everything happened that the soldier wanted. He later became king, and in times of war or great need he now and then called on the iron man, who always helped him. However, when the solder died, the candles disappeared as well. Source: August Ey, "Der eiserne Mann," Harzmärchenbuch; oder, Sagen und Märchen aus dem Oberharze (Stade: Verlag von Fr. Steudel, 1862), pp. 122-28 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. Return to the table of contents . The Three Dogs Germany, Georg Schambach and Wilhelm Müller A soldier, returning home following a long war, had run out of money, so that he had nothing left. He met an old woman, whom he asked for a small gift. The woman was willing, and gave him her old apron. She told him to walk up a brook with it until he came to a willow tree. He should then climb this tree and let himself down inside it. Taking leave of her he asked her if he could do something for her on the way. "Oh yes," she answered. "Bring me the tinderbox which is there. I forgot it." The soldier went to the tree and climbed down inside it. Below there stood a large chest, and sitting on it was a dog who had eyes in his head that were as large as saucers. A second chest was also there, and on it sat a dog with eyes as large as plates, and a third chest was there with eyes as large as serving platters. With no further ado the soldier set all three dogs onto the old apron and opened the chests. In the first one was copper money, in the second one silver money, and in the third one minted gold. From this chest he took as much as he could carry, not forgetting to pick up the tinderbox as well. Then he climbed out of the hollow tree and went on his way. Not long afterward he again met the old woman, who asked him for the tinderbox, but he did not want to give it to her. They began quarreling over it, and the soldier struck the old woman dead. He now had money enough and was able to live well, but he spent so much that it soon came to an end. With time his many friends abandoned him, until at last he was living desolate and alone. One day he wanted to light a pipe, and for this he used the tinderbox, which he had long forgotten. He suddenly discovered what the tinderbox was good for. The three dogs immediately appeared and asked him what he wished. He told them to bring him some money. Less than a half hour later the dogs returned with a large sum of money. Now he was once again wealthy, and thought he would like to marry the princess, who lived in the city. But he did not know where to begin, because he was not at all handsome. Then he called his dogs and asked them if they knew how to make it happen. "We can do that," replied the dogs, and ran away. That evening all three went to the castle and brought the princess on their backs to the soldier. Afterward they took her back to the castle in the same way. The next morning the princess told about this, as though it had been a dream. However, the king was concerned and posted guards outside her bedroom door. When the dogs returned the next night the guards were asleep, so the dogs took the princess with them again. However, one soldier saw them, followed them, and drew a mark on the house that they ran into. But the dogs observed this, and they drew marks on all the houses, so that no one could know where the princess had been. On the third evening the dogs fetched the princess again. This time the soldier scattered peas in front of the house, but the dogs gathered up all the peas. On the fourth day the soldier himself went to the king and asked for his daughter's hand in marriage, but the king had him thrown into prison. Now he was lost, for he did not have his tinderbox with him, and was not able to call the dogs. He thought long and hard how he might escape, but nothing came to him. Then a boy walked beneath his window, and the soldier asked him to do him a favor, the last one, because in only a few days he was to die. The boy was willing. He asked him to fetch the tinderbox that was in his room, and described exactly where it was. The boy soon returned with the tinderbox, and the soldier pulled it up to his barred window with a string. "Now everything is all right," he thought. Later when he was standing at the place of execution he asked permission to smoke one last time, and this was granted him. He had scarcely struck a light when the three dogs arrived. He said to them, "Attack!" and they tore apart the judges and the king. Then the soldier married the princess. He lived very happily with her, and if they have not died then they are still alive. Source: Georg Schambach and Wilhelm Müller, "Die Drei Hunde," Niedersächsische Sagen und Märchen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht's Verlag, 1855), pp. 285-87 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. Return to the table of contents . The Soldier and the Tinderbox Germany A discharged soldier was making his way along a country road. His provisions and money were at an end. Unable to work and not wanting to steal, he had no other choice but to seek his food by begging, which he did not especially enjoy. He found himself in a dense forest, and deep in sad thoughts he lost his way. Then a little black dwarf approached him and asked him what was wrong: "Why are you so sad?" "Oh," said the soldier, "why shouldn't I be sad? During the war everything was all right. I had plenty of money and wine, but now I'm suffering from hunger and thirst. My clothes are in shreds, and my spirit is broken." The dwarf encouraged him, saying, "Just follow this path and you'll come to an enchanted castle guarded by many wild animals. There is a large stone in front of the castle. Sit down on it, and the animals will begin to roar fiercely, but just sit there quietly until the bell strikes twelve, and the animals will fall asleep. Then go into the castle, and you can take enough money to last a lifetime; but you must return before the bell strikes one, or things will go very badly for you." The soldier thanked the dwarf and went down the path that he had shown him. Arriving at the castle, he sat down on the stone, and the wild animals on guard began to roar fiercely. The soldier ignored them and sat there quietly until twelve o'clock when the animals fell asleep. Then he went into the castle. He came first to a beautiful room filled with copper coins. A sleeping giant was lying there. The soldier filled his pockets and was about to leave when he noticed a second door. Opening it, he went into a second room that was even more beautiful than the first one. On the floor lay a large pile of silver coins, nothing but shining thalers. A giant was lying there as well, snoring. The soldier quickly threw away the copper coins and filled his pockets with the silver ones, thinking, "Now you have enough money to last a lifetime. You'd better turn around." But then he saw a third door, opened it, and looked inside. It was good that he did so, for there he saw a great pile of pure gold. A giant was lying there as well, fast asleep and snoring. He quickly threw away the silver coins and packed away as much gold as he could carry. He was about to leave when he saw a fourth door. He opened it and went inside the fourth and last room. It was more beautiful than even the most beautiful room in the king's palace. There was no money there, but the table was set with wine and roasts. It smelled delicious, and the plates, knives, and forks were made of pure gold. He sat down and treated his hungry stomach to a feast, drinking as much wine as he wanted. Now it was time for him to turn back. A pipe and tobacco pouch were hanging on the wall, and a tinderbox lay on the table. He pocketed these items as well, for he was a great friend of smoking. Then he made haste to leave the castle before his time was up. And he just made it, for the bell struck one as he arrived at the large stone. The wild animals awoke and began to roar fiercely. The soldier made his way onward with his riches, safely coming out of the woods, and finally arriving at the city where the king held court. He asked which was the best inn, then went inside and ordered a room. Because he was so tattered and dirty the innkeeper took him to the servants' quarters. "These are miserable accommodations," said the soldier. "Bring me some wine!" The innkeeper fetched a bottle of the worst kind, thinking that it would be good enough for such a tramp, but the soldier, who had drunk the finest wine in the enchanted castle, knew full well how good wine should taste. He sampled the wine, pulled a face, and cried out, "Bah! This wine is not drinkable! Bring a better one!" The innkeeper calmed himself and brought a wine of medium quality, but the soldier, after sampling it, again cried out, "Bah! Bring a better one, no matter what it costs! Here is the money!" With that he threw a few cold coins onto the table. Seeing this, the innkeeper suddenly became very polite and brought a bottle of his best wine. "So!" said the soldier. "I can drink this one. Now bring me to better quarters and get me out of this miserable hole." The innkeeper, bowing deeply, took him to the best room in the inn. "Now," said the soldier, "bring a merchant to me who can buy clothes, horses, and a carriage for me." The merchant arrived. "Listen up," said the soldier. "I want clothing as good as what the king wears, and three coaches, each with six horses: six black, six white, and six brown." "That is all well and good," said the merchant, "but may I ask how you are going to pay for everything?" "Here is your money," said the soldier, reaching into his pocket. He threw a few handfuls of gold pieces onto the table, and the merchant left, bowing deeply. In short order the merchant provided everything that the soldier had requested. The soldier now lived in the greatest luxury. Every afternoon he drove in his coach through the city and past the king's palace. Now the king had three daughters, and every day they saw the soldier driving by in his elegant clothes and beautiful coach. The oldest one said, "For sure he is a wealthy prince. I would like to invite him here as a guest." She sent a servant to the inn with an invitation for the soldier. He came, bringing with him a bag filled with gold pieces. After dinner they played cards, and the soldier had such bad luck that he lost all the money that he had brought with him. The next evening the second princess invited him, and once again he was unlucky at cards, losing all the money that he had brought with him. On the third evening he was invited to visit the youngest and most beautiful princess. He wanted very much to go, but having no more money, he sold his coaches and horses. He received a good sum for them, and with this he went to the princess. After dinner they played cards, and the soldier again lost all his money. Now he was as poor as he had been when he left the army and had made his way through the world as a beggar. Out of sorts and frustrated, he returned to his inn and went to bed. He could not close his eyes, and he tossed and turned from one side to the other. Finally, unable to stay in bed any longer, he got up and paced back and forth in his room. He suddenly remembered the pipe and the tinderbox that he had brought from the enchanted castle. Finding no peace from his unhappy thoughts, he decided to distract himself by smoking his pipe. He picked up the tinderbox and struck a few sparks. At the first blow a huge, all-powerful giant stood before him, one of the three that had been guarding the money in the enchanted castle. "What is my lord's command?" asked the giant. "Bring me a bagful of gold!" said the soldier. He had scarcely uttered these words when the giant disappeared, then returned with a large bag filled with gold. "So!" said the soldier, "Now bring the youngest princess to me." The giant disappeared, then returned with the princess in her bed. After kissing her passionately, the soldier had the giant carry her away. The next morning the princess said to her mother, "Oh, mother dear, I thought that a giant carried me in my bed to a handsome prince, who then kissed me." "My dear child," said the mother, "that was only a dream. Don't think anymore about it." The next evening the soldier again took the tinderbox and struck a flame. The giant appeared immediately and asked, "What is my lord's command?" "Bring the princess to me," said the soldier. The giant disappeared and brought her in her bed. After the soldier once again had kissed her passionately, he had the giant carry her away. The next morning the princess said to her mother, "Oh, mother dear, last night the same thing happened as the night before. A giant carried me to a handsome prince, who then kissed me." "My dear child," said the mother, "that was only a dream. Don't think anymore about it." However, the queen thought it was unusual that the girl should have the same dream two nights in a row. Wanting to know if there might be some truth to the matter, she sewed up a bag, filled it with peas, then cut a small hole in it so that the peas could slowly spill out, then hung the bag on the princess's bed. That night the giant once again carried the princess away, but without his noticing, the peas spilled out along the entire way. When the queen looked in the next morning she could see that her daughter's dreams were not unfounded. The scattered peas revealed to her the path that the giant had taken, and they led to the soldier's door at the inn. She took the innkeeper aside and asked him who the guest was, what his standing was, and where he came from. The innkeeper answered that he himself did not know for sure, but that it must be a discharged soldier who had suddenly come into a lot of money. When he had first arrived he had worn a dirty soldier's uniform. The queen ran and fetched a guard, who captured the soldier before he realized what was happening. They locked him up in a secure prison tower. The king, learning what had happened, sentenced the soldier to death. Now the soldier would have been able to free himself easily, if he only had had his tinderbox, but in his haste he had left it lying at the inn. He was to be executed the next day. That morning, before daybreak, he sat sadly before the prison bars. Looking out onto the street he saw the innkeeper's servant girl, who had just fetched milk. He called to her and promised her a lot of money if she would bring the tinderbox to him that he had forgotten in his room. The girl did indeed run and get it for him. The soldier struck fire, and immediately the giant stood before him. "What is my lord's command?" asked the giant. "Free me from this prison," said the soldier. With that the giant disappeared, then returned with his two comrades. They broke down the walls, and the soldier walked away safely. Then the giants said, "We have served you well, now you can do us the favor of redeeming us. A sword is hanging on the wall of the enchanted castle's first room. With this you must cut off our heads and those of the wild animals, and that will end our enchantment." "Yes," said the soldier, "as difficult as that will be for me to do to you who have served me so well, if it must be done, I will do it willingly. But as a final act you must bring the youngest princess to me, for I cannot live without her." The giants disappeared, then brought her to him. The soldier took her with him to the enchanted castle. Once again he sat down on the large stone until the bell struck twelve. Then he went into the castle, found the sword, and struck off the heads of the giants and the wild animals guarding the castle. Suddenly the most beautiful music sounded forth and a swarm of happy people advanced. They paid homage to him as their king. Soon afterward the soldier married his beautiful princess. Source: Wilhelm Busch, "Der Soldat und das Feuerzeug," Ut ôler Welt: Volksmärchen, Sagen, Volkslieder und Reime (Munich: Lothar Joachim Verlag, 1910), no. 32, pp. 77-82 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2016. Return to the table of contents . The Giants and the Tinderbox Germany Once upon a time there was a cobbler's apprentice who ran away from his master, wanting to go out into the wide world. He came to an old abandoned mineshaft. A witch was standing before it, and she asked if she might lower him into the shaft in a basket, so he could bring back something that was on a table down below. Thus she lowered the apprentice into the shaft in a basket. Inside the shaft were a copper passageway, a silver passageway, and a connecting tunnel. A table stood in the connecting tunnel, and seated on the table was a fellow with claws on his fingers and on his feet. In front of him there was a tinderbox. The fellow gave the tinderbox to the cobbler's apprentice, as well as copper, silver, and gold. The apprentice then had the witch pull him back up. He gave the copper to the witch, but kept the silver, gold, and the tinderbox for himself. He went on his way, and with the gold and silver he was suddenly a wealthy man. Whenever he struck a light with the tinderbox two giants appeared before him and said, "What is my lord's command?" With time he came to the royal city, and one night he struck a light with the tinderbox. When the two giants appeared and asked, "What is my lord's command?" he answered, "I want you to bring me the princess in her bed." Not long afterward they brought the princess in her bed to the apprentice. From that time onward the same thing happened every night. When the king learned from the princess what was happening to her in the night, he commanded that a loosely bound bag of peas be fastened beneath her bed. By following the peas that fell out, one could discover where the princess was being taken each night. However, underway the giants noticed the bag of peas, and after they had brought the princess back to her room, they gathered up all the peas, so that no one could see where she had been. They did the same thing the next night when the king had a loosely bound bag of lentils fastened beneath her bed, and not a single lentil remained in the street. The next night when the giants brought the princess's bed to the apprentice, they said sadly, "My lord, your last hour has struck. The king had a cow's bladder filled with blood fastened under the princess's bed, and we giants are not able to wipe up the blood that dripped out of the cow's bladder. In the morning the king will learn where the princess has been during the night, and he will have you executed." Indeed, the next morning soldiers forced their way into the apprentice's room and took him prisoner. A golden scaffold was constructed on which he was to die. However, before he lay his head on the scaffold, he asked to be permitted to smoke one last pipeful of tobacco before his end. This wish was granted him, and he pulled the tinderbox from his pocket and struck a flame. The two giants appeared immediately, asking, "What is my lord's command?" He commanded them to capture the king and throw him into prison. And thus the cobbler's apprentice at once became king. He had the old king beheaded and married the princess. Source: Heinrich Pröhle, "Die Riesen und das Stippfeuerzeug," Kinder- und Volksmärchen (Leipzig: Avenarius und Mendelssohn, 1953), no. 11, pp. 48-49 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2016. Return to the table of contents . The Transverse Flute Germany A peasant's wife died, and after she had been buried and mourned, the peasant said to his son, "Hans, I don't want to marry again. See that you find a housewife." This saddened Hans, for he had no desire to get married. The father became angry and said, "Why are you making such a sour face?" Hans replied, "I don't want to get married. I won't even think of it." "Why not?" asked the father angrily. "Didn't I get married, and didn't it serve me well?" "I believe you," answered the son, "but you had my blessed mother. Do you want me to live with a total stranger?" Whatever the father said, he could not talk Hans into getting married, so he himself fetched a new wife into the household. This was a great misfortune for Hans, for when the stepmother gave birth to her own son, she succeeded in sowing discord between Hans and his father, until finally Hans was forced to leave home. He took a sausage from the smoking rack, cut a sturdy stick from his father's bush, then wandered off into the wide world. Toward evening he came into a large forest, lost his way, and was in great distress. He heard a rustling in the brush and a gray dwarf stepped forward, saying, "I'm hungry. Give me something to eat!" Hans reached into his pocket, pulled out the sausage, and gave it to the dwarf. Then the dwarf reached into his pocket, pulled out a transverse flute, then gave it to Hans, saying, "If you are in need, just blow!" With that the dwarf disappeared. Has was tired, so he lay down in the grass and fell asleep. The next morning he wandered further, and when he became hungry he blew on the flute. Two large wolfhounds suddenly appeared; the one had a sausage in his mouth, the other a loaf of bread. Hans ate until he was full, then wandered onward. Toward evening a wolf approached him and threatened to tear him apart. Hans blew on his flute and the dogs suddenly appeared and tore the wolf apart. The next day he again blew on the flute when he was hungry, and the dogs brought him bread and sausage. The same thing happened on the third day. And, when a bear attacked him toward evening on the second day, he blew on the flute, and the dogs appeared and tore the bear apart. Toward evening on the third day he came to a cave. A cannibal woman lived there with her son. Hans asked them for shelter, which they gladly offered him, for they intended to strangle him in the night, and then eat him. Time went by slowly for him, but that night when they came into his room to kill him, he blew on his flute. The dogs appeared and tore the cannibal and her son to pieces. When Hans awoke the next morning he found himself in the middle of a large city. during the night the dogs had carried him there. The innkeeper came to him and said, "Have you heard the news? Last night the dragon carried the princess away. Whoever can rescue her can have her and become king." Hans went out and followed the dragon's tracks. Before long he found himself back in the great forest. The dragon was lying beneath a large oak tree, and the princess was petting his head. Hans pulled the princess away. The dragon woke up and attempted to eat Hans. He blew on his flute. The dogs appeared and tore the dragon apart. Hans took the princess to her father, who said to him, "Do you want her?" "Yes," said Hans. "She looks like my mother, only younger and more noble. Therefore I would like her." Then they married and lived many years together in peace and joy. Source: Carl and Theodor Colshorn, "Die Querpfeife," Märchen und Sagen (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), no. 43, pp. 141-43 . The Colshorns' source: "Oral, from Vollbüttel." Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2016. Return to the table of contents . The Tinderbox Denmark, Hans Christian Andersen A soldier came marching along the high road. One, two! One, two! He had his knapsack on his back and his sword at his side, for he had been to the wars and he was on his way home now. He met an old witch on the road, she was so ugly, her lower lip hung right down on to her chin. She said, "Good evening, soldier! What a nice sword you've got, and such a big knapsack; you are a real soldier! You shall have as much money as ever you like!" "Thank you kindly, you old witch!" said the soldier. "Do you see that big tree!" said the witch, pointing to a tree close by. "It is hollow inside! Climb up to the top and you will see a hole into which you can let yourself down, right down under the tree! I will tie a rope round your waist so that I can haul you up again when you call!" "What am I to do down under the tree?" asked the soldier. "Fetch money!" said the witch. "You must know that when you get down to the bottom of the tree you will find yourself in a wide passage; it's quite light there, for there are over a hundred blazing lamps. You will see three doors which you can open, for the keys are there. If you go into the first room you will see a big box in the middle of the floor. A dog is sitting on the top of it, and he has eyes as big as saucers, but you needn't mind that. I will give you my blue checked apron, which you can spread out on the floor; then go quickly forward, take up the dog and put him on my apron, open the box and take out as much money as ever you like. It is all copper, but if you like silver better, go into the next room. There you will find a dog with eyes as big as millstones; but never mind that, put him on my apron and take the money. If you prefer gold you can have it too, and as much as you can carry, if you go into the third room. But the dog sitting on that box has eyes each as big as the Round Tower. He is a dog, indeed, as you may imagine! But don't let it trouble you; you only have to put him on to my apron and then he won't hurt you, and you can take as much gold out of the box as you like!" "That's not so bad!" said the soldier. "But what am I to give you, old witch? For you'll want something, I'll be bound." "No," said the witch, "not a single penny do I want; I only want you to bring me an old tinderbox that my grandmother forgot the last time she was down there!" "Well! tie the rope round my waist!" said the soldier. "Here it is," said the witch, "and here is my blue-checked apron." Then the soldier climbed up the tree, let himself slide down the hollow trunk, and found himself, as the witch had said, in the wide passage where the many hundred lamps were burning. Now he opened the first door. Ugh! There sat the dog with eyes as big as saucers staring at him. "You are a nice fellow!" said the soldier, as he put him on to the witch's apron, and took out as many pennies as he could cram into his pockets. Then he shut the box, and put the dog on the top of it again, and went into the next room. Hallo! there sat the dog with eyes as big as millstones. "You shouldn't stare at me so hard; you might get a pain in your eyes!" Then he put the dog on the apron, but when he saw all the silver in the box he threw away all the coppers and stuffed his pockets and his knapsack with silver. Then he went on into the third room. Oh! how horrible! that dog really had two eyes as big as the Round Tower, and they rolled round and round like wheels. "Good evening!" said the soldier, saluting, for he had never seen such a dog in his life; but after looking at him for a bit he thought, "That will do," and then he lifted him down on to the apron and opened the chest. Preserve us! What a lot of gold! He could buy the whole of Copenhagen with it, and all the sugar pigs from the cake-women, all the tin soldiers, whips and rocking-horses in the world! That was money indeed! Now the soldier threw away all the silver he had filled his pockets and his knapsack with, and put gold in its place. Yes, he crammed all his pockets, his knapsack, his cap and his boots so full that he could hardly walk! Now, he really had got a lot of money. He put the dog back on to the box, shut the door, and shouted up through the tree, " Haul me up, you old witch!" "Have you got the tinderbox?" "Oh! to be sure!" said the soldier. "I had quite forgotten it." And he went, back to fetch it. The witch hauled him up, and there he was standing on the high road again with his pockets, boots, knapsack and cap full of gold. "What do you want the tinderbox for?" asked the soldier. "That's no business of yours," said the witch. "You've got the money; give me the tinderbox!" "Rubbish!" said the soldier. "Tell me directly what you want with it, or I will draw my sword and cut off your head." "I won't!" said the witch. Then the soldier cut off her head; there she lay! But he tied all the money up in her apron, slung it on his back like a pack, put the tinderbox in his pocket, and marched off to the town. It was a beautiful town, and he went straight to the finest hotel, ordered the grandest rooms and all the food he liked best, because he was a rich man now that he had so much money. Certainly the servant who had to clean his boots thought they were very funny old things for such a rich gentleman, but he had not had time yet to buy any new ones; the next day he bought new boots and fine clothes. The soldier now became a fine gentleman, and the people told him all about the grand things in the town, and about their king, and what a lovely princess his daughter was. "Where is she to be seen?" asked the soldier. "You can't see her at all! " they all said. "She lives in a great copper castle surrounded with walls and towers. Nobody but the king dare go in and out, for it has been prophesied that she will marry a common soldier, and the king doesn't like that!" "I should like to see her well enough!" thought the soldier. But there was no way of getting leave for that. He now led a very merry life; went to theaters, drove about in the King's Park, and gave away a lot of money to poor people, which was very nice of him; for he remembered how disagreeable it used to be not to have a penny in his jpocket. Now he was rich, wore fine cloth, and had a great many friends, who all said what a nice fellow he was -- a thorough gentleman -- and he liked to be told that. But as he went on spending money every day and his store was never renewed, he at last found himself with only two pence left. Then he was obliged to move out of his fine rooms. He had to take a tiny little attic up under the roof, clean his own boots, and mend them himself with a darning needle. None of his friends went to see him, because there were far too many stairs. One dark evening when he had not even enough money to buy a candle with, he suddenly remembered that there was a little bit in the old tinderbox he had brought out of the hollow tree, when the witch helped him down. He got out the tinderbox with the candle end in it and struck fire, but as the sparks flew out from the flint the door burst open and the dog with eyes as big as saucers, which he had seen down under the tree, stood before him and said, " What does my lord command?" "By heaven!" said the soldier, "this is a nice kind of tinderbox, if I can get whatever I want like this! Get me some money," he said to the dog, and away it went. It was back in a twinkling with a big bag full of pennies in its mouth. Now the soldier saw what a treasure he had in the tinderbox. If he struck once, the dog which sat on the box of copper came; if he struck twice, the dog on the silver box came, and if he struck three times, the one from the box of gold. He now moved down to the grand rooms and got his fine clothes again, and then all his friends knew him once more and liked him as much as ever. Then he suddenly began to think: After all it's a curious thing that no man can get a sight of the princess! Everyone says she is so beautiful! But what is the good of that, when she always has to be shut up in that big copper palace with all the towers. Can I not somehow manage to see her? Where is my tinderbox? Then he struck the flint, and, whisk, came the dog with eyes as big as saucers. "It certainly is the middle of the night," said the soldier, "but I am very anxious to see the princess, if only for a single moment." The dog was out of the door in an instant, and before the soldier had time to think about it, he was back again with the princess. There she was fast asleep on the dog's back, and she was so lovely that anybody could see that she must be a real princess! The soldier could not help it, but he was obliged to kiss her, for he was a true soldier. Then the dog ran back again with the princess, but in the morning when the king and queen were having breakfast, the princess said that she had had such a wonderful dream about a dog and a soldier. She had ridden on the dog's back, and the soldier had kissed her. "That's a pretty tale," said the queen. After this an old lady-in-waiting had to sit by her bed at night to see if this was really a dream, or what it could be. The soldier longed so intensely to see the princess again that at night the dog came to fetch her. He took her up and ran off with her as fast as he could, but the old lady-in-waiting put on her galoshes and ran just as fast behind them; when she saw that they disappeared into a large house, she thought, "Now I know where it is," and made a big cross with chalk on the gate. Then she went home and lay down, and presently the dog came back, too, with the princess. When he saw that there was a cross on the gate, he took a bit of chalk, too, and made crosses on all the gates in the town. Now this was very clever of him, for the lady-in-waiting could not possibly find the gate when there were crosses on all the gates. Early next morning the king, the queen, the lady-in-waiting, and all the court officials went to see where the princess had been. "There it is," said the king, when he saw the first door with the cross on it. "No, my dear husband, it is there," said the queen, who saw another door with a cross on it. "But there is one, and there is another!" they all cried out. They soon saw that it was hopeless to try and find it. Now the queen was a very clever woman; she knew more than how to drive in a chariot. She took her big gold scissors and cut up a large piece of silk into small pieces, and made a pretty little bag, which she filled with fine grains of buckwheat. She then tied it onto the back of the princess, and when that was done she cut a little hole in the bag, so that the grains could drop out all the way wherever the princess went. At night the dog came again, took the princess on his back, and ran off with her to the soldier, who was so fond of her that he longed to be a prince, so that he might have her for his wife. The dog never noticed how the grain dropped out all along the road from the palace to the soldier's window, where he ran up the wall with the princess. In the morning the king and the queen easily saw where their daughter had been, and they seized the soldier and threw him into the dungeons. There he lay! Oh, how dark and tiresome it was, and then one day they said to him, "Tomorrow you are to be hanged." It was not amusing to be told that, especially as he had left his tinderbox behind him at the hotel. In the morning he could see through the bars in the little window that the people were hurrying out of the town to see him hanged. He heard the drums and saw the soldiers marching along. All the world was going; among them was a shoemaker's boy in his leather apron and slippers. He was in such a hurry that he lost one of his slippers, and it fell close under the soldier's window where he was peeping out through the bars. "I say, you boy! Don't be in such a hurry," said the soldier to him. "Nothing will happen till I get there! But if you will run to the house were I used to live, and fetch me my tinderbox, you shall have a penny! You must put your best foot foremost!" The boy was only too glad to have the penny, and tore off to get the tinderbox, gave it to the soldier, and -- yes, now we shall hear. Outside the town a high scaffold had been raised, and the soldiers were drawn up round about it, as well as crowds of the townspeople. The king and the queen sat upon a beautiful throne exactly opposite the judge and all the councillors. The soldier mounted the ladder, but when they were about to put the rope round his neck, he said that before undergoing his punishment a criminal was always allowd the gratification of a harmless wish, and he wanted very much to smoke a pipe, as it would be his last pipe in this world. The king would not deny him this, so the soldier took out his tinderbox and struck fire, once, twice, three times, and there were all the dogs. The one with eyes like saucers, the one with eyes like millstones, and the one whose eyes were as big as the Round Tower. "Help me! Save me from being hanged!" cried the soldier. And then the dogs rushed at the soldiers and the councillors; they took one by the legs, and another by the nose, and threw them up many fathoms into the air; and when they fell down, they were broken all to pieces. "I won't!" cried the king, but the biggest dog took both him and the queen and threw them after all the others. Then the soldiers became alarmed, and the people shouted, "Oh! good soldier, you shall be our king and marry the beautiful princess!" Then they conducted the soldier to the king's chariot, and all three dogs danced along in front of him and shouted, "Hurrah!" The boys all put their fingers in their mouths and whistled, and the soldiers presented arms. The princess came out of the copper palace and became queen, which pleased her very much. The wedding took place in a week, and the dogs all had seats at the table, where they sat staring with all their eyes. Source: Fairy Tales from Hans Christian Anderse n (London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1907), pp. 260-66 . The translator of this volume is variously given as Edgar Lucas or Mrs. E. Lucas (Alice Lucas). This story was first published in 1835. Link to this story in the original Danish: Fyrtøiet . Return to the table of contents . Lars, My Lad! Sweden, G. Djurklo There was once a prince or a duke, or something of that sort, but at any rate he belonged to a very grand family, and he would not stop at home. So he traveled all over the world, and wherever he went he was well liked, and was received in the best and gayest families, for he had no end of money. He made friends and acquaintances, as you may imagine, wherever he went, for he who has a well-filled trough is sure to fall in with pigs who want to have their fill. But he went on spending his money until he came to want, and at last his purse became so empty that he had not even a farthing left. And now there was an end to all his friends as well, for they behaved like the pigs; when the trough was empty and he had no more to give them, they began to grunt and grin, and then they ran away in all directions. There he stood alone with a long face. Everybody had been so willing to help him to get rid of his money, but nobody would help him in return; and so there was nothing for it but to trudge home and beg for crusts on the way. So late one evening he came to a great forest. He did not know where he should find a shelter for the night, but he went on looking and searching till he caught sight of an old tumble-down hut, which stood in the middle of some bushes. It was not exactly good enough for such a fine cavalier, but when you cannot get what you want you must take what you can get. And, since there was no help for it, he went into the hut. Not a living soul was to be seen; there was not even a stool to sit upon, but alongside the wall stood a big chest. What could there be inside that chest? If only there were some bits of moldy bread in it! How nice they would taste! For, you must know, he had not had a single bit of food the whole day, and he was so hungry and his stomach so empty that it groaned with pain. He lifted the lid. but inside the chest there was another chest, and inside that chest there was another; and so it went on, each one smaller than the other, until they became quite tiny boxes. The more there were the harder he worked away, for there must be something very fine inside, he thought, since it was so well hidden. At last he came to a tiny, little box, and in this box lay a bit of paper -- and that was all he got for his trouble! It was very annoying, of course, but then he discovered there was something written on the paper, and when he looked at it he was just able to spell it out, although at first it looked somewhat difficult. "Lars, my lad!" As he pronounced these words something answered right in his ear, "What are master's orders?" He looked round, but he saw nobody. This was very funny, he thought, and so he read out the words once more, "Lars, my lad!" And the answer came as before, "What are master's orders?" But he did not see anybody this time either. "If there is anybody about who hears what I say, then be kind enough to bring me something to eat," he said. And the next moment there stood a table laid out with all the best things one could think of. He set to work to eat and drink, and had a proper fill. He had never enjoyed himself so much in all his life, he thought. When he had eaten all he could get down, he began to feel sleepy, and so he took out the paper again, "Lars, my lad!" "What are master's orders?" "Well, you have given me food and drink, and now you must get me a bed to sleep in as well. But I want a really fine bed," he said, for you must know he was a little more bold now that his hunger was stayed. Well, there it stood, a bed so fine and dainty that even the king himself might covet it. Now this was all very well in its way, but when once you are well off you wish for still more, and he had no sooner got into bed than he began to think that the room was altogether too wretched for such a grand bed. So he took out the paper again: "Lars, my lad!" "What are master's orders?" "Since you are able to get me such food and such a bed here in the midst of the wild forest, I suppose you can manage to get me a better room, for you see I am accustomed to sleep in a palace, with golden mirrors and draped walls and ornaments and comforts of all kinds," he said. Well, he had no sooner spoken the words than he found himself lying in the grandest chamber anybody had ever seen. Now he was comfortable, he thought, and felt quite satisfied as he turned his face to the wall and closed his eyes. But that was not all the grandeur; for when he woke up in the morning and looked round, he saw it was a big palace he had been sleeping in. One room led into the other, and wherever he went the place was full of all sorts of finery and luxuries, both on the walls and on the ceilings, and they glittered so much when the sun shone on them that he had to shade his eyes with his hand, so strong was the glare of gold and silver wherever he turned. He then happened to look out of the window. Good gracious! How grand it was! There was something else than pine forests and juniper bushes to look at, for there was the finest garden anyone could wish for, with splendid trees and roses of all kinds. But he could not see a single human being, or even a cat; and that, you know, was rather lonely, for otherwise he had everything so grand and had been set up as his own master again. So he took out the bit of paper: "Lars, my lad!" "What are master's orders?" "Well, now you have given me food and bed and a palace to live in, I intend to remain here, for I like the place," he said, "yet I don't like to live quite by myself. I must have both lads and lasses whom I may order about to wait on me," he said. And there they were. There came servants and stewards and scullery maids and chambermaids of all sorts, and some came bowing and some curtseying. So now the duke thought he was really satisfied. But now it happened that there was a large palace on the other side of the forest, and there the king lived who owned the forest, and the great, big fields around it. As he was walking up and down in his room he happened to look out through the window and saw the new palace, where the golden weathercocks were swinging to and fro on the roof in the sunlight, dazzling his eyes. "This is very strange," he thought; and so he called his courtiers. They came rushing in, and began bowing and scraping. "Do you see the palace over there?" said the king. They opened their eyes and began to stare. Yes, of course, they saw it. "Who is it that has dared to build such a palace on my grounds?" said the king. They bowed, and they scraped with their feet, but they did not know anything about it. The king then called his generals and captains. They came, stood at attention and presented arms. "Be gone, soldiers and troopers," said the king, "and pull down the palace over there, and hang him who has built it; and don't lose any time about it!" Well, they set off in great haste to arm themselves, and away they went. The drummers beat the skins of their drums, and the trumpeters blew their trumpets, and the other musicians played and blew as best they could, so that the duke heard them long before he could see them. But he had heard this kind of noise before, and knew what it meant, so he took out his scrap of paper: "Lars, my lad!" "What are master's orders?" "There are soldiers coming here," he said, "and now you must provide me with soldiers and horses, that I may have double as many as those over in the wood, and with sabers and pistols, and guns and cannons with all that belongs to them; but be quick about it." And no time was lost; for when the duke looked out, he saw an immense number of soldiers, who were drawn up around the palace. When the king's men arrived, they came to a sudden halt and dared not advance. But the duke was not afraid; he went straight up to the colonel of the king's soldiers and asked him what he wanted. The colonel told him his errand. "It's of no use," said the duke. "You see how many men I have; and if the king will listen to me, we shall become good friends, and I will help him against his enemies, and in such a way that it will be heard of far and wide," he said. The colonel was of the same opinion, and the duke then invited him and all his soldiers inside the palace, and the men had more than one glass to drink and plenty of everything to eat as well. But while they were eating and drinking they began talking; and the duke then got to hear that the king had a daughter who was his only child, and was so wonderfully fair and beautiful that no one had ever seen her like before. And the more the king's soldiers ate and drank the more they thought she would suit the duke for a wife. And they went on talking so long that the duke at last began to be of the same opinion. "The worst of it," said the soldiers, "is that she is just as proud as she is beautiful, and will never look at a man." But the duke laughed at this. "If that's all," said the duke, "there's sure to be a remedy for that complaint." When the soldiers had eaten and drunk as much as they could find room for, they shouted "Hurrah!" so that it echoed among the hills, and then they set out homeward. But, as you may imagine, they did not walk exactly in parade order, for they were rather unsteady about the knees, and many of them did not carry their guns in regulation manner. The duke asked them to greet the king from him. He would call on him the following day, he said. When the duke was alone again, he began to think of the princess, and to wonder if she were as beautiful and fair as they had made her out to be. He would like to make sure of it; and as so many strange things had happened that day it might not be impossible to find that out as well, he thought. "Lars, my lad!" "What are master's orders?" "Well, now you must bring me the king's daughter as soon as she has gone to sleep," he said; "but she must not be awakened either on the way here or back. Do you hear that?" he said. And before long the princess was lying on the bed. She slept so soundly and looked so wonderfully beautiful as she lay there. Yes, she was as sweet as sugar, I can tell you. The duke walked round about her, but she was just as beautiful from whatever point of view he looked at her. The more he looked the more he liked her. "Lars, my lad!" "What are master's orders?" "You must now carry the princess home," he said, "for now I know how she looks and tomorrow I will ask for her hand," he said. Next morning the king looked out of the window. "I suppose I shall not be troubled with the sight of that palace anymore," he thought. But, zounds! There it stood just as on the day before, and the sun shone so brightly on the roof, and the weathercocks dazzled his eyes. He now became furious, and called all his men. They came quicker than usual. The courtiers bowed and scraped, and the soldiers stood at attention and presented arms. "Do you see the palace there?" screamed the king. They stretched their necks, and stared and gaped. Yes, of course, that they did. "Have I not ordered you to pull down the palace and hang the builder?" he said. Yes, they could not deny that; but then the colonel himself stepped forward and reported what had happened and how many soldiers the duke had, and how wonderfully grand the palace was. And next he told him what the duke had said, and how he had asked him to give his greetings to the king, and all that sort of thing. The king felt quite confused, and had to put his crown on the table and scratch his head. He could not understand all this, although he was a king; for he could take his oath it had all been built in a single night; and if the duke were not the evil one himself, he must in any case have done it by magic. While he sat pondering, the princess came into the room. "Good morning to you, father!" she said. "Just fancy, I had such a strange and beautiful dream last night!" she said. "What did you dream then, my girl?" said the king. "I dreamed I was in the new palace over yonder, and that I saw a duke there, so fine and handsome that I could never have imagined the like; and now I want to get married, father," she said. "Do you want to get married? -- you, who never cared to look at a man! That's very strange!" said the king. "That may be." Said the princess; "but it's different now, and I want to get married, and it's the duke I want," she said. The king was quite beside himself, so frightened did he become of the duke. But all of a sudden he heard a terrible noise of drums and trumpets and instruments of all kinds; and then came a message that the duke had just arrived with a large company, all of whom were so grandly dressed that gold and silver glistened in every fold. The king put on his crown and his coronation robes, and then went out on the steps to receive them. And the princess was not slow to follow him. The duke bowed most graciously, and the king of course did likewise, and when they had talked awhile about their affairs and their grandeur they became the best of friends. A great banquet was then prepared, and the duke was placed next to the princess at the table. What they talked about is not easy to tell, but the duke spoke so well for himself that the princess could not very well say "No" to anything he said, and then he went up to the king and asked for her hand. The king could not exactly say "No" either, for he could very well see that the duke was a person with whom it was best to be on friendly terms; but give his sanction there and then, he could not very well do that either. He wanted to see the duke's palace first, and find out about the state of affairs over there, as you may understand. So it was arranged that he should visit the duke and take the princess with him to see his palace; and with this they parted company. When the duke returned home, Lars became busier than ever, for there was so much to attend to. But he set to work and strove hard; and when the king and his daughter arrived everything was so magnificent and splendid that no words can describe it. They went through all the rooms and looked about, and they found everything as it should be, and even still more splendid, thought the king, and so he was quite pleased. The wedding then took place, and that in grand style; and on the duke's arrival home with his bride he, too, gave a great feast, and then there was an end to the festivities. Some time passed by, and one evening the duke heard these words: "Are you satisfied now?" It was Lars, as you may guess, but the duke could not see him. "Well, I ought to be," said the duke. "You have provided me with everything I have," he said. "Yes, but what have I got in return?" asked Lars. "Nothing," said the duke; "but, bless me, what could I have given you, who are not of flesh and blood, and whom I cannot see either?" he said. "But if there is anything I can do for you, tell me what it is, and I shall do it." "Well, I should like to ask you for that little scrap of paper which you found in the chest," said Lars. "Nothing else?" said the duke. "If such a trifle can help you, I can easily do without it, for now I begin to know the words by heart," he said. Lars thanked the duke, and asked him to put the paper on the chair in front of the bed when he retired to rest, and he would be sure to fetch it during the night. The duke did as he was told; and so he and the princess lay down and went to sleep. But early in the morning the duke awoke and felt so cold that his teeth chattered, and when he had got his eyes quite open he found that he was quite naked and had not even as much as a thread on his back; and instead of the grand bed and the beautiful bedroom, and the magnificent palace, he lay on the big chest in the old tumble-down hut. He began to shout, "Lars, my lad!" But he got no answer. He shouted once more, "Lars, my lad!" But he got no answer this time either. So he shouted all he could, "Lars, my lad!" But it was all in vain. Now he began to understand how matters stood. When Lars had got the scrap of paper he was freed from service at the same time, and now he had taken everything with him. But there was no help for it. There stood the duke in the old hut quite naked; and as for the princess she was not much better off, although she had her clothes on, for she had got them from her father, so Lars had no power over them. The duke had now to tell the princess everything, and ask her to leave him. He would have to manage as best he could, he said. But she would not hear of it. She well remembered what the parson had said when he married them, and she would never, never leave him, she said. In the meantime the king in his palace had also awakened, and when he looked out of the window he did not see any sign whatever of the other palace where his daughter and son-in-law lived. He became uneasy, as you may imagine, and called his courtiers. They came in, and began to bow and scrape. "Do you see the palace over yonder behind the forest?" he asked. They stretched their necks and stared with all their might. No, they did not see it. "Where had it gone to, then?" asked the king. Well, really they did not know. It was not long before the king set out with all his court through the forest; and when he arrived at the place where the palace with the beautiful gardens should have been, he could not see anything but heather and juniper bushes and firs. But then he discovered the old tumble-down hut, which stood there among the bushes. He entered the hut and -- mercy on us! -- what a sight met his eyes! There stood his son-in-law, quite naked, and his daughter, who had not very many clothes on either, and who was crying and moaning. "Dear, dear! what does all this mean?" said the king; but he did not get any answer, for the duke would rather have died than tell him. The king did his utmost to get him to speak; but in spite of all the king's promises and threats the duke remained obstinate and would not utter a word. The king then became angry; and no wonder, for now he could see that this grand duke was not what he pretended to be, and so he ordered the duke to be hanged, and that without any loss of time. The princess begged and prayed for mercy; but neither prayers nor tears were of any help now; for an impostor he was, and as an impostor he should die, said the king. And so it had to be. They erected a gallows, and placed the rope round the duke's neck. But while they were getting the gallows ready, the princess got hold of the hangman, and gave both him and his assistant some money, that they should so manage the hanging of the duke that he should not lose his life, and in the night they were to cut him down, so that he and the princess might then flee the country. And that's how the matter was arranged. In the meantime they had strung up the duke, and the king and his court and all the people went their way. The duke was now in great straits. He had, however, plenty of time to reflect how foolish he had been in not saving some of the crumbs when he was living in plenty, and how unpardonably stupid he had been in letting Lars have the scrap of paper. This vexed him more than all. If only he had it again, he thought, they should see he had been gaining some sense in return for all he had lost. But it is of little use snarling if you haven't got any teeth. "Ah, well, well!" he sighed, and so he dangled his legs, which was really all he could do. The day passed slowly and tediously for him, and he was not at all displeased when he saw the sun setting behind the forest. But just before it disappeared he heard a fearful shouting, and when he looked down the hill, he saw seven cartloads of worn-out shoes, and on the top of the hindmost cart he saw a little old man in gray clothes and with a red pointed cap on his head. His face was like that of the worst scarecrow, and the rest of him was not very handsome either. He drove straight up to the gallows, and when he arrived right under it he stopped and looked up at the duke, and then burst out laughing, the ugly old fellow! "How stupid you were!" he said; "but what should the fool do with his stupidity if he did not make use of it?" And then he laughed again. "Yes, there you are hanging now, and here am I carting away all the shoes I have worn out for your whims. I wonder if you can read what is written on this bit of paper, and if you recognize it?" he said with an ugly laugh, holding up the paper before the duke's eyes. But all who hang are not dead, and this time it was Lars who was befooled. The duke made a clutch, and snatched the paper from him. "Lars, my lad!" "What are master's orders?" "Well, you must cut me down from the gallows and put the palace and all the rest in its place again, exactly as it was before, and when the night has set in you must bring back the princess." All went merrily as in a dance, and before long everything was in its place, just as it was when Lars took himself off. When the king awoke the next morning he looked out of the window, as was his custom, and there stood the palace again, with the weathercocks glittering so beautifully in the sunshine. He called his courtiers, and they came and began to bow and scrape. They stretched their necks as far as they could, and stared and gaped. "Do you see the palace over there?" said the king. Yes, of course, they did. The king then sent for the princess, but she was not to be found. He then went out to see if his son-in-law was still hanging on the gallows, but neither son-in-law nor gallows was to be seen. He had to lift off his crown and scratch his head. But that did not improve matters; he could not make head or tail of either one thing or the other. He set off at once with all his court through the forest, and when he came to the place where the palace should stand, there it stood sure enough. The gardens and the roses were exactly as they used to be, and the duke's people were to be seen everywhere among the trees. His son-in-law and his daughter received him on the steps, dressed in their finest clothes. "Well, I never saw the like of this," said the king to himself; he could scarcely believe his own eyes, so wonderful did it all seem to him. "God's peace be with you, father, and welcome here!" said the duke. The king stood staring at him. "Are you my son-in-law?" he asked. "Well, I suppose I am," said the duke. "Who else should I be?" "Did I not order you to be hanged yesterday like any common thief?" said the king. "I think you must have been bewitched on the way," said the duke, with a laugh. "Do you think I am the man to let myself be hanged? Or is there anyone here who dares to believe it?" he said, and looked so fiercely at the courtiers that they felt as if they were being pierced through and through. They bowed and scraped and cringed before him. Who could believe such a thing? Was it at all likely? "Well, if there is anyone who dares to say the king could have wished me such evil, let him speak out," said the duke, and fixed his eyes upon them still more fiercely than before. They went on bowing and scraping and cringing. How could anyone dare say such a thing? No, they had more sense than that, they should hope. The king did not know what to believe, for when he looked at the duke he thought he never could have wished him such evil; but still he was not quite convinced. "Did I not come here yesterday, and was not the whole palace gone, and was there not an old hut in its place? And did not I go into that hut, and did not you stand stark naked right before my eyes?" he asked. "I wonder the king can talk so," said the duke. "I think the trolls must have bewitched your eyes in the forest and made you quite crazy; or what do you think?" he said, and turned round to the courtiers. They bowed and bowed till their backs were bent double, and agreed with everything he said, there could be no mistake about that. The king rubbed his eyes, and looked round about him. "I suppose it is as you say, then," he said to the duke, "and it is well I have got back my proper sight and have come to my senses again. For it would have been a sin and a shame if I had let you be hanged," he said; and so he was happy again, and nobody thought any more about the matter. "Once bitten, twice shy," as the proverb says; and the duke now took upon himself to manage and look after most of his affairs, so that it was seldom Lars had to wear out his shoes. The king soon gave the duke half the kingdom into the bargain; so he had now plenty to do, and people said they would have to search a long time to find his equal in wise and just ruling. Then one day Lars came to the duke, looking very little better than the first time he had seen him; but he was, of course, more humble, and did not dare giggle and make grimaces. "You do not want my help any longer, now," he said; "for although I did wear out my shoes at first, I am now unable to wear out a single pair, and my feet will soon be covered all over with moss. So I thought I might now get my leave of absence," he said. The duke quite agreed with him. "I have tried to spare you, and I almost think I could do without you," he said. "But the palace and all the rest I do not want to lose, for such a clever builder as you I shall never get again; nor do I ever want to adorn the gallows again, as you can well understand; so I cannot give you back the paper on any account," he said. "Well, as long as you have got it, I need not fear," said Lars; "but if anybody else should get hold of it there will be nothing but running and trudging about again, and that's what I want to avoid; for when one has been tramping about for a thousand years, as I have done, one begins to get tired of it," he said. But they went on talking, and at last they agreed that the duke should put the paper in the box, and then bury it seven ells under the ground, under a stone fixed in the earth. They then gave mutual thanks for the time they had spent in each other's company, and so they parted. The duke carried out his part of the agreement, for he was not likely to want to change it. He lived happy and contented with the princess, and they had both sons and daughters. When the king died, he got the whole of the kingdom, and you may guess he was none the worse off for that; and there no doubt he still lives and reigns, if he is not dead. But as for the box with the scrap of paper in it, there are many who are still running about looking for it. Source: Fairy Tales from the Swedish of G. Djurklo , translated by H. L. Bræstad (London: William Heinemann, 1901), pp. 1-26 . Return to the table of contents . Sir Buzz India Once upon a time a soldier died, leaving a widow and one son. They were dreadfully poor, and at last matters became so bad that they had nothing left in the house to eat. "Mother," said the son, "give me four shillings, and I will go seek my fortune in the wide world." "Alas!" answered the mother, "and where am I, who haven't a farthing wherewith to buy bread, to find four shillings?" "There is that old coat of my father's," returned the lad. "Look in the pocket -- perchance there is something there." So she looked, and behold! there were six shillings hidden away at the very bottom of the pocket! "More than I bargained for," quoth the lad, laughing. "See, mother, these two shillings are for you. You can live on that till I return; the rest will pay my way until I find my fortune." So he set off to find his fortune, and on the way lie saw a tigress, licking her paw, and moaning mournfully. He was just about to run away from the terrible creature, when she called to him faintly, saying, "Good lad, if you will take out this thorn for me, I shall be forever grateful." "Not I!" answered the lad. "Why, if I begin to pull it out, and it pains you, you will kill me with a pat of your paw." "No, no!" cried the tigress, "I will turn my face to this tree, and when the pain comes I will pat it. " To this the soldier's son agreed; so he pulled out the thorn, and when the pain came the tigress gave the tree such a blow that the trunk split all to pieces. Then she turned towards the soldier's son, and said gratefully, "Take this box as a reward, my son, but do not open it until you have traveled nine miles." So the soldier's son thanked the tigress, and set off with the box to find his fortune. Now when he had gone five miles, he felt certain that the box weighed more than it had at first, and every step he took it seemed to grow heavier and heavier. He tried to struggle on -- though it was all he could do to carry the box -- until he had gone about eight miles and a quarter, when his patience gave way. "I believe that tigress was a witch, and is playing off her tricks upon me," he cried, "but I will stand this nonsense no longer. Lie there, you wretched old box! Heaven knows what is in you, and I don't care." So saying, he flung the box down on the ground. It burst open with the shock, and out stepped a little old man. He was only one span high, but his beard was a span and a quarter long, and trailed upon the ground. The little manikin immediately began to stamp about and scold the lad roundly for letting the box down so violently. "Upon my word!" quoth the soldier's son, scarcely able to restrain a smile at the ridiculous little figure, " but you are weighty for your size, old gentleman! And what may your name be?" "Sir Buzz!" snapped the one-span manikin, still stamping about in a great rage. "Upon my word!" quoth the soldier's son once more, "if you are all the box contained, I am glad I didn't trouble to carry it farther." "That's not polite," snarled the manikin. "Perhaps if you had carried it the full nine miles you might have found something better; but that's neither here nor there. I'm good enough for you, at any rate, and will serve you faithfully according to my mistress's orders." "Serve me! Then I wish to goodness you'd serve me with some dinner, for I am mighty hungry! Here are four shillings to pay for it." No sooner had the soldier's son said this and given the money, than with a whiz! boom! bing! like a big bee, Sir Buzz flew through the air to a confectioner's shop in the nearest town. There he stood, the one-span manikin, with the span and a quarter beard trailing on the ground, just by the big preserving pan, and cried in ever so loud a voice, "Ho! ho! Sir Confectioner, bring me sweets!" The confectioner looked round the shop, and out of the door, and down the street, but could see no one, for tiny Sir Buzz was quite hidden by the preserving pan. Then the manikin called out louder still, " Ho! ho! Sir Confectioner, bring me sweets! " And when the confectioner looked in vain for his customer, Sir Buzz grew angry, and ran and pinched him on the legs, and kicked him on the foot, saying, " Impudent knave! do you mean to say you can't see me? Why, I was standing by the preserving pan all the time!" The confectioner apologized humbly, and hurried away to bring out his best sweets for his irritable little customer. Then Sir Buzz chose about a hundredweight of them, and said, "Quick, tie them up in something and give them into my hand; I'll carry them home." "They will be a good weight, sir," smiled the confectioner. "What business is that of yours, I should like to know?" snapped Sir Buzz. "Just you do as you're told, and here is your money." So saying he jingled the four shillings in his pocket. "As you please, sir," replied the man cheerfully, as he tied up the sweets into a huge bundle and placed it on the little manikin's outstretched hand, fully expecting him to sink under the weight; when lo! with a boom! bing! he whizzed off with the money still in his pocket. He alighted at a corn-chandler's shop, and, standing behind a basket of flour, called out at the top of his voice, "Ho! ho! Sir Chandler, bring me flour!" And when the corn-chandler looked round the shop, and out of the window, and down the street, without seeing anybody, the one-span manikin, with his beard trailing on the ground, cried again louder than before, "Ho! ho! Sir Chandler, bring me flour!" Then on receiving no answer, he flew into a violent rage, and ran and bit the unfortunate corn-chandler on the leg, pinched him, and kicked him, saying, "Impudent varlet! Don't pretend you couldn't see me! Why, I was standing close beside you behind that basket!" So the corn-chandler apologized humbly for his mistake, and asked Sir Buzz how much flour he wanted. "Two hundredweight," replied the manikin. "Two hundredweight, neither more nor less. Tie it up in a bundle, and I'll take it with me." "Your honor has a cart or beast of burden with you, doubtless?" said the chandler, "for two hundredweight is a heavy load." "What's that to you? " shrieked Sir Buzz, stamping his foot, " isn't it enough if I pay for it? " And then he jingled the money in his pocket again. So the corn-chandler tied up the flour in a bundle, and placed it in the manikin's outstretched hand, fully expecting it would crush him, when, with a whiz! Sir Buzz flew off, with the shillings still in his pocket. Boom! bing! boom! The soldier's son was just wondering what had become of his one-span servant, when, with a whir! the little fellow alighted beside him, and wiping his face with his handkerchief, as if he were dreadfully hot and tired, said thoughtfully, "Now I do hope I've brought enough, but you men have such terrible appetites!" "More than enough, I should say," laughed the lad, looking at the huge bundles. Then Sir Buzz cooked the girdle-cakes, and the soldier's son ate three of them and a handful of sweets; but the one-span manikin gobbled up all the rest, saying at each mouthful, "You men have such terrible appetites -- such terrible appetites!" After that, the soldier's son and his servant Sir Buzz traveled ever so far, until they came to the king's city. Now the king had a daughter called Princess Blossom, who was so lovely, and tender, and slim, and fair, that she only weighed five flowers. Every morning she was weighed in golden scales, and the scale always turned when the fifth flower was put in, neither less nor more. Now it so happened that the soldier's son by chance caught a glimpse of the lovely, tender, slim, and fair Princess Blossom, and, of course, he fell desperately in love with her. He would neither sleep nor eat his dinner, and did nothing all day long but say to his faithful manikin, "Oh, dearest Sir Buzz! oh, kind Sir Buzz! -- carry me to the Princess Blossom, that I may see and speak to her." "Carry you!" snapped the little fellow scornfully. "That's a likely story! Why, you're ten times as big as I am. You should carry me! " Nevertheless, when the soldier's son begged and prayed, growing pale and pining away with thinking of the Princess Blossom, Sir Buzz, who had a kind heart, was moved, and bade the lad sit on his hand. Then with a tremendous boom! bing! boom! they whizzed away and were in the palace in a second. Being nighttime, the Princess was asleep; nevertheless the booming wakened her and she was quite frightened to see a handsome young man kneeling beside her. She began of course to scream, but stopped at once when the soldier's son with the greatest politeness, and in the most elegant of language, begged her not to be alarmed. And after that they talked together about everything delightful, while Sir Buzz stood at the door and did sentry; but he stood a brick up on end first, so that he might not seem to pry upon the young people. Now when the dawn was just breaking, the soldier's son and Princess Blossom, wearied of talking, fell asleep; whereupon Sir Buzz, being a faithful servant, said to himself, "Now what is to be done? If my master remains here asleep, someone will discover him, and he will be killed as sure as my name is Buzz; but if I wake him, ten to one he will refuse to go." So without more ado he put his hand under the bed, and bing! boom! carried it into a large garden outside the town. There he set it down in the shade of the biggest tree, and pulling up the next biggest one by the roots, threw it over his shoulder, and marched up and down keeping guard. Before long the whole town was in a commotion, because the Princess Blossom had been carried off, and all the world and his wife turned out to look for her. By and by the one-eyed chief constable came to the garden gate. "What do you want here?" cried valiant Sir Buzz, making passes at him with the tree. The chief constable with his one eye could see nothing save the branches, but he replied sturdily, "I want the Princess Blossom!" "I'll blossom you! Get out of my garden, will you?" shrieked the one-span manikin, with his one and quarter span beard trailing on the ground; and with that he belabored the constable's pony so hard with the tree that it bolted away, nearly throwing its rider. The poor man went straight to the king, saying, " Your majesty! I am convinced your majesty's daughter, the Princess Blossom, is in your majesty's garden, just outside the town, as there is a tree there which fights terribly." Upon this the king summoned all his horses and men, and going to the garden tried to get in; but Sir Buzz behind the tree routed them all, for half were killed, and the rest ran away. The noise of the battle, however, awoke the young couple, and as they were now convinced they could no longer exist apart, they determined to fly together. So when the fight was over, the soldier's son, the Princess Blossom, and Sir Buzz set out to see the world. Now the soldier's son was so enchanted with his good luck in winning the princess, that he said to Sir Buzz, " My fortune is made already; so I shan't want you anymore, and you can go back to your mistress." "Pooh!" said Sir Buzz. "Young people always think so; however, have it your own way, only take this hair out of my beard, and if you should get into trouble, just burn it in the fire. I'll come to your aid." So Sir Buzz boomed off, and the soldier's son and the Princess Blossom lived and traveled together very happily, until at last they lost their way in a forest, and wandered about for some time without any food. When they were nearly starving, a Brahman found them, and hearing their story said, "Alas! you poor children! Come home with me, and I will give you something to eat." Now had he said, "I will eat you," it would have been much nearer the mark, for he was no Brahman, but a dreadful vampire, who loved to devour handsome young men and slender girls. But, knowing nothing of all this, the couple went home with him quite cheerfully. He was most polite, and when they arrived at his house, said, "Please get ready whatever you want to eat, for I have no cook. Here are my keys; open all my cupboards save the one with the golden key. Meanwhile I will go and gather firewood." Then the Princess Blossom began to prepare the food, while the soldier's son opened all the cupboards. In them he saw lovely jewels, and dresses, and cups and platters, such bags of gold and silver, that his curiosity got the better of his discretion, and, regardless of the Brahman's warning, he said, "I will see what wonderful thing is hidden in the cupboard with the golden key." So he opened it, and lo! it was full of human skulls, picked quite clean, and beautifully polished. At this dreadful sight the soldier's son flew back to the Princess Blossom, and said, "We are lost! we are lost! This is no Brahman, but a horrid vampire!" At that moment they heard him at the door, and the princess, who was very brave and kept her wits about her, had barely time to thrust the magic hair into the fire, before the vampire, with sharp teeth and fierce eyes, appeared. But at the selfsame moment a boom! boom! binging noise was heard in the air, coming nearer and nearer. Whereupon the vampire, who knew very well who his enemy was, changed into a heavy rain pouring down in torrents, hoping thus to drown Sir Buzz, but he changed into the storm wind beating back the rain. Then the vampire changed to a dove, but Sir Buzz, pursuing it as a hawk, pressed it so hard that it had barely time to change into a rose, and drop into King Indra's lap as he sat in his celestial court listening to the singing of some dancing girls. Then Sir Buzz, quick as thought, changed into an old musician, and standing beside the bard who was thrumming the guitar, said, "Brother, you are tired; let me play." And he played so wonderfully, and sang with such piercing sweetness, that King Indra said, "What shall I give you as a reward? Name what you please, and it shall be yours." Then Sir Buzz said, " I only ask the rose that is in your Majesty's lap." "I had rather you asked more, or less," replied king Indra. "It is but a rose, yet it fell from heaven; nevertheless it is yours." So saying, he threw the rose towards the musician, and lo! the petals fell in a shower on the ground. Sir Buzz went down on his knees and instantly gathered them up; but one petal escaping, changed into a mouse. Whereupon Sir Buzz, with the speed of lightning, turned into a cat, which caught and gobbled up the mouse. Now all this time the Princess Blossom and the soldier's son, shivering and shaking, were awaiting the issue of the combat in the vampire's hut; when suddenly, with a bing! boom! Sir Buzz arrived victorious, shook his head, and said, "You two had better go home, for you are not fit to take care of yourselves." Then he gathered together all the jewels and gold in one hand, placed the Princess and the soldier's son in the other, and whizzed away home, to where the poor mother -- who all this time had been living on the two shillings -- was delighted to see them. Then with a louder boom! bing! boom! than usual, Sir Buzz, without even waiting for thanks, whizzed out of sight, and was never seen or heard of again. But the soldier's son and the Princess Blossom lived happily ever after. Source: Flora Annie Steel, Tales of the Punjab: Told by the People (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), pp. 1-12 . This story was also published under the title "Sir Bumble": F. A. Steel and R. C. Temple, Wide-Awake Stories: A Collection of Tales Told by Little children, between Sunset and Sunrise in the Panjab and Kashmir (Bombay: Education Society's Press; London: Trübner and Company, 1884), pp. 5-16 . Return to the table of contents . Revised April 8, 2016. Bluebeard: Folktales of types 312 and 312A Bluebeard folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 312 and 312A about women who narrowly escape from their ruthless husbands or abductors translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2023 Contents Bluebeard (France, Charles Perrault). Bluebeard: A Legend from Auvergne (Cantal) (France). King Bluebeard (Germany). Knight Goldbeard (Switzerland). Don Firriulieddu (Italy). The Little Boy and His Dogs (African-American, Joel Chandler Harris). Blue-Beard (North Carolina, USA). The Chosen Suitor (Antigua, British West Indies). Man-Snake as Bridegroom (Jamaica). The Brahman Girl That Married a Tiger (India). Related links . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Bluebeard Charles Perrault There was once a man who had fine houses, both in town and country, a deal of silver and gold plate, embroidered furniture, and coaches gilded all over with gold. But this man was so unlucky as to have a blue beard, which made him so frightfully ugly that all the women and girls ran away from him. One of his neighbors, a lady of quality, had two daughters who were perfect beauties. He desired of her one of them in marriage, leaving to her choice which of the two she would bestow on him. Neither of them would have him, and they sent him backwards and forwards from one to the other, not being able to bear the thoughts of marrying a man who had a blue beard. Adding to their disgust and aversion was the fact that he already had been married to several wives, and nobody knew what had become of them. Bluebeard, to engage their affection, took them, with their mother and three or four ladies of their acquaintance, with other young people of the neighborhood, to one of his country houses, where they stayed a whole week. The time was filled with parties, hunting, fishing, dancing, mirth, and feasting. Nobody went to bed, but all passed the night in rallying and joking with each other. In short, everything succeeded so well that the youngest daughter began to think that the man's beard was not so very blue after all, and that he was a mighty civil gentleman. As soon as they returned home, the marriage was concluded. About a month afterwards, Bluebeard told his wife that he was obliged to take a country journey for six weeks at least, about affairs of very great consequence. He desired her to divert herself in his absence, to send for her friends and acquaintances, to take them into the country, if she pleased, and to make good cheer wherever she was. "Here," said he," are the keys to the two great wardrobes, wherein I have my best furniture. These are to my silver and gold plate, which is not everyday in use. These open my strongboxes, which hold my money, both gold and silver; these my caskets of jewels. And this is the master key to all my apartments. But as for this little one here, it is the key to the closet at the end of the great hall on the ground floor. Open them all; go into each and every one of them, except that little closet, which I forbid you, and forbid it in such a manner that, if you happen to open it, you may expect my just anger and resentment." She promised to observe, very exactly, whatever he had ordered. Then he, after having embraced her, got into his coach and proceeded on his journey. Her neighbors and good friends did not wait to be sent for by the newly married lady. They were impatient to see all the rich furniture of her house, and had not dared to come while her husband was there, because of his blue beard, which frightened them. They ran through all the rooms, closets, and wardrobes, which were all so fine and rich that they seemed to surpass one another. After that, they went up into the two great rooms, which contained the best and richest furniture. They could not sufficiently admire the number and beauty of the tapestry, beds, couches, cabinets, stands, tables, and looking glasses, in which you might see yourself from head to foot; some of them were framed with glass, others with silver, plain and gilded, the finest and most magnificent that they had ever seen. They ceased not to extol and envy the happiness of their friend, who in the meantime in no way diverted herself in looking upon all these rich things, because of the impatience she had to go and open the closet on the ground floor. She was so much pressed by her curiosity that, without considering that it was very uncivil for her to leave her company, she went down a little back staircase, and with such excessive haste that she nearly fell and broke her neck. Having come to the closet door, she made a stop for some time, thinking about her husband's orders, and considering what unhappiness might attend her if she was disobedient; but the temptation was so strong that she could not overcome it. She then took the little key, and opened it, trembling. At first she could not see anything plainly, because the windows were shut. After some moments she began to perceive that the floor was all covered over with clotted blood, on which lay the bodies of several dead women, ranged against the walls. (These were all the wives whom Bluebeard had married and murdered, one after another.) She thought she should have died for fear, and the key, which she, pulled out of the lock, fell out of her hand. After having somewhat recovered her surprise, she picked up the key, locked the door, and went upstairs into her chamber to recover; but she could not, so much was she frightened. Having observed that the key to the closet was stained with blood, she tried two or three times to wipe it off; but the blood would not come out; in vain did she wash it, and even rub it with soap and sand. The blood still remained, for the key was magical and she could never make it quite clean; when the blood was gone off from one side, it came again on the other. Bluebeard returned from his journey the same evening, saying that he had received letters upon the road, informing him that the affair he went about had concluded to his advantage. His wife did all she could to convince him that she was extremely happy about his speedy return. The next morning he asked her for the keys, which she gave him, but with such a trembling hand that he easily guessed what had happened. "What!" said he, "is not the key of my closet among the rest?" "I must," said she, "have left it upstairs upon the table." "Fail not," said Bluebeard, "to bring it to me at once." After several goings backwards and forwards, she was forced to bring him the key. Bluebeard, having very attentively considered it, said to his wife, "Why is there blood on the key?" "I do not know," cried the poor woman, paler than death. "You do not know!" replied Bluebeard. "I very well know. You went into the closet, did you not? Very well, madam; you shall go back, and take your place among the ladies you saw there." Upon this she threw herself at her husband's feet, and begged his pardon with all the signs of a true repentance, vowing that she would never more be disobedient. She would have melted a rock, so beautiful and sorrowful was she; but Bluebeard had a heart harder than any rock! "You must die, madam," said he, "at once." "Since I must die," answered she (looking upon him with her eyes all bathed in tears), "give me some little time to say my prayers." "I give you," replied Bluebeard, "half a quarter of an hour, but not one moment more." When she was alone she called out to her sister, and said to her, "Sister Anne" (for that was her name), "go up, I beg you, to the top of the tower, and look if my brothers are not coming. They promised me that they would come today, and if you see them, give them a sign to make haste." Her sister Anne went up to the top of the tower, and the poor afflicted wife cried out from time to time, "Anne, sister Anne, do you see anyone coming?" And sister Anne said, "I see nothing but a cloud of dust in the sun, and the green grass." In the meanwhile Bluebeard, holding a great saber in his hand, cried out as loud as he could bawl to his wife, "Come down instantly, or I shall come up to you." "One moment longer, if you please," said his wife; and then she cried out very softly, "Anne, sister Anne, do you see anybody coming?" And sister Anne answered, "I see nothing but a cloud of dust in the sun, and the green grass." "Come down quickly," cried Bluebeard, "or I will come up to you." "I am coming," answered his wife; and then she cried, "Anne, sister Anne, do you not see anyone coming?" "I see," replied sister Anne, "a great cloud of dust approaching us." "Are they my brothers?" "Alas, no my dear sister, I see a flock of sheep." "Will you not come down?" cried Bluebeard. "One moment longer," said his wife, and then she cried out, "Anne, sister Anne, do you see nobody coming?" "I see," said she, "two horsemen, but they are still a great way off." "God be praised," replied the poor wife joyfully. "They are my brothers. I will make them a sign, as well as I can for them to make haste." Then Bluebeard bawled out so loud that he made the whole house tremble. The distressed wife came down, and threw herself at his feet, all in tears, with her hair about her shoulders. "This means nothing," said Bluebeard. "You must die!" Then, taking hold of her hair with one hand, and lifting up the sword with the other, he prepared to strike off her head. The poor lady, turning about to him, and looking at him with dying eyes, desired him to afford her one little moment to recollect herself. "No, no," said he, "commend yourself to God," and was just ready to strike. At this very instant there was such a loud knocking at the gate that Bluebeard made a sudden stop. The gate was opened, and two horsemen entered. Drawing their swords, they ran directly to Bluebeard. He knew them to be his wife's brothers, one a dragoon, the other a musketeer; so that he ran away immediately to save himself; but the two brothers pursued and overtook him before he could get to the steps of the porch. Then they ran their swords through his body and left him dead. The poor wife was almost as dead as her husband, and had not strength enough to rise and welcome her brothers. Bluebeard had no heirs, and so his wife became mistress of all his estate. She made use of one part of it to marry her sister Anne to a young gentleman who had loved her a long while; another part to buy captains' commissions for her brothers, and the rest to marry herself to a very worthy gentleman, who made her forget the ill time she had passed with Bluebeard. Moral: Curiosity, in spite of its appeal, often leads to deep regret. To the displeasure of many a maiden, its enjoyment is short lived. Once satisfied, it ceases to exist, and always costs dearly. Another moral: Apply logic to this grim story, and you will ascertain that it took place many years ago. No husband of our age would be so terrible as to demand the impossible of his wife, nor would he be such a jealous malcontent. For, whatever the color of her husband's beard, the wife of today will let him know who the master is. Source: Andrew Lang, The Blue Fairy Book , 5th edition (London and New York: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1891), pp. 290-95 . First published 1889. Lang's source: Charles Perrault, Histoires ou contes du temps passé, avec des moralités: Contes de ma mère l'Oye (Paris, 1697). Link to Perrault's tale in the original French: "La Barbe Bleuë," Perrault's Popular Tales , edited from the original editions, with introduction, etc. by Andrew Lang (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1888), pp. 23-29 . Aarne-Thompson type 312. Return to the table of contents . Bluebeard: A Legend from Auvergne (Cantal) France On the mountains of Auvergne there was formerly a magnificent castle with large towers. One could enter it only by passing over a drawbridge which then would immediately rise. It was said in the country that all those who went in did not come out. It was called the cursed castle. The people of the country avoided passing through the area. Furthermore, they feared the castle's lord. He was a very wicked man, very tall and very strong, only going out dressed in armor and mounted on a black horse. He had a large beard with blue highlights. Therefore he was known only by the name Bluebeard. He was always alone, and he never had been known to have any friends. Especially women were afraid of him, for it was said that he carried off those who pleased him into his castle, and that they were never seen again. One day the beautiful Catherine, Father Barriez's daughter, had gone to gather wood in the forest. She was very happy that day, because she had just become engaged to the most attractive and best lad in the area. Their marriage was to take place after the harvest. Singing, she went deep into the woods, as far as the Trail of the Three Hermits. She gave no thought to the evil Bluebeard. Having collected a bundle of dry branches, she was about to return home to her father, when suddenly Bluebeard appeared in front of her. He seized her, placed her in front of him on his horse, and galloped back to his castle. He took her to a beautiful room where there was furniture covered in silk, gold, and silver. "All that will be yours, Catherine," he said to her, "for in three days you will be my wife. Get ready. Here is some fabric to make dresses for you. Spare nothing, for I want you to be beautiful on the day of our wedding. You can go and pray in the castle chapel, but don't try to flee. It would be useless. The drawbridge is up, the towers are high, and the moats are deep. You hear a dog barking. He would certainly devour you, if he were to get hold of you. Moreover, you are so far from your father's house, that you could not reach it in a week. You would die of fatigue, or I would have time to capture you and kill you." The poor girl begged in vain to be allowed to return to her father and to her fiancé, but to no avail. Bluebeard then left her, saying that he was going away to look for a priest to unite them, and that afterwards he would would put him to death. Catherine was frightened, for she had heard many times that Bluebeard had had several wives, and that he had killed them a few days after each wedding. She was especially sad that she was never again to see her fiancé, whom she loved very much. "I am going to pray," she said, "and prepare myself, not for marriage, but for death." She went into the chapel, which was dazzling with lights. All the candles were lit. She was very surprised and was greatly frightened when she saw three enormous stones, three tombs, in front of the altar. Catherine knelt down and began her prayer, mixing it with tears and sobs. Suddenly she heard a voice saying: "Poor Catherine!" Immediately a second voice said: "Poor Catherine!" Then a third voice repeated very sadly: "Poor Catherine!" At the same time the stones which were covering the three tombs rose up. "Who are you," she asked, "you who pity me so?" Three women wrapped in shrouds came out of the tombs and answered her: "We are the three women killed by Bluebeard, and you will be the fourth, if you do not manage to save yourself." "And how could I run away?" asked Katherine. "The drawbridge is up. The tower is high, and the moats are deep. The dog would devour me. And the road to my father's house is so long, so long, that I couldn't get there in a week." "Take this rope with which Bluebeard strangled me," said the first, "and with it you will be able to slide down the wall." "Take this poison with which Bluebeard poisoned me," said the second. "Throw it to the dog. He will swallow it and fall down dead." "Take this big stick with which Bluebeard clubbed me to death," said the third. "You can support yourself with it as you make your long journey." Then all three added: "Make haste, for if Bluebeard comes back, he will kill you. Good luck, Catherine! Farewell." And they returned to their tombs. Catherine took the poison, the rope, and the stick. She threw the poison at the dog in the yard. He rushed at her, swallowed the poison, and fell down thunderstruck. She fastened the rope and slid down the wall. Once in the fields, Catherine began to run. She was in a great hurry to get away from the accursed castle, but she was soon tired, and she leaned on the stick. After a long journey, she returned to her father, who was crying by the fireside, because he believed that his daughter had been devoured by wolves. A month later, Catherine married her betrothed. They were very happy and had many children. She never returned to the forest, but she learned that when Bluebeard had returned home, furious at not finding her, he had set out after her, wanting to bring her back to his castle and make her suffer badly and kill her afterwards. For three months Bluebeard wandered around, looking everywhere for her, but to no avail. Finally, one day he was found dead, just where he had met Catherine. It was said that a werewolf had killed him. Long afterward one could still hear moans and sobs on the Trail of the Three Hermits at night. The inhabitants of the country never went there after sunset, when the hens were in the chicken coop. For a long time one saw white specters and ghosts at the spot where Bluebeard's castle stood. They were, it was said, the women and the priests whom the wicked lord had murdered. Young ladies, never go too far into the forest. Remember Catherine's misfortunes. You might meet wicked Bluebeards there, and you would be lost. Source (books.google.com): Antoinette Bon, "Barbe-Bleue: Légende d'Auvergne (Cantal)," Revue des traditions populaires , vol. 2 (Paris, 1898), pp. 245-47 . Source (Internet Archive): Antoinette Bon, "Barbe-Bleue: Légende d'Auvergne (Cantal)," Revue des traditions populaires , vol. 2 (Paris, 1898), pp. 245-47 . Bon's source: "Narrated by Jean Raynaud, an old weaver." Return to the table of contents . King Bluebeard Germany Next to a great forest there lived an old man who had three sons and two daughters. Once they were sitting together thinking of nothing when a splendid carriage suddenly drove up and stopped in front of their house. A dignified gentleman climbed from the carriage, entered the house, and engaged the father and his daughters in conversation. Because he especially liked the youngest one, he asked the father if he would not give her to him to be his wife. This seemed to the father to be a good marriage, and he had long desired to see his daughters taken care of while he was still alive. However, the daughter could not bring herself to say yes, for the strange knight had an entirely blue beard, which caused her to shudder with fear whenever she looked at him. She went to her brothers, who were valiant knights, and asked them for advice. The brothers thought that she should accept Bluebeard, and they gave her a little whistle, saying, "If you are ever threatened, just blow this whistle, and we will come to your aid!" Thus she let herself be talked into becoming the strange man's wife, but she did arrange for her sister to accompany her when King Bluebeard took her to his castle. When the young wife arrived there, there was great joy throughout the entire castle, and King Bluebeard was very happy as well. This continued for about four weeks, and then he said that he was going on a journey. He turned all the keys of the castle over to his wife, saying, "You may go anywhere in the castle, unlock everything, and look at anything you want to, except for one door, to which this little golden key belongs. If you value your life, you are not allowed to open it!" "Oh no!" she said, adding that she surely would not open that door. But after the king had been away for a while, she could find no rest for constantly thinking about what there might be in the forbidden chamber. She was just about to unlock it when her sister approached her and held her back. However, on the morning of the fourth day, she could no longer resist the temptation, and taking the key she secretly crept to the room, stuck the key into the lock, and opened the door. Horrified, she saw that the entire room was filled with corpses, all of them women. She wanted to slam the door shut immediately, but the key fell out and into the blood. She quickly picked it up, but it was stained with blood. And however much she rubbed and cleaned it, the stains would not go away. With fear and trembling she went to her sister. When King Bluebeard finally returned from his journey, he immediately asked for the golden key. Seeing the bloodstains on it, he said, "Wife, why did you not heed my warning? Your hour has now struck! Prepare yourself to die, for you have been in the forbidden room!" Crying, she went to her sister, who lived upstairs in the castle. While she was bemoaning her fate to her, the sister thought of the whistle that she had received from her brothers, and said, "Give me the whistle! I shall send a signal to our brothers. Perhaps they will be able to help!" And she blew the whistle three times, issuing a bright sound that rang through the woods. An hour later they heard Bluebeard rustling up the stairs to get his wife and slaughter her. "Oh God, oh God!" she cried out. "Aren't my brothers coming?" She rushed to the door and locked it, then fearfully stood there holding it shut as well. Bluebeard pounded on the door, crying out that she should open it, and when she did not do so, he tried to break it down. "Oh sister, oh sister, aren't my brothers coming?" she said to her sister, who was standing at the window looking out into the distance. She replied, "I don't see anyone yet." Meanwhile, Bluebeard was breaking the door apart more and more, and the opening was almost large enough for him to get through, when three knights suddenly appeared before the castle. The sister cried from the window as loudly as she could, "Help! Help!" and waved to her brothers. They stormed up the stairs to where they had heard their sister's cry for help. There they saw King Bluebeard, sword in hand, standing before the broken door, and they heard their sister screaming inside the room. Immediately sensing what he was up to, they quickly ran their daggers into his breast and killed him. When the brothers learned what the godless king was going to do to their sister, and that he had already killed so many women, they destroyed his castle, so that there was not one stone remaining on another one. They took with them all his treasures, and lived happily with their sisters in their father's house. Source: Ernst Meier, "König Blaubart," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 38, pp. 134-37 . Type 312. Return to the table of contents . Knight Goldbeard Switzerland Once a noble-looking knight appeared in the Visper Valley. No one recognized him. He rode a proud black horse. The saddle was trimmed with broad strips of gold, and the reins were cut from the finest red leather. On his head he wore a silver helmet with eagle feathers. His face was adorned with a beard that seemed to be woven from the thinnest threads of gold. All the girls fell in love with this knight. He could be nice to them all, having flattering words for everyone. He was obviously wealthy, like a prince, because every day he pulled presents out of his pocket, which he gave first to one girl and then to another one. He lived in the largest house in the village. This house belonged to a family that had one grown son and three beautiful daughters. The two older daughters were hated by the people because of their arrogance, but the youngest was loved and highly honored because of her loveliness and modesty. She loved music, and in the evening she often played her dulcimer so sweetly and delicately that the birds stopped singing, and the river in the valley flowed more quietly. The knight joked with and teased the three sisters, taking first one and then another aside, so that each one believed that she was his chosen sweatheart. He whispered to each one in her ear that she was his beloved, but that she was not allowed to tell the others. Thus all three believed him and kept the secret from the others. The knight's room was above that of the youngest daughter, who heard him singing with three different voices every morning when he got up. Never before had she heard anything so lovely and artistic. It sounded more beautiful than the strings of her dulcimer, and she wanted with all her heart to learn to sing like that as well. For a long time she did not dare to speak to the knight about it, but when he called her his beloved and his fiancée, and secretly kissed her, she found the courage to speak, and she asked him to teach her to sing with three different voices. He stroked her cheeks and said: "Tomorrow afternoon we will go for a walk together out into the woods, my dear fiancée. There I will teach you to sing so beautifully that you will fall silent from hearing your own song!" This made her very happy, and she could hardly wait for the following day. The next morning she walked back and forth in the village and told everyone that she soon would be able to sing like the knight. He had promised her this, and a knight would keep his word. Knight Goldbeard had given the other two daughters the same promise. Early in the morning he took the oldest with him out into the woods. She held onto his arm, looked around haughtily, and was full of joy. Suddenly he ordered her to kneel down. Then he tied a rope around the terrified girl's neck and hung her from a tree. After this he went back to the village and fetched the second sister, who was waiting for him longingly. She had no idea what a terrible fate awaited her. With kind words he lured her into the woods. Then he wrapped the rope around her neck and hung her from the tree next to her sister. After lunch he took the third and youngest sister for a walk. She laughed and skipped like a chamois, rejoicing at how wonderful it would be when she would be able to sing with three different voices like the knight. As happened with the other two, he led her by the arm and told her the most beautiful stories. In the middle of the forest he suddenly changed his voice and ordered her to kneel down. She was startled, clasped her hands, and looked up at the sky. When she saw her two sisters hanging dead on the tree, she let out a piercing scream. Wringing her hands, she begged for mercy. But the knight said: "You must die. Two are hanging there on the tree, and you must become the third!" When she saw that the beast was not moved by her pleas, she begged to be allowed three cries before he killed her . He replied with a hellish grin: "Just sing, my little dove. It will not help you!" They were in the thickest part of the woods, where the larch trees stood close together and blocked any view of the village. She gave the first cry and shouted: "Father, come quickly, or I will die in the forest!" Everything remained silent. The knight stood motionless beside her, rope in hand. On a branch a little bird sang the evening song. She sighed deeply and called out for the second time: "Mother, come quickly, or I will die in the forest!" The wind rustled very softly through the trunks, and a hunter's horn could be heard in the distance. She looked into the stoney face of the murderer, who motioned to her to hurry. She screamed the third time: "Brother, come quickly, or I will die in the forest!" Her knees trembled, and she looked in horror at the man who was unwinding the noose. Then someone crashed through the bushes. It was her brother. He had been out hunting and had heard her scream. Seeing his death-pale and trembling sister kneeling before the fiend, he cried out: "Your reward is coming! Let my sister live!" He raised his rifle and shot the murderer through the head. The sister was still shuddering, and he led her home by the hand. Then he said: "You can live here and prosper, but never again should you trust a knight!" The next day the murdered sisters were buried in the churchyard. Source (books.google.com): Johannes Jegerlehner, "Ritter Goldbart," Was die Sennen erzählen: Märchen und Sagen aus dem Wallis (Bern: Verlag von A. Francke, 1907), pp. 112-15 . Source (Internet Archive): Johannes Jegerlehner, "Ritter Goldbart," Was die Sennen erzählen: Märchen und Sagen aus dem Wallis (Bern: Verlag von A. Francke, 1907), pp. 112-15 . Return to the table of contents . Don Firriulieddu Italy Once upon a time there was a farmer who had a daughter who used to take his dinner to him in the fields. One day he said to her, "So that you may find me I will sprinkle bran along the way. You follow the bran, and you will come to me." By chance the old ogre passed that way, and seeing the bran, said, "This means something." So he took the bran and scattered it so that it led to his own house. When the daughter set out to take her father his dinner, she followed the bran until she came to the ogre's house. When the ogre saw the young girl, he said, "You must be my wife." Then she began to weep. When the father saw that his daughter did not appear, he went home in the evening, and began to search for her, and not finding her, he asked God to give him a son or a daughter. A year after, he had a son whom they called Don Firriulieddu. When the child was three days old it spoke, and said, "Have you made me a cloak? Now give me a little dog and the cloak, for I must look for my sister." So he set out and went to seek his sister. After a while he came to a plain where he saw a number of men, and asked, "Whose cattle are these?" The herdsman replied, "They belong to the ogre, who fears neither God nor the saints, who fears Don Firriulieddu, who is three days old, and is on the way, and gives his dog bread and says, 'Eat, my dog, and do not bark, for we have fine things to do.'" Afterwards he saw a flock of sheep, and asked, "Whose are these sheep?" and received the same answer as from the herdsman. Then he arrived at the ogre's house and knocked, and his sister opened the door and saw the child. "Who are you looking for?" she said. "I am looking for you, for I am your brother, and you must return to mamma." When the ogre heard that Don Firriulieddu was there, he went and hid himself upstairs. Don Firriulieddu asked his sister, "Where is the ogre?" "Upstairs." Don Firriulieddu said to his dog, "Go upstairs and bark, and I will follow you." The dog went up and barked, and Firriulieddu followed him, and killed the ogre. Then he took his sister and a quantity of money, and they went home to their mother, and are all contented. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 76, pp. 241-42 . Type 312. Return to the table of contents . The Little Boy and His Dogs African American, Joel Chandler Harris Uncle Remus's little patron seemed to be so shocked at the burning of the woman [in the previous story, "How a Witch Was Caught"] that the old man plunged at once into a curious story about a little boy and his two dogs. One time there was a woman living alongside the big road, and this woman, she had one little boy. It seems to me that he must have been just about your size. He might have been a little broader in the shoulders and a little longer in the legs, yet, take him up one side and down the other, he was just about your shape and size. He was a mighty smart little boy, and his mammy set lots by him. It seems like she had never had any luck except with that boy, because there was a time when she had a little gal, and bless your soul, somebody came along and carried the little gal off, and the little boy didn't have a little sister anymore. This made both of them mighty sorry, but it looked like the little boy was the sorriest, because he showed it the most. Some days he'd take a notion to go and hunt for his little sister, and then he'd go down the big road and climb a big pine tree, and get clear to the top, and look all around to see if he couldn't see his little sister somewhere in the woods. He couldn't see her, but he'd stay up there in the tree and swing in the wind and allow to himself that maybe he might see her by and by. One day while he was sitting up there, he saw two mighty fine ladies walking down the road. He climbed down out of the tree, he did, and ran and told his mammy. The she up an asked, "How fine are they, honey?" "Mighty fine, mammy, mighty fine: puffy-out petticoats and long green veils." "How do they look, honey?" "Spick-and-span new, mammy." "They aren't any of our kin, are they, honey?" "That they aren't, mammy. They are mighty fine ladies." The fine ladies, they came on down the road, they did, and stopped by the woman's house, and begged to please give them some water. The little boy, he ran and fetched them a gourd full, and they put the gourd under their veils and drank, and drank, and drank just like they were nearly perished for water. The little boy watched them. Soon he hollered out, "Mammy, mammy! What do you reckon? They are lapping the water." The woman hollered back, "I reckon that's the way quality folks do, honey." Then the ladies begged for some bread, and the little boy took them a pone. They ate it like they were mighty nigh famished for bread. By and by the little boy hollered out and said, "Mammy, mammy! What do you reckon? They've got great long teeth." The woman, she hollered back, "I reckon all the quality folks have got them, honey." Then the ladies asked for some water to wash their hands, and the little boy brought them some. He watched them, and by and by he hollered out, "Mammy, mammy! What do you reckon? They've got hairy hands and arms." The woman, she hollered back, "I reckon all the quality folks have got them, honey." Then the ladies begged the woman to please let the little boy show them where the big road forks. But the little boy didn't want to go. He hollered out, "Mammy, folks don't have to be shown where the road forks." But the woman, she allowed, "I reckon the quality folks do, honey." The little boy, he began to whimper and cry, because he didn't want to go with the ladies, but the woman said he ought to be ashamed of himself for going on that way in front of the quality folks, and more than that, he might run into his little sister and fetch her home. Now this here little boy had two mighty bad dogs. One of them was named Minnyminny Morack, and the other one was named Follerlinsko, and they were so bad that they had to be tied in the yard day and night, except when they were a-hunting. So the little boy, he went and got a pan of water and set in down in the middle of the floor, and then he went and got himself a willow limb, and he stuck it in the ground. Then he allowed, "Mammy, when the water in this here pan turns to blood, then you run out and set loose Minnyminny Morack and Follerlinsko, and when you see that there willow limb a-shaking, you run and sick them on my track." The woman, she up and said, she'd turn the dogs loose, and then the little boy, he stuck his hands in his pockets and went on down the road a-whistling, just the same as any other little boy, except that he was a lot smarter. He went on down the road, he did, and the fine quality ladies, they came on behind. The further he went the faster he walked. This made the quality ladies walk fast too, and it wasn't so mighty long before the little boy heard them making a mighty curious fuss, and when he turned around, bless gracious! they were a-panting, because they were so tired and hot. The little boy allowed to himself that it was mighty curious how ladies could pant the same as a wild varmint, but he said he expected that was the way quality ladies do when they get hot and tired, and he made like he couldn't hear them, because he wanted to be nice and polite. After a while, when the quality ladies thought the little boy wasn't looking at them, he saw one of them drop down on her all fours and trot along just like a varmint, and it wasn't long before the other one dropped down on her all fours. Then the little boy allowed, "Shoo! If that is the way quality ladies rest themselves when they get tired, I reckon a little chap about my size had better be fixing to rest himself." So he looked around, he did, and he took and picked himself out a great big pine tree by the side of the road, and began to climb it. Then, when they saw that, one of the quality ladies allowed, "My goodness! What in the world are you up to now?" The little boy, he said, "I'm just a-climbing a tree to rest my bones." The ladies, they allowed, "Why don't you rest them on the ground?" The little boy, he said, "Because I want to get up where it is cool and high." The quality ladies, they took and walked around and around the tree like they were measuring it to see how big it was. By and by, after a while, they said, "Little boy, little boy! You'd better come down from there and show us the way to the forks of the road." Then the little boy allowed, "Just keep right on, ladies. You'll find the forks of the road. You can't miss them. I'm afraid to come down, because I might fall and hurt one of you all." The ladies, they said, "You'd better come down before we run and tell your mammy how bad your are." The little boy allowed, "While you are telling her, please tell her how scared I am." The quality ladies got mighty mad. They walked around that tree and fairly snorted. They pulled off their bonnets, and their veils, and their dresses, and, lo and behold, the little boy saw that they were two great big panthers. They had great big eyes, and big sharp teeth, and great long tails, and they looked up at the little boy and growled and grinned at him until he mighty nigh had a chill. They tried to climb the tree, but they had trimmed their claws so they could get gloves on, and they couldn't climb any more. Then one of them sat down in the road and made a curious mark in the sand, and their great long tales turned into axes, and no sooner did the tails turn into axes than they began to cut the tree down. I don't dare tell you how sharp those axes were, because you wouldn't nigh believe me. One of them stood on one side of the tree, and the other one stood on the other side, and they whacked at that tree like they were taking a holiday. They whacked out chips as big as your hat, and it wasn't so mighty long before the tree was ready to fall. But while the little boy was sitting up there, scared mighty nigh to death, it came into his mind that he had some eggs in his pocket that he had brought with him to eat whenever he got hungry. He took out one of the eggs and broke it, and said, "Place fill up!" And bless your soul, the place sure enough filled up, and the tree looked just exactly like nobody had been a-cutting on it. But them there panthers, they were very vigorous. They just spit on their hands and cut away. When they got the tree mighty nigh cut down, the little boy, he pulled out another egg and broke it, and said, "Place, fill up!" And by the time he said it, the tree was done made sound again. They kept on this a-way until the little boy began to get scared again. He had broken all his eggs except one, and them there creatures were a-cutting away like they were venomous, which they most surely were. Just about that time the little boy's mammy happened to stumble over the pan of water that was sitting down on the floor, and there it was, all turned to blood. Then she ran and unloosed Minnyminny Morack and Follerlinsko. Then when she did that she saw the willow limb a-shaking, and then she put the dogs on the little boy's track, and away they went. The little boy heard them a-coming, and he hollered out, "Come on, my good dogs. Here, dogs, here." The panthers, they stopped chopping and listened. One asked the other one what she could hear. The little boy said, "You don't hear anything. Go on with your chopping." The panthers, they chopped some more, and then they thought they heard the dogs a-coming. Then they tried their best to get away, but it wasn't any use. They didn't have time to change their axes back into tails, and because they couldn't run with axes dragging behind them, the dogs caught them. The little boy, he allowed, "Shake them and bite them. Drag them around and around, until you drag them two miles." So the dogs dragged them around for two miles. Then the little boy said, "Shake them and tear them. Drag them around and around, until you drag them ten miles." They dragged them ten miles, and by the time they got back, the panthers were cold and stiff. Then the little boy climbed down out of the tree and sat down to rest himself. By and by, after a while, he allowed to himself that beings he was having so much fun, he believed he'd take his dogs and go way off into the woods to see if he couldn't find his little sister. He called his dogs, he did, and went off into the woods, and they hadn't gone so mighty far before he saw a house in the woods away off by itself. The dogs, they went up and smelled around, they did, and came back with their bristles up, but the little boy allowed he'd go up there anyhow and see what the dogs were mad about. So he called the dogs and went towards the house, and when he got close up he saw a little gal toting wood and water. She was a might pretty little gal, because she had milk-white skin and great long yellow hair, but her clothes were all in rags, and she was crying because she had to work so hard. Minnyminny Morack and Follerlinsko wagged their tales when they saw the little gal, and the little boy knew by that that she was his sister. So he went up and asked her what her name was, and she said she didn't know what her name was, because she was so scared she forgot. Then he asked her what in the name of goodness she was crying about, and she said she was crying because she had to work so hard. Then he asked her who the house belonged to, and she allowed it belonged to a great big old black bear, and this old bear made her tote wood and water all the time. She said the water was to go into the big wash-pot, and the wood was to make the pot boil, and the pot was to cook folks that the great big old bear brought home to his children. The little boy didn't tell the little gal that he was her brother, but he allowed that he was going to stay and eat supper with the big old bear. The little gal cried and allowed he'd better not, but the little boy said he wasn't afraid to eat supper with a bear. So they went into the house, and when the little boy got in there, he saw that the bear had two great big children, and one of them was squatting on the bed, and the other one was squatting down in the hearth. The children were both named Cubs for short, but the little boy wasn't scared of them, because there were his dogs to do away with them if they so much as rolled an eyeball. The old bear was a mighty long time coming back, so the little gal, she up and fixed supper anyhow, and the little boy, he scrounged from Cubs first on one side and then on the other, and he and the little gal got as much as they wanted. After supper the little boy told the little gal that he'd take and comb her hair just to while away the time. But the little gal's hair hadn't been combed for so long, and it was in such a tangle, that it made the poor creature cry to hear anybody talking about combing it. Then the little boy allowed he wasn't going to hurt her, and he took and warmed some water in a pan and put it on her hair, and then he combed and curled it, just as nice you ever did see. When the old bear got home he was mighty taken back when he saw he had company, and when he saw them all sitting down like they had come to stay. But he was mighty polite, and he shook hands all around, and sat down by the fire and dried his boots, and asked about the crops, and allowed that the weather would be monstrous fine if they could get a little season of rain. Then he took and made a great admiration over the little gal's hair, and he asked the little boy how in the whole world he could curl it and fix it so nice. The little one allowed it was easy enough. Then the old bear said he believed he would like to get his hair curled up that way, and the little boy said, "Fill the big pot with water." The old bear filled the pot with water. Then the little boy said, "Build a fire under the pot and heat the water hot." When the water got scalding hot, the little boy said, "All ready now. Stick your head in. It's the only way to make your hair curl." Then the old bear stuck his head in the water, and that was the last of him, bless gracious! The scalding water curled the hair until it came off, and I suspect that is where they got the idea about putting bear grease on folks's hair. The young bears, they cried like everything when they saw how their daddy had been treated, and they wanted to bite and scratch the little boy and his sister, but those dogs -- Minnyminny Morack and Follerlinsko -- they just laid hold of them there bears, and there wasn't enough left of them to feed a kitten. "What did they do then?" asked the little boy who had been listening to the story. The old man took off his spectacles and cleaned the glasses on his coattail. "Well, sir," he went on, "the little boy took and carried his sister home, and his mammy said that she never again would set any store by folks with fine clothes, because they were so deceitful. No, never, so long as the Lord might spare her. And then after that they lived together right straight along, and if it hadn't been for the war, they'd be a-living there now. Because war is a mighty dangerous business." Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Daddy Jake, the Runaway; and, Short Stories Told After Dark by "Uncle Remus" (New York: The Century Company, 1896), pp. 93-107 . © 1889 by Joel Chandler Harris. Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. The episode describing the boy's rescue of his sister bears a strong resemblance to tales of types 312 and 312A. The episode describing how the bear is tricked into scalding himself in order to curl his hair is classified as Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 8A. Return to the table of contents . Blue-Beard North Carolina, USA He had a big basket he car'ed on his back. He'd go to people's house an' beg fur something to eat; an' when de pretty girls would come out an' gi' him something to eat, he grabbed 'em in the basket an' run away wi' them. He had a fine large place he car'ed 'em to -- to his kingdom. He gi' 'em de keys. He tol' 'em everything there belonged to them but one room. "Don't go in there." He tol' 'em the day they went in that room, they would be put to death. Married seven times, an' all was sisters. The seven wife one day, when he was gone away, she taken the keys an' looks in dat room. Finds all her sisters dead in there in a pile. She is so excited, she dropped the keys an' got them bloody. So he come back an' call for his keys. She kep' them hid from him for several days, didn' want him to see 'em. At las' she brought them out an' give them to him. He tol' her to say a prayer. She prayed seven times. An' her seven brothers came jus' as he went to kill her. An' he ran away into the woods, an' never been seen since. Source: Elsie Clews Parsons, " Tales from Guilford County, North Carolina ," Journal of American Folklore , vol. 30, no. 116 (April-June, 1917), p. 183. Parsons' source: Lulu Young, about 25. Parsons' note concerning the quality of these orally collected tales: "In the following collection we see the art of the folktale in its last stage of disintegration. The tale is cut down or badly told or half forgotten." (pp. 168-69) Return to the table of contents . The Chosen Suitor Antigua, British West Indies Dere's a woman had one daughter an' one son. Dis boy coco-bay (leprosy) boy, an' he was an ol' witch too. Dis woman wouldn't allow da girl to court anybody, you know. So one day Bro' Boar-Hog came dere, properly dressed same as any gentleman. When he want to drop off his clothes, he had a song to sing. Da day when dis Bro' Boar-Hog come to see da daughter, the son tell his mother, "Ma, don' let sister marry to dis man, for he's a boar-hog!" Da mother drive him off, an' say dat he was rude. She say dat dis man was a gentleman. He tol' da mother, "All right! you will see." One day da mother give him some food to carry to dis man, all tied up nicely on a tray. When da boy reach to da yard, he got behind a tree. While he got behind da tree, he see dis boar-hog rooting' up de ground. An' dis boar-hog root all de ground, like ten men with forks. Dis boy stay behind da tree an' see all he do. When da boy see him, he wait a little; den da boy say, "Ahem!" Boar-Hog jump around; he start to say: Indiana, Indiana, um, um! Indiana, Indiana, um, um! Indiana, Indiana, um, um! Dat caused his clothes to jump right on him according' as he sing da song. He step out, put his two hands in his pocket, an' say, "Boy, see how I plough up dis land!" He boast about da work he do on da field. Den he say to da boy, "How long you come?" Boy say, "Just come." He took da food an' carry it in da house, and tell da boy all right, he can go home. Da boy didn't go home. He got behind de tree again. When Bro' Boar-Hog t'ought da boy gone, he had a long trough, and he dump all de food in da trough. He t'row a bucket a water in too. Den, when he done, he start to say: Indiana, Indiana, um, um! Indiana, Indiana, um, um! Indiana, Indiana, um, um! An' all his clothes drop off. He went in da trough. All dat time da boy watchin' him, you know. Boy start for home now, an' tell his mother all what he see. Da grandfather tell him all right, dey'll catch him. De daughter an' mother didn't believe, but da grandfather believed. So dat same afternoon dis Bro' Boar-Hog came to da house all dressed up in frock-coat. As he come in da house, he start talkin' an' laughin' wid da mother an' daughter. During dis time da ol' man had his gun prepare. Little boy take up his fife an' start to play da same song: Indiana, Indiana, um, um! Indiana, Indiana, um, um! Indiana, Indiana, um, um! Bro' Boar-Hog say, "What vulgar song dat boy singin'!" He start to movin'. He not able to keep still, 'cause his tail comin' out fast. Quick he say, "Stop it, stop it! Let's go out for a walk! Let's go out for a walk! I can't stay here." So dey all went out, -- da daughter, da mother, an' da grandfather. After dey was goin' on, dey was talkin' when Bro' Boar-Hog look back, he see da boy was comin'. He say, "Where dat boy goin', where he goin'? Turn him back. I don't want to be in his company." So da grandfather tol' him let da boy alone, let him go for a walk too. Grandfather say, "Play, boy! Play, boy!" Da boy start: Indiana, Indiana, um, um! Indiana, Indiana, um, um! Indiana, Indiana, um, um! His beaver drop off. Den he play on again da same song: his coat drop, his shirt drop. All drop save his pant. Da ol' man tell him, "Play, boy! play, play, play!" An' his pant drop off. Dey see his long tail show, an' he start to run. Da ol' man point da gun at him an' shoot him dead. And I went through Miss Havercomb alley, And I see a lead was bending; So the lead ben', So the story en'. Source: John H. Johnson, " Folk-Lore from Antigua, British West Indies ," Journal of American Folklore , vol. 34, no. 131 (January - March, 1921), pp. 62-63. Johnson's source: George W. Edwards. Type 312A. Return to the table of contents . Man-Snake as Bridegroom Jamaica Der is a woman to court. Every man come to court her, she said she don' want him, till one day she saw a coal-black man, pretty man. 'he said, "O mudder, dis is my courtier!" She tek de man. Breakfas' an' dinner de man don' eat, only suck couple raw egg. So her got a brudder name of Collin. She didn't count de brudder. De brudder tell her, said, "Sister, dat man you gwine to marry to, it is a snake." She said, "Boy, you eber hear snake kyan tu'n a man?" Collin said, "All right! De day you are married, me wi' be in de bush shootin' me bird." So de weddin' day when de marry ober, de man took his wife, all his weddin' garment, he borrow everyt'ing; so him gwine home, everywhere him go all doze t'ing him borrow, him shed dem off one by one till de las' house he tek off de las' piece an', — de Bogie! He walk wid his wife into de wood an' to a cave. He put down his wife to sit down. He tu'n a yellow snake an' sit down in his wife lap an' have his head p'int to her nose to suck her blood to kill her. An de woman sing, "Collin now, Collin now, Fe me li'l brudder callin' come o!" De Snake said, "Urn hum, hum he, A han'some man you want, A han'some man wi' kill you." De woman sing again, "Collin now, Collin now, Fe me li'l brudder callin' come o!" De Snake say, "Urn hum, hum he, Deh han'some man, Deh han'some man wi' kill you." Collin said, "Wonder who singin' me name in dis middle wood?" an' he walk fas' wid his gun. When he come to de cave, de snake-head jus' gwine to touch de woman nose. An' Collin shoot him wid de gun an' tek out his sister. So she never count her brudder till her brudder save her life. Source (Internet Archive): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 85, pp. 103-105 . Source (Sacred Texts): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 85, pp. 103-105 . Beckwith's informant: Richard Morgan, Santa Cruz. Type 312A. Return to the table of contents . The Brahman Girl That Married a Tiger India In a certain village there lived an old Brahman who had three sons and a daughter. The girl being the youngest was brought up most tenderly and become spoilt, and so whenever she saw a beautiful boy she would say to her parents that she must be wedded to him. Her parents were, therefore, much put about to devise excuses for taking her away from her youthful lovers. Thus passed on some years, until the girl was very nearly grown up, and then the parents, fearing that they would be driven out of their caste if they failed to dispose of her hand in marriage before she came to the years of maturity, began to be eager about finding a bridegroom for her. Now near their village there lived a fierce tiger, that had attained to great proficiency in the art of magic, and had the power of assuming different forms. Having a great taste for Brahman's food, the tiger used now and then to frequent temples and other places of public refreshment in the shape of an old famished Brahman in order to share the food prepared for the Brahmans. The tiger also wanted, if possible, a Brahman wife to take to the woods, and there to make her cook his meals after her fashion. One day, when he was partaking of his meals in Brahman shape at a public feeding place, he heard the talk about the Brahman girl who was always falling in love with every beautiful Brahman boy. Said he to himself, "Praised be the face that I saw first this morning. I shall assume the shape of a Brahman boy, and appear as beautiful as can be, and win the heart of the girl." Next morning he accordingly assumed the form of a Brahman teacher proficient in the Ramayana near the landing of the sacred river of the village. Scattering holy ashes profusely over his body he opened the Ramayana and began to read. "The voice of the new teacher is most enchanting. Let us go and hear him," said some women among themselves, and sat down before him to hear him expound the great book. The girl for whom the tiger had assumed this shape came in due time to bathe at the river, and as soon as she saw the new teacher fell in love with him, and bothered her old mother to speak to her father about him, so as not to lose her new lover. The old woman too was delighted at the bridegroom whom fortune had thrown in her way, and ran home to her husband, who, when he came and saw the teacher, raised up his hands in praise of the great god Mahesvara. The teacher was now invited to take his meals with them, and as he had come with the express intention of marrying the daughter, he, of course, agreed. A grand dinner followed in honor of the teacher, and his host began to question him as to his parentage, etc., to which the cunning tiger replied that he was born in a village beyond the adjacent wood. The Brahman had no time to wait for further inquiries, and as the boy was very fair he married his daughter to him the very next day. Feasts followed for a month, during which time the bridegroom gave every satisfaction to his new relatives, who supposed him to be human all the while. He also did full justice to the Brahman dishes, and swallowed everything that was placed before him. After the first month was over the tiger bridegroom yearned for his accustomed prey, and hankered after his abode in the woods. A change of diet for a day or two is all very well, but to renounce his own proper food for more than a month was hard. So one day he said to his father-in-law, "I must go back soon to my old parents, for they will be pining at my absence. But why should we have to bear the double expense of my coming all the way here again to take my wife to my village? So if you will kindly let me take the girl with me I shall take her to her future home, and hand her over to her mother-in-law, and see that she is well taken care of." The old Brahman agreed to this, and replied, "My dear son-in-law, you are her husband, and she is yours, and we now send her with you, though it is like sending her into the wilderness with her eyes tied up. But as we take you to be everything to her, we trust you to treat her kindly." The mother of the bride shed tears at the idea of having to send her away, but nevertheless the very next day was fixed for the journey. The old woman spent the whole day in preparing cakes and sweetmeats for her daughter, and when the time for the journey arrived, she took care to place in her bundles and on her head one or two margosa leaves to keep off demons. The relatives of the bride requested her husband to allow her to rest wherever she found shade, and to eat wherever she found water, and to this he agreed, and so they began their journey. The boy tiger and his human wife pursued their journey for an hour or so in free and pleasant conversation, when the girl happened to see a fine pond, around which the birds were warbling their sweet notes. She requested her husband to follow her to the water's edge and to partake of some of the cakes and sweetmeats with her. But he replied, "Be quiet, or I shall show you my original shape." This made her afraid, so she pursued her journey in silence until she saw another pond, when she asked the same question of her husband, who replied in the same tone. Now she was very hungry, and not liking her husband's tone, which she found had greatly changed ever since they had entered the woods, said to him, "Show me your original shape." No sooner were these words uttered than her husband's form changed from that of a man. Four legs, striped skin, a long tail, and a tiger's face came over him suddenly and, horror of horrors! a tiger and not a man stood before her! Nor were her fears stilled when the tiger in human voice began as follows: "Know henceforth that I, your husband, am a tiger -- this very tiger that now speaks to you. If you have any regard for your life you must obey all my orders implicitly, for I can speak to you in human voice, and understand what you say. In an hour or so we shall reach my home, of which you will become the mistress. In the front of my house you will see half a dozen tubs, each of which you must fill up daily with some dish or other, cooked in your own way. I shall take care to supply you with all the provisions you want." So saying the tiger slowly conducted her to his house. The misery of the girl may more be imagined than described, for if she were to object she would be put to death. So, weeping all the way, she reached her husband's house. Leaving her there he went out and returned with several pumpkins and some flesh, of which she soon prepared a curry and gave it to her husband. He went out again after this and returned in the evening with several vegetables and some more flesh, and gave her an order, "Every morning I shall go out in search of provisions and prey, and bring something with me on my return; you must keep cooked for me whatever I leave in the house." So next morning as soon as the tiger had gone away she cooked everything left in the house and filled all the tubs with food. At the fourth hour the tiger returned and growled out, "I smell a man! I smell a woman in my wood." And his wife for very fear shut herself up in the house. As soon as the tiger had satisfied his appetite he told her to open the door, which she did, and they talked together for a time, after which the tiger rested awhile, and then went out hunting again. Thus passed many a day, until the tiger's Brahman wife had a son, which also turned out to be only a tiger. One day, after the tiger had gone out to the woods, his wife was crying all alone in the house, when a crow happened to peck at some rice that was scattered near her, and seeing the girl crying, began to shed tears. "Can you assist me?" asked the girl. "Yes," said the crow. So she brought out a palmyra leaf and wrote on it with an iron nail all her sufferings in the wood, and requested her brothers to come and relieve her. This palmyra leaf she tied to the neck of the crow, which, seeming to understand her thoughts, flew to her village and sat down before one of her brothers. He untied the leaf and read the contents of the letter and told them to his other brothers. All the three then started for the wood, asking their mother to give them something to eat on the way. She had not enough rice for the three, so she made a big ball of clay and stuck it over with what rice she had, so as to make it look like a ball of rice. This she gave to the brothers to eat on their way, and started them off to the woods. They had not proceeded long before they caught sight of a donkey. The youngest, who was of a playful disposition, wished to take the donkey with him. The two elder brothers objected to this for a time, but in the end they allowed him to have his own way. Further on they saw an ant, which the middle brother took with him. Near the ant there was a big palmyra tree lying on the ground, which the eldest took with him to keep off the tiger. The sun was now high in the horizon and the three brothers became very hungry. So they sat down near a tank and opened the bundle containing the ball of rice. To their utter disappointment they found it to be all clay, but being extremely hungry they drank all the water in the pond and continued their journey. On leaving the tank they found a big iron tub belonging to the washerman of the adjacent village. This they took also with them in addition to the donkey, the ant, and the palmyra tree. Following the road described by their sister in her letter sent by the crow, they walked on and on until they reached the tiger's house. The sister, overjoyed to see her brothers again, ran out at once to welcome them, "My dearest brothers, I am so glad to see that you have come here to relieve me after all, but the time for the tiger's coming home is approaching, so hide yourselves in the loft, and wait until he is gone." So saying, she helped her brothers to ascend into the loft. By this time the tiger returned, and perceived the presence of human beings by the peculiar smell. He asked his wife whether anyone had come to their house. She said, "No." But when the brothers, who with their trophies of the way -- the donkey, the ant, and so on -- were sitting upon the loft, saw the tiger dallying with their sister, they were greatly frightened; so much so that the youngest, through fear, began to quake, and they all fell on the floor. "What is all this?" said the terrified tiger to his wife. "Nothing," said she, "but your brothers-in-law. They came here three hours ago, and as soon as you have finished your meals they want to see you." "How can my brothers-in-law be such cowards?" thought the tiger to himself. He then asked them to speak to him, whereon the youngest brother put the ant which he had in his hand into the ear of the donkey, and as soon as the latter was bitten, it began to bawl out most horribly. "How is it that your brothers have such a hoarse voice?" said the tiger to his wife. He next asked them to show him their legs. Taking courage at the stupidity of the tiger on the two former occasions, the eldest brother now stretched out the palmyra tree. "By my father, I have never seen such a leg," said the tiger, and asked his brothers-in-law to show their bellies. The second brother now showed the tub, at which the tiger shuddered, and saying, "such a harsh voice, so stout a leg, and such a belly, truly I have never heard of such persons as these!" He ran away. It was already dark, and the brothers, wishing to take advantage of the tiger's terror, prepared to return home with their sister at once. They ate up what little food she had, and ordered her to start. Fortunately for her, her tiger child was asleep. So she tore it into two pieces and suspended them over the hearth, and, thus getting rid of the child, she ran off with her brothers towards home. Before leaving she bolted the front door from inside, and went out at the back of the house. As soon as the pieces of the cub, which were hung up over the hearth, began to roast, they dripped, which made the fire hiss and sputter; and when the tiger returned at about midnight, he found the door shut and heard the hissing of the fire, which he mistook for the noise of cooking muffins. "I see," said he to himself, "how very cunning you are; you have bolted the door and are cooking muffins for your brothers. Let us see if we can't get your muffins." So saying, he went around to the back door and entered his house, and was greatly perplexed to find his cub torn in two and being roasted, his house deserted by his Brahman wife, and his property plundered; for his wife, before leaving, had taken with her as much of the tiger's property as she could conveniently carry. The tiger now discovered all the treachery of his wife, and his heart grieved for the loss of his son, that was now no more. He determined to be revenged on his wife, and to bring her back into the wood, and there tear her into many pieces in place of only two. But how to bring her back? He assumed his original shape of a young bridegroom, making, of course, due allowance for the number of years that had passed since his marriage, and next morning went to his father-in-law's house. His brothers-in-law and his wife saw from a distance the deceitful form he had assumed, and devised means to kill him. The younger ones too ran here and there to bring provisions to feed him sumptuously, and the tiger was highly pleased at the hospitable way in which he was received. There was a ruined well at the back of the house, and the eldest of the brothers placed some thin sticks across its mouth, over which he spread a fine mat. Now it is usual to ask guests to have an oil bath before dinner, and so his three brothers-in-law requested the tiger to take his seat on the fine mat for his bath. As soon as he sat on it, the thin sticks being unable to bear his weight, gave way, and down fell the cunning tiger with a heavy crash! The well was at once filled in with stones and other rubbish, and thus the tiger was effectually prevented from doing any more mischief. But the Brahman girl, in memory of her having married a tiger, raised a pillar over the well and planted a tulasi shrub on the top of it. Morning and evening, for the rest of her life, she used to smear the pillar with sacred cow dung, and water the tulasi shrub. This story is told to explain the Tamil proverb, "Be quiet, or I shall show you my original shape." Source: Mrs. Howard Kingscote and Pandit Natêsá Sástrî, Tales of the Sun; or, Folklore of Southern India (London: W. H. Allen and Company, 1890), no. 10, pp. 119-30 . Type 312A. Return to the table of contents . Related links Targets open in new windows. How the Devil Married Three Sisters and other type 311 tales. The Robber Bridegroom and other type 955 tales. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 14, 2023. The Blue Belt, a folktale from Norway The Blue Belt Norway, Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe Edited by D. L. Ashliman. Copyright 1996. Return to Index of Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Det blå båndet, the original Norwegian text. Once upon a time there was an old beggar woman, who had gone out to beg. She had a little boy with her, and when she had got her bag full, she struck across the hills towards her own home. When they had gone a bit up the hillside they came upon a little blue belt, which lay where two paths met, and the boy asked his mother's permission to pick it up. "No," she said, "maybe there's witchcraft in it;" and so with threats she forced him to follow her. But when they had gone a bit farther, the boy said he must turn aside a moment out of the road, and meanwhile his mother sat down on a tree stump. But the boy was a long time gone, for as soon as he got so far into the wood that the old woman could not see him, he ran off to where the belt lay, picked it up, tied it round his waist and lo! he felt so strong that he could lift the whole mountain. When he got back, the old woman was very angry, and wanted to know what he had been doing so long. "You don't care how much time you waste, and yet you know the night is drawing on, and we must cross the mountain before it gets dark!" So on they tramped, but when they had got about halfway, the old woman grew tired, and said she must rest under a bush. "Dear mother," said the boy, may I just go up to the top of this high crag while you rest, and try if I can't see some sign of folk hereabouts?" Yes, he might do that. When he reached the top he saw a light shining from the north. So he ran down and told his mother. "We must get on, mother; we are near a house, for I see a bright light shining quite close to us in the north." Then she got up, shouldered her bag, and set off to see. They hadn't gone far, before they came to a steep cliff, right across their path. "Just as I thought!" said the old woman; "now we can't go a step farther; a pretty bed we shall have here!" But the boy took the bag under one arm, and his mother under the other, and ran straight up the steep cliff with them." "Now, don't you see! Don't you see that we are close to a house! Don't you see the bright light?" The old woman said those were not Christians, but trolls, for she knew her way about that forest far and near, and knew there was not a living soul in it until you were well over the ridge and had come down on the other side. But they went on, and in a little while they came to a large house which was all painted red. "What's the good of it?" asked the old woman. "We don't dare go inside, for trolls live here." "Don't say that; we must go in. There must be men where the lights shine so," said the boy. So in he went, and his mother followed him, but he had barely opened the door before she fainted, for there she saw a great stout man at least twenty feet high, sitting on the bench. "Good evening, grandfather!" said the boy. "Well, I've sat here three hundred years," said the man on the bench, "and no one has ever come and called me grandfather before." Then the boy sat down by the man's side, and began to talk to him as if they had been old friends. "But what's come over your mother?" said the man, after they had chatted a while. "I think she fainted; you had better look after her." So the boy took hold of the old woman and dragged her up the hall along the floor. That brought her to herself, and she kicked and scratched, and flung herself about, and at last sat down on a heap of firewood in the corner; but she was so frightened that she scarcely dared to look one in the face. After a while, the boy asked if they could spend the night there. "Yes, to be sure," said the man. So they went on talking again, but the boy soon got hungry, and wanted to know if they could get food as well as lodging. "Of course," said the man, "you may have that too." And after he had sat a while longer, he rose up and threw six loads of dry pitch-pine on the fire. This made the old woman still more afraid. "Oh! now he's going to roast us alive," she said, in the corner where she sat. And when the wood had burned down to glowing embers, the man got up and walked out of his house. "Heaven bless and help us! You are so brave," said the old woman; "don't you see we have ended up with trolls?" "Stuff and nonsense!" said the boy; "no harm if we have." In a little while, the man came back with an ox so fat and big, the boy had never seen its like, and he gave it one blow with his fist under the ear, and it fell down dead on the floor. When that was done, he took it up by all four legs, and laid it on the glowing embers, and turned it and twisted it about until it was roasted brown outside. After that, he went to a cupboard and took out a great silver dish and laid the ox on it; and the dish was so big that none of the ox hung over on any side. This he put on the table, and then he went down into the cellar, and fetched a cask of wine, knocked out one end, and put the cask on the table, together with two knives, which were each six feet long. When this was done, he asked them go and sit down to supper and eat. So they went, the boy first and the old woman after, but she began to whimper and wail, and to wonder how she should ever use such knives. But her son seized one and began to cut slices out of the thigh of the ox, which he placed before his mother. And when they had eaten a bit, he took up the cask with both hands, and lifted it down to the floor; then he told his mother to come and drink, but it was still so high she couldn't reach up to it; so he caught her up, and held her up to the edge of the cask while she drank. As for himself, he clambered up and hung down like a cat inside the cask while he drank. So when he had quenched his thirst, he picked up the cask and put it back on the table, and thanked the man for the good meal, and told his mother to come and thank him too. Afraid though she was, she dared do nothing else but thank the man. Then the boy sat down again next to the man and began to gossip. After they had sat a while, the man said, "Well, I must just go and get a bit of supper too," and so he went to the table and ate up the whole ox--hoofs, and horns, and all--and drained the cask to the last drop, and then went back and sat on the bench. "As for beds," he said, "I don't know what's to be done. I've only got one bed and a cradle; but we could get on pretty well if you would sleep in the cradle, and then your mother might lie in the bed yonder." "Thank you kindly, that will do nicely," said the boy; and with that he pulled off his clothes and lay down in the cradle; but to tell you the truth, it was quite as big as a four-poster. As for the old woman, she had to follow the man, who showed her to bed, though she was out of her wits for fear. "Well," thought the boy to himself, "it will never do to go to sleep yet. I'd best lie awake and listen how things go as the night wears on." After a while the man began to talk to the old woman, and at last he said, "We two might live here quite happily together could we only be rid of this son of yours." "But do you know how to take care of him? Is that what you're thinking of?" she asked. "Nothing easier," he said; at any rate he would try. He would just say that he wished the old woman would stay and keep house for him a day or two. Then he would take the boy with him up the mountain to quarry cornerstones, and roll down a large rock on him. As they spoke, the boy lay still and listened. The next day the troll--for it was a troll, as clear as day--asked if the old woman would stay and keep house for him a few days. Later that day he took a large iron crowbar and asked the boy if he had a mind to go with him up the mountain and quarry a few cornerstones. With all his heart, he said, and went with him; and so, after they had split a few stones, the troll wanted him to go down below and look for cracks in the rock. While he was doing this, the troll worked away, and wearied himself with his crowbar until he moved a whole crag out of its bed, which came rolling right down on the place where the boy was; but he held it up until he could get to one side, and then let it roll on. "Oh!" said the boy to the troll, "now I see what you mean to do with me. You want to crush me to death; so just go down yourself and look for cracks and splits in the rock, and I'll stand up above." The troll did not dare to do otherwise than the boy asked him, and the end of it was that the boy rolled down a large rock, which fell on the troll and broke one of his thighs. "Well! you are in a sad plight," said the boy, as he strode down, lifted up the rock, and set the man free. After that he had to put him on his back and carry him home; so he ran with him as fast as a horse, and shook him, so that the troll screamed and screeched as if a knife had been run into him. When he got home, they had to put the troll to bed, and there he lay in a sad pickle. The night wore on, and the troll began to talk to the old woman again, and to wonder however they could be rid of the boy. "Well," said the old woman, "if you can't hit on a plan to get rid of him, I'm sure I can't." "Let me see," said the troll; "I've got twelve lions in a garden. If they could only get hold of the boy they'd soon tear him to pieces." So the old woman said it would be easy enough to get him there. She would pretend to be sick and say she felt so poorly, nothing would do her any good but lion's milk. All that the boy lay and listened to; and when he got up in the morning his mother said she was worse than she looked, and she thought she should never be well again unless she could get some lion's milk. "Then I'm afraid you'll be sick a long time, mother," said the boy, "for I'm sure I don't know where any is to be got." "Oh! if that be all," said the troll, "there's no lack of lion's milk, if we only had the man to fetch it," and then he went on to say how his brother had a garden with twelve lions in it, and how the boy might have the key if he had a mind to milk the lions. So the boy took the key and a milking pail and walked off. When he unlocked the gate and entered the garden, there stood all the twelve lions on their hind paws, raging and roaring at him. But the boy laid hold of the biggest, and led him about by the forepaws, and dashed him against sticks and stones, until there wasn't a bit of him left but the two paws. When the rest saw that, they were so afraid that they crept up and lay at his feet like so many curs. After that they followed him about wherever he went, and when he got home they laid down outside the house, with their forepaws on the door sill. "Now, mother, you'll soon be well," said the boy, when he went in, "for here is the lion's milk." He had just milked a drop in the pail. But the troll, as he lay in bed, swore it was all a lie. He was sure the boy was not the man to milk lions. When the boy heard that, he forced the troll to get out of bed, threw open the door, and all the lions rose up and seized the troll, and at last the boy had to make them leave their hold. That night the troll began to talk to the old woman again. "I'm sure I can't tell how to put this boy out of the way. He is so awfully strong. Can't you think of some way?" "No," said the old woman; "if you can't tell, I'm sure I can't." "Well," said the troll, "I have two brothers in a castle; they are twelve times as strong as I am, and that's why I was turned out and had to put up with this farm. They hold that castle, and nearby there is an apple orchard, and whoever eats those apples sleeps for three days and three nights. If we could only get the boy to go for the fruit, he wouldn't be able to keep from tasting the apples, and as soon as he fell asleep my brothers would tear him to pieces." The old woman said she would pretend to be sick, and say she could never be herself again unless she tasted those apples, for she had set her heart on them. All this the boy lay and listened to. When the morning came the old woman was so ill that she couldn't utter a word but groans and sighs. She was sure she should never be well again, unless she had some of the apples that grew in the orchard near the castle where the man's brothers lived; only she had no one to send for them. The boy was ready to go that instant, and the eleven lions went with him. He came to the orchard, he climbed the apple tree and ate as many apples as he could. He was barely down again before he fell into a deep sleep; but the lions all lay around him in a ring. On the third day the troll's brothers came, but they did not come in human shape. They came snorting like man-eating steeds, and wondered who it was that dared to be there, and said they would tear him to pieces so small that there would be nothing left of him. But the lions rose up and tore the trolls into small pieces, so that the place looked as if a manure pile had been tossed about. After they had finished the trolls, they lay down again. The boy did not wake up until late in the afternoon, and when he got on his knees, and rubbed the sleep out of his eyes, and saw the hoof marks, he wondered what had been going on. He walked towards the castle, and a girl who had seen all that had happened looked out of a window said, "You may thank your stars that you weren't in that tussle, or you surely would have lost your life." "What! I lose my life! No fear of that, I think," said the boy. She begged him to come in and talk with her, for she hadn't seen a Christian soul ever since she came there. But when she opened the door the lions wanted to go in too, and she got so frightened that she began to scream, and so the boy had them lie outside. Then the two talked and talked, and the boy asked how it came that she, who was so lovely, could put up with those ugly trolls. She never wished it, she said; it was quite against her will. They had seized her by force, and she was the King of Arabia's daughter. So they talked on, and at last she asked him what he would do; whether she should go back home, and if he would take her as a wife. Of course he would marry her, and she shouldn't go home. After that they went around the castle, and at last they came to a great hall, where the trolls' two great swords hung high up on the wall. "I wonder if you are man enough to wield one of these," said the princess. "Who? I?" said the boy. "It would be a pretty thing if I couldn't wield one of these." With that he stacked two or three chairs on top of each other, jumped up, and touched the biggest sword with his finger tips, tossed it up in the air, and caught it again by the hilt; leapt down, and at the same time dealt such a blow with it on the floor that the whole hall shook. After he had thus got down he put the sword under his arm and carried it about with him. So when they had lived a little while in the castle, the princess thought she ought to go home to her parents and let them know what had become of her; so they loaded a ship, and she set sail from the castle. After she had gone, and the boy had wandered about a little, he remembered that he had been sent on an errand, and had come to fetch something for his mother's health. He said to himself, "After all, the old woman was not so bad, and she's probably all right by now." Still, he thought he ought to go and just see how she was. So he went and found both the man and his mother quite fresh and healthy. "What wretches you are to live in this beggarly hut," said the boy. "Come with me up to my castle, and you shall see what a fine fellow I am." Well! they were both ready to go, and on the way his mother talked to him, and asked how it was he had become so strong. "If you must know, it came from that blue belt which lay on the mountainside that time when you and I were out begging," said the boy. "Have you got it still?" asked she. "Yes," he had. It was tied around his waist. "May I see it?" "Yes, you may." And with that he pulled open his waistcoat and shirt to show it to her. Then she seized it with both hands, tore it off, and twisted it around her fist. "Now," she cried, "what shall I do with such a wretch as you? I'll just give you one blow, and dash your brains out!" "Far too good a death for such a scamp," said the troll. "No! let's first burn out his eyes, and then turn him adrift in a little boat." So they burned out his eyes and turned him adrift, in spite of his prayers and tears; but, as the boat drifted, the lions swam after, and at last they laid hold of it and dragged it ashore on an island, and placed the boy under a fir tree. They caught game for him, and they plucked the birds and made him a bed of down; but he was forced to eat his meat raw, and he was blind. At last, one day the biggest lion was chasing a hare which was blind, for it ran straight over stock and stone, and in the end, it ran right up against a fir stump and tumbled head over heels across the field right into a spring; but lo! when it came out of the spring it saw its way quite plain, and thus saved its life. "So, so!" thought the lion, and dragged the boy to the spring, and dipped his head and ears into it. When he had his sight again, he went down to the shore and made signs to the lions that they should all lie close together like a raft; then he stood on their backs while they swam with him to the mainland. When he had reached the shore he went up into a birch grove and made the lions lie quiet. Then he stole up to the castle, like a thief, to see if he couldn't lay hands on his belt. When he arrived at the door, he peeped through the keyhole, and there he saw his belt hanging over a door in the kitchen. He crept softly across the floor, for there was no one there; but as soon as he got hold of the belt, he began to kick and stomp about as though he were crazy. Just then his mother came rushing out. "Dear heart, my darling little boy! Do give me the belt again," she said. "Thank you kindly," he said. "Now you shall have the fate that you gave to me," and he finished the task at once. The old troll heard what was happening and came in. He begged fervently that his life might be spared. "Well, you may live," said the boy, "but you shall undergo the same punishment that you gave me;" and so he burned out the troll's eyes, and set him adrift at sea in a little boat, but he had no lions to follow him. Now the boy was all alone, and he went about longing and longing for the princess. Finally he could bear it no longer. He had to look for her, his heart was so bent on having her. So he loaded four ships and set sail for Arabia. For some time they had fair wind and fine weather, but after that they lay wind-bound near a rocky island. The sailors went ashore and strolled about to spend the time, and there they found a huge egg, almost as big as a little house. So they began to knock it about with large stones, but they couldn't crack the shell. Then the boy came up with his sword to see what all the noise was about. When he saw the egg, he thought it a simple matter to crack it. He gave it one blow, and the egg split, and out came a chicken as big as an elephant. "We have done a bad thing," said the boy; "this can cost us all our lives." He then asked his sailors if they were men enough to sail to Arabia in twenty-four hours, if they had a good wind. Yes, they would be able to do that, they said, so they set sail with a fine breeze, and got to Arabia in twenty-three hours. As soon as they landed, the boy ordered all the sailors to go and bury themselves up to their eyes in a sand hill, so that they could barely see the ships. The boy and the captains climbed a high crag and sat down under a fir tree. In a little while a great bird came flying with an island in its claws, which it let fall down on the fleet, sinking every ship. After it had done that, it flew up to the sand hill and flapped its wings, so that the wind nearly blew off the sailors' heads, and it flew past the fir tree with such force that it turned the boy right around, but he was ready with his sword, and gave the bird one blow and brought it down dead. After that he went to the town, where everyone was glad, because the king had got his daughter back. However, the king had now hidden her away himself, and promised her hand as a reward to anyone who could find her, even though she was already engaged. Now as the boy went along he met a man who had white bearskins for sale. He bought one of the hides and put it on. One of the captains took an iron chain and lead him about, and so disguised he went into the town and began to play pranks. The news came to the king's ears that there never had been such fun in the town before, for here was a white bear that danced and cut capers just as it was asked. A messenger came to say that the bear must come to the castle at once, for the king wanted to see its tricks. When it got to the castle everyone was afraid, for they had never seen such a beast before. However, the captain said there was no danger unless they laughed at it. They mustn't do that, or else it would tear them to pieces. When the king heard that, he warned all the court not to laugh. But while the fun was going on, in came one of the king's maids, and began to laugh and make fun of the bear. The bear pounced on her and clawed her until there was barely a rag of her left. Then all the court began to cry, and the captain most of all. "Stuff and nonsense," said the king; "she's only a maid, besides it's more my affair than yours." When the show was over, it was late at night. "It's no good your going away when it's so late," said the king. "The bear had best sleep here." "Perhaps it might sleep in the inglenook by the kitchen fire," said the captain. "No," said the king, "it shall sleep up here, and it shall have pillows and cushions to sleep on." So a whole heap of pillows and cushions was brought, and the captain had a bed in a side room. At midnight the king came with a lamp in his hand and a big bunch of keys, and led the white bear away. He passed along gallery after gallery, through doors and rooms, upstairs and downstairs, until at last he came to a pier which ran out into the sea. Then the king began to pull and haul at posts and pins, this one up and that one down, until at last a little house floated up to the water's edge. There he kept his daughter, for she was so dear to him that he had hid her, so that no one could find her. He left the white bear outside while he went in and told her how it had danced and played its pranks. She said she was afraid, and did not dare to look at it; but he convinced her that there was no danger, if she only wouldn't laugh. So they brought the bear in, and locked the door, and it danced and played its tricks. Just when the fun was at its height the princess's maid began to laugh. Then the boy pounced on her and tore her to bits, and the princess began to cry and sob. "Stuff and nonsense," cried the king; "all this fuss about a maid! I'll get you just as good a one again. But now I think the bear had best stay here until morning, for I don't want to lead it along all those galleries and stairs at this time of night." "Well," said the princess, "if it sleeps here I'm sure I won't." But just then the bear curled himself up and lay down by the stove. It was determined that the princess should sleep there too, with a light burning. As soon as the king was gone, the white bear begged her to undo his collar. The princess was so frightened that she almost fainted; but she felt about until she found the collar. She had barely undone it before the bear pulled his head off. Then she recognized him, and was so glad that there was no end to her joy. She wanted to tell her father at once that her rescuer had come, but the boy would not hear of it. He would earn her once more, he said. So in the morning, when they heard the king rattling at the posts outside, the boy pulled on the hide, and lay down by the stove. "Well, has it lain still?" the king asked. "I should think so," said the princess. "It hasn't so much as turned or stretched itself once." When they got up to the castle again, the captain took the bear and led it away. Then the boy threw off the hide and went to a tailor and ordered clothes fit for a prince. When they were ready he went to the king, and said he wanted to find the princess. "You're not the first who has wished the same thing," said the king, "but they have all lost their lives; for if anyone who tries can't find her in twenty-four hours his life is forfeited." Yes, the boy knew all that. Still he wished to try, and if he couldn't find her, it would be his responsibility. Now in the castle there was a band that played sweet tunes, and there were fair maids to dance with, and so the boy danced away. When twelve hours were gone, the king said, "I pity you with all my heart. You are not very good at seeking; you will surely lose your life." "Stuff!" said the boy. "While there's life there's hope. So as long as there's breath in the body there's no fear. we have lots of time." And so he went on dancing until there was only one hour left. Then he said he would begin to search. "It's no use now," said the king. "Time's up." "Light your lamp; out with your big bunch of keys," said the boy, "and follow me where I want to go. There is still a whole hour left." So the boy went the same way which the king had led him the night before, and he asked the king to unlock door after door until they came to the pier which ran out into the sea. "It's all no use, I tell you," said the king; "time's up, and this will only lead you out into the sea." "Still five minutes more," said the boy, as he pulled and pushed at the posts and pins, and the house floated up. "Now the time is up," bawled the king. "Come here, headsman, and cut off his head." "No, no!" said the boy; "stop a bit, there are still three minutes. Out with the key, and let me get into this house." But the king stood there and fumbled with his keys, to draw out the time. At last he said he didn't have the key. "Well, if you haven't, I have," said the boy, and he gave the door such a kick that it flew to splinters inwards on the floor. The princess met him at the door, and told her father this was her rescuer, on whom her heart was set. So she got him, and this was how the beggar boy came to marry the daughter of the King of Arabia. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiania [Oslo], 1842-1852), translated by George Webb Dasent (1859). Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. Copyright 1995 by D. L. Ashliman. This is a type 590 folktale. The blue belt in this tale is reminiscent of Thor's belt of strength as described in The Prose Edda of Snorri Sturluson. Return to The top of this document. D. L. Ashliman's index of Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Det blå båndet, the original Norwegian text. Revised February 17, 1997. The Boy Who Had Never Seen a Woman: Folktales of Type 1678 The Boy Who Had Never Seen a Woman Boccaccio's Story of Filippo Balducci and His Son and other tales similar to Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1678 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2011 Contents Filippo Balducci and His Son (abstracted from The Decameron by Giovanni Boccaccio). An Inexperienced Youth (Italy, The Facetiæ of Poggio). A Young Monk Wanted to Have a Goose (Germany). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Filippo Balducci and His Son Giovanni Boccaccio When Filippo Balducci lost his wife to death, he resolved to devote himself and his young son to God. Consequently he gave his worldly possessions to charity, then took his little son to the slopes of Mount Asinaio, where they lived together in a cave, completely secluded from the ways and temptations of the world. In this remote sanctuary, Filippo taught his son about God and the saints, protecting him always from distractions and sin. Only after the boy reached the age of eighteen did the father feel it safe to expose him to the outside world. "Surely," thought Filippo, "his years of devotion and prayer in this place of solitude will now defend him against the ways of the world." And the two of them, father and son, set off for the city of Florence. Everything was new and amazing for the son: houses, palaces, churches, horses, and people. Filled with amazement, he asked his father about every unfamiliar thing, and Filippo dutifully provided names and explanations for all that they saw, that is, until they happened upon a party of beautiful young women. The boy, who until now had never beheld such a sight, could not take his eyes from them. "Do not look at them," warned Filippo. "But what are they?" asked the son. "Oh, they are just geese," replied Filippo, wanting to divert the boy's attention from the young women. "Please, father," begged the boy, "let me have one of those geese. I could put something into its bill. "No!" exclaimed the father. "Their bills are not where you think they are, and they require special feeding. And furthermore they are evil!" Poor Filippo now regretted having taken his son from his protective sanctuary, for even as he spoke, he realized that however clever his responses were, they were no match for the boy's natural inclinations. Source: Giovanni Boccaccio, The Decameron , day 4, introduction. Retold and shortened. © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. The Decameron (Il Decamerone) was written between 1350 and 1355. Return to the table of contents . An Inexperienced Youth Italy, The Facetiæ of Poggio A young Bolognese, a simple-minded ninny, had married a beautiful maiden. The first night, not being in the least up to his business, since he had never before frequented any woman, he did not succeed in consummating the marriage. The next morning, being asked by a friend how matters had fared overnight: "Sadly," he sighed; "for, after repeated endeavours, I could never find in my wife the aperture I was told of." Seeing his silliness: "Hush, for God's sake," said the friend; "speak not a word about it; how unpleasant, and what a shame for you if the thing were known!" The simpleton begged for his advice and assistance: "I'll undertake," said his interlocutor, "to bore that aperture for you, if only you stand a first rate supper; but I shall require eight days to perform the operation, which is a very difficult one." The idiot assented, and, at night, secreted his mate with his wife, himself retiring to another bed. After the interval agreed upon, the road had been so well opened by friendly exertions, that no more thorns were to be feared: the husband was sent for: "I have toiled and moiled for your service," said his obliging companion, "but the requisite orifice is at last made." The young woman, now thoroughly initiated, congratulated her husband, praising highly his friend's labour. The fool, overjoyed at his wife's perforation, gave his best thanks to his comrade, and paid the supper. Source: The Facetiæ or Jocose Tales of Poggio , vol. 2 (Paris: Isidore Liseux, 1879), no. 150, pp. 45-47 . Poggio's complete title is "An Inexperienced Youth Who Did Not Make the Acquaintance of His Wife During Their First Wedding-Night." This anecdote combines elements of folktale types 1678 (The Boy Who Had Never Seen a Woman) and 1686 (The Wedding Night). Poggio's full name was Gian Francesco Poggio Bracciolini; he lived between 1380 and 1459. Return to the table of contents . A Young Monk Wanted to Have a Goose Germany A hermit once took a young monk to the city. He had raised him since childhood, and the old monk now wanted put the young one to a test. Arriving in the city, they saw a number of women walking to and fro. Filled with amazement, the young monk stared at them with calf's eyes. Until now he had never seen a woman, for since his earliest childhood he had been raised in a monastery. He asked the old monk what these things were. The old monk answered, saying, "They are geese." The women were wearing white veils and white cloaks. The young monk left good enough alone and said nothing more. Afterward, when the two were back at their monastery, the young monk began to cry bitterly. The old monk asked him why he was crying. The young monk replied, "Father, why should I not be crying! I wanted every so badly to have a goose!" Source: Johann Gailer von Kaisersberg, ca. 1510. Freely translated from Ignaz Hub, Die komische und humoristische Literatur der deutschen Prosaisten des 16. Jahrhunderts , vol. 1 (Nürnberg: Verlag der v. Ebner'schen Buchhandlung, 1856), p. 35 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 18, 2013. The Enchanted Pear Tree The Enchanted Pear Tree Boccaccio's Story of Lydia and Pyrrhus Chaucer's Merchant's Tale and other tales of type 1423 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2014 Contents The Story of Lydia and Pyrrhus (abstracted from The Decameron by Giovanni Boccaccio). The Merchant's Tale (abstracted from The Canterbury Tales by Geoffrey Chaucer). Story of the Credulous Husband ( 1001 Nights , translated by John Payne). The Tale of the Simpleton Husband ( 1001 Nights , translated by Richard Burton). The Twenty-Ninth Vizier's Story (Turkey, The History of the Forty Viziers ). Husband, Wife, Lover, and Mango Tree (Tibet/Nepal). The Fourth Lady, Her Husband, and the Brahmin (India/Persia). Vibhîtaka Tree (India). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Story of Lydia and Pyrrhus Giovanni Boccaccio Nicostratus, a wealthy patrician, married Lydia, a woman of great distinction and unsurpassed beauty. He was well advanced in years, while she was still a paragon of youth and vitality. Consequently, to state the matter delicately, their marriage did not leave the young wife entirely satisfied. Thus, it is quite understandable that Lydia found herself paying ever more attention to one of her husband's servants, Pyrrhus by name, who was elegant, handsome, young, and energetic. He was attracted to her as well, and gladly would have accepted her invitations to love, but the old man gave them no opportunity. What he lacked in vigor he made up with jealousy and perseverance, rarely leaving his beautiful young wife alone. Their unrequited passion aglow, Lydia and Pyrrhus devised a daring scheme through which, even in the master's presence, they might satisfy their longing for one another. Accordingly, one day when the three were walking in the garden, as they often did, Lydia requested a pear from a certain tree. Pyrrhus climbed after the fruit, but once in the tree, he called to his master, "Have you no shame, making love like that in broad daylight?" The master demanded an explanation for the strange remark, and Pyrrhus concluded that the pear tree was enchanted, giving the impression of unreal happenings below. To test the theory, he asked his master to climb the tree, and see if he too would behold impossible things below. His curiosity piqued, Nicostratus mustered enough strength to climb onto one of the pear tree's lower branches. Looking down, what did he behold but Pyrrhus and Lydia making fervent love. From his precarious perch, he shouted curses, threats, and insults at them. but they -- engaged with other pursuits -- quite ignored him. Nicostratus climbed down from the tree, only to find Pyrrhus and Lydia seated discretely on a garden bench. Their innocent demeanor convinced him that nothing unseemly had happened. Fearing that only a bedeviled tree could be responsible for the vile images that he had perceived, he sent for an ax and had it cut down immediately. From that time forth Nicostratus relaxed his watchful vigil over his young wife, and thus Pyrrhus and Lydia were able to pluck the fruits of their love at regular intervals, even without the help of their enchanted pear tree. Source: Giovanni Boccaccio, The Decameron , day 7, tale 9. Retold and shortened. © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. The Decameron (Il Decamerone) was written between 1350 and 1355. Link to the entire work: Giovanni Boccaccio, The Decameron; or, Ten Days of Entertainment (Cincinnati: Steward and Kidd Company, 1919), seventh day, novel 9, pp. 367-74 . Link to the work in Italian: Giovanni Boccaccio, Il Decamerone , vol. 2 (Paris: Libraire de Firmin Didot Frères, 1849), giornata settima, novella 9, p. 85-94. Return to the table of contents . The Merchant's Tale Geoffrey Chaucer In the town of Pavia in Lombardy there lived a worthy knight by the name of January. Although throughout his long and prosperous life he had partaken often of the fruits of love, he felt no need for marriage until he passed his sixtieth year, when suddenly he was overcome by a violent urge to become a wedded man. "A young and beautiful wife," he concluded, "would be the fulfillment of my wealth and glory. Obedient, loyal, and untiring, she would attend to my every need in my waning years, and further, she may well present me with an heir." "Not so!" argued some. "A wife's interest will be more toward your fortune than toward your well being, and further, her unbridled passions may place your honor at risk." But January listened not to these negative voices, paying heed instead to those who praised the virtues of womanhood and the benefits of marriage. And thus he soon announced to his friends his resolve to find a bride, "But," he asserted, "she must be under twenty years of age, for young veal is tastier than old beef." His friends tried to dissuade him from this resolve, but to no avail, and at last -- driven onward by unrelenting fantasies -- he found the woman who satisfied his dreams. Although not of high rank, she was young and beautiful, and, in his love-blinded perception, she was also compliant and self-disciplined. Further, like old January himself, she too bore the name of a season: May. Marriage documents were executed, the holy sacrament of marriage was duly performed, and the priest united January and May as husband and wife. One wedding guest was particularly moved, a robust young man named Damian, who served as a squire to Knight January. Ravished by May's fresh beauty, the squire fell madly in love with his master's young bride. No one knows what young May was thinking in her heart as old January -- with his beard of stubble and loose skin shaking about his throat -- labored in the field of love. But Damian's thoughts were not entirely secret. He poured out his soul with pen and ink, then managed to slip the letter into the hand of his beloved May without being seen by the ever-watchful January. May's only opportunity to read the letter came in that small place where everyone goes alone. There she committed Damian's message to memory, then tore the letter into pieces and threw them into the privy. But one thing is certain. She took no offense at the young squire's forwardness, for as soon as she could steal a few minutes' time, she composed a letter to the young squire, promising him the satisfaction he desired of her as soon as the time and place might present themselves. In the meantime old January's fortune turned against him, and he lost his sight. The curse of blindness increased the knight's possessiveness and jealousy toward his young wife. Fearing that she might succumb to some temptation under the cover of his darkness, he never let her go out unless he himself had her by the hand. Nevertheless, by using private hand signals and smuggled letters, she communicated her forbidden love to Damian, and invented a plan whereby it might be consummated. The tryst was to take place in a private garden where January and May often walked together. Following his beloved's plan, Damian let himself into the garden at the appointed time, then hid himself in the branches of a pear tree that grew there. A little later January and May, hand in hand, approached the tree, when May suddenly declared an intense appetite for a pear from the nearby tree. "Do let me climb the tree and pluck a pear," she begged of her husband. Then recalling his blind jealousy, she added, "You can hold your arms around the tree to make sure that I am alone." Not wanting to deny her this innocent request, he stooped over and let her step onto his back. Taking hold of a branch, she pulled herself into tree and into the arms of the waiting Damian. Now ladies, please take no offence, but I must tell the story as it actually happened. Damian forthwith lifted her smock and thrust away, with the deceived husband blindly hugging the tree beneath them. However, this shameful tryst was not entirely unseen. The king and queen of Fairyland saw all, and the king -- horrified at the cuckoldry -- resolved at once to restore the old knight's sight immediately and thus expose his wife's and his squire's faithlessness. "Do that!" replied the fairy king's wife. "But nothing bad will come to the young woman, for I will give her a bold and quick answer that will excuse her and her lover from all guilt." And thus it happened. As granted by the fairy king, sight miraculously returned to January's aging eyes. But his rejoicing was short lived, for looking up, the first thing he saw was his wife engaged in an act that polite words cannot describe. "Strumpet!" he called out angrily. "What are you up to?" Now it was the fairy queen's turn to ply her magic, and -- as promised -- she put a quick response onto the wayward wife's tongue. "Sir," replied May, "have patience. Don't you see what I have done? I was told that the only cure for your blindness would be for me to struggle with a man upon a tree." "Struggle?" said he. "It went right in!" "Oh no!" said she. "You caught a hazy glimpse, my good sir, but your sight is still poor. Things are not as they first appeared to you." Then she continued, "This slander is my reward for helping you to see." "Never mind!" said he. "Come down. But it did appear to me that Damian was enjoying you with your smock upon his breast." "Think what you will," said she, "but it was only a false vision following your long blindness." With that she jumped down from the tree, and January led her happily back home. Source: Geoffrey Chaucer, The Canterbury Tales , "The Merchant's Tale." Retold and shortened. © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. The tale above combines elements of folktale type 1423 (the enchanted pear tree) with those of type 1419M (a wife convinces her husband that her infidelity has saved him from a curse). Chaucer was born about the year 1340 and died in 1400. He began writing The Canterbury Tales in about 1386. The great work remained unfinished. Link to a Middle English text with an interlinear translation of The Marchantes Tale from the Geoffrey Chaucer Page at Harvard University. Link to a Middle English text of The Marchantes Tale from eChaucer, edited by Gerard NeCastro, University of Maine at Machias. Link to a modern translation of The Merchant's Tale from eChaucer, edited by Gerard NeCastro, University of Maine at Machias. Return to the table of contents . Story of the Credulous Husband 1001 Nights (translated by John Payne) There was once of old time a foolish, ignorant man, who had wealth galore, and his wife was a fair woman, who loved a handsome youth. The latter used to watch for her husband's absence and come to her, and on this wise he abode a long while. One day, as the woman was private with her lover, he said to her, "O my lady and my beloved, if thou desire me and love me, give me possession of thyself and accomplish my need in thy husband's presence; else will I never again come to thee nor draw near thee, what while I abide on life." Now she loved him with an exceeding love and could not brook his separation an hour nor could endure to vex him; so, when she heard his words, she said to him, "[So be it,] in God's name, O my beloved and solace of mine eyes, may he not live who would vex thee!" Quoth he, "Today?" And she said, "Yes, by thy life," and appointed him of this. When her husband came home, she said to him, "I desire to go a-pleasuring." And he said, "With all my heart." So he went, till he came to a goodly place, abounding in vines and water, whither he carried her and pitched her a tent beside a great tree; and she betook herself to a place beside the tent and made her there an underground hiding-place, [in which she hid her lover]. Then said she to her husband, "I desire to mount this tree." And he said, "Do so." So she climbed up and when she came to the top of the tree, she cried out and buffeted her face, saying, "Lewd fellow that thou art, are these thy usages? Thou sworest [fidelity to me] and liedst." And she repeated her speech twice and thrice. Then she came down from the tree and rent her clothes and said, "O villain, if these be thy dealings with me before my eyes, how dost thou when thou art absent from me?" Quoth he, "What aileth thee?" and she said, "I saw thee swive the woman before my very eyes." "Not so, by Allah!" cried he. "But hold thy peace till I go up and see." So he climbed the tree and no sooner did he begin to do so than up came the lover [from his hiding-place] and taking the woman by the legs, [fell to swiving her]. When the husband came to the top of the tree, he looked and beheld a man swiving his wife. So he said, "O strumpet, what doings are these?" And he made haste to come down from the tree to the ground; [but meanwhile the lover had returned to his hiding-place] and his wife said to him, "What sawest thou?" "I saw a man swive thee," answered he; and she said, "Thou liest; thou sawest nought and sayst this but of conjecture." On this wise they did three times, and every time [he climbed the tree] the lover came up out of the underground place and bestrode her, whilst her husband looked on and she still said, "O liar, seest thou aught?" "Yes," would he answer and came down in haste, but saw no one and she said to him, "By my life, look and say nought but the truth!" Then said he to her, "Arise, let us depart this place, for it is full of Jinn and Marids." [So they returned to their house] and passed the night [there] and the man arose in the morning, assured that this was all but imagination and illusion. And so the lover accomplished his desire. Source: John Payne, Tales from the Arabic of the Breslau and Calcutta (1814-18) Editions of the Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night Not Occurring in the Other Printed Texts of the Work . Now first done into English, vol. 1 (London: Printed for subscribers only, 1884), pp. 270-72 . Square brackets denote Payne's additions to a faulty original text. Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Simpleton Husband 1001 Nights (translated by Richard Burton) There was once in olden time a foolish man and an ignorant, who had abounding wealth, and his wife was a beautiful woman, who loved a handsome youth. The Cicisbeo [gallant] used to watch for her husband's absence and come to her, and on this wise he abode a long while. One day of the days, as the woman was closeted with her lover, he said to her, "O my lady and my beloved, an [if] thou desire me and love me, give me possession of thy person and satisfy my need in the presence of thy husband; otherwise I will never again come to thee nor draw near thee while I live my life." Now she loved him with exceeding love and c&uld not suffer his separation an hour nor could endure to anger him; so, when she heard his words, she said to him, "Bismillah, so be it, in Allah's name, O my darling and coolth of mine eyes: may he not live who would vex thee!" Quoth he, "Today?" And quoth she, "Yes, by thy life," and made an appointment with him for this. When her husband came home, she said to him, "I want to go a-pleasuring," and he said, "With all my heart." So he went, till he came to a goodly place, abounding in vines and water, whither he carried her and pitched her a tent by the side of a tall tree; and she betook herself to a place alongside the tent and made her there a Sarddb [an underground vault], in which she hid her lover. Then said she to her husband, "I want to climb this tree"; and he said, "Do so." So she clomb it and when she came to the tree-top, she cried out and slapped her face, saying, "O thou lecher, are these thy lewd ways? Thou swarest faith to me, and thou liedest." And she repeated her speech twice and thrice. Then she came down from the tree and rent her raiment and said, "O lecher, an [if] these be thy dealings with me before my eyes, how dost thou when thou art absent from me?" Quoth he, "What aileth thee?" and quoth she, "I saw thee futter the woman before my very eyes." Cried he, "Not so, by Allah! But hold thy peace till I go up and see." So he clomb the tree and no sooner did he begin to do so than out came the lover from his hiding place and taking the woman by the legs, fell to shagging her. When the husband came to the top of the tree, he looked and beheld a man futtering his wife; so he called out, "O whore, what doings are these?" and he made haste to come down from the tree to the ground. But meanwhile the lover had returned to his hiding place and his wife asked him, "What sawest thou?" and he answered, "I saw a man shag thee." But she said, "Thou liest; thou sawest naught and sayst this only by way of phantasy." The same they did three several times, and every time he clomb the tree the lover came up out of the underground place and mounted her, whilst her husband looked on and she still said, "Seest thou aught, O liar?" "Yes," would he answer, and came down in haste, but saw no one and she said to him, "By my life, look and speak naught but sooth!" Then he cried to her, "Arise, let us depart this place, for 'tis full of Jinn and Marids." Accordingly, they returned to their house and nighted there, and the man arose in the morning, assured that this was all but phantasy and fascination. And so the lover won his wicked will. Source: Richard F. Burton, Supplemental Nights to the Book of the Thousand and One Nights , vol. 1 (Printed by the Burton Club for private subscribers only, 1886), pp. 239-41 . Return to the table of contents . The Twenty-Ninth Vizier's Story Turkey There was in the palace of the world a grocer, and he had a wife, a beauty of the age, and that woman had a lover. One day this woman's lover said, "If your husband found us out, he would not leave either of us sound." The woman said, "I am able to manage that I shall make merry with you before my husband's eyes." The youth said, "Such a thing cannot be." The woman replied, "In such and such a place there is a large tree. Tomorrow I will go on an outing with my husband to the foot of that tree. Hide yourself in a secret place near that tree, and when I make a sign to you, come." As her lover left, her husband arrived. The woman said, "Man, I would like to go on an outing with you tomorrow to such and such a tree." The man replied, "So be it." When it was morning the woman and her husband went to that tree. The woman said, "They say that he who eats this sweetmeat sees single things as though they were double," and she ate some and gave her husband some to eat. Half an hour afterward the woman climbed up the tree and turned and looked down and began, "May you be struck blind! May God punish you! Man, what are you doing? Is there anyone who has ever done such a thing? You are making merry with a strange woman under the eyes of your wife. Quick, divorce me!" And she cried out. Her husband said, "What is with you, woman? Have you gone mad? There is no one with me." Said the woman, "Be silent, you unblushing and shameless fellow. The woman is with you, and you deny it." Her husband said, "Come down." She replied, "I will not come down so long as that woman is with you." Her husband began to swear, protesting, and the woman came down and said to him, "Where is that harlot? Quick, show her to me, or else!" Again the man swore, and the woman said, "Can it then be the work of the sweetmeat?" The man said, "May be." Said the woman, "You too go up and look down on me, and let us see." Her husband took hold of the tree, and while he was climbing, the woman made a sign to her lover. The man looked down and saw the woman making merry with a youth. This time the man cried out, "Away with you! What is with you, you shameless boy?" The woman said, "You are lying." But the man could not endure it and began to come down, and the youth ran off. Source: Sheykh-Zada, The History of the Forty Vezirs; or, The Story of the Forty Morns and Eves , translated by E. J. W. Gibb (London: George Redway, 1886), pp. 303-305 . Translation modernized by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Return to the table of contents . Husband, Wife, Lover, and Mango Tree Tibet/Nepal In a certain village lived an honest man who had a wife both beautiful and clever, but devoted to another man. One day she went by assignation to a grove of mango trees, and there dallied with her lover. But the husband also came. So the lover, seeing him approaching, jumped up hastily, and stepping aside, stood modestly concealed. Then the woman, seeing her lord, said to him, "Can I have a mango to eat?" He replied, "I will fetch you one." Quoth she: "My longing is to climb up myself and eat a mango." "Do so for yourself then," said he. So when she had climbed up the tree, she looked at her husband and said: "My dear, what do you mean by making love to another woman before my very eyes?" "What are you talking about?" said he. "There is no other woman." "Can this be the nature of the tree [so that one sees double]?" said she. "You come up and look at me standing on the ground." When so it was done, she called her paramour, and took her fill of love. Then said the husband: "Yes, indeed, it is the nature of the tree." Whereon the lover made off. Source: Cecil Bendall, "The Tantrakhyana, a Collection of Indian Folklore, from a Unique Sanskrit Manuscript Discovered in Nepal," tale 42, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland , new series, vol. 20 (London: Trübner and Company, 1888), pp. 500-501 . Bendall's source: A Tibetan manuscript dated A.D. 1484. Return to the table of contents . The Fourth Lady, Her Husband, and the Brahmin India/Persia Frame Story Five cunning women meet a handsome but naive Brahmin at a well in Benares [Veranasi], India, then lead him into a series of compromising situations, each claiming to be a lesson from the Tirrea Bede , (the fifth Veda), although in truth the Hindus recognize only four such sacred texts. Story 8 The fourth lady, ... having bestowed her attention on the pilgrim Brahmin, dispatched him to an orchard; and having gone home, said to her wise husband, "I have heard that in the orchard of a certain husbandman, there is a date tree, the fruit of which is of remarkably fine flavour; but what is yet stranger, whoever ascends it, sees many wonderful objects. If today, going to visit this orchard, we gather dates from this tree, and also see the wonders of it, it will not be unproductive of amusement." In short, she so worked upon her husband with flattering speeches and caresses, that nolens volens [unwillingly or willingly] he went to the orchard, and at the instigation of his wife, ascended the tree. At this instant she beckoned to the Brahmin, who was previously seated, expectantly, in a corner of the garden. The husband, from the top of the tree, beholding what was not fit to be seen, exclaimed in extreme rage, "Ah! thou shameless Russian-born wretch, what abominable action is this?" [ footnote ] The wife making not the least answer, the flames of anger seized the mind of the man, and he began to descend from the tree; when the Brahmin with activity and speed having hurried over the fourth section of the Tirrea Bede, went his way. VERSE. The road to repose is that of activity, and quickness! The wife, during her husband's descent from the tree having arranged her plan, said, "Surely, man, frenzy must have deprived thy brain of the fumes of sense, that having foolishly set up such a cry, and not reflecting. Upon thy own disgrace, (for here, excepting thyself, what male is present ?) thou wou'dst fix upon me the charge of infidelity?" The husband, when he saw no person near, was astonished, and said to himself, "Certainly, this vision must have been miraculous." The completely artful wife, from the hesitation of her husband, guessed the cause, and impudently began to abuse him. Then instantly tying her vest round her waist, she ascended the tree. When she had reached the topmost branch, she suddenly cried out, "O thou shameless man, what abominable action is this! If thy evil star hath led thee from the path of virtue, surely thou mightest have in secret ventured upon it. Doubtless to pull down the curtain of modesty from thy eyes, and with such impudence to commit such a wicked deed, is the very extreme of debauchery." The husband replied, "Woman, do not thus ridiculously cry out, but be silent; for such is the property of this tree, that whoever ascends it, sees man or woman below in such situations." The cunning wife now came down, and said to her husband, "What a charming garden and amusing spot is this! where one can gather fruit, and at the same time behold the wonders of the world." The husband replied, "Destruction seize the wonders which falsely accuse man of abomination!" In short, the devilish wife, notwithstanding the impudence of such an action, escaped safely to her house; and the next day, according to custom, attending at the well, introduced the Brahmin to the ladies, and informed them of her worthy contrivance. Source: Jonathan Scott, Bahar-Danush; or, Garden of Knowledge: An Oriental Romance , translated from the Persic of Einaiut Oollah [Inayat Allah], vol. 2 (Shrewsbury: Printed by J. and W. Eddowes for T. Cadell, jun., and W. Davies, in the Strand, London, 1799), story 8, lesson 4, pp. 64-68 . Footnote by Scott: "The Asiatics have a very contemptible opinion of the Russians, especially of the females, whom they believe to be void of common modesty." [ Return to the text. ] Einaiut Oollah, modern English spelling Inayat Allah , or in full: Shaikh Inayat Allah Kamboh , was born in 1608 and died in 1671 at Delhi. Return to the table of contents . The Vibhîtaka Tree India There is a large village called Kukhâddâ; in it dwelt a certain Jarasa, who was a great fool. His wife's name was Devikâ. She was a flighty, ill- conducted person, and had a lover -- a Brahman -- whom she used to meet under a Vibhîtaka tree, some way from the village. These meetings were a great subject of gossip in the place, and in course of time her husband heard of them. So he made up his mind to see into the matter himself and went and climbed into the tree. What he saw from his hiding-place fully justified all the gossip, and he called out to his wife: "You good-for-nothing hussy! You have been up to this game for some time past." She was put into somewhat of a difficulty and said: "I don't know what you mean!" "I will let you know what I mean," he answered, "if you will just wait till I come down." So she promised to wait till he came down from the tree, and meanwhile sent her lover away. At last her husband reached the ground. "It is of no use your making excuses," he said. "You have been caught in flagranti delicto. " "My dear husband!" she replied, "You must know that this tree has very peculiar properties: anyone who climbs up into it can see at once whether their husband or wife has attractions away from home." Her husband replied, "Well, you climb up and see if it is so." Which she did, and cried out: "You good-for-nothing wretch! You have been running after other women for days and days." As this was perfectly true the fool had nothing to say, and so he made it up with his wife and they went home together. Source: B. Hale Wortham, The Enchanted Parrot: Being a Selection from the "Suka Saptati," or, The Seventy Tales of a Parrot , translated from the Sanskrit (London: Luzac and Company, 1911), story 28, pp. 72-73 . The Suka Saptati , also spelled Sukasaptati , or Seventy Tales of a Parrot is a collection of Sanskrit stories dating from the 12th century or earlier. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 14, 2014. The Three-Ring Parable: Tales of Type 972 The Three-Ring Parable tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 920E edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2008 Contents Melchizedek Avoids a Trap (abstracted from Giovanni Boccaccio's Decameron ). Of the Triple State of the World ( Gesta Romanorum ). The Parable of the Three Rings (abstracted from Nathan der Weise , a drama by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing). Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Melchizedek Avoids a Trap Giovanni Boccaccio Through acts of generosity and the costs of waging war, Saladin depleted his treasury. Caught by a sudden need for money, he thought of a wealthy Jew, Melchizedek by name, who lived in Alexandria. But Melchizedek had a reputation for miserliness, and he would never voluntarily surrender the vast sum needed by Saladin, nor was the Sultan prepared to take the money by force. At last Saladin devised a plan whereby he would embarrass the wealthy Jew, who would then redeem himself with money. Accordingly, Saladin summoned Melchizedek to his palace, then stated, "Men speak highly of your wisdom. What conclusion have you reached concerning the ways of God? Which of the three great religions is the truly authentic one? Judaism, Christianity, or Islam?" Sensing that with this question Saladin was seeking to lead him into an unwinnable quarrel and thus gain advantage over him, Melchizedek answered, "That is an excellent question, my lord. I can best explain my views on the subject with the following story:" I have heard that there was once a wealthy man whose most prized possession was a precious ring. He bequeathed this ring to one of his sons, and by this sign, the latter was known as the head of family. Succeeding generations followed this tradition, with the principal heir always inheriting the cherished ring from his father. But, to make a long story short, the ring finally came into the possession of a man who had three sons, each the equal of the others in obedience, virtue, and worthiness. Unwilling to favor one son over the others, the father had a master artisan make two copies of the valued ring, and he bequeathed a ring to each son. Following the father's death, each son laid claim to the deceased man's title and estate, showing the inherited ring as proof. However, a careful inspection of the three rings could not reveal which of them was the authentic one, so the three sons' claims remain unresolved. The same is true with the three great religions, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. The adherents of each religion consider themselves to be the legitimate heirs of God's truth. But as was the case with the rings, their claims too remain unresolved. Saladin, recognizing that the Jew had escaped his trap, decided to ask him directly for a loan. Melchizedek gladly provided him with the sum he needed. The Sultan later repaid the debt in full, and Saladin and Melchizedek remained friends as long as they lived. Source: Giovanni Boccaccio, The Decameron , day 1, tale 3. Retold and shortened. © 1999 by D. L. Ashliman. The Decameron (Il Decamerone) was written between 1350 and 1355. Saladin (born 1137 or 1138, died 1193), Sultan of Egypt, Syria, Yemen, and Palestine, was the greatest Muslim hero of the middle ages. Return to the table of contents . Of the Triple State of the World Gesta Romanorum A certain knight had three sons, and on his deathbed he bequeathed the inheritance to his firstborn; to the second, his treasury; and to the third, a very valuable ring, of more worth indeed than all he had left to the others. But the two former had also rings, and they were all apparently the same. After their father's death the first son said, "I possess that precious ring of my father." The second said, "You have it not -- I have." To this the third son answered, "That is not true. The elder of us has the estate, the second the treasure, and therefore it is but meet that I should have the most valuable ring." The first son answered, "Let us prove, then, whose claims to it have the preeminence." They agreed, and several sick men were made to resort to them for the purpose. The two first rings had no effect, but the last cured all their infirmities. Application: My beloved, the knight is Christ. The three sons are the Jews, Saracens [Muslims], and Christians. The most valuable ring is faith, which is the property of the younger, that is, of the Christians Source: Gesta Romanorum . I have used the following edition: Gesta Romanorum; or, Entertaining Moral Stories , translated from the Latin by Charles Swan (London: George Bell and Sons, 1877), tale 89, pp. 161-162. Translation slightly revised. The Gesta Romanorum or Deeds of the Romans was compiled in Latin in the early fourteenth century by an English cleric. It was first published about 1473. Its title notwithstanding, only a few of the work's some 283 stories deal with the Romans. Instead, the work presents a mixture of anecdotes, legends, and fables, gleaned from many sources and presented in a context appropriate for incorporation into Christian sermons. Return to the table of contents . The Parable of the Three Rings Gotthold Ephraim Lessing An uneasy peace ruled in Jerusalem. Saladin's victory against the Crusaders had cost the Muslims dearly, both in the loss of troops and in the depletion of the royal treasury. Saladin was resolved to rule with civilized humanity as far as possible. But it was an uneasy peace, with Jews, Christians, and the newly victorious Muslims all suspicious of one another. Thus when Saladin requested an audience with Nathan, a leading Jewish merchant, the latter was very apprehensive about the Sultan's motivation. Nathan was known far and wide not only for his successes in commerce, but also for his skills in diplomacy and negotiation. Jews, Christians, and Muslims alike called him Nathan the Wise. Nathan's suspicions were well founded, for Saladin was indeed looking to replenish his exhausted coffers with a loan or a gift from his wealthy Jewish subject. Too civil to openly demand such a tribute from the peace-loving Nathan, the Sultan instead masked his request in the form of a theological question. "Your reputation for wisdom is great," said the Sultan. "You must have studied the great religions. Tell me, which is the best, Judaism, Islam, or Christianity?" "Sultan, I am a Jew," replied Nathan. "And I a Muslim," interrupted Saladin, "and between us stands the Christian. But the three faiths contradict one another. They cannot all be true. Tell me the results of your own wise deliberations. Which religion is best?" Nathan recognized the trap at once. Any answer except "Islam" would offend Saladin the Muslim, whereas any answer except "Judaism" would place his own integrity under question. Thus, instead of giving a direct answer, Nathan responded by relating a parable to Saladin: In the Orient in ancient times there lived a man who possessed a ring of inestimable worth. Its stone was an opal that emitted a hundred colors, but its real value lay in its ability to make its wearer beloved of God and man. The ring passed from father to most favored son for many generations, until finally its owner was a father with three sons, all equally deserving. Unable to decide which of the three sons was most worthy, the father commissioned a master artisan to make two exact copies of the ring, then gave each son a ring, and each son believed that he alone had inherited the original and true ring. But instead of harmony, the father's plan brought only discord to his heirs. Shortly after the father died, each of the sons claimed to be the sole ruler of the father's house, each basing his claim to authority on the ring given to him by the father. The discord grew even stronger and more hateful when a close examination of the rings failed to disclose any differences. "But wait," interrupted Saladin, "surely you do not mean to tell me that there are no differences between Islam, Judaism, and Christianity!" "You are right, Sultan," replied Nathan. "Their teachings and practices differ in ways that can be seen by all. However, in each case, the teachings and practices are based on beliefs and faith, beliefs and faith that at their roots are the same. Which of us can prove that our beliefs and our faith are more reliable than those of others?" "I understand," said Saladin. "Now continue with your tale." "The story is nearly at its end," replied Nathan. The dispute among the brothers grew until their case was finally brought before a judge. After hearing the history of the original ring and its miraculous powers, the judge pronounced his conclusion: "The authentic ring," he said, "had the power to make its owner beloved of God and man, but each of your rings has brought only hatred and strife. None of you is loved by others; each loves only himself. Therefore I must conclude that none of you has the original ring. Your father must have lost it, then attempted to hide his loss by having three counterfeit rings made, and these are the rings that cause you so much grief." The judge continued: "Or it may be that your father, weary of the tyranny of a single ring, made duplicates, which he gave to you. Let each of you demonstrate his belief in the power of his ring by conducting his life in such a manner that he fully merits -- as anciently promised -- the love of God and man. "Marvelous! Marvelous!" exclaimed Saladin. "Your tale has set my mind at rest. You may go." "Sultan, was there nothing else you wished from me?" asked Nathan. "No. Nothing." "Then may I take the liberty to make a request of you. My trade of late has brought me unexpected wealth, and in these uncertain times I need a secure repository. Would you be willing to accept my recent earnings as loan or deposit?" The Sultan gladly acceded to Nathan's wish. And thus Saladin gained from his wise Jewish subject both material and spiritual benefit, and Nathan the Wise found a safe haven for his wealth and earned the respect of the Islamic Sultan. Source: Abstracted from Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, Nathan der Weise , a drama in five acts (1779). Events leading up to Nathan's telling of the parable are depicted in act 3, scenes 4-7. The parable itself is contained in act 3, scene 7. © 1999 by D. L. Ashliman. Link to the text of the entire play (in German): Nathan der Weise . Note that in Lessing's version of the three-ring parable, unlike its precedents, all three rings are deemed to be false. Saladin (born 1137 or 1138, died 1193), Sultan of Egypt, Syria, Yemen, and Palestine, was the greatest Muslim hero of the middle ages. Return to the table of contents . Return to: Table of Contents. Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Revised March 19, 2013. Boccaccio: Griselda Griselda Giovanni Boccaccio Gualtieri, the Marquis of Saluzzo, spent so much time at hunting and other sports that he gave no thought about marrying and establishing a family. His friends and subjects, fearing that old age would overtake him before he acquired an heir, pressured him to take a wife. Finally, more to silence his critics than to satisfy any desire that he might have for matrimony, he resolved to court a beautiful, but poor young woman from a neighboring village. Her family's low station in life would spite those who had so urgently insisted that he marry, and her beauty, he thought, would make living with her at least bearable. Gualtieri informed Griselda -- that was the young woman's name -- of his intention to marry her, and asked her if she would accept him as a husband, to love, honor, and obey, for better or for worse, and never criticize him nor question his authority. She readily agreed, and their wedding was celebrated forthwith. Griselda appeared to be a worthy addition to Gualtieri's noble household, but the marquis, unsure of the depth of her character, decided to test her loyalty and her patience. Thus, soon after the birth of their first child -- it was a beautiful girl -- he informed her that his subjects were unhappy with the child and that it was to be put to death. Without hesitation she acceded to her husband's demands and surrendered the child. However, instead of killing the baby girl, Gualtieri had her spirited away and tended in a secret place. Some time later Griselda gave birth to a son, and her husband, intent on carrying his test still further, berated her and insisted that her child be put to death. She again yielded to his demands without complaint, and as before, he took the child to a secret place where he was well cared for. Still unsatisfied, Gualtieri devised a final test. He publicly denounced Griselda, claiming that the pope had granted him dispensation to divorce her and to take a more deserving wife. Griselda, wearing only a shift, was sent back to her father. All these indignities she bore without complaint. As the day approached when Gualtieri, as it was supposed, was to take a new bride, he asked Griselda to return to his palace, for no one knew better how to prepare for guests than did she. Griselda returned to her former residence, now as a cleaning woman and servant, to make preparations for her former husband's wedding. Gualtieri had his and Griselda's daughter, who was now twelve years old, dressed in bridal clothes, and he presented her to Griselda, who could not have known that this was her own child. "What do you think of my new bride?" he asked. Griselda replied without guile, "If her wisdom matches her beauty, then the two of you will be very happy together." At last recognizing Griselda's sincerity, faithfulness, and patience, Gualtieri revealed to her the trials that he had devised to test her loyalty. With tears of joy, she received her children and once again assumed her position as Gualtieri's ever patient and obedient wife. Source: Giovanni Boccaccio, The Decameron (written between 1348 and 1353), day 10, tale 10. Retold and shortened by D. L. Ashliman . © 2003. Aarne-Thompson type 887. Versions of this tale are also found in Chaucer's Canterbury Tales ("The Clerk's Tale"), numerous Renaissance ballads and chapbooks, and Charles Perrault's Griselda . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 13, 2003. Bogeyman / Boogeyman Bogeymen / Boogeymen Stories about imaginary specters used to frighten children translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2021-2024 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Dictionary Definitions . Of Vaine Apparitions (Reginald Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft , 1584). Imaginary Monsters (England). Goblin Names (England). Raw Head and Bloody Bones (England). Peg Powler (England). Menschikoff (England). The Bogey Man (England). Mr. Miacca (England). The Fairies (Ireland). A Rhyme We Say While Skipping (Ireland). The Night Huntsman (Germany). The Rye-Mother (Germany). Frau Trude (Germany). Mother Hinne's Parlor (Germany). Frightening Children (Germany). Butzemann (Germany). Krampus-Chains (Austria). The Krampus (Austria). The Krampus and Saint Nicholas (Austria). The Devil Takes a Child (Austria). The Hard-Hearted Father (Austria). Link to a collection of fables where a nurse threatens to throw a crying child to a wolf: The Nurse and the Wolf (Aesop, Babrius, Avianus, and Others). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Dictionary Definitions Samuel Johnson, A Dictionary of the English Language (1755) Bug. Bugbear. A frightful object; a walking spectre, imagined to be seen; generally now used for a false terrour to frighten babees. Rawhead. The name of a spectre, mentioned to frighten children. Oxford English Dictionary (1971) Bugbear. A sort of hobgoblin (presumably in the shape of a bear) supposed to devour naughty children; hence, generally, any imaginary being invoked by nurses to frighten children. Webster's New International Dictionary of the English Language , 2nd edition (1947) Bugbear. A kind of imaginary goblin or specter, used to excite needless fear, as in children; now, any object of dread or abhorrence. Syn. -- bugaboo, bogy. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language (1947) Boogeyman. Boogerman. Boogieman. A monstrous imaginary figure used in threatening children. Be good or the boogeyman will get you. Funk and Wagnalls Standard Dictionary of Folklore, Mythology, and Legend (1984) Bogey. Bogie. Bogy. A terrifying spirit of English folklore, of uncertain, but probably hobgoblinish nature; invoked especially to frighten children. Return to the table of contents . Of Vaine Apparitions England How people have beene brought to feare bugges, which is partlie reformed by preaching of the gospell, the true effect of Christes miracles. But certeinlie, some one knave in a white sheete hath cousened and abused manie thousands that waie; speciallie when Robin good-fellow kept such a coile in the countrie. But you shall understand, that these bugs speciallie are spied and feared of sicke folke, children, women, and cowards, which through weaknesse of mind and bodie, are shaken with vaine dreames and continuall feare. The Scythians , being a stout and a warlike nation (as divers writers report) never see anie vaine sights or spirits. It is a common saieng; A lion feareth no bugs. But in our childhood our mothers maids have so terrified us with an ouglie divell having hornes on his head, fier in his mouth, and a taile in his breech, eies like a bason, fanges like a dog, clawes like a beare, a skin like a Niger, and a voice roring like a lion, whereby we start and are afraid when we heare one crie Bough: and they have so fraied us with bull beggers, spirits, witches, urchens, elves, hags, fairies, satyrs, pans, faunes, sylens, kit with the cansticke, tritons, centaurs, dwarfes, giants, imps, calcars, conjurors, nymphes, changlings, Incubus, Robin good-fellowe, the spoorne, the mare, the man in the oke, the hell waine, the fierdrake, the puckle, Tom thombe, hob gobblin, Tom tumbler, boneles, and such other bugs, that we are afraid of our owne shadowes: in so much as some never feare the divell, but in a darke night; and then a polled sheepe is a perillous beast, and manie times is taken for our fathers soule, speciallie in a churchyard, where a right hardie man heretofore scant durst passe by night, but his haire would stand upright. For right grave writers report, that spirits most often and speciallie take the shape of women appearing to monks, &c: and of beasts, dogs, swine, horsses, gotes, cats, haires; of fowles, as crowes, night owles, and shreeke owles; but they delight most in the likenes of snakes and dragons. Well, thanks be to God, this wretched and cowardlie infidelitie, since the preaching of the gospell, is in part forgotten: and doubtles, the rest of those illusions will in short time (by Gods grace) be detected and vanish awaie. Source (books.google.com): Reginald Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584), book 7, ch. 15, pp. 152-53 . Source (Internet Archive): Reginald Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584), book 7, ch. 15, pp. 152-53 . Return to the table of contents . Imaginary Monsters England The boggarts who are named in those awful threats by means of which the young are quelled into obedience to authority seem wellnigh innumerable. They include monsters of every sort and description. Amongst these imaginary monsters are: Black Parr . Bo-Chap . Bo-Lo . Bodach , for example: "In ye binna quayet the Bodach ill cum doon the lum (chimney) an' tak ye." Bugabo . Jack-up-the-Orchard , for example: "If yo' dunna tak' car' I'll shewn yo' Jack-up-the Orchut." Knocky-Boh , a bogie who taps behind the wainscot to frighten children. Mumpoker , for example: "I'll zend the Mumpoker ater ye." Old Scrat , for example: "By goy! but Auld Scratty'll git thi if thoo doesn't come in." Pokey-Hokey . Punky . Tankerabogus , or Tantarabobus , for example: "Now, Polly, yü've abin a bad, naughty maid, and ef yü be sich a wicked cheel again, I'll zend vur Tankerabogus tü come and car yü away tü' is pittee-awl (pit-hole)." Tod-Lowrie , for example: "Here's Tod-Lowrie coming." Tom Dockin , a bogie having iron teeth, with which he devours bad children. Tom-Poker , a bogie who inhabits dark closets, holes under stairs, unoccupied cock lofts, etc. Churn-Milk Peg and Melsh Dick are wood-demons supposed to protect soft, unripe nuts from being gathered by naughty children, the former being wont to beguile her leisure by smoking a pipe. The Gooseberry Wife , in the guise of a large furry caterpillar, takes charge of the green gooseberries, for example: "If ye goos out in the gearden, the Gooseberry-Wife'll be sure to ketch ye." In the orchards Awd Goggie is guarding the unripe apples. Grindylow , Jenny Green-Teeth , and Nelly Long Arms are the various names of a nymph or water-demon who is said to lurk at the bottom of deep pits, ponds, and wells. When children approach too near to the edge of her domain, she will stretch out her long, sinewy arms, seize them, and drag them under the water, holding them there till they are drowned. Her presence is indicated by a green scum on the surface of the water. If there is no pond or deep water for her near by, she has been supposed to take up a temporary lodging in the tops of trees, where after nightfall she may be heard moaning, in a voice like the sighing of the night-wind through the branches of trees. In some parts of the country, instead of Jenny Green-Teeth , the boggart of the ponds is a masculine water demon called Rawhead , Tommy Rawhead , Bloody-Bones , or Rawhead and Bloody-bones , for example: "Keep away from the marl-pit or Rawhead and Bloody-Bones will have you." Pictures such as these, when presented to the vivid imagination of children, doubtless gain rather than lose in lurid colouring and terrifying shape, and one shudders to think of the effect they must produce on impressionable minds, though in the majority of cases, no doubt, familiarity breeds a wholesome contempt. Source (books.google.com): Elizabeth Mary Wright, Rustic Speech and Folk-Lore (London: Oxford University Press, 1913), pp. 197-99 . Source (Internet Archive): Elizabeth Mary Wright, Rustic Speech and Folk-Lore (London: Oxford University Press, 1913), pp. 197-99 . Abstracted from the original source by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . Goblin Names England Bugaboo. -- A bugbear with which to frighten children. Hob-Goblin. -- A supposied bogie to frighten children. Tom-Loudy. -- A goblin conjurd up to frighten children. Source (books.google.com): Mrs. Gutch and Mabel Peacock, County Folk-Lore , vol. 5: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning Lincolnshire (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1908), pp. 57-58 . Source (Internet Archive): Eliza Gutch and Mabel Peacock, County Folk-Lore , vol. 5: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning Lincolnshire (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1908), pp. 57-58 . Return to the table of contents . Raw Head and Bloody Bones England Amongst other youthful terrors to which I remember being subjected, one had reference to a mythic monster styled "raw head and bloody bones." This boggart appeared to partake of the cannibal nature of some of the giants and ogres in our nursery tales, one of which, on the approach of the redoubtable "Jack, the Giant Killer," called out to his wife, "I smell fresh meat!" or according to the popular rhyme: Fee, fo, fam, I smell the blood of an Englishman! Be be alive or be he dead, I'll grind his bones to salt and bread! The said "raw head and bloody bones," I was seriously informed, preferred to breakfast on the bodies of naughty children, nicely roasted! I can likewise remember well being told that boggarts especially loved to haunt and otherwise annoy those who refused to believe in their existence. After experience, I need scarcely say, has demonstrated the contrary to be much nearer the truth. Source (books.google.com): Charles Hardwick, Traditions, Superstitions, and Folk-Lore (Chiefly Lancashire and the North of England) (Manchester: A. Ireland and Company, 1872), p. 131 . Source (Internet Archive): Charles Hardwick, Traditions, Superstitions, and Folk-Lore (Chiefly Lancashire and the North of England) (Manchester: A. Ireland and Company, 1872), p. 131 . Return to the table of contents . Peg Powler England The river Tees has its sprite, called Peg Powler, a sort of Lorelei, with green tresses, and an insatiable desire for human life, as has the Jenny Greenteeth of Lancashire streams. Both are said to lure people to their subaqueous haunts, and then drown or devour them. The foam or froth, which is often seen floating on the higher portion of the Tees in large masses, is called "Peg Powler's suds;" the finer less sponge-like froth is called "Peg Powler's cream." Mr. Denham tells Mr. Denham tells us that children are still warned from playing on the banks of the river, especially on Sundays, by threats that Peg Powler will drag them into the water; and he pleads guilty to having experienced great terror whenever, as a boy, he found himself alone by the haunted stream. Source (books.google.com): William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders , a new edition (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by W. Satchell, Peyton, and Company, 1879), p. 265 . Source (Internet Archive): William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders , a new edition (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by W. Satchell, Peyton, and Company, 1879), p. 265 . Return to the table of contents . Menschikoff England Baby, baby, naughty baby, Hush! you squalling thing, I say; Peace this instant! peace! or maybe Menschikoff will pass this way. Baby, baby, he's a giant, Black and tall as Rouen's steeple, Sups and dines and lives reliant Every day on naughty people. Baby, baby, if he hears you As he gallops past the house, Limb from limb at once he'll tear you Just as pussy tears a mouse. And he'll beat you, beat you, beat you, And he'll beat you all to pap; And he'll eat you, eat you, eat you, Gobble you, gobble you, snap! snap! snap! Source (books.google.com): Notes and Queries , series 5, vol. 7 (January-June, 1877), p. 49 . Source (Internet Archive): Notes and Queries , series 5, vol. 7 (January-June, 1877), p. 49 . Return to the table of contents . The Bogey Man England The Bogey Man is so terribly tall, The Bogey Man is as high as the wall, The Bogey Man is intended to fall On violent, truculent folks. The Bogey Man is the nurs'ry police, There isn't a nephew, nor is there a niece, But of whose folly he knows every piece, And his horrible wrath it provokes. "We told you he'd catch you," my family said, When I was a youngster; and there by the bed He seemed to be standing, all green, blue, and red, And every sort of a hue. I thought he would leap in the dark with a cry And carry me off to his home in the sky -- But he never did yet, for here still am I -- So I don't believe that it's true. Source (books.google.com): The Windsor Magazine: An Illustrated Monthly for Men and Women , vol. 23 (December 1905 to May 1906), p. 820 . Source (Internet Archive): The Windsor Magazine: An Illustrated Monthly for Men and Women , vol. 23 (December 1905 to May 1906), p. 820 . Return to the table of contents . Mr. Miacca England Tommy Grimes was sometimes a good boy, and sometimes a bad boy; and when he was a bad boy, he was a very bad boy. Now his mother used to say to him: "Tommy, Tommy, be a good boy, and don't go out of the street, or else Mr. Miacca will take you." But still when he was a bad boy he would go out of the street; and one day, sure enough, he had scarcely got round the comer, when Mr. Miacca did catch him and popped him into a bag upside down, and took him off to his house. When Mr. Miacca got Tommy inside, he pulled him out of the bag and set him down, and felt his arms and legs. "You're rather tough," says he; "but you're all I've got for supper, and you'll not taste bad boiled. But body o' me, I've forgot the herbs, and it's bitter you'll taste without herbs. Sally! Here, I say, Sally!" and he called Mrs. Miacca. So Mrs. Miacca came out of another room and said: "What d'ye want, my dear?" "Oh, here's a little boy for supper," said Mr. Miacca, "and I've forgot the herbs. Mind him, will ye, while I go for them." "All right, my love," says Mrs. Miacca, and off he goes. Then Tommy Grimes said to Mrs. Miacca: "Does Mr. Miacca always have little boys for supper?" "Mostly, my dear," said Mrs. Miacca, "if little boys are bad enough, and get in his way." "And don't you have anything else but boy-meat? No pudding?" asked Tommy. "Ah, I loves pudding," says Mrs. Miacca. "But it's not often the likes of me gets pudding." "Why, my mother is making a pudding this very day," said Tommy Grimes," and I am sure she'd give you some, if I ask her. Shall I run and get some?" "Now, that's a thoughtful boy," said Mrs. Miacca, "only don't be long and be sure to be back for supper." So off Tommy pelters, and right glad he was to get off so cheap; and for many a long day he was as good as good could be, and never went round the corner of the street. But he couldn't always be good; and one day he went round the corner, and as luck would have it, he hadn't scarcely got round it when Mr. Miacca grabbed him up, popped him in his bag, and took him home. When he got him there, Mr. Miacca dropped him out; and when he saw him, he said: "Ah, you're the youngster what served me and my missus that shabby trick, leaving us without any supper. Well, you shan't do it again, I'lll watch over you myself. Here, get under the sofa, and I'll set on it and watch the pot boil for you." So poor Tommy Grimes had to creep under the sofa, and Mr. Miacca sate on it and waited for the pot to boil. And they waited, and they waited, but still the pot didn't boil, till at last Mr. Miacca got tired of waiting, and he said: "Here, you under there, I'm not going to wait any longer; put out your leg, and I'll stop your giving us the slip." So Tommy put out a leg, and Mr. Miacca got a chopper, and chopped it off, and pops it in the pot. Suddenly he calls out: "Sally, my dear, Sally!" and nobody answered. So he went into the next room to look out for Mrs. Miacca, and while he was there. Tommy crept out from under the sofa and ran out of the door. For it was a leg of the sofa that he had put out. So Tommy Grimes ran home, and he never went round the corner again till he was old enough to go alone. Source (books.google.com): Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 164-66 . Source (Internet Archive): Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 164-66 . Jacobs' source: "From memory of Mrs. B. Abrahams, who heard it from her mother some years ago." This is a type 327 folktale. Return to the table of contents . The Fairies Ireland The fairies are the Tuatha De Danaans . Most people believe in fairies. Now those fairies are supposed to live in the old forts. Many people are afraid of the anger of the fairies. There are many old tales told about the fairies. When young children do not do as they are told, their mothers threaten to bring them to the fairies. The fairies are very important to the people in Ireland. No one has ever done any harm to them. M. Murray, aged about 45 years. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Meath >> Rathcarran, pp. 352-53 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . A Rhyme We Say While Skipping Ireland As I was in the kitchen, Doing a bit of stitching, In came a bogey man, And I ran out. Collector: Eva Nolan. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Kildare >> Kilcullen (Convent), p. 278 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . The Night Huntsman Germany In the nighttime one often hears sounds of wild animals and the voice and the horn of a huntsman. This is said to be the night huntsman. His cries terrify the children. They can be brought to silence calling out to them, "Be quiet! Can't you hear the night huntsman?" This threat is similar to that of the Romans when they said, " Hannibal ad portas! [Hannibal is at the gates!] Similarly, the Germans say, "Be quiet, or Truyd will come!" In the old Mark among my fellow countrymen they say, "Shut your mouth, or the Rye-Mother with her long black tits will come and take you away." In other places they say, "Be quiet, or the Popanz will come." Or: "Knecht Ruprecht will put you into his sack." In this manner the Silesians threaten their obstinate little ones with the night huntsman. Perhaps they believe that this is Rübezahl's ghost. Source (books.google.com): Johannes Praetorius, Des Rübezahls anderer und zwar gantz frischer historischer Theil (1665), pp. 134-38 . Return to the table of contents . The Rye-Mother Germany The rural people of Mark Brandenburg tell the legend of the Rye-Mother who hides in grain fields. For this reason children do not dare to walk into a grain field. Children in Altmark are kept silent with the words: "Hold your mouth or the Rye-Mother, with her long black tits, will come and take you away!" In the vicinity of Braunschweig and Lüneburg she is called the Grain-Wife. Children seeking cornflowers tell one another stories about how she steals little children; and hence they do not dare go too far into the green fields. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Roggenmuhme," Deutsche Sagen , 2nd edition, vol. 1 (Berlin: Nicolaische Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1865), no. 90, p. 127 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Roggenmuhme," Deutsche Sagen , 2nd edition, vol. 1 (Berlin: Nicolaische Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1865), no. 90, p. 127 . For more information about grain spirits see Wilhelm Mannhardt, Die Korndämonen (Berlin: Ferd. Dümmler's Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1868), pp. 19-22 . Return to the table of contents . Frau Trude Germany Once upon a time there was a small girl who was strong willed and forward, and whenever her parents said anything to her, she disobeyed them. How could anything go well with her? One day she said to her parents: "I have heard so much about Frau Trude. Someday I want to go to her place. People say such amazing things are seen there, and such strange things happen there, that I have become very curious. Her parents strictly forbade her, saying: "Frau Trude is a wicked woman who commits godless acts. If you go there, you will no longer be our child. But the girl paid no attention to her parents and went to Frau Trude's place anyway. When she arrived there, Frau Trude asked: "Why are you so pale?" "Oh," she answered, trembling all over, "I saw something that frightened me." "What did you see?" "I saw a black man on your steps." "That was a charcoal burner." "Then I saw a green man." "That was a huntsman." "Then I saw a blood-red man." "That was a butcher." "Oh, Frau Trude, it frightened me when I looked through your window and could not see you, but instead saw the devil with a head of fire." "Aha!" she said. "So you saw the witch properly outfitted. I have been waiting for you and wanting you for a long time. Light the way for me now!" With that she turned the girl into a block of wood and threw it into the fire. When it was thoroughly aglow Frau Trude sat down next to it, and warmed herself by it, saying: "It gives such a bright light!" Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 43, p. 43 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 43, p. 43 . Link to this tale in a separate file: Frau Trude . Return to the table of contents . Mother Hinne's Parlor Germany On the way from Westerhausen to Thale, directly behind the village, there is a stone cave in a mountain covered with sandstone cliffs. A wild woman lives there, Mother Hinne. No one knows how she came to be there. Some say that she is no longer there, but the children know better, for if they do not behave themselves, one says to them: "Just wait, Mother Hinne is coming now to take you away!" That helps a lot, even if they are misbehaving terribly. Source (books.google.com): A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Die Hinnemutterstube," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 190, p. 167 . Source (Internet Archive): A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Die Hinnemutterstube," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 190, p. 167 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "Oral." Return to the table of contents . Frightening Children Germany 1. In the vicinity of Tübingen, Heilbronn, and elsewhere they say to misbehaving children: "Just wait, Hairy Martin will come with his sack and carry you away into the woods." Or: "The chimney sweep will stuff you into his sack and throw you into the water." In Pfullingen and elsewhere instead of "Hairy Martin" they say "Hairy Michael." However, most often they fighten children with "Shame Klaus." In Tübingen they also say "Santa Klaus," a corruption of "Saint Nicholas," who goes about on December 6th just as Hairy Martin does on December 24th, punishing naughty children and giving presents to the good ones. 2. In Poltringen and elsewhere they fighten children with the " Butzemäckeler. " (A Butzemann is understood to be a scarecrow set up in a field to frighten away birds and wild animals. It is usually crossed sticks with an old hat and a pair of trousers.) In the Black Forest children are threatened with the " Butzegraale. " In Fildern and in Mittelstadt they say: "The Graale is coming." Here Hairy Martin is called Graale , which means "Little Gray Man." In the Black Forest they also say: "Just wait, you'll be taken to Höllehäfele. " They say the same thing in Derendingen whenever a child curses or cries. 3. In Wurmlingen to frighten children away from water they say: "Someone is under there with a hook, and he'll pull you in." Generally they say: "The Hook Man will grab you." Or: "He will pull you in with his hook." In Bühlerthann they say to the children: "There is a cart man in the water, and he'll take you to the bottom in his cart. 4. When there were still wild pigs in Pfullingen, whenever children wanted to go into a grain field they would say: "Don't go there. There's a wild sow there." 5. In the vicinity of Brettn in Baden in the evening they frighten children with the " Nachtape, " an old woman. Around Lahr and elsewhere in the Black Forest it is the " Nachtrab (night raven), a ghost-like bird who similarly takes children away. In Bretten when carnival cakes are being baked, and the children do not want to leave the kitchen, they frighten the children away with the "Carnival Mother," who sticks the children with pins. 6. In the vicinity of Tübingen children who want to go into the town with their parents are told: "At the town gate you would have to bite into an iron chain," and then they remain at home. In Pfullingen they say: "I'm going into the Sow Woods. You cannot come with me." Source (books.google.com): Ernst Meier, "Kinderscheuchen," Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben , vol. 1 (Stuttgart: Verlag der J. B. Metzler'schen Buchhandlung, 1852), no. 168, pp. 148-50 . Source (Internet Archive): Ernst Meier, "Kinderscheuchen," Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben , vol. 1 (Stuttgart: Verlag der J. B. Metzler'schen Buchhandlung, 1852), no. 168, pp. 148-50 . Return to the table of contents . Butzemann Germany, Achim von Arnim and Clemens Brentano Es tranzt ein Butzemann In unserm Haus herum di dum, Er rüttelt sich, er schüttelt sich. Er wirft sein Säckchen hinter sich. Es tanzt ein Butzemann In unserm Haus herum. A Butzemann is dancing In our house around, di dum, He prances and he shakes. He throws his sack behind himself. A Butzemann is dancing In our house around. Source (books.google.com): Achim von Arnim and Clemens Brentano, Des Knaben Wunderhorn: Alte deutsche Lieder , vol. 3 (Heidelberg: Mohr und Zimmer, 1808), Kinderlieder , p. 77 . Source (Internet Archive): Achim von Arnim and Clemens Brentano, Des Knaben Wunderhorn: Alte deutsche Lieder , vol. 3 (Heidelberg: Mohr und Zimmer, 1808), Kinderlieder , p. 77 . Source (Deutsches Textarchiv): Achim von Arnim and Clemens Brentano, Des Knaben Wunderhorn: Alte deutsche Lieder , vol. 3 (Heidelberg: Mohr und Zimmer, 1808), Kinderlieder , p. 77 . Return to the table of contents . Krampus-Chains Austria Der Krampus kommt! Der Krampus kommt! Ihr Kinderchen, habt acht, Daß er mit seinen Ketten nicht Euch zu Gefang'nen macht! Here comes the Krampus! You had better pray! Little children, say your prayers, Or he'll bind you in his chains, And then take you away! Source (books.google.com): "Krampus-Ketten," Der g'rad Michel (1863), p. 1175 . Return to the table of contents . The Krampus Austria The Krampus, a kind of monster in the shape of a devil, plays a much bigger role in the lives of poor children at Christmastime than in those of rich children. For the latter, Saint Nicholas is far more likely to be the one carrying a sack with apples, nuts and cookies than the Krampus with his switch and clanking iron chains. I was terribly afraid for weeks before the Krampus appeared. The slightest mistake I made would provoke the threat: "Just wait, the Krampus is coming soon!" Long before, I had already recited in my head all the prayers I knew in order to make a good impression on the strict Herr Krampus. When the day came, and he rang at our door, and my mother opened it, a huge man appeared. He was wearing a bishop's hat and a bishop's robe made of paper, so that he looked like Saint Nicholas. He was carrying a sack from which he gave me some apples as I sank to my knees, trembling and stammering the Lord's Prayer. But his companion, the Krampus, approached the boys. He looked terrifying. He was completely black, and a red tongue hung out of his mouth. Two mighty horns were on his forehead. In his left hand he dragged a heavy chain which was also attached to his foot to make it rattle more. In his right hand he held a switch with which he beat the boys soundly when they did not give the right answers to Saint Nicholas' questions. They were asked if they said their prayers every day morning, noon, and evening; and if they went to church every Sunday. If they hesitated in reciting the Lord 's Prayer and the Catechism, the blows from the switch fell heavily on them. Parents felt it was necessary to give their children such a reminder. They considered this a healthy lesson for their children's moral behavior. Source (books.google.com): Adelheid Popp, Erinnerungen aus meinen Kindheits- und Mädchenjahren (Stuttgart: J. H. W. Dietz Nachfolger, 1915), pp. 18-19 . Adelheid Popp (1869-1939) was a prominent Austrian feminist and socialist. Link to her Wikipedia article: Adelheid Popp . Return to the table of contents . The Krampus und Saint Nicholaus A Christmastime Play Performed in Steyr, Austria Saint Nicholas in bishop's robes and with a bishop's staff appears at the left in front of the row of houses, followed by a horribly roaring Krampus. They go from door to door. Saint Nicholas asks everywhere if any bad children are there, and everywhere he receives the answer: "Oh no! My children like to say their prayers, and they revere Saint Nicholas!" This reply always bothers the Krampus so much that he roars terribly and rattles his chain. To this the children shudder cheerfully. Finally someone says: "Yes! We have a bad boy at home!" Now that is exactly what the Krampus wants to hear. With a fantastic roar and rattle he rushes into the house and comes out with a howling boy in his pack basket. Grunting with hellish joy, he trudges after Saint Nicholas. But his joy does not last long. In the middle of the path the naughty boy jumps out of the pack basket, and before the clumsy Krampus can stop him, he runs away and back home to his mother. She receives him with joy and promises him a seven-meter-long cream strudel for the fright he has endured. Source (books.google.com): Victor R. von Geramb and Viktor Zack, "Das Steyrer Kripperl," Wiener Zeitschrift für Volkskunde , vol. 25 (1919), p. 24 . Return to the table of contents . The Devil Takes a Child Austria If one calls on the devil, he will come. This was learned by a woman in Obermiemingen who was more often invoking the devil than God. One evening her child would not stop crying, and she said, "Just wait, if you do not be still, the devil will take you away," and she held the child out of the window. The child was ripped away from her, and its crying could long be heard from the ever increasing distance. That opened the woman's eyes, and she never again called on the devil. Source (books.google.com): Ignaz Vinzenz Zingerle, "Der Teufel holt ein Kind," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Tirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1859), no. 474, pp. 265-66 . Source (Internet Archive): Ignaz Vinzenz Zingerle, "Der Teufel holt ein Kind," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Tirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1859), no. 474, pp. 265-66 . Return to the table of contents . The Hard-Hearted Father Austria "Crippled Simon," a cobbler at Signa near Reit or Rattenberg, is still alive. His feet are terribly twisted, and he can only walk very slowly with his cane. His father was an evil-tempered laborer who was fond of drinking. When Simon was approaching his fourth year he was a lively healthy child. Once when his father came home late, the child was crying and would not fall asleep. The father shouted at the boy to be still, but this only frightened the youngster, and he cried even louder. The father became so angry that he threatened the child with the devil, calling him the devil's rascal. Finally he ripped open the window and held the boy out in the cold night, shouting, "The devil can take him, because he won't be still!" Outside it howled like a fierce storm. The mother began to cry and tremble, and when the window began to rattle the father took fright as well. He pulled the child back in, but the boy's feet were twisted out of shape, and he was now quite still, as though dead. From that time onward the boy suffered from cramps, lameness, and tremors. He is now 46 years old, and he remains a cripple. The father suffered from a bad conscience until he himself died. Others always accused him of his son's misfortune. Everyone who hears or reads this account will understand what the moral of the story is. Source (books.google.com): Johann Nepomuk Ritter von Albenburg, "Der hartherzige Vater," Mythen und Sagen Tirols (Zürich: Verlag von Meyer und Zeller, 1857), pp. 286-87 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Nepomuk Ritter von Albenburg, "Der hartherzige Vater," Mythen und Sagen Tirols (Zürich: Verlag von Meyer und Zeller, 1857), pp. 286-87 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 24, 2024. The Boy Who Had Never Seen a Woman: Folktales of Type 1678 The Boy Who Had Never Seen a Woman Boccaccio's Story of Filippo Balducci and His Son and other tales similar to Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1678 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2011 Contents Filippo Balducci and His Son (abstracted from The Decameron by Giovanni Boccaccio). An Inexperienced Youth (Italy, The Facetiæ of Poggio). A Young Monk Wanted to Have a Goose (Germany). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Filippo Balducci and His Son Giovanni Boccaccio When Filippo Balducci lost his wife to death, he resolved to devote himself and his young son to God. Consequently he gave his worldly possessions to charity, then took his little son to the slopes of Mount Asinaio, where they lived together in a cave, completely secluded from the ways and temptations of the world. In this remote sanctuary, Filippo taught his son about God and the saints, protecting him always from distractions and sin. Only after the boy reached the age of eighteen did the father feel it safe to expose him to the outside world. "Surely," thought Filippo, "his years of devotion and prayer in this place of solitude will now defend him against the ways of the world." And the two of them, father and son, set off for the city of Florence. Everything was new and amazing for the son: houses, palaces, churches, horses, and people. Filled with amazement, he asked his father about every unfamiliar thing, and Filippo dutifully provided names and explanations for all that they saw, that is, until they happened upon a party of beautiful young women. The boy, who until now had never beheld such a sight, could not take his eyes from them. "Do not look at them," warned Filippo. "But what are they?" asked the son. "Oh, they are just geese," replied Filippo, wanting to divert the boy's attention from the young women. "Please, father," begged the boy, "let me have one of those geese. I could put something into its bill. "No!" exclaimed the father. "Their bills are not where you think they are, and they require special feeding. And furthermore they are evil!" Poor Filippo now regretted having taken his son from his protective sanctuary, for even as he spoke, he realized that however clever his responses were, they were no match for the boy's natural inclinations. Source: Giovanni Boccaccio, The Decameron , day 4, introduction. Retold and shortened. © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. The Decameron (Il Decamerone) was written between 1350 and 1355. Return to the table of contents . An Inexperienced Youth Italy, The Facetiæ of Poggio A young Bolognese, a simple-minded ninny, had married a beautiful maiden. The first night, not being in the least up to his business, since he had never before frequented any woman, he did not succeed in consummating the marriage. The next morning, being asked by a friend how matters had fared overnight: "Sadly," he sighed; "for, after repeated endeavours, I could never find in my wife the aperture I was told of." Seeing his silliness: "Hush, for God's sake," said the friend; "speak not a word about it; how unpleasant, and what a shame for you if the thing were known!" The simpleton begged for his advice and assistance: "I'll undertake," said his interlocutor, "to bore that aperture for you, if only you stand a first rate supper; but I shall require eight days to perform the operation, which is a very difficult one." The idiot assented, and, at night, secreted his mate with his wife, himself retiring to another bed. After the interval agreed upon, the road had been so well opened by friendly exertions, that no more thorns were to be feared: the husband was sent for: "I have toiled and moiled for your service," said his obliging companion, "but the requisite orifice is at last made." The young woman, now thoroughly initiated, congratulated her husband, praising highly his friend's labour. The fool, overjoyed at his wife's perforation, gave his best thanks to his comrade, and paid the supper. Source: The Facetiæ or Jocose Tales of Poggio , vol. 2 (Paris: Isidore Liseux, 1879), no. 150, pp. 45-47 . Poggio's complete title is "An Inexperienced Youth Who Did Not Make the Acquaintance of His Wife During Their First Wedding-Night." This anecdote combines elements of folktale types 1678 (The Boy Who Had Never Seen a Woman) and 1686 (The Wedding Night). Poggio's full name was Gian Francesco Poggio Bracciolini; he lived between 1380 and 1459. Return to the table of contents . A Young Monk Wanted to Have a Goose Germany A hermit once took a young monk to the city. He had raised him since childhood, and the old monk now wanted put the young one to a test. Arriving in the city, they saw a number of women walking to and fro. Filled with amazement, the young monk stared at them with calf's eyes. Until now he had never seen a woman, for since his earliest childhood he had been raised in a monastery. He asked the old monk what these things were. The old monk answered, saying, "They are geese." The women were wearing white veils and white cloaks. The young monk left good enough alone and said nothing more. Afterward, when the two were back at their monastery, the young monk began to cry bitterly. The old monk asked him why he was crying. The young monk replied, "Father, why should I not be crying! I wanted every so badly to have a goose!" Source: Johann Gailer von Kaisersberg, ca. 1510. Freely translated from Ignaz Hub, Die komische und humoristische Literatur der deutschen Prosaisten des 16. Jahrhunderts , vol. 1 (Nürnberg: Verlag der v. Ebner'schen Buchhandlung, 1856), p. 35 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 18, 2013. Breaking Wind: Legendary Farts Breaking Wind: Legendary Farts folktales about flatulance selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2020 Contents The Historic Fart ( 1001 Nights ). The Hodja as Envoy to the Kurds (Turkey). How Till Eulenspiegel Became a Furrier's Apprentice (Germany). Till Eulenspiegel and the Innkeeper at Cologne (Germany). Links to related folktales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Historic Fart 1001 Nights They recount that in the city of Kaukaban in Yemen there was a man named Abu Hasan of the Fadhli tribe who left the Bedouin life and became a townsman and the wealthiest of merchants. His wife died while both were young, and his friends pressed him to marry again. Weary of their pressure, Abu Hasan entered into negotiations with the old women who procure matches, and married a woman as beautiful as the moon shining over the sea. To the wedding banquet he invited kith and kin, ulema and fakirs, friends and foes, and all of his acquaintances. The whole house was thrown open to feasting: There were five different colors of rice, and sherbets of as many more; kid goats stuffed with walnuts, almonds, and pistachios; and a young camel roasted whole. So they ate and drank and made merry. The bride was displayed in her seven dresses -- and one more -- to the women, who could not take their eyes off her. At last the bridegroom was summoned to the chamber where she sat enthroned. He rose slowly and with dignity from his divan; but in do doing, for he was over full of meat and drink, he let fly a great and terrible fart. In fear for their lives, all the guests immediately turned to their neighbors and talked aloud, pretending to have heard nothing. Mortified, Abu Hasan turned away from the bridal chamber and as if to answer a call of nature. He went down to the courtyard, saddled his mare, and rode off, weeping bitterly through the night. In time he reached Lahej where he found a ship ready to sail for India; so he boarded, arriving ultimately at Calicut on the Malabar coast. Here he met with many Arabs, especially from Hadramaut, who recommended him to the King. This King (who was a Kafir) trusted him and advanced him to the captaincy of his bodyguard. He remained there ten years, in peace and happiness, but finally was overcome with homesickness. His longing to behold his native land was like that of a lover pining for his beloved; and it nearly cost him his life. Finally he sneaked away without taking leave and made his way to Makalla in Hadramaut. Here he donned the rags of a dervish. Keeping his name and circumstances a secret, he set forth on foot for Kaukaban. He endured a thousand hardships of hunger, thirst, and fatigue; and braved a thousand dangers from lions, snakes, and ghouls. Drawing near to his old home, he looked down upon it from the hills with brimming eyes, and said to himself, "They might recognize me, so I will wander about the outskirts and listen to what people are saying. May Allah grant that they do not remember what happened." He listened carefully for seven nights and seven days, until it happened that, as he was sitting at the door of a hut, he heard the voice of a young girl saying, "Mother, tell me what day was I born on, for one of my companions wants to tell my fortune." The mother answered, "My daughter, you were born on the very night when Abu Hasan farted." No sooner had the listener heard these words than he rose up from the bench and fled, saying to himself, "Verily my fart has become a date! It will be remembered for ever and ever. He continued on his way, returning finally to India, where he remained in self exile until he died. May the mercy of Allah be upon him! Source: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night: A Plain and Literal Translation of the Arabian Nights Entertainments, translated by Richard F. Burton (Privately printed by the Burton Club, 1885), vol. 5, pp. 135-137. Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Hodja as Envoy to the Kurds Turkey The Hodja was sent to the Kurds as an envoy. Immediately upon his arrival he was invited to a banquet. He put on his fur coat and went. In the middle of the conversation he suddenly let a fart. They said to him, "It is scandalous to fart like that." "What?" he replied. "How was I to know that the Kurds would understand when I farted in Turkish?" Source: Albert Wesselski, ed., Der Hodscha Nasreddin , vol. 1 (Weimar: Alexander Duncker Verlag, 1911), no. 47, p. 24 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Link to additional stories about Nasreddin Hodja , the Turkish trickster. Return to the table of contents . How Till Eulenspiegel Became a Furrier's Apprentice Germany It was mid winter when Till Eulenspiegel arrived at Ascherleben. Times were hard, but finally he found a furrier who was willing to take on an apprentice, and he was put to work sewing pelts. Not being accustomed to the smell of the curing hides, he said, "Pew! Pew! You are as white as chalk, but stink like dung!" The furrier said, "If you don't like the smell, then why are you a furrier's apprentice? It's a natural smell. It's only wool." Eulenspiegel said nothing, but thought, "One bad thing can drive another bad thing away." Then he let such a sour fart that the furrier and his wife had to stop working. The furrier said, "If you have to fart like that, then go out into the courtyard. There you can fart as much as you like." Eulenspiegel answered, "A fart is more natural and healthier than the stench of your sheep pelts." The furrier said, "Healthy or not, if you want to fart, then go outside." Eulenspiegel said, "Master, it would do no good, because farts don't like the cold. They are used to being in a warm place. That's why if you let a fart it always rushes for your nose. It goes from one warm place to another." The furrier said nothing, for he could see that Eulenspiegel knew nothing of the furrier trade and was a rogue at that. And he sent him on his way. Source: Retold from Ein kurtzweilig Lesen von Dyl Ulenspiegel (Strasbourg, 1515). © 2000 by D. L. Ashliman. Link to the text of this story in German: Wie Eulenspiegel sich bei einem Kürschner verdingte und bei ihm in der Stube furzte, damit ein Gestank den anderen vertriebe. This is a Projekt Gutenberg text. Return to the table of contents . Till Eulenspiegel and the Innkeeper at Cologne Germany Eulenspiegel journeyed to Cologne, where he stayed at an inn for two or three days without letting anyone know who he was. During this time he noticed that the innkeeper was a rogue, and he thought, "The guests will not be well off where the innkeeper is a rogue. You should find another place to stay." That evening he told the innkeeper that he would be looking for another place to stay. The latter showed the other guests to their beds, but not Eulenspiegel, who then said, "Sir, I paid just as much for my lodging as the others did, but you showed them to their beds. Am I supposed to sleep here on this bench?" The innkeeper said, "Look! Here is a pair of sheets!" and he let a fart. Then he let another one and said, "Look! This is your pillow!" Then for a third time he let one, until it stank, and he said, "Look! Now you have an entire bed! Use them until morning, and then lay them in a pile for me, so I can find everything together!" Eulenspiegel said nothing, but thought, "Look! Take note that one rogue deserves another rogue." And that night he slept on the bench. Now the innkeeper had a nice folding table. Eulenspiegel opened up the leaves, shit a large pile on the table, and then closed it up again. He got up early in the morning, went to the innkeeper's room and said, "Sir, I thank you for the night's lodging." Then letting a large fart, he said, "Those are the feathers from your bed. I laid the pillow, the sheets, and the covers all together in a pile." The innkeeper said, "Sir, that is good. I will look after them as soon as I get up." Eulenspiegel said, "Do that! Just look around. You'll find them all right!" And with that he left the inn. The innkeeper expected many guests for the noon meal, and he said that they should eat at the nice folding table. When he opened up the table, an evil stink flew up his nose. Seeing the dung, he said, "He gives what was earned. He paid for a fart with shit." Then the innkeeper sent for Eulenspiegel, because he wanted to get to know him better. Eulenspiegel did indeed come back, and he and the innkeeper appreciated one another's tricks so much, that from this time forth Eulenspiegel got a good bed. Source: Ein kurtzweilig Lesen von Dyl Ulenspiegel (Strasbourg, 1515). Freely translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Link to the text of this story in German: Wie Eulenspiegel in Köln dem Wirt auf den Tisch schiß und ihm sagte, er möge kommen, damit er es fände . This is Projekt Gutenberg text. Return to the table of contents . Links to Related Folktales Deceiving the Devil by Breaking Wind . Folktales by type 1176. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised July 2, 2020. The Bremen Town Musicians The Bremen Town Musicians and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 130 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2024 Contents The Bremen Town Musicians (Germany). The Robber and the Farm Animals (Germany/Switzerland). The Sheep and the Pig Who Set Up House (Norway). The Six Male Animals (Denmark). The Animals and the Devil (Finland). The Choristers of St. Gudule (Flanders) The Story of the White Pet (Scotland). The Bull, the Tup, the Cock, and the Steg (England). Jack and His Comrades (Ireland). A Story (Ireland). How Jack Went to Seek His Fortune, version 1 (USA). How Jack Went to Seek His Fortune, version 2 (USA). The Dog, the Cat, the Ass, and the Cock (USA). Benibaire (Spain). The World's Reward (South Africa). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Bremen Town Musicians Germany A man had a donkey, who for long years had untiringly carried sacks to the mill, but whose strength was now failing, so that he was becoming less and less able to work. Then his master thought that he would no longer feed him, but the donkey noticed that it was not a good wind that was blowing and ran away, setting forth on the road to Bremen, where he thought he could become a town musician. When he had gone a little way he found a hunting dog lying in the road, who was panting like one who had run himself tired. "Why are you panting so, Grab-Hold?" asked the donkey. "Oh," said the dog, "because I am old and am getting weaker every day and can no longer go hunting, my master wanted to kill me, so I ran off; but now how should I earn my bread?" "Do you know what," said the donkey, "I am going to Bremen and am going to become a town musician there. Come along and take up music too. I'll play the lute, and you can beat the drums." The dog was satisfied with that, and they went further. It didn't take long, before they came to a cat sitting by the side of the road and making a face like three days of rainy weather. "What has crossed you, old Beard-Licker?" said the donkey. "Oh," answered the cat, "who can be cheerful when his neck is at risk? I am getting on in years, and my teeth are getting dull, so I would rather sit behind the stove and purr than to chase around after mice. Therefore my mistress wanted to drown me, but I took off. Now good advice is scarce. Where should I go?" "Come with us to Bremen. After all, you understand night music. You can become a town musician there." The cat agreed and went along. Then the three refugees came to a farmyard, and the rooster of the house was sitting on the gate crying with all his might. "Your cries pierce one's marrow and bone," said the donkey. "What are you up to?" "I just prophesied good weather," said the rooster, "because it is Our Dear Lady's Day, when she washes the Christ Child's shirts and wants to dry them; but because Sunday guests are coming tomorrow, the lady of the house has no mercy and told the cook that she wants to eat me tomorrow in the soup, so I am supposed to let them cut off my head this evening. Now I am going to cry at the top of my voice as long as I can." "Hey now, Red-Head," said the donkey, "instead come away with us. We're going to Bremen. You can always find something better than death. You have a good voice, and when we make music together, it will be very pleasing." The rooster was happy with the proposal, and all four went off together. However, they could not reach the city of Bremen in one day, and in the evening they came into a forest, where they would spend the night. The donkey and the dog lay down under a big tree, but the cat and the rooster took to the branches. The rooster flew right to the top, where it was safest for him. Before falling asleep he looked around once again in all four directions, and he thought that he saw a little spark burning in the distance. He hollered to his companions, that there must be a house not too far away, for a light was shining. The donkey said, "Then we must get up and go there, because the lodging here is poor." The dog said that he could do well with a few bones with a little meat on them. Thus they set forth toward the place where the light was, and they soon saw it glistening more brightly, and it became larger and larger, until they came to the front of a brightly lit robbers' house. The donkey, the largest of them, approached the window and looked in. "What do you see, Gray-Horse?" asked the rooster. "What do I see?" answered the donkey. "A table set with good things to eat and drink, and robbers sitting there enjoying themselves." "That would be something for us," said the rooster. "Ee-ah, ee-ah, oh, if we were there!" said the donkey. Then the animals discussed how they might drive the robbers away, and at last they came upon a plan. The donkey was to stand with his front feet on the window, the dog to jump on the donkey's back, the cat to climb onto the dog, and finally the rooster would fly up and sit on the cat's head. When they had done that, at a signal they began to make their music all together. The donkey brayed, the dog barked, the cat meowed and the rooster crowed. Then they crashed through the window into the room, shattering the panes. The robbers jumped up at the terrible bellowing, thinking that a ghost was coming in, and fled in great fear out into the woods. Then the four companions seated themselves at the table and freely partook of the leftovers, eating as if they would get nothing more for four weeks. When the four minstrels were finished, they put out the light and looked for a place to sleep, each according to his nature and his desire. The donkey lay down on the manure pile, the dog behind the door, the cat on the hearth next to the warm ashes, and the rooster sat on the beam of the roof. Because they were tired from their long journey, they soon fell asleep. When midnight had passed and the robbers saw from the distance that the light was no longer burning in the house, and everything appeared to be quiet, the captain said, "We shouldn't have let ourselves be chased off," and he told one of them to go back and investigate the house. The one they sent found everything still, and went into the kitchen to strike a light. He mistook the cat's glowing, fiery eyes for live coals, and held a sulfur match next to them, so that it would catch fire. But the cat didn't think this was funny and jumped into his face, spitting, and scratching. He was terribly frightened and ran toward the back door, but the dog, who was lying there, jumped up and bit him in the leg. When he ran across the yard past the manure pile, the donkey gave him a healthy blow with his hind foot, and the rooster, who had been awakened from his sleep by the noise and was now alert, cried down from the beam, "Cock-a-doodle-doo!" Then the robber ran as fast as he could back to his captain and said, "Oh, there is a horrible witch sitting in the house, she blew at me and scratched my face with her long fingers. And there is a man with a knife standing in front of the door, and he stabbed me in the leg. And a black monster is lying in the yard, and it struck at me with a wooden club. And the judge is sitting up there on the roof, and he was calling out, 'Bring the rascal here.' Then I did what I could to get away." From that time forth, the robbers did not dare go back into the house. However, the four Bremen Musicians liked it so well there, that they never left it again. And the person who just told that, his mouth is still warm. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Bremer Stadtmusikanten," Kinder- und Hausmärchen[Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales] , 7th edition (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 27, pp. 145-48 . The Grimms' source: Dorothea Viehmann (1755-1815). The Grimms first published this tale in the second edition of their Kinder- und Hausmärchen (1819). With the exception of a few minor stylistic changes, the story remained essentially unaltered in the editions that followed during the Grimms' lifetime. Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2001. Link to a file containing only this tale: The Bremen Town Musicians . Return to the table of contents . The Robber and the Farm Animals Germany/Switzerland Once upon a time there was a miller's servant who had served his master faithfully and diligently for many years. He had grown old in the mill, and the heavy work that he had to do there finally surpassed his strength. So one day he said to his master: "I can no longer serve you; I am too weak. I am therefore asking you for my dismissal and my wages." The miller said: "The time of wandering servants has passed. You are free to leave if you wish, but you will receive no wages. Now the old servant would sooner give up his wages than to continue to be tormented in the mill, so he took leave from his master. Before leaving home he went to the animals that until now he had fed and tended, in order to bid them farewell. While taking leave from the horse, it said to him: "Where are you going?" "I have to leave," he said. "I cannot take it here any longer." And when he set forth, the horse followed along after him. He then went to the ox, stroked him once again, and said: "God be with you, old fellow!" "Where are you going?" spoke the ox. "Oh, I must leave. I cannot take it here any longer," said the miller's servant and sadly went on his way to take leave from the dog. The ox followed along behind, just as the horse had done. And the other animals to whom he said farewell -- the dog, the cat, the goose, and the rooster -- all did the same thing. He made his way out into the country, where he first noticed that the faithful animals were following him. He spoke to them in a friendly manner, asking them to turn around and return home. "I have nothing more for myself," he said, "and I can no longer care for you." But the animals told him that they would not abandon him, and they contentedly followed along behind. After several days they came to a great forest. Here the horse and the ox found good grass, which the goose and the rooster enjoyed as well. However, the other animals -- the cat and the dog -- had to suffer hunger, as did the old miller's servant; but they did not grumble and complain. Finally, after having gone very deep into the forest, they suddenly saw a large, beautiful house before them. It was locked up securely. Only an empty stall was open, and from here they could go through the barn into the house itself. Because no one could be seen in the house, the servant decided to stay there with his animals, and he assigned each one to a place. He put the horse up front in the stall. He led the ox to the other side. The rooster was given a place on the roof, the dog on the manure pile, the cat on the hearth, and the goose behind the stove. Then he gave each one his feed, which was plentifully stored in the house. He himself ate and drank all he wanted, then fell asleep in a good bed, which was all made up in the bedroom. During the night, while he was fast asleep, the robber -- who owned the forest house -- returned. As he stepped into yard, the dog jumped on him furiously, and barked at him. The rooster cried down from the roof: "Cock-a-doodle-doo, cock-a-doodle-doo!" All this terrified the robber, for he had never seen farm animals that live with people, knowing instead only the wild animals of the forest. He fled hurriedly into the stall, but there the horse kicked out from behind, hitting him in the side. He staggered around and around, and only with difficulty could he retreat into the back part of the stall. He scarcely arrived there when the ox turned around and tried to pick him up on his horns. This frightened him anew, and he ran as fast as he could through the barn and into the kitchen, where he wanted to strike a light and see what was there. Feeling around the hearth, he touched the cat, which jumped on him and scratched him with its claws until jumped away head over heels, and tried to hide behind the stove in the main room. The goose jumped up, screaming and beating its wings. The terrified robber fled into the bedroom. There the miller's servant was snoring mightily like a purring spinning wheel, and the robber thought the entire room was filled with strangers. You had better believe that he was overcome by a terrible fear. He rushed out of the house and ran into the woods, not stopping until until he had found his fellow robbers. He began talking: "I don't know what has happened in our house. Some strange people are living there. When I stepped into the yard a large wildman jumped at me, yelling and bellowing so terribly that I thought he would kill me. An another one cheered him on, calling down from the roof: 'Hit him for me too! Hit him for me too!' The first one was bad enough; I wasn't going to wait for more of them to jump me, so I fled into the stall. There a shoemaker threw a last at my side, and I can still feel where it hit. I ran to the back of the stall. A pitchfork maker was standing there who tried to impale me on his pitchfork. I ran into the kitchen, where a hackle maker beat me with his hackle [a sharp-toothed tool for combing flax]. I tried to hide behind the stove, but there was a shovel maker there who beat me with his shovel. Finally I ran into the bedroom, but there were so many others snoring in there that was happy to escape with my life." When the robbers heard this, they were so horrified that not a one of them had any desire to enter the house. To the contrary, they believed that the entire region was threatened by these strange people. That same night they departed for another country, and they never returned. The miller's servant lived in peace in the robbers' house with his faithful animals. He no longer had to suffer in his old age, for the beautiful garden next to the house produced more fruit, vegetables, and all kinds of food every year than he and his animals could eat. Source: Ernst Meier, "Der Räuber und die Hausthiere," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 3, pp. 11-15 . This story is also printed in a collection of Swiss folktales: Otto Sutermeister, "Der Räuber und die Hausthiere," Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus der Schweiz (Aarau: H. R. Sauerländer, 1873), no. 29, pp. 91-94 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Return to the table of contents . The Sheep and the Pig Who Set Up House Norway Once on a time there was a sheep who stood in the pen to be fattened; so he lived well, and was stuffed and crammed with everything that was good. So it went on, till, one day, the dairymaid came and gave him still more food, and then she said, "Eat. away, sheep; you won't be much longer here; we are going to kill you tomorrow." It is an old saying, that women's counsel is always worth having, and that there is a cure and physic for everything but death. "But, after all," said the sheep to himself, "there may be a cure even for death this time." So he ate till he was ready to burst; and when he was crammed full, he butted out the door of the pen, and took his way to the neighboring farm. There he went to the pigsty to a pig whom he had known out on the common, and ever since had been the best friends with. "Good day!" said the sheep, "and thanks for our last merry meeting." "Good day!" answered the pig, "and the same to you." "Do you know," said the sheep, "why it is you are so well off, and why it is they fatten you and take such pains with you?" "No, I don't," said the pig. "Many a flask empties the cask; I suppose you know that," said the sheep. "They are going to kill and eat you." "Are they?" said the pig. "Well, I hope they'll say grace after meat." "If you will do as I do," said the sheep, "we'll go off to the wood, build us a house, and set up for ourselves. A home is a home be it ever so homely." Yes! The pig was willing enough. "Good company is such a comfort," he said, and so the two set off. So, when they had gone a bit they met a goose. "Good day, good sirs, and thanks for our last merry meeting," said the goose. "Whither away so fast today?" "Good day, and the same to you," said the sheep. "You must know we were too well off at home, and so we are going to set up for ourselves in the wood, for you know every man's house is his castle." "Well!" said the goose, "it's much the same with me where I am. Can't I go with you too, for it's child's play when three share the day." "With gossip and gabble is built neither house nor stable," said the pig. "Let us know what you can do." "By cunning and skill a cripple can do what he will," said the goose. "I can pluck moss and stuff it into the seams of the planks, and your house will be tight and warm." "Yes! They would give him leave, for above all things, piggy wished to be warm and comfortable. So, when they had gone a bit farther -- the goose had hard work to walk so fast -- they met a hare, who came frisking out of the wood. "Good day, good sirs, and thanks for our last merry meeting," she said. "How far are you trotting today?" "Good day, and the same to you," said the sheep. "We were far too well off at home, and so we're going to the wood, to build us a house, and set up for ourselves, for you know, try all the world round, there's nothing like home." "As for that," said the hare, "I have a house in every bush -- yes, a house in every bush; but, yet, I have often said, in winter, 'If I only live till summer, I'll build me a house.' And so I have half a mind to go with you and build one up, after all." "Yes!" said the pig. "If we ever get into a scrape, we might use you to scare away the dogs, for you don't fancy you could help us in house building." "He who lives long enough always finds work enough to do," said the hare. "I have teeth to gnaw pegs, and paws to drive them into the wall, so I can very well set up to be a carpenter, for 'good tools make good work,' as the man said, when he flayed the mare with a gimlet." Yes! He too got leave to go with them and build their house; there was nothing more to be said about it. When they had gone a bit farther they met a cock. "Good day, good sirs," said the cock, "and thanks for our last merry meeting. Whither are ye going today, gentlemen?" "Good day, and the same to you," said the sheep. "At home we were too well off, and so we are going off to the wood to build us a house, and set up for ourselves; for he who out of doors shall bake, loses at last both coal and cake." "Well! said the cock, "that's just my case; but it's better to sit on one's own perch, for then one can never be left in the lurch, and, besides, all cocks crow loudest at home. Now, if I might have leave to join such a gallant company, I also would like to go to the wood and build a house." "Ay! Ay!" said the pig. "Flapping and crowing sets tongues a-going; but a jaw on a stick never yet laid a brick. How can you ever help us to build a house?" "Oh!" said the cock, "that house will never have a clock, where there is neither dog nor cock. I am up early, and I wake every one." "Very true," said the pig. "The morning hour has a golden dower; let him come with us;" for, you must know, piggy was always the soundest sleeper. "Sleep is the biggest thief," he said. "He thinks nothing of stealing half one's life." So they all set off to the wood, as a band and brotherhood, and built the house. The pig hewed the timber, and the sheep drew it home; the hare was carpenter, and gnawed pegs and bolts, and hammered them into the walls and roof; the goose plucked moss and stuffed it into the seams; the cock crew, and looked out that they did not oversleep themselves in the morning; and when the house was ready, and the roof lined with birch bark, and thatched with turf. There they lived by themselves, and were merry and well. "Tis good to travel east and west," said the sheep, "but after all a home is best." But you must know that a bit farther on in the wood was a wolf's den, and there lived two graylegs. So when they saw that a new house had risen up hard by, they wanted to know what sort of folk their neighbors were, for they thought to themselves that a good neighbor was better than a brother in a foreign land, and that it was better to live in a good neighborhood than to know many people miles and miles off. So one of them made up an errand, and went into the new house and asked for a light for his pipe. But as soon as ever he got inside the door, the sheep gave him such a butt that he fell head foremost into the stove. Then the pig began to gore and bite him, the goose to nip and peck him, the cock upon the roost to crow and chatter; and as for the hare -- he was so frightened out of his wits, that he ran about aloft and on the floor, and scratched and scrambled in every corner of the house. So after a long time the wolf came out. "Well!" said the one who waited for him outside, "neighborhood makes brotherhood. You must have come into a perfect paradise on bare earth, since you stayed so long. But what became of the light, for you have neither pipe nor smoke." "Yes, yes!" said the other. "It was just a nice light and a pleasant company. Such manners I never saw in all my life. But then you know we can't pick and choose in this wicked world, and an unbidden guest gets bad treatment. As soon as I got inside the door, the shoemaker let fly at me with his last, so that I fell head foremost into the stithy fire; and there sat two smiths who blew the bellows and made the sparks fly, and beat and punched me with red hot tongs and pincers, so that they tore whole pieces out of my body. As for the hunter he went scrambling about looking for his gun, and it was good luck he did not find it. And all the while there was another who sat up under the roof, and slapped his arms and sang out, 'Put a hook into him and drag him hither; drag him hither.' That was what he screamed, and if he had only got hold of me, I should never have come out alive." Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Tales from the Fjeld: A Second Series of Popular Tales , translated by G. W. Dasent (London: Chapman and Hall, 1874), pp. 267-72 . Another translation (Internet Archive): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, "The Ram, and the Pig Who Went into the Woods to Live by Themselves," Fairy Tales from the Far North , translated by H. L. Brækstad (London: David Nutt, 1897), pp. 1-7 . Dasent's and Brækstad's source: Books.google.com: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, "Væderen og Grisen, som skulde til Skovs og bo for sig selv," Norske Folke-Eventyr , ny Samling, med Bedrag fra Jøgren Moes Reiser og Optegnelser (Christiania [Oslo]: Jak. Dybwad, 1871), no. 61, pp. 1-4 . Internet Archive: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, "Væderen og Grisen, som skulde til Skovs og bo for sig selv," Norske Folke-Eventyr , ny Samling, med Bedrag fra Jøgren Moes Reiser og Optegnelser (Christiania [Oslo]: Jak. Dybwad, 1871), no. 61, pp. 1-4 . Return to the table of contents . The Six Male Animals Denmark There was a farmer who thought that he would raise six male animals together to see how long each one could live. They were a bull, a ram, a dog, a cat, a cock, and a drake. After their birth each one became big and strong, especially the bull, who was now so manly that they could control him only with difficulty. One day a stranger came to visit the farmer. They went out to the field to see the animals, and they came across the mean bull. "What a hideous bull you have there!" said the stranger. "Will he become a breeding animal?" "Yes, he is hideous," said the farmer, "but he probably won't keep his freedom. I have taken care of these male animals to see how long each one would live, but now we probably will have the bull gelded, or maybe we should just slaughter him." Yes, the stranger thought that that would be the best thing to do. While the men were walking around looking for hay to pile up, the bull thought to himself: "Well, is that to be my fate? Thus far I have thrived, but now have only very little power. They lied to me about my long life." That evening after returning home, he talked to the other male animals about what he had heard. They too were afraid that on another occasion they might suffer the same fate, so they all decided to run away. They ran off as best they were able to, but as soon as they had left the field the drake got tired and said: "Sit, sit, sit, sit!" "No," said the bull. "That won't do. We have to leave, but I can help you. If you can't keep up, you will have to get on my back." That happened, and they traveled onward for a day. Finally the cock got tired. He ran along flapping his wings and saying: "Kokky, kokky, kokky!" "Yes, men," said the bull, "it may well be a bit warm for you. You can complain about it, but we have to continue onward." Then, without permission, the cock jumped onto the bull's back next to the drake, but the bull certainly could carry them both. Well, they went on like that until finally in the evening they approached a mill. They were hungry and tired, and they resolved to rest and have something to eat there. When they come closer to the mill, the miller and his wife came running out to them. The bull asked: "Could this be the miller?" "Yes, I'm the miller," he said. "Listen, could we get shelter in your mill tonight and get something to eat? We are very hungry." "Well, men, you can get something to eat now, but nighttime is not good. No one can be in the mill at night because of ghosts." "That's all right," said the bull. "We can stay there. We can deal with the ghosts." "All right," said the miller, "you may go down there if you dare to, but you yourselves are responsible for the consequences. You can tell my journeyman to give you the keys when he is finished for the day." Well, they went down to miller's journeyman and got instructions as to where they could get something to eat. The journeyman then left for his own supper and gave the keys to the bull. Next the bull arranged everything as to where they should spend the night. Outside there was an iron shed without a door where boots could be dried. The cock was to sit there and keep watch. The dog was to lie under the tile stove. The cat was to sit on the chimney. The ram was to sit in the oven. The bull and the drake went into the great room. They were all to stay awake, but the cock was so tired from his wandering that he immediately fell asleep. After midnight old Lucifer appeared, and he had another devil with him. When they arrived at the gate, he said to his companion: "Now you can go inside and light the candle, and then I will come." The companion went ahead, but he noticed nothing outside the door, because the cock was sleeping soundly. When he entered the living room, the dog jumped out from under the tile stove and angrily bared his teeth. He tore at the devil's trousers, ripping them to pieces. The devil escaped into the kitchen, where the cat flew at his head, spitting and scratching. The poor devil wasn't safe there, and he thought to himself: "Perhaps no one is in the oven." He climbed inside, but the powerful ram butted him from one side of the oven to the other, finally pushing him out. He made his way toward the door when the ram butted his behind, pushing him into the ashes in the fireplace. He got out of the fireplace, but then the cat jumped on him again, spitting and scratching. He made his way back through the living room, where the dog attacked him again, giving him a terrible bite. He absolutely had to get outside where he could be in peace. He went back through the great room, but the bull met him, butting him from the ground to the ceiling and from the ceiling to the ground with his horns, while the drake ran around the bull crying "Sit! Sit! Sit!" He finally managed to escape from the bull and the drake, and he wanted to return to the Old Man. At the same time, the cock, awakened by all the commotion, shouted: "Kokkelihyhaa!" The poor devil finally got back to the Old Man at the gate. Lucifer said: "What? You didn't light the candle!" "No," he said, "I had something else to think about. I tried to light the candle, and now you can try it." "What was the matter? Why couldn't you light the candle?" "I don't know what it was about. When I entered the living room a man came out from the tile stove, and he walked on all fours. He must have been a German, because I couldn't understand a word of what he said. He tore my trousers and bit my legs and gnashed his teeth. Finally I got away from him, but there was an old hag sitting in the ashes with a carding comb in each hand, and she flew at my head and carded me in the head with both carding combs, all the time spitting terribly. At last I escaped into the oven and wanted to try it there; but a giant came towards me with a club in his hand, and he knocked me from one side of the oven to the other. Finally I got out of there, but the old hag with the carding combs attacked me again. At last I got into the living room, but the old man who spoke German bit my legs terribly. Then I reached the front room. It was the only place in the house that was peaceful, because I hadn't noticed anything there when I first came. I just got inside the door, when a terrible large giant with a pitchfork in each hand attacked me. He forked me from the ground to the ceiling and from the ceiling to the ground, while a wretched little man ran around him shouting: 'I have a stick! I have a stick!' I escaped from there into the corridor, but it was just as bad there, because just as I was going out the door, a guard was standing there and shouted: 'I have a hook to poke in your behind, so you'd better put up your hands!'" Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "De segs Handyr," Æventyr fra Jylland, samlede af Folkemunde , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: Karl Schønbergs Boghandel, 1884), no. 46, pp. 311-15 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, "De segs Handyr," Æventyr fra Jylland, samlede af Folkemunde , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: Karl Schønbergs Boghandel, 1884), no. 46, pp. 311-15 . Return to the table of contents . The Animals and the Devil Finland Once upon a time there was an old man who owned three animals: a cat, a rooster, and an ox. One evening at supper time the man said to his servant, "Tomorrow morning you have to kill the cat." However, after the meal the servant warned the cat, "Flee, otherwise early tomorrow you'll be slaughtered." The cat took the warning to heart, and the next morning when they wanted to kill her, she had fled, and they heard nothing more from her. The next evening the man said, "Tomorrow morning we have to slaughter our rooster." The servant warned the rooster as well, and he too hurriedly left the farmyard. In like manner the ox ran away as well, and the three of them came together in the woods. They wandered on through the trees. A wolf approached them, and they asked him, "Where are you going?" "I'm headed for the herd over there," answered the wolf. "I'll try to catch a little lamb for a snack." "Don't go there!" replied the others. "They will kill you. Instead, come with us." The wolf agreed to this, and the four went on their way. A bear approached them, and they asked him, "Where are you going?" "To the village over there, where I'll get some oats to eat," answered the bear. "Don't go there; it's too dangerous," said the others. You'd better come with us instead." So the bear joined them, and after the five of them had gone a little further they came upon a hare. They convinced him to come with them as well. Coming to a village, and they approached a bath-house. A dog lay at its entrance, and he warned them, "Don't go inside. Evil spirits live there." But they went inside anyway. The bear laid himself down on the doorstep; the wolf between the doorposts; the ox found a corner for himself; the rooster flew onto a rafter; the cat lay on the hearth; the hare under the bench; and the dog in the middle of the room. The devil came to the bath-house and opened the door. The wolf immediately bit him in the leg; the bear hit him with his paw; the ox butted him with his horns; the rooster began to crow and the cat to meow; the hare jumped back and forth under the bench, and the dog ran around and around the room. Frightened by all the confusion, the devil fell over backwards. Picking himself up, he freed himself from his enemies' claws and fled out the door into the woods, where he claimed to his companions: "Don't go into the bath-house. Powerful strangers are there. On the doorstep a tailor stuck me with his needles. A rough-haired man hit me in the chest with his fists. A cobbler hit me with his gear-bag until I fell over backward. The apprentices ran around the room, jumping from one corner to the other with glowing eyes, trying to beat me, but they couldn't find me. One of them [the rooster] cried out to them as I was getting away: 'Grab the guy! Grab the guy!'" Source (books.google.com): Emmy Schreck, "Die Thiere und der Teufel," Finnische Märchen (Weimar: Hermann Böhlau, 1887), pp. 224-26 . Source (Internet Archive): Emmy Schreck, "Die Thiere und der Teufel, Finnische Märchen (Weimar: Hermann Böhlau, 1887), pp. 224-26 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2017. Return to the table of contents . The Choristers of St. Gudule Flanders The miller of Sandhills had a donkey which had served him well in its time, but was now too old to work. The miller was a careful man, who did not believe in feeding useless mouths, so he decided that he would sell the donkey for the price of its skin. "I do not suppose I shall get very much for the wretched beast," he said, regarding poor Grayskin as he stood with hanging head in his stall, "but I shall save the cost of his corn anyhow, and that is always something." Left alone, Grayskin reflected sadly upon the fate in store for him. "Such is the way of the world," he thought. "When I was young and hearty nothing was too good for me. Now I'm old and useless I am to be cast out. But am I so useless after all? True, I can no longer pull a cart to market, but I have a magnificent voice still. There must be a place somewhere for one who can sing as beautifully as I. I'll go to the Cathedral of St. Gudule in Brussels and offer myself as a chorister." Grayskin lost no time in acting upon his resolve, but left his stable immediately and set out on the road to Brussels. Passing the burgomaster's house he saw an old hound sitting disconsolately on the doorstep. "Hallo, friend!" said he. "What is the matter with you? You seem very sad this morning." "The matter is that I am tired of life," answered the dog. "I'm getting old and stiff, and I can no longer hunt hares for my master as I used to do. The result is that I am reckoned good for nothing, and they grudge me every morsel of food I put into my mouth." "Come, come, cheer up, my friend," said Grayskin. "Never say die! I am in a similar case to yourself and have just left my master for precisely the same reason. My plan is to go to the Cathedral of St. Gudule and offer my services to the master of the choir. If I may say so without conceit, I have a lovely voice -- one must make the most of one's gifts, you know -- and I ought to be able to command good pay." "Well, if it comes to that," said the dog, "I can sing too. I sang a lovely song to the moon last night, and if you'll believe me, all the people in our street opened their windows to listen. I sang for quite an hour, and I'd have gone on longer if some malicious person, who was no doubt jealous, had not thrown an old boot at my head." "Excellent," said Grayskin. "Come along with me. You shall sing tenor and I'll sing bass. We'll make a famous pair." So the dog joined company with Grayskin, and they went on together towards Brussels. A little farther down the road they saw a cat sitting on the rubbish heap outside a miserable hovel. The creature was half blind with age and had a face as long as a fiddle. "Why, what is the matter with you?" asked Grayskin, who had a tender heart. "Matter enough," said the cat. "I've just been turned out of house and home, and all because I took a little piece of bacon from the larder. Upon my honor, it was no bigger than a baby's fist, but they made as much fuss as though it had been a whole gammon. I was beaten and kicked out to starve. If I could catch mice as I used to do, it would not matter so much, but the mice are too quick for me nowadays. They laugh at me. Nothing remains for me but to die, and I hope it may be soon." "Nonsense," said Grayskin. "You shall live to laugh at all your troubles. Come along with us and sing in the choir at St. Gudule. Your voice is a little too thin for my own taste, but you'll make a very good soprano in a trio. What do you say?" "You give me new hopes," answered the cat. "Of course I'll join you," and so the three went on together. Towards nightfall they arrived at a farmyard, on the gate of which a cock was crowing lustily. "Hall!" said Grayskin. "What's all this about?" "I am singing my last song on earth," said the cock. "An hour ago I sang a song, although it is not my usual custom to crow in the afternoon, and as I ended I heard the farmer's wife say, 'Hearken to Chanticleer. He's crowing for fine weather tomorrow. I wonder if he'd crow so loudly if he knew that we had guests coming, and that he was going into the pot to make their soup!' She has a horrid laugh, that woman. I have always hated her!" "And do you mean to tell me," said Grayskin, "that you are going to stay here quite contentedly till they come to wring your neck?" "What else can I do?" asked Chanticleer. "Join us and turn your talents to account. We are all beautiful singers and we are going to Brussels to offer ourselves as choristers at St. Gudule. We were a trio before. With you we shall be a quartet, and that's one better!" Chanticleer was only too glad to find a means of escape, so he willingly joined the party, and they once more took the road. A little while afterwards they came to a thick wood, which was the haunt of a notorious band of robbers. There they decided to rest for the night, so Grayskin and the dog lay down beneath the shelter of a large beech tree, while the cat climbed onto one of the branches, and Chanticleer perched himself at the very top. From this lofty post he could see over the whole wood, and it was not long before he espied a light twinkling among the trees not far away. "There must be a house of some sort over there," he said to his companions. "Shall we go and see? We may find something to eat." "Or some straw to lie upon, at any rate," said Grayskin. "This damp ground gives me rheumatics in my old bones." "I was just thinking the same thing," said the dog. "Let us go." So the four choristers, led by the cock, walked in the direction from which the light came, and before long they found themselves in front of a little house, the windows of which were brilliantly lighted. In order to reach to the windows the animals made a tower of their bodies, with Grayskin at the bottom and Chanticleer at the top. Now this house was the abode of a band of robbers, who, at that very moment, were seated before a table laden with all kinds of food. There they sat and feasted, and poor Chanticleer's mouth watered as he watched them. "Is there anybody inside?" asked the dog, who was impatient. "Hush!" said Chanticleer. "Men! They're eating their dinner!" "I wish I was," said the dog. "What are they eating?" "All sorts of things -- sausage and fish ...." "Sausage!" said the dog. "Fish!" said the cat. "And ever so many other delicacies," Chanticleer went on. "Look here, friends. Wouldn't it be a fine thing if we could get a share of their meal? I confess that my stomach aches with hunger." "And mine too," said the dog. "I've never been so hungry in my life. But how are we to get the food?" "Let us serenade them, and perhaps they'll throw us something as a reward," said Grayskin. "Music, you know, has charms to soothe the savage breast." This seemed such a good idea that the choristers lost no time in putting it into execution. All four began to sing. They donkey hee-hawed, the dog howled, the cat meowed, and the cock crowed. From the noise they made one would have thought that the heavens were falling. The effect of this marvelous quartet upon the robbers was instantaneous. Leaping from their seats, they ran from place to place in mortal terror, tumbling over one another, oversetting chairs and adding to the racket by their shrieks and cries. At that moment the cock fell against the window, breaking the glass to smithereens. The donkey gave the frame a push, and all the four precipitated themselves into the room. This was the last straw. The robbers could stand no more. Half mad with fear they rushed to the door and fled into the forest. Then our four choristers drew up to the table and set to work upon the food with which it was laden. Their long walk had given them a good appetite, so that there was little left by the time they had finished. Feeling drowsy after their meal, they then settled themselves to sleep. The donkey made himself a bed on a heap of straw in the yard; the dog stretched himself out upon the mat by the house door; the cat lay among the warm cinders on the hearth; and the cock perched upon the rooftop. A few minutes more and they were all fast asleep. Meanwhile the robbers, who had retreated some distance into the forest, waited anxiously for something dreadful to happen. An hour passed by and there was neither sight nor sound to alarm them, so they began to feel a little ashamed of their cowardice. Creeping stealthily nearer to the cottage, they saw that everything was still, and that no light was showing from the windows. At last the robber chief sent his lieutenant to spy out the land, and this man, returning to the cottage without mishap, found his way into the kitchen and proceeded to light a candle. He had no matches, but he saw two sparks of fire among the cinders on the hearth, so he went forward to get a light from them. Now this light came from the cat's eyes, and as soon as puss felt the robber touch her, she sprang up, snarling and spitting, and scratched his face. With a scream of terror, he dropped his candle and rushed for the door, and as he passed, the dog bit him in the leg. By this time the noise had awakened Grayskin, who got upon his feet just as the man ran by, and helped him forward with a might kick, which sent him flying out into the roadway. Seeing this, the cock on the housetop spread his wings and crowed in triumph, "Cock-a-doodle-doo!" I wish you could have seen the way that robber ran! He covered the ground so quickly that he seemed like a flying shadow, and I am perfectly certain that not even a hare could have overtaken him. At last, panting for breath, he rejoined his comrades in the forest, who were eagerly awaiting his return. "Well," cried the chief, "is the way clear? Can we go back?" "Not on any account," cried the robber. "There's a horrible witch in the kitchen. Directly I entered she sprang at me and tore my face with her long claws, calling out at the same time to her creatures to come and devour me. As I ran through the door, one of them buried his fangs in my leg, and a little farther on, in the yard, a great black monster struck at me with an enormous club, giving me a blow that nearly broke my backbone. On the roof a little demon with wings and eyes that shone like coals of fire cried, 'Stop him! Eat him! Stop him! Eat him!' You may guess that I did not wait for more. It is a miracle that I have escaped with my life!" When they heard this terrible story the robbers lost no time in decamping, and such was their terror that they deserted the forest altogether and went away to another part of the country. The result was that our four friends were left to dwell in the cottage, where they lived happily for the rest of their lives, and as they had now everything they wanted, they quite gave up their idea of going to St. Gudule. Source: Jean de Bosschère, Folk Tales of Flanders (New York: Dodd, Mead, and Company, 1918), pp. 41-49 . The medieval principality of Flanders includes portions of modern France, Belgium, and the Netherlands. Return to the table of contents . The Story of the White Pet Scotland There was a farmer before now who had a White Pet (sheep), and when Christmas was drawing near, he thought that he would kill the White Pet. The White Pet heard that, and he thought he would run away; and that is what he did. He had not gone far when a bull met him. Said the bull to him, "All hail! White Pet, where are you going?" "I," said the White Pet, "am going to seek my fortune; they were going to kill me for Christmas, and I thought I had better run away." "It is better for me," said the bull, "to go with you, for they were going to do the very same with me." "I am willing," said the White Pet; "the larger the party the better the fun." They went forward until they fell in with a dog. "All hail! White Pet," said the dog. "All hail! dog." "Where are you going?" said the dog. "I am running away, for I heard that they were threatening to kill me for Christmas." "They were going to do the very same to me," said the dog, "and I will go with you." "Come, then," said the White Pet. They went then, until a cat joined them. "All hail! White Pet," said the cat. "All hail! oh cat." "Where are you going?" said the cat. "I am going to seek my fortune," said the White Pet, " because they were going to kill me at Christmas." "They were talking about killing me too," said the cat," and I had better go with you." "Come on then," said the White Pet. Then they went forward until a cock met them. "All hail! White Pet," said the cock. "All hail to yourself! oh cock," said the White Pet. "Where," said the cock," are you going?" "I," said the White Pet, "am going away, for they were threatening my death at Christmas." "They were going to kill me at the very same time," said the cock, " and I will go with you." "Come, then," said the White Pet. They went forward until they fell in with a goose. "All hail! White Pet," said the goose. "All hail to yourself! oh goose," said the White Pet. "Where are you going?" said the goose. "I," said the White Pet, "am running away, because they were going to kill me at Christmas." "They were going to do that to me too," said the goose, "and I will go with you." The party went forward until the night was drawing on them, and they saw a little light far away; and though far off, they were not long getting there. When they reached the house they said to each other that they would look in at the window to see who was in the house, and they saw thieves counting money; and the White Pet said, "Let every one of us call his own call. I will call my own call; and let the bull call his own call; let the dog call his own call; and the cat her own call; and the cock his own call; and the goose his own call." With that they gave out one shout -- Gaire! When the thieves heard the shouting outside, they thought the mischief was there; and they fled out, and they went to a wood that was near them. When the White Pet and his company saw that the house was empty, they went in and they got the money that the thieves had been counting, and they divided it among themselves; and then they thought that they would settle to rest. Said the White Pet, "Where will you sleep tonight, oh bull?" "I will sleep," said the bull, "behind the door where I used to be." "Where will you sleep, White Pet?" "I will sleep," said the White Pet, "in the middle of the floor where I used to be." "Where will you sleep, oh dog?" said the White Pet. "I will sleep beside the fire where I used to be," said the dog. "Where will you sleep, oh cat?" "I will sleep," said the cat, "in the candle press, where I like to be." "Where will you sleep, oh cock?" said the White Pet. "I," said the cock, " will sleep on the rafters where I used to be." "Where will you sleep, oh goose?" "I will sleep," said the goose, "on the manure pile, where I was accustomed to be." They were not long settled to rest, when one of the thieves returned to look in to see if he could perceive if any one at all was in the house. All things were still, and he went on forward to the candle press for a candle, that he might kindle to make him a light; but when he put his hand in the box the cat thrust her claws into his hand, but he took a candle with him, and he tried to light it. Then the dog got up, and he stuck his tail into a pot of water that was beside the fire; he shook his tail and put out the candle. Then the thief thought that the mischief was in the house, and he fled; but when he was passing the White Pet, he gave him a blow; before he got past the bull, he gave him a kick; and the cock began to crow; and when he went out, the goose began to belabor him with his wings about the shanks. He went to the wood where his comrades were, as fast as was in his legs. They asked him how it had gone with him. "It went," said he, "but middling; when I went to the candle press, there was a man in it who thrust ten knives into my hand; and when I went to the fireside to light the candle, there was a big black man lying there, who was sprinkling water on it to put it out; and when I tried to go out, there was a big man in the middle of the floor, who gave me a shove; and another man behind the door who pushed me out; and there was a little brat on the loft calling out Cuir-anees-an-shaw-ay-s-foni-mi-hayn-da -- Send him up here and I'll do for him; and there was a shoemaker, out on the manure pile, belaboring me about the shanks with his apron." When the thieves heard that, they did not return to seek their lot of money; and the White Pet and his comrades got it to themselves; and it kept them peaceably as long as they lived. Source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 1 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Doublas, 1860), pp. 194-97 . Campbell's source was a Mrs. MacTavish, who collected the story in Gaelic from a servant maid in at Port Ellen, Isaly, in 1859. A "white pet" is a lamb brought up by hand. Return to the table of contents . The Bull, the Tup, the Cock, and the Steg England A bull, a tup [ram], a cock, and a steg [gander] set out together to seek their fortune. When it got to night, they came to a house, and asked for a night's lodging, but the folks said no. However, at last they were let come into the kitchen. The bull said he would lie on the floor, the tup said he would lie by his side, the cock would perch on the rannel bank, and the steg would stand at t' back of the door. At midnight, when all was quiet, two men, meaning to rob the house, were heard parleying outside which should go in, and which watch outside. One went in, the bull got up and knocked him about, the tup did the same, and the cock said, "Fetch him here, I'll pick out his eyen." So he says, "I'd best be out of this." As he went to the door, the steg took him by the nose with its neb, and beat him with its wings. The other said when he got out, "What have you done?" "Done!" says he, "The devil knocked me about; when he'd done, one of his imps set on. A thin wi' glowering eyen said, 'Fetch him here,' etc. and when I got to the door, a blacksmith took me by the snout with his tongs, and flapped me by the lugs with his leather apron." Source: Folk-Lore: Transactions of the Folk-Lore Society , vol. 20, no. 1 (March 1909), pp. 75-76 . Collected in Gainford, County Durham, by Alice Ecleston, 1893 or earlier. Return to the table of contents . Jack and His Comrades Ireland Once there was a poor widow, and often there was, and she had one son. A very scarce summer came, and they didn't know how they'd live till the new potatoes would be fit for eating. So Jack said to his mother one evening, "Mother, bake my cake, and kill my cock, till I go seek my fortune; and if I meet it, never fear but I'll soon be back to share it with you." So she did as he asked her, and he set out at break of day on his journey. His mother came along with him to the bawn (yard) gate, and says she, "Jack, which would you rather have, half the cake and half the cock with my blessing, or the whole of 'em with my curse?" "O musha, mother," says Jack, "why do you ax me that question? Sure you know I wouldn't have your curse and Damer's estate along with it." "Well, then, Jack," says she, "here's the whole tote (lot) of 'em, and my thousand blessings along with them." So she stood on the bawn ditch (fence) and blessed him as far as her eyes could see him. Well, he went along and along till he was tired, and ne'er a farmer's house he went into wanted a boy. At last his road led by the side of a bog, and there was a poor ass up to his shoulders near a big bunch of grass he was striving to come at. "Ah, then, Jack asthore," says he, "help me out or I'll be dhrownded ." "Never say't twice," says Jack, and he pitched in big stones and scraws (sods) into the slob, till the ass got good ground under him. "Thank you, Jack," says he, when he was out on the hard road; "I'll do as much for you another time. Where are you going?" "Faith, I'm going to seek my fortune till harvest comes in, God bless it!" "And if you like," says the ass, "I'll go along with you; who knows what luck we may have!" "With all my heart; it's getting late, let us be jogging." Well, they were going through a village, and a whole army of gorsoons [ garçons ] were hunting a poor dog with a kittle tied to his tail. He ran up to Jack for protection, and the ass let such a roar out of him, that the little thieves took to their heels as if the ould boy (the devil) was after them. "More power to you, Jack!" says the dog. "I'm much obleeged to you; where is the baste and yourself going?" "We're going to seek our fortune till harvest comes in." "And wouldn't I be proud to go with you!" says the dog, "and get shut (rid) of them ill conducted boys; purshuin' to 'em!" "Well, well, throw your tail over your arm, and come along." They got outside the town, and sat down under an old wall, and Jack pulled out his bread and meat, and shared with the dog; and the ass made his dinner on a bunch of thistles. While they were eating and chatting, what should come by but a poor half-starved cat, and the moll-row he gave out of him would make your heart ache. "You look as if you saw the tops of nine houses since breakfast," says Jack; "here's a bone and something on it." "May your child never know a hungry belly!" says Tom; "it's myself that's in need of your kindness. May I be so bold as to ask where yez are all going?" "We're going to seek our fortune till the harvest comes in, and you may join us if you like." "And that I'll do with a heart and a half," says the cat, " and thank'ee for asking me." Off they set again, and just as the shadows of the trees were three times as long as themselves, they heard a great cackling in a field inside the road, and out over the ditch jumped a fox with a fine black cock in his mouth. "Oh you anointed villian !" says the ass, roaring like thunder. "At him, good dog!" says Jack, and the word wasn't out of his mouth when Coley was in full sweep after the Moddhera Rua (Red Dog). Reynard dropped his prize like a hot potato, and was off like shot, and the poor cock came back fluttering and trembling to Jack and his comrades. "O musha, naybours !" says he, "wasn't it the hoith o' luck that threw you in my way! Maybe I won't remember your kindness if ever I find you in hardship; and where in the world are you all going?" "We're going to seek our fortune till the harvest comes in; you may join our party if you like, and sit on Neddy's crupper when your legs and wings are tired." Well, the march began again, and just as the sun was gone down they looked around, and there was neither cabin nor farm house in sight. "Well, well," says Jack, "the worse luck now the better another time, and it's only a summer night after all. We'll go into the wood, and make our bed on the long grass." No sooner said than done. Jack stretched himself on a bunch of dry grass, the ass lay near him, the dog and cat lay in the ass's warm lap, and the cock went to roost in the next tree. Well, the soundness of deep sleep was over them all, when the cock took a notion of crowing. "Bother you, Cuileach Dhu (Black Cock)!" says the ass; "you disturbed me from as nice a wisp of hay as ever I tasted. What's the matter?" "It's daybreak that's the matter; don't you see light yonder?" "I see a light indeed," says Jack, "but it's from a candle it's coming, and not from the sun. As you've roused us we may as well go over, and ask for lodging." So they all shook themselves, and went on through grass, and rocks, and briars, till they got down into a hollow, and there was the light coming through the shadow, and along with it came singing, and laughing, and cursing. "Easy, boys!" says Jack; "walk on your tippy toes till we see what sort of people we have to deal with." So they crept near the window, and there they saw six robbers inside, with pistols, and blunderbushes , and cutlashes , sitting at a table, eating roast beef and pork, and drinking mulled beer, and wine, and whisky punch. "Wasn't that a fine haul we made at the Lord of Dunlavin's!" says one ugly-looking thief with his mouth full, "and it's little we'd get only for the honest porter; here's his purty health!" "The porter's purty health!" cried out every one of them, and Jack bent his finger at his comrades. "Close your ranks, my men," says he in a whisper, "and let every one mind the word of command." So the ass put his fore-hoofs on the sill of the window, the dog got on the ass's head, the cat got on the dog's head, and the cock on the cat's head. Then Jack made a sign, and they all sung out like mad. "Hee haw, hee-haw!" roared the ass; "bow-wow!" barked the dog; "meaw-meaw!" cried the cat; "cock-a-doodle-doo!" crowed the cock. "Level your pistols!" cried Jack, "and make smithereens of 'em. Don't leave a mother's son of 'em alive; present, fire!" With that they gave another halloo, and smashed every pane in the window. The robbers were frightened out of their lives. They blew out the candles, threw down the table, and skelped out at the back door as if they were in earnest, and never drew rein till they were in the very heart of the wood. Jack and his party got into the room, closed the shutters, lighted the candles, and ate and drank till hunger and thirst were gone. Then they lay down to rest -- Jack in the bed, the ass in the stable, the dog on the door mat, the cat by the fire, and the cock on the perch. At first the robbers were very glad to find themselves safe in the thick wood, but they soon began to get vexed. "This damp grass is very different from our warm room," says one; "I was obliged to drop a fine pig's crubeen (foot)," says another; " I didn't get a foy -spoonful of my last tumbler," says another; "and all the Lord of Dunlavin's goold and silver that we left behind!" says the last. "I think I'll venture back," says the captain, "and see if we can recover anything." "That's a good boy!" said they all, and away he went. The lights were all out, and so he groped his way to the fire, and there the cat flew in his face, and tore him with teeth and claws. He let a roar out of him, and made for the room door, to look for a candle inside. He trod on the dog's tail, and if he did, he got the marks of his teeth in his arms, and legs, and thighs. " Millia murdher (thousand murders)!" cried he; "I wish I was out of this unlucky house." When he got to the street door, the cock dropped down upon him with his claws and bill, and what the cat and dog done to him was only a flay -bite to what he got from the cock. "Oh, tattheration to you all, you unfeeling vagabones !" says he, when he recovered his breath; and he staggered and spun round and round till he reeled into the stable, back foremost, but the ass received him with a kick on the broadest part of his small clothes, and laid him comfortably on the dunghill. When he came to himself, he scratched his head, and began to think what happened him; and as soon as he found that his legs were able to carry him, he crawled away, dragging one foot after another, till he reached the wood. "Well, well," cried them all, when he came within hearing, "any chance of our property?" "You may say chance," says he, "and it's itself is the poor chance all out. Ah, will any of you pull a bed of dry grass for me? All the sticking-plaster in Inniscorfy (Enniscorthy) will be too little for the cuts and bruises I have on me. Ah, if you only knew what I have gone through for you! When I got to the kitchen fire, looking for a sod of lighted turf, what should be there but a colliach (old woman) carding flax, and you may see the marks she left on my face with the cards. I made to the room door as fast as I could, and who should I stumble over but a cobbler and his seat, and if he did not work at me with his awls and his pinchers you may call me a rogue. Well, I got away from him somehow, but when I was passing through the door, it must be the divel himself that pounced down on me with his claws, and his teeth, that were equal to sixpenny nails, and his wings -- ill luck be in his road! Well, at last I reached the stable, and there, by way of salute, I got a pelt from a sledge-hammer that sent me half a mile off. If you don't believe me, I'll give you leave to go and judge for yourselves." "Oh, my poor captain," says they, "we believe you to the nines . Catch us, indeed, going within a hen's race of that unlucky cabin!" Well, before the sun shook his doublet next morning, Jack and his comrades were up and about. They made a hearty breakfast on what was left the night before, and then they all agreed to set off to the castle of the Lord of Dunlavin, and give him back all his gold and silver. Jack put it all in the two ends of a sack, and laid it across Neddy's back, and all took the road in their hands. Away they went, through bogs, up hills, down dales, and sometimes along the yalla high road, till they came to the hall door of the Lord of Dunlavin, and who should be there, airing his powdered head, his white stockings, and his red breeches, but the thief of a porter. He gave a cross look to the visitors, and says he to Jack, "What do you want here, my fine fellow? There isn't room for you all." "We want," says Jack, "what I'm sure you haven't to give us -- and that is, common civility." "Come, be off, you lazy geochachs (greedy strollers)!" says he, "while a cat 'ud be licking her ear, or I'll let the dogs at you." "Would you tell a body," says the cock that was perched on the ass's head, "who was it that opened the door for the robbers the other night?" Ah! maybe the porter's red face didn't turn the colour of his frill, and the Lord of Dunlavin and his pretty daughter, that were standing at the parlour window unknownst to the porter, put out their heads. "I'd be glad, Barney," says the master, "to hear your answer to the gentleman with the red comb on him." "Ah, my lord, don't believe the rascal; sure I didn't open the door to the six robbers." "And how did you know there were six, you poor innocent?" said the lord. "Never mind, sir," says Jack, "all your gold and silver is there in that sack, and I don't think you will begrudge us our supper and bed after our long march from the wood of Athsalach (muddy ford)." "Begrudge, indeed! Not one of you will ever see a poor day if I can help it." So all were welcomed to their heart's content, and the ass, and the dog, and the cock got the best posts in the farmyard, and the cat took possession of the kitchen. The lord took Jack in hands, dressed him from top to toe in broadcloth, and frills as white as snow, and turnpumps, and put a watch in his fob. When they sat down to dinner, the lady of the house said Jack had the air of a born gentleman about him, and the lord said he'd make him his steward. Jack brought his mother, and settled her comfortably near the castle, and all were as happy as you please. The old woman that told me the story said Jack and the young lady were married ; but if they were, I hope he spent two or three years getting the edication of a gentleman. I don't think that a country boy would feel comfortable, striving to find discoorse for a well-bred young lady, the length of a summer's day, even if he had the Academy of Compliments and the Complete Letter Writer by heart.* *Footnote: Two chap or pedler's books, great favourites among our populace during the last century, and still finding some readers. The concluding observations, as well as the body of the story, are in the words of the original narrator. Source: Patrick Kennedy Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 5-12 . This story is also printed in: Joseph Jacobs, Celtic Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1892), pp. 112-20 . Return to the table of contents . A Story Ireland Once upon a time there was a sheep who stood in his pen to be fattened. When the maid came to feed him she said, "Eat away sheep you won't be here much longer. To morrow we are going to kill you." The sheep ate until he ate a good deal to much, and when he had finished he went out the door of his pen, and made his way to the neighbouring farm. There he went straight tot he pig-sty where there lived a pig whom he met out in the field. "Good day," said the sheep, "and thanks for your kindness last time we met." "Good day," said the pig, "and the same to you." "Do you know why they feed you so good," said the sheep. "No," said the pig. "Because they are going to kill you and eat you," said the sheep. "Much good may do them," said the pig. "Come to the wood and we will build a house for ourselves," said the sheep. "Good company is a fine thing," said the pig, and the too set off together. When they had gone a short distance they met a goose. "Good day," said the goose, "where are ye going to day." "Well," said they, "you must know we were not to well treated at home, and we are going to the wood to build a house for ourselves." "May I go with ye," said the goose, "for it's child's play when three share the [?]." "What can you do to build a house?" said the pig. "I can pull moss and [?] it in them cracks and make your house very comfortable," said the goose. "Very well," said the pig, "she might come with us," for above all things Mr. Piggy wished to be warm and comfortable. When our friends had gone a little farther, walking slowly, for the goose found it hard to keep up with them. they met a hare. "Good day sirs," said the hare, "how far are ye travelling to day," "Good day," said the sheep, "we were not very well off at home and so we are going to the wood to build a house." "Well," said the hare, "I have a home in every bush, but I often said in winter, If I live till summer I'll build a house," and so I have a good mind to go with you. "We might bring you with us to frighten away the dogs," said the pig with a grin, "but I don't know what you can do towards building a house." "Well," said the hare, "I have teeth to get pegs and paws to drive them intot he wall," "All right," they said the hare might go with them and help to build the house. When they had gone a bit farther they met a cock. "Good day sirs," said the cock, "where are ye going to day gentlemen. "Good day," said the sheep. "At home we were not to well off and we are going to build a house for ourselves." "Well," said the cock, "I would like to join such a gallant company. I also would like to build a house." "How can you ever help us to build a house," said the pig. "Ah," said the cock, "I am up early and can wake every one. "Very true," said the pig, "let him come with us." So they all set off together. When the house was finished they lived very well and merry ever afterwards. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Mayo >> N. Peadair, Caisleán an Bharraigh, pp. 479-82 . Collector: Brigid Moran. Informant: James Moran. The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . How Jack Went to Seek His Fortune USA Version 1 Once on a time there was a boy named Jack, and one morning he started to go and seek his fortune. He hadn't gone very far before he met a cat. "Where are you going, Jack?" said the cat. "I am going to seek my fortune." "May I go with you?" "Yes," said Jack, "the more the merrier." So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt. They went a little further and they met a dog. "Where are you going, Jack?" said the dog. "I am going to seek my fortune." "May I go with you?" "Yes," said Jack, "the more the merrier." So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt. They went a little further and they met a goat, "Where are you going, Jack?" said the goat. "I am going to seek my fortune." "May I go with you?" "Yes," said Jack, "the more the merrier." So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt. They went a little further and they met a bull. "Where are you going, Jack?" said the bull. "I am going to seek my fortune." "May I go with you?" "Yes," said Jack, "the more the merrier." So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt. They went a little further and they met a skunk. "Where are you going, Jack?" said the skunk. "May I go with you?" "Yes," said Jack, "the more the merrier." So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt. They went a little further and they met a rooster. "Where are you going, Jack?" said the rooster. "I am going to seek my fortune." "May I go with you?" "Yes," said Jack, "the more the merrier." So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt. Well, they went on till it was about dark, and they began to think of some place where they could spend the night. About this time they came in sight of a house, and Jack told them to keep still while he went up a looked in through the window. And there were some robbers counting over their money. Then Jack went back and told them to wait till he gave the word, and then to make all the noise they could. So when they were all ready Jack gave the word, and the cat mewed, and the dog barked, and the goat blatted, and the bull bellowed, and the rooster crowed, and all together they made such a dreadful noise that it frightened the robbers all away. And then they went in a took possession of the house. Jack was afraid the robbers would come back in the night, and so when it came time to go to bed he put the cat in the rocking-chair, and he put the dog under the table, and he put the goat upstairs, and he put the bull down cellar, and he put the skunk in the corner of the fireplace, and the rooster flew up onto the roof, and Jack went to bed. By and by the robbers saw it was all dark, and they sent one man back to the house to look after their money. Before long he came back in a great fright and told them his story. "I went back to the house," said he, "and went in an tried to sit down in the rocking-chair, and there was an old woman knitting, and she stuck her knitting needles into me. I went to the table to look after the money, and there was a shoemaker under the table, and he stuck his awl into me. I started to go upstairs, and there was a man up there threshing, and he knocked me down with his flail. I started to go down cellar, and there was a man down there chopping wood, and he knocked me up with his axe. I went to warm me at the fireplace, and there was an old woman washing dishes, and she threw her dishwater onto me. But I shouldn't have minded all that if it hadn't been for that little fellow on top of the house, who kept a hollering, 'Toss him up to me-e! Toss him up to me-e!'" Source: Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 1 (1888), pp. 227-28 . Contributed by Francis L. Palmer, Hartford, Connecticut, as told by his grandfather in Chicopee, Massachusetts. The same tale, slightly revised, is recorded in Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1898), pp. 24-27. Return to the table of contents . How Jack Went to Seek His Fortune USA Version 2 Once on a time there was a boy named Jack, who set out to seek his fortune. He had not gone but a little way when he came to a horse. The horse said, "Where are you going, Jack?" He said, "I'm going to seek my fortune. Won't you go along too?" "Don't know, guess I will." So they walked along together. By and by they came to a cow. The cow said, "Where are you going, Jack?" He said, "I'm going to seek my fortune. Won't you go along too?" "Don't know, guess I will." So they walked along together. By and by they came to a ram. The ram said, "Where are you going, Jack?" He said, "I'm going to seek my fortune. Won't you go along too?" "Don't know, guess I will." So they walked along together. By and by they came to a dog. The dog said, "Where are you going, Jack?" "I'm going to seek my fortune. Won't you go along too?" "Don't know, guess I will." So they all walked along together. By and by they came to a cat. The cat said, "Where are you going, Jack?" He said, "I'm going to seek my fortune. Won't you go along too?" "Don't know, guess I will." So they all walked along together. By and by they came to a rooster. The rooster said, "Where are you going, Jack?" "I'm going to seek my fortune. Won't you go along too?" "Don't know, don't care if I do." So they all walked along together. They traveled along until it began to grow dark, and then they were looking for a place to spend the night, when they saw a log cabin in the edge of a woods. Jack went up to the house and found the door unlocked, and went in. After looking about he found a good bed upstairs and plenty of good food in the cupboard. There was a fire on the hearth. As he could see no one living there, after he had eaten a good supper and fed all the animals, he began to make preparations for the night. First he led the horse out into the stable, and fed him some hay, for he found plenty of good hay on the mow. Then he took all the other animals into the house, and he found the door closed into the locker, so he stationed the dog under the table near the door, so that he mighty bite anyone who might chance to enter the house. The cat lay down on the hearth, and the rooster perched on a large crossbeam, and then he stationed the cow at the foot of the stairs, and the ram at the top of the stairs that led to the loft. Then he covered up the fire, put out the light, and went to bed, and was soon fast asleep. Now it happened that this valley was the home of two wicked robbers, who had gone out during the day in search of plunder. Late in the night Jack was awakened by a great noise, for the robbers had returned and opened the door, expecting to find things as usual. They were suddenly grabbed by the dog, who bit them furiously, barking all the while. At last they managed to escape from him, and started to the fireplace, thinking to strike a light. One of the robbers tried to light a match by a coal which he thought he saw shining in the ashes; but this was the cat's eye, and as soon as she was molested she flew on them and scratched their faces dreadfully, till they were glad to escape from the fireplace. They went from the fireplace toward the stairs, but as they passed under the rooster's perch he dropped very disagreeable material (these words to be whispered) upon them. The robbers groped their way through the dark to the foot of the stairs, meaning to creep up to the bed and rest till morning, but just as they reached the stairs they were suddenly caught on the horns of the cow, and tossed up in the air. The ram called out, "Toss 'em up to me!" Before they lighted he caught them on his horns and tossed them up in the air. And the cow called out, "Toss 'em down to me!" Before they lighted she caught them on her horns and tossed them up in the air. Then the ram called out, "Toss 'em up to me!" And before they lighted he caught them on his horns, etc. (to be repeated ad libitum ). And so they tossed them back and forth until they were all mangled and bloody. At last they managed to escape from the cow's horns, and thought they would crawl off to the barn and spend the rest of the night. As they passed the dog in going to the door he gave them a parting snip, but they escaped from him and found the way out to the barn. When they tried to creep in at the door the horse began to kick them so dreadfully that they had to give that up, and were only just able to creep off to a fence corner, where they laid down and died. As soon as Jack found that everything was quiet he went to sleep, and slept soundly till morn, after he got up and dressed himself. By and by he looked about and found there was a large bag of gold under his bed, which had been stolen from time to time by the robbers. So Jack kept the gold, was well provided for, and lived happily forever after with his faithful animals. Source: Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 1 (1888), pp. 228-30 . Contributed by Fannie D. Bergen, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Told in Mansfield, Ohio, about 1855. Return to the table of contents . The Dog, the Cat, the Ass, and the Cock USA Once upon a time, a long while ago, when beasts and fowls could talk, it happened that a dog lived in a farmer's barnyard. By and by he grew tired of watching the house all night and working hard all day, so he thought he'd go out into the world to seek his fortune. One fine day, when the farmer had gone away, he started off down the road. He hadn't gone far when he spied a cat curled up asleep on a door-stone in a farmer's yard, so he looked over the fence and called to the cat, "I'm going out into the world to seek my fortune. Don't you want to come along too?" But the cat said she was very comfortable where she was, and didn't think she cared to go traveling. But the dog told her that by and by when she got old the farmer wouldn't let her lie on his sunny door-stone, but would make her lie in the cold, no matter whether it snowed or not. So the cat concluded she'd go along too, and they walked down the road arm in arm. They hadn't gone far when they spied a jackass eating grass in a farmer's yard. So the dog looked over the fence and called to the jackass, "We're going out into the world to seek our fortune. Don't you want to come along too?" But the jackass said he was very comfortable where he was, and didn't think he cared to go traveling. But the dog told him that by and by, when he got old and stiff, he'd have to work early and late, year after year, for only just what he would eat, and short allowance at that. So the jackass concluded to go along too, and they all walked down the road arm in arm. They hadn't gone far when they spied a cock crowing in a farmer's yard, so the dog looked over the fence and called, "We're going out into the world to seek our fortune. Don't you want to come along too?" But the rooster said he was very comfortable where he was, and didn't think he cared to go traveling. But the dog told him that by and by, when it came Thanksgiving, pop would go his head, and he'd make a fine dinner for the farmer. So the rooster concluded he'd go along too, and they all walked down the road arm in arm. Now they had neglected to take anything to eat along with them, and when night overtook them, weary, footsore, and hungry, they were in a dense forest, and they all began to blame the dog for getting them into such a scrape. The ass proposed that the cock should fly to the top of a high tree to see if he could discover a place for them to lodge. He had scarcely perched on a limb before he called to his friends that a house was a little way off, for he could see a light in the window. The dog called to him to come down and lead the was to the house, and they all walked off arm in arm to the house. When they got there it was perfectly still about the house. They could hear no one inside. The ass kicked at the door, but no one answered. They looked about and found the house had only one window, and that was so high up they couldn't look in. He proposed that the jackass should stand on his hind legs, with his forelegs resting against the house, while the dog should clamber up his back and stand on his head, the cat run up the backs of both, and the rooster fly to the cat's head, and then he could just look in at the window. "Hurry and tell what you see," said the jackass, "for my neck is breaking off." "I see a fire on a hearth and a table loaded with all sorts of fine things to eat: turkey and plum pudding, and pan-dowdy, and a band of men sitting round the table." "Zounds!" said the dog, "we must get in." So the rooster flew against the window with such a crash that it scared the robbers -- for this was a band of robbers -- nearly to death. They jumped up from the table so quickly that they overturned their chairs and whisked out the candles, while in flew the rooster, the cat, and the dog at the window, while the jackass went round and waited at the door till the robbers came out and ran away. Then the beasts lighted the candles again, and picked up the chairs, and sat down and had a good supper. Then they began to look about to see how they should dispose of themselves for the night. The jackass went out in the barn to sleep in the hay, the dog lay on the rug by the hearth, the cat took up her bed among the warm ashes, and the rooster flew to the ridgepole of the house, and soon all were fast asleep, being very tired by their long day's journey. By and by the robbers plucked up courage, and about midnight came back to the house to see if perchance they had not been scared at their shadows. Two of them got in at the window to take a survey, and seeing the cat's glowing eyes in the ashes mistook them for coals, and scratching a match in them the cat sunk her claws in his hand, which terrified him so much that in attempting to escape he ran against the dog, and he in turn caught the robber by the leg and bit him. By this time the tumult had awakened the ass, and just as the robber rushed out at the door the jackass met him and kicked him ten feet in the air, while the rooster set up a hideous crowing. It took but a few minutes for the robbers to escape to the woods and find their companions, to whom they told a doleful tale, how in trying to light a match at the fireplace the devil with red-hot eyes stuck his claws into his hands, a second devil attacked him in the rear, while another devil kicked him into the air, and as he came down on the greensward, more dead than alive, another horrid demon form the housetop cried out, "Throw the rascal up her, through the rascal up here." The thieves could never be induced to go back to the house. They thought it haunted by devils. So our friends, the jackass, the dog, the cat, and the rooster, lived there happy forever after, preferring it to traveling about to see the world. Source: Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 1 (1888), pp. 230-33 . Contributed by Miss H. S. Thurston, as told in Salem, Massachusetts, about 1858. Return to the table of contents . Benibaire Spain Once upon a time there were three little kids who were very poor, and the eldest said: "What shall we do?" The second replied: "I don't know." And the third said: "I know what we will do. We will go to Benibaire's house and steal three flasks of oil." "Well thought of," said the others; "we will go there." After walking a league, they heard a voice crying: "Bah, bah." They saw a great sheep, and were afraid, and ran away, saying: "Fly, fly, it is going to attack us." But the sheep cried to them: "Don't be afraid. Where are you going?" "To Benibaire's house, to steal three flasks of oil," they answered. "Would you like me to go too?" said the sheep. "Oh, yes," they replied. They went another league, and heard a voice that said: "Mieaou, mieaou." And they saw a very great black cat, and were frightened, and ran away, saying: "Fly, fly, it is going to scratch us." But the cat cried to them: "Don't be frightened, I won't scratch you. Where are you going?" "To Benibaire's house, to steal three flasks of oil," they replied. "Would you like me to go too?" "Oh, do come," answered the kids. They went a league farther, and heard a voice crowing: "Cock-a-doodle-doo." And the saw a very fiery cock, and were frightened, and fled, saying: "Fly, fly, it is going to peck us." The cock said to them: "Don't be afraid, I won't peck you. Where are you going?" "To Benibaire's house, to steal three flasks of oil." "Would you like me to go?" "By all means," replied the kids. They went another league, and saw a packing needle, and were frightened, and ran away, saying: "Fly, fly, It will prick us." But the needle said: "Don't be afraid, I won't prick you. Where are you going?" "To Benibaire's house, to steal three flasks of oil." "Would you like me to go?" "Yes, come along." They went another league, and arrived at Benibaire's house; and as it was night, the door was closed. "How shall we get in?" said the little kids. To which the cock replied: "I will fly on to the roof, and get down the chimney." And he did so, and opened the door to them all. They entered the house, and said, "Where shall we hide ourselves?" The cock replied: "I have my place already; I will go into the chimney." The cat hid in the cinders; the needle put itself into the towel, and the sheep got behind the door. Then the kids went to the jars to draw the oil. Whilst they were drawing it they let the funnel fall, and this aroused Benibaire, who said: "Oh, Lord! thieves have got into my house." He got up and went to the chimney, and looked up the flue, to see if it were day. Whilst he was looking up, the cock dropped some lime into his eyes and blinded him. He ran to the towel to wipe his face, and as the needle was there, it pricked him; he went to kindle a fire by the eye of the cat in the ashes, and she darted out at him and scratched him; he went flying to the door, and when he got there the sheep gave him a push and he rolled into the street; he went to the mill, and fell into the river, and was drowned, and the three kids remained masters of the house, and had a very good time of it. Source: Fernan Caballero [Cecilia Francisca J. Arrom de Ayala], The Bird of Truth and Other Fairy Tales , translated by J. H. Ingram (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1883), pp. 204-208 . Return to the table of contents . The World's Reward South Africa Once there was a man that had an old dog, so old that the man desired to put him aside. The dog had served him very faithfully when he was still young, but ingratitude is the world's reward, and the man now wanted to dispose of him. The old dumb creature, however, ferreted out the plan of his master, and so at once resolved to go away of his own accord. After he had walked quite a way he met an old bull in the veldt. "Don't you want to go with me?" asked the dog. "Where?" was the reply. "To the land of the aged," said the dog, "where troubles don't disturb you, and thanklessness does not deface the deeds of man." "Good," said the bull, "I am your companion." The two now walked on and found a ram. The dog laid the plan before him, and all moved off together, until they afterwards came successively upon a donkey, a cat, a cock, and a goose. These joined their company, and the seven set out on their journey. Late one night they came to a house, and through the open door they saw a table spread with all kinds of nice food, of which some robbers were having their fill. It would help nothing to ask for admittance, and seeing that they were hungry, they must think of something else. Therefore the donkey climbed up on the bull, the ram on the donkey, the dog on the ram, the cat on the dog, the goose on the cat, and the cock on the goose, and with one accord they all let out terrible (threatening) noises (cryings). The bull began to bellow, the donkey to bray, the dog to bark, the ram to bleat, the cat to mew, the goose to giggle gaggle, and the cock to crow, all without cessation. The people in the house were frightened perfectly limp; they glanced out through the front door, and there they stared on the strange sight. Some of them took to the ropes over the back lower door, some disappeared through the window, and in a few counts the house was empty. Then the seven old animals climbed down from one another, stepped into the house, and satisfied themselves with the delicious food. But when they had finished, there still remained a great deal of food, too much to take with them on their remaining journey, and so together they contrived a plan to hold their position until the next day after breakfast. The dog said, "See here, I am accustomed to watch at the front door of my master's house," and thereupon flopped himself down to sleep; the bull said, "I go behind the door," and there he took his position; the ram said, I will go up on to the loft"; the donkey, "I at the middle door"; the cat, "I in the fireplace"; the goose, "I in the back door "; and the cock said, "I am going to sleep on the bed." The captain of the robbers after a while sent one of his men back to see if these creatures had yet left the house. The man came very cautiously into the neighborhood, listened and listened, but he heard nothing; he peeped through the window, and saw in the grate just two coals still glimmering, and thereupon started to walk through the front door. There the old dog seized him by the leg. He jumped into the house, but the bull was ready, swept him up with his horns, and tossed him on to the loft. Here the ram received him and pushed him off the loft again. Reaching ground, he made for the middle door, but the donkey set up a terrible braying and at the same time gave him a kick that landed him in the fireplace, where the cat flew at him and scratched him nearly to pieces. He then jumped out through the back door, and here the goose got him by the trousers. When he was some distance away the cock crowed. He thereupon ran so that you could hear the stones rattle in the dark. Purple and crimson and out of breath, he came back to his companions. "Frightful, frightful!" was all that they could get from him at first, but after a while he told them, "When I looked through the window I saw in the fireplace two bright coals shining, and when I wanted to go through the front door to go and look, I stepped into an iron trap. I jumped into the house, and there some one seized me with a fork and pitched me up on to the loft, there again someone was ready, and threw me down on all fours. I wanted to fly through the middle door, but there some one blew on a trumpet, and smote me with a sledge hammer so that I did not know where I landed; but coming to very quickly, I found I was in the fireplace, and there another flew at me and scratched the eyes almost out of my head. I thereupon fled out of the back door, and lastly I was attacked on the leg by the sixth with a pair of fire tongs, and when I was still running away, someone shouted out of the house, 'Stop him, stop h - i - m!'" Source: James A. Honeÿ, South-African Folk-Tales (New York: The Baker and Taylor Company, 1910), pp. 28-32 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. See also Aging and Death in Folklore . An essay by D. L. Ashliman, with supporting texts from proverbs, folktales, and myths from around the world. Revised January 11, 2024 Bride Tests in Folktales Bride Tests folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 1450, 1451, 1452, 1453, and 1457 about choosing a bride translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2010 Contents The Hurds (type 1451, Germany). Choosing a Bride (type 1452, Germany). The Cheese Test (type 1452, Switzerland). The Storehouse Key in the Distaff (type 1453, Norway). The Suitor (types 1450, 1453, and 1457; Denmark). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Hurds Germany Once upon a time there was a girl who was beautiful, but lazy and negligent. When she had to spin she was so ill tempered that if there was a little knot in the flax, she at once pulled out a whole heap of it, and scattered it about on the ground beside her. Now she had a servant who was industrious, and who gathered together the discarded flax, cleaned it, spun it well, and had a beautiful dress woven out of it for herself. A young man had courted the lazy girl, and the wedding was about to take place. On the eve of the wedding, the industrious girl was dancing merrily about in her beautiful dress, and the bride said, Ach, wat kann das Mäken springen in minen Slickerlingen! Ah, how that girl can jump about, in my hurds! The bridegroom heard this, and asked the bride what she meant by it. So she told him that the girl was wearing a dress made from the flax which she had thrown away. When the bridegroom heard this, and saw how lazy she was, and how industrious the poor girl was, he gave her up and went to the other girl, and chose her as his wife. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Schickerlinge," Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales), no. 156. Translated by Margaret Hunt (1884). Translation revised and corrected by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. This tale was added to the Grimms' collection with the second edition (1819). German text of this tale from the edition of 1857 (the last edition printed during the Grimms' lifetimes": Kinder- und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm . Zeiter Band. (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 156, p. 288 . The Grimms' precise source of this tale is not known, only that it came from Mecklenburg. Type 1451. Hurds, as evident from the context, are bits of flax wasted in the spinning process. Link to a separate file of this tale: The Hurds . Return to the table of contents . Choosing a Bride Germany (Swabia) A man wanted to select a wife for himself from among three sisters, all of whom pleased him greatly. He invited them all to eat their noon meal with him at an inn. Wanting to find himself an industrious and efficient housewife, he decided to test them on how they ate cheese. When her cheese was served the eldest cut the rind off so thick that it included a lot of good cheese, which was thus lost. "She will waste too much and throw out everything," thought the man. "You cannot choose her." Then the second sister received her cheese, and she ate her piece without cutting off any of the rind. "She is not the wife for you either," thought the man. "She will be disorderly." Then the youngest sister was served her cheese. She scraped her piece off cleanly and carefully, and then ate it. Thus the suitor thought, "She is the right one!" and he did indeed marry her. Source: Ernst Meier, "Die Brautschau," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 30, p. 110 . Meier's source: oral, from Oerendingen. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Type 1452. Link to a variation of this tale by the Grimm brothers Choosing a Bride . Return to the table of contents . The Cheese Test Switzerland A young herdsman wanted to get married. Now he knew three sisters. All were equally beautiful, and he liked them all equally well, so he could not decide which of them he should choose as his bride. His mother noticed this, and she said to him, "Let me give you some good advice. Invite all three sisters to eat with you at the same time. Serve them some cheese and pay attention to what they do with it." The son followed this advice. He invited the girls to his house and served them cheese. The first one greedily ate her piece, complete with the rind, so that not a trace of it was left. The second one, to the contrary, cut off the rind so thick that she wasted a lot of good cheese. The third one neatly peeled off just the right amount of rind. The herdsman told his mother what had happened with the cheese, and she said, "Choose the third one. She will bring you luck." That is what he did, and as long as he lived, he never regretted having followed his mother's advice. Source: Otto Sutermeister, "Die Käsprobe," Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus der Schweiz (Aarau: Druck und Verlag von H. R. Sauerländer, 1869), no. 40, p. 121 . Sutermeister's source: Joh. Rudolf Wyß, Idyllen, Volkssagen, Legenden und Erzählungen aus der Schweiz (Bern: J. J. Burgdorfer; Leipzig: E. Gottl. Schmid, 1815), p. 321 ; and an oral source from Zürich. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Type 1452. Note by Sutermeister: Why the test in this story has to do with cheese is explained by the meaning of cheese in the lives herdspeople of all times. Swiss herdspeople even today understand only bread and cheese with the word food . Link to a variation of this tale by the Grimm brothers: Choosing a Bride . Return to the table of contents . The Storehouse Key in the Distaff Norway There was once a rich farmer's son who went out to woo. He had heard of a lass who was fair and gentle, and who was both clever in the house and good at cooking. Thither he went, for it was just such a wife he wanted. The people on the farm knew, of course, on what errand he came, so they asked him to take a seat near to them, and they talked and chatted with him, as the custom is, and beside offered him a drink and asked him to stop to dinner. They went in and out of the room, so the lad had time to look about him, and over in a corner he saw a spinning wheel with the distaff full of flax. "Whose spinning wheel is that?" asked the lad. "Oh, that's our daughter's," said the woman of the house. "There's a deal of flax on it," said the lad. "I suppose she takes more than a day to spin that," said he. "No, not at all," said the woman. "She does it easily in one day and perhaps less than that." That was more than he had ever heard of anyone being able to spin in such a short time. When they were going to carry in the dinner they all went out of the room and he was left alone. He then saw an old key lying in the window, and this he took and stowed well away among the flax on the distaff. So they ate and drank and got on well together, and when the lad thought he had been there long enough, he said good-bye and went his way. They asked him to come soon again, which he promised, but he did not speak of the matter he had at heart, although he liked the lass very well. Some time after, he came again to the farm, and they received him still better than the first time. But just as they were chatting at their best, the farmer's wife said, "Last time you were here something very remarkable happened. Our storehouse key disappeared all at once, and we have never been able to find it since." The lad went over to the spinning wheel, which stood in the corner with just as much flax on it as when last he was there. He put his hand in among the flax and said, "Here is the key! Much cannot be made by the spinning when the spinning day lasts from Michaelmas [September 29] to Easter." So he said good-bye, and did not speak of the matter he had at heart that time either. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Fairy Tales from the Far North , translated by H. L. Brækstad. Authorised edition (London: David Nutt, 1897), pp. 269-71 . Translator's preface dated London, September 1897. Link to the original Norwegian text: Stabbursnøkkelen i rokkehodet . Type 1453. A distaff is the staff which holds the fiber (typically flax or wool) being spun, either by hand or by a spinning wheel. Spinning was such an important part of women's work in preindustrial Europe that the word distaff came to refer to a woman's realm in general. Return to the table of contents . The Suitor Denmark There was once a handsome young fellow by the name of Tom. From an old, wealthy uncle he had inherited a fine farm, and being well established in life, he determined to seek a wife. As he was quite wealthy, he considered himself able to afford a little more than ordinary people in this direction, for the wives of wealthy men must always be prettier and wiser than those of the poor, as we all know. So Tom wanted a wife who was handsome and industrious, wise and good, and of course it would not be out of the way if she possessed some property. One day he rode over to a rich farmer who lived in the neighborhood and who had three daughters, all of whom were ready to be married at once. He had seen, although he had never talked with, them, and thought well of all three. Now these girls, who were otherwise pretty and good, had one great fault: namely, that they could not talk distinctly. When Tom came riding into the yard the farmer received him kindly and conducted him into the room where the three girls sat spinning diligently. They nodded kindly to him and smiled, but did not utter a sound, as their mother had strictly forbidden them to do so. The farmer led the talking, while his wife waited on them with good food and drinks. The girls spun, and looked at the young man at the table, and glanced at each other and at the ceiling and out of the windows, but none of them spoke. At length the one happened to break her yarn. "My 'arn bote!" exclaimed she. "Tie it adain," advised her sister. "Mamma told us we say no'tin', and now we t'ant teep 'till!" broke in the third one. When Tom heard these grown girls talk like babies he hurried away, utterly shocked. A wife who could not speak distinctly he had no use for at all. He proceeded to another farm, where they had a daughter who was said to be a very fine girl in all respects. Tom went into the house and saw her. If the first three ones had been too silent, this one talked, however, more fluently and volubly than any girl whom he had ever met. She talked like a house on fire, while her spinning wheel went more rapidly than any engine. "How long does it take you to use up such a head of flax?" asked the young man, pointing to the rock [distaff]. "Oh," she said, "I use up a couple of them every day." While she left the room a few minutes to look after the servants, Tom seized a key from a drawer of a bureau in the room and stuffed it into the head of flax. When she returned they finished their conversation; whereupon he bid her parents and herself good-bye, promising to call again in a week. On the appointed day Tom returned. The girl and her parents expected him to talk this time of his errand. When he came into the room the girl was busy with her rock, as before. She bid him welcome, and invited him to sit down. "How unfortunate!" began she. "We have been missing the key of that bureau ever since you were here. We are unable to find it, and I cannot reach any of my things. It never happened before." On hearing this, Tom went over and pulled the key out of the head of flax. It was the same key, and, still worse, the very same head of flax that he had seen a week before. Thus he knew her word could not be depended upon; and bidding her good-bye he left at once, richer in experience than before. Some time afterwards he heard of a girl who was very pretty and good, but especially wise and thoughtful in all practical matters. Her parents were said to be the same. Tom saddled his horse and rode over to see her. The whole family was at home and received the young man very kindly. While the men drifted into a talk about the weather and crops, the women placed before them the best that the house could afford. "Go into the cellar and fetch a bottle of wine," said the woman to her daughter. The girl went into the cellar, but was so busy thinking what pattern she might choose for a wedding dress that she sat down on the floor, lost in reflection upon this important subject, and the wine was entirely forgotten. After she had left the room, the parents told Tom of their daughter's many good qualities; how industrious she was, how thoughtful, and so on. The young man thought that she would be exactly such a wife as he wished. But as the girl did not appear with the wine, her mother went to see what had become of her. When she came into the cellar and found her daughter sitting on the floor, she asked, "Why do you sit there, instead of bringing the wine?" "Well," was the answer, "I am thinking that if I marry Tom I must make a careful choice of the pattern for my wedding gown. The question is, what pattern would do best?" "Yes, indeed," answered her mother, "which pattern will be the most suitable?" She sat down by her daughter, pondering over this important question. "I wonder what has become of them both!" at length exclaimed the man, referring to his wife and daughter. "I must look after them." He went into the cellar, and when he saw both women sitting on the floor he cried, "Why are you both sitting here? You have kept us waiting for over an hour!" "We are thinking," replied his wife, "of the pattern for the wedding gown. If she is to marry Tom, the gown must, of course, be a pretty one, and the choice of the right pattern is, indeed, an important matter." "To be sure!" answered her husband, seating himself on the floor beside them to consider the same subject. As at length Tom grew tired of waiting, he went himself into the cellar to see if anything unusual had happened. He found the whole family sitting on the floor and looking extremely thoughtful. "Why do you all sit here?" he asked. At length the farmer, aroused from his reverie, proceeded to relate the difficult question which had caught their attention. "Yes, in dee e ed," answered Tom. "Which will be the most suitable pattern? You may think of that until I return, and in the meantime I will do the same. Good bye to you!" Mounting his horse, he rode home as rapidly as the steed would carry him, and if he has not found another and less thoughtful girl, he is yet a bachelor. But the three people may yet be sitting on the cellar floor, thinking of the pattern for the bridal gown, for all that I know! Source: J. Christian Bay, Danish Folk Tales (New York and London: Harper and Brothers Publishers, 1899), pp. 150-54 . Bay does not identify his specific source for each tale in this collection, but he does state in his preface that "the sources from which most of these stories were gathered are principally the works of the late Professor Svend Grundtvig." Rock (Danish rok ) is an archaic English term for distaff. The first episode in this tale, the story of the sisters with speech impediments, is classified as type 1457. The second episode, the story of the hidden key, is classified as type 1453. The final episode, the story of the would-be bride and her family worrying about an unimportant detail, is classified as type 1450. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised July 17, 2010. Blood Brothers The Blood Brothers a European folktale retold by D. L. Ashliman © 2012 Once upon a time a fisherman caught a fish that said to him, "If you will set me free, I will grant you any wish." Now more than anything else, the fisherman wanted to have a child with his wife, so he made this wish, and turned the fish loose. Before swimming away, the fish said, "Cast your net again, and give your next catch to your wife to eat." The fisherman did as he was told. His next cast netted him one little fish, which he took home with him. His wife ate the flesh. His dog ate the insides. And his horse ate the bones. Some time later his wife gave birth to twin boys; the dog had a litter of two pups; and the horse foaled with two colts. The twin boys gave their parents much pleasure, but with time the older brother became restless, and wanted to seek his fortune abroad. He left a bottle of clear white wine with his younger twin, saying, "All will be well with me as long as the wine is white. But if it ever turns red, I will be in need of your help." With that he took leave of his brother and of his parents, mounted the older twin horse, and, accompanied by the older twin dog, set forth into the world. After a long journey he came to a kingdom that was being ravished by a terrible dragon. The king had promised his daughter's hand in marriage to whatever man succeeded in killing the dragon. The twin tracked the dragon to its lair, then engaged him in battle. The fight was long and hard, but the brave twin finally prevailed, and the dragon lay dead at his feat. As proof that he had killed the beast, he cut out its tongue, then set out for the castle to claim the princess as his reward. Now the king had a steward who happened to come upon the dead dragon soon after the twin left. He decided to claim the kill for himself, cut off the dragon's head, and took a shortcut to the castle. The king was delighted to see the dragon's head, and he arranged for the wedding between the steward and the princess to take place immediately. The twin arrived just as the festivities were starting. Seeing that another man was unfairly claiming his prize, he said, "It is a strange dragon that has no tongue." "Of course the dragon has a tongue," said the steward, opening the dragon's mouth. But the tongue was not there. "The dragon had a tongue when I killed it," answered the twin, "and here it is." With this he produced the dragon's tongue. The king now saw that the steward had lied, and had him cast into a dark dungeon. The festivities continued, but this time with the twin as hero and bridegroom. The twin and the princess lived happily for some time, but after a while he became restless again. He announced that he wanted to go hunting in a nearby forest, named the Forest of No Return. His young wife asked him not to go, but his spirit of adventure prevailed. Soon after entering the Forest of No Return, the twin met an old woman, who, unknown to him, was a wicked witch. "Good day, young sir," she said. He began to return the greeting, but had scarcely opened his mouth when she cast a spell on him, turning him to stone. Meanwhile, back at the fisherman's cottage, the younger twin examined the bottle of wine every day. Its clear white color let him know that his older brother was well. One day, however, the wine turned blood red, and the younger brother knew that his twin was in need. He took leave of his parents, mounted the younger twin horse, and, accompanied by the younger twin dog, set forth into the world to find his older brother. After a long journey he came to the kingdom where his twin brother had killed the dragon. Everyone thought that he was their new prince, and he was escorted to the castle with honor. "I thought that you would never come back from the Forest of No Return," said the princess tenderly. However, to her dismay and surprise, instead of returning her love, that night he laid his sword between them in their bed. Early the next morning the younger twin set forth for the Forest of No Return. Soon after entering this forest, he met the old witch. "Good day, young sir," she said. Sensing her evil design, he said not a word, but leaped on her and pinned her to the ground. Holding his sword to her neck, he shouted, "lead me to my brother, or die at once!" The witch, fearing for her life, led the young twin to his petrified brother. She anointed the stone with salve, and he returned to life. Overjoyed, the two brothers made they way back toward the castle. On their way, each one told the other of his adventures. When it was the younger brother's turn to speak, he told of how the white wine had turned to blood red, how he had found his way to the castle, how he had slept with the princess.... He was not able finish his sentence. The older twin, hearing that his brother had slept with his wife, drew his sword and cut off his head. When the older twin arrived at the castle, he was received by his wife with love. "At last you are yourself!" she said. "Not like the last time you were here, when you put a sword between us in bed." The older twin now knew that he had unjustly killed his brother. He rushed back to the place where his body lay. Fortunately, he still had some of the witch's salve, and with it he anointed the dead man's wounds, placed the head back on the body, and brought his brother back to life. Together they returned to the castle, where they lived happily ever after. Retold from various sources. This tale is told throughout the Indo-European cultural area. Aarne-Thomspon-Uther type 303. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 6, 2012. Brothers Turned into Birds: Folktales of Type 451 The Brothers Who Were Turned into Birds Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 451 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2013 Contents The Seven Doves (Italy, Giambattista Basile). The Curse of the Seven Children (Italy). The Bewitched Brothers (Romania). The Twelve Brothers (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Seven Ravens (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Six Swans (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Twelve Wild Ducks (Norway, Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe). Link to The Wild Swans (Denmark, Hans Christian Andersen). The Little Sister: The Story of Suyettar and the Nine Brothers (Finland). The Twelve Wild Geese (Ireland). The Sister and Her Seven Brothers (Basque). Link to Udea and Her Seven Brothers (Libya, Andrew Lang, The Grey Fairy Book , 1900). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Seven Doves Italy, Giambattista Basile There was once in the county of Arzano a good woman to whom every year gave a son, until at length there were seven of them, who looked like a syrinx of the god Pan, with seven reeds, one larger than another. And when they had changed their first teeth, they said to Jannetella their mother, "Hark ye, mother, if, after so many sons, you do not this time have a daughter, we are resolved to leave home, and go wandering through the world like the sons of the blackbirds." When their mother heard this sad announcement, she prayed Heaven to remove such an intention from her sons, and prevent her losing seven such jewels as they were. But the sons said to Jannetella, "We will retire to the top of yonder hill or rock opposite; if Heaven sends you another son, put an inkstand and a pen up at the window; but if you have a little girl, put up a spoon and a distaff. For if we see the signal of a daughter, we shall return home and spend the rest of our lives under your wings; but if we see the signal of a son, then forget us, for you may know that we have taken ourselves off." Soon after the sons had departed it pleased Heaven that Jannetella should have given her a pretty little daughter; then she told the nurse to make the signal to the brothers, but the woman was so stupid and confused that she put up the inkstand and the pen. As soon as the seven brothers saw this signal, they set off, and walked on and on, until at the end of three years they came to a wood, where the trees were performing the sword-dance to the sound of a river which made counterpoint upon the stones. In this wood was the house of an ogre, whose eyes having been blinded whilst asleep by a woman, he was such an enemy to the sex that he devoured all whom he could catch. When the youths arrived at the ogre's house, tired out with walking and exhausted with hunger, they begged him for pity's sake to give them a morsel of bread. And the ogre replied, that if they would serve him, he would give them food, and they would have nothing else to do but to watch over him, like a dog, each in turn for a day. The youths, upon hearing this, thought they had found mother and father; so they consented, and remained in the service of the ogre, who having gotten their names by heart, called one time Giangrazio, at another Cecchitiello, now Pascale, now Nuccio, now Pone, now Pezzillo, and now Carcavecchia, for so the brothers were named; and giving them a room in the lower part of his house, he allowed them enough to live upon. Meanwhile their sister had grown up; and hearing that her seven brothers, owing to the stupidity of the nurse, had set out to walk through the world, and that no tidings of them had ever been received, she took it into her head to go in search of them. And she begged and prayed her mother so long, that at last, overcome by her entreaties, she gave her leave to go, and dressed her like a pilgrim. Then the maiden walked and walked, asking at every place she came to whether anyone had seen seven brothers. And thus she journeyed on, until at length she got news of them at an inn, where having inquired the way to the wood, one morning, she arrived at the ogre's house, where she was recognized by her brothers with great joy, who cursed the inkstand and pen for writing falsely such misfortune for them. Then giving her a thousand caresses, they told her to remain quiet in their chamber, that the ogre might not see her; bidding her at the same time give a portion of whatever she had to eat to a cat which was in the room, or otherwise she would do her some harm. Cianna (for so the sister was named) wrote down this advice in the pocket-book of her heart, and shared everything with the cat, like a good companion, always cutting justly, and saying, "This for me, this for thee, this for the daughter of the king!" giving the cat a share to the last morsel. Now it happened one day that the brothers, going to hunt for the ogre, left Cianna a little basket of chickpeas to cook; and as she was picking them, by ill luck she found among them a hazelnut, which was the stone of disturbance to her quiet; for having swallowed it without giving half to the cat, the latter out of spite ran up to the hearth and put out the fire. Cianna seeing this, and not knowing what to do, left the room, contrary to the command of her brothers, and going into the ogre's chamber begged him for a little fire. Then the ogre, hearing a woman's voice, said, "Welcome, madam! Wait a while, you have found what you are seeking." And so saying he took a Genoa stone, and daubing it with oil he fell to whetting his tusks. But Cianna, who saw that she had made a mistake, seizing a lighted stick, ran to her chamber; and bolting the door inside, she placed against it bars, stools, bedsteads, tables, stones, and everything there was in the room. As soon as the ogre had put an edge on his teeth he ran to the chamber of the brothers, and finding the door fastened, he fell to kicking it to break it open. At this noise and disturbance the seven brothers came home, and hearing themselves accused by the ogre of treachery for making their chamber the abode of his women-enemies, Giangrazio, who was the eldest and had more sense than the others, and saw matters going badly, said to the ogre, "We know nothing of this affair, and it may be that this wicked woman has perchance come into the room whilst we were at the chase; but as she has fortified herself inside, come with me, and I will take you to a place where we can seize her without her being able to defend herself." Then they took the ogre by the hand, and led him to a deep, deep pit, where giving him a push they sent him headlong to the bottom; and taking a shovel, which they found on the ground, they covered him with earth. Then they bade their sister unfasten the door, and they rated her soundly for the fault she had committed, and the danger in which she had placed herself; telling her to be more careful in future, and to beware of plucking grass upon the spot where the ogre was buried, or they would be turned into seven doves. "Heaven keep me from bringing such a misfortune upon you!" replied Cianna. So taking possession of all the ogre's goods and chattels, and making themselves masters of the whole house, they lived there merrily enough, waiting until winter should pass away. Now it happened one day, when the brothers were gone to the mountains to get firewood, to defend themselves against the cold, which increased from day to day, that a poor pilgrim came to the ogre's wood, and made faces at an ape that was perched up in a pine tree; whereupon the ape threw down one of the fir apples from the tree upon the man's pate, which made such a terrible bump that the poor fellow set up a loud cry. Cianna hearing the noise went out, and taking pity on his disaster, she quickly plucked a sprig of rosemary from a tuft which grew upon the ogre's grave; then she made him a plaster of it with chewed bread and salt, and after giving the man some breakfast she sent him away. Whilst Cianna was laying the cloth, and expecting her brothers, lo! she saw seven doves come flying, who said to her, "Ah! better that your hand had been cut off, you cause of all our misfortune, ere it plucked that accursed rosemary and brought such a calamity upon us! Have you eaten the brains of a cat, O sister, that you have driven our advice from your mind? Behold us turned to birds, a prey to the talons of kites, hawks, and falcons! Behold us made companions of water-hens, snipes, goldfinches, woodpeckers, jays, owls, magpies, jackdaws, rooks, starlings, woodcocks, cocks, hens and chickens, turkey-cocks, blackbirds, thrushes, chaffinches, tomtits, jenny-wrens, lapwings, linnets, greenfinches, crossbills, flycatchers, larks, plovers, kingfishers, wagtails, redbreasts, red finches, sparrows, ducks, fieldfares, wood-pigeons and bullfinches! A rare thing you have done! And now we may return to our country to find nets laid and twigs limed for us! To heal the head of a pilgrim, you have broken the heads of seven brothers; nor is there any help for our misfortune, unless you find the Mother of Time, who will tell you the way to get us out of trouble." Cianna, looking like a plucked quail at the fault she had committed, begged pardon of her brothers, and offered to go round the world until she should find the dwelling of the old woman. Then praying them not to stir from the house until she returned, lest any ill should betide them, she set out, and journeyed on and on without ever tiring; and though she went on foot, her desire to aid her brothers served her as a sumpter-mule, with which she made three miles an hour. At last she came to the seashore, where with the blows of the waves the sea was banging the rocks. Here she saw a huge whale, who said to her, "My pretty maiden, what go you seeking?" And she replied, "I am seeking the dwelling of the Mother of Time." "Hear then what you must do," replied the whale. "Go straight along this shore, and on coming to the first river, follow it up to its source, and you will meet with someone who will show you the way. But do me one kindness. When you find the good old woman, beg of her the favor to tell me some means by which I may swim about safely, without so often knocking upon the rocks and being thrown on the sands." "Trust to me," said Cianna. Then thanking the whale for pointing out the way, she set off walking along the shore; and after a long journey she came to the river, which was disbursing itself into the sea. Then taking the way up to its source, she arrived at a beautiful open country, where the meadow vied with the heaven, displaying her green mantle starred over with flowers. And there she met a mouse, who said to her, "Whither are you going thus alone, my pretty girl?" And Cianna replied, "I am seeking the Mother of Time." "You have a long way to go," said the mouse; "but do not lose heart. Everything has an end. Walk on therefore toward yon mountains, and you will soon have more news of what you are seeking. But do me one favor. When you arrive at the house you wish to find, get the good old woman to tell you what we can do to get rid of the tyranny of the cats; then command me, and I am your slave." Cianna, after promising to do the mouse this kindness, set off toward the mountains, which, although they appeared to be close at hand, seemed never to be reached. But having come to them at length, she sat down tired out upon a stone; and there she saw an army of ants carrying a large store of grain, one of whom turning to Cianna said, "Who art thou, and whither art thou going?" And Cianna, who was courteous to everyone, said to her, "I am an unhappy girl, who for a matter that concerns me am seeking the dwelling of the Mother of Time." "Go on farther," replied the ant, "and where these mountains open into a large plain you will obtain more news. But do me a great favor. Set the secret from the old woman what we ants can do to live a little longer; for it seems to me a folly in worldly affairs to be heaping up such a large store of food for so short a life." "Be at ease," said Cianna. "I will return the kindness you have shown me." Then she passed the mountains and arrived at a wide plain; and proceeding a little way over it, she came to a large oak tree, whose fruit tasted like sweetmeats to the maiden, who was satisfied with little. Then the oak, making lips of its bark and a tongue of its pith, said to Cianna, "Whither are you going so sad, my little daughter? Come and rest under my shade." Cianna thanked him much, but excused herself, saying that she was going in haste to find the Mother of Time. And when the oak heard this he replied, "You are not far from her dwelling; for before you have gone another day's journey you will see upon a mountain a house, in which you will find her whom you seek. But if you have as much kindness as beauty, I prithee learn for me what I can do to regain my lost honor; for instead of being food for great men, I am now only made the food of hogs." "Leave that to me," replied Cianna. "I will take care to serve you." So saying she departed, and walking on and on without ever resting, she came at length to the foot of an impertinent mountain, which was poking its head into the face of the clouds. There she found an old man, who wearied and way-worn had lain down upon some hay. And as soon as he saw Cianna, he knew her at once, and that it was she who had cured his bump. When the old man heard what she was seeking, he told her that he was carrying to Time the rent for the piece of earth which he had cultivated, and that Time was a tyrant who usurped everything in the world, claiming tribute from all, and especially from people of his age; and he added that, having received kindness from Cianna, he would now return it a hundredfold, by giving her some good information about her arrival at the mountain; and that he was sorry he could not accompany her thither, since his old age, which was condemned rather to go down than up, obliged him to remain at the foot of those mountains, to cast up accounts with the clerks of Time, which are the labors, the sufferings, and the infirmities of life, and to pay the debt of Nature. So the old man said to her, "Now, my pretty innocent child, listen to me. You must know that on the top of this mountain you will find a ruined house, which was built long ago time out of mind; the walls are cracked, the foundations crumbling away, the doors worm eaten, the furniture all worn out, and in short everything is gone to wrack and ruin. On one side are seen shattered columns, on another broken statues, and nothing is left in a good state except a coat-of-arms over the door, quartered, on which you will see a serpent biting its tail, a stag, a raven, and a phoenix. When you enter, you will see on the ground files, saws, scythes, sickles, pruning-hooks, and hundreds and hundreds of vessels full of ashes, with the names written on them, like gallipots in an apothecary's shop; and there may be read Corinth, Saguntum, Carthage, Troy, and a thousand other cities, the ashes of which Time preserves as trophies of his conquests. When you come near the house, hide yourself until Time goes out; and as soon as he has gone forth, enter, and you will find an old, old woman, with a beard that touches the ground and a hump reaching to the sky. Her hair, like the tail of a dapple-gray horse, covers her heels; her face looks like a plaited collar, with the folds stiffened by the starch of years. The old woman is seated upon a clock, which is fastened to a wall; and her eyebrows are so large that they overshadow her eyes, so that she will not be able to see you. As soon as you enter, quickly take the weights off the clock; then call to the old woman, and beg her to answer your questions; whereupon she will instantly call her son to come and eat you up; but the clock upon which the old woman sits having lost its weights, her son cannot move, and she will therefore be obliged to tell you what you wish. But do not trust any oath she may make, unless she swear by the wings of her son. Then give faith to her, and do what she tells you, and you will be content." So saying, the poor old man fell down and crumbled away, like a dead body brought from a catacomb to the light of day. Then Cianna took the ashes, and mixing them with a pint of tears, she made a grave and buried them, praying Heaven to grant them quiet and repose. And ascending the mountain, till she was quite out of breath, she waited until Time came out, who was an old man with a long, long beard, and who wore a very old cloak covered with slips of paper, on which were worked the names of various people. He had large wings, and ran so fast that he was out of sight in an instant. When Cianna entered the house of his mother, she started with affright at the sight of that black old chip; and instantly seizing the weights of the clock, she told what she wanted to the old woman, who setting up a loud cry called to her son. But Cianna said to her, "You may butt your head against the wall as long as you like, for you will not see your son whilst I hold these clock-weights." Thereupon the old woman, seeing herself foiled, began to coax Cianna, saying, "Let go of them, my dear, and do not stop my son's course; for no man living has ever done that. Let go of them, and may Heaven preserve you! for I promise you by the aquafortis of my son, with which he corrodes everything, that I will do you no harm." "That's time lost," answered Cianna. "You must say something better if you would have me quit my hold." "I swear to you by those teeth which gnaw all mortal things, that I will tell you all you desire." "That is all nothing," answered Cianna; "for I know you are deceiving me." "Well then," said the old woman, "I swear to you by those wings which fly over all, that I will give you more pleasure than you imagine." Thereupon Cianna, letting go the weights, kissed the old woman's hand, which had a moldy feel and a musty smell. And the old woman, seeing the courtesy of the damsel, said to her, "Hide yourself behind this door, and when Time comes home I will make him tell me all you wish to know. And as soon as he goes out again, for he never stays quiet in one place, you can depart. But do not let yourself be heard or seen, for he is such a glutton that he does not spare even his own children; and when all fails, he devours himself, and then springs up anew." Cianna did as the old woman told her, and lo! soon after Time came flying quick, quick, high, and light, and having gnawed whatever came to hand, down to the very moldiness upon the walls, he was about to depart, when his mother told him all she had heard from Cianna, beseeching him to answer exactly all her questions. After a thousand entreaties her son replied, "To the tree may be answered, that it can never be prized by men so long as it keeps treasures buried under its roots To the mice, that they will never be safe from the cat, unless they tie a bell to her leg, to tell them when she is coming. To the ants, that they will live a hundred years, if they can dispense with flying; for when the ant is going to die she puts on wings. To the whale, that it should be of good cheer, and make friends with the sea-mouse, who will serve him as a guide, so that he will never go wrong. And to the doves, that when they alight on the column of wealth, they will return to their former state." So saying, Time set out to run his accustomed post; and Cianna, taking leave of the old woman, descended to the foot of the mountain, just at the very time that the seven doves, who had followed their sister's footsteps, arrived there. Wearied with flying so far, they stopped to rest upon the horn of a dead ox; and no sooner had they alighted, than they were changed into handsome youths, as they were at first. But while they were marveling at this, they heard the reply which Time had given, and saw at once that the horn, as the symbol of plenty, was the column of wealth of which Time had spoken. Then embracing their sister with great joy, they all set out on the same road by which Cianna had come. And when they came to the oak tree, and told it what Cianna had heard from Time, the tree begged them to take away the treasure from its roots, since it was the cause why its acorns had lost their reputation. Thereupon the seven brothers, taking a spade which they found in a garden, dug and dug, until they came to a great heap of gold money, which they divided into eight parts, and shared among themselves and their sister, so that they might carry it away conveniently. But being wearied with the journey and the load, they laid themselves down to sleep under a hedge. Presently a band of robbers coming by, and seeing the poor fellows asleep, with their heads upon the cloths full of dollars, bound them hand and foot to some trees, and took away the money, leaving them to bewail not only their wealth, which had slipped through their fingers as soon as found, but their life; for being without hope of succor, they were in peril of either soon dying of starvation or allaying the hunger of some wild beast. As they were lamenting their unhappy lot, up came the mouse, who, as soon as she heard the reply which Time had given, in return for the good service nibbled the cords with which they were bound and set them free. And having gone a little way farther they met on the road the ant, who, when she heard the advice of Time, asked Cianna what was the matter, that she was so pale-faced and cast down. And when Cianna told her their misfortune, and the trick which the robbers had played them, the ant replied, "Be quiet, I can now requite the kindness you have done me. You must know, that whilst I was carrying a load of grain underground, I saw a place where these dogs of assassins hide their plunder; they have made some holes under an old building, in which they shut up all the things they have stolen. They are just now gone out for some new robbery, and I will go with you and show you the place, so that you may recover your money." So saying she took the way toward some tumble-down houses, and showed the seven brothers the mouth of a pit; whereupon Giangrazio, who was bolder than the rest, entering it, found there all the money of which they had been robbed. Then taking it with them, they set out, and walked towards the seashore, where they found the whale, and told him the good advice which Time -- who is the father of counsel -- had given them. And whilst they stood talking of their journey, and all that had befallen them, they saw the robbers suddenly appear, armed to the teeth, who had followed in their footsteps. At this sight they exclaimed, "Alas, alas! we are now wholly lost, for here come the robbers armed, and they will not leave the skin on our bodies!" "Fear not," replied the whale," for I can save you out of the fire, and will thus requite the love you have shown me. So get upon my back, and I will quickly carry you to a place of safety." Cianna and her brothers, seeing the foe at their heels and the water up to their throat, climbed upon the whale, who, keeping far off from the rocks, carried them to within sight of Naples; but being afraid to land them on account of the shoals and shallows, he said, "Where would you like me to land you? On the shore of Amalfi? " And Giangrazio answered, "See whether that cannot be avoided, my dear fish; I do not wish to land at any place hereabouts; for at Massa they say barely good-day, at Sorrento thieves are plenty, at Vico they say you may go your way, at Castel-a-Mare no one says how are ye?" Then the whale, to please them, turned about and went toward the Salt-Rock, where he left them; and they got put on shore by the first fishing boat that passed. Thereupon they returned to their own country, safe and sound and rich, to the great joy and consolation of their mother and father; and, thanks to the goodness of Cianna, they enjoyed a happy life, verifying the old saying, Do good whenever you can, and forget it. Source: Giambattista Basile, The Pentamerone; or, The Story of Stories , translated from the Neapolitan by John Edward Taylor, new edition revised and edited by Helen Zimmern, with illustrations by George Cruikshank (New York: Macmillan and Company; London: T. Tisher Unwin, 1894), pp. 157-75 [day 4, story 8]. Giambattista Basile (ca 1575 - 1632) is best known for his collection of Neopolitan fairy tales titled Lo cunto de li cunti ( The Tale of Tales ), published postumously in 1634 and 1636, later renamed Il Pentamerone in recognition of its similarity in structure to Il Decameron by Giovanni Boccaccio (1313-1375). Return to the table of contents . The Curse of the Seven Children Italy There was once a king and a queen who had six children, all sons. The queen was about to give birth to another child, and the king said that if it was not a daughter all seven children would be cursed. Now it happened that the king had to go away to war; and before departing he said to the queen, "Listen. If you have a son, hang a lance out of the window; if a daughter, a distaff; so that I can see as soon as I arrive which it is." After the king had been gone a month, the queen gave birth to the most beautiful girl that was ever seen. Imagine how pleased the queen was at having a girl. She could scarcely contain herself for joy, and immediately gave orders to hang the distaff out of the window; but in the midst of the joyful confusion, a mistake was made, and they put out a lance. Shortly after, the king returned and saw the sign at the window, and cursed all his seven sons; but when he entered the house and the servants crowded around him to congratulate him and tell him about his beautiful daughter, then the king was amazed and became very melancholy. He entered the queen's room and looked at the child, who seemed exactly like one of those wax dolls to be kept in a box; then he looked about him and saw nothing of his sons, and his eyes filled with tears, for those poor youths had wandered out into the world. Meanwhile the girl grew, and when she was large she saw that her parents caressed her, but always with tears in their eyes. One day she said to her mother, "What is the matter with you, mother, that I always see you crying?" Then, the queen told her the story, and said that she was afraid that some day she would see her disappear too. When the girl heard how it was, what did she do? One night she rose softly and left the palace, with the intention of going to find her brothers. She walked and walked, and at last met a little old man, who said to her, "Where are you going at this time of the night?" She answered, "I am in search of my brothers." The old man said, "It will be difficult to find them, for you must not speak for seven years, seven months, seven weeks, seven days, seven hours, and seven minutes." She said, "I will try." Then she took a bit of paper which she found on the ground, wrote on it the day and the hour with a piece of charcoal, and left the old man and hastened on her way. After she had run a long time, she saw a light and went towards it, and when she was near it, she saw that it was over the door of a palace where a king lived. She entered and sat down on the stairway, and fell asleep. The servants came later to put out the light, and saw the pretty girl asleep on the stone steps; they awakened her, asking her what she was doing there. She began to make signs, asking them to give her a lodging. They understood her, and said they would ask the king. They returned shortly to tell her to enter, for the king wished to see her before she was shown to her room. When the king saw the beautiful girl, with hair like gold, flesh like milk and wine, teeth white as pearls, and little hands that an artist could not paint as beautiful as they were, he suddenly imagined that she must be the daughter of some lord, and gave orders that she should be treated with all possible respect. They showed her to a beautiful room; then a maid came and undressed her and put her to bed. Next morning, Diana, for so she was called, arose, saw a frame with a piece of embroidery in it, and began to work at it. The king visited her, and asked if she needed anything, and she made signs that she did not. The king was so pleased with the young girl that he ended by falling in love with her, and after a year had passed he thought of marrying her. The queen mother, who was an envious person, was not content with the match, because, said she, no one knows where she came from, and, besides, she is dumb, something that would make people wonder if a king should marry her. But the king was so obstinate that he married her; and when his mother saw that there was no help, she pretended to be satisfied. Shortly after, the queen mother put into the king's hands a letter which informed him of an imminent war, in which, if he did not take part, he would run the risk of losing his realm. The king went to the war, in fact, with great grief at leaving his wife; and before departing, he commended her earnestly to his mother, who said, "Do not be anxious, my son, I shall do all that I can to make her happy." The king embraced his wife and mother, and departed. Scarcely had the king gone when the queen mother sent for a mason, and made him build a wall near the kitchen sink, so that it formed a sort of box. Now you must know that Diana expected soon to become a mother, and this afforded the queen mother a pretext to write to her son that his wife had died in giving birth to a child. She took her and put her in the wall she had had built, where there was neither light nor air, and where the wicked woman hoped that she would die. But it was not so. The scullion went every day to wash the dishes at the sink near where poor Diana was buried alive. While attending to his business, he heard a lamentation, and listened to see where it could come from. He listened and listened, until at last he perceived that the voice came from the wall that had been newly built. What did he do then? He made a hole in the wall, and saw that the queen was there. The scullion asked how she came there; but she only made signs that she was about to give birth to a child. The poor scullion had his wife make a fine cushion, on which Diana reposed as well as she could, and gave birth to the most beautiful boy that could be seen. The scullion's wife went to see her every moment, and carried her broth, and cared for the child; in short, this poor woman, as well as her husband, did everything she could to alleviate the poor queen, who tried to make them understand by signs what she needed. One day it came into Diana's head to look into her memorandum book and see how long she still had to keep silent, and she saw that only two minutes yet remained. As soon as they had passed, she told the scullion all that had happened. At that moment the king arrived, and the scullion drew the queen from out the hole, and showed her to the king. You can imagine how delighted he was to see again his Diana, whom he believed to be dead. He embraced her, and kissed her and the child; in short, such was his joy that it seemed as if he would go mad. Diana related everything to him: why she had left her home, and why she had played dumb so long, and finally how she had been treated by the queen mother, and what she had suffered, and how kind those poor people had been to her. When he had heard all this, he said, "Leave the matter to me; I will arrange it." The next day the king invited all the nobles and princes of his realm to a great banquet. Now it happened that in setting the tables the servants laid six plates besides the others; and when the guests sat down, six handsome youths entered, who advanced and asked what should be given to a sister who had done so and so for her brothers. Then the king sprang up and said, "And I ask what shall be done to a mother who did so and so to her son's wife?" and he explained everything. One said, "Burn her alive." Another, "Put her in the pillory." Another, "Fry her in oil in the public square." This was agreed to. The youths had been informed by that same old man whom Diana had met, and who was a magician, where their sister was and what she had done for them. Then they made themselves known, and embraced Diana and their brother-in-law the king, and after the greatest joy, they all started off to see their parents. Imagine the satisfaction of the king and queen at seeing again all their seven children. They gave the warmest reception to the king, Diana's husband, and after they had spent some days together, Diana returned with her husband to their city. And all lived there afterward in peace and contentment. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 11, pp. 54-57 . Return to the table of contents . The Bewitched Brothers Romania Once upon a time there was such a famine in the land that the people lived on grass and even on sawdust, and were dying of hunger in untold numbers. At that time there lived a widow who had managed to husband a little flour. When she found that nothing else was left to her she took that flour and mixing it with water kneaded it into dough. Then she lit the furnace and got a shovel to put the dough on it and thence into the furnace to bake. This woman had two sons and one daughter. The two boys came in just at the moment when the loaves of dough were on the shovel. They were so hungry that they did not wait for the dough to be baked, and before their mother had time to put the shovel into the oven they got hold of the dough, raw and uncooked as it was, and ate it up to the smallest bit. They did not leave even a little piece for their mother and sister. When the mother saw the terrible greediness of her children, and that they ate the raw stuff and did not leave even a small piece for her or their sister, she cursed them and said, "May you be cursed by God and be changed into two birds; may you haunt the highest peaks of the mountains; may you never be able to eat bread even when you see it, because you did not leave any for me this day." No sooner had the boys gone out of the house than they were changed into two huge eagles, who, spreading their wings, flew away to the ends of the earth, no one knowing whither they had gone. A short time afterwards their sister, who had not been at home when all this had happened, came in, and she asked the mother where her brothers were. Her mother did not tell her what had happened, and said that the brothers, finding it was impossible for them to live any longer here, had gone out into the wide world to live by their own earnings. When the girl heard this she wept, and said, "If that be so, then I will also go out into the wide world, and will seek my brothers until I find them," and would not listen to the words of her mother, who wanted to keep her back. She said good-bye and departed, and traveled on and on for a long time, until she came to the ends of the earth, where the sun and moon no longer shone, and the days were dark. So she fell a-praying, and said, "I have gone in search of my brothers; O God, help me," and as she turned round she saw a forest full of high trees which she had not noticed before, and she said to herself, "I will go into that forest; I am sure nothing will happen to me," and so she did. She went into the forest not knowing where she was going. In the midst of it she saw a beautiful meadow full of singing birds, and there was a huge castle surrounded by thick walls and closed by a gate with six locks. At the entrance of the gate there were two huge monsters. She was very frightened. Still she watched until these monsters had fallen asleep, and then slipping past them she entered the gates. There she was met by a fox, who said to her, "What has brought thee hither into this the other world from the world outside? I fear our master will eat you up. As soon as he comes home he will swallow you." Still she went on, and on entering the house she met the mistress of the house, who asked her the same question, and she told her what had happened to her from the beginning to the end, and that she had gone out into the wide world to seek for her lost brothers. When the mistress heard her tale she took pity on her, and taking her into the innermost chamber she hid he there, and then went to await the homecoming of the master. About midday, when the sun stands on the crossways of heaven, there was a great noise in the house; the place shook, for the master had come, and he was none other than a huge lion. At table, the mistress said to him, "O my master, thou hast always been so good to me; I ask you to be once more good and kind; promise me." And he promised, and asked her her request. She told him what had happened to that girl, and said that she had come there from the other world in search of her brothers. The lion called the young girl, who was greatly frightened, and she told him again all that had happened to her. He then said, "I will call together all my subjects and ask them whether they have seen your brothers passing by this way, or whether meeting them they have eaten them." So he called from far and near all the animals who were in his dominion, and he asked them about the brothers. But they all said that these had never passed through the land, and they had neither seen them nor eaten them. So the lion told her to go on. She went on and came to another forest, very big and dark, and waling for a time in it she came to another meadow full of birds singing so beautifully that you could not hear enough of them, and there in the midst was a house deep down in the ground with a thatched roof. The girl went in the house, and there was an old woman sitting on the oven. "May God help you," said the young girl, and the old woman replied, "Welcome, my daughter, what has brought you here into this part of the world never yet trodden by human foot?" And the girl told her that she had left her mother's house and gone in search of her brothers. The woman said, "Your brothers are alive, but they are under a spell, for they have been charmed into huge birds, and they live yonder in the castle on that steep mountain. If you can reach that place you will be able to see your brothers." Full of joy at these tidings, the girl went to the mountain and found that it was a bare, steep, high cliff with little patches of grass here and there, just the place for eagles' nests. taking courage, she started climbing up, and after endless toil reached the top. There she saw a huge palace surrounded by iron walls, and going inside she saw a room; the table was set and food was on the table. As she was very hungry, she went round the table and took a bit from every dish. Then she hid herself, watching to see what would happen. She had not to wait very long, for soon two huge eagles came from the depths of heaven. They entered and sat down at the table and began to eat their meal. Suddenly one of them said to the other, "Halloo, someone must have been here, for I see that my food has been nibbled." The other said, "It is impossible for anyone to come here," and took no further notice of it. On the second day they noticed that once again some of their food had been eaten again, and so on the third day, when more of it had been eaten. So they started hunting through the house to find out who was hidden there, for surely someone must have come to eat the food. After a long search they found the girl huddled up in a small room. As soon as they saw her they recognized her as their sister, and taking her into the large hall they asked her what had happened and what had brought her to them. She told them all that had happened to her, and how she had been through the forest and climbed up the mountain, and that she was now there with them. The brothers then said to her, "We are under a spell; mother has cursed us. We have now been changed into birds of prey; but if you will stay here for six years and not speak a single word, that will save us; the spell will be broken, and we shall again be human beings." The girl promised to do all they wished, as the old woman whom she had met before had told her that she was to do whatever her brothers would wish he to do. And there she remained. Her brothers spread their wings and flew away. Five years had passed, the girl no seeing anything of them, and not speaking all the time. After that time she said to herself, "What is the good of my sitting here and keeping silent when none of them have come; perchance they are dead, or who know what has happened?" No sooner had she opened her mouth and spoken a word when in came her two brothers, and said to her mournfully, "Thou hast not kept thy vow, thou hast broken thy promise, thou hast spoken! If thou wouldst have waited one more year we would have become human beings, and the spell would have been broken. Now we are cursed forever. We must remain eagles and birds of prey." And so they have remained to this day, preying on birds and beasts, living on raw meat, never being able to touch bread, and even picking up children under six years of age, the years which their sister had to wait in order to break the spell. Source: M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 77, pp. 231-35 . Gaster's full title for this story is "Why Does the Eagle Live on Raw Meat? The Story of the Bewitched Brothers." Return to the table of contents . The Twelve Brothers Germany Once upon a time there was a king who had twelve children, all boys. He also wanted to have a girl and said to the queen, "If our thirteenth child, which you are soon going to bring to the world, is a girl, then I shall have the twelve others killed, but if it is also a boy, then they may all live together." The queen tried to dissuade him, but the king would not listen to her. "If it happens as I said, then they must die. I would rather strike off their heads myself than to have a girl among them." This saddened the queen, for she loved her sons greatly and did not know how to save them. Finally she went to the youngest one, whom she loved even more than the others, and revealed to him what the king had decided, saying, "Dear child, go out into the forest with your eleven brothers. Stay there and do not return home. One of you must keep watch from a tree and look toward the tower here. If I bring a little son into the world, then I shall fly a white flag from the top of the tower, but if it is a little daughter, then it shall be a red flag. Then you must save yourselves by fleeing into the world, and may God protect you. I will get up every night and pray for you, in the cold of winter that you may not freeze and that a warm fire may be burning before you, and in the heat of summer that you may rest and sleep in a cool forest." Thus she blessed her children, and they went forth into the forest. They often looked toward the tower, and one of them always had to sit high in a tall oak tree and keep watch. Soon a flag was raised, but it was not the white one, but rather the red-blood flag that threatened their destruction. When the boys saw it they became angry and cried out, "Are we to lose our lives for the sake of a girl!" Then they swore among themselves to remain in the middle of the forest, and whenever they might happen upon a girl, they would kill her without mercy. They found a cave in the darkest part of the forest, and there they lived. Every morning eleven of them set forth to hunt, but one of them had to stay at home to cook and keep house. Every girl that the eleven came upon was done away with without mercy. And so it was for many years. The little sister at home grew up as an only child. One day she discovered twelve men's shirts in the wash. "Whose shirts are these?" asked the princess. "They are much too small for my father." Then the washerwoman told her that she had had twelve brothers who had secretly left home because the king had wanted to have them killed, and no one knew where they now were. The twelve shirts belonged to these twelve brothers. The little sister was amazed that she had never heard anything of her twelve brothers. That afternoon she sat in a meadow bleaching the wash and pondering the words of the washerwoman. Finally she stood up, took the twelve shirts, and walked into the forest where her brothers lived. The little sister came to the cave where they lived. Eleven were out hunting, and only one of them was at home doing the cooking. When he saw the girl he grabbed her and reached for his sword, saying, "Kneel down! Your red blood will flow this instant!" "Master, let me live!" she begged. "I will stay here and serve you well. I will cook and keep house." Now this was the youngest brother, and the girl's beauty softened him, and he spared her life. The eleven returned home and were amazed to find a live girl in their cave. He said to them, "Brothers, this girl came to our cave. I was about to strike her down, but she begged so fervently for her life, and agreed to serve us faithfully and to keep house for us, so I spared her." The others agreed that this was to their advantage, and that now all twelve would be able to go out hunting, and they were satisfied. Then she showed them the twelve shirts and said that she was their sister. They rejoiced and were happy that they had not killed her. The little sister took over the household. While the brothers were out hunting, she gathered wood and herbs, tended the fire, made the clean, white beds, and did everything eagerly and well. One day it happened that when she was finished with her work she went for a walk in the woods. She came to a place where there were twelve tall white lilies, and because she liked them so much, she plucked them all. This had scarcely happened when an old woman appeared before her. "Oh, my daughter," she said. "Why didn't you leave the twelve flowers standing? They are your twelve brothers, who have now been transformed into ravens and are lost forever." The little sister began to cry. "Oh!" she said. "Is there no way to redeem them?" "No, there is only one way in the world, and it is so difficult that you will never succeed. You must remain silent for twelve whole years. If you speak a single word, even if all but one hour has passed, then it will all be for nothing, and your brothers will die that instant." The little sister took a seat high in a tall tree in the forest where she would spin in silence for twelve years and thus redeem her brothers. One day a king was hunting in this forest. His dog stopped at the tree and barked. The king halted, looked up, and was amazed at the princess's beauty. He called to her, asking her if she would become his wife. She remained silent, but nodded a little with her head. The king himself climbed up and lifted her down, set her before him on his horse, and took her home to his castle, where their wedding was celebrated with splendor. The princess never spoke a word, and the king thought that she was a mute. They would have lived happily together if it had not been for the king's mother, who began to slander her to him, "You have brought home a common beggar girl, and behind your back she is doing the most unspeakable things." Because the queen could not defend herself, the king was led into believing his mother, and finally he had his wife sentenced to death. A large fire was set in the courtyard where she was to be burned to death. She was already standing in the fire, with the flames jumping at her dress when the last minutes of the twelve years elapsed. There was a rushing sound in the air, and twelve ravens came flying down and landed. When they touched the earth they turned into twelve handsome princes, who scattered the fire about, and pulled out their sister. Then she spoke once again, telling the king everything, how she had had to redeem her twelve brothers, and they all rejoiced that everything turned out so well. But what should they do with the wicked stepmother? She was thrown into a barrel filled with boiling oil and poisonous snakes, and died a miserable death. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die zwölf Brüder," Kinder- und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm [Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales], 7th ed., vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterischen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 9, pp. 48-53 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2012. The young queen's "unspeakable" acts are specified in less inhibited versions of this episode. They include, in some instances, cannibalizing her own newborn children, and in others, giving birth to animals. Return to the table of contents . The Seven Ravens Germany A man had seven sons, but however much he wished for a daughter, he did not have one yet. Finally his wife gave him hope for another child, and when it came into the world it was indeed a girl. Great was their joy, but the child was sickly and small, and because of her weakness, she was to be given an emergency baptism. The father sent one of the boys to run quickly to the well and get some water for the baptism. The other six ran along with him. Because each one of them wanted to be first one to dip out the water, the jug fell into the well. There they stood not knowing what to do, and not one of them dared to go home. When they did not return the father grew impatient, and said, "They have forgotten what they went after because they were playing, those godless boys." Fearing that the girl would die without being baptized, he cried out in anger, "I wish that those boys would all turn into ravens." He had hardly spoken these words when he heard a whirring sound above his head, and looking up, he saw seven coal-black ravens flying up and away. The parents could not take back the curse, and however sad they were at the loss of their seven sons, they were still somewhat comforted because of their dear little daughter, who soon gained strength and became more beautiful every day. For a long time she did not know that she had had brothers, for her parents took care not to mention them to her. However, one day she accidentally overheard some people talking about her. They said that she was beautiful enough, but that in truth she was to blame for her seven brothers' misfortune. This troubled her greatly, and she went to her father and mother and asked them if she indeed had had brothers, and what had happened to them. Her parents could no longer keep the secret, but said that it had been heaven's fate, and that her birth had been only the innocent cause. However, this ate at the girl's conscience every day, and she came to believe that she would have to redeem her brothers. She had neither rest nor peace until she secretly set forth and went out into the wide world, hoping to find her brothers and to set them free, whatever it might cost. She took nothing with her but a little ring as a remembrance from her parents, a loaf of bread for hunger, a little jug of water for thirst, and a little chair for when she got tired. She walked on and on -- far, far to the end of the world. She came to the sun, but it was too hot and terrible, and ate little children. She hurried away, and ran to the moon, but it was much too cold, and also frightening and wicked, and when it saw the child, it said, "I smell, smell human flesh." Then she hurried away, and came to the stars, and they were friendly and good to her, each one sitting on its own little chair. When the morning star arose, it gave her a chicken bone, and said, "Without that chicken bone you cannot open the glass mountain, and your brothers are inside the glass mountain." The girl took the bone, wrapped it up well in a cloth, and went on her way again until she came to the glass mountain. The door was locked, and she started to take out the chicken bone, but when she opened up the cloth, it was empty. She had lost the gift of the good stars. What could she do now? She wanted to rescue her brothers, but she had no key to the glass mountain. The good little sister took a knife, cut off one of her little fingers, put it into the door, and fortunately the door opened. After she had gone inside a little dwarf came up to her and said, "My child, what are you looking for?" "I am looking for my brothers, the seven ravens," she replied. The dwarf said, "The lord ravens are not at home, but if you want to wait here until they return, step inside." Then the dwarf carried in the ravens' dinner on seven little plates, and in seven little cups. The sister ate a little bit from each plate and took a little sip from each cup. Into the last cup she dropped the ring that she had brought with her. Suddenly she heard a whirring and rushing sound in the air, and the dwarf said, "The lord ravens are flying home now." They came, wanted to eat and drink, and looked for their plates and cups. Then one after the other of them said, "Who has been eating from my plate? Who has been drinking from my cup? It was a human mouth." When the seventh one came to the bottom of his cup, the ring rolled toward him. Looking at it, he saw that it was a ring from their father and mother, and said, "God grant that our sister might be here; then we would be set free." The girl was listening from behind the door, and when she heard this wish she came forth. Then the ravens were restored to their human forms again. They hugged and kissed one another, and went home happily. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die sieben Raben," Kinder- und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm [Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales], 7th ed., vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterischen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 25, pp. 137-39 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2002. The Grimms' source: The Hassenpflug family, and others. This tale was included, with the title "Die drei Raben" (The Three Ravens), in the first edition of the Kinder- und Hausmärchen (1812). It was retitled and substantially rewritten for the second edition (1819). Only small stylistic changes were introduced in succeeding editions. Return to the table of contents . The Six Swans Germany A king was once hunting in a great forest, and he chased his prey so eagerly that none of his men could follow him. As evening approached he stopped and looked around, and saw that he was lost. He looked for a way out of the woods, but he could not find one. Then he saw an old woman with a bobbing head who approached him. She was a witch. "My dear woman," he said to her, "can you show me the way through the woods?" "Oh, yes, your majesty," she answered, "I can indeed. However, there is one condition, and if you do not fulfill it, you will never get out of these woods, and will die here of hunger." "What sort of condition is it?" asked the king. "I have a daughter," said the old woman, "who is as beautiful as anyone you could find in all the world, and who well deserves to become your wife. If you will make her your queen, I will show you the way out of the woods." The king was so frightened that he consented, and the old woman led him to her cottage, where her daughter was sitting by the fire. She received the king as if she had been expecting him. He saw that she was very beautiful, but in spite of this he did not like her, and he could not look at her without secretly shuddering. After he had lifted the girl onto his horse, the old woman showed him the way, and the king arrived again at his royal castle, where the wedding was celebrated. The king had been married before, and by his first wife he had seven children, six boys and one girl. He loved them more than anything else in the world. Fearing that the stepmother might not treat them well, even do them harm, he took them to a secluded castle which stood in the middle of a forest. It was so well hidden, and the way was so difficult to find, that he himself would not have found it, if a wise woman had not given him a ball of magic yarn. Whenever he threw it down in front of him, it would unwind itself and show him the way. However, the king went out to his dear children so often that the queen took notice of his absence. She was curious and wanted to know what he was doing out there all alone in the woods. She gave a large sum of money to his servants, and they revealed the secret to her. They also told her about the ball of yarn which could point out the way all by itself. She did not rest until she discovered where the king kept the ball of yarn. Then she made some little shirts of white silk. Having learned the art of witchcraft from her mother, she sewed a magic charm into each one of them. Then one day when the king had ridden out hunting, she took the little shirts and went into the woods. The ball of yarn showed her the way. The children, seeing that someone was approaching from afar, thought that their dear father was coming to them. Full of joy, they ran to meet him. Then she threw one of the shirts over each of them, and when the shirts touched their bodies they were transformed into swans, and they flew away over the woods. The queen went home very pleased, believing that she had gotten rid of her stepchildren. However, the girl had not run out with her brothers, and the queen knew nothing about her. The next day the king went to visit his children, but he found no one there but the girl. "Where are your brothers?" asked the king. "Oh, dear father," she answered, "they have gone away and left me alone." Then she told him that from her window she had seen how her brothers had flown away over the woods as swans. She showed him the feathers that they had dropped into the courtyard, and which she had gathered up. The king mourned, but he did not think that the queen had done this wicked deed. Fearing that the girl would be stolen away from him as well, he wanted to take her away with him, but she was afraid of her stepmother and begged the king to let her stay just this one more night in the castle in the woods. The poor girl thought, "I can no longer stay here. I will go and look for my brothers." And when night came she ran away and went straight into the woods. She walked the whole night long without stopping, and the next day as well, until she was too tired to walk any further. Then she saw a hunter's hut and went inside. She found a room with six little beds, but she did not dare to get into one of them. Instead she crawled under one of them and lay down on the hard ground where she intended to spend the night. The sun was about to go down when she heard a rushing sound and saw six swans fly in through the window. Landing on the floor, they blew on one another, and blew all their feathers off. Then their swan-skins came off just like shirts. The girl looked at them and recognized her brothers. She was happy and crawled out from beneath the bed. The brothers were no less happy to see their little sister, but their happiness did not last long. "You cannot stay here," they said to her. "This is a robbers' den. If they come home and find you, they will murder you." "Can't you protect me?" asked the little sister. "No," they answered. "We can take off our swan-skins for only a quarter hour each evening. Only during that time do we have our human forms. After that we are again transformed into swans." Crying, the little sister said, "Can you not be redeemed?" "Alas, no," they answered. "The conditions are too difficult. You would not be allowed to speak or to laugh for six years, and in that time you would have to sew together six little shirts from asters for us. And if a single word were to come from your mouth, all your work would be lost." After the brothers had said this, the quarter hour was over, and they flew out the window again as swans. Nevertheless, the girl firmly resolved to redeem her brothers, even if it should cost her her life. She left the hunter's hut, went to the middle of the woods, seated herself in a tree, and there spent the night. The next morning she went out and gathered asters and began to sew. She could not speak with anyone, and she had no desire to laugh. She sat there, looking only at her work. After she had already spent a long time there it happened that the king of the land was hunting in these woods. His huntsmen came to the tree where the girl was sitting. They called to her, saying, "Who are you?" But she did not answer. "Come down to us," they said. "We will not harm you." She only shook her head. When they pressed her further with questions, she threw her golden necklace down to them, thinking that this would satisfy them. But they did not stop, so she then threw her belt down to them, and when this did not help, her garters, and then -- one thing at a time -- everything that she had on and could do without, until finally she had nothing left but her shift. The huntsmen, however, not letting themselves be dissuaded, climbed the tree, lifted the girl down, and took her to the king. The king asked, "Who are you? What are you doing in that tree?" But she did not answer. He asked her in every language that he knew, but she remained as speechless as a fish. Because she was so beautiful, the king's heart was touched, and he fell deeply in love with her. He put his cloak around her, lifted her onto his horse in front of himself, and took her to his castle. There he had her dressed in rich garments, and she glistened in her beauty like bright daylight, but no one could get a word from her. At the table he seated her by his side, and her modest manners and courtesy pleased him so much that he said, "My desire is to marry her, and no one else in the world." A few days later they were married. Now the king had a wicked mother who was dissatisfied with this marriage and spoke ill of the young queen. "Who knows," she said, "where the girl who cannot speak comes from? She is not worthy of a king." A year later, after the queen had brought her first child into the world, the old woman took it away from her while she was asleep, and smeared her mouth with blood. Then she went to the king and accused her of being a cannibal. The king could not believe this, and would not allow anyone to harm her. She, however, sat the whole time sewing on the shirts, and caring for nothing else. The next time, when she again gave birth to a beautiful boy, the deceitful mother-in-law did the same thing again, but the king could not bring himself to believe her accusations. He said, "She is too pious and good to do anything like that. If she were not speechless, and if she could defend herself, her innocence would come to light." But when the old woman stole away a newly born child for the third time, and accused the queen, who did not defend herself with a single word, the king had no choice but to bring her to justice, and she was sentenced to die by fire. When the day came for the sentence to be carried out, it was also the last day of the six years during which she had not been permitted to speak or to laugh, and she had thus delivered her dear brothers from the magic curse. The six shirts were finished. Only the left sleeve of the last one was missing. When she was led to the stake, she laid the shirts on her arm. Standing there, as the fire was about to be lighted, she looked around, and six swans came flying through the air. Seeing that their redemption was near, her heart leapt with joy. The swans rushed towards her, swooping down so that she could throw the shirts over them. As soon as the shirts touched them their swan-skins fell off, and her brothers stood before her in their own bodies, vigorous and handsome. However, the youngest was missing his left arm. In its place he had a swan's wing. They embraced and kissed one another. Then the queen went to the king, who was greatly moved, and she began to speak, saying, "Dearest husband, now I may speak and reveal to you that I am innocent, and falsely accused." Then she told him of the treachery of the old woman who had taken away their three children and hidden them. Then to the king's great joy they were brought forth. As a punishment, the wicked mother-in-law was tied to the stake and burned to ashes. But the king and the queen with her six brothers lived many long years in happiness and peace. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die sechs Schwäne," Kinder- und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm [Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales], 7th ed., vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterischen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 49, pp. 245-50 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2002. The Grimms' source: Dorothea (Dortchen) Wild (1795-1867). This tale was included in the first edition of the Kinder- und Hausmärchen (1812). It was substantially rewritten for the second edition (1819). Only small stylistic changes were introduced in succeeding editions. Return to the table of contents . The Twelve Wild Ducks Norway Once on a time there was a queen who was out driving, when there had been a new fall of snow in the winter; but when she had gone a little way, she began to bleed at the nose, and had to get out of her sledge. And so, as she stood there, leaning against the fence, and saw the red blood on the white snow, she fell a thinking how she had twelve sons and no daughter, and she said to herself, "If I only had a daughter as white as snow and as red as blood, I shouldn't care what became of all my sons." But the words were scarce out of her mouth before an old witch of the trolls came up to her. "A daughter you shall have," she said, "and she shall be as white as snow and as red as blood; and your sons shall be mine, but you may keep them till the babe is christened." So when the time came the queen had a daughter, and she was as white as snow, and as red as blood, just as the troll had promised, and so they called her "Snow-White and Rosy-Red." Well, there was great joy at the king's court, and the queen was as glad as glad could be; but when what she had promised to the old witch came into her mind, she sent for a silversmith, and bade him make twelve silver spoons, one for each prince, and after that she bade him make one more, and that she gave to Snow-White and Rosy-Red. But as soon as ever the princess was christened, the princes were turned into twelve wild ducks, and flew away. They never saw them again. Away they went, and away they stayed. So the princess grew up, and she was both tall and fair, but she was often so strange and sorrowful, and no one could understand what it was that ailed her. But one evening, the queen was also sorrowful, for she had many strange thoughts when she thought of her sons. She said to Snow-White and Rosy-Red, "Why are you so sorrowful, my daughter? Is there anything you want? If so, only say the word, and you shall have it." "Oh, it seems so dull and lonely here," said Snow-White and Rosy-Red." Everyone else has brothers and sisters, but I am all alone; I have none; and that's why I'm so sorrowful." "But you had brothers, my daughter," said the queen. "I had twelve sons who were your brothers, but I gave them all away to get you." And so she told her the whole story. So when the princes heard that, she had no rest; for, in spite of all the queen could say or do, and all she wept and prayed, the lassie would set off to seek her brothers, for she thought it was all her fault; and at last she got leave to go away from the palace. On and on she walked into the wide world, so far, yon would never have thought a young lady could have strength to walk so far. So, once, when she was walking through a great, great wood, one day she felt tired, and sat down on a mossy tuft and fell asleep. Then she dreamt that she went deeper and deeper into the wood, till she came to a little wooden hut, and there she found her brothers; just then she woke, and straight before her she saw a worn path in the green moss, and this path went deeper into the wood; so she followed it, and after a long time she came to just such a little wooden house as that she had seen in her dream. Now, when she went into the room there was no one at home, but there stood twelve beds, and twelve chairs, and twelve spoons -- a dozen of everything, in short. So when she saw that she was so glad, she hadn't been so glad for many a long year, for she could guess at once that her brothers lived here, and that they owned the beds, and chairs, and spoons. So she began to make up the fire, and sweep the room, and make the beds, and cook the dinner, and to make the house as tidy as she could; and when she had done all the cooking and work, she ate her own dinner, and crept under her youngest brother's bed, and lay down there, but she forgot her spoon upon the table. So she had scarcely laid herself down before she heard something flapping and whirring in the air, and so all the twelve wild ducks came sweeping in; but as soon as they crossed over the threshold they became princes. "Oh, how nice and warm it is in here," they said. "Heaven bless him who made up the fire, and cooked such a good dinner for us." And so each took up his silver spoon and was going to eat. But when each had taken his own there was one still left lying on the table, and it was so like the rest that they couldn't tell it from them. "This is our sister's spoon," they said; "and if her spoon be here, she can't be very far off herself." "If this be our sister's spoon, and she be here," said the eldest, "she shall be killed, for she is to blame for all the ill we suffer." And this she lay under the bed and listened to. "No" said the youngest; "'twere a shame to kill her for that. She has nothing to do with our suffering ill; for if any one's to blame, it's our own mother." So they set to work hunting for her both high and low, and at last they looked under all the beds, and so when they came to the youngest prince's bed, they found her, and dragged her out. Then the eldest prince wished again to have her killed, but she begged and prayed so prettily for herself. "Oh! gracious goodness! don't kill me, for I've gone about seeking you these three years, and if I could only set you free, I'd willingly lose my life." "Well! "said they, "if you will set us free, you may keep your life; for you can if you choose." "Yes; only tell me," said the princess, "how it can be done, and I'll do it, whatever it be." "You must pick thistledown," said the princes, "and you must card it, and spin it, and weave it; and after you have done that, you must cut out and make twelve coats, and twelve shirts, and twelve neckerchiefs, one for each of us, and while you do that, you must neither talk, nor laugh, nor weep. If you can do that, we are free." "But where shall I ever get thistle-down enough for so many neckerchiefs, and shirts, and coats? " asked Snow-White and Rosy-Red. "We'll soon show you," said the princes. And so they took her with them to a great wide moor, where there stood such a crop of thistles, all nodding and nodding in the breeze, and the down all floating and glistening like gossamers through the air in the sunbeams. The princess had never seen such a quantity of thistledown in her life, and she began to pluck and gather it as fast and as well as she could; and when she got home at night she set to work carding and spinning yarn from the down. So she went on a long long time, picking, and carding, and spinning, and all the while keeping the princes' house, cooking, and making their beds. At evening home they came, flapping and whirring like wild ducks, and all night they were princes, but in the morning off they flew again, and were wild ducks the whole day. But now it happened once, when she was out on the moor to pick thistledown -- and if I don't mistake, it was the very last time she was to go thither -- it happened that the young king who ruled that land was out hunting, and came riding across the moor and saw her. So he stopped there and wondered who the lovely lady could be that walked along the moor picking thistledown, and he asked her her name, and when he could get no answer, he was still more astonished. And at last he liked her so much, that nothing would do but he must take her home to his castle and marry her. So he ordered his servants to take her and put her up on his horse. Snow-White and Rosy-Red, she wrung her hands, and made signs to them, and pointed to the bags in which her work was, and when the king saw she wished to have them with her, he told his men to take up the bags behind them. When they had done that the princess came to herself, little by little, for the king was both a wise man and a handsome man too, and he was as soft and kind to her as a doctor. But when they got home to the palace, and the old queen, who was his stepmother, set eyes on Snow-White and Rosy-Red, she got so cross and jealous of her because she was so lovely, that she said to the king, "Can't you see now, that this thing whom you have picked up, and whom you are going to many, is a witch. Why, she can't either talk, or laugh, or weep!" But the king didn't care a pin for what she said, but held on with the wedding, and married Snow-White and Rosy-Red, and they lived in great joy and glory; but she didn't forget to go on sewing at her shirts. So when the year was almost out, Snow-White and Rosy-Red brought a prince into the world, and then the old queen was more spiteful and jealous than ever, and at dead of night, she stole in to Snow-White and Rosy-Red, while she slept, and took away her babe, and threw it into a pit full of snakes. After that she cut Snow-White and Rosy-Red in her finger, and smeared the blood over her mouth, and went straight to the king. "Now come and see," she said, "what sort of a thing you have taken for your queen; here she has eaten up her own babe." Then the king was so downcast, he almost burst into tears, and said, "Yes, it must be true, sure I see it with my own eyes; but she'll not do it again, I'm sure, and so this time I'll spare her life." So before the next year was out she had another son, and the same thing happened. The king's stepmother got more and more jealous and spiteful. She stole in to the young queen at night while she slept, took away the babe, and threw it into a pit full of snakes, cut the young queen's finger, and smeared the blood over her mouth, and then went and told the king she had eaten up her own child. Then the king was so sorrowful, you can't think how sorry he was, and he said, "Yes, it must be true, since I see it with my own eyes; but she'll not do it again, I'm sure, and so this time too I'll spare her life." Well! before the next year was out, Snow-White and Rosy-Red brought a daughter into the world, and her, too, the old queen took and threw into the pit full of snakes, while the young queen slept. Then she cut her finger, smeared the blood over her mouth, and went again to the king and said, " Now you may come and see if it isn't as I say; she's a wicked, wicked witch for here she has gone and eaten up her third babe too." Then the king was so sad, there was no end to it, for now he couldn't spare her any longer, but had to order her to be burnt alive on a pile of wood. But just when the pile was all ablaze, and they were going to put her on it, she made signs to them to take twelve boards and lay them round the pile, and on these she laid the neckerchiefs, and the shirts, and the coats for her brothers, but the youngest brother's shirt wanted its left arm, for she hadn't had time to finish it. And as soon as ever she had done that, they heard such a flapping and whirring in the air, and down came twelve wild ducks flying over the forest, and each of them snapped up his clothes in his bill and flew off with them. "See now! " said the old queen to the king, "Wasn't I right when I told you she was a witch; but make haste and burn her before the pile burns low." "Oh!" said the king, "We've wood enough and to spare, and so I'll wait a bit, for I have a mind to see what the end of all this will be." As he spoke up came the twelve princes riding along, as handsome well-grown lads as you'd wish to see; but the youngest prince had a wild duck's wing instead of his left arm. "What's all this about?" asked the princes. "My queen is to be burnt," said the king, "because she's a witch, and because she has eaten up her own babes." "She hasn't eaten them at all," said the princes. "Speak now, sister. You have set us free and saved us, now save yourself." Then Snow-White and Rosy-Red spoke, and told the whole story; how every time she was brought to bed, the old queen, the king's stepmother, had stolen into her at night, and taken her babes away, and cut her little finger, and smeared the blood over her mouth. And then the princes took the king, and showed him the snake pit where three babes lay playing with adders and toads, and lovelier children you never saw. So the king had them taken out at once, and went to his stepmother, and asked her what punishment she thought that woman deserved who could find it in her heart to betray a guiltless queen and three such blessed little babes. "She deserves to be fast bound between twelve unbroken steeds, so that each may take his share of her," said the old queen. "You have spoken your own doom," said the king, "and you shall suffer it at once." So the wicked old queen was fast bound between twelve unbroken steeds, and each got his share of her. But the king took Snow-White and Rosy-Red, and their three children, and the twelve princes; and so they all went home to their father and mother, and told all that had befallen them, and there was joy and gladness over the whole kingdom, because the princess was saved and set free, and because she had set free her twelve brothers. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), pp. 423-32 . Link to the original Norwegian text: De tolv villender . Return to the table of contents . The Little Sister: The Story of Suyettar and the Nine Brothers Finland There was once a woman who had nine sons. They were good boys and loved her dearly but there was one thing about which they were always complaining. "Why haven't we a little sister?" they kept asking. "Do give us a little sister!" When the time came that another child was to be born, they said to their mother, "If the baby is a boy we are going away and you will never see us again, but if it is a little girl then we shall stay home and take care of it." The mother agreed that if the child were a girl she would have her husband put a spindle outside on the gatepost and, if it were a boy, an ax. "Just wait," she said, "and see what your father puts on the gatepost and then you will know whether it is another brother God has sent you or a little sister." The baby turned out to be a girl and the mother was overjoyed. "Hurry, husband!" she cried, "and put a spindle on the gatepost so that our nine sons may know the good news!" The man did so and then quickly returned to the mother and baby. The moment he was gone Suyettar slipped up and changed the tokens. She took away the spindle and put in its place an ax. Then with an evil grin she hurried off mumbling to herself, "Now we'll see what we'll see!" She hoped to bring trouble and grief and she succeeded. As soon as the nine sons saw the ax on the gatepost they thought their mother had given birth to another son and at once they left home vowing never to return. The poor mother waited for them and waited. "What is keeping my sons?" she cried at last. "Go out to the gate, husband, and see if they are coming." The man went out and soon returned bringing back word that someone had changed the tokens. "The spindle that I put on the gatepost is gone," he said, "and in its place is an ax." "Alas!" cried the poor mother, "some evil creature has done this to spite us! Oh, if we could only get word to our sons of the little sister they were so eager to have!" But there was no way to reach them for no one knew the way they had gone. In a short time the husband died and the poor woman, abandoned by her nine sons, had only her little daughter left. She named the child Kerttu. Kerttu was a dear little girl and her face was as beautiful as her heart was good. Whenever she found her mother weeping alone she tried to comfort her and, as she grew older, she wanted to know the cause of her mother's grief. At last the mother told her about her nine brothers and how they had gone away never to return owing to the trick of some evil creature. "My poor mother!" she cried, "how sorry I am that I am the innocent cause of your loss! Let me go out into the world and find my brothers! When once they hear the truth they will gladly come home to you to care for you in your old age!" At first the mother would not consent to this. "You are all I have," she said, "and I should indeed be miserable and lonely if anything happened you!" But Kerttu continued to weep every time she thought of her poor brothers driven unnecessarily from home and at last the mother, realizing that she would nevermore be happy unless she were allowed to go in search of them, gave up opposing her. "Very well, my daughter, you may go and may God go with you and bring you safely back to me. But before you go I must prepare you a bag of food for the journey and bake you a magic cake that will show you the way." So she baked a batch of bread and at the same time mixed a little round cake with Kerttu's own tears and baked it, too. Then she said, "Here now, my child, are provisions for the journey and here is a magic cake that will lead you to your brothers. All you have to do is throw it down in front of you and say: Roll, roll, my little cake! Show me the way that I must take To find at last the brothers nine Whose own true mother is also mine! Then the little cake will start rolling and do you follow wherever it rolls. But, Kerttu, my child, you must not start out alone. You must have some friend or companion to go with you." Now it happened that Kerttu had a little dog, Musti, that she loved dearly. "I'll take Musti with me!" she said. "Musti will protect me!" So she called Musti and Musti wagged his tail and barked with joy at the prospect of going out into the world with his mistress. Then Kerttu threw down the magic cake in front of her and sang: Roll, roll, my little cake! Show me the way that I must take To find at last the brothers nine Whose own true mother is also mine! At once the cake rolled off like a little wheel and Kerttu and Musti followed it. They walked until they were tired. Then Kerttu picked up the little cake and they rested by the wayside. When they were ready again to start the cake a-rolling, all Kerttu had to do was throw it down in front of her and say the magic rhyme. Their first day was without adventure. When night came they ate their supper and went to sleep in a field under a tree. The second day they overtook an ugly old woman whom Kerttu disliked on sight. But she said to herself, "Shame on you, Kerttu, not liking this woman just because she's old and ugly!" and she made herself answer the old woman's greetings politely, and she made Musti stop snarling and growling. The old hag asked Kerttu who she was and where she was going and Kerttu told her. "Ah!" said the old woman, "how fortunate that we have met each other for our ways lie together!" She smiled and petted Kerttu's arm and Kerttu felt like shuddering. But she restrained herself and told herself severely, "You're a wicked girl not to feel more friendly to the poor old thing!" Musti felt much as Kerttu did. He no longer growled for Kerttu had told him not to, but he drooped his tail between his legs and, pressing up close to Kerttu, he trembled with fright. And well he might, too, for the old hag was none other than Suyettar who had been waiting all these years just for this very chance to do further injury to Kerttu and her brothers. Kerttu, poor child, was, alas! too good and innocent to suspect evil in others. She said to Suyettar, "Very well, if our ways lie together then we can be companions." So Suyettar joined Kerttu and Musti and the three of them walked on following the little cake. As the day advanced the sun grew hotter and hotter and at last when they reached a lake Suyettar said, "My dear, let us sit down here for a few moments and rest." They all sat down and presently Suyettar said, "Let us go bathing in the lake. That will refresh us." Kerttu would have agreed if Musti had not tugged at her skirts and warned her not to. "Don't do it, dear mistress!" Musti growled softly. "Don't go in bathing with her! She'll bewitch you!" So Kerttu said, "No, I don't want to go in bathing." Suyettar waited until they were again journeying on and then when Kerttu wasn't looking she turned around and kicked Musti and broke one of the poor little dog's legs. Thereafter Musti had to hop along on three legs. The next afternoon when they passed another lake, Suyettar tried again to tempt Kerttu into the water. "The sun is very hot," she said, "and it would refresh us both to bathe. Come, Kerttu, my dear, don't refuse me this time!" But again Musti tugged at Kerttu's skirts and, licking her hand, whispered the warning, "Don't do it, dear mistress! Don't go in bathing with her or she will bewitch you!" So again Kerttu said politely, "No, I don't feel like going in bathing. You go in alone and I'll wait for you here." But this was not what Suyettar wanted and she said, no, she didn't care to go in alone. She was furious, too, with Musti and later when Kerttu wasn't looking she gave the poor little dog a kick that broke another leg. Thereafter Musti had to hop along on two legs. They slept the third night by the wayside and the next day they went on again always following the magic cake. In midafternoon they passed a lake and Suyettar said: "Surely, my dear, you must be tired and hot. Let us both bathe in this cool lake." But Musti, hopping painfully along on two legs, yelped weakly and said to Kerttu, "Don't do it, dear mistress! Don't go in bathing with her or she'll bewitch you!" So for a third time Kerttu refused and later, when she wasn't looking, Suyettar kicked Musti and broke the third of the poor little dog's legs. Thereafter Musti hopped on as best he could on only one leg, Well, they went on and on. When night came they slept by the roadside and then next morning they started on again. The sun grew hot and by midafternoon Kerttu was tired and ready to rest. When they reached a lake Suyettar again begged that they both go in bathing. Kerttu was tempted to agree when poor Musti threw himself panting at her feet and whimpered, "Don't do it, dear mistress! Don't go in bathing with her or she will bewitch you!" So Kerttu again refused. "That's right, dear mistress!" Musti panted, "don't do it! I shall soon be dead, I know, for she hates me, but before I die I want to warn you one last time never to go in bathing with her or she will bewitch you!" "What's that dog saying?" Suyettar demanded angrily, and without waiting for an answer she picked up a heavy piece of wood and struck poor Musti such a blow on the head that it killed him. "What have you done to my poor little dog?" Kerttu cried. "Don't mind him, my dear," Suyettar said. "He was sick and lame and it was better to put him out of his misery." Suyettar tried to soothe Kerttu and make her forget Musti but all afternoon Kerttu wept to think that she would never again see her faithful little friend. The next afternoon when Suyettar begged her to go in bathing there was no Musti to warn her against it and at last Kerttu allowed herself to be persuaded. She was tired from her many days' wandering and it was true that the first touch of the cool water refreshed her. "Now splash water in my face!" Suyettar cried. But Kerttu didn't want to splash water into Suyettar's face for she supposed Suyettar was an old woman and she thought it would be disrespectful to splash water into the face of an old woman. "Do you hear me!" screamed Suyettar. When Kerttu still hesitated, Suyettar looked at her with such a terrible, threatening expression that Kerttu did as she was bidden. She splashed water into Suyettar's face and, as the water touched Suyettar's eyes, Suyettar cried out: Your bonny looks give up to me And you take mine for all to see! Instantly they two changed appearance: Suyettar looked young and beautiful like Kerttu, and Kerttu was changed to a hideous old hag. Then too late she realized that the awful old woman to whom she had been so polite was Suyettar. "Oh, why," Kerttu cried, "why didn't I heed poor Musti's warning!" Suyettar dragged her roughly out of the water. "Come along!" she said. "Dress yourself in those rags of mine and start that cake a-rolling! We ought to reach your brothers' house by tonight." So poor Kerttu had to dress herself in Suyettar's filthy old garments while Suyettar, looking like a fresh young girl, decked herself out in Kerttu's pretty bodice and skirt. Unwillingly now and with a heavy heart Kerttu threw down the cake and said: Roll, roll, my little cake! Show me the way that I must take To find at last the brothers nine Whose own true mother is also mine! Off rolled the little cake and they two followed it, Kerttu weeping bitterly and Suyettar taunting her with ugly laughs. Then suddenly Kerttu forgot to weep for Suyettar took from her her memory and her tongue. The little cake led them at last to a farmhouse before which it stopped. This was where the nine brothers were living. Eight of them were out working in the fields but the youngest was at home. He opened the door and when Suyettar told him that she was Kerttu, his sister, he kissed her tenderly and made her welcome. Then he invited her inside and they sat side by side on the bench and talked and Suyettar told him all she had heard from Kerttu about his mother and about the tokens which had been changed at Kerttu's birth. The youngest brother listened eagerly and Suyettar told her story so glibly that of course he supposed that she was his own true sister. "And who is the awful looking old hag that has come with you?" he asked pointing at Kerttu. "That? Oh, that's an old serving woman whom our mother sent with me to bear me company. She's dumb and foolish but she's a good herd and we can let her drive the cow out to pasture every day." The older brothers when they came home were greatly pleased to find what they thought was their sister. They began to love her at once and to pet her and they said that now she must stay with them and keep house for them. She told them that was what she wanted to do and she said that now she was here the youngest brother need no longer stay at home but could go out every morning with the rest of them to work in the fields. So now began a new life for poor Kerttu. In the morning after the brothers were gone Suyettar would scold and abuse her. She would bake a cake for her dinner to be eaten in the fields and she would fill the cake with stones and sticks and filth. Then she would take Kerttu as far as the gate where she would give her back her tongue and her memory and order her roughly to drive the cow to pasture and look after it all day long. In the late afternoon when Kerttu drove home the cow, Suyettar would meet her at the gate and take from her her tongue and her memory and then in the evening the brothers would see her as a foolish old woman who couldn't talk. Every morning and every evening Kerttu begged Suyettar to show her a little mercy, but far from showing her any mercy Suyettar grew more cruel from day to day. Suyettar was very proud to think that nine handsome young men took her for a beautiful girl and she felt sure they would never find out their mistake for only Kerttu knew who she really was and Kerttu was entirely in her power. At night seated in the shadow in a far corner of the kitchen with her nine brothers laughing and talking Kerttu felt no sorrow for at such times of course she had no memory. But during the day it was different. Then when she was alone in the meadow she had her memory and her tongue and she thought about her poor mother at home anxiously awaiting her return and she thought of her nine sturdy brothers all of whom might now through her mistake fall victims to Suyettar. These thoughts made her weep with grief and as the days went by she put this grief into a song which she sang constantly: I've found at last the brothers nine Whose own true mother is also mine, But they know me not from stick or stone! They leave me here to weep alone, While Suyettar sits in my place With stolen looks and stolen face! She snared me first with evil guile And now she mocks me all the while: By night she takes my tongue away, She feeds me sticks and stones by day! . . . Oh, little they guess, the brothers nine, That their own true mother is also mine! The brothers as they worked in nearby fields used to hear the song and they wondered about it. "Strange!" they said to one another. "Can that be the old woman singing? In the evening at home she never opens her mouth and our dear sister always says that she's dumb and foolish." One afternoon when Kerttu's song sounded particularly sad, the youngest brother, crept close to the meadow where Kerttu was sitting in order to hear the words. He listened carefully and then hurried back to the others and with frightened face told them what he had heard. "Nonsense I" the older brothers said. "It can't be so!" However, they, too, wanted to hear for themselves the words of the strange song, so they all crept near to listen. It looked like an old hag who was singing but the voice that came out of the withered mouth was the voice of a young girl. As they listened they, too, grew pale: I've found at last the brothers nine Whose own true mother is also mine, But they know me not from stick or stone! They leave me here to weep alone, While Suyettar sits in my place With stolen looks and stolen face! She snared me first with evil guile And now she mocks me all the while: By night she takes my tongue away, She feeds me sticks and stones by day! . . . Oh, little they guess, the brothers nine, That their own true mother is also mine! "Can it be true?" they said, whispering together. They sent the youngest brother to question Kerttu, and he, when he had heard her story, believed it true. Then the other brothers went to her one by one and questioned her and finally they were all convinced of the truth of her story. "It is well for us," they said, "if we do not all fall into the power of that awful creature! How, O how can we rescue our poor little sister!" "I can never get back my own looks," Kerttu said, "unless Suyettar splashes water into my eyes and unless I cry out a magic rhyme as she does it." The brothers discussed one plan after another and at last agreed on one that they thought might deceive Suyettar. They had Kerttu inflame her eyes with dust and come groping home one midday. The brothers, too, were at home and as Kerttu came stumbling into the kitchen they said to Suyettar, "Oh, sister, sister, see the poor old woman! Something ails her! Her eyes -- they're all red and swollen! Get some water and bathe them!" "Nonsense!" Suyettar said. "The old hag's well enough! Let her be! She doesn't need any attention!" "Oh, sister!" the youngest brother said, reproachfully, "is that any way for a human, kindhearted girl like you to talk? If you won't bathe the old creature's eyes, I will myself!" Then Suyettar who of course wanted them to think that she was a human, kindhearted girl said, no, she would bathe them. So she took a basin of water over to Kerttu and told her to lean down her head. As she splashed the first drop of water into Kerttu's eyes, Kerttu cried out: "My own true looks give back to me And take your own for all to see! Instantly Suyettar was again a hideous old hag though still dressed in Kerttu's pretty bodice and skirt, and Kerttu was herself again, young and fresh and sweet, though still incased in Suyettar's rags. But the brothers pretended that they saw no difference and kept on talking to Suyettar as though they still thought her Kerttu. And Suyettar because her eyes were blinded with the dust supposed that they were still deceived. Then one of the brothers said to Suyettar, "Sister dear, the sauna is all heated and ready. Don't you want to bathe?" Suyettar thought that this would be a fine chance to wash the dust from her eyes, so she let them lead her to the sauna. Once they got her inside they locked the door and set the sauna afire. Oh, the noise she made then when she found she had been trapped! She kicked and screamed and cursed and threatened! But Kerttu and the brothers paid no heed to her. They left her burning in the sauna while they hurried homewards. They found their poor old mother seated at the window weeping, for she thought that now Kerttu as well as her sons was lost forever. As Kerttu and the nine handsome young men came in the gate she didn't recognize them until Kerttu sang out: I bring at last the brothers nine Whose own true mother is also mine! Then she knew who they were and with thanks to God she welcomed them home. Source: Parker Fillmore, Mighty Mikko: A Book of Finnish Fairy Tales and Folk Tales (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company, 1922), pp. 99-120 . This story differs from most type 451 folktales in that here the sister, not her brothers, is bewitched. Return to the table of contents . The Twelve Wild Geese Ireland There was once a king and queen that lived very happily together, and they had twelve sons and not a single daughter. We are always wishing for what we haven't, and don't care for what we have, and so it was with the queen. One day in winter, when the bawn was covered with snow, she was looking out of the parlor window, and saw there a calf that was just killed by the butcher, and a raven standing near it. "Oh," says she, "if I had only a daughter with her skin as white as that snow, her cheeks as red as that blood, and her hair as black as that raven, I'd give away every one of my twelve sons for her." The moment she said the word, she got a great fright, and a shiver went through her, and in an instant after, a severe-looking old woman stood before her. "That was a wicked wish you made," said she, "and to punish you it will be granted. You will have such a daughter as you desire, but the very day of her birth you will lose your other children." She vanished the moment she said the words. And that very way it turned out. When she expected her delivery, she had her children all in a large room of the palace, with guards all round it, but the very hour her daughter came into the world, the guards inside and outside heard a great whirling and whistling, and the twelve princes were seen flying one after another out through the open window, and away like so many arrows over the woods. Well, the king was in great grief for the loss of his sons, and be would be very enraged with his wife if he only knew that she was so much to blame for it. Everyone called the little princess Snow-White-and-Rose-Red on account of her beautiful complexion. She was the most loving and loveable child that could be seen anywhere. When she was twelve years old she began to be very sad and lonely, and to torment her mother, asking her about her brothers that she thought were dead, for none up to that time ever told her the exact thing that happened them. The secret was weighing very heavy on the queen's conscience, and as the little girl persevered in her questions, at last she told her. "Well, mother," said she, "it was on my account my poor brothers were changed into wild geese, and are now suffering all sorts of hardship; before the world is a day older, I'll be off to seek them, and try to restore them to their own shapes." The king and queen had her well watched, but all was no use. Next night she was getting through the woods that surrounded the palace, and she went on and on that night, and till the evening of next day. She had a few cakes with her, and she got nuts, and mugoreens (fruit of the sweet briar) and some sweet crabs as she went along. At last she came to a nice wooden house just at sunset. There was a fine garden round it, full of the handsomest flowers, and a gate in the hedge. She went in, and saw a table laid out with twelve plates, and twelve knives and forks, and twelve spoons, and there were cakes, and cold wild fowl, and fruit along with the plates, and there was a good fire, and in another long room there were twelve beds. Well, while she was looking about her she heard the gate opening, and footsteps along the walk, and in came twelve young men, and there was great grief and surprise on all their faces when they laid eyes on her. "Oh, what misfortune sent you here?" said the eldest. "For the sake of a girl we were obliged to leave our father's court, and be in the shape of wild geese all day. That's twelve years ago, and we took a solemn oath that we would kill the first young girl that came into our hands. It's a pity to put such an innocent and handsome girl as you are out of the world, but we must keep our oath." "But," said she, "I'm your only sister that never knew anything about this till yesterday; and I stole away from our father's and mother's palace last night to find you out and relieve you if I can." Every one of them clasped his hands, and looked down on the floor, and you could hear a pin fall till the eldest cried out, "A curse light on our oath! what shall we do?" "I'll tell you that," said an old woman that appeared at the instant among them. "Break your wicked oath which no one should keep. If you attempted to lay an uncivil finger on her I'd change you into twelve booliaun buis (stalks of ragweed), but I wish well to you as well as to her. She is appointed to be your deliverer in this way. She must spin and knit twelve shirts for you out of bog down, to be gathered by her own hands on the moor just outside of the wood. It will take her five years to do it, and if she once speaks, or laughs, or cries the whole time, you will have to remain wild geese by day till you're called out of the world. So take care of your sister; it is worth your while." The fairy then vanished, and it was only a strife with the brothers to see who would be first to kiss and hug their sister. So for three long years the poor young princess was occupied pulling bog down, spinning it, and knitting it into shirts, and at the end of the three years she had eight made. During all that time, she never spoke a word, nor laughed, nor cried; the last was the hardest to refrain from. One fine day she was sitting in the garden spinning, when in sprung a fine greyhound and bounded up to her, and laid his paws on her shoulder, and licked her forehead and her hair. The next minute a beautiful young prince rode up to the little garden gate, took off his hat, and asked for leave to come in. She gave him a little nod, and in he walked. He made ever so many apologies for intruding, and asked her ever so many questions, but not a word could he get out of her. He loved her so much from the first moment, that he could not leave her till he told her he was king of a country just bordering on the forest, and he begged her to come home with him, and be his wife. She couldn't help loving him as much as he did her, and though she shook her head very often and was very sorry to leave her brothers, at last she nodded her head, and put her hand in his, she knew well enough that the good fairy and her brothers would he able to find her out. Before she went she brought out a basket holding all her bog down, and another holding the eight shirts. The attendants took charge of these, and the prince placed her before him on his horse. The only thing that disturbed him while riding along was the displeasure his stepmother would feel at what he had done. However he was full master at home, and as soon as he arrived he sent for the bishop, got his bride nicely dressed, and the marriage was celebrated, the bride answering by signs. He knew by her manners she was of high birth, and no two could be fonder of each other. The wicked stepmother did all she could to make mischief, saying she was sure she was only a woodman's daughter; but nothing could disturb the young king's opinion of his wife. In good time the young queen was delivered of a beautiful boy, and the king was so glad he hardly knew what to do for joy. All the grandeur of the christening and the happiness of the parents tormented the bad woman more than I can tell you, and she determined to put a stop to all their comfort. She got a sleeping posset given to the young mother, and while she was thinking and thinking how she could best make away with the child, she saw a wicked-looking wolf in the garden, looking up at her, and licking his chops. She lost no time, but snatched the child from the arms of the sleeping woman, and pitched it out. The beast caught it in his mouth, and was over the garden fence in a minute. The wicked woman then pricked her own fingers, and dabbled the blood round the mouth of the sleeping mother. Well, the young king was just then coming into the big bawn from hunting, and as soon as he entered the house, she beckoned to him, shed a few crocodile tears, began to cry and wring her hands, and hurried him along the passage to the bedchamber. Oh, wasn't the poor king frightened when he saw the queen's mouth bloody, and missed his child? It would take two hours to tell you the devilment of the old queen, the confusion, and fright, and grief of young king and queen, the bad opinion he began to feel of his wife, and the struggle she had to keep down her bitter sorrow, and not give way to it by speaking or lamenting. The young king would not allow anyone to be called, and ordered his step-mother to give out that the child fell from the mother's arms at the window, and that a wild beast ran off with it. The wicked woman pretended to do so, but she told underhand to everybody she spoke to, what the king and herself saw in the bedchamber. The young queen was the most unhappy woman in the three kingdoms for a long time, between sorrow for her child, and her husband's bad opinion; still she neither spoke nor cried, and she gathered bog down and went on with the shirts. Often the twelve wild geese would be seen lighting on the trees in the park or on the smooth sod, and looking in at her windows. So she worked on to get the shirts finished, but another year was at an end, and she had the twelfth shirt finished except one arm, when she was obliged to take to her bed, and a beautiful girl was born. Now the king was on his guard, and he would not let the mother and child be left alone for a minute; but the wicked woman bribed some of the attendants, set others asleep, gave the sleepy posset to the queen, and had a person watching to snatch the child away, and kill it. But what should she see but the same wolf in the garden looking up, and licking his chops again? Out went the child, and away with it flew the wolf, and she smeared the sleeping mother's mouth and face with blood, and then roared, and bawled, and cried out to the king and to everybody she met, and the room was filled, and every one was sure the young queen had just devoured her own babe. The poor mother thought now her life would leave her. She was in such a state she could neither think nor pray, but she sat like a stone, and worked away at the arm of the twelfth shirt. The king was for taking her to the house in the wood where he found her, but the stepmother, and the lords of the court, and the judges would not hear of it, and she was condemned to be burned in the big bawn at three o'clock the same day. When the hour drew near, the king went to the farthest part of his palace, and there was no more unhappy man in his kingdom at that hour. When the executioners came and led her off, she took the pile of shirts in her arms. There were still a few stitches wanted, and while they were tying her to the stake, she still worked on. At the last stitch she seemed overcome and dropped a tear on her work, but the moment after she sprang up, and shouted out, "I am innocent; call my husband!" The executioners stayed their hands, except one wicked-disposed creature who set fire to the faggot next him, and while all were struck in amaze, there was a rushing of wings, and in a moment the twelve wild geese were standing round the pile. Before you could count twelve, she flung a shirt over every bird, and there in the twinkling of an eye were twelve of the finest young men that could be collected out of a thousand. While some were untying their sister, the eldest, taking a strong stake in his hand, struck the busy executioner such a blow that he never needed another. While they were comforting the young queen, and the king was hurrying to the spot, a fine-looking woman appeared among them holding the babe on one arm and the little prince by the hand. There was nothing hut crying for joy, and laughing for joy, and hugging and kissing, and when any one had time to thank the good fairy, who in the shape of a wolf, carried the child away, she was not to be found. Never was such happiness enjoyed in any palace that ever was built, and if the wicked queen and her helpers were not torn by wild horses they richly deserved it. Source: Patrick Kennedy, The Fireside Stories of Ireland (Dublin: M'Glashan and Gill, 1870), pp. 14-19 . Return to the table of contents . The Sister and Her Seven Brothers Basque There was a man and a woman very poor, and overburdened with children. They had seven boys. When they had grown up a little, they said to their mother that it would be better that they should go on their own way -- that they would get on better like that. The mother let them go with great regret. After their departure she gave birth to a little girl, and when this little girl was grown up a little she went one day to a neighbor's to amuse herself, and having played some childish trick the neighbor said to her, "You will be a good one, you too, as your brothers have been." The child goes home and says to her mother, "Mother, have I some brothers?" The mother says, "Yes." "Where are they?" "Oh, gone off somewhere." The daughter said to her, "I must go too, then. Give me a piece of linen enough to make seven shirts." And she would go off at once. The mother was very sorry for it, having already seven children away from home, and the only one she had wished to go away. She let her go then. This young girl went off, far, far, far away. She asks in a town if they know seven brothers who work together. They tell her, "No." She goes off to a mountain and asks there too, and they tell her in what house they live. She goes to this house, and sees that all the household work is to be done, and that there is nobody at home. She makes the beds, and cleans the whole house, and puts it in order. She prepares the dinner, and then hides herself in the dust-hole. Her brothers come home, and are astonished to see all the household work done and the dinner ready. They begin to look if there is anyone in the house, but they never think of looking in the dust-hole, and they go off again to their work. Before night this young girl does all the rest of the work, and had the supper ready against the return of her brothers, and hides herself again in the dust-hole. Her brothers are astonished, and again search the house, but find nothing. They go to bed, and this young girl takes to sewing and sews a whole shirt. She gives it to her eldest brother, and in the same way she made a shirt every night, and took it to one of her brothers. They could not understand how that all happened. They always said that they would not go to sleep, but they fell asleep as soon as they were in bed. When the turn of the youngest came to have the shirt, he said to them, "Certainly I will not fall asleep." After he is in bed the young girl goes and says to him, thinking that he is asleep, "Your turn has come now at last, my dearly loved brother." And she begins to put the shirt on him on the bed, when her brother says to her, "You are then my sister, you?" And he kisses her. She tells him then how she had heard that she had brothers, and how she had wished to go to them to help them. The other brothers get up and rejoice, learning that it was their sister who had done all the household work. The brothers forbad her ever to go to such a neighbor's, whatever might happen. But one day, without thinking about it, when she was behindhand with her work, she went running to the house to ask for some fire, in order to make the supper ready quicker. She was very well received; the woman offered to give her everything she wanted, but she said she was satisfied with a little fire. This woman was a witch, and gives her a parcel of herbs, telling her to put them as they were into the footbath -- that they relieved the fatigue very much. Every evening the seven brothers washed their feet at the same time in a large copper. She therefore put these herbs into the copper, and as soon as they had dipped their feet in they became six cows, and the seventh a Breton cow. This poor girl was in such trouble as cannot be told. The poor cows all used to kiss their sister, but the young girl always loved much best the Breton one. Every day she took them to the field, and stopped with them to guard them. One day when she was there the son of a king passes by, and is quite astonished to see so beautiful a girl there. He speaks to her, and tells her that he wishes to marry her. The young girl says to him that she is very poor, and that that cannot be. The king says, "Yes, yes, yes, that makes no difference." The young girl makes as conditions that, if she marries him, he must never kill these cows, and especially this little Breton one. The king promises it her, and they are married. The princess takes these cows home with her; they were always well treated. The princess became pregnant, and was confined while the king was absent. The witch comes, and takes her out of her bed, and throws her down a precipice that there was in the king's grounds, and the witch puts herself into the princess' bed. When the king comes home, he finds her very much changed, and tells her that he would not have recognized her. The princess tells him that it was her sufferings that had made her thus, and, in order to cure her more quickly, he must have the Breton cow killed. The king says to her, "What! Did you not make me promise that she should never be killed? How is it you ask me that?" The witch considered that one her greatest enemy; and, as she left him no peace, he sent a servant to fetch the cows. He finds them all seven by the precipice; they were lowing, and he tried to drive them to the house, but he could not do it in any way; and he hears a voice, which says, "It is not for myself that I grieve so much, but for my child, and for my husband, and for my dearly loved cows. Who will take care of them?" The lad could not succeed (in driving them), and goes and tells to the king what is taking place. The king himself goes to the precipice, and hears this voice. He quickly throws a long cord down, and, when he thinks that she has had time to take hold of it, he pulls it up, and sees that they have got the princess there. Judge of the joy of the king! She relates to her husband all that the witch had done to her, both formerly and now. The king goes to the witch's bed, and says to her, "I know your villainies now; and, if you do not immediately change these cows, as they were before, into fine boys, I will put you into a red-hot oven." The witch makes them fine men, and, notwithstanding that, the king had her burnt in a red-hot oven, and threw her ashes into the air. The king lived happily with his wife, and her seven brothers married ladies of the court, and sent for their mother, and they all lived happily together. Source: Wentworth Webster, Basque Legends: Collected Chiefly in the Labourd (London: Griffith and Farran, 1879), pp. 187-91 . Wentworth's source: Louise Lanusse. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 2, 2013. Things That Go Bump in the Night Things That Go Bump in the Night Edited by D. L. Ashliman Copyright 1997 Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Contents Scottish Prayer When the Whole Earth Was Overrun with Ghosts Scottish Prayer Traditional From ghoulies and ghosties And long-leggedy beasties And things that go bump in the night, Good Lord, deliver us! When the Whole Earth Was Overrun with Ghosts England Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated, The bird of dawning singeth all night long: And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad; The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm, So hallowed and so gracious is the time. --Marcellus. So have I heard and do in part believe it. --Horatio. So says the immortal Shakespeare [ Hamlet , act 1, scene 1]; and the truth thereof few nowadays, I hope, will call in question. Grose observes, too, that those born on Christmas Day cannot see spirits; which is another incontrovertible fact. What a happiness this must have been seventy or eighty years ago and upwards, to those chosen few who had the good luck to be born on the eve of this festival of all festivals; when the whole earth was so overrun with ghosts, boggles, bloody-bones, spirits, demons, ignis fatui, brownies, bugbears, black dogs, specters, shellycoats, scarecrows, witches, wizards, barguests, Robin-Goodfellows, hags, night-bats, scrags, breaknecks, fantasms, hobgoblins, hobhoulards, boggy-boes, dobbies, hob-thrusts, fetches, kelpies, warlocks, mock-beggars, mum-pokers, Jemmy-burties, urchins, satyrs, pans, fauns, sirens, tritons, centaurs, calcars, nymphs, imps, incubuses, spoorns, men-in-the-oak, hell-wains, fire-drakes, kit-a-can-sticks, Tom-tumblers, melch-dicks, larrs, kitty-witches, hobby-lanthorns, Dick-a-Tuesdays, Elf-fires, Gyl-burnt-tales, knockers, elves, rawheads, Meg-with-the-wads, old-shocks, ouphs, pad-foots, pixies, pictrees, giants, dwarfs, Tom-pokers, tutgots, snapdragons, sprets, spunks, conjurers, thurses, spurns, tantarrabobs, swaithes, tints, tod-lowries, Jack-in-the-Wads, mormos, changelings, redcaps, yeth-hounds, colt-pixies, Tom-thumbs, black-bugs, boggarts, scar-bugs, shag-foals, hodge-pochers, hob-thrushes, bugs, bull-beggars, bygorns, bolls, caddies, bomen, brags, wraiths, waffs, flay-boggarts, fiends, gallytrots, imps, gytrashes, patches, hob-and-lanthorns, gringes, boguests, bonelesses, Peg-powlers, pucks, fays, kidnappers, gallybeggars, hudskins, nickers, madcaps, trolls, robinets, friars' lanthorns, silkies, cauld-lads, death-hearses, goblins, hob-headlesses, bugaboos, kows, or cowes, nickies, nacks [necks], waiths, miffies, buckies, ghouls, sylphs, guests, swarths, freiths, freits, gy-carlins [Gyre-carling], pigmies, chittifaces, nixies, Jinny-burnt-tails, dudmen, hell-hounds, dopple-gangers, boggleboes, bogies, redmen, portunes, grants, hobbits, hobgoblins, brown-men, cowies, dunnies, wirrikows, alholdes, mannikins, follets, korreds, lubberkins, cluricauns, kobolds, leprechauns, kors, mares, korreds, puckles korigans, sylvans, succubuses, blackmen, shadows, banshees, lian-hanshees, clabbernappers, Gabriel-hounds, mawkins, doubles, corpse lights or candles, scrats, mahounds, trows, gnomes, sprites, fates, fiends, sibyls, nicknevins, whitewomen, fairies, thrummy-caps, cutties, and nisses, and apparitions of every shape, make, form, fashion, kind and description, that there was not a village in England that had not its own peculiar ghost. Nay, every lone tenement, castle, or mansion-house, which could boast of any antiquity had its bogle, its specter, or its knocker. The churches, churchyards, and crossroads were all haunted. Every green lane had its boulder-stone on which an apparition kept watch at night. Every common had its circle of fairies belonging to it. And there was scarcely a shepherd to be met with who had not seen a spirit! Source: The Denham Tracts , edited by James Hardy, (London: Folklore Society, 1895), vol. 2, pp. 76-80. This two volume work brings together various folklore publications of Michael Aislabie Denham first published between 1846 and 1859. Denham's title for this piece is "Ghosts Never Appear on Christmas Eve!" His copious footnotes have been omitted. Return to Table of Contents D. L. Ashliman's Index of Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts Revised November 11, 1997. Cain and Abel: Scriptures and Legends Cain and Abel scriptures and legends selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2019 Contents Cain and Abel ( Genesis ). The Story of the Two Sons of Adam ( The Quran ). Can and Abel (Jewish Legend). Kabil and Habil (Palestine). Cain and Abel (Turkey, History of the Forty Vezirs ). Cain and Abel (Turkey [Armenian]). Abel and Cain (Italy). The First Grave (Poland). The Treasures of Cain (Romania). Links to addtional texts . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Cain and Abel The First Book of Moses, called Genesis And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man from the LORD. And she again bare his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground. And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the LORD. And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. And the LORD had respect unto Abel and to his offering: But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell. And the LORD said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen? If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door. And unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him. And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him. And the LORD said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not: Am I my brother's keeper? And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground. And now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand; When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth. And Cain said unto the LORD, My punishment is greater than I can bear. Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass, that every one that findeth me shall slay me. And the LORD said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And the LORD set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him. And Cain went out from the presence of the LORD, and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden. And Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare Enoch: and he builded a city, and called the name of the city, after the name of his son, Enoch. Source: Genesis 4:1-17, King James version. Link to the entire King James Bible (Internet Sacred Text Archive). Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Two Sons of Adam The Quran Recite to them the story of the two sons of Adam; truly when they offered an offering, and it was accepted from one of them, and was not accepted from the other, that one said, "I will surely kill thee;" he said, "God only accepts from those who fear. If thou dost stretch forth to me thine hand to kill me, I will not stretch forth mine hand to kill thee; verily, I fear God, the Lord of the worlds; verily, I wish that thou mayest draw upon thee my sin and thy sin, and be of the fellows of the Fire, for that is the reward of the unjust." But his soul allowed him to slay his brother, and he slew him, and in the morning he was of those who lose. And God sent a crow to scratch in the earth and show him how he might hide his brother's shame, he said, "Alas, for me! Am I too helpless to become like this crow and hide my brother's shame?" and in the morning he was of those who did repent. Source: The Qur'ān , 5:30-34, translated by E. H. Palmer (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1880), p. 101 . In more recent translations of The Quran the division into verses of this passage is given as 5:27-31. The title of the sacred book of Islam is variously Romanised as Koran, Quran, Qur'an , or Qur'ān . Return to the table of contents . Cain and Abel Jewish Legend The Birth of Cain There were ten generations from Adam to Noah, to show how long-suffering is the Lord, for all the generations provoked Him unto wrath, until He brought the deluge upon them. By reason of their impiousness God changed His plan of calling one thousand generations into being between the creation of the world and the revelation of the law at Mount Sinai; nine hundred and seventy-four He suppressed before the flood. Wickedness came into the world with the first being born of woman, Cain, the oldest son of Adam. When God bestowed Paradise upon the first pair of mankind, He warned them particularly against carnal intercourse with each other. But after the fall of Eve, Satan, in the guise of the serpent, approached her, and the fruit of their union was Cain, the ancestor of all the impious generations that were rebellious toward God, and rose up against Him. Cain's descent from Satan, who is the angel Samael, was revealed in his seraphic appearance. At his birth, the exclamation was wrung from Eve, "I have gotten a man through an angel of the Lord." Adam was not in the company of Eve during the time of her pregnancy with Cain. After she had succumbed a second time to the temptations of Satan, and permitted herself to be interrupted in her penance, she left her husband and journeyed westward, because she feared her presence might continue to bring him misery. Adam remained in the east. When the days of Eve to be delivered were fulfilled, and she began to feel the pangs of travailing, she prayed to God for help. But He hearkened not unto her supplications. "Who will carry the report to my lord Adam?" she asked herself. "Ye luminaries in the sky, I beg you, tell it to my master Adam when ye return to the east!" In that selfsame hour, Adam cried out: "The lamentation of Eve has pierced to my ear! Mayhap the serpent has again assaulted her," and he hastened to his wife. Finding her in grievous pain, he besought God in her behalf, and twelve angels appeared, together with two heavenly powers. All these took up their post to right of her and to left of her, while Michael, also standing on her right side, passed his hand over her, from her face downward to her breast, and said to her, "Be thou blessed, Eve, for the sake of Adam. Because of his solicitations and his prayers I was sent to grant thee our assistance. Make ready to give birth to thy child!" Immediately her son was born, a radiant figure. A little while and the babe stood upon his feet, ran off, and returned holding in his hands a stalk of straw, which he gave to his mother. For this reason he was named Cain, the Hebrew word for stalk of straw. Now Adam took Eve and the boy to his home in the east. God sent him various kinds of seeds by the hand of the angel Michael, and he was taught how to cultivate the ground and make it yield produce and fruits, to sustain himself and his family and his posterity. After a while, Eve bore her second son, whom she named Hebel, because, she said, he was born but to die. Fratricide The slaying of Abel by Cain did not come as a wholly unexpected event to his parents. In a dream Eve had seen the blood of Abel flow into the mouth of Cain, who drank it with avidity, though his brother entreated him not to take all. When she told her dream to Adam, he said, lamenting, "O that this may not portend the death of Abel at the hand of Cain!" He separated the two lads, assigning to each an abode of his own, and to each he taught a different occupation. Cain became a tiller of the ground, and Abel a keeper of sheep. It was all in vain. In spite of these precautions, Cain slew his brother. His hostility toward Abel had more than one reason. It began when God had respect unto the offering of Abel, and accepted it by sending heavenly fire down to consume it, while the offering of Cain was rejected. They brought their sacrifices on the fourteenth day of Nisan, at the instance of their father, who had spoken thus to his sons: "This is the day on which, in times to come, Israel will offer sacrifices. Therefore, do ye, too, bring sacrifices to your Creator on this day, that He may take pleasure in you." The place of offering which they chose was the spot whereon the altar of the Temple at Jerusalem stood later. Abel selected the best of his flocks for his sacrifice, but Cain ate his meal first, and after he had satisfied his appetite, he offered unto God what was left over, a few grains of flax seed. As though his offense had not been great enough in offering unto God fruit of the ground which had been cursed by God! What wonder that his sacrifice was not received with favor! Besides, a chastisement was inflicted upon him. His face turned black as smoke. Nevertheless, his disposition underwent no change, even when God spoke to him thus: "If thou wilt amend thy ways, thy guilt will be for given thee; if not, thou wilt be delivered into the power of the evil inclination. It coucheth at the door of thy heart, yet it depends upon thee whether thou shalt be master over it, or it shall be master over thee." Cain thought he had been wronged, and a dispute followed between him and Abel. "I believed," he said, "that the world was created through goodness, but I see that good deeds bear no fruit. God rules the world with arbitrary power, else why had He respect unto thy offering, and not unto mine also?" Abel opposed him; he maintained that God rewards good deeds, without having respect unto persons. If his sacrifice had been accepted graciously by God, and Cain's not, it was because his deeds were good, and his brother's wicked. But this was not the only cause of Cain's hatred toward Abel. Partly love for a woman brought about the crime. To ensure the propagation of the human race, a girl, destined to be his wife, was born together with each of the sons of Adam. Abel's twin sister was of exquisite beauty, and Cain desired her. Therefore he was constantly brooding over ways and means of ridding himself of his brother. The opportunity presented itself ere long. One day a sheep belonging to Abel tramped over a field that had been planted by Cain. In a rage, the latter called out, "What right hast thou to live upon my land and let thy sheep pasture yonder?" Abel retorted: "What right hast thou to use the products of my sheep, to make garments for thy self from their wool? If thou wilt take off the wool of my sheep wherein thou art arrayed, and wilt pay me for the flesh of the flocks which thou hast eaten, then I will quit thy land as thou desirest, and fly into the air, if I can do it." Cain thereupon said, "And if I were to kill thee, who is there to demand thy blood of me?" Abel replied: " God, who brought us into the world, will avenge me. He will require my blood at thine hand, if thou shouldst slay me. God is the Judge, who will visit their wicked deeds upon the wicked, and their evil deeds upon the evil. Shouldst thou slay me, God will know thy secret, and He will deal out punishment unto thee." These words but added to the anger of Cain, and he threw himself upon his brother. Abel was stronger than he, and he would have got the worst of it, but at the last moment he begged for mercy, and the gentle Abel released his hold upon him. Scarcely did he feel himself free, when he turned against Abel once more, and slew him. So true is the saying, "Do the evil no good, lest evil fall upon thee." The Punishment of Cain The manner of Abel's death was the most cruel conceivable. Not knowing what injury was fatal, Cain pelted all parts of his body with stones, until one struck him on the neck and inflicted death. After committing the murder, Cain resolved to flee, saying, "My parents will demand account of me concerning Abel, for there is no other human being on earth." This thought had but passed through his mind when God appeared unto him, and addressed him in these words: "Before thy parents thou canst flee, but canst thou go out from My presence, too? 'Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him?' Alas for Abel that he showed thee mercy, and refrained from killing thee, when he had thee in his power! Alas that he granted thee the opportunity of slaying him!" Questioned by God, "Where is Abel thy brother?" Cain answered: "Am I my brother's keeper? Thou art He who holdest watch over all creatures, and yet Thou demandest account of me! True, I slew him, but Thou didst create the evil inclination in me. Thou guardest all things; why, then, didst Thou permit me to slay him? Thou didst Thyself slay him, for hadst Thou looked with a favorable countenance toward my offering as toward his, I had had no reason for envying him, and I had not slain him." But God said, "The voice of thy brother's blood issuing from his many wounds crieth out against thee, and likewise the blood of all the pious who might have sprung from the loins of Abel." Also the soul of Abel denounced the murderer, for she could find rest nowhere. She could neither soar heavenward, nor abide in the grave with her body, for no human soul had done either before. But Cain still refused to confess his guilt. He insisted that he had never seen a man killed, and how was he to suppose that the stones which he threw at Abel would take his life? Then, on account of Cain, God cursed the ground, that it might not yield fruit unto him. With a single punishment both Cain and the earth were chastised, the earth because it retained the corpse of Abel, and did not cast it above ground. In the obduracy of his heart, Cain spake: "O Lord of the world! Are there informers who denounce men before Thee? My parents are the only living human beings, and they know naught of my deed. Thou abidest in the heavens, and how shouldst Thou know what things happen on earth?" God said in reply: "Thou fool! I carry the whole world. I have made it, and I will bear it" -- a reply that gave Cain the opportunity of feigning repentance. "Thou bearest the whole world," he said, "and my sin Thou canst not bear? Verily, mine iniquity is too great to be borne! Yet, yesterday Thou didst banish my father from Thy presence, today Thou dost banish me. In sooth, it will be said, it is Thy way to banish." Although this was but dissimulation, and not true repentance, yet God granted Cain pardon, and removed the half of his chastisement from him. Originally, the decree had condemned him to be a fugitive. and a wanderer on the earth. Now he was no longer to roam about forever, but a fugitive he was to remain. And so much was hard enough to have to suffer, for the earth quaked under Cain, and all the animals, the wild and the tame, among them the accursed serpent, gathered together and essayed to devour him in order to avenge the innocent blood of Abel. Finally Cain could bear it no longer, and, breaking out in tears, he cried: "Whither shall I go from Thy spirit? Or whither shall I flee from Thy presence?" To protect him from the onslaught of the beasts, God inscribed one letter of His Holy Name upon his forehead, and furthermore He addressed the animals: "Cain's punishment shall not be like unto the punishment of future murderers. He has shed blood, but there was none to give him instruction. Henceforth, however, he who slays another shall himself be slain." Then God gave him the dog as a protection against the wild beasts, and to mark him as a sinner, He afflicted him with leprosy. Cain's repentance, insincere though it was, bore a good result. When Adam met him, and inquired what doom had been decreed against him, Cain told how his repentance had propitiated God, and Adam exclaimed, "So potent is repentance, and I knew it not!" Thereupon he composed a hymn of praise to God, beginning with the words, "It is a good thing to confess thy sins unto the Lord!" The crime committed by Cain had baneful consequences, not for himself alone, but for the whole of nature also. Before, the fruits which the earth bore unto him when he tilled the ground had tasted like the fruits of Paradise. Now his labor produced naught but thorns and thistles. The ground changed and deteriorated at the very moment of Abel's violent end. The trees and the plants in the part of the earth whereon the victim lived refused to yield their fruits, on account of their grief over him, and only at the birth of Seth those that grew in the portion belonging to Abel began to flourish and bear again. But never did they resume their former powers. While, before, the vine had borne nine hundred and twenty-six different varieties of fruit, it now brought forth but one kind. And so it was with all other species. They will regain their pristine powers only in the world to come. Nature was modified also by the burial of the corpse of Abel. For a long time it lay there exposed, above ground, because Adam and Eve knew not what to do with it. They sat beside it and wept, while the faithful dog of Abel kept guard that birds and beasts did it no harm. On a sudden, the mourning parents observed how a raven scratched the earth away in one spot, and then hid a dead bird of his own kind in the ground. Adam, following the example of the raven, buried the body of Abel, and the raven was rewarded by God. His young are born with white feathers, wherefore the old birds desert them, not recognizing them as their offspring. They take them for serpents. God feeds them until their plumage turns black, and the parent birds return to them. As an additional reward, God grants their petition when the ravens pray for rain. Source: Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews , vol. 1, translated from the German manuscript by Henrietta Szold (Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1909), pp. 105-113 . Notes to this section: Louis Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews , vol. 5: Notes to Volumes 1 and 2: From the Creation to the Exodus (Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication Society of America, 1925), pp. 132-43 . Return to the table of contents . Kabil and Habil Palestine Kabil and Habil, or Cain and Abel, with their two sisters, were the first children born to Adam and Eve. Adam, by Allah's direction, ordered Cain to marry Abel's twin sister, and that Abel should marry Cain's, for it being the common opinion that marriages ought not to take place with those very near akin, such as their own sisters, it seemed reasonable to supose that they ought to take those of the remoter degree, but this Cain refused to, because his sister was the handsomer. Hereupon Adam told them to take their offerings to Allah, thereby referring the dispute to His determination. Cain's offering was a sheaf of the very worst of his corn, but Abel's a fat lamb of the best of his flock. Allah having declared His acceptance of the latter in a visible manner, Cain said to his brother, "I will certainly kill you." Abel was the stronger of the two, and would easily have prevailed against his brother, but he answered, "If you stretch forth your hand against me, to slay me, I will not stretch forth my hand against you to slay you, for I fear Allah, the Lord of all creatures." So Cain began to consider in what way he should effect the murder, and as he was doing so, the devil appeared to him in human shape, and showed him how to do it, by crushing the head of a bird between two stones. Cain, having committed the fratricide, became exceedingly troubled in his mind, and carried the dead body on his shoulders for a considerable time, not knowing where to conceal it, till it stank horribly. And then Allah taught him to bury it by the example of a raven, who, having killed another raven in his presence, dug a pit with his claws and beak and buried him therein. Source: J. E. Hanauer, Folk-Lore of the Holy Land: Moslem, Christian, and Jew (London: Duckworth and Company, 1907), pp. 69-70 . Stylistically slightly revised by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . Cain and Abel Turkey It is related that when our mother Eve bare Cain and Abel, she bare a daughter along with each. God Most High commanded the Messenger Adam, saying, "For the sake of their offspring, give to Cain the girl born with Abel, and give to Abel the girl born with Cain." The Messenger Adam did so. Now the girl born with Cain was exceeding fair; and Cain said, "O father, let the girl born with him be his, and let the girl born with me be mine." Adam answered, "God Most High commanded otherwise." But Cain loved that girl exceedingly; so he went and slew Abel. Thus because of a woman was blood first shed upon the ground. Source: The History of the Forty Vezirs; or, The Story of the Forty Morns and Eves , written in Turkish by Sheykh-Zada, translated into English by E. J. W. Gibb (London: George Redway, 1886), p. 395 . This book is the translation of a manuscript prepared apparently in the early seventeenth century, but based on much older stories, similar in style and function to those found in the 1001 Nights . Return to the table of contents . Cain and Abel Turkey (Armenian) One day Eve called to her Cain and Abel, who, still little children, were playing on the grass. She held out to her firstborn her right arm, and to her second son her left, and said, "Bite them, I command you." The elder boy bit till he drew blood, but Abel merely imprinted a long lingering kiss on his mother's arm. Then said Eve to her husband, "Our Cain will be a wicked man." Adam and Eve loved Abel dearly. Cain was jealous of their partiality. He wished to kill his brother, but knew not how. Satan took the form of a raven, picked a quarrel with another raven, and in Cain's presence cut his opponent's throat with a pointed black pebble. Cain picked up the stone, hid it in his girdle, proposed to his brother a walk on the mountain, and there cut his throat with the pebble. The peasants of Armenia to this day call flints "Satan's nails," and conscientiously break every pointed black one they may find. Cain, after his crime, dared not return to his parents; the blood of his brother still adhered to his hands. In vain did he hold them all day long immersed in a neighboring spring; the stain was still there. Night came on, and, not being able to sleep, he wandered long and far, seeking a waterfall. Guided at last to one by the noise of its waters in the still night, he lay down on the bank and held his reddened hands under the cascade. There he held them, day and night, summer and winter, during a whole year, without sleep and without food, but at the end of that time they were still as crimson as on the day of the crime. And so long as Cain lived, he was never able to get rid of the proof of his fratricide. Source: Lucy M. J. Garnett, The Women of Turkey and Their Folk-Lore (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 273-74 . Return to the table of contents . Abel and Cain Italy They were two brothers. Abel greatly loved Cain, but Cain did not love so much the brother Abel. Cain had no great will to work. Abel, however, on the contrary, was greatly disposed ( si ingegnava ) to labor, because he had found it profitable. He was industrious in all, and at last became a grazier ( mercante di manzi . And Cain also, being moved by jealousy ( per astia ), wished to become a grazier, but the wheel did not turn for him as it did for Abel. And Cain also was a good man, and set himself contentedly to work, believing that he could become as rich as his brother, but he did not succeed in this, for which reason he became so envious of Abel that it resulted in tremendous hate, and he swore to be revenged. Cain often visited his brother, and once said to him, "Abel, thou art rich and I am poor. Give me the half of thy wealth, since thou wishest me so well!" Then Abel replied, "If I give thee a sum which thou thyself couldst gain by industry, thou shouldst still labor as I do, and I will give thee nothing, since, if thou wilt work as I do, thou wilt become as rich." One day there were together Cain, Abel, and a merchant, whose name I forget. And one told that he had seen in a dream seven fat oxen and seven lean. And the merchant, who was an astrologer or wizard, explained that the seven fat oxen meant seven years of abundance, and the seven lean as many years of famine. And so it came to pass as he foretold -- seven years of plenty and seven of famine. And Cain, hearing this, thought, "During the seven years of plenty Abel will lay by a great store, and then I will slay him, and possess myself of all his goods, and thus I will take care of myself, and my brother will be dead." Now, Cain greatly loved God; he was good towards God, more so than Abel, because Abel, having become rich, never spoke more unto the Lord; and Abel would gladly have become a wizard himself. Then Cain began to think how he could slay Abel and become a merchant in his place, and so went forth to cut wood. One day he called his brother Abel, and said to him, "Thou art so rich, while I am poor, and all my work avails me little." And with that he gave Abel a blow with a knife, and dressed himself in his garments, and took a bundle of thorns on his back, and thus clad he took Abel's place as a merchant, believing that no one would recognize him as Cain. And while thus buying and selling he met the merchant-wizard who had foretold the seven years of famine and of abundance. And he said, "Oh, good day, Abel," to make Cain believe that he was not discovered. But the oxen who were present all began to chant in chorus: Do not call that person Abel; It is Cain, do you not see it? Cain who, for the greed of money, Treacherously slew his brother, And then clad him in his garments. Now, O Cain! thou wilt be summoned Speedily unto the presence Of the Lord, who had condemned thee Unto death for thy great avarice. Cain came before God. O great God of endless mercy, Thou who art so good and mighty, Grant, I pray thee, grant me pardon For the good I did while living! Truly once, but for an instant, I forgot myself, but deeply I since then have long repented That I slew my brother Abel. But God replied: A punishment thou shalt have because thou didst slay thy brother from a desire to become rich. Likewise thou didst meddle with witchcraft and sorceries, as did thy brother. And Abel made much money and was very rich, because he did not love God, but sorcerers. Albeit, ever good he never did evil things, and many good, wherefore God pardoned him. But thou shalt not be pardoned because thou didst imbrue thy hands in human blood, and, what is worse, in thy own brother's blood. The punishment which I inflict is this: The thorns which thou didst put upon thy brother are now for thee. Thou shalt be imprisoned in the moon, and from that place shalt behold the good and the evil of all mankind. And the bundle of thorns shall never leave thee, and every time when anyone shall conjure thee, the thorns shall sting thee cruelly. They shall draw thy blood. And thus shalt thou be compelled to do that which shall be required of thee by the sorcerers or by conjuring, and if they ask of thee that which thou wilt not give, then the thorns shall goad thee until the sorceries shall cease. Source: Charles Godfrey Leland (Hans Breitmann) Legends of Florence , collected from the people and retold, first series (London: David Nutt; and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1895), pp. 263-66 . Breitmann's source: "Taken down from an old dame." Return to the table of contents . The First Grave Poland Adam and Eve were standing on the bank of a brook, and before them lay the corpse of Abel, who had been killed by Cain. As they sat there, not knowing what they should do with the corpse, suddenly a little bird fell from a nearby tree. The little bird was still very young and could not fly. The fall killed it. Adam and Eve looked at the dead bird and saw that it was a raven. Soon the old raven flew by, and when he saw that his young one was dead, he scratched a hole in the ground with his feet, and laid it inside. Then he scratched the hole full and flew away. Adam and Eve observed all this and followed the raven's example. They made a hole in the earth, laid Abel's corpse in it, and covered it with earth. This was the first human grave. Source: Otto Knoop, "Das erste Grab," Ostmärkische Sagen, Märchen und Erzählungen (Lissa [Leszno]: Oskar Eulitz' Verlag, 1909), no. 73, p. 149 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Return to the table of contents . The Treasures of Cain Romania Cain's treasures are hidden in a cave beneath the two mountains named Adam and Eve near Kimpolung. These treasures can only be won by a person who, first, has slain his brother and, second, like Abel is a shepherd. Recovering this treasure would be possible only on St. John's Day. Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Adolf Staufe-Simiginowicz, "Die Schätze des Kain," Volkssagen aus der Bukowina (Czernowitz [Chernivtsi]: Verlag der k. k. Universitäts-Buchhandlung Heinrich Perdini, 1885), p. 62 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludwig Adolf Staufe-Simiginowicz, "Die Schätze des Kain," Volkssagen aus der Bukowina (Czernowitz [Chernivtsi]: Verlag der k. k. Universitäts-Buchhandlung Heinrich Perdini, 1885), p. 62 . Return to the table of contents . Links to additional texts The Book of Adam and Eve: Also Called The Conflict of Adam and Eve with Satan , translated by S. C. Malan (London: Williams and Norgate, 1882), book 1, chapters 74-79, pp. 91-103 ; book 2, chapter 1, pp. 104-106 . Eliezer ben Hyrcanus, "Cain and Abel," Pirkê de Rabbi Eliezer , translated by Gerald Friedlander (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Company, 1916), chapter 21, pp. 150-57 . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 12, 2020. Where there Were No Graves The Place Where There Were No Graves folktales about eating dead people edited by D. L. Ashliman ©2001-2016 Contents The Place Where There Were No Graves (Egypt). The Country Where Death Is Not (Sudan). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Place Where There Were No Graves Egypt There was a man who married a wife of whom he was very fond. But after a while the wife died. Then the man wandered away in order to find a country in which no one died. So he went from place to place, looking for a town where there were no graves. At last he came to a town in the Sudan where there were no graves. So he remained here, in the house of the sheik. The sheik made a feast for him, and first offered him a piece of a roasted leg. "Where is your father?" asked the man. "This is his leg," said the sheik, "the rest of him is up there," pointing to a shelf. Then the man learned that when anyone fell ill, he was killed and eaten, and that this was the reason there were no graves. So in the night he ran away back to his own country. Source: A. H. Sayce, " Cairene and Upper Egyptian Folk-Lore ," Folk-Lore: Transactions of the Folk-Lore Society , vol. 31, no. 3 (September 1920), p. 178. Return to the table of contents . The Country Where Death Is Not Sudan There was a man with his mother. The mother was much afraid of dying, therefore she wished to go into a country where there is no death. The son said, "Where is a country without death?" She answered, "Well, there is such a country, bring me there!" The woman was very old. So they traveled into a very, very distant country to reach the country where there is no death. They turned into a village and asked for water. When it was given them, the son asked, "Is there death in this country?" The people answered, "Dear me, where do you come from that you ask such a question concerning death?" He answered, "My mother is afraid of dying, so she wants a country where death is not." The people said, "Why, go away!" They went and turned to another village. There they asked again and received the answer, "Why, what kind of man are you that you ask about dying? Go away! There is death here." Then they went to a very distant country and asked, "How is your country? Is there death in it?" The answer was, "No, people do not die here." The mother was very glad, she said, "Well done, my son, you have brought me to a country where there is no death." Her son had a friend in that town, and to his home he brought his mother. He said, "Here is my mother, let her live with you. I shall go to our country, and after three years I shall return to see you and my mother." His mother was satisfied. So the boy returned to his native country and stayed there for some time. But his mother became sick; she got a headache; she said, "Friend of my son, I have a headache." On that the boy arose and called the people together. The people came and sat down. The boy said, "I have called you because of the mother of my friend, who is here. Now collect money, that we may give it to her son when he returns. For she says her head is aching; and because of her sickness her meat will spoil. For that reason," he said, "she must be killed at once." When the woman heard this, she began crying, "I am not sick! I have no headache!" But the people said, "Never mind, seize her, or her flesh will be spoiled." So she was caught, brought, thrown on the ground and killed; her flesh was divided among the people, and they ate it. The next day they collected money and brought it to the friend of her son. And her son came back. He sat down, they gave him food, and he ate. He asked, "Where is my mother?" His friend answered, "My friend, your mother was seized with sickness, so we collected money, -- here is the money! -- and killed her, lest her meat should be spoiled. For as for us, we do not die in our country; if a man is seized with sickness, we kill him." The boy replied, "Why, should I sell my mother? Never!" Then he said, "I will but go." His friend said, "You are angry?" He replied, "No, I am not angry." In the meantime the people came and wanted to eat the boy too. His friend therefore went to him saying, "Go, or you also will be eaten like your mother." He accompanied him into a distant country. When the boy came home, he said to his people, "My mother has been eaten by a lion." That is all; and the people said, "Your mother was a sinful woman. Is not death in all the world, and should there be a place where there is no death?" Source: Diedrich Westermann, The Shilluk People: Their Language and Folklore (Philadelphia: Board of Foreign Missions of the United Presbyterian Church of North America, 1912), pp. 228-29 . Return to the table of contents . Related links Aging and Death in Folklore . An essay by D. L. Ashliman, with supporting texts from proverbs, folktales, and myths from around the world. Killing of Old Men . Folktales of type 981 and other legends about geronticide. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised Halloween, 2016. Cat and Mouse: Fables about Cats and Mice Cat and Mouse fables about cats and mice translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2013 Contents Cat and Mouse in Partnership (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm), type 15. Mouse and Mouser (England, Joseph Jacobs), type 111. Belling the Cat (Aesop), type 110. The Cat and the Mice (Aesop), type 113*. The Hypocritical Cat (Tibet), type 113B. The Cat and the Mice (Tibet), type 113B. The Cat as Holy Man (Palestine), type 113B. The Town Mouse and the Field Mouse (Romania, M. Gaster), types 112 and 113B. The Dog, the Cat, and the Mouse (Romania, M. Gaster), type 200. The Cat and the Mouse (England, James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps), type 2034. Cat and Mouse (Germany, Ernst Meier), type 2034. Why the Cat Kills Rats (Nigeria, Elphinstone Dayrell). Related Links . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Cat and Mouse in Partnership Germany A cat and a mouse wanted to live together and keep house as a partnership. They prepared for winter by buying a pot of fat, and because they had no safer spot for it, they placed it under the alter in the church until such time that they would need it. However, one day the cat took a longing for it, and approached the mouse. "Listen, little mouse, my cousin has invited me to serve as godfather. She has given birth to a brown and white spotted little son, and I am supposed to carry him to his baptism. Is it all right for me to leave you home alone with the housework today?" "Go ahead," said the mouse, "and if they serve you something good, just think of me. I would certainly welcome a drop of good red christening wine." But the cat went straight to the church and ate the top off the fat and then went strolling about the town and did not return home until evening. "You must have had a good time," said the mouse. "What name did they give the child?" "Top-Off," answered the cat. "Top-Off? That's a strange name, one that I've not yet heard." Soon afterward the cat took another longing, went to the mouse, and said, "I've been asked to serve as godfather once again. The child has a white ring around its body. I can't say no. You'll have to do me a favor and take care of the house by yourself today." The mouse agreed, and the cat went and ate up half the fat. When she returned home, the mouse asked, "What name did this godchild receive?" "Half-Gone." "Half-Gone? What are you telling me? I've never heard that name. It certainly isn't in the almanac." Now the cat could not take his mind off the pot of fat. "I've been invited to serve as godfather for a third time," he said. "The child is black and has white paws, but not another white hair on his entire body. That only happens once in a few years. You will let me go, won't you?" "Top-Off, Half-Gone," said the mouse. "Those names are so curious that it makes me a bit suspicious, but go ahead." The mouse took care of the house and cleaned up everything, while the cat finished off the pot of fat. Round and full, she did not return until nighttime. "What is the third child's name?" "All-Gone." "All-Gone! That is a worrisome name!" said the mouse. "All-Gone. Just what does this mean? I've never seen that name in print," and she shook her head and went to bed. No one invited the cat to serve as godfather a fourth time. Winter soon came, and when they could no longer find anything to eat outside, the mouse said to the cat, "Let's get the provisions that we've hid in the church under the altar." They went there, but the pot was empty. "Now I see!" said the mouse. "You came here when you said you were invited to be a godfather. First came Top-Off, then it was Half-Gone, and then..." "Be still," said the cat. "I'll eat you up, if you say another word." "All-Gone" was already in the poor mouse's mouth, and she had scarcely said it before the cat jumped on her and swallowed her down. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 1st ed. (Berlin, 1812/1815), v. 1, no. 2. Link to the German text Katz und Maus in Gesellschaft . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 15. Return to the table of contents . Mouse and Mouser England The mouse went to visit the cat, and found her sitting behind the hall door, spinning. Mouse: What are you doing, my lady, my lady, What are you doing, my lady? Cat (sharply): I'm spinning old breeches, good body, good body, I'm spinning old breeches, good body. Mouse: Long may you wear them, my lady, my lady, Long may you wear them, my lady. Cat (gruffly): I'll wear 'em and tear 'em, good body, good body, I'll wear 'em and tear 'em, good body. Mouse: I was sweeping my room, my lady, my lady, I was sweeping my room, my lady. Cat: The cleaner you'd be, good body, good body, The cleaner you'd be, good body. Mouse: I found a silver sixpence, my lady, my lady, I found a silver sixpence, my lady. Cat: The richer you were, good body, good body, The richer you were, good body. Mouse: I went to the market, my lady my lady, I went to the market, my lady. Cat: The further you went, good body, good body, The further you went, good body. Mouse: I bought me a pudding, my lady, my lady, I bought me a pudding, my lady. Cat: (snarling): The more meat you had, good body, good body, The more meat you had, good body. Mouse: I put it in the window to cool, my lady, I put it in the window to cool. Cat (sharply): The faster you'd eat it, good body, good body, The faster you'd eat it, good body. Mouse (timidly): The cat came and ate it, my lady, my lady, The cat came and ate it, my lady. Cat (pouncingly): And I'll eat you, good body, good body, And I'll eat you, good body. (Springs upon the mouse and kills it.) Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons; London: David Nutt, 1898), pp. 48-50. Jacobs' source: From memory by Lady Burne-Jones. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 111. Return to the table of contents . Belling the Cat Aesop Long ago, the mice held a general council to consider what measures they could take to outwit their common enemy, the cat. Some said this, and some said that; but at last a young mouse got up and said he had a proposal to make, which he though would meet the case. "You will all agree," said he, "that our chief danger consists in the sly and treacherous manner in which the enemy approaches us. Now, if we could receive some signal of her approach, we could easily escape from her. I venture, therefore, to propose that a small bell be procured, and attached by a ribbon round the neck of the cat. By this means we should always know when she was about, and could easily retire while she was in the neighborhood." This proposal met with general applause, until an old mouse got up and said, "That is all very well, but who is to bell the cat?" The mice looked at one another and nobody spoke. Then the old mouse said: " It is easy to propose impossible remedies ." Source: Joseph Jacobs, The Fables of Æsop: Selected, Told Anew, and Their History Traced (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), pp. 159-60 . This fable is sometimes entitled "Mice in Council." Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 110. Return to the table of contents . The Cat and the Mice Aesop There was once a house that was overrun with mice. A cat heard of this, and said to herself, "That's the place for me," and off she went and took up her quarters in the house, and caught the mice one by one and ate them. At last the mice could stand it n longer, and they determined to take to their holes and stay there. "That's awkward," said the cat to herself. "The only thing to do is to coax them out by a trick." So she considered a while, and then climbed up the wall and let herself hang down by her hind legs from a peg, and pretended to be dead. By and by a mouse peeped out and saw the cat hanging there. "Aha!" it cried, "You're very clever, madam, no doubt. But you may turn yourself into a bag of meal hanging there, if you like, yet you won't catch us coming anywhere near you." If you are wise you won't be deceived by the innocent airs of those whom you have once found to be dangerous. Source: V. S. Vernon Jones, transl., Æsop's Fables (London: W. Heinemann, 1912), pp. 2-3. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 113*. Return to the table of contents . The Hypocritical Cat Tibet In long-past times there was a chieftain of a company of mice who had a retinue of five hundred mice. And there was also a cat named Agnija. In his youth he had been wont to kill all the mice in the neighborhood of his dwelling place. But afterward, when he had grown old, and no longer had the power of catching mice, he thought, "In former times, when I was young, I was able to catch mice by force. But now that I can do so no more, I must use some trick in order to make a meal off them." So he began to watch the mice by stealth. By means of such watching he found out that there were five hundred mice in the troop. At a spot not far distant from the mouse hole, he took to performing fictitious acts of penance, and the mice, as they ran to and fro, saw him standing there with pious mien. So they cried out to him from a distance, "Uncle, what are you doing?" The cat replied, "As in my youth I have perpetrated many vicious actions, I am now doing penance in order to make up for them." The mice fancied that he had given up his sinful life, and there grew up within them confidence nourished by faith. Now as they returned into their hole every day after making their rounds, the cat always seized on and devoured the mouse which came last. Seeing that the troop was constantly dwindling, the chief thought, "There must be some cause for the fact that my mice are diminishing in number, and this cat is thriving apace." So he began t observe the cat closely. And when he saw that the cat was fat and well covered with hair, he thought, "There is no doubt that this cat has killed the mice. Therefore must I bring the matter to the light of day." Now as he kept careful watch from a hiding place, he saw how the cat ate up the mouse which went last. Then from afar off he pronounced this verse: As the uncle's body waxes bigger, but my troop on the contrary becomes smaller, and as he who eats roots and berries will not become fat and well covered with hair, this is not a genuine penance, but one performed only for the sake of gain. Because the number of the mice diminished, have you, O Agnija, thrived. Source: Tibetan Tales, Derived from Indian Sources , translated from the Tibetan of the Kaygyur [Kanjur] by F. Anton von Schiefner, and from the German into English by W. R. S. Ralston (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner and Company, 1906), no. 40, pp. 344-45 . The Kanjur ("translated word") is a large collection of Buddhist teachings and tales, probably brought to Tibet by Indian refugees in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Depending on the edition, the Kanjur consists of 100, 102, or 108 folio volumes. The Kanjur plus the Tanjur ("translated treatises"), comprise the two parts of the official canon of Tibetan Buddhism. Return to the table of contents . The Cat and the Mice Tibet Once upon a time there was a cat who lived in a large farmhouse in which there was a great number of mice. For many years the cat found no difficulty in catching as many mice as she wanted to eat, and she lived a very peaceful and pleasant life. But as time passed on she found that she was growing old and infirm, and that it was becoming more and more difficult for her to catch the same number of mice as before; so after thinking very carefully what was the best thing to do, she one day called all the mice together, and after promising not to touch them, she addressed them as follows: "Oh! mice," said she, "I have called you together in order to say something to you. The fact is that I have led a very wicked life, and now, in my old age, I repent of having caused you all so much inconvenience and annoyance. So I am going for the future to turn over a new leaf. It is my intention now to give myself up entirely to religious contemplation and no longer to molest you, so henceforth you are at liberty to run about as freely as you will without fear of me. All I ask of you is that twice every day you should all file past me in procession and each one make an obeisance as you pass me by, as a token of your gratitude to me for my kindness." When the mice heard this they were greatly pleased, for they thought that now, at last, they would be free from all danger from their former enemy, the cat. So they very thankfully promised to fulfill the cat's conditions, and agreed that they would file past her and make a salaam twice every day. So when evening came the cat took her seat on a cushion at one end of the room, and the mice all went by in single file, each one making a profound salaam as it passed. Now the cunning old cat had arranged this little plan very carefully with an object of her own; for, as soon as the procession had all passed by with the exception of one little mouse, she suddenly seized the last mouse in her claws without anybody else noticing what had happened, and devoured it at her leisure. And so twice every day, she seized the last mouse of the series, and for a long time lived very comfortably without any trouble at all in catching her mice, and without any of the mice realizing what was happening. Now it happened that amongst these mice there were two friends, whose names were Rambé and Ambé, who were very much attached to one another. Now these two were much cleverer and more cunning than most of the others, and after a few days they noticed that the number of mice in the house seemed to be decreasing very much, in spite of the fact that the cat had promised not to kill any more. So they laid their heads together and arranged a little plan for future processions. They agreed that Rambé was always to walk at the very front of the procession of the mice, and the Ambé was to bring up the rear, and that all the time the procession was passing, Rambé was to call to Ambé, and Ambé to answer Rambé at frequent intervals. So next evening, when the procession started as usual, Rambé marched along in front, and Ambé took up his position last of all. As soon as Rambé had passed the cushion where the cat was seated and had made his salaam, he called out in a shrill voice, "Where are you, Brother Ambé?" "Here I am, Brother Rambé," squeaked the other from the rear of the procession. And so they went on calling out and answering one another until they had all filed past the cat, who had not dared to touch Ambé as long as his brother kept calling to him. The cat was naturally very much annoyed at having to go hungry that evening, and felt very cross all night. But she thought it was only an accident which had brought the two friends, one in front and one in rear of the procession, and she hoped to make up for her enforced abstinence by finding a particularly fat mouse at the end of the procession next morning. What, then, was her amazement and disgust when she found that on the following morning the very same arrangement had been made, and that Rambé called to Ambé, and Ambé answered Rambé until all the mice had passed her by, and so, for the second time, she was foiled of her meal. However, she disguised her feelings of anger and decided to give the mice one more trial; so in the evening she took her seat as usual on the cushion and waited for the mice to appear. Meanwhile, Rambé and Ambé had warned the other mice to be on the lookout, and to be ready to take flight the moment the cat showed any appearance of anger. At the appointed time the procession started as usual, and as soon as Rambé had passed the cat he squeaked out, "Where are you, Brother Ambé?" "Here I am, Brother Rambé," came the shrill voice from the rear. This was more than the cat could stand. She made a fierce leap right into the middle of the mice, who, however, were thoroughly prepared for her, and in an instant they scuttled off in every direction to their holes. And before the cat had time to catch a single one, the room was empty and not a sign of a mouse was to be seen anywhere. After this the mice were very careful not to put any further trust in the treacherous cat, who soon after died of starvation owing to her being unable to procure any of her customary food. But Rambé and Ambé lived for many years, and were held in high honor and esteem by all the other mice in the community. Source: W. F. O'Connor, Folk Tales from Tibet (London: Hurst and Blackett, Ltd., 1906), no. 5, pp. 26-29. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 113B. Return to the table of contents . The Cat as Holy Man Palestine A town cat, having destroyed almost all the mice and rats in the place, found itself forced, for lack of prey, to go into the fields and hunt for birds, mice, rats, and lizards. In this time of need it thought of the following ruse. It stayed away for some weeks from its usual haunts, and, returning, lay down in front of a mouse and rat warren, with a rosary round its neck; then, with its eyes closed, fell to purring loudly. Soon a mouse peeped out of a hole, but, seeing the cat, hastily returned. "Why do you flee?" said pussy gently. "Instead of showing pleasure at the return of an old neighbor from the pilgrimage, you run away as soon as you see him. Come and visit me, fear nothing." Surprised at hearing itself thus addressed, the mouse again ventured to the door of its hole and said, "How can you expect me to visit you? Are you not the enemy of my race? Should I accept your invitation you would surely seize and devour me as you did my parents and so many others of my kindred." "Alas!" sighed the cat, "your reproaches are just. I have been a great sinner, and have earned abuse and enmity. But I am truly penitent. As you see from this rosary round my neck, I now devote myself to prayer, meditation, and the recital of holy books, the whole of which I have learnt by heart, and was just beginning to repeat when you happened to look out of your hole. Besides this, I have visited the Holy Places, so am a Hajji [pilgrim] as well as a Hâfiz [one who knows the whole Koran by heart]. Go, my injured but nevertheless generous and forgiving friend, make my change of life and sentiments known to the rest of your people and bid them no longer shun my society, seeing that I am become a recluse. Whilst you are absent I shall resume my recitations. Purr, purr, purr." Much surprised at the news he had just heard, the mouse made it known to the rest of the tribe. They were at first incredulous; but at last after one and another had ventured to peep from the mouth of its hole and had beheld the whiskered ascetic with the rosary round his neck apparently oblivious of earthly things, and steadily repeating his purr, purr, purr, which they supposed to be the contents of holy books, they thought that there might be some truth in the matter, and they convened a meeting of mice and rats to discuss it. After much debate it was judged right to test the reality of the cat's conversion, but to be prudent at the same time; and so a large and experienced rat was sent out to reconnoiter. Being a wary veteran, he kept well out of the cat's reach, though he saluted him respectfully from a distance. The cat allowed the rat to prowl about unmolested for a long time in the hope that other rats and mice would come out, when his prey would be easy to catch and plentiful. But no others came, and at last the pangs of hunger made him resolve to wait no longer. The rat, however, was on the alert and darted off the instant he noticed, from a slight movement of the cat's muscles, that the pretended saint was about to kill him. "Why do you go away so abruptly?" mewed the cat. "Are you tired of hearing me repeat scripture, or do you doubt the correctness of my recitation?" "Neither," answered the rat as he peeped from the hole in which he had taken refuge. "Neither," answered the rat as he peeped from the hole in which he had taken refuge. "I am convinced that, however much you may have learnt by rote, you have neither unlearnt nor eschewed your habits of pouncing upon us." Source: J. E. Hanauer, Folk-Lore of the Holy Land: Moslem, Christian, and Jewish , edited by Marmaduke Pickthall (London: Duckworth and Company, 1907), pp. 267-70 . Hanauer does not provide a title for this story. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 113B. Return to the table of contents . The Town Mouse and the Field Mouse Romania A mouse living in the town one day met a mouse which lived in the field. "Where do you come from?" asked the latter when she saw the town mouse. "I come from yonder town," replied the first mouse. "How is life going there with you?" "Very well, indeed. I am living in the lap of luxury. Whatever I want of sweets or any other good things is to be found in abundance in my master's house. But how are you living?" "I have nothing to complain of. You just come and see my stores. I have grain and nuts, and all the fruits of the tree and field in my storehouse." The town mouse did not quite believe the story of her new friend, and, driven by curiosity, went with her to the latter's house. How great was her surprise when she found that the field mouse had spoken the truth; her garner was full of nuts and grain and other stores, and her mouth watered when she saw all the riches which were stored up there. Then she turned to the field mouse and said, "Oh, yes, you have here a nice snug place and something to live upon, but you should come to my house and see what I have there. Your stock is as nothing compared with the riches which are mine." The field mouse, who was rather simple by nature and trusted her new friend, went with her into the town to see what better things the other could have. She had never been into the town and did not know what her friend could mean when she boasted of her greater riches. So they went together, and the town mouse took her friend to her master's house. He was a grocer, and there were boxes and sacks full of every good thing the heart of a mouse could desire. When she saw all these riches, the field mouse said she could never have believed it, had she not seen it with her own eyes. While they were talking together, who should come in but the cat. As soon as the town mouse saw the cat, she slipped quietly behind a box and hid herself. Her friend, who had never yet seen a cat, turned to her and asked her who that gentleman was who had come in so quietly. "Do you not know who he is? Why, he is our priest, and he has come to see me. You must go and pay your respects to him and kiss his hand. See what a beautiful glossy coat he has on, and how his eyes sparkle, and how demurely he keeps his hands in the sleeves of his coat." Not suspecting anything, the field mouse did as she was told and went up to the cat. He gave her at once his blessing, and the mouse had no need of another after that. The cat gave her extreme unction there and then. That was just what the town mouse had intended. When she saw how well stored the home of the field mouse was, she made up her mind to trap her and to kill her, so that she might take possession of all that the field mouse had gathered up. She had learned the ways of the townspeople and had acted accordingly. Source: M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 105, pp. 311-312. Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 112 and 113B. This is the familiar Aesopian fable of the town mouse and the country mouse (told here with an ironic twist), followed by the tale of the cat as a holy man. Return to the table of contents . The Dog, the Cat, and the Mouse Romania In the beginning there was no enmity between the cat and dog, and they lived on friendly terms together and served their master (Adam) faithfully, each one doing its own work. But as you know, it is very much better to have a written agreement at the beginning than to have a row afterwards, so they decided to draw up an agreement defining the work which each had to do, and decided that the dog was to do the work outside the house, and the cat the work inside. For greater safety the dog agreed that the cat should take care of the agreement, and the cat put it in the loft. After a time, the devil, who could not allow peace to last for a long time, must needs set the dog up against the cat; so one day the dog remarked to the cat that he was not fairly treated. He did not see why he should have all the trouble outside the house, to watch for thieves and protect the house and suffer from cold and rain, and only have scraps and bones for food, and sometimes nothing at all, whilst the cat had all the comfort, purring and enjoying herself, and living near the hearth in warmth and safety. The cat said, "An agreement is an agreement." The dog replied, "Let me see that agreement." The cat went quickly up the loft to fetch the agreement, but the agreement, which had been a little greasy, had been nibbled by the mice who were living in the loft, and they went on nibbling away until nothing was left of it but a heap of paper fluff, and as it was as soft as down the mice made their home of it. When the cat came up and saw what the mice had done, her fury knew no bounds. She pursued them madly, killing as many as she could seize, and running after the others with the intent of catching them. When she came down the dog asked her for the agreement, and as the cat had not brought it, the dog, taking hold of her, shook her until he got tired of shaking her. Since that time, whenever a dog meets a cat he asks her for the agreement, and as she cannot show it to him he goes for her. And the cat, knowing what the mice had done to her, runs after them when she sees them. Source: M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 66, pp. 208-209. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 200. Return to the table of contents . The Cat and the Mouse England The cat and the mouse Played in the malt-house. The cat bit the mouse's tail off. "Pray, puss, give me my tail." "No," says the cat, "I'll not give you your tail, till you go to the cow, and fetch me some milk." First she leapt, and then she ran, Till she came to the cow, and thus began: "Pray, cow, give me milk, that I may give cat milk, that cat may give me my own tail again." "No," said the cow, I will give you no milk, till you go to the farmer and get me some hay." First she leapt, and then she ran, Till she came to the farmer, and thus began: "Pray, farmer, give me hay, that I may give cow hay, that cow may give me milk, that I may give cat milk, that cat may give me my own tail again." "No," says the farmer, I'll give you no hay, till you go to the butcher and fetch me some meat." First she leapt, and then she ran, Till she came to the butcher, and thus began: "Pray, butcher, give me meat, that I may give farmer meat, that farmer may give me hay, that I may give cow hay, that cow may give me milk, that I may give cat milk, that cat may give me my own tail again." "No," says the butcher, "I'll give you no meat, till you go the baker and fetch me some bread." First she leapt, and then she ran, Till she came to the baker, and thus began: Pray, baker, give me bread, that I may give butcher bread, that butcher may give me meat, that I may give farmer meat, that farmer may give me hay, that I may give cow hay, that cow may give me milk, that I may give cat milk, that cat may give me my own tail again." "Yes," says the baker, I'll give you some bread, But if you eat my meal, I'll cut off your head. Then the baker gave mouse bread, and mouse gave butcher bread, and butcher gave mouse meat, and mouse gave farmer meat, and farmer gave mouse hay, and mouse gave cow hay, and cow gave mouse milk, and mouse gave cat milk, and cat gave mouse her own tail again! Source: James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps: Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to the Nursery Rhymes of England (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), pp. 33-34. Footnote by Halliwell-Phillipps: This tale has been traced back fifty years, but it is probably considerably older. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 2034. Return to the table of contents . Cat and Mouse Germany (Swabia) Once upon a time a cat and a mouse went for a walk together, and the cat bit off the mouse's tail. So the mouse said to the cat, "Give me back my tail." The cat said to the mouse, "If you will get me some cheese." So the mouse went to the innkeeper and said: Innkeeper, give me some cheese! I'll give it to the cat, And the cat will give me back my tail. The innkeeper said, "If you will fetch me a knife." So the mouse went to the blacksmith and said: Blacksmith, give me a knife! I'll give it to the innkeeper, And the innkeeper will give me cheese for the cat, And the cat will give me back my tail. The blacksmith said, "If you will fetch me a horn." So the mouse went to the goat and said: Goat, give me a horn! I'll give it to the blacksmith, And the blacksmith will give me a knife for the innkeeper, And the innkeeper will give me cheese for the cat, And the cat will give me back my tail. The goat said, "If you will fetch me some hay." So the mouse went to the farmer and said: Farmer, give me hay! I'll give it to the goat, And the goat will give me a horn for the blacksmith, And the blacksmith will give me a knife for the innkeeper, And the innkeeper will give me cheese for the cat, And the cat will give me back my tail. The farmer said, "If you will fetch me some soup." So the mouse went to the cook and said: Cook, give me soup! I'll give it to the farmer, And the farmer will give me hay for the goat, And the goat will give me a horn for the blacksmith, And the blacksmith will give me a knife for the innkeeper, And the innkeeper will give me cheese for the cat, And the cat will give me back my tail. The cook said, "If you will fetch me some slippers." So the mouse went to the shoemaker and said: Shoemaker, give me slippers! I'll give them to the cook, And the cook will give me soup for the farmer, And the farmer will give me hay for the goat, And the goat will give me a horn for the blacksmith, And the blacksmith will give me a knife for the innkeeper, And the innkeeper will give me cheese for the cat, And the cat will give me back my tail. The shoemaker said, "If you will fetch me some bristles." So the mouse went to the sow and said: Sow, give me bristles! I'll give them to the shoemaker, And the shoemaker will give me slippers for the cook, And the cook will give me soup for the farmer, And the farmer will give me hay for the goat, And the goat will give me a horn for the blacksmith, And the blacksmith will give me a knife for the innkeeper, And the innkeeper will give me cheese for the cat, And the cat will give me back my tail. The sow said, "If you will fetch me some bran." So the mouse went to the miller and said: Miller, give me bran! I'll give it to the sow, And the sow will give me bristles for the shoemaker, And the shoemaker will give me slippers for the cook, And the cook will give me soup for the farmer, And the farmer will give me hay for the goat, And the goat will give me a horn for the blacksmith, And the blacksmith will give me a knife for the innkeeper, And the innkeeper will give me cheese for the cat, And the cat will give me back my tail. The miller said, "If you will fetch me some water." So the mouse went to the brook in order to fetch water. But she fell in and drowned. Source: Ernst Meier, "Kätzle und Mäusle," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlins Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 81, pp. 283-285. Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002. Return to the table of contents . Why the Cat Kills Rats Nigeria Ansa was King of Calabar for fifty years. He had a very faithful cat as a housekeeper, and a rat was his house-boy. The king was an obstinate, headstrong man, but was very fond of the cat, who had been in his store for many years. The rat, who was very poor, fell in love with one of the king's servant girls, but was unable to give her any presents, as he had no money. At last he thought of the king's store, so in the nighttime, being quite small, he had little difficulty, having made a hole in the roof, in getting into the store. He then stole corn and native pears, and presented them to his sweetheart. At the end of the month, when the cat had to render her account of the things in the store to the king, it was found that a lot of corn and native pears were missing. The king was very angry at this, and asked the cat for an explanation. But the cat could not account for the loss, until one of her friends told her that the rat had been stealing the corn and giving it to the girl. When the cat told the king, he called the girl before him and had her flogged. The rat he handed over to the cat to deal with, and dismissed them both from his service. The cat was so angry at this that she killed and ate the rat, and ever since that time whenever a cat sees a rat she kills and eats it. Source: Elphinstone Dayrell, Folk Stories from Southern Nigeria, West Africa (London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1910), no. 18, pp. 68-69. Links to additional folktales from Nigeria . Return to the table of contents . Related Links The Pied Piper of Hameln and related legends from other towns . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 5, 2013. Cattarinetta Cattarinetta a folktale from Italy of Aarne-Thompson type 333A about a careless girl who is eaten up by a witch translated and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999 Contents Cattarinetta (Italy). Links to related tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Cattarinetta Italy Once upon a time there was a mother who had a little daughter named Cattarinetta. One day she wanted to bake a cake and so she sent the girl to borrow a pan from her aunt, who was a wicked witch. The aunt gave the pan to the girl, saying, "Don't forget to bring me a piece of cake." The cake was baked, and as soon as it was done the mother cut off a piece and put it in the pan, which the girl was to take back to the aunt. The delicious piece of cake tempted the girl, and as she walked along she pinched off one bite after the other and ate it, until finally there was nothing left in the pan. She was terrified, but she thought of a trick that would help her. She picked up a cow pie from the path and laid it in the pan so that it looked like a piece of cake with brown crust. "Did you bring me the pan and a piece of cake?" asked the aunt as Cattarinetta arrived. "Yes," said the girl, then set the pan down and ran away hurriedly. Cattarinetta arrived back home, and when night fell she went to bed. Then suddenly she heard her aunt's voice calling, "Cattarinetta, I am coming. I am already at your front door!" The girl slid further down into her bed, but the voice called out in short intervals again and again: "Cattarinetta, I am coming. I am already on the stairway!" "Cattarinetta, I am coming. I am already just outside your door!" "Cattarinetta, I am coming. I am already beside your bed!" And slurp! She swallowed up the girl. Source: Christian Schneller, "Cattarinetta," Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), no. 5, pp. 8-9. This story is from South Tyrol, an alpine region in northern Italy but with historical and cultural ties to Austria. Aarne-Thompson type 333A. Return to the table of contents . Links to related tales Little Red Riding Hood and other tales of Aarne-Thompson type 333. Little Red Riding Hood (Charles Perrault). Little Red Cap (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Little Red Hat (Italy/Austria). The False Grandmother (France). A Corpse Claims Its Property . Tales of Aarne-Thompson type 366. These stories share with those of type 333A the closing episode in which a supernatural visitor terrorizes the main character with increasingly ominous threats. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 26, 1999. Censorship in Folklore Censorship in Folklore An essay by D. L. Ashliman © 1997-2021 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Tales not fit for print One could argue, as folklorists sometimes do in their professional meetings and journals, that no true folktale is fit for print. What they mean by this is that the act of reducing any oral performance to written language, by the very nature of things, introduces its own set of changes. Interaction between teller and listener is largely lost, as are nuances of voice; meaning carried by gestures, and so on. Collectors and editors of folktales have wrestled with these problems from the very beginning. How, for example, should one spell the "wolf whistle" used by insensitive construction workers to signal their approval of attractive women? "Wheet-wheeo" may get the point across, but it surely does not carry the emotional impact of the audible whistle. Similarly, how should one spell the sound of disapproval made by clicking the tongue against the roof of the mouth? The approximation "tsk, tsk" is about the best one can do with a written word, but it too is a weak imitation of the real thing, to say nothing of a statement such as "and he responded with an obscene gesture." Further, speech in a regional or socio-economic dialect carries a level of meaning that can only be alluded to in print. For example, the pioneer folktale collectors Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm bemoaned the loss of texture and meaning imposed on their stories by translating them from local dialects into standard German. They did, by way of example, publish a handful of tales in Low German, Bavarian German, and Swiss German, but the great majority of their stories are in a simple, but literate and grammatically correct standard High German, the language of writing, not the language of ordinary speech. The problem of reducing speech to print intensifies when one is confronted with words or acts that, according to longstanding convention, are "unprintable." Any collector of ordinary people's speech acts will soon meet up with indelicate, even tabooed language, gestures, and events. By today's norms, nineteenth-century (the age of most pioneering folklore collections) publication standards were exceedingly careful, even prudish. Although printed anecdote collections from earlier centuries were normally unashamedly blunt, nineteenth and early twentieth-century editors and publishers were much more cautious. With few exceptions, they bowdlerized or omitted any potentially offensive words and episodes. "Victorian" scholars (and those from later generations as well) have seen no contradiction in their attempts to preserve common culture while avoiding that which was vulgar. Virtually every major collection offers examples. The following quotations speak for themselves: In this new edition we have carefully removed every expression inappropriate for children. -- Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, preface to the 1819 edition of their Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales). These comments are repeated in the authoritative edition of 1857: Kinder und Hausmärchen: Gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , 7th ed., vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), p. xi . In our translation of these "Household Stories" ... we have omitted about a dozen short pieces to which English mothers might object, and for good and satisfactory reasons have altered, in a slight way, four other stories. The mixture of sacred subjects with profane, though frequent in Germany, would not meet with favor in an English book. Household Stories . Collected by the Brothers Grimm. Newly Translated. With 240 illustrations by Edward H. Wehnert. Vol 1. London: Addey and Company, 1853, p. iv .) A very few of the tales have been omitted, as not exactly suited to young English readers. -- Grimm's Fairy Tales . A new translation by Mrs. H. B. Paull. Specially adapted and arranged for young people. London: Frederick Warne and Company, p. iv . And now, before the translator takes leave of his readers for the second time, he will follow the lead of the good godmother in one of these tales, and forbid all good children to read the two which stand last in the book [Tom Totterhouse" and "Little Annie the Goose-Girl"]. -- George Webbe Dasent, preface to the second edition (dated 1859) of his translation of Popular Tales from the Norse by Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe (London: George Routledge and Sons, n.d.), p. vi. Dasent did not include this warning in his first edition of this collection. To the contrary, his preface (dated 1858) to this edition he justifies his unwillingnes to "soften" any of the tales: "Any, who may be inclined to be offended at first ... may find, not only that the softening process would have spoilt these popular traditions for all except the most childish readers, but that the things which shocked them at the first blush, are, after all, not so very shocking. -- George Webbe Dasent, Popular Tales from the Norse (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), p. vi . Many parts [of the old Cornish folk plays] are omitted, as they would in our refined days, be considered coarse; but as preserving a true picture of a peculiar people, as they were a century and a half or two centuries since, I almost regret the omissions. -- Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England , second series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), p. 188 . "The Swineherd" has certain traits in common with an old Danish folktale, but the version I heard, as a child, would be quite unprintable. -- Hans Christian Andersen, "Notes for Fairy Tales and Stories" (1874), as quoted in The Complete Fairy Tales and Stories , translated by Erik Christian Haugaard (Garden City: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1983), p. 1073. I heard another version of the same story ["The Smith and the Fairies"] in Lewis from a medical gentleman, who got it from an old woman, who told it as a fact, with some curious variations unfit for printing. -- J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), p. 54 . Many of the tales in this collection appeared either in the Indian Antiquary , the Calcutta Review , or the Legends of the Punjab . They were then in the form of literal translations, in many cases uncouth or even unpresentable to ears polite, in all scarcely intelligible to the untravelled English reader. -- Flora Annie Steel, Tales of the Punjab , notes by R. C. Temple (London: Macmillan and Company, 1894), p. v . First published (without the above disclaimer) in 1884 under the title Wide-Awake Stories: A Collection of Tales Told by Little Children, between Sunset and Sunrise, in the Panjab and Kashmir (Bombay: Education Society's Press; London: Trübner and Company, 1884. I have had to omit a certain number of stories as unsuited for publication. -- Cecil Henry Bompas, preface to Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), p. 7 . Here are a few of the stories told of Johha [a Palestinian trickster analagous to the Turkish Nasreddin Hodja or the European Till Eulenspiegel]. The majority are unfit for reproduction. -- J. E. Hanauer, Folk-Lore of the Holy Land: Moslem, Christian, and Jewish (London: Duckworth and Company, 1907), p. 84 . When the tales are found they are adapted to the needs of British children by various hands, the editor doing little beyond guarding the interests of propriety, and toning down to mild reproofs the tortures inflicted on wicked stepmothers and other naughty characters. -- Andrew Lang, preface to The Crimson Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1903), p. v . Whenever an original incident, so far as I could penetrate to it, seemed to me too crudely primitive for the children of the present day, I have had no scruples in modifying or mollifying it, drawing attention to such bowdlerization in the somewhat elaborate notes at the end of the volume. -- Joseph Jacobs, preface to Europa's Fairy Book: Restored and Retold (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), p. viii . A few (four or five) of the stories are frankly indecent, and are always expurgated from popular editions of the work in Italy, a course which I have followed here. Two or three of the present collection are also a trifle free, but I have decided to leave them in their place, with a few unimportant excisions and alterations. -- Edward Storer's introduction to his translation of Il Novellino: The Hundred Old Tales (London and New York: George Routledge and Sons and E. P. Dutton and Co., ca. 1925), pp. 31-32 . Uncle Blessing said some of the tales some preachers told were "too plumb filthy for any use." Of such tales he told me none at all. When the tale which he called "The Girl That Wouldn't Do a Hand's Turn" came to a certain point in the narrative, Uncle Blessing said that after that point it became a "long blackguard tale too nasty for telling"; and he ended the story right there. -- Marie Campbell, Tales from the Cloud Walking Country [Kentucky] (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1958), p. 209. Being productions of a more outspoken age, many of the following tales are, as was to be expected, of a character that is contrary to the taste of the present time. I have, however omitted nothing in this book; but in the case of a few isolated passages and of three entire stories, the nature of which is such as to preclude the possibility of their publication in these days, I have been content to print the original transliterated into the Roman alphabet, but untranslated. -- E. J. W. Gibb, preface to his translation from the Turkish of The History of the Forty Vezirs; or, The Story of the Forty Morns and Eves by Sheykh-Zada, (London: George Redway, 1886), pp. xx-xxi . Some of the tales have been omitted as unsuitable for translation into English. -- B. Hale Wortham, introduction to his translation of The Enchanted Parrot: Being a Selection from the "Suka Saptati," or, The Seventy Tales of a Parrot (London: Luzac and Company, 1911), p. 8 . In one or two instances I was asked if I would allow a Paharee man, well versed in local folk-lore, to relate a few stories to me; but, for obvious reasons I was obliged to decline the offer, for many Simla Village tales related to me by women, and not included in this book, were grotesquely unfit for publication. -- Alice Elizabeth Dracot, preface to Simla Village Tales; or, Folk Tales from the Himalayas (London: John Murray, 1906), p. x . As was to be expected in a work devoted to a delineation of the virtues, and follies, and vices of man, by means of proverbs, anecdotes and narratives, a number of stories occur which would have been omitted by an occidental compiler. These have, however, been relegated to the respectable obscurity of the Latin tongue by my friend Mr. J. B. Hodge, M.A., of the Department of Printed Books, British Museum; thus the integrity of the work has been maintained in its printed form, and it is hoped that the general reader will find nothing to offend his taste. -- E. A. Wallis Budge, preface to his translation of The Laughable Stories , collected by Mar Gregory John Bar-Hebraeus (London: Luzac and Company, 1897), p. viii . His book is befouled with obscenity, and, like obscenity itself, is ceasing by degrees to be part of a gentleman's education.... The translator ... must leave whole pages in the decent obscurity of Latin. -- Michael Heseltine, preface to his translation of the Satyricon of Petronius, Loeb Classical Library (London: William Heinemann; New York: The Macmillan Company, 1913, p. xvi . Similarly, naive readers of the 1891 English translation of The Facetious Nights by Giovanni Francesco Straparola (ca. 1480 - ca. 1557) are protected from the passages of that collection that are most wanting in decency by the fact that the editor translates the critical parts of the most offensive tales (for example, night 6, tales 2 and 4) from the original Italian into French rather than into English. Uneducated readers -- who presumably would not understand French -- are thus spared from the deleterious effects of the racier tales. Educated readers -- who could read French -- presumably would be protected from negative influences by their own sophistication. Bibliographic reference: Straparola, Giovanni Francesco. The Facetious Nights , London: Privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901. Not even the works of established and (for the most part) respected storytellers are safe from bowdlerization. Boccaccio's The Decameron , contains a number of tales deemed by some translators and publichers to be too racy for ordinary readers, most famously the tenth story of the third day ("Alibech Puts the Devil Back into Hell," type 1425). Their solution: as was the case with the above cited translation of Straparola's The Facetious Nights , they translated the offending passages into French, although the acceptable portions of the book were rendered into English; or they left the objectionable portions in the original Italian. Bibliographic references: The Decameron; or, Ten Days' Entertainment of Boccaccio , translated by Walter Keating Kelly (London: H. G. Bohn, 1855). Portions of day 3, story 10, are left untranslated ( pp. 191-98 ). Stories of Boccaccio (The Decameron) . Translated from the Italian into English by Léopold Flameng. Philadelphia: G. Barrie, Importer, 1881. Portions of day 3, story 10, are left untranslated ( pp. 172-79 ). Stories of Boccaccio (The Decameron) . Translated by John Payne. Printed for the Bibliophilist Library, 1903. Portions of day 3, story 10, are translated into French ( pp. 185-92 ). The Decameron by M. Giovanni Boccaccio, vol. 2. London: Gibbings and Company, 1898). Portions of day 3, story 10, are translated into French ( pp. 198-212 ). A further example is offered in W. H. D. Cowell's translation of The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births (Cambridge: University Press, 1895), no. 273, pp. 246-47 . Without explanation, this tale is translated from the Pali into Latin instead of into English. Presumably readers who understand Latin will be intelligent enough not to misunderstand or otherwise misuse the story's offensive contents. Even scholars of folklore, whose very science depends upon the unaltered recording of data, are sometimes reluctant to give the whole story, or -- in some instances -- any of the story. For example, Antti Aarne and Stith Thompson, two of the greatest folktale catalogers, were reluctant to provide details for the many erotic tales that they encountered, sometimes identifying them by little more than a number and the tag "obscene" (for example, types 1546*, 1549*, 1580*). Hans-Jörg Uther, in his exemplary revision of the Aarne-Thompson catalog, adds relevant details to many of Aarne's and Thompson's sketchy summaries. For example, Aarne and Thompson label type 1547* "The Trickster with the Painted Member," adding only the vague summary: "The father wants his daughter's child to be a bishop." Uther labels his entry for the same folktale type "The Trickster with Painted Penis," then adds two full paragraphs describing how the trickster uses this prank to dupe a naive married couple. Returning to the type numbers mentioned above labeled "obscene" by Aarne and Thompson, with no summaries: Uther omits these numbers from his catalog. Bibliographic reference: Aarne, Antti, and Thompson, Stith. The Types of the Folktale: A Classification and Bibliography . FF Communications 184. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 1961. Uther, Hans-Jörg. The Types of International Folktales: A Classification and Bibliography. 3 vols. FF Communications 284-86. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 2004. Counter examples The Grimm Brothers Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, as stated above in their own words, "carefully removed every expression inappropriate for children" from their published folktales. They did not, however, avoid tabooed material altogether. For example, their story "All-Kinds-of-Fur" (no. 65) has the threat of father-daughter incest as its central theme, while "Old Hildebrand" (no. 95) is the tale of an adulterous adventure between a priest and a peasant woman. But still, in the main the Grimms avoided material that would have offended their 19th-century bourgeois public. Click here for the full text of the Grimms' All-Kinds-of-Fur (in English); or "Allerleirauh," Kinder- und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , 7th ed., vol. 1 (Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 65, pp. 353-59 (in German). Click here for the full text of the Grimms' Old Hildebrand (in English); or "Der alte Hildebrand," Kinder- und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , 7th ed., vol. 2 (Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 95, pp. 53-56 (in Bavarian dialect). Aleksandr Afanasyev Aleksandr Afanasyev (the transliteration Afanas'ev is also used) (1826-1871), the Russian counterpart to the brothers Grimm, published 640 folktales in numerous editions between the years 1855 and 1873. Like the Grimms, he molded authentic folklore material into a simple, but literate style, a style that has endured for more than a century. Unlike the Grimms (and unlike virtually every other nineteenth-century folklorist) Afanasyev did not shy away from patently offensive material and language. His published stories are innocent enough, but he also kept manuscript collections of obscene stories. These were smuggled out of Russia and first published (in Russian, under the title Russian Secret Tales ) in Switzerland in 1872. Anticlerical, scatological, erotic, and often crude, these tales, reflect a vulgar side of everyday life in the nineteenth century that many would rather not think about. But without doubt it was there. Two English translations of Afanayef's Russian secret tales are: Russian Secret Tales: Bawdy Folktales of Old Russia . New York: Brussel and Brussel, 1966. Erotic Tales of Old Russia . Bilingual edition. Oakland: Scythian Books, 1980. The late twentieth century For better or for worse, the reading public appears to have lost its squeamishness with reference to tabooed subjects, and folklorists of today no longer apologize for their "offensive" material, as did their nineteenth-century counterparts. Indeed, what few restrictions may have been imposed by the book publishing industry have vanished into cyberspace. Here are a few titles by respected folklorists that, a few years ago were quite daring, but that today seem almost bland. Examples: Legman, G. Rationale of the Dirty Joke: An Analysis of Sexual Humor . New York: Grove Press, 1968. Randolph, Vance. Pissing in the Snow and Other Ozark Folktales . New York: Avon Books, 1977. Dundes, Alan. Life is Like a Chicken Coop Ladder: A Portrait of German Culture Through Folklore . New York: Columbia University Press, 1984. In the tradition of fairy tales, I let three examples suffice. And in the tradition of my Victorian forebears, I leave unsaid why it is that "life is like a chicken coop ladder," even though as a boy, one of my chores was to haul the sh-- out of the chicken coop. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 17, 2021. Nanny Who Wouldn't Go Home to Supper: A Chain-Folktale of Type 2015 Nanny Who Wouldn't Go Home to Supper a chain-folktale from Norway edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009 There was once upon a time a woman who had a son and a goat. The son was called Espen and the goat they called Nanny. But they were not good friends, and did not get on together, for the goat was perverse and wayward, as goats will be, and she would never go home at the right time for her supper. So it happened one evening that Espen went out to fetch her home, and when he had been looking for her a while he saw Nanny high, high up on a crag: "My dear Nanny, you must not stay any longer up there; you must come home now, it is just supper time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I shan't," said Nanny, "not before I have finished the grass on this tussock, and that tussock and this and that tussock." "Then I'll go and tell mother," said the lad. "That you may, and then I shall be left to eat in peace," said Nanny. So Espen went and told his mother. "Go to the fox and ask him to bite Nanny," said his mother. The lad went to the fox. "My dear fox, bite Nanny, for Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry, and I want my supper," said Espen. "No, I don't want to spoil my snout on pig's bristles and goat's beard," said the fox. So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the wolf," said his mother. The lad went to the wolf: "My dear wolf, tear the fox, for the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry, and I want my supper." "No," said the wolf, "I won't wear out my paws and teeth on a skinny fox." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the bear and ask him to slay the wolf," said the mother. The lad went to the bear. "My dear bear, slay the wolf, for the wolf won't tear the fox, and the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, that I won't," said the bear; "I don't want to wear out my claws for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the Finn and ask him to shoot the bear." The lad went to the Finn. "My dear Finn, shoot the bear, for the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the Finn; "I am not going to shoot away my bullets for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well go to the fir," said his mother, "and ask it to crush the Finn." The lad went to the fir tree: "My dear fir, crush the Finn, for the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the fir, "I am not going to break my boughs for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the fire," said his mother, "and ask it to burn the fir." The lad went to the fire: "My dear fire, burn the fir, for the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the fire, "I am not going to burn myself out for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the water, and ask it to quench the fire," she said. The lad went to the water. "My dear water, quench the fire, for the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the water, "I am not going to waste myself for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the ox," said she, "and ask him to drink up the water." The lad went to the ox: "My dear ox, drink up the water, for the water won't quench the fire, the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the ox. "I'm not going to burst myself for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the yoke," said she, "and ask it to throttle the ox." The lad went to the yoke. "My dear yoke, throttle the ox, for the ox won't drink the water, the water won't quench the fire, the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the yoke. "I'm not going to break myself in two for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the axe," said she, "and tell it to split the yoke." The lad went to the axe. "My dear axe, split the yoke, for the yoke won't throttle the ox, the ox won't drink the water, the water won't quench the fire, the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the axe. "I am not going to blunt my edge for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the smith," said she, "and ask him to hammer the axe." The lad went to the smith. "My dear smith! hammer the axe, for the axe won't split the yoke, the yoke won't throttle the ox, the ox won't drink the water, the water won't quench the fire, the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the smith. "I'll not burn my coals and wear out my sledge-hammers for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the rope," said she, "and ask it to hang the smith." The lad went to the rope. "My dear rope, hang the smith, for the smith won't hammer the axe, the axe won't split the yoke, the yoke won't throttle the ox, the ox won't drink the water, the water won't quench the fire, the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the rope. "I'm not going to break in two for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the mouse," said she, "and ask her to gnaw the rope." The lad went to the mouse. "My dear mouse, gnaw the rope, for the rope won't hang the smith, the smith won't hammer the axe, the axe won't split the yoke, the yoke won't throttle the ox, the ox won't drink the water, the water won't quench the fire, the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the mouse. "I'm not going to wear out my teeth for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the cat," said she, "and ask her to catch the mouse." The lad went to the cat. "My dear cat, catch the mouse, for the mouse won't gnaw the rope, the rope won't hang the smith, the smith won't hammer the axe, the axe won't split the yoke, the yoke won't throttle the ox, the ox won't drink the water, the water won't quench the fire, the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "Yes, but give me a drop of milk for my kittens, and then" said the cat. Yes, that she should have. So the cat caught the mouse, and the mouse gnawed the rope, and the rope hanged the smith, and the smith hammered the axe, and the axe split the yoke, and the yoke throttled the ox, and the ox drank the water, and the water quenched the fire, and the fire burned the fir, and the fir crushed the Finn, and the Finn shot the bear, and the bear slew the wolf, and the wolf tore the fox, and the fox bit Nanny, and Nanny took to her heels, scampered home, and ran against the barn wall and broke one of her legs. "M-a-h-a-h!" bleated the goat. There she lay, and if she isn't dead she is still limping about on three legs. But Espen said it served her right, because she would not come home in time for supper that day. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Fairy Tales from the Far North , translated from the Norwegian by H. L. Brækstad (London: David Nutt, 1897), pp. 246-52. The text of this tale in Norwegian: Hårslå, som aldri ville hjem gå . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 2015. Links to additional chain tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 29, 2009. Mourning the Death of a Spouse: Chain Tales of Type 2022 Mourning the Death of a Spouse chain tales of Aarne-Thompson type 2022 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2006 Contents Little Louse and Little Flea (Germany). Titty Mouse and Tatty Mouse (England). The Cock Who Fell into the Brewing Vat (Norway). The Cat and the Mouse (Italy). The Death and Burial of Poor Hen-Sparrow (Pakistan). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Little Louse and Little Flea Germany A little louse and a little flea kept house together. They were brewing beer in an eggshell when the little louse fell in and burned herself to death. At this the little flea began to cry loudly. Then the little parlor door said, "Why are you crying, little flea?" "Because little louse has burned herself to death." Then the little door began to creak. Then a little broom in the corner said, "Why are you creaking, little door?" "Why should I not be creaking? Little louse has burned herself to death. Little flea is crying." Then the little broom began to sweep furiously. Then a little cart came by and said, "Why are you sweeping, little broom?" "Why should I not be sweeping? Little louse has burned herself to death. Little flea is crying. Little door is creaking." Then the little cart said, "Then I will run," and it began to run furiously. It ran by a little manure pile, which said, "Why are you running, little cart?" "Why should I not be running? Little louse has burned herself to death. Little flea is crying. Little door is creaking. Little broom is sweeping." Then the little manure pile said, "Then I will burn furiously," and it began to burn in bright flames. A little tree that stood near the little manure pile said, "Little manure pile, why are you burning?" "Why should I not be burning? Little louse has burned herself to death. Little flea is crying. Little door is creaking. Little broom is sweeping. Little cart is running." Then the little tree said, "Then I will shake myself," and it began to shake itself until all its leaves fell off. A girl who came up with her water pitcher saw that, and said, "Little tree, why are you shaking?" "Why should I not be shaking? Little louse has burned herself to death. Little flea is crying. Little door is creaking. Little broom is sweeping. Little cart is running. Little manure pile is burning." Then the girl said, "Then I will break my little water pitcher." And she broke her little water pitcher. Then the little spring from which the water was flowing said, "Girl, why did you break your little water pitcher?" "Why should I not break my little water pitcher? Little louse has burned herself to death. Little flea is crying. Little door is creaking. Little broom is sweeping. Little cart is running. Little manure pile is burning. Little tree is shaking." "Oh," said the spring, "then I will begin to flow," and it began to flow furiously. And everything drowned in the water: the girl, the little tree, the little manure pile, the little cart, the little broom, the little door, the little flea, and the little louse, all together. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Läuschen und Flöhchen , Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales), no. 30. The Grimms' source: Dorothea Catharina Wild (1752-1813). This tale was introduced to the Grimms' collection in the first edition (1812). Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002. Translator's notes: From the German-language original it is impossible to determine the genders of the louse and the flea. I have arbitrarily made the deceased louse a female and the grieving flea a male, although it could also have been the other way around. Most English translators have ignored the diminutive endings in the Grimms' title Läuschen und Flöhchen, thus translating the title as "The Louse and the Flea." Link to the text of this tale in a single file: Little Louse and Little Flea . Return to the table of contents . Titty Mouse and Tatty Mouse England Titty Mouse and Tatty Mouse both lived in a house. Titty Mouse went a leasing and Tatty Mouse went a leasing, so they both went a leasing. Titty Mouse leased an ear of corn, and Tatty Mouse leased an ear of corn, so they both leased an ear of corn. Titty Mouse made a pudding, and Tatty Mouse made a pudding, so they both made a pudding. And Tatty Mouse put her pudding into the pot to boil, but when Titty went to put hers in, the pot tumbled over, and scalded her to death. Then Tatty sat down and wept. Then a three-legged stool said, "Tatty, why do you weep?" "Titty's dead," said Tatty, "and so I weep." "Then," said the stool, "I'll hop," so the stool hopped. Then a broom in the corner of the room said, "Stool, why do you hop?" "Oh!" said the stool, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and so I hop." "Then," said the broom, "I'll sweep," so the broom began to sweep. "Then," said the door, "Broom, why do you sweep?" "Oh!" said the broom, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and the stool hops, and so I sweep." "Then," said the door, "I'll jar," so the door jarred. Then said the window, "Door, why do you jar?" "Oh!" said the door, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and the stool hops, and the broom sweeps, and so I jar." "Then," said the window, "I'll creak," so the window creaked. Now there was an old form outside the house, and when the window creaked, the form said, "Window, why do you creak?" "Oh!" said the window, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and the stool hops, and the broom sweeps, the door jars, and so I creak." "Then," said the old form, "I'll run round the house." Then the old form ran round the house. Now there was a fine large walnut tree growing by the cottage, and the tree said to the form, "Form, why do you run round the house?" "Oh!" said the form, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and the stool hops, and the broom sweeps, the door jars, and the window creaks, and so I run round the house." "Then," said the walnut tree, "I'll shed my leaves," so the walnut tree shed all its beautiful green leaves. Now there was a little bird perched on one of the boughs of the tree, and when all the leaves fell, it said, "Walnut tree, why do you shed your leaves?" "Oh!" said the tree, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, the stool hops, and the broom sweeps, the door jars, and the window creaks, the old form runs round the house, and so I shed my leaves." "Then," said the little bird, "I'll molt all my feathers," so he molted all his pretty feathers. Now there was a little girl walking below, carrying a jug of milk for her brothers' and sisters' supper, and when she saw the poor little bird molt all its feathers, she said, "Little bird, why do you molt all your feathers?" "Oh!" said the little bird, "Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, the stool hops, and the broom sweeps, the door jars, and the window creaks, the old form runs round the house, the walnut tree sheds its leaves, and so I molt all my feathers." "Then," said the little girl, "I'll spill the milk," so she dropped the pitcher and spilled the milk. Now there was an old man just by on the top of a ladder thatching a rick, and when he saw the little girl spill the milk, he said, "Little girl, what do you mean by spilling the milk? Your little brothers and sisters must go without their supper." Then said the little girl, "Titty's dead, Tatty weeps, the stool hops, and the broom sweeps, the door jars, and the window creaks, the old form runs round the house, the walnut tree sheds all its leaves, the little bird molts all its feathers, and so I spill the milk." "Oh!" said the old man, "then I'll tumble off the ladder and break my neck," so he tumbled off the ladder and broke his neck. And when the old man broke his neck, the great walnut tree fell down with a crash, and upset the old form and house, and the house falling knocked the window out, and the window knocked the door down, and the door upset the broom, and the broom upset the stool, and poor little Tatty Mouse was buried beneath the ruins. Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales , 3rd ed. (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons and David Nutt, 1898), no. 16, pp. 77-80. Jacobs lists his source as "Halliwell, Nursery Rhymes , p. 115." This volume is presumable Nursery Rhymes and Nursery Tales by James Orchard Halliwell (London, 1843). Halliwell also used the name Halliwell-Phillips. Return to the table of contents . The Cock Who Fell into the Brewing Vat Norway Once upon a time there was a cook and a hen, who were out in a field scratching and scraping and pecking. All at once the hen found a barleycorn, and the cock found a bur of hops, and so they made up their minds they would make some malt and brew beer for Christmas. "I plucked the barley and I malted the corn and brewed the beer, and the beer is good," cackled the hen. "Is the wort strong enough?" said the cock, and flew up to the edge of the vat to taste it; but when he stooped down to take a sip he began flapping with his wings and fell on his head into the vat and was drowned. When the hen saw this she was quite beside herself. She flew onto the hearth and began to scream and cry, "Got, got, got, drowned! Got, got, got, drowned!" And this she went on crying all the time and would not stop. "What is the matter with you, Mother Tup, since you are crying and grieving so?" asked the hand-quern. "Oh, Father Tup has fallen into the brewing vat and got drowned and there he lies dead!" said the hen. "That's the reason I cry and grieve." "Well, if I can't do anything else I will grind and groan," said the hand-quern, and began grinding as fast as it could. When the stool heard this it said, "What's the matter with you, quern, since you groan and grind so fast?" "Oh, Father Tup has fallen into the brewing vat and got drowned; Mother Tup is sitting on the hearth, crying and grieving; therefore I grind and groan," said the hand-quern. "Well, if I can't do anything else I shall creak," said the stool, and began creaking and cracking. This the door heard, so it said, "What's the matter with you? Why are you creaking, stool?" "Oh, Father Tup has fallen into the brewing vat and got drowned; Mother Tup is sitting on the hearth crying and grieving and the hand-quern is grinding and groaning; therefore I creak and crack and crackle," said the stool. "Well, if I can't do anything else I'll bang and slam and whine and whistle" said the door, and began opening and shutting and slamming and banging till it went through one's bones and marrow to hear it. This the dustbin heard. "Why are you slamming and banging like that, door?" said the bin. "Oh, Father Tup fell into the brewing vat and got drowned; Mother Tup is sitting on the hearth crying and grieving; the hand-quern is grinding and groaning; the stool is creaking and cracking; therefore I keep slamming and banging," said the door. "Well, if I can't do anything else I'll fume and smoke," said the dustbin, and began fuming and smoking and sending the dust up in clouds all over the room. This the hay-rake saw, as it stood peeping in through the window. "Why are you raising the dust like that, dustbin?" asked the rake. "Oh, Father Tup fell into the brewing vat and got drowned; Mother Tup is sitting on the hearth crying and grieving; the hand-quern is grinding and groaning; the stool is creaking and cracking; the door is slamming and banging; therefore I keep fuming and smoking," said the dustbin. "Well, if I can't do anything else I'll rake and rend," said the rake, and began rending and raking. This the aspen tree saw as it looked on. "Why do you rend and rake like that, rake? said the tree. "Oh, Father Tup fell into the brewing vat and got drowned; Mother Tup is sitting on the hearth crying and grieving; the hand-quern is grinding and groaning; the stool is creaking and cracking; the door is slamming and banging; the dustbin is fuming and smoking; therefore I keep rending and raking," said the rake. "Well, if I can't do anything else," said the aspen, "I will quiver and quake." This the birds noticed. "Why do you quiver and quake like that?" said the birds to the tree. "Oh, Father Tup fell into the brewing vat and got drowned; Mother Tup is sitting on the hearth crying and grieving; the hand-quern is grinding and groaning; the stool is creaking and cracking; the door is slamming and banging; the dustbin is fuming and smoking; the rake is rending and raking; therefore I quiver and quake," said the aspen. "Well, if we can't do anything else we will pluck off our feathers," said the birds, and began pecking and plucking till the feathers flew about the farm like snow. The farmer stood looking on, and when he saw the feathers flying about he asked the birds, "Why are you plucking off your feathers like that, birds?" "Oh, Father Tup fell into the brewing vat and got drowned; Mother Tup is sitting on the hearth crying and grieving; the hand-quern is grinding and groaning; the stool is creaking and cracking; the door is slamming and banging; the dustbin is fuming and smoking; the rake is rending and raking; the aspen is quivering and quaking; therefore we keep pecking and plucking," said the birds. "Well, if I can't do anything else I will pull the besoms to pieces," said the farmer, and began tugging and pulling the besoms to pieces, so that the twigs flew about, both east and west. His wife was boiling the porridge for supper when she saw this. "Why are you pulling the besoms to pieces, husband?" said she. "Oh, Father Tup fell into the brewing vat and got drowned; Mother Tup is sitting on the hearth crying and grieving; the hand-quern is grinding and groaning; the stool is creaking and cracking; the door is slamming and banging; the dustbin is fuming and smoking; the rake is rending and raking; the aspen is quivering and quaking; the birds are pecking and plucking off their feathers; therefore I am pulling the besom to pieces," said the man. "Well, then I'll daub the walls all over with porridge," she said. And she set about it there and then, and took one ladleful after another and smeared the porridge all over the walls, so that no one could see what they were made of. Then they kept the burial feast of the cock who fell into the brewing vat. And if you don't believe it, you had better go there and taste both the beer and the porridge. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Fairy Tales from the Far North, translated by H. L. Brækstad (New York: A. L. Burt Company, 1897), pp. 172-177. Link to the story in the original Norwegian: Hanen som falt I bryggekaret . Return to the table of contents . The Cat and the Mouse Italy Once upon a time there was a cat that wanted to get married. So she stood on a corner, and every one who passed by said, "Little Cat, what's the matter?" "What's the matter? I want to marry." A dog passed by and said, "Do you want me?" "When I see how you can sing." The dog said, "Bow, wow!" "Fy! What horrid singing! I don't want you." A pig passed. "Do you want me, Little Cat?" "When I see how you sing." "Uh! uh!" "Fy! You are horrid! Go away! I don't want you." A calf passed and said, "Little Cat, will you take me?" "When I see how you sing." "Uhm!" "Go away, for you are horrid! What do you want of me?" A mouse passed by: "Little Cat, what are you doing ?" "I am going to get married." "Will you take me?" "And how can you sing?" "Ziu, ziu!" The cat accepted him, and said, "Let us go and be married, for you please me." So they were married. One day the cat went to buy some pastry, and left the mouse at home. "Don't stir out, for I am going to buy some pastry." The mouse went into the kitchen, saw the pot on the fire, and crept into it, for he wanted to eat the beans. But he did not; for the pot began to boil, and the mouse stayed there. The cat came back and began to cry; but the mouse did not appear. So the cat put the pastry in the pot for dinner. When it was ready the cat ate, and put some on a plate for the mouse also. When she took out the pastry she saw the mouse stuck fast in it. "Ah! my little mouse! Ah! my little mouse!" So she went and sat behind the door, lamenting the mouse. "What is the matter," said the door, "that you are scratching yourself so and tearing out your hair?" The cat said, "What is the matter? My mouse is dead, and so I tear my hair." The door answered, "And I, as door, will slam." In the door was a window, which said, "What's the matter, door, that you are slamming?" "The mouse died, the cat is tearing her hair, and I am slamming." The window answered, "And I, as window, will open and shut." In the window was a tree, that said, "Window, why do you open and shut?" The window answered, "The mouse died, the cat tears her hair, the door slams, and I open and shut." The tree answered and said, "And I, as tree, will throw myself down." A bird happened to alight in this tree, and said: "Tree, why did you throw yourself down?" The tree replied, "The mouse died, the cat tears her hair, the door slams, the window opens and shuts, and I, as tree, threw myself down." "And I, as bird, will pull out my feathers." The bird went and alighted on a fountain, which said, "Bird, why are you plucking out your feathers so?" The bird answered as the others had done, and the fountain said, "And I, as fountain, will dry up." A cuckoo went to drink at the fountain, and asked, "Fountain, why have you dried up?" And the fountain told him all that had happened. "And I, as cuckoo, will put my tail in the fire." A monk of St. Nicholas passed by, and said, "Cuckoo, why is your tail in the fire?" When the monk heard the answer he said, "And I, as monk of St. Nicholas, will go and say mass without my robes." Then came the queen, who, when she heard what the matter was, said, "And I, as queen, will go and sift the meal." At last the king came by, and asked, " 0h Queen! Why are you sifting the meal?" When the queen had told him everything, he said: "And I, as king, am going to take my coffee." Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Company, 1885), no. 82, pp. 257-259. The episode of the cat choosing a mate is classified as Aarne-Thompson type 2023. Return to the table of contents . The Death and Burial of Poor Hen-Sparrow Pakistan Once upon a time there lived a cock-sparrow and his wife, who were both growing old. But despite his years the cock-sparrow was a gay, festive old bird, who plumed himself upon his appearance, and was quite a ladies' man. So he cast his eyes on a lively young hen, and determined to marry her, for he was tired of his sober old wife. The wedding was a mighty grand affair, and everybody as jolly and merry as could be, except of course the poor old wife, who crept away from all the noise and fun to sit disconsolately on a quiet branch just under a crow's nest, where she could be as melancholy as she liked without anybody poking fun at her. Now while she sat there it began to rain, and after a while the drops, soaking through the crow's nest, came drip-dripping onto her feathers. She, however, was far too miserable to care, and sat there all huddled up and peepy till the shower was over. Now it so happened that the crow had used some scraps of dyed cloth in lining its nest, and as these became wet the colors ran, and dripping down on to the poor old hen-sparrow beneath, dyed her feathers until she was as gay as a peacock. Fine feathers make fine birds, we all know, and she really looked quite spruce; so much so, that when she flew home, the new wife nearly burst with envy, and asked her at once where she had found such a lovely dress. "Easily enough," replied the old wife; "I just went into the dyer's vat." The bride instantly determined to go there also. She could not endure the notion of the old thing being better dressed than she was, so she flew off at once to the dyer's, and being in a great hurry, went pop into the middle of the vat, without waiting to see if it was hot or cold. It turned out to be just scalding. Consequently the poor thing was half boiled before she managed to scramble out. Meanwhile, the gay old cock, not finding his bride at home, flew about distractedly in search of her, and you may imagine what bitter tears he wept when he found her, half drowned and half boiled, with her feathers all awry, lying by the dyer's vat. "What has happened?" quoth he. But the poor bedraggled thing could only gasp out feebly: The old wife was dyed -- The nasty old cat! And I, the gay bride, Fell into the vat! Whereupon the cock-sparrow took her up tenderly in his bill and flew away home with his precious burden. Now, just as he was crossing the big river in front of his house, the old hen-sparrow, in her gay dress, looked out of the window, and when she saw her old husband bringing home his young bride in such a sorry plight, she burst out laughing shrilly, and called aloud, "That is right! That is right! Remember what the song says: Old wives must scramble through water and mud, But young wives are carried dry-shod o'er the flood." This allusion so enraged her husband that he could not contain himself, but cried out, "Hold your tongue, you shameless old cat!" Of course, when he opened his mouth to speak, the poor draggled bride fell out, and, going plump into the river, was drowned. Whereupon the cock-sparrow was so distracted with grief that he picked off all his feathers until he was as bare as a plowed field. Then, going to a pipal tree, he sat all naked and forlorn on the branches, sobbing and sighing. "What has happened?" cried the pipal tree, aghast at the sight. "Don't ask me!" wailed the cock-sparrow. "It isn't manners to ask questions when a body is in deep mourning." But the pipal would not be satisfied without an answer, so at last poor bereaved cock-sparrow replied: The ugly hen painted. By jealousy tainted, The pretty hen dyed. Lamenting his bride, The cock, bald and bare, Sobs loud in despair! On hearing this sad tale, the pipal became overwhelmed with grief and, declaring it must mourn also, shed all its leaves on the spot. By and by a buffalo, coming in the heat of the day to rest in the shade of the pipal tree, was astonished to find nothing but bare twigs. "What has happened?" cried the buffalo. "You were as green as possible yesterday!" "Don't ask me!" whimpered the pipal. "Where are your manners? Don't you know it isn't decent to ask questions when people are in mourning?" But the buffalo insisted on having an answer, so at last, with many sobs and sighs, the pipal replied: The ugly hen painted. By jealousy tainted, The pretty hen dyed. Bewailing his bride, The cock, bald and bare, Sobs loud in despair; The pipal tree grieves By shedding its leaves!" "Oh dear me!" cried the buffalo. "How very sad! I really must mourn too!" So she immediately cast her horns, and began to weep and wail. After a while, becoming thirsty, she went to drink at the riverside. "Goodness gracious!" cried the river, "What is the matter? And what have you done with your horns?" "How rude you are!" wept the buffalo. "Can't you see I am in deep mourning? And it isn't polite to ask questions." But the river persisted until the buffalo, with many groans, replied: The ugly hen painted. By jealousy tainted, The pretty hen dyed. Lamenting his bride, The cock, bald and bare, Sobs loud in despair; The pipal tree grieves By shedding its leaves; The buffalo mourns By casting her horns! "Dreadful!" cried the river, and wept so fast that its water became quite salt [salty]. By and by a cuckoo, coming to bathe in the stream, called out, "Why, river! What has happened? You are as salt as tears!" "Don't ask me!" mourned the stream. "It is too dreadful for words!" Nevertheless, when the cuckoo would take no denial, the river replied: The ugly hen painted. By jealousy tainted, The pretty hen dyed. Lamenting his bride, The cock, bald and bare, Sobs loud in despair; The pipal tree grieves By shedding its leaves; The buffalo mourns By casting her horns; The stream, weeping fast, Grows briny at last! "Oh dear! Oh dear me!" cried the cuckoo. "How very, very sad! I must mourn too!" So it plucked out an eye, and going to a corn [grain] merchant's shop, sat on the doorstep and wept. "Why, little cuckoo! what's the matter?" cried Bhagtu the shopkeeper. "You are generally the pertest of birds, and today you are as dull as ditchwater!" "Don't ask me!" sniveled the cuckoo. "It is such terrible grief! Such dreadful sorrow! Such-such horrible pain!" However, when Bhagtu persisted, the cuckoo, wiping its one eye on its wing, replied: The ugly hen painted. By jealousy tainted, The pretty hen dyed. Lamenting his bride, The cock, bald and bare, Sobs loud in despair; The pipal tree grieves By shedding its leaves; The buffalo mourns By casting her horns; The stream, weeping fast, Grows briny at last; The cuckoo with sighs Blinds one of its eyes! "Bless my heart!" cried Bhagtu, "But that is simply the most heartrending tale I ever heard in my life! I must really mourn likewise!" Whereupon he wept, and wailed, and beat his breast, until he went completely out of his mind. And when the queen's maidservant came to buy of him, he gave her pepper instead of turmeric, onion instead of garlic, and wheat instead of pulse. "Dear me, friend Bhagtu!" quoth the maidservant. "Your wits are wool-gathering! What's the matter?" "Don't! please don't!" cried Bhagtu. "I wish you wouldn't ask me, for I am trying to forget all about it. It is too dreadful -- too, too terrible!" At last, however, yielding to the maid's entreaties, he replied, with many sobs and tears: The ugly hen painted. By jealousy tainted, The pretty hen dyed. Lamenting his bride, The cock, bald and bare, Sobs loud in despair; The pipal tree grieves By shedding its leaves; The buffalo mourns By casting her horns; The stream, weeping fast, Grows briny at last; The cuckoo with sighs Blinds one of its eyes; Bhagtu's grief so intense is, He loses his senses! "How very sad!" exclaimed the maidservant. "I don't wonder at your distress. But it is always so in this miserable world! Everything goes wrong!" Whereupon she fell to railing at everybody and everything in the world, until the queen said to her, "What is the matter, my child? What distresses you?" "Oh!" replied the maidservant, "The old story! Everyone is miserable, and I most of all! Such dreadful news! -- The ugly hen painted. By jealousy tainted, The pretty hen dyed. Lamenting his bride, The cock, bald and bare, Sobs loud in despair; The pipal tree grieves By shedding its leaves; The buffalo mourns By casting her horns; The stream, weeping fast, Grows briny at last; The cuckoo with sighs Blinds one of its eyes; Bhagtu's grief so intense is, He loses his senses; The maidservant wailing Has taken to railing! "Too true!" wept the queen, "Too true! The world is a vale of tears! There is nothing for it but to try and forget!" Whereupon she set to work dancing away as hard as she could. By and by in came the prince, who, seeing her twirling about, said, "Why, mother! what is the matter?" The queen, without stopping, gasped out: The ugly hen painted. By jealousy tainted, The pretty hen dyed. Lamenting his bride, The cock, bald and bare, Sobs loud in despair; The pipal tree grieves By shedding its leaves; The buffalo mourns By casting her horns; The stream, weeping fast, Grows briny at last; The cuckoo with sighs Blinds one of its eyes; Bhagtu's grief so intense is, He loses his senses; The maidservant wailing Has taken to railing; The queen, joy enhancing, Takes refuge in dancing! "If that is your mourning, I'll mourn too!" cried the prince, and seizing his tambourine, he began to thump on it with a will. Hearing the noise, the king came in, and asked what was the matter. "This is the matter!" cried the prince, drumming away with all his might: The ugly hen painted. By jealousy tainted, The pretty hen dyed. Lamenting his bride, The cock, bald and bare, Sobs loud in despair; The pipal tree grieves By shedding its leaves; The buffalo mourns By casting her horns; The stream, weeping fast, Grows briny at last; The cuckoo with sighs Blinds one of its eyes; Bhagtu's grief so intense is, He loses his senses; The maidservant wailing Has taken to railing; The queen, joy enhancing, Takes refuge in dancing; To aid the mirth coming, The prince begins drumming! "Capital! capital!" cried the king, "That's the way to do it!" So, seizing his zither, he began to thrum away like one possessed. And as they danced, the queen, the king, the prince, and the maidservant sang: The ugly hen painted. By jealousy tainted, The pretty hen dyed. Bewailing his bride, The cock, bald and bare, Sobs loud in despair; The pipal tree grieves By shedding its leaves; The buffalo mourns By casting her horns; The stream, weeping fast, Grows briny at last; The cuckoo with sighs Blinds one of its eyes; Bhagtu's grief so intense is, He loses his senses; The maidservant wailing Has taken to railing; The queen, joy enhancing, Takes refuge in dancing; To aid the mirth coming, The prince begins drumming; To join in it with her The king strums the zither! So they danced and sang till they were tired, and that was how everyone mourned poor cock-sparrow's pretty bride. Source: Flora Annie Steel (1847-1929), Tales of the Punjab: Told by the People (London: The Bodley Head, 1973), no. 18, pp. 100-107. This collection was first published under the title of Wide-Awake Stories (London: Trubner and Company, 1884). A new edition appeared under the title Tales of the Punjab: Told by the People (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894). Steel's source for this story: "Hajjan, a Pathan girl at Muzaffargarh." Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites The Death of a Child . Folktales about excessive mourning. The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales). The Grimm Brothers' Home Page . Aging and Death in Folklore . An essay by D. L. Ashliman, with supporting texts from proverbs, folktales, and myths from around the world. Texts of additional chain tales . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Return to the table of contents . Revised April 29, 2009. Runaway Pancake: Folktales of Type 2025 The Runaway Pancake folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 2025 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2019 Contents The Pancake (Norway). The Runaway Pancake (Germany). The Thick, Fat Pancake (Germany). Dathera Dad (England). The Wonderful Cake (Ireland). The Wee Bunnock (Scotland [Ayrshire]). The Wee Bannock (Scotland [Dumfriesshire]). The Wee Bannock (Scotland [Selkirkshire]). The Fox and the Little Bonnach (Scotland). The Gingerbread Boy (USA). The Johnny-Cake (USA). The Little Cakeen (USA). The Devil in the Dough-Pan (Russia). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Pancake Norway Once upon a time there was a good housewife, who had seven hungry children. One day she was busy frying pancakes for them, and this time she had used new milk in the making of them. One was lying in the pan, frizzling away -- ah! so beautiful and thick -- it was a pleasure to look at it. The children were standing round the fire, and the husband sat in the corner and looked on. "Oh, give me a bit of pancake, mother, I am so hungry!" said one child. "Ah, do! dear mother," said the second. "Ah, do! dear, good mother," said the third. "Ah, do! dear, good, kind mother," said the fourth. "Ah, do! dear, good, kind, nice mother," said the fifth. "Ah, do! dear, good, kind, nice, sweet mother," said the sixth. "Ah, do! dear, good, kind, nice, sweet, darling mother," said the seventh. And thus they were all begging for pancakes, the one more prettily than the other, because they were so hungry, and such good little children. "Yes, children dear, wait a bit until it turns itself," she answered -- she ought to have said "until I turn it" -- "and then you shall all have pancakes, beautiful pancakes, made of new milk -- only look how thick and happy it lies there." When the pancake heard this, it got frightened, and all of a sudden, it turned itself and wanted to get out of the pan, but it fell down in it again on the other side, and when it had been fried a little on that side too, it felt a little stronger in the back, jumped out on the floor, and rolled away, like a wheel, right through the door and down the road. "Halloo!" cried the good wife, and away she ran after it, with the frying pan in one hand and the ladle in the other, as fast as she could, and the children behind her, while the husband came limping after, last of all. "Halloo, won't you stop? Catch it, stop it. Halloo there!" they all screamed, the one louder than the other, trying to catch it on the run, but the pancake rolled and rolled, and before long, it was so far ahead, that they could not see it, for the pancake was much smarter on its legs than any of them. When it had rolled a time, it met a man. "Good day, pancake!" said the man. "Well met, Manny Panny," said the pancake. "Dear pancake," said the man, "don't roll so fast, but wait a bit and let me eat you." "When I have run away from Goody Poody and the husband and seven squalling children, I must run away from you too, Manny Panny," said the pancake, and rolled on and on, until it met a hen. "Good day, pancake," said the hen. "Good day, Henny Penny," said the pancake. "My dear pancake, don't roll so fast, but wait a bit and let me eat you," said the hen. "When I have run away from Goody Poody and the husband and seven squalling children, and from Manny Panny, I must run away from you too, Henny Penny," said the pancake, and rolled on like a wheel down the road. Then it met a cock. "Good day, pancake," said the cock. "Good day, Cocky Locky," said the pancake. "My dear pancake, don't roll so fast, but wait a bit and let me eat you," said the cock. "When I have run away from Goody Poody and the husband and seven squalling children, from Manny Panny, and Henny Penny, I must run away from you too, Cocky Locky," said the pancake, and rolled and rolled on as fast as it could. When it had rolled a long time, it met a duck. "Good day, pancake," said the duck. "Good day, Ducky Lucky," said the pancake. "My dear pancake, don't roll so fast, but wait a bit and let me eat you," said the duck. "When I have run away from Goody Poody and the husband and seven squalling children, from Manny Panny, and Henny Penny, and Cocky Locky, I must run away from you too, Ducky Lucky," said the pancake, and with that it fell to rolling and rolling as fast as ever it could. When it had rolled a long, long time, it met a goose. Good day, pancake," said the goose. "Good day, Goosey Poosey," said the pancake. "My dear pancake, don't roll so fast, but wait a bit and let me eat you," said the goose. "When I have run away from Goody Poody and the husband and seven squalling children, from Manny Panny, and Henny Penny, and Cocky Locky, and Ducky Lucky, I must run away from you too, Goosey Poosey," said the pancake, and away it rolled. So when it had rolled a long, very long time, it met a gander. Good day, pancake," said the gander. "Good day, Gander Pander," said the pancake. "My dear pancake, don't roll so fast, but wait a bit and let me eat you," said the gander. "When I have run away from Goody Poody and the husband and seven squalling children, from Manny Panny, and Henny Penny, and Cocky Locky, and Ducky Lucky, and Goosey Poosey, I must run away from you too, Gander Pander," said the pancake, and rolled and rolled as fast as it could. When it had rolled on a long, long time, it met a pig. Good day, pancake," said the pig. "Good day, Piggy Wiggy," said the pancake, and began to roll on faster than ever. Nay, wait a bit," said the pig, "you needn't be in such a hurry-scurry; we two can walk quietly together and keep each other company through the wood, because they say it isn't very safe there." The pancake thought there might be something in that, and so they walked together through the wood; but when they had gone some distance, they came to a brook. The pig was so fat it wasn't much trouble for him to swim across, but the pancake couldn't get over. "Sit on my snout," said the pig, "and I will ferry you over." The pancake did so. "Ouf, ouf," grunted the pig, and swallowed the pancake in one gulp, and as the pancake couldn't get any farther -- well, you see we can't go on with this story any farther, either. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Pannekaken , translated by H. L. Brækstad in Round the Yule Log: Norwegian Folk and Fairy Tales (London: Sampson Sow, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1881), pp. 62-67 . Return to the table of contents . The Runaway Pancake Germany Two women in Jetzschko were baking a pancake, and when it was almost done they began to quarrel, because each one wanted the whole thing. The one woman said, "I get the pancake!" The other one replied, "No, I want all of it!" Before they knew what was happening, the pancake suddenly grew feet, jumped out of the pan, and ran away. He came to a fox, who said to him, "Pancake, pancake, where are you going?" The pancake answered, "I ran away from two old women, and I shall run away from you as well!" Then he met a hare. It too shouted, "Pancake, pancake, where are you going?" The pancake answered, "I ran away from two old women, Reynard the Fox, and I shall run away from you as well. The pancake ran on until he came to some water. A ship full of people was floating on the water. They too cried out to him, "Pancake, pancake, where are you going?" Again he said, "I ran away from two old women, Reynard the Fox, Speedy the Hare, and I shall run away from you as well." Then he came to a large pig. It too shouted to him, "Pancake, pancake, where are you going?" "Oh," he said, "I ran away from two old women, Reynard the Fox, Speedy the Hare, a ship full of people, and I shall run away from you as well." The pig said, "Pancake, I am hard of hearing. You'll have to say it into my ear!" So the pancake went up close, and bam! bam! the pig snatched him and ate him up, and with that the story is ended. Source: Karl Gander, "Der fortgelaufene Eierkuchen," Niederlausitzer Volkssagen, vornehmlich aus dem Stadt- und Landkreise Guben (Berlin: Deutsche Schriftsteller-Genossenschaft, 1894), no. 319, pp. 122-123 . Gander's source: "Oral, from Hanschke, Senior, a cottager and peddler in Ögeln." Freely translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Return to the table of contents . The Thick, Fat Pancake Germany Once upon a time there were three old women who wanted a pancake to eat. The first one brought an egg, the second one milk, and the third one grease and flour. When the thick, fat pancake was done, it pulled itself up in the pan and ran away from the three old women. It ran and ran, steadfastly, steadfastly into the woods. There he came upon a little hare, who cried, "Thick, fat pancake, stop! I want to eat you!" The pancake answered, "I have run away from three old women. Can I not run away from Hoppity Hare as well?" And it ran steadfastly, steadfastly into the woods. Then a wolf came running toward him, and cried, "Thick, fat pancake, stop! I want to eat you!" The pancake answered, "I have run away from three old women and Hoppity Hare. Can I not run away from Waddly Wolf as well?" And it ran steadfastly, steadfastly into the woods. Then a goat came hopping by, and cried, "Thick, fat pancake, stop! I want to eat you!" The pancake answered, "I have run away from three old women, Hoppity Hare, and Waddly Wolf. Can I not run away from Longbeard Goat as well?" And it ran steadfastly, steadfastly into the woods. Then a horse came galloping by, and cried, "Thick, fat pancake, stop! I want to eat you!" The pancake answered, "I have run away from three old women, Hoppity Hare, Waddly Wolf, and Longbeard Goat. Can I not run away from Flatfoot Horse as well?" And it ran steadfastly, steadfastly into the woods. Then a sow came running up, and cried, "Thick, fat pancake, stop! I want to eat you!" The pancake answered, "I have run away from three old women, Hoppity Hare, Waddly Wolf, Longbeard Goat, and Flatfoot Horse. Can I not run away from Oink-Oink Sow as well?" And it ran steadfastly, steadfastly into the woods. Then three children came by. They had neither father nor mother, and they said, "Dear pancake, stop! We have had nothing to eat the entire day!" So the thick, fat pancake jumped into the children's basket and let them eat it up. Source: Carl and Theodor Colshorn, "Vom dicken fetten Pfannekuchen," Märchen und Sagen (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), no. 57, pp. 168-169. The Colshorns' source: "oral, from Salzdahlum." Freely translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. This tale is also contained in Paul Zaunert, Deutsche Märchen seit Grimm , vol. 1 (Jena: Eugen Diederichs Verlag, 1922), pp. 176-77 . Return to the table of contents . Dathera Dad England There was once a farmer's wife who made a pudding and set it on the fire to be boiled. As soon as the water began to boil the pudding jumped, and at last it jumped out upon the floor and rolled about as if it were bewitched. As the pudding was rolling about on the floor a travelling tinker came to the door, and the woman picked the pudding up and gave it to him. So the tinker put it into his budget and slung it over his back. As he trudged along the road the pudding kept rolling about in the budget till at last it broke in pieces, when out came a littlo fairy child who cried, "Take me to my dathera dad, take me to my dathera dad." Source: Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales with Other Traditional Remains: Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby, and Nottingham (London: David Nutt, 1895), no. 7, p. 9 . Addy's source: "From Eyam, in Derbyshire." Return to the table of contents . The Wonderful Cake Ireland A mouse, a rat, and a little red hen once lived together in the same cabin, and one day the little red hen said, "Let us bake a cake and have a feast." "Let us," says the mouse; and "Let us," says the rat. "Who'll go get the wheat ground?" says the hen. "I won't," says the mouse; "I won't," says the rat; "I'll go myself," says the little red hen. "Who'll make the cake? "I won't," says the mouse; "I won't," says the rat; "I will myself," says the little red hen. "Who'll eat the cake?" "I will," says the mouse; "I will," says the rat; "Dickens a bit you shall," says the little red hen. Well, while the hen was putting over her hand to it, magh go brath with it out of the door, and after it with the three housekeepers. When it was running away, it went by a barn full of thrashers, and they asked it where it was running. "Oh," says it, "I'm running away from the mouse, the rat, and the little red hen, and from you too if I can." So they piked away after it with their flails, and it run and it run till it came to a ditch full of ditchers, and they asked it where it was running. "Oh, I'm running away from the mouse, the rat, and the little red hen, and from a barn full of thrashers, and from you too if I can." Well they all ran after it along with the rest till it came to a well full of washers, and they asked the same question, and it returned the same answer, and after it they went. At last it came to a ford where it met with a fox, who asked where it was running. "Oh, I'm running away from the mouse, the rat, and the little red hen, from a barn full of thrashers, a ditch full of ditchers, a well full of washers, a crumply-horned cow, a saddled-backed sow, and from you too if I can." "But you can't cross the ford," says the fox. "And can't you carry me over?" says the cake. "What'll you give me?" says the fox. "A kiss at Christmas, and an egg at Easter," says the cake. "Very well," says the fox." Up with you." So he sat on his currabingo with his nose in the air, and the cake got up by his tail till it sat on his crupper. "Now over with you," says the cake. "You're not high enough." Then it scrambled up on his shoulder. "Up higher still," says he, "you wouldn't be safe there." "Am I right now ?" says the cake, when it was on his head. "Not quite," says he; "you'll be safer on the ridge pole of my nose." "Well," says the cake, "I think I can go no further." "Oh, yes," says he, and he shot it up in the air, caught it in his mouth, and sent it down the red lane. Source: Patrick Kennedy, The Fireside Stories of Ireland (Dublin: M'Glashan and Gill, 1870), pp. 19-20 . Return to the table of contents . The Wee Bunnock Scotland "Grannie, grannie, come tell us the story o' the wee bunnock." "Hout, bairns, ye've heard it a hunner times afore. I needna tell it owre again." "Ah, but, grannie, it's sic a fine ane. Ye maun tell't. Just ance." "Weel, weel, bairns, if ye'll a' promise to be guid, I'll tell ye't again. But I'll tell you a bonny tale about a guid aitmeal bunnock. There lived an auld man and an auld wife at the side o' a burn. They had twa kye, five hens and a cock, a cat and twa kittlins. The auld man lookit after the kye, and the auld wife span on the tow-rock. The kittlins aft grippit at the auld wife's spindle, as it tussled owre the hearth-stane. "Sho, sho," she wad say, "gae wa';" and so it tussled about. Ae day, after parritch time, she thought she wad hae a bunnock. Sae she bakit twa aitmeal bunnocks, and set them to to the fire to harden. After a while, the auld man came in, and sat down aside the fire, and takes ane o' the bunnocks, and snappit it through the middle. When the tither ane sees this, it rins aff as fast as it could, and the auld wife after't, wi' the spindle in the tae hand and the tow-rock in the tither. But the wee bunnock wan awa', and out o' sight, and ran till it came to a guid muckle thack house, and ben it ran boldly to the fireside; and there were three tailors sitting on a muckle table. When they saw the wee bunnock come ben, they jumpit up, and gat in ahint the goodwife, that was cardin' tow ayont the fire. "Hout," quo' she, "be na fleyt; it's but a wee bunnock. Grip it, and I'll gie ye a soup milk till 't." Up she gets wi' the tow-cards, and the tailor wi' the goose, and the twa prentices, the ane wi' the muckle shears, and the tither wi' the lawbrod; but it jinkit them, and ran round about the fire; and ane o' the prentices, thinking to snap it wi' the shears, fell i' the ase-pit. The tailor cuist the goose, and the goodwife the tow-cards; but a' wadna do. The bunnock wan awa', and ran till it came to a wee house at the roadside; and in it rins, and there was a weaver sittin' on the loom, and the wife winnin' a clue o' yarn. "Tibby," quo' he, "what's tat?" "Oh," quo' she, "it's a wee bunnock." "It's weel come," quo' he, "for our sowens were but thin the day. Grip it, my woman; grip it." "Ay," quo' she; "what recks! That's a clever bunnock. Kep, Willie; kep, man." "Hout," quo' Willie, "cast the clue at it." But the bunnock whipit round about, and but the floor, and aff it gaed, and owre the knowe, like a new-tarred sheep or a daft yell cow. And forrit it runs to the niest house, and ben to the fireside; and there was the goodwife kirnin'. "Come awa', wee bunnock," quo' she; "I'se hae ream and bread the day." But the wee bunnock whipit round about the kirn, and the wife after't, and i' the hurry she had near-hand coupit the kirn. And afore she got it set right again, the wee bunnock was aff, and down the brae to the mill; and in it ran. The miller was siftin' meal i' the trough; but, looking up: " Ay," quo' he, "it's a sign o' plenty when ye're rinnin' about, and naebody to look after ye. But I like a bunnock and cheese. Come your wa's ben, and I'll gie ye a night's quarters." But the bunnock wadna trust itsel' wi' the miller and his cheese. Sae it turned and ran its wa's out; but the miller didna fash his head wi't. So it toddled awa', and ran till it came to the smithy; and in it rins, and up to the studdy. The smith was making horse-nails. Quo' he: "I like a bicker o' guid yill and a weel-toastit bunnock. Come your wa's in by here." But the bunnock was frightened when it heard about the yill, and turned and aff as hard as it could, and the smith after't, and cuist the hammer. But it whirlt awa', and out o' sight in a crack, and ran till it came to a farm-house wi' a guid muckle peat-stack at the end o't. Ben it rins to the fireside. The goodman was clovin' lint, and the goodwife hecklin'. "O Janet," quo' he, "there's a wee bunnock; I'se hae the hauf o't." "Weel, John, I'se hae the tither hauf. Hit it owre the back wi' the clove." But the bunnock playt jink-about . "Hout, tout," quo' the wife, and gart the heckle flee at it. But it was owre clever for her. And aff and up the burn it ran to the niest house, and whirlt its wa's ben to the fireside. The goodwife was stirrin' the sowens, and the goodman plettin' sprit-binnings for the kye. "Ho, Jock," quo' the goodwife, "come here. Thou's aye crying about a wee bunnock. Here's ane. Come in, haste ye, and I'1l help thee to grip it." "Ay, mither, whaur is't ?" "See there. Rin owre o' that side." But the bunnock ran in ahint the goodman's chair. Jock fell amang the sprits. The goodman cuist a binning, and the goodwife the spurtle. But it was owre clever for Jock and her baith. It was aff and out o' sight in a crack, and through among the whins, and down the road to the niest house, and in, and ben to the fireside. The folk were just sittin' down to their sowens, and the goodwife scartin' the pat. "Losh," quo' she, "there's a wee bunnock come in to warm itsel' at our fireside." "Steek the door," quo' the goodman, "and we'll try to get a grip o't." When the bunnock heard that, it ran but the house, and they after't wi' their spunes, and the goodman cuist his bunnat. But it whirlt awa', and ran, and better ran, till it came to another house; and when it gaed ben, the folk were just gaun to their beds. The goodman was castin' aff his breeks, and the goodwife rakin' the fire. "What's tat?" quo' he. "O," quo' she, "it's a wee bunnock." Quo' he, "I could eat the hauf o't, for a' the brose I hae suppit." "Grip it," quo' the wife, " and I'll hae a bit too." "Cast your breaks at it -- kep -- kep!" The goodman cuist the breeks, and had near-hand smoor't it . But it warsl't out, and ran, and the goodman after't, wanting the breeks; and there was a clean chase owre the craft park, and up the wunyerd, and in amang the whins; and the goodman lost it, and had to come his wa's trottin' hame hauf-nakit. But now it was grown dark, and the wee bunnock couldna see; but it gaed into the side o' a muckle whin bush, and into a tod's hole. The tod had gotten nae meat for twa days. "O welcome, welcome," quo' the tod, and snappit it in twa i' the middle. And that was the end o' the wee bunnock. Now, be ye lords or commoners, Ye needna laugh nor sneer, For ye'll be a' i' the tod's hole In less than a hunner year. At the conclusion, Grannie would look round upon her little audience, and add the following, by way of moral: "Now, weans, an ye live to grow muckle, be na owre lifted up about onything, nor owre sair cuisten down; for ye see the folk were a' cheated, and the puir tod got the bunnock." Source: Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), pp. 82-85 . Chambers' source: "From the manuscript of an elderly individual, who spent his early years in the parish of Symington, in Ayrshire. It was one of a great store of similar legends possessed by his grandmother, and which she related, upon occasion, for the gratification of himself and other youngsters, as she sat spinning by the fireside, with these youngsters clustered around her. This venerable person was bor n in the year 1704, and died in 1789." A bunnock (usually spelled bannock ) is a small loaf of flat bread. Return to the table of contents . The Wee Bannock Scotland A variation of the story of the Wee Bannock, from Dumfriesshire, is as follows: When cockle shells turned music bells, And turkeys chewed tobacco, And birds biggit their nests in auld men's beards, as hereafter they may do in mine -- There was an auld man and an auld wife. and they lived in a killogie. Quoth the auld man to the auld wife: "Rise, and bake me a bannock." So she rase and bakit a bannock, and set it afore the greeshoch to harden. Quoth the auld wife to the auld man: "Rise and turn the bannock." "Na, na," quoth the bannock, "I'll turn mysel'." And it turned round, and whirl't out at the door. And after it they ran, and the tane flang at it a pot, and the t'other a pan; but baith missed it . And it ran, and it ran, till it came to twa well-washers. "Welcome, welcome, wee bannockie," quo' they; "where came thou fra?" I fore-ran A wee wee wife and a wee wee man; A wee wee pot and a wee wee pan; And sae will I you an I can. And they ran after't, to daud it wi' wat claes. But it ran, and it ran, till it came to twa barn-threshers. "Welcome, welcome, wee bannockie," quo' they; 'where came thou frae?" I fore-ran A wee wee wife and a wee wee man; A wee wee pot and a wee wee pan; Twa well-washers and twa barn-threshers; And sae will I you an I can. And they ran after't wi' their flails. Thus the story goes on through a series of adventures, which are perhaps sufficiently indicated by the answer of the bannock to Tod Lowrie at last: I fore-ran A wee wee wife and a wee wee man; A wee wee pot and a wee wee pan; Twa well-washers and twa barn-threshers; Twa dike-delvers and twa heather-pu'ers; Twa ploughmen, twa harrowers, twa hungry herds; And sae will I you an I can. But the tod snappit it a' up at ae mouthful, and that was an end o' the wee bannock. Source: Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), pp. 85-86 . Return to the table of contents . The Wee Bannock Scotland It may be worth while, in order to shew the extent to which nursery stories are provincially varied, to give the Selkirkshire version of the wee bannock: There was a wife bakin' bannocks, and there was a man cam and wanted ane o' them. And he said to the wife: "Yer bannas is burnin': come awa' and I'1l turn them." And the wife said: "Na, I'll turn them;" and he said: "Na, I'll turn them;" and she said: "Na, I'1l turn them." And as they were threepin', ane o' the bannas got up and ran awa', and they couldna catch't. And it ran and ran or it cam to a sheep, and the sheep wantit it, and it said to the sheep: I've beat a wee wife, And I've beat a wee man, And I'll try and beat ye too if I can. Sae it ran and ran, and beat the sheep. And it cam to a goat, and it said to the goat: I've beat a wee wife, And I've beat a wee man, And I've beat a wee sheep, And I'll try and beat ye too if I can. And it ran and ran, and beat the goat. And it cam to a fox, and it said to the fox: I've beat a wee wife, And I've beat a wee man, And I've beat a wee sheep, And I've beat a wee goat, And I'll try and beat ye too if I can. And the fox said: "Get on my back and I'll carry ye;" and the banna said: "Na, I'll rin mysel'." And the fox said: "Na, get on my back, and I'll carry ye o'er the burn." Sae the banna got on its back, and the fox turned round its head and took a grip o't. And the banna cried: "Oh, ye're nippin's, ye're nippin's, ye're nippin's." And the fox said: "Na, I'm just clawin' mysel'." And it took anither grip, and the banna cried: "Oh, ye're nippin's, ye're nippin's, ye're nippin's." And the fox nippit it a' awa' but a wee bit, and it fell into the burn, and that was the end o' the banna. Source: Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), pp. 86-87 . Return to the table of contents . The Fox and the Little Bonnach Scotland The fox was once going over a loch, and there met him a little bonnach, and the fox asked him where he was going. The little bonnach told him he was going to such a place. "And whence camest thou?" said the fox. "I came from Geeogan, and I came from Cooaigean, and I came from the slab of the bonnach stone, and I came from the eye of the quern, and I will come from thee if I may," quoth the little bonnach. "Well, I myself will take thee over on my back," said the fox. "Thou'lt eat me, thou'lt eat me," quoth the little honnach. "Come then on the tip of my tail," said the fox. "Oh! I will not; thou wilt eat me," said the little bonnach. "Come into my ear," said the fox. "I will not go; thou wilt eat me," said the little bonnach. "Come into my mouth," said the fox. "Thou wilt eat me that time at all events," said the little bonnach. "Oh, I will not eat thee," said the fox. "At the time when I am swimming I cannot eat anything at all." He went into his mouth. "Oh! ho!" said the fox, "I may do my own pleasure to thee now. It is long since it was heard that a hard morsel is good in the mouth of the stomach." The fox ate the little bonnach. Then he went to the house of a gentleman, and he went to a loch, and he caught hold of a duck that was in if, and he ate that. He went up to a hill side, and he began to stroke his sides on the hill. "Oh king! how finely the bullet would spank upon my belly just now." Who was listening but a hunter. "It will be tried upon thee directly," said the hunter. "Bad luck to the place that is here," quoth the fox, "in which a creature dares not say a word in fun that is not taken in earnest." The hunter put a bullet in his gun, and he fired at him and killed him. Source: John Francis Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 3 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1862), pp. 100-101 . Campbell's source: "From Hector Boyd, who learnt it from one John Campbell, who died three yreas ago, at the age of thirty. --Sept. 20, 1860." A bonnach (usually spelled bannock ) is a small loaf of flat bread. Return to the table of contents . The Gingerbread Boy USA Now you shall hear a story that somebody's great-great-grandmother told a little girl ever so many years ago: There was once a little old man and a little old woman, who lived in a little old house in the edge of a wood. They would have been a very happy old couple but for one thing -- they had no little child, and they wished for one very much. One day, when the little old woman was baking gingerbread, she cut a cake in the shape of a little boy, and put it into the oven. Presently she went to the oven to see if it was baked. As soon as the oven door was opened, the little gingerbread boy jumped out, and began to run away as fast as he could go. The little old woman called her husband, and they both ran after him. But they could not catch him. And soon the gingerbread boy came to a barn full of threshers. He called out to them as he went by, saying: I've run away from a little old woman, A little old man, And I can run away from you, I can! Then the barn full of threshers set out to run after him. But, though they ran fast, they could not catch him. And he ran on till he came to a field full of mowers. He called out to them: I've run away from a little old woman, A little old man, A barn full of threshers, And I can run away from you, I can! Then the mowers began to run after him, but they couldn't catch him. And he ran on till he came to a cow. He called out to her: I've run away from a little old woman, A little old man, A barn full of threshers, A field full of mowers, And I can run away from you, I can! But, though the cow started at once, she couldn't catch him. And soon he came to a pig. He called out to the pig: I've run away from a little old woman, A little old man, A barn full of threshers, A field full of mowers, A cow, And I can run away from you, I can! But the pig ran, and couldn't catch him. And he ran till he came across a fox, and to him he called out: I've run away from a little old woman, A little old man, A barn full of threshers, A field full of mowers, A cow and a pig, And I can run away from you, I can! Then the fox set out to run. Now foxes can run very fast, and so the fox soon caught the gingerbread boy and began to eat him up. Presently the gingerbread boy said, "Oh dear! I'm quarter gone!" And then, "Oh, I'm half gone!" And soon, "I'm three-quarters gone!" And at last, "I'm all gone!" and never spoke again. Source: St. Nicholas Magazine , vol. 2, no. 7 (May 1875), pp. 448-49 . Editor's note: The author of the "Gingerbread Boy," in our pages for Little Folks, writes as follows: "The 'Gingerbread Boy' is not strictly original. A servant girl from Maine told it to my children. It interested them so much that I thought it worth preserving. I asked where she found it, and she said an old lady told it to her in her childhood. So it may possibly have been in print, though I have never seen it." -- The Letter-Box, p. 452 . Return to the table of contents . Johnny-Cake USA Once upon a time there was an old man, and an old woman, and a little boy. One morning the old woman made a Johnny-Cake and put it in the oven to bake. "You watch the Johnny-Cake while your father and I go out to work in the garden." So the old man and the old woman went out and began to hoe potatoes and left the little boy to tend the oven. But he didn't watch it all the time, and all of a sudden he heard a noise, and he looked up and the oven door popped open, and out of the oven jumped Johnny-Cake and went rolling along end over end towards the open door of the house. The little boy ran to shut the door, but Johnny-Cake was too quick for him and rolled through the door, down the steps, and out into the road long before the little boy could catch him. The little boy ran after him as fast as he could lip it, crying out to his father and mother, who heard the uproar and threw down their hoes and gave chase too. But Johnny-Cake outran all three a long way, and was soon out of sight, while they had to sit down, all out of breath, on a bank to rest. On went Johnny-Cake, and by and by he came to two well-diggers, who looked up from their work and called out, "Where are you going, Johnny-Cake?" He said, "I have outrun an old man and an old woman and a little boy, and I can outrun you too-o-o!" "Ye can, can ye?" We'll see about that!" said they, and they threw down their picks and ran after him, but couldn't catch up with him, and soon they had to sit down by the roadside to rest. On ran Johnny-Cake, and by and by he came to two ditch-diggers who were digging a ditch. "Where ye going, Johnny-Cake?" said they. He said, "I've outrun an old man and an old woman and a little boy and two well-diggers, and I can outrun you too-o-o!" "Ye can, can ye? We'll see about that!" said they, and they threw down their spades and ran after him too. But Johnny-Cake soon outstripped them also, and seeing they could never catch him, they gave up the chase and sat down to rest. On went Johnny-Cake, and by and by he came to a bear. The bear said, "Where are ye going, Johnny-Cake?" He said, "I've outrun an old man and an old woman and a little boy and two well-diggers and two ditch-diggers, and I can outrun you too-o-o!" "Ye can, can ye?" growled the bear. "We'll see about that!" and trotted as fast as his legs could carry him after Johnny-Cake, who never stopped to look behind him. Before long the bear was left so far behind that he saw he might as well give up the hunt first as last, so he stretched himself out by the roadside to rest. On went Johnny-Cake, and by and by he came to a wolf. The wolf said, "Where ye going, Johnny-Cake?" He said, "I've outrun an old man and an old woman and a little boy and two well-diggers and two ditch-diggers and a bear, an I can outrun you too-o-o!" "Ye can, can ye?" snarled the wolf. "We'll see about that!" And he set into a gallop after Johnny-Cake, who went on and on so fast that the wolf too saw there was no hope of overtaking him, and he too lay down to rest. On went Johnny-Cake, and by and by he came to a fox that lay quietly in a corner of the fence. The fox called out in a sharp voice, but without getting up, "Where ye going, Johnny-Cake?" He said, "I've outrun an old man and an old woman and a little boy and two well-diggers and two ditch-diggers, a bear, and a wolf, and I can outrun you too-o-o!" The fox said, "I can't quite hear you, Johnny-Cake. Won't you come a little closer?" turning his head a little to one side. Johnny-Cake stopped his race for the first time, and went a little closer, and called out in a very loud voice, "I've outrun an old man and an old woman and a little boy and two well-diggers and two ditch-diggers and a bear and a wolf, and I can outrun you too-o-o!" "Can't quite hear you. Won't you come a little closer?" Johnny-Cake came up close, and leaning towards the fox screamed out, "I'VE OUTRUN AN OLD MAN AND AN OLD WOMAN AND A LITTLE BOY AND TWO WELL-DIGGERS AND TWO DITCH-DIGGERS AND A BEAR AND A WOLF, AND I CAN OUTRUN YOU TOO-O-O!" "You can, can you?" yelped the fox, and he snapped up the Johnny-Cake in his sharp teeth in the twinkling of an eye. Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 28, pp. 155-58 . Jacobs' source: American Journal of Folk-Lore , vol. 2, p. 60. Return to the table of contents . The Little Cakeen USA The following story was written down for me in March, 1889, by Miss Frances Perry, of Exeter, N. H., from her recollection of the form in which it was repeated to her by a relative, some fifteen years ago. It is thought to have been derived from an Irish domestic. "The Little Cakeen" is an interesting variant of the tale already printed in the Journal of American Folk-Lore (vol. ii. pp. 60, 217), under the title of " Johnny-Cake ." Once upon a time there was a little maneen and a little womaneen; and the little womaneen made a little cakeen and put it in the oven to bake. And the little maneen stood at one side of the oven, and said the little cakeen was done; and the little womaneen stood at the other side and said it wasn't. And while they were quarrelling about it, the little cakeen jumped out of the oven and ran off; and the little maneen and the little womaneen ran after it. Pretty soon the little cakeen came to a little pusheen [cat?], and the little pusheen said, "Where are you going so fast, little cakeen, on those little legs of yours?" And the little cakeen said: "I'm running away from the little maneen; I'm running away from the little womaneen, and now I'll run away from you!" So the little pusheen ran after it. Then it came to a little dogeen, and the little dogeen said, "Where are you going so fast, little cakeen, on those little legs of yours?" And the little cakeen said: "I'm running away from the little maneen; I'm running away from the little womaneen; I'm running away from the little pusheen, and now I'11 run away from you!" So the little dogeen ran after it (and so on, with coween, heneen, owleen, etc.). Then it came to a little foxeen; and the little foxeen said: "Where are you going so fast, little cakeen, on those little legs of yours?" And the little cakeen answered: "I'm running away from the little maneen; I'm running away from the little womaneen; I'm running away from the little pusheen; I'm running away from the little dogeen; I'm running away from the little coween; I'm running away from the little heneen; I'm running away from the little owleen (etc., etc.), and now I'll run away from you." But the little foxeen said: " Oh! don't do that, little cakeen; I will show you where to hide." So the little cakeen said, " All right!" So the little foxeen said: "Jump upon my tail;" and the little cakeen jumped on his tail. Then the foxeen said: "Jump on my back;" and the little cakeen jumped on his back. Then the little foxeen said: "Jump on my head;" so the little cakeen jumped on his head. Then the little foxeen said: "Now jump in my mouth." So the little cakeen jumped into his mouth, and he ate it all up! Source: George Lyman Kittredge, "English Folk-Tales in America," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 3, no. 11 (October - December 1890), pp. 291-92 . Addendum by George Lyman Kittredge: In an obliging note, Miss Perry adds: "I am not sure but that the maneen, womaneen, etc., came to the fox and asked him if he had seen a little cakeen, and he said that no little cakeen had passed; so they all ran home again." Return to the table of contents . The Devil in the Dough-Pan Russia Once a woman was kneading bread, but had forgotten to say the blessing. So the demon, Potánka, ran up and sat down in it. Then she recollected she had kneaded the dough without saying the blessing, went up to it and crossed herself; and Potánka wanted to escape, but could not anyhow, because of the blessing. So she put the leavened dough through a strainer and threw it out into the street, with Potánka inside. The pigs turned him over and over, and he could not escape for three whole days. At last he tore his way out through a crack in the dough and scampered off without looking behind him. He ran up to his comrades, who asked him, " Where have you been, Potánka?" "May that woman be accursed!" he said. "Who?" "The one who was kneading her dough and had made it without saying the proper blessing; so I ran up and squatted in it. Then she laid hold of me and crossed herself, and after three livelong days I got out, the pigs poking me about and I unable to escape! Never again will I get into a woman's dough." Source: Leonard A. Magnus, Russian Folk-Tales (New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1916), p. 317 . Magnus' source: Alexander Afanasyev . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Links to related sites Aging and Death in Folklore . An essay by D. L. Ashliman, with supporting texts from proverbs, folktales, and myths from around the world. Texts of additional chain tales . Revised October 1, 2019. "The Old Woman and Her Pig" and Other Chain-Folktales of Type 2030 The Old Woman and Her Pig and Other Chain-Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 2030 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009 Contents The Old Woman and Her Pig (England). Moorachug and Meenachug (Scotland). The Wife and Her Bush of Berries (Scotland). The Wifie an Her Kidie (Scotland). Nanny Who Wouldn't Go Home to Supper (Norway). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Old Woman and Her Pig England An old woman was sweeping her house, and she found a little crooked sixpence. "What," said she, "shall I do with this little sixpence? I will go to market, and buy a little pig." As she was coming home, she came to a stile. But the piggy wouldn't go over the stile. She went a little further, and she met a dog. So she said to him, "Dog! Dog! Bite pig. Piggy won't go over the stile; and I shan't get home tonight." But the dog wouldn't. She went a little further, and she met a stick. So she said, "Stick! Stick! Beat dog! Dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home tonight." But the stick wouldn't. She went a little further, and she met a fire. So she said, "Fire! Fire! Burn stick. Stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home tonight." But the fire wouldn't. She went a little further, and she met some water. So she said, "Water! Water! Quench fire. Fire won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home tonight." But the water wouldn't. She went a little further, and she met an ox. So she said, "Ox! Ox! Drink water. Water won't quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home tonight." But the ox wouldn't. She went a little further and she met a butcher. So she said, "Butcher! Butcher! Kill ox. Ox won't drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home tonight." But the butcher wouldn't. She went a little further, and she met a rope. So she said, "Rope! Rope! Hang butcher. Butcher won't kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home tonight." But the rope wouldn't. She went a little further, and she met a rat. So she said, "Rat! Rat! Gnaw rope. Rope won't hang butcher, butcher won't kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home tonight." But the rat wouldn't. She went a little further, and she met a cat. So she said, "Cat! Cat! Kill rat. Rat won't gnaw rope; rope won't hang butcher; butcher won't kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home tonight." But the cat said to her, "If you will go to yonder cow, and fetch me a saucer of milk, I will kill the rat." So away went the old woman to the cow. But the cow said to her, "If you will go to yonder haystack, and fetch me a handful of hay, I'll give you the milk." So away went the old woman to the hay-stack; and she brought the hay to the cow. As soon as the cow had eaten the hay, she gave the old woman the milk; and away she went with it in a saucer to the cat. As soon as the cat had lapped up the milk, the cat began to kill the rat; the rat began to gnaw the rope; the rope began to hang the butcher; the butcher began to kill the ox; the ox began to drink the water; the water began to quench the fire; the fire began to burn the stick; the stick began to beat the dog; the dog began to bite the pig; the little pig in a fright jumped over the stile; and so the old woman got home that night. Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 4, pp. 20-23 . Jacobs' source: "Halliwell's Nursery Rhymes and Tales , 114." An earlier edition: James Orchard Halliwell, The Nursery Rhymes of England: Collected Chiefly from Oral Tradition (London: John Russell Smith, 1846), pp. 182-84 . Return to the table of contents . Moorachug and Meenachug Scotland Moorachug and Meenachug went to gather fruit, and as Moorachug would gather Meenachug would eat. Moorachug went to seek a rod to lay on Meenachaig, and she eating his share of fruit. "What's thy news today, oh Voorachai ?" said the rod. "'T is my own news, that I am seeking a rod to lay on Meenachug, and she eating my share of fruit." "Thou wilt not get me until thou gettest an axe that will reap me." He reached the axe. "What's thy news to-day, oh Voorachai?" "'T is my own news that I am seeking an axe to reap rod -- rod to lay on Meenachug -- and she eating my share of fruit." "Thou wilt not get me until thou gettest a stone to smooth me." He reached a stone. "What's thy news today, oh Voorachai?" said the stone. "'Tis my own news that I am seeking stone to smooth axe -- axe to reap rod -- rod to lay on Meenachaig -- and she eating my share of fruit." "Thou wilt not get me," said the stone, "till thou gettest water will wet me." He reached the water. "What's thy news today, oh Voorachai?" said the water. "'Tis my own news that I am seeking -- water to stone -- stone to smooth axe -- axe to reap rod -- rod to lay on Meenachaig -- and she eating my share of fruit." "Thou wilt not get me," said the water, "till thou gettest a deer to swim me." He reached the deer. "What's thy news today, oh Voorachai ?" said the deer. "'Tis my own news, that I am seeking -- deer to swim water -- water to stone -- stone to smooth axe -- axe to reap rod -- rod to lay on Meeuachaig -- and she eating my share of fruit." "Thou wilt not get me," said the deer, " until thou gettest a dog to run me." He reached the dog. "What's thy news today, oh Voorachai?" said the dog. "'Tis my own news that I am seeking -- dog to run deer -- deer to swim water -- water to stone -- stone to smooth axe -- axe to reap rod -- rod to lay on Meenachaig -- and she eating my share of fruit." "Thou wilt not get me," said the dog, "till thou gettest butter to be rubbed to my feet." He reached the butter. "What's thy news today, oh Voorachai?" said the butter. "'T is my own news, that I am seeking -- butter to feet of dog -- dog to run deer -- deer to swim water -- water to stone -- stone to smooth axe -- axe to reap rod -- rod to lay on Meenachaig -- and she eating my share of fruit." "Thou wilt not get me," said the butter, "till thou gettest a mouse will scrape me." He reached the mouse. "What's thy news today, oh Voorachai?" said the mouse. "'T is my own news, that I am seeking -- mouse to scrape butter -- butter to feet of dog -- dog to run deer -- deer to swim water -- water to stone -- stone to smooth axe -- axe to reap rod -- rod to lay on Meenachaig -- and she eating my share of fruit." "Thou wilt not get me," said the mouse, "till thou gettest a cat to hunt me." He reached the cat. "What's thy news today, oh Voorachai?" said the cat. "'Tis my own news, that I am seeking -- cat to hunt mouse -- mouse to scrape butter -- butter to feet of dog -- dog to run deer -- deer to swim water -- water to stone -- stone to smooth axe -- axe to reap rod -- rod to lay on Meenachaig -- and she eating my share of fruit." "Thou wilt not get me," said the cat, "until thou gettest milk for me." He reached the cow. "What's thy news today, oh! Voorachai?" said the cow. "'Tis my own news, that I am seeking -- milk for the cat -- cat to hunt mouse -- mouse to scrape butter -- butter to feet of dog -- dog to run deer -- deer to swim water -- water to stone -- stone to smooth axe -- axe to reap rod -- rod to lay on Meenachaig -- and she eating my share of fruit." "Thou wilt not get milk from me till thou gettest a whisp from the barn gillie." He reached the barn gillie. "What's thy news today, oh Voorachai?" said the barn gillie. "'T is my own news, that I am seeking -- a whisp for the cow -- a cow will shed milk for the cat -- cat to hunt mouse -- mouse to scrape butter -- butter to feet of dog -- dog to run deer -- deer to swim water -- water to stone -- stone to smooth axe -- axe to reap rod -- rod to lay on Meenachaig -- and she eating my share of fruit." "Thou wilt not get a whisp from me," said the barn gillie, "till thou gettest a bonnach for me from the kneading wife." He reached the kneading wife. "What's thy news today, oh Voorachai?" said the kneading wife. "'Tis my own news, that I am seeking -- bonnach to the barn gillie -- whisp to the cow from the barn gillie -- milk from the cow to the cat -- cat will hunt mouse -- mouse will scrape butter -- butter to feet of dog -- dog to run deer -- deer to swim water -- water to stone -- stone to smooth axe -- axe to reap rod -- rod to lay on Meenaehaig -- and she eating my share of fruit." "Thou wilt not get bonnach from me till thou bringest in water will knead it." "How will I bring in the water?" "There is no vessel but that sowen's sieve." Moorachug took with him the sowen's sieve. He reached the water, and every drop he would put in the sowen's sieve it would go through. A hoodie came over his head, and she cried, " Gawr-rag, gawr-rag (little silly, little silly)." "Thou art right, oh hoodie," said Moorachug. " Crèah rooah s' còinneach, crèah rooah s' còinneach, " said the hoodie. Moorachug set crèah rooah s' còinneach (brown clay and moss) to it, and he brought in the water to the kneading wife -- and he got bonnach from the kneading wife to barn gillie -- whisp from the barn gillie to the cow -- milk from the cow to the cat -- cat to hunt mouse -- mouse to scrape butter -- butter to feet of dog -- dog to run deer -- deer to swim water -- water to stone -- stone to smooth axe -- axe to reap rod -- rod to lay on Meenaehaig -- and she eating his share of fruit. And when Moorachug returned Meenachag had just BURST. Source: John Francis Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 1 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 157-60 . Campbell's sources: "From Ann Darroch, James Wilson, Hector MacLean, Islay, and many others in other parts of the Highlands." Notes by Campbell ( pp. 160-61 ): This is the best known of all Gaelic tales. It is the infant ladder to learning a chain of cause and effect, and fully as sensible as any of its kind. It used to be commonly taught to children of five or six years of age, and repeated by school boys, and it is still remembered by grown-up people in all parts of the highlands. There are few variations. In one version the crow was a little bird ; in another a gull was introduced, which advised the use of sand to stuff the riddle. The tale has sixteen steps, four of which contain double ideas. The English "House that Jack Built" has eleven. The Scotch "Old Woman with the Silver Penny" has twelve. The Norsk "Cock and Hen A-nutting" twelve, ten of which are double. The German story in Grimm has five or six, all single ideas. All these are different. In Uist the actors are Biorachan mor agus Biorchan Beag ; in Sutherland, Morachan agus Mionachan . The speech of the Hoodie is always a very close imitation of his note. In another version she says, " Cuir criadh righin ruadh Ris-Put tough red clay to it;" and the gull said, " Cuir Poll Bog ris (Put soft mud to it)," which is rather the speech of some other bird. There are several rare words in this ; for example, gadhar , a dog. Link to the Gaelic text of this story: Murchadh a's Mionachag . Return to the table of contents . The Wife and Her Bush of Berries Scotland Lang syne, when geese were swine, And turkeys chewed tobacco, And birds biggit their nests in auld mens's beards, And mowdies del't potawtoes -- There was a wife that lived 'n a wee house by hersel', and as she was soopin' the house one day, she fand twall pennies. So she thought to hersel' what she wad do wi' her twall pennies, and at last she thought she couldna do better than gang wi't to the market and buy a kid. Sae she gaed to the market and coffed a fine kid. And as she was gaun hame, she spied a bonny buss o' bernies growin' beside a brig. And she says to the kid, "Kid, kid, keep my house till I pu' my bonny, bonny buss o' berries." "'Deed no," says the kid, "I'll no keep your house till ye pu' your bonny buss o' berries." Then the wife gaed to the dog, and said, "Dog, dog, bite kid. Kid winna keep my house till I pu' my bonny buss o' berries." "'Deed," says the dog, "I'll no bite the kid, for the kid never did me ony ill." Then the wife gaed to a staff and said, "Staff, staff, strike dog; for dog winna bite kid, and kid winna keep my house," etc. "'Deed," says the staff, "I winna strike the dog, for the dog never did me ony ill." Then the wife gaed to the fire, and said, "Fire, fire, burn staff. Staff winna strike dog; dog winna bite kid," etc. "'Deed," says the fire, "I winna burn the staff, for the staff never did me ony ill." Wife: "Water, water, slocken fire. Fire winna," etc. "'Deed," says the water, "I winna slocken fire, for fire never did me ony ill." Wife: "Ox, ox, drink water. Water winna slocken fire," etc. "'Deed, says the ox, "I winna drink water, for water never did me ony ill." Wife: "Ax, ax, fell ox. Ox winna drink water," etc. "'Deed , says the ax, "I winna fell ox, for ox never did me ony ill." Wife: "Smith, smith, smooth ax. Ax winna," etc. "'Deed," says the smith, "I winna smooth ax, for ax never did me ony ill." Wife: "Rope, rope, hang smith. Smith winna smooth ax," etc. "'Deed," says the rope, "I winna hang smith, for smith never did me ony ill." Wife: "Mouse, mouse, cut rope. Rope winna hang smith," etc. "'Deed," says the mouse, "I winna cut rope, for rope never did me ony ill." Wife: "Cat, cat, kill mouse. Mouse winna cut rope; rope winna hang smith; smith winna smooth ax; ax winna fell ox; ox winna drink water; water winna slocken fire; fire winna burn staff; staff winna strike dog; dog winna bite kid; kid winna keep my house till I pu' my bonny buss o' berries." "'Deed, says the cat, "I winna kill the mouse, for the mouse never did me ony ill." Wife: "Do't, and I'll gie ye milk and bread." Wi' that the cat to the mouse, and the mouse to the rope, and the rope to the smith, and the smith to the ax, and the ax to the ox, and the ox to the water, and the water to the fire, and the fire to the staff, and the staff to the dog, and the dog to the kid, and the kid keepit the wife's house, till she pu'd her bonny buss o' berries. Source: Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), pp. 57-59 . Preface dated November 24, 1841. Return to the table of contents . The Wifie an Her Kidie Scotland There wiz a wifie, an she sweipit her hoosie clean an fair, an she fan twal pennies. An she geed till the market, an she bocht a kid. An she said, "Kid, kid, rin hame, leuk the hoose, an come again, till I gedder a puckle sticks to my fair firie." "Niver a lenth," said the kid, "will I rin hame, leuk the hoose, an come again; ye can dee't yersel." An the wifie said to the dog, "Dog, dog, bite kid; kid winna rin hame, leuk the hoose, an come again till I gedder a puckle sticks to my fair firie." "Niver a lenth," said the dog, "will I bite the kid; the kid niver did me ony ill." "Stick, stick, ding dog. Dog winna bite kid, kid winna rin hame," etc. "Niver a lenth," said the stick, "will I ding dog; dog niver did me ony ill." "Fire, fire, burn stick; stick winna ding dog, dog winna bite kid, kid winna rin," etc. "Niver a lenth," said the fire, "will I burn the stick; the stick niver did me ony ill." "Watter, watter, quench fire; fire winna burn stick, stick winna ding dog," etc. "Niver a lenth," said the watter, "will I quench fire; fire niver did me ony ill." "Ox, ox, drink watter; watter winna quench fire; fire winna burn stick," etc. "Niver a lenth," said the ox, "the watter niver did me ony ill." "Aix, aix, kill ox; ox winna drink watter; watter winna quench fire; fire," etc. "Niver a lenth," said the aix, "the ox niver did me ony ill." "Smith, smith, smee aix; aix winna kill ox; ox," etc. "Niver a lenth," said the smith, "the aix niver did me ony ill." "Rope, rope, hang smith; smith winna smee aix; aix winna," etc. "Niver a lenth," said the rope, "the smith niver did me ony ill." "Moosie, moosie, gnaw rope; rope winna hang smith; smith," etc. Noo, a' this time the cattie wiz sittin i' the ingle-neuk singin a sang till hersel. So the wifie said, "Bonnie cattie, gin ye wud tak moosie, I wud gie you some fine milk an breed t' yersel." So the cattie t' the moosie, an the moosie t' the rope, an the rope t' the smith, an the smith t' the aix, an the aix t' the ox, and the ox t' the watter, an the watter t' the fire, an the fire t' the stick, an the stick t' the dog, an the dog t' the kid, an the kid ran hame, leukit the hoose, an cam again till the wifie gedderit a puckle sticks till her fair firie. Another version of the ending is: An the kiddie ran ower the brig o' the waulk-mill an broke her neck. Source: Walter Gregor, "A Folk-Tale from Aberdeenshire," The Folk-Lore Journal , vol. 2, no. 9 (September 1884), pp. 277-78 . Gregor's source: Mr. James Moir, M.A., rector of the grammar school, Aberdeen. Return to the table of contents . Nanny Who Wouldn't Go Home to Supper Norway There was once upon a time a woman who had a son and a goat. The son was called Espen and the goat they called Nanny. But they were not good friends, and did not get on together, for the goat was perverse and wayward, as goats will be, and she would never go home at the right time for her supper. So it happened one evening that Espen went out to fetch her home, and when he had been looking for her a while he saw Nanny high, high up on a crag: "My dear Nanny, you must not stay any longer up there; you must come home now, it is just supper time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I shan't," said Nanny, "not before I have finished the grass on this tussock, and that tussock and this and that tussock." "Then I'll go and tell mother," said the lad. "That you may, and then I shall be left to eat in peace," said Nanny. So Espen went and told his mother. "Go to the fox and ask him to bite Nanny," said his mother. The lad went to the fox. "My dear fox, bite Nanny, for Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry, and I want my supper," said Espen. "No, I don't want to spoil my snout on pig's bristles and goat's beard," said the fox. So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the wolf," said his mother. The lad went to the wolf: "My dear wolf, tear the fox, for the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry, and I want my supper." "No," said the wolf, "I won't wear out my paws and teeth on a skinny fox." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the bear and ask him to slay the wolf," said the mother. The lad went to the bear. "My dear bear, slay the wolf, for the wolf won't tear the fox, and the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, that I won't," said the bear; "I don't want to wear out my claws for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the Finn and ask him to shoot the bear." The lad went to the Finn. "My dear Finn, shoot the bear, for the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the Finn; "I am not going to shoot away my bullets for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well go to the fir," said his mother, "and ask it to crush the Finn." The lad went to the fir tree: "My dear fir, crush the Finn, for the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the fir, "I am not going to break my boughs for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the fire," said his mother, "and ask it to burn the fir." The lad went to the fire: "My dear fire, burn the fir, for the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the fire, "I am not going to burn myself out for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the water, and ask it to quench the fire," she said. The lad went to the water. "My dear water, quench the fire, for the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the water, "I am not going to waste myself for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the ox," said she, "and ask him to drink up the water." The lad went to the ox: "My dear ox, drink up the water, for the water won't quench the fire, the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the ox. "I'm not going to burst myself for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the yoke," said she, "and ask it to throttle the ox." The lad went to the yoke. "My dear yoke, throttle the ox, for the ox won't drink the water, the water won't quench the fire, the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the yoke. "I'm not going to break myself in two for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the axe," said she, "and tell it to split the yoke." The lad went to the axe. "My dear axe, split the yoke, for the yoke won't throttle the ox, the ox won't drink the water, the water won't quench the fire, the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the axe. "I am not going to blunt my edge for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the smith," said she, "and ask him to hammer the axe." The lad went to the smith. "My dear smith! hammer the axe, for the axe won't split the yoke, the yoke won't throttle the ox, the ox won't drink the water, the water won't quench the fire, the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the smith. "I'll not burn my coals and wear out my sledge-hammers for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the rope," said she, "and ask it to hang the smith." The lad went to the rope. "My dear rope, hang the smith, for the smith won't hammer the axe, the axe won't split the yoke, the yoke won't throttle the ox, the ox won't drink the water, the water won't quench the fire, the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the rope. "I'm not going to break in two for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the mouse," said she, "and ask her to gnaw the rope." The lad went to the mouse. "My dear mouse, gnaw the rope, for the rope won't hang the smith, the smith won't hammer the axe, the axe won't split the yoke, the yoke won't throttle the ox, the ox won't drink the water, the water won't quench the fire, the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "No, I will not," said the mouse. "I'm not going to wear out my teeth for that." So the lad went and told his mother. "Well, go to the cat," said she, "and ask her to catch the mouse." The lad went to the cat. "My dear cat, catch the mouse, for the mouse won't gnaw the rope, the rope won't hang the smith, the smith won't hammer the axe, the axe won't split the yoke, the yoke won't throttle the ox, the ox won't drink the water, the water won't quench the fire, the fire won't burn the fir, the fir won't crush the Finn, the Finn won't shoot the bear, the bear won't slay the wolf, the wolf won't tear the fox, the fox won't bite Nanny, and Nanny won't come home in time. I am so hungry and want my supper." "Yes, but give me a drop of milk for my kittens, and then" said the cat. Yes, that she should have. So the cat caught the mouse, and the mouse gnawed the rope, and the rope hanged the smith, and the smith hammered the axe, and the axe split the yoke, and the yoke throttled the ox, and the ox drank the water, and the water quenched the fire, and the fire burned the fir, and the fir crushed the Finn, and the Finn shot the bear, and the bear slew the wolf, and the wolf tore the fox, and the fox bit Nanny, and Nanny took to her heels, scampered home, and ran against the barn wall and broke one of her legs. "M-a-h-a-h!" bleated the goat. There she lay, and if she isn't dead she is still limping about on three legs. But Espen said it served her right, because she would not come home in time for supper that day. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Fairy Tales from the Far North , translated from the Norwegian by H. L. Brækstad (London: David Nutt, 1897), pp. 246-52. The text of this tale in Norwegian: Hårslå, som aldri ville hjem gå . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Links open in new windows. Chain Tales . Texts of additional cumulative stories. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 29, 2009. The Mouse Who Was to Marry the Sun: Fables of type 2031C The Mouse Who Was to Marry the Sun fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 2031C edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2014 Contents The Transformed Mouse Seeks a Bridegroom (India, The Panchatantra ). A Story on Caste (India). The Rats and Their Daughter (Japan). A Bridegroom for Miss Mole (Korea). The Most Powerful Husband in the World (French North Africa). The Vole Who Sought a Wife (Marie de France). The Mouse Metamorphosed into a Maid (Jean de La Fontaine). The Story of the Rat and Her Journey to God (Romania). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Transformed Mouse Seeks a Bridegroom India ( The Panchatantra ) On the shore of the Ganges there was a hermitage filled with holy men dedicated to prayer, self denial, repentance, the study of holy scriptures, fasting, and meditation. They drank only small amounts of very pure water, and mortified their bodies with a diet of bulbs, roots, fruits, and water plants. Their only clothing were loincloths made from tree bark. The father of the hermitage was named Yajnavalkya. He had just finished bathing in the Ganges and was about to rinse out his mouth when a little mouse fell from a falcon's beak into his hand. After looking at it, he set it onto a fig leaf, bathed himself once more, rinsed out his mouth, and performed his penitential and other rituals. Then through the power of his holiness he transformed the mouse into a girl. Taking her home with him to his hermitage, he said to his wife, who was childless, "My dear, take her in place of a daughter. Bring her up with care!" Thereafter she was reared, loved, and nurtured. When she was twelve years old, and the wife saw that she was ready for marriage, she said to her husband, "Listen, husband, do you not see that it is past time for our daughter's marriage?" He said, "What you say is quite right! So if she is willing, I will summon the exalted sun god and present her to him as a wife. His wife said, "What could be said against that? Do it!" Through the power of prayer and incantations the sun appeared without delay, saying, "Holy man, why do you summon me?" The man answered, "Behold! Here stands my little daughter. If she will have you, take her as a wife!" Having said this, he said to his daughter, "Daughter, does this exalted one please you, this sun god who illuminates the three worlds?" The daughter said, "Father, he is too hot. I do not want him. Summon a better one!" Hearing this, the wise man said to the sun, "Exalted one, is there a being more powerful than you?" The sun answered, "Yes, there is a stronger one than I. The cloud, through whose cover I become invisible." Then the wise man summoned the cloud and said to his daughter, "Daughter, shall I give you to this one as a wife?" She answered, "He is black and cold. Therefore give me to another powerful being!" Upon this the wise man asked the cloud, "Listen, cloud! Is there anyone more powerful than you?" The cloud answered, "The wind is more powerful than I! Driven by the wind, I am scattered into a thousand pieces." After hearing this, the wise man summoned the wind and said, "Daughter, does the wind please you most of all as a husband?" She answered, "Father! He is entirely too inconstant. Summon a more powerful one instead!" The wise man said, "Wind, is there anyone more powerful than you?" The wind said, "The mountain is more powerful than I, for however strong I am, he still stands firmly against me." Then the wise man summoned the mountain and said to the girl, "Daughter, shall I give you to this one in marriage?" She answered, "Father, he is hard and rigid. Therefore give me to another one." The wise man asked the mountain, "Listen, king of the mountains, is there anyone more powerful than you?" The mountain answered, "The mice are more powerful than I, for they make holes in my body with violence." With that the wise man summoned a mouse and showed him to her, saying, "Daughter, shall I give you to him as a wife? Does this mouse king please you?" Seeing him, she thought, "He is of my own kind." Her hair stood on end with pleasure, making her even more beautiful, and she said, "Father, make me into a mouse and give me to him as a wife so I can fulfill the domestic duties prescribed for my kind!" Through the power of his holiness he transformed her into a little mouse and gave her to the other mouse as a wife. Source: The Panchatantra , book 3. I have used the following edition: "Die verwandelte Maus soll sich einen Bräutigam wählen," Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen , aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey, vol. 2 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), pp. 262-66 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. In addition to making a few minor stylistic changes, I have omitted from my translation a lengthy discourse in verse, presented by the wise man to his wife, on the supposed benefits of child marriage. About The Panchatantra One of India's most influential contributions to world literature, The Panchatantra (also spelled Pañcatantra or Pañca-tantra ) consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled in their current form between the third and fifth centuries AD. It is believed that even then the stories were already ancient. The tales' self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes The Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai, which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of The Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced medieval writers of fables. Link to additional Tales from the Panchatantra . Return to the table of contents . A Story on Caste India There was once a village inhabited only by Musahars. Among them was one girl who was so beautiful that she seemed more than human. Her father and mother were so proud of her looks that they determined not to marry her to a man of their own caste. They were constantly discussing whom they should choose as a son-in-law; one day they began to consider who were the greatest persons in the world. The old woman was of opinion that there was no one greater than Chando, the Sun God, and suggested that they should marry the girl to him. Her husband agreed and off they set and presented themselves before Chando. Chando asked why they had come. "O Chando, we understand that you are the greatest being in the world and we have come to marry our daughter to you." Chando answered, "I fancy there is some one greater than I." "Who is he?" asked the parents. "The cloud is greater than I, for it can hide my face and quench my rays." At this the father and mother hurried off with their daughter in search of the cloud, and when they found him, told him that they had brought their daughter to give him to wife, as he was the greatest being in the world. "I may be great," said the cloud, "but there is a greater than I, the wind. The wind rises and blows me away in a minute." So they went in search of the wind and when they found him, explained to him why they had brought him their daughter. The wind said, "I am strong but there are stronger than I. The mountains are stronger. I can blow things down or whirl them away, but I cannot move the mountains." So on they went to the mountain and explained their errand. The mountain said, "I am great but there are more powerful than I. The ground-rat is more powerful, for however high I may be the ground-rats burrow holes in me and I cannot resist them." The poor parents by this time began to feel rather discouraged, but still they made up their minds to persevere and went on to look for the ground-rat. They found him and offered him their daughter in marriage, but the ground-rat denied that he was the most powerful being on earth. The Musahars were more powerful for they lived by digging out ground-rats and eating them. The hapless couple went home very dejectedly, reflecting that they had begun by despising their own caste and had gone in search of something greater and had ended where they began. So they arranged to marry their daughter to a man of their own caste after all. Moral. You should not despise your own caste or race; you cannot help what caste you are born into. A Santal may learn to read and write and associate with men of good position and thereby his mind may be perverted. He may wish to change his caste and become a Sadhu, or a Kherwar, or a Boistab, or a Mussulman, or a Christian or anything else; but people will still know him for a beef-eating Santal. If he becomes a Christian, no one will think him the equal of a Saheb or a Brahman; no Saheb will marry his daughter or give him his daughter in marriage. Remember what happened to the Musahar, who despised his own caste. God caused you to be born in a certain caste. He and not we made the different castes, and He knows what is good and bad for us. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 51, pp. 168-70 . Return to the table of contents . The Rats and Their Daughter Japan Once near a lonely farmhouse surrounded by rice fields there lived a rat couple. They were highly regarded by their own kind and very prosperous. One day, in addition to their many other children, a little daughter was born to them. She was so dainty with her shiny gray fur, her broad little upright ears, and her glistening eyes, that her parents became quite proud of their little daughter. Day in and day out their only thoughts were how they might prepare a magnificent future for her. When the little rat came of age, both parents came to the conclusion that only the most powerful being in the entire world should be her husband. Once they were discussing this matter with a neighbor, and he said, "If you want to give your daughter in marriage to the most powerful being, you must choose the sun as your son-in-law, for without question, no one equals the sun in power. The rat couple saw that this was true, and without hesitation they made their way to the sun and presented to him their proposal that he should marry their daughter. The sun replied, "I am much indebted to you that you have come so far, and that you have the kind intention to give me your daughter in marriage, but please tell me just why you have chosen me to be your son-in-law." The rats said, "We would like to give our daughter in marriage to the most powerful being in the world, and without dispute you are that one. Therefore we have chosen you to be our son-in-law." Then the sun said, "What you say is not without foundation, but there is a being more powerful than I, and it is he to whom you must give your daughter." The rats replied, "Can there in truth be someone more powerful than you?" The sun said, "When I want to shine on the earth, a cloud often comes by and covers me up, and my rays are unable either to penetrate it or to frighten it away. I am powerless against the cloud. Thus you must go to the cloud and make him your son-in-law." The rats saw that it was so, and they went to the cloud. After they had presented their proposal to him, the cloud said, "You are in error if you think that I am the most powerful being. I do indeed have the power to cover the sun, but I am powerless against the wind. When he begins to blow, he drives me away and tears me to pieces. There is nothing I can do against him." So the rats went to the wind and made the proposal to him that he should marry their daughter, whom they wanted to give in marriage to the most powerful being. But the wind said, "You are in error. I do indeed have the power to drive away the cloud, but I am powerless against the wall that people build to hold me back. I can neither blow through it nor do anything to it. The wall is much more powerful than I." So the rats again set forth and came to the wall, to whom, in a similar manner, they made their request. The wall replied, "It is indeed true that I have the power to resist the wind, but there is a rat that is undermining me, boring into me and making holes throughout me, and there is nothing I can do to stop him. I am powerless against the rat. It would be better for you to take the rat for your son-in-law than to choose me!" This pleased the rats, for they saw that the wall was right. They returned home and married their dear daughter to a handsome young rat. They never regretted this, for their daughter lived happily and contentedly with a man of her own kind. And the parents, who once had wanted to elevate her so high, shared in her happiness and satisfaction. Source: David Brauns, "Die Ratten und ihr Töchterlein," Japanische Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich, 1885), pp. 85-87 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. Link to additional Folktales from Japan . Return to the table of contents . A Bridegroom for Miss Mole Korea By the river Kingin stands the great stone image, or Miryek, that was cut out of the solid rock ages ago. Its base lies far beneath the ground and around its granite cap, many feet square, the storm clouds gather and play as they roll down the mountain. Down under the earth, near this mighty colossus, lived a soft-furred mole and his wife. One day a daughter was born to them. It was the most wonderful mole baby that ever was known. The father was so proud of his lovely offspring that he determined to marry her only to the grandest thing in the whole universe. Nothing else would satisfy his pride in the beautiful creature he called his own. Father Mole sought long and hard to find out where and what, in all nature, was considered the most wonderful. He called in his neighbors and talked over the matter with them. Then he visited the king of the moles and asked the wise ones in his court to decide for him. One and all agreed that the Great Blue Sky was above everything else in glory and greatness. So up to the Sky the Mole Father went and offered his daughter to be the bride of the Great Blue, telling how, with his vast azure robe, the Sky had the reputation, both on the earth and under it, of being the greatest thing in the universe. But, much to the Mole Father's surprise, the Sky declined. "No, I am not the greatest. I must refer you to the Sun. He controls me, for he can make it day or night as he pleases. Only when he rises, can I wear my bright colors. When he goes down, darkness covers the world, and men do not see me at all, but the stars instead. Better take your charming daughter to him." So to the Sun went Mr. Mole and though afraid to look directly into his face, he made his plea. He would have the Sun marry his attractive daughter. But the mighty luminary, that usually seemed so fierce, dazzling men's eyesight and able to burn up the very grass of the field, seemed suddenly very modest. Instead of accepting at once the offer, the Sun said to the father, "Alas! I am not master. The Cloud is greater than I, for he is able to cover me up and make me invisible for days and weeks. I am not as powerful as you think me to be. Let me advise you to offer your daughter to the Cloud." Surprised at this, the Mole Father looked quite disappointed. Now he was in doubt as to what time he had best propose to the Cloud, -- when it was silvery white and glistening in a summer afternoon, or when it was black and threatening a tempest. However, his ambition to get for his daughter the mightiest possible bridegroom prompted him to wait until the lightnings flashed and the thunder rolled. Then, appearing before the terrible dark Cloud that shot out fire, he told of the charms of his wonderful daughter and offered her as bride. "And why do you come to me?" asked the Cloud, its face inky black with the wrath of a storm and its eyes red with the fires of lightning. "Because you are not only the greatest thing in the universe, but you have proved it by your terrible power," replied the Father Mole. At this the Cloud ceased its rolling, stopped its fire and thunder and almost laughed. "So far from being the greatest thing in the world, I am not even my own master. See already how the Wind is driving me. Soon I shall be invisible, dissolved in air. Let me commend you to the Wind. The Master of the Cloud will make a grand son-in-law." Thereupon Papa Mole waited until the Wind calmed down, after blowing away the clouds. Then telling of his daughter's accomplishments and loveliness, he made proffer of his only child as bride to the Wind. But the Wind was not half so proud as the Mole Father had expected to find him. Very modest, almost bashful seemed the Wind, as he confessed that before Miryek, the colossal stone image, his power was naught. "Why, I smite that Great Stone Face and its eyes do not even blink. I roar in his ears, but he minds it not. I try to make him sneeze, but he will not. Smite him as I may, he still stands unmoved and smiling. Alas, no. I am not the grandest thing in the universe, while Miryek stands. Go to him. He alone is worthy to marry your daughter." By this time the Mole Father was not only footsore and weary, but much discouraged also. Evidently all appreciated his shining daughter; but would he be able, after all, to get her a worthy husband? He rested himself a while and then proceeded to Miryek, the colossus of granite as large as a lighthouse, its head far up in the air, but with ears ready to hear. The Mole Father squeaked out compliments to the image as being by common confession the greatest thing on earth. He presented his request for a son-in-law and then in detail mentioned the accomplishments of his daughter, sounding her praises at great length. Indeed, he almost ruined his case by talking so long. With stony patience, Miryek listened to the proud father with a twinkle in his white granite eyes. When his lips moved, he was heard to say, "Fond Parent, what you say is true. I am great. I care not for the sky day or night, for I remain the same in daylight and darkness. I fear not the sun, that cannot melt me, nor the frost that is not able to make me crumble. Cold or hot, in summer or in winter time, I remain unchanged. The clouds come and go, but they cannot move me. Their fire and noise, lightning and thunder, I fear not. Yes, I am great." Then the stone lips closed again. "You will make, then, a good bridegroom for my daughter? You will marry her, I understand?" asked the proud father as his hopes began to rise, though he was still doubtful. "I would gladly do so, if I were greatest. But I am not," said Miryek. "Down under my feet is the Mole. He digs with his shovel-like hands and makes burrows day and night. His might I cannot resist. Soon he shall undermine my base and I shall topple down and lie like common stone along the earth. Yes I by universal confession, the Mole is the greatest thing in the universe and to him I yield. Better marry your daughter to him." So after all his journeying, the lovely daughter's father sought no further. Advised on all sides, and opinion being unanimous, he found out that the Mole was the greatest thing in the universe. His daughter's bridegroom was found at home and of the same family of creatures. He married her to a young and handsome Mole, and great was the joy and rejoicing at the wedding. The pair were well-mated and lived happily ever afterward. Source: William Elliot Griffis, The Unmannerly Tiger and Other Korean Tales (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Company, 1911), pp. 50-55 . Return to the table of contents . The Most Powerful Husband in the World French North Africa It is said that a monk, whose prayers were always answered, was one day seated on the seashore, when he saw a kite fly holding in one of its claws a little mouse, which escaped and fell on the monk. Touched with compassion for the mouse, he took it, wrapped it up in a leaf, and carried it home with him. Fearing that his people would not be very eager to care for it, he prayed his Lord to change it into a young girl; and immediately it became a young girl gifted with great beauty. The monk led her to his wife, and said to the latter, "Here is a girl who belongs to me, and I desire that you shall treat her as my own child." When she had come to the age of womanhood, the monk said to her, "My dear daughter, you are quite grown up, and you absolutely must have a husband; choose then, one to suit yourself, so that I may unite you to him." "Since you leave me free to choose," she replied, "I wish for my husband, he who is the most powerful in the world." "Perhaps you would like the sun?" said he; and he went to find the sun, and said to it, "O! thou who art so essentially great, I have a daughter who desires to have for a husband he who is the most powerful in the world; would you be willing to marry her?" "I will show you someone who is more powerful than I," said the sun. "It is the cloud which obscures me, and makes my rays pale and tarnishes the splendor of my fires." The monk went to the cloud and repeated to him the sun's words." "And I," said the cloud, "I will show you someone more powerful than I. Go find the wind which makes me come and go, which drives me from east to west." The monk went to find the wind, and said to him the same things which he had said to the cloud; but the wind said to him also, "I will show you someone more powerful than I. It is the mountain that I cannot move." Then the monk went to speak to the mountain, which made him this reply, "I will show you someone more powerful than I. It is the rat, against which I cannot defend myself, when he bores into me and makes his home in me." At last the monk went and said to the rat, "Do you wish to marry my young daughter?" "And how could I do so?" cried the rat. "My hole is narrow, and a rat only marries a mouse." The monk then prayed his Lord to change the young girl into a mouse, as she was before, and this to the entire contentment of the young girl. Immediately she resumed her original shape, and she ran away with the rat. Source: Martha Ward Carey, transl. Fairy Legends of the French Provinces (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell and Co., 1887), pp. 118-20 . The stories in this collection were gathered from the French folklore journal Mélusine and Paul Sébillot's Contes des provinces de la France. This tale is identified as "An Arabian Story," suggesting that its origin is one of the former French colonies in North Africa. Return to the table of contents . The Vole Who Sought a Wife Marie de France Once there was a proud vole (a kind of mouse) that wanted to marry, but would not have a bride from his own lineage, wanting instead the daughter of a most high being. Thus he went to the sun, whom he held to be the mightiest being of all, and asked for the hand of his daughter. The sun replied, "But there is one even mightier than I: the cloud, for he is able to cover my brightness entirely." So the vole went to the cloud, addressed him as "the mightiest one," and asked to wed his daughter. The cloud responded that the vole would find an even stronger being in the wind, who had the power to push the cloud away at will. Next the vole journeyed to the wind, explaining that he understood him to be the most powerful creature of all, and wishing therefore to marry his daughter. "You are mistaken," answered the wind. "The wall is stronger than I. He can withstand my mightiest blast." "Then I withdraw my request for you daughter's hand," replied the vole. I will marry only into the mightiest family." And he went forthwith to the wall. Upon hearing the vole's request to marry his daughter, and the explanations thereto, the wall replied, "You have been misled, my friend. There is a creature still mightier than I." "Who, then?" asked the vole. "He must be the strongest in the world." "Quite so," said the wall. "It's the mouse who has a nest inside of me. No mortar can withstand her gnawing. With time she'll be the death of me. However far you go, you'll find no better wife than this little lady mouse." And thus it is with the proud and the arrogant who strive beyond their rightful place, and end up even lower than where they started. Source: Retold from the Anglo-Norman verse fable: "Dou Muset ki quist Fame," Poésies de Marie de France , vol. 2 (Paris: Chasseriau, 1820), no. 64, pp. 274-80 . © D. L. Ashliman, 2014. Little is known about the life of the medieval poet Marie de France, except that she probably was born in France and lived in England during the late 12th century. Return to the table of contents . The Mouse Metamorphosed into a Maid Jean de La Fontaine A mouse once from an owl's beak fell; I'd not have pick'd it up, I wis; A Brahmin did it: very well; Each country has its prejudice. The mouse, indeed, was sadly bruised. Although, as neighbors, we are used To be more kind to many others, The Brahmins treat the mice as brothers. The notion haunts their heads, that when The soul goes forth from dying men, It enters worm, or bird, or beast, As Providence or Fate is pleased; And on this mystery rests their law, Which from Pythagoras they're said to draw. And hence the Brahmin kindly pray'd To one who knew the wizard's trade, To give the creature, wounded sore, The form in which it lodged before. Forthwith the mouse became a maid, Of years about fifteen; A lovelier was never seen. She would have waked, I ween, In Priam's son, a fiercer flame Than did the beauteous Grecian dame. Surprised at such a novelty, The Brahmin to the damsel cried, "Your choice is free; For every he Will seek you for his bride." Said she, "Am I to have a voice? The strongest, then, shall be my choice." "O sun!" the Brahmin cried, "this maid is thine, And thou shalt be a son-in-law of mine." "No," said the sun, "this murky cloud, it seems, In strength exceeds me, since he hides my beams; And him I counsel you to take." Again the reverend Brahmin spake -- "O cloud, on-flying with thy stores of water, Pray wast thou born to wed my daughter?" "Ah, no, alas! for, you may see, The wind is far too strong for me. My claims with Boreas' to compare, I must confess, I do not dare." "O wind," then cried the Brahmin, vex'd, And wondering what would hinder next, -- "Approach, and, with thy sweetest air, Embrace -- possess -- the fairest fair." The wind, enraptured, thither blew; -- A mountain stopp'd him as he flew, To him now pass'd the tennis-ball, And from him to a creature small. Said he, "I'd wed the maid, but that I've had a quarrel with the rat. A fool were I to take the bride From one so sure to pierce my side." The rat! It thrill'd the damsel's ear; The name at once seem'd sweet and dear. The rat! 'Twas one of Cupid's blows; The like full many a maiden knows; But all of this beneath the rose. One smacketh ever of the place Where first he show'd the world his face. Thus far the fable's clear as light; But, if we take a nearer sight, There lurks within its drapery Somewhat of graceless sophistry; For who, that worships e'en the glorious sun, Would not prefer to wed some cooler one? And doth a flea's exceed a giant's might, Because the former can the latter bite? And, by the rule of strength, the rat Had sent his bride to wed the cat; From cat to dog, and onward still To wolf or tiger, if you will: Indeed, the fabulist might run A circle backward to the sun. -- But to the change the tale supposes, -- In learned phrase, metempsychosis. The very thing the wizard did Its falsity exposes -- If that indeed were ever hid. According to the Brahmin's plan, The proud aspiring soul of man, And souls that dwell in humbler forms Of rats and mice, and even worms, All issue from a common source, And, hence, they are the same of course. -- Unequal but by accident Of organ and of tenement, They use one pair of legs, or two, Or e'en with none contrive to do, As tyrant matter binds them to. Why, then, could not so fine a frame Constrain its heavenly guest To wed the solar flame? A rat her love possess'd. In all respects, compared and weigh'd, The souls of men and souls of mice Quite different are made, -- Unlike in sort as well as size. Each fits and fills its destined part As Heaven doth well provide; Nor witch, nor fiend, nor magic art, Can set their laws aside. Source: Jean de La Fontaine, The Fables of Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright; a new edition with notes by J. W. M. Gibbs (London: George Bell and Sons, 1888), book 9, fable 7, pp. 231-33 . Link to this fable in the original French: La souris métamorphosée en fille . Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Rat and Her Journey to God Romania In a mill a rat once lived and prospered. It took after the miller, and from day to day its paunch grew bigger. It became as round as a cucumber and as fat as a candle. One day, looking at its round, sleek figure, the rat said to itself, "Behold I am so beautiful and strong. Why should I not go and pay a visit to God? He is sure to receive me." No sooner said than done. Leaving the mill, he started on his journey to God. After traveling a few days and not coming nearer to God, he stopped and said, "Methinks that either God lives much farther away than I believed, or I have lost my way. I will go to the sun and ask where God is." Coming to the sun, the rat asked, "Where is God?" "Off with you," shouted the sun. "I have no time for idle talkers." The rat went to the clouds and asked them, "Where is God?" "We cannot stop to bandy words with the like of you." Away the rat went and came to the wind. "Where is God?" asked the rat. "There," replied the wind, whistling, and getting hold of the rat hurled him down onto an ant-heap, and there he found his level. Source: M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 109, p. 318 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Texts of additional chain tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 30, 2014. Chain Tales of Type 2032 The Cock and the Mouse and The Sexton's Nose chain tales of Aarne-Thompson type 2032 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2003 Contents The Cock and the Mouse (Italy). The Sexton's Nose (Italy). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Cock and the Mouse Italy Once upon a time there was a cock and a mouse. One day the mouse said to the cock, "Friend cock, shall we go and eat some nuts on yonder tree?" "As you like." So they both went under the tree, and the mouse climbed up at once and began to eat. The poor cock began to fly, and flew and flew, but could not come where the mouse was. When it saw that there was no hope of getting there, it said, "Friend mouse, do you know what I want you to do? Throw me a nut." The mouse went and threw one and hit the cock on the head. The poor cock, with its head broken and all covered with blood, went away to an old woman. "Old aunt, give me some rags to cure my head." "If you will give me two hairs, I will give you the rags." The cock went away to a dog. "Dog, give me some hairs. The hairs I will give the old woman. The old woman will give me rags to cure my head." "If you will give me a little bread," said the dog, "I will give you the hairs." The cock went away to a baker. "Baker, give me bread. I will give the bread to the dog. The dog will give hairs. The hairs I will carry to the old woman. The old woman will give me rags to cure my head." The baker answered, "I will not give you bread unless you give me some wood!" The cock went away to the forest. "Forest, give me some wood. The wood I will carry to the baker. The baker will give me some bread. The bread I will give to the dog. The dog will give me hairs. The hairs I will carry to the old woman. The old woman will give me rags to cure my head." The forest answered, "If you will bring me a little water, I will give you some wood." The cock went away to a fountain. "Fountain, give me water. Water I will carry to the forest. Forest will give wood. Wood I will carry to the baker. Baker will give bread. Bread I will give dog. Dog will give hairs. Hairs I will give old woman. Old woman will give rags to cure my head." The fountain gave him water. The water he carried to the forest. The forest gave him wood. The wood he carried to the baker. The baker gave him bread. The bread he gave to the dog. The dog gave him the hairs. The hairs he carried to the old woman. the old woman gave him the rags. And the cock cured his head. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1885, no. 80, pp. 252-253. Return to the table of contents . The Sexton's Nose Italy A sexton, one day in sweeping the church, found a piece of money (it was a fifth of a cent) and deliberated with himself as to what he would buy with it. If he bought nuts or almonds, he was afraid of the mice; so at last he bought some roasted peas, and ate all but the last pea. This he took to a bakery nearby, and asked the mistress to keep it for him. She told him to leave it on a bench, and she would take care of it. When she went to get it, she found that the cock had eaten it. The next day the sexton came for the roast pea, and when he heard what had become of it, he said they must either return the roast pea or give him the cock. This they did, and the sexton, not having anyplace to keep it, took it to a miller's wife, who promised to keep it for him. Now she had a pig, which managed to kill the cock. The next day the sexton came for the cock, and on finding it dead, demanded the pig, and the woman had to give it to him. The pig he left with a friend of his, a pastry cook, whose daughter was to be married the next day. The woman was mean and sly, and killed the pig for her daughter's wedding, meaning to tell the sexton that the pig had run away. The sexton, however, when he heard it, made a great fuss, and declared that she must give him back his pig or her daughter. At last she had to give him her daughter, whom he put in a bag and carried away. He took the bag to a woman who kept a shop, and asked her to keep for him this bag, which he said contained bran. The woman by chance kept chickens, and she thought she would take some of the sexton's bran and feed them. When she opened the bag she found the young girl, who told her how she came there. The woman took her out of the sack, and put in her stead a dog. The next day the sexton came for his bag, and putting it on his shoulder, started for the seashore, intending to throw the young girl in the sea. When he reached the shore, he opened the bag, and the furious dog flew out and bit his nose. The sexton was in great agony, and cried out, while the blood ran down his face in torrents, "Dog, dog, give me a hair to put in my nose, and heal the bite." The dog answered, "Do you want a hair? Give me some bread." The sexton ran to a bakery, and said to the baker, "Baker, give me some bread to give the dog. The dog will give a hair. The hair I will put in my nose, and cure the bite." The baker said, "Do you want bread? Give me some wood." The sexton ran to the woodman. "Woodman, give me wood to give the baker. The baker will give me bread. The bread I will give to the dog. The dog will give me a hair. The hair I will put in my nose, and heal the bite." The woodman said, "Do you want wood? Give me a mattock." The sexton ran to a smith. "Smith, give me a mattock to give the woodman. The woodman will give me wood. I will carry the wood to the baker. The baker will give me bread. I will give the bread to the dog. The dog will give me a hair. The hair I will put in my nose, and heal the bite." The smith said, "Do you want a mattock? Give me some coals." The sexton ran to the collier. "Collier, give me some coals to give the smith. The smith will give me a mattock. The mattock I will give the woodman. The woodman will give me some wood. The wood I will give the baker. The baker will give me bread. The bread I will give the dog. The dog will give me a hair. The hair I will put in my nose, and heal the bite." "Do you want coals? Give me a cart." The sexton ran to the wagon maker. "Wagon maker, give me a cart to give the collier. The collier will give me some coals. The coals I will carry to the smith. The smith will give me a mattock. The mattock I will give the woodman. The woodman will give me some wood. The wood I will give the baker. The baker will give me bread. The bread I will give to the dog. The dog will give me a hair. The hair I will put in my nose, and heal the bite." The wagon maker, seeing the sexton's great lamentation, is moved to compassion, and gives him the cart. The sexton, well pleased, takes the cart and goes away to the collier. The collier gives him the coals. The coals he takes to the smith. The smith gives him the mattock. The mattock he takes to the woodman. The woodman gives him wood. The wood he carries to the baker. The baker gives him bread. The bread he carries to the dog. The dog gives him a hair. The hair he puts in his nose, and heals the bite. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1885, no. 79, pp. 250-252. In this version the chain tale of type 2032 is introduced by a type 1655 tale about profitable exchanges. Link to additional tales of type 1655 . Treating a dog bite by applying to it the hair of the dog that inflicted the wound is a widespread folk cure. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Return to the table of contents . Chain Tales . Links to additional stories about chains of events. Revised June 23, 2003. The End of the World: folktales of type 20C and 2033 The End of the World The Sky Is Falling folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 20C (including former type 2033) in which storytellers from around the world make light of paranoia and mass hysteria selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2021 Contents The Timid Hare and the Flight of the Beasts (India, The Jataka Tales ). The Flight of the Beasts (Tibet). The Hares and the Frogs (Aesop -- edited by Samuel Croxall). The Hares and the Frogs (Aesop -- edited by Thomas Berwick). The Story of Chicken-Licken (England). Henny-Penny and Her Fellow Travelers (Scotland). Chickie Birdie (Scotland). Henny-Penny (England/Australia). The End of the World (Ireland). The Hen That Went to Dovrefjell to Keep the Whole World from Coming to an End (Norway). The Little Chicken Kluk and His Companions (Denmark). The End of the World (Flanders). The Dumb Little Animals (Alsace). Brother Rabbit Takes Some Exercise (African-American). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Timid Hare and the Flight of the Beasts India Once upon a time when Brahmadatta reigned in Benares, the Bodhisatta [the future Buddha] came to life as a young lion. And when fully grown he lived in a wood. At this time there was near the Western Ocean a grove of palms mixed with vilva trees. A certain hare lived here beneath a palm sapling, at the foot of a vilva tree. One day this hare, after feeding, came and lay down beneath the young palm tree. And the thought struck him, "If this earth should be destroyed, what would become of me?" And at this very moment a ripe vilva fruit fell on a palm leaf. At the sound of it, the hare thought, "This solid earth is collapsing," and starting up he fled, without so much as looking behind him. Another hare saw him scampering off, as if frightened to death, and asked the cause of his panic flight. "Pray, don't ask me," he said. The other hare cried, "Pray, sir, what is it?" and kept running after him. Then the hare stopped a moment and without looking back said, "The earth here is breaking up." And at this the second hare ran after the other. And so first one and then another hare caught sight of him running, and joined in the chase till one hundred thousand hares all took to flight together. They were seen by a deer, a boar, an elk, a buffalo, a wild ox, a rhinoceros, a tiger, a lion, and an elephant. And when they asked what it meant and were told that the earth was breaking up, they too took to flight. So by degrees this host of animals extended to the length of a full league. When the Bodhisatta saw this headlong flight of the animals, and heard the cause of it was that the earth was coming to an end, he thought, "The earth is nowhere coming to an end. Surely it must be some sound which was misunderstood by them. And if I don't make a great effort, they will all perish. I will save their lives." So with the speed of a lion he got before them to the foot of a mountain, and lion-like roared three times. They were terribly frightened at the lion, and stopping in their flight stood all huddled together. The lion went in amongst them and asked why there were running away. "The earth is collapsing," they answered. "Who saw it collapsing?" he said. "The elephants know all about it," they replied. He asked the elephants. "We don't know," they said, "the lions know." But the lions said, "We don't know, the tigers know." The tigers said, "The rhinoceroses know." The rhinoceroses said, "The wild oxen know." The wild oxen, "the buffaloes." The buffaloes, "the elks." The elks, "the boars." The boars, "the deer." The deer said, "We don't know; the hares know." When the hares were questioned, they pointed to one particular hare and said, "This one told us." So the Bodhisatta asked, "Is it true, sir, that the earth is breaking up?" "Yes, sir, I saw it," said the hare. "Where," he asked, "were you living, when you saw it?" "Near the ocean, sir, in a grove of palms mixed with vilva trees. For as I was lying beneath the shade of a palm sapling at the foot of a vilva tree, methought, 'If this earth should break up, where shall I go?' And at that very moment I heard the sound the breaking up of the earth, and I fled." Thought the lion, "A ripe vilva fruit evidently must have fallen on a palm leaf and made a 'thud,' and this hare jumped to the conclusion that the earth was coming to an end, and ran away. I will find out the exact truth about it." So he reassured the herd of animals, and said, "I will take the hare and go and find out exactly whether the earth is coming to an end or not, in the place pointed out by him. Until I return, do you stay here." Then placing the hare on his back, he sprang forward with the speed of a lion, and putting the hare down in the palm grove, he said, "Come, show us the place you meant." "I dare not, my lord," said the hare. "Come, don't be afraid," said the lion. The hare, not venturing to go near the vilva tree, stood afar off and cried, "Yonder, sir, is the place of dreadful sound," and so saying, he repeated the first stanza: From the spot where I did dwell Issued forth a fearful "thud"; What it was I could not tell, Nor what caused it understood. After hearing what the hare said, the lion went to the foot of the vilva tree, and saw the spot where the hare had been lying beneath the shade of the palm tree, and the ripe vilva fruit that fell on the palm leaf, and having carefully ascertained that the earth had not broken up, he placed the hare on his back and with the speed of a lion soon came again to the herd of beasts. Then he told them the whole story, and said, "Don't be afraid." And having thus reassured the herd of beasts, he let them go. Verily, if it had not been for the Bodhisatta at that time, all the beasts would have rushed into the sea and perished. It was all owing to the Bodhisatta that they escaped death. Alarmed at sound of fallen fruit A hare once ran away, The other beasts all followed suit Moved by that hare's dismay. They hastened not to view the scene, But lent a willing ear To idle gossip, and were clean Distraught with foolish fear. They who to Wisdom's calm delight And Virtue's heights attain, Though ill example should invite, Such panic fear disdain. Source (books.google.com): "Daddabha-Jataka," The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 3 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1897), no. 322, pp. 49-52 . Source (Internet Archive): "Daddabha-Jataka," The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 3 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1897), no. 322, pp. 49-52 . Return to the table of contents . The Flight of the Beasts Tibet At a long distant period there stood on the shore of a lake a vilva forest. In this forest dwelt six hares. Now a vilva tree in that forest fell into the lake, thereby producing a great noise. When the six hares heard this noise, they began, as they had but small bodies, to run away full of fear. The jackals saw them running, and asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The hares replied, "There was a great noise." Thereupon the jackals also took to flight. When the monkeys saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The jackals replied, "There was a great noise." Thereupon the monkeys also took to flight. When the gazelles saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The monkeys replied, "There was a great noise." Thereupon the gazelles also took to flight. When the boars saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The gazelles replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the boars also took to flight. When the buffaloes saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run? " The boars replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the buffaloes also took to flight. When the rhinoceroses saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The buffaloes replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the rhinoceroses also took to flight. When the elephants saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The rhinoceroses replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the elephants also took to flight. When the bears saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The elephants replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the bears also took to flight. When the hyenas saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The bears replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the hyenas also took to flight. When the panthers saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The hyenas replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the panthers also took to flight. When the tigers saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The panthers replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the tigers also took to flight. When the lions saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The tigers replied, "There was a loud noise." Thereupon the lions also took to flight. At the foot of the mountain there dwelt a maned lion, which likewise seemed to wear a diadem. When it saw the lions running it asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye all run, although each of you is strong in claws and strong in teeth?" The lions replied, "There was a loud noise." "O honored ones, whence did the noise come?" it asked. "We do not know," they replied. Then said that lion, "O honored ones, do not run. Inquiry must be made as to where the noise came from." It asked the tigers, "Who told you about it?" The tigers replied, "The panthers." It asked the panthers, "Who was it told you?" The panthers replied, "The hyenas." It asked the hyenas, "Who was it told you?" The hyenas replied, "The bears." It asked the bears, "Who was it told you?" The bears replied, "The elephants." It asked the elephants, "Who was it told you ?" The elephants replied, "The rhinoceroses." It asked the rhinoceroses, "Who was it told you?" The rhinoceroses replied, "The buffaloes." It asked the buffaloes, "Who was it told you?" The buffaloes replied, "The boars." It asked the boars, "Who was it told you?" The boars replied, "The gazelles." It asked the gazelles, "Who was it told you?" The gazelles replied, "The monkeys." It asked the monkeys, "Who was it told you?" The monkeys replied, "The jackals." It asked the jackals, "Who was it told you?" The jackals replied, "The hares." It asked the hares, "Who was it told you?" The hares replied, "We saw the terrible thing with our own eyes. Come, we will show you whence the noise came." So they guided the lion, and showed it the vilva forest, saying, "That is where the noise came from." Inasmuch as the noise was caused by the fall of a vilva tree out of that forest into the lake, the lion said, "O honored ones, be not afraid, for that was only an empty sound." Consequently they were all tranquillized. And a deity uttered this verse, "Let not men believe in words. They ought to see everything for themselves. Observe how, through the fall of a vilva, the forest lost its beasts." Source (books.google.com): Anton Schiefner, Tibetan Tales: Derived from Indian Sources , translated by W. R. S. Ralston (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, and Company, 1906), no. 22, pp. 296-98 . Source (Internet Archive): Anton Schiefner, Tibetan Tales: Derived from Indian Sources , translated by W. R. S. Ralston (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, and Company, 1906), , no. 22, pp. 296-98 . Return to the table of contents . The Hares and the Frogs Aesop Upon a great Storm of Wind that blew among the Trees and Bushes, and made a Rustling with the Leaves, the Hares (in a certain Park where there happen'd to be a Plenty of them) were so terribly frighted that they ran like mad all over the Place, resolving to seek out some Retreat of more security, or to end their unhappy Days by doing Violence to themselves. With this Resolution, they found an Outlet where a Pale had been broken down; and, bolting forth upon an adjoining Common, had not run far before their Course was stopt by that of a gentle Brook which glided across the way they intended to take. This was so grievous a Disappointment, that they were not able to bear it, and they deterinin'd rather to throw themselves headlong into the Water, let what would become of it, than lead a Life so full of Dangers and Crosses. But upon their coming to the brink of the River, a Parcel of Frogs, which were fitting there, frighted at their Approach, leapt into the Stream in great Confusion, and dived to the very Bottom for Fear. Which a cunning old Puss observing, call'd to the rest and said, "Hold, have a care what ye do: here are other Creatures, I perceive, which have their Fears as well as us: Don't then let us fancy ourselves the most miserable of any upon Earth; but rather, by their Example, learn to bear patiently those Inconveniencies which our Nature has thrown upon us." The Application This Fable is design'd to shew us how unreasonable many People are, for living in such continual Fears and Disquiets about the Miserableness of their Condition. There is hardly any State of Life great enough to satisfy the Wishes of an ambitious Man; and scarce any so mean, but may supply all the Necessities of him that is moderate. But if People will be so unwise as to work themselves up to imaginary Misfortunes, why do they grumble at Nature and their Stars, when their own perverse Minds are only to blame? If we are to conclude ourselves unhappy by as many Degrees as there are others greater than we, why then the greatest Part of Mankind must be miserable, in some degree at least. But, if they who repine at their own afflicted Condition, would but reckon up how many more there are with whom they would not change Cases, than whose Pleasures they envy, they would certainly rise up better satisfied from such a Calculation. But what shall we say to those who have a way of creating themselves Panics from the rustling of the Wind, the scratching of a Rat or Mouse, behind the Hangings, the fluttering of a Moth, or the Motion of their own Shadow by Moonlight? Their whole Life is as full of Alarms as that of a Hare, and they never think themselves so happy as when, like the timorous Folks in the Fable, they meet with a Set of Creatures as fearful as themselves. Source (books.google.com): Fables of Æsop and Others , translated into English with instructive applications by Samuel Croxall, 10th edition, carefully revised and improved (London, 1775), no. 30, pp. 54-56 . Source (Internet Archive): Fables of Æsop and Others , translated into English with instructive applications by Samuel Croxall, 14th edition, carefully revised and improved (London, 1788), no. 30, pp. 54-56 . Return to the table of contents . The Hares and the Frogs Aesop The Hares in a certain park having met to consult upon some plan to preserve themselves from their numerous enemies, all agreed that life was full of care and misery, and that they saw no prospect of things changing for the better. Full of these desponding thoughts, and just as it had been proposed that they should put an end to their existence, a storm arose, which tore the branches from the trees, and whirled the leaves about their ears. Panic-struck, they ran like mad creatures, until they were stopped by a lake, into which they hastily resolved to throw themselves headlong, rather than lead a life so full of dangers and crosses: but upon their approaching its margin, a number of Frogs, which were sitting there, frightened at their sudden approach, in the greatest confusion leapt into the water, and dived to the bottom; which an old Hare, more sedate than the rest, observing, called out, "Have a care what ye do! Here are other creatures I perceive, which have their fears as well as we. Don't then let us fancy ourselves the most miserable of any upon earth; but rather, by their example, learn to bear patiently those inconveniences which nature has thrown upon us." Application This Fable is designed to shew us how unreasonable many people are, who live in continual fears and disquiet about the miserableness of their condition. There is hardly any state of life great enough to satisfy the wishes of an ambitious man; and scarcely any so mean, but may supply the necessities of him that is moderate. There are few beings so very wretched, that they cannot pick out others in a more deplorable situation, and with whom they would not change cases. The rich man envies the poor man's health, without considering his wants; and the poor man envies the other's treasure, without considering his diseases. The miseries of others should serve to add vigour to our minds, and teach us to bear up against the load of lighter misfortunes. But what shall we say to those who have a way of creating themselves panics from the rustling of the wind, the scratching of a rat or a mouse behind the hangings, the fluttering of a moth, or the motion of their own shadow by moon-light! Their whole life is as full of alarms as that of a Hare, and they never think themselves so easy as when, like the timorous folks in the Fable, they meet with a set of creatures as fearful as themselves. Source (books.google.com): The Fables of Æsop, and Others , with designs on wood, by Thomas Bewick (Newcastle: Printed by E. Walker, for T. Bewick and Son, 1818), pp. 251-52 . Source (Internet Archive): The Fables of Æsop, and Others , with designs on wood, by Thomas Bewick (Newcastle: Printed by E. Walker, for T. Bewick and Son, 1818), pp. 251-52 . Return to the table of contents . The Story of Chicken-Licken England As Chicken-Licken went one day to the wood, an acorn fell upon her poor bald pate, and she thought the sky had fallen. So she said she would go and tell the king that the sky had fallen. So Chicken-Licken turned back, and met Hen-Len. "Well, Hen-Len, where are you going?" And Hen-Len said, "I'm going to the wood for some meat." And Chicken-Licken said, "Oh! Hen-Len, don't go, for I was going, and the sky fell upon my poor bald pate, and I'm going to tell the king." So Hen-Len turned back with Chicken-Licken, and met Cock-Lock. "Oh! Cock-Lock, where are you going?" And Cock-Lock said, "I'm going to the wood for some meat." Then Hen-Len said, "Oh! Cock-Lock, don't go, for I was going, and I met Chicken-Licken, and Chicken-Licken had been at the wood, and the sky had fallen on her poor bald pate, and we are going to tell the king." So Cock-Lock turned back, and met Duck-Luck. "Well, Duck-Luck, where are you going?" And Duck-Luck said, "I'm going to the wood for some meat." Then Cock-Lock said, "Oh! Duck-Luck, don't go, for I was going, and I met Hen-Len, and Hen-Len met Chicken-Licken, and Chicken-Licken had been at the wood, and the sky had fallen on her poor bald pate, and we are going to tell the king." So Duck-Luck turned back, and met Drake-Lake. "Well, Drake-Lake, where are you going?" And Drake-Lake said, "I'm going to the wood for some meat." Then Duck-Luck said, "Oh! Drake-Lake, don't go, for I was going, and I met Cock-Lock, and Cock-Lock met Hen-Len, and Hen-Len met Chicken-Licken, and Chicken-Licken had been at the wood, and the sky had fallen on her poor bald pate, and we are going to tell the king." So Drake-Lake turned back, and met Goose-Loose. "Well, Goose-Loose, where are you going?" And Goose-Loose said, "I'm going to the wood for some meat." Then Drake-Lake said, "Oh! Goose-Loose, don't go, for I was going, and I met Duck-Luck, and Duck-Luck met Cock-Lock, and Cock-Lock met Hen-Len, and Hen-Len met Chicken-Licken, and Chicken-Licken had been at the wood, and the sky had fallen on her poor bald pate, and we are going to tell the king." So Goose-Loose turned back, and met Gander-Lander. " Well, Gander-Lander, where are you going?" And Gander-Lander said, "I'm going to the wood for some meat." Then Goose-Loose said, "Oh! Gander-Lander, don't go, for I was going, and I met Drake-Lake, and Drake-Lake met Duck-Luck, and Duck-Luck met Cock-Lock, and Cock-Lock met Hen-Len, and Hen-Len met Chicken-Licken, and Chicken-Licken had been at the wood, and the sky had fallen on her poor bald pate, and we are going to tell the king." So Gander-Lander turned back, and met Turkey-Lurkey. "Well, Turkey-Lurkey, where are you going?" And Turkey-Lurkey said, "I'm going to the wood for some meat." Then Gander-Lander said, "Oh! Turkey-Lurkey, don't go, for I was going, and I met Goose-Loose, and Goose-Loose met Drake-Lake, and Drake-Lake met Duck-Luck, and Duck-Luck met Cock-Lock, and Cock-Lock met Hen-Len, and Hen-Len met Chicken-Licken, and Chicken-Licken had been at the wood, and the sky had fallen on her poor bald pate, and we are going to tell the king." So Turkey-Lurkey turned back, and walked with Gander-Lander, Goose-Loose, Drake-Lake, Duck-Luck, Cock-Lock, Hen-Len, and Chicken-Licken. And as they were going along, they met Fox-lox. And Fox-Lox said, " Where are you going, my pretty maids?" And they said, "Chicken-licken went to the wood, and the sky fell upon her poor bald pate, and we are going to tell the king." And Fox-Lox said, "Come along with me, and I will show you the way." But Fox-Lox took them into the fox's hole, and he and his young ones soon ate up poor Chicken-Licken, Hen-Len, Cock-Lock, Duck-Luck, Drake-Lake, Goose-Loose, Gander-Lander, and Turkey-Lurkey, and they never saw the king, to tell him that the sky had fallen! Source (books.google.com): James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to The Nursery Rhymes of England (London: J. R. Smith, 1849), pp. 29-31 . Source (Internet Archive): James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to The Nursery Rhymes of England (London: J. R. Smith, 1849), pp. 29-31 . Return to the table of contents . Henny-Penny and Her Fellow Travelers Scotland A hen was picking at a stack of pea-straw when a pea fell on her head, and she thought the sky was falling. And she thought she would go and tell the king about it. And she went, and went, and went, and she met a cock. And he said, "Where are you going this day, Henny-Penny?" And she says, "I'm going to tell the king the sky is falling." And he says, "I'll go with you, Henny-Penny." And they went, and they went, and they went. And they met a duck. And the duck says, "Where are you going this day, Cocky-Locky, Henny-Penny?" "We're going to tell the king the sky is falling." "I'll go with you, Cocky-Locky, Henny-Penny." "Then come along, Ducky-Daddles." And they went, and they went, and they went. And they met a goose. And the goose says, "Where are you going this day, Ducky-Daddles, Cocky-Locky, Henny-Penny?" "We're going to tell the king the sky is falling." And he says, "I'll go with you, Ducky-Daddles, Cocky-Locky, Henny-Penny." "Then come along, Goosie-Poosey," said they. And they went, and they went, and they went, till they came to a wood, and there they met a fox. And the fox says, "Where are you going this day, Goosie-Poosey, Ducky-Daddles, Cocky-Locky, Henny-Penny?" "We're going to tell the king the sky is falling." And he says, "Come along, and I'll show you the road, Goosie-Poosey, Ducky-Daddles, Cocky-Locky, Henny-Penny." And they went, and they went, and they went, till they came to the fox's hole. And he shoved them all in, and he and his young ones ate them all up, and they never got to tell the king the sky was falling. Source (books.google.com): Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), p. 59 . Preface dated November 24, 1841. Source (Internet Archive): Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), p. 59 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Following widespread tradition, I have included Henny-Penny's name in the title. Chambers' title for this story is simply "The Hen and Her Fellow Travelers." Return to the table of contents . Chickie Birdie Scotland Once upon a time, as a chicken was pecking under a gooseberry bush, a gooseberry fell on his head. "Dear me!" said Chickie Birdie, "the lifts are falling. I wonder if the king knows. I think I'll go and tell him, and perhaps he will give me a reward." So away started Chickie Birdie. He had not gone far before he met Henny Penny. "Good morning, Chickie Birdie," said she; "and where are you going?" "I'm going to tell the king the lifts have fallen." "Who told you, Chickie Birdie; who told you?" "Who told me! The thing that I both heard and felt! Why it came ripple rapple down on my fore-pen (beak)." "I'll go with you, Chickie Birdie." So they went on together, and they met Goosey-Poosey, Ducky-Daddles, Cockie-Lockie, and Pow Parley (turkey), with each of whom the same formula is gone through. They all went on together, and presently it began to rain, and they took refuge in a washing-house. Presently up came Tod Lowrie (fox), and he begged hard to be let in: "Just his fore-paw, because it was getting so wet," then "only just the tip of his nose," "his head," and so on, until he got in altogether. Then they all cried out: "Tod Lowrie! Tod Lowrie, the huntsmen and the hounds are coming! Jump in here!" So he jumped into the boiler, and Goosey-Poosey poured hot water upon him! Then they went on to the king, and Chickie Birdie told him all about the lifts falling, and he thanked them very much and ordered them a good dinner. Source (books.google.com): Selina Gate, "Scottish Folk-Lore Tales," Notes and Queries , series 7, vol. 10 (London: July-December, 1890), p. 464 . Source (Internet Archive): Selina Gate, "Scottish Folk-Lore Tales," Notes and Queries , series 7, vol. 10 (London: July-December, 1890), p. 464 . Gate's source: A Scottish lady, who was familiar with the tale in her childhood in Dumbartonshire. Return to the table of contents . Henny-Penny England/Australia One day Henny-Penny was picking up corn in the cornyard when -- whack! -- something hit her upon the head. "Goodness gracious me!" said Henny-Penny; "the sky's a-going to fall; I must go and tell the king." So she went along and she went along and she went along till she met Cocky-Locky. "Where are you going, Henny-Penny?" says Cocky-Locky. "Oh! I'm going to tell the king the sky's a-falling," says Henny-Penny. "May I come with you?" says Cocky-Locky. "Certainly," says Henny-Penny. So Henny-Penny and Cocky-Locky went to tell the king the sky was falling. They went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they met Ducky-Daddles. "Where are you going to, Henny-Penny and Cocky-Locky?" says Ducky-Daddles. "Oh! we're going to tell the king the sky's a-falling," said Henny-Penny and Cocky-Locky. "May I come with you?" says Ducky-Daddles. "Certainly," said Henny-Penny and Cocky-Locky. So Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, and Ducky-Daddles went to tell the king the sky was a-falling. So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they met Goosey-Poosey. "Where are you going to, Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, and Ducky-Daddles?" said Goosey-Poosey. "Oh! we're going to tell the king the sky's a-falling," said Henny-Penny and Cocky-Locky and Ducky-Daddles. "May I come with you," said Goosey-Poosey. "Certainly," said Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky and Ducky-Daddles. So Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, and Goosy-Poosey went to tell the king the sky was a-falling. So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they met Turkey-Lurkey. "Where are you going, Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, and Goosey-Poosey?" says Turkey-Lurkey. "Oh! we're going to tell the king the sky's a-falling," said Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, and Goosey-Poosey. "May I come with you? Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, and Goosey-Poosey?" said Turkey-Lurkey. "Oh, certainly, Turkey-Lurkey," said Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, and Goosey-Poosey. So Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey all went to tell the king the sky was a-falling. So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they met Foxy-Woxy, and Foxy-Woxy said to Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey: "Where are you going, Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey?" And Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey said to Foxy-Woxy: "We're going to tell the king the sky's a-falling." "Oh! but this is not the way to the king, Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey," says Foxy-Woxy. "I know the proper way; shall I show it you?" "Oh certainly, Foxy-Woxy," said Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey. So Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, Turkey-Lurkey, and Foxy-Woxy all went to tell the king the sky was a-falling. So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they came to a narrow and dark hole. Now this was the door of Foxy-Woxy's cave. But Foxy-Woxy said to Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey: "This is the short way to the king's palace; you'll soon get there if you follow me. I will go first and you come after, Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey." "Why of course, certainly, without doubt, why not?" said Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey. So Foxy-Woxy went into his cave, and he didn't go very far but turned round to wait for Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey. So at last at first Turkey-Lurkey went through the dark hole into the cave. He hadn't got far when "Hrumph," Foxy-Woxy snapped off Turkey-Lurkey's head and threw his body over his left shoulder. Then Goosey-Poosey went in, and "Hrumph," off went her head and Goosey-Poosey was thrown beside Turkey-Lurkey. Then Ducky-Daddles waddled down, and "Hrumph," snapped Foxy-Woxy, and Ducky-Daddles' head was off and Ducky-Daddles was thrown alongside Turkey-Lurkey and Goosey-Poosey. Then Cocky-Locky strutted down into the cave and he hadn't gone far when "Snap, Hrumph!" went Foxy-Woxy and Cocky-Locky was thrown alongside of Turkey-Lurkey, Goosey-Poosey and Ducky-Daddles. But Foxy-Woxy had made two bites at Cocky-Locky, and when the first snap only hurt Cocky-Locky, but didn't kill him, he called out to Henny-Penny. But she turned tail and off she ran home, so she never told the king the sky was a-falling. Source (books.google.com): Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 20, pp. 113-16 . Source (Internet Archive): Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 20, pp. 113-16 . Jacobs' source: "I give this as it was told to me in Australia in 1860." ( Notes and References, p. 238) . Return to the table of contents . The End of the World Ireland A hen was standing under a hazel-tree one day, and a nut fell on her tail. Away she ran to the cock, and says she, "Cocky Locky, the end of the world is come." "How do you know, Henny Penny?" says he. "Oh, a nut fell on my tail just now." "If that be so, we have nothing for it but to run away." So they ran till they met the duck. "Oh, Ducky Lucky, the end of the world is come." "How do you know, Cocky Locky?" "Oh, a nut fell just now on Henny Penny's tail." "If that be so, we must run for it." When they were pegging off, they met the goose. "Oh, Goosey Poosey, the end of the world is come." "How do you know, Ducky Lucky?" "A nut fell on Henny Penny's tail just now." "If that be the case, we are done for." They met the fox. "Oh, Foxy Coxy, the world is come to an end." "How do you know that, Goosey Poosey?" "Oh, a nut fell on Henny Penny's tail." "Then let us be off." So they got into the wood, and says Foxy Coxy, "Let me count if all are safe. I, Foxy Coxy, one; you, Goosey Poosey, two; Ducky Lucky, three; Cocky Locky, four; Henny Penny, five. Number five, I'll put you in a safe place where the end of the world won't hurt you." So he took Henny Penny behind a hush and put her out of pain. "Now," says he, coming back, "let us count if all the rest are safe. I, Foxy Coxy, one; you, Goosey Poosey, two; etc., etc. Number four, I'll put you in a place where you'll be safe when the end of the world comes." He took him behind another bush, etc., etc., etc. "Now let me see if all the rest are here. I, Foxy Coxy, one; etc., etc., etc." and so on till he put the fear of the world's end out of every one of them. Source (books.google.com): Patrick Kennedy, The Fireside Stories of Ireland (Dublin: M'Glashan and Gill, 1870), p. 25 . Source (Internet Archive): Patrick Kennedy, The Fireside Stories of Ireland (Dublin: M'Glashan and Gill, 1870), p. 25 . Return to the table of contents . The Hen That Went to Dovrefjell to Keep the Whole World from Coming to an End Norway Once upon a time there was a hen that had flown up and perched on an oak tree for the night. When the night came, she dreamed that unless she got to Dovrefjell, the world would come to an end. So that very minute she jumped down, and set out on her way. When she had walked a bit she met a cock. "Good day, Cocky-Locky," said the hen. "Good day, Henny-Penny," said the cock. "Where are you going so early?" "Oh, I'm going to Dovrefjell, that the world won't come to an end," said the hen. "Who told you that, Henny-Penny?" asked the cock. "I sat in the oak and dreamed it last night," said the hen. "I'll go with you," said the cock. Well, they walked on a good bit, and then they met a duck. "Good day, Ducky-Lucky," said the cock. "Good day, Cocky-Locky" said the duck. "Where are you going so early?" "Oh, I'm going to Dovrefjell, that the world won't come to an end," said the cock. "Who told you that, Cocky-Locky?" "Henny-Penny," said the cock. "Who told you that, Henny-Penny?" asked the duck. "I sat in the oak and dreamed it last night," said the hen. "I'll go with you," said the duck. So they went off together, and after a bit they met a goose. "Good day, Goosey-Poosey," said the duck. "Good day, Ducky-Lucky," said the goose. "Where are you going so early?" "I'm going to Dovrefjell, that the world won't come to an end," said the duck. "Who told you that, Ducky-Lucky?" asked the goose. "Cocky-Locky." "Who told you that, Cocky-Locky?" "Henny-Penny." "How do you know that, Henny-Penny?" said the goose. "I sat in the oak and dreamed it last night, Goosey-Poosey," said the hen. "I'll go with you," said the goose. Now when they had all walked along for a bit, a fox met them. "Good day, Foxy-Cocksy," said the goose. "God day, Goosey-Poosey." "Where are you going, Foxy-Cocksy?" "Where are you going yourself, Goosey-Poosey?" "I'm going to Dovrefjell, that the world won't come to an end," said the goose. "Who told you that, Goosey-Poosey?" asked the fox. "Ducky-Lucky." "Who told you that, Ducky-Lucky?" "Cocky-Locky." "Who told you that, Cocky-Locky?" "Henny-Penny." "How do you know that, Henny-Penny?" "I sat in the oak and dreamed last night, that if we don't get to Dovrefjell, the world will come to an end," said the hen. "Stuff and nonsense," said the fox. "The world won't come to an end if you don't go there. No, come home with me to my den. That's far better, for it's warm and jolly there." Well, they went home with the fox to his den, and when they got inside, the fox laid on lots of fuel, so that they all got very sleepy. The duck and the goose, they settled themselves down in a corner, but the cock and hen flew up on a post. So when the goose and duck were well asleep, the fox took the goose and laid him on the embers, and roasted him. The hen smelled the strong roast meat, and sprang up to a higher peg, and said, half asleep, "Phooey, what a nasty smell! What a nasty smell!" "Oh, stuff!" said the fox. "It's only the smoke driven down the chimney. Go to sleep again, and hold your tongue." So the hen went off to sleep again. Now the fox had hardly got the goose well down his throat, before he did the very same with the duck. He took and laid him on the embers, and roasted him for a dainty bit. Then the hen woke up again, and sprang up to a higher peg still. "Phooey, what a nasty smell! What a nasty smell!" she said again, and when she got her eyes open, and came to see how the fox and eaten two of them, both the goose and the duck. So she flew up to the highest peg of all, and perched there, and peeped up through the chimney. "Nay, nay, just see what a lovely lot of geese are flying over there," she said to the fox. Out ran Reynard to fetch a fat roast. But while he was gone, the hen woke up the cock and told him how it had gone with Goosey-Poosey and Ducky-Lucky. And so Cocky-Locky and Henny-Penny flew out through the chimney, and if they hadn't reached Dovrefjell, the world surely would have come to an end. Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, "The Cock and Hen That Went to Dovrefell," Popular Tales from the North , translated by George Webbe Dasent, new edition (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons; Edinburgh: David Douglas, 1912), pp. 353-56 . Source (Internet Archive): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, "The Cock and Hen That Went to the Dovrefell," Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent, 2nd edition, enlarged (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), pp. 407-410 . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Links to the original Norwegian text: Books.google.com: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, "Høna som skulle til Dovrefjeld, forat ikke Allverden skulle forgaae," Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiania [Oslo]: Forlagt af Johan Dahl, 1844), no. 43, pp. 16-18 . Internet Archive: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, "Høna som skulle til Dovrefjeld, forat ikke Allverden skulle forgaae," Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiania [Oslo]: Johan Dahls Forlag, 1852), no. 42, pp. 262-64 . This tale was collected by Asbjørnsen in the Telemark region of Norway. Dovrefjell is a mountainous region in south-central Norway. Return to the table of contents . The Little Chicken Kluk and His Companions Denmark There was once a little chicken called Kluk. A nut fell on his back, and gave him such a blow that he fell down and rolled on the ground. So he ran to the hen, and said, "Henny Penny, run, I think all the world is falling!" "Who has told thee that, little chicken Kluk?" "Oh, a nut fell on my back, and struck me so that I rolled on the ground." "Then let us run," said the hen. So they ran to the cock, and said, " Cocky Locky, run, I think all the world is falling." "Who has told thee that, Henny Penny? " "Little chicken Kluk." "Who told thee that, little chicken Kluk?" "Oh, a nut fell on my back, and struck me so that I rolled on the ground." "Then let us run," said the cock. So they ran to the duck, and said, "Ducky Lucky, run, I think all the world is falling." "Who told thee that, Cocky Locky?" "Henny Penny." "Who has told thee that, Henny Penny?" "Little chicken Kluk." "Who has told thee that, little chicken Kluk?" "Oh, a nut fell on my back, and struck me so that I rolled on the ground." "Then let us run," said the duck. So they ran to the goose. "Goosy Poosy, run, I think all the world is falling." "Who has told thee that, Ducky Lucky?" "Cocky Locky." "Who has told thee that, Cocky Locky?" "Henny Penny." "Who has told thee that, Henny Penny ?" "Little chicken Kluk." "Who has told thee that, little chicken Kluk?" "Oh, a nut fell on my back, and struck me so, that I rolled on the ground. "Then let us run," said the goose. Then they ran to the fox, and said, Foxy Coxy, run, I think all the world is falling." "Who has told thee that, Goosy Poosy?" "Ducky Lucky." "Who has told thee that, Ducky Lucky?" "Cocky Locky." "Who has told thee that, Cocky Locky?" "Henny Penny." "Who has told thee that, Henny Penny?" "Little chicken Kluk." "Who has told thee that, little chicken Kluk?" "Oh, a nut fell on my back, and struck me so, that I rolled on the ground." "Then let us run," said the fox. So they all ran into the wood. Then the fox said, "I must now count and see if I have got you all here. I, Foxy Coxy, one; Goosy Poosy, two; Ducky Lucky, three; Cocky Locky, four; Henny Penny, five; and little chicken Kluk, six; Hei ! That one I'll snap up." He then said : "Let us run." So they ran further into the wood. Then said he, Now I must count and see if I have got you all here. I, Foxy Coxy, one; Goosy Poosy, two; Ducky Lucky, three; Cocky Locky, four; Henny Penny, five; Hei! That one I'll snap up." And so he went on till he had eaten them all up. Source (books.google.com): Benjamin Thorpe, Yule-Tide Stories: A Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions, from the Swedish, Danish, and German , (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853), pp. 421-22 . Source (Internet Archive): Benjamin Thorpe, Yule-Tide Stories: A Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions, from the Swedish, Danish, and German (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853), pp. 421-22 . Return to the table of contents . The End of the World Flanders Once upon a time an old woman sat spinning in a room at the top of a high tower. Beneath her chair Chaton, her cat, lay peacefully sleeping. All of a sudden the spinning wheel jarred and made a loud creaking sound. Startled out of his sleep, Chaton the Cat rushed out of the room and bolted down the stairs as though a thousand demons were at his heels. In the yard he passed the house dog who was sitting in front of his kennel. "Hallo, Chaton!" cried the dog. "Where are you going to in such a hurry?" "I am fleeing the country," answered Chaton. "I have just heard the sounding of the last trump! The end of the world is at hand!" "If that is so," said the dog, "I would like to run away too. May I come with you?" "Certainly," answered Chaton. "Seat yourself on my beautiful curly tail." So the dog perched himself on the cat's tail, and off they went together. A little farther on they came to the farm gate, and there, perched on the topmost rail, was the cock. "Whither away, Chaton?" asked the cock. "You seem to be in haste." "Yes," said Chaton. "I have heard the last trump, which proves that the world is coming to an end, and I want to get safely away before that happens." "Take me with you, Chaton dear," said the cock. "By all means," answered the cat. "Jump on to my beautiful curly tail beside the dog." So the cock perched himself on Chaton's tail, and now there were two passengers. Away went the cat even faster than before, so as to make up for lost time, and presently they passed a rabbit who was nibbling the grass in a field. "Chaton, Chaton," cried the rabbit, "why are you running so quickly?" "Don't stop me!" answered the cat. "I've heard the last trump! The end of the world is coming!" "Oh, dear me!" cried the rabbit. "What an unfortunate thing! Don't leave me here, Chaton, for I am afraid to face the end of the world." "Very well," said Chaton. "Jump on to my beautiful curly tail with the dog and the cock, and I'll take you with me." So the rabbit also perched himself on the cat's tail, and now there were three of them riding there. Off went the cat again, but not so quickly this time, because of the weight on his tail, and before very long he came to a pond by the side of which a goose was standing. "Now then, now then, what's the hurry?" asked the goose. "If you run so fast you'll overheat your blood and die of a fever." "It's all very well to scoff," answered the cat, "but you must know that the end of the world is coming. I have heard the last trump sound!" "My goodness!" said the goose. "This is dreadful! Take me with you, Chaton, and I'll be grateful for ever." "Very well," said the cat. "Jump on to my beautiful curly tail with the dog and the fox and the rabbit." So the goose also perched herself on the cat's tail, so now there were four passengers, and that made five altogether who were running away to escape the end of the world. All that day the cat kept on running, and towards dusk they came to a forest. "This seems a good place to rest," said Chaton. "Now then, master cock, fly to the top of a tree and see if you can espy a house in which we can take shelter." The cock flew to the top of a high tree and from there he saw a number of lights twinkling in the distance. The five fugitives thereupon set off in the direction from which the lights shone, and before long they came to a little village. All the people of the village had left their houses and were gathered together in the square, round a man dressed all in red, with a big red feather in his cap, who was addressing them. Chaton and his companions pressed close to the edge of the crowd and were just in time to hear these words: "Whoever finds the ring," said the man with the red feather," and places it on the table in my palace tomorrow before dawn, shall have the five bags of gold which hang on my saddle bow." Having said this, the man in red mounted his horse and rode away. Chaton went up to a little peasant who was standing in the crowd. "Tell me, gossip," said he, "who is the man with the red feather, and what's all this about a ring and five bags of gold?" "Why," said the peasant, "the man in red is the king of this country. He had a valuable ring which was kept in a tiny wooden case on the table by his bed. This afternoon a magpie flew in through the window, snatched up the case, and bore it away to its nest in the topmost boughs of the walnut tree on the village green. The king wants his ring back again, and will give the five bags of gold to anybody who will recover it for him." "I see," said Chaton; "and why don't you climb the walnut tree and get the ring?" "Because I have too much respect for my neck," answered the peasant, "and so has everybody else here. The boughs at the top of the tree where the nest is are so thin and slender that they would not bear the weight of a child, let alone a grown man. Gold is good, but whole limbs are better, that's what I say!" "And I!" "And I!" echoed other villagers who had been listening to this conversation. "In my belief you are quite right," said Chaton seriously. "Let the king risk his own life if he is so anxious to recover his ring." But afterwards, when he had withdrawn with his companions to the shelter of the wood, he sang a different tune. "My friends," said he, "our fortunes are made! As soon as all is quiet I will climb the tree and get the ring; then you shall sit on my tail again and we'll all go off together to the king's palace and get the bags of gold!" He danced for joy, and the dog and the cock and the goose and the rabbit danced with him. An hour afterwards the cat climbed the tree and came down safely with the little wooden box. The rabbit gnawed it open with his teeth, and sure enough there was the ring inside it. "Now," said Chaton, "we will all go to the king's palace, but I am very tired with running all day. I propose that the dog takes a turn at carrying us." This was agreed. The other four got on to the dog's back and clung there while he ambled off as fast as he could along the road towards the palace. Just before dawn they came to a wide river. Now it was the turn of the goose to work for the common good. She was quite used to the water, and one by one she took the other animals across on her back. Shortly afterwards they arrived at the king's palace, and the cock flew up through the open window of the king's room with the ring in his beak, and placed it on the table by the bed. Then he awoke the king with a loud crow and claimed the reward, which was willingly given. In great glee at their good fortune the animals went on their way, each with his bag of gold, and every one of them had by this time quite forgotten his fear about the coming of the end of the world. They went on and on until they came to a place where five ways met. Then Chaton said, "Here we are at the parting of the ways. Let us each choose a road, and part good friends." At this moment there came along a pig with a knife and fork stuck in his back. In his right ear was salt; in his left ear pepper, and mustard was on his tail, so that everybody who was hungry had only to cut themselves a slice of meat and sit down to feast. Our friends gladly availed themselves of this good chance, and I who tell you this story would willingly have done the same, but as soon as I went up to the pig, he ran at me with his head down and sent me flying through the air, and through the window of my house, where I fell into the chair in which I am now sitting, finishing this story of the wonderful adventures of Chaton, the dog, the cock, the rabbit, and the goose. Source: Jean de Bosschère, Folk Tales of Flanders (New York: Dodd, Mead, and Company, 1918), pp. 139-46. Flanders is a cultural region comprising parts of France, Belgium, and the Netherlands. Return to the table of contents . The Dumb Little Animals Alsace (Germany / France) Once there was a chicky who went walking in a field. Suddenly he began to run until he came to ducky. Ducky said, "Chicky, why are you running?" "Because the sky is falling in!" "Chicky, who told you so?" "A piece of it fell on my head." So the ducky ran along too. After a while they came to Goosey, and Goosey said, "Why are you running?" Ducky said, "Because the sky is falling in!" "Ducky, who told you so?" "Chicky told me so." "Chicky, who told you so." "A piece of it fell on my head." So Goosey ran along too. After a while they came to Doggy, and Doggy said, "Why are you running?" Goosey said, "Because the sky is falling in!" "Goosey, who told you so?" "Ducky told me so." "Ducky, who told you so?" "Chicky told me so." "Chicky, who told you so." "A piece of it fell on my head." So Doggy ran along too. After a while they came to Bunny, and Bunny said, "Why are you running?" Doggy said, "Because the sky is falling in!" "Doggy, who told you so?" "Goosey told me so." "Goosey, who told you so?" "Ducky told me so." "Ducky, who told you so?" "Chicky told me so." "Chicky, who told you so." "A piece of it fell on my head." So Bunny ran along too. After a while they came to Calfy, and Calfy said, "Why are you running?" Bunny said, "Because the sky is falling in!" "Who told you so?" "Doggy told me so." "Doggy, who told you so?" "Goosey told me so." "Goosey, who told you so?" "Ducky told me so." "Ducky, who told you so?" "Chicky told me so." "Chicky, who told you so." "A piece of it fell on my head." So the calfy ran along too. After a while they came to a little boy, and the little boy said, "Why are you animals running?" All together they shouted "Hey! The sky is falling in!" "Where?" "At Chicky's place. A piece of it fell on his head." So they took the little boy with them to Chicky's place. It began to rain, and they took shelter under a cherry tree, and a little twig fell onto the little boy's back, and he said, "The sky must be falling in!" With that the animals were so ashamed that they all ran away. They are still running, and if you catch one of them, you can keep him. Source (books.google.com): August Stöber, "Die dummen Thierlein," Elsässisches Volksbüchlein (Straßburg: G. L. Schuler, 1842), no. 238, pp. 97-98 . Source (Internet Archive): August Stöber, "Die dummen Thierlein," Elsässisches Volksbüchlein (Straßburg: G. L. Schuler, 1842), no. 238, pp. 97-98 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2021. Return to the table of contents . Brother Rabbit Takes Some Exercise African American One night while the little boy was sitting in Uncle Remus's cabin, waiting for the old man to finish his hoe-cake, and refresh his memory as to the further adventures of Brother Rabbit, his friends and his enemies, something dropped upon the top of the house with a noise like the crack of a pistol. The little boy jumped, but Uncle Remus looked up and exclaimed, "Ah-yi!" in a tone of triumph. "What was that, Uncle Remus?" the child asked, after waiting a moment to see what else would happen. "New from Jack Frost, honey. When that hickory-nut tree out there hears him coming, she begins to drop what she's got. I'm mighty glad," he continued, scraping the burnt crust from hi hoe-cake with an old case-knife. "I'm mighty glad hickory nuts aren't as big and heavy as grindstones." He waited a moment to see what effect this queer statement would have on the child. "Yes, sir, I'm might glad, that I am. Because if hickory nuts were as big as grindstones, this here old calaboose would be leaking long before Christmas." Just then another hickory nut dropped upon the roof, and the little boy jumped again. This seemed to amuse Uncle Remus, and he laughed until he was near to choking himself with his smoking hoe-cake. "You are doing exactly what old Brer Rabbit did, I declare to gracious if you aren't," the old man cried, as soon as he could get his breath. "Exactly for the world." The child was immensely flattered, and at once he wanted to know how Brother Rabbit did. Uncle Remus was in such good humor that he needed no coaxing. He pushed his spectacles back on he forehead, wiped him mouth on his sleeve, and began: It came about that early one morning towards the fall of the year Brer Rabbit was stirring around in the woods after some bergamot to use for making him some hair grease. The wind was blowing so cold that it made him feel right frisky, and every time he heard the bushes rattle, it seemed to scare him. He was going on this way, hoppity-skippity, when by and by he heard Mr. Man cutting on a tree way off in the woods. He sat up, Brer Rabbit did, and listened first with one ear and then with the other. The man, he cut and cut, and Brer Rabbit, he listened and listened. By and by, while all this was going on, down came the tree: kubber-lang-bang-blam! Brer Rabbit, he took and jumped just like you jumped, and not only that, he made a break, he did, and he leaped out of as though the dogs were after him. "Was he scared, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy. "Scared! Who? Him? Shoo! Don't you fret yourself about Brer Rabbit, honey. In those days there was nothing going that could scare Brer Rabbit. To be sure, he took care of himself, and if you know anyone who refuses to take care of himself, I would mighty well like you to point him out. Indeed I would!" Uncle Remus seemed to boil over wit argumentative indignation. Well then, he continued, Brer Rabbit ran until he sort of got heated up, and about the time he was getting ready to squat and catch his wind, who should he meet but Brer Coon going home after sitting up with old Brer Bull-Frog. Brer Coon saw him running, and he hailed him, "What's your hurry, Brer Rabbit?" "Haven't got time to tarry." "Folks sick?" "No, my Lord! Haven't got time to tarry!" "Trying out your suppleness?" "No, my Lord! Haven't got time to tarry!" "Do pray, Brer Rabbit, tell me the news!" "Mighty big fuss back there in the woods. Haven't got time to tarry!" This made Brer Coon feel might skittish, because he was far from home, and he just leaped out, he did, and he went a-boiling through the woods. Brer Coon hadn't gone far until he met Brer Fox. "Hey, Brer Coon, where are you going?" "Haven't got time to tarry!" "Going to the doctor?" "No, my Lord! Haven't got time to tarry!" Do pry, Brer Coon, tell me the news." Mighty queer racket back there in the woods! Haven't got time to tarry! With that, Brer Fox leaped out, he did, and fairly split the wind. He hadn't gone far until he met Brer Wolf. "Hey, Brer Fox! Stop and rest yourself!" "Haven't got time to tarry!" "Who is wanting the doctor?" "No one, my Lord! Haven't got time to tarry." "Do pray, Brer Fox, good or bad, tell me the news." "Mighty curious fuss back there in the woods! Haven't got time to tarry!" With that, Brer Wolf shook himself loose from the face of the earth, and he didn't get far until he met Brer Bear. Brer Bear, he asked, and Brer Wolf made an answer, and by and by Brer Bear snorted and ran off. And, bless gracious, it wasn't long before the last one of the creatures was a-skaddling through the woods as though the Old Boy were after them, and all because Brer Rabbit heard Mr. Man cut a tree down. They ran and they ran, Uncle Remus went on, until they them to Brer Terrapin's house, and they sort of slacked up, because they had nearly lost their wind. Brer Terrapin, he up an asked them where they were going, and they said there was a monstrous, terrifying racket back there in the woods. Brer Terrapin, he asked what it sounded like. One said he didn't know; the other said he didn't know; and they all said they didn't know. This made old Brer Terrapin laugh way down in his insides, and he up and said, "You all can run along if you feel skittish," he said. "After I cook my breakfast and wash up the dishes, and if I get wind of any suspicious racket, maybe I might just take down my parasol and follow along after you," he said. When the creatures came to ask one another about who started the news, it went right back to Brer Rabbit, but low and behold, Brer Rabbit wasn't there! It turned out that Brer Coon was the one who had seen him last. Then they got to laying the blame of it on one or the other, until they almost began to fight, but then old Brer Terrapin, he up and said that if they wanted to straighten it out, they'd better go see Brer Rabbit. All the creatures agreed, the they started out for Brer Rabbit's house. When they got there, Brer Rabbit was sitting cross-legged on the front porch winking his eyes at the sun. Brer Bear spoke up, "What made you fool me, Brer Rabbit?" "Fool who, Brer Bear?" "Me, Brer Rabbit, that's who." "This is the first time I've seen you today, Brer Bear, and you are more than welcome at that." They all asked him and got the same answer, and then Brer Coon put in, "What made you fool me, Brer Rabbit?" "How did I fool you, Brer Coon?" "You made like there was a big racket, Brer Rabbit." "What kind of a racket, Brer Rabbit?" " Ah-yi! You should have asked me that first, Brer Coon." "I'm asking you now, Brer Rabbit." "Mr. Man cut a tree down, Brer Coon." Of course this made Brer Coon feel like a natural-born slink, and it wasn't long before all the creatures made their bows to Brer Rabbit and moseyed off home. "Brother Rabbit had the best of it all along," said the little boy, after waiting to see whether there was a sequel to the story. "Oh, did he ever!" exclaimed Uncle Remus. "Brer Rabbit was a mighty man in those days." Source (books.google.com): Joel Chandler Harris, Nights with Uncle Remus: Myths and Legends of the Old Plantation (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1883), no. 20, pp. 108-13 . Source (Internet Archive): Joel Chandler Harris, Nights with Uncle Remus: Myths and Legends of the Old Plantation (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1883), no. 20, pp. 108-113 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Texts of additional chain tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 5, 2021. Chain Tales of Type 2034D The Grain of Corn and The Little Blackbird chain tales of Aarne-Thompson type 2034D edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Grain of Corn (India). The Little Blackbird (India). Links to related sites . The Grain of Corn India Once upon a time a farmer's wife was winnowing corn, when a crow, flying past, swooped off with a grain from the winnowing basket and perched on a tree close by to eat it. The farmer's wife, greatly enraged, flung a clod at the bird with so good an aim that the crow fell to the ground, dropping the grain of corn, which rolled into a crack in the tree. The farmer's wife, seeing the crow fall, ran up to it, and seizing it by the tail, cried, "Give me back my grain of corn, or I will kill you!" The wretched bird, in fear of death, promised to do so, but, lo and behold! when he came to search for the grain, it had rolled so far into the crack that neither by beak nor claw could he reach it. So he flew off to a woodman, and said: Man! man! cut tree; I can't get the grain of corn To save my life from the farmer's wife! But the woodman refused to cut the tree; so the crow flew on to the king 's palace, and said: King! king! kill man; Man won't cut tree; I can't get the grain of corn To save my life from the farmer's wife! But the king refused to kill the man; so the crow flew on to the queen , and said: Queen! queen! coax king; King won't kill man; Man won't cut tree. I can't get the grain of corn To save my life from the farmer's wife! But the queen refused to coax the king; so the crow flew on till he met a snake, and said: Snake! snake! bite queen; Queen won't coax king; King won't kill man; Man won't cut tree; I can't get the grain of corn To save my life from the farmer's wife! But the snake refused to bite the queen; so the crow flew on till he met a stick, and said: Stick! stick! beat snake; Snake won't bite queen; Queen won't coax king; King won't kill man: Man won't cut tree; I can't get the grain of corn To save my life from the farmer's wife! But the stick refused to beat the snake; so the crow flew on till he saw a fire, and said: Fire! fire! burn stick; Stick won't beat snake; Snake won't bite queen; Queen won't coax king; King won't kill man; Man won't cut tree; I can't get the grain of corn To save my life from the farmer's wife! But the fire refused to burn the stick; so the crow flew on till he met some water, and said: Water! water! quench fire; Fire won't burn stick; Stick won't beat snake; Snake won't bite queen; Queen won't coax king; King won't kill man; Man won't cut tree; I can't get the grain of corn To save my life from the farmer's wife! But the water refused to quench the fire; so the crow flew on till he met an ox, and said: Ox! ox! drink water; Water won't quench fire; Fire won't burn stick; Stick won't beat snake; Snake won't bite queen; Queen won't coax king; King won't kill man; Man won't cut tree; I can't get the grain of corn To save my life from the farmer's wife! But the ox refused to drink the water; so the crow flew on till he met a rope, and said: Rope! rope! bind ox; Ox won't drink water; Water won't quench fire; Fire won't burn stick; Stick won't beat snake; Snake won't bite queen; Queen won't coax king; King won't kill man; Man won't cut tree; I can't get the grain of corn To save my life from the farmer's wife! But the rope wouldn't bind the ox; so the crow flew on till he met a mouse, and said: Mouse! mouse! gnaw rope; Rope won't bind ox; Ox won't drink water; Water won't quench fire; Fire won't burn stick; Stick won't beat snake; Snake won't bite queen; Queen won't coax king; King won't kill man; Man won't cut tree; I can't get the grain of corn To save my life from the farmer's wife! But the mouse wouldn't gnaw the rope; so the crow flew on until he met a cat, and said: Cat! cat! catch mouse; Mouse won't gnaw rope; Rope won't bind ox; Ox won't drink water; Water won't quench fire; Fire won't burn stick; Stick won't beat snake; Snake won't bite queen; Queen won't coax king; King won't kill man; Man won't cut tree; And I can't get the grain of corn To save my life from the farmer's wife! The moment the cat heard the name of mouse, she was after it; for the world will come to an end before a cat will leave a mouse alone. So the cat began to catch the mouse, The mouse began to gnaw the rope, The rope began to bind the ox, The ox began to drink the water, The water began to quench the fire, The fire began to burn the stick, The stick began to beat the snake, The snake began to bite the queen , The queen began to coax the king , The king began to kill the man, The man began to cut the tree; So the crow got the grain of corn, And saved his life from the farmer's wife! Source: Flora Annie Steel, Tales of the Punjab: Told by the People (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), pp. 198ff. Return to the table of contents . The Little Blackbird India There was once a little blackbird (the litia ) who was the proud owner of three kauries , or shells. This bird used to come to a king and say, "O king, I have three kauries , O king." The king was so much annoyed by the continual chirping of the little bird that he ordered his servants to take the three kauries from the bird and to drive it away. But the bird would not leave the king, and so it began to say, "My wealth has made you rich, O king. My wealth has made you rich, O king." The king then ordered that the three kauries should be returned to the little blackbird. The bird then took the three kauries, and went to the seller of parched gram (a coarse pea), and with the three kauries she bought three grains of parched gram. Taking these the bird flew off and sat on a new cart which a carpenter was making, and there she started eating the gram. Having eaten two grains, she was about to eat the third, when it dropped from her beak and fell into a joint of the new cart, where she could not reach it. In great distress she appealed to the carpenter to take to pieces his cart that she might get at the grain she had lost. "You silly little thing," said the carpenter. "Do you suppose I am going to take to pieces my new cart to get at a single grain which you have dropped into the joint of the woodwork?" The little blackbird then went to the king, and said to him that she had lost her grain, and asked him to order the carpenter to open his cart that she might get at her grain. "You silly little thing," said the king. "Do you suppose I am going to order the carpenter to open his cart that you may get one small grain?" The little blackbird then went to the queen, and begged of her to persuade the king to order the carpenter to open the cart to let her get at the grain. But the queen also said, "Get away, you silly thing." Then the little blackbird went to a deer and said, "Come, O deer, graze in the queen's garden, for she will not persuade the king, and the king will not order the carpenter, and the carpenter will not open the cart, and I cannot get at my grain." But the deer would give to heed to the bird, and called her "You silly little thing." Then said the bird, "I will go to the lathi (the strong, stout stick)." To the lathi she went and said, "Come, stout stick, strike the deer, for the deer will not graze in the queen's garden, and the queen will not persuade the king, and the king will not command the carpenter, and the carpenter will not open his cart, and I cannot get at my grain." But the stick also would give no ear to the cry of the little blackbird, so she went at once to the fire; and she begged the fire to burn the stick, for the deer would not eat the queen's garden, and the queen would not persuade the king, the king would not command the carpenter, the carpenter would not break up his cart, and she could not get at her grain. But the fire also made light of the little bird's prayer. So she went next to the lake, and implored the lake to quench the fire, for the fire would not burn the stick, and the stick would not strike the deer, and the deer would not destroy the garden, and the queen would not persuade the king, and the king refused to command the carpenter, who also refused to open his cart, so that the bird could not get at her grain. But the lake refused to help the bird. She then went to a place where there were thousands of rats, and to the rats she presented her prayer that they should come and fill the lake with their diggings, for the lake would not quench the fire, etc., etc. But the rats also gave no attention to the wishes of the small blackbird. Then the bird went to a cat, and of the cat she implored that she should attack the rats, for the rats would not fill in the lake, and the lake would not quench the fire, etc., and she could not get at her grain. But the cat also was deaf to the prayers of the small blackbird. Then she went to the elephant, and of the elephant she implored that he would crush the cat, for the cat would not kill the rats, etc., etc., and she could not get at her grain. But the elephant treated her as did all the others. Then she went to an ant, and begged the wee ant to crawl into the elephant's ear, for the elephant would not crush the cat, etc., etc. and she could not get at her grain. But the ant also gave no heed to her prayer. Then at last she came to the crow, the most greedy of all creatures, and of the crow she begged that he should eat the ant. From sheer greed the crow consented to eat the ant; but the ant, seeing the crow about to eat it, went to crawl into the ear of the elephant, and the elephant, fearing the harm which the ant could do him, went to crush the cat; but the cat slipped away, and was about the destroy the rats, and they at once began to fill in the lake; and the lake, becoming alarmed, was about to quench the fire, when the fire began to burn the stick, and the stick began to beat the deer, so that the deer was about to destroy the queen's garden, when the queen began to persuade the king, and the king commanded the carpenter, and the carpenter opened his new cart; and the little blackbird found her grain, and happily taking it up she flew away, and quietly enjoyed her repast, and lived very happily ever after. Source: E. M. Gordon, Indian Folk Tales, Being Side-Lights on Village Life in Bilaspore, Central Provinces (London: Elliot Stock, 1908), pp. 53-56. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Chain Tales . Links to additional stories about chains of events. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 11, 2000. The House That Jack Built: An English Nursery Rhyme The House That Jack Built an English nursery rhyme of folktale type 2035 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009 This is the house that Jack built. This is the malt That lay in the house that Jack built. This is the rat, That ate the malt That lay in the house that Jack built. This is the cat, That kill'd the rat, That ate the malt That lay in the house that Jack built. This is the dog, That worried the cat, That kill'd the rat, That ate the malt That lay in the house that Jack built. This is the cow with the crumpled horn, That toss'd the dog, That worried the cat, That kill'd the rat, That ate the malt That lay in the house that Jack built. This is the maiden all forlorn, That milk'd the cow with the crumpled horn, That tossed the dog, That worried the cat, That kill'd the rat, That ate the malt That lay in the house that Jack built. This is the man all tatter'd and torn, That kissed the maiden all forlorn, That milk'd the cow with the crumpled horn, That tossed the dog, That worried the cat, That kill'd the rat, That ate the malt That lay in the house that Jack built. This is the priest all shaven and shorn, That married the man all tatter'd and torn, That kissed the maiden all forlorn, That milked the cow with the crumpled horn, That tossed the dog, That worried the cat, That kill'd the rat, That ate the malt That lay in the house that Jack built. This is the cock that crow'd in the morn, That waked the priest all shaven and shorn, That married the man all tatter'd and torn, That kissed the maiden all forlorn, That milk'd the cow with the crumpled horn, That tossed the dog, That worried the cat, That kill'd the rat, That ate the malt That lay in the house that Jack built. This is the farmer sowing his corn, That kept the cock that crow'd in the morn, That waked the priest all shaven and shorn, That married the man all tatter'd and torn, That kissed the maiden all forlorn, That milk'd the cow with the crumpled horn, That tossed the dog, That worried the cat, That killed the rat, That ate the malt That lay in the house that Jack built. Source: James Orchard Halliwell [Halliwell-Phillipps], The Nursery Rhymes of England: Collected Chiefly from Oral Tradition , 4th edition (London: John Russell Smith, 1846), no. 398, pp. 175-78 . Links to additional nineteenth-century versions: Bentley's Miscellany , vol. 13 (London: Richard Bentley, 1843), p. 481 . This is a parody of the traditional rhyme. It was first published in the Morning Chronicle , September 22, 1809. [William Hone], The Political House That Jack Built , illustrated by George Cruikshank (1819). This is a parody of the traditional rhyme. "A New House That Jack Built," The Examiner: A Sunday Paper on Politics, Domestic Economy and Theatricals , for the year 1819 (London: John Hunt, 1819), p. 652 . This is a parody of the traditional rhyme. A Treasury of Pleasure Books for Young People (London: Sampson Low and Son, 1856), no. 5, pp. 1-16 . Each story in this volume is numbered separately. Laura Valentine, Games for Family Parties and Children (London: Frederick Warne and Company, 1869), p. 66 . William Alexander Clouston, Popular Tales and Fictions: Their Migrations and Transformations , vol. 1 (Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1887), pp. 289-91 . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 1, 2009. What Have You Got There? Children's Games of Folktale Type 2043 What Have You Got There? Children's Games of Folktale Type 2043 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009-2011 Contents What Have You Got There? (England). Club Fist (USA). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. What Have You Got There? England Two playfellows place their clenched fists one on the top of the other; the owner of the uppermost fist is asked, "What have you got there?" He replies, "Apple pie," or any other victuals; is told, "Take it off or else I'll knock it off!" and obeys; and so on till the last, when the dialogue runs: "What have you got there?" -- Ans. "Roast beef." "Where's my part?" -- Ans. "The cat's got it." "Where's the cat?" -- Ans. "In the wood." "Where's the wood?" Ans. "The fire's burnt it." "Where's the fire?" -- Ans. "The water's quenched it." "Where's the water?" -- Ans. "The ox has drunk it." "Where's the ox?" -- Ans. "The butcher's killed it." "Where's the butcher?" -- Ans. "Behind the church door cracking nuts.' Both (pretending to throw nutshells at each other) : "You shall have the shells, and I shall have the kernels!" Source: Charlotte Sophia Burne, Shropshire Folk-Lore: A Sheaf of Gleanings , edited by Charlotte Sophia Burne from the collections of Georgina F. Jackson (London: Trübner and Compnay, 1883), p. 529 . Return to the table of contents . Club Fist USA A child lays on a table his clenched fist, with the thumb elevated; another grasps the raised thumb with his own fist, and so on until a pile of fists is built up. A player, who remains apart from the group, then addresses the child whose hand is at the top: "What's that?" "A pear." "Take it off, or I'll knock it off." The same conversation is repeated with the next child, and so on; the fist being withdrawn as speedily as possible, to escape a rap from the questioner. When only one is left, the following dialogue ensues: "What have you got there?" "Bread and cheese." "Where's my share ?" "Cat's got it." "Where's the cat?" "In the woods." "Where's the woods ?" "Fire burned it." "Where's the fire?" "Water quenched it." "Where's the water?" "Ox drank it." "Where's the ox?" "Butcher killed it." "Where's the butcher?" "Rope hung him." "Where's the rope?" "Rat gnawed it." "Where's the rat?" "Cat caught it." "Where's the cat?" "Behind the church door. The first who laughs, or grins, or shows the teeth has three pinches and three knocks." Then follows a general scattering; for some child is sure to laugh, and if he does not do so of his own accord, his neighbors will certainly tweak him, poke him, or otherwise excite his risibility. Georgia. In Pennsylvania the conversation ends: "Where's the butcher?" "He's behind the door eracking nuts, and whoever speaks first I'll slap his fingers, Because I am the keeper of the keys, And I do whatever I please." This dialogue, based on a well-known nursery tale, has maintained itself with remarkable persistence, and even verbal identity, in several European languages. We meet it in Germany and Denmark, as well as England. Source: William Wells Newell, Games and Songs of American Children (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1884), no. 75, pp. 134-35 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Additional texts of chain tales . Another children's game using a traditional narrative: London Bridge Has Fallen Down . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 12, 2011. Tikki Tikki Tembo Tikki Tikki Tembo a chain tale from China recalled by D. L. Ashliman Once upon a time in faraway China there lived two brothers, one named Sam, and one named Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako. Now one day the two brothers were playing near the well in their garden when Sam fell into the well, and Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako ran to his mother, shouting, "Quick, Sam has fallen into the well. What shall we do?" "What?" cried the mother, "Sam has fallen into the well? Run and tell father!" Together they ran to the father and cried, "Quick, Sam has fallen into the well. What shall we do?" "Sam has fallen into the well?" cried the father. "Run and tell the gardner!" Then they all ran to the gardner and shouted, "Quick, Sam has fallen into the well. What shall we do?" "Sam has fallen into the well?" cried the gardner, and then he quickly fetched a ladder and pulled the poor boy from the well, who was wet and cold and frightened, and ever so happy to still be alive. Some time afterward the two brothers were again playing near the well, and this time Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako fell into the well, and Sam ran to his mother, shouting, "Quick, Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako has fallen into the well. What shall we do?" "What?" cried the mother, "Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako has fallen into the well? Run and tell father!" Together they ran to the father and cried, "Quick, Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako has fallen into the well. What shall we do?" "Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako has fallen into the well?" cried the father. "Run and tell the gardner!" Then they all ran to the gardner and shouted, "Quick, Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako has fallen into the well. What shall we do?" "Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako has fallen into the well?" cried the gardner, and then he quickly fetched a ladder and pulled Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako from the well, but the poor boy had been in the water so long that he had drowned. And from that time forth, the Chinese have given their children short names. Source: I heard this story in the 1940's from my mother, Elgarda Zobell Ashliman, who learned it about 1927 in Rigby, Idaho, from Ruth Harper, a schoolteacher. I do not know whether Ruth Harper learned the story from a published book or from oral tradition. A more recent retelling of this Chinese folktale is Tikki Tikki Tembo , retold by Arlene Mosel, illustrated by Blair Lent (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1968). This tale follows the pattern of the traditional chain story "The Death of the Little Hen," in which a chicken chokes on a nut, then dies while its partner is seeking help from first one source and then another (Aarne-Thompson type 2021A). Link to additional chain tales . Return to Folktales from China , edited by D. L. Ashliman. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 18, 2002. Changelings: An Essay by D. L. Ashliman Changelings An Essay by D. L. Ashliman Copyright 1997 Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts Changeling Legends from the British Isles. Electronic Texts. German Changeling Legends. Electronic Texts. Scandinavian Changeling Legends. Electronic Texts. Contents The legends A living superstition The legend genre Martin Luther on changelings Shared responsibility Justifying infanticide Brewing in eggshells Other protective measures Working mothers Gender bias Organized religion The stolen child's perspective Selma Lagerlöf Conclusion Footnotes Additional notes and links The legends A mother had her child taken from the cradle by elves. In its place they laid a changeling with a thick head and staring eyes who would do nothing but eat and drink. In distress she went to a neighbor and asked for advice. The neighbor told her to carry the changeling into the kitchen, set it on the hearth, make a fire, and boil water in two eggshells. That should make the changeling laugh, and if he laughs it will be all over with him. The woman did everything just as her neighbor said. When she placed the eggshells filled with water over the fire, the blockhead said: Now I am as old As the Wester Wood, But have never seen anyone cooking in shells! And he began laughing about it. When he laughed, a band of little elves suddenly appeared. They brought the rightful child, set it on the hearth, and took the changeling away. {footnote 1} * * * * * The following true story took place in the year 1580. Near Breslau there lived a distinguished nobleman who had a large crop of hay every summer which his subjects were required harvest for him. One year there was a new mother among his harvest workers, a woman who had barely had a week to recover from the birth of her child. When she saw that she could not refuse the nobleman's decree, she took her child with her, placed it on a small clump of grass, and left it alone while she helped with the haymaking. After she had worked a good while, she returned to her child to nurse it. She looked at it, screamed aloud, hit her hands together above her head, and cried out in despair, that this was not her child: It sucked the milk from her so greedily and howled in such an inhuman manner that it was nothing like the child she knew. As is usual in such cases, she kept the child for several days, but it was so ill-behaved that the good woman nearly collapsed. She told her story to the nobleman. He said to her: "Woman, if you think that this is not your child, then do this one thing. Take it out to the meadow where you left your previous child and beat it hard with a switch. Then you will witness a miracle." The woman followed the nobleman's advice. She went out and beat the child with a switch until it screamed loudly. Then the Devil brought back her stolen child, saying: "There, you have it!" And with that he took his own child away. This story is often told and is known by both the young and the old in and around Breslau. {footnote 2} A living superstition We all want explanations for happenings that fall outside of our control, especially those that have a direct bearing on our welfare. It is only natural that our forebears wanted to know why some children fail to develop normally, and what our responsibilities are toward these handicapped individuals. The two stories quoted above are part of a vast network of legends and superstitions that give primitive but satisfying answers to these questions. These accounts -- which, unlike most fantasy tales, were actually widely believed -- suggest that a physically or mentally abnormal child is very likely not the human parents' offspring at all, but rather a changeling -- a creature begotten by some supernatural being and then secretly exchanged for the rightful child. {footnote 3} From pre-Christian until recent times, many people have sincerely and actively believed that supernatural beings can and do exchange their own inferior offspring for human children, making such trades either in order to breed new strength and vitality into their own diminutive races or simply to plague humankind. These beliefs continued to exert influence well into the nineteenth century, and in some areas even later. Writing in England in 1890, the pioneer folklorist Edwin Sidney Hartland could state: "In dealing with these stories [about changelings] we must always remember that not merely are we concerned with sagas of something long past, but with a yet living superstition." {footnote 4} In 1911 W. Y. Evans-Wentz, himself a true believer in the reality of fairy life, published an extensive study, The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries, which contains numerous accounts of exchanged children. This book, with a new introduction praising the author for his courageous acceptance of "a greater reality beyond the everyday world," was reissued in 1966. As late as 1924 it was reported that in sections of rural Germany many people were still taking traditional precautions against the demonic exchange of infants. {footnote 5} Finally, writing in 1980, Hasan M. El-Shamy reports: "The belief that the jinn may steal a human infant and put their own infant in its place is widespread in numerous parts of Egypt." {footnote 6} Views held firmly for a thousand years do not die easily, especially when they appear to answer some of life's most troublesome questions. The legend genre In keeping with their higher level of popular credibility, changeling accounts are much more often classified as legends than as fairy tales by folktale scholars. The Grimms themselves delineate between these two principal folktale genres in terms that twentieth-century folklorists still find meaningful: "The fairy tale is more poetic, the legend is more historical.... While it is the children alone who believe in the reality of fairy tales, the folk have not yet stopped believing in their legends." {footnote 7} Legends, they conclude, are less fantastic and more firmly rooted in reality than fairy tales. Storytellers use a variety of literary devices to emphasize the familiarity and credibility of their changeling accounts. In contrast to fairy tales, which nearly always take place at an indefinite "once upon a time" and in an unnamed place, changeling legends frequently are set in a precisely identified time and location. The opening of "Beating the Changeling with Switches" is typical in this regard: "The following true story took place in 1580. Near Breslau there lived a well-known nobleman." Another changeling tale begins with the sentence: "A reliable citizen of Leipzig told the following story." {footnote 8} Martin Luther on changelings The Grimms do not identify their "reliable citizen of Leipzig," but they do identify another of their sources, a man whose name certainly carried a great amount of authority and respect throughout Protestant Germany: Martin Luther. The influential church reformer was not only an avid storyteller, but -- as his own writings demonstrate -- he was also a true believer in changelings. Luther was very much a product of his own times with respect to superstitious beliefs and practices. He sincerely believed that Satan was responsible for the malformed children known as changelings, and that such satanic child exchanges occurred frequently. {footnote 9} In Luther's theological view, a changeling was a child of the devil without a human soul, "only a piece of flesh." This view made it easy to justify almost any abuse of an unfortunate child thought to be a changeling, including the ultimate mistreatment: infanticide. Luther himself had no reservations about putting such children to death. {footnote 10} Shared responsibility In spite of the general credibility given to changeling accounts, and the support that they received from respected church leaders (Catholics as well as Protestants), there is evidence that many people were uneasy about the cruel treatment that the legends seemed to advocate. This evidence comes from the stories themselves. Parents who suspect that their child has been replaced with a changeling almost never decide on a course of action without first receiving advice and moral support from a third party. This fact is stated or implied in virtually all changeling tales, although it is usually communicated in an offhand manner. For example: "In distress she [the mother] went to her neighbor and asked her for advice." {footnote 11} The parents of seriously handicapped children obviously wanted others to share the moral responsibility for whatever decisions were reached. Folklore suggests that parents sought and received advice and approval from all segments of society before taking any drastic measures with their suspected changelings. The Grimms' accounts offer excellent examples of this broadly based community support: In three of their tales, the advice comes from ordinary people: a neighbor, a stranger on the street, and an unidentified person. In two other instances, the mothers -- peasant women -- are advised by their feudal landlords, and in one tale, "The Changeling in the Thuringian Forest," {footnote 12} the mother receives information from her pastor that enables her to discover her changeling's true identity and to drive him away. Several levels of community support are suggested by the sources of advice in these changeling stories. Peer approval is indicated by the participation of ordinary people in the parents' decisions, and the voice of civil and ecclesiastical authority is added by the pronouncements of the landlords and the clergy. Justifying infanticide The cruelty to which suspected changelings are subjected in folktales makes it clear why the perpetrators of this harsh treatment sought the symbolic approval of their community. In the Grimms' accounts alone, we learn of changelings being thrown into water, beaten severely with a switch, left unfed and crying in an open field, or placed on a hot stove. This list of ordeals can easily be expanded by consulting other changeling tales from throughout northern Europe. There is ample evidence that these legendary accounts do not misrepresent or exaggerate the actual abuse of suspected changelings. Court records between about 1850 and 1900 in Germany, Scandinavia, Great Britain, and Ireland reveal numerous proceedings against defendants accused of torturing and murdering suspected changelings. {footnote 13} Similar incidents were undoubtedly even more common in earlier centuries, but prior to the mid nineteenth century, public opinion, religious attitudes, and legal indifference made it unlikely that such cases would be prosecuted. The court records of Gotland, Sweden, for 1690 document one of the rare exceptions. A man and woman were placed on trial for having left a ten-year-old "changeling" -- a sickly child who was not growing properly -- on a manure pile overnight on Christmas Eve, hoping that the elves who had made the exchange some years earlier would now return their rightful son. The child died of exposure. {footnote 14} Without doubt many similar cases went unprosecuted and unrecorded. Folklore sources suggest that such fatal abuse of malformed children was not unusual. The mistreatment of changelings in folklore accounts often (although not always) leads to a happy outcome for the human parents and their rightful child. To halt the abuse of their offspring, the otherworldly parents frequently rescue the changeling and return the stolen mortal child. Stories with these fantasy endings provided hope, wish fulfillment, and escape to an era that was plagued with birth defects and debilitating infant diseases. But not all changeling accounts have happy endings. Often the child thought to be a changeling is driven away or killed, but there is no indication that the healthy original child is returned. The tales that omit the safe recovery of the rightful child authentically illustrate a painful aspect of family survival in pre-industrial Europe. A peasant family's very subsistence frequently depended upon the productive labor of each member, and it was enormously difficult to provide for a person who was a permanent drain on the family's scarce resources. The fact that the changelings' ravenous appetite is so frequently mentioned indicates that the parents of these unfortunate children saw in their continuing existence a threat to the sustenance of the entire family. Changeling tales support other historical evidence in suggesting that infanticide was not infrequently the solution selected. Brewing in eggshells Cruel abuse is not the only way to force demonic parents into reclaiming their misshapen children in changeling legends, although this is the most frequently described method. A more humane approach was to force the changeling to laugh or to make him utter an expression of surprise, which -- according to popular belief -- would expose his true identity and force his supernatural parents to take him away. A common trick was to make preparations in the presence of the changeling to brew beer or to cook stew in eggshells. This approach is described in some detail in Jacob Grimm's German Mythology {footnote 15} and is used in numerous folktales throughout Europe. Typically the changeling responds with surprise, claiming that he is as old as a nearby forest, but has never before witnessed such a sight. The belief that a changeling was actually much older than the child he was impersonating could lead to a fear of the child, as illustrated in the Icelandic tale "The Changeling who Stretched." {footnote 16} This legend tells of a woman who is left alone in the house with a boy of confirmation age who is suspected of being a changeling. She watches in horror as the lad, who apparently thinks that he is alone, yawns and stretches until he reaches the rafters. Terrified at being alone with this monster, the woman screams, and the boy collapses as if he had been shot, resumes his former size, and returns to his bed. It is easy to see how this tale could have grown out of a woman's fears of being left alone with a mentally retarded but sexually maturing male. A changeling's ostensibly great age plays an important role in yet another folktale motif: the child who neither matures nor dies, remaining helplessly dependent and insatiably hungry for an interminable amount of time. The opening paragraph of the Norwegian tale "The Changeling Betrays His Age" {footnote 17} exemplifies the problem: "On Lindheim Farm, in Nesherad, there was supposed to have been a changeling. No one could remember when he was born or when he had come to the farm. No one had ever heard him speak, but all the same they were afraid to do anything to him or make him angry. He ate so much that the people at Lindheim had been living from hand to mouth, generation after generation, on his account." Although other sources suggest that changelings seldom lived longer than seven years, or -- at the longest -- eighteen or nineteen years, {footnote 18} the fear could easily evolve that a changeling might survive several normal lifetimes, bringing poverty and suffering to a family for many generations. To some the burden of caring for a retarded child must have appeared to be interminable. If one believed that such problems may not resolve themselves during an entire human lifetime, then drastic measures would be all the more justified. Other protective measures Changeling folklore not only explained why some children fail to grow and develop normally and helped to justify the extreme actions that may have been taken (whether in fact or only in fantasy) to free the parents or society from the burden of caring for handicapped children, it also provided protective measures against demonic exchange. The most frequently mentioned preventative practice, and one that undoubtedly evolved because of its positive consequences, was the insistence that the newborn infant be watched very carefully until certain danger periods had passed. "Women who have recently been delivered may not go to sleep until someone is watching over the child. Mothers who are overcome by sleep often have changelings laid in their cradles," recorded Jacob Grimm in his German Mythology. {footnote 19} In the legend appropriately entitled "Watching Out for the Children," we are given to believe that a child would have been stolen by a supernatural being, had not the parents been so watchful during the night. According to most beliefs, a newborn was to be watched continuously for the first three days of its life; a somewhat reduced, but still high level of watchfulness was called for during the first six weeks. The fact that the mother (or her substitute) was expected to keep the baby close at hand for at least six weeks helped to protect it from environmental dangers, aided the child's psychological development, and contributed significantly to family cohesiveness. Working mothers An added benefit of the six weeks of close watching was the relief thus granted to the mother from some of her most strenuous duties, thus aiding her recovery from pregnancy and delivery. In "The Changeling in the Thuringian Forest," the exchange of infants takes place when the mother leaves her baby alone in the house while she fetches wood, a common but strenuous household task. In other legends, {footnote 20} babies are exchanged when landlords force peasant mothers to do difficult harvest labor before their six-week recovery periods are past. These accounts thus impart the lesson that women recovering from confinement should not do work that takes them away from their newborn babies. The last line of one such story states the lesson succinctly: "And from that time forth he [the nobleman] resolved to never again force a woman who had recently given birth to work." {footnote 21} Interestingly, this prohibition is not described as being for the sake of the women, but rather for the protection of their children. But however stated, the mothers themselves shared in the benefits of this belief. Although the welfare of the family (and of society at large) dictated that women recovering from childbirth be spared many of the strenuous tasks that normally were expected of them, the patriarchal bias of German society did not provide for a woman's workload to be lightened for her own benefit. The only acceptable justification for this temporary relief from strenuous duties was the belief that the woman's child was thus being protected from supernatural harm. Numerous other superstitions regulating a woman's post-confinement activities confirm this view, for example, the belief that "if a woman spins wool, hemp, or flax within six weeks of her confinement, her child will someday be hanged." {footnote 22} Consistent with changeling beliefs, this superstitious practice spared the recently delivered woman the hardest of the spinning tasks, not for her own sake, but for the protection of her child. Gender bias Other aspects of changeling folklore illustrate this same anti-female stance. Most changeling accounts deal with male babies, implying that the fairies, elves, trolls, and devils have but little use for a female human child. In fact, in some areas boys were dressed in girls' clothing until they were ten or eleven years old in order to deceive supernatural kidnappers in search of young boys. {footnote 23} Further, a number of the protective measures prescribed by tradition have a strong patriarchal bias. For example, the popular belief that "whenever the mother leaves the infant's room she should lay an article of the father's clothing on the child, so that it cannot be exchanged." {footnote 24} Organized religion Numerous religion-oriented protective measures also evolved, which further strengthened the connection between changeling beliefs and organized churches. {footnote 25} As one would expect, Catholics sought to shield infants with holy water, crucifixes, and representations of various saints, whereas Protestants relied on the Bible for protection, often placing the book itself (or perhaps a single page) in the cradle as a talisman. In both faiths the unbaptized child was deemed to be especially vulnerable, although baptism did not offer complete protection against demonic exchange. Interestingly, the Grimm brothers omit most references to Christianity in their writings on changelings, probably in order to emphasize their view that the changeling legends and practices still extant in nineteenth-century Germany were basically survivals from pre-Christian Europe. The stolen child's perspective Nearly all changeling tales are told from the concerned parents' point of view. In the same manner as the parents, we the audience learn that something is wrong with an infant, discover the cause, and are told how to effect a resolution. The perspective of another involved party -- the changeling, the elf-parents, or the abducted child -- is seldom represented. Shakespeare's A Midsummer-Nights's Dream builds an exception to this general rule. An important subplot of this play is built around Oberon's and Titania's (king and queen of the fairies) fight over the guardianship of a changeling boy. Another exception is found in the Finnish tale "The Kantele Player," {footnote 26} in which we first learn that a child exchange has taken place when the abducted person -- now a beautiful and mature woman -- appears to a lonely young man who is playing a kantele (a Finnish harp) and reveals her story to him. The couple seeks out the woman's father, a count, and convince him that his supposed daughter, who is twenty-one years old and "will neither grow nor die," is in truth a changeling, a witch's daughter. "But what should we do with this child who has been with us for twenty-one years?" asks the count. Acting upon the advice of the returning daughter, who knows the ways of witches, they build a roaring fire, and the legitimate daughter herself throws the imposter into the flames. A cry is heard from the witches who have been watching through the window: "Don't burn our child!" The changeling's skin bursts from its body, and only an alder stump is left in the fireplace. This story has a genuine fairy-tale ending (for everyone save the changeling). The kantele player, in spite of his poverty, marries the count's daughter, and -- we are told -- they still live in the stone house built for them by her grateful father. Selma Lagerlöf An even happier conclusion (this time for all parties concerned) is given to us by Selma Lagerlöf, who won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1909, in her children's book "The Changeling." {footnote 27} This artful fairy tale weaves the primitive motifs of troll-lore into a humane and satisfying fantasy story. True to tradition, the author describes the kidnapping of a mortal child by an old troll woman, who leaves her own misshapen baby in its place. Following the pattern of countless folk legends, the parents are told to beat the changeling child with a heavy cane if they want to recover their own baby. The father is only too willing to abuse the ugly troll child, but the mother's maternal instincts cause her to intercede on the changeling's behalf. Several episodes are described in which the father attempts to follow the community's expectations by cruelly punishing or even killing the unwanted child, but each time the mother selflessly protects the troll baby. Her kindness and perseverance are rewarded in the end, and the two children are restored to their original parents. Only then do we learn that during his absence the human child had lived in an unseen parallel world to that of his parents. Every act of cruelty or of kindness visited upon the troll child by his human guardians had been duplicated upon him by his troll stepmother. It was a mother's kindness and humanity rather than the expected abuse and neglect that rescued her child. Lagerlöf thus cloaks an ancient and cruel superstition in a modern and humane dress. Conclusion The advance of science during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries slowly but surely eroded the popular belief that malformed and retarded children likely were not human at all, but rather the offspring of some demonic being, offspring that could be neglected, abused, and even put to death with no moral compunctions. As these theological explanations for retardation gave way to medical explanations, community values and personal attitudes changed to such an extent that the very word "changeling," its synonym "killcrop," and their equivalents in other languages now have become historical curiosities, survivals of beliefs and practices that helped our northern European forebears -- for good or for bad -- face the problems of life and death when confronted with mentally or physically defective children. Footnotes "The Elves," Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Children's and Household Tales (1812), no. 39/III; migratory legend type 5085. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. "A Changeling is Beaten with a Switch," Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends (1816), no. 88; migratory legend type 5085. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Other descriptions of changelings in the Grimms' German Legends are found in nos. 60, 82, 83, 89, 90, 91, 153. Studies of changeling beliefs and practices include: Heinrich Appel, Die Wechselbalgsage, diss. Heidelberg (Berlin, 1937). Hanns Bächtold-Stäubli, Handwörterbuch des deutschen Aberglaubens (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1927-1942), v. 9, col. 835-864. Katherine M. Briggs, An Encyclopedia of Fairies, Hobgoblins, Brownies, Bogies, and other Supernatural Creatures. (New York: Pantheon, 1976), pp. 69-72). Edwin Sidney Hartland, The Science of Fairy Tales: An Inquiry into Fairy Mythology. (London: Walter Scott, 1891), pp. 93-134. Gisela Piaschewski, Der Wechselbalg: Ein Beitrag zum Aberglauben der nordeuropäischen Völker (Breslau I.: Maruschke & Berendt Verlag, 1935). Lewis Spence, The Fairy Tradition in Britain (London; New York: Rider, 1948), pp. 228-254. Edwin Sidney Hartland, The Science of Fairy Tales: An Inquiry into Fairy Mythology. (London: Walter Scott, 1891), p. 118. Friedrich Ranke, Die deutschen Volkssagen (München: C. H. Becksche Verlagsbuchhandlung Oskar Beck, 1924), p. 138. See also Karl Friedrich Wilhelm Wander, Sprichwörter-Lexikon: Ein Hausschatz für das deutsche Volk (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1867-1880), v. 4, col. 1840. Hasan M. El-Shamy, Folktales of Egypt (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980), p. 179. Foreword to Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, The German Legends of the Brothers Grimm, translated by Donald Ward (Philadelphia: Institute for the Study of Human Issues, 1981), v. 1, pp. 1-2. "Watching Out for the Children," Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends (1816), no. 89. Martin Luther, Werke, kritische Gesamtausgabe: Tischreden (Weimar: Böhlau, 1912-1921), v. 4, pp. 357-358. Martin Luther, Werke, kritische Gesamtausgabe: Tischreden (Weimar: Böhlau, 1912-1921), v. 5, p. 9. Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Children's and Household Tales (1812), no. 39/III. Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Märchen aus dem Nachlaß, edited by Heinz Rölleke (Bonn: Bouvier Verlag Herbert Grundmann, 1979), p. 91. Edwin Sidney Hartland, The Science of Fairy Tales: An Inquiry into Fairy Mythology (London: Walter Scott, 1891), pp. 121-122. Gisela Piaschewski, Der Wechselbalg: Ein Beitrag zum Aberglauben der nordeuropäischen Völker (Breslau I.: Maruschke & Berendt Verlag, 1935), pp. 141-146. For an account of this case see Ilmar Arens and Bengt af Klintberg, "Bortbytingssägner i en gotländsk dombok fran 1690," Rig, v. 62, no. 3 (1979), pp. 89-97. Jacob Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie (Frankfurt am Main: Ullstein, 1981 [reprint of 4th edition of 1876]), v. I, pp. 387-389. Jacqueline Simpson, Icelandic Folktales and Legends (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972), pp. 25-26. Reidar Christiansen, Folktales of Norway, translated by Pat Shaw Iversen (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964), no. 40. The Grimm brothers supply this information in a footnote to their German Legends (1816), no. 82. Jacob Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie (Frankfurt am Main: Ullstein, 1981 [reprint of 4th edition of 1876]), v. 3, p. 451, par. 510. For example: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends (1816), nos. 88, 90. Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends (1816), , no. 90. Jacob Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie (Frankfurt am Main: Ullstein, 1981 [reprint of 4th edition of 1876]), v. 3, p. 442. In the same work similar post-confinement beliefs are described in the following entries, v. 3, pp. 434-477, nos. 1, 35, 36, 240, 308, 451, 458, 509, 510, 538, 654, 672, 733, 765, 782, 844, 845, 885, 900, 1049, 1064, 1084. E. Estyn Evans, Irish Folkways (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1957), p. 289. Jacob Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie (Frankfurt am Main: Ullstein, 1981 [reprint of 4th edition of 1876]), v. 3, p. 460. Gisela Piaschewski, Der Wechselbalg: Ein Beitrag zum Aberglauben der nordeuropäischen Völker (Breslau I.: Maruschke & Berendt Verlag, 1935), pp. 86-91, 110-113. August von Löwis of Menar, Finnische und estnische Märchen (Düsseldorf: Eugen Diederichs Verlag, 1962), no. 19. Swedish title: Bortbytingen. English translation: The Changeling (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992). Additional notes and links Return to the top of this document. Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts Changeling Legends from the British Isles. Electronic Texts. German Changeling Legends. Electronic Texts. Scandinavian Changeling Legends. Electronic Texts. Selected poems about changelings The Changeling by James Russell Lowell. The Changeling by John Greenleaf Whittier. Return to the top of this document. Revised September 3, 1997. James Russell Lowell's "The Changeling" The Changeling James Russell Lowell Edited by D. L. Ashliman I had a little daughter, And she was given to me To lead me gently backward To the Heavenly Father's knee, That I, by the force of nature, Might in some dim wise divine The depth of his infinite patience To this wayward soul of mine. I know not how others saw her, But to me she was wholly fair, And the light of the heaven she came from Still lingered and gleamed in her hair; For it was as wavy and golden, And as many changes took, As the shadows of the sun-gilt ripples On the yellow bed of a brook. To what can I liken her smiling Upon me, her kneeling lover, How it leaped from her lips to her eyelids, And dimpled her wholly over, Till her outstretched hands smiled also, And I almost seemed to see The very heart of her mother Sending sun through her veins to me! She had been with us scarce a twelvemonth, And it hardly seemed a day, When a troop of wandering angels Stole my little daughter away; Or perhaps those heavenly Zingari But loosed the hampering strings, And when they had opened her cage-door, My little bird used her wings. But they left in her stead a changeling, A little angel child, That seems like her bud in full blossom, And smiles as she never smiled: When I wake in the morning, I see it Where she always used to lie, And I feel as weak as a violet Alone 'neath the awful sky. As weak, yet as trustful also; For the whole year long I see All the wonders of faithful Nature Still worked for the love of me; Winds wander, and dews drip earthward, Rain falls, suns rise and set, Earth whirls, and all but to prosper A poor little violet. The child is not mine as the first was, I cannot sing it to rest, I cannot lift it up fatherly And bliss it upon my breast; Yet it lies in my little one's cradle And sits in my little one's chair, And the light of the heaven she's gone to Transfigures its golden hair. Source: James Russell Lowell, The Poetical Works (Cambridge: Riverside, 1904), vol. 1 ( The Complete Writings of James Russell Lowell , vol. 9), pp. 251-253. Related Links Return to the top of this document. Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. "The Changeling" by John Greenleaf Whittier. Changelings: An essay by D. L. Ashliman. Revised July 24, 1997. Changeling Legends from the British Isles and Ireland Changeling Legends from the British Isles and Ireland edited by D. L. Ashliman, University of Pittsburgh © 1998-2023 Return to: Changelings: An Essay by D. L. Ashliman. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Changeling . A poem by James Russell Lowell. The Changeling . A ballad by John reenleaf Whittier. German Changeling Legends . Scandinavian Changeling Legends. Table of Contents The Changeling, Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology. Scottish Changelings, Sir Walter Scott, "On the Fairies of Popular Superstition." The Smith and the Fairies, J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands. How to Find Out a Fairy Changeling , Walter Gregor, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the North-East of cotland. The Fair Folk, Walter Gregor, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the North-East of Scotland. Torr-a-Bhulig, James MacDougall, Folktales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English. The Fairy of Corrie Osben and the Tailor, James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English. The Glengarry Fairy, James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English. The Kintalen Changeling, James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English. The Red-Haired Tailor of Rannoch and the Fairy, James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English. The Trows Steal a Child, G. F. Black, Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands. Mind the Crooked Finger (dialect), J. G. Ollason, Shetland Islands. Mind the Crooked Finger (standard English), J. G. Ollason, Shetland Islands. The Trows, the Tailor, and the Idiot Child, Shetland Islands. Danger from Fairies, William Henderson, Notes of the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders. Fairy Butter, Michael Aislabie Denham, The Denham Tracts. The Fairy Hill's Afire, Michael Aislabie Denham, The Denham Tracts. The Piskies' Changeling, Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England. Brewery of Eggshells, Joseph Jacobs, Celtic Fairy Tales. The Changeling Twins of Corwrion, John Rhys, Celtic Folklore. The Tylwyth Teg Steal a Child, John Rhys, Celtic Folklore. Two Manx Changelings, Sir Walter Scott, "On the Fairies of Popular Superstition." A Changeling Musician, W.Y. Evans-Wentz, The Fairy Faith in Celtic Countries. A Pisky Changeling, W. Y. Evans-Wentz, The Fairy Faith in Celtic Countries. A Remarkable Changeling Story, W. Y. Evans-Wentz, The Fairy Faith in Celtic Countries. The Fairy Child and the Tailor, Sophia Morrison, Isle of Man. The Changeling, T. Crofton Crocker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland. The Brewery of Eggshells, T. Crofton Crocker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland. Irish Changeling Beliefs, Thomas Johnson Westropp, "A Study of Folklore on the Coasts of Connacht, Ireland." The Changeling Thomas Keightley A couple of Strathspey lads who dealt in whiskey that never paid duty, which they used to purchase in Glenlivat, and sell at Badenoch and Fort William, were one night laying in stock at Glenlivat when they heard the child in the cradle give a piercing cry, just as if it had been shot. The mother, of course, blessed it, and the Strathspey lads took no further notice, and soon after set out with their goods. They had not gone far when they found a fine healthy child lying all alone on the road-side, which they soon recognized as that of their friend. They saw at once how the thing was. The fairies had taken away the real child and left a stock, but, owing to the pious ejaculation of the mother, they had been forced to drop it. As the urgency of their business did not permit them to return, they took the child with them, and kept it till the next time they had occasion to visit Glenlivat. On their arrival they said nothing about the child, which they kept concealed. In the course of conversation, the mother took occasion to remark that the disease which had attacked the child the last time they were there had never left it, and she had not little hopes of its recovery. As if to confirm her statement, it continued uttering most piteous cries. To end the matter at once, the lads produced the real child healthy and hearty, and told how they had found it. An exchange was at once effected, and they forthwith proceeded to dispose of their new charge. For this purpose they got an old creel to put him in and some straw to light under it. Seeing the serious turn matters were likely to take, he resolved not to await the trial, but flew up the smoke-hole, and when at the top he cried out that things would have gone very differently with them had it not been for the arrival of their guests. Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology, Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries, a new edition, revised and greatly enlarged (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), p. 393. Return to the table of contents . Scottish Changelings Sir Walter Scott, "On the Fairies of Popular Superstition" The most formidable attribute of the elves, was the practice of carrying away and exchanging children, and that of stealing human souls from their bodies. "A persuasion prevails among the ignorant," says the author of a MS. history of Moray, that "in a consumptive disease, the fairies steal away the soul, and put the soul of a fairy in the room of it." This belief prevails chiefly along the eastern coast of Scotland, where a practice, apparently of druidical origin, is used to avert the danger. In the increase of the March moon, withes of oak and ivy are cut, and twisted into wreaths or circles, which they preserve till next March. After that period, when persons are consumptive, or children hectic, they cause them to pass thrice through these circles. In other cases the cure was more rough, and at least as dangerous as the disease, as will appear from the following extract:-- There is one thing remarkable in this parish of Suddie, (in Isverness-shire,) which I think proper to mention. There is a small hill N.W. from the church commonly called Therdy Hill, or Hill of Therdie, as some term it; on the top of which there is a well, which I had the curiosity to view, because of the several reports concerning it. When children happen to be sick, and languish long in their malady, so that they almost turn skeletons, the common people imagine they are taken away (at least the substance) by spirits, called Fairies, and the shadow left with them; so, at a particular season in summer, they leave them all night themselves, watching at a distance, near this well, and this they imagine will either end or mend them; they say many more do recover than do not. Yea, an honest tenant who lives hard by it, and whom I had the curiosity to discourse about it, told me it has recovered some, who were about eight or nine years of age, and to his certain knowledge, they bring adult persons to it; for, as he was passing one dark night, he heard groanings, and, coming to the well, he found a man, who had been long sick, wrapped in a plaid, so that he could scarcely move, a stake being fixed in the earth, with a rope, or tedder, that was about the plaid; he had no sooner inquired what he was, but he conjured him to loose him, and out of sympathy he was pleased to slacken that wherein he was, as I may so speak, swaddled; but, if I right remember, he signified, he did not recover.-- Account of the Parish of Suddie, apud Macfarlane's MSS. According to the earlier doctrine, concerning the original corruption of human nature, the power of demons over infants had been long reckoned considerable, in the period intervening between birth and baptism. During this period, therefore, children were believed to be particularly liable to abstraction by the fairies, and mothers chiefly dreaded the substitution of changelings in the place of their own offspring. Various monstrous charms existed in Scotland, for procuring the restoration of a child which had been thus stolen; but the most efficacious of them was supposed to be, the roasting of the supposititious child upon the live embers, when it was believed it would vanish, and the true child appear in the place, whence it had been originally abstracted. [Note 1] It may be questioned if this experiment could now be made without the animadversion of the law. Even that which is prescribed in the following legend is rather too hazardous for modern use. A certain woman having put out her child to nurse in the country, found, when she came to take it home, that its form was so much altered that she scarce knew it; nevertheless, not knowing what time might do, took it home for her own. But when, after some years, it could neither speak nor go, the poor woman was fain to carry it, with much trouble, in her arms; and one day, a poor man coming to the door, "God bless you, mistress," said he, "and your poor child; be pleased to bestow something on a poor man." "Ah! this child," replied she, "is the cause of all my sorrow," and related what had happened, adding, moreover, that she thought it changed, and none of her child. The old man, whom years had rendered more prudent in such matters, told her, to find out the truth, she should make a clear fire, sweep the hearth very clean, and place the child fast in his chair, that he might not fall, before it, and break a dozen eggs, and place the four-and-twenty half-shells before it; then go out, and listen at the door: for, if the child spoke, it was certainly a changeling; and then she should carry it out, and leave it on the dunghill to cry, and not to pity it, till she heard its voice no more. The woman, having done all things according to these words, heard the child say, "Seven years old was I before I came to the nurse, and four years have I lived since, and never saw so many milk pans before." So the woman took it up, and left it upon the dunghill to cry, and not to be pitied, till at last she thought the voice went up into the air; and coming, found there her own natural and well-favored child.--Grose's Provincial Glossary, quoted from "A Pleasant Treatise on Witchcraft.." Source: Sir Walter Scott, "On the Fairies of Popular Superstition" (Introduction to "The Tale of Tamlane," Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border, Poetic Works (Edinburgh: Ballantyne, 1833), vol. 2, pp. 317-321. Note 1: Less perilous recipes were sometimes used. The Editor is possessed of a small relic, termed by tradition a toad-stone, the influence of which was supposed to preserve pregnant women from the power of demons, and other dangers incidental to their situation. It has been carefully preserved for several generations, was often pledged for considerable sums of money, and uniformly redeemed from a belief in its efficacy. [Footnote in the edition of 1833.] Return to the table of contents . The Smith and the Fairies J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands Years ago there lived in Crossbrig a smith of the name of MacEachern. This man had an only child, a boy of about thirteen or fourteen years of age, cheerful, strong, and healthy. All of a sudden he fell ill, took to his bed, and moped whole days away. No one could tell what was the matter with him, and the boy himself could not, or would not, tell how he felt. He was wasting away fast; getting thin, old, and yellow; and his father and all his friends were afraid that he would die. At last one day, after the boy had been lying in this condition for a long time, getting neither better nor worse, always confined to bed, but with an extraordinary appetite,--one day, while sadly revolving these things, and standing idly at his forge, with no heart to work, the smith was agreeably surprised to see an old man, well known to him for his sagacity and knowledge of out-of-the-way things, walk into his workshop. Forthwith he told him the occurrence which had clouded his life. The old man looked grave as he listened; and after sitting a long time pondering over all he had heard, gave his opinion thus-- "It is not your son you have got. The boy has been carried away by the 'Daoine Sith,' and they have left a Sibhreach in his place." "Alas! and what then am I to do?" said the smith. "How am I ever to see my own son again?" "I will tell you how," answered the old man. "But, first, to make sure that it is not your own son you have got, take as many empty eggshells as you can get, go with them into the room, spread them out carefully before his sight, then proceed to draw water with them, carrying them two and two in your hands as if they were a great weight, and arrange when full, with every sort of earnestness, round the fire." The smith accordingly gathered as many broken eggshells as he could get, went into the room, and proceeded to carry out all his instructions. He had not been long at work before there arose from the bed a shout of laughter, and the voice of the seeming sick boy exclaimed, " I am now 800 years of age, and I have never seen the like of that before." The smith returned and told the old man. "Well, now," said the sage to him, "did I not tell you that it was not your son you had: your son is in Brorra-cheill in a digh there (that is, a round green hill frequented by fairies). Get rid as soon as possible of this intruder, and I think I may promise you your son. "You must light a very large and bright fire before the bed on which this stranger is lying. He will ask you, 'What is the use of such a fire as that?' Answer him at once, 'You will see that presently!' and then seize him, and throw him into the middle of it. If it is your own son you have got, he will call out to save him; but if not, this thing will fly through the roof." The smith again followed the old man's advice; kindled a large fire, answered the question put to him as he had been directed to do, and seizing the child flung him in without hesitation. The "Sibhreach" gave an awful yell, and sprung through the roof, where a hold was left to let the smoke out. On a certain night the old man told him the green round hill, where the fairies kept the boy, would be open. And on that night the smith, having provided himself with a Bible, a dirk, and a crowing cock, was to proceed to the hill. He would hear singing and dancing and much merriment going on, but he was to advance boldly; the Bible he carried would be a certain safeguard to him against any danger from the fairies. On entering the hill he was to stick the dirk in the threshold, to prevent the hill from closing upon him; "and then," continued the old man, "on entering you will see a spacious apartment before you, beautifully clean, and there, standing far within, working at a forge, you will also see you own son. When you are questioned, say you come to seek him, and will not go without him." Not long after this the time came round, and the smith sallied forth, prepared as instructed. Sure enough, as he approached the hill, there was a light where light was seldom seen before. Soon after a sound of piping, dancing, and joyous merriment reached the anxious father on the night wind. Overcoming every impulse to fear, the smith approached the threshold steadily, stuck the dirk into it as directed, and entered. Protected by the Bible her carried on his breast, the fairies could not touch him; but they asked him, with a good deal of displeasure, what he wanted there. He answered, "I want my son, whom I see down there, and I will not go without him." Upon hearing this the whole company before him gave a loud laugh, which wakened up the cock he carried dozing in his arms, who at once leaped up on his shoulder, clapped his wings lustily, and crowed loud and long. The fairies, incensed, seized the smith and his son, and, throwing them out of the hill, flung the dirk after them, and in an instant all was dark. For a year and a day the boy never did a turn of work, and hardly ever spoke a word; but at last one day, sitting by his father and watching him finishing a sword he was making for some chief, and which he was very particular about, he suddenly exclaimed, "That is not the way to do it;" and, taking the tools from his father's hands, he set to work himself in his place, and soon fashioned a sword the like of which was never seen in the country before. From that day the young man wrought constantly with his father, and became the inventor of a peculiarly fine and well-tempered weapon, the making of which kept the two smiths, father and son, in constant employment, spread their fame far and wide, and gave them the means in abundance, as they before had the disposition, to live content with all the world and very happily with one another. Source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands, as published in George Douglas, Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales (London: Walter Scott Publishing Co., 1901), pp. 125-128. Return to the table of contents . How to Find Out a "Fairy Changeling" Walter Gregor, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the North-East of Scotland If the child became cross and began to dwine [waste away], fears immediately arose that it might be a "fairy changeling," and the trial by fire was put into operation. The hearth was piled with peat, and when the fire was at its strength the suspected changeling was placed in front of it and as near as possible not to be scorched, or it was suspended in a basket over the fire. If it was a "changeling child" it made its escape by the lum [chimney] throwing back word of scorn as it disappeared. One mode of bringing back the true child was the following. A new skull [an oblong basket] was taken and hung over the fire from a piece of a branch of a hazel tree, and into this basket the suspected changeling was laid. Careful watch was kept till it screamed. If it screamed it was a changeling, and it was held fast to prevent its escape. When an opportunity occurred, it was carried to a place where four roads met, and a dead body was carried over it. The true child was restored. Source: Walter Gregor, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the North-East of Scotland (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1881), pp. 8-9. Return to the table of contents . The Fair Folk Walter Gregor, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the North-East of Scotland "The fair folk" were most covetous of new-born children and their mothers. Till the mothers were "sained" and churched, and the children were baptized, the most strict watch and ward had to be kept over them to keep them from being stolen. Every seven years they had to pay "the teind to hell," and to save them from paying this tribute with one of themselves they were ever on the alert to get hold of human infants. There came a wind oot o' the north, A sharp wind and a snell; And a dead sleep came over me, And frae my horse I fell; The Queen of Fairies she was there, And took me to hersel. And never would I tire, Janet, In fairyland to dwell, But aye, at every seven years They pay the teind to hell; And though the Queen macks much o' me I fear 'twill be mysel. Sometimes they succeeded in carrying off an unbaptized infant, and for it they left one of their own. The one left by them soon began to "dwine," and to fret and cry night and day. At times the child has been saved from them as they were carrying it through the dog-hole. A fisherman had a fine thriving baby. One day what looked like a beggar woman entered the house. She went to the cradle in which the baby was lying, and handled it under pretense of admiring it. From that day the child did nothing but fret and cry and waste away. This had gone on for some months, when one day a beggar man entered asking alms. As he was getting his alms his eye lighted upon the infant in the cradle. After looking on it for some time he said, "That's nae a bairn; that's an image; the bairn's been stoun." He immediately set to work to bring back the child. He heaped up a large fire on the hearth, and ordered a black hen to be brought to him. When the fire was blazing at its full strength, he took the hen and held her over the fire as near it as possible, so as not to kill her. The bird struggled for a little, then escaped from the man's grasp, and flew out by the "lum." The child was restored, and throve every day afterwards. Another. A strong healthy boy in the parish of Tyrie began to "dwine." The real baby had been stolen. A wise woman gave the means of bringing him back. His clothes were to be taken to a south-running well, washed, laid out to dry beside the well, and most carefully watched. This was done for some time, but no one came to take them away. The next thing to be done was to take the child himself and lay him between two furrows in a cornfield. This was carried out, and the child throve daily afterwards. All this was annoying to the "fair folk," and rather than submit to such annoyance they restored the child, and took back their own one. One day a fisherwoman with her baby was left a-bed alone, when in came a little man dressed in green. He proceeded at once to lay hold of the baby. The woman knew at once who the little man was and what he intended to do. She uttered the prayer, "God be atween you an me." Out rushed the fairy in a moment, and the woman and her baby were left without further molestation. Source: Walter Gregor, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the North-East of Scotland, (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1881), pp. 60-62. Return to the table of contents . Torr-a-Bhuilg James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English Long ago a poor woman happened to call in a house near Torr-a-Bhuilg. At the time there was no one in the house but the housewife and what appeared to be a little child. The child kept tumbling about on the floor and screaming incessantly day and night. The poor woman asked what lad she had there on the floor. The housewife answered that she did not know. "Well," said the poor woman, "I know well what he is, and if you take my advice you will get rid of him; but, if not, you will get enough of him." The housewife said that she would take her advice, and the poor woman then told her what she was to do to him. After the poor woman left, the housewife went out and brought in a basket of eggs, which she placed in a circle on the floor. While she was thus engaged, the lad kept looking sullenly at her, and said at length, roughly: "What are you doing in that manner?" "I am making a brewing caldron," was the reply. "A brewing caldron? I am more than three hundred years old and I never yet saw a brewing caldron like that!" The housewife had no longer any doubt of the child being a fairy, but she went about her business for a while in her usual way. Then she looked out at the window and assumed a scared look and began to start back as if she beheld something dreadful. The squaller on the floor, looking askance at her for a while, at last asked what it was she beheld. "I see," said she, "Torr-a-Bhuilg on fire." He waited where he was no longer, but spring out at the door saying: "My hammers and my anvil and my bellows," and after that he was never seen again. Source: James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English, Edinburgh: John Grant, 1910, pp. 100-103 (Gaelic and English on facing pages). Return to the table of contents . The Fairy of Corrie Osben and the Tailor James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English In Corrie Osben lived a shepherd's wife, whose child grew very peevish and difficult to nurse. Neither she nor her husband knew what was the matter with the child, or what was to be done with him, until the tailor came to make clothes of a web of homemade cloth newly come from the walking-mill. Next day after his arrival, the shepherd's wife went to the peat-moss, and left the child under his care till she should return. Shortly after she went away, what did the tailor hear behind him but the sweet music of the bagpipes. He looked the way whence the music came, and whom did he see sitting in the bed but a little old grey-headed man with a pipe of straw in his mouth, busy playing a tune, to which the following verses are sung: Hush! Oranan, Hush! Oranan, Hush! Oranan, Hush! Oheé! Long is the lassie of coming To give the Cannan a wee. Hush! Oranan, etc. He kept playing this tune until he heard the woman coming; then the music ceased, and he was again a little child. The tailor told the woman nothing of what he had seen and heard while she was absent. Next day, when she went a second time to the peat-moss, he took an egg, emptied the shell of its contents, filled it with water, and placed it near the fire. The little old mannie's curiosity was so much excited by what he saw that he turned round and said: "What are you going to do with that, tailor?" "I am going to heat water to steep malt in," said the tailor. "Well, I am more than a hundred years old, and never till now did I see an eggshell used to heat water for steeping malt in," said the little man, as he turned away and began again to play on his straw-pipe. He kept playing the tune of the day before until he heard the woman coming, and then he once more became a little child. On the third day, the tailor told the woman what he had witnessed, and his opinion that the child was nothing but a fairy. "And what am I to do with him?" asked the woman. "Take him," said the tailor, "to the neighbouring ravine, and throw him over the bank into the water below." The woman did as she was told, but no sooner had the child touched the water than he became a little grey manikin. He then rose to his feet in a great rage, and scrambled up the steep side of the ravine, threatening the woman with vengeance if he overtook her. But she took to her heels as fast as she could, and never looked behind her until she arrived at the house, where she found her own child laid at the door before her. Source: James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English, Edinburgh: John Grant, 1910, pp. 154-157 (Gaelic and English on facing pages). Return to the table of contents . The Glengarry Fairy James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English There once lived in Glengarry a widow with a young child who was a boy. One day she went to the well for water; and when she was returning to the house, she heard the child, whom she had left sleeping quietly in the cradle, screaming as if he were in great pain. She hastened in, a gave him a drink as quickly as she could. This quieted him for a little while, but he soon broke out again as badly as ever. She gave him another drink; and while he was at her breast she looked at him and saw that he had two teeth in his mouth, each more than an inch long, and that his face was as old and withered as any face she had ever seen. She said to herself: "Now I am undone, but I will keep quiet until I see what will come of this." Next day she lifted the lad in her arms, put a shawl about him, and went away as though she was going to the next farm with him. A bug burn ran across her path, and when she was going over the ford, the creature put his head out of the shawl and said: "Many a big fold have I seen on the banks of this stream!" The woman did not wait to hear more of his history, but threw him into a deep pool below the ford, where he lay for a while, tumbling about and reviling her, and saying if he had known beforehand the trick she was going to play him, he would have shown her another. She then heard a sound like that of a flock of birds flying about her, but saw nothing until she looked at her feet, and there beheld her own child with his bones as bare as the tongs. She took him home with her, and he got gradually better, and was at last as healthy as any other child. Source: James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English, Edinburgh: John Grant, 1910, pp. 115-119 (Gaelic and English on facing pages). Return to the table of contents . The Kintalen Changeling James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English There was living in Kintalen a woman who had a male-child with neither the growth nor the bloom of other children of his age. From morning to evening he would not cease one minute from crying, and he would eat far more food than was natural for the like of him. It was harvest, and there was not a person on the farm who could draw a sickle but was out on the reaping field, except the mother of the child. She, too, would have been out were it not for fear that the nasty screaming thing would break his heart crying, if she should leave him in charge of any other person. It happened that there was at the time a tailor in the house, making clothes. The tailor was a shrewd, observant man, and he was but a short time within until he became suspicious of the lad in the cradle. "You," said he to the woman, "may go to the reaping, and I will take care of the child." The woman went away. But she had barely taken her feet over the threshold when the withered object she had left behind began shrieking and crying loudly and sorely. The tailor listened to him a good while, keeping his eye on him, till he was sure that he was nothing but a changeling. He now lost patience with him, and cried in a sharp, angry voice: "Stop that music, lad, or I'll put thee on the fire." The crying ceased for a while, but afterwards it began a second time. "Art thou at it again, piper of the one tune?" said the tailor. "Let me hear that music any more from thee, and I will kill thee with the dirk." When the fairy beheld the frown on the tailor's countenance and the dirk in his hand, he took such a fright that he kept quiet a good while. The tailor was a cheerful man, and to keep from wearying he began to hum a tune. In the middle of the music the ugly elf raised a loud howl. But, if he did, he was not allowed to go on with his warble but a very short time. The tailor leaped off his work-table, went, dirk in hand, over to the cradle, and said to the fairy: "We have enough of that music, take the right great bagpipes and give us one good tune on them, or else I'll put the dirk in thee." The fairy sat up in the cradle, took the pipes which he had somewhere about him, and struck up the sweetest music the tailor had ever heard. The reapers heard it on the field, and instantly dropped their sickles and stood listening to the fairy music. At length they left the field, and ran in the direction whence the music came. But before they reached the house the tune had ceased; and they knew not who played it or whence it came. When the reapers returned home in the evening, and the tailor got the mistress of the house alone, he told her everything that happened while she was at the reaping, and that her child was nothing but a changeling. He then told her to go with him to the Ardsheal side of the bay, and to throw him out in the Loch. She did as was told her, and as soon as the nasty little elf touched the water he became a big grey-haired old man, and swam to the other side of the bay. When he got his foot on dry land, he cried to her that if he had known beforehand what she was going to do he would have made her never think of doing such a thing again. She returned home and found her own child at the door before her, hale and sound. Source: James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English, Edinburgh: John Grant, 1910, pp. 148-153 (Gaelic and English on facing pages). Return to the table of contents . The Red-Haired Tailor of Rannoch and the Fairy James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English The red-haired tailor lived in Rannoch. Like the rest of his kind, he went from house to house to make clothes of the cloth which thrifty wives manufactured for their husbands and sons in by-gone times. Once as he was approaching a house, where he had a few days' work to do, evening came on, and he saw, in the dimness of the twilight, one like a very little child, running before him and keeping out of sight behind every bush and every hillock at the road-side. The tailor hardened his step, hoping to overtake the curious manikin before him, but instead of gaining, he was losing ground at every step he took. As soon as he noticed this, he began to run with all his might; but in spite of his skin, he could not shorten the distance between them. At length he lost patience so completely that he threw his big shears at the nimble little man ahead, and struck him with them in the knee joints. The fairy, for such he was, fell on his face, and before he had time to rise up, was in the tailor's arms, and the shears on his breast. "Tell me where thou art going, my good lad," said the tailor. "I am on my way from the Big Fairy Knoll, to the house ahead of thee, to get a while of the breast of the wife," replied the little imp. This was the very house to which the tailor was going. "And what wilt thou do with the woman's own child?" said he then. "Oh, I will put him out at the back window to my people, and they will take him with them to our place," answered the other. "And will they send him home when thou hast had enough of his mother's breast?" "Oh, no; never!" "That will do," said the tailor, and he let his prisoner go. As soon as he got his liberty, he stretched away to the house, and was within before the tailor arrived. He had the house to himself, for the goodman and his wife were in the byre milking the cows, and no one within but the child in the cradle. He lifted the child in his arms, and handed it out at the back window to the other fairies, as he thought; but the tailor was before them, and took the child quietly in his arms, and then went away with it to the house of his sister, who lived a short distance off, and left it in her charge. When he returned he found the wife before him, and the changeling in the cradle, ready to burst with crying. The wife took him up, and gave him a drink, and then put him back in the cradle again. He was not long there till he began to scream and cry once more. She took him up, and gave him another drink. But to all appearance nothing would please him but to be left always on the breast. This game went on for a few days more. But when the patience of the tailor ran out, he sprang at last from the work-table, took in a creelful of peats, and put a big fire on the hearth. When the fire was in the heat of its burning, he sprang over to the cradle, took with him the changeling, and before any one in the house could interpose, he threw him in the very middle of the flames. But the little knave leaped out through the chimney, and from the house-top cried in triumph to the wife: "I have got so much of the sap of thy breast in spite of thee," and he departed. Source: James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English , Edinburgh: John Grant, 1910, pp. 142-147 (Gaelic and English on facing pages). Return to the table of contents . The Trows Steal a Child G. F. Black, Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands Two married brothers were living in one house, and the wife of one was expecting to become a mother. Her brother-in-law, being informed of what was going on, took up a fishing rod and set off to the Craigs (crag-fishing) to be out of the way. He had to pass a plantiecrü, the favorite haunt of many Trows, and when he got there he saw a number of them going as if towards his house. Jaimie instantly turned back, for he knew that they had power at such times, and the saining might be neglected. Hurrying home he went and opened his trunk, took out a Bible, laid it near the door, and left the key in the lock. Making sure that no door or box was locked in the house (for that angers the Trows and they have power when a key is turned), and exhorting the güde wives assembled not to allow their patient to go past the fireplace, Jaimie walked off, intending to visit a neighbor instead of venturing near the plantiecrü again. But by that time the Trows had got near and found out that he had guarded the way to their coveted treasure, so they took all power from him as soon as he got a stone's throw from his own door. At that place he had to cross a stile and when he had got one leg over the stile, he found he could get no farther. There he sat without power to move; and he sat for hours astride the wall. By-and-by one of the güde wives came out, and seeing Jaimie sitting like that, she cried, "Jaimie, güde be aboot de! What's do sitting yonder for a' this time?" As soon as she said "Güde be aboot de" the power to move came back and Jamie came home to share in the blythe feast. But that very night a child of his took a crying. It cried and cried for exactly eight days, then it lay as if sleeping for eight days, and all folk said that it appeared to be another child. Then Jaimie knew it was a changeling, so he set the cradle outside the house-door, beyond the shadow of the lintel, and the changeling was no more. There was just an image left lifeless in the cradle. Source: County Folk-Lore , vol. 3: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands, collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1903), pp. 28-29. Black's source: Biot Edmonston and Jessie M. E. Saxby The Home of a Naturalist, (London, 1888), p. 213. Return to the table of contents . Mind the Crooked Finger J. G. Ollason, Shetland Islands Bill Robertson, æt. 71, residing in Lerwick, soberly narrated this trowy story: My midder, God rest her soul, tauld me this, and she nedder could nor wid ha' tauld me a lee. Shü wis staying wi' freends at Kirgood-a-Weisdale; an' ee nicht about da hüming (twilight) da guidman was sair fashed, for da honest wife haed just haed a pirie baby. An' noo, my lamb 'at ye ir (are), what sud he hear juist as he was gaein' ta leave the lamb-house, but three most unearthly knocks, da sam as it haed a been frae onder da grund. Noo, he kent na what dis could be, but he made a' fast, an' gangs up intil de corn yard, and as he comes in sight of the screws he hears a voice 'at said tree times, "Mind da crooked finger." Noo, his wife haed a crooked finger, and he kent ower weel 'at something wis gaen ta happen, for his grey neebors wis apon da watch for da helpless infant, or midder, or baith. So he comes into da hoose, an' lichts a candle, taks doon da Bible, an' a steel knife. He opens da buik an' da knife, when such a roaring and trüling, an' onerthly stamping an' rattling, an' confusion comes frae da byre as made da whole hoose shak. An' a' body fell a-whaaking (quaking). Noo, he taks da open Bible, and maks for da byre, an' dem 'at wis i' da hoos follows him trimbling an' whaaking, only da wise-woman bein' left with da poor wife an' infant. Noo, whin he gets ta da door, he heaves in da Bible afore him, sticks da open knive in his mouth, edge ootwards, and da lowin' candle in een o' his hands. Da instant yon was dune da trülin' an' noise an' din ceased all of a sudden, and da image 'at haed been prepared for ta pit i' da place i' da poor wife an' innocent pirie lamb was a' 'at was left i' da byre. "Weel," says da guidman, as he gripped in his airms da very likeness o' his wife 'at da trows had left i' da byre, "I've taen dee, and I'll use dee." Weel, he tuk in ta da hoose da image left by da trows, an' it haed every joint an' pairt of a woman. An' my midder tauld me shü saw it, an' da honest folk for mony a year, an' der children after dem, sat upon da stock, or image, or likness; an' things was set on it, and wood was sawn on it. An' dat's as true as I'm spekin' to you, and no a borrowed or handed story; for my midder tauld me it wi' her ain lips, an' she wid no a tauld me a lee." Source: George Douglas, Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales (London: Walter Scott Publishing Co., 1901), pp. 123-124. Return to the table of contents . Mind the Crooked Finger J. G. Ollason, Shetland Islands Bill Robertson, age 71, residing in Lerwick, soberly narrated this trustworthy story: My mother, God rest her soul, told me this, and she neither could nor would have told me a lie. She was staying with friends at Kirgood-a-Weisdale; one night at about twilight the man of the house was very concerned, for his honest wife had just had a pretty baby. And now, my lamb that you are, what should he hear just as he was going to leave the lamb-house, but three most unearthly knocks, the same as if it had been from under the ground. Now, he didn't know what this could be, but he took hold of himself and went up to the corn yard, and as he comes in sight of the granary he hears a voice that said three times, "Mind the crooked finger." Now, his wife had a crooked finger, and he knew very well that something was going to happen, for his gray neighbors were on the watch for the helpless infant, or mother, or both. So he comes into the house, and lights a candle, takes down the Bible, and a steel knife. He opens the book and the knife, when such a roaring and trolling, and unearthly stamping and rattling, and confusion comes from the cow-barn that made the whole house shake. And everybody fell a-quaking. Now, he takes the open Bible, and makes for the cow-barn, and those that were in the house follow him trembling and quaking, only the wise-woman being left with the poor wife and infant. Now, when he gets to the door, he heaves in the Bible before him, sticks the open knife in his mouth, edge outwards, and the burning candle in one of his hands. That instant the trolling was done and the noise and din ceased all of a sudden, and the image that had been prepared to put in the place of the poor wife and innocent pretty lamb was all that was left in the cow-barn. "Well," says the man of the house, as he gripped in his arms the very likeness of his wife that the trolls had left in the cow-barn, "I've taken you, and I'll use you." Well, he took into the house the image left by the trolls, and it had every joint and part of a woman. And my mother told me she saw it, and the honest folk for many a year, and their children after them, sat upon the stock, or image, or likeness; and things was set on it, and wood was sawn on it. And that's as true as I'm speaking to you, and not a borrowed or handed-down story; for my mother told me it with her own lips, and she would not have told me a lie." Source: George Douglas, Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales (London: Walter Scott Publishing Co., 1901), pp. 123-124. Rewritten in standard English by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Trows, the Tailor, and the Idiot Child Shetland Islands The Shetlanders believe in two kinds of trows, as they call the Scandinavian trolls, those of the land and those of the sea. The former, whom, like the Scots, they also term the guid folk and guid neighbors, they conceive to inhabit the interior of green hills. Saining (blessing oneself) is the grand protection against them; a Shetlander always sains himself when passing by their hills. They have all the picking and stealing propensities of the Scandinavian trolls. Lying-in women and "unchristened bairns" they regard as lawful prize. The former they employ as wet nurses, the latter they of course rear up as their own. Nothing will induce parents to show any attention to a child that they suspect of being a changeling. But there are persons who undertake to enter the hills and regain the lost child. A tailor, not long since, related the following story. He was employed to work at a farm house where there was a child that was an idiot, and who was supposed to have been left there by the trows instead of some proper child, whom they had taken into the hills. One night, after he had retired to his bed, leaving the idiot asleep by the fire, he was suddenly waked out of his sleep by the sound of music, and on looking about him he saw the whole room full of fairies, who were dancing away their rounds most joyously. Suddenly the idiot jumped up and joined in the dance, and showed such a degree of acquaintance with the various steps and movements as plainly testified that it must have been a long time since he first went under the hands of the dancing master. The tailor looked on for some time with admiration, but at last he grew alarmed and sained himself. On hearing this, the trows all fled in the utmost disorder, but one of them, a woman, was so incensed at this interruption of their revels, that as she went out she touched the big toe of the tailor, and he lost the power of ever after moving it. Abstracted from Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology (1850), pp. 164-166. Keightley's souce: Dr. Hibbert, Description of the Shetland Islands (1822). Danger from Fairies William Henderson, Notes of the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders In the southern counties of Scotland children are considered before baptism at the mercy of the fairies, who may carry them off at pleasure or inflict injury upon them. Hence, of course, it is unlucky to take unbaptized children on a journey -- a belief which prevails throughout Northumberland, and indeed in many other parts of the country Brand mentions this danger ( Popular Antiquities, vol. 2, p. 73), and says the Danish women guard their children during this period against evil spirits by placing in the cradle, or over the door, garlic slat, bread, and steel in the form of some sharp instrument. "Something like this," he adds, "obtained in England;" and accordingly I am told that in the West Riding of Yorkshire "a child was kept safe while sleeping by hanging a carving knife from the head of the cradle with the point suspended near the infant's face." In Germany, the proper things to lay in the cradle are "orant" (which is translated into either horehound or snapdragon), blue marjoram, black cumin, a right shirt sleeve, and a left stocking. The "Nickert" cannot then harm the child. The modern Greeks dread witchcraft at this period of their children's lives, and are careful not to leave them alone during their first eight days, within which period the Greek Church refuses to baptize them. (Wright's Literature of the Middle Ages , vol. 1, p. 291) In Scotland the little one's safeguard is held to lie in the juxtaposition of some article of dress belonging to its father. This was experienced by the wife a shepherd near Selkirk. Soon after the birth of her first child, a fine boy, she was lying in bed with her baby by her side, when suddenly she became aware of a confused noise of talking and merry laughter in the "spence," or room. This, in fact, proceeded from the fairies, who were forming a child of wax as a substitute for the baby, which they were planning to steal away. The poor mother suspected as much, so in great alarm she seized her husband's waistcoat, which chanced to be lying at the foot of the bed, and flung it over herself and the child. The fairies set up a loud scream, calling out "Auld Luckie has cheated us o' our bairnie!" Soon afterwards the woman heard something fall down the lum (or chimney), and looking out she saw a waxen image of her baby, stuck full of pins, lying on the hearth. When her husband came home he made up a large fire and threw the fairy lump upon it; but, instead of burning, the thing flew up the chimney, and the house instantly resounded with shouts of joy and peals of laughter. Family affection must have been very strong when any trifle closely connected with the father was deemed a safeguard for the child, a safeguard needed till its baptism shielded it from every evil or malicious sprite. Source: William Henderson, Notes of the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1879), pp. 14-15. Return to the table of contents . Fairy Butter Michael Aislabie Denham, The Denham Tracts Mothers sometimes brought the cradle to the field in the harvest time and left it at the ridge end, when the little inmate would be liable to be exchanged for one of fairy breed. To deter children who gleaned behind the reapers from interfering with the stooks, it was customary to tell them that baits of "fairy butter" were placed among the sheaves, and if they were tempted to touch and eat it the fairies would kidnap them. A story is told at Pierse Bridge how that, some women going into the field to work rather earlier one morning than usual, now some fifty or sixty years ago, found as much as nearly a pound upon the top of a gatepost, how they carefully gathered it into a basin, and how they each and all partook, and found it to be the "nicest butther that ony o' them had iver taästed." Source: The Denham Tracts: A Collection of Folklore by Michael Aislabie Denham, edited by James Hardy (London: The Folklore Society, 1895), vol. 2, p. 138. Slightly revised. Return to the table of contents . The Fairy Hill's Afire Michael Aislabie Denham, The Denham Tracts A woman had a child that was remarkably puny. It was voracious enough, "but put all the meat it got within an ill skin," and never grew any, and there were shrewd suspicions that it was a changeling. One day a neighbor came running into her house, and shouted out, "Come here, and ye'll see a sight! Yonder's the Fairy Hill a' alowe." "Waes me! what'll come o' my wife and bairns?" screamed out the elf in the bed, and straightway made its exit up the chimney. Source: The Denham Tracts: A Collection of Folklore by Michael Aislabie Denham, edited by James Hardy (London: The Folklore Society, 1895), vol. 2, p. 137. Return to the table of contents . The Piskies' Changeling Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England This story is told by Mr. T. Q. Couch, as an example of the folk-lore of a Cornish village, in "Notes and Queries," under the name of "Coleman Gray": There is a farmhouse of some antiquity with which my family have a close connection; and it is this circumstance, more than any other, that has rendered this tradition concerning it more interesting to us, and better remembered than many other equally romantic and authentic. Close to this house, one day, a little miserable-looking bantling was discovered alone, unknown, and incapable of making its wants understood. It was instantly remembered by the finder, that this was the way in which the piskies were accustomed to deal with those infants of their race for whom they sought human protection; and it would have been an awful circumstance if such a one were not received by the individual so visited. The anger of the piskies would be certain, and some direful calamity must be the result; whereas, a kind welcome would probably be attended with great good fortune. The miserable plight of this stranger, therefore, attracted attention and sympathy. The little unconscious one was admitted as one of the family. Its health was speedily restored, and its renewed strength, activity, intelligence, and good-humour, caused it to become a general favourite. It is true the stranger was often found to indulge in odd freaks; but this was accounted for by a recollection of its pedigree, which was not doubted to be of the piskie order. So the family prospered, and had banished the thought that the foundling would ever leave them. There was to the front door of this house, a hatch, which is a half-door, that is kept closed when the whole door behind it is open, and it then serves as a guard against the intrusion of dogs, hogs, and ducks, while air and light are freely admitted. This little being was one day leaning over the top of this hatch, and looking wistfully outward, when a clear voice was heard to proceed from a neighbouring part of the townplace, calling "Coleman Gray, Coleman Gray!" The piskie immediately started up, and with a sudden laugh clapped its hands, exclaiming, "Aha! my daddy is come!" It was gone in a moment, never to be seen again. Source: Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England: The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall, 2nd ed. (London: John Camden Hotten, 1871), pp. 95-96. This story, somewhat altered and under the title "Colman Grey", is told by Edwin Sidney Hartland in his English Fairy and Other Folk Tales (London: Walter Scott Publishing Co., ca. 1890), p. 125. Return to the table of contents . Brewery of Eggshells Joseph Jacobs, Celtic Fairy Tales In Treneglwys there is a certain shepherd's cot known by the name of Twt y Cymrws because of the strange strife that occurred there. There once lived there a man and his wife, and they had twins whom the woman nursed tenderly. One day she was called away to the house of a neighbor at some distance. She did not much like going and leaving her little ones all alone in a solitary house, especially as she had heard tell of the good folk haunting the neighborhood. Well, she went and came back as soon as she could, but on her way back she was frightened to see some old elves of the blue petticoat crossing her path though it was midday. She rushed home, but found her two little ones in the cradle and everything seemed as it was before. But after a time the good people began to suspect that something was wrong, for the twins didn't grow at all. The man said: "They're not ours." The woman said: "Whose else should they be?" And so arose the great strife so that the neighbors named the cottage after it. It made the woman very sad, so one evening she made up her mind to go and see the Wise Man of Llanidloes, for he knew everything and would advise her what to do. So she went to Llanidloes and told the case to the Wise Man. Now there was soon to be a harvest of rye and oats, so the Wise Man said to her, "When you are getting dinner for the reapers, clear out the shell of a hen's egg and boil some potage in it, and then take it to the door as if you meant it as a dinner for the reapers. Then listen if the twins say anything. If you hear them speaking of things beyond the understanding of children, go back and take them up and throw them into the waters of Lake Elvyn. But if you don't hear anything remarkable, do them no injury." So when the day of the reap came the woman did all that the Wise Man ordered, and put the eggshell on the fire and took it off and carried it to the door, and there she stood and listened. Then she heard one of the children say to the other: Acorn before oak I knew, An egg before a hen, But I never heard of an eggshell brew A dinner for harvest men. So she went back into the house, seized the children and threw them into the Llyn, and the goblins in their blue trousers came and saved their dwarfs and the mother had her own children back and so the great strife ended. Source (books.google.com): Joseph Jacobs, Celtic Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1892), pp. 223-25 . Source (Internet Archive): Joseph Jacobs, Celtic Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1892), pp. 223-25 . Jacob's source: Books.google.com: "The Egg-Shell Pottage," The Cambrian Quarterly Magazine and Celtic Repertory , vol. 2, no. 5 (January 1, 1830), pp. 86-87 . Internet Archive: "The Egg-Shell Pottage," The Cambrian Quarterly Magazine and Celtic Repertory , vol. 2, no. 5 (January 1, 1830), pp. 86-87 . Return to the table of contents . The Changeling Twins of Corwrion John Rhys, Celtic Folklore Once on a time, in the fourteenth century, the wife of a man at Corwrion had twins, and she complained one day to a witch, who lived close by, at Tydyn y Barcud, that the children were not getting on, but that they were always crying day and night. "Are you sure that they are your children?" asked the witch, adding that it did not seem to her that they were like hers. "I have my doubts also," said the mother. "I wonder if somebody has exchanged children with you," said the witch. "I do not know," said the mother. "But why do you not seek to know?" asked the other. "But how am I to go about it?" said the mother. The witch replied, "Go and do something rather strange before their eyes and watch what they will say to one another." "Well, I do not know what I should do," said the mother. "Well," said the other, "take an eggshell, and proceed to brew beer in it in a chamber aside, and come here to tell me what the children will say about it." She went home and did as the witch had directed her, when the two children lifted their heads out of the cradle to find what she was doing--to watch and to listen. Then one observed to the other, "I remember seeing an oak having an acorn," to which the other replied, "And I remember seeing a hen having an egg"; and one of the two added, "But I do not remember before seeing anybody brew beer in the shell of a hen's egg." The mother then went to the witch and told her what the twins had said one to the other; and she directed her to go to a small wooden bridge not far off, with one of the strange children under each arm, and there to drop them from the bridge into the river beneath. The mother went back home again and did as she had been directed. When she reached home this time, she found to her astonishment that her own children had been brought back. Source: John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1901), vol. 1, pp. 62-63. Return to the table of contents . The Tylwyth Teg Steal a Child John Rhys, Celtic Folklore Mr. [William] Jones mentions that, within his memory, there were still people in his neighborhood who believed that the fairies stole unbaptized children and placed their own in their stead: he gives the following story about the farmer's wife of Dyffryn Mymbyr, near Capel Curig, and her infant: [Rhys quotes the story in Welsh, then gives the following English translation.] This woman had given birth to a healthy and vigorous child at the beginning of the harvest, one wretched and inclement summer. As the homestead was a considerable distance from church or chapel, and the weather so very rainy, it was neglected to baptize the child at the usual time, that is to say, before it was eight days old. One fine day, in the middle of this wretched harvest, the mother went to the field with the rest of the family to try to save the harvest, and left her baby sleeping in its cradle in its grandmother's charge, who was so aged and decrepit as to be unable to go much about. The old woman fell asleep, and, while she was in that state, the Tylwyth Teg came in and took away the baby, placing another in its stead. Very shortly the latter began to whine and groan, so that the grandmother awoke: she went to the cradle, where she saw a slender, wizened old man moving restlessly and peevishly about. "Alas! alas!" said she, "the old Tylwyth have been here"; and she at once blew in the horn to call the mother home, who came without delay. As she heard the crying in the cradle, she ran towards it, and lifted the little one without looking at him; she hugged him, put him to her breast, and sang lullaby to him, but nothing was of any avail, as he continued, without stopping, to scream enough to break her heart; and she knew not what to do to calm him. At last she looked at him: she saw that he was not like her dear little boy, and her heart was pierced with agony. She looked at him again, and the more she examined him the uglier he seemed to her. She sent for her husband home from the field, and told him to search for a skilled man somewhere or other; and, after a long search, he was told by somebody that the parson of Trawsfynyd was skilled in the secrets of the spirits; so he want to him. The latter bade him take a shovel and cover it with salt, and make the figure of the cross in the salt; then to take it to the chamber where the fairy child was, and, after taking care to open the window, to place the shovel on the fire until the salt was burnt. This was done, and when the salt had got white hot, the peevish abortion went away, seen of no one, and they found the other baby whole and unscathed at the doorstep. Source: John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1901), vol. 1, pp. 100-103. Return to the table of contents . Two Manx Changelings Sir Walter Scott, "On the Fairies of Popular Superstition" I. I [Scott's source] was prevailed upon myself to go and see a child, who, they told me, was one of these changelings, and, indeed, must own, was not a little surprised, as well as shocked, at the sight. Nothing under heaven could have a more beautiful face; but, though between five and six years old, and seemingly healthy, he was so far from being able to walk or stand, that he could not so much as move any one joint; his limbs were vastly long for his age, but smaller than any infant's of six months; his complexion was perfectly delicate, and he had the finest hair in the world. He never spoke nor cried, ate scarce anything, and was very seldom seen to smile; but if anyone called him a fairy-elf, he would frown, and fix his eyes so earnestly on those who said it, as if he would look them through. His mother, or at least his supposed mother, being very poor, frequently went out a charring, and left him a whole day together. The neighbors, out of curiosity, have often looked in at the window, to see how he behaved while alone; which, whenever they did, they were sure to find him laughing, and in the utmost delight. This made them judge that he was not without company, more pleasing to him than any mortals could be; and what made this conjecture seem the more reasonable, was, that if he were left ever so dirty, the woman, at her return, saw him with a clean face, and his hair combed with the utmost exactness and nicety. II. Waldron gives another account of a poor woman, to whose offspring, it would seem, the Fairies had taken a special fancy. A few nights after she was delivered of her first child, the family were alarmed by a dreadful cry of "Fire!" All flew to the door, while the mother lay trembling in bed, unable to protect her infant, which was snatched from the bed by an invisible hand. Fortunately, the return of the gossips, after the causeless alarm, disturbed the Fairies, who dropped the child, which was found sprawling and shrieking upon the threshold. At the good woman's second accouchement, a tumult was heard in the cowhouse, which drew thither the whole assistants. They returned, when they found that all was quiet among the cattle, and lo! the second child had been carried from the bed, and dropped in the middle of the lane. But, upon the third occurrence of the same kind, the company were again decoyed out of the sick woman's chamber by a false alarm, leaving only a nurse, who was detained by the bonds of sleep. On this last occasion, the mother plainly saw her child removed, though the means were invisible. She screamed for assistance to the nurse; but the old lady had partaken too deeply of the cordials which circulate upon such joyful occasions, to be easily awakened. In short, the child was this time fairly carried off, and a withered, deformed creature left in its stead, quite naked, with the clothes of the abstracted infant, rolled in a bundle, by its side. This creature lived nine years, ate nothing but a few herbs, and neither spoke, stood, walked, nor performed any other functions of mortality; resembling, in all respects, the changeling already mentioned. Source: Sir Walter Scott, "On the Fairies of Popular Superstition" (Introduction to "The Tale of Tamlane," Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border, Poetic Works (Edinburgh: Ballantyne, 1833), vol. 2, pp. 321-323. Scott's source: Waldron, Isle of Man, pp. 128-129. Return to the table of contents . A Changeling Musician W. Y. Evans-Wentz, The Fairy Faith in Celtic Countries A family at Dalby [Isle of Man] had a poor idiot baby, and when it was twenty years old it still sat by the fire just like a child. A tailor came to the house to work on a day when all the folks were out cutting corn, and the idiot was left with him. The tailor began to whistle as he sat on the table sewing, and the little idiot sitting by the fire said to him: "If you'll not tell anybody when they come in, I'll dance that tune for you." So the little fellow began to dance, and he could step it out splendidly. Then he said to the tailor: "If you'll not tell anybody when they come in, I'll play the fiddle for you." And the tailor and the idiot spent a very enjoyable afternoon together. But before the family came in from the fields, the poor idiot, as usual, was sitting in a chair by the fire, a big baby who couldn't hardly talk. When the mother came in she happened to say to the tailor, "You've a fine chap her," referring to the idiot. "Yes, indeed," said the tailor, "we've had a very fine afternoon together; but I think we had better make a good fire and put him on it." "Oh!" cried the mother, "the poor child could never even walk." "Ah, but he can dance and play the fiddle, too," replied the tailor. And the fire was made; but when the idiot saw that they were for putting him on it he pulled from his pocket a ball, and this ball went rolling on ahead of him, and he, going after it, was never seen again. After this strange story was finished I asked Mrs. Moore where she had heard it, and she said: "I have heard this story ever since I was a girl. I knew the house and family, and so did my mother. The family's name was Cubbon." Source: W. Y. Evans-Wentz, The Fairy Faith in Celtic Countries (1911), pp. 128-129. Evans-Wentz's prefatory remarks are noteworthy: The next morning, Christmas morning, I called at the picturesque roadside home of Mrs. Dinah Moore a Manxwoman living near Glen Meay; and she contributed the best single collection of Manx folk legends I discovered on the island. The day was bright and frosty, and much snow still remained in the shaded nooks and hollows, so that a seat before the cheerful fire in Mrs. Moore's cottage was very comfortable; and with most work suspended for the ancient day of festivities in honor of the Sun, reborn after its death at the hands of the Powers of Darkness, all conditions were favorable for hearing about fairies, and this may explain why such important results were obtained. (P. 127.) Return to the table of contents . A Pisky Changeling W. Y. Evans-Wentz, The Fairy Faith in Celtic Countries A woman who lived near Breage Church [Isle of Man] had a fine girl baby, and she thought the piskies came and took it and put a withered child in its place. The withered child lived to be twenty years old, and was no larger when it died than when the piskies brought it. It was fretful and peevish and frightfully shriveled. The parents believed that the piskies often used to come and look over a certain wall by the house to see the child. And I heard my grandmother say that the family once put the child out of doors at night to see if the piskies would take it back again. Source: W. Y. Evans-Wentz, The Fairy Faith in Celtic Countries (1911), p. 171. The narrator of this story was, according to Evans-Wentz, Mrs. Harriett Christopher, a peasant woman from the Isle of Man's Crill region. Return to the table of contents . A Remarkable Changeling Story W. Y. Evans-Wentz, The Fairy Faith in Celtic Countries Forty to fifty years ago, between St. John's and Foxdale [Isle of Man], a boy, with whom I often played, came to our house at nightfall to borrow some candles, and while he was on his way home across the hills he suddenly saw a little boy and a little woman coming after him. If he ran, they ran, and all the time they gained on him. Upon reaching home he was speechless, his hand were altered (turned awry), and his feet also, and his fingernails had grown long in a minute. He remained that way a week. My father went to the boy's mother and told her it wasn't Robby at all that she saw; and when my father was for taking the tongs and burning the boy with a piece of glowing turf [as a changeling test], the boy screamed awfully. Then my father persuaded the mother to send a messenger to a doctor in the north near Ramsey "doing charms," to see if she couldn't get Robby back. As the messenger was returning, the mother stepped out of the house to relieve him, and when she went into the house again her own Robby was there. As soon as Robby came to himself all right, he said a little woman and a little boy had followed him, and that just as he got home he was conscious of being taken away by them, but he didn't know where they came from nor where they took him. He was unable to tell more than this. Robby is alive yet, so far as I know; he is Robert Christian, of Douglas. Source: W. Y. Evans-Wentz, The Fairy Faith in Celtic Countries (1911), pp. 132-133. The narrator of this story was, according to Evans-Wentz, "James Caugherty, a farmer and fisherman, born in Kirk Patrick fifty-eight years ago." This story was collected about 1910, so it ostensibly took place between about 1860 and 1870. Return to the table of contents . The Fairy Child and the Tailor Sophia Morrison, Isle of Man The following story was told to me by Joe Moore, who lives in the parish of Patrick, some mile from Close-ny-Lheiy. I wrote the story down from notes made at the time,--the dialogue being taken down, word for word, as it fell from his lips. He told me that this father got the story from old Hom Bridson himself, ninety years ago and more; he never repeated the story while any of the Colloo family lived, but the last descendant died many years ago, and the old farmhouse is in ruins. It was a curious coincidence that, in the week following that in which I had the story from Joe Moore, I received it also from Logan, Utah, from Miss Quirk, who had it from an old Manxman who had lived there for fifty years and had emigrated from Glen Meay. There was one time a woman named Colloo in Close-ny-Lheiy, near Glen Meay, and she had a child that had fallen sick in a strange way. Nothing seemed wrong with him yet crosser and crosser he grew, nying-nyanging night and day. The woman was in great distress. Charms had failed, and she didn't know rightly what to do. It seems that, about a fortnight after birth, the child, as fine a child for his age as you would see in a day's walk, was left asleep while the mother went to the well for water. Now Herself forgot to put the tongs on the cradle, and, when she came back, the child was crying pitiful, and no quatin' for him. And from that very hour the flesh seemed to melt off his bones, till he became as ugly and as wizened a child as you would see between the Point of Ayre and the Calf. He was that way, his whining howl filling the house, for four years, lying in the cradle without a motion on him to put his feet under him. Not a day's res' nor a night's sleep was there at the woman these four years with him. She was fair scourged with him, until there came a fine day in the spring that Hom beg Bridson, the tailor, was in the house sewing. Hom is dead now, but there's many alive as remember him. He was wise tremenjus, for he was going from house to house sewing, and gathering wisdom as he was going. Well, before that day the tailor was seeing lots of wickedness at the child. When the woman would be out feeding the pigs and sarvin' the craythurs, he would be hoisting his head up out of the cradle and making faces at the tailor, winking, and slicking, and shaking his head, and saying "What a lad I am!" That day the woman wanted to go to the shop in Glen Meay to sell some eggs that she had, and says she to the tailor: "Hom man, keep your eye on the chile that the bogh [poor dear] won't fall out of the cradle and hurt himself while I slip down to the shop." When she was gone the tailor began to whistle aisy to himsef, as he stitched, the tune on a lil hymn. "Drop that, Hom beg," said a lil harsh voice. The tailor, scandalized, looked round to see if it was the child that had spoken, and it was. "Whush, whush, now, lie quate," says the tailor, rocking the cradle with his foot, and as he rocked he whistled the hymn tune louder. "Drop that, Hom beg, I tell ye, an' give us something light an' handy," says the lil fella back to him, middling sharp. "Aw, anything at all to plaze thee," says the tailor, whistling a jig. "Hom," says my lad, "can thou dance anything to that?" "I can," says the tailor, "can thou?" "I can that," says my lad, "would thou like to see me dance?" "I would, says the tailor. "Take that oul' fiddle down then, Hom man," he said, "and put 'Tune y wheeyl vooar' [Tune of the big wheel] on it." "Aw, I'll do that for thee, an' welcome," says the tailor. The fiddle quits its hook on the wall, and the tailor tunes up. "Hom," says the lil fella, "before thou begin to play, clear the kitchen for me,--cheers an' stools, everything away. Make a place for me to step out to the music, man." "Aw, I'll do that for thee, too," says the tailor. He cleared the kitchen floor, and then he struck up "Tune y wheeyl vooar." In a crack the lil fella bounced from his cradle onto the floor with a "Chu!" and began flying round the kitchen. "Go it Hom,--face your partner,--heel and toe does it. Well done, Hom,--jog your elbow, man." Hom plays faster and faster, till me lad was jumping as high as the table. With a "Chu!" up goes his foot on top of the dresser, and "Chu!" then on top of the chimlee piece, and "Chu!" bang against the partition, then he was half flying, half footing it round the kitchen, turning and going round that quick that it put a reel in Hom's head to be looking at him. Then he was whirling everything round for a clear space, even Hom himself, who by degrees gets up on the table in the corner and plays wilder and wilder, as the whirling jig grew madder and madder. "M' Yee!" says the tailor, throwing down the fiddle, "I mus' run, thou're not the chile that was in the cradle. Are thou?" "Houl' man! thou're right enough," says the lil fella. "Strike up for me, make has'e, make has'e man,--more power to you elbow." "Whush!" said the tailor, "here's Herself coming." The dancing ceased. The child gave a hop, skip, and jump into the cradle. "Get on with thee sewing, Hom; don't say a word," says the lil fella, covering himself up in the clothes till nothing was left of him to be seen except his eyes which keeked out like a ferret's. When Herself came in the house, the tailor, all of a tremble, was sitting cross-legged on the round table and his specs on his nose and letting on that he was busy sewing; the child in the cradle was shouting and sweeling [squealing] as usual. "What in all the earthly worl'...! But it's quare stitching, altogether, there's been goin' on her, an' me out. An' how thou can see thee needle in that dark corner, Hom Bridson, let alone sew, it beats me," says she, siding the place. "Well, well then, well, well, on the boghee veg [poor little thing]. Did he think Mammy had gone an' lef' him then, the chree [heart]? Mammy is goin' to feed him, though." The tailor had been thinking mighty with himself what he ought to do, so he says,-- "Look here, woman, give him nothing at all, but go out and get a creelful of good turf." She brought in the turf, and throws a big bart [bundle] of fern on it. The tailor give a leap off the table down to the floor, and it wasn't long till he had the fine fire. "Thou'll have the house put on fire for me, Hom," says Herself. "No fear, but I'll fire some of them," says the tailor. The child, with his two eyes going out of his head watching to see what the tailor would do then, was slowly turning his whining howl into a kind of call,--to his own sort to come and fetch him, as like. "I'll send thee home," says the tailor, drawing near the cradle, and he stretches out his two hands to take the child and put him on the big red turf fire. Before he was able to lay a hand on him, the lil fella leaped out of the cradle and took for the door. "The back of me han' an the sole of me fut to you!" says he, "if I would only ha' had only another night I could have showed thee a trick or two more than that yet." Then the door flew open with a bang, as though someone had thrown it open, and he took off with himself like a shot. A hullabaloo of laughing and making fun was heard outside, and the noise of many running little feet. Out on the door of the house goes Herself, she saw no one, but she caught sight of a flock of low-lying clouds shaped like gulls chasing each other away up Glen Rushen, and then comes to her ears, as if afar off from the clouds, sharp whistles and wicked little laughs as if making mock of her. Then, as she was turning round and searching, she suddenly sees her own sweet rosy smiling child with thumb in mouth lying on the bink [stone bench] right before her. And she took all the joy in the worl' of the child that he was home again safe and sound. Source: Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom, vol. 21 (1910), pp. 472-475. Return to the table of contents . The Changeling Ireland A young woman, whose name was Mary Scannell, lived with her husband not many years ago at Castle Martyr. One day in harvest time she went with several more to help in binding up the wheat, and left her child, which she was nursing, in a corner of the field, quite safe, as she thought, wrapped up in her cloak. When she had finished her work, she returned where the child was, but in place of her own child she found a thing in the cloak that was not half the size, and that kept up such a crying you might have heard it a mile off: so she guessed how the case was, and, without stop or stay, away she took it in her arms, pretending to be mighty fond of it all the while, to a wise woman, who told her in a whisper not to give it enough to eat, and to beat and pinch it without mercy, which Mary Scannell did; and just in one week after to the day, when she awoke in the morning, she found her own child lying by her side in the bed! The fairy that had been put in its place did not like the usage it got from Mary Scannell, who understood how to treat it, like a sensible woman as she was, and away it went after the week's trial, and sent her own child back to her. Source (books.google.com): T. Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland (London: John Murray, 1825), pp. 77-78 . Source (Internet Archive): T. Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland (London: John Murray, 1825), pp. 77-78 . Return to the table of contents . The Brewery of Eggshells T. Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland Mrs. Sullivan fancied that her youngest child had been exchanged by "fairies theft," and certainly appearances warranted such a conclusion; for in one night her healthy, blue-eyed boy had become shrivelled up into almost nothing, and never ceased squalling and crying. This naturally made poor Mrs. Sullivan very unhappy; and all the neighbors, by way of comforting her, said that her own child was, beyond any kind of doubt, with the good people, and that one of themselves was put in his place. Mrs. Sullivan of course could not disbelieve what every one told her, but she did not wish to hurt the thing; for although its face was so withered, and its body wasted away to a mere skeleton, it had still a strong resemblance to her own boy. She, therefore, could not find it in her heart to roast it alive on the griddle, or to burn its nose off with the red hot tongs, or to throw it out in the snow on the roadside, notwithstanding these, and several like proceedings, were strongly recommended to her for the recovery of her child. One day who should Mrs. Sullivan meet but a cunning woman, well known about the country by the name of Ellen Leah (or Grey Ellen). She had the gift, however she got it, of telling where the dead were, and what was good for the rest of their souls; and could charm away warts and wens, and do a great many wonderful things of the same nature. "You're in grief this morning, Mrs. Sullivan," were the first words of Ellen Leah to her. "You may say that, Ellen," said Mrs. Sullivan, "and good cause I have to be in grief, for there was my own fine child whipped off from me out of his cradle, without as much as 'by your leave' or 'ask you pardon,' and an ugly dony bit of of a shrivelled up fairy put in his place; no wonder, then, that you see me in grief, Ellen." "Small blame to you, Mrs. Sullivan," said Ellen Leah, "but are you sure 'tis a fairy?" "Sure!" echoed Mrs. Sullivan, "sure enough I am to my sorrow, and can I doubt my own two eyes? Every mother's soul must feel for me!" "Will you take an old woman's advice?" said Ellen Leah, fixing her wild and mysterious gaze upon the unhappy mother; and, after a pause, she added, "but maybe you'll call it foolish?" "Can you get me back my child, my own child, Ellen?" said Mrs. Sullivan with great energy. "If you do as I bid you," returned Ellen Leah, "you'll know." Mrs. Sullivan was silent in expectation, and Ellen continued, "Put down the big pot, full of water, on the fire, and make it boil like mad; then get a dozen new-laid eggs, break them, and keep the shells, but throw away the rest; when that is done, put the shells in the pot of boiling water, and you will soon know whether it is your own boy or a fairy. If you find that it is a fairy in the cradle, take the red hot poker and cram in down his ugly throat, and you will not have much trouble with him after that I promise you." Home went Mrs. Sullivan, and did as Ellen Leah desired. She put the pot on the fire, and plenty of turf under it, and set the water boiling as such a rate, that if ever water was red hot, it surely was. The child was lying, for a wonder, quite easy and quiet in the cradle, very now and then cocking his eye, that would twinkle as keen as a star in a frosty night, over at the great fire, and the big pot upon it; and he looked on with great attention at Mrs. Sullivan breaking the eggs and putting down the eggshells to boil. At last he asked, with the voice of a very old man, "What are you doing mammy?" Mrs. Sullivan's heart, as she said herself, was up in her mouth ready to choke her, at hearing the child speak. But she contrived to put the poker in the fire, and to answer, without making any wonder at the words, "I'm brewing, a vick " (my son). "And what are you brewing, mammy?" said the little imp, whose supernatural gift of speech now proved beyond question that he was a fairy substitute. "I wish the poker was red," thought Mrs. Sullivan; but it was a large one, and took a long time heating; so she determined to keep him in talk until the poker was in a proper state to thrust down his throat, and therefore repeated the question. "Is it what I'm brewing, a vick, " said she, "you want to know?" "Yes, mammy: what are you brewing?" returned the fairy. "Eggshells, a vick, " said Mrs. Sullivan. "Oh!" shrieked the imp, starting up in the cradle, and clapping his hands together, "I'm fifteen hundred years in the world, and I never saw a brewery of eggshells before!" The poker was by this time quite red, and Mrs. Sullivan, seizing it, ran furiously towards the cradle; but somehow or other her foot slipped, and she fell flat on the floor, and the poker flew out of her hand to the other end of the house. However, she got up without much loss of time and went to the cradle, intending to pitch the wicked thing that was in it into the pot of boiling water, when there she saw her own child in a sweet sleep, one of his soft round arms rested upon the pillow--his features were as placid as if their repose had never been disturbed, save the rosy mouth, which moved with a gentle and regular breathing. Source: W. B. Yeats, Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry (London: Walter Scott, 1888), pp. 48-50 . Yeats's source: J. Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland (London: John Murray, 1825), pp. 65-76 . A number of Croker's fairy legends were translated into German by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm: Irische Elfenmärchen: Uebersetzt von den Brüdern Grimm (Leipzig: Friedrich Fleischer, 1826). Return to the table of contents . Irish Changeling Beliefs Thomas Johnson Westropp, "A Study of Folklore on the Coasts of Connacht, Ireland" Otway in A Tour in Connaught also notes beliefs among the people of Inishbofin which I found flourishing over seventy years later in that primitive place. It was firmly believed that the hills were full of fairies, "romping and carousing within," and that they carried off children and robbed milk and butter. The sprites could exercise malignant power on infants especially before baptism, stealing the handsome ones and replacing them by puny withered changelings. The only way to get rid of these was to set a pot on the fire and threaten to boil the fairy child, who then vanishes and the real child was brought back. Women who die in childbirth are believed to have been carried off to fairyland. I met everywhere, from Ballycastle to Inishbofin, beliefs as to the existence of changelings. Lady Wilde gives several from Inishark which seem to be good local tales. [Note 1] I must only give the shortest condensation of the beliefs. An old woman came into a house and looked at a child without saying "God bless you"; it got ill, a strange "wise woman" told the parents that it had been changed and directed them to get a bit of the old woman's cloak. This made the elf sneeze and the true child was brought back. A man saw the fairies carrying off a boy, and, signing the cross, rescued the infant. He found the mother weeping over the supposed corpse, which he made her throw into the fire, where it came to life and flew up the chimney. He then gave her the real baby. A man, whose young wife had long been childless, taunted her, and she soon after bore a lovely boy. One day to his horror it suddenly grew a long beard, and he beat his wife, at whose screams two red-capped women came and beat him till he asked pardon. The real child sent a tuft of rushes to the mother, and she was able to enter the fairy palace. An old woman brought her to the king and said she was the nurse of his own son. He restored her own child and said the man who beat her was a fairy disguised as her husband. She invoked God's name and fell senseless, eventually recovering and returning home to find she had been three years absent. She found that her husband had detected the changeling and put it on the fire, when it shrieked and flew up the chimney. Mary Callan of Shark while sitting alone with her newborn child was wrapped in a cloak by two men and carried away to the Fairy Hall. She touched her eye with the fairies' ointment and saw a crowd of her neighbors' supposed-dead children who told her that they could not return till Doomsday. One also told her that the men were waiting to steal her child till the candle she had lit should go out, and bade her tell his mother that he was alive. He gave her a leaf to crush when in trouble, and she found herself outside of the Hill, returning home, to find her child dying, she crushed the leaf and the infant recovered. The leaf was put into an amulet. A changeling, found playing pipes behind a tub of meal, was put on a shovel over the fire and vanished. Source: Thomas Johnson Westropp, "A Study of Folklore on the Coasts of Connacht, Ireland," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review, vol. 32 (1921), pp. 103-105. This long article covers many additional subjects. Note 1: Ancient Cures, Charms and Usages of Ireland (1890), p. 141; Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms and Superstitions of Ireland (1887), vol i, pp. 38, 73, 119. [Footnote in original] Return to the table of contents . Return to: The top of this document. Revised January 31, 2023. German Changeling Legends German Changeling Legends translated and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2018 See also the electronic texts: Changelings: An Essay by D. L. Ashliman. The Changeling . A ballad by John Greenleaf Whittier. Changeling Legends from the British Isles. Scandinavian Changeling Legends. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Return to the Yahoo! index Society and Culture:Mythology and Folklore:Fabulous Creatures:Faeries . Table of Contents How to Protect Your Child, Jacob Grimm, German Mythology The Elves, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Children's and Household Tales The Nixie Changelings from the Saal River, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends The Changeling, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends Changelings in the Water, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends A Changeling Is Beaten with a Switch, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends Keeping Watch over Children, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends The Rye-Mother, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends The Two Underground Women, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends The Nickert, A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, North German Legends, Tales, and Customs Changeling Beliefs in Altmark, J. D. H. Temme, Folk Legends from Altmark The Changeling, Karl Haupt, The Legend Book of Lausitz The Dwarf's Confession, August Ey, Legends and Tales from the Upper Harz The Changeling of Plau, Karl Bartsch, Legends, Tales, and Customs from Mecklenburg The Underground People Try to Steal a Child, Karl Bartsch, Legends, Tales, and Customs from Mecklenburg The Changeling of Spornitz, Karl Bartsch, Legends, Tales, and Customs from Mecklenburg The Underground People of Lüth Farm , Karl Bartsch, Legends, Tales, and Customs from Mecklenburg Mecklenburg Changelings, Karl Bartsch, Legends, Tales, and Customs from Mecklenburg The Underground People Steal a Child, Karl Bartsch, Legends, Tales, and Customs from Mecklenburg The Changeling , Johann August Ernst Köhler, Legend Book of Erzgebirge Table Talks on Changelings, Martin Luther The Story of a Changeling at Dessau Changelings from the Devil The Killcrop of Halberstadt The Changeling of Cüstrinichen, J. G. Th. Grässe, Legend Book of the Prussian State The Underground People of Amrum, J. G. Th. Grässe, Legend Book of the Prussian State The Underground People at Lüttensee , J. G. Th. Grässe, Legend Book of the Prussian State Phantom Swedes, Karl Lyncker, German Legends and Customs in the Hessian Districts The Changeling, Anton Altrichter, Legends from the Iglau Language Island Satan Attempts to Steal a Child Johann Adolf Heyl, Folk Legends, Customs, and Beliefs from Tyrol How to Protect Your Child Jacob Grimm, German Mythology Placing a key next to an infant will prevent him from being exchanged. Women may never be left alone during the first six weeks following childbirth, for the devil then has more power over them. During the first six weeks following childbirth, mothers may not go to sleep until someone has come to watch the child. If mothers are overcome by sleep, changelings are often laid in the cradle. To prevent this one should lay a pair of men's pants over the cradle. Whenever the mother leaves the infant's room she should lay an article of the father's clothing on the child, so that it cannot be exchanged. Source: Jacob Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie, 4th ed. (1877), v. 3, pp. 450-460 (items 484, 509, 510, 744). The Elves Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Children's and Household Tales A mother had her child taken from the cradle by elves. In its place they laid a changeling with a thick head and staring eyes who would do nothing but eat and drink. In distress she went to a neighbor and asked for advice. The neighbor told her to carry the changeling into the kitchen, set it on the hearth, make a fire, and boil water in two eggshells. That should make the changeling laugh, and if he laughs it will be all over with him. The woman did everything just as her neighbor said. When she placed the eggshells filled with water over the fire, the blockhead said: Now I am as old As the Wester Wood, But have never seen anyone cooking in shells! And he began laughing about it. When he laughed, a band of little elves suddenly appeared. They brought the rightful child, set it on the hearth, and took the changeling away. Source: Wilhelm and Jacob Grimm, Die Wichtelmänner: Drittes Märchen , Kinder- und Hausmärchen, no. 39/III. The Nixie Changelings from the Saal River Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends From time to time nixies would emerge from the Saal River and go into the city of Saalfeld where they would buy fish at the market. They could be recognized by their large, dreadful eyes and by the hems of their skirts that were always dripping wet. It is said that they were mortals who, as children, had been taken away by nixies, who had then left changelings in their place. Source: Wilhelm and Jacob Grimm, Die Elbjungfer und das Saalweiblein , Deutsche Sagen, no. 60. The passage above is an extract from a longer depiction of nixies and related water spirits in the Elbe and Saal Rivers. The Changeling Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends At Hessloch near Odernheim in the Gau the servant and the cook of a clergyman were living together as man and wife, although they had not been able to have their relationship publicly consecrated. They had a child together, but it failed to grow and gain weight. It cried day and night, always demanding to be fed. Finally the woman sought advice, and was told that the baby would improve if she would take it to Neuhausen on the Cyriak Meadow, have it weighed there, and give it water from the Cyriak Spring. At that time it was believed that in such cases a child thus would be restored to health or would die within nine days. [Note 1] As the woman approached the millrace near Westhofen, the child, whom she was carrying on her back, became so heavy that she began to pant, and the sweat began running from her face. At that moment a traveling student approached her, saying: "Woman, what sort of wild creature are you carrying? It will be a miracle if it doesn't break your neck!" She answered that it was her own dear child that would neither grow nor gain weight, and that she was therefore taking it to Neuhausen to have it weighed. He replied: "That is not your child! It is the devil! [Note 2] Throw him into the brook!" She did not want to do this, insisting that it was her child while kissing it. He continued: "Your child is at home in a new cradle behind the chest in the side room. Throw this monster into the brook!" Crying and sobbing she did has she had been told. Immediately there issued a great cry and commotion from beneath the bridge she was standing on, like the howling of wolves and bears. And when the mother arrived home, she found her baby, hearty and healthy, laughing in its new cradle. Note 1: A changeling generally does not live longer that seven years; according to others, they live eighteen or nineteen years. [Footnote in the original] Note 2: For the devil removes the rightful children from their cradles, takes them away, and replaces them with his own. Hence the name "changeling." [Footnote in the original] Source: Wilhelm and Jacob Grimm, Der Wechselbalg , Deutsche Sagen, no. 82. Changelings in the Water Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends Near Halberstadt a peasant had a killcrop that sucked its mother and five wet nurses dry, all the while eating voraciously (for they eat more than ten other children). It behaved in such a manner that they became tired of it. The peasant was advised that he should take the child on a pilgrimage in praise of the Virgin Mary to Heckelstadt and have him weighed at that place. The good peasant followed this advice. He put the child in a pack basket and set forth carrying it on his back. He was about to cross over a stream on a bridge when he heard a shout from the water beneath him: "Killcrop! Killcrop!" The child in the basket, who had until now never spoken a word, answered: "Ho! Ho!" The peasant did not expect this, and it startled him. Then the devil in the water asked further: "Where are you going?" The killcrop above answered "I am going to Heckelstadt to our Dear Lady, and have myself weighed, that I might thrive." When the peasant heard that the changeling could talk perfectly well, he became angry and threw him, together with the basket, into the water. Then the two devils came together, cried out "Ho! Ho! Ha!" and frolicked and jousted with one another, and then disappeared. Source: Wilhelm and Jacob Grimm, Die Wechselbälge im Wasser , Deutsche Sagen , no. 83. A Changeling Is Beaten with a Switch Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends The following true story took place in the year 1580. Near Breslau there lived a distinguished nobleman who had a large crop of hay every summer which his subjects were required harvest for him. One year there was a new mother among his harvest workers, a woman who had barely had a week to recover from the birth of her child. When she saw that she could not refuse the nobleman's decree, she took her child with her, placed it on a small clump of grass, and left it alone while she helped with the haymaking. After she had worked a good while, she returned to her child to nurse it. She looked at it, screamed aloud, hit her hands together above her head, and cried out in despair, that this was not her child: It sucked the milk from her so greedily and howled in such an inhuman manner that it was nothing like the child she knew. As is usual in such cases, she kept the child for several days, but it was so ill-behaved that the good woman nearly collapsed. She told her story to the nobleman. He said to her: "Woman, if you think that this is not your child, then do this one thing. Take it out to the meadow where you left your previous child and beat it hard with a switch. Then you will witness a miracle." The woman followed the nobleman's advice. She went out and beat the child with a switch until it screamed loudly. Then the Devil brought back her stolen child, saying: "There, you have it!" And with that he took his own child away. This story is often told and is known by both the young and the old in and around Breslau. Source: Wilhelm and Jacob Grimm, "Wechselkind mit Ruten gestrichen," Deutsche Sagen, herausgegeben von den Brüdern Grimm (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 87, pp. 144-45 [no. 88 in later editions]. Keeping Watch over Children Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends A reliable citizen of Leipzig told the following story: When his first child was a few weeks old they found it on three different nights lying crossways and uncovered in its cradle, even though the cradle stood immediately next to the mother's bed. The father therefore resolved to stay awake during the third night and to pay close attention to his child. He persisted a long while, staying awake until after midnight. Nothing happened to the child, because he had been keeping a watchful eye on it. But then his eyes began to close a little. Shortly afterward the mother woke up and saw that the child was again lying crossways, and that the cover had been taken from the cradle and thrown across the middle of her bed. In keeping with common custom, she normally folded the cover back at the foot of the cradle. Everything had happened so fast that everyone was amazed. However, the demon did not seem to have had any further power over the child. Source: Wilhelm and Jacob Grimm, Das Schauen auf die Kinder , Deutsche Sagen, no. 89. The Rye-Mother Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends The rural people of Mark Brandenburg tell the legend of the Rye-Mother who hides in grain fields. For this reason children do not dare to walk into a grain field. In Altmark children a kept silent with the words: "Hold your mouth or the Rye-Mother, with her long black tits, will come and take you away!" In the vicinity of Braunschweig and Lüneburg she is called the Grain-Wife. Children seeking cornflowers tell one another stories about how she steals little children; and hence they do not dare go too far into the green fields. In the year 1662 a woman from Saalfeld told Prätorius the following story: A nobleman from there forced one of his subjects, a woman who had given birth less than six weeks earlier, to help bind sheaves during the harvest. The woman, who was still nursing her baby, took it with her to the field. In order better to perform her work, she laid the child on the ground. Some time later, the nobleman, who was present there, saw an Earth-Woman with a child come and exchange it for the peasant woman's child. The false child began to cry. The peasant woman hurried to it in order to nurse it, but the nobleman held her back, saying that he would tell her the reason in good time. The woman thought that he was doing this in order to make her work harder, which caused her great concern. Meanwhile, the child cried incessantly, until finally the Rye-Mother returned, picked up the crying child, and layed the stolen child back in its place. After seeing all of this transpire, the nobleman summoned the peasant woman and told her to return home. And from that time forth he resolved to never again force a woman who had recently given birth to work. Source: Wilhelm and Jacob Grimm, Die Roggenmuhme , Deutsche Sagen, no. 90. The Two Underground Women Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, German Legends The following story was told to Prätorius by a student, whose mother claimed that it happened in Dessau. A woman gave birth to a child and laid it next to herself. She fell into a deep sleep. The child had not yet been baptized. At midnight two underground women came in and made a fire on the hearth. They placed a kettle of water over the fire. Then they bathed the child they had brought with them in the water, and carried it into the woman's room where they exchanged it for her sleeping child. They took the child away, but upon arriving at the first hill, they began fighting over it, throwing it back and forth at each other like a ball. The child began to cry, which woke up the housemaid. She looked at the underground women's child and realized that an exchange had taken place. She ran to the front of the house, where she found the women arguing about the stolen child. She stepped into the fray and caught the child as they were throwing it back and forth. With the child in her arms she ran home. She placed the changeling outside the door, and the hill-women came and took it back. Source: Wilhelm and Jacob Grimm, Die zwei unterirdischen Weiber , Deutsche Sagen, no. 91. The Nickert A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, North German Legends, Tales, and Customs The Nickert is a small gray person that lives in the water and has a great desire for human children. If they have not yet been baptized, he will steal them, leaving his own children in their place. They are very small, but have large, broad heads. Once a woman on a journey gave birth to a child at Scharfenbrück. As soon as she had recovered and was crossing the Ruthe Bridge on her way home, the Nickert came upon her without being seen and stole her newborn child, leaving in its place his malformed brat with its thick head. It lived for eight years, and then died. If the woman had not crossed over running water with her newborn, the Nickert would not have been able to do anything to her. The changelings that the Nickert substitutes for human children are very strong, often having more strength than three strong men together. Once in Zühlichendorf there was a large Nickert child that was completely wild. He dirtied himself, and was almost like an animal. One day a worker came home with a heavily loaded wagon full of grain and ran into the gatepost so hard that he could not get loose. The Nickert child, who was sitting inside next to the window, saw what had happened and asked, "Should I help you?" The bad-tempered worker replied, "You stupid quack, it's too heavy for you!" Then the Nickert child came outside and with one powerful shove pushed the wagon free. Three days later the Nickert child disappeared. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 92-93. Changeling Beliefs in Altmark J. D. H. Temme, Folk Legends from Altmark To prevent the "thickheads" (underground spirits) from exchanging a newborn child, it must be continuously watched until it is baptized. For this reason the baptism takes place as soon as possible. Dwarfs in the region between Salzwedel and Disdorf are not called "thickheads," but rather "the underground people." Here the belief that a child can be exchanged is especially strong. People fear that the misshapen dwarfs who live beneath the earth, and who would like nothing more than to have beautiful, well-formed human children, will steal newborns, leaving their own malformed children, called changelings, in their place. Therefore there is always a great rush to have the child baptized, and until this happens the mother and child will not be left alone for even an instant. Furthermore, until then there must always be a burning light near them, even in broad daylight, because the underground people are afraid of light. A child must carefully and continuously be protected against exchange by the underground people until it is baptized. Therefore the so-called "word of God," a leaf from the Bible from a hymnbook, is either wrapped up with the child in its blanket or laid in its cradle. Source: J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen der Altmark (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1839), pp. 74, 82, 86. The Changeling Karl Haupt, The Legend Book of Lausitz A child must always have someone nearby until it is six weeks old. Otherwise, an old woman from the woods or the mountains could come and exchange a physically and mentally retarded, malformed changeling for the infant. At the very least, one must place a hymnbook near the child's head before leaving the room. However, if--through negligence--the misfortune does occur, you should take prompt notice of it. Then you need only make a switch from the branches of a weeping birch tree and beat the changeling severely with it. The old woman will respond to his cries by bringing back the exchanged child and taking the beastly child away. You must allow her to depart unhindered, neither scolding nor cursing her, otherwise you will be left with the changeling hanging on your neck. Source: Karl Haupt, Sagenbuch der Lausitz. Erster Theil: Das Geisterreich (Leipzig, Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1862), p. 69. Haupt's source is Leopold Haupt and J. E. Schmaler, Volkslieder der Wenden in der Ober- und Niederlausitz (Grimma, 1841), vol. 2, p. 267. The Dwarf's Confession August Ey, Legends and Tales from the Upper Harz A mother had her child exchanged by the dwarfs, and in its place they laid a changeling. The mother was concerned, because the child looked so very old. She shared her grief with a laborer. He told her that it wasn't her child, but rather a dwarf. She could prove this by boiling some oil while holding the child and then asking him how old he was. The woman did this. With the child on her arm, she put the oil on the fire. It asked her what she was doing, and the mother said that she wanted to brew some beer. With that she set some empty walnut shells around the fire, so she could later pour the beer into them. Then the dwarf said, innocently and without thinking: Now I am as old As the Harz Wood, And I've never seen anything like this, My entire life long. Brewing beer in walnut shells! Now the mother knew that it was an old dwarf. Thus she set him down and threatened to kill him if he didn't bring her child back. The dwarf told just to go outside for a short while. When she came back in, her child was there and the dwarf was gone. Later the child became large, strong, wealthy, and very happy. Source: August Ey, Harzmärchenbuch; oder, Sagen und Märchen aus dem Oberharze (Stade: Verlag von Fr. Steudel, 1862), pp. 106-107. The Changeling of Plau Karl Bartsch, Legends, Tales, and Customs from Mecklenburg A married couple in Plau had a child that after two years was still only as long as a shoe. It had an enormously large head and could not learn to talk. They shared their concern with an old man, who said: "For sure the underground people have exchanged your child. If you want to be certain about this, then take an empty eggshell and in the presence of the child pour fresh beer into it, then add yeast to make it ferment. If the child then starts to talk, then my suspicion is right." They followed this advice. The beer had scarcely begun to ferment when the child called out from its cradle: Now I am as old As Bohemian gold, But this is the first I've ever heard tell, Of beer being brewed in an eggshell. The parents determined that the very next night they would throw the child into the Elbe River. They arose after midnight and went to the cradle, where they discovered a strong and healthy child. The underground people had taken back their own child. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (Vienna, Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), vol. 1, p. 42. Mecklenburg is in northeast Germany, bordering the Baltic Sea. The dwarf's actual words, in the original Low German: Ik bün so olt as Böhmer Gold, doch dat seih ik taum irsten Mal, dat man Bier brugt in Eierschal. The Underground People Try to Steal a Child Karl Bartsch, Legends, Tales, and Customs from Mecklenburg In Lanken near Parchim a peasant woman was lying in bed one night with her small child that had not yet been baptized. Because the moon was shining, she blew out the light. Then she suddenly noticed that a little woman was standing at the door next to the bell. She came to the bed and took hold of the boy and wanted to take him away. The peasant woman held as fast as she could, but the small person was pulling almost stronger than she was. Then the peasant woman called for her husband, and when he struck a light, the little woman disappeared. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (Vienna, Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), vol. 1, p. 46. Bartsch's source for this legend is a secondary school student named Behm from Parchim. The Changeling of Spornitz Karl Bartsch, Legends, Tales, and Customs from Mecklenburg A young peasant woman in Spornitz had her child stolen by an underground person or a Mönk, and a changeling put in its place in the cradle. The mother saw it happen, but she could neither move nor call out. The maniken told her that her son would someday become the king of the underground people. From time to time they had to exchange one of their king's children for a human child so that earthly beauty would not entirely die out among them. She was told to take good care of the little dwarf prince, and her house would be blessed with good fortune. With that the Mönk laid the changeling on her breast and disappeared with her child. She took care of the child, and the prosperity of her household increased visibly. However, the changeling remained small and ugly, and died in his twentieth year. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (Vienna, Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), vol. 1, p. 46. Bartsch gives his source for this legend as "Niederhöffer 4, 154 ff." The Underground People of Lüth Farm Karl Bartsch, Legends, Tales, and Customs from Mecklenburg It is said that the farmyard of Peasant Lüth in Spornitz was formerly frequented by the underground people. Once when the peasant had gone to town they exchanged his child for one of their own, one who had an enormously large head and who did not grow properly, but who otherwise was mentally all right. In order to get their own child back, acting on the advice of a neighbor woman, the peasant's wife brewed beer in an eggshell. As she was doing it, the child asked: "What are you doing there?" She answered: "I'm brewing." Then the child said: I am as old As Bohemian gold, But in all my days I've never seen such brewing. Then the woman said: "I'll throw you in." Then the child began to cry. The underground people heard it and brought her child back. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (Vienna, Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), vol. 1, pp. 46-47. Bartsch's source for this legend is a secondary school student named Thoms from Parchim. The verse in Low German: Ik bün so olt as Böhmegold æwer so'n Brugen heww 'k min Dag nich seihn. Mecklenburg Changelings Karl Bartsch, Legends, Tales, and Customs from Mecklenburg In Rövershagen the underground people once exchanged a woman's unbaptized child for one of their own. Following the advice of a wise man, she laid the underground people's child on the chopping block as though she were going to kill it with an ax. The dwarf's child immediately disappeared, and her own child was returned. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (Vienna, Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), vol. 1, p. 62. Bartsch's source for this legend is Pastor Dolberg from Hinrichshagen. The Underground People Steal a Child Karl Bartsch, Legends, Tales, and Customs from Mecklenburg According to an old woman from Witzin, in her village and in the entire district of Sternberg, it was formerly the practice to keep a light burning all night in the vicinity of a newborn child until it was baptized. A certain woman who failed to do this had her child stolen by the underground people, and they laid one of their own in its place. The woman noticed the exchange the next day and asked her neighbor for advice. She told her that she should "brew through an egg." The mother followed this advice, and the changeling, who until now had not uttered a sound, cried out: I am as old As Bohemian gold, But I have never seen such brewing. At this the woman cried out: "To the devil with you! You are not my child!" Then there was a great commotion, and the changeling disappeared, and the mother got back her own child. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (Vienna, Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), vol. 1, pp. 64-65. Bartsch's source is a seminary student from Zarrentin identified by the initials "G. P." Bartsch explains the phrase "brew through an egg" with the following note: "This is done by opening an egg at both ends, but the one hole must be larger than the other. One then pours water into the larger hole and lets it drip out through the smaller one." The verse in Low German: Ik bün so olt as Böhmer Gold, doch sonn Brug'n heww ik noch nie seihn. The Changeling Johann August Ernst Köhler, Legend Book of Erzgebirge A child less than six weeks old should not be carried "on the change," (that is, alternating between the right arm and the left arm), for consequently it might be stolen by a changeling. Source: Johann August Ernst Köhler, Sagenbuch des Erzgebirges (Schneeberg and Schwarzenberg: Verlag und Druck von Carl Moritz Gärtner, 1886), no. 198, p. 154. Note by Köhler: Here the changeling is the demon who exchanges children. However, in the legends of Lausitz [See Karl Haupt Sagenbuch der Lausitz (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1862), vol. 1, no. 71], a changeling is a mentally retarded, malformed child that an old woman from the mountains or the woods has exchanged for an unattended and unbaptized well formed child less than six weeks old. Similarly, according to a Schlesian legend a water-nymph exchanged her child for a human child that had been left alone in a field. The child from the water-nymph remained retarded and was also called a changeling. Table Talks on Changelings Martin Luther The Story of a Changeling at Dessau Eight years ago [in the year 1532] at Dessau, I, Dr. Martin Luther, saw and touched a changeling. It was twelve years old, and from its eyes and the fact that it had all of its senses, one could have thought that it was a real child. It did nothing but eat; in fact, it ate enough for any four peasants or threshers. It ate, shit, and pissed, and whenever someone touched it, it cried. When bad things happened in the house, it laughed and was happy; but when things went well, it cried. It had these two virtues. I said to the Princes of Anhalt: "If I were the prince or the ruler here, I would throw this child into the water--into the Molda that flows by Dessau. I would dare commit homicidium on him!" But the Elector of Saxony, who was with me at Dessau, and the Princes of Anhalt did not want to follow my advice. Therefore, I said: "Then you should have all Christians repeat the Lord's Prayer in church that God may exorcise the devil." They did this daily at Dessau, and the changeling child died in the following year.... Such a changeling child is only a piece of flesh, a massa carnis, because it has no soul. Source: Martin Luther, "Historia von einem Wechselkinde zu Dessau," Sämmtliche Werke , vol. 60 (Frankfurt am Main: Verlag von Heyder & Zimmer, 1854), pp. 39-40 . Changelings from the Devil Changelings and killcrops are laid in the place of legitimate children by Satan in order to plague mankind. He often pulls certain girls into the water, impregnates them, and keeps them with him until they deliver their children; afterward he places these children in cradles, taking the legitimate children away. But such changelings, it is said, do not live more than eighteen or nineteen years. Source: Martin Luther, "Wechselkinder vom Teufel," Sämmtliche Werke , vol. 60 (Frankfurt am Main: Verlag von Heyder & Zimmer, 1854), p. 22 . The Killcrop of Halberstadt A man who lived near Halberstadt in Saxony had a killcrop who had sucked his mother and five additional wet nurses dry. Further, he was eating a great deal and behaving very strangely. The man was told that he should take the child on a pilgrimage to Hockelstadt to praise the Virgin Mary and to have him weighed there. The peasant followed this advice and set forth, carrying the child in a basket. But when he came to a bridge over some water, a devil in the water beneath the bridge called out: "Killcrop! Killcrop!" The child in the basket, who had never yet spoken a word, answered: "Ho! Ho!" This startled the peasant. The devil in the water then asked: "Where are you going?" The killcrop said: "I'm on my way to Hockelstadt to Our Dear Lady, to have myself weighed there so that I may grow." When the peasant heard the changeling speak, the first time this had ever happened, he became angry and threw the child into the water, basket and all. Then the two devils came together, shouted "Ho, ho, ha!," played with each other, rolled around with each other, and disappeared. Satan plagues mankind with such changelings and killcrops by substituting them for real children. Satan has the power to exchange children, placing a devil in the cradle in the place of a child. This devil will suck and eat like an animal, but it will not grow. Thus it is said that changelings and killcrops do not live longer than eighteen or nineteen years. It happens often, that babies are exchanged during their first six weeks, and that devils lay themselves in their place, making themselves detestable by shitting, eating, and crying more than any ten other children. The parents get no rest from such filthy beasts. The mothers are sucked dry and are no longer able to nurse.... However, changeling children should be baptized, because they cannot always be recognized as such during their first year. Source: Martin Luther, "Ein andere Historie von einem Wechselkinde," Sämmtliche Werke , vol. 60 (Frankfurt am Main: Verlag von Heyder & Zimmer, 1854), pp. 40-42 . This story is included in the Deutsche Sagen (1816, no. 83) of Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. The Changeling of Cüstrinichen J. G. Th. Grässe, Legend Book of the Prussian State In the year 1565 in the village of Cüstrinichen in the New Mark Brandenburg, the wife of a peasant named of Andreas Prawitz gave birth to a child who was baptized with the name Matthias. The child originally appeared to be perfectly normal, but by the time it had reached the age of twenty it still lacked all reason, and had developed a repulsive appearance. And even though it reached the legal age of majority and had a beard upon its chin, it never learned to stand or to walk or even to speak. When it was hungry it just whimpered or bellowed. It could not move from one place to the next, and did nothing but eat and drink. Many people thought that it must be a killcrop or a changeling, of the kind that Luther discusses in his works. Source: J. G. Th. Grässe, Sagenbuch des Preußischen Staats, vol. 1 (Glogau: Verlag von Carl Flemming, 1871), no. 59, p. 75. The Underground People of Amrum J. G. Th. Grässe, Legend Book of the Prussian State On the Island of Amrum there were many underground people, little manikins or dwarfs no taller than a table. They wore red caps on their heads. It was feared that if one did not keep watch over a newborn child until it was baptized, it might be exchanged by the underground people. Source: J. G. Th. Grässe, Sagenbuch des Preußischen Staats, vol. 1 (Glogau: Verlag von Carl Flemming, 1871), p. 1091. This account (no. 1350, pp. 1091-1092) contains additional beliefs about the underground people on the Island of Amrum in the North Sea. The Underground People at Lüttensee J. G. Th. Grässe, Legend Book of the Prussian State In the previous century in the vicinity of Lüttensee in Holstein there were two girls with enormously large heads who were descendants of the underground people who had exchanged them from the cradle for other children. Previously, parents always kept a light burning near their children and kept constant watch to prevent the underground people from taking them away. It is said that the girls lived in a house that was owned by a certain Eggert Möller, but no one knows what became of them. Source: J. G. Th. Grässe, Sagenbuch des Preußischen Staats, vol. 1 (Glogau: Verlag von Carl Flemming, 1871), no. 1243, p. 1010. Phantom Swedes Karl Lyncker, German Legends and Customs in the Hessian Districts Since the Thirty Years' War, the Swedes have lived in dreadful memory along the Kinzig River. "Swede," like "Croat," is a bad curse word, and there are stories of male and female phantom Swedes as harmful beings and evil sorcerers. In Steinau, a woman, carrying her year and a half old boy on her arm, came upon the Phantom Swedish Woman while walking across the street in broad daylight. The latter grabbed the child and made it disappear. She told the grieving mother to go back home, where she would find her child in his bed. Seized by a deathly fear, the woman hurried home. In the bed she saw a howling, ugly changeling, a boy with an extremely thick head. With time the boy grew up, but he remained mentally retarded. Source: Karl Lyncker, Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Cassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), p. 110. Lyncker's source: Dr. Bernstein from Schlüchtern. The Changeling Anton Altrichter, Legends from the Iglau Language Island [in Moravia] An old midwife related this, so it must be true. Until a child is baptized, mysterious beings attempt to steal it and put a changeling in its place. Such a changeling has a large head with coal-black hair and a small body with thin legs, which do not learn to walk. When this misfortune occurs, one must beat the changeling without mercy until the thief returns the right child. A woman had laid her as yet unbaptized baby in a canopied bed. The cherries had just ripened, and the red, tempting fruit was beckoning through the window from the garden. The new mother could not resist, and went outside to pick a few cherries. She had scarcely crossed the threshold when she was overcome by anxiety for her slumbering child, and she quickly returned. There was, in fact, a being standing next to the bed. The woman cried out and the being disappeared. The imprint of its horrible paw, where it had grabbed for the child, could still be seen on the canopied bed. Source: Anton Altrichter, Sagen aus der Iglauer Sprachinsel (Iglau: Druck von J. Rippel und Sohn, 1920), p. 100. Satan Attempts to Steal a Child Johann Adolf Heyl, Folk Legends, Customs, and Beliefs from Tyrol In the Sarn Valley there lived a farmer's wife who did not take Christianity all too seriously. She failed to bless her children morning and night. Nor was she good to people in other regards. She quarreled with the servants, and no one did well enough to please her. One evening she scolded the entire household and sent the children the bed without giving them a blessing or having them say their prayers. Suddenly the devil stood in the middle of the room, ripped the youngest child from its bed and was about to carry it away. He was already at the hole in the wall though which he had entered when the farmer's wife saw him. She was terrified, but fortunately it occurred to her to make the sign of the cross above the child. Seeing this, the devil dropped the child to the floor and fled screaming back out through the hole. That was a good lesson for the woman. She changed her ways and became pious and patient, and she also had her children say their prayers. Never again did she allow one of them to get up or go to bed without receiving her blessing. However, no one was ever able to plaster shut the hole that the devil had made in the wall in order to enter the house. Source: Joh. Adolf Heyl, Volkssagen, Bräuche und Meinungen aus Tirol (Brixen: Verlag der Buchhandlung des Kath.-polit. Pressvereins, 1897), pp. 277-278. Return to the table of contents. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Tabulation by WebCounter . Revised October 16, 2018. Scandinavian Changeling Legends Scandinavian Changeling Legends edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1997-2024 Contents The Changelings (Sweden). The Midwife at Rørhus (Norway). Changelings (Norway). They Said She Was a Changeling (Norway). Two Changeling Tales (Denmark). The Changeling and the Sausage (Denmark). The Changeling and the Eggshells (Denmark). The Huldu-Folk in the Faroes (Faroe Islands). The Father of Eighteen in Elvenhome (Iceland). Elf-Women Steal Human Children (Iceland). The Baby Cradle at Minni-Thverá (Iceland). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Changelings Sweden Every intelligent grandmother knows that the fire must not be allowed to go out in a room where there is a child not yet christened; that the water in which the newborn child is washed should not be thrown out; also, that a needle, or some other article of steel must be attached to its bandages [diapers]. If attention is not paid to these precautions it may happen that the child will be exchanged by the trolls, as once occurred in Bettna many years ago. A young peasant's wife had given birth to her first child. Her mother, who lived some distance away, was on hand to officiate in the first duties attending its coming, but the evening before the day on which the child should be christened she was obliged to go home for a short time to attend to the wants of her own family, and during her absence the fire was allowed to go out. No one would have noticed anything unusual, perhaps, if the child had not, during the baptism, cried like a fiend. After some weeks, however, the parents began to observe a change. It became ugly, cried continuously, and was so greedy that it devoured everything that came in its way. The people being poor, they were in great danger of being eaten out of house and home. There could no longer be any doubt that the child was a changeling. Whereupon the husband sought a wise old woman, who, it was said, could instruct the parents what to do to get back their own child. The mother was directed to build a fire in the bake oven three Thursday evenings in succession, lay the young one upon the bake shovel, then pretend that she was about to throw it into the fire. The advice was followed, and when the woman, the third evening, was in the act of throwing the changeling into the fire, it seemed, a little deformed, evil-eyed woman rushed up with the natural child, threw it in the crib, and requested the return of her child. "For," said she, "I have never treated your child so badly and I have never thought to do it such harm as you now propose doing mine," whereupon she took the unnatural child and vanished through the door. Another changeling story, but with less unfortunate consequences, is told in Södermanland: A resident of Vingåkir, who made frequent trips to Nyköping with loads of flour, was in the habit of halting for the night at the house of a farmer in Verna. One summer night he arrived later than usual, and, as the people were already in bed and asleep, the weather being pleasant, he did not wish to wake anyone, so unhitched his horse from the wagon, hitched him to a haystack, and laid himself under the wagon to sleep. He had been some time under the wagon, yet awake, when, from under a stone nearby, an ugly, deformed woman, carrying a babe, made her appearance. Looking about her carefully, she laid the child on the stone and went into the house. In a short time she returned, bearing another child; laid it upon the stone, and taking up the first one, returned to the house. The man observed her actions, and divining their purpose, crept cautiously from his resting place as soon as the woman had disappeared into the house, took the sleeping child and hid it in his coat under the wagon. When the troll returned and found the child gone, she went a third time to the house, for which she returned with the child she had just carried in, whereupon she disappeared under the stone. The traveler, anxious for the welfare of his little charge, which had in such an extraordinary manner fallen into his hands, could not close his eyes for the rest of the night. As soon as it dawned he went with his precious burden to the house, where he found the occupants in great consternation over the disappearance of the child, which, as may be presumed, was received with great rejoicing. Source (books.google.com): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 176-78 . Source (Internet Archive): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 176-78 . Link to the two legends in Swedish: Herman Hofberg, "Bortbytingen," Svenska Folkägner (Stockholm: Fr. Skoglunds Förlag, 1882), pp. 154-56 (books.google.com). Return to the table of contents . The Midwife at Rørhus Norway Sigrid, a midwife at Rørhus in Sundelven parish, was once taken by a huldre-man to his wife who was having difficulty giving birth. Sigrid succeeded at her craft, and after the baby was born, the huldre-man took it and went away with it to Sigrid's neighbor woman at Rørhus, and exchanged it for her new-born child, since she too had recently given birth. He stated aloud that the exchange would last as long as their cowshed was standing. Sigrid was taken back home, and the underground-man gave her a wooden box and a basket packed with sweets and food for her help with the huldre-woman. Concerning the changeling given to Sigrid's neighbor woman: When he grew up he remained a true huldre-fellow who often had dealings with his companions -- saw them in broad daylight, conversed with them, and saw their cattle grazing near Rørhus. He saw how milking was done by the Huldre-people, how they prepared curdled milk, and so forth. When the woman saw that he was completely preoccupied with the undergound people, she realized that he was a changeling, and she wanted to get her real son back from the underground people. She recalled the words that the Huldre-fellow had said when the exchange had taken place: that it would last as long as their cowshed was standing. Thus she had the cowshed burned down. The scurvy troll disappeared, and the Rørhus woman got her right child back. Source (books.google.com): Peder Fyling, "Jordemoderen paa Rørhus," Folkesagn (Ålesund: F. M. Olsens Forlag, 1874), pp. 157-58 . This tale combines two legend types: "Midwife for the Elves" (type 5070) and "The Changeling" (type 5085). Link to additional legends of type 5070: Midwife (or Godpqrent, or Nurse) for the Elves . Return to the table of contents . Changelings Norway Exchanges and abductions are among the most common subjects of local legends. There are supernatural beings who would like to exchange small children; these are usually called the underground people . They will come and take back their changeling child if one beats it severely, for they live close by and belong to the hidden people. One should put some steel or a hymn book in a baby's cradle, especially before they are baptized. Otherwise the underground people can take the human child, replacing it with one of their own. Such a changeling will reveal its origin by its old-man's face and its large head. If you have such a changeling lying in your cradle you must beat it with a birch switch three Thursday nights in succession, and that will bring forth the trolls. The underground mother will be moved by her child's screams and will bring the human child back to the cradle. One day a woman's baby boy was taken from the cradle and a changeling put there in his place. It had the face of an old man, drank like a wolf, and could never be satisfied. A neighbor woman advised that she should try to get him to talk, and if he did so, she should beat him with seven new brooms until no twig was left on them. The woman sat down to weave at a loom in which there was no yarn. The changling lay still for a long time and staring at it. Finally he sat up in the cradle and asked what the mother was doing. "Oh, I'm weaving a shirt out of nothing," said the woman. "Now I have lived in seven woods (the time from when a tree sprouts until it dies of old age), but I have never seen anyone weave something from nothing," said the changeling. Then the wife began to beat him with a broom until the twigs flew. She had worn two brooms naked and taken hold of the third. The changeling was screaming. Then the trolls rushed in and threw her boy to her, saying, "There you have your ugly boy, let's take our poor fellow back again." It is feared that the underground people also abduct adults. There are many reports that they lure away someone they are in love with and want to marry. If successful, the boy or girl will disappear, and they may be gone for a long time. Often the missing person does come back, but then he or she is usually quite strange or weird. Thus on a farm in Skjerstad there was a half-grown boy named Lars, and he disappeared. But one day, when the people were doing field work, Lars was seen sitting near them with his back against a large rock. In his hand he was holding a flat stone slab and staring at it. They took the stone slab and threw it away. Then the boy stopped crying. They had destroyed the catechism he had from the underground. The priest was probably told where the boy had been, but he was too wise to tell what the boy had experienced with the underground people. The boy was now half-witted, as it often happens to the someone who has been taken away. Source (books.google.com): Amund Helland, Norges Land og Folk (Kristiania: Forlagt af H. Aschehoug & Co., 1908), pp. 440-41 . Link to a collection of legends Abducted by Aliens . The aliens in these legends are not those from outer space, but rather underground people from our own earth: fairies, trolls, elves, and the like. Return to the table of contents . They Said She Was a Changeling Norway About the year 1720, Søren married Jesper Bekhus's daughter Asloug. With her he got the farm, and they were quite well off. However, Asloug was uglier than anyone, beyond measure ugly. It was said that she was a changeling, and there was reason to believe this legend. As a child her mother had whipped her and on many a Thursday night had left her out on the manure pile. The child had screamed and carried on like a wild dog, but she had not been re-exchanged. Finally they thought that they might as well keep her as she was. It was as the proverb states: "You cannot will beauty anymore than you can shit a lily." Nevertheless, Søren and Asloug lived quite well together and had many children, most of whom died as infants. Source (books.google.com): Magnus Brostrup Landstad, Ættesagaer og Sagn fra Telemarken (Kristiania: Dybwads Forlag, 1924), pp. 192-93 . Return to the table of contents . Two Changeling Tales Denmark There lived once, near Tis Lake, two lonely people, who were sadly plagued with a changeling, given them by the underground people instead of their own child, which had not been baptized in time. This changeling behaved in a very strange and uncommon manner, for when there was no one in the place, he was in great spirits, ran up the walls like a cat, sat under the roof, and shouted and bawled away lustily; but sat dozing at the end of the table when anyone was in the room with him. He was able to eat as much as any four, and never cared what it was that was set before him; but though he regarded not the quality of his food, in quantity he was never satisfied, and gave excessive annoyance to everyone in the house. When they had tried for a long time in vain how they could best get rid of him since there was no living in the house with him, a smart girl pledged herself that she would banish him from the house. She accordingly, while he was out in the fields, took a pig and killed it, and put it, hide, hair, and all, into a black pudding, and set it before him when he came home. He began, as was his custom, to gobble it up, but when he had eaten for some time, he began to relax a little in his efforts, and at last he sat quite still, with his knife in his hand, looking at the pudding. At length, after sitting for some time in this manner, he began: "A pudding with hide! And a pudding with legs in it! Well, three times have I seen a young wood by Tis Lake, but never yet did I see such a pudding! The devil himself may stay here now for me!" So saying, he ran off with himself, and never more came back again. Another changeling was got rid of in the following manner: The mother, suspecting it to be such from its refusing food, and being so ill-thriven, heated the oven as hot as possible. The maid, as instructed, asked her why she did it. "To burn my child in it to death," was the reply. When the question had been put and answered three times, she placed the child on the peel, and was shoving it into the oven, when the troll-woman came in a great fright with the real child, and took away her own, saying, "There's your child for you. I have treated it better than you treated mine," and in truth it was fat and hearty. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), pp. 125-26 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), pp. 125-26 . Keightley's source: J. M. Thiele, "Skiftingen," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), pp. 276-79 . Tis Lake (Danish: Tisø ) is a prominent lake on the island of Zealand (Danish: Sjælland ), and is featured in many legends. Return to the table of contents . The Changeling and the Sausage Denmark In Rold Forest, near Hobro, there lived a married couple who had only one child, a boy of eight or nine years old, but he was no bigger than a child of three. He had a large head and thick speech, and was as ugly as sin, but neither the man nor the wife could see this, for of course everyone thinks well of their own children. One harvest the man had a litter of little pigs, and as these were so cheap that year that it would not pay to sell them, they roasted them and ate them themselves. They wrapped them up in a piece of canvas, plastered this over with clay, and laid them in the glowing ashes, and when they were sufficiently roasted, they could flay canvas, clay and hair off them, and then take out the inside. This then made a beautiful roast, which they ate with great satisfaction. One day they had laid one of the little pigs in the ashes to be cooked in this way, and had gone out to the harvest, leaving it to be ready when they came home again. The child was left poking about at home, and in raking among the ashes he found the pig. At first he was greatly puzzled as to what this could be, but finally made up his mind that it was a sausage. At this he was greatly delighted, leapt and sprang round the room, crying out, "Sausage, have you ears? Sausage, have you eyes? Sausage, have you a tail? I have lived so long that I have seen Rold Forest cut down twice and grow up thrice, but never have I seen such a sausage!" He kept on shouting this and leaping about, till finally he crawled up on a rafter, and was sitting there repeating the same words, when the man and his wife came home. The woman heard him and said, "Now I know why the child is never growing any bigger. He is a changeling, but I'll soon get rid of him." She entered the house, and called to the little fellow to come down, as she wanted to talk to him. He did so, and she took him and gave him a good thrashing, and threw him out of doors. There he lay and howled at the top of his voice. After a while there came an ugly little woman with a child on her arm, which she threw to the woman, saying, "There you have your youngster; I have been better to him than you have been to mine." When she had said this she disappeared with the changeling, but the woman's own child was quite ruined by the troll-folk, and died soon after. Source (books.google.com): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustration of the Traditional Belief of the Northern Peoples (Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), pp. 107-108 . Source (Internet Archive): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustration of the Traditional Belief of the Northern Peoples (Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), pp. 107-108 . Craigie's source: Evald Tang Kristensen, "Det gamle barn," Danske Sagn (Åhus: Folkeblads Trykkeri, 1892-1901), no. 1049, pp. 314-15 (books.google.com). Evald Tang Kristensen, "Det gamle barn," Danske Sagn (Åhus: Folkeblads Trykkeri, 1892-1901), no. 1049, pp. 314-15 (Internet Archive). Kristensen's source: "Kristen Nielsen, Ejgsgård." Craigie's translation slightly modified. Return to the table of contents . The Changeling and the Eggshells Denmark A woman's child was once changed by the troll-folk, and instead of a beautiful fair-haired child, she got a little dumpy creature, with a big head, and little eyes as black as coal. The poor mother had recourse to a "wise woman," who gave her the following advice. She should first try whether the child was really a changeling, and if was so, she should threaten to throw it into the heated baking-oven, and then its real mother would come and take it away. The woman therefore set the changeling down on the hearth, while she went about saying to herself that now she would start to brew. She then took seven eggshells filled with water, and set them on the fire beside the child, after which she hid herself near at hand, to see how the changeling would behave at this. It looked long at the eggshells in which the water was boiling, and then exclaimed in amazement: "Long have I lived and much have I seen. I have seen Rold Forest seven times burned down, and seven times grow up again, but never have I seen anyone brew in eggshells." The woman then came out of her hiding-place and said: "Then you are old enough now, you little troll! Into the oven you shall go." But immediately there appeared a little grey female with the woman's child on her arm, which she gave her, while at the same time she seized the changeling and said, "I have never treated your child as you have treated mine!" Source (books.google.com): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustration of the Traditional Belief of the Northern Peoples (Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), pp. 106-107 . Source (Internet Archive): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustration of the Traditional Belief of the Northern Peoples (Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), pp. 106-107 . Craigie's source: Jens Kamp, "Skiftingen," Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R. Nielsens Forlag, 1877), no. 14, p. 19 (books.google.com). Jens Kamp, "Skiftingen," Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R. Nielsens Forlag, 1877), no. 14, p. 19 (Internet Archive). Return to the table of contents . The Huldu-Folk in the Faroes Faroe Islands These are tall of stature; their clothes are all gray, and their hair black; they live in mounds and are also called "elves." There is an "elf-howe" in northern Streymoy, south from Haldarsvik. They live like other folk, go out to fish, and have sheep and cattle, which go in the pastures among other cattle. They can make themselves and their property invisible to mortal men, and hence it is often said, when one is searching for anything, that a "hulda has hid it." They are eager to get children, who have not been baptised, taken out of the cradle, and to leave their own instead, but the latter remain mere idiots. Little children, who go out alone, often disappear, carried off by the huldu-folk. Sometimes they are afterwards found far away from any habitation, and have then told that a big man brought them food while they were away. Huldu-girls often fall in love with Christian men, and try then to tempt them, and draw them to themselves; if the men are out on the pastures, thirsty and tired, then the mound opens and the girl comes out to offer them ale or milk to drink. Unless they blow off the froth (for in that lies the charm), they forget everything as soon as they drink, the fairy gets power over them, and carries them off with her into her elf-howe. Source (books.google.com): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustration of the Traditional Belief of the Northern Peoples (Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), pp. 161-62 . Source (Internet Archive): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustration of the Traditional Belief of the Northern Peoples (Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), pp. 161-62 . Craigie's source: V. U. Hammershaimb, Færøsk Anthologi , vol. 1: Tekst samt historisk og grammatisk indledning (Copenhagen: S. L. Møllers Bogtrykkeri, 1891), p. 327 (books.google.com). V. U. Hammershaimb, Færøsk Anthologi , vol. 1: Tekst samt historisk og grammatisk indledning (Copenhagen: S. L. Møllers Bogtrykkeri, 1891), p. 327 (books.google.com). Craigie's translation slightly modified. Return to the table of contents . The Father of Eighteen in Elvenhome Iceland At a certain farm, long ago, it happened that all the household were out one day, making hay, except the farmer's wife and her only child, a boy of four years. He was a strong, handsome, lusty little fellow, who could already speak almost as well as his elders, and was looked upon by his parents with great pride and hope. As his mother had plenty of other work to do besides watching him, she was obliged to leave him alone for a short time, while she went down to the brook to wash the milk pails. So she left him playing in the door of the cottage, and came back again as soon as she had placed the milk pails to dry. As soon as she spoke to the child, it began to cry in a strange and unnatural way, which amazed her not a little, as it had always been so quiet and sweet tempered. When she tried to make the child speak to her, as it normally did, it only yelled the more, and so it went on for a long time, always crying and never would be soothed, till the mother was in despair at so remarkable a change in her boy, who now seemed to have lost his senses. Filled with grief, she went to ask the advice of a learned and skillful woman in the neighborhood, and confided to her all her trouble. Her neighbor asked her all sorts of questions: How long ago this change in the child's manner had happened? What his mother thought to be the cause of it? and so forth. To all of which the wretched woman gave the best answers she could. At last the wise woman said: "Do you not think, my friend, that the child you now have is a changeling? Without doubt it was put at your cottage door in the place of your son, while you were washing the milk pails. "I know not," replied the other, "but advise me how to find it out." So the wise woman said: "I will tell you. Place the child where he may see something he has never seen before, and let him fancy himself alone. As soon as he believes no one to be near him, he will speak. But you must listen attentively, and if the child says something that declares him to be a changeling, then beat him without mercy." That was the wise woman's advice, and her neighbor, with many thanks for it, went home. When she got to her house, she set a cauldron in the middle of the hearth, and taking a number of rods, bound them end to end, and at the bottom of them fastened a porridge spoon. This she stuck into the cauldron in such a way that the new handle she had made for it reached right up the chimney. As soon as she had prepared everything, she fetched the child, and placing him on the floor of the kitchen left him and went out, taking care, however, to leave the door ajar, so that she could hear and see all that went on. When she had left the room, the child began to walk round and round the cauldron, and eye it carefully, and after a while he said: "Well! I am old enough, as anybody may guess from by beard, and the father of eighteen elves, but never in all my life, have I seen so long a spoon to so small a pot." On hearing this the farmer's wife waited not a moment, but rushed into the room and snatching up a bundle of firewood flogged the changeling with it, till he kicked and screamed again. In the midst of all this, the door opened, and a strange woman, bearing in her arms a beautiful boy, entered and said, "See how we differ! I cherish and love your son, while you beat and abuse my husband." With these words, she gave back to the farmer's wife her own son, and taking the changeling by the hand, disappeared with him. But the little boy grew up to manhood, and fulfilled all the hope and promise of his youth. Source (books.google.com): Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: R. Bentley, 1864), pp. 41-44 . Source (Internet Archive): Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: R. Bentley, 1864), pp. 41-44 . Translation slightly revised. Links to the text in the original Icelandic: Jón Árnason, "Átján barna faðir í álfheimum," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), pp. 42-43 (books.google.com). Jón Árnason, "Átján barna faðir í álfheimum," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), pp. 42-43 (Internet Archive). Return to the table of contents . Elf-Women Steal Human Children Iceland One strange weakness in the character of the elf-women is their propensity to steal or change human children. They go to the cradles of young babies, and take with them their husbands, eighty years old, whom they knock, and kick, and squeeze until they are small enough to get into the cradle, whereupon the change takes place. It is, therefore, a very dangerous thing to leave a child alone in the cradle, save one put the mark of the cross at least over or upon him; but the best plan is to place it both over and under the infant. Another plan, likewise, is to leave with the child a Bible, or a book of hymns, or some other religious work, which will effectually prevent any evil being or changeling from approaching the cradle. As the cradle-child they leave behind is, in reality, nothing but an old man, toothless and hairless, the changeling will never cut teeth, nor will his hair grow. The finest children are the most sought for, and the most hideous oldling is put in their place. The temper of the changeling is unchangeable; he is always ill-humoured and naughty, and can be satisfied by no possible means. The only way to get rid of such an one is to flog him so thoroughly that his cries may reach to the ears of his elfin consort or relative, who then will be sure to return the stolen child and rescue her own oldling from his torments . Elves try in another way also to change children, namely, by charms. When human children happen to be left alone, in or out of doors in a farm, elf-women will often, putting on both form and dress of their mother, or someone whom they love, approach them in order to lure them away from home. The faster the false mother runs, the faster the poor child will follow her, stretching forth its hands towards her, crying: "Take me, take me!" These charmed children run always at a preternatural speed after the elfin-enticer; and when they are missed before they have yet got out of sight, it requires an almost more than human power to overtake them, and not the less so to bring them back to reason. Some have been lost completely, and have passed for good into the invisible world of the elves. Source (books.google.com): Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , second series, translated with notes and introductory essay by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkr Magnússon (London: Longmans, Gree, and Company, 1866), pp. lii-liv . Source (Internet Archive): Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , second series, translated with notes and introductory essay by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkr Magnússon (London: Longmans, Gree, and Company, 1866), pp. lii-liv . Return to the table of contents . The Baby Cradle at Minni-Thverá Iceland Kristin, who was at Minni-Thverá between about 1830 and 1840 related the following: Her mother was clairvoyant. In her youth she one day found herself in a meadow with Kristin's grandmother. She saw two women come out of some cliffs. Between them they were leading a man who was carrying something. As they approached they took what the man was carrying, and Kristin's mother saw that it was a cradle covered with something red. Then the women took hold of the man and pressed against him until he shrank to the size of a small boy. Then they him up again and kneaded him until he was the size of a baby. Next they laid him in the cradle, covered him with the red cloth, and walked in the direction of the farmhouse. The girl told her mother what she had seen. The mother hurriedly ran home, arriving there ahead of the elf-women. She had left her own child in front of the house. When the elf-women saw her there they picked up their child and pulled at him from all sides until he became as large as he had been before. Then they took the man back to the cliffs, where all three disappeared. Source (books.google.com): Jón Árnason, "Barnsvaggan á Minni-Þverá," Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), pp. 44-45 . Source (Internet Archive): Jón Árnason, "Barnsvaggan á Minni-Þverá," Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), pp. 44-45 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Changelings: An Essay by D. L. Ashliman . Changeling Legends from the British Isles . German Changeling Legends . Scandinavia, Finland, and Estonia . A digital library of folklore, folktales, and fairy tales. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 2, 2024. Charms against Sprains Charms against Sprains Edited by D. L. Ashliman Copyright 1997-2021 Contents Cure for the Sprain (Ireland). Sprain Thread (Ireland). Straining Thread (Ireland). The Wristing or Wresting Thread (Orkney Islands). When a Person Has Received a Sprain (Shetland Islands). Link to the second Merseburg Incantation -- Merseburger Zauberspruch -- (Germany). Opens in a new window. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Cure for the Sprain Ireland A number of people in this district have this cure. The injured joint is rubbed with the bare hand, no oil or salve is used. The "doctor" repeats some words under his breath which one does not hear and which are guarded jealously as a family secret. Three visits are made by the patient to get this cure. It is usually a success. People who have this cure: David Wales, Crappagh (age: 62 years), Doohat P O, Newbliss Co. Monaghan. Mrs. Catherine Monahan, Crover (age: 75 years), Newbliss. Miss A. Abbott, Lisnaveane, Parish of Ematris, Barony of Dartrey. (age 70 yrs.) Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Monaghan >> Nart, pp. 160-61 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Link to additional accounts of Sprain Cures in The Schools' Collection . Return to the table of contents . Sprain Thread Ireland Thomas McHale of Belcarra died last year (1937) aged 86 years. He was a weaver. He always had a quantity of the sprain thread ready in the house. If a person sprained an ankle or anything, that person would go to Thomas and say "Thomas I got a hurt," but never ask him for the thread. Or somebody else would go instead of him: but in no circumstance must the thread be asked for. Thomas would understand, and give him a piece of the sprain thread. That piece of thread would be tied round the hurt limb, and the limb would get alright. It was only a piece of the wool-thread that the weaver used in to the loom. Pieces of the sprain thread have often been sent to England to cure boys from Belcarra district who suffered from sprain in England where they went to work. Information from Thomas McHale. Micheál Ó Gealbháin. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Mayo >> Clochar, pp. 63-64 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Straining Thread Ireland The "straining thread," a thin thread of hemp made with certain prayers, now lost, is usually kept for a cure for sprains and strains. Not every one made them. A local weaver named Murray used to make them. He is dead thirty years or so. Informant: M. McGlynn, aged 45. Killynagh More, County Roscommon. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Roscommon >> Cluain Uí Chuinn, p. 280 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . The Wristing or Wresting Thread Orkney Islands (Sanday) The following charm was used for the cure of sprains. A linen thread is tied around the injured part, after the solemn repetion of the charm: Our Savior rade, His fore-foot slade; Our Savior lichtit down. Sinew to sinew, vein to vein, Joint to joint, and bane to bane, Mend thou in God's name! During the time of repeating this charm nine knots must be tied on the thread, at regular distances, and to ensure success the charm should be repeated at every knot. Source (books.google.com): County Folk-Lore , vol. 3: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands , collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1903), p. 144 . Source (Internet Archive): County Folk-Lore , vol. 3: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands , collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1903), p. 144 . Black's source: W. H. Fotheringham, "Orkney Charms," Notes and Queries, series 1, vol. 10, pp. 220-221. In 1848 Mr. Fotheringham communicated these charms to the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland ( MS. Communications, vol 8, 1842-1852), with the statement that they were found among the family papers of the Traills of Westray. Return to the table of contents . When a Person Has Received a Sprain Shetland Islands When a person has received a sprain, it is customary to apply to an individual practiced in casting the "wresting thread." This is a thread spun from black wool, on which are cast nine knots, and tied round a sprained leg or arm. During the time the operator is putting the thread round the affected limb, he says, but in such a tone of voice as not to be heard by the bystanders, nor even by the person operated upon: The Lord rade, And the foal slade; He lighted. And he righted. Set joint to joint, Bone to bone, And sinew to sinew. Heal in the Holy Ghost's Name! Source (books.google.com): County Folk-Lore , vol. 3: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands , collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1903), p. 144 . Source (Internet Archive): County Folk-Lore , vol. 3: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands , collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1903), p. 144 . Black's source: The New Statistical Account of Scotland, (Edinburgh, 1845), vol. 15 (Shetland), p. 141. Return to the table of contents . Revised May 1, 2021. Child Custody: Folktales of Type 926 Child Custody folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 926 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2019 Contents Solomon and the Two Women (Bible, First Book of Kings). Link to The Iugement of the kynge Salamon (Geoffroy de La Tour Landry). The Future Buddha as a Wise Judge (The Jataka Tales). The Question Regarding the Son (Ummaga Jataka). The Brahman and His Two Wives (Telugu Folktale). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Solomon and the Two Women The First Book of Kings Then came there two women, that were harlots, unto King Solomon, and stood before him. And the one woman said, "Oh my lord, I and this woman dwell in one house; and I was delivered of a child with her in the house. And it came to pass the third day after that I was delivered, that this woman was delivered also: and we were together; there was no stranger with us in the house, save we two in the house. And this woman's child died in the night; because she overlaid it. And she arose at midnight, and took my son from beside me, while thine handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and laid her dead child in my bosom. And when I rose in the morning to give my child suck, behold, it was dead: but when I had considered it in the morning, behold, it was not my son, which I did bear." And the other woman said, "Nay; but the living is my son, and the dead is thy son." And this said, "No; but the dead is thy son, and the living is my son." Thus they spake before the king. Then said the king, "The one saith, 'This is my son that liveth, and thy son is the dead'; and the other saith, 'Nay; but thy son is the dead, and my son is the living.'" And the king said, "Bring me a sword." And they brought a sword before the king. And the king said, "Divide the living child in two, and give half to the one, and half to the other." Then spake the woman whose the living child was unto the king, for her bowels yearned upon her son, and she said, "Oh my lord, give her the living child, and in no wise slay it." But the other said, "Let it be neither mine nor thine, but divide it." Then the king answered and said, "Give her the living child, and in no wise slay it: she is the mother thereof." And all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged; and they feared the king: for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him, to do judgment. Source: First Book of Kings, 3:16-28. King James translation . Solomon's wise judgments (including many that are not recorded in the Bible) are featured in many Middle Eastern and European folktales. Link to such a text, composed by Geoffroy de la Tour Landry(ca. 1320-1391), and translated in English in 1484: "The Iugement of the kynge Salamon," The Book of the Knight of La Tour-Landry: Compiled for the Instruction of His Daughters , translated from the original French into English in the reign of Henry VI, edited by Thomas Wright, revised edition, 1906 (London: Published for the Early English Text Society by Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner and Company, 1868), pp. 100-101 . Return to the table of contents . The Future Buddha as a Wise Judge Jataka Tales A woman, carrying her child, went to the future Buddha's tank to wash. And having first bathed the child, she put on her upper garment and descended into the water to bathe herself. Then a Yakshini, seeing the child, had a craving to eat it. And taking the form of a woman, she drew near, and asked the mother, "Friend, this is a very pretty child. Is it one of yours?" And when she was told it was, she asked if she might nurse it. And this being allowed, she nursed it a little, and then carried it off. But when the mother saw this, she ran after her, and cried out, "Where are you taking my child to?" and caught hold of her. The Yakshini boldly said, "Where did you get the child from? It is mine!" And so quarreling, they passed the door of the future Buddha's Judgment Hall. He heard the noise, sent for them, inquired into the matter, and asked them whether they would abide by his decision. And they agreed. Then he had a line drawn on the ground; and told the Yakshini to take hold of the child's arms, and the mother to take hold of its legs; and said, "The child shall be hers who drags him over the line." But as soon as they pulled at him, the mother, seeing how he suffered, grieved as if her heart would break. And letting him go, she stood there weeping. Then the future Buddha asked the bystanders, "Whose hearts are tender to babes? Those who have borne children, or those who have not?" And they answered, "Oh sire! The hearts of mothers are tender." Then he said, "Who, think you, is the mother? She who has the child in her arms, or she who has let go?" And they answered, "She who has let go is the mother." And he said, "Then do you all think that the other was the thief?" And they answered, "Sire! We cannot tell." And he said, "Verily, this is a Yakshini, who took the child to eat it." And he replied, "Because her eyes winked not, and were red, and she knew no fear, and had no pity, I knew it." And so saying, he demanded of the thief, "Who are you?" And she said, "Lord! I am a Yakshini." And he asked, "Why did you take away this child?" And she said, "I thought to eat him, Oh my Lord!" And he rebuked her, saying, "Oh foolish woman! For your former sins you have been born a Yakshini, and now do you still sin!" And he laid a vow upon her to keep the Five Commandments, and let her go. But the mother of the child exalted the future Buddha, and said, "Oh my Lord! Oh great physician! May your life be long!" And she went away, with her babe clasped to her bosom. Source: Buddhist Birth-Stories; or, Jataka Tales , edited by V. Fausbøll and translated by T. W. Rhys Davids, vol. 1 (London: Trübner and Company, 1880), pp. xiv-xvi . This tale is one of several stories included in the multi-part Jataka no. 546. Link to another translation: "The Son," The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 6, translated by E. B. Cowell and W. H. D. Rouse (Cambridge: University Press, 1907), p. 163 . Return to the table of contents . The Question Regarding the Son Ummagga Jataka A certain woman, carrying her infant son, went to the Pandit's [future Buddha's] tank, and having bathed her son and placed him on her clothes, descended into the pond to wash her head and bathe herself. Immediately after she had gone down to bathe, a Yakinni, observing her son, and wishing to eat him, took the form of a woman, and coming near the child, said to the woman, "Friend, this child is very pretty. Is he yours?" On her saying "Yes," the Yakinni asked her, "Shall I give the child suck?" And when she replied, "Very well," the Yakinni took up the child, gave it a little milk, and ran away with it. The mother, seeing the woman running away with her child, ran after her, and asking her, "Where are you taking my child to?" caught hold of her. The Yakinni then fearlessly replied, "Where did you get a child from? This one is my own son." These two were thus quarrelling, and passing by the gate of the "Hall," when the Bosat [future Buddha], hearing the noise of their quarrel, sent for both, and inquired of them what the cause of their dispute was; and recognising the Yakinni from the fact of her not winking, and her eyes being as red as olinda seeds, he inquired, "Will you abide by my decision?" and on their agreeing to do so, he caused a line to be drawn on the ground, and the child to be laid exactly in the middle of the line. He then ordered the Yakinni to take hold of the child's two arms, and the mother the two legs, and said, "Now, both of you pull away, and whosoever pulls the child over the line will be declared the mother." They accordingly pulled the child, which suffered grievous pain thereby (and cried). The mother, whose heart burst with sorrow, then let go the child and stood weeping. The Bosat then inquired from those who were present, "Whose heart is tender towards children? Is it that of the mother or of the stranger?" Many answered, "Pandit! the heart of a mother is tender." Having heard this, the Pandit inquired of all, "What now do you think? Is it the woman who has the child in her arms that is the mother, or the woman who let go the child?" Everyone said, "O Pandit! the woman who has let go the child is the mother." Then the Pandit asked them, "Do you all know now who it is that has stolen the child?" And when they replied, "Pandit! we do not know," he said, "Oh! this woman is a Yakinni, and she has taken the child to eat it." The people then asked the Pandit, "How do you know it?" And he replied, "Because her eyes are red and never wink, and she neither fears nor loves anybody. It is thus that I found out that she is a Yakinni." Having thus spoken, the Pandit asked her, "Who are you?" She replied, "I am a Yakiuni." "Why did you take away this child?" "Lord! to eat him," she replied. The Pandit then warning her, said, "Hear me! you foolish one. Because you committed sin in your last birth, you have been born a Yakinni; nevertheless, you commit sin still! Oh ! how foolish thou art!" After that, exhorting her, he made her take the "Pansil," [five moral precepts] and sent her away. The mother, taking the child in her arms, thanked him, and said, "Lord! may you live long!" and went her way. Here ends the case regarding the son. Source: Ummagga Jataka (The Story of the Tunnel) , translated from the Sinhalese by T. B. Yatawara (London: Luzac and Company, 1898), pp. 19-20 . The five moral precepts of Pali Buddhism (as formlated in Wikipedia are: I undertake the training rule to abstain from killing. I undertake the training rule to abstain from taking what is not given. I undertake the training rule to avoid sexual misconduct. I undertake the training rule to abstain from false speech. I undertake the training rule to abstain from fermented drink that causes heedlessness. Return to the table of contents . The Brahman and His Two Wives Telugu Folktale In the Dakhan lived a Brahman who had two wives. To the elder of these a son was born. When the son was about ten months old, the old Brahman set out with his family on a pilgrimage to Benares [Varanasi], but he unfortunately died on his way. The two women thereupon "went to an adjacent agraharam (the Brahmans' quarters in a city or village), and remained there, rearing the boy with great affection, so much so that the child knew not which of the two was his real mother. But one day the younger lady quarrelled with the elder, and, declaring that she would no longer remain with her, took the child and set out to go home. The elder thereupon seized the child and demanded of the other why she was taking him away. The younger replied that as she had borne the child she was going away with him. So the two still disputing went to the Judge and told their story. He reflected a little, called his servants and ordered them to divide the child in twain and to give each a half. The younger lady remained silent, but the elder, being the real mother, was of opinion that so long as the child did but live it was enough; and, not consenting the Judge's proposal, said to him that the child was not her own, and requested him to give it to the other lady. The Judge, hearing these words, decided that the elder lady was the child's mother, and had the boy given to her. Source: G. R. Subramiah Pantulu, Folk-Lore of the Telugus: A Collection of Forty-Two Highly Amusing and Instructive Tales (Madras [Chennai]: G. A. Natesan and Company, [1910]), no. 17, pp. 40-41 . The Telegu people are a South Indian ethnic group, residing mostly in the state of Andhra Pradesh. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 24, 2019. Chinese Creation and Flood Myth A Chinese Creation and Flood Myth From the Miao People The Miao have no written records, but they have many legends in verse, which they learn to repeat and sing. The Hei Miao (or Black Miao, so called from their dark chocolate-colored clothes) treasure poetical legends of the creation and of a deluge. These are composed in lines of five syllables, in stanzas of unequal length, one interrogative and one responsive. They are sung or recited by two persons or two groups at feasts and festivals, often by a group of youths and a group of maidens. The legend of the creation commences: Who made heaven and earth? Who made insects? Who made men? Made male and made female? I who speak don't know. Heavenly King made heaven and earth, Ziene made insects, Ziene made men and demons, Made male and made female. How is it you don't know? How made heaven and earth? How made insects? How made men and demons? Made male and made female? I who speak don't know. Heavenly King was intelligent, Spat a lot of spittle into his hand, Clapped his hands with a noise, Produced heaven and earth, Tall grass made insects, Stories made men and demons, Made men and demons, Made male and made female. How is it you don't know? The legend proceeds to state how and by whom the heavens were propped up and how the sun was made and fixed in its place. The legend of the flood tells of a great deluge. It commences: Who came to the bad disposition, To send fire and burn the hill? Who came to the bad disposition, To send water and destroy the earth? I who sing don't know. Zie did. Zie was of bad disposition, Zie sent fire and burned the hill; Thunder did. Thunder was of bad disposition, Thunder sent water and destroyed the earth. Why don't you know? In this story of the flood only two persons were saved in a large bottle gourd used as a boat, and these were A-Zie and his sister. After the flood the brother wished his sister to become his wife, but she objected to this as not being proper. At length she proposed that one should take the upper and one the lower millstone, and going to opposite hills should set the stones rolling to the valley between. If these should be found in the valley properly adjusted on above the other, she would be his wife, but not if they came to rest apart. The young man, considering it unlikely that two stones thus rolled down from opposite hills would be found in the valley, one upon another, while pretending to accept the test suggested, secretly placed two other stones in the valley, one upon the other. The stones rolled from the hills were lost in the tall wild grass, and on descending into the valley, A-Zie called his sister to come and see the stones he had placed. She, however, was not satisfied, and suggested as another test that each should take a knife from a double sheath and, going again to the opposite hilltops, hurl them into the valley below. If both these knives were found in the sheath in the valley, she would marry him, but if the knives were found apart, they would live apart. Again the brother surreptitiously placed two knives in the sheath, and, the experiment ending as A-Zie wished, his sister became his wife. They had one child, a misshapen thing without arms or legs, which A-Zie in great anger killed and cut to pieces. He threw the pieces all over the hill, and next morning, on awakening, he found these pieces transformed into men and women. Thus the earth was re-peopled. Source: E. T. C. Werner, Myths and Legends of China (London: George G. Harrap and Company, 1922), pp. 406-408. Edited by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002-2003. Return to Folktales from China , edited by D. L. Ashliman. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 7, 2003. Cinderella Cinderella Aarne-Thompson-Uther folktale type 510A and related stories of persecuted heroines translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman ©1998-2024 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Rhodopis (Strabo). The Cinder Maid (reconstructed from various European sources by Joseph Jacobs). Cinderella; or, The Little Glass Slipper (France, Charles Perrault). Cinderella (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, version of 1812). Link to the version of 1857 (English translation). Katie Woodencloak (Norway). The Broken Pitcher (England). Ashey Pelt (Ireland). Fair, Brown, and Trembling (Ireland). The Sharp Grey Sheep (Scotland). Rashin-Coatie (Scotland). The Hearth-Cat (Portugal). Cinderella (Italy). Little Saddleslut (Greece). Conkiajgharuna, the Little Rag Girl (Georgia). Pepelyouga (Serbia). The Wonderful Birch (Russia). The Baba Yaga (Russia). The Wicked Stepmother (Kashmir). Maria and the Golden Slipper (Philippines). The Poor Turkey Girl (Native American, Zuni). The Turkey Herd (Native American, Zuni). The Indian Cinderella (Native American). Link to The Green Knight (Denmark). Link to The Father Who Wanted to Marry His Daughter. Folktales of type 510B. Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Rhodopis Strabo A pyramid at Memphis is called "Tomb of the Courtesan," having been built by her lovers -- the courtesan whom Sappho the Melic poetess calls Doricha, the beloved of Sappho's brother Charaxus, who was engaged in transporting Lesbian wine to Naucratis for sale, but others give her the name Rhodopis. They tell the fabulous story that, when she was bathing, an eagle snatched one of her sandals from her maid and carried it to Memphis; and while the king was administering justice in the open air, the eagle, when it arrived above his head, flung the sandal into his lap; and the king, stirred both by the beautiful shape of the sandal and by the strangeness of the occurrence, sent men in all directions into the country in quest of the woman who wore the sandal; and when she was found in the city of Naucratis, she was brought up to Memphis, became the wife of the king, and when she died was honoured with the above-mentioned tomb. Source (Internet Archive): The Geography of Strabo , with an English translation by Horace Leonard Jones, vol. 8 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, 1917), pp. 93-95 . Strabo was a Greek geographer and historian who lived in Asia minor between about 64 B.C. and 24 A.D. Although the story of Rhodopis is often cited as the earliest variant of a Cinderella folktale, it lacks the prototypical motif of the persecuted heroine mistreated by her stepmother and stepsisters. Return to the table of contents . The Cinder Maid Europe (Joseph Jacobs) Once upon a time, though it was not in my time or in your time, or in anybody else's time, there was a great king who had an only son, the prince and heir who was about to come of age. So the king sent round a herald who should blow his trumpet at every four corners where two roads met. And when the people came together he would call out, "O yes, O yes, O yes, know ye that his grace the king will give on Monday sennight" -- that meant seven nights or a week after -- "a royal ball to which all maidens of noble birth are hereby summoned; and be it furthermore known unto you that at this ball his highness the prince will select unto himself a lady that shall be his bride and our future queen. God save the king." Now there was among the nobles of the king's court one who had married twice, and by the first marriage he had but one daughter, and as she was growing up her father thought that she ought to have someone to look after her. So he married again, a lady with two daughters, and his new wife, instead of caring for his daughter, thought only of her own and favored them in every way. She would give them beautiful dresses but none to her stepdaughter who had only to wear the castoff clothes of the other two. The noble's daughter was set to do all the drudgery of the house, to attend the kitchen fire, and had naught to sleep on but the heap of cinder raked out in the scullery; and that is why they called her Cinder Maid. And no one took pity on her and she would go and weep at her mother's grave where she had planted a hazel tree, under which she sat. You can imagine how excited they all were when they heard the king's proclamation called out by the herald. "What shall we wear, mother; what shall we wear?" cried out the two daughters, and they all began talking about which dress should suit the one and what dress should suit the other, but when the father suggested that Cinder Maid should also have a dress they all cried out, "What, Cinder Maid going to the king's ball? Why, look at her, she would only disgrace us all." And so her father held his peace. Now when the night came for the royal ball Cinder Maid had to help the two sisters to dress in their fine dresses and saw them drive off in the carriage with her father and their mother. But she went to her own mother's grave and sat beneath the hazel tree and wept and cried out: Tree o' mine, O tree o' me, With my tears I've watered thee; Make me a lady fair to see, Dress me as splendid as can be. And with that the little bird on the tree called out to her: Cinder Maid, Cinder Maid, shake the tree, Open the first nut that you see. So Cinder Maid shook the tree and the first nut that fell she took up and opened, and what do you think she saw? -- a beautiful silk dress blue as the heavens, all embroidered with stars, and two little lovely shoon [shoes] made of shining copper. And when she had dressed herself the hazel tree opened and from it came a coach all made of copper with four milk-white horses, with coachman and footmen all complete. And as she drove away the little bird called out to her: Be home, be home ere mid-o'-night Or else again you'll be a fright. When Cinder Maid entered the ballroom she was the loveliest of all the ladies, and the prince, who had been dancing with her stepsisters, would only dance with her. But as it came towards midnight Cinder Maid remembered what the little bird had told her and slipped away to her carriage. And when the prince missed her he went to the guards at the palace door and told them to follow the carriage. But Cinder Maid when she saw this, called out: Mist behind and light before, Guide me to my father's door. And when the prince's soldiers tried to follow her there came such a mist that they couldn't see their hands before their faces. So they couldn't find which way Cinder Maid went. When her father and stepmother and two sisters came home after the ball they could talk of nothing but the lovely lady: "Ah, would not you have like to have been there?" said the sisters to Cinder Maid as she helped them to take off their fine dresses. "The was a most lovely lady with a dress like the heavens and shoes of bright copper, and the prince would dance with none but her; and when midnight came she disappeared and the prince could not find her. He is going to give a second ball in the hope that she will come again. Perhaps she will not, and then we will have our chance." When the time of the second royal ball came round the same thing happened as before; the sisters teased Cinder Maid, saying "Wouldn't you like to come with us?" and drove off again as before. And Cinder Maid went again to the hazel tree over her mother's grave and cried: Tree o' mine, O tree o' me, Shiver and shake, dear little tree; Make me a lady fair to see, Dress me as splendid as can be. And then the little bird on the tree called out: Cinder Maid, Cinder Maid, shake the tree, Open the first nut that you see. But this time she found a dress all golden brown like the earth embroidered with flowers, and her shoon were made of silver; and when the carriage came from the tree, lo and behold, that was made of silver too, drawn by black horses with trappings all of silver, and the lace on the coachman's and footmen's liveries was also of silver; and when Cinder Maid went to the ball the prince would dance with none but her; and when midnight cam round she fled as before. But the prince, hoping to prevent her running away, had ordered the soldiers at the foot of the staircase to pour out honey on the stairs so that her shoes would stick in it. But Cinder Maid leaped from stair to stair and got away just in time, calling out as the soldiers tried to follow her: Mist behind and light before, Guide me to my father's door. And when her sisters got home they told her once more of the beautiful lady that had come in a silver coach and silver shoon and in a dress all embroidered with flowers: "Ah, wouldn't you have like to have been there?" said they. Once again the prince gave a great ball in the hope that his unknown be3auty would come to it. All happened as before; as soon as the sisters had gone Cinder Maid went to the hazel tree over her mother's grave and called out: Tree o' mine, O tree o' me, Shiver and shake, dear little tree; Make me a lady fair to see, Dress me as splendid as can be. And then the little bird appeared and said: Cinder Maid, Cinder Maid, shake the tree, Open the first nut that you see. And when she opened the nut in it was a dress of silk green as the sea with waves upon it, and her shoes this time were made of gold; and when the coach came out of the tree it was also made of gold, with gold trappings for the horses and for the retainers. And as she drove off the little bird from the tree called out: Be home, be home ere mid-o'-night Or else again you'll be a fright. Now this time, when Cinder Maid came to the ball, she was a desirous to dance only with the prince as he with her, and so, when midnight came round, she had forgotten to leave till the clock began to strike, one -- two -- three -- four -- five -- six, -- and then she began to run away down the stairs as the clock struck eight -- nine -- ten. But the prince had told his soldier to put tar upon the lower steps of the stairs; and as the clock struck eleven her shoes stuck in the tar, and when she jumped to the foot of the stairs one of her golden shoes was left behind, and just then the clock struck TWELVE, and the golden coach with its horses and footmen, disappeared, and the beautiful dress of Cinder Maid changed again into her ragged clothes and she had to run home with only one golden shoe. You can imagine how excited the sister were when they came home and told Cinder Maid all about it, how that the beautiful lady had come in a golden coach in a dress like the sea, with golden shoes, and how all had disappeared at midnight except the golden shoe. "Ah, wouldn't you have liked to have been there?" said they. Now when the prince found out that he could not keep his lady-love nor trace where she had gone he spoke to his father and showed him the golden shoe, and told him that he would never marry anyone but the maiden who could wear that shoe. So the king, his father, ordered the herald to take round the golden shoe upon a velvet cushion and to go to every four corners where two streets met and sound the trumpet and call out, "O yes, O yes, O yes, be it known unto you all that whatsoever lady of noble birth can fit this shoe upon her foot shall become the bride of his highness the prince and our future queen. God save the king." And when the herald came to the house of Cinder Maid's father the eldest of her two stepsisters tried on the golden shoe, But it was much too small for her, as it was for every other lady that had tried it up to that time; but she went up into her room and with a sharp knife cut off one of her toes and part of her heel, and then fitted her foot into the shoe, and when she came down she shoed it to the herald, who sent a message to the palace saying that the lady had been found who could wear the golden shoe. Thereupon the prince jumped at once upon his horse and rode to the house of Cinder Maid's father. But when he saw the stepsister with the golden shoe, "Ah," he said, "but this is not the lady." "But," she said, "you promised to marry the one that could wear the golden shoe," And the prince could say nothing, but offered to take her on his horse to his father's palace, for in those days ladies used to ride on a pillion at the back of the gentleman riding on horseback. Now as they were riding towards the palace her foot began to drip with blood, and the little bird from the hazel tree that had followed them called out: Turn and peep, turn and peep, There's blood within the shoe; A bit is cut from off the heel And a bit from off the toe. And the prince looked down and saw the blood streaming from her shoe and then he knew that this was not his true bride, and he rode back to the house of Cinder Maid's father; and then the second sister tried her chance; but when she found that her foot wouldn't fit the shoe she did the same as her sister, but all happed as before. The little bird called out: Turn and peep, turn and peep, There's blood within the shoe; A bit is cut from off the heel And a bit from off the toe. And the prince took her back to her mother's house, and then he asked, "Have you no other daughter?" and the sisters cried out, "No, sir." But the father said, "Yes, I have another daughter. And the sisters cried out, "Cinder Maid, Cinder Maid, she could not wear that shoe." But the prince said, "As she is of noble birth she has a right to try the shoe." So the herald went down to the kitchen and found cinder Maid; and when she saw her golden shoe she took it from him and put it on her foot, which it fitted exactly; and then she took the other golden shoe from underneath the cinders where she had hidden it and put that on too. Then the herald knew that she was the true bride of his master; and her took her upstairs to where the prince was; when he saw her face, he knew that she was the lady of his love. So he took her behind him upon his horse; and as they rode to the palace the little bird from the hazel tree cried out: Some cut their heel, and some cut their toe, But she sat by the fire who could wear the shoe. And so they were married and lived happy ever afterwards. Source: Joseph Jacobs, Europa's Fairy Book (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), pp. 1-12 . This version of "Cinderella" is Jacobs' "reconstruction" of the story's original form, based on his analysis of the common features of hundreds of variants collected throughout Europe. Joseph Jacobs was born in 1854 in Australia. He immigrated in 1872 to England, graduated from Cambridge University, and became one of the best known folklorists of his era. In 1900 he immigrated to the United States, where he died in 1916. Return to the table of contents . Cinderella; or, The Little Glass Slipper France (Charles Perrault) Once there was a gentleman who married, for his second wife, the proudest and most haughty woman that was ever seen. She had, by a former husband, two daughters of her own, who were, indeed, exactly like her in all things. He had likewise, by another wife, a young daughter, but of unparalleled goodness and sweetness of temper, which she took from her mother, who was the best creature in the world. No sooner were the ceremonies of the wedding over but the stepmother began to show herself in her true colors. She could not bear the good qualities of this pretty girl, and the less because they made her own daughters appear the more odious. She employed her in the meanest work of the house. She scoured the dishes, tables, etc., and cleaned madam's chamber, and those of misses, her daughters. She slept in a sorry garret, on a wretched straw bed, while her sisters slept in fine rooms, with floors all inlaid, on beds of the very newest fashion, and where they had looking glasses so large that they could see themselves at their full length from head to foot. The poor girl bore it all patiently, and dared not tell her father, who would have scolded her; for his wife governed him entirely. When she had done her work, she used to go to the chimney corner, and sit down there in the cinders and ashes, which caused her to be called Cinderwench. Only the younger sister, who was not so rude and uncivil as the older one, called her Cinderella. However, Cinderella, notwithstanding her coarse apparel, was a hundred times more beautiful than her sisters, although they were always dressed very richly. It happened that the king's son gave a ball, and invited all persons of fashion to it. Our young misses were also invited, for they cut a very grand figure among those of quality. They were mightily delighted at this invitation, and wonderfully busy in selecting the gowns, petticoats, and hair dressing that would best become them. This was a new difficulty for Cinderella; for it was she who ironed her sister's linen and pleated their ruffles. They talked all day long of nothing but how they should be dressed. "For my part," said the eldest, "I will wear my red velvet suit with French trimming." "And I," said the youngest, "shall have my usual petticoat; but then, to make amends for that, I will put on my gold-flowered cloak, and my diamond stomacher, which is far from being the most ordinary one in the world." They sent for the best hairdresser they could get to make up their headpieces and adjust their hairdos, and they had their red brushes and patches from Mademoiselle de la Poche. They also consulted Cinderella in all these matters, for she had excellent ideas, and her advice was always good. Indeed, she even offered her services to fix their hair, which they very willingly accepted. As she was doing this, they said to her, "Cinderella, would you not like to go to the ball?" "Alas!" said she, "you only jeer me; it is not for such as I am to go to such a place." "You are quite right," they replied. "It would make the people laugh to see a Cinderwench at a ball." Anyone but Cinderella would have fixed their hair awry, but she was very good, and dressed them perfectly well. They were so excited that they hadn't eaten a thing for almost two days. Then they broke more than a dozen laces trying to have themselves laced up tightly enough to give them a fine slender shape. They were continually in front of their looking glass. At last the happy day came. They went to court, and Cinderella followed them with her eyes as long as she could. When she lost sight of them, she started to cry. Her godmother, who saw her all in tears, asked her what was the matter. "I wish I could. I wish I could." She was not able to speak the rest, being interrupted by her tears and sobbing. This godmother of hers, who was a fairy, said to her, "You wish that you could go to the ball; is it not so?" "Yes," cried Cinderella, with a great sigh. "Well," said her godmother, "be but a good girl, and I will contrive that you shall go." Then she took her into her chamber, and said to her, "Run into the garden, and bring me a pumpkin." Cinderella went immediately to gather the finest she could get, and brought it to her godmother, not being able to imagine how this pumpkin could help her go to the ball. Her godmother scooped out all the inside of it, leaving nothing but the rind. Having done this, she struck the pumpkin with her wand, and it was instantly turned into a fine coach, gilded all over with gold. She then went to look into her mousetrap, where she found six mice, all alive, and ordered Cinderella to lift up a little the trapdoor. She gave each mouse, as it went out, a little tap with her wand, and the mouse was that moment turned into a fine horse, which altogether made a very fine set of six horses of a beautiful mouse colored dapple gray. Being at a loss for a coachman, Cinderella said, "I will go and see if there is not a rat in the rat trap that we can turn into a coachman." "You are right," replied her godmother, "Go and look." Cinderella brought the trap to her, and in it there were three huge rats. The fairy chose the one which had the largest beard, touched him with her wand, and turned him into a fat, jolly coachman, who had the smartest whiskers that eyes ever beheld. After that, she said to her, "Go again into the garden, and you will find six lizards behind the watering pot. Bring them to me." She had no sooner done so but her godmother turned them into six footmen, who skipped up immediately behind the coach, with their liveries all bedaubed with gold and silver, and clung as close behind each other as if they had done nothing else their whole lives. The fairy then said to Cinderella, "Well, you see here an equipage fit to go to the ball with; are you not pleased with it?" "Oh, yes," she cried; "but must I go in these nasty rags?" Her godmother then touched her with her wand, and, at the same instant, her clothes turned into cloth of gold and silver, all beset with jewels. This done, she gave her a pair of glass slippers, the prettiest in the whole world. Being thus decked out, she got up into her coach; but her godmother, above all things, commanded her not to stay past midnight, telling her, at the same time, that if she stayed one moment longer, the coach would be a pumpkin again, her horses mice, her coachman a rat, her footmen lizards, and that her clothes would become just as they were before. She promised her godmother to leave the ball before midnight; and then drove away, scarcely able to contain herself for joy. The king's son, who was told that a great princess, whom nobody knew, had arrived, ran out to receive her. He gave her his hand as she alighted from the coach, and led her into the hall, among all the company. There was immediately a profound silence. Everyone stopped dancing, and the violins ceased to play, so entranced was everyone with the singular beauties of the unknown newcomer. Nothing was then heard but a confused noise of, "How beautiful she is! How beautiful she is!" The king himself, old as he was, could not help watching her, and telling the queen softly that it was a long time since he had seen so beautiful and lovely a creature. All the ladies were busied in considering her clothes and headdress, hoping to have some made next day after the same pattern, provided they could find such fine materials and as able hands to make them. The king's son led her to the most honorable seat, and afterwards took her out to dance with him. She danced so very gracefully that they all more and more admired her. A fine meal was served up, but the young prince ate not a morsel, so intently was he busied in gazing on her. She went and sat down by her sisters, showing them a thousand civilities, giving them part of the oranges and citrons which the prince had presented her with, which very much surprised them, for they did not know her. While Cinderella was thus amusing her sisters, she heard the clock strike eleven and three-quarters, whereupon she immediately made a courtesy to the company and hurried away as fast as she could. Arriving home, she ran to seek out her godmother, and, after having thanked her, she said she could not but heartily wish she might go to the ball the next day as well, because the king's son had invited her. As she was eagerly telling her godmother everything that had happened at the ball, her two sisters knocked at the door, which Cinderella ran and opened. "You stayed such a long time!" she cried, gaping, rubbing her eyes and stretching herself as if she had been sleeping; she had not, however, had any manner of inclination to sleep while they were away from home. "If you had been at the ball," said one of her sisters, "you would not have been tired with it. The finest princess was there, the most beautiful that mortal eyes have ever seen. She showed us a thousand civilities, and gave us oranges and citrons." Cinderella seemed very indifferent in the matter. Indeed, she asked them the name of that princess; but they told her they did not know it, and that the king's son was very uneasy on her account and would give all the world to know who she was. At this Cinderella, smiling, replied, "She must, then, be very beautiful indeed; how happy you have been! Could not I see her? Ah, dear Charlotte, do lend me your yellow dress which you wear every day." "Yes, to be sure!" cried Charlotte; "lend my clothes to such a dirty Cinderwench as you are! I should be such a fool." Cinderella, indeed, well expected such an answer, and was very glad of the refusal; for she would have been sadly put to it, if her sister had lent her what she asked for jestingly. The next day the two sisters were at the ball, and so was Cinderella, but dressed even more magnificently than before. The king's son was always by her, and never ceased his compliments and kind speeches to her. All this was so far from being tiresome to her, and, indeed, she quite forgot what her godmother had told her. She thought that it was no later than eleven when she counted the clock striking twelve. She jumped up and fled, as nimble as a deer. The prince followed, but could not overtake her. She left behind one of her glass slippers, which the prince picked up most carefully. She reached home, but quite out of breath, and in her nasty old clothes, having nothing left of all her finery but one of the little slippers, the mate to the one that she had dropped. The guards at the palace gate were asked if they had not seen a princess go out. They replied that they had seen nobody leave but a young girl, very shabbily dressed, and who had more the air of a poor country wench than a gentlewoman. When the two sisters returned from the ball Cinderella asked them if they had been well entertained, and if the fine lady had been there. They told her, yes, but that she hurried away immediately when it struck twelve, and with so much haste that she dropped one of her little glass slippers, the prettiest in the world, which the king's son had picked up; that he had done nothing but look at her all the time at the ball, and that most certainly he was very much in love with the beautiful person who owned the glass slipper. What they said was very true; for a few days later, the king's son had it proclaimed, by sound of trumpet, that he would marry her whose foot this slipper would just fit. They began to try it on the princesses, then the duchesses and all the court, but in vain; it was brought to the two sisters, who did all they possibly could to force their foot into the slipper, but they did not succeed. Cinderella, who saw all this, and knew that it was her slipper, said to them, laughing, "Let me see if it will not fit me." Her sisters burst out laughing, and began to banter with her. The gentleman who was sent to try the slipper looked earnestly at Cinderella, and, finding her very handsome, said that it was only just that she should try as well, and that he had orders to let everyone try. He had Cinderella sit down, and, putting the slipper to her foot, he found that it went on very easily, fitting her as if it had been made of wax. Her two sisters were greatly astonished, but then even more so, when Cinderella pulled out of her pocket the other slipper, and put it on her other foot. Then in came her godmother and touched her wand to Cinderella's clothes, making them richer and more magnificent than any of those she had worn before. And now her two sisters found her to be that fine, beautiful lady whom they had seen at the ball. They threw themselves at her feet to beg pardon for all the ill treatment they had made her undergo. Cinderella took them up, and, as she embraced them, said that she forgave them with all her heart, and wanted them always to love her. She was taken to the young prince, dressed as she was. He thought she was more charming than before, and, a few days after, married her. Cinderella, who was no less good than beautiful, gave her two sisters lodgings in the palace, and that very same day matched them with two great lords of the court. Moral: Beauty in a woman is a rare treasure that will always be admired. Graciousness, however, is priceless and of even greater value. This is what Cinderella's godmother gave to her when she taught her to behave like a queen. Young women, in the winning of a heart, graciousness is more important than a beautiful hairdo. It is a true gift of the fairies. Without it nothing is possible; with it, one can do anything. Another moral: Without doubt it is a great advantage to have intelligence, courage, good breeding, and common sense. These, and similar talents come only from heaven, and it is good to have them. However, even these may fail to bring you success, without the blessing of a godfather or a godmother. Source: Andrew Lang, The Blue Fairy Book , 5th ed. (London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1891), pp. 64-71 . Lang's source: Charles Perrault, Histoires ou contes du temps passé, avec des moralités: [Contes de ma mère l'Oye] (Paris: Chez Claude Barbin, 1697). Link to the original French text: "Cendrillon, ou la petite pantoufle de verre," Perrault's Popular Tales , edited from the original editions, with introduction, etc., by Andrew Lang (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1888), pp. 41-49 . Return to the table of contents . Cinderella Germany (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm) Once upon a time there was a rich man who lived happily for a long time with his wife. Together they had a single daughter. Then the woman became ill, and when she was lying on her deathbed, she called her daughter to her side, and said, "Dear child, I must leave you now, but I will look down on you from heaven. Plant a little tree on my grave, and when you want something, just shake the tree, and you shall get what you want. I will help you in time of need. Just remain pious and good." Then she closed her eyes and died. The child cried, and planted a little tree on her mother's grave. She did not need to carry any water to it, because her tears provided all the water that it needed. The snow fell over the mother's grave like a white cloth; then after the sun had retired from it a second time, and the little tree had become green a second time, the man took another wife. The stepmother already had two daughters by her first husband. They were beautiful to look at, but in their hearts they were proud, arrogant, and evil. After the wedding was over, the three moved into the man's house, and times grew very bad for his poor child. "What is that useless creature doing in the best room?" asked the stepmother. "Away to the kitchen with her! And if she wants to eat, then she must earn it. She can be our maid." Her stepsisters took her dresses away from her and made her wear an old gray skirt. "That is good enough for you!" they said, making fun of her and leading her into the kitchen. Then the poor child had to do the most difficult work. She had to get up before sunrise, carry water, make the fire, cook, and wash. To add to her misery, her stepsisters ridiculed her and then scattered peas and lentils into the ashes, and she had to spend the whole day sorting them out again. At night when she was tired, there was no bed for her to sleep in, but she had to lie down next to the hearth in the ashes. Because she was always dirty with ashes and dust, they gave her the name Cinderella . The time came when the king announced a ball. It was to last, in all splendor, for three days, and there his son, the prince, would choose a wife for himself. The two proud sisters were invited. "Cinderella," they cried, "Come here. Comb our hair. Brush our shoes, and tighten our laces. We are going to the prince's ball." Cinderella did the best that she could, but they rewarded her only with curses. When they were ready, they said with scorn, "Cinderella, wouldn't you like to go to the ball?" "Oh, yes. But how can I go? I don't have a dress." "No," said the oldest one, "and we would be ashamed if you were to be seen there, and people learned that you are our sister. You belong in the kitchen. Here is a basin of lentils. Sort the good ones from the bad ones, and if there is a single bad one in the lot when we return, you can expect the worst." With that, they left. Cinderella stood and watched until she could no longer see them. Then she sadly went into the kitchen and spread the lentils out over the hearth. There was a very, very large pile of them. "Oh," she said with a sigh. "I'll have to sit here sorting lentils until midnight, and I can't close my eyes, no matter how much they hurt. If only my mother knew about this!" She kneeled down in the ashes next to the hearth and was about to begin her work when two white pigeons flew in through the window. They lit on the hearth next to the lentils. Nodding their heads, they said, "Cinderella, do you want us to help you sort the lentils?" "Yes," she answered: The bad ones go into your crop, The good ones go into the pot. And peck, peck, peck, peck, they started at once, eating up the bad ones and leaving the good ones lying. In only a quarter of an hour there was not a single bad lentil among the good ones, and she brushed them all into the pot. Then the pigeons said to her, "Cinderella, if you would like to see your sisters dancing with the prince, just climb up to the pigeon roost." She followed them and climbed to the top rung of the ladder to the pigeon roost. There she could see into the hall, and she saw her sisters dancing with the prince. Everything glistened by the glow of a thousand lights. After she had seen enough, she climbed back down. With a heavy heart she lay down in the ashes and fell asleep. The next morning the two sisters came to the kitchen. They were angry when they saw that she had sorted the lentils, for they wanted to scold her. Because they could not, they began telling her about the ball. They said, "Cinderella, it was so grand at the ball. The prince, who is the best looking man in the whole world, escorted us, and he is going to choose one of us to be his wife." "Yes," said Cinderella, "I saw the glistening lights. It must have been magnificent." "Now just how did you do that?" asked the oldest one. "By standing up there on the pigeon roost." When she heard this, her envy drove her to have the pigeon roost torn down immediately. Cinderella had to comb their hair and get them ready again. The youngest sister, who had a little sympathy in her heart, said, "Cinderella, when it gets dark you can go and look through the windows from the outside." "No!" said the oldest one. "That would only make her lazy. Here is a sackful of seeds. Sort the good ones from the bad ones, and do it well. If tomorrow there are any bad ones in the lot, then I will dump the whole sackful into the ashes, and you will have to go without eating until you have picked them all out again." Cinderella sadly sat down on the hearth and spread out the seeds. The pigeons flew in again, and said, "Cinderella, do you want us to help you sort the seeds?" "Yes," she answered: The bad ones go into your crop, The good ones go into the pot. Peck, peck, peck, peck, it went as fast as if twelve hands were at work. When they were finished, the pigeons said, "Cinderella, would you like to go dancing at the ball?" "Oh, my goodness," she said, "how could I go in these dirty clothes?" "Just go to the little tree on your mother's grave, shake it, and wish yourself some beautiful clothes. But come back before midnight." So Cinderella went and shook the little tree, and said: Shake yourself, shake yourself, little tree. Throw some nice clothing down to me! She had scarcely spoken these words when a splendid silver dress fell down before her. With it were pearls, silk stockings with silver decorations, silver slippers, and everything else that she needed. Cinderella carried it all home. After she had washed herself and put on the beautiful clothing, she was as beautiful as a rose washed in dew. She went to the front door, and there was a carriage with six black horses all decorated with feathers, and servants dressed in blue and silver. They helped her into the carriage, and away they galloped to the king's castle. The prince saw the carriage stop before the gate, and thought that a foreign princess was arriving. He himself walked down the steps, helped Cinderella out, and escorted her into the hall. Many thousand lights shone upon her, and she was so beautiful that everyone there was amazed. The sisters stood there, angry that someone was more beautiful than they were, but they had no idea that it was Cinderella, who they thought was lying at home in the ashes. The prince danced with Cinderella and paid her every royal honor. He thought to himself, "I am supposed to choose myself a bride. I will have no one but her." However long she had suffered in ashes and sorrow, Cinderella was now living in splendor and joy. As midnight approached, before the clock struck twelve, she stood up, bowed, and said that she had to go, in spite of the prince's requests for her to stay. The prince escorted her out. Her carriage stood there waiting for her. And she rode away just as splendidly as she had come. Back at home, Cinderella returned to the tree on her mother's grave, and said: Shake yourself, shake yourself, little tree! Take the clothing back from me! The tree took back the clothes. Cinderella put on her old ash-dress again, went home, dirtied her face, and lay down in the ashes to sleep. The next morning the two sisters came in looking out of sorts, and without saying a word. Cinderella said, "Did you have a good time yesterday evening?" "No. A princess was there who danced with the prince almost the whole time, but no one knew who she was nor where she came from." "Was she the one in the splendid carriage drawn by six black horses?" asked Cinderella. "How did you know that?" "I was standing in the front door when she rode by the house." "In the future do not leave your work," said the oldest one, giving Cinderella an evil look. "What were you doing, standing in the front door?" Cinderella had to get her sisters ready a third time. Her reward was a basin filled with peas, which she was supposed to sort. "And do not dare to leave your work," shouted the oldest one, as she was leaving. Cinderella thought, "If only my pigeons will come again," and her heart beat a little faster. The pigeons did come, just as they had the evening before, and said, "Cinderella, would you like us to help you sort the peas." "Yes," she said: The bad ones go into your crop, The good ones go into the pot. Once again the pigeons picked out the bad ones, and soon they were finished. Then they said, "Cinderella, shake the little tree, and it will throw down even more beautiful clothes. Go to the ball, but be careful to come back before midnight." Cinderella went and said: Shake yourself, shake yourself, little tree. Throw some nice clothing down to me! Then a dress fell down that was even more magnificent and more splendid than the other one, made entirely of gold and precious stones. With it were stockings decorated with gold, and slippers made of gold. Cinderella put them on, and she glistened like the sun at midday. A carriage with six white horses pulled up at the door. The horses had tall white plumes on their heads, and the servants were dressed in red and gold. When Cinderella arrived, the prince was waiting for her at the stairway. He escorted her into the hall. If everyone had been astounded at her beauty yesterday, today they were even more astounded. The sisters stood in the corner, pale with envy. If they had known that this was Cinderella, who they thought was at home lying in the ashes, they would have died of jealousy. The prince wanted to know who the foreign princess was, where she was from, and where she was going. He placed his people in the street to keep watch. To prevent her from running away so fast, he had the stairway covered with pitch. Cinderella danced with the prince again and again. Filled with joy, she did not think about midnight. Suddenly, in the middle of a dance, she heard the clock strike. She suddenly remembered what the pigeons had warned her. Frightened, she rushed to the door and ran down the stairs. Because they were covered with pitch, one of her golden slippers stuck fast, and in her fear she did not think to pick it up. She reached the last step just as the clock struck twelve. The carriage and the horses disappeared, and Cinderella was left standing there in the dark street dressed in her ash-clothes. The prince had rushed after her. He found the golden slipper on the stairway, pulled it loose, and picked it up. But by the time he arrived below, she had disappeared. The people whom he had ordered to keep watch came and said that they had seen nothing. Cinderella was glad that it had not been worse. She returned home, lit her simple oil lamp, hung it in the chimney, and lay down in the ashes. Before long the two sisters returned, and called out, "Cinderella, get up and light the way for us." Cinderella yawned and acted as though she had been asleep. While lighting their way, she heard one of them say, "God knows who the cursed princess is. I wish that she were lying beneath the earth! The prince danced only with her, and after she left, he did not want to stay any longer, and the whole party came to an end." "It was as though they suddenly blew out all the lights," said the other one. Cinderella knew exactly who the foreign princess was, but she did not say a word. Now the prince decided that since nothing else had succeeded, he would let the slipper help him find his bride. He had it proclaimed that he would marry the person whose foot fit the golden slipper. But it was too small for everyone. Indeed, some could not have gotten their foot inside, if it had been twice as large. Finally it came time for the two sisters to try on the slipper. They were happy, for they had small, beautiful feet, and each one believed that she could not fail. "If only the prince would come here sooner!" they thought. "Listen," said the mother secretly. "Take this knife, and if the slipper is too tight, just cut off part of your foot. It will hurt a little, but what harm is that? The pain will soon pass, and then one of you will be queen." Then the oldest one went to her bedroom and tried on the slipper. The front of her foot went in, but her heel was too large, so she took the knife and cut part of it off, so she could force her foot into the slipper. Then she went out to the prince, and when he saw that she was wearing the slipper, he said that she was to be his bride. He escorted her to his carriage and was going to drive away with her. When he arrived at the gate, the two pigeons were perched above, and they called out: Rook di goo, rook di goo! There's blood in the shoe. The shoe is too tight, This bride is not right! The prince bent over and looked at the slipper. Blood was streaming from it. He saw that he had been deceived, and he took the false bride back. The mother then said to her second daughter, "Take the slipper, and if it is too short for you, then cut off your toes." So she took the slipper into her bedroom, and because her foot was too long, she bit her teeth together, and cut off a large part of her toes, then quickly pulled on the slipper. When she stepped out wearing it, the prince thought that she was the right one, and wanted to ride away with her. But when they came to the gate, the pigeons again called out: Rook di goo, rook di goo! There's blood in the shoe. The shoe is too tight, This bride is not right! The prince looked down and saw that her white stockings were stained red, and that blood and had come up high on them. The prince took her back to her mother and said, "She is not the right bride either. Is there not another daughter here in this house?" "No," said the mother. "There is only a dirty cinder girl here. She is sitting down there in the ashes. The slipper would never fit her." She did not want to call her, but the prince insisted. So they called Cinderella, and when she heard that the prince was there, she quickly washed her hands and face. She stepped into the best room and bowed. The prince handed her the golden slipper, and said, "Try it on. If it fits you, you shall be my wife." She pulled the heavy shoe from her left foot, then put her foot into the slipper, pushing ever so slightly. It fit as if it had been poured over her foot. As she straightened herself up, she looked into the prince's face, and he recognized her as the beautiful princess. He cried out, "This is the right bride." The stepmother and the two proud sisters turned pale with horror. The prince escorted Cinderella away. He helped her into his carriage, and as they rode through the gate, the pigeons called out: Rook di goo, rook di goo! No blood's in the shoe. The shoe's not too tight, This bride is right! Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 1st ed. (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), v. 1, no. 21. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. In the edition of 1819 (and all subsequent editions) the stepsisters' punishment is more severe: The pigeons attack them and peck out their eyes, leaving them blind for life. Link to the original German text of the above tale: Aschenputtel (1812) . Link to the German text of the final version (1857) of this tale: Aschenputtle (1857) . Link to an English translation of the last version (1857) of Cinderella. Link to the Grimm Brothers Home Page. Return to the table of contents . Katie Woodencloak Norway (Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe) Once on a time there was a king who had become a widower. By his queen he had one daughter, who was so clever and lovely, there wasn't a cleverer or lovelier princess in all the world. So the king went on a long time sorrowing for the queen, whom he had loved so much, but at last he got weary of living alone, and married another queen, who was a widow, and had, too, an only daughter; but this daughter was just as bad and ugly as the other was kind, and clever, and lovely. The stepmother and her daughter were jealous of the princess, because she was so lovely; but so long as the king was at home they daren't do her any harm, he was so fond of her. Well, after a time he fell into war with another king, and went out to battle with his host, and then the stepmother thought she might do as she pleased; and so she both starved and beat the princess, and was after her in every hole and corner of the house. At last she thought everything too good for her, and turned her out to herd cattle. So there she went about with the cattle, and herded them in the woods and on the fells. As for food, she got little or none, and she grew thin and wan, and was always sobbing and sorrowful. Now in the herd there was a great dun bull, which always kept himself so neat and sleek, and often and often he came up to the princess, and let her pat him. So one day when she sat there, sad, and sobbing, and sorrowful, he came up to her and asked her outright why she was always in such grief. She answered nothing, but went on weeping. "Ah!" said the bull, "I know all about it quite well, though you won't tell me; you weep because the queen is bad to you, and because she is ready to starve you to death. But food you've no need to fret about, for in my left ear lies a cloth, and when you take and spread it out, you may have as many dishes as you please." So she did that, took the cloth and spread it out on the grass, and lo! it served up the nicest dishes one could wish to have; there was wine too, and mead, and sweet cake. Well, she soon got up her flesh again, and grew so plump, and rosy, and white, that the queen and her scrawny chip of a daughter turned blue and yellow for spite. The queen couldn't at all make out how her stepdaughter got to look so well on such bad fare, so she told one of her maids to go after her in the wood, and watch and see how it all was, for she thought some of the servants in the house must give her food. So the maid went after her, and watched in the wood, and then she saw how the stepdaughter took the cloth out of the bull's ear, and spread it out, and how it served up the nicest dishes, which the stepdaughter ate and made good cheer over. All this the maid told the queen when she went home. And now the king came home from war, and had won the fight against the other king with whom he went out to battle. So there was great joy throughout the palace, and no one was gladder than the king's daughter. But the queen shammed sick, and took to her bed, and paid the doctor a great fee to get him to say she could never be well again unless she had some of the dun bull's flesh to eat. Both the king's daughter and the folk in the palace asked the doctor if nothing else would help her, and prayed hard for the bull, for everyone was fond of him, and they all said there wasn't that bull's match in all the land. But no; he must and should be slaughtered, nothing else would do. When the king's daughter heard that, she got very sorrowful, and went down into the byre to the bull. There, too, he stood and hung down his head, and looked so downcast that she began to weep over him. "What are you weeping for?" asked the bull. So she told him how the king had come home again, and how the queen had shammed sick and got the doctor to say she could never be well and sound again unless she got some of the dun bull's flesh to eat, and so now he was to be slaughtered. "If they get me killed first," said the bull, "they'll soon take your life too. Now, if you're of my mind, we'll just start off, and go away tonight." ''Well, the princess thought it bad, you may be sure, to go and leave her father, but she thought it still worse to be in the house with the queen; and so she gave her word to the bull to come to him. At night, when all had gone to bed, the princess stole down to the byre to the bull, and so he took her on his back, and set off from the homestead as fast as ever he could. And when the folk got up at cockcrow next morning to slaughter the bull, why, he was gone; and when the king got up and asked for his daughter, she was gone too. He sent out messengers on all sides to hunt for them, and gave them out in all the parish churches; but there was no one who had caught a glimpse of them. Meanwhile, the bull went through many lands with the king's daughter on his back, and so one day they came to a great copper wood, where both the trees, and branches, and leaves, and flowers, and everything, were nothing but copper. But before they went into the wood, the bull said to the king's daughter, "Now, when we get into this wood, mind you take care not to touch even a leaf of it, else it's all over both with me and you, for here dwells a troll with three heads who owns this wood." No, bless her, she'd be sure to take care not to touch anything. Well, she was very careful, and leant this way and that to miss the boughs, and put them gently aside with her hands; but it was such a thick wood, 'twas scarce possible to get through; and so, with all her pains, somehow or other she tore off a leaf, which she held in her hand. "AU! AU! what have you done now?" said the bull; "there's nothing for it now but to fight for life or death; but mind you keep the leaf safe." Soon after they got to the end of the wood, and a troll with three heads came running up. "Who is this that touches my wood?" said the troll. "It's just as much mine as yours," said the bull. "Ah!" roared the troll, "we'll try a fall about that." "As you choose," said the bull So they rushed at one another, and fought; and the bull he butted, and gored, and kicked with all his might and main; but the troll gave him as good as he brought, and it lasted the whole day before the bull got the mastery; and then he was so full of wounds, and so worn out, he could scarce lift a leg. Then they were forced to stay there a day to rest, and then the bull bade the king's daughter to take the horn of ointment which hung at the troll's belt, and rub him with it. Then he came to himself again, and the day after they trudged on again. So they traveled many, many days, until, after a long, long time, they came to a silver wood, where both the trees, and branches, and leaves, and flowers, and everything, were silvern. Before the bull went into the wood, he said to the king's daughter, "Now, when we get into this wood, for heaven's sake mind you take good care; you mustn't touch anything, and not pluck off so much as one leaf, else it is all over both with me and you; for here is a troll with six heads who owns it, and him I don't think I should be able to master." "No," said the king's daughter; "I'll take good care and not touch anything you don't wish me to touch." But when they got into the wood, it was so close and thick, they could scarce get along. She was as careful as careful could be, and leant to this side and that to miss the boughs, and put them on one side with her hands, but every minute the branches struck her across the eyes, and, in spite of all her pains, it so happened she tore off a leaf. "AU! AU! what have you done now?" said the bull. "There's nothing for it now but to fight for life and death, for this troll has six heads, and is twice as strong as the other, but mind you keep the leaf safe, and don't lose it." Just as he said that, up came the troll. "Who is this," he said, "that touches my wood?" "It's as much mine as yours," said the bull. "That we'll try a fall about," roared the troll "As you choose," said the bull, and rushed at the troll, and gored out his eyes, and drove his horns right through his body, so that the entrails gushed out; but the troll was almost a match for him, and it lasted three whole days before the bull got the life gored out of him. But then he, too, was so weak and wretched, it was as much as he could do to stir a limb, and so full of wounds, that the blood streamed from him. So he said to the king's daughter she must take the horn of ointment that hung at the troll's belt, and rub him with it. Then she did that, and he came to himself; but they were forced to stay there a week to rest before the bull had strength enough to go on. At last they set off again, but the bull was still poorly, and they went rather slow at first. So to spare time the king's daughter said as she was young and light of foot, she could very well walk, but she couldn't get leave to do that. No; she must seat herself up on his back again. So on they traveled through many lands a long time, and the king's daughter did not know in the least whither they went; but after a long, long time they came to a gold wood. It was so grand, the gold dropped from every twig, and all the trees, and boughs, and flowers, and leaves, were of pure gold. Here, too, the same thing happened as had happened in the silver wood and copper wood. The bull told the king's daughter she mustn't touch it for anything, for there was a troll with nine heads who owned it, and he was much bigger and stouter than both the others put together, and he didn't think he could get the better of him. No; she'd be sure to take heed not to touch it; that he might know very well. But when they got into the wood, it was far thicker and closer than the silver wood, and the deeper they went into it the worse it got. The wood went on getting thicker and thicker, and closer and closer; and at last she thought there was no way at all to get through it. She was in such an awful fright of plucking off anything, that she sat, and twisted and turned herself this way and that, and hither and thither, to keep clear of the boughs, and she put them on one side with her hands; but every moment the branches struck her across the eyes, so that she couldn't see what she was clutching at; and lo! before she knew how it came about, she had a gold apple in her hand. Then she was so bitterly sorry she burst into tears and wanted to throw it away; but the bull said she must keep it safe and watch it well, and comforted her as well as he could; but he thought it would be a hard tussle, and he doubted how it would go. Just then up came the troll with the nine heads, and he was so ugly, the king's daughter scarcely dared to look at him. "Who is this that touches my wood?" he roared. "It's just as much mine as yours," said the bull. "That we'll try a fall about," roared the troll again. "Just as you choose," said the bull; and so they rushed at one another, and fought, and it was such a dreadful sight the king's daughter was ready to swoon away. The bull gored out the troll's eyes, and drove his horns through and through his body, till the entrails came tumbling out; but the troll fought bravely; and when the bull got one head gored to death, the rest breathed life into it again, and so it lasted a whole week before the bull was able to get the life out of them all. But then he was utterly worn out and wretched. He couldn't stir a foot, and his body was all one wound. He couldn't so much as ask the king's daughter to take the horn of ointment which hung at the troll's belt, and rub it over him. But she did it all the same, and then he came to himself by little and little; but they had to lie there and rest three weeks before he was fit to go on again. Then they set off at a snail's pace, for the bull said they had still a little farther to go, and so they crossed over many high hills and thick woods. So after a while they got upon the fells. "Do you see anything?" asked the bull. "No, I see nothing but the sky and the wild fell," said the king's daughter. So when they climbed higher up, the fell got smoother, and they could see farther off. "Do you see anything now?" asked the bull. "Yes, I see a little castle far, far away," said the princess. "That's not so little though," said the bull. After a long, long time, they came to a great cairn, where there was a spur of the fell that stood sheer across the way. "Do you see anything now?" asked the bull. "Yes, now I see the castle close by," said the king's daughter, "and now it is much, much bigger." "Thither you're to go," said the bull. "Right underneath the castle is a pigsty, where you are to dwell. When you come thither you'll find a wooden cloak, all made of strips of lath; that you must put on, and go up to the castle and say your name is Katie Woodencloak, and ask for a place. But before you go, you must take your penknife and cut my head off, and then you must flay me, and roll up the hide, and lay it under the wall of rock yonder, and under the hide you must lay the copper leaf, and the silvern leaf, and the golden apple. Yonder, up against the rock, stands a stick; and when you want anything, you've only got to knock on the wall of rock with that stick." At first she wouldn't do anything of the kind; but when the bull said it was the only thanks he would have for what he had done for her, she couldn't help herself. So, however much it grieved her heart, she hacked and cut away with her knife at the big beast till she got both his head and his hide off, and then she laid the hide up under the wall of rock, and put the copper leaf, and the silvern leaf, and the golden apple inside it. So when she had done that, she went over to the pigsty, but all the while she went she sobbed and wept. There she put on the wooden cloak, and so went up to the palace. When she came into the kitchen she begged for a place, and told them her name was Katie Woodencloak. Yes, the cook said she might have a place -- she might have leave to be there in the scullery, and wash up, for the lassie who did that work before had just gone away. "But as soon as you get weary of being here, you'll go your way too, I'll be bound." No; she was sure she wouldn't do that. So there she was, behaving so well, and washing up so handily. The Sunday after there were to be strange guests at the palace, so Katie asked if she might have leave to carry up water for the prince's bath; but all the rest laughed at her, and said, "What should you do there? Do you think the prince will care to look at you, you who are such a fright?" But she wouldn't give it up, and kept on begging and praying; and at last she got leave. So when she went up the stairs, her wooden cloak made such a clatter, the prince came out and asked, "Pray, who are you?" "Oh, I was just going to bring up water for your Royal Highness's bath," said Katie. "Do you think now," said the prince, "I'd have anything to do with the water you bring?" and with that he threw the water over her. So she had to put up with that, but then she asked leave to go to church; well, she got that leave too, for the church lay close by. But first of all she went to the rock, and knocked on its face with the stick which stood there, just as the bull had said. And straightway out came a man, who said, "What's your will?" So the princess said she had got leave to go to church and hear the priest preach, but she had no clothes to go in. So he brought out a kirtle, which was as bright as the copper wood, and she got a horse and saddle beside. Now, when she got to the church, she was so lovely and grand, all wondered who she could be, and scarce one of them listened to what the priest said, for they looked too much at her. As for the prince, he fell so deep in love with her, he didn't take his eyes off her for a single moment. So, as she went out of church, the prince ran after her, and held the church door open for her; and so he got hold of one of her gloves, which was caught in the door. When she went away and mounted her horse, the prince went up to her again, and asked whence she came. "Oh, I'm from Bath," said Katie; and while the prince took out the glove to give it to her, she said: Bright before and dark behind, Clouds come rolling on the wind; That this prince may never see Where my good steed goes with me. The prince had never seen the like of that glove, and went about far and wide asking after the land whence the proud lady, who rode off without her glove, said she came; but there was no one who could tell where "Bath" lay. Next Sunday some one had to go up to the prince with a towel. "Oh, may I have leave to go up with it?" said Katie. "What's the good of your going?" said the others; "you saw how it fared with you last time." But Katie wouldn't give in; she kept on begging and praying, till she got leave; and then she ran up the stairs, so that her wooden cloak made a great clatter. Out came the prince, and when he saw it was Katie, he tore the towel out of her hand, and threw it into her face. "Pack yourself off, you ugly troll," he cried; "do you think I'd have a towel which you have touched with your smutty fingers?" After that the prince set off to church, and Katie begged for leave to go too. They all asked what business she had at church -- she who had nothing to put on but that wooden cloak, which was so black and ugly. But Katie said the priest was such a brave man to preach, what he said did her so much good; and so at last she got leave. Now she went again to the rock and knocked, and so out came the man, and gave her a kirtle far finer than the first one; it was all covered with silver, and it shone like the silver wood; and she got besides a noble steed, with a saddlecloth broidered with silver, and a silver bit. So when the king's daughter got to the church, the folk were still standing about in the churchyard. And all wondered and wondered who she could be, and the prince was soon on the spot, and came and wished to hold her horse for her while she got off. But she jumped down, and said there was no need, for her horse was so well broke, it stood still when she bade it, and came when she called it. So they all went into church, but there was scarce a soul that listened to what the priest said, for they looked at her a deal too much; and the prince fell still deeper in love than the first time. When the sermon was over, and she went out of church. and was going to mount her horse, up came the prince again and asked her whence she came. "Oh, I'm from Towelland," said the king's daughter; and as she said that, she dropped her riding whip, and when the prince stooped to pick it up, she said: Bright before and dark behind, Clouds come rolling on the wind; That this prince may never see Where my good steed goes with me. So away she was again; and the prince couldn't tell what had become of her. He went about far and wide, asking after the land whence she said she came, but there was no one who could tell him where it lay; and so the prince had to make the best he could of it. Next Sunday someone had to go up to the prince with a comb. Katie begged for leave to go up with it, but the others put her in mind how she had fared the last time, and scolded her for wishing to go before the prince -- such a black and ugly fright as she was in her wooden cloak. But she wouldn't leave off asking till they let her go up to the prince with his comb. So, when she came clattering up the stairs again, out came the prince, and took the comb, and threw it at her, and bade her be off as fast as she could. After that the prince went to church, and Katie begged for leave to go too. They asked again what business she had there, she who was so foul and black, and who had no clothes to show herself in. Might be the prince or some one else would see her, and then both she and all the others would smart for it; but Katie said they had something else to do than to look at her; and she wouldn't leave off begging and praying till they gave her leave to go. So the same thing happened now as had happened twice before. She went to the rock and knocked with the stick, and then the man came out and gave her a kirtle which was far grander than either of the others. It was almost all pure gold, and studded with diamonds; and she got besides a noble steed, with a gold broidered saddlecloth and a golden bit. Now when the king's daughter got to the church, there stood the priest and all the people in the churchyard waiting for her. Up came the prince running, and wanted to hold her horse, but she jumped off, and said, "No; thanks -- there's no need, for my horse is so well broke, it stands still when I bid him." So they all hastened into church, and the priest got into the pulpit, but no one listened to a word he said; for they all looked too much at her, and wondered whence she came; and the prince, he was far deeper in love than either of the former times. He had no eyes, or ears, or sense for anything, but just to sit and stare at her. So when the sermon was over, and the king's daughter was to go out of the church, the prince had got a firkin of pitch poured out in the porch, that he might come and help her over it; but she didn't care a bit -- she just put her foot right down into the midst of the pitch, and jumped across it; but then one of her golden shoes stuck fast in it, and as she got on her horse, up came the prince running out of the church, and asked whence she came. "I'm from Combland," said Katie. But when the prince wanted to reach her the gold shoe, she said: Bright before and dark behind, Clouds come rolling on the wind; That this prince may never see Where my good steed goes with me. So the prince couldn't tell still what had become of her, and he went about a weary time all over the world asking for "Combland," but when no one could tell him where it lay, he ordered it to be given out everywhere that he would wed the woman whose foot could fit the gold shoe. So many came of all sorts from all sides, fair and ugly alike; but there was no one who had so small a foot as to be able to get on the gold shoe. And after a long, long time, who should come but Katie's wicked stepmother, and her daughter, too, and her the gold shoe fitted; but ugly she was, and so loathly she looked, the prince only kept his word sore against his will. Still they got ready the wedding feast, and she was dressed up and decked out as a bride; but as they rode to church, a little bird sat upon a tree and sang: A bit off her heel, And a bit off her toe; Katie Woodencloak's tiny shoe Is full of blood -- that's all I know. And, sure enough, when they looked to it, the bird told the truth, for blood gushed out of the shoe. Then all the maids and women who were about the palace had to go up to try on the shoe, but there was none of them whom it would fit at all. "But where's Katie Woodencloak?" asked the prince, when all the rest had tried the shoe, for he understood the song of birds very well, and bore in mind what the little bird had said. "Oh, she! think of that!" said the rest; it's no good her coming forward. "Why, she's legs like a horse." "Very true, I daresay," said the prince; "but since all the others have tried, Katie may as well try too." "Katie!" he bawled out through the door; and Katie came trampling upstairs, and her wooden cloak clattered as if a whole regiment of dragoons were charging up. "Now, you must try the shoe on, and be a princess, you too," said the other maids, and laughed and made game of her. So Katie took up the shoe, and put her foot into it like nothing, and threw off her wooden cloak; and so there she stood in her gold kirtle, and it shone so that the sunbeams glistened from her; and, lo! on her other foot she had the fellow to the gold shoe. So when the prince knew her again, he grew so glad, he ran up to her and threw his arms round her, and gave her a kiss; and when he heard she was a king's daughter, he got gladder still, and then came the wedding-feast; and so Snip, snip, snover, This story's over. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , 2nd ed., translated by George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), pp. 411-28 . Translation slightly revised by D. L. Ashliman. Link to the tale in Norwegian: Kari Trestakk. This is a text from Projekt Runeberg. Return to the table of contents . The Broken Pitcher England Once upon a time there were two sisters, one called Orange and the other Lemon. Their mother loved Lemon much more than Orange, and made Orange do all the hard work in the house, and fetch water from the well every day. One day Orange went to the well as usual, taking her pitcher with her, and as she was stooping down to fill it with water the pitcher fell out of her hand into the well and was broken. Then Orange was very grieved and dared not go home; so she sat down on the grass and cried. After she had cried awhile she looked up from the ground and saw a beautiful fairy standing near her. And the fairy said, "Why dost thou cry, little Orange?" Orange said, "Because I have broken our pitcher, and mother will beat me." "Dry up thy tears," said the fairy, "and see, I live in the well and know all about you, and I will help you, because thou art such a good little girl, and so ill used." Then the fairy struck the ground, and the pitcher came back out of the well sound and whole, and just as it was before, except that it had arms and legs. "See," said the fairy, "this little pitcher shall always be thy friend, and now it will walk home with thee and carry the water itself. Go home now, tell it to nobody, and be a good little girl." Having said this the fairy disappeared down the well. After this Orange soon dried up her tears, and, taking hold of the pitcher's hand, she and the pitcher walked home together. But when they got to the door of her mother's house the arms and legs of the pitcher were gone. Then Orange took the pitcher into the house, and, remembering what the fairy had said, told what had happened to nobody. The next morning Orange awoke very early, as she always did, and said to herself, "How tired I shall be before night comes, for there is so much work to do in the house." So she got up, and when she came downstairs she found the pitcher, with its arms and legs on, sweeping the kitchen and doing all the hard work, and ever after the pitcher was her faithful and helpful friend. Source: Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales with Other Traditional Remains: Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby, and Nottingham (London: David Nutt, 1895), no. 29, pp. 29-30 . Addy's source: "From Sheffield." Return to the table of contents . Ashey Pelt Ireland Well, my grandmother she told me that in them auld days a ewe might be your mother. It is a very lucky thing to have a black ewe. A man married again, and his daughter, Ashey Pelt, was unhappy. She cried alone, and the black ewe came to her from under the greystone in the field and said, "Don't cry. Go and find a rod behind the stone and strike it three times, and whatever you want will come." So she did as she was bid. She wanted to go to a party. Dress and horses and all came to her, but she was bound to be back before twelve o'clock or all the enchantment would go, all she had would vanish. The sisters they did na' like her, she was so pretty, and the stepmother she kept her in wretchedness just. She was most lovely. At the party the prince fell in love with her, and she forgot to get back in time. In her speed a-running she dropped her silk slipper, and he sent and he went over all the country to find the lady it wad fit. When he came to Ashey Pelt's door he did not see her. The sisters was busy a-nipping and a-clipping at their feet to get on the silk slipper, for the king's son he had given out that he loved that lady sae weel he wad be married on whaever could fit on that slipper. The sisters they drove Ashey Pelt out bye to be out of the road, and they bid her mind the cows. They pared down their feet till one o' them could just squeeze it on. But she was in the quare agony I'm telling you. So off they rode away; but when he was passing the field the voice of the auld ewe cried on him to stop, and she says, says she: Nippet foot, and clippet foot Behind the king's son rides, But bonny foot, and pretty foot Is with the cathering hides. So he rode back and found her among the cows, and he married her, and if they lived happy, so may you and me. Source: M. Damant, "Folktales," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 6 (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1895), pp. 305-306 . Damant's source: "The following tale was told me by a woman now living, a native of Ulster, aged about sixty." Return to the table of contents . Fair, Brown, and Trembling Ireland King Aedh Cúrucha lived in Tir Conal, and he had three daughters, whose names were Fair, Brown, and Trembling. Fair and Brown had new dresses, and went to church every Sunday. Trembling was kept at home to do the cooking and work. They would not let her go out of the house at all; for she was more beautiful than the other two, and they were in dread she might marry before themselves. They carried on in this way for seven years. At the end of seven years the son of the king of Omanya [the ancient Emania in Ulster] fell in love with the eldest sister. One Sunday morning, after the other two had gone to church, the old henwife came into the kitchen to Trembling, and said, "It's at church you ought to be this day, instead of working here at home." "How could I go?" said Trembling. "I have no clothes good enough to wear at church; and if my sisters were to see me there, they'd kill me for going out of the house." "I'll give you," said the henwife, "a finer dress than either of them has ever seen. And now tell me what dress will you have?" "I'll have," said Trembling, "a dress as white as snow, and green shoes for my feet." The henwife put on the cloak of darkness, clipped a piece from the old clothes the young woman had on, and asked for the whitest robes in the world and the most beautiful that could be found, and a pair of green shoes. That moment she had the robe and the shoes, and she brought them to Trembling, who put them on. When Trembling was dressed and ready, the henwife said, "I have a honey-bird here to sit on your right shoulder, and a honey-finger to put on your left. At the door stands a milk-white mare, with a golden saddle for you to sit on, and a golden bridle to hold in your hand." Trembling sat on the golden saddle; and when she was ready to start, the henwife said, "You must not go inside the door of the church, and the minute the people rise up at the end of mass, do you make off, and ride home as fast as the mare will carry you." When Trembling came to the door of the church there was no one inside who could get a glimpse of her but was striving to know who she was; and when they saw her hurrying away at the end of mass, they ran out to overtake her. But no use in their running; she was away before any man could come near her. From the minute she left the church till she got home, she overtook the wind before her, and outstripped the wind behind. She came down at the door, went in, and found the henwife had dinner ready. She put off the white robes, and had on her old dress in a twinkling. When the two sisters came home the henwife asked, "Have you any news today from the church?" "We have great news," said they. "We saw a wonderful, grand lady at the church door. The like of the robes she had we have never seen on woman before. It's little that was thought of our dresses beside what she had on; and there wasn't a man at the church, from the king to the beggar, but was trying to look at her and know who she was." The sisters would give no peace till they had two dresses like the robes of the strange lady; but honey-birds and honey-fingers were not to be found. Next Sunday the two sisters went to church again, and left the youngest at home to cook the dinner. After they had gone, the henwife came in and asked, "Will you go to church today?" "I would go," said Trembling, "if I could get the going." "What robe will you wear?" asked the henwife. "The finest black satin that can be found, and red shoes for my feet." "What color do you want the mare to be?" "I want her to be so black and so glossy that I can see myself in her body." The henwife put on the cloak of darkness, and asked for the robes and the mare. That moment she had them. When Trembling was dressed, the henwife put the honey-bird on her right shoulder and the honey-finger on her left. The saddle on the mare was silver, and so was the bridle. When Trembling sat in the saddle and was going away, the henwife ordered her strictly not to go inside the door of the church, but to rush away as soon as the people rose at the end of mass, and hurry home on the mare before any man could stop her. That Sunday the people were more astonished than ever, and gazed at her more than the first time; and all they were thinking of was to know who she was. But they had no chance; for the moment the people rose at the end of mass she slipped from the church, was in the silver saddle, and home before a man could stop her or talk to her. The henwife had the dinner ready. Trembling took off her satin robe, and had on her old clothes before her sisters got home. "What news have you today?" asked the henwife of the sisters when they came from the church. "Oh, we saw the grand strange lady again! And it's little that any man could think of our dresses after looking at the robes of satin that she had on! And all at church, from high to low, had their mouths open, gazing at her, and no man was looking at us." The two sisters gave neither rest nor peace till they got dresses as nearly like the strange lady's robes as they could find. Of course they were not so good; for the like of those robes could not be found in Erin. When the third Sunday came, Fair and Brown went to church dressed in black satin. They left Trembling at home to work in the kitchen, and told her to be sure and have dinner ready when they came back. After they had gone and were out of sight, the henwife came to the kitchen and said, "Well, my dear, are you for church today?" "I would go if I had a new dress to wear." "I'll get you any dress you ask for. What dress would you like?" asked the henwife. "A dress red as a rose from the waist down, and white as snow from the waist up; a cape of green on my shoulders; and a hat on my head with a red, a white, and a green feather in it; and shoes for my feet with the toes red, the middle white, and the backs and heels green." The henwife put on the cloak of darkness, wished for all these things, and had them. When Trembling was dressed, the henwife put the honey-bird on her right shoulder and the honey-finger on her left, and placing the hat on her head, clipped a few hairs from one lock and a few from another with her scissors, and that moment the most beautiful golden hair was flowing down over the girl's shoulders. Then the henwife asked what kind of a mare she would ride. She said white, with blue and gold-colored diamond-shaped spots all over her body, on her back a saddle of gold, and on her head a golden bridle. The mare stood there before the door, and a bird sitting between her ears, which began to sing as soon as Trembling was in the saddle, and never stopped till she came home from the church. The fame of the beautiful strange lady had gone out through the world, and all the princes and great men that were in it came to church that Sunday, each one hoping that it was himself would have her home with him after mass. The son of the king of Omanya forgot all about the eldest sister, and remained outside the church, so as to catch the strange lady before she could hurry away. The church was more crowded than ever before, and there were three times as many outside. There was such a throng before the church that Trembling could only come inside the gate. As soon as the people were rising at the end of mass, the lady slipped out through the gate, was in the golden saddle in an instant, and sweeping away ahead of the wind. But if she was, the prince of Omanya was at her side, and, seizing her by the foot, he ran with the mare for thirty perches, and never let go of the beautiful lady till the shoe was pulled from her foot, and he was left behind with it in his had. She came home as fast as the mare could carry her, and was thinking all the time that the henwife would kill her for losing the shoe. Seeing her so vexed and so changed in the face, the old woman asked, "What's the trouble that's on you now?" "Oh! I've lost one of the shoes off my feet," said Trembling. "Don't mind that; don't be vexed," said the henwife; "maybe it's the best thing that ever happened to you." Then Trembling gave up all the things she had to the henwife, put on her old clothes, and went to work in the kitchen. When the sisters came home, the henwife asked, "Have you any news from the church?" "We have indeed," said they; "for we saw the grandest sight today. The strange lady came again, in grander array than before. On herself and the horse she rode were the finest colors of the world, and between the ears of the horse was a bird which never stopped singing from the time she came till she went away. The lady herself is the most beautiful woman ever seen by man in Erin." After Trembling had disappeared from the church, the son of the king of Omanya said to the other kings' sons, "I will have that lady for my own." They all said, "You didn't win her just by taking the shoe off her foot, you'll have to win her by the point of the sword; you'll have to fight for her with us before you can call her your own." "Well," said the son of the king of Omanya, "when I find the lady that shoe will fit, I'll fight for her, never fear, before I leave her to any of you." Then all the kings' sons were uneasy, and anxious to know who was she that lost the shoe; and they began to travel all over Erin to know could they find her. The prince of Omanya and all the others went in a great company together, and made the round of Erin; they went everywhere -- north, south, east, and west. They visited every place where a woman was to be found, and left not a house in the kingdom they did not search, to know could they find the woman the shoe would fit, not caring whether she was rich or poor, of high or low degree. The prince of Omanya always kept the shoe; and when the young women saw it, they had great hopes, for it was of proper size, neither large nor small, and it would beat any man to know of what material it was made. One thought it would fit her if she cut a little from her great toe; and another, with too short a foot, put something in the tip of her stocking. But no use, they only spoiled their feet, and were curing them for months afterwards. The two sisters, Fair and Brown, heard that the princes of the world were looking all over Erin for the woman that could wear the shoe, and every day they were talking of trying it on; and one day Trembling spoke up and said, "Maybe it's my foot that the shoe will fit." "Oh, the breaking of the dog's foot on you! Why say so when you were at home every Sunday?" They were that way waiting, and scolding the younger sister, till the princes were near the place. The day they were to come, the sisters put Trembling in a closet, and locked the door on her. When the company came to the house, the prince of Omanya gave the shoe to the sisters. But though they tried and tried, it would fit neither of them. "Is there any other young woman in the house?" asked the prince. "There is," said Trembling, speaking up in the closet; "I'm here." "Oh! we have her for nothing but to put out the ashes," said the sisters. But the prince and the others wouldn't leave the house till they had seen her; so the two sisters had to open the door. When Trembling came out, the shoe was given to her, and it fitted exactly. The prince of Omanya looked at her and said, "You are the woman the shoe fits, and you are the woman I took the shoe from." Then Trembling spoke up, and said, "Do stay here till I return." Then she went to the henwife's house. The old woman put on the cloak of darkness, got everything for her she had the first Sunday at church, and put her on the white mare in the same fashion. Then Trembling rode along the highway to the front of the house. All who saw her the first time said, "This is the lady we saw at church." Then she went away a second time, and a second time came back on the black mare in the second dress which the henwife gave her. All who saw her the second Sunday said, "That is the lady we saw at church." A third time she asked for a short absence, and soon came back on the third mare and in the third dress. All who saw her the third time said, "That is the lady we saw at church." Every man was satisfied, and knew that she was the woman. Then all the princes and great men spoke up, and said to the son of the king of Omanya, "You'll have to fight now for her before we let her go with you." "I'm here before you, ready for combat," answered the prince. Then the son of the king of Lochlin stepped forth. The struggle began, and a terrible struggle it was. They fought for nine hours; and then the son of the king of Lochlin stopped, gave up his claim, and left the field. Next day the son of the king of Spain fought six hours, and yielded his claim. On the third day the son of the king of Nyerfó fought eight hours, and stopped. The fourth day the son of the king of Greece fought six hours, and stopped. On the fifth day no more strange princes wanted to fight; and all the sons of kings in Erin said they would not fight with a man of their own land, that the strangers had had their chance, and as no others came to claim the woman, she belonged of right to the son of the king of Omanya. The marriage day was fixed, and the invitations were sent out. The wedding lasted for a year and a day. When the wedding was over, the king's son brought home the bride, and when the time came a son was born. The young woman sent for her eldest sister, Fair, to be with her and care for her. One day, when trembling was well, and when her husband was away hunting, the two sisters went out to walk; and when they came to the seaside, the eldest pushed the youngest sister in. A great whale came and swallowed her. The eldest sister came home alone, and the husband asked, "Where is your sister?" "She has gone home to her father in Ballyshannon; now that I am well, I don't need her." "Well," said the husband, looking at her, "I'm in dread it's my wife that has gone." "Oh! no," said she; "it's my sister Fair that's gone." Since the sisters were very much alike, the prince was in doubt. That night he put his sword between them, and said, "If you are my wife, this sword will get warm; if not, it will stay cold." In the morning when he rose up, the sword was as cold as when he put it there. It happened when the two sisters were walking by the seashore, that a little cowboy was down by the water minding cattle, and saw Fair push Trembling into the sea; and next day, when the tide came in, he saw the whale swim up and throw her out on the sand. When she was on the sand she said to the cowboy, "When you go home in the evening with the cows, tell the master that my sister Fair pushed me into the sea yesterday; that a whale swallowed me, and then threw me out, but will come again and swallow me with the coming of the next tide; then he'll go out with the tide, and come again with tomorrow's tide, and throw me again on the strand. The whale will cast me out thee times. I'm under the enchantment of this whale, and cannot leave the beach or escape myself. Unless my husband saves me before I'm swallowed the fourth time, I shall be lost. He must come and shoot the whale with a silver bullet when he turns on the broad of his back. Under the breast fin of the whale is a reddish-brown spot. My husband must hit him in that spot, for it is the only place in which he can be killed." When the cowboy got home, the eldest sister gave him a draught of oblivion, and he did not tell. Next day he went again to the sea. The whale came and cast Trembling on shore again. She asked the boy, "Did you tell the master what I told you to tell him?" "I did not," said he; "I forgot." "How did you forget?" asked she. "The woman of the house gave me a drink that made me forget." "Well, don't forget telling him this night; and if she gives you a drink, don't take it from her." As soon as the cowboy came home, the eldest sister offered him a drink. He refused to take it till he had delivered his message and told all to the master. The third day the prince went down with his gun and a silver bullet in it. He was not long down when the whale came and threw Trembling upon the beach as the two days before. She had no power to speak to her husband till he had killed the whale. Then the whale went out, turned over once on the broad of his back, and showed the spot for a moment only. That moment the prince fired. He had but the one chance, and a short one at that; but he took it, and hit the spot, and the whale, mad with pain, made the sea all around red with blood, and died. That minute Trembling was able to speak, and went home with her husband, who sent word to her father what the eldest sister had done. The father came, and told him any death he chose to give her to give it. The prince told the father he would leave her life and death with himself. The father had her put out then on the sea in a barrel, with provisions in it for seven years. In time Trembling had a second child, a daughter. The prince and she sent the cowboy to school, and trained him up as one of their own children, and said, "If the little girl that is born to us now lives, no other man in the world will get her but him." The cowboy and the prince's daughter lived on till they were married. The mother said to her husband, "You could not have saved me from the whale but for the little cowboy; on that account I don't grudge him my daughter." The son of the king of Omanya and Trembling had fourteen children, and they lived happily till the two died of old age. Source: Jeremiah Curtin, Myths and Folk-Lore of Ireland (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1890), pp. 78-92 . The motif of the false bride, which plays a prominent role in the latter part of this story is common in folktales. It is often an integral part of the following folktale types: Type 313 (The Girl Helps the Hero Flee) Type 403 (The Black and the White Bride) Type 408 (The Love of Three Oranges) Type 412 (The Girl Whose Soul Was in Her Necklace) Type 450 (Little Brother, Little Sister) Type 533 (The Goose Girl) Type 533* (The Snake Helper) Type 870B* (The True Bride Sews a Wedding Dress) Return to the table of contents . The Sharp Grey Sheep Scotland There was a king and a queen, and they had a daughter, and the queen found death, and the king married another. And the last queen was bad to the daughter of the first queen, and she used to beat her and put her out of the door. She sent her to herd the sheep, and was not giving her what should suffice her. And there was a sharp (horned) grey sheep in the flock that was coming with meat to her. The queen was taking wonder that she was keeping alive and that she was not getting meat enough from herself, and she told it to the henwife. The henwife thought that she would send her own daughter to watch how she was getting meat, and Ni Mhaol Charach [Bald Scabby Thing], the henwife's daughter, went to herd the sheep with the queen's daughter. The sheep would not come to her so long as Ni Mhaol Charach was there, and Ni Mhaol Charach was staying all the day with her. The queen's daughter was longing for her meat, and she said, "Set thy head on my knee, and I will dress thy hair." And Ni Mhaol Charach set her head on the knee of the queen's daughter, and she slept. The sheep came with meat to the queen's daughter, but the eye that was in the back of the head of the bald black-skinned girl, the henwife's daughter, was open, and she saw all that went on, and when she awoke she went home and told it to her mother, and the henwife told it to the queen, and when the queen understood how the girl was getting meat, nothing at all would serve her but that the sheep should be killed. The sheep came to the queen's daughter and said to her, "They are going to kill me, but steal thou my skin and gather my bones and roll them in my skin, and I will come alive again, and I will come to thee again." The sheep was killed, and the queen's daughter stole her skin, and she gathered her bones and her hoofs and she rolled them in the skin; but she forgot the little hoofs. The sheep came alive again, but she was lame. She came to the king's daughter with a halting step, and she said, "Thou didst as I desired thee, but thou hast forgotten the little hoofs." And she was keeping her in meat after that. There was a young prince who was hunting and coming often past her, and he saw how pretty she was, and he asked, "Who's she?" And they told him, and he took love for her, and he was often coming the way; but the bald black-skinned girl, the henwife's daughter, took notice of him, and she told it to her mother, and tho henwife told it to the queen. The queen was wishful to get knowledge what man it was, and the henwife sought till she found out whom he (was), and she told the queen. When the queen heard who it was she was wishful to send her own daughter in his way, and she brought in the first queen's daughter, and she set her own daughter to herd in her place, and she was making the daughter of the first queen do the cooking and every service about the house. The first queen's daughter was out a turn, and the prince met her, and he gave her a pair of golden shoes. And he was wishful to see her at the sermon, but her muime [stepmother] would not let her go there. But when the rest would go she would make ready, and she would go after them, and she would sit where he might see her, but she would rise and go before the people would scatter, and she would be at the house and everything in order before her muime would come. But the third time she was there the prince was wishful to go with her, and he sat near to the door, and when she went he was keeping an eye on her, and he rose and went after her. She was running home, and she lost one of her shoes in the mud; and he got the shoe, and because he could not see her he said that the one who had the foot that would fit the shoe was the wife that would be his. The queen was wishful that the shoe should fit her own daughter, and she put the daughter of the first queen in hiding, so that she should not be seen till she should try if the shoe should fit her own daughter. When the prince come to try the shoe on her, her foot was too big, but she was very anxious that the shoe should fit her, and she spoke to the henwife about it. The henwife cut the points of her toes off that the shoe might fit her, and the shoe went on her when the points of the toes were cut. When the wedding day came the daughter of the first queen was set in hiding in a nook that was behind the fire. When the people were all gathered together, a bird came to the window, and he cried, "The blood 's in the shoe, and the pretty foot's in the nook at the back of the fire." One of them said, "What is that creature saying?" And the queen said, "It's no matter what that creature is saying; it is but a nasty, beaky, lying creature." The bird came again to the window; and the third time he came, the prince said, "We will go and see what he is saying." And he rose and he went out, and the bird cried, "The blood's in the shoe, and the pretty foot's in the nook that is at the back of the fire." He returned in, and he ordered the nook at the back of the fire to be searched. And they searched it, and they found the first queen's daughter there, and the golden shoe on the one foot. They cleaned the blood out of the other shoe, and they tried it on her, and the shoe fitted her, and its like was on the other foot. The prince left the daughter of the last queen, and he married the daughter of the first queen, and he took her from them with him, and she was rich and lucky after that. Source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 286-89 . Campbell's source: "From John Dewar, laborer, Glendaruail [Glendaruel], Cowal." Return to the table of contents . Rashin-Coatie Scotland Once, a long time ago, there was a gentleman had two lassies. The oldest was ugly and ill natured, but the youngest was a bonnie lassie and good; but the ugly one was the favorite with her father and mother. So they ill used the youngest in every way, and they sent her into the woods to herd cattle, and all the food she got was a little porridge and whey. Well, amongst the cattle was a red calf, and one day it said to the lassie, "Gee that porridge and whey to the doggie, and come wi' me." So the lassie followed the calf through the wood, and they came to a bonnie hoosie, where there was a nice dinner ready for them; and after they had feasted on everything nice they went back to the herding. Every day the calf took the lassie away, and feasted her on dainties; and every day she grew bonnier. This disappointed the father and mother and the ugly sister. They expected that the rough usage she was getting would take away her beauty; and they watched and watched until they saw the calf take the lassie away to the feast. So they resolved to kill the calf; and not only that, but the lassie was to be compelled to kill him with an axe. Her ugly sister was to hold his head, and the lassie who loved him had to give the blow and kill him. She could do nothing but greet [weep]; but the calf told her not to greet, but to do as he bade her; and his plan was that instead of coming down on his head she was to come down on the lassie's head who was holding him, and then she was to jump on his back and they would run off. Well, the day came for the calf to be killed, and everything was ready -- the ugly lassie holding his head, and the bonnie lassie armed with the axe. So she raised the axe, and came down on the ugly sister's head; and in the confusion that took place she got on the calf's back and they ran away. And they ran and better nor ran till they came to a meadow where grew a great lot of rashes; and, as the lassie had not on many clothes, they pu'ed rashes, and made a coatie for her. And they set off again and traveled, and traveled, till they came to the king's house. They went in, and asked if they wanted a servant. The mistress said she wanted a kitchen lassie, and she would take Rashin-Coatie. So Rashin-Coatie said she would stop, if they keepit the calf too. They were willing to do that. So the lassie and the calf stoppit in the king's house, and everybody was well pleased with her; and when Yule came, they said she was to stop at home and make the dinner, while all the rest went to the kirk. After they were away the calf asked if she would like to go. She said she would, but she had no clothes, and she could not leave the dinner. The calf said he would give her clothes, and make the dinner too. He went out, and came back with a grand dress, all silk and satin, and such a nice pair of slippers. The lassie put on the dress, and before she left she said: Ilka peat gar anither burn, An' ilka spit gar anither turn, An' ilka pot gar anither play, Till I come frae the kirk on gude Yule day. So she went to the kirk, and nobody kent it was Rashin-Coatie. They wondered who the bonnie lady could be; and, as soon as the young prince saw her, he fell in love with her, and resolved he would find out who she was, before she got home; but Rashin-Coatie left before the rest, so that she might get home in time to take off her dress, and look after the dinner. When the prince saw her leaving, he made for the door to stop her; but she jumped past him, and in the hurry lost one of her shoes. The prince kept the shoe, and Rashin-Coatie got home all right, and the folk said the dinner was very nice. Now the prince was resolved to find out who the bonnie lady was, and he sent a servant through all the land with the shoe. Every lady was to try it on, and the prince promised to marry the one it would fit. That servant went to a great many houses, but could not find a lady that the shoe would go on, it was so little and neat. At last he came to a henwife's house, and her daughter had little feet. At first the shoe would not go on, but she paret her feet, and clippit her toes, until the shoes went on. Now the prince was very angry. He knew it was not the lady that he wanted; but, because he had promised to marry whoever the shoe fitted, he had to keep his promise. The marriage day came, and, as they were all riding to the kirk, a little bird flew through the air, and it sang: Clippit feet an' paret taes is on the saidle set; But bonnie feet an' braw feet sits in the kitchen neuk. "What's that ye say?" said the prince "Oh," says the henwife, "would ye mind what a feel bird says?" But the prince said, "Sing that again, bonnie birdie." So the bird sings: Clippit feet an' paret taes is on the saidle set; But bonnie feet an' braw feet sits in the kitchen neuk. The prince turned his horse and rode home, and went straight to his father's kitchen, and there sat Rashin-Coatie. He kent her at once, she was so bonnie; and when she tried on the shoe it fitted her, and so the prince married Rashin-Coatie, and they lived happy, and built a house for the red calf, who had been so kind to her. Source: George Douglas, Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales (New York: A. L. Burt Company, n.d. [ca. 1901]), pp. 86-89 . Link to another version of this story, but one including an incest motif and thus categorized as a type 510B folktale: Rashen Coatie . Return to the table of contents . The Hearth-Cat Portugal There was once a schoolmistress who was a widow, and had a daughter who was very plain. This mistress had a pupil who was very pretty, and the daughter of a traveler. The mistress was very attached to her father, and every day would beg the girl to ask him to marry her, promising to give her porridge made with honey. The girl went home to ask her father to marry her schoolmistress, as she would then give her porridge made with honey. To this request the father replied that he would not marry her, for he well knew that though she said now that she would give her porridge made with honey, later on she would give her porridge with gall. Yet, as the child began to cry, begging her father to consent, the father, who loved his child very much, in order to comfort her, replied that he would order a pair of boots to be made of iron, and hang them up until the boots would rust to pieces with age, when he would marry the mistress. The little girl, very pleased to hear this, went immediately to tell the mistress, who then instructed her pupil to wet the boots every day. The little girl did so, and after a while the boots fell to pieces, and she went and told her father of it. He then said that he would marry the mistress, and on the following day married her. So long as the father was at home the child was treated with kindness and affection, but the moment he went out the mistress was very unkind to her, and treated her badly. She one day sent her to graze a cow, and gave her a loaf, which she desired her to bring back whole, and an earthen pot with water, out of which she expected her to drink, and yet was to bring back full. One day the mistress told the girl that she wished her to employ herself in winding some skeins of thread until the evening. The little girl went away crying and bewailing her lot; but the cow comforted her, and told her not to be distressed, -- to fix the skein on her horns and unravel the thread. The good cow after that took out all the crumb from the loaf by making a small hole with one of her horns, and then stopped the aperture, and gave the girl the loaf back again entire. In the evening the girl returned home. When her stepmother saw that she had finished her task, and brought all the thread ready wound, she was very vexed and wanted to beat her, saying that she was sure the cow had had something to do with it, and next day ordered the animal to be killed. At this the girl began to cry very bitterly, but the step-mother told her that she would have to clean and wash the cow's entrails in a tank they had, however grieved she might feel for the loss of the animal. The cow, however, again told the girl not to be troubled, but to go and wash her entrails, but was to be careful to save whatever she saw come out of them. The girl did so, and when she was cleaning them she saw a ball of gold come out and fall into the water. The girl went into the tank to search for it, and there she saw a house with everything in it in disorder, and she began to arrange and make the house look tidy. She suddenly heard footsteps, and in her hurry she hid herself behind the door. The fairies entered and began to look about, and a dog came in also with them, and went up to where she was and began to bark, saying: "Bow, bow, bow, behind the door hides somebody who did us good, and will yet render us more services. Bow, bow, bow, behind the door hides somebody who has done us good, and will yet render us more services." The fairies, as they searched about, hearing the dog bark, discovered where the girl was hiding, and began to say to her, "We endow you by the power we possess with the gift of beauty, making you the most lovely maiden ever seen." The next fairy then said, "I cast a sweet spell over you, so that when you open } our mouth to speak, pearls and gold shall drop from your lips." The third fairy coming forward said, "I endow you with every blessing, making you the happiest maiden in the world. Take this wand, it will grant you whatever you may ask." The girl then left the enchanted region, and returned home, and as soon as the mistress's daughter saw her approach she commenced to cry out to her mother to come quickly and see the hearth-cat, who had come back at last. The mistress ran to greet her, and asked her where and what she had been doing all that time. The girl related the contrary of what she had seen, as the fairies had instructed her to do: that she had found a tidy house, and that she had disarranged everything in it, to make it look untidy. The mistress sent her own daughter there, and she had hardly arrived at the house when she began at once to do as her half-sister had told her; she disarranged everything, to make the house look untidy and uncared for. And when she heard the fairies coming in she hid behind the door. The little dog saw her, and barking at her said, "Behind the door stands one who has done us much harm, and will still continue to molest us. Bow, bow, bow, behind the door stands one who has done us much harm, and will continue to molest us on the first opportunity." The fairies hearing this approached her, and one began to say, "I throw a spell over you which will render you the ugliest maid that can be found." The next one took up the word and said, "I bewitch you, so that when you attempt to speak all manner of filth shall fall out of your mouth." And the third fairy said, "I also bewitch you, and you shall become the poorest and most wretched maid in existence." The mistress's daughter returned home, thinking she was looking quite a beauty; but when she came up close to her mother, and began to speak, the mother burst out crying on seeing her own daughter so disfigured and wretched. Full of rage, she sent her step-daughter to the kitchen, saying, that she was the hearth-cat, and that she should take care that she kept there, as the only place which was fit for her. On a certain day the mistress and her daughter repaired to some races which were then taking place, but when the girl saw that they had left the house, she asked her divining rod to give her a very handsome dress, boots, a hat, and everything complete. She dressed and adorned herself with all she had, and went to the races, and stood in front of the royal stand. The mistress's daughter instantly saw her, and began to exclaim and cry out at the top of her voice, in the midst of all the people present, saying, "Oh! mother, mother, that beautiful maiden over there is our very hearth-cat." The mother, to quiet her, told her to be calm; that the maiden was not her step-sister, as she had remained at home under lock and key. The races were hardly over when the girl departed home; but the king, who had seen her, was in love with her. The moment the mother reached home she asked the hearth-cat whether she had been out. She replied, that she had not; and showed her face besmeared with smut. Next day the girl asked the wand to strike and give her another dress which would be more splendid than the previous one. She put on her things and repaired to the races. The moment the king perceived her he felt very pleased indeed; but the races were hardly concluded than she retired in haste, and went into her carriage and drove home, leaving the king more in love than ever with her. The third day the girl asked the divining rod to give her a garment which should surpass the other two in richness and beauty, and other shoes; and she went and attended the races. When the king saw her, he was delighted, but was again disappointed to see her depart before the races were concluded. In her hurry to enter her carriage quickly, she let fall one of her slippers. The king picked it up and returned to the palace, and fell lovesick. The slipper had some letters upon it which said, "This shoe will only fit its owner." The whole kingdom was searched to find the lady whose foot would be found to fit the slipper exactly, yet no one was found. The schoolmistress went to the palace to try the slipper on, but all her efforts were in vain. After her, her daughter followed, and endeavored her best to fit the slipper on, but with no better success. There only remained the hearthcat. The king inquired who was the next to try on the slipper, and asked the mistress if there was any other lady left in her house who could fit on the slipper. The schoolmistress then said that there only remained a hearth-cat in her house, but that she had never worn such a slipper. The king ordered the girl to be brought to the palace, and the mistress had no alternative but to do so. The king himself insisted on trying the slipper on the girl's foot, and the moment she put her little foot into the slipper and drew it on, it fitted exactly. The king then arranged that she should remain in the palace and married her. And he ordered the mistress and her daughter to be put to death. Source: Consiglieri Pedroso, Portuguese Folk-Tales , translated from the original Ms. by Henriqueta Monteiro, with an introduction by W. R. S. Ralston (London: Published for the Folk Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1882), no. 18, pp. 75-79 . This tale combines elements of type 480 "The Kind and the Unkind Girls" with type 510A "Cinderella." Return to the table of contents . Cinderella Italy Once upon a time there was a man who had three daughters. He was once ordered to go away to work, and said the them, "Since I am about making a journey, what do you want me to bring you when I return?" One asked for a handsome dress; the other, a fine hat and a beautiful shawl. He said to the youngest, "And you, Cinderella, what do you want?" They called her Cinderella because she always sat in the chimney corner. "You must buy me a little bird Verdeliò." "The simpleton! She does not know what to do with the bird! Instead of ordering a handsome dress, a fine shawl, she takes a bird. Who knows what she will do with it!" "Silence!" she says. "It pleases me." The father went, and on his return brought the dress, hat, and shawl for the two sisters, and the little bird for Cinderella. The father was employed at the court, and one day the king said to him, "I am going to give three balls; if you want to bring your daughters, do so; they will amuse themselves a little." "As you wish," he replies, "thanks!" and accepts. He went home and said, "What do you think, girls? His majesty wishes you to attend his ball." "There, you see, Cinderella, if you had only asked for a handsome dress! This evening we are going to the ball." She replied, "It matters nothing to me! You go; I am not coming." In the evening, when the time came, they adorned themselves, saying to Cinderella, "Come along, there will be room for you, too." "I don't want to go; you go; I don't want to." "But," said their father, "let us go, let us go! Dress and come along; let her stay." When they had gone, she went to the bird and said, "O Bird Verdeliò, make me more beautiful than I am!" She became clothed in a sea green dress, with so many diamonds that it blinded you to behold her. The bird made ready two purses of money, and said to her, "Take these two purses, enter your carriage, and away!" She set out for the ball, and left the bird Verdeliò at home. She entered the ballroom. Scarcely had the gentlemen seen this beautiful lady (she dazzled them on all sides), when the king, just think of it, began to dance with her the whole evening. After he had danced with her all the evening, his majesty stopped, and she stood by her sisters. While she was at her sisters' side, she drew out her handkerchief, and a bracelet fell out. "Oh, Signora," said the eldest sister, "you have dropped this." "Keep it for yourself," she said. "Oh, if Cinderella were only here, who knows what might not have happened to her?" The king had given orders that when this lady went away they should find out where she lived. After she had remained a little she left the ball. You can imagine whether the servants were on the lookout! She entered her carriage and away! She perceives that she is followed, takes the money and begins to throw it out of the window of the carriage. The greedy servants, I tell you, seeing all that money, thought no more of her, but stopped to pick up the money. She returned home and went upstairs. "O Bird Verdeliò, make me homelier than I am!" You ought to see how ugly, how horrid, she became, all ashes. When the sisters returned, they cried, "Cin-der-ella!" "Oh, leave her alone," said her father. "She is asleep now, leave her along!" But they went up and showed her the large and beautiful bracelet. "Do you see, you simpleton? You might have had it." "It matters nothing to me." Their father said, "Let us go to supper, you little geese." Let us return to the king, who was awaiting her servants, who had not the courage to appear, but kept away. He calls them. "How did the matter go?" The fall at his feet. "Thus and thus! She threw out so much money!" "Wretches, you are nothing else." he said. "Were you afraid of not being rewarded? Well! tomorrow evening, attention, under pain of death." The next evening the usual ball. The sisters say, "Will you come this evening, Cinderella?" "Oh," she says, "don't bother me! I don't want to go." Their father cries out to them, "How troublesome you are! Let her alone!" So they began to adorn themselves more handsomely than the former evening, and departed. "Good-bye, Cinderella!" When they had gone, Cinderella went to the bird and said, "Little Bird Verdeliò, make me more beautiful than I am!" Then she became clothed in sea green, embroidered with all the fish of the sea, mingled with diamonds more than you could believe. The bird said, "Take these two bags of sand, and when you are followed, throw it out, and so they will be blinded." She entered her carriage and set out for the ball. As soon as his majesty saw her he began to dance with her and danced as long as he could. After he had danced as long as he could (she did not grow weary, but he did), she placed herself near her sisters, drew out her handkerchief, and there fell out a beautiful necklace all made of coal. The second sister said, "Signora, you have dropped this." She replied, "Keep it for yourself." "If Cinderella were here, who knows what might not happen to her! Tomorrow she must come!" After a while she leaves the ball. The servants (just think, under pain of death!) were all on the alert, and followed her. She began to throw out all the sand, and they were blinded. She went home, dismounted, and went upstairs. "Little Bird Verdeliò, make me homelier than I am!" She became frightfully homely. When her sisters returned they began from below, "Cin-der-ella! if you only knew what that lady gave us!" "It matters nothing to me!" "Yes, yes! you would have had it!" The father says, "Let us go to supper and let her alone; you are really silly!" Let us return to his majesty, who was waiting for his servants to learn where she lived. Instead of that they were all brought back blinded, and had to be accompanied. "Rogue!" he exclaimed, "either this lady is some fairy or she must have some fairy who protects her." The next day the sisters began, "Cinderella, you must go this evening! Listen; it is the last evening; you must come." The father: "Oh let her alone! You are always teasing her!" Then they went away and began to prepare for the ball. When they were all prepared, they went to the ball with their father. When they had departed, Cinderella went to the bird: "Little Bird Verdeliò, make me more beautiful than I am!" Then she was dressed in all the colors of the heavens; all the comets, the stars, and moon on her dress, and the sun on her brow. She enters the ballroom. Who could look at her! For the sun alone they lower their eyes, and are all blinded. His majesty began to dance, but he could not look at her, because she dazzled him. He had already given orders to his servants to be on the lookout, under pain of death, not to go on foot, but to mount their horses that evening. After she had danced longer than on the previous evenings she placed herself by her father's side, drew out her handkerchief, and there fell out a snuffbox of gold, full of money. "Signora, you have dropped this snuffbox." "Keep it for yourself!" Imagine that man. He opens it and sees it full of money. What a joy! After she had remained a time she went home as usual. The servants followed her on horseback, quickly, at a distance from the carriage; but on horseback that was not much trouble. She perceived that she had not prepared anything to throw that evening. "Oh!" she cried. "What shall I do?" She left the carriage quickly, and in her haste lost one of her slippers. The servants picked it up, took the number of the house, and went away. Cinderella went upstairs and said, "Little Bird Verdeliò, make me more homely than I am!" The bird does not answer. After she had repeated it three or four times, it answered, "Rogue! I ought not to make you more homely, but ..." and she became homely and the bird continued, "What are you going to do now? You are discovered." She began to weep in earnest. When her sisters returned they cried, "Cin-der-ella!" You can imagine that she did not answer them this evening. "See what a beautiful snuffbox. If you had gone you might have had it." "I do not care! Go away!" Then their father called them to supper. Let us now turn to the servants who went back with the slipper and the number of the house. "Tomorrow," said his majesty, "as soon as it is day, go to that house, take a carriage, and bring that lady to the palace." The servants took the slipper and went away. The next morning they knocked at the door. Cinderella's father looked out and exclaimed, "Oh heavens! It is his majesty's carriage. What does it mean?" They open the door and the servants ascend. "What do you want of me?" asked the father. "How many daughters have you?" "Two." "Well, show them to us." The father made them come in there. "Sit down," they said to one of them. They tried the slipper on her; it was ten times too large for her. The other one sat down; it was too small for her. "But tell me, good man, have you no other daughters? Take care to tell the truth! because majesty wishes it, under pain of death!" "Gentlemen, there is another one, but I do not mention it. She is all in the ashes, the coals. If you should see her! I do not call her my daughter from shame." "We have not come for beauty, or for finery; we want to see the girl!" Her sisters began to call her, "Cin-der-ella!" but she did not answer. After a time she said, "What is the matter?" "You must come down! There are some gentlemen who wish to see you." "I don't want to come." "But you must come, you see!" "Very well; tell them I will come in a moment." She went to the little bird: "Ah little Bird Verdeliò, make me more beautiful than I am!" Then she was dressed as she had been the last evening, with the sun, and moon, and stars, and in addition, great chains all of gold everywhere about her. The bird said, "Take me away with you! Put me in your bosom!" She puts the bird in her bosom and begins to descend the stairs. "Do you hear her?" said the father. "Do you hear her? She is dragging with her the chains from the chimney corner. You can imagine how frightful she will look!" When she reached the last step, and they saw her, "Ah!" they exclaimed, and recognized the lady of the ball. You can imagine how her father and sisters were vexed. They made her sit down, and tried on the slipper, and it fitted her. Then they made her enter the carriage, and took her to his majesty, who recognized the lady of the other evenings. And you can imagine that, all in love as her was, he said to her, "Will you really be my wife?" You may believe she consents. She sends for her father and sisters, and makes them all come to the palace. They celebrate the marriage. Imagine what fine festivals were given at this wedding! The servants who had discovered where Cinderella lived were promoted to the highest positions in the palace as a reward. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 9, pp. 42-47 . Return to the table of contents . Little Saddleslut Greece There were once three sisters spinning flax, and they said, "Whosever spindle falls, let us kill her and eat her." The mother's spindle fell, and they left her alone. Again they sat down to spin, and again the mother's spindle fell, and again and yet again. "Ah, well!" said they, "let us eat her now!" "No!" said the youngest, "do not eat her; eat me, if flesh you will have." But they would not; and two of them killed their mother and cooked her for eating. When they had sat down to make a meal of her, they said to the youngest, "Come and eat too!" But she refused, and sat down on a saddle which the fowls were covering with filth, and wept, and upbraided them. Many a time they said to her, "Come and eat!" but she would not; and when they had done eating, they all went away. Then the youngest, whom they called Little Saddleslut, gathered all the bones together and buried them underneath the grate, and smoked them every day with incense for forty days; and after the forty days were out, she went to take them away and put them in another place. And when she lifted up the stone, she was astonished at the rays of light which it sent forth, and raiment was found there, like unto the heavens and the stars, the spring with its flowers, the sea with its waves; and many coins of every kind; and she left them where she found them. Afterwards her sisters came and found her sitting on the saddle, and jeered at her. On Sunday her sisters went to church; then she, too, arose; she washed and attired herself, putting on the garment that was as the heavens with the stars, and went to church, taking with her a few gold pieces in her purse. When she went into the church all the people were amazed, and could not gaze upon her by reason of the brightness of her garments. When she left the church, the people followed her to see whither she went. Then she filled her hand with money from her bag and cast it in the way, and so she kept throwing it down all the way she went, so that they might not get near her. Then the crowd scrambled for the coins, and left her alone. And straightway she went into her house, and changed her clothes, and put on her old things, and sat down upon the saddle. Her sisters came home from church and said to her, "Where are you, wretch? Come and let us tell you how there came into the church a maiden more glorious than the sun, who had such garments on as you could not look on, so brightly did they gleam and shine, and she strewed money on the way! Look, see what a lot we have picked up! Why did not you come too? Worse luck to you!" "You are welcome to what you picked up; I don't want it," said she. Next Sunday they went to church again, and she did the same. Then they went another Sunday, and just as she was flinging the money, she lost her shoe among the crowd, and left it behind her. Now the king's son was following her, but could not catch her, and only found her shoe. Then said he to himself, "Whose ever foot this shoe exactly fits, without being either too large or too small, I will take her for my wife." And he went to all the women he knew and tried it on, but could not manage to fit it. Then her sisters came to her and spoke as follows to her, "You go and try; perhaps it will fit you!" "Get away with you!" said she. "Do you think he will put the shoe on me, and get it covered with filth? Do not make fun of me." The prince had taken all the houses in turn, and so he came at length to the house of Little Saddleslut, and his servants told her to come and try on the shoe. "Do not make fun of me," she says. However she went down, and when the prince saw her, he knew the shoe was hers, and said to her, "Do you try on the shoe." And with the greatest ease she put it on, and it fitted her. Then said the prince to her, "I will take you to wife." "Do not make fun of me," she answered, "so may your youth be happy!" "Nay, but I will marry you," said he, and he took her and made her his wife. Then she put on her fairest robes. When a little child was born to her, the sisters came to see it. And when she was helpless and alone they took her and put her into a chest, and carried her off and threw her into a river, and the river cast her forth upon a desert. There was a half-witted old woman there, and when she saw the chest, she thought to cut it up [for firewood] and took it away for that purpose. And when she had broken it open, and saw someone alive in it, she got up and made off. So the princess was left alone, and heard the wolves howling, and the swine and the lions, and she sat and wept and prayed to God, "Oh God, give me a little hole in the ground that I may hide my head in it, and not hear the wild beasts," and he gave her one. Again she said, "Oh God, give me one a little larger, that I may get in up to my waist." And he gave her one. And she besought him again a third time, and he gave her a cabin with all that she wanted in it; and there she dwelt, and whatever she said, her bidding was done forthwith. For instance, when she wanted to eat, she would say, "Come, table with all that is wanted! Come food! Come spoons and forks, and all things needful," and straightway they all got ready, and when she finished the would ask, "Are you all there?" and they would answer, "We are." One day the prince came into the wilderness to hunt, and seeing the cabin he went to find out who was inside; and when he got there he knocked at the door. And she saw him and knew him from afar, and said, "Who is knocking at the door?" "It is I, let me in," said he. "Open, doors!" said she, and in a twinkling the doors opened and he entered. He went upstairs and found her seated on a chair. "Good day to you," said he. "Welcome!" said she, and straightway all that was in the room cried out, "Welcome!" "Come chair!" she cried, and one came at once. "Sit down," she said to him and down he sat. And when she had asked him the reason of his coming, she bade him stay and dine, and afterwards depart. He agreed, and straightway she gave her orders: "Come table with all the covers," and forthwith they presented themselves, and he was sore amazed. "Come basin," she cried. "Come jug, pour water for us to wash! Come food in ten courses!" and immediately all that she ordered made its appearance. Afterwards when the meal was ended, the prince tried to hide a spoon, and put it into his shoe; and when they rose from table, she said "Table, have you all your covers?" "Yes I have." "Spoons, are you all there?" "All," they said, except one which said "I am in the prince's shoe." Then she cried again, as though she had not heard, "Are you all there, spoons and forks?" And as soon as the prince heard her he got rid of it on the sly and blushed. And she said to him "Why did you blush? Don't be afraid. I am your wife." Then she told him how she got there and how she fared. And they hugged and kissed each other, and she ordered the house to move and it did move. And when they came near the town all the world came out to see them. Then the prince gave orders for his wife's sisters to be brought before him, and they brought them and he hewed them in pieces. And so henceforward they lived happily, and may we live more happily still. Source: Edmund Martin Geldart, Folk-Lore of Modern Greece: The Tales of the People (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1884), pp. 27-30 . Return to the table of contents . Conkiajgharuna, the Little Rag Girl Georgia There was and there was not, there was a miserable peasant. He had a wife and a little daughter. So poor was this peasant that his daughter was called Conkiajgharuna (Little Rag Girl). Some time passed, and his wife died. He was unhappy before, but now a greater misfortune had befallen him. He grieved and grieved, and at last he said to himself, "I will go and take another wife; she will mind the house, and tend my orphan child." So he arose and took a second wife, but this wife brought with her a daughter of her own. When this woman came into her husband's house and saw his child, she was angry in heart. She treated Little Rag Girl badly. She petted her own daughter, but scolded her stepdaughter, and tried to get rid of her. Every day she gave her a piece of badly cooked bread, and sent her out to watch the cow, saying, "Here is a loaf; eat of it, give to every wayfarer, and bring the loaf home whole." The girl went, and felt very miserable. Once she was sitting sadly in the field, and began to weep bitterly. The cow listened, and then opened its mouth, and said, "Why are you weeping? What troubles you?" The girl told her sad tale. The cow said, "In one of my horns is honey, and in the other is butter, which you can take if you want to, so why be unhappy?" The girl took the butter and the honey, and in a short time she grew plump. When the stepmother noticed this she did not know what to do for rage. She rose, and after that every day she gave her a basket of wool with her; this wool was to be spun and brought home in the evening finished. The stepmother wished to tire the girl out with toil, so that she should grow thin and ugly. Once when Little Rag Girl was tending the cow, it ran away onto a roof. [In some parts of the Caucasus the houses of the peasantry are built in the ground, and it is quite possible to walk onto a roof unwittingly. (Note by Wardrop)] She pursued it, and wished to drive it back to the road, but she dropped her spindle on the roof. Looking inside she saw an old woman seated, and said to her, "Good mother, will you give me my spindle?" The old dame replied, "I am not able, my child, come and take it yourself." The old woman was a devi . The girl went in and was lifting up her spindle, when the old dame called out, "Daughter, daughter, come and look at my head a moment. I am almost eaten up." The girl came and looked at her head. She was filled with horror; all the worms in the earth seemed to be crawling there. The little girl stroked her head and removed some, and then said, "You have a clean head. Why should I look at it?" This conduct pleased the old woman very much, and she said, "When you leave here, go along such and such a road, and in a certain place you will see three springs -- one white, one black, and one yellow. Pass by the white and black, and put your head in the yellow and rinse it with your hands." The girl did this. She went on her way, and came to the three springs. She passed by the white and black, and bathed her head with her hands in the yellow fountain. When she looked up she saw that her hair was quite golden, and her hands, too, shone like gold. In the evening, when she went home, her stepmother was filled with fury. After this she sent her own daughter with the cow. Perhaps the same good fortune would visit her! So Little Rag Girl stayed at home while her stepsister drove out the cow. Once more the cow ran onto the roof. The girl pursued it, and her spindle fell down. She looked in, and seeing the devi woman, called out, "Dog of an old woman! Here! Come and give me my spindle!" The old woman replied, "I am not able, child, come and take it yourself." When the girl came near, the old woman said, "Come, child, and look at my head." The girl came and looked at her head, and cried out, "Ugh! What a horrid head you have! You are a disgusting old woman!" The old woman said, "I thank you, my child; when you go on your way you will see a yellow, a white, and a black spring. Pass by the yellow and the white springs, and rinse your head with your hands in the black one." The girl did this. She passed by the yellow and white springs, and bathed her head in the black once. When she looked at herself she was black as an African, and on her head there was a horn. She cut it off again and again, but it grew larger and larger. She went home and complained to her mother, who was almost frenzied, but there was no help for it. Her mother said to herself, "This is all the cow's fault, so it shall be killed." This cow knew the future. When it learned that it was to be killed, it went to Little Rag Girl and said, "When I am dead, gather my bones together and bury them in the earth. When you are in trouble come to my grave, and cry aloud, 'Bring my steed and my royal robes!'" Little Rag Girl did exactly as the cow had told her. When it was dead she took its bones and buried them in the earth. After this, some time passed. One holiday the stepmother took her daughter, and they went to church. She placed a trough in front of Little Rag Girl, spread a large measure of millet in the courtyard, and said, "Before we come home from church fill this trough with tears, and gather up this millet, so that not one grain is left." Then they went to church. Little Rag Girl sat down and began to weep. While she was crying a neighbor came in a said, "Why are you in tears? What is the matter?" The little girl told her tale. The woman brought all the brood hens and chicken, and they picked up every grain of millet, then she put a lump of salt in the trough and poured water over it. "There, child," said she, "there are your tears! Now go and enjoy yourself." Little Rag Girl then thought of the cow. She went to its grave and called out, "Bring me my steed and my royal robes!" There appeared at once a horse and beautiful clothes. Little Rag Girl put on the garments, mounted the horse, and went to the church. There all the folk began to stare at her. They were amazed at her grandeur. Her stepsister whispered to her mother when she saw her, "This girl is very much like our Little Rag Girl!" Her mother smiled scornfully and said, "Who would give that sun darkener such robes?" Little Rag Girl left the church before anyone else; she changed her clothes in time to appear before her stepmother in rags. On the way home, as she was leaping over a stream, in her haste she let her slipper fall in. A long time passed. Once when the king's horses were drinking water in this stream, they saw the shining slipper and were so afraid that they would drink no more water. The king was told that there was something shining in the stream, and that the horses were afraid. The king commanded his divers to find out what it was. They found the golden slipper, and presented it to the king. When he saw it, he commanded his viziers, saying, "Go and seek the owner of this slipper, for I will wed none but her." His viziers sought the maiden, but they could find no one whom the slipper would fit. Little Rag Girl's mother heard this, adorned her daughter, and placed her on a throne. Then she went and told the king that she had a daughter whose foot he might look at. It was exactly the model for the shoe. She put Little Rag Girl in a corner, with a big basket over her. When the king came into the house he sat down on the basket, in order to try on the slipper. Little Rag Girl took a needle and pricked the king from under the basket. He jumped up, stinging with pain, and asked the stepmother what she had under the basket. The stepmother replied, "It is only a turkey I have there." The king sat down on the basket again, and Little Rag Girl again stuck the needle into him. The king jumped up, and cried out, "Lift the basket. I will see underneath!" The stepmother pleaded with him, saying, "Do not blame me, your majesty, it is only a turkey, and it will run away." But the king would not listen to her pleas. He lifted the basket up, and Little Rag Girl came forth, and said, "This slipper is mine, and fits me well." She sat down, and the king found that it was indeed a perfect fit. Little Rag Girl became the king's wife, and her shameless stepmother was left with a dry throat. Source: Marjory Wardrop, Georgian Folk Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 63-67 . Wardrop's heroine and the story itself are both named "Conkiajgharuna," which means "the little girl in rags." This story combines important motifs from type 480 ("Frau Holle") and type 510A ("Cinderella"). Return to the table of contents . Pepelyouga Serbia On a high pasture land, near an immense precipice, some maidens were occupied in spinning and attending to their grazing cattle, when an old strange looking man with a white beard reaching down to his girdle approached, and said, "Oh fair maidens, beware of the abyss, for if one of you should drop her spindle down the cliff, her mother would be turned into a cow that very moment!" So saying the aged man disappeared, and the girls, bewildered by his words, and discussing the strange incident, approached near to the ravine which had suddenly become interesting to them. They peered curiously over the edge, as though expecting to see some unaccustomed sight, when suddenly the most beautiful of the maidens let her spindle drop from her hand, and before she could recover it, it was bounding from rock to rock into the depths beneath. When she returned home that evening she found her worst fears realized, for her mother stood before the door transformed into a cow. A short time later her father married again. His new wife was a widow, and brought a daughter of her own into her new home. This girl was not particularly well favored, and her mother immediately began to hate her stepdaughter because of the latter's good looks. She forbade her henceforth to wash her face, to comb her hair or to change her clothes, and in every way she could think of she sought to make her miserable. One morning she gave her a bag filled with hemp, saying, "If you do not spin this and make a fine top of it by tonight, you need not return home, for I intend to kill you." The poor girl, deeply dejected, walked behind the cattle, industriously spinning as she went, but by noon when the cattle lay down in the shade to rest, she observed that she had made but little progress and she began to weep bitterly. Now, her mother was driven daily to pasture with the other cows, and seeing her daughter's tears she drew near and asked why she wept, whereupon the maiden told her all. Then the cow comforted her daughter, saying, "My darling child, be consoled! Let me take the hemp into my mouth and chew it; through my ear a thread will come out. You must take the end of this and wind it into a top." So this was done; the hemp was soon spun, and when the girl gave it to her stepmother that evening, she was greatly surprised. Next morning the woman roughly ordered the maiden to spin a still larger bag of hemp, and as the girl, thanks to her mother, spun and wound it all, her stepmother, on the following day, gave her twice the quantity to spin. Nevertheless, the girl brought home at night even that unusually large quantity well spun, and her stepmother concluded that the poor girl was not spinning alone, but that other maidens, her friends, were giving her help. Therefore she, next morning, sent her own daughter to spy upon the poor girl and to report what she saw. The girl soon noticed that the cow helped the poor orphan by chewing the hemp, while she drew the thread and wound it on a top, and she ran back home and informed her mother of what she had seen. Upon this, the stepmother insisted that her husband should order that particular cow to be slaughtered. Her husband at first hesitated, but as his wife urged him more and more, he finally decided to do as she wished. On learning what had been decided, the stepdaughter wept more than ever, and when her mother asked what was the matter, she told her tearfully all that had been arranged. Thereupon the cow said to her daughter, "Wipe away your tears, and do not cry any more. When they slaughter me, you must take great care not to eat any of the meat, but after the repast, carefully collect my bones and inter them behind the house under a certain stone; then, should you ever be in need of help, come to my grave and there you will find it." The cow was killed, and when the meat was served the poor girl declined to eat of it, pretending that she had no appetite; after the meal she gathered with great care all the bones and buried them on the spot indicated by her mother. Now, the name of the maiden was Marra, but, as she had to do the roughest work of the house, such as carrying water, washing, and sweeping, she was called by her stepmother and stepsister Pepelyouga (Cinderella). One Sunday, when the stepmother and her daughter had dressed themselves for church, the woman spread about the house the contents of a basktetful of millet, and said, "Listen, Pepelyouga; if you do not gather up all this millet and have dinner ready by the time we return from church, I will kill you!" When they had gone, the poor girl began to weep, reflecting, "As to the dinner I can easily prepare it, but how can I possibly gather up all this millet?" But that very moment she recalled the words of the cow, that, if she ever should be struck by misfortune, she need but walk to the grave behind the house, when she would find instant help there. Immediately she ran out, and, when she approached the grave, lo! a chest was lying on the grave wide open, and inside were beautiful dresses and everything necessary for a lady's toilet. Two doves were sitting on the lid of the chest, and as the girl drew near, they said to her, "Marra, take from the chest the dress you like the best, clothe yourself, and go to church. As to the millet and other work, we ourselves will attend to that and see that everything is in good order!" Marra needed no second invitation; she took the first silk dress she touched, made her toilet, and went to church, where her entrance created quite a sensation. Everybody, men and women, greatly admired her beauty and her costly attire, but they were puzzled as to who she was, and where she came from. A prince happened to be in the church on that day, and he, too, admired the beautiful maiden. Just before the service ended, the girl stole from the church, went hurriedly home, took off her beautiful clothes and placed them back in the chest, which instantly shut and became invisible. She then rushed to the kitchen, where she discovered that the dinner was quite ready, and that the millet was gathered into the basket. Soon the stepmother came back with her daughter, and they were astounded to find the millet gathered up, dinner prepared, and everything else in order. A desire to learn the secret now began to torment the stepmother mightily. Next Sunday everything happened as before, except that the girl found in the chest a silver dress, and that the prince felt a greater admiration for her, so much so that he was unable, even for a moment to take his eyes from her. On the third Sunday, the mother and daughter again prepared to go to church, and, having scattered the millet as before, she repeated her previous threats. As soon as they disappeared, the girl ran straight to her mother's grave, where she found, as on the previous occasions, the open chest and the same two doves. This time she found a dress made of gold lace, and she hastily clad herself in it and went to church, where she was admired by all, even more than before. As for the czar's son, he had come with the intention not to let her this time out of his sight, but to follow and see where she went. Accordingly, as the service drew near to its close, and the maiden withdrew quietly as before, the enamored prince followed after her. Marra hurried along, for she had none too much time, and, as she went, one of her golden slippers came off, and she was too agitated to stop and pick it up. The prince, however, who had lost sight of the maiden, saw the slipper and put it in his pocket. Reaching home, Marra took off her golden dress, laid it in the chest, and rushed back to the house. The prince now resolved to go from house to house throughout his father's realm in search of the owner of the slipper, inviting all the fair maidens to try on the golden slipper. But, alas! his efforts seemed to be doomed to failure; for some girls the slipper was too long, for others too short, for others, again, too narrow. There was no one whom it would fit. Wandering from door to door, the sad prince at length came to the house of Marra's father. The stepmother was expecting him, and she had hidden her stepdaughter under a large trough in the courtyard. When the prince asked whether she had any daughters, the stepmother answered that she had but one, and she presented the girl to him. The prince requested the girl to try on the slipper, but, squeeze as she would, there was not room in it even for her toes! Thereupon the prince asked whether it was true that there were no other girls in the house, and the stepmother replied that indeed it was quite true. That very moment a cock flew onto the trough and crowed out lustily, " Kook-oo-ryeh-koooo! Here she is under this very trough!" The stepmother, enraged, exclaimed, "Sh! Go away! May an eagle seize you and fly off with you!" The curiosity of the prince was aroused. He approached the trough, lifted it up, and, to his great surprise, there was the maiden whom he had seen three times in church, clad in the very same golden dress she had last worn, and having only one golden slipper. When the prince recognized the maiden he was overcome with joy. Quickly he tried the slipper on her dainty foot. It not only fit her admirably, but it exactly matched the one she already wore on her left foot. He lifted her up tenderly and escorted her to his palace. Later he won her love, and they were happily married. Source: Woislav M. Petrovitch, Hero Tales and Legends of the Serbians (New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, preface dated 1914), pp. 224-30 . Link to another translation of this tale, here titled "Papalluga; or, The Golden Slipper": Serbian Folk-Lore: Popular Tales , selected and translated by Madam Csedomille Mijatovies, edited, with an introduction by W. Denton (London: W. Isbister and Company, 1874), pp. 59-66 . Return to the table of contents . The Wonderful Birch Russia Once upon a time there were a man and a woman, who had an only daughter. Now it happened that one of their sheep went astray, and they set out to look for it, and searched and searched, each in n different part of the wood. Then the good wife met a witch, who said to her, "If you spit, you miserable creature, if you spit into the sheath of my knife, or if you run between my legs, I shall change you into a black sheep." The woman neither spat, nor did she run between her legs, but yet the witch changed her into a sheep. Then she made herself look exactly like the woman, and called out to the good man, "Ho, old man, halloa! I have found the sheep already!" The man thought the witch was really his wife, and he did not know that his wife was the sheep; so he went home with her, glad at heart because his sheep was found. When they were safe at home the witch said to the man, "Look here, old man, we must really kill that sheep lest it run away to the wood again." The man, who was a peaceable quiet sort of fellow, made no objections, but simply said, "Good, let us do so." The daughter, however, had overheard their talk, and she ran to the flock and lamented aloud, "Oh, dear little mother, they are going to slaughter you!" "Well, then, if they do slaughter me," was the black sheep's answer, "eat you neither the meat nor the broth that is made of me, but gather all my bones, and bury them by the edge of the field." Shortly after this they took the black sheep from the flock and slaughtered it. The witch made pease-soup of it, and set it before the daughter. But the girl remembered her mother's warning. She did not touch the soup, but she carried the bones to the edge of the field and buried them there; and there sprang up on the spot a birch tree -- a very lovely birch tree. Some time had passed away -- who can tell how long they might have been living there? -- when the witch, to whom a child had been born in the meantime, began to take an ill-will to the man's daughter, and to torment her in all sorts of ways. Now it happened that a great festival was to be held at the palace, and the king had commanded that all the people should be invited, and that this proclamation should be made: Come, people all! Poor and wretched, one and all! Blind and crippled though ye be, Mount your steeds or come by sea. And so they drove into the king's feast all the outcasts, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind. In the good man's house, too, preparations were made to go to the palace. The witch said to the man, "Go you on in front, old man, with our youngest; I will give the elder girl work to keep her from being dull in our absence." So the man took the child and set out. But the witch kindled a fire on the hearth, threw a potful of barleycorns among the cinders, and said to the girl, "If you have not picked the barley out of the ashes, and put it all back in the pot before nightfall, I shall eat you up!" Then she hastened after the others, and the poor girl stayed at home and wept. She tried to be sure to pick up the grains of barley, but she soon saw how useless her labor was; and so she went in her sore trouble to the birch tree on her mother's grave, and cried and cried, because her mother lay dead beneath the sod and could help her no longer. In the midst of her grief she suddenly heard her mother's voice speak from the grave, and say to her, "Why do you weep, little daughter?" "The witch has scattered barleycorns on the hearth, and bid me pick them out of the ashes," said the girl; "that is why I weep, dear little mother." "Do not weep," said her mother consolingly. "Break off one of my branches, and strike the hearth with it crosswise, and all will be put right." The girl did so. She struck the hearth with the birchen branch, and lo! the barleycorns flew into the pot, and the hearth was clean. Then she went back to the birch tree and laid the branch upon the grave. Then her mother bade her bathe on one side of the stem, dry herself on another, and dress on the third. When the girl had done all that, she had grown so lovely that no one on earth could rival her. Splendid clothing was given to her, and a horse, with hair partly of gold, partly of silver, and partly of something more precious still. The girl sprang into the saddle, and rode as swift as an arrow to the palace. As she turned into the courtyard of the castle the king's son came out to meet her, tied her steed to a pillar, and led her in. He never left her side as they passed through the castle rooms; and all the people gazed at her, and wondered who the lovely maiden was, and from what castle she came; but no one knew her -- no one knew anything about her. At the banquet the prince invited her to sit next him in the place of honor; but the witch's daughter gnawed the bones under the table. The prince did not see her, and thinking it was a dog, he gave her such a push with his foot that her arm was broken. Are you not sorry for the witch's daughter? It was not her fault that her mother was a witch. Towards evening the good man's daughter thought it was time to go home; but as she went, her ring caught on the latch of the door, for the king's son had had it smeared with tar. She did not take time to pull it off, but, hastily unfastening her horse from the pillar, she rode away beyond the castle walls as swift as an arrow. Arrived at home, she took off her clothes by the birch tree, left her horse standing there, and hastened to her place behind the stove. In a short time the man and the woman came home again too, and the witch said to the girl, "Ah! you poor thing, there you are to be sure! You don't know what fine times we have had at the palace! The king's son carried my daughter about, but the poor thing fell and broke her arm." The girl knew well how matters really stood, but she pretended to know nothing about it, and sat dumb behind the stove. The next day they were invited again to the king's banquet. "Hey! old man," said the witch, "get on your clothes as quick as you can; we are bidden to the feast. Take you the child; I will give the other one work, lest she weary." She kindled the fire, threw a potful of hemp seed among the ashes, and said to the girl, "If you do not get this sorted, and all the seed back into the pot, I shall kill you!" The girl wept bitterly; then she went to the birch tree, washed herself on one side of it and dried herself on the other; and this time still finer clothes were given to her, and a very beautiful steed. She broke off a branch of the birch tree, struck the hearth with it, so that the seeds flew into the pot, and then hastened to the castle. Again the king's son came out to meet her, tied her horse to a pillar, and led her into the banqueting hall. At the feast the girl sat next him in the place of honor, as she had done the day before. But the witch's daughter gnawed bones under the table, and the prince gave her a push by mistake, which broke her leg -- he had never noticed her crawling about among the people's feet. She was very unlucky! The good man's daughter hastened home again betimes, but the king's son had smeared the door-posts with tar, and the girl's golden circlet stuck to it. She had not time to look for it, but sprang to the saddle and rode like an arrow to the birch tree. There she left her horse and her fine clothes, and said to her mother, "I have lost my circlet at the castle; the door-post was tarred, and it stuck fast." "And even had you lost two of them," answered her mother, "I would give you finer ones." Then the girl hastened home, and when her father came home from the feast with the witch, she was in her usual place behind the stove. Then the witch said to her, "You poor thing! what is there to see here compared with what we have seen at the palace? The king's son carried my daughter from one room to another; he let her fall, 'tis true, and my child's foot was broken." The man's daughter held her peace all the time, and busied herself about the hearth. The night passed, and when the day began to dawn, the witch awakened her husband, crying, "Hi! get up, old man! We are bidden to the royal banquet." So the old man got up. Then the witch gave him the child, saying, "Take you the little one; I will give the other girl work to do, else she will weary at home alone." She did as usual. This time it was a dish of milk she poured upon the ashes, saying, "If you do not get all the milk into the dish again before I come home, you will suffer for it." How frightened the girl was this time! She ran to the birch tree, and by its magic power her task was accomplished; and then she rode away to the palace as before. When she got to the courtyard she found the prince waiting for her. He led her into the hall, where she was highly honored; but the witch's daughter sucked the bones under the table, and crouching at the people's feet she got an eye knocked out, poor thing! Now no one knew any more than before about the good man's daughter, no one knew whence she came; but the prince had had the threshold smeared with tar, and as she fled her gold slippers stuck to it. She reached the birch tree, and laying aside her finery, she said, "Alas I dear little mother, I have lost my gold slippers!" "Let them be," was her mother's reply; "if you need them I shall give you finer ones." Scarcely was she in her usual place behind the stove when her father came home with the witch. Immediately the witch began to mock her, saying, "Ah! you poor thing, there is nothing for you to see here, and we -- ah: what great things we have seen at the palace! My little girl was carried about again, but had the ill-luck to fall and get her eye knocked out. You stupid thing, you, what do you know about anything?" "Yes, indeed, what can I know?" replied the girl; "I had enough to do to get the hearth clean." Now the prince had kept all the things the girl had lost, and he soon set about finding the owner of them. For this purpose a great banquet was given on the fourth day, and all the people were invited to the palace. The witch got ready to go too. She tied a wooden beetle on where her child's foot should have been, a log of wood instead of an arm, and stuck a bit of dirt in the empty socket for an eye, and took the child with her to the castle. When all the people were gathered together, the king's son stepped in among the crowd and cried, "The maiden whose finger this ring slips over, whose head this golden hoop encircles, and whose foot this shoe fits, shall be my bride." What a great trying on there was now among them all! The things would fit no one, however. "The cinder wench is not here," said the prince at last; "go and fetch her, and let her try on the things." So the girl was fetched, and the prince was just going to hand the ornaments to her, when the witch held him back, saying, "Don't give them to her; she soils everything with cinders; give them to my daughter rather." Well, then the prince gave the witch's daughter the ring, and the woman filed and pared away at her daughter's finger till the ring fitted. It was the same with the circlet and the shoes of gold. The witch would not allow them to be handed to the cinder wench; she worked at her own daughter's head and feet till she got the things forced on. What was to be done now? The prince had to take the witch's daughter for his bride whether he would or no; he sneaked away to her father's house with her, however, for he was ashamed to hold the wedding festivities at the palace with so strange a bride. Some days passed, and at last he had to take his bride home to the palace, and he got ready to do so. Just as they were taking leave, the kitchen wench sprang down from her place by the stove, on the pretext of fetching something from the cowhouse, and in going by she whispered in the prince's ear as he stood in the yard, "Alas! dear prince, do not rob me of my silver and my gold." Thereupon the king's son recognized the cinder wench; so he took both the girls with him, and set out. After they had gone some little way they came to the bank of a river, and the prince threw the witch's daughter across to serve as a bridge, and so got over with the cinder wench. There lay the witch's daughter then, like a bridge over the river, and could not stir, though her heart was consumed with grief. No help was near, so she cried at last in her anguish, "May there grow a golden hemlock out of my body! Perhaps my mother will know me by that token." Scarcely had she spoken when a golden hemlock sprang up from her, and stood upon the bridge. Now, as soon as the prince had got rid of the witch's daughter he greeted the cinder wench as his bride, and they wandered together to the birch tree which grew upon the mother's grave. There they received all sorts of treasures and riches, three sacks full of gold, and as much silver, and a splendid steed, which bore them home to the palace. There they lived a long time together, and the young wife bore a son to the prince. Immediately word was brought to the witch that her daughter had borne a son -- for they all believed the young king's wife to be the witch's daughter. "So, so," said the witch to herself; "I had better away with my gift for the infant, then." And so saying she set out. Thus it happened that she came to the bank of the river, and there she saw the beautiful golden hemlock growing in the middle of the bridge, and when she began to cut it down to take to her grandchild, she heard a voice moaning, "Alas! dear mother, do not cut me so!" "Are you here?" demanded the witch. "Indeed I am, dear little mother," answered the daughter "They threw me across the river to make a bridge of me." In a moment the witch had the bridge shivered to atoms, and then she hastened away to the palace. Stepping up to the young Queen's bed, she began to try her magic arts upon her, saying, "Spit, you wretch, on the blade of my knife; bewitch my knife's blade for me, and I shall change you into a reindeer of the forest." "Are you there again to bring trouble upon me?" said the young woman. She neither spat nor did anything else, but still the witch changed her into a reindeer, and smuggled her own daughter into her place as the prince's wife. But now the child grew restless and cried, because it missed its mother's care. They took it to the court, and tried to pacify it in every conceivable way, but its crying never ceased. "What makes the child so restless?" asked the prince, and he went to a wise widow woman to ask her advice. "Ay, ay, your own wife is not at home," said the widow woman; "she is living like a reindeer in the wood; you have the witch's daughter for a wife now, and the witch herself for a mother-in- law." "Is there any way of getting my own wife back from the wood again?" asked the prince. "Give me the child," answered the widow woman. "I'll take it with me tomorrow when I go to drive the cows to the wood. I'll make a rustling among the birch leaves and a trembling among the aspens -- perhaps the boy will grow quiet when he hears it." "Yes, take the child away, take it to the wood with you to quiet it," said the prince, and led the widow woman into the castle. "How now? you are going to send the child away to the wood?" said the witch in a suspicious tone, and tried to interfere. But the king's son stood firm by what he had commanded, and said, "Carry the child about the wood; perhaps that will pacify it." So the widow woman took the child to the wood. She came to the edge of a marsh, and seeing a herd of reindeer there, she began all at once to sing: Little Bright-eyes, little Redskin, Come nurse the child you bore! That bloodthirsty monster, That man-eater grim, Shall nurse him, shall tend him no more. They may threaten and force as they will, He turns from her, shrinks from her still, and immediately the reindeer drew near, and nursed and tended the child the whole day long; but at nightfall it had to follow the herd, and said to the widow woman, "Bring me the child tomorrow, and again the following day; after that I must wander with the herd far away to other lands." The following morning the widow woman went back to the castle to fetch the child. The witch interfered, of course, but the prince said, "Take it, and carry it about in the open air; the boy is quieter at night, to be sure, when he has been in the wood all day." So the widow took the child in her arms, and carried it to the marsh in the forest. There she sang as on the preceding day: Little Bright-eyes, little Redskin, Come nurse the child you bore! That bloodthirsty monster, That man-eater grim, Shall nurse him, shall tend him no more. They may threaten and force as they will, He turns from her, shrinks from her still, and immediately the reindeer left the herd and came to the child, and tended it as on the day before. And so it was that the child throve, till not a finer boy was to be seen anywhere. But the king's son had been pondering over all these things, and he said to the widow woman, "Is there no way of changing the reindeer into a human being again?" "I don't rightly know," was her answer. "Come to the wood with me, however; when the woman puts off her reindeer skin I shall comb her head for her; whilst I am doing so you must burn the skin." Thereupon they both went to the wood with the child; scarcely were they there when the reindeer appeared and nursed the child as before. Then the widow woman said to the reindeer, "Since you are going far away tomorrow, and I shall not see you again, let me comb your head for the last time, as a remembrance of you." Good; the young woman stripped off the reindeer skin, and let the widow woman do as she wished. In the meantime the king's son threw the reindeer skin into the fire unobserved. "What smells of singeing here?" asked the young woman, and looking round she saw her own husband. "Woe is me! you have burnt my skin. Why did you do that?" "To give you back your human form again." "Alack-a-day! I have nothing to cover me now, poor creature that I am!" cried the young woman, and transformed herself first into a distaff, then into a wooden beetle, then into a spindle, and into all imaginable shapes. But all these shapes the king's son went on destroying till she stood before him in human form again. "Alas! wherefore take me home with you again," cried the young woman, "since the witch is sure to eat me up?" "She will not eat you up," answered her husband; and they started for home with the child. But when the witch wife saw them she ran away with her daughter, and if she has not stopped she is running still, though at a great age. And the prince, and his wife, and the baby lived happy ever afterwards. Source: Andrew Lang, The Red Fairy Book , 5th ed. (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1890), pp. 123-32 . Lang's source: "From the Russo-Karelian." Return to the table of contents . The Baba Yaga Russia (Aleksandr Afanasyev) Once upon a time there was an old couple. The husband lost his wife and married again. But he had a daughter by the first marriage, a young girl, and she found no favor in the eyes of her evil stepmother, who used to beat her, and consider how she could get her killed outright. One day the father went away somewhere or other, so the stepmother said to the girl, "Go to your aunt, my sister, and ask her for a needle and thread to make you a shift." Now that aunt was a Baba Yaga. Well, the girl was no fool, so she went to a real aunt of hers first, and says she, "Good morning, auntie!" "Good morning, my dear! What have you come for?" "Mother has sent me to her sister, to ask for a needle and thread to make me a shift." Then her aunt instructed her what to do. "There is a birch tree there, niece, which would hit you in the eye -- you must tie a ribbon round it; there are doors which would creak and bang -- you must pour oil on their hinges; there are dogs which would tear you in pieces -- you must throw them these rolls; there is a cat which would scratch your eyes out -- you must give it a piece of bacon." So the girl went away, and walked and walked, till she came to the place. There stood a hut, and in it sat weaving the Baba Yaga, the bony-shanks. "Good morning, auntie," says the girl. "Good morning, my dear," replies the Baba Yaga. " Mother has sent me to ask you for a needle and thread to make me a shift." "Very well; sit down and weave a little in the meantime." So the girl sat down behind the loom, and the Baba Yaga went outside, and said to her servant maid, "Go and heat the bath, and get my niece washed; and mind you look sharp after her. I want to breakfast off her." Well, the girl sat there in such a fright that she was as much dead as alive. Presently she spoke imploringly to the servant maid, saying, "Kinswoman dear, do please wet the firewood instead of making it burn; and fetch the water for the bath in a sieve." And she made her a present of a handkerchief. The Baba Yaga waited awhile; then she came to the window and asked, "Are you weaving, niece? Are you weaving, my dear?" "Oh yes, dear aunt, I'm weaving." So the Baba Yaga went away again, and the girl gave the cat a piece of bacon, and asked, "Is there no way of escaping from here?" "Here's a comb for you and a towel," said the cat; "take them, and be off. The Baba Yaga will pursue you, but you must lay your ear on the ground, and when you hear that she is close at hand, first of all, throw down the towel. It will become a wide, wide river. And if the Baba Yaga gets across the river, and tries to catch you, then you must lay your ear on the ground again, and when you hear that she is close at hand, throw down the comb. It will become a dense, dense forest; through that she won't be able to force her way anyhow." The girl took the towel and the comb and fled. The dogs would have rent her, but she threw them the rolls, and they let her go by; the doors would have begun to bang, but she poured oil on their hinges, and they let her pass through; the birch tree would have poked her eyes out, but she tied the ribbon around it, and it let her pass on. And the cat sat down to the loom, and worked away; muddled everything about, if it didn't do much weaving. Up came the Baba Yaga to the window, and asked, "Are you weaving, niece? Are you weaving, my dear?" "I'm weaving, dear aunt, I'm weaving," gruffly replied the cat. The Baba Yaga rushed into the hut, saw that the girl was gone, and took to beating the cat, and abusing it for not having scratched the girl's eyes out. "Long as I've served you," said the cat, "you've never given me so much as a bone; but she gave me bacon." Then the Baba Yaga pounced upon the dogs, on the doors, on the birch tree, and on the servant maid, and set to work to abuse them all, and to knock them about. Then the dogs said to her, "Long as we've served you, you've never so much as pitched us a burnt crust; but she gave us rolls to eat." And the doors said, "Long as we've served you, you've never poured even a drop of water on our hinges; but she poured oil on us." The birch tree said, "Long as I've served you, you've never tied a single thread around me; but she fastened a ribbon around me." And the servant maid said, "Long as I've served you, you've never given me so much as a rag; but she gave me a handkerchief." The Baba Yaga, bony of limb, quickly jumped into her mortar, sent it flying along with the pestle, sweeping away the while all traces of its flight with a broom, and set off in pursuit of the girl. Then the girl put her ear to the ground, and when she heard that the Baba Yaga was chasing her, and was now close at hand, she flung down the towel. And it became a wide, such a wide river! Up came the Baba Yaga to the river, and gnashed her teeth with spite; then she went home for her oxen, and drove them to the river. The oxen drank up every drop of the river, and then the Baba Yaga began the pursuit anew. But the girl put her ear to the ground again, and when she heard that the Baba Yaga was near, she flung down the comb, and instantly a forest sprang up, such an awfully thick one! The Baba Yaga began gnawing away at it, but however hard she worked, she couldn't gnaw her way through it, so she had to go back again. But by this time the girl's father had returned home, and he asked, "Where's my daughter?" "She's gone to her aunt's," replied her stepmother. Soon afterwards the girl herself came running home. " Where have you been?" asked her father. "Ah, father!" she said, "mother sent me to aunt's to ask for a needle and thread to make me a shift. But aunt's a Baba Yaga, and she wanted to eat me!" "And how did you get away, daughter?" "Why like this," said the girl, and explained the whole matter. As soon as her father had heard all about it, he became wroth with his wife, and shot her. But he and his daughter lived on and flourished, and everything went well with them. Source: W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1873), pp. 139-42 . Type 313H*. Ralston's source: Aleksandr Afanasyev. Return to the table of contents . The Wicked Stepmother Kashmir One day a Brahman adjured his wife not to eat anything without him lest she should become a she goat. In reply the Brahman's wife begged him not to eat anything without her, lest he should be changed into a tiger. A long time passed by and neither of them broke their word, until one day the Brahman's wife, while giving food to her children, herself took a little to taste; and her husband was not present. That very moment she was changed into a goat. When the Brahman came home and saw the she goat running about the house he was intensely grieved, because he knew that it was none other than his own beloved wife. He kept the goat tied up in the yard of his house, and tended it very carefully. In a few years he married again, but this wife was not kind to the children. She at once took a dislike to them, and treated them unkindly and gave them little food. Their mother, the she goat, heard their complainings, and noticed that they were getting thin, and therefore called one of them to her secretly, and bade the child tell the others to strike her horns with a stick whenever they were very hungry, and some food would fall down for them. They did so, and instead of getting weaker and thinner, as their stepmother had expected, they became stronger and stronger. She was surprised to see them getting so fat and strong while she was giving them so little food. In course of time a one-eyed daughter was born to this wicked woman. She loved the girl with all her heart, and grudged not any expense or attention that she thought the child required. One day, when the girl had grown quite big and could walk and talk well, her mother sent her to play with the other children, and ordered her to notice how and whence they obtained anything to eat. The girl promised to do so, and most rigidly stayed by them the whole day, and saw all that happened. On hearing that the goat supplied her stepchildren with food the woman got very angry, and determined to kill the beast as soon as possible. She pretended to be very ill, and sending for the hakim, bribed him to prescribe some goat's flesh for her. The Brahman was very anxious about his wife's state, and although he grieved to have to slay the goat (for he was obliged to kill the goat, not having money to purchase another), yet he did not mind if his wife really recovered. But the little children wept when they heard this, and went to their mother, the she goat, in great distress, and told her everything. "Do not weep, my darlings," she said. "It is much better for me to die than to live such a life as this. Do not weep. I have no fear concerning you. Food will be provided for you, if you will attend to my instructions. Be sure to gather my bones, and bury them all together in some secret place, and whenever you are very hungry go to that place and ask for food. Food will then be given you." The poor she goat gave this advice only just in time. Scarcely had it finished these words and the children had departed than the butcher came with a knife and slew it. Its body was cut into pieces and cooked, and the stepmother had the meat, but the stepchildren got the bones. They did with them as they had been directed, and thus got food regularly and in abundance. Some time after the death of the she goat one morning one of the stepdaughters was washing her face in the stream that ran by the house, when her nose ring unfastened and fell into the water. A fish happened to see it and swallowed it, and this fish was caught by a man and sold to the king's cook for his majesty's dinner. Great was the surprise of the cook when, on opening the fish to clean it, he found the nose ring. He took it to the king, who was so interested in it that he issued a proclamation and set it to every town and village in his dominions, that whosoever had missed a nose ring should apply to him. Within a few days the brother of the girl reported to the king that the nose ring belonged to his sister, who had lost it one day while bathing her face in the river. The king ordered the girl to appear before him, and was so fascinated by her pretty face and nice manner that he married her, and provided amply for the support of her family. Source: J. Hinton Knowles, Folk-Tales of Kashmir (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, and Company, 1893), pp. 127-29 . Type 511. Return to the table of contents . Maria and the Golden Slipper Philippines Once there lived a couple who had an only daughter, Maria. When Maria was a little girl, her mother died. A few years later Maria's father fell in love with a widow named Juana, who had two daughters. The elder of these daughters was Rosa, and the younger was Damiana. When Maria was grown to be a young woman, her father married the woman Juana. Maria continued to live with her father and stepmother. But Juana and her two daughters treated Maria as a servant. She had to do all the work in the house: cook the food, wash the clothes, clean the floors. The only clothes she herself had to wear were ragged and dirty. One day Prince Malecadel wanted to get married, so he gave a ball, to which he invited all the ladies in his kingdom. He said that the most beautiful of all was to be his wife. When Damiana and Rosa knew that all the ladies were invited, they began to discuss what clothes they would wear to the ball; but poor Maria was in the river, washing the clothes. Maria was very sad and was weeping, for she had no clothes at all in which she could appear at the prince's fête. While she was washing, a crab approached her, and said, "Why are you crying, Maria? Tell me the reason, for I am your mother." Then Maria said to the crab, "I am treated by my aunt ( sic! ) and sisters as a servant; and there will be a ball tonight, but I have no clothes to wear." While she was talking to the crab, Juana came up. The stepmother was very angry with Maria, and ordered her to catch the crab and cook it for their dinner. Maria seized the crab and carried it to the house. At first she did not want to cook it, for she knew that it was her mother; but Juana whipped her so hard, that at last she was forced to obey. Before it was put in the earthen pot to be cooked, the crab said to Maria, "Maria, don't eat my flesh, but collect all my shell after I am eaten, and bury the pieces in the garden near the house. They will grow into a tree, and you can have what you want if you will only ask the tree for it." After her parents had eaten the flesh of the crab, Maria collected all its shell and buried it in the garden. At twilight she saw a tree standing on the very spot where she had buried the shell. When night came, Rosa and Damiana went to the ball, and Juana retired for the night as soon as her daughters were gone. When Maria saw that her aunt was sleeping, she went into the garden and asked the tree for what she wanted. The tree changed her clothes into very beautiful ones, and furnished her with a fine coach drawn by four fine horses, and a pair of golden slippers. Before she left, the tree said to her, "You must be in your house before twelve o'clock. If you are not, your clothes will be changed into ragged, dirty ones again, and your coach will disappear." After promising to remember the warning of the tree, Maria went to the ball, where she was received by the prince very graciously. All the ladies were astonished when they saw her; she was the most beautiful of all. Then she sat between her two sisters, but neither Rosa nor Damiana recognized her. The prince danced with her all the time. When Maria saw that it was half-past eleven, she bade farewell to the prince and all the ladies present, and went home. When she reached the garden, the tree changed her beautiful clothes back into her old ones, and the coach disappeared. Then she went to bed and to sleep. When her sisters came home, they told her of everything that had happened at the ball. The next night the prince gave another ball. After Rosa and Damiana had dressed themselves in their best clothes and gone, Maria again went to the garden to ask for beautiful clothes. This time she was given a coach drawn by five (?) horses, and again the tree warned her to return before twelve. The prince was delighted to see her, and danced with her the whole evening. Maria was so enchanted that she forgot to notice the time. While she was dancing, she heard the clock striking twelve. She ran as fast as she could down stairs and out the palace door, but in her haste she dropped one of her golden slippers. This night she had to walk home, and in her old ragged clothes, too. One of her golden slippers she had with her; but the other, which she had dropped at the door, was found by one of the guards, who gave it to the prince. The guard said that the slipper had been lost by the beautiful lady who ran out of the palace when the clock was striking twelve. Then the prince said to all the people present, "The lady whom this slipper fits is to be my wife." The next morning the prince ordered one of his guards to carry the slipper to every house in the city to see if its owner could be found. The first house visited was the one in which Maria lived. Rosa tried to put the slipper on her foot, but her foot was much too big. Then Damiana put it on her foot, but her foot was too small. The two sisters tried and tried again to make the slipper fit, but in vain. Then Maria told them that she would try, and see if the slipper would fit her foot; but her sisters said to her, "Your feet are very dirty. This golden slipper will not go on your foot, for your feet are larger than ours." And they laughed at her. But the guard who had brought the slipper said, "Let her try. It is the prince's order that all shall try." So he gave it to Maria. Then Maria put it on, and it fitted her foot exactly. She then drew the other slipper from underneath her dress, and put it on her other foot. When the two sisters saw the two slippers on Maria's feet, they almost fainted with astonishment. So Maria became the wife of the prince, and from that time on she was very dear to her sisters and aunt. Source: Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, PA, and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 45B, pp. 314-16 . Fansler's source: "Narrated by Dolores Zafra, a Tagalog from Pagsanjan, Laguna. She says that this is a Tagalog story, and was told to her when she was a little girl." Return to the table of contents . The Poor Turkey Girl Native American (Zuni) Long, long ago, our ancients had neither sheep nor horses nor cattle; yet they had domestic animals of various kinds -- amongst them turkeys. In Mátsake, or the Salt City, there dwelt at this time many very wealthy families, who possessed large flocks of these birds, which it was their custom to have their slaves or the poor people of the town herd in the plains round about Thunder Mountain, below which their town stood, and on the mesas beyond. Now, in Mátsake at this time there stood, away out near the border of the town, a little tumble-down, single-room house, wherein there lived alone a very poor girl, -- so poor that her clothes were patched and tattered and dirty, and her person, on account of long neglect and ill-fare, shameful to look upon, though she herself was not ugly, but had a winning face and bright eyes; that is, if the face had been more oval and the eyes less oppressed with care. So poor was she that she herded turkeys for a living; and little was given to her except the food she subsisted on from day to day, and perhaps now and then a piece of old, worn-out clothing. Like the extremely poor everywhere and at all times, she was humble, and by her longing for kindness, which she never received, she was made kind even to the creatures that depended upon her, and lavished this kindness upon the turkeys she drove to and from the plains every day. Thus, the turkeys, appreciating this, were very obedient. They loved their mistress so much that at her call they would unhesitatingly come, or at her behest go whithersoever and whensoever she wished. One day this poor girl, driving her turkeys down into the plains, passed near Old Zuni, -- the Middle Ant Hill of the World, as our ancients have taught us to call our home, -- and as she went along, she heard the herald-priest proclaiming from the housetop that the Dance of the Sacred Bird (which is a very blessed and welcome festival to our people, especially to the youths and maidens who are permitted to join in the dance) would take place in four days. Now, this poor girl had never been permitted to join in or even to watch the great festivities of our people or the people in the neighboring towns, and naturally she longed very much to see this dance. But she put aside her longing, because she reflected: "It is impossible that I should watch, much less join in the Dance of the Sacred Bird, ugly and ill-clad as I am." And thus musing to herself, and talking to her turkeys, as was her custom, she drove them on, and at night returned them to their cages round the edges and in the plazas of the town. Every day after that, until the day named for the dance, this poor girl, as she drove her turkeys out in the morning, saw the people busy in cleaning and preparing their garments, cooking delicacies, and otherwise making ready for the festival to which they had been duly invited by the other villagers, and heard them talking and laughing merrily at the prospect of the coming holiday. So, as she went about with her turkeys through the day, she would talk to them, though she never dreamed that they understood a word of what she was saying. It seems that they did understand even more than she said to them, for on the fourth day, after the people of Mátsake had all departed toward Zuni, and the girl was wandering around the plains alone with her turkeys, one of the big gobblers strutted up to her, and making a fan of his tail, and skirts, as it were, of his wings, blushed with pride and puffed with importance, stretched out his neck and said: "Maiden mother, we know what your thoughts are, and truly we pity you, and wish that, like the other people of Mátsake, you might enjoy this holiday in the town below. We have said to ourselves at night, after you have placed us safely and comfortably in our cages: 'Truly our maiden mother is as worthy to enjoy these things as any one in Mátsake, or even Zuni.' Now, listen well, for I speak the speech of all the elders of my people: If you will drive us in early this afternoon, when the dance is most gay and the people are most happy, we will help you to make yourself so handsome and so prettily dressed that never a man, woman, or child amongst all those who are assembled at the dance will know you; but rather, especially the young men, will wonder whence you came, and long to lay hold of your hand in the circle that forms round the altar to dance. Maiden mother, would you like to go to see this dance, and even to join in it, and be merry with the best of your people?" The poor girl was at first surprised. Then it seemed all so natural that the turkeys should talk to her as she did to them, that she sat down on a little mound, and, leaning over, looked at them and said: "My beloved turkeys, how glad I am that we may speak together! But why should you tell me of things that you full well know I so long to, but cannot by any possible means, do?" "Trust in us," said the old gobbler, "for I speak the speech of my people, and when we begin to call and call and gobble and gobble, and turn toward our home in Mátsake, do you follow us, and we will show you what we can do for you. Only let me tell you one thing: No one knows how much happiness and good fortune may come to you if you but enjoy temperately the pleasures we enable you to participate in. But if, in the excess of your enjoyment, you should forget us, who are your friends, yet so much depend upon you, then we will think: 'Behold, this our maiden mother, though so humble and poor, deserves, forsooth, her hard life, because, were she more prosperous, she would be unto others as others now are unto her.'" "Never fear, O my turkeys," cried the maiden, -- only half trusting that they could do so much for her, yet longing to try, -- "never fear. In everything you direct me to do I will be obedient as you always have been to me." The sun had scarce begun to decline, when the turkeys of their own accord turned homeward, and the maiden followed them, light of heart. They knew their places well, and immediately ran to them. When all had entered, even their bare-legged children, the old gobbler called to the maiden, saying: "Enter our house." She therefore went in. "Now, maiden, sit down," said he, "and give to me and my companions, one by one, your articles of clothing. We will see if we cannot renew them." The maiden obediently drew off the ragged old mantle that covered her shoulders and cast it on the ground before the speaker. He seized it in his beak, and spread it out, and picked and picked at it; then he trod upon it, and lowering his wings, began to strut back and forth over it. Then taking it up in his beak, and continuing to strut, he puffed and puffed, and laid it down at the feet of the maiden, a beautiful white embroidered cotton mantle. Then another gobbler came forth, and she gave him another article of dress, and then another and another, until each garment the maiden had worn was new and as beautiful as any possessed by her mistresses in Mátsake. Before the maiden donned all these garments, the turkeys circled about her, singing and singing, and clucking and clucking, and brushing her with their wings, until her person was as clean and her skin as smooth and bright as that of the fairest maiden of the wealthiest home in Mátsake. Her hair was soft and wavy, instead of being an ugly, sun-burnt shock; her cheeks were full and dimpled, and her eyes dancing with smiles, -- for she now saw how true had been the words of the turkeys. Finally, one old turkey came forward and said: "Only the rich ornaments worn by those who have many possessions are lacking to thee, O maiden mother. Wait a moment. We have keen eyes, and have gathered many valuable things, -- as such things, being small, though precious, are apt to be lost from time to time by men and maidens." Spreading his wings, he trod round and round upon the ground, throwing his head back, and laying his wattled beard on his neck; and, presently beginning to cough, he produced in his beak a beautiful necklace; another turkey brought forth earrings, and so on, until all the proper ornaments appeared, befitting a well-clad maiden of the olden days, and were laid at the feet of the poor turkey girl. With these beautiful things she decorated herself, and, thanking the turkeys over and over, she started to go, and they called out: "O maiden mother, leave open the wicket, for who knows whether you will remember your turkeys or not when your fortunes are changed, and if you will not grow ashamed that you have been the maiden mother of turkeys? But we love you, and would bring you to good fortune. Therefore, remember our words of advice, and do not tarry too long." "I will surely remember, O my Turkeys!" answered the maiden. Hastily she sped away down the river path to ward Zuni. When she arrived there, she went in at the western side of the town and through one of the long covered ways that lead into the dance court. When she came just inside of the court, behold, everyone began to look at her, and many murmurs ran through the crowd, -- murmurs of astonishment at her beauty and the richness of her dress, - and the people were all asking one another, "Whence comes this beautiful maiden?" Not long did she stand there neglected. The chiefs of the dance, all gorgeous in their holiday attire, hastily came to her, and, with apologies for the incompleteness of their arrangements, -- though these arrangements were as complete as they possibly could be, -- invited her to join the youths and maidens dancing round the musicians and the altar in the center of the plaza. With a blush and a smile and a toss of her hair over her eyes, the maiden stepped into the circle, and the finest youths among the dancers vied with one another for her hand. Her heart became light and her feet merry, and the music sped her breath to rapid coming and going, and the warmth swept over her face, and she danced and danced until the sun sank low in the west. But, alas! In the excess of her enjoyment, she thought not of her turkeys, or, if she thought of them, she said to herself, "How is this, that I should go away from the most precious consideration to my flock of gobbling turkeys? I will stay a while longer, and just before the sun sets I will run back to them, that these people may not see who I am, and that I may have the joy of hearing them talk day after day and wonder who the girl was who joined in their dance." So the time sped on, and another dance was called, and another, and never a moment did the people let her rest; but they would have her in every dance as they moved around the musicians and the altar in the center of the plaza. At last the sun set, and the dance was well-nigh over, when, suddenly breaking away, the girl ran out, and, being swift of foot, -- more so than most of the people of her village, -- she sped up the river path before any one could follow the course she had taken. Meantime, as it grew late, the turkeys began to wonder and wonder that their maiden mother did not return to them. At last a gray old gobbler mournfully exclaimed, "It is as we might have expected. She has forgotten us; therefore is she not worthy of better things than those she has been accustomed to. Let us go forth to the mountains and endure no more of this irksome captivity, inasmuch as we may no longer think our maiden mother as good and true as once we thought her." So, calling and calling to one another in loud voices, they trooped out of their cage and ran up toward the Canyon of the Cottonwoods, and then round behind Thunder Mountain, through the Gateway of Zuni, and so on up the valley. All breathless, the maiden arrived at the open wicket and looked in. Behold, not a turkey was there! Trailing them, she ran and she ran up the valley to overtake them; but they were far ahead, and it was only after a long time that she came within the sound of their voices, and then, redoubling her speed, well-nigh overtook them, when she heard them singing this song : Up the river, to! to! Up the river, to! to! Sing ye ye! Up the river, to! to! Up the river, to! to! Sing yee huli huli! Oh, our maiden mother To the Middle Place To dance went away; Therefore as she lingers, To the Canyon Mesa And the plains above it We all run away! Sing ye yee huli huli, Tot-tot, tot-tot, tot-tot, Huli huli! Tot-tot, tot-tot, tot-tot, Huli huli! Hearing this, the maiden called to her turkeys; called and called in vain. They only quickened their steps, spreading their wings to help them along, singing the song over and over until, indeed, they came to the base of the Canyon Mesa, at the borders of the Zuni Mountains. Then singing once more their song in full chorus, they spread wide their wings, and thlakwa-a-a, thlakwa-a-a , they fluttered away over the plains above. The poor turkey girl threw her hands up and looked down at her dress. With dust and sweat, behold! it was changed to what it had been, and she was the same poor turkey girl that she was be fore. Weary, grieving, and despairing, she returned to Mátsake. Thus it was in the days of the ancients. Therefore, where you see the rocks leading up to the top of Canyon Mesa ( Shoya-k'oskwi ), there are the tracks of turkeys and other figures to be seen. The latter are the song that the turkeys sang, graven in the rocks; and all over the plains along the borders of Zuni Mountains since that day turkeys have been more abundant than in any other place. After all, the gods dispose of men according as men are fitted; and if the poor be poor in heart and spirit as well as in appearance, how will they be aught but poor to the end of their days? Thus shortens my story. Source: Frank Hamilton Cushing, Zuni Folk Tales (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1901), pp. 54-64 . Return to the table of contents . The Turkey Herd Native American (Zuni) Long ago at Kyakima lived a girl who spent all her time herding turkeys. She never did anything for her sisters. Nobody would comb her hair. It was all in a snarl. Her sisters would tell her to cook. They would say, "Why do you so love the turkeys?" She did not answer. After her sisters had cooked, she would take the bread and go out and tend the turkeys. At Matsaki they were dancing lapalehakya (lapa>lapapoawe, "parrots;" lahakya, "tell"). They were dancing for the third time, when the turkey girl said, "Younger sisters [ ahani ]!" The turkeys said, "What?" The girl said, "I want to go and see the dance." The turkeys said, "You are too dirty to go." She repeated, "I want to go." The turkeys said, "Let us eat the lice out of her hair!" Then each ate lice from her hair. Then an elder-sister ( kyauu ) turkey clapped her wings, and down from the air fell women's moccasins ( mokwawe ). Then her younger sister ( ikina ) clapped her wings, and down from the air fell a blanket dress ( yatone ). Then another elder sister clapped her wings, and down from the air fell a belt ( ehnina ). A younger sister clapped her wings, and a pitone fell down. An elder sister clapped, and a blanket ( eha ) fell down. The little younger sister ( an hani tsanna ) clapped, and a hair belt ( tsutokehnina ) fell down. An kyauu said, "Is this all you want?" The girl said, "Yes." She put on the moccasins and the ehayatonana . The turkeys put up her hair in a queue. She said to the turkeys, "I will come back before sundown." She went to her house, and made a little cloth bag, and filled it with meal. Then she went on to Matsaki. Her sisters said, "Has she gone to the dance?" One said, "Yes." -- "She is too dirty to go." After she reached Matsaki, as she stood there, the dance director ( otakya mosi ) asked if she would dance. She said, "Yes." She danced all day. When the sun set, she finished dancing, and ran back to the turkeys. The turkeys had said, when she did not come, "We must not go on living here. Our sister does not love us." When she arrived, they were not there. They were on top of a little hill, singing: Kyana to to kyana to to kyana to to ye uli uli uli to to to to. They flew down to Kyakima. They went on as fast as they could until they came to turkey tracks ( tonateanawa ). There they drank at the spring. Their tracks were from north, south, east, west. After they drank, they flew to Shoakoskwikwi. They reached a high rock. They sat on it, and sang: Kyana to to kyana to to kyana to to ye uli uli uli to to to to. When awan kyauu arrived, the turkeys were not there. She saw their tracks. She followed the tracks on a run. At Tonateanawa she saw where they had drunk. She ran on. Then she lost their tracks. She went back to her house. The turkeys had flown to Shoakoskwikwi, to the spring there. That is why at Shoakoskwikwi you see wild turkeys. The girl came back to her house crying. Her sisters said, "Don't cry! You did not return on time. You did not love them." The girl stayed and cooked for her sisters. Thus it was long ago. Source: Elsie Clews Parsons, "Pueblo-Indian Folk-Tales, Probably of Spanish Provenience," Journal of American Folklore vol. 31, no. 120 (April - June 1918), pp. 234-35 . Parsons' source: "Tsatiselu of Zuni." Note by Parsons: "This is, I suggest, a Cinderella tale, the pattern in regard to the sisters being confused." Return to the table of contents . The Indian Cinderella Native American On the shores of a wide bay on the Atlantic coast there dwelt in old times a great Indian warrior. It was said that he had been one of Glooskap's best helpers and friends, and that he had done for him many wonderful deeds. But that, no man knows. He had, however, a very wonderful and strange power; he could make himself invisible; he could thus mingle unseen with his enemies and listen to their plots. He was known among the people as Strong Wind, the Invisible. He dwelt with his sister in a tent near the sea, and his sister helped him greatly in his work. Many maidens would have been glad to marry him, and he was much sought after because of his mighty deeds; and it was known that Strong Wind would marry the first maiden who could see him as he came home at night. Many made the trial, but it was a long time before one succeeded. Strong Wind used a clever trick to test the truthfulness of all who sought to win him. Each evening as the day went down, his sister walked on the beach with any girl who wished to make the trial. His sister could always see him, but no one else could see him. And as he came home from work in the twilight, his sister as she saw him drawing near would ask the girl who sought him, "Do you see him?" And each girl would falsely answer "Yes." And his sister would ask, "With what does he draw his sled?" And each girl would answer, "With the hide of a moose," or "With a pole," or "With a great cord." And then his sister would know that they all had lied, for their answers were mere guesses. And many tried and lied and failed, for Strong Wind would not marry any who were untruthful. There lived in the village a great chief who had three daughters. Their mother had long been dead. One of these was much younger than the others. She was very beautiful and gentle and well beloved by all, and for that reason her older sisters were very jealous of her charms and treated her very cruelly. They clothed her in rags that she might be ugly; and they cut off her long black hair; and they burned her face with coals from the fire that she might be scarred and disfigured. And they lied to their father, telling him that she had done these things herself. But the young girl was patient and kept her gentle heart and went gladly about her work. Like other girls, the chief's two eldest daughters tried to win Strong Wind. One evening, as the day went down, they walked on the shore with Strong Wind's sister and waited for his coming. Soon he came home from his day's work, drawing his sled. And his sister asked as usual, "Do you see him?" And each one, lying, answered "Yes." And she asked, "Of what is his shoulder strap made?" And each, guessing, said "Of rawhide." Then they entered the tent where they hoped to see Strong Wind eating his supper; and when he took off his coat and his moccasins they could see them, but more than these they saw nothing. And Strong Wind knew that they had lied, and he kept himself from their sight, and they went home dismayed. One day the chief's youngest daughter with her rags and her burnt face resolved to seek Strong Wind. She patched her clothes with bits of birch bark from the trees, and put on the few little ornaments she possessed, and went forth to try to see the Invisible One as all the other girls of the village had done before. And her sisters laughed at her and called her "fool"; and as she passed along the road all the people laughed at her because of her tattered frock and her burnt face, but silently she went her way. Strong Wind's sister received the little girl kindly, and at twilight she took her to the beach. Soon Strong Wind came home drawing his sled. And his sister asked, "Do you see him?" And the girl answered "No," and his sister wondered greatly because she spoke the truth. And again she asked, "Do you see him now?" And the girl answered, "Yes, and he is very wonderful." And she asked, "With what does he draw his sled?" And the girl answered, "With the Rainbow," and she was much afraid. And she asked further, "Of what is his bowstring?" And the girl answered, "His bowstring is the Milky Way." Then Strong Wind's sister knew that because the girl had spoken the truth at first her brother had made himself visible to her. And she said, "Truly, you have seen him." And she took her home and bathed her, and all the scars disappeared from her face and body; and her hair grew long and black again like the raven's wing; and she gave her fine clothes to wear and many rich ornaments. Then she bade her take the wife's seat in the tent. Soon Strong Wind entered and sat beside her, and called her his bride. The very next day she became his wife, and ever afterwards she helped him to do great deeds. The girl's two elder sisters were very cross and they wondered greatly at what had taken place. But Strong Wind, who knew of their cruelty, resolved to punish them. Using his great power, he changed them both into aspen trees and rooted them in the earth. And since that day the leaves of the aspen have always trembled, and they shiver in fear at the approach of Strong Wind, it matters not how softly he comes, for they are still mindful of his great power and anger because of their lies and their cruelty to their sister long ago. Source: Cyrus Macmillan, Canadian Wonder Tales (London: John Lane, 1920), pp. 116-19 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Marian Roalfe Cox, Cinderella: Three Hundred and Forty-Five Variants of Cinderella, Catskin, and Cap o' Rushes , with an introduction by Andrew Lang (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1893). Cinderella , from Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia. Cinderella Bibliography . A thorough and scholarly annotated bibliography of texts, analogues, criticism, modern versions, parodies -- ranging from ancient folklore through recent popular culture, and modern scholarship. Organized by Russell A. Peck, University of Rochester. The Annotated Cinderella , from the SurLaLune Fairy Tales by Heidi Anne Heiner. The Father Who Wanted to Marry His Daughter , folktales of type 510B. These stories resemble the "Cinderella" tales (type 510A), but they also include an episode depicting attempted incest. Return to: The table of contents D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised July 19, 2024. The Green Knight: A Cinderella Story from Denmark The Green Knight A Cinderella Story from Denmark edited by D. L. Ashliman Return to: Cinderella : Aarne-Thompson-Uther folktale type 510A and related stories of persecuted heroines. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Green Knight Denmark (Svendt Grundtvig) Once upon a time there were a king and a queen and they had but one little daughter, and when she was very young her dear mother became sick unto death. When the queen knew that she had only a short time to live, she called the king and said, "My dear lord and husband! in order that I may die in peace you must promise me one thing, and that is, that you will never refuse our child anything that she may ask of you if it be possible to grant her wish." That the king promised her and she died soon afterward. The king's heart was nearly broken for he loved his wife devotedly, and his little daughter alone could comfort him. The princess grew up, and the fulfillment of the promise was indeed easy for the king; he never refused her a request. That spoiled her a little, but otherwise she was a dear, good child who only needed a mother to understand and love her; for the lack of this she was often moody and melancholy. The princess did not care for games and amusements like other children, but instead she liked to wander alone in the gardens and woods, and above all she loved flowers and birds and animals, and she was also fond of reading poetry and stories. Not far from the palace there lived the widow of a count, who had a daughter a little older than the princess. The young countess, however, was not a good girl, but was vain, selfish and hard-hearted; on the other hand she was clever, like her mother, and could dissimulate when she thought it would serve her ends. The countess cleverly devised ways so that her daughter was often thrown together with the princess, and both mother and daughter spared no pains to please her. They did everything in their power to give her pleasure and cheer her, and soon she always had to have either one or the other by her side. Now that was just what the countess wanted and had been working for; so that when she saw that she had brought matters to that point, she made her daughter tell the princess, amid tears, that they must now separate because she and her mother had to go far away into another country. Then the little princess ran at once to the countess and told her that she must not leave with her daughter, for she could not live without her and would grieve to death if she left her. Then the countess pretended to be deeply moved and told the princess that there was only one way that she could be persuaded to stay in the country, and that was for the king to marry her. Then both mother and daughter could always stay with her, and they painted in glowing colors the joys that would be hers if that should come to pass. Then the princess went to her father, the king, and begged and implored him to marry the countess, for otherwise she would go away and his poor little daughter would lose her only friend and grieve to death. "You would certainly repent of it, if I were to do it," said the king, "and I should also, for I have no desire whatever to marry, and I have no confidence in the deceitful countess and her deceitful daughter." But the princess did not cease crying and imploring him until he promised to grant her wish. Then the king asked the countess to marry him and she at once consented. Soon after that the wedding ceremony took place and the countess became queen and was now the stepmother of the young princess. But after the marriage all was changed. The queen did nothing but tease and torment her stepdaughter, while nothing was too good for her own child. Her daughter did not pay any attention to the poor princess, but did everything she could to make her life miserable. The king, who could see all this, took it very much to heart, for he loved his daughter deeply; so he said to her on one occasion, "Alas, my poor little daughter, you are having a sad life and must certainly have repented many a time of that which you asked of me, for it has all turned out as I foretold. But now, unfortunately, it is too late. I think it would be better for you to leave us for a time and go out to my summer palace on the island; there you would, at least, have peace and quiet." The princess agreed with her father, and although it was very hard for them to be separated, it was nevertheless absolutely necessary, as she could no longer endure her wicked stepmother and her malicious stepsister. So she took with her two of her ladies in waiting to live in the summer palace on the island, and her father came from time to time to visit her; and he could see very plainly that she was much happier here than she would have been at home with her wicked stepmother. So she grew up to be a lovely maiden, pure, innocent and thoughtful, kind to both men and beasts. But she was never really happy, and there was always an undercurrent of sadness in her nature, and a longing for something better than she had hitherto found in the world. One day her father came to her to bid her farewell, for he had to go on a long journey to be present at a gathering of kings and nobles from many lands, and would not return for a long time. The king wanted to cheer his daughter, so he said to her jestingly that he would look carefully among the princes to see whether he could not find one among them all who would be worthy to become her husband. Then the princess answered him and said, "I thank you, dear father; if you see the Green Knight, greet him and tell him that I am waiting and longing for him, for he alone and no other can free me from my suffering." When the princess said that, she was thinking of the green churchyard with its many green mounds, for she longed for death. But the king did not understand her and wondered much at the strange greeting to a strange knight whose name he had never heard of before; but he was accustomed to grant her every wish, so he only said he would not forget to greet the knight as soon as he met him. Then he bade his daughter a tender farewell and started on his journey to the meeting of the kings. There he found many princes, young nobles and knights, but among them there was no one called the Green Knight, so that the king could not deliver his daughter's message. At last he started on his homeward journey and had to cross high mountains and wide rivers and to go through dense forests. And as the king one day was passing through one of those great woods with his train, they came upon a large open space where thousands of boars were feeding. These were not wild, but tame, and were guarded by a swineherd in the garb of a huntsman who sat, surrounded by his dogs, on a little knoll and had a pipe to whose notes all animals listened and were obedient. The king wondered at this herd of tame boars, and had one of his retainers ask the swineherd to whom they belonged. He answered that they belonged to the Green Knight. Then the king remembered what his daughter had asked him, and he himself rode up to the man and asked whether the Green Knight lived in the neighborhood. "No," he replied, "he lives far from here, towards the east. If you ride in that direction you will meet other herdsmen who will show you the way to his castle." Then the king and his men rode eastward for three days through a great forest, until they came again to a large plain surrounded by great forests, on which immense herds of elks and wild oxen were grazing. These also were guarded by a herdsman in hunter's dress, accompanied by his dogs. And the king rode to the man, who told him that all these herds belonged to the Green Knight, who lived further eastward. And again after three days the King came to a great clearing, where he saw great herds of stags and does, and the herdsman, in answer to his question, said that the Green Knight's castle was but a day's journey distant. Then the king rode for a day on green paths, through green woods, until he came to a great castle which was also green, for it was entirely covered by vines and climbing plants. When they rode up to the castle, a large number of men dressed in green like hunters, appeared and escorted them into the castle, and announced that the king of such and such a kingdom had arrived and desired to greet their master. Then the lord of the castle came himself -- a tall, handsome, young man, also clad in green -- and bade his guest welcome and entertained them in a lordly manner. Then said the king, "You live far away and you have so great a domain that I had to go much out of my way to fulfill my daughter's wish. When I rode forth to attend the gathering of the kings, she asked me to greet the Green Knight for her, and to tell him how she longed for him, and that he alone could free her from her torment. This is a very strange commission that I have undertaken, but my daughter knows what is right and proper, and moreover I promised her mother on her deathbed that I would never refuse our only child a wish; so I have come here to deliver the message and keep my promise." Then the Green Knight said to the king, "Your daughter was sad, and was certainly not thinking of me when she gave you her message, for she can never have heard of me; she was probably thinking of the churchyard with its many green mounds, where alone she hoped to find rest. But perhaps I can give her something to alleviate her sorrow. Take this little book, and tell the princess when she is sad and heavy-hearted to open her east window and to read in the book; it will gladden her heart." Then the knight gave the king a little green book, but he could not read it, because he did not know the letters with which the words were written. He took it, however, and thanked the Green Knight for his kind and hospitable reception. He was very sorry, he assured the knight, that he had disturbed him, as the princess had not meant him at all. They had to remain overnight in the castle, and the knight would gladly have kept them longer, but the king insisted that he must leave the next day; so the following morning he said goodbye to his host, and rode back the way he had come until he came to the clearing where the boars were, and from there he went straight home. The first thing the king did, was to go to the island and take the little green book to his daughter. She was astonished when her father told her about the Green Knight, and gave her his greetings and the book, for she had not thought of a human being, nor had she the faintest idea that a Green Knight existed. But that very evening, when her father was gone, the princess opened her east window and began to read her green book, although it was not written in her mother tongue. The book contained many poems, and its language was beautiful. One of the first things that she read began as follows: The wind has risen on the sea, And bloweth over field and lea, And while on earth broods silent night, Who, to the knight, her troth will plight? While she was reading the first verse she heard distinctly the rushing of the wind over the water; at the second verse she heard a rustling in the trees; at the third verse her ladies in waiting and all those in or near the palace, fell into a deep slumber. And when the princess read the fourth line, the Green Knight himself flew through the window in the shape of a bird. Then he resumed his human form, greeted her kindly, and begged her to have no fear. The knight told her that he was the Green Knight whom the king had visited, and from whom he had received the book, and that she herself had brought him thither by reading those lines. She could speak freely to him, and this would relieve her sadness. Then the princess at once felt a great confidence in him, so that she told him her inmost thoughts; and the knight spoke to her with such sympathy and understanding that she felt happy as never before. Then he said to her that every time she opened the book and read those first verses, the same would come to pass that had happened that evening; everybody on the island would fall asleep except the princess, and he would come to her immediately, although he lived far from her. And the prince also told her that he would always gladly come to her if she really wanted to see him. Now, however, she would better close the book and betake herself to rest. And at the very moment that she closed the book, the Green Knight disappeared, and the court ladies and all the attendants awoke. Then the princess went to bed and dreamed of the knight and all that he had said to her. When she awoke the next morning she was light-hearted and happy as she had never been before, and day by day her health improved. Her cheeks grew rosy and she laughed and jested, so that all about her were amazed at the change that had taken place in her. The king said that the evening air and the little green book had really helped her, and the princess agreed with him. But what nobody knew was, that every evening when the princess had read in her book, she received a visit from the Green Knight, and that they had long talks together. On the third visit he gave her a gold ring, and they became betrothed. But not until three months had elapsed could he go to her father and ask her hand in marriage; then he would take her home with him as his beloved wife. In the meantime the stepmother learned that the princess was growing stronger and more beautiful, and that she was happier than ever before. The queen wondered at this and was vexed, for she had always believed and hoped that the princess would waste away and die, and that then her own daughter would become princess and heiress to the throne. So one day she sent one of her court ladies over to the island to pay the princess a visit, and to try to find out what was the cause of this remarkable improvement. On the following day the young woman returned and told the queen that it seemed to be particularly helpful to the princess to sit at an open window every evening and read in a book that a strange prince had given her. The evening air had made her drowsy and she had fallen into a deep sleep; the same thing, she said, happened every evening to the court ladies who complained that it made them ill, while the princess became rosier and happier every day. The next day the queen sent her daughter to act as a spy, and told her to pay careful attention to all that the princess did. "There is some mystery about that window; perhaps a man comes in by it." The daughter came back the next day, but she could not tell any more than the maid, for she, too, had fallen into a deep sleep when the princess seated herself at the window and began to read. Then on the third day the stepmother went herself to call on the princess. She was as sweet as honey to her, and pretended to be delighted to see how well she was. The queen questioned her as much as she dared, but could learn nothing from her. Then she went to the east window where the princess was in the habit of sitting and reading every evening, and examined it carefully, but could discover nothing special about it. The window was high above the ground, but vines grew up to it, so that it might have been possible for a very active person to climb up. For that reason the queen took a small pair of scissors, smeared them with poison, and fastened them in the window with their points turned upward, but in such a manner that no one could see them. When evening came and the princess seated herself at the window with the little green book in her hand, the queen said to herself that she would take good care not to fall asleep as the others had done. But her resolve did not help her in the least, for, in spite of herself, when the princess began to read, the queen's eyelids fell and she slept soundly as did the others. And at that same moment the Green Knight in the form of a bird came in through the window, unseen and unheard by all except the princess. They talked of their love for each other and how there remained only one week of the three months, and then the knight would go to her father's court and ask for her hand in marriage. Then he would take her home, and she would always be with him in his green castle, which lay in the midst of the great woodland realm over which he ruled, and about which he had told her so often. Then the Green Knight bade his betrothed a tender farewell, resumed the form of a bird, and flew out of the window. But he flew so low that he grazed the scissors that the queen had fastened there, and scratched one leg. He uttered a cry, but disappeared quickly. The princess, who had heard him, sprang up; but in so doing, the book fell from her hand to the floor and closed, and she also uttered a piercing cry which awoke the queen and all the court ladies. They rushed to her and asked what had happened. She answered that nothing was the matter, but that she had only dozed a little, and had been awakened by a bad dream. But that very hour she became ill with a fever and had to go to bed at once. The queen, in the meantime, slipped to the window to get her scissors, and when she found that there was blood on them, she hid them under her apron and took them home. The princess, however, could not sleep the whole night, and felt miserable all the next day; nevertheless towards evening she rose in order to get a little fresh air. So she seated herself at the open east window, opened the book and read as usual: The wind has risen on the sea, And bloweth over field and lea, And while on earth broods silent night Who to the knight her troth will plight? And the wind soughed through the trees, and the leaves rustled and all slept, except the princess -- but the knight came not. And so the days passed and she waited and watched, and read in her little green book and sang -- but no Green Knight came. Then her red cheeks again became pale and her happy heart, sad and heavy; and she began to waste away, to the sorrow of her father, but to the secret joy of her stepmother. One day the princess walked feebly alone through the castle garden on the island, and seated herself on a bench under a high tree, and there she remained a long time plunged in sad and gloomy thoughts; while she was there two ravens came and perched on a branch over her head, and began to talk together. "It is pitiful," said one, "to see our dear princess grieving to death for her beloved." "Yes," said the other one, "especially as she is the only one who can cure him of the wound inflicted on him by the poisoned scissors of the queen." "How so?" asked the first raven. "Like cures like," replied the other one. "Over yonder, in the courtyard of the king, west of the stables, there lies, in a hole under a stone, an adder with her nine young. If the princess could get these and cook them, and give three young adders every day to the sick knight, he would recover. Otherwise there is no help for him." As soon as night came the princess slipped out of the castle, went down to the shore where she found a boat, and rowed over to the palace. She went straight to the stone in the courtyard and rolled it away, heavy as it was, and there she found the nine young adders. These she tied up in her apron, and went forth on the way that she knew her father had taken when he returned from the gathering of the kings. So she traveled on foot for weeks and months over high mountains and through dense forests, until she came at last upon the same swineherd that her father had met. He pointed out to her the way through the woods to the second herdsman, who in turn showed her the path to the third man. At last she reached the green castle where the knight lived, and lay sick with the poison and a fever, so ill that he recognized nobody, but only rolled and tossed in anguish and pain. Physicians had been called from the ends of the earth, but no one could procure for him the slightest relief. The princess went into the kitchen and asked whether they could not give her some employment; she would wash the dishes, or do anything they asked her to, if only they would allow her to stay. The cook consented, and because she was so neat and quick and willing at every kind of work, he soon found her a valuable helper, and let her have her own way in many things. So one day she said to him, "Today you must let me prepare the soup for our sick master. I know very well how it ought to be cooked, but I want to be allowed to cook it alone, and no one may look into the pot." The cook was willing, and so she cooked three of the young adders in the soup, which was carried up to the Green Knight. And when he had eaten the soup, the fever went down so much that he could recognize those about him and speak intelligently; then he called the cook, and asked him whether he had cooked the soup that had done him so much good. The cook answered that he had done so, as no one else was allowed to prepare the food for his master. Then the Green Knight bade him make more of the same kind of soup on the morrow. Now it was the cook's turn to go to the princess and beg her to prepare the soup for the knight; and as before, she cooked three young adders in it. This time, after partaking of it, he felt so well that he could get up out of bed. At this, all the doctors were amazed and could not understand how it happened; but, of course, they said that the medicines they had been giving him were beginning to have an effect. On the third day, the kitchen maid again had to prepare the soup, and she cooked in it the last three young adders. And as soon as the knight had eaten it he felt perfectly well. Then he jumped up and wanted to go down to the kitchen himself to thank the cook, for, after all, he was certainly the best physician. Now it happened that when he entered the kitchen there was no one there except a maid who was wiping dishes; but even as he looked he recognized her, and it suddenly dawned upon him what she had done for him. He folded her in his arms and said, "It was you then, was it not, who saved my life and cured me of the poison that penetrated into my blood, when I scratched myself on the scissors that the queen had put into the window?" She could not deny it; she was overjoyed, and he also. Soon after that their wedding was celebrated in the green castle; and there they are probably still living together and ruling over all the inhabitants of the green forests. Source: Svendt Grundtvig, Danish Fairy Tales , translated by J. Grant Cramer (Boston: Richard G. Badger, 1912), pp. 22-37 . This tale combines elements of a traditional Cinderella story (Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 510A) with those of type 425N (The Bird Husband) and type 432 (The Prince as Bird). Return to Cinderella : Aarne-Thompson folktale type 510A and related stories of persecuted heroines. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 29, 2009. Father-Daughter Incest in International Folktales The Father Who Wanted to Marry His Daughter Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 510B translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2021 Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Cinderella. Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 510A. Contents Doralice (Italy, Giovanni Francesco Straparola). The She-Bear (Italy, Giambattista Basile). Link to Donkey Skin (France, Charles Perrault). Ass'-Skin (Basque, Wentworth Webster). All-Kinds-of-Fur , also known as "Allerleirauh" (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, version of 1812). Link to an English translation of the version of 1857: All-Kinds-of-Fur . Link to the original German, version of 1812: Allerlei-Rauh . Link to the original German, version of 1857: Allerleirauh . Cinder Blower (Germany, Karl Bartsch). Kaiser Heinrich in Sudemer Mountain (Germany, A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz). Broomthrow, Brushthrow, Combthrow (Austria, Theodor Vernaleken). The Emperor's Daughter in the Pig Stall (Romania, Arthur and Albert Schott). Fair Maria Wood (Italy, Thomas Frederick Crane). Maria Wood (Italy, Rachel Harriette Busk). All-Kinds-of-Fur (Greece, J. G. von Hahn). The Princess Who Would Not Marry Her Father (Portugal, Consiglieri Pedroso). The Horse's Skin (Portugal, Francisco Adolpho Coelho). The King Who Wished to Marry His Daughter (Scotland, J. F. Campbell). Morag a Chota Bhain -- Margery White Coats (Scotland, J. F. Campbell). Rashen Coatie (Scotland, Peter Buchan). The Princess and the Golden Cow (England, Isabella Barclay). The Story of Catskin (England, James Orchard Halliwell). The Princess in the Cat-Skins (Ireland, Patrick Kennedy). The Beautiful Princess (Lithuania, August Schleicher). The Princess with a Golden Star on Her Forehead (Czechia, Božena Němcová) Pigskin (Ukraine, Alexander Afanasyev). Kniaz Danila Govorila (Russia, Alexander Afanasyev). Seggu-Jataka: How a Pious Greengrocer Tested His Daughter's Virtue (India, The Jataka ). Links to related cites . Notes and Bibliography . Type 510B folktales in the English language . Type 510B folktales in the German language . Doralice Italy, Giovanni Francesco Straparola Tebaldo, Prince of Salerno, wishes to have his only daughter Doralice to wife, but she, through her father's persecution, flees to England, where she marries Genese the king, and has by him two children. These, having been slain by Tebaldo, are avenged by their father King Genese. I cannot think there is one amongst us who has not realized by his own experience how great is the power of love, and how sharp are the arrows he is wont to shoot into our corruptible flesh. He, like a mighty king, directs and governs his empire without a sword, simply by his individual will, as you will be able to understand from the tenor of the story which I about to tell to you. You must know, dear ladies, that Tebaldo, Prince of Salerno, according to the story I have heard repeated many times by my elders, had to wife a modest and prudent lady of good lineage, and by her he had a daughter who in beauty and grace outshone all the other ladies of Salerno; but it would have been well for Tebaldo if she had never seen the light, for in that case the grave misadventure which befell him would never have happened. His wife, young in years but of mature wisdom, when she lay a-dying besought her husband, whom she loved very dearly, never to take for his wife any woman whose finger would not exactly fit the ring which she herself wore; and the prince, who loved his wife no less than she loved him, swore by his head that he would observe her wish. After the good princess had breathed her last and had been honorably buried, Tebaldo indulged in the thought of wedding again, but he bore well in mind the promise he had made to his wife, and was firmly resolved to keep her saying. However, the report that Tebaldo, Prince of Salerno, was seeking another mate soon got noised abroad, and came to the ears of many maidens who, in worth and in estate, were no whit his inferiors; but Tebaldo, whose first care was to fulfil the wishes of his wife who was dead, made it a condition that any damsel who might be offered to him in marriage should first try on her finger his wife's ring, to see whether it fitted, and not having found one who fulfilled this condition -- the ring being always found too big for this and too small for that -- he was forced to dismiss them all without further parley. Now it happened one day that the daughter of Tebaldo, whose name was Doralice, sat at table with her father; and she, having espied her mother's ring lying on the board, slipped it on her finger and cried out, "See my father, how well my mother's ring fits me!" And the prince, when he saw what she had done, assented. But not long after this the soul of Tebaldo was assailed by a strange and diabolical temptation to take to wife his daughter Doralice, and for many days he lived tossed about between yea and nay. At last, overcome by the strength of this devilish intent, and fired by the beauty of the maiden, he one day called her to him and said, "Doralice, my daughter, while your mother was yet alive, but fast nearing the end of her days, she besought me never to take to wife any woman whose finger would not fit the ring she herself always wore in her lifetime, and I swore by my head that I would observe this last request of hers. Wherefore, when I felt the time was come for me to wed anew, I made trial of many maidens, but not one could I find who could wear your mother's ring, except yourself. Therefore I have decided to take you for my wife, for thus I shall satisfy my own desire without violating the promise I made to your mother." Doralice, who was as pure as she was beautiful, when she listened to the evil designs of her wicked father, was deeply troubled in her heart; but, taking heed of his vile and abominable lust, and fearing the effects of his rage, she made no answer and went out of his presence with an untroubled face. As there was no one whom she could trust so well as her old nurse, she repaired to her at once as the surest bulwark of her safety, to take counsel as to what she should do. The nurse, when she had heard the story of the execrable lust of this wicked father, spake words of comfort to Doralice, for she knew well the constancy and steadfast nature of the girl, and that she would be ready to endure any torment rather than accede to her father's desire, and promised to aid her in keeping her virginity unsullied by such terrible disgrace. After this the nurse thought of nothing else than how she might best find a way for Doralice out of this strait, planning now this and now that, but finding no method which gained her entire approval. She would fain have had Doralice take to flight and put long distance betwixt her and her father, but she feared the craft of Tebaldo, and lest the girl should fall into his hands after her flight, feeling certain that in such event he would put her to death. So while the faithful nurse was thus taking counsel with herself, she suddenly hit upon a fresh scheme, which was what I will now tell you. In the chamber of the dead lady there was a fair cassone, or clothes-chest, magnificently carved, in which Doralice kept her richest dresses and her most precious jewels, and this wardrobe the nurse alone could open. So she removed from it by stealth all the robes and the ornaments that were therein, and bestowed them elsewhere, placing in it a good store of a certain liquor which had such great virtue, that whosoever took a spoonful of it, or even less, could live for a long time without further nourishment. Then, having called Doralice, she shut her therein, and bade her remain in hiding until such time as God should send her better fortune, and her father be delivered from the bestial mood which had come upon him. The maiden, obedient to the good old woman's command, did all that was told her; and the father, still set upon his accursed design, and making no effort to restrain his unnatural lust, demanded every day what had become of his daughter; and, neither finding any trace of her, or knowing aught where she could be, his rage became so terrible that he threatened to have her killed as soon as he should find her. Early one morning it chanced that Tebaldo went into the room where the chest was, and as soon as his eye fell upon it, he felt, from the associations connected with it, that he could not any longer endure the sight of it, so he gave orders that it should straightway be taken out and placed elsewhere and sold, so that its presence might not bee an offence to him. The servants were prompt to obey their master's command, and, having taken the thing on their shoulders, they bore it away to the marketplace. It chanced that there was at that time in the city a rich dealer from Genoa, who, as soon as he caught sight of the sumptuously carved cassone, admired it greatly, and settled with himself that he would not let it go from him, however much he might have to pay for it. So, having accosted the servant who was charged with the sale of it, and learnt the price demanded, he bought it forthwith, and gave orders to a porter to carry it away and place it on board his ship. The nurse, who was watching the trafficking from a distance, was well pleased with the issue thereof, though she grieved sore at losing the maiden. Wherefore she consoled herself by reflecting that when it comes to the choice of evils it is ever wiser to avoid the greater. The merchant, having set sail from Salerno with his carven chest and other valuable wares, voyaged to the island of Britain, known to us today as England, and landed at a port near which the country was spread out in a vast plain. Before he had been there long, Genese, who had lately been crowned king of the island, happened to be riding along the seashore, chasing a fine stag, which, in the end, ran down to the beach and took to the water. The king, feeling wary and worn with the long pursuit, was fain to rest awhile, and, having caught sight of the ship, he sent to ask the master of it to give him something to drink; and the latter, feigning to be ignorant he was talking to the king, greeted Genese familiarly, and gave him a hearty welcome, finally prevailing upon him to go on board his vessel. The king, when he saw the beautiful clothes-chest so finely carved, was taken with a great longing to possess it, and grew so impatient to call it his own that every hour seemed like a thousand till he should be able to claim it. He then asked the merchant the price he asked for it, and was answered that the price was a very heavy one. The king, being now more taken than ever with the beautiful handicraft, would not leave the ship till he had arranged a price with the merchant, and, having sent for money enough to pay the price demanded, he took his leave, and straightway ordered the cassone to be borne to the palace and placed in his chamber. Genese, being yet over-young to wive, found his chief pleasure in going every day to the chase. Now that the cassone was transported into his bedroom, with the maiden Doralice hidden inside, she heard, as was only natural, all that went on in the king's chamber, and, in pondering over her past misfortunes, hoped that a happier future was in store for her. And as soon as the king had departed for the chase in the morning, and had left the room clear, Doralice would issue from the clothes-chest, and would deftly put the chamber in order, and sweep it, and make the bed. Then she would adjust the bed curtains, and put on the coverlet cunningly embroidered with fine pearls, and two beautifully ornamented pillows thereto. After this, the fair maiden strewed the bed with roses, violets, and other sweet-smelling flowers, mingled with Cyprian spices which exhaled a subtle odor and soothed the brain to slumber. Day after day Doralice continued to compose the king's chamber in this pleasant fashion, without being seen of anyone, and thereby gave Genese much gratification; for every day when he came back from the chase it seemed to him as if he was greeted by all the perfumes of the East. One day he questioned the queen his mother, and the ladies who were about her, as to which of them had so kindly and graciously adorned his room and decked the bed with roses and violets and sweet scents. They answered, one and all, that they had no part in all this, for every morning, when they went to put the chamber in order, they found the bed strewn with flowers and perfumes. Genese, when he heard this, determined to clear up the mystery, and the next morning gave out that he was going to hunt at a village ten leagues distant. But, in lieu of going forth, he quietly hid himself in the room, keeping his eyes steadily fixed on the door, and waiting to see what might occur. He had not been long on the watch before Doralice, looking more beautiful than the sun, came out of the cassone and began to sweep the room, and to straighten the carpets, and to deck the bed, and diligently to set everything in order, as was her wont. The beautiful maiden had no sooner done her kindly and considerate office, than she made as if she would go back to her hiding place. But the king, who had keenly taken note of everything, suddenly caught her by the hand, and, seeing that she was very fair, and fresh as a lily, asked her who she was; whereupon the trembling girl confessed that she was the daughter of a prince. She declared, however, that she had forgotten what was his name, on account of her long imprisonment in the cassone, and she would say nothing as to the reason why she had been shut therein. The king, after he had heard her story, fell violently in love with her, and, with the full consent of his mother, made her his queen, and had by her two fair children. In the meantime Tebaldo was still mastered by his wicked and treacherous passion, and, as he could find no trace of Doralice, search as he would, he began to believe that she must have been hidden in the coffer which he had caused to be sold, and that, having escaped his power, she might be wandering about from place to place. Therefore, with his rage will burning against her, he set himself to try whether perchance he might not discover her whereabouts. He attired himself as a merchant, and, having gathered together a great store of precious stones and jewels, marvelously wrought in gold, quitted Salerno unknown to anyone, and scoured all the nations and countries round about, finally meeting by hazard the trader who had originally purchased the clothes-chest. Of him he demanded whether he had been satisfied with his bargain, and into whose hands the chest had fallen, and the trader replied that he had sold the cassone to the King of England for double the price he had given for it. Tebaldo, rejoicing at this news, made his way to England, and when he had landed there and journeyed to the capital, he made a show of his jewels and golden ornaments, amongst which were some spindles and distaffs cunningly wrought, crying out the while, "Spindles and distaffs for sale, ladies." It chanced that one of the dames of the court, who was looking out of a window, heard this and saw the merchant and his goods; whereupon she ran to the queen and told her there was below a merchant who had for sale the most beautiful golden spindles and distaffs that ever were seen. The queen commanded him to be brought into the palace, and he came up the stairs into her presence, but she did not recognize him in his merchant's guise. Moreover, she was not thinking ever to behold her father again; but Tebaldo recognized his daughter at once. The queen, when she saw how fair was the work of the spindles and distaffs, asked of the merchant what price he put upon them. "The prince is great," he answered, "but to you I will give one of them for nothing, provided you suffer me to gratify a caprice of mine. This is that I may be permitted to sleep one night in the same room as your children." The good Doralice, in her pure and simple nature, never suspected the accursed design of the feigned merchant, and, yielding to the persuasion of her attendants, granted his request. But before the merchant was led to the sleeping chamber, certain ladies of the court deemed it wise to offer him a cup of wine well drugged to make him sleep sound, and when night had come and the merchant seemed overcome with fatigue, one of the ladies conducted him into the chamber of the king's children, where there was prepared for him a sumptuous couch. Before she left him the lady said, "Good man, are you not thirsty?" "Indeed I am," he replied; whereupon she handed him the drugged wine in a silver cup. But the crafty Tebaldo, while feigning to drink the wine, spilled it over his garments, and then lay down to rest. Now there was in the children's a side door through which it was possible to pass into the queen's apartment. At midnight, when all was still, Tebaldo stole through this, and, going up to the bed beside which the queen had left her clothes, he took away a small dagger, which he had marked the day before hanging from her girdle. Then he returned to the children's room and killed them both with the dagger, which he immediately put back into its scabbard, all bloody as it was. And having opened a window he let himself down by a cord. As soon as the shopmen of the city were astir, he went to a barber's and had his long beard taken off, for fear he might be recognized, and having put on different clothes he walked about the city without apprehension. In the palace the nurses went, as soon as they awakened, to suckle the children; but when they came to the cradles they found them both lying dead. Whereupon they began to scream and to weep bitterly, and to rend their hair and their garments, thus laying bare their breasts. The dreadful tiding came quickly to the ears of the king and queen, and they ran barefooted and in their nightclothes to the spot, and when they saw the dead bodies of the babes they wept bitterly. Soon the report of the murder of the two children was spread throughout the city, and, almost at the same time, it was rumored that there had just arrived a famous astrologer, who, by studying the courses of the various stars, could lay bare the hidden mysteries of the past. When this came to the ears of the king, he caused the astrologer to be summoned forthwith, and, when he was come into the royal presence, demanded whether or not he could tell the name of the murderer of the children. The astrologer replied that he could, and whispering secretly in the king's ear he said, "Sire, let all the men and women of your court who are wont to wear a dagger at their side be summoned before you, and if amongst these you shall find one whose dagger is befouled with blood in its scabbard, that same will be the murderer of your children." Wherefore the king at once gave command that all his courtiers should present themselves, and, when they were assembled, he diligently searched with his own hands to see if any one of them might have a bloody dagger at his side, but he could find none. Then he returned to the astrologer -- who was no other than Tebaldo himself -- and told him how his quest had been vain, and that all in the palace, save his mother and the queen, had been searched. To which the astrologer replied, "Sire, search everywhere and respect no one, and then you will surely find the murderer." So the king searched first his mother, and then the queen, and when he took the dagger which Doralice wore and drew it from the scabbard, he found it covered with blood. Then the king, convinced by this proof, turned to the queen and said to her, "O, wicked and inhuman woman, enemy of your own flesh and blood, traitress to your own children! What desperate madness has led you to dye your hands in the blood of these babes? I swear that you shall suffer the full penalty fixed for such a crime." But though the king in his rage would fain have sent her straightway to a shameful death, his desire for vengeance prompted him to dispose of her so that she might suffer longer and more cruel torment. Wherefore he commanded that she should be stripped and thus naked buried up to her chin in the earth, and that she should be well fed in order that she might linger long and the worms devour her flesh while she still lived. The queen, seasoned to misfortune in the past, and conscious of her innocence, contemplated her terrible doom with calmness and dignity. Tebaldo, when he learned that the queen had been adjudged guilty and condemned to a cruel death, rejoiced greatly, and, as soon as he had taken leave of the king, left England, quite satisfied with his work, and returned secretly to Salerno. Arrived there, he told to the old nurse the whole story of his adventures, and how Doralice had been sentenced to death by her husband. As she listened, the nurse feigned to be as pleased as Tebaldo himself, but in her heart she grieved sorely, overcome by this love which she had always borne towards the princess, and the next morning she took horse early and rode on day and night until she came to England. Immediately she repaired to the palace and went before the king, who was giving public audience in the great hall, and, having thrown herself at his feet, she demanded an interview on a matter which concerned the honor of his crown. The king granted her request, and took her by the hand and bade her rise. Then, when the rest of the company had gone and left them alone, the nurse thus addressed the king, "Sire, know that Doralice, your wife, is my child. She is not, indeed, the fruit of my womb, but I nourished her at these breasts. She is innocent of the deed which is laid to her charge, and for which she is sentenced to a lingering and cruel death. And you, when you shall have learnt everything, and laid your hand upon the impious murderer, and understood the reason which moved him to slay your children, you will assuredly show her mercy and deliver her from these bitter and cruel torments. And if you find that I speak falsely in this, I offer myself to suffer the same punishment which the wretched Doralice is now enduring." Then the nurse set forth fully from beginning to end the whole history of Doralice's past life; and the king, when he heard it, doubted not the truth of it, but forthwith gave orders that the queen, who was now more dead than alive, should be taken out of the earth; which was done at once, and Doralice, after careful nursing and ministration by physicians, was restored to health. Next day King Genese stirred up through all his kingdom mighty preparations for war, and gathered together a great army, which he dispatched to Salerno. After a short campaign the city was captured, and Tebaldo, bound hand and foot, taken back to England, where King Genese, wishing to know the whole sum of his guilt, had him put upon the rack, whereupon the wretched man made full confession. The next day he was conducted through the city in a cart drawn by four horses, and then tortured with red-hot pincers like Gano di Magazza, and after his body had been quartered, his flesh was thrown to be eaten of ravenous dogs. And this was the end of the impious wretch Tebaldo. And King Genese and Doralice his queen lived many years happily together, leaving at their death divers children in their place. Source: The Facetious Nights of Straparola , vol. 1, translated by W. G. Waters (London: privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901), pp. 79-101 (night 1, tale 4) . We know almost nothing about the personal life of Giovanni Francesco [also spelled Gianfrancesco] Straparola (ca. 1480 - ca. 1557). His two-volume work Le piacevoli notti (1550-1553), called in English The Facetious Nights of Straparola or simply The Nights of Straparola , contains some 75 novellas and fairy tales, some of oriental origin. Obviously patterning his collection after Boccaccio's Decamerone , Straparola depicts here thirteen nights of revelry in a luxurious villa on the island of Murano near Venice. The participants add to the entertainment by telling one another stories. Included are tales of magic and the supernatural as well as bawdy jokes and anecdotes. Straparola's work is one of Europe's earliest collections of stories based largely on folklore. Return to the table of contents . The She-Bear Italy, Giambattista Basile Now it is said that once upon a time there lived a king of Roccaspra, who had a wife who for beauty, grace, and comeliness exceeded all other women. Truly she was the mother of beauty, but this beautiful being, at the full time of her life, fell from the steed of health, and broke the threads of life. But before the candle of life was finally put out, she called her husband, and said, "I know well, that you have loved me with excessive love, therefore show me a proof of your love and give me a promise that you will never marry, unless you meet one beautiful as I have been; and if you will not so promise, I will leave you a curse, and I will hate you even in the other world." The king, who loved her above all things, hearing this her last will, began to weep and lament, and for a while could not find a word to say; but after his grief subsided, he replied, "If I ever think of taking a wife, may the gout seize me, and may I become as gaunt as an asparagus; oh my love, forget it. Do not believe in dreams, nor that I can ever put my affection upon another woman. You will take with you all my joy and desire." And while he was thus speaking, the poor lady, who was at her last, turned up her eyes and stretched her feet. When the king saw that her soul had taken flight, his eyes became fountains of tears, and he cried with loud cries, buffeted his face, and wept, and wailed, so that all the courtiers ran to his side. He continually called upon the name of that good soul and cursed his fate, which had deprived him of her, and tore his hair, and pulled out his beard, and accused the stars of having sent to him this great misfortune. But he did as others do. A bump on the elbow and the loss of a wife cause much pain, but it does not last. The one pain disappears at one's side, and the other into the grave. Night had not yet come forth to look about the heavens for the bats, when he began to make count on his fingers, saying "My wife is dead, and I am a widower, and sad hearted without hope of any kind but my only daughter, since she left me. Therefore it will be necessary to find another wife that will bear me a son. But where can I find one? Where can I meet a woman endowed with my wife's beauty, when all other females seem witches in my sight? There is the rub! Where shall I find another like unto her? Where am I to seek her with a bell, if nature formed Nardella (may her soul rest in glory), and then broke the mould? Alas! in what labyrinth am I! What a mistake was the promise I made her! But what? I have not seen the wolf yet, but I am running away already. Let us seek, let us see, and let us understand. Is it possible, that there is no other donkey in the stable except for Nardella? Is it possible that the world will be lost for me? Will there be such a plague that all women will be destroyed and their seed lost?" And thus saying, he commanded the public crier to proclaim that all the beautiful women in the world should come and undergo the comparison of beauty, that he would take to wife the best looking of all, and make her the queen of his realm. This news spread in all parts of the world, and not one of the women in the whole universe failed to come and try this venture. Not even flayed hags stayed behind, they came by the dozen, because, when the point of beauty is touched, there is none who will yield, there is no sea monster who will give herself up as hideous; each and everyone boasts of uncommon beauty. If a donkey speaks the truth, the mirror is blamed for not reflecting the form as it is naturally; it is the fault of the quicksilver at the back. And now the land was full of women, and the king ordered that they should all stand in file, and he began to walk up and down, like a sultan when he enters his harem, to choose the best Genoa stone to sharpen his damascene blade. He came and went, up and down, like a monkey who is never still, looking and staring at this one and that one. One had a crooked brow, another a long nose, one a large mouth, and another thick lips. This one was too tall and gaunt, that other was short and badly formed, this one was too much dressed, another was too slightly robed. He disliked the Spanish woman because of the hue of her skin; the Neapolitan was not to his taste because of the way in which she walked; the German seemed to him too cold and frozen; the French woman too light of brains; the Venetian a spinning wheel full of flax. At last, for one reason or another, he sent them all about their business with one hand in front and another behind. Seeing so many beautiful heads of celery turned to hard roots and having resolved to marry nevertheless, he turned to his own daughter, saying, "What am I seeking about these Marys of Ravenna, if my daughter Preziosa is made from the same mould as her mother? I have this beautiful face at home, and yet I should go to the end of the world seeking it?" Thus he explained to his daughter his desire, and was severely reproved and censured by her, as Heaven knows. The king was angry at her rejection, and said to her, "Be quiet and hold your tongue. Make up your mind to tie the matrimonial knot with me this very evening; otherwise when I finish with you there will be nothing left but your ears." Preziosa, hearing this threat, retired to her room, and wept and lamented her evil fate. And while she lay there in this plight, an old woman, who used to bring her cosmetics, came to her, and finding her in such a plight, looking like one more ready for the other world than for this one, enquired the cause of her distress. When the old woman learned what had happened, she said, "Be of good cheer, my daughter, and despair not, for every evil has a remedy. Death alone has no cure. Now listen to me: When your father comes to you this evening -- donkey that he is, wanting to act the stallion -- put this piece of wood into your mouth, and you will at once become a she-bear. Then you can make your escape, for he will be afraid of you and let you go. Go straight to the forest, for it was written in the book of fate, the day that you were born, that there you should meet your fortune. When you want to turn back into a woman as you are and will ever be, take the bit of wood out of your mouth, and you will return to your pristine form." Preziosa embraced and thanked the old woman, told the servants to give her an apron full of flour and some slices of ham, and sent her away. When the sun began to change her quarters like a bankrupt strumpet, the king sent for his minister, and had him issue invitations to all the lords and grandees to come to the marriage feast. They all crowded in. After spending five or six hours in high revelry and unrestrained eating, the king made his way to the bed chamber, and called to the bride to come and fulfil his desire. But she put the bit of wood into her mouth, and instantly took the shape of a fierce she-bear, and stood thus before him. He, frightened at the sudden change, rolled himself up in the bedding, and did not put forth a finger or an eye until morning. Meanwhile Preziosa made her way toward the forest, where the shadows met concocting together how they could annoy the sun. There she lay in good fellowship and at one with the other animals. When the day dawned, it happened by chance that the son of the King of Acquacorrente should come to that forest. He sighted the she-bear and was greatly frightened, but the beast came forward, and wagging her tail, walked around him, and put her head under his hand for him to caress her. He took heart at this strange sight, smoothed its head as he would have done to a dog, and said to it, "Lie down, down, quiet, quiet, there there, good beast." Seeing that the beast was very tame, he took her home with him, commanding his servants to put her in the garden by the side of the royal palace, and there to attend to and feed her well, and treat her as they would his own person, and to take her to a particular spot so that he might see her from the windows of his palace whenever he had a mind to. Now it so happened that one day all his people were away on some errand, and the prince being left alone, thought about the bear, and looked out of the window to see her. However, at that very moment Preziosa, believing she was utterly alone, had taken the bit of wood from her mouth, and stood combing her golden hair. The prince was amazed at this woman of great beauty, and he descended the stairs and ran to the garden. But Preziosa, perceiving the ambush, at once put the bit of wood into her mouth, and became a she-bear once more. The prince looked about, but could not see what he had sighted from above, and not finding what he came to seek, remained very disappointed, and was melancholy and sad hearted, and in a few days became grievously ill. He kept repeating, "Oh my bear, oh my bear." His mother, hearing this continual cry, imagined that perhaps the bear had bit him or done him some evil, and therefore ordered the servants to kill her. But all the servants loved the beast because it was so very tame, even the stones in the roadway could not help liking her, so they had compassion and could not think of killing her. Therefore they led her to the forest, and returning to the queen, told her that she was dead. When this deed came to the prince's ears, he acted as a madman, and leaving his bed, ill as he was, was about to make mincemeat of the servants. They told him the truth of the affair. He mounted his steed and searched backward and forward until at length he came to a cave and found the bear. He carried her home with him and put her in a chamber, saying, "Oh you beautiful morsel fit for kings, why do you hide your passing beauty in a bear's hide? Oh light of love, why are you closed in such an hairy lantern? Why have you acted this way toward me, is it so that you may see me die a slow death? I am dying of despair, charmed by your beautiful form, and you can see the witness of my words in my failing health and sickening form. I am become skin and bone, and the fever burns my very marrow, and consumes me with heart-sore pain. Therefore lift the veil from that stinking hide, and let me behold once more your grace and beauty; lift up the leaves from this basket's mouth, and let me take a view of the splendid fruit within; lift the tapestry, and allow my eyes to feast upon the luxury of your charms. Who has enclosed in a dreary prison such a glorious work? Who has enclosed in a leather casket such a priceless treasure? Let me behold your passing grace, and take in payment all my desires. Oh my love, only this bear's grease can cure the nervous disease of which I suffer." But perceiving that his words had no effect, and that all was time lost, he took to his bed, and his illness increased daily, until the doctors feared for his life. The queen, his mother, who had no other love in the world, sat at his bedside, and said to him, "Oh my son, where does your heartsickness come from? What is the cause of all this sadness? You are young, you are rich, you are beloved, you are great. What do you want, my son? Speak, for only a shameful beggar carries an empty pocket. If you desire to take a wife, choose, and I will command; take, and I will pay. Can you not see that your sickness is my sickness and that your pulse beats in unison with my heart? If you burn with fever in your blood, I burn with fever on the brain. I have no other support for my old age but you. Therefore, my son, be cheerful, and cheer my heart, and do not darken this realm, and raze to the ground this house, and bereave your mother." The prince, hearing these words, said, "Nothing can cheer me, if I may not see the bear; therefore, if you desire to see me in good health again, let her stay in this room, and I do not wish that any other serve me, and make my bed, and cook my meals, if it be not herself, and if what I desire be done, I am sure that I shall be well in a few days." To the queen it seemed folly for her son to ask that a bear should act as cook and housemaid. She believed that the prince must be delirious; nevertheless, to please his fancy, she went for the bear, and when the beast came to the prince's bedside she lifted her paw and felt the invalid's pulse. The queen smiled at the sight, thinking that by and by the bear would scratch the prince's nose. But the prince spoke to the bear, and said, "Oh mischievous mine, will you not cook for me, and feed me, and serve me?" And the bear nodded yes with her head, showing that she would accept the charge. Then the queen sent for some chickens, and had a fire lit in the fireplace in the same chamber, and had a kettle with boiling water put on the fire. The bear took hold of a chicken, scalded it, dexterously plucked off its feathers, cleaned it, put half of it on the spit, and stewed the other half. When it was ready, the prince, who could not before eat even sugar, ate it all and licked his fingers. When he had ended his meal, the bear brought him some drink, and handed it so gracefully that the queen kissed her on the head. After this the prince arose, and went to the salon to receive the doctors, and to be directed by their judgment. The bear at once made the bed, ran to the garden and gathered a handful of roses and orange blossoms, which she scattered upon the bed. She fulfilled her various duties so well that the queen said to herself, "This bear is worth a treasure, and my son is quite right in being fond of the beast." When the prince returned to his chambers, and saw how well the bear had fulfilled her duties, it was like adding fuel to the fire. If he had been consumed himself in a slow fire before, he was now burning with intense heat. He said to the queen "Oh my lady mother, if I cannot give a kiss to this bear, I shall give up the ghost." The queen, seeing her son nearly fainting, said to the bear, "Kiss him, kiss him, oh my beautiful bear, do not leave my poor son to die in despair." Then the bear obediently neared the prince, who took her cheeks between his fingers, could not stop kissing her on the lips. While thus engaged, I do not know how it happened, the bit of wood fell from Preziosa's mouth, and she remained in the prince's embrace, the most beautiful and ravishing being in the world. He strained her to his bosom with tightly clasped arms, and said, "You are caught at last, and you shall not escape so easily without a reason." Preziosa, reddening with the lovely tint of modesty and of shame, the most beautiful of natural beauties, answered, "I am in your hands. I surrender my honor to your loyalty. Do with me what you will." The queen asked who this charming woman was, and what had caused her to live such a wild life. She related to them all her misfortunes, and the queen praised her as a good and honored child, and said to her son that she was well satisfied that he should marry the princess. The prince, who wanted nothing else, at once announced his betrothal to her. Kneeling before the queen, they both received her blessing, and with great feasting the marriage took place. Thus Preziosa demonstrated the truth of the proverb: "Those who do good may expect good in return." Source: Il Pentamorone; or, The Tale of Tales , translated by Richard F. Burton, vol. 1 (London: Henry and Company, 1893), pp. 181-90 (day 2, tale 6) . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. Basile's Il Pentamerone was first published in five installments between 1634 and 1636. Return to the Table of Contents . Ass'-Skin Basque, Wentworth Webster Like many others in the world, there was a king and a queen. One day there came to them a young girl who wished for a situation. They asked her her name, and she said, "Faithful." The king said to her, "Are you like your name?" and she said, "Yes." She stopped there seven years. Her master gave her all the keys, even that of the treasure. One day, when the king and queen were out, Faithful goes to the fountain, and she sees seven robbers coming out of the house. Judge what a state this poor girl was in! She runs straight to the treasury, and sees that more than half the treasure is missing. She did not know what would become of her -- she was all of a tremble. When the king and queen came home she told them what had happened, but they would not believe her, and they put her in prison. She stays there a year. She kept saying that she was not in fault, but they would not believe her. The king condemns her to death, and sends her with four men to the forest to kill her, telling them to bring him her heart. They go off, but these men thought it a pity to kill this young girl, for she was very pretty, and she told them that she was innocent of this robbery; and they say to her, "If you will not come any more into this land, we will spare your life." She promises them that she will not be seen again in those parts. The men see an ass, and they tell her that they will carry its heart to the king. The young girl said to them, "Flay this ass, I pray you; and, in order that no one may know me, I will never take this skin off me." The men do so, and go off to the king, and the young girl goes to look for some shelter. At nightfall she finds a beautiful house. She asks if they want some one to keep the geese. They tell her, "Yes, yes, yes." They put her along with the geese, and tell her that she must go with them every day to such a field. She went out very early in the morning and came back late. It was the king's house, and it was the queen-mother and her son who lived there. After some time there appeared to her one day an old woman, who called to her, "Faithful, you have done penance enough. The son of the king is going to give some grand feasts, and you must go to them. This evening you will ask madame permission, and you will tell her that you will give her all the news of the ball if she will let you go for a little while. And, see, here is a nut. All the dresses and things you want will come out of that. You will break it as you go to the place of the festival." That evening she asked permission of her mistress to go and see the festival which the king is going to give, for a short time only, and that she will return directly and tell her all that she has seen there. Her mistress said, "Yes." That evening she goes then. On her way she breaks the nut, and there comes out of it a silver robe. She puts it on, and goes there, and immediately she enters all the world looks at her. The king is bewitched, he does not quit her for an instant, and they always dance together. He pays no attention at all to the other young ladies. They enjoy the refreshments very much. Some friends of the king call him, and he has to go there; and in this interval Faithful makes her escape to the house. She tells the queen how that a young girl had come to the ball, how she had dazzled everybody, and especially the king, who paid attention to her alone, but that she had escaped. When the son comes to the house, his mother says to him, "She escaped from you then, your young lady? She did not care for you, doubtless." He says to his mother, "Who told you that?" "Ass'-Skin; she wished to go and see it." The king goes to where Faithful was and gives her two blows with his slipper, saying to her, "If you return there again I will kill you on the spot." The next day Ass'-Skin goes with her geese, and there appears to her again the old woman. She tells her that she ought to go to the ball again this evening -- that her mistress would give her permission. "Here is a walnut; you have there all that is necessary to dress yourself with. The king will ask you your name: Braf-le-mandoufle [Beaten with the slipper]." In the evening she asks permission of her mistress, but she is astonished (at her asking), and says to her, "You do not know what the king has said -- that if he catches you he will kill you on the spot?" "I am not afraid. He will be sure not to catch me." "Go, then." She goes off, and on the way she breaks the walnut, and there comes out of it a golden robe. She goes in. The king comes with a thousand compliments, and asks her how she had escaped the evening before without saying anything to him, and that he had been very much hurt at it. They amuse themselves thoroughly. The king has eyes for her alone. He asks her her name. She tells him, "Braf-le-mandoufle." They feast themselves well, and some friends having called to him he goes to them, and the young lady escapes. Ass'-Skin goes to tell the queen that yesterday evening's young lady had come, but still more beautiful -- that she had escaped in the very middle of the ball. She goes off to her geese. The king comes to his house. His mother says to him, "She came then, the young lady you love? But she only loves you so-so, since she has gone off in this fashion." "Who told you that?" "Ass'-Skin." He goes off to her and gives her two kicks with his slipper, and says to her, "Woe to you if you go there again; I will kill you on the very spot." She goes off to her geese, and the old woman comes to her again and tells her to ask permission again for this evening -- that she must go to the dance. She gives her a peach, and tells her that she will have there all that is necessary to dress herself with. She goes then to ask her mistress if she will give her permission, like last night, to go to the ball. She says to her, "Yes, yes, I will give you leave. But are you not afraid lest the king should catch you? He has said that he will kill you if you go there." "I am not afraid, because I am sure that he will not catch me. Yesterday he looked for me again, but he could not catch me." She goes off then. On the way she opens her peach, and finds there a dress entirely of diamonds, and if she was beautiful before, judge what she is now! She shone like the sun. The king was plunged into joy when he saw her. He was in an ecstasy. He did not wish to dance, but they sat down at their ease on beautiful arm-chairs, and with their refreshments before them they passed such a long time together. The king asked her to give him her promise of marriage. The young lady gives him her word, and the king takes his diamond ring off his finger and gives it to her. His friends call him away to come quickly to see something very rare, and off he goes, leaving his lady. She takes advantage of this opportunity to escape. She tells her mistress all that has passed -- how that this young Lady had come with a dress of diamonds, that all the world was dazzled by her beauty, that they could not even look at her she shone so brightly, that the king did not know where he was for happiness, that they had given each other their promise of marriage, and that the king had given her his diamond ring, but that the best thing of all was that today again she has escaped him. The king comes in at that very instant. His mother says to him, "She has not, she certainly has not, any wish for you. She has gone off with your diamond ring. Where will you go and look for her? You do not know where she lives. Where will you ask for a young lady who has such a name as 'Braf-le-mandoufle!' She has given you her promise of marriage too; but she does not wish to have you, since she has acted like that." Our king did not even ask his mother who has told her that. He went straight to bed thoroughly ill, and so Ass'-Skin did not have her two kicks that evening. The queen was in great trouble at seeing her son ill like that. She was continually turning over in her head who this young lady might be. She said to her son, "Is this young lady our Ass'-Skin ? How else could she have known that you had given your promise to one another, and that you had given her the ring too? She must have been very close to you. Did you see her?" He says, "No," but remains buried in thought. His mother says, "She has a very pretty face under her ass'-skin." And she says that she must send for her, and that he must have a good look at her too ; that he shall have some broth brought up by her. She sends for Ass'-Skin to the kitchen, has the broth made for her son, and Ass'-Skin puts in the middle of the bread the ring which the king had given her. The lady had her well dressed, and she goes to the king. The king, after having seen her, was still doubtful. He drank his broth; but when he puts the bread into his mouth he finds something (hard), and is very much astonished at seeing his ring. He was ill no longer. He goes and runs to his mother to tell her his joy that he has found his lady. He wishes to marry directly, and all the kings of the neighbourhood are invited to the feast; and, while they were dining, everyone had some fine news to relate. They ask the bride, too, if she had not something to tell them. She says, "Yes," but that she cannot tell what she knows that it would not please all at the table. Her husband tells her to speak out boldly; he draws his sword, and says, "Whosoever shall speak a word shall be run through with this sword." She then tells how a poor girl was servant at a king's house; how she remained there seven years; that they liked her very much, and treated her with confidence, even to giving her the keys of the treasure. One day, when the king and his wife were out, robbers entered, and stole almost all the treasure. The king would not believe that robbers had come. He puts the young girl in prison for a whole year, and at the end of that time he sends her to execution, telling the executioners to bring her heart to the house. The executioners were better than the king; they believed in her innocence, and, after having killed an ass, they carried its heart to the king; "and for the proof, it is I who was servant to this king." The bridegroom says to her, "Who can this king be? Is it my uncle?" The lady says, " I do not know if he is your uncle, but it is that gentleman there." The bridegroom takes his sword and kills him on the spot, saying to his wife, "You shall not be afraid of him any more." They lived very happily. Some time afterwards they had two children, a boy and a girl. When the elder was seven years old he died, telling his father and mother that he was going to heaven to get a place there ready for them. At the end of a week the other child dies too, and she says to them that she, too, is going to heaven, and that she will keep their place ready; that they, too, would quickly go to them. And, as she had said, at the end of a year, at exactly the very same time, both the gentleman and lady died, and they both went to heaven. Source: Wentworth Webster, Basque Legends , 2nd edition (London: Griffith and Farran, 1879), pp. 158-65 . Although this tale contains most motifs traditionally found in type 510B stories, it does lack the incest motif. Return to the table of contents . All-Kinds-of-Fur Version of 1812 Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once upon a time there was a king whose wife was the most beautiful woman in the world, with hair of pure gold. Together they had a daughter, and she was as beautiful as her mother, and she had the same golden hair. The queen became ill, and when she felt that she was about to die, she called the king to her side and asked him not to marry anyone following her death, unless she was just as beautiful as she, and unless her hair was just as golden as hers. The king made this promise, and she died. For a long time the king was so grieved that he did not think about a second wife, but finally his councilors advised him to marry again. He sent messengers to all the princesses, but none was as beautiful as the deceased queen, and such golden hair could not be found anywhere in the world. Then one day the king's glance fell on his daughter, and he saw that she looked just like her mother, and that she had the same golden hair. He thought to himself, "You will never find anyone in the world this beautiful. You will have to marry your daughter." And in that instant he felt such a strong love for her, that he immediately announced his decision to his councilors. They tried to dissuade him, but to no avail. The princess was horrified at his godless intentions, but because she was clever, she told the king that he should first get her three dresses: one as golden as the sun, one as white as the moon, one that glistened like the stars. Further, he was to get her a coat made from a thousand kinds of fur. Every animal in the kingdom would have to give up a piece of its skin for it. The king was so fervent in his desires, that he had his huntsmen capture animals from across the entire kingdom. They were skinned, and a coat was made from their pelts. Thus, it did not take long before he brought the princess everything that she had asked for. The princess said that she would marry him the next day. That night she sought out the presents that she had received from her fiancé: a golden ring, a little golden spinning wheel, and a little golden yarn reel. She put the three dresses into a nutshell, blackened her hands and face with soot, put on the coat of all kinds of fur, and left. She walked the entire night until she came to a great forest. She would be safe there. Because she was tired, she sat down in a hollow tree and fell asleep. She was still asleep the next day when the king, her fiancé, came to this forest to hunt. His dogs ran up to the tree and sniffed at it. The king sent his huntsmen to see what kind of animal was in the tree. They came back and said that it was a strange animal, the likes of which they had never seen before. It had every kind of fur on its skin, and it was lying there asleep. The king ordered them to capture it and to tie it onto the back of his carriage. As the huntsmen were doing this, they saw that it was a girl. They tied her onto the back of the carriage and rode home with her. "All-Kinds-of-Fur," they said, "you are good for the kitchen. You can carry water and wood, and clean out the ashes." Then they gave her a little stall beneath the steps, where the light of day never shone, and said, "This is where you can live and sleep." So she had to help the cook in the kitchen. She plucked chickens, tended the fire, gathered vegetables, and did all the dirty work. Because she did very well at all this, the cook was good to her, and in the evening he often invited her in and gave her something to eat from the leftovers. Before the king went to bed, she had to go upstairs and pull off his boots. When she had pulled them off, he always threw them at her head. Poor All-Kinds-of-Fur lived like this for a long time. Oh, you beautiful maiden, what will become of you? Once there was a ball at the castle, and All-Kinds-of-Fur thought that she might see her fiancé once again, so she went to the cook and asked him if he would allow her to go upstairs a little and look in at the splendor from the doorway. "Go ahead," said the cook, "but do not stay longer than a half hour. You still have to clean out the ashes tonight." Then All-Kinds-of-Fur took her little oil lamp and went to her stall where she washed off the soot. Her beauty came forth just like blossoms in the springtime. She took off the fur coat, opened up the nut and took out the dress that glistened like the sun. She put it on and went upstairs. Everyone made room for her, and thought that a noble princess had entered the hall. The king immediately invited her to dance, and as he danced with her, he thought how closely this unknown princess resembled his own fiancée. The longer he looked at her, the stronger the resemblance. He was almost certain that this was his fiancée, and at the end of the dance, he was going to ask her. However, when they finished dancing, she bowed, and before the king knew what was happening, she disappeared. He asked the watchmen, but none of them had seen the princess leave the castle. She had run quickly to her stall, taken off the dress, blackened her hands and face, and put on the fur coat once again. Then she went to the kitchen to clean out the ashes, but the cook said, "Leave them until morning. I want to go upstairs and have a look at the dance. You make some soup for the king, but don't let any hairs fall into it, or there will be nothing more to eat for you." All-Kinds-of-Fur made some bread soup for the king, then she put the golden ring in it that he had given her. When the ball was over, the king had his bread soup brought to him. It tasted better than any he had ever eaten. When he was finished, he found the ring on the bottom of the bowl. Looking at it carefully, he saw that it was his engagement ring. Astonished, he could not understand how it had gotten there. He summoned the cook, who then became very angry with All-Kinds-of-Fur. "You must have let a hair fall into the soup," he said. "If you did, there will be blows for you." However, when the cook went upstairs, the king asked him who had made the soup, because it had been better than usual. The king had to confess that it had been All-Kinds-of-Fur. Then the king had her sent up to him. "Who are you?" he asked upon her arrival. "What are you doing in my castle, and where did you get the ring that was lying in the soup?" She answered, "I am only a poor child whose father and mother are dead. I have nothing, and I am good for nothing more than having boots thrown at my head. And I know nothing about the ring." With that she ran away. Soon there was another ball. All-Kinds-of-Fur again asked the cook to allow her to go upstairs. The cook gave his permission, but only for a half hour, because by then she would have to be back in the kitchen to make the king's bread soup. All-Kinds-of-Fur went to her stall, washed herself clean, and took out the moon-dress. It was purer and brighter than newly fallen snow. When she arrived upstairs the dance had just begun. The king extended his hand to her, and danced with her, and no longer doubted that this was his fiancée, for no one else in the world had such golden hair. However, the princess immediately slipped out when the dance ended, and the king, in spite of his great effort, could not find her. Further, he had not spoken a single word with her. She was All-Kinds-of-Fur once again, with blackened hands and face. She took her place in the kitchen and made bread soup for the king, while the cook went upstairs to have a look. When the soup was ready, she put the golden spinning wheel in it. The king ate the soup, and thought that it was even better this time. When he found the golden spinning wheel, he was even more astonished, because it had been a present from him to his fiancée some time ago. The cook was summoned again, and then All-Kinds-of-Fur, but once again she answered by saying that she knew nothing about it, and that she was there only to have boots thrown at her head. For the third time, the king held a ball. He hoped that his fiancée would come again, and he would not let her escape this time. All-Kinds-of-Fur again asked the cook to allow her to go upstairs, but he scolded her, saying, "You are a witch. You are always putting things in the soup. And you can cook better than I can." But because she begged so, and promised to behave herself, he gave her permission to go upstairs for a half hour. She put on the dress of stars. It glistened like stars in the night. She went upstairs and danced with the king, and he thought that he had never seen her more beautiful. While dancing, he slipped a ring onto her finger. He had ordered that it should be a very long dance. He could not bring himself to speak to her, nor could he keep her from escaping. As soon as the dance ended, she jumped into the crowd and disappeared before he could turn around. She ran to her stall. Because she had been gone more than a half hour, she quickly took off her dress, and in her rush she failed to blacken herself entirely. One finger remained white. When she returned to the kitchen, the cook had already left. She quickly made some bread soup and put the golden yarn reel into it. The king found it, just as he had found the ring and the golden spinning wheel, and now he knew for sure that his fiancée was nearby, for no one else could have had these presents. All-Kinds-of-Fur was summoned. Once again she tried to make an excuse and then run away, but as she ran by, the king noticed a white finger on her hand, and he held her fast. He found the ring that he had slipped onto her finger, and then he ripped off her fur coat. Her golden hair flowed out, and he saw that it was his dearly beloved fiancée. The cook received a generous reward. Then they got married and lived happily until they died. Notes: Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Allerlei-Rauh," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 1st ed. (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812/1815), vol. 1, no. 65, pp. 308-316 . Incest, one of our strongest taboos, has, until our own era, largely escaped exposure and discussion on the printed page. Publishers of folktales dealing with incest have gotten around the taboo in various ways. One of the most disingenuous solutions was used in the following passage from a nineteenth-century English "translation" of the Grimms' "All-Kinds-of-Fur": Now, the King had a daughter, who was just as beautiful as her dead mother, and had just such golden hair. One day when she had grown up, her father looked at her, and saw that she was exactly like her mother, so he said to his councilors, "I will marry my daughter to one of you, and she shall be queen, for she is exactly like her dead mother, and when I die her husband shall be king." But when the Princess heard of her father's decision, she was not at all pleased, and said to him, "Before I do your bidding, I must have three dresses; one as golden as the sun, one as silver as the moon, and one as shining as the stars. Besides these, I want a cloak made of a thousand different kinds of skin; every animal in your kingdom must give a bit of his skin to it." But she thought to herself, "This will be quite impossible, and I shall not have to marry someone I do not care for." -- Andrew Lang, The Green Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green and Company.1892), p. 276 . Other versions of the story (including later Grimm editions) make it abundantly clear that the fiancé mentioned here is a different king, not her own father. Beginning with the edition of 1819, the Grimms omitted the episode describing how the young king threw his boots at the heroine's head. The Grimms obviously wanted to de-emphasize the abusive nature of the relationship between the two lovers. However, most versions of the tale describe how the "hero" belittles, and possibly beats the woman he will later marry. Link to an English translation of the version of 1857: All-Kinds-of-Fur . Return to the Table of Contents . Emperor Heinrich in Sudemer Mountain Germany Emperor Heinrich the Fowler liked to stay at Goslar, which he often did, and many stories are told about him there. Above all they tell about how marvelously beautiful his wife was, and how he could not be consoled when she died. After his grief had subsided somewhat, he revealed to his own daughter, who was almost more beautiful than her mother, his sinful desire to marry her. She appropriately resisted him, finally convincing him to first to travel to the courts of all the kings and counts in Europe in search of a spouse more beautiful than she. He traveled far and wide, but finally returned with the news that a more beautiful woman could not be found anywhere. But still she resisted his pleas and his advances. Finally he set the condition that he would desist from his demands if she could create a blanket upon which all of the earths animals could be seen. She went into a small chapel in the upper city and fervently prayed to God, but she found no comfort in her prayers, so finally in despair she called upon the devil to come and help her. He appeared immediately, saying that he would bring the blanket to her, if she could remain awake in the chapel for three days and three nights. She brought her little dog into the chapel with her and spent the time ceaselessly praying. However, during the third night, just as morning was breaking, sleep almost overcame her. At that moment the devil approached, and her little dog, seeing him, pulled at her skirt so vigorously that she jumped up. The devil angrily dropped the blanket, furiously threw the little dog against church wall, and disappeared. She took the blanket to her father, who then was overcome by such powerful pain that he lost all will to live. He bewitched himself into the Sudemer Mountain near Goslar, whose watchtower is visible throughout the region. There he sits until the present day, and will return only when Goslar finds itself in great need, or when the Day of Judgment arrives. Others say that the emperor is sitting in Rammel Mountain, and that before his death he had three stones mortared into the Goslars city wall, saying that he would return when these stones fall out. But no one knows which stones they are. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Kaiser Heinrich in Sudemerberg," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 184-85 . Heinrich (Henry) the Fowler was born about 876 and died in 936. His wife Matilda founded many monasteries and is a saint of the Roman Catholic Church. Goslar in Lower Saxony is one of northern Germanys best preserved medieval cities. The incest motif in this legend is reminiscent of the type 510B folktales told throughout Europe. The "sleeping hero" motif (type 766) is also found in numerous folktales and legends. Link to additional Sleeping Hero Legends . Return to the table of contents . Cinder Blower Karl Bartsch A rich widower had an only daughter who was developing into a beautiful and charming woman. Her father's heart became inflamed with impure love, but she withstood his advances. He threatened to force himself on her, and she responded with cunning. She promised to yield to his will if he would give her a dress made of silver. When she received such a dress, she then demanded one made from gold, and the third time, one made from jewels. After receiving that one as well, she said, "Now all I need is a crow-skin coat," and then she made one last wish: a magic wand. These too she received. Now in another land there lived a prince who had heard of the girl's beauty. Taking the magic wand in her hand and the dresses over her shoulder, she wished herself to the vicinity of the prince's castle. She immediately found herself in the castle garden. Then she wished for herself a chest in an oak tree in the garden, put her dresses in it, put on the crow-skin coat and went to the castle kitchen where she presented herself as a poor boy looking for work. "I can use you," said the cook. "You can be the cinder blower." A few days later the prince came to the kitchen with some freshly killed game. She saw him and liked him beyond measure. Soon afterward there was a wedding in a nearby castle, and the prince went to it. Many people went there to look on at the dance. Cinder Blower asked the cook for permission to observe. She ran to the oak tree, put on the silver dress, and wished herself a carriage in which she rode to the castle. The prince saw her and danced with her, but after a few dances she disappeared. Seating herself in her carriage she said, Darkness behind me, Before me light, So none can follow me into the night. The next morning the prince was in a bad mood, for he had been awake all night thinking about his beautiful dance partner. Cinder Blower was asked to polish his boots, and this she did, but she failed to polish one small spot on one of the toes. The prince noticed this and angrily came into the kitchen and threw the boot at her head. The next evening there was another dance, and Cinder Blower again asked for permission to go. This time she put on the golden dress, then rode there in the carriage. The prince had been looking for her and was very happy when she arrived. While dancing with her he asked her where she lived. "In Boot-Throw" was her answer. She remained there one hour, and then disappeared. In vain the prince asked where Boot-Throw was. No one could tell him. Again that night the prince could not close his eyes, and the next day he was in an even worse mood than before. Cinder Blower was asked to brush his coat, but he did not like the way she did it, and finally he threw the brush at her head. The third evening Cinder Blower again asked for permission to look on at the dance, then put on her dress of precious stones. While dancing with her the prince asked her where she lived. "In Brush-Throw," was her answer. "Whoever you are," he said, "take this ring from me." She let him put the ring onto her finger. Then she tried to sneak away, but the prince carefully watched her and followed close behind her. She climbed out of her carriage near the oak tree. However, she did not have time to take off her dress, but quickly put on the crow-skin coat over it. The next morning when the cook was preparing the soup, Cinder Blower dropped the ring into it. The prince found it and asked the cook who had been in the kitchen. "Only Cinder Blower and I," he answered. The prince summoned Cinder Blower and said, "My head itches. Look and see if any vermin are there." Cinder Blower obeyed, but when she stood before him, he saw the diamond dress glistening forth from beneath the worn-out crow-skin coat. Then he recognized her. "Now you are mine," he said, and he made her his wife and they lived happily together until they died. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg] (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879, vol. 1, pp. 479-481 . Return to the table of contents . Broomthrow, Brushthrow, Combthrow Austria, Theodor Vernaleken In a castle there once lived a count by the name of Rudolf. His wife had a golden cross on her forehead. Their daughter Adelheid had the same mark on her forehead. When she was twenty years old her mother suddenly died. The count's and his daughter's sorrow and grief were endless. After the mother's burial, the father and his child locked themselves in their rooms and were seldom seen. After a month had passed, the count had his daughter brought to his room and said to her, "Dear child, you know how much I loved your mother. I cannot live without a wife. Therefore I am going out into the world to seek a wife who -- like your blessed mother -- has a golden cross on her forehead. If I do not find such a woman within a year and a day, then I will marry you." When Adelheid heard these words she was very upset, and she silently withdrew. The next morning Count Rudolf departed, promising to return within a year and a day. When Adelheid was alone she considered whether or not it would be possible for her father to find a woman with such a cross. Then she remembered that her mother had once told her that except for her and Adelheid, no one on the entire earth had such a cross. She decided to go away. She would rather earn her bread with the work of her own hands than to eat the finest tidbits at her father's table as his wife. She entrusted one of her loyal servants with her plan, and they made preparations to depart. She secretly loaded her valuables, her jewelry, her gold, and her clothes into several large carriages. During the night she drove off with them, accompanied by her servant Gotthold and several others who were loyal to her. They came to a large city where she rented a house and moved into it with her servants. Adelheid had often stated that she wanted to earn her bread with the work of her own hands. Therefore Gotthold sought a position for his mistress in the city. He learned that there was an opening for a kitchen maid in the castle of Prince Adolf. Thus he went to the chief cook and asked him if he would be willing to hire his niece, for that is what he called the countess. As he talked further with the chief cook, Gotthold recognized in him a friend whom he had not seen for many years. He told him that his brother had died, leaving a daughter in his care. The chief cook agreed to hire her. The loyal servant happily returned to the countess and remained in the rented house. Adelheid now dyed her face, neck, and hands brown; covered her golden cross and her hair with a large head-scarf; took off her magnificent robes, putting on instead old, dirty, torn clothing; and presented herself to the chief cook. She was given a small room where she could sleep and keep her things. Slowly she grew accustomed to her job, even though she was exhausted by the hard work. Until now she had not yet seen the prince. One day he invited all his friends and acquaintances to a great ball. On the morning of the ball, Adelheid was sweeping the staircase, when the prince, without being seen by her, walked up and tipped over the dust pail, thus dirtying his boots. As she was fleeing he angrily ripped the broom from her hands and threw it at her. That evening as the hall was filling with people, the young countess went to the chief cook and asked him for permission to go to the ball. He replied, "No, I cannot allow you to do that. What if the prince were to find out!" Adelheid continued to beg, until he finally said, "Just go. But don't stay too late, and if you get anything, bring some back for me as well." Now she went to Gotthold's house, changed her clothes, washed away the color, and ordered up a splendid carriage in which she rode to the prince's. When the guests saw the splendid carriage approaching in the distance they all hurried outside and said, "A foreign lady! A beautiful lady!" The prince hurried toward her, lifted her from her carriage, and led her up the stairs. She had to dance with him the entire evening and to sit next to him at the table. After eating, he asked her what her name was and where she came from. "My name is Adelheid, and I come from Broomthrow," replied the countess. At twelve o'clock she left, and with her the majority of guests. Arriving at home she quickly got undressed, colored herself brown, and took three gold pieces which she gave to the chief cook, claiming that she had stood behind a door and had received the gold from an old woman. The next morning the prince looked for Broomthrow on his maps, but he could not find it. He wanted to ask her about her home city once again, but because he did not know where she lived he invited his friends to a second ball. On the morning of the second ball Adelheid was brushing her clothing when the prince, without being seen, came up the stairs. She turned around and dropped the brush, which fell onto the prince's feet. Angrily Adolf picked up the brush and threw it at the embarrassed countess's head. That evening the chief cook once again allowed her to go the ball, and she took advantage of his permission. At the ball Adolf told her that he had not been able to find Broomthrow. "How could you be looking for Broomthrow?" she replied. "I said Brushthrow." Once again they danced together, and as midnight approached she went home. She brought the chief cook a gold band, claiming that she had received it as a gift. The next morning the prince looked for Brushthrow, but could not find it. He then invited his friends and acquaintances to a third ball, which was to be even more magnificent than the first two. On the eve of the ball, shortly before the festivities were to begin, Adelheid, contrary to custom, was combing her hair in the castle. The prince, displeased because the foreign lady had not arrived yet, walked up the stairs just as the countess dropped her comb. Prince Adolf picked it up and threw it at the kitchen servant's head. She quickly withdrew, changed her clothes, and went to the ball. At the table the prince said that he had not been able to find Brushthrow anywhere. "I can believe that," she said. "I called the place Combthrow." He didn't want to believe her, but she argued with him until he finally gave in. Before she left he placed a ring on her finger, without her noticing it. The next morning the prince was not well, and he asked a chief cook to make soup for him. The latter announced this in the kitchen, and Adelheid asked for permission to make the soup. But he said, "If you put something in the soup that doesn't belong there, then I am the one who will be punished." She replied, "I will not put anything wrong in it." She made the soup, and without being seen, she threw the prince's ring into the soup. The prince poured the soup into a dish and heard something jingle. He felt around and fished out the ring. Amazed, he then asked who had made the soup. "The kitchen maid" was the answer. Adolph ordered his servant, "Bring her here." She hurriedly put on the dress that she had worn the previous evening, and when the prince saw her, he recognized his dance partner. She now had to tell him her life story, and soon afterward he married her. In the meantime her father had come home, and when he discovered that his daughter had already married, he had to accept his fate. Source: Theodor Vernaleken, Österreichische Kinder- und Hausmärchen: Treu nach mündlicher Überlieferung (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1864), no. 33, pp. 172-77 . Return to the table of contents . The Emperor's Daughter in the Pig Stall Romania An emperor, whose wife had died, came upon the horrible idea to marry his daughter. However, she refused, and in this she was supported by her nurse with whom she confided all the secrets of her heart. When the emperor again brought his proposal to her, she declared -- following the old woman's advice -- that she would accept if she could have a beautiful silver dress. The emperor quickly had such a dress made and brought it to his daughter himself, hoping that now she would cease hesitating. But the princess, again coached by her nurse, this time demanded a beautiful golden dress, that would have to be ten times more valuable than the silver one. The emperor immediately ordered the master goldsmiths in his capital city to make such a dress, taking as much gold as they needed from his treasury. When it was finished he joyfully took it to the princess, but found her as resistant as before. Now she demanded a beautiful diamond dress that was worth ten thousand times more than the golden one. "Such a dress," the nurse had said, "will cost more than his treasury contains, and that will be the end of his proposals." The emperor was astonished at this monstrous requirement, but in order to achieve his goal he depleted his treasury, and what was still needed he forcefully took from his subjects. Thus he collected enough wealth to have a diamond dress made than cost ten thousand times what the golden one had cost. The princess was startled when he brought it to her, and asked for one day to think things through. The emperor granted her this, and she discussed the situation with her nurse, who advised her to demand a dress that he certainly would not be able to have made: one made entirely of louse pelts, and trimmed with flea pelts. When the emperor heard the princess's latest wish he became angry, but said nothing. Instead he issued the order to have such a dress made. It took an entire year to collect all the pelts and hides for this dress, and yet another year before they were all sewn together. Then emperor brought the dress to his daughter, and this time the princess -- following the old woman's advice -- let the marriage between herself and her father take place. That evening, after entering the bridal chamber with him, she asked for permission to step outside for a moment. He refused, for he did not trust her and thought that she wanted to escape from him. She gave him a piece of string, tying one end around her own left hand, and told him that if she did not come back in time, he would only have to pull her in. So the hateful father finally agreed, and the princess slipped out the door, where her nurse was standing ready with an old bill goat, and they quickly tied the string around its horns. Then the princess put on all her dresses -- first the one of diamonds, over that the one of gold, then the silver one, and over them all the disgusting one that the emperor had just had made. Then she fled. Meanwhile the emperor waited impatiently, finally pulling gently on the string. Outside the billy goat pulled back. The emperor finally pulled hard, but the billy goat would not be outdone in such a tug-of-war. Finally the emperor, filled with rage, jumped up and went to the door. To his astonishment, instead of his charming daughter he found there a shaggy black billy goat, which rudely attacked him with its horns. The emperor retreated into the bridal chamber, and called for his people, who -- led by the nurse -- came to him. The emperor vented his anger with a storm of curse words. He told of his adventure and ordered that the billy goat be taken away. The nurse began to shriek, "See here, you tyrannical father, see what you have caused? God has punished you because of your wicked marriage. He has transformed your daughter into this terrible horned monster!" With these and many other words, the cunning nurse convinced the deceived ruler that the just anger of God had caused this miracle. Filled with shame, he said nothing more about the matter. Meanwhile the princess fled into a great forest, where -- since the season was right -- she lived from berries and nuts that she found in the bushes. Now it happened that the prince of the kingdom to which these woods belonged was hunting there. Evening was approaching when the prince, accompanied by just one servant, pursued a wild boar into a deep thicket. To his great astonishment he saw there an unusual forest creature. Not knowing what to make of it, he aimed an arrow at it. When he saw that it was not moving, he climbed the tree and captured the unknown animal alive. With great clamor the forest creature was led through the city to the palace. There, because of its disgusting fur, it was turned over to the swineherd, who locked it in his worst pig stall, above which was a chicken coop. Thus the unknown forest creature's fur became even filthier. From the scraps that they brought it to eat, it would take only berries and nuts from the forest. Soon afterward there was a glorious festival in the city. The son of a well-known gentleman was getting married. All the beautiful and important people were gathered there: maidens, ladies, and gentlemen, whatever their names. When evening came the princess, pulled off her disgusting garb, revealing the silver dress beneath it, left the pig stall, and went to the wedding. The prince, who was also there, saw her and danced with her; and because he found her so extraordinarily beautiful he gave her a valuable ring, after having spoken with her, and in the end having danced only with her. Morning approached, and the unknown beauty disappeared from the hall without anyone observing where she went. The princess had put her stall garb back on and was peacefully asleep in the pig stall. On the second evening she again appeared at the wedding, this time in her golden dress. The prince, who had been looking for her, was very happy to see her, and did not leave her side, for he wanted to know who this exceptionally wealthy gleaming beauty was. However, although he watched her carefully, trying to prevent her from escaping again, she took advantage of an opportune moment and slipped away. Before anyone noticed her absence she was again hidden beneath her filthy garb in the pig stall. On the third evening the mysterious maiden once again appeared at the wedding. Her glorious diamond dress astonished everyone. The prince thought that a maiden wearing such an incalculably costly dress must be of high nobility, but he was a thousand times more impressed by her personal beauty. He happily conversed with her alone, but to his dismay she would not tell him who she was or where she came from. As morning approached she again slipped away from the hall so cunningly that neither the prince nor anyone else noticed her leave. The wedding was now over, and the prince had no hope of seeing his mysterious beloved again. This made him seriously ill. The princess sat in her pig stall, but not as calmly as earlier, for she too had fallen in love. A few days passed, and the prince, almost dying of longing, did not leave his bed. Then one of his friends came to visit him, and he ordered breakfast for the prince. The strange forest creature appeared to be quiet and well-behaved, so they let it run about freely. On this morning it had gone to the kitchen to warm itself by the fire, for it was cold in the stall. Reluctantly the kitchen maid had allowed this, and the forest creature was cowering next to the stove. When milk was placed on the fire, the forest creature asked who it was for. Learning that it was for the prince, she secretly pulled from her finger the ring that the prince had given her at the wedding, and dropped it into the pot. After warming herself, she crept back to the pig stall, put on her diamond dress, and was once again the most beautiful princess. Meanwhile the prince was eating breakfast with his friend, and he was shocked almost to death to discover at the bottom of the milk pot the ring that he had given to his beloved mysterious stranger. He immediately summoned the kitchen maid who had prepared his breakfast, but she swore that she did not know how the ring came to be in the pot. The prince investigated further: Who else had been in the kitchen. Finally the girl admitted, after resisting for a long time, that the ugly forest creature had been there warming itself by the fire. The prince and his friend immediately went to the stall where the disgusting forest creature was kept. He opened the door and looked inside, then took three steps back in joyful surprise. There sat his beautiful and beloved mysterious stranger, dressed in her glorious gown. She stepped out and said, "I am the one, my prince!" Answering his questions as to how she had come to this horrible place, she told him her story, which astonished everyone. Then the prince tenderly took his beloved princess into his arms. Soon thereafter, to the pleasure of the entire court, a magnificent wedding brought this story to a happing end. Source: Arthur and Albert Schott, "Die Kaiserstochter im Schweinstall," Walachische Maehrchen (Stuttgart: J. G. Cotta, 1845), pp. 96-100 . Return to the table of contents . Fair Maria Wood Italy, Thomas Frederick Crane There was once a husband and wife who had but one child, a daughter. Now it happened that the wife fell ill and was at the point of death. Before dying she called her husband, and said to him, weeping, "I am dying; you are still young; if you ever wish to marry again, be mindful to choose a wife whom my wedding ring fits; and if you cannot find a lady whom it fits well, do not marry." Her husband promised that he would do so. When she was dead he took off her wedding ring and kept it until he desired to marry again. Then he sought for some one to please him. He went from one to another, but the ring fitted no one. He tried so many but in vain. One day he thought of calling his daughter, and trying the ring on her to see whether it fitted her. The daughter said, "It is useless, dear father; you cannot marry me, because you are my father." He did not heed her, put the ring on her finger, and saw that it fitted her well, and wanted to marry his daughter nolens volens . She did not oppose him, but consented. The day of the wedding, he asked her what she wanted. She said that she wished four silk dresses, the most beautiful that could be seen. He, who was a gentleman, gratified her wish and took her the four dresses, one handsomer than the other, and all the handsomest that had ever been seen. "Now, what else do you want?" said he. "I want another dress, made of wood, so that I can conceal myself in it." And at once he had this wooden dress made. She was well pleased. She waited until one day her husband was out of sight, put on the wooden dress, and under it the four silk dresses, and went away to a certain river not far off, and threw herself in it. Instead of sinking and drowning, she floated, for the wooden dress kept her up. The water carried her a long way, when she saw on the bank a gentleman, and began to cry, "Who wants the fair Maria Wood?" That gentleman who saw her on the water, and whom she addressed, called her and she came to the bank and saluted him. "How is it that you are thus dressed in wood, and come floating on the water without drowning?" She told him that she was a poor girl who had only that dress of wood, and that she wanted to go out to service. "What can you do?" "I can do all that is needed in a house, and if you would only take me for a servant you would be satisfied." He took her to his house, where his mother was, and told her all that had happened, saying, "If you, dear mother, will take her as a servant, we can try her." In short, she took her and was pleased with this woman dressed in wood. It happened that there were balls at that place which the best ladies and gentlemen attended. The gentleman who had the servant dressed in wood prepared to go to the ball, and after he had departed, the servant said to his mother, "Do me this kindness, mistress: let me go to the ball too, for I have never seen any dancing." "What, you wish to go to the ball so badly dressed that they would drive you away as soon as they saw you!" The servant was silent and when the mistress was in bed, dressed herself in one of her silk dresses and became the most beautiful woman that was ever seen. She went to the ball, and it seemed as if the sun had entered the room; all were dazzled. She sat down near her master, who asked her to dance, and would dance with no one but her. She pleased him so much that he fell in love with her. He asked her who she was and where she came from. She replied that she came from a distance, but told him nothing more. At a certain hour, without anyone perceiving it, she went out and disappeared. She returned home and put on her wooden dress again. In the morning the master returned from the ball, and said to his mother, "Oh! if you had only seen what a beautiful lady there was at the ball! She appeared like the sun, she was so beautiful and well dressed. She sat down near me, and would not dance with anyone but me." His mother then said, "Did you not ask her who she was and where she came from?" "She would only tell me that she came from a distance; but I thought I should die; I wish to go again this evening." The servant heard all this dialogue, but kept silent, pretending that the matter did not concern her. In the evening he prepared himself again for the ball, and the servant said to him, "Master, yesterday evening I asked your mamma to let me, too, go to the ball, for I have never seen dancing, but she would not; will you have the kindness to let me go this evening?" "Be still, you ugly creature, the ball is no place for you!" "Do me this favor," she said, weeping, "I will stand out of doors, or under a bench, or in a corner so no one shall see me; but let me go!" He grew angry then, and took a stick and began to beat the poor servant. She wept and remained silent. After he had gone, she waited until his mother was in bed, and put on a dress finer than the first, and so rich as to astonish, and away to the ball! When she arrived all began to gaze at her, for they had never seen anything more beautiful. All the handsomest young men surrounded her and asked her to dance; but she would have nothing to do with anyone but her master. He again asked her who she was, and she said she would tell him later. They danced and danced, and all at once she disappeared. Her master ran here and there, asked one and another, but no one could tell him where she had gone. He returned home and told his mother all that had passed. She said to him, "Do you know what you must do? Take this diamond ring, and when she dances with you give it to her; and if she takes it, it is a sign that she loves you." She gave him the ring. The servant listened, saw everything, and was silent. In the evening the master prepared for the ball and the servant again asked him to take her, and again he beat her. He went to the ball, and after midnight, as before, the beautiful lady returned more beautiful than before, and as usual would dance only with her master. At the right moment he took out the diamond ring, and asked her if she would accept it. She took it and thanked him, and he was happy and satisfied. Afterward he asked her again who she was and where from. She said that she was of that country, That when they speak of going to a ball They are beaten on the head and said no more. At the usual hour she stopped dancing and departed. He ran after her, but she went like the wind, and reached home without his finding out where she went. But he ran so in all directions, and was in such suffering, that when he reached home he was obliged to go to bed more dead than alive. Then he fell ill and grew worse every day, so that all said he would die. He did nothing but ask his mother and everyone if they knew anything of that lady, and that he would die if he did not see her. The servant heard everything; and one day, when he was very ill, what did she think of? She waited until her mistress's eye was turned, and dropped the diamond ring in the broth her master was to eat. No one saw her, and his mother took him the broth. He began to eat it, when he felt something hard, saw something shine, and took it out. You can imagine how he looked at it and recognized the diamond ring! They thought he would go mad. He asked his mother if that was the ring and she swore that it was, and all happy, she said that now he would see her again. Meanwhile the servant went to her room, took off her wooden dress, and put on one all of silk, so that she appeared a beauty, and went to the room of the sick man. His mother saw her and began to cry, "Here she is; here she is!" She went in and saluted him, smiling, and he was so beside himself that he became well at once. He asked her to tell him her story: who she was, where she came from, how she came, and how she knew that he was ill. She replied, "I am the woman dressed in wood who was your servant. It is not true that I was a poor girl, but I had that dress to conceal myself in, for underneath it I was the same that I am now. I am a lady; and although you treated me so badly when I asked to go to the ball, I saw that you loved me, and now I have come to save you from death." You can believe that they stayed to hear her story. They were married and have always been happy and still are. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Company, 1885), no. 10, pp. 48-52 . Return to the Table of Contents . Maria Wood Italy They say, there was a king, whose wife, when she came to die, said to him, "When I am dead, you will want to marry again; but take my advice: marry no woman but her whose foot my shoe fits." But this she said because the shoe was under a spell, and would fit no one whom he could marry. The king, however, caused the shoe to be tried on all manner of women; and when the answer always was that it would fit none of them, he grew quite bewildered and strange in his mind. After some years had passed, his young daughter, having grown up to girl's estate, came to him one day, saying, "Oh, papa; only think! Mamma's shoe just fits me!" "Does it!" replied the simple king; "then I must marry you." "Oh, that cannot be, papa," said the girl, and ran away. But the simple king was so possessed with the idea that he must marry the woman whom his wife's shoe fitted, that he sent for her every day and said the same thing. But the queen had not said that he should marry the woman whom her shoe fitted, but that he should not marry any whom it did not fit. When the princess found that he persevered in his silly caprice, she said at last, "Papa, if I am to do what you say, you must do some thing for me first." "Agreed, my child," replied the king; "you have only to speak." "Then, before I marry," said the girl, "I want a lot of things, but I will begin with one at a time. First, I want a dress of the color of a beautiful noontide sky, but all covered with stars like the sky at midnight, and furnished with a parure to suit it." Such a dress the king had made and brought to her. "Next," said the princess, "I want a dress of the color of the sea, all covered with golden fishes, with a fitting parure." Such a dress the king had made, and brought to her. "Next," said the princess, "I want a dress of a dark blue, all covered with gold embroidery and spangled with silver bells, and with a parure to match." Such a dress the king had made and brought to her. "These are all very good," said the princess; "but now you must send for the most cunning artificer in your whole kingdom, and let him make me a figure of an old woman just like life, fitted with all sorts of springs to make it move and walk when one gets inside it, just like a real woman." Such a figure the king had made, and brought it to the princess. "That is just the sort of figure I wanted," said she;" and now I don't want anything more." And the simple king went away quite happy. As soon as she was alone, however, the princess packed all the three dresses and many of her other dresses, and all her jewelry and a large sum of money, inside the figure of the old woman, and then she got into it and walked away. No one seeing an old woman walking out of the palace thought she had anything to do with the princess, and thus she got far away without anyone thinking of stopping her. On, on, on, she wandered till she came to the palace of a great king, and just at the time that the king's son was coming in from hunting. "Have you a place in all this fine palace to take in a poor old body?" whined the princess inside the figure of the old woman. "No, no! get out of the way! How dare you come in the way of the prince!" said the servants, and drove her away. But the prince took compassion on her, and called her to him. "What's your name, good woman?" said the prince. "Maria Wood is my name, your Highness," replied the princess. "And what can you do, since you ask for a place?" "Oh, I can do many things. First, I understand all about poultry, and then --" "That'll do," replied the prince; "take her, and let her be the hen-wife, and let her have food and lodging, and all she wants." So they gave her a little hut on the borders of the forest, and set her to tend the poultry. But the prince as he went out hunting often passed by her hut, and when she saw him pass she never failed to come out and salute him, and now and then he would stop his horse and spend a few moments in gossip with her. Before long it was Carnival time; and as the prince came by Maria Wood came out and wished him a "good Carnival." The prince stopped his horse and said, his young head full of the pleasure he expected, "Tomorrow, you know, we have the first day of the feast." "To be sure I know it; and how I should like to be there; won't you take me?" answered Maria Wood. "You shameless old woman," replied the prince, "to think of your wanting to go to a festino at your time of life!" and he gave her a cut with his whip. The next day Maria put on her dress of the color of the noontide sky, covered with stars like the sky at midnight, with the parure made to wear with it, and came to the feast. Every lady made place before her dazzling appearance, and the prince alone dared to ask her to dance. With her he danced all the evening, and fairly fell in love with her, nor could he leave her side; and as they sat together, he took the ring off his own finger and put it on to her hand. She appeared equally satisfied with his attentions, and seemed to desire no other partner. Only when he tried to gather from her whence she was, she would only say she came from the country of Whipblow, which set the prince wondering very much, as he had never heard of such a country. At the end of the ball, the prince sent his attendants to watch her that he might learn where she lived, but she disappeared so swiftly it was impossible for them to tell what had become of her. When the prince came by Maria Wood's hut next day, she did not fail to wish him again a "good Carnival." "Tomorrow we have the second festino , you know," said the prince. "Well I know it," replied Maria Wood; "shouldn't I like to go! Won't you take me?" "You contemptible old woman to talk in that way!" exclaimed the prince. "You ought to know better!" and he struck her with his boot. Next night Maria put on her dress of the color of the sea, covered all over with gold fishes, and the parure made to wear with it, and went to the feast. The prince recognized her at once, and claimed her for his partner all the evening, nor did she seem to wish for any other, only when he tried to learn from her whence she was, she would only say she came from the country of Bootkick. The prince could not remember ever to have heard of the Bootkick country, and thought she meant to laugh at him; however, he ordered his attendants to make more haste this night in following her; but what diligence so ever they used she was too swift for them. The next time the prince came by Maria Wood's hut, she did not fail to wish him again a "good Carnival." "Tomorrow we have the last festino !" exclaimed he, with a touch of sadness, for he remembered it was the last of the happy evenings that he could feel sure of seeing his fair unknown. "Ah! you must take me. But, what'll you say if I come to it in spite of you?" answered Maria Wood. "You incorrigible old woman!" exclaimed the prince; "you provoke me so with your nonsense, I really cannot keep my hand off you;" and he gave her a slap. The next night Maria Wood put on her dress of a dark blue, all covered with gold embroidery and spangled with silver bells, and the parure made to wear with it. The prince constituted her his partner for the evening as before, nor did she seem to wish for any other, only when he wanted to learn from her whence she was, all she would say was that she came from Slapland. This night the prince told his servants to make more haste in following her, or he would discharge them all. But they answered, "It is useless to attempt the thing, as no mortal can equal her in swiftness." After this, the prince fell ill of his disappointment, because he saw no hope of hearing any more of the fair domino with whom he had spent three happy evenings, nor could any doctor find any remedy for his sickness. Then Maria Wood sent him word, saying, "Though the prince's physicians cannot help him, yet let him but take a cup of broth of my making, and he will immediately be healed." "Nonsense! how can a cup of broth, or how can any medicament, help me!" exclaimed the prince. "There is no cure for my ailment." Again Maria Wood sent the same message; but the prince said angrily, "Tell the silly old thing to hold her tongue; she doesn't know what she's talking about." But again, the third time, Maria Wood sent to him, saying, "Let the prince but take a cup of broth of my making, and he will immediately be healed." By this time the prince was so weary that he did not take the trouble to refuse. The servants finding him so depressed began to fear that he was sinking, and they called to Maria Wood to make her broth, because, though they had little faith in her promise, they knew not what else to try. So Maria Wood made ready the cup of broth she had promised, and they put it down beside the prince. Presently the whole palace was roused; the prince had started up in bed, and was shouting, "Bring hither Maria Wood! Quick! Bring hither Maria Wood!" So they ran and fetched Maria Wood, wondering what could have happened to bring about so great a change in the prince. But the truth was, that Maria had put into the cup of broth the ring the prince had put on her finger the first night of the feast, and when he began to take the broth he found the ring with the spoon. When he saw the ring, he knew at once that Maria Wood could tell where to find his fair partner. "Wait a bit! There's plenty of time!" said Maria, when the servant came to fetch her in all haste; and she waited to put on her dress of the color of the noontide sky. The prince was beside himself for joy when he saw her, and would have the betrothal celebrated that very day. Source: Rachel Harriette Busk Roman Legends: A Collection of the Fables and Folk-Lore of Rome (Boston: Estes and Lauriat, 1877), pp. 84-90 . Return to the table of contents . All-Kinds-of-Fur Greece Once upon a time there was a king whose wife died, leaving him a small daughter. With time she grew into a beautiful maiden, and when the king saw how beautiful she was he said to her, "I want to marry you. You must become my wife." "How can you take me for a wife," said the girl, "for I am your daughter." "That is all the same to me. I want to marry you." "That is entirely impossible!" said the girl. "Just go to the bishop and listen to what he says. If he says that you are right, then take me in God's name." So the king went to the bishop and asked, "If someone has a lamb that he himself has cared for and raised, is it better that he should eat it, or that another person should eat it?" "No," answered the bishop, "it is better for the person to eat it who raised it." Then the king went back to his daughter and said, "He told me that I may take you." "If he really told you that you make take me, then take me in God's name. But first make me two dresses of pure gold, and fill the pockets with ducats. Also make a bed for me, and a shaft that goes ten fathoms deep into the earth." When the king had done all this, the girl took the dresses, climbed into the bed, then rode in into the shaft, saying, "Earth, open further." And the earth opened further, and she rode one until she came out at another place, and there she remained. A prince was hunting there, and he found the girl, wrapped in an animal skin. He approached her and asked, "Are you a human?" She answered, "Yes, I am a human. May I go with you?" He replied, "For all I care you may come with me." He took her with him and let her herd the geese. One day the king gave a feast, and the women began to dance. Then the girl slipped out of her animal skin and went to the ball in her golden dress, and danced. The prince saw her and said to himself," Who can that be? When she leaves the ball, I will follow her." When the ball was over the girl left, and the prince crept after her. She noticed him, and she began to run, and he ran after her. Then the girl took a handful of ducats and threw them to the ground. While the prince was gathering up the gold she slipped away and hid herself in her animal skin. Then the prince said, "Tomorrow I will give another feast, in order to see who she is." The next day at the ball the girl came again and danced, and when she left the ball the prince ran after her. While running away she lost a shoe, and while the prince was picking it up she escaped half barefoot, then hid herself again in her animal skin. The prince took the shoe and tried it onto all the girls in order to see whom it fitted, but he could not find the right one. When the servant girls were taking wash water to the king before he ate, the girl split her animal skin a little at her knee so that her gold dress was visible. Then she went to the servant girls and said that she would like to take the water to the king. But they said, "What? You, a goose girl want to take water to the king?" "What is the matter?" asked the king. "The goose girl want to bring your water." "Then let her do so. Just let her come." When she knelt down the golden dress shone through the slit. The prince saw this and cried out, "So you are the one who tormented me so!" And with that he took her as his wife. Source: J. G. von Hahn, "Allerleirauh," Griechische und albanesische Märchen , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1864), no. 27, pp. 191-93 . Return to the table of contents . The Princess Who Would Not Marry Her Father Portugal There was once a king and a queen. But a few years after their marriage the queen died. At her death she placed a ring on a table, and bade the king marry whomsoever that ring should fit. It happened that their daughter, the princess, approached the table by chance, saw the ring, and tried it on. She then ran to the king her father, and said, "Sire, do you know that a ring which I found on the table fits me as though it had been made expressly for me! . . ." The king, on hearing this, replied, "Oh! my daughter, you will have to marry me, because your mother, before she died, expressed a wish that I should marry whoever this ring would fit." The princess, greatly distressed, shut herself up in a room which had the window looking into the garden, and gave vent to her grief. Soon, however, a little old woman appeared to her, and asked her, "Why do you weep, royal lady?" To which the princess replied, "Well, what else can I do? My father says that I must marry him." The little old woman then said to her, " Listen to me, royal lady, go and tell your father that you will only marry him on condition that he buys you a dress of the color of the stars in the heavens." And after saying this she departed. The princess then went up to the king, who asked her, "Well, my daughter, are we to be married?" To which she replied, "Well, father, I shall marry you when you bring me a dress of the color of the stars in the heavens." The father, on hearing this, went out and bought her the dress, and gave it to her readymade. The princess again went to her room to cry. The little old woman again appeared to her, and asked her, "What ails you, royal lady?" She replied, "What can ail me! My father has bought me the dress I asked him for, and he wishes to marry me." The old lady rejoined, "Never mind, you must now ask him to bring you a dress of the color of the flowers that grow in the fields." The princess again went to her father and told him that she could only marry him on condition of his bringing her a robe of the color of wild flowers. The king bought the dress and gave it to her made up, and quite ready to be put on. The princess, again in trouble, retired to her chamber to weep. The old lady again appeared and demanded, "What ails you, royal lady? " To which the princess replied, "What can ail me, indeed! My father has bought me the second robe, and is determined to marry me." The good old lady rejoined, "Ask your father now for a robe of various colors." The princess did so, and asked for a robe of various colors, and the king bought her the dress and brought it to her ready to be put on. The princess returned to her chamber to weep over her new trouble, but the little old woman came to her and asked her what troubled her. The princess replied that the king had bought her the third robe she required of him, and was now determined that the marriage should take place. "And now what shall I do to prevent it? " inquired the princess. The little old woman replied, "Royal lady, you must now send for a carpenter and order him to make you a dress of wood; get inside it and go to the palace of the king who lives yonder, who requires a servant to tend the ducks." The princess did as she was told, had a dress made of wood, put all her jewels, and everything else she would require, inside, and getting inside it herself; and one fine day she ran away. She walked on and on until she arrived at the said palace. She knocked at the door, and told the servants to ask his majesty the king if he required a maid to mind the ducks. He replied that he did ; and he asked her what her name was, and she rejoined that her name was Maria do Pau; and after this the king sent her to tend the ducks, which were in a field next to the palace gardens. The moment the princess reached it she took off everything she had on, and the wooden dress also; she washed herself, as she was travel-stained, and then put on the richest robe she had, which was the one the color of the stars. The king was taking a walk in the garden, and noticed a lovely maiden who was in the field driving the ducks, and heard her repeat Ducks here, ducks there, The daughter of a king tends the ducks, A thing never seen before! When she had finished saying this she killed one of the ducks; then took off her robes, and again got into her wooden dress. At night she went indoors, saying, "Oh! king, I have killed one of the ducks." The king asked her, "Maria do Pau, who was that beautiful maiden so splendidly robed that minded the ducks?" To this she said, "Indeed there was no one else there but myself in disguise." Next day the king again sent Maria do Pau to tend the ducks. And when she was in the field she did the same thing as the day before. She took off her wooden dress, washed and combed herself carefully, put on the robe the color of wild flowers, and went about driving the ducks, saying as before Ducks here, ducks there, The daughter of a king tends the ducks, A thing never seen before! After which she killed another duck. Next day she did as the day before, put on the robe of many colors, and killed another duck. In the evening when she went indoors, the king said to her, "I do not wish you to take care of the ducks any longer, for every day we find a duck has been killed! Now you shall remain locked up in the house. We are to have a feast which will last three days, but I promise you that you shall not enjoy it, for I shall not allow you to go to it." To this she said to the king, "Oh! my liege, do let me go." But the king replied, "No, indeed, you shall not go." On the first day of the feast she again begged of the king to allow her to repair to it, and his majesty replied, "God, preserve me! What would be the consequences of taking Maria do Pau to the feast!" The king put on his gala robes and then sent for her to his chamber, asked her what dress she would like to put on, and the princess replied by asking him to give her a pair of boots, which the king threw at her and took his departure for the feast. She then repaired to her chamber and removed from inside the dress made of wool a wand she had, which the little old woman, who was a fairy, had given her, and holding it up she said, "Oh! divining rod, by the virtue that God gave you, send me here the best royal carriage, which is the very one that took the king to the feast." The carriage was instantly in sight, and entering it she made her appearance at the feast, in the robe of the color of the stars. The king, who had his eyes continually fixed upon her, went out to the guards and told them not to allow the maiden to pass. But when she wished to get out she threw them a bag of money, and the guards allowed her to pass, but they asked her to what country she belonged, to which she replied that she came from the land of the boot. The king went home, and on arriving found the princess was already in the palace. The king, who wished to find out whether the lovely maiden which he had seen at the feast could possibly be Maria do Pau, went to see if she was safe in her chamber, and afterwards sent for her and said to her, "Oh! Maria do Pau, do you happen to know where the land of the boot is situated?" "Oh! my liege, do not come troubling me with your questions. Is it possible that your majesty does not know where the land of the boot is situated?" The king replied, "I do not. A maiden was at the feast. I asked her where she came from, and she said that she came from the land of the boot, but I do not know where that is." Next day the king again attended the feast, but before leaving he said to Maria do Pau, ''You shall not be allowed to go there." "Do allow me for once," replied she. The king then asked her to give him the towel, and as she presented him with it he threw it at her, and departed for the feast. The princess repaired to her room, struck the divining rod, and put on the robe, which was the color of the wild flowers. The king who had been charmed with her on the first day of the feast, now admired her all the more, because she appeared more beautiful than ever. He went out to the guards and told them to ask the beautiful maiden when she passed to what country she belonged; and when she went out she informed them that she was from the land of the towel. As soon as the king was told of this he returned to the palace to think over, and try to guess, if possible, where the land of the towel could be situated. And when he arrived at the palace the first thing he did was to ask his maid if she knew where the land of the towel could be found. To his inquiries she replied, "Well, well! here comes a king who does not know, and cannot tell, where the land of the towel is situated! Neither do I know." The king now said, "Oh! Maria do Pau, every time that I have been at the feast I have seen such a pretty maiden. If the one I saw yesterday was beautiful, the one of today is perfectly lovely, and much more charming than the first." Next day as the king was on the point of going out the princess said to his majesty, "Oh! my liege, let me go to the feast, that I may see the maiden that is so beautiful!" The king replied, "God, preserve me! What would be the result if I were to present you before that maiden?" After which he asked her to give him his walking stick, and as he was going out he struck her with it. He went to the feast, and when there the princess presented herself before him in the robe of many colors. If on the previous days she appeared most beautiful, on this day of the feast she looked perfectly ravishing, and more interesting than ever. The king fixed his eyes upon her so as not to lose sight of her, as he wished to see her go out, and follow her to where she lived, as it was the last day of the feast. But the king missed seeing her depart after all, and he could find her nowhere. He went to the guards and asked them what she had said, but the guards replied that she had come from the land of the walking stick. The king returned to the palace and inquired of his maid where the land of the walking stick could be found; but she replied, "Oh! my liege, that I should know where the land of the walking stick is situated. Does not my liege know? Neither do I." The king again asked her, "Do you really not know? Today I again saw the same girl who is so beautiful; but I begin to think it cannot be the same one every time, because at one time she says that she comes from the land of the boot, next time that she is from the land of the towel, and lastly she says she is from the land of the walking stick. The princess repaired to her room, washed and combed herself, and dressed herself in the robe she had on on the first day of the feast. The king went to look through the keyhole to find out why she was so long away and remained in her chamber so quiet, and also to see what she was at. He saw a lovely maiden, the same one who had appeared at the feast dressed in the robe the color of the stars in the heavens, sitting down busy with some embroidery. When the princess left her chamber to repair to the dinner table again disguised the king said to her, "Oh! Maria do Pau, you must embroider a pair of shoes for me." She replied, "Do I know how to embroider shoes?" and she left the parlor to go back to her chamber. Every day she put on one of the dresses she had worn at the feast, and on the last day she robed herself with the one of many colors. The king begged her every day to embroider him a pair of shoes, and she always returned the same answer. He had a key made to open the princess's room, and one day when he saw through the keyhole that she was robed in her best, he suddenly opened the door without her perceiving it and entered the chamber. The princess startled, and very much frightened, tried to run away, but the king said to her, "Do not be troubled for you shall marry me! But I wish you first to tell me your history, and why it is that you wear a wooden dress." The princess recounted all the events of her life, and the king married her. The king next sent for the little old woman who had given her the wand, to come and live in the palace, but she refused to live there because she was a fairy. Consiglieri Pedroso, Portuguese Folk-Tales , translated from the original manuscript by Henriqueta Monteiro (London: Folk Lore Society, 1882), no. 16, pp. 66-72 . Return to the table of contents . The Horse's Skin Portugal This is the story of a wicked king, who was a widower and had three daughters. Many years had elapsed since his queen died, and he began to feel lonely without a partner in life, and one who could occupy the vacant seat beside him on the throne, so he resolved to visit a certain court where a princess lived, whom he admired, and to make an offer of marriage to her. The princess, who was selfish and only cared for her own comfort, asked the king before accepting his offer, what he intended to do with his daughters, as she did not want them about her in the palace. "If my daughters," replied the king, "are a hindrance to our union, I can soon dispose of them, and send them where you will never see them or hear of them." On his return to the palace he said to his daughters, "Get ready at once to go with me to the Tower of Moncorvo, where I will show you what you have never seen before in your life." The daughters, full of confidence in their father, and not suspecting any treachery, readily prepared to accompany him, and after travelling many leagues arrived at the celebrated tower. When the king had them safe in the castle, he said to his daughters, "Remain here, whilst I pay a short visit to a friend and worthy subject, who lives in this neighbourhood. On my return I will take you back to the palace." The wicked king, who only made up this excuse to blind his daughters to his real intentions, fastened the great gates of the tower as he went out, so that his daughters could not possibly escape. He supplied them with food every day until his marriage day, but after that he never concerned himself about them any more, but left them to their fate. Hours passed, and days came and went, and still no succour arrived, and they began to be in a dreadful state, without a morsel of food or water to refresh them. And so it happened that one day, when they had given up all hopes of being relieved, and were nearly dead from starvation, the eldest of the princesses said to her sisters, "Why should we all starve? The best thing you two can do is to kill me and feed upon me as long as I afford you sustenance." She had hardly said these words when she dropped down dead from want. A few days after this sad event the surviving princesses were again short of food, and nothing was left them but to die. Then the second sister, remembering what the first one had so generously done, followed her example, and suggested that her younger sister should kill her for food; and when she had finished uttering the last words of her advice she also dropped down and died. The poor young girl, now left alone in the large dreary castle, felt very disconsolate, and rent the air with her lamentations. But after a while, being of a courageous mind, she thought to herself that weeping was no remedy for her woes, and that she must devise some means of escape from her prison before she became faint again with want. She now set about examining the various rooms of which the castle was composed, and when she reached the top of the watchtower she looked out and saw a ship sailing on the ocean. Overjoyed at the sight, she at once began to make signals, waving her handkerchief in hopes of attracting the notice of someone in the vessel. The sailors were not slow to perceive the signal, and calling up their captain, drew his attention to it. The captain, who was a humane and chivalrous man, directed the ship towards the spot, and effected an entrance by scaling the wall of the fortress. On reaching the watchtower, the captain and the sailors that accompanied him were shocked to see a maiden of such rank and beauty treated worse than a common criminal. They took her up tenderly and lowered her into the vessel, and sailing to a port of safety they landed her, together with a chest in which she had packed some of her own and her sisters' dresses. As she stood on the seashore she glanced around her, and felt the wretchedness of her situation, without a home or friends to whom to apply for shelter. She had not been long immersed in these melancholy thoughts when she perceived an old woman coming towards her, whom she felt sure was a good benevolent person. She approached her and addressed her thus: "My good woman, do you know of anyone that would give me shelter and a meal for today? I am willing to work for it." "If you want employment come and draw water from the well, and help me to carry it to the house I work for; there you will get a meal, and in the evening you can take up your quarters in my little cottage." "Tell me first," replied the princess, "what house it is you work for?" "Oh! I draw water for our king's palace." The young maiden consented to help the old woman, but as she could not work in her fine clothes, she had a garment made for her of the skin of a horse, and thus disguised she did not think that anyone would take her for a princess. Every day she went to the well and helped the old woman to draw water and carry the pitchers to the palace; and from the odd garments she wore everyone in the palace called her "Horse-Skin." One day as she entered the palace yard, carrying a pitcher of water poised on her head in a light and graceful manner, which showed off her elegant figure, a page, who had often noticed her beauty, and secretly suspected that the girl was not born to do this drudgery, and that there was some mystery about her, accosted her very respectfully, and said: "Do you know that our good king is going to give balls for three nights running, so that he may choose himself a wife from among the dancers? The prettiest girl is to carry off the prize, and the king, as a mark of his choice, is to give her a ring -- and what a ring that will be! I wish you could manage to go." "What have I to do with balls, a poor girl like me? It is all very well for princesses and fine people. I shall turn in at my old woman's tonight, as usual." When the princess had done her work she went home, and that evening being the first night of the balls at the palace, she dressed herself in her eldest sister's clothes, and went to the ball. When she entered the ballrooms, which were brilliantly lighted up, all eyes were turned upon her, and before the end of the dance she was pronounced by all present as most beautiful. The king was not long in discovering her charms, and caused great jealousy among the ladies by asking her again and again to dance with him, and loading her with delicate and polite attentions. But she slipped out of the palace early, before the king had time to notice her absence. The next day Horse-Skin was again toiling and carrying water to the palace as if nothing had happened. As she entered the palace yard the page again accosted her, and repeated what he had said the day before. "Have I not told you, man, that all this does not concern me? What is it to me whether the king gives a ball or not? I shall go home to my old lady and spend the evening resting after my hard work." The princess went to the second ball in her second sister's dress, which set off her beauty even more than the first had done. A number of partners were anxious to dance with her, but they had little chance, for the king mostly danced with her. He treated the princess with the profoundest respect as he gazed on her loveliness, and dared not ask her who she was. But she with her usual discretion left the ballroom at a moment when the king's attention was engaged by other guests; and next morning, as usual, Horse-Skin was at her duties in the palace. The page once again came up to her and said in a beseeching tone: "Do, Horse-Skin, go to the last ball, which is to take place in the palace tonight, for the king is to give the ring tonight to the fairest lady and the one he admires most! You should have seen what jealousy there was among the ladies that attended the ball last night; they say it is useless for them to go to the ball again, as the king would not so much as look at them, or speak a word to them. All his interest was centred on a lovely and mysterious maiden who attended the last two dances, and who, I assure you, has nearly turned the king's brain with love; you should see her smile, her coral lips, her star-like eyes -- the very image of yours, I declare! -- and the fascinating manner in which she danced -- there -- I only wish I was a prince to marry her!" The princess's only reply to all this, was: "Leave me alone; what matters it to me whom the king admires? Tonight I shall be at my old woman's, as usual." At the last ball the princess wore her own robes, the colour, stuff, and make of which harmonised with her beauty still more than did her sister's garments; and as she mingled among the invited in the state apartments that night, she outshone all the other ladies -- princesses, marchionesses, duchesses, and squires' daughters -- like a brilliant gem of the first water. The king, fairly captivated, danced with her alone, and towards the end of the evening gave her the ring, as the sign of his having chosen her to be his spouse and queen. And though he had set several of his court courtiers to watch and see which way she took when she left the palace, the princess eluded their vigilance, and departed without being noticed even by the sentinels at the palace gate. Next day the king was sorely puzzled and grieved when, on making enquiries, he found that no one in the palace could give him the slightest information about the lady to whom he had given the ring, in token of his admiration and choice. He ordered a search through all the country round, to find out, if possible, who the maiden was; but all was of no avail, for the damsel could not be discovered high or low. At this the king, from grief and disappointment, sickened, and lay in a stupor for days together, until the physicians began to fear he would not live much longer. One day Horse-Skin met his majesty's nurse, and asked her how the king was. The nurse said the king was so ill that he was not expected to live through the day, all through the violent passion his majesty had conceived for the damsel to whom he had given the ring, and of whom no traces could be found. "And," said she, "unless the cruel girl makes herself known to his majesty soon, we shall lose our beloved king." The nurse was at the time carrying some broth to give to the king; and Horse-Skin took this opportunity to drop the ring into the basin, without the nurse perceiving her. Great was the king's surprise when he discovered the ring; and the nurse being asked who had put that ring in his broth, replied that she did not know, and that the only person that had come near her, when carrying the basin, was poor Horse-Skin. The king then sent for Horse-Skin, and bade her tell him who had given her the ring which she had dropped into the basin. "If your majesty will allow me to leave your presence for a few minutes, I will tell you, on my return, who gave the ring to me." She had not been absent long when she returned to the king dressed in her own rich garments, and adorned as she had appeared at the last ball in the palace. She stood before the king, and said, "Does your majesty know me now?" "Of course I do, you are the same sweet damsel to whom I gave the ring." "Very well," said the princess, "I am she who dropped it in the broth, and I am your humble servant, Horse-Skin." "Explain yourself, you are still a mystery to me." Thereupon the princess related the history of her life, which she did amid tears and sobs, as it brought back to her mind all she had suffered since her cruel father had deserted her and her sisters. The king from being sad, was now delighted to have found his lost love, and soon recovered from his illness, and was once more full of health. The king then led her to a magnificently furnished chamber where she was to remain until his marriage with her, as he would not let her return to the old woman's cottage. The happy pair were married amid great rejoicings, and the king and his beautiful bride were heartily welcomed by his subjects, who had mourned his absence from state affairs. They reigned happily for many long years. Source: Francisco Adolpho Coelho, Tales of Old Lusitania from the Folk-Lore of Portugal , translated by Henriqueta Monteiro (London: Swan, Sonnenschein, and Company, 1888), pp. 51-60 . Although in this tale the incest motif has been suppressed, most elements of the plot coincide with those of traditional type 510B folktales. Return to the table of contents . The King Who Wished to Marry His Daughter Scotland There was a king before now, and he married, and he had but one daughter. When his wife departed, he would marry none but one whom her clothes would fit. His daughter one day tried her mother's dress on, and she came and she let her father see how it fitted her. It was fitting her well. When her father saw her he would marry no woman but her. She went crying where her muime was; and her foster mother said to her, "What was the matter with her?" She said, "that her father was insisting that he would marry her." Her muime told her to say to him, "that she would not marry him till he should get her a gown of the swan's down." He went, and at the end of a day and a year he came, and the gown with him. She went again to take the counsel of her muime. "Say to him," said her muime, "that thou wilt not marry him till he gets thee a gown of the moorland canach." She said this to him. He went, and at the end of a day and year he returned, and a gown of the moorland canach with him. "Say now to him," said her muime, "that thou wilt not marry him till he brings thee a gown of silk that will stand on the ground with gold and silver." At the end of a day and year he returned with the gown. "Say to him now," said her muime, "that thou wilt not marry him till he brings thee a golden shoe, and a silver shoe." He got her a golden shoe and a silver shoe. "Say to him now," said her muime, "that thou wilt not marry him unless he brings thee a kist that will lock without and within, and for which it is all the same to be on sea or on land." When she got the kist, she folded the best of her mother's clothes, and of her own clothes in it. Then she went herself into the kist, and she asked her father to put it out on the sea to try how it would swim. Her father put it out; when it was put out, it was going, and going, till it went out of sight. It went on shore on the other side; and a herd came where it was, intending to break it, in hopes that there were findings in the chest. When he was going to break it she called out, "Do not so, but say to thy father to come here, and he will get that which will better him for life." His father came, and he took her with him to his own house. It was with a king that he was herd, and the king's house was near him. "If I could get," said she, "leave to go to service to this great house yonder." "They want none," said the herd, "unless they want one under the hand of the cook." The herd went to speak for her, and she went as a servant maid under the hand of the cook. When the rest were going to the sermon; and when they asked her if she was going to it, she said, "that she was not; that she had a little bread to bake, and that she could not go to it." When they went away, she took herself to the herd's house, and she put on a gown of the down of the swan. She went to the sermon, and she sat opposite the king's son. The king's son took love for her. She went a while before the sermon skailed, she reached the herd's house, she changed her clothes, and she was in before them. When the rest came home, it was talking about the gentlewoman that was at the sermon they were. The next Sunday they said to her, "Was she going to the sermon?" and she said, "that she was not, that she had a little bread to bake." When they went away, she reached the herd's house, and she put on a gown of the moorland canach; and she went to the sermon. The king's son was seated where she was the Sunday before, and she sat opposite to him. She came out before them, and she changed, and she was at the house before them; and when the rest came home, it was talking about the great gentlewoman that was at the sermon they were. The third Sunday, they said to her, "Was she going to the sermon?" and she said, "that she was not, that she had a little bread to bake." When they went away, she reached the herd's house. She put on the gown that would stand on the ground with gold and silver, and the golden shoe and the silver shoe, and she went to the sermon. The king's son was seated where she was the Sunday before, and she sat where he was. A watch was set on the doors this Sunday. She arose, she saw a cranny, and she jumped out at the cranny; but they kept hold of one of the shoes. The king's son said, "Whomsoever that shoe would fit, she it was that he would marry." Many were trying the shoe on, and taking off their toes and heels to try if it would fit them; but there were none whom the shoe would fit. There was a little bird in the top of a tree, always saying as everyone was trying on the shoe, " Beeg beeg ha nan doot a heeg ach don tjay veeg a ha fo laiv a hawchkare. " -- Wee wee, it comes not on thee; but on the wee one under the hand of the cook. When he could get none whom the shoe would fit, the king's son lay down, and his mother went to the kitchen to talk over the matter. "Won't you let me see the shoe?" said she. "I will not do it any harm at all events." "Thou! thou ugly dirty thing, that it should fit thee." She went down, and she told this to her son. "Is it not known," said he, "that it won't fit her at all events? And can't you give it her to please her?" As soon as the shoe went on the floor, the shoe jumped on her foot. "What will you give me," said she, " to let you see the other one?" She reached the herd's house, and she put on the shoes, and the dress that would stand on the floor with gold and silver. When she returned, there was but to send word for a minister, and she herself and the king's son married. Source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 1 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 219-22 . Campbell's source: Ann Darroch, Islay. Return to the table of contents . Morag a Chota Bhain -- Margery White Coats Scotland A king had four daughters, and his wife died, and he said he would marry anyone whom his dead wife's clothes would fit. One day the daughters tried, and the youngest only could wear them. The king saw them from a window, and wished to marry her, and she went for advice to her mother's brother. He advised her to promise to marry the king if he would bring her a gown of birds' down, and a gown of the colors of the sky, woven with silver; and when he got that, a gown of the colors of the stars, woven with gold, and glass shoes. When he had got them, she escaped with all her clothes, by the help of her uncle, on a filly, with a magic bridle, she on one side, and her chest of clothes on the other. She rode to a king's palace, hid the chest in a hill under a bush of rushes, turned the filly loose, and went to the palace with nothing on but a white petticoat and a shift. She took service with the cook, and grew dirty and ugly, and slept on a bench by the kitchen fire, and her work was to blow under the great caldron all day long. One day the king's son came home, and was to hold a feast; she went to the queen and asked leave to go, and was refused because she was so dirty. The queen had a basin of water in her hand, and threw it at her, and it broke. She went to the hill, took out the dress of down and silver, and shook her magic bridle; the filly came, and she mounted, and rode to the feast. The king's son took her by the hand, and took her up as high as any there, and set her on his own lap; and when the feast was over, there was no reel that he danced but he gave it to her. He asked her whence she came, and she said, "From the kingdom of Broken Basins," and the prince said that he had never heard of that land, though he had travelled far. She escaped and returned to the cook, and all were talking about the beautiful lady. She asked about her, and was told not to talk about what she did not understand, "a dirty little wretch like her." Then the prince had another feast; and she asked leave again, and the queen refused, and threw a candlestick at her, and it broke, and she did as before. She put on another dress and went; the king's son had eight men on each side of the door to catch her. The same scene went on, and she said she came from the country of Candlesticks, and escaped, leaving a glass shoe. Then the king's son fell sick (of course), and would only marry the woman whom the shoe would fit; and all the ladies came and cut off their toes and heels, but in vain. Then he asked if there was none other. Then a small creature put his head in at the door and said, "If thou didst but know, she whom thou seekest is under the cook." Then he got the history of the basin and candlestick from his mother. The shoe was tried and fitted, and he was to marry Morag. All were in despair, and abused her; but she went out to her chest, shook the magic bridle, and arrayed herself, and came back on the filly, with a "powney" behind with the chest. Then all there that had despised her fell on their knees, and she was married to the prince. "And I did not get a bit there at the wedding," said the girl. This was told as we walked along the road, and is but a short outline of what was told me, written from notes made in the evening. The man said that the girl told it with a great deal of the queer old language, which he could not remember. The girl and her chest on the same horse may be seen in the Highlands. The girl, in her white coats and short gown, may be seen blowing the fire in highland inns, the queen's likeness might be found; and the feast is a highland ball; the filly and the magic bridle are common in other stories; the incidents of the basin and candlestick have an equivalent in Norse; and I got them from a woman at the Sound of Barra afterwards, in another story. This shows what may be lost by dignified traveling. While the man was enjoying himself in the kitchen, the employer was smoking in solitary dignity, upstairs in his bedroom, writing a journal, and utterly unconscious that the game he pursued was so near. I have other versions of this tale from other sources, and may find room for them hereafter. Source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 1 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 225-26 . Return to the table of contents . Rashen Coatie Scotland At an early period, when a plurality of kings reigned in Scotland, it chanced that one of them had lost his queen; and one of the queens had lost her husband. These two, the widow and widower were married, each of them having had a daughter in their first marriage, it caused a good deal of dissention and strife, particularly as the king's daughter was a perfect model of beauty, and the queen's daughter as much so of deformity; but the king willing to indulge his queen as much as possible, and for the sake of keeping peace in his own house, he often winked at the bad treatment his daughter received from her stepmother, all because she was more handsome and fair than her beloved but ugly daughter. Her treatment was however so very bad, that she was put to herd her father's cattle; while the queen's daughter wallowed in all the luxuries of a court endowed with peace and plenty. Rashen Coatie, (for so shall the king's daughter be called), having her meat, which was of the coarsest fare, brought her by the queen's favourite daughter daily, she had learned from some kind fairy how to charm her asleep when partaking of her food, which she did on her immediate arrival, by repeating the following words: Lay down your head upon my knee, And well looked after it there shall be, Then sleep ye one eye or sleep ye two, Ye soon shall see what power can do. These words had the desired effect of lulling her sound asleep, which no sooner took place than a genii in the shape and form of a calf, brought her meats and dainties of every description, of which she partook heartily, unknown to all but her favourite calf. The queen being now wearied with trying all the arts that mischief could devise, to bring Rashen Coatie's beauty to a level with her daughter's; or to raise her daughter's beauty to that of Rashen Coatie's; thought she must have some hidden means of subsistence, as all the stratagems she tried were always attended with want of success. On consulting her henwife, who was a witch, how she should behave in this critical juncture; the witch said she would give her an eye in her neck, by which sight she would be able to discover many things, particularly how Rashen Coatie was fed and maintained without her perceiving it. Accordingly the queen went next day to the castle to discover Rashen Coatie's friends, and discovered how she was fed, owing to an omission of Rashen Coatie's. She found that it was the calf that fed her, which made her long to get it destroyed. The king though loath to deprive his daughter of her only companion, her favourite calf, he was obliged to comply with the queen's imperious demands, in order to suppress the wrangling and strife which were daily taking place among his domestics, particularly by his queen. Rashen Coatie having discovered the queen's intention, mourned over her ravenous appetite, with streaming eyes and bleached cheeks. The calf having the power of speech, requested her not to be alarmed at what was to take place, but to gather together all the bones into one mass, and place them beneath a particular stone, and in a short time they would revive and come to life again. This having been done as commanded, everything came to pass as predicted by the calf; and the malicious queen having partook of the entrails of the calf, lingered and died of a disease hitherto unknown in that part of the country. Her daughter now became of contempt, despised and hooted by everyone. Rashen Coatie's sun now began to shine in meridian splendour; she was gentle and mild, humble to everyone, which gained her the esteem and good will of both great and small. Her beauty having kept pace with her virtue, her father took such a liking to her, as to wish to marry her; but this being quite contrary to her principles of sound morality, she grew melancholy, every day more and more, and lingered out a weary existence, till having met with her calf, she asked it what was best to be done under such pressing difficulties. The calf advised her to ask from her father a gown and petticoat made of the rashes that grew on the bonny burn side, in which she was to be drest. This having been accomplished; she then requested of him to give her a dress composed of all the colours of the birds of the air. This also having been given her; she demanded a new suit of variegated colours, composed of all those appearances that float in the air, and in the earth beneath. Having obtained all these varieties; she had now no excuse but to comply with her father's wishes, which were to accompany him to the altar, where all things were ready for the marriage ceremony. Having thus far complied with his wishes, she went, but on arriving at the place appointed, she started back, exclaiming, that she had forgotten her marriage ring. Her father, to prevent her returning home, said he had one which would answer the purpose perfectly well; but she insisted on having her mother's ring, and must needs return for it, but promised to be back in a few minutes. Again, she had recourse to the advice of her calf, which was to dress herself in her rashen weed, and to leave her father's kingdom with all speed. This was accordingly done, and she wandered far till she came to a hunting lodge, kept by the prince of that country. Here she made free to enter, and go to the prince's bed to rest her wearied limbs, which had undergone much toil and fatigue in the course of a long and laborious travel. When the prince came to his lodge, he was surprised to find a sleeping beauty in his bed, as it was in a sequestered part of his kingdom, where few inhabitants were to be found. She soon made her escape from him, and went to his father's palace, where she asked a place as a menial servant, which was granted, and thereby put into the kitchen to assist the cook in turning the spits which groaned with the weight of the meat that was roasting for their majesties' dinner. Here she continued for some time, doing all the drudgery of the meanest servant. Christmas, however, came on, when great preparations were made for church. Rashen Coatie also wished to appear among the rest, but was denied permission by the master cook. But it so happened that, on the first yule day, when all were gone, and she left alone in the kitchen to attend the meat, she said to the spits, peats, and pots, to do their duty till she returned; which was accordingly done. The words of the charm which she made use of on this occasion were as follows: Every spit gar another turn, Every peat gar another burn, Every pot gar another play Till I return on good yule day. These did as desired; when she went and dressed herself in rich attire. On arriving at the church, she placed herself in a conspicuous part of the seat, nearly opposite to where the young prince was sitting. He caught more of the flame of love than of the minister's spiritual exhortations, and could scarcely contain himself from making enquiries during the sermon. She went in the same manner all the holy days of yule, but every day more and more superbly drest. The prince at length determined on discovering her rank and place of abode, if possible, little thinking that it was his own menial, Rashen Coatie, as her history seemed to be a mystery to everyone. The term of her secrecy seemed to be now at end; for hurrying home on the last day, she dropped one of her shoes, which were so completely fitted to her feet, that it was supposed it would suit no one else. The prince, on having found the shoe, which was of pure gold, caused to be proclaimed throughout all the regions of his father's kingdom round about, that everyone should have free liberty to try on the shoe, and whomsoever the shoe fitted best, was to be his bride. Many trials were made, but all to no purpose, till the henwife's daughter caused her heels and toes to be pared; by which process she got it forced on her foot. Agreeably to the proclamation, it therefore became the prince to marry her, with which he was to comply, but with a heavy heart. On their way to the marriage seat, a small bird fluttered over their heads, crying as they went: Clipped heels and pared toes. They're in the kitchen the shoe on goes. The prince hearing the voice of the bird, requested to know its meaning, when it was explained. With joy he returned to his father's castle, much against the henwife's inclination, when it was found that Rashen Coatie, who hurkled in the kitchen, had not got an opportunity of trying on the shoe. On presenting her with the shoe, it went easily on, but what was more to their surprise and astonishment, she pulled out its fellow, and put it on before them. They, of course, we need not add, were immediately married, and lived long and happy. Shortly after the marriage, they paid a visit to her father's court in great pomp and grandeur, by whom they were most cordially received, and his kingdom, at his death, bestowed on them. Source: Ancient Scottish Tales: An Unpublished Collection Made by Peter Buchan , with an introduction by John A. Fairley (Peterhead, Scotland, 1908), pp. 29-32 . Reprinted from the transactions of the Buchan Field Club. Buchan assembled this collection between 1827 and 1829. Link to a version of this tale that omits the father's attempt to marry the heroine: Rashin-Coatie . Return to the table of contents . The Princess and the Golden Cow England One there was a king who had a daughter, being very beautiful, and he loved her so much he wanted to marry her. Here I forget details , but the princess was in great trouble, especially as she loved a prince who lived a long way off, and he loved her. She had made (or got her father to give her) a beautiful golden cow as large as a real one. She made arrangements in some manner ( details forgotten ) to have the golden cow conveyed under pretence of its being a parting gift or token of remembrance to the prince. She got inside it, and went in the cow a long journey by sea. There was a signal prearranged ( details forgotten ) of three knocks on the cow to show when she could come out safely. But when she had gone a long way the cow was landed (I think the captain of the ship was in the secret, and was to see to her reaching the prince), but people came to see the cow, for it was very curious, amongst them three gentlemen who wanted to be able to say they had touched it, and one poked it with his umbrella ( sic ), and said, "I've touched the golden cow," and the next poked it with his umbrella, and said, "I've touched the golden cow," and the third poked it with his umbrella, and said, "I've touched the golden cow." With that the princess opened the door and came out, for she thought those three knocks were the signal. Then the prince turned up, after some adventures that I have forgotten, and all ended happily. Source: Isabella Barclay, "The Princess and the Golden Cow," Folklore , vol. 1 , no. 4 (December 1890), Supplement, p. 149 . Barclay's source: "The following variant ... was told to myself and sisters when wer were children by a servant from the Lizard district of Cornwall." Return to the table of contents . The Story of Catskin England, James Orchard Halliwell Note by D. L. Ashliman: The conflict between father and daughter in most folktales of type 510B derives from the mother's death and the father's subsequent attempts to marry his own daughter, as evidenced in the previous tales at this site. In some versions, however, the incest motif is suppressed, and the conflict between father and daughter is given a different motivation. The following tale, told here in verse, illustrates this minority group. The heroine here is not at risk because of her father's incestuous desires, but for an inclination much less governed by taboo: his displeasure over the birth of a female child. Note also that the abusive relationship between the heroine and the man she will ulitmately marry has also been altered in this version. She receives the same blows, but from the hands of her female employer, not her future husband. And now, an English version of Catskin: There once was a gentleman grand, Who lived at his country seat; He wanted an heir to his land, For he'd nothing but daughters yet. His lady's again in the way, So she said to her husband with joy, "I hope some or other fine day, To present you, my dear, with a boy." The gentleman answered gruff, "If't should turn out a maid or a mouse, For of both we have more than enough, She shan't stay to live in my house." The lady, at this declaration, Almost fainted away with pain; But what was her sad consternation, When a sweet little girl came again. She sent her away to be nurs'd, Without seeing her gruff papa; And when she was old enough, To a school she was packed away. Fifteen summers are fled, Now she left good Mrs. Jervis; To see home she was forbid, She determined to go and seek service. Her dresses so grand and so gay, She carefully rolled in a knob; Which she hid in a forest away, And put on a catskin robe. She knock'd at a castle gate, And pray'd for charity; They sent her some meat on a plate, And kept her a scullion to be. My lady look'd long in her face, And prais'd her great beauty; I'm sorry I've no better place, And you must our scullion be. So Catskin was under the cook, A very sad life she led, For often a ladle she took, And broke poor Catskin's head. There is now a grand ball to be, When ladies their beauties show; "Mrs. Cook," said Catskin, "dear me, How much I should like to go!" "You go with your catskin robe, You dirty impudent slut! Among the fine ladies and lords, A very fine figure you'd cut." A basin of water she took, And dash'd in poor Catskin's face; But briskly her ears she shook, And went in her hiding place. She washed every stain from her skin, In some crystal waterfall; Then put on a beautiful dress, And hasted away to the ball. When she entered, the ladies were mute, Overcome by her figure and face; But the lord, her young master, at once Fell in love with her beauty and grace; He pray'd her his partner to be, She said, "Yes!" with a sweet smiling glance; All night with no other lady But Catskin, our young lord would dance. "Pray tell me, fair maid, where you live?" For now was the sad parting time; But she no other answer would give, Than this distich of mystical rhyme, -- Kind sir, if the truth I must tell, At the sign of the Basin of Water I dwell. Then she flew from the ballroom, and put On her catskin robe again; And slipt in unseen by the cook, Who little thought where she had been. The young lord, the very next day, To his mother his passion betrayed; He declared he never would rest, Till he'd found out this beautiful maid. There's another grand ball to be, Where ladies their beauties show; "Mrs. Cook," said Catskin, "dear me, How much I should like to go!" "You go with your catskin robe, You dirty impudent slut! Among the fine ladies and lords, A very fine figure you'd cut." In a rage the ladle she took, And broke poor Catkin's head; But off she went shaking her ears, And swift to her forest she fled. She washed every blood stain off In some crystal waterfall; Put on a more beautiful dress, And hasted away to the ball. My lord, at the ballroom door, Was waiting with pleasure and pain; He longed to see nothing so much As the beautiful Catskin again. When he asked her to dance, she again Said "Yes!" with her first smiling glance; And again, all the night, my young Lord With none but fair Catskin did dance. "Pray tell me," said he, "where you live?" For now 'twas the parting time; But she no other answer would give, Than this distich of mystical rhyme, -- Kind sir, if the truth I must tell, At the sign of the Broken Ladle I dwell. Then she flew from the ball, and put on Her catskin robe again; And slipt in unseen by the cook, Who little thought where she had been. My lord did again, the next day, Declare to his mother his mind, That he never more happy should be, Unless he his charmer should find. Now another grand ball is to be, Where ladies their beauties show; "Mrs. Cook", said Catskin, "dear me, How much I should like to go!" "You go with your catskin robe, You impudent, dirty slut! Among the find ladies and lords, A very fine figure you'd cut." In a fury she took the skimmer, And broke poor Catskin's head; But heart-whole and lively as ever, Away to her forest she fled. She washed the stains of blood In some crystal waterfall; Then put on her most beautiful dress, And hasted away to the ball. My lord, at the ballroom door, Was waiting with pleasure and pain; He longed to see nothing so much As the beautiful Catskin again. When he asked her to dance, she again Said "Yes!" with her first smiling glance; And all the night long, my young Lord With none but fair Catskin would dance. "Pray tell me, fair maid, where you live?" For now was the parting time; But she no other answer would give, Than this distich of mystical rhyme, -- Kind sir, if the truth I must tell, At the sign of the Broken Skimmer I dwell. Then she flew from the hall, and threw on Her catskin cloak again; And slipt in unseen by the cook, Who little thought where she had been. But not by my lord unseen, For this time he followed too fast; And, hid in the forest green, Saw the strange things that past. Next day he took to his bed, And sent for the doctor to come; And begg'd him no other than Catskin, Might come into his room. He told him how dearly he lov'd her, Not to have her his heart would break; Then the doctor kindly promised To the proud old lady to speak. There's a struggle of pride and love, For she fear'd her son would die; But pride at the last did yield, And love had the mastery. Then my lord got quickly well, When he was his charmer to wed; And Catskin, before a twelvemonth, Of a young lord was brought to bed. To a wayfaring woman and child, Lady Catskin one day sent an alms; The nurse did the errand, and carried The sweet little lord in her arms. The child gave the alms to the child, This was seen by the old lady mother; "Only see," said that wicked old woman, "How the beggars' brats take to each other!" This throw went to Catskin's heart, She flung herself down on her knees, And pray'd her young master and lord To seek out her parents would please. They sent out in my lord's own coach; They traveled, but naught befell Till they reach'd the town hard by Where Catskin's father did dwell. They put up at the head inn, Where Catskin was left alone; But my lord went to try if her father His natural child would own. When folks are away, in short time What great alterations appear; For the cold touch of death had all chill'd The hearts of her sisters dear. Her father repented too late, And the loss of his youngest bemoan'd; In his old and childless state, He his pride and cruelty own'd. The old gentleman sat by the fire, And hardly looked up at my lord; He had no hope of comfort A stranger could afford. But my lord drew a chair close by, And said, in a feeling tone, "Have you not, sir, a daughter, I pray, You never would see or own?" The old man alarm'd, cried aloud, "A hardened sinner am I! I would give all my worldly goods, To see her before I die." Then my lord brought his wife and child To their home and parent's face, Who fell down and thanks returned To God, for his mercy and grace. The bells, ringing up in the tower, Are sending a sound to the heart; There's a charm in the old church bells, Which nothing in life can impart! Source: James Orchard Halliwell, The Nursery Rhymes of England (London: F. Warne and Company, 1886), no. 45, pp. 22-31 . First published 1853. Return to the Table of Contents The Princess in the Cat-Skins Ireland There was once a queen that was left a widow with one daughter, who was as good and handsome as any girl could be. But her mother wasn't satisfied to remain without a husband; so she married again, and a very bad choice she made. Her second husband treated her very badly; and she died soon after. Well, would you ever think of the widower taking it into his head to marry the young princess at the end of a year? She was as shocked as she could be when he made her the offer, and burst out a crying. "I took you too sudden," said he. "Sleep on it, and you can give me an answer tomorrow." She was in great trouble all the rest of the day, and when the evening came she went out into the paddock, where a beautiful filly she used to ride was grazing. "Oh my poor beast! " said she, "I'm sure if you knew my trouble you'd pity me." "I do know your trouble, and I pity you, and I'll help you too," says the filly. "I'm the fairy that watched over you from the time you were born, and I am here near you since your mother married the second time. Your stepfather is an enchanter, but he'll find me too strong for him. Don't seem shocked when he'll ask your consent tomorrow, but say you must have first a dress of silk and silver thread that will fit into a walnut shell. He'll promise, and will be able to get it made too, but I'll bother his spinner and his weaver long enough before he'll get it wove, and his seamstress after that, before it's sewed." The princess done as she was bid, and the enchanter was in great joy; but he was kept in great trouble and anger for a full half year before the dress was ready to go on the princess. At last it was fitted, and he asked her was she ready to be his wife. "I'll tell you tomorrow," said she. So she went to consult her filly in the paddock. Well, the next day he put the question to her again, and she said that she couldn't think of marrying anyone till she had another dress of silk and gold thread that would fit in a walnut shell. "I wish you had mentioned itself and the silver dress together. Both could have been done at the same time. No matter. I'll get it done." Whatever trouble the spinner and the weaver and the seamstress had with the other dress, they had twice it with this; but at last it was tried on, and fitted like a glove. "Well now," says Fear Dhorrach , "I hope you're satisfied, and won't put off the wedding again." "Oh, you must forgive me," said she, "for my vanity." She was talking to the filly the evening before. "I can't do without a dress of silk thread as thick as it can be with diamonds and pearls no larger than the head of a minnikin pin. Three is a lucky number, you know." "Well, I wish you had mentioned this at first, and the three could be making together. Now this is the very last thing you'll ask, I expect." "Oh, I'll never ask another, you may depend, till I'm married." She didn't say till we're married. The dress came home at last. Well, the same evening she found on her bed another made from bottom to top of cat-skins, and this she put on. She put her three walnut shells in her pocket, and then stole out to the stable, where she found her filly with a bridle in her mouth, and the nicest side-saddle ever you saw on her back. Away they went, and when the light first appeared in the sky they were a hundred miles away. They stopped at the edge of a wood, and the princess was very glad to rest herself on a bunch of dry grass at the foot of a tree. She wasn't a minute there when she fell asleep; and soundly she did sleep, till she was woke up by the blowing of bugles and the yelping of beagles. She jumped up in a fright. There was no filly near her, but half a hundred spotted hounds were within forty perches of her, yelling out of them like vengeance. I needn't tell you she was frightened. She had hardly power to put one foot past the other, and she'd be soon tore into giblets by the dogs on account of her dress, but a fine young hunter leaped over their heads, and they all fell back when he shook his whip and shouted at them. So he came to the princess, and there she was as wild looking as you please, with her cat-skins hanging round her, and her face and hands and arms as brown as a berry, from a wash she put on herself before she left home. Well that didn't hinder her features from being handsome, and the prince was astonished at her beauty and her color and her dress, when he found she was a stranger, and alone in the world. He got off his horse, and walked side by side with her to his palace, for he was the young king of that country. He sent for his housekeeper when he came to the hall door, and bid her employ the young girl about whatever she was fit for, and then set off to follow the hounds again. Well, there was great tittering in the servants' hall among the maids at her color and her dress, and the ganders of footmen would like to be joking with her, but she made no freedom with one or the other, and when the butler thought to give her a kiss, she gave him a light slap on the jaw that wouldn't kill a fly, but he felt as if a toothache was at him for eight and forty hours. By my word, the other buckeens did not give her an excuse to raise her hand to them. Well, she was so silent and kept herself to herself so much, that she was no favorite, and they gave her nothing better to do than help the scullery maid, and at night she had to put up with a little box of a place under the stairs for a bedroom. The next day, when the prince returned from hunting, he sent word to the housekeeper by the whipper-in to let the new servant bring him up a basin and towel till he'd wash before dinner. "Oh, ho!" says the cook, "there's an honor for Cat-Skin. I'm here for forty years and never was asked to do such a thing; how grand we are! purshuin to all impedent people!" The princess didn't mind their jibes and their jeers. She took up the things, and the prince delayed her ever so long with remarks and questions, striving to get out of her what rank of life she was born in. As little as she said he guessed her to be a lady. I suppose it is as hard for a lady or gentleman to pass for a vulgarian, as for one of us to act like one of the quality. Well to be sure! all the cold and scornful noses that were in the big kitchen before her; and it was, "Cat-Skin, will you hand me this? Cat-Skin, will you grease my shoes? Cat-Skin, will you draw a jug of beer for me?" And she done everything she was asked without a word or a sour look. Next night the prince was at a ball about three miles away, and the princess got leave from the housekeeper to go early to bed. Well, she couldn't get herself to lie down. She was in a fever like; she threw off her outside dress, and she stepped out into the lawn to get a little fresh air. There what did she behold but her dear filly under a tree. She ran over, and threw her arms round her neck, and kissed her face, and began to cry. "No time for crying!" says the filly. "Take out the first walnut shell you got." She did so, and opened it. "Hold what's inside over your head," said the other, and in a moment the silk and silver dress wrapped her round as if a dozen manty-makers were after spending an hour about it. "Get on that stump," says the filly, "and jump into the side-saddle." She did so, and in a few minutes they were at the hall door of the castle where the ball was. There she sprung from her saddle, and walked into the hall. Lights were in the hall and everywhere, and nothing could equal the glitter of the princess's robes and the accoutrements of her steed. It was like the curling of a stream in the sun. You may believe that the quality were taken by surprise, when the princess walked in among them as if they were the lords and ladies in her father's court. The young king came forward as he saw the rest were a little cowed, and bade her good evening and welcome; and they talked whatever way kings and queens and princesses do, and he made her sit on his own seat of honor, and took a stool or a chair near her, and if he wasn't delighted and surprised, her features were so like the scullery maid's, leave it till again. They had a fine supper and a dance, and the prince and she danced, and every minute his love for her was increasing, but at last she said she should go. Every one was sorry, and the prince more than anyone, and he came with her to the hall, and asked might he see her safe home. But she showed him her filly and excused herself. Said he, "I'll have my brown horse brought, and myself and my servants will attend you." "Hand me up on my filly," says she, " first of all," and, be the laws, I don't know how princes put princesses on horseback. Maybe one of the servants stoops his back, and the prince goes on one knee, and she steps first on his knee and then on the servant's back, and then sits in the saddle. Anyhow she was safe up, and she took the prince's hand, and bid him good night, and the filly and herself were away like a flash of lightning in the dark night. Well, everything appeared dismal enough when he went back to where a hundred tongues were going hard and fast about the lady in the dazzling dress. Next morning he bid his footman ask the girl in the cat-skin to bring him hot water and a towel for him, to shave. She came in as modest and backward as you please; but whenever the prince got a peep at her face, there were the beautiful eyes and nose and mouth of the lady in the glittering dress, but all as brown as a bit of bogwood. He thought to get a little talk out of her, but dickens a word would come out of her mouth but yes or no . And when he asked her was she of high birth, she turned off the discourse and wouldn't say one thing or the other; and when he asked would she like to put on nice clothes and be about his mother, she refused just as if he asked her to drown herself. So he found he could make nothing of her, and let her go down stairs. There was another great ball in a week's time, and the very same thing took place again. There was the princess, and the dress she had on was of silk and gold thread, and the darlintest little gold crown in the world over her purty curling hair. If the prince was in love before, he was up to his eyes in it this time; but while they were going on with the nicest sweet talk, says she, "I'm afraid, prince, that you are in the habit of talking lovingly to every girl you meet." Well, he was very eager to prove he was not. "Then," said she, "a little bird belied you as I was coming through the wood. He said that you weren't above talking soft even to a young servant girl with her skin as brown as a berry, and her dress no better than cat-skin.'' "I declare to you, princess," said he, "there is such a girl at home, and if her skin was as white as yours, and her dress the same, no eye could see a bit of differ between you." "Oh, thankee, prince!" says she, "for the compliment; it's time for me to be going." Well, he thought to mollify her, but she curled her upper lip and cocked her nose, and wasn't long till she left, the way she did before. While she was getting on her filly, he almost went down on his knees to her to make it up. So at last she smiled, and said, "If I can make up my mind to forgive you, I'll come to the next ball without invitation." So she was away, and when they came under the tree in the lawn she took the upper hem of her dress in her fingers and it came off like a glove, and she made her way in at the hack door, and into her crib at the stair-foot. The prince slept little that night, and in the morning he sent his footman to ask the girl in the cat-skins to bring up a needle and thread to sew a button on his shirt sleeve. He watched her fingers, and saw they were small and of a lovely shape; and when one of them touched his wrist, it felt as soft and delicate as silk. All he could say got nothing out of her only, "It wasn't a nice thing for a prince to speak in that way to a girl of low degree, and he boasting of it after to princesses and great ladies." Well, how he did begin to deny anything so ungenteel, but the button was sewed, and she skipped away downstairs. The third night came, and she shook the dress of silk and pearls and diamonds over her, and the nicest crown of the same on her head. As grand and beautiful as she was before, she was twice as grand now; and the lords and ladies hardly dared to speak above their breaths, and the prince thought he was in heaven. He asked her at last would she be his queen, and not keep him in misery any longer, and she said she would, if she was sure he wouldn't ask Miss Cat-Skin the same question next day. Oh, how he spoke, and how he promised! He asked leave to see her safe home, but she wouldn't agree. "But don't be downcast," said she. "You will see me again sooner than you think; and if you know me when you meet me next, we'll part no more." Just as she was sitting in her saddle, and the prince was holding her hand, he slipped a dawny limber ring of gold on one finger. It was so small and so nice to the touch he thought she wouldn't feel it. "And now, my princess," says he to himself, "I think I'll know you when I meet you." Next morning he sent again for the scullery girl, and she came and made a curtchy . "What does your majesty want me to do?" said she. "Only to advise me which of these two suits of clothes would look best on me; I'm going to be married." "Ah, how could the likes of me be able to advise you? Is the rich dressed lady, that I heard the footmen talking about, to be your queen?" "Yourself is as likely to be my wife as that young lady." "Then who is it?" "Yourself, I tell you." " Myself! How can your majesty joke that way on a poor girl? They say you're promised to the lady of the three rich dresses." "I'm promised to no one but yourself. I asked you twice already to be my queen; I ask you now the third time." "Yes, and maybe after all, you'll marry the lady of the dresses." "You promised you'd have me if I knew you the next time we'd meet. This is the next time. If I don't know you, I know my ring on your fourth finger." She looked, and there it was sure enough. Maybe she didn't blush. "Will your majesty step into the next room for a minute," said she, "and leave me by myself?" He did so, and when she opened the door for him again, there she was with the brown stain off her face and hands, and her dazzling dress of silk and jewels on her. Wasn't he the happy prince, and she the happy princess? And weren't the noisy servants lewd of themselves when they saw poor Cat-Skin in her royal dress saying the words before the priest? They didn't put off their marriage, and there was the fairy now in the appearance of a beautiful woman; and if I was to tell you about the happy life they led, I'd only be tiring you. Source: Patrick Kennedy, The Fireside Stories of Ireland (Dublin: M'Glashan and Gill, 1870), pp. 81-87 ). Return to the table of contents . The Beautiful Princess Lithuania Once upon a time there was a king who had a beautiful wife. She had stars on her forehead, the sun on top of her head, and the moon on the back of her head, but she soon died. The king had a daughter who was just as beautiful as his wife. He traveled far and wide to seek another wife, but found no one as beautiful as his first wife had been. Therefore he decided to marry his own daughter, but she did not want to marry him. She was not able to change his mind, so she told him to buy for her a louse-coat (a coat lined with louse pelts), a silver dress, a diamond ring, and golden shoes. The king had an old kinswoman. The evening before the wedding the princess asked her what she should do. The old woman advised her to pack her things and run away, so that night she left. The next morning the king looked for his girl, but could not find her. He asked everyone, "Haven't you seen her? Haven't you seen my bride?" But no one could give him any information. When the princess ran away she came to a river. She boarded a boat, but the ferryman did not want to transport her. He said, "If you will not promise to give yourself to me, I will drown you here and now." She refused him, and he threw her overboard, but she jumped to the water's edge. She continued onward, without knowing where she was going. Then she came to some cliffs, and said, "Oh, dear God, if only there were a room here!" Then the cliffs did indeed open into a room, and she went inside. Everything there was just what she had wished for. She soon went out, leaving her beautiful clothes in the room, and it turned back into a cliff, just as before. She went to an estate where she found a position as a Cinderella. Her brother was there as well. He too had left their father, and was employed in the estate as a secretary. He had a servant, and whenever he told his servant to bring him water or his boots, Cinderella ran and brought them to him. And every time she did this, he would throw them at her. She asked her mistress for permission to return home now and then. But instead of going home she went back to the cliffs, and whenever she approached them, they again opened up into a room, and then she would put on her beautiful clothes. Then every time a coach would drive up and take her to church. The secretary was also at church, and he saw the beautiful girl. Therefore he went to church the next Sunday, and the girl was there as well. Her mistress had told her that she had to return before the secretary did. However, one day she was late, and she did not have time to take off her beautiful clothes. Instead she put on her everyday clothes over the beautiful ones. The secretary told his servant to have her come and delouse him. She did not want to do this, and said, "You have never needed me to do that before, and you don't need me to do it now." But after the servant had called her a second and a third time, she had to go. While she was looking through his hair, he was examining her clothing, coming finally to the coat. Then he raised his head from her knees, ripped the scarf from her head, and immediately recognized her as his sister. Then they left the estate, and no one knows where they went. Source: August Schleicher, Litauische Märchen, Sprichworte, Rätsel und Lieder (Weimar: Hermann Böhlau, 1857), pp. 10-12 . Return to the table of contents . The Princess with a Golden Star on Her Forehead Czechia Once upon a time, a king and a queen lived in a castle. The queen was very beautiful, and she had a golden star on her forehead. Unfortunately, the queen died giving birth to her daughter, and the king promised on her deathbed that he would not marry anyone but a woman who also had a golden star on her forehead. So he handed the baby over to the nursemaids and went out into the world to find such a bride -- but since there was no one with a golden star on her forehead, he returned home with failure. When he arrived home, his beautiful daughter Lada ran to meet him, and he saw the golden star on her forehead. The king fell in love and decided to marry her. Lada was terrified, and she said she would only marry the king if he brought her three beautiful dresses -- the one sewn from the wings of a rose-beetle, the second dress to look like the sun, and the third a heaven-like dress. The king did this, so the wedding could not be avoided. Then the princess was visited in a dream by her deceased mother, who advised her to escape from the kingdom. The princess put on a coat made of mouse skin, covered her face with a veil, and left the kingdom. She took with her the beautiful dresses from her father. After some time she came to a city with a royal castle. She hid her beautiful dresses under a stone and asked a little fish in a well to guard them. Then she asked for a job in the castle. At first they did not want to accept such an ugly girl covered by dirt, but Lada eventually found work in the royal kitchen. Some time later a ball was held in the castle, and Lada asked the chief cook for permission to go. The cook agreed, and Lada went to the well, washed herself, and put on one of her beautiful dresses. No one at the ball recognized her, and Prince Hostivít himself fell in love with her. They danced together all the night long. After the ball, Lada run back to the well, took off her fine dress and put on the coat made of mouse skin. On two more evenings Lada went to the ball dressed in her beautiful dresses. At the third ball she gave Hostivít her ring, and he gave her his ring in return. Then Lada went back to the kitchen. The following day, Hostivít felt ill with love. The cook ordered Lada to make the prince's medicinal spices, and she dropped the ring from Hostivít into the cup. Finding the ring, the the prince wanted to talk with the girl who had prepared the medicinal spices. Lada claimed that she knew nothing about the ring. However, Hostivít did not give up, and he followed Lada to the well. There he watched as Lada took off the mouse fur and washed herself. Then he realized that this ugly girl was his beloved Lada. Lada and Hostivít got engaged, and they left his kingdom to ask Lada's father for his daughter's hand in marriage. In the meantime Lada's father had been visited by the queen, Lada's deceased mother, and she had rebuked him for his sinful love. Thus the king's heart turned to a father's love, and he blessed the young couple. Source (books.google.com): Božena Němcová, "O princezně se zlatou hvězdou na čele," České pohádky (Prague: Jan Laichter, 1907), pp. 66-81 . Translated and retold by Lenka Vídršperková, Charles University, Prague. Božena Němcová (1820-1862) was a Czech writer and collector of folktales. Return to the table of contents . Pigskin Ukraine In a Little-Russian [Ukrainian] variant of one of those numerous stories, current in all lands, which commence with the escape of the heroine from an incestuous union, a priest insists on marrying his daughter. She goes to her mother's grave and weeps there. Her dead mother "comes out from her grave," and tells her what to do. The girl obtains from her father a rough dress of pig's skin, and two sets of gorgeous apparel; the former she herself assumes, in the latter she dresses up three Kuklui , which in this instance were probably mere blocks of wood. Then she takes her place in the midst of the dressed-up forms, which cry, one after the other, "Open, O moist earth, that the fair maiden may enter within thee!" The earth opens, and all four sink into it. Source: W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1873), p. 159 . Ralston's source: Alexander Afanasyev . Return to the table of contents . Kniaz Danila Govorila Russia Sometimes it is a brother, instead of a father, from whom the heroine is forced to flee. Thus in the story of Kniaz Danila Govorila , Prince Daniel the Talker is bent upon marrying his sister, pleading the excuse so often given in stories on this theme, namely, that she is the only maiden whose finger will fit the magic ring which is to indicate to him his destined wife. While she is weeping "like a river," some old women of the mendicant-pilgrim class come to her rescue, telling her to make four Kukolki , or small puppets, and to place one of them in each corner of her room. She does as they tell her. The wedding day arrives, the marriage service is performed in the church, and then the bride hastens back to the room. When she is called for -- says the story -- the puppets in the four corners begin to coo: Kuku! Prince Danila! Kuku! Govorila! Kuku! He wants to marry, Kuku! His own sister. Kuku! Split open, O Earth! Kuku! Sister, disappear! The earth opens, and the girl slowly sinks into it. Twice again the puppets sing their song, and at the end of its third performance, the earth closes over the head of the rescued bride. Presently in rushes the irritated bridegroom. "No bride is to be seen; only in the corners sit the puppets, singing away to themselves." He flies into a passion, seizes a hatchet, chops off their heads, and flings them into the fire. Source: W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1873), pp. 159-60 . Ralston's source: Alexander Afanasyev . Return to the table of contents . Seggu-Jataka: How a Pious Greengrocer Tested His Daughter's Virtue India, The Jataka This story the Master told, while dwelling at Jetavana, about a greengrocer who was a lay-brother. The circumstances have been already given in the First Book [Jataka 102]. Here again the Master asked him where he had been so long; and he replied, "My daughter, Sir, is always smiling. After testing her, I gave her in marriage to a young gentleman. As this had to be done, I had no opportunity of paying you a visit. To this the Master answered, "Not now only is your daughter virtuous, but virtuous she was in days of yore; and as you have tested her now, so you tested her in those days. And at the man's request he told an old-world tale: Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta was a tree spirit. This same pious greengrocer took it into his head to test his daughter. He led her into the woods, and seized her by the hand, making as though he had conceived a passion for her. And as she cried out in woe, he addressed her in the words of the first stanza: All the world's on pleasure bent; Ah, my baby innocent! Now I've caught you, pray don't cry; As the town does, so do I. When she heard it, she answered, "Dear Father, I am a maid, and I know not the ways of sin"; and weeping she uttered the second stanza: He that should keep me safe from all distress, The same betrays me in my loneliness; My father, who should be my sure defense, Here in the forest offers violence. And the greengrocer, after testing his daughter thus, took her home, and gave her in marriage to a young man. Afterwards he passed away according to his deeds. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , translated from the Pali by various hands, under the editorship of E. B. Cowell; vol. 2, translated by W. H. D. Rouse (Cambridge: University Press, 1895), book, 2, no. 217, p. 126 . Link to a different version of this tale, mentioned in the above text: "Pannika-Jataka: To Test His Daughter's Virtue, a Man Makes Love to Her," The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , translated from the Pali by various hands, under the editorship of E. B. Cowell; vol. 1, translated by Robert Chalmers (Cambridge: University Press, 1895), book 1, no. 102, p. 244 . Return to the table of contents . Links to Related Sites Cinderella , folktales of type 510A about persecuted heroines. Kora and His Sister , a folktale from India. Notes and Bibliography In their classical form, type 510B folktales include the follow the following motifs: A dying woman extracts from her husband the promise that he will remarry only if he can find a woman that fits a certain description. After a period of mourning, the widower discovers that only his daughter meets the requirements for remarriage set by his deceased wife, and he asks her to marry him. The daughter, in order to buy time, and in hope of dissuading her father, asks for a number of gifts, but he finds these with little difficulty. Seeing no other solution to her dilemma, the girl dresses herself in an unusual garb and runs away. She finds both refuge and abuse in another man's household, where she serves as a maid. She temporarily escapes from the kitchen where she works and makes a series of appearances at a dress ball. A prince falls in love with the heroine in her beautiful attire. He discovers that the beautiful woman is none other than his maid, and he marries her. In some versions of the story, the incest motif that sets the plot into motion is suppressed, with a different conflict being given between father and daughter. The second half of this story bears a strong resemblance to the Cinderella (type 510A) folktales. Type 510B tales in the English Language Title Collection All-Kinds-of-Fur (Grimm, 1st edition.). Ashliman, Voices from the Past , p. 135. All-Kinds-of-Fur (Grimm, final edition) Grimm, Children's and Household Tales , no. 65. Allerleirauh (Grimm, altered). Lang, Green Fairy Book , p. 276. Ashey Pelt. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 140. Barbarina and the Black Snake. Mathias and Raspa, Italian Folktales in America , no. 1. Bear, The. Lang, Grey Fairy Book , p. 269. Black Yow, The. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 164. Cap o' Rushes. Jacobs, English Fairy Tales , p. 51. Cap o' Rushes. Philip, Penguin Book of English Folktales , p. 122. Cap o' Rushes. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 2, p. 387. Catskin. Jacobs, More English Fairy Tales , p. 204. Catskin: The Princess and the Golden Cow. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 179. Catskins. Chase, Grandfather Tales , no. 11. Cinderella. Examples and commentary. (All examples given in this chapter contain motifs representative of type 510B, although in some instances the incest motif has been supressed. Taggart, Enchanted Maidens , ch. 6. Deerskin. McKinly, Robin. Delgadina. Robb, Hispanic Folk Music of New Mexico and the Southwest , A2a-j, 31-43. Delgadina. Paredes, A Texas-Mexican Cancionero , p. 5, 14-16. Delgadina. Campa, Spanish Folk Poetry in New Mexico , p. 30-33. Donkey Skin (France, Le Cabinet des Fées). Lang, Grey Fairy Book , p. 1. Donkey Skin. Falassi, Folklore by the Fireside , p. 42. Donkey-Skin. Perrault, Fairy Tales (trans. Carter), p. 139. Fair Maria Wood (Italy). Ashliman, Voices from the Past , p. 139. Fair Maria Wood. Crane, Italian Popular Tales , no. 10. Florinda. Pino-Saavedra, Folktales of Chile , no. 21. Flying Princess, The. Dawkins, Modern Greek Folktales , no. 40. Gold Teeth. Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review , London, 1928, v. 39, pp. 236-238. Golden Box, The. Villa, 100 Armenian Tales , no. 24. Golden Filly Chest, The. Campbell, Cloudwalking Country , p. 196. Grey Castle, The. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 298. Hanchi. Ramanujan, Folktales from India , p. 285. Katie Woodencloak (Norway). Thompson, 100 Folktales , no. 41. King Who Wished to Marry His Daughter. Campbell, West Highlands , v. 1, p. 226. Like Meat Loves Salt. Chase, Grandfather Tales , no. 13. Little Blue Bonnet, The. Gmelch and Kroup, To Shorten the Road , p. 177. Little Cat Skin. Campbell, Cloudwalking Country , p. 82. Little Donkey Mother, The. Taggart, Enchanted Maidens , p. 204. Little Stick Figure, The. Pino-Saavedra, Folktales of Chile , no. 20. Margery White Coats. Campbell, West Highlands , v. 1, p. 232. Mossycoat. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 416. Mossycoat. Briggs and Tongue, Folktales of England , no. 4. Princess in the Donkey Skin, The. Roberts, South from Hell , no. 18. Princess in the Suit of Leather, The. Bushnaq, Arab Folktales , p. 193. Princess That Wore a Rabbit-Skin Dress. Campbell, Cloudwalking Country , p. 161. Princess Whose Father Wanted to Marry Her, The. Ramanujan, Folktales from India , p. 186. Queen with the Golden Hair, The. Campbell, Cloudwalking Country , p. 30. Rashie Coat. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 455. Rashiecoat. Aitken, A Forgotten Heritage , p. 73. Rashin Coatie. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 456. Red Calf, The. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 460. She Donkey's Skin, The. Massignon, Folktales of France , no. 44. She-Bear, The (Basile). Ashliman, Voices from the Past , p. 129. She-Bear, The. Basile, Pentamerone , Day 2, Tale 6. Silver Dress, the Gold Dress, and the Diamond Dress, The. Blecher, Swedish Folktales and Legends , p. 168. Story of Catskin, The (England). Ashliman, Voices from the Past , p. 143. Tattercoats. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 502. Tattercoats. Jacobs, More English Fairy Tales , p. 67. Tebaldo Wishes to Have His Only Daughter Doralice to Wife. Straparola, Facetious Nights , Night 1, Tale 4. Wooden Maria. Calvino, Italian Folktales , no. 103. Type 510B tales in the German Language Titel Sammlung Allerlei Rauch. Grimm, Älteste Märchensammlung , Nr. 7. Allerlei Rauh. Grimm, Märchen aus dem Nachlaß , Nr. 18. Allerleirauh. Grimm, Kinder- und Hausmärchen , Nr. 65. Allerleirauh [3 Erzählungen]. Ranke, Schleswig-Holsteinische Volksmärchen , Bd. 2, S. 125. Aschenbrödel - Aschentrödel. Boskovic-Stulli, Kroatische Volksmärchen , Nr. 4. Aschengrübel. Wildhaber, Schweizer Volksmärchen , Nr. 11. Aschenpüster mit der Wünschelgerte. Bechstein, Sämtliche Märchen , Nr. N01. Aschenpuster. Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg , Bd. 1, S. 479. Curia, schöne Curia. Uffer, Rätoromanische Märchen , Nr. 33. Das Fellmädchen. Spies, Türkische Volksmärchen , Nr. 24. Das Mädchen im Tierfell. Karlinger, Baskische Märchen , Nr. 8. Das Rindenmädchen. Camaj, Albanische Märchen , Nr. 27. Das Wasser-Handtuch-Peitschen-Schloß. Range, Litauische Volksmärchen , Nr. 39. Der Drächengrudel. Wildhaber, Schweizer Volksmärchen , Nr. 12. Der gehende Wagen. Haiding, Österreichs Märchenschatz , Nr. 52. Der goldene Ballon. Bukowska-Grosse, Polnische Volksmärchen , Nr. 16. Der goldene Stier. Soupault, Französische Märchen , Nr. 27. Der Vater und die Tochter. Afanasjew, Russische Volksmärchen , S. 799. Der Vater, der seine Tochter heiraten wollte. Uffer, Rätoromanische Märchen , Nr. 29. Die Bärin. Basile, Das Pentameron , Tag 2, Novelle 6. Die drei Kleider. Meier, Spanische Märchen , Nr. 39. Die hölzerne Maria. Karlinger, Italienische Volksmärchen , Nr. 17. Die kleine goldene Kuh. Meier, Portugiesische Märchen , Nr. 86. Die Zarentochter im unterirdischen Reich. Olesch, Russische Volksmärchen , Nr. 9. Helga und der Zwerg. Schier, Märchen aus Island , Nr. 17. Ruuchklaas. Wisser, Plattdeutsche Märchen , Nr. 40. Schweinehaut. Afanasjew, Russische Volksmärchen , S. 669. Stoppelpelz. Schier, Schwedische Volksmärchen , Nr. 33. Return to Table of Contents D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Cinderella . Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 510A. Kora and His Sister . A folktale from India about brother-sister incest. Revised September 5, 2021. Clothes Make the Man: Folktales of Type 1558 Clothes Make the Man folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 1558 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2009 Contents The Brahman's Clothes (India). Nasreddin Hodja at a Bridal Festival (Turkey). Eat, My Clothes! (Italy). Heroes They Seemed When Once They Were Clothed (Iceland). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Brahman's Clothes India There was once a Brahman who had two wives. Like many Brahmans he lived by begging and was very clever at wheedling money out of people. One day the fancy took him to go to the marketplace dressed only in a small loincloth such as the poorest laborers wear and see how people treated him. So he set out, but on the road and in the marketplace and in the village no one salaamed to him or made way for him, and when he begged no one gave him alms. He soon got tired of this and hastened home and, putting on his best pagri [turban] and coat and dhoti [waistcloth], went back to the marketplace. This time everyone who met him on the road salaamed low to him and made way for him, and every shopkeeper to whom he went gave him alms; and the people in the village who had refused before gladly made offerings to him. The Brahman went home smiling to himself and took off his clothes and put them in a heap and prostrated himself before them three or four times, saying each time, "O source of wealth! O source of wealth! It is clothes that are honored in this world and nothing else." Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas , (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 146, pp. 372-73 . Return to the table of contents . Nasreddin Hodja at a Bridal Festival Turkey One day Nasreddin Hodja went to a bridal festival. The master of the feast observing his old and wretched garments, paid him no consideration whatever. The Hodja saw that he had no chance of notice; so going out he hurried to his house, and putting on a splendid pelisse, returned to the place of festival. No sooner did he enter the door than the master advanced to meet him, and saying, "Welcome, Nasreddin Hodja," with all imaginable honor and reverence placed him at the head of the table, and said, "Please to eat, Lord Hodja." Forthwith the Hodja taking hold of one of the furs of his pelisse, said, "Welcome, my pelisse, please to eat, my lord." The master, looking at the Hodja with great suprise, said, "What are you about?" Whereupon the Hodja replied, "It is quite evident that all the honor paid is paid to my pelisse, so let it have some food too." Source: George Borrow, The Turkish Jester; or, The Pleasantries of Cogia Nasr Eddin Effendi (Ipswich: W. Webber, 1884), p. 20 . There are numerous variants of the name of Turkish jester featured in this story. Borrow uses the full name Cogia Nasr Eddin Effendi , which I have changed to the more usual Nasreddin Hodja . Link to additional tales about Nasreddin Hodja . Return to the table of contents . Eat, My Clothes! Italy As Giufà was half a simpleton no one showed him any kindness, such as to invite him to his house or give him anything to eat. Once Giufà went to a farmhouse for something, and the farmers, when they saw him looking so ragged and poor, came near setting the dogs on him, and made him leave in a hurry. When his mother heard it she procured for him a fine coat, a pair of breeches, and a velvet vest. Giufà dressed up like an overseer, went to the same farmhouse, and then you should see what great ceremonies they made! They invited him to dine with them. While at the table all were very attentive to him. Giufà, on the one hand, filled his stomach, and on the other, put into the pockets, coat, and hat whatever was left over, saying: "Eat, my clothes, for you were invited!" Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 102. p. 296 . The trickster Giufà, who is described elsewhere as "stupid, lazy, and cunning" (can one be both stupid and cunning?), is featured in many Italian folktales. His exploits compare to those of Germany's Till Eulenspiegel and Turkey's Nasreddin Hodja, to mention but two of his many counterparts in other nations. Return to the table of contents . Heroes They Seemed When Once They Were Clothed Iceland My garments once I gave in the field to two land-marks made as men; heroes they seemed when once they were clothed; 'tis the naked who suffer shame! Source: The Hávámal: The Words of Odin the High One , verse 49. Link to the entire text of the above work. Return to the table of contents . For a literary treatment (in the German language) of the folklore motif featured above, see the novella Kleider machen Leute by the Swiss novelist and poet Gottfried Keller (1819-90). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 14, 2013. A Corpse Claims Its Property: Ghost Stories of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 366 A Corpse Claims Its Property ghost stories of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 366 and similar frightening tales translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2022 Contents White Cap (Iceland). The Shroud (Russia). The Stolen Liver (Poland). Ahlemann (Germany). The Man from the Gallows (Germany). The Burial Dress (Germany). The Audacious Girl (Germany). The Golden Leg (Germany). It's Mine! (Denmark). Saddaedda (Italy). The Golden Arm (England). The Golden Cup (England). Teeny-Tiny (England). Give Me My Teeth (England). The Old Man at the White House (England). A Ghost Story (African-American, Joel Chandler Harris). How to Tell a Story: The Golden Arm (African-American, Mark Twain). Related links . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. White Cap Iceland A certain boy and girl, whose names this tale telleth not, once lived near a church. The boy being mischievously inclined, was in the habit of trying to frighten the girl in a variety of ways, till she became at last so accustomed to his tricks, that she ceased to care for anything whatever, putting down everything strange that she saw and heard to the boy's mischief. One washing-day, the girl was sent by her mother to fetch home the linen, which had been spread to dry in the churchyard. When she had nearly filled her basket, she happened to look up, and saw sitting on a tomb near her a figure dressed in white from head to foot, but was not the least alarmed, believing it to be the boy playing her, as usual, a trick. So she ran up to it, and pulling its cap off said, "You shall not frighten me, this time." Then when she had finished collecting the linen she went home. But, to her astonishment -- for he could not have reached home before her without her seeing him -- the boy was the first person who greeted her on her arrival at the cottage. Among the linen, too, when it was sorted, was found a moldy white cap, which appeared to be nobody's property, and which was half full of earth. The next morning the ghost (for it was a ghost that the girl had seen) was found sitting with no cap upon its head, upon the same tombstone as the evening before. And as nobody had the courage to address it, or knew in the least how to get rid of it, they sent into the neighboring village for advice. An old man declared that the only way to avoid some general calamity, was for the little girl to replace on the ghost's head the cap she had seized from it, in the presence of many people, all of whom were to be perfectly silent. So a crowd collected in the churchyard, and the little girl, going forward, half afraid, with the cap, placed it upon the ghost's head, saying, "Are you satisfied now?" But the ghost, raising its hand, gave her a fearful blow, and said, "Yes, but are you now satisfied?" The little girl fell down dead, and at the same instant the ghost sank into the grave upon which it had been sitting, and was no more seen. Source: Jón Arnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 157-58 . Return to the table of contents . The Shroud Russia In a certain village there was a girl who was lazy and slothful, hated working, but would gossip and chatter away like anything! Well, she took it into her head to invite the other girls to a spinning party. For in the villages, as every one knows, it is the lazybones who gives the spinning feast, and the sweet-toothed are those who go to it. Well, on the appointed night she got her spinners together. They span for her, and she fed them and feasted them. Among other things they chatted about was this -- which of them all was the boldest? Says the lazybones, "I'm not afraid of anything!" "Well then," say the spinners, "if you're not afraid, go past the graveyard to the church, take down the holy picture from the door, and bring it here." "Good, I'll bring it; only each of you must spin me a distaff-full." That was just her sort of notion: to do nothing herself, but to get others to do it for her. Well, she went, took down the picture, and brought it home with her. Her friends all saw that sure enough it was the picture from the church. But the picture had to be taken back again, and it was now the midnight hour. Who was to take it? At length the lazybones said, "You girls go on spinning. I'll take it back myself. I'm not afraid of anything!" So she went and put the picture back in its place. As she was passing the graveyard on her return, she saw a corpse in a white shroud, seated on a tomb. It was a moonlight night; everything was visible. She went up to the corpse, and drew away its shroud from it. The corpse held its peace, not uttering a word; no doubt the time for it to speak had not come yet. Well, she took the shroud and went home. "There!" says she, "I've taken back the picture and put it in its place; and, what's more, here's a shroud I took away from a corpse." Some of the girls were horrified; others didn't believe what she said, and laughed at her. But after they had supped and lain down to sleep, all of a sudden the corpse tapped at the window and said, "Give me my shroud! Give me my shroud!" The girls were so frightened they didn't know whether they were alive or dead. But the lazybones took the shroud, went to the window, opened it, and said, "There, take it." "No," replied the corpse, "restore it to the place you took it from." Just then the cocks suddenly began to crow. The corpse disappeared. Next night, when the spinners had all gone home to their own houses, at the very same hour as before, the corpse came, tapped at the window, and cried, "Give me my shroud!" Well, the girl's father and mother opened the window and offered him his shroud. "No," says he, "let her take it back to the place she took it from." "Really now, how could one go to a graveyard with a corpse? What a horrible idea!" she replied. Just then the cocks crew. The corpse disappeared. Next day the girl's father and mother sent for the priest, told him the whole story, and entreated him to help them in their trouble. "Couldn't a service be performed?" they said. The priest reflected awhile; then he replied, "Please tell her to come to church tomorrow." Next day the lazybones went to church. The service began, numbers of people came to it. But just as they were going to sing the cherubim song, there suddenly arose, goodness knows whence, so terrible a whirlwind that all the congregation fell flat on their faces. And it caught up that girl, and then flung her down on the ground. The girl disappeared from sight; nothing was left of her but her back hair. Source: W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1873), pp. 307-309 . Ralston's source: Aleksandr Afanasyev. Ralston's footnote concerning "her back hair": "The kosa or single braid in which Russian girls wear their hair." Return to the table of contents . The Stolen Liver Poland In the village of Hammer near Czernikowo many years ago there lived a young married couple. The wife loved to eat liver and could not live if she didn't eat a liver every day. One day she sent her husband once again to town to fetch a liver. However, in Czernikowo the husband met a group of young merrymakers and went with them to a tavern, where he drank away all his money. Sad, and without the liver, he made his way homeward. It was late. On his way he had to go through a great forest. Here he met a hunter, who asked him why he was so sad. The man told him everything, upon which the hunter said, "In the middle of the forest there is a clearing with a gallows, upon which a number of dead bodies are hanging. Take one of them down, cut out his liver, and give it to your wife. Tell her it is beef liver." The man did just that. When he arrived home his wife was at first angry because he had been away so long, but she calmed down as soon as she saw the liver, and began frying it. The man lay down and went to sleep. Suddenly a white figure appeared at the window, and it cried into the room, "Everyone is asleep. The dogs are keeping watch in the yard. And you are standing there frying my liver." The man was terrified, and in his fear he cried out to his wife that she should come to bed. But the wife wanted first to dip a little piece of bread into the gravy and taste it. Meanwhile, the phantom, a white skeleton, had already entered the house, always calling out the same words again and again. The woman was not afraid, but asked the ghost, "Now, my little fellow, what happened to your flesh?" The ghost replied, "The ravens ate it, and the wind blew it away." Then the woman asked, "Now, my little fellow, what happened to your eyes and ears?" And the ghost answered, "The ravens ate them, and the wind blew them away." The woman asked, "Now, my little fellow, what happened to your liver?" Then the ghost cried out, "You have it!" And with that he seized the woman and strangled her to death. Source: Otto Knoop, "Die kleine Geschichte," Ostmärkische Sagen, Märchen und Erzählungen (Lissa in Posen: Oskar Eulitz' Verlag, 1909), no. 85, p. 181-182. Return to the table of contents . Ahlemann Germany There was once a man named Ahlemann, and he had a wife and four children. One day he wanted to eat some liver, so he said, "Have it ready when I arrive home from work." His wife went to town and bought a nice large liver. After it was fried, and the husband still hadn't come home, it smelled so good that wanted some ever so much. Finally she sat down and tasted it herself. First she ate just a very little piece, thinking, "He will never notice it." But then she cut off another little piece, and soon the entire liver was gone. Then she became terribly frightened that her husband would scold her, so she ran to the gallows where someone was hanging whom they had hanged a short time ago. She cut out his liver and fried it. When Ahlemann came home he sat down, and it tasted marvelous. Afterward he went for beer with his children. Evening came, and it was already dark. The woman was lying in her bed when she heard something approaching her room. A voice called out, "Where is Ah-lemann? Where is Ah-lemann?" She said, "Ahlemann has gone for beer with all four!" But she heard it coming closer and closer, and she called out in fear, "Come Ah-lemann; come Ah-lemann. I am terribly afraid." But it was to no avail. Suddenly it was standing before her bed, and it broke her neck. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Ahlemann," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 357-58 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "From the vicinity of Cottbus, through Professor Jungk." Return to the table of contents . The Man from the Gallows Germany Late one evening an old woman received guests. She had no more food and did not know what she could cook for them. She went to the gallows where a dead man was hanging and cut out his liver. This she fried for her guests, and they ate all of it. At midnight someone knocked on the door of her hut. She woke up. There stood the dead man. His head was naked; he had no eyes; and there was a wound in his body. "Where is your hair?" "The wind blew it off." "Where are your eyes?" "The ravens picked them out." "Where is your liver?" "You ate it." Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Mann vom Galgen," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , vol. 3 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterich'schen Buchhandlung, 1856), p. 276). The Grimms call this short piece a "fragment." It is contained in volume three of their famous collection, a volume comprising scholarly comments on their tales. Return to the table of contents . The Burial Dress Germany As was previously the custom, a woman made her own burial dress while she was still living. After she died, her daughter-in-law thought that a lesser dress would do just as well. Therefore she kept the burial dress for herself and dressed the dead woman in an old worn-out one. However, the old woman had scarcely been buried when in the evening a voice was heard in the parlor saying, "I want to have my dress." This happened every evening, and did not stop until the right dress was laid on the grave. Source: Karl Bartsch, "Das Todtenhemd," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg] (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), vol. 1, no. 294, pp. 227-28 . Bartsch's source: F. Haase, a teacher from Rostock. Return to the table of contents . The Audacious Girl Germany 1. In Pinno some people lived directly next to the churchyard, and when their daughter went to the spinning room in the evening she always had to walk through the churchyard. The young fellows teased her about this and told her that something would happen to her if she continued to walk by herself through the churchyard. One evening when she was once again walking through the churchyard on her way to the spinning room, she saw a figure sitting on a grave. She thought it was one of the young fellows trying to frighten her, so she went up to the figure and ripped something off its body. She ran with it to the spinning room and said, "You tried to play a trick on me, but you failed! I took this away from the fellow who was trying to trick me!" The other spinning girls said to her, "That is a burial shroud that you have in your hands." She was frightened as she made her way home. The young fellows and girls went with her, and nothing happened to her. In the night something knocked on her window, and a voice called out, "Give me my things. I'm freezing.!" She was afraid to give the things back, and there came another knock. Then she opened the window a little and reached the things out with a stick. But outside no one took them. Every night the knocking and the calling came again. Then the girl went with her mother to the pastor and told him about it. The pastor said that he and the teacher would go with her to take the things back to the same place where she had taken them. When all three were standing at the grave they heard the girl cry, "My Jesus! My Jesus!" Suddenly the girl disappeared from their midst. They found only a few tattered pieces of her clothing lying there next to them. The Evil One had torn the girl apart and taken her with him. 2. In a village there was once a very audacious girl who wanted to have something from the churchyard, for such things were considered to be of value. The girl went to the churchyard at twelve o'clock in the night. There she saw a white figure sitting on a grave. It had a white cloth wrapped around its head. The girl unwrapped the cloth and took it with her. The next night the white figure came to the girl's bed and wanted the have the cloth back. This happened every night. Then the frightened girl ran to the pastor and told him about it. He said that she would have to take the cloth back to the place she had taken it from. The following night the girl went to the churchyard. The white figure was sitting on the grave again, and she wrapped the cloth around its head. When the girl had done this she received a slap that knocked to the ground, and she was dead. Source: Karl Gander, "Das dreiste Mädchen," Niederlausitzer Volkssagen, vornehmlich aus dem Stadt- und Landkreise Guben (Berlin: Deutsche Schriftsteller-Genossenschaft, 1894), no. 198, pp. 77-78 . Gander lists his source for the first legend as "oral" and for the second as "oral, from Gubinchen." Return to the table of contents . The Little Golden Leg Germany A distinguished lady once had a little girl. It cannot even be said how very, very much she loved her. Now the little girl went to school, and she walked on some ice, slipped and fell, and broke off one of her little legs. They picked her up and carried her back to her mother and told her that she had fallen on some ice and broken off one of her little legs. The mother cried many tears and then had the surgeon come and said to him, "If only you could bring the little girl so far that she could walk on her legs again." The surgeon looked at the little leg from this side and that side and then said, "The girl must have a little golden leg." So the mother had a little golden leg made and placed on the girl, but it did not help. A little while later the door opened and Death entered. "Oh!" said the lady. "Are you going to take my dear, dear child away from me?" "Yes," said Death, "her time and her hour have come. She must go with me." "Oh!" said the mother to her child. "Are you going to leave me?" "Mother, dear," said the child, "I must! I would like to stay here, but Death will not allow it." Then Death took the little girl by the hand and went out the door with her. When the child was buried the gravedigger broke open the casket and took the little golden leg off the little girl and went home with it. At the hour of midnight, the child came to the gravedigger's bed and said, "Give my little leg! Give me my little leg!" But the gravedigger pretended that he did not hear her. So the child came the first night, and she came the second night, and she also came the third night, and said, "Give me my little leg! Give me my little leg!" The third night the gravedigger said, "I do not have your little leg." But the child did not allow herself to be made a fool of, and she said two times and three times, "Give me my little leg! Give me my little leg! There -- you -- have -- my -- little leg! " This last sentence is to be suddenly shouted to the child who is anxiously listening. The child will jump with fear, then recover, and then laugh about being frightened. He will seldom ask about the conclusion, but if he does, the story ends thus: From that hour on, the girl rested peacefully in her grave. Source: Carl and Theodor Colshorn, "Vom gollenen Beineken," Märchen und Sagen (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), no. 6, pp. 31-32 . The Colshorns' source: "Oral, in Celle." Return to the table of contents . "It's Mine!" Denmark In earlier times, in the Sønderomme church there was a funeral chapel beneath the choir where the nobility were buried. Once, when the church was being restored, one of the masons made a bet with his comrades that he would dare to go into the church at night and down into the chapel and bring back a skull from one of the crumbled corpses that were lying there. He did indeed win the bet. At midnight he went down into the chapel and picked up the largest skull he could find. He had the skull in his hands and was about to leave when he heard a rough, harsh voice say: "That's mine!" "Yes, it's yours. I don't want it after all," said the mason. He then picked up another one which was not so large. This time he heard a fine voice sadly crying out: "That one, it's mine!" The fellow then threw it back and picked up the smallest one he could find. Now a child's frail voice cried out: "It's mine! It's mine!" Yes, and even if it were the priest's," said the mason, "I'm going to take it anyway!" He then ran out of the church with the skull, and thus he won the bet. However, the mason never had peace afterwards. It always seemed to him that wherever he walked, an innocent little child was running behind him, shouting: "It's mine! It's mine!" From then on he was depressed and just not the same. He did not live very long afterwards. Source (books.google.com): Jens Kamp, "Det er min!" Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R. Nielsens Forlag, 1877), no. 35, p. 31 . Source (Internet Archive): Jens Kamp, "Det er min!" Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R. Nielsens Forlag, 1877), no. 35, p. 31 . Kamp's source: "Ane Thuesdatter, Thorsted." Return to the table of contents . Saddaedda Italy Once upon a time there was a girl called Saddaedda, who was crazy. One day, when her mother had gone into the country and she was left alone in the house, she went into a church where the funeral service was being read over the body of a rich lady. The girl hid herself in the confessional. No one knew she was there. So, when the other people had gone, she was left alone with the corpse. It was dressed out in a rose-colored robe and everything else becoming, and it had earrings in its ears and rings on its fingers. These the girl took off, and then she began to undress the body. When she came to the stockings she drew off one easily, but at the other she had to pull so hard that at last the leg came off with it. Saddaedda took the leg, carried it to her lonely home, and locked it up in a box. At night came the dead lady and knocked at the door. "Who's there?" said the girl. "It is I," answered the corpse. "Give me back my leg and stocking!" But Saddaedda paid no heed to the request. Next day she prepared a feast and invited some of her playfellows to spend the night with her. They came, feasted, and went to sleep. At midnight the dead woman began to knock at the door and to repeat last night's request. Saddaedda took no notice of the noise, but her companions, whom it awoke, were horrified, and as soon as they could, they ran away. On the third night just the same happened. On the fourth she could persuade only one girl to keep her company. On the fifth she was left entirely alone. The corpse came, forced open the door, strode up to Saddaedda's bed, and strangled her. Then the dead woman opened the box, took out her leg and stocking, and carried them off with her to her grave. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Company; London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 73, p. 238 . Return to the table of contents . The Golden Arm England There was once a man who traveled the land all over in search of a wife. He saw young and old, rich and poor, pretty and plain, and could not meet with one to his mind. At last he found a woman young, fair, and rich, who possessed the supreme, the crowning glory of having a right arm of solid gold. He married her at once, and thought no man so fortunate as he was. They lived happily together, but, though he wished people to think otherwise, he was fonder of the golden arm than of all his wife's gifts besides. At last she died. The husband appeared inconsolable. He put on the blackest black, and pulled the longest face at the funeral. But for all that he got up in the middle of the night, dug up the body, and cut off the golden arm. He hurried home to secrete his recovered treasure, and thought no one would know. The following night he put the golden arm under his pillow, and was just falling asleep, when the ghost of his dead wife glided into the room. Stalking up to the bedside it drew the curtain, and looked at him reproachfully. Pretending not to be afraid, he spoke to the ghost, and said, "What have you done with your cheeks so red." "All withered and wasted away," replied the ghost, in a hollow tone. "What have you done with your red rosy lips?" "All withered and wasted away." "What have you done with your golden hair?" "All withered and wasted away." "What have you done with your golden arm ?" "You have it!" Source: S. Baring-Gould, Appendix to William Henderson, Notes on the Folk Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866), no. 14, pp. 338-39 . Baring-Gould's note on the telling of this story: "The dialog progresses in horror, till at the close, the ghost's exclamation is shrieked out at the top of the narrator's voice, the candle extinguished, and the young auditors duly panic stricken. No one desires to know what became of the avaricious husband." Language cautiously modernized by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Golden Cup England There was once a lady who had one little daughter, and this daughter had a beautiful golden cup. Now one day the lady was going out to visit her friends, and her little daughter asked if she might go too. Her mother said, "No, dear, I cannot take you now, but you can have your golden cup to play with until I come back." When the mother had gone the little girl said to the maid, "Fetch me my golden cup out of the cupboard." The maid said, "I can't fetch it now, I am too busy." But the little girl, kept asking for the cup again and again, until at last the maid grew angry, and said, "If you ask for it again I'll cut your head off." But the little girl asked for the cup once more, and thereupon the maid took her into the cellar, got the hatchet, and cut her head off. Then she got a pickaxe and a spade, and dug a hole, and buried the little girl under one of the stone flags in the cellar. When the mother came back in the evening she said, "Where's baby?" The maid said, "I have let her go out for a walk." "Then go and seek her," said the mother. The maid went out, and when she came back she said, "I have looked for her everywhere and cannot find her." Then the mother was deeply grieved, and she sat up all that night, and all the next night. On the third night as she sat alone and wide awake she heard the voice of her daughter outside the door saying, "Can I have my golden cup?" The mother opened the door, and when her daughter had repeated the question three times she saw her spirit, but the spirit vanished at once, and she never saw it more. Source: Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales with Other Traditional Remains, Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby, and Nottingham (London: David Nutt, 1895), no. 43, pp. 42-43 . This tale is from Eckington in Derbyshire. Return to the table of contents . Teeny-Tiny England Once upon a time there was a teeny-tiny woman lived in a teeny-tiny house in a teeny-tiny village. Now, one day this teeny-tiny woman put on her teeny-tiny bonnet, and went out of her teeny-tiny house to take a teeny-tiny walk. And when this teeny-tiny woman had gone a teeny-tiny way she came to a teeny-tiny gate. So the teeny-tiny woman opened the teeny-tiny gate, and went into a teeny-tiny churchyard. And when this teeny-tiny woman had got into the teeny-tiny churchyard, she saw a teeny-tiny bone on a teeny-tiny grave, and the teeny-tiny woman said to her teeny-tiny self, "This teeny-tiny bone will make me some teeny-tiny soup for my teeny-tiny supper." So the teeny-tiny woman put the teeny-tiny bone into her teeny-tiny pocket, and went home to her teeny-tiny house. Now when the teeny-tiny woman got home to her teeny-tiny house she was a teeny-tiny bit tired. So she went up her teeny-tiny stairs to her teeny-tiny bed, and put the teeny-tiny bone into a teeny-tiny cupboard. And when this teeny-tiny woman had been to sleep a teeny-tiny time, she was awakened by a teeny-tiny voice from the teeny-tiny cupboard, which said, "Give me my bone!" And this teeny-tiny woman was a teeny-tiny frightened, so she hid her teeny-tiny head under the teeny-tiny clothes and went to sleep again. And when she had been to sleep again a teeny-tiny time, the teeny-tiny voice again cried out from the teeny-tiny cupboard a teeny-tiny louder, "Give me my bone!" This made the teeny-tiny woman a teeny-tiny more frightened, so he hid her teeny-tiny head a teeny-tiny further under the teeny-tiny clothes. And when the teeny-tiny woman had been to sleep again a teeny-tiny time, the teeny-tiny voice from the teeny-tiny cupboard said again a teeny-tiny louder, "Give me my bone!" And this teeny-tiny woman was a teeny-tiny bit more frightened, but she put her teeny-tiny head out of the teeny-tiny clothes, and said in her loudest teeny-tiny voice, "TAKE IT!" Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 12, pp. 57-58 . Jacobs' source: James Orchard Halliwell, Nursery Rhymes and Nursery Tales (London, 1843), p. 148. Another edition is Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to the Nursery Rhymes of England (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), pp. 25-26 . Return to the table of contents . Give Me My Teeth England Mr. Halliwell gives us, in his Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales , the story of Teeny-Tiny. In this a little old woman takes a bone from the churchyard to make soup. She goes to bed, and puts the bone in the cupboard. During the night someone comes demanding the bone, and at length the terrified old woman gives it up. A similar story is told in Cornwall. An old lady had been to the church in the sands of Perranzabuloe. She found, amidst the numerous remains of mortality, some very good teeth. She pocketed these, and at night placed them on her dressing table before getting into bed. She slept, but was at length disturbed by someone calling out, "Give me my teeth. Give me my teeth." At first, the lady took no notice of this, but the cry, "Give me my teeth," was so constantly repeated, that she, at last, in terror, jumped out of bed, took the teeth from the dressing table, and, opening the window, flung them out, exclaiming, "Drat the teeth, take 'em!" They no sooner fell into the darkness on the road than hasty retreating footsteps were heard, and there were no more demands for the teeth. Source: Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , second series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 268-69 . Hunt entitles this tale "Cornish Teeny-Tiny." Return to the table of contents . The Old Man at the White House England There was once a man who lived in a white house in a certain village, and he knew everything about everybody that lived in the place. In the same village there lived a woman who had a daughter called Sally, and one day she gave Sally a pair of yellow kid gloves and threatened to kill her if she lost them. Now Sally was very proud of her gloves, but she was careless enough to lose one of them. After she had lost it she went to a row of houses in the village and inquired at every door if they had seen her glove. But everybody said "No;" and she was told to go and ask the old man that lived in the white house. So Sally went to the white house and asked the old man if he had seen her glove. The old man said, "I have thy glove, and I will give it thee if thou wilt promise me to tell nobody where thou hast found it. And remember if thou tells anybody I shall fetch thee out of bed when the clock strikes twelve at night." So he gave the glove back to Sally. But Sally's mother got to know about her losing the glove, and said, "Where did thou find it?" Sally said, "I daren't tell, for if I do an old man will fetch me out of bed at twelve o'clock at night." Her mother said, "I will bar all the doors and fasten all the windows, and then he can't get in and fetch thee;" and then she made Sally tell her where she had found her glove. So Sally's mother barred all the doors and fastened all the windows, and Sally went to bed at ten o'clock that night and began to cry. At eleven she began to cry louder, and at twelve o'clock she heard a voice saying in a whisper, but gradually getting louder and louder: "Sally, I'm up one step." "Sally, I'm up two steps." "Sally, I'm up three steps." "Sally, I'm up four steps." "Sally, I'm up five steps." "Sally, I'm up six steps." "Sally, I'm up seven steps." "Sally, I'm up eight steps." "Sally, I'm up nine steps." "Sally, I'm up ten steps." "Sally, I'm up eleven steps." "Sally, I'm up twelve steps!" "Sally, I'm at thy bedroom door!!" "Sally, I have hold of thee!!!" Source: S. O. Addy, "Four Yorkshire Folktales," Folklore , vol. 8, no. 4 (December 1897), pp. 393-94 . Addy's source: "From Wakefield. Told to me by C. R. Hirst, of Sheffield, aged 18. Note by Addy: "It is hoped that this tale will not be reprinted in any book intended for children." Return to the table of contents . A Ghost Story Joel Chandler Harris The next time the little boy visited Uncle Remus he persuaded Tildy to go with him. Daddy Jack was in his usual place, dozing and talking to himself, while Uncle Remus oiled the carriage harness. After a while Aunt Tempy came in. The conversation turned on Daddy Jack's story about "haunts" and spirits [the previous story in the collection, "Spirits, Seen and Unseen"]. Finally Tildy said, "When it comes to tales about haunts, I hear tell of one that will just naturally make the kinks on your head uncurl themselves." "What tale is that, child?" asked Aunt Tempy. "Uncle Remus, must I tell it?" "Let it come," said Uncle Remus. "Well then," said Tildy, rolling her eyes back and displaying her white teeth: One time there was a woman and a man. It seems like they lived close to one another, and the man, he set his eyes on the woman, and the woman, she just went along and tended to her business. The man, he kept his eyes set on her. By and by, the woman, she tended to her business so much that she took sick and died. The man, he up and told her folks she was dead, and the folks came and fixed her. They laid her out, and they lit some candles, and they sat up with her, just like folks do now, and they put two big round shiny silver dollars on her eyes to hold her eyelids down. In describing the silver dollars Tildy joined the ends of her thumbs and forefingers together, and made a figure as large as a saucer. "They were lots bigger that dollars are these days." She continued: And they looked mighty pretty. It seems like they were all the money the woman had, and the folks put them on her eyelids to hold them down. Then when the folks did that, they called on the man and told him he would have to dig a grave and bury the woman, and then they all went off about their business. Well, then the man, he took and dug the grave and made ready to bury the woman. He looked at that money on her eyelids, and it shined mighty pretty. Then he took it off and felt it. It felt might good, but just about that time, the man looked at the woman, and he saw her eyelids open. It looked like she was looking at him, and he took and put the money where he got it from. Well, then the man, he took and got a wagon and hauled the woman out to the burying ground, and when he got there he fixed everything, and then he grabbed the money and covered up the grave right quick. Then he went home and put the money in a tin box and rattled it around. It rattled loud and it rattled nice, but the man, he didn't feel so good. It seems like he knew the woman's eyelids were stretched wide open looking for him. Yet he rattled the money around, and it rattled loud and it rattled nice. Well, then the man, he took and put the tin box with the money on the mantel shelf. The day went by, and night came, and when night came, the wind began to rise up and blow. It rose high and it blew strong. It blew on top of the house. It blew under the house. It blew around the house. The man, he felt queer. He sat by the fire and listened. The wind said "Buzz-zoo-o-o-o-o!" The man listened. The wind hollered and cried. It blew on top of the house. It blew under the house. It blew around the house. It blew into the house. The man got close to the chimney jamb. The wind found the cracks and blew in them. "Bizzy, bizzy, buzz-zoo-o-o-o-o!" Well, then the man, he listened and listened, but by and by he got tired of this, and he allowed to himself that he was going to bed. He took and flung a freshly lighted knot into the fire, and then he jumped into bed, and curled himself up, and put his head under the covers. The wind hunted for the cracks, "Bizzy-buzz, bizzy-buzz, buzz-zoo-o-o-o-o!" The man kept his head under the covers. The lighted knot flared up and flickered. The man didn't dare to move. The wind blew and whistled, "Phew-fee-e-e-e!" The lighted knot flickered and flared. The man, he kept his head covered. Well, then the man lay there, and got scareder and scareder. He scarcely dared to wink his eyes, and it seemed like he was going to have swamp fever. While he was lying there shaking, and the wind was a-blowing, and the fire flickering, he heard some other kind of noise. It was a mighty curious kind of noise, "Clinkity, clinkalinkle!" The man said, "Hey! Who is stealing my money?" But he kept his head covered while he lay and listened. He heard the wind blow, and then he heard that other kind of noise, "Clinkity, clink, clinkity, clinkalinkle!" Well, then he flung off the covers and sat right up in bed. He looked, but he didn't see anything. The fire flickered and flared, and the wind blew. The man went and put a chain and a bar across the door. Then he went back to bed, and he had no more than touched his head on the pillow when he heard this other noise, "Clink, clink, clinkity, clinkalinkle!" The man got up, but he didn't see anything at all. Mighty queer! Just about the time was going to lie down again, here came the noise, "Clinkity, clinkalinkle." It sounded like it was on the mantle shelf. Not only that, it sounded like it was in the tin box on the mantle shelf. Not only that, it sounded like it was the money in the tin box on the mantle shelf. The man said, "Hey! A rat done got in the box!" The man looked. No rat was there. He shut up the box and set it down on the shelf. As he did that, here came the noise, "Clinkity, clinkity, clinkalinkle!" The man opened the box and looked at the money. Those two silver dollars were lying there just like he put them. While the man was doing this, it seemed liked he could hear something saying, away off yonder, "Where's my money? Oh, give me my money! I want my money!" Well, then the man got scared sure enough, and he got a flatiron and put it on the tin box, and then he took and piled all the chairs against the door, and ran and jumped into bed. He just knew there was a boogie coming. By the time he got into bed and covered his head, the money rattled louder, and something cried away off yonder, "I want my money! Oh, give me my money!" The man, he shook and he shivered. The money, it clinked and rattled. And the boogie, it hollered and cried. The boogie came closer. The money clinked louder. The man shook worse and worse. The money said, "Clinkity, clinkalinkle!" The boogie cried, "Oh, give me my money!" The man hollered, "Oh, Lordy, Lordy!" Well, then it kept on this way until the man heard the door open. He peeped from under the covers, and in walked the woman that he had buried in the burying ground. The man shivered and shivered. The wind blew and blew. The money rattled and rattled. The woman cried and cried. "Buzz-zoo-o-o-o-o!" said the wind. "Clinkalink!" said the box. "Oh, give me my money!" said the woman. "Oh, Lordy!" said the man. The woman heard the money, but it looked like she couldn't see it, and she groped around, and groped around, and groped around with her hands in the air like this. Here Tildy stood up, pushed her chair back with her foot, raised her arms over her head, and leaned forward in the direction of Daddy Jack. The wind was blowing. The fire was flickering. The money was rattling. The man was shaking and shivering. The woman was groping around and saying, "Give me my money! Oh, who's got my money?" Tildy advanced a few steps. The money looked like it was going to tear the tin box all to flinders. The woman groped and cried, until by and by she jumped on the man and hollered, "You've got my money!" As she reached this climax, Tildy sprang at Daddy Jack and seized him, and for a few moments there was considerable confusion in the corner. The little boy was frightened, but the collapsed appearance of Daddy Jack convulsed him with laughter. The old African was very angry. His little eyes glistened with momentary malice, and he shook his cane threateningly at Tildy. The latter coolly adjusted her earrings, as she exclaimed, "There now! I knew I'd get even with the old villain. Come a-calling me pigeon-toed!" "Better keep your eye on him, child," said Aunt Tempy. "He'll bewitch you for sure." "Bewitch who? If he comes bewitching around me, I'll break his back, I'm telling you that right point-blank." Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Nights with Uncle Remus: Myths and Legends of the Old Plantation (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1883), no. 29, pp. 161-66 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Return to the table of contents . How to Tell a Story: The Golden Arm Mark Twain The pause is an exceedingly important feat ure in any kind of story, and a frequently re curring feature, too. It is a dainty thing, and delicate, and also uncertain and treacherous; for it must be exactly the right length -- no more and no less -- or it fails of its purpose and makes trouble. If the pause is too short the impressive point is passed, and the audience have had time to divine that a surprise is in tended -- and then you can't surprise them, of course. On the platform I used to tell a negro ghost story that had a pause in front of the snapper on the end, and that pause was the most im portant thing in the whole story. If I got it the right length precisely, I could spring the finishing ejaculation with effect enough to make some impressible girl deliver a startled little yelp and jump out of her seat -- and that was what I was after. This story was called " The Golden Arm," and was told in this fash ion. You can practise with it yourself -- and mind you look out for the pause and get it right. The Golden Arm Once 'pon a time dey wuz a monsus mean man, en he live 'way out in de prairie all 'lone by hisself, 'cep'n he had a wife. En bimeby she died, en he tuck en toted her way out dah in de prairie en buried her. Well, she had a golden arm -- all solid gold, fum de shoulder down. He wuz pow'ful mean -- pow'ful; en dat night he couldn't sleep, caze he want dat golden arm so bad. When it come midnight he couldn't stan' it no mo'; so he git up, he did, en tuck his lantern en shoved out thoo de storm en dug her up en got de golden arm; en he bent his head down 'gin de win', en plowed en plowed en plowed thoo de snow. Den all on a sudden he stop (make a considerable pause here, and look startled, and take a listening attitude) en say: "My lan', what's dat!" En he listen -- en listen -- en de win' say (set your teeth together and imitate the wailing and wheezing singsong of the wind), "Bzzz-z-zzz" -- en den, way back yonder whah de grave is, he hear a voice! -- he hear a voice all mix' up in de win' -- can't hardly tell 'em 'part -- "Bzzz-zzz -- W-h-o -- g-o-t -- m-y -- g-o-l-d-e-n arm? -- zzz -- zzz -- W-h-o g-o-t m-y g-o-l-d-e-n arm? (You must begin to shiver violently now.) En he begin to shiver en shake, en say, "Oh, my! Oh, my lan'!" en de win' blow de lantern out, en de snow en sleet blow in his face en mos' choke him, en he start a-plowin' knee-deep towards home mos' dead, he so sk'yerd -- en pooty soon he hear de voice agin, en (pause) it 'us comin' after him! "Bzzz -- zzz -- zzz -- W-h-o -- g-o-t -- m-y -- g-o-l-d-e-n -- arm? " When he git to de pasture he hear it agin -- closter now, en a- comin! -- a-comin' back dah in de dark en de storm -- (repeat the wind and the voice). When he git to de house he rush up-stairs en jump in de bed en kiver up, head and years, en lay dah shiverin' en shakin' -- en den way out dah he hear it agin! -- en a- comin! En bimeby he hear (pause -- awed, listening attitude) -- pat -- pat -- pat -- hit's a- comin' up-stairs! Den he hear de latch, en he know it's in de room! Den pooty soon he know it's a- stannin' by de bed! (Pause.) Den -- he know it's a- bendin down over him -- en he cain't skasely git his breath! Den -- den -- he seem to feel someth'n c-o-l-d , right down 'most agin his head ! (Pause.) Den de voice say, right at his year -- " W-h-o -- g-o-t -- m-y -- g-o-l-d-e-n arm? " "(You must wail it out very plaintively and accusingly; then you stare steadily and impressively into the face of the farthest-gone auditor -- a girl, preferably -- and let that awe-inspiring pause begin to build itself in the deep hush. When it has reached exactly the right length, jump suddenly at that girl and yell, "You've got it!" If you've got the pause right, she'll fetch a dear little yelp and spring right out of her shoes. But you must get the pause right; and you will find it the most troublesome and aggravating and uncertain thing you ever undertook.) Source: Mark Twain, How to Tell a Story and Other Essays (New York and London: Harper and Brothers, 1898), pp. 9-12 . Return to the table of contents . Related links Cattarinetta , a folktale from Italy of type 333A about a careless girl who is eaten up by a witch. They storyteller uses the same technique to build suspense as used in most tales of type 366. Another collection of folktales about grave-robbers: Revived from Apparent Death by a Grave-Robber , legends of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 990. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 17, 2022. The Crane, the Crab and the Fish: Fables of Type 231 The Crane, the Crab, and the Fish Fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 231 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2020 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Cruel Crane Outwitted (India, The Jataka ). The Heron That Liked Crab-Meat (India, The Panchatantra ). The Heron and the Crab (India, The Book of Kalilah and Dimnah ). The Crane and the Makara (India, The Kathá Sarit Ságara ). The Booby and the Crab (India, The Hitopadesa ). The Crane and the Fish (India). The Crane, the Crab, and the Fish (India). The Pelican's Punishment (Malaya). The Heron and the Crab (Sri Lanka). The Story of a Fish in the Pond ( The 1001 Nights ). The Fishes and the Cormorant (Jean de La Fontaine). The Heron, the Fishes, and the Crab (Leo Tolstoy). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Cruel Crane Outwitted India, The Jataka Long ago the Bodisat was born to a forest life as the Genius of a tree standing near a certain lotus pond. Now at that time the water used to run short at the dry season in a certain pond, not over large, in which there were a good many fish. And a crane thought, on seeing the fish, "I must outwit these fish somehow or other and make a prey of them." And he went and sat down at the edge of the water, thinking how he should do it. When the fish saw him, they asked him, "What are you sitting there for, lost in thought?" "I am sitting thinking about you," said he. "Oh, sir! what are you thinking about us?" said they. "Why," he replied; "there is very little water in this pond, and but little for you to eat; and the heat is so great! So I was thinking, 'What in the world will these fish do now?'" "Yes, indeed, sir! what are we to do?" said they. "If you will only do as I bid you, I will take you in my beak to a fine large pond, covered with all the kinds of lotuses, and put you into it," answered the crane. "That a crane should take thought for the fishes is a thing unheard of, sir, since the world began. It's eating us, one after the other, that you're aiming at!" "Not I! So long as you trust me, I won't eat you. But if you don't believe me that there is such a pond, send one of you with me to go and see it." Then they trusted him, and handed over to him one of their number -- a big fellow, blind of one eye, whom they thought sharp enough in any emergency, afloat or ashore. Him the crane took with him, let him go in the pond, showed him the whole of it, brought him back, and let him go again close to the other fish. And he told them all the glories of the pond. And when they heard what he said, they exclaimed, "All right, sir! You may take us with you." Then the crane took the old purblind fish first to the bank of the other pond, and alighted in a Varana-tree growing on the bank there. But he threw it into a fork of the tree, struck it with his beak, and killed it; and then ate its flesh, and threw its bones away at the foot of the tree. Then he went back and called out, "I've thrown that fish in; let another come!" And in that manner he took all the fish, one by one, and ate them, till he came back and found no more! But there was still a crab left behind there; and the crane thought he would eat him too, and called out, "I say, good crab, I've taken all the fish away, and put them into a fine large pond. Come along. I'll take you too!" "But how will you take hold of me to carry me along?" "I'll bite hold of you with my beak." "You'll let me fall if you carry me like that. I won't go with you!" "Don't be afraid! I'll hold you quite tight all the way." Then said the crab to himself, "If this fellow once got hold of fish, he would never let them go in a pond! Now if he should really put me into the pond, it would be capital; but if he doesn't -- then I'll cut his throat, and kill him!" So he said to him, "Look here, friend, you won't be able to hold me tight enough; but we crabs have a famous grip. If you let me catch hold of you round the neck with my claws, I shall be glad to go with you." And the other did not see that he was trying to outwit him, and agreed. So the crab caught hold of his neck with his claws as securely as with a pair of blacksmith's pincers, and called out, "Off with you, now!" And the crane took him and showed him the pond, and then turned off towards the Varana-tree. "Uncle!" cried the crab, "the pond lies that way, but you are taking me this way!" "Oh, that's it, is it!" answered the crane. "Your dear little uncle, your very sweet nephew, you call me! You mean me to understand, I suppose, that I am your slave, who has to lift you up and carry you about with him! Now cast your eye upon the heap of fish-bones lying at the root of yonder Varana-tree. Just as I have eaten those fish, every one of them, just so I will devour you as well!" "Ah! those fishes got eaten through their own stupidity," answered the crab; "but I'm not going to let you eat me. On the contrary, it is you that I am going to destroy. For you in your folly have not seen that I was outwitting you. If we die, we die both together; for I will cut off this head of yours, and cast it to the ground!" And so saying, he gave the crane's neck a grip with his claws, as with a vice. Then gasping, and with tears trickling from his eyes, and trembling with the fear of death, the crane beseeched him, saying, "O my Lord! Indeed I did not intend to eat you. Grant me my life!" "Well, well! step down into the pond, and put me in there." And he turned round and stepped down into the pond, and placed the crab on the mud at its edge. But the crab cut through its neck as clean as one would cut a lotus-stalk with a hunting-knife, and then only entered the water! When the Genius who lived in the Varana-tree saw this strange affair, he made the wood resound with his plaudits, uttering in a pleasant voice the verse: The villain, though exceeding clever, Shall prosper not by his villany. He may win indeed, sharp-witted in deceit, But only as the crane here from the crab!" Source (books.google.com): Buddhist Birth Stories; or, Jataka Tales , translated by T. W. Rhys Davids, vol. 1 (London: Trübner and Company, 1880), , no. 38, pp. 317-20 . Source (Internet Archive): Buddhist Birth Stories; or, Jataka Tales , translated by T. W. Rhys Davids, vol. 1 (London: Trübner and Company, 1880), , no. 38, pp. 317-20 . Return to the table of contents . The Heron That Liked Crab-Meat India, The Panchatantra There was once a heron in a certain place on the edge of a pond. Being old, he sought an easy way of catching fish on which to live. He began by lingering at the edge of his pond, pretending to be quite irresolute, not eating even the fish within his reach. Now among the fish lived a crab. He drew near and said: "Uncle, why do you neglect today your usual meals and amusements?" And the heron replied: "So long as I kept fat and flourishing by eating fish, I spent my time pleasantly, enjoying the taste of you. But a great disaster will soon befall you. And as I am old, this will cut short the pleasant course of my life. For this reason I feel depressed." "Uncle," said the crab, "of what nature is the disaster?" And the heron continued: "Today I overheard the talk of a number of fishermen as they passed near the pond. 'This is a big pond,' they were saying, 'full of fish. We will try a cast of the net tomorrow or the day after. But today we will go to the lake near the city.' This being so, you are lost, my food supply is cut off, I too am lost, and in grief at the thought, I am indifferent to food today." Now when the water-dwellers heard the trickster's report, they all feared for their lives and implored the heron, saying: "Uncle! Father! Brother! Friend! Thinker! Since you are informed of the calamity, you also know the remedy. Pray save us from the jaws of this death." Then the heron said: "I am a bird, not competent to contend with men. This, however, I can do. I can transfer you from this pond to another, a bottomless one." By this artful speech they were so led astray that they said: "Uncle! Friend! Unselfish kinsman! Take me first! Me first! Did you never hear this? Stout hearts delight to pay the price Of merciful self-sacrifice, Count life as nothing, if it end In gentle service to a friend." Then the old rascal laughed in his heart, and took counsel with his mind, thus: "My shrewdness has brought these fishes into my power. They ought to be eaten very comfortably." Having thus thought it through, he promised what the thronging fish implored, lifted some in his bill, carried them a certain distance to a slab of stone, and ate them there. Day after day he made the trip with supreme delight and satisfaction, and meeting the fish, kept their confidence by ever new inventions. One day the crab, disturbed by the fear of death, importuned him with the words: "Uncle, pray save me, too, from the jaws of death." And the heron reflected: "I am quite tired of this unvarying fish diet. I should like to taste him. He is different, and choice." So he picked up the crab and flew through the air. But since he avoided all bodies of water and seemed planning to alight on the sun-scorched rock, the crab asked him: "Uncle, where is that pond without any bottom?" And the heron laughed and said: "Do you see that broad, sun-scorched rock? All the water-dwellers have found repose there. Your turn has now come to find repose." Then the crab looked down and saw a great rock of sacrifice, made horrible by heaps of fish-skeletons. And he thought: "Ah me! Friends are foes and foes are friends As they mar or serve your ends; Few discern where profit tends. Again: If you will, with serpents play; Dwell with foemen who betray: Shun your false and foolish friends, Fickle, seeking vicious ends. Why, he has already eaten these fish whose skeletons are scattered in heaps. So what might be an opportune course of action for me? Yet why do I need to consider? Man is bidden to chastise Even elders who devise Devious courses, arrogant, Of their duty ignorant. Again: Fear fearful things, while yet No fearful thing appears; When danger must be met, Strike, and forget your fears. So, before he drops me there, I will catch his neck with all four claws." When he did so, the heron tried to escape, but being a fool, he found no parry to the grip of the crab's nippers, and had his head cut off. Then the crab painfully made his way back to the pond, dragging the heron's neck as if it had been a lotus-stalk. And when he came among the fish, they said: "Brother, why come back?" Thereupon he showed the head as his credentials and said: "He enticed the water-dwellers from every quarter, deceived them with his prevarications, dropped them on a slab of rock not far away, and ate them. But I -- further life being predestined -- perceived that he destroyed the trustful, and I have brought back his neck. Forget your worries. All the water-dwellers shall live in peace." And that is why I say: "A heron ate what fish he could, . . . . and the rest of it." Source (Wikisource): The Panchatantra , translated from the Sanskrit by Arthur W. Ryder (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1925), book 1, pp. 76-80 . Source (Internet Archive): The Panchatantra (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1925), book 1, pp. 76-80 . Source (Columbia University): The Panchatantra (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1925), book 1, pp. 76-80 . Return to the table of contents . The Heron and the Crab India, The Book of Kalilah and Dimnah The Jackal: It is said that in a certain marshy lake was a heron. And there were many fishes in the lake. [But in time the heron got too old to catch any,] and became very hungry, and his soul languished. A certain crab seeing him from afar, approached him, saying: "Why is your soul distressed, and why are you sad?" The Heron: And how should I not be sad who until today have lived on these fishes, but this day have seen two fishermen, one of whom said to the other: "Let us not catch (all) these fishes at one time," his companion replying: "I have seen another lake in which there are plenty of fishes. Let us go and catch them (first), and then we will come and catch all these in a twinkling.'" I know that when they return from their journey, they will not leave anything in this lake, and I shall utterly perish from life! Then the crab spoke to the fishes. And all the fishes gathered to the heron, and said to him: "Although you are an enemy to us, because we are your food and you feed on us, still he who has the fear of God, in time of trouble does not refuse what is right, or profane the emblem of the faith. Lo! we are all knocking at your door, that you may hearken to us and ease the distress of our soul, and counsel us what to do in this distressful time." The Heron: To do battle with the fishermen I am not able, and expel them from this region I cannot. But I know of a certain pool in which there is water abundant, fresh and clear. And there are green reeds in it. If you could remove thither from here, you would gain advantage to yourselves. The Fishes: But how is it possible for us to do so without your help? The Heron: I will do what you wish and consent to you. But I am sore afraid of those fishermen, lest they come hastily. But I will begin to carry some of you every day, as many as I can, until I have exhausted (you and taken) you all away from here. And he began to carry off one or two every day, and to convey them to a certain region, and to eat them there; the others being ignorant of it. It came to pass one day (that) the crab said to the heron: "I too find this place unpleasant. Pray carry me off too and convey me with my companions." So the heron carried off the crab. When he reached the place where he had eaten the fishes, the crab beheld and saw the bones of his companions. And he perceived that the heron had done this wickedness, and was about to devour him too. And the crab said within himself: "He that goes forth to battle and encounters his enemy wherever it may be, if he knows that his enemy will not hesitate to destroy him if he can, whether he make war with him (the enemy) or remain at peace with him, he ought to fight for himself strenuously, and not destroy himself for want of exertion. For if he is vanquished and perishes, still his honour goes with him, and his glory (remains) on his head." Then the crab grasped the heron's throat with his pincers, and kept gripping him with his claws, until he throttled him and took away his life. So the crab escaped from slaughter. And he went little by little until he got (back) to the fishes, whom he acquainted with the story about the heron. The jackal said to the raven: "This parable I have related to you, [that you may know] that when a man engages in fraudulent plans and transactions and schemes, his wickedness returns on his own head, and he himself perishes by his own artifices." Source (books.google.com): Kalilah and Dimnah; or, The Fables of Bidpai , translated from the Syriac version by I. G. N. Keith-Falconer (Cambridge: University Press, 1885), pp. 24-25 . Source (Internet Archive): Kalilah and Dimnah; or, The Fables of Bidpai , translated from the Syriac version by I. G. N. Keith-Falconer (Cambridge: University Press, 1885), pp. 24-25 . Return to the table of contents . The Crane and the Makara India, The Kathá Sarit Ságara Of old time there dwelt a crane in a certain tank rich in fish; and the fish in terror used to flee out of his sight. Then the crane, not being able to catch the fish, told them a lying tale: "There has come here a man with a net who kills fish. He will soon catch you with a net and kill you. So act on my advice, if you repose any confidence in me. There is in a lonely place a translucent lake, it is unknown to the fishermen of these parts; I will take you there one by one, and drop you into it, that you may live there." When those foolish fish heard that, they said in their fear: "Do so, we all repose confidence in you." Then the treacherous crane took the fish away one by one, and, putting them down on a rock, devoured in this way many of them. Then a certain makara dwelling in that lake, seeing him carrying off fish, said: "Whither are you taking the fish?" Then that crane said to him exactly what he had said to the fish. The makara, being terrified, said: "Take me there too." The crane's intellect was blinded with the smell of his flesh, so he took him up, and soaring aloft carried him towards the slab of rock. But when the makara got near the rock, he saw the fragments of the bones of the fish that the crane had eaten, and he perceived that the crane was in the habit of devouring those who reposed confidence in him. So no sooner was the sagacious makara put down on the rock, than with complete presence of mind he cut off the head of the crane. And he returned and told the occurrence, exactly as it happened, to the other fish, and they were delighted, and hailed him as their deliverer from death. Source (books.google.com): The Kathá Sarit Ságara; or, Ocean of the Streams of Story , translated from the original Sanskrit by C. H. Tawney, vol. 2 (Calcutta: Printed by J. W. Thomas at the Baptist Mission Press, 1884), book 10, ch. 60, pp. 31-32 . Source (Internet Archive): The Kathá Sarit Ságara; or, Ocean of the Streams of Story , translated from the original Sanskrit by C. H. Tawney, vol. 2 (Calcutta: Printed by J. W. Thomas at the Baptist Mission Press, 1884), book 10, ch. 60, pp. 31-32 . The Kathá Sarit Ságara (also spelled Kathasaritsagara ) is an eleventh-century collection of Indian tales compiled by a Brahman named Somadeva Bhatta. The makara is a sea creature in Hindu mythology. Link to the Wikipedia article Makara (Hindu mythology) . Return to the table of contents . The Booby and the Crab India, The Hitopadesa A certain booby after having devoured fish of every size and quality, at length is killed from his attempting a crab out of mere gluttony. "How was that?" demanded Chitra-Varna; and his minister related the following story: In the country of Malava there is a lake distinguished by the name of Padma-Garbha, where lived an old booby, who, being deprived of his former abilities, stood and feigned to appear like one who was troubled in mind; in which situation being observed by a crab at a distance, the latter asked him why he stood there, and did not look for food. "You know," replied the booby, "that fish is what I live upon; and I know for certain that fishermen are coming to catch them all; for, as I was looking about the skirts of the next village, I overheard the conversation of some water-men upon that subject; so this being the case, I have lost my appetite with reflecting that, when our food is gone, death will soon follow." This being overheard by all the fish, they observed to one another that it was proper to look out for assistance whilst they had time; and, said they, "Let us ask the booby himself what is best to be done; for: One may better form a connection with an enemy who will render one assistance, than with a friend who would do one an injury. These two should rather be distinguished according to the good or injury they do to one. " Accordingly, the fish accosted the booby, and said, "Pray, master booby, tell us what means can be devised for our safety upon this occasion?" "There is one way to be safe," replied the artful booby, and that is, going to another pond, whither I am willing to transport you." The fish, in the greatness of their fears, consented to this proposal, and their treacherous deliverer devoured them all one by one as he took them out of the water. At length, the crab asked him to take him also; and the booby, although he had never before had any inclination to taste one of his species, took him up with great marks of respect, and carried him ashore. When the crab seeing the ground covered with the bones of the fish which the booby had destroyed, cried to herself, "Alas, how unfortunate! I shall certainly be killed too, unless I can contrive some means of escaping. Let me try immediately what the occasion requires. They say: In times of danger it is proper to be alarmed until danger be near at hand; but when we perceive that danger is near, one should oppose it as if one were not afraid. When one attacked beholdeth no safety for himself, if he be a wise man, he will die fighting with his foe. It is also said, that: As out of battle death is certain, etc. The crab having come to this resolution, he seized the opportunity, when the booby stretched out his neck to devour him, to tear open his throat with the pincers of his claws. Wherefore I repeat: " A certain booby after having devoured fish of every size and quality, at length is killed from his attempting a crab out of mere gluttony. " Source (books.google.com): Fables and Proverbs from the Sanskrit; Being the Hitopadesa , translated by Charles Wilkins (London: George Routledge and Sons, 1885), fable 7, pp. 237-39 . Source (Internet Archive): Fables and Proverbs from the Sanskrit; Being the Hitopadesa , translated by Charles Wilkins (London: George Routledge and Sons, 1885), fable 7, pp. 237-39 . Return to the table of contents . The Crane and the Fish India Lake Vimalavati has been occupied from time immemorial by large numbers of fish. Once upon a time, a crane, which happened to pass by, conceived the idea of preying on them, and stood on the brink of the lake. But it saw the fish going away from it shaking with fear, and so it said: "I very much regret your going away from me in the belief that birds of my order make you their prey, and that I would do the same. But I have not come here with such an object in view. I, following others of my kind, have killed a good many fish, and become a sinner, but I am now grown very old, and have renounced the world. I am come here to perform penance. Fear not any harm from me. You may roam anywhere you please." The poor fish believed the wily words of the crane, especially as the crane did not interfere with them at all, though they approached it. After some time had thus elapsed, the crane appeared to be very much dejected and melan choly. The fish approached it, and asked it what the matter was. To which the crane replied: "What shall I say? A twelve years' famine will very shortly visit the land. Not a drop of water will then remain in this lake. I am able to know this by second sight, and, as you are my close friends, I cannot resist the temptation of informing you, lest you die when the famine comes." The fish were exceedingly joyed at the humane nature of the crane, and requested it to save them from the impending peril. The crane thereupon informed them, that there was a lake a few yards further off, which would never dry, and that it would be a very happy refuge for the fish. The latter requested the former to take them up and leave them there. The crane thereupon took them up one by one and left them in the sun on a mountain-top, and slowly devoured them. Moral: We should never, therefore, believe the words of our natural enemies. Source (books.google.com): G. R. Subramiah Pantulu, "Some Notes on the Folklore of the Telugus," The Indian Antiquary: A Journal of Oriental Research vol. 26 (Bombay, 1897), no. 35, p. 168 . Source (Internet Archive): G. R. Subramiah Pantulu, "Some Notes on the Folklore of the Telugus," The Indian Antiquary: A Journal of Oriental Research , vol. 26 (Bombay, 1897), no. 35, p. 168 . Return to the table of contents . The Crane, the Crab, and the Fish India A crane that had long coveted the fish in a pond, one day stood on the bank in a melancholy mood. "Sir Crane," said the fish in a shoal, "why are you sad today?" "My dear fish," said Sir Crane, "I am so sorry that the fisherman is to come tomorrow with his net and take you all away." "Oh, what shall we do?" cried the fish. "Why," said the crane, if you would only listen to my advice, you will all be saved." "Do help us, by all means, Sir Crane; we will be so thankful to you," said the fish. "Well, it may be a source of some trouble to me, but that is immaterial; when one can do a kind turn, he ought to do it. I shall take up as many of you as I can at a time, and carry you to a pond at some distance in a forest, where no fisherman can molest you." So saying, he carried each time a number of fish, and dropped them on a great piece of stone. There he made a hearty meal on as many as he could eat at a time, and left the remainder to dry in the sun. It came to the turn of the crab to be carried. While the crane was flying in the air, the crab saw fish all the way, dried and drying. He cut asunder the neck of the crane with his sharp feet, and, falling into a pond, saved himself and the remaining fish in the pond he had left. The wicked and the oppressor will find their doom in the end. Source (books.google.com): P. V. Ramaswami Raju, Indian Fables (London: Swan Sonnenschein, Lowrey, and Company, 1887), pp. 88-89 . Source (Internet Archive): P. V. Ramaswami Raju, Indian Fables (London: Swan Sonnenschein, Lowrey, and Company, 1887), pp. 88-89 . Return to the table of contents . The Pelican's Punishment Malaya Undan the pelican, being hungry, told Ruan the fish that his pool would shortly dry up, and offered to carry himself or any members of his family to another pool to see how they liked it. To this Ruan agreed, and Undan carried him over to the pool and back again as stipulated, and the fish, liking it, informed all his relatives. Then Undan carried the fish back again to the new pool and returned to fetch the rest of his family. But instead of putting them into the pool, Undan sat in a tree and ate the fish till his droppings reached to the lower branches. By this time there were no more fish to be eaten, and Undan commenced in like manner to cheat the family of Ketam the crab. But as soon as ever Ketam caught sight of the droppings, he saw through the trick and pinched Undan's neck so that he died. Source (books.google.com): Walter Skeat, Fables and Folk-Tales from an Eastern Forest (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1901), no. 7, pp. 18-19 . Source (Internet Archive): Walter Skeat, Fables and Folk-Tales from an Eastern Forest (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1901), no. 7, pp. 18-19 . This story was collected on the Tembeling River in Ulu Pahang. Return to the table of contents . The Heron and the Crab Sri Lanka There is a great big mountain. On the mountain there is a rock-hole [containing water]. In it there are some small fishes. At all other places a heron eats the small fishes. In this rock-hole the heron cannot eat the small fishes; he goes along [in the air], above the rock cave. On account of it, the heron puts on a false appearance. "I am indeed an ascetic," he said. "I do not kill living creatures," he said. Thereupon the small fishes came for a talk. After they came he said, "Being in this hole ye cannot go up and down," he said. "Because it is so, I will take you and put you in a river possessing length and breadth," he said. After that, having taken them one by one he ate them. At the time when he was taking the crab which remained over from them, the crab took hold of the neck of the heron. While on the way, when the heron was preparing to kill the crab, the crab getting to know of it, cut the neck of the heron with his claws and killed it. Source (Internet Archive): H. Parker, Village Folk-Tales of Ceylon , vol. 1 (London: Luzac and Company, 1910), no. 64, p. 342 . Parker's source: A durayā [baggage carrier], Northwestern Province. Return to the table of contents . The Story of a Fish in the Pond The 1001 Nights Once a great number of fish lived in a pond that was filled only by rainwater. It happened that one summer very little rain fell. The pond grew ever smaller, and the declining water level greatly concerned the fish. They said to one another: "What will become of us? What can we do? Who can give us advice?" Then the oldest of them came forth and said: "We can only turn to God and to the crab, the wisest of all water-dwellers." The other fish all agreed, and they presented themselves before the crab, who was lying peacefully at the door of his nest. He knew nothing of the fishes' problem. The oldest of them approached him, and after greeting him, said: "You need not concern yourself with our sad situation, o wise and learned crab." The crab asked: "Just what is your problem then?" They told him about the lack of water and of their approaching downfall, then asked him for advice and support. The crab was silent for a while, thinking: "These simple fish have but little trust in God. But I shall set them at ease. God's will shall then transpire." Then he said to the fish: "Don't you fish know that the year has just begun. There is still plenty of water. It will rain again. Trust in God. Pray to him often, for he hears the prayers of his creatures. Let us wait until winter when it will rain as usual. If not we shall flee from this pond to wherever God leads us." The fish expressed approval of the crab's opinion, thanked him, and went on their way. A few days later a great rain fell from heaven and filled the pond even higher than normal. Source (books.google.com): "Geschichte eines Fisches im Wasserteich," Tausend und eine Nacht: Arabische Erzählungen , translated by Gustav Weil, vol. 3 (Stuttgart: Rieger'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1889), pp. 914-15 . Source (Internet Archive): "Geschichte eines Fisches im Wasserteich," Tausend und eine Nacht: Arabische Erzählungen , translated by Gustav Weil, vol. 3 (Pforzheim: Dennig, Finch, & Co., 1841), pp. 914-15 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2018. Return to the table of contents . The Fishes and the Cormorant Jean de La Fontaine No pond nor pool within his haunt But paid a certain cormorant Its contribution from its fishes, And stock'd his kitchen with good dishes. Yet, when old age the bird had chill'd, His kitchen was less amply fill'd. All cormorants, however grey, Must die, or for themselves purvey. But ours had now become so blind, His finny prey he could not find; And, having neither hook nor net, His appetite was poorly met. What hope, with famine thus infested? Necessity, whom history mentions, A famous mother of inventions, The following stratagem suggested: He found upon the water's brink A crab, to which said he, "My friend, A weighty errand let me send: Go quicker than a wink -- Down to the fishes sink, And tell them they are doom'd to die; For, ere eight days have hasten'd by, Its lord will fish this water dry." The crab, as fast as she could scrabble, Went down, and told the scaly rabble. What bustling, gathering, agitation! Straight up they send a deputation To wait upon the ancient bird. "Sir Cormorant, whence hast thou heard This dreadful news? And what Assurance of it hast thou got? How such a danger can we shun? Pray tell us, what is to be done?" "Why, change your dwelling-place," said he, "What, change our dwelling! How can we?" "O, by your leave, I'll take that care, And, one by one, in safety bear You all to my retreat: The path's unknown To any feet, Except my own. A pool, scoop'd out by Nature's hands, Amidst the desert rocks and sands, Where human traitors never come, Shall save your people from their doom." The fish republic swallow'd all, And, coming at the fellow's call, Were singly borne away to stock A pond beneath a lonely rock; And there good prophet cormorant, Proprietor and bailiff sole, From narrow water, clear and shoal, With ease supplied his daily want, And taught them, at their own expense, That heads well stored with common sense Give no devourers confidence. -- Still did the change not hurt their case, Since, had they staid, the human race, Successful by pernicious art, Would have consumed as large a part. What matters who your flesh devours. Of human or of bestial powers? In this respect, or wild or tame, All stomachs seem to me the same: The odds is small, in point of sorrow, Of death today, or death tomorrow. Source (books.google.com): The Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright (London: George Bell and Sons, 1888), book 10, fable 4, pp. 261-62 . Source (Internet Archive): The Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright (London: Ingram, Cooke, and Company, 1853), book 10, fable 4, pp. 72 . Link to this fable in the original French: Les poissons et le cormoran . Return to the table of contents . The Heron, the Fishes, and the Crab Leo Tolstoy A heron was living near a pond. She grew old, and had no strength left with which to catch the fish. She began to contrive how to live by cunning. So she said to the fishes: "You fishes do not know that a calamity is in store for you: I have heard the people say that they are going to let off the pond, and catch every one of you. I know of a nice little pond back of the mountain. I should like to help you, but I am old, and it is hard for me to fly." The fishes begged the heron to help them. So the heron said: "All right, I will do what I can for you, and will carry you over. Only I cannot do it at once, -- I will take you there one after another." And the fishes were happy; they kept begging her: "Carry me over! Carry me over!" And the heron started carrying them. She would take one up, would carry her into the field, and would eat her up. And thus she ate a large number of fishes. In the pond there lived an old crab. When the heron began to take out the fishes, he saw what was up, and said: "Now, heron, take me to the new abode!" The heron took the crab and carried him off. When she flew out on the field, she wanted to throw the crab down. But the crab saw the fish-bones on the ground, and so squeezed the heron's neck with his claws, and choked her to death. Then he crawled back to the pond, and told the fishes. Source (books.google.com): Leo Tolstoy, Fables for Children; Stories for Children; Natural Science Stories; Natural Science Stories; Popular Education; Decembrists; Moral Tales ; The Complete Works of Count Tolstoy, vol. 12 (London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1904), p. 24 . Source (Internet Archive): Leo Tolstoy, Fables for Children; Stories for Children; Natural Science Stories; Natural Science Stories; Popular Education; Decembrists; Moral Tales ; The Complete Works of Count Tolstoy, vol. 12 (Boston: Dana Estes and Company, 1904), p. 24 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 24, 2020. Blackfoot Creation and Origin Myths Blackfoot Creation and Origin Myths edited by D. L. Ashliman Contents The Making of the Earth . Languages Confused on a Mountain . Order of Life and Death . Why People Die Forever . The First Marriage . Old Man Leads a Migration . Old Man and the Great Spirit . This collection of narratives was made among the several divisions of the Blackfoot Indians during the years 1903-1907. In rendering these narratives explanatory matter supplied by the Native-American narrator is indicated by parenthesis, that supplied by the translator or editor (Clark Wissler or D. C. Duvall) is indicated by brackets. The Making of the Earth During the flood, Old Man was sitting on the highest mountain with all the beasts. The flood was caused by the above people, because the baby (a fungus) of the woman who married a star was heedlessly torn in pieces by an Indian child. Old Man sent the Otter down to get some earth. For a long time he waited, then the Otter came up dead. Old Man examined its feet, but found nothing on them. Next he sent Beaver down, but after a long time he also came up drowned. Again nothing was found on his feet. He sent Muskrat to dive next. Muskrat also was drowned. At length he sent the Duck (?). It was drowned, but in its paw held some earth. Old Man saw it, put it in his hand, feigned putting it on the water three times, and at last dropped it. Then the above-people sent rain, and everything grew on the earth. Source: Clark Wissler and D. C. Duvall, Mythology of the Blackfoot Indians (New York: Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, 1908), v. 2, part 1, p. 19 . Return to the table of contents . Languages Confused on a Mountain After the flood, Old Man mixed water with different colors. He whistled, and all the people came together. He gave one man a cup of one kind of water, saying, "You will be chief of these people here." To another man he gave differently colored water, and so on. The Blackfoot, Piegan, and Blood all received black water. Then he said to the people, "Talk," and they all talked differently; but those who drank black water spoke the same. This happened on the highest mountain in the Montana Reservation [Chief Mountain?]. Source: Clark Wissler and D. C. Duvall, Mythology of the Blackfoot Indians (New York: Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, 1908), v. 2, part 1, p. 19 . Return to the table of contents . Order of Life and Death There was once a time when there were but two persons in the world, Old Man and Old Woman. One time, when they were traveling about, Old Man met Old Woman, who said, "Now, let us come to an agreement of some kind; let us decide how the people shall live." "Well," said Old Man, " I am to have the first say in everything." To this Old Woman agreed, provided she had the second say. Then Old Man began, "The women are to tan the hides. When they do this, they are to rub brains on them to make them soft; they are to scrape them well with scraping tools, etc. But all this they are to do very quickly, for it will not be very hard work." "No, I will not agree to this," said Old Woman. "They must tan the hide in the way you say; but it must be made very hard work, and take a long time, so that the good workers may be found out." "Well", said Old Man, "let the people have eyes and mouths in their faces; but they shall be straight up and down." "No," said Old Woman, "we will not have them that way. We will have the eyes and mouth in the faces, as you say; but they shall all be set crosswise." "Well," said Old Man, "the people shall have ten fingers on each hand." "Oh, no!" said Old Woman. "That will be too many. They will be in the way. There shall be four fingers and one thumb on each hand." "Well," said Old Man, "we shall beget children. The genitals shall be at our navels." "No," said Old Woman, "that will make childbearing too easy; the people will not care for their children. The genitals shall be at the pubes." So they went on until they had provided for everything in the lives of the people that were to be. Then Old Woman asked what they should do about life and death. Should the people always live, or should they die? They had some difficulty in agreeing on this; but finally Old Man said, "I will tell you what I will do. I will throw a buffalo chip into the water, and, if it floats, the people die for four days and live again. But, if it sinks, they will die forever." So he threw it in, and it floated. "No," said Old Woman, "we will not decide in that way. I will throw in this rock. If it floats, the people will die for four days. If it sinks, the people will die forever." Then Old Woman threw the rock out into the water, and it sank to the bottom. "There," said she, "it is better for the people to die forever; for, if they did not die forever, they would never feel sorry for each other, and there would be no sympathy in the world." "Well," said Old Man, let it be that way." After a time Old Woman had a daughter, who died. She was very sorry now that it had been fixed so that people died forever. So she said to Old Man, "Let us have our say over again." "No," said he, "we fixed it once." Source: Clark Wissler and D. C. Duvall, Mythology of the Blackfoot Indians (New York: Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, 1908), v. 2, part 1, pp. 19-21 . Return to the table of contents . Why People Die Forever One time Old Man said to Old Woman, "People will never die." Oh! " said Old Woman, "that will never do; because, if people live always, there will be too many people in the world." "Well," said, Old Man, "we do not want to die forever. We shall die for four days and then come to life again." "Oh, no!" said Old Woman, "it will be better to die forever, so that we shall be sorry for each other." "Well," said Old Man, "we will decide this way. We will throw a buffalo chip into the water. If it sinks, we will die forever; if it floats, we shall live again." "Well," said Old Woman, "throw it in." Now, Old Woman had great power, and she caused the chip to turn into a stone, so it sank. So when we die, we die forever. Source: Clark Wissler and D. C. Duvall, Mythology of the Blackfoot Indians (New York: Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, 1908), v. 2, part 1, p. 21 . Return to the table of contents . The First Marriage Now in those days, the men and the women did not live together. The men lived in one camp and the women in the other. The men lived in lodges made of skin with the hair on; the women, in good lodges. [The idea is, that the women dress the skins, hence the men could not live in dressedskin lodges.] One day Old Man came to the camp of the men, and, when he was there, a woman came over from the camp of the women. She said she had been sent by the chief of the women to invite all the men, because the women were going to pick out husbands. Now the men began to get ready, and Old Man dressed himself up in his finest clothes. He was always fine looking. Then they started out, and when they came to the women's camp they all stood up in a row. Now the chief of the women came out to make the first choice. She had on very dirty clothes, and none of the men knew who she was. She went along the line, looked them over, and finally picked out Old Man because of his fine appearance. Now Old Man saw many nicely dressed women waiting their turn, and when the chief of the women took him by the hand he pulled back and broke away. He did this because he thought her a very common woman. When he pulled away, the chief of the women went back to her lodge and instructed the other women not to choose Old Man. While the other women were picking out their husbands, the chief of the women put on her best costume. When she came out, she looked very fine, and as soon as Old Man saw her, he thought, "Oh! There is the chief of the women. I wish to be her husband." He did not know that it was the same woman. Now the chief of the women came down once more to pick out a husband, and as she went around, Old Man kept stepping in front of her, so that she might see him. But she paid no attention to him, finally picking out another for her husband. After a while all the men had been picked out except Old Man. Now he was very angry; but the chief of the women said to him, "After this you are to be a tree, and stand just where you are now." Then he became a tree, and he is mad yet, because he is always caving down the bank. Source: Clark Wissler and D. C. Duvall, Mythology of the Blackfoot Indians (New York: Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, 1908), v. 2, part 1, pp. 21-22 . Return to the table of contents . Old Man Leads a Migration The first Indians were on the other side of the ocean, and Old Man decided to lead them to a better place. So he brought them over the ice to the far north. When they were crossing the ice, the Sarcee were in the middle and there was a boy riding on a dog travois. As they were going along, this boy saw a horn of some animal sticking up through the ice. Now the boy wanted this horn, and began to cry. So his mother took an ax and cut it off. As she did so, the ice gave way, and only those on this side of the place where the horn was will ever get here. Now Old Man led these people down to where the Blood Reserve now is, and told them that this would be a fine country for them, and that they would be very rich. He said, "I will get all the people here." All the people living there ate and lived like wild animals; but Old Man went among them and taught them all the arts of civilization. (When crossing the ice, only about thirty lodges succeeded in getting across, and among these were the representatives of all the tribes now in this country. At that time the Blackfoot were just one tribe.) When he was through teaching them, he did not die, but went among the Sioux, where he remained for a time, but finally disappeared . He took his wife with him. He had no children. Source: Clark Wissler and D. C. Duvall, Mythology of the Blackfoot Indians (New York: Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, 1908), v. 2, part 1, pp. 22-23 . Return to the table of contents . Old Man and the Great Spirit There was once a Great Spirit who was good. He made a man and a woman. Then Old Man came along. No one made Old Man. He always existed. The Great Spirit said to him, "Old Man, have you any power?" "Yes," said Old Man, "I am very strong." "Well," said the Great Spirit, "suppose you make some mountains." So Old Man set to work and made the Sweet-Grass Hills. To do this he took a piece of Chief Mountain. He brought Chief Mountain up to its present location, shaped it up, and named it. The other mountains were called blood colts. "Well," said the Great Spirit, "you are strong." "Now," said Old Man, "there are four of us: the man and woman, you and I." The Great Spirit said, "All right." The Great Spirit said, "I will make a big cross for you to carry." Old Man said "No, you make another man so that he can carry it." The Great Spirit made another man. Old Man carried the cross a while, but soon got tired and wanted to go. The Great Spirit told him that he could go, but he should go out among the people and the animals, and teach them how to live, etc. Now the other man got tired of carrying, the cross. He was a white man. The Great Spirit sent him off as a traveler. So he wandered on alone. The man and woman who had been created wandered off down towards Mexico, where they tried to build a mountain in order to get to the sky to be with their children. But the people got mixed up until they came to have many different languages. Source: Clark Wissler and D. C. Duvall, Mythology of the Blackfoot Indians (New York: Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, 1908), v. 2, part 1, pp. 23-24 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 10, 2019. Chinese Creation and Flood Myth A Chinese Creation and Flood Myth From the Miao People The Miao have no written records, but they have many legends in verse, which they learn to repeat and sing. The Hei Miao (or Black Miao, so called from their dark chocolate-colored clothes) treasure poetical legends of the creation and of a deluge. These are composed in lines of five syllables, in stanzas of unequal length, one interrogative and one responsive. They are sung or recited by two persons or two groups at feasts and festivals, often by a group of youths and a group of maidens. The legend of the creation commences: Who made heaven and earth? Who made insects? Who made men? Made male and made female? I who speak don't know. Heavenly King made heaven and earth, Ziene made insects, Ziene made men and demons, Made male and made female. How is it you don't know? How made heaven and earth? How made insects? How made men and demons? Made male and made female? I who speak don't know. Heavenly King was intelligent, Spat a lot of spittle into his hand, Clapped his hands with a noise, Produced heaven and earth, Tall grass made insects, Stories made men and demons, Made men and demons, Made male and made female. How is it you don't know? The legend proceeds to state how and by whom the heavens were propped up and how the sun was made and fixed in its place. The legend of the flood tells of a great deluge. It commences: Who came to the bad disposition, To send fire and burn the hill? Who came to the bad disposition, To send water and destroy the earth? I who sing don't know. Zie did. Zie was of bad disposition, Zie sent fire and burned the hill; Thunder did. Thunder was of bad disposition, Thunder sent water and destroyed the earth. Why don't you know? In this story of the flood only two persons were saved in a large bottle gourd used as a boat, and these were A-Zie and his sister. After the flood the brother wished his sister to become his wife, but she objected to this as not being proper. At length she proposed that one should take the upper and one the lower millstone, and going to opposite hills should set the stones rolling to the valley between. If these should be found in the valley properly adjusted on above the other, she would be his wife, but not if they came to rest apart. The young man, considering it unlikely that two stones thus rolled down from opposite hills would be found in the valley, one upon another, while pretending to accept the test suggested, secretly placed two other stones in the valley, one upon the other. The stones rolled from the hills were lost in the tall wild grass, and on descending into the valley, A-Zie called his sister to come and see the stones he had placed. She, however, was not satisfied, and suggested as another test that each should take a knife from a double sheath and, going again to the opposite hilltops, hurl them into the valley below. If both these knives were found in the sheath in the valley, she would marry him, but if the knives were found apart, they would live apart. Again the brother surreptitiously placed two knives in the sheath, and, the experiment ending as A-Zie wished, his sister became his wife. They had one child, a misshapen thing without arms or legs, which A-Zie in great anger killed and cut to pieces. He threw the pieces all over the hill, and next morning, on awakening, he found these pieces transformed into men and women. Thus the earth was re-peopled. Source: E. T. C. Werner, Myths and Legends of China (London: George G. Harrap and Company, 1922), pp. 406-408. Edited by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002-2003. Return to Folktales from China , edited by D. L. Ashliman. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 7, 2003. Creation Myths from the Philippines Creation Myths from the Philippines edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2003 Contents How the World Was Made . The Creation (Igorot). How the Moon and the Stars Came to Be (Bukidnon). Origin (Bagobo). The Story of the Creation (Bilaan). In the Beginning (Bilaan). The Children of the Limokon (Mandaya). The Creation Story (Tagalog). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. How the World Was Made This is the ancient Filipino account of the creation. Thousands of years ago there was no land nor sun nor moon nor stars, and the world was only a great sea of water, above which stretched the sky. The water was the kingdom of the god Maguayan, and the sky was ruled by the great god Captan. Maguayan had a daughter called Lidagat, the sea, and Captan had a son known as Lihangin, the wind. The gods agreed to the marriage of their children, so the sea became the bride of the wind. Three sons and a daughter were born to them. The sons were called Licalibutan, Liadlao, and Libulan; and the daughter received the name of Lisuga. Licalibutan had a body of rock and was strong and brave; Liadlao was formed of gold and was always happy; Libulan was made of copper and was weak and timid; and the beautiful Lisuga had a body of pure silver and was sweet and gentle. Their parents were very fond of them, and nothing was wanting to make them happy. After a time Lihangin died and left the control of the winds to his eldest son Licalibutan. The faithful wife Lidagat soon followed her husband, and the children, now grown up, were left without father or mother. However, their grandfathers, Captan and Maguayan, took care of them and guarded them from all evil. After a time, Licalibutan, proud of his power over the winds, resolved to gain more power, and asked his brothers to join him in an attack on Captan in the sky above. At first they refused; but when Licalibutan became angry with them, the amiable Liadlao, not wishing to offend his brother, agreed to help. Then together they induced the timid Libulan to join in the plan. When all was ready the three brothers rushed at the sky, but they could not beat down the gates of steel that guarded the entrance. Then Licalibutan let loose the strongest winds and blew the bars in every direction. The brothers rushed into the opening, but were met by the angry god Captan. So terrible did he look that they turned and ran in terror; but Captan, furious at the destruction of his gates, sent three bolts of lightning after them. The first struck the copper Libulan and melted him into a ball. The second struck the golden Liadlao, and he too was melted. The third bolt struck Licalibutan, and his rocky body broke into many pieces and fell into the sea. So huge was he that parts of his body stuck out above the water and became what is known as land. In the meantime the gentle Lisuga had missed her brothers and started to look for them. She went toward the sky, but as she approached the broken gates, Captan, blind with anger, struck her too with lightning, and her silver body broke into thousands of pieces. Captan then came down from the sky and tore the sea apart, calling on Maguayan to come to him and accusing him of ordering the attack on the sky. Soon Maguayan appeared and answered that he knew nothing of the plot as he had been asleep far down in the sea. After a time he succeeded in calming the angry Captan. Together they wept at the loss of their grandchildren, especially the gentle and beautiful Lisuga; but with all their power they could not restore the dead to life. However, they gave to each body a beautiful light that will shine forever. And so it was that golden Liadlao became the sun, and copper Libulan the moon, while the thousands of pieces of silver Lisuga shine as the stars of heaven. To wicked Licalibutan the gods gave no light, but resolved to make his body support a new race of people. So Captan gave Maguayan a seed, and he planted it on the land, which, as you will remember, was part of Licalibutan's huge body. Soon a bamboo tree grew up, and from the hollow of one of its branches a man and a woman came out. The man's name was Sicalac, and the woman was called Sicabay. They were the parents of the human race. Their first child was a son whom they called Libo; afterwards they had a daughter who was known as Saman. Pandaguan was a younger son and he had a son called Arion. Pandaguan was very clever and invented a trap to catch fish. The very first thing he caught was a huge shark. When he brought it to land, it looked so great and fierce that he thought it was surely a god, and he at once ordered his people to worship it. Soon all gathered around and began to sing and pray to the shark. Suddenly the sky and sea opened, and the gods came out and ordered Pandaguan to throw the shark back into the sea and to worship none but them. All were afraid except Pandaguan. He grew very bold and answered that the shark was as big as the gods, and that since he had been able to overpower it he would also be able to conquer the gods. Then Captan, hearing this, struck Pandaguan with a small thunderbolt, for he did not wish to kill him but merely to teach him a lesson. Then he and Maguayan decided to punish these people by scattering them over the earth, so they carried some to one land and some to another. Many children were afterwards born, and thus the earth became inhabited in all parts. Pandaguan did not die. After lying on the ground for thirty days he regained his strength, but his body was blackened from the lightning, and all his descendants ever since that day have been black. His first son, Arion, was taken north, but as he had been born before his father's punishment he did not lose his color, and all his people therefore are white. Libo and Saman were carried south, where the hot sun scorched their bodies and caused all their descendants to be of a brown color. A son of Saman and a daughter of Sicalac were carried east, where the land at first was so lacking in food that they were compelled to eat clay. On this account their children and their children's children have always been yellow in color. And so the world came to be made and peopled. The sun and moon shine in the sky, and the beautiful stars light up the night. All over the land, on the body of the envious Licalibutan, the children of' Sicalac and Sicabay have grown great in numbers. May they live forever in peace and brotherly love! Source: John Maurice Miller, Philippine Folklore Stories (Boston: Ginn and Company, 1904), pp. 57-64. Preface by John Maurice Miller (or his editor): As these stories are only legends that have been handed down from remote times, the teacher must impress upon the minds of the children that they are myths and are not to be given credence; otherwise the imaginative minds of the native children would accept them as truth, and trouble would be caused that might be hard to remedy. Explain then the fiction and show the children the folly of belief in such fanciful tales. (page 5) Return to the table of contents . The Creation Igorot In the beginning there were no people on the earth. Lumawig, the Great Spirit, came down from the sky and cut many reeds. He divided these into pairs which he placed in different parts of the world, and then he said to them, "You must speak." Immediately the reeds became people, and in each place was a man and a woman who could talk, but the language of each couple differed from that of the others. Then Lumawig commanded each man and woman to marry, which they did. By and by there were many children, all speaking the same language as their parents. These, in turn, married and had many children. In this way there came to be many people on the earth. Now Lumawig saw that there were several things which the people on the earth needed to use, so he set to work to supply them. He created salt, and told the inhabitants of one place to boil it down and sell it to their neighbors. But these people could not understand the directions of the Great Spirit, and the next time he visited them, they had not touched the salt. Then he took it away from them and gave it to the people of a place called Mayinit. These did as he directed, and because of this he told them that they should always be owners of the salt, and that the other peoples must buy of them. Then Lumawig went to the people of Bontoc and told them to get clay and make pots. They got the clay, but they did not understand the molding, and the jars were not well shaped. Because of their failure, Lumawig told them that they would always have to buy their jars, and he removed the pottery to Samoki. When he told the people there what to do, they did just as he said, and their jars were well shaped and beautiful. Then the Great Spirit saw that they were fit owners of the pottery, and he told them that they should always make many jars to sell. In this way Lumawig taught the people and brought to them all the things which they now have. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Company, 1916), pp. 99-101. Notes by Mabel Cook Cole: Lumawig is the greatest of all spirits and now lives in the sky, though for a time his home was in the Igorot village of Bontoc. He married a Bontoc girl, and the stones of their house are still to be seen in the village. It was Lumawig who created the Igorot, and ever since he has taken a great interest in them, teaching them how to overcome the forces of nature, how to plant, to reap and, in fact, everything that they know. Once each month a ceremony is held in his honor in a sacred grove, whose trees are believed to have sprung from the graves of his children. Here prayers are offered for health, good crops, and success in battle. A close resemblance exists between Lumawig of the Igorot and Kaboniyan of the Tinguian, the former being sometimes called Kambun'yan. The Bukidnon of Mindanao have the following story: During a great drought Mampolompon could grow nothing on his clearing except one bamboo, and during a high wind this was broken. From this bamboo came a dog and a woman, who were the ancestors of the Moro. At the north end of the village of Mayinit are a number of brackish hot springs, and from these the people secure the salt which has made the spot famous for miles around. Stones are placed in the shallow streams flowing from these springs, and when they have become encrusted with salt (about once a month) they are washed and the water is evaporated by boiling. The salt, which is then a thick paste, is formed into cakes and baked near the fire for about half an hour, when it is ready for use. It is the only salt in this section, and is in great demand. Even hostile tribes come to a hill overlooking the town and call down, then deposit whatever they have for trade and withdraw, while the Igorot take up the salt and leave it in place of the trade articles. The women of Samoki are known as excellent potters, and their ware is used over a wide area. From a pit on a hillside to the north of the village they dig a reddish-brown clay, which they mix with a bluish mineral gathered on another hillside. When thoroughly mixed, this clay is placed on a board on the ground, and the potter, kneeling before it, begins her molding. Great patience and skill are required to bring the vessel to the desired shape. When it is completed it is set in the sun to dry for two or three days, after which it is ready for the baking. The new pots are piled tier above tier on the ground and blanketed with grass tied into bundles. Then pine bark is burned beneath and around the pile for about an hour, when the ware is sufficiently fired. It is then glazed with resin and is ready to market. Return to the table of contents . How the Moon and the Stars Came to Be Bukidnon (Mindanao) One day in the times when the sky was close to the ground a spinster went out to pound rice. Before she began her work, she took off the beads from around her neck and the comb from her hair, and hung them on the sky, which at that time looked like coral rock. Then she began working, and each time that she raised her pestle into the air it struck the sky. For some time she pounded the rice, and then she raised the pestle so high that it struck the sky very hard. Immediately the sky began to rise, and it went up so far that she lost her ornaments. Never did they come down, for the comb became the moon and the beads are the stars that are scattered about. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Company, 1916), p. 124. Notes by Mabel Cook Cole: The common way to pound rice is to place a bundle of the grain on the ground on a dried carabao hide and pound it with a pestle to loosen the heads from the straw. When they are free they are poured into a mortar and again pounded with the pestle until the grain is separated from the chaff, after which it is winnowed. According to the Klemantin myth (Borneo), the sky was raised when a giant named Usai accidentally struck it with his mallet while pounding rice. See Hose and McDougall, Pagan Tribes of Borneo , p. 142. Return to the table of contents . Origin Bagobo (Mindanao) In the beginning there lived one man and one woman, Toglai and Toglibon. Their first children were a boy and a girl. When they were old enough, the boy and the girl went far away across the waters seeking a good place to live in. Nothing more was heard of them until their children, the Spaniards and Americans, came back. After the first boy and girl left, other children were born to the couple; but they all remained at Cibolan on Mount Apo with their parents, until Toglai and Toglibon died and became spirits. Soon after that there came a great drought which lasted for three years. All the waters dried up, so that there were no rivers, and no plants could live. "Surely," said the people, "Manama is punishing us, and we must go elsewhere to find food and a place to dwell in." So they started out. Two went in the direction of the sunset, carrying with them stones from Cibolan River. After a long journey they reached a place where were broad fields of cogon grass and an abundance of water, and there they made their home. Their children still live in that place and are called Magindanau, because of the stones which the couple carried when they left Cibolan. Two children of Toglai and Toglibon went to the south, seeking a home, and they carried with them women's baskets (baraan). When they found a good spot, they settled down. Their descendants, still dwelling at that place, are called Baraan or Bilaan, because of the women's baskets. So two by two the children of the first couple left the land of their birth. In the place where each settled a new people developed, and thus it came about that all the tribes in the world received their names from things that the people carried out of Cibolan, or from the places where they settled. All the children left Mount Apo save two (a boy and a girl), whom hunger and thirst had made too weak to travel. One day when they were about to die the boy crawled out to the field to see if there was one living thing, and to his surprise he found a stalk of sugarcane growing lustily. He eagerly cut it, and enough water came out to refresh him and his sister until the rains came. Because of this, their children are called Bagobo. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Company, 1916), pp. 133-134. Note by Mabel Cook Cole: This is a good example of the way in which people at a certain stage try to account for their surroundings. Nearly all consider themselves the original people. We find the Bagobo no exception to this. In this tale, which is evidently very old, they account for themselves and their neighbors, and then, to meet present needs, they adapt the story to include the white people whom they have known for not more than two hundred years. Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Creation Bilaan (Mindanao) In the very beginning there lived a being so large that he cannot be compared with any known thing. His name was Melu, and when he sat on the clouds, which were his home, he occupied all the space above. His teeth were pure gold, and because he was very cleanly and continually rubbed himself with his hands, his skin became pure white. The dead skin which he rubbed off his body was placed on one side in a pile, and by and by this pile became so large that he was annoyed and set himself to consider what he could do with it. Finally Melu decided to make the earth; so he worked very hard in putting the dead skin into shape, and when it was finished he was so pleased with it that he determined to make two beings like himself, though smaller, to live on it. Taking the remnants of the material left after making the earth he fashioned two men, but just as they were all finished except their noses, Tau Tana from below the earth appeared and wanted to help him. Melu did not wish any assistance, and a great argument ensued. Tau Tana finally won his point and made the noses which he placed on the people upside down. When all was finished, Melu and Tau Tana whipped the forms until they moved. Then Melu went to his home above the clouds, and Tau Tana returned to his place below the earth. All went well until one day a great rain came, and the people on the earth nearly drowned from the water which ran off their heads into their noses. Melu, from his place on the clouds, saw their danger, and he came quickly to earth and saved their lives by turning their noses the other side up. The people were very grateful to him, and promised to do anything he should ask of them. Before he left for the sky, they told him that they were very unhappy living on the great earth all alone, so he told them to save all the hair from their heads and the dry skin from their bodies and the next time he came he would make them some companions. And in this way there came to be a great many people on the earth. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Company, 1916), pp. 139-140. Notes by Mabel Cook Cole: This story is well known among the Bilaan, who are one of the tribes least influenced by the Spaniards, and yet it bears so many incidents similar to biblical accounts that there is a strong suggestion of Christian influence. It is possible that these ideas came through the Mohammedan Moro. Melu is the most powerful of the spirits and the one to whom the people resort in times of danger. A similar story is found in British North Borneo. See Evans, Journal of Royal Anthropological Institute , 1913, p. 423. Return to the table of contents . In the Beginning Bilaan (Mindanao) In the beginning there were four beings (Melu, Fiuweigh, Diwata, and Saweigh), and they lived on an island no larger than a hat. On this island there were no trees or grass or any other living thing besides these four people and one bird (Buswit). One day they sent this bird out across the waters to see what he could find, and when he returned he brought some earth, a piece of rattan, and some fruit. Melu, the greatest of the four, took the soil and shaped it and beat it with a paddle in the same manner in which a woman shapes pots of clay, and when he finished he had made the earth. Then he planted the seeds from the fruit, and they grew until there was much rattan and many trees bearing fruit. The four beings watched the growth for a long time and were well pleased with the work, but finally Melu said, "Of what use is this earth and all the rattan and fruit if there are no people?" And the others replied, "Let us make some people out of wax." So they took some wax and worked long, fashioning it into forms, but when they brought them to the fire the wax melted, and they saw that men could not be made in that way. Next they decided to try to use dirt in making people, and Melu and one of his companions began working on that. All went well till they were ready to make the noses. The companion, who was working on that part, put them on upside down. Melu told him that the people would drown if he left them that way, but he refused to change them. When his back was turned, however, Melu seized the noses, one by one, and turned them as they now are. But he was in such a hurry that he pressed his finger at the root, and it left a mark in the soft clay which you can still see on the faces of people. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Company, 1916), pp. 141-142. Return to the table of contents . The Children of the Limokon Mandaya (Mindanao) In the very early days before there were any people on the earth, the limokon (a kind of dove ) were very powerful and could talk like men though they looked like birds. One limokon laid two eggs, one at the mouth of the Mayo River and one farther up its course. After some time these eggs hatched, and the one at the mouth of the river became a man, while the other became a woman. The man lived alone on the bank of the river for a long time, but he was very lonely and wished many times for a companion. One day when he was crossing the river something was swept against his legs with such force that it nearly caused him to drown. On examining it, he found that it was a hair, and he determined to go up the river and find whence it came. He traveled up the stream, looking on both banks, until finally he found the woman, and he was very happy to think that at last he could have a companion. They were married and had many children, who are the Mandaya still living along the Mayo River. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Company, 1916), pp. 143-144. Notes by Mabel Cook Cole: This origin story is of a very different type from those of the Bukidnon and Bagobo. While the others show foreign influence, this appears to be typically primitive. The limokon is the omen bird of the Mandaya. It is believed to be a messenger from the spirit world which, by its calls, warns the people of danger or promises them success. If the coo of this bird comes from the right side, it is a good sign, but if it is on the left, in back, or in front, it is a bad sign, and the Mandaya knows that he must change his plans. Return to the table of contents . The Creation Story Tagalog When the world first began there was no land, but only the sea and the sky, and between them was a kite (a bird something like a hawk). One day the bird which had nowhere to light grew tired of flying about, so she stirred up the sea until it threw its waters against the sky. The sky, in order to restrain the sea, showered upon it many islands until it could no longer rise, but ran back and forth. Then the sky ordered the kite to light on one of the islands to build her nest, and to leave the sea and the sky in peace. Now at this time the land breeze and the sea breeze were married, and they had a child which was a bamboo. One day when this bamboo was floating about on the water, it struck the feet of the kite which was on the beach. The bird, angry that anything should strike it, pecked at the bamboo, and out of one section came a man and from the other a woman. Then the earthquake called on all the birds and fish to see what should be done with these two, and it was decided that they should marry. Many children were born to the couple, and from them came all the different races of people. After a while the parents grew very tired of having so many idle and useless children around, and they wished to be rid of them, but they knew of no place to send them to. Time went on and the children became so numerous that the parents enjoyed no peace. One day, in desperation, the father seized a stick and began beating them on all sides. This so frightened the children that they fled in different directions, seeking hidden rooms in the house -- some concealed themselves in the walls, some ran outside, while others hid in the fireplace, and several fled to the sea. Now it happened that those who went into the hidden rooms of the house later became the chiefs of the islands; and those who concealed themselves in the walls became slaves. Those who ran outside were free men; and those who hid in the fireplace became negroes; while those who fled to the sea were gone many years, and when their children came back they were the white people. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Company, 1916), pp. 187-188. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Flood Myths from the Philippines . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 8, 2003. The Raelian Creation of Life on Earth The Creation of Life on Earth according to The Raelian Movement abstracted from the official web site of RAEL (The True Face of God) by D. L. Ashliman Scientists from another planet created all life on earth using DNA. On December 13, 1973, in the heart of the Puy de Lassolas crater, near Clermond-Ferrand in the center of France, a journalist, Claude Vorilhon, saw a metallic looking engine about 7 meters in diameter in the shape of a flattened bell descend from the sky. It resembled no existing terrestrial technology. Astounded, he saw the engine stop and a trap door open. A human being of small size (1.2 meters) descended and approached him. Reassured by the pacifist attitude of the visitor, Claude Vorilhon wanted to communicate, and questioned him in French, "Where do you come from?" He heard the small being answer, "From very far, from another planet. I have come to meet you, you Claude Vorilhon. I have many things to tell you, and I have chosen you for a difficult mission. You are going to transmit to humans what I am going to tell you, and according to their reactions we will see if we can officially show ourselves to them. I know that you have recently read the Bible. Come into my machine. We will be more comfortable to talk." The extra-terrestrial was about four feet in height, had long dark hair, almond-shaped eyes, olive skin, and exuded harmony and humor. He gave Claude Vorilhon the name Rael, then told him, "We were the ones who made all life on earth. You mistook us for gods. We were at the origin of your main religions. Now that you are mature enough to understand this, we would like to enter official contact through an embassy." The messages dictated to Rael explain how life on Earth is not the result of random evolution, nor the work of a supernatural "God." It is a deliberate creation, using DNA, by a scientifically advanced people who made human beings literally in their image, what one can call "scientific creationism." References to these scientists and their work, as well as to their symbol of infinity can be found in the ancient texts of many cultures. For example, in Genesis, the biblical account of creation, the word "Elohim" has been mistranslated as "God" in the singular, but it is a plural, which means "those who came from the sky." A very long time ago on a distant planet, the development of knowledge made it possible to scientifically create life. The ethics committees at the time, which were put in place by this distant government, banned such experiments from being done on their planet. The scientific teams were given the material and technological means to go and explore other planets in order to continue these projects deemed dangerous for the population. Our planet, "the Earth," was one of these sites where such research was applied, in particular the synthesis of life in laboratories. They made reconnaissance flights, and artificial satellites were placed around the Earth to study its constitution and atmosphere, as we are currently doing on Mars or Jupiter. Then, they started a vast terraforming project, in other words, planning of the soil and the implementation of a big colony of technicians, scientists in all disciplines, and artists. They pursued the project they were forced to stop on their planet of origin: the creation of life. The work done in genetic engineering allowed them to conceive all imaginable life forms on a planet which could offer such a luxury of possibilities, since it was virgin. After the creation of elementary life forms from the synthesis of DNA, they created more complex forms. First was plant life. Then there were the aquatic animals, which were carefully conceived so as to find the right ecological balance. Then came birds of all sorts. The conjunction of the scientist's and artist's ideas gave diverse and remarkable colors, forms, and attitudes to life on earth. Despite strict directives from their government, after the creation of terrestrial animals some scientists were tempted to reproduce a being with human shape and behavior. These works, which were done in total secrecy, succeeded after a long period of trials and prototypes. The public opinion on their planet was scandalized when they discovered the facts. Public opinion was forced to accept that the first humans were a reality. So, the experiment was continued officially, with orders as strict as the previous ones: to keep these new creatures in total ignorance of their origin. At this time in their history, these scientists were not aware yet that they had given birth to a new humanity on earth, our humanity. They were merely repeating an unwavering cycle in the cosmos: The created will one day become creator. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 8, 2003. The Creation, according to the Book of Genesis The Creation of Heaven and Earth according to The First Book of Moses called Genesis (King James Version) Chapter 1 In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. And God said, Let there be light: and there was light. And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the darkness. And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day. And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters. And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so. And God called the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the morning were the second day. And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so. And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters called he Seas: and God saw that it was good. And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth: and it was so. And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind: and God saw that it was good. And the evening and the morning were the third day. And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years: And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was so. And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also. And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth, And to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw that it was good. And the evening and the morning were the fourth day. And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven. And God created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that it was good. And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth. And the evening and the morning were the fifth day. And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so. And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that it was good. And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth. And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat. And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for meat: and it was so. And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very good. And the evening and the morning were the sixth day. Chapter 2 Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them. And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and made. These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the LORD God made the earth and the heavens, And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the LORD God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground. But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground. And the LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul. And the LORD God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed. And out of the ground made the LORD God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil. And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads. The name of the first is Pison: that is it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold; And the gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone. And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia. And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which goeth toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates. And the LORD God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it. And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat: But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die. And the LORD God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him. And out of the ground the LORD God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof. And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him. And the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof; And the rib, which the LORD God had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man. And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man. Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh. And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed. Chapter 3 Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the LORD God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden: But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die: For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat. And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons. And they heard the voice of the LORD God walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the LORD God amongst the trees of the garden. And the LORD God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou? And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself. And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat? And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat. And the LORD God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. And the LORD God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life: And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel. Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee. And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life; Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return. And Adam called his wife's name Eve; because she was the mother of all living. Unto Adam also and to his wife did the LORD God make coats of skins, and clothed them. And the LORD God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever: Therefore the LORD God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken. So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 4, 2003. Legendary Origins Legendary Origins edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2003-2010 Contents The Origin of the Wrekin (England). Bomere Pool (England). The Origin of Tis Lake (Denmark). The Origin of the Island Hiddensee (Germany). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Origin of the Wrekin England Long, long ago, in the days when there were giants in the land, two of them were turned out by the rest and forced to go and live by themselves, so they set to work to build themselves a hill to live in. In a very short time they had dug out the earth from the bed of the Severn, which runs in the trench they made to the present time, and with it they piled up the Wrekin, intending to make it their home. Those bare patches on the turf, between the Bladderstone and the top of the hill, are the marks of their feet, where from that day to this the grass has never grown. But they had not been there long before they quarrelled, and one of them struck at the other with his spade, but failed to hit him, and the spade descending to the ground cleft the solid rock and made the "Needle's Eye." Then they began to fight, and the giant with the spade (for they seem to have had only one between them -- perhaps that was what they quarrelled about!) was getting the best of it at first, but a raven flew up and pecked at his eyes, and the pain made him shed such a mighty tear that it hollowed out the little basin in the rock which we call the Raven's Bowl, or sometimes the Cuckoo's Cup, which has never been dry since, but is always full of water even in the hottest summers. And now you may suppose that it was very easy for the other giant to master the one who had the spade, and when he had done so, he determined to put him where he could never trouble anyone again. So he very quickly built up the Ercall Hill beside the Wrekin, and imprisoned his fallen foe within it. There the poor blind giant remains until this day, and in the dead of night you may sometimes hear him groaning. There is another and a better-known legend of this famous Wreken: Once upon a time there was a wicked old giant in Wales who, for some reason or other, had a very great spite against the Mayor of Shrewsbury and all his people, and he made up his mind to dam up the Severn, and by that means cause such a flood that the town would be drowned. So off he set, carrying a spadeful of earth, and tramped along mile after mile trying to find the way to Shrewsbury. And how he missed it I cannot tell, but he must have gone wrong somewhere, for at last he got close to Wellington, and by that time he was puffing and blowing under his heavy load, and wishing he was at the end of his journey. By and by there came a cobbler along the road with a sack of old boots and shoes on his back, for he lived at Wellington, and went once a fortnight to Shrewsbury to collect his customers' old boots and shoes, and take them home with him to mend. And the giant called out to him. "I say," he said, "how far is it to Shrewsbury?" "Shrewsbury?" said the cobbler; "what do you want at Shrewsbury?" "Why," said the giant, "to fill up the Severn with this lump of earth I've got here. I've an old grudge against the mayor and the folks at Shrewsbury, and now I mean to drown them out, and get rid of them all at once." "My word!" thought the cobbler. "This'll never do! I can't afford to lose my customers!" And he spoke up again. "Eh!" he said, "you'll never get to Shrewsbury -- not today nor tomorrow. Why look at me! I'm just come from Shrewsbury, and I've had time to wear out all these old boots and shoes on the road since I started." And he showed him his sack. "Oh!" said the giant, with a great groan. "Then it's no use! I'm fairly tired out already, and I can't carry this load of mine any farther. I shall just drop it here and go back home." So he dropped the earth on the ground just where he stood, and scraped his boots on the spade, and off he went home again to Wales, and nobody ever heard anything of him in Shropshire after. But where he put down his load, there stands the Wrekin to this day; and even the earth that he scraped off his boots was such a pile that it made the little Ercall by the Wrekin's side. Source: Charlotte S. Burne, Shropshire Folk-Lore: A Sheaf of Glearnings (London: Trübner and Company, 1883), pp. 2-3 . The Wrekin is a prominent peak (1334 feet high) just south of Wellington and Shrewsbury in western England, near the Welsh border. Return to the table of contents . Bomere Pool England Many years ago a village stood in the hollow which is now filled up by the mere. But the inhabitants were a wicked race, who mocked at God and his priest. They turned back to the idolatrous practices of their fathers, and worshipped Thor and Woden. They scorned to bend the knee, save in mockery, to the White Christ who had died to save their souls. The old priest earnestly warned them that God would punish such wickedness as theirs by some sudden judgment, but they laughed him to scorn. They fastened fish bones to the skirt of his cassock, and set the children to pelt him with mud and stones. The holy man was not dismayed at this; nay, he renewed his entreaties and warnings, so that some few turned from their evil ways and worshipped with him in the little chapel which stood on the bank of a rivulet that flowed down from the mere on the hillside. The rains fell that December in immense quantities. The mere was swollen beyond its usual limits, and all the hollows in the hills were filled to overflowing. One day when the old priest was on the hillside gathering fuel he noticed that the barrier of peat, earth, and stones, which prevented the mere from flowing into the valley, was apparently giving way before the mass of water above. He hurried down to the village and besought the men to come up and cut a channel for the discharge of the superfluous waters of the mere. They only greeted his proposal with shouts of derision, and told him to go and mind his prayers, and not spoil their feast with his croaking and his killjoy presence. These heathen were then keeping their winter festival with great revelry. It fell on Christmas Eve. The same night the aged priest summoned his few faithful ones to attend at the midnight mass, which ushered in the feast of our Savior's nativity. The night was stormy, and the rain fell in torrents, yet this did not prevent the little flock from coming to the chapel. The old servant of God had already begun the holy sacrifice, when a roar was heard in the upper part of the valley. The server was just ringing the Sanctus bell which hung in the bell cot, when a flood of water dashed into the church, and rapidly rose till it put out the altar lights. In a few moments more the whole building was washed away, and the mere, which had burst its mountain barrier, occupied the hollow in which the village had stood. Men say that if you sail over the mere on Christmas Eve, just after midnight, you may hear the Sanctus bell tolling. Here is another variant of the same legend, related to me by a lady in the parish of Condover, 1881: In the days of the Roman empire, when Uriconium was standing, a very wicked city stood where we now see Bomere Pool. The inhabitants had turned back from Christianity to heathenism, and though God sent one of the Roman soldiers to be a prophet to them, like Jonah to Nineveh, they would not repent. Far from that, they ill-used and persecuted the preacher. Only the daughter of the governor remained constant to the faith. She listened gladly to the Christian's teaching, and he on his part loved her, and would have had her to be his wife. But no such happy lot was in store for the faithful pair. On the following Easter eve, sudden destruction came upon the city. The distant Caradoc [a hill] sent forth flames of fire, and at the same time the city was overwhelmed by a tremendous flood, while the sun in the heavens danced for joy, and the cattle in the stalls knelt in thanksgiving that God had not permitted such wickedness to go unpunished. But the Christian warrior was saved from the flood, and he took a boat and rowed over the waters, seeking for his betrothed, but all in vain. His boat was overturned, and he too was drowned in the depths of the mere. Yet whenever Easter eve falls on the same day as it did that year, the form of the Roman warrior may be seen again, rowing across Bomere in search of his lost love, while the church bells are heard ringing far in the depths below. Source: Charlotte S. Burne, Shropshire Folk-Lore: A Sheaf of Glearnings (London: Trübner and Company, 1883), pp. 64-66 . Bomere Pool is a lake near Shrewsbury in western England. The word mere (akin to the German Meer , sea) can refer to a sea, an inlet, or a lake. Return to the table of contents . The Origin of Tis Lake Denmark A troll had once taken up his abode near the village of Kund, in the high bank on which the church now stands; but when the people about there had become pious, and went constantly to church, the troll was dreadfully annoyed by their almost incessant ringing of bells in the steeple of the church. He was at last obliged, in consequence of it, to take his departure; for nothing has more contributed to the emigration of the troll folk out of the country than the increasing piety of the people, and their taking to bell ringing. The troll of Kund accordingly quitted the country, and went over to Funen, where he lived for some time in peace and quiet. Now it chanced that a man who had lately settled in the town of Kund, coming to Funen on business, met on the road with this same troll. "Where do you live?" said the troll to him. Now there was nothing whatever about the troll unlike a man, so he answered him, as was the truth, "I am from the town of Kund." "So?" said the troll. "I don't know you then! And yet I think I know every man in Kund. Will you, however," continued he, "just be so kind to take a letter from me back with you to Kund?" The man said, of course, he had no objection. The troll then thrust the letter into his pocket, and charged him strictly not to take it out till he came to Kund church, and then to throw it over the churchyard wall, and the person for whom it was intended would get it. The troll then went away in great haste, and with him the letter went entirely out of the man's mind. But when he was come back to Zealand he sat down by the meadow where Tis Lake now is, and suddenly recollected the troll's letter. He felt a great desire to look at it at least. So he took it out of his pocket, and sat a while with it in his hands, when suddenly there began to dribble a little water out of the seal. The letter now unfolded itself, and the water came out faster and faster, and it was with the utmost difficulty that the poor man was enabled to save his life, for the malicious troll had enclosed an entire lake in the letter. The troll, it is plain, had thought to avenge himself on Kund church by destroying it in this manner; but God ordered it so that the lake chanced to run out in the great meadow where it now flows. Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), pp. 111-12 . Tis Lake (Danish, Tissø ) is in western Zealand Return to the table of contents . The Origin of the Island Hiddensee Germany When in the ninth century the monks of Corvei were attempting to convert the heathens of Rügen to the Christian faith, one of the missionaries traveled to Hiddensee. Late one evening he stopped at the door of a hut in a fishing village and asked to be allowed inside. The woman of the house rejected him as a beggar, sending him away with harsh words. He then turned to her poor neighbor, where he at once received shelter and nourishment. The next morning he thanked the poor widow, then departed from her with these words, "I have neither gold nor silver to pay for the lodging, but the first thing you do today shall be blessed!" Thinking nothing of these words, she began to measure a little piece of linen that she had woven. But it had no end. She measured and measured throughout the whole day, until the sun went down, and thus filled her entire house with linen. Remembering the words of the apostle, she revealed the source of her good fortune to her envious neighbor. The latter remembered the words exactly, and when, some time later, the missionary once again knocked on her door, she received him with the greatest eagerness. The next morning, after the guest had departed saying the familiar words, she decided to immediately count the money she had saved in a jar. However, first of all she had to go outside to answer an unexpected call of nature. Suddenly the holy man's blessing took effect, and with such force that the land was flooded and became separated from Rügen. Source: A. Haas, "Urspring der Insel Hiddensee," Rügensche Sagen und Märchen (Stettin: Johs. Burmeister's Buchhandlung, 1903), no. 201, pp. 178-79 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2003. Rügen is a large German island in the Baltic Sea. Hiddensee is a smaller island off the west coast of Rügen. Link to a home page for Hiddensee (in the German language). The episode of the wish with its unanticipated bad consequences is classified as an Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 750A folktale. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 22, 2013. Origin of Underground People The Origin of Underground People Legends about fairies, elves, trolls, and other hidden creatures translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1997-2024 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Fallen Angels Origin of the Elves (Iceland). The Origin of Bergfolk (Denmark). When Satan Was Cast Out of Heaven (Sweden). The Origin of Fairies (Scotland). Angels Who Were Turned Out of Heaven (Ireland). The Fairy Race (Ireland). The Fairies as Fallen Angels (Ireland). The Tylwyth Teg (Wales). The Origin of the Elves (Switzerland). Lower Elemental Spirits (Bohemia). Eve's Unequal Children (Folktales of Type 758) The Genesis of the Hid-Folk (Iceland). The Origin of the Troll Folk (Denmark). The Hidden People in Valdres (Norway). The Origin of Fairies (Wales). The Baby Farmer (Wales). A Curious Legend (Slavonic). The Creation of the Underground People (Germany). Eve's Unequal Children (Germany). Eve's Children (Austria / Italy). The Offspring of Lilith, Adam's First Wife The Origin of the Tusser (Norway). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Fallen Angels Origin of the Elves Iceland A traveler once lost his way, and knew not whither to turn or what to do. At last, after wandering about for some time, he came to a hut, which he had never seen before; and on his knocking at the door, an old woman opened it, and invited him to come in, which he gladly did. Inside, the house seemed to be a clean and good one. The old woman led him to the warmest room, where were sitting two young and beautiful girls. Besides these, no one else was in the house. He was well received and kindly treated, and having eaten a good supper was shown to bed. He asked whether one of the girls might stay with him, as his companion for the night, and his request was granted. And now wishing to kiss her, the traveler turned towards her, and placed his hand upon her; but his hand sank through her, as if she had been of mist, and though he could well see her lying beside him, he could grasp nothing but the air. So he asked what this all meant, and she said, "Be not astonished, for I am a spirit. When the devil, in times gone by, made war in heaven, he, with all his armies, was driven into outer darkness. Those who turned their eyes to look after him as he fell, were also driven out of heaven; but those who were neither for nor against him, were sent to the earth and commanded to dwell there in the rocks and mountains. These are called elves and hidden people. They can live in company with none but their own race. They do either good or evil, which they will, but what they do they do thoroughly. They have no bodies as you other mortals, but can take a human form and be seen of men when they wish. I am one of these fallen spirits, and so you can never hope to embrace me." To this fate the traveler yielded himself, and has handed down to us this story. Source (books.google.com): Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 20-21 . Source (Internet Archive): Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 29-21 . Link to this legend in the original Icelandic: Books.google.com: Jón Árnason, "Uppruni álfa," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 5-6 . Internet Archive: Jón Árnason, "Uppruni álfa," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 5-6 . Return to the table of contents . The Origin of Bergfolk Denmark Bergmen originated in this way, that when Our Lord cast down the wicked angels from heaven they could not all get to hell together, and some of them settled in the mounds and banks. Brownies, bergmen, and such creatures originated in this way. When Our Lord cast the wicked angels down from heaven some of them fell on mounds and banks, and these became bergmen; some fell into woods and mosses, and these became fairies ( ellefolk ), while those that fell into buildings became brownies ( nisser ). They are just little devils, the whole lot of them. Source (books.google.com): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples (London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), p. 93 . Source (Internet Archive): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples (London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), p. 93 . Craigie's source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Bjærgfolks tilblivelse," Danske Sagn, som de har lydt i Folkemunde , vol. 1 (Aarhus: Folkeblads Trykkeri, 1892), pp. 3-4 . Return to the table of contents . When Satan Was Cast Out of Heaven Sweden Know that when Satan was cast out of heaven, on account of his pride, and fell to the earth, there were other spirits, which, like him, were also cast out. These spirits, in their fall, were borne hither and thither on the winds like the golden leaves in the autumn storm, falling to earth finally, some into the sea, some into the forests, and some upon the mountains. Where they fell there they remained, so the saying runs, and found there their field of action. After their abiding places they were given different names. Thus we have sea nymphs, mountain fairies, wood fairies, elves, and other spirits, all of which are described in the catechism. Source (books.google.com): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), p. 56 . Source (Internet Archive): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), p. 56 . This excerpt is from a longer account entitled "Katrineholm Manor" (pp. 55-59) from the province of Småland in southern Sweden. Hofberg's source is "a good old woman, resident in the neighborhood." Hofberg does not give this excerpt a title. Link to this text in the original Swedish: Books.google.com: Herman Hofberg, Svenska Folksägner (Stockholm: Fr. Skoglunds Förlag, 1882), pp. 44-45 . Return to the table of contents . The Origin of Fairies Scotland Various theories have been advanced as to the origin of fairies and as to the belief in them. The most concrete form in which the belief has been urged has been by the Rev. Robert Kirk, minister of Aberfoyle, in Perthshire. Another theory of the origin of fairies I took down in the island of Miunghlaidh (Minglay; and, though I have given it in Carmina Gadelica , it is sufficiently interesting to be quoted here. During October 1871, Roderick Macneill, known as Ruaraidh mac Dhomhuil, then ninety-two years of age, told it in Gaelic to the late J. F. Campbell of Islay and the writer, when they were storm-stayed in the precipitous island of Miunghlaidh, Barra: The Proud Angel fomented a rebellion among the angels a of heaven, where he had been a leading light. He declared that he would go and found a kingdom for himself. When going out at the door of heaven the Proud Angel brought prickly lightning and biting lightning out of the doorstep with his heels. Many angels followed him -- so many that at last the Son called out, "Father! Father! the city is being emptied!" whereupon the Father ordered that the gates of heaven and the gates of hell should be closed. This was instantly done. And those who were in were in, and those who were out were out; while the hosts who had left heaven and had not reached hell flew into the holes of the earth, like the stormy petrels. These are the Fairy Folk -- ever since doomed to live under the ground, and only allowed to emerge where and when the King permits. They are never allowed abroad on Thursday, that being Columba's Day; nor on Friday, that being the Son's Day; nor on Saturday, that being Mary's Day; nor on Sunday, that being the Lord's Day. God be between me and every fairy, Every ill wish and every druidry; Today is Thursday on sea and land, I trust in the King that they do not hear me. On certain nights when their bruthain ( bowers ) are open and their lamps are lit, and the song and the dance are moving merrily, the fairies may be heard singing light-heartedly: Not of the seed of Adam are we, Nor is Abraham our father; But of the seed of the Proud Angel, Driven forth from Heaven. Source (books.google.com): W. Y. Evans Wentz, The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries (London, New York, Toronto, and Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 1911), pp. 84-86 . Source (Internet Archive): W. Y. Evans Wentz, The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries (London, New York, Toronto, and Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 1911), pp. 84-86 . Return to the table of contents . Angels Who Were Turned Out of Heaven Ireland It is said by those who ought to understand such things, that the good people, or the fairies, are some of the angels who were turned out of heaven, and who landed on their feet in this world, while the rest of their companions, who had more sin to sink them, went down further to a worse place. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireand (London: John Murray, 1825), p. 37 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireand (London: John Murray, 1825), p. 37 . Return to the table of contents . The Fairy Race Ireland The Sidhe , or spirit race, called also the Feadh-Ree , or fairies, are supposed to have been once angels in heaven, who were cast out by Divine command as a punishment for their inordinate pride. Some fell to earth, and dwelt there, long before man was created, as the first gods of the earth. Others fell into the sea, and they built themselves beautiful fairy palaces of crystal and pearl underneath the waves; but on moonlight nights they often come up on the land, riding their white horses, and they hold revels with their fairy kindred of the earth, who live in the clefts of the hills, and they dance to gether on the green sward under the ancient trees, and drink nectar from the cups of the flowers, which is the fairy wine. Other fairies, however, are demoniacal, and given to evil and malicious deeds; for when cast out of heaven they fell into hell, and there the devil holds them under his rule, and sends them forth as he wills upon missions of evil to tempt the souls of men downward by the false glitter of sin and pleasure. These spirits dwell under the earth, and impart their knowledge only to certain evil persons chosen of the devil, who gives them power to make incantations, and brew love potions, and to work wicked spells, and they can assume different forms by their knowledge and use of certain magical herbs. Source (books.google.com): Lady Wilde [Lady Jane Francesca Elgee Wilde], Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland , vol. 1 (London: Ward and Downey, 1887), pp. 68-69 . Source (Internet Archive): Lady Wilde [Lady Jane Francesca Elgee Wilde], Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland , vol. 1 (Boston: Ticknor and Company, 1887), pp. 68-69 . Return to the table of contents . The Fairies as Fallen Angels Ireland The islanders, like all the Irish, believe that the fairies are the fallen angels who were cast down by the Lord God out of heaven for their sinful pride. And some fell into the sea, and some on the dry land, and some fell deep down into hell, and the devil gives to these knowledge and power, and sends them on earth where they work much evil. But the fairies of the earth and the sea are mostly gentle and beautiful creatures, who will do no harm if they are let alone, and allowed to dance on the fairy raths in the moonlight to their own sweet music, undisturbed by the presence of mortals. Source (books.google.com): Lady Wilde [Lady Jane Francesca Elgee Wilde], Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland , (London: Ward and Downey, 1888), p. 89 . Source (Internet Archive): Lady Wilde [Lady Jane Francesca Elgee Wilde], Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland , (London: Ward and Downey, 1888), p. 89 . Return to the table of contents . The Tylwyth Teg Wales The common or popular theory is in Wales the poetico-religious one. This is, in a word, the belief that the Tylwyth Teg are the souls of dead mortals not bad enough for hell nor good enough for heaven. They are doomed to live on earth, to dwell in secret places, until the resurrection day, when they will be admitted into paradise. Meantime they must be either incessantly toiling or incessantly playing, but their toil is fruitless and their pleasure unsatisfying. A variation of this general belief holds these souls to be the souls of the ancient Druids, a fancy which is specially impressive, as indicating the duration of their penance, and reminds us of the Wandering Jew myth . It is confined mainly to the Coblynau, or dwellers in mines and caves. Another variation considers the fairies bad spirits of still remoter origin -- the same in fact who were thrown over the battlements of heaven along with Satan, but did not fall into hell -- landed on the earth instead, where they are permitted to tarry till doomsday as above. A detail of this theory is in explanation of the rare appearance of fairies nowadays; they are refraining from mischief in view of the near approach of the judgment, with the hope of thus conciliating heaven. Source (books.google.com): Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), pp. 134 . Source (Internet Archive): Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), pp. 134 . Return to the table of contents . The Origin of the Elves Switzerland When the fallen spirits were cast into hell, God gave them a deadline by which time all of them were to have arrived at this place. However, their number was so great that a thick crowd of them fell from heaven like snow. Like snowflakes, some of the spirits fell faster and arrived earlier; some fell slower and arrived later. In the instant of the deadline, some still falling between heaven and hell. These did not become devils, but rather elves, because they were left hanging on the earth. Source (books.google.com): Alois Lütolf, "Entstehung der Erdleutchen," Sagen, Bräuche und Legenden aus des fünf Orten Lucern, Uri, Schwyz, Unterwalden und Zug (Lucerne: Verlag von Frz. Jos. Schiffmann, 1865), no. 435, pp. 473-74 . Source (Internet Archive): Alois Lütolf, "Entstehung der Erdleutchen," Sagen, Bräuche und Legenden aus des fünf Orten Lucern, Uri, Schwyz, Unterwalden und Zug (Lucerne: Verlag von Frz. Jos. Schiffmann, 1865), no. 435, pp. 473-74 . Lütolf's source: Pastor Wing from Obwalden. Return to the table of contents . Lower Elemental Spirits Bohemia In addition to the gods, heathens knew a whole row of lower demons which can be placed together under the names sprites and elves. They constitute a distinct spirit realm on earth, independent of the world of humans. They possess supernatural powers with which they harm and help humans. However, they shy away from humans, because physically they are not our equals. In Bohemia they tell about the origin of these demons as follows: When God cast out the arrogant angels from heaven, they became the evil spirits that plague mankind day and night, tormenting us and inflicting us with harm. The ones who fell into hell and into caves and abysses became devils and death-maidens. However, those who fell onto the earth became goblins, imps, dwarfs, thumblings, alps, noon-and-evening-ghosts, and will-o'-the-wisps. Those who fell into the forests became the wood-spirits who live there: the hey-men, the wild-men, the forest-men, the wild-women, and the forest-women. Finally, those who fell into the water became water spirits: water-men, mermaids, and merwomen. Source (books.google.com): Josef Virgil Grohmann, "Niedere Elementargeister," Sagenbuch von Böhmen und Mähren , vol. 1: Sagen aus Böhmen (Prague: Verlag der J. G. Calve'schen k. k. Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1863), pp. 108-109 . Source (Internet Archive): Josef Virgil Grohmann, "Niedere Elementargeister," Sagenbuch von Böhmen und Mähren , vol. 1: Sagen aus Böhmen (Prague: Verlag der J. G. Calve'schen k. k. Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1863), pp. 108-109 . The German names of the spirits mentioned are: Teufel, Todmädchen, Kobolde, Schrätlein, Zwerge, Daumlinge, Alpe, Mittags- und Abendgespenster, Irrlichter, Waldgeister, Hemänner, wilde Männer, Waldmänner, wilde Weiber, Waldfrauen, Wassergeister, Wassermänner, Meerjungfern, Meerfrauen. The historical region of Bohemia is currently part of the Czech Republic. Return to the table of contents . Eve's Unequal Children (Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-UtherType 758) The Genesis of the Hid-Folk Iceland Once upon a time, God Almighty came to visit Adam and Eve. They received him with joy, and showed him everything they had in the house. They also brought their children to him, to show him, and these He found promising and full of hope. Then He asked Eve whether she had no other children than these whom she now showed him. She said "None." But it so happened that she had not finished washing them all, and, being ashamed to let God see them dirty, had hidden the unwashed ones. This God knew well, and said therefore to her, "What man hides from God, God will hide from man." These unwashed children became forthwith invisible, and took up their abode in mounds, and hills, and rocks. From these are the elves descended, but we men from those of Eve's children whom she had openly and frankly shown to God. And it is only by the will and desire of the elves themselves that men can ever see them. Source (books.google.com): Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 19-20 . Source (Internet Archive): Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 19-20 . Link to this legend in the original Icelandic: Books.google.com: Jón Árnason, "Huldumanna-Genesis," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 5 . Source (Internet Archive): Jón Árnason, "Huldumanna-Genesis," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 5 . Return to the table of contents . The Origin of the Troll Folk Denmark One day Eve was washing her children at a spring when our Lord suddenly came to her. She was startled and hid the children who were not yet washed. Our Lord asked if all her children were present here. She answered "Yes," wanting to avoid his anger if he saw that some had not yet been washed. But then our Lord said that what she had hidden from him should henceforth also be hidden from mankind. In that same hour the unclean children disappeared and were hidden in the mountains. From them have descended all the underground folk. Source (books.google.com): J. M. Thiele, "Troldfolkets Oprindelse," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), pp. 175-76 . Source (Internet Archive): J. M. Thiele, "Troldfolkets Oprindelse," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), pp. 175-76 . Return to the table of contents . The Hidden People in Valdres Norway Eve, the wife of Adam, lived a long time and gave birth to many children, even after she should have had no more. She was ashamed for having so many in her old age. One day Our Lord came walking by and approached Eve. He asked to see her children. She brought out a whole flock, but she missed a few, because she was ashamed of having so many, being so old. Our Lord understood this, but he was offended, and said to Eve: "If you hide your children from me, then they will be hidden from you." Then Eve could no longer see these children. They became the haugafølk (hidden people) and the bergatrøll (mountain trolls). They do not want anyone to see them, although sometimes they are seen. People with foresight can see what they look like and what they are doing. There is no great difference between them and us, because the same one created them. However, they are not Christians like we are. Source (books.google.com): O. K. Ødegaard, "Meir um haugafølk i Valdres," Gamal tru o gamal skjikk (Kristiania [Oslo]: Olaf Norlis Forlag, 1917), pp. 102-103 . Return to the table of contents . The Origin of Fairies Wales The following is the account related in Wales of the origin of the fairies, and was told me by an individual from Anglesea: In our Saviour's time there lived a woman whose fortune it was to be possessed of near a score of children, . . . and as she saw our blessed Lord approach her dwelling, being ashamed of being so prolific, and that he might not see them all, she concealed about half of them closely, and, after his departure, when she went in search of them, to her surprise she found they were gone. They never afterwards could be discovered, for it was supposed that, as a punishment from heaven, for hiding what God had given her, she was deprived of them; and, it is said, these, her offspring, have generated the race of beings called fairies. Source (books.google.com): William Howells, "Cambrian Superstitions and Fugitive Pieces," The Cambrian Quarterly Magazine and Celtic Repertory , vol. 3 (London: H. Hughes and T. Hookham, 1831), p. 76 . Source (Internet Archive): William Howells, "Cambrian Superstitions and Fugitive Pieces," The Cambrian Quarterly Magazine and Celtic Repertory , vol. 3 (London: H. Hughes and T. Hookham, 1831), p. 76 . Return to the table of contents . The Baby Farmer Wales Old Kaddy was a baby-farmer, and one day she went to the woods to gather sticks for her fire, and whilst she was gathering the sticks she found a piece of gold, and took it home; but she never told anyone she had found the money, for she always pretended to be very poor. But though she was so poor, she used to dress two of her children in fine clothes; but the others, whom she did not like, she kept in the filthiest rags. One day a man knocked at her door, and asked to see the children. He sat down in her little room, and she went and brought the ragged little boy and girl, saying she was very poor, and couldn't afford to dress them better; for she had been careful to hide the well-dressed little boy and girl in a cockloft. After the stranger had gone she went to the cockloft to look for her well-dressed favorites, but they had disappeared, and they were never seen afterwards, for they were turned into fairies. Source (books.google.com): Peter Henry Emerson, Welsh Fairy-Tales and Other Stories (London: D. Nutt, 1894), p. 14 . Source (Internet Archive): Peter Henry Emerson, Welsh Fairy-Tales and Other Stories (London: D. Nutt, 1894), p. 14 . Explanation of baby farming from Wikipedia: Baby farming was a term used in late-Victorian Era Britain (and, less commonly, in Australia and the United States) to mean the taking in of an infant or child for payment; if the infant was young, this usually included wet-nursing (breast-feeding by a woman not the mother). Some baby farmers "adopted" children for lump-sum payments, while others cared for infants for periodic payments. Though baby farmers were paid in the understanding that care would be provided, the term "baby farmer" was used as an insult, and improper treatment was usually implied. Return to the table of contents . A Curious Legend Slavonic A curious legend exists among the Sclavonic nations by which the existence of elves is accounted for. It is said that Adam had by his wife Eve, thirty sons and thirty daughters. God asked him, one day, the number of his children. Adam was ashamed of having so many girls, so he answered, "Thirty sons and twenty-seven daughters." But from the eye of God nothing can be concealed, and He took from among Adam's daughters the three fairest, and He made them Willis or elves; they were good and holy, and therefore did not perish in the Deluge, but entered with Noah into the ark and were saved. Source (books.google.com): S. Baring-Gould, Legends of Old Testament Characters , vol. 1 (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1871), p. 55 . Source (Internet Archive): S. Baring-Gould, Legends of Old Testament Characters , vol. 1 (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1871), p. 55 . Return to the table of contents . The Creation of the Undergound People Germany Once our lord Christ was wandering upon the earth. He came to a house where a woman lived who had five beautiful and five ugly children. When the lord stepped into her house she hid the five ugly children in the cellar. The lord invited the children to come to him, and when he saw the five beautiful children he asked the woman where her other children were. The woman said: "I have no other children." Then the lord blessed the five beautiful children and cursed the five ugly ones, saying: "That which is below shall remain below, and that which is above shall remain above." When the woman returned to the cellar, the five children had disappeared. The underground people originated from them. Source (books.google.com): Karl Müllenhoff, "Die Erschaffung der Unterirdischen," Sagen, Märchen und Lieder der herzogthümer Schleswig, Holstein und Lauenburg (Kiel: Schwersche Buchhandlung, 1845), no. 379, p. 279 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Müllenhoff, "Die Erschaffung der Unterirdischen," Sagen, Märchen und Lieder der herzogthümer Schleswig, Holstein und Lauenburg (Kiel: Schwersche Buchhandlung, 1845), no. 379, p. 279 . Müllenhoff's source: Dr. Clement, from Amrum. Return to the table of contents . Eve's Unequal Children Germany When Adam and Eve were driven from paradise, they were forced to build a house for themselves on barren ground, and eat their bread by the sweat of their brow. Adam hoed the field, and Eve spun the wool. Every year Eve brought a child into the world, but the children were unlike each other. Some were good looking, and some ugly. After a considerable time had gone by, God sent an angel to them to announce that he himself was coming to inspect their household. Eve, delighted that the Lord should be so gracious, cleaned her house diligently, decorated it with flowers, and spread rushes on the floor. Then she brought in her children, but only the good-looking ones. She washed and bathed them, combed their hair, put freshly laundered shirts on them, and cautioned them to be polite and well-behaved in the presence of the Lord. They were to bow down before him courteously, offer to shake hands, and to answer his questions modestly and intelligently. The ugly children, however, were not to let themselves be seen. She hid one of them beneath the hay, another in the attic, the third in the straw, the fourth in the stove, the fifth in the cellar, the sixth under a tub, the seventh beneath the wine barrel, the eighth under an old pelt, the ninth and tenth beneath the cloth from which she made their clothes, and the eleventh and twelfth under the leather from which she cut their shoes. She had just finished when someone knocked at the front door. Adam looked through a crack, and saw that it was the Lord. He opened the door reverently, and the Heavenly Father entered. There stood the good-looking children all in a row. They bowed before him, offered to shake hands, and knelt down. The Lord began to bless them. He laid his hands on the first, saying, "You shall be a powerful king," did the same thing to the second, saying, "You a prince," to the third, "You a count," to the fourth, "You a knight," to the fifth, "You a nobleman," to the sixth, "You a burgher," to the seventh, "You a merchant," to the eighth, "You a scholar." Thus he bestowed his richest blessings upon them all. When Eve saw that the Lord was so mild and gracious, she thought, "I will bring forth my ugly children as well. Perhaps he will bestow his blessings on them too." So she ran and fetched them from the hay, the straw, the stove, and wherever else they were hidden away. In they came, the whole coarse, dirty, scabby, sooty lot of them. The Lord smiled, looked at them all, and said, "I will bless these as well." He laid his hands on the first and said to him, "You shall be a peasant," to the second, "You a fisherman," to the third, "You a smith," to the fourth, "You a tanner," to the fifth, "You a weaver," to the sixth, "You a shoemaker," to the seventh, "You a tailor," to the eighth, "You a potter," to the ninth, "You a teamster," to the tenth, "You a sailor," to the eleventh, "You a messenger," to the twelfth, "You a household servant, all the days of your life." When Eve had heard all this she said, "Lord, how unequally you divide your blessings. All of them are my children, whom I have brought into the world. You should favor them all equally." But God replied, "Eve, you do not understand. It is right and necessary that the entire world should be served by your children. If they were all princes and lords, who would plant grain, thresh it, grind and bake it? Who would forge iron, weave cloth, build houses, plant crops, dig ditches, and cut out and sew clothing? Each shall stay in his own place, so that one shall support the other, and all shall be fed like the parts of a body." Then Eve answered, "Oh, Lord, forgive me, I spoke too quickly to you. Let your divine will be done with my children as well." Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die ungleichen Kinder Evas," Kinder und Hausmärchen vol. 2, 7th edition (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), , no. 180, pp. 374-78 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die ungleichen Kinder Evas," Kinder und Hausmärchen vol. 2, 7th edition (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), , no. 180, pp. 374-78 . The Grimms' source: Hans Sachs (1494-1576). The Grimms attribute this tale to two of Sachs's comic dramas, both from the year 1553, as well as a verse anecdote by Sachs from the year 1558. Sachs's source was a Latin poem by Philipp Melanchthon (1497-1560). Translated by Margaret Hunt (1884). Translation revised and corrected by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Return to the table of contents . Eve's Children Austria / Italy Eve, the mother of our race had become quite old when our dear Lord asked her how many children she had. Not knowing the exact number, she stated a number that was several thousand too few. As a consequence the uncounted ones were all transformed into monkeys. Thus, monkeys are nothing other than banished humans. Source (books.google.com): Alois Menghin, "Eva's Kinder," Aus dem deutschen Südtirol (Merano: Verlag von Fr. Plant's Buchhandlung, 1884), pp. 87-88 . Return to the table of contents . The Offspring of Lilith, Adam's First Wife The Origin of the Tusser Norway There was a farm in the eastern highlands where the people often were visited by the tusser . One tusse in particular often borrowed something from a man. The pastor heard about this and went up to the farm to see what was happening. "Yes," said the man. "And if you will wait here for an hour you'll be able to see the tusse . He borrowed a pot of beer from me, and he'll return it here when the clock strikes." The pastor sat down, and when the clock struck, the tusse appeared. Seeing the stranger, he was afraid to speak. He set the pot on the table, bowed to the man, and wanted to leave immediately. The pastor ran to the door and blocked his way out. He spoke to the tusse , telling him about the New Testament and the little Christ Child. He explained the texts to him. He wanted to convert him, for he thought that he might be a devil. The tusse again tried to run away, but the pastor held the door shut and continued to explain the scriptures. The tusse said nothing to this, but finally he did answer: "I am not learned enough to talk with you. But if you will wait here for a little while, I'll fetch my brother. He is a pastor just like you." He promised that his brother would come, but the pastor was afraid that the tusse would only escape. "You can let him go," said the man. If he has promised that his brother will come, his brother will come. He never lies." The pastor let him go, then sat down and waited for a while. Then the tusse pastor came, with his robe and white collar, and with a Bible in his hand. "Do you know the Book of Creation?" asked the tusse . Yes, he knew it. "It says there that in the beginning God created man and woman. Do you know that?" Yes, he knew that as well. "But in the second chapter it says that God created a woman from Adam's rib. Do you know that?" Yes, he knew that. "Then Adam said, 'This time it is bone from my bone and flesh from my flesh.' Why did he say this time ? Do you know why?" This pastor did not know. Then the tusse said: "The woman created by God in the beginning was Adam's equal. She did not want to be subservient to him, for she thought that her creation had been just as good as Adam's. God saw that it was not good for man and woman to be equal, so he banished her and her offspring to live inside the mountains and hills. Being without sin, they are invisible and can only be seen if they themselves want to be seen. -- But in the second chapter God took a rib from Adam's side and created a woman from it. Then Adam said this time , because this time a woman had been created from a man. Their offspring are with sin, and therefore they need the New Testament. The tusse folk need only the Old Testament. The pastor had nothing to say against the tusse . He never again returned to his pulpit. The Bible does not give us the name of Adam's first wife. She was called Lilli, or perhaps Lillo. It really does not make a difference. This story was told to me by Sveinung Hass-Sta. Sveinung came from the east. I was old enough to go to the mill with him, and he told me this story on the way. Source (books.google.com): Johannes Skar, "Upphavi ti Tusso," Gamalt or Sætesdal , vol. 3 (Kristiania [Oslo]: Olaf Norsis Forlag, 1903), pp. 53-55 . Lilith is the standard English form of the name mentioned above as Lilli or Lillo . Link to the Wikipedia article about Lilith . The Norwegian word tusse (alternative spelling tuss ) is translate into English variously as gnome , goblin , troll , kobold , or sprite . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 6, 2024. Paiute Creation and Origin Legends Paiute Creation and Origin Legends edited by D. L. Ashliman Contents Southern Paiute Legend (J. W. Powell). Paiute Legend of Bryce Canyon (Indian Dick). Southern Paiute Legend Si-chom-pa Ka-gon (Old Woman of the Sea) came out of the sea with a sack filled with something, and securely tied. Then she went back to the home of the Shin-au-av brothers. She delivered to them the sack and told them to carry it to the middle of the world and open it. There they would meet Tov-wots, who would tell them what to do with it. Shin-au-av-pa-vits (the elder) gave the sack to Shin-au-av-skaits (the younger) and told him to do as Si-chom-pa Ka-gon had directed, and especially enjoined upon him that he must not open the sack lest some calamity should befall him. As he proceeded, his curiosity overcame him, and he untied the sack, when out sprang hosts of people who passed out on the plain, shouting and running toward the mountain. Then Tov-wots suddenly appeared, being very angry. "Why have you done this? I wanted these people to live in that good land to the east, and here, foolish boy, you have let them out in a desert." Abstracted from a display at the visitor center of Bryce Canyon National Park, Utah. Collected and translated by J. W. Powell. Return to the table of contents . Paiute Legend of Bryce Canyon Before there were any Indians the Legend People, To-when-an-ung-wa, lived in that place. Because they were bad, Coyote turned them all into rocks. You can see them in that place now -- some standing in rows, some sitting down, some holding onto others. You can see their faces with paint on, just as they were before they became rocks. The name of that place is Agka-ku-wass-a-wits (red painted faces). Abstracted from a display at the visitor center of Bryce Canyon National Park, Utah. Source: "Indian Dick. Recorded in 1936." Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 9, 2003. Crop Division between Man and Ogre: Folktales of Type 1030 Crop Division between Man and Ogre Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1030 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2008-2021 Contents The Farmer and the Devil on Island of the Popefigs (France, François Rabelais). The Troll Outwitted (Denmark). The Bear and the Fox Go into Partnership (Norway). The Fox and the Wolf Plant Oats and Potatoes (Scotland). The Farmer and the Boggart (England). The Bogie and the Farmer (England). Jack o' Kent and the Devil: The Tops and the Butts (England). Link to Th' Man an' th' Boggard (England). External link to the book by Mabel Peacock, North Lincolnshire Dialect: Tales and Rhymes in the Lindsey Folk-Speech (London: George Jackson and Son, 1886), pp. 67-71 . Paddy Always on Top (Ireland). Above the Ground and under the Ground (USA). The Peasant and the Devil (Germany). Saint John and the Devil (Italy/Austria). The Peasant and the Bear (Russia). Mercury and the Traveller (Aesop). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Farmer and the Devil on Island of the Popefigs France, François Rabelais The Fourth Book of Pantagruel. Pantagruel ... was told that for the last three years there had raged in the island a pestilence so horrible, that the half or more of the country had remained desolate, and the lands without occupiers. When the pestilence had gone by, this man ... was plowing a large and fertile piece of ground and sowing it with wheat at the very day and hour that a small devil (one who did not know how to thunder or hail except only on parsley and cabbages, and moreover could not yet read or write) had obtained leave from Lucifer to go for a holiday and recreation in this Island of the Popefigs, wherein the devils were very familiar with the men and women, and often went there to pass their time. This devil, having got to the place, addressed himself to the laborer, and asked him what he was doing. The poor man answered him that he was sowing this field with wheat, to help him to live the following year. "Nay, but this field is none of thine," said the devil. "It is mine, and belongs to me; for ... all this country was adjudged, proscribed and given up to us. To sow corn, however, is not my province; wherefore I leave thee the field, but on condition that we share the profit." "I am willing," answered the laborer. "I mean," said the devil, "that we are to make two lots of the profit that results. One shall be that which grows above the earth, the other that which shall be covered by the earth. The right of choosing belongs to me, for I am a devil, born of a noble and ancient race; thou art but a clown. I make choice of that which shall be in the earth. Thou shall have that which is above. At what time shall be the in-gathering?" "About the middle of July," answered the laborer. "Very well," said the devil, "I will not fail to be here. Meantime do as is thy duty to do. Work, villain, work. I am off to tempt to the gallant sin of luxury, the noble nuns of Pette-sec, also the cowled hypocrites and gluttons. Of their desires I am more than assured. They have but to meet, and the combat takes place." When mid July had come, the devil presented himself at the place, accompanied by a troop of little devilkins of the choir. There, finding the laborer, he said, "Now, villain, how hast thou done since my departure? It is fitting now that we should make out our shares." "It is but reason," answered the laborer. Then the laborer and his men began to reap the corn. The devilkins likewise pulled up the stubble from the earth. The laborer threshed his corn on the threshing floor, winnowed it, put it in sacks and carried it to market to sell. The imps did the same, and set themselves down at the marketplace, near the laborer, to sell their stubble. The laborer sold his corn very well, and with the money filled an old half-buskin, which he carried at his girdle. The devils sold nothing. Nay, on the contrary, the peasants jeered at them in open market. When the market was over, the devil said to the laborer, "Villain, thou hast cheated me this time. Next time thou shall not do so." "Master Devil," said the laborer, "how could I have cheated you, when you had the first choice? The truth is, that in this choice you thought to cheat me, expecting that nothing would come out of the earth for my share, and that you would find below the whole of the grain which I had sown, intending therewith to tempt the poor and needy, the hypocrites, or the misers, and by temptation to make them fall into your snares. But you are mighty young at your trade. The grain which you see in the earth is dead and rotten. The corruption of that has caused the generation of the other, which you saw me sell. So you do choose the worse. That is why you are cursed in the Gospel." "Let us leave this subject," said the devil. "What canst thou sow our field with next year? " "To make a profit like a good husbandman," said the laborer, "the proper thing would be to sow turnips." "Well," said the devil, "thou art an honest clown. Sow turnips in abundance. I will guard them from the storm, and will not hail upon them. But understand thoroughly: I retain for my share that which shall be above ground. Thou shall have all that is below. Work, villain, work. I am off to tempt the heretics. Their souls are dainty morsels when broiled on the coals. My lord Lucifer has the colic; they will make a tid-bit for him." When the time of gathering was come, the devil appeared on the ground with a squadron of waiting devilkins. There, finding the laborer and his men, he began to cut and gather the leaves of the turnips. After him the laborer dug and pulled up the big turnips, and put them into sacks. So they all go off together to market. The laborer sold his turnips very well. The devil sold nothing, and, what was worse, they jeered at him publicly. "I see very well, villain," said the devil, "that I have been cheated by thee. I will make an end of the business between thee and me. Source: François Rabelais, The Life of Gargantua and of Pantagruel , book 4, in: Rabelais: The Five Books and Minor Writings , vol. 2 (London: Alexander P. Watt, 1893), book 4, ch. 45-47, pp. 189-197 . In Rabelais' account, the conflict continues when the devil challenges the farmer to a "scratching contest," which the latter handily wins with the help of his wife. This humorous episode, too racy for inclusion in some texts, is classified as a type 1095 folktale and is related under the title How the Devil Was Deceived by an Old Woman in Pantagruel , book 4, ch. 47. Book 4 of The Life of Gargantua and of Pantagruel was written in 1552. Return to the table of contents . The Troll Outwitted Denmark A husbandman, who had a little mount on his field, resolved not to let it lie waste, and began to plow it up. At this the troll, who dwelt in the mount, came out and demanded who it was that dared to plow on his roof. The husbandman said that he did not know it was his roof, and at the same time represented to him that it was disadvantageous for both to let such a piece of land lie uncultivated; that he was willing to plow, sow and reap every year, and that the troll should alternately have that which in one year grew on the earth, and the man that which grew beneath, and the next year the reverse. To this the troll agreed, and the man in the first year sowed carrots, and in the year following, corn [grain], and gave the troll the tops of the carrots and the roots of the corn. From that time there was a good understanding between them. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology: Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), pp. 149-50 . Thorpe's Source: J. M. Thiele, "En bonde narrer en trold," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), pp. 240-41 . This legend is also recorded in Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology, Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries , vol. 1 (London: Whittaker, Treacher, and Company, 1833), p. 186 . Return to the table of contents . The Bear and the Fox Go into Partnership Norway Once the fox and the bear made up their minds to have a field in common. They found a small clearing far away in the forest, where they sowed rye the first year. "Now we must share and share alike," said Reynard. "If you will have the roots I will have the tops," he said. Yes, Bruin was quite willing. But when they had threshed the crop, the fox got all the grain, while the bear got nothing but the roots and tares. Bruin didn't like this, but the fox said it was only as they had agreed. "This year I am the gainer," said the fox. "Another year it will be your turn. You can then have the tops, and I will be satisfied with the roots." Next spring the fox asked the bear if he didn't think turnips would be the right thing for that year. "Yes, that better food than grain," said the bear, and the fox thought the same. When the autumn came the fox took the turnips, but the bear only got the tops. The bear then became so angry that he parted company then and there with Reynard. Source: P. C. Asbjørnsen, Fairy Tales from the Far North , translated from the Norwegian by H. L. Brækstad. Authorised edition (London: David Nutt, 1897), pp. 176-79 . Translation slightly revised by D. L. Ashliman. Link to the Norwegian text of the tale: Bjørnen og reven: 3. De skulle ha åker i sameie . This link leads to a collection of four short tales about the bear and the fox. Scroll down until you come to number three. Return to the table of contents . The Fox and the Wolf Plant Oats and Potatoes Scotland [The fox and the wolf together came into possession of a piece of land.] It was oats that they set that year, and they reaped it, and they began to divide it. "Well, then," said the fox, "wouldst thou rather have the root or the tip? Thou shalt have thy choice." "I'd rather the root," said the wolf. Then the fox had fine oaten bread all the year, and the other one had fodder. On the next year they set a crop; and it was potatoes that they set, and they grew well. "Which wouldst thou like best, the root or the crop this year?" said the fox. "Indeed, thou shalt not take the twist out of me anymore. I will have the top this year," quoth the wolf. "Good enough, my hero," said the fox. Thus the wolf had the potato tops, and the fox the potatoes. But the wolf used to keep stealing the potatoes from the fox. Source: Joseph Jacobs, More Celtic Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 132-33 . This episode is extracted from a longer story ( pp. 125-34 ) entitled "The Russet Dog" (a nickname for the fox). Jacobs source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , new edition, vol. 3 (London: Alexander Gardner, 1892). p. 110 . Campbell titles the larger piece, from which this episode is extracted, The Keg of Butter . Return to the table of contents . The Farmer and the Boggart England T' boggart, a squat hairy man, strong as a six-year-old horse, and with arms almost as long as tackle poles, comes to a farmer who has just taken a bit of land, and declares that he is the proper owner, and the farmer must quit. The farmer proposes an appeal to the law, but boggart will have naught to do wi' law, which has never yet done him justice, and suggests that they should share the produce equally. "Very well," says the farmer, "wilt thou tek what grows above ground, or what grows beneath ground? Only, moind, thou mun stick to what thou sattles; oi doant want no back-reckunnings after." He arranges to take what grows above ground, and the farmer promptly sets potatoes. Of course, when the boggart comes at harvest time to claim his share he gets nothing but the haulms and twitch, and is in a sore taking. At last, however, he agrees to take all that grows beneath ground for next season, whereupon the farmer sows wheat, and when boggart comes round at t' backend, the man gets corn and straw, and naught is left for boggart but the stubble. Boggart then insists that next year wheat should be sown again, and that they should mow together, each taking what he mows. The farmer consults the local wise man, and studs boggart's "falls" with thin iron rods, which wear down boggart's strength in cutting and take all the edge of his scythe. So boggart stops to whet, and boggart stops to rest, but the farmer mows steadily on till at last the boggart throws down his scythe in despair and says, "Ye may tek t' mucky owd land an' all 'ats on it; I wean't hev no more to do wi' it." And off he goes and nivver comes back no more, leastways not after no land, but awms aboot t' delves, an' skears loane foaks o' noights; an' if thou leaves thy dinner or thy tools about, ofttimes he meks off wi' 'em. Source: County Folk-Lore , vol. 5, Printed Extracts, no. 7: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore concerning Lincolnshire, collected by Mrs. Gutch and Mabel Peacock (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1908), pp. 326-27 . This story comes from Mumby, near Alford. Return to the table of contents . The Bogie and the Farmer England The following legend, very commonly narrated in Northamptonshire, places this [the Bogies lack of cunning] in a strong light: One of these spirits [a Bogie] once asserted a claim to a field hitherto possessed by a farmer, and, after much disputing, they came to an arrangement by agreeing to divide its produce between them. At seed-time the farmer asks the Bogie what part of the crop he will have, "tops or bottoms." "Bottoms," said the spirit. Upon hearing which his crafty antagonist sows the field with wheat, so that when harvest arrived the corn [grain] falls to his share, while the poor Bogie is obliged to content himself with the stubble. Next year the Bogie, finding he had made such an unfortunate selection in the bottoms, chose the "tops," whereupon the crafty farmer sets the field with turnips -- thus, again, outwitting the simple claimant. Tired of this unprofitable farming, the Bogie agrees to hazard his claims on a mowing match, the land in question to be the stake for which they played. Before the day of meeting the canny earth-tiller procures a number of iron bars, which he strews among the grass to be mown by his opponent; and when the trial commences, the unsuspecting goblin finds his progress retarded by his scythe continually coming into contact with these obstacles, which he takes to be some hard species of dock. "Mortal hard docks these!" said he. "Nation hard docks!" His blunted blade soon brings him to a standstill; and as, in such cases, it is not allowable for one to sharpen without the other, he turns to his antagonist, now far ahead, and in a tone of despair inquires, "When dye wiffle waffle (whet), mate?" "Waffle!" said the farmer, with a well-feigned stare of amazement, "oh, about noon, mebby." "Then," said the despairing Bogie, "I've lost my land!" So saying, he disappeared, and the farmer reaped the reward of his artifice by ever afterwards continuing the undisputed possessor of the soil. Source: Thomas Sternberg, The Dialect and Folk-lore of Northamptonshire (London: John Russell Smith, 1851), pp. 140-41 . The "mowing contest" episode is classified as a type 1090 folktale. Return to the table of contents . Jack o' Kent and the Devil: The Tops and the Butts England One day Jack took the devil into a field of wheat, when it was springing up. He said, "Which will you have, the tops or the butts?" There was not much top to be seen, so the devil said he's have the butts. At harvest time Jack accordingly had the wheat, the devil the straw. Naturally he grumbled a good deal over such a bad bargain. Next year the field was sown with turnip seed, and Jack said, "You shall have tops this time." The devil agreed to this, and in due time Jack had the turnips, leaving his partner the green tops. After that they went to mow a field of grass, each one to have all the hay he could cut. They were to begin together in the morning. Jack got up in the night and put harrow tines in the grass on the side of the meadow where the devil was to mow. In the morning these notched and blunted the scythe, which was continually catching in them; but the "Old 'Un," thinking they were only burdocks, kept muttering, "Burdock, Jack! Burdock Jack!" Jack took no notice, and, mowing away diligently, secured nearly all the crop for himself once more. Then they went to threshing. Jack was to have bottoms this time, so he got the barn floor, and the devil went on top. He put up a hurdle [gate] for the devil to thresh on, and as he battered away Jack collected the corn [grain] on the floor. Source: Ella Mary Leather, The Folk-Lore of Herefordshire (London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1912), pp. 165-66 . The final two episodes in this tale are classified as type 1090 "Mowing Contest" and 1089 "Theshing Contest." Return to the table of contents . Paddy Always on Top Ireland One day Paddy was going to an auction and he met the devil on his way. "Well Paddy," said the devil, "are you going to the auction?" "I am." said Paddy. "What do you think of buying a field for oats between us?" "All right," agreed Paddy, "What part will you take?" "I will take under the ground" said the devil. When the time came for cutting it, Paddy got the oats and the devil got the roots. Next year Paddy was going to the auction and he met the devil again. He asked him this time to buy a field for potatoes. Paddy asked him what he would take this year, and the devil said he would take over the ground. Paddy got the potatoes and the devil got the stalks. The devil said that he would have nothing to do with Paddy again, as he had got the best of him every time. (This story was got from Patrick Tuite, Mullagh.) Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Monaghan >> Taite Bui (Blackstaff), p. 259 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Above the Ground and under the Ground USA (North Carolina) Devil an' a prospec' went to farmin'. Devil said he would take everything grown in the groun'; an' Prospec', out of de groun'. Plant a crop o' corn. Prospec' got all de crop, Devil didn't get nothin'. Devil said, "We'll try it again. I'll take what grows out de groun', you take what grows in de groun'." "All right." Planted a crop of potatoes. Prospec' he got dat crop. Devil said, "You can't whip me." Prospec' said, "All right, try dat. What you want me to fight with?" Devil say, "I'm going to take de foot ad [adze?], you take de peg-an'-awl." "All right, we'll have to fight dis battle in a hogshead." Source: Elsie Clews Parsons, "Tales from Guilford County, North Carolina," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 30, no. 116, (April-June, 1917), p. 175. Parson's informant: Sam Cruse, about 30. Notes by Parsons: Variant: Rabbit agreed with Fox that he, Fox, would "take all what grows on top of de groun' an' I take all what grows under de groun'." That's a bargain. "I take all de 'taters an' gi' you all de vines." It was explained that the "foot ad" was a tool that had to be drawn inward, whereas the peg-an'-awl could be struck outwards. Return to the table of contents . The Peasant and the Devil Germany Once upon a time there was a clever, wily peasant, whose tricks could be much talked about. The best story, however, is how he once got the best of the devil and made a fool of him. One day the peasant had been working in his field, and just as it was getting dark he was getting ready to go home when in the middle of his field he saw a pile of burning coals. Filled with amazement he walked toward it, and sitting on the top of the glowing coals there was a little black devil. "You must be sitting on a treasure," said the peasant. "Yes indeed," replied the devil, "on a treasure that contains more gold and silver than you have ever seen in your life." "The treasure is in my field and belongs to me," said the peasant. "It is yours," answered the devil, "if for two years you will give me one half of everything your field produces. I have enough money, but I have a desire for the fruits of the earth." The peasant entered into the bargain, saying, "To prevent any dispute from arising about the division, everything above the ground shall belong to you, and everything beneath the ground to me." The devil was quite satisfied with that, but the cunning peasant had planted turnips. Now when harvest time came the devil appeared and wanted to take away his crop, but he found nothing except the yellow withered leaves, and the happy peasant dug up his turnips. "You got the best of me this time," said the devil, "but it won't happen again. Next time what grows above ground shall be yours, and what is under it shall be mine." "That is all right with me," answered the peasant. When planting time came the peasant did not plant turnips again, but wheat. The crop ripened, and the peasant went into the field and cut the full stalks off at ground level. When the devil came he found nothing but the stubble, and he angrily disappeared into a chasm in a cliff. "That's the way one has to deal with foxes," said the peasant, then carried away the treasure. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Bauer und der Teufel," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , (Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales), 7th edition, vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 189, pp. 411-12 . The Grimms added this tale to their Kinder- und Hausmärchen with the fifth edition (1843). The Grimms' source: Ludwig Aurbacher, "Der Teufel und der Bauer," Ein Büchlein für die Jugend (Stuttgart and Tübingen: J. G. Cotta, 1834), pp. 249-52 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman , © 2002. Link to a file containing only this tale: The Peasant and the Devil . Return to the table of contents . Saint John and the Devil Italy/Austria Saint John and the devil were sitting together on the roof of a house. They made a wager as to who would first be able to string together a certain number of small wooden shingles. Saint John took only short pieces of string, pulled them through the nail holes, then tied all the strings together, and thus he had all the shingles strung together. On the other hand, the devil clumsily took hold of a very long string and worked feverishly away. Because his string was always getting tangled up, the devil had to keep running back and forth in order to untangle it, and he was only half finished when Saint John had completed his work. The devil was very angry at having lost this first wager. He then pointed to a field and said, "Let us take what is growing there and share it, each of us to receive half. Do you want the top or the bottom?" Saint John looked and saw that it was a field of turnips. He chose the bottom half. The devil was happy to get the top half, thinking that it was the best part, the bottom part being only thin, bitter roots. The two returned when the turnips had grown and were ready to harvest. Then the devil received only a little pile of half-withered, wormy leaves, whereas Saint John received a large pile of the most beautiful and juiciest turnips. When the devil became angry again, Saint John pointed to another field and asked, "Do you want to wager once again?" "Yes indeed," replied the devil, "but this time I'll take the bottom half." "Then I'll take the top part," said John. However, this field was planted with wheat, and when harvest time came, Saint John received the beautiful heads, heavy with grain, while the devil was left with the naked stubble. The devil did not enter into any new wagers, but instead, filled with anger and rage, returned to hell. Source: Christian Schneller, "St. Johannes und der Teufel," Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol: Ein Beitrag zur deutschen Sagenkunde (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagnerschen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), no. 2, pp. 5-6 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. The beginning episode in this story is a variant of type 1096. Such tales most often depict a sewing contest between the devil (or other ogre) and a tailor, with the devil losing because he begins by threading his needle with an entire spool of thread. Return to the table of contents. The Peasant and the Bear Russia Once upon a time a certain peasant lost his wife, then he lost his other relations, and then he was left alone with no one to help him in his home or his fields. So he went to Bruin and said, "Look here, Bruin, let's keep house and plant our garden and sow our corn together." And Bruin asked, "But how shall we divide it afterwards?" "How shall we divide it?" said the peasant, "Well, you take all the tops and let me have all the roots." "All right," answered Bruin. So they sowed some turnips, and they grew beautifully. And Bruin worked hard, and gathered in all the turnips, and then they began to divide them. And the peasant said, "The tops are yours, aren't they, Bruin?" "Yes," he answered. So the peasant cut off all the turnip tops and gave them to Bruin, and then sat down to count the roots. And Bruin saw that the peasant had done him down. And he got huffy, lay down in his den, and started sucking his paws. The next spring the peasant again came to see him, and said, "Look here, Bruin, let's work together again, shall we?" And Bruin answered, "Right-ho! Only this time mind! you can have the tops, but I'm going to have the roots!" "Very, well," said the peasant. And they sowed some wheat, and when the ears grew up and ripened, you never saw such a sight. Then they began to divide it, and the peasant took all the tops with the grain, and gave Bruin the straw and the roots. So he didn't get anything that time either. And Bruin said to the peasant, "Well, good-bye! I'm not going to work with you any more, you're too crafty!" And with that he went off into the forest. Source: Valery Carrick [Valerian Karrik], More Russian Picture Tales , translated by Nevill Forbes (New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1920), pp. 39-44 . Return to the table of contents . Mercury and the Traveller Aesop One that was just entring upon a long journey took up a fancy of putting a trick upon Mercury. He say'd him a short prayer for the bon-voyage , with a promise that the god should go half with him in whatever he found. Somebody had lost a bag of dates and almonds, it seems, and it was his fortune to find it. He fell to work upon 'em immediately, and when he had eaten up the kernels, and all that was good of them himself, he laid the stones and the shells upon an altar; and desir'd Mercury to to take notice that he had permorm'd his vow. "For," says he, "here are the outsides of the one ande the insides of the other, and there's the moiety [division] I promis'd ye." The Moral Men talk as if they believed in God, but they live as if they thought there were none; but their very prayers are mockeries, and their vows and promises are no more than words, of course, which they never intended to make good. Source: The Fables of Æsop and other Eminent Mythologists. With morals and reflections . By Sir Roger L'Estrange (London: Printed for R. Sare et al., 1692), no. 97, p. 91 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 11, 2021. Cupid and Psyche Cupid and Psyche Lucius Apuleius A certain king and queen had three daughters. The charms of the two elder were more than common, but the beauty of the youngest was so wonderful that the poverty of language is unable to express its due praise. The fame of her beauty was so great that strangers from neighboring countries came in crowds to enjoy the sight, and looked on her with amazement, paying her that homage which is due only to Venus herself. In fact Venus found her altars deserted, while men turned their devotion to this young virgin. As she passed along, the people sang her praises, and strewed her way with chaplets and flowers. This homage to the exaltation of a mortal gave great offense to the real Venus. Shaking her ambrosial locks with indignation, she exclaimed, "Am I then to be eclipsed in my honors by a mortal girl? In vain then did that royal shepherd, whose judgment was approved by Jove himself, give me the palm of beauty over my illustrious rivals, Pallas and Juno. But she shall not so quietly usurp my honors. I will give her cause to repent of so unlawful a beauty." Thereupon she calls her winged son Cupid, mischievous enough in his own nature, and rouses and provokes him yet more by her complaints. She points out Psyche to him and says, "My dear son, punish that contumacious beauty; give your mother a revenge as sweet as her injuries are great; infuse into the bosom of that haughty girl a passion for some low, mean, unworthy being, so that she may reap a mortification as great as her present exultation and triumph." Cupid prepared to obey the commands of his mother. There are two fountains in Venus's garden, one of sweet waters, the other of bitter. Cupid filled two amber vases, one from each fountain, and suspending them from the top of his quiver, hastened to the chamber of Psyche, whom he found asleep. He shed a few drops from the bitter fountain over her lips, though the sight of her almost moved him to pity; then touched her side with the point of his arrow. At the touch she awoke, and opened eyes upon Cupid (himself invisible), which so startled him that in his confusion he wounded himself with his own arrow. Heedless of his wound, his whole thought now was to repair the mischief he had done, and he poured the balmy drops of joy over all her silken ringlets. Psyche, henceforth frowned upon by Venus, derived no benefit from all her charms. True, all eyes were cast eagerly upon her, and every mouth spoke her praises; but neither king, royal youth, nor plebeian presented himself to demand her in marriage. Her two elder sisters of moderate charms had now long been married to two royal princes; but Psyche, in her lonely apartment, deplored her solitude, sick of that beauty which, while it procured abundance of flattery, had failed to awaken love. Her parents, afraid that they had unwittingly incurred the anger of the gods, consulted the oracle of Apollo, and received this answer, "The virgin is destined for the bride of no mortal lover. Her future husband awaits her on the top of the mountain. He is a monster whom neither gods nor men can resist." This dreadful decree of the oracle filled all the people with dismay, and her parents abandoned themselves to grief. But Psyche said, "Why, my dear parents, do you now lament me? You should rather have grieved when the people showered upon me undeserved honors, and with one voice called me a Venus. I now perceive that I am a victim to that name. I submit. Lead me to that rock to which my unhappy fate has destined me." Accordingly, all things being prepared, the royal maid took her place in the procession, which more resembled a funeral than a nuptial pomp, and with her parents, amid the lamentations of the people, ascended the mountain, on the summit of which they left her alone, and with sorrowful hearts returned home. While Psyche stood on the ridge of the mountain, panting with fear and with eyes full of tears, the gentle Zephyr raised her from the earth and bore her with an easy motion into a flowery dale. By degrees her mind became composed, and she laid herself down on the grassy bank to sleep. When she awoke refreshed with sleep, she looked round and beheld nearby a pleasant grove of tall and stately trees. She entered it, and in the midst discovered a fountain, sending forth clear and crystal waters, and fast by, a magnificent palace whose august front impressed the spectator that it was not the work of mortal hands, but the happy retreat of some god. Drawn by admiration and wonder, she approached the building and ventured to enter. Every object she met filled her with pleasure and amazement. Golden pillars supported the vaulted roof, and the walls were enriched with carvings and paintings representing beasts of the chase and rural scenes, adapted to delight the eye of the beholder. Proceeding onward, she perceived that besides the apartments of state there were others filled with all manner of treasures, and beautiful and precious productions of nature and art. While her eyes were thus occupied, a voice addressed her, though she saw no one, uttering these words, "Sovereign lady, all that you see is yours. We whose voices you hear are your servants and shall obey all your commands with our utmost care and diligence. Retire, therefore, to your chamber and repose on your bed of down, and when you see fit, repair to the bath. Supper awaits you in the adjoining alcove when it pleases you to take your seat there." Psyche gave ear to the admonitions of her vocal attendants, and after repose and the refreshment of the bath, seated herself in the alcove, where a table immediately presented itself, without any visible aid from waiters or servants, and covered with the greatest delicacies of food and the most nectareous wines. Her ears too were feasted with music from invisible performers; of whom one sang, another played on the lute, and all closed in the wonderful harmony of a full chorus. She had not yet seen her destined husband. He came only in the hours of darkness and fled before the dawn of morning, but his accents were full of love, and inspired a like passion in her. She often begged him to stay and let her behold him, but he would not consent. On the contrary he charged her to make no attempt to see him, for it was his pleasure, for the best of reasons, to keep concealed. "Why should you wish to behold me?" he said. "Have you any doubt of my love? Have you any wish ungratified? If you saw me, perhaps you would fear me, perhaps adore me, but all I ask of you is to love me. I would rather you would love me as an equal than adore me as a god." This reasoning somewhat quieted Psyche for a time, and while the novelty lasted she felt quite happy. But at length the thought of her parents, left in ignorance of her fate, and of her sisters, precluded from sharing with her the delights of her situation, preyed on her mind and made her begin to feel her palace as but a splendid prison. When her husband came one night, she told him her distress, and at last drew from him an unwilling consent that her sisters should be brought to see her. So, calling Zephyr, she acquainted him with her husband's commands, and he, promptly obedient, soon brought them across the mountain down to their sister's valley. They embraced her and she returned their caresses. "Come," said Psyche, "enter with me my house and refresh yourselves with whatever your sister has to offer." Then taking their hands she led them into her golden palace, and committed them to the care of her numerous train of attendant voices, to refresh them in her baths and at her table, and to show them all her treasures. The view of these celestial delights caused envy to enter their bosoms, at seeing their young sister possessed of such state and splendor, so much exceeding their own. They asked her numberless questions, among others what sort of a person her husband was. Psyche replied that he was a beautiful youth, who generally spent the daytime in hunting upon the mountains. The sisters, not satisfied with this reply, soon made her confess that she had never seen him. Then they proceeded to fill her bosom with dark suspicions. "Call to mind," they said, "the Pythian oracle that declared you destined to marry a direful and tremendous monster. The inhabitants of this valley say that your husband is a terrible and monstrous serpent, who nourishes you for a while with dainties that he may by and by devour you. Take our advice. Provide yourself with a lamp and a sharp knife; put them in concealment that your husband may not discover them, and when he is sound asleep, slip out of bed, bring forth your lamp, and see for yourself whether what they say is true or not. If it is, hesitate not to cut off the monster's head, and thereby recover your liberty." Psyche resisted these persuasions as well as she could, but they did not fail to have their effect on her mind, and when her sisters were gone, their words and her own curiosity were too strong for her to resist. So she prepared her lamp and a sharp knife, and hid them out of sight of her husband. When he had fallen into his first sleep, she silently rose and uncovering her lamp beheld not a hideous monster, but the most beautiful and charming of the gods, with his golden ringlets wandering over his snowy neck and crimson cheek, with two dewy wings on his shoulders, whiter than snow, and with shining feathers like the tender blossoms of spring. As she leaned the lamp over to have a better view of his face, a drop of burning oil fell on the shoulder of the god. Startled, he opened his eyes and fixed them upon her. Then, without saying a word, he spread his white wings and flew out of the window. Psyche, in vain endeavoring to follow him, fell from the window to the ground. Cupid, beholding her as she lay in the dust, stopped his flight for an instant and said, "Oh foolish Psyche, is it thus you repay my love? After I disobeyed my mother's commands and made you my wife, will you think me a monster and cut off my head? But go; return to your sisters, whose advice you seem to think preferable to mine. I inflict no other punishment on you than to leave you for ever. Love cannot dwell with suspicion." So saying, he fled away, leaving poor Psyche prostrate on the ground, filling the place with mournful lamentations. When she had recovered some degree of composure she looked around her, but the palace and gardens had vanished, and she found herself in the open field not far from the city where her sisters dwelt. She repaired thither and told them the whole story of her misfortunes, at which, pretending to grieve, those spiteful creatures inwardly rejoiced. "For now," said they, "he will perhaps choose one of us." With this idea, without saying a word of her intentions, each of them rose early the next morning and ascended the mountain, and having reached the top, called upon Zephyr to receive her and bear her to his lord; then leaping up, and not being sustained by Zephyr, fell down the precipice and was dashed to pieces. Psyche meanwhile wandered day and night, without food or repose, in search of her husband. Casting her eyes on a lofty mountain having on its brow a magnificent temple, she sighed and said to herself, "Perhaps my love, my lord, inhabits there," and directed her steps thither. She had no sooner entered than she saw heaps of corn, some in loose ears and some in sheaves, with mingled ears of barley. Scattered about, lay sickles and rakes, and all the instruments of harvest, without order, as if thrown carelessly out of the weary reapers' hands in the sultry hours of the day. This unseemly confusion the pious Psyche put an end to, by separating and sorting everything to its proper place and kind, believing that she ought to neglect none of the gods, but endeavor by her piety to engage them all in her behalf. The holy Ceres, whose temple it was, finding her so religiously employed, thus spoke to her, "Oh Psyche, truly worthy of our pity, though I cannot shield you from the frowns of Venus, yet I can teach you how best to allay her displeasure. Go, then, and voluntarily surrender yourself to your lady and sovereign, and try by modesty and submission to win her forgiveness, and perhaps her favor will restore you the husband you have lost." Psyche obeyed the commands of Ceres and took her way to the temple of Venus, endeavoring to fortify her mind and ruminating on what she should say and how best propitiate the angry goddess, feeling that the issue was doubtful and perhaps fatal. Venus received her with angry countenance. "Most undutiful and faithless of servants," said she, "do you at last remember that you really have a mistress? Or have you rather come to see your sick husband, yet laid up of the wound given him by his loving wife? You are so ill favored and disagreeable that the only way you can merit your lover must be by dint of industry and diligence. I will make trial of your housewifery." Then she ordered Psyche to be led to the storehouse of her temple, where was laid up a great quantity of wheat, barley, millet, vetches, beans, and lentils prepared for food for her pigeons, and said, "Take and separate all these grains, putting all of the same kind in a parcel by themselves, and see that you get it done before evening." Then Venus departed and left her to her task. But Psyche, in a perfect consternation at the enormous work, sat stupid and silent, without moving a finger to the inextricable heap. While she sat despairing, Cupid stirred up the little ant, a native of the fields, to take compassion on her. The leader of the anthill, followed by whole hosts of his six-legged subjects, approached the heap, and with the utmost diligence taking grain by grain, they separated the pile, sorting each kind to its parcel; and when it was all done, they vanished out of sight in a moment. Venus at the approach of twilight returned from the banquet of the gods, breathing odors and crowned with roses. Seeing the task done, she exclaimed, "This is no work of yours, wicked one, but his, whom to your own and his misfortune you have enticed." So saying, she threw her a piece of black bread for her supper and went away. Next morning Venus ordered Psyche to be called and said to her, "Behold yonder grove which stretches along the margin of the water. There you will find sheep feeding without a shepherd, with golden-shining fleeces on their backs. Go, fetch me a sample of that precious wool gathered from every one of their fleeces." Psyche obediently went to the riverside, prepared to do her best to execute the command. But the river god inspired the reeds with harmonious murmurs, which seemed to say, "Oh maiden, severely tried, tempt not the dangerous flood, nor venture among the formidable rams on the other side, for as long as they are under the influence of the rising sun, they burn with a cruel rage to destroy mortals with their sharp horns or rude teeth. But when the noontide sun has driven the cattle to the shade, and the serene spirit of the flood has lulled them to rest, you may then cross in safety, and you will find the woolly gold sticking to the bushes and the trunks of the trees." Thus the compassionate river god gave Psyche instructions how to accomplish her task, and by observing his directions she soon returned to Venus with her arms full of the golden fleece; but she received not the approbation of her implacable mistress, who said, "I know very well it is by none of your own doings that you have succeeded in this task, and I am not satisfied yet that you have any capacity to make yourself useful. But I have another task for you. Here, take this box and go your way to the infernal shades, and give this box to Proserpine and say, 'My mistress Venus desires you to send her a little of your beauty, for in tending her sick son she has lost some of her own.' Be not too long on your errand, for I must paint myself with it to appear at the circle of the gods and goddesses this evening." Psyche was now satisfied that her destruction was at hand, being obliged to go with her own feet directly down to Erebus. Wherefore, to make no delay of what was not to be avoided, she goes to the top of a high tower to precipitate herself headlong, thus to descend the shortest way to the shades below. But a voice from the tower said to her, "Why, poor unlucky girl, do you design to put an end to your days in so dreadful a manner? And what cowardice makes you sink under this last danger who have been so miraculously supported in all your former?" Then the voice told her how by a certain cave she might reach the realms of Pluto, and how to avoid all the dangers of the road, to pass by Cerberus, the three-headed dog, and prevail on Charon, the ferryman, to take her across the black river and bring her back again. But the voice added, "When Proserpine has given you the box filled with her beauty, of all things this is chiefly to be observed by you, that you never once open or look into the box nor allow your curiosity to pry into the treasure of the beauty of the goddesses." Psyche, encouraged by this advice, obeyed it in all things, and taking heed to her ways traveled safely to the kingdom of Pluto. She was admitted to the palace of Proserpine, and without accepting the delicate seat or delicious banquet that was offered her, but contented with coarse bread for her food, she delivered her message from Venus. Presently the box was returned to her, shut and filled with the precious commodity. Then she returned the way she came, and glad was she to come out once more into the light of day. But having got so far successfully through her dangerous task a longing desire seized her to examine the contents of the box. "What," said she, "shall I, the carrier of this divine beauty, not take the least bit to put on my cheeks to appear to more advantage in the eyes of my beloved husband!" So she carefully opened the box, but found nothing there of any beauty at all, but an infernal and truly Stygian sleep, which being thus set free from its prison, took possession of her, and she fell down in the midst of the road, a sleepy corpse without sense or motion. But Cupid, being now recovered from his wound, and not able longer to bear the absence of his beloved Psyche, slipping through the smallest crack of the window of his chamber which happened to be left open, flew to the spot where Psyche lay, and gathering up the sleep from her body closed it again in the box, and waked Psyche with a light touch of one of his arrows. "Again," said he, "have you almost perished by the same curiosity. But now perform exactly the task imposed on you by my mother, and I will take care of the rest." Then Cupid, as swift as lightning penetrating the heights of heaven, presented himself before Jupiter with his supplication. Jupiter lent a favoring ear, and pleaded the cause of the lovers so earnestly with Venus that he won her consent. On this he sent Mercury to bring Psyche up to the heavenly assembly, and when she arrived, handing her a cup of ambrosia, he said, "Drink this, Psyche, and be immortal; nor shall Cupid ever break away from the knot in which he is tied, but these nuptials shall be perpetual." Thus Psyche became at last united to Cupid, and in due time they had a daughter born to them whose name was Pleasure. Source: Thomas Bulfinch, The Age of Fable; or, Stories of Gods and Heroes , 3rd edition (Boston: Sanborn, Carter, Bazin and Company, 1855), ch. 11, pp. 115-28 . Edited by D. L. Ashliman, © 2001. Bulfinch's source is The Golden Ass (books 4-6) by the Roman writer Lucius Apuleius. Link to Apuleius' "Cupid and Psyche": The Story of Cupid and Psyche , translated from the Latin of Apuleius by Charles Stuttaford; illustrated by Jessie Mothersole (London: David Nutt, 1903). Link to Apuleius' novel The Metamorphosis; or, Golden Ass of Apuleius , translated from the original Latin by Thomas Taylor (London: Robert Triphook and Thomas Rudd, 1822). The inserted story of Cupid and Psyche is found on pages 66-99 . Lucius Apuleius was born about 124 in northern Africa and was educated in Carthage and Athens. The account of Cupid and Psyche is presented in his novel The Golden Ass (also titled The Metamorphoses , or Metamorphosis ) as an "old wive's tale" told by an old woman to comfort a young woman who has been abducted by a band of robbers and is being held for ransome. In the main Bulfinch retells Apuleius' story with accuracy and sensitivity, but he does omit a few important details, for example: Psyche is pregnant with Cupid's child throughout her search for her lost husband, a fact emphasized by Apuleius. The cruel treatment meted out to Psyche by her mother-in-law Venus is substantially understated in Bulfinch's account. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 425B. Link to a Norwgian folktale of type 425B: East of the Sun and West of the Moon . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 14, 2020. Dancing in Thorns: Folktales of Type 592 Dancing in Thorns and similar folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 592 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2019-22 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Jew in the Thorns (Germany). They Dance to the Pipe (Austria). Little Freddy and His Fiddle (Norway). The Gifts of the Magician (Finland). Jack Horner's Magic Pipes (England). A Mery Geste of the Frere and the Boye (England). The Friar and the Boy (England). A Witch Rescues a Man (England). The Golden Harp (Wales). The Fiddler and the Minister (Ireland). Tom Clancy (Ireland). The Man Who Could Make People Dance (Ireland). The Three Gifts (France). Shortboot and His Flute (France). The Magic Violin (France). The Little Flute (Italy). The Magic Flute (Greece). Cecilio, the Servant of Emilio (Philippines). Cochinango (Philippines). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Jew in the Thorns Germany Once upon a time there was a rich man who had a servant who served him diligently and honestly. Every morning he was the first one out of bed, and at night the last one to go to bed. Whenever there was a difficult job that nobody wanted to do, he was always the first to volunteer. He never complained at any of this, but was contented with everything and always happy. When his year was over, his master gave him no wages, thinking, "That is the smartest thing to do, for it will save me something. He won't leave me, but will gladly stay here working for me." The servant said nothing, but did his work the second year as he had done before, and when at the end of this year he again received no wages, he still stayed on without complaining. When the third year had passed, the master thought it over, then put his hand into his pocket, but pulled out nothing. However, this time the servant said, "Master, I have served you honestly for three years. Be so good as to give me what by rights I have coming to me. I would like to be on my way and see something else of the world." "Yes, my good servant," answered the old miser, "you have served me without complaint, and you shall be kindly rewarded." With this he put his hand into his pocket, then counted out three hellers one at a time, saying, "There, you have a heller for each year. That is a large and generous reward. Only a few masters would pay you this much." The good servant, who understood little about money, put his wealth into his pocket, and thought, "Ah, now that I have a full purse, why should I worry and continue to plague myself with hard work?" So he set forth, uphill and down, singing and jumping for joy. Now it came to pass that as he was passing by a thicket a little dwarf stepped out, and called to him, "Where are you headed, Brother Merry? You don't seem to be burdened down with cares." "Why should I be sad?" answered the servant. "I have everything I need. Three years' wages are jingling in my pocket. "How much is your treasure?" the dwarf asked him. "How much? Three hellers in real money, precisely counted." "Listen," said the dwarf, "I am a poor and needy man. Give me your three hellers. I can no longer work, but you are young and can easily earn your bread." Now because the servant had a good heart and felt pity for the dwarf, he gave him his three hellers, saying, "In God's name, I won't miss them." Then the dwarf said, "Because I see that you have a good heart I will grant you three wishes, one for each heller. They shall all be fulfilled." "Aha," said the servant. "You are a miracle worker. Well, then, if it is to be so, first of all I wish for a gun that will hit everything I aim at; second, for a fiddle, that when I play it, anyone who hears it will have to dance; and third, that whenever I ask a favor of anyone, it will be granted." "You shall have all that," said the dwarf. He reached into the bush, and what do you think, there lay a fiddle and a gun, all ready, just as if they had been ordered. He gave them to the servant, saying, "No one will ever be able to deny any request that you might make." "What more could my heart desire?" said the servant to himself, and went merrily on his way. Soon afterward he met a Jew with a long goatee, who was standing listening to a bird singing high up in the top of a tree. "One of God's own miracles," he shouted, "that such a small creature should have such a fearfully loud voice. If only it were mine! If only someone would sprinkle some salt on its tail!" "If that is all you want," said the servant, "then the bird shall soon be down here." He took aim, hit it precisely, and the bird fell down into a thorn hedge. "Rogue," he said to the Jew, "Go and fetch the bird out for yourself." "My goodness," said the Jew, "don't call me a rogue, sir, but I will be the dog and get the bird out for myself. After all, you're the one who shot it." Then he lay down on the ground and began crawling into the thicket. When he was in the middle of the thorns, the good servant could not resist the temptation to pick up his fiddle and begin to play. The Jew's legs immediately began to move, and he jumped up. The more the servant fiddled the better went the dance. However, the thorns ripped apart the Jew's shabby coat, combed his beard, and pricked and pinched him all over his body. "My goodness," cried the Jew, "what do I want with your fiddling? Stop playing, sir. I don't want to dance." But the servant did not listen to him, and thought, "You have fleeced people often enough, and now the thorn hedge shall do the same to you." He began to play all over again, so that the Jew had to jump even higher, leaving scraps from his coat hanging on the thorns. "Oh, woe is me!" cried the Jew. "I will give the gentleman anything he asks, if only he quits fiddling, even a purse filled with gold." "If you are so generous," said the servant, "then I will stop my music. But I must praise the singular way that you dance to it." Then he took his purse he went on his way. The Jew stood there quietly watching the servant until he was far off and out of sight, and then he screamed out with all his might, "You miserable musician, you beer-house fiddler! Wait until I catch you alone. I will chase you until you wear the soles off your shoes. You ragamuffin, just put a groschen in your mouth, so that you will be worth six hellers." He continued to curse as fast as he could speak. As soon as he had thus refreshed himself a little, and caught his breath again, he ran into the town to the judge. "Judge, sir," he said, "Oh, woe is me! See how a godless man has robbed me and abused me on the open road. A stone on the ground would feel sorry for me. My clothes are ripped into shreds. My body is pricked and scratched to pieces. And what little I owned has been taken away with my purse -- genuine ducats, each piece more beautiful than the others. For God's sake, let the man be thrown into prison." The judge asked, "Was it a soldier who cut you up like that with his saber?" "God forbid," said the Jew. "He didn't have a naked dagger, but rather a gun hanging from his back, and a fiddle from his neck. The scoundrel can easily be recognized." The judge sent his people out after him. They found the good servant, who had been walking along quite slowly. And they found the purse with the money on him as well. When he was brought before the judge he said, "I did not touch the Jew, nor take his money. He offered it to me freely, so that I would stop fiddling, because he could not stand my music." "God forbid!" cried the Jew. "He is reaching for lies like flies on the wall." The judge did not believe his story, and said, "That is a poor excuse. No Jew would do that." And because he had committed robbery on the open road, the good servant was sentenced to the gallows. As he was being led away, the Jew screamed after him, "You good-for-nothing. You dog of a musician. Now you will receive your well earned reward." The servant walked quietly up the ladder with the hangman, but on the last rung he turned around and said to the judge, "Grant me just one request before I die." "Yes," said the judge, "if you do not ask for your life." "I do not ask for life," answered the servant, "but let me play my fiddle one last time." The Jew cried out miserably, "For God's sake, do not allow it! Do not allow it!" But the judge said, "Why should I not grant him this short pleasure? It has been promised to him, and he shall have it." In any event, he could not have refused because of the gift that had been bestowed on the servant. The Jew cried, "Oh, woe is me! Tie me up. Tie me up tightly." The good servant took his fiddle from his neck, and made ready. As he played the first stroke, they all began to quiver and shake: the judge, the clerks, and the court officials. The rope fell out of the hand of the one who was going to tie up the Jew. At the second stroke they all lifted their legs. The hangman released the good servant and made ready to dance. At the third stroke everyone jumped up and began to dance. The judge and the Jew were out in front and were the best at jumping. Soon everyone who had gathered in the marketplace out of curiosity was dancing with them, old and young, fat and thin, all together with each other. Even the dogs that had run along with the crowd stood up on their hind legs and hopped along as well. The longer he played, the higher the dancers jumped, until they were knocking their heads together and crying out terribly. Finally the judge, quite out of breath, shouted, "I will give you your life, but just stop fiddling." The good servant listened to this, then took his fiddle, hung it around his neck again, and climbed down the ladder. He went up to the Jew, who was lying upon the ground gasping for air, and said, "You rogue, now confess where you got the money, or I will take my fiddle off my neck and begin to play again." "I stole it. I stole it," he cried. "But you have honestly earned it." With that the judge had the Jew led to the gallows and hanged as a thief. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Jude im Dorn," Kinder und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 110, pp. 121-25 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Jude im Dorn," Kinder und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 110, pp. 121-25 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2001. Translator's note: A heller is a small copper coin. The word can be translated with farthing or penny. The Grimms' knew at least four versions of this tale: Albrecht Dietrich, Historia von einem Bawrenknecht (1618, originally written as a rhymed theater piece in 1599). Jakob Ayrer, Fritz Dölla mit seiner gewünschten Geigen (1620). An oral version from Hessen. An oral version from the von Haxthausen family. Return to the table of contents . They Dance to the Pipe Austria Once there lived a couple who had three sons. Two of them passed for the handsomest fellows of the place; but they played every kind of trick on their brother, who was a hunchback. At first the latter took no notice, but the brothers carried their tormenting so far that at last he was compelled to go away from home. The hunchback went sorrowfully on, and wandered the whole day through the mountains. Towards evening he was so weary that he swooned away, and lay on the roadside. On awakening he saw a little man two feet high standing by him, and on the point of pouring a yellow liquid into, his mouth from a bottle. The hunchback looked about him, and saw to his surprise that he was in a cavern, lighted by a faint light. The dwarf spoke to him, and asked whether he was hungry. "O yes," he said, and the dwarf led him into another room, where stood a covered table. "Of these dishes, said the dwarf, "partake as much as thou wilt; and when thou hast eaten enough, lie down in yonder bed and sleep till I wake thee." The hunchback did as the dwarf bade him, and soon forgot all his troubles in a sound sleep. Next morning the dwarf awoke him, and after breakfasting they went out of the cave through a long passage lighted here and there by a feeble oil lamp. For two hours they wandered, when suddenly through a door they came into the open. Here the dwarf held out his hand to the hunchback, and said, "Thou seest here a place quite strange to thee, but fear not, and travel on this road. As a keepsake from me take this little pipe. It has the property of making every one who hears it dance, and that as long as thou pipest." The dwarf vanished, and the hunchback went on his way. Presently a shepherd met him, and he thought he would try the power of the pipe upon him. He took it in his hand and piped, whereupon the shepherd instantly began to dance. Even the sheep leaped joyously around in a circle. Then be came into a forest, where night surprised him. He got under an elder-bush, and was going to lie down and sleep, when he heard a noise hard by, growing louder every moment. At first he was alarmed, but soon he glided nearer to the spot. Concealed by a drooping branch he observed a number of robbers, who were dividing their booty, consisting of many gold pieces. The glittering gold attracted him, and he bethought him how he could get hold of it. His pipe occurred to him. Quickly he took it in his hand, and blew hard into it. Instantly the robbers got up and danced until they fell down. Then the hunchback came out, took the money and ran away. In the course of a few hours it became brighter, and he arrived at a place where the people seemed to be very sad. He asked the cause, and learned that the landlord, who had been so good to the people, was going to sell his property, and move to another place. The hunchback went to the proprietor, purchased his property, and be came lord of the land. He treated the tenants very kindly, only he was very fond of teasing them with his pipe. One day there came two beggars, who begged an alms from him. He looked more closely at them, and recognized his two brothers. He disclosed himself, and asked how it had come about that they were going round as beggars. They told him that soon after his departure a fire had broken out in the place, which consumed all their property. Their parents could not save themselves in time, and perished. And as the brothers had nothing left, they had set out, and so come to that place. Then they begged the hunchback's pardon for their behaviour to him in the past. He readily granted it, and retained them on his property. But one morning he said to his brothers, "Dear brothers, I told you how I came into the property. I will now do you a pleasure; look upon the property as your own, and I will go forth to seek another." At first the brothers refused, but as he would not listen to them, they let him go, and wished him much good luck on the journey. He went on, and had wandered for some months, when one day a gentleman in splendid attire joined him. They spoke of different things, and presently the gentleman showed him a box, saying that it would never be empty. "I could use that," said the hunchback. The gentleman promised it to him if he would bind his soul to him. But the hunchback refused, because he knew of an easier way of getting the box. He took his pipe, and piped so long that at last the devil, for such the fine gentleman really was, fell all of a heap. Then he took the box, went into a great city, and lived long, rich and respected. Source (books.google.com): Theodor Vernaleken, In the Land of Marvels: Folk-Tales from Austria and Bohemia (London: Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1889), pp. 331-34 . Source (Internet Archive): Theodor Vernaleken, In the Land of Marvels: Folk-Tales from Austria and Bohemia (London: Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1889), pp. 331-34 . Links to the original German: books.google.com: Theodor Vernaleken, "Sie tanzen nach der Pfeife," Österreichische Kinder- und Hausmärchen. Treu nach mündlicher Überlieferung (Wien: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1864), no. 58, pp. 327-30 . Internet Archive: Theodor Vernaleken, "Sie tanzen nach der Pfeife," Österreichische Kinder- und Hausmärchen. Treu nach mündlicher Überlieferung (Wien: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1864), no. 58, pp. 327-30 . Vernaleken's source: "From Haugsdorf in Lower Austria." Return to the table of contents . Little Freddy and His Fiddle Norway Once on a time there was a cottager who had an only son, and this lad was weakly, and hadn't much health to speak of; so he couldn't go out to work in the field. His name was Freddy, and undersized he was, too; and so they called him Little Freddy. At home there was little either to bite or sup, and so his father went about the country trying to bind him over as a cowherd or an errand-boy; but there was no one who would take his son till he came to the sheriff, and he was ready to take him, for he had just packed off his errand-boy, and there was no one who would fill his place, for the story went that he was a skinflint. But the cottager thought it was better there than nowhere: he would get his food, for all the pay he was to get was his board -- there was nothing said about wages or clothes. So when the lad had served three years he wanted to leave, and then the sheriff gave him all his wages at one time. He was to have a penny a year. "It couldn't well be less," said the sheriff. And so he got threepence in all. As for Little Freddy, he thought it was a great sum, for he had never owned so much; but for all that he asked if he wasn't to have something more. "You have already had more than you ought to have," said the sheriff. "Sha'n't I have anything, then, for clothes?" asked Little Freddy; "for those I had on when I came here are worn to rags, and I have had no new ones." And, to tell the truth, he was so ragged that the tatters hung and flapped about him. "When you have got what we agreed on," said the sheriff, "and three whole pennies beside, I have nothing more to do with you. Be off!" But for all that be got leave just to go into the kitchen and get a little food to put in his scrip; and after that he set off on the road to buy himself more clothes. He was both merry and glad, for he had never seen a penny before; and every now and then he felt in his pockets as he went along to see if he had them all three. So when he had gone far, and farther than far, he got into a narrow dale, with high fells on all sides, so that he couldn't tell if there were any way to pass out; and he began to wonder what there could be on the other side of those fells, and how he ever should get over them. But up and up he had to go, and on he strode; he was not strong on his legs, and had to rest every now and then -- and then he counted and counted how many pennies he had got. So when he had got quite up to the very top, there was nothing but a great plain overgrown with moss. There he sat him down, and began to see if his money were all right; and before he was aware of him a beggar-man came up to him -- and he was so tall and big that the lad began to scream and screech when he got a good look of him, and saw his height and length. "Don't you be afraid," said the beggar-man, '"I'll do you no harm; I only beg for a penny, in God's name." "Heaven help me!" said the lad. "I have only three pennies, and with them I was going to the town to buy clothes." "It is worse for me than for you," said the beggar-man. "I have got no penny, and I am still more ragged than you." "Well! then you shall have it," said the lad. So when he had walked on awhile he got weary, and sat down to rest again. But when he looked up there he saw another beggar-man, and he was still taller and uglier than the first; and so when the lad saw how very tall and ugly and long he was he fell a-screeching. "Now, don't you be afraid of me," said the beggar; "I'll not do you any harm. I only beg for a penny, in God's name." "Now, may heaven help me!" said the lad. "I've only got two pence, and with them I was going to the town to buy clothes. If I had only met you sooner, then --" "It's worse for mo than for you," said the beggar-man. I have no penny, and a bigger body and less clothing." "Well, you may have it," said the lad. So he went awhile farther, till he got weary, and then he sat down to rest; but he had scarce sat down than a third beggar-man came to him. He was so tall and ugly and long, that the lad had to look up and up, right up to the sky. And when he took him all in with his eyes, and saw how very, very tall and ugly and ragged he was he fell a-screeching and screaming again. "Now, don't you be afraid of me, my lad," said the beggar-man. "I'll do you no harm; for I am only a beggar-man, who begs for a penny in God's name." "May heaven help me!" said the lad. "I have only one penny left, and with it I was going to the town to buy clothes. If I had only met you sooner, then --" "As for that," said the beggar-man, "I have no penny at all -- that I haven't, and a bigger body and less clothes, so it is worse for me than for you." "Yes!" said Little Freddy, he must have the penny then -- there was no help for it; for so each would have what belonged to him, and he would have nothing. "Well!" said the beggarman, "since you have such a good heart that you gave away all that you had in the world, I will give you a wish for each penny." For you must know it was the same beggar-man who had got them all three; he had only changed his shape each time, that the lad might not know him again. "I have always had such a longing to hear a fiddle go, and see folk so glad and merry that they couldn't help dancing," said the lad; "and so, if I may wish what I choose, I will wish myself such a fiddle, that everything that has life must dance to its tune." "That he might have," said the beggarman; but it was a sorry wish. "You must wish something better for the other two pennies." "I have always had such a love for hunting and shooting," said Little Freddy; "so if I may wish what I choose, I will wish myself such a gun that I shall hit everything I aim at, were it ever so far off." "That he might have," said the beggarman; "but it was a sorry wish. You must wish better for the last penny." "I have always had a longing to be in company with folk who were kind and good," said Little Freddy; and so, if I could get what I wish, I would wish it to be so that no one can say 'Nay' to the first thing I ask." "That wish was not so sorry," said the beggarman; and off he strode between the hills, and he saw him no more. And so the lad laid down to sleep, and the next day he came down from the fell with his fiddle and his gun. First he went to the storekeeper and asked for clothes, and at one farm he asked for a horse, and at another for a sledge; and at this place he asked for a fur coat, and no one said him "Nay," -- even the stingiest folk, they were all forced to give him what he asked for. At last he went through the country as a fine gentleman, and had his horse and his sledge; and so when he had gone a bit he met the sheriff with whom he had served. "Good-day, master," said Little Freddy, as he pulled up and took off his hat. "Good-day," said the sheriff. And then he went on, "When was I ever your master?" "Oh, yes!" said Little Freddy. "Don't you remember how I served you three years for three pence?" "Heaven help us!" said the sheriff. "How you have got on all of a hurry! And pray how was it that you got to be such a fine gentleman?" "Oh, that's tellings!" said Little Freddy. "And are you full of fun, that you carry a fiddle about with you?" asked the sheriff." "Yes! Yes!" said Freddy. "I have always had such a longing to get folk to dance; but the funniest thing of all is this gun, for it brings down almost anything that I aim at, however far it may be off. Do you see that magpie yonder, sitting in the spruce fir? What'll you bet I don't bag it, as we stand here?" On that the sheriff was ready to stake horse and groom, and a hundred dollars beside, that he couldn't do it; but, as it was, he would bet all the money he had about him; and he would go to fetch it when it fell -- for he never thought it possible for any gun to carry so far. But as the gun went off down fell the magpie, and into a great bramble thicket; and away went the sheriff up into the brambles after it, and he picked it up and showed it to the lad. But in a trice Little Freddy began to scrape his fiddle, and the sheriff began to dance, and the thorns to tear him; but still the lad played on, and the sheriff danced, and cried, and begged till his clothes flew to tatters, and he scarce had a thread to his back. "Yes!" said Little Freddy; "now I think you're about as ragged as I was when I left your service. So now you may get off with what you have got." But, first of all, the sheriff had to pay him what he had wagered that he could not hit the magpie. So when the lad came to the town he turned aside into an inn, and he began to play, and all who came danced, and he lived merrily and well. He had no care, for no one could say him "Nay" to anything he asked. But just as they were all in the midst of their fun up came the watchmen to drag the lad off to the town-hall: for the sheriff had laid a charge against him, and said he had waylaid him and robbed him, and nearly taken his life. And now he was to be hanged -- they would not hear of anything else. But Little Freddy had a cure for all trouble, and that was his fiddle. He began to play on it, and the watchmen fell a-dancing, till they lay down and gasped for breath. So they sent soldiers and the guard on their way; but it was no better with them than with the watchmen. As soon as ever Little Freddy scraped his fiddle, they were all bound to dance, so long as he could lift a finger to play a tune; but they were half dead long before he was tired. At last they stole a march on him, and took him while he lay asleep by night; and when they had caught him he was doomed to be hanged on the spot, and away they hurried him to the gallows-tree. There a great crowd of people flocked together to see this wonder, and the sheriff, he, too, was there; and he was so glad at last at getting amends for the money and the skin he had lost, and that he might see him hanged with his own eyes. But they did not get him to the gallows very fast, for Little Freddy was always weak on his legs, and now he made himself weaker still. His fiddle and his gun he had with him also -- it was hard to part him from them; and so, when he came to the gallows, and had to mount the steps, he halted on each step; and when he got to the top he sat down, and asked if they could deny him a wish, and if he might have leave to do one thing? He had such a longing, he said to scrape a tune and play a bar on his fiddle before they hanged him. "No! No!" they said. "It were sin and shame to deny him that." For, you know, no one could gainsay what he asked. But the sheriff he begged them, for God's sake, not to let him have leave to touch a string, else it was all over with them altogether; and if the lad got leave, he begged them to bind him to the birch that stood there. So Little Freddy was not slow in getting his fiddle to speak, and all that were there fell a-dancing at once -- those who went on two legs, and those who went on four; both the dean and the parson, and the lawyer, and the bailiff, and the sheriff; masters and men, dogs and swine, they all danced and laughed and screeched at one another. Some danced till they lay for dead; some danced till they fell into a swoon. It went badly with all of them, but worst of all with the sheriff, for there he stood bound to the birch, and he danced and scraped great bits off his back against the trunk. There was not one of them who thought of doing anything to Little Freddy, and away he went with his fiddle and his gun, just as he chose; and he lived merrily and happily all his days, for there was no one who could say him "Nay" to the first thing he asked for." Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Tales from the Fjeld: A Second Series of Popular Tales from the Norse of P. Chr. Asbjørnsen , translated by G. W. Dasent (London: Chapman and Hall, 1874), pp. 293-301 . Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Tales from the Fjeld: A Second Series of Popular Tales from the Norse of P. Chr. Asbjørnsen , translated by G. W. Dasent (London: Chapman and Hall, 1874), pp. 293-301 . Link to the original Norwegian text: Veslefrikk med fela . Return to the table of contents . The Gifts of the Magician Finland Once upon a time there was an old man who lived in a little hut in the middle of a forest. His wife was dead, and he had only one son, whom he loved dearly. Near their hut was a group of birch trees, in which some black-game had made their nests, and the youth had often begged his father's permission to shoot the birds, but the old man always strictly forbade him to do anything of the kind. One day, however, when the father had gone to a little distance to collect some sticks for the fire, the boy fetched his bow, and shot at a bird that was just flying towards its nest. But he had not taken proper aim, and the bird was only wounded, and fluttered along the ground. The boy ran to catch it, but though he ran very fast, and the bird seemed to flutter along very slowly, he never could quite come up with it; it was always just a little in advance. But so absorbed was he in the chase that he did not notice for some time that he was now deep in the forest, in a place where he had never been before. Then he felt it would be foolish to go any further, and he turned to find his way home. He thought it would be easy enough to follow the path along which he had come, but somehow it was always branching off in unexpected directions. He looked about for a house where he might stop and ask his way, but there was not a sign of one anywhere, and he was afraid to stand still, for it was cold, and there were many stories of wolves being seen in that part of the forest. Night fell, and he was beginning to start at every sound, when suddenly a magician came running towards him, with a pack of wolves snapping at his heels. Then all the boy's courage returned to him. He took his bow, and aiming an arrow at the largest wolf, shot him through the heart, and a few more arrows soon put the rest to flight. The magician was full of gratitude to his deliverer, and promised him a reward for his help if the youth would go back with him to his house. "Indeed there is nothing that would be more welcome to me than a night's lodging," answered the boy; "I have been wandering all day in the forest, and did not know how to get home again." "Come with me, you must be hungry as well as tired," said the magician, and led the way to his house, where the guest flung himself on a bed, and went fast asleep. But his host returned to the forest to get some food, for the larder was empty. While he was absent the housekeeper went to the boy's room and tried to wake him. She stamped on the floor, and shook him and called to him, telling him that he was in great danger, and must take flight at once. But nothing would rouse him, and if he did ever open his eyes he shut them again directly. Soon after, the magician came back from the forest, and told the housekeeper to bring them something to eat. The meal was quickly ready, and the magician called to the boy to come down and eat it, but he could not be wakened, and they had to sit down to supper without him. By and by the magician went out into the wood again for some more hunting, and on his return he tried afresh to waken the youth. But finding it quite impossible, he went back for the third time to the forest. While he was absent the boy woke up and dressed himself. Then he came downstairs and began to talk to the housekeeper. The girl had heard how he had saved her master's life, so she said nothing more about his running away, but instead told him that if the magician offered him the choice of a reward, he was to ask for the horse which stood in the third stall of the stable. By and by the old man came back and they all sat down to dinner. When they had finished the magician said: "Now, my son, tell me what you will have as the reward of your courage?" "Give me the horse that stands in the third stall of your stable," answered the youth. "For I have a long way to go before I get home, and my feet will not carry me so far." "Ah! my son," replied the magician, "it is the best horse in my stable that you want! Will not anything else please you as well?" But the youth declared that it was the horse, and the horse only, that he desired, and in the end the old man gave way. And besides the horse, the magician gave him a zither, a fiddle, and a flute, saying: "If you are in danger, touch the zither; and if no one comes to your aid, then play on the fiddle; but if that brings no help, blow on the flute." The youth thanked the magician, and fastening his treasures about him mounted the horse and rode off. He had already gone some miles when, to his great surprise, the horse spoke, and said: "It is no use your returning home just now, your father will only beat you. Let us visit a few towns first, and something lucky will be sure to happen to us." This advice pleased the boy, for he felt himself almost a man by this time, and thought it was high time he saw the world. When they entered the capital of the country everyone stopped to admire the beauty of the horse. Even the king heard of it, and came to see the splendid creature with his own eyes. Indeed, he wanted directly to buy it, and told the youth he would give any price he liked. The young man hesitated for a moment, but before he could speak, the horse contrived to whisper to him: "Do not sell me, but ask the king to take me to his stable, and feed me there; then his other horses will become just as beautiful as I." The king was delighted when he was told what the horse had said, and took the animal at once to the stables, and placed it in his own particular stall. Sure enough, the horse had scarcely eaten a mouthful of corn out of the manger, when the rest of the horses seemed to have undergone a transformation. Some of them were old favourites which the king had ridden in many wars, and they bore the signs of age and of service. But now they arched their heads, and pawed the ground with their slender legs as they had been wont to do in days long gone by. The king's heart beat with delight, but the old groom who had had the care of them stood crossly by, and eyed the owner of this wonderful creature with hate and envy. Not a day passed without his bringing some story against the youth to his master, but the king understood all about the matter and paid no attention. At last the groom declared that the young man had boasted that he could find the king's war horse which had strayed into the forest several years ago, and had not been heard of since. Now the king had never ceased to mourn for his horse, so this time he listened to the tale which the groom had invented, and sent for the youth. "Find me my horse in three days," said he, "or it will be the worse for you." The youth was thunderstruck at this command, but he only bowed, and went off at once to the stable. "Do not worry yourself," answered his own horse. "Ask the king to give you a hundred oxen, and to let them be killed and cut into small pieces. Then we will start on our journey, and ride till we reach a certain river. There a horse will come up to you, but take no notice of him. Soon another will appear, and this also you must leave alone, but when the third horse shows itself, throw my bridle over it." Everything happened just as the horse had said, and the third horse was safely bridled. Then the other horse spoke again: "The magician's raven will try to eat us as we ride away, but throw it some of the oxen's flesh, and then I will gallop like the wind, and carry you safe out of the dragon's clutches." So the young man did as he was told, and brought the horse back to the king. The old stableman was very jealous, when he heard of it, and wondered what he could do to injure the youth in the eyes of his royal master. At last he hit upon a plan, and told the king that the young man had boasted that he could bring home the king's wife, who had vanished many months before, without leaving a trace behind her. Then the king bade the young man come into his presence, and desired him to fetch the queen home again, as he had boasted he could do. And if he failed, his head would pay the penalty. The poor youth's heart stood still as he listened. Find the queen? But how was he to do that, when nobody in the palace had been able to do so! Slowly he walked to the stable, and laying his head on his horse's shoulder, he said: "The king has ordered me to bring his wife home again, and how can I do that when she disappeared so long ago, and no one can tell me anything about her?" "Cheer up!" answered the horse, "we will manage to find her. You have only got to ride me back to the same river that we went to yesterday, and I will plunge into it and take my proper shape again. For I am the king's wife, who was turned into a horse by the magician from whom you saved me." Joyfully the young man sprang into the saddle and rode away to the banks of the river. Then he threw himself off, and waited while the horse plunged in. The moment it dipped its head into t he water its black skin vanished, and the most beautiful woman in the world was floating on the water. She came smiling towards the youth, and held out her hand, and he took it and led her back to the palace. Great was the king's surprise and happiness when he beheld his lost wife stand before him, and in gratitude to her rescuer, he loaded him with gifts. You would have thought that after this the poor youth would have been left in peace; but no, his enemy the stableman hated him as much as ever, and laid a new plot for his undoing. This time he presented himself before the king and told him that the youth was so puffed up with what he had done that he had declared he would seize the king's throne for himself. At this news the king waxed so furious that he ordered a gallows to be erected at once, and the young man to be hanged without a trial. He was not even allowed to speak in his own defense, but on the very steps of the gallows he sent a message to the king and begged, as a last favour, that he might play a tune on his zither. Leave was given him, and taking the instrument from under his cloak he touched the strings. Scarcely had the first notes sounded than the hangman and his helper began to dance, and the louder grew the music, the higher they capered, till at last they cried for mercy. But the youth paid no heed, and the tunes rang out more merrily than before, and by the time the sun set they both sank on the ground exhausted, and declared that the hanging must be put off till tomorrow. The story of the zither soon spread through the town, and on the following morning the king and his whole court and a large crowd of people were gathered at the foot of the gallows to see the youth hanged. Once more he asked a favour -- permission to play on his fiddle, and this the king was graciously pleased to grant. But with the first notes, the leg of every man in the crowd was lifted high, and they danced to the sound of the music the whole day till darkness fell, and there was no light to hang the musician by. The third day came, and the youth asked leave to play on his flute. "No, no," said the king, "you made me dance all day yesterday, and if I do it again it will certainly be my death. You shall play no more tunes. Quick! the rope round his neck." At these words the young man looked so sorrowful that the courtiers said to the king: "He is very young to die. Let him play a tune if it will make him happy." So, very unwillingly, the king gave him leave; but first he had himself bound to a big fir tree, for fear that he should be made to dance. When he was made fast, the young man began to blow softly on his flute, and bound though he was, the king's body moved to the sound, up and down the fir tree till his clothes were in tatters, and the skin nearly rubbed off his back. But the youth had no pity, and went on blowing, till suddenly the old magician appeared and asked: "What danger are you in, my son, that you have sent for me?" "They want to hang me," answered the young man; "the gallows are all ready and the hangman is only waiting for me to stop playing." "Oh, I will put that right," said the magician; and taking the gallows, he tore it up and flung it into the air, and no one knows where it came down. "Who has ordered you to be hanged?" asked he. The young man pointed to the king, who was still bound to the fir; and without wasting words the magician took hold of the tree also, and with a mighty heave both fir and man went spinning through the air, and vanished in the clouds after the gallows. Then the youth was declared to be free, and the people elected him for their king; and the stable helper drowned himself from envy, for, after all, if it had not been for him the young man would have remained poor all the days of his life. Source (books.google.com): Andrew Lang, The Crimson Fairy Book (London, New York, and Bombay: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1903), pp. 134-44 . Source (Internet Archive): Andrew Lang, The Crimson Fairy Book (London, New York, and Bombay: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1903), pp. 134-44 . Lang's source: Emmy Schreck, "Die Gaben des Unholds," Finnische Märchen (Weimar: Hermann Böhlau, 1887), pp. 151-58 (books.google.com). Emmy Schreck, "Die Gaben des Unholds," Finnische Märchen (Weimar: Hermann Böhlau, 1887), pp. 151-58 (Internet Archive). Return to the table of contents . Jack Horner's Magic Pipes England CHAP. IV How he met with an old Hermit, who for a Bottle of nappy Ale, gave him an invincible Coat and a Pair of inchanted Pipes, with which he shewed many merry Tricks. Upon a pleasant holyday. Jack going to a fair, And as he passed along the way, He saw a wonder there. An aged man sat in a Cave, Who could not stand nor go, His head bore blossoms of the grave, And locks as white as snow, Strange hollow eyes and wrinkled brow His nose and chin did meet, To him Jack Homer made a bow, With words both soft and sweet. He call'd to John and thus did say, Come hither lad to me, And if thou dost my will obey, Thou shalt rewarded be: Bring me a fairing from the town, At thy own proper cost, A jug of nappy liquor brown, Thy labour shan't be lost. Jack made the Hermit this reply, Who then sat in his cell, What's your request I'll not deny, And so old dad farewel. At night he being stout and strong, This Hermit he'd not fail, But at his back he lug'd along, A lusty jug of ale: Which when the Hermit he beheld, It pleas'd him to the heart; Out of the same cup he fill'd, And said, Before we part, I have a pipe which I'll bestow Upon you never doubt, Whoever hears you when you blow, Shall dance and trump about: They shan't be able to stand still While you the Music play, But after you o'er dale and hill, They all shall dance the hay. I have thee a coat likewise, Invincible I mean, The which shall so bedim their eyes, That thou shalt not be seen: If you with a hundred meet, When thus you pass along, Though in the very open street, Not one of all the throng, Shall ever see you in the least, Yet hear the music sound, And wonder that both man and beast, Are forced to dance around. Jack took the Coat and Bagpipes too, And thankfully did say, Old Father I will call on you Whene'er I come this way. CHAP. V How he serv'd six Fidlers, and as many Pedlers, whom he caused to dance thro' Hedge and Ditch after his Pipes, till they broke all their Glasses and Crowds. This Pipe and coat he having got, He homeward trudg'd with speed, At length it was his happy Lot to cross a pleasant Mead: Where he six Fidlers soon espy'd a coming from a Fair, Under their Coats, crowds by their sides, and many others there: Amongst the rest six jolly blades, after those crowders came, Who on their shoulders carried Crades with Glasses in the same. Jack presently his Coat put on, Which screen'd him from their sight, And said I'll do the best I can To plague them all this night. For Crowders they are Rogues I know And Crades-men they are worse, They cousin all where'er they go, And pick each Lass's purse. His pipe he then began to play, The Crowders they did dance, The Crades-men too as fast as they Did caper, skip, and prance. Still Jack play'd up a merry strain, Both pleasant, loud, and shrill, So that they danc'd and jump'd amain Tho' much against their Will: They cried, this is enchanted Ground, For why no soul we see, And yet a pleasant Music sound, Makes, us dance vehemently. Jack Homer laugh'd, and piping went Strait down into a hollow, These hair brain'd Dancers, by consent Did after him soon follow, He led them through Bogs and Sloughs Nay, likewise Ponds and Ditches, And in the thorny briar boughs Poor rogues they tore their Breeches, Each Fidler lost, or tore his Cloak, But yet they followed after, Their crow'ds were, crack'd their glasses broke, This was a woeful slaughter. At length it being something late, Jack did his piping leave, They ceased and saw their wretched state, Which made them sigh and grieve. This is, said some, Old Nick I know The author of this evil, The others cry'd out, if it be so, He is a merry Devil. Jack Horner laugh'd and went his Way And left them in despair, So that e'er since that very day, The Fidlers came not there. Source (books.google.com): The Pleasant History of Jack Horner: containing the witty Tricks and pleasant Pranks he play'd from his Youth to his riper Years; pleasant and delightful both for Winter and Summer Recreation (London: J. Drewry, [ca. 1790]), chs. 4-5, pp. 9-13 . Source (Internet Archive): The Pleasant History of Jack Horner: containing the witty Tricks and pleasant Pranks he play'd from his Youth to his riper Years; pleasant and delightful both for Winter and Summer Recreation (London: J. Drewry, [ca. 1790]), chs. 4-5, pp. 9-13 . Jack Horner's adventures continue as a type 571B folktale: Jack Horner and the Innkeeper's Wife . Return to the table of contents . A Mery Geste of the Frere and the Boye England Here Begynneth A Mery Geste of the Frere and the Boye God that deyde ffor vs all, And dranke eysell and gall, Brynge vs out of bale, Ang gyue them good lyfe and long That lysteneth to my songe, Or tendeth to my tale. Ther was a man in my countre That had wyues thre, Be proseys of tyme, Bey the fyrst wyfe a sone he had, That was a hapey ladde, And a partey hyne. His fader loued hym wele, So dyde his moder neuer a dele, I tell yow as I thinke; Sche thowth lost, he the rode, That dyde the boye ony good, Other mete or drynke. And yet y wys it was but badde, Nor halffe ynowh therof he had, Oft he was afforst: Therfore euyll mote she fare, Ofte she dyde the lytell boye care, As ferforth as she dorste. The good wyfe to her hushonde gan saye; I wolde ye wolde put this boye awaye, And that ryght soone in haste; Truly he is a cursed ladde, I wolde some other man hym had, That wolde hym hetter chaste. Then sayd the good man agayne: Dame, I shall to the sayne, He is but tender of age; He shall abyde with me this yere, Tyll he he more strongere, For to wynne better wage. We haue a man, a stoute freke, That in the felde kepeth our nete, He slepys all the daye, He shall come home, so god me shelde, And the boye shall into the felde, To kepe our beestes, yf he may. Than sayd the wyfe, verament: Sere, therto I assent, I holde het be the beste. On the morowe, whan it was daye, The lytell boye wente on his waye, To the ffellde full prest; Of no man he had no care, But sung, hey howe, awaye the mare, And made ioye ynough. Fforet he wente, truly to sayne, Tyll he came to the playne, Hys dyner foret he drough. Whan he sawe, it was bad, Lytell lust therto he had, But put it yp agayne; Therfore he was not to wyte, He sayd he wolde ete but lyte, Tyll nyght that he home came. And as the boye sate on a hill, An olde man came hym tyll, Walkynge by the waye: Sone, he sayde, god the se. Syr, welcome mote ye be The lytell boye gan saye. The olde man sayd: I honger sore, Hast thou ony mete in store, That thou mayst gyue me? The chylde sayd: so god me saue, To such vytayle as I haue Welcome shall ye be. Therof the olde man was gladde, The boye drewe forth suche as he had, And made him ryght merry. The olde man was easy to please, He ete, and made hym well at ease, And sayd: sone, gramercy. Ffor they mete that thou hast geffe me I shall gyue the thynges thre, Thou shalt them not forgete. The boye seyde: het is best I trowe, Ffor me to haue a bowe, At byrdes for to shete. A bowe, sone, I shall the gyue, That shall last the all thy lyue, And euer a lyke mete, Shote therin, whan thou good thynke, For yf thou shote, and wynke, The prycke thow shalte hytte. Whan he the howe in honde felte, And the boltes vnder his belte, Lowde than he lough; He sayd: now had I a pype, Though it were neuer so lyte, Than were I gladde ynough. A pype thou shalte haue also, In true musyke it shall go, I put thee out of doubt; All that may the pype here Shall not themselfe stere, But laugh and lepe aboute. What shall the thyrde be? Gyfftes I schall geve the three. As I haue sayd before. The lytell boye on hym lough, And sayd: syr, I haue ynough, I wyll desyre no more. The olde man sayd: my trouth I plyght, Thou shalte haue that I the hyght; Say on now, and let me se. Than sayd the boye anone: I haue a stepdame at home, She is a shrewe to me: Whan my fader gyueth me awth, Be God that me dere bowth, Sche stareth me in the face; Whan she loketh on me so, I wolde she sholde let a rappe go, That myght rynge ouer all the place. Than sayd the olde man tho: Whan she loketh on the so, She shall begyn to blowe; All that euer it may here Shall not themselfe stere, But dans on a rowe. Farewell, quod the olde man. God kepe the, sayd the chylde than, I take my leue at the; God, that moost best may, iso Kepe the bothe nyght and day. Gramercy, sone, sayd he. Than drewe it towarde the nyght, Iacke hym hyed home full ryght, It was his ordynaunce; He toke his pype, and began to blowe; All his beestes on a rowe Aboute hym they can daunce. Thus wente he pypynge thrugh the towne, His beestes hym folowed by the sowne Into his faders close; He wente, and put them vp echone, Homewarde he wente anone; Into the hall he gose; His fader at his souper sat; Lytell Iacke espyed well that, And sayd to hym anone: Fader, I haue kepte your nete, I praye you gyue me some mete, I am an hongred, by Saynt Ihone. I have sytten metelesse All this daye kepynge your beestes, My dyner feble it was. His fader toke a capons wynge, And at the boye he gan it flynge, And badde hym ete apace. That greued his Dames herte sore, As I tolde you before; She stared hym in the face, With that she let go a blaste, That all in the hall were agaste, It range ouer all the place. All they laughed, and had good game, The wyfe waxed red for shame, She wolde that she had ben gone. Quod the boye: well I wote, That gonne was well shote, As it had ben a stone. Cursedly she loked on hym tho; Another blaste she let go, She was almoost rente. Quod the boye: wyll ye se How my dame letteth pellettes fle, In fayth or euer she stynte! The boye sayde vnto his dame: Tempre thy bombe, he sayd, for shame: She was full of sorowe. Dame, sayd the good man, go thy waye: For I swere to the, by my faye, Thy gere is not to borowe. Afterwarde, as ye shall here. To the hous ther came a frere, To lye there all nyght; The wyfe loued him as a saynt, And to hym made her complaynt, And tolde hym all aryght. Wee haue a boye within ywys, A shrewe for the nones he is, He dooth me moche care; I dare not loke hym vpon: I am ashamed, by Saynt Iohn, To tell yow how I fare. I praye you mete the boye tomorowe, Bete hym well, and gyue hym sorowe, And make the boye lame. Quod the frere: I shall hym bete. Quod the wyfe: do not forgete, He dooth to me moche shame: I trowe the boye be some wytche. Quod the frere: I shall hym teche, Haue thou therof no care; I shall hym teche, yf I may. Quod the wyfe: I the praye, Do hym not spare. On the morowe the boye arose, Into the felde soone he gose, His beestes for to dryue; The frere ranne out at the gate, He was a ferde leest he came to late, He ranne fast and blyue. Whan he came vpon the londe, Lytell Iacke there he fonde, Dryuynge his beestes all alone; Boye, he sayd, god gyue the shame, What hast thou done to thy dame, Tell thou me anone? But yf thou canst excuse the well, By my trouth bete the I wyll, I will no lenger abyde. Quod the boye: what eyleth the? My dame fareth as well as ye, What nedeth ye to chyde? Quod the boye: wyll ye wete How I can a byrde shete, And other thynge withall? Syr, he sayd, though I be lyte, Yonder byrde wyll I smyte, And gyue her the I shall. There sate a byrde vpon a brere, Shote on, boy, quod the frere, For that me lysteth to se. He hytte the byrde on the heed, That she fell downe deed, No ferder myght she flee. The frere to the busshe wente, Vp the byrde for to hente, He thought it best for to done. Iacke toke his pype, and began to blowe, Then the frere, as I trowe, Began to daunce soone. As soone as he the pype herd, Lyke a wood man he fared, He lepte and daunced aboute; The breres scratched hym in the face, And in many an other place, That the blode brast out; And tare his clothes by and by, His cope and his scapelary, And all his other wede. He daunced amonge the thornes thycke, In many places they dyde hym prycke, That fast gan he blede. Iacke pyped and laughed amonge, The frere amonge the thornes was thronge, He hopped wunderous hye; At the last he held vp his honde, And sayd: I haue daunced so longe, That I am lyke to dye; Gentyll Iacke, holde thy pype styll, And by my trouth I plyght the tyll, I will do the no woo. Iacke sayd in that tide: Frere, skyppe out on the ferder syde, Lyghtly that thou were goo. The frere out of the busshe wente, All to ragged and to rente, And torne on euery syde; Unnethes on hym he had one cloute, His bely for to wrappe aboute; His harneys for to hyde. The breres had hym scratched in the face, And in many an other place, He was all to bledde with blode ; All that myght the frere se, Were fayne awaye to flee, They wende he had ben wode. Whan he came to his hoost, Of his ionrney he made no boost, His clothes were rente all; Moche sorowe in his herte he had, And euery man hym dradde, Whan he came in to the hall. The wyfe sayd: where hast thou bene? In an euyll place, I wene, Me thynketh by thyn araye. Dame, I haue ben with thy sone, The deuyll of hell hym ouercome: For no man elles may. With that came in the good man, The wife sayd unto hym than: Here is a foule araye; Thy sone, that is thy lefe and dere, Hath almoost slayne this holy frere, Alas, and welawaye. The good man sayd: benedicite! What hath the boye done, frere, to the, Tell me without lette? The frere sayd: the deuyll hym spode, He hath made me daunce, maugro my hede, Amonge the thornes, hey go bette. The good man sajd to hym tho: Haddest thou lost thy lyfe so, It had ben grete synne. The frere sayd: by our lady, The pype went so meryly, That I coude neuer blynne. Whan it drewe towarde the nyght, The boye came home full ryght, As he was wont to do. Whan he came into the hall, Soone his fader gan hym call, And badde hym come hym to. Boye, he sayd, tell me here, What hast thou done unto the frere, Tell me without lesynge? Fader, he sayd, by my faye, I dydo nought elles, as I yow saye, But pyped him a sprynge. That pype, sayd his fader, wolde I here. Mary, god forbede, sayd the frere: His handes he dyde wrynge. Yes, sayd the good man, by goddes grace. Then, sayd the frere, out alas, And made grete mournynge. For the loue of god, quod the frere. If ye wyll that pype here, Bynde me to a post: For I knowe none other rede, And I daunce, I am but deed, Well I wote my lyfe is lost. Stronge ropes they toke in honde, The frere to the poste they bonde, In the myddle of the halle. All that at the souper sat Laughed and had good game therat, And said, the frere wolde not fall. Than sayd the good man: Pype, sonne, as thou can, Hardely whan thou wylle. Fader, he sayd, so mote I the, Haue ye shall ynough of gle, Tyll ye bydde me be styll. As soon as Iacke the pype hent, All that there were, verament, Began to daunce and lepe; Whan they gan the pype here, They myght not themselfe stere, But hurled on an hepe. The good man was in no dyspayre, But lyghtly lepte out of his chayre, All with a goodly chere; Some lepte ouer the stocke; Some stombled at the blocke: And some fell flatte in the fyre. The good man had grete game, How they daunced all in same; The good wyfe after gan steppe; Euermore she kest her eye at Iacke, And fast her tayle began to cracke, Lowder than they coude speke. The frere hymselfe was almoost lost, For knockynge his heed ayenst the post, He had none other grace; The rope rubbed hym vnder the chynne, That the blode downe dyde rynne, In many a dyuers place. Iacke ranne into the strete, After hym fast dyde they lepe, Truly they coude not stynte; They wente out at the dore so theke, That eche man fell on others necke, So pretely out they wente. Neyghbours that were fast by, Herde the pype go so meryly, They ranne into the gate; Some lepte ouer the hatche, They had no time to drawe the latche, They wende they had come to late. Some laye in theyr bedde, And helde vp theyr hede, Anone they were waked; Some sterte in the waye, Truly as I you saye, Stark bely naked. By that they were gradred aboute, I wys there was a grete route, Dauncynge in the strete; Some were lame, and myght not go, But yet ywys they daunced allso, On handes and on fete. The boye sayd: now wyll I rest. Quod the good man: I holde it best, With a mery chere; Sease, sone, whan thou wylte, In fayth this is the meryest fytte That I herde this seuen yere. They daunced all in same. Some laughed, and had good game, And some had many a fall. Thou cursed boye, quod the frere, Here I somon the that thou appere Before the offycyall; Loke thou be there on Frydaye, I wyll the mete and I may, For to ordeyne the sorowe. The boye sayd: by god auowe, Frere, I am as redy as thou, And Frydaye were to morowe. Frydaye came, as ye may here; Iackes stepdame and the frere Togeder there they mette; Folke gadered a grete pase, To here euery mannes case, The offycyall was sette. There was moche to do, Maters more than one or two, Both with preest and clerke. Some had testamentes for to preue, And fayre women, by your leue, That had strokes in the derke. Euery man put forth his case, Then came forth frere Topyas, And Iackes stepdame also. Sir offycyall, sayd he, I haue brought a boye to thee, Which hath wrought me moche wo; He is a grete nygromancere, In all Orlyaunce is not his pere, As by my trouth I trowe. He is a wytche, quod the wyfe: Than, as I shall tell you blythe, Lowde coude she blowe. Some laughed without fayle, Some sayd: dame, tempre thy tayle, Ye wreste it all amysse. Dame, quod the offycyall, Tel forth on thy tale, Lette not for all this. The wyfe was afrayed of an other cracke, That no wordo more she spacke, She durst not for drede. The frere sayd: so mote I the, Knaue, this is long of the That euyl mote thou spede. The frere sayd: syr offycyall, The boye wyll combre vs all, But yf ye may him chaste; Syr, he hath a pype truly, Wyll make you daunce, and lepe on hye, Tyll your herte braste. The offycyall sayd: so mot I the, That pype wolde I fayne se, And knowe what myrth that he can make. Mary, god forbede, than sayd the frere, That he sholde pype here, Afore that I hens the waye take. Pype on, Iacke, sayd the offycyall, I wyll here now how thou canst playe. Iacke blewe vp, the sothe to saye, And made them soone to daunce all. The offycyall lepte ouer the deske, And daunced aboute wonder faste, Tyll bothe his shynnes he all to brest, Hym thought it was not of the best, Than cryed he vnto the chylde, To pype no more within this place, But to holde styll, for goddes grace, And for the loue of Mary mylde. Than sayd Iacke to them echone: If ye wolde me graunte with herte fre, That they shall do me no vylany, But hens to departe euen as I come. Therto they answered all anone, And promysed him anone ryght, In his quarell for to fyght, And defende hym from his fone. Thus they departed in that tyde, The offycyall and the sompnere, His stepdame and the frere, With great ioye and moche pryde. Thus endeth the Frere and ye Boye. Enprynted at London in Flete strete at the sygne of the sonne by Wynkyn de Worde. Source (books.google.com): W. Carew Hazlitt, Remains of the Early Popular Poetry of England (London: John Russell Smith, 1866), pp. 60-81 . Source (Internet Archive): W. Carew Hazlitt, Remains of the Early Popular Poetry of England (London: John Russell Smith, 1866), pp. 60-81 . Return to the table of contents . The Friar and the Boy England There was a man in a certain country who in process of time had three wives. By the first he had a son, who was a light-hearted lad; but by the other twain issue had he none. His father loved this boy well; but his step-dame looked upon him with an evil eye, and stinted him in his victual, and did him many a shrewd turn. At length she said unto the goodman: "I heartily pray you, sir, that you would put away this boy, who is a cursed plague to me, and let him serve someone else who will give him his desert." Her husband answered her, saying: "Woman, he is but a child. Let him abide with us another year, till he is better able to shift. We have a man, a stout carl, who keeps our beasts afield; look, the boy shall take his place, and we will have the fellow in the stead of him at home." To which the goodwife agreed. So on the morrow the little lad was sent to tend the sheep, and all the way he sang out of the gaiety of his heart; and his dinner he carried with him in a clout. But when he came to see what his step-dame had given him to eat, he had small lust thereto, and he took but little, thinking that he would get more when he returned homeward at sundown. The boy sat on a hillside, watching his sheep and singing, when there came along an aged man, and stood still, when he espied the child, saying unto him: "Son, God bless thee!" "Welcome, father," the boy replied. The old man said: "I hunger sore; hast thou any food of which thou mightest give me even some?" The child returned: "To such victual as I have thou art welcome, father." So he gave the old man the rest of his dinner, and thereof he was full fain. He ate, and grudged not. To please him was not hard. Then, when he had finished, he said: "Gramercy, child; and for the meat which thou hast spared me I will give thee three things. Tell me now what they shall be." The boy thought in his mind, and anon: "I would," quoth he, "have a bow, wherewith I could shoot birds." "I will find thee incontinently," said the stranger, "one that shall last thee through thy whole life, and shall never need renewing. Thou hast but to draw it, and it will hit the mark." Then he handed him the bow and the arrows; and when the child saw them, aloud he laughed, and was mightily content. "Now," said he, "if I had a pipe, if it were ever so small, then I should be glad." "A pipe I here give thee," the old man said, "which hath in it strange properties; for all whosoever, save thyself, shall hear it, when thou playest, must dance to the music perforce. I promised thee three things. Say, what is to be the last?" "I seek nothing more," replied the boy. "Nothing?" quoth the stranger. "Speak, and thou hast thy will." "Well," said he, musing, "I have at home a step-dame -- a shrewd wife she -- and she oftentimes looks ill-favouredly at me, as though she meant me no love. Now, prythee, when so she looketh in that wise, let her laugh till she fall to the earth, and laugh still, unless I bid her to desist." "It is granted," said the stranger. "Farewell!" "God keep thee, sir," said the boy. The evening drew on, and Jack wended homeward in great glee. He took his pipe and played it, and all his beasts and his dog danced to it in a row. He played as he went along, and the sheep and kine followed at his heels and the dog, dancing all the way, till they came to his father's abode; and he put by the pipe, and saw that all was fast, and then walked he into the house. His father sat at his supper, and Jack said unto him: "I am a-hungered, sir; my dinner I might not eat, and I have had charge of the beasts the whole day." The husbandman threw a capon's wing toward him and told him to eat it. The goodwife sorely grudged that he should have so fair a morsel, and eyed him sourly. But she straightway fell to laughing, and she laughed, and she laughed, till she could no longer stand or sit, and fell on the floor, laughing still, and she ceased not till she was half-dead; and then the boy said: "Dame, enough!" and she laughed not a whit more, which made them both amazed. Now this goodwife loved a friar, who oftentimes came to the house; and when he next shewed himself she made complaint to him of the boy, and told him how Jack had caused her to laugh, and had mocked her, and she prayed this friar to meet him on the morrow and beat him for his pains. "I will do thy pleasure as thou desirest," quoth the friar. "Do not forget," quoth the goodwife. "I trow he is some witch." So the morning following the boy went forth to drive his father's beasts to the field, and he took with him his bow and his pipe. And the friar rose betimes likewise, lest he might be too late, and he approached the boy, and thus he accosted him: "What, forsooth, hast thou done by thy step-mother, Jack, that she is angered at thee? Tell me what it is; and if thou canst not satisfy me, surely I will beat thee." "What aileth thee?" asked Jack. "My dame fares as well as thou. Have done with thy chiding. Come, wilt thou see how I can bring down a bird with my bow, and what other things I can do? Though I be a little fellow, I will shoot yonder bird, and yours it shall be." "Shoot on," said the friar. The bird was hit surely enough, and dropped into a thorn-bush. "Go and fetch it," said Jack. The friar stepped into the middle of the brambles and picked up the bird. Jack put the pipe to his lips and began to play. The friar let the bird fall and set to dancing, and the louder the pipe sounded the higher he leapt, and the more the briars tore his clothes and pierced his flesh. His dress was now in shreds, and the blood streamed from his legs and arms. Jack played all the faster, and laughed withal. "Gentle Jack," gasped out the friar, "hold thy hand. I have danced so long that I am like to die. Let me go, and I promise thee I will never again offer thee harm." "Jump out on the other side," quoth the boy, pausing, "and get thee gone." And the holy man made all the haste he could for shame's sake; for the thorns had almost stripped him to the skin, and covered him with blood. When he reached the house they wondered where he had been, and how he had fallen into such a sorry plight. The goodwife said: "I see well, father, by thine array that thou hast come to some mischief. What has befallen thee?" "I have been with thy son," he replied. "The devil overcome him, for no one else may!" Then entered the goodman, and his wife said unto him: "Here is a pretty matter! Thy dear son hath well-nigh slain this holy friar. Alack! Alack!" The goodman said: " Benedicite! what hath the boy been doing to thee, friar?" "He made me dance willy-willy among the briars, and, by Our Lady, the pipe went so merrily that I might have danced till I burst myself." "Hadst thou met with thy death so, father," said the goodman," it had been a great sin." At night, at the usual hour, the boy came back, and his father called him unto him, and questioned him about the friar. "Father," said Jack, " I did nought, I tell thee, but play him a tune." "Well," answered the goodman, "let me hear this pipe myself." "Heaven forbid!" cried the friar, wringing his hands. "Yea," quoth the goodman, "give us some music, Jack." "If," entreated the friar piteously, "thou wilt indeed have him play, first bind me to some post. If I hear that pipe I must fain dance, and then my life is nought worth. I am a dead man." They fastened him to a post in the centre of the hall, and they all laughed at his distress, and one said, "The friar is out of danger of falling now." "Now, boy," said the goodman, "play on." "That will I do, father," he replied, "till you bid me hold, and I warrant ye shall have music enough." As soon as the boy took up the pipe and laid his mouth to it, all began to dance and jump, faster and faster, and higher and higher, as though they were out of their wits. Even the friar struck his head against the post and screamed with pain. Some leapt over the table; some tumbled against the chairs; some fell in the fire. Jack passed out into the street, and they all followed him, capering wildly as they went. The neighbours started at the sound, and came out of their houses, springing over the fences; and many that had gone to rest jumped out of bed and hurried into the village, naked as they were, and joined the throng at Jack's heels. A phrenzy was upon them all, and they bounded into the air, and looked not whither they plunged; and some that could no longer keep their feet for lameness danced on all fours. The goodman said to his son: "Jack, I trow it is best to give over." "Let it be so," said the boy, and he desisted from his playing accordingly. "This is the merriest sport," said the goodman, "that I have known this seven year." "Thou cursed boy!" exclaimed the friar, when they returned to the house, "I summon thee before the judge. Look thou be there on Friday." "Good," answered the boy; "I will. I would with all my heart it were already come." Friday arrived, and friar Topas and the step-dame, and the whole party, appeared, and the judge was in his place, and there was a goodly gathering of people, for there were many other cases to be heard. The friar was fain to wait till his turn came, and then he addressed the judge, saying to him: "See, my lord, I have brought a boy to thee who hath wrought me and others many grievous trouble and sorrow. He is a necromancer such as in all this country hath not his like." "I hold him for a witch," put in the goodwife, and scowled at Jack; and forthwith she set to laughing till she fell down, and none could tell what she ailed, or whence her great mirth arose. "Woman," said the judge, "tell thy tale." But she could not utter another word, though Jack stayed her laughter as he had power given to him to do so by the stranger on the hillside. Then spake Friar Topas, and said: "My lord, this boy will worst us all unless you soundly chastise him. He hath, sir, a pipe that will make you dance and hop till you are well-nigh spent." The judge said, "This pipe I fain would see, and know what sort of mirth it maketh." "Marry! God forbid!" quoth the friar, "till I am out of the hearing of it." "Play on, Jack," said the judge," and let me see what thou canst do." Jack set the pipe to his lips and blew, and the whole room was quickly in motion. The judge sprang over the desk and bruised both his shins; and he shouted out to the boy to cease for God's sake and the love of the Virgin. "Well," said Jack, "I will if they will promise me that they will never again do me trespass so long as I live." Then as many as were there, the friar, the step-dame, and the rest, sware before the judge that they would keep the peace toward the boy, and help him to their power at all seasons against his enemies; and when they had done so Jack bad the judge farewell, and all proceeded merrily home. And thus it may be seen how the boy, because he was courteous and kind to the old man whom he met on the hillside while he tended his father's beasts, prospered, and kept every one in his country in his fear for evermore. For the old man was in truth a magician. Source (books.google.com): W. Carew Hazlitt, Tales and Legends of National Origin or Widely Current in England from Early Times (London: Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1899), pp. 17-25 . Source (Internet Archive): W. Carew Hazlitt, Tales and Legends of National Origin or Widely Current in England from Early Times (London: Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1899), pp. 17-25 . Return to the table of contents . A Witch Rescues a Man England A witch rescues a man, who was going to gaol, and plagues the bailiffs, by leading them a dance over hedge and ditch. A poor man, being arrested by a cruel creditor for debt, and he not being able to pay it, they were carrying him to Lancaster Gaol, when Mother Cuthbert met them, and desired to know the matter. The officers answered her very surlily, pushing her aside, which, raising her choler, she said, "But you shall let him go before we do part." And they said he should not. Whereupon she bade the poor man stop his ears close; and then she drew out a pipe which had been given her by the Witch of Penmure, and then set piping, and led them through hedges and thorns, over ditches, banks, and poles, sometimes tumbling, and other times tearing and bruising their flesh, while the poor fellow got time enough to make his escape; but the catchpoles cried out for mercy, thinking the devil had led them a dance. At length she left them in the middle of a stinking pond, to shift for themselves. Source (books.google.com): John Harland and T. T. Wilkinson, Lancashire Legends, Traditions, Pageants, Sports, etc., with an Appendix Containing a Rare Tract of the Lancashire Witches (Manchester and London: John Heywood, Deansgate, and Ridgefield, 1882), pp. 252-53 . Source (Internet Archive): John Harland and T. T. Wilkinson, Lancashire Legends, Traditions, Pageants, Sports, etc., with an Appendix Containing a Rare Tract of the Lancashire Witches (London: George Routledge and Sons, 1873), pp. 252-53 . Return to the table of contents . The Golden Harp Wales Morgan is one of the oldest names in Cymric land. It means one who lives near the sea. Every day, for centuries past, tens of thousands of Welsh folks have looked out on the great blue plain of salt water. It is just as true, also, that there are all sorts of Morgans. One of these named Taffy, was like nearly all Welshmen, in that he was very fond of singing. The trouble in his case, however, was that no one but himself loved to hear his voice, which was very disagreeable. Yet of the sounds which he himself made with voice or instrument, he was an intense admirer. Nobody could persuade him that his music was poor and his voice rough. He always refused to improve. Now in Wales, the bard, or poet, who makes up his poetry or song as he goes along, is a very important person, and it is not well to offend one of these gentlemen. In French, they call such a person by a very long name -- the improvisator. These poets have sharp tongues and often say hard things about people whom they do not like. If they used whetstones, or stropped their tongues on leather, as men do their razors, to give them a keener edge, their words could not cut more terribly. Now, on one occasion, Morgan had offended one of these bards. It was while the poetic gentleman was passing by Taffy's house. He heard the jolly fellow inside singing, first at the top and then at the bottom of the scale. He would drop his voice down on the low notes and then again rise to the highest until it ended in a screech. Someone on the street asked the poet how he liked the music which he had heard inside. "Music?" replied the bard with a sneer. "Is that what Morgan is trying? Why! I thought it was first the lowing of an aged cow, and then the yelping of a blind dog, unable to find its way. Do you call that music?" The truth was that when the soloist had so filled himself with strong ale that his brain was fuddled, then it was hard to tell just what kind of a noise he was making. It took a wise man to discover the tune, if there was any. One evening, when Morgan thought his singing unusually fine, and felt sorry that no one heard him, he heard a knock. Instead of going to the door to inquire, or welcome the visitor, he yelled out "Come in!" The door opened and there stood three tired looking strangers. They appeared to be travelers. One of them said: "Kind sir, we are weary and worn, and would be glad of a morsel of bread. If you can give us a little food, we shall not trouble you further." "Is that all?" said Morgan. "See there the loaf and the cheese, with a knife beside them. Take what you want, and fill your bags. No man shall ever say that Taffy Morgan denied anyone food, when he had any himself." Whereupon the three travelers sat down and began to eat. Meanwhile, without being invited to do so, their host began to sing for them. Now the three travelers were fairies in disguise. They were journeying over the country, from cottage to cottage, visiting the people. They came to reward all who gave them a welcome and were kind to them, but to vex and play tricks upon those who were stingy, bad tempered, or of sour disposition. Turning to Taffy before taking leave, one of them said: "You have been good to us and we are grateful. Now what can we do for you? We have power to grant anything you may desire. Please tell us what you would like most." At this, Taffy looked hard in the faces of the three strangers, to see if one of them was the bard who had likened his voice in its ups and downs to a cow and a blind dog. Not seeing any familiar face, he plucked up his courage, and said: "If you are not making fun of me, I'll take from you a harp. And, if I can have my wish in full, I want one that will play only lively tunes. No sad music for me!" Here Morgan stopped. Again he searched their faces, to see if they were laughing at him and then proceeded. "And something else, if I can have it; but it's really the same thing I am asking for." "Speak on, we are ready to do what you wish," answered the leader. "I want a harp, which, no matter how badly I may play, will sound out sweet and jolly music." "Say no more," said the leader, who waved his hand. There was a flood of light, and, to Morgan's amazement, there stood on the floor a golden harp. But where were the three travelers? They had disappeared in a flash. Hardly able to believe his own eyes, it now dawned upon him that his visitors were fairies. He sat down, back of the harp, and made ready to sweep the strings. He hardly knew whether or not he touched the instrument, but there rolled out volumes of lively music, as if the harp itself were mad. The tune was wild and such as would set the feet of young folks a-going, even in church. As Taffy's fingers seemed every moment to become more skillful, the livelier the music increased, until the very dishes rattled on the cupboard, as if they wanted to join in. Even the chair looked as if about to dance. Just then, Morgan's wife and some neighbors entered the house. Immediately, the whole party, one and all, began dancing in the jolliest way. For hours, they kept up the mad whirl. Yet all the while, Taffy seemed happier and the women the merrier. No telegraph ever carried the news faster, all over the region, that Morgan had a wonderful harp. All the grass in front of the house, was soon worn away by the crowds that came to hear and dance. As soon as Taffy touched the harp strings, the feet of everyone, young and old, began shuffling, nor could anyone stop, so long as Morgan played. Even very old, lame and one-legged people joined in. Several old women, whom nobody had ever prevailed upon to get out of their chairs, were cured of their rheumatism. Such unusual exercise was severe for them, but it seemed to be healthful. A shrewd monk, the business manager of the monastery near by, wanted to buy Morgan's house, set up a sanatorium and advertise it as a holy place. He hoped thus to draw pilgrims to it and get for it a great reputation as a healing place for the lame and the halt, the palsied and the rheumatic. Thus the monastery would be enriched and all the monks get fat. But Taffy was a happy-go-lucky fellow, who cared little about money and would not sell; for, with his harp, he enjoyed both fun and fame. One day, in the crowd that stood around his door waiting to begin to hop and whirl, Morgan espied the bard who had compared his voice to a cow and a cur. The bard had come to see whether the stories about the harp were true or not. He found to his own discomfort what was the fact and the reality, which were not very convenient for him. As soon as the harp music began, his feet began to go up, and his legs to kick and whirl. The more Morgan played, the madder the dance and the wilder the antics of the crowd, and in these the bard had to join, for he could not help himself. Soon they all began to spin round and round on the flagstones fronting the door, as if crazy. They broke the paling of the garden fence. They came into the house and knocked over the chairs and sofa, even when they cracked their shins against the wood. They bumped their heads against the walls and ceiling, and some even scrambled over the roof and down again. The bard could no more stop his weary legs than could the other lunatics. To Morgan his revenge was so sweet, that he kept on until the bard's legs snapped, and he fell down on top of people that had tumbled from shear weariness, because no more strength was left in them. Meanwhile, Morgan laughed until his jaws were tired and his stomach muscles ached. But no sooner did he take his fingers off the strings, to rest them, than he opened his eyes in wonder; for in a flash the harp had disappeared. He had made a bad use of the fairies' gift, and they were displeased. So both the monk and Morgan felt sorry. Yet the grass grew again when the quondam harper and singer ceased desolating the air with his quavers. The air seemed sweeter to breathe, because of the silence. However, the fairies kept on doing good to the people of good will, and today some of the sweetest singers in Wales come from the poorest homes. Source (books.google.com): William Elliot Griffis, Welsh Fairy Tales (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1921), no. 6, pp. 39-46 . Source (Internet Archive -- Wayback Machine): William Elliot Griffis, Welsh Fairy Tales (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1921), no. 6, pp. 39-46. Return to the table of contents . The Fiddler and the Minister Ireland One time there was a man who used to be always out shooting in a minister's land and the minister did not like it. One day he was out shooting and he met a fairy. He asked a gift of him and he told him that if he did not get it he would shoot him. The gift was that any time he would play his fiddle, anyone that would hear it would have to keep dancing while he was playing. This day he was out shooting and he seen a hare in a bunch of briars. He shot him and the hare was in the minister's land. The minister saw him and ran to get him (the hare). The huntsman began playing the fiddle and the minister had to start dancing in the briars until he was nearly torn to death. He brought the huntsman to court and said he tried to kill him. The judge said he would be hanged for it and that he would get any gift (request) he would like before he would die. The gift he asked for was to get leave to play a tune on his fiddle and he got leave. Every one in the court had to start dancing and they could not stop. The judge said he would let him free if he would stop playing and that he would hang the minister instead. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Mayo >> Eanach Mór, pp. 125-26 . Collector: Mártain Ó Braonáin. The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Tom Clancy Ireland There was a man living in the village of Lahinch one time whose name was Tom Clancy. He was one of the great scholars of the time. When he was young he had a great love for learning. His father wanted to keep him at home, because he was an only son, but Tom would not stay, so he went away to Denmark, and he learned a subject called the Black Art. Tom Clancy was a Free Mason. When he came home from Denmark his father and all the neighbours said he knew nothing, so he wanted to show them that he did. One night there was a dance at a house in Lahinch, and Tom wrote some magical words on a slip of paper, and he stuck it under the thatch of the house where the dance was to be held. After a while the boys got up to dance, and when they tried to stop they couldn't. After a while one man would get up to make the peace, but after a while he would be dancing too. At last someone went in for Tom Clancy's father. He came out thinking to make the peace without delay, but no sooner had he entered the house when he too was dancing. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Clare >> Lahinch, p. 375-76 . Informant: Michael Finnucane (aged 60). Moymore South, County Claire. Told to him by his father about 20 years ago. The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . The Man Who Could Make People Dance Ireland Once upon a time a man lived in Inagh who had a charm for making people dance. He was in no friends with Father Grace because the latter had tried to make him give up the charm. One day Father Grace came to his house and the man set the charm as soon as he saw him. Father Grace was dancing all the whole day and in the end he was ready to fall he was so tired. Then he asked the man to undo the charm. "In the honour of God." The man then is stopped from dancing with black ass blood and a raven's feather. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Clare >> Dubhloch, Cill Mháille, p. 154 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . The Three Gifts France Once upon a time there lived a little boy whose mother had died and whose father had remarried. But his stepmother didn't like him, so she fed him old, moldy crusts of bread. Whenever he went out into the fields, he always put them into the spring to soften them. One day he was sitting by the water, when a poor man passed by and called out to him: "What are you doing here?" "I am soaking the moldy crusts of bread that my stepmother gave me to eat." "Give me one." The boy gave the beggar some crusts of bread, who ate them and then said: "You have done a good deed, and as a reward I will grant you three wishes. What would you like?" The boy scratched his head, then finally said, "First of all, I want my stepmother to soil her underwear every time I look at her." The beggar didn't reply, so the boy continued: "I also would like a small pistol for shooting birds, such that anyone who sees me shooting must run after the bullet." The beggar pulled out a small pistol from his pocket and handed it to the boy, saying, "What is your third wish?" "I would like a clarinet such that all those who watch or listen to my playing shall be compelled to dance." The beggar gave him a clarinet and disappeared. The boy went home. His stepmother was just tethering the cow in the stable when he entered. As soon as he looked at her, she soiled her underclothes, and this happened every time he looked at her. The next day she was invited to a wedding. She warned her husband to lock the boy up in a shed near the house, for she was afraid that her illness might return. Around noon, however, the father released the boy and told him to check on his stepmother. She was seated between two gentlemen at the wedding table. The boy went to a window and looked at his stepmother, who immediately soiled herself so much that everyone had to hold their noses. Finally they made her leave. The boy hurried back to the shed so that when his stepmother came home and checked she found him inside. "Surely there must be some magic behind this!" she cried. The next day she went to confession and told the priest everything. The priest comforted her by saying, "I will come to you and force the boy to tell me about the magic he uses." He went to the field where the spring was and noticed the boy soaking his crusts of bread. "What are you doing there?" asked the priest. "I am soaking the moldy bread crusts that my stepmother gives me to eat." "You are suspected of practicing magic." "Oh, who says that?" "If you will tell me the truth, I'll give you a nice picture next Sunday." "I don't need a picture, but if you'll strip naked, you shall learn everything." The priest took off his cassock and trousers, but kept on his underpants and undershirt. However, the boy insisted that he strip naked, and since no one else was around the priest stripped off the rest of his clothing. The boy then shot his pistol into a thorny thicket. Immediately the priest ran after the bullet. When he was in the middle of the thicket, the boy began to play the clarinet, so that the priest, despite the thorns, had to dance. The priest shouted, "You're a magician! You're a magician!" but he had to keep dancing. Finally the boy stopped blowing, and the priest, all scratched and bleeding, was able to get dressed and go on his way. He told the court the how the boy had tricked him, saying that he should be hanged. The bailiffs brought the boy before the judges, and he was sentenced to death. Before the execution, one of the judges asked him if he had a last wish. "Yes," replied the boy, "I should like to take a walk along the pond, fire a pistol shot, and play my clarinet one more time." They granted him this request. The priest called: "He is a magician, tie me up!" People thought he was a fool, but in the end they tied him up. Everyone present at the court session went to the pond with the boy. As soon as he got there, led by two guards, he fired his pistol and they all followed the bullet into the water. He immediately picked up his clarinet and began to play, so that everyone in the water began to dance and finally drowned. The boy freed the priest, and they both happily returned home. (Upper Brittany) Source (books.google.com): E. K. Blümml, "Die drei Geschenke," Schnurren und Schwänke des französischen Bauernvolkes (Leipzig: Deutsche Verlagsactiengesellschaft, 1906), no. 14, pp. 41-43 . Source (Internet Archive): E. K. Blümml, "Die drei Geschenke," Schnurren und Schwänke des französischen Bauernvolkes (Leipzig: Deutsche Verlagsactiengesellschaft, 1906), no. 14, pp. 41-43 . Return to the table of contents . Shortboot and His Flute France Once upon a time there lived a man and a woman who had no children, despite having been married for fifteen years. Twenty times a day wife and husband cried out: "Lord, give us a son, nothing but a son, even if he is only as big as a boot." God finally heard their request, and after fifteen years and nine months gave them a son who was two spans tall and did not grow any taller. For this reason his parents named him Shortboot. When he was old enough to work, nobody wanted to take him, the dwarf. However, he was more clever and more intelligent than the others. At last he found work as a cowherd for an evil and miserly farmer. Bad bread, bad soup, a bed of straw, many beatings, and sparse wages, that is what our thumbling got. But the dwarf was in good spirits and thought to himself: "Patience. After rain comes sunshine." One day he was tending his cows and lying at a pasture on the banks of the River Gers. On the opposite bank he saw a woman who was scarcely a span tall, black as the night, and very old. "Cowherd," she cried, "help me to the other bank of the river." "Gladly, dear lady." He took off his clothes. It was just after harvest time, so the water was so low that it came only up to his waist. "Dear woman, now you are on this side." "Thank you, dear cowherd. Your service shall be repaid to you. Here you have a flute that you should never part with. When you play it, animals and people who hear you will be forced to dance until you stop playing." "Thank you, dear woman." The old woman disappeared. Shortboot began to play the flute. The oxen, cows, and calves immediately began to dance and did not stop until he stopped playing. Soon after, near a hedge of thorns, the Justic of the Peace came by. He was an exceedingly angry and evil man. Shortboot took off his cap: "Hello, Your Honor." But he did not answer, nor did he touch his hat. "Your Honor, I greeted you properly, can't you say thank you?" He only raised his stick. Then Shortboot played his flute, and immediately the Justice of the Peace danced into the thorn hedge, where he tore his clothes and scratched his skin. He danced until the dwarf stopped playing. Shortboot brought his cattle home. His master and his family had a feast that day. There was bread soup, roast goose and turkey, cheese, and wine. "Dear sir, may I have some of that." "Be gone, you rascal. Moldy bread crusts are too good for you. Be gone, or there will be blows." Shortboot played his flute, and the farmer and his family immediately began to dance. They danced around the benches and the overturned chairs, on plates, bowls, and broken wine bottles, which cut into them bloodily. They danced and danced until he stopped playing. After this Shortboot returned to his parents, but the Justice of the Peace and the farmer brought charges against him in court. Three days later the cowherd was sentenced to death by hanging. The red-robed judges, the priest, the hangman and his helpers led him to the gallows. He nearly burst with laughter when he saw the Justice of the Peace and the farmer among the people marching with them. The hangman put the rope around his neck, but he began to play the flute, and everyone -- the judge, the priest, the hangman and his helpers, and the people -- danced. They danced up to the gallows, and their legs and arms were in constant danger of being broken. They danced until he stopped playing. "Well, my dear people, do you still want to hang me?" "No, Shortboot, be calm. Nothing will happen to you." "My dear people, that's not enough for me. The Justice of the Peace and the farmer must be hanged without mercy." "Shortboot, that's not possible!" Shortboot played his flute again, and everyone immediately began to dance. They danced up to the gallows, and their legs and arms were in constant danger of being broken. They danced until he stopped playing. "My dear people, I want the justice of the peace and the farmer to be hanged without mercy. Is this still not possible?" "As you wish, Shortboot. Executioner, perform your duties." The executioner and his helpers hanged the magistrate and the farmer. "And now, dear people, you must give me a thousand pieces of gold as compensation." "Shortboot, that's not possible!" But Shortboot played the flute again, and everyone immediately began to dance. They danced up onto the gallows and back down again. Their arms and legs were in constant danger of being broken. They danced until he stopped playing. "My dear people, you must give me a thousand pieces of gold as compensation for the injustice that I have suffered. Is this still not possible?" "We will pay, Shortboot, but we don't have the money here." "Then have it fetched, otherwise I'll play the flute again." They brought the money, and Shortboot returned to his parents laden with gold. He lived happily and contentedly for many years afterward. (Gascony) Source (books.google.com): E. K. Blümml, "Courtebotte und seine Flöte," Schnurren und Schwänke des französischen Bauernvolkes (Leipzig: Deutsche Verlagsactiengesellschaft, 1906), no. 40, pp. 111-17 . Source (Internet Archive): E. K. Blümml, "Courtebotte und seine Flöte," Schnurren und Schwänke des französischen Bauernvolkes (Leipzig: Deutsche Verlagsactiengesellschaft, 1906), no. 40, pp. 111-17 . Link to addional stories about tiny heroes: Tom Thumb, Folktales of Type 700 . Return to the table of contents . The Magic Violin France One day a young boy named Johann hired himself out as a herdsman on a farm. After three years he left the service and asked his master for his wages. The master took three hellers from his purse and gave them to Johann, who happily went on his way. After three days he came to a crossroads. A dirty, ragged old man was sitting there. He called to him, "Give me something, for God's sake!" "I only have three hellers, but I'll give them to you. In three years I'll earn them again. Just take them." "I thank you very much, and I shall grant you three wishes. What do you choose." "I ask for a gun that never misses its target, for a violin that makes everyone dance, and further I wish that no one will be able refuse my requests." The old man made the wishes come true, and Johann continued on his way, half dancing, half walking. He came to a forest and stayed there to rest. Suddenly he heard someone say, "Oh, I'd gladly give anything if I could have the beautiful nightingale singing over there on that tree." It was the farmer who had given Johann three hellers as wages who uttered these words. Johann took his gun, which never missed its target, and shot down the nightingale, which fell into a thicket of thorns. The miser crept into the thorny thicket. Johann took up his violin and played, and the miser, driven by a higher power, began to hop and leap, and the thorns pricked him miserably. "Hold on, hold on," he yelled to the boy, "I'll give you five hundred thalers. Just let me go." Johann stopped playing, the farmer paid him the thalers, but went away grumbling and then brought charges against him at the court. Johann was arrested and sentenced to death. The execution was to take place the next day. The farmer, the judges, and all the local people were gathered at the place of execution, where a high gallows was set up. Johann was brought in but asked the judges for his violin so that he could play once more before he died. The farmer yelled, "Don't give it to him! Tie me up!" But since Johann could not be denied anything, the violin was brought to him. He started to play, and everyone had to dance. The judges, tired and exhausted, asked Johann to stop playing and promised him that they would set him free. He agreed to this and was now able to return to his village with his gun and his violin, which he still used on various occasions. (Somme) Source (books.google.com): E. K. Blümml, "Die wunderbare Violine," Schnurren und Schwänke des französischen Bauernvolkes (Leipzig: Deutsche Verlagsactiengesellschaft, 1906), no. 64, pp. 182-83 . Source (Internet Archive): E. K. Blümml, "Die wunderbare Violine," Schnurren und Schwänke des französischen Bauernvolkes (Leipzig: Deutsche Verlagsactiengesellschaft, 1906), no. 64, pp. 182-83 . Return to the table of contents . The Little Flute Italy Once upon a time there was a shepherd boy who lived happily with his goats in the green forest and on the lofty heights, without wishing for anything better. One day he found two women sleeping in the forest. Since the sun was hot on them, he cut branches and made a green roof over them so that they were now lying in the shade. Soon afterwards they awoke and were quite amazed. "Oh," they said, "who built the little green shelter for us?" The boy approached them and said: "I did it." They praised him, and one of them said: "You may ask anything from me, and you shall have it." The boy replied: "Give me a little flute which will make everyone who hears it dance when I blow onto it." The woman gave this to him. Then the second woman said: "I too want to give you something. What do you want?" The boy answered: "Give me a rifle with which without powder or shot I can hit all the birds I see in the air!" She gave him the rifle. He thanked them and happily went on his way with the two wonderful gifts. Now that was the life! When he played his flute in the forest, the geese danced merrily around him, and the hares in the bushes, and the squirrels in the trees, and even the foxes in their dens came and danced as if they had all gone mad. And when a bird of prey soared in the air, or a nasty raven croaked, he took his rifle and shot them down. But he did nothing to harm the dear little songbirds. He let them sing and hop as much as they wanted. Once a priest was walking through the forest. The boy had just shot a bird, which had fallen into some thorn bushes. The priest went and wanted to get the bird out. Then the boy began to play his flute. and the poor man had to dance in the thorn bushes until he was all torn and bloody. He went to court and brought charges against the shepherd. The court sent out henchmen to seize the boy; but as they approached him he began to blow on his flute, and they had to dance until he stopped playing. They were now so tired that they could hardly stand upright. He did that every time they tried to capture him. However, they finally attacked him by surprise, snatched the flute from him, bound him, and led him bound to the dungeon. He was brought to trial, and the judges pronounced the verdict that he should die on the gallows. He had been led to the gallows and was about to be hanged when he begged for mercy and to be granted one final request. This was granted to him, and he asked to be able to play his flute one final time. When he began to play, the hangman, who already had the rope in his hand, began to dance merrily. The judges too, and the henchmen, and the spectators all danced until they were dead tired. Thus the boy escaped easily, and he never let himself be captured again. Source (books.google.com): Christian Schneller, "Das Pfeifchen (Il zufolotto)," Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), no. 16, pp. 30-31 . Source (Internet Archive): Christian Schneller, "Das Pfeifchen (Il zufolotto)," Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), no. 16, pp. 30-31 . Return to the table of contents . The Magic Flute Greece Once upon a time there was a priest who had a son who was so good that everyone loved him. His task was to go out and tend the goats. One day he met Pan at his pasture, and Pan gave him a kid like no other in the world: its fur was golden, its ears were silver and his hooves were platinum. The youth had scarcely received the kid when he offered it to God as a burnt sacrifice. Then an angel, sent from God, appeared before him and asked him what reward he wanted for this act. The youth replied that he wished only for a shepherd's pipe with the quality that whenever he played it all who heard it would begin to dance. Such a flute was suddenly there. The youth took it, and whenever he was threatened, he saved himself with his flute. Then came the order from the king to have him arrested, but no one was able to capture him. Finally, in order to take revenge on the king, he voluntarily allowed himself to be captured. After they had thrown him into prison, he began to blow his flute, and not only animals and people danced, but also houses and cliffs. The houses and cliffs fell on the people and crushed them all together with the king. Only the youth himself and his family survived. The whole thing was instigated by Pan to cleanse the world of bad people. Source (books.google.com): Bernhard Schmidt, "Die Wunderpfeife," Griechische Märchen, Sagen und Volkslieder (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1877), pp. 115-16 . Source (Internet Archive): Bernhard Schmidt, "Die Wunderpfeife," Griechische Märchen, Sagen und Volkslieder (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1877), pp. 115-16 . Return to the table of contents . Cecilio, the Servant of Emilio Philippines Once upon a time there lived a witty orphan whose name was Cecilio. His parents had died when he was six years old. After that time he became a servant of Emilio, a man of wealth living in a very lonely and desolate barrio. The boy was faithful and kind-hearted, but his master was cruel. Cecilio had no wages at all. In short, he served Emilio for four years, and at the end of that time he was given five hundred centavos as a payment for his services. Cecilio thought that he had been given too much: he was so simple-minded, that he did not know he had been cheated by his master, who should have given him ten times five hundred centavos. Cecilio put his money in a new purse, and rushed out into the main road of the barrio to find his companions and tell them of the reward he had received. He was so very happy, that before he knew it, and without feeling at all tired, he had reached another barrio. Suddenly on his way he met two men with drawn bolos. They stopped him, and said, "Boy, your money, or your life!" Cecilio was much amazed at these words, but was also so frightened that he gave up the money at once. He only said to himself, "Well, since I am not strong enough to defend myself, I either have to surrender my money or die." He sat under a tree lamenting his fortune. But the two robbers were in trouble, because one of them wanted a greater share than the other. The second robber said that their shares should be the same, for they had stolen the money together; but the former answered, "I am in all respects better than you are." "Oh, no! for we have not yet had a trial," said the second. At this they began to fight; and soon both fell so severely wounded, that they died before Cecilio, who had heard the noise of the struggle, could reach the place where they were disputing. Now the boy was very happy again, for he had gotten his money back. As he had already travelled very far, he did not know where he was: he was lost. But he proceeded along the road until he met another man, who said roughly to him, "Give me your money, or else you will die!" Cecilio, thinking that he would rather live than try to defend his wealth, which he would lose in any case, gave his purse to the man. Then the boy went away and wept. While he was crying over his bad luck, a very old woman came near him, and said, "Why are you weeping, my boy?" The boy replied, "I am weeping because somebody took my money." "Well, why did you give it up?" said the old woman. "I gave it up because he said that he would kill me if I didn't." Then the old woman said, "Take this cane with you, and whenever you see him, let it loose and pronounce these words: ' Sigue garrole, sigue garrote, Strike that fellow over there!' When you want the cane to stop, all you need to say is: 'Stop, stop, for that is enough!'" The boy then said, "Is that all?" "After you have recovered your money," said the old woman, "you must turn back here; but you had better hurry up now." Cecilio then bade the old woman good-by, and at once ran away to overtake the man who had robbed him. When he saw the man, he said, "Give me back my money, or else you now shall die, and not I!" The man laughed at him, and said, "Of course I shall not give you back your money." When he heard these words, the boy said, "Is that so?" and, letting go of his cane, he uttered the formula that the old woman had told him to pronounce. The cane at once began to rain blows on the stranger's head and body. When he could no longer endure the blows, and saw that he could not catch the stick, the man said, "If you will call off your cane, I will return your purse." "Very well, I will pardon you," said Cecilio; "but if you had treated me as you should have treated me and others, you would not have been harmed." Then he said to the cane, "Stop, stop, for that is enough!" At once the magic stick stopped, and returned to its owner. The money was given back, and the man promised Cecilio that he would not rob any poor boy again. On his way back toward the old woman, Cecilio met another man who wanted to rob him; but the boy said, "Don't you dare attempt to take my purse, or you will get yourself into trouble!" The man became angry, and rushed at Cecilio to knock him down; but the boy pronounced the words which the old woman had taught him, and let the cane loose. The cane at once began to rain blows on the man's head and body. When he could no longer endure the pain, the man asked Cecilio's pardon. As the youth was kind-hearted, he forgave the man. When he reached the old woman's house, Cecilio told her that the cane had been very useful to him, for it had saved both his life and his money. Then he returned the stick to the old woman, and thanked her very much. She now offered to sell him a guitar which she had, the price of which was five hundred centavos. Since she had been so good to him, Cecilio at once agreed to the exchange; and after he had once more bade her good-by, he set out for his master's house. When he came near his old home, Cecilio saw his master Emilio shooting at a very handsome bird on the top of a bamboo-tree. The bird fell down, and the man ran to pick it up. As Emilio was making his way up to the bird through the thorny bamboo undergrowth, Cecilio sat down to wait for him, and, having nothing else to do, began to play his guitar. The master at once began to dance among the bamboo-trees, and he received many wounds because of the sharp spines. Now, in reality, the boy was playing his guitar unintentionally, and did not know of its magic power; but Emilio thought that Cecilio had discovered the deceit that had been practised on him, and was playing for revenge. Now, it happened that Emilio had a purse of money with him to give to the laborers working in his hacienda, so he promised to give all this money to Cecilio if he would only stop playing. The boy, who had by this time learned of the magic power of his guitar, stopped his music and received the money. The crafty Emilio, however, at once hastened to the town, and asked the magistrate to apprehend Cecilio, a young robber. Cecilio set out for the old woman's house again; but the policemen soon overtook him, arrested him, and took him before the magistrate. There the boy was sentenced to death the next morning. Emilio's money was given back to him. The following day, when he was about to be shot, Cecilio asked permission to play his guitar once more, and he was not refused it. As soon as he began to play, all began to dance, even his master, who was still sore from the previous day's exercise. Finally Emilio could endure no more. He begged Cecilio to stop playing, and promised to give him all his wealth. He then told the soldiers to set the boy free, for it was all his own fault. Cecilio stopped playing, and was liberated by the magistrate. Emilio kept his word, and bestowed on the boy all his wealth. When the old man died, Cecilio was the richest man in the town. He be came a capitan, and was greatly honored by the inhabitants of his barrio. Source (books.google.com): Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 28, pp. 237-40 . Source (Internet Archive): Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 28, pp. 237-40 . Fansler's Source: "Narrated by Sancho B. de Leon, a Tagalog from Santa Cruz, Laguna. He heard the story from his grandfather." Return to the table of contents . Cochinango Philippines Once upon a time there lived in a small village on the border of a powerful kingdom a poor farmer, who had a son. This son was called a fool by many; but a palmer predicted that Cochinango would some day dine with the king, kiss the princess, marry her, and finally would himself be king. Cochinango wondered how he could ever marry the princess and himself be king, for he was very poor. One day he heard that the king had summoned all those who would like to at tempt to answer the questions of the princess. It was announced that the person who could answer them all without fail should marry her. Cochinango thought that the time had now come for him to try his fortune, so he mounted his ass and rode towards the king's palace. On his way Cochinango had to pass through a wide forest. Just at the edge of the wood he met a weary traveller. Cochinango had forgotten to bring buyo with him, so he asked the traveller for some. The traveller said, "I have with me a magic buyo that will answer any question you put to it. If you give me some food, I will give you my buyo. " Cochinango willingly exchanged a part of his provisions for it. Then he rode on. He came to a stream, where he met an old man leaning on his cane. Seeing that the old man wanted to get on the other side, but was too weak to swim, Cochinango offered to carry him across. In return for his kindness, the old man gave him his cane. "You are very kind, young man," said he. "Take this cane, which will furnish you with food at any time." Cochinango thanked the old man, took the cane, and rode on. It is to be known that this old man was the same one who had given him the magic buyo. It was God himself, who had come down on earth to test Cochinango and to reward him for his kindness. Cochinango had not ridden far when he met a wretched old woman. Out of pity he gave her a centavo, and in return she gave him an empty purse from which he could ask any sum of money he wanted. Cochinango rode on, delighted with his good fortune, when he met God again, this time in the form of a jolly young fellow with a small guitar. He asked Cochinango to exchange his ass for the guitar. At first Cochinango hesitated; but, when he was told that he could make anybody dance by plucking its strings, he readily agreed to exchange. Cochinango now had to proceed on foot, and it took him two days to reach the gates of the palace. Luckily he arrived on the very day of the guessing-contest. In spite of his mean dress, he was admitted. The princess was much astonished at Cochinango's appearance, and disgusted by his boldness; but she was even more chagrined when he rightly answered her first question. Yet she denied that his answer was correct. She asked him two more questions, the most difficult that she could think of; but Cochinango, with the help of his magic buyo, answered both. The princess, however, could not admit that his answers were right. She shrunk from the idea of being married to a poor, foolish, lowly-born man. So she asked her father the king to imprison the insolent peasant, which was instantly done. In the prison Cochinango found many nobles who, like himself, were victims of the guessing-match. Night came, and they were not given any food. The princess wanted to starve them to death. Cochinango told them not to worry; he struck a table with his cane, and instantly choice food appeared. When this was reported to the princess by the guards, she went to the prison and begged Cochinango to give her the cane; but he would not give it up unless she allowed him to kiss her. At last she consented, and went away with the cane, thinking that this was the only way by which she could starve her prisoners. The next day Cochinango asked for a large sum of money from his magic purse. He distributed it among his companions and among the guards, and they had no difficulty in getting food. Again the princess went to the prison, and asked Cochinango for the purse; but he would give it up only on condition that he be allowed to dine with the king. Accordingly he was taken to the king's table, where he ate with the king and the princess; but he was put in prison again as soon as the dinner was over. At last Cochinango began to be tired of prison life, so he took up his wonderful guitar and began to play it. No sooner had he touched the strings than his fellow prisoners and the guards began to dance. As he played his guitar louder and louder, the inmates of the palace heard it, and they too began to dance. He kept on playing throughout the night; and the king, princess, and all got no rest whatsoever. By morning most of them were tired to death. At last the king ordered the guards to open the prison doors and let the prisoners go free; but Cochinango would not stop playing until the king consented to give him the princess in marriage. The princess also at last had to agree to accept Cochinango as her husband, so he stopped playing. The next day they were married with great pomp and ceremony. Thus the poor, foolish boy was married to a princess. More than once he saved the kingdom from the raiding Moros by playing his guitar; for all his enemies were obliged to dance when they heard the music, and thus they were easily captured or killed. When the king died, Cochinango became his successor, and he and the princess ruled happily for many years. Source (books.google.com): Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 35, pp. 276-79 . Source (Internet Archive): Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 35, pp. 276-79 . Fansler's source: "Narrated by Felix Y. Velasco, who heard the story from his grandmother, a native of Laong, Ilocoa Norte." Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 27, 2022. The Daughter of the Sun (Solens Datter), a Danish Folktale from the collection of Jens Kamp. The Daughter of the Sun Denmark, Jens Kamp Once upon a time there was a mighty king who married a princess from another country. They lived very happily together, but to their great sorrow they had no children. Finally, after many years the queen gave birth to a daughter, and now there was great joy in the castle and throughout the entire land. Before the child was named, they sent for an old wise woman who lived in the country. She was to predict the child's fate. At that time, such was the custom. The woman came, and when she saw the child's little hand, she was amazed beyond words. The startled king asked if his child was to be cursed with an evil fate. "Both bad and good, as you take it," answered the old woman. "She shall become the most beautiful girl who has ever lived on earth." The king thought that was something to be happy about. "Yes," added the old woman, "but she will be so beautiful that even the sun will fall in love with her if he is allowed to see her. And it shall be her fate that when she turns fifteen, she shall have a child. The sun himself shall be the father." This seemed to the king the strangest news he had ever heard; but he gave the wise woman a generous gift and let her go. The king then determined that everything possible must be done to avert this fate. As the girl grew up, she became so well-liked and beautiful that no one had seen her equal. When she was twelve years old, the king had a tower built that had only one window, and it faced north. The daughter was put inside with a playmate and nurses, who were strictly instructed never to let her out, lest the sun would would shine on her. The daughter longed for free nature, and most of all she wanted to see the golden sun again; but she had to settle for living in her prison. Thus some time passed. Meanwhile, during the long summer days the sun burned the clay walls of the tower, so that the outside had cracked in several places. What was worse: one day, when the young princess had had fish to eat, she took one of the largest fish bones, and with this bone she began to drill into the clay wall on the southern side of the tower. She only wanted to get a little peep hole; but when she had finally made a small hole, a ray of sunlight crept through and hit her on the chest. When the nurses saw the hole, they quickly closed it up. However, the damage was done, and the following year the princess gave birth to a daughter. When the king heard what had happened, he became very bitter. The nurses were severely punished, and he himself did not want to see the child. He had her taken from her mother and set out in the wilderness, so that she would perish. The little child lay there, but she did not perish. The dew comforted her with its moisture, and the sun warmed her with its rays. And finally she was found by a loving person. A young prince from the neighboring kingdom had lost his way. He found the child where she lay, and since she was so lovely, he took her home with him to be brought up. As the child grew, she became so beautiful that he had never seen anything so beautiful. The prince's mother wanted him to marry; but he could not be persuaded to do so. He wanted to wait until his foster child grew up, and then she would be his wife. When she did grow up, she became the most beautiful maiden anyone had ever seen. The prince then asked her if she would be his wife. She replied that she would never belong to any man unless he could tell her who her father was. The prince could not do that, so he had to leave her with the matter unsettled. He then arranged for an apartment for her in one wing of the castle, because his mother did not like to see her. Here she had her own household, with servant girls and everything. The prince asked these girls to question her from time to time, in order to find out who her father was. This didn't lead to anything, because she always answered: My parents are a cat and a dog; If you don't want me, then jiggety-jog. Now the prince's mother pressed harder than ever to get her son married. She had a hall in the castle decorated, where she hung pictures of all the princesses from far and near; but none of them could compare in beauty with the prince's foster daughter. Finally the prince was forced to decide on one of the princesses whose pictures were hung in the hall. He courted her, and she said "yes." The wedding was held with great splendor. But the foreign princess had heard about the prince's foster child, whom he was supposed to love more than her, and therefore she was jealous of her right from the start. The daughter of the sun was not at the wedding; but on the wedding day a boy was to carry some of the finest wedding food over to her. She thanked and accepted the food, but then asked the boy to wait. She then commanded the firewood to place itself in the fireplace. She commanded the sun's rays to light a fire, and they obeyed her. Then she commanded a pan to sit over the fire and the butter to go into the pan. Next, she fried two golden fish. One held the prince's name and the other the princess's name in its mouth. When the fish were finished, she asked the boy to take them back to the prince in return for the wedding meal that he had given her. When the prince and the princess and the wedding guests saw this work of art, they were very surprised. But the princess's jealousy awoke, and she said that she too could make such a masterpiece. She had no peace of mind until she went to the kitchen and got started. But for her the kitchen was a dangerous place in the house, for she had hardly been in a kitchen before. Once there, she knocked over the large frying pan and was scalded and burned. She died soon afterwards. The prince was free again; but his mother gave him no peace. He was forced to choose a new bride. Shortly afterwards there was another wedding at the castle. The bride and groom rode in a golden carriage to the church, where they were married. This young princess had also heard about the prince's foster daughter, but not yet seen her. When they now came driving back from the church, the daughter of the sun was sitting on a chair which she had put out on the sloping roof. She did not fall down, for she had commanded the sunbeams to hold her chair. The new bride could now see her, and when she saw how beautiful she was, ten times more beautiful than she herself, she became very jealous. She said that it was no great art to sit out there on the roof; she could do that too. She would not rest until she too had her chair put out on the roof. But then she fell down and killed herself. The prince was now a widower for the second time, and now he thought that his mother surely must leave him alone; but nothing helped. Once more he had to choose a wife, and for the third time a wedding was held at the castle. The daughter of the sun was not at the party; but when it was time to eat, a boy was sent over with some of the finest food for her. The daughter of the sun asked him to wait, in order to take something back in return. He now saw how she commanded, and how everything obeyed. The firewood went into the fireplace, the sun's rays lit the fire, the flour formed itself into dough, the dough became an artistic pastry and moved itself into the oven. The boy was very surprised at this; but he was most surprised when the daughter of the sun, who was standing and looking into the oven, suddenly crept into it to fix a little of the baked goods. She stayed in the oven for a long time, and when she came out with the pastry, she was more beautiful than ever. The boy carried the pastry back to the prince and the princess, and he did not forget to tell about how the foster daughter had taken it from the oven. The princess then said that she herself could do the same thing. She lit a large fire in the baking oven, and climbed in with a pastry; but she burned herself so badly that she died immediately after they had taken her out again. Now the prince was a widower for the third time, and it did not matter whether the mother scolded or begged. He would not marry again, unless he could get the one he loved. A long time passed, and one day he went to visit his foster daughter. He asked her if she would not tell him who her father was; but she answered him, as always: My parents are a cat and a dog; If you don't want me, then jiggety-jog. She wanted to cook a meal for him, and he saw then, as had happened before, how everything obeyed her. She was in the kitchen, but the prince was sitting in the living room, and here he was playing with the mortar that she had taken down from the shelf. It happened that she called for the mortar; but the prince held onto it so that it could not come. Then the princess became angry and forgot herself. She shouted: "Mortar! Where are you? Don't you know that I am the daughter of the sun, and that everything must obey me?" The prince listened. Now he could tell her who her father was. She then would have to become his wife. A wedding was held, and they lived happily and well together for many years. Source (books.google.com): Jens Kamp, "Solens Datter," Danske Folkeæventyr , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: Jakob H. Mansas Forlag, 1891), no. 17, pp. 180-87 . Aarne-Thompson-Uther folktale type 898. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2022. Return to the table of contents . Related links Rapunzel and Other Folktales of Type 310 . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 11, 2022. Death of a Child: Folktales about Excessive Mourning The Death of a Child folktales about excessive mourning translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2023 Contents The Parable of the Mustard Seed (A Buddhist parable). The Death of a Dearly Loved Grandson (A Buddhist parable from The Udana ). Ubbiri: Why Weep for Eighty-Four Thousand Daughters (A Buddhist parable). The Burial Shirt (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). A Mother's Tears (Northern Europe). The Tear-Filled Jug (Germany). Let the Dead Rest (Germany). Grief-Stricken Mothers (Germany). The Sad Little Angel (Germany). The Sad Child (Switzerland). Excessive Grief for the Dead (England). The Child's Grave (Ireland). A Mother's Tears (Denmark). Cried to Life (Denmark). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Parable of the Mustard Seed A Buddhist Parable Kisagotami [Kisa Gotami] is the name of a young girl, whose marriage with the only son of a wealthy man was brought about in true fairy-tale fashion. She had one child, but when the beautiful boy could run alone, it died. The young girl, in her love for it, carried the dead child clasped to her bosom, and went from house to house of her pitying friends asking them to give her medicine for it. But a Buddhist mendicant, thinking "She does not understand," said to her, "My good girl, I myself have no such medicine as you ask for, but I think I know of one who has." "O tell me who that is," said Kisagotami. "The Buddha can give you medicine. Go to him," was the answer. She went to Gautama, and doing homage to him said, "Lord and master, do you know any medicine that will be good for my child?" "Yes, I know of some," said the teacher. Now it was the custom for patients or their friends to provide the herbs which the doctors required, so she asked what herbs he would want. "I want some mustard seed," he said; and when the poor girl eagerly promised to bring some of so common a drug, he added, "You must get it from some house where no son, or husband, or parent, or slave has died." "Very good," she said, and went to ask for it, still carrying her dead child with her. The people said, "Here is mustard seed, take it." But when she asked, "In my friend's house has any son died, or husband, or a parent or slave?" they answered, "Lady, what is this that you say? The living are few, but the dead are many." Then she went to other houses, but one said, "I have lost a son"; another, "We have lost our parents"; another, "I have lost my slave." At last, not being able to find a single house where no one had died, her mind began to clear, and summoning up resolution, she left the dead body of her child in a forest, and returning to the Buddha paid him homage. He said to her, "Have you the mustard seed?" "My lord," she replied, "I have not. The people tell me that the living are few, but the dead are many." Then he talked to her on that essential part of his system -- the impermanence of all things, till her doubts were cleared away, and, accepting her lot, she became a disciple and entered the first path. Source: T. W. Rhys Davids, Buddhism: Being a Sketch of the Life and Teachings of Gautama, the Buddha , 23rd thousand (London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1912), pp. 133-34 . Link to a different translation of the above parable: "Kisa Gotami: There Is No Cure for Death," Buddhist Parables , translated from the original Pali by Eugene Watson Burlingame (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1922), pp. 92-94 . Return to the table of contents . The Death of a Dearly Loved Grandson The Udana Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi, in the eastern monastery, in the pavilion of Visakha-Migaramata. Now at that time, the dearly loved grandson of Visakha-Migaramata died. And Visakha-Migaramata went at unseasonable hours, with hands and hair wet (with tears), to where the Blessed One was, and drawing near she saluted the Blessed One and sat down apart. And the Blessed One said to Visakha-Migaramata, as he sat there: "Wherefore, O Visakha, do you come here at unseasonable hours, with hands and hair wet (with tears)?" "Sire, my dearly loved grandson is dead; that is why I come here, at unseasonable hours, with hands and hair wet (with tears)." "Do you find, O Visakha, that there are sons and grandsons in proportion to the number of men in Savatthi?" "I find, Blessed One, that there are sons and grandsons in proportion to the number of men." "And how many men of Savatthi, Visakha, die daily?" "Sometimes, Sire, ten men of Savatthi die daily, some times nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two; some times, Sire, only one man dies in the day. Of men dying in Savatthi, there is no lack, Sire." "What think you, Visakha; have you found at anytime or anywhere, men whose garments have been unwetted (by tears), whose hair has been unwetted (by tears)?" "Not so, Sire; how is that possible with so many sons and grandsons?" "Those, Visakha, who have a hundred dear ones, have a hundred sorrows. These who have ninety dear ones, have ninety sorrows. These who have eighty dear ones, have eighty sorrows etc. Those who have one dear one, have one sorrow. Those who have no dear one, for them there is no sorrow. These, I declare, are the griefless ones, free from human passion, without despair." Whatsoever of sorrow, lamentation and pain is in the world, All this arises from clinging, where clinging is not, these are not. Therefore happy and sorrowless are those who cling not to anything in the world. Set not your affections on things on earth. Source: The Udama; or, The Solemn Utterances of the Buddha , translated from the Pali by D. M. Strong (London: Luzac and Company, 1902), chapter 3, section 8, pp. 126-27 . Link to a different translation of the above parable: "Visakha's Sorrow: So Many Dear Ones, So Many Sorrows," Buddhist Parables , translated from the original Pali by Eugene Watson Burlingame (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1922), pp. 107-108 . Note: In this translation the deceased child is identified as a granddaughter, not a grandson. Return to the table of contents . Ubbiri: Why Weep for Eighty-Four Thousand Daughters A Buddhist Parable Ubbiri was reborn in the dispensation of the present Buddha at Savatthi, in the family of a wealthy householder, and she was exceedingly beautiful and fair to see. When she reached womanhood, she was conducted to the house of the king of Kosala, and after a few years had passed, obtained an only daughter. To the latter they gave the name Jivanti, or Living. The king, seeing her daughter, was pleased at heart, and conferred upon Ubbiri the ceremonial sprinkling of a queen. But when her daughter was old enough to walk and to run hither and yon, she died. Every day the mother went to the burning-ground where her body was laid, and wept. One day she went to the Teacher, saluted him, sat down for a short while, and then departed. Standing on the bank of the river Aciravati, she wept for her daughter. Seeing her, the Teacher, just as he sat in the Perfumed Chamber, manifested himself to her, and asked her: "Why do you lament?" "I lament for my daughter, Exalted One." "In this burning-ground have been burned eighty-four thousand daughters of yours. For which one of these do you lament?" And pointing out the spot where this one had been burned, where that, he uttered the first half of a stanza: You cry in the wood: "O Jiva dear!" Come to yourself, O Ubbiri! In all, eighty-four thousand Daughters of yours named Jiva. Have been burned in this burning-ground. For which one of these do you lament? After the Teacher had taught her this lesson, she extended her knowledge in conformity with the lesson, laid hold on insight, and both by the charm of the Teacher's lesson and by her own accumulation of causes in previous states of existence, became established in the highest of the fruits, sainthood. And having attained sainthood, she made known the specific attainment she had attained by uttering the second half of the stanza: Ah! he has drawn out the arrow, So hard to find, that was in my heart. For when I was overcome with sorrow, He banished my sorrow for my daughter. I here today am one from whom an arrow has been drawn, I am cut off from the world, I am gone to Nibbana. I seek refuge in the Sage, -- the Buddha, And in the Doctrine, and in the Order. Source: Buddhist Parables , translated from the original Pali by Eugene Watson Burlingame (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1922), pp. 106-107 . Burlingame's source: Theri-Gatha Commentary , no. 33. Return to the table of contents . The Burial Shirt Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm A mother had a little boy of seven years who was so attractive and good natured that no one could look at him without liking him, and he was dearer to her than anything else in the world. He suddenly died, and the mother could find no solace. She cried day and night. However, soon after his burial, the child began to appear every night at those places where he had sat and played while still alive. When the mother cried, he cried as well, but when morning came he had disappeared. The mother did not cease crying, and one night he appeared with the white shirt in which he had been laid into his coffin, and with the little wreath on his head. He sat down on the bed at her feet and said, "Oh, mother, please stop crying, or I will not be able to fall asleep in my coffin, because my burial shirt will not dry out from your tears that keep falling on it." This startled the mother, and she stopped crying. The next night the child came once again. He had a little light in his hand and said, "See, my shirt is almost dry, and I will be able to rest in my grave." Then the mother surrendered her grief to God and bore it with patience and peace, and the child did not come again, but slept in his little bed beneath the earth. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Das Totenhemdchen," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 7th edition, vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 109, p. 120 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2000. Translation based on the Grimms' final version (1857). The tale underwent relatively minor alterations between its introduction as no. 23 of vol. 2 of the 1st edition (1815) and the final edition (1857). It has been no. 109 since the 2nd edition (1819). This tale is also translated under the titles "The Shroud" or "The Little Shroud." Link to a separate text of the Grimms' The Burial Shirt . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 769. Return to the table of contents . A Mother's Tears Northern Europe Thomas of Cantimpré's grandmother had a son, the firstborn of her marriage. He was beautiful and loveable in every way, but he did not live long. Afterward she bore another son who excelled in weaponry, but at the same time was a lazy wastrel. The poor mother could not look at him without thinking of her firstborn son and breaking into tears. One day, after crying for him, she experienced the following vision: She saw a number of boys joyfully walking down a street. At once she thought of her son and looked to see if he might be one of them, but to no avail. Broken hearted she began crying bitterly, but soon afterward she saw her lost son creeping slowly along the street. Deeply grieved, the good woman called out, "Son, why are walking by yourself and not with the others? What is holding you back and slowing your pace?" Then the departed one pointed to his clothing, which was heavy with wetness, and said, "See, mother, these are the tears that you are shedding, unnecessarily and against my will. Their weight is pressing down on me so much that I cannot possibly keep up with the others. Please desist with them, and offer them instead to God, so that I can be freed of this burden." The woman did just that and cried no more for the dead boy . Source: Johann Wilhelm Wolf, "Mutterthränen," Deutsche Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1845), no. 42, pp. 162-63 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 769. Thomas of Cantimpré (1201-1272) was a Roman Catholic teacher and theologian, active in the Netherlands, Belgium, France, and Germany. Wolf's source for this account is a text written by Thomas. Return to the table of contents . The Tear-Filled Jug Germany Once upon a time a mother had an only child, a daughter whom she loved with all of her heart. She could not live without her. But then the Lord sent a terrible disease which raged among the children. It also seized the daughter, who sank onto her bed and became deathly ill. For three days and three nights the mother watched, cried, and prayed for her beloved daughter, but the child died. The mother was now alone on God's earth, and she was seized with a violent, nameless pain. She could neither eat nor drink. For three days and three nights she wept, wept, and wept, endlessly calling for her child. On the third night, weary from tears and exhausted from pain to the point of fainting, she was sorrowfully sitting at the place where her child had died when the door opened softly. The startled mother saw her dead daughter standing before her. The girl had become a sacred little angel, sweetly smiling with blessed innocence and beauty. In her hands she was carrying a little jug, which was almost full. The child spoke: "Mother dear, weep no more for me! Look, in this little jug are the tears that you have shed for me. The angel of grief has collected them in this container. If you cry just one more tear for me, the little jug will overflow, and I will then have no peace in my grave and no bliss in heaven. Therefore, mother dear, weep no more for me. I am well taken care of and happy. My playmates are angels." With that the dead child disappeared, and from then on the mother cried no more tears. She overcame her deep pain, and cried no more tears, so that her child might rest in peace and have her heavenly bliss. So strong and mighty is a mother's love! Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Bechstein, "Das Thränenkrüglein," Deutsches Märchenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1847), pp. 109-110 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludwig Bechstein, "Das Thränenkrüglein," Deutsches Märchenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1847), pp. 109-110 . Return to the table of contents . Let the Dead Rest Germany A wealthy widow in Karlsruhe had an only daughter whom she loved beyond measure because she was as beautiful as she was virtuous. At the prime of her life the girl died, and her mother could not be consoled. She spent several hours every day in the churchyard crying and mourning at her child's grave. Early one day as she was again sitting there lamenting, her daughter's voice called to her from out of the grave, "Mother, please let me rest!" Shaken, the woman left the cemetery and, to pacify the dead girl, sought to master her grief. Source: Bernhard Baader, "Laß die Todten ruhen," Neugesammelte Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: A. Geßner'sche Buchhandlung, 1859), no. 116, p. 85 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2000. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 769. Return to the table of contents . Grief-Stricken Mothers Germany In Guben a child of Frau P. died, and she cried excessively. Then the child came to her and said, "Mother, do not cry so much. I am deep in water. If you cry any more, I will drown." One evening another woman from the same town who had also cried excessively for her child placed the water cans upside down in the hallway of her house. The next morning she found them right side up behind the door. Then she thought, "That must mean something. I had better not cry so much, or the water cans will soon be filled with tears." Source: Karl Gander, "Untröstliche Mütter," Niederlausitzer Volkssagen, vornehmlich aus dem Stadt- und Landkreise Guben (Berlin: Deutsche Schriftsteller-Genossenschaft, 1894), no. 208, pp. 81-82 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2000. Gander received these two accounts from an oral source in Guben. Guben is southeast of Berlin on the Neisse River. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 769. Return to the table of contents . The Sad Little Angel Germany Once upon a time there was a mother whose only child died. She cried for it unceasingly. Once she was out in the field and crying again. Suddenly she saw an entire band of lovely angels flying above her, all of them young and beautiful, all of them happy and cheerful. Then the mother thought, "Oh, if only my child were also such a little angel!" And she looked to see if she could not find her child in the band. But she could not see it. Then from behind there came a little angel. It was very sad and was carrying a heavy black jug in its little hands. It was the mother's child. The mother asked, "My child, why are you not with the happy little angels?" "Mother," it said, "as long as you are crying I must collect your tears and cannot be happy like the others." From that hour forth the mother cried no more. Source: Karl Gander, "Das traurige Engelchen," Niederlausitzer Volkssagen, vornehmlich aus dem Stadt- und Landkreise Guben (Berlin: Deutsche Schriftsteller-Genossenschaft, 1894), no. 209, p. 82 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2000. Gander received this account in writing from a teacher by the name of Becker from Luckau, whose source was a Frau Becker from Jetzschko, who in turn heard the legend from her grandmother in Schenkendorf. These places are near Guben, a town southeast of Berlin on the Neisse River. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 769. Return to the table of contents . The Sad Child Switzerland In Reiden a married couple had two children, a boy and a girl. The woman was a midwife and was called out to help with a childbirth. As was usual in such cases, she left the children in the care of their father. In order to better look after his little son, the father took him with him to his workplace. In an unguarded moment the child left the workplace and walked to a nearby pond, where he fell in and drowned. Afterwards the mother wept incessantly for the loss and was inconsolable. A few days later it seemed as though she could hear a lovely sound in the night. She opened the window and saw a host of angels around the pond rejoicing with music. Her child was in their midst, but he stood there sadly among the happy ones. The mother now realized that this was because her grief was too great. This disturbs the joy and peace of the departed. Source (books.google.com): Alois Lütolf, "Das traurige Kind," Sagen, Bräuche und Legenden aus den fünf Orten Lucern, Uri, Schwyz, Unterwalden und Zug (Lucerne: Verlag von Frz. Jos. Schiffmann, 1865), no. 471, p. 515 . Source (Internet Archive): Alois Lütolf, "Das traurige Kind," Sagen, Bräuche und Legenden aus den fünf Orten Lucern, Uri, Schwyz, Unterwalden und Zug (Lucerne: Verlag von Frz. Jos. Schiffmann, 1862), no. 471, p. 515 . Reiden is a municipality in the Canton of Lucerne in Switzerland. Return to the table of contents . Excessive Grief for the Dead England An old woman still living (1854) in Piersebridge, who mourned with inordinate grief for a length of time the loss of a favorite daughter, asserts that she was visited by the spirit of her departed child, and earnestly exhorted not to disturb her peaceful repose by unnecessary lamentations and repinings at the will of God; and from that time she never grieved more. Events of this kind were common a century ago. Source: Michael Aislabie Denham, The Denham Tracts , a collection of folklore by Michael Aislabie Denham, and reprinted from the original tracts and pamphlets printed by Mr. Denham between 1846 and 1859, edited by James Hardy, vol. 2 (London: Folklore Society, 1895), pp. 58-59 . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 769. Return to the table of contents . The Child's Grave Ireland Once upon a time there was a mother and a boy. The boy was seven years old. He was very good and nice. He was the only boy of the family, and the mother loved him very much. One day he got sick and died. The mother used to be crying day and night after the little boy. Not long after his death he appeared one night in the place where he always used to be playing, and while his mother wept he wept too. But after the middle of the night he disappeared. He appeared again one other night. He said he felt he was going to be laid in his coffin and a lot of flowers were to be put round his head. He sat down at the foot of his mother on the bed and he said to her, "Mother don't be crying." The mother got courage and dried her tears. The child appeared once again, and he was holding a light in his hand. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Mayo >> Eaglais, p. 9 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . A Mother's Tears Denmark There was a woman who had a little child and it died. She cried for it both early and late. She cried herself to sleep every night. One evening, just as she had cried herself to sleep, she dreamed that many little children came and walked past her. Each one had a green branch in its hand. She thought that she should see her own child and waited for it to come, but it did not come. At long last, her child came far behind the others. "Why did you not come with the other children?" she asked. "It's your fault, mother," said the child. "All the tears that you have cried for me have fallen on me, and now I am so heavy and wet that I can hardly move. Then she woke up, and now she could see that her dream was a sign that she should not keep crying so much. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Sagn (Aarhus: Jacob Zeuners Bogtrykkeri, 1893), p. 312 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Sagn (Aarhus: Jacob Zeuners Bogtrykkeri, 1893), p. 312 . Kristensen's source: Johanne Marie Kristensdatter, Søheden. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2022. Kristensen does not give this legend a title. Return to the table of contents . Cried to Life Denmark There is no longer any vicarage in Almind, because it was closed at the beginning of this century. The only thing remaining from the former vicarage are some large linden trees in the farm's garden. It is said of one of the last priests in Almind that one of his children fell ill and died, and that the priest was very grieved. At the same time a wise woman came to the vicarage, and she said that the child could be cried back to life. Following her instructions, the priest's wife and the girls ran around the house crying. After about an hour the dead child began to show signs of life. It did indeed come back to life, but the parents were not particularly happy about this, because the child was a simpleton for as long as it lived. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Grædt til live," Sagn og overtro fra Jylland, samlede af folkemunde (Kolding: Konrad Jörgensen, 1886), no. 690, p. 382 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Grædt til live," Sagn og overtro fra Jylland, samlede af folkemunde (Kolding: Konrad Jörgensen, 1886), no. 690, p. 382 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2022. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Mourning the Death of a Spouse . Chain tales of Aarne-Thompson type 2022. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 14, 2023. Death of an Underground Person Death of an Underground Person migratory legends of type 6070B (also classified as Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 113A folktales) translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2024 Contents Torke's Child Is Dead / Kilian's Child Is Dead (Germany). Hübel and Habel (Germany). Prilling and Pralling Is Dead (Germany). Pingel Is Dead! (Germany). The Unknown Girl (Germany). King Pippe Is Dead! (Denmark). The Troll Turned Cat (Denmark). The Cat of the Carman's Stage (Ireland). The King of the Cats (Ireland). The King of the Cats (Scotland). The King o' the Cats (England). Dildrum, King of the Cats (England). Mally Dixon (England). Johnny Reed's Cat (England). Le Petit Colin (Guernsey). Notes and Bibliography . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Torke's Child Is Dead / Kilian's Child Is Dead Germany 1. Near Westerhausen there are dwarf caves. Ages ago dwarfs lived there, and they were very active in the region. Once a peasant was driving from Halberstadt to Börneke, which lies about a half hour from Westerhausen. As he was approaching Mount Tekenberg, someone shouted to him, "Wedgehead, tell Torke to come home. His child is dead!" He looked around, but peering far and wide he could not see anyone who could have called out. So he drove home, and after his arrival there, while seated at his table, it kept going around in his head that someone had shouted to him and that he had seen no one. So he said to his wife, "Just think, as I was approaching Mount Tekenberg, someone shouted to me, Wedgehead, tell Torke to come home. His child is dead!'" He had scarcely said this when someone called out from the best room, "Is that so? Then I must go there at once!" Then they heard something fall. They went into the room and found there a bag. It was filled with dough from their baking trough. 2. There were also many dwarfs in Mount Kuckuksberg near Westerhausen and in Mount Steinberg near Börneke. They were thick-headed people with black faces. They wore three-cornered hats. They sometimes helped humans and sometimes harmed them. When Old Fritz [Frederick the Great of Prussia] came to power, he did not want them in his country any more, and he exiled them to the other side of the Black Sea. Thus they all emigrated, and nothing more has been heard about them since then. Formerly, however, there were many stories about them. For example, once a peasant was driving past Mount Kuckuksberg when someone shouted to him, "Leave your wagon and your horses here, and run home quickly, and tell Kilian he should come here. His child is dead!" The peasant did that. Arriving at home, he gave the message, and suddenly the bread dough fell down from above, and someone said that in the future they should make three crosses on the bread when they leave the dough overnight, and then the dwarfs would not be able to take it away. For this reason, to this very day three crosses are made on bread. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 162-64 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Return to the table of contents . Hübel and Habel Germany A dwarf appeared to the owner of the Halbhufe farm near Mount Dittersberg, while he was working in his field. He asked him to tell Hübel (a female dwarf) that Habel (a male dwarf) had died. The farmer related this unusual incident at the dinner table, and even as he spoke, a small woman, previously unseen, came into view in a corner of the room. She ran crying from the room, and was never seen again. Source: Karl Haupt, Sagenbuch der Lausitz , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1862), p. 36 . Haupt's source: Johann Georg Theodor Grässe, Sagenschatz des Königreichs Sachsen (Dresden: Verlag von G. Schönfeld's Buchhandlung, 1855), pp. 552-53 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Return to the table of contents . Prilling and Pralling Is Dead Germany The servant of Landholder Gireck (whose residence in Plau was on Elden Street where Master Mason Büttner's house now stands) was once hauling a load of manure to a field abutting Gall Mountain. He had just unloaded the manure and was about to put the sideboards back onto the wagon when he heard his name being called from the mountain, together with the words, "When you get home say that Prilling and Pralling is dead." Back at home, he had scarcely related this experience and repeated the words, when they heard groaning and crying coming from the house's cellar. They investigated, but found nothing but a pewter mug, of a kind that had never before been seen in Plau. The master of the house kept the mug, and when he later moved to Hamburg he took it with him. About seventy years ago someone from Plau saw it there. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg] , vol. 1 (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), pp. 42-43 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Link to additional stories about drinking vessels abandoned by or stolen from the underground people: Fairy Cup Legends . Return to the table of contents . Pingel Is Dead! Germany In Jagel, near Schleswig, there was once a host who observed with vexation that his beer always ran out too fast, without his knowing how. But one day, when on his way from the city, where he had been to fetch a fresh supply, he heard, on passing the Jagelberg, where there is a giant-grave, a voice crying in a tone of lamentation, "Pingel is dead! Pingel is dead!" On his return home he related what he had heard to his wife, and had scarcely uttered the words when a little underground man came rushing out of the cellar, and crying: Ach, is Pingel tot, is Pingel tot, So hab ich hier Bier genug geholt, Ah, if Pingel's dead, if Pingel's dead, Then have I fetched beer enough, and then ran off. A jug was afterwards found in the cellar standing by the beer-cask, which the little man had left behind; for it was for the sick Pingel that he had stolen the beer. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology: Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 3 (London: Edward Lumley, 1852), p. 37 . Return to the table of contents . The Unknown Girl Germany A peasant in Holl had a servant girl whom no one knew. She was very industrious and well behaved, but she would not say what her name was. One day the man was carrying a yoke home from the field when the voice of an unseen person called out to him several times, "You, the man carrying the yoke, tell Gloria that the chancellor has died." The man did not think about this occurance until suppertime, and then he related it to the girl, adding that he now knew that her name was Gloria. The girl immediately jumped head over heels and fled. And no one has seen her since then. Source: Bernard Baader, Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: Verlag der Herder'schen Buchhandlung, 1852), no. 26, p. 20 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Return to the table of contents . King Pippe Is Dead! Denmark Between Nordborg and Sønderborg, on the isle of Als, there is a mount called Stakkelhøi, which in former days was inhabited by a multitude of the subterranean folk, who were noted for their diligent researches in the neighboring pantries. One evening late, as a man was passing over Stakkelhoi to Hagenbierg, he heard some one in the mount exclaim, "Now King Pippe is dead!" These words he retained in his memory. At the same time, one of the mount-people of Stakkelhøi was paying a visit at a peasant's in Hagenbierg, for the purpose of letting some of his beer flow into a silver jug that he had brought with him. The troll was just sitting cheek by jowl with the cask, when the aforesaid man entered the house and told the peasant how, as he was passing over Stakkelhøi, he heard a voice in the mount saying, "Now King Pippe is dead!" At this the troll in a fright exclaimed, "Is King Pippe dead?" and rushed out of the house with such haste that he forgot to take his silver jug with him. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), pp. 132-33 . Thorpe's source: J. M. Thiele, "Stakkelhøi [No is Pippe Kong dodt]," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), p. 207 . Link to additional stories about drinking vessels abandoned by or stolen from the underground people: Fairy Cup Legends . Return to the table of contents . The Troll Turned Cat Denmark About a quarter of a mile from Soröe lies Pedersborg, and a little farther on is the town of Lyng. Just between these towns is a hill called Bröndhöi ( Spring-hill ), said to be inhabited by the troll-people. There goes a story that there was once among these troll-people of Bröndhöi an old cross-grained curmudgeon of a troll, whom the rest nick-named Knurremurre ( Rumble-grumble ), because he was evermore the cause of noise and uproar within the hill. The Knurremurre having discovered what he thought to be too great a degree of intimacy between his young wife and a young troll of the society, took this in such ill part, that he vowed vengeance, swearing he would have the life of the young one. The latter, accordingly, thought it would be his best course to be off out of the hill till better times; so, turning himself into a noble tortoise-shell tom-cat, he one fine morning quitted his old residence, and journeyed down to the neighboring town of Lyng, where he established himself in the house of an honest poor man named Plat. Here he lived for a long time comfortable and easy, with nothing to annoy him, and was as happy as any tom-cat or troll crossed in love well could be. He got every day plenty of milk and good grout to eat, and lay the whole day long at his ease in a warm arm-chair behind the stove. Plat happened one evening to come home rather late, and as he entered the room the cat was sitting in his usual place, scraping meal-grout out of a pot, and licking the pot itself carefully. "Harkye, dame," said Plat, as he came in at the door, "till I tell you what happened to me on the road. Just as I was coming past Bröndhöi, there came out a troll, and he called out to me, and said, Harkye Plat Tell your cat, That Knurremurre is dead. The moment the cat heard these words, he tumbled the pot down on the floor, sprang out of the chair, and stood up on his hind-legs. Then, as he hurried out of the door, he cried out with exultation, "What! is Knurremurre dead? Then I may go home as fast as I please." And so saying he scampered off to the hill, to the amazement of honest Plat; and it is likely lost no time in making his advances to the young widow. Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), pp. 120-21 Keightley's source: J. M. Thiele, "Brøndøi [Knurremurre er død!]," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), pp. 187-88 . Return to the table of contents . The Cat of the Carman's Stage Ireland A carman was leaving Bunclody one morning for Dublin, when what should he see but a neighbor's cat galloping along the side of the road, and crying out every moment, "Tell Moll Browne, Tom Dunne is dead. Tell Moll Browne, Tom Dunne is dead." At last he got tired of this ditty, and took up a stone and flung it at the cat, bidding himself, and Tom Browne, and Moll Dunne, to go to Halifax, and not be botherin' him. When he got to Luke Byrne's in Francis Street, where all the Wicklow and Wexford carmen used to stop, he was taking a pot of beer in the taproom, and began to tell the quare thing that happened on the road. There was a comfortable-looking gray cat sitting by the fire, and the moment he mentioned what the Bunclody cat was saying, she cried out, "That's my husband!" That's my husband!" She made only one leap out through the door, and no one ever saw her at Luke Byrne's again. Source: Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Co., 1866), pp. 157-58 . Return to the table of contents . The King of the Cats Ireland A most important personage in feline history is the King of the Cats. He may be in your house a common looking fellow enough, with no distinguishing mark of exalted rank about him, so that it is very difficult to verify his genuine claims to royalty. Therefore the best way is to cut off a tiny little bit of his ear. If he is really the royal personage, he will immediately speak out and declare who he is ; and perhaps, at the same time, tell you some very disagreeable truths about yourself, not at all pleasant to have discussed by the house cat. A man once, in a fit of passion, cut off the head of the domestic pussy, and threw it on the fire. On which the head exclaimed, in a fierce voice, "Go tell your wife that you have cut off the head of the King of the Cats; but wait! I shall come back and be avenged for this insult," and the eyes of the cat glared at him horribly from the fire. And so it happened; for that day year, while the master of the house was playing with a pet kitten, it suddenly flew at his throat and bit him so severely that he died soon after. A story is current also, that one night an old woman was sitting up very late spinning, when a knocking came to the door. "Who is there?" she asked. No answer; but still the knocking went on. "Who is there?" she asked a second time. No answer; and the knocking continued. "Who is there?" she asked the third time, in a very angry passion. Then there came a small voice, "Ah, Judy, agrah, let me in, for I am cold and hungry; open the door, Judy, agrah, and let me sit by the fire, for the night is cold out here. Judy, agrah, let me in, let me in!" The heart of Judy was touched, for she thought it was some small child that had lost its way, and she rose up from her spinning, and went and opened the door -- when in walked a large black cat with a white breast, and two white kittens after her. They all made over to the fire and began to warm and dry themselves, purring all the time very loudly; but Judy said never a word, only went on spinning. Then the black cat spoke at last, "Judy, agrah, don't stay up so late again, for the fairies wanted to hold a council here tonight, and to have some supper, but you have prevented them; so they were very angry and determined to kill you, and only for myself and my two daughters here you would be dead by this time. So take my advice, don't interfere with the fairy hours again, for the night is theirs, and they hate to look on the face of a mortal when they are out for pleasure or business. So I ran on to tell you, and now give me a drink of milk, for I must be off." And after the milk was finished the cat stood up, and called her daughters to come away. "Good-night, Judy, agrah," she said. "You have been very civil to me, and I'll not forget it to you. Good-night, goodnight." With that the black cat and the two kittens whisked up the chimney; but Judy looking down saw something glittering on the hearth, and taking it up she found it was a piece of silver, more than she ever could make in a month by her spinning, and she was glad in her heart, and never again sat up so late to interfere with the fairy hours, but the black cat and her daughters came no more again to the house. Source: Lady [Jane Francesca Elgee] Wilde, Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland (Boston: Ticknor and Company, 1888), pp. 153-54 . Return to the table of contents . The King of the Cats Scotland Many years ago, long before shooting in Scotland was a fashion as it is now, two young men spent the autumn in the very far north, living in a lodge far from other houses, with an old woman to cook for them. Her cat and their own dogs formed all the rest of the household. One afternoon the elder of the two young men said he would not go out, and the younger one went alone, to follow the path of the previous day's sport looking for missing birds, and intending to return home before the early sunset. However, he did not do so, and the elder man became very uneasy as he watched and waited in vain till long after their usual supper-time. At last the young man returned, wet and exhausted, nor did he explain his unusual lateness until, after supper, they were seated by the fire with their pipes, the dogs lying at their feet, and the old woman's black cat sitting gravely with half-shut eyes on the hearth between them. Then the young man began as follows:-- "You must be wondering what made me so late. I have had a curious adventure to-day. I hardly know what to say about it. I went, as I told you I should, along our yesterday's route. A mountain fog came on just as I was about to turn homewards, and I completely lost my way. I wandered about for a long time, not knowing where I was, till at last I saw a light, and made for it, hoping to get help. As I came near it, it disappeared, and I found myself close to a large old oak-tree. I climbed into the branches the better to look for the light, and, behold! it was beneath me, inside the hollow trunk of the tree. I seemed to be looking down into a church, where a funeral was in the act of taking place. I heard singing, and saw a coffin, surrounded by torches, all carried by ---- But I know you won't believe me if I tell you!" His friend eagerly begged him to go on, and laid down his pipe to listen. The dogs were sleeping quietly, but the cat was sitting up apparently listening as attentively as the man, and both young men involuntarily turned their eyes towards him. "Yes," proceeded the absentee," it is perfectly true. The coffin and the torches were both borne by cats, and upon the coffin were marked a crown and scepter!" He got no further; the cat started up shrieking, "By Jove! old Peter's dead! and I'm the King o' the Cats!" rushed up the chimney and was seen no more. Source: Charlotte S. Burne, "Two Folk-Tales from Herefordshire," Folk-Lore Journal , vol. 2, part 1 (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1884), pp. 22-23 . Note in original: References to parallel stories in Shropshire Folk-Lore , p. 52 , note. Return to the table of contents . The King o' the Cats England One winter's evening the sexton's wife was sitting by the fireside with her big black cat, Old Tom, on the other side, both half asleep and waiting for the master to come home. They waited and they waited, but still he didn't come, till at last he came rushing in, calling out, "Who's Tommy Tildrum?" in such a wild way that both his wife and his cat stared at him to know what was the matter. "Why, what's the matter?" said his wife. "And why do you want to know who Tommy Tildrum is?" "Oh, I've had such an adventure. I was digging away at old Mr. Fordyce's grave when I suppose I must have dropped asleep, and only woke up by hearing a cat's meow." "Meow!" said Old Tom in answer. "Yes, just like that! So I looked over the edge of the grave, and what do you think I saw?" "Now, how can I tell?" said the sexton's wife. "Why, nine black cats all like our friend Tom here, all with a white spot on their chestesses. And what do you think they were carrying? Why, a small coffin covered with a black velvet pall, and on the pall was a small coronet all of gold, and at every third step they took they cried all together, 'Meow --'" "Meow!" said Old Tom again. "Yes, just like that!" said the sexton. "And as they came nearer and nearer to me I could see them more distinctly, because their eyes shone out with a sort of green light. Well, they all came towards me, eight of them carrying the coffin and the biggest cat of all walking in front for all the world like -- but look at our Tom, how he's looking at me. You'd think he knew all I was saying." "Go on, go on," said his wife. "Never mind Old Tom." "Well, as I was a-saying, they came towards me slowly and solemnly, and at every third step crying all together, 'Meow --'" "Meow!" said Old Tom again. "Yes, just like that, till they came and stood right opposite Mr. Fordyce's grave, where I was, when they all stood still and looked straight at me. I did feel queer, that I did! But look at Old Tom. He's looking at me just like they did." "Go on, go on," said his wife. "Never mind Old Tom." "Where was I? Oh, they all stood still looking at me, when the one that wasn't carrying the coffin came forward and, staring straight at me, said to me -- yes, I tell 'ee, said to me -- with a squeaky voice, 'Tell Tom Tildrum that Tim Toldrum's dead,' and that's why I asked you if you knew who Tom Tildrum was, for how can I tell Tom Tildrum Tim Toldrum's dead if I don't know who Tom Tildrum is?" "Look at Old Tom! Look at Old Tom!" screamed his wife. And well he might look, for Tom was swelling, and Tom was staring, and at last Tom shrieked out, "What -- old Tim dead! Then I'm the King o' the Cats!" and rushed up the chimney and was never more seen. Source: Joseph Jacobs, More English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 156-58 . Jacobs reconstructed this version using various English sources. Return to the table of contents . Dildrum, King of the Cats England The following tradition is often heard in South Lancashire: A gentleman was one evening sitting cosily in his parlor, reading or meditating, when he was interrupted by the appearance of a cat, which came down the chimney, and called out, "Tell Dildrum, Doldrum's dead!" He was naturally startled by the occurrence; and when, shortly afterwards, his wife entered, he related to her what had happened, and their own cat, which had accompanied her, exclaimed, "Is Doldrum dead?" and immediately rushed up the chimney, and was heard of no more. Of course there were numberless conjectures upon such a remarkable event, but the general opinion appears to be that Doldrum had been king of cat-land, and that Dildrum was the next heir. Source: John Harland and T. T. Wilkinson, Lancashire Legends, Traditions, Pageants, Sports, etc. (Manchester and London: John Heywood, 1882), pp. 12-13 . Return to the table of contents . Mally Dixon England Stories of fairies appearing in the shape of cats are common in the North of England. Mr. Longstaffe relates that a farmer of Staindrop, in Durham, was one night crossing a bridge, when a cat jumped out, stood before him, and looking him full in the face, said: Johnny Reed! Johnny Reed! Tell Madam Momfort That Mally Dixon's dead. The farmer returned home, and in mickle wonder recited this awfu' stanza to his wife, when up started their black cat, saying, "Is she?" and disappeared for ever. It was supposed she was a fairy in disguise, who thus went to attend a sister's funeral, for in the North fairies do die, and green shady spots are pointed out by the country folks as the cemeteries of the tiny people. Source: James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to the Nursery Rhymes of England (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), p. 51 . This legend is sometimes titled "Johnny Reed! Johnny Reed!" Return to the table of contents . Johnny Reed's Cat England Yes, cats are queer folk, sure enough, and often know more than a simple beast ought to by knowledge that's rightly come by. There's that cat there, you've been looking at, will stand at a door on its hind legs with its front paws on the handle trying like a Christian to open the door, and mewling in a manner that's almost like talking. He's a London cat, he is, being brought me by a cousin who lives there, and is called Gilpin, after, I 'm told, a mayor who was christened the same. He's a knowing cat, sure enough; but it's not the London cats that are cleverer than the country ones. Who knows, he may be a relative of Johnny Reed's own tom-cat himself. And who was Johnny Reed? And what was there remarkable about his cat? Have you never heard tell of Johnny Reed's cat? It's an old tale they have in the north country, and it's true enough, though folk may not believe it in these days when the Bible's not gospel enough for some of them. I've heard my father often tell the story, and he came from Newcastle way, which is the very part where Johnny Reed used to live, being a parish sexton in a village not far away. Well, Johnny Reed was the sexton, as I've already said, and he and his wife kept a cat, a well enough behaved creature, sure enough, and a beast as he had no fault to set on, saving a few of the tricks which all cats play at times, and which seem born in the blood of the creatures. It was all black except one white paw, and seemed as honest and decent a beast as could be, and Tom would as soon have suspected it of being any more than it really seemed to be as he would one of his own children themselves, like many other folk, perhaps, who, may be, have cats of the same kind, little thinking it. Well, the cat had been with him some years when a strange thing occurred. One night Johnny was going home late from the churchyard, where he had been digging a grave for a person who had died on a sudden, throwing the grave on Johnny's hands unexpectedly, so that he had to stop working at it by the light of a lantern to have it ready for the next day's burying. Well, having finished his work, and having put his tools in the shed in a corner of the yard, and having locked them up safe, he began to walk home pretty brisk, thinking would his wife be up and have a bit of fire for him, for the night was cold, a keen wind blowing over the fields. He hadn't gone far before he comes to a gate at the roadside, and there seemed to be a strange shadow about it, in which Johnny saw, as it might be, a lot of little gleaming fires dancing about, while some stood steady, just like flashes of light from little windows in buildings all on fire inside. Says Johnny to himself, for he was not a man to be easily frightened, being accustomed by his calling to face things which might upset other folk, "'Hullo! What's here? Here's a thing I never saw before." And with that he walks straight up to the gate, while the shadow got deeper and the fires brighter the nearer he came to it. Well, when he came right up to the gate he finds that the shadow was just none at all, but nine black cats, some sitting and some dancing about, and the lights were the flashes from their eyes. When he came nearer he thought to scare them off, and he calls out, "Sh -- sh -- sh," but never a cat stirs for all of it. "I'll soon scatter you, you ugly varmin," says Johnny, looking about him for a stone, which was not to be found, the night being dark and preventing him seeing one. Just then he hears a voice calling, '"Johnny Reed!" "Hullo!" says he, "Who's that wants me?" "Johnny Reed," says the voice again. "Well," says Johnny, "I'm here," and looking round and seeing no one, for no one was about 'tis true. "Was it one of you," says he, joking like, to the cats, "as was calling me?" "Yes, of course," answers one of them, as plain as ever Christian spoke. "It's me as has called you these three times." Well, with that, you may be sure, Johnny begins to feel curious, for 'twas the first time he had ever been spoken to by a cat, and he didn't know what it might lead to exactly. So he takes off his hat to the cat, thinking that it was, perhaps, best to show it respect, and, seeing that he was unable to guess with whom he was dealing, hoping to come off all the better for a little civility. "Well, sir," says he, "what can I do for you?" "It's not much as I want with you," says the cat, "but it's better it'll be with you if you do what I tell you. Tell Dan Ratcliffe that Peggy Poyson's dead." "I will, sir," says Johnny, wondering at the same time how he was to do it, for who Dan Ratcliffe was he knew no more than the dead. Well, with that all the cats vanished, and Johnny, running the rest of the way home, rushes into his house, smoking hot from the fright and the distance he had to go over. "Nan," says he to his wife, the first words he spoke, "who's Dan Ratcliffe?" "Dan Ratcliffe," says she. "I never heard of him, and don't know there's any one such living about here." "No more do I," says he, '"but I must find him wherever he is." Then he tells his wife all about how he had met the cats, and how they had stopped him and given him the message. Well, his cat sits there in front of the fire looking as snug and comfortable as a cat could be, and nearly half asleep, but when Johnny comes to telling his wife the message the cats had given him, then it jumped up on its feet, and looks at Johnny, and says, "What! Is Peggy Poyson dead? Then it's no time for me to be here." And with that it springs through the door and vanishes, nor was ever seen again from that day to this. "And did the sexton ever find Dan Ratcliffe," I asked. Never. He searched high and low for him about, but no one could tell him of such a person, though Johnny looked long enough, thinking it might be the worse for him if he didn't do his best to please the cats. At last, however, he gave the matter up. Then, what was the meaning of the cat's message? It's hard to tell; but many folk thought, and I'm inclined to agree with them, that Dan Ratcliffe was Johnny's own cat, and no one else, looking at the way he acted, and no other of the name being known. Who Peggy Poyson was no one could tell, but likely enough it was some relative of the cat, or may be someone it was interested in, for it's little we know concerning the creatures and their ways, and with whom and what they're mixed up. Source: [Charles John Tibbits], Folk-Lore and Legends: English (London: W. W. Gibbings, 1890), pp. 150-55 . Return to the table of contents . Le Petit Colin Guernsey Fairies have sometimes been known to enter into the service of mankind, but by what motives they were actuated in so doing is not clear. A certain "Mess" [Monsieur] Dumaresq, of "Les Grands Moulins," once engaged as a farm servant a boy who offered himself. No one knew whence he came, nor did he appear to have any relations. He was extremely lively, active, and attentive to his duties, but so small that he acquired and was known by no other name than that of "P'tit Colin." One morning as Dumaresq was returning from St. Saviour's, he was astonished, on passing the haunted hill known as "La Roque où le Coq Chante," to hear himself called by name. He stopped his horse and looked round, but could see no one. Thinking that his imagination must have deceived him, he began to move on, but was again arrested by the voice. A second time he stopped and looked round, but with no more success than the first. Beginning to feel alarmed, he pushed his horse forward, but was a third time stopped by the voice. He now summoned up all his courage and asked who it was that called, and what was required of him. The voice immediately answered, "Go home directly and tell P'tit Colin that Grand Colin is dead." Wondering what could be the meaning of this, he made the best of his way home, and, on his arrival, sent for Le Petit Colin, to whom he communicated what had befallen him. The boy replied, "What! Is Le Grand Colin dead? Then I must leave you," and immediately turned round to depart. "Stop," said Mess Dumaresq, "I must pay you your wages." "Wages!" said Colin, with a laugh, "I am far richer now than you. Goodbye." Saying this he left the room and was never afterwards seen or heard of. This story is still related by Dumaresq's descendants. Source: Edgar MacCulloch, Guernsey Folk Lore: A Collection of Popular Superstitions, Legendary Tales, Peculiar Customs, Proverbs, Weather Sayings, etc., of the People of that Island , edited by Edith F. Carey (London: Elliot Stock, 1903), pp. 213-14 . MacCulloch's source: "From Miss Lane and John de Garis, Esq." Return to the table of contents . Notes and Bibliography Migratory legend type 6070B; Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 113A. In many versions of this tale the deceased is a cat, usually the "king of the cats," while the mysterious person who runs off after hearing of the death is the family housecat. Many folklore traditions, of course, connect cats with elves, fairies, and other supernatural beings. "Death of an elf (or cat)" tales are classified as type 113A tales in the Aarne-Thompson-Uther folktale classification system, or as a migratory legend type 6070B in the Christiansen system. For more information about folktale types see: Aarne, Antti, and Thompson, Stith. The Types of the Folktale: A Classification and Bibliography . FF Communications, no. 184. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 1961. Ashliman, D. L. A Guide to Folktales in the English Language . New York; Westport Connecticut; and London: Greenwood Press, 1987. Christiansen, Reidar Th. The Migratory Legends . FF Communications, no. 175. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 1958. Uther, Hans-Jörg. The Types of International Folktales: A Classification and Bibliography . 3 vols. FF Communications, no. 284-86. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 2004. Return to: The table of contents D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 27, 2024. Death's Messengers Death's Messengers folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 335 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2019 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Death's Messengers (Retold by D. L. Ashliman). Death's Messengers (Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof, Wendunmuth ). Death's Messengers (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). An Old Man That Was Willing to Put off Death (Laurentius Abstemius). Our Lord and the Church Father (Transylvania). The Old Man and the Physician (Rumi, The Masnavi ). Spanish Moss (Georgia, USA). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Death's Messengers Retold by D. L. Ashliman Death entered into a pact with a young man, agreeing not to come for him without first sending messengers in advance. Some years later Death appeared, saying, "Your time has come." "But you did not send your messengers in advance," said the man. "You can't take me yet." "Has your sight not dimmed?" asked Death. "Is not your hair thin and gray? Your back hunched? Your arms weak? And your once long stride now a feeble shuffle?" "That is true," admitted the man, then started to protest anew. "Those were my messengers," said Death, interrupting him abruptly. "Your failure to recognize them changes nothing. Your time has come." Source: Retold from various European sources. Return to the table of contents . Death's Messengers Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof, Wendunmuth It is said that once a large, powerful giant overcame Death. He struck him down and left him lying on the ground unconscious and powerless. A young man came by and mercifully helped the defeated one recover his former health and strength. Death thanked the young man by promising that although God and nature dictated that all men must die, Death would not take him without giving him advanced notice. The young man, because of this promise, felt secure and proud. He ate and drank in excess and led a sinful life. With time he was plagued with any number of ailments. Then Death approached him, telling him that his hour of departure had arrived. The man did not accept this fate and accused Death of failing to keep his promise, as he had sent no messengers to forewarn him. "Hey! Be still!" answered Death. "Have you not received any number of messengers? Some years ago you were plagued with severe fever and soon afterward an even worse one. Now your head is dizzy; your chest suffers from coughing and wheezing; your belly aches with great pain; your arms and legs have lost their strength; your skin has become withered and wrinkly. You should have been reminded of all those things by my dear brother sleep, in whose bands you have so often lain as if you were dead. Therefore your excuses are nothing. I shall take you with me." Source (books.google.com): Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof, "Von deß Todts Botten," Wendunmuth , edited by Herman Österley, book 1 (Tübingen: Für den Litterarischen Verein in Stuttgart, gedruckt von H. Laupp, 1869), no. 124, pp. 591-92 . Source (Internet Archive): Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof, "Von deß Todts Botten," Wendunmuth , edited by Herman Österley, book 1 (Tübingen: Für den Litterarischen Verein in Stuttgart, gedruckt von H. Laupp, 1869), no. 124, pp. 591-92 . The German writer Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof lived between 1525 and 1602. Return to the table of contents . Death's Messengers Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm In ancient times a giant was wandering along the highway when suddenly a stranger jumped toward him and shouted, "Stop! Not one step further!" "What?" said the giant. "You, a creature that I could crush between my fingers, you want to block my way? Who are you that you dare to speak so boldly?" "I am Death," answered the other one. "No one resists me, and you too must obey my orders." But the giant refused, and began to wrestle with Death. It was a long, violent battle, and finally the giant got the upper hand, and knocked Death down with his fist, causing him to collapse by a stone. The giant went on his way, and Death lay there conquered, so weak that he could not get up again. "What is to come of this?" he said. "If I stay lying here in a corner, no one will die in the world, and it will become so filled with people that they won't have room to stand beside one another." Meanwhile a young man came down the road. Vigorous and healthy, he was singing a song and looking this way and that. Seeing the half-conscious individual, he approached him with compassion, raised him up, gave him a refreshing drink from his flask, and waited until he regained his strength. "Do you know," asked the stranger, as he stood up, "who I am, and whom you have helped onto his legs again?" "No," answered the youth, "I do not know you." "I am Death," he said. "I spare no one, nor can I make an exception with you. However, so you may see that I am grateful, I promise you that I will not attack you without warning, but instead will send my messengers to you before I come and take you away." "Good," said the youth. "It is to my benefit that I shall know when you are coming, and that I will be safe from you until then." Then he went on his way, and was cheerful and carefree, and lived one day at a time. However, youth and good health did not last long. Soon came sickness and pain, which tormented him by day and deprived him of his rest by night. "I shall not die," he said to himself, "for Death will first send his messengers, but I do wish that these wicked days of sickness were over." Regaining his health, he began once more to live cheerfully. Then one day someone tapped on his shoulder. He looked around, and death was standing behind him, who said, "Follow me. The hour of your departure from this world has come." "What?" replied the man. "Are you breaking your word? Did you not promise me that you would send your messengers to me before you yourself would come? I have not seen a one of them." "Be still!" answered Death. "Have I not sent you one messenger after another? Did not fever come and strike you, and shake you, and throw you down? Has not dizziness numbed your head? Has not gout pinched your limbs? Did your ears not buzz? Did toothache not bite into your cheeks? Did your eyes not darken? And furthermore, has not my own brother Sleep reminded you every night of me? During the night did you not lie there as if you were already dead?" The man did not know how to answer, so he surrendered to his fate and went away with Death. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Boten des Todes," Kinder- und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 2, 7th edition (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 177, pp. 356-57 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Boten des Todes," Kinder- und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 2, 7th edition (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 177, pp. 356-57 . The Grimms' source: Hans Wilhelm Kirchhoff, Wendunmuth , (1563, edition of 1581), no. 124. The Grimms first published this tale in the fourth edition (1840) of their Kinder- und Hausmärchen . Return to the table of contents . An Old Man That Was Willing to Put off Death Laurentius Abstemius There goes a Story that Death call'd upon an Old Man, and bad him come along with him. The Man Excus'd himself, that T'other world was a Great Journy to take upon so short a Warning, and begg'd a Little time only to make his Will before he Dy'd. Why (says Death) You have had Warning enough One would think, to have made Ready before This. In truth, says the Old Man. This is the First Time that ever I saw ye in my whole Life. That's False, says Death, for you have had Daily Examples of Mortality before Your Eyes, in People of All Sorts, Ages, and Degrees; And is not the Frequent Spectacle of Other Peoples Deaths, a Memento sufficient to make You think of Your Own? Your Dim and Hollow Eyes methinks, the Los of your Hearing, and the Faltering of the rest or your Senses, should Mind ye, without more ado, that Death has bid hold of ye already: And is This a time of day d'ye think to stand Shuffling it off still? Your Peremptory Hour, I tell ye, is now come, and there's No Thought of a Reprieve in the Case of Fate. The MORAL Want of Warning is No Excuse in the Case of Death: For Every Moment of our Lives; either Is, or Ought to he a Time of Preparation for't. REFLEXION 'Tis the Great Bus'ness of Life to fit our selves for our End; and no Man can Live Well that has not Death always in his Eye. 'Tis a Strange Mixture of Madness and Folly in One Solecism, for People to Say or Imagine that ever any Man was Taken out of This World without time to Prepare himself for Death: But the Delay of Fitting our selves is our Own Fault, and we turn the very Sin into an Excuse. Every Breath we draw is not only a Step towards Death, but a Part of it. It was Born with us, It goes along with us: It is the Only Constant Companion that we have in This World, and yet we never think of it any more then if we knew Nothing on't. The Text is True to the very Letter, that we Die Daily, and yet we Feel it not. Every thing under the Sun reads a Lecture of Mortality to us. Our Neighbours, our Friends, our Relations, that fall Every where round about us, Admonish us of our Last Hour; and yet here's an Old Man on the Wrong-side of Fourscore perhaps, Complaining that he is surpriz'd. Source (Internet Archive): Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and Reflexions (London, 1692), no. 350, pp. 305-306 . Laurentius Abstemius (ca. 1440 - 1508) was an Italian writer. Return to the table of contents . Our Lord and the Church Father Transylvania A church father, as it happens now and again, made a gift to his church. It was a magnificent candelabra with a large wax candle. Our Lord appeared to him in the form of an old man and promised him that as thanks for this gift he would forewarn the church father three times about death before calling him from this earth. Happy about this, the church father led a merry and lavish life, eating and drinking to his heart's content. He took every advantage of the church's winecellar. Living such a life, he never thought about death. However, after a few years his body began to give in. His knees failed him. His back bent downward. He could walk only with the aid of a crutch. Not long afterward he lost his sight, and then his hearing as well. Crippled, blind, and deaf as he was, he nonetheless continued the same frivolous life as before. Finally our Lord came to take him away. The church father was surprised and angry. He complained as to why he had not been forewarned three times as promised. To this our Lord spoke with justified anger: "What? Did I not forewarn you? Did I not at first knock on your armpits and knees causing you to walk crookedly? Did I not touch your eyes with my finger causing you to lose your sight? Did I not pull your ears causing you to lose your hearing? My promise to you has been fulfilled. Follow after me!" The church father humbly begged for forgiveness, saying that he truthfully had not understood the messages and thus had not prepared himself for death. Our Lord looked gently at the penitent church father and said: "Just come with me. I will treat you more with mercy than with justice!" You all must take note of this: Our Lord is forewarning you as well. Be sure that when he calls for you, you are not as unprepared as was this church father. Source (books.google.com): Joseph Haltrich, "Unser Herrgott und der Kirchenvater," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus dem Sachsenlande in Siebenbürgen (Berlin: Verlag von Julius Springer, 1856), no. 12, pp. 62-63 . Source (Internet Archive): Joseph Haltrich, "Unser Herrgott und der Kirchenvater," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus dem Sachsenlande in Siebenbürgen (Berlin: Verlag von Julius Springer, 1856), no. 12, pp. 62-63 . Transylvania is in present-day Romania. Return to the table of contents . The Old Man and the Physician Rumi, The Masnavi An old man complained to his physician that he suffered from headache. The physician replied, "That is caused by old age." The old man next complained of a defect in his sight, and the physician again told him that his malady was due to old age. The old man went on to say that he suffered from pain in the back, from dyspepsia, from shortness of breath, from nervous debility, from inability to walk, and so on; and the physician replied that each of these ailments was likewise caused by old age. The old man, losing patience, said, "Fool, know you not that God has ordained a remedy for every malady?" The physician answered, "This passion and choler are also symptoms of old age. Since all your members are weak, you have lost the power of self-control, and fly into a passion at every word.'' Source (Internet Archive): Rumi, Masnavi i Ma'Navi , translated and abridged by E. H. Whinfield (London: Trübner and Company, 1887), book 2, story 13, p. 100 . Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi, popularly known simply as Rumi, was a 13th century Persian poet and theologian. Return to the table of contents . Spanish Moss Georgia, USA Long time ago there was a powerful wicked man. He was that sinful, that Death he don't have the heart to cut him off in his sins, 'cepten' he give him a warning. So one day Death he appear to the wicked man, and he tell him how that day week he gwine come for him. The wicked man he that frightened, he get on his knees and beg Death to let him live a little longer. The wicked man he take on, and he beg, 'twell Death he promise he won't come for him 'twell he give him one more warning. Well, the years go by, but the wicked man he grow more wicked; and one day Death he appear to him again, and Death he tell the wicked man how that day week he gwine come for him; but the wicked man he more frightened than what he was before; and he get on his knees, the wicked man do, and beg Death to let him live a little longer; and Death he promise the wicked man how before he come for him he gwine send him a token what he can see or what he can hear. Well, the years go by; and the wicked man he get a powerful old man, -- he deaf and blind, and he jest drag hisself about. One day Death he done come for the wicked man once more, but the wicked man he say how Death done promise him he won't come for him twell he send him a token what he can see or hear; and Death he say he done send a token what he can see. Then the wicked man he say how he can't see no token, 'cause he say how he done blind. Then Death he say how he done send a token what he can hear. But the wicked man he say how he plum deaf, and he say how he can't hear no token; and he beg Death that hard to let him live, that Death he get plum outdone with the wicked man, and Death he jest go off and leave him to hisself. And the wicked man he jest wander about the woods, and his chillen all die, and his friends all die. Still he jest wander about the woods. He blind, and he can't see; and he deaf, and he can't hear. He that blind he can't see to find no food; and he that deaf he never know when anybody try to speak to him. And the wicked man he done perish away twell he jest a shaddow with long hair. His hair it grow longer and longer, and it blow in the wind; and still he can't die, 'cause Death he done pass him by. So he here to wander and blow about in the woods, and he perish away twell all yo can see is his powerful long hair blowing all 'bout the trees; and his hair it done blow about the trees twell it done grow fast, and now yo all folks done calls it Spanish Moss. Source (jstor): E. M. Backus, "The Negro's Superstition of the Spanish Moss," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 25, no. 96 (April - June 1912), pp. 135-36 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 18, 2019. Death and the Old Man: Folktales of Type 845 Death and the Old Man Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 845 tedited by D. L. Ashliman © 2022-2023 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Death and an Old Man (Aesop, Roger L'Estrange). The Asses Skin (Aesop, Roger L'Estrange). The Old Man and Death (Aesop, Samuel Croxall). The Old Man and Death (Aesop, Robert Dodsley). The Old Man and Death (Aesop, Joseph Jacobs). Death and the Unfortunate (Jean de La Fontaine). Death and the Woodman (Jean de La Fontaine). The Old Man and Death (Leo Tolstoy). The Lord and Toby (USA -- Virginia). The Lord and Langton (USA -- Virginia). God and Moses (USA -- Florida). Death and the Negro Man (Joel Chandler Harris). Links to Related Sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Death and an Old Man Aesop (Roger L'Estrange) An Old Man that had Travell'd a Great Way under a Huge Burden of Sticks, found himself so Weary, that he Cast it Down , and call'd upon Death to Deliver him from a more miserable Life. Death came presently at his Call, and Asked him hi Bus'ness. Pray Good Sir, says he, do me but the favour to Help me up with my Burden again. The MORAL Men call upon Death, as they Do upon the Devil: When he comes they're affraid of him. Source (books.google.com): Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists: With Morals and Reflexions (London, 1692), no. 113, pp. 105-106 . Source (Internet Archive): Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists: With Morals and Reflexions (London, 1692), no. 113, pp. 105-106 . Return to the table of contents . The Asses Skin Aesop (Roger L'Estrange) A Miserable Ass that was ready to sink under Blows and Burdens, call'd upon Death to Deliver him from that Intolerable Oppression. Death was within Hearing it seems, and took him at his Word; but told him withal for his Comfort, that whereas other Creatures end their Misfortunes and their Lives together, You must not expect that it will be so with you; sor (says Death,) they'l make drums of your Skin, when your Carcass shall be Carrion, and never leave Drubbof ye so long as on Piece will hold to another. The MORAL Some People are Miserable beyong the Relief even of Death it self: That is to say, there are Men that lead Restless Lives in this World, under a Dreadful Apprehension at the same time, of being more Wretched in the next. Source (books.google.com): Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists: With Morals and Reflexions (London, 1692), no. 437, p. 414 . Source (Internet Archive): Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists: With Morals and Reflexions (London, 1692), no. 437, p. 414 . Return to the table of contents . The Old Man and Death Aesop (Samuel Croxall) A Poor, feeble, old Man, who had crawl'd out into a neighbouring Wood to gather a few Sticks, had made up his Bundle, and laying it over his Shoulders, was trudging homeward with it; but what with Age, the Length of the Way, and the Weight of his Burden, he grew so faint and weak, that he sunk under it; and, as he sat on the Ground, call'd upon Death to come, once for all, and ease him of his Troubles. Death no sooner heard him, but he came, and demanded of him what he wanted. The poor old Creatre, who little thought Death had been so near, and frighted almost out of his Senses with his terrible Aspect, answer'd him trembling, that having by Chance let his Bundle of Sticks fall, and being too infirm to get it up himself, he had made bold to call upon him to helm him: That indeed, this was all he wanted at present, and that he hop'e his Worship was not offended with him for the Liberty he had taken in so doing. REFLECTION Death is immediately call'd upon by peevish Men, on every little cross Accident; but let him only offer to make his Appearance, and then all they want is to live a little longer. Source (books.google.com): Samuel Croxall, Fables of Æsop, and Others , 4th edition (Whitehaven: John Dunn, 1763), no. 52, pp. 54-55 . First published in 1722. Return to the table of contents . The Old Man and Death Aesop (Robert Dodsley) A Feeble Old Man quite spent with carrying a burthen of sticks, which with much labour he had gathered in a neighbouring wood, called upon death to release him from the fatigues he endured. Death hearing the invocation, was immediately at his elbow, and asked him what he wanted. Frightened and trembling at the unexpected appearance -- O good sir! said he, my burthen had like to have slipt from me, and being unable to recover it myself, I only implored yor assistance to replace it on my shoulders. Source (books.google.com): Robert Dodsley, Select Fables of Esop and Other Fabulists (Birmingham: Printed by John Baskerville, for R. and J. Dodsley, 1761), no. 29, p. 33 . Return to the table of contents . The Old Man and Death Aesop (Joseph Jacobs) An old labourer, bent double with age and toil, was gathering sticks in a forest. At last he grew so tired and hopeless that he threw down the bundle of sticks, and cried out: "I cannot bear this life any longer. Ah, I wish Death would only come and take me!" As he spoke, Death, a grisly skeleton, appeared and said to him: "What wouldst thou, Mortal? I heard thee call me." "Please, sir," replied the woodcutter, "would you kindly help me to lift this faggot of sticks on to my shoulder?" We would often be sorry if our wishes were gratified. Source (books.google.com): Joseph Jacobs, The Fables of Æsop (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), no. 69, pp. 164-65 . Source (Internet Archive): Joseph Jacobs, The Fables of Æsop (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), no. 69, pp. 164-65 . Return to the table of contents . Death and the Unfortunate Jean de La Fontaine A poor unfurtunate, from day to day, Call'd Death to take him from this world away. "O Death," he said, "to me how fair thy form! Come quick, and end for me life's cruel storm." Death heard, and, with a ghastly grin, Knock'd at his door, and enter'd in. With horror shivering, and affright, "Take out this object from my sight!" The poor man loudly cried; "Its dreadful looks I can't abide; O stay him, stay him; let him come no nigher; O Death! O Death! I pray thee to retire!" A gentleman of note In Rome, Mæcenas, somewhere wrote: "Make me the poorest wretch that begs, Sore, hungry, crippled clothed in rags, In hopeless impotence of arms and legs; Provided, after all, you give The one sweet liberty to live: I'll ask of Death no greater favour Than just to stay away for ever." Source (books.google.com): Jean de La Fontaine, The Fables of La Fontaine , transtlated from the French by Elizur Wright (London: George Bell and Sons, 1888), book 1, fable 15, p. 18 . Source (Internet Archive): Jean de La Fontaine, Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright (Boston: Sanborn, Carter, and Bazin, 1856), book 1, fable 15, p. 69 . Links to the French-language fable: Books.google.com: Jean de La Fontaine, "La mort et le malheureux," Fables de La Fontaine (Tours: Alfred Mame et Fils, 1864), livre 1, fable 15, p. 27-28 . Internet Archive: Jean de La Fontaine, "La mort et le malheureux," Fables de La Fontaine (Paris: Garnier Fréres, 1864), livre 1, fable 15, p. 19-20 . Return to the table of contents . Death and the Woodman Jean de La Fontaine A poor wood-chopper, with his fagot load, Whom weight of years, as well as load, oppress'd, Sore groaning in his smoky hut to rest, Trudged wearily along his homeward road. At last his wood upon the ground he throws, And sits him down to think o'er all his woes. To joy a stranger, since his hapless birth, What poorer wretch upon this rolling earth? No bread sometimes, and ne'er a moment's rest; Wife, children, soldiers, landlords, public tax, All wait the swinging of his old, worn axe, And paint the veriest picture of a man unblest. On Death he calls. Forthwith that monarch grim Appears, and asks what he should do for him. "Not much, indeed; a little help I lack To put these fagots on my back." Death ready stands all ills to cure; But let us not his cure invite. Than die, 'tis better to endure, Is both a manly maxim and a right. Source (books.google.com): Jean de La Fontaine, The Fables of La Fontaine , transtlated from the French by Elizur Wright (London: George Bell and Sons, 1888), book 1, fable 16, pp. 18-19 . Source (Internet Archive): Jean de La Fontaine, Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright (Boston: Sanborn, Carter, and Bazin, 1856), book 1, fable 16, p. 70 . Links to the French-language fable: Books.google.com: Jean de La Fontaine, "La mort et le bucheron," Fables de La Fontaine (Tours: Alfred Mame et Fils, 1864), livre 1, fable 16, p. 28-29 . Internet Archive: Jean de La Fontaine, "La mort et le bucheron," Fables de La Fontaine (Paris: Garnier Fréres, 1864), livre 1, fable 16, p. 20-21 . Return to the table of contents . The Old Man and Death Leo Tolstoy An Old Man cut some wood, which he carried away. He had to carry it far. He grew tired, so he put down his bundle, and said: "Oh, if Death would only come!" Death came, and said: "Here I am, what do you want?" The Old Man was frightened, and said: "Lift up my bundle! Source (books.google.com): Leo Tolstoy, The Complete Works of Count Tolstoy: Fables for Children (Boston: Dana Estes and Company, 1904), p. 13 . Source (Internet Archive): Leo Tolstoy, The Complete Works of Count Tolstoy: Fables for Children (Boston: Dana Estes and Company, 1904), p. 13 . Return to the table of contents . The Lord and Toby USA (Virginia) Man prayin' all de time: "O Lord! Send down thy angel to take ol' Toby home, Toby's tired o' living. O Lord! Send down thy angel to take ol' Toby home." So his master knocked at de do'. Said, "Who's dat?" "Oh, de Lord sent his angel to take Toby home." Toby said, "I say, can't de Lord take jokin'? Mo'ober, Toby's gone to de nex' neighbor, an' I don' know when he's gwine come back." Source (books.google.com): Portia Smiley, "Folk-Lore from Virginia, South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, and Florida," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 32 (1919), 361-62 . Source (Internet Archive): Portia Smiley, "Folk-Lore from Virginia, South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, and Florida," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 32 (1919), 361-62 . Return to the table of contents . The Lord and Langton USA (Virginia) Once there was an old man named Langton; and whenever he prayed, he would say, "O Lord! please come and take poor Langton home out of his suffering!" Every night he did that, people began to notice it: so some mischievous boys said that they would try his faith. One night they came to the old man's door, and waited until the old man began to pray. When he got to his old saying, one of them knocked on the door, -- bam, bam, bam! The old man stopped praying and listened, and no one said anything. After a while he began again; and soon he said, "O Lord! please come and take poor Langton home out of his sufferings!" One of the boys knocked on the door, -- blip, blip, blip! The old man stopped again, and asked, "Who is that?" One of them replied, "The Lord has come to take poor Langton home out of his sufferings." The man jumped off his knees and blew the light out, then with a very excited voice exclaimed, "Langton has been dead and gone a fortnight!" Source (Internet Archive): A. M. Bacon and E. C. Parsons, "Folk-Lore from Elizabeth City County, Virginia," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 35 (1922), no. 62, p. 295 . Source (JSTOR): A. M. Bacon and E. C. Parsons, "Folk-Lore from Elizabeth City County, Virginia," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 35 (1922), no. 62, p. 295. Return to the table of contents . God and Moses USA (Florida) Said a fellow named Moses, an' he was prayin' to God to take him out de world. An' while he was prayin' to God to take him out de worl', "Who dere?" "Moses." "Who dere?" "God." "What God want?" "Want po' Moses." "Who?" he said. "God." "Moses hain't here, his wife here. His wife do as well." "Come here, Moses, an' go to God." Say, "Where my shoes?" "You know where you shoes are. Dey under de bed dere." "Where's my hat?" "You know where you hat is. You go git it." "O God! stan' one side! You so high, I can't go over you. You so wide, I can't go around you. You so low, I can't go under you. Stan' one side!" Den he stood one side. Him an' God, what a race den dey had! An' he jumped over a high railin' fence, an' de fence fell on him. An' he said, "Get off me, God, get off me!" An' God never did get off. Source (books.google.com): Elsie Clews Parsons, "Folk-Tales Collected at Miami, Florida," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 30 (1917), p. 227 . Source (Internet Archive): Elsie Clews Parsons, "Folk-Tales Collected at Miami, Florida," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 30 (1917), p. 227 . Return to the table of contents . Death and the Negro Man Joel Chandler Harris One day Uncle Remus was grinding the axe with which he chopped kindling for the kitchen and the big house. The axe was very dull. It was full of "gaps," and the work of putting an edge on it was neither light nor agreeable. A Negro boy turned the grindstone, and the little boy poured on water when water was needed. "Ef dis yer axe wuz a yard longer, it ud be a cross cut saw, en den ef we had de lumber we could saw it up en build us a house," said the old man. The Negro boy rolled his eyes and giggled, seeing which Uncle Remus bore so heavily on the axe that the grindstone could hardly be turned. The Negro boy ceased giggling, but he continued to roll his eyes. "Turn it!" exclaimed the old man. "Turn it! Ef you don't turn it, I'll make you stan' dar plum twel night gwine thoo de motions. I'll make you do like de Negro man done when he got tired er work." The old man stopped talking, but the grinding went on. After awhile, the little boy asked, "What did the man do when he got tired of work?" "Dat's a tale, honey, en tellin' tales is playin'," replied Uncle Remus. He wiped the blade of the axe on the palm of his hand, and tried the edge with his thumb. "She won't shave," he said, by way of comment, "but I speck she'll do ter knock out kindlin'. Yit ef I had de time, I 'd like ter stan' here en see how long dish yer triflin' vilyun would roll dem eyes at me." In a little while the axe was supposed to be sharp enough, and then, dismissing the Negro boy, Uncle Remus seated himself on one end of the frame that supported the grindstone, wiped his forehead on his coat sleeve, and proceeded to enjoy what he called a breathing spell. "Dat ar Negro man you hear me talk about," he remarked: Dat ar Negro man you hear me talk about wuz a-gittin' sorter ol', en he got so he ain't want ter work nohow you kin fix it. When folks hangs back fum work what dey bin set ter do, hit natchully makes bad matters wuss, en dat de way 't wuz with dish yer Negro man. He helt back, en he hung back, en den de white folks got fretted wid 'im en sot 'im a task. Gentermens! dat Negro man wuz mad.... He quoiled en he quoiled when he 'uz by his own lone se'f, en he quoiled when he 'uz wid tudder folks. He got so mad dat he say he hope ole Gran'sir Death'll come take him off, en take his marster en de overseer 'long wid 'im. He talk so long en he talk so loud, dat de white folks hear what he say. Den de marster en de overseer make it up 'mongst deyse'f dat dey gwine ter play a prank on dat Negro man. So den, one night, a leetle atter midnight, de marster got 'm a white counterpane, he did, en wrop hisse'f in it, en den he cut two eye-holes in a piller-case, en drawed it down over his head, en went down ter de house whar de Negro man stay. Negro man ain't gone ter bed. He been fryin' meat en bakin' ashcake, en he sot dar in de cheer noddin', wid grease in his mouf en big hunk er ashcake in his han'. De door wuz half-way open, en de fire burnin' low. De marster walk in, he did, en sorter cle'r up his th'oat. Negro man ain't wake up. Ef he make any movement, it uz ter clinch de ashcake a leetle tighter. Den de marster knock on de door -- blim-blim-blim! Negro man sorter fling his head back, but't wan't long 'fo' hit drapt forrerd ag'in, en he went on wid his noddin' like nothin' ain't happen. De marster knock some mo' -- blam-blam- blam! Dis time de Negro wake up en roll his eye-balls roun'. He see de big white thing, en he skeered ter move. His han' shake so he tu'n de ashcake loose. Negro man 'low, "Who dat?" De marster say: "You call me, en I come." Negro man say: "I ain't call you. What yo' name?" Marster 'low, "Grandsir Death." Negro man shake so he can't skacely set still. De col' sweat come out on 'im. He 'low, "Marse Death, I ain't call you. Somebody been fool you." De marster 'low, "I been hear you call me p'intedly. I listen at you ter-day, en yis-tiddy, en day 'fo' yis-tiddy. You say you want me ter take you en yo' marster en de overseer. Now I done come at yo' call." Negro man shake wuss. He say: "Marse Death, go git de overseer fust. He lots bigger en fatter dan what I is. You'll like him de bes'. Please, suh, don't take me dis time, en I won't bodder you no mo' long ez I live." De marster 'low, "I come f er de man dat call me! I'm in a hurry! Daylight mus'n't ketch me here. Come on!" Well, suh, dat Negro man make a break for de winder, he did, en he went thoo it like a frog divin' in de mill pon'. He tuck ter de woods, en he 'uz gone mighty nigh a week. When he come back home he went ter work, en he work harder dan any er de res'. Somebody come 'long en try ter buy 'im, but his marster 'low he won't take lev'm hunder'd dollars for 'im, -- cash money, paid down in his han'! Source (books.google.com): Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus and His Friends (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1892), no. 4, pp. 34-38 . Source (Internet Archive): Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus and His Friends (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1892), no. 4, pp. 34-38 . Return to the table of contents . Links to Related Sites Aging and Death in Folklore . An essay by D. L. Ashliman. Old Folks in Aesop's Fables . Godfather Death . Folktales of type 332. Death's Messengers . Folktales of type 335. The Old Man and Death , from Wikipedia, the Free Encylopedia. Death in Folklore and Fairy Tales , by Terri Windling. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 2, 2023. Death of the Seven Dwarfs Death of the Seven Dwarfs A Legend from Switzerland translated by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2023 On one of the high plains between Brugg and Waldshut, near the Black Forest, seven dwarfs lived together in a small house. Late one evening an attractive young peasant girl, who was lost and hungry, approached them and requested shelter for the night. The dwarfs had only seven beds, and they fell to arguing with one another, for each one wanted to give up his bed for the girl. Finally the oldest one took the girl into his bed. Before they could fall asleep a peasant woman appeared before their house, knocked on the door, and asked to be let inside. The girl got up immediately and told the woman that the dwarfs had only seven beds, and that there was no room there for anyone else. With this the woman became very angry and accused the girl of being a slut, thinking that she was cohabiting with all seven men. Threatening to make a quick end to such evil business, she went away in a rage. That same night she returned with two men, whom she had brought up from the bank of the Rhine. They immediately broke into the house and killed the seven dwarfs. They buried the bodies outside in the garden and burned the house to the ground. No one knows what became of the girl. Tod der sieben Zwerge Auf einer der Hochebenen zwischen Brugg und Waldshut am Schwarzwalde wohnten sieben Zwerge zusammen in einem kleinen Häuschen. Da kam einmal spät Abends ein junges nettes Bauernmädchen verirrt und hungrig des Weges und bat um ein Nachtlager. Die Zwerge hatten nur sieben Betten, dennoch stritten sie sich, denn jeder wollte dem Mädchen sein Bett abtreten; endlich nahm sie der Älteste von ihnen zu sich in seines, kaum aber ging's ans Einschlafen, so kam noch eine Bauernfrau vors Häuschen, klopfte und begehrte Einlass. Das Mädchen stand gleich auf und sagte ihr, wie die sieben Zwerge hier selber nur sieben Betten und sonst keine Platz mehr für jemand übrig hätten. Darüber wurde die Frau sehr zornig und schalt in ihrem Argwohn das Mädchen, in welcher sie die Beihälterin von sieben Männern vermutete, ein Lumpenmaitschi. Unter Drohungen, dass man einer solchen Wirtschaft bald ein Ende gemacht haben werde, ging sie grimmig davon; noch in derselben Nacht aber erschien sie mit zwei Männern, die sie vom Rheinufer her geholt hatte, und diese brachen sogleich ins Haus ein, und erschlugen die Zwerge. Man verscharrte die Leichen draußen in dem Gärtchen und verbrannte das Haus. Das Mädchen war darüber den Leuten aus den Augen gekommen. Source: Ernst Ludwig Rochholz, "Tod der sieben Zwerge," Schweizersagen aus dem Aargau , vol. 1 (Aarau: Druck und Verlag von H. R. Sauerländer, 1856), no. 222, p. 312 . Aargau is a canton in northeast Switzerland. Return to The top of this document. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Snow White and other tales of type 709. Revised March 3, 2023. How the Devil Married Three Sisters How the Devil Married Three Sisters and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 311 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2024 Contents How the Devil Married Three Sisters (Italy). The Devil (Italy). The Cobbler and His Three Daughters (Blue Beard) (Basque). The Three Sisters Who Were Taken into the Mountain (Norway). The Sisters in the Troll's Hill (Denmark). Fitcher's Bird (Germany). The Three Sisters (Germany). Link to The Hare's Bride (Germany). This tale is contained in a separate file and will open in a new window. The Three Chests: The Story of the wicked Old Man of the Sea (Finland). The Widow and Her Daughters (Scotland). Peerifool (Scotland). Jean-Parle (Canada). The Secret Room (New York, USA). The Three Sisters (Jamaica). The Wood-Cutter's Daughter (Palestine). The Tiger's Bride (India). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. How the Devil Married Three Sisters Italy Once upon a time the devil was seized with a desire to marry. He therefore left hell, took the form of a handsome young man, and built a fine large house. When it was completed and furnished in the most fashionable style he introduced himself to a family where there were three pretty daughters, and paid his addresses to the eldest of them. The handsome man pleased the maiden, her parents were glad to see a daughter so well provided for, and it was not long before the wedding was celebrated. When he had taken his bride home, he presented her with a very tastefully arranged bouquet, led her through all the rooms of the house, and finally to a closed door. "The whole house is at your disposal," said he, "only I must request one thing of you; that is, that you do not on any account open this door." Of course the young wife promised faithfully; but equally, of course, she could scarcely wait for the moment to come when she might break her promise. When the devil had left the house the next morning, under pretence of going hunting, she ran hastily to the forbidden door, opened it, and saw a terrible abyss full of fire that shot up towards her, and singed the flowers on her bosom. When her husband came home and asked her whether she had kept her promise, she unhesitatingly said "Yes." But he saw by the flowers that she was telling a lie, and said, "Now I will not put your curiosity to the test any longer. Come with me. I will show you myself what is behind the door." Thereupon he led her to the door, opened it, gave her such a push that she fell down into hell, and shut the door again. A few months after he wooed the next sister for his wife, and won her; but with her everything that had happened with the first wife was exactly repeated. Finally he courted the third sister. She was a prudent maiden, and said to herself, "He has certainly murdered my two sisters; but then it is a splendid match for me, so I will try and see whether I cannot be more fortunate than they." And accordingly she consented. After the wedding the bridegroom gave her a beautiful bouquet, but forbade her, also, to open the door which he pointed out. Not a whit less curious than her sisters, she, too, opened the forbidden door when the devil had gone hunting, but she had previously put her flowers in water. Then she saw behind the door the fatal abyss and her sisters therein. "Ah!" she exclaimed, "poor creature that I am; I thought I had married an ordinary man, and instead of that he is the devil! How can I get away from him?" She carefully pulled her two sisters out of hell and hid them. When the devil came home he immediately looked at the bouquet, which she again wore on her bosom, and when he found the flowers so fresh he asked no questions; but reassured as to his secret, he now, for the first time, really loved her. After a few days she asked him if he would carry three chests for her to her parents' house, without putting them down or resting on the way. "But," she added, "you must keep your word, for I shall be watching you." The devil promised to do exactly as she wished. So the next morning she put one of her sisters in a chest, and laid it on her husband's shoulders. The devil, who is very strong, but also very lazy and unaccustomed to work, soon got tired of carrying the heavy chest, and wanted to rest before he was out of the street on which he lived; but his wife called out to him, "Don't put it down; I see you!" The devil went reluctantly on with the chest until he had turned the corner, and then said to himself, "She cannot see me here; I will rest a little." But scarcely had he begun to put the chest down when the sister inside cried out, "Don't put it down; I see you still!" Cursing, he dragged the chest on into another street, and was going to lay it down on a doorstep, but he again heard the voice, "Don't lay it down, you rascal; I see you still!" "What kind of eyes must my wife have," he thought, "to see around corners as well as straight ahead, and through walls as if they were made of glass!" and thus thinking he arrived, all in a perspiration and quite tired out, at the house of his mother-in-law, to whom he hastily delivered the chest, and then hurried home to strengthen himself with a good breakfast. The same thing was repeated the next day with the second chest. On the third day she herself was to be taken home in the chest. She therefore prepared a figure which she dressed in her own clothes, and placed on the balcony, under the pretext of being able to watch him better; slipped quickly into the chest, and had the maid put it on the devil's back. "The deuce!" said he; "this chest is a great deal heavier than the others; and today, when she is sitting on the balcony, I shall have so much the less chance to rest." So by dint of the greatest exertions he carried it, without stopping, to his mother-in-law, and then hastened home to breakfast, scolding, and with his back almost broken. But quite contrary to custom, his wife did not come out to meet him, and there was no breakfast ready. "Margerita, where are you?" he cried, but received no answer. As he was running through the corridors, he at length looked out of a window and saw the figure on the balcony. "Margerita, have you gone to sleep? Come down. I am as tired as a dog, and as hungry as a wolf." But there was no reply. "If you do not come down instantly I will go up and bring you down," he cried, angrily; but Margerita did not stir. Enraged, he hastened up to the balcony, and gave her such a box on the ear that her head flew off, and he saw that the head was nothing but a milliner's form, and the body, a bundle of rags. Raging, he rushed down and rummaged through the whole house, but in vain; he found only his wife's empty jewel box. "Ha!" he cried; "she has been stolen from me and her jewels, too!" and he immediately ran to inform her parents of the misfortune. But when he came near the house, to his great surprise he saw on the balcony above the door all three sisters, his wives, who were looking down on him with scornful laughter. Three wives at once terrified the devil so much that he took his flight with all possible speed. Since that time he has lost his taste for marrying. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company 1885), no. 16, pp. 78-81 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company 1885), no. 16, pp. 78-81 . Return to the table of contents . The Devil Italy (Venice) Once upon a time there was a husband and wife, and they had three daughters all grown up, and they took in washing. As it happened, a gentleman passed by their house one day and fell in love with the eldest. girl. He went to her parents and asked if they would give her to him. for his wife. They saw that he was a handsome gentleman, and they said yes. And he married her, and took her away. And he took her to the finest palace that eyes could see. When they got there, he gave her the keys of all the rooms; but he said "Go wherever you like, except into that room there. If you do go into it, it will be worse for you." And he gave her a beautiful fresh rose to put in her hair, and then he up and went away. This woman was curious to know what was in that chamber that he said she was not to go into, so she went and opened the door, and she saw that there were ever so many souls inside, all on the fire, and she knew that it was hell. "Oh!" cried she. "what have I done? What have I done? For certain, he'll put me in there too!" Then she looked at the rose in her hair and saw that it was quite faded. By-and-by back comes the husband, and says he, "Good morning!" He noticed that the rose was faded, and he knew well enough that she had been into that room; so he said, "Did you go into that room where I told you not to go?" And she answered him, "Not I, indeed! Once you told me not to go; that was enough." "Very well; now I'll take you myself to see it." With that he opened the chamber and pushed her into it. Then he locked the door; and what did he do but set off to her mother, and he told her that her daughter had been so ill, so ill, until at last she was dead; and that now he should like to have the second daughter. And the mother gave her to him. The same story is of course repeated with the second daughter, and, after she is disposed of in the same manner as her sister, the devil -- who is represented as an eminently domestic character -- not being able to do without a wife, returns a third time to the house of the washerwoman and demands her last remaining daughter in marriage. He obtains her from her confiding parents, takes her home, gives her the keys and the fresh-blown rose, and absents himself as before. But this third young lady is at least a match for her husband! She is no whit less curious than her sisters, but she takes the precaution of removing the rose from her hair before peeping into the forbidden chamber. Of course she sees there what her sisters saw, and sees them into the bargain. They cry to her to hasten away, for otherwise her husband will throw her in there too. But, nothing daunted, she answers, "Wait a bit. Don't be afraid. Only leave it to me!" The master of the house on his return finds his wife with the flower in her hair still fresh and blooming. He accepts her assurance that she has obeyed him, and professes an unbounded affection for her. "Well now, hark ye, old man," said she; "we must think of sending a few things to the wash, for all the house linen is dirty. Tomorrow morning I will put it all into a chest, and you must carry it to my mother's, and she'll wash it for us." She waited till her husband went out, and then she put a few soiled things into the chest, and went and fetched her eldest sister and put her into the chest too, and some money besides. And she said to her, "Remember, when you are on the way, if you feel him setting the chest down to peep into it, you must cry out 'Mind, I'm looking at you!' " And she shut up the chest, and left it until he came back. By-and-by home he came, and she said to him, "Now, there's a good fellow, take this chest and carry it to my mother's. But mind you don't peep into it, d'ye hear? because if you do peep I shall see you." With that he took up the chest on his shoulders. "Oh," cried he, "What a weight it is!" "Well, just think," answered his wife, "it is such a long time since we had a wash that everything was dirty!" On the road he began to think, "What a weight this chest is! I should like to know what's inside it!" He was just beginning to set it down, when he heard a voice crying "Mind, I'm looking at you!" "Oh," says he, "she can see me! No, no, I won't touch it." The chest with its contents is safely carried to the washerwoman's house and left there; the husband answering his wife's inquiries on his return home with the assurance that he has not peeped into it. The same thing happens again when the second sister is put into the chest and carried to her mother's house. In order to effect her own escape, the cunning third sister feigns illness. She desires to be left undisturbed because she wants to sleep, and tells her husband that he will find another chest full of soiled linen at her bedroom door, which he must carry to the wash as before. Meanwhile she makes a huge rag-doll, dresses it in her own clothes, places it in her bed, and gets into the chest herself, not forgetting to take with her a provision of money and fine linen this time. By-and-by the devil came home and went on tip-toe into the bedroom. He looked at the bed, and saw her there all covered up, and said he, "Oh, bless her heart! I won't wake her. I'll leave her quiet. Now I'll carry the chest away." He took up the chest, but said he, "My stars and garters ( corpo di Baco! ), what a weight this one is! It's heavier than the two others." And he put it on his shoulders and set off. But when he had got half way, he began to set down the chest, and he heard a voice crying, "Mind, I'm looking at you!" "Why, bless her heart," says he; although she's ill in bed, she sees me all the same!" He went to her mother's house, and said he, "Make haste and get all these things washed. I must be off home to my wife, for she's not at all well." "Mercy me!" cried the mother, "I hope she's not going to die like those two others!" "No, no; I'm going at once to look after her." He went home and went on tip-toe into the bedroom, and went up to the bed, and said, "Wife, how goes it? Ah! she don't answer me. Poor dear! why, can she be dead?" With that he pulled the cover off the bed, and found the rag-doll there. "Ah, the hussy! she has tricked me! Oh dear, oh dear! whatever will become of me?" He ran into the other room to see if the two sisters were there still, and found them gone too. Upon this the devil fell into such a passion that he got a fit of the bile, and that killed him. And so, you see, as the saying is, "Women are a match for the devil himself." Source (books.google.com): "Venetian Popular Legends," The Cornhill Magazine , vol. 32, (London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1875), pp. 83-85 . Source (Internet Archive): "Venetian Popular Legends," The Cornhill Magazine , vol. 32, (London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1875), pp. 83-85 . The story in original Italian (Venetian dialect): Books.google.com: Domenico Giuseppe Bernoni, "El Diavolo," Fiabe e Novelle Popolari Veneziane (Venice: Tipografia Fontana-Ottolini, 1873), no. 3, pp. 16 . Internet Archive: Domenico Giuseppe Bernoni, "El Diavolo," Fiabe e Novelle Popolari Veneziane (Venice: Tipografia Fontana-Ottolini, 1873), no. 3, pp. 16 . Return to the table of contents . The Cobbler and His Three Daughters (Blue Beard) Basque Like many others in the world, there was a cobbler who had three daughters. They were very poor. He only earned enough just to feed his children. He did not know what would become of him. He went about in his grief, walking, walking sadly on, and he meets a gentleman, who asks him where he is going, melancholy like that. He answers him, "Even if I shall tell you, I shall get no relief." "Yes, yes; who knows? Tell it." "I have three daughters, and I have not work enough to maintain them. I have famine in the house." "If it is only that, we will manage it. You will give me one of your daughters, and I will give you so much money." The father was, very grieved to make any such bargain; but at last he comes down to that. He gives him his eldest daughter. This gentleman takes her to his palace, and, after having passed some time there, he said to her that he has a short journey to make -- that he will leave her all the keys, that she might see everything, but that there is one key that she must not make use of -- that it would bring misfortune on her. He locks the door on the young lady. This young girl goes into all the rooms, and finds them very beautiful, and she was curious to see what there was in that which was forbidden. She goes in, and sees heaps of dead bodies. Judge of her fright! With her trembling she lets the key fall upon the ground. She trembles for the coming of her husband. He arrives, and asks her if she has entered the forbidden chamber. She tells him "Yes." He takes her and puts her into an underground dungeon; hardly, hardly did he give her enough to eat (to live on), and that was human flesh. This cobbler had finished his money, and he was again melancholy. The gentleman meets him again, and says to him, "Your other daughter is not happy alone; you must give me another daughter. When she is happy, I will send her back; and I will give you so much money." The father did not like it; but he was so poor that, in order to have a little money, he gives him his daughter. The gentleman takes her home with him, like the other. After some days he said to her too, "I must take a short journey. I will give you all the keys of the house, but do not touch such a key of such a room." He locks the house door, and goes off, after having left her the food she needed. This young girl goes into all the rooms, and, as she was curious, she went to look into the forbidden chamber. She was so terribly frightened at the sight of so many dead bodies in this room, that she lets the key fall, and it gets stained. Our young girl was trembling as to what should become of her when the master should come back. He arrives, and the first thing he asks, "Have you been in that room?" She told him "Yes." He takes her underground, like her other sister. This cobbler had finished his money, and he was in misery; when the gentleman comes to him again, and says to him, "I will give you a great deal of money if you will let your daughter come to my house for a few days; the three will be happier together, and I will send you the two back again together." The father believes it, and gives him his third daughter. The gentleman gives him the money, and he takes this young girl, like the others. At the end of some days he leaves her, saying that he is going to make a short journey. He gives her all the keys of the house, saying to her, "You will go into all the rooms except this one," pointing out the key to her. He locks the outside door, and goes off. This young girl goes straight, straight to the forbidden chamber; she opens it, and think of her horror at seeing so many dead people. She thought that he would kill her too, and, as there were all kinds of arms in this chamber, she takes a sabre with her, and hides it under her dress. She goes a little further on, and sees her two sisters almost dying with hunger, and a young man in the same condition. She takes care of them as well as she can till the gentleman comes home. On his arrival, he asks her, "Have you been in that room?" She says, "Yes;" and, in giving him back the keys, she lets them fall on the ground, on purpose, and at the instant that this gentleman stoops to pick them up, the young lady cuts off his head (with her sword). Oh, how glad she was! Quickly she runs to deliver her sisters and that young man, who was the son of a king. She sends for her father, the cobbler, and leaves him there with his two daughters, and the youngest daughter goes away with her young gentleman, after being married to him. If they lived well, they died well too. Source (books.google.com): Wentworth Webster, Basque Legends , 2nd edition (London: Griffith and Farran, 1879), pp. 173-75 . Source (Internet Archive): Wentworth Webster, Basque Legends (London: Griffith and Farran, 1877), pp. 173-75 . Return to the table of contents . The Three Sisters Who Were Taken into the Mountain Norway Once upon a time there was an old widow who lived, with her three daughters, far away from the rest of the world, next to a mountain. She was so poor that her only animal was a single hen, which she prized as the apple of her eye. It was always cackling at her heels, and she was always running to look after it. One day, all at once, the hen was gone. The old woman went out, and walked around and around the cottage, looking and calling for her hen, but it was gone, and could not be found. So the woman said to her oldest daughter, "You must just go out and see if you can find our hen, for we must have it back, even if we have to fetch it out of the mountain." The daughter was ready enough to go, so she set off and walked up and down, and looked and called, but she could not find the hen. Suddenly, just as she was about to give up the hunt, she heard someone calling out from a cleft in the rock: Your hen is in the mountain! Your hen is in the mountain! So she went into the cleft to see what it was, but she had barely set foot inside, when she fell through a trapdoor, deep, deep down, into an underground cavern. When she got to the bottom she went through many rooms, each finer than the one before it; but in the innermost room of all, a large ugly troll came to her and asked, "Will you be my sweetheart?" "No! I will not," she said. She wouldn't have him for any price! All she wanted was to get above ground again as fast as ever she could, and to find her lost hen. Then the troll got so angry that he picked her up, twisted her head off, and then threw both the head and body into the cellar. While this was going on, her mother sat at home waiting and waiting, but no daughter came. After she had waited a bit longer, and neither heard nor saw anything of her daughter, she told her middle daughter to go out and look for her sister, and, she added, "Give our hen a call at the same time." So the second sister had to set off, and the very same thing happened to her. She was looking and calling, and suddenly she too heard a voice calling from from the cleft in the rock: Your hen is in the mountain! Your hen is in the mountain! She thought that this was strange, and went to see what it was. She too fell through the trapdoor, deep, deep down, into the cavern. She too went from room to room, and in the innermost one the troll came to her and asked if she would be his sweetheart? No, she would not. All she wanted was to get above ground again, and hunt for her lost hen. The troll got angry, and picked her up, twisted her head off, and threw both head and body into the cellar. Now, when the old woman had sat and waited seven lengths and seven breadths for her second daughter, and could neither see nor hear anything of her, she said to the youngest, "Now, you must go out and look for your sisters. It was silly to lose the hen, but it would be sillier still to lose both your sisters. Of course, you can give the hen a call at the same time." You see, the old woman's heart was still set on her hen. Yes, the youngest was ready to go, and she walked up and down, hunting for her sisters and calling the hen, but she could neither see nor hear anything of them. She too came to the cleft in the rock, and heard something say: Your hen is in the mountain! Your hen is in the mountain! She thought that this was strange, so she too went to see what it was, and she too fell through the trapdoor, deep, deep down, into a cavern. When she reached the bottom she went from one room to another, each grander than the one before it; but she wasn't at all afraid, and took time to look carefully about her. As she was peeping into this and that, she saw the trapdoor into the cellar, and looked down it, and what should she see there but her dead sisters. She barely had time to slam to the trapdoor before the troll came to her and asked, "Will you be my sweetheart?" "With all my heart," answered the girl, for she saw very well how it had gone with her sisters. When the troll heard that, he brought her the finest clothes in the world. Indeed, she had only to ask, and she got whatever she wanted, because the troll was so glad that someone would be his sweetheart. One day, after she had been there a little while, she was looking very gloomy and downcast, so the troll asked her what was the matter, and why she was so sad. "Ah!" said the girl, "it's because I can't get home to my mother. I know that she has very little to eat and drink, and she has no one with her." "Well!" said the troll, "I can't let you go to see her; but just stuff some meat and drink into a sack, and I'll carry it to her." With many thanks, she said that she would do that. However, she put a lot of gold and silver into the bottom of the sack, then laid a little food on top. She told the ogre the sack was ready, but that he must be sure not to look into it. He gave his word not to look inside, and set off. As the troll walked off, she peeped out at him through a chink in the trapdoor. When he had gone a little way, he said, "This sack is very heavy. I'll just see what is inside." He was about to untie the the sack, when the girl called out to him, "I can still see you! I can still see you!" "The devil you can!" said the troll; "you must have mighty sharp eyes!" And the troll did not try to look into it again. When he reached the widow's cottage, he threw the sack in through the cottage door, saying, "Here you have meat and drink from your daughter; she doesn't want for anything." After the girl had been in the mountain a good bit longer, one day a billy goat fell down the trapdoor. "Who sent for you, you long bearded beast!" said the troll, in an awful rage, and he picked up the goat, twisted his head off, and threw him into the cellar. "Oh!" said the girl, "why did you do that? I might have had the goat to play with down here." "Well!" said the troll, "you don't need to be so down in the mouth about it. I can bring the billy goat back to life again." So saying, he took down a flask that was hanging on the wall, put the billy goat's head on his body again, and smeared it with some ointment from flask, and he was as well and as lively as before. "Aha!" said the girl to herself; "that flask is worth something -- that it is." When she had been in the mountain some time longer, on a day when the troll was away, she took her oldest sister, put her head on her shoulders, smeared her with some of the ointment from the flask, just as she had seen the troll do with the billy goat, and in an instant her sister came to life again. The girl stuffed her into a sack, laid a little food over her, and when the troll came home, she said to him, "Dear friend! Now do go home to my mother with a morsel of food again. I'm certain that the poor thing is both hungry and thirsty, and besides that, she's all alone in the world. But you must not look into the sack." He said that he would carry the sack, and that he would not look into it. But when he had gone a little way, he thought that the sack was getting very heavy; and when he had gone a bit further he said to himself, "Come what will, I must see what's inside this sack, for however sharp her eyes may be, she can't see me all this way off." But just as he was about to untie the sack, the girl inside the sack called out, "I can still see you! I can still see you!" "The devil you can!" said the ogre; "then you must have mighty sharp eyes," for he thought it was the girl inside the mountain who was speaking. So he didn't dare so much as to peep into the sack again, but carried it straight to her mother as fast as he could, and when he got to the cottage door he threw it in through the door, and cried out, "Here you have meat and drink from your daughter; she wants for nothing." When the girl had been in the mountain a while longer, she did the very same thing with her other sister. She put her head on her shoulders, smeared her with ointment from the flask, brought her to life, and put her into the sack. This time she crammed in also as much gold and silver as the sack would hold, laying just a little food on top. "Dear friend," she said to the troll, "you really must run home to my mother with a little food again; and don't look into the sack." Yes, the troll was eager to do as she wished, and he gave his word too that he wouldn't look into the sack; but when he had gone a little way he began to think that the sack was getting very heavy, and when he had gone a bit further, he could scarce stagger along under it, so he set it down, and was just about to untie the string and look into it, when the girl inside the sack cried out, "I can still see you! I can still see you!" "The devil you can," said the troll, "then you must have mighty sharp eyes." Well, he did not dare to try to look into the sack, but hurried straight to the girl's mother. When he got to the cottage he threw the sack in through the door, and roared out, "Here you have food from your daughter; she wants for nothing!" After the girl had been there a good while longer, on a day when the troll had decided to go out for the day, the girl pretended to be sick. She moaned and complained. "There's no need for you to come home before twelve o'clock tonight," she said, "for I won't be able to have supper ready before then. I'm just too sick!" As soon as the troll was out of the house, she stuffed some of her clothes with straw, and stood this straw girl in the corner by the chimney, with a broom in her hand, so that it looked just as though she herself were standing there. After that she stole off home, and got a marksman to stay in the cottage with her mother. So when the clock struck twelve, or thereabouts, the troll came home, and the first thing he said to the straw girl was, "Give me something to eat." But she did not answer him. "Give me something to eat, I say!" called out the troll, "for I am almost starved." But she did not have a word for him. "Give me something to eat!" roared out the ogre the third time. "I think you'd better open your ears and hear what I say, or else I'll wake you up, I will!" But the girl stood just as still as ever; so he flew into a rage, and gave her such a slap in the face, that the straw flew all about the room. When he saw that he had been tricked, he began to hunt everywhere. When he came to the cellar, and found both the girl's sisters missing, he soon figured out what had happened, and ran off to the cottage, saying, "I'll soon pay her for this!" But when he reached the cottage, the marksman fired off his piece. The troll did not dare go into the house, for he thought it was thunder [Thor]. So he set off for home again as fast as he could run; but just as he reached the trapdoor, the sun rose and he exploded. There's a lot of gold and silver down there still, if you only knew where the trapdoor is! Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), pp. 16-24 . Source (Internet Archive): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), pp. 18-27 . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. Dasent gives his translation of this tale the title "The Old Dame and Her Hen." The original Norwegian text: Books.google.com: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, "De tre Søstre, som bleve indtagne i Berget," Norske Folkeeventyr , vol. 1 (Christiania [Oslo]: Forlagt af Johan Dahl, 1843), no. 36, pp. 237-45 . Internet Archive: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, "De tre Søstre, som bleve indtagne i Berget," Norske Folkeeventyr , vol. 1 (Christiania [Oslo]: Johan Dahls Forlag, 1850), no. 35, pp. 208-214 . Return to the table of contents . The Sisters in the Troll's Hill Denmark There was a man and a woman. They lived in a small house, and they had three daughters. One was sitting on the table carding, and the other was sitting on a chair spinning, and the third was sitting on the floor knitting stockings. At that time a troll lived in a nearby hill. He transformed himself into a pig and walked through their cabbage patch. When the man saw it, he said to the eldest daughter: "Go out and chase that pig out of the cabbage patch." She grabbed the distaff in her hand and ran out and beat the pig. She smashed the distaff to pieces, but it wouldn't go away. Then the pig said: "Climb on and ride me, and then I'll go away!" She didn't think about what consequences it might have, and sat him, but then she couldn't get down again, and the pig ran with her to the hill. There was a small door on it, and when they entered it, the pig became a troll. She had to remain there, for she saw that she was locked inside. He comforted her as best he could, promising her that she would be much better off than she ever was before, if only she could accept being with him. At the same time, he showed her all of his fine things, and in the end she thought that she might well want to stay with him. Then he gave her twelve keys, one for each of his twelve chambers. She should open the eleven and see what was in those chambers, but she could not use the twelfth. And finally he gave her a golden apple, which she could play with, but she had to be careful not to loose it. The troll went out every day with his sheep and his goats. As usual he left the next morning, but before he left, he again strictly forbade her to enter that chamber. Now she went and rummaged around the house and looked at everything, but when she came to the door she was not allowed to open, she thought to herself: "You, what shameful thing can there be inside? It can't hurt if I open the door and look inside." In the end, she could no longer control her curiosity, and so she unlocked the door. But it was a horrible sight that she got to see. The chamber was full of corpses, and a vessel stood there that was half full of blood. Now she hastened to slam the door shut, but she dropped the golden apple, and it happened so unluckily that it fell right into the pool of blood. She had to get hold of her apple again, so she had to go inside and to pick it up. Well, she wiped it off to the best of her ability and then closed the door, but the apple wasn't as clean as it had been before, and she couldn't get the blood off it. So she cried and moaned, because she was so frightened that when the troll came home, her apple would look like that. Now there was an old gray cat who said that if she wanted to give it a dish of sour milk, it would lick her apple just as clean as it had been before. The girl said said no, the cat would not be able to do that, since she herself had dried it and polished it, and she didn't want to give the cat any milk either. That evening, the troll came home. "May I see your apple, my good girl," was the first thing he said. She showed it to him, and he said: "Yes, you've been in there, and you're going to lose your life!" With that he killed her and threw her body in with the other dead bodies. The next morning he came again and walked through the man's cabbage patch in the shape of a pig. "Now there's a pig in the cabbage patch again," said the man to the second-oldest daughter. "Go out and chase it away!" She ran out with the carding combs in her hand and hit the pig, but the carding combs broke into pieces. He said: "Sit on my back and I'll go away!" Then it also happened to her that she entered hill. The troll told her, just like the first one, that she should be well off, and that she should have control over the whole house except for the one chamber. You are my girl, and now you can stay here and see my finery." And she stayed there. The next morning he gave her a golden apple, which she was to play with while he was away, "because I am going out with my sheep and goats," he said. Now the girl went around all the beautiful rooms and looked at everything. Finally she came to the chamber that she was not allowed to enter. "Oh, dear, what will it matter if I push the door open a little crack? He can't know that when that he's away," she said. "I'll be careful not to do anything wrong in there." Then she opened the door, but she was very much taken aback when she looked in there. Yes, she was so startled that she dropped the apple, and it fell into the tub. It was only when she saw the apple floating there that she came to herself again,. She picked it up and rubbed it carefully, yes, the best she could. Then she put it into her pocket for a bit. But it did no good. The blood could not be washed away. She was completely miserable about this. The gray cat came to her as well and said that if she would give it a dish of sour milk, it would lick her apple clean. "You can't do that," she said, "because I've been working on it until my fingers are all sore. Nothing takes the blood away." When the troll came home in the evening and saw the apple, he found out what she had done. "You have been in there, I can see that on your apple, and therefore you must lose your life." Then he also killed her, and now he was girlless again. He did not like this at all, and therefore he had to go to hunting again. He transformed himself into a pig and ran into the man's cabbage patch for the third time. "The pig is out there again. Go out and chase it away!" said the man to the girl who was sitting there knitting stockings. She ran out and hit at him with the knitting needles; but he wouldn't leave the cabbage patch. "Get onto my back, and I'll go away!" he said. She did this, and he ran with her straight up to the hill and into the little door that was on it. She could not get away from the pig in any way. Then the pig turned into a troll, and he made himself nice to her and said: "Now you will be my girl and see all the nice things that I have here, if you want to stay with me." But she was very disheartened and grieving, even though she had had a hard time at home and had been mistreated by the others. He kept promising good things, and talking good things to her, and showing her all that he had of wealth and finery. He said that she could have control over all this. In the end he persuaded her to promise to stay with him. He now showed her around and gave her the keys to his twelve chambers. He also came to the chamber that she was not allowed to open. There he said: "You must not enter this little chamber, because then you would lose your life. But there are other chambers besides this one. Furthermore you have here a golden apple that I want to give you; but you have to take care of it." Yes, that was such a threatening statement. "There must be a lot of work to keep clean here, as there are so many chambers here," she said. "Have we any brewed beer? No, it was all used up. "Then we must get some. I can't do without beer in the house." The next morning he had to go out to get hold of some malt, for he had already taken his sheep and goats out. It didn't take long before he was back again, and she busied herself with brewing. But she also thought that they had too little fuel, so he took the axe over his shoulder and walked through the forest. Now she was the only one at home for a while, but she was very disheartened, no matter how much there was to look at. She intended to find her sisters, but they were nowhere to be found, and she didn't know what to do. Then she took the apple and looked at it. "I wonder where I should keep it? If it would cause harm to throw it away, I must take good care of it." With that, she made a pouch out of leather, tightly laced the apple in it, and put it in her pocket. Then she walked around and looked at the chambers. All of them were full of silver and gold and good things. Finally she came to the twelfth chamber. "Why am I not allowed to go in there?" she thought. "I'm curious to see what's inside." Then she opened the door and saw the same horrible sight, and what made it even more terrifying was that her two sisters were also lying there. She ran to them, but then the apple began to jump up and down inside her pocket as fast as it could. She held onto the laces, but her pocket broke into pieces, so the apple fell into the tub. She was quick to pick it up, but it was bloody. She put it down and rubbed on it, but it remained just as bloody. Now she was afraid that the troll would be angry when he came home and do to her just as he had done to her sisters. She remembered how they had come there and thought that she should run away from there. But then the old gray cat came to her and said: "You can't run away, because the troll will catch up with you and kill you. You'd better stay here." Yes, but she didn't know what to do: "What am I going to do when the troll comes and my golden apple looks like this?" "If you will give me a dish of sour milk, I will lick off your apple," said the cat. Yes, she said that she would give the cat two dishes full, and then it licked her golden apple until it was just as shiny as when the troll had given it to her. When the troll came home after working hard in the forest, he immediately said: "Let me see your golden apple." Yes, it was just as beautiful as when he had given it to her. Yes, she was a good girl, he told her. Now he had had hundreds of girls, but he had never had one as faithful as her, because she had not been in that chamber. Now she was to be his wife, and so she lay by his side that night. The next morning after the troll had left, she was to brew some beer. But then the gray cat came to her and said: "Because you were good to me, I will give you a pipe with which you can blow life into your sisters." She was very happy about that pipe, and she immediately went into the chamber and blew one of her sisters to life. Then the cat gave her information as to how she should best manage to get her sisters and herself back again to their parents. When he came home, she put the eldest sister in a bag with some malt around her. Then she said: "I have brewed today." "Good," he said," then I can get a drink of new beer." No, he couldn't, because the bad cat had gone and spilled all the beer. "Well," he said, then you can brew again tomorrow. "But here I have a sackful of malt that I would like my mother to have for her chickens. You have no use for it. Won't you take it to her? You're not missing anything by loitering there." No, he couldn't do anything here. H would to go with it. "There are also a couple of brewing stones in the bag that they can use," she said, and then put the bag on his shoulders. "But hurry now and go, and don't let me see you rest along the way. I'll be watching after after you, and you mustn't look into the bag. If you did so, I would die." Then he took off. When he gone a little way, he became tired with the burden, which was not so strange, for it was quite heavy, and he mumbled to himself: It's a long, long road, with this heavy load. In spite of my bride, I'll see what's inside. Then, just as the sister had taught her, the girl in the bag said: "I can see you there. If you look inside I will die." "No, I won't do that," he said, because he thought it was the girl at home who had said that. Then he lifted the bag back onto his shoulders started on his way. But fatigue came over him again, and he began to mumble: "I can't help but wanting to look inside. It can't be malt. It weighs too much." "I can see you. I can see you," said the sister in the bag, and he had to go on his way again, because he was afraid of the girl at home. Finally he came to the parents' house, opened the door, and threw the bag in the middle of the floor. "There you have some malt and some brewing stones from your daughter!" he shouted, and with that he slammed the door shut, and off he went home. "That was very nice. Now we have what we need for the chickens,", said the wife. "God bless him!" She then had the sack dragged in and had it opened. What a surprise it was when her eldest daughter came crawling out of the sack. Meanwhile, the youngest sister at home in the hill had been busy breathing life into the other girl and had her put into a bag with some malt. When the troll returned home, he told her about the heavy burden and how he thrown it into her father's house. She said: "Yes, you may think that you are done now, but there is still a lot more malt, and I've put it into a bag, so it's probably best for you be off with it too. You can't get there too soon with it." "Yes, but may I see your apple!" he said. Yes, but when he saw that it was clean, everything was good, and he prepared to put the sack on his back. "Don't look in it at all," she said, "because then I would die. Now I want to stand outside of the house and watch you." So he stomped off, but when he got a little further, the bag felt heavy on his back, and he mumbled to himself: It's a long, long road, with this heavy load. In spite of my bride, I'll see what's inside. "If you look inside I'll die! If you look at it, I'll die," said the girl on his back, just as the sister had taught her. He did not even think of putting it down, for he thought it was the girl outside of his house who was talking, so he had to continue on his way. But after a little while, he became quite tired, and then he started talking again about the fact that he had to take the bag off. "I can't help but wanting to look inside. It can't be malt. It weighs too much." "I can see you. I can see you," said the girl in the bag, and he had to move on quickly. At last he arrived at her father's home, but he was out of breath and dizzy headed. He threw the sack into the corner near the tile stove and shouted: "Here's the malt from your daughter!" Then he slammed the door behind him, and it rattled throughout the house. They could see that he was not very well, and so of course they let him go home. While he was away, the youngest sister had been busy telling the cat what to say to the troll when he returned, and she had a roof truss put in her bed with her head cloth on it, and wrapped as much as much cloth around it as possible, so that it could look like there was a person lying there. When she had finished with this, she herself got into a sack and had a large pile of gold and silver stacked by her. Then she had a small amount of malt spread on top. Finally the cat tied the sack shut, and then the troll came back. Then the cat said what the girl had told it to say: that there was another sackful of malt, and she would like to have it carried home to her father's as well. He was not to look into the sack. She had become so ill that she could no longer stay up, and that she had gone to bed. He looked over to the bed, and when he thought that she was asleep, he thought it would be wrong to speak to her, and so he might as well take off at once. This time the bag was hard to pick up, because now he had to lift it by himself. The cat said that this was the last of the malt, and that was a comfort to him. When he gone a little way, the sack started to get too heavy for him, and he spilled it on himself a couple of times. No, it was too heavy: It's a long, long road, with this heavy load. In spite of my bride, I'll see what's inside. "If you look inside it, I'll die," said the girl, and he turned and looked back. Then he saw the cat standing at the corner of the house, and he was afraid that it would tell the girl. He went a little further, but finally he got very confused and said: "I can't help but wanting to look inside." "I can see you. I can see you,", she said, and so he had to continue on his way. She was afraid that he might put it down, so she moaned from inside the bag: "Oh, oh, oh!" Then he thought: "She is so ill that I can hear her out here. I must hurry on my way." He ran as fast as he could. Finally he came to the parents' home with it, but it was hard, because it was the heaviest malt that he had every carried. He threw the sack on the floor, as he had done before, and said: "Here is the last malt from you daughter. Now you will not get any more malt!" Now he would have just slammed the door shut, as was his custom, but the man jumped up and asked him to sit down at the end of the table. The fact was that they now had been told the whole truth by the two girls who had come home, and they probably wanted to talk a little more with the troll. Then they carried the bag out of the living room and began to set out good food and drink for him, while they just as quietly sent for the priest, and he came in his robe and collar. When the troll returned to his home the cat took pushed him away. He was so angry that he jumped on everything he could. He was unlucky enough to fall over a stone and break both his legs, so he had to drag himself back home. He now heaped rubbish on his wife, but no one answered. Then he limped about and shook the roof trusses, and then he looked around the whole house. In the end he looked in the chamber, you know, with the dead bodies, and then he discovered that all of his girls were gone. The only thing left was the malt beer. With that he got so angry that he jumped into one of the flintstones, and they are the ones we now walk and cut our feet on. And since then there have been no more trolls. After the troll had left them, the people back at home were quick to get the third daughter out of the bag. They were all so happy that there was no end to their happiness. Now they also had enough to live on, and they could all thank the youngest daughter for that. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, Søstrene I Bjærgmandens Høj," Æventyr fra Jylland , vol. 1 (Copenhagen: Karl Schønbergs Boghandel, 1881), no. 37, pp. 277-88 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, Søstrene I Bjærgmandens Høj," Æventyr fra Jylland , vol. 1 (Copenhagen: Karl Schønbergs Boghandel, 1881), no. 37, pp. 277-88 . Return to the table of contents . Fitcher's Bird Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once upon a time there was a sorcerer who was a thief. He disguised himself as a poor man and went begging from house to house. A girl came to the door and brought him a piece of bread. He touched her, and she was forced to jump into his pack basket. Then he carried her to his house where everything was splendid, and he gave her everything that she wanted. One day he said, "I have to take care of something away from home. I will be away for a while. Here is an egg. Take good care of it. Carry it with you at all times. And here is a key, but at the risk of your life, do not go into the room that it opens. But as soon as he had gone, she unlocked the door and went into the room. In the middle there was a large basin. In it there were dead and dismembered people. She was so terrified that she dropped the egg, which she was holding in her hand, into the basin. She quickly took it out again and wiped off the blood, but it reappeared in an instant. She could not get the egg clean, no matter how much she wiped and scrubbed. When the man returned, he asked for the egg and the key. He looked at them and knew that she had been in the blood chamber. "You did not heed my words," he said angrily, "and now you are going into the chamber against your will." With that he seized her, led her into the room, cut her up in pieces, and threw her into the basin with the others. Sometime later the man went begging again. He captured the second daughter from the house, and the same thing happened to her as to the first one. She too opened the forbidden door, dropped the egg into the blood, and was cut to pieces and thrown into the basin. Then the sorcerer wanted to have the third daughter. He captured her in his pack basket, carried her home, and at his departure gave her the egg and the key. However, the third sister was clever and sly. First of all, she put the egg in a safe place, and then she went into the secret chamber. When she saw her sisters in the basin, she found all of their parts and put each one back in its right place: head, body, arm, and leg. The parts started to move, and then they joined together, and the two sister came back to life. She took them both out of the room and hid them. When the man returned and found that the egg was free of blood, he asked her to become his bride. She said yes, but told him that first he would have to carry a basket filled with gold on his back to her parents, and that meanwhile she would be getting ready for the wedding. Then she told her sisters to get help from home. She put them into the basket and covered them over with gold. Then she said to the man, "Carry this away. And don't you dare stop to rest. If you do, I'll be able to see through my window." He lifted the basket onto his back and started off, but it was so heavy that the weight nearly killed him. He wanted to rest a little, but one of the girls inside the basket called out, "I can see through my window that you are resting. Walk on at once!" He thought it was his bride calling out, so he got up and walked on. Every time he wanted to rest, he heard the call, and had to continue on. Meanwhile, back at his house, his bride dressed up a skull and placed it in the attic window. Then she invited all the sorcerer's friends to the wedding. Then she dipped herself in a barrel of honey, cut open the bed, and rolled in the feathers so that no one would be able to recognize her. In this strange disguise, she left the house and started down the path. Soon she met some of the guests, who said, "You, Fitcher's bird, where are you coming from?" "I'm coming from Fitcher's house." "And what is his young bride doing?" "She's cleaning the house from bottom to top. Right now she is looking out of the attic window." Then she also met the bridegroom, who was returning home. "You, Fitcher's bird, where are you coming from?" "I'm coming from Fitcher's house." "And what is my young bride doing?" "She's cleaning the house from bottom to top. Right now she is looking out of the attic window." The bridegroom looked up, and saw the disguised skull. Thinking it was his bride, he waved to it. But after he arrived home, and all his friends were there as well, the help came that the sisters had sent. They closed up the house and set it afire, and because no one could get out, they all perished in the flames. Source (Wikisource): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Fitchers Vogel," Kinder- und Haus-Märchen , 1st ed., vol. 1 (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 46, pp. 200-203 . Source (Deutsches Textarchiv): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Fitchers Vogel," Kinder- und Haus-Märchen , 1st ed., vol. 1 (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 46, pp. 200-203 . Links to the final (1857) version: Books.google.com: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Fitchers Vogel," Kinder und Hausmärchen , 7th ed., vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieteerichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 46, pp. 228-31 . Internet Archive: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Fitchers Vogel," Kinder und Hausmärchen , 7th ed., vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieteerichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 46, pp. 228-31 . Link to a translation of the final (1857) version of Fitcher's Bird . Return to the table of contents . The Three Sisters Germany Once upon a time there was a mother who had three daughters whom she did not like. The oldest one was finally tired of this and said: "Mother, I am going out to seek my fortune." The mother replied: "Then I wish it would rain paving stones when you are on your way." The girl paid no attention to this and went on her way. Some time later the sky became black. At first it rained only a little, then more, and finally a whole rain of paving stones fell from the air. The girl ran and took shelter under the protruding roof of a beautiful, beautiful house. She had stood there for only a little while, when she heard a little voice calling out: "Who is standing under my little, little roof?" "It's me, sir!" replied the girl, and the little voice said: "Come inside, child." "I'm too frightened," replied the girl. "Don't be afraid to come inside," said the little voice. Then the girl went inside and came to a magnificent room where a little man was sitting. He asked: "What do you want, red wine or white wine?" "Red wine," answered the girl, because she didn't know that red wine meant blood and white wine meant pus. Then the little man asked further: "What do you want, that I cut off your head on a block or that I crush you between two doors?" "I would rather have my head cut off on a block," replied the girl, and the little man grabbed her and cut off her head on a block with an axe. When the girl didn't return, the second sister said: "Mother, I am going out today to seek my fortune." The old woman replied: "Then I wish it would rain buckets when you are on your way." The girl paid no attention to this and went on her way. When she had gone a few steps, it started to rain buckets: big and small and light and heavy. She ran and took shelter under the roof. The little voice could be heard again and called out: "Who is standing under my little, little roof?" "It's me," answered the girl. "Well, then come in, child," said the little voice. "I'm too frightened," replied the girl. The little voice said: "Just come inside. Nothing will happen to you." Then the girl went inside and came into the beautiful room and found the little man there, who immediately asked: "Now what do you want, red wine or white wine?" "Red wine," said the girl, because she didn't know that it meant blood. Then the little man continued: "What do you want now, that I cut off your head on a block or that I crush you between two doors?" "I would rather have my head cut off on a block," answered the girl, and with an axe the little man chopped off her head on the block. When the second sister didn't return either, the youngest said: "Mother, I'm leaving today." The old woman replied: "Then I wish that as soon as you're on your way it will rain paving stones. The girl didn't pay much attention to this, and she set forth to seek her fortune. After she had walked a little way, it began to rain paving stones, and she took shelter under the roof of the beautiful house. Then the little voice asked again: "Who is standing under my little, little roof? "It's me," the girl replied. Then the little voice continued: "Just come insie, child." "I'm too frightened," said the girl. "Just come inside. Nothing will happen to you," said the little voice, and the girl went inside. She came into the room and found the little man. "What do you want," asked the little man, "red wine or white wine?" "I'm not thirsty," said the girl, and that pleased the little man, who was almost dumbfounded because of the girl's wonderful beauty. Then the little man asked further: "What do you want, to have your head cut off on a block? Or to marry me?" "I would rather marry you," answered the girl, "than have my head cut off." The little man was very happy about that, and he married the beautiful girl, and she became richer than any human being in the world has ever been. Source (books.google.com): Johann Wilhelm Wolf, "Die drei Schwestern," Deutsche Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1845), no. 15, pp. 73-75 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Wilhelm Wolf, "Die drei Schwestern," Deutsche Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1845), no. 15, pp. 73-75 . Return to the table of contents . The Three Chests: The Story of the Wicked Old Man of the Sea Finland There was once an honest old farmer who had three daughters. His farm ran down to the shores of a deep lake. One day as he leaned over the water to take a drink, wicked old Wetehinen reached up from the bottom of the lake and clutched him by the beard. "Ouch! Ouch!" the farmer cried. "Let me go!" Wetehinen only held on more tightly. "Yes, I'll let you go," he said, "but only on this condition: that you give me one of your daughters for wife!" "Give you one of my daughters? Never!" "Very well, then I'll never let go!" wicked old Wetehinen declared and with that he began jerking at the beard as if it were a bell rope. "Wait! Wait!" the fanner spluttered. Now he didn't want to give one of his daughters to wicked old Wetehinen -- of course not! But at the same time he was in Wetehinen's power and he realized that if he didn't do what the old reprobate demanded he might lose his life and so leave all three of his daughters orphans. Perhaps for the good of all he had better sacrifice one of them. "All right," he said, "let me go and I'll send you my oldest daughter. I promise." So Wetehinen let go his beard and the farmer scrambled to his feet and hurried home. "My dear," he said to his oldest daughter, "I left a bit of the harness down at the lake. Like a good girl will you run down and get it for me." The eldest daughter went at once and when she reached the water's edge, old Wetehinen reached up and caught her about the waist and carried her down to the bottom of the lake where he lived in a big house. At first he was kind to her. He made her mistress of the house and gave her the keys to all the rooms and closets. He went very carefully over the keys and pointing to one he said, "That key you must never use for it opens the door to a room which I forbid you to enter." The eldest daughter began keeping house for old Wetehinen and spent her time cooking and cleaning and spinning much as she used to at home with her father. The days went by and she grew familiar with the house and began to know what was in every room and every closet. At first she felt no temptation to open the forbidden door. If old Wetehinen wanted to have a secret room, well and good. But why in the world had he given her the key if he really didn't want her to open the door? The more she thought about it the more she wondered. Every time she passed the room she stopped a moment and stared at the door. It looked just exactly like the doors that led into all the other rooms. "I wonder why he doesn't want me to open just that door?" she kept asking herself. Finally one day when old Wetehinen was away she thought, "I don't believe it would matter if I opened that door just a little crack and peeped in once! No one would know the difference!" For a few moments she hesitated, then mustered up courage enough to turn the key in the forbidden lock and throw open the door. The room was a storeroom with boxes and chests and old jars piled up around the wall. That was unexciting enough, but in the middle of the floor was something that made her start when she saw what it was. It was blood -- that's what it was, a pool of dark red blood! She was about to slam the door shut when she saw something else that made her pause. This was a lovely shining ring that lay in the midst of the pool. "Oh!" she thought to herself, "what a beautiful ring! If I had it I'd wear it on my finger!" The longer she looked at it, the more she wanted it. "If I'm very careful," she said, "I know I could reach over and pick it up without touching the blood." She tiptoed cautiously into the room, wrapped her skirts tightly about her legs, knelt down on the floor, and stretched her arm over the pool. She picked up the ring very carefully but even so she got a few drops of blood on her fingers. "No matter!" she thought. "I can wash that off! And see the lovely ring!" But later, after she had the door again locked, when she tried to wash the blood off, she found she couldn't. She tried soap, she tried sand, she tried everything she could think of, but without success. "I don't care!" she thought to herself. "If Wetehinen sees the blood, I'll just tell him I cut my finger by accident." So when Wetehinen came home, she hid the ring and pretended nothing was the matter. After supper Wetehinen put his head in her lap and said, "Now, my dear, scratch my head and make me drowsy for bed." She began scratching his head as she had many nights before but, at the first touch of her fingers, he cried out, "Stop! You're burning my ear! There must be some blood on your fingers! Let me see!" He reached up and caught her hand and, when he saw the blood stains, he flew into a towering rage. "I thought so! You've been in the forbidden room!" He jumped up and without allowing her time to say a word he just cut off her head then and there with no more concern than if she had been a mosquito! After that he took the body and the severed head and threw them into the forbidden room and locked the door. "Now then," he growled, " she won't disobey me again!" This was all very well but now he had no one to keep house for him and cook and scratch his head in the evening and soon he decided he'd have to get another wife. He remembered that the farmer had two more daughters, so he thought to himself that now he'd marry the second sister. He waited his chance and one day when the farmer was out in his boat fishing, old Wetehinen came up from the bottom of the lake and clutched the boat. When the poor old farmer tried to row back to shore he couldn't make the boat move an inch. He worked and worked at the oars and wicked old Wetehinen let him struggle until he was exhausted. Then he put his head up out of the water and over the side of the boat and as though nothing were the matter he said, "Hullo!" "Oh!" the farmer cried, wishing he were safe on shore, "it's you, is it? I wondered what was holding my boat." "Yes," wicked old Wetehinen said, "it's me and I'm going to hold your boat right here on this spot until you promise to give me another of your daughters." What could the farmer do? He pleaded with Wetehinen but Wetehinen was firm and the upshot was that before the farmer again walked dry land he had promised Wetehinen his second daughter. Well, when he got home, he pretended he had forgotten his ax in the boat and sent his second daughter down to the lake to get it. Wicked old Wetehinen caught her as he had caught her sister and carried her home with him to his house at the bottom of the lake. Wetehinen treated the second sister just exactly as he had the first, making her mistress of the house and telling her she might use every key but one. Like her sister she, too, after a time gave way to the temptation of looking into the forbidden room and when she saw the shining ring lying in the pool of blood of course she wanted it and of course when she reached to get it she dabbled her fingers in the blood. So that was the end of her, too, for wicked old Wetehinen when he saw the blood stains just cut her head right off and threw her body and the severed head into the forbidden room beside the body and head of her sister and locked the door. Time went by and the farmer was living happily with his youngest daughter when one day while he was out chopping wood he found a pair of fine birch bark brogues. He put them on and instantly found himself, walking away from the woods and down to the lake. He tried to stop but he couldn't. He tried to walk in another direction but the brogues carried him straight down to the water's edge and out into the lake until he was in waist deep. Then he heard a gruff voice saying, "Hullo, there! What are you doing with my brogues?" Of course it was wicked old Wetehinen who had played that trick to get the farmer into his power again. "What do you want this time?" the poor farmer cried. "I want your youngest daughter," Wetehinen said. "What! My youngest daughter!" "Yes." "I won't give her up!" the farmer declared. "I don't care what you do to me. I won't give her up!" "Oh, very well!" Wetehinen said, and immediately the brogues which had been standing still while they talked started walking again. They carried the farmer out into the lake farther and farther until the water was up to his chin. "Wait -- wait a minute!" he cried. The brogues stopped walking and Wetehinen said, "Well, do you promise to give her to me?" "No!" the farmer began. "She's my last daughter and -- " Before he could say more, the brogues walked on and the water rose to his nose. In desperation he threw up his hands and shouted, "I promise! I promise!" So when he got home that day he said to his youngest daughter whose name was Lisa, "Lisa, my dear, I forgot my brogues at the lake. Like a good girl won't you run and get them for me?" So Lisa went to the lake and Wetehinen of course caught her and carried her down to his house as he had her two sisters. Then the same old story was repeated. Wetehinen made Lisa mistress of the house and gave her keys to all the doors and closets with the same prohibition against opening the door of the forbidden room. "If I am mistress of the house," Lisa said to herself, "why should I not unlock every door?" She waited until one day when Wetehinen was away from home, then went boldly to the forbidden room, fitted the key in the lock, and flung open the door. There lay her two poor sisters with their heads cut off. There in the pool of blood sparkled the lovely ring, but Lisa paid no heed to it. "Wicked old Wetehinen!" Lisa cried. "I suppose he thinks that ring will tempt me, but nothing will tempt me to touch that awful blood!" Then she rummaged about, opening boxes and chests, and turning things over. In a dark corner she found two pitchers, one marked Water of Life , the other Water of Death . "Ha! This is what I want!" she cried, taking the pitcher of the Water of Life. She set the severed heads of her sisters in place and then with the magic water brought them back to life. She used up all the Water of Life , so she filled the pitcher marked Water of Life with the water from the other pitcher, the Water of Death . She hid her sisters each in a big wooden chest, she shut and locked the door of the forbidden room, and Wetehinen when he came home found her working at her spinning wheel as though nothing unusual had happened. After supper Wetehinen said, "Now scratch my head and make me drowsy for bed." So Lisa scratched his wicked old head and she did it so well that he grunted with satisfaction. "Uh! Uh!" he said. "That's good! Now just behind my right ear! That's it! That's it! You're a good girl, you are! You're not like some of them who do what they're told not to do! Now behind the other ear! Oh, that's fine! Yes, you're a good girl, and if there's anything you want me to do just tell me what it is." "I want to send a chest of things to my poor old father," Lisa said. "Just a lot of little nothings -- odds and ends that I've picked up about the house. I'd be ashamed to have you open the chest and see them. I do wish you'd carry the chest ashore tomorrow and leave it where my father will find it." "All right, I will," Wetehinen promised. He was true to his word. The next morning he hoisted one of the chests on his shoulder, the one that had in it the eldest sister. He trudged off with it, and tossed it up on shore at a place where he was sure the farmer would find it. Lisa then wheedled him into carrying up the second chest that had in it the second sister. This time Wetehinen wasn't so good-natured. "I don't know what she can always be sending her father!" he grumbled. "If she sends another chest I'll have to look inside and see." Now Lisa, when the second sister was safely delivered, began to plan her own escape. She pulled out another empty chest and then one evening after she had succeeded in making old Wetehinen comfortable and drowsy she begged him to carry this also to her father. He grumbled and protested but finally promised. "And you won't look inside, will you? Promise me you won't!" Lisa begged. Wetehinen said he wouldn't, but he intended to just the same. Well, the next morning as soon as Wetehinen went out, Lisa took the churn and dressed it up in some of her own clothes. She carried it to the top of the house and perched it on the ridge of the roof before a spinning wheel. Then she herself crept inside the third chest and waited. When Wetehinen came home he looked up and saw what he thought was Lisa spinning on the roof. "Hullo!" he shouted. "What are you doing up there?" Lisa, in the chest, answered in a voice that sounded as if it came from the roof: "I'm spinning. And you, Wetehinen, my dear, don't forget the chest that you promised to carry to my poor old father. It's standing in the kitchen." Wetehinen grumbled but because of his promise he hoisted the chest on his shoulder and started off. When he had gone a little way he thought to put it down and take a peep inside. Instantly Lisa's voice, sounding as if it came from the roof, cried out, "No! No! You promised not to look inside!" "I'm not looking inside!" Wetehinen called back. "I'm only resting a minute!" Then he thought to himself, "I suppose she's sitting up there so she can watch me!" When he had gone some distance farther, he thought again to set down the chest and open the lid but instantly Lisa's voice, as from a long way off, called out: "No! No! You promised not to look inside!" "Who's looking inside?" he called back, pretending again he was only resting. Every time he thought it would be safe to put down the chest and open the lid, Lisa's voice cried out: "No! No! You promised not to !" "Mercy on us!" old Wetehinen fumed to himself, "who would have thought she could see so far!" On the shore of the lake when he threw down the chest in disgust he tried one last time to raise the lid. Instantly Lisa's voice cried out: "No! No! You promised not to!" "I'm not looking inside!" Wetehinen roared, and in a fury he left the chest and started back into the water. All the way home He grumbled and growled, "A nice way to treat a man, always making him carry chests! I won't carry another one no matter how much she begs me!" When he came neat home he saw the spinning wheel still on the roof and the figure still seated before it. "Why haven't you got my dinner ready?" he called out angrily. The figure at the spinning wheel made no answer. "What's the matter with you?" Wetehinen cried. "Why are you sitting there like a wooden image instead of cooking my dinner?" Still the figure made no answer and in a rage Wetehinen began climbing up the roof. He reached out blindly and clutched at Lisa's skirt and jerked it so hard that the churn came clattering down on his head. It knocked him off the roof and he fell all the way to the ground and cracked his wicked old head wide open. "Ouch! Ouch!" he roared in pain. "Just wait till I get hold of that Lisa!" He crawled to the forbidden room and poured over himself the water that was in the pitcher marked Water of Life . But it wasn't the Water of Life at all, it was the Water of Death , and so it didn't help his wicked old cracked head at all. In fact it just made it worse and worse and worse. Lisa and her sisters were never again troubled by him nor was any one else that lived on the shores of that lake. "Wonder what's become of wicked old Wetehinen?" people began saying. Lisa thought she knew but she didn't tell. Source (books.google.com): Parker Fillmore, Mighty Mikko: A Book of Finnish Fairy Tales and Folk Tales (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company, 1922), pp. 47-65 . Source (Internet Archive): Parker Fillmore, Mighty Mikko: A Book of Finnish Fairy Tales and Folk Tales (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company, 1922), pp. 47-65 . Return to the table of contents . The Widow and Her Daughters Scotland There was formerly a poor widow, and she had three daughters, and all she had to feed them was a kailyard. There was a great gray horse who was coming every day to the yard to eat the kail. Said the eldest of the daughters to her mother, "I will go to the yard today, and I will take the spinning-wheel with me, and I will keep the horse out of the kail." "Do," said her mother. She went out. The horse came; she took the distaff from the wheel and she struck him. The distaff stuck to the horse, and her hand stuck to the distaff. Away went the horse till they reached a green hill, and he called out, "Open, open, oh green hill, and let in the king's son; open, open, oh green hill, and let in the widow's daughter." The hill opened, and they went in. He warmed water for her feet, and made a soft bed for her limbs, and she lay down that night. Early on the morrow, when he rose, he was going to hunt. He gave her the keys of the whole house, and he said to her that she might open every chamber inside but the one. "By all she ever saw not to open that one." That she should have his dinner ready when he should come back, and that if she would be a good woman that he would marry her. When he went away she began to open the chambers. Every one, as she opened it, was getting finer and finer, till she came to the one that was forbidden. It seemed to her, "What might be in it that she might not open it too." She opened it, and it was full of dead gentlewomen, and she went down to the knee in blood. Then she came out, and she was cleaning her foot; and though she were cleaning it, still she could not take a bit of the blood off it. A tiny cat came where she was, and she said to her, "If she would give a little drop of milk that she would clean her foot as well as it was before. "Thou! Ugly beast! Be off before thee. Dost thou suppose that I won't clean them better than thou?" "Yes, yes, take thine own way. Thou wilt see what will happen to thee when himself comes home." He came home, and she set the dinner on the board, and they sat down at it. Before they ate a bit he said to her, "Wert thou a good woman today?" "I was," said she. "Let me see thy foot, and I will tell thee whether thou wert or wert not." She let him see the one that was clean. "Let me see the other one," said he. When he saw the blood, "Oh! ho!" said he. He rose and took the axe and took her head off, and he threw her into the chamber with the other dead people. He laid down that night, and early on the morrow he went to the widow's yard again. Said the second one of the widow's daughters to her mother, "I will go out today, and I will keep the gray horse out of the yard." She went out sewing. She struck the thing she was sewing on the horse. The cloth stuck to the horse, and her hand stuck to the cloth. They reached the hill. He called as usual to the hill; the hill opened, and they went in. He warmed water for her feet, and made a soft bed for her limbs, and they lay down that night. Early in the morning he was going to hunt, and he said to her that she should open every chamber inside but one, and "by all she ever saw" not to open that one. She opened every chamber till she came to the little one, and because she thought, "What might be in that one more than the rest that she might not open it?" She opened it, and it was full of dead gentlewomen, and her own sister amongst them. She went down to the knee in blood. She came out, and she was cleaning herself, and the little cat came round about, and she said to her, "If thou wilt give me a tiny drop of milk I will clean thy foot as well as it over was." " Thou! Ugly beast! Begone. Dost thou think that I will not clean it myself better than thou?" "Thou wilt see," said the cat, "what will happen to thee when himself comes home." When he came she set down the dinner, and they sat at it. Said he, "Wert thou a good woman today?" "I was," said she. "Let me see thy foot, and I will tell thee whether thou wert or wert not." She let him see the foot that was clean. " Let me see the other one," said he. She let him see it. "Oh! ho!" said he, and he took the axe and took her head off. He lay down that night. Early on the morrow, said the youngest one to her mother, as she wove a stocking, "I will go out with my stocking today, and I will watch the gray horse. I will see what happened to my two sisters, and I will return to tell you." "Do," said her mother, "and see thou dost not stay away." She went out, and the horse came. She struck the stocking on the horse. The stocking stuck to the horse, and the band stuck to the stocking. They went away, and they reached the green hill. He called out as usual, and they got in. He warmed water for her feet, and made a soft bed for her limbs, and they lay down that night. On the morrow he was going to hunt, and he said to her, "If she would behave herself as a good woman till he returned, that they would be married in a few days." He gave her the keys, and he said to her that she might open every chamber that was within but that little one, "but see that she should not open that one." She opened every one, and when she came to this one, because she thought, "what might be in it that she might not open it more than the rest?" She opened it, and she saw her two sisters there dead, and she went down to the two knees in blood. She came out, and she was cleaning her feet, and she could not take a bit of the blood off them. The tiny cat came where she was, and she said to her, "Give me a tiny drop of milk, and I will clean thy feet as well as they were before." "I will give it, thou creature; I will give thee thy desire of milk if thou will clean my feet" The cat licked her feet as well as they were before. Then the king came home, and they set down his dinner, and they sat at it Before they ate a bit, he said, to her, "Wert thou a good woman today?" "I was middling," said she; I have no boasting to make of myself." "Let me see thy feet," said he. She let him see her feet. "Thou wert a good woman," said he; "and if thou holdest on thus till the end of a few days, thyself and I will be married." On the morrow he went away to hunt. When he went away the little cat came where she was. "Now, I will tell thee in what way thou wilt be quickest married to him," said the cat. "There are," said she, "a lot of old chests within. Thou shall take out three of them; thou shalt clean them. Thou shalt say to him next night, that he must leave these three chests, one about of them, in thy mother's house, as they are of no use here; that there are plenty here without them; thou shalt say to him that he must not open any of them on the road, or else, if he opens, that thou wilt leave him; that thou wilt go up into a tree top, and that thou wilt be looking, and that if he opens any of them that thou wilt see. Then when he goes hunting, thou shalt open the chamber, thou shalt bring out thy two sisters; thou shalt draw on them the magic club, and they will be as lively and whole as they were before; thou shalt clean them then, and thou shall put one in each chest of them, and thou shalt go thyself into the third one. Thou shalt put of silver and of gold, as much in the chests as will keep thy mother and thy sisters right for their lives. When he leaves the chests in thy mother's house, and when he returns he will fly in a wild rage; he will then go to thy mother's house in this fury, and he will break in the door; be thou behind the door, and take off his head with the bar; and then he will be a king's son, as precious as he was before, and he will marry thee. Say to thy sisters, if he attempts the chests to open them by the way, to call out, 'I see thee, I see thee,' and that he will think that thou wilt be calling out in the tree." When he came home he went away with the chests, one after one, till he left them in her mother's house. When he came to a glen, where he thought she in the tree could not see him, he began to let the chest down to see what was in it; she that was in the chest called out, "I see thee, I see thee!" " Good luck be on thy pretty little head," said he, " if thou canst not see a long way!" This was the way with him each journey, till he left the chests altogether in her mother's house. When he returned home on the last journey, and saw that she was not before him, he flew in a wild rage; he went back to the widow's house, and when he reached the door he drove it in before him. She was standing behind the door, and she took his head off with the bar. Then he grew a king's son, as precious as ever came; there he was within, and they were in great gladness. She and himself married, and they left with her mother and sisters, of gold and silver, as much as left them well for life. Source (books.google.com): John Francis Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 265-70 . Source (Internet Archive): John Francis Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 265-70 . Campbell's source: "From Mrs. MacGeachy, Farmer's Wife, Islay." Campbell gives another version of this story on pp. 274-75 . Return to the table of contents . Peerifool Scotland (Orkney Islands) At the extreme risk of boring the patient reader I venture to print the following fairy tale, sent from the Orkneys by Mr. D. J. Robertson. It is told, he says, almost in the very words of the original narrator, a woman who was an Orcadian, but had been in service in England. Every reader will recognise a form of Grimm's Rumpelstilzkin , and Chambers's Whuppity Stoorie . Mr. Clodd, in the last number of the Folk Lore Journal , published a Norfolk variety of this fairy tale -- a most interesting, lively, and humorous version of rural England. The story was quite as good as the German version, or better, and quite disproves the idea that our English country folk cannot tell a tale well. This Orcadian version has a novel opening, that which generally begins the story of "East o' the Sun and west o' the Moon." Note the poverty of queens with their little "kail-yaird" or cabbage garden. The flaying is, unluckily, an historical trait. The demon, or whoever he is, lives in a "knowe," a hillock or tumulus, as the dead Gunnar of Lithend, in the saga of Burnt Njal, lived still and sang within his home, or grave-mound. We need not infer, "as others use," that Peerifool was an ancestral spirit. The fate of the Giant is badly charpenté , and Peerifool asks no great price, such as the body or soul or child of the lassie, in case she cannot tell him her name. Mr. Robertson has other Orkney stories; perhaps they are more or less Scandinavian in origin as the Norsemen settled the islands. But the older Celtic stories would not die out as long as an old woman of the earlier race was left alive in the land. There were once a king and queen in Rousay who had three daughters. The king died and the queen was living in a small house with her daughters. They kept a cow and a kail yard (cabbage garden) -- they found their cabbage was all being taken away. The eldest daughter said to the queen, she would take a blanket about her and would sit and watch what was going away with the kail. So when the night came she went out to watch. In a short time a very big giant came into the yard; he began to cut the kail and throw it in a big cubby (creel). So he cut till he had it well filled. The princess was always asking him why he was taking her mother's kail. He was saying to her, if she was not quiet he would take her too. As soon as he had filled his cubby he took her by a leg and an arm and threw her on the top of his cubby of kail and away home he went with her. When he got home he told her what work she had to do; she had to milk the cow and put her up to the hills called Bloodfield, and then she had to take wool, and wash and tease it and comb and card, and spin and make claith [cloth]. When the giant went out she milked the cow and put her to the hills. Then she put on the pot and made porridge to herself. As she was supping it, a great many peerie (little) yellow-headed folk came running, calling out to give them some. She said: Little for one, and less for two, And never a grain have I for you. When she came to work the wool, none of that work could she do at all. The giant came home at night and found she had not done her work. He took her and began at her head, and peeled the skin off all the way down her back and over her feet. Then he threw her on the couples [rafters] among the hens. The same adventure befell the second girl. If her sister could do little with the wool she could do less. When the giant came home he found her work not done. He began at the crown of her head and peeled a strip of skin all down her back and over her feet, and threw her on the couples beside her sister. They lay there and could not speak nor come down. The next night the youngest princess said she would take a blanket about her and go to watch what had gone away with her sisters. Ere long, in came a giant with a big cubby, and began to cut the kail. She was asking why he was taking her mother's kail. He was saying if she was not quiet he would take her too. He took her by a leg and an arm and threw her on the top of his cubby and carried her away. Next morning he gave her the same work as he had given her sisters. When he was gone out she milked the cow and put her to the high hills. Then she put on the pot and made porridge to herself. When the peerie yellow-headed folk came asking for some she told them to get something to sup with. Some got heather cows and some got broken dishes; some got one thing, and some another, and they all got some of her porridge. After they were all gone a peerie yellow-headed boy came in and asked her if she had any work to do; he could do any work with wool. She said she had plenty, but would never be able to pay him for it. He said all he was asking for it was to tell him his name. She thought that would be easy to do, and gave him the wool. When it was getting dark an old woman came in and asked her for lodging. The princess said she could not give her that, but asked her if she had any news. But the old woman had none, and went away to lie out. There is a high knowe [knoll] near the place, and the old woman sat under it for shelter. She found it very warm. She was always climbing up, and when she came to the top she heard someone inside saying, "Tease, teasers, tease; card, carders, card; spin, spinners, spin, for peerie fool, peerie fool is my name." There was a crack in the knowe, and light coming out. She looked in and saw a great many peerie folk working, and a peerie yellow-headed boy running round them calling out that. The old woman thought she would get lodging if she went to give this news, so she came back and told the princess the whole of it. The princess went on saying "peerie fool, peerie fool," till the yellow-headed boy came with all the wool made into claith. He asked what was his name, and she guessed names; and he jumped about and said "No." At last she said, "Peeriefool is your name." He threw down the wool and ran off very angry. As the giant was coming home he met a great many peerie yellow-headed folk, some with their eyes hanging on their cheeks, and some with their tongues hanging on their breasts. He asked them what was the matter. They told him it was working so hard pulling wool so fine. He said he had a good-wife at home, and if she was safe, never would he allow her to do any work again. When he came home she was all safe, and had a great many webs lying all ready, and he was very kind to her. Next day when he went out she found her sisters, and took them down from the couples. She put the skin on their backs again, and she put her eldest sister in a cazy (cubby or creel), and put all the fine things she could find with her, and grass on the top. When the giant came home she asked him to take the cazy to her mother with some food for her cow. He was so pleased with her he would do anything for her, and took it away. Next day she did the same with her other sister. She told him she would have the last of the food she had to send her mother for the cow ready next night. She told him she was going a bit from home, and would leave it ready for him. She got into the cazy with all the fine things she could find, and covered herself with grass. He took the cazy and carried it to the queen's house. She and her daughters had a big boiler of boiling water ready. They couped [overturned] it about him when he was under the window, and that was the end of the giant. Source (books.google.com): Longman's Magazine , edited by Charles James Longman; vol. 14 (May to October, 1889), pp. 330-34 . Source (Internet Archive): Longman's Magazine , edited by Charles James Longman; vol. 14 (July 1889), pp. 330-34 . The episode concerning Peerifool's name is a type 500 folktale , best known in the Grimm brothers' version Rumpelstiltskin . Rousay is a small island north of the mainland island of Orkney. Return to the table of contents . Jean-Parle Canada Once there was a widow who had three daughters: Charlotte, Javotte, and the youngest, Finette. They earned their living by spinning wool for the locals. One day, a well-dressed man arrived at their house and introduced himself under the name of Jean-Parle. "Madam, I am looking for a servant." The widow replied: "Monsieur, we do not know you. My daughters have never gone out into service; I cannot . . ." "You have nothing to fear, Madam. I am the lord of the neighboring country." "Even if you are a lord, we do not know the people of the neighboring country." "If you are afraid, you can ask the priest or the bishop of the place about me. They know me well." Charlotte spoke up and said: "Mom, he can't eat me. I'm going to go there for a month." The girl then got into the carriage and left with Jean-Parle. Arriving at his house, Jean-Parle said to Charlotte: "You are going to be the mistress of this palace." A few days later, he gave her all the keys to his house: "Here are the keys. You can see everything. But as for this key, I forbid you from entering its room. If you go there, some misfortune will happen to you." "Do not be afraid, monsieur." As he left, Jean-Parle said: "I am leaving for eight days. I have given you a servant to help you with the cleaning. Remember, I am forbidding you to go into this room." Charlotte, having visited all the rooms, soon asked herself: "What could possibly be in this room, and why did he forbid me from going there?" To the servant she said: "Today we'll go and see." Taking the key, she unlocked the door, opened it and saw a trapdoor, a block, and an axe. All were smeared with blood. Opening the trapdoor, and what did she see? In the cellar there were bodies of women with their heads severed. "My God! Now I'll be going there too. That's why he forbade me so strongly from entering here!" Closing the door, she took the key from the lock, and found it all red with blood. She rubbed the key to clean it and return it to its original state, but in vain. She remained very sad. After a few days, Jean-Parle arrived: "Hello, my servant." "Hello, monsieur." "Are you bored?" "Certainly, Monsieur Jean-Parle." "But, have you not seen through the castle and visited all the rooms? They are all filled with new furniture." She replied: "Yes, I went through the whole castle, all the apartments." "Have you been in all the apartments?" "Yes." "Go get me the keys so I can see." Going to get the bunch of keys, she took out the one that was stained with blood, and gave the others to her master. "The key to the forbidden door, where is it?" "I forgot it. It's upstairs." She went to get it, and gave it to him. "Ah!" he said. "My unfortunate girl, you went there! Well, you are going to go back there to stay." She threw herself at his knees and said: "I don't want to, Jean-Parle." "You don't want to! You opened this door; and, as soon as you knew what's there, you were going to go inside yourself." Pushing her into the forbidden room, he put her head on the block and cut it off with one blow of an axe. Some time later Jean-Parle returned to the widow's house, dressed as a priest, and said to the widow: "Could I hire a servant from here?" "Sir, you cannot hire a servant from here. And she added: "The oldest of my daughters, Charlotte, left like that, and we haven't heard from her since." "But, Madam, you speak very severely to me. I am a priest. There is no danger that I will eat her, your daughter." The widow replied: "You are a priest; the other was lord of a country." Speaking up, Finette said: "Mom, let Javotte get involved. He's a priest, and he won't eat her!" The mother replied: "But, Finette, we will be left alone to do all the work. You know, all the spinning that has to be done." "It doesn't matter, mother; we will do what we can, and the rest will wait." The priest said to Javotte: "Come on board with me, and after a month, I will take you back to see your mother." And they left together. Arriving at his house, Jean-Pere said to Javotte: "You are going to be the mistress of the castle. If you want to, you can be happy with me. But, if you do not want to, you also can be unhappy." "I will try to do what you want, monsieur." "Here are all the keys to the castle, and this is the key to the door here. With this key I also give you a golden ball. But I forbid you from opening this door." "I will only try to please you. Don't worry. It will be easy for me!" One morning, Jean-Parle said: "I'm leaving for a month. I'm going to give you a servant to help you. Go through the whole castle if you want to; but I forbid you from opening this door." "Don't, don't be afraid, Monsieur Jean-Parle." A fortnight after he left, Javotte said to the servant: "Why shouldn't we go and see inside that room? Let's go!" She took the key, unlocked the door, opened it, and saw her sister's dress hanging on a rack. "My God! She was killed in here. That's why the same thing will happen to me." Opening the trapdoor, she saw her sister, her head cut off, on a pile of corpses. She closed the trapdoor, left the room, and locked the door. When she took the key from the lock, she saw that it was all rusty. "My servant, now we are trapped. Look at the key: it's rusty." The servant replied: "Let's go and rub it. Maybe the rust will go away." They scrubbed and rubbed the key all day long. The more they rubbed, the more the key rusted. Javotte then went to see her golden apple. The golden apple was all stained with blood. "My servant, I think that the end of our days is near. As soon as he arrives and asks for the key and the golden apple, he will know everything!" At the end of the month, Jean-Parle arrived and asked his servant if she had seen through the castle. "Yes, Monsieur Jean-Parle. I visited everything." "You didn't go to the forbidden room?" "No, that's the only place I didn't go." "Go and get me the keys and the golden apple that I gave you." She brought the bunch of keys. "The key to the door of this room and the golden apple?" "You don't need them tonight." "Go get them right away." She went and got the key and the golden apple and gave them to him. "You wanted to know where your sister was? You're going to go join her. I'll give you a quarter of an hour to ask God for forgiveness for your sins." When the quarter of an hour was over, Jean-Parle took her to the forbidden room, placed her head on the block, and cut it off with an axe. Some time passed, and Jean-Parle, having stolen the clothes of the local bishop, disguised himself as a bishop and went again to the widow. "Madame, can you show me the way to Rome?" She replied: "Monsignor, you who are a bishop must know the way to Rome much better than I do. I am only a poor widow without education." "Yes, but without being educated, you can still show me the shortest way to Rome. It's a hasty journey that I have to make." "Well! Take the first road on the right. Follow it until the first side road, where you will go straight ahead. When you reach the second road, you will find the main road that leads to Paris. And there, you will get information." "Yes, madam, that is well said. But send your daughter with me for a few minutes to show me the second road." "My daughter is not for going away with you. Another time a priest came to hire Javotte, my daughter, and since then we have heard nothing at all from her." "Yes, but if you don't receive any news, do you think I'm going to steal your daughter?" "Mom, I'm going to show him the way, for a while." Finette got into his carriage, and he drove very fast, not stopping to let Finette get out. "I am not a bishop," he said. "My name is Jean-Parle, and it was I who came to get your two sisters, Charlotte and Javotte. Is your name Finette? We will see if you are as fine as your name." On arriving at the castle: "Here, my little Finette, if you are smart, you will be all right." He gave her the keys to the castle and gave her servants, if she should need them. Some time later, he said: "Listen, my little Finette, you are very fine, but I have a trip to make, which will last fifteen days." "Yes, Monsieur Jean-Parle, you can make your trip. With my servants, everything here will be done as usual." As he left he said to her: "During these fifteen days, you can go into all the rooms of the castle, one by one, but I do not want you to set foot in this room here, neither you nor the servants. And take good care of the keys." Ah, Monsieur Jean-Parle, if that's all there is to do, you can leave without fear." "Be careful, Finette! If you want to do well here, you had better not go there and look." About ten days passed, and Finette had visited all the rooms of the castle. The only one that remained was the room that Jean-Parle had prohibited her from opening. One morning, Finette took the key, the shiniest of all, looked at it carefully, unlocked the forbidden door and saw her sisters' dresses hanging on the wall. "What! Is this where my sisters were killed?" Opening the trapdoor, she saw her two dead sisters. "He must be a sorcerer, this Jean-Parle!" she said to herself. She closed the trapdoor, went out, and took the key from the lock. The key was all rusty! Finette thought: "Wait a little, Jean-Parle! If you are a sorcerer, you will see who is the smartest." Taking the key, she smeared it with her sisters' blood, then put it back into the lock. Then having glued Charlotte's head back to her body, and Javotte's head to hers, she left the room. Removing the key from the lock, she found it as shiny as when she had received it. To her servants she said: "Jean-Parle is coming back in two days. I will say that I am very ill. Forbid him from coming to see me. Let him take the first chest here in the passage, and go with it to my mother's house. It's laundry that I'm sending to be washed." But what is in the chest is Charlotte's body and a letter addressed to the parish priest, asking him to collect the people from justice to punish the sorcerer. As he entered, Jean-Parle asked: "Where is my little Finette?" "Ah, Monsieur Jean-Parle! Your little Finette is very ill. She cannot see you before you have taken this chest of laundry for washing to her mother." He had not soon left when Finette said to her servants: "When he arrives, send him with this second chest as quickly as he can." In this chest she placed the body of Javotte, so that she might be buried. Here Jean-Parle returned: "Where is my little Finette? Is she not up yet?" "No, monsieur. Finette is very ill and cannot see you. She asks you to take this second chest to her mother, and not to delay in returning for the third, lest she die before your return." Jean-Parle took the chest and carried it as quickly as he could. Meanwhile, Finette stuffed her skirt and jacket and put them in her bed, in her usual place. "My servants, you will tell him to come and see me at the door of my room, but without speaking to me, because otherwise I would die. And that he should quickly go and carry the third chest to my mother, without stopping on the way. If he were to stop, misfortune would happen to him." After this Finette placed herself in the chest, with all the silver and gold that she found at the castle. Jean-Parle once again took the trunk, placed it on his back and set off. When he had walked a mile, he thought: "But this chest is very heavy!" Placing it on the ground, he opened it to see what it contains. But a voice said to him: "Hurry up! Finette is dying." Picking up the chest, he put it back on his shoulder. "Poor Finette! I hear her screaming from here. I will hurry to help her." A mile further on, he put the chest on the ground again, saying: "But, this chest weighs frightfully!" Finette shouted at him: "Hurry up! Finette is dying." Grabbing the chest, he ran to the widow's house and said to her: "I must go back quickly. Finette is dying." "Yes?" but rest for a few minutes. Supper is ready, and it's getting late." "Grandmother, I don't have time. As I came back, she shouted to me twice: 'Hurry up! Finette is dying!'" But, in the meantime, the men of justice: the bailiff and the police arrived. They seized Jean-Parle, and did him justice on a block, with an axe. As for Finette? She inherited the castle and the fortune of Jean-Parle. And for me, she wanted to hire me to stay at the castle. But I didn't want to. Who knows? This Jean-Parle, being a sorcerer, would perhaps come back! I preferred to stay here to tell you this story. Source (books.google.com): C. Marius Barbeau, "Contes Populaires Canadiens," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 29, no. 111 (January - March 1916), no. 28, pp. 117-21 . Source (Internet Archive): C. Marius Barbeau, "Contes Populaires Canadiens," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 29, no. 111 (January - March 1916), no. 28, pp. 117-21 . Return to the table of contents . The Secret Room New York, USA Once upon a time there lived a mother with three daughters, whose duty it was to guard the cabbage patch in front of the cottage in which they lived. One day they were all sitting in the sun, spinning, when they saw a bull in the cabbage-patch. "Take your distaff and run, child, run!" said the mother to the eldest daughter. So the girl took her distaff and ran. The bull ran and she ran, and she ran and the bull ran, until they came to a great house standing on the edge of a wood. There the bull gave her a large bunch of keys, and told her that she could go anywhere in the house she liked except one room. He showed her the key to this room, and told her that she must not unlock the door to which it belonged. Then the bull went away and left her. The girl took the keys and roamed from one beautiful room to another, until she had seen all except the forbidden room. This she wanted to see more than she had any of the others. At last her curiosity became so great that she opened the door and went inside. What was her horror to discover that the room was full of headless bodies hung on all sides. Quickly she locked the door and ran downstairs. But she had some blood on the key, on her hand, and on her shoes. As she was trying the best she knew how to get the blood off, along came a big black cat, which said to her, "Mew, mew, mew! Give me a dish of bread and milk, and I will tell you how to get the blood off your shoes." "Go away, you old black thing! I am not going to bother with you." So the cat went away, and pretty soon the bull came. "Let me see your keys!" said he. "How came the blood on this one?" Then he asked to see her hands and her shoes. When he saw blood on them too, he knew that she had disobeyed him; so, as he had done with all the others who had disobeyed him, he cut her head off and hung her body up with the others in the forbidden room. The next day, when the mother and her two remaining daughters again sat spinning in the sun, they again saw the bull in the cabbage-patch. The mother sent the second daughter just as she had sent the first, and exactly the same things happened to her. The third day the mother and the youngest daughter sat spinning in the sun, when the mother looked up and saw the bull a third time in the cabbage patch. "Take your distaff and run, child, run!" cried the mother. So the youngest daughter ran, and the bull ran. The bull ran and she ran until they came to the great house on the edge of the wood. There the bull gave her a bunch of keys, and told her that she might open every door in the house except the one whose key he showed her. Then the bull went away. The youngest daughter did just as her sisters had done, and went into all the rooms except the forbidden one. She kept wondering what could be in there, until her curiosity became so great that she unlocked the door and went in. She, too, was so horrified that she quickly shut the door and ran downstairs, but with the tell-tale blood on the key, on her hand, and on her shoes. To her came the big black cat, who said, "Mew, mew, mew! Give me a dish of bread and milk, and I will tell you how to get the blood off your shoes." Instead of telling the cat to go away, as her sisters had done, she went and got some bread and milk for him. When the cat had finished eating, he said, "If you will go into the attic, you will find there a sickle. Take it, rub it on the key, on your hand, and on your shoes, while you say, 'Blood, be gone! Blood, be gone!"' The girl went to the attic, found the sickle, and did with it as the cat had told her to do, saying, "Blood, be gone! blood, be gone!" Even as she spoke the last word, the blood-stains disappeared. Then the girl went downstairs, where she found the bull waiting for her. "Let me see your keys," he said, "and your hands and your shoes!" When he saw that she had no blood-stains upon her, he suddenly changed from a bull into a beautiful prince. "I was bewitched," he said, "by a girl who loved me, but whom I wouldn't marry because I didn't love her. I killed many a girl when I was a bull; but now we will have the bodies taken care of, and then we will be married." So they buried the bodies, and then were married and lived happily ever after. Source (books.google.com): Emelyn E. Gardner, "Folk-Lore from Schoharie County, New York," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 27, no. 105 (July-September, 1914), no. 4, pp. 310-11 . Source (JSTOR): Emelyn E. Gardner, " Folk-Lore from Schoharie County, New York ," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 27, no. 105 (July-September, 1914), no. 4, pp. 310-11 . Gardner's source: Mrs. William Buell. Mrs. Buell heard the story from her mother, believed to be from Germany. This story is unusual in that the heroine marries her erstwhile captor. This turn illustrates a "contamination" of a traditional animal bridegroom tale with a type 311 (How the Devil Married Three Sisters) or type 312 (Bluebeard) tale. Return to the table of contents . The Three Sisters Jamaica There was t'ree sister living into a house, an' everybody want them fe marry, an' them refuse. An' one day a Snake go an' borrow from his neighbour long coat an' burnpan hat an' the whole set out of clothing. Then he dress himself, an' him tell his friends that him mus' talk to those young lady. An' what you think the fellow does? He get up a heap a men to carry him to the young lady yard. An' when him got there the door was lock with an iron bar. An' when he come he say: "Please to open the door, there is a stranger coming in." An' he sing like this: My eldes' sister, will you open the door? My eldes' sister, will you open the door oh? Fair an' gandelow steel. An' the eldest one was going to open the door. An' the last one, who was a old witch, say to her sister: "Don't open the door" an' she sing: My door is bar with a scotran bar, My door is bar with a scotran bar oh, Fair an' gandelow steel. Then the Snake ask again to the same tune: My second sister will you open the door? My second sister will you open the door oh? Fair an' gandelow steel. An' the Snake turn to a Devil, an' the t'ree sister come an' push on the door to keep it from open. An' the Devil ask a third time: My youngest sister will you open the door? My youngest sister will you open the door oh? Fair an' gandelow steel. But the last sister won't have it so, an' she said with a very wrath: The Devil roguer than a womankind, The Devil roguer than a womankind oh, Fair an' gandelow steel. An' the Devil get into a great temper an' say: What is roguer than a womankind? What is roguer than a womankind oh? Fair an' gandelow steel. Then the Devil fly from the step straight into hell an have chain round his waist until now. Jack Mantora me no choose none. Source (books.google.com): Walter Jekyll, Jamaican Song and Story: Annancy Stories, Digging Sings, Ring Tunes, and Dancing Tunes (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1907), pp. 26-28 . Source (Internet Archive): Walter Jekyll, Jamaican Song and Story: Annancy Stories, Digging Sings, Ring Tunes, and Dancing Tunes (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1907), pp. 26-28 . Note by Jekyll: " Gandelow, sootran . The meaning of these words is lost." Jamaican Anansi stories typically end with the formula " Jack Mantora me no choose none." This implies that neither the storyteller nor this listener is to blame for the tale's content. Return to the table of contents . The Wood-Cutter's Daughter Palestine There was once a poor wood-cutter who had a wife and three daughters to feed and clothe from the proceeds of his labor. One day, while he was at work in the forest, a man came his way and stopped to talk with him. The stranger, learning about the daughters, persuaded the father, for a large sum of money then and there paid in advance, to promise him the eldest of the three in marriage. That night, when the wood-cutter went home, he told his wife of the bargain that he had made, and the next morning, with her consent, took the girl to a certain cave and delivered her to the stranger, whose name was 'Abu Fraywar. The latter, as soon as the father was gone, said to his wife, "You must be hungry; eat these." So saying, he drew a knife, and, cutting off his own ears, gave them to her with a loathsome loaf of black bread. The girl, though frightened, refused to eat; whereupon her husband hung her by her hair from the ceiling of a chamber in the cave, which he had meanwhile by magic transformed into a beautiful palace. The next day 'Abu Fraywar went again to the forest and said to the wood-cutter, "I am so pleased with your daughter that I want the next younger for my brother. Here is more money. Bring her tomorrow." The simple father, overcome by the smooth words and bright gold of his son-in-law, again yielded, and the next day brought his second daughter to the cave, where she met with precisely the same treatment as her elder sister. Finally, 'Abu Fraywar came for the third daughter, pretending that he wanted her for another brother. This time, also, the parents were easily won; but the girl, being somewhat spoiled, as the youngest of a family is apt to be, refused to go unless she might take with her a box in which she kept sweets, etc., and her favorite kitten. When, however, her terms were accepted, she followed her sisters to the cave where they were still hanging. When 'Abu Fraywar offered his ears -- which grew again as often as they were removed -- to this girl, she, instead of showing the disgust she felt by refusing them, took them without hesitation and promised to eat them as soon as she felt hungry. He then left her for a time, saying that, when he returned, he expected to find that she had obeyed his wishes. Now, the second sister, when 'Abu Fraywar left her, in the same way ordering her to dispose of the meal provided for her during his absence, had undertaken to deceive him by hiding his ears under the rug. She did not succeed; for, when he returned and she told him, in response to his inquiries, that she had eaten them, he called out, "Ears of mine, are you hot or cold? " and they immediately replied, "As cold as ice, and lying under the rug." Her attempt to deceive him, of course, made him very angry and furnished him an excuse for hanging her up beside his first victim. The third sister proved wiser than either of the others. She gave the ears to her cat, which devoured them with relish, while she ate some food that she had brought from home. When 'Abu Fraywar returned and called out as before, "Ears of mine, are you hot or cold?" they replied, "As hot as can be in this snug little stomach." At this the monster was so well pleased that from that time he grew more and more fond of the girl and treated her with increasing kindness. One day, after she had been some time with him, he said to her, "I have to go on a journey. There are forty rooms in the palace. Here are the keys. You may open any you please except the one to which this golden key gives entrance." S he promised not to disturb the forbidden chamber, and he took his departure. For a while after he was gone she amused herself with examining the rest of the rooms. She had reached the thirty-ninth, when, on looking from the window, which opened on a graveyard, she was horrified at seeing her husband, who was really a ghoul ( ghul ), devouring a corpse that he had just taken from its grave. She was so fascinated by the spectacle that she took a position from which she could see without being seen and watched him at his ghastly work. Presently he started and listened, then hid himself behind a tomb in the vicinity. It was a funeral that had disturbed him. As the procession drew near she noticed that the bearers of the corpse seemed in great haste, and finally heard one of them say, "Let us be off as soon as possible, lest the ghoul that haunts the place seize and devour us." The discovery that she had made gave the girl great uneasiness. She was especially anxious to know what was in the fortieth room, and her anxiety at last became so intense that she resolved at any cost to solve the mystery. When she applied the golden key to the door and opened it, there were her sisters, still alive, hanging from the ceiling by their hair. She cut them down and fed them; then, as soon as their strength was in a measure restored, she sent them back to their parents. The next day her husband returned, but he did not remain long with her. After a few days he told her that he was obliged to make another journey. This time, before he left her, he gave her permission to have any of her relatives whom she wished to see to visit her. Accordingly, when he was gone, she sent invitations to several of her friends and relatives. They were accepted, but, when the people came, she said nothing to them about her troubles. It was well that she did not, for among those who came to see her there were some who were not what they seemed, but her husband in the various shapes which his knowledge of magic enabled him to take for the purpose of entrapping her. At last he took the form of her aged grandmother and succeeded. No sooner did his unsuspecting wife see, as she sup- posed, the friend of her childhood, than she threw herself upon her neck and told her her sorrows. Thereupon 'Abu Fraywar unmasked and, taking a poisoned nail, drove it into her breast. The wound thus made did not kill her; it only caused her to swoon and remain indefinitely in this condition. As soon as she became unconscious her husband put her into a chest, which he then sank in the sea. Now the sultan of that country had a son who was very fond of sailing and fishing. It so happened that, soon after 'Abu Fraywar had made away with the wood-cutter's daughter, the young man, while engaged in fishing, ordered a large net to be cast from his boat near the place where she had been lowered. It inclosed the chest, which, after some difficulty, was finally brought to the surface. The prince ordered it taken into the boat, and then, before opening it, said to his men, "If the chest contains money or jewels, you may have it with all its contents; but, if anything else, I shall claim it." The young man was deeply pained, as well as surprised, when he saw what was actually in the chest. He wept and lamented over the sad fate of the unfortunate creature, and carried the body to his mother's chamber, that it might be prepared for proper burial. During this process the nail was discovered and removed, when the young woman began to sneeze and finally recovered consciousness. When Zerendac -- for that was her name -- was completely restored, she became the wife of the prince and in due time bore him a daughter. One day, however, when she was alone with her baby, the wall of her room suddenly parted and 'Abu Fraywar made his appearance. He did not stop to greet his former wife, but, seizing the child, swallowed it and instantly vanished. The bereaved mother was so stunned by her loss that, when her husband asked her what had become of the child, she had nothing to answer. The same fate befell her second child, a son, and the third, another daughter. The last time 'Abu Fraywar, in his malignity, went so far as to smear the mother's face with her child's blood. When he was gone she washed her face, but in her haste and excitement she missed a slight stain just below her under lip. Her husband and his mother, who already suspected her, when they caught sight of this spot, at once concluded that she was a ghuleh, and had devoured her own children. Seeing that her life was in danger, Zerendac told her story; but no one believed it. Her husband, however, refusing to put her to death, ordered her to be confined in a small room underground and fed on bread and water. Later, at his mother's suggestion, he sought another wife, and, hearing of the daughter of a neighboring sultan, went in person to sue for her hand. Before starting on his journey, not for the purpose of comforting, but of tormenting her, he sent to the mother of his lost children to ask her what he should bring her on his return. She replied, begging him to bring her a box of aloes ( sebr ) and another of henna; also a dagger. The prince complied with his wife's request, and, when he reached home, sent her the things just mentioned. \She opened the boxes, and, placing them in front of her, said, "O box of sebr, you have not in you more patience than I have shown. O box of henna, you can not be gentler than I have been;" and, having said this, she was on the point of stab-bing herself with the dagger, when the wall again parted and 'Abu Fraywar again appeared, this time leading a handsome boy and two beautiful girls. "Do not kill yourself," he cried, "I have not slain your children. Here they are." He then, by the utterance of a magical formula, called into existence a staircase connecting the room in which Zerendac was imprisoned with the principal salon of the royal palace. At the top there was a trap-door so cunningly constructed that no one who was not in the secret could find it or would suspect its existence. This done, he took the dagger and killed himself. When the time for the marriage of the prince with the sultan's daughter arrived, Zerendac sent the three children, arrayed in rich garments and rare jewels, up the staircase, with instructions to play as many pranks on the guests and do as much damage among the glass and china in the salon as possible. Now, the mother of the prince was so struck with the beauty of the children that, although she was annoyed by the mischief they did, she could not find it in her heart to punish them, especially as there was something in their features and movements that reminded her of her son in his childhood. However, at last she lost her patienc; but just as she was about to strike one of them, they all shouted in chorus, "O lady, make haste and see how the moon is revolving." At this, of course, everybody rushed to the window and the children seized the opportunity to lift the trap-door and escape. On the day on which the wedding was to be consummated the children appeared again when their father was present. He was attracted by their beauty and amused by their conversation. They, however, went about upsetting vases and doing all the mischief in other ways that occurred to them. When he remonstrated with them, they replied, "This house is our house, and all that is in it belongs to us and our parents." "What do you mean?" inquired the prince. For answer they took him down the secret staircase to their mother, who told him that they were his children and how they had been restored to her. The prince, deeply touched by the story, begged her to forgive his unkindness and return to her place in his household; which she was only too happy to do. He then sent the sultan's daughter, with an explanation and a satisfactory compensation, back to her father, and the reunited couple lived happily ever after. Source (books.google.com): J. E. Hanauer, Tales Told in Palestine (Cincinnati: Jennings and Graham; New York: Eaton and Mains, 1904), pp. 139-47 . Source (Internet Archive): J. E. Hanauer, Tales Told in Palestine (Cincinnati: Jennings and Graham; New York: Eaton and Mains, 1904), pp. 139-47 . Return to the table of contents . The Tiger's Bride India One day a woman went to cut thatching grass and she cut such a quantity that when she tied it up, the bundle was too big for her to lift on to her head; so she stood and called for some one to help her, but no one was within hearing and no one came. She called and called and at last began to promise that she would give her daughter in marriage to any one who would help her. After she had called out this a few times, a tiger suddenly appeared and asked what she wanted; she explained her difficulty and the tiger undertook to lift the load on to her head, if she would really give him her daughter in marriage. She promised and with the help of the tiger took up the bundle and went home. Two or three days after, the tiger presented himself at her house and was duly married to the daughter. After the wedding the couple started for the tiger's home; all the way the unhappy bride wept und sang: "How far off is our home, big head?" "You can just see the mouth of the cave," answered the tiger and in a short time they came to a large cave. Then the tiger told her to set to work and cook a feast while he went off and invited his friends to come and share it. But the bride when left alone caught a cat and killed it and hung it over the fire, so that its blood dropped slowly into the pan and made a fizzling noise, as if cooking were going on; and then she ran off to her mother's house and climbed a tree which grew near it and began to sing: You married me to a ti-ti-tiger: You threw me to a bear: Take back the necklace you gave me Take back the bracelet and the diamonds and the coral. Meanwhile the tiger returned with his friends and sat down outside the cave and told his wife to be quick with the cooking of the cakes for he heard the hissing over the fire and thought that she was cooking. At last as she did not come out, he got tired of waiting and went in to fetch her. Then he saw that she had disappeared and had to go and tell his friends. They were very angry at being cheated out of a feast, and fell upon the tiger and beat him, till he ran away and was seen no more; but his bride was left to flit from tree to tree singing: You married me to a ti-ti-tiger: You threw me to a bear: Take back the necklace you gave me Take back the bracelet and the diamonds and the coral. Source (Internet Archive): Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 45, pp. 154-55. . Source (HathiTrust): Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 45, pp. 154-55 . Although the heroine does not rescue previously captured sisters in this tale, it otherwise shows most characteristics of a traditional type 311 folktale. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Targets open in new windows. Blue Beard . Folktales of types 312 and 312A about women whose brothers rescue them from their ruthless husbands or abductors. The Robber Bridegroom and Other Tales Type 955 . The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales). Grimm Brothers' Home Page . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 21, 2024. The Devil (or Ogre) and the Gun: Folktales of Type 1157 The Devil (or Ogre) and the Gun Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 1157 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009 Contents How the Devil Played the Flute (Germany). The Origin of the Jack-o'-Lantern (Wales). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. How the Devil Played the Flute Germany Once the devil became bored in hell and wanted to take a pleasure trip to earth. Not wanting to be alone (for he does not like that at all; he loves company) he took his youngest son with him, a young black curious whippersnapper. They traveled out through a mountain cave, arriving in a forest. The little devil was delighted. He jumped about, climbed up the trees and hung by his tail, just like a monkey, doing all sorts of foolish things. They came to a large oak tree where a man in a green jacket and with a green cap was lying asleep. A bag was hanging next to him from the tree, from which were protruding all kinds of game: hares, woodcocks, and wild ducks. Next to the bag there was a gun. The little devil ran up and examined everything closely. Picking up the gun, he asked his father what it was. The old devil wrinkled his forehead and said, "That is a flute, my son. When people play on it, wild animals run up to them, and they only have to catch them." "That I have to see," said the little devil. "You should play something for me on it." "It takes two, my son. One to blow and one to finger." "Then you can blow, and I will finger," said the whippersnapper. So the old one had to put the barrel into his mouth, whether he wanted to or not, because he had spoiled the little fellow rotten. The old one blew, and the whippersnapper fingered and fingered, but not a single tone came out. "You have to press down on the keys, you stupid boy," said the old one. The little devil pushed against the hammer, then there came such a blow that the old one was struck to the ground, for the entire load of shot hit him in the throat. The young one ran away, terrified. The old one soon recovered and ran after his boy, for the sound of the gun had awakened the man. "That was not a beautiful tone," said the whippersnapper. "You pressed the wrong key," said the old one, "and the flute was dusty, so all the dust flew into my throat." Source: Johann Wilhelm Wolf, "Wie der Teufel auf der Flöte blies," Deutsche Hausmärchen (Göttingen: Dieterich'sche Buchhandlung, 1851), pp. 438-39 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. Return to the table of contents . The Origin of the Jack-o'-Lantern Wales A popular legend giving the origin of the jack-o'-lantern in Wales deals with the idea of a stupid devil: A long time ago there lived on the hills of Arfon an old man of the name of Sion Dafydd, who used to converse much with one of the children of the bottomless pit. One morning Sion was on his way to Llanfair-Fechan, carrying a flail on his shoulder, for he had corn there, when whom should he meet but his old friend from the pit, with a bag on his back, and in it two little devils like himself. After conversing for some time they began to quarrel, and presently were in the midst of a terrible fight. Sion fell to basting the devils with his flail, until the bag containing the two little ones went all to pieces, and the two tumbling out, fled for their lives to Rhiwgyfylchi, which village is considered to this day a very wicked place from this fact. Sion then went his way rejoicing, and did not for a long time encounter his adversary. Eventually, however, they met, and this time Sion had his gun on his shoulder. "What's that long thing you're carrying?" inquired the devil. "That's my pipe," said Sion. Then the devil asked, "Shall I have a whiff out of it?" "You shall," was Sion's reply, and he placed the mouth of his gun in the devil's throat and drew the trigger. Well; that was the loudest report from a gun that was ever heard on this earth. "Ach!-tw!-tw!" exclaimed the smoker, "your pipe is very foul," and he disappeared in a flame. After a lapse of time, Sion met him again in the guise of a gentleman, but the Welshman knew it was the tempter. This time he made a bargain for which he was ever afterwards sorry, i.e., he sold himself to the devil for a sum down, but with the understanding that whenever he could cling to something the devil should not then control him. One day when Sion was busily gardening, the evil one snatched him away into the air without warning, and Sion was about giving up all hopes of again returning to earth, when he thought to himself, "I'll ask the devil one last favor." The stupid devil listened. "All I want is an apple," said Sion, "to moisten my lips a bit down below; let me go to the top of my apple tree, and I'll pick one." "Is that all?" quoth the diawl, and consented. Of course Sion laid hold of the apple tree, and hung on. The devil had to leave him there. But the old reprobate was too wicked for heaven, and the devil having failed to take him to the other place, he was turned into a fairy, and is now the jack-o'- lantern. Source: Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), pp. 204-205 . Jack-o'-lantern, in the context of this tale, is another name for a will-o'-the-wisp . The motif of a mortal selling his soul to the devil is epitomized in the Faust legends . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 25, 2009. Deceiving the Devil with a Rope of Sand: Folktales of Type 1174 Deceiving the Devil with a Rope of Sand folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1174 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2020-2021 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Michael Scott (Scotland). Mitchell Scott (England). Donald Duival and the Devil (England). A Wild Legend (Scotland). The Devil and the Schoolmaster at Cockerham (England). Tregeagle (England). The Devil's Mill (Ireland). The Shoemaker, the Tailor, and the Sailor (Germany). The Cheated Devil (Germany). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Michael Scott Scotland Michael Scott was, once upon a time, much embarrassed by a spirit, for whom he was under the necessity of finding constant employment. He commanded him to build a cauld, or dam-head, across the Tweed at Kelso: it was accomplished in one night, and still does honour to the infernal architect. Michael next ordered, that Eildon hill, which was then a uniform cone, should be divided into three. Another night was sufficient to part its summit into the three picturesque peaks which it now bears. At length the enchanter conquered this indefatigable dæmon, by employing him in the hopeless and endless task of making ropes out of sea sand. Source (books.google.com): Walter Scott, The Lay of the Last Minstrel (London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme; Edinburgh: A. Constable and Company, 1805), p. 240 . Source (Internet Archive): Walter Scott, The Lay of the Last Minstrel (London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme; Edinburgh: A. Constable and Company, 1805), p. 240 . Michael Scot (usually spelled with one t ) was a mathematician and astrologer born in 1175 in southern Scotland or northern England. He died in about 1232. Return to the table of contents . Mitchell Scott England Long before Sir Walter Scott had given increased celebrity to the wizard feats of his clansman, Michael Scott, his fame had penetrated to the remotest villages of Northumberland. Similar anecdotes, but somewhat varied in the telling, have been transmitted of him there, as well as in the hamlets on the northern side of the Borders.... The Northumbrians call the magician Mitchell Scott. The fame of Mitchell is great in that district for having beat the devil and his myrmidons by the well-known device of employing them to spin ropes of sand, denying them even the aid of chaff to supply some degree of tenacity to the incohesivo material. Source (books.google.com): The Denham Tracts: A Collection of Folklore by Michael Aislabie Denham , edited by James Hardy, vol. 2 (London: Published for the Folklore Society, 1895), p. 116 . Source (Internet Archive): The Denham Tracts: A Collection of Folklore by Michael Aislabie Denham , edited by James Hardy, vol. 2 (London: Published for the Folklore Society, 1895), p. 116 . Return to the table of contents . Donald Duival and the Devil Scotland The devil is apt to be cheated by clever mortals.... Donald Duival had a hand-to-hand fight with the devil, and overcame him. He would not allow him go until he gave him whatsover he asked. This was myriads of elves shut up in a box, or a book with clasps, as some say. The box or book was somehow opened, and every one of the elves rushed out, invisible, one version says, and kept crying, "Obair, obair -- work, work." He set them to thrash his corn, but that was done in a minute. He then asked them to build him a "square" or farm out-house, and it was put up in no time. Then he asked them to strip the hill above his house of its heather. Before he could look about him, they had all the heather at his side. He then asked them to build sand mounds in the sea, and they were spoiling the harbours when he stopped them and asked them to make ropes of the sand. This they are still working at, it is said, for they have not been able to hit on a method of making ropes of sand purely. Could they be allowed to use straw along with sand, they would succeed. Source (books.google.com): Alexander Macbain, "Highland Superstition," Transactions of the Gaelic Society of Inverness vol. 14 (1887-88), pp. 239-40. . Source (Internet Archive): Alexander Macbain, "Highland Superstition," Transactions of the Gaelic Society of Inverness vol. 14 (1887-88), pp. 239-40. . Return to the table of contents . A Wild Legend Scotland The parish [of Kemnay] is believed by some to derive its name from the Kembs , a chain of low rounded sand-hills, which run along the northern boundary at some distance from the Don, and terminate on the borders of Cluny, on the southeast. A wild legend accounts for the peculiar broken character of these hills or rather hillocks , but it is almost forgotten in the parish, so that it is well nigh impossible to get a correct version of it. It appears, however, that the devil challenged an old witch to make a rope of sand. How she contrived to outwit his Satanic Majesty is unknown, but win the wager she did. The devil's rope broke, and remains to this day in the Kembs of Kemnay. Source (books.google.com): Jeanie M. Laing, "Some Notes on the History of Kemnay," Scottish Notes and Queries , vol. 1, no. 9 (February 1888), p. 138 . Return to the table of contents . The Devil and the Schoolmaster at Cockerham England It is said that the arch Spirit of Evil once took up his abode in Cockerham, and so scared and disturbed the inhabitants of that quiet place, that at length in public meeting, to consider how to free themselves from this fiendish persecution, they appointed the schoolmaster, as the wisest and cleverest man in the place, to do his best to drive the devil away. Using the prescribed incantation at midnight, the pedagogue succeeded in raising Satan; but when he saw his large horns and tail, saucer eyes, and long claws, he became almost speechless. According to the recognised procedure in such cases, the devil granted him the privilege of setting three tasks, which if he (Satan) accomplished, the schoolmaster became his prey; if he failed, it would compel the flight of the demon from Cockerham. The first task, to count the number of dewdrops on certain hedges, was soon accomplished; and so was the second, to count the number of stalks in a field of grain. The third task was then proposed in the following words, according to a doggerel version of the tradition: Now make me, dear sir, a rope of yon sand, Which will bear washing in Cocker, and not lose a strand. Speedily the rope was twisted of fine sand, but it would not stand washing; so the devil was foiled, and at one stride he stepped over the bridge over Broadfleet, at Pilling Moss. The metrical version of the legend is scarcely worth printing. Source (books.google.com): John Harland and T. T. Wilkinson, Lancashire Folk-Lore: Illustrative of the Superstitious Beliefs and Practices, Local Customs and Usages of the People of the County Palatine (London: Frederick Warne and Company, 1867), pp. 83-84 . Source (Internet Archive): John Harland and T. T. Wilkinson, Lancashire Folk-Lore: Illustrative of the Superstitious Beliefs and Practices, Local Customs and Usages of the People of the County Palatine (London: Frederick Warne and Company, 1867), pp. 83-84 . Cockerham is a small village in Lancashire. Return to the table of contents . Tregeagle England There is a popular story attached to this lake [Dozmary Pool], ridiculous enough as most of those tales are. It is, that a person of the name of Tregeagle, who had been a rich and powerful man but very wicked, guilty of murder and other heinous crimes, lived near this place; and that, after his death, his spirit haunted the neighbourhood, but was at length exorcised and laid to rest in Dozmary Pool. But having in his lifetime, in order to enjoy the good things of this world, disposed of his soul and body to the devil, his infernal majesty takes great pleasure in tormenting him, by imposing on him difficult tasks; such as spinning a rope of sand, dipping out the pool with a limpet shell, etc. Source (books.google.com): Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The drolls, Traditions, and Superstititions of Old Cornwall , first series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), p. 147 . Source (Internet Archive): Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The drolls, Traditions, and Superstititions of Old Cornwall , first series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), p. 147 . Dozmary Pool is a small lake in Cornwall. Its name is variously spelled Dozmary, Dozmaré, and Dosmery. Return to the table of contents . The Devil's Mill Ireland There was a squire one time and he wanted money badly and the devil appeared to him and he asked him if he wanted money and he said he did. The devil said he would give him a room of money on conditions that he would go with him at the end of twenty-one years and if he was not able he would give work to do what he would not be able to do. They made a bargain for a roomful of gold and the devil sent his men to fill the room with with gold. When they were shovelling in the gold they were getting tired and the squire had a hole made in the floor and his men were bringing it away into another room so the devil stopped his men from shovelling and he called up the squire and the squire told him he had enough. So at the end of twenty-one years the devil was to come for the squire, and if the squire gave him work to do he would not go with him. The squire began to live in happiness and pleasure with all the gold he had until the twenty-one years were up. Then he began to get down-hearted and did not know what to do. He was retired to his room, and he was reading his bible and trying to content himself. The devil appeared to him and told him to be preparing that in a week his twenty-one years would be up, so when the twenty-one years were up the devil came to him in the room and told him he would have to give him something to do and if he was able to do it he would have to go with him tomorrow. The squire brought the devil to a river in his own land and he said that he would have to build a mill two story high and have it built and slated before twelve o'clock the next day. The squire thought the devil would not be able to build it that short of time. Early next morning he was called by one of his servants and the servant told him that the mill was built below at the river; he got up and went down to the mill, and he did not know what to do. So home he went and began to read his bible until the devil was with him and asked him was he ready to come or did he see the mill. The squire said he did and it was a great mill and it would take a week to prepare. He said he could not that he would have to come now and give him work. He would give him no time, and his wife was arguing with her servants. Is there anything you cannot do try said the devil, "can you stop a woman's tongue" if you stop my ladies tongue. The devil disappeared out of the room and the servants ran up the stairs to the master and said the wife was dying and when he went down she was dead. Now said the devil is there anything else you have to do. You will have to give me until I bury my wife. The squire locked himself up in the room reading the bible and trying to convert himself. The devil had him anoyed and wanted him to bury his wife. He did not bury her for seven days so the devil was trying to get him to go and he was reading the bible night and day. After he burying his wife the devil came and said he should come now. The squire wanted him to give wait for three days and it was no use he would not give him three hours. He said he would not go until one day and he said he would sooner be dead than alive. The devil said he bring him one way as the other dead or alive. The squire said he would like to be hanged with a certain class of a rope a rope that would be made of sand of the sea shore. The devil struck him the rope of sand and blinded one eye in him. He asked five minutes more off him and he said he would not give so the squire began to cry. The candle he had was nearly burned out and he asked him him to give him until the candle was burned out and the devil said he would and the squire quenched the candle and the candle was never burned out from that day to this. The squire said he would not go until the candle was burned out and he said it would never be burned out so the devil went out the door mad. Got by, Told by, Ellen Rattigan, John Oates, Kilroosky, Kilroosky, Roscommon. Roscommon. Age 70 years. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Roscommon >> Bealach, pp. 186-90 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . The episode of making a rope of sand is a type 1174 folktale. In most versions of this tale the devil is unsuccessful in completing this task. The episode of the candle that does not burn out is a type 1187 folktale. The Shoemaker, the Tailor, and the Sailor Germany Once there were a shoemaker, a tailor, and a sailor who came upon hard times. Then they made a pact with the devil: that he should fulfill all their wishes, but for this they signed away their souls. Thus they wished for endless money, good food and drink, and everything else that they could think of. But the deadline soon came, and each one thought of some task that the devil would be unable fulfill, in which case they would be free of their pact. Thus the tailor demanded that the devil bring to him every trimming of cloth that he had ever cut off -- large and small -- in his previous tailoring. The devil should sew together into one piece every scrap that had ever fallen to the floor, and not a single stitch was to be visible. The devil soon completed this task and wrung the tailor's neck. The same thing happened to the shoemaker, who demanded a single hide stitched together from the trimmings of all the shoes he had ever made. However, the sailor gave the devil the task of making an anchor rope out of fine sand. The devil attempted to do so, but failed, and thus the sailor saved his own life and his soul. Source (books.google.com): Rudolf Baier, "Der betrogene Teufel: Zwei Märchen von der Insel Rügen," Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde , edited by J. W. Wolf, vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1855), pp. 147-48 . Source (Internet Archive): Rudolf Baier, "Der betrogene Teufel: Zwei Märchen von der Insel Rügen," Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde , edited by J. W. Wolf, vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1855), pp. 147-48 . This legend was collected on the German island of Rügen in the Baltic Sea. Return to the table of contents . The Cheated Devil Germany In a village there lived two brothers who led very wanton lives. After they had squandered all their money and property the devil came to them. He told them that he would give them a great pile of money that they could never use up. At the end of a year he would return, and they should give him a task. If he were able to fulfill this task, then they would forfeit their bodies and souls to him. If he failed to do so for even one of them, then he would give them a second pile of money equal to what he had already given them. The brothers entered into this pact. The younger brother purchased many horses, and from the entire countryside he hauled together a whole mountain of stones. To the contrary, the older brother did not give up his wild living. At the end of a year the Evil One returned. The younger brother commanded him to blow apart the pile of stones with just three puffs. With only his second puff the devil blew all the sand in the pile into the sky, and with his third puff half the mountain and disappeared. Having done this he took hold of the man, and then flew with him to the older brother. This brother was sitting in a tavern, and came outside only after much cajoling. When the devil asked him for his task, this brother broke wind and said, "Catch that for me, and tie a square knot into it!" That was too much for the devil. He had to release the younger brother and give them a great pile of money as well. One might think that the requirement to tie a square knot was superfluous -- that in any event the devil would have been unable to fulfill such a task. But that is not true, as a simple peasant learned to his sorrow. He gave the same task to the Evil One, but without the square knot, and what happened? A day passed, then a month, and then another month, and the devil did not return. The peasant felt quite safe, but at the end of an entire year the Evil One came running up, out of breath. He pulled out a feather, and behold: He had captured all the man's wind, to the last puff, and put it into the quill. And, of course, with that he had won the peasant's soul. Another man from the same village had better luck. He commanded the devil to to collect and bring to him all the iron that had worn away from his plow as it had worked his fields. Knowing that he would not be able to do this, the devil threw the contract at the peasant's feet, and flew away. The devil is also unable to spin a mountain of sand into a rope. Many individuals have escaped from him by giving him this task. Source (books.google.com): Ulrich Jahn, "Der geprellte Teufel," Volkssagen aus Pommern und Rügen , 2nd edition (Berlin: Mayer & Müller, 1889), , no. 402, pp. 320-21 . Source (Internet Archive): Ulrich Jahn, "Der geprellte Teufel," Volkssagen aus Pommern und Rügen (Stettin: Verlag von H. Dannenberg, 1886), , no. 402, pp. 320-21 . Jahn's source: "Oral, from the districts of Bütow, Fürstentum, and Regenwalde." The episode about Deceiving the Devil by Breaking Wind is a type 1176 folktale. A square knot (German Kreuzknoten ) is also called a reef knot. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 21, 2021. Straightening a Curly Hair: Folktales of type 1175 Straightening a Curly Hair folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1175 in which a demon is defeated because he cannot straighten a curly hair Edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2021 Contents The Brahmarâkshas and the Hair (India) Tapai and the Brahman (India) The Devil and the Farmer (England) The Deceived Devil (Germany) Related links Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Brahmarâkshas and the Hair India In a certain village there lived a very rich landlord who owned several villages, but was such a great miser that no tenant would willingly cultivate his lands, and those he had gave him not a little trouble. He was indeed so vexed with them that he left all his lands untilled, and his tanks and irrigation channels dried up. All this, of course, made him poorer and poorer day by day. Nevertheless, he never liked the idea of freely opening his purse to his tenants and obtaining their good will. While he was in this frame of mind a learned Sanayâsi [holy man] paid him a visit, and on his representing his case to him, he said, "My dear son, I know an incantation (mantra) in which I can instruct you. If you repeat it for three months day and night, a Brahmarâkshas will appear before you on the first day of the fourth month. Make him your servant, and then you can set at naught all your petty troubles with your tenants. The Brahmarâkshas will obey all your orders, and you will find him equal to one hundred servants." Our hero fell at his feet and begged to be instructed at once. The sage then sat facing the east and his disciple the landlord facing the west, and in this position formal instruction was given, after which the Sanayâsi went his way. The landlord, mightily pleased at what he had learnt, went on practicing the incantation, till, on the first day of the fourth month, the great Brahmarâkshas stood before him. "What do you want, sir, for my hands?" said he. "What is the object of your having propitiated me for these three months?" The landlord was thunderstruck at the huge monster who now stood before him and still more so at his terrible voice, but nevertheless said, "I want you to become my servant and obey all my commands." "Agreed," answered the Brahmarâkshas in a very mild tone, for it was his duty to leave off his impertinent ways when anyone who had performed the required penance wanted him to become his servant. "Agreed. But you must always give me work to do. When one job is finished you must at once give me a second, and so on. If you fail, I shall kill you." The landlord, thinking that he would have work for several such Brahmarâkshasas, was pleased to see that his demoniacal servant was so eager to help him. He at once took him to a big tank, which had been dried up for several years, and pointing it out spoke as follows, "You see this big tank; you must make it as deep as the height of two palmyra trees and repair the embankment wherever it is broken." "Yes, my master, your orders shall be obeyed," humbly replied the servant and fell to work. The landlord, thinking that it would take several months, if not years, to do the work in the tank, for it was two kos long and one kos broad, returned delighted to his home, where his people were awaiting him with a sumptuous dinner. When evening was approaching, the Brahmarâkshas came to inform his master that he had finished his work in the tank. He was indeed astonished and feared for his own life. "What! Finished the work in one day which I thought would occupy him for months and years. If he goes on at this rate, how shall I keep him employed. And when I cannot find it for him he will kill me!" Thus he thought and began to weep. His wife wiped the tears that ran down his face, and said, "My dearest husband, you must not lose courage. Get out of the Brahmarâkshas all the work you can and then let me know. I'll give him something that will keep him engaged for a very very long time, and then he'll trouble us no more." But her husband only thought her words to be meaningless and followed the Brahmarâkshas to see what he had done. Sure enough the thing was as complete as could be, so he asked him to plow all his lands, which extended over twenty villages! This was done in two ghatikas ! The landlord now grew hopeless. "What more work have you for me?" roared the Brahmarâkshas, as he found that his master had nothing for him to do, and that the time for his eating him up was approaching. "My dear friend," said he, "my wife says she has a little job to give you. Do it please now. I think that is the last thing I can give you to do, and after it, in obedience to the conditions under which you took service with me, I must become your prey! At this moment his wife came to them, holding in her left hand a long hair, which she had just pulled out from her head, and said, "Well Brahmarâkshas, I have only a very light job for you. Take this hair, and when you have made it straight, bring it back to me." The Brahmarâkshas calmly took it, and sat in a pîpal tree to make it straight. He rolled it several times on his thigh and lifted it up to see if it became straight; but no, it would still bend! Just then it occurred to him that goldsmiths, when they want to make their metal wires straight, have them heated in fire; so he went to a fire and placed the hair over it, and of course it frizzled up with a nasty smell! He was horrified! "What will my master's wife say if I do not produce the hair she gave me?" So he became mightily afraid, and ran away. This story is told to explain the modern custom of nailing a handful of hair to a tree in which devils are supposed to dwell, to drive them away. Source (books.google.com): Georgiana Kingscote and Natêsá Sástrî, Tales of the Sun; or, Folklore of Southern India (London and Calcutta: W. H. Allen and Company, 1890), no. 26, pp. 285-89 . Source (Internet Archive): Georgiana Kingscote and Natêsá Sástrî, Tales of the Sun; or, Folklore of Southern India (London and Calcutta: W. H. Allen and Company, 1890), no. 26, pp. 285-89 . The sentence above that begins "When evening was approaching..." reads in the original publication "When enemies were approaching...." I have taken the liberty to correct this apparent typographical error. --DLA. Return to the table of contents . Tapai and the Brahman India A middle-aged Brahman, one cold winter's night, was crossing a wide plain on his way home. The wind blew shrill and chill, and the wayfarer, Sibu by name, trembled in every limb. Suddenly, on the left of his path, he saw a fire blazing cheerily, and round it a number of people enjoying its warmth. What a temptation to warm himself in good company before continuing his homeward journey! He came near, and feeling the genial influence of the flame from afar, incautiously shouted " Tapai, tapai ," meaning "I am warmed, I am warmed." Alas, the creatures round the fire were maleficent ghosts, hideous, distorted, grinning, sworn enemies of mankind, shouting obscene words with the nasal utterance which marks their race. Moreover, one of them was named Tapai, and the ghostly assemblage were mightily vexed at a mortal's familiar use of their comrade's name. They threatened him with instant death. The Brahman, in terror, felt for his sacred thread, but it had slipped down. He strove to repeat the holy names of the gods, but his memory was paralyzed with fear. But finally the thread came into his hand, and taking heart, he boldly asserted that he knew Tapai quite well, seeing that Tapai and his ancestors for three generations had been the slaves of his family. "Well," cried Tapai, "if he can tell me the names of my ancestors, I will become his bond servant." To which the keen-witted priest replied, "How can I be expected to know the names of all the slaves of my ancestors? But I have them recorded in a ledger at home." On which he was allowed to depart on condition that he returned on the third day to answer to Tapai's challenge. Otherwise not only he but his family would perish at the hands of the man-eating bhutas . The Brahman went home, saved for the moment, indeed, but filled with despair for the future. For two miserable days the wretched priest could neither eat nor sleep, and his wife and daughter and infant son shared his anxiety. The third night, when his family slept, the miserable man went forth to hang himself in the jungle rather than face his ghostly foes. But on the very tree he chose for his suicide were two dark forms. He shuddered, he stood still, but he listened. It was Tapai and his wife, and the latter, with true feminine curiosity, was asking her husband the names of his forebears. Of course Tapai had to tell, as every husband does when his wife presses him. He recited the following verse: Haramu, And his son Chharamu, And his son Apai, And his son Tapai. Such was the verse which the Brahman committed to memory, and groping his way home through the dark forest, faced life with a new confidence. Next evening he went to the ghostly rendezvous, and the unlucky Tapai followed him home, his submissive slave. But there was one condition. Tapai would perform all tasks given to him from dawn till nightfall. But he must be kept occupied all the time. At first the condition seemed easy to fulfil. The bhuta was ordered to build a palace, raise a noble temple, dig a tank, procure a bridegroom for the Brahman's daughter, etc., etc. But there are limits to human desires and human inventiveness, and even the Brahman was, in spite of all the luxury with which he was now surrounded, a harassed and perplexed mortal. He was like to die of sheer worry and anxious thought, when his wife came to his rescue. She plucked a curly hair from her husband's eyebrow. "Give that to the creature," she said, "and tell him to straighten it." The poor demon, for once, was at his wit's end. He pulled the hair, and pressed it, and wetted it. But all in vain. The moment it was released, it curled up again. Finally, at nightfall, the good Brahman released Tapai, as Prospero released Ariel, and then he and his family lived happily afterwards! Source (JSTOR): J. D. Anderson, book review in Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 31 (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1920), pp. 258-60 . Anderson retells this story in his review of the book Sajher Bhog by Rai Sahib Dinesh Chandra Sen (Calcutta: Sisir Publishing House, 1919). Title added by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Devil and the Farmer England The devil once called on a farmer and asked him if he could give him a job. "What can you do?" said the farmer. "Oh! anything about a farm," said the devil. "Well, I want a man to help me thresh a mow of wheat," says the farmer. "All right," says the devil, "I'm your man." When they got to the barn, the farmer said to the devil, "Which do you want to do, thresh or throw down?" "Thresh," said the devil. So the farmer got on top of the mow and began to throw down the sheaves of wheat onto the barn floor, but as fast as he could throw them down, the devil with one stroke of his flail knocked all the grain out of them and sent the sheaves flying out of the barn door. The farmer thought he had got a queer sort of a thresher man; and as he couldn't throw down fast enough for him, he says to him, "Will you come and throw down?" "All right," says the devil. So the farmer gets down off the mow by the ladder, but the devil, he just gives a leap up from the barn floor to the top of the mow without waiting to go up the ladder. "Are you ready?" says the devil. "Yes," says the farmer. With that the devil sticks his fork into as many sheaves as would cover the barn floor and throws them down. "That'll do for a bit," says the farmer. So the devil sat down and waited till the farmer had threshed that lot, and when he was ready again, he threw another floor full; and before night they'd finished threshing the whole mow of wheat. The farmer couldn't help thinking a good deal about his new man, for he'd never seen such a one before. (He didn't know it was the devil, you know, because he took care not to let the farmer see his cloven foot.) So in the morning he got up early and went and spoke to a cunning man about it. The cunning man said it must be the devil that had come to him, and as he had asked him in, he couldn't get rid of him unless he could give him a job that he couldn't do. Soon after the farmer got home again, his new man wanted to know what he was to do that day, and the farmer thought he'd give him a teaser, so he says, "Go into the barn, look, and count the number of grains there are in that pile of wheat that we threshed out yesterday." "All right," says old Nick, and off he went. In a few minutes he comes back and says, "Master, there are so many" (naming ever so many thousand or millions and odd, I don't know how many). "Are you sure you counted them all?" says the farmer. "Every grain," says Satan. Then the farmer ordered him to go and fill a hogshead barrel full of water with a sieve. So off he shoots again, but soon comes back and tells the farmer he'd done it; and sure enough he had. And every job the farmer set him to do was the same. The poor farmer didn't know what to make of it, for though he was getting his work done up so quick, he didn't like his new man's company. However, the farmer thought he'd have another try to trick him, and told the devil he wanted him to go with him mowing next morning. "All right," says the old one. "I'll be there, master." But as soon as it was night, the farmer went to the field, and in the part the devil was to mow, he drove a lot of harrow tines into the ground amongst the grass. In the morning they got to the field in smart time, and began to mow. The farmer he took his side, and told the devil to begin on the other, where he'd stuck in the harrow tines, you know. Well, at it went the devil, who but he, and soon got in among the stuck-up harrow tines, but they made no odds. His scythe went through them all, and the only notice on them he took was to say to the farmer every time he'd cut one of them through, "a burdock, master," and kept on just the same. The poor farmer, he got so frightened at last, he threw down his scythe and left the devil to finish the field. As luck would have it, soon after he got home, a Gypsy woman called at the farm house, and seeing the farmer was in trouble, asked him what was the matter. So he up and told her all about it. "Ah, master," she says to him when he had told her all about it, "you have got the devil in your house sure enough, and you can only get rid of him by giving him something to do that he can't manage." "Well, woman," says the farmer, "what's the use of telling me that? I tried everything I can think of, but darned if I can find him any job that he can't do." "I'll tell you what to do," says the Gypsy woman, "When he comes home, you get the missus to give him one of her curly hairs, and then send him to the blacksmith's shop to straighten it on the blacksmith's anvil. He'll find he can't do that, and he'll get so wild over it, that he'll never come back to you again." The farmer was very thankful to the Gypsy woman and said he'd try her plan. So by and by in comes the old fellow, and says, "I have finished the mowing, master. What else have you got for me to do?" "Well, I can't think of another job just now," says the farmer, "but I think the missus has got a little job for you." So he called the missus, and she gave the devil a curly hair lapped up in a bit of paper, and told him to go to the blacksmith's shop and hammer that there hair straight; and when it was straight to bring it back to her. "All right, missus," the devil says, and off he shot. When he got to the blacksmith's shop, he hammered and hammered at that there hair on the anvil, but the more he hammered the crookeder the hair got; so at last he threw down the hammer and the hair, and bolted, and never went back to the farmer again. Source (books.google.com): Jesse Salisbury, A Glossary of Words and Phrases Used in South-East Worcestershire (London: English Dialect Society, 1893), pp. 72-75 . Source (Internet Archive): Jesse Salisbury, A Glossary of Words and Phrases Used in South-East Worcestershire (London: English Dialect Society, 1893), pp. 72-75 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Deceived Devil Germany A young man made the following contract with the devil: The devil was to provide the man with money. In return, at a predetermined time the man was to give the devil work that would keep him busy an entire day. If the man were able to do this, then the devil would have given him the money for nothing. If he were not able to do this, then the man would belong to the devil, and the latter would be able to take him away. It came to pass that the time lapsed just as the man was celebrating his wedding. A boy came up to him and told him that a strange gentleman was outside who wanted to speak with him. The man immediately remembered the devil and did not go. The boy returned and called for him again, but still he did not go. Then the devil came inside personally and demanded either a task or the man himself. The man showed him a field of clover and told him to mow it. This would have taken a single man several days, but the devil finished it in an instant and demanded another task. Then the man took a bushel of clover seeds, scattered them over the field, and told the devil to gather them back up. It was a simple matter for him, and he was finished in a half hour. The man became terrified when the devil asked for yet another task. Then the man's bride noticed her husband's concern and said, "What is the matter? Why do you keep running in and out?" The man confessed everything to her and told her of the danger that he now faced. The bride said, "I will help you. You should have told me about it earlier!" Plucking out one of her short curly hairs, she gave it to her husband and said, "Take this to the devil and demand that he straighten it!" The man did this. The devil made an ugly face, then picked and pulled and bent away at the hair. He even placed it on an anvil and tried to pound it straight with a hammer, but it was all for nothing. The devil was not able to complete this task that day. The hair remained curly and crooked, and he was tricked out of his prize. Source (books.google.com): Ernst Meier, "Der angeführte Teufel," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 33, pp. 120-22 . Source (Internet Archive): Ernst Meier, "Der angeführte Teufel," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 33, pp. 120-22 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . Related links Additional folktales about mortals who enter into reckless contracts with demonic helpers: Crop Division between Man and Ogre , folktales of type 1030. Deceiving the Devil with a Rope of Sand , folktales of type 1174. Deceiving the Devil by Breaking Wind , folktales of type 1176. Faust Legends . The Name of the Helper , folktales of type 500, in which a mysterious and threatening helper is defeated when the hero or heroine discovers his name. Master-Builders and Their Supernatural Helpers , migratory legends of type 7065. Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Table of Contents Revised March 23, 2021. Deceiving the Devil by Breaking Wind: Folktales of Type 1176 Deceiving the Devil by Breaking Wind or a similar trick folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1176 translated and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2020-2021 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Ridiculing the Devil (Martin Luther). The Peasant and the Devil (Martin Montanus). Timmermann's Fart (Germany). Deceiving the Devil (Germany). The Cheated Devil (Germany). The Square Knot (East Prussia). A Story (Ireland). A Funny Story (Ireland). Links to Related Tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Ridiculing the Devil Martin Luther To show that ridicule is the best means of dealing with the devil, Dr. Luther related the following story, which took place in Magdeburg: When I was beginning my ministry in Magdeburg, a citizen's child died, and he did not have a Roman Catholic vigil performed, nor a death-mass sung, for these were expensive. The devil intervened, for he gladly would have preserved Purgatorium and discursum animarum in Magdeburg. Every night at eight o'clock the devil came into the citizen's bedroom and cried like a young child. The man was distraught and did not know what to do. The priests exclaimed: "Now you see what happens when you do not hold a vigil. The poor little soul is suffering." The man wrote to me and asked what he should do, for he had read my sermon on the saying "You have Moses and the prophets." I wrote to him that he should not believe the priests. He should let the entire household know that the sound of a child crying was the devil's doing. Then the members of the household ridiculed the devil, saying "Devil, why are you here? Have you nothing better to do? Go back where you belong, into the depths of hell, you cursed spirit!" Then the devil ceased immitating a child and instead stormed about, ranting and raving. He often appeared in the form of a howling wolf, but the children and other members of the household simply ridiculed him. Whenever a maid went upstairs with a child, he would follow after them, clapping his hands, but they responded, "Hey, are you crazy?" Finally Herr Jacob [Präpositus], an official in Bremen, came and resided with them. He wanted to hear the spirit. The host said, "Just wait until eight o'clock, and you shall hear him. He will come for sure." And that is what happened. The devil threw everything down from the stop of the stove. Herr Jacob said, "I have heard enough. Let's go to bed now!" There were two bedrooms next to each other. The lady of the house, the children, and the servants were sleeping in the one room. The host and Herr Jacob were in the other room. Herr Jacob had just gone to bed when the devil appeared and teased him, pulling off the bed-cover. Herr Jacob was terrified and prayed fervently, while the devil stormed about on the floor. Finally the devil went over to the poor woman in the next room. He teased her as well, running across her bed like a pack of rats. He would not stop, so the woman raised up, stuck her a--- out of the bed, and let a f--- (politely stated). Then she said, "Look, devil, here is a staff for you. Take it in your hand and go on a pilgrimage to your idol, the pope in Rome. Get an indulgence from him!" And thus the devil was ridiculed. Thereafter the devil stayed away with his spooking, quia est superbus spiritus et non potest ferre contemptum sui [for the proud spirit cannot bear contempt]. Source (books.google.com): D. Martin Luther's Tischreden oder Colloquia , edited by Karl Eduard Förstemann, section 3 (Leipzig: Gebauer'sche Buchhandlung, 1846), pp. 38-39 . Source (Internet Archive): D. Martin Luther's Tischreden oder Colloquia , edited by Karl Eduard Förstemann, section 3 (Leipzig: Gebauer'sche Buchhandlung, 1846), pp. 38-39 . Martin Luther's Tischreden ( Table Talk ) is a collection of the protestant reformer's sayings collected by his students between 1531 and 1544, and first published in 1566. Return to the table of contents . The Peasant and the Devil Martin Montanus A peasant in a village was wealthy in land and goods, but still rash and disagreeable. It was harvest time, and he should have had workers in his fields cutting the grain, but he did not want to give out the money for their pay. So it is with the wealthy: The more they have, the stingier they are. Thus he spent day and night worrying about how he could bring in his harvest without any cost to himself. While he was thus fretting, the devil appeared to him in the form of a man and asked him why he was so concerned. Would he be able to help? The peasant said, "Dear brother, I have a great harvest in my fields. It should be cut and brought into my barn, but I don't want to give out my money to the workers. If you have any advice for me, let me hear it." The devil said, "If you agree to be mine afterward, I shall bring all your grain into your barn." The sly peasant, thinking that he could outwit the devil, answered, "If you can do three things that I ask of you, then afterward I will go with you wherever you want." The devil agreed to this and asked what he should do. "Good," said the peasant. "First bring all my grain into the barn, without damaging any of it. And after you have done that, bring to my house all the wood that is lying about in the forest and in the meadows. When you have done all this, I'll tell you what else you have to do." The devil did not think that any of this would be difficult, and he completed these two tasks forthwith. He then returned to the peasant and asked what his last task was to be. Now early that morning the peasant had eaten raw turnips so that he would be able to fart mightily. Then he let a great fart and said to the devil, "Listen, brother, catch that and tie a knot in it!" The devil was unable to do this, so he went away and left the peasant sitting there by himself. Source (books.google.com): Martin Montanus, Schwankbücher (1557-1566) , edited by Johannes Bolte (Tübingen: Gedruckt für den litterarischen Verein in Stuttgart, 1899), pp. 300-301. . Source (Internet Archive): Martin Montanus, Schwankbücher (1557-1566) , edited by Johannes Bolte (Tübingen: Gedruckt für den litterarischen Verein in Stuttgart, 1899), pp. 300-301. . The German author Martin Montanus was born about 1537 in Strasbourg, and died about 1566. Return to the table of contents . Timmermann's Fart Germany Once a carpenter made a pact with the devil, and when his time was up, the devil came to him and wanted to take him away. However, the carpenter told him that he had to fulfill one last request for him, and the devil agreed to this. With that the carpenter broke wind mightily and then told the devil to bring it back to him. The devil was not able to do this, however much he tried. A whirlwind is just the devil flying along behind the carpenter's fart. For this reason a whirlwind is called simply "Timmerman's Fart." [ Timmermann is Low German for carpenter .] Source (Internet Archive): A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Timmermann's Skitz," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg, Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), p. 304 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "Oral tradition from Werlte." Return to the table of contents . Deceiving the Devil Germany There were once three happy-go-lucky fellows who made a pact with the devil, promising their souls to him on a certain date if he would make them rich. A further condition was that he would have to grant them one last wish when he came to get them. The devil agreed to this. The first man hauled gigantic stone blocks down from a mountain from morning until evening, When his time was up and the devil came to get him, he told the devil to replace all the stones back on the mountain within one day. But the devil did not need a day. He finished the task in five minutes and took him away. Then the devil came for the second fellow, who following the pact had gone immediately to a tavern where he joyfully spent every day eating and drinking to his heart's content, for he had all the money he could use. When he saw the devil coming he was full of good cheer and made no sign of getting ready to leave. The latter told him to make haste, for his time was up. The fellow said, "Now, now, I still have some time. My hour hasn't come yet." Walking back and forth in his room he finally broke wind mightily and then said to the devil, "Bring that back to me!" The devil was not able to do this, and he left in an sour mood. I cannot tell you what the third fellow did to defeat the devil. If you want to know, you'll have to ask the old tavern keeper at Steina. By now it will have come back to him. Source (Internet Archive): A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Der betrogene Teufel," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg, Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 329-30 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "Oral tradition from Steina." Return to the table of contents . The Cheated Devil Germany In a village there lived two brothers who led very wanton lives. After they had squandered all their money and property the devil came to them. He told them that he would give them a great pile of money that they could never use up. At the end of a year he would return, and they should give him a task. If he were able to fulfill this task, then they would forfeit their bodies and souls to him. If he failed to do so for even one of them, then he would give them a second pile of money equal to what he had already given them. The brothers entered into this pact. The younger brother purchased many horses, and from the entire countryside he hauled together a whole mountain of stones. To the contrary, the older brother did not give up his wild living. At the end of a year the Evil One returned. The younger brother commanded him to blow apart the pile of stones with just three puffs. With only his second puff the devil blew all the sand in the pile into the sky, and with his third puff half the mountain and disappeared. Having done this he took hold of the man, and then flew with him to the older brother. This brother was sitting in a tavern, and came outside only after much cajoling. When the devil asked him for his task, this brother broke wind and said, "Catch that for me, and tie a square knot into it!" That was too much for the devil. He had to release the younger brother and give them a great pile of money as well. One might think that the requirement to tie a square knot was superfluous -- that in any event the devil would have been unable to fulfill such a task. But that is not true, as a simple peasant learned to his sorrow. He gave the same task to the Evil One, but without the square knot, and what happened? A day passed, then a month, and then another month, and the devil did not return. The peasant felt quite safe, but at the end of an entire year the Evil One came running up, out of breath. He pulled out a feather, and behold: He had captured all the man's wind, to the last puff, and put it into the quill. And, of course, with that he had won the peasant's soul. Another man from the same village had better luck. He commanded the devil to to collect and bring to him all the iron that had worn away from his plow as it had worked his fields. Knowing that he would not be able to do this, the devil threw the contract at the peasant's feet, and flew away. The devil is also unable to spin a mountain of sand into a rope. Many individuals have escaped from him by giving him this task. Source (books.google.com): Ulrich Jahn, "Der geprellte Teufel," Volkssagen aus Pommern und Rügen , 2nd edition (Berlin: Mayer & Müller, 1889), , no. 402, pp. 320-21 . Source (Internet Archive): Ulrich Jahn, "Der geprellte Teufel," Volkssagen aus Pommern und Rügen (Stettin: Verlag von H. Dannenberg, 1886), , no. 402, pp. 320-21 . Jahn's source: "Oral, from the districts of Bütow, Fürstentum, and Regenwalde." A square knot (German Kreuzknoten ) is also called a reef knot. Spinning sand into a rope is the principal motif in folktales of type 1174 . Return to the table of contents . The Square Knot East Prussia Once there was a journeyman tailor who had worked diligently all winter. When spring arrived he was no longer willing to squat on the tailoring table making one stitch after the other. He packed up his few things, and with his awl in one hand and his iron in the other he went on his way once again. Before long he met up with a young fellow with fists like a pair of hammers, and the tailor knew at once who he was. "Hello, Brother Smith, where are you off to?" "Thank you, Brother Tailor. I'm just following my nose." "Shall we go along together?" "Why not!" And so they plodded along together. Some time later they came upon someone else. He was not as tall as the huge smith, but was still a a good head taller than the tailor. As his cap and clothes were covered with white dust, they said to him, "Hello, Brother Miller, where are you off to?" Thank you, Brother Tailor, thank you Brother Smith, I'm just going wherever my feet take me." "Shall we go along together?" "Why not!" And so they plodded along together. Toward evening they came to a crossroad. The tailor's nose pointed to the right, and the miller's feet wanted to go to the right as well, so they made their way in that direction. But it was not the right way. They came into a deep forest and did not know the way out again. Finally the pathway ended altogether, and they found themselves in a large meadow where there stood a large devil-stone. It was covered with green moss and was buried halfway in the earth. The tailor said nothing, but the smith and the miller began to curse like soldiers. "The devil take me!" shouted the one; the other added, "And let the devil take me as well!" No sooner had they said this than from the trees there came a roaring and groaning sound, which curdled their blood. Suddenly someone appeared before them, as if he had grown out of the earth. He was wearing a little green hat with a red rooster-feather on it. Although he was dressed like a hunter, it was obvious, even from the distance of a hundred feet, that he was up to no good. With his right foot he scratched like a rooster on a manure pile, and then said, "I'm the one who is taking you away! But today has been a good day for me, so each one of you can demand something from me. If you ask me to do something that I cannot do, I'll lead you out of the woods. But otherwise you must go to hell with me!" "You first," he said to the smith, who made a face like a cat in a thunderstorm, and did not know what to say. "You're running out of time!" shouted the devil. The smith stuttered, "Can you throw this big stone here into the clouds and then catch it with your right ear?" Saying nothing, the devil grabbed the stone with both fists as though he wanted to squeeze it to death, and with one jerk pulled it out of the earth. He swung it up and down and then threw it into the clouds -- so high that it could no longer be seen. When the rock came hurtling back, the three of them jumped aside like billy-goats. The devil caught it with his right ear, then gently placed it back into its hole. "What do you say to that?" he asked the smith, who was standing lamely by. The devil gave him a kick, and in a large arc he flew directly into hell. "Now what's your task?" he asked the miller. The miller's heart had fallen into his trousers, and he could think of nothing except for the large rock. "Can you grind this large rock into flour?" he asked. The devil grinned, then ground away at the rock with his teeth: Gurtsch, gurtsch. He had barely begun when there was nothing left of the rock but a pile of gray flour. The miller received his kick as well, and in a large arc he flew after the smith. Now only the tailor remained. He was shaking over his whole body and was as white as a handkerchief. "Now, Threadman, what have you decided?" But the tailor could say nothing. The Evil One looked at him with his fiery eyes and bellowed, "Say something, tailor, I don't have any more time!" With that the tailor let out a sigh, a sigh from deep within his breast and so loud that it could be heard from afar. (Some folks say that he broke wind, but such people are rather crude.) Then suddenly, and he himself did not know why, the tailor said, "Catch that and tie it into a square knot." However, the sigh had long since been blown away by the wind, and the devil stood there like an ox before a gate. He had to let the tailor go. In his anger he stamped his horse-hoof foot to the ground. It opened up, and he fell head-first into hell. Recovering from his fright, the tailor saw that he was all alone. There was nothing more to be seen of the smith, the miller, or the devil. If it hadn't been for the pile of stone-flour and the stench of pitch and sulfur throughout the woods, it all could have been a dream. Then he took off, as though someone were chasing after him. He found his way out of the woods and happily returned home. He married a beautiful girl. My grandfather was at the wedding, and many times he heard the tailor himself telling this story. Therefore it certainly has to be true. Source (books.google.com): Karl Plenzat, "De Kriezknopp," Der Wundergarten: Volksmärchen (Berlin and Leipzig: Franz Schneider Verlag, 1922), pp. 146-49 . Plenzat's source: Oral tradition from the district of Stallupönen (Nesterov), East Prussia. East Prussia, formerly a province of Prussia, is now a part of Poland, Lithuania, and Russia. Its German inhabitants were largely expelled after 1945. A square knot (Low German Kriezknopp ) is also called a reef knot. Return to the table of contents . A Story Ireland Once upon a time there were three men round on a holiday through the world. While they were on the journey they never went to mass. One of them was an Irishman, the other a Scotchman, and the other an Englishman. When the three men died they went to Hell. They met the devil. They asked the devil to let them out, but he would not. They kept asking him day after day to let them out, but he would not. He thought of a plan. He asked the three men to think of a question and within three days to have the question thought of and not to tell each of them what they were thinking of. The day came at last when they wer to be called out. The Englishman was the first to be called out. He said to the devil. "We have some cattle grazing out in a field. We have a certain name on one cow. Could you tell it to me?" The devil took his magic fan and said some words, and he brought the cow up beside him, so he was able to know the name. He wasn't going to get out. It was the Scotchman's turn now. He said to the devil. "We have a big brewery out in the world and we have a name on a certain name on a bottle of whiskey. Could you tell me that name?" The devil got his magic fan again, and he brought the bottle there beside them. He wasn't going to get out either. It was the Irishman's turn now, so he whistled a tune. When it was finished, he said, "Sew a button on that now." The devil was not able to do that. So he had to let the three of them out. Information received from: Written by: Mr. James Harte Maura Meehan Kilcoon, Kilcoon, Dromahair, Dromahair, (age 40 years) (age 12 years) Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Leitrim >> Advarney, pp. 160-61 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . A Funny Story Ireland There were two men one time and they were very fond of card-playing. They were playing cards one night in a neighbor's house. When they were returning home they met the devil and he had a pack of cards. He asked them to have a game. They said they had no money. So the devil said "Come along and I will put out money for ye." They played all night and before they stopped playing they won ten pounds each. When they were going to part the devil said he would call to see them in twelve months time. One of them was a tailor and the other a shoemaker. Then the devil said "If ye have not a job that I am not able to do the two of ye will have to come with me." So the two men went home thinking of their job. When the twelve months were up the devil came knocking at the tailor's door. The tailor said "Come in." When he opened the door who was there but the devil looking for his job. So the tailor got a box of scrap and told him to make a candle and light it for him. Then the devil started off fiddling with the box of scrap until he made his candle. When he had it made he took out a box of matches and lit it for him. He said he would have to come with him. Then the devil went to the shoemaker and he was in bed. He never thought of his job. He asked him had he a job and the shoemaker said nothing only started to laugh at the devil. He let a big shout out of him and said "Wax that and put a bristle on it." Mary Burns, told to me by my father, Michael Burns, Killure, Ahascragh, Ballinasloe, Co. Galway. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Galway >> Cill Iubhair, pp. 10-12 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Links to Related Tales Type 1174 Folktales , in which a devil is defeated when he is unable to make a rope of sand. Type 1175 Folktales , in which a devil is defeated when he is unable to straighten a curly hair. Breaking Wind: Legendary Farts , folktales about flatulance. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 21, 2021. Devil's Bridge Legends The Devil's Bridge folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1191 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2022 Contents The Sachsenhäuser Bridge at Frankfurt (Germany). The Bamberg Cathedral and Bridge (Germany). The Devil's Bridge in Lake Galenbeck (Germany). The Devil's Bridge (Austria). The Taugl Bridge (Austria). The Devil's Bridge near Klaus (Austria) The Devil's Bridge (Switzerland). The Devil's Bridge (Switzerland/France). The Legend of the Devil's Bridge (Tuscany, Italy). The Devil's Bridge in Martorell (Catalonia, Spain). The Devil's Bridge in Cardiganshire (Wales). The Devil's Bridge (Wales). The Devil's Bridge (Wales). The Devil's Bridge at Kirkby (England). The Bridge at Kentchurch (England). The Devil's Bridge (England). Kilgrim Bridge (England). Related Links . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Sachsenhäuser Bridge at Frankfurt Germany There are two arches in the middle of the Sachsenhäuser Bridge. At the top they are closed partially only with wood which, in time of war, can easily be removed so that the connection can be destroyed without blasting. The following legend is told about this bridge: The builder had agreed to complete the bridge by a certain date. As the date approached he saw that it would be impossible to meet the deadline. With only two days remaining, in his fear he called upon the devil and asked him for help. The devil appeared to him and offered to complete the bridge during the last night if the builder would deliver to him the first living being that crossed the bridge. The contract was settled, and during the last night the devil completed the bridge. In the darkness no human eye saw how he did it. At the break of day the builder came and drove a rooster across the bridge ahead of himself, thus delivering it to the devil. However, the latter had expected a human soul, and when he saw that he had been deceived he angrily grabbed the rooster, ripped it apart, and threw it through the bridge, thus causing the two holes that to the present day cannot be mortared shut. Any repair work that is completed during the day just falls apart the next night. A golden rooster on an iron bar still stands as the bridge's emblem. Source: Jacob and Wilelm Grimm, "Die Sachsenhäuser Brücke zu Frankfurt," Deutsche Sagen, herausgegeben von den Brüdern Grimm , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 185, pp. 267-68 . In later editions this legend is numbered 186. The Grimms' source: "Oral, from Frankfurt." Link to a German-language encyclopedia article about Die Alte Brücke in Frankfurt am Main . Return to the table of contents . The Bamberg Cathedral and Bridge Germany A famous master builder and his journeyman, while building the Bamberg Cathedral's tower and the Bamberg Bridge, entered into a wager which could finish first. When the master was almost finished, the journeyman was still far behind, so the latter made a pact with the devil, that he should quickly build the bridge. In return, the devil would receive the first living being to cross the bridge. The devil quickly went to work and was finished within a short time. Then the journeyman fetched a rooster and chased it across the bridge. The devil angrily departed with it. The master builder of the tower was so irritated with the early completion of the bridge that in his dismay he threw himself from the tower. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, "Dom und Brücke zu Bamberg," Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen und einigen andern, besonders den angrenzenden Gegenden Norddeutschlands , vol. 1 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), no. 418, pp. 372-73 . Return to the table of contents . The Devil's Bridge in Lake Galenbeck Germany In Lake Galenbeck (in the vicinity of Friedland) there is a tongue of land, probably artificial, that stretches about to the middle of the lake. It is called the devil's bridge, and is said to be the remains of a bridge started, but never completed, by the devil. A shepherd had to drive his herd completely around the lake in order to reach his pasture. This annoyed him, and one day he wished with a curse that a bridge went across the lake. He had scarcely uttered this wish when a man appeared before him. The man promised to build a bridge in one night, before the rooster crowed three times, under the condition that the shepherd would then belong to him. The shepherd entered into this agreement. That evening when he arrived home, he told his wife what had happened. She said nothing, but at midnight she went to the chicken coop and awakened the rooster, who thought that it was already morning, and crowed three times. The devil heard this. He was not finished with his work, and angrily flew off through the air without completing the bridge. Source: Karl Bartsch, "Die Teufelsbrücke im Gahlenbeker See," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg] , vol. 1 (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), no. 555, p. 400 . Bartsch's source: Fräulein W. Zimmermann from Neustrelitz. Return to the table of contents . The Devil's Bridge Austria Almost every country possesses some legend of a "Devil's Bridge," and how the Evil One has been ultimately cheated by his own handiwork, and the Tyrol, which is alive with legends and superstitions, is not behind any other in this respect. In the valley of Montafon, the bridge of the village broke down, or rather the swollen torrent carried it away; and as the parish was anxious to restore it as soon as possible, the villagers of course being unable to pass to and from Schruns, on the other side of the river, for all their daily wants, they applied to the village carpenter, and offered him a large sum of money if he would rebuild the bridge in three days' time. This puzzled the poor fellow beyond description; he had a large family and now his fortune would be made at once; but he saw the impossibility of finishing the work in so short a time, and therefore he begged one day for reflection. Then he set to work to study all day, up to midnight, to find out how he could manage to do the work within the specified time; and as he could find out nothing, he thumped the table with his fist, and called out, "To the devil with it! I can find out nothing." In his anger and annoyance he was on the point of going to bed, when all at once a little man wearing a green hat entered the room, and asked, "Carpenter, wherefore so sad?" and then the carpenter told him all his troubles. The little fellow replied, "It is very easy to help you. I will build your bridge, and in three days it shall be finished, but only on the condition that the first soul out of your house who passes over the bridge shall be mine." On hearing this, the carpenter, who then knew with whom he had to do, shuddered with horror, though the large sum of money enticed him, and he thought to himself, "After all, I will cheat the devil," and so he agreed to the contract. Three days afterwards the bridge was complete, and the devil stood in the middle, awaiting his prey. After having remained there for many days, the carpenter at last appeared himself, and at that sight the devil jumped with joy; but the carpenter was driving one of his goats, and as he approached the bridge, he pushed her on before him, and called out, "There you have the first soul out of my house," and the devil seized upon the goat. But, oh, grief and shame! First disappointed, and then enraged, he dragged the poor goat so hard by her tail that it came out, and then off he flew, laughed at and mocked by all who saw him. Since that time it is that goats have such short tails. Source: Marie Alker Günther, Tales and Legends of the Tyrol (London: Chapman and Hall, 1874), pp. 179-81 . Return to the table of contents . The Taugl Bridge Austria Next to the Taugl Mill a daring arched bridge made of huge stone blocks spans the Taugl River where its wild water has washed out a deep gorge. According to local tradition this bridge is not of human construction, but rather the work of the devil. Thus all who walk over it cross themselves so that the Evil One cannot harm them. Eighteen hundred years ago the devil made a pact with a miller's wife, promising her that he would build a bridge over the Taugl. If he could accomplish this before she gave birth to the child that she was then carrying under her heart, then this child would be his. When the child was born the bridge was finished except for one final stone that to this day is still missing in the arch. Thus the devil was defeated. Not wanting to return to hell empty-handed, he declared, "I have lost the child, but I shall take the first being that passes over the bridge." The miller's wife, a very clever woman, heard this and chased her big tomcat over the bridge. The devil grabbed the cat and took it with him into that deep hole where the Taugl flows downward, foaming with rage. Source (books.google.com): Rudolf von Freisauff von Neudegg, "Die Tauglbrücke," Salzburger Volkssagen (Vienna, Pest, and Leipzig: A. Hartleben's Verlag, 1880), pp. 510-11 . Source (Internet Archive): Rudolf von Freisauff von Neudegg, "Die Tauglbrücke," Salzburger Volkssagen (Vienna, Pest, and Leipzig: A. Hartleben's Verlag, 1880), pp. 510-11 . The Taugl is a white-water river in the State of Salzburg, Austria. Return to the table of contents . The Devil's Bridge Near Klaus Austria One hour from Klaus [an der Pyhrnbahn], on the road to Steyr, one comes to a high, massive bridge across a brook. According to legend it was built by the devil, under the condition that the first one to cross it would belong to him. When the bridge was completed no one wanted to volunteer to be cast into certain eternal damnation. Then it occurred to a clever follow to drive a rooster across the bridge. The enraged devil, seeing that he had been cheated out of his reward, took the bird and with a howl flew into the air. Source (books.google.com): P. Amand Baumgarten, "Teufelsbrücke eine Stunde von Klaus," Aus der volksmässigen Ueberlieferung der Heimat (Linz: Oberösterreichischer Musealverein, 1864), p. 119 . Return to the table of contents . The Devil's Bridge Switzerland A Swiss herdsman who often visited his girlfriend had either to make his way across the Reuss River with great difficulty or to take a long detour in order to see her. It happened that once he was standing on a very high precipice when he spoke out angrily, "I wish that the devil were here to make me a bridge to the other side!" In an instant the devil was standing beside him, and said, "If you will promise me the first living thing that walks across it, I will build a bridge for you that you can use from now on to go across and back. The herdsman agreed, and in a few moments the bridge was finished. However, the herdsman drove a chamois across the bridge ahead of himself, and he followed along behind. The deceived devil ripped the animal apart and threw the pieces from the precipice. Source: Jacob and Wilelm Grimm, "Teufels-Brücke," Deutsche Sagen, herausgegeben von den Brüdern Grimm , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 336, pp. 436-37 . In later editions this legend is numbered 337. The Grimms' source: "Oral." The Reuss River flows from the high Alps near the Saint Gotthard Pass into Lake Urn near the Swiss city of Altdorf. Return to the table of contents . The Devil's Bridge Switzerland/France There is a curious legend connected with a bridge which spans some tributary of the Rhine forming the boundary between Alsace and Switzerland. When this bridge was being built, an almost insurmountable difficulty arose. Beelzebub, always willing to win a human soul, offered to aid the builders on condition that the first living being that crossed the bridge should be his, and he sent one of his imps to help. The bridge builder, being aware of the extreme gullibility of the fiend, consented, but outwitted him, for as soon as the bridge was completed, he brought a black goat, and placing it before him, pushed it across the bridge. Beelzebub's imp, in his rage at being outwitted, grasped the goat by the horns, and hurled it through the floor of the bridge. Every old Alsatian who comes from this part of Alsace will solemnly aver that the hole is still there, because all efforts at repairing the breach are frustrated by Beelzebub's imps. Source: W. J. Wintemberg, "German Folk-Tales Collected in Canada," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 19, no. 74 (July - September 1906), p. 242 . Return to the table of contents . The Legend of the Devil's Bridge Tuscany Straddling the Serchio river by the small town of Borgo a Mozzano in northern Tuscany, the striking Ponte della Maddalena, also known as the Devil's Bridge, is shrouded in mystery and, for this reason, is a source of fascination for many visitors who travel to the area just to see it. According to legend, the head construction worker supervising the building of the bridge was worried about not completing the work on time. Thus, he made a pact with the devil: in exchange for his help to finish the bridge in one night, the devil demanded the soul of the first passerby to cross the bridge. However, feeling remorseful about giving a person's soul to the devil, the construction worked consulted with the local priest and they decided to have a dog cross the bridge first. Furious, the devil plunged into the river with the dog, never to be seen again. It is said that the dog, a white Maremma sheepdog, is sometimes seen walking on the bridge in the evenings at the end of October, and that he is the devil still looking for the soul of the head construction worker. Probably commissioned by the Countess Matilda of Tuscany in the 11th century, the Ponte della Maddalena, a remarkable example of medieval engineering, used to be on the Via Francigena, one of the most important pilgrimage routes in the Middle Ages. It took on the name of Ponte della Maddalena around 1500, because a statue of Mary Magdalene stood at the foot of the bridge in an oratory (now the statue is in the parish church of Borgo a Mozzano). Source: Italy Magazine . Accessed December 11, 2020. Return to the table of contents . The Devil's Bridge in Martorell Catalonia The legend of the Devil's Bridge is common in Catalonia, and there are many structures bearing its name. The most well-known is the Devil's Bridge in Martorell. According to legend: The stream was high one night and a peasant woman had to cross it and she did not know how. The devil appeared before her and promised to build a bridge and finish it before the rooster's crow at the break of day, if she gave him her soul in exchange. The peasant agreed. But when there were just a few stones left, she threw a bucket of water on the poor sleeping rooster. With the sudden, cold shock the rooster started crowing. The devil, believing it was already day, left hurriedly, leaving the bridge incomplete. Since he didn't hold up his end of the deal, the peasant woman didn't have to deliver her soul and was able to cross the river untroubled. Source: Pont del Diable . Accessed December 11, 2020. Return to the table of contents . The Devil's Bridge in Cardiganshire Wales Best known among the natural objects in various parts of Wales which are connected with the devil in popular lore, is the Devil's Bridge, in Cardiganshire. Associated with this bridge are several legends, which derive their greatest interest from their intrinsic evidences of an antiquity in common with the same legends in other lands. The guidebooks of the region, like guidebooks everywhere, in their effort to avoid being led into unwarranted statement, usually indulge in playfully sarcastic references to these ancient tales. They are much older, however, than the bridge itself can possibly be. The devil's activity in bridge-building is a myth more ancient than the medieval devil of our acquaintance. The building story of the Devil's Bridge in Cardiganshire runs briefly thus: An old woman who had lost her cow spied it on the other side of the ravine, and was in great trouble about it, not knowing how to get over where the animal was. The devil, taking advantage of her distress, offered to throw a bridge over the ravine, so that she might cross and get her cow; but he stipulated that the first living creature to cross the bridge should be his. The old woman agreed; the bridge was built; and the devil waited to see her cross. She drew a crust of bread from her pocket, threw it over, and her little black dog flew after it. "The dog's yours, sir," said the dame; and Satan was discomfited. In the story told of the old bridge over the Main at Frankfort, a bridge-contractor and his troubles are substituted for the old woman and her cow; instead of a black dog a live rooster appears, driven in front of him by the contractor. The Welsh Satan seems to have received his discomfiture good-naturedly enough; in the German tale he tears the fowl to pieces in his rage. In Switzerland, every reader knows the story told of the devil's bridge in the St. Gotthard pass. A new bridge has taken the place, for public use, of the old bridge on the road to Andermatt, and to the dangers of the crumbling masonry are added superstitious terrors concerning the devil's power to catch any one crossing after dark. The old Welsh bridge has been in like manner superseded by a modern structure; but I think no superstition like the last noted is found at Hafod. Source: Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions , 2nd edition (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), pp. 205-206 . Return to the table of contents . The Devil's Bridge Wales The Devil's Bridge is twelve miles from Aberystwyth; it is over the Afon Mynach just before its junction with the Rheidol. The Mynach cataract consists of four leaps, making a total descent of 210 feet. The bridge has been thrown across a chasm 114 feet above the first fall and 324 feet above the bottom of the cataract. The original bridge was constructed by the monks of Strata Florida, at what time is unknown, but legend says it was built by the devil. Old Megan Llandunach, of Pont-y-Mynach, Had lost her only cow; Across the ravine the cow was seen. But to get it she could not tell how. In this dilemma the Evil One appeared to her cowled as a monk, and with a rosary at his belt, and offered to cast a bridge across the chasm if she would promise him the first living being that should pass over it when complete. To this she gladly consented. The bridge was thrown across the ravine, and the Evil One stood beyond bowing and beckoning to the old woman to come over and try it. But she was too clever to do that She had noticed his left leg as he was engaged on the construction, and saw that the knee was behind in place of in front, and for a foot he had a hoof. In her pocket she fumbled, a crust out tumbled, She called her little black cur; The crust over she threw, the dog after it flew, Says she, "The dog's yours, crafty sir!" Source: Sabine Baring-Gould, A Book of South Wales , (London: Methuen and Company, 1905), pp. 266-67 . Return to the table of contents . The Devil's Bridge Wales One day in the olden time, old Megan of Llandunach stood by the side of the river Mynach feeling very sorry for herself. The Mynach was in flood, and roared down the wooded dingle in five successive falls, tumbling over three hundred feet in less than no time. Just below the place where Megan was standing, there was a great cauldron in which the water whirled, boiled, and hissed as if troubled by some evil spirit. From the cauldron the river rushed and swirled down a narrow, deep ravine, and if the old woman had had an eye for the beauties of nature, the sight of the seething pot and the long shadowy cleft would have made her feel joyous rather than sorrowful. But Megan at this time cared for none of these things, because her one and only cow was on the wrong side of the ravine, and her thoughts were centered on the horned beast which was cropping the green grass carelessly just as if it made no difference what side of the river it was on. How the wrong-headed animal had got there Megan could not guess, and still less did she know how to get it back. As there was no one else to talk to, she talked to herself. "Oh dear, what shall I do?" she said. "What is the matter, Megan?" said a voice behind her. She turned round and saw a man cowled like a monk and with a rosary at his belt. She had not heard anyone coming, but the noise of the waters boiling over and through the rocks, she reflected, might easily have drowned the sound of any footsteps. And in any case, she was so troubled about her cow that she could not stop to wonder how the stranger had come up. "I am ruined," said Megan. "There is my one and only cow, the sole support of my old age, on the other side of the river, and I don't know how to get her back again. Oh dear, oh dear, I am ruined." "Don't you worry about that," said the monk. "I'll get her back for you." "How can you?" asked Megan, greatly surprised. "I'll tell you," answered the stranger. "It is one of my amusements to build bridges, and if you like, I'll throw a bridge across this chasm for you." "Well, indeed," said the old woman, "nothing would please me better. But how am I to pay you? I am sure you will want a great deal for a job like this, and I am so poor that I have no money to spare, look you, no indeed." "I am very easily satisfied," said the monk. "Just let me have the first living thing that crosses the bridge after I have finished it, and I shall be content." Megan agreed to this, and the monk told her to go back to her cottage and wait there until he should call for her. Now, Megan was not half such a fool as she looked, and she had noticed, while talking to the kind and obliging stranger, that there was something rather peculiar about his foot. She had a suspicion, too, that his knees were behind instead of being in front, and while she was waiting for the summons, she thought so hard that it made her head ache. By the time she was halloed for, she had hit upon a plan. She threw some crusts to her little dog to make him follow her, and took a loaf of bread under her shawl to the riverside. "There's a bridge for you," said the monk, pointing proudly to a fine span bestriding the yawning chasm. And it really was something to be proud of. "H'm, yes," said Megan, looking doubtfully at it. "Yes, it is a bridge. But is it strong?" "Strong?" said the builder, indignantly. "Of course it is strong." "Will it hold the weight of this loaf?" asked Megan, bringing the bread out for underneath her shawl. The monk laughed scornfully. "Hold the weight of this loaf? Throw it on and see. Ha, ha!" So Megan rolled the loaf right across the bridge, and the little black cur scampered after it. "Yes, it will do," said Megan. "And, kind sir, my little dog is the first live thing to cross the bridge. You are welcome to him, and I thank you very much for all the trouble you have taken." "Tut, the silly dog is no good to me," said the stranger, very crossly, and with that he vanished into space. From the smell of brimstone which he had left behind him, Megan knew that, as she had suspected, it was the devil whom she had outwitted. And this is how the Bad Man's Bridge came to be built. Source: W. Jenkyn Thomas, The Welsh Fairy Book (London: T. Fisher Unwin, Ltd., [1908], pp. 286-90 . Return to the table of contents . The Devil's Bridge at Kirkby England The Devil's Bridge, a remarkable structure, composed of three beautifully fluted arches, and so named from having, it is said, been built by his Satanic majesty; if so it is certainly inconsistent and in direct contradiction to his general character, and the good that has come out of evil in this instance is most remarkable. Respecting the building, the legend which nearly all Kirkby people will tell you, is as follows: A cow belonging to a poor woman had strayed across the river at some convenient wading place, and not having returned with the town herd at milking time, the woman went forth to seek her. In the meantime the water had risen considerably, and, not being able to cross the river, the woman was in a dilemma, for her good man, a laborer, and her cow, were on the opposite side. At this juncture the devil, in human form, appeared on the other bank, no doubt assuming the soft guile of the tempter, promised to build a bridge, on condition that the first living thing which passed over should become his lawful prize; to this the woman gladly assented. Darkness deepened rapidly -- necessary for diabolical thought and deed, which in this instance was frustrated by the forethought of the woman, whose husband or herself had been singled out for the victim which was to propitiate the building of the bridge. At the appointed hour she returned, bringing with her a dog, and a delicious morsel wherewith to tempt it. The bridge was complete, and there stood his sable majesty, anxiously awaiting his victim. Suddenly, across the bridge, she threw the tempting morsel, and after it sprang the dog. The devil, seeing how cleverly he had been outwitted, gave forth a terrific howl, which aroused all the inhabitants in the old town, who at once rushed down to the river to ascertain the cause, thinking there had been an earthquake, instead of which they were agreeably astonished to find a substantial bridge, across which the woman, accompanied by her husband and dog, were driving the cow. And there still stands the remarkable structure to witness or attest the truth, as story says, if I lie, and as a further proof, below the bridge is still to be seen the Devil's Neck Collar -- a rock with a large perforation, which he lost from his neck in that wild unearthly plunge from the bridge, on finding his hellish scheme thwarted. Source: Edmund Bogg, A Thousand Miles of Wandering along the Roman Wall, the Old Border Region, Lakeland, and Ribblesdale (Leeds: Edmund Bogg, 1898), pp. 229-30 . Return to the table of contents . The Bridge at Kentchurch Herefordshire, England Jack [o' Kent] and the devil built the bridge over the Monnow between Kentchurch and Grosmont in a single night. What they built by night fell down by day as long as the bridge remained incomplete, hence the need for haste. The first passenger to pass over the bridge was to belong to the devil, so Jack threw a bone across, and a poor dog ran after it. That dog was all the devil had for his pains. Source (books.google.com: Ella Mary Leather, The Folk-Lore of Herefordshire: Collected from Oral and Printed Sources (Hereford: Jakeman and Carver; London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1912), p. 164. Return to the table of contents . The Devil's Bridge Yorkshire, England The highway between Pateley Bridge and Grassington crosses, in the parish of Burnsall, the deep dell in which runs the small river Dibb, or Dibble, by a bridge known in legend as the Devil's Bridge. It might reasonably be supposed that Deep-Dell Bridge, or Dibble Bridge, was the correct and desirable designation, but legend and local tradition will by no means have it so, and account for the less pleasant name in the following manner. In the days when Fountain's Abbey was in its prime, a shoemaker and small tenant of part of the abbey lands, named Ralph Calvert, resided at Thorp-sub-Montem, and journeyed twice a year along this road to pay his rent to the abbot, dispose of the fruits of his six months' handiwork, and return the shoes entrusted to him on his previous visit for repair, and bring back with him, on his return, a bag well filled with others that needed his attention. The night before setting out on one of these occasions, he had a fearful dream, in which he struggled with the devil, who, in this wild, rocky ravine, amid unpleasant surroundings, endeavored to thrust Ralph into a bag, similar to the one in which he carried his stock-in-trade. This he and his wife feared boded no good. In the morning, however, he started on his journey, and duly reached the abbey, assisted at the service, did his business with the abbot and brethren, and then started, with his well filled bag, on his return homewards. When he arrived near home, in the deep ravine, where on previous occasions he had found but a small brook which he could easily ford, he now found a mountain torrent, through which he only with difficulty and some danger made his way. Having accomplished the passage, he sat down to rest and to dry his wetted garments. As he sat and contemplated the place, he could not but recall how exactly it corresponded with the spot seen in his dream, and at which the author of evil had tried to bag him. Dwelling on this brought anything but pleasant thoughts, and to drive them away, and to divert his mind, he struck up a familiar song, in which the name of the enemy finds frequent mention, and the refrain of which was: Sing luck-a-down, heigh down, Ho, down derry. He was unaware of any presence but his own. But, to his alarm, another voice than his added a further line: Tol lol derol, darel dol, dolde derry. Ralph thought of his dream. Then he fancied he saw the shadow of a man on the road. Then from a projecting corner of a rock he heard a voice reading over a list of delinquents in the neighborhood, with whom he must remonstrate -- Ralph's own name among the rest. Not to be caught eavesdropping, Ralph feigned sleep. But after a time was aroused by the stranger, and a long conversation ensued, the upshot of which was, after they had entered into a compact of friendship, that Satan informed the shoemaker who he was and inquired of the alarmed man if there was anything that he could do for him. Ralph looked at the swollen torrent and thought of the danger he had lately incurred in crossing it, and of his future journeys that way to the abbey. And then he said, "I have heard that you are an able architect. I should wish you to build a bridge across this stream. I know you can do it." At nightfall Ralph reached his home at Thorpe, and related his adventure to his wife, and added, "In spite of all that is said against him, the Evil One is an honest gentleman, and I have made him promise to build a bridge at the Gill Ford on the road to Pateley. If he fulfils his promise, St. Crispin bless him." The news of Ralph's adventure and of the promise soon spread among the neighbors, and he had no small amount of village chaff and ridicule to meet before the eventful Saturday -- the fourth day -- arrived. At last it came. Accompanied by thirty or forty of the villagers, Ralph made his way to the dell, where, on arrival, picture their astonishment at the sight! Lo, a beautiful and substantial bridge spanned the abyss! Surveyor, and mason, and priest pronounced it to be perfect. The latter sprinkled it with holy water, caused a cross to be placed at each approach to it, and then declared it to be safe for all Christian people to use. So it remained until the Puritan Minister of Pateley, in the time of the Commonwealth, discerning the story to be a Popish legend, caused the protecting crosses to be removed as idolatrous. After that time, neither the original builder nor any other person seems to have thought fit to keep the bridge in "good and tenantable" repair, and in time it fell into so disreputable and dangerous a condition, that the liberal and almost magic-working native of the parish -- Sir William Craven, Lord Mayor of London in the reign of the 1st James -- took the matter in hand and built upon the old foundations a more terrestrial, but not less substantial and enduring, structure. Still men call it the Devil's Bridge. Source: Thomas Parkinson, Yorkshire Legends and Traditions, as Told by Her Ancient Chroniclers, Her Poets, and Journalists (London: Elliot Stock, 1888), pp. 121-24 . Return to the table of contents . Kilgrim Bridge England Regarding the building of this [Kilgrim] bridge is the following curious legend: Many bridges having been built on this site by the inhabitants, none had been able to withstand the fury of the floods until his "Satanic Majesty" promised to build a bridge which would defy the fury of the elements, on condition that the first living creature who passed over should fall a sacrifice to his "Sable Majesty." Long did the inhabitants consider, when the bridge was complete, as to who should be the victim. A shepherd, more wise than his neighbors, owned a dog called Grim. This man having first swum the river, whistled for the dog to follow. Poor Grim unwittingly bounded across the bridge and thus fell a victim to his "Sable Majesty." Tradition says, from this circumstance the spot has ever since been known as Kill Grim Bridge. Source: Gutch, Mrs.[Eliza], Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the North Riding of Yorkshire, York and the Ainsty = County Folk-Lore , vol. 2, Printed Extracts , no. 4 (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1901), p. 19 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Faust Legends , stories about mortals who enter into contracts with the demonic powers. Master Builder Legends , in which a mortal tricks a supernatural being (typically a troll or a giant) into helping him build a grand edifice. Giving the devil a task that he cannot fulfill: Spinning a Rope of Sand . Folktales of type 1174. Straightening a Curly Hair . Folktales of type 1175. Capturing Broken Wind . Folktales of type 1176. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 3, 2022. Dividing Souls in the Graveyard: Folktales of Type 1791 Dividing Souls in the Graveyard Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 1791 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2013 Contents The Miller and the Tailor (England). The Bag of Nuts (Derbyshire, England). Mother Elston's Bag of Nuts (Devonshire, England). Tom Daly and the Nut-Eating Ghost (Ireland). Dividing the Souls (Virginia, USA). Dividing the Souls (North Carolina, USA). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Miller and the Tailor England The subjoined story is from the same source as "John Adroyns" and the " Maltman of Colebrook," and is at once more elaborate and more dramatic. It is in our estimation one of the drollest and best-sustained narrations of the kind in our language. The plot is slightly involved, but it is managed and developed with rare skill and felicity. The treatment of this and other narrations and pleasantries in the "Hundred Merry Tales" (1526), tends to corroborate the notion which we broached in 1887, that Sir Thomas More had a share in compiling the volume, which combines with unusual literary merit a singular freedom from grossness, and was evidently under the inspiration of some masculine intellect with a precocious sense of humour and a descriptive faculty at that time almost unique. Like the preceding relation, the particulars here found were by no means improbably derived from an actual fact, although the writer doubtless permitted himself more or less license in the way of romantic embellishment. [Note by Hazlitt] There was a certain rich farmer in a village, who marvellously loved nuts, and planted trees of filberts and other nuts in his orchard, which through his whole life he cared for well; and when he died it appeared that his executors were to engage to bury with him in the grave a bag of nuts under pain of losing their executorship. So these executors did as they were bidden. It so happened that on the very night after the burial a miller in a white coat came to the dead man's garden to steal a bag of nuts; and as he went along he met with a tailor in a black coat, an unthrifty fellow, and discovered to him his scheme. The tailor confessed in his turn that that same night he planned stealing a sheep. It was determined between them that each should effect his purpose, and that they should meet, later on, in the church porch, the one who came first to tarry for the other. The miller gathered his nuts, and was the first to reach the porch; and while he waited for the tailor, he sat down and cracked nuts. It being about nine o'clock, the sexton came to ring the curfew; and when he looked, and saw a man in the porch dressed in white and cracking nuts, he weened that it was the farmer risen from his grave, cracking the nuts that had been buried along with him, and sped home in all haste and told a cripple, who lived in the same house what he had beheld. This cripple, when he heard the sexton so speak, reproved him, and said that, were it in his power to go to the place, he would conjure the spirit. "By my faith, if thou art not afraid, I will carry thee on my back," said the sexton. And the sexton took the cripple on his back, and brought him to the churchyard; whereupon the miller in the porch, seeing one approach with something on his back, and weening it had been the tailor with the sheep, rose up, and came toward them, saying, "Is he fat? Is he fat?" The sexton, hearing these words, cast down the cripple, and said, "Fat or lean, take him as he is," and vanished; and the cripple by miracle was made whole, and ran as fast as the sexton, or faster. The miller, perceiving that there were two, and that one ran from the other, thought that one was the owner of the sheep and had espied the tailor stealing it; and lest somebody might have seen him steal the nuts out of the orchard, he left the shells behind him, and hied home to his mill. Presently came the tailor with the sheep on his back to seek him, as it had been arranged; and when he saw nought but nutshells, he concluded, as was indeed the truth, that the miller had gone home. So, throwing his sheep once more over his shoulder, he walked toward the mill. Meanwhile the sexton, when he ran away, went not to his own house, but to the parish priest, to whom he shewed how the spirit of the dead man was seated in the church porch eating nuts; and they both proceeded back together to the place, that the priest might conjure the spirit. The priest put on his stole and surplice, and took holy water with him; and as they went along, the tailor with the white sheep on his back met them, and in the dusk, taking the priest in his white surplice to be the miller in his white coat, shouted to him, "By God! I have him! I have him!" meaning the sheep which he had stolen. But the priest, seeing the tailor all in black and a white thing on his shoulder, imagined it to be the devil bearing away the spirit of the man that had just been buried, and ran away at full speed, the sexton following at his heels. The tailor judged that the two had been following him to take him for stealing the sheep, and thought that the miller might have got into trouble for stealing the nuts. So he went on toward the mill, to see if he could be of any use to the miller, and to hear what news. When he rapped at the mill-door, the miller called out, "Who is there?" The tailor answered and said, "By God! I have caught one of them, and made him sure, and tied him fast by the legs." Then the miller feared that the tailor had been taken and secured by the constable, and that he had now come to fetch him away for stealing the nuts; wherefore he ran out at a backdoor as fast as ever he could. The tailor heard the door open, and going to the other side of the mill saw the miller posting off; and for a few moments he stood musing there with his sheep on his back. The parish priest and the sexton, who had been hiding near the mill for fear of the spirit of the dead man, presently caught sight of the black tailor and the white sheep again, and fled in dismay, and the priest, not knowing the ground, leapt into a ditch, where the mud almost reached his chin. Then the tailor, perceiving that the miller ran one way and the sexton another, and that the priest cried for assistance, and supposing that it was the constable, who had come at last to arrest him, cast down the sheep, and also disappeared. Thus each man suffered misfortune, because some had done what was wrong and others what was foolish, and all were afraid without cause; and a good deal was owing to the time when it happened, for it was in the night that all this strange game of errors was played. Source: W. Carew Hazlitt, Tales and Legends of National Origin or Widely Current in England from Early Times (London: Swan, Sonnenschein, and Company, 1899), pp. 454-58 . Return to the table of contents . The Bag of Nuts England (Derbyshire) It happened once that two young men met in a churchyard, about eight o'clock in the evening. One of them said to the other, "Where are you going?" The other answered, "I'm going to get a bag of nuts that lies underneath my mother's head in this churchyard. But tell me, where are you going?" He said, "I'm going to steal a fat sheep out of this field. Wait here till I come back." Then the other man got the nuts that were under his dead mother's head, and stood in the church porch cracking them. In those days it was the custom to ring a bell at a certain time in the evening, and just as the man was cracking the nuts the sexton came into the churchyard to ring it. But when he heard the cracking of the nuts in the porch he was afraid, and ran to tell the parson, who only laughed at him, and said, "Go and ring, fool." However, the sexton was so afraid, that he said he would not go back unless the parson would go with him. After much persuasion the parson agreed to go, but he had the gout very badly, and the sexton had to carry him on his back. When the man in the porch who was cracking the nuts saw the sexton coming into the churchyard with the parson on his back he thought it was the man who had just gone out to steal the sheep, and had returned with a sheep on his back. So he bawled out, "Is it a fat one?" When the sexton heard this he was so frightened that he threw the parson down and said, "Aye, and thou canst take it if thou lik'st." So the sexton ran away as fast as he could, and left the parson to shift for himself. But the parson ran home as fast as the sexton. Source: Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales with Other Traditional Remains: Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby, and Nottingham (London: David Nutt, 1895), no. 2, pp. 4-5 . Return to the table of contents . Mother Elston's Bag of Nuts England (Devonshire) Mother Elston used to go from place to place selling nuts, and before she died she begged that a bag of them might be put in her coffin. Her wishes were fulfilled, and she was buried, and then it began to be said her ghost used to sit on her grave and crack the nuts. Many people heard it, and the clergyman of the parish was told. He said that, if at any time it was made known to him that the ghost was there, to be seen or heard, he would come at once and lay it. One fine night, after a neighbouring "revel," three men rather the worse for drink came by, and saw some sheep in a field close to the churchyard. The thought struck them that here was a good opportunity for helping themselves, and while one man went into the church porch to keep watch, the others went to steal the sheep. Now, the man in the porch had brought a lot of nuts from the revel, and while waiting he began to eat them. Just then the sexton came by and heard nuts being cracked, sure enough. So off he ran to the vicarage to fetch the parson, who agreed to come at once. Unfortunately he was afflicted with St. Vitus' dance and could not walk, being obliged to go in a perambulator. "Have you my perambulator?" said the parson. "No, sir; I don't naw where he's to," replied the sexton. "Never mind; this little way you can carry me on your back," said the parson. So off they set, and just inside the churchyard they heard the nuts still being cracked. The sexton stopped. "Go a little nearer," urged the parson. The sexton went a little nearer. "Go a little nearer still"; and the sexton still went a little nearer. Then the parson began saying something to lay the ghost. But the man in the porch thought they were one of his mates with a sheep. "Is he fat?" he called. And the sexton was so frightened that he dropped the parson and ran away as fast as he could. But St. Vitus' dance comes with a fright and goes with a fright, they say, and the parson was quite cured from that minute, and could walk as well as ever he could after. Source: P. F. S. Amery, ed., "Seventeenth Report of the Committee on Devonshire Folk-Lore," Report and Transactions of the Devonshire Association for the Advancement of Science, Literature, and Art , vol. 32 (Plymouth: W. Brendon and Son, 1900), pp. 87-88 . Return to the table of contents . Tom Daly and the Nut-Eating Ghost Ireland The value of the next story (which was told by the blind man), apart from the comic in its form and con tents, is the fact that nuts are buried for the godfather to eat after death. This is an interesting survival of primitive Gaelic belief. [Note by Curtin] Tom Daly lived between Kenmare and Skneem, but nearer to Kenmare, and had an only son, who was called Tom, after the father. When the son was eighteen years old Tom Daly died, leaving a widow and this son. The wife was paralysed two years before Tom's death, and could rise out of the bed only as she was taken out, but as the fire was near the bed she could push a piece of turf into it if the turf was left at hand. Tom Daly while alive was in the employ of a gentleman living at Drummond Castle. Young Tom got the father's place, and he looked on his godfather as he would on his own father, for the father and godfather had been great friends always, and Tom's mother was as fond of the godfather as she was of her own husband. Four years after old Tom died the godfather followed him. He was very fond of chestnuts, and when he came to die he asked his friends to put a big wooden dish of them in his coffin, so he might come at the nuts in the next world. They carried out the man's wishes. The godfather was buried, and the bedridden widow mourned for him as much as for her own husband. The young man continued to work for the gentleman at Drummond Castle, and in the winter it was often late in the evening before he could come home. There was a shortcut from the gentleman's place through a grove and past the graveyard. Young Tom was going home one winter night, the moon was shining very brightly. While passing the graveyard he saw a man on a big tomb that was in it, and he cracking nuts. Young Daly saw that it was on his godfather's tomb the man was, and when he remembered the nuts that were buried with him he believed in one minute that it was the godfather who was before him. He was greatly in dread then, and ran off as fast as ever his legs could carry him. When he reached home he was out of breath and panting. "What is on you," asked the mother, "and to be choking for breath?" "Sure I saw my godfather sitting on the tomb and he eating the nuts that were buried with him." "Bad luck to you," said the mother; "don't be belying the dead, for it is as great a sin to tell one lie on the dead as ten on the living." "God knows," said Tom, "that I'd not belie my godfather, and 'tis he that is in it; and hadn't I enough time to know him before he died?" "Do you say in truth, Tom, that 'tis your godfather?" "As sure as you are my mother there before me 'tis my godfather that's in the graveyard cracking nuts." "Bring me to him, for the mercy of God, till I ask him about your own father in the other world." "I'll not do that," said Tom. "What a queer thing it would be to bring you to the dead." "Isn't it better to go, Tom dear, and speak to him? Ask about your father, and know is he suffering in the other world. If he is, we can relieve him with masses for his soul." Tom agreed at last, and, as the mother was a cripple, all he could do was to put a sheet around her and take her on his back. He went then towards the graveyard. There was a great thief living not far from Kenmare, and he came that night towards the estate of the gentleman where Tom was working. The gentleman had a couple of hundred fat sheep that were grazing. The thief made up his mind to have one of the sheep, and he sent an apprentice boy that he had to catch one, and said that he'd keep watch on the top of the tomb. As he had some nuts in his pockets, the thief began to crack them. The boy went for the sheep, but before he came back the thief saw Tom Daly, with his mother on his back. Thinking that it was his apprentice with the sheep, he called out, "Is she fat?" Tom Daly, thinking it was the ghost asking about the mother, dropped her and said, "Begor, then, she is, and heavy!" Away with him, then, as fast as ever his two legs could carry him, leaving the mother behind. She, forgetting her husband and thinking the ghost would kill and eat her, jumped up, ran home like a deer, and was there as soon as her son. "God spare you, mother, how could you come!" cried Tom, "and be here as soon as myself?" "Sure I moved like a blast of March wind," said the old woman; "'tis the luckiest ride I had in my life, for out of the fright the good Lord gave me my legs again." Source: Jeremiah Curtin, Tales of the Fairies and of the Ghost World: Collected from Oral Tradition in South-West Munster (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1895), pp. 54-57 . Return to the table of contents . Dividing the Souls Virginia, USA Once there were two men, an' they were out one afternoon fishin'. They caught a large basket of fish. It was growin' towards evening. One of the men says, "Where shall we go to count the fish?" The other man says, "Oh, we'll find a place." So they went on till they come to a graveyard. So they stopped. They went in an' started a-countin', "One for me, an' one for you." They had dropped two fish on the road. They kept on saying, "One for me an' one for you, two for me an' two for you." One of the preacher's friends come along. He stopped an' listened, an' they were in their fifties. He thought the Devil and the Lord was in the graveyard dividin' up people. So he goes to the preacher's house. And he said, "Reverend John, your preachin's true, but the Devil an' the Lord's in the graveyard dividin' up people." Says, "How do you know? I don't believe you." Says, "Well, get your hat and come an' see." When they had got to the graveyard, they heard the two fishermen say, "Let us go after the other two!" So they both ran home as fast as they could go. Source: Elsie Clews Parsons, "Tales from Maryland and Pennsylvania," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 30, (Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1917), no. 8, p. 215 . Parsons' source: Ruth Holmes, who heard the story from her grandmother from Charlotteville, Virginia. Return to the table of contents . Dividing the Souls North Carolina, USA One time a colored man an' a white man out hick'ry-nut huntin'. Found big hick'ry nut an' small walnut. Lay 'em up on de gatepost. Go into de graveyard. Say, "We'll divide what we got. You take this one, an' I'll take the other." They divided all dey had in de graveyard. Then said, "We'll go up to de gate-pos' an' divide. You take the black, an' I'll take the white." Man on outside goin' along, an' he heard 'em talkin'. An' he become frighten. An' he went back to his neighbor's house where there was an ol' man had the rheumatism. An' he said, "You go with me. I'll tote you." Goes on with him, an' he says, "Jesus Christ an' the Devil is up there dividin' up the dead." An' when they got along near the gate-post says, "You take the black one, an' I'll take the white one." So he throws this white man down, an' he run off. An' the ol' man beat him back home. Source: Elsie Clews Parsons, "Tales from Guilford County, North Carolina," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 30, (Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1917), no. 12, p. 177 . Parsons' source: Sam Cruse, about 30. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 27, 2013. Divination: Charms to Predict Future Bridgrooms and Brides Divination Charms to Predict Future Bridegrooms and Brides translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2021 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Saint Andrew's Eve (Germany / Austria). Superstitions (Germany). The Spell (England). Midsummer Superstitious Customs (Cornwall, England). Halloween (Scotland). The Bible and Key Trial (Scotland). Rhamanta , or Romantic Divination (Wales). A Story (Ireland). Hallow-E'n (Ireland). Hallowe'en Customs (Ireland). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Saint Andrew's Eve Germany / Austria It is believed that on Saint Andrew's Eve, Saint Thomas's Eve, Christmas Eve, and New Year's Eve a maiden can conjure up and see her future beloved. To do so she must set a table for two, but no forks can be included with the untensils. Whatever is left behind by the lover must be carefully set aside. Later he will return to the person who has it and love her passionately. However, he must not see the object, for it would remind him of the torment he endured that night when he had been overcome by supernatural powers. Great misfortune would follow. Once in Austria a beautiful maiden wanted to see her future beloved. At midnight, following the necessary rituals, a shoemaker with a dagger appeared to her. He threw the dagger in her direction and then disappeared. She picked up the dagger and and locked it in her chest. Soon afterward the shoemaker came to her and asked her to marry him. Some years after their marriage, on a Sunday after mass, she went to her chest to get some handwork for the following day. Her husband came up to her just as she was opening the chest, and he wanted to see what was inside. She tried to keep him away, but he pushed her aside, looked into the chest, and saw the lost dagger. He picked it up and demanded to know how she came to have the dagger that he had lost some time ago. Frightened and confused, she confessed that this was the dagger that he had left with her that night when she had magically seen him. With anger he shouted at her: "Whore! So you are the hussy who frightend me so terribly that night!" And he stabbed her through the heart with the dagger. This story is told at various places and about different individuals. For example, there is an oral account about a hunter who left his hunting knife. When his wife was recovering from childbirth she sent him to her chest to fetch some bedding, not thinking about the magical item that was there. He found the hunting knife and killed her with it. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Andreas-Nacht," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 114, pp. 171-72 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Andreas-Nacht," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 114, pp. 171-72 . In later editions this legend is numbered 115. Return to the table of contents . Superstitions Germany The numbers in parentheses refer to the numbered items in the original text by Jacob Grimm. If an unmarried woman pours molten lead into cold water on Christmas Eve, the lead will take the shape of her future husband's workday tools. (97) Unmarried women who desire husbands should, on the night before Saint Andrew's day, naked, call on this saint, and their loved ones will appear to them in their sleep. (100) If a girl wishes to know what kind of hair her future loved one has, on Christmas Eve she should reach backwards out the door, and she shall hold the hair in her hand. (102) To learn if she shall marry within the next year, a virgin should knock on the chicken coop on Christmas Eve or at midnight. If a rooster cackles she will, if a hen cackles she will not. (105) To discover if her future lover will be upright or crooked, a girl must stand against a cord or a stack of wood on Christmas Eve and pull a log out backwards; her lover will be like the log. (109) To discover the name of her future husband, a girl must take a strand of the yarn first spun one morning, then stretch it across the house door. The first man to walk by will have the same name as her future husband. (110) Christmas Eve between 11 and 12 o'clock all single girls wake up. To learn whether or not they will marry in the next year, they take off all their clothes, stick their heads into the kitchen kettle and watch the bubbling water. (506) If, between eleven and twelve o'clock on Saint Andrew's Eve, a girl melts lead in a spoon then pours it through a key with a cross-shaped cut in its beard, the lead will take the shape of her future husband's workday tools. (579) On Saint Andrew's Eve unmarried girls form a circle around a goose. The first girl that the goose turns toward will be the next one to marry. (847) On Saint John's Eve between eleven and twelve o'clock the unmarried girls pick nine kinds of blossoms, and these must include clover, cranesbill, and rue. These blossoms are woven into a wreath. The thread that holds it together must be spun in that same hour. When the wreath is finished, one of the girls throws it backwards against a tree. However many times it is thrown without hanging to the tree is how many years it will be before she marries. This must be done without anyone saying a word. (848) Some girls take an inherited key and a ball of yarn, then wind the yarn onto the key, as much as will fit, with about one or two yards hanging loose. This they hang out of the window, moving it back and forth from side to side while saying, "Listen! Listen!" The direction that they hear a voice coming from tells them where they will marry and make their future home. (954) The day before Christmas Eve a girl can cut nine kinds of wood, then at midnight make a fire with it in the main room. Then she will take off all her clothes and throw her shifts out of the door while saying, "I'm sitting here bare naked, waiting for my beloved to come and throw my shift in to me." Her beloved will come and throw the shift in to her, and she will recognize his face. (955) Other girls take four onions and place one in each corner of the main room, giving each onion the name of a young man. They leave the onions in place from Christmas until Three Kings Day. Whoever's onion has sprouted, he will be the girl's husband. If none of the onions have sprouted, there will be no wedding. (956) A few days before Christmas Eve some girls purchase a penny's worth of white bread. They cut off a piece of the crust and tie it under their right arm and leave it there during the daytime. Upon going to bed on Christmas Eve they say, "I am lying here with bread; let my beloved come and eat with me!" If the following morning some of the bread has been chewed away, she will marry in the coming year. If the bread is still whole, there is no such hope. (957) In the middle of the night on Christmas Eve a young man or woman can go to the woodpile and pull out a piece of wood. If it is crooked or straight will reveal shape of a future spouse. (958) Girls should pay attention to where the dogs bark on Saint Andrew's Eve. Her groom will come from this area. (964) When the bride takes her clothes off, she must give one of her stockings to a bridesmaid, who will then throw it onto the gathered wedding guests. On whomever the stocking lands, he or she shall be the next to marry. (1106) At the end of the wedding celebration, the bride and groom are to sit down on the marriage bed, fully dressed, except for their shoes and stockings. One of the bridesmaids takes off the groom's stocking, sits down on the floor with her back against the bed and throws it with her left hand over her right shoulder, aiming for the face of the groom. All the bridesmaids then repeat this, and the ones who succeed will soon be married. The the bride's stocking is then removed by the young men and thrown in the same fashion, thereby determining which of them will be next. (1107) Source (books.google.com): Jacob Grimm, "Aberglaube: Auszüge aus neueren Samlungen," Deutsche Mythologie , 4th edition, vol. 3, edited by Elard Hugo Meyer (Berlin: Ferd. Dümmlers Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1878), pp. 434-77 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob Grimm, "Aberglaube: Auszüge aus neueren Samlungen," Deutsche Mythologie , 4th edition, vol. 3, edited by Elard Hugo Meyer (Berlin: Ferd. Dümmlers Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1878), pp. 434-77 . Return to the table of contents . The Spell England Hobnelia seated in a dreary vale, In pensive mood rehears'd her piteous tale; Her piteous tale the winds in sighs bemoan, And pining eccho answers groan for groan. I rue the day, a rueful day I trow, The woeful day, a day indeed of woe! When Lubberkin to town his cattle drove, A maiden fine bedight he hapt to love; The maiden fine bedight his love retains, And for the village he forsakes the plains. Return, my Lubberkin, these ditties hear; Spells will I try, and spells shall ease my care. With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground, And turn me thrice around, around, around. When first the year, I heard the cuckow sing, And call with welcome note the budding spring, I straitway set a running with such haste, Deb'rah that won the smock scarce ran so fast. 'Till spent for lack of breath, quite weary grown, Upon arising bank I sat adown, Then doff'd my shoe, and by my troth, I swear, Therein I spy'd this yellow frizled hair, As like to Lubberkin's in curl and hue, As if upon his comely pate it grew. With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground, And turn me thrice around, around, around. At eve last midsummer no sleep I sought, But to the field a bag of hemp-seed brought, I scatter'd round the seed on ev'ry side, And three times in a trembling accent cry'd, This hemp-seed with my virgin hands I sow, Who shall my true-love be, the crop shall mow. I strait look'd back, and if my eyes speak truth, With his keen scythe behind me came the youth. With my tharp heel I three times mark the ground, And turn me thrice around, around, around. Last Valentine, the day when birds of kind Their paramours with mutual chirpings find; I rearly rose, just at the break of day, Before the sun had chas'd the stars away; A-field I went, amid the morning dew To milk my kine (for so should huswifes do) Thee first I spy'd, and the first swain we see, In spite of fortune shall our true-love be. See, Lubberkin, each bird his partner take, And can'st thou then thy sweetheart dear forsake? With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground, And turn me thrice around, around, around. Last May-day fair I search'd to find a snail That might my secret lover's name reveal; Upon a gooseberry-bush a snail I found, For always snails near sweetest fruit abound. I seiz'd the vermine, home I quickly sped, And on the hearth the milk-white embers spread. Slow crawl'd the snail, and if I right can spell, In the soft Ashes mark'd a curious L; Oh, may this wondrous omen lucky prove! For L is found in Lubberkin and Love. With my sharp heel threetimes mark the ground, And turn me thrice around, around, around. Two hazel-nuts I threw into the flame, And to each nut I gave a sweetheart's name. This with the loudest bounce me sore amaz'd, That in a flame of brightest colour blaz'd. As blaz'd the nut so may thy passion grow, For 'twas thy nut that did so brightly glow. With my tharp heel three times mark the ground, And turn me thrice around, around, around. As peascods once I pluck'd, I chanc'd to see One that was closely fill'd with three times three, Which when I crop'd I safely homeconvey'd, And o'er my door the spell in secret laid. My wheel I turn'd, and sung a ballad new, While from the spindle I the fleeces drew; The latch mov'd up, when who should first come in, But in his proper person, -- Lubberkin. I broke my yarn surpriz'd the sight to see, Sure sign that he would break his word with me. Eftsoons I join'd it with my wonted slight, So may again his love with mine unite! With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground, And turn me thrice around, around, around. This lady-fly I take from off the grass, Whose spotted back might scarlet red surpass. Fly, lady-bird, north, south, or east or west, Fly where the man is sound that I love best. He leaves my hand, see to the west he's flown, To call my true-love from the faithless town. With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground, And turn me thrice around, around, around. I pare this pippin round and round again, My shepherd's name to flourish on the plain. I fling th' unbroken paring o'er my head, Upon the grass a perfect L is read; Yet on my heart a fairer L is seen Than what the paring makes upon the green. With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground, And turn me thrice around, around, around. This pippin shall another trial make: See from the core two kernels brown I take; This on my cheek for Lubberkin is worn, And Boobyclod on t'other side is born; But Boobyclod soon drops upon the ground, A certain token that his love's unsound, While Lubberkin sticks firmly to the last; Oh were his lips to mine but join'd so fast! With my tharp heel three times mark the ground, And turn me thrice around, around, around. As Lubberkin once slept beneath a tree, I twitch'd his dangling garter srom hi sknee; He wist not when the hempen string I drew, Now mine I quickly doff of inkle blue; Together fast I tye the garters twain, And while I knit the knot repeat this strain; Three times a true-love's knot I tye secure, Firm be the knot, firm may his love endure. With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground, And turn me thrice around, around, around. As I was wont, I trudg'd last market-day To town, with new-laid eggs preserv'd in hay; I made my market long before 'twas night, My purse grew heavy and my basket light. Strait to the pothecary's shop I went, And in love-powder all my mony spent; Behap what will, next Sunday after prayers, When to the ale-house Lubberkin repairs, These golden flies into his mug I'll throw, And soon the swain with fervent love shall glow. With my sharp heel I three times mark the ground, And turn me thrice around, around, around. But hold ---- our Light-foot barks, and cocks his ears. O'er yonder stile see Lubberkin appears. He comes, he comes, Hobnelia's not betray'd, Nor shall she crown'd with willow die a maid. He vows, he swears, he'll give me a green gown, Oh dear! I fall adown, adown, adown! Source (books.google.com): John Gay, "Thursday; or, The Spell," The Shepherd's Week in Six Pastorals (Dublin: Printed by S. Powell for G. Grierson, 1714), pp. 29-35 . Source (Internet Archive): John Gay, "Thursday; or, The Spell," The Shepherd's Week in Six Pastorals , edited by H. F. B. Brett-Smith (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1924), pp. 30-38 . Return to the table of contents . Midsummer Superstitious Customs Cornwall, England If on midsummer-eve a young woman takes off the shift which she was been wearing, and, having washed it, turns its wrong side out, and hangs it in silence over the back of a chair, near the fire, she will see, about midnight, her future husband, who deliberately turns the garment. If a young lady will, on midsummer-eve, walk backwards into the garden and gather a rose, she has the means of knowing who is to be her husband. The rose must be cautiously sewn up in a paper bag, and put aside in a dark drawer, there to remain until Christmas-day. On the morning of the Nativity the bag must be carefully opened in silence, and the rose placed by the lady in her bosom. Thus she must wear it to church. Some young man will either ask for the rose, or take it from her without asking. That young man is destined to become eventually the lady's husband. At eve last midsummer no sleep I sought, But to the field a bag of hemp-seed brought; I scatter'd round the seed on every side, And three times in a trembling accent cried, -- "This hemp-seed with my virgin hands I sow, Who shall my true love be, the crop shall mow." I straight look'd back, and, if my eyes speak truth, With his keen scythe behind me came the youth. Gay's Pastorals The practice of sowing hemp-seed on midsummer-eve is not especially a Cornish superstition, yet it was at one time a favorite practice with young women to try the experiment. Many a strange story have I been told as to the result of the sowing, and many a trick could I tell of, which has been played off by young men who had become acquainted with the secret intention of some maidens. I believe there is but little difference in the rude rhyme used on the occasion, -- Hemp-seed I sow, Hemp-seed I hoe, (the action of sowing the seed and of hoeing it in, must be deliberately gone through); -- And he Who will my true love be Come after me and mow. A phantom of the true lover will now appear, and of course the maid or maidens retire in wild affright. If a young unmarried woman stands at midnight on midsummer-eve in the porch of the parish church, she will see, passing by in procession, every one who will die in the parish during the year. This is so serious an affair that it is not, I believe, often tried. I have, however, heard of young women who have made the experiment. But every one of the stories relates that, coming last in the procession, they have seen shadows of themselves; that from that day forward they have pined, and ere midsummer has again come round, that they have been laid to rest in the village graveyard. Source (books.google.com): Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , second series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 172-73 . Source (Internet Archive): Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , second series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 172-73 . Return to the table of contents . Halloween Scotland Editor's Note (DLA) In twenty-eight rhymed stanzas Rober Burns describes how "some merry, friendly, countra folks" convened on Halloween to perform various traditional rituals, with the hope of thus conjuring up images of their future marriage partners. Each ritual, described in Scottish dialect, is elucidated with an explanatory footnote. Foreword The following POEM will, by many Readers, be well enough understood; but, for the sake of those who are unacquainted with the manners and traditions of the country where the scene is cast, Notes are added, to give some account of the principal Charms and Spells of that Night, so big with Prophecy to the Peasantry in the West of Scotland. The passion of prying into Futurity makes a striking part of the history of Human-nature, in it's rude ftate, in all ages and nations; and it may be some entertainment to a philosophic mind, if any such should honor the Author with a perusal, to see the remains of it, among the more unenlightened in our own. Preface Yes! Let the Rich deride, the Proud disdain, The simple pleasures of the lowly train; To me more dear, congenial to my heart, One native charm, than all the gloss of art. GOLDSMITH Note to the Title "Halloween" Is thought to be a night when Witches, Devils, and other mischief making beings, are all abroad on their baneful, midnight errands: particularly, those aerial people, the Fairies, are said, on that night, to hold a grand Anniversary. Note to Stanza 4 The first ceremony of Halloween, is, pulling each a Stock or plant of kail. They must go out, hand in hand, with eyes shut, and pull the first they meet with: its being big or little, straight or crooked, is prophetic of the size and shape of the grand object of all their Spells -- the husband or wife. If any yird , or earth, stick to the root, that is tocher , or fortune; and the taste of the cufloc , that is, the heart of the stem, is indicative of the natural temper and disposition. Lastly, the stems, or to give them their ordinary appellation, the runts , are placed somewhere above the head of the door; and the christian names of the people whom chance brings into the house, are, according to the priority of placing the runts , the names in question. Note to Stanza 6 They go to the barn-yard, and pull each, at three several times, a stalk of Oats. If the third stalk wants the top-pickle , that is, the grain at the top of the stalk, the party in question will want the Maidenhead. Note to Stanza 7 Burning the nuts is a favourite charm. They name the lad and lass to each particular nut, as they lay them in the fire; and according as they burn quietly together, or start from beside one another, the course and issue of the Courtship will be. Note to Stanza 11 Whoever would, with success, try this spell, must strcitly observe these directions. Steal out, all alone, to the kiln , and, darkling, throw into the pot , a clew of blue yarn; wind it in a new clew off the old one; and towards the latter end, something will hold the thread: demand, wha hands? i. e. who holds? and answer will be returned from the kiln pot, by naming the christian and sirname of your future Spouse. Note to Stanza 13 Take a candle, and go, alone, to a looking glass: eat an apple before it, and some traditions say you should comb your hair all the time: the face of your conjugal companion, to be , will be seen in the glass, as if peeping over your shoulder. Note to Stanza 16 Steal out, unperceived, and sow a handful of hemp seed; harrowing it with any thing you can conveniently draw after you. Repeat, now and then, "Hemp seed I saw thee, Hemp seed I saw thee; and him (or her) that is to be my true love, I come after me and pou thee." Look over your left shoulder, and you will see the appearance of the person invoked, in the attitude of pulling hemp. Some traditions say, "come after me and shaw thee," that is, show thyself; in which case it simply appears. Others omit the harrowing, and say, "come after me and harrow thee." Note to Stanza 21 This charm must likewise be performed, unperceived and alone. You go to the barn , and open both doors; taking them off the hinges, if possible; for there is danger, that the Being, about to appear, may shut the doors, and do you some mischief. Then take that inftrument used in winnowing the corn, which, in our country dialect, we call a wecht ; and go thro' all the attitudes of letting down corn against the wind. Repeat it three times; and the third time, an apparition will pass thro' the barn, in at the windy door, and out at the other, having both the figure in question and the appearance or retinue, marking the employment or station in life. Note to Stanza 23 Take an opportunity of going, unnoticed, to a Bear-stack , and fathom it three times round. The last fathom of the last time, you will catch in your arms, the appearance of your future conjugal yoke-fellow. Note to Stanza 24 You go out, one or more, for this is a social spell, to a south-running spring or rivulet, where "three Lairds' lands meet," and dip your left shirt-sleeve. Go to bed in sight of a fire, and hang your wet sleeve before it to dry. Ly awake; and sometime near midnight, an apparition, having the exact figure of the grand object in question, will come and turn the sleeve, as if to dry the other side of it. Note to Stanza 27 Take three dishes; put clean water in one, foul water in another, and leave the third empty: blindfold a person, and lead him to the hearth where the dishes are ranged; he (or she) dips the left hand: if by chance in the clean water, the future husband or wife will come to the bar of Matrimony, a Maid; if in the foul, a widow; if in the empty dish, it foretells, with equal certainty, no marriage at all. It is repeated three times; and every time the arrangement of the dishes is aliered. Source (books.google.com): Robert Burns, Poems, Chiefly in the Scottish Dialect (Kilmarnock: Printed by John Wilson, 1786), pp. 100-117 . Source (Internet Archive): Robert Burns, Poems, Chiefly in the Scottish Dialect (Edinburgh: Printed for the author and sold by William Creech, 1787), pp. 154-73 . Return to the table of contents . The Bible and Key Trial Scotland In my young days, a process of divining, allied to casting lots, was resorted to by young women in order to discover a thief, or to ascertain whether a young man who was courting one of them was in earnest, and would in the future become that girl's husband. The process was was called the Bible and key trial, and the formula was as follows: A key and Bible were procured, the key being so much longer than the Bible that, when placed between the leaves, the head and handle would project. If the enquiry was about the good faith of a sweetheart, the key was placed in Ruth i. 16, on the words, "Entreat me not to leave thee: where thou goest I will go," etc. The Bible was then closed, and tied round with tape. Two neutral persons, sitting opposite each other, held out the forefingers of their right hands, and the person who was consulting the oracle suspended the Bible between their two hands, resting the projecting parts of the key on the outstretched forefingers. No one spoke except the enquirer, and she, as she placed the key and Bible in position, repeated slowly the whole passage, "Entreat me not to leave thee," John or James, or whatever the name of the youth was, "for where thou goest I will go," etc. If the key and Bible turned and fell off the fingers, the answer was favourable; and generally by the time the whole passage was repeated this was the result, provided the parties holding up the key and Bible were firm and steady. For the detection of a thief, the formula was the same, with only this difference, that the key was put into the Bible at the fiftieth Psalm, and the enquirer named the suspected thief, and then repeated the eighteenth verse of that Psalm, "When thou sawest a thief then thou consentest with him," etc. If the Bible turned round and fell, it was held to be proof that the person named was the thief. This method of divining was not frequently practised, not through want of faith in its efficacy, but through superstitious terror, for the movement of the key was regarded as evidence that some unseen dread power was present, and so overpowering occasionally was the impression produced that the young woman who was chief actor in the scene fainted. The parties holding the key and Bible were generally old women, whose faith in the ordeal was perfect, and who, removed by their age from the intenser sympathies of youth, could therefore hold their hands with steadier nerve. It is only when firm hands hold it that the turning takes place, for this phenomenon depends upon the regular and steady pulsations in the fingers, and when held steadily the ordeal never fails. Source (books.google.com): James Napier, Folk Lore; or, Superstitious Beliefs in the West of Scotland within this Century (Paisley: Alex. Gardner, 1879), pp. 106-107 . Source (Internet Archive): James Napier, Folk Lore; or, Superstitious Beliefs in the West of Scotland within this Century (Paisley: Alex. Gardner, 1879), pp. 106-107 . Return to the table of contents . Rhamanta , or Romantic Divination Wales The customs of rhamanta , or romantic divination, by which lovers and sweethearts seek to pierce the future, are many and curious, in all parts of Wales. Besides such familiar forms of this widely popular practice as sleeping on a bit of wedding-cake, etc., several unique examples may be mentioned. One known as the Maid's Trick is thus performed; and none must attempt it but true maids, or they will get themselves into trouble with the fairies: On Christmas eve, or on one of the Three Spirit Nights, after the old folks are abed, the curious maiden puts a good stock of coal on the fire, lays a clean cloth on the table, and spreads thereon such store of eatables and drinkables as her larder will afford. Toasted cheese is considered an appropriate luxury for this occasion. Having prepared the feast, the maiden then takes off all her clothing, piece by piece, standing before the fire the while, and her last and closest garment she washes in a pail of clear spring water, on the hearth, and spreads it to dry across a chair-back turned to the fire. She then goes off to bed, and listens for her future husband, whose apparition is confidently expected to come and eat the supper. In case she hears him, she is allowed to peep into the room, should there be a convenient crack or keyhole for that purpose; and it is said there be unhappy maids who have believed themselves doomed to marry a monster, from having seen through a cranny the horrible spectacle of a black-furred creature with fiery eyes, its tail lashing its sides, its whiskers dripping gravy, gorging itself with the supper. But if her lover come, she will be his bride that same year. In Pembrokeshire a shoulder of mutton, with nine holes bored in the blade bone, is put under the pillow to dream on. At the same time the shoes of the experimenting damsel are placed at the foot of the bed in the shape of a letter T, and an incantation is said over them, in which it is trusted by the damsel that she may see her lover in his every-day clothes. In Glamorganshire a form of rhamanta still exists which is common in many lands. A shovel being placed against the fire, on it a boy and a girl put each a grain of wheat, side by side. Presently these edge towards each other; they bob and curtsey, or seem to, as they hop about. They swell and grow hot, and finally pop off the shovel. If both grains go off together, it is a sign the young pair will jump together into matrimony; but if they take different directions, or go off at different times, the omen is unhappy. In Glamorganshire also this is done: A man gets possession of a girl's garters, and weaves them into a true lover's knot, saying over them some words of hope and love in Welsh. This he puts under his shirt, next his heart, till he goes to bed, when he places it under the bolster. If the test be successful the vision of his future wife appears to him in the night. A curious rhamanta among farm-women is thus described by a learned Welsh writer [Cynddelw, Manion Hynafiaethol , 53]: The maiden would get hold of a pullet's first egg, cut it through the middle, fill one half-shell with wheaten flour and the other with salt, and make a cake out of the egg, the flour, and the salt. One half of this she would eat; the other half was put in the foot of her left stocking under her pillow that night; and after offering up a suitable prayer, she would go to sleep. What with her romantic thoughts, and her thirst after eating this salty cake, it was not perhaps sur prising that the future husband should be seen, in a vision of the night, to come to the bedside bearing a vessel of water or other beverage for the thirsty maid. Another custom was to go into the garden at midnight, in the season when "black seed" was sown, and sow leeks, with two garden rakes. One rake was left on the ground while the young woman worked away with the other, humming to herself the while: Y sawl sydd i gydfydio, Doed i gydgribinio! Or in English: He that would a life partner be, Let him also rake with me. There was a certain young Welshwoman who, about eighty years ago, performed this rhamanta, when who should come into the garden but her master! The lass ran to the house in great fright, and asked her mistress, "Why have you sent master out into the garden to me?" " Wel, wel ," replied the good dame, in much heaviness of heart, "make much of my little children!" The mistress died shortly after, and the husband eventually married the servant. The sterner sex have a form of rhamanta in which the knife plays a part. This is to enter the churchyard at midnight, carrying a twca , which is a sort of knife made out of an old razor, with a handle of sheep or goat-horn, and encircle the church edifice seven times, holding the twca at arm's length, and saying, " Dyma'r twca, p'le mae'r wain? " (Here's the twca , where's the sheath?) Source (books.google.com): Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions , 2nd edition (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), pp. 302-305 . Source (Internet Archive): Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions , 2nd edition (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), pp. 302-305 . Return to the table of contents . A Story Ireland This hapened on a Hallow Eve night. There were two girls living in this house. Their names were Peg and Etna. Peg was very rough and wild but Etna was very mild and gentle. They were playing tricks with the object of seeing their future husband. It was said that anyone who would get into a haunted room and start peeling an apple while looking into the mirror would see her future husband in the mirror. Peg took courage and braved it. As she started to peel the apple she heard terrible laughing. Immediately she saw a man in the mirror. The next day a man came to this old haunted ruin. It was the very same man she saw in the mirror the night before. Then Peg fell very much in love with him. They planned that they would get married and then go away. They were to go on a certain night, and Peg arranged that Etna was to go to bed early that night. At a late hour the knock came to the door. By some stroke of ill-luck Peg was not ready to answer the door. Then Etna came down the stairs and she had a good light. She looked down at the feet and what did she see but the cloven feet. She knew then the visitor was no other than the devil. She pointed out this to Peg and she saved her from eternal damnation. Peg got very ill and never did much good after. That ended the Hallow E'en tricks in that neighbourhood for a long and many a day after. Ettie Millar, 6th May, 1938. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Roscommon >> Kilmore, p. 166 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Hallow-E'n Ireland Long ago the young people used to peel an apple before a looking glass at midnight [on Halloween] and they would see their future wife or husband looking over their shoulder. Collector: Mary McCafferty. Informant: Bernard McCafferty. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Donegal >> Derries, pp. 78-79 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Hallowe'en Customs Ireland On Hallowe'en night many customs are practiced in my district. On that night it is said that "pookas" and other evil spirits roam from house to house casting evil spells on man and beast, so on that account everybody stays indoors. In the evening the woman of the house makes a sweet cake and puts a ring in it,. At supper that night whoever happens to get the ring is supposed to be the first to get married. Two nuts are also placed beside the fire and the name of a boy and girl put on each of them. If they happen to jump into the fire they will not be married, but if they remain together they will. Three saucers are then procured, water is placed in one, clay in another and a ring on the third. Then the company are blindfolded on turn. If they touch the water, they will cross water before the year is out. If they touch clay they will die, and if they ring is touched they will be married. This custom is never practised nowadays, but was practised much long ago. One of the girls of the house went into a dark room and peeled an apple before a mirror. At the hour of midnight she was supposed to see the face of her future husband in the glass. About sixty years ago a girl named McDonagh who live in Keash was said to have seen her future husband one Hallowe'en night. About two months afterwards she was returning from the town one evening when she met the very same (roads) man as she had seen in the looking-glass. On the instant she fell in a faint on the road. She never recovered from the shock and in less than three months afterwards, she died. The following custom was also practised long ago. One of the girls of the house went to a lime-kiln at the hour of mid-night and brought a ball of wool with her. She threw the wool into the lime-kiln and held the end of the thread. She then shouted "who holds the wool?" three times and her future husband was supposed to shout up his name. On this night also cabbage is strewn about the roads and in the towns the knockers on the door are tied together. The above was told by: Mr. Cryan, Tully, County Sligo. Written by: Maeve Turbitt, Boyle, County Roscommon. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Roscommon >> Abbeytown Convent N. S., pp. 117-120 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 21, 2021. Doctor Know-All: Folktales of Type 1641 Doctor Know-All and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1641 about being in the right place at the right time selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2018 Contents The Cobbler Turned Doctor (Attributed to Aesop). Harisarman (India). The Stolen Treasure (India). The Four Jogis (India). Crab (Italy). Doctor Know-All (Germany). Doctor Cure-All (Ireland). Black Robin (Wales). Doctor and Detective (Denmark). The Charcoal Burner (Norway). John the Conjurer (Spain). Suan's Good Luck (Philippines). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Cobbler Turned Doctor Attributed to Aesop A very unskillful cobbler, finding himself unable to make a living at his trade, gave up mending boots and took to doctoring instead. He gave out that he had the secret of a universal antidote against all poisons, and acquired no small reputation, thanks to his talent for puffing himself. One day, however, he fell very ill; and the king of the country bethought him that he would test the value of his remedy. Calling, therefore, for a cup, he poured out a dose of the antidote, and, under pretense of mixing poison with it, added a little water, and commanded him to drink it. Terrified by the fear of being poisoned, the cobbler confessed that he knew nothing about medicine, and that his antidote was worthless. Then the king summoned his subjects and address them as follows: "What folly could be greater than yours? Here is this cobbler to whom no one will send his boots to be mended, and yet you have not hesitated to entrust him with your lives!" Source: Æsop's Fables , a new translation by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: William Heinemann; New York: Doubleday, Page, and Company, 1916), p. 127 . Return to the table of contents . Harisarman India There was a certain Brahman in a certain village, named Harisarman. He was poor and foolish and in evil case for want of employment, and he had very many children, that he might reap the fruit of his misdeeds in a former life. He wandered about begging with his family, and at last he reached a certain city, and entered the service of a rich householder called Sthuladatta. His sons became keepers of Sthuladatta's cows and other property, and his wife a servant to him, and he himself lived near his house, performing the duty of an attendant. One day there was a feast on account of the marriage of the daughter of Sthuladatta, largely attended by many friends of the bridegroom, and merrymakers. Harisarman hoped that he would be able to fill himself up to the throat with ghee and flesh and other dainties, and get the same for his family, in the house of his patron. While he was anxiously expecting to be fed, no one thought of him. Then he was distressed at getting nothing to eat, and he said to his wife at night, "It is owing to my poverty and stupidity that I am treated with such disrespect here; so I will pretend by means of an artifice to possess a knowledge of magic, so that I may become an object of respect to this Sthuladatta; so, when you get an opportunity, tell him that I possess magical knowledge." He said this to her, and after turning the matter over in his mind, while people were asleep he took away from the house of Sthuladatta a horse on which his master's son-in-law rode. He placed it in concealment at some distance, and in the morning the friends of the bridegroom could not find the horse, though they searched in every direction. Then, while Sthuladatta was distressed at the evil omen, and searching for the thieves who had carried off the horse, the wife of Harisarman came and said to him, "My husband is a wise man, skilled in astrology and magical sciences. He can get the horse back for you. Why do you not ask him?" When Sthuladatta heard that, he called Harisarman, who said, "Yesterday I was forgotten, but today, now the horse is stolen, I am called to mind," and Sthuladatta then propitiated the Brahman with these words, "I forgot you, forgive me," and asked him to tell him who had taken away their horse. Then Harisarman drew all kinds of pretended diagrams, and said, "The horse has been placed by thieves on the boundary line south from this place. It is concealed there, and before it is carried off to a distance, as it will be at close of day, go quickly and bring it." When they heard that, many men ran and brought the horse quickly, praising the discernment of Harisarman. Then Harisarman was honored by all men as a sage, and dwelt there in happiness, honored by Sthuladatta. Now, as days went on, much treasure, both of gold and jewels, had been stolen by a thief from the palace of the king. As the thief was not known, the king quickly summoned Harisarman on account of his reputation for knowledge of magic. And he, when summoned, tried to gain time, and said, "I will tell you tomorrow," and then he was placed in a chamber by the king, and carefully guarded. And he was sad because he had pretended to have knowledge. Now in that palace there was a maid named Jihva (which means tongue), who, with the assistance of her brother, had stolen that treasure from the interior of the palace. She, being alarmed at Harisarman's knowledge, went at night and applied her ear to the door of that chamber in order to find out what he was about. And Harisarman, who was alone inside, was at that very moment blaming his own tongue, that had made a vain assumption of knowledge. He said, "Oh tongue, what is this that you have done through your greediness? Wicked one, you will soon receive punishment in full." When Jihva heard this, she thought, in her terror, that she had been discovered by this wise man, and she managed to get in where he was, and falling at his feet, she said to the supposed wizard, "Brahman, here I am, that Jihva whom you have discovered to be the thief of the treasure, and after I took it I buried it in the earth in a garden behind the palace, under a pomegranate tree. So spare me, and receive the small quantity of gold which is in my possession." When Harisarman heard that, he said to her proudly, "Depart, I know all this; I know the past, present and future; but I will not denounce you, being a miserable creature that has implored my protection. But whatever gold is in your possession you must give back to me." When he said this to the maid, she consented, and departed quickly. But Harisarman reflected in his astonishment, "Fate brings about, as if in sport, things impossible, for when calamity was so near, who would have thought chance would have brought us success? While I was blaming my jihva, the thief Jihva suddenly flung herself at my feet. Secret crimes manifest themselves by means of fear." Thus thinking, he passed the night happily in the chamber. And in the morning he brought the king, by some skillful parade of pretended knowledge into the garden, and led him up to the treasure, which was buried under the pomegranate tree, and said that the thief had escaped with a part of it. Then the king was pleased, and gave him the revenue of many villages. But the minister, named Devajnanin, whispered in the king's ear, "How can a man possess such knowledge unattainable by men, without having studied the books of magic. You may be certain that this is a specimen of the way he makes a dishonest livelihood, by having a secret intelligence with thieves. It will be much better to test him by some new artifice." Then the king of his own accord brought a covered pitcher into which he had thrown a frog, and said to Harisarman, "Brahman, if you can guess what there is in this pitcher, I will do you great honor today." When the Brahman Harisarman heard that, he thought that his last hour had come, and he called to mind the pet name of "Froggie" which his father had given him in his childhood in sport, and, impelled by luck, he called to himself by his pet name, lamenting his hard fate, and suddenly called out, "This is a fine pitcher for you, Froggie; it will soon become the swift destroyer of your helpless self." The people there, when they heard him say that, raised a shout of applause, because his speech chimed in so well with the object presented to him, and murmured, "Ah! a great sage, he knows even about the frog!" Then the king, thinking that this was all due to knowledge of divination, was highly delighted, and gave Harisarman the revenue of more villages, with gold, an umbrella, and state carriages of all kinds. So Harisarman prospered in the world. Source: Jacobs, Indian Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1892), no. 11, pp. 85-89 . Jacobs' source: Somadeva, Kathá Sarit Ságara; or, Ocean of the Streams of Story . Translated from the original Sanskrit by C. H. Tawney. Vol. 1 (Calcutta: Printed by J. W. Thomas at the Baptist Mission Press, 1880), pp. 272-74 . This volume contains additional information in a note on the story of Harisárman . Return to the table of contents . The Stolen Treasure India Once upon a time three jars full of money were stolen from a raja's palace. As all search was fruitless the raja at last gave notice that whoever could find them should receive one half of the money. The offer brought all the jans [witch-finders] and ojhas in the country to try their hand, but not one of them could find the treasure. The fact was that the money had been stolen by two of the raja's own servants, and it fell to the duty of these same two men to entertain the ojhas who came to try and find the money. Thus they were able to keep watch and see whether any of them got on the right track. Not far from the raja's city lived a certain tricky fellow. From his boyhood he had always been up to strange pranks, and he had married the daughter of a rich village headman. At the time that the raja's money was stolen his wife was on a visit to her father, and after she had been some time away, he went to fetch her home. However, on his way, he stopped to have a flirtation with a girl he knew in the village, and the result was that he did not get to his father-in-law's house till long after dark. As he stood outside he heard his wife's relations talking inside, and from their conversation he learned that they had killed a capon for supper, and that there was enough for each of them to have three slices of capon and five pieces of the vegetable which was cooked with it. Having learned this he opened the door and went in. The household was amazed at his arriving so late at night, but he explained that he had dreamed that they had killed a capon and were having a feast, and that there was enough for them each to have three slices of capon and five pieces of vegetable, so he had come to have a share. At this his father-in-law could do nothing but have another fowl killed and give him supper. He was naturally astonished at the trickster's powers of dreaming and insisted that he must certainly go and try his luck at finding the raja's stolen money. The trickster was taken aback at this, but there was no getting out of it. So the next morning he set out with his father-in-law to the raja's palace. When they arrived they were placed in charge of the two guilty servants, who offered them refreshments of curds and parched rice. As he was washing his hands after eating, the trickster ejaculated, "Find or fail, I have at any rate had a square meal." Now the two servants were named Find and Fail, and when they heard what the trickster said, they thought he was speaking of them, and had by some magic already found out that they were the thieves. This threw them into consternation, and they took the trickster aside and begged him not to tell the raja that they were the thieves. He asked where they had put the money, and they told him that they had hidden it in the sand by the river. Then he promised not to reveal their guilt, if they would show him where to find the money when the time came. They gladly promised and took him the raja. The trickster pretended to read an incantation over some mustard see, and then taking a bamboo went along tapping the ground with it. He refused to have a crowd with him ,because they would spoil the spell, but Find and Fail followed behind him and showed him where to go. So he soon found the jars of money and took them to the raja, who according to his promise gave him half their contents. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 68, pp. 206-208 . Note from Bompas's preface: "The Santal Parganas is a district 4800 square miles in area, lying about 150 miles north of Calcutta." From Bompas's glossary: Jan or jan guru . A witch finder. When a man is ill the jan is consulted as to what witch is responsible. The jan usually divines by gazing at an oiled leaf. Ojha . An exorcist, a charm doctor, one who counteracts the effects of witchcraft. Return to the table of contents . The Four Jogis India Once four Jogis were out on a begging expedition and came to a city were a raja lived. As they went along they discussed how they should beg of the raja; and while they were discussing the point, they saw a field rat and one of them exclaimed: "I know how I shall beg of him! I shall say 'See, he throws up the earth, scrapety scrape!'" This did not help the other three, but, further on, some frogs jumped into a pond as they passed by, and one of the others at once said: "I know what I shall say! I shall say 'Plumpety plump! Down he has sat.'" A little later, they saw a pig wallowing in the mud, and the third Jogi called out: "I have it! I shall say 'Rub away, rub away! Now some more water! Rub away, rub away! I know, my boys, what you are going to do.'" The fourth Jogi was still in perplexity but, when they came in sight of the raja's city, he exclaimed "I know what I shall say: 'Highways and byeways, what a big city! The kotwal is going his rounds, his rounds.'" Then they got a man to write down these four forms of address on a sheet of paper and presented it to the raja. The raja took it, and read it, and could not make head or tail of it. And when the four Jogis saw him looking so puzzled, they got frightened and took to their heels, for they could not read themselves and were not sure of what the paper really contained. Now the raja's chief officer was a Tehsildar, and he had also a barber, who shaved him every day. And that evening after the Jogis had run away, the Tehsildar proposed to the barber that, when shaving the raja the next morning, he should cut the raja's throat and they could then divide the kingdom between them, and the barber consented. Not content with this, the Tehsildar and the palace chowkidar that same night tried to break into the raja's palace and steal his money and jewelry. They began to cut a hole through the mud wall of the raja's room, but it chanced that the raja was so puzzled by the paper which the Jogis had put into his hand, that he kept on reading it over and over again, and just as the Tehsildar and chowkidar had half cut their way through the wall, they heard the raja saying: "See, he throws up the earth, scrapety, scrape!" At once they concluded that they had been heard and they crouched down; the raja went on: "Plumpety, plump! Down he has sat." This made them think that they had been seen and the chowkidar crept to the door to listen. He heard the raja saying: " Highways and byeways, what a big city! The kotwal is going his rounds, his rounds!" Then the chowkidar felt sure that he was discovered and he ran off with the Tehsildar, without completing their burglary. The next morning the barber went to shave the raja, and, while he was sharpening the razor, the raja again began to study the mysterious paper, murmuring "Rub away, rub away, now some more water. Rub away, rub away! I know my boy what you are going to do." The Barber thought that the raja referred to his rubbing water over his face for shaving, and concluded that the Tehsildar had revealed the plot; so he threw himself at the raja's feet and confessed everything, swearing that the Tehsildar and not he was to blame. The raja at once sent for the chowkidar to take the Tehsildar and Barber to prison. When the chowkidar came in he found the raja repeating "See he throws up the earth, scrapety, scrape!" He at once concluded that the raja was referring to the burglary and he fell on his knees and confessed all that had happened. This was news to the raja, but he went and saw the place where the wall had been partly cut through, and then he sent all the guilty men to prison and despatched messengers to look for the Jogis who had been the means of saving his life and property; but the Jogis had been so frightened and had run away so far, that they were never found. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 58, pp. 181-83 . Return to the table of contents . Crab Italy There was once a king who had lost a valuable ring. He looked for it everywhere, but could not find it. So he issued a proclamation that if any astrologer could tell him where it was he would be richly rewarded. A poor peasant by the name of Crab heard of the proclamation. He could neither read nor write, but took it into his head that he wanted to be the astrologer to find the king's ring. So he went and presented himself to the king, to whom he said, "Your majesty must know that I am an astrologer, although you see me so poorly dressed. I know that you have lost a ring and I will try by study to find out where it is." "Very well," said the king, "and when you have found it, what reward must I give you?" "That is at your discretion, your majesty." "Go, then, study, and we shall see what kind of an astrologer you turn out to be." He was conducted to a room, in which he was to be shut up to study. It contained only a bed and a table on which were a large book and writing materials. Crab seated himself at the table and did nothing but turn over the leaves of the book and scribble the paper so that the servants who brought him his food thought him a great man. They were the ones who had stolen the ring, and from the severe glances that the peasant cast at them whenever they entered, they began to fear that they would be found out. They made him endless bows and never opened their mouths without calling him "Mr. Astrologer." Crab, who, although illiterate, was, as a peasant, cunning, all at once imagined that the servants must know about the ring, and this is the way his suspicions were confirmed. He had been shut up in his room turning over his big book and scribbling his paper for a month, when his wife came to visit him. He said to her, "Hide yourself under the bed, and when a servant enters, say, 'That is one.' When another comes, say, 'That is two,' and so on." The woman hid herself. The servants came with the dinner, and hardly had the first on entered when a voice from under the bed said, "That is one." The second one entered; the voice said, "That is two," and so on. The servants were frightened at hearing that voice, for they did not know where it came from, and held a consultation. One of them said, "We are discovered. If the astrologer denounces us to the king as thieves, we are lost." "Do you know what we must do?" said another. "Let us hear." "We must go to the astrologer and tell him frankly that we stole the ring, and ask him not to betray us, and present him with a purse of money. Are you willing?" "Perfectly." So they went in harmony to the astrologer, and making him a lower bow than usual, one of them began, "Mr. Astrologer, you have discovered that we stole the ring. We are poor people and if you reveal it to the king, we are undone. So we beg you not to betray us, and accept this purse of money." Crab took the purse and then added, "I will not betray you, but you must do what I tell you, if you wish to save your lives. Take the ring and make that turkey in the courtyard swallow it, and leave the rest to me." The servants were satisfied to do so and departed with a low bow. The next day Crab went to the king and said to him, "Your majesty must know that after having toiled over a month I have succeeded in discovering where the ring has gone to." "Where is it, then?" asked the king. "A turkey has swallowed it." "A turkey? Very well, let us see." They went for the turkey, opened it, and found the ring inside. The king, amazed, presented the astrologer with a large purse of money and invited him to a banquet. Among the other dishes, there was brought on the table a plate of crabs. Crabs must then have been very rare, because only the king and a few others knew their name. Turning to the peasant the king said, "You, who are an astrologer, must be able to tell me the name of these things which are in this dish." The poor astrologer was very much puzzled, and, as if speaking to himself, but in such a way that the others heard him, he muttered, "Ah! Crab, Crab, what a plight you are in!" All who did not know that his name was Crab rose and proclaimed him the greatest astrologer in the world. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 109, pp. 314-16 . Return to the table of contents . Doctor Know-All Germany Once upon a time there was a poor peasant by the name of Crab who drove two oxen with a load of wood into town where he sold it to a doctor for two thalers. He received his money just as the doctor was sitting down to eat. When the peasant saw how well the doctor ate and drank, his heart took a longing for the same things, and he decided that he would like to have been a doctor. He stood there for a while, and then asked if he too could not become a doctor. "Certainly," said the doctor, "in no time at all." "What do I have to do?" asked the peasant. First of all, buy yourself an ABC-book, one that has a picture of a rooster up front. Second, sell your wagon and your two oxen and buy yourself some clothing and other things that doctors use. Third, have yourself a sign painted with the words 'I am Doctor Know-All' and nail it above the door to your house." The peasant did everything he was told to do. After he had doctored a little -- but not very much -- some money was stolen from a great and wealthy nobleman. Someone told him about the Doctor Know-All who lived in such and such a village, and who must know where the money had gone. So the nobleman had his carriage hitched up, rode out to the village, and asked him if he were Doctor Know-All. "Yes, that I am." "Then you must come with me and recover my stolen money." "Yes, but my wife Grete must come along too." The nobleman agreed and had them take their places in his carriage. They rode away together. They arrived at the nobleman's court just at mealtime, and the nobleman invited him to eat. "Yes, but include my wife Grete," he replied, and the two of them sat down behind the table. When the first servant brought out a platter of fine food the peasant nudged his wife and said, "Grete, that's the first one," meaning the meal's first course. However, the servant thought that he meant, "That's the first thief," and because that is indeed what he was, he took fright, and outside he said to his comrades, "The doctor knows everything. It's going to go badly for us. He said that I'm the first one." The second one did not want to go inside at all, but finally he had to, and when he entered, the peasant nudged his wife and said, "Grete, that's the second one." This servant took fright as well, and went outside. It did not go any better for the third one. Once again the peasant said, "Grete, that's the third one." The fourth one brought in a covered platter, and the nobleman told the doctor that he should demonstrate his art by guessing what it contained. It was crabs. The peasant looked at the platter, and seeing no way out of his dilemma, he said to himself, "Oh, poor Crab!" Hearing this, the nobleman called out, "If he knows that then he must know who has the money as well!" The servant grew very fearful and motioned to the doctor to go outside. There all four of them confessed to him that they had stolen the money. They offered to give it all to him and a handsome sum in addition, if he would not turn them in. Otherwise they would all hang. They showed him where the money was hidden. The doctor was satisfied with this, and he went back inside and sat down again at the table. "My lord," he said, "Now I will look in my book to see where the money is hidden. However, the fifth servant climbed into the stove in order to hear if the doctor knew anything else. The doctor leafed back and forth in his book looking for the picture of the rooster. Not finding it, he said, "I know that you are in there. Come on out." The man in the stove thought that the doctor was talking to him, and terrified, he jumped out, saying, "The man knows everything!" Then Doctor Know-All showed the nobleman where the money was, but he did not tell who had stolen it. Thus he received a large reward from each side and became a famous man. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Doktor Allwissend," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 98, pp. 69-71 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Return to the table of contents . Doctor Cure-All Ireland There was once a poor fagot-cutter that used to work very hard, and one day that he took a load of fagots to the doctor in the next town, he was brought into the parlour to be paid, and didn't he admire the fine furniture he saw about him! When he was coming away, says he to the doctor, "Musha, sir, would you lend me one of these fine-bound books for about a quarter of a year or so, and I'll return it honestly?" "What is the book to be about?" says the doctor, "and what do you want with it?" "I don't care what it's about," says he, "and I'll tell you when I return it the use I'll make of it." The doctor laughed, and gave him a well-looking wolume, but I don't know no more nor the fagot-cutter himself what was in it. "A fine thing," says he, "to be slavin' oneself as I do for my bit and sup, and see what grandeur that man is in for doing nothing at all, as a body might say." When he got home, he removed bag and baggage into the town after selling his little furniture, and buying a shute of broad cloth, and a Caroline hat, and a Barcelona hankecher. He got a painter to put up a sign-board with DOCTOR CURE-ALL over his door, put some bottles on a shelf, and sat down at his little round table with his book before him. Well, he soon got custom, but all the cures he knew was bowl almanac [Bole-Armeniac], salts and senna, castor oil, and sugar and soap for plasters. But he was so courageous in promising cures, and so many got well, no thanks to him, and there was so many that there was nothing amiss with at all, that he soon got a great name. He even recovered stolen things, for he gave out that he knew by his books who had them, and the thieves used to bring them unknownst to him, and give him some money for not telling on them. Well, there was a gentleman in the neighbourhood that had a very valuable ring taken from him, and he sent for Dr. Cure-all to find out the thief for him. "I'll find him out," says he, "if he's above ground, but it can't be done in a minute. I'll have to see where you kept it, and get a lock of hair from everyone in the house, and study my conjurin' book for eight days. The ninth morning you'll have the ring safe and sound. I'll have to stay on the premises the whole time." "Very good," says the gentleman. Well, he lived like a fighting cock for five days, but I give you my word he began then to get uneasy, for no one about the house seemed inclined to confess, though he gave out from the beginning that he'd have his hand on the thief the evening of the eighth day. The evening of the sixth he was walking in the paddock near the hedge, and he was muttering to himself, "Three days only now, and be this and be that there goes one of 'em!" says he in an angry voice. Well, there was three rogues of servants concerned in the robbery, and one of them was padrowlin' [patrolling] in the cabbage-garden the other side of the hedge the same minute. He never drew rein till he got to the other fellows, and says he, "We're discovered as sure as fate." Well, they talked and they talked, and didn't know what to do till next evening, when the second of 'em was close by the hedge, and what did he hear but the doctor cry out, "And there goes the second of 'em!" Well, they were more frightened now than before, and came to the point of confessing if the doctor knew there was three of 'em. The next evening the poor man was walking sorrowful enough in the same place. "Ovoch!" was he saying to himself, "there was only three evenings of the time left since I took my walk here to give the thief an opportunity of talking to me," and then his heart was so bitter he cried out, "Here is the third of 'em!" "Docthor, docthor," says a voice the other side of the hedge, "you're a considherate man; here's the ring and a guinea-note along with it. Keep our secret." "You don't deserve it, you unlucky rogue, for delaying so long. The master 'ud have you in the stone-jug [gaol] tomorrow only for your late repentance." Well, the whole family were assembled in the big parlour next morning, and the doctor sitting very stately in an arm-chair. "Who is the robber?" says the master. "I know the robber, and the place he hid the ring," says the doctor, "but I can only reveal one. Which is it to be?" The master, of course, chose to get his valuable ring. "Well, then," says he, "go to the hen-house wherever that is; I don't know. Put your right hand on the little board that's inside over the door, and in the middle of it you'll find what you're in search of." Out went the mistress and the little girl that minded the fowl, and there the ring was sure enough. Well, there was great joy, you may depend, and very great honour was paid to the wise man, but the master's brother that came that day on a visit, wouldn't give the doctor any credit at all. "Wait till dinner time," says he "and if I don't astonish his weak mind, you may say what you like." Well, the brother and his servant were cooking something very secretly in the kitchen before dinner time, and when that was over, and the doctor's health was drunk, and himself greatly praised, says the brother, "Doctor, I'll praise you more than all the family if you tell me what's in this covered plate." Ah, wouldn't anyone pity the poor man at that moment? "No use," says he to himself, "in throwing sand in people's eyes any longer." Then speaking out loud, says be, "Ah, sir, let the fox go as far as he pleases, he'll be cotch [caught] at last." "Well," says the gentleman, "I see I must give it up. It's a bit of a fox sure enough!" He lifted the cover for an instant, and then threw plate and cover and fox out of the window. And that's the way with the world. Impedence will bring a man through an auger hole, where an honest man can't get through an open gate. Source (books.google.com): Patrick Kennedy, The Fireside Stories of Ireland (Dublin: M'Glashan and Gill; London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Company; Edinburgh: John Menzies and Company, 1870), pp. 116-19 . Source (Internet Archive): Patrick Kennedy, The Fireside Stories of Ireland (Dublin: M'Glashan and Gill; London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Company; Edinburgh: John Menzies and Company, 1870), pp. 116-19 . Return to the table of contents . Black Robin Wales There was once an old man in North Wales called Robin Ddu, or Black Robin. He pretended to be a wizard, and though he had no magical power, he was so cunning that he made people believe he had, and his fame spread over the whole of Wales. A lady in the Vale of Towy lost three precious gems. They had been given to her by a dead sister, and she valued them all the more on that account. Every search was made for them, but they could not be found. The lady had not heard of the Well of Llanbedrog. (By means of that it is quite easy to discover who has stolen your property. All you have to do is to kneel by it, and after throwing in a bit of bread, name all whom you suspect. When the thief's name is mentioned, the bread sinks.) But she had heard of Black Robin, and at last she decided to send for him. She dispatched a servant to North Wales to offer him fifty pounds if he would restore her lost diamonds to her, and Robin traveled south with the messenger. When he arrived, he said he would not begin his work unless fifty pounds were given to him beforehand. "Fifty pounds is a lot of money," said the lady. "I should like to test your power before giving it you." To this Robin reluctantly agreed. The lady put a tame robin redbreast under a dish on the table. Sending for the supposed magician, she asked him to say what was under the vessel. He did not know what to say or do, and thought the best thing he could do was to confess his ignorance. "Robin is caught," he said. Thinking he referred to the bird and not to himself, the lady was astounded at what she regarded as a wonderful display of power, and Robin was too cunning to confess. The money was paid over, and the process of finding the gems began. First of all he inquired carefully into all the circumstances of the disappearance of the gems, cross-examining all the inmates of the house minutely. This investigation convinced him that one of the servants had stolen them, but for some time he could not find out the actual thief. One day, as he was taking the air with one of the menservants, he happened to enter the churchyard. The sexton in digging a grave had come across a quantity of old bones, among them being a skull. Robin took the skull back with him to his room, and his startled companion told the servants' hall about it. Then Robin called all the servants to him, and looking very stern, "Tomorrow night," said he, "I will summon a legion of devils, and they will punish the guilty with all the tortures of hell. But the innocent shall not suffer with the guilty. Take these," and with this he handed to each a tooth which he had wrenched from the skull. "By Friday morning" (it was then Wednesday) "the guilty, after suffering unspeakable anguish and pain, will be as dead as the body from which these teeth have been taken. But I will not invoke my devils if the gems are brought to me before midnight, nor will I disclose to any living soul who took them." Sure enough, before midnight on Thursday a trembling maidservant brought the diamonds to his room. The next thing to devise was how to restore them to their owner without disclosing the manner in which hey had been recovered, and at the same time in such a way as to reflect credit on himself as a magician. Looking out of his window in the morning he saw a flock of geese feeding in a field not far from the mansion. Going out he took with him a small piece of bread, in which he placed the stones. He threw the piece of bread to the gander, which at once greedily swallowed it. Some time after, summoning the lady, "Kill that gander," he said, "and you will find inside him your lost treasure." This was done and the diamonds were found. "They were dropped on the floor and accidentally swept out with the dust," he explained, "and this greedy bird swallowed them. By means of the skull which the sexton dug out of the grave on Wednesday I was able to divine the mystery." Source: W. Jenkyn Thomas, The Welsh Fairy Book (London: T. Fisher Unwin, [1908], pp. 296-98 . Return to the table of contents . Doctor and Detective Denmark There was once an old farmer who had a great deal of turf, which he sold to customers in town. One day, when he drove to town with a large wagonload, he chanced to meet a doctor. This worthy man came walking along in a stately manner, with a long pipe in his mouth, a cane in his hand, and a doctor's hat on his head. Under his arm he had a thick doctor-book. He was wrapped in a long, loose mantle. The farmer tipped his hat reverently, whereupon the doctor addressed him and said that he would like to buy the turf. They talked back and forth for some time, and finally came to an agreement in regard to the price. The farmer was to have the long mantle, the pipe and the cane, the doctor's hat and the book, and the doctor was to receive the turf. The bargain was closed. The farmer secured the doctor's articles and the doctor the farmer's turf, and then each went his own way. It was late before the farmer returned home to his wife. She asked him at once if he had made a good bargain. When he produced the entire doctor's outfit she was not at all pleased, but wept, and asked, plaintively, how they would now obtain their bread and butter, since he had received no money for the turf. Her husband did his best to comfort her, saying that in a little while they would have all that they needed, for now he had decided to take up a doctor's profession. He put on the mantle and the doctor's hat, and with the long pipe dangling from between his teeth he sat from morning to night reading diligently in the large doctor-book. He looked exactly like a real doctor. No one would notice the slightest difference. But, nevertheless, no one came to consult him. Thinking the reason might be that no one knew of him, he at length decided to place a sign above his door stating, "Here Lives the Greatest Doctor in the World," as he was sure this would at once turn the general attention towards him. He began to paint these letters on an old board. But as he had a very faint idea of writing -- in fact, this was the first time he had ever tried the art -- he wrote instead, "Here Lives the Greatest Detective in the World." A few days afterwards the king happened to pass the house of the "Greatest Detective." "What in all the world is written on that sign?" said he, dispatching one of his servants over to examine it closely. The servant reported that the sign advertised the greatest detective in the world. "Well," said the king, "I shall remember him and employ his services some day." Some time after, it happened that a thief entered the royal stables and stole two of the king's best horses. A thorough search was made throughout the land, both for the thief and the horses, but without success. At length someone reminded the king of the detective whose house they had passed. "Exactly so!" cried the king. "Now we shall find both thief and horses." He at once bid one of his men go and seek the wise man's advice in the difficult problem. The man rode back, found the house, knocked at the door, and walked in. Here he saw the detective sitting in front of the table, reading in the large doctor-book. He took off his hat, bowed politely, and presented the king's compliments. "I have come," he said, "to ask --" "That is all very well," interrupted the doctor. "I know it already." "Oh yes, of course you do," answered the messenger. "Will you kindly direct me where to go and find them?" "Ye-es," replied the wise man, turning the leaves in the large book before him. "I will tell you what to do. Wait a moment." Now he took out a slip of paper which he had found among the leaves in the book, folded it, and handed it to the messenger, directing him to go to the drugstore and have this prescription filled. "Take the medicine promptly," he concluded, "then you will find them!" He looked just as wise and important as any doctor in the land and waved his hand graciously at the messenger as a sign that the audience was at an end. The messenger lost no time in having the prescription filled, and as soon as the medicine was in his hand he took a drink from the bottle, and rode along as rapidly as he could, anxious to return to the king and relate his interview with the extraordinary man who seemed to know all beforehand. He had not gone very far, however, before the medicine began to act. Of a sudden he was seized with a terrible headache, and was obliged to seek refuge in a house near the road, where he was very kindly received. Thinking that a little rest would do him good, he lay down on a sofa in a room facing the yard. The headache became more and more severe, however, and the poor fellow cursed the wise man and his medicine with all his heart. But just as he complained of his evil fate, he heard the neighing of a horse in the stable across the yard. He arose quietly and approached the window, listening attentively, as the neighing seemed familiar to him. Now the horse neighed once more. His doubts vanished, and as the same moment his headache seemed to also completely vanish. Silently he opened the window, jumped into the yard, crept into the stable, and at once found the stolen horses, which he immediately untied. A few hours later he stood before the king, who did not know how to praise and reward the wisdom of the Great Detective before whom nothing was, of course, concealed. He lost no time in sending him two hundred dollars as a token of his high esteem and his gratitude. When the doctor received the money he said to his wife that a doctor's trade seemed to be a very easy one, and she answered that his bargain, which had seemed to her a foolish one, was, after all, quite satisfactory so far. Some time passed, when one day a beautiful gold ring belonging to the princess was stolen. A diligent search was made, but it seemed to have vanished altogether, with the thief. At length the Great Detective was named to the king as the right man to be consulted in this difficult affair. His majesty lost no time in sending a beautiful carriage and a messenger, with an invitation to the great man. Would he kindly assist in finding the gold ring which had been stolen? "Yes, I know it all," said he to the messenger who stood before him, bowing politely, "and I am willing to come." So he entered the carriage in his complete doctor's outfit, followed by his wife, whereupon they drove to the royal palace. The king himself stepped forward and opened the carriage door to the worthy couple, bowing and scraping and making himself agreeable. He invited them to partake of a dinner. The following day they would begin the search for the ring. The wise man assented to this, and they proceeded to the dinner table, which was, of course, laid in a splendid and gorgeous manner. The doctor whispered to his wife that she must remember how many dishes they had. When all had been seated, the door was opened and in came the servant with the first dish. The wise man looked at his wife, nodded, and said, "This is the first one." He did not see -- in fact no one did -- that the servant turned as pale as a sheet, but busied himself with doing justice to the excellent things before him. The servant, however, was fearfully frightened, and before returning to the kitchen he stopped behind the chair of the Great Detective, plucking him by the sleeve in order to attract his attention, but without apparent result. The dismayed man had nothing to do but return to the kitchen. He was one of the thieves, and, with two other servants, had stolen the ring and buried it in the royal gardens under a large apple tree. Pale and trembling from fear, he told his two friends how the Great Detective had said to his wife, "This is the first one" -- meaning of course, the first thief. As the second servant was to carry in the next dish, his two comrades told him to do his best and ask the wise man to step into the kitchen. Perhaps he could be induced to spare their lives. As the servant entered the dining hall, the doctor said to his wife, "This is the second one." She nodded. The servant grew white from fear and pulled him from behind by the sleeve. The great man thought, however, of nothing but the dishes, and did not feel the servant's endeavor to attract his attention. Thus the poor fellow was obliged to return to the kitchen without having accomplished his errand. When the third servant entered, the doctor said to his wife, "This is the third one." The servant pulled him, however, so violently by the sleeve that he turned in his chair, asking what he wanted. "Would he," whispered the unfortunate man, "go with him into the kitchen?" So he arose and followed him. When he entered the kitchen the three servants implored him to spare them. He was right. They had stolen the ring. The wise man looked keenly at the three culprits, bit his lips, and said that of course he had know it all the time. They were great rascals who deserved a severe punishment. He did not know whether he could really save them from the gallows. They now fell upon their knees and implored him to show mercy. They would be willing to give back the ring and pay him two hundred dollars if he would agree to keep their secret. This he promised, and before leaving them he told them to put the ring into a cake and serve it to the king's dog the next morning. They promised to do as he bid them. Next morning the king began to speak of the lost ring. The Great Detective assumed his most important air, looked around him, and finally fixed his glance upon the big dog which was walking about on the floor. They were just eating breakfast, and when one of the servants carried around the dishes he stole a glance at the doctor and nodded, thus assuring him that the dog had eaten the cake. "Can you tell me where to find the thief and the ring?" pursued the king. "Both are in this room!" answered he. The king looked around in great astonishment. "Both in this room?" repeated he. "There is the thief," continued the doctor, pointing to the dog. Now the king was thoroughly amazed, and even angry. He thought the wise man made fun of him. "Kill the thief," said the doctor, sternly, "and you will be sure to find the ring." They did so at once, and, indeed, found the ring in the stomach of the animal. The wise man received a great sum of money from the king, and afterward the three servants paid him the two hundred dollars which they had promised him for keeping their secret. But from this day the doctor became so famous that no one dared to steal. His very name frightened the thieves and made them control their evil instincts. Although he was no more called upon to detect stolen goods, he had already earned money enough for the rest of his lifetime. He lived happily many years, honored by everyone in the land. Source: J. Christian Bay, Danish Folk Tales (New York and London: Harper and Brothers Publishers, 1899), pp. 111-18 . Return to the table of contents . The Charcoal Burner Norway There was once upon a time a charcoal burner who had a son, and he was also a charcoal burner. When the father died, the son got married, but he would not do any work, and he neglected also to look after his kilns, and very soon no one would have him to burn charcoal any more for them. But one day he had got a kiln of charcoal ready burnt, and he set out for town with some loads of it and sold them. When he had done his business, he loitered down some of the streets and looked about him. On his way home he fell in with some neighbors and other people from the same parish, and he talked and bragged to them about all that he had seen in town. The most remarkable thing he saw, he said, was the great number of parsons he met, and all the people in the streets took off their hats to them. "I wish I was a parson," he said, "perhaps the people would take off their hats to me too; now, they don't appear to see me at all." "Well, your clothes are black enough, anyhow," said his neighbors; "but now that we are on the way, we may as well call in at the sale at the old parson's, and get a glass with the others, and you can buy yourself a gown and ruff at the same time." Yes, he did so, and when he came home he hadn't a penny left. "I suppose you have brought both money and good manners home with you from town this time?" said his wife. "Good manners! yes, I should think so," said the charcoal burner. "Just look here! I am a parson now. Here is both the gown and the ruff!" "Yes, very likely!" said his wife; "strong beer makes big words, it appears! You don't care how things go!" "You shouldn't boast or bother about the coals you are burning, till they are ready," answered the husband. But one day a great many people, dressed like parsons, passed the charcoal burner's house on their way to the palace, and it was plain to see that something was going to take place there, so the charcoal burner thought he would go as well, and put on the old parson's clothes. His wife thought it would be wiser of him to stay at home, for even if he got the chance to hold a horse for some grand person, she was afraid the sixpence he got for it would vanish down his throat, which usually was the case. "Yes, everybody talks about the drink, but no one about the thirst, do they, mother?" said the husband; "the more one drinks, the more one thirsts," and with that he started for the palace. All the strangers were invited to come into the presence of the king, and the charcoal burner entered with the others. The king then told them that he had lost his most costly ring, and he felt sure it had been stolen. He had therefore called together all the learned clergy in the country, to hear if any of them could tell him who the thief was. And the king promised that he would handsomely reward the one who could tell him about it; if he was a curate, he should get a living; if he was a rector, he should be made a dean; if he was a dean, he should be made a bishop; and if he was a bishop, he should be the first man after the king. So the king went from one to the other, and asked them all if they could tell him who the thief was, and when he came to the charcoal burner, he said, "Who are you?" "I am the wise parson and the true prophet," said the charcoal burner. "Then you can tell me who has taken my ring?" said the king. "Well, it isn't beyond sense and reason, that what has happened in the dark might be brought to light," said the charcoal burner; "but it isn't every year that the salmon plays in the fir-tops. I have now been studying and working for seven years to get bread for myself and my family, but I haven't got a living yet, so if the thief is to be found, I must have plenty of time and paper, for I must write and reckon early and late." Yes, he should have as much time and paper as he wished, if he only could find the thief. So he got a room to himself in the palace, and before long they found out that he must know something more than writing a sermon, for he used so much paper that it lay about in heaps; but there wasn't one who could make out a word of all he had written, for it was only pothooks and marks like a crow's toes. But the time wore on, and he could not find any trace of the thief. So the king got tired of waiting, and told him that if he couldn't find the thief in three days, he should lose his life. "Ah, but he that rules must not be hasty, but wait till his temper cools," said the charcoal burner. "One can't begin and rake out the coals, till they are thoroughly burnt and the fire has gone out." But the king stuck to what he said, and the charcoal burner felt his life wasn't worth much. Now it so happened, that it was three of the king's servants who waited upon him day by day in turn that had stolen the ring between them. So one day, when one of the servants came into his room and cleared away the table after supper, and was just about leaving the room, the charcoal burner heaved a deep sigh and looked after him and said, "There goes the first of them." But he only meant the first of the three days he still had to live. "This parson knows all about it," said the servant, when he got his comrades by themselves, and told them that the parson had said, "that he was the first of them." The second servant, who was to wait upon him the next day, was to notice what he would say then, and sure enough, as he was going out after having cleared the table, the charcoal burner gazed steadily at him, sighed and said, "There goes the second of them." So the third servant was to observe what happened the third day; it got worse and worse he thought, for when the servant came to the door and was going out with all the plates and dishes, the charcoal burner folded his hands and said, "There goes the third of them," and then he sighed as if his heart would break. The servant came breathlessly out to his comrades and told them it was clear enough that the parson knew all about it, and so they went into his room and fell on their knees before him, and prayed and begged of him, that he would not tell it was they who had taken the ring; they would give him a hundred dollars each, if he only would not bring them into trouble. He promised faithfully, that no one should get into trouble if he got the money, the ring, and a lump of porridge. He put the ring into the porridge, and told one of them to give it to the biggest pig belonging to the king. Next morning the king came; it was easy to see he would not be played with; he would know all about the thief. "Well, I have written and reckoned far and wide," said the charcoal burner, "but I find it's not a man who has stolen the ring." "Pooh! Who is it then?" said the king. "Oh, it's that big pig which belongs to your majesty," said the charcoal burner. Well, they brought out the pig and killed it, and, sure enough, the ring was found inside it. So the charcoal burner got a living, and the king was so pleased that he gave him a farm and horse and a hundred dollars in the bargain. It did not take the charcoal burner long to move, and the first Sunday after he had settled in his parish he was going to church to read his first sermon. But before he started he had to get some breakfast, and so he put the sermon on the bread plate; but he made a mistake and took the sermon instead of the bread, and dipped it into the soup, and when he felt it was so tough to chew, he gave it all to his dog, and the dog made short work of it and swallowed it all. When he found out his mistake, he was at a loss what to do. But he had to go to church, for his congregation was waiting for him; and when he came there, he went straight up into the pulpit He put on such a grand air while he was getting ready for the sermon, that all thought he must be a very fine preacher. But when he did begin, it wasn't so very fine after all. "The words, my dear brethren, which you were going to hear this day, have gone to the dogs; but come again, some other Sunday, my dear parishioners, and you shall hear something else! And thus endeth this sermon!" Well, all the people thought he was a queer parson, for they had never heard such a sermon; but then they thought he might improve, and if not -- why, they would know how to deal with him. Next Sunday the church was so crowded by people who wanted to hear the new parson, that there was scarcely room for them all in the church. As soon as the parson arrived, he went straight up into the pulpit, and then he stood for some time without saying a word, but all at once he made a start and cried out, "I say, old mother Berit, why do you sit so far back in the church?" "Oh, my boots are in such a bad state, your reverence!" said she. "But you could have got an old pig's skin and made yourself a new pair of boots, and then you could have come to the front like other decent people. Besides, I wish you would all consider which way you are going, for I see that some of you, when you are coming to church, come from the north, and others come from the south, and the same when you leave church; but I suppose you stop and gossip on the way, and then they wonder at home what has become of you. Yea! who knows what will become of us all? And then I have to give notice, that the old parson's widow has lost her black mare. She had fetlocks round her hoofs, and a long mane, and more of this kind which I shan't mention in this place. And then I have a big hole in my old breeches pocket, which I know, but you don't! But whether any of you have a piece of some stuff, which would suit the hole, neither you nor I know." Some of the people were well satisfied with the sermon, and believed that he in time would make a good parson, but most of them thought it was really too bad; and when the dean came round on one of his visits, they complained to him of the parson and said that such sermons were never heard before, and one of them happened to recollect the last one about the old widow's mare and repeated it all to the dean. "That was a very good sermon," said the dean. "He spoke very likely in parables and impressed upon you to seek the light and to shun the darkness and its deeds, when he spoke about those who were walking on the broad or the narrow road; and particularly do I consider his notice about the old widow's mare a splendid parable as to how it will fare with us all in the end. The breeches pocket with the hole in it referred to his wants, and the piece of stuff was the offerings and gifts he expected from his congregation," said the dean. "Yes, we thought as much," they said. "It was all about his offerings, sure enough!" And so the dean said that he thought the parish had got such a good, sensible parson, that they should not complain of him, and the end was, that they got no other parson; but as time wore on he got worse instead of better, and so they complained to the bishop. Well, after a long time the bishop came round on a visitation, but the charcoal burner had been in the church the day before without anybody knowing of it, and had sawed the pulpit in several places, so it only hung together when one walked up the steps carefully. So when the congregation had assembled, and the parson was to preach before the bishop, he stole quietly up the steps and began his sermon in his usual style, but after having gone on for some time he spoke up, threw up his arms, and cried out, "If there is any one here, who has any evil deed or thought in his mind, it were better he left this place, for today, this very day, there will be a fall, the like of which has not taken place since the creation of the world." And with that he struck the pulpit with his hands, and down tumbled both pulpit and parson with such a crash, that the congregation took to their heels and ran out of the church, as if the day of judgment had come. So the bishop told the people that he wondered that the congregation could complain of a parson, who was so gifted and had such wisdom, that he could prophesy things that were to come. He thought he ought at least to be dean, and it was not long before he was made one. There was no help for it; they had to put up with him. Now it so happened, that the king and queen in that country had no children, but when the king heard that he was to have one he was curious to know whether he was to get a son and heir to his broad lands and acres, or if he only would get a princess. So all the learned men in the land were called to the palace to say which it would be. But as none of them were able to do this, both the king and the bishop happened to think of the new dean, and it did not take long till they had him brought before them and began questioning him. No, he could not tell, he said, for it wasn't easy to guess what no one could know anything about. "Well, well!" said the king, "I don't care whether you know it or not; but you are the wise parson and the true prophet, who can foretell things to come, and if you won't tell me, you'll lose both your gown and your ruff! But never mind, I'll give you a trial first," and so he took the biggest silver tankard he had and went down to the sea shore with the parson. "Can you tell me now, what I have got in this tankard?" said the king; "and if so, you can tell me the other thing I asked you as well," and he held the lid of the tankard tight. The charcoal burner wrung his hands in despair and cried, "Oh, you unfortunate crawling crab of this earth, what have you now in return for all your toil and trouble!" "Ah, there you see! You did know it after all!" said the king, for he had put a crab in the tankard. So the charcoal burner had to go back to the palace, where he was shown, into the queen's drawing room. He took a chair and sat down in the middle of the room, while the queen walked up and down the floor. "One should never make a stall for the unborn calf, and never quarrel about the baby's name before it is born," said the charcoal burner, "but I never saw anything like this before; when the queen comes towards me, I fancy it will be a prince, and when she walks away from me, it seems to me as if it will be a princess." It turned out in time to be twins, and so the charcoal burner had made a lucky hit that time also. And thus for telling what no one could know anything about he got loads of money, and he became next man to the king. Snip, snap, snout, that man knew what he was about. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Round the Yule Log: Norwegian Folk and Fairy Tales , translated by H. L. Brækstad (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1881), pp. 308-316 . Link to this tale in the original Norwegian: Kullbrenneren . Return to the table of contents . < h2> John the Conjurer Spain Formerly there was a man named John Cigarron (or the Great Cigar), who gained money by pretending to be a magician. He played his part to perfection; gave himself such airs and graces that he quite deceived everybody; for you must know, fair readers, that people have an unfortunate propensity for believing what they should not believe, and doubting what they ought not to doubt. Thus it was that John Cigarron at that time acquired a fame similar to what in our days is acquired by other impostors of his style. It so happened that a great quantity of plate was stolen from the king's palace, and notwithstanding the most diligent search it was impossible to find out who were the perpetrators of the robbery. As a last resource the king was counselled to order the famous magician to be brought to him, as nothing could be hidden from this man, although, it was remarked, he would not always display his power save only when he was in the humour to do so. The king ordered the magician to be brought into his presence; and the man, as may be imagined, when he came before his Majesty, was nearly dead from fright. The king informed him that he was to be shut up in prison for three days, and that if at the end of those three days he had not discovered the authors of the robbery, he would have him hanged as a liar and an impostor. "I may as well prepare myself for death," thought John Cigarron, when he found himself in prison. "Never would I have held myself forth as a magician if I had known what it would cost me. Only three days of life left to me; not one more nor one less! A nice scrape you've got into, John Cigarron!" The truth was, that the plate had been stolen by three of the king's pages, who were the very youths charged to take the prisoner his food. When the first of them took his evening meal to the cell, John Cigarron, alluding to the three days to which his existence was limited by the king, exclaimed: "Ah, my lord Saint Bruno, Of the three there goes uno" (one). As the page's conscience was bad, and as he had heard it reported that nothing could be concealed from this magician, he was startled, and said to his companions: "We are lost! The magician knows that we are the thieves." The others would not believe it; but on the second day, when another of the three pages entered the cell with the food, and heard John Cigarron exclaiming sadly: "Ah lord Saint John de Dios, Of the three I have seen dos!" (two), he went out more alarmed than the first. "You are right," he said to his companions. "He knows, and we are lost!" So when it came to pass on the following day that the third had to take the food in, and heard John Cigarron saying in despair: "Ah, Saint Andre's, Now I've seen the tres!" (three) he fell on his knees, confessed the crime, and offered to restore all the stolen plate, and give John Cigarron a great present, if he would not betray them. The three days having passed, the king commanded the magician to be brought into his presence, and the man entered with much pomposity. "Well," said the king, "do you bring me news of my lost property?" "Sire," responded John Cigarron, with great bombast, "I am too noble and too philanthropic to betray anyone, but I confide in your Majesty being contented with my skill and power if the stolen plate be restored." "Yes, yes," replied the king, "I shall be satisfied if the plate be given up. Where is it?" John Cigarron drew himself up and responded, as he made a majestic gesture: "Let someone go to the cell in which I was confined, and it will be found there." This was done, and the plate, which had been carried there by the pages, was found. The king was struck with admiration, and took such interest in John Cigarron's fate, that he appointed him Chief Magician, Royal Diviner, and Soothsayer in Ordinary. But all this was far from gratifying to the office-bearer, who trembled with dread at the thought of what might present itself upon the next occasion when his Majesty should require his scientific services, and when, he feared, he might not emerge with such flying colours. And his fears were not quite groundless; for one day when the king was walking in his gardens he thought he would like another proof of his Chief Magician's skill, so he presented himself to him suddenly, with his hand closed, and asked him what he had in it. On hearing this unexpected question, the poor fellow was quite stupefied, and exclaimed: "Sire, the game is up, Cigarron is in your hands now!" A cry of admiration escaped from the king, who opened his hand and displayed what was in it; it was a large cigar (cigarron)! In his enthusiasm the king told the lucky conjurer to ask whatever he wished for; and whatever it should be, he gave him his royal word that he would grant it. In reply, John Cigarron said: "Then, sire, I beg that you will never again put my powers of divination to the test!" Source: Fernan Caballero, The Bird of Truth and Other Fairy Tales (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, [1883]), pp. 72-76 . Return to the table of contents . Suan's Good Luck Philippines There was once an old woman who had an only son named Suan [a common nickname for Juan]. Suan was a clever, sharp-witted boy. His mother sent him to school. Instead of going to school, however, Suan climbed up the tree that stood by the roadside. As soon as his mother had passed by from the market, Suan hurried home ahead of her. When she reached home, he cried, "Mother, I know what you bought in the market today." He then told her, article by article. This same thing happened so repeatedly, that his mother began to believe in his skill as a diviner. One day the ring of the datu's [village chieftain's] daughter disappeared. All the people in the locality searched for it, but in vain. The datu called for volunteers to find the lost ring, and he offered his daughter's hand as a prize to the one who should succeed. Suan's mother heard of the proclamation. So she went to the palace and presented Suan to the datu. "Well, Suan, tomorrow tell me where the ring is," said the datu. "Yes, my lord, I will tell you, if you will give your soldiers over to me for tonight," Suan replied. "You shall have everything you need," said the datu. That evening Suan ordered the soldiers to stand around him in a semicircle. When all were ready, Suan pointed at each one of them, and said, "The ring is here, and nowhere else." It so happened that Suan fixed his eyes on the guilty soldier, who trembled and became pale. "I know who has it," said Suan. Then he ordered them to retire. Late in the night this soldier came to Suan, and said, " I will get the ring you are in search of, and will give it to you if you will promise me my safety." "Give it to me, and you shall be safe," said Suan. Very early the next morning Suan came to the palace with a turkey in his arms. "Where is the ring? " the datu demanded. "Why, sir, it is in this turkey's intestines," Suan replied. The turkey was then killed, and the ring was found inside it. "You have done very well, Suan. Now you shall have my daughter's hand," said the datu. So Suan became the princess's husband. One day the datu proposed a bet with anyone who wished to prove Suan's skill. Accordingly another datu came. He offered to bet seven cascos [cargo boats] of treasure that Suan could not tell the number of seeds that were in his orange. Suan did not know what to do. At midnight he went secretly to the cascos. Here he heard their conversation, and from it he learned the number of seeds in the orange. In the morning Suan said boastfully, "I tell you, your orange has nine seeds." Thus Suan won the whole treasure. Hoping to recover his loss, the datu came again. This time he had with him fourteen cascos full of gold. He asked Suan to tell him what was inside his golden ball. Suan did not know what to say. So in the dead of night he went out to the cascos, but he could learn nothing there. The next morning Suan was summoned into the presence of the two datus. He had no idea whatever as to what was in the ball; so he said scornfully, "Nonsense!" "That is right, that is right!" shouted a man. "The ball contains nine cents." Consequently Suan won the fourteen cascos full of gold. From now on, nobody doubted Suan's merit. Source (books.google.com): Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania; New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), , no. 1A, pp. 1-2 . Source (Internet Archive): Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania; New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), , no. 1A, pp. 1-2 . Note by Fansler: "Narrated by Macaria Garcia. The story is popular among the Pampangans." Fansler's collection includes one additional tale of type 1641: "Suan Eket" (pp. 2-6). Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites W. A. Clouston, "The Lucky Imposter," Popular Tales: Their Migrations and Transformations , vol. 2 (Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1887), pp. 413-31 . Twigmuntus, Cowbelliantus, Perchnosius , the tale (type 1641C) of a simple lad who confounds a group of scholars by pretending to know Latin. The Emperor's New Clothes and other folktales of type 1620. Return to The table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 25, 2018. Dragon Slayers: An Index Page Dragon Slayers an index page assembled by D. L. Ashliman © 2009-2024 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Linked sites open in new windows. Return to this page by closing the targeted window. Beowulf . A summary in English prose. See especially Part Three: Beowulf and the Dragon . The Blood Brothers . A type 303 folktale, told throughout Europe. Fridleif the Dragon Slayer . An account of a Danish hero from the Gesta Danorum by Saxo Grammaticus. The Nibelungenlied . A summary in English prose. An account of Siegfried the dragon slayer. Saint George and the Dragon . An index page for the legendary saint. Alpine Dragons . Legends from Switzerland, Austria, and Germany. British Dragons . Legends from England, Wales, and Scotland. Tristan and Isolde . A summary of the Celtic legend as recorded in the medieval epices of Gottfried von Strassburg and Thomas of Britain. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 5, 2024. Alpine Dragons Alpine Dragons Legends from Switzerland and Neighboring Alpine Countries translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2024-2025 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents About Snakes and Dragons in Switzerland (Switzerland). Syntram and Baltram (Canton Bern). The Dragon in the Reuss River (Luzern). The Cooper in the Dragon Hole (Mount Pilatus). The Cat-Faced Dragon on Mount Wangserberg (St. Gallen). Winkelried and the Lindworm (Unterwalden). The Dragon in the Macun-Lakes Plateau (Graubünden). The Dragon in Lake Alpiglia (Graubünden). The Stollenwurm (Bernese Oberland). Giant Haym (Innsbruck). Saint Mang and the Dragon (Tyrol / Bavaria). The Dragon in Seefelder Lake (Tyrol). Dragons near Salzburg (Salzburg). The Lindworm of Lake Goggau (Carinthia). The Dragon Fight at Murnau (Bavaria). The Lindworm in Volkach (Bavaria). The Lindworm in Marktbreit (Bavaria). Legend of the Foundation of Ljubljana (Slovenia). The Ljubljana Dragon (Slovenia). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. About Snakes and Dragons in Switzerland Switzerland Friedrich von Tschudi, in his Das Thierleben der Alpenwelt , claims that very few snakes can be found in the mountains of the German south. And yet the mountain dwellers there have many strange things to say about all kinds of snake-like animals. According to popular belief, in ancient times Switzerland was swarming with monstrous and horrific snakes, worms, and dragons, which devoured harmless farmers and entire herds. They inhabited not only the Drachenloch cave and Mount Pilatus, but also hundreds of valleys and gorges in all the mountains. Fear and superstition sometimes gave these monsters wings and tails, then sometimes clawed feet and curly tails, and sometimes fire-sparking eyes. Some of these serpents have golden crowns on their heads. Knights, such as Arnold Struthan von Winkelried [also known as Heinrich von Winkelried] , fought against them. Wagner, in his Historia naturalis Helvetiæ curiosa , from the 17th century gives many accounts of such animals, which he divides into winged, footed, and footless. In the Bernese Oberland and the Jura there is still a widespread belief that there are Stollenwürmer , i.e., snakes, three to six feet in length, with two short feet. These are said to appear only in prolonged drought before the onset of rainy weather. Scheuchzer says in his Itinera per Helvetiæ Alpinas that most of these monsters are reported in the Luzern area. However, people in other districts have talked about them as well. Most dragons seen in Switzerland have feet. In Bonstetten (Zürich) Casper Gilg claimed to have seen a black dragon that was four feet long, had four feet, a neck as thick as an arm, with a yellow ring, and a yellow crown on its head. At Weiningen (Zürich) in the beginning of the 18th century a beautifully colored snake-shaped beast was seen, with a cock's head and a bushy crown. Above Lake Thun lies the cave of the hermit Saint Beatus , who converted the residents to Christianity. Before Beatus lived in the cave, a dragon is said to have lived there. It is said that the hermit killed him through prayer and the sign of the cross. Many dragon stories are told in the canton of Luzern. Athanasius Kircher relates: "When I was looking at the bright sky at night in 1649, I saw a shining dragon flying past from a hole in a very large rock cliff on Mount Pilatus. Its wings were moving rapidly, and as it flew it threw off sparks like glowing iron when it is being forged." The story of the Luzern cooper or barrel-maker is well known ( Grimm, Deutsche Sagen , no. 216 ). We only add that he died two months after leaving the dragon's cave, because his stomach was no longer used to human food. This legend reminds one of Daniel and Vitalis, who spent time in lions' dens. A hunter named Paul Schumperlin climbed up the face of a cliff while hunting. There he met a dragon at the entrance to a large cave on Saint Jacob's Day in 1654. It had a snake's head. Its neck and tail were the same length. It had four feet. Its whole body was scaly and sprinkled with colorful spots. As soon as it saw the hunter, it shook his scales and went into the cave. The following story is told in Graubünden : In 1696, a cowherd from the Plurs area drove the cows to pasture on Mount Joppatsch. On top of the mountain he saw in a deep pit a coiled beast that looked red from the sun's rays. Soon he saw the animal with its body erect, about two cubits long, with its head somewhat compressed. Instead of feet it had scaly fins like a fish, a tongue like a snake, and a tail divided into two parts. Frightened, the shepherd fled, and the animal pursued him. The shepherd took refuge behind a hill over which the dragon could not get. It twisted and turned around on the hill in a frenzy. Meanwhile, the man grabbed his rifle, which alpine herders often carry with them, and shot the beast with a bullet. The bullet did not kill it, and it pursued the shepherd, shooting towards him like an arrow in a straight line. The shepherd then threw stones at the beast, killing it. The local residents testify that such dragons were often seen flying through the air like arrows from Mount Joppatsch towards the Utgeis. In the Gaster district a man saw a dragon that had feet, and wings that were marked with red spots and shone like silver. Two days later there was a thunderstorm with hail. A common legend of the Alpine people confirms that severe thunderstorms generally occur after a dragon has appeared. We add the following to the Grimms' Deutsche Sagen , no. 216 : In Luzern there is a dragon stone that is round, very hard, and of different colors. It is said to have healing power against the plague and other diseases. You hold it against an infected area or tie it there for a while. Johann Jakob Scheuchzer, in his Natur-Geschichte des Schweitzerlandes tells several stories of dragon-stone healings. One of them relates how a man found such a stone while haying. A dragon came through the air, and the man fainted in terror. When he stood up, he found blood splattered by dragons. The stone lay in this blood. The owner safeguarded this dragon stone like a treasure. It weighed nine ounces. Source (books.google.com): Theodor Vernaleken, "Über Schlangen und Drachen in der Schweiz," Alpensagen: Volksüberlieferungen aus der Schweiz, aus Vorarlberg, Kärnten, Steiermark, Salzburg, Ober- und Niederösterreich (Vienna: Verlag von L. W. Swidel, 1858), no. 184, pp. 261-64 . Source (Internet Archive): Theodor Vernaleken, "Über Schlangen und Drachen in der Schweiz," Alpensagen: Volksüberlieferungen aus der Schweiz, aus Vorarlberg, Kärnten, Steiermark, Salzburg, Ober- und Niederösterreich (Vienna: Verlag von L. W. Swidel, 1858), no. 184, pp. 261-64 . Return to the table of contents . Syntram and Baltram Canton Bern Burgdorf, now part of the city of Bern, was established many hundreds of years ago by two brothers, one named Syntram and the other named Baltram, both dukes of Lenzburg. On the hill where the castle and Saint Margaret's Chapel now stand, a monstrous dragon was threatening both humans and cattle. While out hunting, the two brothers came upon the dragon and attacked it. Baltram led the assault and was swallowed by the dragon. Syntram, the younger brother, then attacked the dragon so furiously that he killed it. He immediately cut open the dragon's belly and freed his brother. This happened in the year 712 at the place where Saint Margaret's Chapel now stands, which the dukes had built and endowed in memory of this event. Furthermore, they had the story depicted with a painting inside the chapel. Source (books.google.com): Johann Leopold Cysat, Beschreibung deß berühmbten Lucerner- oder 4 Waldstätten Sees (Luzern: David Hautten, 1661), pp. 175-76 . This legend is also recorded by the brothers Grimm: Books.google.com: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Das Drachenloch," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 219 (no. 220 in later editions), pp. 301-302 . Internet Archive: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Das Drachenloch," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 219 (no. 220 in later editions), pp. 301-302 . Return to the table of contents . The Dragon in the Reuss River Luzern In the year 1499, on the 26th day of May, a large and frightful dragon swam to Luzern from the lake through the Reuss River under the Reuss Bridge. Because it swam so quickly, no one knows its length and size. Furthermore, it swam very deep in the water. Source (books.google.com): Johann Leopold Cysat, Beschreibung deß berühmbten Lucerner- oder 4 Waldstätten Sees (Luzern: David Hautten, 1661), p. 173 . Return to the table of contents . The Cooper in the Dragon Hole Mount Pilatus There are very few residents of Luzern who have not seen the writing on a vestment robe in the Abbey Church of Saint Leodegar. Depicted here is the very miraculous and believable story that deals with a certain cooper or barrel-maker, an inhabitant of said city, plus two dragons or lindworms. Unfortunately, due to carelessnes or other circumstances, the day, year, and the name of the man are now forgotten. Some believe that it happened 100 years ago, but others say it was about 130 years ago. One day in fall time, said cooper went to Mount Pilatus to find material for his handicraft. (Some people believe it happened on Mount Rigi, because there is a greater abundance of saplings for the hoops to be found there.) While looking for saplings to cut for barrel-hoops, he unexpectedly and suddenly fell into a very deep crevice, or cave. Because of his hard fall he lay there unconscious for some time. When he came to himself, he found that he could not get out of his new lodging, for no human help was at hand. Instead, he found himself in the company of and between two large, frightening, and monstrous dragons or lindworms. Just think of of his terror, lying there. But miraculously he was not at all harmed by these beasts. He had nothing to eat, and he did not know how the monstrous animals stilled their hunger. He finally saw that both lindworms were constantly rising up and licking the cliffs at the side of the cave. He too then licked the same cliffs and felt refreshed. Thus he miserably spent the entire winter in this situation, not having any food other than what he got from licking the cliffs with the two lindworms. With the arrival of spring, one lindworm flew from the cave, which it could easily do with the help of its wings. The one that was left caressed the poor man, as if it wanted to make him understand that because of the approaching summertime, he too should leave the cave. While the lindworm made preparations to fly away, the man (without doubt having been inspired by God) took hold of the lindworm's tail. Holding on with all his power and strength he was thus pulled to freedom. The good man, whose family had given him up for dead, returned to Luzern following a half year of imprisonment with horrible company. To thank God Almighty and to immortalize the event, he had a beautiful vestment robe embroidered in silk with an image of himself in a cave seated between two dragons. This can still be seen in the Abbey Church of Saint Leodegar. The cooper, now unaccustomed to natural food and drink, died a half year following his return home. Source (books.google.com): Johann Leopold Cysat, Beschreibung deß berühmbten Lucerner- oder 4 Waldstätten Sees (Luzern: David Hautten, 1661), pp. 173-75 . Return to the table of contents . The Cat-Faced Dragon on Mount Wangserberg St. Gallen About twenty years ago [1660] Andreas Roduner, Secretary and Ensign of the Prefecture of Obersaxen, was climbing Mount Wangserberg (in Sarganserland) with another man. Here they encountered a mountain-dragon of terrifying size, which, at their sight, raised itself up on its hind legs to the height of a man. Its body was covered with very rough scales. The length of it was equal to half a haystack, and its thickness was proportionate. It had four legs, ears, and the face of a cat. Its tail was about three cubits long. Its belly had yellow stripes between the front and back legs through which the veins shone through. Its entire back was covered with bristles up to its head, which was topped with a comb. Abandoning the main trail, the men continued on their way across country unscathed. Source (books.google.com): Johann Jakob Wagner, "De Draconibus," Historia naturalis Helvetiæ curiosa (Zürich: Joh. Henrici Lindinneri, Bibliopeg., 1680), pp. 249-50 . Link to an image of Andreas Roduner and the cat-faced dragon . Return to the table of contents . Winkelried and the Lindworm Unterwalden In ancient times, near the village of Wyler in Unterwalden, there lived a hideous lindworm which killed everything it came across, livestock and people, and ravaged the entire area, in such a way that the place took the name Ödwyler (Desolate Wyler) from it. Then it happened that a native of the area named Winkelried, who had fled the country because of a murder, offered to attack and kill the dragon on the condition that afterwards he would be allowed to return to his homeland. The people were happy with this and allowed him back into the country. He bravely attacked the monster and overcame it by pushing a bundle of thorns into its gaping mouth. Trying in vain to spit out the thorns, the animal failed to defend itself, and the hero took advantage of its weakness and killed it. Rejoicing, he threw up his arm with which he held the bloody sword and showed the inhabitants his victorious deed. But the poisonous dragon's blood flowed onto his arm and onto his bare skin, and he died soon afterward. Thus the land was saved and reconciled. Even today, the animal's den in the cliff is shown and called the Dragon Cave. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Winkelried und der Lindwurm," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 217 [218 in later editions], pp. 299-300 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Winkelried und der Lindwurm," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 217 [218 in later editions], pp. 299-300 . Return to the table of contents . The Dragon in the Macun-Lakes Plateau Canton of Graubünden (Grisons) On the east side of Zernez is the Macun-Lakes Plateau. The largest of these small alpine lakes is inhabited by a dragon. Sometimes he rises out of the water, shakes his wings and looks around horribly, then he sneaks around until he comes across a lost cow, which he then drags towards the lake and then disappears with it into the depths of the water. But if he hasn't caught anything for a long time, he roars so terribly that you can hear him over the mountains. If you come to this lake with good weather, then throw a stone into it and accidentally hit the dragon, the lake foams up like in the worst storm. A terrible fog then arises over the water, and out of this fog comes a heavy downpour of rain. Then the lake becomes calm again. Source (books.google.com): Dietrich Jecklin, "Der Drache in der Alpe Macun," Volksthümliches aus Graubünden (Zürich: Orell Füssli & Co., 1874), p. 44 . Source (Internet Archive): Dietrich Jecklin, "Der Drache in der Alpe Macun," Volksthümliches aus Graubünden (Zürich: Orell Füssli & Co., 1874), p. 44 . Return to the table of contents . The Dragon in Lake Alpiglia Canton of Graubünden (Grisons) A terrible dragon lived in the small lake at the foot of Mount Piz-Mezdi. It is said that Johann Branca of Guarda, with the help of a sorcerer, covered the lake with leaves and branches. Thus the monster was forced to leave the lake in the middle of a terrible storm. He tumbled down the cliffs toward the Inn River, then swam to Innsbruck where he was safely killed. Source (books.google.com): Dietrich Jecklin, "Der Drache im Alpiglia-See," Volksthümliches aus Graubünden (Zürich: Orell Füssli & Co., 1874), pp. 44-45 . Source (Internet Archive): Dietrich Jecklin, "Der Drache im Alpiglia-See," Volksthümliches aus Graubünden (Zürich: Orell Füssli & Co., 1874), pp. 44-45 . Return to the table of contents . The Stollenwurm Bernese Oberland In present-day Switzerland dragons are considered to be extinct or all having been slain. However, the Bernese Oberland is still replete with legends and testimonies about a snake-like monster, which is referred to by the local name of Stollenwurm . According to believable reports from many country people, they are seen here or there almost every year. This creature is described as a type of snake with very short feet. Since snakes are generally called worms, and a short, thick foot is called a Stollen , this gave rise to the special name for this creature: Stollenwurm . It is almost always described as having a round cat's head, and sometimes two, sometimes four, and sometimes several feet, similar to the type that caterpillars have. It is sometimes described as hairy, and usually is relatively thick but short. Thus there is no general agreement as to this creature's outer appearance. A farmer in a field near the Grimselstrasse sincerely described to me how, as a boy he, along with a few friends, had killed a Stollenwurm and found young ones in its body. I thus concluded that it was a mammal -- perhaps one of the rare otters, or even more likely a marten, a polecat, or a weasel. These people often have little or no knowledge about these animals. A trustworthy shepherd in the Gadmen valley told me the following about Stollenwürmer : There are two types, he said -- white ones with little crowns on their heads, and black ones, which are more common. One day, a daring man who knew magic, drew a circle around himself in order to demonstrate his art, and with his flute he enchanted the vermin in such numbers that they swarmed all around the circle. He piped stubbornly on and on until a few worms from a distance brought a particularly thick and hideous one on their backs and immediately threw it across the circle towards the magician. He cried out loudly: "I am lost!" and was instantly torn apart by the monster. According to the opinion of some Alpine residents near Bridel, Stollenwürmer often suck the milk from cows in the pasture. Popular superstition claims that such cows can be protected by a keeping a white rooster among the grazing cattle. Source (books.google.com): Johann Rudolf Wyss, Reise in das Berner Oberland , part 2 (Bern: J. J. Burgdorfer, 1817), pp. 422-24 . Note by Wyss: "The best and most detailed information about this supposedly unique creature has been compiled by the Swiss naturalist, Professor Studer in Bern, as recorded in König's Alpenreise (pp. 127-39)." [Franz Niklaus König, "Stollenwurm," Reise in die Alpen (Bern, 1814), pp. 127-39 ]. Return to the table of contents . Giant Haym Innsbruck Ages ago there was a giant named Haym or Haymon. A poisonous dragon came to the wilderness of the Inn Valley and caused great harm to the inhabitants. Haymon set forth, sought the dragon, and killed it. In return, the inhabitants of the Inn Valley submitted to his rule. Afterwards he gained even greater fame by building a sturdier bridge over the Inn, from which the city of Innsbruck takes its name. For this reason many foreign people came to visit him. The Bishop of Chur [in Switzerland] baptized him, and Haymon built the Wilten Abbey in Christ's honor, where he lived until he died, and where he is buried. His grave, fourteen feet and three inches long, can be seen in the Wilten Abbey. His image, in armor and carved from wood, is on his grave. The dragon's tongue is also shown in the sacristy, together with an old chalice on which the Passion is depicted. The chalice was found in the earth more than 1,100 years ago when the foundation of the monastery was being dug. Thus the chalice was made soon after Christ's Ascension. There is a plaque next to Haym's grave describing his life. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Riese Haym," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 139 [140 in later editions], pp. 210-211 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Riese Haym," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 139 [140 in later editions], pp. 210-211 . Return to the table of contents . Saint Mang and the Dragon Tyrol / Bavaria Saint Magnus (Mang) came to the area where Reutte and Füssen are now located. Then he set off with his brothers to a desolate place to pray in secret. Now there was a powerful dragon lying in this desolate place, and it would not let anyone pass by. The saint said to his companion Toto: "Dear brother, we shall stay here tonight and pray that the Lord will give us the power to withstand the wild beast." Toto thought that the dragon would destroy them both, but he did not want to abandon the saint, so he stayed with him. The saint put consecrated bread in his pocket, took resin and pitch in one hand and hung a cross on his neck. In his other hand he wielded the miraculous staff of Saint Gallus. When he came near the dragon's lair, he put some of the consecrated bread in his mouth and made the sign of the cross on his chest. When the dragon saw him, it stood up straight against him and wanted to attack him with its mouth open. Then the saint took resin and pitch, threw them into the monster's mouth, saying: "Lord, my God, come to the aid of your servant!" The dragon was burned by the resin and pitch, and it perished. Then the saint and his companion went to the hole in the rock where the worm lived. In front of it they came across a tall and wide apple tree with many ripe apples. Saint Mang hung the cross on it, which he had carried around his neck. Later he built a cathedral on the site for pious brothers from the neighborhood. At his request it was consecrated by Bishop Witterp in honor of the Virgin Mary and Saint Florian, the martyr. Source (books.google.com): Johann Adolf Heyl, "St. Mang und der Drache," Volkssagen, Bräuche und Meinungen aus Tirol (Brixen: Verlag der Buchhandlung des Kath. Polit. Pressvereins, 1897), pp. 11-12 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Adolf Heyl, "St. Mang und der Drache," Volkssagen, Bräuche und Meinungen aus Tirol (Brixen: Verlag der Buchhandlung des Kath. Polit. Pressvereins, 1897), pp. 11-12 . Return to the table of contents . The Dragon in Seefelder Lake Tyrol Once there were two fairly large lakes in the high plateau of Seefeld above the town of Zirl [near Innsbruck]. They are less important now, but formerly people believed at least one of them was of unmeasurable depth. Such beliefs are common with respect to many other mountain lakes. A man from Seefeld once wanted to investigate the larger of the lakes. Not thinking that it was very deep, he rode into it on a horse. For a while the horse found the bottom, but when it got to the middle it found no ground and had to swim with its rider. At the same time, a terrible dragon emerged from the bottom of the lake. Its eyes glittered with anger, and it shouted: "If you try to fathom the lake, I'll swallow all of Seefeld!" The dragon then showed what it meant with the word "swallow" by devouring the horse and rider. It then sunk with them into the unfathomable depths. A few weeks later the saddle of the horse on which the rider had been riding was found floating in the second lake. The dragon had found the saddle indigestible. Because the saddle emerged in the second lake, it was proven that there was an underground connection between the two lakes. Since then, no one has ever thought of trying to measure the depth of the lake. Source (books.google.com): Johann Nepomuk Ritter von Alpenburg, "Der Drache im Seefelder-See," Deutsche Alpensagen (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1861), no. 133, pp. 136-37 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Nepomuk Ritter von Alpenburg, "Der Drache im Seefelder-See," Deutsche Alpensagen (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1861), no. 133, pp. 136-37 . Return to the table of contents . Dragons near Salzburg Salzburg Countless ages ago a dragon raged in the great marsh that stretches between Mount Mönchsberg and Mount Untersberg. It devoured any animal or human that came close to it. This area was so feared that a small lookout point (the Wartelstein ) was built on Mount Mönchsberg in order to monitor the marsh from there. In the vicinity of Weingarten, a blockhouse was built to close off the road between Mülln and Nonntal at night. Finally, when churches honoring Saint George the dragon slayer were built at two opposite ends of the marsh, the horrors gradually ceased, and the dragon disappeared without a trace. A similar monster is said to have wreaked havoc in Schallmoos, and this is where the name Guggenthal (Look into the Valley) comes from. Source (books.google.com): Rudolf von Freisauff von Neudegg, "Drachen um Salzburg," Salzburger Volkssagen (Vienna, Pest, and Leipzig: A. Hartleben's Verlag, 1880), p. 296 . Source (Internet Archive): Rudolf von Freisauff von Neudegg, "Drachen um Salzburg," Salzburger Volkssagen (Vienna, Pest, and Leipzig: A. Hartleben's Verlag, 1880), p. 296 . Return to the table of contents . The Lindworm of Lake Goggau Carinthia (Kärnten) In the upper Wimitz Valley, a rather inhospitable area near Feldkirchen, there is a small lake, Lake Goggau. The local residents say that the devil brought this to the spot in a large vessel and filled it with the most hideous beasts. One of them was a huge fish that had a long, sharp saw on its back and used it to cut through anything that came near it. A sea diver attempted to examine the lake bottom. To avoid being cut by the sawfish, he put on nine glass suits. He dove beneath the surface, and this attempt nearly cost him his life, because eight of the glass shields were immediately cut in half by the monster's sharp saw, despite the diver's ninefold armor. The diver told the people that he had seen many other terrible creatures and had narrowly escaped them. In earlier times a mermaid is said to have inhabited the lake. She had a beautiful face and alabaster-white arms. Instead of feet she had fins growing on her body. She stayed at the southern end of the lake, where the water flows in circles and forms a wide vortex. This water-woman was very feared by the people, because with her extraordinary beauty and her sweet song she attracted many people and pulled them down into the whirlpool. A third creature was also feared by those who lived around the lake: an enormously large lindworm. It had such a mouth that it could devour a team of oxen along with a load of hay. A seven-year-old domestic rooster had laid a red egg in a manure pile, and after three years a lindworm emerged from it, which quickly grew into a giant animal and devoured many people and cattle. Nobody had the courage to fight it. Only an old man known as a sorcerer offered to put an end to the monster. For this purpose the man asked the farmers for a bull, slaughtered it, and took out its entrails. He then stuffed a large black lump soaked with deadly poisons into the empty abdominal cavity. The old man then ordered the dead animal to be taken to the lake near the place where the lindworm lived. No one wanted to take this risk, because everyone feared for their lives. Only the "Village Idiot," as everyone called him, agreed to do so. With superhuman strength he lifted the dead bull onto his shoulders and carried it to the shore. The dragon immediately sensed prey, flew up with a snort, and devoured the servant and the bull. Soon the sorcerer's deadly poisons took effect. The armored worm began to twist and stretch, then died in terrible contortions. This last victim of the lindworm is honored every year on the day of his death with a holy mass. The above legend is also available in a different version: Not far from Lake Goggau, popularly known as Lake Gogga, there is a ditch called Sojer's Ditch after a farmer who used to live there. A long time ago there lived a lindworm in this place. It had such power that it dragged everyone crossing Lake Dor into the ditch. In order to finally get rid of this plague, the Sojer farmer sent his "house hunk" (a mentally retarded person who does farm work for the house) into the ditch with a load of hay, which was pulled by two oxen. The lad knew nothing about the Lindworm. There was a barrel of quicklime hidden in the hay. Several days later the Farmer Sojer checked the ditch, where he found the dead dragon. People claim that the skeleton of the monster could still be seen many years later. It was used as a shelter from pouring rain. For a long time the residents showed their gratitude to the poor unfortunate servant by praying for his salvation. Source (books.google.com): Georg Graber, "Der Lindwurm vom Goggauersee," Sagen aus Kärnten (Leipzig: Dieterich'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Theodor Weicher, 1914), no. 74, pp. 68-69 . Return to the table of contents . The Dragon Fight at Murnau Bavaria (Oberbayern) Murnau was originally called Wurmau. When it received its town charter a dragon was depicted in its coat of arms, commemorating the monster that Saint Magnus had fought in the area. After defeating the dragon, Saint Magnus hung a tin bell at Ramsee, and this bell is still preserved there. It is said that the currant name of Murnau does not come from the mudflows in the area, but rather from the lindworm ( muraena ), that lived in the moorland and was dangerous to livestock and people. There is a legend about it that reminds us of the slaying of the dragon at Babel by Daniel: Since the surrounding residents did not know how to save themselves from the monster, a daring person offered to do away with it. He took a calf's skin, filled it with quicklime, then set it out for the beast to eat. The dragon hastily and greedily devoured the calf, but then burst asunder from the quicklime. Source (books.google.com): Johann Nepomuk Sepp, "Der Drachenkampf zu Murnau," Altbayerischer Sagenschatz zur Bereicherung der indogermanischen Mythologie (Munich: Druck und Verlag von Ernst Stahl, 1876), no. 36, pp. 112-13 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Nepomuk Sepp, "Der Drachenkampf zu Murnau," Altbayerischer Sagenschatz zur Bereicherung der indogermanischen Mythologie (Munich: Druck und Verlag von Ernst Stahl, 1876), no. 36, pp. 112-13 . The biblical account of Daniel slaying the dragon at Babel, alluded to above, is found in the Vulgate , Daniel 14:22-27 : There was a great dragon in that place, and the Babylonians worshipped him. And Daniel said: "Give me leave, O king, and I will kill this dragon without sword or club." And the king said: "I give thee leave." Then Daniel took pitch, and fat, and hair, and boiled them together. And he made lumps, and put them into the dragon's mouth, and the dragon burst asunder. Return to the table of contents . The Lindworm in Volkach Bavaria (Lower Franconia) On the western side of the town of Volkach on the Main, part of the old fortifications, namely the circular wall, towers, ramparts, and moat, are still preserved. A stone martyr's column stands there. On one side is a depiction of Christ on the cross with knights, women, and children kneeling. The other side depicts Saint George killing the dragon. The knight Saint George is the patron saint of the city. In this moat, as the legend goes, there used to be a lake in which a lingwurm (according to the local pronunciation) lived that poisoned people and animals. However, the lake was drained and the moat dried up, and then the animal could no longer stay there. Since then there has been peace. Every year, on the Saturday evening following Corpus Christi, a large pilgrimage goes to Burgwindheim celebrating this event. Source (books.google.com): Friedrich Panzer, "Der Lindwurm in Volkach, in Unterfranken," Bayerische Sagen und Bräuche (Munich: Christian Kaiser, 1848), no. 190, pp. 164-65 . Source (Internet Archive): Friedrich Panzer, "Der Lindwurm in Volkach, in Unterfranken," Bayerische Sagen und Bräuche (Munich: Christian Kaiser, 1848), no. 190, pp. 164-65 . Panzer's source: "Oral." Return to the table of contents . The Lindworm in Marktbreit Bavaria (Lower Franconia) On the town hall of Marktbreit on the Main there is a stone carving of Saint George, patron of the city, killing the lindworm. The lindworm lay in the city moat and demanded a human sacrifice every day, until a brave hero killed it. Source (books.google.com): Friedrich Panzer, "Der Lindwurm in Marktbreit, in Unterfranken," Bayerische Sagen und Bräuche (Munich: Christian Kaiser, 1848), , no. 191, p. 165 . Source (Internet Archive): Friedrich Panzer, "Der Lindwurm in Marktbreit, in Unterfranken," Bayerische Sagen und Bräuche (Munich: Christian Kaiser, 1848), no. 191, p. 165 . Panzer's source: "Oral." Return to the table of contents . Legend of the Foundation of Ljubljana Slovenia Jason, the Hero of Greek Mythology Legend has it that Ljubljana was founded by Jason, the hero of Greek mythology who stole the golden fleece from King Aeëtes and then fled aboard the Argo with his comrades, known as the Argonauts, across the Black Sea and up the Danube and the Sava until they reached the Ljubljanica. There they dismantled their ship in order to carry it overland to the Adriatic coast, where they rebuilt the vessel and set sail back to Greece. On their way to the coast, they stopped at a large lake in the marshes near the source of the Ljubljanica, where a dragon was said to dwell, whereupon Jason fought, defeated and killed the monster. The Dragon as Symbol and Protector of Ljubljana Dragon symbols have thus been present in Ljubljana since ancient times. The dragon was originally present on the medieval coat of arms as a decoration, but later assumed a more central position. From its initial portrayal as a monster, the dragon gradually transformed into a symbolic protector of the city, embodying power, courage and wisdom. The Dragons on the Dragon Bridge When the architect Giorgio Zaninovich drew up his plans for the Franz Joseph I Jubilee Bridge in 1900, his original design envisaged winged lion statues adorning the ends of the bridge. In the final design, however, the lions were replaced by the great statues of dragons that are today one of Ljubljana's most famous sights. Source (Visit Ljubljana): The Legend of the Sunken Bell . Accessed November 2025. Link to a photograph of one the the dragons guarding the "Dragon Bridge" across the Ljubljanica River. Return to the table of contents . The Ljubljana Dragon Slovenia You have probably heard the legend about the Greek mythological hero Jason and the Argonauts, who stole the Golden Fleece and fled across the Black Sea, the Danube and Sava Rivers to the Adriatic Sea and continued to Greece. But you perhaps did not know that they also stopped in the Ljubljana Marshes. A fearless dragon lived there, but Jason beat him. Despite this, the dragon left his marks all around Ljubljana, the capital of Slovenia. Source (Slovenia.info): "The Ljubljana Dragon." Accessed November 2025. Return to the table of contents . Legend of the Foundation of Ljubljana Slovenia Jason, the Hero of Greek Mythology Legend has it that Ljubljana was founded by Jason, the hero of Greek mythology who stole the golden fleece from King Aeëtes and then fled aboard the Argo with his comrades, known as the Argonauts, across the Black Sea and up the Danube and the Sava until they reached the Ljubljanica. There they dismantled their ship in order to carry it overland to the Adriatic coast, where they rebuilt the vessel and set sail back to Greece. On their way to the coast, they stopped at a large lake in the marshes near the source of the Ljubljanica, where a dragon was said to dwell, whereupon Jason fought, defeated and killed the monster. The Dragon as Symbol and Protector of Ljubljana Dragon symbols have thus been present in Ljubljana since ancient times. The dragon was originally present on the medieval coat of arms as a decoration, but later assumed a more central position. From its initial portrayal as a monster, the dragon gradually transformed into a symbolic protector of the city, embodying power, courage and wisdom. The Dragons on the Dragon Bridge When the architect Giorgio Zaninovich drew up his plans for the Franz Joseph I Jubilee Bridge in 1900, his original design envisaged winged lion statues adorning the ends of the bridge. In the final design, however, the lions were replaced by the great statues of dragons that are today one of Ljubljana's most famous sights. Source: "Ljubljana, City of Dragons." Accessed November 2025. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 15, 2025. British Dragons British Dragons legends from England, Wales, and Scotland translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2023 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Fiery Dragons at Lindisfarne (Northumberland). Kindling Fires to Drive Away Dragons (Traditional). Bone-Fires (Traditional). The Red Dragon of Wales (Wales). The Story of Lludd and Llevelys (Wales). The Radnorshire Dragon (Wales). The Linton Worm (Roxburghshire, Scotland). The Dragon at the Nine Maidens' Well (Forfarshire, Scotland). The Stove Worm (Orkney Islands, Scotland). The Dragon of Loschy Wood (Yorkshire). The Serpent of Kellington (Yorkshire). The Slingsby Serpent (North Yorkshire). The Dragon of Wantley (South Yorkshire). The Dragon of Unsworth (Lancashire). The Laidley Worm of Spindleston Heugh (Northumberland). The Longwitton Dragon (Northumbria). The Serpent of Deerhurst (Gloucestershire). Saint George and the Uffington White Horse (Oxfordshire). The Mordiford Dragon or Serpent (Herefordshire). The Dragon's Well at Brinsop (Herefordshire). The Lambton Worm (County Durham). Conyers of Sockburn (County Durham). The Dragon of Well (County Durham). Piers Shonke and the Serpent (Hertfordshire). The Long Dragon of Shervage Wood (Somerset). The Dragon of St. Leonard's Forest (Sussex). The Dragon of Bignor Hill (Sussex). The Fiery Dragon of Dolbury Hill (Devonshire). The Legend of the Ludham Dragon (Norfolk). Links to Related Sites. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Fiery Dragons at Lindisfarne Northumberland A.D. 793. This year dire forewarnings came over the land of the Northumbrians, and miserably terrified the people; these were excessive whirlwinds and lightnings, and fiery dragons were seen flying in the air. A great famine soon followed these tokens; and a little after that, in the same year, on the 6th of the ides of January [8th Jan.], the ravaging of heathen men lamentably destroyed God's church at Lindisfarne, through rapine and slaughter. Source (books.google.com): The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle , translated by Joseph Stevenson (London: Seeleys. 1853), pp. 34-35 . Source (Internet Archive): The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle , translated by Joseph Stevenson (London: Seeleys. 1853), pp. 34-35 . Return to the table of contents . Kindling Fires to Drive Away Dragons Traditional Belithus tells us, that it was a custom to carry lighted torches on Midsummer-Eve , as an emblem of St. John Baptist, who was a burning and a shining light, and the preparer of the way of Christ. But if this was the reason of this custom formerly, as it's probable it was, . . . yet the custom still continu'd among us, was originally instituted upon another bottom. And indeed the original of this custom is heathenish. For in ancient times the dragons, being incited to lust through the heat of the season, did frequentlyu, as they flew through the air, spermatize in the wells and fountains. By the means the water beame infected, and the air polluted; so that whoever drank the waters, was either tormented with a grievious distemper, or lost his life. As soon as the physicians perceived this, they ordered fires to be made everywhere about the wells and fountains, and those things which occasioned the noisomest smell, to be burnt, knowing that thereby the dragons would be driven away. Source (books.google.com): Henry Bourne, Antiquitates Vulgares; or, The Antiquities of the Common People (Newcastle: J. White, 1712), pp. 211-212 . Source (Internet Archive): Henry Bourne, Antiquitates Vulgares; or, The Antiquities of the Common People (Newcastle: J. White, 1712), pp. 211-212 . Return to the table of contents . Bone-Fires Traditional The reasons, given for making bonfires on St. John's eve, are various, among which are the following: "They made large fires, which might be seen at a great distance, upon the vigil of this saint, in token that he was said, in holy writ, to be a shining light. " Also: "These fires were made to drive away the dragons and evil spirits, which hovered in the air." In some countries, bones were used for fuel, whence they were called bone-fires , (by contraction, bonfires ,) "because the dragons hated nothing more than the stench of brenyng ( burning ) bones. " Source (books.google.com): John Harris, The British History, Briefly Told; and a Description of the Ancient Customs, Sports, and Pastimes of the English (London: John Harris, 1840), p. 324 . Return to the table of contents . The Red Dragon of Wales Wales Vortigern's magicians advised him to build a very strong tower for his own safety, since he had lost all his other fortified places. Accordingly, he made a progress about the country to find out a convenient situation, and came at last to Mount Erir, where he assembled workmen from several countries and ordered them to build the tower. The builders, therefore, began to lay the foundation; but whatever they did one day the earth swallowed up the next, so as to leave no appearance of their work. Vortigern being informed of this, again consulted with his magicians concerning the cause of it, who told him that he must find out a youth that never had a father, and kill him, and then sprinkle the stones and cement with his blood; for by those means, they said, he would have a firm foundation. Hereupon messengers are forthwith dispatched away over all the provinces, to inquire out such a man. In their travels they came to a city, called afterwards Kaermerdin, where they saw some young men, playing before the gate, and went up to them; but being weary with their journey, they sat down in the ring, to see if they could meet with what they were in quest of. Towards evening, there happened on a sudden a quarrel between two of the young men, whose names were Merlin and Dabutius. In the dispute, Dabutius said to Merlin: "You fool, do you presume to quarrel with me? Is there any equality in our birth? I am descended of royal race, both by my father and mother's side. As for you, nobody knows what you are, for you never had a father." At that word the messengers looked earnestly upon Merlin, and asked the bystanders who he was. They told him it was not known who was his father, but that his mother was daughter to the king of Demetia, and that she lived in St. Peter's Church among the nuns of that city. Upon this the messengers hastened to the governor of the city and ordered him, in the king's name, to send Merlin and his mother to the king. As soon as the governor understood the occasion of their message, he readily obeyed the order, and sent them to Vortigern to complete his design. When they were introduced into the king's presence, he received the mother in a very respectful manner, on account of her noble birth; and began to inquire of her by what man she had conceived. "My sovereign lord," said she, "by the life of your soul and mine, I know nobody that begot him of me. Only this I know, that as I was once with my companions in our chambers, there appeared to me a person in the shape of a most beautiful young man, who often embraced me eagerly in his arms, and kissed me; and when he had stayed a little time, he suddenly vanished out of my sight. But many times after this he would talk with me when I sat alone, without making any visible appearance. When he had a long time haunted me in this manner, he at last lay with me several times in the shape of a man, and left me with child. And I do affirm to you, my sovereign lord, that excepting that young man, I know no body that begot him of me." The king, full of admiration at this account, ordered Maugantius to be called, that he might satisfy him as to the possibility of what the woman had related. Maugantius, being introduced, and having the whole matter repeated to him, said to Vortigern: "In the books of our philosophers, and in a great many histories, I have found that several men have had the like original. For, as Apuleius informs us in his book concerning the Demon of Socrates, between the moon and the earth inhabit those spirits, which we call incubuses. These are of the nature partly of men, and partly of angels, and whenever they please assume human shapes, and lie with women. Perhaps one of them appeared to this woman, and begot that young man of her." Merlin in the mean time was attentive to all that had passed, and then approached the king, and said to him: "For what reason am I and my mother introduced into your presence?" "My magicians," answered Vortigern, "advised me to seek out a man that had no father, with whose blood my building is to be sprinkled, in order to make it stand." Order your magicians," said Merlin, "to come before me, and I will convict them of a lie." The king was surprised at his words, and presently ordered the magicians to come and sit down before Merlin, who spoke to them after this manner: "Because you are ignorant what it is that hinders the foundation of the tower, you have recommended the shedding of my blood for cement to it, as if that would presently make it stand. But tell me now, what is there under the foundation? For something there is that will not suffer it to stand." The magicians at this began to be afraid, and made him no answer. Then said Merlin, who was also called Ambrose: "I entreat your majesty would command your workmen to dig into the ground, and you will find a pond which causes the foundation to sink." This accordingly was done, and then presently they found a pond deep under ground, which had made it give way. Merlin after this went again to the magicians, and said: "Tell me, ye false sycophants, what is there under the pond." But they were silent. Then said he again to the king: "Command the pond to be drained, and at the bottom you will see two hollow stones, and in them two dragons asleep." The king made no scruple of believing him, since he had found true what he said of the pond, and therefore ordered it to be drained; which done, he found as Merlin had said; and now was possessed with the greatest admiration of him. Nor were the rest that were present less amazed at his wisdom, thinking it to be no less than divine inspiration. . . . As Vortigern, king of the Britons, was sitting upon the bank of the drained pond, the two dragons, one of which was white, the other red, came forth, and approaching one another, began a terrible fight, and cast forth fire with their breath. But the white dragon had the advantage, and made the other fly to the end of the lake. And the red dragon, for grief at his flight, renewed the assault upon his pursuer, and forced the white dragon to retire. After this battle of the dragons, the king commanded Ambrose Merlin to tell him what it portended. Upon which he, bursting into tears, delivered what his prophetical spirit suggested to him, as follows: "Woe to the red dragon, for his banishment hasteneth on. His lurking holes shall be seized by the white dragon, which signifies the Saxons whom you invited over; but the red denotes the British nation, which shall be oppressed by the white. Therefore shall its mountains be levelled as the valleys, and the rivers of the valleys shall run with blood. The exercise of religion shall be destroyed, and churches be laid open to ruin. At last the oppressed [the red dragon] shall prevail, and oppose the cruelty of foreigners. For a boar of Cornwall shall give his assistance, and trample their necks under his feet. The islands of the ocean shall be subject to his power, and he shall possess the forests of Gaul. The house of Romulus shall dread his courage, and his end shall be doubtful. He shall be celebrated in the mouths of the people; and his exploits shall be food to those that relate them." Source (books.google.com): Geoffrey of Monmouth, The British History of Geoffrey of Monmouth , translated from the Latin by A. Thompson; a new edition, revised and corrected by J. A. Giles (London: James Bohn, 1842), pp. 127-30; 132-33 . Source (Internet Archive): Geoffrey of Monmouth, The British History of Geoffrey of Monmouth , translated from the Latin by A. Thompson; a new edition, revised and corrected by J. A. Giles (London: James Bohn, 1842), pp. 127-30; 132-33 . Geoffrey of Monmouth was born about 1095 in Wales. His Historia regum Britanniae ( History of the Kings of Britain ) was written in about 1136. Return to the table of contents . The Story of Lludd and Llevelys Wales Preface , from Wikipedia . The story begins as Lludd inherits the kingship of Britain from his father, Beli. Soon after, he helps his brother Llefelys marry the princess of France and become king of that country. Though Lludd's reign starts off auspiciously -- he founds "Caer Lludd", later to become London, as in Geoffrey -- before long three plagues disrupt the peace. After a space of time had passed, three plagues fell on the Island of Britain, such as none in the Islands had ever seen the like. The first was a certain race that came, and was called the Coranians; and so great was their knowledge, that there was no discourse upon the face of the Island, however low it might be spoken, but what, if the wind met it, it was known to them. through this they could not be injured. The second plague was a shriek which came on every May eve, over every hearth in the Island of Britain. And this went through people's hearts, and so scared them, that the men lost their hue and their strength, and the women their children, and the young men, and the maidens lost their senses, and all the animals and trees and the earth and the waters, were left barren. Llevelys explains the second plague to his brother Lludd, King of Britain: "And the second plague," said he, "that is in thy dominion, behold it is a dragon. And another dragon of a foreign race is fighting with it, and striving to overcome it. And therefore does your dragon make a fearful outcry. And on this wise mayest thou come to know this. After thou hast returned home, cause the Island to be measured in its length and breadth, and in the place where thou dost find the exact central point, there cause a pit to be dug, and cause a cauldron full of the best mead that can be made to be put in the pit, with a covering of satin over the face of the cauldron. And then, in thine own person do thou remain there watching, and thou wilt see the dragon fighting in the form of terrific animals. And at length they will take the form of dragons in the air. And last of all, after wearying themselves with fierce and furious fighting, they will fall in the form of two pigs upon the covering, and they will sink in, and the covering with them, and they will draw it down to the very bottom of the cauldron. And they will drink up the whole of the mead; and after that they will sleep. Thereupon do thou immediately fold the covering around them, and bury them in a kistvaen, in the strongest place thou hast in thy dominions, and hide them in the earth. And as long as they shall bide in that strong place no plague shall come to the Island of Britain from elsewhere." Having freed Britain from the first plague (occupation by foreign invaders, the Coranians), Lludd follows his brother's advice and frees his island from the second plague: And some time after this Lludd caused the Island to be measured in its length and in its breadth. And in Oxford he found the central point, and in that place he caused the earth to be dug, and in that pit a cauldron to be set, full of the best mead that could be made, and a covering of satin over the face of it. And he himself watched that night. And while he was there, he beheld the dragons fighting. And when they were weary they fell, and came down upon the top of the satin, and drew it with them to the bottom of the cauldron. And when they had drunk the mead they slept. And in their sleep, Lludd folded the covering around them, and in the securest place he had in Snowdon, he hid them in a kistvaen. Now after that this spot was called Dinas Emreis, but before that, Dinas Ffaraon. And thus the fierce outcry ceased in his dominions. Subsequently Lludd, again following his brother's advice, frees his land from the third plague, a giant magician who has been stealing their food and drink. And thus Lludd freed the Island of Britain from the three plagues. And from thenceforth until the end of his life, in prosperous peace did Lludd the son of Beli rule the Island of Britain. And this tale is called the Story of Lludd and Llevelys. And thus it ends. Source (books.google.com): The Mabinogion , from the Llyfr Coch o Hergest, and other ancient Welsh manuscripts, with an English translation and notes by Lady Charlotte Guest; vol. 3 (London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, 1849), pp. 306-315 . The original Welsh text is found on pages 297-305 . Source (Internet Archive): The Mabinogion , from the Llyfr Coch o Hergest, and other ancient Welsh manuscripts, with an English translation and notes by Lady Charlotte Guest; vol. 3 (London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, 1849), pp. 306-315 . The original Welsh text is found on pages 297-305 . The Mabinogion is a collection of Welsh stories compiled between about 1350 and 1410. As orally transmitted myths and legends, the stories date to several centuries earlier. Return to the table of contents . The Radnorshire Dragon Wales The dragon or the worm (Norse, ormr ) finds a prominent place in the folk-lore of the county [of Radnorshire]. Ages ago, one of these vicious and powerful brutes slept every night on the tower of Llandilo Graban Church, after making dreadful devastations during the day. Many brave men tried to destroy the monster, but their attempts were always futile, and sometimes even fatal to themselves! At last, the parishioners offered a rich reward to anyone who would capture and slay this destructive brute which measured three yards and one inch long. After After many vain attempts on its life he became "curster" than ever. An ingenious plough-boy, attracted by the handsome reward, devised a plan that proved successful. He made a dummy-man out of a large log of oak, and, aided by the local blacksmith, armed it with numerous iron hooks, powerful, keen, and barbed. Then he dressed the dummy in red and fixed it firmly on the top of the tower. At dawn the following day the dragon first saw his daring bed fellow and dealt him a violent blow with his tail, which was badly torn by the hooks. Infuriated by the pain, he attacked the dummy with tooth, claw, wing, and tail, and finally wound round its wooden foe and bled to death. This, we are told, was the end of the last dragon in Radnorshire, and the beginning of an affluent time for the plough-boy and a happier and freer life for the whole neighbourhood. The dragon has always been with us. In the far-off misty past in reality, in early Christian times as the incarnation of evil, and these days in our quaint and extravagant fireside stories. Source (books.google.com): D. Edmondes Owen, "Pre-Reformation Survivals in Radnorshire," The Transactions of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion , session 1910-1911 (London: Issued by the Society, 1912), pp. 112-13 . Source (The National Library of Wales): D. Edmondes Owen, "Pre-Reformation Survivals in Radnorshire," The Transactions of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion , session 1910-1911 (London: Issued by the Society, 1912), pp. 112-13 . Return to the table of contents . The Linton Worm Roxburghshire, Scotland Above the south entrance of the ancient parish church of Linton, in Roxburghshire, is a rude piece of sculpture, representing a knight, with a falcon on his arm, encountering with his lance, in full career, a sort of monster, which the common people call a worm, or snake. Tradition bears, that this animal inhabited a den, or hollow, at some distance from the church, whence it was wont to issue forth, and ravage the country, or, by the facination of its eyes and breath, draw its prey into its jaws. Large rewards were in vain offered for the destruction of this monster, which had grown to so huge a bulk, that it used to twist itself, in spiral folds, round a green hillock of considerable height. When sleeping in this place, with its mouth open, popular credulity affirms, that it was slain by the Laird of Lariston, a man brave even to madness, who, coming upon the snake at full gallop, thrust down its throat a burning peat (a piece of turf dried for fuel), fixed to the point of his lance. The aromatic quality of the peat is said to have preserved the champion from the effects of the monster's poisonous breath; and, in dying, the serpent contracted his folds with so much violence, that their spiral impression is still discernible round the hillock where it lay. The noble family of Somerville are said to be descended from this adventurous knight, in memory of whose atchievement they bear a dragon as their crest. Source (books.google.com): Walter Scott, Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border (Kelso: James Ballantyne, 1802), pp. 90-91 . Source (Internet Archive): Walter Scott, Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border (Kelso: James Ballantyne, 1802), pp. 90-91 . Return to the table of contents . The Dragon at the Nine Maidens' Well Forfarshire, Scotland A fertile source of mythical narrations is found in the ancient names of places; legends being invented to account for the names, and then we are gravely informed that the names were derived from the alleged facts of the legends. Near Dundee, in Forfarshire, there is a well called the Nine Maidens' Well, and adjoining are places named respectively Pittempton, Baldragon, Strathmartin, and Martinstane. From these simple circumstances we have a dragon story, which may be thus abridged: A dragon devoured nine maidens at the well near Pittempton. Martin, the lover of one of the maidens, finding life a burden, determined to kill the reptile, or perish in the attempt. Accordingly, he attacked it with a club, striking the first blow at Strath -- pronounced by the country people Strike -- martin. The venomous beast was scotched, not killed, by this blow; but as it dragged -- Scottice, draiglet -- its slow length along through a morass, the hero of the adventure followed up the attack, and finally killed the monster at Martinstane. The dragon, like other great criminals of the olden time, made a last speech, confession, and dying declaration, in the following words: I was tempit (tempted) at Pittempton, Draiglit (draggled) at Baldragon, Stricken at Strikemartin, And killed at Martinstane. Source (books.google.com): Robert Chambers, The Book of Days: A Miscellany of Popular Antiquities , vol. 1 (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1863), p. 541 . Source (Internet Archive): Robert Chambers, The Book of Days: A Miscellany of Popular Antiquities , vol. 1 (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1863), p. 541 . Return to the table of contents . The Stove Worm Orkney Islands, Scotland The Stove Worm or great Sea Serpent [also known as Stoor Worm or Stoorworm ] at one time bulked largely in oceanic mythology; and seems to have held, as became his bulk, his full share in Orkney Sea Myths. While the Orcadians had plenty of the more modern stories about the Sea Serpent, their great outstanding tale regarding him was that of the Mester Stove Worm that the Mester Assipattle slew. In my young days a fireside gossip about the Stove Worm generally ended in some old man or woman telling the above-named tale. This tale is much too long for insertion here, and I only give so much of it as refers to the subject on hand. The Mester Stove Worm was the biggest, had the most devouring stomach, and was the most terrible of all living things on land or sea. He was not like other animals, created for the use of man. There hung an awful mystery about his creation. But it was generally believed that he had been hatched into life by some malignant spirits. Whatever was his beginning, he was placed in ocean, and became one of the nine curses that plague mankind. His length was beyond telling, and reached thousands and thousands of miles in the sea. His tongue itself was hundreds on hundreds of miles long. And when in anger, with his tongue he would sweep whole towns, trees, and hills into the sea. His terrible tongue was forked. And the prongs of the fork he used as a pair of tongs with which to seize his prey. With that fork he would crush the largest ship like an egg-shell. With that fork he would crack the walls of the biggest castle like a nut, and suck every living thing out of the castle into his maw. So long as he lay with his head near the shores of a country the people of that kingdom had to supply him with food. If they failed to supply his wants he would sweep their whole land into the sea, or else the monster would cast forth a pestilential reek in which no man or beast could live, and which blighted every growing thing, and the venomous stench thereof caused pestilence all round. While he kept his head near the shore the folk had to pacify him by giving him seven virgins once every week; for though a venomous beast he had a dainty taste. Every Saturday morning at sunrise he yawned nine times. Now it came to pass that one time long ago the Mester Stove Worm set up his awful head near the shore, and the folk were forced to feed him every Saturday at sunrise with seven young maidens. Oh, it was lamentable to hear the shrieks of the poor lassies as they were crunched between the pitiless jaws of the monster! Well, the folk got tired of giving up their daughters to death; for they said there would be no women left in the land. So they took advice with an old Spayman (prophet and wizard combined). And the Spayman said to the folk that, if the King's daughter was given to the Stove Worm, the monster would leave the land and trouble them no more. On hearing this the King was very sorry, for the princess was his only child and heir to his throne, and he loved her much. Nevertheless, he was forced to agree, that to save the land his daughter should go to the Stove Worm. But the King would have ten weeks of respite, in which he would send to the countries around, offering his daughter and his kingdom to any one that would destroy the Stove Worm. But no one would attempt that tremendous deed. On the last day of the ten weeks the Mester Assipattle made his appearance. I omit his previous history, and all his plans and operations for conflict with the Stove Worm. Suffice it to say, that Assipattle in his boat entered the Serpent's mouth, rowed down through the monster's gullet, set fire to the liver of the Stove Worm, and returned to land in safety. Yes, the liver of the monster being full of oil blazed into a terrible fire, and the heat thereof caused the Stove Worm unutterable pain, so that in his dying agonies he was like to have capsized the world by his terrible struggles. He flung out his tongue and raised it far up in the heavens. When, by chance, he caught hold of the moon; and they say he shifted the moon, but I don't know. He took hold of one of the moon's horns with the fork of his tongue, but, by great good fortune, his tongue slipped over the horn of the moon. Down fell the tongue with a tremendous force that made the world quake. And where it fell the tongue formed a great channel in the face of the earth, now filled by the sea. And this is the sea that divides Denmark from "Norawa" and "Swed-land." And they say, at the inner end of that sea are two great bays, made by the fork of the Stove Worm's tongue. As the monster lay struggling in dire pain, he would lift up his head to the sky, and then let it fall with terrific violence. As he did so once he shed a number of his great teeth, and those teeth became the Orkney Isles. The next time his head came down another lot of his teeth fell out, and they became the Shetland Isles. Now, while he was in the death-grips, he was gradually coiling himself together in one vast lump. Again he threw up his monstrous head, again it fell, striking as it always did, the bottom of the sea. And this time the teeth knocked out became the Faroe Isles. Then he rolled himself up, and his huge body when he died became the large island of Iceland. But his liver still burns, and the flames of its fire are sometimes seen rising from the mountains of that dreadful land. Source (books.google.com): W. Traill Dennison, "Orkney Folklore: Sea Myths," Northern Notes and Queries; or, The Scottish Antiquary , edited by A. W. Cornelius Hallen (Edinburgh: A. Constable, 1891), pp. 130-31 . Source (Internet Archive): W. Traill Dennison, "Orkney Folklore: Sea Myths," Northern Notes and Queries; or, The Scottish Antiquary , edited by A. W. Cornelius Hallen (Edinburgh: A. Constable, 1891), pp. 130-31 . Link (HaviTrust) to the longer version of this tale mentioned above: George Douglas, "Assipattle and the Mester Stoorworm," Scottish Fairy and Folk-Tales (London: Walter Scott, [1893]), pp. 58-72 . Douglas's source: "Mr. W. Traill Dennison's MS." Return to the table of contents . The Dragon of Loschy Wood Yorkshire In the church of Nunnington, in the North Riding of Yorkshire, is an ancient tomb, surmounted by the figure of a knight in armour in a recumbent posture, the legs crossed, the feet resting against a dog, the hands apparently clasping a heart, but no inscription to determine to whom it belongs. The traditional account current in the neighbourhood is that it is the tomb of Peter Loschy, a famous warrior, whose last exploit was killing a huge serpent or dragon which infested the country, and had its den on a wooded eminence called Loschy Hill, near East Newton, in the parish of Stonegrave. The details of the combat, as related by tradition, are as follows. Having determined to free the country from the pest, the redoubted Peter Loschy had a suit of armour prepared, every part of it covered with razor-blades set with the edges outwards, and thus prepared, armed only with his sword, and accompanied by a faithful dog, he went forth to seek the destroyer, which he quickly found in a thicket on Loschy Hill. The dragon, glad of another victim, darted upon the armed man, notwithstanding a wound from his sword, and folded itself around his body, intending, no doubt, as it had often done before, to squeeze its victim to death, and afterwards to devour it at leisure; but in this it was disappointed; the razorblades were keen, and pierced it in every part, and it quickly uncoiled itself again, when, to the great surprise of the knight, soon as it rolled on the ground its wounds instantly healed, and it was strong and vigorous as ever, and a long and desperate fight ensued between the knight and the serpent without much advantage to either. At length the sword of the knight severed a large portion of the serpent, which the dog quickly snatched up in his mouth and ran across the valley with nearly a mile, and there left it on a hill near Nunnington Church, and immediately returned to the scene of combat, and snatching up another fragment cut off in the same manner, conveyed it to the same place, and returned again and again for other fragments until they were all removed, the last portion conveyed being the poisonous head. The knight now rejoicing at his victory, stooped to pat and praise his faithful dog; the latter, overjoyed, looked up and licked the knight's face, when, sad to relate, the poison of the serpent imbibed by the dog was inhaled by the knight, and he fell down dead in the moment of victory, and the dog also died by the side of his master. The villagers buried the body of the knight in Nunnington Church, and placed a monument over the grave, on which were carved the figures of the knight and his faithful dog to witness the truth of the story. Source (Internet Archive): "The Serpent Legends of Yorkshire," The Leisure Hour , vol. 72, no. 1375 (May 4, 1878), p. 279 . Return to the table of contents . The Serpent of Kellington Yorkshire In the churchyard at Kellington, near Pontefract, there is an old stone in a horizontal position, which may have been the cover of a stone coffin, or may be monumental. Upon this there is cut, what appears to be, in the middle a cross, and, on the right side of it, the figure of a man with clasped hands, at his feet a dog; while on the left of the cross there are some undecipherable marks, which may have represented a serpent. There are other figures upon it, but too much worn away to be distinguished. The explanation given by legend of these figures is that, "once upon a time," in the dim and distant past, the dark and dank marshy woodlands, then around Kellington, harboured an enormous serpent, which wrought terrible destruction among the flocks of the surrounding shepherds. At length a shepherd, named Armroyd, more daring than the rest, determined to do battle with the monster. By aid of his shepherd's crook and his faithful dog, he prevailed and slew the enemy; but, alas! at the expense of his own life, as well as of the life of his dog. They perished together, and this stone, bearing the figures of them all -- of the man, his dog, his shepherd's crook, and of the slain monster -- is an enduring testimony to the facts of the story. A field in the neighbourhood, named Armroyd Close, is said to have been given to his descendants, by his grateful neighbours, as a recognition of the service he had rendered. It has since passed from Armroyd's descendants to other owners. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Parkinson, Yorkshire Legends and Traditions, as Told by Her Ancient Chroniclers, Her Poets, and Journalists , second series (London: Elliot Stock, 1889), p. 238 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Parkinson, Yorkshire Legends and Traditions, as Told by Her Ancient Chroniclers, Her Poets, and Journalists , second series (London: Elliot Stock, 1889), p. 238 . Return to the table of contents . The Slingsby Serpent North Yorkshire Osgodby Hall was once the residence of a branch of the Wyvills, Knights of Slingsby Hall, a very ancient family, of great estate in this neighbourhood, "but one of them taking part with Stafford that came to Scarborough and took the castle, lost all his lands but Wyvill Hall which was then in jointure. Sir Marmaduke Wyvill of Burton Constable descended from these more ancient Wyvills." The same authority also relates a curious tradition respecting this Wyvill. The road through Slingsby from Hovingham instead of proceeding in a direct line, takes a singular and awkward angle to the right, proceeding several hundred yards due south, which our authority says was explained in his day by the tradition of the snake. "The tradition is, that near this town there was some time a serpent that lived upon prey of passengers, which this Wyvill and his dog did kill when he received his death wound. There is a great hole half a mile from the town, round, three yards broad or more where the serpent lay. In which time the street was turned a mile on the south side; which does still shew itself, if any takes pains to survey it." The tale of the snake is still current in the neighbourhood, and is stated to have been a mile in length. The tradition, it appears, has been increasing in the marvellous with the lapse of years, but there is no doubt some truth in the fable, as there is an ancient monument of this Wyvill and his dog erected in the church. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Gill, Vallis Eboracensis: Comprising the History and Antiquities of Easingwold and its Neighbourhood (London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Company, 1852), p. 235 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Gill, Vallis Eboracensis: Comprising the History and Antiquities of Easingwold and its Neighbourhood (London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Company, 1852), p. 235 . Gill's source: A manuscript (1619) by Roger Dodsworth, in the Bodleian Library at Oxford. Return to the table of contents . The Dragon of Wantley South Yorkshire Old stories tell, how Hercules A dragon slew at Lerna, With seven heads, and fourteen eyes, To see and well discern-a: But he had a club, this dragon to drub, Or he had ne'er done it, I warrant ye: But More of More-Hall, with nothing at all, He slew the dragon of Wantley. This dragon had two furious wings, Each one upon each shoulder; With a sting in his tayl, as long as a flayl, Which made him bolder and bolder. He had long claws, and in his jaws Four and forty teeth of iron; With a hide as tough as any buff, Which did him round environ. Have you not heard how the Trojan horse Held seventy men in his belly? This dragon was not quite so big, But very near, I'll tell ye. Devoured he poor children three, That could not with him grapple; And at one sup he eat them up, As one would eat an apple. All sorts of cattle this dragon did eat. Some say he did eat up trees, And that the forests sure he would Devour up by degrees: For houses and churches were to him geese and turkies; He ate all, and left none behind, But some stones, dear Jack, that he could not crack, Which on the hills you will find. In Yorkshire, near fair Rotherham, The place I know it well; Some two or three miles, or thereabouts, I vow I cannot tell; But there is a hedge, just on the hill edge, And Matthew's house hard by it; O there and then was this dragon's den, You could not chuse but spy it. Some say this dragon was a witch; Some say he was a devil, For from his nose a smoke arose, And with it burning snivel; Which he cast off, when he did cough, In a well that he did stand by; Which made it look, just like a brook Running with burning brandy. Hard by a furious knight there dwelt, Of whom all towns did ring, For he could wrestle, play at quarter-staff, kick, cuff and huff, Call son of a whore, do any kind of thing: By the tail and the main, with his hands twain He swung a horse till he was dead; And that which is stranger, he for very anger Eat him all up but his head. These children, as I told, being eat; Men, women, girls, and boys, Sighing and sobbing, came to his lodging, And made a hideous noise: O save us all, More of More-hall, Thou peerless knight of these woods; Do but slay this dragon, who won't leave us a rag on, We'll give thee all our goods. Tut, tut, quoth he, no goods I want; But I want, I want, in sooth, A fair maid of sixteen, that's brisk and keen, With smiles about the mouth; Hair black as sloe, skin white as snow, With blushes her cheeks adorning; To anoynt me o'er night, ere I go to fight, And to dress me in the morning. This being done, he did engage To hew the dragon down; But first he went, new armour to Bespeak at Sheffield town; With spikes all about, not within but without, Of steel so sharp and strong; Both behind and before, arms, legs, and all o'er, Some five or six inches long. Had you but seen him in this dress, How fierce he look'd, and how big, You would have thought him for to be Some Egyptian porcupig: He frighted all, cats, dogs, and all, Each cow, each horse, and each hog: For fear they did flee, for they took him to be Some strange outlandish hedge-hog. To see this fight, all people then Got up on trees and houses, On churches some, and chimneys too; But these put on their trowses, Not to spoil their hose. As soon as he rose, To make him strong and mighty, He drank by the tale six pots of ale, And a quart of aqua-vitæ. It is not strength that always wins, For wit doth strength excell; Which made our cunning champion Creep down into a well; Where he did think this dragon would drink; And so he did in truth; And as he stoop'd low, he rose up and cry'd, boh! And hit him in the mouth. Oh, quoth the dragon, pox take thee, come out, Thou disturb'st me in my drink: And then he turn'd, and s---- at him; Good lack how he did stink! Beshrew thy soul, thy body's foul, Thy dung smells not like balsam; Thou son of a whore, thou stink'st so sore, Sure thy diet is unwholesome. Our politick knight, on the other side, Crept out upon the brink, And gave the dragon such a douse, He knew not what to think: By cock, quoth he, say you so: do you see? And then at him he let fly With hand and with foot, and so they went to't; And the word it was, hey boys, hey ! Your words, quoth the dragon, I don't understand: Then to it they tell at all, Like two wild boars so fierce, if I may Compare great things with small. Two days and a night, with this dragon did fight Our champion on the ground; Tho' their strength it was great, their skill it was neat, They never had one wound. At length the hard earth began to quake, The dragon gave him a knock, Which made him to reel, and straitway he thought, To lift him as high as a rock, And thence let him fall. But More of More-Hall, Like a valiant son of Mars, As he came like a lout, so he turn'd him about, And hit him a kick on the a---- Oh, quoth the dragon, with a deep sigh, And turn'd six times together, Sobbing and tearing, cursing and swearing Out of his throat of leather; More of More-Hall! O thou rascàl! Would I had seen thee never; With the thing at thy foot, thou hast prick'd my a---- gut, And I'm quite undone for ever. Murder, murder, the dragon cry'd, Alack, alack, for grief; Had you but mist that place, you could Have done me no mischief. Then his head he shaked, trembled and quaked, And down he laid and cry'd; First on one knee, then on back tumbled he, So groan'd, kickt, ----, and dy'd. Since the first Edition was printed off, the Editor has been favoured with some curious particulars relating to the foregoing Song, which are here given in the words of the Relater. In Yorkshire, six miles from Rotherham, is a village, called Wortley, the seat of the late Wortley Montague, Esq. About a mile from this village is a lodge, called Warncliff Lodge, but vulgarly called Wantley: here lies the scene of the Song. I was there above forty years ago; and it being a woody, rocky place, my friend made me clamber over rocks and stones, not telling me to what end, till I came to a sort of a cave; then asked my opinion of the place, and pointing to one end, says, "Here lay the Dragon killed by Moor of Moor-Hall: here lay his head; here lay his tail; and the stones we came over on the hill, are those he could not crack; and yon white house you see half a mile off, is Moor-Hall." I had dined at the lodge, and knew the man's name was Matthew, who was a keeper to Mr. Wortley, and, as he endeavoured to persuade me, was the same Matthew mentioned in the Song: In the house is the picture of the Dragon and Moor of Moor-Hall, and near it a Well, which, says he, is the Well described in the Ballad. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Percy, Reliques of Ancient English Poetry: Consisting of Old Heroic Ballads, Songs, and Other Pieces of our Earlier Poets (Chiefly of the Lyric Kind) Together with Some Few of Later Date , second edition, vol. 3 (London: J. Dodsley, 1767), pp. 299-305 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Percy, Reliques of Ancient English Poetry: Consisting of Old Heroic Ballads, Songs, and Other Pieces of our Earlier Poets, Together with Some Few of Later Date , third edition, vol. 3 (London: J. Dodsley, 1775), pp. 300-306 . Article in Wikipedia : Dragon of Wantley . Return to the table of contents . The Dragon of Unsworth Lancashire Traditions respecting the ravages formerly made by the so-called dragons occur in many counties. Yorkshire has claimed the legend of the Dragon of Wantley, and the Lambton Worm has rendered the county of Durham famous. One of the most noted dragon stories of Lancashire has its locality assigned to Unsworth, a small village or hamlet about three miles from Bury. The principal mansion in this village is occupied by a lineal descendant of the ancient family of Unsworth, who probably derived their name from the homestead they have so long occupied. The house contains little worthy of notice; but it has long been famous for containing an ancient carved oak table and panel connected with a legend attaching to the family. It is said that Thomas Unsworth was the owner of this property when the district was devastated by an enormous dragon, which was not content with its ordinary fare but proceeded to swallow up the women and children. The scales of this dragon were so hard and firmly set, that bullets shot by the guns of those days took no effect upon the monster; and the owner of Unsworth, finding this the case, loaded his gun with his dagger and mortally wounded the dragon under the throat, as it was raising its head to rush at its assailant. The table is said to have been constructed after this event, and was partly carved by the dagger which had destroyed the reptile. The carvings on the table and panel are somewhat curious. One is a representation of St George and the Dragon, another contains rude figures of the eagle and child, a third the lion and unicorn, and a fourth of the Dragon of Unsworth. The crest of the family consists of a man in black armour holding a battle axe in one hand; and tradition states that this is a portrait of Thomas Unsworth in the dress he wore at the time of the conflict. What may have given rise to the legend it is quite impossible to determine; but an estate was once granted to a member of this family for some important military service, and this may have had something to do with its origin. There are several carvings of the dragon in the possession of the family. One of these resembles a long serpent with the head and wings of a sphinx; another represents the monster as a serpent with the head of an old man; and a third resembles a serpent in folds with stings at the ends of the tongue and tail. The initials "C. V.," under the head of one of the figures, serve to indicate that the carvings have been executed for one of the owners of the mansion. Source (books.google.com): John Harland and T. T. Wilkinson, Lancashire Legends, Traditions, Pageants, Sports, etc. (London: George Routledge and Sons; Manchester: L. C. Gent, 1873), pp. 63-64 . Source (Internet Archive): John Harland and T. T. Wilkinson, Lancashire Legends, Traditions, Pageants, Sports, etc. (London: George Routledge and Sons; Manchester: L. C. Gent, 1873), pp. 63-64 . Link to an earlier rendition of this legend, including drawings of the dragon (books.google.com): An Illustrated Itinerary of the County of Lancaster (London: How and Parsons, 1842), pp. 252-53 . Return to the table of contents . The Laidley Worm of Spindleston Heugh Northumberland The history of the Laidley ( i. e. ) loathly, or loathsome) Worm of Spindleston Heugh is exceedingly popular on the Borders, as Sir Walter Scott remarks in his Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border, though he refrains from transcribing it on account of its resemblance to "Kempion." The legend was put into verse -- very unequal, however, in character -- by a former vicar of Norham. It opens with a parting between a king and his daughter. He goes out to win a second bride, and leaves his child, the Lady Margaret, in charge of Bamborough Castle. We see her, during her father's absence, arranging everything against his return, tripping out and tripping in, with the keys hanging over her left shoulder. At last the day arrives; the chieftains of the Border are all assembled to receive the king and queen. They come; the Lady Margaret welcomes them to hall and bower, and then, turning sweetly to her stepmother, reminds her that everything now is hers. One of the chieftains, struck by the young girl's beauty and simplicity, praises her loudly in the queen's hearing, as Excelling all of woman kind In beauty and in worth. The jealous queen mutters, "You might have excepted me;" and from that hour Margaret's fate was sealed. The next morning the maiden was standing at her bower-door, laughing for joy of heart; but before nightfall her stepdame had witched her to a loathsome worm, so to abide till her brother, the Childe of Wynde, should come to her rescue from beyond seas. The cave is still shown at Spindleston Heugh where the worm hid itself by day; during the night it would wander on the coast. We do not hear of any depredations it committed beyond the exaction of a tribute of milk (that favourite beverage of northern worms!); but so poisonous was the creature that for seven long miles in every direction the country was laid waste -- no green thing would grow. At last, word went over the sea to the Childe of Wynde, that his native land was desolated by a Laidley Worm on Spindleston Heugh; and, fearing lest any harm should befall his sister, he summoned his merry men, thirty-and-three in number: They built a ship without delay, With masts of the rowan-tree, With fluttering sails of silk so fine, And set her on the sea. They went on board, the wind with speed Blew them along the deep; At length they spied a huge square tower On a rock so high and steep. The sailors recognised the Northumbrian coast and King Ida's Castle, and made towards shore. Meanwhile, the queen looked out of her bower-window, and spying the gallant ship with its silken sails, sent out her evil companions, the "witch wives," to sink it in the waters; but they returned baffled and sullen, murmuring that there must be rowan-wood about the ship, for all their spells were powerless. Next she dispatched a boat with armed men to withstand the landing of the vessel; but the gallant Childe speedily put them to the rout. Lastly, it would seem that the worm itself withstood its deliverer, for we are told that The worme lept up, the worme lept down, She plaited round the stone, And aye, as the ship came close to land, She banged it off again. However, the Childe of Wynde steered the ship out of her reach, ran ashore on the sands of Budle, a small village near Bamborough, and, drawing his sword, went boldly towards the monster, as if to do battle at once. But the creature submitted, exclaiming: "O quit thy sword, and bend thy bow, And give me kisses three; For though I be a poisonous worme, No hurt I'll do to thee. O quit thy sword, and bend thy bow, And give me kisses three; If I'm not won ere set of sun, Won shall I never be." He quitted his sword, and bent his bow, He gave her kisses three; She crept into her hole a worme, But out stept a ladye. Our hero folded his recovered sister in his mantle, and bore her with him to Bamborough Castle, where he found his father inconsolable for her loss, though, through the queen's witcheries, he had tamely submitted to it. However, the queen's power was over now, and the Childe pronounced her unalterable doom. Changed into a toad, she was to wander till doomsday round Bamborough Castle, and the fair maidens of that neighbourhood believe that she still vents her malice against them by spitting venom at them. Source (books.google.com): William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Nortern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866), pp. 253-56 . Source (Internet Archive): William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Nortern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866), pp. 253-56 . This is a type 402A* folktale. This story is also told in ballad form, for example: " Kemp Owne ," Francis James Child, The English and Scottish Popular Ballads" , part 1 (Boston: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1882), no. 34. Return to the table of contents . The Longwitton Dragon Northumbria From Longwitton-Hall there is an agreeable walk for nearly a mile, by a woody dingle, called the Dene-Burn, to the gardens belonging the house, which are situated on a small loamy plain, a lovely and romantic spot, sheltered on all sides by the steep and well-wooded banks of the Hart. . . . A little to the east of them, in a wood, are three wells, which rise beneath a thick stratum of sandstone rock, which Wallis calls Thruston Wells; (probably from their coming through the stone) but the people of the neighbourhood Our Lady's Wells, and The Holy-Wells. . . . Great concourses of people from all parts, also used to assemble here in the memory of old people, on "Midsummer Sunday and the Sunday following," and amuse themselves with leaping, eating ginger-bread brought for sale to the spot, and drinking the waters of the wells. A tremendous dragon, too, that could make itself invisible, formerly guarded these foountains, till the famous knight, Guy Earl of Warwick, wandering in quest of chivalrous employment, came this way and waged battle with the monster. With words that could not be disobeyed, the winged serpent was commanded from his den, and to keep his natural and visible form; but as often as the knight wounded him, and his strength from loss of blood began to fail, he glided back, dipt his tail into the well, and returned healed, and with new vigour to the combat: till the earl, perceiving the cause of his long resistance, leapte between him and the wells, and in on furious onset stabbed him to the heart. Source (books.google.com): John Hodgson, A History of Northumberland , vol. 2 (Newcastle upon Tyne: Frank Graham, 1827), pp. 308-309 . Hodgson's source: "I am indebted for this account of the sports, and dragon of Our Lady's Well . . . to the narration of Mr. Wm. Hepple, farmer at Rugley-Walls, near Cambo, who is near 90 years old." Return to the table of contents . The Serpent of Deerhurst Gloucestershire There goes a story, that a serpent of prodigious bigness was a great grievance to all the country about Deerhurst by poysoning the inhabitants and killing their cattle. The inhabitants petitioned the king, and a proclamation was issued out, that whosoever should kill the serpent should enjoy an estate on Walton Hill in this parish, which then belonged to the crown. One John Smith, a labourer, undertook it, and succeeded; for finding the serpent lying in the sun, with his scales ruffled up, he struck between the scales with his ax, and struck off his head. The family of the Smiths enjoy the estate at present; and Mr. Lane, who married a widow of that family has the ax in his possession. Source (Internet Archive): Robert Atkyns, The Ancient and Present State of Glostershire (London:W. Bowyer, 1712), p. 388 . Return to the table of contents . Saint George and the Uffington White Horse Oxfordshire April 12th, 1757 On the 11th I left Newtown on the road from London to Auburn, and from Marlborough to Oxford. We came to the camp over the White Horse, which commands a glorious prospect into Wiltshire, Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and Gloucestershire. The camp itself is defended by one deep fossee. It is of an irregular form of four sides, about 800 paces in circumference. To the north-east of it is a small hill like a barrow, which was cut off from it. It is call'd Dragon Hill. On the side of the hill over it, just under the camp, is the White Horse, cut in turf as if in a trot. The green sod remains to form the body. It may be 100 yards in length, and is well designed. On Dragon Hill, the common people say, St. George kill'd the dragon and show a spot on it which they affirm is never cover'd with grass, and there they say the dragon was killed, and I think buryed, and that the white horse was St. George's steed. Source (books.google.com): James Joel Cartwright, ed., The Travels Through England of Dr. Richard Pococke , vol. 2 (Camden Society, 1889), pp. 248-49 . Source (Internet Archive): James Joel Cartwright, ed., The Travels Through England of Dr. Richard Pococke , vol. 2 (Camden Society, 1889), pp. 248-49 . The British National Trust describes Dragon Hill near the Uffington White Horse as follows: "A rounded natural chalk outcrop. Some say the 'scar' on its summit is the spot where St. George killed the dragon, spilling its blood and poisoning the soil forever." Link to an article on the Uffington White Horse in Oxfordshire, England, from Wikipedia . Return to the table of contents . The Mordiford Dragon or Serpent Herefordshire On the east end of the church of Mordiford is represented in plaster, an enormous dragon or serpent, the history of which is thus recorded: Some centuries ago, we know not when, a dragon is reported to have been the devourer of all the cattle on the adjoining hills called Offwood, and was a monster of such terrific qualities, that no one could for a great length of time be found bold enough to undertake his destruction, till at length a pardon being granted to a condemned criminal, on condition that he would undertake it, he atchieved his purpose, by slaying the dragon as he was solacing himself in a cyder hogshead. This wonderful relation, seems to be generally credited by the people in the neighbourhood, as no doubt it was at the building of this edifice, or this strange monster would not have been represented in so terrific a form, and in so conspicuous a place as the front of the church. Source (books.google.com): Samuel Ireland, Picturesque Views on the River Wye (London: R. Faulder, 1797), pp. 61-62 . Source (Internet Archive): Samuel Ireland, Picturesque Views on the River Wye (London: R. Faulder, 1797), pp. 61-62 . Return to the table of contents . The Dragon's Well at Brinsop Herefordshire The church at Brinsop is dedicated to St. George, and contains a fine tympanum of eleventh century date, representing St. George mounted, in the act of slaying the dragon. The Dragon's Well is in Duck's Pool meadow, on the south side of the church, while on the other side is a field called "Lower Stanks," pointed out by the late parish clerk as the spot where St. George slew the dragon. Source (books.google.com): Ella Mary Leather, The Folk-Lore of Herefordshire: Collected from Oral and Printed Sources (Hereford: Jakeman and Carver; London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1912), p. 11 . Source (HathiTrust): Ella Mary Leather, The Folk-Lore of Herefordshire: Collected from Oral and Printed Sources (Hereford: Jakeman and Carver; London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1912), p. 11 . Link to an article about Brinsop from Wikipedia . Return to the table of contents . The Lambton Worm County Durham The park and manor house of Lambton, belonging to a family of the same name, lie on the banks of the Wear, to the north of Lumley. The family is a very ancient one, much older, it is believed, than the twelfth century, to which date its pedigree extends. The old castle was dismantled in 1797, when the present mansion was built on the north bank of the swiftly-flowing Wear, in a situation of exceeding beauty. The park also contains the ruins of a chapel, called Brugeford or Bridgeford, close to one of the bridges which span the Wear. Long, long ago, some say about the fourteenth century, the young heir of Lambton led a careless, profane life, regardless alike of his duties to God and man, and in particular neglecting to attend mass, that he might spend his Sunday mornings in fishing. One Sunday, while thus engaged, having cast his line into the Wear many times without success, he vented his disappointment in curses loud and deep, to the great scandal of the servants and tenantry as they passed by to the chapel at Brugeford. Soon afterwards, he felt something tugging at his line, and trusting he had at last secured a fine fish, he exerted all his skill and strength to bring his prey to land. But what were his horror and dismay on finding that, instead of a fish, he had only caught a worm [serpent] of most unsightly appearance! He hastily tore the thing from his hook, and flung it into a well close by, which is still known by the name of the Worm Well. The young heir had scarcely thrown his line again into the stream, when a stranger of venerable appearance, passing by, asked him what sport he had met with. To which he replied, "Why, truly, I think I have caught the devil himself. Look in and judge." The stranger looked, and remarked that he had never seen the like of it before; that it resembled an eft, only it had nine holes on each side of its mouth; and, finally, that he thought it boded no good. Meanwhile the worm remained in the well till it outgrew so confined a dwelling place. It then emerged, and betook itself by day to the river, where it lay coiled round a rock in the middle of the stream, and by night to a neighbouring hill, round whose base it would twine itself; while it continued to grow so fast, that it soon could encircle the hill three times. This eminence is still called the Worm Hill. It is oval in shape, on the north side of the Wear, and about a mile and a half from Lambton Hall. The monster now became the terror of the whole countryside. It sucked the cows' milk, worried the cattle, devoured the lambs, and committed every sort of depredation on the helpless peasantry. Having laid waste the district on the north side of the river, it crossed the stream and approached Lambton Hall, where the old lord was living alone and desolate. His son had repented of his evil life, and had gone to the wars in a distant country. Some authorities tell us he had embarked as a crusader for the Holy Land. On hearing of their enemy's approach, the terrified household assembled in council. Much was said, but to little purpose, till the steward, a man of age and experience, advised that the large trough which stood in the courtyard should immediately be filled with milk. This was done without delay; the monster approached, drank the milk, and, without doing further harm, returned across the Wear to wrap his giant form around his favourite hill. The next day he was seen recrossing the river; the trough was hastily filled again, and with the same results. It was found that the milk of "nine kye" was needed to fill the trough; and if this quantity was not placed there every day, regularly and in full measure, the worm would break out into a violent rage, lashing its tail round the trees in the park, and tearing them up by the roots. The Lambton Worm was now, in fact, the terror of the North Country. It had not been left altogether unopposed. Many a gallant knight had come out to fight with the monster, but all to no purpose; for it possessed the marvellous power of reuniting itself after being cut asunder, and thus was more than a match for the chivalry of the North. So, after many conflicts, and much loss of life and limb, the creature was left in possession of its favourite hill. After seven long years, however, the heir of Lambton returned home, a sadder and a wiser man: returned to find the broad lands of his ancestors waste and desolate, his people oppressed and well-nigh exterminated, his father sinking into the grave overwhelmed with care and anxiety. He took no rest, we are told, till he had crossed the river and surveyed the worm as it lay coiled round the foot of the hill; then, hearing how its former opponents had failed, he took counsel in the matter from a sybil or wise woman. At first the sybil did nothing but upbraid him for having brought this scourge upon his house and neighbourhood; but when she perceived that he was indeed penitent, and desirous at any cost to remove the evil he had caused, she gave him her advice and instructions. He was to get his best suit of mail studded thickly with spear-heads, to put it on, and thus armed to take his stand on the rock in the middle of the river, there to meet his enemy, trusting the issue to Providence and his good sword. But she charged him before going to the encounter to take a vow, that, if successful, he would slay the first living thing that met him on his way homewards. Should he fail to fulfill this vow, she warned him that for nine generations no lord of Lambton would die in his bed. The heir, now a belted knight, made the vow in Brugeford Chapel; he studded his armour with the sharpest spearheads, and unsheathing his trusty sword, took his stand on the rock in the middle of the Wear, At the accustomed hour the worm uncoiled its "snaky twine," and wound its way towards the hall, crossing the river close by the rock on which the knight was standing, eager for the combat. He struck a violent blow upon the monster's head as it passed, on which the creature, "irritated and vexed," though apparently not injured, flung its tail round him, as if to strangle him in its coils. Now was seen the value of the sybil's advice. The closer the worm wrapped him in its folds, the more deadly were its self-inflicted wounds, till at last the river ran crimson with its gore. Its strength thus diminishing, the knight was able at last with his good sword to cut the serpent in two; the severed part was immediately borne away by the swiftness of the current, and the worm, unable to reunite itself, was utterly destroyed. During this long and desperate conflict, the household of Lambton had shut themselves within-doors to pray for their young lord, he having promised that when it was over, he would, if conqueror, blow a blast on his bugle. This would assure his father of his safety, and warn them to let loose the favourite hound, which they had destined as the sacrifice on the occasion, according to the sybil's requirements and the young lord's vow. When, however, the bugle notes were heard within the hall, the old man forgot everything but his son's safety, and rushing out of doors, ran to meet the hero and embrace him. The heir of Lambton was thunderstruck; what could he do? It was impossible to lift his hand against his father; yet how else to fulfil his vow? In his perplexity he blew another blast; the hound was let loose, it bounded to its master; the sword, yet reeking with the monster's gore, was plunged into its heart; but all in vain. The vow was broken, the sybil's prediction fulfilled, and the curse lay upon the house of Lambton for nine generations. Source (books.google.com): William Henderson, Notes on the Folk Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866), pp. 247-52 . Source (Internet Archive): William Henderson, Notes on the Folk Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866), pp. 247-52 . Henderson's source (books.google.com): Sir Cuthbert Sharpe, "The Worme of Lambton," The Bishoprick Garland; or, A Collection of Legends, Song, Ballads, etc., Belonging to the County of Durham (London: Nichols, and Baldwin and Cradock, 1834), pp. 21-30 . According to tradition, the legend of the Lambton Worm may have inspired Lewis Carroll to write his poem " Jabberwocky " (1871). Return to the table of contents . Conyers of Sockburn County Durham Sockburn -- where Conyers so trusty A huge serpent did dish up, That had else eat the Bish-up, But now his old faulchion's grown rusty, grown rusty. Fragment. The ancient service by which the manor of Sockburn was held, was by the presentation of a faulchion to the Bishop of Durham, on his first arrival in his diocese. The ceremony is still retained; and the lord of Sockburn, or his steward, meets the bishop in the middle of the Tees, or on Croft bridge, and presents the faulchion, with the following address: My Lord Bishop, I here present you with the faulchion where with the champion Conyers slew the Worm, Dragon, or fiery flying Serpent, which destroyed man, woman, and child; in memory of which, the King then reigning gave him the manor of Sockburn, to hold by this tenure, that upon the first entrance of every bishop into the country this faulchion [falchion] should be presented. The bishop takes the faulchion into his hand, and immediately returns it courteously to the person who presents it, wishing the lord of Sockburn health, and a long enjoyment of the manor. This tenure is distinctly noted in the inquest held on the death of Sir John Conyers, in 1396; and the ancient service by which this manor was held proves the legend to be of no modern origin. No doubt some gallant exploit is veiled under this chivalrous tale, with at least an adumbration of truth. The observance is still continued, and the steward of Sir Edward Blackett, the present lord of the manor, presented the faulchion to Bishop Van Mildert on Croft Bridge. Source (books.google.com): Cuthbert Sharp, The Bishoprick Garland; or, A Collection of Legends, Songs, Ballads, etc. Belonging to the County of Durham (London: Nichols, and Baldwin and Cradock, 1834), pp. 2-3 . According to tradition, the legend of the Sockburn Worm may have inspired Lewis Carroll to write his poem " Jabberwocky " (1871). Return to the table of contents . The Dragon of Well County Durham There is a dim tradition still existing in this village of an enormous dragon having once had its lair in the vicinity of Well, and was a source of terror to the inhabitants, until a champion was found in an ancestor of the Latimers, who went boldly forth like a true knight of olden times, and after a long and terrible fight he slew the monster, hence a dragon on the coat of arms of this family. The scene of the conflict is still pointed out, and is midway between Tanfield and Well. Source (books.google.com): Edmund Bogg, From Edenvale to the Plains of York: Or, A Thousand Miles in the Valleys of the Nidd and Yore (Leeds: Emund Bogg; York: John Sampson, 1894), p. 296 . Source (Internet Archive): Edmund Bogg, From Edenvale to the Plains of York: Or, A Thousand Miles in the Valleys of the Nidd and Yore (Leeds: Emund Bogg; York: John Sampson, 1894), p. 296 . Return to the table of contents . Piers Shonke and the Serpent Hertfordshire In the Northwall of this Church [in the village of Brent Pelham] lyeth an ancient Monument of Stone, wherein a Man is figur'd, and about him an Eagle, a Lyon, and a Bull, all having Wings; and the fourth of the Shape of an Angel; as if they should represent the four Evangelists; under the Feet of the Man, is the Cross Flurie , and under the Cross, a Serpent. He is thought sometime to have been the Lord of an old decayed House well moated, not far from this Place, call'd O Piers Shonkes. He flourish'd, Anno à Conquestu. 21. An Inscription formerly on the Monument of Pierce Skonke, who died, anno 1086. Cadmi Fama manet tantum tua Fama Georgi Posthuma, tempus edax Ossa, Sepulchra vocat: Attamen hoc Tumulo, Shonkus qui perdidit Anguem, Invito Satanæ, cautè sepultus erat. Cadmus his Fame, St. George his Fame alone remain Their Tombs and Ashes, all are gone: But Shonke , who valiantly the Serpent wounded In spight of Satan, here he lyes entombed. Or thus, Tantum Fama manet, Cadmi Sanctiq; Georgi Posthuma, Tempus edax Ossa, Sepulchra vocat; Hoc tamen in muro tutus, qui perdidit Anguem, Invito, positus, Demonæ Shonkus erat. Nothing of Cadmus nor St. George , those names Of great Renown survives them, but their Fames; Time was so sharp set, as to make no Bones Of theirs, nor of their monumental Stones, But Shonke one Serpent kills, to'ther defies, And in this Wall as in a Fortress lyes. Source (books.google.com): Henry Chauncy, The Historical Antiquities of Hertfordshire (London: B. Griffin, 1700), p. 143 . Source (Internet Archive): Henry Chauncy, The Historical Antiquities of Hertfordshire (London: B. Griffin, 1700), p. 143 . Return to the table of contents . The Long Dragon of Shervage Wood Somerset On the western slope of the Quantock Hills, it is said that a dragon with two heads, was slain by an unnamed champion at Crowcombe, and one of the bench ends in the church records the feat. Another dragon, also carved in the church, was killed by a champion of the Fitzwarren family, nearer Taunton, at Norton Fitzwarren, but of these two exploits no details are preserved. A third dragon, which had its habitation in Shervage Wood, below the Danesborough camp, on the eastern slope of the hills, is however told of very definitely, and is still used as a deterrent to children who might linger too late among the whortleberry bushes. It was a long dragon, "one of that sort they called a worm," and devoured every living thing within reach. Consequently the local woodman was unable to go to the wood and cut the faggots on which his living depended. At last, however, starvation drove him to work at a time when the dragon seemed to have gone elsewhere in search of prey, and during the morning he cut wood unmolested, seeing or hearing nothing of the terror. At noon he sat on a fallen log half buried in fern to eat his "nummit" (noon-meat), and as he sat, the log heaved under him. It was the sleeping dragon. Whereon, in desperation, he leapt up, and crying, "So thee do movey, do 'ee? Take that then!" he struck his axe into the beast, and fled. But what became of the dragon no man knows, for it was never seen afterward. Source (books.google.com): C. W. Whistler, "Local Traditions of the Quantocks," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 19 (1908), p. 35 . Source (Internet Archive): C. W. Whistler, "Local Traditions of the Quantocks," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 19 (1908), p. 35 . Return to the table of contents . The Dragon of St. Leonard's Forest Sussex True and Wonderfull. A Discourse relating a strange and monstrous Serpent (or Dragon) lately discovered, and yet living, to the great Annoyance and divers Slaughters both of Men and Cattell, by his strong and violent Poyson: In Sussex, two Miles from Horsam, in a Woode called St. Leonard's Forrest, and thirtie Miles from London, this present Month of August, 1614. With the true Generation of Serpents. Printed at London, by John Trundle, 1614. This relation breathes such a spirit of sincerity, seems so well attested, and tallies so well with what has been advanced on the same head by the best antient and modern historians , that we cannot well doubt of its truth. Since, therefore, this small piece is become now so extremely scarce, as not to be met with in the libraries, or even cabinets of the curious, and the subject of it is uncommon and entertaining; we flatter ourselves, that a republication of it will not prove unacceptable to our readers. The style, indeed, is rude and unpolished, agreeable to the genius of the age wherein it was wrote: notwithstanding which, we could not prevail upon ourselves to modernize it, as believing this would not entitle it to so favourable a reception, amongst all true lovers of history and antiquity. To the Reader The just rewarde of him that is accustomed to lie, is, not be believed when he speaketh the truth. So just an occasion may sometime bee imposed upon the pamphleting pressers; and therefore, if we receive the same rewarde, we cannot much blame our accusers, which often fals out either by our forward credulity to but-seeming true reports, or by false coppies translated from other languages, which (though we beget not) we foster, and our shame is little the lesse. But, passing by what's past, let not our present truth blush for any former falshood-sake. The countrie is near us, Sussex; the time present, August; the subject, a serpent: strange, yet now a neighbour to us; and it were more than impudence to forge a lie so near home, that every man might turn in our throates; believe it, or reade it not, or reade it (doubting) for I believe e're thou hast read this little all, thou wilt not doubt of one, but believe there are many serpents in England. Farewell. By A. R. He that would send better newes, if he had it. In Sussex, there is a pretty market-towne, called Horsam [Horsham], neare unto it a forrest, called St. Leonard's Forrest, and there, in a vast and unfrequented place, heathie, vaultie, full of unwholesome shades, and over-growne hollowes, where this serpent is thought to be bred; but, wheresoever bred, certaine and too true it is, that there it yet lives. Within three or four miles compasse, are its usual haunts, oftentimes at a place called Faygate, and it hath been seene within halfe a mile of Horsam; a wonder, no doubt, most terrible and noisome to the inhabitants thereabouts. There is always in his tracke or path left a glutinous and slimie matter (as by a small similitude we may perceive in a snaile's) which is very corrupt and offensive to the scent; insomuch that they perceive the air to be putrified withall, which must needes be very dangerous. For though the corruption of it cannot strike the outward part of a man, unless heated into his blood; yet by receiving it in at any of our breathing organs (the mouth or nose) it is by authoritie of all authors, writing in that kinde, mortall and deadlie, as one thus saith: Noria sepentum est admixto sanguine pestis. Lucan. This serpent (or dragon, as some call it) is reputed to be nine feete, or rather more, in length, and shaped almost in the forme of an axeltree of a cart; a quantitie of thickness in the middest, and somewhat smaller at both endes. The former part, which he shootes forth as a necke, is supposed to be an elle long; with a white ring, as it were, of scales about it. The scales along his backe seem to be blackish, and so much as is discovered under his bellie, appeareth to be red; for I speak of no nearer description than of a reasonable ocular distance. For coming too neare it, hath already beene too dearely payd for, as you shall heare hereafter. It is likewise discovered to have large feete, but the eye may be there deceived; for some suppose that serpents have no feete, but glide upon certain ribbes and scales, which both defend them from the upper part of their throat unto the lower part of their bellie, and also cause them to move much the faster. For so this doth, and rids way (as we call it) as fast as a man can run. He is of countenance very proud, and at the sight or hearing of men or cattel, will raise his necke upright, and seem to listen and looke about, with great arrogancy. There are likewise on either side of him discovered, two great bunches so big as a large foote-ball, and (as some thinke) will in time grow to wings; but God, I hope, will (to defend the poor people in the neighbourhood) that he shall be destroyed before he grow so fledge. He will cast his venome about four rodde from him, as by woefull experience it was proved on the bodies of a man and a woman comming that way, who afterwards were found dead, being poysoned and very much swelled, but not prayed upon. Likewise a man going to chase it, and as he imagined, to destroy it with two mastive dogs, as yet not knowing the great danger of it, his dogs were both killed, and he himselfe glad to returne with hast to preserve his own life. Yet this is to be noted, that the dogs were not prayed upon, but slaine and left whole: for his food is thought to be, for the most part, in a conie-warren, which he much frequents; and it is found much scanted and impaired in the encrease it had woont to afford. These persons, whose names are hereunder printed, have seene this serpent, beside divers others, as the carrier of Horsam, who lieth at the White Horse in Southwarke, and who can certifie the truth of all that has been here related. John Steele. Christopher Holder. And a Widow Woman dwelling nere Faygate. Source (books.google.com): The Harleian Miscellany: A Collection of Scarce, Curious, and Entertaining Pamphlets and Tracts, as Well in Manuscript as in Print, Selected from the Library of Edward Harley, Second Earl of Oxford , vol. 3 (London: John White, John Murray, and John Harding, 1809), pp. 109-112 . Source (Internet Archive): The Harleian Miscellany: A Collection of Scarce, Curious, and Entertaining Pamphlets and Tracts, as Well in Manuscript as in Print, Found in the Late Earl of Oxford's Library , vol. 3 (London: Robert Dutton, 1809), pp. 227-31 . Return to the table of contents . The Dragon of Bignor Hill Sussex The old inhabitants of the place [Bignor in Sussex] have a tradition, now nearly lost, that a large dragon had its den on Bignor Hill, and that marks of its folds were to be seen on the hill; a relick of remote antiquity, and of Celtic origin. Source (books.google.com): "Roman Roads, etc., in Sussex," The Gentleman's Magazine and Historical Chronicle vol. 86 (July to December, 1816), p. 19 . Source (Internet Archive): "Roman Roads, etc., in Sussex," The Gentleman's Magazine and Historical Chronicle vol. 86 (July to December, 1816), p. 19 . Return to the table of contents . The Fiery Dragon of Dolbury Hill Devonshire If Cadburye-Castle and Dolbury-Hill dolven were, All England might ploughe with a golden sheere. Cadbury-Castle (alias Caderbyr), the land of William de Campo Arnulphi, and after of Willowby, Fursden, and now Carew. This castle may be seene farr offe (so they tearme of high, upright topped hill, by nature and slyght art anciently fortified, which in those Roman or Saxon warrs might be of goode strength) conteyninge within the compass thereof near - - - - acres. Here you may see some fyve mile distant to the south-east, in the parish of Broad Clyst, another down, called Dolbury-hill; between these two hills, you may be pleased to hear a pretty tale that is said (I sett not downe those words to lessen your belief of the matter) but to let you knowe that, nil præter auditum habeo. Take yt on this condition. Yt holds credyt by tradition. That a fiery dragon, or some ignis fatuus in such lykeness, hath bynne often seene to flye between these hills, komming from the one to the other in the night season, whereby it is supposed ther is a great treasure hydd in each of them, and that the dragon is the trusty treasurer and sure keeper thereof, as he was of the golden fleece in Colcos, which Jason, by the help of Medea, brought thence; for, as Ovid sayeth, he was very vigilant. A watchfull dragon sett, This golden fleece to keep, Within whose careful eyes Come never wink of sleep. And as the two relations may be as true, one as the other, for any thinge I knowe, for it is constantly believed of the credulous heer, and some do averr to have seene yt lately. And of this hydden treasure, the ryming proverbe here quoted goes commonly and anciently. Source (books.google.com): Francis Grose, A Provincial Glossary, with a Collection of Local Proverbs and Popular Superstitions (London: S. Hooper, 1787), pp. cxcii-cxciv . Source (Internet Archive): Francis Grose, A Provincial Glossary, with a Collection of Local Proverbs and Popular Superstitions (London: S. Hooper, 1787), pp. 201-203 . Return to the table of contents . The Legend of the Ludham Dragon Norfolk During the period in which the Bishops of Norwich occupied their palace at Ludham, the parishioners were horrified at the appearance of a hideous monster. Some said it was an enormous lizard; this was manifestly wrong, because it had wings and was covered with scales. Its horrible mouth was filled with huge teeth, and it was said to have measured from 10 to 12 ft. in length! It was confidently asserted that it was the dragon from which S. Benedict rescued the young monk Edwin in A.D. 1133, as related in the Legend of the Seal. After having wandered all over the world for his victim, the dragon returned to the locality from which the young Monk had so wickedly strayed. As it appeared only after sunset, none dared to leave their homes after dark. The Parish Clerk offered to ring the bell at the time the monster appeared. He did so once, when the dragon, in fury, got over the churchyard wall, and after knocking over several gravestones commenced roaring and continued to do so all through that night. Several times a deputation of the principal inhabitants waited on the Bishop at the Palace to beseech his Lordship to exorcise the monster. Each time they did so the answer was "The Bishop is not at home!" The dragon made a burrow, commencing in a yard at the back of what is now "The Carpenters' Arms." in the main street -- the exit was just beyond the N.W. angle of the churchyard. Every morning this exit was filled with bricks and stones, only to be thrown out at night. One sunshiny afternoon it unexpectedly left the burrow, and when it had got some distance away a plucky parishioner dropped a single large round flint stone into the burrow. After basking in the sun it returned, and being unable to remove the stone, began bellowing with rage, lashing its sides furiously with its tail. Many watched it from the church tower and it was suggested that it should be shot at, but it was thought that would only enrage the monster. After a time it made its way across the fields in the direction of the Palace. Turning aside, it traversed the causeway over the marshes to the Abbey Gateway. Round and round the ruin it ran, throwing up stones and earth in fury. At last it entered the Gateway, making its way to the vaults beneath and was seen no more. After a time the burrow was carefully filled up. Since when, no more has been heard of The Ludham Dragon. Source (books.google.com): Great Eastern Magazine , vol. 13, no. 151 (July 1923), p. 129 . Return to the table of contents . Links to Related Sites Jacqueline Simpson, "Fifty British Dragon Tales: An Analysis," Folklore , vol. 89, no. 1 (1978), pp. 79-93 . Available via JSTOR. Dragon Slayers , an index page assembled by D. L. Ashliman. Saint George and the Dragon , an index page for the legendary saint, edited by D. L. Ashliman. Dragon , from Wikipedia . European Dragon , from Wikipedia . Germanic Dragon , from Wikipedia . Wyvern , from Wikipedia . Welsh Dragon , from Wikipedia . Lindworm , from Wikipedia . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman"s folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 26, 2023. Dream Bread: Folktales of Type 1626 Dream Bread folktales of type 1626 assembled and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2011 Contents The Three Dreams (Petrus Alphonsi). The Three Travelers (The Masnavi ). Jesus, Peter, and Judas (The Toledot Yeshu ). Of the Deceits of the Devil ( Gesta Romanorum ). Comical History of Three Dreamers . (Spain). The "Dream-Bread" Story Once More (USA). Link to The Three Travelers and the Load (W. A. Clouston). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Three Dreams Petrus Alphonsi Two burghers and a simple peasant, on their way to Mecca, found themselves with no food except enough flour to make a single small loaf of bread. The two burghers took counsel together how they might cheat their companion of his share, and proposed that whichever of the three should have the most wonderful dream while the bread was baking should have the loaf all to himself. Thinking thus to deceive the peasant, they placed the dough in the ashes and lay down to sleep. But the peasant saw through their trick, arose and ate the loaf when it was half baked, and lay down again. Then one of the burghers, as though frightened by his dream, awoke and called the other. "What's the matter?" "I've had a wonderful dream. Two angels opened the gates of heaven and brought me before the Lord." "That is a splendid dream," replied the other; "but I dreamed that two angels came, clove the earth asunder, and took me into hell." The peasant heard all this, but nevertheless pretended to be asleep. The burghers, however, who were taken in by their own trick ( decepti et decipere volentes ), called him to wake up. "Who is calling me?" he cried in great terror. "Have you come back?" "Where should we come back from?" "Why, I just had a dream in which I saw two angels take one of you and open the gates of heaven and lead him before the Lord; then two angels took the other of you, opened the earth, and led him into hell. And when I saw this, I realized that neither of you would return, so I got up and ate the bread." Source: Petrus Alphonsi, Disciplina Clericalis , as retold by Paull Franklin Baum, "The Three Dreams or 'Dream-Bread' Story," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 30 (1917), p. 378 . Link to the Wikipedia article on Petrus Alphonsi . Return to the table of contents . The Three Travelers The Masnavi A Muslim was traveling with two unbelievers, a Jew and a Christian, like wisdom linked with the flesh and the devil. God was "nigh unto his faithful servant," and when the first stage was completed he caused a present of sweetmeats to be laid before the travelers. As the Jew and the Christian had already eaten their evening meal when the sweetmeats arrived, they proposed to lay them aside till the morrow; but the Muslim, who was keeping fast, and therefore could not eat before nightfall, proposed to eat them that night. To this the other two refused to consent, alleging that the Muslim wanted to eat the whole of the sweetmeats himself. Then the Muslim proposed to divide them into three portions, so that each might eat his own portion when he pleased; but this also was objected to by the others, who quoted the proverb, "The divider is in hell." The Muslim explained to them that this proverb meant the man who divides his allegiance between God and lust; but they still refused to give way, and the Muslim therefore submitted, and lay down to sleep in the endurance of the pangs of hunger. Next morning, when they awoke, it was agreed between them that each should relate his dreams, and that the sweetmeats should be awarded to him whose dream was the best. The Jew said that he had dreamed that Moses had carried him to the top of Mount Sinai, and shown him marvelous visions of the glory of heaven and the angels. The Christian said he had dreamed that Jesus had carried him up to the fourth heaven and shown him all the glories of the heavens. Finally the Muslim said that the Prophet Muhammad had appeared to him in person, and after commending him for his piety in saying his prayers and keeping fast so strictly on the previous night, had commanded him to eat up those divinely provided sweetmeats as a reward, and he had accordingly done so. The Jew and the Christian were at first annoyed with him for thus stealing a march upon them; but on his pointing out that he had no option but to obey the Prophet's commands, they admitted that he had done right, and that his dream was the best, as he had been awake, while they were asleep. The moral is, that the divine treasure is revealed as an immediate intuition to those who seek it with prayer and humble obedience, and not to those who seek to infer and deduce its nature and quality from the lofty abstractions of philosophy. Source: Jalal ad-D īn Muhammad Rumi, Masnavi I Ma'navi: The Spiritual Couplets (London: Trübner and Company, 1887), book 6, story 7, pp. 304-305 . Spelling modernized by D. L. Ashliman. Link to the Wikipedia article on the Masnavi . Link to the Wikipedia article on Jalal ad-D īn Muhammad Rumi . Return to the table of contents . Jesus, Peter, and Judas The Toledot Yeshu On the journey from Rome to Jerusalem, Jesus, Peter, and Judas stopped at a small inn, and the host had only one goose to offer his three guests. Jesus then took the goose and said, "This is verily not sufficient for three persons; let us go to sleep, and the whole goose shall be his who shall have the best dream." Whereupon they lay down to slumber. In the middle of the night Judas arose and ate the goose. When morning came, the three met, and Peter said, "I dreamed I sat at the foot of the throne of Almighty God." And to him Jesus answered, "I am the son of Almighty God, and I dreamed thou wert seated near me; my dream is therefore superior to thine, and the goose shall be mine to eat." Then Judas said, "And I, while I was dreaming, ate the goose." And Jesus sought the goose, but vainly, for Judas had devoured it. Source: The Toledot Yeshu , also spelled Toldoth Jeschu , summarized by Paull Franklin Baum, "The Three Dreams or 'Deam-Bread' Story," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 30 (1917), p. 382 . Link to the Wikipedia article on the Toledot Yeshu . Return to the table of contents . Of the Deceits of the Devil Gesta Romanorum There were once three friends, who agreed to make a pilgrimage together. It happened that their provisions fell short, and having but one loaf between them, they were nearly famished. "Should this loaf," they said to each other, "be divided amongst us, there will not be enough for any one. Let us then take counsel together, and consider how the bread is to be disposed of." "Suppose we sleep upon the way," replied one of them; "and whosoever hath the most wonderful dream shall possess the loaf?" The other two acquiesced, and settled themselves to sleep. But he who gave the advice arose while they were sleeping and eat up the bread, not leaving a single crumb for his companions. When he had finished he awoke them. "Get up quickly," said he, "and tell us your dreams." "My friends," answered the first, "I have had a very marvelous vision. A golden ladder reached up to heaven, by which angels ascended and descended. They took my soul from my body, and conveyed it to that blessed place, where I beheld the Holy Trinity, and where I experienced such an overflow of joy as eye hath not seen nor ear heard. This is my dream." "And I," said the second, "beheld the devils with iron instruments, by which they dragged my soul from the body, and plunging it into hell flames, most grievously tormented me, saying, 'As long as God reigns in heaven this will be your portion.'" "Now then," said the third, who had eaten the bread, "hear my dream. It appeared as if an angel came and addressed me in the following manner: 'My friend, would you see what is become of your companions?' I answered, 'Yes, Lord. We have but one loaf between us, and I fear that they have run off with it.' 'You are mistaken,' he rejoined, 'it lies beside us; follow me.' He immediately led me to the gate of heaven, and by his command I put in my head and saw you; and I thought that you were snatched up into heaven and sat upon a throne of gold, while rich wines and delicate meats stood around you. Then said the angel, 'Your companion, you see, has an abundance of good things, and dwells in all pleasures. There he will remain for ever; for he has entered the celestial kingdom, and cannot return. Come now where your other associate is placed.' I followed, and he led me to hell-gates, where I beheld you in torment, as you just now said. Yet they furnished you, even there, with bread and wine in abundance. I expressed my sorrow at seeing you in misery, and you replied, 'As long as God reigns in heaven here I must remain, for I have merited it. Do you then rise up quickly and eat up all the bread, since you will see neither me nor my companion again.' I complied with your wishes, arose, and eat the bread." APPLICATION My beloved, the Saracens and Jews, the rich and powerful, and, finally, the perfect among men, are typified by the three companions. The bread represents the kingdom of heaven. Source: Gesta Romanorum , translated from the Latin by Charles Swan; revised and corrected by Wynnard Hooper (London: George Bell and Sons, 1906), no. 106, pp. 184-85 . Link to the Wikipedia article on the Gesta Romanorum . Return to the table of contents . Comical History of Three Dreamers Spain Three companions, of whom two were tradesmen and townsmen, and the third a villager, on the score of devotion, went on pilgrimage to a noted sanctuary; and as they went on their way, their provision began to fail them, insomuch that they had nothing to eat, but a little flour, barely sufficient to make of it a very small loaf of bread. The tricking townsmen seeing this, said between themselves, "We have but little bread, and this companion of ours is a great eater; on which account it is necessary we should think how we may eat this little bread without him." When they had made it and set it to bake, the tradesmen seeing in what manner to cheat the countryman, said, "Let us all sleep, and let him that shall have the most marvelous dream betwixt all three of us, eat the bread." This bargain being agreed upon, and settled between them, they laid down to sleep. The countryman, discovering the trick of his companions, drew out the bread half baked, ate it by himself, and turned again to sleep. In a while, one of the tradesmen, as frightened by a marvelous dream, began to get up, and was asked by his companion, why he was so frightened. He answered, "I am frightened and dreadfully surprised by a marvelous dream: it seemed to me that two angels, opening the gates of heaven, carried me before the throne of God with great joy." His companion said, "This is a marvelous dream, but I have seen another more marvelous, for I saw two angels, who carried me over the earth to hell." The countryman hearing this, made as if he slept; but the townsmen, desirous to finish their trick, awoke him; and the countryman, artfully as one surprised, answered, "Who are these that call me?" They told him, "We are thy companions." He asked them, "How did you return?" They answered, "We never went hence; why d'ye talk of our return?" The countryman replied, "It appeared to me that two angels, opening the gates of heaven, carried one of you before our Lord God, and dragged the other over the earth to hell, and I thought you never would return hither, as I have never heard that any had returned from paradise, nor from hell, and so I arose and eat the bread by myself. Source: John Aubrey, Miscellanies upon Various Subjects , 5th edition (London: Reeves and Turner, 1890), pp. 68-69 . Aubrey's source: "From an old edition of Lazarillo de Tormes ." Link to the Wikipedia article on the Lazarillo de Tormes . Link to the Wikipedia article on the John Aubrey . Return to the table of contents . The "Dream-Bread" Story Once More USA The following verses (to the tune of "Pop goes the Weasel") were communicated to me through the mediation of Mr. Max Deutch by Mr. Frank Wolff. They were composed by the latter in conjunction with an employee of the St. Louis Post Office. He is unable to identify any part as his contribution, and knows the tale merely as a floating anecdote. Two Irishmen and a Hebrew one day Went out for recreation. They took enough provisions along To spend a week's vacation. One night they got lost in the woods; The night was dark and lonely. At last the food they had gave out, Except a piece of baloney. As one of them took up a knife, I said, "It's no use of carving, For if we share this piece of baloney, It won't keep us from starving." So I suggested we all go to sleep, And so did Maloney. And the one that had the best of dreams Wins the piece of baloney. The following morn we all got up, It was quarter after seven. One of them said: "I had a dream, I died and went to heaven; St. Peter met me at the gate, Riding on a pony. I guess that dream couldn't be beat, So that wins the piece of baloney." The other one said: "I too had a dream; I died and went to heaven; St. Peter met me at the gate, Stuck out his hand, and said, 'Hello, Maloney!' I guess that dream couldn't be beat, So that wins the piece of baloney." The Hebrew said: "It's true, my friend, That you were sleeping. The reason why I know it is 'Cause I was peeping. I saw you both go up in heaven; And, believe me, I was lonely; I thought you'd never come back again, So I got up and ate the baloney." Source: Archer Taylor, " The 'Dream-Bread' Story Once More," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 34 (1921), pp. 327-28 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 12, 2011. Dream Treasure Turns to Filth Dream Treasure Turns to Filth tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1645B edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2016 Contents A Man Who Found Gold During His Sleep (Poggio Bracciolini). The Hodja Dreams That He Had Found a Treasure (Attributed to Nasreddin Hodja). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. A Man Who Found Gold During His Sleep Poggio Bracciolini A friend of ours related, at a party, that one night he had found gold in a dream. "Mind," said someone, "mind the same thing does not befall you, that befell one of my neighbors, whose gold was turned into muck." Being asked to relate that dream, he said: My neighbor one night dreamt that the devil had led him into a field to dig out gold. When he had found a good lot: "You are not allowed to carry it away now," quoth the demon; "but mark the place, that you may be alone to know it again." The man enquired what sign he could well use: "Cack here," replied the devil. "It is the best way that nobody should suspect there is gold. None but you will have cognizance of the matter." The man thought that a good plan, and, awaking forthwith, became aware that he had abominably loosened his bowels in the bed. Rising amid the muck and stench to leave the house, he set on the crown of his head a cap wherein the cat had just done its needs. Enraged at the horrible smell, he had to go and wash the filth off his head and hair. Thus the golden dream had turned to turd. Source: Poggio Bracciolini, The facetiae or Jocose Tales , volume 2 (Paris: Isidore Liseux, 1879), no. 130, pp. 14-15 . Return to the table of contents . The Hodja Dreams That He Had Found a Treasure Attributed to Nasreddin Hodja One night the Hodja dreamed that while traveling he had found a treasure. To mark its location he relieved himself on the spot. Upon awakening he discovered that only the last part of his dream had come true. Then he cried out, "Lord, why did you leave the mess here for me while taking away the gold? You would have had as much use for the one as for the other!" Source: Albert Wesselski Der Hodscha Nasreddin , volume 1 (Weimar: Alexander Duncker Verlag, 1911), no. 314, p. 178 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2016. Link to additional tales about Nasreddin Hodja , the Turkish trickster. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 21, 2016. The Man Who Became Rich through a Dream: Folktales of Type 1645 The Man Who Became Rich through a Dream and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1645 about dreamers who seek treasure abroad but find it at home selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2025 Contents The Ruined Man Who Became Rich Again Through a Dream ( The 1001 Nights ). A Man of Baghdad (Persia). Numan's Dream (Turkey). How the Junkman Traveled to Find Treasure in His Own Yard (Turkey). Hoderich and Hanfrat (France). The Peddler of Swaffham (England). The Swaffham Legend (England). A Cobbler in Somersetshire (England). Upsall Castle (England). Dundonald Castle (Scotland). Themselves (Isle of Man). Dreaming Tim Jarvis (Ireland). The Bridge of the Kist (Ireland). Dreaming of Treasure (Ireland). The Dream of Treasure under the Bridge at Limerick (Ireland). A Kerry Man (Ireland). Treasure at Ardnaveagh (Ireland). The Bridge at Kempen (1) (Holland). The Bridge at Kempen (2) (Holland). Dreams Are Lies (Germany). The Dream of the Treasure on the Bridge (Germany). The Bridge at Lübeck (Germany). Treasure Unearthed (Germany). The Pine Tree of Steltzen (Germany). Digging Up Snakes (Germany). A Good Dream (Switzerland). Treasure at the Isar Bridge (Austria / Germany). The Dream of Treasure (Austria). The Dwarf on the Ziller Bridge (Austria). The Dream of the Zirl Bridge (Austria). How one Became Rich through a Dream: A Legend (Austria). The Treasure under the Bridge (Austria). The Golden Fox (Czech Republic / Austria). The Fish-Dealer of Palermo (Italy). The Church at Erritsø (Denmark). The Treasure in Tanslet (Denmark). A Peasant in Vester-Brøndum (Denmark). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Ruined Man Who Became Rich Again Through a Dream 1001 Nights There lived once in Baghdad a very wealthy man, who lost all his substance and became so poor, that he could only earn his living by excessive labor. One night, he lay down to sleep, dejected and sick at heart, and saw in a dream one who said to him, "Thy fortune is at Cairo; go thither and seek it." So he set out for Cairo; but, when he arrived there, night overtook him and he lay down to sleep in a mosque. Presently, as fate would have it, a company of thieves entered the mosque and made their way thence into an adjoining house; but the people of the house, being aroused by the noise, awoke and cried out; whereupon the chief of the police came to their aid with his officers. The robbers made off; but the police entered the mosque and finding the man from Baghdad asleep there, laid hold of him and beat him with palm-rods, till he was well-nigh dead. Then they cast him into prison, where he abode three days, after which the chief of the police sent for him and said to him, "Whence art thou?" "From Baghdad," answered he. "And what brought thee to Cairo?" asked the magistrate. Quoth the Baghdadi, "I saw in a dream one who said to me, 'Thy fortune is at Cairo; go thither to it.' But when I came hither, the fortune that he promised me proved to be the beating I had of thee. The chief of the police laughed, till he showed his jaw teeth, and said, "O man of little wit, thrice have I seen in a dream one who said to me, 'There is in Baghdad a house of such a fashion and situate so-and-so, in the garden whereof is a fountain and thereunder a great sum of money buried. Go thither and take it.' Yet I went not; but thou, of thy little wit, hast journeyed from place to place, on the faith of a dream, which was but an illusion of sleep." Then he gave him money, saying, "This is to help thee back to thy native land." Now the house he had described was the man's own house in Baghdad; so the latter returned thither, and digging underneath the fountain in his garden, discovered a great treasure; and [thus] God gave him abundant fortune. Source: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night , translated by John Payne, vol. 4 (London: Printed for subscribers only, 1884), pp. 134-35 . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. Since its first translation into a European language between 1704 and 1717, The Thousand and One Nights, also known as The Arabian Nights, has been recognized as a universal classic of fantasy narrative. It is, of course, a much older work and one with a complicated genealogy. Based on Indian, Persian, and Arab folklore, this work dates back at least 1000 years as a unified collection, with many of its individual stories undoubtedly being even older. One of the collection's forebears is a book of Persian tales, likely of Indian origin, titled A Thousand Legends. These stories were translated into Arabic about 850, and at least one reference from about the year 950 calls them The Thousand and One Nights. Arabic stories, primarily from Baghdad and Cairo were added to the ever evolving collection, which by the early 1500's had assumed its more-or-less final form. Return to the table of contents . A Man of Baghdad Persia An anecdote is told of a man of Baghdad who was in great distress, and who, after calling on God for aid, dreamt that a great treasure lay hid in a certain spot in Egypt. He accordingly journeyed to Egypt, and there fell into the hands of the patrol, who arrested him, and beat him severely on suspicion of being a thief. Calling to mind the proverb that "falsehood is a mischief but truth a remedy," he determined to confess the true reason of his coming to Egypt, and accordingly told them all the particulars of his dream. On hearing them they believed him, and one of them said, "You must be a fool to journey all this distance merely on the faith of a dream. I myself have many times dreamt of a treasure lying hid in a certain spot in Baghdad, but was never foolish enough to go there." Now the spot in Baghdad named by this person was none other than the house of the poor man of Baghdad, and he straightway returned home, and there found the treasure. Source: Jalalu-d'-Din Muhammad i Rumi, Masnavi i Ma'navi: The Spiritual Couplets (London: Trübner and Company, 1887), p. 322 . Wikipedia article about Jalalu-d'-Din Muhammad i Rumi (1207-1273). Wikipedia article about the Masnavi , written between about 1258 and 1273. Return to the table of contents . Numan's Dream Turkey There was of old time in the city of Cairo a man called Numan, and he had a son. One day when this boy's time to learn to read was fully come he took him to a school and gave to a teacher. This Numan was exceeding poor, so that he followed the calling of a water seller, and in this way he supported his wife and child. When the teacher had made the boy read through the Koran, he told the boy to fetch him his present. So the boy came and told his father. His father said, "O son, the Koran is the Word of God Most High, we have nothing worthy of it; there is our camel with which I follow my trade of water seller, take it at least and give it to thy teacher." The boy took the camel and brought it to his teacher. But that day his father could gain no money, and that night his wife and his son and himself remained hungry. Now his wife was a great scold, and when she saw this thing she said, "Out on thee, husband, art thou mad? Where are thy senses gone? Thou hadst a camel, and by means of it we made shift to live, and now thou hast taken and given it in a present; would that that boy had not been born, or that thou hadst not sent him to read; what is he and what his reading?' And she made so much noise and clamor that it cannot be described. Numan saw this thing, and he bowed down his head, and from the greatness of his distress he fell asleep. In his dream a radiant elder, white-bearded and clad in white raiment, came and said, "O Numan, thy portion is in Damascus; go, take it." Just then Numan awoke and he saw no one, and he arose and said, "Is the vision divine or is it satanic?" While saying this, he again fell asleep, and again he saw it. Brief, the elder appeared three times to him that night in his dream and said, "Indeed is thy provision in Damascus; delay not, go to Damascus and take it." When it was morning Numan spake to his wife of the vision; his wife said, "Thou gavest away our camel and didst leave us hungry, and now thou canst not abide our complaints and wishest to run off; I fear thou wilt leave thy child and me here and go off." Numan said, "My life, I will not run off." Quoth the woman, "I will not bide, I will not bide; where thou goest I too will go with thee." Numan sware that he would not run off, and the woman was persuaded and let him go. So Numan went forth; and one day he entered Damascus, and he went in through the gate of the Amawi Mosque. That day someone had baked bread in an oven and was taking it to his house; when he saw Numan opposite him and knew him to be a stranger, he gave him a loaf. Numan took it and ate it, and lay down through fatigue and fell asleep. That elder again came to him in his vision and said, "0 Numan, thou hast received thy provision; delay not, go back to thy house." Numan awoke and was amazed and said, "Then our bearing this much trouble and weariness was for a loaf." And he returned. One day he entered his house, and the woman looked and saw there was nothing in his hand; and Numan told her. When the woman learned that Numan had brought nothing, she turned and said, "Out on thee, husband, thou art become mad, thou art a worthless man; had thy senses been in thy head, thou hadst not given away our camel, the source of our support, and left us thus friendless and hungry and thirsty; not a day but thou doest some mad thing." And she complained much. And Numan's heart was broken by the weariness of the road and the complaining of the woman, and he fell asleep. Again in his vision that elder came and said, "O Numan, delay not, arise, dig close by thee, thy provision is there, take it." But Numan heeded not. Three times the elder appeared to him in his dream and said, "Thy provision is indeed close by thee; arise, take it." So Numan, unable to resist, arose and took a pick-axe and shovel and began to dig where his head had lain. The woman made mock of Numan and said, "Out on thee, man; the half of the treasure revealed to thee is mine." Numan replied, "So be it; but I am weary, come thou and dig a bit that I may take breath a little." The woman said, "Thou art not weary now; when thou art weary I will help." Numan went on: and when he had dug as deep as half the height of a man, a marble slab appeared. The woman saw the marble and, saying in herself, "This is not empty," she asked the pick-axe from Numan. Numan said, "Have patience a little longer." The woman said, "Thou art weary." Numan replied, "Now am I rested." Quoth the woman, "I am sorry for thee, thou dost not know kindness." While thus talking they saw that one side of that marble was pierced and that there was a hole. Thereupon grew Numan eager, and he pulled the marble from its place, and below it was a well and a ladder. He caught hold of the ladder and went down and saw a royal vase filled full with red gold, and he called out to the woman, "Come here." Thereupon the woman descended likewise and saw the vase of gold, and she threw her arms round Numan's neck and said, "O my noble little husband! Blessed be God, for thy luck and thy fortune." Numan took up some of these sequins, and the woman said, "What wilt thou do?" Numan replied, "I shall take these to our king and tell him that there is a vase full of them, and that an elder came to me in my dream and told me, and I shall say, 'Take them all; and, if thou wilt, bestow on me a few of them that I and my wife may eat and drink, and in our comfort may bless and praise thee.'" Quoth the woman, "My life, husband, speak not to our king now, so that all of them may remain ours and we shall have ease of heart." Numan listened not, but took them and laid them before the king. The king said, "What is this?" Numan answered, "O king, I found them in thy ground." And he told of the elder's coming in his dream and of there being a vase full of them, and said, "O king, send a slave of thine, and he will return; and I shall accept the king's alms, whatever it may be." The king said to a scribe, "Come, read this, let us see from whose time it has remained." When the scribe took the sequin into his hand he saw that there was written on the one side of it, "This is an alms from before God to Numan." Then the scribe turned over the other side and saw that it was thus written on that side, "By reason of his respect toward the Koran." When the scribe had read the inscriptions to the king, the king said, "What is thy name?" He replied, "My name is Numan." The king caused all these sequins to be read, and the writing on the whole of them was the same. The king said, "Go ye and bring some from the bottom of the vase." And they went and brought some from the bottom of the vase, and they read them, and they all bore the inscription of the first. And the king wondered and said, "Go, poor man, God Most High has given it thee, on my part too be it lawful for thee; come, take these sequins also." So Numan took them and went to his house, and he took out the sequins that were in the vase; and he enjoyed delight in the world until he died, and in the hereafter he attained a lofty station. And all this felicity was for his respect to the glorious Koran. Source: Sheykh-Zada, "The Twenty-Sixth Vezir's Story," The History of the Forty Vezirs; or, The Story of the Forty Morns and Eves , translated by E. J. W. Gibb (London: George Redway, 1886), pp. 278-84 . In Gibbs's translation the hero's name is given as Nu'mān. Return to the table of contents . How the Junkman Traveled to Find Treasure in His Own Yard Turkey In one of the towers overlooking the Sea of Marmora and skirting the ancient city of Stamboul, there lived an old junkman, who earned a precarious livelihood in gathering cinders and useless pieces of iron, and selling them to smiths. Often did he moralize on the sad Kismet that had reduced him to the task of daily laboring for his bread to make a shoe, perhaps for an ass. Surely he, a true Muslim, might at least be permitted to ride the ass. His eternal longing often found satisfaction in passing his hours of sleep in dreams of wealth and luxury. But with the dawning of the day came reality and increased longing. Often did he call on the spirit of sleep to reverse matters, but in vain; with the rising of the sun began the gathering of the cinders and iron. One night he dreamt that he begged this nocturnal visitor to change his night to day, and the spirit said to him, "Go to Egypt, and it shall be so." This encouraging phrase haunted him by day and inspired him by night. So persecuted was he with the thought that when his wife said to him, from the door, "Have you brought home any bread?" he would reply, "No, I have not gone; I will go tomorrow; " thinking she had asked him, " Have you gone to Egypt?" At last, when friends and neighbors began to pity poor Ahmet, for that was his name, as a man on whom the hand of Allah was heavily laid, removing his intelligence, he one morning left his house, saying, "I go! I go! to the land of wealth!" And he left his wife wringing her hands in despair, while the neighbors tried to comfort her. Poor Ahmet went straight on board a boat which he had been told was bound for Iskender (Alexandria), and assured the captain that he was summoned thither, and that he was bound to take him. Half-witted and mad persons being more holy than others, Ahmet was conveyed to Iskender. Arriving in Iskender, Hadji Ahmet roamed far and wide, proceeding as far as Cairo, in search of the luxuries he had enjoyed at Constantinople when in the land of Morpheus, which he had been promised to enjoy in the sunshine, if he came to Egypt. Alas! for Hadji Ahmet; the only bread he had to eat was that which was given him by sympathizing humanity. Time sped on, sympathy was growing tired of expending itself on Hadji Ahmet, and his crusts of bread were few and far between. Wearied of life and suffering, he decided to ask Allah to let him die, and wandering out to the pyramids he solicited the stones to have pity and fall on him. It happened that a Turk heard this prayer, and said to him, "Why so miserable, father? Has your soul been so strangled that you prefer its being dashed out of your body, to its remaining the prescribed time in bondage?" "Yes, my son," said Hadji Ahmet. "Far away in Stamboul, with the help of God, I managed as a junkman to feed my wife and myself; but here am I, in Egypt, a stranger, alone and starving, with possibly my wife already dead of starvation, and all this through a dream." "Alas! Alas! my father! that you at your age should be tempted to wander so far from home and friends, because of a dream. Why, were I to obey my dreams, I would at this present moment be in Stamboul, digging for a treasure that lies buried under a tree. I can even now, although I have never been there, describe where it is. In my mind's eye I see a wall, a great wall, that must have been built many years ago, and supporting or seeming to support this wall are towers with many corners, towers that are round, towers that are square, and others that have smaller towers within them. In one of these towers, a square one, there live an old man and woman, and close by the tower is a large tree, and every night when I dream of the place, the old man tells me to dig and disclose the treasure. But, father, I am not such a fool as to go to Stamboul and seek to verify this. It is an oft-repeated dream and nothing more. See what you have been reduced to by coming so far." "Yes," said Hadji Ahmet, "it is a dream and nothing more, but you have interpreted it. Allah be praised, you have encouraged me; I will return to my home." And Hadji Ahmet and the young stranger parted, the one grateful that it had pleased Allah to give him the power to revive and encourage a drooping spirit, and the other grateful to Allah that when he had despaired of life a stranger should come and give him the interpretation of his dream. He certainly had wandered far and long to learn that the treasure was in his own garden. Hadji Ahmet in due course, much to the astonishment of both wife and neighbors, again appeared upon the scene not a much changed man. In fact, he was the cinder and iron gatherer of old. To all questions as to where he was and what he had been doing, he would answer, "A dream sent me away, and a dream brought me back." And the neighbors would say, "Truly he must be blessed." One night Hadji Ahmet went to the tree, provided with spade and pick, that he had secured from an obliging neighbor. After digging a short time a heavy case was brought to view, in which he found gold, silver, and precious jewels of great value. Hadji Ahmet replaced the case and earth and returned to bed, much lamenting that it had pleased God to furnish women, more especially his wife, with a long tongue, long hair, and very short wits. "Alas!" he thought, "If I tell my wife, I may be hung as a robber, for it is against the laws of nature for a woman to keep a secret." Yet, becoming more generous when thinking of the years of toil and hardship she had shared with him, he decided to try and see if, by chance, his wife was not an exception to other women. Who knows, she might keep the secret. To test her, at no risk to himself and the treasure, he conceived a plan. Crawling from his bed, he sallied forth and bought, found, or stole an egg. This egg on the following morning he showed to his wife, and said to her, "Alas! I fear I am not as other men, for evidently in the night I laid this egg; and, wife mine, if the neighbors hear of this, your husband, the long-suffering Hadji Ahmet, will be bastinadoed, bowstrung, and burned to death. Ah, truly, my soul is strangled." And without another word Hadji Ahmet, with a sack on his shoulder, went forth to gather the cast-off shoes of horse, ox, or ass, wondering if his wife would prove an exception in this, as she had in many other ways, to other women. In the evening he returned, heavily laden with his finds, and as he neared home he heard rumors, ominous rumors, that a certain Hadji Ahmet, who had been considered a holy man, had done something that was unknown in the history of man, even in the history of hens: that he had laid a dozen eggs. Needless to add that Hadji Ahmet did not tell his wife of the treasure, but daily went forth with his sack to gather iron and cinders, and invariably found, when separating his finds of the day, in company with his wife, at first one, and then more gold and silver pieces, and now and then a precious stone. Source: Cyrus Adler and Allan Ramsay, Told in the Coffee House: Turkish Tales (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1898), pp. 35-42 . The episode describing the junkman's wife embellishment of his "secret" is classified as a type 1381D folktale. Return to the table of contents . Hoderich and Hanfrat France Hoderich and Hanfrat were farmers, descended from their four ancestors, i.e., their lineage did not extend beyond parents and grandparents. They lived in Balduch, near Paris. This village undoubtedly corresponds to present-day Bailly ( Seine et Oise, arrondissement de Versailles, canton de Marly le Roi ), known in medieval times as Balliacum. One silent midnight, a dwarf approached the bed of Hoderich, the eldest brother, and began to wake him, causing him to bolt from his sleep. "Hoderich," said the dwarf, "as soon as day breaks, you should get up and go to Paris, to the bridge. There you will experience both joy and sorrow. I will tell you no more." Hoderich took it all as a dream, turned over, and fell asleep again. But it didn't end there. The next night the dwarf crept silently up again and said: "Hoderich, get up and go to Paris, to the bridge. There you will learn of the joy and sorrow that will befall you. I will tell you no more." Hoderich was troubled by this strange vision, but after the dwarf had left, sleep came to him and he fell asleep again. However, the dwarf persisted, and on the third night, he came to the bedside and poked the sleeping man a nudge in the side, so that he angrily awoke. He heard the dwarf call out: "Listen, you must go to the bridge in Paris tomorrow morning, where you will learn of joy and sorrow. I will tell you nothing more. Hoderich did not know why all this was happening, but whatever the reason, early in the morning at daybreak he rose and walked towards Paris. Upon reaching the bridge, he rested in anticipation of what was to come. Now listen to what happened. A money changer going about his business saw Hoderich sitting there and called out "Good morning!" Hoderich bowed and returned the greeting. "Where are you from, good man?" the money changer asked. "Ah, sir," said Hoderich, "I come from Balduch, and to tell you the truth, a dwarf has kept me awake for three nights now. He told me to come here and stand on the bridge, where I soon I would hear of joys and sorrows to befall me. That is what I now am waiting for." "Indeed!" replied the money changer. "I see that you are a fool. Last year at midnight, a boisterous dwarf came to my bedside and told me to get up and go to the village of Balduch, where, in a green pature by the stream, I would find a treasure richer than anyone ever found elsewhere. If I had been foolish enough to make such a journey for the sake of a dwarf, I would have deserved to be severely beaten with sticks. You simpleton, because you allowed yourself to be led astray by the dwarf's chatter, you deserve a slap in the cheek from my hand as your reward!" And before Hoderich knew it, the blow landed on his cheek, and the words rang out: "Get out of here, you stupid fool. Sickness is running down your throat! If you wander about, seduced by elven deceit, you will never have peace! Go home and take care of your own affairs!" The money changer flew into such a rage at Hoderich that, had the latter not fled, even more abuse would have befallen him. Thus, with the blow to his cheek, Hoderich had now experienced the prophesied misfortune on the bridge. The pleasant thing that was to befall him was the money changer's message. He understood fully that the promised treasure lay buried in the Balducher pasture, a place well known to him. Hoderich hurried home and informed his brother that it was now their right to unearth a great treasure on their own land next to the barn where a brook ran through their pasture. Hanfrat decided to dig for it without delay. The following night, the brothers went to the designated spot with pick and spade and had not dug long before they came across a lead pot with a great treasure inside. This discovery immediately brought about a great change in the brothers' entire lives. They left the village for Paris, engaged in profitable financial transactions, and considerably increased their wealth. Having come to know King Pippin, they had the opportunity to render him significant services and advance him sums of money that he could not repay, for which land, castles, and cities had to be mortgaged, so that they gradually became regarded as the most powerful and respected men in the realm, after the king. Source (books.google.com): Jacob Grimm, "Der Traum von dem Schatz auf der Brücke," Abhandlungen zur Litteratur und Grammatik (Berlin: Ferd. Dümmlers Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1866), pp. 416-19 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob Grimm, "Der Traum von dem Schatz auf der Brücke," Abhandlungen zur Litteratur und Grammatik (Berlin: Ferd. Dümmlers Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1866), pp. 416-19 . Jacob Grimm's source: Karlmeinet , an anonymous compilation from the 14th century about Charlemagne (ca. 747-814) and his times. Return to the table of contents . The Peddler of Swaffham England Constant tradition says that there lived in former times in Soffham (Swaffham), alias Sopham, in Norfolk, a certain peddler, who dreamed that if he went to London Bridge, and stood there, he should hear very joyful news, which he at first slighted, but afterwards, his dream being doubled and trebled upon him, he resolved to try the issue of it, and accordingly went to London, and stood on the bridge there two or three days, looking about him, but heard nothing that might yield him any comfort. At last it happened that a shopkeeper there, hard by, having noted his fruitless standing, seeing that he neither sold any wares nor asked any alms, went to him and most earnestly begged to know what he wanted there, or what his business was; to which the peddler honestly answered that he had dreamed that if he came to London and stood there upon the bridge he should hear good news; at which the shopkeeper laughed heartily, asking him if he was such a fool as to take a journey on such a silly errand, adding, "I'll tell you, country fellow, last night I dreamed that I was at Sopham, in Norfolk, a place utterly unknown to me where I thought that behind a peddler's house in a certain orchard, and under a great oak tree, if I dug I should find a vast treasure! Now think you," says he, "that I am such a fool to take such a long journey upon me upon the instigation of a silly dream? No, no. I'm wiser. Therefore, good fellow, learn wit from me, and get you home, and mind your business." The peddler observing his words, what he had said he dreamed, and knowing they concerned him, glad of such joyful news, went speedily home, and dug and found a prodigious great treasure, with which he grew exceeding rich; and Soffham (Church) being for the most part fallen down, he set on workmen and rectified it most sumptuously, at his own charges; and to this day there is his statue therein, but in stone, with his pack at his back and his dog at his heels; and his memory is also preserved by the same form or picture in most of the old glass windows, taverns, and alehouses of that town unto this day. Source: Edwin Sidney Hartland, English Fairy and Other Folk Tales (London: Walter Scott Publishing Company, ca. 1890), pp. 76-77 . Hartland's source: The Diary of Abraham de la Pryme, the Yorkshire Antiquary (Durham: Andrews and Company, 1870), pp. 219-20 . De la Pryme lived from 1671 to 1704. Another version of this legend: Joseph Jacobs, "The Pedlar of Swaffham," More English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 91-93 . Return to the table of contents . The Swaffham Legend England Swaffham Church, noted for its architectural beauties, has furnished material for a legend worth recording. According to tradition, the entire expense of erecting this noble edifice was defrayed by a tinker or pedlar residing in the parish named John Chapman, who, if the voice of the legend is to be believed, was marvelously provided for by Divine Providence. It is said that this tinker dreamed that if he went to London Bridge he would, to use the phraseology of a certain class of advertisements, "hear of something greatly to his advantage." Nothing daunted by the difficulties of so long a journey five hundred years ago, when, not to utter a hint of railroads, even stage coaches had not been invented, the tinker heeded the voice of his good spirit, and went to London. After standing about the bridge for several hours -- some versions of the legend mention the traditional three days -- a man accosted him, and invited him to unfold the nature of his errand. With candor quite equal to his faith, John Chapman replied that he came there on the "vain errand of a dream." Now it appears that the stranger was a dreamer also, but, unlike the tinker, he was neither superstitious nor imprudent. "Alas! good friend," said he, "if I had heeded dreams, I might have proved myself as very a fool as thou art, for 'tis not long since I dreamt that at a place called Swaffham in Norfolk dwelt John Chapman, a pedlar, who hath a tree at the back of his house, under which is buried a pot of money." John Chapman, of course, on hearing this hastened home, dug under his tree, and very soon found the treasure. But not all of it. The box that he found had a Latin inscription on the lid, which of course John Chapman could not decipher. But though unlettered, he was not without craftiness and a certain kind of wisdom, so in the hope that some unsuspicious wayfarer might read the inscriptiou in his hearing, he placed it in his window. It was not long before he heard some youths turn the Latin sentence into an English couplet: Under me doth lie Another much richer than I. Again he went to work, digging deeper than before, and found a much richer treasure, than the former. With a heart overflowing with gratitude for his good fortune, the tinker shortly afterwards, when the inhabitants of Swaffham wished to re-edify their church, astonished the whole town by offering to defray the expense of a large portion of the works. On the ends of the oaken bench nearest the pulpit, there is the carved effigy of John Chapman on one side and that of his dog on the other, and this is sufficient to establish the truth of the legend in the minds of the credulous of the district. Source: John Glyde, The Norfolk Garland: A Collection of the Superstitious Beliefs and Practices, Proverbs, Curious Customs, Ballads, and Songs of the People of Norfolk (London: Jarrold and Sons, 1872), pp. 68-70 . Return to the table of contents . A Cobbler in Somersetshire England A cobbler in Somersetshire dreamt that a person told him that if he would go to London Bridge he would meet with something to his advantage. He dreamt the same the next night, and again the night after. He then determined to go to London Bridge, and walked thither accordingly. When arrived there, he walked about the whole of the first day without anything occurring; the next day was passed in a similar manner. He resumed his place the third day, and walked about till evening, when, giving it up as hopeless, he determined to leave London, and return home. At this moment a stranger came up and said to him, "I have seen you for the last three days walking up and down this bridge; may I ask if you are waiting for anyone?" The answer was, "No." "Then, what is your object in staying here?" The cobbler then frankly told his reason for being there, and the dream that had visited him three successive nights. The stranger then advised him to go home again to his work, and no more pay any attention to dreams. "I myself," he said "had about six months ago a dream. I dreamt three nights together that, if I would go into Somersetshire, in an orchard, under an apple tree, I should find a pot of gold; but I paid no attention to my dream, and have remained quietly at my business." It immediately occurred to the cobbler that the stranger described his own orchard and his own apple tree. He immediately returned home, dug under the apple tree, and found a pot of gold. After this increase of fortune, he was enabled to send his son to school, where the boy learnt Latin. When he came home for the holidays, he one day examined the pot which had contained the gold, on which was some writing. He said, "Father, I can show you what I have learnt at school is of some use." He then translated the Latin inscription on the pot thus: "Look under, and you will find better." They did look under, and a larger quantity of gold was found. Source: George Laurence Gomme, English Traditions and Foreign Customs (London: Elliot Stock, 1885), pp. 335-36 . Gomme's source: The Saturday Review , December 28, 1878. Return to the table of contents . Upsall Castle England Many years ago there resided in the village of Upsall a man who dreamed three nights successively that if he went to London Bridge he would hear of something greatly to his advantage. He went, traveling the whole distance from Upsall to London on foot. Arrived there, he took his station on the bridge, where he waited till his patience was nearly exhausted, and the idea that he had acted a very foolish part began to arise in his mind. At length he was accosted by a Quaker, who kindly inquired what he was waiting there so long for. After some hesitation, he told his dreams. The Quaker laughed at his simplicity, and told him that he had had that night a very curious dream himself, which was, that if he went and dug under a certain bush in Upsall Castle in Yorkshire, he would find a pot of gold; but he did not know where Upsall was, and inquired of the countryman if he knew, who, seeing some advantage in secrecy, pleaded ignorance of the locality; and then, thinking his business in London was completed, returned immediately home, dug beneath the bush, and there he found a pot filled with gold, and on the cover an inscription in a language he did not understand. The pot and cover were, however, preserved at the village inn, where one day a bearded stranger like a Jew made his appearance, saw the pot, and read the inscription, the plain English of which was: Look lower, where this stood Is another twice as good. The man of Upsall, hearing this, resumed his spade, returned to the bush, dug deeper, and found another pot filled with gold far more valuable than the first. Encouraged by this, he dug deeper still, and found another yet more valuable. This story has been related of other places, but Upsall appears to have as good a claim to this yielding of hidden treasure as the best of them. Here we have the constant tradition of the inhabitants, and the identical bush still remains beneath which the treasure was found -- an elder near the northwest corner of the ruins. Source: Eliza Gutch, County Folk-Lore , vol. 2: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the North Riding of Yorkshire, York, and the Ainsty (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1901), pp. 408-409 . Gutch's source: William Grainge, "Crocks of Gold," The Vale of Mowbray: A Historical and Topographical Account of Thirsk and Its Neighbourhood (London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Company, 1859), pp. 277-78 . Return to the table of contents . Dundonald Castle Scotland In Ayrshire, the following rhyme is prevalent, and is probably very old: Donald Din Built his house without a pin, alluding to Dundonald Castle, the ancient seat of King Robert II, and now the last remaining property in Ayrshire of the noble family who take their title from it. According to tradition, it was built by a hero named Donald Din, or Din Donald, and constructed entirely of stone, without the use of wood, a supposition countenanced by the appearance of the building, which consists of three distinct stories, arched over with strong stonework, the roof of one forming the floor of another. Donald, the builder, was originally a poor man, but had the faculty of dreaming lucking dreams. Upon one occasion he dreamed, thrice in one night, that if he were to go to London Bridge, he would become a wealthy man. He went accordingly, saw a man looking over the parapet of the bridge, whom he accosted courteously, and, after a little conversation, entrusted with the secret of the occasion of his coming to London Bridge. The stranger told him that he had made a very foolish errand, for he himself had once had a similar vision, which direct him to go to a certain spot in Ayrshire, in Scotland, where he would find a vast treasure, and, for his part, he had never once thought of obeying the injunction. From his description of the spot, the sly Scotsman at once perceived that the treasure in question must be concealed in no other place than his own humble kail-yard [cabbage patch] at home, to which he immediately repaired, in full expectation of finding it. Nor was he disappointed; for, after destroying many good and promising cabbages, and completely cracking credit with his wife, who esteemed him mad, he found a large potful of gold coin, with the proceeds of which he built a stout castle for himself, and became the founder of a flourishing family. Source: Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), pp. 236-38 . Note by Chambers: Dundonald Castle, the scene of King Robert's early attachment and nuptials with the fair Elizabeth (Mure), is situated in Kyle-Stewart, of which, from the remotest period, it appears to have been the chief messuage, about six miles southwest of Rowallan, and approaching within about a mile of the Firth of Clyude. Its situation, on the summit of a beautiful round hill, in the close vicinity of Dundonald Church, is singularly noble and baronial. Although evidently of considerable antiquity, yet certainly another of still greatly more remote origin to the present castle of Dundonald once occupied the same site. To the more remote building may allude the following rude rhyme, if it be not altogether a piece of rustic wit of recent times: There stands a castle in the west, They ca' it Donald Din; There's no nail in a' its proof, Nor yet a wooden pin. -- History of the House of Rowallan , p. 50. King Robert died at Dundonald Castle anno 1390. Dr. Johnson and Mr. Boswell visited the ruins on their return from the Hebrides; and the former laughed outright at the idea of a Scottish monarch being accommodated, with his court, in so narrow a mansion. Return to the table of contents . Themselves Isle of Man There was a man once in the Isle of Man who met one of the Little Fellows, and the Little Fellow told him that if he would go to London Bridge and dig, he would find a fortune. So he went, and when he got there he began to dig, and another man came to him and said, "What are you doing?" "One of Themselves told me to come to London Bridge and I would get a fortune," says he. And the other man said, "I dreamed that I was back in the lil' islan' an' I was at a house with a thorn tree at the chimley of it, and if I would dig there I would find a fortune. But I wouldn' go, for it was only foolishness." Then he told him so plainly about the house that the first man knew it was his own, so he went back to the Island. When he got home he dug under the little thorn tree by the chimney and he found an iron box. He opened the box, and it was full of gold, and there was a letter in it, but he could not read the letter because it was in a foreign language. So he put it in the smithy window and challenged any scholar who went by to read it. None of them could, but at last one big boy said it was Latin and it meant, "Dig again and you'll find another." So the man dug again under the thorn tree, and what did he find but another iron box full of gold! And from that day till the day of his death, that man used to open the front door before going to bed, and call out, "My blessing with the Little Fellows!" Source: Sophia Morrison, Manx Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1911), pp. 1-2 . Themselves and Little Fellows are circumlocutions for fairies , who do not like to be referred to directly. Return to the table of contents . Dreaming Tim Jarvis Ireland Timothy Jarvis was a decent, honest, quiet, hard-working man, as every body knows that knows Balledehob. Now Balledehob is a small place, about forty miles west of Cork. It is situated on the summit of a hill, and yet it is in a deep valley; for on all sides there are lofty mountains that rise one above another in barren grandeur, and seem to look down with scorn upon the little busy village, which they surround with their idle and unproductive magnificence. Man and beast have alike deserted them to the dominion of the eagle, who soars majestically over them. On the highest of those mountains there is a small, and as is commonly believed, unfathomable lake, the only inhabitant of which is a huge serpent, who has been sometimes seen to stretch its enormous head above the waters, and frequently is heard to utter a noise which shakes the very rocks to their foundation. But, as I was saying, everybody knew Tim Jarvis to be a decent, honest, quiet, hard-working man, who was thriving enough to be able to give his daughter Nelly a fortune of ten pounds; and Tim himself would have been snug enough besides, but that he loved the drop sometimes. However, he was seldom backward on rent day. His ground was never distrained but twice, and both times through a small bit of a mistake; and his landlord had never but once to say to him, "Tim Jarvis, you're all behind, Tim, like the cow's tail." Now it so happened that, being heavy in himself, through the drink, Tim took to sleeping, and the sleep set Tim dreaming, and he dreamed all night, and night after night, about crocks full of gold and other precious stones; so much so, that Norah Jarvis his wife could get no good of him by day, and have little comfort with him by night. The grey dawn of the morning would see Tim digging away in a bog-hole, maybe, or rooting under some old stone walls like a pig. At last he dreamt that he found a mighty great crock of gold and silver, and where, do you think? Every step of the way upon London Bridge, itself! Twice Tim dreamt it, and three times Tim dreamt the same thing; and at last he made up his mind to transport himself, and go over to London, in Pat Mahoney's coaster; and so he did! Well, he got there, and found the bridge without much difficulty. Every day he walked up and down looking for the crock of gold, but never the find did he find it. One day, however, as he was looking over the bridge into the water, a man, or something like a man, with great black whiskers, like a Hessian, and a black cloak that reached down to the ground, taps him on the shoulder, and says he, "Tim Jarvis, do you see me?" "Surely I do, sir," said Tim; wondering that anybody should know him in the strange place. "Tim," says he, "what is it brings you here in foreign parts, so far away from your own cabin by the mine of grey copper at Balledehob?" "Please your honor," says Tim, "I'm come to seek my fortune." "You're a fool for your pains, Tim, if that's all," remarked the stranger in the black cloak; "this is a big place to seek one's fortune in, to be sure, but it's not so easy to find it." Now, Tim, after debating a long time with himself, and considering, in the first place, that it might be the stranger who was to find the crock of gold for him; and in the next, that the stranger might direct him where to find it, came to the resolution of telling him all. "There's many a one like me comes here seeking their fortunes," said Tim. "True,'' said the stranger. "But," continued Tim, looking up, "the body and bones of the cause for myself leaving the woman, and Nelly, and the boys, and traveling so far, is to look for a crock of gold that I'm told is lying somewhere hereabouts." "And who told you that, Tim?" "Why, then, sir, that's what I can't tell myself rightly; only I dreamt it." "Ho, ho! is that all, Tim?" said the stranger, laughing; "I had a dream myself; and I dreamed that I found a crock of gold, in the fort field, on Jerry Driscoll's ground at Balledehob; and by the same token, the pit where it lay was close to a large furze bush, all full of yellow blossom." Tim knew Jerry Driscoll's ground well; and, moreover, he knew the fort field as well as he knew his own potato garden; he was certain, too, of the very furze bush at the north end of it. So, swearing a bitter big oath, says he, "By all the crosses in a yard of check, I always thought there was money in that same field!" The moment he rapped out the oath the stranger disappeared, and Tim Jarvis, wondering at all that had happened to him, made the best of his way back to Ireland. Norah, as may well be supposed, had no very warm welcome for her runaway husband -- the dreaming blackguard, as she called him -- and so soon as she set eyes upon him, all the blood of her body in one minute was into her knuckles to be at him; but Tim, after his long journey, looked so cheerful and so happy-like, that she could not find it in her heart to give him the first blow! He managed to pacify his wife by two or three broad hints about a new cloak and a pair of shoes, that, to speak honestly, were much wanting to her to go to chapel in; and decent clothes for Nelly to go to the patron with her sweetheart, and brogues for the boys, and some corduroy for himself. "It wasn't for nothing," says Tim, "I went to foreign parts all the ways; and you'll see what'll come out of it -- mind my words." A few days afterwards Tim sold his cabin and his garden, and bought the fort field of Jerry Driscoll, that had nothing in it, but was full of thistles, and old stones, and blackberry bushes; and all the neighbors -- as well they might -- thought he was cracked! The first night that Tim could summon courage to begin his work, he walked off to the field with his spade upon his shoulder; and away he dug all night by the side of the furze bush, till he came to a big stone. He struck his spade against it, and he heard a hollow sound; but as the morning had begun to dawn, and the neighbors would be going out to their work, Tim, not wishing to have the thing talked about, went home to the little hovel, where Norah and the children were huddled together under a heap of straw; for he had sold everything he had in the world to purchase Driscoll's field, that was said to be "the back-bone of the world, picked by the devil." It is impossible to describe the epithets and reproaches bestowed by the poor woman on her unlucky husband for bringing her into such a way. Epithets and reproaches which Tim had but one mode of answering, as thus: "Norah, did you see e'er a cow you'd like?" -- or, "Norah, dear, hasn't Poll Deasy a featherbed to sell?" -- or, "Norah, honey, wouldn't you like your silver buckles as big as Mrs. Doyle's?" As soon as night came Tim stood beside the furze bush spade in hand. The moment he jumped down into the pit he heard a strange rumbling noise under him, and so, putting his ear against the great stone, he listened, and overheard a discourse that made the hair on his head stand up like bulrushes, and every limb tremble. "How shall we bother Tim?" said one voice. "Take him to the mountain, to be sure, and make him a toothful for the old serpent; 'tis long since he has had a good meal," said another voice. Tim shook like a potato blossom in a storm. "No," said a third voice; "plunge him in the bog, neck and heels." Tim was a dead man, barring the breath. "Stop!" said a fourth; but Tim heard no more, for Tim was dead entirely. In about an hour, however, the life came back into him, and he crept home to Norah. When the next night arrived the hopes of the crock of gold got the better of his fears, and takings care to arm himself with a bottle of potheen, away he went to the field. Jumping into the pit, he took a little sup from the bottle to keep his heart up -- he then took a big one -- and then, with desperate wrench, he wrenched up the stone. All at once, up rushed a blast of wind, wild and fierce, and down fell Tim -- down, down, and down he went -- until he thumped upon what seemed to be, for all the world, like a floor of sharp pins, which made him bellow out in earnest. Then he heard a whisk and a hurra, and instantly voices beyond number cried out: Welcome, Tim Jarvis, dear! Welcome, down here!" Though Tim's teeth chattered like magpies with the fright, he continued to make answer: "I'm he-he-har-ti-ly ob-ob-liged to-to you all, gen-gentlemen, fo-for your civility to-to a poor stranger like myself." But though he had heard all the voices about him, he could see nothing, the place was so dark and so lonesome in itself for want of the light. Then something pulled Tim by the hair of his head, and dragged him, he did not know how far, but he knew he was going faster than the wind, for he heard it behind him, trying to keep up with him, and it could not. On, on, on, he went, till all at once, and suddenly, he was stopped, and somebody came up to him, and said, "Well, Tim Jarvis, and how do you like your ride?" "Mighty well! I thank your honor," said Tim; "and 'twas a good beast I rode, surely!" There was a great laugh at Tim's answer; and then there was a whispering, and a great cugger mugger, and coshering; and at last a pretty little bit of a voice said, "Shut your eyes, and you'll see, Tim." "By my word, then," said Tim, "that is the queer way of seeing; but I'm not the man to gainsay you, so I'll do as you bid me, any how." Presently he felt a small warm hand rubbed over his eyes with an ointment, and in the next minute he saw himself in the middle of thousands of little men and women, not half so high as his brogue, that were pelting one another with golden guineas and lily-white thirteens, as if they were so much dirt. The finest dressed and the biggest of them all went up to Tim, and says he, "Tim Jarvis, because you are a decent, honest, quiet, civil, well-spoken man," says he, "and know how to behave yourself in strange company, we've altered our minds about you, and will find a neighbor of yours that will do just as well to give to the old serpent." "Oh, then, long life to you, sir!" said Tim, "and there's no doubt of that." "But what will you say, Tim," inquired the little fellow, "if we fill your pockets with these yellow boys? What will you say, Tim, and what will you do with them?" "Your honor's honor, and your honor's glory," answered Tim, "I'll not be able to say my prayers for one month with thanking you -- and indeed I've enough to do with them. I'd make a grand lady, you see, at once of Norah -- she has been a good wife to me. We'll have a nice bit of pork for dinner; and, maybe, I'd have a glass, or maybe two glasses; or sometimes, if 'twas with a friend, or acquaintance, or gossip, you know, three glasses every day; and I'd build a new cabin; and I'd have a fresh egg every morning, myself, for my breakfast; and I'd snap my fingers at the 'squire, and beat his hounds, if they'd come coursing through my fields; and I'd have a new plow; and Norah, your honor, should have a new cloak, and the boys should have shoes and stockings as well as Biddy Leary's brats -- that's my sister what was -- and Nelly should marry Bill Long of Affadown; and, your honor, I'd have some corduroy for myself to make breeches, and a cow, and a beautiful coat with shining buttons, and a horse to ride, or maybe two. I'd have every thing," said Tim, "in life, good or bad, that is to be got for love or money -- hurra-whoop! -- and that's what I'd do." "Take care, Tim," said the little fellow, "your money would not go faster than it came, with your hurra-whoop." But Tim heeded not this speech: heaps of gold were around him, and he filled and filled away as hard as he could, his coat and his waistcoat and his breeches pockets; and he thought himself very clever, moreover, because he stuffed some of the guineas into his brogues. When the little people perceived this, they cried out, "Go home, Tim Jarvis, go home, and think yourself a lucky man." "I hope, gentlemen," said he, "we won't part for good and all; but maybe ye'll ask me to see you again, and to give you a fair and square account of what I've done with your money." To this there was no answer, only another shout, "Go home, Tim Jarvis; go home; fair play is a jewel; but shut your eyes, or ye'll never see the light of day again." Tim shut his eyes, knowing now that was the way to see clearly; and away he was whisked as before -- away, away he went 'till he again stopped all of a sudden. He rubbed his eyes with his two thumbs -- and where was he? -- Where, but in the very pit in the field that was Jer Driscoll's, and his wife Norah above with a big stick ready to beat "her dreaming blackguard." Tim roared out to the woman to leave the life in him, and put his hands in his pockets to show her the gold; but he pulled out nothing only a handful of small stones mixed with yellow furze blossoms. The bush was under him, and the great flag-stone that he had wrenched up, as he thought, was lying, as if it was never stirred, by his side: the whiskey bottle was drained to the last drop; and the pit was just as his spade had made it. Tim Jarvis, vexed, disappointed, and almost heart-broken, followed his wife home; and, strange to say, from that night he left off drinking, and dreaming, and delving in bog-holes, and rooting in old caves. He took again to his hard working habits, and was soon able to buy back his little cabin and former potato garden, and to get all the enjoyment he anticipated from the fairy gold. Give Tim one or, at most, two glasses of whiskey punch (and neither friend, acquaintance, or gossip can make him take more), and he. will relate the story to you much better than you have it here. Indeed it is worth going to Balledehob to hear him tell it. He always pledges himself to the truth of every word with his forefingers crossed; and when he comes to speak of the loss of his guineas, he never fails to console himself by adding: "If they stayed with me I wouldn't have luck with them, sir; and father O'Shea told me 'twas as well for me they were changed, for if they hadn't, they'd have burned holes in my pocket, and got out that way." I shall never forget his solemn countenance, and the deep tones of his warning voice, when he concluded his tale, by telling me, that the next day after his ride with the fairies, Mick Dowling was missing, and he believed him to be given to the serpent in his place, as he had never been heard of since. "The blessing of the saints be between all good men and harm," was the concluding sentence of Tim Jarvis's narrative, as he flung the remaining drops from his glass upon the green sward. Source: Thomas Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland , part 2 (London: John Murray, 1828), pp. 221-33 . Link to additional legends of fairy abduction: Abducted by Aliens . Return to the table of contents . The Bridge of the Kist Ireland There was once a man the name of Michael Hugh, and he was tormented with dreams of a kist was buried in under a bridge in England. For awhile he took no heed to the visions were with him in the stillness of the night, but at long last the notion grew in his mind that he be to visit that place and find out was there anything in it. "I could make right use of a treasure," thinks he to himself. "For 'tis heart scalded I am with dwelling in poverty, and a great weariness is on me from toiling for a miserable wage." Then he bethought of the foolishness of making the journey if all turned out a deceit. "Sure I'll be rid of belief in the dreams are driving me daft with their grandeur and perseverance," says he. "Evenly failure will bring a sort of satisfaction for I'll get fooling whatever spirit does be bringing the vision upon me." So my brave Michael Hugh took an ash plant in his hand, and away with him oversea to England to discover the bridge of the kist. He was a twelvemonth travelling and rambling with no success to rise his heart, and he began for to consider he had better return to his own place. But just as he was making ready to turn didn't he chance on a strong flowing river, and the sight near left his eyes when he found it was spanned by the bridge he was after dreaming of. Well Michael Hugh went over and he looked down on the black depth of water was flowing in under the arch. "It'll be a hard thing surely to be digging for a kist in that place," says he. "I'm thinking a man would find a sore death and no treasure at all if he lepped into the flood. But maybe it's laid out for me to gather my fortune here, and some person may come for to give me instruction." With that he walked up and down over the bridge, hoping for further advice since he could not contrive a wisdom for his use. There was a house convenient to the river, and after awhile a man came from it. "Are you waiting on any person in this place?" says he to Michael Hugh. "It's bitter weather to be abroad and you be to be as hardy as a wild duck to endure the cold blast on the bridge." "I'm hardy surely," Michael Hugh makes his answer. "But 'tis no easy matter to tell if I'm waiting on any person." "You're funning me," says the Englishman. "How would you be abroad without reason, and you having a beautiful wise countenance on you?" With that Michael Hugh told him the story of the dreams that brought him from Ireland, and how he was expectant of a sign to instruct him to come at the kist. The Englishman let a great laugh. "You're a simple fellow," says he. "Let you give up heeding the like of visions and ghosts, for there is madness in the same and no pure reason at all. There's few has more nor better knowledge than myself of how they be striving to entice us from our work, but I'm a reasonable man and I never gave in to them yet." "Might I make so free as to ask," says Michael Hugh, "what sort of a vision are you after resisting?" "I'll tell you and welcome," says the Englishman. "There isn't a night of my life but I hear a voice calling: 'Away with you to Ireland, and seek out a man the name of Michael Hugh. There is treasure buried in under a lone bush in his garden, and that is in Breffny of Connacht.'" The poor Irishman was near demented with joy at the words, for he understood he was brought all that journey to learn of gold was a stone's throw from his own little cabin door. But he was a conny sort of a person, and he never let on to the other that Michael Hugh was the name of him, nor that he came from Breffny of Connacht. The Englishman invited him into his house for to rest there that night, and he didn't spare his advice that dreams were a folly and sin. "You have me convinced of the meaning of my visions," says Michael Hugh. "And what's more I'll go home as you bid me." Next morning he started out, and he made great haste with the desire was on him to get digging the gold. When he came to his own place in Connacht he made straight for a loy and then for the lone bush. Not a long was he digging before he hoked out a precious crock full of treasure, and he carried it into the house. There was a piece of a flag stone lying on top of the gold, and there was a writing cut into it. What might be the meaning of that Michael Hugh had no notion, for the words were not Gaelic nor English at all. It happened one evening that a poor scholar came in for to make his cailee. "Can you read me that inscription, mister?" asks Michael Hugh, bringing out the flag. "Aye surely," says the poor scholar. "That is a Latin writing, and I am well learned in the same." "What meaning is in it?" asks the other. "'The same at the far side,'" says the scholar. "And that is a droll saying surely when it gives no information beyond." "Maybe it will serve my turn, mister!" says Michael Hugh, in the best of humour. After the scholar was gone on his way, didn't himself take the loy and out to the garden. He began for to dig at the far side of the lone bush, and sure enough he found a second beautiful kist the dead spit of the first. It was great prosperity he enjoyed from that out. And he bought the grandest of raiment, the way the neighbours began for to call him Michael Hughie the Cock. Source (books.google.com): Bampton Hunt, Folk Tales of Breffny (London: Macmillan and Company, 1912), no. 09, pp. 83-88 . Source (Internet Archive): Bampton Hunt, Folk Tales of Breffny (London: Macmillan and Company, 1912), no. 09, pp. 83-88 . Return to the table of contents . Dreaming of Treasure Ireland I'll tell you a story that's all truth. There was a farmer man living there beyond over the mountains, and one day a strange man came in and asked a night's lodging. "Where do you come from?" says the farmer. "From the county Mayo," says he, and he told how he had a dream of a bush in this part of the world, and gave a description of it, and in his dream he saw treasure buried under it. "Then go home, my poor man," said the farmer, "for there's no such place as that about here." So the man went back again to Mayo. But the bush was all the time just at the back of the [farmer's] house, and when the stranger was gone, the farmer began to dig, and there, sure enough, he found the pot of gold, and took it for his own use. But all the children he had turned silly after that; there was one of them not long ago going about the town with long hair over his shoulders. And after that, a poor scholar, such as used to be going about in those times, came to the house, and when he had sat down, the lid of the pot the gold was found in was lying by the fire. And he took it up and rubbed it, and there was writing on it, in Irish, that no one had ever been able to read. And the poor scholar made it out, "This side of the bush is no better than the other side." So he went out to dig, and there he found another pot on the other side just the same as the first pot and he brought it away with him, and what became of him after is unknown. Source (books.google.com): Lady Isabelle Augusta Gregory, Visions and Beliefs in the West of Ireland , 2nd series (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1920), pp. 35-36 . Source (Internet Archive): Lady Isabelle Augusta Gregory, Visions and Beliefs in the West of Ireland , 2nd series (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1920), pp. 35-36 . Lady Gregory's source: A Clare woman. Lady Gregory does not give this piece a title. Return to the table of contents . The Dream of Treasure under the Bridge at Limerick Ireland I heard of a man from Mayo went to Limerick, and walked two or three times across the bridge there. And a cobbler that was sitting on the bridge took notice of him, and knew by the look of him and by the clothes he wore that he was from Mayo, and asked him what was he looking for. And he said he had a dream that under the bridge of Limerick he'd find treasure. "Well," says the cobbler, "I had a dream myself about finding treasure, but in another sort of a place than this." And he described the place where he dreamed it was, and where was that, but in the Mayo man's own garden. So he went home again, and sure enough, there he found a pot of gold with no end of riches in it. But I never heard that the cobbler found anything under the bridge at Limerick. Source (books.google.com): Lady Isabelle Augusta Gregory, Visions and Beliefs in the West of Ireland , 2nd series (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1920), pp. 36-37 . Source (Internet Archive): Lady Isabelle Augusta Gregory, Visions and Beliefs in the West of Ireland , second series (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1920), pp. 36-37 . Lady Gregory's source: John Phelan. Lady Gregory does not give this piece a title. Return to the table of contents . A Kerry Man Ireland There was a Kerry man once who heard of a pot of gold that was in Dublin. He went to Dublin and began to search. He was searching for a week, when a man that was working near the place, asked him what he was doing. He said he was searching for a pot of gold. The Dublin man told him that he was a foolish man, and to go home. For he heard of a pot of gold in Kerry, in the corner of a haggard [haystack enclosure] under an apple tree. The Kerry man found out that it was his own haggard, and he went home and opened a hole under the tree and got a pot of gold. John Fitzgerald. Ballygiltenan, Glin. Co. Limerick. (Told by my father John Fitzgerald, farmer, aged 56.) Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Limerick >> Baile Giolla tSionáin (B.), An Gleann, p. 180 . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Treasure at Ardnaveagh Ireland A long time ago this happened where my father was working. The man's name was Mr. Keating of Ardnaveagh, Ardbohill not far from Keen's Pike. This farmer often dreamt that a crock of gold was hidden in his land, but he would not believe it. This time he had a dream and it continued for three nights in succession, that there was a crock of gold for him at the Draws Bridge outside Limerick. He started at four o'clock in the morning, when he arrived there, to his surprise the first person he met was a man coming towards him. He stopped to speak to him. Mr. Keating asked the stranger where he was going. He told him he had a dream that there was a crock of gold at Mr. Keatings of Ardnaveagh, and he came to find it. Would you tell me where the place is. Mr. Keating did not give him any account for he knew it was his own place he was talking about. He hurried home to dig for the gold himself and found it in his own haggard [haystack enclosure] under a white-thorn bush. He never saw the man he met at Draws Bridge afterward. Written by Patrick Kelly. Told to him by James Kelly, Gortroe, Rathkeale. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Limerick >> Coolcappa, Árd-achadh, pp. 271-72 . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . The Bridge at Kempen (1) Holand A young man in Dordrecht, Holland, had squandered his entire inheritance and incurred considerable debt. One night he had a vision in his sleep that he should travel to the town of Kempen, where he would meet someone on the bridge who would reveal a way for him to escape his predicament. The man traveled the long way to Kempen, and after walking back and forth on the bridge for almost a whole day, a beggar sitting there addressed him and said: "Dear friend, tell me, why do you walk so sadly back and forth?" The young man explained the reason to him. The beggar said: "Are you crazy to travel so far on the spur of a dream? If there were any truth to such whims, I myself would go to Dordrecht and find a treasure hidden under a thorn bush in a garden, as was shown to me in a dream." He then described his dream even further, from which the young man deduced that it was his late father's garden. The man from Dordrecht pretended not to take the beggar's speech seriously, then wished God's blessing on him. With that he returned home and went straight to the garden described by the beggar. Digging under the thorn bush, he found such a large sum of gold and silver that he was able to completely free himself from his debts and manage his household so well that he spent the rest of his life in peace and prosperity. Source (books.google.com): Johannes Praetorius, Gazophylaci gaudium: Das ist, ein Ausbund von Wündschel-Ruthen, oder sehr lustreiche und ergetzliche Historien von wunderseltzamen Erfindungen der Schätze (Leipzig: In Ritzschens Buchladen, 1667), pp. 372-73 . The German writer Johannes Praetorius (latinization of Hans Schultz) was born in 1630 and died in 1680. Return to the table of contents . The Bridge at Kempen (2) Holland Not many years ago there was a man in Dordrecht in Holland who quite simply wasted all his possessions through drunkenness and lust. These two are generally related, for when Bacchus sits behind the stove, Venus comes in as well. They are as close to each other as the button is to the trousers. It is also frequently observed that just as dampness and water will ignite lime, excessive wine drinking also awakens undue Venusian flames in the relevant body. Women and grapes most often empty one's purse. Thus, just as in the calendar November follows October, unbridled wine drinking is usually followed by a dreary life, and poverty creeps in like a mute beggar. Bacchus carries a ruling staff in one hand and a begging staff in the other. This is what happened to the aforementioned Dutchman. Through his excessive living he not only burdened his conscience and reduced his purse, but he also burdened himself with large debts. In winter he had no need to clear the snow from the front of his house, because the frustrated debt collectors kept his pathway well tromped down. Just as bats hate daylight, he too did not want to let himself be seen by others, who would stare at him and point their fingers at him. This recluse, in his deep melancholy, had a dream one night and thought he saw a man, middle-aged and of fine physique, who reminded him of his reprehensible conduct, but then told him to go immediately to the town of Kempen, where on the bridge he would meet a man who would give him certain means by which he could recover his former fortune. He finally woke up, noticed that it was a dream, but still believed that there must be something behind it. Thus he went the direct route from Dordrecht to the town of Kempen, stayed there a whole day on the bridge, and finally became angry with himself that he had given such firm belief to a meaningless dream and resolved to return home. But then a beggar spoke to him and asked why he had been walking about with a sad face for such a long time. He said: "I dreamt that here in this place I would find a bandage for my wounds, that is to say, a key to my former good fortune." "Indeed! To find what?" replied the beggar. "Here you will find only that you are a fool. Isn't it absurd folly to believe in a dream and to undertake such a journey because of it? You must be a gullible fool. If such nonsense were possible, a long time ago I would have travelled to Dordrecht to dig up a treasure under a thorn bush in such and such a garden, just as I had dreamed." With that the beggar related the dream in full detail, from which the Dutchman perceived that this place was in his father's garden. He pretended to pay but little attention to all this. He gave the beggar a friendly "God bless you," and hurried back home to Dordrecht, dug under the thorn bush mentioned, and did indeed find a great treasure rich in gold and silver. Source (books.google.com): Abraham a Sancta Clara, Judas der Ertz-Schelm , vol. 1 (Salzburg: Gedruckt und verlegt bey Melchior Haan, 1686), pp. 4-6 . Source (Deutsches Textarchiv): Abraham a Sancta Clara, Judas der Ertz-Schelm , vol. 1 (Salzburg: Gedruckt und verlegt bey Melchior Haan, 1686), pp. 4-6 . Abraham a Sancta Clara (born Johann Ulrich Megerle) was an Augustinian friar who lived from 1644 to 1709. His novel Judas der Erzschelm (4 volumes) was first published in Salzburg between 1686 and 1695. Return to the table of contents . Dreams Are Lies Germany A certain man once dreamed that he should go to the bridge at Regensburg, where he would become wealthy. He went there, and after fourteen days of standing on the bridge a wealthy merchant approached him and asked why was standing there on the bridge. What was he looking for? The man answered that he had dreamed that he would become wealthy if he would go to the Regensburg bridge. "Oh!" said the merchant. "Do you believe in dreams? Dreams are lies. Now I dreamed that there is a large kettle of gold buried under that tree (and he pointed out the tree to him). But I did nothing about it, because dreams are lies." The man then dug beneath the tree and found a great treasure. Thus he became wealthy, and his dream was confirmed. I have often heard this account from my dear father. Source (books.google.com): Johannes Agricola, "Trewme seind lügen," Sibenhundert unnd Fünffzig Teutscher Sprüchwörter (1541), pp. 328-29 . Source (Internet Archive): Johannes Agricola, "Trewme seind lügen," Sybenhundert vnd Fünfftzig Teütscher Sprichwörter (1534), no pagination . This story is part of a longer piece entitled "Trewme seind lügen" ( no. 623, pp. 326-29 ). Johannes Agricola (1494-1566) was a German protestant reformer. Return to the table of contents . The Dream of the Treasure on the Bridge Germany Some time ago a man dreamed that he should go to the bridge at Regensburg where he would become rich. He went there, and after spending some fourteen days there a wealthy merchant, who wondered why was spending so much time on the bridge, approached him and asked him what he was doing there. The latter answered, "I dreamed that I was to go to the bridge at Regensburg, where I would become rich." "What?" said the merchant, "You came here because of a dream? Dreams are fantasies and lies. Why I myself dreamed that there is a large pot of gold buried beneath that large tree over there." And he pointed to the tree. "But I paid no attention, for dreams are fantasies." Then the visitor went and dug beneath the tree, where he found a great treasure that made him rich, and thus his dream was confirmed. Agricola adds: "I have often heard this from my dear father." This legend is also told about other cities, for example about Lübeck (or Kempen), where a baker's servant dreams that he will find a treasure on the bridge. Upon going there and walking back and forth, a beggar speaks to him, telling how he has dreamed that a treasure lies beneath a linden tree in the churchyard at Möln (or at Dordrecht beneath a bush) but that he is not about to go there. The baker's servant answers, "Yes, dreams are often nothing but foolishness. I will give my bridge-treasure to you." With that he departed and dug up the treasure from beneath the linden tree. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Traum vom Schatz auf der Brücke," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 211, pp. 290-91 . In later editions this legend is numbered 212. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999-2011. Link to the text by Agricola: Es hat eynem auff eyn zeit getrewmet er solt gen Regenspurg gehen auff die brucken / da solt er reich werden. Source: Johannes Agricola, Sibenhundert Vnnd Fünfftzig Teutscher Sprüchwörter (1541), no. 623 . Return to the table of contents . The Bridge at Lübeck Germany Ages ago, according to a chronicle, in the year 1394 a baker's apprentice in Lübeck dreamed one night that near the stone bridge that crosses the Trave River in front of the Holsten Gate a treasure was buried which he was destined to unearth. When he went there early the next morning and began digging, an old beggar approached him and asked what he was looking for. The apprentice remained silent and continued digging. Then, finding nothing, he recounted his dream. "Oh, you fool!" said the poor man, "I dreamt last night that there was a large pile of money in Mölln under the linden tree in the churchyard, but I don't believe it." The baker's apprentice quietly took leave from his master and went to Mölln. There he dug beneath the linden tree, found the money, and kept it. Because he liked it so much in Mölln, he stayed there with all his wealth. He was not the man to live high and indulge himself. Now the day has many hours, and he had learned nothing other than how to bake excellent bread, so he contiued as a baker, even if with this there was only a small profit or even a loss. Here he was ever more successful, until finally he invented the famous Mölln Zwieback, which to this day is still available in markets between the Elbe and Trave rivers. Source (books.google.com): Julius von der Traun, Exkursionen eines Österreichers: 1840-1879 , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Duncker und Humblot, 1881), pp. 274-75 . Source (Internet Archive): Julius von der Traun, Exkursionen eines Österreichers: 1840-1879 , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Duncker und Humblot, 1881), pp. 274-75 . Although these events ostensibly took place in 1394, the Holsten Gate ( Holstentor ) in Lübeck was not constructed until 1464). Return to the table of contents . Treasure Unearthed Germany A farmer in Holtershausen named Brinckmann dreamed for three consecutive nights that he would become rich on the Hameln Bridge. So he went to Hameln and stood on the bridge, but nothing happened to him. However, a distinguished gentleman was strolling on the bridge. On the second day he stood on the bridge again, and the distinguished gentleman was there again as well. When the gentleman saw the farmer standing there again, he asked him why he was standing there, since he also had been there the day before. The farmer replied that the gentleman might not believe him, but he told about his dream. To this, the distinguished gentleman replied that dreams should not be taken seriously; he himself had dreamed that on the Mönchebreite meadow near the Litberg Hill there stood several hollow trees, and a treasure was buried under one of them, an oak. The farmer said nothing, for he himself owned the Mönchebreite meadow on the Litberg Hill. He returned to Holtershausen, dug at the designated spot, and indeed found a treasure there. As a result, he became very rich. Later people saw entire plates of silver in his possession, but the wealth did not remain in the family. A relative of that man is still alive, but in poverty. Source (books.google.com): Georg Schambch und Wilhelm Müller, "Schatz gehoben," Niedersächsische Sagen und Märchen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Göttingen Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht's Verlag, 1855), no. 136, pp. 107-108 . Source (Internet Archive): Georg Schambch und Wilhelm Müller, "Schatz gehoben," Niedersächsische Sagen und Märchen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Göttingen Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht's Verlag, 1854), no. 136, pp. 107-108 . The town of Hameln (also spelled Hamelin ) is famous for the legend " The Pied Piper of Hameln. " Return to the table of contents . The Pine Tree of Steltzen Germany Steltzen is the name of a village that belongs to the Voigtsberg municipality. A peasant from there once dreamed that he should travel to Regensburg where he would get rich on the bridge. The man got up, took a bag with some provisions of bread and butter, but very little money because he was poor. He went to Regensburg and walked back and forth on the bridge for a few days, but no wealth was to be seen. He continuously looked on the ground for a bag of money, but in vain. He looked at everyone with sad eyes and finally decided to return home. However, before leaving he met a man on the bridge who asked him what his problems were. The peasant told him about his dream and his great poverty and how he had scarcely but one Kreutzer to get home with. The man from Regensburg told him that he had acted foolishly by going so far because of a mere dream. He then told him how he himself had dreamed, that he should go to Steltzen in Voigtland where he would see a big pine tree just outside of the village. If he would dig under it he would find lots of money. He added that if he had gone there he would have had the same bad luck. Then out of pity he gave the peasant a gulden for pocket-money on his return trip. The peasant was glad for this information, because the pine tree was on his own land, and he thought long and hard about what that man had said. He arrived home empty handed. His wife looked at him with angry eyes, but he paid no attention to her. Without saying anything to anyone, he took a hoe and a shovel and went to the tree. To his good luck in a short time he found a copper kettle filled with fine old money. He put as much into his pockets as they would hold and then filled back the hole in the ground. He returned to his wife, and the two of them then went back and took the rest of the money. The pine tree was still standing until recent times and was so well shaped and tall that it could be seen from a distance of five miles. Source (books.google.com): Johann Georg Theodor Grässe, "Die Kiefer zu Steltzen," Der Sagenschatz des Königreichs Sachsen (Dresden: Verlag von G. Schönfeld's Buchhandlung, 1855), no. 587, pp. 435-36 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Georg Theodor Grässe, "Die Kiefer zu Steltzen," Der Sagenschatz des Königreichs Sachsen (Dresden: Verlag von G. Schönfeld's Buchhandlung, 1855), no. 587, pp. 435-36 . Return to the table of contents . Digging Up Snakes Germany A man in Gedernheim dreamed several times that he should go out to his orchard and dig a hole beneath the third cherry tree to the left. There he would find a pot full of money. At first he did nothing about the dream, but when it repeated itself night after night, he finally went out and began to dig at the place described in the dream. Before long he struck something hard, and when he pulled it out it was indeed a little pot. He broke it open and saw that it was full of snakes. He became angry and threw them into the brook. One of them fell to the ground, and he inadvertantly loaded it onto his hand cart with a bundle of twigs, which he hauled home. When he unloaded the cart a roll of money fell out with the twigs. He opened it, and silver thalers rolled out onto the ground. He quickly ran back to the brook and spent the rest of the day looking for the other snakes, but he could not find them. He kept the silver thalers a long time, and no one recognized the pattern that they were stamped with. Source (books.google.com): J. W. Wolf, "Schlangen ausgegraben," Hessische Sagen (Göttingen: Dieterichsche Buchhandlung; Leipzig: Fr. Chr. Wilh. Vogel, 1853), no. 185, p. 119 . Source (Internet Archive): J. W. Wolf, "Schlangen ausgegraben," Hessische Sagen (Göttingen: Dieterichsche Buchhandlung; Leipzig: Fr. Chr. Wilh. Vogel, 1853), no. 185, p. 119 . Wolf's source: "Oral." Gedernheim (now spelled Gadernheim ) is a division of the community Lautertal in the German state of Hesse ( Hessen ). The creatures in this legend are variously identified as Blindschleichen (slow worms, legless lizards that resemble small snakes, or as Schlangen (snakes). Return to the table of contents . A Good Dream Switzerland In Findeln a peasant dreamed that if he would go to Sion he would find his fortune. This he dreamed three times, and so vividly that he decided to go there and see if the dream would be fulfilled. He was just crossing the large bridge in Sion when he met a man who asked him where he was going. He replied that he had dreamed three times that he would find his fortune here, and so he wanted to see if this were true. The man laughed at him for being such a fool. He himself had dreamed that he could find his fortune at the uppermost house in the village of Findeln, but this dream left him cold. The peasant from Findeln returned home and said to himself, "Now what did that man say? In the uppermost house in the village? That is my house. I'll just have a look!" He dug and dug, and he found a pot full of gold. Thus he did indeed find his fortune in Sion. (Visperterminen) Source (Core): Johannes Jegerlehner, "Ein guter Traum," Sagen und Märchen aus dem Oberwallis: Aus dem Volksmunde gesammelt (Basel: Verlag der Schweizerischen Gesellschaft für Volkskunde, 1913), p. 272. Source (Hathitrust): Johannes Jegerlehner, "Ein guter Traum," Sagen und Märchen aus dem Oberwallis: Aus dem Volksmunde gesammelt (Basel: Verlag der Schweizerischen Gesellschaft für Volkskunde, 1913), p. 272. Return to the table of contents . Treasure at the Isar Bridge Austria / Germany In Jenbach, a respectable village on the left bank of the Inn River, between Schwaz and Münster, lived a farmer whose house was called the "Kachelhof." Now, the Kachelhofer once dreamed that he should go to Munich, stand on the Isar bridge, and there he would learn something new. The farmer paid no attention, but the same dream came to him three times in a row, and so one morning he took up his walking stick and set forth on the long journey to Munich. Early on the second day, he arrived there, walked through the suburb of Au, and joyfully saw the Isar bridge. He immediately took up his post on the bridge like a sentry. He never went into the actual city of Munich. At first nobody took notice of him, but gradually the fruit and chestnut vendors and the peddlers hawking their wares by the bridge become aware of the Tyrolean, who stood there continuously as if he had made a vow to St. John of Nepomuk. They ridiculed him relentlessly, but this did not bother him in the slightest. Towards evening, a soldier who was at home in the Achental Valley on the Bavarian border came by and said: "Greetings, fellow countryman! Who are you waiting for?" The Tyrolean trusted him and told him about his dream. The soldier laughed: "Oh, you poor fool!" he said! "How could you waste so much time on a dream? Dreams are just fantasy! I dreamed that I should go to Tyrol, all the way across the Ochntholt and down to Jenbach, because there was a farmer there named Kachelhofer who had three pots full of gold and silver under his kitchen hearth. Oh my God, half a potful would have been enough for me." Kachelhofer didn't reveal his identity to the soldier, but he wrote down his name and treated him most courteously. The next day, very early in the morning, Kachelhofer set off and hurried home as fast as he could. He ripped up his hearth so recklessly that his wife thought he'd gone mad; but he did indeed find the treasure and rewarded the soldier very generously with it. Source (books.google.com): Johann Nepomuk von Alpenburg, "Schatzträume," Deutsche Alpensagen (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1861), no. 84, pp. 80-81 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Nepomuk von Alpenburg, "Schatzträume," Deutsche Alpensagen (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1861), no. 84, pp. 80-81 . Return to the table of contents . The Dream of Treasure Austria On the Tyrolean border near Wopnitz there lived a peasant from Krain whose name was Japnig. His domestic situation had fallen to the point that he feared his few remaining goods would be confiscated by the authorities. One night he dreamed he should go to Stall in the Möll Valley, and, according to the dream, he would find a treasure on his way there. Japnig found this dream very striking, so he set forth immediately. Underway he met an old invalid on a bridge, who, as is customary asked him how far he was going. "To Stall," answered the peasant, then added, "And you?" "I don't know" answered the invalid, "I have neither home nor money." This all-too-frequent topic of conversation gave the two common ground, and they complained to one another about their hard times. Finally the peasant told the old soldier about his dream. The latter laughed into his face and said, "Anyone can dream about treasure. I myself have dreamed three times that there was a treasure in the hearth of someone named Japnig, or was it Havenot -- have you ever heard such a horrible name? What good is this to me? Do I even know if such a fellow exists? Dreams are foam." Japnig was right startled to hear his name. He became still as a mouse, then said farewell to the soldier. He did not go to Stall, but after a small detour returned immediately to his home in Wopnitz, where he forthwith began to tear apart his hearth. His wife thought that he had gone mad, but mortared into the hearth he found a pot filled with thalers, which solved all of Japnig's difficulties. According to another legend, Japnig walked all the way to the bridge at Prague where he met the old soldier. That would have been a great distance, but this frequently told legend always features a bridge, with the favorites being at Innsbruck, Regensburg, or Prague. Source: Johann Nepumuk Ritter von Alpenburg, "Geträumter Schatz," Deutsche Alpensagen (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1861), no. 331, pp. 313-14 . Return to the table of contents . The Dwarf on the Ziller Bridge Austria On the path from Wald to Ronach in Pinzgau, the traveler notices three large stone houses on the steep, wooded hillside, situated some distance apart and forming a marked contrast to the surrounding wooden huts. They are called Lähn, Reitl, and Berg; and the locals tell the following story about their origin: In the seventeenth century, a hardworking and honest farmer lived in Lähn, but various misfortunes brought him to the brink of ruin. He was no longer able to feed his large family. In this sad situation, he one day threw himself down on his bed and brooded over the dark thought of ending his own suffering. A pleasant slumber finally overcame him, and with it a dream. It was as if he heard a voice calling to him: He should go to the Ziller bridge; there he would find light about his future fate. He awoke, pondered the strange dream, and set out before dawn. He blessed his sleeping children beforehand, resolving never to return to them unless he could bring them better days. The sun began to set, and for several hours the unfortunate farmer sat silently and expectantly by the Ziller bridge; but not a single passerby had paid him any attention. Bitter tears rolled down his sunken cheeks; he didn't know whether to wait any longer or return home, and he gazed sadly down into the rushing waters of the Ziller. Suddenly, a beggar man with white hair and a long beard came walking towards the bridge. The little man paused at the sight of the farmer and asked him kindly: "Fellow countryman, how are you? Why so sad?" The farmer told him his story in a few words, and also described his dream. "Well," the old man interrupted: "Dreams are dreams! I dreamt last night that there was a pot of gold buried under the hearth at Lahn on the Waldberg hill. But I know neither the Waldberg hill nor Lahn, and even if I am a beggar, I don't want any dream to fool me. Go home and be of good cheer!" So spoke the little man, and went on his way. The farmer felt as if he were dreaming something new. At Lahn on the Waldberg, where misery and sorrow dwell, there should be a pot of gold? I want to see if it's all just a dream. He hurried through the Zillertal and the Gerlos valleys to his home, dug out the hearth and found -- his dream fulfilled. His misery had now come to an end. The man was rich; his herds grew numerous; he bought the neighboring estates and built the three brick houses. Source (DigiPress, Bayerische Staatsbibliothek): "Pinzgauische Sagen der Vorzeit: Das Männchen an der Zillerbrücke," Intelligenzblatt von Salzburg , no. 43 (October 25, 1800), columns 674-675 . Source (books.google.com): "Das Männchen an der Zillerbrücke," Austria: Oder Oesterreichischer Universal-Kalender fü das gemeine Jahr 1845 , vol. 6 (Vienna: Ignaz Klang, Buchhändler, 1845), no. 37, pp. 49-50 . Return to the table of contents . The Dream of the Zirl Bridge Austria It was not going well for the peasant of G. in Rinn, and his shoes pinched him on all sides. Once he dreamed that he should go to the bridge at Zirl where he would discover something important. After having the same dream the following night he shared this information with his wife and declared that he wanted to go to Zirl. But his old woman would not allow this, saying, "Why do you want to waste an entire day and wear out your shoes for nothing? You will not have as much as a green twig to show for yourself!" So he remained unhappily at home, but behold, the next night he had exactly the same dream again. He arose very early and hurried to Zirl. At sunrise he was already standing by the bridge there. After walking back and forth for a quarter hour, he was approached by a goat herder who wished him a good morning, then drove his herd onward. He did not see anyone for a long time after that. Noon finally arrived, and hunger was tormenting him. He took a piece of Turkish bread [a confection made from peanuts] from his pocket and let it suffice, for he was not going to leave the bridge for any price. But however long he waited, no one came to him. He was losing his patience, and he was irritated by the thought of how his wife would laugh at him and ridicule him for his gullibility. But he nevertheless held out, until finally the sun was about to set, and the goat herder returned with his herd. He was more that a little surprised to see that the man from Rinn was still there, and he asked him why he had been waiting there so long. "You see," said the peasant, "I dreamed that if I were to go to the Zirl bridge that I would discover something important." "Indeed!" answered the goat herder, laughing. "And I dreamed that if I were to go to G. in Rinn that I would find a pot of gold beneath the hearth." The man from Rinn had now heard enough. He ran home to see if the herder's words were true. Arriving home late in the evening, he secretly dismantled his hearth at once, and he did indeed find a pot completely filled with gold. Thus he became the richest peasant far and wide. (Zillertal) Source: Ignaz D. Zingerle, "Der Traum von der Zirler Brücke," Sagen aus Tirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1891), no. 624, pp. 353-54 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. Return to the table of contents . How one Became Rich through a Dream: A Legend Austria In the village of Heiligenblut, the beautiful Gothic church adorns the eastern slope of the entire Alpine Valley, through which the Möll River flows. Today called Hadergasse , the stretch was once covered by a lake called the Weissensee . It was fed from the glaciers of the Grossglockner Mountain. Over time the lake broke through the rocks that enclosed it, and the basin was cultivated. The Möll River forms the Möll Falls at the breached point. On the right side of the falls there is a farmstead, called "Tribuser-Place." The great-grandfather of the present owner found himself in dire circumstances and was constantly thinking of a way to improve his situation. Work and savings were not enough, and he became convinced that he had to get help from another source. The belief in supernatural protection and assistance, common at the time, strengthened his resolve. He went to bed with these thoughts and fell asleep with them. One night the dream-god told him to go to the Möll Bridge where he would find a treasure. At first he ignored this admonition, but when the dream repeated itself a second and a third time, he put some provisions into his travel bag, tied it together, put it over his shoulders, and secretly went to the Möll Bridge without saying anything to his family. Once there, he leaned his elbows against the railing of the bridge, stared down into the waters of the Möll River, and with a gloomy expression and a worried brow, considered his sad situation. He may well have stood there for more than two hours, noticing wave after wave slipping away, but not how time passed. Then he straightened up. His glance towards heaven seemed to beg for help once more, and a sigh escaped his breast. Then his face darkened, as if he were angry with the dream-god for making fun of him. At that moment a man crossed the bridge. Judging from his attire, he appeared to be a soldier. Concerned by the farmer's sad appearance, the stranger thought that the unhappy man might be considering suicide. With a sympathetic expression he asked the farmer what he wanted and why he was gazing so gloomily down into the waves. Pity and sympathy opened his heart, and Tribuser told him about his troubles and also about his threefold dream. "Oh, come on," said the solder. "Forget your superstition about the meaning of dreams. Now I had a dream that I should go to the Tribuser house, where I would find a horde of gold and silver walled up in the hearth. But how am I to know where this Tribuser house is?" Tribuser, of course, concealed his name. He hurried back home, and on the second night, while the housemates were asleep, he quietly tore apart the hearth. And there he discovered a pot filled with silver and gold. With the help of the discovered treasure he rebuilt his dwelling house and the outbuildings. He paid off his debts only gradually, so as not to cause a stir. Even today the heirs of this name are wealthy people in Heiligenblut. Whether the discovered treasure or other favorable speculations in the cattle trade, etc., were the root of the wealth of the Tribuser family, it is enough that those touched by the popular acceptance of the supernatural will believe in that dream and its actual fulfillment. Source (books.google.com): W. Urschitz, "Wie man im Traume reich wird: Eine Sage," Carinthia (November 17, 1860), p. 181 . Source (Internet Archive): W. Urschitz, "Wie man im Traume reich wird: Eine Sage," Carinthia (November 17, 1860), p. 181 . Return to the table of contents . The Treasure under the Bridge Austria A story he [Rabbi Nachman of Breslov] told of the treasure that is under the bridge, that once there was a man from a certain city, who dreamt that in Vienna, under the bridge there is a treasure. Therefore he traveled there and stood by the bridge and wondered what to do. For during the daytime he was unable to procede due to the many people. A soldier passed by there and said to him: "Why are you standing here and contemplating?" He thought that it would be good to tell him, in order that the soldier could help him, and they would divide the treasure between themselves. He told him the whole matter. The soldier spoke up and said to him: "Ay, a Jew gives consideration to a dream. But I myself dreamt that in such and such a place, by such and such a person (and he mentioned the city of the man and the name of this man) in the closet there is a treasure. But will I travel there?" So the man travelled back to his own house, and dug in his closet, and found the treasure. And he said afterwards: "Now I know: the treasure is by me, but in order for me to know of the treasure, it was necessary to travel to Vienna." So it is in the matter of serving Hashem , that the treasure is by each one by himself, but in order to know of the treasure it is incumbent to travel to the tzaddik. Source (books.google.com): Rabbi Nachman of Breslov, Book of Legendary Tales (Seepooray Ma'asiyoas) (Published by "LevBusar"), pp. 320-21 . Return to the table of contents . The Golden Fox Czech Republic / Austria In Prague they tell about a poor man who dreamed that he would find a great treasure if he would go to the Prague Bridge. He went there and waited on the bridge for a long time, until finally he told a passerby about his dream. "Oh!" said the latter. I too had such a dream. I dreamed that if I were to go the Prater Woods in Vienna, I would find a golden fox that's buried there. I'm not going to travel that far just because of a dream." However, the poor man did indeed make the trip, and he found the golden fox. Source (books.google.com): Eucharius Ferdinand Christian Oertel, Meine Land- und Wasserreise von Ansbach über München, Passau, Wien, Brünn und Olmüz nach Gräfenberg zum Herrn Wasserdoktor Vincenz Priessnit, im Juli und August 1836 (Nürnberg: Friedrich Campe, 1837), pp. 78-79 . Return to the table of contents . The Fish-Dealer of Palermo Italy There was at Palermo a man who sold tunny-fish. One night he dreamed that someone appeared to him and said: "Do you wish to find your Fate? Go under the bridge di li Testi ; there you will find it." For three nights he dreamed the same thing. The third time, he went under the bridge and found a poor man all in rags. The fish-seller was frightened and was going away, when the man called him. It was his Fate. He said: "Tonight, at midnight, where you have placed the barrels of fish, dig, and what you find is yours." The fish-dealer did as he was told; dug, and found a staircase, which he descended, and found a room full of money. The fish-dealer became wealthy, lent the king of Spain money, and was made viceroy and raised to the rank of prince and duke. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), p. 239 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), p. 239 . Note by Crane: The bridge di li Testi (of the Heads), so the people call the Ponte dell' Ammiraglio , a bridge now abandoned, constructed in 1113 by the Admiral Georgios Antiochenos. Return to the table of contents . The Church at Erritsø Denmark Many years ago there lived at Erritsø, near Fredericia, a very poor man, who one day said, "If I had a large sum of money, I would build a church for the parish." The following night he dreamed that if he went to the south bridge at Veile, he would make his fortune. He followed the intimation, and strolled backwards and forwards on the bridge, until it grew late, but without seeing any sign of his good fortune. When just on the point of returning, he was accosted by an officer, who asked him why he had spent the whole day so on the bridge. He told him his dream, on hearing which the officer related to him in return, that he also, on the preceding night, had dreamed, that in a barn at Erritsø, belonging to a man whose name he mentioned, a treasure lay buried. But the name he mentioned was the man's own, who prudently kept his own counsel, hastened home, and found the treasure in his barn. The man was faithful to his word and built the church. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), pp. 253-54 . Two closely related Danish-language legends, both recorded by J. M. Thiele in his Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 1 (Copenhagen: Universitetsboghandler C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843): "Kirken i Erritsø," p. 246 . "Skatten i Tanslet," p. 357 . Return to the table of contents . The Treasure in Tanslet Denmark There was a man from Als who found a treasure in a strange manner. One night he dreamed that he would find a treasure on a street in Flensburg. Relying on this, he went there. He walked about in the streets of Flensburg, but could not comprehend how he might find a treasure there. A Flensburger came to him and asked why he was walking about like that. He told the man about his dream, but the Flensburger laughed at him, saying, "In that case I should go to Tanslet on the island of Als, for last night I dreamed that a treasure was buried there." To this the man said nothing, but immediately returned to Als, and in Tanslet he found the treasure that he had intended to find on a street in Flensburg. Source (books.google.com): Just Mathias Thiele, "Skatten i Tanslet," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 1 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), pp. 357-58 . Source (Internet Archive): Just Mathias Thiele, "Skatten i Tanslet," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 1 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), pp. 357-58 . Return to the table of contents . A Peasant in Vester-Brøndum Denmark A peasant in Vester-Brøndum once dreamed that on a certain day he should go to Randers and find his fortune there at the Sønderbro Bridge. All day he stood there in vain and was just about to go on his way, when a man came up and asked him what he was waiting for. He told him his errand and about the dream he had had. "Oh, it's never worth bothering about such a thing," said the stranger, for I dreamed that I should find gold and other treasures under a man's table in Vester-Brøndum." When the Brøndum man heard this, he returned home and dug under his own table. There he found kettles filled with gold, silver, and other valuables. Thus he became a very rich man. Out of gratitude he promised to build a church, and set about with the work; but it could not move foreward. Everything that was built up during the day was torn down and destroyed by the trolls at night. On the advice of a wise man, two young oxen were then tied together and left alone overnight. The Øls Church was built where they were found grazing the next morning. It still stands there. Source (books.google.com): Svend Grundtvig, "En Bonde i Vester-Br&aslashndum," Gamle danske Minder i Folkemunde: Folkeæventyr, Folkeviser, Folkesagn (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversen, 1854), no. 234, p. 190 . Source (Internet Archive): Svend Grundtvig, "En Bonde i Vester-Br&aslashndum," Gamle danske Minder i Folkemunde: Folkeæventyr, Folkeviser, Folkesagn (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversen, 1854), no. 234, p. 190 . The final episode in this story is a type 7060 migratory legend: "Disputed Site for a Church." Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 14, 2025. Asbjørnsen and Moe: "East of the Sun and West of the Moon" East of the Sun and West of the Moon Norway Once upon a time there was a poor peasant who had so many children that he did not have enough of either food or clothing to give them. Pretty children they all were, but the prettiest was the youngest daughter, who was so lovely there was no end to her loveliness. One day -- it was on a Thursday evening late in the fall -- the weather was wild and rough outside, and it was cruelly dark. The rain was falling and the wind blowing, until the walls of the cottage shook. They were all sitting around the fire busy with this thing and that. Then all at once something gave three taps on the window. The father went out to see what was the matter. Outside, what should he see but a great big white bear. "Good evening to you," said the white bear. "The same to you," said the man. "Will you give me your youngest daughter? If you will, I'll make you as rich as you are now poor," said the bear. Well, the man would not be at all sorry to be so rich; but still he thought he must have a bit of a talk with his daughter first; so he went in and told them how there was a great white bear waiting outside, who had given his word to make them so rich if he could only have the youngest daughter. The girl said "No!" outright. Nothing could get her to say anything else; so the man went out and settled it with the white bear, that he should come again the next Thursday evening and get an answer. Meantime he talked to his daughter, and kept on telling her of all the riches they would get, and how well off she herself would be. At last she agreed to it, so she washed and mended her rags, and made herself as smart as she could. Soon she was ready for the trip, for she didn't have much to take along. The next Thursday evening came the white bear to fetch her. She got on his back with her bundle, and off they went. After they had gone a good way, the white bear said, "Are you afraid?" No, she wasn't. "Just hold tight to my shaggy coat, and there's nothing to be afraid of," said the bear. She rode a long, long way, until they came to a large steep cliff. The white bear knocked on it. A door opened, and they came into a castle, where there were many rooms all lit up; rooms gleaming with silver and gold. Further, there was a table set there, and it was all as grand as grand could be. Then the white bear gave her a silver bell; and when she wanted anything, she only had to ring it, and she would get it at once. Well, after she had eaten, and it became evening, she felt sleepy from her journey, and thought she would like to go to bed, so she rang the bell. She had barely rung it before she found herself in a room, where there was a bed made as fair and white as anyone would wish to sleep in, with silken pillows and curtains, and gold fringe. All that was in the room was gold or silver. After she had gone to bed, and put out the light, a man came and laid himself alongside her. It was the white bear, who cast off his pelt at night; but she never saw him, for he always came after she had put out the light. Before the day dawned he was up and off again. Things went on happily for a while, but at last she became quiet and sad. She was alone all day long, and she became very homesick to see her father and mother and brothers and sisters. So one day, when the white bear asked what was wrong with her, she said it was so lonely there, and how she longed to go home to see her father and mother and brothers and sisters, and that was why she was so sad, because she couldn't get to them. "Well," said the bear, "that can happen all right, but you must promise me, not to talk alone with your mother, but only when the others are around to hear. She will want to take you by the hand and lead you into a room to talk alone with her. But you must not do that, or else you'll bring bad luck on both of us." So one Sunday the white bear came and said they could now set off to see her father and mother. Off they went, she sitting on his back; and they went far and long. At last they came to a grand house. Her bothers and sisters were outside running about and playing. Everything was so pretty, it was a joy to see. "This is where your father and mother live now," said the white bear. "Now don't forget what I told you, else you'll make us both unhappy." No, heaven forbid, she'd not forget. When they reached the house, the white bear turned around and left her. She went in to see her father and mother, and there was such joy, that there was no end to it. None of them could thank her enough for all she had done for them. They now had everything they could wish for, as good as good could be. Then they wanted to know how she was. Well, she said, it was very good to live where she did; she had all she wished. I don't know what else she said, but I don't think she told any of them the whole story. That afternoon, after they had eaten dinner, everything happened as the white bear had said it would. Her mother wanted to talk with her alone in her bedroom; but she remembered what the white bear had said, and wouldn't go with her. "What we have to talk about we can talk about any time," she said, and put her mother off. But somehow or other, her mother got to her at last, and she had to tell her the whole story. She told her, how every night, after she had gone to bed, a man came and lay down beside her as soon as she had put out the light, and how she never saw him, because he was always up and away before the morning dawned; and how she was terribly sad, for she wanted so much to see him, and how she was by herself all day long, and how dreary, and lonesome it was. "Oh dear," said her mother; "it may well be a troll you are sleeping with! But now I'll give you some good advice how to see him. I'll give you a candle stub, which you can carry home in your bosom; just light it while he is asleep, but be careful not to drop any tallow on him." Yes, she took the candle, and hid it in her bosom, and that evening the white bear came and took her away. But when they had gone a piece, the white bear asked if all hadn't happened as he had said. She couldn't deny that it had. "Take care," said he, "if you have listened to your mother's advice, you will bring bad luck on us both, and it will be finished with the two of us." No, by no means! So when she reached home, and had gone to bed, it was the same as before. A man came and lay down beside her; but in the middle of the night, when she heard that he was fast asleep, she got up and lit the candle. She let the light shine on him, and saw that he was the most handsome prince one ever set eyes on. She fell so deeply in love with him, that she thought she couldn't live if she didn't give him a kiss at once. And so she did, but as she kissed him she let three drops of hot tallow drip onto his shirt, and he woke up. "What have you done?" he cried; "now you have made us both unlucky, for had you held out only this one year, I would have been free! I have a stepmother who has bewitched me, so that I am a white bear by day, and a man by night. But now all ties are broken between us. Now I must leave you for her. She lives in a castle east of the sun and west of the moon, and there, too, is a princess, one with a nose three yards long, and now I will have to marry her." She cried and grieved, but there was no help for it; he had to go. Then she asked if she could go with him. No, she could not. "Tell me the way, then" she said, "so I can look for you; surely I may do that." Yes, she could do that, but there was no way leading to the place. It lay east of the sun and west of the moon, and she'd never find her way there. The next morning, when she woke up, both the prince and the castle were gone, and she was lying on a little green patch, in the midst of the thick, dark forest, and by her side lay the same bundle of rags she had brought with her from her old home. When she had rubbed the sleep out of her eyes, and cried until she was tired, she set out on her way, and walked many, many days, until she came to a high cliff. An old woman sat under it, and played with a golden apple which she tossed about. The girl asked her if she knew the way to the prince, who lived with his stepmother in the castle east of the sun and west of the moon, and who was to marry the princess with a nose three yards long. "How did you come to know about him?" asked the old woman. "Maybe you are the girl who should have had him?" Yes, she was. "So, so; it's you, is it?" said the old woman. "Well, all I know about him is, that he lives in the castle east of the sun and west of the moon, and that you'll get there too late or never; but still you may borrow my horse, and you can ride him to my next neighbor. Maybe she'll be able to tell you; and when you get there just give the horse a switch under the left ear, and beg him to be off home. And you can take this golden apple along with you." So she got on the horse, and rode a long, long time, until she came to another cliff, under which sat another old woman, with a golden carding comb. The girl asked her if she knew the way to the castle that lay east of the sun and west of the moon, and she answered, like the first old woman, that she knew nothing about it, except that it was east of the sun and west of the moon. "And you'll get there too late or never; but you can borrow my horse to my next neighbor; maybe she'll tell you all about it; and when you get there, just switch the horse under the left ear, and beg him to be off for home." This old woman gave her the golden carding comb; she might find some use for it, she said. So the girl got up on the horse, and again rode a long, long way. At last she came to another great cliff, under which sat another old woman, spinning with a golden spinning wheel. She asked her, as well, if she knew the way to the prince, and where the castle was that lay east of the sun and west of the moon. But it was the same thing over again. "Perhaps you are the one who should have had the prince?" said the old woman. Yes, that she was. But she didn't know the way any better than the other two. She knew it was east of the sun and west of the moon, but that was all. "And you'll get there too late or never; but I'll lend you my horse, and then I think you'd best ride to the east wind and ask him; maybe he knows his way around those parts, and can blow you there. When you get to him, just give the horse a switch under the left ear, and he'll trot home by himself." She too gave her her golden spinning wheel. "Maybe you'll find a use for it," said the old woman. She rode many weary days, before she got to the east wind's house, but at last she did reach it, and she asked the east wind if he could tell her the way to the prince who lived east of the sun and west of the moon. Yes, the east wind had often heard tell of it, the prince and the castle, but he didn't know the way there, for he had never blown so far. "But, if you want, I'll go with you to my brother the west wind. Maybe he knows, for he's much stronger. If you will just get on my back I'll carry you there." Yes, she got on his back, and off they went in a rush. When they arrived at the west wind's house, the east wind said the girl he had brought was the one who was supposed to have had the prince who lived in the castle east of the sun and west of the moon. She had set out to find him, and he had brought her here, and would be glad to know if the west wind knew how to get to the castle. "No," said the west wind, "I've never blown so far; but if you want, I'll go with you to our brother the south wind, for he's much stronger than either of us, and he has flown far and wide. Maybe he'll tell you. Get on my back, and I'll carry you to him." Yes, she got on his back, and so they traveled to the south wind, and I think it didn't take long at all. When they got there, the west wind asked him if he could tell her the way to the castle that lay east of the sun and west of the moon, for she was the one who was supposed to have had the prince who lived there. "Is that so?" said the south wind. "Is she the one? Well, I have visited a lot of places in my time, but I have not yet blown there. If you want, I'll take you to my brother the north wind; he is the oldest and strongest of us all, and if he doesn't know where it is, you'll never find anyone in the world to tell you. Get on my back, and I'll carry you there." Yes, she got on his back, and away he left his house at a good clip. They were not long underway. When they reached the north wind's house he was so wild and cross, that he blew cold gusts at them from a long way off. "Blast you both, what do you want?" he roared at them from afar, so that it struck them with an icy shiver. "Well," said the south wind, "you don't need to bluster so, for here I am, your brother, the south wind, and here is the girl who was supposed to have had the prince who lives in the castle that lies east of the sun and west of the moon, and now she wants to ask you if you ever were there, and can show her the way, for she wants so much to find him again." "Yes, I know where it is," said the north wind; "a single time I blew an aspen leaf there, but afterward I was so tired that I couldn't blow a puff for many days. But if you really wish to go there, and aren't afraid to come along with me, I'll take you on my back and see if I can blow you there." Yes, with all her heart; she wanted to and had to get there if it were at all possible; and she wouldn't be afraid, however madly he went. "Very well, then," said the north wind, "but you must sleep here tonight, for we must have the whole day before us, if we're to get there at all." Early next morning the north wind woke her, and puffed himself up, and blew himself out, and made himself so stout and big. that he was gruesome to look at. Off they went high up through the air, as if they would not stop until they reached the end of the world. Here on earth there was a terrible storm; acres of forest and many houses were blown down, and when it swept over the sea, ships wrecked by the hundred. They tore on and on -- no one can believe how far they went -- and all the while they still went over the sea, and the north wind got more and more weary, and so out of breath he could barely bring out a puff, and his wings drooped and drooped, until at last he sunk so low that the tops of the waves splashed over his heels. "Are you afraid?" said the north wind. No, she wasn't. They weren't very far from land by now, and the north wind had enough strength left that he managed to throw her up on the shore under the windows of the castle which lay east of the sun and west of the moon. But then he was so weak and worn out, that he had to stay there and rest many days before he could go home again. The next morning the girl sat down under the castle window, and began to play with the golden apple. The first person she saw was the long-nosed princess who was to have the prince. "What do you want for your golden apple, you girl?" said the long-nosed one, as she opened the window. "It's not for sale, for gold or money," said the girl. "If it's not for sale for gold or money, what is it that you will sell it for? You may name your own price," said the princess. "Well, you can have it, if I may get to the prince, who lives here, and be with him tonight," said the girl whom the north wind had brought. Yes, that could be done. So the princess took the golden apple; but when the girl came up to the prince's bedroom that night, he was fast asleep. She called him and shook him, and cried and grieved, but she could not wake him up. The next morning. as soon as day broke, the princess with the long nose came and drove her out. That day she sat down under the castle windows and began to card with her golden carding comb, and the same thing happened. The princess asked what she wanted for it. She said it wasn't for sale for gold or money, but if she could have permission to go to the prince and be with him that night, the princess could have it. But when she went to his room she found him fast asleep again, and however much she called, and shook, and cried, and prayed, she couldn't get life into him. As soon as the first gray peep of day came, the princess with the long nose came, and chased her out again. That day the girl sat down outside under the castle window and began to spin with her golden spinning wheel, and the princess with the long nose wanted to have it as well. She opened the window and asked what she wanted for it. The girl said, as she had said twice before, that it wasn't for sale for gold or money, but if she could go to the prince who was there, and be alone with him that night she could have it. Yes, she would be welcome to do that. But now you must know that there were some Christians who had been taken there, and while they were sitting in their room, which was next to the prince's, they had heard how a woman had been in there, crying, praying, and calling to him for two nights in a row, and they told this to the prince. That evening, when the princess came with a sleeping potion, the prince pretended to drink it, but threw it over his shoulder, for he could guess it was a sleeping potion. So, when the girl came in, she found the prince wide awake, and then she told him the whole story of how she had come there. "Ah," said the prince, "you've come in the very nick of time, for tomorrow is to be our wedding day. But now I won't have the long-nose, and you are the only woman in the world who can set me free. I'll say that I want to see what my wife is fit for, and beg her to wash the shirt which has the three spots of tallow on it. She'll agree, for she doesn't know that you are the one who put them there. Only Christians, and not such a pack of trolls, can wash them out again. I'll say that I will marry only the woman who can wash them out, and ask you to try it." So there was great joy and love between them all the night. But next day, when the wedding was planned, the prince said, "First of all, I'd like to see what my bride is fit for." "Yes!" said the stepmother, with all her heart. "Well," said the prince, "I've got a fine shirt which I'd like for my wedding shirt, but somehow or other it got three spots of tallow on it, which I must have washed out. I have sworn to marry only the woman who is able to do that. If she can't, then she's not worth having." Well, that was no big thing they said, so they agreed, and the one with the long nose began to wash away as hard as she could, but the more she rubbed and scrubbed, the bigger the spots grew. "Ah!" said the old troll woman, her mother, "you can't wash. Let me try." But she had hardly touched the shirt, before it got far worse than before, and with all her rubbing, and wringing, and scrubbing, the spots grew bigger and blacker, and the shirt got ever darker and uglier. Then all the other trolls began to wash, but the longer it lasted, the blacker and uglier the shirt grew, until at last it was as black all over as if it been up the chimney. "Ah!" said the prince, "none of you is worth a straw; you can't wash. Why there, outside, sits a beggar girl, I'll bet she knows how to wash better than the whole lot of you. Come in, girl!" he shouted. She came in. "Can you wash this shirt clean, girl, you?" he said. "I don't know," she said, "but I think I can." And almost before she had taken it and dipped it into the water, it was as white as driven snow, and whiter still. "Yes, you are the girl for me," said the prince. At that the old troll woman flew into such a rage, she exploded on the spot, and the princess with the long nose after her, and the whole pack of trolls after her -- at least I've never heard a word about them since. As for the prince and princess, they set free all the poor Christians who had been captured and shut up there; and they took with them all the silver and gold, and flew away as far as they could from the castle that lay east of the sun and west of the moon. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1859), no. 36, pp. 266-80 . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. © 2001. Link to the text in Norwegian: Østenfor sol og vestenfor måne . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 425A. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 25, 2019. Eat Me When I'm Fatter: Folktales of Type 122F Eat Me When I'm Fatter folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 122F translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2008 Contents The Sheep, the Lamb, the Wolf, and the Hare (Tibet). The Lambikin (India). The Fisher and the Little Fish (Aesop). The Dog and the Wolf (Bohemia). Mr. Hawk and Brother Rabbit (African-America). Related links . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Sheep, the Lamb, the Wolf, and the Hare Tibet Once upon a time there lived an old sheep in a low-lying valley of Tibet, and every year she, with her lamb, were in the habit of leaving the valley during the early months of summer, and going up on to the great northern plateau, where grass is plentiful, and where many sheep and goats graze throughout the summer. One spring the sheep, in accordance with her annual custom, set out for the north, and one day, as she was strolling sedately along the path, while her little lamb skipped about beside her, she suddenly came face to face with a large, fierce-looking wolf. "Good morning, Aunty Sheep," said the wolf; "where are you going to?" "Oh! Uncle Wolf," replied the trembling sheep, "we are doing no harm; I am just taking my lamb to graze on the rich grass of the great northern plateau." " Well," said the wolf, " I am really very sorry for you; but the fact is, I am hungry, and it will be necessary for me to eat you both on the spot." "Please, please, Uncle Wolf, don't do that," replied the sheep. "Please don't eat us now; but if you will wait till the autumn, when we shall both be very much fatter than we are now, you can eat us with much more benefit to yourself on our return journey." The wolf thought this was a good idea. "Very well, Aunty Sheep," said he, "that is a bargain. I will spare your lives now, but only on condition that you meet me at this very spot on your return journey from the north in the autumn." So saying, he galloped off, and the sheep and the lamb continued on their way towards the north, and soon forgot all about their encounter with the wolf. All the summer they grazed about on the succulent grass of the great plateau, and when autumn was approaching both were as fat as fat could be, and the little lamb had grown into a fine young sheep. When the time came for returning to the south, the sheep remembered her bargain with the wolf, and every day as they drew farther and farther south she grew more and more downhearted. One day, as they were approaching the place where they had met the wolf, it chanced that a hare came hopping along the road towards them. The hare stopped to say good morning to the sheep, and noticing that she was looking very sad, he said, "Good-morning, Sister Sheep, how is it that you, who are so fat and have so fine a lamb, are looking so sad this morning?" "Oh! Brother Hare," replied the sheep, "mine is a very sad story. The fact is that last spring, as I and my lamb were coming up this very road, we met an ugly- looking wolf, who said he was going to eat us; but I begged him to spare our lives, explaining to him that we should both be much larger and fatter in the autumn, and that he would get much better value from us if he waited till then. The wolf agreed to this, and said that we must meet him at the same spot in the autumn. We are now very near the appointed place, and I very much fear that in another day or two we shall both be killed by the wolf." So saying, the poor sheep broke down altogether and burst into tears. "Dear me! Dear me!" replied the hare. "This is indeed a sad story; but cheer up, Sister Sheep, you may leave it to me, and I think I can answer for it that I know how to manage the wolf." So saying, the hare made the following arrangements. He dressed himself up in his very best clothes, in a new robe of woolen cloth, with a long earring in his left ear, and a fashionable hat on his head, and strapped a small saddle on to the back of the sheep. He then prepared two small bundles, which he slung across the lamb, and tied them on with a rope. When these preparations were complete, he took a large sheet of paper in his hand, and, with a pen thrust behind his ear, he mounted upon the back of the sheep, and the little procession started off down the path. Soon after, they arrived at the place where they were to meet the wolf, and sure enough there was the wolf waiting for them at the appointed spot. As soon as they came within earshot of where the wolf was standing the hare called out in a sharp tone of authority, "Who are you, and what are you doing there?" "I am the wolf," was the reply; " and I have come here to eat this sheep and its lamb, in accordance with a regular arrangement. Who may you be, pray?" "I am Lomden, the hare," that animal replied, "and I have been deputed to India on a special mission by the Emperor of China. And, by the way, I have a commission to bring ten wolf skins as a present to the King of India. What a fortunate thing it is that I should have met you here! Your skin will do for one, anyway." So saying, the hare produced his sheet of paper, and, taking his pen in his hand, he wrote down the figure "1" very large. The wolf was so frightened on hearing this that he turned tail and fled away ignominiously; while the sheep and the lamb, after thanking the hare heartily for his kind offices, continued their journey safely to their own home. Source: W. F. O'Connor, Folk Tales from Tibet (London: Hurst and Blackett, 1906), pp. 56-59 . Note by O'Connor: "This story is a satire on the assumption and arrogance of Tibetan and Chinese officials, and the timidity and submissiveness of the Tibetan peasants. It illustrates how the meanest government clerk, more especially when armed with pen and paper, can strike terror into the heart of the boldest and strongest countryman." ( p. 59 ) The episode referred to in the above note exists elsewhere as an independent story and is classified as a type 126 folktale. Return to the table of contents . The Lambikin India Once upon a time there was a wee wee lambikin, who frolicked about on his little tottery legs, and enjoyed himself amazingly. Now one day he set off to visit his granny, and was jumping with joy to think of all the good things he should get from her, when who should he meet but a jackal, who looked at the tender young morsel and said, "Lambikin! Lambikin! I'll eat YOU! " But Lambikin only gave a little frisk and said, To granny's house I go, Where I shall fatter grow, Then you can eat me so. The jackal thought this reasonable, and let Lambikin pass. By and by he met a vulture, and the vulture, looking hungrily at the tender morsel before him, said, "Lambikin! Lambikin! I'll eat YOU! " But Lambikin only gave a little frisk, and said, To granny's house I go, Where I shall fatter grow, Then you can eat me so. The vulture thought this reasonable, and let Lambikin pass. And by and by he met a tiger, and then a wolf, and a dog, and an eagle, and all these, when they saw the tender little morsel, said, "Lambikin! Lambikin! I'll eat YOU! " But to all of them Lambikin replied, with a little frisk, To granny's house I go, Where I shall fatter grow, Then you can eat me so. At last he reached his granny's house, and said, all in a great hurry, "Granny, dear, I've promised to get very fat. So, as people ought to keep their promises, please put me into the corn bin at once. " So his granny said he was a good boy, and put him into the corn bin, and there the greedy little lambikin stayed for seven days, and ate, and ate, and ate, until he could scarcely waddle, and his granny said he was fat enough for anything, and must go home. But cunning little Lambikin said that would never do, for some animal would be sure to eat him on the way back, he was so plump and tender. "I'll tell you what you must do," said Master Lambikin. "You must make a little drumikin out of the skin of my little brother who died, and then I can sit inside and trundle along nicely, for I'm as tight as a drum myself." So his granny made a nice little drumikin out of his brother's skin, with the wool inside, and Lambikin curled himself up snug and warm in the middle, and trundled away gaily. Soon he met with the eagle, who called out, Drumikin! Drumikin! Have you seen Lambikin? And Mr. Lambikin, curled up in his soft warm nest, replied, Fallen into the fire, and so will you On little Drumikin. Tum-pa, tum-too! "How very annoying!" sighed the eagle, thinking regretfully of the tender morsel he had let slip. Meanwhile Lambikin trundled along, laughing to himself, and singing, Tum-pa, tum-too; Tum-pa, tum-too! Every animal and bird he met asked him the same question, Drumikin! Drumikin! Have you seen Lambikin? And to each of them the little sly-boots replied, Fallen into the fire, and so will you On little Drumikin. Tum-pa, tum-too! Tum-pa, tum-too; Tum-pa, tum-too! Then they all sighed to think of the tender little morsel they had let slip. At last the jackal came limping along, for all his sorry looks as sharp as a needle, and he too called out, Drumikin! Drumikin! Have you seen Lambikin? And Lambikin, curled up in his snug little nest, replied gaily, Fallen into the fire, and so will you On little Drumikin! Tum-pa -- But he never got any further, for the jackal recognized his voice at once, and cried, "Hullo! You've turned yourself inside out, have you? Just you come out of that!" Whereupon he tore open Drumikin and gobbled up Lambikin. Source: Joseph Jacobs, Indian Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1892), no. 3, pp. 17-20 . Jacobs' source: F. A. Steel and R. C. Temple, Wide-Awake Stories: A Collection of Tales Told by Little Children Between Sunset and Sunrise in the Panjab and Kashmir (Bombay: Education Society's Press, 1884), pp. 69-72 . The tale was originally published in Indian Antiquary, vol. 12. The episode of rolling along inside a drum is very similar to the pig's escape from the wolf by rolling down a hill in a churn in the English tale Three Little Pigs . Return to the table of contents . The Fisher and the Little Fish Aesop It happened that a fisher, after fishing all day, caught only a little fish. "Pray, let me go, master," said the fish. "I am much too small for you to eat just now. If you put me back into the river I shall soon grow. Then you can make a fine meal off me." "Nay, nay, my little fish," said the fisher. "I have you now. I may not catch you hereafter." A little thing in hand is worth more than a great thing in prospect. Source: Joseph Jacobs, The Fables of Æsop (London: Macmillan and Company, 1902), no. 53, p. 124 . First published 1894. Return to the table of contents . The Dog and the Wolf Bohemia Once upon a time there was a peasant family who had a watchdog named Sultan among their household animals. The dog grew old, and, thinking that he could no longer properly attend to to his duties, the peasant chased him away. Dejected and with his head hanging low, the dog left the village, complaining to himself, "So this is my reward for loyalty at a difficult job. After using up my youthful and energetic years at work, they chase me away and grant me no rest now that I am old and weak." He sadly went his way, wandering aimlessly about for many days without finding any tolerable shelter. Emaciated and weak from his long journey, he came to a forest. A wolf came out of the forest, ran up to the poor dog, and cried, "Stop, old fellow! Beware, you are now in my power." Hearing the wolf speak in this manner, the frightened old Sultan said, "Dear friend, just take a good look at me, and your appetite for me will disappear. I would make the worst roast you have ever had, for I am nothing but skin and bones. But I do have some advice for you." The wolf said, "I don't need any advice from you, you miserable creature. I know what you will say even before you speak, namely that I should let you live. No, I won't change my mind. The long and the short of it is that I am going to eat you." To this the dog answered, "I wouldn't think of asking that of you, for I do not want to live any longer. Bite away as long as you want to. But I still have good advice for you. Wouldn't it be better to fatten me up before eating me? You wouldn't loose anything on the feed, because you would get it all back on me. Then I'd make a decent roast. What do you think, Brother Wolf?" The wolf spoke, "I'll do it, if the feeding doesn't take too long. Follow me to my hut." The dog did this, and together they went deeper into the woods. Arriving at the hut, Sultan crept inside, while the wolf went forth to hunt some game for the weak dog. When he returned, he threw his capture to Sultan, who ate it with relish. The next day the wolf came and spoke to the dog, "Yesterday you ate. Today I will eat." The dog replied, "What are you thinking of, dear wolf? I scarcely felt yesterday's food in my stomach." To be sure, this irritated the wolf, but he had to be happy with going into the woods again to hunt game for the dog. With similar responses, our Sultan put off the wolf as long as he was not strong enough to take on the wolf. The wolf continued to hunt and to bring the dog whatever he captured, eating little or nothing himself so that Sultan would have enough. Thus the dog grew ever stronger, while the opposite was true for the wolf. On the sixth day the wolf came to the dog and spoke, "I believe that you are ready now." Sultan answered, "Yes indeed. To be sure, I feel so well that I will take you on unless you set me free." The wolf spoke, "You are joking! Just think, I have been feeding you for six days now, while eating nothing myself. Now am I to go away with nothing? That will never do!" To this Sultan responded, "You are partially right, but does that give you the right to eat me up?" "That is the right of the strong over the weak," answered the wolf. "Right on!" replied the dog. "And thus you have pronounced judgment on yourself." With these words he made a daring leap, and before the wolf knew it, he was lying on the ground, overpowered by Sultan. "Because you allowed me to live, I will not kill you immediately, but rather submit your life to fate. Choose two companions, and I will do the same. Tomorrow come to this place in the woods with them, and we will settle our dispute." The two separated to seek out their fellow warriors. Angrily, the wolf went deeper into the woods. The dog hurried to the nearest village. After much pleading, the wolf got an ill-tempered, grumbling bear and a sly fox to be his comrades. Our Sultan ran first to the parsonage, where he talked a large gray cat into going with him. Then he went to the town judge's barnyard where he found a brave rooster as a second fellow warrior. It was just getting light, and the dog was already underway with his two companions. They had what they needed. He might even surprise his enemies while they were still deep in sleep. The wolf was the first one to awaken. He woke his comrades, then said to the bear, "You can climb trees, can't you? Be so good as to climb that tall fir tree and see if you can't get a glimpse of our enemies." The bear did this, and from the top of the tree he cried down, "Flee! Our enemies are very near, and what powerful enemies they are! One of them is riding proudly along, carrying many sharp sables. They glisten strongly in the morning sun. Another one is walking stealthily after him, pulling a long iron rod behind. Woe unto us!" The fox was so frightened at these words, that he decided it would be advisable to make himself scarce. The bear hurriedly climbed down from the tree and crept into some thick brush, so that only the tip of his tail was showing. The enemy was now at hand. The wolf, seeing that his friends had deserted him, tried to get away, but Sultan confronted him. One leap, and the dog had the wolf by the back of his neck, and he finished him off. Meanwhile, the cat noticed the tip of the bear's tail moving in the brush. Hoping to catch a mouse, she snapped at it. Terrified, the bear jumped from his hiding place and fled in all haste up a tree, where he thought he would be safe from the enemy. But he was wrong, because the rooster was there as well. Seeing the bear in the tree, the rooster jumped from one branch to the next, always going higher and higher. The bear was beside himself. Terrified, he fell from the tree and lay there stone dead. And thus the battle ended. The news of the brave deeds of Sultan and his companions spread far and wide, also to the village where Sultan had formerly served. As a consequence, the peasant family took back their loyal watchdog and cared for him. Source: Theodor Vernaleken, "Der Hund und der Wolf," Österreichische Kinder- und Hausmärchen: Treu nach mündlicher Überlieferung (Vienna and Leipzig: WilhelmBraumüller, 1896), no. 9, pp. 39-43 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. The story's final episode is classified as type 104, The War between the Village Animals and the Forest Animals . Link to a related fable, Old Sultan by the Grimm brothers. Bohemia is mostly in today's Austria and the Czech Republic. Return to the table of contents . Mr. Hawk and Brother Rabbit African-America (Joel Chandler Harris) One time Brer Rabbit was going along through the bushes singing to himself, and he saw a shadow pass before him. He looked up, and there was Mr. Hawk sailing around and around. Every time he sailed around, he got a little closer, but Brer Rabbit didn't notice this, and by and by, down he dropped right slam-bang on Brer Rabbit, and there he had him. He held him in a mighty tight grip. He held him so tight that it made Brer Rabbit's breath come short like it does off a long journey. He hollered and he begged, but that didn't do any good. He squalled and he cried, but that didn't do any good. He kicked and he groaned, but that didn't do any good. Then Brer Rabbit lay still and studied about what in the name of goodness he was going to do. By and by he up and allowed, "I don't know what you want with me, Mr. Hawk. I am scarcely a mouthful for you." Mr. Hawk, he said, "I'll do away with you, and then I'll go catch me a couple of jay-birds." This made Brer Rabbit shake all over, because if there was any kind of creature that he despised on the topside of the earth, it was a jay-bird. Brer Rabbit, he said, "Do pray, Mr. Hawk, go catch those jay-birds first, because I can't stand them being on top of me. I'll stay right here until you come back," he said. Mr. Hawk, he said, "Oh-oh, Brer Rabbit, you've been fooling too many folks. You're not fooling me," he said. Brer Rabbit, he said, "If you can't do that, Mr. Hawk, then the best thing for you to do is to wait and let me get tame, because I am so wild now that I won't taste good." Mr. Hawk, he said, "Oh-oh!" Brer Rabbit, he said, "Well then, if that won't do, you had better wait and let me grow big, so I'll be a full meal of vittles." Mr. Hawk, he said, "Now you are talking sense!" Brer Rabbit, he said, "And I'll rush around among the bushes and drive out some partridges for you, and we'll have more fun than what you can shake a stick at." Mr. Hawk was sort of studying about this, and Brer Rabbit, he begged, and he explained, and the long and short of it was that Brer Rabbit got loose, and he did not get any bigger, and neither did he drive out any partridges for Mr. Hawk. Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Nights with Uncle Remus (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1883), no. 65, pp. 366-70 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Harris's story includes additional episodes. Here I have extracted only the episode of type 122F from his longer story. Return to the table of contents . Related links Three Billy Goats Gruff and other talesof type 122E. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 4, 2008. The Luck of Edenhall (Eden Hall) The Luck of Edenhall (Eden Hall) edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2005-2019 Contents The Luck of Edenhall (1) . A fairy legend from Cumberland, England. The Luck of Eden Hall (2) . Another version of the above legend. The Luck of Eden Hall (3) . A third version of the above legend. The Luck of Eden Hall (4) A fourth version of the above legend. Link to another account of this legend: The Luck of Eden Hall: A Tale of the Musgraves . Das Glück von Edenhall . A German ballad by Ludwig Uhland. The Luck of Edenhall . An English translation of Uhland's ballad by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. Link to a description of the antique goblet "The Luck of Edenhall" on display at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. Link to additional Fairy Cup Legends . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Luck of Edenhall (1) England In an excursion to the North of England, I was easily prevailed upon to see the Luck of Edenhall ,* [*Edenhall, the antient seat of Sir Philip Musgrave, near Penrith, Cumberland] celebrated in a ballad of Ritson's Select Collection of English Songs. The only description I can give you of it is, a very thin, bell-mouthed, beaker glass, deep and narrow, ornamented on the outside with fancy work of coloured glass, and may hold something more than a pint. Antient superstition may have contributed not a little to its preservation; but that it should not, in a more enlightened age, or in moments of conviviality (see the Ballad), meet with one gentle rap (and a gentle one would be quite sufficient for an ordinary glass of the same substance), is to me somewhat wonderful. Superstition, however, cannot be entirely eradicated from the mind at once. The late agent of the family had such a reverential regard for this glass, that he would not suffer any person to touch it, and but few to see it . When the family, or other curious people, had a desire to drink out of it, a napkin was held underneath, less any accident should befall it; and it is still carefully preserved in a case made on purpose. The case is said to be the second, yet bears the marks of antiquity, and is charged with ihs . Tradition, our only guide here, says, that a party of Fairies were drinking and making merry round a well near the Hall, called St. Cuthbert's well; but, being interrupted by the intrusion of some curious people, they were frightened, and made a hasty retreat, and left the cup in question: one of the last screaming out, If this cup should break or fall, Farewell the Luck of Edenhall. Source: George Laurence Gomme, editor, The Gentleman's Magazine Library: Being Classified Collection of the Chief Contents of the Gentleman's Magazine from 1731 to 1868: Popular Superstititions (London: Elliot Stock, 1884), pp. 189-90 . These pages are reprinted from The Gentleman's Magazine , 1791, part 2, pp. 721 ff. The ballad alluded to is reproduced on pages 190-93 of the above volume. This glass is now on display at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. Return to the table of contents . The Luck of Eden Hall (2) England In this house (Eden Hall, a seat of the Musgraves), are some good old-fashioned, apartments. An old painted drinking glass, called the Luck of Eden Hall , is preserved with great care. In the garden near to the house is a well of excellent spring water, called St. Cuthbert's Well. (The church is dedicated to that saint.) This glass is supposed to have been a sacred chalice; but the legendary tale is, that the butler, going to draw water, surprised a company of Fairies, who were amusing themselves upon the green near the well; he seized the glass which was standing upon its margin. They tried to recover it; but, after an ineffectual struggle, flew away, saying, If that glass either break or fall, Farewell the luck of Eden Hall. Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of various Countries , vol. 2 (London: Whittaker, Treacher, and Company, 1833), pp. 111-12 . Keightley's source: William Hutchinson, The History of the County of Cumberland , vol. 1 (Carlisle: F. Jolie, 1794), p. 269 . This glass is now on display at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. Return to the table of contents . The Luck of Eden Hall Joseph Ritson In Eden Hall, in Cumberland, the mansion of the knightly family of Musgrave for many generations, is carefully preserved, in a leathern case, an old painted drinking glass, which, according to the tradition of the neighborhood, was long ago left by fairies near a well not far from the house, with an inscription along with it to this effect: If this glass do break or fall, Farewell the luck of Eden Hall. From this friendly caution the glass obtained the name recorded in a humorous and excellent ballad, usually, but erroneously attributed to the Duke of Wharton, of a famous drinking match at this place, which begins thus: God prosper long from being broke, The luck of Eden Hall. The good fortune, however, of this ancient house was never so much endangered as by the Duke himself, who, having drunk its contents, to the success and perpetuity, no doubt of the worthy owner and his race, inadvertently dropped it, and here, most certainly, would have terminated The Luck of Eden Hall if the butler, who had brought the draught, and stood at his elbow to receive the empty cup, had not happily caught it in his napkin. Source: Joseph Ritson, Fairy Tales, Now First Collected , to which are prefixed two dissertations: 1. On Pygmies; 2. On Fairies (London: Printed for Payne and Foss and William Pickering by Thomas Davison, 1831), tale 19, pp. 150-51 . This glass is now on display at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. Return to the table of contents . The Luck of Eden Hall (4) Evelyn Blantyre Simpson The elves were hospitable. They liked their human neighbours to eat, drink, and be merry with them. Endless tales are told of them biding their big neighbours, who strayed in among them while they were carousing, to partake of their feast. A goblet in which they were drinking a "richt gude willie waught" in their sovereign's honour roused the envy of a Musgrave. He rushed in, seized the glass, mounted in hot haste and galloped away with his stolen trophy. Some authorities hold that the good folk are not averse to crossing running water. It is only a wicked class of them whose powers are blunted by traversing flowing streams. But legend tells us Musgrave pressed his steed towards the brook, for he knew if once he forded it, the rain of fairy flints showered at him, and all pursuit, would cease. His terrified courser, spurred by steel and fear, leapt the water. Safe across the river he paused, and borne on the breeze, Musgrave heard his despoiled pursuers forgivingly sing: Joy to thy banner, bold Sir Knight, But if yon goblet break or fall, Farewell thy vantage in the fight. Farewell the luck of Eden Hall. In the Musgraves' Cumberland home the illicitly-obtained "luck" -- a glass goblet -- remains intact, carefully preserved. Source (books.google.com): Evelyn Blantyre Simpson, Folk Lore in Lowland Scotland (London: J. M. Dent and company, 1908), pp. 107-108 . Source (Internet Archive): Evelyn Blantyre Simpson, Folk Lore in Lowland Scotland (London: J. M. Dent and company, 1908), pp. 107-108 . Return to the table of contents . Das Glück von Edenhall Ludwig Uhland Von Edenhall der junge Lord Läßt schmettern Festtrommetenschall, Er hebt sich an des Tisches Bord Und ruft in trunkner Gäste Schwall: »Nun her mit dem Glücke von Edenhall!« Der Schenk vernimmt ungern den Spruch, Des Hauses ältester Vasall, Nimmt zögernd aus dem seidnen Tuch Das hohe Trinkglas von Kristall, Sie nennen's: das Glück von Edenhall . Darauf der Lord: »Dem Glas zum Preis Schenk Roten ein aus Portugal!« Mit Händezittern gießt der Greis, Und purpurn Licht wird überall, Es strahlt aus dem Glücke von Edenhall. Da spricht der Lord und schwingt's dabei: »Dies Glas von leuchtendem Kristall Gab meinem Ahn am Quell die Fei, Drein schrieb sie: kommt dies Glas zu Fall, Fahr wohl dann, o Glück von Edenhall! Ein Kelchglas ward zum Los mit Fug Dem freud'gen Stamm von Edenhall; Wir schlürfen gern in vollem Zug, Wir läuten gern mit lautem Schall; Stoßt an mit dem Glücke von Edenhall!« Erst klingt es milde, tief und voll, Gleich dem Gesang der Nachtigall, Dann wie des Waldstroms laut Geroll, Zuletzt erdröhnt wie Donnerhall Das herrliche Glück von Edenhall. »Zum Horte nimmt ein kühn Geschlecht Sich den zerbrechlichen Kristall; Er dauert länger schon als recht, Stoßt an! mit diesem kräft'gen Prall Versuch ich das Glück von Edenhall.« Und als das Trinkglas gellend springt, Springt das Gewölb mit jähem Knall, Und aus dem Riß die Flamme dringt; Die Gäste sind zerstoben all Mit dem brechenden Glücke von Edenhall. Ein stürmt der Feind, mit Brand und Mord, Der in der Nacht erstieg den Wall, Vom Schwerte fällt der junge Lord, Hält in der Hand noch den Kristall, Das zersprungene Glück von Edenhall. Am Morgen irrt der Schenk allein, Der Greis, in der zerstörten Hall', Er sucht des Herrn verbrannt Gebein, Er sucht im grausen Trümmerfall Die Scherben des Glücks von Edenhall. »Die Steinwand – spricht er – springt zu Stück, Die hohe Säule muß zu Fall, Glas ist der Erde Stolz und Glück, In Splitter fällt der Erdenball Einst gleich dem Glücke von Edenhall.« Return to the table of contents . The Luck of Edenhall Henry Wadsworth Longfellow From the German of [Ludwig] Uhland The tradition upon which this ballad is founded, and the "shards of the Luck of Edenhall," still exist in England. The goblet is in the possession of Sir Christopher Musgrave, Bart., of Eden Hall, Cumberland; and is not so entirely shattered as the ballad leaves it [note by Longfellow]. Of Edenhall, the youthful Lord Bids sound the festal trumpet's call. He rises at the banquet board, And cries, 'mid the drunken revellers all, "Now bring me the Luck of Edenhall!" The butler hears the words with pain, The house's oldest seneschal, Takes slow from its silken cloth again The drinking glass of crystal tall; They call it The Luck of Edenhall. Then said the Lord, "This glass to praise, Fill with red wine from Portugal!" The graybeard with trembling hand obeys; A purple light shines over all, It beams from the Luck of Edenhall. Then speaks the Lord, and waves it light: "This glass of flashing crystal tall Gave to my sires the Fountain-Sprite; She wrote in it, If this glass doth fall, Farewell then, O Luck of Edenhall! "'Twas right a goblet the Fate should be Of the joyous race of Edenhall! Deep draughts drink we right willingly: And willingly ring, with merry call, Kling! klang! to the Luck of Edenhall!" First rings it deep, and full, and mild, Like to the song of a nightingale Then like the roar of a torrent wild; Then mutters at last like the thunder's fall, The glorious Luck of Edenhall. "For its keeper takes a race of might, The fragile goblet of crystal tall; It has lasted longer than is right; King! klang!--with a harder blow than all Will I try the Luck of Edenhall!" As the goblet ringing flies apart, Suddenly cracks the vaulted hall; And through the rift, the wild flames start; The guests in dust are scattered all, With the breaking Luck of Edenhall! In storms the foe, with fire and sword; He in the night had scaled the wall, Slain by the sword lies the youthful Lord, But holds in his hand the crystal tall, The shattered Luck of Edenhall. On the morrow the butler gropes alone, The graybeard in the desert hall, He seeks his Lord's burnt skeleton, He seeks in the dismal ruin's fall The shards of the Luck of Edenhall. "The stone wall," saith he, "doth fall aside, Down must the stately columns fall; Glass is this earth's Luck and Pride; In atoms shall fall this earthly ball One day like the Luck of Edenhall!" Source: Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Ballads and Other Poems , 3rd edition (Cambridge: John Owen, 1842), pp. 48-52 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 6, 2019. The Emperor's New Clothes: Tales of type 1620 The Emperor's New Clothes and other tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1620 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2019 Contents The Emperor's New Clothes (Denmark). The Invisible Cloth (Spain). How Eulenspiegel Painted the Forbears of the Landgrave of Hessen (Germany). Fine Thread (Russia). The Miller with the Golden Thumb (England). The King's New Turban (Turkey). The King and the Clever Girl (India). The Invisible Silk Robe (Sri Lanka). Links to related tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Emperor's New Clothes Denmark Many years ago there lived an emperor who loved beautiful new clothes so much that he spent all his money on being finely dressed. His only interest was in going to the theater or in riding about in his carriage where he could show off his new clothes. He had a different costume for every hour of the day. Indeed, where it was said of other kings that they were at court, it could only be said of him that he was in his dressing room! One day two swindlers came to the emperor's city. They said that they were weavers, claiming that they knew how to make the finest cloth imaginable. Not only were the colors and the patterns extraordinarily beautiful, but in addition, this material had the amazing property that it was to be invisible to anyone who was incompetent or stupid. "It would be wonderful to have clothes made from that cloth," thought the emperor. "Then I would know which of my men are unfit for their positions, and I'd also be able to tell clever people from stupid ones." So he immediately gave the two swindlers a great sum of money to weave their cloth for him. They set up their looms and pretended to go to work, although there was nothing at all on the looms. They asked for the finest silk and the purest gold, all of which they hid away, continuing to work on the empty looms, often late into the night. "I would really like to know how they are coming with the cloth!" thought the emperor, but he was a bit uneasy when he recalled that anyone who was unfit for his position or stupid would not be able to see the material. Of course, he himself had nothing to fear, but still he decided to send someone else to see how the work was progressing. "I'll send my honest old minister to the weavers," thought the emperor. He's the best one to see how the material is coming. He is very sensible, and no one is more worthy of his position than he. So the good old minister went into the hall where the two swindlers sat working at their empty looms. "Goodness!" thought the old minister, opening his eyes wide. "I cannot see a thing!" But he did not say so. The two swindlers invited him to step closer, asking him if it wasn't a beautiful design and if the colors weren't magnificent. They pointed to the empty loom, and the poor old minister opened his eyes wider and wider. He still could see nothing, for nothing was there. "Gracious" he thought. "Is it possible that I am stupid? I have never thought so. Am I unfit for my position? No one must know this. No, it will never do for me to say that I was unable to see the material." "You aren't saying anything!" said one of the weavers. "Oh, it is magnificent! The very best!" said the old minister, peering through his glasses. "This pattern and these colors! Yes, I'll tell the emperor that I am very satisfied with it!" "That makes us happy!" said the two weavers, and they called the colors and the unusual pattern by name. The old minister listened closely so that he would be able say the same things when he reported back to the emperor, and that is exactly what he did. The swindlers now asked for more money, more silk, and more gold, all of which they hid away. Then they continued to weave away as before on the empty looms. The emperor sent other officials as well to observe the weavers' progress. They too were startled when they saw nothing, and they too reported back to him how wonderful the material was, advising him to have it made into clothes that he could wear in a grand procession. The entire city was alive in praise of the cloth. "Magnifique! Nysseligt! Excellent!" they said, in all languages. The emperor awarded the swindlers with medals of honor, bestowing on each of them the title Lord Weaver. The swindlers stayed up the entire night before the procession was to take place, burning more than sixteen candles. Everyone could see that they were in a great rush to finish the emperor's new clothes. They pretended to take the material from the looms. They cut in the air with large scissors. They sewed with needles but without any thread. Finally they announced, "Behold! The clothes are finished!" The emperor came to them with his most distinguished cavaliers. The two swindlers raised their arms as though they were holding something and said, "Just look at these trousers! Here is the jacket! This is the cloak!" and so forth. "They are as light as spider webs! You might think that you didn't have a thing on, but that is the good thing about them." "Yes," said the cavaliers, but they couldn't see a thing, for nothing was there. "Would his imperial majesty, if it please his grace, kindly remove his clothes." said the swindlers. "Then we will fit you with the new ones, here in front of the large mirror." The emperor took off all his clothes, and the swindlers pretended to dress him, piece by piece, with the new ones that were to be fitted. They took hold of his waist and pretended to tie something about him. It was the train. Then the emperor turned and looked into the mirror. "Goodness, they suit you well! What a wonderful fit!" they all said. "What a pattern! What colors! Such luxurious clothes!" "The canopy to be carried above your majesty awaits outside," said the grandmaster of ceremonies. "Yes, I am ready!" said the emperor. "Don't they fit well?" He turned once again toward the mirror, because it had to appear as though he were admiring himself in all his glory. The chamberlains who were to carry the train held their hands just above the floor as if they were picking up the train. As they walked they pretended to hold the train high, for they could not let anyone notice that they could see nothing. The emperor walked beneath the beautiful canopy in the procession, and all the people in the street and in their windows said, "Goodness, the emperor's new clothes are incomparable! What a beautiful train on his jacket. What a perfect fit!" No one wanted it to be noticed that he could see nothing, for then it would be said that he was unfit for his position or that he was stupid. None of the emperor's clothes had ever before received such praise. "But he doesn't have anything on!" said a small child. "Good Lord, let us hear the voice of an innocent child!" said the father, and whispered to another what the child had said. "A small child said that he doesn't have anything on!" Finally everyone was saying, "He doesn't have anything on!" The emperor shuddered, for he knew that they were right, but he thought, "The procession must go on!" He carried himself even more proudly, and the chamberlains walked along behind carrying the train that wasn't there. Source: Hans Christian Andersen, Keiserens nye klæder (1837). Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Andersen's source: " The Invisible Cloth ," Spanish story recorded by Don Juan Manuel (1282-1348). Andersen knew this story through a German translation "So ist der Lauf der Welt ("Such Is the Way of the World"), in: Eduard von Bülow, Das Novellenbuch , vol. 4 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1836), no. 3, pp. 40-44 . Return to the table of contents . The Invisible Cloth Spain Three impostors came to a king, and told him they were cloth-weavers, and could fabricate a cloth of so peculiar a nature that a legitimate son of his father could see the cloth; but if he were illegitimate, though believed to be legitimate, he could not see it. Now the king was much pleased at this, thinking that by this means he would be able to distinguish the men in his kingdom who were legitimate sons of their supposed fathers from those who were not, and so be enabled to increase his treasures, for among the Moors only legitimate children inherit their father's property; and for this end he ordered a palace to be appropriated to the manufacture of this cloth. And these men, in order to convince him that they had no intention of deceiving him, agreed to be shut up in this palace until the cloth was manufactured, which satisfied the king. When they were supplied with a large quantity of gold, silver, silk, and many other things, they entered the palace, and, putting their looms in order, gave it to be understood that they were working all day at the cloth. After some days, one of them came to the king and told him the cloth was commenced, that it was the most curious thing in the world, describing the design and construction; he then prayed the king to favor them with a visit, but begged he would come alone. The king was much pleased, but wishing to have the opinion of some one first, sent the lord chamberlain to see it, in order to know if they were deceiving him. When the lord chamberlain saw the workmen, and heard all they had to say, he dared not admit he could not see the cloth, and when he returned to the king he stated that he had seen it; the king sent yet another, who gave the same report. When they whom he had sent declared that they had seen the cloth he determined to go himself. On entering the palace and seeing the men at work, who began to describe the texture and relate the origin of the invention as also the design and color, in which they all appeared to agree, although in reality they were not working; when the king saw how they appeared to work, and heard the character of the cloth so minutely described, and yet could not see it, although those he had sent had seen it, he began to feel very uneasy, fearing he might not be the son of the king, who was supposed to be his father, and that if he acknowledged he could not see the cloth he might lose his kingdom; under this impression he commenced praising the fabric, describing its peculiarities after the manner of the workmen. On the return to his palace he related to his people how good and marvelous was the cloth, yet at the same time suspected something wrong. At the end of two or three days the king requested his Alguacil (or officer of justice) to go and see the cloth. When the Alguacil entered and saw the workmen, who, as before, described the figures and pattern of the cloth, knowing that the king had been to see it, and yet could not see it himself, he thought he certainly could not be the legitimate son of his father, and therefore could not see it. He, however, feared if he was to declare that he could not see it he would lose his honorable position; to avoid this mischance he commenced praising the cloth even more vehemently than the others. When the Alguacil returned to the king and told him that he had seen the cloth, and that it was the most extraordinary production in the world, the king was much disconcerted; for he thought that if the Alguacil had seen the cloth, which he was unable to see, there could no longer be a doubt that he was not the legitimate son of the king, as was generally supposed, he therefore did not hesitate to praise the excellency of the cloth and the skill of the workmen who were able to make it. On another day he sent one of his councillors, and it happened to him as to the king and the others of whom I have spoken; and in this manner and for this reason they deceived the king and many others, for no one dared to say he could not see the cloth. Things went on thus until there came a great feast, when all requested the king to be dressed in some of the cloth; so the workmen, being ordered, brought some rolled up in a very fine linen and inquired of the king how much of it he wished them to cut off; so the king gave orders how much and how to make it up. Now when the clothes were made and the feast day had arrived the weavers brought them to the king, informing his majesty that his dress was made of the cloth as he had directed, the king all this time not daring to say he could not see it. When the king had professed to dress himself in this suit he mounted on horseback and rode into the city; but fortunately for him it was summertime. The people seeing his majesty come in this manner were much surprised; but knowing that those who could not see this cloth would be considered illegitimate sons of their fathers, kept their surprise to themselves, fearing the dishonor consequent upon such a declaration. Not so, however, with a negro, who happened to notice the king thus equipped; for he, having nothing to lose, came to him and said, "Sire, to me it matters not whose son I am, therefore I tell you that you are riding without any clothes." On this the king commenced beating him, saying that he was not the legitimate son of his supposed father, and therefore it was that he could not see the cloth. But no sooner had the negro said this, than others were convinced of its truth, and said the same; until, at last, the king and all with him lost their fear of declaring the truth, and saw through the trick of which these impostors had made them the victims. When the weavers were sought for they were found to have fled, taking with them all they had received from the king by their imposition. Source: Don Juan Manuel, Count Lucanor; or, The Fifty Pleasant Stories of Patronio , written by the Prince Don Juan Manuel and first done into English by James York, M.D., 1869 (London: Gibbings and Company, 1899), chapter 7, pp. 52-58 . "The Fifty Pleasant Stories of Patronio" is part the the Libro de los ejemplos del conde Lucanor y de Patronio , written in 1335 by Juan Manuel, Prince of Villena (1282-1348). Link to the text of this story in Spanish: Un rey con tres hombres burladores . Return to the table of contents . How Eulenspiegel Painted the Forbears of the Landgrave of Hessen Germany Many marvellous things did Eulenspiegel bring to pass in the land of Hessen. After that he had journeyed up and down in the country of Saxony, and his fame had spread so abroad that no longer dare he work his knaveries and beguilings in that land, came our worshipful master forth from Saxony, and did enter into the land of Hessen, and came therein unto Marburg, unto the landgrave where that he kept his court. Then inquired the landgrave of Eulenspiegel, what manner of man he was and what he could do. Then answered Eulenspiegel, and said: "Lord, I know the arts, and that manner of man am I, and your humble servant." Thereat rejoiced the landgrave greatly, for he thought that Eulenspiegel was an alchymist, and in alchymy had the landgrave much delight. Then spake he unto him, saying: "Art thou an alchymist?" And Eulenspiegel answered: "Nay, that am I not, in good sooth, for of dross make not I gold, but rather quite the other thing. Yet am I a painter, the equal unto whom can be nowhere found in any country, for my work is far better than the work of any other painter." Then said the landgrave: "Come, let us now look upon some of thy work." And Eulenspiegel said: "Yea, my lord." And he had with him some paintings cunningly devised, the which he had brought out of Flanders. These took he from his wallet, and displayed them before that prince. These pleased the lord much, and he said unto Eulenspiegel: "Worshipful sir painter, what money will ye have if that ye would paint on the wall of our castle hall the story of the family of the landgraves of Hessen, and how that through them I became friendly unto and with the King of Hungary, and other lords and princes, and how long the land of Hessen hath been established? And that must ye tell me in the wise that will be most costly and precious." Then answered Eulenspiegel: "Behold, most gracious prince, if that ye would have it so rarely done, it might truly cost not less than four hundred marks." Then answered the landgrave, and said unto Eulenspiegel: "Master, an if you do but make it rarely, the money shall not fail, nor will we forget to reward thee as ye shall deserve." Then did Eulenspiegel consent to become the painter of the picture; and thereat gave the landgrave unto Eulenspiegel one hundred marks so that he might buy colours therewith. But when that Eulenspiegel came with three servants he had found, to see what the work was which was to be done, he gat him unto the landgrave, and spake unto him, and entreated him, saying: "Behold, noble prince, I would crave a grace from ye, which I would ask that ye should grant unto me." Then spake the landgrave: "Yea, that I will grant thee. Speak on." And Eulenspiegel answered, and said: "The grace I crave from thee is, that, while my work is going forward, no one shall enter without that they ask of me whether they may enter therein." And therewith the landgrave granted Eulenspiegel the grace he desired. Then conferred Eulenspiegel with his men, and said unto them, that they must take an oath unto him not to betray him; and so did they. And he said unto them, that they need not do any kind of labour, but they might play at tables and chess and other merry pastimes. And thereat were the men content; nor was it greatly marvellous that in such wise they should be, for Eulenspiegel did promise to pay them for serving him after this manner. Then it came to pass, after some three or four weeks had gone by, that the landgrave craved much to see in what measure the painting of Eulenspiegel was ready, and whether, of a truth, it did resemble the ensamples which Eulenspiegel had shewn unto him, which were so goodly and fair. Thereat gat he him to Eulenspiegel, and said unto him: "Alas, most worshipful master, I would fain come into the hall and see in what measure my picture doth grow ready." Then Eulenspiegel spake unto the landgrave, and answered him, and said: "Yea, and that shall ye also do. But I must tell unto thee a marvellous secret which doth touch all my painting, in that no one, if he be ignobly born, or not according unto the ordinance of Holy Church, can behold my painting to see it." The landgrave said thereafter: "Truly that is a marvellous thing." Yet, my masters, ye may perceive in that the landgrave was an alchymist, so had he also more belief in such affairs than cometh unto the lot of all men. And then went he with Eulenspiegel into the hall, and there had Eulenspiegel hanged up a white cloth, that he should have painted. And with a white wand did he point to the wall when that he had with his hand put the cloth somewhat aside, and then spake he to the landgrave, and said unto him: "Most noble landgrave, look upon this painting, so marvellous well done and with fair colours, and behold here in this corner he that was first lord of Hessen and earl of the land. And here perceive ye one that was an earl of Rome there unto, and he had a princess and a wife, who was duchess of Bavaria and a daughter of the mild and good Justinian, who afterwards became emperor. And look ye, noble lord; of them was born Adolphus. And of Adolphus came William the Swart; and this William had a son Ludwig, who was named the Pious; and so forward until that we come down unto your lordship's grace. And I know well that there is no person living that can reprove my work, so curiously have I made it, and with such fair and goodly colours." Yet saw the lord nought before his face but the white wall, and he thought unto himself: "Though I see no thing but the wall, yet will I say nought unto the master, else will he know full well that L am not nobly born, but basely and vilely." Therefore said the landgrave unto Eulenspiegel: "Learned and cunning master painter, your work pleaseth me marvellously well, yet is my understanding very small therein." Therefore departed he out of the hall. And when that he did come unto the princess his wife, she spake unto him, and asked him, saying: "How goeth it with the master painter? Ye have seen his work and devices, and how are ye pleased therewith? Truly have I but small belief in him; for he seemeth unto me a rare and most cunning knave and beguiler." And the landgrave answered her: "I have shrewd trust in him; and therein is displayed great cunning and mastery; I like it well. Would it please thee also to look thereon?" And she said: "Yea, that it would." And the landgrave said: "Then, with the master's consent, shall ye do it." Then sent she for Eulenspiegel, and said unto him, that she did desire to behold his painting. And that did Eulenspiegel grant unto her; but he told her likewise the marvellous secret which did hang upon his painting. And they entered in, and with the princess came eight maidens of her women and her woman-fool, which did everywhere be in her company. And Eulenspiegel put back the cloth with his hand, and with his wand told them the same story which he had told unto the landgrave. Yet perceived they nothing; but being ashamed, spake not any word, neither praising nor blaming the picture. But then did the woman-fool open her mouth, and spake, and said unto Eulenspiegel: "Worshipful master, an if it be that I am basely born, yet see I no thing of thy device upon the wall." And Eulenspiegel thought: "Now goeth the matter not so rarely on as before; for if the fools speak truth, then truly must I depart hence," and laughed thereat within himself. Thereafter departed the princess, and went unto her lord and husband, and he spake unto her, and asked her how that the work liked [pleased] her. And she answered and said: "Most gracious lord, it liketh me as well as it did you, and truly is most rare. But my woman-fool it liketh not; and she saith that she cannot see any painting there at all. And she and my maidens think that there lieth hid some knavish practice therein." Thereat began the landgrave to take counsel within himself, if it might be that he was beguiled; but he sent word unto Eulenspiegel that he should make ready his work, for that all his court was coming to behold the picture, and that if any among them fortuned to be base-born, then should their lands be escheated unto the landgrave. Thereat gat him Eulenspiegel unto his fellows and discharged them, and gave them money, and they departed. And then went he unto the treasurer, and of him gat he other hundred marks; and then went he forth from the castle, and so departed on his way. And it came to pass that on the morrow the landgrave demanded where that his painter might be -- but he had departed. Thereat went he with all his lords into the hall where that the master had exercised his cunning device, but there saw they no painting; so they spake no words, but kept their mouths shut. Thereat said the landgrave, for he beheld the sign which Eulenspiegel did always write where that he had worked any knavery, which was that he wrote up the device of an owl [Eule] and a glass [Spiegel]: "Now do we know that we are be guiled; and with Eulenspiegel have we but little for to be moved, but rather for the two hundred marks, but the loss thereof can we likewise bear. But a great knave is he, and must henceforth remain far from our lands." Thus did our noble Master Eulenspiegel everywhere teach wisdom unto the lieges; but from Marburg had he gat him forth, nor would he again have to do with the painter's mastery. Source: The Marvellous Adventures and Rare Conceits of Master Tyll Owlglass [Till Eulenspiegel] , newly collected, chronicled and set forth in our English tongue by Kenneth R. H. Mackenzie (London: Trübner and Company, 1860), adventure 28, pp. 43-49 . Mackenzie, unlike most modern translators, gives Eulenspiegel an English name: Owlglass . I have taken the liberty to restore his German name. Till Eulenspiegel (Low German Dyl Ulenspegel or Dyl Ulenspiegel ; English Till Owlglass ) is a legendary German trickster said to have lived between about 1300 and 1350. His exploits are described in a number of chapbooks, including Ein kurtzweilig Lesen von Dyl Ulenspiegel, geboren uß dem Land zu Brunßwick, wie er sein leben volbracht hat (Strasbourg, 1510-11). Link to the text of this tale in modern German: Karl Simrock, Die deutschen Volksbücher , vol 10 (Frankfurt am Main: Druck und Verlag von Heinrich Ludwig Brönner, 1864), pp. 368-72 . Return to the table of contents . Fine Thread Russia A man ordered some fine thread from a spinner. The spinner spun it for him, but the man said that the thread was not good, and that he wanted the finest thread he could get. The spinner said: "If this is not fine enough, take this!" and she pointed to an empty space. He said that he did not see any. The spinner said: "You do not see it, because it is so fine. I do not see it myself." The fool was glad, and ordered some more thread of this kind, and paid her for what he got. Source (books.google.com): Leo Tolstoy, Fables for Children; Stories for Children; Natural Science Stories; Popular Education; Decembrists; Moral Tales (London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1904), p. 19 . Source (Internet Archive): Leo Tolstoy, Fables for Children; Stories for Children; Natural Science Stories; Popular Education; Decembrists; Moral Tales (Boston: Dana Estes and Company, 1904), p. 19 . Return to the table of contents . The Miller with the Golden Thumb England A merchant that thought to deride a miller sitting among company said to him, "Sir, I have heard that every honest miller that tells the truth has a golden thumb." The miller answered and said it was true. Then the merchant said, "I pray, let me see your thumb." And when the miller showed his thumb, the merchant said, "I cannot perceive that your thumb is gold. It is the same as other men's thumbs." The miller answered, and said, "Sir, the truth is that my thumb is gold, but you have no power to see it, for it has the property that he who is a cuckold shall never have power to see it." Source: W. Carew Hazlitt, "Of the mylner with the golden thombe," Shakespeare Jest-Books: Reprints of the Early and Very Rare Jest-Books Supposed to Have Been Used by Shakespeare (London: Willis and Sotheran, 1864), p. 23 . Language modernized by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The King's New Turban Turkey Of old time there was a great king. One day a man came before him and said, "My king, I shall weave a turban such that one born in wedlock will see it, while the bastard will see it not." The king marveled and ordered that that weaver should weave that turban; and the weaver received an allowance from the king and tarried a long while. One day he folded up this side and that side of a paper and brought it and laid it before the king and said, "Oh king, I have woven that turban." So the king opened the paper and saw that there was nothing; and all the viziers and nobles who stood there looked on the paper and saw nothing. Then the king said in his heart, "Do you see? I am then a bastard"; and he was sad. And he thought, "Now, the remedy is this, that I say it is a goodly turban and admire it, else will I be put to shame before the folk." And he said, "Blessed by God! Oh master, it is a goodly turban, I like it much." Then that weaver youth said, "Oh king, let them bring a cap that I may wind the turban for the king." They brought a cap, and the weaver youth laid that paper before him and moved his hands as though he wound the turban, and he put it on the king's head. All the nobles who were standing there said, "Blessed be it! Oh king, how fair, how beautiful a turban!" and they applauded it much. Then the king rose and went with two viziers into a private room and said, "Oh viziers, I am then a bastard; I see not the turban." The viziers said, "Oh king, we too see it not." At length they knew of a surety that the turban had not existence, and that that weaver had thus played a trick for the sake of money. Source: Sheykh-Zada, The History of the Forty Vezirs; or, the Story of the Forty Morns and Eves , translated by E. J. W. Gibb (London: George Redway, 1886), pp. 148-49 . The tale's original title is "The Lady's Twelfth Story." The History of the Forty Vezirs is the translation of a manuscript prepared apparently in the early seventeenth century, but based on much older stories, similar in style and function to those found in the 1001 Nights . Return to the table of contents . The King and the Clever Girl India There was once a king who, during the day, used to sit on his throne and dispense justice, but who at night was accustomed to disguise himself and to wander about the streets of his city looking for adventures. One evening he was passing by a certain garden when he observed four young girls sitting under a tree, and conversing together in earnest tones. Curious to overhear the subject of their discourse, he stopped to listen. One of the girls said, "I think of all tastes the pleasantest in the world is the taste of telling lies." This remark so interested the king that the next day he summoned the girl to his palace. "Tell me," he said, "what you and your companions talked about under the tree last night." "It was not about the king," answered she. "Nevertheless," asked he, "what was it you said?" "Those who tell lies, said I, must tell them because they find the practice agreeable," replied she. "Whose daughter are you?" inquired the king. "I am the daughter of a farmer," answered the girl. "And what made you think there was pleasure in telling lies?" asked the king. The girl answered saucily, "Oh, you yourself will tell lies someday!" "How?" said the king. "What can you mean?" The girl answered, "If you will give me two lacs of rupees, and six months to consider, I will promise to prove my words." So the king gave the girl the sum of money she asked for, and agreed to her conditions. After six months he called her to his presence again, and reminded her of her promise. Now, in the interval the girl had built a fine palace far away in the forest, upon which she had expended the wealth which the king had given to her. It was beautifully adorned with carvings and paintings, and furnished with silk and satin. So she now said to the king, "Come with me, and you shall see God." Taking with him two of his ministers, the king went out, and by the evening they all arrived at the palace. "This palace is the abode of God," said the girl. "But he will reveal himself only to one person at a time, and he will not reveal himself even to him unless he was born in lawful wedlock. Therefore, while the rest remain without, let each of you enter in order." "Be it so," said the king. "But let my ministers precede me. I shall go in last." So the first minister passed through the door and at once found himself in a noble room, and as he looked around he said to himself, "Who knows whether I shall be permitted to see God or not? I may be a bastard. And yet this place, so spacious and so beautiful, is a fitting dwelling place even for the deity." With all his looking and straining, however, he quite failed to see God anywhere. Then said he to himself, "If now I go out and declare that I have not seen God, the king and the other minister will throw it in my teeth that I am base-born. I have only one course open, therefore, which is to say that I have seen him." So he went out, and when the king asked, "Have you seen God?" he answered at once, "Of course I have seen God." "But have you really seen him?" continued the king. "Really and truly," answered the minister. "And what did he say to you?" inquired the king further. "God commanded me not to divulge his words," readily answered the minister. Then said the king to the other minister, "Now you go in." The second minister lost no time in obeying his master's order, thinking in his heart as he crossed the threshold, "I wonder if I am base-born?" Finding himself in the midst of the magnificent chamber, he gazed about him on all sides, but failed to see God. Then said he to himself, "It is very possible I am base-born, for no God can I see. But it would be a lasting disgrace that I should admit it. I had better make out that I also have seen God." Accordingly, he returned to the king, who said to him, "Well, have you seen God?" when the minister asserted that he had not only seen him, but that he had spoken with him too. It was now the turn of the king, and he entered the room confident that he would be similarly favored. But he gazed around in dismay, perceiving no sign of anything which could even represent the Almighty. Then began he to think to himself, "This God, wherever he is, has been seen by both my ministers, and it cannot be denied, therefore, that their birthright is clear. Is it possible that I, the king, am a bastard, seeing that no God appears to me? The very thought is confusion, and necessity will compel me to assert that I have seen him too." Having formed this resolution, the king stepped out and joined the rest of his party. "And now, O king," asked the cunning girl, "have you also seen God?" "Yes," answered he with assurance, "I have seen God." "Really?" asked she again. "Certainly," asserted the king. Three times the girl asked the same question, and three times the king unblushingly lied. Then said the girl, "O king, have you never a conscience? How could you possibly see God, seeing that God is a spirit?" Hearing this reproof, the king recalled to mind the saying of the girl that one day he would lie too, and, with a laugh, he confessed that he had not seen God at all. The two ministers, beginning to feel alarmed, confessed the truth as well. Then said the girl, "O king, we poor people may tell lies occasionally to save our lives, but what had you to fear? Telling lies, therefore, for many has its own attractions, and to them at least the taste of lying is sweet." Far from being offended at the stratagem which the girl had practiced on him, the king was so struck with her ingenuity and assurance that he married her forthwith, and in a short time she became his confidential adviser in all his affairs, public as well as private. Thus this simple girl came to great honor and renown, and so much did she grow in wisdom that her fame spread through many lands. Source: Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 22, pp. 56-62 . Swynnerton's story includes three additional episodes, one dealing with each of the girls overheard by the king. Link to the entire story, with its original title: The Story of the King and the Four Girls . Return to the table of contents . The Invisible Silk Robe Sri Lanka A Brahman wrote seven stanzas in praise of his king's copper-colored silk robes. Seven men heard these stanzas and resolved to trick a foolish king from another city. Traveling to that city, the seven men said to the king, "Maharaja, what sort of robe is your majesty wearing? We have woven a copper-colored silk robe for the king of our city. It is like the thin silk robes from the divine world. In comparison to our king, you look like one of his servants." Thus spoke the seven men. These words brought shame to the king. Thus filled with shame, he thought to himself, "I too am a king. Can I not have such robes woven for me as well?" Then he asked, "What would you require to weave such silk robes?" The seven men replied, "You must obtain good silk thread and give it to us. Then construct for us a place in your festival garden and provide us with food and drink." Then they added, "The silk cloth that we weave is not visible to a low-born person; only a well-born person can see it." So the king procured silk thread for the men. The men took it to the festival garden and put it away. People came to the festival garden to look at the copper-colored silk robe. The seven men were there at work. The people could see their motions of weaving, cutting, and stitching, but the silk robe itself was not visible. Hence each man thought to himself, "I must be low-born, for I cannot see this copper-colored silk robe." And what if these were their thoughts! Each person kept them to himself, and no one uttered them aloud. The king sent a messenger to see if the robe was finished. He saw the seven men's motions of weaving and stitching, but the robe itself was not visible. "If I report that I did not see the robe, they will say that I am the son of a courtesan," he thought. To hide his shame, the messenger returned to the royal house and said, "The men are weaving a priceless robe, but the work is not yet finished. Once finished, they will dress your honor in the robe." Because of the messenger's statement, many people went to look at the robe, but in spite of the workers' motions, the robe was not visible to anyone. Fearing that others would call them illegitimate, they all said, "We see it. It is indeed a very costly robe." And they went away. After seven days the king himself went to look at the silk robe. He looked, but it was not visible to him either. He uttered not a word that he could not see it. Afterward the seven men came to the king and said, "We have woven for you the copper-colored silk robe. It is finished." Then they added, "Get out all the clothes that you have inherited from seven generations of ancestors. After we have dressed you in the new robe you must give us all those other clothes." Thus the king took out all the vestments from his ancestors and gave them and all his other clothes to the seven men. After receiving all the clothes, the seven men surrounded the king and told him that they were putting on him the copper-colored silk clothing. They stroked his head, saying that they were putting on the crown. They stroked his arms, saying that they were putting on the jacket. In the same manner they stroked all parts of his body, saying that they were dressing him. Then they brought the king into the middle of a great procession and announced to the citizens, "Neither his majesty our king, nor any other person within this procession has ever worn or even seen such clothing as this. In celebration of the king's new robe, let him sit atop the festival elephant and be carried throughout the entire city and then back to the royal house!" Having said this, they brought forth the elephant, seated the naked king upon it, and started him on his procession throughout the city. But the seven men took goods from his house and went away. And the foolish king remained without clothes. Source: Henry Parker, Village Folk-Tales of Ceylon , volume 2 (London: Luzac and Company, 1914), no. 89, pp. 66-69 . This tale is from the northwestern part of Sri Lanka. Retold by D. L. Ashliman. Parker's translation follows his Sinhalese sources so closely that English syntax is violated in almost every sentence. I have cautiously attempted to bring his narrative closer to idiomatic English. Return to the table of contents . Links to related tales Doctor Know-All and other folktales of type 1641. Twigmuntus, Cowbelliantus, Perchnosius , the tale of a simple lad who confounds a group of scholars by pretending to know Latin. Return to The table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's index of folklore and mythology electronic texts . Revised September 7, 2019. The End of the World: folktales of type 20C and 2033 The End of the World The Sky Is Falling folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 20C (including former type 2033) in which storytellers from around the world make light of paranoia and mass hysteria selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2021 Contents The Timid Hare and the Flight of the Beasts (India, The Jataka Tales ). The Flight of the Beasts (Tibet). The Hares and the Frogs (Aesop -- edited by Samuel Croxall). The Hares and the Frogs (Aesop -- edited by Thomas Berwick). The Story of Chicken-Licken (England). Henny-Penny and Her Fellow Travelers (Scotland). Chickie Birdie (Scotland). Henny-Penny (England/Australia). The End of the World (Ireland). The Hen That Went to Dovrefjell to Keep the Whole World from Coming to an End (Norway). The Little Chicken Kluk and His Companions (Denmark). The End of the World (Flanders). The Dumb Little Animals (Alsace). Brother Rabbit Takes Some Exercise (African-American). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Timid Hare and the Flight of the Beasts India Once upon a time when Brahmadatta reigned in Benares, the Bodhisatta [the future Buddha] came to life as a young lion. And when fully grown he lived in a wood. At this time there was near the Western Ocean a grove of palms mixed with vilva trees. A certain hare lived here beneath a palm sapling, at the foot of a vilva tree. One day this hare, after feeding, came and lay down beneath the young palm tree. And the thought struck him, "If this earth should be destroyed, what would become of me?" And at this very moment a ripe vilva fruit fell on a palm leaf. At the sound of it, the hare thought, "This solid earth is collapsing," and starting up he fled, without so much as looking behind him. Another hare saw him scampering off, as if frightened to death, and asked the cause of his panic flight. "Pray, don't ask me," he said. The other hare cried, "Pray, sir, what is it?" and kept running after him. Then the hare stopped a moment and without looking back said, "The earth here is breaking up." And at this the second hare ran after the other. And so first one and then another hare caught sight of him running, and joined in the chase till one hundred thousand hares all took to flight together. They were seen by a deer, a boar, an elk, a buffalo, a wild ox, a rhinoceros, a tiger, a lion, and an elephant. And when they asked what it meant and were told that the earth was breaking up, they too took to flight. So by degrees this host of animals extended to the length of a full league. When the Bodhisatta saw this headlong flight of the animals, and heard the cause of it was that the earth was coming to an end, he thought, "The earth is nowhere coming to an end. Surely it must be some sound which was misunderstood by them. And if I don't make a great effort, they will all perish. I will save their lives." So with the speed of a lion he got before them to the foot of a mountain, and lion-like roared three times. They were terribly frightened at the lion, and stopping in their flight stood all huddled together. The lion went in amongst them and asked why there were running away. "The earth is collapsing," they answered. "Who saw it collapsing?" he said. "The elephants know all about it," they replied. He asked the elephants. "We don't know," they said, "the lions know." But the lions said, "We don't know, the tigers know." The tigers said, "The rhinoceroses know." The rhinoceroses said, "The wild oxen know." The wild oxen, "the buffaloes." The buffaloes, "the elks." The elks, "the boars." The boars, "the deer." The deer said, "We don't know; the hares know." When the hares were questioned, they pointed to one particular hare and said, "This one told us." So the Bodhisatta asked, "Is it true, sir, that the earth is breaking up?" "Yes, sir, I saw it," said the hare. "Where," he asked, "were you living, when you saw it?" "Near the ocean, sir, in a grove of palms mixed with vilva trees. For as I was lying beneath the shade of a palm sapling at the foot of a vilva tree, methought, 'If this earth should break up, where shall I go?' And at that very moment I heard the sound the breaking up of the earth, and I fled." Thought the lion, "A ripe vilva fruit evidently must have fallen on a palm leaf and made a 'thud,' and this hare jumped to the conclusion that the earth was coming to an end, and ran away. I will find out the exact truth about it." So he reassured the herd of animals, and said, "I will take the hare and go and find out exactly whether the earth is coming to an end or not, in the place pointed out by him. Until I return, do you stay here." Then placing the hare on his back, he sprang forward with the speed of a lion, and putting the hare down in the palm grove, he said, "Come, show us the place you meant." "I dare not, my lord," said the hare. "Come, don't be afraid," said the lion. The hare, not venturing to go near the vilva tree, stood afar off and cried, "Yonder, sir, is the place of dreadful sound," and so saying, he repeated the first stanza: From the spot where I did dwell Issued forth a fearful "thud"; What it was I could not tell, Nor what caused it understood. After hearing what the hare said, the lion went to the foot of the vilva tree, and saw the spot where the hare had been lying beneath the shade of the palm tree, and the ripe vilva fruit that fell on the palm leaf, and having carefully ascertained that the earth had not broken up, he placed the hare on his back and with the speed of a lion soon came again to the herd of beasts. Then he told them the whole story, and said, "Don't be afraid." And having thus reassured the herd of beasts, he let them go. Verily, if it had not been for the Bodhisatta at that time, all the beasts would have rushed into the sea and perished. It was all owing to the Bodhisatta that they escaped death. Alarmed at sound of fallen fruit A hare once ran away, The other beasts all followed suit Moved by that hare's dismay. They hastened not to view the scene, But lent a willing ear To idle gossip, and were clean Distraught with foolish fear. They who to Wisdom's calm delight And Virtue's heights attain, Though ill example should invite, Such panic fear disdain. Source (books.google.com): "Daddabha-Jataka," The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 3 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1897), no. 322, pp. 49-52 . Source (Internet Archive): "Daddabha-Jataka," The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 3 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1897), no. 322, pp. 49-52 . Return to the table of contents . The Flight of the Beasts Tibet At a long distant period there stood on the shore of a lake a vilva forest. In this forest dwelt six hares. Now a vilva tree in that forest fell into the lake, thereby producing a great noise. When the six hares heard this noise, they began, as they had but small bodies, to run away full of fear. The jackals saw them running, and asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The hares replied, "There was a great noise." Thereupon the jackals also took to flight. When the monkeys saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The jackals replied, "There was a great noise." Thereupon the monkeys also took to flight. When the gazelles saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The monkeys replied, "There was a great noise." Thereupon the gazelles also took to flight. When the boars saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The gazelles replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the boars also took to flight. When the buffaloes saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run? " The boars replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the buffaloes also took to flight. When the rhinoceroses saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The buffaloes replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the rhinoceroses also took to flight. When the elephants saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The rhinoceroses replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the elephants also took to flight. When the bears saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The elephants replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the bears also took to flight. When the hyenas saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The bears replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the hyenas also took to flight. When the panthers saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The hyenas replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the panthers also took to flight. When the tigers saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The panthers replied, "There was a noise." Thereupon the tigers also took to flight. When the lions saw them running they asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye run?" The tigers replied, "There was a loud noise." Thereupon the lions also took to flight. At the foot of the mountain there dwelt a maned lion, which likewise seemed to wear a diadem. When it saw the lions running it asked, "O honored ones, wherefore do ye all run, although each of you is strong in claws and strong in teeth?" The lions replied, "There was a loud noise." "O honored ones, whence did the noise come?" it asked. "We do not know," they replied. Then said that lion, "O honored ones, do not run. Inquiry must be made as to where the noise came from." It asked the tigers, "Who told you about it?" The tigers replied, "The panthers." It asked the panthers, "Who was it told you?" The panthers replied, "The hyenas." It asked the hyenas, "Who was it told you?" The hyenas replied, "The bears." It asked the bears, "Who was it told you?" The bears replied, "The elephants." It asked the elephants, "Who was it told you ?" The elephants replied, "The rhinoceroses." It asked the rhinoceroses, "Who was it told you?" The rhinoceroses replied, "The buffaloes." It asked the buffaloes, "Who was it told you?" The buffaloes replied, "The boars." It asked the boars, "Who was it told you?" The boars replied, "The gazelles." It asked the gazelles, "Who was it told you?" The gazelles replied, "The monkeys." It asked the monkeys, "Who was it told you?" The monkeys replied, "The jackals." It asked the jackals, "Who was it told you?" The jackals replied, "The hares." It asked the hares, "Who was it told you?" The hares replied, "We saw the terrible thing with our own eyes. Come, we will show you whence the noise came." So they guided the lion, and showed it the vilva forest, saying, "That is where the noise came from." Inasmuch as the noise was caused by the fall of a vilva tree out of that forest into the lake, the lion said, "O honored ones, be not afraid, for that was only an empty sound." Consequently they were all tranquillized. And a deity uttered this verse, "Let not men believe in words. They ought to see everything for themselves. Observe how, through the fall of a vilva, the forest lost its beasts." Source (books.google.com): Anton Schiefner, Tibetan Tales: Derived from Indian Sources , translated by W. R. S. Ralston (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, and Company, 1906), no. 22, pp. 296-98 . Source (Internet Archive): Anton Schiefner, Tibetan Tales: Derived from Indian Sources , translated by W. R. S. Ralston (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, and Company, 1906), , no. 22, pp. 296-98 . Return to the table of contents . The Hares and the Frogs Aesop Upon a great Storm of Wind that blew among the Trees and Bushes, and made a Rustling with the Leaves, the Hares (in a certain Park where there happen'd to be a Plenty of them) were so terribly frighted that they ran like mad all over the Place, resolving to seek out some Retreat of more security, or to end their unhappy Days by doing Violence to themselves. With this Resolution, they found an Outlet where a Pale had been broken down; and, bolting forth upon an adjoining Common, had not run far before their Course was stopt by that of a gentle Brook which glided across the way they intended to take. This was so grievous a Disappointment, that they were not able to bear it, and they deterinin'd rather to throw themselves headlong into the Water, let what would become of it, than lead a Life so full of Dangers and Crosses. But upon their coming to the brink of the River, a Parcel of Frogs, which were fitting there, frighted at their Approach, leapt into the Stream in great Confusion, and dived to the very Bottom for Fear. Which a cunning old Puss observing, call'd to the rest and said, "Hold, have a care what ye do: here are other Creatures, I perceive, which have their Fears as well as us: Don't then let us fancy ourselves the most miserable of any upon Earth; but rather, by their Example, learn to bear patiently those Inconveniencies which our Nature has thrown upon us." The Application This Fable is design'd to shew us how unreasonable many People are, for living in such continual Fears and Disquiets about the Miserableness of their Condition. There is hardly any State of Life great enough to satisfy the Wishes of an ambitious Man; and scarce any so mean, but may supply all the Necessities of him that is moderate. But if People will be so unwise as to work themselves up to imaginary Misfortunes, why do they grumble at Nature and their Stars, when their own perverse Minds are only to blame? If we are to conclude ourselves unhappy by as many Degrees as there are others greater than we, why then the greatest Part of Mankind must be miserable, in some degree at least. But, if they who repine at their own afflicted Condition, would but reckon up how many more there are with whom they would not change Cases, than whose Pleasures they envy, they would certainly rise up better satisfied from such a Calculation. But what shall we say to those who have a way of creating themselves Panics from the rustling of the Wind, the scratching of a Rat or Mouse, behind the Hangings, the fluttering of a Moth, or the Motion of their own Shadow by Moonlight? Their whole Life is as full of Alarms as that of a Hare, and they never think themselves so happy as when, like the timorous Folks in the Fable, they meet with a Set of Creatures as fearful as themselves. Source (books.google.com): Fables of Æsop and Others , translated into English with instructive applications by Samuel Croxall, 10th edition, carefully revised and improved (London, 1775), no. 30, pp. 54-56 . Source (Internet Archive): Fables of Æsop and Others , translated into English with instructive applications by Samuel Croxall, 14th edition, carefully revised and improved (London, 1788), no. 30, pp. 54-56 . Return to the table of contents . The Hares and the Frogs Aesop The Hares in a certain park having met to consult upon some plan to preserve themselves from their numerous enemies, all agreed that life was full of care and misery, and that they saw no prospect of things changing for the better. Full of these desponding thoughts, and just as it had been proposed that they should put an end to their existence, a storm arose, which tore the branches from the trees, and whirled the leaves about their ears. Panic-struck, they ran like mad creatures, until they were stopped by a lake, into which they hastily resolved to throw themselves headlong, rather than lead a life so full of dangers and crosses: but upon their approaching its margin, a number of Frogs, which were sitting there, frightened at their sudden approach, in the greatest confusion leapt into the water, and dived to the bottom; which an old Hare, more sedate than the rest, observing, called out, "Have a care what ye do! Here are other creatures I perceive, which have their fears as well as we. Don't then let us fancy ourselves the most miserable of any upon earth; but rather, by their example, learn to bear patiently those inconveniences which nature has thrown upon us." Application This Fable is designed to shew us how unreasonable many people are, who live in continual fears and disquiet about the miserableness of their condition. There is hardly any state of life great enough to satisfy the wishes of an ambitious man; and scarcely any so mean, but may supply the necessities of him that is moderate. There are few beings so very wretched, that they cannot pick out others in a more deplorable situation, and with whom they would not change cases. The rich man envies the poor man's health, without considering his wants; and the poor man envies the other's treasure, without considering his diseases. The miseries of others should serve to add vigour to our minds, and teach us to bear up against the load of lighter misfortunes. But what shall we say to those who have a way of creating themselves panics from the rustling of the wind, the scratching of a rat or a mouse behind the hangings, the fluttering of a moth, or the motion of their own shadow by moon-light! Their whole life is as full of alarms as that of a Hare, and they never think themselves so easy as when, like the timorous folks in the Fable, they meet with a set of creatures as fearful as themselves. Source (books.google.com): The Fables of Æsop, and Others , with designs on wood, by Thomas Bewick (Newcastle: Printed by E. Walker, for T. Bewick and Son, 1818), pp. 251-52 . Source (Internet Archive): The Fables of Æsop, and Others , with designs on wood, by Thomas Bewick (Newcastle: Printed by E. Walker, for T. Bewick and Son, 1818), pp. 251-52 . Return to the table of contents . The Story of Chicken-Licken England As Chicken-Licken went one day to the wood, an acorn fell upon her poor bald pate, and she thought the sky had fallen. So she said she would go and tell the king that the sky had fallen. So Chicken-Licken turned back, and met Hen-Len. "Well, Hen-Len, where are you going?" And Hen-Len said, "I'm going to the wood for some meat." And Chicken-Licken said, "Oh! Hen-Len, don't go, for I was going, and the sky fell upon my poor bald pate, and I'm going to tell the king." So Hen-Len turned back with Chicken-Licken, and met Cock-Lock. "Oh! Cock-Lock, where are you going?" And Cock-Lock said, "I'm going to the wood for some meat." Then Hen-Len said, "Oh! Cock-Lock, don't go, for I was going, and I met Chicken-Licken, and Chicken-Licken had been at the wood, and the sky had fallen on her poor bald pate, and we are going to tell the king." So Cock-Lock turned back, and met Duck-Luck. "Well, Duck-Luck, where are you going?" And Duck-Luck said, "I'm going to the wood for some meat." Then Cock-Lock said, "Oh! Duck-Luck, don't go, for I was going, and I met Hen-Len, and Hen-Len met Chicken-Licken, and Chicken-Licken had been at the wood, and the sky had fallen on her poor bald pate, and we are going to tell the king." So Duck-Luck turned back, and met Drake-Lake. "Well, Drake-Lake, where are you going?" And Drake-Lake said, "I'm going to the wood for some meat." Then Duck-Luck said, "Oh! Drake-Lake, don't go, for I was going, and I met Cock-Lock, and Cock-Lock met Hen-Len, and Hen-Len met Chicken-Licken, and Chicken-Licken had been at the wood, and the sky had fallen on her poor bald pate, and we are going to tell the king." So Drake-Lake turned back, and met Goose-Loose. "Well, Goose-Loose, where are you going?" And Goose-Loose said, "I'm going to the wood for some meat." Then Drake-Lake said, "Oh! Goose-Loose, don't go, for I was going, and I met Duck-Luck, and Duck-Luck met Cock-Lock, and Cock-Lock met Hen-Len, and Hen-Len met Chicken-Licken, and Chicken-Licken had been at the wood, and the sky had fallen on her poor bald pate, and we are going to tell the king." So Goose-Loose turned back, and met Gander-Lander. " Well, Gander-Lander, where are you going?" And Gander-Lander said, "I'm going to the wood for some meat." Then Goose-Loose said, "Oh! Gander-Lander, don't go, for I was going, and I met Drake-Lake, and Drake-Lake met Duck-Luck, and Duck-Luck met Cock-Lock, and Cock-Lock met Hen-Len, and Hen-Len met Chicken-Licken, and Chicken-Licken had been at the wood, and the sky had fallen on her poor bald pate, and we are going to tell the king." So Gander-Lander turned back, and met Turkey-Lurkey. "Well, Turkey-Lurkey, where are you going?" And Turkey-Lurkey said, "I'm going to the wood for some meat." Then Gander-Lander said, "Oh! Turkey-Lurkey, don't go, for I was going, and I met Goose-Loose, and Goose-Loose met Drake-Lake, and Drake-Lake met Duck-Luck, and Duck-Luck met Cock-Lock, and Cock-Lock met Hen-Len, and Hen-Len met Chicken-Licken, and Chicken-Licken had been at the wood, and the sky had fallen on her poor bald pate, and we are going to tell the king." So Turkey-Lurkey turned back, and walked with Gander-Lander, Goose-Loose, Drake-Lake, Duck-Luck, Cock-Lock, Hen-Len, and Chicken-Licken. And as they were going along, they met Fox-lox. And Fox-Lox said, " Where are you going, my pretty maids?" And they said, "Chicken-licken went to the wood, and the sky fell upon her poor bald pate, and we are going to tell the king." And Fox-Lox said, "Come along with me, and I will show you the way." But Fox-Lox took them into the fox's hole, and he and his young ones soon ate up poor Chicken-Licken, Hen-Len, Cock-Lock, Duck-Luck, Drake-Lake, Goose-Loose, Gander-Lander, and Turkey-Lurkey, and they never saw the king, to tell him that the sky had fallen! Source (books.google.com): James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to The Nursery Rhymes of England (London: J. R. Smith, 1849), pp. 29-31 . Source (Internet Archive): James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to The Nursery Rhymes of England (London: J. R. Smith, 1849), pp. 29-31 . Return to the table of contents . Henny-Penny and Her Fellow Travelers Scotland A hen was picking at a stack of pea-straw when a pea fell on her head, and she thought the sky was falling. And she thought she would go and tell the king about it. And she went, and went, and went, and she met a cock. And he said, "Where are you going this day, Henny-Penny?" And she says, "I'm going to tell the king the sky is falling." And he says, "I'll go with you, Henny-Penny." And they went, and they went, and they went. And they met a duck. And the duck says, "Where are you going this day, Cocky-Locky, Henny-Penny?" "We're going to tell the king the sky is falling." "I'll go with you, Cocky-Locky, Henny-Penny." "Then come along, Ducky-Daddles." And they went, and they went, and they went. And they met a goose. And the goose says, "Where are you going this day, Ducky-Daddles, Cocky-Locky, Henny-Penny?" "We're going to tell the king the sky is falling." And he says, "I'll go with you, Ducky-Daddles, Cocky-Locky, Henny-Penny." "Then come along, Goosie-Poosey," said they. And they went, and they went, and they went, till they came to a wood, and there they met a fox. And the fox says, "Where are you going this day, Goosie-Poosey, Ducky-Daddles, Cocky-Locky, Henny-Penny?" "We're going to tell the king the sky is falling." And he says, "Come along, and I'll show you the road, Goosie-Poosey, Ducky-Daddles, Cocky-Locky, Henny-Penny." And they went, and they went, and they went, till they came to the fox's hole. And he shoved them all in, and he and his young ones ate them all up, and they never got to tell the king the sky was falling. Source (books.google.com): Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), p. 59 . Preface dated November 24, 1841. Source (Internet Archive): Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), p. 59 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Following widespread tradition, I have included Henny-Penny's name in the title. Chambers' title for this story is simply "The Hen and Her Fellow Travelers." Return to the table of contents . Chickie Birdie Scotland Once upon a time, as a chicken was pecking under a gooseberry bush, a gooseberry fell on his head. "Dear me!" said Chickie Birdie, "the lifts are falling. I wonder if the king knows. I think I'll go and tell him, and perhaps he will give me a reward." So away started Chickie Birdie. He had not gone far before he met Henny Penny. "Good morning, Chickie Birdie," said she; "and where are you going?" "I'm going to tell the king the lifts have fallen." "Who told you, Chickie Birdie; who told you?" "Who told me! The thing that I both heard and felt! Why it came ripple rapple down on my fore-pen (beak)." "I'll go with you, Chickie Birdie." So they went on together, and they met Goosey-Poosey, Ducky-Daddles, Cockie-Lockie, and Pow Parley (turkey), with each of whom the same formula is gone through. They all went on together, and presently it began to rain, and they took refuge in a washing-house. Presently up came Tod Lowrie (fox), and he begged hard to be let in: "Just his fore-paw, because it was getting so wet," then "only just the tip of his nose," "his head," and so on, until he got in altogether. Then they all cried out: "Tod Lowrie! Tod Lowrie, the huntsmen and the hounds are coming! Jump in here!" So he jumped into the boiler, and Goosey-Poosey poured hot water upon him! Then they went on to the king, and Chickie Birdie told him all about the lifts falling, and he thanked them very much and ordered them a good dinner. Source (books.google.com): Selina Gate, "Scottish Folk-Lore Tales," Notes and Queries , series 7, vol. 10 (London: July-December, 1890), p. 464 . Source (Internet Archive): Selina Gate, "Scottish Folk-Lore Tales," Notes and Queries , series 7, vol. 10 (London: July-December, 1890), p. 464 . Gate's source: A Scottish lady, who was familiar with the tale in her childhood in Dumbartonshire. Return to the table of contents . Henny-Penny England/Australia One day Henny-Penny was picking up corn in the cornyard when -- whack! -- something hit her upon the head. "Goodness gracious me!" said Henny-Penny; "the sky's a-going to fall; I must go and tell the king." So she went along and she went along and she went along till she met Cocky-Locky. "Where are you going, Henny-Penny?" says Cocky-Locky. "Oh! I'm going to tell the king the sky's a-falling," says Henny-Penny. "May I come with you?" says Cocky-Locky. "Certainly," says Henny-Penny. So Henny-Penny and Cocky-Locky went to tell the king the sky was falling. They went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they met Ducky-Daddles. "Where are you going to, Henny-Penny and Cocky-Locky?" says Ducky-Daddles. "Oh! we're going to tell the king the sky's a-falling," said Henny-Penny and Cocky-Locky. "May I come with you?" says Ducky-Daddles. "Certainly," said Henny-Penny and Cocky-Locky. So Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, and Ducky-Daddles went to tell the king the sky was a-falling. So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they met Goosey-Poosey. "Where are you going to, Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, and Ducky-Daddles?" said Goosey-Poosey. "Oh! we're going to tell the king the sky's a-falling," said Henny-Penny and Cocky-Locky and Ducky-Daddles. "May I come with you," said Goosey-Poosey. "Certainly," said Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky and Ducky-Daddles. So Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, and Goosy-Poosey went to tell the king the sky was a-falling. So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they met Turkey-Lurkey. "Where are you going, Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, and Goosey-Poosey?" says Turkey-Lurkey. "Oh! we're going to tell the king the sky's a-falling," said Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, and Goosey-Poosey. "May I come with you? Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, and Goosey-Poosey?" said Turkey-Lurkey. "Oh, certainly, Turkey-Lurkey," said Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, and Goosey-Poosey. So Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey all went to tell the king the sky was a-falling. So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they met Foxy-Woxy, and Foxy-Woxy said to Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey: "Where are you going, Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey?" And Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey said to Foxy-Woxy: "We're going to tell the king the sky's a-falling." "Oh! but this is not the way to the king, Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey," says Foxy-Woxy. "I know the proper way; shall I show it you?" "Oh certainly, Foxy-Woxy," said Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey. So Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, Turkey-Lurkey, and Foxy-Woxy all went to tell the king the sky was a-falling. So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they came to a narrow and dark hole. Now this was the door of Foxy-Woxy's cave. But Foxy-Woxy said to Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey: "This is the short way to the king's palace; you'll soon get there if you follow me. I will go first and you come after, Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey." "Why of course, certainly, without doubt, why not?" said Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey. So Foxy-Woxy went into his cave, and he didn't go very far but turned round to wait for Henny-Penny, Cocky-Locky, Ducky-Daddles, Goosey-Poosey, and Turkey-Lurkey. So at last at first Turkey-Lurkey went through the dark hole into the cave. He hadn't got far when "Hrumph," Foxy-Woxy snapped off Turkey-Lurkey's head and threw his body over his left shoulder. Then Goosey-Poosey went in, and "Hrumph," off went her head and Goosey-Poosey was thrown beside Turkey-Lurkey. Then Ducky-Daddles waddled down, and "Hrumph," snapped Foxy-Woxy, and Ducky-Daddles' head was off and Ducky-Daddles was thrown alongside Turkey-Lurkey and Goosey-Poosey. Then Cocky-Locky strutted down into the cave and he hadn't gone far when "Snap, Hrumph!" went Foxy-Woxy and Cocky-Locky was thrown alongside of Turkey-Lurkey, Goosey-Poosey and Ducky-Daddles. But Foxy-Woxy had made two bites at Cocky-Locky, and when the first snap only hurt Cocky-Locky, but didn't kill him, he called out to Henny-Penny. But she turned tail and off she ran home, so she never told the king the sky was a-falling. Source (books.google.com): Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 20, pp. 113-16 . Source (Internet Archive): Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 20, pp. 113-16 . Jacobs' source: "I give this as it was told to me in Australia in 1860." ( Notes and References, p. 238) . Return to the table of contents . The End of the World Ireland A hen was standing under a hazel-tree one day, and a nut fell on her tail. Away she ran to the cock, and says she, "Cocky Locky, the end of the world is come." "How do you know, Henny Penny?" says he. "Oh, a nut fell on my tail just now." "If that be so, we have nothing for it but to run away." So they ran till they met the duck. "Oh, Ducky Lucky, the end of the world is come." "How do you know, Cocky Locky?" "Oh, a nut fell just now on Henny Penny's tail." "If that be so, we must run for it." When they were pegging off, they met the goose. "Oh, Goosey Poosey, the end of the world is come." "How do you know, Ducky Lucky?" "A nut fell on Henny Penny's tail just now." "If that be the case, we are done for." They met the fox. "Oh, Foxy Coxy, the world is come to an end." "How do you know that, Goosey Poosey?" "Oh, a nut fell on Henny Penny's tail." "Then let us be off." So they got into the wood, and says Foxy Coxy, "Let me count if all are safe. I, Foxy Coxy, one; you, Goosey Poosey, two; Ducky Lucky, three; Cocky Locky, four; Henny Penny, five. Number five, I'll put you in a safe place where the end of the world won't hurt you." So he took Henny Penny behind a hush and put her out of pain. "Now," says he, coming back, "let us count if all the rest are safe. I, Foxy Coxy, one; you, Goosey Poosey, two; etc., etc. Number four, I'll put you in a place where you'll be safe when the end of the world comes." He took him behind another bush, etc., etc., etc. "Now let me see if all the rest are here. I, Foxy Coxy, one; etc., etc., etc." and so on till he put the fear of the world's end out of every one of them. Source (books.google.com): Patrick Kennedy, The Fireside Stories of Ireland (Dublin: M'Glashan and Gill, 1870), p. 25 . Source (Internet Archive): Patrick Kennedy, The Fireside Stories of Ireland (Dublin: M'Glashan and Gill, 1870), p. 25 . Return to the table of contents . The Hen That Went to Dovrefjell to Keep the Whole World from Coming to an End Norway Once upon a time there was a hen that had flown up and perched on an oak tree for the night. When the night came, she dreamed that unless she got to Dovrefjell, the world would come to an end. So that very minute she jumped down, and set out on her way. When she had walked a bit she met a cock. "Good day, Cocky-Locky," said the hen. "Good day, Henny-Penny," said the cock. "Where are you going so early?" "Oh, I'm going to Dovrefjell, that the world won't come to an end," said the hen. "Who told you that, Henny-Penny?" asked the cock. "I sat in the oak and dreamed it last night," said the hen. "I'll go with you," said the cock. Well, they walked on a good bit, and then they met a duck. "Good day, Ducky-Lucky," said the cock. "Good day, Cocky-Locky" said the duck. "Where are you going so early?" "Oh, I'm going to Dovrefjell, that the world won't come to an end," said the cock. "Who told you that, Cocky-Locky?" "Henny-Penny," said the cock. "Who told you that, Henny-Penny?" asked the duck. "I sat in the oak and dreamed it last night," said the hen. "I'll go with you," said the duck. So they went off together, and after a bit they met a goose. "Good day, Goosey-Poosey," said the duck. "Good day, Ducky-Lucky," said the goose. "Where are you going so early?" "I'm going to Dovrefjell, that the world won't come to an end," said the duck. "Who told you that, Ducky-Lucky?" asked the goose. "Cocky-Locky." "Who told you that, Cocky-Locky?" "Henny-Penny." "How do you know that, Henny-Penny?" said the goose. "I sat in the oak and dreamed it last night, Goosey-Poosey," said the hen. "I'll go with you," said the goose. Now when they had all walked along for a bit, a fox met them. "Good day, Foxy-Cocksy," said the goose. "God day, Goosey-Poosey." "Where are you going, Foxy-Cocksy?" "Where are you going yourself, Goosey-Poosey?" "I'm going to Dovrefjell, that the world won't come to an end," said the goose. "Who told you that, Goosey-Poosey?" asked the fox. "Ducky-Lucky." "Who told you that, Ducky-Lucky?" "Cocky-Locky." "Who told you that, Cocky-Locky?" "Henny-Penny." "How do you know that, Henny-Penny?" "I sat in the oak and dreamed last night, that if we don't get to Dovrefjell, the world will come to an end," said the hen. "Stuff and nonsense," said the fox. "The world won't come to an end if you don't go there. No, come home with me to my den. That's far better, for it's warm and jolly there." Well, they went home with the fox to his den, and when they got inside, the fox laid on lots of fuel, so that they all got very sleepy. The duck and the goose, they settled themselves down in a corner, but the cock and hen flew up on a post. So when the goose and duck were well asleep, the fox took the goose and laid him on the embers, and roasted him. The hen smelled the strong roast meat, and sprang up to a higher peg, and said, half asleep, "Phooey, what a nasty smell! What a nasty smell!" "Oh, stuff!" said the fox. "It's only the smoke driven down the chimney. Go to sleep again, and hold your tongue." So the hen went off to sleep again. Now the fox had hardly got the goose well down his throat, before he did the very same with the duck. He took and laid him on the embers, and roasted him for a dainty bit. Then the hen woke up again, and sprang up to a higher peg still. "Phooey, what a nasty smell! What a nasty smell!" she said again, and when she got her eyes open, and came to see how the fox and eaten two of them, both the goose and the duck. So she flew up to the highest peg of all, and perched there, and peeped up through the chimney. "Nay, nay, just see what a lovely lot of geese are flying over there," she said to the fox. Out ran Reynard to fetch a fat roast. But while he was gone, the hen woke up the cock and told him how it had gone with Goosey-Poosey and Ducky-Lucky. And so Cocky-Locky and Henny-Penny flew out through the chimney, and if they hadn't reached Dovrefjell, the world surely would have come to an end. Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, "The Cock and Hen That Went to Dovrefell," Popular Tales from the North , translated by George Webbe Dasent, new edition (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons; Edinburgh: David Douglas, 1912), pp. 353-56 . Source (Internet Archive): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, "The Cock and Hen That Went to the Dovrefell," Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent, 2nd edition, enlarged (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), pp. 407-410 . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Links to the original Norwegian text: Books.google.com: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, "Høna som skulle til Dovrefjeld, forat ikke Allverden skulle forgaae," Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiania [Oslo]: Forlagt af Johan Dahl, 1844), no. 43, pp. 16-18 . Internet Archive: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, "Høna som skulle til Dovrefjeld, forat ikke Allverden skulle forgaae," Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiania [Oslo]: Johan Dahls Forlag, 1852), no. 42, pp. 262-64 . This tale was collected by Asbjørnsen in the Telemark region of Norway. Dovrefjell is a mountainous region in south-central Norway. Return to the table of contents . The Little Chicken Kluk and His Companions Denmark There was once a little chicken called Kluk. A nut fell on his back, and gave him such a blow that he fell down and rolled on the ground. So he ran to the hen, and said, "Henny Penny, run, I think all the world is falling!" "Who has told thee that, little chicken Kluk?" "Oh, a nut fell on my back, and struck me so that I rolled on the ground." "Then let us run," said the hen. So they ran to the cock, and said, " Cocky Locky, run, I think all the world is falling." "Who has told thee that, Henny Penny? " "Little chicken Kluk." "Who told thee that, little chicken Kluk?" "Oh, a nut fell on my back, and struck me so that I rolled on the ground." "Then let us run," said the cock. So they ran to the duck, and said, "Ducky Lucky, run, I think all the world is falling." "Who told thee that, Cocky Locky?" "Henny Penny." "Who has told thee that, Henny Penny?" "Little chicken Kluk." "Who has told thee that, little chicken Kluk?" "Oh, a nut fell on my back, and struck me so that I rolled on the ground." "Then let us run," said the duck. So they ran to the goose. "Goosy Poosy, run, I think all the world is falling." "Who has told thee that, Ducky Lucky?" "Cocky Locky." "Who has told thee that, Cocky Locky?" "Henny Penny." "Who has told thee that, Henny Penny ?" "Little chicken Kluk." "Who has told thee that, little chicken Kluk?" "Oh, a nut fell on my back, and struck me so, that I rolled on the ground. "Then let us run," said the goose. Then they ran to the fox, and said, Foxy Coxy, run, I think all the world is falling." "Who has told thee that, Goosy Poosy?" "Ducky Lucky." "Who has told thee that, Ducky Lucky?" "Cocky Locky." "Who has told thee that, Cocky Locky?" "Henny Penny." "Who has told thee that, Henny Penny?" "Little chicken Kluk." "Who has told thee that, little chicken Kluk?" "Oh, a nut fell on my back, and struck me so, that I rolled on the ground." "Then let us run," said the fox. So they all ran into the wood. Then the fox said, "I must now count and see if I have got you all here. I, Foxy Coxy, one; Goosy Poosy, two; Ducky Lucky, three; Cocky Locky, four; Henny Penny, five; and little chicken Kluk, six; Hei ! That one I'll snap up." He then said : "Let us run." So they ran further into the wood. Then said he, Now I must count and see if I have got you all here. I, Foxy Coxy, one; Goosy Poosy, two; Ducky Lucky, three; Cocky Locky, four; Henny Penny, five; Hei! That one I'll snap up." And so he went on till he had eaten them all up. Source (books.google.com): Benjamin Thorpe, Yule-Tide Stories: A Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions, from the Swedish, Danish, and German , (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853), pp. 421-22 . Source (Internet Archive): Benjamin Thorpe, Yule-Tide Stories: A Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions, from the Swedish, Danish, and German (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853), pp. 421-22 . Return to the table of contents . The End of the World Flanders Once upon a time an old woman sat spinning in a room at the top of a high tower. Beneath her chair Chaton, her cat, lay peacefully sleeping. All of a sudden the spinning wheel jarred and made a loud creaking sound. Startled out of his sleep, Chaton the Cat rushed out of the room and bolted down the stairs as though a thousand demons were at his heels. In the yard he passed the house dog who was sitting in front of his kennel. "Hallo, Chaton!" cried the dog. "Where are you going to in such a hurry?" "I am fleeing the country," answered Chaton. "I have just heard the sounding of the last trump! The end of the world is at hand!" "If that is so," said the dog, "I would like to run away too. May I come with you?" "Certainly," answered Chaton. "Seat yourself on my beautiful curly tail." So the dog perched himself on the cat's tail, and off they went together. A little farther on they came to the farm gate, and there, perched on the topmost rail, was the cock. "Whither away, Chaton?" asked the cock. "You seem to be in haste." "Yes," said Chaton. "I have heard the last trump, which proves that the world is coming to an end, and I want to get safely away before that happens." "Take me with you, Chaton dear," said the cock. "By all means," answered the cat. "Jump on to my beautiful curly tail beside the dog." So the cock perched himself on Chaton's tail, and now there were two passengers. Away went the cat even faster than before, so as to make up for lost time, and presently they passed a rabbit who was nibbling the grass in a field. "Chaton, Chaton," cried the rabbit, "why are you running so quickly?" "Don't stop me!" answered the cat. "I've heard the last trump! The end of the world is coming!" "Oh, dear me!" cried the rabbit. "What an unfortunate thing! Don't leave me here, Chaton, for I am afraid to face the end of the world." "Very well," said Chaton. "Jump on to my beautiful curly tail with the dog and the cock, and I'll take you with me." So the rabbit also perched himself on the cat's tail, and now there were three of them riding there. Off went the cat again, but not so quickly this time, because of the weight on his tail, and before very long he came to a pond by the side of which a goose was standing. "Now then, now then, what's the hurry?" asked the goose. "If you run so fast you'll overheat your blood and die of a fever." "It's all very well to scoff," answered the cat, "but you must know that the end of the world is coming. I have heard the last trump sound!" "My goodness!" said the goose. "This is dreadful! Take me with you, Chaton, and I'll be grateful for ever." "Very well," said the cat. "Jump on to my beautiful curly tail with the dog and the fox and the rabbit." So the goose also perched herself on the cat's tail, so now there were four passengers, and that made five altogether who were running away to escape the end of the world. All that day the cat kept on running, and towards dusk they came to a forest. "This seems a good place to rest," said Chaton. "Now then, master cock, fly to the top of a tree and see if you can espy a house in which we can take shelter." The cock flew to the top of a high tree and from there he saw a number of lights twinkling in the distance. The five fugitives thereupon set off in the direction from which the lights shone, and before long they came to a little village. All the people of the village had left their houses and were gathered together in the square, round a man dressed all in red, with a big red feather in his cap, who was addressing them. Chaton and his companions pressed close to the edge of the crowd and were just in time to hear these words: "Whoever finds the ring," said the man with the red feather," and places it on the table in my palace tomorrow before dawn, shall have the five bags of gold which hang on my saddle bow." Having said this, the man in red mounted his horse and rode away. Chaton went up to a little peasant who was standing in the crowd. "Tell me, gossip," said he, "who is the man with the red feather, and what's all this about a ring and five bags of gold?" "Why," said the peasant, "the man in red is the king of this country. He had a valuable ring which was kept in a tiny wooden case on the table by his bed. This afternoon a magpie flew in through the window, snatched up the case, and bore it away to its nest in the topmost boughs of the walnut tree on the village green. The king wants his ring back again, and will give the five bags of gold to anybody who will recover it for him." "I see," said Chaton; "and why don't you climb the walnut tree and get the ring?" "Because I have too much respect for my neck," answered the peasant, "and so has everybody else here. The boughs at the top of the tree where the nest is are so thin and slender that they would not bear the weight of a child, let alone a grown man. Gold is good, but whole limbs are better, that's what I say!" "And I!" "And I!" echoed other villagers who had been listening to this conversation. "In my belief you are quite right," said Chaton seriously. "Let the king risk his own life if he is so anxious to recover his ring." But afterwards, when he had withdrawn with his companions to the shelter of the wood, he sang a different tune. "My friends," said he, "our fortunes are made! As soon as all is quiet I will climb the tree and get the ring; then you shall sit on my tail again and we'll all go off together to the king's palace and get the bags of gold!" He danced for joy, and the dog and the cock and the goose and the rabbit danced with him. An hour afterwards the cat climbed the tree and came down safely with the little wooden box. The rabbit gnawed it open with his teeth, and sure enough there was the ring inside it. "Now," said Chaton, "we will all go to the king's palace, but I am very tired with running all day. I propose that the dog takes a turn at carrying us." This was agreed. The other four got on to the dog's back and clung there while he ambled off as fast as he could along the road towards the palace. Just before dawn they came to a wide river. Now it was the turn of the goose to work for the common good. She was quite used to the water, and one by one she took the other animals across on her back. Shortly afterwards they arrived at the king's palace, and the cock flew up through the open window of the king's room with the ring in his beak, and placed it on the table by the bed. Then he awoke the king with a loud crow and claimed the reward, which was willingly given. In great glee at their good fortune the animals went on their way, each with his bag of gold, and every one of them had by this time quite forgotten his fear about the coming of the end of the world. They went on and on until they came to a place where five ways met. Then Chaton said, "Here we are at the parting of the ways. Let us each choose a road, and part good friends." At this moment there came along a pig with a knife and fork stuck in his back. In his right ear was salt; in his left ear pepper, and mustard was on his tail, so that everybody who was hungry had only to cut themselves a slice of meat and sit down to feast. Our friends gladly availed themselves of this good chance, and I who tell you this story would willingly have done the same, but as soon as I went up to the pig, he ran at me with his head down and sent me flying through the air, and through the window of my house, where I fell into the chair in which I am now sitting, finishing this story of the wonderful adventures of Chaton, the dog, the cock, the rabbit, and the goose. Source: Jean de Bosschère, Folk Tales of Flanders (New York: Dodd, Mead, and Company, 1918), pp. 139-46. Flanders is a cultural region comprising parts of France, Belgium, and the Netherlands. Return to the table of contents . The Dumb Little Animals Alsace (Germany / France) Once there was a chicky who went walking in a field. Suddenly he began to run until he came to ducky. Ducky said, "Chicky, why are you running?" "Because the sky is falling in!" "Chicky, who told you so?" "A piece of it fell on my head." So the ducky ran along too. After a while they came to Goosey, and Goosey said, "Why are you running?" Ducky said, "Because the sky is falling in!" "Ducky, who told you so?" "Chicky told me so." "Chicky, who told you so." "A piece of it fell on my head." So Goosey ran along too. After a while they came to Doggy, and Doggy said, "Why are you running?" Goosey said, "Because the sky is falling in!" "Goosey, who told you so?" "Ducky told me so." "Ducky, who told you so?" "Chicky told me so." "Chicky, who told you so." "A piece of it fell on my head." So Doggy ran along too. After a while they came to Bunny, and Bunny said, "Why are you running?" Doggy said, "Because the sky is falling in!" "Doggy, who told you so?" "Goosey told me so." "Goosey, who told you so?" "Ducky told me so." "Ducky, who told you so?" "Chicky told me so." "Chicky, who told you so." "A piece of it fell on my head." So Bunny ran along too. After a while they came to Calfy, and Calfy said, "Why are you running?" Bunny said, "Because the sky is falling in!" "Who told you so?" "Doggy told me so." "Doggy, who told you so?" "Goosey told me so." "Goosey, who told you so?" "Ducky told me so." "Ducky, who told you so?" "Chicky told me so." "Chicky, who told you so." "A piece of it fell on my head." So the calfy ran along too. After a while they came to a little boy, and the little boy said, "Why are you animals running?" All together they shouted "Hey! The sky is falling in!" "Where?" "At Chicky's place. A piece of it fell on his head." So they took the little boy with them to Chicky's place. It began to rain, and they took shelter under a cherry tree, and a little twig fell onto the little boy's back, and he said, "The sky must be falling in!" With that the animals were so ashamed that they all ran away. They are still running, and if you catch one of them, you can keep him. Source (books.google.com): August Stöber, "Die dummen Thierlein," Elsässisches Volksbüchlein (Straßburg: G. L. Schuler, 1842), no. 238, pp. 97-98 . Source (Internet Archive): August Stöber, "Die dummen Thierlein," Elsässisches Volksbüchlein (Straßburg: G. L. Schuler, 1842), no. 238, pp. 97-98 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2021. Return to the table of contents . Brother Rabbit Takes Some Exercise African American One night while the little boy was sitting in Uncle Remus's cabin, waiting for the old man to finish his hoe-cake, and refresh his memory as to the further adventures of Brother Rabbit, his friends and his enemies, something dropped upon the top of the house with a noise like the crack of a pistol. The little boy jumped, but Uncle Remus looked up and exclaimed, "Ah-yi!" in a tone of triumph. "What was that, Uncle Remus?" the child asked, after waiting a moment to see what else would happen. "New from Jack Frost, honey. When that hickory-nut tree out there hears him coming, she begins to drop what she's got. I'm mighty glad," he continued, scraping the burnt crust from hi hoe-cake with an old case-knife. "I'm mighty glad hickory nuts aren't as big and heavy as grindstones." He waited a moment to see what effect this queer statement would have on the child. "Yes, sir, I'm might glad, that I am. Because if hickory nuts were as big as grindstones, this here old calaboose would be leaking long before Christmas." Just then another hickory nut dropped upon the roof, and the little boy jumped again. This seemed to amuse Uncle Remus, and he laughed until he was near to choking himself with his smoking hoe-cake. "You are doing exactly what old Brer Rabbit did, I declare to gracious if you aren't," the old man cried, as soon as he could get his breath. "Exactly for the world." The child was immensely flattered, and at once he wanted to know how Brother Rabbit did. Uncle Remus was in such good humor that he needed no coaxing. He pushed his spectacles back on he forehead, wiped him mouth on his sleeve, and began: It came about that early one morning towards the fall of the year Brer Rabbit was stirring around in the woods after some bergamot to use for making him some hair grease. The wind was blowing so cold that it made him feel right frisky, and every time he heard the bushes rattle, it seemed to scare him. He was going on this way, hoppity-skippity, when by and by he heard Mr. Man cutting on a tree way off in the woods. He sat up, Brer Rabbit did, and listened first with one ear and then with the other. The man, he cut and cut, and Brer Rabbit, he listened and listened. By and by, while all this was going on, down came the tree: kubber-lang-bang-blam! Brer Rabbit, he took and jumped just like you jumped, and not only that, he made a break, he did, and he leaped out of as though the dogs were after him. "Was he scared, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy. "Scared! Who? Him? Shoo! Don't you fret yourself about Brer Rabbit, honey. In those days there was nothing going that could scare Brer Rabbit. To be sure, he took care of himself, and if you know anyone who refuses to take care of himself, I would mighty well like you to point him out. Indeed I would!" Uncle Remus seemed to boil over wit argumentative indignation. Well then, he continued, Brer Rabbit ran until he sort of got heated up, and about the time he was getting ready to squat and catch his wind, who should he meet but Brer Coon going home after sitting up with old Brer Bull-Frog. Brer Coon saw him running, and he hailed him, "What's your hurry, Brer Rabbit?" "Haven't got time to tarry." "Folks sick?" "No, my Lord! Haven't got time to tarry!" "Trying out your suppleness?" "No, my Lord! Haven't got time to tarry!" "Do pray, Brer Rabbit, tell me the news!" "Mighty big fuss back there in the woods. Haven't got time to tarry!" This made Brer Coon feel might skittish, because he was far from home, and he just leaped out, he did, and he went a-boiling through the woods. Brer Coon hadn't gone far until he met Brer Fox. "Hey, Brer Coon, where are you going?" "Haven't got time to tarry!" "Going to the doctor?" "No, my Lord! Haven't got time to tarry!" Do pry, Brer Coon, tell me the news." Mighty queer racket back there in the woods! Haven't got time to tarry! With that, Brer Fox leaped out, he did, and fairly split the wind. He hadn't gone far until he met Brer Wolf. "Hey, Brer Fox! Stop and rest yourself!" "Haven't got time to tarry!" "Who is wanting the doctor?" "No one, my Lord! Haven't got time to tarry." "Do pray, Brer Fox, good or bad, tell me the news." "Mighty curious fuss back there in the woods! Haven't got time to tarry!" With that, Brer Wolf shook himself loose from the face of the earth, and he didn't get far until he met Brer Bear. Brer Bear, he asked, and Brer Wolf made an answer, and by and by Brer Bear snorted and ran off. And, bless gracious, it wasn't long before the last one of the creatures was a-skaddling through the woods as though the Old Boy were after them, and all because Brer Rabbit heard Mr. Man cut a tree down. They ran and they ran, Uncle Remus went on, until they them to Brer Terrapin's house, and they sort of slacked up, because they had nearly lost their wind. Brer Terrapin, he up an asked them where they were going, and they said there was a monstrous, terrifying racket back there in the woods. Brer Terrapin, he asked what it sounded like. One said he didn't know; the other said he didn't know; and they all said they didn't know. This made old Brer Terrapin laugh way down in his insides, and he up and said, "You all can run along if you feel skittish," he said. "After I cook my breakfast and wash up the dishes, and if I get wind of any suspicious racket, maybe I might just take down my parasol and follow along after you," he said. When the creatures came to ask one another about who started the news, it went right back to Brer Rabbit, but low and behold, Brer Rabbit wasn't there! It turned out that Brer Coon was the one who had seen him last. Then they got to laying the blame of it on one or the other, until they almost began to fight, but then old Brer Terrapin, he up and said that if they wanted to straighten it out, they'd better go see Brer Rabbit. All the creatures agreed, the they started out for Brer Rabbit's house. When they got there, Brer Rabbit was sitting cross-legged on the front porch winking his eyes at the sun. Brer Bear spoke up, "What made you fool me, Brer Rabbit?" "Fool who, Brer Bear?" "Me, Brer Rabbit, that's who." "This is the first time I've seen you today, Brer Bear, and you are more than welcome at that." They all asked him and got the same answer, and then Brer Coon put in, "What made you fool me, Brer Rabbit?" "How did I fool you, Brer Coon?" "You made like there was a big racket, Brer Rabbit." "What kind of a racket, Brer Rabbit?" " Ah-yi! You should have asked me that first, Brer Coon." "I'm asking you now, Brer Rabbit." "Mr. Man cut a tree down, Brer Coon." Of course this made Brer Coon feel like a natural-born slink, and it wasn't long before all the creatures made their bows to Brer Rabbit and moseyed off home. "Brother Rabbit had the best of it all along," said the little boy, after waiting to see whether there was a sequel to the story. "Oh, did he ever!" exclaimed Uncle Remus. "Brer Rabbit was a mighty man in those days." Source (books.google.com): Joel Chandler Harris, Nights with Uncle Remus: Myths and Legends of the Old Plantation (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1883), no. 20, pp. 108-13 . Source (Internet Archive): Joel Chandler Harris, Nights with Uncle Remus: Myths and Legends of the Old Plantation (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1883), no. 20, pp. 108-113 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Texts of additional chain tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 5, 2021. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from England: A Digital Library Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from England a digital library assembled by D. L. Ashliman © 2010-2023 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Unless otherwise noted all links lead to books digitized by books.google.com . Addy, Sidney, Oldall. Household Tales with Other Traditional Remains Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby, and Nottingham . London: David Nutt; Sheffield: Pawson and Brailsford, 1895. Andrews, William. Old Church Lore . Hull: William Andrews and Company; London: Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent, and Company, 1891. Armistead, Wilson. Tales and Legends of the English Lakes . London: Simpkin, Marshall and Company; Glasgow: Thomas D. Morison, 1891. Ashton, John. Humour, Wit, & Satire of the Seventeenth Century . London: Chatto and Windus, 1883. Atkinson, John Christopher. Forty Years in a Moorland Parish: Reminiscences and Researches in Danby in Cleveland . With maps. London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1891. Aubrey, John. Miscellanies upon Various Subjects . 5th edition, to which is added Hydriotaphia; or, Urn Burial by Sir Thomas Browne. London: Reeves and Turner, 1890. Axon, William E. A. Bygone Sussex . London: William Andrews and Company, 1897. Axon, William E. A. Cheshire Gleanings . Manchester: Tubbs, Brook, and Chrystal; London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Company, 1884. Axon, William E. A. Stray Chapters in Literature, Folk-Lore, and Archaeology . London: John Heywood, 1888. Balfour, M. C. County Folk-Lore, vol. 4: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning Northumberland . Edited by Northcote W. Thomas. London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1904. Barham, Richard Harris. See Ingoldsby, Thomas . Baring-Gould, Sabine. A Book of the West: Being an Introduction to Devon and Cornwall . Vol. 1: Devon. London: Methuen and Company, 1899. Baring-Gould, Sabine. A Book of the West: Being an Introduction to Devon and Cornwall . Vol. 2: Cornwall. London: Methuen and Company, 1899. Baring-Gould, Sabine. Devonshire Characters and Strange Events . With 55 full-page illustrations reproduced from old prints, etc. London and New York: John Lane, 1908. Baring-Gould, Sabine. Old English Fairy Tales . 3rd edition. Illustrated by F. D. Bedford. London: Methuen and Company, [1906]. Baring-Gould, Sabine, and H. Fleetwood Sheppard. Songs and Ballads of the West: A Collection Made from the Mouths of the People . London: Methuen and Company, 1891. This digital text is presented by the Internet Archive . Baring-Gould, Sabine. Yorkshire Oddities, Incidents, and Strange Events . New and revised edition. London: Methuen and Company, 1890. Bethell, Augusta. See Parker, Augusta . Blakeborough, Richard. Wit, Character, Folklore, and Customs of the North Riding of Yorkshire . With a glossary of over 4,000 words and idioms now in use. London: Henry Frowde, 1898. Bottrell, William. Stories and Folk-Lore of West Cornwall . With illustrations by Joseph Blight. 3rd series. Penzance: Printed for the author by F. Rodda, 1880. Bottrell, William. Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall . [1st series.] Penzance: Printed for the author by W. Cornish, 1870. Bottrell, William. Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall . With illustrations by Joseph Blight. 2nd series. Penzance: Printed for the author by Beare and Son, 1873. Bourne, Henry. Antiquitates Vulgares; or, The Antiquities of the Common People, Giving an Account of Several of Their Opinions and Ceremonies . Newcastle: Printed by J. White for the Author, 1725. Bowker, James. Goblin Tales of Lancashire . With illustrations from drawings by the late Charles Gliddon. London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, [1883]. This digital version is presented by the Internet Archive . Brand, John. Observations on Popular Antiquities: Including the Whole of Mr. [Henry] Bourne's Antiquitates Vulgares , with Addenda to Every Chapter of That Work . Newcastle upon Tyne: Printed by T. Saint, for J. Johnson, 1777. Brand, John. Observations on Popular Antiquities: Chiefly Illustrating the Origin of Our Vulgar Customs, Ceremonies, and Superstitions . Arranged, revised, and greatly enlarged for this edition by Henry Ellis. Vol. 1. London: Charles Knight and Company, 1841. Brand, John. Observations on Popular Antiquities: Chiefly Illustrating the Origin of Our Vulgar Customs, Ceremonies, and Superstitions . Arranged, revised, and greatly enlarged for this edition by Henry Ellis. A new edition, with further additions. Vol. 2. London: Henry G. Bohn, 1849. Brand, John. Observations on Popular Antiquities Chiefly Illustrating the Origin of Our Vulgar Customs, Ceremonies, and Superstitions . Arranged, revised, and greatly enlarged for this edition by Henry Ellis. Vol. 3. London: Charles Knight and Company, 1842. Brand, John. Popular Antiquities: Chiefly Illustrating the Origin of our Vulgar Customs, Ceremonies, and Superstitions . A new edition, with the additions of Sir Henry Ellis. London: Chatto and Windus, 1900. Bray, Anna Eliza. Legends, Superstitions of Devonshire on the Borders of the Tamar and the Tavy, Illustrative of Its Manners, Customs, History, Antiquities, Scenery, and Natural History . Vol. 1. London: John Murray, 1838. Bray, Anna Eliza. Legends, Superstitions of Devonshire on the Borders of the Tamar and the Tavy, Illustrative of Its Manners, Customs, History, Antiquities, Scenery, and Natural History . Vol. 2. London: John Murray, 1838. Bray, Anna Eliza. Legends, Superstitions of Devonshire on the Borders of the Tamar and the Tavy, Illustrative of Its Manners, Customs, History, Antiquities, Scenery, and Natural History . Vol. 3. London: John Murray, 1838. Bray, Anna Eliza. Legends, Superstitions of Devonshire on the Borders of the Tamar and the Tavy, Illustrative of Its Manners, Customs, History, Antiquities, Scenery, and Natural History . Vol. 3. London: John Murray, 1844. Bray, Anna Eliza. The Borders of the Tamar and the Tavy: Their Natural History, Manners, Customs, Superstitions, Scenery, Antiquities, Eminent Persons, etc. A new edition in two volumes. Vol. 2. London: W. Kent and Company, 1879. Burne , Charlotte Sophia. Shropshire Folk-Lore: A Sheaf of Gleanings . From the collections of Georgina F. Jackson. London: Trübner and Company, 1883. Burne, Charlotte Sophia. Shropshire Folk-Lore: A Sheaf of Gleanings . From the collections of Georgina F. Jackson. Part 2. London: Tübner and Company, 1885. Burne, Charlotte Sophia. Shropshire Folk-Lore: A Sheaf of Gleanings . From the collections of Georgina F. Jackson. Part 3. London: Tübner and Company, 1886. Couch, Jonathan; and Thomas Q. Couch. The History of Polperro, a Fishing Town on the South Coast of Cornwall; Being a Description of the Place, Its People, Their Manners, Customs, Modes of Industry, etc., with a Short Account of the Life and Labours of the Author, and Many Additions on the Popular Antiquities of the District . Truro: W. Lake, and London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Company, 1871. Cunningham, Allan. Traditional Tales of the English and Scottish Peasantry . Vol. 1. London: Taylor and Hessey, 1822. Cunningham, Allan. Traditional Tales of the English and Scottish Peasantry . Vol. 2. London: Taylor and Hessey, 1822. Cunningham, Allan. Traditional Tales of the English and Scottish Peasantry . A new edition. London: F. and W. Kerslake, 1874. Cunningham, Allan. Traditional Tales of the English and Scottish Peasantry . With an introduction by Henry Morley. London: George Routledge and Sons, 1887. Dyer, T. F. Thiselton. Folk-Lore of Shakespeare . New York: Harper and Brothers, 1884. Child's Own Book, The . Illustrated with nearly three hundred engravings. 9th edition. Revised and corrected, with original tales translated from the German. London: William Tegg, 1861. Courtney, M. A. Cornish Feasts and Folk-Lore . Revised and reprinted from the Folk-Lore Society journals, 1886-87. Penzance: Beare and Son, 1890. Denham, Michael Aislabie. A Collection of Proverbs and Popular Sayings Relating to the Seasons, the Weather, and Agricultural Pursuits; Gathered Chiefly from Oral Tradition . London: Percy Society, 1846. Denham, Michael Aislabie. The Denham Tracts; or, A Few Pictures of the Olden Time, in Connection with the North of England . Richmond: John Bell, 1859. Denham, Michael Aislabie. The Denham Tracts: A Collection of Folklore by Michael Aislabie Denham, and Reprinted from the Original Tracts and Pamphlets Printed by Mr. Denham between 1846 and 1859 . Edited by James Hardy. Vol. 1. London: Published for the Folklore Society by David Nutt, 1892. Denham, Michael Aislabie. The Denham Tracts: A Collection of Folklore by Michael Aislabie Denham, and Reprinted from the Original Tracts and Pamphlets Printed by Mr. Denham between 1846 and 1859 . Edited by James Hardy. Vol. 2. London: Published for the Folklore Society by David Nutt, 1895. Denham, Michael Aislabie. Slogans of the North of England . Newcastle upon Tyne: George Bouchier Richardson, 1851. Dixon, David Dippie. Upper Coquetdale, Northumberland: Its Traditions, Folk-Lore, and Scenery . With illustrations by John Turnbull Dixon. Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Robert Redpath, 1903. Dixon, James Henry. Ancient Poems, Ballads, and Songs of the Peasantry of England . Taken down from oral recitation and transcribed from provate manuscripts, rare broadsides, and scarce publications. Edited by Robert Bell. London: John W. Parker and Son, 1857. Doyle, Arthur Conan. The Coming of the Fairies . London, Toronto, and New York: Hodder and Stoughton, 1922. Dutton, Maude Barrows. Little Stories of England . New York: American Book Company, 1911. This digital version is presented by the Internet Archive . Dyer, Thomas Firminger Thiselton. British Popular Customs, Present and Past, Illustrating the Social and Domestic Manners of the People, Arranged According to the Calendar of the Year . London: George Bell and Sons, 1900. Dyer, Thomas Firminger Thiselton. English Folk-Lore . London: Hardwicke and Bogue, 1878. Dyer, Thomas Firminger Thiselton. Folk-Lore of Woman as Illustrated by Legendary and Traditional Tales, Folk-Rhymes, Proverbial Sayings, Superstitions, etc. By T. F. Thiselton-Dyer. London: Elliot Stock, 1905. Elder, Abraham. Tales and Legends of the Isle of Wight: With the Adventures of the Author in Search of Them . Part the first. London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Company, 1839. Faulding, G. M. Fairies . London: B. T. Batsford, [1913]. This digital version is presented by the Internet Archive . Field, John Edward. The Myth of the Pent Cuckoo: A Study in Folklore . London: Elliot Stock, 1913. This digital version is presented by the Internet Archive . Fletcher, J. S. A Picturesque History of Yorkshire: Being an Account of the History, Topography, and Antiquities of the Cities, Towns, and Villages of the County of York, founded on Personal Observations Made During Many Journeys through the Three Ridings . Vol. 3. London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1901. Fletcher, Joseph Smith. A Book about Yorkshire . With sixteen illustrations in colour by Wal Paget and Frank Southgate, and sixteen other illustrations. New York: McClure Company; London: Methuen and Company, 1908. Fryer, Alfred C. Book of English Fairy Tales from the North-Country . London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1884. Fuller, Thomas. Gnomologia: Adagies and Proverbs; Wise Sentences and Witty Sayings, Ancient and Modern, Foreign and British . London: B. Barker, A. Bettesworth, and C. Hitch, 1732. Gibson, Alexander Craig. The Folk-Speech of Cumberland and Some Districts Adjacent: Being Short Stories and Rhymes in the Dialects of the West Border Counties . London: John Russell Smith; Carlisle: G. and T. Coward, 1873. Glyde, John. The Norfolk Garland: A Collection of the Superstitious Beliefs and Practices, Proverbs, Curious Customs, Ballads, and Songs of the People of Norfolk . London: Jarrold and Sons, 1872. Gomme, Alice Bertha. The Traditional Games of England, Scotland, and Ireland . With tunes, singing-rhymes, and methods of playing according to the variants extant and recorded in different parts of the kingdom. Vol. 1: Accroshay - Nuts in May. London: David Nutt, 1894. Gomme, George Laurence. Folk-Lore Relics of Early Village Life . London: Elliot Stock, 1883. Grose, Francis. A Provincial Glossary, with a Collection of Local Proverbs and Popular Superstitions . London: S. Hooper, 1787. Gurdon, Eveline Camilla. County Folk-Lore: Printed Extracts, No. 2, Suffolk . Introduction by Edward Clodd. London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by D. Nutt, 1893. Gutch, Eliza. County Folk-Lore, vol. 2: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the North Riding of Yorkshire, York, and the Ainsty . London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1901. Gutch, Eliza, and Mabel Peacock. County Folk-Lore, vol. 5: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning Lincolnshire . London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1908. Gutch, Eliza. County Folk-Lore, vol. 6: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the East Riding of Yorkshire . London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1912). Hale, Edward Everett. The Only True Mother Goose Melodies: An Exact Reproduction of the Text and Illustrations of the Origianl Edition Published and Copyrighted in Boston in the Year 1833 by Munroe and Francis . Boston: Lothrop, Lee and Shepard Company, 1905. Halliwell, James Orchard. The Merry Tales of the Wise Men of Gotham . London: John Russell Smith, 1840. Halliwell, James Orchard. The Nursery Rhymes of England . With illustrations by W. B. Scott. London and New York: Frederick Warne and Company, 1886. Halliwell, James Orchard. The Nursery Rhymes of England: Obtained Principally from Oral Tradition . 2nd edition, with alterations and additions. London: John Russell Smith, 1843. Halliwell, James Orchard. The Nursery Rhymes of England: Obtained Principally from Oral Tradition . 4th edition, with illustrations. London: John Russell Smith, 1846. Halliwell-Phillipps, James Orchard. Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to the Nursery Rhymes of England . London: John Russell Smith, 1849. Hardwick, Charles. Traditions, Superstitions, and Folk-Lore (Chiefly Lancashire and the North of England): Their Affinity to Others in Widely-Distributed Localities; Their Eastern Origin and Mythical Significance . Manchester: A. Ireland and Company; London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Company, 1872. Harland , John, and T. T. Wilkinson. Lancashire Folk-Lore: Illustrative of the Superstitious Beliefs and Practices, Local Customs, and Usages of the People of the County Palatine . London: Frederick Warne and Company; New York: Scribner and Company, 1867. Harland, John, and T. T. Wilkinson. Lancashire Legends, Traditions, Pageants, Sports, etc. With an appendix containing a rare tract on the Lancashire witches, etc., etc. London: John Heywood, 1882. Hartland, Edwin Sidney. English Fairy and Other Folk Tales . London: Walter Scott, [1890]. This digital version is presented by the Internet Archive . Hartland, Edwin Sidney. English Fairy and Other Folk Tales . London: Walter Scott Publishing Company, [1906?]. This digital version is presented by the Internet Archive . Hazlitt, W. Carew. Shakespeare Jest-books: Merie Tales of the Mad Men of Gotham. XII Mery Jests of the Wydow Edyth. Pasquils Jests with Mother Bunches Merriments. The Pleasant Conceits of Old Hobson. Certayne Conceyts and Jeasts. Taylors Wit and Mirth. Conceits, Clinches, Flashes, and Whimzies . Old English Jest-Books , vol. 3. London: Willis and Sotheran, 1864. Hazlitt, W. Carew. Shakespeare Jest-Books: Reprints of the Early and Very Rare Jest-Books Supposed to Have Been Used by Shakespeare . 1. A Hundred Mery Talys , from the only known copy. 2. Mery Tales and Quicke Answeres , from the rare edition of 1567. London: Willis and Sotheran, 1864. Hazlitt, W. Carew. Tales and Legends of National Origin or Widely Current in England from Early Times . London: Swan Sonnenschein and Company; New York: Macmillan and Company, 1899. This digital version is presented by the Internet Archive . Henderson, William. Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders . With an appendix of household stories by S. Baring-Gould. London: Longlmans, Green, and Company, 1866. Henderson, William. Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders . A new edition with many additional notes. London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by W. Satchell, Peyton, and Company, 1879. Hewett, Sarah. Nummits and Crummits: Devonshire Customs, Characteristics, and Folk-Lore . London: Thomas Burleigh, 1900. This digital version is presented by the Internet Archive . Hewett, Sarah. The Peasant Speech of Devon and Other Matters Connected Therewith . 2nd edition. London: Elliot Stock, 1892. Hollingsworth, A. G. H. The History of Stowmarket, the Ancient County Town of Suffolk . With some notices of the Hundred of Stow. Ipswich: F. Pawsey, 1844. Appendix 6 ( pp. 247-48 ) contains a selection of witchcraft and fairy legends. Hope, Robert Charles. The Legendary Lore of the Holy Wells of England: Including Rivers, Lakes, Fountains, and Springs . Copiously illustrated by curious original woodcuts. London: Elliot Scott, 1893. Hunt, Robert. Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall . 1st series. London: John Camden Hotten, 1865. Hunt, Robert. Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall . 2nd series. London: John Camden Hotten, 1865. Hunt, Robert. Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall . Illustrations by George Cruikshank. 3rd edition, revised and enlarged. London: Chatto and Windus, 1881. Hunt, Robert. Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall . Illustrations by George Cruikshank. A new edition. London: Chatto and Windus, 1903. Ingoldsby , Thomas [Richard Harris Barham]. The Ingoldsby Legends; or, Mirth and Marvels . 1st series. New York and London: George Routledge and Sons, 1840. Ingoldsby, Thomas [Richard Harris Barham]. The Ingoldsby Legends; or, Mirth and Marvels . vol. 2. London: Richard Bentley and Son, 1876. Jackson, Georgina F. See Burne, Charlotte Sophia. Shropshire Folk-Lore: A Sheaf of Gleanings . Jacobs, Joseph. English Fairy Tales . Illustrated by John D. Batten. London: David Nutt, 1890. Jacobs, Joseph. English Fairy Tales . 3rd edition, revised. London: David Nutt, 1898. Jacobs, Joseph. More English Fairy Tales . Illustrated by John D. Batten. London: David Nutt, 1894. Johnson, Walter. Folk-Memory; or, The Continuity of British Archaeology . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1908. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology . Vol. 1. London: William Harrison Ainsworth, 1828. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries . Vol. 2. London: Whittaker, Treacher, and Company, 1833. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology, Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries . A new edition, revised and greatly enlarged. London: H. G. Bohn, 1850. Lang, Andrew. "English and Scotch Fairy Tales," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 1, no. 3 (September 1890), pp. 289-312 . Lang, Andrew. The Nursery Rhyme Book . Illustrated by L. Leslie Brooke. London and New York: Frederick and Company, 1897. Leather, Ella Mary. Folk-Lore of Herefordshire: Collected from Oral and Printed Sources . With an introduction by Edwin Sidney Hartland. Hereford: Jakeman and Carver; London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1912. This digital text is presented by the HathiTrust Digital Library . Legends of Devon . London: Whittaker and Company, 1848. Leigh, Egerton. Ballads and Legends of Cheshire . London: Longmans and Company, 1867. Leprince de Beaumont, Jeanne-Marie. The Young Misses Magazine: Containing Dialogues between a Governess and Several Young Ladies of Quality, Her Scholars . Vol. 2. Whitehall: Printed for William Young, Philadelphia, 1800. Lewis, M. G. Tales of Wonder . London: Printed by W. Bulmer and Company for J. Bell, 1801. Lincolnshire Notes and Queries: A Quarterly Journal (Illustrated) Devoted to the Antiquities, Parochial Records, Family History, Folk-Lore, Quaint Customs, etc. of the County . Edited by J. Clare Hudson and E. Mansel Sympson. Vol. 4. Horncastle: W. K. Morton, 1896. The London Budget of Wit; or, A Thousand Notable Jests . London: Walker and Edwards, 1817. Northall, G. F. English Folk-Rhymes: A Collection of Traditional Verses Relating to Places and Persons, Customs, Superstitions, etc. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner and Company, 1892. Northamptonshire Notes and Queries: An Illustrated Quarterly Journal Devoted to Antiquities, Family History, Traditions, Parochial Records, Folk-Lore, Quaint Customs, etc. of the County . Edited by John Taylor. Vol. 6. Northampton: Dryden Press, 1896. Parker, Augusta . Among the Fairies . By the Hon. Mrs. Adamson Parker (Hon. Augusta Bethell). London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, [1883]. Parkinson, Thomas. Yorkshire Legends and Traditions as Told by Her Ancient Chroniclers, Her Poets, and Journalists . London: Elliot Stock, 1888. Parkinson, Thomas. Yorkshire Legends and Traditions as Told by Her Ancient Chroniclers, Her Poets, and Journalists . 2nd series. London: Elliot Stock, 1889. Peacock, Mabel. Tales and Rhymes in the Lindsey Folk-Speech . Brigg: George Jackson and Son; London: George Bell and Sons, 1886. Peele, George, The Old Wives Tale, 1595 . Oxford: Printed for the Malone Society at the Oxford University Press, 1908. Pryme, Abraham de la. The Diary of Abraham de la Pryme, the Yorkshire Antiquary . Durham: Andrews and Company, 1870. Rhys, Ernest. The English Fairy Book . With Illustrations by Frederic C. Witney. London: T. Fisher Unwin, [ca. 1900]. This digital text is presented by the HathiTrust Digital Library . Rhys, Ernest. Fairy Gold: A Book of Old English Fairy Tales . Chosen by Ernest Rhys. Everyman's Library. London: J. M. Dent and Company; New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, [1909]. This digital text is presented by the Internet Archive . Rhys, Ernest and Grace. English Fairy Tales . With coloured illustrations by Herbert Cole and R. Anning Bell. London: J. M. Dent and Sons; New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, [1913]. This digital text is presented by the Internet Archive . Richardson, M. A. The Local Historian's Table Book of Remarkable Occurrences, Historical Facts, Traditions, Legendary and Descriptive Ballads, etc., etc., Connected with the Counties of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Northumberland, and Durham . Legendary division, vol. 1. Newcastle-upon-Tyne: M. A. Richardson, 1842. Ritson, Joseph. Fairy Tales, Now First Collected . To which are prefixed two dissertations: 1. On Pygmies; 2. On Fairies. London: Printed for Payne and Foss and William Pickering by Thomas Davison, 1831. Ritson, Joseph. Fairy Tales, Legends, and Romances Illustrating Shakespeare and Other English Writers . To which are prefixed two preliminary dissertations: 1. On Pigmies; 2. On Fairies. London: Frank and William Kerslake, 1875. Sharpe, Sir Cuthbert. The Bishoprick Garland; or, A Collection of Legends, Song, Ballads, etc., Belonging to the County of Durham . London: Nichols, and Baldwin and Cradock, 1834. Stapleton, Alfred. All about the Merry Tales of Gotham . With original sketches by Harry Packer, facsimiles, plans, etc. Nottingham: R. N. Pearson, 1900. Steel, Flora Annie. English Fairy Tales . Illustrated by Arthur Rackham. New York: Macmillan Company, 1918. Sternberg, Thomas. The Dialect and Folk-Lore of Northamptonshire . London: Russell Smith; Northampton: Abel and Sons, 1851. Swainson, Charles. The Folklore and Provincial Names of British Birds . London: Elliot Stock, 1886. Stephens, George. " Two English Folk-Tales ." The Folk-Lore Record . Vol. 3, part 2 (1881), pp. 153-56. Tabart, Benmanin. Popular Fairy Tales; or, A Liliputian Library; Containing Twenty-Six Choice Pieces of Fancy and Fiction, by Those Renowned Personages King Oberon, Queen Mab, Mother Goose, Mother Bunch, Master Puck, and Other Distinguished Personages at the Court of the Fairies . With twenty-six coloured engravings. London: Sir Richard Phillips and Company, 1830. Tibbits, Charles John. Folk-Lore and Legends: English . London: W. W. Gibbings, 1890. Published anonymously. Tibbits, Charles John. Folk-Lore and Legends: English . Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Company, 1891. Published anonymously. Whitcombe, Mary Elizabeth Joce (Mrs. Henry Pennell Whitcombe). Bygone Days of Devonshire and Cornwall, with Notes of Existing Superstitions and Customs . London: Richard Bentley and Son, 1874. Wilkinson, T. T. See Harland, John . Wright, Elizabeth Mary. Rustic Speech and Folk-Lore . London: Oxford University Press, 1913. Related bibliographies Grimm. Grimms' Fairy Tales in English . Ireland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Ireland . Man. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from the Isle of Man . Scandinavia, Finland, and Estonia. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Iceland, Norway, Denmark, Sweden, Finland, and Estonia . Scotland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Scotland . Slavic. Slavic and Other Eastern European Folk and Fairy Tales . Wales. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Wales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. February 26, 2023. Ertha, the Germanic Earth Goddess Ertha, the Germanic Earth Goddess as depicted by the Roman historian Tacitus edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1996-2010 Nothing remarkable occurs in any of these tribes [of northern Germany], except that they unite in the worship of Hertha [Ertha], or Mother Earth. They believe that she interposes in the affairs of men, and visits the different nations in her chariot. On an island of the ocean stands a sacred and unviolated grove, in which is a consecrated chariot, covered with a veil, which the priest alone is permitted to touch. He becomes conscious of the entrance of the goddess into this secret recess; and with profound veneration attends the vehicle, which is drawn by yoked cows. At this season all is joy; and every place which the goddess deigns to visit is a scene of festivity. No wars are undertaken; arms are untouched; and every hostile weapon is shut up. At this time, only peace abroad and at home are known. At length the same priest conducts the goddess, now weary of mortal intercourse, back to her temple. The chariot, with its curtain, and, if we may believe it, the goddess herself, then undergo ablution in a secret lake. This ritual is performed by slaves, whom the same lake instantly swallows up. Hence arises a mysterious horror and a pious ignorance of these events, which are beheld only by those who are about to perish. Source: The Works of Tacitus . The Oxford Translation, revised. Vol. 2 (London: George Bell and Sons, 1898), pp. 332-33 . Text slightly revised by D. L. Ashliman. This treatise, whose full title is " A Treatise on the Situation, Manners, and Inhabitants of Germany ," was written in Latin in the year 98. Ertha (or Hertha) is also known by the name Nerthus. Link to Hertha Lake, a legend from the German island of Rügen in the Baltic Sea, as recorded by J. D. H. Temme. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Tabulation by WebCounter . Revised June 26, 2010. Fairies' Hope for Christian Salvation: Migratory Legends of Type 5050 Fairies' Hope for Christian Salvation Migratory Legends of Type 5050 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009-2024 Contents A Redeemer for the Elves? (Sweden). The Näck and the Strömkarl (Sweden). Salvation for the Neck (Sweden). The Water Nymph (Sweden). Link to The Prospects of the Huldre -Folk for Salvation (Norway). This link leads to Reidar Thoralf Christiansen, Folktales of Norway (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968), no. 37, pp. 87-88 . The Trolls Desire to Be Saved (Denmark). The Clergyman and the Dwarfs (Denmark). Gillikop (Denmark). When We Cease to Exist.... (An excerpt from "The Little Mermaid" by Hans Christian Andersen). The Convent Nixie in Guben (Germany). The Sea Bishop (Germany / Poland). The Pious Clergyman and the Fairy (Scotland). A Ross-Shire Narrative (Scotland). The Priest's Supper (Ireland). The Belated Priest (Ireland). The First Turf Fire (Ireland). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. A Redeemer for the Elves? Sweden If the wanderer in a summer's evening lays himself to rest by an elf-mount, he soon hears the tones of a harp with sweet singing. If he then promises them redemption, he will hear the most joyful notes resound from numerous stringed instruments; but if he says, "Ye have no redeemer," then with cries and loud lament they will dash their harps in pieces; after which all is silent in the mount. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstititions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), p. 64 . Thorpe does not give this account a title. Return to the table of contents . The Näck and the Strömkarl Sweden The näck appears sometimes in the form of a grown man, and is particularly dangerous to haughty and pert damsels; sometimes in that of a comely youth, with his lower extremities like those of a horse; sometimes like an old man with a long beard; and occasionally as a handsome youth, with yellow locks flowing over his shoulders and a red cap, sitting in a summer evening on the surface of the water with a golden harp in his hand. If any one wishes to learn music of him, the most welcome remuneration that can be offered to him is a black lamb, especially if the hope of his salvation -- which the näck has greatly at heart -- be at the same time expressed to him. Hence when two boys once said to a näck : "What good do you gain by sitting here and playing? You will never enjoy eternal happiness," he began to weep bitterly. . . . A näck who takes up his abode under a bridge or in a stream, is commonly called a strömkarl . He always plays on the viol; and when any musician plays with extraordinary boldness and skill, he is said to play with the strömkarl's touch. Near Hornborga Bridge, in Västergötland, a strömkarl was once heard singing, to a pleasant melody, these words thrice repeated: "I know, and I know, and I know that my redeemer liveth." As seen by sailors, the näck is described as an old man, sitting on a rock, wringing the water out of his large, green beard. Their appearance is said to forebode storm and tempest. Under this form they may be more correctly called mermen . He is sometimes seen on the shore under the form of a handsome horse, but with his hoofs reversed. A priest riding one evening over a bridge, heard the most delightful tones of a stringed instrument, and, on looking round, saw a young man, naked to the waist, sitting on the surface of the water, with a red cap and yellow locks, as already described. He saw that it was the näck , and in his zeal addressed him thus: "Why dost thou so joyously strike thy harp? Sooner shall this dried cane that I hold in my hand grow green and flower, than thou shalt obtain salvation." Thereupon the unhappy musician cast down his harp, and sat bitterly weeping on the water. The priest then turned his horse, and continued his course. But lo! Before he had ridden far, he observed that green shoots and leaves, mingled with most beautiful flowers, had sprung from his old staff. This seemed to him a sign from heaven, directing him to preach the consoling doctrine of redemption after another fashion. He therefore hastened back to the mournful näck , showed him the green, flowery staff, and said: "Behold! Now my old staff is grown green and flowery like a young branch in a rose garden. So likewise may hope bloom in the hearts of all created beings, for their Redeemer liveth!" Comforted by these words, the näck again took his harp, the joyous tones of which resounded along the shore the whole livelong night. Source (books.google.com): Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), pp. 78-80 . Source (Internet Archive): Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), pp. 78-80 . Return to the table of contents . Salvation for the Neck Sweden The following story is told in all parts of Sweden: Two boys were one time playing near a river that ran by their father's house. The neck rose and sat on the surface of the water, and played on his harp; but one of the children said to him, "What is the use, neck , of your sitting there and playing? You will never be saved." The neck then began to weep bitterly, flung away his harp, and sank down to the bottom. The children went home, and told the whole story to their father, who was the parish priest. He said they were wrong to say so to the neck , and desired them to go immediately back to the river, and console him with the promise of salvation. They did so; and when they came down to the river the neck was sitting on the water, weeping and lamenting. They then said to him, " Neck , do not grieve so; our father says that your redeemer liveth also." The neck then took his harp and played most sweetly, until long after the sun was gone down. In another form of this legend, a priest says to the neck , "Sooner will this cane which I hold in my hand grow green flowers than thou shalt attain salvation." The neck in grief flung away his harp and wept, and the priest rode on. But soon his cane began to put forth leaves and blossoms, and he then went back to communicate the glad tidings to the neck , who now joyously played on all the entire night. Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology, Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries , new edition (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), p. 149-50 . Keightley does not give titles to these two accounts. The neck (Swedish näck ) is a nature-being associated with water. Often taking the form of a horse, he is represented (with various names) in folklore throughout northern Europe. Return to the table of contents . The Water Nymph Sweden About a mile northwest from Järna Church was located, at one time, a water mill, Snöåqvarn, belonging to the parishoners of Näs. One Sunday morning, before the church of Järna had a priest of its own, the chaplain of Näs set out for that place, and had just arrived at the mill, when he saw a water man sitting in the rapids below it, playing on a fiddle a psalm from a psalm book. "What good do you think your playing will do you?" said the priest. "You need expect no mercy!" Sadly the figure ceased playing, and broke his fiddle in pieces, whereupon the priest regretted his severe condemnation, and again spoke, "God knows, maybe, after all." "Is that so?" exclaimed the man in joy, "Then I'll pick up my pieces and play better and more charmingly than before." Source (books.google.com): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 194-95 . Source (Internet Archive): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 194-95 . Footnote by Hofberg: "The water nymphs are noted musicians; their music usually being in a plaintive strain and expressing a longing to be released on the day of judgment. Sometimes, but not so often, they appear in the folklore as the capricious rulers of the streams which they inhabit." The original Swedish text (books.google.com): Herman Hofberg, "Forskarlen," Svenska Folksägner (Stockholm: Fr. Skoglunds Förlag, 1882), pp. 169-70 . The places named in this legend are in the Swedish province of Dalarna. Return to the table of contents . The Trolls Desire to Be Saved Denmark One night as a priest was going from Hiorlunde to Rolskilde [ sic ], he passed by a mount in which there were music, dancing and other merriment. At this moment some Dwarfs sprang forth from the mount, stopped the priest's vehicle, and said, "Whither art thou going?" "To Landemode," answered the priest. They then asked him whether he thought they could be saved; to which he replied that he could not then inform them. They then appointed him to meet them with an answer in a year. In the meantime it went ill with the coachman, who the next time he passed by the mount was overturned and killed on the spot. When the priest came again at the end of a year, they again asked him the same question, to which he answered, "No! You are all damned!" Scarcely had he uttered the words before the whole mount was in a blaze. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), pp. 151-52 . Thorpe's source: J. M. Thiele, "Troldene ønske at blive salige," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: Universitetsboghandler C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), pp. 243-44 . Return to the table of contents . The Clergyman and the Dwarfs Denmark A clergyman, it is said, was journeying one night to Roeskilde [ sic ] in Zealand. His way led by a hill in which there was music and dancing and great merriment going forward. Some dwarfs jumped suddenly out of it, stopped the carriage, and asked him whither he was going. He replied to the synod of the church. They asked him if he thought they could be saved. To that, he replied, he could not give an immediate answer. They then begged that he would give them a reply by next year. When he next passed, and they made the same demand, he replied, "No, you are all damned." Scarcely had he spoken the word, when the whole hill appeared in flames. Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology, Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), pp. 149-50 . Keightley does not give this account a title. Return to the table of contents . Gillikop Denmark Once some Jutlanders got hold of a mound-dwarf. Not knowing any better, they wanted to make him a Christian, so they put him on a cart to take him to church, where he was to be baptized. He sat there looking out, when the peasants heard a voice on the road shouting: "Where to, Gillikop?" The dwarf answered from the cart: "Far away, Slangerop! To a little water that will make a better man of me!" Source (books.google.com): J. M. Thiele, "Gillikop," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), p. 243 . Source (Internet Archive): J. M. Thiele, "Gillikop," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), p. 243 . Return to the table of contents . When We Cease to Exist.... An excerpt from "The Little Mermaid" by Hans Christian Andersen "If human beings are not drowned," asked the little mermaid, "can they live forever? Do they never die, as we do here in the sea?" "Yes," replied the old lady [the little mermaid's grandmother], "they must also die, and their term of life is even shorter than ours. We sometimes live for three hundred years, but when we cease to exist here, we become only foam on the surface of the water and have not even a grave among those we love. We have not immortal souls, we shall never live again; like the green seaweed when once it has been cut off, we can never flourish more. Human beings, on the contrary, have souls which live forever, even after the body has been turned to dust. They rise up through the clear, pure air, beyond the glittering stars. As we rise out of the water and behold all the land of the earth, so do they rise to unknown and glorious regions which we shall never see." "Why have not we immortal souls?" asked the little mermaid, mournfully. "I would gladly give all the hundreds of years that I have to live, to be a human being only for one day and to have the hope of knowing the happiness of that glorious world above the stars." "You must not think that," said the old woman. "We believe that we are much happier and much better off than human beings." "So I shall die," said the little mermaid, "and as the foam of the sea I shall be driven about, never again to hear the music of the waves or to see the pretty flowers or the red sun? Is there anything I can do to win an immortal soul?" "No," said the old woman; "unless a man should love you so much that you were more to him than his father or his mother, and if all his thoughts and all his love were fixed upon you, and the priest placed his right hand in yours, and he promised to be true to you here and hereafter -- then his soul would glide into your body, and you would obtain a share in the future happiness of mankind. He would give to you a soul and retain his own as well; but this can never happen." Source: Hans Christian Andersen, Hans Andersen's Fairy Tales , second series, edited by J. H. Stickney (Boston: Ginn and Company, 1915), pp. 143-45 . For the entire story see pp. 124-69 . Link to "The Little Mermaid" in Danish: Den lille Havfrue (1837). Return to the table of contents . The Convent Nixie in Guben Germany On the outpost Einbecke near Guben there is a spring that 300 years ago was called Ostera Spring and was prized for its healing powers. A nixie lives in this spring. On holy nights, especially at Easter and Saint John's Day, she can still be seen at the edge of the spring. This nixie once loved a handsome young burgher's son from Guben, named Heinrich. She had many secret meetings with him, but in the end the young man's piety and fear of God were stronger than his love for her. He dedicated himself to the Virgin Mary, and for the sake of his soul's salvation, he resisted all the temptations of the lovely pagan woman. Tormented by indescribable grief at the loss of her beloved, the nixie decided to learn of the powers that had estranged the youth from her. To this end she entered the service of the Holy Virgin, who, as she jealously thought, had robbed her of her handsome Heinrich. Thus she went to the convent of the virgins and, as a lay sister, performed the meanest and hardest maid services, silently and unrecognized. However, Christ entered her soul and filled her with the blessings of the gospel. Thus holy love for her rival Mary erased the pagan resentment in her heart. Her humility and piety were soon recognized, and with time, under the name of Paula, she became a nun, a subprioress, a prioress, and finally the abbess of the convent. Her wonderful knowledge of natural healing powers and her undaunted active love of healing the sick soon brought her a reputation for holiness. No one suspected her origin, because the nixies completely resemble humans, although they always have a damp hem on their robes as a sign of their native element. No matter how carefully the abbess tried to hide the damp hem of her veil, it did not escape the spying eyes of a young, clever, and curious nun, and her secret soon became known to the whole convent. From that hour on she was alienated from the hearts of the nuns. Cold greetings, lurking looks, and secret whispers wounded the heart of the loving abbess. The confessor of the convent soon learned her secret. In his zeal for the salvation of the church, he questioned the abbess in the confessional. Hearing his first words, the unfortunate woman stood up, wringing her hands and lamenting. She confessed that she was the nixie of Ostera Spring and added, lamenting, that she now had to go back to her damp dwelling. Just one more year, and her seven years of trial would have been over, and her soul would have been saved. Close to her goal, she was now farther than ever from it, because of the hasty zeal of the nuns. She took leave of the convent, all its sacred objects, and all its inhabitants. The nuns wept a great deal, for they all loved greatly, even though she was a nixie. And then she silently went back to her former cold dwelling. Since then she has often been seen walking through the cloisters of the convent at night in her nun's habit. She can be seen particularly well there on the night before August 15, the feast of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary. She has never done harm to anyone. Note: The name of the spring is a clear reminder of the Germanic goddess Ostera. The longing of the nixies for salvation and bliss and their pain when their hope for it is frustrated is a particularly melancholy and touching trait, which is particularly characteristic of Nordic legends. Source (books.google.com): Karl Haupt, "Die Klosternixe zu Guben," Sagenbuch der Lausitz , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1863), no. 328, pp. 232-33 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Haupt, "Die Klosternixe zu Guben," Sagenbuch der Lausitz , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1863), no. 328, pp. 232-33 . Return to the table of contents . The Sea Bishop Germany / Poland In 1433 a merman who resembled a bishop in every way was caught in the Baltic Sea. He wore a bishop's mitre on his head, held a bishop's staff in his hand, and wore a robe like a chasuble. The king of Poland kept him for some days, but when he found that the merman would not live long because of great distress, he had him put back into the sea. The merman showed the bishops a great deal of honor. He let them touch him, but he did not speak. When the king of Poland wanted to lock him up in a tower and keep him there, he protested and begged the bishops with expressions and signs to let him go back to his element. He was then led by two bishops to the sea. When he saw the water, he showed great joy and quickly jumped in. He then made the sign of the cross, bowed his head as if he wanted to thank them, and dived under. He was never seen again. Source (books.google.com): Johannes Wilhelm Wolf, "Seebischof," Deutsche Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1845), no. 246, p. 355 . Source (Internet Archive): Johannes Wilhelm Wolf, "Seebischof," Deutsche Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1845), no. 246, p. 355 . Return to the table of contents . The Pious Clergyman and the Fairy Scotland Not long since, as a pious clergyman was returning home, after administering spiritual consolation to a dying member of his flock, it was late of the night, and he had to pass through a good deal of uncanny ground. He was, however, a good and a conscientious minister of the gospel, and feared not all the spirits in the country. On his reaching the end of a lake which stretched alongst the roadside for some distance, he was a good deal surprised to have his attention arrested by the most melodious strains of music. Overcome by pleasure and curiosity, the minister coolly sat down to listen to the harmonious sounds, and try what new discoveries he could make with regard to their nature and source. He had not sitten many minutes when he could distinguish the approach of the music, and also observe a light in the direction from whence it proceeded gliding across the lake towards him. Instead of taking to his heels, as any faithless wight would have done, the pastor fearlessly determined to await the issue of the phenomenon. As the light and music drew near, the clergyman could at length distinguish an object resembling a human being walking on the surface of the water, attended by a group of diminutive musicians, some of them bearing lights, and others of them instruments of music, on which they continued to perform those melodious strains which first attracted his attention. The leader of the band dismissed his attendants, landed on the beach, and afforded the minister the amplest opportunities of examining his appearance. He was a little primitive looking grey-headed man, clad in the most grotesque habit he ever witnessed, and such as led the venerable minister all at once to suspect his real character. He walked up to the minister, whom he saluted with great grace, offering an apology for his intrusion. The pastor returned his compliments, and without farther explanation, invited the mysterious stranger to sit down by his side. The invitation was complied with, upon which the minister proposed the following question: "Who art thou, stranger, and from whence?" To this question the fairy, with downcast eye, replied, that he was one of those sometimes called Doane Shee , or men of peace, or good men, though the reverse of this title was a more fit appellation for them. Originally angelic in his nature and attributes, and once a sharer of the indescribable joys of the regions of light, he was seduced by Satan to join him in his mad conspiracies; and, as a punishment for his transgression, he was cast down from those regions of bliss, and was now doomed, along with millions of fellow sufferers, to wander through seas and mountains, until the coming of the great day; what their fate would be then they could not divine, but they apprehended the worst. "And," continued he, turning to the minister, with great anxiety, "the object of my present intrusion on you is to learn your opinion, as an eminent divine, as to our final condition on that dreadful day." Here the venerable pastor entered upon a long conversation with the fairy, (the particulars of which we shall be excused for omitting,) touching the principles of faith and repentance. Receiving rather unsatisfactory answers to his questions, the minister desired the " Sheech " to repeat after him the Paternoster, in attempting to do which, it was not a little remarkable, that he could not repeat the word " art ," but " wert, " in heaven. Inferring from every circumstance, that their fate was extremely precarious, the minister resolved not to puff the fairies up with presumptuous and perhaps groundless expectations. Accordingly, addressing himself to the unhappy fairy, who was all anxiety to know the nature of his sentiments, the reverend gentleman told him, that he could not take it upon him to give them any hopes of pardon, as their crime was of so deep a hue as scarcely to admit of it. On this the unhappy fairy uttered a shriek of despair, plunged headlong into the loch, and the minister resumed his course to his home. Source (books.google.com): William Grant Stewart, The Popular Superstitions and Festive Amusements of the Highlanders of Scotland (Edinburgh: Archibald Constable and Company; London: Hurst, Robinson, and Company, 1823), pp. 58-62 . Source (Internet Archive): William Grant Stewart, The Popular Superstitions and Festive Amusements of the Highlanders of Scotland (Edinburgh: Archibald Constable and Company; London: Hurst, Robinson, and Company, 1823), pp. 58-62 . Return to the table of contents . A Ross-Shire Narrative Scotland In a Ross-Shire narrative, a beautiful green lady is represented as appearing to an old man reading the Bible, and seeking to know, if for such as her, Holy Scripture held out any hope of salvation. The old man spoke kindly to her; but said, that in these pages there was no mention of salvation for any but the sinful sons of Adam. She flung her arms over her head, screamed, and plunged into the sea. Source: John Francis Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), p. 64 . Campbell does not give this account a title. Return to the table of contents . The Priest's Supper Ireland It is said by those who ought to understand such things, that the good people, or the fairies, are some of the angels who were turned out of heaven, and who landed on their feet in this world, while the rest of their companions, who had more sin to sink them, went down further to a worse place. Be this as it may, there was a merry troop of the fairies, dancing and playing all manner of wild pranks on a bright moonlight evening towards the end of September. The scene of their merriment was not far distant from Inchegeela, in the west of the county Cork -- a poor village, although it had a barrack for soldiers; but great mountains and barren rocks, like those round about it, are enough to strike poverty into any place. However, as the fairies can have every thing they want for wishing, poverty does not trouble them much, and all their care is to seek out unfrequented nooks and places where it is not likely anyone will come to spoil their sport. On a nice green sod by the river's side were the little fellows dancing in a ring as gaily as may be, with their red caps wagging about at every bound in the moonshine; and so light were these bounds, that the lobes of dew, although they trembled under their feet, were not disturbed by their capering. Thus did they carry on their gambols, spinning round and round, and twirling and bobbing, and diving and going through all manner of figures, until one of them chirped out, Cease, cease, with your drumming, Here's an end to our mumming, By my smell I can tell A priest this way is coming! And away every one of the fairies scampered off as hard as they could, concealing themselves under the green leaves of the lusmore, where, if their little red caps should happen to peep out, they would only look like its crimson bells; and more hid themselves in the hollow of stones, or at the shady side of brambles, and others under the bank of the river, and in holes and crannies of one kind or another. The fairy speaker was not mistaken; for along the road, which was within view of the river, came Father Horrigan on his pony, thinking to himself that as it was so late he would make an end of his journey at the first cabin he came to. According to this determination, he stopped at the dwelling of Dermod Leary, lifted the latch, and entered with "My blessing on all here." I need not say that Father Horrigan was a welcome guest wherever he went, for no man was more pious or better beloved in the country. Now it was a great trouble to Dermod that he had nothing to offer his reverence for supper as a relish to the potatoes which "the old woman," for so Dermod called his wife, though she was not much past twenty, had down boiling in the pot over the fire; he thought of the net which he had set in the river, but as it had been there only a short time, the chances were against his finding a fish in it. "No matter," thought Dermod, "there can be no harm in stepping down to try, and may be as I want the fish for the priest's supper that one will be there before me." Down to the river side went Dermod, and he found in the net as fine a salmon as ever jumped in the bright waters of "the spreading Lee." But as he was going to take it out, the net was pulled from him, he could not tell how or by whom, and away got the salmon, and went swimming along with the current as gaily as if nothing had happened. Dermod looked sorrowfully at the wake which the fish had left upon the water, shining like a line of silver in the moonlight, and then, with an angry motion of his right hand, and a stamp of his foot, gave vent to his feelings by muttering, "May bitter bad luck attend you night and day for a blackguard schemer of a salmon, wherever you go! You ought to be ashamed of yourself, if there's any shame in you, to give me the slip after this fashion! And I'm clear in my own mind you'll come to no good, for some kind of evil thing or other helped you -- did I not feel it pull the net against me as strong as the devil himself?" "That's not true for you," said one of the little fairies, who had scampered off at the approach of the priest, coming up to Dermod Leary, with a whole throng of companions at his heels; "there was only a dozen and a half of us pulling against you." Dermod gazed on the tiny speaker with wonder, who continued, "Make yourself noways uneasy about the priest's supper; for if you will go back and ask him one question from us, there will be as fine a supper as ever was put on a table spread out before him in less than no time." "I'll have nothing at all to do with you," replied Dermod, in a tone of determination; and after a pause he added, "I'm much obliged to you for your offer, sir, but I know better than to sell myself to you or the like of you for a supper; and more than that, I know Father Horrigan has more regard for my soul than to wish me to pledge it for ever, out of regard to any thing you could put before him -- so there's an end of the matter." The little speaker, with a pertinacity not to be repulsed by Dermod's manner, continued, "Will you ask the priest one civil question for us?" Dermod considered for some time, and he was right in doing so, but he thought that no one could come to harm out of asking a civil question. "I see no objection to do that same, gentlemen," said Dermod; "but I will have nothing in life to do with your supper, -- mind that." "Then," said the little speaking fairy, whilst the rest came crowding after him from all parts, "go and ask Father Horrigan to tell us whether our souls will be saved at the last day, like the souls of good Christians; and if you wish us well, bring back word what he says without delay." Away went Dermod to his cabin, where he found the potatoes thrown out on the table, and his good woman handing the biggest of them all, a beautiful laughing red apple, smoking like a hard-ridden horse on a frosty night, over to Father Horrigan. "Please your reverence," said Dermod, after some hesitation, "may I make bold to ask your honour one question?" "What may that be?" said Father Horrigan. "Why, then, begging your reverence's pardon for my freedom, it is, if the souls of the good people are to be saved at the last day?" "Who bid you ask me that question, Leary?" said the priest, fixing his eyes upon him very sternly, which Dermod could not stand before at all. "I'll tell no lies about the matter, and nothing in life but the truth," said Dermod. "It was the good people themselves who sent me to ask the question, and there they are in thousands down on the bank of the river waiting for me to go back with the answer." "Go back by all means," said the priest, "and tell them, if they want to know, to come here to me themselves, and I'll answer that or any other question they are pleased to ask with the greatest pleasure in life." Dermod accordingly returned to the fairies, who came swarming round about him to hear what the priest had said in reply; and Dermod spoke out among them like a bold man as he was: but when they heard that they must go to the priest, away they fled, some here and more there; and some this way and more that, whisking by poor Dermod so fast and in such numbers, that he was quite bewildered. When he came to himself, which was not for a long time, back he went to his cabin and ate his dry potatoes along with Father Horrigan, who made quite light of the thing; but Dermod could not help thinking it a mighty hard case that his reverence, whose words had the power to banish the fairies at such a rate, should have no sort of relish to his supper, and that the fine salmon he had in the net should have been got away from him in such a manner. Source: Thomas Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland (London: John Murray, 1834), pp. 22-27 . Return to the table of contents . The Belated Priest Ireland In one point of elvish mythology, Teuton and Celt are agreed, viz., that whether the supernatural beings of the old superstition be called fairies, elves, nixes, trolls, korigans, or duergars, they all live in fear of utter condemnation at the Day of Judgment. Their dislike of the human race arises from envy of their destiny, which they regard as the filling of the heavenly seats lost by themselves. Sometimes they experience a slight hope that their place may not be with Satan and his angels, and then they become urgent with holy and wise mortals, to give judgment on their case. This phase of fairy life will be illustrated by the local legend of -- THE BELATED PRIEST. A very lonesome road connects the village of Ballindaggin, in the Duffrey, with the townland of Mangan, on the Bantry side of the brawling Urrin, and outside these intermediate stations it leads to Kaim and Castleboro, on one side, and the high road from Bunclody to Ross on the other. From the river to Ballindaggin, you hardly meet a house, and fallow fields extend on each side. Father Stafford was asked, rather late in the day, to make a sick call at a cabin that stood among these fields, at a considerable distance from this road, a cabin from which no lane led either to by-road or public road. He was delayed longer than he expected, and when he was leaving the cabin it was nearly dark. This did not disturb him much. There was a path that led to the road, and he knew he had only to keep a northeasterly direction to come out on it, not far from the village already named. So he went on fearlessly for some time, but complete obscurity soon surrounded him, and he would have been sorely perplexed, had it not been that the path lay for the most part beside the fences. At last, instead of passing in a line near the fence, it struck across the field; and, open his eyes wide as he might, he could hardly distinguish it from the dry, russet-colored grass at each side. Well, he kept his eyes steadily fixed in the due direction, and advanced till he was about the middle of the field, which happened to be a large one. There some case of conscience, or other anxious subject, crossed his mind, and he stopped and fidgeted about, walking restlessly this way and that for a few steps, totally forgetting his present circumstances. Coming at last to some solution of his difficulty, full recollection returned, and he was sensible of being thoroughly ignorant of the direction in which his proper route lay. If he could but get a glimpse of Mount Leinster, it would be all well; but, beyond a few perches, all was in the deepest darkness on every side. He then set off in a straight line, which he knew would bring him to some fence, and perhaps he might find stile or gap for his guidance. He went twice round the field, but, in the confusion of his faculties, he could find no trace of path or pass. He at last half resolved to cross the fence, and go straight on, but the dykes were, for the most part, encumbered with briers, and furze bushes crowned the tops of the steep clay mounds. While he stood perplexed, he heard the rustle of wings or bodies passing swiftly through the air, and a musical voice was heard, "You will suffer much if you do not find your way. Give us a favorable answer to a question, and you shall be on the road in a few minutes." The good priest was somewhat awed at the rustle and the voice, but he answered without delay, "Who are you, and what's your question?" The same voice replied, "We are the Chlann Sighe, and wish you to declare that at the last day our lot may not be with Satan. Say that the Savior died for us as well as for you." "I will give you a favorable answer, if you can make me a hopeful one. Do you adore and love the Son of God?" He received no answer but weak and shrill cries, and the rushing of wings, and at once it seemed as if he had shaken off some oppression. The dark clouds had separated, a weak light was shed round where he stood, and he distinguished the path, and an opening in the bushes on the fence. He crossed into the next field, and, following the path, he was soon on the road. In fifteen minutes he was seated at his comfortable fire, and his little round table, covered with books, was at his side. Source: Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1891), pp. 87-89 . Return to the table of contents . The First Turf Fire Ireland So natural does it seem to see the turf burning on the cottage hearths, that it is difficult to conceive of a time when the people were ignorant of the use of it. Most things, however, have a beginning, and this is the story of the first turf fire according to Francis Whelan of Driny, who had it from an old resident in the place: Before the days of Saint Patrick, the only fuel the Irish had was wood, for the use of turf had not been discovered. One day St. Patrick's servant was returning home, when suddenly a little man in red appeared in front of him. "If you will ask St. Patrick the answer to one question," said he, "I will tell you something in return." "Well, what is it?" said the man. "Tomorrow morning at Mass ask him this question: 'Is there any hope for the fallen angels [fairies]?'" So the next morning at Mass, at the elevation, the servant called out he had a question he wished to ask (for the celebrant must answer any question put to him that moment). When Mass was over, St. Patrick said, "Who was that wretched man who called out?" The servant then told the saint about the little man and his question. Said St. Patrick: "You may just go and dig your own grave, for when you tell him the answer he will surely kill you, but don't forget to lay the loy and the shovel crosswise over the grave when you have done, for the answer to the little man's question is, 'There is no hope for the fallen angels.'" Then the man went and dug his grave, and he had just put the loy and shovel over him, when the little red man appeared and asked his question. When he heard the reply he tried to get at the poor servant to kill him, but as he was protected by the cross made by the loy and shovel, he could not touch him. At last he said: "Well, you have answered my question, and though it is against us, I must tell you something as I promised. Go to the bog and throw up some of the turf on it, and let it dry in the sun, and it will make a good fire for you" -- and he disappeared. The man got out of the grave then, and he told St. Patrick what the little red man had said, and when they tried they found every word true, and from that day the Irish have used turf for fuel. Source: Leland L. Duncan, "Further Notes from County Leitrim," Folk-Lore: Transactions of the Folk-Lore Society , vol. 5, no. 3 (September 1894), pp. 182-83 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised July 1, 2024. A Captured Fairy: Migratory Legends of Type 6010 A Captured Fairy migratory legends of type 6010 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2016 Contents A Fairy Caught (England). Skillywidden the Fairy (England). Colman Grey (England). A Woman Caught a Fairy (Wales). The Wonderful Plough (Germany). Krachöhrle! Where Are You? (Germany). Link to The Leprechaun: Ireland's Fairy Shoemaker , additional tales about captured fairies. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. A Fairy Caught England The following, communicated to me on the 8th of August, is too good to be lost. I therefore give it in my correspondent's own words: I heard last week of three fairies having been seen in Zennor very recently. A man who lived at the foot of Trendreen hill, in the valley of Treridge, I think, was cutting furze on the hill. Near the middle of the day he saw one of the small people, not more than a foot long, stretched at full length and fast asleep, on a bank of griglans (heath), surrounded by high brakes of furze. The man took off his furze cuff, and slipped the little man into it, without his waking up; went down to the house; took the little fellow out of the cuff on the hearthstone, when he awakened, and seemed quite pleased and at home, beginning to play with the children, who were well pleased with the small body, and called him Bobby Griglans. The old people were very careful not to let Bob out of the house, or be seen by the neighbours, as he promised to shew the man where the crocks of gold were buried on the hill. A few days after he was brought from the hill, all the neighbours came with their horses (according to custom) to bring home the winter's reek of furze, which had to be brought down the hill in trusses on the backs of the horses. That Bob might be safe and out of sight, he and the children were shut up in the barn. Whilst the furze-carriers were in to dinner, the prisoners contrived to get out, to have a "courant" round the furze-reek, when they saw a little man and woman, not much larger than Bob, searching into every hole and corner among the trusses that were dropped round the unfinished reek. The little woman was wringing her hands and crying, "Oh, my dear and tender Skillywidden, wherever canst ah (thou) be gone to? Shall I ever cast eyes on thee again?" "Go 'e back," says Bob to the children. "My father and mother are come here too." He then cried out, "Here I am, mammy!" By the time the words were out of his mouth, the little man and woman, with their precious Skillywidden, were nowhere to be seen, and there has been no sight nor sign of them since. The children got a sound thrashing for letting Skillywidden escape. Source (books.google.com): Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , 2nd series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 265-66 . Source (Internet Archive): Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , 2nd series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 265-66 . Return to the table of contents . Skillywidden the Fairy England "I wish we could but catch a spriggan, a piskey, or a knacker," says Capt. Mathy one night. "Ef one can but lay hands on any of the smale people unawares before they vanish, or turn into muryans (ants), they may be made to tell where the goold es buried." "Ded 'e ever hear of anybody who ever catched one?" Jack asked. "Why ess, and knowed his son too; he was my near neighbour, and lived in Trevidga: he told me all about et." One day Uncle Billy, his father, was over in the craft, Zennor church-town side of the hill, cuttan away down in the bottom, where the furze was as high as his head, with bare places here and there, among the brakes all grown over with three-leaved grass (white clover), hurt-trees (whortleberry plants), and griglans (heath). Uncle Billy was cuttan an openan into one of these places, thinkan to touch pipe there, eat his fuggan (heavy cake), and have a smoke. As he opened the furze, to come to work his hook handy, he spied the prettiest little creature of a smale body one ever seed, sleepan away on a bank of wild thyme all in blossom. The little creature wasn't bigger than a cat, yet every inch like a man, dressed in a green coat, sky-blue breeches and stockings, with diamond-buckled shoes; his little three-cocked hat was drawn over his face to shade en from the sun while he slept. Uncle Billy stopped and looked at am more than a minute, langan to carry an home some way or other. "Ef I could but keep am," thought he, "we should soon be rich enow to ride in a coach." Then he put down the furze-hook easy, took off the cuff from his arm, and slipped the little gentleman into the cuff, feet foremost, before he waked up. The little fellow then opened his pretty brown eyes and said, "Mammy! where are 'e, mammy and daddy! and where am I? And who are you? You are a ?ne great bucca sure enough; what are 'e caled, an?" says he to Uncle Billy. "I want my mammy! Can 'e ?nd her for me?" "I don't know where abouts she do put up," says Uncle Billy. "Come, you shall go home with me, ef you will, and live with our people till your mother do come for 'e." "Very well," says the spriggan. "I dearly love to ride the kids over the rocks, and to have milk and blackberries for supper. Will 'e give me some?" "Ess, my son, and bread and honey too," says the old man Uncle Billy, as he took the small body up in his arms and carried him home. When the little chap was took out of the furze-cuff and placed upon the hearth-stone, he begun to play with the children as if he had lived with them all his lifetime. The old man and woman were delighted. The children crowed for joy to see the pretty little man jumpan about, and they called am Bobby Griglans. Twice a day a little chayne cup of milk, fresh from the cow, was given to Bobby. He was very nice in his diet, and didn't care for anything but a drop of milk, and a few blackberries, hurts, or hoggans (haws) for a change. In the mornings, when the work was going on, he would perch himself up on the furze and ferns in the top of the wood-corner, to be out of the smut and dirt. There he would sing and chirrup away like a robin redbreast. When the hearth was swept, the turfy ?re made up, and the old woman ?xed on the chimney stool, to knit for the afternoon, Bobby would dance for hours together on the hearth-stone, before her. The faster the knitting-needles clicked, the quicker Bobby would spin round and round. Uncle Billy and An Mary wouldn't leave Bobby go out to play, for fear he might be seen, or run away, before the next good moonlight nights, when he promised to show the old couple the exact spot, on Rosewall Hill, where there was lots of money buried, and another place on the hill where there was a good lode of tin. Three days after Bobby Griglans was catched and carried up to Trevidga, half-a-score or more of the neighbours came, with their horses and leaders, to help Uncle Billy get home his furze from the hill, in trusses, and to help him make the rick for winter, as the custom was before wheel-roads were made and wains came into use. The old man didn't like for the spriggan to be seen, so he shut him and the youngest children up in the barn and put a padlock on the door. The smale people had been getting scarcer and scarcer, as so much larning and love of unpoetical facts came into fashan, until they were nearly all frightened away. However, Uncle Billy would keep his out of sight for the time, because you see it was become such a rare thing to see a spriggan or piskey that the folks would be coming about in troops to have a look at Bobby, who didn't like to be gazed at and made to show all his parts to strangers. "Now, stay in the barn and play like good children, but ef one of 'e cry, or try to get out, you will get your breeches warmed with a good wallopan," says Uncle Billy. The children were sometimes heard laughan and sometimes cryan. Bobby passed the time dancean on the barn-boards and peepan through the cracks in the door at the furze-carriers; but, as soon as ever the men went in to dinner, up jumped Bob, unbarred the winder, called to the children, "Come along, come, quick; now for a game of mop-and-heede' (hide and seek)." Bob and the children jumped out and away, to play among the trusses of furze dropped all round the stem of the rick. In turnan a corner they saw a little man and woman no bigger than Bob. The little man was dressed just like an, only he wore high ridan boots with little silver spurs. The little woman's green gound was spangled all over with silver stars; diamond buckles shone in her high-heeled shoes; and her little steeple-crowned blue hat, perched on a pile of golden curls, was wreathed round with griglan blossoms. The pretty little soul was wringan her hands and cryan, "Oh! my dear and tender Skillywidden; wherever can'st a be gone to? Shall I never cast eyes on thee any more, my only joy?" "Now go 'e back, do," says Bob to the children. "My dad and mam are come here too!" On the same breath he called out, "Here I am, mammy." By the time he said "Here I am," the little man and woman, with their precious Skillywidden, were no more to be seen, and they have never ben seen there since. The children got a good threshan for leavan Skillywidden get away, and serve them right, for ef they had kept an in tell night, he would have shown their daddy where plenty of crocks of gold are buried, and all of them would be gentry now. Source (books.google.com): William Bottrell, Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall (Penzance: Printed for the author by W. Cornish, 1870), pp. 72-74 . Return to the table of contents . Colman Grey England A farmer, who formerly lived on an estate in our vicinity, was returning one evening from a distant part of the farm, when, in crossing a particular field, he saw, to his surprise, sitting on a stone in the middle of it, a miserable-looking little creature, human in appearance, though diminutive in size, and apparently starving with cold and hunger. Pitying its condition, and perhaps aware that it was of elfish origin, and that good luck would amply repay him for his kind treatment of it, he took it home, placed it by the warm hearth on a stool, and fed it with nice milk. The poor bantling soon recovered from the lumpish and only half-sensible state in which it was found, and, though it never spoke, became very lively and playful. From the amusement which its strange tricks excited, it became a general favourite in the family, and the good folk really felt very sorry when their strange guest quitted them, which he did in a very unceremonious manner. After the lapse of three or four days, as the little fellow was gamboling about the farm kitchen, a shrill voice from the town-place or farm yard, was heard to call three times, "Colman Grey!" at which he sprang up, and gaining voice, cried "Ho! ho! ho! my daddy is come," flew through the key-hole, and was never afterwards heard of. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Q. Couch, "The Folk Lore of a Cornish Village," Choice Notes from "Notes and Queries": Folklore (London: Bell and Daldy, 1859), p. 73 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Q. Couch, "The Folk Lore of a Cornish Village," Choice Notes from "Notes and Queries": Folklore (London: Bell and Daldy, 1859), p. 73 . Return to the table of contents . A Woman Caught a Fairy Wales Pant Shon Shenkin, it must be her remarked, was a famous place for the Carmarthenshire fairies. The traditions thereabout respecting them are numerous. Among the strangest is, that a woman once actually caught a fairy on the mountain near Pant Shon Shenkin, and that it remained long in her custody, retaining still the same height and size, but at last made its escape. Source (books.google.com): Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), p. 78 . Source (Internet Archive): Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions , 2nd edition (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), p. 78 . Return to the table of contents . The Wonderful Plough Germany There was once a farmer who was master of one of the little black ones, that are the blacksmiths and armourers; and he got him in a very curious way. On the road leading to this farmer's ground there stood a stone cross, and every morning as he went to his work he used to stop and kneel down before this cross, and pray for some minutes. On one of these occasions he noticed on the cross a pretty bright insect, of such a brilliant hue that he could not recollect having ever before seen the like with an insect. He wondered greatly at this, yet still he did not disturb it; but the insect did not remain long quiet, but ran without ceasing backwards and forwards on the cross, as if it was in pain and wanted to get away. Next morning the farmer again saw the very same insect, and again it was running to and fro, in the same state of uneasiness. The farmer began now to have some suspicions about it, and thought to himself, "Would this now be one of the little black enchanters? For certain, all is not right with that insect; it runs about just like one that had an evil conscience, as one that would, yet cannot, go away." And a variety of thoughts and conjectures passed through his mind; and he called to mind what he had often heard from his father, and other old people, that when the underground-people chance to touch any thing holy, they are held fast and cannot quit the spot, and are therefore extremely careful to avoid all such things. But he also thought it may as well be something else; and you would perhaps be committing a sin in disturbing and taking away the little animal; so he let it stay as it was. But when he had found it twice more in the same place, and still running about with the same marks of uneasiness, he said, "No, it is not all right with it. So now, in the name of God!" and he made a grasp at the insect, that resisted and clung fast to the stone; but he held it tight, and tore it away by main force, and lo! then he found he had, by the top of the head, a little ugly black chap, about six inches long, screeching and kicking at a most furious rate. The farmer was greatly astounded at this sudden transformation; still he held his prize fast and kept calling to him, while he administered to him a few smart slaps on the buttocks: "Be quiet, be quiet, my little man! If crying was to do the business, we might look for heroes in swaddling clothes. We 'll just take you with us a bit, and see what you are good for." The little fellow trembled and shook in every limb, and then began to whimper most piteously, and to beg hard of the farmer to let him go. But "No, my lad," replied the farmer, "I will not let you go till you tell me who you are, and how you came here, and what trade you know, that enables you to earn your bread in the world." At this the little man grinned and shook his head, but said not a word in reply, only begged and prayed the more to get loose; and the farmer found that he must now begin to entreat him if he would coax any information out of him. But it was all to no purpose. He then adopted the contrary method, and whipped and slashed him till the blood ran down, but just to as little purpose; the little black thing remained as dumb as the grave, for this species is the most malicious and obstinate of all the underground race. The farmer now got angry, and he said, "Do but be quiet, my child; I should be a fool to put myself into a passion with such a little brat. Never fear, I shall soon make you tame enough." So saying, he ran home with him, and clapped him into a black, sooty, iron pot, and put the iron lid upon it, and laid on the top of the lid a great heavy stone, and set the pot in a dark cold room, and as he was going out he said to him, "Stay there, now, and freeze till you are black! I'll engage that at last you will answer me civilly." Twice a-week the farmer went regularly into the room and asked his little black captive if he would answer him now; but the little one still obstinately persisted in his silence. The farmer had now, without success, pursued this course for six weeks, at the end of which time his prisoner at last gave up. One day as the farmer was opening the room door, he, of his own accord, called out to him to come and take him out of his dirty stinking dungeon, promising that he would now cheerfully do all that was wanted of him. The farmer first ordered him to give him his history. The black one replied, "My dear friend, you know it just as well as I, or else you never had had me here. You see I happened by chance to come too near the cross, a thing we little people may not do, and there I was held fast, and obliged instantly to let my body become visible; so, then, that people might not recognise me, I turned myself into an insect. But you found me out. For when we get fastened to holy or consecrated things, we never ean get away from them unless a man takes us off. That, however, does not happen without plague and annoyance to us, though, indeed, to say the truth, the staying fastened there is not over pleasant. And so I struggled against you, too, for we have a natural aversion to let ourselves be taken in a man's hand." "Ho, ho! is that the tune with you?" cried the farmer. "You have a natural aversion, have you? Believe me, my sooty friend, I have just the same for you; and so you shall be away without a moment's delay, and we will lose no time in making our bargain with each other. But you must first make me some present." "What you will, you have only to ask," said the little one. "Silver and gold, and precious stones, and costly furniture -- all shall be thine in less than an instant." "Silver and gold, and precious stones, and all such glittering fine things will I none," said the farmer. "They have turned the heart and broken the neck of many a one before now, and few are they whose lives they make happy. I know that you are handy smiths, and have many a strange thing with you that other smiths know nothing about. So come, now, swear to me that you will make me an iron plough, such that the smallest foal may be able to draw it without being tired, and then run off with you as fast as your legs can carry you." So the black swore, and the farmer then cried out, "Now, in the name of God; there, you are at liberty," and the little one vanished like lightning. Next morning, before the sun was up, there stood in the farmer's yard a new iron plough, and he yoked his dog Water to it, and though it was of the size of an ordinary plough, Water drew it with ease through the heaviest clay-land, and it tore up prodigious furrows. The farmer used this plough for many years, and the smallest foal or the leanest little horse could draw it through the ground, to the amazement of every one who beheld it, without turning a single hair. And this plough made a rich man of the farmer, for it cost him no horse-flesh, and he led a cheerful and contented life by means of it. Hereby we may see that moderation holds out the longest, and that it is not good to covet too much. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology , vol. 1 (London: William Harrison Ainsworth, 1828), pp. 319-25 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology (London: William Harrison Ainsworth, 1828), pp. 319-25 . This story is from the German island Rügen in the Baltic Sea. Return to the table of contents . Krachöhrle! Where Are You? Germany In the valley between Wehr and Hasel there was a hole in the ground. A man assumed that there was a badger inside it. He sent his dog into the hole while firmly holding an open sack at its opening. Before long something jumped into the sack. The man immediately tied it shut, lifted it onto his back, and went on his way. Suddenly an elf cried out from nearby: "Krachöhrle! Where are you?" A voice answered: "On his shoulders in the sack!" The man now knew that instead of a badger he had captured an elf, and without delay he turned it loose. Source (books.google.com): Bernhard Baader, "Erdleute: Krachöhrle! Wo bist du?" Neugesammelte Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: A. Gessner'sche Buchhandlung, 1859), pp. 11-12 . Source (Internet Archive): Bernhard Baader, "Erdleute: Krachöhrle! Wo bist du?" Neugesammelte Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: A. Gessner'sche Buchhandlung, 1859), pp. 11-12 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2016. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 5, 2016. Fairy Cup Legends Fairy Cup Legends Migratory Legends of Christiansen Type 6045 and other stories of drinking vessels stolen from or abandoned by fairies translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009-2019 Contents The Oldenburg Horn (Germany, Hermann Hamelmann). The Oldenburg Horn (Germany, Adalbert Kuhn and Wilhelm Schwartz). Link to The Osenberg Dwarfs (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Stolen Cup (Germany, Karl Müllenhoff). Church Cups (Germany/Denmark, Karl Müllenhoff). The Altar Cup in Aagerup (Ågerup) (Denmark, Thomas Keightley). Svend Fælling and the Elle-Maid (Denmark, J. M. Thiele). The Öiestad (Øyestad) Horn (Norway, Benjamin Thorpe). The Trolls Celebrate Christmas (Sweden, Benjamin Thorpe). Origin of the Noble Name of Trolle (Sweden, Benjamin Thorpe). The Fairy Banquet (England, William of Newburgh). The Fairy Horn (England, Gervase of Tilbury). The Story of the Fairy Horn (England, Ernest Rhys). The Rillaton Gold Cup (England, Sabine Baring-Gould). Link to The Luck of Edenhall (Eden Hall) (England). The Fairy Cup of Kirk Malew (Isle of Man, George Waldron). The Silver Cup (Isle of Man, Sophia Morrison). The Trowie Pig (Scotland, John Nicolson). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Oldenburg Horn Germany In the time of count Otto of Oldenburg, who succeeded his father Ulrich in the year 967, a wonderful transaction occurred. For as he, being a good sportsman, and one who took great delight in the chase, had set out early one day with his nobles and attendants, and had hunted in the wood of Bernefeuer, and the count himself had put up a roe, and followed him alone from the wood of Bernefeuer to the Osenberg, and with his white horse stood on the top of the hill, and endeavoured to trace the game, he said to himself, for it was an excessively hot day, "Oh God! If one had now but a cool drink!" No sooner had the count spoken the word than the Osenberg opened, and out of the cleft there came a beautiful maiden, fairly adorned and handsomely dressed, and with her beautiful hair divided on her shoulders, and a garland on her head. And she had a rich silver vessel, that was gilded and shaped like a hunter's horn, well and ingeniously made, granulated, and fairly ornamented. It was adorned with various kinds of arms that are now but little known, and with strange unknown inscriptions and ingenious figures, and it was soldered together and adorned in the same manner as the old antiques, and it was beautifully and ingeniously wrought. This horn the maiden held in her hand, and it was full, and she gave it into the hand of the count, and prayed that the count would drink out of it to refresh himself therewith. When the count had received and taken this gilded silver horn from the maiden, and had opened it and looked into it, the drink, or whatever it was that was in it, when he shook it, did not please him, and he therefore refused to drink for the maiden. Whereupon the maiden said, "My dear lord, drink of it upon my faith, for it will do you no harm, but will be of advantage;" adding farther, that if the count would drink out of it, it would go well with him, count Otto, and his, and also with the whole house of Oldenburg after him, and that the whole country would improve and flourish. But if the count would place no faith in her, and would not drink of it, then for the future, in the succeeding family of Oldenburg, there would remain no unity. But when the count gave no heed to what she said, but, as was not without reason, considered with himself a long time whether he should drink or not, he held the silver gilded horn in his hand and swung it behind him, and poured it out, and some of its contents sprinkled the white horse, and where it fell and wetted him the hair all came off. When the maiden saw this, she desired to have her horn back again, but the count made speed down the hill with the horn, which he held in his hand, and when he looked round he observed that the maiden was gone into the hill again. And when terror seized on the count on account of this, he laid spurs to his horse, and at full speed hasted to join his attendants, and informed them of what had befallen him. He moreover showed them the silver gilded horn, and took it with him to Oldenburg, and the same horn, as it was obtained in so wonderful a manner, was preserved as a costly jewel by him, and by all the succeeding reigning princes of the house of Oldenburg. Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), pp. 237-38 . The drinking horn featured in this legend is still extant. Although the legend begins its human provenance in the tenth century, scholars of today date its manufacture some 500 years later. The horn was mentioned in the treasury inventory of Oldenburg Castle in Lower Saxony in 1592. Through an inheritance technicality the horn later was ceded to the Danish royal family. Since 1824 it has been in the treasury of Rosenborg Castle in Copenhagen, where it is now on public view. Link to a photograph of the Oldenburg horn . Footnote by Keightley: Given by Büsching ( Volks-Sagen, Märchen und Legenden . Leipzig, 1820), from Hammelmann's Oldenburg Chronicle , 1599. Mme. Naubert has, in the second volume of her Volksmärchen , wrought it up into a tale of 130 pages. The Oldenburg horn, or what is called such, is now in the King of Denmark's collection. An earlier edition of Keightley's immediate source: Johann Gustav Büsching, "Das Oldenburger Horn," Volks-Sagen, Märchen und Legenden , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Carl Heinrich Reclam, 1812), no. 78, pp. 380-83 . Additional German-language versions of this legend: Friedrich Ludwig Ferdinand von Dobeneck, "Die Nymphe des Osenbergs," Des deutschen Mittelalters Volksglauben und Heroensagen , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Realschulbuchhandlung, 1815), pp. 83-86 . An English translation of this version is: Benjamin Thorpe, "The Oldenburg Horn," Northern Mythology: Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 3 (London: Edward Lumley, 1852), pp. 128-30 . Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Das Oldenburger Horn," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 2 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1818), no. 541, pp. 317-19 . It later editions this legend is numbered 547. Ludwig Bechstein, "Das Oldenburger Horn," Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Wigand, 1853), no. 163, pp. 149-50 . J. W. Wolf, "Das Oldenburger Horn," Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie , vol. 2 (Göttingen: Dieterichsche Buchhandlung, 1857), p. 276 . Des Knaben Wunderhorn (The Boy's Magic Horn), a pioneering collection of German folksongs edited by Achim von Arnim and Clemens Brentano (3 volumes, 1806-1808), featured as a frontispiece for volume 2 a copper engraving of the Oldenburg horn. Return to the table of contents . The Oldenburg Horn Germany Once Count Anton Günther was hunting, when in the fury of the chase he rode ahead of his party, arriving at Mount Osenberg, not far from Oldenburg Castle. The fast ride had made him thirsty, and it so happened that as he approached Mount Osenberg it opened up, and a maiden stepped out. She offered him a drink from a magnificent horn. Taking hold of the horn with his right hand, with his left hand the count quickly swung himself back into his saddle. He threw out the drink backwards over his head, then hurriedly rode away. In the distance he heard the maiding wailing. Looking back he saw the mountain open up again and the maiden disappear inside. On the place where the spilled drink had touched his horse all the hairs had been singed away. He took the horn with him, keeping it a long time at Oldenburg Castle as an eternal reminder of the miraculous event. Later it was removed to the Hannover Art Treasury. Especially miraculous is the fact that when the cup's point was broken off no goldsmith or silversmith was able to repair it, for it is made of a metal unknown to humans. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 314, pp. 280-81 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "Oral." Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. Return to the table of contents . The Stolen Cup Germany 1. A man by the name of Klaus Fink from Tensbüttel one day rode his horse into one of the mountains named Mannigfallige Bargen or Mannigfule Bargen that stretch between Tensbüttel and Alversdorf. There the underground people were holding a cheerful feast, and they invited the peasant to participate. However, he stole a silver cup from them and hurriedly rode away with it. When New Year's Eve arrived he took the cup from his trunk in order to drink from it. Suddenly the cattle in the barn began to cry terribly. Everyone ran outside to see what was wrong, but they found nothing. When they came back inside they discovered that the underground people had taken back their property. From Rhode, Antiquitäten-Remarques , p. 77. 2. Two small peasant boys were playing in the field one day at noon. While they were busily scraping the earth looking for colored or rounded stones, a cavern suddenly opened up before them. "Let's crawl inside," said the one. "No," said the other. "Underground people live in there for sure." "Then I want to go inside," said the first one, a daring boy. "Dwarfs sleep at noontime." Throwing himself to the ground, he crawled inside on all fours. There was indeed an entire little family of underground people there, sound asleep. They were lying near the walls on mats. The boy became afraid, and he was about to creep away when he saw a beautiful little cup sitting on a little round table. He picked it up and took it with him. When he arrived home his mother was very pleased with treasure that they had so easily gained. But the father scolded the boy, insisting most earnestly that he take it back to the place where he had found it. The boy set forth, but the little people, who had discovered their loss, in order to hide their dwelling had made all the surroundings look alike, so no trace could be seen of where they had been. Crying, the boy returned home with the cup. His father was an innkeeper, and a merchant had just arrived there. After examining the cup, he said, "This is of the finest gold. You are not going to be so stupid as to return it to the rabble. Why should something like this be under the earth!" "Na!" said the innkeeper. "It will be something else if they try to get it back!" Evening came, and a young man was returning late to the village from the field when the underground people surrounded him and told him to let it be known in the village that the following night whoever took the cup from them should place it on a certain boundary stake, where they could pick it up. If that did not happen the entire village would suffer, but if an honest person returned it, he and his property would receive special protection. When the innkeeper heard this he took his son by the hand and had him take the cup to the boundary stake. The boy never forgot this as long as he lived, and afterward he and his family always enjoyed good fortune. From O. St. of the Stapelholm Church. Source: Karl Müllenhoff, "Der gestohlene Becher," Sagen, Märchen und Lieder der Herzogthümer Schleswig, Holstein und Lauenburg (Kiel: Schwersche Buchhandlung, 1845), no. 403, pp. 294-95 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. Return to the table of contents . Church Cups Germany/Denmark 1. One night a man from the parish of Viöl was riding from Bredstedt to Norstedt. As he approached the village an underground person stood next to the road in front of a hill where he had lived since ancient times. He offered him a drink from a glistening golden cup. The man accepted the cup without dismounting from his horse. He was about to place it to his lips when he was struck with fear, and instead of drinking he emptied the cup's contents behind himself, gave his horse the spurs, and rode away with his booty. He immediately heard the little man calling his comrades or subjects. They all suddenly appeared, pelting him with stones. Fortunately the village was not far away; otherwise he would have been lost. With his horse he jumped the gate that blocked the entrance, and was safe. The stones thrown at him now bounced off the village gate. Coming to a halt and examining his horse, he saw that all the hair had been burned off where he had spilled the drink. To give thanks for his fortunate rescue he presented the cup to the church at Viöl, where it was used for a long time. A few years ago when the parsonage was struck by lightening, it was destroyed in the ensuing fire. From Mr. Petersen, a teacher in Norstedt. 2. Late one evening a peasant from Ragebøl was riding home from Satrup. As he passed by a hill called Boehøi he saw that it had been lifted up and was sitting on four golden pillars. Inside they were cheerfully drinking and making merry. Then the peasant shouted out that they should give him something to drink as well. One of them came out immediately and offered him a golden cup. However, the peasant did not dare to drink from it, and he poured out its entire contents behind himself. This singed off the horse's hair and skin. Then with the cup in his hand he rode off quickly toward the village. The one who had brought the cup to him shouted in the direction of the hill, "Come quickly, Onehorn; Goldhorn is gone!" The two of them ran after the rider, and as he rode in at the stall door, they grabbed the horse by a leg and nearly tore it off. After that the man did not dare to keep the cup at home, but instead presented it to the church. From Sundewith. 3. The church at Hjordkær received its altar cup in the same manner. Because it was used not only in the church, but also to deliver communion to the sick, it was proven that the cup possessed a miraculous healing power. Most sick people who drank from it recovered. It was also lent out at weddings for the use of the newlyweds, for it was believed that it promoted marital happiness and blessing. After this had been the custom for many years, one day a poor man dressed in rags appeared at a wedding in Alsleben and asked for a drink from the cup, because -- as he had been told -- it could cure him of an otherwise incurable illness. The compassionate wedding couple granted his wish, but no sooner did the beggar have the cup in his hand than he disappeared with it, before the eyes of everyone present. From Pastor Hansen in Hjordkær. Source: Karl Müllenhoff, "Die Kirchenbecher," Sagen, Märchen und Lieder der Herzogthümer Schleswig, Holstein und Lauenburg (Kiel: Schwersche Buchhandlung, 1845), no. 402, pp. 293-94 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. Account no. 1 is set in present-day northern Germany; accounts 2 and 3 are set in southern Denmark. Return to the table of contents . The Altar Cup in Aagerup (Ågerup) Denmark Between the villages of Marup and Aagerup in Zealand, there is said to have lain a great castle, the ruins of which are still to be seen near the strand. Tradition relates that a great treasure is concealed among them, and that a dragon there watches over three kings' ransoms. Here, too, people frequently happen to get a sight of the underground folk, especially about festival times, for then they have dancing and great jollity going on down on the strand. One Christmas Eve, a farmer's servant in the village of Aagerup went to his master and asked him if he might take a horse and ride down to look at the troll meeting. The farmer not only gave him leave but desired him to take the best horse in the stable; so he mounted and rode away down to the strand. When he was come to the place he stopped his horse, and stood for some time looking at the company who were assembled in great numbers. And while he was wondering to see how well and how gaily the little dwarfs danced, up came a troll to him, and invited him to dismount, and take a share in their dancing and merriment. Another troll came jumping up, took his horse by the bridle, and held him while the man got off, and went down and danced away merrily with them the whole night long. When it was drawing near day he returned them his very best thanks for his entertainment, and mounted his horse to return home to Aagerup. They now gave him an invitation to come again on New Year's night, as they were then to have great festivity; and a maiden who held a gold cup in her hand invited him to drink the stirrup-cup. He took the cup; but, as he had some suspicion of them, he, while he made as if he was raising the cup to his mouth, threw the drink out over his shoulder, so that it fell on the horse's back, and it immediately singed off all the hair. He then clapped spurs to his horse's sides, and rode away with the cup in his hand over a ploughed field. The trolls instantly gave chase all in a body ; but being hard set to get over the deep furrows, they shouted out, without ceasing: Ride on the lay, And not on the clay. He, however, never minded them, but kept to the ploughed field. However, when he drew near the village he was forced to ride out on the level road, and the trolls now gained on him every minute. In his distress he prayed unto God, and he made a vow that if he should be delivered he would bestow the cup on the church. He was now riding along just by the wall of the churchyard, and he hastily flung the cup over it, that it at least might be secure. He then pushed on at full speed, and at last got into the village; and just as they were on the point of catching hold of the horse, he sprung in through the farmer's gate, and the man clapt to the wicket after him. He was now safe; but the trolls were so enraged, that, taking up a huge great stone, they flung it with such force against the gate, that it knocked four planks out of it. There are no traces now remaining of that house, but the stone is still lying in the middle of the village of Aagerup. The cup was presented to the church, and the man got in return to best farmhouse on the lands of Eriksholm. Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), pp. 109-110 . Keightley's source: "Oral." In a footnote Keightley gives the Danish-language version of the trolls' verse: Rid paa det Bolde, Og ikke paa det Knolde. In a second footnote Keightley provides the following additional information: This is an adventure common to many countries. The church of Vigersted in Zealand has a cup obtained in the same way. The man, in this case, took refuge in the church, and was there besieged by the trolls till morning. The bridge of Hagbro in Jutland got its name from a similar event. When the man rode off with the silver jug from the beautiful maiden who presented it to him, an old crone set off in pursuit of him with such velocity, that she would surely have caught him, but that providentially he came to a running water. The pursuer, however, like Nannie with Tam o' Shanter, caught the horse's hind leg, but was only able to keep one of the cocks of his shoe: hence the bridge was called Hagbro, i. e. Cock Bridge. In modern Danish Aagerup is spelled Ågerup . Return to the table of contents . Svend Fælling and the Elle-Maid Denmark Svend Fælling was, while a little boy, at service in Sjeller-wood-house in Framley; and it one time happened that he had to ride of a message to Eistrup. It was evening before ho got near home, and as he came by the hill of Borum Es, he saw the Elle-maids, who were dancing without ceasing round and round his horse. Then one of the Elle- maids stepped up to him, and reached him a drinking cup, bidding him at the same time to drink. Svend took the cup, but as he was dubious of the nature of the contents, he flung it out over his shoulder, where it fell on the horse's back, and singed off all the hair. While he had the horn fast in his hand, he gave his horse the spurs and rode off full speed. The Elle-maid pursued him till he came to Trigebrand's mill, and rode through the running water, over which she could not follow him. She then earnestly conjured Svend to give her back the horn, promising him in exchange twelve men's strength. On this condition he gave back the horn, and got what she had promised him; but it very frequently put him to great inconvenience, for he found that along with it he had gotten an appetite for twelve. Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), p. 88 . Keightley's source: J. M. Thiele, "Svend Fælling, II," Danmarks Folkesagn (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), vol. 2, pp. 230-31 . Footnote by Keightley: Framley is in Jutland. Svend (i. e. Swain ) Fælling is a celebrated character in Danish tradition; he is regarded as a second Holger Danske, and he is the hero of two of the Kjempe Viser . In Sweden he is named Sven Färling or Fotling. Grimm has shown that he and Sigurd are the same person. Deutsche Mythologie , p. 345. In the Nibelungenlied (st. 345) Sifret (Sigurd) gets the strength of twelve men by wearing the Tarnkappe of the dwarf Albrich. Another tradition, presently to be mentioned, says it was from a dwarf he got his strength, for aiding him in battle against another dwarf. It is added, that when Svend came home in the evening, after his adventure with the Elle-maids, the people were drinking their Yule-beer, and they sent him down for a fresh supply. Svend went without saying anything, and returned with a barrel in each hand and one under each arm. Return to the table of contents . The Öiestad (Øyestad) Horn Norway Near the river Nid in Nedenæs there is a mansion called Neersteen, in which there once dwelt a man named Siur, who was both powerful and rich; for besides Neersteen he owned six other mansions, and a considerable salmon fishery in the Nid; but what was more than all these, he had a daughter, who was the fairest maid of all the surrounding neighbourhood. She was courted by a Westland man named Ring, but the wealthy Siur rejected him for a son-in-law, although his daughter was fondly attached to him. The lover, however, was not disheartened, so while the father one St. John's Day was at matins in Öiestad Church, Ring came to the mansion and found his lass, although her father had taken the precaution of locking her up in one of the presses -- which, according to the custom of the time, were made at the foot of the bed -- a corner of her apron having protruded and betrayed her. They now fled, and Siur, the instant he was apprized of their elopement, mounted his horse and went in pursuit of them. On the way he was stopped by a troll, who came out of a mount, and bade him welcome, at the same time presenting to him a full drinking horn. Instead of emptying it, he cast its contents behind him, but some drops that fell on the horse's loins instantly singed the hair off. Siur, who had from the first suspected mischief, put spurs to his horse, and galloped away with the horn in his hand and the troll whining after him. He was now in a most serious dilemma, from which he was unexpectedly rescued by another troll, who was on terms of hostility with the former one, who called to him when he had just reached a large field: "Ride through the rye and not through the wheat." Following this counsel he got the start of his pursuer, who could not proceed so rapidly through the tall rye. The danger was not, however, completely over until he came near the mansion of Bringsvær, when the cock crew and the troll vanished. Siur now continued his pursuit without further delays, and overtook the fugitives on a hill where they had stopped to take a few moments rest. When the men got sight of each other, they immediately drew their knives, and a contest ensued, the result of which was, that Siur stabbed Ring in the belly, who instantly gave up the ghost. In expiation of this homicide, Siur was compelled to make heavy compensation. The horn, which he kept, was preserved in the family down to our times. Of the daughter's fate tradition makes no mention. The (or rather a ) horn, which had long been an heirloom in Siur's family, has lately been presented by Shipmaster Berge to the public library and museum of Arendal School, where it now is. It is very handsome, and has on its three silver-gilt rings the following inscription, in monkish characters: potum servorum benedic deus alme [tuorum reliqvam unus benede le un]? caspar, melchior, baltazar. A similar occurrence to the above took place many years ago near Hahauger in Hallingdal, where one Christmas Eve a subterranean woman presented drink in a horn to a man named Gudbrand Goelberg, which he threw over his shoulder and rode off with the horn; but down to the ninth generation, his posterity, as a penalty, were afflicted with some bodily blemish or defect, as the troll had threatened. This horn, which was long preserved at Halsteensgaard in Aal, contained nearly three quarts, and was encircled by a strong gilt copper ring about three inches broad, on which, in monkish characters, stood melchior, baltazar, caspar . In the middle was a small, gilt copper plate, in which an oval crystal was set. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology: Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), pp. 14-15 . Return to the table of contents . The Trolls Celebrate Christmas Sweden Of the manner in which the trolls celebrate Christmas Eve there are traditions throughout the whole North. At that time it is not advisable for Christian men to be out. On the heaths witches and little trolls ride, one on a wolf, another on a broom or a shovel, to their assemblies, where they dance under their stones. These stones are then raised on pillars, under which the trolls dance and drink. In the mount are then to be heard mirth and music, dancing and drinking. On Christmas morn, during the time between cock-crowing and daybreak, it is highly dangerous to be abroad. One Christmas night in the year 1490, as Fru Cissela Ulftand was sitting in her mansion at Liungby in Scania, a great noise was heard proceeding from the trolls assembled at the Magle stone, when one of the lady's boldest servants rode out to see what was going on. He found the stone raised, and the trolls in a noisy whirl dancing under it. A beautiful female stepped forth, and presented to the guest a drinking horn and a pipe, requesting him to drink the troll-king's health and to blow in the pipe. He took the horn and pipe, but at the same instant clapped spurs to his horse, and galloped straight, over rough and smooth, to the mansion. The trolls followed him in a body with a wild cry of threats and prayers, but the man kept the start, and delivered both horn and pipe into the hands of his mistress. The trolls promised prosperity and riches to Fru Cissela's race, if she would restore their pipe and horn; but she persisted in keeping them, and they are still preserved at Liungby, as memorials of the wonderful event. The horn is said to be of an unknown mixture of metals with brass ornaments, and the pipe of a horse's leg-bone. The man who stole them from the trolls died three days after, and the horse on the second day. Liungby mansion has been twice burnt, and the Ulftand family never prospered afterwards. This tradition teaches that Christians should act justly even towards trolls. It is also related of some priests, who were riding before daybreak by a mount on a Christmas morning, while the trolls were at their sports, how a berg- or mount-woman came out and offered them drink in metal bowls; and how they cast the drink behind them, but that some drops chanced to fall on the horses' loins and burned the hair off. The bowls they carried away with them, and such are still to be found in several churches, where, it is said, they were formerly used as chalices. This drink, which the trolls were in the habit of offering so liberally, was believed to have the property of obliterating from the memory all the past, and of rendering the guest who partook of it contented with all he met with in the mount. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology: Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), pp. 89-91 . Liungby is spelled Ljungby in modern Swedish. Scania (Swedish Skåne ) is a geographical region at the southernmost tip of Sweden. It has strong historical connection to Denmark. Return to the table of contents . Origin of the Noble Name of Trolle Sweden On the wall of Voxtorp church in Småland there is a painting representing a knight named Herve Ulf, when one Christmas morning he received a drinking horn from a troll-wife with one hand, while with his sword he struck off her head with the other, kept the horn and rode to church. In remembrance of this deed, the king commanded him to call himself Trolle, and to take a troll without a head for his armorial bearing. Such is the origin of the noble name of Trolle. This wonderful horn was of three hundred colours, and was first preserved in the cathedral of Wexiö; but when the Danes in 1570 burned Wexiö, the horn was carried to Denmark. It is said that the trolls are very prolific, but that their offspring for the most part dies when it thunders; whence the saying: "Were it not for thunder, the trolls would destroy the world." Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology: Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), p. 91 . Return to the table of contents . The Fairy Banquet England In the province of the Deiri (Yorkshire), not far from my birthplace, a wonderful thing occurred, which I have known from my boyhood. There is a town a few miles distant from the Eastern Sea, near which are those celebrated waters commonly called Gipse.... A peasant of this town went once to see a friend who lived in the next town, and it was late at night when he was coming back, not very sober; when lo! from the adjoining barrow, which I have often seen, and which is not much over a quarter of a mile from the town, he heard the voices of people singing, and, as it were, joyfully feasting. He wondered who they could be that were breaking in that place, by their merriment, the silence of the dead night, and he wished to examine into the matter more closely. Seeing a door open in the side of the barrow, he went up to it, and looked in; and there he beheld a large and luminous house, full of people, women as well as men, who were reclining as at a solemn banquet. One of the attendants, seeing him standing at the door, offered him a cup. He took it, but would not drink; and pouring out the contents, kept the vessel. A great tumult arose at the banquet on account of his taking away the cup, and all the guests pursued him; but he escaped by the fleetness of the beast he rode, and got into the town with his booty. Finally, this vessel of unknown material, of unusual colour, and of extraordinary form, was presented to Henry the Elder, King of the English, as a valuable gift, and was then given to the queen's brother David, King of the Scots, and was kept for several years in the treasury of Scotland; and a few years ago (as I have heard from good authority), it was given by William, King of the Scots, to Henry the Second, who wished to see it. Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), pp. 283-84 . Keightley's source: William of Newburgh (or Newbury), Historia rerum Anglicarum . William of Newburgh (erroneously named William of Newbridge by Keightley) lived between about 1136 and 1198. Commentary by Keightley ( p. 284 ): "The scene of this legend, we may observe, is the very country in which the Danes settled; and it is exactly the same as some of the legends current at the present day among the Danish peasantry. It is really extraordinary to observe the manner in which popular traditions and superstitions will thus exist for centuries." Return to the table of contents . The Fairy Horn England There is in the county of Gloucester, a forest abounding in boars, stags, and every species of game that England produces. In a grovy lawn of this forest there is a little mount, rising in a point to the height of a man, on which knights and other hunters are used to ascend when fatigued with heat and thirst, to seek some relief for their wants. The nature of the place, and of the business, is, however, such, that whoever ascends the mount must leave his companions, and go quite alone. When alone, he was to say, as if speaking to some other person, "I thirst," and immediately there would appear a cup-bearer in an elegant dress, with a cheerful countenance, bearing in his stretched-out hand a large horn, adorned with gold and gems, as was the custom among the most ancient English. In the cup nectar of an unknown but most delicious flavour was presented, and when it was drunk, all heat and weariness fled from the glowing body, so that one would be thought ready to undertake toil instead of haying toiled. Moreover, when the nectar was taken, the servant presented a towel to the drinker, to wipe his mouth with, and then having performed his office, he waited neither for a recompense for his services, nor for questions and enquiry. This frequent and daily action had for a very long period of old times taken place among the ancient people, till one day a knight of that city, when out hunting, went thither, and having called for a drink and gotten the horn, did not, as was the custom, and as in good manners he should have done, return it to the cupbearer, but kept it for his own use. But the illustrious Earl of Gloucester, when he learned the truth of the matter, condemned the robber to death, and presented the horn to the most excellent King Henry the Elder, lest he should be thought to have approved of such wickedness, if he had added the rapine of another to the store of his private property. Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), pp. 284-85 . Keightley's source: Gervase of Tilbury, Otia imperialia . Gervase of Tilbury lived between about 1150 and 1228. Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Fairy Horn England Once upon a time there was a knight that had a Wyvern on his shield ; but he was none the better for that, as you shall hear. One day as he was riding in the country beyond Gloucester, he came to a forest abounding in boars, stags, and every kind of wild beast. Now in a grovy lawn of this forest there was a little mount, rising in a point to the height of a man, on which knights and other hunters were used to ascend when fatigued with heat and thirst, to seek some relief. The nature of the place -- for it is a fairy place -- is, however, such that whoever ascends the mount must leave his companions, and go quite alone. As the knight rode in the wood, and came nigh this fairy-knoll, he met with a wood-cutter and questioned him about it. He must go thither alone, the wood-cutter told him, and say, as if speaking to some other person, "I thirst!" Immediately there would appear a cup-bearer in a rich crimson dress, with a shining face, bearing in his stretchedout hand a large horn, adorned with gold and gems, such as was the custom among the most ancient English. The cup was full of nectar, of an unknown but most delicious flavour, and when it was drunk, all heat and weariness fled from those who drank of it, so that they became ready to toil anew, instead of being tired from having toiled. Moreover, when the nectar was drunk, the cup-bearer offered a towel to the drinker, to wipe his mouth with, and then having done this courtesy, he waited neither for a silver penny for his services, nor for any question to be asked. Now the knight with the Wyvern laughed to himself when he heard this. "Who," thought he, "would be fool enough, having within his grasp such a drinking-horn, ever to let it go again from him!" Later, that very same day, as he rode back hot and tired and thirsty from his hunting, he bethought him of the fairy-knoll and the fairy-horn. Sending away his followers, he repaired thither all alone, and did as the wood-cutter had told him. He ascended the little hill, and said in a bold voice, "I thirst!" Instantly there appeared, as the wood-cutter had foretold, a cup-bearer in a crimson dress, bearing in his hand a drinking-horn. The horn was richly beset with precious gems; and the knight was filled with envy at sight of it. No sooner had he seized upon it, and tasted of its delicious nectar, which glowed in his veins, than he determined when he had drained it to make off with the horn. So, having gotten the horn, and drunk of it every drop, instead of returning it to the cup-bearer, as in good manners he should have done, he stepped down from the knoll, and rudely made off with it in his hand. But, learn ye then what fate overtook this knight that bore the Wyvern on his shield, but was without true knighthood, and robbed the Fairy Horn. For the good Earl of Gloucester, who had often quenched his thirst, and restored his strength, standing on the fairy-knoll, when he heard that the wicked knight had destroyed the kind custom of the horn, attacked the robber in his stronghold, and forthright slew him, and carried off the horn. But alas! The earl did not return it to the fairy-cupbearer, but gave it to his master and lord, King Henry the Elder. Since then you may stand all day at the fairy-knoll, and many times cry, "I thirst!" but you may not taste of the Fairy Horn. Source: Ernest Rhys, Fairy Gold: A Book of Old English Fairy Tales ( London: J. M. Dent and Company; New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, [1909]), pp. 39-40 . Return to the table of contents . The Rillaton Gold Cup England (Cornwall) A curious instance of the persistency of tradition may be mentioned in connection with the cairn near the Hurlers and the Cheesewring, in which a gold cup was found a few years ago. The story long told is that a party were hunting the wild boar in Trewartha Marsh. Whenever a hunter came near the Cheesewring a prophet -- by whom an archdruid is meant -- who lived there received him, seated in the stone chair, and offered him to drink out of his golden goblet, and if there were as many as fifty hunters approach, each drank, and the goblet was not emptied. Now on this day of the boar hunt one of those hunting vowed that he would drink the cup dry. So he rode up to the rocks, and there saw the grey druid holding out his cup. The hunter took the goblet and drank till he could drink no more, and he was so incensed at his failure that he dashed what remained of the wine in the druid's face, and spurred his horse to ride away with the cup. But the steed plunged over the rocks and fell with his rider, who broke his neck, and as he still clutched the cup, he was buried with it. Immediately outside the rampart of the stone fort above the Cheesewring is a large natural block of granite, hollowed out by the weather into a seat called the Druid's Chair. Source: Sabine Baring-Gould, A Book of the West: Being an Introduction to Devon and Cornwall , vol. 2 (London: Methuen and Company, 1899), p. 107 . The cup described here was discovered in 1837 in a bronze-age burial tomb near the village of Rillaton in Cornwall. It is now on display in the British Museum. It is included in the museum's listing of its "top ten British treasures." Link to a photograph of the Rillaton Gold Cup from Wikipedia. Return to the table of contents . The Fairy Cup of Kirk Malew Isle of Man One story in particular was told me of a man who had been led by invisible musicians for several miles together; and not being able to resist the harmony, followed till it conducted him to a large common, where were a great number of little people sitting round a table, and eating and drinking in a very jovial manner. Among them were some faces whom he thought he had formerly seen, but forbore taking any notices or they of him, till the little people offering him drink, one of them, whose features seemed not unknown to him, plucked him by the coat and forbad him, whatever he did, to taste anything he saw before him; for if you do, added he, you will be as I am, and return no more to your family. The poor man was much af frighted but resolved to obey the injunction: accordingly a large silver cup, filled with some sort of liquor, being put into his hand, he found an opportunity to throw what it contained on the ground. Soon after the musick ceasing, all the company disappeared, leaving the cup in his hand, and he returned home, tho' much wearied and fatigued. He went the next day and communicated to the minister of the parish all that had happened and asked his advice how he should dispose of the cup: to which the parson reply'd, he could not do better than devote it to the service of the church; and this very cup, they tell me, is that which is now used for the consecrated wine in Kirk Merlugh [Malew]. Source: George Waldron, A Description of the Isle of Man (1731). I have used the internet version published by the Manx Society. This story (untitled by Waldron) has been retold by many succeeding writers, including: George Cumming, The Isle of Man: Its History, Physical, Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Legendary (London: John van Voorst, 1848), pp. 29-30 . Arthur William Moore, The Folk-Lore of the Isle of Man: Being an Account of Its Myths, Legends, Superstitions, Customs, and Proverbs (London: D. Nutt, 1891), pp. 41-42 . John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1901), vol. 1 p. 290 . Return to the table of contents . The Silver Cup Isle of Man There was once a man living in the south of the island whose name was Colcheragh. He was a farmer, and he had poultry on his street, sheep on the mountain, and cattle in the meadow land alongside the river. His cows were the best cows in the parish. Nowhere could you see such a fine head of cattle as he had; they were the pride of his heart, and they served him well with milk and butter. But after a time he began to think that something was amiss with the cows. He went to the cow-house the first thing every morning, and one morning he noticed the cows looking so tired they could hardly stand. When it came to milking time they found not a drop of milk. The girls, who went out to milk the cows, came back with empty cans, saying, "The milk has gone up into the cows' horns!" Colcheragh began to think that some one had put an evil eye on his cows, so he swept up some of the dust from the cross four-roads close by, in a shovel, and sprinkled it on their backs. But the cows got no better. Then he wondered if some one was coming at night to steal the milk. He made up his mind to sit in the cow-house all night to see if he could catch the thief. So one night after everyone had gone to bed he crept out of the house and hid himself under some straw in a corner of the cow-house. Hour after hour of the dark lonesome night crept on, and he heard nothing but the cows' breathing and their rustle in the straw. He was very cold and stiff, and he had just made up his mind to go into the house when a glimmering light showed under the door; and then he heard things laughing and talking -- queer talk. He knew that they were not right people. The cow-house door opened, and in came a whole lot of little men, dressed in green coats and leather caps. Keeking through the straw, he saw their horns hung by their sides, their whips in their hands, and scores of little dogs of every colour -- green, blue, yellow, scarlet, and every colour you can think of -- at their heels. The cows were lying down. The little fellows loosed the yokes from the cows' necks, hopped on their backs, a dozen, maybe, on each cow, and cracked their little whips. The cows jumped to their feet, and Themselves galloped off. Colcheragh ran to the stable, got on a horse, and made chase after his cows. The night was dark, but he could hear the whizz of the little whips through the air, the click of the cows' hoofs on stones, and the little dogs going, "Yep, yep, yep." He heard, too, the laughing of Themselves. Then one of them would be singing out to the dogs, calling them up by name, giving a call out of him, "Ho la, ho la, la!" Colcheragh followed these sounds, keeping close at their heels. On and on they went, helter-skelter over hedges and over ditches till they got to the Fairy Hill, and Colcheragh was still following them, though on any other night he would not have gone within a mile of the great green mound. When the little fellows came to the hill they sounded a tan-ta-ra-ra-tan on their horns. The hill opened, bright light streamed out, and sounds of music and great merriment. Themselves passed through, and Colcheragh slid off his horse and slipped unnoticed in after them. The hill closed behind them and he found himself in a fine room, lit up till it was brighter than the summer noonday. The whole place was crowded with little people, young and old, men and women, all decked out for a ball, that grand -- he had never looked on the like. Among them were some faces that he thought he had seen before, but he took no notice of them, nor they of him. In one part there was dancing to the music of Hom Mooar -- that was the name of the fiddler -- and when he played all men must follow him whether they would or no. The dancing was like the dancing of flowers in the wind, such dancing as he had never seen before. In another part his cows were being killed and roasted, and after the dance there was a great feast, with scores of tables set out with silver and gold and everything of the best to eat and drink. There was roast and boiled, and sollaghan and cowree, and puddings and pies, and jough and wine -- a feast fit for the Governor himself. When they were taking their seats one of them, whose face he thought he knew, whispered to him: "Don't thee taste nothin' here or thou will be like me, and never go back to thy ones no more." Colcheragh made up his mind to take this advice. When the feast was coming to an end there was a shout for the joughy-dorrys, the stirrup cup. Someone ran to fetch the cup. The one among the little people, who seemed to be their king, filled it with red wine, drank himself, and passed it on to the rest. It was going round from one to another until it came to Colcheragh, who saw, when he had it in his hands, that it was of fine carved silver, and more beautiful than anything ever seen outside that place. He said to himself, "The little durts have stolen and killed, and eaten my cattle. This cup, if it were. mine, would pay me for all." So standing up and grasping the silver cup tightly in his hand, he held it up and said, "Shoh Slaynt!" which is the Manx toast. Then he dashed the cupful of wine over Themselves and the lights. In an instant the place was in black darkness, save for, a stime of grey dawn light which came through the chink of the half-closed door. Colcheragh made for it, cup in hand, slammed the door behind him, and ran for his life. After a moment of uproar Themselves missed the cup and Colcheragh, and with yells of rage they poured out of the hill, after him, in full chase. The farmer, who had a good start, ran as he had never run before. He knew he would get small mercy at their hands if he was caught; he went splashing through the wet mire and keeping off the stepping stones; he knew they could not take him in the water. He looked over his shoulder and caught a glimpse of the whole Mob Beg behind him, close at his heels, waving their naked arms in the light of the torch each one held up. On they come, shrieking and howling in Manx: Colcheragh, Colcheragh, Put thy foot on the stone, And do not put it in the wet! But he ran in the water till he came to the churchyard, and they could not touch him there. When he went into the cowhouse the next morning the cows had all come home and they got rest after that. He put the cup in the church at Rushen, and they are saying it was there for, many years; then it was sent to London. It is said that after this the farmer would not go out of his house of an evening after dark. Source: Sophia Morrison, Manx Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1911), pp. 27-33 . Link to additional tales about thieving fairies: Fairy Theft . Return to the table of contents . The Trowie "Pig" Scotland (Shetland) Laurence Farker was a highly nervous man. He suffered from innumerable maladies, and was often unable either to go to the fishing, or lend a hand at working the croft. This annoyed his better half considerably. She did not sympathise with her husband in the least, for she believed, and perhaps not without some reason, that his ills were more imaginary than real. One morning Laurence found that he was quite unable to go to the fishing with the other men. He lay in bed all that day, and his wife went about her manifold duties, and paid very little attention to him. At nightfall she titied up the house and went to visit a neighbour, and Laurence was left alone. He was lying bemoaning his unhappy lot, when he perceived a number of little folks come trooping in over the floor. One of them carried a stone pig (earthenware bottle) in his hand. The trows, for such Laurence knew them to be, seated themselves on the hearth round the blazing peat fire. After a little, one of them spoke. "The guidman is no weel," said he. "No," remarked another, "but if he had somethin' oot o' wir pig, dat wid better him." A short silence followed, and the listener waited eagerly. "His wife is not guid til him," said the first speaker; "she'll be comin' back, so we had better go." With this they got up in a body and made for the door, but when they were opposite the bed, Laurence cried out, "Loard surround me, an' sae da pig!" The trows immediately vanished, but the pig was left behind. Laurence recollected what the trow had said. He took "somethin' oot o' da pig," and after a few doses all his ills departed. The fame of that pig went far and wide. Its contents never grew less, and proved a never-failing cure for all diseases. Source: John Nicolson, Some Folk-Tales and Legends of Scotland (Edinburgh: Thomas Allan and Sons, 1920), p. 38. Trow is a Scottish term for troll . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Edwin Sidney Hartland, The Science of Fairy Tales: An Enquiry into Fairy Mythology (New York: Scribner and Welford, 1891), chapter 6 . Migratory legends of type 6070B ("Death of an Underground Person"), in which a mysterious being abandons a drinking vessel: Prilling and Pralling Is Dead (Germany). King Pippe Is Dead! (Denmark). Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 6, 2019. The Fairy Flag of Dunvegan Castle The Fairy Flag of Dunvegan Castle edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009-2019 Contents The Fairy Flag of Dunvegan Castle (Scotland). A Family Tradition (Scotland). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Fairy Flag of Dunvegan Castle Scotland Among the treasures of Dunvegan is a green fairy flag, which some materialists believe to be only a relic of the Crusades -- a consecrated banner of the Knights Templars, but which all true Highlanders affirm to have been a gift to some ancestral MacLeod, from a fairy maiden. She promised that on three distinct occasions when he or his clan were in danger, he might wave the flag with certainty of relief. MacLeod proved false to his fairy, and married a mere commonplace human maiden, whereupon his spirit wife waxed wroth, and ordained that every woman in the clan should give birth to a dead child, and that all the cattle should have dead calves. Then a loud and bitter wail rang through the green valleys, and along the shores, and MacLeod, in sore tribulation, bethought him of the flag. The fairy proved more true to her words than her lover had been to his, so she withdrew her spell, and the clan once more flourished. Then came a terrible battle, when MacLeod and his men were well-nigh routed, and again, though he must have been sorely ashamed of himself, he waved the flag, and the victory was his. Why the flag was not waved for the third time, when the isles were ruined by the failure of the kelp trade, or during the potato famine, MacLeod best knows. Perhaps he thought it well to save one "last tune in the old fiddle." At all events the green flag still lies in its old case, and is such a treasure as no other laird can show. Source: C. F. Gordon Cumming, In the Hebrides , a new edition (London: Chatto and Windus, 1883), p. 360 . The author's full name is Constance Frederica Gordon Cumming. Dunvegan Castle is on the Scottish Isle of Skye. The stone bridge where, according to tradition, the fairy and her faithless human lover last parted still stands and is named Fairy Bridge. Sir Walter Scott, who visited Dunvegan Castle in August 1814, described the fairy flag as "a pennon of silk, with something like round red rowan-berries wrought upon it," adding that it had three properties: "Produced in battle, it multiplied the numbers of the Macleods; spread on the nuptial bed, it ensured fertility; and lastly, it brought herring into the loch." (J. G. Lockhart, Memoirs of the Life of Sir Walter Scott, Bart. , a new edition [Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black, 1852], p. 282 ) Return to the table of contents . A Family Tradition Janet MacLeod Golden (age 13) Once upon a time, way back in the middle ages, the clan MacLeod was a very strong clan in Scotland, and the fairies or "little people" favored it much. So the queen of the fairies gave to the chief a wonderful flag which possessed the quality of granting them three wishes, but only in time of great need. The flag was carefully laid away and not brought out for a long while. At last there was great woe at Dunvegan, the castle of the MacLeods, for the heir was lost. Then someone thought of the flag and it was used, and soon after the boy was found. A second time it was used to save the chief from death, and carefully laid away again, but, alas, so carefully that it could not be found till, in 1799, an iron chest that seemed keyless was broken open and found to contain an inner case in which was a scented casket, in that the fairy flag. Now, before the finding of the flag a seer had predicted that when the third Norman son of an English lady should perish accidentally, the "Maidens" (three large rocks in the ocean belonging to MacLeod) should be sold to the Campbells; a fox should litter in the castle; and the fairy flag be found. The glory of the MacLeods would then depart, but to be more than recovered in the future when another chief called Ian Breac should arise. In 1799 all these things happened, but at the present time the heir presumptive is called Ian Breac, so it is to be hoped that the glory of the MacLeod's will return. The fairy flag is still shown at Dunvegan Castle, on the Isle of Skye. It is of fine yellow silk and has many so called "elf marks" on it in red silk thread. Lovers of Scott's poems will recognize these lines of his translation of "Mackrimmon's Lament," an old song composed by a piper of the clan MacLeod: MacLeod's wizard flag from the gray castle sallies, The rowers are seated, Unmoored are the galleys. I have before me, as I write, a letter from the twenty-third chief of the clan, in which he tells me that though the belief in fairies is probably gone, the flag is still there to convince people of this tradition. Source: St. Nicholas: An Illustrated Magazine for Young Folks , vol. 33, part 2 (May - October, 1906), p. 659 . Complete text of the poem quoted above: The Complete Works of Sir Walter Scott , vol. 1 (New York: Conner and Cooke, 1833), p. 692 . Return to the table of contents . Links to additional legends about fairy artifacts Fairy Flag , an article from Wikipedia. The Luck of Edenhall (Eden Hall) , the story of a famous drinking glass abandoned by fairies in Cumberland, England, and now on display at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. The Osenberg Dwarfs (Germany). A pitcher abandoned by dwarfs brings good fortune to a family of innkeepers. Prilling and Pralling Is Dead (Germany). A mysterious being vacates a peasant's cellar, leaving an unusual mug behind. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 6, 2019. Fairy Gifts: Folktales of Type 503 Fairy Gifts folktales and legends of type 503 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2019 Return to folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Fairies and the Hump-Back (Scotland). The Hunchback of Willow Brake (Scotland). The Legend of Knockgrafton (Ireland). The Palace in the Rath (Ireland). A Fairy Tale in the Ancient English Style (Thomas Parnell). Billy Beg, Tom Beg, and the Fairies (Isle of Man). The Fairies and the Two Hunchbacks: A Story of Picardy (France). The Tailor on the Brocken (Germany). The Gifts of the Mountain Spirits (Germany). The Gifts of the Little People (Germany). The Two Hunchbacked Brothers (Italy). The Two Humpbacks (Italy). The Elves and the Envious Neighbor (Japan). How an Old Man Lost His Wen (Japan). The Old Man with the Wen (Japan). The Story of Hok Lee and the Dwarfs (China). The Fairies and the Hump-Back Scotland A man who was a hump-back once met the fairies dancing, and danced with their queen; and he sang with them, "Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday," so well that they took off his hump, and he returned home a straight-bodied man. Then a tailor went past the same place, and was also admitted by the fairies to their dance. He caught the fairy queen by the waist, and she resented his familiarity. And in singing he added "Thursday" to their song and spoilt it. To pay the tailor for his rudeness and ill manners, the dancers took up the hump they had just removed from the first man and clapped it on his back, and the conceited fellow went home a hump-back. Notes: Source: W. Y. Evans-Wentz, The Fairy Faith in Celtic Countries (London: Henry. Frowde, Oxford University Press, 1911), p. 92 . Evans-Wentz's source was a protestant minister whose calling had taken him to the Western Hebrides. The above legend comes from the remote island of Benbecula in the Western Hebrides. Thursday is, of course, the day of Thor, the mortal enemy of Scandinavian underground people, which may be the reason why adding the name "Thursday" to the fairies' song was such a breach of etiquette. Return to the table of contents . The Hunchback of Willow Brake Scotland Little Hunchback was but a poor, melancholy creature, an object of pity to the compassionate, and a laughing-stock to the thoughtless and foolish. He was deformed from the day of his birth, with his weak knees that bent under him, and a large lump between his shoulders. When he reached boyhood, he was uglier and more deformed than he had been even in his childhood. He never went out of doors but a crowd of naughty children followed, laughing at him and mocking him. Their cruel conduct made him so shy and unsociable that he avoided their company, and he passed his time day after day alone in the Willow Brake, which stood at a short distance from his mother's house. His neighbors noticed where he was accustomed to go, and nicknamed him the Hunchback of the Willow Brake. On a certain evening, after suffering much ridicule from the children of the town where he lived, he fled with a sore heart and weeping eyes to the Willow Brake for shelter. He had not gone far into the wood, when he was met by the very prettiest little babe he had ever seen. The babe was a fairy woman, but he could not afterwards give a full description of her appearance, nor had he any recollection of her attire, beyond this, that about her shoulders was a green mantle, which was bound with a golden girdle about her waist, and that on her head was a green cap, with a tuft of silver feathers waving from its crown. "Where are you going?" said the fairy. "I am going to pass the evening in the Willow Brake," replied Hunchback. "Have you no companion at all with whom you can play?" said she then. "No; none will keep company with me, since I am not like other children," said Hunchback. At last she asked his name, and he told her it was Hunchback. "Hunchback!" she exclaimed. "It is long since we expected to meet you. I am Play of Sunbeam, and my joy is making the world merry. Come with me, my people are expecting you, and pass the night with us, and in the morning you will have neither disability nor defect." He went cheerfully with her, until they arrived at the back of the Big Fairy Knoll. "Shut your eyes, and give me your hand," said the fairy. He did as she told him, and presently they were in the very grandest mansion he had ever seen. She dragged him up through the midst of the company, singing merrily: Silence, all ye! Sunbeam's back hither. Hunchback and she Have come together. "Success and happiness attend Play of Sunbeam!" said a handsome maiden, who was more finely dressed than the rest, and who wore on her head a gold crown full of jewels. "What does she wish us to do for poor Hunchback?" For pain to give him lustihead, And, good man's wish, a thriving trade. And Play of Sunbeam will be merry and glad. And then away she went dancing, and without casting another look on Hunchback. "When is Play of Sunbeam otherwise?" said the Queen, "and according to her request let it be." The other fairies seized him, and when he thought that they had pulled him to pieces among them they let him go, and he was as straight and active as he behoved to be. Then he heard the sweetest music he had ever listened to, and joy filled his heart, and he began to dance with the little people that were on the floor, and stopped not until he fell, unable to stand with fatigue. He had not lain but a short time on the floor, till sleep crept over him, and he felt the fairies carrying him away through the air, and the soft, sad music receding further and further from him. At length he awoke, and on looking round, he found himself lying in the Willow Brake. He rose, and returned home. He had been away a year and a day; and in that time so great a change had come over him that it was with difficulty that his own mother knew him. She rejoiced at his coming, and after that found him a great help, for now he had a hand for every trade. Among the youngsters who used to mock at him was a boy that bore the nickname of Punchy. Punchy was a little ugly creature, with hands and feet like the paws of a frog, and a big hump between his shoulders. When he saw how Hunchback had returned, as straight as a rush and as gay as a calf-herd, he made friends with him, and rested not until Hunchback had told him everything that had happened, from the evening he went to the Willow Brake, till he came back again. He laid a vow, however, on Punchy, not to tell it to a living being, because he himself was under a promise to the fairies to keep it secret. Punchy promised to do as was requested of him. On that very evening Punchy went to the Willow Brake, expecting to meet one of the fairies who would heal him as Hunchback was healed; but he saw none. Evening after evening he continued going to the same place, until at last he saw a small manikin, sitting at the root of a holly bush, and gazing with a mocking smile on his countenance. "Are you Play of Sunbeam?" said Punchy. "I am not, but I am Never-Mind-Who," replied the manikin. "What is your business with Play of Sunbeam?" "O, that she will take this hump off me, as she took the hunch off Hunchback," said Punchy. "Will you take me to the place where she dwells?" "I will do that," said Never-Mind-Who, "but you will get leave to come out of it as you like." "I do not care how I get out, if I get in, and if this ugly hump is taken off me." The little manikin gave a loud laugh, and then went away with Punchy to the Big Fairy Knoll, and took him in, as Hunchback was taken. "Who is this come to us without invitation or tryst?" cried the Queen, looking sternly at Punchy. "It is a toad named Punchy whom Hunchback has sent on a chance journey, in the hope that his hump will be taken off him," replied Never-Mind-Who. "Did Hunchback break his vow and his promise, that never of his own accord would he tell any one how it fared with him here?" said the Queen, turning towards Punchy with wrath in her countenance. "No," replied Punchy, "for he told me nothing until I first prayed and entreated him." "You impudent fellow," said she, "you will get your deserts," and immediately she cried to the other fairies: "Throw the hunch on the hump, and the one load will take them home." "The hunch on the hump, the hunch on the hump," screamed all the fairies; and then they laid hold of Punchy by his hands and his feet, and tossed him up and down, to this side and that, till he lost all consciousness. When he came to himself, he lay in the Willow Brake, the hump twice its former size, and his bones so tired and bruised that he could scarcely move. With a great effort he got to his feet, and then crept home; but to the day of his death he told no one except Hunchback what happened to him in the Big Fairy Knoll. Source: James MacDougall, Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English , edited by George Calder (Edinburgh: John Grant, 1910), pp. 205-213 . Return to the table of contents . The Legend of Knockgrafton Ireland There was once a poor man who lived in the fertile glen of Aherlow, at the foot of the gloomy Galtee mountains, and he had a great hump on his back: he looked just as if his body had been rolled up and placed upon his shoulders; and his head was pressed down with the weight so much that his chin, when he was sitting, used to rest upon his knees for support. The country people were rather shy of meeting him in any lonesome place, for though, poor creature, he was as harmless and as inoffensive as a new-born infant, yet his deformity was so great that he scarcely appeared to be a human creature, and some ill-minded persons had set strange stories about him afloat. He was said to have a great knowledge of herbs and charms; but certain it was that he had a mighty skillful hand in plaiting straw and rushes into hats and baskets, which was the way he made his livelihood. Lusmore, for that was the nickname put upon him by reason of his always wearing a sprig of the fairy cap, or lusmore (the foxglove), in his little straw hat, would ever get a higher penny for his plaited work than any one else, and perhaps that was the reason why some one, out of envy, had circulated the strange stories about him. Be that as it may, it happened that he was returning one evening from the pretty town of Cahir towards Cappagh, and as little Lusmore walked very slowly, on account of the great hump upon his back, it was quite dark when he came to the old moat of Knockgrafton, which stood on the right-hand side of his road. Tired and weary was he, and noways comfortable in his own mind at thinking how much farther he had to travel, and that he should be walking all the night; so he sat down under the moat to rest himself, and began looking mournfully enough upon the moon. Presently there rose a wild strain of unearthly melody upon the ear of little Lusmore; he listened, and he thought that he had never heard such ravishing music before. It was like the sound of many voices, each mingling and blending with the other so strangely that they seemed to be one, though all singing different strains, and the words of the song were these: "Da Luan, Da Mort, Da Luan, Da Mort, Da Luan, Da Mort"; when there would be a moment's pause, and then the round of melody went on again. Lusmore listened attentively, scarcely drawing his breath lest he might lose the slightest note. He now plainly perceived that the singing was within the moat; and though at first it had charmed him so much, he began to get tired of hearing the same round sung over and over so often without any change; so availing himself of the pause when the "Da Luan, Da Mort" had been sung three times, he took up the tune, and raised it with the words "augus Da Cadine," and then went on singing with the voices inside of the moat, "Da Luan, Da Mort," finishing the melody, when the pause again came, with "augus Da Cadine." The fairies within Knockgrafton, for the song was a fairy melody, when they heard this addition to the tune, were so much delighted that, with instant resolve, it was determined to bring the mortal among them, whose musical skill so far exceeded theirs, and little Lusmore was conveyed into their company with the eddying speed of a whirlwind. Glorious to behold was the sight that burst upon him as he came down through the moat, twirling round and round, with the lightness of a straw, to the sweetest music that kept time to his motion. The greatest honor was then paid him, for he was put above all the musicians, and he had servants tending upon him, and everything to his heart's content, and a hearty welcome to all; and, in short, he was made as much of as if he had been the first man in the land. Presently Lusmore saw a great consultation going forward among the fairies, and, notwithstanding all their civility, he felt very much frightened, until one stepping out from the rest came up to him and said: Lusmore! Lusmore! Doubt not, nor deplore, For the hump which you bore On your back is no more; Look down on the floor, And view it, Lusmore! When these words were said, poor little Lusmore felt himself so light, and so happy, that he thought he could have bounded at one jump over the moon, like the cow in the history of the cat and the fiddle; and he saw, with inexpressible pleasure, his hump tumble down upon the ground from his shoulders. He then tried to lift up his head, and he did so with becoming caution, fearing that he might knock it against the ceiling of the grand hall, where he was; he looked round and round again with greatest wonder and delight upon everything, which appeared more and more beautiful; and, overpowered at beholding such a resplendent scene, his head grew dizzy, and his eyesight became dim. At last he fell into a sound sleep, and when he awoke he found that it was broad daylight, the sun shining brightly, and the birds singing sweetly; and that he was lying just at the foot of the moat of Knockgrafton, with the cows and sheep grazing peacefully round about him. The first thing Lusmore did, after saying his prayers, was to put his hand behind to feel for his hump, but no sign of one was there on his back, and he looked at himself with great pride, for he had now become a well-shaped dapper little fellow, and more than that, found himself in a full suit of new clothes, which he concluded the fairies had made for him. Towards Cappagh he went, stepping out as lightly, and springing up at every step as if he had been all his life a dancing-master. Not a creature who met Lusmore knew him without his hump, and he had a great work to persuade every one that he was the same man -- in truth he was not, so far as outward appearance went. Of course it was not long before the story of Lusmore's hump got about, and a great wonder was made of it. Through the country, for miles round, it was the talk of every one, high and low. One morning, as Lusmore was sitting contented enough, at his cabin door, up came an old woman to him, and asked him if he could direct her to Cappagh. "I need give you no directions, my good woman," said Lusmore, "for this is Cappagh; and whom may you want here?" "I have come," said the woman," out of Decie's country, in the county of Waterford looking after one Lusmore, who, I have heard tell, had his hump taken off by the fairies; for there is a son of a gossip of mine who has got a hump on him that will be his death; and maybe if he could use the same charm as Lusmore, the hump may be taken off him. And now I have told you the reason of my coming so far: 'tis to find out about this charm, if I can." Lusmore, who was ever a good-natured little fellow, told the woman all the particulars, how he had raised the tune for the fairies at Knockgrafton, how his hump had been removed from his shoulders, and how he had got a new suit of clothes into the bargain. The woman thanked him very much, and then went away quite happy and easy in her own mind. When she came back to her gossip's house, in the county of Waterford, she told her everything that Lusmore had said, and they put the little hump-backed man, who was a peevish and cunning creature from his birth, upon a car, and took him all the way across the country. It was a long journey, but they did not care for that, so the hump was taken from off him; and they brought him, just at nightfall, and left him under the old moat of Knockgrafton. Jack Madden, for that was the humpy man's name, had not been sitting there long when he heard the tune going on within the moat much sweeter than before; for the fairies were singing it the way Lusmore had settled their music for them, and the song was going on; "Da Luan, Da Mort, Da Luan, Da Mort, Da Luan, Da Mort, augus Da Cadine," without ever stopping. Jack Madden, who was in a great hurry to get quit of his hump, never thought of waiting until the fairies had done, or watching for a fit opportunity to raise the tune higher again than Lusmore had; so having heard them sing it over seven times without stopping, out he bawls, never minding the time or the humor of the tune, or how he could bring his words in properly, augus Da Cadine, augus Da Hena, thinking that if one day was good, two were better; and that if Lusmore had one new suit of clothes given him, he should have two. No sooner had the words passed his lips than he was taken up and whisked into the moat with prodigious force; and the fairies came crowding round about him with great anger, screeching, and screaming, and roaring out, "Who spoiled our tune? who spoiled our tune?" and one stepped up to him, above all the rest and said: Jack Madden! Jack Madden! Your words came so bad in The tune we felt glad in; This castle you're had in, That your life we may sadden; Here's two humps for Jack Madden! And twenty of the strongest fairies brought Lusmore's hump and put it down upon poor Jack's back, over his own, where it became fixed as firmly as if it was nailed on with twelve-penny nails, by the best carpenter that ever drove one. Out of their castle they then kicked him; and, in the morning, when Jack Madden's mother and her gossip came to look after their little man, they found him half dead, lying at the foot of the moat, with the other hump upon his back. Well to be sure, how they did look at each other! But they were afraid to say anything, lest a hump might be put upon their own shoulders. Home they brought the unlucky Jack Madden with them, as downcast in their hearts and their looks as ever two gossips were; and what through the weight of his other hump, and the long journey, he died soon after, leaving they say his heavy curse to anyone who would go to listen to fairy tunes again. Notes: Source: Joseph Jacobs, More Celtic Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 156-63 . Jacobs' source: Thomas Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland (London: John Murray, 1826, pp. 18-26 . Croker provides additional notes to this legend on pp. 26-30 . W. B. Yeats included this story in his Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry (London: Walter Scott, 1888), pp. 40-45 . In his notes Yeats offers the following explanations and comments: Moat does not mean a place with water, but a tumulus or barrow [i.e., an ancient mound-grave]. The words "Da Luan Da Mort augus Da Dardeen" are Gaelic for "Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday too." "Da Hena" is Thursday. Mr. Douglas Hyde has heard the story in Connaught, with the song of the fairy as "Peean Peean daw feean, Peean go leh agus leffin," which in English means, "a penny, a penny, twopence, a penny and a half, and a halfpenny." Return to the table of contents . The Palace in the Rath Ireland Everyone from Bunclody to Enniscorthy knows the rath {footnote 1} between Tombrick and Munfin. Well, there was a poor, honest, quiet little creature, that lived just at the pass of Glanamoin, between the hill of Coolgarrow and Kilachdiarmid. His back was broken when he was a child, and he earned his bread by making cradles, and bosses, and chairs, and beehives, out of straw and briers. No one in the barony of Bantry of Scarawalsh could equal him at these. Well, he was a sober little fellow enough, but the best of us may be overtaken. He was coming from the fair of Enniscorthy one fine summer evening, up along the beautiful shady road of Munfin; and when he came near the stream that bounds Tombrick, he turned into the fields to make his road short. He was singing merrily enough, but by degrees he got a little stupefied; and when he was passing the dry, grassy ditch that surrounds the rath, he felt an inclination to sit and rest himself. It is hard to sit awhile, and have your eyes a little glassy, and the things seeming to turn round you, without falling off asleep; and asleep my poor little man of straw was in a few minutes. Things like droves of cattle, or soldiers marching, or big flakes of foam on a flooded river, were pushing on though his brain, and he thought the drums were playing a march, when up he woke, and there in the face of the steep bank that was overgrown with bushes and blackthorn, a passage was open between nice pillars, and inside was a great vaulted room, with arches crossing each other, a hundred lamps hanging from the vault, and thousands of nice little gentlemen and ladies, with green coats and gowns, and red sugar-loaf caps, curled at the tops like old Irish birredhs , dancing and singing, and nice little pipers and fiddlers, perched up in a little gallery by themselves, and playing music to help out the singing. He was a little cowed at first, but as he found no one taking notice of him, he stole in, and sat in a corner, and thought he'd never be tired looking at the fine little people figuring, and cutting capers, and singing. But at last he began to find the singing and music a little tedious. It was nothing but two short bars and four words, and this was the style: Yae Luan, yae Morth -- Yae Luan, yae Morth. The longer he looked on, the bolder he grew, and at last he shouted at the end of the verse: Agus Dha Haed-yeen. Oh, such cries of delight as rose up among the merry little gentry! They began the improved song, and shouted it till the vault rang: Yae Luan, yae Morth -- Yae Luan, yae Morth -- Yae Luan, yae Morth, Agus Dha Haed-yeen. {footnote 2} After a few minutes, they all left off the dance, and gathered round the boss maker, and thanked him for improving their tune. "Now," said the chief, "if you with for anything, only say the word, and, if it is in our power, it must be done." "I thank you, ladies and gentlemen," says he; "and if you would only remove this hump from my back, I'd be the happiest man in the Duffrey." "Oh, easy done, easy done!" said they. "Go on again with the dance, and you come along with us." So on they went with: Monday, Tuesday -- Monday, Tuesday -- Monday, Tuesday. And Wednesday too. One fairy taking their new friend by the heel, shot him in a curve to the very roof, and down he came the other side of the hall. Another gave him a shove, and up he flew back again. He felt as if he had wings; and one time when his back touched the roof, he found a sudden delightful change in himself; and just as he touched the ground, he lost all memory of everything around him. Next morning he was awakened by the sun shining on his face from over Slieve Buie, and he had a delightful feel down along his body instead of the disagreeable cruith he was accustomed to. He felt as if he could go from that to the other side of the stream at one step, and he burned little daylight till he reached Glanamoin. He had some trouble to persuade the neighbors of the truth of what had happened; but the wonder held only nine days; and he had like to lose his health along with his hump, for if he only made his appearance in Ballycarney, Castle-Dockrell, Ballindaggin, Kilmeashil, or Bunclody, ten people would be inviting him to a share of a tumbler of punch, or a quart of mulled beer. The news of the wonderful cure was talked of high and low, and even went as far as Ballynocrish, in Bantry, where another poor angashore of a humpback lived. But he was very unlike the Duffrey man in his disposition: he was as cross as a brier, and almost begrudged his right hand to help his left. His poor old aunt and a neighbor of hers set out one day, along with him, along the Bunclody road, passing by Killanne and the old place of the Colcloughs at Duffrey Hall, till they reached Temple-shambo. Then they kept along the hilly by-road till they reached the little man's house near the pass. So they up and told their business, and he gave them a kind welcome, and explained all the ins and outs of his adventure; and the end was, the four went together in the heel of the evening to the rath, and left the little lord in his glory in the dry, brown grass of the round dyke, where the other met his good fortune. The little ounkran never once thanked them for all the trouble they were taking for him. He only whimpered about being left in that lonesome place, and bade them to be sure to be with him at the flight of night, because he did not know what way to take from it. At last, the poor cross creature fell asleep; and after dreaming about falling down from rocks, and being held over the sea by his hump, and then that a lion had him by the same hump, and was running away with him, and then that it was put up for a target for soldiers to shoot at, the first volley they gave awoke him, and what was it but the music of the fairies in full career. The melody was the same as it was left them by the hivemaker, and the tune and dancing was twice as good as it was at first. This is the way it went: Yae Luan, yae Morth -- Yae Luan, yae Morth -- Yae Luan, yae Morth, Agus Dha Haed-yeen. But the new visitor had neither taste nor discretion; so when they came about the third time to the last line, he croaked out: Agus Dha Yærd-yeen Agus Dha Haen-ya. {footnote 3} It was the same as a cross fiddler that finds nobody going to give him anything, and makes a harsh back-screak of his bow along one of the strings. A thousand voices cried out, "Who stops our dance? Who stops our dance?" And all gathered round the poor fellow. He could do nothing but stare at them with his poor, cross, frightened face; and they screamed and laughed till he thought it was all over with him. But it was not over with him. "Bring down that hump," says the king; and before you could kiss your hand it was clapped on, as fast as the knocker of Newgate, over the other hump. The music was over now, the lights went out, and the poor creature lay till morning in a nightmare; and there the two women found him, at daybreak, more dead than alive. It was a dismal return they had to Ballynocrish; and the moral of my story is, that you should never drive till you first try the virtue of leading. Source: Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 100-104 . The following footnotes are from Kennedy's original text: Footnote 1: A small circular meadow surrounded by a mound overgrown with furze bushes, the remains of the earthen fort of one of the small chiefs of old days. They are erroneously called "Danes' forts." Footnote 2: Correctly Dia Luain, Dia Mairt, Dia Ceodoin -- Moon's Day, Mar's Day, Woden's Day (First Fast). Footnote 3: Correctly Diar Daoin, Dia Aoine , Dies Jovis, Vies Veneris -- Thursday, Friday. A final note by Kennedy: This fairy legend is certainly one of the most ancient of its kind. Dancing to the tiresome melody was a punishment inflicted on the fairies for their pristine crimes. No wonder that they should have felt grateful for the improvement effected. Return to the table of contents . A Fairy Tale in the Ancient English Style Thomas Parnell In Britain's Isle and Arthur's days, When Midnight Faeries daunc'd the Maze, Liv'd Edwin of the Green; Edwin, I wis, a gentle Youth, Endow'd with Courage, Sense and Truth, Tho' badly Shap'd he been. His Mountain Back mote well be said To measure heigth against his Head, And lift it self above: Yet spite of all that Nature did To make his uncouth Form forbid, This Creature dar'd to love. He felt the Charms of Edith's Eyes, Nor wanted Hope to gain the Prize, Cou'd Ladies took within; But one Sir Topaz dress'd with Art, And, if a Shape cou'd win a Heart, He had a Shape to win. Edwin (if right I read my Song) With slighted Passion pac'd along All in the Moony Light: 'Twas near an old enchaunted Court, Where sportive Faeries made Resort To revel out the Night. His Heart was drear, his Hope was cross'd, 'Twas late, 'twas farr, the Path was lost That reach'd the Neighbour-Town; With weary Steps he quits the Shades, Resolv'd the darkling Dome he treads, And drops his Limbs adown. But scant he lays him on the Floor, When hollow Winds remove the Door, A trembling rocks the Ground: And (well I ween to count aright) At once an hundred Tapers light On all the Walls around. Now sounding Tongues assail his Ear, Now sounding Feet approachen near, And now the Sounds encrease: And from the Corner where he lay He sees a Train profusely gay Come pranckling o'er the Place. But (trust me Gentles!) never yet Was dight a Masquing half so neat, Or half so rich before; The Country lent the sweet Perfumes, The Sea the Pearl, the Sky the Plumes, The Town its silken Store. Now whilst he gaz'd, a Gallant drest In flaunting Robes above the rest, With awfull Accent cry'd; What Mortall of a wretched Mind, Whose Sighs infect the balmy Wind, Has here presum'd to hide? At this the Swain whose vent'rous Soul No Fears of Magick Art controul, Advanc'd in open sight; "Nor have I Cause of Dreed," he said, "Who view by no Presumption led Your Revels of the Night." "'Twas Grief, for Scorn of faithful Love, Which made my Steps unweeting rove Amid the nightly Dew." 'Tis well, the Gallant crys again, We Faeries never injure Men Who dare to tell us true. Exalt thy Love-dejected Heart, Be mine the Task, or e'er we part, To make thee Grief resign; Now take the Pleasure of thy Chaunce; Whilst I with Mab my part'ner daunce, Be little Mable thine. He spoke, and all a sudden there Light Musick floats in wanton Air; The Monarch leads the Queen: The rest their Faerie Partners found, And Mable trimly tript the Ground With Edwin of the Green. The Dauncing past, the Board was laid, And siker such a Feast was made As Heart and Lip desire; Withouten Hands the Dishes fly, The Glasses with a Wish come nigh, And with a Wish retire. But now to please the Faerie King, Full ev'ry deal they laugh and sing, And antick Feats devise; Some wind and tumble like an Ape, And other-some transmute their Shape In Edwin's wond'ring Eyes. 'Till one at last that Robin hight, (Renown'd for pinching Maids by Night) Has hent him up aloof; And full against the Beam he flung, Where by the Back the Youth he hung To spraul unneath the Roof. From thence, "Reverse my Charm," he crys, "And let it fairely now suffice The Gambol has been shown." But Oberon answers with a Smile, Content thee Edwin for a while, The Vantage is thine own. Here ended all the Phantome-play; They smelt the fresh Approach of Day, And heard a Cock to crow; The whirling Wind that bore the Crowd Has clap'd the Door, and whistled loud, To warn them all to go. Then screaming all at once they fly, And all at once the Tapers dy; Poor Edwin falls to Floor; Forlorn his State, and dark the Place, Was never Wight in sike a Case Through all the Land before. But soon as Dan Apollo rose, Full Jolly Creature home he goes, He feels his Back the less; His honest Tongue and steady Mind Han rid him of the Lump behind Which made him want Success. With lusty livelyhed he talks, He seems a dauncing as he walks, His Story soon took wind; And beautious Edith sees the Youth, Endow'd with Courage, Sense and Truth, Without a Bunch behind. The Story told, Sir Topaz mov'd, (The Youth of Edith erst approv'd) To see the Revel Scene: At close of Eve he leaves his home, And wends to find the ruin'd Dome All on the gloomy Plain. As there he bides, it so befell, The Wind came rustling down a Dell, A shaking seiz'd the Wall: Up spring the Tapers as before, The Faeries bragly foot the Floor, And Musick fills the Hall. But certes sorely sunk with woe Sir Topaz sees the Elphin show, His Spirits in him dy: When Oberon crys, "a Man is near, A mortall Passion, cleeped Fear, Hangs flagging in the Sky." With that Sir Topaz (Hapless Youth!) In Accents fault'ring ay for Ruth Intreats them Pity graunt; For als he been a mister Wight Betray'd by wand'ring in the Night To tread the circled Haunt; "Ah Losell Vile, at once they roar! And little skill'd of Faerie lore, Thy Cause to come we know: Now has thy Kestrell Courage fell; And Faeries, since a Ly you tell, Are free to work thee Woe." Then Will, who bears the wispy Fire To trail the Swains among the Mire, The Caitive upward flung; There like a Tortoise in a Shop He dangled from the Chamber-top, Where whilome Edwin hung. The Revel now proceeds apace, Deffly they frisk it o'er the Place, They sit, they drink, and eat; The time with frolick Mirth beguile, And poor Sir Topaz hangs the while 'Till all the Rout retreat. By this the Starrs began to wink, They skriek, they fly, the Tapers sink, And down ydrops the Knight. For never Spell by Faerie laid With strong Enchantment bound a Glade Beyond the length of Night. Chill, dark, alone, adreed, he lay, 'Till up the Welkin rose the Day, Then deem'd the Dole was o'er: But wot ye well his harder Lot? His seely Back the Bunch has got Which Edwin lost afore. This Tale a Sybil-Nurse ared; She softly strok'd my youngling Head, And when the Tale was done, "Thus some are born, my Son (she cries) With base Impediments to rise, And some are born with none. "But Virtue can it self advance To what the Fav'rite Fools of Chance By Fortune seem'd design'd; Virtue can gain the Odds of Fate, And from it self shake off the Weight Upon th' unworthy Mind." Source: University of Vermont, Spenser and the Tradition: English Poetry 1579-1830, Thomas Parnell, "A Fairy Tale in the Ancient English Style." Thomas Parnell, an Irish poet and clergyman, was born in 1679 and died in 1718. This poem was first published by Alexander Pope in 1722. Sources printed in the eighteenth century: Poems on Several Occasions , written by Dr. Thomas Parnell, late Arch-Deacon of Clogher, and published by Mr. [Alexander Pope] (London: Bernard Lintot, 1726), pp. 32-45 . The Court of Queen Mab: Containing a Select Collection of Only the Best, Most Instructive, and Entertaining Tales of the Fairies (London: M. Cooper, 1752), pp. 359-65 . Return to the table of contents . Billy Beg, Tom Beg, and the Fairies Isle of Man Not far from Dalby, Billy Beg and Tom Beg, two humpback cobblers, lived together on a lonely croft. Billy Beg was sharper and cleverer than Tom Beg, who was always at his command. One day Billy Beg gave Tom a staff, and quoth he, "Tom Beg, go to the mountain and fetch home the white sheep." Tom Beg took the staff and went to the mountain, but he could not find the white sheep. At last, when he was far from home, and dusk was coming on, he began to think that he had best go back. The night was fine, and stars and a small crescent moon were in the sky. No sound was to be heard but the curlew's sharp whistle. Tom was hastening home, and had almost reached Glen Rushen, when a grey mist gathered, and he lost his way. But it was not long before the mist cleared, and Tom Beg found himself in a green glen such as he had never seen before, though he thought he knew every glen within five miles of him, for he was born and reared in the neighborhood. He was marveling and wondering where he could be, when he heard a far-away sound drawing nearer to him. "Aw," said he to himself, "there's more than myself afoot on the mountains tonight; I'll have company." The sound grew louder. First, it was like the humming of bees, then like the rushing of Glen Meay waterfall, and last it was like the marching and the murmur of a crowd. It was the fairy host. Of a sudden the glen was full of fine horses and of little people riding on them, with the lights on their red caps shining like the stars above and making the night as bright as day. There was the blowing of horns, the waving of flags, the playing of music, and the barking of many little dogs. Tom Beg thought that he had never seen anything so splendid as all he saw there. In the midst of the drilling and dancing and singing one of them spied Tom, and then Tom saw coming towards him the grandest little man he had ever set eyes upon, dressed in gold and silver, and silk shining like a raven's wing. "It is a bad time you have chosen to come this way," said the little man, who was the king. "Yes; but it is not here that I'm wishing to be though," said Tom. Then said the king, "Are you one of us tonight, Tom?" "I am surely," said Tom. "Then," said the king, "it will be your duty to take the password. You must stand at the foot of the glen, and as each regiment goes by, you must take the password: it is 'Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday.'" "I'll do that with a heart and a half," said Tom. At daybreak the fiddlers took up their fiddles; the Fairy army set itself in order; the fiddlers played before them out of the glen; and sweet that music was. Each regiment gave the password to Tom as it went by, "Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday"; and last of all came the king, and he, too, gave it, "Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday." Then he called in Manx to one of his men, "Take the hump from this fellow's back," and before the words were out of his mouth the hump was whisked off Tom Beg's back and thrown into the hedge. How proud now was Tom, who so found himself the straightest man in the Isle of Man! He went down the mountain and came home early in the morning with light heart and eager step. Billy Beg wondered greatly when he saw Tom Beg so straight and strong, and when Tom Beg had rested and refreshed himself he told his story how he had met the Fairies who came every night to Glen Rushen to drill. The next night Billy Beg set off along the mountain road and came at last to the green glen. About midnight he heard the trampling of horses, the lashing of whips, the barking of dogs, and a great hullabaloo, and, behold, the Fairies and their king, their dogs and their horses, all at drill in the glen as Tom Beg had said. When they saw the humpback they all stopped, and one came forward and very crossly asked his business. "I am one of Yourselves for the night, and should be glad to do you some service," said Billy Beg. So he was set to take the password, "Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday." And at daybreak the King said, "It's time for us to be off," and up came regiment after regiment giving Billy Beg the password, "Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday." Last of all came the king with his men. and gave the password also, "Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday." "AND SUNDAY," says Billy Beg, thinking himself clever. Then there was a great outcry. "Get the hump that was taken off that fellow's back last night and put it on this man's back," said the king, with flashing eyes, pointing to the hump that lay under the hedge. Before the words were well out of his mouth the hump was clapped onto Billy Beg's back. "Now," said the King, "be off, and if ever I find you here again, I will clap another hump on to your front!" And on that they all marched away with one great shout, and left poor Billy Beg standing where they had found him, with a hump growing on each shoulder. And he came home next day dragging one foot after another, with a wizened face and as cross as two sticks, with his two humps on his back, and if they are not off they are there still. Source: Sophia Morrison , Manx Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1911), pp. 56-61 . Return to the table of contents . The Fairies and the Two Hunchbacks: A Story of Picardy France Once there were three fairies who used to amuse themselves by dancing round and round, and singing, "Sunday, Monday; Sunday, Monday." One day a little hunchback surprised them at this sport, and without being afraid, he took them by the hand and began to dance with them, repeating also, "Sunday, Monday; Sunday, Monday." He danced so prettily that the fairies were charmed, and to reward him took away his hunch. Perfectly happy, he returned home, constantly singing as he went, "Sunday, Monday; Sunday, Monday." On the road he met another little hunchback whom he knew. The latter was greatly astonished to see his friend relieved of his hunch, and said, "How did you manage it? Your hunch is gone." "It is all very easy," replied the other. "You have only to go to a certain wood, when you will find some fairies. You must dance with them and sing, 'Sunday, Monday; Sunday, Monday,' and they will take away your hunch." "I will go, I will go at once," cried the little hunchback, and started immediately for the wood to which he had been directed, where, sure enough, he found the three fairies. Without hesitating, he took them by the hand and danced with them, repeating, "Sunday, Monday." But unhappily for him, he added, "Tuesday, Wednesday." The fairies, indignant, added to his hunch that of the first hunchback, so that he was a fright to behold, so frightful that if you had seen him you would have run away from him. And then ? -- And then the cock crew, and it was day. Told by Auguste Gourdin, miller, aged 63, at Warloy-Baillon (Somme). Henri Carnoy. Source: Martha Ward Carey, Fairy Legends of the French Provinces (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1887), pp. 6-7 . Return to the table of contents . The Tailor on the Brocken Germany A tailor heard that during the night between the last of April and the first of May witches gather on Glocker Mountain and there perform incredible dances. Being curious, on the preceding day he set forth and climbed Glocker Mountain. He hid himself among the branches of a willow tree and then saw how many hundred witches flew there through the air, had a lovely feast, and then danced joyfully. One of the witches noticed him and shouted to another one, "See what a large burl that willow branch has. I'm going to drive my ax into it, so I can find it again next year." And she drove her ax into his back. He only felt a single stab, but from that moment onward his back was very heavy, and when the sun came up he saw with terror from his shadow that he was now a hunchback. Nevertheless, the following year when the first of May was approaching he could not restrain his desire to return to Glocker Mountain, because the dances had pleased him so much. Seated once again in the willow tree, the witch saw him, as before, and said, "I want to pull my ax out of the willow burl, so I won't lose it." She reached for his back, and he felt a light stab. From that time onward his hump was gone. When the witch pulled her hand back, she was holding an ax. Source: Emil Sommer, "Der Schneider auf dem Brocken," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Sachsen und Thüringen (Halle: Eduard Anton, 1846), vol. 1, pp. 56-57 . Sommer's source: "Oral from Halle." Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. The Brocken, also called Glockersberg (Glocker Mountain), or -- more commonly -- Blocksberg is the highest peak in the Harz Mountains of north-central Germany, and is a legendary gathering place of witches and devils, especially during the night before May Day (Walpurgis Night -- German, Walpurgisnacht ). Link to another legend about the witches' sabbath on the Brocken: The Trip to the Brocken . Opens in a new window. Return to the table of contents . The Gifts of the Mountain Spirits Germany A tailor and a goldsmith were journeying together, and as evening approached they heard wonderful lovely music. It was so beautiful that they forgot how tired they were and took longer and longer steps to see who the musicians were. When they listened it was at first like the wind softly blowing in the linden trees along the pathway, then it was as though the bluebells in the meadow were ringing as they nodded in the wind. The tailor thought about his dear fiancée, whom he had left at home, and sighed because he was so poor that the musicians would not be playing at their wedding dance. As they walked along the music sounded nearer and nearer, and at last on a hill they saw many small figures, little men and little women, holding hands and dancing in a circle around an old man. They were singing (that was the music), and one after the other they bowed before the old man. The old man was somewhat larger than the others, had a long ice-gray beard that hung down low over his chest, had a majestic appearance, and was magnificently dressed. The tailor and the goldsmith stood there amazed and could not see enough. Then the old man motioned to them; the dancers opened their circle; and the goldsmith, who was a small hunchbacked fellow, stepped inside. The frightened tailor stayed where he was, but when he saw how the little men and women welcomed his companion, he took heart and followed him into the circle. With the circle now closed, the little people continued to dance and to sing. The old man took a long, broad knife, whetted it until it glistened brightly, and then shaved off the hair and the beards of the tailor and the goldsmith. They shook with fear that their heads would be next, but the old man patted them friendly on their shoulders, as if to say that it was good that they had not resisted. Afterward he pointed to a pile of coal that lay nearby, indicating to them with gestures that they should fill their pockets with it. The goldsmith, who was greedy by nature, took much more than did the tailor, even though the coal had no value. Then the two of them walked down the hill to seek shelter for the night, looking back repeatedly at the tiny dancers. The music sounded more distant and more softly. The monastery bell in the valley struck twelve, and suddenly the hill was empty. Everything had disappeared. Once at the inn the two wanderers covered themselves with their jackets, and because they were very tired, they forgot to take the coal out of their pockets. They awakened earlier than usual, because their jackets were pushing down on them like lead. They reached into the pockets and could not believe their eyes when they saw that they contained pure gold instead of coal. The goldsmith estimated that his was worth thirty thousand thalers, and the tailor's fifteen thousand. Furthermore, their hair and beards had been restored as well. They praised the old man on the mountain, and the goldsmith said, "Do you know what? Let's go back this evening and fill our pockets clear full." But the tailor did not want to do this. "I have enough," he said, "and am satisfied. Now I can become a master tailor and marry my Margaret. We will manage beautifully." The goldsmith did not want to journey onward, and because they had traveled together for a long time, as a favor the tailor spent the day with him at the inn. As evening approached, the goldsmith hung several bags over his shoulders and went back to the hill. He heard the music, as they had before, and saw the little dancers with the old man in the middle. And the old man again motioned to him, shaved him, indicating that he should take some coal. He gathered up as much as he could carry away, hurried back to the village inn, covered himself with his jacket, and could not fall asleep in anticipation that the pockets and bags, now filled with light coal, would be getting heavier and heavier. But on earth not everything happens the way foolish people think it will. The pockets and bags remained light. As dawn approached he went to the window and looked at each piece of coal. It was ordinary coal, and it made his fingers black. Frightened, he fetched the gold from the previous day, but it no longer glistened. Everything had turned back into coal. Then he awakened the tailor in order to share his sorrow with him. When the tailor saw him he was horrified. Only now did the goldsmith discover his entire misfortune. His hair and his beard had been shaved off completely, and they never grew back. But the worst thing was this: he had had a hump on his back, but now he had one of the same size on his chest, and would be unable to work. He recognized this as punishment for his greed, and began to cry bitterly. However, the tailor comforted him, saying, "Since we have been good traveling companions for so long, and since we found the treasure together, from now on you can live with me and share my treasure." The tailor soon became a master and married his Margaret. He had many pious children and always enough work; and he is still taking care of the goldsmith with the two humps and no hair. Source: Emil Sommer, "Der Berggeister Geschenke," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Sachsen und Thüringen (Halle: Eduard Anton, 1846), vol. 1, pp. 82-86 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. Sommer's source: "Oral from Halle." This tale was rewritten under the title " The Gifts of the Little People " by the Grimm brothers for inclusion in the sixth edition (1850) of their Kinder- und Hausmärchen (no. 182). Return to the table of contents . The Gifts of the Little People Germany A tailor and a goldsmith were journeying together when one evening, just as the sun had sunk behind the mountains, they heard the sound of distant music. It grew more and more distinct. It had a strange sound, but was so pleasing that they forgot their fatigue and walked speedily ahead. The moon had already risen when they arrived at a hill, upon which they viewed a large number of small men and women who were holding hands and dancing around and cheerfully singing with the greatest pleasure and happiness. That was the music that the wanderers had heard. An old man, somewhat larger than the others, sat in their midst. He wore a brightly colored jacket, and his ice-gray beard hung down over his chest. Filled with amazement, the two wanderers stopped and watched the dance. The old man motioned to them that they too should join in, and the little people voluntarily opened their circle. The goldsmith, who had a hump on his back, and -- like all hunchbacks -- was forward enough, stepped right up. The tailor was at first a little shy and held back, but as soon as he saw what fun it was, he too took heart and joined in. They closed the circle again, and the little people sang and danced wildly forth. However, the old man took a broad knife, that had been hanging from his belt, sharpened it, and as soon as it was sufficiently sharpened, looked at the strangers. They were frightened, but they did not have to worry for long. The old man grabbed the goldsmith and with the greatest speed smoothly shaved off his beard and the hair from his head. Then the same thing happened to the tailor. Their fear disappeared when the old man patted them friendly on their shoulders as if he wanted to say that they had done well by letting it all happen without resisting. With his finger he pointed toward a pile of coal that lay nearby, and indicated to them through gestures that they should fill their pockets with it. They both obeyed, although they did not know of what use the coal would be to them. Then they went on their way to seek out a place to spend the night. They had just arrived in the valley when the bell from a neighboring monastery struck twelve. The singing ceased instantly. Everyone disappeared, and the hill lay in lonely moonlight. The two wanderers found shelter. Lying on beds of straw, they covered themselves with their jackets. They were so tired that they forgot to take the coal out of their pockets first. They were awakened earlier than normal by a heavy weight pressing down on their limbs. They reached into their pockets, and could hardly believe their eyes when they saw that they were not filled with coal, but with pure gold. Further, their hair and their beards had also been fully restored. Now they were rich. However, the goldsmith had twice as much as the tailor, because -- true to his greedy nature -- he had filled his pockets better. However much a greedy person has, he always wants more, so the goldsmith proposed to the tailor that they stay there another day in order to be able to gain even more wealth from the old man on the mountain that evening. The tailor did not want to do this, and said: "I have enough and am satisfied. I am going to become a master, marry my pleasant object (as he called his sweetheart), and be a happy man." However, to please the goldsmith, he agreed to stay one more day. That evening the goldsmith hung several bags over his shoulders in order to be able to carry everything, and set off for the hill. As had happened the night before, he found the little people dancing and singing. The old man shaved him smooth once again, and indicated that he should take some coal. Without hesitating he packed away as much as his pockets and bags would hold, and then happily returned home. Covering himself with his jacket he said: "I can bear it, if the gold presses down on me." With the sweet premonition that he would awaken tomorrow as a very rich man, he fell asleep. When he opened his eyes, he got up quickly in order to examine his pockets and bags. How astounded he was, that he pulled out nothing but black coal, however often he reached inside. "Anyway, I still have the gold from the night before," he thought, and reached for it. Horrified, he saw that it too had turned back into coal. He struck himself on the forehead with his grimy hand, and felt that his entire head was as bald and smooth as his beardless chin. Nor was that the end of his misfortune. Only now did he notice that in addition the hump on his back, a second one, of the same size, had grown onto his chest. Now he recognized the punishment for his greed and began to cry aloud. The good tailor, who had been awakened by all this, consoled the unhappy man as best he could, saying: "You were my traveling companion, and you can stay with me now and live from my treasure." He kept his word, but the poor goldsmith had to bear two humps and cover his bald head with a cap as long as he lived. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Geschenke des kleinen Volkes," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 182, pp. 384-86 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. This tale was added to the Grimms' collection in the sixth edition (1850). The Grimms' source: Emil Sommer, "Der Berggeister Geschenke," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Sachsen und Thüringen (Halle: Eduard Anton, 1846), pp. 82-86 . This story is included in the present collection under the title The Gifts of the Mountain Spirits . Return to the table of contents . The Two Hunchbacked Brothers Italy There was once a man who had one son, who married a widow who also had one son, and both were hunchbacks. The wife took very good care of her own son, but the son of her husband she used to put to hard work and gave him scarcely anything to eat. Her son, too, used to imitate, his mother, and sadly ill-treat his stepbrother. After treating him ill for a long time, she at last sent him away from the house altogether. The poor little hunchback wandered away without knowing where to go. On, on, on he went, till at last he came to a lonely hut on a wide moor. At his approach a whole host of little hunchbacks came out and danced round him, chanting plaintively: Sabbato! Domenica! a great number of times. At last our little hunchback felt his courage stirred, and, taking up the note of their chant, chimed in with: Lunedi! Instantly the dancing ceased, all the little hunchback dwarfs became full-grown, well-formed men, and, what was better still, his own hump was gone too, and he felt that he, too, was a well-grown lad. "Good people," said our hunchback -- now hunchbacked no more -- ''I thank you much for ridding me of my hump and making me a well-grown lad. Give me now some work to do among you, and let me live with you." But the chief of the strange people answered him and said: "This favour we owe to you, not you to us; for it was your chiming in with the right word on the right note which destroyed the spell that held us all. And in testimony of our gratitude we give you further this little wand, and you will not need to work with us. Go back and live at home, and if ever anyone beats you as heretofore, you have only to say to it, 'At 'em, good stick!' and you will see what it will do for you." Then all disappeared, and the boy went home. "So you've come back, have you?" said the stepmother. "What, and without your hump, too! Where have you left that?" Then the good boy told her all that had happened, without hiding anything. "Do you hear that?" said the stepmother to her own son. "Now go you and get rid of your hump in the same way." So the second hunchback went forth, and journeyed on till he came to the lonely hut on the moor. A tribe of hunchbacks came out and danced round him, and sung" Sabbato! Domenica! Lunedi! to which the bad son of the stepmother added in his rough voice, all out of tune: Martedi! Immediately all the hunchbacks came round him and gave him a drubbing, and the chief of them stuck on him a hump in front as well as behind. Thus they sent him home to his mother. When his mother saw him come home in this plight, she turned upon the stepson and abused him for having misled her son to injure him; and both mother and son set upon him and belaboured him after their wont. But he had only told the truth, without intention to deceive; and the stepmother's son had incurred the anger of the dwarfs by his discordant addition to their chant. So the first hero took out his wand and said, "At' em, good stick!" and the wand flew out of his hand and administered on mother and son a sounder drubbing than that they had themselves been administering. Ever after that he was able to live at home in peace, for everyone was afraid to injure him because of the power of his stick. Source (books.google.com): R. H. Busk, The Folk-Lore of Rome: Collected by Word of Mouth from the People (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1874), pp. 96-98 . Source (Internet Archive): R. H. Busk, The Folk-Lore of Rome: Collected by Word of Mouth from the People (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1874), pp. 96-98 . Return to the table of contents . The Two Humpbacks Italy There were once two companions who were humpbacks, but one more so than the other. They were both so poor that they had not a penny to their names. One of them said: "I will go out into the world, for here there is nothing to eat; we are dying of hunger. I want to see whether I can make my fortune." "Go," said the other. "If you make your fortune, return, and I will go and see if I can make mine." So the humpback set off on his journey. Now these two humpbacks were from Parma. When the humpback had gone a long way, he came to a square where there was a fair, at which everything was sold. There was a person selling cheese, who cried out: "Eat the little Parmesan!" The poor humpback thought he meant him, so he ran away and hid himself in a courtyard. When it was one o'clock, he heard a clanking of chains and the words "Saturday and Sunday" repeated several times. Then he answered: "And Monday." "Oh, heavens!" said they who were singing. "Who is this who has harmonized with our choir?" They searched and found the poor humpback hidden. "O gentlemen!" he said, "I have not come here to do any harm, you know!" "Well! we have come to reward you; you have harmonized our choir; come with us!" They put him on a table and removed his hump, healed him, and gave him two bags of money. "Now," they said, "you can go." He thanked them and went away without his hump. He liked it better, you can believe! He returned to his place at Parma, and when the other humpback saw him he exclaimed: "Does not that look just like my friend? But he had a hump! It is not he! Listen! You are not my friend so and so, are you?" "Yes, I am," he replied. "Listen! Were you not a humpback?" "Yes. They have removed my hump and given me two bags of money. I will tell you why. I reached," he continued, "such and such a place, and I heard them beginning to say, 'Eat the little Parmesan! Eat the little Parmesan!' I was so frightened that I hid myself." (He mentioned the place -- in a courtyard.) "At a certain hour, I heard a noise of chains and a chorus singing: 'Saturday and Sunday.' After two or three times, I said: 'And Monday.' They came and found me, saying that I had harmonized their chorus, and they wanted to reward me. They took me, removed my hump, and gave me two bags of money." "Oh, heavens!" said the other humpback. "I want to go there, too!" "Go, poor fellow, go! Farewell!" The humpback reached the place, and hid himself precisely where his companion had. After a while he heard a noise of chains, and the chorus: "Saturday and Sunday!" Then another chorus: "And Monday!" After the humpback had heard them repeat: "Saturday and Sunday, and Monday!" several times, he added: "And Tuesday!" "Where," they exclaimed, "is he who has spoiled our chorus? If we find him, we will tear him in pieces." Just think! they struck and beat this poor humpback until they were tired; then they put him on the same table on which they had placed his companion, and said: "Take that hump and put it on him in front." So they took the other's hump and fastened it to his breast, and then drove him away with blows. He went home and found his friend, who cried: "Mercy! Is not that my friend? But it cannot be, for this one is humpbacked in front. Listen," he said, "are you not my friend?" "The same," he answered, weeping. "I did not want to bear my own hump, and now I have to carry mine and yours! and so beaten and reduced, you see!" "Come," said his friend, "come home with me, and we will eat a mouthful together; and don't be disheartened." And so, every day, he dined with his friend, and afterward they died, I imagine. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 27, pp. 103-104 . Return to the table of contents . The Elves and the Envious Neighbor Japan Once upon a time there was a certain man, who, being overtaken by darkness among the mountains, was driven to seek shelter in the trunk of a hollow tree. In the middle of the night, a large company of elves assembled at the place; and the man, peeping out from his hiding place, was frightened out of his wits. After a while, however, the elves began to feast and drink wine, and to amuse themselves by singing and dancing, until at last the man, caught by the infection of the fun, forgot all about his fright, and crept out of his hollow tree to join in the revels. When the day was about to dawn, the elves said to the man, "You're a very jolly companion, and must come out and have a dance with us again. You must make us a promise, and keep it." So the elves, thinking to bind the man over to return, took a large wen that grew on his forehead and kept it in pawn; upon this they all left the place, and went home. The man walked off to his own house in high glee at having passed a jovial night, and got rid of his wen into the bargain. So he told the story to all his friends, who congratulated him warmly on being cured of his wen. But there was a neighbor of his who was also troubled with a wen of long standing, and, when he heard of his friend's luck, he was smitten with envy, and went off to hunt for the hollow tree, in which, when he had found it, he passed the night. Elves, mistaking him for their former boon-companion, were delighted to see him, and said, "You're a good fellow to recollect your promise, and we'll give you back your pledge." So one of the elves, pulling the pawned wen out of his pocket, stuck it onto the man's forehead, on the top of the other wen which he already had. So the envious neighbor went home weeping, with two wens instead of one. This is a good lesson to people who cannot see the good luck of others, without coveting it for themselves. Source: A. B. Mitford, Tales of Old Japan , vol. 1 (London: Macmillan and Company, 1871), pp. 276-77 . Return to the table of contents . How an Old Man Lost His Wen Japan There was once an old man who had a wen on his right cheek. This disfigurement caused him a good deal of annoyance, and he had spent a considerable sum of money in trying to get rid of it. He took various medicines and applied many lotions, but instead of the wen disappearing or even diminishing, it increased in size. One night, while the old man was returning home laden with firewood, he was overtaken by a terrible thunderstorm, and was forced to seek shelter in a hollow tree. When the storm had abated, and just as he was about to proceed on his journey, he was surprised to hear a sound of merriment close at hand. On peeping out from his place of retreat, he was amazed to see a number of demons dancing and singing and drinking. Their dancing was so strange that the old man, forgetting caution, began to laugh, and eventually left the tree in order that he might see the performance better. As he stood watching, he saw that a demon was dancing by himself, and, moreover, that the chief of the company was none too pleased with his very clumsy antics. At length the leader of the demons said: "Enough! Is there no one who can dance better than this fellow?" When the old man heard these words, it seemed that his youth returned to him again, and having at one time been an expert dancer, he offered to show his skill. So the old man danced before that strange gathering of demons, who congratulated him on his performance, offered him a cup of sak, and begged that he would give them the pleasure of several other dances. The old man was extremely gratified by the way he had been received, and when the chief of the demons asked him to dance before them on the following night, he readily complied. "That is well," said the chief, "but you must leave some pledge behind you. I see that you have a wen on your right cheek, and that will make an excellent pledge. Allow me to take it off for you." Without inflicting any pain, the chief removed the wen, and having accomplished this extraordinary feat, he and his companions suddenly vanished. The old man, as he walked towards his home, kept on feeling his right cheek with his hand, and could scarcely realize that after many years of disfigurement he had at last the good fortune to lose his troublesome and unsightly wen. At length he entered his humble abode, wife was none the less pleased with what had taken place. A wicked and cantankerous old man lived next door to this good old couple. For many years he had been afflicted with a wen on his left cheek, which had failed to yield to all manner of medical treatment. When he heard of his neighbor's good fortune, he called upon him and listened to the strange adventures with the demons. The good old man told his neighbor where he might find the hollow tree, and advised him to hide in it just before sunset. The wicked old man found the hollow tree and entered it. He had not remained concealed more than a few minutes when he rejoiced to see the demons. Presently one of the company said: "The old man is a long time coming. I made sure he would keep his promise." At these words the old man crept out of his hiding-place, flourished his fan, and began to dance; but, unfortunately, he knew nothing about dancing, and his extraordinary antics caused the demons to express considerable dissatisfaction. "You dance extremely ill," said one of the company, "and the sooner you stop the better we shall be pleased; but before you depart we will return the pledge you left with us last night." Having uttered these words, the demon flung the wen at the right cheek of the old man, where it remained firmly fixed, and could not be removed. So the wicked old man, who had tried to deceive the demons, went away with a wen on either side of his face. Source: F. Hadland Davis, Myths and Legends of Japan (London: George G. Harrap and Company, 1912), pp. 372-74 . Return to the table of contents . The Old Man with the Wen Japan Long ago, in the far west of Japan, there lived an old man who was kind and good. He was always very bright and happy, but he had some thing which often caused him a lot of trouble, and this was a large wen or lump on the side of his face. He had tried all sorts of remedies and cures, but the wen only grew bigger and bigger. One day the old man was out on the mountain side gathering sticks and pieces of wood when a. heavy storm came on. The sky became dark and gloomy-looking, the lightning ?ashed, the thunder roared, and the raindrops came pattering down one after another. The old man looked about for some means of shelter, and after a little while found a large hollow in the trunk of a very big tree. He was so glad at having found it; so, putting his bundle of sticks under another tree near by, he crept into the hollow. The rain came down in torrents and the peals of thunder were deafening, whilst the vivid ?ashes of lightning were most terrifying. The poor old man was ?lled with fear, and prayed that the storm would soon cease. It was late in the afternooon, however, when the storm went over, and very soon the sky was again blue, and the rays of the setting sun were seen spreading out far and wide in the west. The old man thought he had better return home as quickly as possible, as his good wife would be wondering how he had fared in the storm; so he was just about to creep out of the hollow when he heard the tramp, tramp, tramp of many feet. The sound came nearer and nearer, and the old man, wondering whatever it could be, thrust his head out of the hollow tree. Oh! what a scare he got! Marching towards him in a long line came a great number of dreadful-looking goblins, headed by a small man with a heavy spiked club in his hand. The old man crouched back in the hollow, hardly daring to breathe. Nearer and nearer they came until, having arrived at the hollow tree, they stopped in front of it, and began to make merry. Soon the younger goblins began to dance and sing, while all the older goblins sat laughing and clapping their hands. So far, they had not seen the old man, who lay curled up in the darkest corner of the tree. After a time the old man became a little braver, and said to himself, "I'll just peep out, and see what they are doing. I suppose it's some kind of a goblins' concert they are having, for it sounds so very, very funny." Saying this, the old man seemed to entirely forget his fear, and ventured out farther and farther. Presently he saw one of the oldest and ugliest-looking goblins get up and say, "Listen to me, brother goblins! You have danced very cleverly, and sang very sweetly, but for all that your dances and songs are very, very old. Do any of you know a new dance? If so, let him come forward and perform it." The old man, on hearing these words, determined to join the company, so, with a loud yell, he jumped out from the hollow tree, and began dancing and clapping his hands. The goblins were much startled at this sudden and unexpected appearance of the old man, and they almost fell over each other in alarm. Still the old man kept on dancing, for he knew that his whole life depended on that single dance. The goblins sat dumbfounded, watching every movement of the old man. "Excellent!" said one goblin; "Simply marvellous!" said many others; and one and all of the goblins praised the old man's dancing very highly. At last the old man stopped and apologised for his gross rudeness in interrupting their honourable feast. "Oh! my dearest man," replied the leader of the goblins, "we all feel indeed grateful to you for your very worthy performance -- it was simply wonderful for so old a man. You have indeed honoured us very much by your presence. Please do us the favour of coming again and dancing for us." The aged dancer was very delighted on hearing these words, and promised to come again. "When will you come again?" asked one of the goblins. "Tomorrow?" "Yes -- very well, I shall come again tomorrow and dance many times for you," replied the old man. "But you must give us some pledge that you will indeed come tomorrow," said the leader of the goblins. "Look here! give us that wen of yours, for I believe a wen on the side of the face is a sign of good luck, and if we take that you will be certain to come again in order to get it back." "Yes! yes!" cried all the goblins, "let us take his wen!" Now this was just what the old man had long wished for, that some goblin or fairy would take from him that troublesome lump, as it had always been a great nuisance to him, and had also caused him much pain. So, without waiting for the old man to make any reply, they seized the wen from the cheek of the delighted old man, and disappeared from sight. Oh! how glad he now felt, for that horrid lump had been taken from him, so with a light heart he began to set out for home. How glad his poor aged wife was to see him, but how much gladder she was to hear the strange story of how her husband had lost his wen. "It is quite a blessing," she said joyfully. "You have indeed been favoured by the gods, and so we ought to be very thankful." Now it happened that in the very next house lived another man who also had a wen on his right cheek, so when he heard the old man's story he felt very envious, and longed to get rid of his troublesome wen also. So he asked his kind old neighbour where he could ?nd the goblins, as he intended to set out the very next day. The kind old man told his neighbour the very place and time in which he could ?nd the goblins; so thanking the kind old man, the neighbour set out. On and on he went until he came to the hollow tree in which his neighbour, the kind old man, had taken refuge from the storm the day before. Towards evening the goblins came, and there they found whom they supposed to be the old man already waiting for them. The neighbour had taken care to conceal his wen behind a fan which he carried in his hand until he began to dance. "Oh, how glad we are to see you!" cried all the goblins. "Do make haste and begin to dance for us again." So the neighbour, who was also an old man, began to dance, holding the fan and singing as loudly as he could. Now this old man could not dance half so well as the other old man, and he began to hop and jump all over the place. "Here, stop that foolish dancing," cried the goblins; "dance as you did yesterday! You are dancing very badly today. Do something better or else stop." But the old man kept on with his clumsy style of dancing, until the goblins got quite angry, and, taking the wen which they took from the other old man the day before, one of the goblins threw it at the old man's left check, where it stuck and began growing at once. Oh! how sorry was this old man then, for, instead of losing the wen on his right cheek, he had gained one on his left. The goblins then quickly disappeared into the woods of the mountain; and the old man was left alone -- a pitiful sight -- with a big wen on each side of his face. Source (books.google.com): Alan Leslie Whitehorn, Wonder Tales of Old Japan (New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1912), pp. 113-119 . Return to the table of contents . The Story of Hok Lee and the Dwarfs China There once lived in a small town in China a man named Hok Lee. He was a steady industrious man, who not only worked hard at his trade, but did all his own housework as well, for he had no wife to do it for him. "What an excellent industrious man is this Hok Lee!" said his neighbors; "how hard he works: he never leaves his house to amuse himself or to take a holiday as others do!" But Hok Lee was by no means the virtuous person his neighbors thought him. True, he worked hard enough by day, but at night, when all respectable folk were fast asleep, he used to steal out and join a dangerous band of robbers, who broke into rich people's houses and carried off all they could lay hands on. This state of things went on for some time, and, though a thief was caught now and then and punished, no suspicion ever fell on Hok Lee, he was such a very respectable, hardworking man. Hok Lee had already amassed a good store of money as his share of the proceeds of these robberies when it happened one morning on going to market that a neighbor said to him: "Why, Hok Lee, what is the matter with your face? One side of it is all swelled up." True enough, Hok Lee's right cheek was twice the size of his left, and it soon began to feel very uncomfortable. "I will bind up my face," said Hok Lee; "doubtless the warmth will cure the swelling." But no such thing. Next day it was worse, and day by day it grew bigger and bigger till it was nearly as large as his head and became very painful. Hok Lee was at his wits' ends what to do. Not only was his cheek unsightly and painful, but his neighbors began to jeer and make fun of him, which hurt his feelings very much indeed. One day, as luck would have it, a traveling doctor came to the town. He sold not only all kinds of medicine, but also dealt in many strange charms against witches and evil spirits. Hok Lee determined to consult him, and asked him into his house. After the doctor had examined him carefully, he spoke thus: "This, O Hok Lee, is no ordinary swelled face. I strongly suspect you have been doing some wrong deed which has called down the anger of the spirits on you. None of my drugs will avail to cure you, but, if you are willing to pay me handsomely, I can tell you how you may be cured." Then Hok Lee and the doctor began to bargain together, and it was a long time before they could come to terms. However, the doctor got the better of it in the end, for he was determined not to part with his secret under a certain price, and Hok Lee had no mind to carry his huge cheek about with him to the end of his days. So he was obliged to part with the greater portion of his ill-gotten gains. When the Doctor had pocketed the money, he told Hok Lee to go on the first night of the full moon to a certain wood and there to watch by a particular tree. After a time he would see the dwarfs and little sprites who live underground come out to dance. When they saw him they would be sure to make him dance too. "And mind you dance your very best," added the doctor. "If you dance well and please them they will grant you a petition and you can then beg to be cured; but if you dance badly they will most likely do you some mischief out of spite." With that he took leave and departed. Happily the first night of the full moon was near, and at the proper time Hok Lee set out for the wood. With a little trouble he found the tree the doctor had described, and, feeling nervous, he climbed up into it. He had hardly settled himself on a branch when he saw the little dwarfs assembling in the moonlight. They came from all sides, till at length there appeared to be hundreds of them. They seemed in high glee, and danced and skipped and capered about, whilst Hok Lee grew so eager watching them that he crept further and further along his branch till at length it gave a loud crack. All the dwarfs stood still, and Hok Lee felt as if his heart stood still also. Then one of the dwarfs called out, "Someone is up in that tree. Come down at once, whoever you are, or we must come and fetch you." In great terror, Hok Lee proceeded to come down; but he was so nervous that he tripped near the ground and came rolling down in the most absurd manner. When he had picked himself up, he came forward with a low bow, and the dwarf who had first spoken and who appeared to be the leader, said, "Now, then, who art thou, and what brings thee here?" So Hok Lee told him the sad story of his swelled cheek, and how he had been advised to come to the forest and beg the dwarfs to cure him. "It is well," replied the dwarf. "We will see about that. First, however, thou must dance before us. Should thy dancing please us, perhaps we may be able to do something; but shouldst thou dance badly, we shall assuredly punish thee, so now take warning and dance away." With that, he and all the other dwarfs sat down in a large ring, leaving Hok Lee to dance alone in the middle. He felt half frightened to death, and besides was a good deal shaken by his fall from the tree and did not feel at all inclined to dance. But the dwarfs were not to be trifled with. "Begin!" cried their leader, and "Begin!" shouted the rest in chorus. So in despair Hok Lee began. First he hopped on one foot and then on the other, but he was so stiff and so nervous that he made but a poor attempt, and after a time sank down on the ground and vowed he could dance no more. The dwarfs were very angry. They crowded round Hok Lee and abused him. "Thou to come here to be cured, indeed!" they cried, "thou hast brought one big cheek with thee, but thou shalt take away two." And with that they ran off and disappeared, leaving Hok Lee to find his way home as best he might. He hobbled away, weary and depressed, and not a little anxious on account of the dwarfs' threat. Nor were his fears unfounded, for when he rose next morning his left cheek was swelled up as big as his right, and he could hardly see out of his eyes. Hok Lee felt in despair, and his neighbors jeered at him more than ever. The doctor, too, had disappeared, so there was nothing for it but to try the dwarfs once more. He waited a month till the first night of the full moon came round again, and then he trudged back to the forest, and sat down under the tree from which he had fallen. He had not long to wait. Ere long the dwarfs came trooping out till all were assembled. "I don't feel quite easy," said one; "I feel as if some horrid human being were near us." When Hok Lee heard this he came forward and bent down to the ground before the dwarfs, who came crowding round, and laughed heartily at his comical appearance with his two big cheeks. "What dost thou want?" they asked; and Hok Lee proceeded to tell them of his fresh misfortunes, and begged so hard to be allowed one more trial at dancing that the dwarfs consented, for there is nothing they love so much as being amused. Now, Hok Lee knew how much depended on his dancing well, so he plucked up a good spirit and began, first quite slowly, and faster by degrees, and he danced so well and gracefully, and made such new and wonderful steps, that the dwarfs were quite delighted with him. They clapped their tiny hands, and shouted, "Well done, Hok Lee, well done, go on, dance more, for we are pleased." And Hok Lee danced on and on, till he really could dance no more, and was obliged to stop. Then the leader of the dwarfs said, "We are well pleased, Hok Lee, and as a recompense for thy dancing thy face shall be cured. Farewell." With these words he and the other dwarfs vanished, and Hok Lee, putting his hands to his face, found to his great joy that his cheeks were reduced to their natural size. The way home seemed short and easy to him, and he went to bed happy, and resolved never to go out robbing again. Next day the whole town was full of the news of Hok's sudden cure. His neighbors questioned him, but could get nothing from him, except the fact that he had discovered a wonderful cure for all kinds of diseases. After a time a rich neighbor, who had been ill for some years, came, and offered to give Hok Lee a large sum of money if he would tell him how he might get cured. Hok Lee consented on condition that he swore to keep the secret. He did so, and Hok Lee told him of the dwarfs and their dances. The neighbor went off, carefully obeyed Hok Lee's directions, and was duly cured by the dwarfs. Then another and another came to Hok Lee to beg his secret, and from each he extracted a vow of secrecy and a large sum of money. This went on for some years, so that at length Hok Lee became a very wealthy man, and ended his days in peace and prosperity. Source: Andrew Lang, The Green Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1892), pp. 229-33 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 25, 2019. Fairy Theft Fairy Theft legends about thieving fairies translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009 Contents Of the Subterranean Inhabitants (Scotland) Fairy Theft (Scotland) Fairy Control over Crops (Ireland) Fairies on May Day (Ireland) The Sidhe (Ireland). Link to The Silver Cup (Isle of Man). The Three Cows (England). A "Verry Volk" Feast (Wales and Brittany) Riechert the Smith (Germany). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Of the Subterranean Inhabitants Scotland THESE Siths , or FAIRIES, they call Sleagh Maith , or the Good People, it would seem, to prevent the Dint of their ill Attempts, (for the Irish use to bless all they fear Harme of;) and are said to be of a midle Nature betuixt Man and Angel, as were Dæmons thought to be of old; of intelligent studious Spirits, and light changable Bodies, (lyke those called Astral), somewhat of the Nature of a condensed Cloud, and best seen in Twilight. Thes Bodies be so plyable thorough the Subtilty of the Spirits that agitate them, that they can make them appear or disappear att Pleasure. Some have Bodies or Vehicles so spungious, thin, and desecat, that they are fed by only sucking into some fine spirituous Liquors, that peirce lyke pure Air and Oyl: others feid more gross on the Foyson or substance of Corns and Liquors, or Corne it selfe that grows on the Surface of the Earth, which these Fairies steall away, partly invisible, partly preying on the Grain, as do Crowes and Mice; wherefore in this same Age, they are some times heard to bake Bread, strike Hammers, and do such lyke Services within the little Hillocks they most haunt: some whereof of old, before the Gospell dispelled Paganism, and in some barbarous Places as yet, enter Houses after all are at rest, and set the Kitchens in order, cleansing all the Vessels. Such Drags goe under the name of Brownies. When we have plenty, they have Scarcity at their Homes; and on the contrarie (for they are empowred to catch as much Prey everywhere as they please,) there Robberies notwithstanding oft tymes occassion great Rickes of Corne not to bleed so weill, (as they call it,) or prove so copious by verie farr as wes expected by the Owner. ... What Food they extract from us is conveyed to their Homes by secret Paths, as sume skilfull Women do the Pith and Milk from their Neighbours Cows into their own Chiese-hold thorow a Hair-tedder, at a great Distance, by Airt Magic, or by drawing a spickot fastened to a Post, which will bring milk as farr of as a Bull will be heard to roar. The Method they take to recover their Milk is a bitter chyding of the suspected Inchanters, charging them by a counter Charme to give them back their own, in God, or their Master's Name. But a little of the Mother's Dung stroakit on the Calves Mouth before it such any, does prevent this theft. Source: Robert Kirk, The Secret Commonwealth of Elves, Fauns and Fairies (Stirling: Eneas Mackay, 1933), pp. 67-68, 71. This edition is a reprint of the 1893 edition, which in turn is based on the first printed edition of 1815. Kirk's original manuscript dates from 1691. I have retained the archaic spelling and punctuation of my source. On-line texts of this book include those published by Sacred Texts and Forgotten Books . Return to the table of contents . Fairy Theft Scotland The elves have got a worse name for stealing than they deserve. So far as taking things without the knowledge or consent of the owners is concerned, the accusation is well founded; they neither ask nor obtain leave, but there are important respects in which their depredations differ from the pilferings committed among men by jailbirds and other dishonest people. The fairies do not take their booty away bodily, they only take what is called in Gaelic its toradh, i.e. its substance, virtue, fruit, or benefit. The outward appearance is left, but the reality is gone. Thus, when a cow is elf-taken, it appears to its owner only as suddenly smitten by some strange disease ( chaidh am beathach ud a ghonadh ). In reality the cow is gone, and only its semblance remains, animated it may be by an Elf, who receives all the attentions paid to the sick cow, but gives nothing in return. The seeming cow lies on its side, and cannot be made to rise. It consumes the provender laid before it, but does not yield milk or grow fat. In some cases it gives plenty of milk, but milk that yields no butter. If taken up a hill, and rolled down the incline, it disappears altogether. If it dies, its flesh ought not to be eaten -- it is not beef, but a stock of alder wood, an aged elf, or some trashy substitute. Similarly when the toradh of land is taken, there remains the appearance of a crop, but a crop without benefit to man or beast -- the ears are unfilled, the grain is without weight, the fodder without nourishment. A still more important point of difference is, that the fairies only take away what men deserve to lose. When mortals make a secret of ( cleth ), or grumble ( ceasad ) over, what they have, the fairies get the benefit, and the owner is a poor man, in the midst of his abundance. When (to use an illustration the writer has more than once heard) a farmer speaks disparagingly of his crop, and, though it be heavy, tries to conceal his good fortune, the fairies take away the benefit of his increase. The advantage goes away mysteriously "in pins and needles" ( na phrìneachan 's na shnàdun ), "in alum and madder' ( na alm 's na mhadair ), as the saying is, and the farmer gains nothing from his crop. Particularly articles of food, the possession of which men denied with oaths ( air a thiomnadh ), became fairy property. The elves are also blamed for lifting with them articles mislaid. These are generally restored as mysteriously and unaccountably as they were taken away. Thus, a woman blamed the elves for taking her thimble. It was placed beside her, and when looked for could not be found. Some time after she was sitting alone on the hillside and found the thimble in her lap. This confirmed her belief in its being the fairies that took it away. In a like mysterious manner a person's bonnet might be whipped off his head, or the pot for supper be lifted off the fire, and left by invisible hands on the middle of the floor. The accusation of taking milk is unjust. It is brought against the elves only in books, and never in the popular creed. The fairies take cows, sheep, goats, horses, and it may be the substance or benefit ( toradh ) of butter and cheese, but not milk. Many devices were employed to thwart fairy inroads. A burning ember ( eibhleag ) was put into "sowens" ( cabhruich ), one of the weakest and most unsubstantial articles of human food and very liable to fairy attack. It was left there till the dish was ready for boiling, i.e. about three days after. A sieve should not be allowed out of the house after dark, and no meal unless it be sprinkled with salt. Otherwise, the fairies may, by means of them, take the substance out of the whole farm produce. For the same reason a hole should be put with the finger in the little cake ( bonnach beag's toll ann ), made with the remnant of the meal after a baking, and when given to children, as it usually is, a piece should be broken off it. A nail driven into a cow, killed by falling over a precipice, was supposed by the more superstitious to keep the elves away. One of the most curious thefts ascribed to them was that of querns, or handmills ( Bra, Brathuinn ). To keep them away these handy and useful implements should be turned deiseal, i.e. with the right hand turn, as sunwise. What is curious in the belief is, that the handmill is said to have been originally got from the fairies themselves. Its sounds have often been heard by the belated peasant, as it was being worked inside some grassy knoll, and songs, sung by the fairy women employed at it, have been learned. Source: John Gregorson Campbell, Superstitions of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland: Collected Entirely from Oral Sources (Glasgow: James MacLehose and Sons, 1900), pp. 32-36 . Cambell's footnote concerning handmills ( p. 35 ): The use of some kind of mill, generally a hand mill, is as universal as the growth of grain, and the necessity for reducing the "solid grain into the more palatable form of meal no doubt led to its early invention. The Gaelic meil (or beil ), to grind, the English mill , the Latin mola , and the Greek μνλη, show that it was known to the Aryan tribes at a period long anterior to history. The handmill mentioned in scripture, worked by two women, seems the same with that still to be found in obscure corners in the West Highlands. An instrument so useful to man in the less advanced stages of his civilization could not fail to be looked upon with much respect and good feeling. In the Hebrides it was rubbed every Saturday evening with a wisp of straw "for payment" of its benevolent labours ( sop ga shuathadh ris a bhrà ga pàigheadh ). Meal ground in it is coarser than ordinary meal,and is known as gairbhein . Return to the table of contents . Fairy Control over Crops Ireland Fairies are believed to control crops and their ripening. A field of turnips may promise well, and its owner will count on so many tons to the acre, but if when the crop is gathered it is found to be far short of the estimate, the explanation is that the fairies have extracted so much substance from it. The same thing is the case with corn. Source: W. Y. Evans Wentz [also spelled Evans-Wentz], The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries (London: Oxford University Press, 1911), p. 38 . Wentz's source: "An Irish Priest." Return to the table of contents . Fairies on May Day Ireland On May Day the good people can steal butter if the chance is given them. If a person enters a house then, and churning is going on, he must take a hand in it, or else there will be no butter. Source: W. Y. Evans Wentz [also spelled Evans-Wentz], The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries (London: Oxford University Press, 1911), p. 43 . Wentz's source: "The town clerk of Tuam, Mr. John Glynn." Return to the table of contents . The Sidhe Ireland As to their food, they will use common things left for them on the hearth or outside the threshold, cold potatoes it may be, or a cup of water or of milk. But for their feasts they choose the best of all sorts, taking it from the solid world, leaving some worthless likeness in its place; when they rob the potatoes from the ridges the diggers find but rottenness and decay; they take the strength from the meat in the pot, so that when put on the plates it does not nourish. They will not touch salt; there is danger to them in it. They will go to good cellars to bring away the wine. Source: Lady Gregory, Visions and Beliefs in the West of Ireland (New York: G. P. Putman's Sons, 1920), pp. iii-iv. Return to the table of contents . The Three Cows England There was a farmer, and he had three cows, fine fat beauties they were. One was called Facey, the other Diamond, and the third Beauty. One morning he went into his cowshed, and there he found Facey so thin that the wind would have blown her away. Her skin hung loose about her, all her flesh was gone, and she stared out of her great eyes as though she'd seen a ghost; and what was more, the fireplace in the kitchen was one great pile of wood-ash. Well, he was bothered with it; he could not see how all this had come about. Next morning his wife went out to the shed, and see! Diamond was for all the world as wisht a looking creature as Facey -- nothing but a bag of bones, all the flesh gone, and half a rick of wood was gone, too; but the fireplace was piled up three feet high with white wood ashes. The farmer determined to watch the third night; so he hid in a closet which opened out of the parlor, and he left the door just ajar, that he might see what passed. Tick, tick went the clock, and the farmer was nearly tired of waiting; he had to bite his little finger to keep himself awake, when suddenly the door of his house flew open, and in rushed maybe a thousand pixies, laughing and dancing and dragging at Beauty's halter till they had brought the cow into the middle of the room. The farmer really thought he should have died with fright, and so perhaps he would, had not curiosity kept him alive. Tick, tick went the clock, but he did not hear it now. He was too intent staring at the pixies and his last beautiful cow. He saw them throw her down, fall on her, and kill her; then with their knives they ripped her open, and flayed her as clean as a whistle. Then out ran some of the little people and brought in firewood and made a roaring blaze on the hearth, and there they cooked the flesh of the cow. They baked and they boiled, they stewed and they fried. "Take care," cried one, who seemed to be the king. "Let no bone be broken." Well, when they had all eaten, and had devoured every scrap of beef on the cow, they began playing games with the bones, tossing them one to another. One little leg bone fell close to the closet door, and the farmer was so afraid lest the pixies should come there and find him in their search for the bone, that he put out his hand and drew it in to him. Then he saw the king stand on the table and say, "Gather the bones!" Round and round flew the imps, picking up the bones. "Arrange them," said the king; and they placed them all in their proper positions in the hide of the cow. Then they folded the skin over them, and the king struck the heap of bone and skin with his rod. Whisht! Up sprang the cow and lowed dismally. It was alive again; but alas! as the pixies dragged it back to its stall, it halted in the off forefoot, for a bone was missing. The cock crew, Away they flew. And the farmer crept trembling to bed. Source: William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866), pp. 321-22 . Henderson's source: Sabine Baring-Gould, who collected this tale in Devonshire. The story is also recorded in Joseph Jacobs, More English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 82-84 . Return to the table of contents . A "Verry Volk" Feast Wales (and Brittany) I heard the following story many years ago: The tenant on the Eynonsford Farm here in Gower had a dream one night, and in it thought he heard soft sweet music and the patter of dancing feet. Waking up, he beheld his cow-shed, which opened off his bedroom, filled with a multitude of little beings, about one foot high, swarming all over his fat ox, and they were preparing to slaughter the ox. He was so surprised that he could not move. In a short time the Verry Volk had killed, dressed, and eaten the animal. The feast being over, they collected the hide and bones, except one very small leg-bone which they could not find, placed them in position, then stretched the hide over them; and, as the farmer looked, the ox appeared as sound and fat as ever, but when he let it out to pasture in the morning he observed that it had a slight lameness in the leg lacking the missing bone. Source: W. Y. Evans Wentz [also spelled Evans-Wentz], The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries (London: Oxford University Press, 1911), p. 159 . Wentz's source: "The Rev. John David Davis, rector of Llanmadoc and Cheriton parishes, and a member of the Cambrian Archaeological Society." Footnote by Wentz: The same sort of a story as this is told in Lower Brittany, where the corrigans or lutins slaughter a farmer's fat cow or ox and invite the farmer to partake of the feast it provides. If he does so with good grace and humour, he finds his cow or ox perfectly whole in the morning, but if he refuses to join the feast or joins it unwillingly, in the morning he is likely to find his cow or ox actually dead and eaten. Return to the table of contents . Riechert the Smith Germany A cultivated field adjoins the east side of Dwarf Mountain near Dardesheim. Once a smith by the name of Riechert planted peas in this field. He noticed that frequently someone picked the peas just as they were at their best. In order to catch the thief he built a little hut on the field, then kept watch in it day and night. He did not see anything during the daytime, but every morning he discovered that in spite of his standing guard some of his crop had been stolen. Angry at his lack of success, he decided to thresh the remaining peas right in the field. He set to work at daybreak. He had not threshed out half the peas when he heard pitiful screams. Investigating, he saw one of the dwarfs lying on the ground beneath the peas. Riechert had crushed his skull with his threshing flail, and because his fog cap had been knocked off, the dwarf was now visible. He quickly fled back into the mountain. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Schmidt Riechert," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 155, pp. 233-34 . In succeeding editions of Deutsche Sagen this legend is numbered 156. The Grimms' source: Johann Karl Christoph, Volcks-Sagen (1800). Dardesheim is a village northwest of Halberstadt in central Germany. The fog cap (German Nebelkappe or Tarnkappe ), with its ability to make its wearer invisible, is a common feature of German dwarf lore. Return to the table of contents . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 15, 2009. The Faithful Wife The Faithful Wife folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 888 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2020 Contents Of Chastity ( Gesta Romanorum ). The Man Hitched to a Plow (France / Germany). Conrad von Tannenberg (Germany). The Tsaritsa Harpist (Russia). The Lute Player (Russia). A Story Told by a Hindu (India). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Of Chastity Gesta Romanorum The Emperor Gallus employed a singularly skilful carpenter in the erection of a magnificent palace. At that period, a certain knight lived who had a very beautiful daughter; and who, perceiving the extraordinary sagacity of the artificer, determined to give him the lady in marriage. Calling him, therefore, he said, "My good friend, ask of me what you will; so that it be possible, I will do it, provided you marry my daughter." The other assented, and the nuptial rites were celebrated accordingly. Then the mother of the lady said to the carpenter, "My son, since you have become one of our family, I will bestow upon you a curious shirt. It possesses this singular property, that as long as you and your wife are faithful to each other, it will neither be rent, nor worn, nor stained. But if -- which Heaven forbid! -- either of you prove unfaithful, instantly it will lose its virtue." The carpenter, very happy in what he heard, took the shirt, and returned great thanks for the gift. A short while afterward, the carpenter being sent for to superintend the building of the emperor's palace, took with him the valuable present which he had received. He continued, absent until the structure was complete; and numbers, observing how much he labored, admired the freshness and spotless purity of his shirt. Even the emperor condescended to notice it, and said to him, "My master, how is it that in despite of your laborious occupation, and the constant use of your shirt, it still preserves its color and beauty?" "You must know, my Lord," said he, "that as long as my wife and I continue faithful to each other, my shirt retains its original whiteness and beauty; but if either of us forget our matrimonial vows, it will sully like any other cloth." A soldier, overhearing this, thought within himself, "If I can I will make you wash your shirt." Wherefore, without giving any cause of suspicion to the carpenter, he secretly hastened to his house, and solicited his wife to dishonor. She received him with an appearance of pleasure, and seemed to be entirely influenced by the same feelings. "But," added she, "in this place we are exposed to observation; come with me, and I will conduct you into a private chamber." He followed her, and closing the door, she said, "Wait here awhile; I will return presently." Thus she did every day, all the time supplying him only with bread and water. Without regard to his urgency, she compelled him to endure this humiliating treatment; and before long, two other soldiers came to her from the emperor's court, with the same evil views. In like manner, she decoyed them into the chamber, and fed them with bread and water. The sudden disappearance, however, of the three soldiers gave rise to much inquiry; and the carpenter, on the completion of his labors, received the stipulated sum, and returned to his own home. His virtuous wife met him with joy, and looking upon the spotless shirt, exclaimed, "Blessed be God! Our truth is made apparent -- there is not a single stain upon the shirt." To which he replied, "My beloved, during the progress of the building, three soldiers, one after another, came to ask questions about the shirt. I related the fact, and since that time nothing has been heard of them." The lady smiled, and said, "The soldiers respecting whom you feel anxious thought me a fit subject for their improper solicitation, and came hither with the vilest intent. I decoyed them into a remote chamber, and have fed them with bread and water." The carpenter, delighted with this proof of his wife's fidelity, spared their lives, and liberated them; and he and his wife lived happily for the rest of their lives. Application My beloved, the emperor is God ; the palace is the human heart. The knight who married his daughter to the carpenter is Christ; the carpenter is any good Christian, and the mother is the Church. The shirt is faith; the three soldiers are pride, lusts of the eyes, and lusts of the heart. Source (books.google.com): Gesta Romanorum, translated from the Latin by Charles Swan; revised and corrected by Wynnard Hooper (London: George Bell and Sons, 1905), no. 69, pp. 122-24 . Source (Internet Archive): Gesta Romanorum, translated from the Latin by Charles Swan; revised and corrected by Wynnard Hooper (London: George Bell and Sons, 1906), no. 69, pp. 122-24 . The Gesta Romanorum ( Deeds of the Romans ) is a collection of tales compiled in Latin about 1300, probably by Christian monks in England, although possibly in France or Germany. Apparently designed as a sourcebook for preachers, the Gesta Romanorum appends a religious "application" to each tale. Charles Swan's translation of the Gesta Romanorum was first published in 1824. Return to the table of contents . The Man Hitched to a Plow France / Germany At Metz in Lorraine there lived a noble knight by the name of Alexander with his beautiful and virtuous wife Florentina. This knight vowed to make a pilgrimage to the Holy Grave. Unable to dissuade him from this journey, his sorrowful wife made for him a white shirt with a red cross and asked him to wear it. The knight then journeyed abroad and was captured by the infidels. He and his unfortunate companions were hitched to a plow and under the blows of a whip were forced to till the fields until blood ran from their bodies. Miraculously, only the shirt that Alexander had received from his wife and which he always wore remained clean and unstained. Rain, sweat, and blood did it no harm, nor did it tear. The Sultan himself learned of this rare circumstance, and he asked the slave precisely about his name, where he was from, and who had given him the shirt. The knight told him everything, adding, "I have the shirt from my virtuous wife. That it remains so white proves to me her continuing faithfulness and chastity." The pagan, his curiosity aroused by this news, resolved to secretly send one of his people to Metz who should spare neither money nor property in order to seduce the knight's wife, and thus determine if the shirt's color would change. The foreigner journeyed to Lorraine, scouted out the wife, then reported to her how miserable her husband was in the pagan land. This greatly saddened her, but she remained steadfastly virtuous. The emissary spent all his money in his unsuccessful attempts to seduce her, then returned to Turkey. Soon afterward Florentina dressed herself as a pilgrim, took up her harp, which she played very well, and set forth following foreign pagan. She caught up with him in Venice, then traveled with him to the land of the pagans, without his recognizing her in her disguise. Arriving at the pagan king's court, the pilgrim so captured him with singing and playing that great presents were offered to her. Rejecting them all, the pilgrim requested one of the captured Christians who were plowing. The request was granted, and Florentina, unrecognized, went to the prisoners, coming finally to the plow where her husband was hitched. Then she requested and received this prisoner, and together they journeyed safely across the sea until they arrived home in Germany. While still a two days' journey from Metz, the pilgrim said to Alexander, "Brother, our paths part here. As a remembrance give me a little piece from your shirt, whose miracle I have heard so much about, so that I can tell and convince others about it." The knight agreed to this, cut a piece from the shirt and gave it to the pilgrim. Then they parted. However, Florentina took a shorter way and arrived in Metz one whole day earlier than he did. She put on her accustomed women's clothes and awaited her husband's arrival. Alexander greeted his wife most tenderly, but soon afterward his friends and relatives began whispering to him that Florentina had traveled about the world for twelve months, leading an immoral life and letting no one hear from her. Alexander, burning with anger, ordered a feast where he publicly accused his wife of unbecoming behavior. Saying nothing, she left the room, went to her chamber, put on the pilgrim's garb that she had worn at that time, took up her harp, and then reappeared. Holding the piece cut from his shirt in her hand, she proved that she had been the pilgrim who had redeemed him from the plow. Then all her accusers fell silently at her feet, and her husband tearfully begged her for forgiveness. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Mann im Pflug," Deutsche Sagen, herausgegeben von den Brüdern Grimm , vol. 2 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1818), no. 531, pp. 277-80 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Mann im Pflug," Deutsche Sagen, herausgegeben von den Brüdern Grimm , vol. 2 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1818), no. 531, pp. 277-80 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. In later editions this legend is numbered 537. The Grimms' source: A Flemish chapbook entitled Florentina de getrouwe . Lorraine is a region in France that has historical ties to Germany. Return to the table of contents . Conrad von Tannenberg Germany Ages ago there lived in Tannenberg Castle on the mountain road a knight whose name was Conrad. He had a wife named Ann-Els who was as beautiful as she was pious. One time she became seriously ill, and he vowed that if she should recover he would make a pilgrimage to the Holy Grave and there battle against the infidels. And lo, Ann-Els recovered soon thereafter, and when her health had fully returned, the knight made himself ready to depart on a pilgrimage. With many tears he took leave of his wife and journeyed to the sea, where together with companions he had met underway he boarded a ship. At sea the ship was attacked by pirates. He and his companions were taken prisoner and sold as slaves to an eminent Turk. Year upon year passed, and his wife received no news from him. Because she was wealthy, she received many marriage proposals from neighboring knights, but she was interested in none of them and rejected them all, which caused a great deal of hate and animosity toward her. Then one day she heard from another pilgrim who was returning home from the promised land that her husband was languishing as a prisoner among the Turks, and she resolved to rescue him, cost it what it may. Dressing herself in men's clothes, she took her harp, which she could play very well, and journeyed across the sea to Turkey. Arriving there safely, she sought and inquired after her husband until finally she discovered where he was. Then one day she approached the Turk who was his master and played such beautiful melodies on her harp, and sang with such charm, that the Turk said she should name her own reward, that he would give her anything she requested. Then she said, "I ask only for a slave to serve me," and from among the slaves she selected one -- her dear husband. However, she did not identify herself to him, but kept him away from her. After the sea voyage was successfully completed and they found themselves again on Christian soil, she left a sum of money for him, then secretly slipped away and hurried home as fast as possible. Not long afterward Conrad too arrived at Tannenberg Castle and was joyfully and festively received by his wife. All the knights from the surrounding area came to the castle to wish him well. While they were eating Knight Conrad told them of his adventures, how he had been captured, mistreated, and so miraculously rescued. Then several of the knights whose marriage proposals Ann-Els had rejected whispered into his ear that in the meantime his wife had been traveling about the land dressed in men's clothes and leading an indecent life. Upon hearing this Conrad jumped up angrily, drew his sword, and attempted to kill Ann-Els, but she fled into her room and barred the door so that he could not harm her. Not long afterward she returned to the hall carrying her harp and wearing the clothes in which she had freed Conrad, and she played a melody. Then Knight Conrad jumped up and fell into the singer's arms. She threw off the clothes and stood there as the faithful Ann-Els. It is not necessary to say how happy Conrad was, nor that the gossipers disappeared as soon as they possibly could, not letting themselves be seen again, and that the festival ended even more joyfully than it had begun. Source (books.google.com): J. W. Wolf, "Conrad von Tannenberg," Hessische Sagen (Göttingen: Dieterichsche Buchhandlung; Leipzig: Fr. Chr. Wilh. Vogel, 1853), no. 238, pp. 147-149 . Source (Internet Archive): J. W. Wolf, "Conrad von Tannenberg," Hessische Sagen (Göttingen: Dieterichsche Buchhandlung; Leipzig: Fr. Chr. Wilh. Vogel, 1853), no. 238, pp. 147-149 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Wolf's source: "Oral." Return to the table of contents . The Tsaritsa Harpist Russia In a certain kingdom in a certain land once there lived a tsar and a tsaritsa. He lived with her for some time, then he thought he would go to that far distant country where the Jews crucified Christ. So he issued orders to his ministers, bade farewell to his wife, and set out on his road. It may be far, it may be short, he at last reached that distant land where the Jews crucified Christ. And in that country then the accursed king was the ruler. This king saw the tsar, and he bade him be seized and lodged in the dungeon. There were many tortures in that dungeon for him. At night he must sit in chains, and in the morning the accursed king used to put a horse-collar on him and make him drive the plough until the evening. This was the torment in which the tsar lived for three whole years, and he had no idea how he should tear himself away or send any news of himself to his tsaritsa. And he sought for some occasion. And he wrote her this little line: "Sell," he said, "all my possessions and come to redeem me from my misfortune." When the tsaritsa received the letter she read it through and said to herself, "How can I redeem the tsar? If I go myself, the accursed king will receive me and will take me to himself as a wife. If I send one of the ministers, I can place no reliance on him. " So what did she advise? She cut off her red hair, went and disguised herself as a wandering musician, took her gusli , and never told anybody, and so set out on her road and way. She arrived at the accursed king's courtyard and began to play the gusli so finely as had never been heard or listened to for ages. When the king heard such wonderful music he summoned the harpist into the palace. "Hail, guslyar ! From what land have you come? From what kingdom?" asked the king. "I do not journey far in the wide white world: I rejoice men's hearts, and I feed myself." "Stay with me one day and another day, and a third, and I will reward you generously." So the guslyar stayed on, and played for an entire day in front of the king, and he could never hear enough of her. "What wonderful music! Why, it drove away all weariness and grief as though at a breath." So the guslyar stayed with the king three days, and, was going to say farewell. "What reward can I offer you for your labour? " asked the king. "Oh, your majesty, give me one prisoner who has sat long in the prison. I must have a companion on the road! I wish to go to foreign kingdoms, and I have no one with whom I can exchange a word." "Certainly! Select whom you will," said the king, and he led the guslyar into the prison. The guslyar looked at the prisoners, selected the tsar, and they went out to roam together. As they were journeying on to their own kingdom the tsar said, "Let me go, good man, for I am no simple prisoner, I am the tsar himself. I will pay you ransom for as much as you will; I will grudge you neither money nor service." "Go with God," said the guslyar . "I do not need you at all." "Well, come to me as my guest." "When the time shall come, I will be there." So they parted, and each set out on his own way. The tsaritsa went by a circuitous route, reached home before her husband, took off her guslyar's dress and arrayed herself like an empress. In about one hour cries rang out and the attendants came up to the palace, for the tsar had arrived. The tsaritsa ran out to meet him, and he greeted them all, but he did not look at her. He greeted the ministers and said, "Look, gentlemen, what a wife mine is! Now she flings herself on my neck, but when I sat in prison and sent her a letter to sell all my goods and to redeem me she did nothing. Of what was she thinking if she so forgot her liege husband?" And the ministers answered the tsar, "Your majesty, on the very day the tsaritsa received your letter she vanished no one knows where, and has been away all this time, and she has only just appeared in the palace." Then the tsar was very angry and commanded, "My ministers, do ye judge my unfaithful wife according to justice and to truth. Where has she been roaming in the white world? Why did she not try to redeem me? You would never have seen your tsar again for ages of eternity, if a young guslyar had not arrived, for whom I am going to pray God, and I do not grudge giving him half my kingdom." In the meantime the tsaritsa got off her throne and arrayed herself as the harpist, went into the courtyard and began to play the gusli. The tsar heard, ran to meet her, seized the musician by the hand, led her into the palace and said to his court, "This is the guslyar who rescued me from my confinement." The guslyar then flung off his outer garment, and they then all recognised the tsaritsa. Then the tsar was overjoyed and for his joy he celebrated a feast which lasted seven whole days. Source (books.google.com): Russian Folk-Tales , translated from the Russian by Leonard A. Magnus (New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1916), pp. 75-77 . Source (Internet Archive): Russian Folk-Tales , translated from the Russian by Leonard A. Magnus (New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1916), pp. 75-77 . Magnus's source: Alexander Afanasyev, Russian Fairy Tales , collected between 1855 and 1863. The great Russian folklorist's family name Афанасьев is also transliterated as Afanasief, Afanasiev or Afanas'ev. His work was consciously modeled after the Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales) of Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. A gusli is a Slavic stringed instrument related to the zither. Return to the table of contents . The Lute Player Russia Once upon a time there was a king and queen who lived happily and comfortably together. They were very fond of each other and had nothing to worry them, but at last the king grew restless. He longed to go out into the world, to try his strength in battle against some enemy and to win all kinds of honor and glory. So he called his army together and gave orders to start for a distant country where a heathen king ruled who ill treated or tormented everyone he could lay his hands on. The king then gave his parting orders and wise advice to his ministers, took a tender leave of his wife, and set off with his army across the seas. I cannot say whether the voyage was short or long; but at last he reached the country of the heathen king and marched on, defeating all who came in his way. But this did not last long, for in time he came to a mountain pass, where a large army was waiting for him, who put his soldiers to flight, and took the king himself prisoner. He was carried off to the prison where the heathen king kept his captives, and now our poor friend had a very bad time indeed. All night long the prisoners were chained up, and in the morning they were yoked together like oxen and had to plow the land till it grew dark. This state of things went on for three years before the king found any means of sending news of himself to his dear queen, but at last he contrived to send this letter: "Sell all our castles and palaces, and put all our treasures in pawn and come and deliver me out of this horrible prison." The queen received the letter, read it, and wept bitterly as she said to herself, "How can I deliver my dearest husband? If I go myself and the heathen king sees me he will just take me to be one of his wives. If I were to send one of the ministers! -- but I hardly know if I can depend on them." She thought, and thought, and at last an idea came into her head. She cut off all her beautiful long brown hair and dressed herself in boy's clothes. Then she took her lute and, without saying anything to anyone, she went forth into the wide world. She traveled through many lands and saw many cities, and went through many hardships before she got to the town where the heathen king lived. When she got there she walked all round the palace and at the back she saw the prison. Then she went into the great court in front of the palace, and taking her lute in her hand, she began to play so beautifully that one felt as though one could never hear enough. After she had played for some time she began to sing, and her voice was sweeter than the lark's: I come from my own country far Into this foreign land, Of all I own I take alone My sweet lute in my hand. Oh! who will thank me for my song. Reward my simple lay? Like lover's sighs it still shall rise To greet thee day by day. I sing of blooming flowers Made sweet by sun and rain; Of all the bliss of love's first kiss, And parting's cruel pain, Of the sad captive's longing Within his prison wall, Of hearts that sigh when none are nigh To answer to their call. My song begs for your pity, And gifts from out your store, And as I play my gentle lay I linger near your door. And if you hear my singing Within your palace, sire, Oh! give, I pray, this happy day To me my heart's desire. No sooner had the heathen king heard this touching song sung by such a lovely voice, than he had the singer brought before him. "Welcome, O lute player," said he. "Where do you come from?" "My country, sire, is far away across many seas. For years I have been wandering about the world and gaining my living by my music." "Stay here then a few days, and when you wish to leave I will give you what you ask for in your song -- your heart's desire." So the lute player stayed on in the palace and sang and played almost all day long to the king, who could never tire of listening and almost forgot to eat or drink or to torment people. He cared for nothing but the music, and nodded his head as he declared, "There's nothing like your playing and singing. It makes me feel as if some gentle hand had lifted every care and sorrow from me." After three days the lute player came to take leave of the king. "Well," said the king, "what do you desire as your reward?" "Sire, give me one of your prisoners. You have so many in your prison, and I should be glad of a companion on my journeys. When I hear his happy voice as I travel along I shall think of you and thank you." "Come along then," said the king, "choose whom you will." And he took the lute player through the prison himself. The queen walked about amongst the prisoners, and at length she picked out her husband and took him with her on her journey. They were long on their way, but he never found out who she was, and she led him nearer and nearer to his own country. When they reached the frontier the prisoner said, "Let me go now, kind lad; I am no common prisoner, but the king of this country. Let me go free and ask what you will as your reward." "Do not speak of reward," answered the lute player. "Go in peace." "Then come with me, dear boy, and be my guest." "When the proper time comes I shall be at your palace," was the reply, and so they parted. The queen took a short way home, got there before the king and changed her dress. An hour later all the people in the palace were running to and fro and crying out, "Our king has come back! Our king has returned to us." The king greeted every one very kindly, but he would not so much as look at the queen. Then he called all his council and ministers together and said to them, "See what sort of a wife I have. Here she is falling on my neck, but when I was pining in prison and sent her word of it she did nothing to help me." And his council answered with one voice, "Sire, when news was brought from you, the queen disappeared and no one knew where she went. She only returned today." Then the king was very angry and cried, "Judge my faithless wife! Never would you have seen your king again, if a young lute player had not delivered him. I shall remember him with love and gratitude as long as I live." Whilst the king was sitting with his council, the queen found time to disguise herself. She took her lute, and slipping into the court in front of the palace she sang, clear and sweet: I sing the captive's longing Within his prison wall, Of hearts that sigh when none are nigh To answer to their call. My song begs for your pity, And gifts from out your store And as I play my gentle lay I linger near your door. And if you hear my singing Within your palace, sire, Oh! give, I pray, this happy day To me my heart's desire. As soon as the king heard this song he ran out to meet the lute player, took him by the hand and led him into the palace. "Here," he cried, "is the boy who released me from my prison. And now, my true friend, I will indeed give you your heart's desire." "I am sure you will not be less generous than the heathen king was, sire. I ask of you what I asked and obtained from him. But this time I don't mean to give up what I get. I want you -- yourself!" And as she spoke she threw off her long cloak and everyone saw it was the queen. Who can tell how happy the king was? In the joy of his heart he gave a great feast to the whole world, and the whole world came and rejoiced with him for a whole week. I was there too, and ate and drank many good things. I shan't forget that feast as long as I live. Source (books.google.com): Andrew Lang, The Violet Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1901), pp. 70-76. Source (Internet Archive): Andrew Lang, The Violet Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1906), pp. 70-76. Lang's source: Not stated, but probably Alexander Afanasyev. Return to the table of contents . A Story Told by a Hindu India Once upon a time there was a Raja who had two sons, and after their father's death they divided the kingdom between them. The two brothers were inveterate gamblers and spent their time playing cards with each other. For a long time fortune was equal, but one day it turned against the elder brother, and he lost and lost until his money and his jewelry, his horses and his elephants and everything that he had, had been won by his younger brother. Then in desperation he staked his share in the kingdom, and that too he lost. Then the younger brother sent drummers through the city to proclaim that the whole kingdom was his. The shame of this was more than the elder prince could bear, so he resolved to quit the country, and he told his wife of his intention and bade her stay behind. But his faithful wife refused to be parted from him. She vowed that he had married her not for one day nor for two, but for good and all, and that where he went, there she would go, and whatever troubles he met, she would share. So he allowed her to come with him, and the two set off to foreign parts. After some time their path led them through an extensive jungle, and after traveling through it for two days they at last lost their way completely. Their food gave out; they were faint with starvation and torn with briars. The prince urged his wife to return, but she would not hear of it, so they pushed on, supporting life on jungle fruits. Sometimes the prince would go far ahead, for his faithful wife could only travel slowly, and then he would return and wait for her. At last he got tired of leading her on and made up his mind to abandon her. At night they lay down at the foot of a tree, and the prince thought, "If wild animals would come and eat us, it would be the best that could happen. I cannot bear to see my wife suffer any more. Although her flesh is torn with thorns, she will not leave me. I will leave her here; may wild beasts kill both her and me, but I cannot see her die before my eyes." So thinking he got up quietly and went off as quickly as he could. When the princess woke and found that she had been abandoned, she began to weep, and wept from dawn to noon without ceasing. At noon a being in the guise of an old woman appeared and asked her why she wept, and comforted her and promised to lead her out of the wood and told her that Chando [a sun god] had had compassion on her and would allow her to find her husband again if they both lived. So saying, the old woman led the princess from the forest and showed her the way to a great city where a Raja lived. The princess went begging her way through the city to the Raja's palace, and there they engaged her as a servant. Now her husband had also escaped from the jungle and sought employment as a laborer, but no one would give him work for more than a day or two, and at last his search for work brought him to the city in which the princess was; and there he was engaged as a groom in the palace stables. The prince had changed his name, and he had no chance of knowing that his wife was in the palace, because she was confined to the women's apartments. So some years passed without their having news of each other. At last one day the princess happened to go onto the roof and looking down at the stables saw and thought she recognized her husband. Then she leaned over and listened till she heard his voice, and at that she was sure that it was he, so she hastened to the Raja and begged to be allowed to meet her husband, and the Raja sent to call the syce [a servant who attends to horses] with the name which the princess had given, but no one came, for the prince would not reveal himself. Then the princess told their story, and how her husband had gambled away his half of the kingdom. The Raja ordered anyone with such a history to come forward, as his wife was in the palace; but the prince did not reveal himself. Then the princess said, "Let all the syces cook rice and bring me a bit of each man's cooking to taste." They did so, and when she tasted the rice cooked by her husband, she at once said that it was his. Her husband was unable to deny it and admitted everything. Then they took him away from his work in the stables and let him live with his wife. After a time the Raja wrote to the younger brother asking whether he would restore the half of the kingdom which he had won; and the younger brother answered that he would gladly do so, if his brother would sign an agreement never to gamble anymore. It was with this object in view and to teach him the folly of his ways that he had dispossessed him. The elder brother gladly gave the required promise and returned to his kingdom with his faithful wife, and lived happily ever afterwards. Source (Internet Archive): Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 42, pp. 144-47 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Andreas Grein of Purbach (Austria). Opens in a new window. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Return to the table of contents . Revised February 1, 2020. Andreas Grein of Purbach Andreas Grein of Purbach a legend about Turkish slavery from Burgenland, Austria translated by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2020 Contents Andreas Grein of Purbach (Burgenland, Austria). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Andreas Grein of Purbach Burgenland, Austria During the Turkish wars the wild hordes of riders advanced as far as Purbach. On such occasions the townspeople of Purbach fled into the nearby Leitha Mountains to seek refuge there from the hordes. During one such attack Andreas Grein remained at home. When the Turkish horde found Grein, they placed him in handcuffs, tied him to a horse's tail, and thus forced him to run along behind. The Turks took Grein back to their country, where he was housed in a stall and forced to pull a plow by day. For food he received nuts and millet. After seven years of terrible suffering he succeeded -- with the help of a fellow countrywoman -- in escaping from Turkey. In October 1647, after traveling on foot for many months, he arrived at Purbach. He stopped to rest on his own property, about 1000 steps from the town. He then went to his home, where he encountered his wife, who had recently remarried. She did not recognize Grein, because of his wild appearance. After much discussion she recognized her husband from his voice. She asked him for forgiveness, and they lived happily together until they died. The second husband, of course, had to step aside. At the place where he had rested, Grein erected a Holy Trinity column, inscribed with the year 1647. Source: Inscription on a roadside plaque near Purbach, Burgenland, Austria. Transcribed and translated by D. L. Ashliman, July 10, 1997. Links to related sites The Faithful Wife Who Rescued Her Husband from Slavery . Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 888. Opens in a new window. Of Chastity ( Gesta Romanorum ). The Man Hitched to a Plow (France / Germany). Conrad von Tannenberg (Germany). The Tsaritsa Harpist (Russia). The Lute Player (Russia). A Story Told by a Hindu (India). D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Return to the table of contents . Revised February 1, 2020. Father-Daughter Incest in International Folktales The Father Who Wanted to Marry His Daughter Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 510B translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2021 Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Cinderella. Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 510A. Contents Doralice (Italy, Giovanni Francesco Straparola). The She-Bear (Italy, Giambattista Basile). Link to Donkey Skin (France, Charles Perrault). Ass'-Skin (Basque, Wentworth Webster). All-Kinds-of-Fur , also known as "Allerleirauh" (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, version of 1812). Link to an English translation of the version of 1857: All-Kinds-of-Fur . Link to the original German, version of 1812: Allerlei-Rauh . Link to the original German, version of 1857: Allerleirauh . Cinder Blower (Germany, Karl Bartsch). Kaiser Heinrich in Sudemer Mountain (Germany, A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz). Broomthrow, Brushthrow, Combthrow (Austria, Theodor Vernaleken). The Emperor's Daughter in the Pig Stall (Romania, Arthur and Albert Schott). Fair Maria Wood (Italy, Thomas Frederick Crane). Maria Wood (Italy, Rachel Harriette Busk). All-Kinds-of-Fur (Greece, J. G. von Hahn). The Princess Who Would Not Marry Her Father (Portugal, Consiglieri Pedroso). The Horse's Skin (Portugal, Francisco Adolpho Coelho). The King Who Wished to Marry His Daughter (Scotland, J. F. Campbell). Morag a Chota Bhain -- Margery White Coats (Scotland, J. F. Campbell). Rashen Coatie (Scotland, Peter Buchan). The Princess and the Golden Cow (England, Isabella Barclay). The Story of Catskin (England, James Orchard Halliwell). The Princess in the Cat-Skins (Ireland, Patrick Kennedy). The Beautiful Princess (Lithuania, August Schleicher). The Princess with a Golden Star on Her Forehead (Czechia, Božena Němcová) Pigskin (Ukraine, Alexander Afanasyev). Kniaz Danila Govorila (Russia, Alexander Afanasyev). Seggu-Jataka: How a Pious Greengrocer Tested His Daughter's Virtue (India, The Jataka ). Links to related cites . Notes and Bibliography . Type 510B folktales in the English language . Type 510B folktales in the German language . Doralice Italy, Giovanni Francesco Straparola Tebaldo, Prince of Salerno, wishes to have his only daughter Doralice to wife, but she, through her father's persecution, flees to England, where she marries Genese the king, and has by him two children. These, having been slain by Tebaldo, are avenged by their father King Genese. I cannot think there is one amongst us who has not realized by his own experience how great is the power of love, and how sharp are the arrows he is wont to shoot into our corruptible flesh. He, like a mighty king, directs and governs his empire without a sword, simply by his individual will, as you will be able to understand from the tenor of the story which I about to tell to you. You must know, dear ladies, that Tebaldo, Prince of Salerno, according to the story I have heard repeated many times by my elders, had to wife a modest and prudent lady of good lineage, and by her he had a daughter who in beauty and grace outshone all the other ladies of Salerno; but it would have been well for Tebaldo if she had never seen the light, for in that case the grave misadventure which befell him would never have happened. His wife, young in years but of mature wisdom, when she lay a-dying besought her husband, whom she loved very dearly, never to take for his wife any woman whose finger would not exactly fit the ring which she herself wore; and the prince, who loved his wife no less than she loved him, swore by his head that he would observe her wish. After the good princess had breathed her last and had been honorably buried, Tebaldo indulged in the thought of wedding again, but he bore well in mind the promise he had made to his wife, and was firmly resolved to keep her saying. However, the report that Tebaldo, Prince of Salerno, was seeking another mate soon got noised abroad, and came to the ears of many maidens who, in worth and in estate, were no whit his inferiors; but Tebaldo, whose first care was to fulfil the wishes of his wife who was dead, made it a condition that any damsel who might be offered to him in marriage should first try on her finger his wife's ring, to see whether it fitted, and not having found one who fulfilled this condition -- the ring being always found too big for this and too small for that -- he was forced to dismiss them all without further parley. Now it happened one day that the daughter of Tebaldo, whose name was Doralice, sat at table with her father; and she, having espied her mother's ring lying on the board, slipped it on her finger and cried out, "See my father, how well my mother's ring fits me!" And the prince, when he saw what she had done, assented. But not long after this the soul of Tebaldo was assailed by a strange and diabolical temptation to take to wife his daughter Doralice, and for many days he lived tossed about between yea and nay. At last, overcome by the strength of this devilish intent, and fired by the beauty of the maiden, he one day called her to him and said, "Doralice, my daughter, while your mother was yet alive, but fast nearing the end of her days, she besought me never to take to wife any woman whose finger would not fit the ring she herself always wore in her lifetime, and I swore by my head that I would observe this last request of hers. Wherefore, when I felt the time was come for me to wed anew, I made trial of many maidens, but not one could I find who could wear your mother's ring, except yourself. Therefore I have decided to take you for my wife, for thus I shall satisfy my own desire without violating the promise I made to your mother." Doralice, who was as pure as she was beautiful, when she listened to the evil designs of her wicked father, was deeply troubled in her heart; but, taking heed of his vile and abominable lust, and fearing the effects of his rage, she made no answer and went out of his presence with an untroubled face. As there was no one whom she could trust so well as her old nurse, she repaired to her at once as the surest bulwark of her safety, to take counsel as to what she should do. The nurse, when she had heard the story of the execrable lust of this wicked father, spake words of comfort to Doralice, for she knew well the constancy and steadfast nature of the girl, and that she would be ready to endure any torment rather than accede to her father's desire, and promised to aid her in keeping her virginity unsullied by such terrible disgrace. After this the nurse thought of nothing else than how she might best find a way for Doralice out of this strait, planning now this and now that, but finding no method which gained her entire approval. She would fain have had Doralice take to flight and put long distance betwixt her and her father, but she feared the craft of Tebaldo, and lest the girl should fall into his hands after her flight, feeling certain that in such event he would put her to death. So while the faithful nurse was thus taking counsel with herself, she suddenly hit upon a fresh scheme, which was what I will now tell you. In the chamber of the dead lady there was a fair cassone, or clothes-chest, magnificently carved, in which Doralice kept her richest dresses and her most precious jewels, and this wardrobe the nurse alone could open. So she removed from it by stealth all the robes and the ornaments that were therein, and bestowed them elsewhere, placing in it a good store of a certain liquor which had such great virtue, that whosoever took a spoonful of it, or even less, could live for a long time without further nourishment. Then, having called Doralice, she shut her therein, and bade her remain in hiding until such time as God should send her better fortune, and her father be delivered from the bestial mood which had come upon him. The maiden, obedient to the good old woman's command, did all that was told her; and the father, still set upon his accursed design, and making no effort to restrain his unnatural lust, demanded every day what had become of his daughter; and, neither finding any trace of her, or knowing aught where she could be, his rage became so terrible that he threatened to have her killed as soon as he should find her. Early one morning it chanced that Tebaldo went into the room where the chest was, and as soon as his eye fell upon it, he felt, from the associations connected with it, that he could not any longer endure the sight of it, so he gave orders that it should straightway be taken out and placed elsewhere and sold, so that its presence might not bee an offence to him. The servants were prompt to obey their master's command, and, having taken the thing on their shoulders, they bore it away to the marketplace. It chanced that there was at that time in the city a rich dealer from Genoa, who, as soon as he caught sight of the sumptuously carved cassone, admired it greatly, and settled with himself that he would not let it go from him, however much he might have to pay for it. So, having accosted the servant who was charged with the sale of it, and learnt the price demanded, he bought it forthwith, and gave orders to a porter to carry it away and place it on board his ship. The nurse, who was watching the trafficking from a distance, was well pleased with the issue thereof, though she grieved sore at losing the maiden. Wherefore she consoled herself by reflecting that when it comes to the choice of evils it is ever wiser to avoid the greater. The merchant, having set sail from Salerno with his carven chest and other valuable wares, voyaged to the island of Britain, known to us today as England, and landed at a port near which the country was spread out in a vast plain. Before he had been there long, Genese, who had lately been crowned king of the island, happened to be riding along the seashore, chasing a fine stag, which, in the end, ran down to the beach and took to the water. The king, feeling wary and worn with the long pursuit, was fain to rest awhile, and, having caught sight of the ship, he sent to ask the master of it to give him something to drink; and the latter, feigning to be ignorant he was talking to the king, greeted Genese familiarly, and gave him a hearty welcome, finally prevailing upon him to go on board his vessel. The king, when he saw the beautiful clothes-chest so finely carved, was taken with a great longing to possess it, and grew so impatient to call it his own that every hour seemed like a thousand till he should be able to claim it. He then asked the merchant the price he asked for it, and was answered that the price was a very heavy one. The king, being now more taken than ever with the beautiful handicraft, would not leave the ship till he had arranged a price with the merchant, and, having sent for money enough to pay the price demanded, he took his leave, and straightway ordered the cassone to be borne to the palace and placed in his chamber. Genese, being yet over-young to wive, found his chief pleasure in going every day to the chase. Now that the cassone was transported into his bedroom, with the maiden Doralice hidden inside, she heard, as was only natural, all that went on in the king's chamber, and, in pondering over her past misfortunes, hoped that a happier future was in store for her. And as soon as the king had departed for the chase in the morning, and had left the room clear, Doralice would issue from the clothes-chest, and would deftly put the chamber in order, and sweep it, and make the bed. Then she would adjust the bed curtains, and put on the coverlet cunningly embroidered with fine pearls, and two beautifully ornamented pillows thereto. After this, the fair maiden strewed the bed with roses, violets, and other sweet-smelling flowers, mingled with Cyprian spices which exhaled a subtle odor and soothed the brain to slumber. Day after day Doralice continued to compose the king's chamber in this pleasant fashion, without being seen of anyone, and thereby gave Genese much gratification; for every day when he came back from the chase it seemed to him as if he was greeted by all the perfumes of the East. One day he questioned the queen his mother, and the ladies who were about her, as to which of them had so kindly and graciously adorned his room and decked the bed with roses and violets and sweet scents. They answered, one and all, that they had no part in all this, for every morning, when they went to put the chamber in order, they found the bed strewn with flowers and perfumes. Genese, when he heard this, determined to clear up the mystery, and the next morning gave out that he was going to hunt at a village ten leagues distant. But, in lieu of going forth, he quietly hid himself in the room, keeping his eyes steadily fixed on the door, and waiting to see what might occur. He had not been long on the watch before Doralice, looking more beautiful than the sun, came out of the cassone and began to sweep the room, and to straighten the carpets, and to deck the bed, and diligently to set everything in order, as was her wont. The beautiful maiden had no sooner done her kindly and considerate office, than she made as if she would go back to her hiding place. But the king, who had keenly taken note of everything, suddenly caught her by the hand, and, seeing that she was very fair, and fresh as a lily, asked her who she was; whereupon the trembling girl confessed that she was the daughter of a prince. She declared, however, that she had forgotten what was his name, on account of her long imprisonment in the cassone, and she would say nothing as to the reason why she had been shut therein. The king, after he had heard her story, fell violently in love with her, and, with the full consent of his mother, made her his queen, and had by her two fair children. In the meantime Tebaldo was still mastered by his wicked and treacherous passion, and, as he could find no trace of Doralice, search as he would, he began to believe that she must have been hidden in the coffer which he had caused to be sold, and that, having escaped his power, she might be wandering about from place to place. Therefore, with his rage will burning against her, he set himself to try whether perchance he might not discover her whereabouts. He attired himself as a merchant, and, having gathered together a great store of precious stones and jewels, marvelously wrought in gold, quitted Salerno unknown to anyone, and scoured all the nations and countries round about, finally meeting by hazard the trader who had originally purchased the clothes-chest. Of him he demanded whether he had been satisfied with his bargain, and into whose hands the chest had fallen, and the trader replied that he had sold the cassone to the King of England for double the price he had given for it. Tebaldo, rejoicing at this news, made his way to England, and when he had landed there and journeyed to the capital, he made a show of his jewels and golden ornaments, amongst which were some spindles and distaffs cunningly wrought, crying out the while, "Spindles and distaffs for sale, ladies." It chanced that one of the dames of the court, who was looking out of a window, heard this and saw the merchant and his goods; whereupon she ran to the queen and told her there was below a merchant who had for sale the most beautiful golden spindles and distaffs that ever were seen. The queen commanded him to be brought into the palace, and he came up the stairs into her presence, but she did not recognize him in his merchant's guise. Moreover, she was not thinking ever to behold her father again; but Tebaldo recognized his daughter at once. The queen, when she saw how fair was the work of the spindles and distaffs, asked of the merchant what price he put upon them. "The prince is great," he answered, "but to you I will give one of them for nothing, provided you suffer me to gratify a caprice of mine. This is that I may be permitted to sleep one night in the same room as your children." The good Doralice, in her pure and simple nature, never suspected the accursed design of the feigned merchant, and, yielding to the persuasion of her attendants, granted his request. But before the merchant was led to the sleeping chamber, certain ladies of the court deemed it wise to offer him a cup of wine well drugged to make him sleep sound, and when night had come and the merchant seemed overcome with fatigue, one of the ladies conducted him into the chamber of the king's children, where there was prepared for him a sumptuous couch. Before she left him the lady said, "Good man, are you not thirsty?" "Indeed I am," he replied; whereupon she handed him the drugged wine in a silver cup. But the crafty Tebaldo, while feigning to drink the wine, spilled it over his garments, and then lay down to rest. Now there was in the children's a side door through which it was possible to pass into the queen's apartment. At midnight, when all was still, Tebaldo stole through this, and, going up to the bed beside which the queen had left her clothes, he took away a small dagger, which he had marked the day before hanging from her girdle. Then he returned to the children's room and killed them both with the dagger, which he immediately put back into its scabbard, all bloody as it was. And having opened a window he let himself down by a cord. As soon as the shopmen of the city were astir, he went to a barber's and had his long beard taken off, for fear he might be recognized, and having put on different clothes he walked about the city without apprehension. In the palace the nurses went, as soon as they awakened, to suckle the children; but when they came to the cradles they found them both lying dead. Whereupon they began to scream and to weep bitterly, and to rend their hair and their garments, thus laying bare their breasts. The dreadful tiding came quickly to the ears of the king and queen, and they ran barefooted and in their nightclothes to the spot, and when they saw the dead bodies of the babes they wept bitterly. Soon the report of the murder of the two children was spread throughout the city, and, almost at the same time, it was rumored that there had just arrived a famous astrologer, who, by studying the courses of the various stars, could lay bare the hidden mysteries of the past. When this came to the ears of the king, he caused the astrologer to be summoned forthwith, and, when he was come into the royal presence, demanded whether or not he could tell the name of the murderer of the children. The astrologer replied that he could, and whispering secretly in the king's ear he said, "Sire, let all the men and women of your court who are wont to wear a dagger at their side be summoned before you, and if amongst these you shall find one whose dagger is befouled with blood in its scabbard, that same will be the murderer of your children." Wherefore the king at once gave command that all his courtiers should present themselves, and, when they were assembled, he diligently searched with his own hands to see if any one of them might have a bloody dagger at his side, but he could find none. Then he returned to the astrologer -- who was no other than Tebaldo himself -- and told him how his quest had been vain, and that all in the palace, save his mother and the queen, had been searched. To which the astrologer replied, "Sire, search everywhere and respect no one, and then you will surely find the murderer." So the king searched first his mother, and then the queen, and when he took the dagger which Doralice wore and drew it from the scabbard, he found it covered with blood. Then the king, convinced by this proof, turned to the queen and said to her, "O, wicked and inhuman woman, enemy of your own flesh and blood, traitress to your own children! What desperate madness has led you to dye your hands in the blood of these babes? I swear that you shall suffer the full penalty fixed for such a crime." But though the king in his rage would fain have sent her straightway to a shameful death, his desire for vengeance prompted him to dispose of her so that she might suffer longer and more cruel torment. Wherefore he commanded that she should be stripped and thus naked buried up to her chin in the earth, and that she should be well fed in order that she might linger long and the worms devour her flesh while she still lived. The queen, seasoned to misfortune in the past, and conscious of her innocence, contemplated her terrible doom with calmness and dignity. Tebaldo, when he learned that the queen had been adjudged guilty and condemned to a cruel death, rejoiced greatly, and, as soon as he had taken leave of the king, left England, quite satisfied with his work, and returned secretly to Salerno. Arrived there, he told to the old nurse the whole story of his adventures, and how Doralice had been sentenced to death by her husband. As she listened, the nurse feigned to be as pleased as Tebaldo himself, but in her heart she grieved sorely, overcome by this love which she had always borne towards the princess, and the next morning she took horse early and rode on day and night until she came to England. Immediately she repaired to the palace and went before the king, who was giving public audience in the great hall, and, having thrown herself at his feet, she demanded an interview on a matter which concerned the honor of his crown. The king granted her request, and took her by the hand and bade her rise. Then, when the rest of the company had gone and left them alone, the nurse thus addressed the king, "Sire, know that Doralice, your wife, is my child. She is not, indeed, the fruit of my womb, but I nourished her at these breasts. She is innocent of the deed which is laid to her charge, and for which she is sentenced to a lingering and cruel death. And you, when you shall have learnt everything, and laid your hand upon the impious murderer, and understood the reason which moved him to slay your children, you will assuredly show her mercy and deliver her from these bitter and cruel torments. And if you find that I speak falsely in this, I offer myself to suffer the same punishment which the wretched Doralice is now enduring." Then the nurse set forth fully from beginning to end the whole history of Doralice's past life; and the king, when he heard it, doubted not the truth of it, but forthwith gave orders that the queen, who was now more dead than alive, should be taken out of the earth; which was done at once, and Doralice, after careful nursing and ministration by physicians, was restored to health. Next day King Genese stirred up through all his kingdom mighty preparations for war, and gathered together a great army, which he dispatched to Salerno. After a short campaign the city was captured, and Tebaldo, bound hand and foot, taken back to England, where King Genese, wishing to know the whole sum of his guilt, had him put upon the rack, whereupon the wretched man made full confession. The next day he was conducted through the city in a cart drawn by four horses, and then tortured with red-hot pincers like Gano di Magazza, and after his body had been quartered, his flesh was thrown to be eaten of ravenous dogs. And this was the end of the impious wretch Tebaldo. And King Genese and Doralice his queen lived many years happily together, leaving at their death divers children in their place. Source: The Facetious Nights of Straparola , vol. 1, translated by W. G. Waters (London: privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901), pp. 79-101 (night 1, tale 4) . We know almost nothing about the personal life of Giovanni Francesco [also spelled Gianfrancesco] Straparola (ca. 1480 - ca. 1557). His two-volume work Le piacevoli notti (1550-1553), called in English The Facetious Nights of Straparola or simply The Nights of Straparola , contains some 75 novellas and fairy tales, some of oriental origin. Obviously patterning his collection after Boccaccio's Decamerone , Straparola depicts here thirteen nights of revelry in a luxurious villa on the island of Murano near Venice. The participants add to the entertainment by telling one another stories. Included are tales of magic and the supernatural as well as bawdy jokes and anecdotes. Straparola's work is one of Europe's earliest collections of stories based largely on folklore. Return to the table of contents . The She-Bear Italy, Giambattista Basile Now it is said that once upon a time there lived a king of Roccaspra, who had a wife who for beauty, grace, and comeliness exceeded all other women. Truly she was the mother of beauty, but this beautiful being, at the full time of her life, fell from the steed of health, and broke the threads of life. But before the candle of life was finally put out, she called her husband, and said, "I know well, that you have loved me with excessive love, therefore show me a proof of your love and give me a promise that you will never marry, unless you meet one beautiful as I have been; and if you will not so promise, I will leave you a curse, and I will hate you even in the other world." The king, who loved her above all things, hearing this her last will, began to weep and lament, and for a while could not find a word to say; but after his grief subsided, he replied, "If I ever think of taking a wife, may the gout seize me, and may I become as gaunt as an asparagus; oh my love, forget it. Do not believe in dreams, nor that I can ever put my affection upon another woman. You will take with you all my joy and desire." And while he was thus speaking, the poor lady, who was at her last, turned up her eyes and stretched her feet. When the king saw that her soul had taken flight, his eyes became fountains of tears, and he cried with loud cries, buffeted his face, and wept, and wailed, so that all the courtiers ran to his side. He continually called upon the name of that good soul and cursed his fate, which had deprived him of her, and tore his hair, and pulled out his beard, and accused the stars of having sent to him this great misfortune. But he did as others do. A bump on the elbow and the loss of a wife cause much pain, but it does not last. The one pain disappears at one's side, and the other into the grave. Night had not yet come forth to look about the heavens for the bats, when he began to make count on his fingers, saying "My wife is dead, and I am a widower, and sad hearted without hope of any kind but my only daughter, since she left me. Therefore it will be necessary to find another wife that will bear me a son. But where can I find one? Where can I meet a woman endowed with my wife's beauty, when all other females seem witches in my sight? There is the rub! Where shall I find another like unto her? Where am I to seek her with a bell, if nature formed Nardella (may her soul rest in glory), and then broke the mould? Alas! in what labyrinth am I! What a mistake was the promise I made her! But what? I have not seen the wolf yet, but I am running away already. Let us seek, let us see, and let us understand. Is it possible, that there is no other donkey in the stable except for Nardella? Is it possible that the world will be lost for me? Will there be such a plague that all women will be destroyed and their seed lost?" And thus saying, he commanded the public crier to proclaim that all the beautiful women in the world should come and undergo the comparison of beauty, that he would take to wife the best looking of all, and make her the queen of his realm. This news spread in all parts of the world, and not one of the women in the whole universe failed to come and try this venture. Not even flayed hags stayed behind, they came by the dozen, because, when the point of beauty is touched, there is none who will yield, there is no sea monster who will give herself up as hideous; each and everyone boasts of uncommon beauty. If a donkey speaks the truth, the mirror is blamed for not reflecting the form as it is naturally; it is the fault of the quicksilver at the back. And now the land was full of women, and the king ordered that they should all stand in file, and he began to walk up and down, like a sultan when he enters his harem, to choose the best Genoa stone to sharpen his damascene blade. He came and went, up and down, like a monkey who is never still, looking and staring at this one and that one. One had a crooked brow, another a long nose, one a large mouth, and another thick lips. This one was too tall and gaunt, that other was short and badly formed, this one was too much dressed, another was too slightly robed. He disliked the Spanish woman because of the hue of her skin; the Neapolitan was not to his taste because of the way in which she walked; the German seemed to him too cold and frozen; the French woman too light of brains; the Venetian a spinning wheel full of flax. At last, for one reason or another, he sent them all about their business with one hand in front and another behind. Seeing so many beautiful heads of celery turned to hard roots and having resolved to marry nevertheless, he turned to his own daughter, saying, "What am I seeking about these Marys of Ravenna, if my daughter Preziosa is made from the same mould as her mother? I have this beautiful face at home, and yet I should go to the end of the world seeking it?" Thus he explained to his daughter his desire, and was severely reproved and censured by her, as Heaven knows. The king was angry at her rejection, and said to her, "Be quiet and hold your tongue. Make up your mind to tie the matrimonial knot with me this very evening; otherwise when I finish with you there will be nothing left but your ears." Preziosa, hearing this threat, retired to her room, and wept and lamented her evil fate. And while she lay there in this plight, an old woman, who used to bring her cosmetics, came to her, and finding her in such a plight, looking like one more ready for the other world than for this one, enquired the cause of her distress. When the old woman learned what had happened, she said, "Be of good cheer, my daughter, and despair not, for every evil has a remedy. Death alone has no cure. Now listen to me: When your father comes to you this evening -- donkey that he is, wanting to act the stallion -- put this piece of wood into your mouth, and you will at once become a she-bear. Then you can make your escape, for he will be afraid of you and let you go. Go straight to the forest, for it was written in the book of fate, the day that you were born, that there you should meet your fortune. When you want to turn back into a woman as you are and will ever be, take the bit of wood out of your mouth, and you will return to your pristine form." Preziosa embraced and thanked the old woman, told the servants to give her an apron full of flour and some slices of ham, and sent her away. When the sun began to change her quarters like a bankrupt strumpet, the king sent for his minister, and had him issue invitations to all the lords and grandees to come to the marriage feast. They all crowded in. After spending five or six hours in high revelry and unrestrained eating, the king made his way to the bed chamber, and called to the bride to come and fulfil his desire. But she put the bit of wood into her mouth, and instantly took the shape of a fierce she-bear, and stood thus before him. He, frightened at the sudden change, rolled himself up in the bedding, and did not put forth a finger or an eye until morning. Meanwhile Preziosa made her way toward the forest, where the shadows met concocting together how they could annoy the sun. There she lay in good fellowship and at one with the other animals. When the day dawned, it happened by chance that the son of the King of Acquacorrente should come to that forest. He sighted the she-bear and was greatly frightened, but the beast came forward, and wagging her tail, walked around him, and put her head under his hand for him to caress her. He took heart at this strange sight, smoothed its head as he would have done to a dog, and said to it, "Lie down, down, quiet, quiet, there there, good beast." Seeing that the beast was very tame, he took her home with him, commanding his servants to put her in the garden by the side of the royal palace, and there to attend to and feed her well, and treat her as they would his own person, and to take her to a particular spot so that he might see her from the windows of his palace whenever he had a mind to. Now it so happened that one day all his people were away on some errand, and the prince being left alone, thought about the bear, and looked out of the window to see her. However, at that very moment Preziosa, believing she was utterly alone, had taken the bit of wood from her mouth, and stood combing her golden hair. The prince was amazed at this woman of great beauty, and he descended the stairs and ran to the garden. But Preziosa, perceiving the ambush, at once put the bit of wood into her mouth, and became a she-bear once more. The prince looked about, but could not see what he had sighted from above, and not finding what he came to seek, remained very disappointed, and was melancholy and sad hearted, and in a few days became grievously ill. He kept repeating, "Oh my bear, oh my bear." His mother, hearing this continual cry, imagined that perhaps the bear had bit him or done him some evil, and therefore ordered the servants to kill her. But all the servants loved the beast because it was so very tame, even the stones in the roadway could not help liking her, so they had compassion and could not think of killing her. Therefore they led her to the forest, and returning to the queen, told her that she was dead. When this deed came to the prince's ears, he acted as a madman, and leaving his bed, ill as he was, was about to make mincemeat of the servants. They told him the truth of the affair. He mounted his steed and searched backward and forward until at length he came to a cave and found the bear. He carried her home with him and put her in a chamber, saying, "Oh you beautiful morsel fit for kings, why do you hide your passing beauty in a bear's hide? Oh light of love, why are you closed in such an hairy lantern? Why have you acted this way toward me, is it so that you may see me die a slow death? I am dying of despair, charmed by your beautiful form, and you can see the witness of my words in my failing health and sickening form. I am become skin and bone, and the fever burns my very marrow, and consumes me with heart-sore pain. Therefore lift the veil from that stinking hide, and let me behold once more your grace and beauty; lift up the leaves from this basket's mouth, and let me take a view of the splendid fruit within; lift the tapestry, and allow my eyes to feast upon the luxury of your charms. Who has enclosed in a dreary prison such a glorious work? Who has enclosed in a leather casket such a priceless treasure? Let me behold your passing grace, and take in payment all my desires. Oh my love, only this bear's grease can cure the nervous disease of which I suffer." But perceiving that his words had no effect, and that all was time lost, he took to his bed, and his illness increased daily, until the doctors feared for his life. The queen, his mother, who had no other love in the world, sat at his bedside, and said to him, "Oh my son, where does your heartsickness come from? What is the cause of all this sadness? You are young, you are rich, you are beloved, you are great. What do you want, my son? Speak, for only a shameful beggar carries an empty pocket. If you desire to take a wife, choose, and I will command; take, and I will pay. Can you not see that your sickness is my sickness and that your pulse beats in unison with my heart? If you burn with fever in your blood, I burn with fever on the brain. I have no other support for my old age but you. Therefore, my son, be cheerful, and cheer my heart, and do not darken this realm, and raze to the ground this house, and bereave your mother." The prince, hearing these words, said, "Nothing can cheer me, if I may not see the bear; therefore, if you desire to see me in good health again, let her stay in this room, and I do not wish that any other serve me, and make my bed, and cook my meals, if it be not herself, and if what I desire be done, I am sure that I shall be well in a few days." To the queen it seemed folly for her son to ask that a bear should act as cook and housemaid. She believed that the prince must be delirious; nevertheless, to please his fancy, she went for the bear, and when the beast came to the prince's bedside she lifted her paw and felt the invalid's pulse. The queen smiled at the sight, thinking that by and by the bear would scratch the prince's nose. But the prince spoke to the bear, and said, "Oh mischievous mine, will you not cook for me, and feed me, and serve me?" And the bear nodded yes with her head, showing that she would accept the charge. Then the queen sent for some chickens, and had a fire lit in the fireplace in the same chamber, and had a kettle with boiling water put on the fire. The bear took hold of a chicken, scalded it, dexterously plucked off its feathers, cleaned it, put half of it on the spit, and stewed the other half. When it was ready, the prince, who could not before eat even sugar, ate it all and licked his fingers. When he had ended his meal, the bear brought him some drink, and handed it so gracefully that the queen kissed her on the head. After this the prince arose, and went to the salon to receive the doctors, and to be directed by their judgment. The bear at once made the bed, ran to the garden and gathered a handful of roses and orange blossoms, which she scattered upon the bed. She fulfilled her various duties so well that the queen said to herself, "This bear is worth a treasure, and my son is quite right in being fond of the beast." When the prince returned to his chambers, and saw how well the bear had fulfilled her duties, it was like adding fuel to the fire. If he had been consumed himself in a slow fire before, he was now burning with intense heat. He said to the queen "Oh my lady mother, if I cannot give a kiss to this bear, I shall give up the ghost." The queen, seeing her son nearly fainting, said to the bear, "Kiss him, kiss him, oh my beautiful bear, do not leave my poor son to die in despair." Then the bear obediently neared the prince, who took her cheeks between his fingers, could not stop kissing her on the lips. While thus engaged, I do not know how it happened, the bit of wood fell from Preziosa's mouth, and she remained in the prince's embrace, the most beautiful and ravishing being in the world. He strained her to his bosom with tightly clasped arms, and said, "You are caught at last, and you shall not escape so easily without a reason." Preziosa, reddening with the lovely tint of modesty and of shame, the most beautiful of natural beauties, answered, "I am in your hands. I surrender my honor to your loyalty. Do with me what you will." The queen asked who this charming woman was, and what had caused her to live such a wild life. She related to them all her misfortunes, and the queen praised her as a good and honored child, and said to her son that she was well satisfied that he should marry the princess. The prince, who wanted nothing else, at once announced his betrothal to her. Kneeling before the queen, they both received her blessing, and with great feasting the marriage took place. Thus Preziosa demonstrated the truth of the proverb: "Those who do good may expect good in return." Source: Il Pentamorone; or, The Tale of Tales , translated by Richard F. Burton, vol. 1 (London: Henry and Company, 1893), pp. 181-90 (day 2, tale 6) . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. Basile's Il Pentamerone was first published in five installments between 1634 and 1636. Return to the Table of Contents . Ass'-Skin Basque, Wentworth Webster Like many others in the world, there was a king and a queen. One day there came to them a young girl who wished for a situation. They asked her her name, and she said, "Faithful." The king said to her, "Are you like your name?" and she said, "Yes." She stopped there seven years. Her master gave her all the keys, even that of the treasure. One day, when the king and queen were out, Faithful goes to the fountain, and she sees seven robbers coming out of the house. Judge what a state this poor girl was in! She runs straight to the treasury, and sees that more than half the treasure is missing. She did not know what would become of her -- she was all of a tremble. When the king and queen came home she told them what had happened, but they would not believe her, and they put her in prison. She stays there a year. She kept saying that she was not in fault, but they would not believe her. The king condemns her to death, and sends her with four men to the forest to kill her, telling them to bring him her heart. They go off, but these men thought it a pity to kill this young girl, for she was very pretty, and she told them that she was innocent of this robbery; and they say to her, "If you will not come any more into this land, we will spare your life." She promises them that she will not be seen again in those parts. The men see an ass, and they tell her that they will carry its heart to the king. The young girl said to them, "Flay this ass, I pray you; and, in order that no one may know me, I will never take this skin off me." The men do so, and go off to the king, and the young girl goes to look for some shelter. At nightfall she finds a beautiful house. She asks if they want some one to keep the geese. They tell her, "Yes, yes, yes." They put her along with the geese, and tell her that she must go with them every day to such a field. She went out very early in the morning and came back late. It was the king's house, and it was the queen-mother and her son who lived there. After some time there appeared to her one day an old woman, who called to her, "Faithful, you have done penance enough. The son of the king is going to give some grand feasts, and you must go to them. This evening you will ask madame permission, and you will tell her that you will give her all the news of the ball if she will let you go for a little while. And, see, here is a nut. All the dresses and things you want will come out of that. You will break it as you go to the place of the festival." That evening she asked permission of her mistress to go and see the festival which the king is going to give, for a short time only, and that she will return directly and tell her all that she has seen there. Her mistress said, "Yes." That evening she goes then. On her way she breaks the nut, and there comes out of it a silver robe. She puts it on, and goes there, and immediately she enters all the world looks at her. The king is bewitched, he does not quit her for an instant, and they always dance together. He pays no attention at all to the other young ladies. They enjoy the refreshments very much. Some friends of the king call him, and he has to go there; and in this interval Faithful makes her escape to the house. She tells the queen how that a young girl had come to the ball, how she had dazzled everybody, and especially the king, who paid attention to her alone, but that she had escaped. When the son comes to the house, his mother says to him, "She escaped from you then, your young lady? She did not care for you, doubtless." He says to his mother, "Who told you that?" "Ass'-Skin; she wished to go and see it." The king goes to where Faithful was and gives her two blows with his slipper, saying to her, "If you return there again I will kill you on the spot." The next day Ass'-Skin goes with her geese, and there appears to her again the old woman. She tells her that she ought to go to the ball again this evening -- that her mistress would give her permission. "Here is a walnut; you have there all that is necessary to dress yourself with. The king will ask you your name: Braf-le-mandoufle [Beaten with the slipper]." In the evening she asks permission of her mistress, but she is astonished (at her asking), and says to her, "You do not know what the king has said -- that if he catches you he will kill you on the spot?" "I am not afraid. He will be sure not to catch me." "Go, then." She goes off, and on the way she breaks the walnut, and there comes out of it a golden robe. She goes in. The king comes with a thousand compliments, and asks her how she had escaped the evening before without saying anything to him, and that he had been very much hurt at it. They amuse themselves thoroughly. The king has eyes for her alone. He asks her her name. She tells him, "Braf-le-mandoufle." They feast themselves well, and some friends having called to him he goes to them, and the young lady escapes. Ass'-Skin goes to tell the queen that yesterday evening's young lady had come, but still more beautiful -- that she had escaped in the very middle of the ball. She goes off to her geese. The king comes to his house. His mother says to him, "She came then, the young lady you love? But she only loves you so-so, since she has gone off in this fashion." "Who told you that?" "Ass'-Skin." He goes off to her and gives her two kicks with his slipper, and says to her, "Woe to you if you go there again; I will kill you on the very spot." She goes off to her geese, and the old woman comes to her again and tells her to ask permission again for this evening -- that she must go to the dance. She gives her a peach, and tells her that she will have there all that is necessary to dress herself with. She goes then to ask her mistress if she will give her permission, like last night, to go to the ball. She says to her, "Yes, yes, I will give you leave. But are you not afraid lest the king should catch you? He has said that he will kill you if you go there." "I am not afraid, because I am sure that he will not catch me. Yesterday he looked for me again, but he could not catch me." She goes off then. On the way she opens her peach, and finds there a dress entirely of diamonds, and if she was beautiful before, judge what she is now! She shone like the sun. The king was plunged into joy when he saw her. He was in an ecstasy. He did not wish to dance, but they sat down at their ease on beautiful arm-chairs, and with their refreshments before them they passed such a long time together. The king asked her to give him her promise of marriage. The young lady gives him her word, and the king takes his diamond ring off his finger and gives it to her. His friends call him away to come quickly to see something very rare, and off he goes, leaving his lady. She takes advantage of this opportunity to escape. She tells her mistress all that has passed -- how that this young Lady had come with a dress of diamonds, that all the world was dazzled by her beauty, that they could not even look at her she shone so brightly, that the king did not know where he was for happiness, that they had given each other their promise of marriage, and that the king had given her his diamond ring, but that the best thing of all was that today again she has escaped him. The king comes in at that very instant. His mother says to him, "She has not, she certainly has not, any wish for you. She has gone off with your diamond ring. Where will you go and look for her? You do not know where she lives. Where will you ask for a young lady who has such a name as 'Braf-le-mandoufle!' She has given you her promise of marriage too; but she does not wish to have you, since she has acted like that." Our king did not even ask his mother who has told her that. He went straight to bed thoroughly ill, and so Ass'-Skin did not have her two kicks that evening. The queen was in great trouble at seeing her son ill like that. She was continually turning over in her head who this young lady might be. She said to her son, "Is this young lady our Ass'-Skin ? How else could she have known that you had given your promise to one another, and that you had given her the ring too? She must have been very close to you. Did you see her?" He says, "No," but remains buried in thought. His mother says, "She has a very pretty face under her ass'-skin." And she says that she must send for her, and that he must have a good look at her too ; that he shall have some broth brought up by her. She sends for Ass'-Skin to the kitchen, has the broth made for her son, and Ass'-Skin puts in the middle of the bread the ring which the king had given her. The lady had her well dressed, and she goes to the king. The king, after having seen her, was still doubtful. He drank his broth; but when he puts the bread into his mouth he finds something (hard), and is very much astonished at seeing his ring. He was ill no longer. He goes and runs to his mother to tell her his joy that he has found his lady. He wishes to marry directly, and all the kings of the neighbourhood are invited to the feast; and, while they were dining, everyone had some fine news to relate. They ask the bride, too, if she had not something to tell them. She says, "Yes," but that she cannot tell what she knows that it would not please all at the table. Her husband tells her to speak out boldly; he draws his sword, and says, "Whosoever shall speak a word shall be run through with this sword." She then tells how a poor girl was servant at a king's house; how she remained there seven years; that they liked her very much, and treated her with confidence, even to giving her the keys of the treasure. One day, when the king and his wife were out, robbers entered, and stole almost all the treasure. The king would not believe that robbers had come. He puts the young girl in prison for a whole year, and at the end of that time he sends her to execution, telling the executioners to bring her heart to the house. The executioners were better than the king; they believed in her innocence, and, after having killed an ass, they carried its heart to the king; "and for the proof, it is I who was servant to this king." The bridegroom says to her, "Who can this king be? Is it my uncle?" The lady says, " I do not know if he is your uncle, but it is that gentleman there." The bridegroom takes his sword and kills him on the spot, saying to his wife, "You shall not be afraid of him any more." They lived very happily. Some time afterwards they had two children, a boy and a girl. When the elder was seven years old he died, telling his father and mother that he was going to heaven to get a place there ready for them. At the end of a week the other child dies too, and she says to them that she, too, is going to heaven, and that she will keep their place ready; that they, too, would quickly go to them. And, as she had said, at the end of a year, at exactly the very same time, both the gentleman and lady died, and they both went to heaven. Source: Wentworth Webster, Basque Legends , 2nd edition (London: Griffith and Farran, 1879), pp. 158-65 . Although this tale contains most motifs traditionally found in type 510B stories, it does lack the incest motif. Return to the table of contents . All-Kinds-of-Fur Version of 1812 Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once upon a time there was a king whose wife was the most beautiful woman in the world, with hair of pure gold. Together they had a daughter, and she was as beautiful as her mother, and she had the same golden hair. The queen became ill, and when she felt that she was about to die, she called the king to her side and asked him not to marry anyone following her death, unless she was just as beautiful as she, and unless her hair was just as golden as hers. The king made this promise, and she died. For a long time the king was so grieved that he did not think about a second wife, but finally his councilors advised him to marry again. He sent messengers to all the princesses, but none was as beautiful as the deceased queen, and such golden hair could not be found anywhere in the world. Then one day the king's glance fell on his daughter, and he saw that she looked just like her mother, and that she had the same golden hair. He thought to himself, "You will never find anyone in the world this beautiful. You will have to marry your daughter." And in that instant he felt such a strong love for her, that he immediately announced his decision to his councilors. They tried to dissuade him, but to no avail. The princess was horrified at his godless intentions, but because she was clever, she told the king that he should first get her three dresses: one as golden as the sun, one as white as the moon, one that glistened like the stars. Further, he was to get her a coat made from a thousand kinds of fur. Every animal in the kingdom would have to give up a piece of its skin for it. The king was so fervent in his desires, that he had his huntsmen capture animals from across the entire kingdom. They were skinned, and a coat was made from their pelts. Thus, it did not take long before he brought the princess everything that she had asked for. The princess said that she would marry him the next day. That night she sought out the presents that she had received from her fiancé: a golden ring, a little golden spinning wheel, and a little golden yarn reel. She put the three dresses into a nutshell, blackened her hands and face with soot, put on the coat of all kinds of fur, and left. She walked the entire night until she came to a great forest. She would be safe there. Because she was tired, she sat down in a hollow tree and fell asleep. She was still asleep the next day when the king, her fiancé, came to this forest to hunt. His dogs ran up to the tree and sniffed at it. The king sent his huntsmen to see what kind of animal was in the tree. They came back and said that it was a strange animal, the likes of which they had never seen before. It had every kind of fur on its skin, and it was lying there asleep. The king ordered them to capture it and to tie it onto the back of his carriage. As the huntsmen were doing this, they saw that it was a girl. They tied her onto the back of the carriage and rode home with her. "All-Kinds-of-Fur," they said, "you are good for the kitchen. You can carry water and wood, and clean out the ashes." Then they gave her a little stall beneath the steps, where the light of day never shone, and said, "This is where you can live and sleep." So she had to help the cook in the kitchen. She plucked chickens, tended the fire, gathered vegetables, and did all the dirty work. Because she did very well at all this, the cook was good to her, and in the evening he often invited her in and gave her something to eat from the leftovers. Before the king went to bed, she had to go upstairs and pull off his boots. When she had pulled them off, he always threw them at her head. Poor All-Kinds-of-Fur lived like this for a long time. Oh, you beautiful maiden, what will become of you? Once there was a ball at the castle, and All-Kinds-of-Fur thought that she might see her fiancé once again, so she went to the cook and asked him if he would allow her to go upstairs a little and look in at the splendor from the doorway. "Go ahead," said the cook, "but do not stay longer than a half hour. You still have to clean out the ashes tonight." Then All-Kinds-of-Fur took her little oil lamp and went to her stall where she washed off the soot. Her beauty came forth just like blossoms in the springtime. She took off the fur coat, opened up the nut and took out the dress that glistened like the sun. She put it on and went upstairs. Everyone made room for her, and thought that a noble princess had entered the hall. The king immediately invited her to dance, and as he danced with her, he thought how closely this unknown princess resembled his own fiancée. The longer he looked at her, the stronger the resemblance. He was almost certain that this was his fiancée, and at the end of the dance, he was going to ask her. However, when they finished dancing, she bowed, and before the king knew what was happening, she disappeared. He asked the watchmen, but none of them had seen the princess leave the castle. She had run quickly to her stall, taken off the dress, blackened her hands and face, and put on the fur coat once again. Then she went to the kitchen to clean out the ashes, but the cook said, "Leave them until morning. I want to go upstairs and have a look at the dance. You make some soup for the king, but don't let any hairs fall into it, or there will be nothing more to eat for you." All-Kinds-of-Fur made some bread soup for the king, then she put the golden ring in it that he had given her. When the ball was over, the king had his bread soup brought to him. It tasted better than any he had ever eaten. When he was finished, he found the ring on the bottom of the bowl. Looking at it carefully, he saw that it was his engagement ring. Astonished, he could not understand how it had gotten there. He summoned the cook, who then became very angry with All-Kinds-of-Fur. "You must have let a hair fall into the soup," he said. "If you did, there will be blows for you." However, when the cook went upstairs, the king asked him who had made the soup, because it had been better than usual. The king had to confess that it had been All-Kinds-of-Fur. Then the king had her sent up to him. "Who are you?" he asked upon her arrival. "What are you doing in my castle, and where did you get the ring that was lying in the soup?" She answered, "I am only a poor child whose father and mother are dead. I have nothing, and I am good for nothing more than having boots thrown at my head. And I know nothing about the ring." With that she ran away. Soon there was another ball. All-Kinds-of-Fur again asked the cook to allow her to go upstairs. The cook gave his permission, but only for a half hour, because by then she would have to be back in the kitchen to make the king's bread soup. All-Kinds-of-Fur went to her stall, washed herself clean, and took out the moon-dress. It was purer and brighter than newly fallen snow. When she arrived upstairs the dance had just begun. The king extended his hand to her, and danced with her, and no longer doubted that this was his fiancée, for no one else in the world had such golden hair. However, the princess immediately slipped out when the dance ended, and the king, in spite of his great effort, could not find her. Further, he had not spoken a single word with her. She was All-Kinds-of-Fur once again, with blackened hands and face. She took her place in the kitchen and made bread soup for the king, while the cook went upstairs to have a look. When the soup was ready, she put the golden spinning wheel in it. The king ate the soup, and thought that it was even better this time. When he found the golden spinning wheel, he was even more astonished, because it had been a present from him to his fiancée some time ago. The cook was summoned again, and then All-Kinds-of-Fur, but once again she answered by saying that she knew nothing about it, and that she was there only to have boots thrown at her head. For the third time, the king held a ball. He hoped that his fiancée would come again, and he would not let her escape this time. All-Kinds-of-Fur again asked the cook to allow her to go upstairs, but he scolded her, saying, "You are a witch. You are always putting things in the soup. And you can cook better than I can." But because she begged so, and promised to behave herself, he gave her permission to go upstairs for a half hour. She put on the dress of stars. It glistened like stars in the night. She went upstairs and danced with the king, and he thought that he had never seen her more beautiful. While dancing, he slipped a ring onto her finger. He had ordered that it should be a very long dance. He could not bring himself to speak to her, nor could he keep her from escaping. As soon as the dance ended, she jumped into the crowd and disappeared before he could turn around. She ran to her stall. Because she had been gone more than a half hour, she quickly took off her dress, and in her rush she failed to blacken herself entirely. One finger remained white. When she returned to the kitchen, the cook had already left. She quickly made some bread soup and put the golden yarn reel into it. The king found it, just as he had found the ring and the golden spinning wheel, and now he knew for sure that his fiancée was nearby, for no one else could have had these presents. All-Kinds-of-Fur was summoned. Once again she tried to make an excuse and then run away, but as she ran by, the king noticed a white finger on her hand, and he held her fast. He found the ring that he had slipped onto her finger, and then he ripped off her fur coat. Her golden hair flowed out, and he saw that it was his dearly beloved fiancée. The cook received a generous reward. Then they got married and lived happily until they died. Notes: Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Allerlei-Rauh," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 1st ed. (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812/1815), vol. 1, no. 65, pp. 308-316 . Incest, one of our strongest taboos, has, until our own era, largely escaped exposure and discussion on the printed page. Publishers of folktales dealing with incest have gotten around the taboo in various ways. One of the most disingenuous solutions was used in the following passage from a nineteenth-century English "translation" of the Grimms' "All-Kinds-of-Fur": Now, the King had a daughter, who was just as beautiful as her dead mother, and had just such golden hair. One day when she had grown up, her father looked at her, and saw that she was exactly like her mother, so he said to his councilors, "I will marry my daughter to one of you, and she shall be queen, for she is exactly like her dead mother, and when I die her husband shall be king." But when the Princess heard of her father's decision, she was not at all pleased, and said to him, "Before I do your bidding, I must have three dresses; one as golden as the sun, one as silver as the moon, and one as shining as the stars. Besides these, I want a cloak made of a thousand different kinds of skin; every animal in your kingdom must give a bit of his skin to it." But she thought to herself, "This will be quite impossible, and I shall not have to marry someone I do not care for." -- Andrew Lang, The Green Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green and Company.1892), p. 276 . Other versions of the story (including later Grimm editions) make it abundantly clear that the fiancé mentioned here is a different king, not her own father. Beginning with the edition of 1819, the Grimms omitted the episode describing how the young king threw his boots at the heroine's head. The Grimms obviously wanted to de-emphasize the abusive nature of the relationship between the two lovers. However, most versions of the tale describe how the "hero" belittles, and possibly beats the woman he will later marry. Link to an English translation of the version of 1857: All-Kinds-of-Fur . Return to the Table of Contents . Emperor Heinrich in Sudemer Mountain Germany Emperor Heinrich the Fowler liked to stay at Goslar, which he often did, and many stories are told about him there. Above all they tell about how marvelously beautiful his wife was, and how he could not be consoled when she died. After his grief had subsided somewhat, he revealed to his own daughter, who was almost more beautiful than her mother, his sinful desire to marry her. She appropriately resisted him, finally convincing him to first to travel to the courts of all the kings and counts in Europe in search of a spouse more beautiful than she. He traveled far and wide, but finally returned with the news that a more beautiful woman could not be found anywhere. But still she resisted his pleas and his advances. Finally he set the condition that he would desist from his demands if she could create a blanket upon which all of the earths animals could be seen. She went into a small chapel in the upper city and fervently prayed to God, but she found no comfort in her prayers, so finally in despair she called upon the devil to come and help her. He appeared immediately, saying that he would bring the blanket to her, if she could remain awake in the chapel for three days and three nights. She brought her little dog into the chapel with her and spent the time ceaselessly praying. However, during the third night, just as morning was breaking, sleep almost overcame her. At that moment the devil approached, and her little dog, seeing him, pulled at her skirt so vigorously that she jumped up. The devil angrily dropped the blanket, furiously threw the little dog against church wall, and disappeared. She took the blanket to her father, who then was overcome by such powerful pain that he lost all will to live. He bewitched himself into the Sudemer Mountain near Goslar, whose watchtower is visible throughout the region. There he sits until the present day, and will return only when Goslar finds itself in great need, or when the Day of Judgment arrives. Others say that the emperor is sitting in Rammel Mountain, and that before his death he had three stones mortared into the Goslars city wall, saying that he would return when these stones fall out. But no one knows which stones they are. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Kaiser Heinrich in Sudemerberg," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 184-85 . Heinrich (Henry) the Fowler was born about 876 and died in 936. His wife Matilda founded many monasteries and is a saint of the Roman Catholic Church. Goslar in Lower Saxony is one of northern Germanys best preserved medieval cities. The incest motif in this legend is reminiscent of the type 510B folktales told throughout Europe. The "sleeping hero" motif (type 766) is also found in numerous folktales and legends. Link to additional Sleeping Hero Legends . Return to the table of contents . Cinder Blower Karl Bartsch A rich widower had an only daughter who was developing into a beautiful and charming woman. Her father's heart became inflamed with impure love, but she withstood his advances. He threatened to force himself on her, and she responded with cunning. She promised to yield to his will if he would give her a dress made of silver. When she received such a dress, she then demanded one made from gold, and the third time, one made from jewels. After receiving that one as well, she said, "Now all I need is a crow-skin coat," and then she made one last wish: a magic wand. These too she received. Now in another land there lived a prince who had heard of the girl's beauty. Taking the magic wand in her hand and the dresses over her shoulder, she wished herself to the vicinity of the prince's castle. She immediately found herself in the castle garden. Then she wished for herself a chest in an oak tree in the garden, put her dresses in it, put on the crow-skin coat and went to the castle kitchen where she presented herself as a poor boy looking for work. "I can use you," said the cook. "You can be the cinder blower." A few days later the prince came to the kitchen with some freshly killed game. She saw him and liked him beyond measure. Soon afterward there was a wedding in a nearby castle, and the prince went to it. Many people went there to look on at the dance. Cinder Blower asked the cook for permission to observe. She ran to the oak tree, put on the silver dress, and wished herself a carriage in which she rode to the castle. The prince saw her and danced with her, but after a few dances she disappeared. Seating herself in her carriage she said, Darkness behind me, Before me light, So none can follow me into the night. The next morning the prince was in a bad mood, for he had been awake all night thinking about his beautiful dance partner. Cinder Blower was asked to polish his boots, and this she did, but she failed to polish one small spot on one of the toes. The prince noticed this and angrily came into the kitchen and threw the boot at her head. The next evening there was another dance, and Cinder Blower again asked for permission to go. This time she put on the golden dress, then rode there in the carriage. The prince had been looking for her and was very happy when she arrived. While dancing with her he asked her where she lived. "In Boot-Throw" was her answer. She remained there one hour, and then disappeared. In vain the prince asked where Boot-Throw was. No one could tell him. Again that night the prince could not close his eyes, and the next day he was in an even worse mood than before. Cinder Blower was asked to brush his coat, but he did not like the way she did it, and finally he threw the brush at her head. The third evening Cinder Blower again asked for permission to look on at the dance, then put on her dress of precious stones. While dancing with her the prince asked her where she lived. "In Brush-Throw," was her answer. "Whoever you are," he said, "take this ring from me." She let him put the ring onto her finger. Then she tried to sneak away, but the prince carefully watched her and followed close behind her. She climbed out of her carriage near the oak tree. However, she did not have time to take off her dress, but quickly put on the crow-skin coat over it. The next morning when the cook was preparing the soup, Cinder Blower dropped the ring into it. The prince found it and asked the cook who had been in the kitchen. "Only Cinder Blower and I," he answered. The prince summoned Cinder Blower and said, "My head itches. Look and see if any vermin are there." Cinder Blower obeyed, but when she stood before him, he saw the diamond dress glistening forth from beneath the worn-out crow-skin coat. Then he recognized her. "Now you are mine," he said, and he made her his wife and they lived happily together until they died. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg] (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879, vol. 1, pp. 479-481 . Return to the table of contents . Broomthrow, Brushthrow, Combthrow Austria, Theodor Vernaleken In a castle there once lived a count by the name of Rudolf. His wife had a golden cross on her forehead. Their daughter Adelheid had the same mark on her forehead. When she was twenty years old her mother suddenly died. The count's and his daughter's sorrow and grief were endless. After the mother's burial, the father and his child locked themselves in their rooms and were seldom seen. After a month had passed, the count had his daughter brought to his room and said to her, "Dear child, you know how much I loved your mother. I cannot live without a wife. Therefore I am going out into the world to seek a wife who -- like your blessed mother -- has a golden cross on her forehead. If I do not find such a woman within a year and a day, then I will marry you." When Adelheid heard these words she was very upset, and she silently withdrew. The next morning Count Rudolf departed, promising to return within a year and a day. When Adelheid was alone she considered whether or not it would be possible for her father to find a woman with such a cross. Then she remembered that her mother had once told her that except for her and Adelheid, no one on the entire earth had such a cross. She decided to go away. She would rather earn her bread with the work of her own hands than to eat the finest tidbits at her father's table as his wife. She entrusted one of her loyal servants with her plan, and they made preparations to depart. She secretly loaded her valuables, her jewelry, her gold, and her clothes into several large carriages. During the night she drove off with them, accompanied by her servant Gotthold and several others who were loyal to her. They came to a large city where she rented a house and moved into it with her servants. Adelheid had often stated that she wanted to earn her bread with the work of her own hands. Therefore Gotthold sought a position for his mistress in the city. He learned that there was an opening for a kitchen maid in the castle of Prince Adolf. Thus he went to the chief cook and asked him if he would be willing to hire his niece, for that is what he called the countess. As he talked further with the chief cook, Gotthold recognized in him a friend whom he had not seen for many years. He told him that his brother had died, leaving a daughter in his care. The chief cook agreed to hire her. The loyal servant happily returned to the countess and remained in the rented house. Adelheid now dyed her face, neck, and hands brown; covered her golden cross and her hair with a large head-scarf; took off her magnificent robes, putting on instead old, dirty, torn clothing; and presented herself to the chief cook. She was given a small room where she could sleep and keep her things. Slowly she grew accustomed to her job, even though she was exhausted by the hard work. Until now she had not yet seen the prince. One day he invited all his friends and acquaintances to a great ball. On the morning of the ball, Adelheid was sweeping the staircase, when the prince, without being seen by her, walked up and tipped over the dust pail, thus dirtying his boots. As she was fleeing he angrily ripped the broom from her hands and threw it at her. That evening as the hall was filling with people, the young countess went to the chief cook and asked him for permission to go to the ball. He replied, "No, I cannot allow you to do that. What if the prince were to find out!" Adelheid continued to beg, until he finally said, "Just go. But don't stay too late, and if you get anything, bring some back for me as well." Now she went to Gotthold's house, changed her clothes, washed away the color, and ordered up a splendid carriage in which she rode to the prince's. When the guests saw the splendid carriage approaching in the distance they all hurried outside and said, "A foreign lady! A beautiful lady!" The prince hurried toward her, lifted her from her carriage, and led her up the stairs. She had to dance with him the entire evening and to sit next to him at the table. After eating, he asked her what her name was and where she came from. "My name is Adelheid, and I come from Broomthrow," replied the countess. At twelve o'clock she left, and with her the majority of guests. Arriving at home she quickly got undressed, colored herself brown, and took three gold pieces which she gave to the chief cook, claiming that she had stood behind a door and had received the gold from an old woman. The next morning the prince looked for Broomthrow on his maps, but he could not find it. He wanted to ask her about her home city once again, but because he did not know where she lived he invited his friends to a second ball. On the morning of the second ball Adelheid was brushing her clothing when the prince, without being seen, came up the stairs. She turned around and dropped the brush, which fell onto the prince's feet. Angrily Adolf picked up the brush and threw it at the embarrassed countess's head. That evening the chief cook once again allowed her to go the ball, and she took advantage of his permission. At the ball Adolf told her that he had not been able to find Broomthrow. "How could you be looking for Broomthrow?" she replied. "I said Brushthrow." Once again they danced together, and as midnight approached she went home. She brought the chief cook a gold band, claiming that she had received it as a gift. The next morning the prince looked for Brushthrow, but could not find it. He then invited his friends and acquaintances to a third ball, which was to be even more magnificent than the first two. On the eve of the ball, shortly before the festivities were to begin, Adelheid, contrary to custom, was combing her hair in the castle. The prince, displeased because the foreign lady had not arrived yet, walked up the stairs just as the countess dropped her comb. Prince Adolf picked it up and threw it at the kitchen servant's head. She quickly withdrew, changed her clothes, and went to the ball. At the table the prince said that he had not been able to find Brushthrow anywhere. "I can believe that," she said. "I called the place Combthrow." He didn't want to believe her, but she argued with him until he finally gave in. Before she left he placed a ring on her finger, without her noticing it. The next morning the prince was not well, and he asked a chief cook to make soup for him. The latter announced this in the kitchen, and Adelheid asked for permission to make the soup. But he said, "If you put something in the soup that doesn't belong there, then I am the one who will be punished." She replied, "I will not put anything wrong in it." She made the soup, and without being seen, she threw the prince's ring into the soup. The prince poured the soup into a dish and heard something jingle. He felt around and fished out the ring. Amazed, he then asked who had made the soup. "The kitchen maid" was the answer. Adolph ordered his servant, "Bring her here." She hurriedly put on the dress that she had worn the previous evening, and when the prince saw her, he recognized his dance partner. She now had to tell him her life story, and soon afterward he married her. In the meantime her father had come home, and when he discovered that his daughter had already married, he had to accept his fate. Source: Theodor Vernaleken, Österreichische Kinder- und Hausmärchen: Treu nach mündlicher Überlieferung (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1864), no. 33, pp. 172-77 . Return to the table of contents . The Emperor's Daughter in the Pig Stall Romania An emperor, whose wife had died, came upon the horrible idea to marry his daughter. However, she refused, and in this she was supported by her nurse with whom she confided all the secrets of her heart. When the emperor again brought his proposal to her, she declared -- following the old woman's advice -- that she would accept if she could have a beautiful silver dress. The emperor quickly had such a dress made and brought it to his daughter himself, hoping that now she would cease hesitating. But the princess, again coached by her nurse, this time demanded a beautiful golden dress, that would have to be ten times more valuable than the silver one. The emperor immediately ordered the master goldsmiths in his capital city to make such a dress, taking as much gold as they needed from his treasury. When it was finished he joyfully took it to the princess, but found her as resistant as before. Now she demanded a beautiful diamond dress that was worth ten thousand times more than the golden one. "Such a dress," the nurse had said, "will cost more than his treasury contains, and that will be the end of his proposals." The emperor was astonished at this monstrous requirement, but in order to achieve his goal he depleted his treasury, and what was still needed he forcefully took from his subjects. Thus he collected enough wealth to have a diamond dress made than cost ten thousand times what the golden one had cost. The princess was startled when he brought it to her, and asked for one day to think things through. The emperor granted her this, and she discussed the situation with her nurse, who advised her to demand a dress that he certainly would not be able to have made: one made entirely of louse pelts, and trimmed with flea pelts. When the emperor heard the princess's latest wish he became angry, but said nothing. Instead he issued the order to have such a dress made. It took an entire year to collect all the pelts and hides for this dress, and yet another year before they were all sewn together. Then emperor brought the dress to his daughter, and this time the princess -- following the old woman's advice -- let the marriage between herself and her father take place. That evening, after entering the bridal chamber with him, she asked for permission to step outside for a moment. He refused, for he did not trust her and thought that she wanted to escape from him. She gave him a piece of string, tying one end around her own left hand, and told him that if she did not come back in time, he would only have to pull her in. So the hateful father finally agreed, and the princess slipped out the door, where her nurse was standing ready with an old bill goat, and they quickly tied the string around its horns. Then the princess put on all her dresses -- first the one of diamonds, over that the one of gold, then the silver one, and over them all the disgusting one that the emperor had just had made. Then she fled. Meanwhile the emperor waited impatiently, finally pulling gently on the string. Outside the billy goat pulled back. The emperor finally pulled hard, but the billy goat would not be outdone in such a tug-of-war. Finally the emperor, filled with rage, jumped up and went to the door. To his astonishment, instead of his charming daughter he found there a shaggy black billy goat, which rudely attacked him with its horns. The emperor retreated into the bridal chamber, and called for his people, who -- led by the nurse -- came to him. The emperor vented his anger with a storm of curse words. He told of his adventure and ordered that the billy goat be taken away. The nurse began to shriek, "See here, you tyrannical father, see what you have caused? God has punished you because of your wicked marriage. He has transformed your daughter into this terrible horned monster!" With these and many other words, the cunning nurse convinced the deceived ruler that the just anger of God had caused this miracle. Filled with shame, he said nothing more about the matter. Meanwhile the princess fled into a great forest, where -- since the season was right -- she lived from berries and nuts that she found in the bushes. Now it happened that the prince of the kingdom to which these woods belonged was hunting there. Evening was approaching when the prince, accompanied by just one servant, pursued a wild boar into a deep thicket. To his great astonishment he saw there an unusual forest creature. Not knowing what to make of it, he aimed an arrow at it. When he saw that it was not moving, he climbed the tree and captured the unknown animal alive. With great clamor the forest creature was led through the city to the palace. There, because of its disgusting fur, it was turned over to the swineherd, who locked it in his worst pig stall, above which was a chicken coop. Thus the unknown forest creature's fur became even filthier. From the scraps that they brought it to eat, it would take only berries and nuts from the forest. Soon afterward there was a glorious festival in the city. The son of a well-known gentleman was getting married. All the beautiful and important people were gathered there: maidens, ladies, and gentlemen, whatever their names. When evening came the princess, pulled off her disgusting garb, revealing the silver dress beneath it, left the pig stall, and went to the wedding. The prince, who was also there, saw her and danced with her; and because he found her so extraordinarily beautiful he gave her a valuable ring, after having spoken with her, and in the end having danced only with her. Morning approached, and the unknown beauty disappeared from the hall without anyone observing where she went. The princess had put her stall garb back on and was peacefully asleep in the pig stall. On the second evening she again appeared at the wedding, this time in her golden dress. The prince, who had been looking for her, was very happy to see her, and did not leave her side, for he wanted to know who this exceptionally wealthy gleaming beauty was. However, although he watched her carefully, trying to prevent her from escaping again, she took advantage of an opportune moment and slipped away. Before anyone noticed her absence she was again hidden beneath her filthy garb in the pig stall. On the third evening the mysterious maiden once again appeared at the wedding. Her glorious diamond dress astonished everyone. The prince thought that a maiden wearing such an incalculably costly dress must be of high nobility, but he was a thousand times more impressed by her personal beauty. He happily conversed with her alone, but to his dismay she would not tell him who she was or where she came from. As morning approached she again slipped away from the hall so cunningly that neither the prince nor anyone else noticed her leave. The wedding was now over, and the prince had no hope of seeing his mysterious beloved again. This made him seriously ill. The princess sat in her pig stall, but not as calmly as earlier, for she too had fallen in love. A few days passed, and the prince, almost dying of longing, did not leave his bed. Then one of his friends came to visit him, and he ordered breakfast for the prince. The strange forest creature appeared to be quiet and well-behaved, so they let it run about freely. On this morning it had gone to the kitchen to warm itself by the fire, for it was cold in the stall. Reluctantly the kitchen maid had allowed this, and the forest creature was cowering next to the stove. When milk was placed on the fire, the forest creature asked who it was for. Learning that it was for the prince, she secretly pulled from her finger the ring that the prince had given her at the wedding, and dropped it into the pot. After warming herself, she crept back to the pig stall, put on her diamond dress, and was once again the most beautiful princess. Meanwhile the prince was eating breakfast with his friend, and he was shocked almost to death to discover at the bottom of the milk pot the ring that he had given to his beloved mysterious stranger. He immediately summoned the kitchen maid who had prepared his breakfast, but she swore that she did not know how the ring came to be in the pot. The prince investigated further: Who else had been in the kitchen. Finally the girl admitted, after resisting for a long time, that the ugly forest creature had been there warming itself by the fire. The prince and his friend immediately went to the stall where the disgusting forest creature was kept. He opened the door and looked inside, then took three steps back in joyful surprise. There sat his beautiful and beloved mysterious stranger, dressed in her glorious gown. She stepped out and said, "I am the one, my prince!" Answering his questions as to how she had come to this horrible place, she told him her story, which astonished everyone. Then the prince tenderly took his beloved princess into his arms. Soon thereafter, to the pleasure of the entire court, a magnificent wedding brought this story to a happing end. Source: Arthur and Albert Schott, "Die Kaiserstochter im Schweinstall," Walachische Maehrchen (Stuttgart: J. G. Cotta, 1845), pp. 96-100 . Return to the table of contents . Fair Maria Wood Italy, Thomas Frederick Crane There was once a husband and wife who had but one child, a daughter. Now it happened that the wife fell ill and was at the point of death. Before dying she called her husband, and said to him, weeping, "I am dying; you are still young; if you ever wish to marry again, be mindful to choose a wife whom my wedding ring fits; and if you cannot find a lady whom it fits well, do not marry." Her husband promised that he would do so. When she was dead he took off her wedding ring and kept it until he desired to marry again. Then he sought for some one to please him. He went from one to another, but the ring fitted no one. He tried so many but in vain. One day he thought of calling his daughter, and trying the ring on her to see whether it fitted her. The daughter said, "It is useless, dear father; you cannot marry me, because you are my father." He did not heed her, put the ring on her finger, and saw that it fitted her well, and wanted to marry his daughter nolens volens . She did not oppose him, but consented. The day of the wedding, he asked her what she wanted. She said that she wished four silk dresses, the most beautiful that could be seen. He, who was a gentleman, gratified her wish and took her the four dresses, one handsomer than the other, and all the handsomest that had ever been seen. "Now, what else do you want?" said he. "I want another dress, made of wood, so that I can conceal myself in it." And at once he had this wooden dress made. She was well pleased. She waited until one day her husband was out of sight, put on the wooden dress, and under it the four silk dresses, and went away to a certain river not far off, and threw herself in it. Instead of sinking and drowning, she floated, for the wooden dress kept her up. The water carried her a long way, when she saw on the bank a gentleman, and began to cry, "Who wants the fair Maria Wood?" That gentleman who saw her on the water, and whom she addressed, called her and she came to the bank and saluted him. "How is it that you are thus dressed in wood, and come floating on the water without drowning?" She told him that she was a poor girl who had only that dress of wood, and that she wanted to go out to service. "What can you do?" "I can do all that is needed in a house, and if you would only take me for a servant you would be satisfied." He took her to his house, where his mother was, and told her all that had happened, saying, "If you, dear mother, will take her as a servant, we can try her." In short, she took her and was pleased with this woman dressed in wood. It happened that there were balls at that place which the best ladies and gentlemen attended. The gentleman who had the servant dressed in wood prepared to go to the ball, and after he had departed, the servant said to his mother, "Do me this kindness, mistress: let me go to the ball too, for I have never seen any dancing." "What, you wish to go to the ball so badly dressed that they would drive you away as soon as they saw you!" The servant was silent and when the mistress was in bed, dressed herself in one of her silk dresses and became the most beautiful woman that was ever seen. She went to the ball, and it seemed as if the sun had entered the room; all were dazzled. She sat down near her master, who asked her to dance, and would dance with no one but her. She pleased him so much that he fell in love with her. He asked her who she was and where she came from. She replied that she came from a distance, but told him nothing more. At a certain hour, without anyone perceiving it, she went out and disappeared. She returned home and put on her wooden dress again. In the morning the master returned from the ball, and said to his mother, "Oh! if you had only seen what a beautiful lady there was at the ball! She appeared like the sun, she was so beautiful and well dressed. She sat down near me, and would not dance with anyone but me." His mother then said, "Did you not ask her who she was and where she came from?" "She would only tell me that she came from a distance; but I thought I should die; I wish to go again this evening." The servant heard all this dialogue, but kept silent, pretending that the matter did not concern her. In the evening he prepared himself again for the ball, and the servant said to him, "Master, yesterday evening I asked your mamma to let me, too, go to the ball, for I have never seen dancing, but she would not; will you have the kindness to let me go this evening?" "Be still, you ugly creature, the ball is no place for you!" "Do me this favor," she said, weeping, "I will stand out of doors, or under a bench, or in a corner so no one shall see me; but let me go!" He grew angry then, and took a stick and began to beat the poor servant. She wept and remained silent. After he had gone, she waited until his mother was in bed, and put on a dress finer than the first, and so rich as to astonish, and away to the ball! When she arrived all began to gaze at her, for they had never seen anything more beautiful. All the handsomest young men surrounded her and asked her to dance; but she would have nothing to do with anyone but her master. He again asked her who she was, and she said she would tell him later. They danced and danced, and all at once she disappeared. Her master ran here and there, asked one and another, but no one could tell him where she had gone. He returned home and told his mother all that had passed. She said to him, "Do you know what you must do? Take this diamond ring, and when she dances with you give it to her; and if she takes it, it is a sign that she loves you." She gave him the ring. The servant listened, saw everything, and was silent. In the evening the master prepared for the ball and the servant again asked him to take her, and again he beat her. He went to the ball, and after midnight, as before, the beautiful lady returned more beautiful than before, and as usual would dance only with her master. At the right moment he took out the diamond ring, and asked her if she would accept it. She took it and thanked him, and he was happy and satisfied. Afterward he asked her again who she was and where from. She said that she was of that country, That when they speak of going to a ball They are beaten on the head and said no more. At the usual hour she stopped dancing and departed. He ran after her, but she went like the wind, and reached home without his finding out where she went. But he ran so in all directions, and was in such suffering, that when he reached home he was obliged to go to bed more dead than alive. Then he fell ill and grew worse every day, so that all said he would die. He did nothing but ask his mother and everyone if they knew anything of that lady, and that he would die if he did not see her. The servant heard everything; and one day, when he was very ill, what did she think of? She waited until her mistress's eye was turned, and dropped the diamond ring in the broth her master was to eat. No one saw her, and his mother took him the broth. He began to eat it, when he felt something hard, saw something shine, and took it out. You can imagine how he looked at it and recognized the diamond ring! They thought he would go mad. He asked his mother if that was the ring and she swore that it was, and all happy, she said that now he would see her again. Meanwhile the servant went to her room, took off her wooden dress, and put on one all of silk, so that she appeared a beauty, and went to the room of the sick man. His mother saw her and began to cry, "Here she is; here she is!" She went in and saluted him, smiling, and he was so beside himself that he became well at once. He asked her to tell him her story: who she was, where she came from, how she came, and how she knew that he was ill. She replied, "I am the woman dressed in wood who was your servant. It is not true that I was a poor girl, but I had that dress to conceal myself in, for underneath it I was the same that I am now. I am a lady; and although you treated me so badly when I asked to go to the ball, I saw that you loved me, and now I have come to save you from death." You can believe that they stayed to hear her story. They were married and have always been happy and still are. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Company, 1885), no. 10, pp. 48-52 . Return to the Table of Contents . Maria Wood Italy They say, there was a king, whose wife, when she came to die, said to him, "When I am dead, you will want to marry again; but take my advice: marry no woman but her whose foot my shoe fits." But this she said because the shoe was under a spell, and would fit no one whom he could marry. The king, however, caused the shoe to be tried on all manner of women; and when the answer always was that it would fit none of them, he grew quite bewildered and strange in his mind. After some years had passed, his young daughter, having grown up to girl's estate, came to him one day, saying, "Oh, papa; only think! Mamma's shoe just fits me!" "Does it!" replied the simple king; "then I must marry you." "Oh, that cannot be, papa," said the girl, and ran away. But the simple king was so possessed with the idea that he must marry the woman whom his wife's shoe fitted, that he sent for her every day and said the same thing. But the queen had not said that he should marry the woman whom her shoe fitted, but that he should not marry any whom it did not fit. When the princess found that he persevered in his silly caprice, she said at last, "Papa, if I am to do what you say, you must do some thing for me first." "Agreed, my child," replied the king; "you have only to speak." "Then, before I marry," said the girl, "I want a lot of things, but I will begin with one at a time. First, I want a dress of the color of a beautiful noontide sky, but all covered with stars like the sky at midnight, and furnished with a parure to suit it." Such a dress the king had made and brought to her. "Next," said the princess, "I want a dress of the color of the sea, all covered with golden fishes, with a fitting parure." Such a dress the king had made, and brought to her. "Next," said the princess, "I want a dress of a dark blue, all covered with gold embroidery and spangled with silver bells, and with a parure to match." Such a dress the king had made and brought to her. "These are all very good," said the princess; "but now you must send for the most cunning artificer in your whole kingdom, and let him make me a figure of an old woman just like life, fitted with all sorts of springs to make it move and walk when one gets inside it, just like a real woman." Such a figure the king had made, and brought it to the princess. "That is just the sort of figure I wanted," said she;" and now I don't want anything more." And the simple king went away quite happy. As soon as she was alone, however, the princess packed all the three dresses and many of her other dresses, and all her jewelry and a large sum of money, inside the figure of the old woman, and then she got into it and walked away. No one seeing an old woman walking out of the palace thought she had anything to do with the princess, and thus she got far away without anyone thinking of stopping her. On, on, on, she wandered till she came to the palace of a great king, and just at the time that the king's son was coming in from hunting. "Have you a place in all this fine palace to take in a poor old body?" whined the princess inside the figure of the old woman. "No, no! get out of the way! How dare you come in the way of the prince!" said the servants, and drove her away. But the prince took compassion on her, and called her to him. "What's your name, good woman?" said the prince. "Maria Wood is my name, your Highness," replied the princess. "And what can you do, since you ask for a place?" "Oh, I can do many things. First, I understand all about poultry, and then --" "That'll do," replied the prince; "take her, and let her be the hen-wife, and let her have food and lodging, and all she wants." So they gave her a little hut on the borders of the forest, and set her to tend the poultry. But the prince as he went out hunting often passed by her hut, and when she saw him pass she never failed to come out and salute him, and now and then he would stop his horse and spend a few moments in gossip with her. Before long it was Carnival time; and as the prince came by Maria Wood came out and wished him a "good Carnival." The prince stopped his horse and said, his young head full of the pleasure he expected, "Tomorrow, you know, we have the first day of the feast." "To be sure I know it; and how I should like to be there; won't you take me?" answered Maria Wood. "You shameless old woman," replied the prince, "to think of your wanting to go to a festino at your time of life!" and he gave her a cut with his whip. The next day Maria put on her dress of the color of the noontide sky, covered with stars like the sky at midnight, with the parure made to wear with it, and came to the feast. Every lady made place before her dazzling appearance, and the prince alone dared to ask her to dance. With her he danced all the evening, and fairly fell in love with her, nor could he leave her side; and as they sat together, he took the ring off his own finger and put it on to her hand. She appeared equally satisfied with his attentions, and seemed to desire no other partner. Only when he tried to gather from her whence she was, she would only say she came from the country of Whipblow, which set the prince wondering very much, as he had never heard of such a country. At the end of the ball, the prince sent his attendants to watch her that he might learn where she lived, but she disappeared so swiftly it was impossible for them to tell what had become of her. When the prince came by Maria Wood's hut next day, she did not fail to wish him again a "good Carnival." "Tomorrow we have the second festino , you know," said the prince. "Well I know it," replied Maria Wood; "shouldn't I like to go! Won't you take me?" "You contemptible old woman to talk in that way!" exclaimed the prince. "You ought to know better!" and he struck her with his boot. Next night Maria put on her dress of the color of the sea, covered all over with gold fishes, and the parure made to wear with it, and went to the feast. The prince recognized her at once, and claimed her for his partner all the evening, nor did she seem to wish for any other, only when he tried to learn from her whence she was, she would only say she came from the country of Bootkick. The prince could not remember ever to have heard of the Bootkick country, and thought she meant to laugh at him; however, he ordered his attendants to make more haste this night in following her; but what diligence so ever they used she was too swift for them. The next time the prince came by Maria Wood's hut, she did not fail to wish him again a "good Carnival." "Tomorrow we have the last festino !" exclaimed he, with a touch of sadness, for he remembered it was the last of the happy evenings that he could feel sure of seeing his fair unknown. "Ah! you must take me. But, what'll you say if I come to it in spite of you?" answered Maria Wood. "You incorrigible old woman!" exclaimed the prince; "you provoke me so with your nonsense, I really cannot keep my hand off you;" and he gave her a slap. The next night Maria Wood put on her dress of a dark blue, all covered with gold embroidery and spangled with silver bells, and the parure made to wear with it. The prince constituted her his partner for the evening as before, nor did she seem to wish for any other, only when he wanted to learn from her whence she was, all she would say was that she came from Slapland. This night the prince told his servants to make more haste in following her, or he would discharge them all. But they answered, "It is useless to attempt the thing, as no mortal can equal her in swiftness." After this, the prince fell ill of his disappointment, because he saw no hope of hearing any more of the fair domino with whom he had spent three happy evenings, nor could any doctor find any remedy for his sickness. Then Maria Wood sent him word, saying, "Though the prince's physicians cannot help him, yet let him but take a cup of broth of my making, and he will immediately be healed." "Nonsense! how can a cup of broth, or how can any medicament, help me!" exclaimed the prince. "There is no cure for my ailment." Again Maria Wood sent the same message; but the prince said angrily, "Tell the silly old thing to hold her tongue; she doesn't know what she's talking about." But again, the third time, Maria Wood sent to him, saying, "Let the prince but take a cup of broth of my making, and he will immediately be healed." By this time the prince was so weary that he did not take the trouble to refuse. The servants finding him so depressed began to fear that he was sinking, and they called to Maria Wood to make her broth, because, though they had little faith in her promise, they knew not what else to try. So Maria Wood made ready the cup of broth she had promised, and they put it down beside the prince. Presently the whole palace was roused; the prince had started up in bed, and was shouting, "Bring hither Maria Wood! Quick! Bring hither Maria Wood!" So they ran and fetched Maria Wood, wondering what could have happened to bring about so great a change in the prince. But the truth was, that Maria had put into the cup of broth the ring the prince had put on her finger the first night of the feast, and when he began to take the broth he found the ring with the spoon. When he saw the ring, he knew at once that Maria Wood could tell where to find his fair partner. "Wait a bit! There's plenty of time!" said Maria, when the servant came to fetch her in all haste; and she waited to put on her dress of the color of the noontide sky. The prince was beside himself for joy when he saw her, and would have the betrothal celebrated that very day. Source: Rachel Harriette Busk Roman Legends: A Collection of the Fables and Folk-Lore of Rome (Boston: Estes and Lauriat, 1877), pp. 84-90 . Return to the table of contents . All-Kinds-of-Fur Greece Once upon a time there was a king whose wife died, leaving him a small daughter. With time she grew into a beautiful maiden, and when the king saw how beautiful she was he said to her, "I want to marry you. You must become my wife." "How can you take me for a wife," said the girl, "for I am your daughter." "That is all the same to me. I want to marry you." "That is entirely impossible!" said the girl. "Just go to the bishop and listen to what he says. If he says that you are right, then take me in God's name." So the king went to the bishop and asked, "If someone has a lamb that he himself has cared for and raised, is it better that he should eat it, or that another person should eat it?" "No," answered the bishop, "it is better for the person to eat it who raised it." Then the king went back to his daughter and said, "He told me that I may take you." "If he really told you that you make take me, then take me in God's name. But first make me two dresses of pure gold, and fill the pockets with ducats. Also make a bed for me, and a shaft that goes ten fathoms deep into the earth." When the king had done all this, the girl took the dresses, climbed into the bed, then rode in into the shaft, saying, "Earth, open further." And the earth opened further, and she rode one until she came out at another place, and there she remained. A prince was hunting there, and he found the girl, wrapped in an animal skin. He approached her and asked, "Are you a human?" She answered, "Yes, I am a human. May I go with you?" He replied, "For all I care you may come with me." He took her with him and let her herd the geese. One day the king gave a feast, and the women began to dance. Then the girl slipped out of her animal skin and went to the ball in her golden dress, and danced. The prince saw her and said to himself," Who can that be? When she leaves the ball, I will follow her." When the ball was over the girl left, and the prince crept after her. She noticed him, and she began to run, and he ran after her. Then the girl took a handful of ducats and threw them to the ground. While the prince was gathering up the gold she slipped away and hid herself in her animal skin. Then the prince said, "Tomorrow I will give another feast, in order to see who she is." The next day at the ball the girl came again and danced, and when she left the ball the prince ran after her. While running away she lost a shoe, and while the prince was picking it up she escaped half barefoot, then hid herself again in her animal skin. The prince took the shoe and tried it onto all the girls in order to see whom it fitted, but he could not find the right one. When the servant girls were taking wash water to the king before he ate, the girl split her animal skin a little at her knee so that her gold dress was visible. Then she went to the servant girls and said that she would like to take the water to the king. But they said, "What? You, a goose girl want to take water to the king?" "What is the matter?" asked the king. "The goose girl want to bring your water." "Then let her do so. Just let her come." When she knelt down the golden dress shone through the slit. The prince saw this and cried out, "So you are the one who tormented me so!" And with that he took her as his wife. Source: J. G. von Hahn, "Allerleirauh," Griechische und albanesische Märchen , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1864), no. 27, pp. 191-93 . Return to the table of contents . The Princess Who Would Not Marry Her Father Portugal There was once a king and a queen. But a few years after their marriage the queen died. At her death she placed a ring on a table, and bade the king marry whomsoever that ring should fit. It happened that their daughter, the princess, approached the table by chance, saw the ring, and tried it on. She then ran to the king her father, and said, "Sire, do you know that a ring which I found on the table fits me as though it had been made expressly for me! . . ." The king, on hearing this, replied, "Oh! my daughter, you will have to marry me, because your mother, before she died, expressed a wish that I should marry whoever this ring would fit." The princess, greatly distressed, shut herself up in a room which had the window looking into the garden, and gave vent to her grief. Soon, however, a little old woman appeared to her, and asked her, "Why do you weep, royal lady?" To which the princess replied, "Well, what else can I do? My father says that I must marry him." The little old woman then said to her, " Listen to me, royal lady, go and tell your father that you will only marry him on condition that he buys you a dress of the color of the stars in the heavens." And after saying this she departed. The princess then went up to the king, who asked her, "Well, my daughter, are we to be married?" To which she replied, "Well, father, I shall marry you when you bring me a dress of the color of the stars in the heavens." The father, on hearing this, went out and bought her the dress, and gave it to her readymade. The princess again went to her room to cry. The little old woman again appeared to her, and asked her, "What ails you, royal lady?" She replied, "What can ail me! My father has bought me the dress I asked him for, and he wishes to marry me." The old lady rejoined, "Never mind, you must now ask him to bring you a dress of the color of the flowers that grow in the fields." The princess again went to her father and told him that she could only marry him on condition of his bringing her a robe of the color of wild flowers. The king bought the dress and gave it to her made up, and quite ready to be put on. The princess, again in trouble, retired to her chamber to weep. The old lady again appeared and demanded, "What ails you, royal lady? " To which the princess replied, "What can ail me, indeed! My father has bought me the second robe, and is determined to marry me." The good old lady rejoined, "Ask your father now for a robe of various colors." The princess did so, and asked for a robe of various colors, and the king bought her the dress and brought it to her ready to be put on. The princess returned to her chamber to weep over her new trouble, but the little old woman came to her and asked her what troubled her. The princess replied that the king had bought her the third robe she required of him, and was now determined that the marriage should take place. "And now what shall I do to prevent it? " inquired the princess. The little old woman replied, "Royal lady, you must now send for a carpenter and order him to make you a dress of wood; get inside it and go to the palace of the king who lives yonder, who requires a servant to tend the ducks." The princess did as she was told, had a dress made of wood, put all her jewels, and everything else she would require, inside, and getting inside it herself; and one fine day she ran away. She walked on and on until she arrived at the said palace. She knocked at the door, and told the servants to ask his majesty the king if he required a maid to mind the ducks. He replied that he did ; and he asked her what her name was, and she rejoined that her name was Maria do Pau; and after this the king sent her to tend the ducks, which were in a field next to the palace gardens. The moment the princess reached it she took off everything she had on, and the wooden dress also; she washed herself, as she was travel-stained, and then put on the richest robe she had, which was the one the color of the stars. The king was taking a walk in the garden, and noticed a lovely maiden who was in the field driving the ducks, and heard her repeat Ducks here, ducks there, The daughter of a king tends the ducks, A thing never seen before! When she had finished saying this she killed one of the ducks; then took off her robes, and again got into her wooden dress. At night she went indoors, saying, "Oh! king, I have killed one of the ducks." The king asked her, "Maria do Pau, who was that beautiful maiden so splendidly robed that minded the ducks?" To this she said, "Indeed there was no one else there but myself in disguise." Next day the king again sent Maria do Pau to tend the ducks. And when she was in the field she did the same thing as the day before. She took off her wooden dress, washed and combed herself carefully, put on the robe the color of wild flowers, and went about driving the ducks, saying as before Ducks here, ducks there, The daughter of a king tends the ducks, A thing never seen before! After which she killed another duck. Next day she did as the day before, put on the robe of many colors, and killed another duck. In the evening when she went indoors, the king said to her, "I do not wish you to take care of the ducks any longer, for every day we find a duck has been killed! Now you shall remain locked up in the house. We are to have a feast which will last three days, but I promise you that you shall not enjoy it, for I shall not allow you to go to it." To this she said to the king, "Oh! my liege, do let me go." But the king replied, "No, indeed, you shall not go." On the first day of the feast she again begged of the king to allow her to repair to it, and his majesty replied, "God, preserve me! What would be the consequences of taking Maria do Pau to the feast!" The king put on his gala robes and then sent for her to his chamber, asked her what dress she would like to put on, and the princess replied by asking him to give her a pair of boots, which the king threw at her and took his departure for the feast. She then repaired to her chamber and removed from inside the dress made of wool a wand she had, which the little old woman, who was a fairy, had given her, and holding it up she said, "Oh! divining rod, by the virtue that God gave you, send me here the best royal carriage, which is the very one that took the king to the feast." The carriage was instantly in sight, and entering it she made her appearance at the feast, in the robe of the color of the stars. The king, who had his eyes continually fixed upon her, went out to the guards and told them not to allow the maiden to pass. But when she wished to get out she threw them a bag of money, and the guards allowed her to pass, but they asked her to what country she belonged, to which she replied that she came from the land of the boot. The king went home, and on arriving found the princess was already in the palace. The king, who wished to find out whether the lovely maiden which he had seen at the feast could possibly be Maria do Pau, went to see if she was safe in her chamber, and afterwards sent for her and said to her, "Oh! Maria do Pau, do you happen to know where the land of the boot is situated?" "Oh! my liege, do not come troubling me with your questions. Is it possible that your majesty does not know where the land of the boot is situated?" The king replied, "I do not. A maiden was at the feast. I asked her where she came from, and she said that she came from the land of the boot, but I do not know where that is." Next day the king again attended the feast, but before leaving he said to Maria do Pau, ''You shall not be allowed to go there." "Do allow me for once," replied she. The king then asked her to give him the towel, and as she presented him with it he threw it at her, and departed for the feast. The princess repaired to her room, struck the divining rod, and put on the robe, which was the color of the wild flowers. The king who had been charmed with her on the first day of the feast, now admired her all the more, because she appeared more beautiful than ever. He went out to the guards and told them to ask the beautiful maiden when she passed to what country she belonged; and when she went out she informed them that she was from the land of the towel. As soon as the king was told of this he returned to the palace to think over, and try to guess, if possible, where the land of the towel could be situated. And when he arrived at the palace the first thing he did was to ask his maid if she knew where the land of the towel could be found. To his inquiries she replied, "Well, well! here comes a king who does not know, and cannot tell, where the land of the towel is situated! Neither do I know." The king now said, "Oh! Maria do Pau, every time that I have been at the feast I have seen such a pretty maiden. If the one I saw yesterday was beautiful, the one of today is perfectly lovely, and much more charming than the first." Next day as the king was on the point of going out the princess said to his majesty, "Oh! my liege, let me go to the feast, that I may see the maiden that is so beautiful!" The king replied, "God, preserve me! What would be the result if I were to present you before that maiden?" After which he asked her to give him his walking stick, and as he was going out he struck her with it. He went to the feast, and when there the princess presented herself before him in the robe of many colors. If on the previous days she appeared most beautiful, on this day of the feast she looked perfectly ravishing, and more interesting than ever. The king fixed his eyes upon her so as not to lose sight of her, as he wished to see her go out, and follow her to where she lived, as it was the last day of the feast. But the king missed seeing her depart after all, and he could find her nowhere. He went to the guards and asked them what she had said, but the guards replied that she had come from the land of the walking stick. The king returned to the palace and inquired of his maid where the land of the walking stick could be found; but she replied, "Oh! my liege, that I should know where the land of the walking stick is situated. Does not my liege know? Neither do I." The king again asked her, "Do you really not know? Today I again saw the same girl who is so beautiful; but I begin to think it cannot be the same one every time, because at one time she says that she comes from the land of the boot, next time that she is from the land of the towel, and lastly she says she is from the land of the walking stick. The princess repaired to her room, washed and combed herself, and dressed herself in the robe she had on on the first day of the feast. The king went to look through the keyhole to find out why she was so long away and remained in her chamber so quiet, and also to see what she was at. He saw a lovely maiden, the same one who had appeared at the feast dressed in the robe the color of the stars in the heavens, sitting down busy with some embroidery. When the princess left her chamber to repair to the dinner table again disguised the king said to her, "Oh! Maria do Pau, you must embroider a pair of shoes for me." She replied, "Do I know how to embroider shoes?" and she left the parlor to go back to her chamber. Every day she put on one of the dresses she had worn at the feast, and on the last day she robed herself with the one of many colors. The king begged her every day to embroider him a pair of shoes, and she always returned the same answer. He had a key made to open the princess's room, and one day when he saw through the keyhole that she was robed in her best, he suddenly opened the door without her perceiving it and entered the chamber. The princess startled, and very much frightened, tried to run away, but the king said to her, "Do not be troubled for you shall marry me! But I wish you first to tell me your history, and why it is that you wear a wooden dress." The princess recounted all the events of her life, and the king married her. The king next sent for the little old woman who had given her the wand, to come and live in the palace, but she refused to live there because she was a fairy. Consiglieri Pedroso, Portuguese Folk-Tales , translated from the original manuscript by Henriqueta Monteiro (London: Folk Lore Society, 1882), no. 16, pp. 66-72 . Return to the table of contents . The Horse's Skin Portugal This is the story of a wicked king, who was a widower and had three daughters. Many years had elapsed since his queen died, and he began to feel lonely without a partner in life, and one who could occupy the vacant seat beside him on the throne, so he resolved to visit a certain court where a princess lived, whom he admired, and to make an offer of marriage to her. The princess, who was selfish and only cared for her own comfort, asked the king before accepting his offer, what he intended to do with his daughters, as she did not want them about her in the palace. "If my daughters," replied the king, "are a hindrance to our union, I can soon dispose of them, and send them where you will never see them or hear of them." On his return to the palace he said to his daughters, "Get ready at once to go with me to the Tower of Moncorvo, where I will show you what you have never seen before in your life." The daughters, full of confidence in their father, and not suspecting any treachery, readily prepared to accompany him, and after travelling many leagues arrived at the celebrated tower. When the king had them safe in the castle, he said to his daughters, "Remain here, whilst I pay a short visit to a friend and worthy subject, who lives in this neighbourhood. On my return I will take you back to the palace." The wicked king, who only made up this excuse to blind his daughters to his real intentions, fastened the great gates of the tower as he went out, so that his daughters could not possibly escape. He supplied them with food every day until his marriage day, but after that he never concerned himself about them any more, but left them to their fate. Hours passed, and days came and went, and still no succour arrived, and they began to be in a dreadful state, without a morsel of food or water to refresh them. And so it happened that one day, when they had given up all hopes of being relieved, and were nearly dead from starvation, the eldest of the princesses said to her sisters, "Why should we all starve? The best thing you two can do is to kill me and feed upon me as long as I afford you sustenance." She had hardly said these words when she dropped down dead from want. A few days after this sad event the surviving princesses were again short of food, and nothing was left them but to die. Then the second sister, remembering what the first one had so generously done, followed her example, and suggested that her younger sister should kill her for food; and when she had finished uttering the last words of her advice she also dropped down and died. The poor young girl, now left alone in the large dreary castle, felt very disconsolate, and rent the air with her lamentations. But after a while, being of a courageous mind, she thought to herself that weeping was no remedy for her woes, and that she must devise some means of escape from her prison before she became faint again with want. She now set about examining the various rooms of which the castle was composed, and when she reached the top of the watchtower she looked out and saw a ship sailing on the ocean. Overjoyed at the sight, she at once began to make signals, waving her handkerchief in hopes of attracting the notice of someone in the vessel. The sailors were not slow to perceive the signal, and calling up their captain, drew his attention to it. The captain, who was a humane and chivalrous man, directed the ship towards the spot, and effected an entrance by scaling the wall of the fortress. On reaching the watchtower, the captain and the sailors that accompanied him were shocked to see a maiden of such rank and beauty treated worse than a common criminal. They took her up tenderly and lowered her into the vessel, and sailing to a port of safety they landed her, together with a chest in which she had packed some of her own and her sisters' dresses. As she stood on the seashore she glanced around her, and felt the wretchedness of her situation, without a home or friends to whom to apply for shelter. She had not been long immersed in these melancholy thoughts when she perceived an old woman coming towards her, whom she felt sure was a good benevolent person. She approached her and addressed her thus: "My good woman, do you know of anyone that would give me shelter and a meal for today? I am willing to work for it." "If you want employment come and draw water from the well, and help me to carry it to the house I work for; there you will get a meal, and in the evening you can take up your quarters in my little cottage." "Tell me first," replied the princess, "what house it is you work for?" "Oh! I draw water for our king's palace." The young maiden consented to help the old woman, but as she could not work in her fine clothes, she had a garment made for her of the skin of a horse, and thus disguised she did not think that anyone would take her for a princess. Every day she went to the well and helped the old woman to draw water and carry the pitchers to the palace; and from the odd garments she wore everyone in the palace called her "Horse-Skin." One day as she entered the palace yard, carrying a pitcher of water poised on her head in a light and graceful manner, which showed off her elegant figure, a page, who had often noticed her beauty, and secretly suspected that the girl was not born to do this drudgery, and that there was some mystery about her, accosted her very respectfully, and said: "Do you know that our good king is going to give balls for three nights running, so that he may choose himself a wife from among the dancers? The prettiest girl is to carry off the prize, and the king, as a mark of his choice, is to give her a ring -- and what a ring that will be! I wish you could manage to go." "What have I to do with balls, a poor girl like me? It is all very well for princesses and fine people. I shall turn in at my old woman's tonight, as usual." When the princess had done her work she went home, and that evening being the first night of the balls at the palace, she dressed herself in her eldest sister's clothes, and went to the ball. When she entered the ballrooms, which were brilliantly lighted up, all eyes were turned upon her, and before the end of the dance she was pronounced by all present as most beautiful. The king was not long in discovering her charms, and caused great jealousy among the ladies by asking her again and again to dance with him, and loading her with delicate and polite attentions. But she slipped out of the palace early, before the king had time to notice her absence. The next day Horse-Skin was again toiling and carrying water to the palace as if nothing had happened. As she entered the palace yard the page again accosted her, and repeated what he had said the day before. "Have I not told you, man, that all this does not concern me? What is it to me whether the king gives a ball or not? I shall go home to my old lady and spend the evening resting after my hard work." The princess went to the second ball in her second sister's dress, which set off her beauty even more than the first had done. A number of partners were anxious to dance with her, but they had little chance, for the king mostly danced with her. He treated the princess with the profoundest respect as he gazed on her loveliness, and dared not ask her who she was. But she with her usual discretion left the ballroom at a moment when the king's attention was engaged by other guests; and next morning, as usual, Horse-Skin was at her duties in the palace. The page once again came up to her and said in a beseeching tone: "Do, Horse-Skin, go to the last ball, which is to take place in the palace tonight, for the king is to give the ring tonight to the fairest lady and the one he admires most! You should have seen what jealousy there was among the ladies that attended the ball last night; they say it is useless for them to go to the ball again, as the king would not so much as look at them, or speak a word to them. All his interest was centred on a lovely and mysterious maiden who attended the last two dances, and who, I assure you, has nearly turned the king's brain with love; you should see her smile, her coral lips, her star-like eyes -- the very image of yours, I declare! -- and the fascinating manner in which she danced -- there -- I only wish I was a prince to marry her!" The princess's only reply to all this, was: "Leave me alone; what matters it to me whom the king admires? Tonight I shall be at my old woman's, as usual." At the last ball the princess wore her own robes, the colour, stuff, and make of which harmonised with her beauty still more than did her sister's garments; and as she mingled among the invited in the state apartments that night, she outshone all the other ladies -- princesses, marchionesses, duchesses, and squires' daughters -- like a brilliant gem of the first water. The king, fairly captivated, danced with her alone, and towards the end of the evening gave her the ring, as the sign of his having chosen her to be his spouse and queen. And though he had set several of his court courtiers to watch and see which way she took when she left the palace, the princess eluded their vigilance, and departed without being noticed even by the sentinels at the palace gate. Next day the king was sorely puzzled and grieved when, on making enquiries, he found that no one in the palace could give him the slightest information about the lady to whom he had given the ring, in token of his admiration and choice. He ordered a search through all the country round, to find out, if possible, who the maiden was; but all was of no avail, for the damsel could not be discovered high or low. At this the king, from grief and disappointment, sickened, and lay in a stupor for days together, until the physicians began to fear he would not live much longer. One day Horse-Skin met his majesty's nurse, and asked her how the king was. The nurse said the king was so ill that he was not expected to live through the day, all through the violent passion his majesty had conceived for the damsel to whom he had given the ring, and of whom no traces could be found. "And," said she, "unless the cruel girl makes herself known to his majesty soon, we shall lose our beloved king." The nurse was at the time carrying some broth to give to the king; and Horse-Skin took this opportunity to drop the ring into the basin, without the nurse perceiving her. Great was the king's surprise when he discovered the ring; and the nurse being asked who had put that ring in his broth, replied that she did not know, and that the only person that had come near her, when carrying the basin, was poor Horse-Skin. The king then sent for Horse-Skin, and bade her tell him who had given her the ring which she had dropped into the basin. "If your majesty will allow me to leave your presence for a few minutes, I will tell you, on my return, who gave the ring to me." She had not been absent long when she returned to the king dressed in her own rich garments, and adorned as she had appeared at the last ball in the palace. She stood before the king, and said, "Does your majesty know me now?" "Of course I do, you are the same sweet damsel to whom I gave the ring." "Very well," said the princess, "I am she who dropped it in the broth, and I am your humble servant, Horse-Skin." "Explain yourself, you are still a mystery to me." Thereupon the princess related the history of her life, which she did amid tears and sobs, as it brought back to her mind all she had suffered since her cruel father had deserted her and her sisters. The king from being sad, was now delighted to have found his lost love, and soon recovered from his illness, and was once more full of health. The king then led her to a magnificently furnished chamber where she was to remain until his marriage with her, as he would not let her return to the old woman's cottage. The happy pair were married amid great rejoicings, and the king and his beautiful bride were heartily welcomed by his subjects, who had mourned his absence from state affairs. They reigned happily for many long years. Source: Francisco Adolpho Coelho, Tales of Old Lusitania from the Folk-Lore of Portugal , translated by Henriqueta Monteiro (London: Swan, Sonnenschein, and Company, 1888), pp. 51-60 . Although in this tale the incest motif has been suppressed, most elements of the plot coincide with those of traditional type 510B folktales. Return to the table of contents . The King Who Wished to Marry His Daughter Scotland There was a king before now, and he married, and he had but one daughter. When his wife departed, he would marry none but one whom her clothes would fit. His daughter one day tried her mother's dress on, and she came and she let her father see how it fitted her. It was fitting her well. When her father saw her he would marry no woman but her. She went crying where her muime was; and her foster mother said to her, "What was the matter with her?" She said, "that her father was insisting that he would marry her." Her muime told her to say to him, "that she would not marry him till he should get her a gown of the swan's down." He went, and at the end of a day and a year he came, and the gown with him. She went again to take the counsel of her muime. "Say to him," said her muime, "that thou wilt not marry him till he gets thee a gown of the moorland canach." She said this to him. He went, and at the end of a day and year he returned, and a gown of the moorland canach with him. "Say now to him," said her muime, "that thou wilt not marry him till he brings thee a gown of silk that will stand on the ground with gold and silver." At the end of a day and year he returned with the gown. "Say to him now," said her muime, "that thou wilt not marry him till he brings thee a golden shoe, and a silver shoe." He got her a golden shoe and a silver shoe. "Say to him now," said her muime, "that thou wilt not marry him unless he brings thee a kist that will lock without and within, and for which it is all the same to be on sea or on land." When she got the kist, she folded the best of her mother's clothes, and of her own clothes in it. Then she went herself into the kist, and she asked her father to put it out on the sea to try how it would swim. Her father put it out; when it was put out, it was going, and going, till it went out of sight. It went on shore on the other side; and a herd came where it was, intending to break it, in hopes that there were findings in the chest. When he was going to break it she called out, "Do not so, but say to thy father to come here, and he will get that which will better him for life." His father came, and he took her with him to his own house. It was with a king that he was herd, and the king's house was near him. "If I could get," said she, "leave to go to service to this great house yonder." "They want none," said the herd, "unless they want one under the hand of the cook." The herd went to speak for her, and she went as a servant maid under the hand of the cook. When the rest were going to the sermon; and when they asked her if she was going to it, she said, "that she was not; that she had a little bread to bake, and that she could not go to it." When they went away, she took herself to the herd's house, and she put on a gown of the down of the swan. She went to the sermon, and she sat opposite the king's son. The king's son took love for her. She went a while before the sermon skailed, she reached the herd's house, she changed her clothes, and she was in before them. When the rest came home, it was talking about the gentlewoman that was at the sermon they were. The next Sunday they said to her, "Was she going to the sermon?" and she said, "that she was not, that she had a little bread to bake." When they went away, she reached the herd's house, and she put on a gown of the moorland canach; and she went to the sermon. The king's son was seated where she was the Sunday before, and she sat opposite to him. She came out before them, and she changed, and she was at the house before them; and when the rest came home, it was talking about the great gentlewoman that was at the sermon they were. The third Sunday, they said to her, "Was she going to the sermon?" and she said, "that she was not, that she had a little bread to bake." When they went away, she reached the herd's house. She put on the gown that would stand on the ground with gold and silver, and the golden shoe and the silver shoe, and she went to the sermon. The king's son was seated where she was the Sunday before, and she sat where he was. A watch was set on the doors this Sunday. She arose, she saw a cranny, and she jumped out at the cranny; but they kept hold of one of the shoes. The king's son said, "Whomsoever that shoe would fit, she it was that he would marry." Many were trying the shoe on, and taking off their toes and heels to try if it would fit them; but there were none whom the shoe would fit. There was a little bird in the top of a tree, always saying as everyone was trying on the shoe, " Beeg beeg ha nan doot a heeg ach don tjay veeg a ha fo laiv a hawchkare. " -- Wee wee, it comes not on thee; but on the wee one under the hand of the cook. When he could get none whom the shoe would fit, the king's son lay down, and his mother went to the kitchen to talk over the matter. "Won't you let me see the shoe?" said she. "I will not do it any harm at all events." "Thou! thou ugly dirty thing, that it should fit thee." She went down, and she told this to her son. "Is it not known," said he, "that it won't fit her at all events? And can't you give it her to please her?" As soon as the shoe went on the floor, the shoe jumped on her foot. "What will you give me," said she, " to let you see the other one?" She reached the herd's house, and she put on the shoes, and the dress that would stand on the floor with gold and silver. When she returned, there was but to send word for a minister, and she herself and the king's son married. Source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 1 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 219-22 . Campbell's source: Ann Darroch, Islay. Return to the table of contents . Morag a Chota Bhain -- Margery White Coats Scotland A king had four daughters, and his wife died, and he said he would marry anyone whom his dead wife's clothes would fit. One day the daughters tried, and the youngest only could wear them. The king saw them from a window, and wished to marry her, and she went for advice to her mother's brother. He advised her to promise to marry the king if he would bring her a gown of birds' down, and a gown of the colors of the sky, woven with silver; and when he got that, a gown of the colors of the stars, woven with gold, and glass shoes. When he had got them, she escaped with all her clothes, by the help of her uncle, on a filly, with a magic bridle, she on one side, and her chest of clothes on the other. She rode to a king's palace, hid the chest in a hill under a bush of rushes, turned the filly loose, and went to the palace with nothing on but a white petticoat and a shift. She took service with the cook, and grew dirty and ugly, and slept on a bench by the kitchen fire, and her work was to blow under the great caldron all day long. One day the king's son came home, and was to hold a feast; she went to the queen and asked leave to go, and was refused because she was so dirty. The queen had a basin of water in her hand, and threw it at her, and it broke. She went to the hill, took out the dress of down and silver, and shook her magic bridle; the filly came, and she mounted, and rode to the feast. The king's son took her by the hand, and took her up as high as any there, and set her on his own lap; and when the feast was over, there was no reel that he danced but he gave it to her. He asked her whence she came, and she said, "From the kingdom of Broken Basins," and the prince said that he had never heard of that land, though he had travelled far. She escaped and returned to the cook, and all were talking about the beautiful lady. She asked about her, and was told not to talk about what she did not understand, "a dirty little wretch like her." Then the prince had another feast; and she asked leave again, and the queen refused, and threw a candlestick at her, and it broke, and she did as before. She put on another dress and went; the king's son had eight men on each side of the door to catch her. The same scene went on, and she said she came from the country of Candlesticks, and escaped, leaving a glass shoe. Then the king's son fell sick (of course), and would only marry the woman whom the shoe would fit; and all the ladies came and cut off their toes and heels, but in vain. Then he asked if there was none other. Then a small creature put his head in at the door and said, "If thou didst but know, she whom thou seekest is under the cook." Then he got the history of the basin and candlestick from his mother. The shoe was tried and fitted, and he was to marry Morag. All were in despair, and abused her; but she went out to her chest, shook the magic bridle, and arrayed herself, and came back on the filly, with a "powney" behind with the chest. Then all there that had despised her fell on their knees, and she was married to the prince. "And I did not get a bit there at the wedding," said the girl. This was told as we walked along the road, and is but a short outline of what was told me, written from notes made in the evening. The man said that the girl told it with a great deal of the queer old language, which he could not remember. The girl and her chest on the same horse may be seen in the Highlands. The girl, in her white coats and short gown, may be seen blowing the fire in highland inns, the queen's likeness might be found; and the feast is a highland ball; the filly and the magic bridle are common in other stories; the incidents of the basin and candlestick have an equivalent in Norse; and I got them from a woman at the Sound of Barra afterwards, in another story. This shows what may be lost by dignified traveling. While the man was enjoying himself in the kitchen, the employer was smoking in solitary dignity, upstairs in his bedroom, writing a journal, and utterly unconscious that the game he pursued was so near. I have other versions of this tale from other sources, and may find room for them hereafter. Source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 1 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 225-26 . Return to the table of contents . Rashen Coatie Scotland At an early period, when a plurality of kings reigned in Scotland, it chanced that one of them had lost his queen; and one of the queens had lost her husband. These two, the widow and widower were married, each of them having had a daughter in their first marriage, it caused a good deal of dissention and strife, particularly as the king's daughter was a perfect model of beauty, and the queen's daughter as much so of deformity; but the king willing to indulge his queen as much as possible, and for the sake of keeping peace in his own house, he often winked at the bad treatment his daughter received from her stepmother, all because she was more handsome and fair than her beloved but ugly daughter. Her treatment was however so very bad, that she was put to herd her father's cattle; while the queen's daughter wallowed in all the luxuries of a court endowed with peace and plenty. Rashen Coatie, (for so shall the king's daughter be called), having her meat, which was of the coarsest fare, brought her by the queen's favourite daughter daily, she had learned from some kind fairy how to charm her asleep when partaking of her food, which she did on her immediate arrival, by repeating the following words: Lay down your head upon my knee, And well looked after it there shall be, Then sleep ye one eye or sleep ye two, Ye soon shall see what power can do. These words had the desired effect of lulling her sound asleep, which no sooner took place than a genii in the shape and form of a calf, brought her meats and dainties of every description, of which she partook heartily, unknown to all but her favourite calf. The queen being now wearied with trying all the arts that mischief could devise, to bring Rashen Coatie's beauty to a level with her daughter's; or to raise her daughter's beauty to that of Rashen Coatie's; thought she must have some hidden means of subsistence, as all the stratagems she tried were always attended with want of success. On consulting her henwife, who was a witch, how she should behave in this critical juncture; the witch said she would give her an eye in her neck, by which sight she would be able to discover many things, particularly how Rashen Coatie was fed and maintained without her perceiving it. Accordingly the queen went next day to the castle to discover Rashen Coatie's friends, and discovered how she was fed, owing to an omission of Rashen Coatie's. She found that it was the calf that fed her, which made her long to get it destroyed. The king though loath to deprive his daughter of her only companion, her favourite calf, he was obliged to comply with the queen's imperious demands, in order to suppress the wrangling and strife which were daily taking place among his domestics, particularly by his queen. Rashen Coatie having discovered the queen's intention, mourned over her ravenous appetite, with streaming eyes and bleached cheeks. The calf having the power of speech, requested her not to be alarmed at what was to take place, but to gather together all the bones into one mass, and place them beneath a particular stone, and in a short time they would revive and come to life again. This having been done as commanded, everything came to pass as predicted by the calf; and the malicious queen having partook of the entrails of the calf, lingered and died of a disease hitherto unknown in that part of the country. Her daughter now became of contempt, despised and hooted by everyone. Rashen Coatie's sun now began to shine in meridian splendour; she was gentle and mild, humble to everyone, which gained her the esteem and good will of both great and small. Her beauty having kept pace with her virtue, her father took such a liking to her, as to wish to marry her; but this being quite contrary to her principles of sound morality, she grew melancholy, every day more and more, and lingered out a weary existence, till having met with her calf, she asked it what was best to be done under such pressing difficulties. The calf advised her to ask from her father a gown and petticoat made of the rashes that grew on the bonny burn side, in which she was to be drest. This having been accomplished; she then requested of him to give her a dress composed of all the colours of the birds of the air. This also having been given her; she demanded a new suit of variegated colours, composed of all those appearances that float in the air, and in the earth beneath. Having obtained all these varieties; she had now no excuse but to comply with her father's wishes, which were to accompany him to the altar, where all things were ready for the marriage ceremony. Having thus far complied with his wishes, she went, but on arriving at the place appointed, she started back, exclaiming, that she had forgotten her marriage ring. Her father, to prevent her returning home, said he had one which would answer the purpose perfectly well; but she insisted on having her mother's ring, and must needs return for it, but promised to be back in a few minutes. Again, she had recourse to the advice of her calf, which was to dress herself in her rashen weed, and to leave her father's kingdom with all speed. This was accordingly done, and she wandered far till she came to a hunting lodge, kept by the prince of that country. Here she made free to enter, and go to the prince's bed to rest her wearied limbs, which had undergone much toil and fatigue in the course of a long and laborious travel. When the prince came to his lodge, he was surprised to find a sleeping beauty in his bed, as it was in a sequestered part of his kingdom, where few inhabitants were to be found. She soon made her escape from him, and went to his father's palace, where she asked a place as a menial servant, which was granted, and thereby put into the kitchen to assist the cook in turning the spits which groaned with the weight of the meat that was roasting for their majesties' dinner. Here she continued for some time, doing all the drudgery of the meanest servant. Christmas, however, came on, when great preparations were made for church. Rashen Coatie also wished to appear among the rest, but was denied permission by the master cook. But it so happened that, on the first yule day, when all were gone, and she left alone in the kitchen to attend the meat, she said to the spits, peats, and pots, to do their duty till she returned; which was accordingly done. The words of the charm which she made use of on this occasion were as follows: Every spit gar another turn, Every peat gar another burn, Every pot gar another play Till I return on good yule day. These did as desired; when she went and dressed herself in rich attire. On arriving at the church, she placed herself in a conspicuous part of the seat, nearly opposite to where the young prince was sitting. He caught more of the flame of love than of the minister's spiritual exhortations, and could scarcely contain himself from making enquiries during the sermon. She went in the same manner all the holy days of yule, but every day more and more superbly drest. The prince at length determined on discovering her rank and place of abode, if possible, little thinking that it was his own menial, Rashen Coatie, as her history seemed to be a mystery to everyone. The term of her secrecy seemed to be now at end; for hurrying home on the last day, she dropped one of her shoes, which were so completely fitted to her feet, that it was supposed it would suit no one else. The prince, on having found the shoe, which was of pure gold, caused to be proclaimed throughout all the regions of his father's kingdom round about, that everyone should have free liberty to try on the shoe, and whomsoever the shoe fitted best, was to be his bride. Many trials were made, but all to no purpose, till the henwife's daughter caused her heels and toes to be pared; by which process she got it forced on her foot. Agreeably to the proclamation, it therefore became the prince to marry her, with which he was to comply, but with a heavy heart. On their way to the marriage seat, a small bird fluttered over their heads, crying as they went: Clipped heels and pared toes. They're in the kitchen the shoe on goes. The prince hearing the voice of the bird, requested to know its meaning, when it was explained. With joy he returned to his father's castle, much against the henwife's inclination, when it was found that Rashen Coatie, who hurkled in the kitchen, had not got an opportunity of trying on the shoe. On presenting her with the shoe, it went easily on, but what was more to their surprise and astonishment, she pulled out its fellow, and put it on before them. They, of course, we need not add, were immediately married, and lived long and happy. Shortly after the marriage, they paid a visit to her father's court in great pomp and grandeur, by whom they were most cordially received, and his kingdom, at his death, bestowed on them. Source: Ancient Scottish Tales: An Unpublished Collection Made by Peter Buchan , with an introduction by John A. Fairley (Peterhead, Scotland, 1908), pp. 29-32 . Reprinted from the transactions of the Buchan Field Club. Buchan assembled this collection between 1827 and 1829. Link to a version of this tale that omits the father's attempt to marry the heroine: Rashin-Coatie . Return to the table of contents . The Princess and the Golden Cow England One there was a king who had a daughter, being very beautiful, and he loved her so much he wanted to marry her. Here I forget details , but the princess was in great trouble, especially as she loved a prince who lived a long way off, and he loved her. She had made (or got her father to give her) a beautiful golden cow as large as a real one. She made arrangements in some manner ( details forgotten ) to have the golden cow conveyed under pretence of its being a parting gift or token of remembrance to the prince. She got inside it, and went in the cow a long journey by sea. There was a signal prearranged ( details forgotten ) of three knocks on the cow to show when she could come out safely. But when she had gone a long way the cow was landed (I think the captain of the ship was in the secret, and was to see to her reaching the prince), but people came to see the cow, for it was very curious, amongst them three gentlemen who wanted to be able to say they had touched it, and one poked it with his umbrella ( sic ), and said, "I've touched the golden cow," and the next poked it with his umbrella, and said, "I've touched the golden cow," and the third poked it with his umbrella, and said, "I've touched the golden cow." With that the princess opened the door and came out, for she thought those three knocks were the signal. Then the prince turned up, after some adventures that I have forgotten, and all ended happily. Source: Isabella Barclay, "The Princess and the Golden Cow," Folklore , vol. 1 , no. 4 (December 1890), Supplement, p. 149 . Barclay's source: "The following variant ... was told to myself and sisters when wer were children by a servant from the Lizard district of Cornwall." Return to the table of contents . The Story of Catskin England, James Orchard Halliwell Note by D. L. Ashliman: The conflict between father and daughter in most folktales of type 510B derives from the mother's death and the father's subsequent attempts to marry his own daughter, as evidenced in the previous tales at this site. In some versions, however, the incest motif is suppressed, and the conflict between father and daughter is given a different motivation. The following tale, told here in verse, illustrates this minority group. The heroine here is not at risk because of her father's incestuous desires, but for an inclination much less governed by taboo: his displeasure over the birth of a female child. Note also that the abusive relationship between the heroine and the man she will ulitmately marry has also been altered in this version. She receives the same blows, but from the hands of her female employer, not her future husband. And now, an English version of Catskin: There once was a gentleman grand, Who lived at his country seat; He wanted an heir to his land, For he'd nothing but daughters yet. His lady's again in the way, So she said to her husband with joy, "I hope some or other fine day, To present you, my dear, with a boy." The gentleman answered gruff, "If't should turn out a maid or a mouse, For of both we have more than enough, She shan't stay to live in my house." The lady, at this declaration, Almost fainted away with pain; But what was her sad consternation, When a sweet little girl came again. She sent her away to be nurs'd, Without seeing her gruff papa; And when she was old enough, To a school she was packed away. Fifteen summers are fled, Now she left good Mrs. Jervis; To see home she was forbid, She determined to go and seek service. Her dresses so grand and so gay, She carefully rolled in a knob; Which she hid in a forest away, And put on a catskin robe. She knock'd at a castle gate, And pray'd for charity; They sent her some meat on a plate, And kept her a scullion to be. My lady look'd long in her face, And prais'd her great beauty; I'm sorry I've no better place, And you must our scullion be. So Catskin was under the cook, A very sad life she led, For often a ladle she took, And broke poor Catskin's head. There is now a grand ball to be, When ladies their beauties show; "Mrs. Cook," said Catskin, "dear me, How much I should like to go!" "You go with your catskin robe, You dirty impudent slut! Among the fine ladies and lords, A very fine figure you'd cut." A basin of water she took, And dash'd in poor Catskin's face; But briskly her ears she shook, And went in her hiding place. She washed every stain from her skin, In some crystal waterfall; Then put on a beautiful dress, And hasted away to the ball. When she entered, the ladies were mute, Overcome by her figure and face; But the lord, her young master, at once Fell in love with her beauty and grace; He pray'd her his partner to be, She said, "Yes!" with a sweet smiling glance; All night with no other lady But Catskin, our young lord would dance. "Pray tell me, fair maid, where you live?" For now was the sad parting time; But she no other answer would give, Than this distich of mystical rhyme, -- Kind sir, if the truth I must tell, At the sign of the Basin of Water I dwell. Then she flew from the ballroom, and put On her catskin robe again; And slipt in unseen by the cook, Who little thought where she had been. The young lord, the very next day, To his mother his passion betrayed; He declared he never would rest, Till he'd found out this beautiful maid. There's another grand ball to be, Where ladies their beauties show; "Mrs. Cook," said Catskin, "dear me, How much I should like to go!" "You go with your catskin robe, You dirty impudent slut! Among the fine ladies and lords, A very fine figure you'd cut." In a rage the ladle she took, And broke poor Catkin's head; But off she went shaking her ears, And swift to her forest she fled. She washed every blood stain off In some crystal waterfall; Put on a more beautiful dress, And hasted away to the ball. My lord, at the ballroom door, Was waiting with pleasure and pain; He longed to see nothing so much As the beautiful Catskin again. When he asked her to dance, she again Said "Yes!" with her first smiling glance; And again, all the night, my young Lord With none but fair Catskin did dance. "Pray tell me," said he, "where you live?" For now 'twas the parting time; But she no other answer would give, Than this distich of mystical rhyme, -- Kind sir, if the truth I must tell, At the sign of the Broken Ladle I dwell. Then she flew from the ball, and put on Her catskin robe again; And slipt in unseen by the cook, Who little thought where she had been. My lord did again, the next day, Declare to his mother his mind, That he never more happy should be, Unless he his charmer should find. Now another grand ball is to be, Where ladies their beauties show; "Mrs. Cook", said Catskin, "dear me, How much I should like to go!" "You go with your catskin robe, You impudent, dirty slut! Among the find ladies and lords, A very fine figure you'd cut." In a fury she took the skimmer, And broke poor Catskin's head; But heart-whole and lively as ever, Away to her forest she fled. She washed the stains of blood In some crystal waterfall; Then put on her most beautiful dress, And hasted away to the ball. My lord, at the ballroom door, Was waiting with pleasure and pain; He longed to see nothing so much As the beautiful Catskin again. When he asked her to dance, she again Said "Yes!" with her first smiling glance; And all the night long, my young Lord With none but fair Catskin would dance. "Pray tell me, fair maid, where you live?" For now was the parting time; But she no other answer would give, Than this distich of mystical rhyme, -- Kind sir, if the truth I must tell, At the sign of the Broken Skimmer I dwell. Then she flew from the hall, and threw on Her catskin cloak again; And slipt in unseen by the cook, Who little thought where she had been. But not by my lord unseen, For this time he followed too fast; And, hid in the forest green, Saw the strange things that past. Next day he took to his bed, And sent for the doctor to come; And begg'd him no other than Catskin, Might come into his room. He told him how dearly he lov'd her, Not to have her his heart would break; Then the doctor kindly promised To the proud old lady to speak. There's a struggle of pride and love, For she fear'd her son would die; But pride at the last did yield, And love had the mastery. Then my lord got quickly well, When he was his charmer to wed; And Catskin, before a twelvemonth, Of a young lord was brought to bed. To a wayfaring woman and child, Lady Catskin one day sent an alms; The nurse did the errand, and carried The sweet little lord in her arms. The child gave the alms to the child, This was seen by the old lady mother; "Only see," said that wicked old woman, "How the beggars' brats take to each other!" This throw went to Catskin's heart, She flung herself down on her knees, And pray'd her young master and lord To seek out her parents would please. They sent out in my lord's own coach; They traveled, but naught befell Till they reach'd the town hard by Where Catskin's father did dwell. They put up at the head inn, Where Catskin was left alone; But my lord went to try if her father His natural child would own. When folks are away, in short time What great alterations appear; For the cold touch of death had all chill'd The hearts of her sisters dear. Her father repented too late, And the loss of his youngest bemoan'd; In his old and childless state, He his pride and cruelty own'd. The old gentleman sat by the fire, And hardly looked up at my lord; He had no hope of comfort A stranger could afford. But my lord drew a chair close by, And said, in a feeling tone, "Have you not, sir, a daughter, I pray, You never would see or own?" The old man alarm'd, cried aloud, "A hardened sinner am I! I would give all my worldly goods, To see her before I die." Then my lord brought his wife and child To their home and parent's face, Who fell down and thanks returned To God, for his mercy and grace. The bells, ringing up in the tower, Are sending a sound to the heart; There's a charm in the old church bells, Which nothing in life can impart! Source: James Orchard Halliwell, The Nursery Rhymes of England (London: F. Warne and Company, 1886), no. 45, pp. 22-31 . First published 1853. Return to the Table of Contents The Princess in the Cat-Skins Ireland There was once a queen that was left a widow with one daughter, who was as good and handsome as any girl could be. But her mother wasn't satisfied to remain without a husband; so she married again, and a very bad choice she made. Her second husband treated her very badly; and she died soon after. Well, would you ever think of the widower taking it into his head to marry the young princess at the end of a year? She was as shocked as she could be when he made her the offer, and burst out a crying. "I took you too sudden," said he. "Sleep on it, and you can give me an answer tomorrow." She was in great trouble all the rest of the day, and when the evening came she went out into the paddock, where a beautiful filly she used to ride was grazing. "Oh my poor beast! " said she, "I'm sure if you knew my trouble you'd pity me." "I do know your trouble, and I pity you, and I'll help you too," says the filly. "I'm the fairy that watched over you from the time you were born, and I am here near you since your mother married the second time. Your stepfather is an enchanter, but he'll find me too strong for him. Don't seem shocked when he'll ask your consent tomorrow, but say you must have first a dress of silk and silver thread that will fit into a walnut shell. He'll promise, and will be able to get it made too, but I'll bother his spinner and his weaver long enough before he'll get it wove, and his seamstress after that, before it's sewed." The princess done as she was bid, and the enchanter was in great joy; but he was kept in great trouble and anger for a full half year before the dress was ready to go on the princess. At last it was fitted, and he asked her was she ready to be his wife. "I'll tell you tomorrow," said she. So she went to consult her filly in the paddock. Well, the next day he put the question to her again, and she said that she couldn't think of marrying anyone till she had another dress of silk and gold thread that would fit in a walnut shell. "I wish you had mentioned itself and the silver dress together. Both could have been done at the same time. No matter. I'll get it done." Whatever trouble the spinner and the weaver and the seamstress had with the other dress, they had twice it with this; but at last it was tried on, and fitted like a glove. "Well now," says Fear Dhorrach , "I hope you're satisfied, and won't put off the wedding again." "Oh, you must forgive me," said she, "for my vanity." She was talking to the filly the evening before. "I can't do without a dress of silk thread as thick as it can be with diamonds and pearls no larger than the head of a minnikin pin. Three is a lucky number, you know." "Well, I wish you had mentioned this at first, and the three could be making together. Now this is the very last thing you'll ask, I expect." "Oh, I'll never ask another, you may depend, till I'm married." She didn't say till we're married. The dress came home at last. Well, the same evening she found on her bed another made from bottom to top of cat-skins, and this she put on. She put her three walnut shells in her pocket, and then stole out to the stable, where she found her filly with a bridle in her mouth, and the nicest side-saddle ever you saw on her back. Away they went, and when the light first appeared in the sky they were a hundred miles away. They stopped at the edge of a wood, and the princess was very glad to rest herself on a bunch of dry grass at the foot of a tree. She wasn't a minute there when she fell asleep; and soundly she did sleep, till she was woke up by the blowing of bugles and the yelping of beagles. She jumped up in a fright. There was no filly near her, but half a hundred spotted hounds were within forty perches of her, yelling out of them like vengeance. I needn't tell you she was frightened. She had hardly power to put one foot past the other, and she'd be soon tore into giblets by the dogs on account of her dress, but a fine young hunter leaped over their heads, and they all fell back when he shook his whip and shouted at them. So he came to the princess, and there she was as wild looking as you please, with her cat-skins hanging round her, and her face and hands and arms as brown as a berry, from a wash she put on herself before she left home. Well that didn't hinder her features from being handsome, and the prince was astonished at her beauty and her color and her dress, when he found she was a stranger, and alone in the world. He got off his horse, and walked side by side with her to his palace, for he was the young king of that country. He sent for his housekeeper when he came to the hall door, and bid her employ the young girl about whatever she was fit for, and then set off to follow the hounds again. Well, there was great tittering in the servants' hall among the maids at her color and her dress, and the ganders of footmen would like to be joking with her, but she made no freedom with one or the other, and when the butler thought to give her a kiss, she gave him a light slap on the jaw that wouldn't kill a fly, but he felt as if a toothache was at him for eight and forty hours. By my word, the other buckeens did not give her an excuse to raise her hand to them. Well, she was so silent and kept herself to herself so much, that she was no favorite, and they gave her nothing better to do than help the scullery maid, and at night she had to put up with a little box of a place under the stairs for a bedroom. The next day, when the prince returned from hunting, he sent word to the housekeeper by the whipper-in to let the new servant bring him up a basin and towel till he'd wash before dinner. "Oh, ho!" says the cook, "there's an honor for Cat-Skin. I'm here for forty years and never was asked to do such a thing; how grand we are! purshuin to all impedent people!" The princess didn't mind their jibes and their jeers. She took up the things, and the prince delayed her ever so long with remarks and questions, striving to get out of her what rank of life she was born in. As little as she said he guessed her to be a lady. I suppose it is as hard for a lady or gentleman to pass for a vulgarian, as for one of us to act like one of the quality. Well to be sure! all the cold and scornful noses that were in the big kitchen before her; and it was, "Cat-Skin, will you hand me this? Cat-Skin, will you grease my shoes? Cat-Skin, will you draw a jug of beer for me?" And she done everything she was asked without a word or a sour look. Next night the prince was at a ball about three miles away, and the princess got leave from the housekeeper to go early to bed. Well, she couldn't get herself to lie down. She was in a fever like; she threw off her outside dress, and she stepped out into the lawn to get a little fresh air. There what did she behold but her dear filly under a tree. She ran over, and threw her arms round her neck, and kissed her face, and began to cry. "No time for crying!" says the filly. "Take out the first walnut shell you got." She did so, and opened it. "Hold what's inside over your head," said the other, and in a moment the silk and silver dress wrapped her round as if a dozen manty-makers were after spending an hour about it. "Get on that stump," says the filly, "and jump into the side-saddle." She did so, and in a few minutes they were at the hall door of the castle where the ball was. There she sprung from her saddle, and walked into the hall. Lights were in the hall and everywhere, and nothing could equal the glitter of the princess's robes and the accoutrements of her steed. It was like the curling of a stream in the sun. You may believe that the quality were taken by surprise, when the princess walked in among them as if they were the lords and ladies in her father's court. The young king came forward as he saw the rest were a little cowed, and bade her good evening and welcome; and they talked whatever way kings and queens and princesses do, and he made her sit on his own seat of honor, and took a stool or a chair near her, and if he wasn't delighted and surprised, her features were so like the scullery maid's, leave it till again. They had a fine supper and a dance, and the prince and she danced, and every minute his love for her was increasing, but at last she said she should go. Every one was sorry, and the prince more than anyone, and he came with her to the hall, and asked might he see her safe home. But she showed him her filly and excused herself. Said he, "I'll have my brown horse brought, and myself and my servants will attend you." "Hand me up on my filly," says she, " first of all," and, be the laws, I don't know how princes put princesses on horseback. Maybe one of the servants stoops his back, and the prince goes on one knee, and she steps first on his knee and then on the servant's back, and then sits in the saddle. Anyhow she was safe up, and she took the prince's hand, and bid him good night, and the filly and herself were away like a flash of lightning in the dark night. Well, everything appeared dismal enough when he went back to where a hundred tongues were going hard and fast about the lady in the dazzling dress. Next morning he bid his footman ask the girl in the cat-skin to bring him hot water and a towel for him, to shave. She came in as modest and backward as you please; but whenever the prince got a peep at her face, there were the beautiful eyes and nose and mouth of the lady in the glittering dress, but all as brown as a bit of bogwood. He thought to get a little talk out of her, but dickens a word would come out of her mouth but yes or no . And when he asked her was she of high birth, she turned off the discourse and wouldn't say one thing or the other; and when he asked would she like to put on nice clothes and be about his mother, she refused just as if he asked her to drown herself. So he found he could make nothing of her, and let her go down stairs. There was another great ball in a week's time, and the very same thing took place again. There was the princess, and the dress she had on was of silk and gold thread, and the darlintest little gold crown in the world over her purty curling hair. If the prince was in love before, he was up to his eyes in it this time; but while they were going on with the nicest sweet talk, says she, "I'm afraid, prince, that you are in the habit of talking lovingly to every girl you meet." Well, he was very eager to prove he was not. "Then," said she, "a little bird belied you as I was coming through the wood. He said that you weren't above talking soft even to a young servant girl with her skin as brown as a berry, and her dress no better than cat-skin.'' "I declare to you, princess," said he, "there is such a girl at home, and if her skin was as white as yours, and her dress the same, no eye could see a bit of differ between you." "Oh, thankee, prince!" says she, "for the compliment; it's time for me to be going." Well, he thought to mollify her, but she curled her upper lip and cocked her nose, and wasn't long till she left, the way she did before. While she was getting on her filly, he almost went down on his knees to her to make it up. So at last she smiled, and said, "If I can make up my mind to forgive you, I'll come to the next ball without invitation." So she was away, and when they came under the tree in the lawn she took the upper hem of her dress in her fingers and it came off like a glove, and she made her way in at the hack door, and into her crib at the stair-foot. The prince slept little that night, and in the morning he sent his footman to ask the girl in the cat-skins to bring up a needle and thread to sew a button on his shirt sleeve. He watched her fingers, and saw they were small and of a lovely shape; and when one of them touched his wrist, it felt as soft and delicate as silk. All he could say got nothing out of her only, "It wasn't a nice thing for a prince to speak in that way to a girl of low degree, and he boasting of it after to princesses and great ladies." Well, how he did begin to deny anything so ungenteel, but the button was sewed, and she skipped away downstairs. The third night came, and she shook the dress of silk and pearls and diamonds over her, and the nicest crown of the same on her head. As grand and beautiful as she was before, she was twice as grand now; and the lords and ladies hardly dared to speak above their breaths, and the prince thought he was in heaven. He asked her at last would she be his queen, and not keep him in misery any longer, and she said she would, if she was sure he wouldn't ask Miss Cat-Skin the same question next day. Oh, how he spoke, and how he promised! He asked leave to see her safe home, but she wouldn't agree. "But don't be downcast," said she. "You will see me again sooner than you think; and if you know me when you meet me next, we'll part no more." Just as she was sitting in her saddle, and the prince was holding her hand, he slipped a dawny limber ring of gold on one finger. It was so small and so nice to the touch he thought she wouldn't feel it. "And now, my princess," says he to himself, "I think I'll know you when I meet you." Next morning he sent again for the scullery girl, and she came and made a curtchy . "What does your majesty want me to do?" said she. "Only to advise me which of these two suits of clothes would look best on me; I'm going to be married." "Ah, how could the likes of me be able to advise you? Is the rich dressed lady, that I heard the footmen talking about, to be your queen?" "Yourself is as likely to be my wife as that young lady." "Then who is it?" "Yourself, I tell you." " Myself! How can your majesty joke that way on a poor girl? They say you're promised to the lady of the three rich dresses." "I'm promised to no one but yourself. I asked you twice already to be my queen; I ask you now the third time." "Yes, and maybe after all, you'll marry the lady of the dresses." "You promised you'd have me if I knew you the next time we'd meet. This is the next time. If I don't know you, I know my ring on your fourth finger." She looked, and there it was sure enough. Maybe she didn't blush. "Will your majesty step into the next room for a minute," said she, "and leave me by myself?" He did so, and when she opened the door for him again, there she was with the brown stain off her face and hands, and her dazzling dress of silk and jewels on her. Wasn't he the happy prince, and she the happy princess? And weren't the noisy servants lewd of themselves when they saw poor Cat-Skin in her royal dress saying the words before the priest? They didn't put off their marriage, and there was the fairy now in the appearance of a beautiful woman; and if I was to tell you about the happy life they led, I'd only be tiring you. Source: Patrick Kennedy, The Fireside Stories of Ireland (Dublin: M'Glashan and Gill, 1870), pp. 81-87 ). Return to the table of contents . The Beautiful Princess Lithuania Once upon a time there was a king who had a beautiful wife. She had stars on her forehead, the sun on top of her head, and the moon on the back of her head, but she soon died. The king had a daughter who was just as beautiful as his wife. He traveled far and wide to seek another wife, but found no one as beautiful as his first wife had been. Therefore he decided to marry his own daughter, but she did not want to marry him. She was not able to change his mind, so she told him to buy for her a louse-coat (a coat lined with louse pelts), a silver dress, a diamond ring, and golden shoes. The king had an old kinswoman. The evening before the wedding the princess asked her what she should do. The old woman advised her to pack her things and run away, so that night she left. The next morning the king looked for his girl, but could not find her. He asked everyone, "Haven't you seen her? Haven't you seen my bride?" But no one could give him any information. When the princess ran away she came to a river. She boarded a boat, but the ferryman did not want to transport her. He said, "If you will not promise to give yourself to me, I will drown you here and now." She refused him, and he threw her overboard, but she jumped to the water's edge. She continued onward, without knowing where she was going. Then she came to some cliffs, and said, "Oh, dear God, if only there were a room here!" Then the cliffs did indeed open into a room, and she went inside. Everything there was just what she had wished for. She soon went out, leaving her beautiful clothes in the room, and it turned back into a cliff, just as before. She went to an estate where she found a position as a Cinderella. Her brother was there as well. He too had left their father, and was employed in the estate as a secretary. He had a servant, and whenever he told his servant to bring him water or his boots, Cinderella ran and brought them to him. And every time she did this, he would throw them at her. She asked her mistress for permission to return home now and then. But instead of going home she went back to the cliffs, and whenever she approached them, they again opened up into a room, and then she would put on her beautiful clothes. Then every time a coach would drive up and take her to church. The secretary was also at church, and he saw the beautiful girl. Therefore he went to church the next Sunday, and the girl was there as well. Her mistress had told her that she had to return before the secretary did. However, one day she was late, and she did not have time to take off her beautiful clothes. Instead she put on her everyday clothes over the beautiful ones. The secretary told his servant to have her come and delouse him. She did not want to do this, and said, "You have never needed me to do that before, and you don't need me to do it now." But after the servant had called her a second and a third time, she had to go. While she was looking through his hair, he was examining her clothing, coming finally to the coat. Then he raised his head from her knees, ripped the scarf from her head, and immediately recognized her as his sister. Then they left the estate, and no one knows where they went. Source: August Schleicher, Litauische Märchen, Sprichworte, Rätsel und Lieder (Weimar: Hermann Böhlau, 1857), pp. 10-12 . Return to the table of contents . The Princess with a Golden Star on Her Forehead Czechia Once upon a time, a king and a queen lived in a castle. The queen was very beautiful, and she had a golden star on her forehead. Unfortunately, the queen died giving birth to her daughter, and the king promised on her deathbed that he would not marry anyone but a woman who also had a golden star on her forehead. So he handed the baby over to the nursemaids and went out into the world to find such a bride -- but since there was no one with a golden star on her forehead, he returned home with failure. When he arrived home, his beautiful daughter Lada ran to meet him, and he saw the golden star on her forehead. The king fell in love and decided to marry her. Lada was terrified, and she said she would only marry the king if he brought her three beautiful dresses -- the one sewn from the wings of a rose-beetle, the second dress to look like the sun, and the third a heaven-like dress. The king did this, so the wedding could not be avoided. Then the princess was visited in a dream by her deceased mother, who advised her to escape from the kingdom. The princess put on a coat made of mouse skin, covered her face with a veil, and left the kingdom. She took with her the beautiful dresses from her father. After some time she came to a city with a royal castle. She hid her beautiful dresses under a stone and asked a little fish in a well to guard them. Then she asked for a job in the castle. At first they did not want to accept such an ugly girl covered by dirt, but Lada eventually found work in the royal kitchen. Some time later a ball was held in the castle, and Lada asked the chief cook for permission to go. The cook agreed, and Lada went to the well, washed herself, and put on one of her beautiful dresses. No one at the ball recognized her, and Prince Hostivít himself fell in love with her. They danced together all the night long. After the ball, Lada run back to the well, took off her fine dress and put on the coat made of mouse skin. On two more evenings Lada went to the ball dressed in her beautiful dresses. At the third ball she gave Hostivít her ring, and he gave her his ring in return. Then Lada went back to the kitchen. The following day, Hostivít felt ill with love. The cook ordered Lada to make the prince's medicinal spices, and she dropped the ring from Hostivít into the cup. Finding the ring, the the prince wanted to talk with the girl who had prepared the medicinal spices. Lada claimed that she knew nothing about the ring. However, Hostivít did not give up, and he followed Lada to the well. There he watched as Lada took off the mouse fur and washed herself. Then he realized that this ugly girl was his beloved Lada. Lada and Hostivít got engaged, and they left his kingdom to ask Lada's father for his daughter's hand in marriage. In the meantime Lada's father had been visited by the queen, Lada's deceased mother, and she had rebuked him for his sinful love. Thus the king's heart turned to a father's love, and he blessed the young couple. Source (books.google.com): Božena Němcová, "O princezně se zlatou hvězdou na čele," České pohádky (Prague: Jan Laichter, 1907), pp. 66-81 . Translated and retold by Lenka Vídršperková, Charles University, Prague. Božena Němcová (1820-1862) was a Czech writer and collector of folktales. Return to the table of contents . Pigskin Ukraine In a Little-Russian [Ukrainian] variant of one of those numerous stories, current in all lands, which commence with the escape of the heroine from an incestuous union, a priest insists on marrying his daughter. She goes to her mother's grave and weeps there. Her dead mother "comes out from her grave," and tells her what to do. The girl obtains from her father a rough dress of pig's skin, and two sets of gorgeous apparel; the former she herself assumes, in the latter she dresses up three Kuklui , which in this instance were probably mere blocks of wood. Then she takes her place in the midst of the dressed-up forms, which cry, one after the other, "Open, O moist earth, that the fair maiden may enter within thee!" The earth opens, and all four sink into it. Source: W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1873), p. 159 . Ralston's source: Alexander Afanasyev . Return to the table of contents . Kniaz Danila Govorila Russia Sometimes it is a brother, instead of a father, from whom the heroine is forced to flee. Thus in the story of Kniaz Danila Govorila , Prince Daniel the Talker is bent upon marrying his sister, pleading the excuse so often given in stories on this theme, namely, that she is the only maiden whose finger will fit the magic ring which is to indicate to him his destined wife. While she is weeping "like a river," some old women of the mendicant-pilgrim class come to her rescue, telling her to make four Kukolki , or small puppets, and to place one of them in each corner of her room. She does as they tell her. The wedding day arrives, the marriage service is performed in the church, and then the bride hastens back to the room. When she is called for -- says the story -- the puppets in the four corners begin to coo: Kuku! Prince Danila! Kuku! Govorila! Kuku! He wants to marry, Kuku! His own sister. Kuku! Split open, O Earth! Kuku! Sister, disappear! The earth opens, and the girl slowly sinks into it. Twice again the puppets sing their song, and at the end of its third performance, the earth closes over the head of the rescued bride. Presently in rushes the irritated bridegroom. "No bride is to be seen; only in the corners sit the puppets, singing away to themselves." He flies into a passion, seizes a hatchet, chops off their heads, and flings them into the fire. Source: W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1873), pp. 159-60 . Ralston's source: Alexander Afanasyev . Return to the table of contents . Seggu-Jataka: How a Pious Greengrocer Tested His Daughter's Virtue India, The Jataka This story the Master told, while dwelling at Jetavana, about a greengrocer who was a lay-brother. The circumstances have been already given in the First Book [Jataka 102]. Here again the Master asked him where he had been so long; and he replied, "My daughter, Sir, is always smiling. After testing her, I gave her in marriage to a young gentleman. As this had to be done, I had no opportunity of paying you a visit. To this the Master answered, "Not now only is your daughter virtuous, but virtuous she was in days of yore; and as you have tested her now, so you tested her in those days. And at the man's request he told an old-world tale: Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta was a tree spirit. This same pious greengrocer took it into his head to test his daughter. He led her into the woods, and seized her by the hand, making as though he had conceived a passion for her. And as she cried out in woe, he addressed her in the words of the first stanza: All the world's on pleasure bent; Ah, my baby innocent! Now I've caught you, pray don't cry; As the town does, so do I. When she heard it, she answered, "Dear Father, I am a maid, and I know not the ways of sin"; and weeping she uttered the second stanza: He that should keep me safe from all distress, The same betrays me in my loneliness; My father, who should be my sure defense, Here in the forest offers violence. And the greengrocer, after testing his daughter thus, took her home, and gave her in marriage to a young man. Afterwards he passed away according to his deeds. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , translated from the Pali by various hands, under the editorship of E. B. Cowell; vol. 2, translated by W. H. D. Rouse (Cambridge: University Press, 1895), book, 2, no. 217, p. 126 . Link to a different version of this tale, mentioned in the above text: "Pannika-Jataka: To Test His Daughter's Virtue, a Man Makes Love to Her," The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , translated from the Pali by various hands, under the editorship of E. B. Cowell; vol. 1, translated by Robert Chalmers (Cambridge: University Press, 1895), book 1, no. 102, p. 244 . Return to the table of contents . Links to Related Sites Cinderella , folktales of type 510A about persecuted heroines. Kora and His Sister , a folktale from India. Notes and Bibliography In their classical form, type 510B folktales include the follow the following motifs: A dying woman extracts from her husband the promise that he will remarry only if he can find a woman that fits a certain description. After a period of mourning, the widower discovers that only his daughter meets the requirements for remarriage set by his deceased wife, and he asks her to marry him. The daughter, in order to buy time, and in hope of dissuading her father, asks for a number of gifts, but he finds these with little difficulty. Seeing no other solution to her dilemma, the girl dresses herself in an unusual garb and runs away. She finds both refuge and abuse in another man's household, where she serves as a maid. She temporarily escapes from the kitchen where she works and makes a series of appearances at a dress ball. A prince falls in love with the heroine in her beautiful attire. He discovers that the beautiful woman is none other than his maid, and he marries her. In some versions of the story, the incest motif that sets the plot into motion is suppressed, with a different conflict being given between father and daughter. The second half of this story bears a strong resemblance to the Cinderella (type 510A) folktales. Type 510B tales in the English Language Title Collection All-Kinds-of-Fur (Grimm, 1st edition.). Ashliman, Voices from the Past , p. 135. All-Kinds-of-Fur (Grimm, final edition) Grimm, Children's and Household Tales , no. 65. Allerleirauh (Grimm, altered). Lang, Green Fairy Book , p. 276. Ashey Pelt. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 140. Barbarina and the Black Snake. Mathias and Raspa, Italian Folktales in America , no. 1. Bear, The. Lang, Grey Fairy Book , p. 269. Black Yow, The. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 164. Cap o' Rushes. Jacobs, English Fairy Tales , p. 51. Cap o' Rushes. Philip, Penguin Book of English Folktales , p. 122. Cap o' Rushes. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 2, p. 387. Catskin. Jacobs, More English Fairy Tales , p. 204. Catskin: The Princess and the Golden Cow. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 179. Catskins. Chase, Grandfather Tales , no. 11. Cinderella. Examples and commentary. (All examples given in this chapter contain motifs representative of type 510B, although in some instances the incest motif has been supressed. Taggart, Enchanted Maidens , ch. 6. Deerskin. McKinly, Robin. Delgadina. Robb, Hispanic Folk Music of New Mexico and the Southwest , A2a-j, 31-43. Delgadina. Paredes, A Texas-Mexican Cancionero , p. 5, 14-16. Delgadina. Campa, Spanish Folk Poetry in New Mexico , p. 30-33. Donkey Skin (France, Le Cabinet des Fées). Lang, Grey Fairy Book , p. 1. Donkey Skin. Falassi, Folklore by the Fireside , p. 42. Donkey-Skin. Perrault, Fairy Tales (trans. Carter), p. 139. Fair Maria Wood (Italy). Ashliman, Voices from the Past , p. 139. Fair Maria Wood. Crane, Italian Popular Tales , no. 10. Florinda. Pino-Saavedra, Folktales of Chile , no. 21. Flying Princess, The. Dawkins, Modern Greek Folktales , no. 40. Gold Teeth. Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review , London, 1928, v. 39, pp. 236-238. Golden Box, The. Villa, 100 Armenian Tales , no. 24. Golden Filly Chest, The. Campbell, Cloudwalking Country , p. 196. Grey Castle, The. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 298. Hanchi. Ramanujan, Folktales from India , p. 285. Katie Woodencloak (Norway). Thompson, 100 Folktales , no. 41. King Who Wished to Marry His Daughter. Campbell, West Highlands , v. 1, p. 226. Like Meat Loves Salt. Chase, Grandfather Tales , no. 13. Little Blue Bonnet, The. Gmelch and Kroup, To Shorten the Road , p. 177. Little Cat Skin. Campbell, Cloudwalking Country , p. 82. Little Donkey Mother, The. Taggart, Enchanted Maidens , p. 204. Little Stick Figure, The. Pino-Saavedra, Folktales of Chile , no. 20. Margery White Coats. Campbell, West Highlands , v. 1, p. 232. Mossycoat. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 416. Mossycoat. Briggs and Tongue, Folktales of England , no. 4. Princess in the Donkey Skin, The. Roberts, South from Hell , no. 18. Princess in the Suit of Leather, The. Bushnaq, Arab Folktales , p. 193. Princess That Wore a Rabbit-Skin Dress. Campbell, Cloudwalking Country , p. 161. Princess Whose Father Wanted to Marry Her, The. Ramanujan, Folktales from India , p. 186. Queen with the Golden Hair, The. Campbell, Cloudwalking Country , p. 30. Rashie Coat. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 455. Rashiecoat. Aitken, A Forgotten Heritage , p. 73. Rashin Coatie. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 456. Red Calf, The. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 460. She Donkey's Skin, The. Massignon, Folktales of France , no. 44. She-Bear, The (Basile). Ashliman, Voices from the Past , p. 129. She-Bear, The. Basile, Pentamerone , Day 2, Tale 6. Silver Dress, the Gold Dress, and the Diamond Dress, The. Blecher, Swedish Folktales and Legends , p. 168. Story of Catskin, The (England). Ashliman, Voices from the Past , p. 143. Tattercoats. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , pt. A, v. 1, p. 502. Tattercoats. Jacobs, More English Fairy Tales , p. 67. Tebaldo Wishes to Have His Only Daughter Doralice to Wife. Straparola, Facetious Nights , Night 1, Tale 4. Wooden Maria. Calvino, Italian Folktales , no. 103. Type 510B tales in the German Language Titel Sammlung Allerlei Rauch. Grimm, Älteste Märchensammlung , Nr. 7. Allerlei Rauh. Grimm, Märchen aus dem Nachlaß , Nr. 18. Allerleirauh. Grimm, Kinder- und Hausmärchen , Nr. 65. Allerleirauh [3 Erzählungen]. Ranke, Schleswig-Holsteinische Volksmärchen , Bd. 2, S. 125. Aschenbrödel - Aschentrödel. Boskovic-Stulli, Kroatische Volksmärchen , Nr. 4. Aschengrübel. Wildhaber, Schweizer Volksmärchen , Nr. 11. Aschenpüster mit der Wünschelgerte. Bechstein, Sämtliche Märchen , Nr. N01. Aschenpuster. Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg , Bd. 1, S. 479. Curia, schöne Curia. Uffer, Rätoromanische Märchen , Nr. 33. Das Fellmädchen. Spies, Türkische Volksmärchen , Nr. 24. Das Mädchen im Tierfell. Karlinger, Baskische Märchen , Nr. 8. Das Rindenmädchen. Camaj, Albanische Märchen , Nr. 27. Das Wasser-Handtuch-Peitschen-Schloß. Range, Litauische Volksmärchen , Nr. 39. Der Drächengrudel. Wildhaber, Schweizer Volksmärchen , Nr. 12. Der gehende Wagen. Haiding, Österreichs Märchenschatz , Nr. 52. Der goldene Ballon. Bukowska-Grosse, Polnische Volksmärchen , Nr. 16. Der goldene Stier. Soupault, Französische Märchen , Nr. 27. Der Vater und die Tochter. Afanasjew, Russische Volksmärchen , S. 799. Der Vater, der seine Tochter heiraten wollte. Uffer, Rätoromanische Märchen , Nr. 29. Die Bärin. Basile, Das Pentameron , Tag 2, Novelle 6. Die drei Kleider. Meier, Spanische Märchen , Nr. 39. Die hölzerne Maria. Karlinger, Italienische Volksmärchen , Nr. 17. Die kleine goldene Kuh. Meier, Portugiesische Märchen , Nr. 86. Die Zarentochter im unterirdischen Reich. Olesch, Russische Volksmärchen , Nr. 9. Helga und der Zwerg. Schier, Märchen aus Island , Nr. 17. Ruuchklaas. Wisser, Plattdeutsche Märchen , Nr. 40. Schweinehaut. Afanasjew, Russische Volksmärchen , S. 669. Stoppelpelz. Schier, Schwedische Volksmärchen , Nr. 33. Return to Table of Contents D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Cinderella . Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 510A. Kora and His Sister . A folktale from India about brother-sister incest. Revised September 5, 2021. Faust Legends Faust Legends translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2021 Contents Doctor Johann Faustus. (Abstracted from the Faust Chapbook of 1587). Doctor Faust in Neu-Ruppin (Germany). Dr. Faust at Boxberg Castle (Germany). Dr. Faust in Erfurt (Germany). Dr. Faust and Melanchton in Wittenberg (Germany). Dr. Faust in Anhalt (Germany). How Doctor Faust came Back to Life (Germany). Faustschlössl (Austria). Doctor Faust at Castle Waardenburg (Netherlands). Faust's Book of Hell's Charms (Germany). Dr. Faust's Hell-Master (Germany). The Pact (Austria). A Scholar Assigns Himself to the Devil (Denmark). Doctor Faustus Was a Good Man (1) (a nursery rhyme from England). Doctor Faustus Was a Good Man (2) (another version of the above nursery rhyme). Dule upon Dun (England). Devil Compacts (Scotland). Dafydd Hiraddug and the Crow Barn, (Wales, Elias Owen). This account is included here because of its similarity with the Faust legends. Selected literary works based on the Faust legend, with links to electronic texts. Selected musical works based on the Faust legend. Related Links. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Doctor Johann Faustus Abstracted from the Faust Chapbook of 1587 Johann Faustus was born in Roda in the province of Weimar, of God-fearing parents. Although he often lacked common sense and understanding, at an early age he proved himself a scholar, mastering not only the Holy Scriptures, but also the sciences of medicine, mathematics, astrology, sorcery, prophesy, and necromancy. These pursuits aroused in him a desire to commune with the Devil, so--having made the necessary evil preparations--he repaired one night to a crossroads in the Spesser Forest near Wittenberg. Between nine and ten o'clock he described certain circles with his staff and thus conjured up the Devil. Feigning anger at having been summoned against his will, the Devil arrived in the midst of a great storm. After the winds and lightning had subsided the Devil asked Dr. Faustus to reveal his will, to which the scholar replied that he was willing to enter into a pact. The Devil, for his part, would agree: to serve Dr. Faustus for as long as he should live, to provide Dr. Faustus with whatever information he might request, and never to utter an untruth to Dr. Faustus. The Devil agreed to these particulars, on the condition that Dr. Faustus would promise: at the expiration of twenty-four years to surrender his body and soul to the Devil, to confirm the pact with a signature written in his own blood, and to renounce his Christian faith. Having reached an agreement, the pact was drawn up, and Dr. Faustus formalized it with his own blood. Henceforth Dr. Faustus' life was filled with comfort and luxury, but marked by excess and perversion. Everything was within his grasp: elegant clothing, fine wines, sumptuous food, beautiful women--even Helen of Troy and the concubines from the Turkish sultan's harem. He became the most famous astrologer in the land, for his horoscopes never failed. No longer limited by earthly constraints, he traveled from the depths of hell to the most distant stars. He amazed his students and fellow scholars with his knowledge of heaven and earth. However, for all his fame and fortune, Dr. Faustus could not revoke the twenty-four year limit to the Devil's indenture. Finally recognizing the folly of his ways, he grew ever more melancholy. He bequeathed his worldly goods to his young apprentice, a student named Christoph Wagner from the University of Wittenberg . Shortly after midnight on the last day of the twenty-fourth year, the students who had assembled at the home of the ailing Dr. Faustus heard a great commotion. First came the sound of a ferocious storm and then the shouts--first terrifyingly loud then ever weaker--from their mentor. At daybreak they ventured into his room. Bloodstains were everywhere. Bits of brain clung to the walls. Here they discovered an eye, and there a few teeth. Outside they found the corpse, its members still twitching, lying on a manure pile. His horrible death thus taught them the lesson that had escaped their master during his lifetime: to hold fast to the ways of God, and to reject the Devil and all his temptations. Source: Abstracted from Historia von D. Johann Fausten (Frankfurt am Main: Johann Spies, 1587). Return to the table of contents . Doctor Faust in Neu-Ruppin Germany It is said that Doctor Faust also once lived in Neu-Ruppin. They say that in the evening he usually played cards with some of the residents, and that he won a lot. One evening one of the players dropped a card beneath the table, and when he picked it up he saw that the doctor had horse-feet. With that it became evident why he always won so much. Long after his death he could often be seen in a thicket on the lake shore sitting at a table with a number of people and playing cards. That is where he continues to practice his art. Source (books.google.com): Adalbert Kuhn, "Doktor Faust," Märkische Sagen und Märchen (Berlin: G. Reimer, 1843), no. 152, p. 160 . Source (Internet Archive): Adalbert Kuhn, "Doktor Faust," Märkische Sagen und Märchen (Berlin: G. Reimer, 1843), no. 152, p. 160 . Kuhn's source: "Oral." Return to the table of contents . Dr. Faust at Boxberg Castle Germany When Dr. Faust was in Heilbronn, performing his troublesome arts throughout the region, he often went to Boxberg Castle, where he was always courteously received. Once he was there on a cold winter's day, strolling with the lords and ladies of the palace along the garden paths on the east side of the castle. The ladies complained about the frost, and he immediately caused the sun to shine warmly, the snow-covered ground to turn green, and a mass of violets and beautiful flowers of every kind to spring forth. Then at his command the trees blossomed, and -- following the desires of the group -- apples, plums, peaches, and other good fruit ripened on the branches. Finally he caused grape vines to grow and bear grapes. He then invited each of his companions to cut off a grape, but not before he gave the signal to do so. When all of them were ready to cut away he removed the deception from their eyes, and each one saw that he was holding a knife against the nose of the person next to him. The part of the garden where this took place has ever since been called "the violet garden." Another time Faust left Boxberg Castle at a quarter past eleven in order to be at a banquet in Heilbronn at the last strike of twelve o'clock. He got into his carriage hitched to four black horses and drove away like the wind, and he did indeed arrive in Heilbronn punctually at the strike of twelve. A man working in a field saw how horned spirits paved the way before the carriage, while others pulled up the paving stones from behind and carried them away, thus destroying every trace of the pavement. Source: August Schnezler, "Doktor Faust zu Boxberg," Badisches Sagen-Buch , vol. 2 (Karlsruhe: Verlag von W. Creuzbauer, 1846), pp. 613-14 . Schnezler's source: Oral tradition, as recorded by Bernhard Baader in Mone's Anzeiger für Kunde teutscher Vorzeit , 1838. This legend was also published in Bernard Baader, Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlruhe: Verlag der Herder'schen Buchhandlung, 1851), no. 367, pp. 327-28 . The story of hypnotic deception in the garden is reminiscent of an episode at the end of the Auerbach's Cellar scene in Goethe's Faust , part one. Link to a German-language version of the above legend: Dr. Faust zu Boxberg . Return to the table of contents . Dr. Faust in Erfurt Germany At one time the renowned Dr. Faust sojourned in Erfurt. He lived in Michelsgasse next to the great Collegium. As a learned professor and with the permission of the academic senate he lectured in the large auditorium of the Collegium Building about Greek poets. Indeed, he explained Homer to his audience, the students, describing the heroic figures of the Iliad and the Odyssey so realistically that the students expressed their desire to see them with their own eyes. He made this possible, conjuring them up from the underworld, but when the students saw the powerful giant Polyphemus, they all became terrified and wanted to see or hear nothing more from him. He drove through the narrowest street in Erfurt with a double-span load of hay, for which reason this street has ever since been called "Dr. Faust's Street." Once he came riding a horse that ate and ate and could never be satisfied. Another time he tapped all kinds of wine from a wooden table and made the drunken drinking companions think that they saw grapes. They wanted to cut them from the vines, but when he caused the deceptive image to disappear, each one had another one's nose in his fingers instead of wine grapes. A house in Schössergasse is said to still have an opening in the roof that can never be closed with roofing tiles because Faust used it for his cloak rides. He is said to have created a magnificent winter garden and provided delicious meals for numerous noble guests, thus achieving a high reputation. Soon everyone in Erfurt was talking of nothing but Dr. Faust, and it was feared that a great many people would be led astray through his devilish arts. Thus a learned monk by the name of Dr. Klinge was sent to convert him. But Faust did not want to be converted. In response to the masses and prayers directed at tearing him away from the devil, Dr. Faust said, "No, my good Dr. Klinge, it would be disreputable for me to break the contract that I signed with my blood. That would be dishonest. The devil has honestly upheld his promises, and I will also keep my word with him." "Then go to the devil, you cursed piece of devil's meat and member of the devil's band!" cried the monk angrily. "Go to the eternal fires that have been prepared for the devil and his angels!" And the monk ran to Rector Magnificus and reported to him that Dr. Faustus was a totally unrepentant sinner. Then Faust was banished from the city of Erfurt, and never again has a sorcerer been accepted there. Source: J. G. Th. Grässe, "Doctor Faust zu Erfurt," Sagenbuch des Preußischen Staats , vol. 1 (Glogau: Verlag von Carl Flemming, 1868), no. 453, pp. 339-40 . The episode with the drunken companions was incorporated into the Auerbach's Cellar scene of Goethe's Faust , part one. Return to the table of contents . Dr. Faust and Melanchton in Wittenberg Germany It is not true, as some claimed as early as the middle of the sixteenth century, that Dr. Faust grew up in Wittenberg and earned a doctorate of theology there, that he lived near the outer gate and had a house and garden in a street named Schneegasse (which never existed), and that he was strangled by the devil in the village of Kimlich, a half mile from Wittenberg, in the presence of several scholars and students. However, he did spend time in Wittenberg and was tolerated there for a while, until he became so crude that they tried to imprison him, and then fled to another place. While in Wittenberg he approached Philipp Melanchton, who read the book to him, scolding him and warning him that if he did not immediately desist from his evil ways he would come to an evil end, which did indeed happen. He did not repent. Now one day at ten o'clock in the morning Master Philipp was leaving his study on his way downstairs to eat when Faust, who was with him at that time, and whom he had vigorously scolded, said to him: "Master Philipp, you always approach me with rough words. Someday, when you are about to sit down to a meal, I am going to cause all the pots in the kitchen to fly up the chimney, so that you and your guests will have nothing to eat." Thereupon Philipp answered him: "Desist from such talk! I ---- on your art!" And he did desist. Another old God-fearing man also tried to convert him. To show his thanks, Faust sent a devil to the man's bedroom to frighten him as he was going to bed. The devil walked about in the room, grunting like a sow. The man, however, was not afraid. Armed with his faith, he ridiculed the devil: "What a fine voice you have! You are singing like an angel who was not allowed to remain in heaven because he wanted to be God's equal and was thus thrust out for his pride and now wanders through people's houses in the form of a sow!" With that the spirit, not wanting to be in a place where he was ridiculed because of his apostasy and his wickedness, returned to Faust and complained to him how he had been received there. Dr. Faust, however, did lead a student astray. Dr. Lercheimer himself knew one of his friends well into an advanced age. This man had a crooked mouth. Whenever he wanted a hare, he would go out into the woods, make his hocus-pocus, and a hare would run right into his hands. Source: J. G. Th. Grässe, "Dr. Faust und Melanchthon zu Wittenberg," Sagenbuch des Preußischen Staats , vol. 1 (Glogau: Verlag von Carl Flemming, 1868), no. 453, pp. 391-92 . Philipp Melanchton (1497-1560), humanist, classical scholar, theologian, and professor at the University of Wittenberg, was an important associate of Martin Luther in the protestant reformation. Return to the table of contents . Doctor Faust in Anhalt Ludwig Bechstein One winter the renowned Doctor Faustus came to the Count of Anhalt. Seeing that the count's wife was pregnant, Doctor Faustus asked her if she did not desire something special to eat, as is often the case with expectant mothers. He said that with the help of his magic powers he could get her anything she wanted. The countess graciously accepted his friendly offer and told him that a great desire of hers would be satisfied if she could have some fresh fruit such as grapes, cherries, and peaches, instead of the dried confection and nuts that she currently had. But she thought that neither he nor any other magician could get such things in the middle of a harsh winter. Doctor Faustus took three silver platters, set them in front of the dining room window, muttered a magic formula, then soon returned with fresh fruit. The first platter was filled with apples, pears, and peaches; the second with cherries, apricots, and plums; and the third filled with red and green grapes. He invited the countess to partake of the fruit, which she did with great pleasure. When it came time for Doctor Faustus to take leave of Anhalt, he requested the count and the countess to accompany him on a walk, for he wanted to show them something new. This they did, accompanied by the count's entourage. Approaching the castle gate, they saw a newly constructed palace on the hill called Rombühl. Water birds were swimming in its broad moats. The palace had five towers. As the party came closer, they found that two of the towers and the outer yard were alive with a menagerie of rare animals which were walking a jumping about inside, without injuring one another. There were apes, monkeys, bears, chamois, ostriches, as well as other animals. An elaborate breakfast awaited them in one of the halls. Doctor Faust's familiar, Christoph Wagner, served as waiter, and music was sounding from an unseen source. The food and wine were such that everyone ate and drank with great pleasure until they were full. After spending more than an hour in this place, the party left the beautiful palace. As they were approaching Anhalt Castle they looked back at the new palace and saw and heard it go up in flames, with the sound of rifles and canons. Faustus and Wagner had disappeared, and they all were suddenly as hungry as lions. They had to have breakfast once again, for everything that they had eaten had been merely an illusion. Source: Ludwig Bechstein, Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 412, pp. 348-49 . Links to additional Faust legends (in German) in Bechstein's Deutsches Sagenbuch : Doctor Faust und sein Teufel Jost (no. 141, pp. 127-28). Another version of this legend: Johann Wilhelm Wolf, "Schloß Waerdenberg bei Bommel (Doctor Faust)," Niederländische Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1843), no. 266, pp. 355-57 . Doktor Faust's Gäßchen (no. 591, p. 494). Doctor Faust in Schwaben (no. 900, pp. 734-35). Return to the table of contents . How Doctor Faust Came Back to Life Germany When Doctor Faust was lying on his deathbed he called to his servant and gave him the following order: "After I have died, cut my body into small pieces. Put everything into a tub and press it all firmly together." Furthermore, the servant was carefully to close all shutters and windows, such that not even the smallest crack remained open. The tub was to be placed behind the stove, which was to be heated glowing hot for three days. The servant was strictly commanded not to enter the room until the three days had passed. He followed these orders. On the third day the smell was so strong that he could no longer stand it, and he looked into the room. Doctor Faust's head and breast emerged from the tub, and he waved to the servant. A moment later he climbed out the the tub, whole and hearty. Source (books.google.com): Anton Birlinger and Michael Richard Buck, "Wie Doktor Faust wieder lebendig worden ist," Sagen, Märchen, Volksaberglauben (Freiburg im Breisgau: Gerder'sche Verlagshandlung, 1861), no. 324, pp. 212-13 . Source (Internet Archive): Anton Birlinger and Michael Richard Buck, "Wie Doktor Faust wieder lebendig worden ist," Sagen, Märchen, Volksaberglauben (Freiburg im Breisgau: Gerder'sche Verlagshandlung, 1861), no. 324, pp. 212-13 . Birlinger's and Buck's source: "Oral, from Dietenheim in the Iller Valley." Return to the table of contents . Faustschlössl Austria Since the year 1500 a small castle on a steep incline across the Danube River from the town of Aschach has been known by the name Fauststöckl or Faustschlössl. It is said that the castle was built in one night by the devil himself at the behest of Dr. Faustus, the famous alchemist and necromancer. As everyone knows, Dr. Faustus had made a pact with the devil: In return for granting Faust's every wish, the devil -- after a period of twenty-four years -- would gain possession of his soul. Faust had commanded the building of the castle not only to provide himself with a magnificent residence, but also in an attempt to give the devil a task that he would be unable to fulfill, thus voiding the pact that ultimately would end with Faust's damnation. However, the devil proved equal to this task. In another attempt to frustrate the devil, Faust requested a bowling alley in the middle of the Danube River. This too was accomplished, and Faust miraculously was able to play at bowls on the surface of the water. Whenever Faust wanted to cross over to the town of Aschach, he had the devil build a bridge across the river. The bridge was constructed immediately before Faust's galloping horses, and dismantled behind him as he passed over. Similarly, as reportedly also occurred elsewhere in Germany, in only a few minutes he had a paved road built for himself as far as Neuhaus, and then torn up when no longer needed. These miracles not only satisfied Faust's great ego; they were also intended to give the devil a task that he would not be able to fulfill. But in this Faust failed. On midnight at the end of the twenty-fourth year a great commotion was heard from within the castle. The devil was seen flying through the air with Faust, and, reaching the height of the nearby mountains, he ripped him to pieces. Since then neither has been seen near the Faustschlössl. A hole remained where the two left the castle, and to this day it cannot be plastered over. After a succession of noble occupants, in 1966 the Faustschlössl was remodeled as a hotel and restaurant. The hotel management claims that the famous "Devil's Hole" still cannot be plastered over, and they offer to show it to their guests. On September 18, 2008, I found myself in Aschach waiting for a bus to take me to the city of Linz. I asked the bus driver about the legend of Faust and the devil at the castle across the river. "It's true," he assured me. "My father is a plasterer, and he has tried to repair that hole, but the plaster keeps falling out." Retold from the following sources: Faust-Schl&oumlssl Geschichte / Sage (Hotel Faust-Schlössl). "Das Faust-Stöckl bei Aschach," Sagen aus Oberösterreich (Vienna: Verlag Carl Ueberreuter, 1947), chapter 43 (Projekt Gutenberg-DE). Albert Depiny, "Teufelsbund und Teufelshilfe," Oberösterreichisches Sagenbuch (Linz: R. Pirngruber, 1932), paragraphs 207-211 (SAGEN.at). D. L. Ashliman, personal journal for the year 2008. Return to the table of contents . Doctor Faust at Castle Waardenburg Netherlands Doctor Faustus was a very learned man. He sat day and night at his books in Castle Waardenburg seeking the philosopher's stone. From time to time he brewed all sorts of drinks in the castle cellar. But all of this came to nothing, and he became peevish and ill-humored. One day the devil came to him and said: "My dear friend Faust, your labors are all in vain. You should take me into your service. I will be your servant for seven years and give you everything that your heart desires." "Very good," said Faust. "I have been seeking something like that for a long time." The devil responded: "If that is what you want, then first you must give me a pact written by hand with your blood." Faust did this at once, and pact was finalized. From that moment on there was nothing of beauty in the world that Faust did not desire. Everything had to come from Amsterdam and Paris. In the middle of winter he demanded lovely grapes, in the middle of summer snow and ice. In the courtyard a large hortensia blossomed continuously, and the garden was always filled with the most costly flowers. Faust did not stop there. The devil also had to get him a carriage with four horses that never tired. In the shortest time he could be in Constantinople, and come back just as fast. If he wanted to go to Bommel [Zaltbommel], he would just say: "Jost, I want a bridge over the Waal River immediately, and then break it down again at once!" The bridge appeared, and then vanished as soon as he had crossed over it. At that time the streets in Bommel were badly paved, but Faust had only to shout out: "Jost, run ahead of the horses and smooth everything out, but then put it back in its previous state, because I don't like the people of Bommel." Once Faust rode out of the door of a tavern mounted on a keg of the best Thielschen beer. Many guests saw this happen. Faust kept Jost busy the whole day. If Jost thought that he could could rest at the end of a day's hard work, then in the evening Faust would scatter a bushel of grain far and wide into the thorn hedges, and Jost had to gather everything up again during the night. Or he would throw a large amount of flour into the castle's moat, and Jost had to bring it all back, completely clean and unspoiled. Jost endured this for four years, but with all his labors he became so thin that he was pathetic to look at. At last his patience broke, and he said to Faust: "I am willing to have served you for four years in vain. I now beg you to dismiss me, because I cannot stand it any longer." Doctor Faustus laughed and said: "So you are tired? But I am not." Jost had to serve him for the remaining three years. However, when these three years had passed, promptly at twelve midnight Jost grabbed the doctor by his hair and pulled him to a large window in the castle tower, and from there to hell. The tower window still can be seen today. Jost pulled Faust through the bars of the window such that his bright red blood stuck to the window and splashed against the wall. People have often tried to clean the stains, but no rain, no snow, and no human hands can do that. The stains will remain there as long as the castle and the tower stand. Source (books.google.com): Johann Wilhelm Wolf, "Schloss Waerdenberg bei Bommel (Doctor Faust)," Niederländische Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1843), no. 266, pp. 355-56 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Wilhelm Wolf, "Schloss Waerdenberg bei Bommel (Doctor Faust)," Niederländische Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1843), no. 266, pp. 355-56 . Link to a Dutch-Language Wikipedia article, including illustrations, about Dokter Faust van Waardenburg . Link to additional Devil's Bridge Legends . Return to the table of contents . Faust's Book of Hell's Charms Zellerfeld, Germany The Book of Hell's Charms is in the church at Zellerfeld, secured by an iron chain. It was written by Doctor Faust. Only a few people can read it, and it is extremely dangerous to read it. To read it without losing one's life, one must be able to read it forwards and backwards. If one reads it forwards, the devil will appear. If one reads it backwards, he will leave. If anyone has read the Book of Hell's Charms forwards and cannot read it backwards, then the devil will do the rest. Source: Hermann Harrys, "Fausts Höllenzwang," Volkssagen, Märchen und Legenden Niedersachsens , vol. 2 (Celle: Verlag von E. H. C. Schulze, 1840) no. 13, p. 20 . Harrys' source: "Oral." The magic book in this legend is called the Höllenzwang , which translates literally as "hell's compulsion," i.e. a book of charms that will compel hell to do one's bidding. This legend's final statement "The devil will do the rest" is somewhat ambiguous. Although it could be interpretted "The devil will read it backwards," a more logical conclusion is "The devil will take possession of the careless reader." Return to the table of contents . Dr. Faust's Hell-Master Germany According to legend, there is a book, named Dr. Faust's Hell-Master, which teaches the art of controling spirits, even of making the devil subservient to oneself. It is said to be buried beneath a thorn bush behind the Chemnitz Castle, on the road to the Küch Forest. Many advocates of the black art have unsuccessfully attempted to find this book. Source: Joh. Aug. Ernst Köhler, "Dr. Faust's Höllenzwang," Sagenbuch des Erzgebirges (Schneeberg and Schwarzenberg: Verlag und Druck von Carl Moritz Gärtner, 1886), no. 277, p. 229 . Return to the table of contents . The Pact Austria A long time ago a peasant at Kolman entered into a ten-year pact with the devil. The Evil One was to serve the peasant for ten years, after which the latter would be delivered to hell. The time passed quickly, and the tenth year was nearly at an end. On the last evening the miserable peasant took refuge with a priest. The priest had him climb into a tub filled with holy water and then blessed him with all kinds of prayers. Thus they awaited the hour of midnight. Soon the devil stormed in to take away his victim. He raged and howled for an hour. Finally the clock struck twelve, and the devil had to retreat, but not before he had pulled out a tuft of the peasant's hair. Source (books.google.com): Ignaz Vincenz Zingerle, "Der Pakt," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Tirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1859), no. 593, p. 347 . Source (Internet Archive): Ignaz Vincenz Zingerle, "Der Pakt," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Tirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1859), no. 593, p. 347 . Return to the table of contents . A Scholar Assigns Himself to the Devil Denmark There was once a scholar in the school of Herlufsholm, who through the devil's craft was seduced to give himself up to his power and will. He therefore wrote a contract on a strip of paper with his own blood, and stuck it in a hole in the church wall. But for the salvation of his sinful soul, which the fiend would else have seized, it happened that another scholar of the school found the paper and took it to the rector. Now nothing was to be done but to have recourse to many prayers, whereby the devil's cunning was turned to naught; but it was long impossible to close up the hole in the wall so effectually that it was not immediately found open again. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), p. 180 . Return to the table of contents . Doctor Faustus Was a Good Man (1) England Doctor Faustus was a good man, He whipt his scholars now and then; When he whipp'd them he made them dance Out of Scotland into France, Out of France into Spain, And then he whipp'd them back again! Source: James Orchard Halliwell, The Nursery Ghymes of England: Obtained Principally from Oral Tradition , 2nd edition (London: John Russell Smith, 1843), no. 54, p. 37 . A slightly different version, with commentary: Alfonzo Gardiner, "On Some of Our English Nursery Rhymes," Yorkshire Folk-Lore Journal , edited by J. Horsfall Turner, vol. 1 (1888), pp. 159-60 . Return to the table of contents . Doctor Faustus Was a Good Man (2) England The following lines are common in Hants [Hampshire]: Doctor Faustus was a good man, He beat his children now and "tan," When he did, he led them a dance, Out of England into France, Out of France into Spain, And then he whipp'd them back again. Source: William Holloway, A General Dictionary of Provincialisms, Written with a View to Rescue from Oblivion the Fast Fading Relics of By-Gone Days , (Lewes, Sussex: Baxter and Son, 1839), p. 170 . Return to the table of contents . Dule upon Dun England In his Rambles on the Ribble Mr. Dobson records what professes to be a genuine Lancashire tale which has been told for generations by many a fireside on the banks of that river. There stood till recently in the town of Clitheroe a public-house bearing the strange name of Dule upon Dun, on the signboard of which the devil was depicted riding off at full speed upon a dun horse, while a tailor, scissors in hand, looked on with delight. It appears that in former days, when the Evil One used to visit the earth in bodily form and enter into contracts with mortals, giving them material prosperity now in exchange for the soul at a future time, a tailor of Clitheroe entered into some such agreement with him. At the expiration of the term, however, the tailor having failed to receive any benefit at all from the agreement, asked from his Satanic Majesty the boon of "one wish more." It was granted. A dun horse was grazing hard by, and the ready-witted tailor, pointing to the animal, wished that the devil might ride straight to his own quarters upon it and never come back to earth to plague mortal. Instantly the horse was bestridden by the Evil One, who speedily rode out of sight never to return in a bodily shape. People came from far and near to see the man who had outwitted the devil, and soon it occurred to the tailor to set up an alehouse for the entertainment of his visitors, taking for a sign the devil riding a dun horse, or as the neighbours called it for brevity "the Dule upon Dun." Source (books.google.com): William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by W. Watchell, Peyton, and Company, 1879), p. 279 . Source (Internet Archive): William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by W. Watchell, Peyton, and Company, 1879), p. 279 . Henderson's source (books.google.com): William Dobson, "Dule upo' Dun," Rambles by the Ribble , first series (Preston: W. and J. Dobson; London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Company, 1864), pp. 137-38 . Dobson's source (books.google.com): John Roby, Traditions of Lancashire , second series, vol. 1 (London: Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown, and Green, 1831), pp. 249-67 . Return to the table of contents . Devil Compacts Scotland It was believed that many went further than the students of "Black Art," and actually made compacts with the devil. Such a compact was made at midnight in some lonely churchyard, or amid the ruins of some castle. Those who did so, were they men or women, became bound to give themselves up soul and body to Satan at the end of a certain number of years, on a fixed day and at a fixed hour, or at the time of their death. For this they received power to do almost everything man could conceive -- to control the elements, to send disease on man or beast, to make crops unfruitful, to destroy them by wind or rain, to amass as much wealth as they wished to spend upon their evil passions -- in short, to do what wicked work they set their minds to. A wild wanton life did such lead, often with the appearance of unbounded wealth and happiness far beyond the reach of most men. Their whole time seemed one round of success and joy. The time fixed by the contract might be prolonged, but, if the contract was not renewed, go they must at the hour appointed. A man had made such a contract. He had, to all appearance, lived a life of comfort and success. The time for him to go drew very near. When he began to think of his doom, horror took hold of him. He told his terrible secret to some of his friends. They did what they could to cheer him, and make him forget it. On the last night they met with him, and kept him surrounded, persuading him and themselves that, if it should come to the worst, they would be able to defend him. Hour after hour passed, and they began to think that the devil had forgotten. The appointed hour came. Next moment a knock was heard at the door. All eyes were turned to it. It opened, and in stalked the devil. There was no delay. He rushed upon his thrall, and both disappeared in fire, leaving behind them nothing but smoke and stench. Source: Walter Gregor, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the North-East of Scotland (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1881), p. 74 . Return to the table of contents . Dafydd Hiraddug and the Crow Barn Wales There is an incredible tradition connected with this place, Ffinant, Trefeglwys. It is said that an old barn stands on the right-hand side of the highway. One Sunday morning, as the master was starting to church, he told one of the servants to keep the crows from a field that had been sown with wheat, in which field the old barn stood. The servant, through some means, collected all the crows into the barn, and shut the door on them. He then followed his master to the church, who, when he saw the servant there, began to reprove him sharply. But the master, when he heard the strange news, turned his steps homewards, and found to his amazement that the tale was true, and it is said that the barn was filled with crows. This barn ever afterwards was called Crow-Barn , a name it still retains. It is said that the servant's name was Dafydd Hiraddug, and that he had sold himself to the devil, and that consequently, he was able to perform feats, which in this age are considered incredible. However, it is said that Dafydd was on this occasion more subtle than the old serpent, even according to the agreement which was between them. The contract was, that the devil was to have complete possession of Dafydd if his corpse were taken over the side of the bed, or through a door, or if buried in a churchyard, or inside a church. Dafydd had commanded, that on his death, the liver and lights were to be taken out of his body and thrown on the dunghill, and notice was to be taken whether a raven or a dove got possession of them; if a raven, then his body was to be taken away by the foot, and not by the side of the bed, and through the wall, and not through the door, and he was to be buried, not in the churchyard nor in the church but under the church walls. And the devil, when he saw that by these arrangements he had been duped cried, saying: Dafydd Hiraddug, badly bred, False when living, and false when dead. Source: Elias Owen, Welsh Folk-Lore: A Collection of the Folk-Tales and Legends of North Wales, Being the Prize Essay of the National Eisteddfod, 1887 (Oswestry and Wrexham: Woodall, Minshall, and Company, [1896]), pp. 159-60 . Return to the table of contents . Selected literary works based on the Faust legend Targets open in new windows. Return to this page by closing the new window. 1587. Anonymous. Historia von D. Johann Fausten (Frankfurt am Main: Johann Spies). 1604. Christopher Marlowe. The Tragicall History of D. Faustus . 1784. Gotthold Lessing. D. Faust (fragment). 1791. Friedrich Maximilian Klinger. Fausts Leben, Taten und Höllenfahrt . 1813. Adalbert von Chamisso. Faust: Ein Versuch (1804); Peter Schlemihls wundersame Geschichte . 1808-31. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. Faust: Eine Tragödie ( Erster Teil , 1808; Zweiter Teil , completed 1831, published 1833). 1829. Christian Dietrich Grabbe. Don Juan und Faust . 1836. Nikolaus Lenau. Faust: Ein Gedicht . 1847. Woldemar Nürnberger. Josephus Faust: Ein Gedicht . 1851. Heinrich Heine. Doktor Faust: Ein Tanzpoem, nebst kuriosen Berichten über Teufel, Hexen und Dichtkunst . 1862. Vischer, Friedrich Theodor. Faust: Der Tragödie dritter Teil . 1945. Paul Valéry. Mon Faust . 1950. Thomas Mann. Doktor Faustus . Return to the table of contents . Selected musical works based on the Faust legend 1813. Louis Spohr. Faust , an opera based on the Faust legend. 1844-53. Robert Schumann. Scenes from Goethe's Faust , an oratorio. 1846. Hector Berlioz. The Damnation of Faust , a dramatic cantata based on a French version of Goethe's work by Gerard de Nerval. This composition is also staged as an opera. 1854 (revised 1857-61). Franz Liszt. A Faust Symphony . 1859. Charles Gounod. Faust , an opera based on part one of Goethe's work. Libretto by Jules Barbier and Michel Carré. 1868. Arrigo Boito. Mefistofele , an opera based on Goethe's work. Boito wrote both the music and the libretto. 1995. Randy Newman. Randy Newman's Faust , a musical play. Return to the table of contents . Related Links Targeted links open in new windows. Return to this page by closing the new window. "The Devil and Dr. Faustus," The Cornhill Magazine , vol. 14 (July - December 1866), pp. 687-701 . The Damnable Life and Death of Stubbe Peeter is a werewolf legend that shares many motifs with the Faust legends. Master Builder Legends , in which a mortal tricks a supernatural being (typically a troll or a giant) into helping him build a grand edifice, have much in common with the Faust stories. Bearskin . Folktales of type 361, in which a man gains a fortune and a beautiful bride by entering into a pact with the devil. The Name of the Helper. Folktales of type 500, in which a mysterious and threatening helper is defeated when the hero or heroine discovers his name. Texts at this site include "Rumpelstiltskin" from Germany and "Tom Tit Tot" from England. Straightening a Curly Hair . Folktales of type 1175, in which a demon helper is defeated because he cannot straighten a curly hair. Deceiving the Devil , a folktale of type 1176, in which the devil loses control over his intended victim by failing to catch and return broken wind. Devil's Bridge Legends . In these tales (type 1191) the devil builds a bridge, but is then cheated out of the human soul he expected as payment. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 10, 2021. Fear: Tales of Type 326 Fear Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 326 and related stories translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2022 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Good Bowling and Card-Playing (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, 1812). The Story of a boy Who Went Forth to Learn Fear (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, 1819). Shuddering (Germany, Ludwig Bechstein). The Brave Flute Player (Germany, Ludwig Bechstein). A Fearless Boy (Denmark). The Boy Who Did Not Know What Fear Was (Iceland). Jack Dreadnought (Hungary). The Boy Who Found Fear at Last (Turkey). The Deadly Mosque (Persia). About the Young Boy Who Had No Fear (Lithuania). The Headless Dwarfs (Estonia). The Man Who Never Knew Fear (Ireland). The Boy Who Feared Nothing (England). The Dauntless Girl (England). A Wager Won (England). The Boy and the Ghost (USA). The Dismembered Ghost (USA). The Haunted House (USA). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Good Bowling and Card-Playing Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, 1812 Once upon a time there was an old king who had a daughter who was the most beautiful maiden in the world. He had it proclaimed: "Whoever keeps watch three nights in my old castle shall have the princess as his wife." Now there was a young fellow, poor by birth, who thought: "I will risk my life for that. I have nothing to lose, but much to win. It's not worth a second thought!" So he he presented himself before the king and offered to keep watch in the castle for three nights. "You may take something with you to the castle, but only things not alive," said the king. "So I ask for a woodcarver's bench with a carving knife, a lathe, and a fire." These things were taken into the old castle for him. He himself went inside as it was beginning to get dark. At first everything was quiet inside. He lit his fire, put the carving knife next to the woodcarver's bench, and sat down on the lathe. Around midnight it started to get noisey -- first gently, then louder and louder: bif! baf! heyhey! holla ho! It got worse and worse, then it quieted down a little. Then a bone came down the chimney and stood up straight in front of him. "Hey there!" shouted the boy. "Send some more. One isn't enough." The noise started up again. Then another bone fell down, and another, and so on until there were nine. "Now that's enough for a bowling game, but the balls are still missing. Come on!" There was a terrible roar and two skulls fall down. He put them in the lathe and turned them round. "Now you'll roll straight!" Then he evened up the bones and set them up like bowling pins. "Hey! Let's have some fun!" Then came two big black cats came in. They walked around the fire, crying out: "Oh! Meow! We're freezing! We're freezing!" "You fools, why are you screaming? Sit by the fire and get warm." When the cats had warmed themselves, they said: "Comrade! we want to play cards with you." "Yes," he answered, "but show me your paws. Your nails are so long that first I want to cut them off for you." With that he grabbed them by their necks and lifted them onto the woodcarver's bench where he clamped them tight and struck them dead. Then he carried them out and threw them into a small pond just outside of the castle. After putting them to rest he wanted to sit down by the fire and and warm himself. But then many black cats and dogs came from every corner. More and more of them came until that he could no longer hide. They cried out, then stepped on his fire and tore it apart, putting it out altogether. Then he grabbed his carving knife and struck out at them. "Away, you rabble!" and attacked them with the knife. Many of them ran away. He struck the others dead and carried them out into the pond. Then he blew on a spark, brought the fire back to life again, and warmed himself. After warming himself he felt tired, so he lay down in a big bed that was in the corner. He was about to fall asleep when the bed began to move around the whole castle. "Not bad, but it could be better!" he said. Then the bed sped off as if six horses were pulling it. It drove over thresholds and stairs. It jumped about hop! hop! then turned itself upside down with him underneath. With that he threw blankets and pillows in the air and climbed out. "Anyone who wants to can have the next ride!" Then he lay down by the fire and slept until daybreak. In the morning the king came, and when he saw the young lad lying there asleep, he thought he was dead. He said that he was sorry for the boy. These words awakened the boy. He got up when he saw the king, who asked him how things had gone during the night. "Very well! The one had passed by, and the other two would pass by as well." The other nights went the same way, for he now knew what to do, and on the fourth day the king's beautiful daughter was given to him. Source (Wikisource): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Gut Kegel- und Kartenspiel," Kinder- und Haus-Märchen. Gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 4, pp. 14-17 . Return to the table of contents . The Story of a Boy Who Went Forth to Learn Fear Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, 1819 A father had two sons. The oldest one was clever and intelligent, and knew how to manage everything, but the youngest one was stupid and could neither understand nor learn anything. When people saw him, they said, "He will be a burden on his father!" Now when something had to be done, it was always the oldest son who had to do it. However, if the father asked him fetch anything when it was late, or even worse, at night, and if the way led through the churchyard or some other spooky place, he would always answer, "Oh, no, father, I won't go there. It makes me shudder!" For he was afraid. In the evening by the fire when stories were told that made one's flesh creep, the listeners sometimes said, "Oh, that makes me shudder!" The youngest son would sit in a corner and listen with the others, but he could not imagine what they meant. "They are always saying, 'It makes me shudder! It makes me shudder!' It does not make me shudder. That too must be a skill that I do not understand." Now it happened that one day his father said to him, "Listen, you there in the corner. You are getting big and strong. You too will have to learn something by which you can earn your bread. See how your brother puts himself out, but there seems to be no hope for you." "Well, father," he answered, "I do want to learn something. Indeed, if possible I would like to learn how to shudder. I don't understand that at all yet." The oldest son laughed when he heard that, and thought to himself, "Dear God, what a dimwit that brother of mine is. Nothing will come of him as long as he lives. As the twig is bent, so grows the tree." The father sighed, and answered him, "You may well learn to shudder, but you will not earn your bread by shuddering." Soon afterward the sexton came to the house on a visit, and the father complained to him about his troubles, telling him how his younger son was so stupid in everything, that he knew nothing and was learning nothing. "Just think," he said, "when I asked him how he was going to earn his bread, he actually asked to learn to shudder." "If there is nothing more than that," replied the sexton, "he can learn that with me. Just send him to me. I will plane off his rough edges." The father agreed to do this, for he thought, "It will do the boy well." So the sexton took him home with him, and he was to ring the church bell. A few days later the sexton awoke him at midnight and told him to get up, climb the church tower, and ring the bell. "You will soon learn what it is to shudder," he thought. He secretly went there ahead of him. After the boy had reached the top of the tower, had turned around and was about to take hold of the bell rope, he saw a white figure standing on the steps opposite the sound hole. "Who is there?" he shouted, but the figure gave no answer, neither moving nor stirring. "Answer me," shouted the boy, "or get out of here. You have no business here at night." The sexton, however, remained standing there motionless so that the boy would think he was a ghost. The boy shouted a second time, "What do you want here? Speak if you are an honest fellow, or I will throw you down the stairs." The sexton thought, "He can't seriously mean that." He made not a sound and stood as if he were made of stone. Then the boy shouted to him for the third time, and as that also was to no avail, he ran toward him and pushed the ghost down the stairs. It fell down ten steps and remained lying there in a corner. Then the boy rang the bell, went home, and without saying a word went to bed and fell asleep. The sexton's wife waited a long time for her husband, but he did not come back. Finally she became frightened and woke up the boy, asking, "Don't you know where my husband is? He climbed up the tower before you did." "No," replied the boy, "but someone was standing by the sound hole on the other side of the steps, and because he would neither give an answer nor go away, I took him for a thief and threw him down the steps. Go there and you will see if he was the one. I am sorry if he was." The woman ran out and found her husband, who was lying in the corner moaning. He had broken his leg. She carried him down, and then crying loudly she hurried to the boy's father. "Your boy," she shouted, "has caused a great misfortune. He threw my husband down the steps, causing him to break his leg. Take the good-for-nothing out of our house." The father was alarmed, and ran to the sexton's house, and scolded the boy. "What evil tricks are these? The devil must have prompted you to do them." "Father," he replied, "do listen to me. I am completely innocent. He was standing there in the night like someone with evil intentions. I did not know who it was, and I warned him three times to speak or to go away." "Oh," said the father, "I have experienced nothing but unhappiness with you. Get out of my sight. I do not want to look at you anymore." "Yes, father, and gladly. Just wait until daylight, and I will go forth and learn how to shudder. Then I shall have a skill that will support me." "Learn what you will," said the father. "It is all the same to me. Here are fifty talers for you. Take them and go into the wide world, but tell no one where you come from, or who your father is, because I am ashamed of you." "Yes, father, I will do just as you wish. If that is all you want from me, I can easily remember it." So at daybreak the boy put his fifty talers into his pocket, and went forth on the main road, continually saying to himself, "If only I could shudder! If only I could shudder!" A man came up to him and heard this conversation that the boy was holding with himself, and when they had walked a little farther to where they could see the gallows, the man said to him, "Look, there is the tree where seven men got married to the rope maker's daughter, and are now learning how to fly. Sit down beneath it, and wait until night comes, and then you will learn how to shudder." "If there is nothing more than that," answered the boy, "I can do it easily. But if I learn how to shudder that quickly, you shall have my fifty talers. Just come back to me tomorrow morning." Then the boy went to the gallows, sat down beneath them, and waited until evening. Because he was cold, he made himself a fire. However, at midnight there came up such a cold wind that in spite of his fire he could not get warm. And as the wind pushed the hanged men against each other, causing them to move to and fro, he thought, "You are freezing down here next to the fire. Those guys up there must really be freezing and suffering." Feeling pity for them, he put up the ladder, and climbed up, untied them, one after the other, and then brought down all seven. Then he stirred up the fire, blew into it, and set them all around it to warm themselves. But they just sat there without moving, and their clothes caught fire. So he said, "Be careful, or I will hang you up again." The dead men, however, heard nothing and said nothing, and they let their rags continue to burn. This made him angry, and he said, "If you won't be careful, I can't help you. I don't want to burn up with you." So he hung them up again all in a row. Then he sat down by his fire and fell asleep. The next morning the man came to him and wanted to have the fifty talers. He said, "Well, do you know how to shudder?" "No," he answered. "Where would I have learned it? Those fellows up there did not open their mouths. They were so stupid that they let the few old rags which they had on their bodies catch fire." Then the man saw that he would not be getting the fifty talers that day. He went away saying, "Never before have I met such a fellow." The boy went on his way as well, and once more began muttering to himself, " Oh, if only I could shudder! Oh, if only I could shudder!" A cart driver who was walking along behind him heard this and asked, "Who are you?" "I don't know," replied the boy. Then the cart driver asked, "Where do you come from?" "I don't know." "Who is your father?" "I am not permitted to say." "What are you always muttering to yourself?" "Oh," replied the boy, "I want to be able shudder, but no one can teach me how." "Stop that foolish chatter," said the cart driver. "Come, walk along with me, and I will see that I get a place for you." The boy went with the cart driver, and that evening they came to an inn where they decided to spend the night. On entering the main room, the boy again said quite loudly, "If only I could shudder! If only I could shudder!" Hearing this, the innkeeper laughed and said, "If that is your desire, there should be a good opportunity for you here." "Oh, be quiet," said the innkeeper's wife. "Too many meddlesome people have already lost their lives. It would be a pity and a shame if his beautiful eyes would never again see the light of day." But the boy said, "I want to learn to shudder, however difficult it may be. That is why I left home." He gave the innkeeper no rest, until the latter told him that there was a haunted castle not far away where a person could very easily learn how to shudder, if he would just keep watch there for three nights. The king had promised that whoever would dare to do this could have his daughter in marriage, and she was the most beautiful maiden under the sun. Further, in the castle there were great treasures, guarded by evil spirits. These treasures would then be freed, and would make a poor man rich enough. Many had entered the castle, but no one had come out again. The next morning the boy went to the king and said, "If it be allowed, I will keep watch three nights in the haunted castle." The king looked at him, and because the boy pleased him, he said, "You may ask for three things to take into the castle with you, but they must be things that are not alive." To this the boy replied, "Then I ask for a fire, a lathe, and a woodcarver's bench with a knife." The king had all these things carried into the castle for him during the day. When night was approaching, the boy went inside and made himself a bright fire in one of the rooms, placed the woodcarver's bench and knife beside it, and sat down at the lathe. "Oh, if only I could shudder!" he said. "But I won't learn it here either." Towards midnight he decided to stir up his fire. He was just blowing into it when a cry suddenly came from one of the corners, "Au, meow! How cold we are!" "You fools," he shouted, "what are you crying about? If you are cold, come and sit down by the fire and warm yourselves." When he had said that, two large black cats came with a powerful leap and sat down on either side of him, looking at him savagely with their fiery eyes. A little while later, after warming themselves, they said, "Comrade, shall we play a game of cards?" "Why not?" he replied, "But first show me your paws." So they stretched out their claws. "Oh," he said, "what long nails you have. Wait. First I will have to trim them for you." With that he seized them by their necks, put them on the woodcarver's bench, and tightened them into the vice by their feet. "I have been looking at your fingers," he said, "and my desire to play cards has disappeared," and he struck them dead and threw them out into the water. After he had put these two to rest, he was about to sit down again by his fire, when from every side and every corner there came black cats and black dogs on red-hot chains. More and more of them appeared until he could no longer move. They shouted horribly, then jumped into his fire and pulled it apart, trying to put it out. He quietly watched them for a little while, but finally it was too much for him, and he seized his carving knife, and cried, "Away with you, you villains!" and hacked away at them. Some of them ran away, the others he killed, and threw out into the pond. When he came back he blew into the embers of his fire until they flamed up again, and warmed himself. As he thus sat there, his eyes would no longer stay open, and he wanted to fall asleep. Looking around, he saw a large bed in the corner. "That is just what I wanted," he said, and lay down in it. However, as he was about to shut his eyes, the bed began to move by itself, going throughout the whole castle. "Good," he said, "but let's go faster." Then the bed rolled on as if six horses were harnessed to it, over thresholds and stairways, up and down. But then suddenly, hop, hop, it tipped upside down and lay on him like a mountain. But he threw the covers and pillows into the air, climbed out, and said, "Now anyone who wants to may drive." Then he lay down by his fire, and slept until it was day. In the morning the king came, and when he saw him lying there on the ground, he thought that the ghosts had killed him and that he was dead. Then said he, "It is indeed a pity to lose such a handsome person." The boy heard this, got up, and said, "It hasn't come to that yet." The king was astonished, but glad, and asked how he had fared. "Very well," he replied. "One night is past. The two others will pass as well." When he returned to the innkeeper, the latter looked astonished and said, "I did not think that I'd see you alive again. Did you learn how to shudder?" "No," he said, "it is all in vain. If someone could only tell me how." The second night he again went up to the old castle, sat down by the fire, and began his old song once more, "If only I could shudder!" As midnight was approaching he heard a noise and commotion. At first it was soft, but then louder and louder. Then it was a little quiet, and finally, with a loud scream, half of a man came down the chimney and fell in front of him. "Hey!" he shouted. "Another half belongs here. This is too little." Then the noise began again. With roaring and howling the other half fell down as well. "Wait," he said. "Let me blow on the fire and make it burn a little warmer for you." When he had done that and looked around again. The two pieces had come together, and a hideous man was sitting in his place. "That wasn't part of the wager," said the boy. "That bench is mine." The man wanted to force him aside, but the boy would not let him, instead pushing him away with force, and then sitting down again in his own place. Then still more men fell down, one after the other. They brought nine bones from dead men and two skulls, then set them up and bowled with them. The boy wanted to play too and said, "Listen, can I bowl with you?" "Yes, if you have money." "Money enough," he answered, "but your bowling balls are not quite round." Then he took the skulls, put them in the lathe and turned them round. "There, now they will roll better," he said. "Hey! This will be fun!" He played with them and lost some of his money, but when the clock struck twelve, everything disappeared before his eyes. He lay down and peacefully fell asleep. The next morning the king came to learn what had happened. "How did you do this time?" he asked. "I went bowling," he answered, "and lost a few pennies." "Did you shudder?" "How?" he said. "I had great fun, but if I only knew how to shudder." On the third night he sat down again on his bench and said quite sadly, "If only I could shudder!" When it was late, six large men came in carrying a coffin. At this he said, "Aha, for certain that is my little cousin, who died a few days ago." Then he motioned with his finger and cried out, "Come, little cousin, come." They put the coffin on the ground. He went up to it and took the lid off. A dead man lay inside. He felt his face, and it was cold as ice. "Wait," he said, "I will warm you up a little." He went to the fire and warmed his own hand, then laid it on the dead man's face, but the dead man remained cold. Then he took him out, sat down by the fire, and laid him on his lap, rubbing the dead man's arms to get the blood circulating again. When that did not help either, he thought to himself, "When two people lie in bed together, they keep each other warm." So he carried the dead man to the bed, put him under the covers, and lay down next to him. A little while later the dead man became warm too and began to move. The boy said, "See, little cousin, I got you warm, didn't I?" But the dead man cried out, "I am going to strangle you." "What?" he said. "Is that my thanks? Get back into your coffin!" Then he picked him up, threw him inside, and shut the lid. Then the six men came and carried him away again. "I cannot shudder," he said. "I won't learn it here as long as I live." Then a man came in. He was larger than all others, and looked frightful. But he was old and had a long white beard. "You wretch," he shouted, "you shall soon learn what it is to shudder, for you are about to die." "Not so fast," answered the boy. "If I am to die, I will have to be there." "I've got you," said the monster. "Now, now, don't boast. I am just as strong as you are, and probably even stronger." "We shall see," said the old man. "If you are stronger than I am, I shall let you go. Come, let's put it to the test." Then the old man led him through dark passageways to a blacksmith's forge, took an ax, and with one blow drove one of the anvils into the ground. "I can do better than that," said the boy, and went to the other anvil. The old man stood nearby, wanting to look on. His white beard hung down. The boy seized the ax and split the anvil with one blow, wedging the old man's beard in the crack. "Now I have you," said the boy. "Now it is your turn to die." Then he seized an iron bar and beat the old man until he moaned and begged him to stop, promising that he would give him great riches. The boy pulled out the ax and released him. The old man led him back into the castle, and showed him three chests full of gold in a cellar. "Of these," he said, "one is for the poor, the second one is for the king, and the third one is yours." Meanwhile it struck twelve, and the spirit disappeared, leaving the boy standing in the dark. "I can find my own way out," he said. Feeling around, he found his way to the bedroom, and fell asleep by his fire. The next morning the king came and said, "By now you must have learned how to shudder." "No," he answered. "What is it? My dead cousin was here, and a bearded man came and showed me a large amount of money down below, but no one showed me how to shudder." Then the king said, "You have redeemed the castle, and shall marry my daughter." "That is all very well," said the boy, "but I still do not know how to shudder." Then the gold was brought up, and the wedding celebrated, but however much the young king loved his wife, and however happy he was, he still was always saying, "If only I could shudder. If only I could shudder." With time this made her angry. Her chambermaid said, "I can help. I know how he can learn to shudder." She went out to the brook that flowed through the garden, and caught a whole bucketful of minnows. That night when the young king was asleep, his wife was to pull the covers off him and pour the bucketful of cold water and minnows onto him, so that the little fishes would wriggle all over him. When she did this, he woke up crying out, "Oh, what is making me shudder? What is making me shudder, dear wife? Yes, now I know how to shudder." Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Mährchen von einem, der auszog das Fürchten zu lernen," Kinder und Huasmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 4, pp. 15-25 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Mährchen von einem, der auszog das Fürchten zu lernen," Kinder und Huasmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 4, pp. 15-25 . Although the Grimms knew a number of variants of this widespread tale, their immediate source for this version (first included in their second edition of 1819), was a written submission by Ferdinand Siebert from the village of Treysa near Kassel. The first edition of Kinder- und Hausmärchen (1812) included a shorter version of this tale entitled "Gut Kegel- und Kartenspiel" ( Good Bowling and Card-Playing ). Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2001-2002. Link to the above tale in a separate file . A taler (also spelled thaler) is any of various German silver coins minted between the fifteenth and nineteenth centuries. The word is a cognate with dollar. Return to the table of contents . Shuddering Germany Once upon a time there were two brothers, one of whom, the eldest, was not stupid, but rather clever -- indeed, clever beyond all measure. However, the younger one had, as they say, a board in front of his head. That worried his father a lot, but not the younger brother himself, because -- like stupid people everywhere -- he lived quite carefree and unsuspectingly in the world. Without knowing it, he may have had that little saying in his head: "If you learn too much, you'll have to do too much." If father wanted something done, he had to tell the older one, Matthes, because the the younger one, Hansel, did everything the wrong way. He broke the oil jug and the brandy bottle, or stayed away for an eternity. Matthes, on the other hand, did everything well, he only had one fault: He was timid by nature. He was too easily frightened. He shuddered when he passed the churchyard in the evening; or when he saw a little mouse scurrying away; or when he heard a ghost story being told. He shuddered so much that he goosebumps like a rasp. "Oh, oh, oh," he would complain. "That makes me shudder!" His brother, stupid little Hansel, would just laught at him and say: "Hey, hey. How can that make you shudder? I'd like to be able to do that trick. I've never shuddered once in my whole lifetime. I really want to learn how to shudder!" The father scolded Hansel: "You look like someone who wants to learn something! It's about time! You're just turning into a big, tough lout. Learning to shudder, you Hans Dunce. There's nothing there. It's not a skill that you can earn a grain of salt with. Do you know how to learn shudder? I'll bet that bet you're too stupid to do even that." While the father and brother were still laughing at stupid Hansel, the neighbor sexton and schoolmaster came over to visit. He heard them laughing at Hansel, and was told that the boy would like to learn how to shudder. "He could learn that from me!" said the sexton. "My schoolhouse is the most miserable wreck of a building in the whole town. I shudder all day long that it will collapse onto my head and kill all the hopeful rows of pupils at the same time. Send little Hansel over there to me. I have to teach lessons to a lot of stupid people, so I'll certainly be able to teach him how to shudder!" The father was satisfied with this suggestion, and little Hansel followed the sexton into the old rickety schoolhouse. But nothing there made him shudder. It just didn't matter to him that the building was in danger of collapsing, just as it didn't matter to the mayor and the distinguished townspeople. Then the sexton thought of another way to certainly make Hansel shudder. He told Hansel to ring the evening bell, but then the sexton secretly slipped up into the belfry ahead of him. Hansel climbed the stairs and took hold of the bell-rope when he heard a dull moaning sound coming from the stairs. He looked around and saw a tall white veiled figure, rigid and unmoving. "Who are you? What do you want?" asked Hansel, without shuddering in the slightest. No answer. "I'm asking, who you are?" cried Hansel in a stronger voice. No answer. "Don't you have a mouth, snowman? Once again: What do you want?" No answer. Our sprightly little Hansel jumped at the figure like Casper attacks the devil in a puppet show. The figure wasn't expecting such a charge, and bang! Head over heals he tumbled down the stairs. And what kind of stairs? Stairs such as can only be found in old village church towers: worn-out, rotten, narrow, and full of centuries-old dust. The ghost lay below, moaning and groaning. Hansel rang the bell for the evening prayers, vigorously swinging the bell-rope, as if nothing had just happened. Then he cheerfully climbed down the stairs and left the tower, locking the door behind him. The sexton's wife didn't know where her husband was. "Where is he?" she asked Hansel. "Who?" asked Hansel. "Him!" said the sexton's wife. "He went to the tower ahead of you." "Oh!" said Hansel. "So that was him? There was a white creature standing by the stairs. He didn't want to answer my questions, so I pushed him down the stairs. He's still lying over there moaning." "You devil!" cried the sexton's wife. She snatched the key from Hansel's hand and ran to the tower. Her husband was lying there in his bed sheet, and he had broken his leg. Then it did not go well for Hansel. The sexton complained about him to his father, and he went wild and cried: "The boy is a good-for-nothing. Get out of my sight! Go away! Here's some money. Go and hang around anywhere you want. Don't let me see you here again. From you we have nothing but shame and disgrace and harm, you good-for-nothing!" "Farewell, Hansel!" mocked Matthes. "Make sure that you learn how to shudder. I've heard that shuddering is fashionable now. People out there in the world are shuddering at all sorts of things, so you'll get your share of shuddering!" Hansel went away, He had some money, and anyone who has money has no need to be afraid. As he went on his way he often said to himself: "If only I could shudder. If only I could shudder!" A man who was walking behind Hans heard this and said to him: "Look over there at the gallows. A nice group is company hanging there -- just seven of them, which -- as they say -- is a gallows full. Camp down there for the night and you'll learn to shudder." "If that turns out to be true," said Hansel, "I'll give you all of my money tomorrow morning. You can come to me and get it, or you can stay here with me!" "That I would be such a fool and staye with you under the gallows!" answered the man. "No, my good fellow. It will be much easier to learn to shudder if you are alone than if there two of us. Good night! I'll see you tomorrow morning!" Hansel sat down under the gallows, and because it was cold, he lit a little fire, which shone brightly up toward the hanged men. The sharp wind moved their quivering bodies back and forth, back and forth. Hansel called up to them: "You poor devils! You're freezing. You're quaking and quivering. Wait, I'll get you down You can warm yourselves by my fire." And Hans, not lazy, found a gallows ladder, climbed up, untied the hanged men and put them by his fire, which he now made bigger. But they looked pitiful: green, yellow and pathetic, lightning-blue, and abominable. They move at all. The fire ate around them, and began to char their ragged and tattered clothes. "Na?" said Hansel. "You're letting your clothes get burned up! Is that what you are saying 'Same old rags; same old rags!' Just wait! I'll come to your aid." He took them, one by one, and hung them up again, wrapped himself in his cloak, stretched out by his fire, and fell asleep. That's how the man from yesterday found him when he came to get the money. When he saw Hansel sleeping there so peacefully, he had little hope that might have learned to shudder overnight. When Hansel woke up and told him what he had done, the man turned to go and said: "I didn't earn your money last night. You'll never learn to shudder." Hansel went on and on his way, saying to himself: "It's such a pity that I can't learn how to shudder. I must be too stupid for that. Oh dear -- if only I could knew how to shudder." This was heard by a carter who was walking along the same path. He said to Hansel: "Hey! You know how to shudder? Just stop at the next inn. If you have any money, the innkeeper there will give you a terrifying bill. I am overwhelmed every time I had to stay there." "We'll see!" said Hansel, thanked the carter, and walked towards the inn. "What's up?" asked the innkeeper. "I'd like to learn how to shudder," replied Hansel. "People on the road say it's easy to learn from you. You are so bad at adding up the bills!" "Just wait!" thought the landlord. "I'll teach you something that will make you shudder." Then he said to Hansel: "My dear journeyman, you have been told a lie. You cannot learn to to shudder here in my inn. I don't treat my guests like that. Some jester just lied to you. If you are concerned about shuddering, just go up to the old haunted castle, and see to it that you get the king's daughter for your wife. Her father has promised her to anyone who who rids the castle of its poltergeists. There you'll find something to shudder about, and get rich as well." "I'll follow your advice," said Hansel. The innkeeper spoke again: "You have to do more than just go up there. First you must ask the king's permission, and then you must stay up there for three nights. If you escape with your life, the princess is your wife." "And if I don't make it out alive, what then?" asked Hansel, The innkeeper laughed in his face and said: "I can tell you're a sly one. You would certainly have invented gunpowder if it hadn't already been invented!" Hansel hurried to the king, asked permission, and received it. Then the king said: "My son, you may also take three things with you, but nothing living." Now, even in his youth, Hans had always loved to light a fire, to sit at a woodcarver's bench and sometimes at a lathe. He knew how to deal with such things. That's why he asked nothing more to take with him to the castle than a good fire-lighter, a woodcarver's bench, and a lathe, "so that I won't freeze," he said; "and I can pass the time." These were given to Hans gladly. He settled down the old castle in a pretty room with a large fireplace. When night fell, Hansel lit a bright fire, which was warm and glowed beautifully. Suddenly two coal-black cats came. They had eyes like green fire and screamed "Meow, meow, we're freezing!" "If you are cold, warm up! Here is a fire!" said Hansel. The cats did just that too, and then they said: "We're getting bored. We'd like to play cards: Skat or poker?" "Poker for all I care," said Hansel, "if you brought cards with you." The cats did indeed have a deck of cards, and they showed it to Hansel. Then Hans saw that they had terrible claws on their black paws and said: "With all due respect, your mother hasn't cut your nails for a long time. Be ashamed of yourself. Come on, I'll trim them for you!" He grabbed the cats and clamped their paws in the lathe. Then they bit him, and so he took his carving knife and cut off their heads, then threw their heads and bodies out of the window into the moat. When he came back to the fire, a large dog was sitting there baring his teeth and having a fiery tongue hanging out at arm's length. Hansel did not like this, so he took his carving knife again and shoved it between the dog's teeth down his throat. With that the dog's tongue fell out, and its upper head said goodbye to its lower part. Hans finally that thought he could have some peace, and he wanted to enjoy it. There was a bed in the corner, so he lay down in it and covered himself. He hadn't fallen asleep yet when the bed started to move like a steam engine and drove around the whole castle: upstairs, downstairs, through halls and rooms. Hansel said: "Look, now I can feel what it's like when the great gentlemen go for a ride. Drive on!" The bed finally must have grown tired of driving abougt. It rolled back into Hansel's room, where the fire was still burning merrily. There it stood still, and Hansel fell asleep and slept like a dead man. The next morning the king stood by his bed and said: "Well, that's what I call a good night's sleep. If only I could sleep so well! No king sleeps this well. I'm glad the boy is still alive and snoring. Hey you! Hansel!" "Good morning, Mr. King! Are you here so early?" asked Hansel. "I hope that you rested well!" said the king. "Thank you. The same to you!" said Hansel. "You can have breakfast and lunch downstairs at the innkeeper's on my account, but you'll be back up here this evening, if you want to." said the king. "Of course," said Hansel. "It has to be three nights." When Hans got to the innkeeper, he was very surprised and asked: "Well? Still alive? But surely you learned to shudder last night?" "Not at all!" replied Hansel. Then the innkeeper himself began to shudder in front of Hansel. Hansel took good advantage of the king's account and didn't worry at all about it. When evening came he was up in the haunted castle again, and he lit his fire. Suddenly there was a rattling sound in the chimney, as if everything were breaking into a thousand pieces. Then a fellow fell down, but he was only half there. "Well," said Hansel, "what's this supposed to be? There's still one half missing, one man and a half isn't company." Hardly had Hans said that, but bang! the other half fell down into the middle of the fire. Hansel took the two halves, threw them out of the fireplace into the living room, and put his fire back in order. As he managed to do it and looked around, the two halves had become a single fellow, but not a handsome one. He was sitting on Hansel's chair. "Wait there!" yelled Hansel, "That's where I sit! Move on, or I'll cut you in half with my carving knife!" Suddenly there was another rumble in the chimney: Skeleton bones and skulls rained down, and a few men of the most horrid appearance. "Good evening gentlemen!" said Hansel. "You're real men, I'll put up with that. Perhaps you belong to the Schön family? Oh, what a pity there isn't a mirror in the room. How can I actually help you?" The men looked at Hans with terrible looks. One took the skeleton bones, there were just nine of them, and set them up as bowling pins, the others took the skulls and rolled them toward the pins. "I love to bowl!" said Hansel. "Won't you let me play too? Do you play board games or cards? For money?" "Do you have money?" asked the men grimly. " Oui! " said Hansel, and put his hand in his pocket and jingled. "So bowl away!" shouted one of the men, handing him a skull. "With all due respect, that's a crooked ball. Give it to me, I've got a lathe here. Let's turn it nice and round so that we can hit all nine." So saying, he sat down, turned the skulls round. Then the game started. Hansel bowled well, but the men bowled even better, and Hansel lost some money. Then the game started again. Hansel bowled and shouted with joy: "All nine!" "No, twelve!" cried the men with muffled voices, and disappeared with bones and skulls, and the old clock on the castle tower struck twelve. "Now what!" called Hansel. "Are those good manners? First they cheat me of my little money, and now that I'm winning they run away." Then he lay down again in the bed, which remained quiet all day long, and he slept until the morning light. "Today he will probably no longer be alive," said the king as he approached Hansel's room. "I don't hear him snoring like yesterday. It is probably all over with him." But Hansel woke up very quickly and said: "I hope that you had a good rest, Your Majesty!" "Likewise, thank you!" answered the king. "How did it go last night?" "Very well, thank you for asking, Mr. King!" replied Hansel. "Some kind of chimney sweeps came down the chimney, and we bowled with skeleton bones." The king's skin shivered, and he said: "But that's really scary!" "What is, Mr. King?" asked Hansel. "Just that!" replied the king. "Well good luck for the third night!" "It's really awful that I'll never learn to shudder!" said Hansel to himself when the third night came. Suddenly there was a great commotion. Six men entered the room, they carried a coffin on a bier, put it in front of Hansel, and disappeared. Hansel thought: "Who could be lying in there?" and opened the coffin. There a body in there that was very stiff and freezing cold. "Oh, he's freezing; he's stiff with frost," said Hansel. "I have to warm him up!" He lifted the dead man out of the coffin and carried him to his fire, but the dead man remained cold." "He'll have to go to bed; he'll warm up then." He took him and laid him in the bed, and and he himself as well. After a while the dead man got warm and woke up. He stretched out and said: "Who told you to disturb my peace? Now you shall die!" "Don't be is such a hurry," said Hansel. He grabbed the man, threw him into the coffin, put the lid on it and quickly screwed it shut. Then the six men came back, picked up the casket, and carried it away. Soon afterward a terrible giant with a great long beard entered. He cried out: "Worm! Now you must die! You must come with me!" "I'm not going with you!" said Hansel. "I'm not available. I still have things to do, as you can see!" Then he sat down at the lathe, and stepped on the treddle, and turned the spindle, and held the chisel to the wood. The giant bent over the wheel and wanted to grab Hansel. But suddenly he cried out loud: "Ow! Ow! My beard, my beard!" The end of the beard had gotten caught under the cord that encircled the spindle. The rapid turning dragged his whole head after it. Hansel jumped up and said: "Fellow, watch out! I'm going to twist off your big nose, twist out your eyes, and turn your thick head into a bowling ball, as sure as my name is Hansel!" Then the giant spoke nicely, promising faithfully that if Hans should let him go, he would show him three chests of gold: one was for the king, the second was for the poor, and the third one for Hansel himself. "Very well," said Hansel. "Take me to those chests, but until I get them, you stay locked in the spindle, and you must carry the lathe on your shoulders." It was very uncomfortable to carry, the lathe on his shoulders, and his beard twisted around the spindle. The giant into another room and showed Hansel the chests of gold. Meanwhile it struck twelve. The giant disappeared, and the lathe stood by itself. Hansel though that the chests might disappear as well. He held them tight and called out: "Stop, stop!" and grabbed them and held them tight. Then he dragged them over to his room, whereupon he lay down to sleep, again without shuddering. The next morning the king came and asked: "Well, you certainly had a pretty scary night, didn't you?" "How so, Mr. King?" asked Hansel. I was given a chest full of gold, one for you too, and one for the poor. Does it have to be scary to get gold as a present?" "You've done a great thing!" said the king. "Through your fearlessness you freed the castle from the poltergeists and forced the enchanted castle into the light. Furthermore, you shall have your reward and marry my daughter!" "Much obliged, Mr. King!" said Hansel. "But it's a pity that I am getting married while I'm still so stupid that I haven't learned how to shudder." "O my dear son and son-in-law!" replied the king. "Just get married, everything will work itself out. Many another man has not been able to do just that, and got married nonetheless. But afterward he shuddered so much that he couldn't get rid of the goosebumps." "I just hope for the same thing, Mr. King!" exclaimed Hansel happily. Soon thereafter a glorious wedding was celebrated. Hansel was very happy, very rich, and had a beautiful wife. Nonetheless he kept saying: "I don't know how long it will be until I learn how to shudder." The young queen, Hansel's wife, said to herself: "Just wait, Hansel! You'll soon be shuddering." She had a bucket of water with little gudgeons and minnows brought to her. While Hansel was sleeping she pulled the blanket off him and then threw the bucket of water and little fish over him. "Brrr!" he jumped up, gasping from the cold. "I dreamed that I had fallen into the fish pond. Brrr! It gives me the creeps! It gives me the creeps! I have goosebumps like a carpenter's rasp! See, my dear wife? At last -- now I know how to shudder! Now I know how to shudder!" Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Bechstein, "Das Gruseln," Ludwig Bechstein's Märchenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1855), pp. 299-315 . Source (Internet Archive): ): Ludwig Bechstein, "Das Gruseln," Ludwig Bechstein's Märchenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1879), pp. 237-52 . Return to the table of contents . The Brave Flute Player Germany Once upon a time there was a merry musician who played the flute masterfully. He earned his keep by traveling about the world, playing his flute in villages and towns. One evening he came to a tenant farm and spent the night there because he wouldn't have been able to reach the next village before nightfall. He was kindly received by the farmer, ate with him, and after the meal was over he played a few pieces. When the musician had done this, he looked out of the window and, by the light of the moon, saw at a short distance an old castle which was lying partly in ruins. "What is that old castle?" he asked the farmer. "And who owned it?" The farmer said that many, many years ago a count had lived there who was very rich but also very stingy. He had greatly tormented his subjects and had never given alms to the poor. Out of stinginess he never married, and he finally died without an heir. His closest relatives wanted to take possession of any inheritance, but they could not find any money at all. It was thus claimed that he must have buried the treasure, and that still today it may lie hidden in the old castle. Many people had gone into the old castle to seek the treasure, but none of them ever came out again. For this reason the authorities have forbidden entry into this old castle and have seriously warned everyone in the whole country about it. The musician listened carefully, and when the farmer had finished his account, the musician said that he himself had a great desire to go into the castle, for he was courageous and knew no fear. The farmer begged him most urgently to spare his young life and not go into the castle. But begging and pleading didn't help. The musician was determined. Finally two of the farmer's servants lit a pair of lanterns and accompanied the eager musician to the old castle. He sent them back with one of the lanterns, but he took the second one in his hand and boldly climbed a high flight of stairs. At the top of the stairs he came into a large hall with doors all around it. He opened the first door and went inside, where he sat down at an old-fashioned table. He put his lantern on it and played his flute. The farmer, however, could not sleep the whole night for sheer worries. He often looked out of the window and was very happy whenever he heard his guest playing music over there. When the clock on the wall struck eleven and the flute stopped playing, he was terribly frightened, for he now believed that the ghost or the devil or whoever else lived in this castle had definitely wrung the neck of the good flute player. However, the musician had purposely stopped his flute playing without being afraid. He finally got hungry because he hadn't eaten much at the farmer's. He paced up and down the room and looked around. Then he saw a pot full of uncooked lentils, and on another table stood a vessel full of water, one full of salt, and a bottle of wine. He quickly poured water over the lentils, salted them, made a fire in the stove because there was plenty of wood at hand. Then he made lentil soup for himself. While the lentils were cooking he drank the bottle of wine and then played the flute again. When the lentils were cooked he pulled them from the fire, poured them into the bowl already on the table, and ate hungrily. Then he looked at his watch, and it was nearly eleven o'clock. Suddenly the door opened, and two tall black men entered, carrying a bier on which a coffin stood. Without saying a word they placed the bier in front of the musician, who did not let himself to be disturbed while he was eating. Then they went out the door just as silently as they had come in. After they had gone away, the musician quickly got up and opened the coffin. Lying inside was an old man, small and wizened, with gray hair and a gray beard. The lad was not afraid. He took the body out and put it by the stove. It had scarcely warmed up when it began to come to life. The musician then gave him lentils to eat, carefully tending the little man, even feeding him like a mother would her child. Then the little man became very lively and spoke to him: "Follow me!" The little man went ahead, and the lad took his lantern and fearlessly followed. The little man led him down a steep, dilapidated staircase until they both came to a deep, horrible vault. A large pile of money was lying there. The little man commanded the lad: "Divide this pile into two equal parts, but if anything is left over, I'll kill you!" The lad just smiled, and then began to count the money back and forth between two large tables. In a short time he thus had divided the money into two equal parts. But in the end there was still one kreuzer left over. The musician considered this for a moment. He took out his pocketknife, placed the blade against the kreuzer, and chiseled it in two with a hammer that was lying nearby. He threw one half on the first file and the other half on the other pile. Then little man became very cheerful and said: "You heavenly man, you have redeemed me! For a hundred years and until someone would succeed in dividing the money into two equal parts, I have had to guard the treasure, which I scraped together out of stinginess. No one has succeeded, and I had to strangle them all. One pile of money is now yours, but you must divide the rest among the poor. Divine man, you have redeemed me!" With that the little man disappeared. The lad climbed back up stairs to his previous room, and then played merry little pieces on his flute. The farmer was happy to hear him playing again. Early in the morning he went to the castle (because anyone was allowed inside during the day) and received the lad full of joy. The lad told him the story, then he went down to his treasure. He did just as the little man had commanded and gave half to the poor. He had the old castle torn down, and soon a new one stood on the previous spot, where the musician now lived as a rich man. Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Bechstein, "Das Gruseln," Ludwig Bechstein's Märchenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1855), pp. 171-75-315 . Source (Internet Archive): ): Ludwig Bechstein, "Das Gruseln," Ludwig Bechstein's Märchenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1879), pp. 126-30 . Return to the table of contents . A Fearless Boy Denmark There were once a man and his wife who had an only son named Hans. It happened, as it has often happened with an only child, that he was petted and spoiled, and was not taught to obey. He was a reckless boy when small, and as he grew up he became more and more so. There was no tree and no house-top so high that he did not climb them. Hans did not care to go to school and learn some thing useful, like other children, but he was so clever that he at once understood all that he heard or saw. There was no end to his pranks and jokes, and his best amusement was to frighten people, while he himself could not be frightened by anything in the world, man or beast. As Hans grew up his parents thought that the time had come to teach him some manners, and have him kept in check, if possible. Although his mother doted upon him, his father brought him to the deacon, asking that worthy man to polish his manners the best he could. Were the deacon only able to frighten him in some manner, the father thought he would at length improve, but if he went into the world without respect or regard for any one, or anything, he would never fare well. The deacon promised to do his best, and the boy soon was initiated into his new duties. One evening, at a rather late hour, the deacon said to him: "You must ring the bell to-night; the ringer is drunk, and if you will do it I will give you eight pennies." "All right," answered the boy, whereupon he trudged across the church-yard and ascended the stairway in the dark steeple, and as he thought it great fun to ring the bells, he pulled the rope so vigorously that the sound was heard throughout the seven adjoining townships. When the ringing was over, Hans descended the steps, but was stopped by a tall, white ghost which stood before him. "If you are alive, speak! If you are dead, begone!" shouted Hans. The ghost made no reply, but lifted its arm in a threatening manner. Hans now jumped forward, pushing the figure down the whole flight of steps. It rolled from one land ing to another, and remained lying in the cellar at the bottom of the staircase. The boy paid no fur ther attention to it, but went back to the deacon's house. "Did you see any one?" asked his mistress. "Yes," replied Hans, "a tall, white ghost came and threat ened me, but I ran against it and pushed it down the whole flight of steps." "Dear me!" cried the deacon's wife; "I hope it was not hurt." "I don't care," returned the boy, "whether it was or not." She asked him, however, to follow her to the steeple, and, although Hans thought she was too tender hearted, he complied. When they reached the cellar, there lay the deacon at the bottom of the stair case with one leg broken, and there they found the white sheet which he had wrapped around himself when he wanted to appear as a ghost and frighten the boy. They carried him home and put him to bed, but ever since that day the deacon carried a lame leg. He did not wish to have anything more to do with this reckless boy, but sent him home to his parents, who were very angry because their son had behaved so badly. His father now asked the minister to take him into his service. "Yes; let him come," was the answer. "I shall manage to knock the foolishness out of his head, depend upon that." Thus Hans came to serve the minister. One Saturday evening, towards midnight, Hans was called out of bed by his master, who said to him: "My son, I forgot my Bible at the altar in the church last Sunday. Will you kindly go and bring it back with you, as I must use it tomorrow morning? I will give you twelve pennies for your trouble." Hans arose, seized the key which was handed him by the minister, and went into the church. When he reached the altar he noticed the Bible which lay upon it; but a tall, dark figure of a man was bending over it, reading. It was an easy matter to this man to read in the dark, for his eyes gleamed like red fireballs. "Excuse me," said Hans, snatching the book out of his hands. Upon this he walked back to the door, locked it, and returned to the minister with the Bible and the key. "Did you see anything remarkable?" asked his master. "No," answered the boy. "Oh yes; there was a tall, dark man reading in the book, but I. merely said, 'Excuse me,' and seized it." "Were you not frightened?" pursued his master. "No," replied Hans; "why should I be frightened?" "You had better return home," said the minister; " I can teach you nothing." Hans returned home and told what had happened. His father became furious, and said that when he feared neither the living nor the dead he did not wish to keep him at home. The next morning, consequently, Hans was obliged to go away, in spite of the pleading and the tears of his mother, who was afraid that he might not be able to fight his way in the great world of which he knew nothing. She followed him to the gate, kissed him, and said, with many tears, "God keep you, my poor boy!" All the long day Hans pursued his way, and when it grew dark he walked into a church-yard, where weeping-willows could shield him until next morning. He lay down, but towards midnight he awoke and found an old man with a long beard bending over him. He carried a sickle in his right hand, and in his left an hour-glass. "Are you not afraid," asked Death -- for he it was -- "to lie here alon?" "No," returned the boy, "what should I be afraid of?" "You seem to be a brave boy," observed Death. "Would you like to visit me?" "Yes; where do you live?" answered Hans. "Directly east of the church," explained his old friend; "where you see a light shine from the ground, you will find a hole. Descend through that, and come tomorrow night at this hour." Hans promised, and Death parted from him. He passed the following day in picking nuts about the church-yard and in the adjoining woods. When midnight came he entered the church-yard, and east of the church he found what seemed to be an open grave, through which a red glare was seen. As there was no rope or ladder, Hans resolutely jump ed into the opening. He fell a long distance, but landed safely on a soft meadow. A few steps away from him a door opened into a large building from which the same ruddy glare issued, and in the door way his old friend Death was standing, bidding him welcome. When they came into the house Hans noticed that great numbers of lighted candles stood every where. There was a huge hall filled with them. Some were as tall as church-candles, others were of ordinary size, and there were some as small as those which are used for Christmas-trees. Some burned brightly, others feebly, and there were some which seemed ready to go out. "Why do you burn all these candles?" inquired Hans. "That is a part of my duty," replied the old man; "these are flames of the lives of all living beings. Whenever one goes out I must be on duty. You notice there are all sizes among them. Some are long yet, and some are short; some will soon have burned up, and they are the life flames of those who must soon die. There is not one light but will some day burn out." "Where is my candle?" inquired Hans again. Death showed him a tall and stately candle, which pleased the boy exceedingly. But when they came to look at his parents' candles, he found that of his father long and vigorous, while there was but little left of his mother's. He asked Death to be allowed to exchange them, and the request was granted. At length they arrived at an empty candlestick. The light was nearly extinguished; only a small spot of wax was left. "This was once a large candle," said Death, "but now it is nearly burned up. Because it has burned in God's service, there is great power in this bit of wax." He then told Hans how a king of a land far away had been paralyzed many years ago, and how he had promised his daughter's hand in marriage to the man who could cure him. The successful person was to receive one-half of the kingdom at once, and ascend the throne when he died. "Go there at once," concluded Death; "take service at the palace. You will be told never to name the king, for he has issued an edict that he who does so must either cure him or be hanged. When you see the king call his name aloud, and when you are told to cure him rub him with this wax. Be careful and keep it well. And now good-bye." Upon this Death conducted Hans to a door, which was opened and then closed behind him. He found himself in the church-yard at the very moment when the sun arose. Hans now set out to find the land where the in valid king was living. All whom he asked told him that it was very far away. He walked on day and night, however, begging a bite of bread at the houses which he happened to pass. When at length he had reached the palace, he walked in and offered his services. He was given a place among the grooms, and from the superintendent of the stables he received the warning never to name the king; if he did, he risked his life. The sick king found pleasure in watching the watering of his horses; every day his easy-chair was rolled to one of the windows, from which he had a view of the courtyard, and where he could sit and watch all his beautiful animals. One day, when Hans drove them to the fountain in the middle of the yard, he glanced towards the window, exclaiming: "Look, there is the king!" The other grooms bid him be silent, but the king having heard his words sent for the superintendent, whom he scolded for not giving his servants better instructions. "However," concluded he, "the law must be en forced. Bring the boy before me!" When Hans was brought into the room the king said to him: "You know the law, and as you have dared, nevertheless, to utter my name, you must cure me, or lose your life. I suppose that death will be your fate, for you do not look wise enough to fulfil the other condition." Hans said that he wished to do his best, at any rate. Producing his wax he commenced rubbing the fingers of the king's right hand, which had been lame for many years. The king at once was able to move his fingers, whereupon the whole arm was rubbed with good effect. The king bid Hans rub away the lameness from the remainder of his body; but the boy replied that this could not be done until they had agreed upon his reward for curing the king entirely. He desired to have it in writing, with the king's own signature attached. The king, of course, must comply with his wishes, and as he felt quite generous he agreed, in writing, to give him the princess and one-half of the king dom at once, neither more nor less. The remainder of the kingdom Hans was to inherit after the king's death. When the agrement had been signed the boy rubbed with the wax all over his body, and thus the king became healthy and well again. By virtue of the agreement Hans was now a prince, and could, of course, wear nothing but a prince's dress. As soon as he had put on his new clothes he was conducted to the princess, who liked him so well that she had -- as Hans had been expect ing all the time -- no objection to marrying him. Their wedding was then celebrated in a truly royal manner. Hans at once received one-half of the land, and began to rule it. When he was well-established in his new position he returned in a stately manner, with his beautiful bride, to his old home. He found his mother, who was by that time a widow, alive, and she was both pleased with and proud of her great son. When Hans had presented one of their poor relatives with the farm, he returned, with his wife and mother, to his new home. The old lady lived happily with her children. She witnessed both how Hans became king of the entire land when the old king had died, and how a number of sweet small princes and princesses learned, one after an other, to love their "dear grandma." Source (books.google.com): J. Christian Bay, Danish Fairy and Folk Tales (New York and London: Harper and Brothers, 1899), pp. 135-43 . Source (Internet Archive): J. Christian Bay, Danish Fairy and Folk Tales (New York and London: Harper and Brothers, 1899), pp. 135-43 . Bay's source: Books.google.com: Svend Grundtvig, "Frisk Mod," Danske Folkeæventyr (Copenhagen: Aug. Bang og Lehmann & Stage, 1884), pp. 1-20 . Internet Archive: Svend Grundtvig, "Frisk Mod," Danske Folkeæventyr (Copenhagen: Aug. Bang og Lehmann & Stage, 1884), pp. 1-20 . The story combines a tale of type 326 with a tale of type 332 ("Godfather Death") . Return to the table of contents . The Boy Who Did Not Know What Fear Was Iceland There was once a boy so courageous and spirited that his relations despaired of ever frightening him into obedience to their will, and took him to the parish priest to be brought up. But the priest could not subdue him in the least, though the boy never showed either obstinacy or ill temper towards him. Once in the winter three dead bodies were brought to be buried, but as it was late in the afternoon they were put into the church till next day, when the priest would be able to bury them. In those days it was the custom to bury people without coffins, and only wrapped up in grave clothes. The priest ordered these three bodies to be laid a little distance apart, across the middle of the church. After nightfall the priest said to the boy, "Run into the church and fetch me the book which I left on the altar." With his usual willingness he ran into the church, which was quite dark, and halfway to the altar stumbled against something which lay on the floor, and fell down on his face. Not in the least alarmed, he got up again, and, after groping about, found that he had stumbled over one of the corpses, which he took in his arms and pushed into the side benches out of his way. He tumbled over the other two, and disposed of them in like manner. Then, taking the book from the altar, he left the church, shut the door behind him, and gave the volume to the priest, who asked him if he had encountered anything extraordinary in the church. "Not that I can remember," said the boy. The priest asked again, "Did you not find three corpses lying across your passage?" "Oh yes," replied he, "but what about them?" "Did they not lie in your way?" "Yes, but they did not hinder me." The priest asked, "How did you get to the altar?" The boy replied, "I stuck the good folk into the side benches, where they lie quietly enough." The priest shook his head, but said nothing more that night. Next morning he said to the boy, "You must leave me; I cannot keep near me any longer one who is shameless enough to break the repose of the dead." The boy, nothing loth, bade farewell to the priest and his family, and wandered about some little time without a home. Once he came to a cottage, where he slept the night, and there the people told him that the Bishop of Skálholt was just dead. So next day he went off to Skálholt, and arriving there in the evening, begged a night's lodging. The people said to him, "You may have it and welcome, but you must take care of yourself." "Why take care of myself so much?" asked the lad. They told him that after the death of the bishop, no one could stay in the house after nightfall, as some ghost or goblin walked about there, and that on this account every one had to leave the place after twilight. The boy answered, "Well and good; that will just suit me." At twilight the people all left the place, taking leave of the boy, whom they did not expect to see again alive. When they had all gone, the boy lighted a candle and examined every room in the house till he came to the kitchen, where he found large quantities of smoked mutton hung up to the rafters. So, as he had not tasted meat for some time, and had a capital appetite, he cut some of the dried mutton off with his knife, and placing a pot on the fire, which was still burning, cooked it. When he had finished cutting up the meat, and had put the lid on the pot, he heard a voice from the top of the chimney, which said, "May I come down?" The lad answered, "Yes, why not?" Then there fell down on to the floor of the kitchen half a giant: head, arms, hands, and body, as far as the waist, and lay there motionless. After this he heard another voice from the chimney, saying, "May I come down?" "If you like," said the boy. "Why not?" Accordingly down came another part of the giant, from the waist to the thighs, and lay on the floor motionless. Then he heard a third voice from the same direction, which said, "May I come down?" "Of course," he replied. "You must have something to stand upon." So a huge pair of legs and feet came down and lay by the rest of the body, motionless. After a bit the boy, finding this want of movement rather tedious, said, "Since you have contrived to get yourself all in, you had better get up and go away." Upon this the pieces crept together, and the giant rose on his feet from the floor, and, without uttering a word, stalked out of the kitchen. The lad followed him, till they came to a large hall, in which stood a wooden chest. This chest the goblin opened, and the lad saw that it was full of money. Then the goblin took the money out in handfuls, and poured it like water over his head, till the floor was covered with heaps of it; and, having spent half the night thus, spent the other half in restoring the gold to the chest in the like manner. The boy stood by and watched him filling the chest again, and gathering all the stray coins toge ther by sweeping his great arms violently over the floor, as if he dreaded to be interrupted before he could get them all in, which the lad fancied must be because the day was approaching. When the goblin had shut up the coffer, he rushed past the lad as if to get out of the hall; but the latter said to him, "Do not be in too great a hurry." "I must make haste," replied the other, "for the day is dawning." But the boy took him by the sleeve and begged him to remain yet a little longer for friendship's sake. At this the goblin waxed angry, and, clutching hold of the youth, said, "Now you shall delay me no longer." But the latter clung tight to him, and slipped out of the way of every blow he dealt, and some time passed away in this kind of struggle. It happened, however, at last, that the giant turned his back to the open door, and the boy, seeing his chance, tripped him up and butted at him with his head, so that the other fell heavily backwards, half in and half out of the hall, and broke his spine upon the threshold. At the same moment the first ray of dawn struck his eyes through the open house door, and he instantly sank into the ground in two pieces, one each side of the door of the hall. Then the courageous boy, though half dead from fatigue, made two crosses of wood and drove them into the ground where the two parts of the goblin had disappeared. This done, he fell asleep till, when the sun was well up, the people came back to Skálholt. They were amazed and rejoiced to find him still alive, ask ing him whether he had seen anything in the night. "Nothing out of the common," he said. So he stayed there all that day, both because he was tired, and because the people were loth to let him go. In the evening, when the people began as usual to leave the place, he begged them to stay, assuring them that they would be troubled by neither ghost nor goblin. But in spite of his assurances they insisted upon going, though they left him this time without any fear for his safety. When they were gone, he went to bed and slept soundly till morning On the return of the people he told them all about his struggle with the goblin, showed them the crosses he had set up, and the chestful of money in the hall, and assured them that they would never again be troubled at night, so need not leave the place. They thanked him most heartily for his spirit and courage, and asked him to name any reward he would like to receive, whether money or other precious things, inviting him, in addition, to remain with them as long as ever he chose. He was grateful for their offers, but said, "I do not care for money, nor can I make up my mind to stay longer with you." Next day he addressed himself to his journey, and no persuasion could induce him to remain at Skálholt. For he said, " I have no more business here, as you can now, without fear, live in the bishop's house. " And taking leave of them all, he directed his steps northwards, into the wilderness. For a long time nothing new befell him, until one day he came to a large cave, into which he entered. In a smaller cave within the other he found twelve beds, all in disorder and unmade. As it was yet early, he thought he could do no better than employ himself in making them, and having made them, threw himself on to the one nearest the entrance, covered himself up, and went to sleep. After a little while he awoke and heard the voices of men talking in the cave, and wondering who had made the beds for them, saying that, whoever he was, they were much obliged to him for his pains. He saw, on looking out, that they were twelve armed men of noble aspect. When they had had supper, they came into the inner cave and eleven of them went to bed. But the twelfth man, whose bed was next to the entrance, found the boy in it, and calling to the others they rose and thanked the lad for having made their beds for them, and begged him to remain with them as their servant, for they said that they never found time to do any work for themselves, as they were compelled to go out every day at sunrise to fight their enemies, and never returned till night. The lad asked them why they were forced to fight day after day? They answered that they had over and over again fought, and overcome their enemies, but that though they killed them overnight they always came to life again before morning, and would come to the cave and slay them all in their beds if they were not up and ready on the field at sunrise. In the morning the cavemen went out fully armed, leaving the lad behind to look after the household work. About noon he went in the same direction as the men had taken, in order to find out where the battlefield was, and as soon as he had espied it in the distance, ran back to the cave. In the evening the warriors returned weary and dispirited, but were glad to find that the boy had arranged everything for them, so that they had nothing more to do than eat their supper and go to bed. When they were all asleep, the boy wondered to himself how it could possibly come to pass that their enemies rose every night from the dead. So moved with curiosity was he, that as soon as he was sure that his companions were fast asleep he took what of their weapons and armour he found to fit him best, and stealing out of the cave, made off in the direction of the battlefield. There was nothing at first to be seen there but corpses and trunkless heads, so he waited a little time to see what would happen. About dawn he perceived a mound near him open of itself, and an old woman in a blue cloak come out with a glass phial in her hand. He noticed her go up to a dead warrior, and having picked up his head, smear his neck with some ointment out of the phial and place the head and trunk together. Instantly the warrior stood erect, a living man. The hag repeated this to two or three, until the boy seeing now the secret of the thing, rushed up to her and stabbed her to death as well as the men she had raised, who were yet stupid and heavy as if after sleep. Then taking the phial, he tried whether he could revive the corpses with the ointment, and found on experiment that he could do so successfully. So he amused himself for a while in reviving the men and killing them again, till, at sunrise, his companions arrived on the field. They were mightily astonished to see him there, and told him that they had missed him as well as some of their weapons and armour; but they were rejoiced to find their enemies lying dead on the field instead of being alive and awaiting them in battle array, and asked the lad how he had got the idea of thus going at night to the battlefield, and what he had done. He told them all that had passed, showed them the phial of ointment, and, in order to prove its power, smeared, the neck of one of the corpses, who at once rose to his feet, but was instantly killed again by the cavemen. They thanked the boy heartily for the service he had rendered them, and begged him to remain among them, offering him at the same time money for his work. He declared that he was quite willing, paid or unpaid, to stay with them, as long as they liked to keep him. The cavemen were well pleased with his answer, and having embraced the lad, set to work to strip their enemies of their weapons: made a heap of them with the old woman on the top, and burned them; and then, going into the mound, appropriated to themselves all the treasures they found there. After this they proposed the game of killing each other, to try how it was to die, as they could restore one another to life again. So they killed each other, but by smearing themselves with the ointment, they at once returned to life. Now this was great sport for a while. But once, when they had cut off the head of the lad, they put it on again wrongside before. And as the lad saw himself behind, he became as if mad with fright, and begged the men to release him by all means from such a painful sight. But when the cave-folk had run to him and, cutting off his head, placed it on all right again. He came back to his full senses, and was as fearless as ever before. The boy lived with them ever afterwards, and no more stories are told about him. Source (books.google.com): Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (Longond: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 161-70 . Source (Internet Archive): Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (Longond: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 161-70 . Links to this tale in the original Icelandic: Books.google.com: Jón Árnason, "&Oacutefælni dreingurinn," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), pp. 270-75 . Internet Archive: Jón Árnason, "&Oacutefælni dreingurinn," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), pp. 270-75 . Return to the table of contents . Jack Dreadnought Hungary A poor widow had a son who was so courageous that not even the devil's mother would have frightened him, and therefore he was named in his childhood Jack Dreadnought. His mother was in continual terror lest something dreadful might happen to her son, as he was so plucky, nay foolhardy, and determined to use all possible means to teach him to fear. For this reason she sent him to the clergy man of the village as "mendicant," and requested the minister to use all his knowledge in trying to teach her son to ?ear. The clergyman left nothing untried to make the boy frightened; he told him all sorts of ghostly and horrible tales, but these, instead of frightening the lad, made him only more anxious to make the acquaintance of ghosts similar to those mentioned in the tales. The clergyman thereupon hit upon the idea of introducing some sham ghosts in order to break Jack Dreadnought's intrepidity. He fixed upon the three nights before Christmas; on these nights the lad had to go to ring the bells at midnight in the tower that stood at the very end of the village, and the clergyman thought that he could find some opportunity of frightening Jack. He took an old cassock and stuffed it with straw and placed it before the tower door with one hand on the handle. Midnight came and Jack went to ring the bells and discovered the dummy in the cassock. "Who are you?" he called out, but received no reply. "Very well," said the boy, "if you won't answer I will tell you this, that if you don't clear off from that door I'll kick you in the stomach that you will turn twelve somersaults." As there was no reply, Jack in his rage took hold of the dummy's collar and threw him on the ground with such violence that it rolled away three fathoms, and then, as if nothing had happened, went up into the tower, rang the bells, and went home. The clergyman, as his first experiment did not succeed, made two dummies the next day, which were exactly alike; one he placed in the same position as before at the door of the tower, the other near the bell ropes. At midnight Jack again went to ring the bells and, as before, made short work of the first dummy; as he did not receive any reply he took him by the collar and threw him on the ground. When he went up into the tower and saw that the rope was held by another, he thought it was the first one, and thus addressed him, "Well, my friend, you've come here, have you? You hadn't enough with the first fall? Answer me or I will dash you on the ground so that you will not be able to get up again," and as the dummy did not reply Jack took it by the throat and pitched it from the window of the tower, and it whizzed through the air. The clergyman had had two unsuccessful experiments but he had great confidence in the third. He made three dummies this time, two were placed as before and the third he stood on the bell so that it might prevent it ringing. Jack Dreadnought dealt with the two first dummies as on the previous night, but as he was about to ring, to his astonishment, he discovered the dummy on the bell; he was not frightened, but when he saw that it would not come down, after a polite request, took it angrily by one leg and pitched it through the window like a cat. The clergyman had now come to the conclusion that he was unable to teach Jack fear, and now commenced to plan how he might get rid of him. The next morning he called him, and thus spoke to him: "Jack, you are a fine courageous fellow; go, take my grey horse, and as much provisions as you think will last you three days, and go into the world and follow your nose; do not stop all day, but take up your night quarter wherever darkness finds you. Do this for three days, and settle. down where you spend the third night, and you will be prosperous." The clergyman thought that Jack would perish on the way; but we shall see whether he did. Jack started off the first day, and in the evening came to a narrow, round timber hut, which was rather high, and he decided to sleep there. As he found it empty he made a fire in its centre and commenced to fry some bacon; all of a sudden he felt something dripping, he looked up and saw something like a human form dangling in the air. "Well, upon my word," shouted he, "the devil won't leave me alone even here. Get down from there, will you, or do you expect me to take you down?" No reply came, and Jack, with a clever jump, caught hold of one of his legs, and brought it down, but the head was torn off and fell down. Only then he discovered that it was a hanged man, but he did not think much of it, and stayed there all night. He travelled the whole of the next day; in the evening he reached an inn and asked for a room, and received in reply that they had an empty room on the upper floor, the only one vacant; but that no one could sleep there, as the place was haunted. "What!" shouted Jack; "Oh! I know those ghosts; let me have a dish of good food, a mouthful of good wine, and a burning candle in the upper room, and I will sleep there. I swear by Beelzebub that the ghosts will come no more!" The innkeeper tried to dissuade Jack froin his foolhardy attempt, but he would not give way. He was shown into the room; it was a large apartment on the upper floor. Jack placed the lighted candle in the middle; a dishful of food and a jug of wine by the side of it; and settled down in a chair, waiting for the awful ghosts. No sooner had the clock struck midnight than, all of a sudden, a fearful chorus of animal noises was to be heard, like the howling of dogs, neighing of horses, bellowing of cattle, roaring of wild beasts, bleating of sheep and of goats, and also crying, laughing, and clanking of chains. Jack was quite delighted with the nocturnal concert; but, all of a sudden a big skull rolled in through the door and stopped by the side of the dish. Jack stared at it, and, instead of the skull, he saw an old monk standing before him with long heavy chains. "Good evening, brother friar!" shouted Jack, "pray have supper with me." "I'm going from here," said the friar, "and I want you to come too; I will show you something." "With pleasure," replied Jack. "Will you lead the way, you devil, or you reverend gentleman?" There upon Jack followed the friar with the lighted candle. When they arrived at the stairs the friar insisted upon his going first, but Jack would not; and the friar was obliged to lead the way. Next they came to a narrow landing at the top of the cellar stairs. Here, again, the friar invited him to go first, but he would not; and so the apparition had to go first. But, as, soon as he went down a few steps, Jack gave the friar such a push with such dexterity that he went head over heels down the steps and broke his neck. In the morning the innkeeper had the friar buried. He made Jack a handsome present, and the latter continued his journey. Jack Dreadnought rode the whole next day, and in the evening again came to an inn, where he could not get any room except up stairs, where no one else would sleep, on account of ghostly visitors. Jack took the room and was again enjoying his supper in the centre, when the old clock struck midnight. The same sort of music struck his ear as on the previous night, and, amid a great crash, a human hand dropped from the ceiling to near his dish. Jack, in cold blood, took up the hand and threw it behind the door. Another hand fell and went the same way. Now a leg came, and this, too, went behind the door. Then came its fellow, which was soon despatched to the rest. At last a big skull dropped right into the middle of the dish and broke it. Jack got into a rage, and threw the skull violently behind the door; and, on looking back, he found, instead of the limbs, an immense ghost standing behind the door, whom Jack at once taxed with the damage done to the dish, demanding payment. The ghost replied, "Very well; I will pay for it, if you come with me." Jack consented, and they went off together; as before, he always insisted on the ghost going first. They came to a long winding staircase, and down into a huge cellar. Jack opened his eyes and mouth wide when he found in the cellar three vats full of gold, six vats of silver, and twelve vats of copper coins. Then the ghost said to him, "There, choose a vat full of coins for your dish, and take it whenever you like." But Jack, how ever, did not touch the money, but replied, " Not I; do you suppose that I will carry that money? Whoever brought it here, let him take it away." "Well done," replied the ghost. I see I've found my man at last. Had you touched the treasure you would have died a sudden death; but now, since you are such a fine courageous fellow, the like of whom I have never seen before, settle down in this place and use the treasure in peace; nobody will ever disturb or haunt you any more." After these words the ghost disappeared. Jack became the owner of the immense treasure, and married the innkeeper's only daughter, who was very pretty, and lives with her to this day, if he has not died since, enjoying life and spending the money he found in the vats in the cellar. Source (books.google.com): W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, Folk-Tales of the Magyars (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 44, pp. 228-32 . Source (Internet Archive): W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, Folk-Tales of the Magyars (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 44, pp. 228-32 . Return to the table of contents . The Boy Who Found Fear at Last Turkey Once upon a time there lived a woman who had one son whom she loved dearly. The little cottage in which they dwelt was built on the outskirts of a forest, and as they had no neighbours, the place was very lonely, and the boy was kept at home by his mother to bear her company. They were sitting together on a winter's evening, when a storm suddenly sprang up, and the wind blew the door open. The woman started and shivered, and glanced over her shoulder as if she half expected to see some horrible thing behind her. "Go and shut the door," she said hastily to her son, "I feel frightened." "Frightened?" repeated the boy. "What does it feel like to be frightened?" "Well -- just frightened," answered the mother. "A fear of something, you hardly know what, takes hold of you." "It must be very odd to feel like that," replied the boy. "I will go through the world and seek fear till I find it." And the next morning, before his mother was out of bed, he had left the forest behind him. After walking for some hours he reached a mountain, which he began to climb. Near the top, in a wild and rocky spot, he came upon a band of fierce robbers, sitting round a fire. The boy, who was cold and tired, was delighted to see the bright flames, so he went up to them and said, "Good greeting to you, sirs," and wriggled himself in between the men, till his feet almost touched the burning logs. The robbers stopped drinking and eyed him curiously, and at last the captain spoke: "No caravan of armed men would dare to come here, even the very birds shun our camp, and who are you to venture in so boldly?" "Oh, I have left my mother"s house in search of fear. Perhaps you can show it to me?" "Fear is wherever we are," answered the captain. "But where?" asked the boy, looking round. "I see nothing." "Take this pot and some flour and butter and sugar over to the churchyard which lies down there, and bake us a cake for supper," replied the robber. And the boy, who was by this time quite warm, jumped up cheerfully, and slinging the pot over his arm, ran down the hill. When he got to the churchyard he collected some sticks and made a fire; then he filled the pot with water from a little stream close by, and mixing the flour and butter and sugar together, he set the cake on to cook. It was not long before it grew crisp and brown, and then the boy lifted it from the pot and placed it on a stone, while he put out the fire. At that moment a hand was stretched from a grave, and a voice said: "Is that cake for me?" "Do you think I am going to give to the dead the food of the living?" replied the boy, with a laugh. And giving the hand a tap with his spoon, and picking up the cake, he went up the mountain side, whistling merrily. "Well, have you found fear?" asked the robbers when he held out the cake to the captain. "No; was it there?" answered the boy. "I saw nothing but a hand which came from a grave, and belonged to someone who wanted my cake, but I just rapped the fingers with my spoon, and said it was not for him, and then the hand vanished. Oh, how nice the fire is!" And he flung himself on his knees before it, and so did not notice the glances of surprise cast by the robbers at each other. "There is another chance for you," said one at length. "On the other side of the mountain lies a deep pool; go to that, and perhaps you may meet fear on the way." "I hope so, indeed," answered the boy. And he set out at once. He soon beheld the waters of the pool gleaming in the moonlight, and as he drew near he saw a tall swing standing just over it, and in the swing a child was seated, weeping bitterly. "That is a strange place for a swing," thought the boy; "but I wonder what he is crying about." And he was hurrying on towards the child, when a maiden ran up and spoke to him. "I want to lift my little brother from the swing," cried she, "but it is so high above me, that I cannot reach. If you will get closer to the edge of the pool, and let me mount on your shoulder, I think I can reach him." "Willingly," replied the boy, and in an instant the girl had climbed to his shoulders. But instead of lifting the child from the swing, as she could easily have done, she pressed her feet so firmly on each side of the youth's neck, that he felt that in another minute he would be choked, or else fall into the water beneath him. So, gathering up all his strength, he gave a mighty heave, and threw the girl backwards. As she touched the ground a bracelet fell from her arm, and this the youth picked up. "I may as well keep it as a remembrance of all the queer things that have happened to me since I left home," he said to himself, and turning to look for the child, he saw that both it and the swing had vanished, and that the first streaks of dawn were in the sky. With the bracelet on his arm, the youth started for a little town which was situated in the plain on the further side of the mountain, and as, hungry and thirsty, he entered its principal street, a Jew stopped him. "Where did you get that bracelet?" asked the Jew. "It belongs to me." "No, it is mine," replied the boy. "It is not. Give it to me at once, or it will be the worse for you!" cried the Jew. "Let us go before a judge, and tell him our stories," said the boy. "If he decides in your favour, you shall have it; if in mine, I will keep it!" To this the Jew agreed, and the two went together to the great hall, in which the kadi was administering justice. He listened very carefully to what each had to say, and then pronounced his verdict. Neither of the two claimants had proved his right to the bracelet, therefore it must remain in the possession of the judge till its fellow was brought before him. When they heard this, the Jew and the boy looked at each other, and their eyes said: "Where are we to go to find the other one?" But as they knew there was no use in disputing the decision, they bowed low and left the hall of audience. Wandering he knew not whither, the youth found himself on the seashore. At a little distance was a ship which had struck on a hidden rock, and was rapidly sinking, while on deck the crew were gathered, with faces white as death, shrieking and wringing their hands. "Have you met with fear?" shouted the boy. And the answer came above the noise of the waves: "Oh, help! help! We are drowning!" Then the boy flung off his clothes, and swam to the ship, where many hands were held out to draw him on board. "The ship is tossed hither and thither, and will soon be sucked down," cried the crew again. "Death is very near, and we are frightened!" "Give me a rope," said the boy in reply, and he took it, and made it safe round his body at one end, and to the mast at the other, and sprang into the sea. Down he went, down, down, down, till at last his feet touched the bottom, and he stood up and looked about him. There, sure enough, a sea-maiden with a wicked face was tugging hard at a chain which she had fastened to the ship with a grappling iron, and was dragging it bit by bit beneath the waves. Seizing her arms in both his hands, he forced her to drop the chain, and the ship above remaining steady, the sailors were able gently to float her off the rock. Then taking a rusty knife from a heap of seaweed at his feet, he cut the rope round his waist and fastened the sea-maiden firmly to a stone, so that she could do no more mischief, and bidding her farewell, he swam back to the beach, where his clothes were still lying. The youth dressed himself quickly and walked on till he came to a beautiful shady garden filled with flowers, and with a clear little stream running through. The day was hot, and he was tired, so he entered the gate, and seated himself under a clump of bushes covered with sweet-smelling red blossoms, and it was not long before he fell asleep. Suddenly a rush of wings and a cool breeze awakened him, and raising his head cautiously, he saw three doves plunging into the stream. They splashed joyfully about, and shook themselves, and then dived to the bottom of a deep pool. When they appeared again they were no longer three doves, but three beautiful damsels, bearing between them a table made of mother of pearl. On this they placed drinking cups fashioned from pink and green shells, and one of the maidens filled a cup from a crystal goblet, and was raising it to her mouth, when her sister stopped her. "To whose health do you drink?" asked she. "To the youth who prepared the cake, and rapped my hand with the spoon when I stretched it out of the earth," answered the maiden, "and was never afraid as other men were! But to whose health do you drink?" "To the youth on whose shoulders I climbed at the edge of the pool, and who threw me off with such a jerk, that I lay unconscious on the ground for hours," replied the second. "But you, my sister," added she, turning to the third girl, "to whom do you drink?" "Down in the sea I took hold of a ship and shook it and pulled it till it would soon have been lost," said she. And as she spoke she looked quite different from what she had done with the chain in her hands, seeking to work mischief. "But a youth came, and freed the ship and bound me to a rock. To his health I drink," and they all three lifted their cups and drank silently. As they put their cups down, the youth appeared before them. "Here am I, the youth whose health you have drunk; and now give me the bracelet that matches a jewelled band which of a surety fell from the arm of one of you. A Jew tried to take it from me, but I would not let him have it, and he dragged me before the kadi, who kept my bracelet till I could show him its fellow. And I have been wandering hither and thither in search of it, and that is how I have found myself in such strange places." "Come with us, then," said the maidens, and they led him down a passage into a hall, out of which opened many chambers, each one of greater splendour than the last. From a shelf heaped up with gold and jewels the eldest sister took a bracelet, which in every way was exactly like the one which was in the judge's keeping, and fastened it to the youth's arm. "Go at once and show this to the kadi," said she, "and he will give you the fellow to it." "I shall never forget you," answered the youth, "but it may be long before we meet again, for I shall never rest till I have found fear." Then he went his way, and won the bracelet from the kadi. After this, he again set forth in his quest of fear. On and on walked the youth, but fear never crossed his path, and one day he entered a large town, where all the streets and squares were so full of people, he could hardly pass between them. "Why are all these crowds gathered together?" he asked of a man who stood next him. "The ruler of this country is dead," was the reply, "and as he had no children, it is needful to choose a successor. Therefore each morning one of the sacred pigeons is let loose from the tower yonder, and on whomsoever the bird shall perch, that man is our king. In a few minutes the pigeon will fly. Wait and see what happens." Every eye was fixed on the tall tower which stood in the centre of the chief square, and the moment that the sun was seen to stand straight over it, a door was opened and a beautiful pigeon, gleaming with pink and grey, blue and green, came rushing through the air. Onward it flew, onward, onward, till at length it rested on the head of the boy. Then a great shout arose: "The king! the king!" but as he listened to the cries, a vision, swifter than lightning, flashed across his brain. He saw himself seated on a throne, spending his life trying, and never succeeding, to make poor people rich; miserable people happy; bad people good; never doing anything he wished to do, not able even to marry the girl that he loved. "No! no!" he shrieked, hiding his face in his hands; but the crowds who heard him thought he was overcome by the grandeur that awaited him, and paid no heed. "Well, to make quite sure, let fly more pigeons," said they, but each pigeon followed where the first had led, and the cries arose louder than ever: "The king! the king!" And as the young man heard, a cold shiver, that he knew not the meaning of, ran through him. "This is fear whom you have so long sought," whispered a voice, which seemed to reach his ears alone. And the youth bowed his head as the vision once more flashed before his eyes, and he accepted his doom, and made ready to pass his life with fear beside him. Source (Wikisource): Andrew Lang, The Olive Fairy Book (London, New York, Bombay, and Calcutta: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1907), pp. 279-88 . Source (Internet Archive): Andrew Lang, The Olive Fairy Book (London, New York, Bombay, and Calcutta: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1907), pp. 279-88 . Lang's source: Books.google.com: Ignaz Kúnos, "Die Furcht," Türkische Volksmärchen aus Stambul (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1905), pp. 11-16 . Internet Archive: Ignaz Kúnos, "Die Furcht," Türkische Volksmärchen aus Stambul (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1905), pp. 11-16 . Return to the table of contents . The Deadly Mosque Persia In the suburbs of a certain city there was a mosque in which none could sleep a night and live. Some said it was haunted by malevolent fairies; others, that it was under the baneful influence of a magic spell; some proposed to put up a notice warning people not to sleep there, and others advised that the door should be kept locked. At last a stranger came to that city and desired to sleep in the mosque, saying that he did not fear to risk his life, as the life of the body was naught, and God has said, "Wish for death if you are sincere." [ Koran , ii, 88] The men of the city warned him again and again of the danger, and rebuked him for his foolhardiness, reminding him that not improbably Satan was tempting him to his own destruction, as he tempted the men of Mecca at the battle of Bedr. [ Koran , viii, 50] The stranger, however, would not be dissuaded, but persisted in his purpose of sleeping in the mosque. He said that he was as one of the devoted agents of the Ismailians, who were always ready to sacrifice their lives at the bidding of their chiefs, and that the terrors of death did not appal him any more than the noise of a little drum beaten by a boy to scare away birds could appal the great drum-bearing camel that used to march at the head of King Mahmud's army. Accordingly, he slept in the mosque, and at midnight he was awakened by a terrible voice, as of one about to attack him. But instead of being dismayed, he bethought himself of the text "Assault them with thy horsemen and thy footmen" [ Koran xvii, 66], and confronted his unseen foe, challenging him to show himself and stand to his arms. At these words the spell was dissipated, and showers of gold fell on all sides, which the brave hero proceeded to appropriate. Source (books.google.com): Rumi, Masnavi i Ma'navi: Spiritual Couplets , translated and abridged by E. H. Whinfield, 2nd edition (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner and Company, 1898), book 3, story 18, p. 165 . Source (Internet Archive): Rumi, Masnavi i Ma'navi: Spiritual Couplets , translated and abridged by E. H. Whinfield, 2nd edition (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner and Company, 1898), book 3, story 18, p. 165 . Return to the table of contents . About the Young Boy Who Had No Fear Lithuania There was a father who had a son, and the son had never been afraid. So his father sent him to the priest, thinking that maybe he could teach him to be afraid. The priest kept him with him, and he sent him to town every night at twelve o'clock to fetch beer. He put his servant girl in white clothes and told her to stand in the courtyard gate and when the boy came back with the beer not to let him through. The girl stood at the courtyard gate, and when the boy came back from town, a white figure was standing at the gate. He came up close and said: "What are you standing here for? Go away and let me go into the house!" But when the maid won't let him pass, he said: "Shove off, or I'll hit you on the neck with the jug, until you've had enough!" This frightened the girl, and she ran away. Then the boy went in to the priest, and the priest asked: "Well, what did you see on the way home?" He replied: "I didn't see anything unusual, but but a white fellow was standing here at the courtyard gate. I was about to hit him on the neck with the beer jug, but then he ran away." The next day the priest sent the boy away again and had the girl put on white clothes again and ordered her to stand in the gate and this time not to run away. When the boy came home, look, there was someone standing at the gate. "Are you standing here again?" he cried, get away or I'll hit you with the jug on the neck until you've had enough!" But the girl did not budge, and so he struck and killed her. Then he went in to the priest, and the priest asked him: "Where did you leave the jug of beer?" He answered: "I saw the white fellow standing at the gate again, so I hit him on the neck with the jug. The jug broke, and I killed the white fellow." The priest was startled. He went out and quietly buried the maid. Another time he sent the boy to spend the night in the chapel in the churchyard. The boy took two chairs, a bottle of brandy, a deck of cards, and a candle with him. He sat down on one of the chairs as though he were in a chapel service. When night fell he heard something scratching behind the altar. It was a dead man. Then the boy said: "Come over here. Let's play a little game and have a drink." The dead man came to him. They played together, and the dead man lost the game. At the stroke of twelve the dead man disappeared. The boy fell asleep in his chair and slept until morning. Then he got up and went home. The next evening the priest sent the boy back to the chapel, and this time he took another chair with him and sat down again in the one chair. Again he heard something scraping behind the altar, and he said: "Come over here. Let's play a little game and have a drink!" Then two dead men came and played. But the two dead men lost, and at the stroke of twelve they disappeared. The boy fell asleep again and went home in the morning. The next evening he took four chairs with him, sat down, and as he sat there he heard something scraping behind the altar again. He said: "Come over here. Let's play a little game and have a drink!" Three dead men came to him. After they had been playing for a good while the boy looked at his watch. It would soon be time for the dead men to disappear. Then he tore the hats off the three of them and said: "Now you must pay me for the three nights, you for the two nights, and you for the one night." One of the dead men said: "In the churchyard there is a bag full of money. You can have it for the three nights." The second one said: "Under the cross there is a kettle full of money. You can have it for the two nights." And the third one said: "There is a bone in the churchyard, and you can take it. It will be payment enough for the one night. If you see something frightening, you only have to shake the bone at it, and the horror will leave you alone." The boy said to them: "You go and fetch the things yourselves. You'll not get your hats back until I have these things." So they went, and the first one brought the moneybag, the second the kettle of money, and the third the bone. The boy gave them their hats back, and they disappeared. Then he fell asleep in his chair. The next morning the priest came by while he was still sleeping peacefully. The priest wanted to see what he was doing. The kettle cauldron full of money was standing next to the boy, and the priest wanted to fill his pockets with the money. The boy woke up and shouted: "Hands off! That's my money!" And then the priest had to back off. When the priest saw that the boy could not be taught to be afraid, he sent him back to his father. He said that he had no more means of teaching him. The father should do with him what he liked. Back at home, the boy gave his father the kettle full of money, but he kept the moneybag and the bone for himself. He then went into a forest and in the evening he found a hut there and went inside. There was a stove in the hut, so he lit a fire and sat there stoking it. After a little while a coffin was thrown into the room toward him. The boy cut away the coffin boards and used them to feed the fire. He placed the dead man, who was quite stiff, by the fire. When the dead man grew warm, he fell over. The boy said to him: "Why don't stay standing up the way that I put you?" He raised the dead man up again, but he fell down again. The boy said again: "Why don't stay standing up the way that I put you?" He raise him up again, and again the dead man fell down. This time he gave him one behind the ears, saying: " Why don't stay standing up the way that I put you?" The next evening the boy came to another hut. There he climbed onto the stove and wanted to sleep the night there. However, a devil's wedding came in and started to dance. He saw a girl there. She was very beautiful, and he wanted to pull her away from the others. The next evening he lay down on the stove again, and the devil's wedding came again. This time he did pull the beautiful girl away from the others. The devils said: "Give the beautiful girl back to us! We have to dance!" He replied: "You have enough girls and can dance." He did not give the girl back to them. Then the devils let worms come at him from all sides, but he shook the bone, and all the worms all went away. Then the girl said to him: "Don't give me back to the devils tomorrow tomorrow night or the night after tomorrow, and everything will be fine." The next evening, when the devil's wedding came again, he caught the girl again and kept her to himself. Devils said, "Give us the girl!" He replied: "You have enough girls, and you can dance." They let the worms come at him again, but he shook the bone, and all the worms disappeared. And the girl said to him, "Keep me with you one more night!" The next evening he caught her again and did not give her to the devils. The devils said: "Give us the girl! We have to dance!" He replied: "You have enough girls, and you can dance." Thus he had taken her away from the devils for three nights, and so she was redeemed, and he married her. There was a great forest there, which turned into an army. The dead man who had been thrown into the coffin was a king. And they all lived gloriously and in joy, and they are still alive if they have not died. Source (books.google.com): August Leskien and K. Brugman, "Von dem jungen Burschen, der keine Furcht hatte," Litauische Volkslieder und Märchen (Strassburg: Verlag von Karl J. Trübner, 1882), pp. 476-80 . Source (Internet Archive): August Leskien and K. Brugman, "Von dem jungen Burschen, der keine Furcht hatte," Litauische Volkslieder und Märchen (Strassburg: Verlag von Karl J. Trübner, 1882), pp. 476-80 . Return to the table of contents . The Headless Dwarfs Estonia There was once a minister who spent his whole time in trying to find a servant who would undertake to ring the church bells at midnight, in addition to all his other duties. Of course it was not everyone who cared to get up in the middle of the night, when he had been working hard all day; still, a good many had agreed to do it. But the strange thing was that no sooner had the servant set forth to perform his task than he disappeared, as if the earth had swallowed him up. No bells were rung, and no ringer ever came back. The minister did his best to keep the matter secret, but it leaked out for all that, and the end of it was that no one would enter his service. Indeed, there were even those who whispered that the minister himself had murdered the missing men! It was to no purpose that Sunday after Sunday the minister gave out from his pulpit that double wages would be paid to anyone that would fulfil the sacred duty of ringing the bells of the church. No one took the slightest notice of any offer he might make, and the poor man was in despair, when one day, as he was standing at his house door, a youth known in the village as Clever Hans came up to him. "I am tired of living with a miser who will not give me enough to eat and drink," said he, "and I am ready to do all you want." "Very good, my son," replied the minister, "you shall have the chance of proving your courage this very night. Tomorrow we will settle what your wages are to be." Hans was quite content with this proposal, and went straight into the kitchen to begin his work, not knowing that his new master was quite as stingy as his old one. In the hope that his presence might be a restraint upon them, the minister used to sit at the table during his servants' meals, and would exhort them to drink much and often, thinking that they would not be able to eat as well, and beef was dearer than beer. But in Hans he had met his match, and the minister soon found to his cost that in his case at any rate a full cup did not mean an empty plate. About an hour before midnight, Hans entered the church and locked the door behind him, but what was his surprise when, in place of the darkness and silence he expected, he found the church brilliantly lighted, and a crowd of people sitting round a table playing cards. Hans felt no fear at this strange sight, or was prudent enough to hide it if he did, and, going up to the table, sat down amongst the players. One of them looked up and asked, "My friend, what are you doing here?" Hans gazed at him for a moment, then laughed and answered, "Well, if anybody has a right to put that question, it is I! And if do not put it, it will certainly be wiser for you not to do so!" Then he picked up some cards, and played with the unknown men as if he had known them all his life. The luck was on his side, and soon the money of the other gamblers found its way from their pockets into his. On the stroke of midnight the cock crew, and in an instant lights, table, cards, and people all had vanished, and Hans was left alone. He groped about for some time, till he found the staircase in the tower, and then began to feel his way up the steps. On the first landing a glimmer of light came through a slit in the wall, and he saw a tiny man sitting there, without a head. "Ho! ho! my little fellow, what are you doing there?" asked Hans, and, without waiting for an answer, gave him a kick which sent him flying down the stairs. Then he climbed higher still, and finding as he went dumb watchers sitting on every landing, treated them as he had done the first. At last he reached the top, and as he paused for a moment to look round him he saw another headless man cowering in the very bell itself, waiting till Hans should seize the bell-pull in order to strike him a blow with the clapper, which would soon have made an end of him. "Stop, my little friend!" cried Hans. "That is not part of the bargain! Perhaps you saw how your comrades walked down stairs, and you are going after them. But as you are in the highest place you shall make a more dignified exit, and follow them through the window!" With these words he began to climb the ladder, in order to take the little man from the bell and carry out his threat. At this the dwarf cried out imploringly, "Oh, brother! spare my life, and I promise that neither I nor my comrades will ever trouble you any more. I am small and weak, but who knows whether some day I shall not be able to reward you." "You wretched little shrimp," replied Hans, "a great deal of good your gratitude is likely to do me! But as I happen to be feeling in a cheerful mood tonight I will let you have your life. But take care how you come across me again, or you may not escape so easily!" The headless man thanked him humbly, slid hastily down the bell rope, and ran down the steps of the tower as if he had left a fire behind him. Then Hans began to ring lustily. When the minister heard the sound of the midnight bells he wondered greatly, but rejoiced that he had at last found some one to whom he could trust this duty. Hans rang the bells for some time, then went to the hay-loft, and fell fast asleep. Now it was the custom of the minister to get up very early, and to go round to make sure that the men were all at their work. This morning everyone was in his place except Hans, and no one knew anything about him. Nine o'clock came, and no Hans, but when eleven struck the minister began to fear that he had vanished like the ringers who had gone before him. When, however, the servants all gathered round the table for dinner, Hans at last made his appearance stretching himself and yawning. "Where have you been all this time?" asked the minister. "Asleep," said Hans. "Asleep!" exclaimed the minister in astonishment. "You don't mean to tell me that you can go on sleeping till mid-day?" "That is exactly what I do mean," replied Hans. "If one works in the night one must sleep in the day, just as if one works in the day one sleeps in the night. If you can find somebody else to ring the bells at midnight I am ready to begin work at dawn; but if you want me to ring them I must go on sleeping till noon at the very earliest." The minister tried to argue the point with him, but at length the following agreement was come to. Hans was to give up the ringing, and was to work like the rest from sunrise to sunset, with the exception of an hour after breakfast and an hour after dinner, when he might go to sleep. "But, of course," added the minister carelessly, "it may happen now and then, especially in winter, when the days are short, that you will have to work a little longer, to get something finished." "Not at all!" answered Hans. "Unless I were to leave off work earlier in summer, I will not do a stroke more than I have promised, and that is from dawn to dark; so you know what you have to expect." A few weeks later the minister was asked to attend a christening in the neighbouring town. He bade Hans come with him, but, as the town was only a few hours' ride from where he lived, the minister was much surprised to see Hans come forth laden with a bag containing food. "What are you taking that for?" asked the minister. "We shall be there before dark." "Who knows?" replied Hans. "Many things may happen to delay our journey, and I need not remind you of our contract that the moment the sun sets I cease to be your servant. If we don't reach the town while it is still daylight I shall leave you to shift for yourself." The minister thought he was joking, and made no further remark. But when they had left the village behind them, and had ridden a few miles, they found that snow had fallen during the night, and had been blown by the wind into drifts. This hindered their progress, and by the time they had entered the thick wood which lay between them and their destination the sun was already touching the tops of the trees. The horses ploughed their way slowly through the deep soft snow and as they went Hans kept turning to look at the sun, which lay at their backs. "Is there anything behind you?" asked the minister. "Or what is it you are always turning round for? " "I turn round because I have no eyes in the back of my neck," said Hans. "Cease talking nonsense," replied the minister, "and give all your mind to getting us to the town before nightfall." Hans did not answer, but rode on steadily, though every now and then he cast a glance over his shoulder. When they arrived in the middle of the wood the sun sank altogether. Then Hans reined up his horse, took his knapsack, and jumped out of the sledge. "What are you doing? Are you mad?" asked the minister, but Hans answered quietly, "The sun is set and my work is over, and I am going to camp here for the night." In vain the master prayed and threatened, and promised Hans a large reward if he would only drive him on. The young man was not to be moved. "Are you not ashamed to urge me to break my word? " said he. "If you want to reach the town tonight you must go alone. The hour of my freedom has struck, and I cannot go with you." "My good Hans," entreated the minister, " I really ought not to leave you here. Consider what danger you would be in! Yonder, as you see, a gallows is set up, and two evil-doers are hanging on it. You could not possibly sleep with such ghastly neighbours." "Why not?" asked Hans. "Those gallows birds hang high in the air, and my camp will be on the ground; we shall have nothing to do with each other." As he spoke, he turned his back on the minister, and went his way. There was no help for it, and the minister had to push on by himself, if he expected to arrive in time for the christening. His friends were much surprised to see him drive up without a coachman, and thought some accident had happened. But when he told them of his conversation with Hans they did not know which was the most foolish, master or man. It would have mattered little to Hans had he known what they were saying or thinking of him. He satisfied his hunger with the food he had in his knapsack, lit his pipe, pitched his tent under the boughs of a tree, wrapped himself in his furs, and went sound asleep. After some hours, he was awakened by a sudden noise, and sat up and looked about him. The moon was shining brightly above his head, and close by stood two headless dwarfs, talking angrily. At the sight of Hans the little dwarfs cried out: "It is he! It is he!" and one of them stepping nearer exclaimed, "Ah, my old friend! it is a lucky chance that has brought us here. My bones still ache from my fall down the steps of the tower. I dare say you have not forgotten that night! Now it is the turn of your bones. Hi! comrades, make haste! make haste!" Like a swarm of midges, a host of tiny headless creatures seemed to spring straight out of the ground, and every one was armed with a club. Although they were so small, yet there were such numbers of them and they struck so hard that even a strong man could do nothing against them. Hans thought his last hour was come, when just as the fight was at the hottest another little dwarf arrived on the scene. "Hold, comrades!" he shouted, turning to the attacking party. "This man once did me a service, and I am his debtor. When I was in his power he granted me my life. And even if he did throw you downstairs, well, a warm bath soon cured your bruises, so you must just forgive him and go quietly home." The headless dwarfs listened to his words and disappeared as suddenly, as they had come. As soon as Hans recovered himself a little he looked at his rescuer, and saw he was the dwarf he had found seated in the church bell. "Ah!" said the dwarf, seating himself quietly under the tree. "You laughed at me when I told you that some day I might do you a good turn. Now you see I was right, and perhaps you will learn for the future not to despise any creature, however small." "I thank you from my heart," answered Hans. "My bones are still sore from their blows, and had it not been for you I should indeed have fared badly." "I have almost paid rny debt," went on the little man, "but as you have suffered already, I will do more, and give you a piece of information. You need not remain any longer in the service of that stingy minister, but when you get home tomorrow go at once to the north corner of the church, and there you will find a large stone built into the wall, but not cemented like the rest. The day after tomorrow the moon is full, and at midnight you must go to the spot and get the stone out of the wall with a pickaxe. Under the stone lies a great treasure, which has been hidden there in time of war. Besides church plate, you will find bags of money, which have been lying in this place for over a hundred years, and no one knows to whom it all belongs. A third of this money you must give to the poor, but the rest you may keep for yourself." As he finished, the cocks in the village crowed, and the little man was nowhere to be seen. Hans found that his limbs no longer pained him, and lay for some time thinking of the hidden treasure. Towards morning he fell asleep. The sun was high in the heavens when his master returned from the town. "Hans," said he, "what a fool you were not to come with me yesterday! I was well feasted and entertained, and I have money in my pocket into the bargain," he went on, rattling some coins while he spoke, to make Hans understand how much he had lost. "Ah, sir," replied Hans calmly, "in order to have gained so much money you must have lain awake all night, but I have earned a hundred times that amount while I was sleeping soundly." "How did you manage that?" asked the minister eagerly, but Hans answered, "It is only fools who boast of their farthings; wise men take care to hide their crowns." They drove home, and Hans neglected none of his duties, but put up the horses and gave them their food before going to the church corner, where he found the loose stone, exactly in the place described by the dwarf. Then he returned to his work. The first night of the full moon, when the whole village was asleep, he stole out, armed with a pickaxe, and with much difficulty succeeded in dislodging the stone from its place. Sure enough, there was the hole, and in the hole lay the treasure, exactly as the little man had said. The following Sunday he handed over the third part to the village poor, and informed the minister that he wished to break his bond of service. As, however, he did not claim any wages, the minister made no objections, but allowed him to do as he wished. So Hans went his way, bought himself a large house, and married a young wife, and lived happily and prosperously to the end of his days. Source (books.google.com): Andrew Lang, The Violet Fairy Book (London, New York and Bombay: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1901), pp. 281-93 . Source (Internet Archive): Andrew Lang, The Violet Fairy Book (London, New York and Bombay: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1901), pp. 281-93 . Lang's source: Books.google.com: Friedrich Kreutzwald, "Die Galgenmännlein," Ehstnische Märchen (Halle: Verlag der Buchhandlung des Waisenhauses, 1869), no. 12, pp. 148-59 . Internet Archive: Friedrich Kreutzwald, "Die Galgenmännlein," Ehstnische Märchen (Halle: Verlag der Buchhandlung des Waisenhauses, 1869), no. 12, pp. 148-59 . Return to the table of contents . The Man Who Never Knew Fear Ireland There was once a lady, and she had two sons whose names were Louras (Lawrence) and Carrol. From the day that Lawrence was born no thing ever made him afraid, but Carrol would never go outside the door from the time the darkness of the night began. It was the custom at that time when a person died for people to watch the dead person's grave in turn, one after another; for there used to be destroyers going about stealing the corpses. When the mother of Carrol and Lawrence died, Carrol said to Lawrence "You say that nothing ever made you afraid yet, but I'll make a bet with you that you haven't courage to watch your mother's tomb tonight." "I'll make a bet with you that I have," said Lawrence. When the darkness of the night was coming, Lawrence put on his sword and went to the burying-ground. He sat down on a tombstone near his mother's grave till it was far in the night and sleep was coming upon him. Then he saw a big black thing coming to him, and when it came near him he saw that it was a head without a body that was in it. He drew the sword to give it a blow if it should come any nearer, but it didn't come. Lawrence remained looking at it until the light of the day was coming, then the head-without-body went, and Lawrence came home. Carrol asked him, did he see any thing in the graveyard. "I did," said Lawrence, and my mother's body would be gone, but that I was guarding it." "Was it dead or alive, the person you saw?" said Carrol. "I don't know was it dead or alive," said Lawrence. "There was nothing in it but a head without a body." "Weren't you afraid?" says Carrol. "Indeed I wasn't," said Lawrence. Don't you know that nothing in the world ever put fear on me?" "I'll bet again with you that you haven't the courage to watch tonight again," says Carrol. "I would make that bet with you," said Lawrence, but that there is a night's sleep wanting to me. Go yourself tonight." "I wouldn't go to the graveyard tonight if I were to get the riches of the world," says Carrol. "Unless you go your mother's body will be gone in the morning," says Lawrence. "If only you watch tonight and to morrow night, I never will ask of you to do a turn of work as long as you will be alive," said Carrol, "but I think there is fear on you." "To show you that there's no fear on me," said Lawrence, "I will watch." He went to sleep, and when the evening came he rose up, put on his sword, and went to the graveyard. He sat on a tombstone near his mother's grave. About the middle of the night he heard a great sound coming. A big black thing came as far as the grave and began rooting up the clay. Lawrence drew back his sword, and with one blow he made two halves of the big black thing, and with the second blow he made two halves of each half, and he saw it no more. Lawrence went home in the morning, and Carrol asked him did he see anything. "I did," said Lawrence, "and only that I was there my mother's body would be gone." "Is it the head-without-body that came again?" said Carrol. "It was not, but a big black thing, and it was digging up my mother's grave until I made two halves of it." Lawrence slept that day, and when the evening came he rose up, put on his sword, and went to the churchyard. He sat down on a tombstone until it was the middle of the night. Then he saw a thing as white as snow and as hateful as sin; it had a man's head; on it, and teeth as long as a flax-carder. Lawrence drew back the sword and was going to deal it a blow, when it said "Hold your hand; you have saved your mother's body, and there is not man in Ireland as brave as you. There is great riches waiting for you if you go looking for it." Lawrence went home, and Carrol asked him did he see anything. "I did," said Lawrence, and but that I was there my mother's body would be gone, but there's no fear of.it now." In the morning, the day on the morrow, Lawrence said to Carrol, "Give me my share of money, and I'll go on a journey, until I have a look round the country." Carrol gave him the money, and he went walking. He went on until he came to a large town. He went into the house of a baker to get bread. The baker began talking to him, and asked him how far he was going. "I am going looking for something that will put fear on me," said Lawrence. "Have you much money?" said the baker. "I have a half-hundred pounds," said Lawrence. "I'll bet another half-hundred with you that there will be fear on you if you go to the place that I'll bid you," says the baker. "I'll take your bet," said Lawrence, if only the place is not too far away from me." "It's not a mile from the place where you're standing," said the baker. Wait here till the night comes, and then go to the graveyard, and as a sign that you were in it, bring me the goblet that is upon the altar of the old church ( cill ) that is in the graveyard. When the baker made the bet he was certain that he would win, for there was a ghost in the churchyard, and nobody went into it for forty years before that whom he did not kill. When the darkness of the night came, Lawrence put on his sword and went to the to the burying-ground. He came to the door of the churchyard and struck it with his sword. The door opened, and there came out a great black ram, and two horns on him as long as flails. Lawrence gave him a blow, and he went out of sight, leaving him up to the two ankles in blood. Lawrence went into the old church, got the goblet, came back to the baker's house, gave him the goblet, and got the bet. Then the baker asked him did he see anything in the churchyard. "I saw a big black ram with long horns on him," said Lawrence, "and I gave him a blow which drew as much blood out of him as would swim a boat; sure he must be dead by this time." In the morning, the day on the morrow, the baker and a lot of people went to the graveyard and they saw the blood of the black ram at the door. They went to the priest and told him that the black ram was banished out of the churchyard. The priest did not believe them, because the churchyard was shut up forty years before that on account of the ghost that was in it, and neither priest nor friar could banish him. The priest came with them to the door of the church yard, and when he saw the blood he took courage and sent for Lawrence, and heard the story from his own mouth. Then he sent for his blessing materials, and desired the people to come in till he read mass for them. The priest went in, and Lawrence and the people after him, and he read mass without the big black ram coming as he used to do. The priest was greatly rejoiced, and gave Lawrence another fifty pounds. On the morning of the next day Lawrence went on his way. He travelled the whole day without seeing a a house. About the hour of midnight he came to a great lonely valley, and he saw a large gathering of people looking at two men hurling. Lawrence stood looking at them, as there was a bright light from the moon. It was the good people that were in it, and it was not long until one of them struck a blow on the ball and sent it into Lawrence's breast. He put his hand in after the ball to draw it out, and what was there in it but the head of a man. When Lawrence got a hold of it, it began screeching, and at last it asked Lawrence, "Are you not afraid?" "Indeed I am not," said Lawrence, and no sooner was the word spoken than both head and people disappeared, and he was left in the glen alone by himself. He journeyed until he came to another town, and when he ate and drank enough, he went out on the road, and was walking until he came to a great house on the side of the road. As the night was closing in, he went in to try if he could get lodging. There was a young man at the door who said to him, "How far are you going, or what are you in search of?" "I do not know how far I am going, but I am in search of something that will put fear on me," said Lawrence. "You have not far to go, then," said the young man. '"If you stop in that big house on the other side of the road there will be fear put on you before morning, and I'll give you twenty pounds into the bargain. "I'll stop in it," said Lawrence. The young man went with him, opened the door, and brought him into a large room in the bottom of the house, and said to him, "Put down fire for yourself and I'll send you plenty to eat and drink." He put down a fire for himself, and there came a girl to him and brought him everything that he wanted. He went on very well, until the hour of midnight came, and then he heard a great sound over his head, and it was not long until a stallion and a bull came in and commenced to fight. Lawrence never put to them nor from them, and when they were tired fighting they went out. Lawrence went to sleep, and he never awoke until the young man came in in the morning, and he was surprised when he saw Lawrence alive. He asked him had he seen anything. "I saw a stallion and a bull fighting hard for about two hours," said Lawrence. "And weren't you afraid?" said the young man. "I was not," says Lawrence. "If you wait tonight again, I'll give you another twenty pounds," says the young man. "I'll wait, and welcome," says Lawrence. The second night, about ten o'clock, Lawrence was going to sleep, when two black rams came in and began fighting hard. Lawrence neither put to them nor from them, and when twelve o'clock struck they went out. The young man came in the morning and asked him did he see anything last night. "I saw two black rams fighting," said Lawrence. "Were you afraid at all?" said the young man. "I was not," said Lawrence. "Wait tonight, and I'll give you another twenty pounds," says the young man. "All right," says Lawrence. The third night he was falling asleep, when there came in a gray old man and said to him, "You are the best hero in Ireland. I died twenty years ago, and all that time I have been in search of a man like you. Come with me now till I show you your riches. I told you when you were watching your mother's grave that there was great riches waiting for you." He took Lawrence to a chamber under ground, and showed him a large pot filled with gold, and said to him, "You will have all that if you give twenty pounds to Mary Kerrigan the widow, and get her forgiveness for me for a wrong I did her. Then buy this house, marry my daughter, and you will be happy and rich as long as you live." The next morning the young man came to Lawrence and asked him did he see anything last night. "I did," said Lawrence, and it's certain that there will be a ghost always in it, but nothing in the world would frighten me; I'll buy the house and the land round it, if you like." "I'll ask no price for the house, but I won't part with the land under a thousand pounds, and I'm sure you haven't that much." "I have more than would buy all the land and all the herds you have," said Lawrence. When the young man heard that Lawrence was so rich, he invited him to come to dinner. Lawrence went with him, and when the dead man's daughter saw him she fell in love with him. Lawrence went to the house of Mary Kerrigan and gave her twenty pounds, and got her forgiveness for the dead man. Then he married the young man's sister and spent a happy life. He died as he lived, without there being fear on him. Source (books.google.com): William Butler Yeats, Irish Fairy Tales (London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1892), pp. 123-37 . Source (Internet Archive): William Butler Yeats, Irish Fairy Tales (London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1892), pp. 123-37 . Translated from the Gaelic by Douglas Hyde. Return to the table of contents . The Boy Who Feared Nothing England (Derbyshire) Once a father made a bet with his son that he dare not go into the bone-house in their village churchyard at midnight and fetch a skull out without taking a light with him. The son accepted the wager, and on the following night went down into the bone-house. In the meantime the father had told a man to hide himself in the bone-house, and watch the boy. When the boy got down amongst the bones, he picked up a skull. Then the man who had hidden himself said, "Don't take that, for that's my mother's skull." So the boy threw it down, and picked up another skull, when the man said, "Don't take that, for that's my grandmother's." So the boy threw that down, and picked another up, but the man said, "And that's my grandfather's." Then the boy shouted, "Why, they're all thy mother's, or thy grandmother's; but I've come for a skull, and I'll have one." So the boy picked one up and ran home to his father, and won the wager. Source (books.google.com): Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales with Other Trational Remains: Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derb, and Nottingham (London: David Nutt; Sheffield: Pawson and Brailsford, 1895), p. 6 . Source (Internet Archive): Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales with Other Trational Remains: Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derb, and Nottingham (London: David Nutt; Sheffield: Pawson and Brailsford, 1895), p. 6 . Return to the table of contents . The Dauntless Girl England (Norfolk) She lived first with a farmer, and he and his friends were a-drinking one night and they ran out of liquor. So the farmer he up and say "Never you mind, my girl will go down to the public and bring us up another bottle." But the night was very dark so his friends they say, "Surelie she'll be afeard to go out such a dark night by herself all alone." But he say "No, she won't, for she's afeared of nothing that's alive nor dead." So she went and she brought 'em back their licker, and his friends they say it was a wery funny thing she shewd be so bold. But the farmer he say "That's nuthin at all for she'd go any where day or night for she ain't afeared of nothing that's alive or dead." And he offered to bet a golden guinea that none of 'em could name a thing she would not dew. So one of 'em agreed to take the bet and they were to meet the same day as it might be next week and he was to set her her task. Meanwhile he goes to the old passon and he borrows the key of the church and then he goes to the old sexton and right-sided it with him for half the guinea to go into the church and hide himself in the dead house so that he was to frighten the Dauntless Girl when she came. So when they all met together at the farmer's he say " This is what the Dauntless Girl won't dew -- she won't go into the church alone at midnight and go to the dead house and bring back a skull bone." But she made no trouble about it and up and went down to the church all along of herself and she opened the door of the dead house and she picked up a skull bone. Then the old sexton from behind the door he muffled out "Let that be, that's my mother's skull bone." So she put it down and picked up another. Then the old sexton he muffled out again "Let that be that's my father's skull bone." So she put that down tew and took up still another and she say out loud for she'd lost her temper, "Father or mother, sister or brother, I must hev a skull bone and that's my last word," and so she up and walked out with it and she locked the door of the dead house behind her and she come home and she put the skull bone on the table and she say "There's your skull bone, master," and she was for going back to her work. But him as had made the bet he up and say "Didn't yew hear nothing, Mary?" "Yes," she say, "some fule of a ghost called out to me, 'Let be that's my father's skull bone and let be that's my mother's skull bone,' but I told him right straight ' that father or mother, sister or brother, I must hev a skull bone, so I tuk it and here t'be and then as I was goin' away arter I had locked the door I heard the old ghost a hallering and shrieking like mad." Then him as had made the bet was rarely upset, for he guessed it was the old sexton a hallerin' about for fear of being locked up all alone in the dead-house. And so it was for when they ran down to let him out they found him lying stone dead on his face a dead-o-fright. And it sarved him right to try and terrify a poor mawther. But her master he gave her the golden guinea he had won. A little while after down in Suffolk there was a squire and his mother, a very old lady and she died and was buried. But she would not rest and kept on coming into the house "specially at meals." Sometimes you could see all of her, sometimes not all, but you'd see a knife and fork get up off the table and play about where her hands should be. Now this upset the servants so much that they would not stop, and the squire was sadly put to, to know what he should do. One day he heard of the Dauntless Girl, tree villages off, who was feared at nowt. So he rode over and told her all about it, and asked her if she would come as servant, and she said she paid no regard to ghosts so she would come, but that it ought to be considered in her wages. And so it was and she went back with the squire. First thing she did was to allus lay a place regular for the ghost at meals and took great care not to put the knife and fork criss cross way. And she used to hand her the vegetables and the rest just as if she were real. And would say "Peppaw, mum, or salt, mum, as it might be." This fared to please the old ghost, but nothing come of it till squire had to go up to London on some law business. Next day the Dauntless Girl was down on her knees a-cleaning the parlour grate when she noticed a thin thing push in through the door, which was just ajar and open out wide when it got into the room, till she turned out to be the old ghost. Then the ghost, she up and spoke for the first time and she say, "Mary, are you afeared of me?" and the girl say, "No, mum, I've no call to be afeared of yew, for yew are dead and I'm alive," which fairly flummoxed the old ghost, but she went on and say "Mary, will yew come down into the cellar along o' me -- yew musent bring a light but I'll shine enow to light yew." So they went down the cellar steps and she shone like an old lantern, and when they got down she pointed out to some loose tiles and said "Pick yew up those tiles." So she did and there were tew bags of gold, one a big 'un and one a little 'un, and she said "Mary, that big bag's for your master and that little bag's for yew, for you are a dauntless girl and desarve it." Then off went the old ghost and never was seen no more and the Dauntless Girl she had a main o' trouble to find her way up in the dark out of the cellar. Then in tree days ' time, back there came the squire and he said "Morning, Mary, hae yew seen anything of my mother since I've been away?" and she said "Iss, sir, that I hev, and if yew ain't afraid of coming down into the cellar along o' me I'll show yew some thing." And he larfed and said he wornt afraid if she wornt for the Dauntless Girl wor a very pretty girl. So they lit a candle and went down and she opened up the tiles and she say there are the tew bags of gold, the little one is for yew and the big ' un is for me. And he say "Lor!" for he thought his mother might have given him the big one (and so she had), but he took what he could. And the Dauntless Girl she ollus afterwards crossed the knives and forks to keep the ghost from telling what she had done. But arter a while the squire thort it all over and he married the Dauntless Girl, so arter all he got both bags of gold, and he used to stick-lick her whensoever he got drunk. And I think she desarved it for deceiving the old ghost. Source (books.google.com): Walter Rye, The Recreations of a Norfolk Antiquary (Holt: Rounce and Wortley; Norwich: H. W. Hunt, 1920), pp. 22-26 . Return to the table of contents . A Wager Won England (Oxfordshire) At Shipton-under-Wychwood Church there is a kind of bone-house or hole, where the bones that were dug up in the churchyard have been put from time out of mind. In the village many years back there was a man that others thought to be daft, or not so sharp as he should be. He was challenged one night at the public-house that he dared not go to the bone-house at twelve o'clock at night and bring away a skull. The challenge was accepted , and on a given night he started. Two of the men were to go and see that he did the job, and they hid themselves in the bone-house. At the stroke of twelve he entered and took up a head , when a voice said, "Put that down! That's mine." He did put it down, and took up another, when the voice again said, "Put that down! That's mine!" "What?" he replied, "Did you have two heads? Then I'll have one of them." And so he won his wager. (June, 1894.) Source (books.google.com): Percy Manning, "Stray Notes on Oxfordshire Folklore," Folk-Lore , vol. 14, no. 4 (December 1903), pp. 412-13 . Return to the table of contents . The Boy and the Ghost USA (Alabama) Once there was a very rich family of people and they all died. Everybody was afraid to go there. Finally some one set up a sign-board which said, "Any one who will go to this house and stay over night can have the house and all that is in it." A poor boy came along and read it. "I will go," said he, and he went at sunset. He found all he wanted and went to work to cook his supper. Just as he was ready to eat it he heard a voice from the top of the chimney. He looked up and saw a leg. The leg said, "I am going to drop." "I don't keer," said the boy, "jes' so's you don' drap in my soup." The leg jumped down on a chair, and another leg came and said, "I am going to drop." "I don't keer," said the boy, "so you don' drap in my soup." One after another, all the members of a man came down in this way. The little boy said, "Will you have some supper? Will you have some supper?" They gave him no answer. "Oh," said the little boy, "I save my supper and manners, too." He ate his supper and made up his bed. "Will you have some bedroom? Will you have some bedroom? " said the little boy. No answer. "Oh," said the little boy, "I save my bedroom and my manners, too," and he went to bed. Soon after he went to bed the legs pulled him under the house and showed him a chest of money. The little boy grew rich and married. Source (books.google.com): Rosa Hunter, "Folk-Lore Scrap-Book," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 12, no. 44 (January - March, 1899), pp. 64-65 . Source (Internet Archive): Rosa Hunter, "Folk-Lore Scrap-Book," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 12, no. 44 (January - March, 1899), pp. 64-65 . Hunter's source: Southern Workman and Hampton School Record , March 1898. Return to the table of contents . The Dismembered Ghost USA Once there was a man, an' he wanted a place to lodge jus' fur the night, him an' his friends. So the man saw a little light 'tween the trees, an' he followed the light. It led him to a little house way back in the woods. It was an old man standin' in the door. The man says, "Say, Mister, have you got a place where I can lodge all night?'' He says, "There's a little house back there, but it's haunted. If you can stay in it, all right." He says, ''I can stay any place the devil can stay." So he says, "Come on, fellers, we've got a good place!" So the man says, ''We can have a nice game of cards here too." They all got around the table, an' had jus' finished a game of cards, when one man looked up, an' a pair of legs came down. He said, ''Come on, let's go!" The other men said, ''Let's stay here an' see what the end of it is.'' So they played a second game, an' a body came down. An' they kep' on playin', an' two arms came down. The other man says, "How much longer you goin' to stay here?"' He said, ''Don't be so scared! Nothin' ain't goin' to bother you." He says, "I'm right here; if anything bothers you, it will bother me too." Then the head come down. The man that was standin' in the middle of the floor said, "Well, what are yer doin' playin' cards in my house?" So they all got up from the table, lef' everything they had, an' ran to the man's house. The man says, ''What's the matter, fellers?'' The men say, "We can't stay in that place." The man says, "Well, you said you could live anywhere the devil was.'' They say, "I know, but I can't live there." That's all. Source (books.google.com): Elsie Clews Parsons, "Tales from Maryland and Pennsylvania," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 30 (1917), p. 217 . Source (Internet Archive): Elsie Clews Parsons, "Tales from Maryland and Pennsylvania," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 30 (1917), p. 217 . Parson's informant: Ruth Holmes. Return to the table of contents . The Haunted House USA (North Carolina) Come along a woman with three children. She met a man. "Could I stay all night at your house?'' Three miles from here he had a house. ''You're welcome to go. If you stay all night and tell me in the morning, I give you the house. You'll see things. You can't stay there." Gave her a light, a flat lamp with a rag put in it. She found dat house just like people had left it. She fed de children. After a while something made a fuss. She kept a-readin' de Bible. Do' came open, a man came in. Looked as if he was wrapped in a sheet. ''In the name of the Father, the Son, an' the Holy Ghost, what do you want here?" She said dat three times. Then he spoke. "You light your light sufficient an' go with me in the cellar. You take a knife an' a fork. Do what I tell you, an' I'll 'pear no more." He showed her what to stick de knife at, an' what to stick de fork. "Next morning you 'quire for de three brothers an' sister, an' go in an' find dis fork an' knife sticking up in de cellar. You'll find a pot of money, an' divide it up wit dese people. I'll pear no more." De man who owned de house give her de place. My mammy said her mammy knowed it was so, an' told her about it. Source (books.google.com): Elsie Clews Parsons, "Tales from Guilford County, North Carolina," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 30 (1917), p. 195 . Source (Internet Archive): Elsie Clews Parsons, "Tales from Guilford County, North Carolina," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 30 (1917), p. 195 . Parsons' informant: Margaret Burke. According to her "free papers," she is 87; but she states that the papers, in order to guarantee her freedom, made her out 21 when she was only 10. Free-born of free parents. Used to live in Rockingham County. Her mother had lived in Robertson County. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 14, 2022. Dissatisfaction and Greed The Fisherman and His Wife and other folktales about dissatisfaction and greed translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2013 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Fisherman and His Wife (Germany). Hanns Dudeldee (Germany). The Old Man, His Wife, and the Fish (Russia). The Stonecutter (Japan). The Bullock's Balls (India). The Fisherman and His Wife Germany There was once upon a time a fisherman and his wife who lived together in a piss pot near the sea. Every day the fisherman went out fishing, and he fished a long time. Once he was sitting there fishing and looking into the clear water when his hook went to the bottom, deep down, and when he pulled it out, he had caught a large flounder. Then the flounder said to him, "I beg you to let me live. I am not an ordinary flounder, but an enchanted prince. Put me back into the water, and let me swim." "Well," said the man, "there's no need to say more. I can certainly let a fish swim away who knows how to talk." Then he put it back into the water, and the flounder quickly disappeared to the bottom, leaving a long trail of blood behind him. The man then went home to his wife in the piss pot and told her that he had caught a flounder that had told him he was an enchanted prince, and that he had let it swim away. "Didn't you ask for anything first?" said the woman. "No," said the man. What should I have asked for?" "Oh," said the woman. "It is terrible living in this piss pot. It is filled with stench and filth. Go back and ask for a little hut for us." The man did not want to, but he went back to the sea, and when he arrived it was all yellow and green, and he stood next to the water and said: Mandje! Mandje! Timpe Te! Flounder, flounder, in the sea! My wife, my wife Ilsebill, Wants not, wants not, what I will The flounder swam up and said, "What does she want then?" "Oh," said the man, "I did catch you, and my wife says that I really should have asked for something. She doesn't want to live in a piss pot any longer. She would like to have a hut." "Go home," said the flounder. "She already has it." The man went home, and his wife was standing in the door of a hut, and she said to him, "Come in. See, now isn't this much better." And there was a parlor and a bedroom and a kitchen; and outside there was a little garden with all kinds of vegetables, and a yard with hens and ducks. "Oh," said the man. "Now we can live well." "Yes," said the woman, "we'll give it a try." Everything went well for a week or two, and then the woman said, "Husband. This hut is too small. The yard and the garden are too little. I want to live in a large stone castle. Go back to the flounder and tell him to get a castle for us." "Oh, wife," said the man. The flounder has just given us the hut. I don't want to go back so soon. It may make the flounder angry." "I know he can do it," said the woman, "and he won't mind. Just go!" So, with a heavy heart, the man went back, and when he came to the sea, the water was quite purple and gray and dark blue, but it was still, and he stood there and said: Mandje! Mandje! Timpe Te! Flounder, flounder, in the sea! My wife, my wife Ilsebill, Wants not, wants not, what I will. "What does she want then?" said the flounder. "Oh," said the man sadly, "my wife wants to live in a stone castle." "Go home. She's already standing before the door," said the flounder. So the man went home, and his wife was standing in front of a large palace. "See, husband," she said. "Isn't this beautiful?" And with that they went inside together. There were many servants inside, and the walls were all white, and there were golden chairs and tables in the parlor, and outside the castle there was a garden and a forest a half mile long, and there were elk and deer and rabbits, and there were cow and horse stalls in the yard. "Oh," said the man, "now we can stay in this beautiful castle and be satisfied." "We'll think about it," said the woman. "Let's sleep on it." And with that they went to bed. The next morning the woman awoke. It was daylight. She poked her husband in the side with her elbow and said, "Husband, get up. We should be king over all this land." "Oh, wife," said the man, "why do you want to be king? I don't want to be king." "Well, I want to be king." "Oh, wife," said the man, "how can you be king? The flounder won't want to do that." "Husband," said the woman, "Go there immediately. I want to be king." So the man, saddened because his wife wanted to be king, went back. And when he arrived at the sea it was dark gray, and the water heaved up from below. He stood there and said: Mandje! Mandje! Timpe Te! Flounder, flounder, in the sea! My wife, my wife Ilsebill, Wants not, wants not, what I will. "What does she want then," said the flounder. "Oh," said the man, "my wife wants to be king." "Go home. She's already king," said the flounder. Then the man went home, and when he arrived at the palace, there were so many soldiers, and drums, and trumpets, and his wife was sitting on a high throne of gold and diamonds, and she was wearing a large golden crown and on either side of her there stood a line of maidens-in-waiting, each one a head shorter than the other. "Oh," said the man, "are you king now?" "Yes," she said, "I am king." And after he had looked at her awhile, he said, "It is nice that you are king. Now we don't have to wish for anything else." "No, husband," she said, "I have been king too long. I can't stand it any longer. I am king, but now I would like to become emperor." "Oh," said the man, "why do you want to become emperor?" "Husband," she said, "go to the flounder. I want to be emperor." "Oh, wife," said the man, "he can't make you emperor. I can't tell him to do that." "I am king," said the woman, "and you are my husband. Now go there immediately!" So the man went, and on his way he thought, "This is not going to end well. To ask to be emperor is shameful. The flounder is going to get tired of this." With that he arrived at the sea. The water was entirely black and dense, and a strong wind blew over him that curdled the water. He stood there and said: Mandje! Mandje! Timpe Te! Flounder, flounder, in the sea! My wife, my wife Ilsebill, Wants not, wants not, what I will. "What does she want then," said the flounder. "Oh," he said, "my wife wants to become emperor." "Go home," said the flounder. "She's already emperor." Then the man went home, and when he arrived, his wife was sitting on a very high throne made of one piece of gold, and she was wearing a large golden crown that was two yards high, and guards were standing at her side, each one smaller than the other, beginning with the largest giant and ending with the littlest dwarf, who was no larger than my little finger. Many princes and counts were standing in front of her. The man went and stood among them and said, "Wife, are you emperor now?" "Yes," she said, "I am emperor." "Oh," said the man, taking a good look at her. "Wife, it's good that you are emperor." "Husband," she said. "Why are you standing there? I'm emperor now, and I want to become pope as well." "Oh, wife!" said the man. "Why do you want to become pope. There is only one pope in all Christendom." "Husband," she said, "I want to become pope before the day is done." "No, wife," he said, "the flounder cannot make you pope. It's not good." "Husband, what nonsense! If he can make me emperor, then he can make me pope as well. Now go there immediately!" Then the man went, and he felt sick all over, and his knees and legs were shaking, and the wind was blowing, and the water looked like it was boiling, and ships, tossing and turning on the waves, were firing their guns in distress. There was a little blue in the middle of the sky, but on all sides it had turned red, as in a terrible lightning storm. Full of despair he stood there and said: Mandje! Mandje! Timpe Te! Flounder, flounder, in the sea! My wife, my wife Ilsebill, Wants not, wants not, what I will. "What does she want then?" said the flounder. "Oh," said the man, "my wife wants to become pope." "Go home," said the flounder. "She's already pope." Then he went home, and when he arrived there, his wife was sitting on a throne that was two miles high, and she was wearing three large crowns. She was surrounded with church-like splendor, and at her sides there were two banks of candles. The largest was as thick and as tall as the largest tower, down to the smallest kitchen candle. "Wife," said the man, giving her a good look, "are you pope now?" "Yes," she said, "I am pope." "Oh," said the man. "It is good that you are pope. Wife, we can be satisfied, now that you are pope. There's nothing else that you can become." "I have to think about that," said the woman. Then they both went to bed, but she was not satisfied. Her desires would not let her sleep. She kept thinking what she wanted to become next. Then the sun came up. "Aha," she thought, as she watched the sunrise through her window. "Couldn't I cause the sun to rise?" Then she became very grim and said to her husband, "Husband, go back to the flounder. I want to become like God." The man, who was still mostly asleep, was so startled that he fell out of bed. "Oh, wife," he said, "go on as you are and remain pope." "No," said the woman, tearing open her bodice. "I will not be quiet. I can't stand it when I see the sun and the moon coming up, and I can't cause them to rise. I want to become like God!" "Oh, wife," said the man. "The flounder can't do that. He can make you emperor and pope, but he can't do that." "Husband," she said, looking very gruesome, "I want to become like God. Go to the flounder right now!" The man trembled with fear at every joint. Outside there was a terrible storm. Trees and mountains were shaking. The heaven was completely black, and there was thunder and lightning. In the sea he could see black waves as high as mountains, and they were capped with white crowns of foam. He said: Mandje! Mandje! Timpe Te! Flounder, flounder, in the sea! My wife, my wife Ilsebill, Wants not, wants not, what I will. "What does she want then," said the flounder. "Oh," he said, "she wants to become like God." "Go home. She is sitting in her piss pot again." And they are sitting there even today. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Von den Fischer und siiner Fru," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 1st ed. (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), v. 1, no. 19. The Grimms' source for this tale, recorded in wonderfully simple, but poetic Low German, was the romantic painter Philipp Otto Runge (1777-1810). In 1806 Runge sent a manuscript of this tale to the publisher of Achim von Arnim's and Clemens Brentano's collection of folk poetry Des Knaben Wunderhorn . In 1809 the manuscript was made available to the Grimm brothers, and they included the tale in the first edition (and -- with stylistic and dialect variations -- all succeeding editions) of their Kinder- und Hausmärchen. A somewhat different version of Runge's manuscript also found its way to Johann Gustav Büsching, who published the tale as no. 58 in his Volks-Sagen, Märchen und Legenden (Leipzig: Carl Heinrich Reclam, 1812), pp. 258-66. This work appeared before the Grimm's collection, which was also published in 1812. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Translator's notes: The couple's place of residence, in the Grimms' Low German, is called a "Pisputt." (Büsching was more cautious, using the truncated spelling "P--pot.") Most translators give this unambiguously earthy word a figurative meaning in English. Thus, one sees "shack," "pigsty," "miserable little hovel," "dirty hovel," and "chamber pot" in various English translations. I have chosen to keep with the low road, and call a Pisputt a piss pot. I have left untranslated the formulaic introduction to the fisherman's oft-repeated call to the fish, "Mandje! Mandje! Timpe Te!" From other sources it is evident that "Mandje" is a dialect word for "Little Man," as in High German "Männchen." "Timpe Te" appears to be the fisherman's name -- elsewhere he is called "Domine" or "Dudeldee." Thus the verse, as recorded by Philipp Otto Runge and immortalized by the Grimm brothers, appears to be a corruption of a more logical version (not unusual in folklore). Logically the fish, not the fisherman, would call out the greeting, "Mandje! Mandje! Timpe Te!" Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 555. Link to the Grimms' final version (1857) of this tale Von dem Fischer un syner Fru , in Low German. Return to the table of contents . Hanns Dudeldee Germany, Albert Ludewig Grimm A long time ago, many hundreds of years ago, there lived a fisherman with his wife. His name was Dudeldee. They were so poor that they did not have a real house, but lived in a hut made of boards without any windows. They looked out through the knot holes. In spite all this, Dudeldee was satisfied, but not his wife. She wished for this or that and constantly tormented her husband because he could not give it to her. Dudeldee usually said nothing, thinking only to himself, "If only I were rich," or "If only I could have everything I wished for." One evening he was standing with his wife before their front door looking around their neighborhood. There were a number of handsome farmhouses nearby. Then his wife said to him, "If we only had a hut as good as the worst of our neighbors' houses. We could have such a one, but you are too lazy. You can't work the way other people work." Dudeldee asked, "What? Don't I work as hard as other people? Don't I stand there fishing the entire day?" "No!" answered his wife. "You could get up earlier and catch as many fish before daybreak as you now get during the whole day. But you are too lazy. You don't want to do anything." And thus she scolded him on and on. So the next morning he got up early and went out to the lake to fish. By the time he saw people going to their fields to work he still had caught nothing. Noon came, and the mowers sat in the shade and ate their noon meals, and still he had caught nothing. Sadly he sat down and pulled his moldy bread from his pocket and ate it. Then he went back to fishing. The sun moved downward, and the mowers went home, the shepherds drove their herds into their enclosures, the cow herds returned home, and the fields grew quiet. But Dudeldee still stood there, and still he had not even one little fish. It was almost dark when he thought about going home. He would throw out his net just one more time and try to catch something. He threw it out, and as if were trying to lure the fish into it, he called out: "Little fish, little fish, in the sea!" "What do you want, Hanns Dudeldee?" asked a little fish that had swum up, sticking his head a little above the water. Poor Hanns Dudeldee was startled to see the little fish, but he collected himself and thought, "If all I have to do is to want something, you will not have to ask me again." He looked around to see what he might wish for. On the other side of the lake there stood a handsome palace from which he could hear the beautiful music of horns resounding. At the same time he thought of his wife's wish to have a better house, so he said, "I would like a country house like that one over there. I would like such a palace instead of my little board hut." "Just go home," said the little fish. "Your board hut is now such a palace." More running than walking, Hanns Dudeldee returned home. Already at some distance, he saw that at the place where his house formerly stood there was now a splendid palace with brightly illuminated rooms. Entering, he saw that everything was so splendid that he did not know how to behave. The entryway was paved with marble. The living-room floor was of inlaid wood, and polished with wax. The walls were covered with wallpaper. Magnificent chandeliers hung in the high halls. In short, everything was so beautiful that Hans Dudeldee did not dare to walk around inside. He could not believe that this was his property. He thought he had entered the wrong house and would have left, if his wife had not met him on the steps. He had scarcely seen her when he asked her, "Now are you satisfied with the house?" and he told her what had happened. "What?" she answered. "Do you think that what we have here is a miracle? I saw much better houses in the city when I was in service there. It is passable, but how could you be so stupid? You forgot the best things. Just look at our clothes against this nice house! See how they stand out! At the same time you should have wished for beautiful clothes for me and for you. But you are too stupid and lazy. You don't even make use of the little bit of intelligence that you have." And thus she continued to scold and bicker until she fell asleep. The next morning at daybreak Hanns Dudeldee went back to the same place, once again threw out his net, and once again called out: "Little fish, little fish, in the sea!" "What do you want, Hanns Dudeldee?" Thus replied the little fish once again, and Dudeldee did not have to think long before saying that he wanted beautiful clothing for his wife and for himself, clothing that was appropriate for their new house. "You have it," said the little fish, and Dudeldee stood there wearing a cloth jacket with gold braid, silk stockings and shoes, and an embroidered vest, everything in keeping with the fashion of the time. Returning home, he would have scarcely recognized his wife in her silk clothing, but she looked out the window and asked, "Hanns, is that you?" "Yes," he answered. "Are you satisfied now?" "We'll see!" she answered. Thus they lived peacefully for a time. But one day, when her husband wanted to go out fishing again, she said, "Why do you need to go fishing? Give that up and instead wish for yourself a chest filled with gold." "Hmm, that is true!" thought Dudeldee, and he went out to the lake, once again threw out his net and called out: "Little fish, little fish, in the sea!" "What do you want, Hanns Dudeldee?" asked the little fish once again. "Oh, a chest filled with gold," he said. "Just go home," said the little fish And when he arrived home, standing in his bedroom was a chest filled with gold pieces. Thus they lived high and well. She bought herself a coach and horses, and a riding horse for her husband. They often drove into the cities, and they engaged a cook and servants. The neighbors always called her the arrogant fishwife. This annoyed her greatly, so she told her husband to make her the ruler over all the neighbors. Once again he went out with his net, threw it into the water, and called out: "Little fish, little fish, in the sea!" "What do you want, Hanns Dudeldee?" asked the little fish. "I would like to be a nobleman or a count and to rule over all my neighbors." "Just go home. It is so." When he arrived home the neighbors were paying homage to his wife. She already had had a few of the neighbor women locked up who previously had called her the arrogant fishwife. Now they often drove to the capital city where the king resided, wanting to join company with other counts. But they did not know how to conduct themselves with the manners of nobility, and everyone ridiculed them. Some countesses would refer to her only as Fish Countess and him as Fish Count Dudeldee. So she again spoke to her husband, "Go out and have yourself made king. I do not want to be called Fish Countess any longer. I want to be queen." However, Hanns Dudeldee advised her against this, saying, "Just remember how it was when we were poor, and we wished for a little hut as good as the worst of our neighbors' houses. Now we have a surplus of everything. Let us call it enough." But his wife did not want to call it enough, and she said, "What? I am to put up with being called Fish Countess? I am to bear the city women's pride? No! They must know who I am. I shall show them! And yet you want to be so simple as to accept all this?" And thus she scolded forth, until he promised to make her queen. Consequently he went out to the sea, repeated once again his little verse, and the little fish again appeared and again asked, "What do you want, Count Dudeldee?" He presented the request, that he would like to be king. The little fish said, "You are!" Returning home, he found that his palace had changed magnificently. It was now much larger. Marshals and ministers with a golden star and golden keys received him with deep bows. His head suddenly became very heavy. He wanted to take off his hat, but behold! Instead of a hat he had a heavy golden crown on his head. And when he saw his wife, he hardly recognized her, so much did her gown glisten with gold and jewels. When he asked her if she was now satisfied, she said, "Yes, until I once again come to know something better. I would be a fool if I could be better off, and did not do so." Thus they lived contentedly for a time, and Dudeldee's wife did not wish for anything further, for she had everything that she possibly could want. She had even taken revenge on the countesses who had called her Countess Fish. But finally she came to lack something. She read in the newspaper about the luxury and the expenditures at other kings' courts, and heard that there were other kings and emperors who ruled over many more people and over much more powerful kingdoms than did Dudeldee. Consequently she again approached him, and tormented him until he promised her to become the most powerful king on earth. Once again he threw out his net, and called out: "Little fish, little fish, in the sea!" "What do you want, King Dudeldee?" asked the little fish, and Dudeldee said, "Just make me the most powerful king or emperor on earth." And immediately that is what he was. When he arrived home ambassadors and deputies from all the kingdoms and all the parts of the earth were there. Poor poets with poems to Atlas awaited him. Schoolmasters who needed better salaries were there with their petitions. Chamberlains, with their hats under their arms, walked back and forth. Peasants engaged in lawsuits wanted an audience. Guards walked up and down. A coach with ten horses, twenty cavaliers, and six couriers was standing there, ready to depart. In an adjacent courtyard there were peacocks and guinea fowls. In short, everything was there that would please such a great emperor. There were even two court jesters who were always near him. The new Emperor Dudeldee was of course angry that these two foolish people were always following him about wherever he might go, and he complained to his wife about them, for after all, he would rather be in the company of reasonable people than of fools. But she told him that he did not understand. It just had to be that way. All important gentlemen preferred to be with fools. Now he was not going to be a fool himself and make an exception. Finally he gave in, and was happy that his wife was satisfied, but their happiness did not last long. One day he came to her and found her very sad. "What is wrong?" he asked her. "Oh," she said, "I am unhappy about the rainy weather. It has lasted four days now, and I would like to have some sunshine. In fact, I wish that I could do everything that God can do, so that I could have spring and summer and fall and winter exactly when I wanted them." Thus she spoke to him, and he liked her idea as well. "Why," he thought, "then I could go out in the rain and come home in the sunshine that my wife had made. I could even get rid of the fools." Thinking this to himself, he immediately took his fishing net and slipped out a back entrance into the rain. He went to the sea, threw in his net, and again said, as before: "Little fish, little fish, in the sea!" "What do you want, Emperor Dudeldee?" the little fish asked. "Oh," he said, "only that my wife would like to be able to do whatever God can do: make rain and sunshine, and have spring and summer and fall and winter exactly when she wants them." "So! Is that all?" asked the little fish. "No, no, Emperor Dudeldee, I see that nothing is good enough for you and your wife. Therefore become the old fisherman Dudeldee once again, for then you were not as proud and unsatisfied as you are now. Then the little fish disappeared. Hanns Dudeldee called out repeatedly: "Little fish, little fish, in the sea!" But no little fish asked: "What do you want, Hanns Dudeldee?" And there he stood, as before, without a jacket, wearing only his dirty leather trousers. And when he returned home, the palace was gone. His little board hut was standing there again, with his wife inside in her dirty clothing and looking out through a knothole, as before, and once again she was the wife of Fisherman Dudeldee. Source: Albert Ludewig Grimm, "Hanns Dudeldee: ein Mährchen," Kindermährchen (Heidelberg: Mohr und Zimmer, [1809], pp. 77-92. Albert Ludewig Grimm was not related to the famous Grimm brothers, Jacob and Wilhelm. Although Albert Ludewig's collection of "children's fairy tales" was published three years before Jacob's and Wilhelm's pioneering collection, it had but little impact and is today virtually unknown. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 555. Return to the table of contents . The Old Man, His Wife, and the Fish Russia There once lived in a hut on the shores of the Isle of Buyan an old man and his wife. They were very poor. The old man used to go to the sea daily to fish, and they only just managed to live on what he caught. One day he let down his net and drew it in. It seemed to be very heavy. He dragged and dragged, and at last got it to shore. There he found that he had caught one little fish of a kind he had never before seen, a golden fish. The fish spoke to him in a man's voice. "Do not keep me, old man," it said; "let me go once more free in the sea and I will reward you for it, for whatever you wish I will do." The old man thought for a while. Then he said, "Well, I don't want you. Go into the sea again," and he threw the fish into the water and went home. "Well," said his wife, when he got home, "what have you caught today?" "Only one little fish," said the man, "a golden fish, and that I let go again, it begged so hard. 'Put me in the blue sea again,' it said, ' and I will reward you, for whatever you wish I will do.' So I let it go, and did not ask anything." "Ah, you old fool!" said the wife in a great rage, "what an opportunity you have lost. You might, at least, have asked the fish to give us some bread. We have scarce a crust in the house." The old woman grumbled so much that her husband could have no quiet, so to please her off he went to the seashore, and there he cried out: Little fish, little fish, come now to me, Your tail in the water, your head out of sea! The fish came to the shore. "Well, what do you want, old man?" it asked. "My wife," said the man, "is in a great passion, and has sent me to ask for bread." "Very well," said the fish, "go home and you shall have it." The old man went back, and when he entered the hut he found bread in plenty. "Well," said he to his wife, "we have enough bread now." "Oh yes!" said she, "but I have had such a misfortune while you were away. I have broken the bucket. What shall I do the washing in now? Go to the fish, and ask it to give us a new bucket." Away went the man. Standing on the shore he called out: Little fish, little fish, come now to me, Your tail in the water, your head out of sea! The fish soon made its appearance. "Well, old man," it said, "what do you want?" "My wife," said the man, " has had a misfortune, and has broken our bucket. So I have come to ask for a new one." "Very well," said the fish, "you shall find one at home." The old man went back. As soon as he got home his wife said to him, "Be off to the golden fish again, and ask it to give us a new hut. Ours is all coming to pieces. We have scarcely a roof over our heads." The old man once more came to the shore, and cried: Little fish, little fish, come now to me, Your tail in the water, your head out of sea! The fish came. "Well, what is it?" asked the fish. "My wife," said the man, "is in a very bad temper, and has sent me to ask you to build us a new cottage. She says she cannot live any longer in our present one." "Oh, do not be troubled about that," said the fish. "Go home. You shall have what you want." The old man went back again, and in the place of his miserable hovel he found a new hut built of oak and nicely ornamented. The old man was delighted, but as soon as he went in his wife set on him, saying, "What an idiot you are! You do not know how to take good fortune when it is offered to you. You think you have done a great thing just because you have got a new hut. Be off again to the golden fish, and tell it I will not be a mere peasant's wife any longer, I will be an archduchess, with plenty of servants, and set the fashion." The old man went to the golden fish. "What is it?" asked the fish. "My wife will not let me rest," replied the man; "she wants now to be an archduchess, and is not content with being my wife." "Well, it shall be as she wishes. Go home again," said the fish. Away went the man. How astonished was he, when, on coming to where his house had stood, he now found a fine mansion, three stories high. Servants crowded the hall, and cooks were busy in the kitchens. On a seat in a fine room sat the man's wife, dressed in robes shining with gold and silver, and giving orders. "Good day, wife!" said the man. "Who are you, man?" said his wife. "What have you to do with me, a fine lady? Take the clown away," said she to her servants. "Take him to the stable, and whip some of the impudence out of him." The servants seized the old man, took him off to the stable, and when they had him there beat him so that he hardly knew whether he was alive or not. After that the wife made him the doorkeeper of the house. She gave him a besom, and put him to keep the yard in order. As for his meals, he got them in the kitchen. He had a hard life of it. If the yard was not swept clean, he had to look out. "Who would have thought she had been such a hag?" said the old man to himself. "Here she has all such good fortune, and will not even own me for her husband!" After a time the wife got tired of being merely an archduchess, so she said to her husband, "Go off to the golden fish, and tell it I will be a czarina." The old man went down to the shore. He cried: Little fish, little fish, come now to me, Your tail in the water, your head out of sea! The fish came swimming to the shore. "Well, old man!" it said, "what do you want?" "My wife is not yet satisfied," said the man; "she wants now to be a czarina," "Do not let that trouble you," said the fish, "but go to your house. "What you ask shall be done." The man went back. In place of the fine house he found a palace with a roof of gold. Soldiers were on guard around it. In front of the palace was a garden, and at the back a fine park, in which some troops were parading. On a balcony stood the czarina surrounded by officers and nobles. The troops presented arms, the drums beat, the trumpets blew, and the people shouted. In a short time the woman got tired of being czarina, and she commanded that her husband should be found and brought to her presence. The palace was all in confusion, for who knew what had become of the old man? Officers and noblemen hurried here and there to search for him. At length he was found in a hut behind the palace. "Listen, you old idiot!" said his wife. "Go to the golden fish, and tell it that I am tired of being czarina. I want to rule over all the ocean, to have dominion over every sea and all the fish." The old man hesitated to go to the fish with such a request. "Be off!" said his wife, "or your head shall be cut off." The man went to the seashore and said: Little fish, little fish, come now to me, Your tail in the water, your head out of sea! The fish did not come. The man waited, but it was not to be seen. Then he said the words a second time. The waves roared. A short while before it had been bright and calm, now dark clouds covered the sky, the wind howled, and the water seemed of an inky blackness. At length the fish came. "What do you want, old man?" it asked. "My old wife," answered he, "is not satisfied even now. She says she will be czarina no longer, but will rule over all the waters and all the fish." The fish made no reply, but dived down and disappeared in the sea. The man went back. What had become of the palace? He looked around, but could not see it. He rubbed his eyes in wonder. On the spot where the palace had stood was the old hut, and at the door stood the old woman in her old rags. So they commenced to live again in their old style. The man often went a-fishing, but he never more caught the golden fish. Source: Folk-Lore and Legends: Russian and Polish (London: W. W. Gibbings, 1890), pp. 35-41 . The introductory note is signed by C. J. T. [Charles John Tibbits]. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 555. Return to the table of contents . The Stonecutter Japan Once upon a time there lived a stonecutter, who went every day to a great rock in the side of a big mountain and cut out slabs for gravestones or for houses. He understood very well the kinds of stones wanted for the different purposes, and as he was a careful workman he had plenty of customers. For a long time he was quite happy and contented, and asked for nothing better than what he had. Now in the mountain dwelt a spirit which now and then appeared to men, and helped them in many ways to become rich and prosperous. The stonecutter, however, had never seen this spirit, and only shook his head, with an unbelieving air, when anyone spoke of it. But a time was coming when he learned to change his opinion. One day the stonecutter carried a gravestone to the house of a rich man, and saw there all sorts of beautiful things, of which he had never even dreamed. Suddenly his daily work seemed to grow harder and heavier, and he said to himself: "Oh, if only I were a rich man, and could sleep in a bed with silken curtains and golden tassels, how happy I should be!" And a voice answered him: "Your wish is heard; a rich man you shall be!" At the sound of the voice the stonecutter looked around, but could see nobody. He thought it was all his fancy, and picked up his tools and went home, for he did not feel inclined to do any more work that day. But when he reached the little house where he lived, he stood still with amazement, for instead of his wooden hut was a stately palace filled with splendid furniture, and most splendid of all was the bed, in every respect like the one he had envied. He was nearly beside himself with joy, and in his new life the old one was soon forgotten. It was now the beginning of summer, and each day the sun blazed more fiercely. One morning the heat was so great that the stonecutter could scarcely breathe, and he determined he would stop at home till the evening. He was rather dull, for he had never learned how to amuse himself, and was peeping through the closed blinds to see what was going on in the street, when a little carriage passed by, drawn by servants dressed in blue and silver. In the carriage sat a prince, and over his head a golden umbrella was held, to protect him from the sun's rays. "Oh, if I were only a prince!" said the stonecutter to himself, as the carriage vanished around the corner. "Oh, if I were only a prince, and could go in such a carriage and have a golden umbrella held over me, how happy I should be!" And a prince he was. Before his carriage rode one company of men and another behind it; servants dressed in scarlet and gold bore him along, the coveted umbrella was held over his head, everything his heart could desire was his. But yet it was not enough. He looked around still for something to wish for, and when he saw that in spite of the water he poured on the grass the rays of the sun scorched it, and that in spite of the umbrella held over his head each day his face grew browner and browner, he cried in his anger: "The sun is mightier than I; oh, if I were only the sun!" And the mountain spirit answered: "Your wish is heard; the sun you shall be." And the sun he was, and felt himself proud in his power. He shot his beams above and below, on earth and in heaven; he burnt up the grass in the fields and scorched the faces of princes as well as of poorer folk. but in a short time he began to grow tired of his might, for there seemed nothing left for him to do. Discontent once more filled his soul, and when a cloud covered his face, and hid the earth from him, he cried in his anger: "Does the cloud hold captive my rays, and is it mightier than I? Oh, that I were a cloud, and mightier than any!" And the mountain spirit answered: "Your wish is heard; a cloud you shall be!" And a cloud he was, and lay between the sun and the earth. He caught the sun's beams and held them, and to his joy the earth grew green again and flowers blossomed. But that was not enough for him, and for days and week he poured forth rain till the rivers overflowed their banks, and the crops of rice stood in water. Towns and villages were destroyed by the power of the rain, only the great rock on the mountainside remained unmoved. The cloud was amazed at the sight, and cried in wonder: "Is the rock, then, mightier than I? Oh, if I were only the rock!" And the mountain spirit answered; "Your wish is heard; the rock you shall be!" And the rock he was, and gloried in his power. Proudly he stood, and neither the heat of the sun nor the force of the rain could move him. "This is better than all!" he said to himself. But one day he heard a strange noise at his feet, and when he looked down to see what it could be, he saw a stonecutter driving tools into his surface. Even while he looked a trembling feeling ran all through him, and a great block broke off and fell upon the ground. Then he cried in his wrath: "Is a mere child of earth mightier than a rock? Oh, if I were only a man!" And the mountain spirit answered: "Your wish is heard. A man once more you shall be!" And a man he was, and in the sweat of his brow he toiled again at his trade of stone cutting. His bed was hard and his food scanty, but he had learned to be satisfied with it, and did not long to be something or somebody else. And as he never asked for things he did not have, or desired to be greater and mightier than other people, he was happy at last, and never again heard the voice of the mountain spirit. Source: Andrew Lang, The Crimson Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1903), pp. 192-97 . Lang's source: David Brauns, Japanische Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich, 1885), pp. 87-90. This story is similar to type 555 folktales. Return to the table of contents . The Bullock's Balls India In a certain place there lived a large bullock by the name of Tîkschnabrischana, which means "having substantial balls." Because of his excessive pride, he left his herd and wandered about in the forest, tearing up the banks as he pleased and devouring the emerald-colored grass. In this same forest there lived a jackal by the name of Pralobhaka, which means "the greedy one." One day he was sitting pleasantly with his wife on an island in the river. Tîkschnabrischana came up to this island to have a drink of water. When the jackal's wife saw the balls, she said to her husband, "Master, just look! This bullock has two pieces of meat hanging down. They will be falling off immediately, at the least in a few hours. Take heed of this, and follow him." The jackal answered, "Loved one, there is nothing certain about their falling off. Why do you ask me to set forth on such a futile task? Let me stay here with you, and together we can eat the mice that come here to drink. This is their pathway. If I leave you to follow the bullock, then someone else will come here and take over this spot. It is not a good idea, for it is said: He who gives up a sure thing for an uncertainty will lose the sure thing, and the uncertainty will remain just that. " The jackal's wife said, "Oh, you are a low-spirited creature. You are satisfied with the worst things that you can find. They also say: It is easy to fill a little brook and also the paws of a little mouse. Ordinary people are easily satisfied. They are pleased with the smallest things. For this reason a good man must always be active. They also say: With every beginning there is a will to act. Avoid idleness, and join the community of the intelligent and the powerful. Think not that fate alone rules. Cease not to work. Without effort the sesame seed will not give up its oil. And further: A foolish man is happy with little. His heart is satisfied just thinking of wealth. It is thus not appropriate for you to say, 'It is uncertain, whether or not they will fall off.' It is also said: Active people deserve praise. Those with pride will be praised. What sort of scoundrel will wait until Indra brings him water? Furthermore, I am mightily tired of eating mouse meat. These two pieces of meat look as though they will soon fall off. You must follow him. Nothing else will do!" After hearing all this, the jackal left his mouse catching, and followed after Tîkschnabrischana. They rightly say: A man is master in all things, until he lets his will be turned by a woman's words. And further: The impossible seems possible, the unachievable easily achieved, and the inedible edible to the man who is spurred on by a woman's words. Thus, together with his wife, he followed the bullock a long time, but the two balls did not fall off. In the fifteenth year, the jackal finally said wearily to his wife, "Fifteen years, my love, I have kept my eyes on those hanging things to see whether or not they are going to fall off, but they still hold fast. Nor will they fall off in the future. Let us return to catching mice!" Source: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen , translated from the Sanskrit into German by Theodor Benfey, vol. 2 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), book 2, story 6, pp. 194-96 . Translated from German into English by D. L. Ashliman . © 2001. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 115. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 22, 2013. Flood Myths from the Philippines Flood Myths from the Philippines edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2003 Contents The Flood Story (Igorot) . The Flood Story (Bukidnon) . Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Flood Story Igorot Once upon a time, when the world was flat and there were no mountains, there lived two brothers, sons of Lumawig, the Great Spirit. The brothers were fond of hunting, and since no mountains had formed there was no good place to catch wild pig and deer, and the older brother said, "Let us cause water to flow over all the world and cover it, and then mountains will rise up." So they caused water to flow over all the earth, and when it was covered they took the head-basket [a bamboo basket, in which the heads of victims are kept prior to the head-taking celebration] of the town and set it for a trap. The brothers were very much pleased when they went to look at their trap, for they had caught not only many wild pigs and deer, but also many people. Now Lumawig looked down from his place in the sky and saw that his sons had flooded the earth and that in all the world there was just one spot which was not covered. And he saw that all the people in the world had been drowned except one brother and sister who lived in Pokis. Then Lumawig descended, and he called to the boy and girl, saying, "Oh, you are still alive." "Yes," answered the boy, "we are still alive, but we are very cold." So Lumawig commanded his dog and deer to get fire for the boy and girl. The dog and the deer swam quickly away, but though Lumawig waited a long time they did not return, and all the time the boy and girl were growing colder. Finally Lumawig himself went after the dog and the deer, and when he reached them he said, "Why are you so long in bringing the fire to Pokis? Get ready and come quickly while I watch you, for the boy and girl are very cold." Then the dog and the deer took the fire and started to swim through the flood, but when they had gone only a little way, the fire was put out. Lumawig commanded them to get more fire and they did so, but they swam only a little way again when that of the deer went out, and that of the dog would have been extinguished also had not Lumawig gone quickly to him and taken it. As soon as Lumawig reached Pokis he built a big fire which warmed the brother and sister; and the water evaporated so that the world was as it was before, except that now there were mountains. The brother and sister married and had children, and thus there came to be many people on the earth. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Company, 1916), pp. 102-104. Notes by Mabel Cook Cole: The mythology of nearly all peoples has a flood story. A bamboo basket, in which the heads of victims are kept prior to the head-taking celebration. The folklore of all countries has some story accounting for the acquisition of fire. The Tinguian tale is as follows: Once in the very old times Kaboniyan sent a flood which covered all the land. Then there was no place for the fire to stay, so it went into the bamboo, the stones, and iron. That is why one who knows how can still get fire out of bamboo and stones. Return to the table of contents . The Flood Story Bukidnon (Mindanao) A long time ago there was a very big crab which crawled into the sea. And when he went in he crowded the water out so that it ran all over the earth and covered all the land. Now about one moon before this happened, a wise man had told the people that they must build a large raft. They did as he commanded and cut many large trees, until they had enough to make three layers. These they bound tightly together, and when it was done they fastened the raft with a long rattan cord to a big pole in the earth. Soon after this the floods came. White water poured out of the hills, and the sea rose and covered even the highest mountains. The people and animals on the raft were safe, but all the others drowned. When the waters went down and the raft was again on the ground, it was near their old home, for the rattan cord had held. But these were the only people left on the whole earth. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Company, 1916), pp. 125-126. Notes by Mabel Cook Cole: A somewhat similar belief that a giant Crab is responsible for the tides is widespread throughout Malaysia. The Batak of Palawan now believe, as also do the Mandaya of eastern Mindanao, that the tides are caused by a giant crab going in and out of his hole in the sea. The similarity of this to the biblical Story of the Flood leads us to suppose that it has come from the neighboring Christianized or Mohammedanized people and has been worked by the Bukidnon into the mould of their own thought. However, the flood story is sometimes found in such a guise that it cannot be accounted for by Christian influence. See, for example, The Flood Story as told in the folklore of the Igorot tribe , on page 102. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Creation Myths from the Philippines . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 4, 2003. The Flying Dutchman The Flying Dutchman legends of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 777* edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2013-2021 Seamen implicitly believe in omens, mermaids, the Flying Dutchman, evil spirits, the appearance of the ghosts of the departed, and the pranks of malicious spirits and goblins -- Naval Sketch-Book (1826), p. 106 . Contents The Sailors Said They Saw the Flying Dutchman (John MacDonald, 1790). The Story of the Flying Dutchman ( A Voyage to New South Wales , 1795). A Common Superstition of Mariners (Scotland, 1803). Written on Passing Dead-Man's Island (Thomas Moore, 1804). The Dæmon-Frigate (Sir Walter Scott, 1813). Vanderdecken's Message Home ( Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine , 1821). The Flying Dutchman (The voyage of H.M.S. Leven, 1823). The Fable of the Flying Dutchman (Heinrich Heine, The Memoirs of Herr von Schnabelewopski , 1833). The Flying Dutchman of the Tappan Sea (Washington Irving Wolfert's Roost , 1855). The Rotterdam (Scotland, 1859). The Spectre Ship of Porthcurno (Cornwall, England, 1865). We Meet the Flying Dutchman ( The Cruise of Her Majesty's Ship "Bacchante," 1881). The Phantom Ship (James William Buehl, 1891). Links to additional texts . Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Sailors Said They Saw the Flying Dutchman John MacDonald, 1790 The weather was so stormy, that the sailors said they saw the flying Dutchman. The common story is, that this Dutchman came to the Cape in distress of weather, and wanted to get into the harbour, but could not get a pilot to conduct her, and was lost; and that ever since, in very bad weather, her vision appears. The sailors fancy that if you would hail her, she would answer like another vessel. Source (books.google.com): John MacDonald, Travels in Various Parts of Europe, Asia, and Africa (London: J. Forbes, 1790), p. 76 . Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Flying Dutchman A Voyage to New South Wales (1795) I had often heard of the superstition of sailors respecting apparitions, but had never given much credit to the report; it seems that some years since a Dutch man-of-war was lost off the Cape of Good Hope, and every soul on board perished; her consort weathered the gale, and arrived soon after at the Cape. Having refitted, and returning to Europe, they were assailed by a violent tempest nearly in the same latitude. In the night watch some of the people saw, or imagined they saw, a vessel standing for them under a press of sail, as though she would run them down; one in particular affirmed it was the ship that had foundered in the former gale, and that it must certainly be her, or the apparition of her; but on its clearing up, the object (a dark thick cloud) disappeared. Nothing could do away the idea of this phenomenon on the minds of the sailors; and, on their relating the circumstances when they arrived in port, the story spread like wildfire, and the supposed phantom was called the Flying Dutchman. From the Dutch the English seamen got the infatuation, and there are very few Indiamen, but what has someone on board, who pretends to have seen the apparition. About two in the morning I was waked by a violent shake by the shoulder, when, starting up in my hammock, I saw the boatswain, with evident signs of terror and dismay in his countenance, standing by me. "For God's sake, messmate," said he, "hand us the key of the case, for by the Lord I'm damnably scarified; for, d'ye see, I was just looking over the weather bow, what should I see but the Flying Dutchman coming right down upon us, with everything set -- I know 'twas she -- I cou'd see all her lower-deck ports up, and the lights fore and aft, as if cleared for action. Now as how, d'ye see, I am sure no mortal ship could bear her lower-deck ports up and pot founder in this here weather. Why, the sea runs mountains high. It must certainly be the ghost of that there Dutchman, that foundered in this latitude, and which, I have heard say, always appears in this here quarter, in hard gales of wind." After taking a good pull or two at the Holland's [a bottle], he grew a little composed, when I jokingly asked him if he was afraid of ghosts? "Why, as to that, d'ye see," said he, "I think as how I'm as good as another man; but I'd always a terrible antipathy to those things. Even when I was a boy, I never could find it in my heart to cross a churchyard in the dark without whistling and hallooing, to make them believe I had company with me, for I've heard say they appear but to one at a time; for now, when I called to Joe Jackson, who was at the helm, to look over the weather bow, he saw nothing; tho', ask how, I saw it as plain as this here bottle," taking another swig at the Geneva. Having some curiosity to see if I could make out anything that could take such an appearance, I turned out, and accompanied him upon deck; but it had cleared up, the moon shining very bright, and not a cloud to be seen; though, by what I could learn from the rest of the people who were on deck, it had been very cloudy about half an hour before, of course I easily divined what kind of phantom had so alarmed my messmate. Source: George Barrington, A Voyage to New South Wales (London, 1795), pp. 45-47 . Return to the table of contents . A Common Superstition of Mariners Scotland, 1803 It is a common superstition of mariners, that, in the high southern latitudes on the coast of Africa, hurricanes are frequently ushered in by the appearance of a specter-ship, denominated the Flying Dutchman. At dead of night, the luminous form of a ship slides rapidly, with topsails flying, and sailing straight in "the wind's eye." The crew of this vessel are supposed to have been guilty of some dreadful crime in the infancy of navigation, and to have been stricken with the pestilence. They were hence refused admittance into every port, and are ordained still to traverse the ocean on which they perished, till the period of their penance expire. Source: John Leyden, Scenes of Infancy: Descriptive of Teviotdale (Edinburgh: Printed by James Ballantyne for T. N. Longman and O. Reese, 1803), pp. 175-76 . Return to the table of contents . Written on Passing Dead-Man's Island* In the Gulf of St Lawrence, Late in the Evening, Sept. 1804. Thomas Moore, 1804 See you, beneath yon cloud so dark, Fast gliding along, a gloomy bark? Her sails are full, though the wind is still, And there blows not a breath her sails to fill! Oh! what doth that vessel of darkness bear? The silent calm of the grave is there, Save now and again a death-knell rung, And the flap of the sails, with night-fog hung! There lieth a wreck on the dismal shore Of cold and pitiless Labrador; Where, under the moon, upon mounts of frost, Full many a mariner's bones are tost! Yon shadowy bark hath been to that wreck, And the dim blue fire, that lights her deck, Doth play on as pale and livid a crew, As ever yet drank the church-yard dew! To Dead-Man's Isle, in the eye of the blast, To Dead-Man's Isle, she speeds her fast; By skeleton shapes her sails are furl'd, And the hand that steers is not of this world! Oh! hurry thee on -- oh! hurry thee on, Thou terrible bark! ere the night be gone, Nor let morning look on so foul a sight As would blanch for ever her rosy light! *This is one of the Magdalen Islands, and, singularly enough, is the property of Sir Isaac Coffin. The above lines were suggested by a superstition very common among sailors, who call this ghost ship, I think, "The Flying Dutchman." Source (books.google.com): Thomas Moore, The Poetical Works of Thomas Moore (Edinburgh and London: Gall and Inglis, 1870), p. 279 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Moore, The Poetical Works of Thomas Moore (Edinburgh and London: Gall and Inglis, 1870), p. 279 . Return to the table of contents . The Dæmon-Frigate Sir Walter Scott, 1813 This is an allusion to a well-known nautical superstition concerning a fantastic vessel, called by sailors the Flying Dutchman, and supposed to be seen about the latitude of the Cape of Good Hope. She is distinguished from earthly vessels by bearing a press of sail when all others are unable, from stress of weather, to show an inch of canvass. The cause of her wandering is not altogether certain; but the general account is, that she was originally a vessel loaded with great wealth, on board of which some horrid act of murder and piracy had been committed; that the plague broke out among the wicked crew who had perpetrated the crime, and that they sailed in vain from port to port, offering, as the price of shelter, the whole of their ill-gotten wealth; that they were excluded from every harbour, for fear of the contagion which was devouring them, and that, as a punishment of their crimes, the apparition of the ship still continues to haunt those seas in which the catastrophe took place, and is considered by the mariners as the worst of all possible omens. Source (books.google.com): Sir Walter Scott, "Notes to Canto Second," Rokeby: A Poem (Boston: Brandford and Read, 1813), note 9, pp. 199-201 . Source (Internet Archive): Sir Walter Scott, "Notes to Canto Second," Rokeby: A Poem (Edinburgh: James Ballantyne and Company, 1813), note 9, pp. 231-32 . Return to the table of contents . Vanderdecken's Message Home Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine , 1821) Our ship, after touching at the Cape, went out again, and soon losing sight of the Table Mountain, began to be assailed by the impetuous attacks of the sea, which is well known to be more formidable there than in most parts of the known ocean. The day had grown dull and hazy, and the breeze, which had formerly blown fresh, now sometimes subsided almost entirely, and then recovering its strength, for a short time, and changing its direction, blew with temporary violence, and died away again, as if exercising a melancholy caprice. A heavy swell began to come from the southeast. Our sails flapped against the masts, and the ship rolled from side to side, as heavily as if she had been water-logged. There was so little wind that she would not steer. At two p.m. we had a squall, accompanied by thunder and rain. The seamen, growing restless, looked anxiously ahead. They said we would have a dirty night of it, and that it would not be worth while to turn into their hammocks. As the second mate was describing a gale he had encountered off Cape Race, Newfoundland, we were suddenly taken all aback, and the blast came upon us furiously. We continued to scud under a double reefed mainsail and foretopsail till dusk; but, as the sea ran high, the captain thought it safest to bring her to. The watch on deck consisted of four men, one of whom was appointed to keep a lookout ahead, for the weather was so hazy, that we could not see two cables' length from the bows. This man, whose name was Tom Willis, went frequently to the bows, as if to observe something; and when the others called to him, inquiring what he was looking at, he would give no definite answer. They therefore went also to the bows, and appeared startled, and at first said nothing. But presently one of them cried, "William, go call the watch." The seamen, having been asleep in their hammocks, murmured at this unseasonable summons, and called to know how it looked upon deck. To which Tom Willis replied, "Come up and see. What we are minding is not on deck, but ahead." On hearing this, they ran up without putting on their jackets, and when they came to the bows there was a whispering. One of them asked, "Where is she? I do not see her." To which another replied, "The last flash of lightning showed there was not a reef in one of her sails; but we, who know her history, know that all her canvass will never carry her into port." By this time, the talking of the seamen had brought some of the passengers on deck. They could see nothing, however, for the ship was surrounded by thick darkness, and by the noise of the dashing waters, and the seamen evaded the questions that were put to them. At this juncture the chaplain came on deck. He was a man of grave and modest demeanor, and was much liked among the seamen, who called him Gentle George. He overheard one of the men asking another, if he had ever seen the Flying Dutchman before, and if he knew the story about her. To which the other replied, "I have heard of her beating about in these seas. What is the reason she never reaches port?" The first speaker replied, "They give different reasons for it, but my story is this: She was an Amsterdam vessel, and sailed from that port seventy years ago. Her master's name was Vanderdecken. He was a staunch seaman, and would have his own way, in spite of the devil. For all that, never a sailor under him had reason to complain; though how it is on board with them now, nobody knows. The story is this, that in doubling the Cape, they were a long day trying to weather the Table Bay, which we saw this morning. However, the wind headed them, and went against them more and more, and Vanderdecken walked the deck, swearing at the wind. Just after sunset, a vessel spoke him, asking if he did not mean to go into the Bay that night. Vanderdecken replied, 'May I be eternally d__d if I do, though I should beat about here till the day of judgment!' And to be sure, Vanderdecken never did go into that bay; for it is believed that he continues to beat about in these seas still, and will do so long enough. This vessel is never seen but with foul weather along with her." To which another replied, "We must keep clear of her. They say that her captain mans his jolly boat, when a vessel comes in sight, and tries hard to get alongside, to put letters on board, but no good comes to them who have communication with him." Tom Willis said, "There is such a sea between us at present, as should keep us safe from such visits." To which the other answered, "We cannot trust to that, if Vanderdeckcn sends out his men." Some of this conversation having been overheard by the passengers, there was a commotion among them. In the meantime, the noise of the waves against the vessel, could scarcely be distinguished from the sounds of the distant thunder. The wind had extinguished the light in the binnacle, where the compass was, and no one could tell which way the ship's head lay. The passengers were afraid to ask questions, lest they should augment the secret sensation of fear which chilled every heart, or learn any more than they already knew. For while they attributed their agitation of mind to the state of the weather, it was sufficiently perceptible that their alarms also arose from a cause which they did not acknowledge. The lamp at the binnacle being re-lighted, they perceived that the ship lay closer to the wind than she had hitherto done, and the spirits of the passengers were somewhat revived. Nevertheless, neither the tempestuous state of the atmosphere, nor the thunder had ceased; and soon a vivid flash of lightning showed the waves tumbling around us, and, in the distance, the Flying Dutchman scudding furiously before the wind, under a press of canvass. The sight was but momentary , but it was sufficient to remove doubt from the minds of the passengers. One of the men cried aloud, "There she goes, top-gallants and all." The chaplain had brought up his prayer book, in order that he might draw from thence something to fortify and tranquillize the minds of the rest. Therefore, taking his seat near the binnacle, so that the light shone upon the white leaves of the book, he, in a solemn tone, read out the service for those distressed at sea. The sailors stood round with folded arms, and looked as if they thought it would be of little use. But this served to occupy the attention of those on deck for a while. In the meantime, the flashes of lightning becoming less vivid, showed nothing else, far or near, but the billows weltering round the vessel. The sailors seemed to think that they had not yet seen the worst, but confined their remarks and prognostications to their own circle. At this time, the captain, who had hitherto remained in his birth, came on deck, and, with a gay and unconcerned air, inquired what was the cause of the general dread. He said he thought they had already seen the worst of the weather, and wondered that his men had raised such a hubbub about a capful of wind. Mention being made of the Flying Dutchman, the captain laughed. He said he would like very much to see any vessel carrying top-gallant-sails in such a night, for it would be a sight worth looking at. The chaplain, taking him by one of the buttons of his coat, drew him aside, and appeared to enter into serious conversation with him. While they were talking together the captain was heard to say, "Let us look to our own ship, and not mind such things," and accordingly, he sent a man aloft, to see if all was right about the foretop-sail yard, which was chafing the mast wit a loud noise. It was Tom Willis who went up; and when he came down, he said that all was tight, and that he hoped it would soon get clearer; and that they would see no more of what they were most afraid of. The captain and first mate were heard laughing loudly together, while the chaplain observed, that it would be better to repress such unseasonable gaiety. The second mate, a native of Scotland, whose name was Duncan Saunderson, having attended one of the university classes at Aberdeen, thought himself too wise to believe all that the sailors said, and took part with the captain. He jestingly told Tom Willis, to borrow his grandam's spectacles the next time he was sent to keep a lookout ahead. Tom walked sulkily away, muttering, that he would nevertheless trust to his own eyes till morning, and accordingly took his station at the bow, and appeared to watch as attentively as before. The sound of talking soon ceased, for many returned to their births, and we heard nothing but the clanking of the ropes upon the masts, and the bursting of the billows ahead, as the vessel successively took the seas. But after a considerable interval of darkness, gleams of lightning began to reappear. Tom Willis suddenly called out, "Vanderdecken, again! Vanderdecken, again! I see, them letting down a boat." All who were on deck ran to the bows. The next flash of lightning shone far and wide over the raging sea, and showed us not only the Flying Dutchman at a distance, but also a boat coming from her with four men. The boat was within two cables' length of our ship's side. The man who first saw her, ran to the captain, and asked whether they should hail her or not. The captain, walking about in great agitation, made no reply. The first mate cried, "Who's going to heave a rope to that boat?" The men looked at each other without offering to do anything. The boat had come very near the chains, when Tom Willis called out, "What do you want, or what devil has blown you here in such weather?" A piercing voice from the boat replied in English, "We want to speak with your captain." The captain took no notice of this, and Vanderdecken's boot having come close alongside, one of the men came upon deck, and appeared like a fatigued and weather-beaten seaman, holding some letters in his hand. Our sailors all drew back. The chaplain, however, looking steadfastly upon him, went forward a few steps, and asked, "What is the purpose of this visit?" The stranger replied, "We have long been kept here by foul weather, and Vanderdecken wishes to send these letters to his friends in Europe." Our captain now came forward, and said as firmly as he could, "I wish Vanderdecken would put his letters on board of any other vessel rather than mine." The stranger replied, "We have tried many a ship, but most of them refuse our letters." Upon which, Tom Willis muttered, "It will be best for us if we do the same, for they say, there is sometimes a sinking weight in your paper." The stranger took no notice of this, but asked where we were from. On being told that we were from Portsmouth, he said, as if with strong feeling, "Would that you had rather been from Amsterdam. Oh that we saw it again! -- We must see our friends again." When he uttered these words, the men who were in the boat below, wrung their hands, and cried in a piercing tone, in Dutch, "Oh that we saw it again! We have been long here beating about; but we must see our friends again." The chaplain asked the stranger, "How long have you been at sea?" He replied, "We have lost our count; for our almanac was blown overboard. Our ship, you see, is there still; so why should you ask how long we have been at sea? for Vanderdecken only wishes to write home and comfort his friends." To which the chaplain replied, "Your letters, I fear, would be of no use in Amsterdam, even if they were delivered, for the persons to whom they are addressed are probably no longer to be found there, except under very ancient green turf in the churchyard." The unwelcome stranger then wrung his hands, and appeared to weep; and replied, "It is impossible. We cannot believe you. We have been long driving about here, but country nor relations cannot be so easily forgotten. There is not a raindrop in the air but feels itself kindred to all the rest, and they fall back into the sea to meet with each other again. How then, can kindred blood be made to forget where it came from? Even our bodies are part of the ground of Holland; and Vanderdecken says, if he once were come to Amsterdam, he would rather be changed into a stone post, well fixed into the ground, than leave it again; if that were to die elsewhere. But in the meantime, we only ask you to take these letters." The chaplain, looking at him with astonishment, said, "This is the insanity of natural affection, which rebels against all measures of time and distance." The stranger continued, "Here is a letter from our second mate, to his dear and only remaining friend, his uncle, the merchant who lives in the second house on Stuncken Yacht Quay." He held forth the letter, but no one would approach to take it. Tom Willis raised his voice, and said, "One of our men here says that he was in Amsterdam last summer, and he knows for certain, that the street called Stuncken Yacht Quay, was pulled down sixty years ago, and now there is only a large church at that place." The man from the Flying Dutchman, said, "It is impossible; we cannot believe you. Here is another letter from myself, in which I have sent a banknote to my dear sister, to buy some gallant lace, to make her a high headdress." Tom Willis hearing this, said, "It is most likely that her head now lies under a tombstone, which will outlast all the changes of the fashion. But on what house is your banknote?" The stranger replied, "On the house of Vanderbrucker and Company." The man, of whom Tom Willis had spoken, said, "I guess there will now be some discount upon it, for that banking house was gone to destruction forty years ago; and Vanderbrucker was afterwards a-missing. -- But to remember these things is like raking up the bottom of an old canal." The stranger called out passionately, "It is impossible. We cannot believe it! It is cruel to say such things to people in our condition. There is a letter from our captain himself, to his much-beloved and faithful wife, whom he left at a pleasant summer dwelling, on the border of the Haarlemer Mer. She promised to have the house beautifully painted and gilded before he came back, and to get a new set of looking-glasses for the principal chamber, that she might see as many images of Vanderdecken, as if she had six husbands at once." The man replied, "There has been time enough for her to have had six husbands since then; but were she alive still, there is no fear that Vanderdecken would ever get home to disturb her." On hearing this the stranger again shed tears, and said, if they would not take the letters, he would leave them; and looking around he offered the parcel to the captain, chaplain, and to the rest of the crew successively, but each drew back as it was offered, and put his hands behind his back. He then laid the letters upon the deck, and placed upon them a piece of iron, which was lying near, to prevent them from being blown away. Having done this, he swung himself over the gangway, and went into the boat. We heard the others speak to him, but the rise of a sudden squall prevented us from distinguishing his reply. The boat was seen to quit the ship's side, and, in a few moments, there were no more traces of her than if she had never been there. The sailors rubbed their eyes, as if doubting what they had witnessed, but the parcel still lay upon deck, and proved the reality of all that had passed. Duncan Saunderson, the Scotch mate, asked the captain if he should take them up, and put them in the letter bag. Receiving no reply, he would have lifted them if it had not been for Tom Willis, who pulled him back, saying that nobody should touch them. In the meantime the captain went down to the cabin, and the chaplain having followed him, found him at his bottle-case, pouring out a large dram of brandy. The captain, although somewhat disconcerted, immediately offered the glass to him, saying, "Here, Charters, is what is good in a cold night." The chaplain declined drinking anything, and the captain having swallowed the bumper, they both returned to the deck, where they found the seamen giving their opinions concerning what should be done with the letters. Tom Willis proposed to pick them up on a harpoon and throw it overboard. Another speaker said, "I have always heard it asserted that it is neither safe to accept them voluntarily, nor when they are left to throw them out of the ship." "Let no one touch them," said the carpenter. "The way to do with the letters from the Flying Dutchman is to case them upon deck, by nailing boards over them, so that if he sends back for them, they are still there to give him." The carpenter went to fetch his tools. During his absence, the ship gave so violent a pitch, that the piece of iron slid off the letters, and they were whirled overboard by the wind, like birds of evil omen whirring through the air. There was a cry of joy among the sailors, and they ascribed the favorable change which soon took place in the weather, to our having got quit of Vanderdecken. We soon got underway again. The night watch being set, the rest of the crew retired to their births. Source: "Vanderdecken's Message Home; or, The Tenacity of Natural Affection," Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine , vol. 9, no. 50 (May 1821), pp. 127-31 . Return to the table of contents . The Flying Dutchman South Africa I am reminded of that singular phenomenon which has been seen off the Cape, and usually termed the " Flying Dutchman," which few sailors who have navigated the Cape, disbelieve, and which most people are very sceptical respecting. The supposed origin of the "Flying Dutchman" is that a vessel from Batavia was on the point of entering Table Bay in stress of weather during the Dutch occupation os the Cape, when in the winter season, no vessel was allowed to enter the bay: the batteries fired on the distressed ship, and compelled it to put to sea, where it was lost, and as the sailors say has continued ever since beating about, and will continue to do so till the day of judgment. The " Dutchman " is said to appear generally to ships in a heavy gale, with all sail set -- and when the eastern navigator is in a calm, the Dutchman appears to be scudding under bare poles. As many persons think such an apparition the creation of fancy, I give the following statement which was noted down in the logbook of his Majesty's ship Leven , when employed with the Barracouta , &c, in surveying East Africa, and in the dangers and disaster of which squadron I participated. His Majesty's ship Leven , Capt. W. F. W. Owen, on the 6th April, 1823, when off Point Danger, on her voyage from Algoa to Simon's Bay, saw her consort the Barracouta about two miles to leeward; this was considered extraordinary as her sailing orders would have placed her in a different direction; but her peculiar rig left no doubt as to her identity, and at last many well known faces were distinctly visible looking towards the Leven . Capt. Owen attempted to close with her to speak, but was surprised that she not only made no effort to join the Leven , on the contrary stood away: being near the destined port, Capt. Owen did not follow her, and continued on his course to the Cape, but at sunset she was observed to heave to and lower a boat, apparently for the purpose of picking up a man overboard; during the night there was no light nor any symptoms of her locality. The next morning, the Leven anchored in Simon's Bay where for a whole week the Barracouta was anxiously expected. On her arrival (the 14th) it was seen by her log, that she was 300 miles from the Leven , when the latter thought she saw her, and had not lowered any boat that evening; it should also be remarked that no other vessel of the same class was ever seen about the Cape. On another occasion a similar phenomenon was witnessed by the Leven , and a boat was apparently lowered as is generally the case when the phantom seeks to lure his victim. The veteran sailor was not however, to be caught,* and the Leven after many perils, reached England in safety. *It is said that any vessel which the "Dutchman" can get his letters on board of is certain to be lost. Thrice as a passenger in a merchant ship, I saw a vessel in nearly similar circumstances: on one occasion we hoisted lights over the gang-way to speak with the stranger; the third time was my recent return from India. We had been in "dirty weather," as the sailors say, for several days, and to beguile the afternoon I commenced after dinner narrating to the French officers and passengers (who were strangers to the Eastern seas), the stories current about the "Flying Dutchman." The wind, which had been freshening during the evening, now blew a stiff gale, and we proceeded on deck to see the crew make our bark all snug for the night. The clouds, dark and heavy, coursed with rapidity across the moon, whose lustre is peculiar in the S. hemisphere, and we could see a distance of from eight to ten miles on the horizon. Suddenly the second officer, a fine Marseilles sailor, who had been among the foremost in the cabin in laughing at and ridiculing the story of the "Flying Dutchman," ascended the weather rigging, exclaiming, " Voila le volant Hollandais! " The captain sent for his night glass, and soon observed, "It is very strange, but there is a ship bearing down upon us with all sail set, while we dare scarcely show a pocket-handkerchief to the breeze." In a few minutes the stranger was visible to all on deck; her rig plainly discernible, and people on her poop; she seemed to near us with the rapidity of lightning, and apparently wished to pass under our quarter, as if for the purpose of speaking. The captain, a resolute Bordeaux mariner, said it was quite incomprehensible, and sent for the trumpet to hail or answer, when in an instant, and while we were all standing on the qui vive , the stranger totally disappeared, and was no more seen. I give this, coupled with Capt. Owen's statement as regards H. M. S. Leven , without remark, and, but that it would seem frivolous, could relate several other instances. The reader will, I hope, excuse this digression, which could not well be avoided in treating of the Cape of Good Hope, whose name is almost associated with that of the "Flying Dutchman." Source (books.google.com): R. Montgomery Martin, History of the British Colonies , vol. 4: Possessions in Africa and Austral-Asia (London: James Cochrane and Company, 1835), pp. 57-59 . Source (Internet Archive): R. Montgomery Martin, History of the British Colonies , vol. 4: Possessions in Africa and Austral-Asia (London: James Cochrane and Company, 1835), pp. 57-59 . li>This account was reprinted in: Army and Navy Chronicle , vol. 3, no. 26 (Washington: December 29, 1836), p. 406 . Return to the table of contents . The Fable of the Flying Dutchman Heinrich Heine, The Memoirs of Herr von Schnabelewopski , 1833 You certainly know the fable of the Flying Dutchman. It is the story of an enchanted ship which can never arrive in port, and which since time immemorial has been sailing about at sea. When it meets a vessel, some of the unearthly sailors come in a boat and beg the others to take a packet of letters home for them. These letters must be nailed to the mast, else some misfortune will happen to the ship -- above all if no Bible be on board, and no horseshoe nailed to the foremast. The letters are always addressed to people whom no one knows, and who have long been dead, so that some late descendant gets a letter addressed to a far away great-great-grandmother, who has slept for centuries in her grave. That wooden ghost, that spook-ship, is so called from the captain, a Dutchman, who once swore by all the devils that he would get round a certain mountain -- its name has escaped me -- in spite of a fearful storm, even if he would have to sail until Judgment Day. The devil took him at his word, therefore he must sail forever, until set free by a woman's loyalty. The devil, in his stupidity, has no faith in female loyalty, and allowed the enchanted captain to land once in seven years and get married, and thus find opportunities to save his soul. The poor Dutchman! He often has been only too glad to escape from his marriage and his wife-savior, and get on board again. The play which I saw in Amsterdam [in the year 1827] was based on this fable. Another seven years have passed; the poor Dutchman is more weary than ever of his endless wandering; he comes ashore, befriends a Scottish nobleman, to whom he sells diamonds at an unbelievably low price, and when he hears that his customer has a beautiful daughter, he asks for her hand in marriage. This bargain is agreed to as well. Next we see the Scotsman's home; with an anxious heart the maiden awaits the bridegroom. With melancholy she often looks up at a large, time-worn picture which hangs in the hall, and depicts a handsome man in Spanish-Dutch clothing. It is an old heirloom, and according to her grandmother, it is a true portrait of the Flying Dutchman as he was seen in Scotland a hundred years earlier, in the time of William of Orange. A warning connected to this portrait has been passed down as well: that the women of the family must beware of the person depicted in the painting. This warning has naturally enough had the result of deeply impressing the features of the dangerous man in the picture in the girl's mind, from her childhood onward. Therefore, when the authentic Flying Dutchman makes his appearance, she is startled, but not from fear. He too is moved when he sees the portrait. But when he is told who it represents, he tactfully turns aside all suspicion, makes fun of the superstition, and ridicules the Flying Dutchman, the Wandering Jew of the Ocean. Nevertheless, now in a melancholy mood, he relates how the gentleman must be suffering horribly out there on the endless waves, how his body is nothing other than a coffin of flesh in which is soul in imprisoned, how life and death alike reject him, like an empty cask scornfully cast ashore by the sea, then contemptuously again set adrift. He further muses that the poor Dutchman's agony must be as deep as the sea on which he sails -- cast between life and death, his ship without anchor, and his heart without hope. I believe that these were, more or less, the words with which the bridegroom ends. The bride looks at him earnestly, now and then casting glances at his portrait. It seems seems that she has guessed his secret; and when he afterwards asks, "Katherine, will you be true to me?" she answers with resolve, "True to death." ............ [Following the intermission] I returned to my seat in the theater just in time to see the play's last scene. The Flying Dutchman's wife is standing on a high cliff above the sea wringing her hands in despair, while her unhappy husband is seen on the deck of his unearthly ship, tossing on the waves. He loves her, and will leave her lest she be lost with him. He confesses to her his dreadful destiny, and the cruel curse which hangs above his head. She cries aloud, "I was true to you to this hour, and I know how to be true unto death! Saying this she throws herself into the waves, and the enchantment is ended. The Flying Dutchman is redeemed, and we see the ghostly ship slowly sink into the depths of the sea. Source: The Memoirs of Herr von Schnabelewopski , ch. 7, The Works of Heinrich Heine , translated from the german by Charles Godfrey Leland (Hans Breitmann), vol. 1 (London: William Heinemann, 1903), pp. 130-36 . Translation corrected and revised by D. L. Ashliman. © 2013. Link to the German-language original: Die Fabel von dem fliegenden Holländer . The play that Heine ostensibly saw in Amsterdam has not been identified. This short sketch by Heinrich Heine served as the impetus for Richard Wagner's opera Der fliegende Holländer (first performed in 1843). Return to the table of contents . The Flying Dutchman of the Tappan Sea Washington Irving The Tappan Sea ... was said to be haunted. Often in the still twilight of a summer evening, when the sea would be as glass, and the opposite hills would throw their purple shadows half across it, a low sound would be heard as of the steady, vigorous pull of oars, though not a boat was to be descried. Some might have supposed that a boat was rowed along unseen under the deep shadows of the opposite shores; but the ancient traditionists of the neighborhood knew better. Some said it was one of the whale-boats of the old Water Guard, sunk by the British ships during the war, but now permitted to haunt its old cruising-grounds; but the prevalent opinion connected it with the awful fate of Rambout van Dam of graceless memory. He was a roistering Dutchman of Spiting Devil, who in times long past had navigated his boat alone one Saturday the whole length of the Tappan Sea, to attend a quilting frolic at Kakiat, on the western shore. Here he had danced and drunk until midnight, when he entered his boat to return home. He was warned that he was on the verge of Sunday morning; but he pulled off nevertheless, swearing he would not land until he reached Spiting Devil, if it took him a month of Sundays. He was never seen afterwards; but may be heard plying his oars, as above mentioned, -- being the Flying Dutchman of the Tappan Sea, doomed to ply between Kakiat and Spiting Devil until the day of judgment. Source (books.google.com): Washington Irving, Wolfert's Roost and Other Papers (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1865), p. 28 . Source (Internet Archive): Washington Irving, Wolfert's Roost and Other Papers (New York: G. P. Putnam and Company, 1855), p. 23 . Return to the table of contents . The Rotterdam Scotland Once upon a time a wicked sea captain built a ship in which he sailed the high seas, and hoped to conquer the world. When she was launched and manned he called her "the Rotterdam," and he said, "I now fear nor God nor man." His ship was so large that on her deck there was a garden of fruits and flowers, besides sheep, and milch kine, and provisions of all sorts. He was ignorant of the navigation of the Dernoch Firth, but he tried to enter it, in the hopes of some northwest passage. He ran his ship on the quicksands of the Gizzen Brigs, and there where she sank the fisherman can still see her topgallant, and her bargee, flying and fluttering in the waves. Her crew and her captain must be still alive, for in calm weather they may be heard praying and singing psalms to avert the judgment of the Last Day, when the master of the Rotterdam will be punished. This recalls the account of Vanderdecken's attempt to double the Cape, and the legend of the "Flying Dutchman." Source (books.google.com): Miss Dempster, "The Folk-Lore of Sutherlandshire," The Folk-Lore Journal , vol. 6, part 3 (July to September 1888), pp. 154-55 . Source (Internet Archive): Miss Dempster, "The Folk-Lore of Sutherlandshire," The Folk-Lore Journal , vol. 6, part 3 (July to September 1888), pp. 154-55 . Dempster's source: "I gathered these tales and sayings from the mouths of the folk in the summer of 1859." Return to the table of contents . The Spectre Ship of Porthcurno England Porthcurno Cove is situated a little to the west of the Logan Stone. There, as in nearly all the coves around the coast, once existed a small chapel or oratory, which appears to have been dedicated to St. Leven. There exists now a little square enclosure about the size of a ( bougie ) sheep's house, which is all that remains of this little holy place. Looking up the valley, (Bottom,) you may see a few trees, with the chimney-tops and part of the roof of an old-fashioned house. That place is Raftra, where they say St. Leven Church was to have been built; but as fast as the stones were taken there by day, they were removed by night to the place of the present church. (These performances are usually the act of the devil, but I have no information as to the saint or sinner who did this work.) Raftra House, at the time it was built, was the largest mansion west of Penzance. It is said to have been erected by the Tresillians, and, ere it was finished, they appear to have been obliged to sell house and lands for less than it had cost them to build the house. This valley is in every respect a melancholy spot, and during a period of storms, or at night, it is exactly the place which might well be haunted by demon revellers. In the days of the saint from whom the parish has its name -- St. Leven -- he lived a long way up from the cove, at a place called Bodelan, and his influence made that, which is now so dreary, a garden. By his pure holiness he made the wilderness a garden of flowers, and spread gladness where now is desolation. Few persons cared to cross that valley after nightfall; and it is not more than thirty years since that I had a narrative from an inhabitant of Penberth, that he himself had seen the spectre ship sailing over the land. This strange apparition is said to have been observed frequently, coming in from sea about nightfall, when the mists were rising from the marshy ground in the Bottoms. Onward came the ill-omened craft. It passed steadily through the breakers on the shore, glided up over the sands, and steadily pursued its course over the dry land, as if it had been water. She is described to have been a black, square-rigged, single-masted affair, usually, but not always, followed by a boat. No crew was ever seen. It is supposed they were below, and that the hatches were battened down. On it went to Bodelan, where St. Leven formerly dwelt. It would then steer its course to Chygwiden, and there vanish like smoke. Many of the old people have seen this ship, and no one ever saw it, upon whom some bad luck was not sure to fall. This ship is somehow connected with a strange man who returned from sea, and went to live at Chygwiden. It may be five hundred years since -- it may be but fifty. He was accompanied by a servant of foreign and forbidding aspect, who continued to be his only attendant; and this servant was never known to speak to any one save his master. It is said by some they were pirates; others make them more familiar, by calling them privateers; while some insist upon it they were American bucaneers. Whatever they may have been, there was but little seen of them by any of their neighbours. They kept a boat at Porthcurno Cove, and at daylight they would start for sea, never returning until night, and not unfrequently remaining out the whole of the night, especially if the weather was tempestuous. This kind of sea-life was varied by hunting. It mattered not to them whether it was day or night; when the storm was loudest, there was this strange man, accompanied either by his servant or by the devil, and the midnight cry of his dogs would disturb the country. This mysterious being died, and then the servant sought the aid of a few of the peasantry to bear his coffin to the churchyard. The corpse was laid in the grave, around which the dogs were gathered, with the foreigner in their midst. As soon as the earth was thrown on the coffin, man and dogs disappeared, and, strange to say, the boat disappeared at the same moment from the cove. It has never since been seen; and from that day to this no one has been able to keep a boat in Porthcurno Cove. Source (books.google.com): Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , second series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 141-43 . Source (Internet Archive): Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , second series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 141-43 . Return to the table of contents . We Meet the Flying Dutchman The Cruise of Her Majesty's Ship "Bacchante," 1881 July 11th, [1881] -- At 4:00 a.m. the Flying Dutchman crossed our bows. A strange red light as of a phantom ship all aglow, in the midst of which light the masts, spars, and sails of a brig 200 yards distant stood out in strong relief as she came up on the port bow. The lookout man on the forecastle reported her as close on the port bow, where also the officer of the watch from the bridge clearly saw her, as did also the quarterdeck midshipman, who was sent forward at once to the forecastle; but on arriving there no vestige nor any sign whatever of any material ship was to be seen either near or right away to the horizon, the night being clear and the sea calm. Thirteen persons altogether saw her, but whether it was Van Diemen or the Flying Dutchman or who else must remain unknown. ............ The Tourmaline and Cleopatra , who were sailing on our starboard bow, flashed to ask whether we had seen the strange red light. At 6:15 a.m. observed land (Mount Diana) to the northeast. At 10:45 a.m. the ordinary seaman who had this morning reported the Flying Dutchman fell from the foretopmast crosstrees on to the topgallant forecastle and was smashed to atoms. At 4:15 p.m. after quarters we hove to with the head-yards aback, and he was buried in the sea. He was a smart royal yardman, and one of the most promising young hands in the ship, and every one feels quite sad at his loss. (At the next port we came to the Admiral also was smitten down). Source: The Cruise of Her Majesty's Ship "Bacchante" 1879-1882 . Compiled from the private journals, letters, and note-books of Prince Albert Victor and Prince George of Wales, with additions by John N. Dalton, vol. 1 (London: Macmillan and Company, 1886.), p. 551 . Return to the table of contents . The Phantom Ship James William Buel The Phantom Ship The tale of the Phantom Vessel is the best known and most poetical of all the nautical legends. Novelists have used it, poets have embellished it, dramatists have put it on the boards with all the accessories of magnificent scenery, composers have made it familiar to the lovers of music in more than one famous opera. The story is told with variations by the sailors of every land, but a striking similarity exists in the main point of all the legends, -- in each the vessel is condemned to wander forever on account of a great crime committed by the captain. The commonly accepted version of the story is that given by [Augustin] Jal: An unbelieving Dutch captain, endeavoring to double Cape Horn against the force of a head wind, profanely swore that he would persist in his course in spite of the decrees of Providence. Undeterred by the remonstrances of his crew, he laughed at their fears, made some of them, who threatened mutiny, walk the plank from the deck into the sea, and flogged others at the mast. Cries from suffering victims rose to heaven, and holy spirits swooped down before him and made merciful appeals to the enraged wretch, but at some he threw dishwater, at others he fired a pistol, and finally a voice from above proclaimed that on account of his blasphemy he should be condemned forever to sail the sea, the evil genius of sailors. Thus the appearance of the Flying Dutchman is ever dreaded as the forerunner of disaster. O'Reilly sings: Heaven help the ship near which the demon sailor steers, The doom of those is fixed to whom the Phantom Ship appears; They'll never reach their destined port, they'll see their homes no more; They who see the Flying Dutchman never, never reach the shore. In Pursuit of the Spectral Ship The Phantom Ship brings sudden squalls and howling tempests. She leads those who follow in her wake on to shoals, quicksands and reefs. She is the Purgatory of wicked sailors; her skeleton crew is composed of the souls of thieves, murderers, pirates who are condemned to everlasting toil, with no rest, no play, and very little food. The Phantom Ship is never seen twice under the same circumstances. By one she is beheld in the midst of the storm, with all sails set, placidly plowing her way through the wildest billows; by another, she is beheld on a calm night, with sails closely reefed, pitching and tumbling as though in a terrible storm. All the main features of the legend are detailed by [Frederick] Marryatt in his story of The Phantom Ship . In this remarkable sea-tale the incidents are told by her captain, who narrates his adventures from the time when, on account of impiety, he was condemned to wander, until, by the restoration of a relic, his aimless voyages came to an end. The dramatic feature of the tale lies in the fact that the captain's son undertakes his redemption, and filled with a filial purpose follows the Phantom Ship to and fro over the watery waste. He sees her first in a cloud, just at sunset, and his ship approaches so close to the spirit vessel that the whistles of the boatswain, the orders given on the decks, the rattling of the cordage are plainly heard. Again he beholds her in a good breeze, her hull enveloped in mist. A gun is fired from her bow; voices are heard and the trampling of the crew as they man the ropes, and she passes out of sight. Again he sees her as she decoys other vessels into dangerous waters, herself passing over the reef without altering her course, and at last she rises slowly out of the water, a demon ship, and awaits the coming of the boat sent by her pursuers. Ghostly Ships of Extraordinary Proportions The Flying Dutchman is not the only phantom vessel; the sailors of the olden time had many, some of gigantic size. The Frisians believed in a Phantom Ship so large that the captain rode about on horseback giving his orders; the sailors, who, as boys, started aloft to execute an order, came down as old men; in the rigging were dining-halls; the cabin was larger than all England. But even this mighty craft was a toy boat compared to the Chasse Foudre, "The Lightning Chaser," of old French mariners, which was so large that seven years were required to tack or change her course; when she rolled, whales were stranded on the shore; thirty thousand men were thirty years in digging the iron to make her hull. Her cables were as thick as the diameter of St. Peter's dome and so long that they could seven times encircle the globe; her lower masts were so tall that a boy grew white-headed before reaching the first yard; her smallest sail was larger than all Europe; twenty-five thousand soldiers could maneuvre on the cap which covered the top of the main-mast; in her forecastle was a garden larger than the whole of France; in every block of the rigging there was a tavern; every quid of tobacco used by one of her sailors would supply a frigate's crew for three years; a dram of grog was composed of seventeen hogsheads of rum, to say nothing of the water. These were stories of the olden times, when the Phantom Ship was in her prime; but within the last three centuries she gradually diminished in size, until sixty years ago she was no larger than an ordinary vessel. She still remained, however, a place of punishment for wicked sailors, and some who beheld her saw death-heads grinning from her ports, a skeleton captain walking her bridge, the corpse of a seaman on the lookout, and a ghost taking his trick at the wheel. She is sometimes inhabited by demons, who chastise the spirits of evil seamen with whips of scorpions; dogs are set to guard the prisoners and inflict ten thousand tortures on the hapless wretches; in her forecastle, cabin and hold, serpents, cats, hobgoblins, creeping things, all kinds of horrors abound. A Monk Who Visited the Islands of the Damned and the Blessed The Phantom Ship takes long voyages; visits strange countries. The lost continent of Atlantis is its frequent destination, although sometimes it lets fall its anchor at the Isles of the Blessed. According to tradition, these were located to the west of Ireland, but judiciously shifted their position as the sea became better known. They were, however, sometimes visited even by the living. St. Brandan, an Irish monk, started to explore them in a phantom boat, and after sailing twenty-four days and nights, came to an island of fiends and volcanoes, where whole fleets of phantom ships were at anchor in the harbor, and spectral sailors wandering to and fro on the shore. Such a spectacle as a monk had never before been seen on the island. He was attacked by the demons, and was only saved by the intercession of a saint more powerful than himself, who conducted him through the island, showed him all the torments in progress, and gave him material for a narrative closely resembling the story of Dante. Leaving this horrid island, after twentyfour days and nights he arrived at the Islands of the Blessed, which were filled with delights of every kind. No night was there, nor heat of the sun; pleasant prospects charmed the eye; soft music from unseen sources fascinated the ear; every flower was fragrant, every taste a pleasure. In this paradisaical place the good monk probably spent the remainder of his days, for we do not hear more of his adventures. Origin of the Ghostly Ship Since the ocean has been thoroughly explored and its lands located, the Islands of the Cursed and of the Blessed have alike disappeared, but not so the spectral ship; and it is a curious fact that science has supported the old sailor in his superstition by often presenting to the most skeptical a view of the phantom vessel. The mirage is more common on the water than on land, and it often happens that a vessel or fleet many miles distant is plainly in view of men on shore, or of mariners at sea. Too many instances are recorded to doubt the fact, and the observers are too cautious to be deceived. During Owen's travels he visited Port Danger, of the South Africa coast, and there he and all with him beheld in the offing the British man-of-war Barracouta . So plainly visible was the vessel that she was recognized by all on shore; even the figures on her deck were plainly to be seen. Some days after she arrived, when it was proven that she was three hundred miles away at the time her spectral counterpart sailed into the harbor and vanished. At Oporto, Lisbon, Marseilles, and other ports of Southern Europe, the phantoms of vessels are often seen during the summer season a day or two before their arrival; in the North Sea, the spectre of a ship upside down is a certain forerunner of bad weather. The Fata Morgana, a daily phenomenon in the Straits of Messina, shows the phantoms of vessels in all sorts of positions and with all kinds of distortion. Sometimes the ship is in the air; sometimes a double reflection is presented in the water; occasionally there are three images of the same vessel, two in the water and one in the air. The tropical seas are full of optical wonders. The Arctic Region abounds with reflected images; of icebergs, of mountains, of continents, of vessels. All these things have become familiar to the modern scientist, and for all a natural explanation has been found. The Flying Dutchman is not an optical delusion, but an optical reality, so the old sailor was right in one particular, the basis of the story; and, given a starting point, the rest was easy. A derelict bark, seen under circumstances of danger, perhaps gave rise to the supernatural appearance of the phantom; a vessel whose crew were all dead of the plague -- a slaver laden with fetid corpses -- gave the idea of the wandering ship haunted by the souls of the dead. The presence of electrical lights at the mast-heads, the brilliancy of the Aurora Borealis, the appearance of peculiar mists, the resonance of the air at certain times, did the rest and embellished the tale with all its fanciful and grotesquely horrible additions. A Real Flying Dutchman There was even a good reason why the wandering vessel should be a Dutchman. At the time the legend was crystallizing the Dutch were the best sailors in the world; cool, impassive, little prone to excitement, their remark able skill was naturally attributed to sorcery. It is even asserted that the Flying Dutchman was a real person, by name Bernard Fokke, of the seventeenth century. He was a reckless, daring seaman who, that he might carry the more sail in a high wind, cased his masts with iron. One voyage to India he made in ninety days, then an unprecedented rate of speed, and so rapidly did he traverse the water-world that even in his own time he was be lieved to be in league with Satan. But Bernard took one risk too many, and setting sail from Amsterdam with the expressed determination to beat his own record to India, was never afterwards heard of, and of course Satan took him and the ship and set them to travelling up and down the world to the be wilderment of better men. Dying Superstition The steamship dissipated the legend by taking away its most attractive feature, for the steam vessel, as easily as the phantom, can move against wind and tide. The use of better lights on board ship banished the ghosts, for it is well known that no ghost can stand the glare of an electric lamp. The old sailor himself will soon be as rare as his spectres, for with improved navigation come increased confidence and decreased credulity. The sailor no longer feels his way across the sea, but calculates exactly where he is, knows how far he has travelled, how far he has still to go. Every rock in the ocean is laid down on the maps, and the seaman knows exactly what course to take to secure the safety of his vessel. He has confidence in his ship, and in his ship's captain; the voyages of the present day are short in comparison to those of former years; appliances for the sailor's safety are more efficient than ever before; the hiss of escaping steam, the crashing of the propellers are a wonderful relief from the dead silence which once reigned over the deep. The sailor knows that on every headland in civilized countries around the globe a lamp blazes, warning him of danger; he hears the steam siren singing from every light-ship, but her voice is significant of peril, not an enticement to destruction. Fear, on eagle pinions, follows banished danger, and with whistle sounding and lights flashing from foretop and sides, with captain and first officer on the bridge, with second and third officers pacing the deck, with double lookout at the bow, the sailor plunges into the fog, forgetful of his phantoms. Source (books.google.com): James William Buel, Heroes of Unknown Seas and Savage Lands (San Francisco: Pacific Publishing Company, 1891), pp. 83-89 . Source (Internet Archive): James William Buel, Heroes of Unknown Seas and Savage Lands (San Francisco: Pacific Publishing Company, 1891), pp. 83-89 . Return to the table of contents . Links to additional texts Baring-Gould, Sabine. "Saint Virgilius and the Flying Dutchman," In Troubadour-Land: A Ramble in Provence and Languedoc (New York: James Pott and Company, 1891), pp. 72-73 . Bassett, Wilbur. "Notes of the Flying Dutchman and Punishment Ships," Wander-Ships: Folk-Stories of the Sea (Chicago: The Open Court Publishing Company, 1917), pp. 45-63 . Boston Symphony Orchestra. Program notes to The Flying Dutchman (1920), pp. 1247-1253 . Chambers's Journal (1894). "The Legend of the Phantom Ship," pp. 381-84 . Glascock, William Nugent. "Superstition of Seamen," Naval Sketch Book; or, The Service Afloat and Ashore , vol. 1 (London: Printed for the author, 1826), pp. 106-111 . St. Clair, Henry. "The Flying Dutchman," Evening Tales for the Winter: Being a Selection of Wonderful and Supernatural Stories , three volumes in one (New York: Richard Marsh, 1856), vol. 2, pp. 54-60 . Scudder, Horace E. "The Flying Dutchman," The Book of Legends Told Over Again , (Boston, New York, and Chicago: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1899), pp. 46-51 . Wright, Charlton, "The Phantom Ship; or, The Flying Dutchman," Tales of the Horrible; or, The Book of Spirits (London: Charlton Wright, 1837), pp. 49-56 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Wikipedia article The Flying Dutchmaan (legend). Wikipedia article The Flying Dutchman (opera by Richard Wagner). The Wandering Jew . Legends of type 777. Wild Huntsman Legends . Dishonest Plowman Legends . Return to the table of contents . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 22, 2021. The Foolish Friend: Folktales of Type 1586 The Foolish Friend and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1586 in which a fool kills an insect resting on someone's head, with catastrophic consequences, selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2014 Contents The Mosquito and the Carpenter (The Jataka Tales). The Foolish Friend (The Panchatantra). The Gardner and the Bear (Bidpai). The Stupid Boy (Sri Lanka). The Seven Wise Men of Buneyr (Pakistan). The Bald Man and the Fly (Aesop). The Bear and the Amateur of Gardening (Jean de La Fontaine). Fortunio (Italy, Giovanni Francesco Straparola). Giufà and the Judge (Italy). The Little Omelet (Italy). Permission Granted, but Probably Regreted (Switzerland). Foolish Hans (Austria-Hungary). The Blockhead and the Judge (England). The Tale of a Butter Tub (Iceland). The Seven Crazy Fellows (Philippines). The Monkeys and the Dragonflies (Philippines). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Mosquito and the Carpenter The Jataka Tales Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta gained his livelihood as a trader. In these days in a border village in Kasi there dwelt a number of carpenters. And it chanced that one of them, a bald gray-haired man, was planing away at some wood with his head glistening like a copper bowl, when a mosquito settled on his scalp and stung him with its dart like sting. Said the carpenter to his son, who was seated hard by, "My boy, there's a mosquito stinging me on the head. Do drive it away." "Hold still then father," said the son. "One blow will settle it." (At that very time the Bodhisatta had reached that village in the way of trade, and was sitting in the carpenter's shop.) "Rid me of it!" cried the father. "All right, father," answered the son, who was behind the old man's back, and, raising a sharp ax on high with intent to kill only the mosquito, he cleft his father's head in two. So the old man fell dead on the spot. Thought the Bodhisatta, who had been an eye witness of the whole scene, "Better than such a friend is an enemy with sense, whom fear of men's vengeance will deter from killing a man." And he recited these lines: Sense-lacking friends are worse than foes with sense; Witness the son that sought the gnat to slay, But cleft, poor fool, his father's skull in two. So saying, the Bodhisatta rose up and departed, passing away in after days to fare according to his deserts. And as for the carpenter, his body was burned by his kinsfolk. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 1, translated by Robert Chalmers (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895), book 1, no. 44, pp. 116-17 . The following Jataka story is very similar: no. 45, pp. 117-18 . Part of the canon of sacred Buddhist literature, this collection of some 550 anecdotes and fables depicts earlier incarnations -- sometimes as an animal, sometimes as a human -- of the being who would become Siddhartha Gautama, the future Buddha. Traditional birth and death dates of Gautama are 563-483 BC. The Jataka tales are dated between 300 BC and 400 AD. In spite of the collection's sacred and didactic nature, it nonetheless includes elements -- obviously derived from ancient folktales -- whose primary function is entertainment. Return to the table of contents . The Foolish Friend The Panchatantra A king, while visiting his wives' apartments, took a monkey from a neighboring stable for a pet. He kept him constantly close at hand for his amusement, for as it is said, parrots, partridges, doves, rams, monkeys, and such creatures are a king's natural companions. It goes without saying that the monkey, fed on the various dishes that the king gave him, grew large and was given respect by all who surrounded the king. Indeed, the king, due to his love and exceeding trust of the monkey, even gave him a sword to carry. In the vicinity of the palace the king had a grove artfully planted with many trees of various sorts. Early in the springtime the king noticed how beautiful the grove was. Its blossoms exuded a magnificent fragrance, while swarms of bees sang praise to the god of love. Thus overcome by love, he entered the grove with his favorite wife. He ordered all his servants to wait for him at the entrance. After having pleasantly strolling through and observing the grove, he grew tired and said to his monkey, "I want to sleep a little while in this arbor of flowers. Take care that nothing disturbs me!" Having said this, the king fell asleep. Presently a bee, pursuing the aroma of the flowers, betel, and musk, flew up and lit on his head. Seeing this, the monkey thought angrily, "What is this? Am I to allow this common creature to bite the king before my very eyes?" With that he proceeded to drive it away. However, in spite of the monkey's defense, the bee approached the king again and again. Finally, blinded by anger, the monkey drew his sword and struck down the bee with a single blow. However, the same blow also split the king's head. The queen, who was sleeping next to the king jumped up in terror. Seeing the crime, she said, "Oh, oh, you foolish monkey! What have you done to the king who placed such trust in you?" The monkey explained how it had happened, but thereafter he was shunned and scorned by everyone. Thus it is said, "Do not choose a fool for a friend, for the king was killed by a monkey." And I say, "It is better to have a clever enemy than a foolish friend." Source: The Panchatantra , book 1, story 12. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen , translated from the Sanskrit by Theodor Benfey, vol. 2 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), book 1, story 12, pp. 154-55 . Translation © 1999 by D. L. Ashliman. India's most influential contribution to world literature, the Panchatantra (also spelled Pañcatantra or Pañca-tantra ) consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled, in their current form, between the third and fifth centuries AD. It is believed that even then the stories were already ancient. The tales' self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes the Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai, which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of the Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced medieval writers of fables. Return to the table of contents . The Gardener and the Bear Bidpai In the eastern part of Persia there lived at one time a gardener whose one joy in life was his flowers and fruit trees. He had neither wife, nor children, nor friends; nothing except his garden. At length, however, the good man wearied of having no one to talk to. He decided to go out into the world and find a friend. Scarcely was he outside the garden before he came face to face with a bear, who, like the gardener, was looking for a companion. Immediately a great friendship sprang up between these two. The gardener invited the bear to come into his garden, and fed him on quinces and melons. In return for this kindness, when the gardener lay down to take his afternoon nap, the bear stood by and drove off the flies. One afternoon it happened that an unusually large fly alighted on the gardener's nose. The bear drove it off, but it only flew to the gardener's chin. Again the bear drove it away, but in a few moments it was back once more on the gardener's nose. The bear now was filled with rage. With no thought beyond that of punishing the fly, he seized a huge stone, and hurled it with such force at the gardener's nose that he killed not only the fly, but the sleeping gardener. It is better to have a wise enemy than a foolish friend. Source: The Tortoise and the Geese and other Fables of Bidpai , retold by Maude Barrows Dutton (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1908), pp. 22-23. Dutton's source appears to have been the Anvar-i-Suhaili , a Persion translation of the Panchatantra. According to Persian and Arabic traditions, the Panchatantra , was compiled by a man named Bidpai. Return to the table of contents . The Stupid Boy Sri Lanka In a certain city there are a Gamarala, a Gama-gaeni (his wife), and a son of theirs. The Gamarala went to the Chena. The Gama-gaeni lay down and told the Gama-puta (the son) to examine her head (for insects). While he was looking through the hair she fell asleep, and a fly settled on her head. "Ade! Fly, do not bite our mother's head," he said. "Mother will scold me." The fly having gone flying away, settled again on her head. Saying ,"Now then, this fly is biting mother's head again," he placed his mother's head gently on the ground. Then having gone and taken a rice pestle, and come back with it, he said, "Is the fly still biting the head?" and struck at the fly with the rice pestle, killing his mother with the blow. The boy's father having come, tried to arouse her. "How is it that mother is dead?" he asked. The boy said, "A fly was biting our mother's head. I struck it with the rice pestle. Because of it she died." So the Gamarala took the woman away and buried her. Source: H. Parker, Village Folk-Tales of Ceylon , vol. 1 (London: Luzac and Company, 1910), no. 58, p. 319 . This tale continues with additional episodes. Return to the table of contents . The Bald Man and the Fly Aesop A fly settled on the head of a bald man and bit him. In his eagerness to kill it, he hit himself a smart slap. But the fly escaped, and said to him in derision, "You tried to kill me for just one little bite; what will you do to yourself now, for the heavy smack you have just given yourself?" "Oh, for that blow I bear no grudge," he replied, "for I never intended myself any harm; but as for you, you contemptible insect, who live by sucking human blood, I'd have borne a good deal more than that for the satisfaction of dashing the life out of you!" Source: Æsop's Fables , translated by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: William Heinemann, 1916), p. 129 . Link to additional folktales about bald men . Return to the table of contents . The Seven Wise Men of Buneyr Pakistan Seven men of Buneyr once left their native wilds for the purpose of seeking their fortunes. When evening came they all sat down under a tree to rest, when one of them said, "Let us count to see if we are all here." So he counted, "One, two, three, four, five, six," but, quite omitting to reckon himself, he exclaimed, "There's one of us missing, we are only six!" "Nonsense!" cried the others, and the whole company of seven began counting with uplifted forefingers, but they all forgot to count themselves. Fearing some evil, they now rose up, and at once set out to search for their missing comrade. Presently they met a shepherd, who greeted them civilly and said, "Friends, why are you in such low spirits?" "We have lost one of our party," answered they; "we started this morning seven in number, and now we are only six. Have you seen any one of us hereabouts?" "But," said the shepherd, "seven you are, for I have found your lost companion; behold: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven! " "Ah," answered the wise men of Buneyr, "you have indeed found our missing brother. We owe you a debt of gratitude. Because you have done us this service, we insist on doing a month's free labor for you." So the shepherd, overjoyed with his good fortune, took the men home with him. Now, the shepherd's mother was a very old woman, in her dotage, utterly feeble and unable to help herself. When the morning came he placed her under the care of one of the Buneyris, saying to him, "You will stay here and take care of my old mother." To another Buneyri he said, "You take out my goats, graze them on the hills by day, and watch over them by night." To the other five he said, "As for you, I shall have work for you tomorrow." The man who was left in charge of the old crippled mother found that his time was fully occupied in the constant endeavor to drive off the innumerable flies which in that hot season kept her in a state of continual excitement and irritation. When, however, he saw that all his efforts were fruitless, and that he flapped the wretches away in vain, he became desperate, and, lifting up a large stone, he aimed it deliberately at a certain fly which had settled on the woman's face. Hurling it with all his might, he of course missed the fly, but, alas! he knocked the woman prone on her back. When the shepherd saw this he wrung his hands in despair. "Ah," cried he, "what has your stupidity done for me? The fly has escaped, but as for my poor old mother, you have killed her dead." Meanwhile, the second Buneyri led his flock of goats up and down among the hills, and when midday came he rested to eat his bread, while many of the assembled goats lay down beside him. As he was eating he began to observe how the goats were chewing the cud and occasionally looking at him So he foolishly imagined that they were mocking him, and waxed wroth. "So," cried he, "because I am taking my food, you must needs crowd round and make game of me, must you?" And, seizing his hatchet, he made a sudden rush at the poor animals, and he had already struck off the heads of several of them, when the shepherd came running to the spot, bemoaning his bad luck and crying to the fellow to desist from slaughter. That night was a sorrowful one for the trustful shepherd, and bitterly he repented his rashness. In the morning the remaining five wise men of Buneyr came to him, and said, "It is now our turn. Give us some work to do, too!" "No, no, my friends," answered he; "you have amply repaid me for the trifling favor I did for you in finding your missing companion; and now, for God's sake, go your way and let me see you no more." Hearing these words, the wise men of Buneyr resumed their journey. Source: Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot. Stock, 1892), no. 74, pp. 305-307 . The episode describing the fools' inability to count themselves is a type 1287 folktale . Return to the table of contents . The Bear and the Amateur of Gardening Jean de La Fontaine A certain mountain bruin once, they say, Was wont within a lonely wood to stray, A new Bellerophon secluded there, His mind had gone, and left his brain-pan bare. Reason on lonely people sheds no ray. It's good to speak -- better to silent stay: Both in excess are bad. No animal Was ever seen, or was within a call. Bear though he was, he wearied of this life, And longed for the world's joy and the world's strife. Then "Melancholy marked him for her own." Not far from him an old man lived alone. Dull as the bear, he loved his garden well; Was priest of Flora and Pomona; still, Though the employment's pleasant, a kind friend Is needfull, its full charms to it to lend. Gardens talk little, save in my small book. Weary at last of their mere smiling look, And those his dumb companions, one fine day, Our man set forth upon his lonely way, To seek a friend. The bear, with the same thought, Had left his mountain, satisfied with naught. By chance most strange the two adventurers meet At the same turning. He's afraid to greet The bear; but fly he can't. What can he do? Well, like a Gascon, he gets neatly through: Conceals his fright. The bear is not well bred; "Here is my cottage; pray come in, my lord;" Still growls, "Come see me!" but the other said, "Do me the honor at my frugal board To lunch al fresco . I have milk and fruit, That will, perhaps, your worship's pleasure suit For once, though not your ordinary fare. I offer all I have." With friendly air They're chums already before reaching home; Still better friends when there they've fairly come. In my opinion it's a golden rule: Better be lonely than be with a fool. The bear, who did not speak two words a day, Left the drudge there to work and toil away. Bruin went hunting, and brought in the game, Or flapped the blow-flies, when the blow-flies came; And kept from off his sleeping partner's face Of wingèd parasites the teasing race. One day a buzzer o'er the sleeping man Poised, and then settled on his nose -- their plan. The bear was crazy: all his chase was vain; "I'll catch you, thief!" he cried. It came again. 'Twas said, 'twas done: The flapper seized a stone, And launched it bravely -- bravely it was thrown. He crushed the fly, but smashed the poor man's skull -- A sturdy thrower, but a reasoner dull. Nothing's so dangerous as a foolish friend; Worse than a real wise foe, you may depend. Source: Jean de La Fontaine, Fables , translated into English verse by Walter Thornbury, book 10, fable 3. Like his contemporary Charles Perrault (1628-1703), Jean de La Fontaine (1621-1695) was a member of the Académie Française and a leading intellectual of his time. La Fontaine's 245 fables, published in twelve books between 1668 and 1694, exemplify the grace and wit of his age. Return to the table of contents . Fortunio Italy, Giovanni Francesco Straparola Fortunio, a servant, endeavoring to crush a fly, kills his master, and saves himself from the gallows by a pleasantry. There lived in the city of Ferrara a rich grocer of good descent, who had in his service Fortunio, a fat good-tempered fellow of very slender wit. Now in the great heats the grocer was wont to lie down to sleep in the middle of the day, and at such times it was Fortunio's part to keep off the flies with a fan, lest they should disturb his master. One day it chanced that, amongst the others, was a very greedy meddlesome horsefly, which took no heed of Fortunio's fanning, nor of his strokes, but alighted constantly on the grocer's bald pate and stung him grievously. And though the fly was chased away three or four times, it always came back to give fresh trouble. At last the servant, incensed at the boldness and persistency of the fly, rashly made trial to kill it when it was about to settle again on his master's temple and suck his blood. Simple fool that he was, he caught up a weighty bronze pestle, and, striking at the fly with all his might with the intent to kill it, he made an end of the grocer instead. As soon as Fortunio saw that he had slain his master and thereby made himself liable to death by the law, he took counsel with himself how he might best save his neck, and first resolved to seek safety in flight, but he afterwards fixed upon another scheme, which was to bury the corpse secretly. Therefore, having wrapped up the dead body of his master in a sack and carried it into a garden adjacent to the shop, he buried it there. This done he went to the sheepfold, and, having chosen a big old ram, he took it and threw it down the well. As the master did not appear at his usual hour in the evening the wife's suspicion fell upon Fortunio, and she questioned him as to her husband's whereabouts, but the fellow declared stoutly that he knew nothing of it. Then the good wife, overcome with grief, began to weep and to call for her husband aloud, but she called in vain. She went to her kinsfolk and told them her grief; whereupon they sought the governor of the city, and laid the crime to Fortunio's charge, demanding that he should be imprisoned and put to the question, in order to make him tell what had become of his master. The governor, having put the servant in hold and tied him to the rope, gave him the strappado as prescribed by law, on account of the charges against him. Handling of this sort was not to his taste, and he forthwith promised to tell all he knew, if they would let him down. So they brought him before the judge, and this was the cunning tale he had prepared for their befooling: "Yesterday, O judge! when I was asleep near the well, I was awakened by a great noise, as of some mighty rock being hurled down into the water below. In my amazement I ran to the well and looked into it, but the water was quite clear and I could see nothing amiss; so I turned to go back to the house, when the same noise again met my ears. I am now quite sure in my mind that my master, when trying to draw some water up out of the well, fell down into it. Now, that the truth of the matter may be laid bare, I make petition that all now present may go to the spot; then I will descend into the well and disclose what I may find therein." The judge was favorable to Fortunio's prayer, holding that experiment is the surest proof, and that no evidence can equal what is brought before one's eyes, and betook himself to the well, bidding the whole assembly follow. There went not only the worshipful persons who were about the judge, but also a vast crowd of the common people, who were curious to learn what might be the issue of the affair. Fortunio, obeying the commandment of the judge, went straightway down the well, and, when he had reached the bottom, made believe to be searching for his master's body in the water; but what he found was the carcass of the old ram which he himself had lately cast in. Feigning to be vastly amazed at this, the cunning fellow bawled up from the bottom of the well, "O my mistress! Tell me whether your husband, my poor master, had horns or not; for I have alighted on somebody down here who has got an enormous pair, both long and large. Is it possible that he can be your husband?" And when the good wife heard Fortunio's question she was so much overcome with shame that she could not find a word to say for herself. Meanwhile the bystanders waited, open-mouthed with curiosity, to set eyes on this corpse with horns, and to see whether it really was the body of the missing grocer or not; and when they saw hauled up Fortunio's old ram, they all clapped their hands, and were shaken by loud laughter. The judge, when he saw the issue of Fortunio's search, deemed that the foolish fellow was acting in good faith, and that he verily believed what he brought out of the well to be the remains of his master. On this account the judge let him go free, as innocent, but the grocer was never seen more, and the good wife, to her dying day, bore the shame anent the horns which Fortunio's cunning trick had cast upon her. Source: Giovanni Francesco Straparola, The Facetious Nights night 13, tale 4, in: The Italian Novelists , vol. 4 (London: Privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901), pp. 149-56 .) We know almost nothing about the personal life of Giovanni Francesco [also spelled Gianfrancesco] Straparola (ca. 1480 - ca. 1557). His two-volume work Le piacevoli notti (1550-1553), called in English The Facetious Nights of Straparola or simply The Nights of Straparola , contains some 75 novellas and fairy tales, some of oriental origin. Obviously patterning his collection after Boccaccio's Decamerone , Straparola depicts here thirteen nights of revelry in a luxurious villa on the island of Murano near Venice. The participants add to the entertainment by telling one another stories. Included are tales of magic and the supernatural as well as bawdy jokes and anecdotes. Straparola's work is one of Europe's earliest collections of stories based largely on folklore. Return to the table of contents . Giufà and the Judge Italy One day Giufà went out to gather herbs, and it was night before he returned. On his way back the moon rose through the clouds, and Giufà sat down on a stone and watched the moon appear and disappear behind the clouds, and he exclaimed constantly, "It appears, it appears! It sets, it sets!" Now there were near the way some thieves who were skinning a calf which they had stolen, and when they heard, "It appears, it sets!" they feared that the officers of justice were coming, so they ran away and left the meat. When Giufà saw the thieves running away, he went to see what it was and found the calf skinned. He took his knife and cut off flesh enough to fill his sack and went home. When he arrived there his mother asked him why he came so late. He said it was because he was bringing some meat which she was to sell the next day, and the money was to be kept for him. The next day his mother sent him into the country and sold the meat. In the evening Giufà returned and asked his mother, "Did you sell the meat?" "Yes, I sold it to the flies on credit." "When will they give you the money?" "When they get it." A week passed, and the flies brought no money, so Giufà went to the judge and said to him, "Sir, I want justice. I sold the flies meat on credit, and they have not come to pay me." The judge said, "I pronounce this sentence on them: Wherever you see them, you may kill them." Just then a fly lighted on the judge's nose, and Giufà dealt it such a blow that he broke the judge's head. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1885), no. 100, p. 293 . Crane adds the following note: The anecdote of the fly in the latter part of the story is found independently in a version from Palermo: The flies plagued Giufà and stung him. He sent to the judge and complained of them. The judge laughed and said, "Wherever you see a fly you can strike it." While the judge was speaking, a fly rested on his face and Giufà dealt it such a blow that he broke the judge's nose." The trickster Giufà, who is described elsewhere as "stupid, lazy, and cunning" (can one be both stupid and cunning?), is featured in many Italian folktales. His exploits compare to those of Germany's Till Eulenspiegel and Turkey's Hodja, to mention but two of his many counterparts in other nations. Return to the table of contents . The Little Omelet Italy Once upon a time there was a little woman who had a little room and a little hen. The hen laid an egg and the little woman took it and made a little omelet of it, and put it to cool in the window. Along came a fly and ate it up. Imagine what an omelet that must have been! The little woman went to the magistrate and told him her story. He gave her a club and told her to kill the fly with it wherever she saw it. At that moment a fly lighted on the magistrate's nose, and the woman, believing it to be the same fly, gave it a blow and broke the magistrate's nose. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1885), no. 101, p. 294 . Return to the table of contents . Permission Granted, but Probably Regreted Switzerland A peasant left a jug of milk with a neighbor for safekeeping. When he reclaimed the jug, the milk had disappeared. Angry words led to a lawsuit, and the judge decreed that the neighbor should pay for the milk, even though the latter claimed that the flies had consumed it. "You should have struck them dead," said the judge. "What?" replied the peasant, "You grant me permission to kill flies?" "Yes indeed," responded the judge. "You have my permission to kill them anywhere you find them." In that moment the peasant saw a fly on the judge's cheek. He stepped up to him and gave him a slap, saying, "I bet that cursed fly is one of those who drank up the milk!" Because of the permission he had granted the peasant, the judge could do nothing about the slap. Source: Leander Petzoldt, Deutsche Schwänke (Stuttgart: Philipp Reclam jun., 1979), no. 217, p. 228. Petzoldt's source: Der große historische Appenzeller Calender auf das Jahr 1824 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Return to the table of contents . Foolish Hans Austria-Hungary Once upon a time there was a poor peasant woman. She was a widow and had but one son. His name was Hans, and he was very stupid. It was summertime, and his mother gave him a large pot of honey, saying, "I am sending you to town to sell this, but don't let people say too much to you." She was afraid that people would bargain too much with him. Arriving in town, he cried out, "Buy my honey!" The people said, "How much does it cost?" He said, "You are saying too much to me." "Can't we at least ask how much it costs?" "No," he said, "you have already said too much," and he packed up and left town. Out in the country the flies and wasps swarmed around him, wanting his honey. "Buy my honey!" he said. They were not able to say anything to him, so he poured his honey out on the ground. "You'll have to pay me in a week," he said. Then he went home and told his mother, "I sold the honey and will get the money in a week." A week later he again set off for town. Because of the money for the honey he took along a stout cudgel. He arrived at the spot, and there were still bees and flies there licking up the little honey that was left. He said, "I want my money now," but they gave him nothing. "I'll make short work of this," he said. "I am reporting you to the judge." He went to the judge, who asked, "Just what do you want?" "The flies and wasps bought honey from me," he said, "and now they refuse to pay." The judge began to laugh, seeing that he was dealing with a real simpleton. "All I can tell you, is that whenever you see a fly you should strike it dead," he answered. Just then a fly flew onto the judge's nose, and Hans hit the fly on his nose. "Ouch, Jeez, my nose!" cried the judge. Then Hans said, "I was hitting at the fly, not at your nose." Then the judge thought, "He could kill someone if he sees a fly sitting on them. And who allowed it to happen? The judge, that's what people will say." So he asked, "How much did your honey cost?" "Three hundred florins," said Hans. So the judge wrote him a slip and sent him with it to the cashier, and when he received his money, he returned home. Source: J. R. Bünker, "Ta' tummi Håns," Schwänke, Sagen und Märchen in heanzischer Mundart (Leipzig: Deutsche Verlagsactiengesellschaft, 1906), no. 7, pp. 17-20 . Bünker's source: Tobias Kern, a street sweeper in Sopron (Ödenburg). Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. This story contains two additional episodes ( pp. 20-21 ). Return to the table of contents . The Blockhead and the Judge England Every schoolboy knows the story of the blockhead who complained to the judge of being annoyed with flies, and being told that he was at liberty to strike them wherever he saw them, observing a big "blue bottle" alight on the judge's nose, delivered a blow with his fist on that useful member, and smashed it as well as the fly. Source: W. A. Clouston, Popular Tales and Fictions: Their Migrations and Transformations , vol. 1 (Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1887), p. 55 . Clouston does not give this brief story a title. Additional examples are given on pages 55-57. Return to the table of contents . The Tale of a Butter Tub Iceland There lived a king and queen in their realm, and a carl and his old wife in their cottage. Once the carl and his old wife bought for themselves a barrel full of butter, which they intended to have for their household use during the winter, but now they were at a loss where to hide the barrel, that nobody should steal out of it. At last they agreed upon having it kept at the king's palace. They readily got the king to undertake the guarding of their tub, but its owner put it into its right place, and covered it as they thought fit. Now the autumn approached, and the old wife began to feel eager for some of the butter, and contrived at once a plan for getting her longing satisfied. One day, in fine weather, she was up early in the morning, and came in to her carl, saying she was called to the king's palace, to hold a child at baptism, wherefore she must go there. The carl said it was a matter of course. Now the old wife got ready in the greatest hurry and went to the king's palace. When she came there she said she should fetch a tiny slice of butter from the barrel. This everyone believed to be true, and she was let in to where the tub stood. Then the old woman took a great pat from the brim of the tub. After that she went home. Then asked the carl what had been the name of the child at the king's. The old woman answered, " Brimmy is hight [named] the well-shaped girl." When the old woman had finished what she had first taken of the butter, she said one morning to her husband, "Eh! I am called yet once again to the king's." "Well, go then," said the carl. The old woman went away, and said at the king's as formerly, that she should fetch butter from the barrel. And this time, the old dame took butter away down to the middle of the tub. When she came home, the carl asked what was the name of the child. She answered, "Middle, is called the little girl." When the old wife had finished this provision of butter, she said to the old man : " Yet, once more, am I called to the king's, to hold a child at baptism." "Go then," quoth the carl. The old wife went, and coming to the king's palace, said she came for butter. Now she took so much, that she could see the corner which the staves made with the bottom of the tub. When she came home, the carl asked her what was the name of the child. She answered. "Logg [woodblock] is hight the ugly girl." Now time passed till the old wife was, once more, in need of butter. Then she said to the old man, "I am called for, once more, at the king's." "Go then," said the old man. The old woman went, and said, as formerly, that she had come for butter. This time, she took all that was left in the barrel. When she came home, the carl asked what was the name of the child. "Bottom is hight the stubby swain," said the old woman. Time passed, till the later months of winter came on. Then the household provisions of the old man and woman began to be rather scarce. The old man said to his old wife, that it would be best to fetch the butter tub from the king's palace. To this, the old woman agreed. They came there and asked for their barrel. It was given to them, and they saw that the covering and everything about the barrel was quite in order. They rolled the barrel home, into the cottage. Now the carl opened the barrel, and lo! it was quite empty. He was rather startled at this, and asked his wife if she could tell the cause of it. She made believe to be no less astonished, and could find no reason for the trick they had been played. But, at the same moment, the old wife saw a big fly, which had got into the open barrel, and she said, "Ah! There comes the wretched thief. Look here. This hateful fly has, doubtless, eaten all our butter from the tub." This, the old man thought must be true, and ran off for the big hammer, with which he used to beat his dried fish, and would break the skull of the fly. He shut the door of the cottage, that the fly should not get out, and now chased the fly all over the place, knocking and beating at it, but never hitting save his own furniture and household chattels, which he broke to pieces. At last, the old man, being tired, sat down in fury and despair. But then the fly came and sat on his nose. Then the carl begged his wife to kill the fly, and said, "Make haste, while it sits on the nose!" (which since has passed into a common saying). The old woman lifted up, with all her might, the hammer, and thumped it on the old man's nose, and broke his skull so well that he was dead on the spot; but the fly escaped with unbroken skull. It is unscathed yet. But the old woman is still wailing over her carl. Source: Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , series 2 (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866), pp. 606-609 . The episode about the stolen butter is classified as a type 15 folktale . Return to the table of contents . The Seven Crazy Fellows Philippines Once there were living in the country in the northern part of Luzon seven crazy fellows, named Juan, Felipe, Mateo, Pedro, Francisco, Eulalio, and Jacinto. They were happy all the day long. One morning Felipe asked his friends to go fishing. They stayed at the Cagayan River a long time. About two o'clock in the afternoon Mateo said to his companions, "We are hungry; let us go home!" "Before we go," said Juan, "let us count ourselves, to see that we are all here!" He counted; but because he forgot to count himself, he found that they were only six, and said that one of them had been drowned. Thereupon they all dived into the river to look for their lost companion; and when they came out, Francisco counted to see if he had been found; but he, too, left himself out, so in they dived again. Jacinto said that they should not go home until they had found the one who was lost. While they were diving, an old man passed by. He asked the fools what they were diving for. They said that one of them had been drowned. "How many were you at first?" said the old man. They said that they were seven. "All right," said the old man. "Dive in, and I will count you." They dived, and he found that they were seven. Since he had found their lost companion, he asked them to come with him. When they reached the old man's house, he selected Mateo and Francisco to look after his old wife; Eulalio he chose to be water carrier; Pedro, cook; Jacinto, wood carrier; and Juan and Felipe, his companions in hunting. When the next day came, the old man said that he was going hunting, and he told Juan and Felipe to bring along rice with them. In a little while they reached the mountains, and he told the two fools to cook the rice at ten o'clock. He then went up the mountain with his dogs to catch a deer. Now, his two companions, who had been left at the foot of the mountain, had never seen a deer. When Felipe saw a deer standing under a tree, he thought that the antlers of the deer were the branches of a small tree without leaves: so he hung his hat and bag of rice on them, but the deer immediately ran away. When the old man came back, he asked if the rice was ready. Felipe told him that he had hung his hat and the rice on a tree that ran away. The old man was angry, and said, "That tree you saw was the antlers of a deer. We'll have to go home now, for we have nothing to eat." Meanwhile the five crazy fellows who had been left at home were not idle. Eulalio went to get a pail of water. When he reached the well and saw his image in the water, he nodded, and the reflection nodded back at him. He did this over and over again; until finally, becoming tired, he jumped into the water, and was drowned. Jacinto was sent to gather small sticks, but he only destroyed the fence around the garden. Pedro cooked a chicken without removing the feathers. He also let the chicken burn until it was as black as coal. Mateo and Francisco tried to keep the flies off the face of their old mistress. They soon became tired, because the flies kept coming back; so they took big sticks to kill them with. When a fly lighted on the nose of the old woman, they struck at it so hard that they killed her. She died with seemingly a smile on her face. The two fools said to each other that the old woman was very much pleased that they had killed the fly. When the old man and his two companions reached home, the old man asked Pedro if there was any food to eat. Pedro said that it was in the pot. The old man looked in and saw the charred chicken and feathers. He was very angry at the cook. Then he went in to see his wife, and found her dead. He asked Mateo and Francisco what they had done to the old woman. They said that they had only been killing flies that tried to trouble her, and that she was very much pleased by their work. The next thing the crazy fellows had to do was to make a coffin for the dead woman; but they made it flat, and in such a way that there was nothing to prevent the corpse from falling off. The old man told them to carry the body to the church; but on their way they ran, and the body rolled off the flat coffin. They said to each other that running was a good thing, for it made their burden lighter. When the priest found that the corpse was missing, he told the six crazy fellows to go back and get the body. While they were walking toward the house, they saw an old woman picking up sticks by the roadside. "Old woman, what are you doing here?" they said. "The priest wants to see you." While they were binding her, she cried out to her husband, "Ah! here are some bad boys trying to take me to the church." But her husband said that the crazy fellows were only trying to tease her. When they reached the church with this old woman, the priest, who was also crazy, performed the burial ceremony over her. She cried out that she was alive; but the priest answered that since he had her burial fee, he did not care whether she was alive or not. So they buried this old woman in the ground. When they were returning home, they saw the corpse that had fallen from the coffin on their way to the church. Francisco cried that it was the ghost of the old woman. Terribly frightened, they ran away in different directions, and became scattered all over Luzon. Source: Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 9, pp. 75-79 . The episode about the fools who cannot count themselves is a type 1287 folktale . Return to the table of contents . The Monkeys and the Dragonflies Philippines One day, when the sun was at the zenith and the air was very hot, a poor dragonfly, fatigued with her long journey, alighted to rest on a branch of a tree in which a great many monkeys lived. While she was fanning herself with her wings, a monkey approached her, and said, "Aha! What are you doing here, wretched creature?" "O sir! I wish you would permit me to rest on this branch while the sun is so hot," said the dragonfly softly. "I have been flying all morning, and I am so hot and tired that I can go no farther," she added. "Indeed!" exclaimed the monkey in a mocking tone. "We don't allow any weak creature such as you are to stay under our shelter. Go away!" he said angrily, and, taking a dry twig, he threw it at the poor creature. The dragonfly, being very quick, had flown away before the cruel monkey could hit her. She hurried to her brother the king, and told him what had happened. The king became very angry, and resolved to make war on the monkeys. So he dispatched three of his soldiers to the king of the monkeys with this challenge: The King of the Monkeys Sir, As one of your subjects has treated my sister cruelly, I am resolved to kill you and your subjects with all speed. DRAGON The monkey king laughed at the challenge. He said to the messengers, "Let your king and his soldiers come to the battlefield, and they will see how well my troops fight." "You don't mean what you say, cruel king," answered the messengers. "You should not judge before the fight is over." "What fools, what fools!" exclaimed the king of the monkeys. "Go to your ruler and tell him my answer," and he drove the poor little creatures away. When the king of the dragonflies received the reply, he immediately ordered his soldiers to go to the battlefield, but without anything to fight with. Meanwhile the monkeys came, each armed with a heavy stick. Then the monkey king shouted, "Strike the flying creatures with your clubs!" When King Dragon heard this order, he commanded his soldiers to alight on the foreheads of their enemies. Then the monkeys began to strike at the dragonflies, which were on the foreheads of their companions. The dragonflies were very quick, and were not hurt at all; but the monkeys were all killed. Thus the light, quick-witted dragonflies won the victory over the strong but foolish monkeys. Source: Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 57, pp. 379-82 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 20, 2014. Foolish Wishes Foolish Wishes tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 750A and other stories about the foolish use of magic wishes selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2013 Contents The Two-Headed Weaver (The Panchatantra). The Three Wishes (1001 Nights). The Ridiculous Wishes (France, Charles Perrault). The Sausage (Sweden, Gabriel Djurklou). Loppi and Lappi (Estonia, Friedrich Kreutzwald). The Wishes (Hungary, W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf). The Woodman's Three Wishes (England, Thomas Sternberg). The Three Wishes (England, Joseph Jacobs). Link to The Monkey's Paw (England, W. W. Jacobs). This external link opens in a new window. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Two-Headed Weaver The Panchatantra In a certain place there lived a weaver by the name of Mantharaka, which means "the simpleton." One day, while weaving cloth, the wooden pieces on his loom broke. He took an ax, and set forth to find some wood. He found a large sissoo tree at the ocean's shore, and said aloud, "Now this is a large tree. If I fell it, I will have wood enough for all my weaving tools." Having thus thought it through, he raised his ax to begin cutting. However, a spirit lived in this tree, and he said, "Listen! This tree is my home, and it must be spared in any event, because I like it here where my body can be stroked by the cool breezes that blow in from the ocean's waves." The weaver said, "Then what am I to do? If I don't find a good tree, then my family will starve. You will have to go somewhere else. I am going to cut it down." The spirit answered, "Listen, I am at your service. Ask whatever you would like, but spare this tree!" The weaver said, "If that is what you want then I will go home and ask my friend and my wife, and when I return, you must give me what I ask for." The spirit promised, and the weaver, beside himself with joy, returned home. Upon his arrival in his city he saw his friend, the barber, and said, "Friend, I have gained control over a spirit. Tell me what I should demand from him!" The barber said, "My dear friend, if that is so then you should demand a kingdom. You could be king, and I would be your prime minister, and we two would first enjoy the pleasures of this world and then those of the next one. For they say: A prince who piously gives to others, achieves fame in this world, and through these good deeds, he will arrive in heaven, equal to the gods themselves ." The weaver spoke, "Friend, so be it! But let us also ask my wife." The barber said, "One should never ask women for advice. They also say: A wise man gives women food, clothing, jewelry, and above all the duties of marriage, but he never asks for their advice. And further: That house must perish where a woman, a gambler, or a child is listened to. And: A man will advance and be loved by worthy people as long as he does not secretly listen to women. Women think only of their own advantage, of their own desires. Even if they love only their own son, still, he will serve their wishes. " The weaver spoke, "Even though this is true, she nonetheless must be asked, because she is subservient to her husband." Having said this, he went quickly to his wife and said to her, "Dear one, today I have gained control over a spirit who will grant me one wish. Hence I have come to ask for your advice. Tell me, what should I ask for? My friend the barber thinks that I should request a kingdom." She answered, "Oh, son of your excellence, what do barbers understand? You should never do what they say. After all, it is stated: A reasonable person will no sooner take advice from dancers, singers, the low born, barbers, or children, than from beggars. Furthermore, a king's life is an unending procession of annoyances. He must constantly worry about friendships, animosities, wars, servants, defense alliances, and duplicity. He never gets a moment's rest, because: Anyone who wants to rule must prepare his spirit for misfortune. The same container that is used for salve can also be used to pour out bad luck. Never envy the life of a king. " The weaver said, "You are right. But what should I ask for?" She answered, "You can now work on only one piece of cloth at a time. That is barely enough to pay for the necessities. You should ask for another pair of arms and a second head so that you can work on two pieces of cloth at once, one in front of you, and one behind you. We can sell the one for household necessities, and you can use the money from the second one for other things. You will thus gain the praise of your relatives, and you will make gains in both worlds." After hearing this he spoke with joy, "Good, you faithful wife! You have spoken well, and I will do what you say. That is my decision." With that he went to the spirit and let his will be known, "Listen, if you want to fulfill my wish, then give me another pair of arms and another head." He had barely spoken before he was two-headed and four-armed. Rejoicing, he returned home, but the people there thought that he was a demon and beat him with sticks and stones, until he fell over dead. And that is why I say: He who cannot think for himself and will not follow the advice of friends, he will push himself into misfortune, just like the weaver Mantharaka. Source: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen , translated from the Sanskrit into German by Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), book 5, story 8 (v. 2, pp. 341-344). Translated into English by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002. Similar to Aarne-Thompson type 750A. Return to the table of contents . The Three Wishes 1001 Nights A certain man had longed all his life to look upon the Night of Power, and one night it befell that he gazed at the sky and saw the angels, and Heaven's gates thrown open; and he beheld all things prostrating themselves before their Lord, each in its several stead. So he said to his wife, "Harkye, such an one, verily Allah hath shown me the Night of Power, and it hath been proclaimed to me, from the invisible world, that three prayers will be granted unto me; so I consult thee for counsel as to what shall I ask." Quoth she, "Oh man, the perfection of man and his delight is in his prickle; therefore do thou pray Allah to greaten thy yard and magnify it." So he lifted up his hands to heaven and said, "Oh Allah, greaten my yard and magnify it." Hardly had he spoken when his tool became as big as a column and he could neither sit nor stand nor move about nor even stir from his stead; and when he would have carnally known his wife, she fled before him from place to place. So he said to her, "Oh accursed woman, what is to be done? This is thy list, by reason of thy lust." She replied, "No, by Allah, I did not ask for this length and huge bulk, for which the gate of a street were too strait. Pray Heaven to make it less." So he raised his eyes to Heaven and said, "Oh Allah, rid me of this thing and deliver me therefrom." And immediately his prickle disappeared altogether and he became clean smooth. When his wife saw this she said, "I have no occasion for thee, now thou art become pegless as a eunuch, shaven and shorn." And he answered her, saying, "All this comes of thine ill-omened counsel and thine imbecile judgment. I had three prayers accepted of Allah, wherewith I might have gotten me my good, both in this world and in the next, and now two wishes are gone in pure waste, by thy lewd will, and there remaineth but one." Quoth she, "Pray Allah the Most High to restore thee thy yard as it was." So he prayed to his Lord and his prickle was restored to its first estate. Thus the man lost his three wishes by the lack of wit in the woman. Source: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night , translated by Richard F. Burton (Privately printed, 1885), v. 6, pp. 180-181. The full title of this story is "The Three Wishes, or the Man who Longed to see the Night of Power." Although I usually find Burton's translation style too florid for twentieth-century taste, his linguistic ornamentation seems to fit this tale, so I have let it stand. Aarne-Thompson type 750A. Return to the table of contents . The Ridiculous Wishes Charles Perrault In days long past there lived a poor woodcutter who found life very hard. Indeed, it was his lot to toil for little guerdon, and although he was young and happily married there were moments when he wished himself dead and below ground. One day while at his work he was again lamenting his fate. "Some men," he said, "have only to make known their desires, and straightway these are granted, and their every wish fulfilled; but it has availed me little to wish for ought, for the gods are deaf to the prayers of such as I." As he spoke these words there was a great noise of thunder, and Jupiter appeared before him wielding his mighty thunderbolts. Our poor man was stricken with fear and threw himself on the ground. "My lord," he said, "forget my foolish speech; heed not my wishes, but cease thy thundering!" "Have no fear," answered Jupiter; "I have heard thy plaint, and have come hither to show thee how greatly thou dost wrong me. Hark! I, who am sovereign lord of this world, promise to grant in full the first three wishes which it will please thee to utter, whatever these may be. Consider well what things can bring thee joy and prosperity, and as thy happiness is at stake, be not over-hasty, but revolve the matter in thy mind." Having thus spoken Jupiter withdrew himself and made his ascent to Olympus. As for our woodcutter, he blithely corded his faggot, and throwing it over his shoulder, made for his home. To one so light of heart the load also seemed light, and his thoughts were merry as he strode along. Many a wish came into his mind, but he was resolved to seek the advice of his wife, who was a young woman of good understanding. He had soon reached his cottage, and casting down his faggot: "Behold me, Fanny," he said. "Make up the fire and spread the board, and let there be no stint. We are wealthy, Fanny, wealthy for evermore; we have only to wish for whatsoever we may desire." Thereupon he told her the story of what had befallen that day. Fanny, whose mind was quick and active, immediately conceived many plans for the advancement of their fortune, but she approved her husband's resolve to act with prudence and circumspection. "'Twere a pity," she said, "to spoil our chances through impatience. We had best take counsel of the night, and wish no wishes until tomorrow." "That is well spoken," answered Harry. "Meanwhile fetch a bottle of our best, and we shall drink to our good fortune." Fanny brought a bottle from the store behind the faggots, and our man enjoyed his ease, leaning back in his chair with his toes to the fire and his goblet in his hand. "What fine glowing embers!" he said, "and what a fine toasting fire! I wish we had a black pudding at hand." Hardly had he spoken these words when his wife beheld, to her great astonishment, a long black pudding which, issuing from a corner of the hearth, came winding and wriggling towards her. She uttered a cry of fear, and then again exclaimed in dismay, when she perceived that this strange occurrence was due to the wish which her husband had so rashly and foolishly spoken. Turning upon him, in her anger and disappointment she called the poor man all the abusive names that she could think of. "What!" she said to him, "when you can call for a kingdom, for gold, pearls, rubies, diamonds, for princely garments and wealth untold, is this the time to set your mind upon black puddings!" "Nay!" answered the man, "'twas a thoughtless speech, and a sad mistake; but I shall now be on my guard, and shall do better next time." "Who knows that you will?" returned his wife. "Once a witless fool, always a witless fool!" and giving free rein to her vexation and ill-temper she continued to upbraid her husband until his anger also was stirred, and he had wellnigh made a second bid and wished himself a widower. "Enough! woman," he cried at last; "put a check upon thy froward tongue! Who ever heard such impertinence as this! A plague on the shrew and on her pudding! Would to heaven it hung at the end of her nose!" No sooner had the husband given voice to these words than the wish was straightway granted, and the long coil of black pudding appeared grafted to the angry dame's nose. Our man paused when he beheld what he had wrought. Fanny was a comely young woman, and blest with good looks, and truth to tell, this new ornament did not set off her beauty. Yet it offered one advantage, that as it hung right before her mouth, it would thus effectively curb her speech. So, having now but one wish left, he had all but resolved to make good use of it without further delay, and, before any other mischance could befall, to wish himself a kingdom of his own. He was about to speak the word, when he was stayed by a sudden thought. "It is true," he said to himself, "that there is none so great as a king, but what of the queen that must share his dignity? With what grace would she sit beside me on the throne with a yard of black pudding for a nose?" In this dilemma he resolved to put the case to Fanny, and to leave her to decide whether she would rather be a queen, with this most horrible appendage marring her good looks, or remain a peasant wife, but with her shapely nose relieved of this untoward addition. Fanny's mind was soon made up: Although she had dreamt of a crown and sceptre, yet a woman's first wish is always to please. To this great desire all else must yield, and Fanny would rather be fair in drugget than be a queen with an ugly face. Thus our woodcutter did not change his state, did not become a potentate, nor fill his purse with golden crowns. He was thankful enough to use his remaining wish to a more humble purpose, and forthwith relieved his wife of her encumbrance. Source: Charles Perrault, The Fairy Tales of Charles Perrault , (London: George G. Harrap and Company, 1922), pp. 129-36 . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 750A. The husband and wife, here called Harry and Fanny, are named Blaise and Fanchon in the original French story. Link to "The Ridiculous Wishes" in the original French verse: Les souhaits ridicules . Link to Charles Perrault's Mother Goose Tales , information about Perrault and his famous collection Histoires ou contes du temps passé, avec des moralités: Contes de ma mère l'Oye , including links to individual tales. Link to Les contes de Perrault . A French-language site featuring Perrault's tales, but not including "The Ridiculous Wishes." Return to the table of contents . The Sausage Sweden There was once an old woman, who was all alone one evening in her cottage, occupied with her household affairs. While she was waiting for her husband, who was away at work over in the forest, and while she was bustling about, a fine, grand lady came in, and so the woman began to curtsy and curtsy, for she had never seen such a grand person before. "I should be so much obliged if you would lend me your brewing pan," said the lady, "for my daughter is going to be married, and I expect guests from all parts." Oh, dear, yes! That she might have, said the woman, although she could not remember whether she had ever seen her before, and so she went to fetch the pan. The lady took it, and thanked the woman, saying that she would pay her well for the loan of it, and so she went her way. Two days afterwards the lady came back with it, and this time she also found the woman alone. "Many thanks for the loan," said the lady. "and now in return you shall have three wishes." And with this the lady left, and vanished so quickly that the old woman had not even time to ask her name or where she lived. But that did not matter, she thought, for now she had three wishes, and she began to think what she should wish for. She expected her husband back soon, and she thought it would be best to wait until he came home and could have a say in the matter. But the least they could wish for must be a fine big farm -- the best in the parish, and a box full of money, and just fancy how happy and comfortable they would be then, for they had worked so hard all their days! Ah, yes, then the neighbors would have something to wonder at, for you may guess how they would stare at all the fine things she would have. But since they were now so rich it was really a shame that there should be nothing but some blue, sour milk and some hard crusts of bread in the cupboard for her husband when he came home tired and weary, he who was fond of hot food. She had just been to her neighbor's and there she had seen a fine big sausage, which they were going to have for supper. "Ah, deary me, I wish I had that sausage here!" sighed the old woman; and the next moment a big sausage lay on the table right before her. She was just going to put it in the pan when her husband came in. "Father, father!" cried the woman, "it's all over with our troubles and hard work now. I lent my brewing pan to a fine lady, and when she brought it back she promised we should have three wishes. And now you must help me to wish for something really good, for you're so clever at hitting upon the right thing -- and it's all true, for just look at the sausage, which I got the moment I wished for it!" "What do you mean, you silly old woman?" shouted the husband, who became angry. "Have you been wishing for such a paltry thing as a sausage, when you might have had anything you liked in the world? I wish the sausage were sticking to your nose, since you haven't any better sense." All at once the woman gave a cry, for sure enough there was the sausage sticking to her nose; and she began tearing and pulling away at it, but the more she pulled the firmer it seemed to stick. She was not able to get it off. "Oh, dear! oh, dear!" sobbed the woman. "You don't seem to have any more sense than I, since you can wish me such ill luck. I only wanted something nice for you, and then -- , oh dear! oh, dear!" and the old woman went on crying and sobbing. The husband tried, of course, to help his wife to get rid of the sausage; but for all he pulled and tugged away at it he did not succeed, and he was nearly pulling his wife's head off her body. But they had one wish left, and what were they now to wish? Yes, what were they to wish? They might, of course, wish for something very fine and grand; but what could they do with all the finery in the world, as long as the mistress of the house had a long sausage sticking to the end of her nose? She would never be able to show herself anywhere! "You wish for something," said the woman in the midst of her crying. "No, you wish," said the husband, who also began crying when he saw the state his wife was in, and saw the terrible sausage hanging down her face. So he thought he would make the best use he could of the last wish, and said, "I wish my wife was rid of that sausage." And the next moment it was gone! They both became so glad that they jumped up and danced around the room in great glee -- for you must know that although a sausage may be ever so nice when you have it in your mouth, it is quite a different thing to have one sticking to your nose all your life. Source: Gabriel Djurklou, Fairy Tales from the Swedish , translated by H. L. Brækstad (Philadelphia and New York: J. B. Lippincott Company, 1901), pp. 27-32. Aarne-Thompson type 750A. Return to the table of contents . Loppi and Lappi Estonia Once a poor cottager lived with his wife in a lonely hut outside the village. The man's name was Loppi, and the woman's name was Lappi. It seems as though both of them had been born into misfortune, for nothing went well for them. In the earlier years of their marriage God had given them children, but none of them were still alive to support the parents in their old age. Every evening husband and wife sat next to the stove like two dried-up tree stumps, and often, for no reason at all, their bitterness spilled over, and they quarreled. As everyone knows, unfortunate people usually try to push their own guilt onto others, and even if they are not willfully evil, they blame others for their own bad luck. Thus Loppi often angrily said, "If only I had had the good luck to marry a better woman, I would have lacked nothing. Today I could have been a wealthy man." Lappi had an even quicker tongue, and for every one of her husband's words, she came back with a dozen of her own. "Just look at you, you stupid lout! Of course it is partially my fault that in my child-like simplicity I did not know enough to choose a better husband, but there must have been witchcraft involved to make me turn to you. Only the devil knows what you secretly put into my food or drink. I had plenty of suitors, and if I had not settled for you, you miserable creature, today I could be a lady seated at a full table. It is your fault, you worthless man, that I'll be suffering from hunger and sorrow until I die. And it is also your fault that all our children have died, because you did not know how to take care of a wife and children." This stream of words gushed forth, not ceasing until the husband stopped her mouth with his fist. One evening the couple were again quarrelling in their hut when a stately woman dressed in clothes of German cut stepped inside. Her appearance brought the wife's tongue to a standstill, and caused the husband to lower his raised arm. After a friendly greeting, the strange woman said, "You are poor wretches and until now have suffered much. However, three days from now your misery will suddenly end. Therefore keep peace in your house, and decide what destiny you would best choose for yourselves. I am not a human, as I appear to you, but rather a higher being who, through God's power, can cause wishes to be fulfilled. You have three days' time for consideration, and then you may state three wishes that you desire. Say your wishes aloud, and in the same instant they will come true through magic power. But be careful not to wish for unnecessary things." Following these words, the stately woman greeting them once again, then disappeared out the door in a flash. Loppi and Lappi, who had now forgotten their quarrel, stared speechlessly out the door through which the miraculous vision had entered and disappeared. Finally the husband said, "Let's go to bed now. We have three days to think about this. We want to use these wishes wisely, so we can get the best luck for ourselves." Although they had three days for consideration, they spent more than half the night burdened with thoughts of which wish would be the very best. Oh, what precious freedom ruled in the hut without interruption for the next three days! Loppi and Lappi had become different people. They spoke together friendlily, and looked after one another's needs. They spent the greatest part of each day sitting quietly in the corner thinking about what they should wish for. On the third day Loppi went into the village, where that morning a swine had been slaughtered, and the sausage kettle must just now be standing on the fire. He took with him the butter pot, with its lid, wanting to ask his neighbor's wife for sausage water to cook his cabbage in that evening. Loppi felt that they would be able to think better if their stomachs were filled with good food. Arriving home he put the cabbage on the fire so their meal would be ready at the right time. Evening arrived, and with it the time when they could make their wishes. The pot of cabbage soup was steaming on the table, and husband and wife sat down to eat. Now they could have their wishes fulfilled. They had already eaten several spoonfuls of the tasty soup when Lappi said, contentedly, "Thanks be to God for this good soup. It will fill us up nicely, but it would taste even better if we only had a sausage to go with it!" Bang! A large sausage fell from above onto the middle of the table. For a while husband and wife were so startled that it did not occur to them to eat the sausage. Loppi remarked that with the sausage their first wish had been fulfilled, and that so angered him that he shouted, "May the Evil One grab you and stick this sausage onto your nose! If...." But the poor man was too frightened to continue speaking, for the sausage was already hanging from Lappi's nose, not like a normal sausage, but like a piece of flesh growing out of the nose. What could they do now? Two wishes had already been wasted, and the second one had so misshapen the woman that she would not dare to be seen by other people. They still had one wish that had not been stated, and with this one they could set everything right. At this moment poor Lappi had no other desire than to free herself from the long sausage, so she said this wish aloud, and the sausage disappeared. Now all three wishes were gone, and Loppi and Lappi had to continue living poorly in their hut. For some time afterward they expected the beautiful woman to return, but the stranger never appeared again. Whoever fails to take immediate advantage of unexpected luck will lose it forever. Source: Friedrich Kreutzwald, "Loppi und Lappi," Estnische Märchen , vol. 2 (Dorpat: Verlag von C. Mattiesen, 1881), no. 4, pp. 23-26 . Translated from Estonian into German by F. Löwe. Translated from German into English by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. Return to the table of contents . The Wishes Hungary There were 10,000 wagons rolling along the turnpike road, in each wagon there were 10,000 casks, in each cask 10,000 bags, in each bag 10,000 poppy seeds, in each poppy seed 10,000 lightnings. May all these thunderous lightnings strike him who won't listen to my tale, which I have brought from beyond the Operencian Sea! There was once, it doesn't matter where: there was once upon a time, a poor man who had a pretty young wife; they were very fond of each other. The only thing they had to complain of was their poverty, as neither of them owned a farthing; it happened, therefore, sometimes, that they quarreled a little, and then they always cast it in each other's teeth that they hadn't got anything to bless themselves with. But still they loved each other. One evening the woman came home much earlier than her husband and went into the kitchen and lighted the fire, although she had nothing to cook. "I think I can cook a little soup, at least, for my husband. It will be ready by the time he comes home." But no sooner had she put the kettle over the fire, and a few logs of wood on the fire in order to make the water boil quicker, than her husband arrived home and took his seat by the side of her on the little bench. They warmed themselves by the fire, as it was late in the autumn and cold. In the neighboring village they had commenced the vintage on that very day. "Do you know the news, wife?" inquired he. "No, I don't. I've heard nothing. Tell me what it is." "As I was coming from the squire's maize field, I saw in the dark, in the distance, a black spot on the road. I couldn't make out what it was, so I went nearer, and lo! do you know what it was? -- A beautiful little golden carriage, with a pretty little woman inside, and four fine black dogs harnessed to it." "You're joking," interrupted the wife. "I'm not, indeed, it's perfectly true. You know how muddy the roads about here are; it happened that the dogs stuck fast with the carriage and they couldn't move from the spot; the little woman didn't care to get out into the mud, as she was afraid of soiling her golden dress. At first, when I found out what it was, I had a good mind to run away, as I took her for an evil spirit, but she called out after me and implored me to help her out of the mud; she promised that no harm should come to me, but on the contrary she would reward me. So I thought that it would be a good thing for us if she could help us in our poverty; and with my assistance the dogs dragged her carriage out of the mud. The woman asked me whether I was married. I told her I was. And she asked me if I was rich. I replied, not at all; I didn't think, I said, that there were two people in our village who were poorer than we. 'That can be remedied,' replied she. 'I will fulfill three wishes that your wife may propose.' And she left as suddenly as if dragons had kidnapped her. She was a fairy." "Well, she made a regular fool of you!" "That remains to be seen. You must try and wish something, my dear wife." Thereupon the woman without much thought said, "Well, I should like to have some sausage, and we could cook it beautifully on this nice fire." No sooner were the words uttered than a frying pan came down the chimney, and in it a sausage of such length that it was long enough to fence in the whole garden. ''This is grand!" they both exclaimed together. "But we must be a little more clever with our next two wishes; how well we shall be off! I will at once buy two heifers and two horses, as well as a sucking pig," said the husband. Whereupon he took his pipe from his hatband, took out his tobacco pouch, and filled his pipe; then he tried to light it with a hot cinder, but was so awkward about it that he upset the frying pan with the sausage in it. "Good heavens! The sausage! What on earth are you doing! I wish that sausage would grow on to your nose," exclaimed the frightened woman, and tried to snatch the same out of the fire, but it was too late, as it was already dangling from her husband's nose down to his toes. "My Lord Creator help me!" shouted the woman. "You see, you fool, what you've done, there! Now the second wish is gone," said her husband. "What can we do with this thing?" "Can't we get it off?" said the woman. "Take off the devil! Don't you see that it has quite grown to my nose. You can't take it off." "Then we must cut it off," said she, "as we can do nothing else." "I shan't permit it. How could I allow my body to be cut about? Not for all the treasures on earth. But do you know what we can do, love? There is yet one wish left. You'd better wish that the sausage go back to the pan, and so all will be right." But the woman replied, " How about the heifers and the horses, and how about the sucking pig? How shall we get those?" "Well, I can't walk about with this ornament, and I'm sure you won't kiss me again with this sausage dangling from my nose." And so they quarreled for a long time, till at last he succeeded in persuading his wife to wish that the sausage go back to the pan. And thus all three wishes were fulfilled; and yet they were as poor as ever. They, however, made a hearty meal of the sausage; and as they came to the conclusion that it was in consequence of their quarrelling that they had no heifers, nor horses, nor sucking pig, they agreed to live thenceforth in harmony together; and they quarreled no more after this. They got on much better in the world, and in time they acquired heifers, horses, and a sucking pig into the bargain, because they were industrious and thrifty. Source: W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, The Folk-Tales of the Magyars: Collected by Kriza, Erdély, Pap, and Others (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1889), pp. 217-19 . Return to the table of contents . The Woodman's Three Wishes England A woodman went to the forest to fell some timber. Just as he was applying the axe to the trunk of a huge old oak, out jumped a fairy, who beseeched him with the most supplicating gestures to spare the tree. Moved more by fright and astonishment than anything else, the man consented, and as a reward for his forbearance was promised the fulfillment of his three next wishes. Whether from natural forgetfulness, or fairy illusion, we know not, but certain it is, that long before evening all remembrance of his visitor had passed from his noddle. At night, when he and his dame were dozing before a blazing fire, the old fellow waxed hungry, and audibly wished for a link of hog's pudding. No sooner had the words escaped his lips than a rustling was heard in the chimney, and down came a bunch of the wished-for delicacies, depositing themselves at the feet of the astounded woodman, who, thus reminded of his morning visitor, began to communicate the particulars to his wife. "Thou bist a fool, Jan," said she, incensed at her husband's carelessness in neglecting to make the best of his good luck. " I wish em wer atte noäse!" whereupon, the legend goes on to state, they immediately attached themselves to the member in question, and stuck so tight that the woodman, finding no amount of force would remove these unsightly appendages from his proboscis, was obliged, reluctantly, to wish them off, thus making the third wish, and at once ending his brilliant expectations. Source: Thomas Sternberg, The Dialect and Folk-lore of Northamptonshire (London: John Russell Smith, 1851), pp. 135-36 . Sternberg does not give this story a title. Return to the table of contents . The Three Wishes England Once upon a time, and be sure 'twas a long time ago, there lived a poor woodman in a great forest, and every day of his life he went out to fell timber. So one day he started out, and the goodwife filled his wallet and slung his bottle on his back, that he might have meat and drink in the forest. He had marked out a huge old oak, which, thought he, would furnish many and many a good plank. And when he was come to it, he took his ax in his hand and swung it round his head as though he were minded to fell the tree at one stroke. But he hadn't given one blow, when what should he hear but the pitifullest entreating, and there stood before him a fairy who prayed and beseeched him to spare the tree. He was dazed, as you may fancy, with wonderment and affright, and he couldn't open his mouth to utter a word. But he found his tongue at last, and, "Well," said he, "I'll e'en do as thou wishest." "You've done better for yourself than you know," answered the fairy, "and to show I'm not ungrateful, I'll grant you your next three wishes, be they what they may." And therewith the fairy was no more to be seen, and the woodman slung his wallet over his shoulder and his bottle at his side, and off he started home. But the way was long, and the poor man was regularly dazed with the wonderful thing that had befallen him, and when he got home there was nothing in his noddle but the wish to sit down and rest. Maybe, too, 'twas a trick of the fairy's. Who can tell? Anyhow, down he sat by the blazing fire, and as he sat he waxed hungry, though it was a long way off suppertime yet. "Hasn't thou naught for supper, dame?" said he to his wife. "Nay, not for a couple of hours yet," said she. "Ah!" groaned the woodman, "I wish I'd a good link of black pudding here before me." No sooner had he said the word, when clatter, clatter, rustle, rustle, what should come down the chimney but a link of the finest black pudding the heart of man could wish for. If the woodman stared, the goodwife stared three times as much. "What's all this?" says she. Then all the morning's work came back to the woodman, and he told his tale right out, from beginning to end, and as he told it the goodwife glowered and glowered, and when he had made an end of it she burst out, "Thou bee'st but a fool, Jan, thou bee'st but a fool; and I wish the pudding were at thy nose, I do indeed." And before you could say "Jack Robinson," there the goodman sat, and his nose was the longer for a noble link of black pudding. He gave a pull, but it stuck, and she gave a pull, but it stuck, and they both pulled till they had nigh pulled the nose off, but it stuck and stuck. "What's to be done now?" said he. "'Tisn't so very unsightly," said she, looking hard at him. Then the woodman saw that if he wished, he must need wish in a hurry; and wish he did, that the black pudding might come off his nose. Well! there it lay in a dish on the table, and if the goodman and goodwife didn't ride in a golden coach, or dress in silk and satin, why, they had at least as fine a black pudding for their supper as the heart of man could desire. Source: Joseph Jacobs, More English Fairy Tales (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, n.d.), pp. 107-109. This collection was first published in 1894. Jacobs' source: "Sternberg's Folk-Lore of Northamptonshire , 1851, but entirely rewritten by Mr. Nutt, who has introduced from other variants one touch at the close -- viz., the readiness of the wife to allow her husband to remain disfigured." Aarne-Thompson type 750A. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 8, 2013 A Fool Does Not Count the Animal He Is Riding. Tales of type 1288A A Fool Does Not Count the Animal He Is Riding tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1288A edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2013 Contents The Simpleton with Ten Asses (Turkey). The Hodja and His Eight Donkeys (Turkey). Johha Fails to Count the Donkey He Is Riding (Palestine). Related links . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Simpleton with Ten Asses Turkey A simpleton, who was a servant, had ten asses which he hired to certain people, and when they came back to their places he took his asses and counted them, and found them to be ten. Then he mounted one of them and rode some distance and came back, and as he was going away he counted those that were before him, and found them to be nine; and he was angry, and alighted and counted them over again, and found them to be ten. And he mounted an ass again, and counted the others and found them to be nine; thereupon he dismounted and counted them, and found them to be ten. Then he said, "Verily there is a devil with me, for whenever I mount an ass I lose one of them; therefore I must not ride lest I lose one altogether." Thus he traveled over the whole country on foot, for he dared not mount one of them. Source: Mâr Gregory John Bar-Hebraeus, Laughable Stories , translated by E. A. Wallis Budge (London: Luzac and Company, 1897), no. 569 (DLXIX), pp. 145-46 . Return to the table of contents . The Hodja and His Eight Donkeys Turkey The Hodja had eight donkeys; he mounted one of them. At the end of his ride he counted them, but he saw only seven. He forgot the one he was sitting on. After dismounting he counted eight. This so confused him that he asked a passerby, "Earlier there were only seven, but now there are suddenly eight!" "The one you were sitting on brought the number to eight." The Hodja answered, "But how was I to see what I had on my behind?" Source: Albert Wesselski, Der Hodscha Nasreddin , vol. 1 (Weimar: Alexander Duncker Verlag, 1911), no. 261, p. 152 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. Link to additional tales about Nasreddin Hodja . Return to the table of contents . Johha Fails to Count the Donkey He Is Riding Palestine When Johha grew old enough to work for his living he became a donkey driver. One day, being in charge of twelve donkeys employed to carry earth to the city, it occurred to him, before starting with the laden animals, to count them. Finding the tale [tally] complete, he took them to their destination and unloaded them. He then mounted one of them, and was going to return when he found one donkey missing. At once dismounting, he put them all in a row, and was astonished and greatly relieved to find the twelve there. He thereupon remounted and set off again, wondering as he rode along how it was that he had missed one donkey. Suddenly the suspicion flashed upon him that possibly the second count had been faulty, so he counted again, to find once more that only eleven were racing along in front of him. Terribly disconcerted, he again got down off the creature he was riding and, stopping the others, once more counted them. He was puzzled to find that there were again twelve. So absorbed was he by this mystery, that he went on counting and recounting the donkeys till his master, surprised at his long absence, came and solved his difficulty by obliging him to follow his asses on foot. Source: J. E. Hanauer, Folk-Lore of the Holy Land: Moslem, Christian, and Jewish (London: Duckworth and Compnay, 1907), pp. 84-85 . Return to the table of contents . Related links Fools Cannot Count Themselves . Tales of type 1287. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 22, 2013. The Fool Whose Wishes All Came True: Folktales of Type 675 The Fool Whose Wishes All Came True folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 675 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2011 Contents Hans Dumb (Germany). Stupid Michel (Germany). Lazy Lars, Who Won the Princess (Denmark). Emelyan the Fool (Russia). Halfman (Greece). Juvadi and the Princess (Italy). Peter the Fool (Giovanni Francesco Straparola, The Facetious Nights ). Peruonto (Giambattista Basile, The Pentamerone ). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Hans Dumb Germany There was a king who lived happily with his daughter, his only child. Quite suddenly the princess had a baby, but no one knew who the father was. For some time the king was beside himself. Finally he ordered the princess to take the child to the church. A lemon would be placed in his hand, and whoever he should give it to would be the child's father and the princess's husband. This happened, but only fine people were admitted into the church. However, in the town there was a small, crooked, hunchbacked lad who was not very smart and who was therefore known as Hans Dumb. He mingled with the others and slipped into the church without being seen. When the child reached out with the lemon, it was to Hans Dumb! The princess was horrified, and the king was so taken aback that he had her, the child, and Hans Dumb placed into a cask and set adrift at sea. The cask soon drifted away, and when they were alone at sea the princess cried out bitterly, "You horrid, hunchbacked, impudent rogue, you are the cause of my suffering. Why did you force your way into the church? You have nothing to do with the child." "Oh yes," said Hans Dumb. "I have a lot to do with it, because one day I wished that you would have a child, and my wishes come true." "If that is so, then wish us something to eat." "I can do that too," said Hans Dumb, and he wished for a plate filled with potatoes. The princess would have liked something better, but because she was so hungry she helped him eat the potatoes. After they had eaten their fill, Hans Dumb said, "Now I shall wish us a fine ship!" He had scarcely said this and they were sitting in a splendid ship, with an excess of everything that they might want. The helmsman steered straight for land, and as they were going ashore Hans Dumb said, "Here there shall be a castle!" And there was a splendid castle there, and servants dressed in gold came and led the princess and the child inside, and when they were in the middle of the great hall, Hans Dumb said, "Now I wish to become a young and intelligent prince!" Then his hump disappeared, and he was handsome and straight and friendly. He found favor with the princess, and he became her husband, and they lived happily for a long time. One day the old king got lost while out riding and came to their castle. He was amazed, because he had never seen it before, and he went inside. The princess recognized her father at once, but he did not know who she was, for he thought that she had long since drowned in the ocean. She received him with splendor, but when he wanted to go back home, she secretly placed a golden goblet into his pocket. After he had ridden away she sent some knights after him to stop him and see if he hadn't stolen the golden goblet. They found it in his pocket and brought him back. He swore to the princess that he had not stolen it and did not know how it came to be in his pocket. She said, "You see, one should always be cautious about accusing another person." With this she revealed herself as his daughter. The king was overjoyed, and they lived happily together, and after his death Hans Dumb became king. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Hans Dumm," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 1st ed., vol. 1 (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 54, pp. 250-52. This story was not included in later editions of the Grimms' famous collection. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. The episode of the golden goblet planted in the father's pocket is reminiscent of the Bible story of Joseph, who had a silver goblet planted in his brother Benjamin's pack. ( Genesis, chapters 44-45) Link to a separate file containing only the Grimms' Hans Dumb . Opens in a new window. Return to the table of contents . Stupid Michel Germany Once upon a time there was a peasant woman who had a son named Michel who never got further from the table than the tile stove. Finally she decided that she would have to send him out into the world, so she said to him, "Michel, go out to the pond and fetch some water." "Yes," said Michel, "but just where is the pond?" "Go out the front door, walk down the garden path, and you will see it to the left." Michel set forth at once and actually found the front door, the garden path, and the pond. When he pulled the bucket from the pond a large pike jumped out of it, and asked Michel to throw him back into the water, and he would reward him greatly. "Did I tell you to jump out of the bucket?" asked Michel. "You can jump back into the water by yourself!" The pike continued to beg, finally promising Michel that all his wishes would come true if he would throw him back into the water. Michel did just that, then picked up the bucket and returned home. Now while at the pond in the distance he had seen a house that glistened magnificently like pure silver and gold, so he asked his mother, "Mother, what kind of a house is the one that I saw from the pond?" His mother said, "That is the king's house. He lives there with the beautiful princess." When Michel heard that a beautiful princess lived there, he thought, "I will see if the pike told me the truth. I wish that the princess should become pregnant." Not long afterward the princess did indeed become pregnant, and when the king discovered this he became very angry and reprimanded her bitterly. But she swore sincerely that no one had been with her; it must have happened while she was asleep. However, the kind did not believe her. With time she gave birth to a boy, and because the father's name was not known, he was named after his grandfather. When the boy grew older he noticed that his grandfather was not his father, and he asked, "Tell me, who is my father?" The grandfather answered, "You do not have a father." "How can I not have a father?" replied the boy. "Everyone has a father. You just don't know who mine is!" Then the old king had to admit that he did have a father, but that no one knew who he was. Then the boy said, "Let's give a large feast, and I'll find out who he is." The king did just that, and all the ministers, generals, and such people within the king's realm came, and the boy mingled among them, carefully looking at each one. Finally he went back to the king and said, "My father is not here. You will have to give a larger feast." So the king invited all of his officers and councilors and even some of the most prominent citizens to come together, and once the boy mingled among them, examining each one. But he did not find his father, and he said to the king, "You must give a feast for everyone, and then I will find my father." Then all the citizens and peasants from the entire land were invited to come together. When Michel's mother heard about this she said, "Michel, you too must go to the castle. The king is giving a general feast." Now Michel had only a dirty, tarry jacket and an old three-cornered hat, but his mother made him look as good as possible, and he went to the court. After everyone had gathered together in a large group, the boy ran quickly among them, and before long he stopped next to Michel in his tarry jacket and three-cornered hat. Taking Michel by the hand, the boy led him to the king and said, "This is my father!" At first the king did not want to believe this, and he told the boy that he must be mistaken, but the boy insisted that Michel was his father. Finally, beside himself with anger, the king said that he would neither accept the father, nor the mother, nor the child. Forthwith he had a large glass ball made with a lid that one could open and close. He had his daughter, Michel, and the boy put inside, then set it adrift on the open sea. After they had drifted for some distance, with the princess sitting there bemoaning the fact that they had found such a father for her child, and that now they would miserably perish, Michel wished that they would come ashore on an island, and immediately the ball hit solid ground, and they all climbed out safely. Then Michel wished for a magnificent castle with the best servants and all the houses that belonged to such a place, and immediately everything was there. Now the princess was happier. Then Michel wished magnificent clothes for himself. Thus he lived here happily with his wife and his child for a long time. Finally the princess grew lonely for her father and her homeland, and she told this to her husband, so he wished for a bridge to her father's kingdom, and immediately one was there, and indeed it had one railing of gold and the other of silver. Then they flew across the water in a golden coach to her father's castle. His anger disappeared when he discovered how well off his daughter now was, and they all lived happily and satisfied until they died. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, "Der dumme Michel," Märkische Sagen und Märchen (Berlin: G. Reimer, 1843), pp. 270-73 . Kuhn's source: "Oral, from Brodewin [now spelled Brodowin]." Return to the table of contents . Lazy Lars, Who Won the Princess Denmark Once upon a time there was a very poor couple who lived not far from the king's castle. They had but one son, and he was not very promising, for he was so terribly lazy that the grass had plenty of time to grow beneath his feet. If you asked him to have a seat, you would be sure to find him later in the same spot. His name was Lars, and no one called him anything but Lazy Lars. His parents worked every day up at the castle. His mother helped out in the kitchen and the father in the garden. Lars stayed at home the whole day doing nothing but turning into a complete lazybones. One day at noon his mother came home to fix something to eat for herself and the boy. She was about to hang the pot over the fire, but there was no water in the house. They didn't have a well, so they had to fetch their water from a spring on the other side of the castle. The mother said, "Listen, Lazy Lars, run and fetch a little water from the spring, or there will be nothing for you to eat." "I'm going," said Lars, but he did not move from where he was sitting. She said it once again, and he gave her the same answer, but he did not move at all. Then the mother became angry and reached for the poker to teach Lazy Lars a lesson with it, so he had to get up after all. He took an old broad-brimmed hat and an old iron kettle whose feet had been knocked off and went on his way. But it was a slow trip, because the day was very hot and every few moments he turned the kettle upside down and sat on it for a while. As he was passing the castle it happened that the king's daughter, a young and spirited princess, was sitting at a window, and when she saw Lazy Lars, whom she knew well, and observed the trip he was making with the kettle, she broke out laughing and called down to him, "Where are you going, Lazy Lars?" "To the spring to fetch water," he shouted. "Hurry up, Lazy Lars, or else your kettle without legs will run away from you!" she called back. Lars answered that there was no danger of that. "You are going to need a boy to help you carry your kettle, Lazy Lars," she shouted haughtily. It made Lars angry that she was thus making fun of him, and he looked up toward the window. He had never before seen such a beautiful girl, and he was so taken back that he just stood there with his mouth open staring at her. She laughed at him even more and shouted, "Close your mouth, Lazy Lars, or your heart will get cold!" Then Lars picked up his feet and did not stop again to rest until he came to the spring. There he took a string, tied it to the handle of the kettle, and lowered it into the spring. The kettle filled with water, but when he pulled it back up there was a frog in it, and the frog could talk. Lars had never seen anything like this before. He set the kettle on the ground and looked in amazement at the frog, who asked him very politely if he could not be put back into the spring. But Lazy Lars said that that would not be possible, for it would be double the effort. The frog again asked politely, promising Lars that he could have one wish granted, if he would but put him back into the water. Lars thought that that would not be bad. He took his old broad-brimmed hat and threw it onto the ground, then said that he wanted to have as many wishes granted as there were blades of grass covered by the hat, for he thought it would be all the same to the frog if he was going to the trouble to grant a wish. So the frog was able to return to the spring and was happy about that. Lars sat down next to his kettle, which he had filled up again, in order to take his time and think about what he should fish for. Of course, he thought that the first thing he should wish for would be that his kettle should get some legs and be able to walk, so he would not have to carry it. Then the princess would not be able to laugh at his kettle, saying that it had no feet, and she would not be able to make fun of him by saying that he needed a boy to carry the kettle. He had scarcely uttered this wish, when the kettle had feet and looked like it wanted to run away. However, Lars took his time, for he wanted to think of another wish, but one did not come to him, so he and the kettle trotted off. He held tightly onto the string that he had tied to the kettle, so that it was half pulling him along behind. Because his large broad-brimmed hat grew too heavy and warm for him, he hung it on the kettle like a lid, and thus, like a proper kettle, it had both feet and a lid. When he arrived at the castle window the young princess was still there, and when she saw the procession coming by with the kettle and the hat and Lazy Lars, she had to laugh, and she laughed so terribly hard that it almost made her sick. "Now your kettle is walking by itself, Lazy Lars, and you don't have to carry your hat either!" she shouted. "All you need now is a boy to push from behind!" "You yourself should have a boy," replied Lars, without thinking what he was saying, for he was tired of being teased. Then the princess closed the window, for she no longer wanted to talk with Lazy Lars. Lars arrived home safely with the kettle and got his noon meal. He did not give any thought to further wishes, for could not think of anything that he needed, so everything stayed as it was. Time passed as always, but nearly a year later something strange was happening at the castle, for the princess had gotten very ill. The doctors were called in. They shook their heads and wrote prescriptions, each one longer than the others, but nothing helped even a little bit. Then the princess's mother had a private talk with her. They spoke for a long time, and the princess cried and insisted that she was innocent, but the queen did not believe her. More time passed, and then there were no longer any doubts, for, as they say, a little barefoot boy came to the princes. The just old king nearly jumped out of his skin that such a scandal should come upon his house, and it did not make matters any better that the princess would not say anything about who the little prince's father was. For good or for evil, more time passed, and the fatherless prince was three years old when the king said that he could no longer endure the scandal. He would find out who the child's father was, and the princess would have to marry whoever it turned out to be. The king proclaimed across the whole realm that all men in the land, large and small, were to come together before the castle on a certain day. There they would hear the voice of the innocent child, who himself would determine who his father was. The day arrived, and a large mass of people, fine and course, came together. Around the castle it was black with people. On this day Lazy Lars's mother came home a little earlier than normal to prepare the noon meal, and as usual she found Lars sitting in the doorway enjoying the sunshine. "I do say," she called out, "does my Lazy Lars have nothing better to do on such a day than to sit here doing nothing?" Lars stretched and asked why she had said that, so she told him what was going on up at the castle. Lars thought that he was just as good as anyone else, so he meandered up there himself. When the king saw Lazy Lars approaching the castle he thought that they could surely begin now, because certainly Lars would be the last one to arrive, even though he lived closest. They put a golden apple in the little prince's hand, and the one to whom he would give the apple, he would be the father. The child walked slowly back and forth with the golden apple among the many people, as though he did not know what he should do with it. Finally he caught sight of Lars, who was standing at the very back of the crowd with his hands in his pockets. He walked toward Lars and reached the apple to him. Lars, in no hurry, slowly removed his hand from his pocket and took the apple. But then there came a huge uproar, so angry were the people -- large and small, poor and rich -- at Lars's good fortune. "Yes," they said, "those who can neither read nor write have all the luck." Lars was nearly trampled by the envious mob, but he held the apple tightly and finally made his way to the king, the queen, and all the ministers. When the king saw that it was Lazy Lars who had received the apple, he discovered that this final embarrassment was even worse than the first one. He took the princess, pushed her toward him, and said that he never wanted to see anything of them in his house again. If it had been a handsome gentleman then everything would have been all right, but Lazy Lars --! The king ordered his people to put Lars and the princess and the child into a boat on the sea east of the castle. They could set their own course and travel to whatever country they might choose. The king's order was carried out, and Lars and the princess were set adrift on the wild sea. They did not know which direction they were going. Evening came, and the princess cried pitifully. Lars, however, was lying on the bottom of the boat thinking only of himself, for this was the first time he had ever had water beneath him, and he was not up to a voyage at sea. "What should we do?" cried the princess. "Tell me, Lars, what should we do?" "Yes, what should be do?" answered Lars. "I don't know what we should do." And so they sailed on. After a while the princess said, "Say something, you Lazy Lars. You just lie there without saying a word." "What should I say then?" mumbled Lars. "The only thing I can say is that I wish we would soon be on land!" He had scarcely uttered this wish when there was suddenly before them, a beautiful island with woods and houses and people and cattle. The princess was very happy that Lars had finally opened his mouth, and she thought that everything would now be quite simple, since he was able to wish so well. She would only have to put the words into his mouth, and he would utter the wish. First of all he would have to wish that he were a normal human being and not the lazy beast that he had been up until now. Then he would have to wish for a beautiful castle with everything that went with it. He had scarcely uttered these wishes when suddenly new life came into Lars, and in the middle of the island there stood a beautiful castle, shimmering like bright gold. Then Lars had to wish for splendid clothing, carriages and horses, soldiers, and much more; and suddenly it was all at hand. -- Yes, the princess knew exactly what she wanted. The next morning after the king had gotten up, he went, as usual, to the window to look out over the sea. He had always liked to do this. There he saw a beautiful island east of his royal castle. On it was a castle that shimmered like bright gold. Could he trust his old eyes? No. He took a pair of spectacles and looked again. Yes, the island and the castle were still there, and that was more than the old king could comprehend. He called his people and asked if until now they had ever seen anything of this before. They too opened their eyes wide and thought that the devil himself had done this to make fools of them, for previously there had no more been an island there than there are roses on a manure pile. To assure himself the king had a ship made ready, and with his people he sailed over to the island. When he arrived on land, a row of soldiers was there, extending from the shore up to the castle. They presented arms to the old king, which pleased him greatly. When the old king and his people finally arrived at the castle, his daughter approached them smiling. She fell at his feet and begged him to accept the two of them into his grace, promising that they would be obedient children. The king was amazed, and his daughter had to tell him everything that had happened. She told him how she had been punished for having lightheartedly ridiculed Lazy Lars without considering that there might be some good in him after all. But it was good that everything had happened, for now she would not want anyone but Lars. He was no longer the way he had been before. New life had come into him. Then Lars came out, and in his beautiful clothing he looked as stately as a prince. He confirmed what the princess had said, and he also asked the king for mercy. All's well that ends well," said the king. We live in a strange world, but whosoever should be together, will be together. So everything was in order. They celebrated their wedding for many days, and they lived happily together. And when the old king died Lars became king and ruled many years with his queen. Source: Klara Stroebe, "Der faule Lars, der die Prinzessin bekam," Nordische Volksmärchen. 1. Teil: Dänemark und Schweden (Jena: Eugen Diederichs, 1922), no. 30, pp. 142-49 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. Stroebe's source: Jens Kamp, "Doven Lars, der fik Prinsessen," Danske Folkæventyr (Copenhagen: Fr. Wøldikes Forlag, 1879), no. 15, pp. 160-69 . Kamp recorded this tale from an unidentified informant on the island of Bogø. Return to the table of contents . Emelyan the Fool Russia In a certain village lived one time a peasant, who had three sons, two of whom were clever, but the third was a fool, and his name was Emelyan. And when the peasant had lived a long time, and was grown very old, he called his three sons to him, and said to them, "My dear children, I feel that I have not much longer to live, so I give you the house and cattle, which you will divide among you, share and share alike. I have also given you each a hundred rubles." Soon after, the old man died, and the sons, when they had buried him, lived on happy and contented. Some time afterward Emelyan's brothers took a fancy to go to the city and trade with the hundred rubles their father had left them. So they said to Emelyan, "Hark ye, fool! We are going to the city, and will take your hundred rubles with us. And if we prosper in trade, we will buy you a red coat, red boots, and a red cap. But do you stay here at home. And when our wives, your sisters-in-law, desire you to do anything, do as they bid you." The fool, who had a great longing for a red coat and cap, and red boots, answered that he would do whatever his sisters-in-law bade him. So his brothers went off to the city, and the fool stayed at home with his two sisters. One day, when the winter was come, and the cold was great, his sisters-in-law told him to go out and fetch water. But the fool remained lying on the stove, and said, "Aye, indeed, and who then are you?" The sisters began to scold him, and said, "How now, fool! We are what you see. You know how cold it is, and that it is a man's business to go." But he said, "I am lazy." "How," they exclaimed, "are you lazy?" Surely you will want to eat, and if we have no water we cannot cook. But never mind," they added. "We will only tell our husbands not to give him anything when they have bought the fine red coat and all for him!" The fool heard what they said. And, as he longed greatly to have the red coat and cap, he saw that he must go. So he got down from the stove and began to put on his shoes and stockings and to dress himself to go out. When he was dressed, he took the buckets and the ax and went down to the river hard by. And when he came to the river he began to cut a large hole in the ice. Then he drew water in the buckets, and setting them on the ice, he stood by the hole, looking into the water. And as the fool was looking, he saw a large pike swimming about. However stupid Emelyan was, he felt a wish to catch this pike. So he stole cautiously and softly to the edge of the hole, and making a sudden grasp at the pike he caught him, and pulled him out of the water. Then, putting him in his bosom, he was hastening home with him, when the pike cried out, "Ho, fool! Why have you caught me?" He answered, "To take you home and get my sisters-in-law to cook you." "Nay, fool! Do not take me home, but throw me back into the water, and I will make a rich man of you." But the fool would not consent and jogged on his way home. When the pike saw that the fool was not for letting him go, he said to him, "Hark ye, fool! Put me back in the water, and will do for you everything you do not like to do yourself. You will only have to wish, and it shall be done." On hearing this, the fool rejoiced beyond measure, for as he was uncommonly lazy, he thought to himself, "If the pike does everything I have no mind to do, all will be done without my being troubled to work." So he said to the pike, "I will throw you back into the water if you do all you promise." The pike said, "Let me go first, and then I will keep my promise." But the fool answered, "Nay, nay, you must first perform your promise, and then I will let you go." When the pike saw that Emelyan would not put him into the water, he said, "If you wish me to do all you desire, you must first tell me what your desire is." "I wish," said the fool, "that my buckets should go of themselves from the river up the hill to the village without spilling any of the water." Then said the pike, "Listen now, and remember the words I say to you: 'At the pike's command, go, buckets, of yourselves up the hill!'" Then the fool repeated after him these words, and instantly, with the speed of thought, the buckets ran up the hill. When Emelyan saw this he was amazed beyond measure, and he said to the pike, "But will it always be so?" "Everything you desire will be done," replied the pike. "But I warn you not to forget the words I have taught you." Then Emelyan put the pike into the water and followed his buckets home. The neighbors were all amazed and said the one another, "This fool makes the buckets come up of themselves from the river, and he follows them home at his leisure." But Emelyan took no notice of them, and went his way home. The buckets were by this time in the house, and standing in their place on the foot-bench. So the fool got up and stretched himself on the stove. After some time his sisters-in-law said to him again, "Emelyan, why are you lazying there? Get up and go cut wood." But the fool replied, "Yes! And you -- who are you?" "Don't you see it is now winter, and if you don't cut wood you will be frozen?" "I am lazy," said the fool. "What! You are lazy?" cried the sisters. "If you do not go instantly and cut wood, we will tell our husbands not to give you the red coat, or the red cap, or the fine red boots!" The fool, who longed for the red cap, coat, and boots, saw that he must go and cut the wood. But as it was bitterly cold, and he did not like to come down from off the stove, he repeated in an undertone, as he lay, the words, "At the pike's command, and at my desire, up, ax, and hew the wood! And do you, logs, come of yourselves in the stove!" Instantly the ax jumped up, ran out into the yard, and began to cut up the wood. And the logs came of themselves into the house, and laid themselves in the stove. When the sisters saw this, they wondered exceedingly at the cleverness of the fool. And, as the ax did of its own accord the work whenever Emelyan was wanted to cut wood, he lived for some time in peace and harmony with them. At length the wood was all finished, and they said to him, "Emelyan, we have no more wood, so you must go in the forest and cut some." "Aye," said the fool, "and you, who are you, then?" The sisters replied, "The wood is far off, and it is winter, and too cold for us to go." But the fool only said, "I am lazy." "How! You are lazy?" cried they. "You will be frozen then. And moreover, we will take care, when our husbands come home, that they shall not give you the red coat, cap, and boots." As the fool longed for the clothes, he saw that he must go and cut the wood. So he got off the stove, put on his shoes and stockings, and dressed himself. And, when he was dressed, he went into the yard, dragged the sledge out of the shed, took a rope and the ax with him, and called out to his sisters-in-law, "Open the gate." When the sisters saw that he was riding off without any horses, they cried, "Why, Emelyan, you have got on the sledge without yoking the horses!" But he answered that he wanted no horses, and bade them only open the gate. So the sisters threw open the gate, and the fool repeated the words, "At the pike's command, and at my desire, away, sledge, off to the wood!" Instantly the sledge galloped out of the yard at such a rate that the people of the village, when they saw it, were filled with amazement at Emelyan's riding the sledge without horses, and with such speed that a pair of horses could never have drawn it at such a rate. The fool had to pass through the town on his way to the wood, and away he dashed at full speed. But the fool did not know that he should cry out, "Make way!" so that he did not run over anyone. But away he went, and rode over quite a lot of people. An, though they ran after him, no one was able to overtake and bring him back. At last Emelyan, having go clear of the town, came to the wood and stopped his sledge. then he got down and said, "At the pike's command, and at my desire, up, ax, hew wood. And you, logs, lay yourselves on the sledge and tie yourselves together." Scarcely had the fool uttered these words when the ax began to cut wood, the logs to lay themselves on the sledge, and the rope to tie them down. When the ax had cut wood enough, Emelyan desired it to cut him a good cudgel. And when the ax had done this, he mounted the sledge and cried, "Up, and away! At the pike's command, and at my desire, go home, sledge!" Away then went the sledge at the top of its speed, and when he come to the town, where he had hurt so many people, he found a crowd waiting to catch him. And, as soon as he got into the gates, they laid hold of him, dragged him off his sledge, and fell to beating him. When the fool saw how they were treating him, he said in an under voice, "At the pike's command, and at my desire, up, cudgel, and thrash them!" Instantly the cudgel began to lay about it on all sides. and, when the people were all driven away, he made his escape, and come to his own village. The cudgel, having thrashed all soundly, rolled home after him. And Emelyan, as usual, when he got home, climbed up and lay upon the stove. After he had left the town, all the people fell to talking, no so much of the number of persons he had injured, as of their amazement at his riding in a sledge without horses. And the news spread from on to another, till it reached the court and came to the ears of the king. And when the king heard it, he felt an extreme desire to see him. So he sent an officer with some soldiers to look for him. The officer instantly started, and took the road that the fool had taken. And when he came to the village where Emelyan lived, he summoned the starosta, or head-man of the village, and said to him, "I am sent by the king to take a certain fool, and bring him before his majesty." The starosta at once showed him the house where Emelyan lived, and the officer went into it and asked where the fool was. He was lying on the stove, and answered, "What is it you want with me?" "How!" said the officer. "What do I want with you? Get up this instant and dress yourself. I must take you to the king." But Emelyan said, "What to do?" Whereat the officer became so enraged at the rudeness of his replies that he hit him on the cheek. "At the pike's command, and at my desire," said the fool, "up, cudgel, and thrash them!" Instantly up sprang the cudgel and began to lay about it on all sides. So the officer was obliged to go back to the town as fast as he could. And when he came before the king, and told him how the fool had cudgeled him, the king marveled greatly, and would not believe the story. Then the king called to him a wise man and ordered him to bring the fool by craft, if nothing else would do. So the wise man went to the village where Emelyan lived, called the starosta before him, and said, "I am ordered by the king to take your fool. And therefore ask for persons with whom he lived." Then the starosta ran and fetched Emelyan's sisters-in-law. The king's messenger asked them what it was the fool liked, and they answered, "Noble sir, if anyone entreats our fool earnestly to anything, he flatly refuses the first and second time. The third time he consents, and does what he is required, for he dislikes to be roughly treated." The king's messenger thereupon dismissed them and forbade them to tell Emelyan that he had summoned them before him. Then he brought raisins, baked plums, and grapes, and went to the fool. When he came into the room, he went up to the stove and said, "Emelyan, why are you lying there?" And with that he gave him the raisins, the baked plums, and the grapes, and said, "Emelyan, we will go together to the king. I will take you with me." But the fool replied, "I am very warm here," for there was nothing he liked so much as being warm. Then the messenger began to entreat him, "Be so good, Emelyan, do let us go! You will like the court vastly." "No," said the fool. "I am lazy." But the messenger entreated him once more, "Do come with me, there's my good fellow, and the king will give you a fine red coat and cap, and a pair of red boots." When the fool heard of the red coat he said, "Go on before. I will follow you." The messenger pressed him no further, but went out and asked the sisters-in-law if there was any danger of the fool's deceiving him. They assured him there was not, and he went away. Emelyan, who remained lying on the stove, then said to himself, "How I dislike this going to the king!" And after a minute's thought, he said, "At the pike's command, and at my desire, up stove, and away to the town!" And instantly the wall of the room opened, and the stove moved out. And when it got clear of the yard, it went at such a rate that there was no overtaking it. Soon it came up with the king's messenger, and went along with him into the palace. When the king saw the fool coming, he went forth with all his court to meet him. And he was amazed beyond measure at seeing Emelyan come riding on the stove. But the fool lay still and said nothing. Then the king asked him why he had upset so many people on his way to the wood. "It was their own fault," said the fool. "Why did they not get out of the way?" Just at that moment the king's daughter came to the window, and Emelyan happening suddenly to look up, and seeing how handsome she was, said in a whisper, "At the pike's command, and at my desire, let this lovely maiden fall in love with me!" And scarcely had he spoken the words when the king's daughter in love with him. Then said the fool, "At the pike's command, and at my desire, up, stove, and away home!" Immediately the stove left the palace, went through the town, returned home, and set itself in its old place. And Emelyan lived there for some time comfortably and happy. But it was very different in the town. For, at the word of Emelyan, the king's daughter had fallen in love, and she began to implore her father to give her the fool for her husband. The king was in a great rage, both with her and with fool, but he knew not how to catch him. Then his minister proposed that the same officer, as a punishment for not succeeding the first time, should be sent again to take Emelyan. This advice pleased the king, and he summoned the officer to his presence, and said, "Hark ye, friend! I sent you before for the fool, and you came back without him. To punish you, I now send you for him a second time. If you bring him, you shall be rewarded. If you return without him, you shall be punished." When the officer heard this, he left the king and lost no time to going in quest of the fool. And on coming to the village he called for the starosta and said to him, "Here is money for you. Buy everything necessary for a good dinner tomorrow. Invite Emelyan, and when he comes, make him drink until he falls asleep." The starosta, knowing that the officer came from the king, was obliged to obey him, so he bought all that was required and invited the fool. And Emelyan said he would come, whereat the officer was greatly rejoiced. So next day the fool came to dinner, and the starosta plied him so well with drink that he fell fast asleep. When the officer saw this, he ordered the kibitka (or carriage) to be brought, and putting the fool into it, they drove off to the town, and went straight to the palace. As soon as the king heard that they were come, he ordered a large cask to be provided without delay, and to be bound with strong iron hoops. When the cask was brought to the king, and he saw that everything was ready as he desired, he commanded his daughter and the fool to be put in it, and the cask to be well pitched. And when this was done, the cask was thrown into the sea, and left to the mercy of the waves. Then the king returned to his palace, and the cask floated along upon the sea. All this time the fool was fast asleep. When he awoke, and saw that it was quite dark, he said to himself, "Where am I?" for he thought he was alone. But the princess said, "You are in a cask, Emelyan! And I am shut up with you in it." "But who are you?" said the fool. "I am the king's daughter," replied she. And she told him why she had been shut up there with him. Then she besought him to free himself and her out of the cask, but the fool said, "Nay, I am warm enough here." "But grant me at least the favor," said the princess. "Have pity on my tears, and deliver me out of this cask." "Why so?" said Emelyan. "I am lazy." Then the princess began to entreat him still more urgently, until the fool was at last moved by her tears and entreaties, and said, "Well, I will do this for you." Then he said softly, "At the pike's command, and at my desire, cast us, O sea, upon the shore, where we may dwell on dry land. But let it be near our own country. And, cask, fall to pieces on the shore." Scarcely had the fool uttered these words when the waves began to roll, and the cask was thrown on a dry place, and fell to pieces of itself. So Emelyan got up and went with the princess round about the spot where they were cast. And the fool saw that they were on a fine island, where there was an abundance of trees, with all kinds of fruit upon them. When the princess saw this, she was greatly rejoiced and said, "But, Emelyan, where shall we live? There is not even a nook here." "You want too much," said the fool. "Grant me one favor," replied the princess. "Let there be at least a little cottage in which we may shelter ourselves from the rain," for the princess knew that he could do everything that he wished. But the fool said, "I am lazy." Nevertheless, she went on entreating him, until at last Emelyan was obliged to do as she desired. Then he stepped aside and said, "At the pike's command, and at my desire, let me have in the middle of this island a finer castle than the king's, and let a crystal bridge lead from my castle to the royal palace. And let there be attendants of all conditions in the court!" Hardly were the words spoken, when there appeared a splendid castle, with a crystal bridge. The fool went with the princess into the castle and beheld the apartments all magnificently furnished, and a number of persons, footmen and all kinds of officers, who waited for the fool's commands. When he saw that all these men were like men, and the he alone was ugly and stupid, he wished to be better, so he said, "At the pike's command, and at my desire, away, let me become a youth without an equal, and extremely wise!" And hardly had he spoken, when he became so handsome and so wise that all were amazed. Emelyan now sent on of his servants to the king to invite him and all his court. So the servant went along the crystal bridge which the fool had made, and when he came to the court, the ministers brought him before the king, and Emelyan's messenger said, "Please, your majesty, I am sent by my master to invite you do dinner." The king asked him who his master was, but he answered, "Please, your majesty, I can tell you nothing about my master (for the fool had ordered him not to tell who he was), but if you come to dine with him, he will inform you himself." The king, being curious to know who had sent to invite him, told the messenger that he would go without fail. The servant went away, and when he got home, the king and his court set out along the crystal bridge to go and visit the fool. And, when they arrived at the castle, Emelyan came forth to meet the king, took him by his white hands, kissed him on his sugared lips, led him into his castle, and seated him at the oaken tables covered with fine diaper tablecloths, and spread with sugar-meats and honey-drinks. The king and him ministers ate and drank and made merry. When they rose from the table and retired, the fool said to the king, "Does your majesty know who I am?" As Emelyan was now dressed in fine clothes, and was very handsome, it was not possible to recognize him, so the king replied that he did not know him. Then the fool said, "Does not your majesty recollect how a fool came riding on a stove to your court, and how you fastened him up in a pitched cask with your daughter, and cast them into the sea? Know me now. I am that Emelyan." When the king saw him thus in his presence he was greatly terrified and knew not what to do. But the fool went to the princess and led her out to him. And the king, on seeing his daughter, was greatly rejoiced, and said, "I have been very unjust to you, and so I gladly give you my daughter to wife." The fool humbly thanked the king. And when Emelyan had prepared everything for the wedding, it was celebrated with great magnificence, and the following day the fool gave a feast to the ministers and all the people. When the festivities were at an end, the king wanted to give up his kingdom to his son-in-law, but Emelyan did not wish to have the crown. So the king went back to his kingdom, and the fool remained in the castle and lived happily. Source: Robert Steele, The Russian Garland: Being Russian Folk Tales Translated from a Collection of Chapbooks Made in Moscow (London: A. M. Philpot, 1916), pp. 166-82 . Link to another translation of this story: W. R. S. Ralston, "Emilian the Fool," Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1873), pp. 263-67 . Return to the table of contents . Halfman Greece Once upon a time there was a woman who had no children. She was so unhappy about this that one day she prayed to God, "Dear God, give me a child, even if it were only half a child." Then God gave her a boy with half a head, half a nose, half a mouth, half a body, one hand and one foot. He was so misshapen that the mother always kept him at home and did not send him out to work. One day, however, he became bored, and he said to his mother, "Mother, I do not want to stay at home any longer. Give me an ax and a mule. I want to go out into the woods to fetch wood." His mother replied, "How can you chop wood, dear child? You are only half a person." Nonetheless, he begged so long that finally his mother gave him an ax and a mule. He took these into the woods. He chopped wood and brought it back home. He did this work so well that his mother allowed him to continue. One day when he was fetching wood he passed by the princess's castle. When she saw him with one foot and one arm sitting on the mule she laughed out loud and called to her maidservants, "Come and see the half man!" This embarrassed Halfman so much that he dropped his ax. He thought for a moment, then asked himself, "Shall I get off and pick it up, or shall I not?" In the end he did not get off, but instead left the ax lying there rode on. The princess said to the maidservants, "Just look at Halfman! He drops his ax and doesn't even get off to pick it up!" This embarrassed Halfman even more, and he dropped his rope. Once again he thought for a moment, then said to himself, "Shall I get off and pick up the rope, or shall I not?" In the end he rode off, leaving the rope lying there. With that the princess called to her maidservants, "Just look at Halfman! He drops his ax and his rope and doesn't even get off to pick them up!" Halfman rode on to the place where he was gathering wood, but arriving there he said to himself, "How can I chop wood, and how can I tie it together?" A lake was there, and while he stood there looking into the water he saw a fish swim up to the bank. He quickly threw his ragged coat onto it and caught it. The fish begged for its life, saying, "Let me loose, Halfman, and I will teach you a charm to make all your wishes come true." Then Halfman said, "If what you say is true, then load my mule with wood." The fish said, "By the first word of God and the second word of the fish, the mule shall be loaded with wood!" And behold, before he finished speaking this charm, the mule was loaded with wood. Seeing this, Halfman said to the fish, "If you will teach me the charm I will set you free." The fish said, "Whenever you want something to happen, just say, 'By the first word of God and the second word of the fish,' and whatever you wish for shall be granted." With that Halfman set the fish free, took his loaded mule, and walked off toward the princess's castle. When the princess saw him she called to her maidservants, "Come quickly and see how Halfman has loaded his mule without an ax or a rope." Then they all laughed until they could laugh no more. This made Halfman angry, and he said, "By the first word of God and the second word of the fish, let the princess become pregnant!" When her time came she bore a child, and no one knew who the father was. Her father summoned her and asked her who the father was, but she answered repeatedly, "I have not even spoken with a man. I do not know where the child came from." When the child was older the king summoned everyone to his capitol. After they had all gathered there he gave the child an apple and said, "Go forth and give this to your father." While the child was walking about and playing with the apple, he dropped it onto the ground, and it rolled away from him, finally coming to a rest in the corner where Halfman was standing. The child bent over to pick up the apple, then lifting his head he saw Halfman and said, "Here Papa! Take the apple!" Hearing this, the people took hold of Halfman and brought him before the king. The king said, "Because it was Halfman who did this, we must kill them all: him, the princess, and the child." However, some of his councilors said to him, "What you say is unjust. The princess is your daughter, and you cannot shed your own blood. It would be better to make an iron cask, put the princess, Halfman, and the child inside, and throw them into the sea. Give them only a bunch of figs for the child, so that it will not die too quickly." This advice pleased the king. Thus he had the cask made, the three placed inside, and thrown into the sea. Now seated inside the cask, the princess said to Halfman, "I have never seen you before. How is it that we are now here together?" "Give me a fig," replied Halfman, "and I will tell you about it." The princess gave him a fig from those that they had brought along for the child. After he had eaten it, Halfman said, "Don't you remember how you laughed at me when I passed by the castle, and I dropped my ax and my rope?" "Yes, I remember that," replied the princess. "Now I know a charm, and when I repeat it my every wish is fulfilled. At that time I wished that you should become pregnant, and that is why you became pregnant." To that the princess said, "If you know such a charm that fulfills your every wish, then wish us out of this cask and onto dry land." Halfman replied, "Give me a fig, and I will do so." So the princess gave him a fig, and he secretly said, "By the first word of God and the second word of the fish, may this cask drift onto dry land and open itself so that we can get out." And immediately the cask hit dry land, opened itself, and they all got out. It was raining outside, and the princess said, "Speak your charm so that we can find shelter and not get wet." Halfman said, "Give me a fig, and I will do so." So the princess gave him a fig, and he said to himself, "By the first word of God and the second word of the fish, let there be shelter here!" Suddenly such was the case, and they got under it. The princess said to Halfman, "Until now you have done very well! Now speak your charm and give us a large castle whose stones and timbers and furnishings all can speak." Halfman said, "Give me a fig, and I will do so." So the princess gave him a fig, and he said to himself, "By the first word of God and the second word of the fish, let there be castle whose stones and timbers and furnishings all can speak!" Suddenly such a castle was there, and everything connected to it could speak, and they went inside to live there, and Halfman brought forth everything that they needed and whatever the princess wished for herself. One day the king was out hunting, and he saw in the distance a castle that he had never seen before. He sent two of his servants thither, saying to them, "Take these partridges, go to that castle and broil them there, and see what kind of castle it is, for I have often been here hunting, but I have never before noticed it." The servants, thus commanded by the king, took the partridges and went to the castle. When they approached the outer door, it said to them, "What do you want here?" They said, "The king sent us here to broil these two partridges." The door replied, "Stay here. First I must ask the lady of the house." Then the outer door asked the first inner door, which in turn asked the second one, which in turn asked the third one, and so on, door to door, until the question reached the lady of the house. She ordered that the strangers be admitted, and suddenly all the doors opened by themselves, allowing the servants to come inside. They were greatly amazed when even the stones and the timbers welcomed them. Entering the kitchen one of them said, "Where can we find some wood?" The pieces of wood called out, "Here we are!" Then they said to one another, "We have no salt and no butter," to which the salt and butter called out, "Here we are!" After they had prepared the partridges, put them on the spit, and placed them next to the fire, they wanted to look around outside the kitchen to see if there were other things in the castle that could speak. However, they found so many such things and stayed away from the kitchen so long that the partridges had burned to charcoal when they finally thought about them and ran back to the kitchen. They did not know how they could excuse themselves to the king for having burned up his partridges. Finally they decided to go directly back to him and tell him what they had seen. The king did not believe them, and he sent other servants thither. They experienced the same things that the first ones had, and when the king heard them say the same thing, he decided that he would go there himself to see and hear with his own eyes and ears. When he arrived at the outside door, it said to him, "Welcome, your majesty!" When he went inside, all the stones and timbers called out the same welcome to him, and the king was amazed that here wood and stones could talk. Hearing that the king himself had arrived, the princess went to him to receive him. She led him into her splendid rooms, but did not tell him who she was. The king wondered about her correct manners and her elegant speech. Meanwhile the servants in the kitchen wanted to broil the partridges that the king had brought, and the same thing happened to them that had happened to the others. Amazed at all they saw and heard, they let the partridges burn to charcoal. When the king learned of this he became extremely angry, for he was very hungry and now had nothing to eat. The princess said, "I beg of your majesty to do us the favor of dining in our humble house." The king accepted, and she left him in order to look for Halfman, who had sneaked away from the king. Finding him, she said, "I invited the king to eat with us. Now speak a charm to provide a splendid feast with the appropriate servants, musicians, dancers, and everything else to go with it." To this Halfman said, "Give me a fig, and I will speak the charm." So the princess gave him a fig, and after he had eaten it he spoke the charm, asking for everything that the princess wanted, and suddenly a feast appeared, with everything that went with it. As soon as the king and his servants were seated at the table the musicians began to play, and they played so beautifully that the king was amazed. He said, "I am a king, but I have never had such music in my castle." Then the dancers began to dance, and they danced so beautifully that the king said to the princess, "I am a king, but I have never had such dancers in my castle. Tell me how you came to them." The princess replied, "My father left them to me as an inheritance." Then the princess went to Halfman and said, "You must speak a charm that will put a spoon into one of the king's boots." Halfman replied, "Give me a fig and I will do so." The princess gave him a fig, and he spoke the charm, granting the princess's wish. When the king was about to depart, the princes said, "Wait a moment. I believe that something is missing." This disturbed the king, who said, "No, that is not possible. We are not such people!" But the princess would not be dissuaded. She called out, "Are you platters all there?" "Yes!" "Are you plates all there?" "Yes!" "Are you spoons all there?" With that the spoon inside the king's boot called out, "I am stuck in the king's boot!" Now the princess began to scold the king, saying, "I invited you into my house, prepared a feast for you, and granted you every honor, and now your are stealing one of my spoons! Are you not ashamed of yourself?" The king said, "This is not possible! Someone put the spoon into my boot! You are doing me a severe injustice!" To that the princess said, "You also did such an injustice to me when you put Halfman and me into a cask, although I had done nothing wrong." The king stood there a long time, speechless with amazement. Then the princess brought Halfman to him, and Halfman explained everything that had happened. The king was amazed at this tale. He took his daughter back home with him and married her to one of his noblemen. He appointed Halfman to be his chief bodyguard and gave him his most beautiful slave girl for a wife. Source: "Der halbe Mensch," Johann Georg von Hahn, Griechische und albanesische Märchen , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Wilhelm Engelmann, 1864), pp. 102-109 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. The episode of the spoon planted in the king's boot is reminiscent of the Bible story of Joseph, who had a silver goblet planted in his brother Benjamin's pack. ( Genesis, chapters 44-45) Return to the table of contents . Juvadi and the Princess Italy One day Juvadi went to gather twigs, and he found an oak branch with acorns on it. He picked it up and carefully carried it in his arms. As he approached town he straddled it like a horse and thus pulled it further along. The little princess was standing at one of the king's windows, and she began to laugh out loud. Juvadi saw her and said, "May you get pregnant by me!" She soon became pregnant, and nine months later gave birth to a girl. The king was so angry about this that he called together his council and said, "Advise me what I should do to the person who has brought this shame upon me. I cannot believe what people are saying." The councilors said, "Bring together all the men in the kingdom, and then we shall see whom the child calls Papa." So the king summoned all the men to his house. His barons, princes, knights, citizens, and peasants all came, but the child did not call any of them Papa. The only man left was Juvadi, who did not come. Then the king forced him to come, and the child had scarcely seen him when she called him Papa. Once again the king called together his council and asked, "What should the punishment be for those who caused this shame?" They answered, "Let us put them into a cask and roll it over a cliff." So they had a cask made and locked the princess, her daughter, and Juvadi inside, then rolled it to a cliff to push it over. As it rolled along, Juvadi said, "Let me out! Let me out! I'll give you figs and raisins." So saying, he threw handfuls of figs and raisins out of the cask. The cask stopped rolling at a level spot. Juvadi broke open the cask, and they all got out. A witch was in the vicinity, and she laughed so hard that a swelling on her neck disappeared. She was very happy about this, and she said to Juvadi, "What is your wish? I can do everything, and will do something good for you." Juvadi answered, "Make a house for me, for we have no place to live." The witch picked up a stick and made a circle with it, saying, "Here shall be a palace, with all the comforts of the world." Suddenly a beautiful palace was there, and Juvadi happily went inside with the princess and their daughter. The princess then said to Juvadi, "Now you have to have an enchantment that will drive out your stupidity." Source: Albert Wesselski, Der Hodscha Nasreddin: türkische, arabische, berberische, maltesische, sizilianische, kalabrische, kroatische, serbische und griechische Märlein und Schwänke , vol. 2 (Weimar: Alexander Duncker Verlag, 1911), no. 439, pp. 123-25 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. Wesselski's source: Calabria, a region in the extreme south of mainland Italy. Wesselski does not give this piece a title. Return to the table of contents . Peter the Fool Giovanni Francesco Straparola A simple fellow, named Peter, gets back his wits by the help of a tunny fish which he spared after having taken it in his net, and likewise wins for his wife a king's daughter. There is proof enough, dear ladies, both in the chronicles of the past and in the doings of our own day, that a fool, whether by lucky accident or by sheer force of blundering, may sometimes score a success where a wise man might fail. Therefore, it has come into my mind to tell you the story of one of these fools, who, through the issue of a very foolish deed, got for his wife the daughter of a king and became a wise man himself into the bargain. In the Ligurian Sea there is an island called Capraia, which, at the time I am describing, was ruled by King Luciano. Amongst his subjects was a poor widow named Isotta, who lived with her only son Peter, a fisher lad. But from Peter's fishing she would scarce have kept body and soul together, for he was a poor silly creature known to all the neighbors as Peter the Fool. Though he went fishing every day he never caught anything, but in spite of his ill success he would always come up from his boat shouting and bellowing so that all the town might hear him, "Mother, mother, bring out your tubs and your buckets and your pails. Bring them out all, great and small, for Peter has caught a boatful of fish." The poor woman soon got to know the value of Peter's bragging, but in spite of this she always prepared the vessels, only to find herself jeered at by the silly youth, who, as soon as he came near, would thrust out his long tongue in ridicule, and otherwise mock at her. Now it chanced that the widow's cottage stood just opposite to the palace of King Luciano, who had only one child, a pretty graceful girl about ten years old, Luciana by name. She, it happened, was looking out of the window of the palace one day when Peter came back from fishing, crying out to his mother to bring out her tubs and her buckets and her pails to hold the fish with which he was laden, and so much was she diverted at the silly antics of the fool, that it seemed likely she would die with laughing. Peter, when he saw that he was made sport of, grew very angry, and threw some ugly words at her, but the more he raged the more she -- after the manner of willful children -- laughed and made mock at him. Peter, however, went on with his fishing day after day, and played the same trick on his mother every evening on his return. But at last fortune favored him, and he caught a fine tunny, very big and fat. Overjoyed at his good luck, he began to shout and cry out over and over again, "Mother and I will have a good supper tonight," when, to his amazement, he heard the tunny which he had just caught begin to speak, "Ah! My dear brother, I pray you of your courtesy to give me my life. When once you have eaten me, what farther benefit do you think you will get from me? But if you will let me live there is no telling what service I may not render you." But Peter, whose thoughts just then were set only on his supper, hoisted the fish on his shoulders and set off homewards. But the tunny still kept on beseeching his captor to spare his life, promising him first as many fish as he could want, and finally to do him any favor he might demand. Peter was not hardhearted, and, though a fool, fancied he might profit by sparing the fish, so he listened to the tunny's petition and threw him back into the sea. The fish, sensible of Peter's kindness, and not wishing to seem ungrateful, told Peter to get into his boat again and tilt it over so that the water could run in. This advice Peter at once followed, and, having leant over on one side, he let the boat be half filled with water, which brought in with it such a huge quantity of fish that the boat was in danger of sinking. Peter was well nigh beside himself with joy when be saw what had happened, and, when he had taken as many fish as he could carry, he betook himself homewards, crying out, as was his wont, when he drew near to the cottage, "Mother, mother, bring out your tubs and your buckets and your pails. Bring out them all, great and small, for Peter has caught a boatful of fish." At first poor Isotta, thinking that he was only playing his old fool's game, took no heed. But at last, hearing him cry out louder than ever, and fearing that he might commit some greater folly if he should not find the vessels prepared as usual, got them all ready. What was her surprise to see her simpleton of a son at last coming back with a brave spoil! The Princess Luciana was at the palace window, and hearing Peter bellowing louder than ever, she laughed louder than ever, so that Peter was almost mad with rage, and having left his fish, he rushed back to the seashore, and called aloud on the tunny to come and help him. The fish, hearing Peter's voice, came to the marge of the shore, and putting his nose up out of the waves, asked what service was required of him. "What service!" cried Peter. "Why I would that Luciana, that saucy minx, the daughter of our king, should find herself with child at once." What followed was a proof that the tunny had. not made an empty promise to Peter, for before many days had passed the figure of the young girl, who was not twelve years old, began to show signs of maternity. Her mother, when she marked this, fell into great trouble, but she could not believe that a child of eleven could be pregnant, and rather set down the swelling to the working of an incurable disease; so she brought Luciana to be examined by some women expert in such cases, and these, as soon as they saw the girl, declared that she was certainly with child. The queen, overwhelmed by this terrible news, told it also to the king, and he, when he heard it, cried aloud for death rather than such ignominy. Strict inquisition was made to discover who could have violated the child, but nothing was found out; so Luciano, to hide her dire disgrace, determined to have his daughter secretly killed. The queen, on hearing this, begged her husband to spare the unfortunate Luciana till the child should be born, and then do with her what he would. The king, moved with compassion for his only daughter, gave way so far; and in due time Luciana was delivered of a boy so fine and beautiful that the king could no longer harbor the thought of putting them away, but, on the other hand, gave order to the queen that the boy should be well tended till he was a year old. When this time was completed the child had become beautiful beyond compare, and then it came into the king's mind that he would again make a trial to find out who the father might be. He issued a proclamation that every man in the city who had passed fourteen years should, under pain of losing his head, present himself at the palace bearing in his hand some fruit or flower which might attract the child's attention. On the appointed day, in obedience to the proclamation, all those summoned came to the palace, bearing, this man one thing and that man another, and, having passed before the king, sat down according to their rank. Now it happened that a certain young man as he was betaking himself to the palace met Peter, and said to him, "Peter, why are you not going to the palace like all the others to obey the order of the king?" "What should I do in such a crowd as that?" said Peter. "Cannot you see I am a poor naked fellow, and have hardly a rag to my back, and yet you ask me to push myself in amongst all those gentlemen and courtiers? No." Then the young man, laughing at him, said, "Come with me, and I will give you a coat. Who knows whether the child may not turn out to be yours?" In the end Peter let himself be persuaded to go to the young man's house, and having put on a decent coat, they went together to the palace. But when they arrived there Peter's heart again failed him, and he hid himself behind a door. By this time all the men had presented themselves to the king, and were seated in the hall. Then Luciano commanded the nurse to bring in the child, thinking that if the father should be there the sense of paternity would make him give some sign. As the nurse carried the child down the hall everyone, as he passed, began to caress him and to give him, this one a fruit and that one a flower; but the infant, with a wave of his hand, refused them all. When the nurse passed by the entrance door the child began to laugh and crow, and threw himself forward so lustily that he almost jumped out of the woman's arms, but she, not knowing that anyone was there, walked on down the hall. When she came back to the same place the child was more delighted than ever, laughing and pointing with his finger to the door; so that the king, who had already noticed the child's actions, called to the nurse and asked her who was behind the door. The nurse, being somewhat confused, said that surely some beggar must be hidden there. By the king's command Peter was at once haled forth, and everybody recognized the town fool. But the child, who was close to him, stretched out his arms and clasped Peter round the neck and kissed him lovingly. The king, recognizing the sign, was stricken to the heart with grief, and having discharged the assembly, commanded that Peter and Luciana and the child should be put to death forthwith. The queen, though assenting to this doom, was fearful lest the public execution of the victims might draw down upon the king the anger of the people; so she persuaded him to have made a huge cask into which the three might be put and cast into the sea to drift at random. Then, at least, no one might witness their dying agony. This the king agreed to; and when the cask was made, the condemned ones were put therein, with a basket of bread and a flask of wine, and a drum of figs for the child, and thrust out into the rough sea, with the expectation that the waves would soon dash it to pieces against the rocks. But this was not to be their fate. Peter's poor old mother, when she heard of her son's misfortune, died of grief in a few days; and the unhappy Luciana, tossed about by the cruel waves, and seeing neither sun nor moon, would have welcomed a similar fate. The child, since she had no milk to give it, had to be soothed to sleep with now and then a fig. But Peter seemed to care for nothing, and ate the bread and drank the wine steadily, laughing the while. "Alas! alas!" cried Luciana in despair. "You care nothing for this evil which you have brought upon me, a poor innocent girl. You eat and drink and laugh without a thought of the danger around us. "Why," replied Peter, "this misfortune is more your own fault than mine. If you had not mocked me so, it would never have happened. But do not lose heart. Our troubles will soon be over." "I believe that," cried Luciana, "for the cask will soon be split on a rock, and then we must all be drowned." "No, no," said Peter." Calm yourself. I have a secret, and were you to know what it is, you would be vastly surprised and vastly delighted too, I believe." "What secret can you know," said Luciana, "which will avail us in such danger as this?" "I will soon tell you," Peter replied. "I have a faithful servant, a great fish, who will do me any service I ask of him, and there is nothing he cannot do. I may as well tell you it was through his working that you became with child." "That I cannot believe," said Luciana. And what may this fish of yours be called?" "His name is Signor Tunny," replied Peter. "Then," said Luciana, "to put your fish to the test, I will ask you to transfer to me the power you exercise over him, and to command him to do my bidding instead of yours." "Be it as you will," said Peter; and without more ado he called the tunny, who at once rose up near the cask, whereupon Peter commanded him to do everything that Luciana might require of him. She at once exercised her power over the fish by ordering him to make the waves cast the cask ashore in a fair safe cleft in the rocks on an island, a short sail from her father's kingdom. As soon as the fish had worked her will so far, she laid other and much harder tasks upon him. One was to change Peter from the ugly fool that he was into a clever, handsome gallant. Another was to have built for her forthwith a rich and sumptuous palace with lofty halls and chambers and girt with carven terraces. Within the court there was to be laid out a beautiful garden, full of trees which should bear, instead of fruit, pearls and precious stones, and in the midst of it two fountains, one of the freshest water and the other of the finest wine. All these wonders were wrought by the fish almost as soon as Luciana had spoken. Now all this time the king and the queen were in deep misery in thinking of the cruel death they had contrived for Luciana and her child, how they had given their own flesh and blood to be eaten by the fishes. Therefore, to find some solace in their woe, they determined to go to Jerusalem and to visit the Holy Land. So they ordered a ship to be put in order for them, and furnished with all things suited to their state. They set sail with a favoring wind, and before they had gone a hundred miles they came in sight of an island upon which they could see a stately palace, built a little above the level of the sea. Seeing that this palace was so fair and sumptuous, and standing, moreover, within Luciano's kingdom, they were seized with a longing to view it more closely. So, having put into a haven, they landed on the island. Before they had come to the palace Luciana and Peter saw and recognized them, and, having gone forth to meet them, greeted them with a cordial welcome, but the king and queen did not know their hosts for the great change which had come over them. The guests were taken first into the palace, which they examined in every part, praising loudly its great beauty, and then they were led by a secret staircase into the garden, the splendor of which pleased them so amazingly that they swore they had never at any time before looked upon a place so delightful. In the center of this garden there stood a noble tree, which bore on one of its branches three golden apples. These the keeper of the garden was charged to guard jealously against robbers, and now, by some secret working which I cannot unravel, the finest of these apples was transported into the folds of the king's robe about his bosom, and there hidden. Luciano and the queen were about to take their leave when the keeper approached and said to Luciana, "Madam, the most beautiful of the three golden apples is missing, and I can find no trace of the thief." Luciana forthwith gave orders that the whole household should be searched, one by one, for such a loss as this was no light matter. The keeper, after he had searched thoroughly everyone, came back and told Luciana that the apple was nowhere to be found. At these words Luciana fell into great confusion, and, turning to the king, said, "Your majesty must not be wroth with me if I ask that even you allow yourself to be searched, for I prize the golden apple that is lost almost as highly as my life." The king, unsuspicious of any trick, and sure of his innocence, straightway loosened his robe, and lo! the golden apple fell from it to the ground. The king stood as one dazed, ignorant as to how the golden apple could have come into his robe, and Luciana spoke, "Sire, we have welcomed you to our house with all the worship fitting to your rank, and now, as a recompense, you would privily rob our garden of its finest fruit. Meseems you have proved yourself very ungrateful." The king, in his innocence, attempted to prove to her that he could not have taken the apple, and Luciana, seeing his confusion, knew that the time had come for her to speak, and reveal herself to her father. "My lord," she said, with the tears in her eyes, "I am Luciana, your hapless daughter, whom you sentenced to a cruel death along with my child and Peter the fisher boy. Though I bore a child, I was never unchaste. Here is the boy, and here is he whom men were wont to call Peter the Fool. You wonder at this change. It has all been brought about by the power of a marvelous fish whose life Peter spared when he had caught it in his net. By this power Peter has been turned into the wisest of men, and the palace you see has been built. In the same way I became pregnant without knowledge of a man, and the golden apple was conveyed into the folds of your robe. I am as innocent of unchastity as you are of theft." When the king heard these words his eyes were opened, and he knew his child. Then, weeping with joy, they embraced each other, and all were glad and happy. After spending a few days on the island, they all embarked and returned together to Capraia, where with sumptuous feastings and rejoicings Peter was duly married to Luciana, and lived with her in great honor and contentment, until Luciano died, and then he became king in his stead. Source: Giovanni Francesco Straparola, The Facetious Nights of Straparola : The Italian Novelists , translated into English by W. G. Waters; vol. 1 (London: Privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901), night 3, tale 1, pp. 242-59 . First published as Le piacevoli notti, 2 vols., 1550/1553. Edited by D. L. Ashliman . © 2011. The episode of the golden apple planted in the father's robe is reminiscent of the Bible story of Joseph, who had a silver goblet planted in his brother Benjamin's pack. ( Genesis , chapters 44-45) Peruonto Giambattista Basile Peruonto goes to the forest to gather a fagot of wood, and behaves kindly towards three girls whom he finds sleeping in the sun, and receives from them a charm. The king's daughter mocks him, and he calls down a curse upon her that she should be with child of him, which coms to pass. Knowing that he is the father, the king commands that he should be put inside a cask with his wife and little ones, and thrown into the sea: but in virtue of the charm he has received, he frees himself of the danger, and becoming a handsome youth, is made king. A good deed is never lost: whoever sows the seed of kindness meets with due reward, and whoever sows the seed of love gathers love in return. The favor which is shown to a grateful heart is never barren, and gratitude gives birth to gifts. Instances of these sayings occur continually in the deeds of mankind: and you will meet with an example of it in the tale that I am about to relate to you. A countrywoman of Casoria, by the name of Ceccarella, had a son named Peruonto, who was the silliest body and the ugliest lump of flesh that nature had ever created; so that the unhappy mother always felt sad at heart, and cursed the day and the hour upon which she had given birth to this good-for-nothing, who was not worth a dog's hide. The unfortunate woman could cry out as much as she liked, but the ass never stirred to do her the lightest service. At last, after screaming herself hoarse, and assailing him with all the epithets she could think of, she induced him to go to the forest and gather a fagot of wood, saying, "It is nearly time that we should have something to eat. Run for this wood, that I may get ready somewhat: and forget not yourself on the way, but come back at once, that I may cook the needful so as to keep the life in us." Peruonto departed, and fared on like a monk among his brethren in a procession. Away he went, stepping as one treading down eggs, with the gait of a jackdaw, counting his paces as he went. At last he reached a certain part of the forest through which ran a streamlet, and nearby he saw three young girls lying on the grass, with a stone for a pillow, fast asleep, with the sun pouring its rays straight upon them. When Peruonto saw them, like a fountain amid a roaring fire, he took compassion upon them; and with the ax which he carried to cut the wood he severed some branches from the trees, and built a kind of arbor over them. Whilst he was busy so doing the young girls awoke (they were the daughters of a fairy), and perceiving the kindness and goodness of heart of Peruonto, in gratitude they gave him a charm, by which he might possess whatever he knew how to ask for. Peruonto, having performed this action, continued faring towards the forest, where he cut down a fagot of wood so large that it would require a cart to carry it. Seeing that it would be impossible for him to lift it, he sat upon it, saying, "Would it not be a fine thing if only this fagot would carry me home?" And behold, the fagot began to trot like a Besignano horse, and arriving before the king's palace, it began to wheel round, and prance, and curvet, so that Peruonto cried out aloud, enough to deafen all hearers. The young ladies who attended the king's daughter, whose name was Vastolla, happening to look out of the window and behold this marvel, hastened to call the princess, who, glancing out and observing the tricks played by the fagot, laughed until she fell backwards, which thing was unusual, and the young ladies were astonished at the sight, as the Lady Vastolla was by nature so melancholy that they never remembered to have seen her smile. Peruonto lifted his head, and perceiving that they were mocking him, said, "O Vastolla, may you be with child by me!" and thus saying, tightened his heels on the fagot, which at once moved away, and in an instant arrived home with a train of screaming children behind; and if his mother had not quickly shut the door, they would have slain him with stones. In the meantime Vastolla, after a feeling of uneasiness, and unrest, and the delay of her monthly period, perceived that she was with child, and hid as long as possible her plight, until she was round as a cask. The king, discovering her condition, was exceedingly angry, and fumed, and swore terrible oaths, and convened a meeting of the council, and thus spoke to them: '"You all know that the moon of my honor is wearing horns, and you all know that my daughter has furnished matter of which to write chronicles, or, even better, to chronicle my shame. You all know that to adorn my brow she has filled her belly; therefore tell me, advise me what I had better do. Methinks I had rather have her slain than have her give birth to a bastard race. I have a mind to let her feel rather the agonies of death than the labor of childbed. I have a mind to let her depart this world ere she bring bad seed into it." The ministers and advisers, who had made use of more oil than vinegar, answered him, saying, "Truly she deserves a great punishment, and of the horns which she forces on your brow should the handle be made of the knife that shall slay her; but if we slay her now that she is with child, the villain who has been the principal cause of your disgust, and who has dressed you with horns right and left will escape unhurt. Let us await, therefore, until it comes to port, and then we are likely to know the root of this dishonor; and afterwards we will think and resolve, with a grain of salt, which course we should best follow." The king was pleased with this advice, perceiving in it sound sense, and therefore held his hand, and said, "Let us await the issue of events." As heaven willed, the time came, and with little labor, at the first sound of the midwife's voice, and the first squeeze of the body, out sprang two male children like two golden apples. The king, who was full of wrath, sent for his ministers and counselors, and said to them, "My daughter has been brought to bed, and the time has come for her to die." The old sages answered (and all to gain time upon time), "No, we will wait until the children get older, so as to be able by their favor to recognize their father." The king, not desiring his counselors to think him unjust, shrugged his shoulders and took it quietly, and patiently waited until the children were seven years of age, at which time he again sent for his counselors, and asked them for their advice. One of them said, "As you have not been able to know from your daughter who was the false coiner that altered the crown from your image, it is time that we seek to obliterate the stain. Command that a great banquet should be prepared, and ask all the grandees and noblemen of the city, and let us be watchful, and seek with our own eyes him to whom the children incline most by the inclination of nature, for that one without fail will be the father, and we will at once get hold of him like goat's excrement." The king was pleased with this advice. He gave orders for the banquet, invited all folk of any consequence, and after they had eaten their fill he asked them to stand in line and pass before the children, but they took as much notice of them as did Alexander's steed of the rabbits, so that the king became enraged and bit his lips with anger, and although he was not wanting in shoes, because of the tightness of those he was compelled to wear he stamped the ground with the excess of pain. His advisers said to him, "Softly, your majesty! Take heart. We will give another banquet in a short while, no more inviting the noblest of the land, but instead folk of the lower class, as women often attach themselves to the worst: and perchance we will meet with the seed of your wrath amid cutlers, comb-sellers, and other merchants of small wares, as we have not met with him among the noble and well-born." The king was pleased with this advice, and commanded the second banquet to be prepared, whereto came, by invited by a summons, all folk from Chiaja, all the rogues, all adventurers and fortune-hunters, all quick-witted, all ruffians, and villains, and apron-wights that were to be found in the city, who, taking seat like unto noblemen at a long table spread with rich abundance, began straightway to stuff themselves. Now it so happened that Ceccarella, having heard the ban which invited folk to this banquet, began to urge Peruonto to go to it also, and so much did she say and do that at last she prevailed upon him to depart, and he went. He had hardly entered the place of feasting, when the two pretty children ran to him, and embraced him, and received him with great joy, and sported and played with him. The king, beholding this sight, pulled out his own beard, seeing that the winning ticket of this lottery had fallen to an ugly brute, the sight of whom made one sick. He was shaggy-headed, owl-eyed, had a nose like a parrot's beak, and a mouth like a fish. He was so tattered and torn, that no part of his body was hidden. Sighing heavily, the king said, "Has ever any one seen anything like this, that that light-o'-brains daughter mine should have it in her head to fall in love with this sea-monster? Has ever any one seen one that could take to the heel of such a hairy foot? Ah, infamous woman, what blind and false metamorphoses are these: to become a strumpet for a pig, so that I should become a ram? But what am I waiting for? What am I thinking of? Let them feel the weight of my just chastisement. Let them be punished as they deserve, and let them bear the penalty that you will adjudge. Take them out of my sight, for I cannot endure them." The ministers all took counsel together, and resolved that the princess and the malefactor, with the two children, should be put into a cask and thrown into the sea, so that they should thus end their days without the king soiling his hands with his own blood. No sooner was the sentence pronounced than the cask was brought, and all four were put therein; but before they were thrown in, some of the handmaidens of Princess Vastolla, who were weeping bitterly, put inside the hogshead raisins and dried figs, so that they could live for a little time. Then the cask was closed, and taken away, and flung into the sea, and it kept sailing on wherever the wind blew it. Meanwhile Vastolla, weeping with sore weeping, her eyes running two streamlets of tears, said to Peruonto, "What great misfortune is ours that our grave should be Bacchus' cradle! Oh, could I but have known who it was that worked in this body to have me thrown into this prison! Alas! I have come to a sad end, without knowing the why or wherefore. O you cruel one, tell me, tell me, what magic art did you use, what wand did thou wave, to bring me to this pass, to be shut herein by this hogshead's hoops? Tell me, tell me, what devil tempted you to put into me the invisible pipe, and gain nothing by it but this dark spectacle? Peruonto, who had for a time listened and pretended not to hear, answered at last, "If thou want know how it came to pass, give me some raisins and figs." The princess, desiring to draw from him something, gave him a handful of each; and as soon as he had eaten them, he began to recount all that had happened to him with the three young girls and the fagot of wood, and how at last he had passed under her window, and how, when she laughed at him, he wished her to be with child by him. When the lady Vastolla heard this, she took heart, and said to him, "Why should we make exit of life inside this hogshead? Why not wish for this vessel to become a splendid ship, so that we may escape from this peril and arrive in good port?' Peruonto answered, "Give me some figs and raisins, if you want this to happen." Vastolla at once satisfied his gluttony, so that he should be willing to speak, and like a carnival fisherwoman, with the raisins and figs she fished for the words fresh out of his body. Peruonto said the words desired by the princess, and at once the cask became a ship, with all the sails ready for sailing, and with all the sailors that were needed for the ship's service; and there were to be seen some lowering the sheets, some hauling the shrouds, some holding the rudder, some setting the studding-sails, some mounting to the upper-main-topsail, one crying, "Put the ship about!" and another, "Put the helm up!" and one blowing the trumpet, and others firing the guns, and some doing one thing, and some another, so long as Vastolla remained on board the ship, swimming in a sea of sweetness. It was now the hour when the moon played with the sun at going and coming, and Vastolla said to Peruonto, "Handsome youth of mine, wish that this ship may become a palace, so that we may be more secure. You know the proverb, 'Praise the sea, but dwell on shore.'" Peruonto answered, "If you want this to happen, give me some figs and raisins," and she at once gave him what he asked for. Peruonto, having eaten, wished his wish, and the ship became a beautiful palace, adorned in all points, and furnished with such splendor that nothing was wanting. So that the princess, who would have parted with life easily but a short time before, now would not have exchanged her place with the highest lady in the world, seeing that she was served and entreated as a queen. Then, to put a seal, upon her good fortune, she begged Peruonto to obtain the grace of becoming handsome and polished, so that they could be happy together, for although the proverb says, "Better a pig for a husband than an emperor for a friend," if he could change his looks she would take it as the greatest good fortune. Peruonto once again answered, "Give me some figs and raisins, if you want this to happen," Vastolla at once responded with the raisins and figs, so that as soon as the wish was spoken he became from a sparrow a bullfinch, from a ghoul a narcissus, and from a hideous mask a handsome youth. Vastolla, seeing such a transformation, was beside herself with joy, and throwing her arms around him, tasted the sweet juice of happiness. Now it so happened that at this same time the king, who from the day on which he had pronounced the cruel sentence had not lifted his eyes from the ground, was entreated to go hunting by his courtiers, who though thus to cheer him up. He went, but was surprised by nightfall. Sighting from afar a light from a lantern at one of the windows of the palace, he sent one of his followers to see if they would receive him there, and he was answered that he could shelter there for the night. The king accepted the invitation, and mounting the steps, entered, and going from room to room, he could see no person living except the two children, who kept at his side, saying, "Grandfather! grandfather! grandfather!" The king wondered with greatest wonder, and marveled with greatest marvel. Being wearied, he seated himself by a table, when he beheld spread on it by invisible hands a white cloth and divers dishes of food, of which he partook, and wines of good vintage, of which he drank truly as a king, served by the two pretty children, never ceasing: and whilst he was eating, a band of musicians played beautifully, touching even the marrow of his bones. When he was finished eating, a bed suddenly appeared made of cloth of gold; and having had his boots pulled off, he took his rest, and all his courtiers did the same, after having eaten well at a hundred tables, which had been made ready in other rooms. As soon as morning came, the king got ready to depart, and was going to take with him also the little ones, when Vastolla and her husband appeared, and falling at his feet, asked his pardon, and recounted to him all their fortune. The king, seeing that he had won two grandsons that were like two grains of gold and two priceless gems, and a son-in-law like a jinn, embraced first one and then the other, and took them with him to the city, and commanded great festivals and rejoicings to be made for this great gain, which lasted many days, solemnly confessing to himself that "Man proposes, but God disposes." Source: Giambattista Basile, Il Pentamerone; or, The Tale of Tales , translated by Richard Burton, vol. 1 (London: Henry and Company, 1893), pp. 30-39 . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 20, 2011. The Fool and the Mare's Egg: Folktales of Type 1319 The Fool and the Mare's Egg Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 1319 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2021 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Purchase of the Horse's Egg (India). The Weaver and the Watermelon (India). Buying a Pumpkin Instead of a Mule (Algeria). Nasreddin Hodja and the Mule's Egg (Turkey). The Two Cockneys and the Mare's Egg (England). The McAndrew Family (Ireland). Kleinenberg Horse Eggs (Germany). The Men from Ried Hatch a Donkey (Switzerland). Donkey Seed (Italy). The Pumpkin (Serbia). The People of Sainte-Dode (France). The Irishman and the Mare's Egg (Canada). The Irishman and the Pumpkin (USA -- Virginia). Racehorse Eggs (USA -- Idaho). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Purchase of the Horse's Egg India The Gooroo Noodle and His Five Disciples Decide to Purchase a Horse The Gooroo demanded how much the price of a horse would amount to. As they heard upon enquiry that it could not cost less than from fifty to a hundred pagodas, the Gooroo determined that he had not ability to pay so much. The matter thus remained a good while under consideration, when one day they perceived that their milch cow which had been turned out to feed, did not return home at the close of the evening; they sought her all over the village, but as, notwithstanding their search, she was not to be found, Blockhead on the following day went to seek her in the surrounding villages. On his return to the Mattam the third day, unable to discover her anywhere, he exclaimed with delight, "The cow, Sir, I cannot find: 'tis no matter, however, for I have met with a horse for us at a very low price.'' "How is that?" demanded the Gooroo with eagerness. To which Blockhead replied, "When I was on my return, after I had been searching from village to village, from common to common, from enclosure to enclosure, in order to find the milch cow, I perceived four or five mares grazing and reposing on the bank of a large lake. As I went on farther I found, in a place which was near, a number of horses' eggs hanging down in every direction, which could not be encompassed by one's two arms. Upon enquiry of one who came up, he informed me that they were in truth horses' eggs, and that the price of each of them was only four or five pagodas. Here is a fine opportunity, Sir. We can thus, at an easy rate, obtain a high bred horse, and as for its docility, this will depend upon the manner in which we rear it and break it in." They all consented to this proposition, and having united Idiot with him, delivered into their hands five pagodas, and despatched them forthwith on their journey. After Blockhead and Idiot had set out, in the manner just mentioned, to purchase the horse's egg, Fool thus threw out a doubt. "Grant that the egg of a high bred courser be obtained, still when obtained, it is only after having been sat upon that it will be hatched; but who in the world is to hatch it I am sure I do not know. He says that it is not to be encompassed by one's two arms: though then we were to keep ten hens together upon it, they could not even stand upon it, much less cover it. Tell us then how we arc to manage in this business." On hearing what he said, they all stared at each other with astonishment, and without opening their mouths, remained speechless. After a considerable pause, the Gooroo addressed himself separately to each of the three who were present, saying, "I see no other way but that one of us should sit on it." Upon this each made his excuses. "It is my business," says one, "to go daily to the river and fetch all the water that is wanted, as also to go to the jungle and procure canes for firewood, how therefore can I possibly hatch it?" Says another, "After remaining night and day without intermission in the kitchen, dressing rice, cooking all kinds of curries, making fancy cakes and boiling water, for everybody, thus killing myself at the stoves, how can the hatching be performed by me?" Says another, "Before daybreak I go to the river, and after having cleansed my teeth, rinsed my mouth, washed my face, purified my hands and feet, and completed all my ceremonies according to the rules, I have to go round the flower gardens, cull the new buds, bring them hither with due respect, tie long garlands, strew flowers over different idols, at the same time worshipping them, and daily assist at the Poojei of the deity. Such is my business; is it not? With all this, how can I hatch it?" To this the Gooroo replied, ''This is all quite true; neither can it be accomplished by the other two who are gone away; for one of them has more business than he can finish, in making enquiries respecting those who come and go, in giving answers to the questions which they propose, and in hearing and settling the disputes which are brought before him. Finally, Blockhead, on all occasions when we wish to transact any business, is he not the person who goes to the shops, to the fairs and to the villages? It is very true, therefore, that you must follow those occupations which constantly require your attention. For my part, am I not here doing nothing? I will place the egg in my lap, embrace it with my arms, cover it with the skirt of my cloth, hug it in my bosom, guard it with tenderness, and thus hatch it. It is enough if we do but produce the horse, we will not regard the trouble which is to be endured." Whilst all this deliberation was taking place in the Mattam, Blockhead and Idiot, who had set out in the third watch with the rising moon, after a journey of more than two kadams and a half, bent their course towards the mark which they had before seen and noticed, and arrived at the borders of the lake where there was an abundance of pumpkins in fruit. On perceiving this, being greatly delighted, they went to the countryman who was attending there and entreated him, saying, "Master, we earnestly conjure you to give us one of these eggs." He, in his turn, seeing their idiotism, said, "Hey-day! do you suppose yourselves fit to buy such high bred horses' eggs as these? They are very costly indeed." To this they replied, "Go to Master, do we not know that five pagodas is the price of them? Look ye, friend, take your five pagodas and give us a good egg." To this he answered, ''You are, to be sure, fine honest fellows. In consideration of your good qualities, I consent to give them to you at this price; select therefore an egg to your liking, and go your ways, but do not publish it abroad that you have obtained it at this easy rate." They both of them selected and took away a fruit which was larger than all the rest, and rising early the next morning, they set out on their journey just as the day was breaking. Blockhead having carefully taken the egg and lifted it on his head, the other went before shewing the way, and while they were thus going along, Blockhead began to say, "Ay, ay, our forefathers have said, They who perform penance, are forwarding their own affairs. We have now seen the proof of this with our own eyes. This in truth is the profit which has accrued by the penance continually performed by our Gooroo. A high bred horse, which is worth a hundred or a hundred and fifty pagodas, we purchase and take to him for five." To which Idiot replied, "Needs this any reflection? Hast thou not heard the saying -- From pious actions alone proceeds delight; all else is irrelevant and unworthy of praise. From virtue, not only profit, but pleasure proceeds; except there be virtue, all else will be misery and disgrace. Did not my father for a long time practise many virtues; and he found his profit and delight in the end, in having me born to him." To which the other replied, "Can this be doubted? If you sow a castor oil tree, will an ebony tree he produced? From good actions, good will proceed, from evil actions, evil." Thus conversing, after they had walked along for a considerable distance, the pumpkin, from striking against the bough of a tree which was bent and hanging down, was dashed out of his hands, and suddenly tumbling upon some shrubs which were spreading in bushes below, cracked and fell to pieces. Upon this, a hare which was sitting in the bushes started up and ran away. Taking the alarm, they cried out, ''Behold! The horse's foal which was in the shell has run away;" and followed after to catch and seize it. Running, regardless of hills or dales, or woods or commons, the clothes which they had on became entangled in the thorny bushes, and were partly torn and partly detained. They continued the pursuit, with their flesh lacerated by the stumps which they trod on, their blood flowing in consequence of the thorns which stuck into them, their bodies all streaming with perspiration, their hearts beating, their two ears closed, puffing and blowing with fatigue, and their bowels jolting; notwithstanding which, the hare was not caught, and they both fell down, wearied out and harassed with fatigue. In the meantime the hare went on, and becoming concealed, so as no longer to be kept in sight, it ran away to a great distance. They too, regardless of their weariness, rose up, and with legs limping and wounded by thorns, stones and stumps, searched in every direction. Journeying in this afflicted condition, they suffered hunger and fasting all that day, and after sunset arrived at the Mattam. When they entered in at the gate, they smote their mouths, crying, "Alas! Alas!" and beating themselves, fell down. "What is it? What is it? What harm has come to you?" demanded the rest; who came, and, taking them by the hand, raised them up. After the two had related in detail all the circumstances that had happened. Blockhead spoke as follows: "O Sir, since the day that I was born, I never beheld so swift a horse as this: of an ash colour, mixed with black; in form and size like a hare, and a cubit in length. Although a foal still in the nest, it pricked up its two ears, cocked its tail, which rose up the length of two fingers, extended and stretched forth its four legs, and with its heart close to the ground, ran with a swiftness and impetuosity which can neither be expressed nor conceived." Upon this they were all bewailing, when the Gooroo appeasing them, said, "True indeed, the five pagodas are gone, but however, it is well that the horse's foal is gone also; if whilst a foal it runs in this manner, when hereafter it shall become full grown, who will be able to ride upon it? I truly am an old man: a horse of this description, my friends, although it were presented to me gratis, I would not accept." Source (books.google.com): Constantino Giuseppe Beschi, The Adventures of the Gooroo Paramartan , translated by Benjamin Babington (London: J. M. Richardson, 1822), pp. 60-70 . Source (Internet Archive): Constantino Giuseppe Beschi, The Adventures of the Gooroo Paramartan , translated by Benjamin Babington (London: J. M. Richardson, 1822), pp. 60-70 . Return to the table of contents . The Weaver and the Watermelon India Once upon a time a poor country weaver visited a town, where he saw a quantity of watermelons piled up one above the other in front of a grain-seller's shop. "Eggs of other birds there are," he said, "and I have seen them; but what bird's eggs are these eggs? These must be mare's eggs." So he looked at the grain-seller, and said: "Are these eggs mare's eggs?" The man instantly cocked his ears; and perceiving that he was a simpleton, answered: "Yes, these eggs are mare's eggs." "What is the price?" inquired the countryman. "One hundred rupees apiece," said the grain-seller. The simple weaver took out his bag of money, and, counting out the price, bought one of the melons and carried it off. As he went along the road, he began to say to himself: "When I get home I will put this egg in a warm corner of my house, and by-and-by a foal will be born, and when the foal is big enough, I shall mount it and ride to the house of my father-in-law. Won't he be astonished?" As the day, however, was unusually hot, he stopped at a pool of water to bathe. But first of all he deposited the melon most carefully in the middle of a low bush, and then he proceeded to undress himself. His garments were not half laid aside, when out from the bush sprang a hare, and the weaver, snatching up part of his clothing while the rest hung about his legs in disorder, made desperate efforts to chase and overtake the hare, crying out: "Ah, there goes my foal! Wo, old boy -- wo, wo!" But he ran in vain, for the hare easily escaped, and was soon out of sight. The poor weaver reconciled himself to his loss as best he could. "Kismet!" cried he; "and as for the egg, it is of course of no use now, and not worth returning for, since the foal has left it." So he made the best of his way home, and said to his wife: "O wife, I have had a great loss this day. "Why," said she, "what have you done?" "I paid one hundred rupees for a mare's egg," replied he; "but while I stopped on the road to bathe, the foal jumped out and ran away." "Ah, what a pity!" cried the wife; "if you had only brought the foal here, I would have got on his back, and ridden him to my father's house!" Hearing this, the weaver fell into a rage, and, pulling a stick out of his loom, began to belabour his wife, saying: "What! you would break the back of a young foal? Ah! you monster, let me break yours." After this he went out, and began to lament his loss to his friends and neighbours, warning them all: "If any of you should see a stray foal, don't forget to let me know." To the village herdsmen especially he related his wonderful story: how the foal came out of the egg, and ran away, and would perhaps be found grazing on the common-lands somewhere. One or two of the farmers, however, to whom the tale was repeated, said: "What is this nonsense? Mares never have eggs. Where did you put this egg of yours?" "I put my egg in a bush," said the weaver, near the tank on the way to the town." "Come and show us!" cried the farmers. "All right," assented the weaver; "come along." When they arrived at the spot, the melon was found untouched in the middle of the bush. "Here it is," cried the weaver; "here's my mare's egg. This is the thing out of which my foal jumped." The farmers turned the melon over and over, and said: "But what part of this egg did the foal jump out of?" So the weaver took the egg, and began to examine it. "Out of this," cried one of the farmers, snatching back the melon, "no foal ever jumped. You are a simpleton, and you have been cheated! We'll show you what the foals are." So he smashed the melon on a stone, and, giving the seeds to the weaver, said: "Here are foals enough for you;" while the farmers themselves, amid much laughter, sat down and ate up the delicious fruit. Source (books.google.com): Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), pp. 146-48 . Source (Internet Archive): Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), pp. 146-48 . Return to the table of contents . Buying a Pumpkin Instead of a Mule Algeria The mother ot a youth of the Beni-Jennad clan gave him a hundred reals to buy a mule; so he went to market, and on his way met a man carrying a watermelon for sale. "How much for the melon?" he asks. "What will you give?" says the man. "I have only got a hundred reals," answered the booby; "had I more, you should have it" "Well," rejoined the man, "I'll take them." Then the youth took the melon and handed over the money. "But tell me," says he, "will its young one be as green as it is?" "Doubtless," answered the man," it will be green." As the booby was going home, he allowed the melon to roll down a slope before him. It burst on its way, when up started a frightened hare. "Go to my house, young one," he shouted. "Surely a green animal has come out of it." And when he got home, he inquired of his mother if the young one had arrived. Source (books.google.com): William Alexander Clouston, The Book of Noodles: Stories of Simpletons; or, Fools and Their Follies (London: Elliot Stock, 1888), p. 37 . Source (Internet Archive): William Alexander Clouston, The Book of Noodles: Stories of Simpletons; or, Fools and Their Follies (London: Elliot Stock, 1888), p. 37 . Return to the table of contents . Nasreddin Hodja and the Mule's Egg Turkey One day the Hodja went into the mountains to cut wood, and he took a melon with him. As he was walking along the melon fell from his arms and rolled down into the valley. A hare was sleeping there. The melon frightend him, and he ran away. Seeing the hare, the Hodja said: "I have done something stupid. The melon must have been pregnant, and that was a mule." With that he turned to his wood-cutting. When he returned home he told his wife about his adventure. She cried out: "Oh dear, husband, you should have caught it and brought it home! We could have ridden him to the garden!" The Hodja picked up a stick and said: "Get off him! He is still too young! You'll break his ribs!" Source (books.google.com): Albert Wesselski, Der Hodscha Nasreddin: Türkische, arabische berberische, maltesische, sizliianische, kalabrische, kroatische, serbische und griechische Märlein und Schwänke , vol. 1 (Weimar: Alexander duncker Verlag, 1911), no. 163, p. 86 . Source (Internet Archive): Albert Wesselski, Der Hodscha Nasreddin: Türkische, arabische berberische, maltesische, sizliianische, kalabrische, kroatische, serbische und griechische Märlein und Schwänke , vol. 1 (Weimar: Alexander duncker Verlag, 1911), no. 163, p. 86 . Link to additional tales about Nasreddin Hodja, the Turkish Trickster . Return to the table of contents . The Two Cockneys and the Mare's Egg England A truly rural story, which indicated to me no small sense of that humour which I am claiming as a set-off against our country dulness, I had from a stranger, an elderly farmer, as I took him to be, a fellow passenger in a train from Salisbury to Grately. Should my unknown friend ever see my version of his tale, I hope that he will pardon me for spoiling it by my indifferent telling, and that he will accept my thanks for the enjoyment which it afforded me. It ran thus, as nearly as I remember: Two cockneys, who had come down to stay a few days in the country, near Grately, on the borders of Hampshire and Wiltshire, met in their walk one morning an old man, who, my informant said, was "a droll old chap," and who happened to have a large pumpkin under his arm. The Londoners noticed that the old man was carrying something, though they could not quite make out what it was, and confident in their power as town-dwellers, they thought they would have a little joke at the old countryman's expense. So they opened fire. "Good morning, master." "Good marnin', zur." "What is that you are carrying under your arm, friend?" "'Tis a mare's egg, zur." "Dear me," said the Londoners, not liking to own their ignorance, "it's the finest we ever saw." "Ah, zur," said the old man, there's lots of common 'uns about, but this is a thoroughbred 'un, zur; that's what makes 'un look so vine." "Will you sell it?" said the cockneys. "Well," said the old man, "I doan't mind partin' wi' 'un, tho' I doan't s'pose you'll give the money I want for a thoroughbred mare's egg." After some bargaining, the men put their hands into their pockets and paid what was asked. The old man then handed over the pumpkin, and as he did so, looked at them very seriously, and said, "Now, mind, zur, and do 'ee take great care wi' 'un, for she'll hatch soon!" Away went the Londoners with their mare's egg, and as they were crossing a hill just by Grately station, which my informant pointed out, the one who was carrying the prize stumbled over one of the juniper bushes with which the hill is dotted about, and dropped the pumpkin, starting at the same time a hare out of the bush. In their excitement, and thinking, I suppose, that the fall had suddenly hastened the hatching, they shouted wildly to some men at work in a field at the bottom of the hill "Hi! Stop our colt! Stop our colt!" The story, told as it was in the purest Wiltshire dialect, was truly amusing. It is, however, a curious illustration of the temptation to give an air of reality and a proportionately increased interest to an anecdote by assigning it to a particular person or locality. When I heard the story in the train, and saw my friend point out the very scene of it on the hill at Grately, I felt that I was receiving it fresh from the very fountain-head. To my surprise, however, I found only the other day that the narrative in almost identical words was a favourite one of the father of one of my own parishioners, a Kentish man born and bred, who had been a resident all his life in his own county. I have since also been assured by a friend in the next parish, that her late husband's father, a Scotchman, living twenty miles beyond the border, used to tell this very same story with the greatest satisfaction. Where, therefore, it took its rise, and how it became known in districts so wide apart as Wiltshire, Kent, and the Lowlands of Scotland, are questions which I, at any rate, am not able to answer. Source (books.google.com): John Coker Egerton, Sussex Folk and Sussex Ways: Stray Studies in the Wealden Formation of Human Nature (London: Trübner and Company, 1884), pp. 19-22 . Return to the table of contents . The McAndrew Family Ireland A long time ago, in the County Mayo, there lived a rich man of the name of McAndrew. He owned cows and horses without number, not to mention ducks and geese and pigs; and his land extended as far as the eye could reach on the four sides of you. McAndrew was a lucky man, the neighbours all said; but as for himself, when he looked on his seven big sons growing up like weeds and with scarcely any more sense, he felt sore enough, for of all the stupid omadhauns, the seven McAndrew brothers were the stupidest. . . . The seven young McAndrews were as happy as could be until the fine old father fell sick and died. The eldest son came in for all the father had, so he felt like a lord. To see him strut and swagger was a sight to make a grum growdy laugh. One day, to show how fine he could be, he dressed in his best, and with a purse filled with gold pieces started off for the market town. When he got there, in he walked to a public-house, and called for the best of everything, and to make a fine fellow of himself he tripled the price of everything to the landlord. As soon as he got through his eye suddenly caught sight of a little keg, all gilded over to look like gold, that hung outside the door for a sign. Con had never heeded it before, and he asked the landlord what it was. Now the landlord, like many another, had it in mind that he might as well get all he could out of a McAndrew, and he answered quickly: "You stupid omadhaun, don't you know what that is? It's a mare's egg." "And will a foal come out of it?" "Of course; what a question to ask a dacent man!" "I niver saw one before," said the amazed McAndrew. "Well, ye see one now, Con, and take a good look at it." "Will ye sell it?" "Och, Con McAndrew, do ye think I want to sell that fine egg afther kaping it so long hung up there before the sun when it is ready to hatch out a foal that will be worth twenty good guineas to me?" "I'll give ye twenty guineas for it," answered Con. "Thin it's a bargain," said the landlord; and he took down the keg and handed it to Con, who handed out the twenty guineas, all the money he had. "Be careful of it, and carry it as aisy as ye can, and when ye get home hang it up in the sun." Con promised, and set off home with his prize. Near the rise of a hill he met his brothers. "What have ye, Con?" "The most wonderful thing in the world -- a mare's egg." "Faith, what is it like?" asked Pat, taking it from Con. "Go aisy, can't ye? It's very careful ye have to be." But the brothers took no heed to Con, and before one could say, "whist," away rolled the keg down the hill, while all seven ran after it; but before any one could catch it, it rolled into a clump of bushes, and in an instant out hopped a hare. "Bedad, there's a foal," cried Con, and all seven gave chase; but there was no use trying to catch a hare. "That's the foinest foal that ever was, if he was five year old the devil himself could not catch him," Con said; and with that the seven omadhauns gave up the chase and went quietly home. Source (books.google.com): Joseph Jacobs, More Celtic Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 97-102 . Source (Internet Archive): Joseph Jacobs, More Celtic Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 97-102 . Jacobs' source: "Supplied by Mrs. Gale, now in the United States, from the recitation of her mother, who left Ireland over fifty years ago. ( Notes and References, p. 228 . Typical of tales about fools, this story includes a number of episodes, only one of which is given here. Return to the table of contents . Kleinenberg Horse Eggs Germany Once a man drove through Kleinenberg with a load of cannonballs. He was asked what they were, and he answered that they were horse eggs. The people of Kleinenberg were curious when they heard that, and asked if he would sell one to them. He said that he would be glad to do so, and then sold one to them for a large sum of money. He also told them how to hatch it: They would have to sit on it without interruption. They did just that, faithfully taking turns. But no foal appeared. Finally one of the sitters became impatient, stood up angrily, kicked against the egg with his foot, and cried out, "You cursed egg, won't you give it up?" Now they had been sitting on the crest of a hill, and when he kicked agains the egg it rolled down into a bush where a hare was seated. The frighted hare ran off, and the Kleinenberger thought that it was his foal. "Come back, Horsey!" he shouted. But Horsey the Hare could not be stopped, and he did not come back. Source (books.google.com): Adalbert Kuhn, "Kleinenberger Pferdeeier," Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), no. 258, pp. 226-27 . Source (Internet Archive): Adalbert Kuhn, "Kleinenberger Pferdeeier," Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), no. 258, pp. 226-27 . Kleinenberg is a city in the German state of Lower Saxony ( Niedersachsen ). Return to the table of contents . The Men from Ried Hatch a Donkey Switzerland After the Lord God had created the world he wandered up and down the Wisper Valley and noticed that he had forgotten one spot. So he threw a handful of earth and stones onto a bare slope, and that was founding of the village of Ried. Now the people of Ried were a simple and backward folk. One day the mayor of Ried was in a village further down in the valley and, for the first time in his life, he saw a donkey. He liked the looks of this beast, and he asked the people how to grow such an animal, for he himself would like to have one. They said, "We plant them on a manure pile as little pumpkins. With sunshine and rain they grow bigger and bigger, and in the summer when the sun is right hot young donkeys hatch out of them, just like little chicks come from eggs. But if you want it to happen more quickly, you have to hatch them yourself." With that the mayor purchased a round green pumpkin and carried it back up to his village. He set it in the middle of the village square and he plus two other men sat on it day and night. After two days others came to relieve them, but while they were changing places the pumpkin rolled away. It crashed into some brush, frightening a hare, which leapt madly away. The mayor ran after it, waving his arms and shouting, "Stop! Stop, little donkey, I'm your father!" Source (books.google.com): Johannes Jegerlehner, Am Herdfeuer der Sennen: Neue Märchen und Sagen aus dem Wallis (Bern: Verlag von A. Francke, 1908), pp. 190-92 . Source (Internet Archive): Johannes Jegerlehner, Am Herdfeuer der Sennen: Neue Märchen und Sagen aus dem Wallis (Bern: Verlag von A. Francke, 1908), pp. 190-92 . Return to the table of contents . Donkey Seed Italy In a small mountain village all the horses and donkeys died. Because the mules were immediately needed, the people got together and chose two men to go to Trento and ask the bishop for some donkey seed. This was done. The bishop politely listened to them, then said, "Come back this afternoon to get what you have requested." When they returned that afternoon he gave them a large pumpkin filled with seeds. They put it on a donkey, thanked the bishop, and made their way homewards. High on the mountainside the donkey shied. The pumpkin fell to the ground and rolled down the mountain. It fell into a hare's nest, and the hares ran away. The two men shouted, "The donkeys are running away! They are running away!" They rushed to tell the others, and all together they ran off in search of the donkeys, but to this day they have not found them. Source (books.google.com): Christian Schneller, Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol: Ein Beitrag zur deutschen Sagenkunde (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), pp. 171-72 . Source (Internet Archive): Christian Schneller, Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol: Ein Beitrag zur deutschen Sagenkunde (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), pp. 171-72 . Return to the table of contents . The Pumpkin Serbia Ages ago when pumpkins were unkown here in this country, one day a peasant found a pumpkin on a hill not far from his village. He had no idea what he had found. Deeply concerned he asked the village judge what sort of thing it was, but the judge could not help him. He then approached the village elders hoping that one of them would be able to identify the mysterious object. They all stood there baffled, until finally one of them stepped forward and said, "It can only be a horse's egg, because you found it where the horses like to graze." The peasants all agreed with this explanation, but now there was a new difficulty: No one knew how to get a horse to sit on the egg to hatch it. Finally they decided that each house would assign a man to take turns hatching the egg. Because the pumpkin was already turning yellow they said, "The foal is almost ready to come out." The hatching turn came to an awkward fellow, and he turned this way and that way on the pumpkin causing it to lose its balance and roll into a gully where a hare was sleeping in the brush. The frightened hare ran away. The peasants pursued him, shouting, "Listen to us! Listen to us!" But the hare did not listen to them, but instead raced frantically into the woods. The peasants went back to the pumpkin to see how the hare had come out of it. They found a mass of pumpkin seeds. Now, first one and then another of them realized that was not an egg after all, but rather something entirely different. The judge distributed the seeds to the houses in the village with the instructions to plant them. The next summer they learned more about the mysterious thing, and since then they have planted pumpkins every year. The seed from which the first pumpkin grew must have been brought to our country by a bird from a foreign land, and thus the pumpkin grew on that hill not far from the village. Source (books.google.com): Friedrich S. Krauss, "Der Flaschenkürbis," Sagen und Märchen der Südslaven , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich), no. 114, pp. 258-59 . Source (Internet Archive): Friedrich S. Krauss, "Der Flaschenkürbis," Sagen und Märchen der Südslaven , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich), no. 114, pp. 258-59 . Return to the table of contents . The People of Sainte-Dode France The people of Sainte-Dode always have been considered to be simpletons, and they have often been taken advantage of. One day it occurred to the people of Sainte-Dode that they were earning too little with their farming, their wine-growing, and their horse breeding. The people -- men, women, and children -- assembled in front of the church to discuss the matter. "People of Sainte-Dode," called out the cleverest of them, "do you want to increase your fortune and at the same time work only half as much?" "Yes! Yes!" they all shouted. "Listen to what we must do. I have been told there is a merchant who lives near the the Daurade Church in Toulouse. He has horse seed for sale, but it is very expensive. We will have to buy some. Let us send four capable men to Toulouse to get some for us." "He is right! We want some of that horse seed!" The four men were soon selected, and they set off at once for Toulouse where they found the merchant's business near the Daurade Church. "Good day." "Good day, gentlemen." "We have been told that you have horse seed for sale here." "Gentlemen, that is true, but each seed costs one hundred gold pistoles . "We'll take one. Here is the money." From the back room the merchant fetched a pumpkin as large as a barrel. "Here, my friends, is my best horse seed. But listen to what I have to say. Shake it as little as possible while carrying it home. Be careful not to break it, otherwise the little foal that is inside will run away, and you will have spent your hundred gold pistoles for nothing. "Many thanks for the warning." The four men made their way toward Saint-Dode, and were ever so careful not to break it. They took turns carrying it on their heads. Everything went well as far as Aubiet, where they stopped to rest on a steep ledge. While they were catching their breath and taking a drink from their cantines the horse seed rolled over the ledge and broke into pieces against a stone. A hare that was sleeping a few steps away jumped up in fright and ran away. "Oh, what misfortune! Our horse seed has been botched. Just see how our little foal is running away!" Beside themselves with grief they arrived in Saint-Dode, where they were greeted with sticks and stones. Source (books.google.com): E. K. Blümml, "Die Einwohner von Sainte-Dode," Schnurren und Schwänke des französischen Bauernvolkes (Leipzig: Deutsche Verlagsactiengesellschaft, 1906), no. 28, pp. 71-72 . Source (Internet Archive): E. K. Blümml, "Die Einwohner von Sainte-Dode," Schnurren und Schwänke des französischen Bauernvolkes (Leipzig: Deutsche Verlagsactiengesellschaft, 1906), no. 28, pp. 71-72 . Return to the table of contents . The Irishman and the Mare's Egg Canada An Irishman had not been long in this country when he was sold a pumpkin by a country fellow, who told him that it was a "mare's egg." The Irishman continued his journey, carrying the pumpkin; but he soon got tired, and sat down to rest on the crest of a hill. The pumpkin rolled down the slope and was smashed to pieces. As it hit a brush-heap at the bottom, a rabbit ran away; and the Irishman jumped up, shouting, "Catch him, catch him! He is a race-horse." Source (books.google.com): F. W. Waugh, "Canadian Folk-Lore from Ontario," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 31 (1918), p. 78 . Return to the table of contents . The Irishman and the Pumpkin USA (Virginia) Once there was a man driving along the road with a pair of mules and a load of pumpkins, when an Irishman stopped him and wanted to know what those things were that he had in his cart. The man replied they were mule's eggs, and told the Irishman that if he would put one on the south side of a hill and sit on it, it would hatch out a mule. So the Irishman bought one and carried it up on the south side of a hill and sat down on it and soon went to sleep. Of course he fell off, and the pumpkin went rolling over and over down the hill and into the brush; out jumped a rabbit and went running off. "Koop, colie! Koop colie! Here's you mammy," called the Irishman, but the rabbit wouldn't stop. So the Irishman went back to the other man and said he wanted another mule's egg; the first one hatched into a mighty fine colt, but it ran so fast he couldn't catch it, and he would like to buy another. Source (books.google.com): The Southern Workman and Hampton School Record , vol. 18, no. 5 (Hampton, Virginia: May 1899), pp. 192-93 . Return to the table of contents . Racehorse Eggs USA (Idaho) Because of its fertility, many Easterners were attracted in former times to Paradise Valley in northern Idaho. An old-timer liked to show to visitors the enormous pumpkins which were grown there; and when asked what they were, he answered "Why, them's hoss eggs. Never seen any afore?" A little later he would stagger around with an un usually huge pumpkin and pretend to stumble and drop it; whereupon it would roll down a hill and start up a rabbit from a colony at the foot of the hill; for the pumpkin would hit a stone and explode with an awful bang. One Easterner, seeing a rabbit bounding off at full speed, cried excitedly: "Well, by gum, that egg would certainly have made some racehorse!" Source (books.google.com): Vardis Fisher, Idaho Lore , prepared by the Federal Writers' Project of the Work Projects Administration (Caldwell, Idaho: The Caxton Printers, 1939), p. 131 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 7, 2021. Fools Cannot Count Themselves: Folktales of type 1287 Fools Cannot Count Themselves folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1287 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2011 Contents The Twelve Men of Gotham (England). The Five Traveling Journeymen (Germany). The Seven Wise Men of Buneyr (Pakistan). The Lost Peasant (Kashmir). How the Kadambawa Men Counted Themselves (Sri Lanka). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Twelve Men of Gotham England On a certain day there were twelve men of Gotham that went to fish, and some stood on dry land; and in going home one said to the other, "We have ventured wonderfully in wading. I pray God that none of us come home and be drowned." "Nay, marry," said one to the other, "let us see that; for there did twelve of us come out." Then they counted themselves, and every one counted eleven. Said one to the other, "There is one of us drowned." They went back to the brook where they had been fishing, and sought up and down for him that was wanting, making great lamentation. A courtier, coming by, asked what it was they sought for, and why they were sorrowful. "Oh," said they, "this day we went to fish in the brook; twelve of us came out together, and one is drowned." Said the courtier, "Count how many there be of you." One of them said, "Eleven," and he did not count himself. "Well," said the courtier, "what will you give me, and I will find the twelfth man?" "Sir," said they, "all the money we have got." "Give me the money," said the courtier, and began with the first, and gave him a stroke over the shoulders with his whip, which made him groan, saying, "Here is one," and so served them all, and they all groaned at the matter. When he came to the last, he paid him well, saying, "Here is the twelfth man." "God's blessing on your heart," said they, "for thus finding our dear brother!" Source: W. A. Clouston, The Book of Noodles: Stories of Simpletons; or, Fools and Their Follies (London: Elliot Stock, 1888), pp. 28-29 . Gotham is a village in Nottinghamshire, England. The foolishness of the men of Gotham is legendary. The earliest known printed collection of their pranks is Merrie Tales of the Mad Men of Gotham , published in 1540, although by that date their pranks had been circulating in oral tradition for at least 100 years. According to some stories, there was method in the Gothamites' madness: They only feigned stupidity to avoid the costs that would have been entailed in hosting King John, who reigned from 1199 to 1216. When royal messengers witnessed their foolish pranks they chose another town for the king to stay in. Link to the Wikipedia article on Gotham, Nottinghamshire . Return to the table of contents . The Five Traveling Journeymen Germany (Swabia) Five journeymen once left a particular place to travel together, and they promised one another that they would all stay together. After walking a good distance, one of them suddenly wondered if they were still all there, and so he asked his comrades. They all stood still, and one of them began counting, "Here am I, one, two, three, four!" "Gracious! How concerned they were when one of them turned up missing!" One after the other each one counted, and the result was always four, because everyone missed himself. Then a stranger came by and asked what the trouble was. They told him and asked if he could help. The man told them all to press their noses into the mud and then count the holes. This they did, and when they saw that five noses were there, they knew that they had not lost one of their comrades, and they happily continued their journey. Source: Ernst Meier, "Die fünf Handwerksburschen auf Reisen," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 68, pp. 242-43 . Swabians are featured in many German anecdotes about fools. The above tale is from Swabia, but it does not identify the ethnicity of the characters. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Return to the table of contents . The Seven Wise Men of Buneyr Pakistan Seven men of Buneyr once left their native wilds for the purpose of seeking their fortunes. When evening came they all sat down under a tree to rest, when one of them said, "Let us count to see if we are all here." So he counted, "One, two, three, four, five, six," but, quite omitting to reckon himself, he exclaimed, "There's one of us missing. We are only six!" "Nonsense!" cried the others, and the whole company of seven began counting with uplifted forefingers, but they all forgot to count themselves. Fearing some evil, they now rose up, and at once set out to search for their missing comrade. Presently they met a shepherd, who greeted them civilly and said, "Friends, why are you in such low spirits?" "We have lost one of our party," answered they; "we started this morning seven in number, and now we are only six. Have you seen any one of us hereabouts?" "But," said the shepherd, "seven you are, for I have found your lost companion; behold: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven! " "Ah," answered the wise men of Buneyr, "you have indeed found our missing brother. We owe you a debt of gratitude." Source: Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 74, p. 305 . This tale continues with addtional episodes further demonstrating the foolishness of the men of Buneyr. Buneyr (also spelled Banêr) is a district in northwestern Pakistan. Return to the table of contents . The Lost Peasant Kashmir Ten peasants were standing on the side of the road weeping. They thought that one of their number had been lost on the way, as each man had counted the company and found them nine only. "Ho, you! What is the matter?" asked a townsman passing by. "Oh, sir," said the peasants, "we were ten men when we left the village, but now we are only nine." The townsman saw at a glance what fools they were. Each of them had omitted to count himself in the number. He therefore told them to take off their topís [skull caps] and place them on the ground. This they did, and counted ten of them, whereupon they supposed they were all there, and were comforted. But they could not tell how it was. Source: J. Hinton Knowles, Folk-Tales of Kashmir , 2nd ed. (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner and Company, 1893), pp. 322-23 . Knowles' source: Pandit Ánand Kol, Zaina Kadal, Srinagar. This tale is the second episode in a group of six stories collectively titled "The Stupid Peasant." Return to the table of contents . How the Kadambawa Men Counted Themselves Sri Lanka Twelve Kadambawa men cut fence sticks, tied them into twelve bundles, then set them upright and leaned them together. Then one of the men said, "Are our men all here? We must count and see." So a man counted them, but he counted only eleven men, omitting himself. "There are only eleven men, but there are twelve bundles of fence sticks," he said. Then another man said, "Maybe you have made a mistake," and counted them again in the same way. "There are eleven men and twelve bundles of fence sticks. There is a man missing," they said, and they went into the jungle to look for him. While they were in the jungle looking, a man from another village heard them shouting. He came to them and asked why they were shouting. The men said, "Twelve of our men came to cut fence sticks. There are twelve bundles of sticks but only eleven men. One man is missing." This man saw that there were twelve men, so he said, "Let each of you pick up your own bundle of fence sticks." So each of the twelve men picked up his own bundle of sticks, and thus they all returned to their village. Source: H. Parker, Village Folk-Tales of Ceylon , vol. 1 (London: Luzac and Company, 1910), no. 44, pp. 258-59 . Ceylon is the name given to Sri Lanka by the British East India Company. Retold by D. L. Ashliman. Parker's translation follows his Sinhalese sources so closely that English syntax is violated in almost every sentence. I have cautiously attempted to bring his narrative a little closer to idiomatic English. Return to the table of contents . Links A Fool Does Not Count the Animal He Is Riding . Tales of type 1288A. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 20, 2011. Forgiveness and Redemption: Legends of types 755 and 756 Forgiveness and Redemption legends of Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 755 and 756 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2001-2019 Contents Tannhäuser (Germany). The Woman Who Had No Shadow (Scandinavia). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Tannhäuser Germany Noble Tannhäuser, a German knight, had traveled through many lands. He even visited the beautiful women of the Mountain of Lady Venus, hoping to see what great miracles occurred there. After sojourning there for a while, with joy and contentment, his conscience finally directed him to return to the world, and he asked to take leave. Lady Venus, however, tempted him with whatever it might take to make him change his mind. She offered him one of her comrades for a wife, pointing out her red lips that never ceased smiling. Tannhäuser answered that he desired no woman other than the one he was now thinking of, nor did he want to burn forever in hell. He was not interested in the red lips. He did not want to stay here any longer, for to do so would destroy his life. Then the she-devil tried to lure him into her room, tempting him with love, but the noble night cursed her loudly, calling upon the Heavenly Virgin to help him escape. Filled with remorse, he set forth toward Rome in order to confess his sins to Pope Urban, and thus do penance to save his soul. However, after he confessed that he had remained an entire year with Lady Venus in her mountain, the Pope said: "Not until leaves begin to grow on this dry stick that I am holding in my hand, will your sins will be forgiven!" Tannhäuser said: "Had I but had only one more year to live, I would have shown remorse and done penance such that God would have taken mercy on me." Grieving that the Pope had cursed him, he left the city and returned to the demonic mountain, intending to stay there forever and ever. Lady Venus welcomed him as one welcomes a long absent lover. Three days later leaves began to grow on the stick, and the Pope sent messengers throughout the country, attempting to discover where Tannhäuser had gone. But it was too late. He was inside the mountain and had chosen a lover. There he will remain until Judgment Day, at which time God may send him to a different place. And a priest should never discourage a sinner but should forgive all who present themselves with remorse and penance. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Tannhäuser," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: in der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 170, pp. 246-47 . In later editions this legend is given the number 171. A second volume of German legends followed in 1818. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 756. Link to a copy of this legend in a single file: Tannhäuser . The historical Tannhäuser (ca. 1205-1267) was a knight, a poet, and a minstrel whose exploits as a crusader and as a lover are featured in numerous ballads and legends. Literary interpretations of his adventures include Richard Wagner's opera Tannhäuser und der Sängerkrieg auf Wartburg (composed between 1842 and 1845). Urban IV served as Pope between 1261 and 1264. Return to the table of contents . The Woman Who Had No Shadow Scandinavia Once there was a pastor's wife who was afraid to have children. Other women are concerned when they have no children, but she was constantly afraid that she could have children. One day she went to a wise woman, a wicked witch, and asked her what to do to avoid having children. The wise woman gave her seven stones and told her if she would throw them into the well she would be spared from having children. The pastor's wife threw the stones into the well. As each stone splashed below, she thought that she heard the cry of a child, but still she felt a great sense of relief. Some time later the pastor and his wife were walking across the churchyard by the light of a full moon, when the pastor suddenly noticed that his wife did not have a shadow. This frightened him, and he asked her for an explanation, stating that she must have committed a dreadful sin, a sin that she would have to confess to him. He continued to press her for a confession, until finally she admitted what she had done. Upon hearing her story, he angrily proclaimed, "Cursed woman! Flowers will grow from our slate roof before God forgives you of this sinful deed!" With that he sent her away, telling her to never again step across his threshold. One night, many years later, a wretched and tattered beggar woman approached the parsonage and asked for shelter. The housekeeper gave the poor woman a bit to eat and made a bed for her next to the kitchen stove. The next morning the pastor found the beggar woman dead on the kitchen floor. In spite of her rags, he recognized her immediately as the woman he had cursed and disowned. As he stood there contemplating her lifeless, but serene face, his housekeeper burst into the room. "Pastor!" she exclaimed. "Come outside! A miracle has happened during the night!" The pastor followed her outside and saw that his slate roof was covered with blossoming flowers. Source: Retold from Scandinavian sources, including: Sven Grundtvig, "Præstekonen," Gamle danske Minder, Viser, Sagn og Æventyr m.m., levende i Folkemunde (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversens Forlagshandel, 1861), no. 6, pp. 19-22 . The opera Die Frau ohne Schatten (1919), with text by Hugo von Hofmannsthal and music by Richard Strauss is related to this folktale. Link to another group of folktales about heroes who lose their shadows because of sinister relationships: The Black School . Link to the German-language text of a literary fairy tale by Adelbert von Chamisso (1781-1838) about a man who trades his shadow to the devil for a purse that will never run out of money: Peter Schlemihls wundersame Geschichte . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 755. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 9, 2019. The Fox and the Cat or The Fox and the Hedgehog: Fables of type 105 The Fox and the Cat or The Fox and the Hedgehog and other fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 105 and similar stories about the dangers of being too clever selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2001-2016 The fox knows many things; the hedgehog one big thing. (Archilochus) The fox knows many things, the hedgehog but one, but it is enough. (Greek proverb) Here's a good rule of thumb: Too clever is dumb. (Ogden Nash) Contents The Fish That Were Too Clever (India, The Panchatantra ). The Crow and the Swan (India, The Mahabharata ). A Fox and a Cat (Aesop, L'Estrange, 1692). The Fox and the Cat (Aesop, Jacobs, 1894). The Cat and Fox (Jean de La Fontaine). The Fox and the Cat (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Seven-Witted Fox and the One-Witted Owl (Romania). The Fox and His Bagful of Wits and the One-Witted Hedgehog (Romania). The Fox and the Hedgehog (South Slavonic). The Fox and the Hedgehog (Greece). The Bear as Judge (Finland). Two Losses (Georgia). Can You Swim? (England). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Fish That Were Too Clever The Panchatantra Two fish lived in a pond. Their names were Satabuddhi (having the understanding of a hundred) and Sahasrabuddhi (having the understanding of a thousand). The two of them had a frog for a friend, whose name was Ekabuddhi (having the understanding of one). For a time they would enjoy friendly conversation on the bank, and then they would return to the water. One day when they had gathered for conversation, some fishermen came by just as the sun was setting. They were carrying nets in their hands and many dead fish on their heads. When the fishermen saw the pond, they said to one another, "There seem to be a lot of fish in this pond, and the water is very low. Let us come back here tomorrow morning!" After saying this, they went home. These words struck the three friends like a thunderbolt, and they took counsel with one another. The frog said, "Oh, my dear Satabuddhi and Sahasrabuddhi, what shall we do? Should we flee, or stay here?" Hearing this, Sahasrabuddhi laughed and said, "Oh, my friend, don't be afraid of words alone! They probably will not come back. But even if they do come back, I will be able to protect myself and you as well, through the power of my understanding, for I know many pathways through the water." After hearing this, Satabuddhi said, "Yes, what Sahasrabuddhi says is correct, for one rightly says: Where neither the wind nor the sun's rays have found a way, intelligent understanding will quickly make a path . And also: Everything on earth is subject to the understanding of those with intelligence . Why should one abandon the place of one's birth that has been passed down from generation to generation, just because of words? We must not retreat a single step! I will protect you through the power of my understanding." The frog said, "I have but one wit, and it is advising me to flee. This very day I shall go with my wife to another pond." After saying this, as soon as it was night, the frog went to another pond. Early the next day the fishermen came like servants of the god of death and spread their nets over the pond. All the fish, turtles, frogs, crabs, and other water creatures were caught in the nets and captured, also Satabuddhi and Sahasrabuddhi, although they fled, and through their knowledge of the various paths escaped for a while by swimming to and fro. But they too, together with their wives, fell into a net and were killed. That afternoon the fishermen happily set forth toward home. Because of his weight, one of them carried Satabuddhi on his head. They tied Sahasrabuddhi onto a string and dragged him along behind. The frog Ekabuddhi, who had climbed onto the bank of his pond, said to his wife, "Look, dear! Mr. Hundred-Wit lies on someone's head, and Mr. Thousand-Wit is hanging from a string. But Mr. Single-Wit, my dear, is playing here in the clear water." Source: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey, vol. 2 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), book 5, story 6, pp. 337-38 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2001. India's most influential contribution to world literature, the Panchatantra (also spelled Pañcatantra or Pañca-tantra ) consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled, in their current form, between the third and fifth centuries AD. It is believed that even then the stories were already ancient. The tales' self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes the Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai, which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of the Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced medieval writers of fables. Return to the table of contents . The Crow and the Swan The Mahabharata There lived on the other side of the ocean a Vaicya (commoner) who had an abundance of wealth and corn. He performed sacrifices, made liberal gifts, was peaceful, devoted to the duties of his own order, and pure in habits and mind. He had many sons whom he loved, and was kind unto all creatures. He lived fearlessly in the dominions of a king that was guided by virtue. There was a crow that lived on the refuse of the dishes set before those well-behaved young children of the Vaicya . Those Vaicya children always gave the crow meat and curds, and milk, and sugared milk with rice, and honey, and butter. Thus fed with the refuse of their dishes by the young children of that Vaicya , the crow became arrogant and came to disregard all birds that were equal to him or even superior. It chanced that on a time certain swans of cheerful hearts, of great speed and capable of going everywhere at will and equal unto Garuda himself in range and speed of flight, came to that side of the ocean. The Vaicya boys, beholding those swans, addressed the crow and said, "O ranger of the skies, thou art superior to all winged creatures!" Deceived by those children of little understanding, that oviparous creature, from folly and pride, regarded their words to be true. Proud of the refuse of the children's dishes upon which he fed, the crow then, alighting in the midst of those swans capable of traversing great distances, desired to enquire as to who amongst them was their leader. The foolish crow at last challenged him amongst those birds of tireless wings whom he regarded their leader, saying, "Let us compete in flight!" Hearing those words of the raving crow, the swans that had been assembled there, those foremost of birds endued with great strength, began to laugh. The swans then, that were capable of going everywhere at will, addressed the crow, saying, "We are swans, having our abode in the Manasa lake. We traverse the whole earth, and amongst winged creatures we are always applauded for the length of the distances we traverse! Being, as thou art, only a crow, how canst thou, O fool, challenge a swan endued with might, capable of going everywhere at will, and doing large distances in course of his flight? Tell us, O crow, how thou shalt fly with us!" The boastful crow, in consequence of the foolishness of his species, repeatedly finding fault with the words of that swan, at last gave this answer. The crow said, "I shall, without doubt, fly, displaying a hundred and one different kinds of motion! Doing every hundred Yojanas in a separate and beautiful kind of motion, I shall display all those motions! Rising up, and swooping down, and whirling around, and coursing straight, and proceeding gently, and advancing steadily, and performing the diverse courses up and down in a slanting direction, and floating still, and wheeling around, and receding back, and soaring high, and darting forward, and soaring upwards with fiercer velocity, and once more proceeding gently and then proceeding with great impetuosity, and once again swooping down and whirling around, and advancing steadily, and rising up and up by jerks, and soaring straight, and once more falling down, and wheeling in a circle, and rushing proudly, and diverse other kinds of motion, -- these all I shall display in the sight of all you! Ye shall then witness my strength! With one of these different kinds of motion I shall presently rise into the sky. Point out duly, ye swans, by which of these motions I shall course through space. Settling the kind of motion amongst yourselves, you will have to course with me. Adopting all those different motions, ye shall have to course with me through supportless space!" The crow having said these words, one of the swans addressed him. The swan spoke, "Thou, O crow, wilt doubtless fly the hundred and one different kinds of flight! I shall, however, fly in that one kind of motion that all other birds know, for I do not, O crow, know any other! As regards thee, O thou of red eyes, fly thou in any kind of course that thou likest!" At these words, those crows that bad been assembled there laughed aloud, saying, "How will the swan by only one kind of flight get the better of a hundred different kinds of flight?" Then those two, viz., the swan and the crow, rose into the sky, challenging each other. Capable of going everywhere at will, the swan proceeded in one kind of motion, while the crow coursed in a hundred different kinds. And the swan flew and the crow also flew, causing each other to wonder at his skill and each speaking highly of his own achievements. Beholding the diverse kinds of flight at successive instants of time, the crows that were there were filled with great joy and began to caw more loudly. The swans also laughed in mockery, uttering many remarks disagreeable to the crows. And they began to soar and alight repeatedly, here and there. And they began to come down and rise up from tree-tops and the surface of the earth. And they uttered diverse cries indicative of their victory. The swan, however, with that one kind of slow motion with which he was familiar began to traverse the skies. For a moment, therefore, he seemed to yield to the crow. The crows, at this, disregarding the swans, said these words: "That swan amongst you which has soared into the sky, is evidently yielding!" Hearing these words, the soaring swan flew westwards with great velocity to the ocean. Then fear entered the heart of the crow who became almost senseless at not seeing any island or trees whereon to perch when tired. And the crow thought within his heart as to where he should alight when tired, upon that vast expanse of water. The ocean, being as it is the abode of countless creatures, is irresistible. Dwelt in by hundreds of monsters, it is grander than space. Nothing can exceed it in depth! Men know that the waters of the ocean are as limitless as space. For the extent of its waters, what is a crow to it? The swan, having traversed a great distance in a moment, looked back at the crow, and, though capable, could not leave him behind. Having transgressed the crow, the swan cast his eyes on him and waited, thinking, "Let the crow come up." The crow then, exceedingly tired, came up to the swan. Beholding him succumbing, and about to sink, and desirous of rescuing him in remembrance of the practices of good folks, the swan addressed him in these words: "Thou hadst repeatedly spoken of many kinds of flight while speaking on the subject! Thou wouldst not speak of this, thy present motion, because of its having been a mystery to us? What is the name of this kind of flight, O crow, that thou hast now adopted? Thou touchest the waters with thy wings and beak repeatedly. Which amongst those diverse kinds of flight is this, O crow, that thou art now practicing? Come, come, quickly, O crow, for I am waiting for thee!" Exceedingly afflicted, and touching the water with his wings and beak, the crow, beheld in that state by the swan, addressed the latter. Indeed, not seeing the limit of that watery expanse, and sinking down in fatigue, and exhausted with the effort of his flight, the crow said unto the swan, "We are crows, we wander hither and thither, crying caw, caw! O swan, I seek thy protection, placing my life-breaths at thy hands! Oh, take me to the shores of the ocean!" Exceedingly afflicted, and touching the ocean with his wings and beak, the crow, very much fatigued, suddenly fell down. Beholding him fallen upon the waters of the ocean with a melancholy heart, the swan, addressing the crow who was on the point of death, said these words: "Remember, O crow, what thou hadst said in praise of thyself! Thy words even were that thou wouldst course through the sky in a hundred and one different kinds of flight. Thou, therefore, that wouldst fly a hundred different kinds of flight, thou that art superior to me, alas, why then art thou tired and fallen down on the ocean?" Overcome with weakness, the crow then, casting his eyes upwards at the swan, and seeking to gratify him, replied, saying, "Proud of the remains of others' dishes upon which I fed, I had, O swan, regarded myself as the equal of Garuda, and had disregarded all crows and many other birds! I now, however, seek thy protection and place my life-breaths at thy hands! Oh, take me to the shores of some island! If, O swan, I can, O lord, return in safety to my own country, I will never again disregard anybody! Oh, rescue me now from this calamity!" Him that said so and was so melancholy and weeping and deprived of his senses, him that was sinking in the ocean, uttering cries of caw, caw, him so drenched by the water and so disgusting to look at and trembling with fear, the swan, without a word, took up with his feet and slowly caused to ride on his back. Having caused the crow whose senses had deserted him to ride upon his back, the swan quickly returned to that island whence thy had both flown, challenging each other. Placing down that ranger of the sky on dry land and comforting him, the swan, fleet as the mind, proceeded to the region he desired. Thus was that crow, fed on the remains of others' dinners, vanquished by the swan. The crow, then, casting off the pride of might and energy, adopted a life of peace and quiet. Source: The Mahabharata of Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa (Calcutta: Bharata Press, 1889), pp. 141-45 . Edited, and slightly shortened by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. Return to the table of contents . A Fox and a Cat Aesop (L'Estrange, 1692) There was a question started betwixt a fox and a cat, which of the two could make the best shift in the world, if they were put to a pinch. "For my own part," says Reynard, "when the worst comes to the worst, I have a whole budget of tricks to come off with at last." At that very instant, up comes a pack of dogs full-cry toward them. The cat presently takes a tree, and sees the poor fox torn to pieces upon the very spot. "Well," says Puss to herself, "one sure trick, I find, is better than a hundred slippery ones." The Moral: Nature has provided better for us, than we could have done for ourselves. Source: Roger L'Estrange Fables of Æsop and other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and Reflexions (London: Printed for R. Sare, T. Sawbridge, B. Took, M. Gillyflower, A. and J. Churchil, and J. Hindmarsh; 1692), no. 374, p. 346 . Return to the table of contents . The Fox and the Cat Aesop A fox was boasting to a cat of its clever devices for escaping its enemies. "I have a whole bag of tricks," he said, "which contains a hundred ways of escaping my enemies." "I have only one," said the cat. "But I can generally manage with that." Just at that moment they heard the cry of a pack of hounds coming towards them, and the cat immediately scampered up a tree and hid herself in the boughs. "This is my plan," said the cat. "What are you going to do?" The fox thought first of one way, then of another, and while he was debating, the hounds came nearer and nearer, and at last the fox in his confusion was caught up by the hounds and soon killed by the huntsmen. Miss Puss, who had been looking on, said, "Better one safe way than a hundred on which you cannot reckon." Source: Joseph Jacobs, The Fables of Æsop (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), pp. 91-92 . Return to the table of contents . The Cat and Fox Jean de La Fontaine The cat and fox, each like a little saint, On pious pilgrimage together went; Two real Tartufes, two Patelins, birds of prey, Soft-footed rogues, who paid or cleared the way, Picking the bones of poultry, stealing cheese, Rivalling each other. They the road to ease, For it was tedious and long, Oft shortened by contentions sharp and strong. Dispute's a very happy source; Without it restless souls would sleep of course. Our pilgrims with it made each other hoarse, Quarrelled their fill, then dirt on neighbours cast. Reynard said to the cat at last: "Pretender, are you bettor skilled than I, Who could with tricks a hundred cats supply?" "No," said the cat, "I only boast of one, But that's worth any thousand known." Ready again their quarrel to begin, With "Yes" and "No," through thick and thin, The pack alarmed them, silencing their din. "Friend," cried the cat, "now search your cunning brain, Examine all your tricks, and search again For some sure plan -- mine's ready, do you see?" He said, and quick sprang up a lofty tree. Sly Reynard played a hundred pranks in vain, Entered a hundred holes -- escaped assault, Put Finder and his brothers in default; He sought asylum all around, But he nowhere asylum found. They watched the burrow where he hid so sly, And smoked him out -- two terriers were nigh, Who worried him as he went bounding by. Avoid too many schemes; there ruin lies; For while we choose, the happy moment flies. Have but one plan, and let that plan be wise. Source: Jean de La Fontaine (1621-1695), The Fables of La Fontaine , translated mainly by R. Thomson (London: J. C. Nimmo and Bain, 1884), book 9, fable 14, pp. 215-16 . Link to the text in the original French: Le Chat et le Renard . Return to the table of contents . The Fox and the Cat Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm It happened that the cat met Mr. Fox in the woods. She thought, "He is intelligent and well experienced, and is highly regarded in the world," so she spoke to him in a friendly manner, "Good-day, my dear Mr. Fox. How is it going? How are you? How are you getting by in these hard times?" The fox, filled with arrogance, examined the cat from head to feet, and for a long time did not know whether he should give an answer. At last he said, "Oh, you poor beard-licker, you speckled fool, you hungry mouse hunter, what are you thinking? Have you the nerve to ask how I am doing? What do you know? How many tricks do you understand?" "I understand only one," answered the cat, modestly. "What kind of a trick is it?" asked the fox. "When the dogs are chasing me, I can jump into a tree and save myself." "Is that all?" said the fox. "I am master of a hundred tricks, and in addition to that I have a sackful of cunning. I feel sorry for you. Come with me, and I will teach you how one escapes from the dogs." Just then a hunter came by with four dogs. The cat jumped nimbly up a tree, and sat down at its top, where the branches and foliage completely hid her. "Untie your sack, Mr. Fox, untie your sack," the cat shouted to him, but the dogs had already seized him, and were holding him fast. "Oh, Mr. Fox," shouted the cat. "You and your hundred tricks are left in the lurch. If you had been able to climb like I can, you would not have lost your life." Source: "Der Fuchs und die Katze," Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales), 7th ed., vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 75, p. 388 . This fable was added to the Grimms' Kinder- und Hausmärchen with the second edition (1819). The Grimms' immediate source has not been identified precisely. Link to a separate file containing this tale alone: The Fox and the Cat by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2001. Return to the table of contents . The Seven-Witted Fox and the One-Witted Owl Romania One day the owl met a fox, and the latter bragged about his intelligence and cleverness, and said that he was very cunning and slim. The owl asked him, "Brother mine, how many minds (wits) have you?" "Seven," he said, boastingly. "No wonder you are so clever. I have only one," said the owl. A short time afterwards the owl again met the fox, but this time he was running for his life. The hunters were after him, and the hounds were trying to catch him. Running as fast as his legs could carry him, he at last managed to slip into a hole. The owl followed him, and seeing him there, exhausted, asked him, "How many minds (wits) have you?" And he replied, "Six. I have lost one by the chase." Meanwhile the hunters and dogs came nearer and nearer, so they could hear the baying of the dogs. The fox did not know what to do. The owl asked him, "How many minds (wits) have you now, old fellow?" "Oh, I have lost all my minds (wits). I have none left." "Where is your cunning of which you bragged?" "It is not kind of you, now, to go for a poor fellow when the dogs are at his heels, and there is no escape for him." "Well," said the owl, "I have but one mind (wit), and I will see whether I cannot save you with my one wit. It is my turn. I am going to lie down here at the entrance as though dead. When the hunters come, they will see me and get hold of me and talk about me. Meanwhile they will forget you, and in the midst of the trouble, you just dash out and run for your life." It happened just as the owl had said. No sooner did the hunters come up and find the owl than they said, "What is this ugly bird doing here? And a dead one to boot." And whilst they were busy with the owl, trying to get hold of it to throw it away, off went the fox through them and escaped. Soon afterwards the owl met him again, and she said, "How have your seven minds (wits) helped you when in time of danger? It is like that with people who have too much. They often have nothing when they want it most, but you see, I had only one mind (wit), but a strong one and not a dissolute one like yours, and that saved both you and me." Source: M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 110, pp. 320-21 . Return to the table of contents . The Fox and His Bagful of Wits and the One-Witted Hedgehog Romania I do not know how he managed it, but a fox one day got into a poultry yard, and there he ate his fill. Some time afterwards, going along to the poultry yard, the hedgehog met him. "Where are you going, brother?" "I am going to eat my fill." "Surely you cannot get it just as you like." "Oh," he said, "you just come with me, and I will show you. I know my way, and there is plenty for me and for you, and some to leave behind for another time." The hedgehog, who was a wise old fellow, said to the fox, "Now, be careful. Are you sure that the owners of the poultry yard will let you in again so easily?" "Don't you trouble," said the fox. "I know my business. You just come with me." And the hedgehog went with him. But the people of the poultry yard were not such fools as the fox had taken them for, and just where the fox had got in last time they had dug a deep pit, and into that the fox and the hedgehog tumbled. When they found themselves at the bottom of the pit, the hedgehog turned to the fox and said, "Well, you clever fellow, is that the proper way to get into the poultry yard? Did I not warn you?" "What is the good of talking?" replied the fox. "We are here now, and we must see how to get out of it." "But you are so clever, and I am only a poor old fool." "Never mind. You were always a wise one. Can you help me?" "No," he said. "I cannot help you. This sudden fall has upset me, and I feel queer and sick." "What," cried the fox. "You are not going to be sick here. That is more than I can stand. Out you go!" So he got hold of the hedgehog by the snout, and the hedgehog coiled himself up with his little paws into a little ball round the fox's mouth. The fox lifted up his head with a jerk and threw the little fellow out of the pit. As soon as he saw himself safely out of the pit, the little hedgehog, bending over the mouth of the pit, said, chuckling to the fox, "Where is your wisdom, you fool? You boast that you have a bagful of wits, whilst it is I who get myself out of the pit, though I have only a little wit." "Oh," said the fox, whining, "do have pity on me! You are such a clever old fellow. Help me out of it too." "Well, said the hedgehog, "I will help you. Now, you pretend to be dead, and when the people come and find you stiff and stark, and a nasty smell about you, they will say, 'The fox has died, and his carcass is rotting. It is going to make all the poultry yard offensive.' They will take you and throw you out. And then see whither your way lies." The fox did as the hedgehog had advised him, and when the people came and found him in that state, they hauled him out and threw him out of the yard onto the road. Quicker than you could clap your hands, the fox was on his legs, and he ran as if the ground was burning under him. Since then the fox and the hedgehog are good friends. Source: M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 111, pp. 322-23 . Return to the table of contents . The Fox and the Hedgehog South Slavonic A fox meeting a hedgehog asked him, "How many wits have you?" And he replied, "Only three. But how many have you?" "I," boasted the fox," have seventy-seven." As they were talking and walking along, not noticing where they were going, they fell into a deep hole which the peasants had dug. The fox asked the hedgehog to save him. The hedgehog said, "I have only three wits. Perhaps you will save me first, then I will see about you afterwards," and he asked the fox to pitch him out of the hole. The fox did so, and then asked the hedgehog whether he could help him. The hedgehog said, "I cannot help you with three, if you cannot help yourself with seventy-seven." And so the fox was caught in the morning by the peasants and killed. Source: M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), pp. 323-24 . Gaster's source: F. S. Krauss, "Fuchs und Igel," Sagen und Märchen der Südslaven , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich, 1883), no. 13, pp. 44-45 . Link to another version of this tale: Louise Seymour Houghton, "The Fox and the Hedgehog," The Russian Grandmother's Wonder Tales (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1913), pp. 73-76 . Return to the table of contents . The Fox and the Hedgehog Greece Once in the fall time a hedgehog and a fox ran into one another, and the fox said to the hedgehog, "Come with me to the vineyard to steal some grapes." The hedgehog answered, "No, I am afraid of the traps that they have set out there." The fox said, "Have no fear. You'll come to no harm, because I have three bags full of tricks." So they went there together and ate until they were full, but just as they were leaving, the fox caught herself in an iron trap. She called out, "Help me, Hedgehog! I'm caught in a trap." He said, "Empty the tricks out of your bag, so I can free you." The fox said, "I jumped over a ditch, and all my tricks fell out. Don't you know even one?" The hedgehog replied, "I know two of them. The one is that when the farmer comes, just play dead; the other is that while you are playing dead you should let a mighty fart." The fox did what the hedgehog had advised, and when the farmer came by, he thought that the fox was already stinky rotten and threw her out of the vineyard. Thus she escaped. Another time the fox again asked the hedgehog to go with her the vineyard and eat grapes. Because everything had worked out so well the first time, he went with her this time as well. After they had eaten until they were full and were about to leave, the hedgehog caught himself in a trap. He called out, "Help me, Mistress Fox, I'm caught in a trap. Empty out your tricks and free me from the trap." The fox replied, "I jumped over a ditch again, and all my tricks fell out." The hedgehog said, "Since I am about to die, forgive me of my sins." The fox said, "If you will forgive me all of my sins against you, then I will ask God to forgive you of all your sins." Then the hedgehog asked, "Come closer and we'll hug one another, because we have lived together for such a long time." The fox went to him, and they hugged one another. Then the hedgehog said, "You should also kiss me on the mouth." The fox did so, but the hedgehog grabbed hold of her tongue with his teeth and held her there until the farmer came by. When the farmer saw how the hedgehog had caught the fox he laughed, then he killed the fox and let the hedgehog run away. Source: Johann Georg von Hahn, "Die Füchsin und der Igel," Griechische und albanesische Märchen , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1864), no. 91, pp. 103-104 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. Return to the table of contents . The Bear as Judge Finland A dispute arose among a number of animals, namely the wolf, the fox, the cat, and the hare. Unable to settle matters by themselves, they summoned the bear to act as judge. The bear asked the disputants, "What are you quarreling about?" "We are arguing about the question as to how many ways each of us has to save his life in time of danger," they answered. The bear first asked the wolf, "Now, how many ways do you have to escape?" "A hundred," was the answer. "And you?" he asked the fox. "A thousand," he answered. Then the bear asked the hare, "How many do you know?" "I have only my fast legs," was the answer. Finally the bear asked the cat, "How many ways to escape do you know?" "Only one," answered the cat. Then the bear decided to put them all to the test in order to see how each one would save himself in time of danger. He suddenly threw himself at the wolf and crushed him half to death. Seeing what had happened to the wolf, the fox started to run away, but the bear grabbed him by the tip of his tail, and even to this day the fox has a white spot on his tail. The hare, with his fast legs, escaped by running away. The cat climbed a tree, and from his high perch sang down, "The one who knows a hundred ways was captured; the one who knows a thousand ways was injured; Longlegs must run on forever; and the one who has only one way to escape sits high in a tree and holds his own." So it is. Source: Emmy Schreck, "Der Bär als Richter," Finnische Märchen (Weimar: Hermann Böhlau, 1887), pp. 231-32 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. Return to the table of contents . Two Losses Georgia During a great storm at sea, a learned man heard the skipper giving his orders, but could not understand a word. When the danger was past, he asked the skipper in what language he had spoken. The sailor replied: "In my mother tongue, of course!" The scholar expressed his regret that a man should have wasted half his life without learning to speak grammatically and intelligibly. A few hours later the storm arose again, and this time the ship sprang a leak and began to founder. Then the captain went to the scholar and asked if he could swim. The man of books replied that he had never learned. "I am sorry, sir, for you will lose your whole life. The ship will go to the bottom in a minute, and my crew and I shall swim ashore. You would have done well if you had spent a little of your time in learning to swim." Source, Marjory Wardrop, Georgian Folk Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 167-68 . The skipper in this anecdote is sometimes identified as Nasreddin Hodja , the Turkish trickster. Return to the table of contents . Can You Swim? England I [John Ellerthorpe] once heard of a professor who was being ferried across a river by a boatman, who was no scholar. So the professor said, "Can you write, my man?" "No, sir," said the boatmam. "Then you have lost one third of your life," said the professor. "Can you read?" again asked he of the boatman. "No," replied the latter, "I can't read." "Then you have lost the half of your life," said the professor. Now came the boatman's turn. "Can you swim?" said the boatman to the professor. "No," was his reply. "Then," said the boatman, "you have lost the whole of your life, for the boat is sinking and you'll be drowned." Source: Henry Woodcock, The Hero of the Humber; or, The History of the Late Mr. John Ellerthorpe , 2nd edition (London: S. W. Partridge, 1880), p. 32 . The boatman in this anecdote is sometimes identified as Nasreddin Hodja , the Turkish trickster. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 27, 2016. The Fox and the Crow The Fox and the Crow and other fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 57 Selected by D. L. Ashliman © 2008-2011 Contents The Fox and the Crow (Aesop, translated by V. S. Vernon Jones). Links to Additional Type 57 Fables . Return to folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Fox and the Crow Aesop A crow was sitting on a branch of a tree with a piece of cheese in her beak when a fox observed her and set his wits to work to discover some way of getting the cheese. Coming and standing under the tree he looked up and said, "What a noble bird I see above me! Her beauty is without equal, the hue of her plumage exquisite. If only her voice is as sweet as her looks are fair, she ought without doubt to be queen of the birds." The crow was hugely flattered by this, and just to show the fox that she could sing she gave a loud caw. Down came the cheese, of course, and the fox, snatching it up, said, "You have a voice, madam, I see. What you want is wits." Source: Æsop's Fables , translated by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: W. Heinemann, 1912), p. 6 . Return to the table of contents . Links to Additional Type 57 Fables Links open in new windows. Most links lead to volumes in the digital library books.google.com . Aesop. The Raven and the Fox . In The Fables of Aesop: As First Printed by William Caxton in 1484 . Edited by Joseph Jacobs. Vol 2: Text and Glossary, p. 21. London: David Nutt, 1889. Aesop. The Fox and the Crow . In Fables of Æsop and Others . Translated into English with Instructive Applications by Samuel Croxall. No. 9, pp. 38-39. Philadelphia: Thomas Cowperthwait and Co., 1850. Aesop. The Fox and the Crow . In Æsop: Retold by Joseph Jacobs , no. 8. Harvard Classics, vol. 17, part 1. New York: P. F. Collier and Son, 190914. Aesop. The Fox and the Crow . In Aesop's Fables . Translated by V. S. Vernon Jones. Introduction and Notes by D. L. Ashliman. No. 9, p. 21. New York: Barnes and Noble, 2003. Jātaka. Jambu-Khādaka-Jātaka . In The Jātaka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births . Edited by E. B. Cowell. Vol. 2 translated by W. H. D. Rouse. No. 294, pp. 299-300. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, [1895]. Jātaka. Anta-Jātaka . In The Jātaka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births . Edited by E. B. Cowell. Vol. 2 translated by W. H. D. Rouse. No. 295, pp. 300-301. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, [1895]. La Fontaine, Jean de. Le Corbeau et le Renard . In Fables de La Fontaine . Book 1, fable 2, pp. 39-40. Tours: Alfred Mame et Fils, 1888. La Fontaine, Jean de. The Crow and the Fox . In The Fables of La Fontaine . Translated from the French [mainly by Robert Thomson]. Book 1, fable 2, p. 18. London: J. C. Nimmo and Bain, 1884. Fansler, Dean Spruill. Auac and Lamiran . In Filipino Popular Tales , no. 64, pp. 395-97. Lancaster, PA. and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921. Wilhelm, Richard. The Fox and the Raven . In The Chinese Fairy Book . Translated from the German by Frederick H. Martens. No. 13, pp. 29-30. New York: Frederick A. Stokes Co., 1921. Return to: The table of contents D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 27, 2011. The Fox (or Jackal) and the Fleas The Fox (or Jackal) and the Fleas folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 63 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2022 Contents When the Fox Is Infested with Fleas (Germany). When the Fox Wants to Get Rid of His Fleas (Norway). When the Fox Is Plagued by Fleas (Denmark). The Fox and the Flees (Scotland). How the Fox Gets Rid of Fleas (USA -- Georgia). The Jackal and the Flees (India / Pakistan). Return to D. L. Ashliman's index of folklore and mythology electronic texts . When the Fox Is Infested with Fleas Germany Jorach writes about the fox, that when he is infested with fleas that he puts a wisp of straw or a twig into his mouth and then walks backward into a stream. He first submerges his tail, then his body, until the fleas all flee to his head to avoid the water. He finally dips his head beneath the water, and the fleas all crawl onto wisp of straw, which he lets float away. He then jumps onto dry land, freed from the fleas. Source (books.google.com): Albertus Magnus, Thierbuch (1545), no pagination . This is a German translation of his De animalibus . Albertus Magnus (ca. 1200 - 128) was a German Domincan friar, philosopher, and scientist. Return to the table of contents . When the Fox Wants to Get Rid of His Fleas Norway The Norwegian farmer can relate most stories of the sagacity and cunning for which the Fox, in all countries, is famous. . . . The Swedish archbifhop, Olaus Magnus ( Hist. lib. xviii. c. 39; 40) says of the Fox: When he wants to get rid of his fleas without disturbance, he takes a bunch of moss or straw in his mouth, and goes backwards into the water, wading by slow steps deeper and deeper; by which means the fleas have time, and can retire gradually to the dry places; at last to the part of the neck and head which he alone keeps above water; and to crown the work, he gathers all his enemies into the before-said bunch of straw, and then drops them in the water, and runs away well washed and cleaned. This project is so cunning, that mankind could not teach him better. Source (books.google.com): Erich Pontoppidan, The Natural History of Norway , part 2 (London: A. Linde, 1755), pp. 21-22 . Source (Internet Archive): Erich Pontoppidan, The Natural History of Norway , part 2 (London: A. Linde, 1755), pp. 21-22 . Return to the table of contents . When the Fox Is Plagued by Fleas Denmark When the fox is badly plagued by fleas, he takes a tuft of moss in his mouth and goes backwards into deep water. When he has gone so far out that only his head is above the water, all the tormenting animals have sought refuge in the moss, which he then lets float away. (West Jutland) Source (books.google.com): Jens Kamp, "Naar Ræven er slemt plaget af Lopper," Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R Nielsens Forlag, 1877), no. 708, p. 219 . Source (Internet Archive): Jens Kamp, "Naar Ræven er slemt plaget af Lopper," Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R Nielsens Forlag, 1877), no. 708, p. 219 . Return to the table of contents . The Fox and the Fleas Scotland The fox is much troubled by fleas, and this is the way in which he gets rid of them. He hunts about until he finds a lock of wool, and then he takes it to the river, and holds it in his mouth, and so puts the end of his brush into the water, and down he goes slowly. The fleas run away from the water, and at last they all run over the fox's nose into the wool, and then the fox dips his nose under and lets the wool go off with the stream. Source (books.google.com): J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 1 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), p. 268 . Source (Internet Archive): J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 1 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), p. 268 . Campbell heard the tale from a namesake, John Campbell, piper, "and many other sources." J. F. Campbell adds the following note: "This is told as a fact. The place where an 'old gray fellow' was seen performing this feat, was mentioned by one of my informants. The fox was seen in the sea near the Caithness hills." Return to the table of contents . How the Fox Gets Rid of Fleas USA -- Georgia Mr. Pruitt turned his pocket inside out to get some tobacco-crumbs for his pipe. "Buddy," he remarked, turning to Joe Maxwell, "did you ever hear tell how the fox gits rid er fleas?" Joe had never heard. "Well," said Mr. Pruitt, "it's this away:" When the fox, speshually ef it's one er these here big reds, gits full er fleas, which they er bleedze ter do in hot weather, he puts out an' goes tell he finds a flock er sheep. Then he runs in amongst 'em, an' runs along by the side er one tell he gits a chance ter pull a mouffle er wool out. Then he makes a break fer the creek an' finds him a wash-hole an' wades in. He don't, ez you may say, splunge in. He jest wades in, a little bit at a time. Fust he gits in up ter his knees, an' then he goes in deeper an' deeper. But he hain't in no hurry. When the water strikes the fleas, nachally they start fer high-water mark. The fox feels 'em crawl up, an' then he goes in a little deeper. When they crawl up ez high ez his back he goes in furder, an' then they crawl to'rds his head. He gits a little deeper, an' they crawl out on his nose. Then he gits deeper, tell they hain't nothin' out er the water but the pint er his nose. Now all this time he's got that chunk er wool in his mouf, an' when the fleas hain't got nowheres else ter go they make fer that. Then when the fleas is all in the wool, the fox drops it in the water, comes out, shakes hisse'f, an' trots off ter do some other devilment. "Dat cert'ny is one way fer ter git red er fleas," exclaimed Mink, laughing heartily. Source (books.google.com): Joel Chandler Harris, On the Plantation: A Story of a Georgia Boy's Adventures During the War (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1892), pp. 149-50 . Source (Internet Archive): Joel Chandler Harris, On the Plantation: A Story of a Georgia Boy's Adventures During the War (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1892), pp. 149-50 . Return to the table of contents . The Jackal and the Flees India / Pakiston There was once a jackal so infested with fleas that life was a burden to him. Determined to be rid of them, he sought for a pool of water, and snatching up a small piece of dry wood in his mouth, he began to enter the water with "measured steps and slow." Gradually, as he advanced, the astonished fleas rushed up his legs and took refuge on his back. The rising water again drove them in multitudes from his back to his head, and from his head to his nose, whence they escaped on to the piece of wood, which became perfectly black with them. When the sly jackal perceived the situation of his foes, he suddenly bobbed his head into the water, relinquished the wood, and with a chuckle swam back to the shore, leaving the feas to their fate. Source (books.google.com): Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folktales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 66, p. 267 . Source (Internet Archive): Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folktales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 66, p. 267 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's index of folklore and mythology electronic texts . Revised August 29, 2022. Fox Steals the Butter: Fables of type 15 The Fox Steals the Butter fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 15 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2014 Contents Reynard and Bruin (Europe). The Fox Cheats the Bear out of His Christmas Fare (Norway). The Fox and the Wolf (Netherlands). The Keg of Butter (Scotland). Cat and Mouse in Partnership (Germany). Mister Rabbit Nibbles Up the Butter (African-American). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Reynard and Bruin Europe You must know that once upon a time Reynard the Fox and Bruin the Bear went into partnership and kept house together. Would you like to know the reason? Well, Reynard knew that Bruin had a beehive full of honeycomb, and that was what he wanted. But Bruin kept so close a guard upon his honey that Master Reynard didn't know how to get away from him and get hold of the honey. So one day he said to Bruin, "Pardner, I have to go and be gossip -- that means godfather, you know -- to one of my old friends." "Why, certainly," said Bruin. So off Reynard goes into the woods, and after a time he crept back and uncovered the beehive and had such a feast of honey. Then he went back to Bruin, who asked him what name had been given to the child. Reynard had forgotten all about the christening and could only say, "Just-Begun." "What a funny name," said Master Bruin. A little while after, Reynard thought he would like another feast of honey. So he told Bruin that he had to go to another christening. And off he went. And when he came back and Bruin asked him what was the name given to the child, Reynard said, "Half-Eaten." The third time the same thing occurred, and this time the name given by Reynard to the child that didn't exist was "All-Gone." You can guess why. A short time afterwards, Master Bruin thought he would like to eat up some of his honey and asked Reynard to come and join him in the feast. When they got to the beehive, Bruin was so surprised to find that there was no honey left, and he turned round to Reynard and said, "Just-Begun, Half-Eaten, All-Gone. So that is what you meant. You have eaten my honey." "Why no," said Reynard. "How could that be?" I have never stirred from your side except when I went a-gossiping [serving as godfather], and then I was far away from here. You must have eaten the honey yourself, perhaps when you were asleep. At any rate we can easily tell. Let us lie down here in the sunshine, and if either of us has eaten the honey, the sun will soon sweat it out of us." No sooner said than done, and the two lay side by side in the sunshine. Soon Master Bruin commenced to doze, and Mr. Reynard took some honey from the hive and smeared it round Bruin's snout. Then he woke him up and said, "See, the honey is oozing out of your snout. You must have eaten it when you were asleep." Source: Joseph Jacobs, Europa's Fairy Book (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), pp. 42-43 . Jacobs, an eminent folklorist, derived this "restored" text from a variety of European sources. Return to the table of contents . The Fox Cheats the Bear out of His Christmas Fare Norway A bear and a fox had once bought between them a tub of butter, which they intended to keep till Christmas, and, therefore, hid it under a thick pine bush. They then went a little distance and lay down on a sunny bank to sleep. When they had lain some time, the fox started up and cried out, "Yes," and ran away towards the butter tub, out of which he ate a good third. When he returned the bear asked him where he had been, as he looked so greasy about the mouth. He said, "What do you think of my being invited to a christening?" "Oh, indeed! What is the name of the child?" asked the bear. "Begun Upon," answered the fox. Thereupon they lay down to sleep again. In a little while the fox sprang up again and cried out, "Yes," and ran to the butter tub. This time he also ate a good portion. When he came back, and the bear again asked where he had been, he answered, "Oh, would you believe it? I have again been invited to a christening." "What is the name of the child?" asked the bear. "Half Eaten," answered the fox. The bear thought that was a strange name, though he did not wonder long about it, but gave a gape and went to sleep again. They had not lain long when the same took place as before. The fox sprang up and cried out, "Yes," and ran to the butter tub, and this time he ate the remainder. When he came back, he had been once more to a christening, and when the bear inquired the name of the child, he answered, "Licked to the Bottom!" They now lay down and slept a long time. At length they agreed to go and look after their butter, and when they found it all eaten up, the bear accused the fox, and the fox accused the bear, of having eaten it. One said that the other must have been to the butter tub while he slept. "Well, well!" said Reynard. "We shall soon see which of us two has stolen the butter. Let us both now lie down on this sunny bank, and the one whose tail is the greasiest when we wake, must be the one who has stolen it." The bear was willing to undergo the ordeal. So, feeling conscious of his innocence, and that he had not even tasted the butter, he lay down to have a good sound sleep in the sun. But Reynard, instead of sleeping, crept softly to the butter tub, and got a little that still remained between the staves. Then sneaking gently back to the bear, he rubbed his tail with it, and lay down to sleep as if nothing had happened. When they both woke, the sun had melted the butter on the bear's tail, so that he was proved to be the one that had eaten the butter. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Yule-Tide Stories: A Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853), pp. 279-80 . Translation slightly revised by D. L. Ashliman. Thorpe's source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Bjørnen og reven: Reven snyter bjørnen for julekosten . Return to the table of contents . The Fox and the Wolf Netherlands The fox and the wolf stole a keg of butter from a peasant and hid it in a safe place. However, the hiding-place was far from where they lived, and one day when the fox got the urge to have a taste of the butter by himself, he felt the necessity of borrowing the wolf's boots for the long journey. The wolf, of course, asked him why he needed the boots. "Well," said the fox, "I must travel a great distance to a baptism." "Good," said the wolf, and the fox, wearing the wolf's boots, took off for the keg. When he returned, the wolf asked him what the child's name was. "Beginning" said the fox, and wolf thought to himself, "That is a nice name." A short time later the fox came again and asked to borrow the boots, saying that once again he had to go to a baptism. "Good," said the wolf, and once again the fox set forth wearing the wolf's boots. When he returned, the wolf asked him, "What is the child's name?" "Middle-of-the-Keg" said the fox, and the wolf thought, "That is an even nicer name." Some time later the fox came again and said that still another child was to be baptized. When he brought back the boots, the wolf again asked him what name the child had been given. "Well," said the fox, "this time his name is Bottom-of-the-Keg." When the fox came a fourth time, the wolf grew somewhat impatient and asked if there would be no end to the baptisms. "Yes," said the fox. "This is the last time." "If that is so," said the wolf, "then go ahead and put on the boots." The fox went again to the keg, and licked it clean. Then he filled it with stones, spread a thin layer of butter over them, and went home. The wolf again asked him what the child's name was, and the fox answered, "Scrape-out-the-Keg." Some time later the fox proposed to the wolf that the two of them should go to the keg of butter and have a real feast. Arriving there, they began quarreling with one another which one should have the first serving. Unable to decide, they drew straws. The wolf was lucky and drew the longer one, so he was to begin first. He started eating vigorously, but, of course, got only a mouthful of stones. You should have seen the wolf and the fox. Each one accused the other one of eating up the butter. "You did it when you were going to the baptisms," said the wolf. "No," said the fox. "You did it when you knew that I wasn't at home." But none of this led anywhere. The keg was empty and remained empty, so they decided to return home without further delay. On their way home they found an old horse in a mire. They wanted to take it with them and asked one another how they might manage. The fox said, "You are the strongest. Tie the horse's tail around your body and pull, while I prod the horse with a stick." That happened, and soon the horse was out of the mud, but it then ran off with the wolf tied to its tail. "Claw your paws into the ground!" cried the fox. "But I can see neither heaven nor earth!" answered the wolf. Finally the wolf succeeded in breaking loose, and he and the fox continued on their way, but without the horse. When they arrived at home the wolf sat down with his back to the fire, for he was wet to the bone. Sitting there, he fell asleep. The fox took some butter and spread it under the wolf's tail. Because of the warmth it soon melted. Then the fox woke up the wolf and shouted, "Now it is clear who licked out the butter keg." Source: G. J. Boekenoogen, "Van den vos en den wolf," Volkskunde: Tijdschrift voon Nederlandsche Folklore , vol. 15 (1903), no. 32, pp. 112-13 . Collected 1894 in Beilen, province of Drente. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. The episode of catching a horse by the tail is categorized as Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 47A. Link to additional tales of type 47A: Catching a Horse by Its Tail . Return to the table of contents . The Keg of Butter Scotland The russet dog and the wild dog (the fox and the wolf) were going together. And they went round about the seashore, and they found a keg of butter, and they buried it. On the morrow the fox went out, and when he returned, he said that a man had come to ask him to a baptism. The fox went, and he arrayed himself in excellent attire, and he went away. And where should he go but to the butter keg. And when he came home, the wolf asked him, "What name was given to the child?" And he said that it was Foveeal (under its mouth). On the morrow the fox said that a man had sent to ask him to a baptism. And he went to the keg, and he took out about half. The wolf asked, when he came home, "What name was given to the child?" "Well," said he, "It is a queer name that I myself would not give to my man child, if I had one. It is Moolay Moolay (about half and half)." On the morrow the fox said that a man had come to ask him to a baptism again. And he went to the keg, and he ate it all up. When he came home, the wolf asked him, "What name was given to the child?" And he said that it was Booill Eemlich (licking all up). On the morrow the fox said to the wolf that they ought to bring the keg home. They went, and when they reached the keg, there was not a shadow of the butter in it. "Well," said the fox, "you came here without me!" The other one swore that he had not come near it. "You need not be claiming that you did not come here. I know that you did come, and that it was you who took the butter. And when we go home, I will see if you ate the butter," said the fox. When they arrived home, the fox hung the wolf by his hind legs, with his head dangling below him. Then he put a dab of the butter under the wolf's mouth, as though it had come out of the wolf's belly. "You red thief!" said the fox. "I said before, that it was you who ate the butter!" Source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands, Orally Collected , vol. 3 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1862), no. 65, pp. 96-98 . Campbell's text cautiously modernized and normalized by D. L. Ashliman. Campbell's source: "From Hector Boyd, Barra, who learnt it from Neil M'Neill, Watersay; and from many other old men. Neil M'Neill died ten years ago, past eighty years of age. -- Castle Bay, Sept. 20, 1860." Return to the table of contents . Cat and Mouse in Partnership Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm A cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse, and had said so much to her about the great love and friendship that he felt for her, that at last the mouse agreed that they should live and keep house together. "But we must make preparations for winter, or else we shall suffer from hunger," said the cat, "and you, little mouse, cannot venture out everywhere, or in the end you will be caught in a trap." This good advice was followed, and they bought a pot of fat, but they did not know where to store it. Finally, after much consideration, the cat said, "I know of no place where it will be better stored up than in the church. No one dares take anything away from there. We will put it beneath the altar, and not touch it until we are need it." So the pot was stored safely away, but it was not long before the cat took a great longing for it, and said to the mouse, "I wanted to tell you, little mouse, that my cousin has brought a little son into the world, and she has asked me to be his godfather. He is white with brown spots, and I am to hold him over the baptismal font. Let me go out today, and you look after the house by yourself." "Yes, yes," answered the mouse. "By all means go, and if you get anything good to eat, think of me. I would like to drink a drop of sweet red christening wine myself." All this, however, was untrue. The cat had no cousin, and had not been asked to be godfather. He went straight to the church, crept up to the pot of fat, began to lick at it, and licked off the top of the fat. Then he went for a stroll on the roofs of the town, looked out for opportunities, and then stretched out in the sun, licking his whiskers whenever he thought of the pot of fat. He did not return home until it was evening. "Well, here you are again," said the mouse. "You must have had a happy day." "Everything went well," answered the cat. "What name did they give the child?" asked the mouse. "Top-Off," said the cat quite coolly. "Top-Off?" cried the mouse. "That is a very odd and uncommon name. Is it a usual one in your family?" "What does that matter?", said the cat. "It is no worse than Crumb-Thief, as your godchildren are called." Before long the cat was seized by another fit of longing. He said to the mouse, "You must do me a favor, and once more manage the house alone for a day. I have been asked again to be godfather, and since the child has a white ring around its neck, I cannot refuse." The good mouse consented. However, the cat crept behind the town wall to the church, and devoured half the pot of fat. "Nothing tastes as good as that which one eats by oneself," he said, and was quite satisfied with his day's work. When he arrived home the mouse asked, "What name was this child christened with?" "Half-Gone," answered the cat. "Half-Gone? What are you saying? I have never heard that name in all my life. I'll wager it is not in the almanac." The cat's mouth soon again began to water for the delicious goods. "All good things come in threes," he said to the mouse. "I have been asked to be godfather again. The child is totally black, only it has white paws. Otherwise it has not a single white hair on its whole body. This only happens once every few years. You will let me go, won't you?" "Top-Off. Half-Gone," answered the mouse. "They are such odd names, that they make me stop and think." "Here you sit at home," said the cat, "with your dark gray fur coat and long braid of hair capturing fantasies. That is because you do not go out in the daytime." During the cat's absence the mouse cleaned the house, and put it in order, but the greedy cat devoured all the rest of the fat. "One has peace only after everything is eaten up," he said to himself. Well filled and fat, he did not return home until nighttime. The mouse immediately asked what name had been given to the third child. "You will not like it either," said the cat. "His name is All-Gone." "All-Gone!", cried the mouse. "That is the most worrisome name of all. I have never seen it in print. All-Gone! What can that mean?" Then she shook her head, curled herself up, and lay down to sleep. From this time forth no one invited the cat to be godfather, but when winter had come and there was no longer anything to be found outside, the mouse thought of their stored food, and said, "Come cat, we will go to our pot of fat which we have stored up for ourselves. It will taste good now." "Yes," answered the cat. "You will enjoy it as much as you would enjoy sticking that dainty tongue of yours out of the window." They set out on their way, but when they arrived, the pot of fat, to be sure, was still in its place, but it was empty. "Alas," said the mouse, "now I see what has happened. Now it comes to light. You are a true friend. You ate everything when you were serving as a godfather. First top off, then half done, then ..." "Be quiet!" cried the cat. "One more word, and I will eat you too." "All gone" was already on the poor mouse's lips. She had scarcely spoken it before the cat sprang on her, seized her, and swallowed her down. You see, that is the way of the world. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Katze und Maus in Gesellschaft," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 7th edition, vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 2, pp. 6-8 . The Grimms' source: Oral tradition, communicated by Gretchen Wild (1787-1819) in Kassel. This tale, in a shorter version, was included in the Grimms' manuscript collection of 1808 and in their first edition (1812), vol. 1, no. 2. Translated by Margaret Hunt (1884). Translation revised and corrected by D. L. Ashliman . © 2000. I have arbitrarily assigned male gender to the cat. Its natural (as opposed to grammatical) gender cannot be determined by the German text. Link to a file containing only the Grimms' Cat and Mouse in Partnership . Return to the table of contents . Mr. Rabbit Nibbles up the Butter African-American "The animals and the creatures," said Uncle Remus, shaking his coffee around in the bottom of his tin cup, in order to gather up all the sugar, they just kept on getting more and more familiar with one another, until by and by it wasn't long before Brer Rabbit and Brer Fox and Brer Possum got to sort of bunching their provisions together in the same shanty. After a while the roof sort of began to leak, and one day Brer Rabbit and Brer Fox and Brer Possum assembled to see if they couldn't kind of patch it up. They had a big day's work in front of them, and they fetched their dinner with them. They lumped the vittles up in one pile, and the butter that Brer Fox brought, they went and put it in the spring-house to keep it cool, and then they went to work, and it wasn't long before Brer Rabbit's stomach began to sort of growl and pester him. Brer Fox's butter sat heavy on his mind, and his mouth watered every time he remembered it. Presently he said to himself that he would like to have a nip at the butter, and then he laid out his plans, he did. First thing you know, while they were working along, Brer Rabbit raised his head quickly and flung his ears forward, and hollered out, "Here I am. What do you want with me?" and off he went, like something was after him. He sallied around, old Brer Rabbit did, and after he made sure that nobody was following, he bounced into the spring-house, and there he stayed until he got a helping of butter. Then he sauntered on back and went to work. "Where have you been?" said Brer Fox. "I heard my children calling me," said Brer Rabbit, "and I had to go see what they wanted. My old woman has gone and taken sick," he said. They worked on until by and by the butter tasted so good that old Brer Rabbit wanted some more. Then he raised up his head, he did, and hollered out, "Heyo! Hold on! I'm a-coming!" And off he went. This time he stayed a good while, and when he got back, Brer Fox asked him where he'd been. "I've been to see my old woman, and she's sinking," he said. Directly Brer Rabbit heard them calling him again, and off he went, and this time, bless your soul, he got the butter out so clean that he could see himself in the bottom of the bucket. He scraped it clean and licked it dry, and then he went back to work looking like a black man that had been picked up by the plantation patrol. "How's your old woman this time?" said Brer Rabbit. "I'm obliged to you, Brer Fox," said Brer Rabbit, "but I'm afraid that she's gone by now," and that sort of made Brer Fox and Brer Possum feel in mourning with Brer Rabbit. By and by, when dinnertime came, they all got out their vittles, but Brer Rabbit kept on looking lonesome, and Brer Fox and Brer Possum, they sort of rustled around to see if they couldn't make Brer Rabbit feel sort of splimmy. "What is that, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy. "Sort of splimmy-splammy [feeling fine], honey. Sort of like he was among friends, sort of like his old woman wasn't dead after all. You know what folks do when they are around people who are mourning? The little boy didn't know, fortunately for him, and Uncle Remus went on: Brer Fox and Brer Possum rustled around, they did, getting out the vittles, and by and by Brer Fox, he said, "Brer Possum, you run down to the spring and fetch the butter, and I'll sail around you and set the table," he said. Brer Possum, he loped off after the butter, and directly he came loping back with his ears a-trembling and his tongue a-hanging out. "Brer Fox!" he hollered out. "What's the matter now, Brer Possum?" he said. "You all had better run, folks" said Brer Possum. "The last drop of that butter is gone." "Where did it go?" said Brer Fox. "It looks like it dried up," said Brer Possum. Then Brer Rabbit, he looked sort of solemn, he did, and he up and said, "I suspect that the butter melted in somebody's mouth," he said. Then they went down to the spring with Brer Possum, and sure enough, the butter was gone. While they were talking about the mystery, Brer rabbit said that he could see tracks all around there, and he pointed out that if they would all go to sleep, he could catch the chap that stole the butter. They all lay down, and Brer Fox and Brer Possum, they soon dropped off to sleep, but Brer Rabbit, he stayed awake, and when the time came, he got up easy, and smeared Brer Possum's mouth with the butter on his paws, and then he ran off and nibbled up the best of the dinner that they had left lying out, and then he came back and woke up Brer Fox and showed him the butter on Brer Possum's mouth. Then they woke up Brer Possum and told him about it, but of course Brer Possum denied it to the last. Now Brer Fox, he's kind of a lawyer, and he argued this way: that Brer Possum was the first one at the butter, and the first one to miss it, and more than that, there were the signs on his mouth. Brer Possum could see that they had him jammed up in a corner, and then he up and said that the way to catch the man that stole the butter was to build a big brush heap and set it on fire, and everyone would try to jump over it, and the one that fell in, that would be the chap that stole the butter. Brer Rabbit and Brer Fox, they both agreed, they did, and they whirled in and built the brush heap, and they built it high, and they built it wide, and then they touched it off. When it got to blazing up good, Brer Rabbit he took the first turn. He sort of stepped back, and looked around and giggled, and over he went, just like a bird flying. Then came Brer Fox. He got back a little further, and spit on his hands, and lit out and made the jump, and he came so close to falling in that his tail caught fire. "Haven't you ever seen a fox, honey?" inquired Uncle Remus, in a tone that implied both conciliation and information. The little boy thought probably he had, but he wouldn't commit himself. "Well then, continued the old man, "next time you see one of them, you look right close and see if the end of his tail isn't white. It's just like I tell you. They bear the scar of that brush right down to this day. They are marked, that's what they are. They are marked." "And what about Brother Possum?" asked the little boy. "Old Brer Possum, he took a running start, he did, and he came lumbering along, and he lit -- kerblam! -- right in the middle of the fire, and that was the last of old Brer Possum." "But, Uncle Remus, Brother Possum didn't steal the butter after all," said the little boy, who was not at all satisfied with such summary injustice. "That's what makes me say what I say, honey. In this world, lots of folks have to suffer for other folks' sins. It looks like it's mighty wrong, but it's just that way. Tribulation seems like it's a-waiting just around the corner to catch one and all of us, honey." Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus; or, Mr. Fox, Mr. Rabbit, and Mr. Terrapin (London and New York: George Routledge and Sons, 1883), no. 17, pp. 82-88 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000-2002. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 9, 2014. The Fox, the Wolf, and the Horse: Folktales of Type 47E The Fox, the Wolf, and the Horse and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 47E edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2013 Contents The Fox, the Wolf, and the Horse (France, Jean de La Fontaine). Two Foxes and a Horse (Scotland). The Wolf and the Tailor (Russia). External link to The Vixen and the Mule (Italy, Novellino ). Related links . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Fox, the Wolf, and the Horse Jean de La Fontaine A fox, though young, by no means raw, Had seen a horse, the first he ever saw: "Ho! neighbour wolf," said he to one quite green, "A creature in our meadow I have seen, -- Sleek, grand! I seem to see him yet, -- The finest beast I ever met." "Is he a stouter one than we?" The wolf demanded, eagerly; "Some picture of him let me see." "If I could paint," said fox, I should delight T' anticipate your pleasure at the sight; But come; who knows? perhaps it is a prey By fortune offer'd in our way." They went. The horse, turn'd loose to graze, Not liking much their looks or ways, Was just about to gallop off. "Sir," said the fox, "your humble servants, we Make bold to ask you what your name may be." The horse, an animal with brains enough, Replied, "Sirs, you yourselves may read my name; My shoer round my heel hath writ the same." The fox excus'd himself for want of knowledge: "Me, sir, my parents did not educate, -- So poor, a hole was their entire estate. My friend, the wolf, however, taught at college, Could read it were it even Greek." The wolf, to flattery weak, Approach'd to verify the boast; For which four teeth he lost. The high raised hoof came down with such a blow, As laid him bleeding on the ground full low. "My brother," said the fox, "this shows how just What once was taught me by a fox of wit, -- Which on thy jaws this animal hath writ, -- 'All unknown things the wise mistrust.'" Source: Jean de La Fontaine (1621-1695), The Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright (London: George Bell and Sons, 1888), book 12, fable 17, p. 333 . Return to the table of contents . Two Foxes and a Horse Scotland Two foxes came to a smith's house, and there was a horse tied at the door, and he had a golden shoe, and there was a name on it. "I will go and read what is written on that shoe," said the big fox, and went. But the horse lifted his foot, and struck a kick on him, and drove his brains out. Source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands , new edition, vol. 1 (London: Alexander Gardner, 1890), pp. 286-87 . Campbell's source: John Mackinnon, a stable boy at Broadford in Skye. Campbell does not give this tale a title. Return to the table of contents . The Wolf and the Tailor Russia This story is a story of the past of the days when Christ and the twelve apostles still walked on earth. One day they were still on their road, going on a long, long road, and a wolf met them and said: "Lord, I am feeling hungry." "Go," Christ said to him, "and eat a mare." So the wolf went to look for a mare. And he saw her going up and down, and said: "Mare, the Lord has bidden me eat you!" So she answered: "Well, please do not eat me it is not the proper thing. But I have a passport on me; only it is driven in very hard." "Well, show it me." "Just come near my hind feet!" So the wolf went up, and she kicked him with her hoofs, and knocked out his front teeth, so that the wolf was thrown, at a blow, three sazhéns away, and the mare ran off. [A sazhén is seven feet.] Back the wolf came with a petition, met Christ, and said: "Lord, the mare almost killed me!" "Well, go on and eat the ram." So the wolf ran up to the ram ran up and said: "Ram, I am going to eat you; it is the command of the Lord." "Well, come and eat me up if you will. I will stand on the hill, and will jump up into your mouth all ready." So the wolf stood on the hill, and the ram told him to open his mouth. So the wolf went and stood on the hill and opened his mouth for the food, and the ram ran down and hit him hard with the horns on his fore-head whack! The wolf was knocked off his feet, and the ram went away. And the wolf got up, looked all round, and there was never a sign of the ram. So he went up with another complaint. And he found Christ and said: "Lord, even the ram has deceived me. Why, it almost knocked me to bits." "All right!" said Christ. "Go and eat the tailor." So the wolf ran up, and he met a tailor on the way. "Tailor," he said, "I am going to eat you, by command of the Lord." "All right. Let me say good-bye I should like to greet my kin." "No, I cannot let you say good-bye with your kin." "Well, I cannot help it it must be so. Come and eat me up. Only at least let me take your measurements. I only want to see whether I shall slip in easily." "All right! Measure away," said the wolf. So the tailor went back, took hold of the wolf by his tail, twined his tail round in his hand, and began to whip the wolf. And the wolf struggled and tussled, roared and shrieked, and tore until he tore his tail loose, and he then took to his feet. So he ran away with all of his might, and he met seven other wolves. They said: "Why are you, grey wolf, tailless?" "Oh, the tailor tore it out." "Where is the tailor?" "You see him there, on the road." " All right we will hunt after him." And they started after the tailor. When the tailor heard the chase coming after him, and saw that it was a disagreeable business, he scaled up a tree as fast as he could. So the wolves arrived there and said: "We will stop here, brothers, and wait until the tailor comes down. Do you, manx-wolf, stop below, and we will each of us climb on the other's shoulders." So the manx-wolf lay at the bottom, and all the seven wolves went after the others and climbed up. When the tailor saw his ill-fate coming so near him, for they were nearer and nearer, he cried out to the top one: "It is nobody's fault, only the manx-wolf's!" So the manx-wolf was frightened, and jumped out from below and ran off. All the seven wolves tumbled down and chased after him, caught him up, and tore him to bits. But the tailor slid down the tree and went back home. Source: Alexander Afanasyev, Russian Folk-Tales , translated from the Russian by Leonard A. Magnus (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, and Company, 1916), pp. 33-35 . The episodes in this tale are classified as follows: The wolf attempts to read the message on the horse's hoof: type 47E. The ram offers to run into the wolf's stomach: type 122M*. The tailor asks for one last favor before being eaten: type 122A. The wolves climb on top of one another: type 121. Return to the table of contents . Related links Catching a Horse by Its Tail . Fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 47A. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 7, 2013. Frau Holle Frau Holle (KHM 24) by the Brothers Grimm a comparison of the versions of 1812 and 1857 compiled and translated by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2003 Return to: Frau Holle by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, a translation of the version of 1857. The Grimm Brothers' Home Page . The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales). D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. First edition, 1812 Final edition, 1857 Frau Holle Frau Holle A widow had two daughters; the one was beautiful and industrious, the other ugly and lazy. A widow had two daughters, the one was beautiful and industrious, the other ugly and lazy. She greatly favored the ugly, lazy girl. She greatly favored the ugly, lazy girl, because she was her own daughter. The other one had to do all the work, and was truly a Cinderella in the house. And the other one had to do all the work, and be the Cinderella of the house. Once the girl went to fetch water, and when she leaned over to pull the bucket from the well, she leaned over too far and fell in. Every day the poor girl had to sit by a well, next to the highway, and spin so much that her fingers bled. Now it happened that one day the reel was completely bloody, so she dipped it in the well, to wash it off, but it dropped out of her hand and fell in. She cried, ran to her stepmother, and told her of the mishap. She scolded her so sharply, and was so merciless that she said, "Since you have let the reel fall in, you must fetch it out again." Then the girl went back to the well, and did not know what to do. Terrified, she jumped into the well to get the reel. And when she awoke and came to herself again, she was in a beautiful meadow. The sun was shining, and there were many thousands of flowers. She lost her senses. And when she awoke and came to herself again, she was in a beautiful meadow where the sun was shining, and there were many thousands of flowers. She walked across this meadow and came to an oven full of bread. She walked across this meadow and came to an oven full of bread. The bread called out, "Oh, take me out. Take me out, or I'll burn! I've been thoroughly baked for a long time!" The bread called out, "Oh, take me out. Take me out, or I'll burn. I've been thoroughly baked for a long time." So she stepped up to it and took everything out. So she stepped up to it, and with a baker's peel took everything out, one loaf after the other. After that she walked further and came to a tree laden with apples. "Shake me! Shake me! We apples are all ripe!" cried the tree. So she shook the tree until the apples fell as though it were raining apples. When none were left in the tree, she continued on her way. After that she walked further and came to a tree laden with apples. "Shake me. Shake me. We apples are all ripe." cried the tree. So she shook the tree until the apples fell as though it were raining apples. When none were left in the tree, she gathered them into a pile, and then continued on her way. Finally she came to a small house. An old woman was peering out from inside. Finally she came to a small house. An old woman was peering out from inside. She had very large teeth, which frightened the girl, and she wanted to run away. She had very large teeth, which frightened the girl, and she wanted to run away. But the old woman called out to her, "Don't be afraid, dear child. Stay here with me, and if you do my housework in an orderly fashion, it will go well with you. Only you must take care to make my bed well and shake it diligently until the feathers fly, then it will snow in the world.* I am Frau Holle." But the old woman called out to her, "Don't be afraid, dear child. Stay here with me, and if you do my housework in an orderly fashion, it will go well with you. Only you must take care to make my bed well and shake it diligently until the feathers fly, then it will snow in the world.* I am Frau Holle." [Footnote:] *Therefore in Hessen whenever it snows they say that Frau Holle is making her bed. [Footnote:] *Therefore in Hessen whenever it snows they say that Frau Holle is making her bed. Because the old woman spoke so kindly to her, the girl agreed, and started in her service. Because the old woman spoke so kindly to her, the girl took heart, agreed, and started in her service. The girl took care of everything to Frau Holle's satisfaction and always shook her featherbed vigorously. The girl took care of everything to Frau Holle's satisfaction and always shook her featherbed vigorously until the feathers flew about like snowflakes. Therefore she had a good life with her: no angry words, and boiled or roast meat every day. Therefore she had a good life with her: no angry words, and boiled or roast meat every day. Now after she had been with Frau Holle for a time, her heart saddened. Even though she was many thousands of times better off here than at home, still she had a yearning to return. Now after she had been with Frau Holle for a time, she became sad. At first she did not know what was the matter with her, but at last she determined that it was homesickness. Even though she was many thousands of times better off here than at home, still she had a yearning to return. Finally she said to the old woman, "I have such a longing for home, and even though I am very well off here, I cannot stay longer." Finally she said to the old woman, "I have such a longing for home, and even though I am very well off here, I cannot stay longer. I must go up again to my own people." Frau Holle said, "You are right, and because you have served me so faithfully, I will take you back myself." Frau Holle said, "I am pleased that you long for your home again, and because you have served me so faithfully, I will take you back myself." With that she took her by the hand and led her to a large gate. With that she took her by the hand and led her to a large gate. The gate was opened, and while the girl was standing under it, an immense rain of gold fell, and all the gold stuck to her, so that she was completely covered with it. The gate was opened, and while the girl was standing under it, an immense rain of gold fell, and all the gold stuck to her, so that she was completely covered with it. "This is yours because you have been so industrious," said Frau Holle. "This is yours because you have been so industrious," said Frau Holle, and at the same time she gave her back the reel which had fallen into the well. With that the gate was closed and the girl found herself above on earth. With that the gate was closed and the girl found herself above on earth, not far from her mother's house. She went home to her mother, and because she arrived all covered with gold, she was well received. And as she entered the yard the rooster, sitting on the well, cried: Cock-a-doodle-doo, Our golden girl is here anew. Then she went inside to her mother, and as she arrived all covered with gold, she was well received, both by her mother and her sister. When the mother heard how she had come to the great wealth, she wanted to achieve the same fortune for the other, the ugly and lazy daughter. The girl told all that had happened to her, and when the mother heard how she had come to the great wealth, she wanted to achieve the same fortune for the other, the ugly and lazy daughter. She made her go and jump into the well. She made her go and sit by the well and spin. And to make her reel bloody, the lazy girl pricked her fingers and shoved her hand into a thorn bush. Then she threw the reel into the well, and jumped in herself. Like the other girl, she too awoke in a beautiful meadow, and she walked along the same path. Like the other girl, she too came to the beautiful meadow and walked along the same path. When she came to the oven, the bread cried again, "Oh, take me out! Take me out, or else I'll burn! I've been thoroughly baked for a long time!" When she came to the oven, the bread cried again, "Oh, take me out. Take me out, or else I'll burn. I've been thoroughly baked for a long time." But the lazy girl answered, "As if I would want to get all dirty," and walked away. But the lazy girl answered, "As if I would want to get all dirty," and walked away. Soon she came to the apple tree. It cried out, "Oh, shake me! Shake me! We apples are all ripe!" Soon she came to the apple tree. It cried out, "Oh, shake me. Shake me. We apples are all ripe." But she answered, "Oh yes, one could fall on my head," and with that she walked on. But she answered, "Oh yes, one could fall on my head," and with that she walked on. When she came to Frau Holle's house, she was not afraid, because she had already heard about her large teeth, and she immediately began to work for her. When she came to Frau Holle's house, she was not afraid, because she had already heard about her large teeth, and she immediately began to work for her. On the first day she forced herself, was industrious, and obeyed Frau Holle, when she said something to her, because she was thinking about all the gold that she would give her. On the first day she forced herself, was industrious, and obeyed Frau Holle, when she said something to her, because she was thinking about all the gold that she would give her. But on the second day she already began to be lazy, on the third day even more so, and then she didn't even want to get up in the morning. But on the second day she already began to be lazy, on the third day even more so, and then she didn't even want to get up in the morning. She did not make the bed for Frau Holle, the way she was supposed to, and she did not shake it until the feathers flew. She did not make the bed for Frau Holle, the way she was supposed to, and she did not shake it until the feathers flew. Frau Holle soon became tired of this and dismissed her of her duties. Frau Holle soon became tired of this and dismissed her of her duties. This was just what the lazy girl wanted, for she thought that she would now get the rain of gold. This was just what the lazy girl wanted, for she thought that she would now get the rain of gold. Frau Holle led her too to the gate. She stood beneath it, but instead of gold, a large kettle full of pitch spilled over her. Frau Holle led her too to the gate. She stood beneath it, but instead of gold, a large kettle full of pitch spilled over her. "That is the reward for your services," said Frau Holle, and closed the gate. "That is the reward for your services," said Frau Holle, and closed the gate. Then the lazy girl went home, entirely covered with pitch, and it would not come off as long as she lived. Then the lazy girl went home, entirely covered with pitch. As soon as the rooster on the well saw her, he cried out: Cock-a-doodle-doo, Our dirty girl is here anew. And the pitch stuck fast to her, and did not come off as long as she lived. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology . Link to the Grimm brothers' German text (1857 version), Frau Holle . Revised Jaunuary 18, 2003. Frau Holle and Other Tales of type 480 Frau Holle and Other Tales of Type 480 The Kind and the Unkind Girls translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2019 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Frau Holle (Germany). Frau Holle and the Distaff (Germany). Saint Joseph in the Woods (Germany). The Two Girls and the Angel (Germany). The Two Stepsisters (Norway). The Fairies (France). The Bucket (Italy). The Three Heads of the Well (England). The Old Woman and the Two Servant Girls (England). The Old Witch (England). Morozko (Jack Frost) (Russia). The Twelve Months (Russia). Conkiajgharuna, the Little Rag-Girl (Georgia). The Two Stepsisters (Romania). The Three Gifts (Poland). Mangita and Larina (Philippines). The Bald Wife (India). Lazy Maria (USA). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Frau Holle Germany A widow had two daughters; the one was beautiful and industrious, the other ugly and lazy. The mother greatly favored the ugly, lazy girl. The other one had to do all the work, and was truly a Cinderella. One day while pulling a bucket of water from the well she leaned over too far and fell in. Recovering, she found herself in a beautiful meadow. The sun was shining, and there were thousands of flowers. She walked along and soon came to an oven full of bread. The bread called out, "Take me out, or I'll burn! I've been thoroughly baked for a long time!" The girl took the bread from the oven and walked further until she came to a tree laden with ripe apples. "Shake me! Shake me! We apples are all ripe!" cried the tree, and the girl shook the tree until the apples fell as though it were raining apples. When none were left in the tree, she continued on her way. Finally she came to a small house. An old woman was peering out from inside. She had very large teeth, which frightened the girl, and she wanted to run away. But the old woman called out to her, "Don't be afraid, dear child. Stay here with me, and if you do my housework in an orderly fashion, it will go well with you. Only you must take care to make my bed well and shake it until the feathers fly, then it will snow in the world. I am Frau Holle." Because the old woman spoke so kindly to her, the girl agreed, and started in her service. She took care of everything to her satisfaction and always shook her featherbed vigorously. Therefore she had a good life with her: no angry words, and cooked meals every day. Now after she had been with Frau Holle for a time, her heart saddened. Even though she was many thousands of times better off here than at home, still she had a yearning for home. Finally she said to the old woman, "I have such a longing for home, and even though I am very well off here, I cannot stay longer." Frau Holle said, "You are right, and because you have served me so faithfully, I will take you back myself." With that she took her by the hand and led her to a large gate. The gate was opened, and while the girl was standing under it, an immense rain of gold fell, and all the gold stuck to her, so that she was completely covered with it. "This is yours because you have been so industrious," said Frau Holle. With that the gate was closed and the girl found herself above in the world. She went home to her mother, and because she arrived all covered with gold, she was well received. When the mother heard how she had come to the great wealth, she wanted to achieve the same fortune for the other, the ugly and lazy daughter. She made her go and jump into the well. Like the other one, she too awoke in a beautiful meadow, and she walked along the same path. When she came to the oven, the bread cried again, "Oh, take me out, take me out, or else I'll burn! I've been thoroughly baked for a long time!" But the lazy one answered, "As if I would want to get all dirty," and walked away. Soon she came to the apple tree. It cried out, "Oh, shake me, shake me, we apples are all ripe." But she answered, "Oh yes, one could fall on my head," and with that she walked on. When she came to Frau Holle's house, she was not afraid, because she had already heard about her large teeth, and she immediately began to work for her. On the first day she forced herself, was industrious and obeyed Frau Holle, when she said something to her, because she was thinking about all the Gold that she would give her. But on the second day she already began to be lazy, on the third day even more so, then she didn't even want to get up in the morning. She did not make the bed for Frau Holle, the way she was supposed to, and she did not shake it until the feathers flew. Frau Holle soon became tired of this and dismissed her of her duties. This is just what the lazy girl wanted, for she thought that she would now get the rain of gold. Frau Holle led her too to the gate. She stood beneath it, but instead of gold, a large kettle full of pitch spilled over her. "That is the reward for your services," said Frau Holle, and closed the gate. Then the lazy girl returned home, entirely covered with pitch, and it would not come off as long as she lived. Source: Kinder- und Haus-Märchen: Gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , 1st ed. (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), v. 1, no. 24, pp. 106-110. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2018, In the second edition of their tales (1819), the Grimms changed the nature of the accident that caused the heroine to fall into the underground realm. The relevant passage follows: Every day the poor girl had to take a seat on the road by a well and had to spin so much that the blood sprang from her fingers. Now it happened once that the spool was entirely bloody, and she leaned over into the well and wanted to wash it off; but it jumped from her hand and fell down. She cried, ran to her stepmother and told her of the misfortune. She scolded her severely and was so uncompassionate that she said, "You let the spool fall, so go get it back." Then the girl went back to the well and didn't know what she should do; and in her great fear she jumped into the well, in order to get the spool. In explanation to the connection between Frau Holle's bedmaking and snow on earth, the Grimms add the following footnote: "For this reason, in Hesse when it snows they say that Frau Holle is making her bed." They might also have mentioned, but did not, that in some areas of Europe Frau Holle's snow making abilities were transferred, in the Christian era, either to Saint Peter or to Jesus himself, both of whom, like their pagan counterpart, caused it to snow by shaking their featherbeds. Bed-making in European folklore is thus not entirely dominated by females. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Frau Holle," Kinder und Hausmärchen: Gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 1, 7th edition (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 24, pp. 133-36 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Frau Holle," Kinder und Hausmärchen: Gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 1, 7th edition (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 24, pp. 133-36 . Link to Frau Holle by the Brothers Grimm: The Version of 1857 . Link to Frau Holle by the Brothers Grimm: A Comparison of the Versions of 1812 and 1857 . Return to the table of contents . Frau Holle and the Distaff Germany In Claustal there once lived two girls who had neither father nor mother and hence had to provide for themselves with their own hands. Spinning was their only source of income. One of the girls span very industriously, but the other one liked to spend her time chatting, and furthermore, when evening came she was the first one who began to nod and to sleep. When the industrious one quit work for the night at eleven o'clock, the lazy one had already slept a few hours. For this reason the lazy sister caused the industrious girl much grief. It was Easter time, and on Easter Eve the industrious girl sat spinning while the other one had gone out to see the Easter celebration and to amuse herself. Liese was spinning when the clock struck eleven. The door opened and in walked a beautiful woman wearing a long white silken dress. She had beautiful long golden yellow hair and carried in her hand a beautiful distaff, white as silver and fine as silk. With a friendly voice she greeted the good girl, who was just letting the last flax run onto the reel as thread. Feeling the thread, she said: Industrious Liese, Empty is your distaff, Fine is your thread, You have done well. Then she touched the girl's spinning wheel with her golden distaff, and with a friendly smile she disappeared. And who was she? She was Frau Holle. Following this appearance, industrious Liese went to bed. Her sister came home later and went to bed as well. On Easter morning when the two girls got up, in the place of Liese's wooden spinning wheel there stood one of shining gold. It sparkled and glistened magnificently, and the thread that Liese had spun was as fine and white as silk. And as she unreeled it, she discovered that however much thread she removed, the reel remained full. Liese was delighted! However, when the lazy girl looked at her spinning wheel, she was startled to discover that her distaff was covered with straw instead of flax. And her chest was now filled with chopped straw instead of the beautiful linen cloth that had been there. And that is why even today they say that the distaff must be spun empty on the Holy Evening, or Frau Holle will come and bring chopped straw. Source (books.google.com): August Ey, "Die Frau Holle und die Flachsdiesse," Harzmärchenbuch; oder, Sagen und Märchen aus dem Oberharze (Stade: vberlag von Fr. Steudel, 1862), pp. 193-94 . Source (Internet Archive): August Ey, "Die Frau Holle und die Flachsdiesse," Harzmärchenbuch; oder, Sagen und Märchen aus dem Oberharze (Stade: vberlag von Fr. Steudel, 1862), pp. 193-94 . Return to the table of contents . Saint Joseph in the Woods Germany Once upon a time there was a mother who had three daughters. The oldest was impolite and wicked, the second much better -- although she too had her shortcomings -- while the youngest was a good and pious child. The mother was so perverted that she favored the oldest daughter and could not stand the youngest. Therefore she often sent the poor girl out into the woods just to get rid of her, for she thought that the girl would lose her way and never return. However, the guardian angel that watches over every pious child never left her and always showed her the way home. But one time the guardian angel pretended to not be close at hand, and the child was unable to find her way out of the woods. She walked on and on until nightfall, when she saw a light burning in the distance. She walked toward it, finally coming to a small hut. She knocked on the door, and it opened. Coming to a second door, she knocked there as well. An old man opened the door for her. He had a snow-white beard and looked very venerable. He was none other than Saint Joseph. Very friendlily he said, "Come, dear child, take a seat on my chair by the fire and warm yourself while I get you some fresh water, if you are thirsty; but here in the forest I have nothing for you to eat except a few roots, which you must first scrape and then cook." Saint Joseph handed her the roots, which she scraped clean. Then she brought forth the little piece of pancake and the bread that her mother had given her. Putting everything together into a pot next to the fire, she cooked some porridge for herself. When it was ready Saint Joseph said, "I am hungry. Give me some of your meal." The child was happy to do so, and gave him more than what she kept for herself, but God's blessing was with her, and she had all that she wanted to eat. After they had eaten, Saint Joseph said, "Let us go to bed now. I have only one bed. You can sleep in it and I'll lie down on some straw on the floor." "No," she answered. "You sleep in your bed. The straw is soft enough for me." However, Saint Joseph took the child into his arms and carried her to the bed. She said her prayers and fell asleep. The next morning when she awoke she wanted to say "good morning" to Saint Joseph, but she did not see him. She got up and looked everywhere for him but could not find him in any corner. Finally she saw a bag of money behind the door, so heavy that she could barely carry it. On it was written that it was for the child who had slept there that night. She took the bag and returned to her mother with it. And because she gave all the money to her mother, the mother had to be satisfied with her. The next day the second child wanted to go into the woods as well. The mother gave her a much larger piece of pancake and bread. The same thing happened to her as with the first child. In the evening she came to Saint Joseph's hut, and he gave her some roots for porridge. When it was ready he said to her, as before, "I am hungry. Give me some of your meal." The child answered, "Share with me." Afterward when Saint Joseph offered her his bed, saying that he would sleep on some straw, she said, "No, let's sleep in the bed together. There is plenty of room for both of us." Saint Joseph took her into his arms and laid her on the bed, then he himself slept on the straw. In the morning the child awoke and looked for Saint Joseph, but he had disappeared. Behind the door she found a bag of money. It was as long as a hand, and on it was written that it was for the child who had slept there that night. She ran home with it and gave it to her mother; however, she secretly kept a few coins for herself. Now the oldest daughter had become very curious, so the next morning she too wanted to go into the woods. The mother gave her as many pancakes as she wanted, as well as bread and cheese. In the evening she found Saint Joseph in his hut just as the other two had done. When the porridge was ready Saint Joseph said, "I am hungry. Give me some of your meal." She answered, "Just wait until I am full, then you can have whatever is left over." She ate nearly everything, and Saint Joseph had to scrape off the leftovers from the bowl. Afterward the good old man offered her his bed, saying that he would sleep on some straw. This she freely accepted, and let the old man sleep on the hard floor. The next morning when she awoke, Saint Joseph was nowhere to be seen, but she was not at all concerned about him. She looked behind the door for the moneybag. She thought that something was lying there on the floor, but unable to see what it was, she bent down until she touched it with her nose. It stuck to her nose, and when she straightened up she saw to her fright that it was a second nose. She began to cry and the howl, but nothing helped. She had to look at her nose, which stuck out far from her face. Crying out, she ran away. She finally came to Saint Joseph. She fell at his feet and begged him so long that he finally took pity and removed the nose; then he even gave her a few pennies. When she arrived at home the mother asked, "What gift did you receive?' She lied, saying, "A large bag filled with money, but I lost it on the way home." "Lost!" cried the mother. "Then we'll go and find it!" She took the child by the hand and wanted to look for the money. The child began to cry and did not want to go, but finally they went off together. On the way they were approached by so many lizards and snakes that they did not know how to escape. The lizards and snakes bit the child until she died, and they also bit the mother in the foot, because she had not better brought up the child. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der heilige Joseph im Walde," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), Kinderlegenden, no. 1, pp. 465-68 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der heilige Joseph im Walde," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), Kinderlegenden, no. 1, pp. 465-68 . Return to the table of contents . The Two Girls and the Angel Germany A young girl wanted to go into the woods and look for strawberries. Her mother gave her permission and provided her with cabbage and bacon to take along. Arriving at the gate, the girl saw an angel sitting there who asked for something to eat. Without hesitating, the girl gave the angel everything that her mother had sent with her, then happily went further into the woods and picked a basketful of strawberries. Upon leaving the woods on her way home, the girl again saw the angel, who asked for a few strawberries. The girl gladly gave them to the angel. Then the angel said, "When you come to the gate you will see a box. Take this with you, but do not open it until you arrive home." No -- she would not open it. Arriving at the gate she found the box, quickly took it home to her mother, and then opened it. It was filled with precious stones and gold coins. Thus the girl suddenly had become very wealthy. Another girl heard about this and wanted to go into the woods and look for strawberries as well. Her mother also gave her cabbage and bacon to take along. When she came to the gate, the angel was sitting there and asked, "Give me a little of your cabbage and bacon." The girl answered, "You can eat dirt!" She went further into the woods and picked a basketful of strawberries. Leaving the woods she saw the same angel, who asked, "Give me a few strawberries." The girl said, "I'm going to eat the strawberries myself," and gave nothing to the angel, who then replied, "Just be on your way! At the gate you will find a box. You may take it with you, but do not open it until you arrive at home." Oh, how the girl ran until she came to the gate and found the box! She was beside herself with joy. Arriving at home she opened the box -- and what was inside? Nothing but little black devils. Source (books.google.com): Ernst Meier, "Die zwei Mädchen und der Engel," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 77, pp. 268-69 . Source (Internet Archive): Ernst Meier, "Die zwei Mädchen und der Engel," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 77, pp. 268-69 . Return to the table of contents . The Two Stepsisters Norway Once upon a time there was a couple, and each of them had a daughter by a former marriage. The woman's daughter was dull and lazy, and could never turn her hand to anything, and the man's daughter was brisk and ready; but somehow or other she could never do anything to her stepmother's liking, and both the woman and her daughter would have been glad to be rid of her. So it fell one day the two girls were to go out and spin by the side of the well, and the woman's daughter had flax to spin, but the man's daughter got nothing to spin but bristles. "I don t know how it is," said the woman's daughter, "you're always so quick and sharp, but still I'm not afraid to spin a match with you." Well, they agreed that she whose thread first snapped should go down the well. So they span away; but just as they were hard at it, the man's daughter's thread broke, and she had to go down the well. But when she got to the bottom, she saw far and wide around her a fair green meadow, and she hadn't hurt herself at all. So she walked on a bit, until she came to a hedge which she had to cross. "Ah! don't step hard on me, pray don't, and I'll help you another time, that I will," said the hedge. Then the girl made herself as light as she could, and stepped so carefully that she hardly touched a twig. So she went on a bit farther, until she came to a brindled cow, which walked there with a milking pail on her horns. It was a large pretty cow, and her udder was very full and round. "Ah! be so good as to milk me, pray," said the cow. "I'm so full of milk. Drink as much as you please, and throw the rest over my hoofs, and see if I don't help you some day." So the man's daughter did as the cow begged. As soon as she touched the teats, the milk spouted out into the pail. Then she drank until her thirst was quenched, and the rest she threw over the cow's hoofs, and the milking pail she hung on her horns again. When she had gone a bit farther, a big sheep met her, which had such thick long wool, it hung down and draggled after him on the ground, and on one of his horns hung a great pair of shears. "Ah! please clip off my wool," said the sheep, "for here I go about with all this wool, and catch up everything I meet, and besides, it's so warm, I'm almost choked. Take as much of the fleece as you please, and twist the rest around my neck, and see if I don't help you some day." Yes, she was willing enough, and the sheep lay down on her lap, and kept quite still, and she clipped him so neatly that there wasn't a scratch on his skin. Then she took as much of the wool as she chose, and the rest she twisted around the neck of the sheep. A little farther on, she came to an apple tree, which was loaded with apples. All its branches were bent to the ground, and leaning against the stem was a slender pole. "Ah! do be so good as to pick my apples off me," said the tree, "so that my branches may straighten themselves again, for it's bad work to stand so crooked. But when you beat them down, don't strike me too hard. Then eat as many as you please. Lay the rest around my roots, and see if I don't help you some day or other." Yes, she picked all she could reach with her hands, and then she took the pole and knocked down the rest. Afterwards she ate her fill, and the rest she laid neatly around the roots. So she walked on a long, long way, and then she came to a large farmhouse, where an old hag of the trolls lived with her daughter. There she turned in to ask if she could get a place. "Oh!" said the old hag. "It's no use your trying. We've had ever so many maids, but none of them was worth her salt." But she begged so nicely that they would just take her on trial, that at last they let her stay. So the old hag gave her a sieve, and asked her go and fetch water in it. She thought it strange to fetch water in a sieve, but still she went, and when see came to the well, the little birds began to sing: Daub in clay, Stuff in straw, Daub in clay, Stuff in straw. Yes, she did so, and found she could carry water in a sieve well enough. But when she got home with the water, and the old witch saw the sieve, she cried out, "This you haven't sucked out of your own breast." Then the old witch said, that she might now go into the stall to pitch out dung and milk the cows. But when she got there she found a pitchfork so long and heavy she couldn't move it, much less work with it. She didn't know at all what to do, or what to make of it. But the little birds sang again that she should take the broomstick and toss out a little with that, and all the rest of the dung would fly after it. So she did that, and as soon as she began with the broomstick, the stall was as clean as if it had been swept and washed. Now she had to milk the cows, but they were so restless that they kicked and frisked; there was no getting near them to milk them. But the little birds sang outside: A little drop, a tiny sup, For the little birds to drink it up. Yes, she did that. She just milked a tiny drop for the little birds outside. It was as much as she could, but then all the cows stood still and let her milk them. They neither kicked nor frisked. They didn't even lift a leg. When the old witch saw her coming in with the milk, she cried out, "This you haven't sucked out of your own breast. But now just take this black wool and wash it white." The girl was at her wit's end to know how to do this, for she had never seen or heard of anyone who could wash black wool white. Still she said nothing, but took the wool and went down with it to the well. There the little birds sang again, and told her to take the wool and dip it into the large tub that stood there. She did so, and out it came as white as snow. "Well, I never!" said the old witch, when she came in with the wool. "It's no good keeping you. You can do everything, and at last you'll be the plague of my life. We'd best part, so take your wages and be off." Then the old hag drew out three chests, one red, one green, and one blue, and of these the girl was to choose one as wages for her service. Now she didn't know at all which to choose, but the little birds sang: Don't take the red, don't take the green, But take the blue, where may be seen Three little crosses all in a row. We saw the marks, and so we know. So she took the blue chest, as the birds sang. "Bad luck to you, then," said the old witch. "See if I don't make you pay for this!" So when the man's daughter was just setting off, the old witch shot a red-hot bar of iron after her, but she sprang behind the door and hid herself, so that it missed her, for her friends, the little birds, had told her beforehand how to behave. Then she walked on and on as fast as she could. But when she got to the apple tree, she heard an awful clatter behind her on the road, and that was the old witch and her daughter coming after her. So the girl was so frightened and scared, she didn't know what to do. "Come here to me, girl, do you hear," said the apple tree, "I'll help you. Get under my branches and hide, for if they catch you they'll tear you to death, and take the chest away from you." Yes, she did so, and she had hardly hidden herself before up came the old witch and her daughter. "Have you seen any girl pass this way, you apple tree?" said the old hag. "Yes, yes," said the Apple tree. "One ran by here an hour ago. But now she's got so far ahead you'll never catch up with her." So the old witch turned back and went home again. Then the lassie walked on a bit, but when she came just about where the sheep was, she heard an awful clatter beginning on the road behind her, and she didn't know what to do. She was so scared and frightened; for she knew well enough it was the old witch, who had changed her mind. "Come here to me, girl," said the sheep, "and I'll help you. Hide yourself under my fleece, and then they'll not see you, or else they'll take away the chest, and tear you to death." Just then up came the old witch, tearing along. "Have you seen any girl pass here, you sheep?" she cried to the sheep. "Oh yes," said the sheep, "I saw one an hour ago, but she ran so fast you'll never catch her." So the old witch turned around and went home. But when the girl had come to where she met the cow, she heard another awful clatter behind her. "Come here to me, girl," said the cow, "and I'll help you to hide yourself under my udder, else the old hag will come and take away your chest, and tear you to death." True enough, it wasn't long before she came up. "Have you seen any girl pass here, you cow?" said the old hag. "Yes, I saw one an hour ago," said the cow, "but she's far away now, for she ran so fast I don't think you'll ever catch up with her." So the old hag turned around, and went back home again. When the girl had walked a long, long way farther on, and was not far from the hedge, she heard again that awful clatter on the road behind her, and she got scared and frightened, for she knew well enough it was the old hag and her daughter, who had changed their minds. "Come here to me, girl," said the hedge, "and I'll help you. Creep under my twigs, so that they can't see you; or else they'll take the chest from you, and tear you to death." Yes; she made all the haste she could to get under the twigs of the hedge. "Have you seen any girl pass this way, you hedge?" said the old hag to the hedge. "No, I haven't seen any girl," answered the hedge, and was as smooth-tongued as if he had melted butter in his mouth; but all the while he spread himself out, making himself so big and tall, that one would have to think twice before crossing him. And so the old witch had no choice but to turn around and go home again. When the man's daughter got home, her stepmother and her stepsister were more spiteful against her than ever; for now she was much prettier, and so smart, it was a joy to look at her. Still she couldn't get permission to live with them, but they drove her out into a pigsty. That was to be her house. So she scrubbed it out neat and clean. Then she opened her chest, to see what she had got for her wages. As soon as she unlocked it, she saw inside so much gold and silver, and lovely things, which came streaming out until all the walls were hung with them, and at last the pigsty was far grander than the grandest king's palace. And when the stepmother and her daughter saw this, they almost jumped out of their skin, and began to ask what kind of a position she had had down there. "Oh," said the girl, "Can't you see what good wages I received? It was such a family and such a mistress to serve, you couldn't find anyone like them anywhere." Yes, the woman's daughter made up her mind to go out to serve too, so that she might get just such another gold chest. So they sat down to spin again, and this time the woman's daughter was to spin bristles, and the man's daughter flax, and she whose thread first snapped was to go down the well. It wasn't long, as you might guess, before the woman's daughter's thread snapped, and so they threw her down the well. The same thing happened. She fell to the bottom, but met with no harm, and found herself on a lovely green meadow. When she had walked a bit she came to the hedge. "Don't step hard on me, pray, girl, and I'll help you again," said the hedge. "Oh!" said she. "What should I care for a bundle of twigs?" And she tramped and stamped over the hedge until it cracked and groaned. A little farther on she came to the cow, which walked about ready to burst for want of milking. "Be so good as to milk me, girl," said the cow, "and I'll help you again. Drink as much as you please, but throw the rest over my hoofs." Yes, she did that. She milked the cow, and drank until she could drink no more. But when she was finished, there was none left to throw over the cow's hoofs, and as for the pail, she tossed it down the hill and walked on. When she had gone a bit farther, she came to the sheep, which walked along with his wool dragging after him. "Oh, be so good as to clip me, girl," said the sheep, "and I'll serve you again. Take as much of the wool as you will, but twist the rest around my neck." Well, she did that; but she went so carelessly to work, that she cut great pieces out of the poor sheep, and as for the wool, she carried it all away with her. A little while after she came to the apple tree, which stood there quite crooked with fruit again. "Be so good as to pick the apples off me so that my limbs may grow straight, for it's weary work to stand all awry," said the apple tree. "But please take care not to beat me too hard. Eat as many as you will, but lay the rest neatly around my roots, and I'll help you again." Well, she picked those nearest to her, and beat down those she couldn't reach with the pole. But she didn't care how she did it, and broke off and tore down great branches, and ate until she was as full as full as could be, and then she threw down the rest under the tree. When she had gone a good bit farther, she came to the farm where the old witch lived. There she asked for a place, but the old hag said she wouldn't have any more maids, for they were either worth nothing, or were too clever, and cheated her out of her goods. But the woman's daughter was not to be put off, she would have a place, so the old witch said she'd give her a trial, to see if she was fit for anything. The first thing she had to do was to fetch water in sieve. Well, off she went to the well, and drew water in a sieve, but as fast as she got it in, it ran out again. So the little birds sang: Daub in clay, Stuff in straw, Daub in clay, Put in straw. But she didn't care to listen to the birds' song, and pelted them with clay, until they flew off far away. And so she had to go home with the empty sieve, and was well scolded by the old witch. Then she was to go into the stall to clean it, and milk the cows. But she was too good for such dirty work, she thought. Still, she went out into the stall, but when she got there, she couldn't get on at all with the pitchfork, it was so big. The birds said the same to her as they had said to her stepsister, and told her to take the broomstick, and toss out a little dung, and then all the rest would fly after it; but all she did with the broomstick was to throw it at the birds. When she came to milk, the cows were so unruly, they kicked and pushed, and every time she got a little milk in the pail, over they kicked it. Then the birds sang again: A little drop, a tiny sup, For the little birds to drink it up. But she beat and banged the cows about, and threw and pelted at the birds everything she could lay hold of, and made such a to do, it was awful to see. So she didn't make much either of her pitching or milking, and when she came indoors she got blows as well as hard words from the old witch, who sent her off to wash the black wool white; but that, too, she did no better. Then the old witch thought this was really too bad, so she set out the three chests, one red, one green, and one blue, and said she no longer had any need of her services, for she wasn't worth keeping, but for wages she should have permission to choose whichever chest she pleased. Then sang the little birds: Don't take the red, don't take the green, But take the blue, where may be seen Three little crosses all in a row. We saw the marks, and so we know. She didn't care a pin for what the birds sang, but took the red one, which caught her eye most. And so she set out on her road home, and she went along quietly and easily enough. There was no one who came after her. When she got home, her mother was ready to jump with joy, and the two went at once into the ingle, and put the chest up there, for they made up their minds there could be nothing in it but pure silver and gold, and they thought to have all the walls and roof gilded like the pigsty. But lo! when they opened the chest there came tumbling out nothing but toads, and frogs, and snakes; and worse than that, whenever the woman's daughter opened her mouth, out popped a toad or a snake, and all the vermin one ever thought of; so that at last there was no living in the house with her. That was all the wages she got for going out to service with the old witch. Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbørnsen, Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), , pp. 355-68 . Source (Internet Archive): Peter Christen Asbørnsen, Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), , pp. 355-68 . Dasent has changed the title of this story. A literal translation of Asbjørnsen's and Moe's title would be "The Man's Daughter and the Woman's Daughter." Link to the text in the original Norwegian: Manndatteren og kjerringdatteren , Norske Folkeeventyr . Return to the table of contents . The Fairies France, Charles Perrault There was once a widow who had two daughters. The elder was so like her mother in temper and face, that to have seen the one was to have seen the other. They were both so disagreeable and proud, that it was impossible to live with them. The younger, who was the exact portrait of her father in her kindly and polite ways, was also as beautiful a girl as one could see. As we are naturally fond of those who resemble us, the mother doted on her elder daughter, while for the younger she had a most violent aversion, and made her take her meals in the kitchen and work hard all day. Among other things that she was obliged to do, this poor child was forced to go twice a day to fetch water from a place a mile or more from the house, and carry back a large jug ?lled to the brim. As she was standing one day by this spring, a poor woman came up to her, and asked the girl to give her some water to drink. "Certainly, my good woman," she replied, and the beautiful girl at once stooped and rinsed out the jug, and then, ?lling it with water from the clearest part of the spring, she held it up to the woman, continuing to support the jug, that she might drink with greater comfort. Having drunk, the woman said to her, "You are so beautiful, so good and kind, that I cannot refrain from conferring a gift upon you," for she was really a fairy, who had taken the form of a poor village woman, in order to see how far the girl's kind heartedness would go. "This gift I make you," continued the fairy, "that with every word you speak, either a ?ower or a precious stone will fall from your mouth." The girl had no sooner reached home than her mother began scolding her for being back so late. "I am sorry, mother," said she, "to have been out so long," and as she spoke, there fell from her mouth two roses, two pearls, and two large diamonds. The mother gazed at her in astonishment. "What do I see!" she exclaimed, " Pearls and diamonds seem to be dropping from her mouth! How is this, my daughter?" It was the ?rst time she had called her daughter . The poor child related in all simplicity what had happened, letting fall quantities of diamonds in the course of her narrative. "I must certainly send my other daughter there," said the mother. "Look, Fanchon, see what falls from your sister's mouth when she speaks! Would you not be glad to receive a similar gift? All you have to do, is to go and fetch water from the spring, and if an old woman asks you for some to drink, to give it her nicely and politely." "I should like to see myself going to the spring," answered the rude, cross girl. " I insist on your going," rejoined the mother, "and that at once." The elder girl went off, still grumbling; with her she took the handsomest silver bottle she could ?nd in the house. She had no sooner arrived at the spring, than she saw a lady magni?cently dressed walking towards her from the wood, who approached and asked for some water to drink. It was the same fairy who had appeared to the sister, but she had now put on the airs and apparel of a princess, as she wished to see how far this girl's rudeness would go. "Do you think I came here just to draw water for you?" answered the arrogant and unmannerly girl; "I have, of course, brought this silver bottle on purpose for madam to drink from! Well, all I have to say is -- drink from it if you like." "You are scarcely polite," said the fairy, without losing her temper; "however, as you are so disobliging, I confer this gift upon you, that with every word you speak, a snake or a toad shall fall from your mouth." Directly her mother caught sight of her, she called out, "Well, my daughter!" "Well, my mother!" replied the ill-tempered girl, throwing out as she spoke two vipers and two toads. "Alack!" cried the mother, "What do I see? This is her sister's doing, but I will pay her out for it," and, so saying, she ran towards the younger girl with intent to beat her. The unhappy girl ?ed from the house, and went and hid herself in a neighbouring forest. The king's son, who was returning from hunting, met her, and seeing how beautiful she was, asked her what she was doing there all alone, and why she was crying. "Alas! sir, my mother has driven me from home." The king's son, seeing ?ve or six pearls and as many diamonds, falling from her mouth as she spoke, asked her to explain how this was, and she told him all her tale. The king's son fell in love with her, and thinking that such a gift as she possessed was worth more than any ordinary dower brought by another, he carried her off to his father's palace, and there married her. As for her sister, she made herself so hated, that her own mother drove her from the house. The miserable girl, having gone about in vain trying to ?nd someone who would take her in, crept away into the corner of a wood, and there died. Of higher worth are gentle words Than diamonds or gold, And even o'er the minds of men A great power they hold. It costs some pains to be polite, And needs some kindly thought, But soon or late, as here you see, Reward will come unsought. Source (books.google.com): Charles Perrault, Tales of Passed Times (London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1900), pp. 55-60 . Source (Internet Archive): Charles Perrault, Tales of Passed Times (London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1900), pp. 55-60 . Link to the text in French: Les fées . Return to the table of contents . The Bucket Italy There was once a mother who had two daughters: one was bad and the other was very good. But the mother loved the bad one more than the good one. She said one day to the bad one: "Go and draw a bucket of water." The bad one did not want to go, and so she would not obey her mother. The good daughter, however, said: "I will go and draw it." She went to draw the water, and the bucket fell down the well. She said: "If I go home now without the bucket, who knows what my mother will do to me?" So she climbed down the well, and at the bottom found a narrow passage, with a door. She knocked at the door. "Have you not found a cord and bucket?" There was a saint there, who answered: "No, my child." She continued her way and found another door. "Have you not found a cord and bucket?" "No!" That was the devil there. He answered her angrily because she was a good girl; he did not say: "My child." She knocked at another door. "Have you not found a cord and bucket?" It was the Madonna who replied: "Yes, my child. Listen. You could do me a pleasure to stay here while I am away. I have my little son here, to whom you will give his soup; you will sweep and put the house in order. When I come home I will give you your bucket." The Madonna went away, and the good girl put the house in order, gave the child his broth, swept the house; and while she was sweeping, instead of finding dirt, she found coral and other beautiful things. She saw that it was not dirt, and put it aside to give the Madonna when she returned. When the Madonna came back, she asked: "Have you done all I told you to do?" The good girl answered: "Yes, but I have kept these things here; I found them on the ground; it is not dirt." "Very well; keep them for yourself. Would you like a dress of calico, or one of silk?" The girl answered: "No, no! a calico dress." Instead of that, the Madonna gave her the silk one. "Do you wish a brass thimble, or a silver one?" "Give me the brass one." "No, take the silver thimble. Here is the bucket and your cord. When you reach the end of this passage, look up in the air." The girl did so, and a beautiful star fell on her brow. She went home, and her mother ran to meet her to scold her for being away so long; and was about to strike her, when she saw the star on her brow, which shone so that it was beautiful to see, and said: "Where have you been until now? Who put that thing on your forehead?" The girl answered: "I don't know what there is there." Her mother tried to wash it away, but instead of disappearing, it shone more beautiful than ever. Then the girl told what had happened to her, and the other sister wished to go there, too. She went, and did the same as her sister. She let the bucket fall, climbed down, and knocked at the saint's door. "Have you not found a cord and bucket?" "No, my child." She knocked at the next door. "Have you not found a cord and bucket?" The devil answered: "No, I have not found them; but come here, my child, come here." But when she heard that he had not found her bucket, she said: "No, I will go on." She knocked at the Madonna's door. "Have you not found a cord and bucket?" The Madonna said that she had. "I am going away: you will give my son his broth, and then you will sweep. When I return I will give you your bucket." Instead of giving the broth to the child, the bad girl ate it herself. "Oh!" she said, "how good it was!" She swept and found a great deal of dirt. "Oh, poor me! My sister found so many pretty things!" The Madonna returned. "Have you done what I told you?" "Yes." "Do you wish the brass or silver thimble?" "Oh! I want the silver one!" She gave her the brass one. "Do you want the calico dress or the silk one?" "Give me the silk dress." She gave her the calico dress. "Here is your bucket and cord. When you are out of here, look up into the air." When she was out she looked up into the air and there fell on her forehead a lump of dirt that soiled her whole face. She went home in a rage to weep and scold her sister because she had had the star, while she had that dirt on her face. Her mother began to wash her face and rub it; and the more she did so the less the dirt went away. Then the mother said: "I understand; the Madonna has done this to show me that I loved the bad girl and neglected the good one." Source (books.google.com): Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 26, pp. 100-102 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 26, pp. 100-102 . Return to the table of contents . The Three Heads of the Well England Long before Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table, there reigned in the eastern part of England a king who kept his court at Colchester. He was witty, strong, and valiant, by which means he subdued his enemies abroad, and secured peace among his subjects at home. Nevertheless, in the midst of his glory, his queen died, leaving behind her an only daughter, about fifteen years of age. This lady, from her courtly carriage, beauty, and affability, was the wonder of all that knew her; but, as covetousness is said to be the root of all evil, so it happened in this instance. The king hearing of a lady who had likewise an only daughter, for the sake of her riches had a mind to marry; though she was old, ugly, hook-nosed, and humpbacked, yet all this could not deter him from marrying her. Her daughter, also, was a yellow dowdy, full of envy and ill-nature; and, in short, was much of the same mould as her mother. This signified nothing, for in a few weeks the king, attended by the nobility and gentry, brought his intended bride to his palace, where the marriage rites were performed. They had not been long in the court before they set the king against his own beautiful daughter, which was done by false reports and accusations. The young princess, having lost her father's love, grew weary of the court, and one day meeting with her father in the garden, she desired him, with tears in her eyes, to give her a small subsistence, and she would go and seek her fortune; to which the king consented, and ordered her mother-in-law [stepmother] to make up a small sum according to her discretion. She went to the queen, who gave her a canvas bag of brown bread and hard cheese, with a bottle of beer; though this was but a very pitiful dowry for a king's daughter. She took it, returned thanks, and proceeded on her journey, passing through groves, woods, and valleys, till at length she saw an old man sitting on a stone at the mouth of a cave, who said, "Good morrow, fair maiden, whither away so fast?" "Aged father," says she, "I am going to seek my fortune." "What has thou in thy bag and bottle?" "In my bag I have got bread and cheese, and in my bottle good small beer; will you please to partake of either?" "Yes," said he, "with all my heart." With that the lady pulled out her provisions, and bid him eat and welcome. He did so, and gave her many thanks, saying thus: "There is a thick thorny hedge before you, which will appear impassable, but take this wand in your hand, strike three times, and say, 'Pray, hedge, let me come through,' and it will open immediately; then, a little further, you will find a well; sit down on the brink of it, and there will come up three golden heads, which will speak. Pray do whatever they require." Promising she would follow his directions, she took her leave of him. Arriving at the hedge, and pursuing the old man's directions, it divided, and gave her a passage; then, going to the well, she had no sooner sat down than a golden head came up singing: Wash me, and comb me, And lay me down softly, And lay me on a bank to dry, That I may look pretty, When somebody comes by. "Yes," said she, and putting forth her hand, with a silver comb performed the office, placing it upon a primrose bank. Then came up a second and a third head, making the same request, which she complied with. She then pulled out her provisions and ate her dinner. Then said the heads one to another, "What shall we do for this lady who hath used us so kindly?" The first said, "I will cause such addition to her beauty as shall charm the most powerful prince in the world." The second said, "I will endow her with such perfume, both in body and breath, as shall far exceed the sweetest flowers." The third said, "My gift shall be none of the least, for, as she is a king's daughter, I'll make her so fortunate that she shall become queen to the greatest prince that reigns." This done, at their request she let them down into the well again, and so proceeded on her journey. She had not travelled long before she saw a king hunting in the park with his nobles; she would have avoided him, but the king having caught a sight of her, approached, and what with her beauty and perfumed breath, was so powerfully smitten, that he was not able to subdue his passion, but commenced his courtship immediately, and was so successful that he gained her love, and, conducting her to his palace, he caused her to be clothed in the most magnificent manner. This being ended, and the king finding that she was the King of Colchester's daughter, ordered some chariots to be got ready, that he might pay the king a visit. The chariot in which the king and queen rode was adorned with rich ornamental gems of gold. The king, her father, was at first astonished that his daughter had been so fortunate as she was, till the young king made him sensible of all that happened. Great was the joy at court amongst all, with the exception of the queen and her club-footed daughter, who were ready to burst with malice, and envied her happiness; and the greater was their madness because she was now above them all. Great rejoicings, with feasting and dancing, continued many days. Then at length, with the dowry her father gave her they returned home. The deformed daughter perceiving that her sister had been so happy in seeking her fortune, would needs do the same; so disclosing her mind to her mother, all preparations were made, and she was furnished not only with rich apparel, but sweetmeats, sugar, almonds, etc., in great quantities, and a large bottle of Malaga sack. Thus provided, she went the same road as her sister, and coming near the cave, the old man said, "Young woman, whither so fast?" "What is that to you?" said she. "Then," said he, "what have you in your bag and bottle?" She answered, "Good things, which you shall not be troubled with." "Won't you give me some?" said he. "No, not a bit, nor a drop, unless it would choke you." The old man frowned, saying, "Evil fortune attend thee." Going on, she came to the hedge, through which she espied a gap, and thought to pass through it, but, going in, the hedge closed, and the thorns run into her flesh, so that it was with great difficulty that she got out. Being now in a painful condition, she searched for water to wash herself, and, looking round, she saw the well; she sat down on the brink of it, and one of the heads came up, saying, "Wash me, comb me, and lay me down softly, etc." But she banged it with her bottle, saying, "Take this for your washing." So the second and third heads came up, and met with no better treatment than the first; whereupon the heads consulted among themselves what evils to plague her with for such usage. The first said, "Let her be struck with leprosy in her face." The second, "Let an additional smell be added to her breath." The third bestowed on her a husband, though but a poor country cobbler. This done, she goes on till she came to a town, and it being market day, the people looked at her, and seeing such an evil face fled out of her sight, all but a poor cobbler (who not long before had mended the shoes of an old hermit, who having no money, gave him a box of ointment for the cure of the leprosy, and a bottle of spirits for a stinking breath). Now the cobbler having a mind to do an act of charity, was induced to go up to her and ask her who she was. "I am," said she, "the King of Colchester's daughter-in-law." "Well," said the cobbler, "if I restore you to your natural complexion, and make a sound cure both in face and breath, will you in reward take me for a husband?" "Yes, friend," replied she, "with all my heart." With this the cobbler applied the remedies, and they worked the effect in a few weeks, and then they were married, and after a few days they set forward for the court at Colchester. When the queen understood she had married a poor cobbler, she fell into distraction, and hanged herself for vexation. The death of the queen was not a source of sorrow to the king, who had only married her for her fortune, and bore her no affection; and shortly afterwards he gave the cobbler a hundred pounds to take the daughter to a remote part of the kingdom, where he lived many years mending shoes, while his wife assisted the housekeeping by spinning, and selling the results of her labours at the country market. Source (books.google.com): James Orchard Halliwell, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to the Nursery Rhymes of England (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), pp. 39-43 . Source (Internet Archive): James Orchard Halliwell, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to the Nursery Rhymes of England (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), pp. 39-43 . Note by Halliwell: "This story is abridged from the old chap-book of the Three Kings of Colchester. The incident of the heads rising out of the well is very similar to one introduced in Peele's Old Wives Tale, 1595. and the verse is also of a similar character." Return to the table of contents . The Old Woman and the Two Servant Girls England There was once an old woman who hired a servant girl to keep her house clean and tidy. She told the girl to rise early and sweep out every corner, but to be sure not to sweep the chimney, and every night she went through the same, saying she was never to put her brush up the chimney. One morning, however, the servant thought she would put the brush up the chimney. She did so, and down fell a bag of money. She took it up and ran away. As she went along she came to a gate, which spoke, and said to her, "Pretty maiden, will you open me, for I have not been opened for many a year?" "Open yourself," said the girl. "I have no time to open you." So she went on, and came to a cow, and the cow said, "Pretty maiden, stop and milk em, for I have not been milked for many a day." "Milk yourself," said the girl. "I have no time to milk you." So she went on, and came to a mill, and the mill said, "Pretty maiden, will you turn me, for I have not been turned for many a day." "Turn yourself," said the girl. "I have no time to turn you." By this time the girl began to get tired, so he hid the bag in the mill hopper. When the old woman got up in the morning, and missed the girl, she went straight to the chimney, and found her money was gone. So she set off directly after the girl, and when she came to the gate she said, "Gate o' mine, gate o' mine, have you seen a maid o' mine, with a ji-jaller bag, and a long leather bag, with all the money in that ever I had?" And the gate said, "Further on." Then she went on and came to the cow, of whom she asked the same question, and got the same answer. And she went on and came to the mill, and said, "Mill o' mine, have you seen a maid o' mine, with a ji-jaller bag, and a long leather bag, with all the money in it that e'er I had?" And the mill said, "Down the mill hopper." So the old woman got her money again, and soon she hired a new girl, and told her the very same things she had told the first. The new girl did just like the first, and ran away. But when she came to the gate she opened it, and when she came to the cow she milked it, and when she came to the mill she turned it. So when the old woman went after the girl, and asked the gate, the cow, and the mill whether they had seen her, there was no answer, and the girl got away with the bag of money. Source (books.google.com): William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders: A New Edition with Many Additional Notes (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1879), pp. 349-50 . Source (Internet Archive): William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders: A New Edition with Many Additional Notes (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1879), pp. 349-50 . Henderson's source: "The following remarkable story, communicated to me by Mr. Joseph Crawhall, was taken down from the lips of an old inhabitant of Newcastle-on-Tyne. The old man said he had known it all his life, and there can be little doubt that it is an ancient tale of that place." Henderson does not give this story a title. Return to the table of contents . The Old Witch England Once upon a time there were two girls who lived with their mother and father. Their father had no work, and the girls wanted to go away and seek their fortunes. Now one girl wanted to go to service, and her mother said she might if she could find a place. So she started for the town. Well, she went all about the town, but no one wanted a girl like her. So she went on farther into the country, and she came to a place where there was an oven where there was lots of bread baking. And the bread said, "Little girl, little girl, take us out, take us out. We have been baking seven years, and no one has come to take us out." So the girl took out the bread, laid it on the ground, and went on her way. Then she met a cow, and the cow said, "Little girl, little girl, milk me, milk me! Seven years have I been waiting, and no one has come to milk me." The girl milked the cow into the pails that stood by. As she was thirsty she drank some, and left the rest in the pails by the cow. Then she went on a little bit farther, and came to an apple-tree, so loaded with fruit that its branches were breaking down, and the tree said, "Little girl, little girl, help me shake my fruit. My branches are breaking, it is so heavy." And the girl said, "Of course I will, you poor tree." So she shook the fruit all off, propped up the branches, and left the fruit on the ground under the tree. Then she went on again till she came to a house. Now in this house there lived a witch, and this witch took girls into her house as servants. And when she heard that this girl had left her home to seek service, she said that she would try her, and give her good wages. The witch told the girl what work she was to do. "You must keep the house clean and tidy, sweep the floor and the fireplace; but there is one thing you must never do. You must never look up the chimney, or something bad will befall you." So the girl promised to do as she was told, but one morning as she was cleaning, and the witch was out, she forgot what the witch said, and looked up the chimney. When she did this a great bag of money fell down in her lap. This happened again and again. So the girl started to go off home. When she had gone some way she heard the witch coming after her. So she ran to the apple-tree and cried: Apple-tree, apple-tree hide me, So the old witch can't find me; If she does she'll pick my bones, And bury me under the marble stones. So the apple-tree hid her. When the witch came up she said: Tree of mine, tree of mine, Have you seen a girl With a willy-willy wag, and a long-tailed bag, Who's stole my money, all I had?" And the apple-tree said, "No, mother; not for seven year." When the witch had gone down another way, the girl went on again, and just as she got to the cow she heard the witch coming after her again, so she ran to the cow and cried: Cow, cow, hide me, So the old witch can't find me; If she does she'll pick my bones, And bury me under the marble stones. So the cow hid her. When the old witch came up, she looked about and said to the cow: Cow of mine, cow of mine, Have you seen a girl With a willy-willy wag, and a long-tailed bag, Who's stole my money, all I had? And the cow said, "No, mother; not for seven year." When the witch had gone off another way, the little girl went on again, and when she was near the oven she heard the witch coming after her again, so she ran to the oven and cried: Oven, oven, hide me, So the old witch can't find me; If she does she'll break my bones, And bury me under the marble stones. And the oven said, "I've no room, ask the baker." And the baker hid her behind the oven. When the witch came up she looked here and there and everywhere, and then said to the baker: Man of mine, man of mine, Have you seen a girl, With a willy-willy wag, and a long-tailed bag, Who's stole my money, all I had? So the baker said, "Look in the oven." The old witch went to look, and the oven said, "Get in and look in the furthest corner." The witch did so, and when she was inside the oven shut her door, and the witch was kept there for a very long time. The girl then went off again, and reached her home with her money bags, married a rich man, and lived happy ever afterwards. The other sister then thought she would go and do the same. And she went the same way. But when she reached the oven, and the bread said, "Little girl, little girl, take us out. Seven years have we been baking, and no one has come to take us out." The girl said, "No, I don't want to burn my fingers." So she went on till she met the cow, and the cow said, "Little girl, little girl, milk me, milk me, do. Seven years have I been waiting, and no one has come to milk me." But the girl said, "No, I can't milk you, I'm in a hurry," and went on faster. Then she came to the apple-tree, and the apple- tree asked her to help shake the fruit. But the girl said, "No, I can't; another day p'raps I may," and went on till she came to the witch's house. Well, it happened to her just the same as to the other girl -- she forgot what she was told, and one day when the witch was out, looked up the chimney, and down fell a bag of money. Well, she thought she would be off at once. When she reached the apple-tree, she heard the witch coming after her, and she cried: Apple-tree, apple-tree, hide me, So the old witch can't find me; If she does she'll break my bones, And bury me under the marble stones. But the tree didn't answer, and she ran on further. Presently the witch came up and said: Tree of mine, tree of mine, Have you seen a girl, With a willy-willy wag, and a long-tailed bag, Who's stole my money, all I had? The tree said, "Yes, mother; she's gone down that way." So the old witch went after her and caught her, she took all the money away from her, beat her, and sent her off home just as she was. Source (books.google.com): Joseph Jacobs, More English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 94-98 . Source (Internet Archive): Joseph Jacobs, More English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 94-98 . Note by Jacobs (p. 230): Source: Collected by Mrs. Gomme at Deptford. Parallels: I have a dim memory of hearing a similar tale in Australia in 1860. It is clearly parallel with the Grimms' ''Frau Holle," where the good girl is rewarded and the bad punished in a similar way. Perrault's "Toads and Diamonds" is of the same genus. Return to the table of contents . Morozko (Jack Frost) Russia There was once a stepmother who, besides her stepdaughter, had a daughter of her own. Whatever her own daughter might do, she looked kindly at her and said, "Sensible darling!" but as for the step daughter, whatever she might do to please, it was always taken amiss. Everything she did was wrong, and not as it should be. Yet, sooth to say, the little stepdaughter was as good as gold; in good hands she would have swum in cheese and butter, but, living with her stepmother, she bathed herself every day in tears. What was she to do? The blast, though it blows, does not blow forever, but a scolding old woman it is not so easy to avoid. She will take anything into her head, even to combing one's teeth. And the stepmother took it into her head to drive her stepdaughter from the house. "Take her, take her away, my old man, whithersoever you like, that mine eyes may not see her, that my ears may not hear of her; but don't take her to my own daughter in the warm room, but take her into the bare fields to the bitter, biting frost." The old man began to lament and weep, but for all that he put his daughter in the sledge; he would have liked to cover her with the horse-cloth, but even that he dared not do. So he took the homeless one into the bare fields, threw her on a heap of snow, crossed himself, and hastened home as fast as possible, that his eyes might not see his daughter's death. There the poor little thing remained on the fringe of the forest, sat down under a fir-tree, shivered, and softly said her prayers. All at once she heard some thing. Morozko was crackling in a fir-tree not far off, and he leaped from fir to fir and snapped his fingers. And look! now he has come to that fir beneath which the girl was sitting; and he snapped his fingers, and leaped up and down, and looked at the pretty girl. "Maiden, maiden, 'tis I -- Moroz-Ruby-Nose!" "Welcome, Moroz! God must have sent thee to my poor sinful soul." "Art thou warm, Maiden?" "Warm, warm, dear little father Morozushko!" Moroz began to descend lower, and crackle still more, and snap his fingers more than ever, and again he began speaking to the girl. "Art thou warm, maiden? Art thou warm, beauty?" The girl was scarce able to draw her breath, and yet she kept on saying, "Yes, warm, Morozushko; warm, little father!" Morozko crackled more than ever, and snapped his fingers harder and yet harder, and he said to the maiden for the last time, "Art thou warm, maiden? Art thou warm, beauty? Art thou warm, sweet clover?" The girl was all benumbed, and it was only in a voice scarcely audible that she could say, "Oh, yes! warm, darling little pigeon mine, Morozushko!" Morozko quite loved her for her pretty speeches. He had compassion on the girl; he wrapped her in furs, warmed her with warm coverings, and brought her a coffer, high and heavy, full of bridal garments, and gave her a robe all garnished with gold and silver. She put it on, and oh, how beautiful and stately she looked! And she sat down and began to sing songs. And the stepmother was preparing her funeral feast and frying pancakes. "Be off, husband, and bury your daughter!" she cried. And off the old man went. But the little dog under the table said, "Bow-wow! The old man's daughter is going about in silver and gold, but the old woman's daughter no wooers will look at." "Silence, you fool! There's a pancake for you, and now say, 'The wooers will take the old woman's daughter, but there's nothing left of the old man's daughter but her bones.'" The little dog ate the pancake, but again he said, "Bow-wow! The old man's daughter goes about in silver and gold, but the old woman's daughter no wooers will look at." The old woman kept beating the dog and giving him pancakes, but the little dog would have his way, and said, "The old man's daughter goes about in silver and gold, but the old woman's daughter no wooers will look at." The floors creaked, the doors flew open wide, and in they brought the high and heavy coffer, and behind it walked the stepdaughter, in gold and silver, glittering like the sun. The stepmother looked at her, and threw up her arms. "Old man, old man! Put to a pair of horses, and take my daughter at once. Put her in the selfsame field, in the selfsame place." And the old man took the daughter to the selfsame place. And Moroz-Ruby-Nose came and looked at his guest, and began to ask her, "Art thou warm, maiden?" "Be off with you!" replied the old woman's daughter, "or are you blind not to see that my arms and legs are quite benumbed with cold?" Morozko began skipping and jumping, fair words were not to be expected from that quarter. And he was angry with the step daughter, and froze her to death. "Old man, old man! Go and fetch my daughter. Put to my swift horses, and don't overturn the sledge and upset the coffer." But the little dog under the table said, "Bow-wow! The wooers will wed the old man's daughter, but they'll bring home nothing of the old woman's daughter but a sack of bones." "Don't lie! There's a cake. Take it and say, 'They'll carry about the old woman's daughter in gold and silver!'" And the doors flew open, the nasty old woman ran out to meet her daughter, and instead of her she embraced a cold corpse. She began to howl and cry. She knew then that she had lost her wicked and envious daughter. Source (books.google.com): R. Nisbet Bain, Russian Fairy Tales , from the Skazki of Polevoi, 2nd edition (London: Lawrence and Bullen, 1893), pp. 8-12 . Source (Internet Archive): R. Nisbet Bain, Russian Fairy Tales , selected and translated from the Skazki of Polevoi (London: Lawrence and Bullen, 1892), pp. 8-12 . Return to the table of contents . The Twelve Months Russia A woman had two daughters, one was her own, the other was a stepdaughter. She loved Holena, her own daughter, but hated Marushka, the stepdaughter, for she was prettier and smarter than Holena. Holena sat around in idleness, while Marushka had to cook, wash, spin, weave, bring grass, and take care of the cow. She was willing to work; she didn't know why her mother hated her, but she bore reproaches with patience. At last the stepmother and her daughter thought only of how to get rid of poor Marushka. They tortured her with hunger, and beat her, but she endured it all and grew more beautiful each day. One day, in the middle of winter, Holena pretended to want violets, and she said to Marushka, "Go to the woods and get me some violets. I want to put them in my belt and enjoy their perfume." "But, sister, what has come to your mind? I have never heard of violets blossoming in winter," answered Marushka. "How do you dare to question when I command? Worthless creature, toad! If you do not go this minute to the woods and get me violets I will kill you," threatened Holena. The stepmother seized Marushka, pushed her out of the house, and closed the door. The girl went to the forest, weeping bitterly. Deep snow was on the ground; there was no trace of a path. Long she wandered. She was hungry and cold, and prayed to God to take her out of the world. At last, off in the distance, she saw a bright light. She went toward it and ascending a hill she came to a fire; around the fire on twelve stones, sat twelve men; three old men with long white beards, three somewhat younger, three in years of manhood, and three beautiful youths. They were sitting in silence and looking calmly on the fire. They were the Twelve Months. December sat in the first place; his hair and beard were white as snow; he held a scepter in his hand. Marushka stood in astonishment, but after a time, summoning courage, she drew near, and asked, "Kind men, will you let me warm myself at the fire? I am shivering with cold." December nodded his head. When the maid was warm, he asked, "Why are you here?" "I am looking for violets," answered Marushka. "But there are no violets in winter; everything is covered with snow." "I know that," answered Marushka, sadly; "but my mother and sister have sent me for violets; if I do not get them they will kill me. Tell me, good shepherds, is there any place where I can find violets?" December rose from his seat, went to the youngest month, and said, "Brother March, sit in the first place." March took the highest place and waved the scepter above the fire; that instant the fire burned more powerfully. The snow thawed; birds appeared on the branches and grass grew green, beneath the trees; flowers began to open. Spring had come. In the thickets violets were blooming; there were so many that they were like a blue carpet. "Quick, Marushka, pluck them!" said March. Marushka gathered a great bouquet, thanked the Twelve Months, and hurried home. Holena and her mother were astonished when they saw Marushka coming with a large bunch of violets in her hand. They opened the door; she entered and the whole house was filled with the perfume. "Where did you find them?" asked Holena. "On a hill; there are many of them under the trees." Holena took the violets, put them in her belt and enjoyed their perfume; she didn't offer even one of them to Marushka. The next day they sent Marushka for strawberries. Long she wandered around in the cold, praying God to take her out of the world; then she came to the Twelve Months and again met with a kind reception. Learning what she wanted, December left his place and going to the month sitting just opposite, gave him the scepter, and said, "Brother June, sit in the first place." June sat in the highest place and waved the scepter above the fire; that instant the flames leaped high, the snow melted, the earth was covered with grass, the trees with leaves; the birds began to sing; many-colored flowers bloomed in the forest. Summer had come. Little white blossoms gleamed, like stars, in the grass, as if some one had put them there on purpose. Before Marushka's eyes the flowers became fruit, and the berries were ripe. She could not look around before the grass was dotted with them as if some one had sprinkled it with blood-drops. Marushka gathered many berries and took them to her sister. Helena ate some of them and gave her mother some, but did not offer even one to Marushka. The next day Holena wanted apples, and she sent Marushka for them. The unfortunate girl waded through deep snow and wandered around in the cold praying God to take her out of the world. At last she found the Twelve Months sitting in front of their fire as formerly. When she told them what she had been sent for, December gave the scepter to his brother September, who sat in the first place and waved the scepter over the fire. The fire burned brighter and the snow vanished, but Nature had a solemn face; leaves were falling from the trees, a fresh wind drove them hither and thither over the dry and yellow grass. Marushka saw no flowers, but she saw an apple tree loaded with red fruit. "Shake the tree quickly," said September. She shook it; one blushing apple fell. She shook it again; another fell. "Now hurry home," said September. She obeyed, and carried home the two apples. Holena wondered at their beauty and so did her mother. "Where did you get them?" "On a hill; there are many there yet." "Why didn't you bring more?" asked Holena, angrily. "No doubt you ate them on the road." "I did not. I shook the tree once: one apple fell; I shook it again: another fell. They wouldn't let me shake it again; they told me to go home." "May lightning strike you!" screamed Holena, and she wanted to beat her sister. The poor girl began to cry. Holena ate an apple; it seemed to her wonderfully sweet. She finished, and said to her mother, "Give me my cloak, I'll go into the forest myself. If that good-for-nothing girl goes she will be sure to eat the apples. I'll shake off every apple whether they permit me to or not; it's all the same to me," She put on her cloak, tied a shawl over her head and went out. The snow was deep; there was no trace of a human foot anywhere. She wandered long, and at last she came to the Twelve Months. Without asking leave Holena walked straight to the fire and began to warm her hands. "What do you want; why are you here?" asked December, severely. "Why ask, old man? What business is it of yours where I am going?" answered Holena, and turned to go into the forest. December frowned and raised his scepter. That moment the fire died down, the heavens grew dark; snow fell in great flakes, as if someone were shaking feathers out of a tick; and a cutting, all-chilling wind whistled through the forest. Holena could not see one step before her; she felt that her limbs were growing stiff. She cursed Marushka, and stumbled on. The mother, waiting at home, looked through the window, and ran to the gate; but hours passed by, one after another, and no Holena came. "Most likely she found the apples so good that she can't stop eating them. I'll go myself and look for her," said the mother. She put on her cloak, threw a shawl over her head and went in search of her daughter. Time passed. Marushka got supper ready, and fed the cow, but neither Holena nor her mother came. "Where are they stopping so long?" thought Marushka, and she sat down to spin. The spinning was finished, then night came, but still they were not at home. "Lord be merciful to us! What has happened to them?" said the kind-hearted girl. She looked out. The heavens were gleaming with stars, the earth glittering with snow, but no human being was visible anywhere. She closed the door, made the sign of the cross, repeated "Our Father" for her stepmother and sister, and then lay down to sleep. The next day she looked for them at breakfast, waited for them at dinner; but in vain. They came not again to the house of living man. Source (Internet Archive): Jeremiah Curtin, Fairy Tales of Eastern Europe (New York: McBride, Nast and Company, 1914), pp. 1-8 . Return to the table of contents . Conkiajgharuna, the Little Rag-Girl Georgia There was and there was not, there was a miserable peasant. He had a wife and a little daughter. So poor was this peasant that his daughter was called Conkiajgharuna (Little Rag-Girl). Some time passed, and his wife died. He was unhappy before, but now a greater misfortune had befallen him. He grieved and grieved, and at last he said to himself, "I will go and take another wife; she will mind the house, and tend my orphan child." So he arose and took a second wife, but this wife brought with her a daughter of her own. When this woman came into her husband's house and saw his child, she was angry in heart. She treated Little Rag-Girl badly. She petted her own daughter, but scolded her stepdaughter, and tried to get rid of her. Every day she gave her a piece of badly cooked bread, and sent her out to watch the cow, saying, "Here is a loaf; eat of it, give to every wayfarer, and bring the loaf home whole." The girl went, and felt very miserable. Once she was sitting sadly in the field, and began to weep bitterly. The cow listened, and then opened its mouth, and said, "Why are you weeping? What troubles you?" The girl told her sad tale. The cow said, "In one of my horns is honey, and in the other is butter, which you can take if you want to, so why be unhappy?" The girl took the butter and the honey, and in a short time she grew plump. When the stepmother noticed this she did not know what to do for rage. She rose, and after that every day she gave her a basket of wool with her; this wool was to be spun and brought home in the evening finished. The stepmother wished to tire the girl out with toil, so that she should grow thin and ugly. Once when Little Rag-Girl was tending the cow, it ran away onto a roof. Note by Wardrop: "In some parts of the Caucasus the houses of the peasantry are built in the ground, and it is quite possible to walk onto a roof unwittingly." She pursued it, and wished to drive it back to the road, but she dropped her spindle on the roof. Looking inside she saw an old woman seated, and said to her, "Good mother, will you give me my spindle?" The old dame replied, "I am not able, my child, come and take it yourself." The old woman was a devi. The girl went in and was lifting up her spindle, when the old dame called out, "Daughter, daughter, come and look at my head a moment. I am almost eaten up." The girl came and looked at her head. She was filled with horror; all the worms in the earth seemed to be crawling there. The little girl stroked her head and removed some, and then said, "You have a clean head. Why should I look at it?" This conduct pleased the old woman very much, and she said, "When you leave here, go along such and such a road, and in a certain place you will see three springs -- one white, one black, and one yellow. Pass by the white and black, and put your head in the yellow and rinse it with your hands." The girl did this. She went on her way, and came to the three springs. She passed by the white and black, and bathed her head with her hands in the yellow fountain. When she looked up she saw that her hair was quite golden, and her hands, too, shone like gold. In the evening, when she went home, her stepmother was filled with fury. After this she sent her own daughter with the cow. Perhaps the same good fortune would visit her! So Little Rag-Girl stayed at home while her stepsister drove out the cow. Once more the cow ran onto the roof. The girl pursued it, and her spindle fell down. She looked in, and seeing the devi woman, called out, "Dog of an old woman! Here! Come and give me my spindle!" The old woman replied, "I am not able, child, come and take it yourself." When the girl came near, the old woman said, "Come, child, and look at my head." The girl came and looked at her head, and cried out, "Ugh! What a horrid head you have! You are a disgusting old woman!" The old woman said, "I thank you, my child; when you go on your way you will see a yellow, a white, and a black spring. Pass by the yellow and the white springs, and rinse your head with your hands in the black one." The girl did this. She passed by the yellow and white springs, and bathed her head in the black one. When she looked at herself she was black as an African, and on her head there was a horn. She cut it off again and again, but it grew larger and larger. She went home and complained to her mother, who was almost frenzied, but there was no help for it. Her mother said to herself, "This is all the cow's fault, so it shall be killed." This cow knew the future. When it learned that it was to be killed, it went to Little Rag-Girl and said, "When I am dead, gather my bones together and bury them in the earth. When you are in trouble come to my grave, and cry aloud, 'Bring my steed and my royal robes!'" Little Rag-Girl did exactly as the cow had told her. When it was dead she took its bones and buried them in the earth. After this, some time passed. One holiday the stepmother took her daughter, and they went to church. She placed a trough in front of Little Rag-Girl, spread a large measure of millet in the courtyard, and said, "Before we come home from church fill this trough with tears, and gather up this millet, so that not one grain is left." Then they went to church. Little Rag-Girl sat down and began to weep. While she was crying a neighbor came in a said, "Why are you in tears? What is the matter?" The little girl told her tale. The woman brought all the brood hens and chicken, and they picked up every grain of millet, then she put a lump of salt in the trough and poured water over it. "There, child," said she, "there are your tears! Now go and enjoy yourself." Little Rag-Girl then thought of the cow. She went to its grave and called out, "Bring me my steed and my royal robes!" There appeared at once a horse and beautiful clothes. Little Rag-Girl put on the garments, mounted the horse, and went to the church. There all the folk began to stare at her. They were amazed at her grandeur. Her stepsister whispered to her mother when she saw her, "This girl is very much like our Little Rag-Girl!" Her mother smiled scornfully and said, "Who would give that sun darkener such robes?" Little Rag-Girl left the church before anyone else; she changed her clothes in time to appear before her stepmother in rags. On the way home, as she was leaping over a stream, in her haste she let her slipper fall in. A long time passed. Once when the king's horses were drinking water in this stream, they saw the shining slipper and were so afraid that they would drink no more water. The king was told that there was something shining in the stream, and that the horses were afraid. The king commanded his divers to find out what it was. They found the golden slipper, and presented it to the king. When he saw it, he commanded his viziers, saying, "Go and seek the owner of this slipper, for I will wed none but her." His viziers sought the maiden, but they could find no one whom the slipper would fit. Little Rag-Girl's mother heard this, adorned her daughter, and placed her on a throne. Then she went and told the king that she had a daughter whose foot he might look at. It was exactly the model for the shoe. She put Little Rag-Girl in a corner, with a big basket over her. When the king came into the house he sat down on the basket, in order to try on the slipper. Little Rag-Girl took a needle and pricked the king from under the basket. He jumped up, stinging with pain, and asked the stepmother what she had under the basket. The stepmother replied, "It is only a turkey I have there." The king sat down on the basket again, and Little Rag-Girl again stuck the needle into him. The king jumped up, and cried out, "Lift the basket. I will see underneath!" The stepmother pleaded with him, saying, "Do not blame me, your majesty, it is only a turkey, and it will run away." But the king would not listen to her pleas. He lifted the basket up, and Little Rag-Girl came forth, and said, "This slipper is mine, and fits me well." She sat down, and the king found that it was indeed a perfect fit. Little Rag-Girl became the king's wife, and her shameless stepmother was left with a dry throat. Source (Internet Archive): Marjory Wardrop, Georgian Folk Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 63-67 . Wardrop's heroine and the story itself are both named "Conkiajgharuna," which means "the little girl in rags." This story combines a tale of type 480 "The Kind and the Unkind Girls" with a tale of type 510A "Cinderella." Return to the table of contents . The Two Stepsisters Romania Once upon a time there was an old widower, who had one daughter; he married again and took for his wife a widow, who also had a daughter. The widow's daughter was ugly, lazy, obstinate and spiteful; yet as she was her mother's own child, the latter was delighted with her and pushed every thing upon her husband's daughter. But the old man's child was beautiful, industrious, obedient and good. God had gifted her with every virtuous and lovable quality, yet she was persecuted by her spiteful sister, as well as by her stepmother; it was fortunate that she possessed endurance and patience, or she would have fared badly. Whenever there was any hard work to be done, it was put upon the old man's daughter -- she was obliged to get dry wood from the forest, drag the heavy sacks of grain to the mill; in short, every task always fell to her lot. The whole livelong day she had no rest, but was kept continually going upstairs and down. Still the old woman and her treasure of a daughter were constantly dissatisfied, and always had something to find fault with. The stepdaughter was a heavy cross to the second wife, but her own daughter was like the basil plant, which is placed before the images of the saints. When the stepsisters went to the village in the evening to spin, the old man's daughter did not allow herself to be interrupted in her work, but finished a whole sieve full of spools, while the old woman's daughter with difficulty completed a single one. When they came home late at night, the old woman's daughter jumped nimbly over the fence and asked to hold the sieve till the other had leaped over it too. Meantime the spiteful girl hurried into the house to her parents, and said she had spun all the spools. The stepsister vainly declared that they were the work of her own hands; mother and daughter jeered at her words, and of course gained their cause. When Sunday or Friday came the old woman's daughter was brushed and bedizened as though the calves had licked her. There was no dance, no feather-plucking in the village to which the old woman's daughter did not go, but the stepdaughter was sternly denied every pleasure of the kind. Yet when the husband came home, his wife's tongue ran like a mill-wheel -- her stepdaughter was disobedient, bold, bad-tempered, this, that, and the other; he must send her away from home, put her out at service, whichever he chose; it was impossible to keep her in the house because she might ruin her daughter too. The old man was a jackanapes, or, as the saying goes, under petticoat government. Everything his wife said was sacred. Had he obeyed the voice of his heart the poor old man might perhaps have said something, but now the hen had begun to crow in the house, and the rooster was of no consequence; yet, if he had thought of opposing them, his wife and her daughter would have soon made him repent it. One day, when he was unusually angry about what his wife had told him, he called the young girl, and said: "My dear child, your mother is always saying that you are disobedient to her, have a spiteful tongue, and are wicked, so that it is not possible for you to stay any longer in my house; therefore go wherever the Lord may guide you, that there may no longer be so much quarreling here on your account. But I advise you as a father, wherever you may go, to be obedient, humble, and industrious, for here with me all your faults have been overlooked, parental affection has aided, but among strangers nobody knows what sort of people you may meet, and they will not indulge you as we have done." When the poor girl saw that her stepmother and her daughter wanted to drive her out of the house at any cost, she kissed her father's hand with tears in her eyes, and went out into the wide world without any hope of ever returning home. She walked along the road till she chanced to meet a little sick dog, so thin that one could count its ribs. When the dog saw her, it said: "You beautiful, industrious girl, have pity on me and take care of me, I will reward you some day." The girl did pity the poor animal, and, taking it in her arms, washed and cleaned it thoroughly. Then she left it and went on, glad that she had been able to do a good action. She had not walked far when she came to a fine pear-tree in full bloom, but it was completely covered with caterpillars. When the pear-tree saw the girl, it said: "You beautiful, industrious girl, take care of me and rid me of these caterpillars, I will repay you for it some day." The girl, with her usual diligence, cleared the pear-tree from its dry branches and most carefully removed the caterpillars; then she walked quietly on to seek some place where she might enter into service. On her way she came to a ruined, neglected fountain, which said to her: "You beautiful, industrious girl, take care of me, I will reward you some day." The little maid cleared the fountain, cleaned it thoroughly, and then went on again. As she walked she came to a dilapidated oven, which had become almost entirely useless. As soon as the oven saw her, it said: "You beautiful, industrious girl, line me with stones and clean me, I will repay you some day!" The young girl knew that work harms no one, so she rolled up her sleeves, moistened some clay, stopped the holes in the stove, greased it and cleaned it till it was a pleasure to see it. Then she washed her hands and continued her journey. As she walked on, day and night, it happened, I don't know how -- that she missed her way; yet she did not lose her trust in God, but walked on and on until early one morning, after passing through a dark forest, she reached a beautiful meadow. In the meadow she saw a little house, completely overgrown with vines, and when she approached it an old woman came out kindly to meet her, and said: "What are you seeking here, child, and who are you?" "Who should I be, good dame! A poor girl, motherless, and I may say fatherless, too, for God alone knows what I have suffered since my own mother's hands were folded on her breast. I am seeking service, and as I know nobody and am wandering from place to place I have lost my way. But the Lord guided me, so that I have reached your house and I beg you to give me a shelter." "Poor child!" replied the old dame. "Surely God himself has led you to me and saved you from danger. I am the goddess of Sunday. Serve me today, and I promise that you shall not leave my house empty-handed tomorrow." "Very well, but I don't know what I have to do." "You must wash and feed my little children, who are now asleep, and then cook my dinner; when I come home from church I want to find it neither hot nor cold, but just right to eat." When she had said this, the old woman set off for church. The young girl rolled up her sleeves and went to work. First of all she prepared the water for the bath, then went out-doors and began to call: "Children, children, children, come to mother and let her wash you." When she looked up, what did she behold? The courtyard was filled and the woods were swarming with a host of dragons and all sorts of wild beasts of every size. But, firm in her faith and trust in God, the young girl did not quail, but taking one animal after another washed and cleaned it in the best possible way. Then she set about cooking the dinner, and when Sunday came out of church and saw her children so nicely washed and every thing so well done she was greatly delighted. After she had sat down to the table, she told the young girl that she might go up into the attic, choose whichever chest she wanted, and take it away with her for her wages; but she must not open it until she reached her father's house. The maiden went to the garret, where there were a number of chests, some old and ugly, others new and beautiful. But as she was not a bit covetous, she took the oldest and ugliest of them all. When she came down with it, the goddess of Sunday frowned slightly, but there was no help for it, so she blessed the girl, who took her trunk on her back and joyfully returned to her father's house. On the way, lo and behold! there was the oven full of beautifully risen, nicely browned cakes. The girl ate and ate, as many as she could, then took some with her for her journey and went on. Soon she came to the fountain she had cleaned, and which was now filled to the brim with water as clear as tears and as sweet and cold as ice. On the edge stood two silver goblets, from which she drank the water until she was entirely refreshed. Then, taking one goblet with her, she walked on. As she went, lo and behold! there stood the pear-tree she had cleaned, full of pears as yellow as wax, perfectly ripe, and as sweet as honey. When the pear-tree saw the girl, it bent its branches down to her, and she ate some of the fruit and took more pears to eat on the way, just as many of them as she wanted. From there she journeyed on again, and lo and behold! she next met the little dog, which was now well and handsome; around its neck it wore a collar of ducats which it gave the old man's daughter as a reward for taking care of it in its sickness. So the young girl at last reached her father's house. When the old man saw her his eyes filled with tears and his heart throbbed with joy. The girl took out the dog's collar and the silver goblet and gave them to her father; when they opened the chest together, out came countless numbers of horses, cattle, and sheep, till the sight of so much wealth instantly made the old man young again. But his wife stood as if she were dazed, and did not know what to do in her rage. Her daughter, however, plucked up courage and said: "Never mind, mother, the world isn't emptied yet; I'll go and fetch you still greater treasures." After saying this she angrily set oft at once. She walked and walked along the same path her stepsister had followed. She, too, met the sick, feeble dog, passed the pear-tree covered with caterpillars, the dry, neglected fountain, and the dilapidated oven which had become almost useless; but when dog, tree, fountain and oven begged her to take care of them, she answered rudely and scornfully: "Do you suppose I'll soil my delicate hands! Have you often been tended by people like me?" As they all knew that it is easier to get milk from a dry cow than to make a spoiled, lazy girl obliging, they let her go her way in peace, and no longer asked her for help. As she walked on and on, she too at last reached the goddess Sunday. But here also she behaved sullenly, saucily, and awkwardly. Instead of cooking the dinner nicely and washing Sunday's children as thoroughly as her stepsister had done, she burned them all till they screamed and ran off as though crazed by the burns and the pain. The food she scorched, charred, and let curdle so that no one could eat it, and when Sunday came home from church she covered her eyes and ears in horror at what she found in her house. Even the gentle, indulgent goddess could not get along with such an obstinate, lazy girl as this one, so she told her to go up into the garret, choose any chest she wanted, and then in God's name continue her journey. The girl went, took the newest and handsomest trunk, for she liked to get as much as possible of the best and finest things, but was not willing to do faithful service. When she came down she did not go to the goddess Sunday to receive her blessing, but hurried off as if she were quitting an evil house. She nearly ran herself off her feet, in the fear that her mistress might change her mind and follow her to get her trunk back. When she reached the oven there were some nice cakes in it, but when she approached to satisfy her hunger the fire burned her and she could take none. The silver goblets were again at the fountain and the fountain was full of water to the brim, but when the girl tried to seize the cup to drink, the goblets instantly vanished, the water dried up, and the girl almost died of thirst. When she came to the pear-tree it stood full of pears, but do you suppose the traveler could taste even one of them? No! The tree had made itself a thousand times as tall as before, so that its boughs touched the clouds! So the old woman's daughter might pick her teeth, she obtained nothing else. Going further on she met the dog, which again had a collar of ducats round its neck; but when the girl tried to take it off the dog bit her so that he tore off her fingers and would not let her touch him. The girl, in rage and shame, sucked her delicate little hands, but it did no good. At last, after great difficulty, she reached her mother's house, but even here she did not find herself rolling in money, for when the old man's wife opened the chest, out came a host of dragons, which swallowed her and her daughter as if they had never been in the world. Then dragons, trunk, and all vanished. The old man could now live in peace, and possessed countless riches; his daughter he married to a worthy, capable man. The cocks now crowed on the gate posts, the threshold, and everywhere, but the hens no longer crowed as an evil omen in the house of the old man, who had not many days of life remaining. He was bald and bent, because his wife had quarreled with him too often and looked to see if he didn't need a drubbing. Source (books.google.com): Mite Kremnitz, Roumanian Fairy Tales , collected by Mite Kremnitz, adapted and arranged by J. M. Percival (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1885), pp. 130-38 . Source (Internet Archive): Mite Kremnitz, Roumanian Fairy Tales , collected by Mite Kremnitz, adapted and arranged by J. M. Percival (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1885), pp. 130-38 . Return to the table of contents . The Three Gifts Poland A very rich widow had three children, a stepson, a fine young fellow, a stepdaughter of wonderful beauty, and a daughter who was not so bad. The three children lived under the same roof, and took their meals together. At length the time came when the children were treated very differently. Although the widow's daughter was bad-tempered, obstinate, vain, and a chatterer, her mother loved her passionately, praised her, and covered her with caresses. She was favoured in every way. The stepson, who was a good-natured lad, and who did all kinds of work, was for ever grumbled at, checked, and treated like a sluggard. As for the stepdaughter, who was so wonderfully pretty, and who had the disposition of an angel, she was tormented, worried, and ill-treated in a thousand ways. Between her sister and her stepmother her life was made miser able. It is natural that one should love one's own children better than those of other folk; but it is only right that liking and disliking should be indulged in with moderation. The evil stepmother, however, loved her child to distraction, and equally detested her stepchildren. To such a pitch did she carry these feelings that when she was angry she used to say how she would advance the fortune of her daughter even at the orphans' expense. An old proverb says, "Man sets the ball rolling, but Heaven directs it," and we shall see what happened. One Sunday morning the stepdaughter, before going to church, went out into the garden to pluck some flowers to place on the altar. She had gathered some roses, when, on lifting up her eyes, she saw, right in front of her, three young men who sat upon a grassy bank. They were clothed in garments of dazzling white which shone like sun shine. Near by them was an old man, who came and asked the girl for alms. The girl was a little frightened when she saw the three men, but when the old man came to her she took her last piece of money out of her pocket and gave it to him. The poor man thanked her, put the piece of money into his bag, and, laying his hand on the girl's head, said to the young men: "You see this little orphan; she is good and patient in suffering, and has so much pity for the poor that she gives them even the last penny she has. What do you wish for her?" The first one said: "I wish that when she cries her tears may turn to pearls." "I wish," said the second, "that when she laughs the most delicately perfumed roses may fall from her lips." "And I," said the third, "wish that when she touches water golden fish spring up in it." "So shall it be," said the old man, and he and his companions vanished. When the girl saw that, she gave thanks to Heaven, and ran joyfully into the house. Hardly had she entered when her stepmother met her and gave her a slap on the face, saying: "Where are you running to?" The poor girl began to cry, but behold! Instead of tears, pearls fell from her eyes. The stepmother forgot her rage, and set herself to gather them up as quickly as possible. The girl could not help laughing at the sight, and from her lips there fell roses of such a delightful scent that the stepmother was beside herself with pleasure. After that the girl, wishing to preserve the flowers she had plucked in the garden, poured some water into a glass: as soon as she touched the water with her finger, it was filled with beautiful golden fish. From that time the same things never failed to happen. The girl's tears turned to pearls, when she laughed roses, which did not die, fell from her lips; and water which she only touched with her little finger became filled with golden fish. The stepmother became better disposed towards her, and by little and little learned from her the secret of how she had obtained these gifts. On the following Sunday she sent her own daughter into the garden to pluck flowers as if for the altar. Hardly had the girl gathered some roses, when, lifting up her eyes, she saw the three young men sitting on a grassy bank, beautiful, and shining like the sun, and by them was the old man, clad in white, who asked her for alms. When she saw the young men, the girl pretended to be afraid, but when the old man spoke to her, she ran to him, took out of her pocket a gold piece, looked hard at it, and then gave it to him, but evidently very much against her will. The old man put the money in his bag, and said to the three others: "You see this girl who is her mother's spoilt child? She is bad-tempered, wicked, and is hard hearted as regards the poor. We know very well why she has been so charitable, for the first time in her life, today. Tell me then what you wish for her." The first said: "I wish that when she cries her tears may change to lizards." "I," said the second, " wish that when she laughs, hideous toads may fall from her lips." "And I," said the third, "wish that when she touches water with her hand it may be filled with serpents." "It shall be as you wish," said the old man, and he and his companions disappeared. The girl was terrified, and ran into the house to tell her mother what had happened. All occurred as had been said. When she laughed toads sprang from her lips, when she cried her tears changed to lizards, and when she touched water it became full of serpents. The stepmother did not know what to do. She paid greater attention than ever to her daughter, and hated the orphans more and more, and so tormented them that the lad, not being able to put up with it, took leave of his sister, praying Heaven to guard her, and, leaving his stepmother's house, set out to seek his fortune. The wide world was before him. He knew not where to go, but he knew that Heaven, that sees all men, watches over the orphans. He prayed, and then walking down to the burial-ground where slept his father and mother, he knelt at the grave. He wept and prayed for a time, and having kissed the earth which covered them three times, he rose and prepared to set out on his journey. All of a sudden he felt, in the folds of his dress on his bosom, something he had not perceived there before. He put his hand up, and was so astonished that he could scarcely believe his eyes, for he found there a charming little picture of his much-loved sister, surrounded by pearls, roses, and little golden fish. Delighted at the sight, he kissed the picture, looked around the burial-ground once more, made the sign of the cross, and set out on his way. A story is soon told, but events move slowly. After many adventures of little importance he came to the capital of a kingdom situated on the seashore. There he sought to obtain a living, and he was not unsuccessful, for he was engaged to look after the king's garden, and was both well fed and well paid. This good fortune did not, however, make him forget his poor sister, about whom he was much troubled. When he had a moment to himself, he would sit down in some quiet spot and look at his picture, sometimes melting into tears, for he looked upon the portrait of his sister as a precious legacy given to him by his parents at their grave. One day while the lad sat thus by a brook, the king saw him, and creeping up to him from behind very softly, he looked over his shoulder at the likeness that the young man was regarding so attentively. "Give me the portrait," said the king. The lad gave it to him. The king looked at it and was delighted. "Never," said he, "in all my life did I see such a beautiful girl, never have I heard of such a one, never did I dream there was such. Tell me, does she live?" The lad burst into tears, and told the king that the picture was the portrait of his sister, who some time ago had been so favoured by Heaven that when she cried her tears became pearls, when she laughed roses sprang from her lips, and when she touched water it was filled with golden fish. The king ordered him to write at once to his stepmother, to tell her to send her lovely step daughter to his palace, where the king waited to make her his wife. On the occasion of his marriage he declared he would heap rewards on the stepmother and on the brother of his bride. The lad wrote the letter, and the king sent a servant with it. A story is quickly told, but events move slowly. After she had read the letter, the stepmother did not show it to the orphan, but to her own daughter. So they plotted together, and the stepmother went to an old sorceress to consult her, and to be instructed in magic. She then set out with her two daughters. As they came near to the capital of the king's dominions, in a place near to the sea, the stepmother suddenly threw the stepdaughter out of the carriage, muttered some magic words, and spat three times behind her. All at once the poor girl became very little, covered with feathers, and changed into a wild duck. She commenced to cackle, threw herself into the sea, just as ducks do, and began to swim about there. The stepmother dismissed her with these words: "By the force of my hate, I have done what I wished! Swim away upon the shore like a duck, happy in liberty, and in the meantime my daughter, clothed in your beauty, shall marry the king, and enjoy all that was meant for you." Hardly had she finished these words when her daughter found herself clothed in all the charms of the unfortunate girl. So they went on their way, came to the palace, which they reached at the time named in the letter, and there the king received the daughter from the hands of the treacherous step mother, in place of the orphan. After the marriage, the stepmother, loaded with presents, returned to her home. The king, looking upon his wife, could not imagine how it was that he did not feel that love and tenderness that had been aroused in him at the sight of the portrait. However, there was no remedy, what was done was done. Heaven sees one, and knows of what malady one shall die, and what woman one shall marry! The king admired his wife's beauty, and thought of the pleasure he would have when he saw the pearls drop from her eyes, the roses from her lips, and the golden fish spring up in the water she touched. During the feast, however, the queen chanced to laugh at her husband, and a mass of hideous toads sprang forth! The king ran off quickly. Then the queen commenced to cry, and instead of pearls, lizards dropped from her eyes. An attendant presented a basin of water to her, but she had no sooner dipped the tip of her finger in the water than it became a mass of serpents, which began to hiss and dart into the middle of the wedding party. Every one was afraid, and all was in confusion. The guards were at last called in, and by their aid the hall was cleared of the horrible reptiles. The king had gone into the garden, where he met with the orphan lad; and so enraged was the king at the trick that he thought had been played him, that he gave the lad a blow on the head with his stick. The poor lad, falling down upon the ground, died at once. The queen came running to the king, sobbing, and, taking him by the hand, said: "What have you done? You have killed my brother, who was altogether guiltless. Is it his fault or mine that, since I have been married to you, I have lost the wonderful powers I once had? They will come back again in time, but time will not bring my brother to me more." "Pardon me, my dear wife," said the king. "In a moment of rage I thought he had betrayed me, and I wished to punish him. I am sorry for what I have done; now, however, it is beyond recall. Forgive me, and I forgive you with all my heart." "I pardon you," said the queen, "but I beg you to order that my brother shall be honourably buried." The queen's wish was carried out. The poor lad, who was thought to be the queen's brother, was put in a fine coffin, and laid on a magnificent catafalque in the church. When night came on a guard of honour was placed around the coffin and at the gates to watch till morning. Towards midnight the doors of the church opened of their own accord and without any noise, and, at the same moment, an irresistible drowsiness came over the soldiers, who all went to sleep. A pretty little wild duck entered, stopped in the middle of the church, shook its feathers, of which it freed itself one by one, and there stood the orphan girl in her former shape. She approached the coffin of her brother, and shed very many tears over him, which all changed to pearls. After she had wept for some time, she reassumed the feathers once more, and went out. When the guards awoke, great was their surprise to find a number of beautiful pearls on the coffin. The next day they told the king how the gates of the church had opened of themselves at midnight, how an irresistible desire to sleep had overtaken them, and how the pearls had been dis covered upon the coffin. The king was surprised at their story, and more so when he saw the pearls. He doubled the guard, and told them to watch more carefully the second night. At the same time the doors opened again of themselves, and the soldiers again fell asleep. The wild duck entered, shook off its feathers, and became the lovely girl. At the sight of the double guard, all of them fast asleep, she could not help laughing, and beautiful roses fell from her lips. As she approached her brother her tears broke forth and fell in a shower of pearls to the ground. At length she took her feathers again and flew away. When the guards awoke they collected the roses and pearls and took them to the king, who was now more surprised than before, seeing not only the pearls but the roses also. He again doubled the guards, and he threatened them with the most severe punishment if they did not keep awake. They did their best, but all was of no use. At the end of their nap on the third night they found not only pearls and roses, but also golden fish swimming in the church font. The king was now very much astonished, and began to think that there must be some magic in the matter. When night came on he again doubled the number of the guards, and hid himself in the chapel, after having put up a mirror in which he could see everything reflected without being himself seen. At midnight the doors opened of themselves, the soldiers dropt their arms, lay down on the ground, and fell fast asleep. The king did not take his eyes off the mirror, and he saw a little wild duck enter, and look timidly around it. When it saw the guards all asleep it seemed to take courage, and came into the middle of the church. Then it cast off its feathers and became a girl of extraordinary loveliness. The king was trans ported with joy and wonder, and felt that this must be his true bride. When she had come to the coffin the king rushed forward with a wax taper in his hand and set fire to the feathers, the flame leaping up and waking the guards. When the girl saw what was done she ran to the king wringing her hands, while pearls dropped from her eyes. "What have you done?" she cried. "How shall I now escape the fury of my stepmother, by whose magic arts I was turned into a wild duck?" Then she told the king all, and he at once ordered some of his guards to seize the woman who had so treacherously married him, and to conduct her out of the kingdom. He also sent some soldiers to take the stepmother and burn her as a sorceress. While the king gave these orders the girl took from her bosom three little vessels, which she had brought with her from the sea, full of different liquids. She sprinkled the liquid in one of them over her brother, and he became supple and warm; his cheeks took their colour again, and the warm red blood began to run from his wound. His sister sprinkled him again with the second liquid, which had the property of healing, and his wound at once closed. She sprinkled him the third time with the water which had the property of calling back to life. The young man opened his eyes, looked on his sister with astonishment, and threw himself, full of happiness, into her arms. At the sight of this the king was overjoyed. He took the young man by the hand, and, leading his sister, the three went to the palace. In a short time he married his true bride, and he lived happily with her and her brother for many years. Source (books.google.com): [Charles John Tibbits], Folk-Lore and Legends: Russian and Polish (London: W. W. Gibbings, 1890), pp. 9-21 . Source (Internet Archive): [Charles John Tibbits], Folk-Lore and Legends: Russian and Polish (London: W. W. Gibbings, 1890), pp. 9-21 . No author is given; the foreword is signed "C. J. T." This story combines a tale of type 480 "The Kind and the Unkind Girls" with a tale of type 403 "The Counterfeit Bride." Return to the table of contents . Mangita and Larina Philippines This is a tale told in the lake district of Luzon. At times of rain or in winter the waters of the Laguna de Bai rise and detach from the banks a peculiar vegetation that resembles lettuce. These plants, which float for months down the Pasig River, gave rise, no doubt, to the story. Many years ago there lived on the banks of the Laguna de Bai a poor fisherman whose wife had died, leaving him two beautiful daughters named Mangita and Larina. Mangita had hair as black as night and a dark skin. She was as good as she was beautiful, and was loved by all for her kindness. She helped her father mend the nets and make the torches to fish with at night, and her bright smile lit up the little nipa house like a ray of sunshine. Larina was fair and had long golden hair of which she was very proud. She was different from her sister, and never helped with the work, but spent the day combing her hair and catching butterflies. She would catch a pretty butterfly, cruelly stick a pin through it, and fasten it in her hair. Then she would go down to the lake to see her reflection in the clear water, and would laugh to see the poor butterfly struggling in pain. The people disliked her for her cruelty, but they loved Mangita very much. This made Larina jealous, and the more Mangita was loved, the more her sister thought evil of her. One day a poor old woman came to the nipa house and begged for a little rice to put in her bowl. Mangita was mending a net and Larina was combing her hair in the doorway. When Larina saw the old woman she spoke mockingly to her and gave her a push that made her fall and cut her head on a sharp rock; but Mangita sprang to help her, washed the blood away from her head, and filled her bowl with rice from the jar in the kitchen. The poor woman thanked her and promised never to forget her kindness, but to her sister she spoke not a word. Larina did not care, however, but laughed at her and mocked her as she painfully made her way again down the road. When she had gone Mangita took Larina to task for her cruel treatment of a stranger; but, instead of doing any good, it only caused Larina to hate her sister all the more. Some time afterwards the poor fisherman died. He had gone to the big city down the river to sell his fish, and had been attacked with a terrible sickness that was raging there. The girls were now alone in the world. Mangita carved pretty shells and earned enough to buy food, but, though she begged Larina to try to help, her sister would only idle away the time. The terrible sickness now swept every where and poor Mangita, too, fell ill. She asked Larina to nurse her, but the latter was jealous of her and would do nothing to ease her pain. Mangita grew worse and worse, but finally, when it seemed as if she would soon die, the door opened and the old woman to whom she had been so kind came into the room. She had a bag of seeds in her hand, and taking one she gave it to Mangita, who soon showed signs of being better, but was so weak that she could not give thanks. The old woman then gave the bag to Larina and told her to give a seed to her sister every hour until she returned. She then went away and left the girls alone. Larina watched her sister, but did not give her a single seed. Instead, she hid them in her own long hair and paid no attention to Mangita's moans of pain. The poor girl's cries grew weaker and weaker, but not a seed would her cruel sister give her. In fact, Larina was so jealous that she wished her sister to die. When at last the old woman returned, poor Mangita was at the point of death. The visitor bent over the sick girl and then asked her sister if she had given Mangita the seeds. Larina showed her the empty bag and said she had given them as directed. The old woman searched the house, but of course could not find the seeds. She then asked Larina again if she had given them to Mangita. Again the cruel girl said that she had done so. Suddenly the room was filled with a blinding light, and when Larina could see once more, in place of the old woman stood a beautiful fairy holding the now well Mangita in her arms. She pointed to Larina and said, "I am the poor woman who asked for rice. I wished to know your hearts. You were cruel and Mangita was kind, so she shall live with me in my island home in the lake. As for you, because you tried to do evil to your good sister, you shall sit at the bottom of the lake forever, combing out the seeds you have hidden in your hair." Then she clapped her hands and a number of elves appeared and carried the struggling Larina away. "Come," said the fairy to Mangita, and she carried her to her beautiful home, where she lives in peace and happiness. As for Larina, she sits at the bottom of the lake and combs her hair. As she combs a seed out, another comes in, and every seed that is combed out becomes a green plant that floats out of the lake and down the Pasig. And to this day people can see them, and know that Larina is being punished for her wickedness. Source (books.google.com): John Maurice Miller, Philippine Folklore Stories (Boston: Ginn and Company, 1904), pp. 47-55 . Source (Internet Archive): John Maurice Miller, Philippine Folklore Stories (Boston: Ginn and Company, 1904), pp. 47-55 . Return to the table of contents . The Bald Wife India A certain man had two wives, the younger of whom he loved more than the elder. The younger wife had two tufts of hair on her head, and the elder only one. The man went to a distant town for merchandise; so the two wives lived together in the house. But they hated each other; the younger one, who was her husband's favourite, ill-treated the other. She made her do all the menial work in the house; rebuked her all day and night; and did not give her enough to eat. One day the younger wife said to the elder, "Come and take away all the lice from the hair of my head.'' While the elder wife was searching among the younger one's hair for the vermin, one lock of hair by chance gave way; on which the younger one, mightily incensed, tore off the single tuft that was on the head of the elder wife, and drove her away from the house. The elder wife, now become completely bald, determined to go into the forest, and there either die of starvation or be devoured by some wild beast. On her way she passed by a cotton plant. She stopped near it, made for herself a broom with some sticks which lay about, and swept clean the ground round about the plant. The plant was much pleased, and gave her a blessing. She wended on her way, and now saw a plantain tree. She swept the ground round about the plantain tree, which, being pleased with her, gave her a blessing. As she went on she saw the shed of a Brahmani bull. As the shed was very dirty, she swept the place clean, on which the bull, being much pleased, blessed her. She next saw a tulasi plant, bowed herself down before it, and cleaned the place round about, on which the plant gave her a blessing. As she was going on in her journey she saw a hut made of branches of trees and leaves, and near it a man sitting cross-legged, apparently absorbed in meditation. She stood for a moment behind the venerable muni. "Whoever you may be," he said, "come before me; do not stand behind me; if you do, I will reduce you to ashes." The woman, trembling with fear, stood before the muni. "What is your petition?" asked the muni. "Father Muni," answered the woman, "thou knowest how miserable I am, since thou art all-knowing. My husband does not love me, and his other wife, having torn off the only tuft of hair on my head, has driven me away from the house. Have pity upon me, Father Muni!" The muni, continuing sitting, said, "Go into the tank which you see yonder. Plunge into the water only once, and then come to me again." The woman went to the tank, washed in it, and plunged into the water only once, according to the bidding of the muni. When she got out of the water, what a change was seen in her! Her head was full of jet black hair, which was so long that it touched her heels; her complexion had become perfectly fair; and she looked young and beautiful Filled with joy and gratitude, she went to the muni, and bowed herself to the ground. The muni said to her, "Rise, woman. Go inside the hut, and you will find a number of wicker baskets, and bring out any you like." The woman went into the hut, and selected a modest-looking basket. The muni said, "Open the basket." She opened it, and found it filled with ingots of gold, pearls and all sorts of precious stones. The muni said, "Woman, take that basket with you. It will never get empty. When you take away the present contents their room will be supplied by another set, and that by another, and that by another, and the basket will never become empty. Daughter, go in peace." The woman bowed herself down to the ground in profound but silent gratitude, and went away. As she was returning homewards with the basket in her hand, she passed by the tulasi plant whose bottom she had swept. The tulasi plant said to her, "Go in peace, child! Thy husband will love thee warmly." She next came to the shed of the Brahmani bull, who gave her two shell ornaments which were twined round its horns, saying, "Daughter, take these shells, put them on your wrists, and whenever you shake either of them you will get whatever ornaments you wish to obtain." She then came to the plantain tree, which gave her one of its broad leaves, saying, "Take, child, this leaf; and when you move it you will get not only all sorts of delicious plantains, but all kinds of agreeable food." She came last of all to the cotton plant, which gave her one of its own branches, saying, "Daughter, take this branch; and when you shake it you will got not only all sorts of cotton clothes, but also of silk and purple. Shake it now in my presence." She shook the branch, and a fabric of the finest glossy silk fell on her lap. She put on that silk cloth, and wended on her way with the shells on her wrists, and the basket and the branch and the leaf in her hands. The younger wife was standing at the door of her house, when she saw a beautiful woman approach her. She could scarcely believe her eyes. What a change! The old, bald hag turned into the very Queen of Beauty herself! The elder wife, now grown rich and beautiful, treated the younger wife with kindness. She gave her fine clothes, costly ornaments, and the richest viands. But all to no purpose. The younger wife envied the beauty and hair of her associate. Having heard that she got it all from Father Muni in the forest, she determined to go there. Accordingly she started on her journey. She saw the cotton plant, but did nothing to it; she passed by the plantain tree, the shed of the Brahmani bull, and the tulasi plant, without taking any notice of them. She approached the muni. The muni told her to bathe in the tank, and plunge only once into the water. She gave one plunge, at which she got a glorious head of hair and a beautifully fair complexion. She thought a second plunge would make her still more beautiful. Accordingly she plunged into the water again, and came out as bald and ugly as before. She came to the muni, and wept. The sage drove her away, saying, "Be off, you disobedient woman. You will get no boon from me." She went back to her house mad with grief. The lord of the two women returned from his travels, and was struck with the long locks and beauty of his first wife. He loved her dearly; and when he saw her secret and untold resources and her incredible wealth, he almost adored her. They lived together happily for many years, and had for their maid-servant the younger woman, who had been formerly his best beloved. Here my story endeth. Source (books.google.com): Lal Behari Day, xxx (London: Macmillan and Company, 1883), no. 22, pp. 280-84 . Source (Internet Archive): Lal Behari Day, Folk-Tales of Bengal (London: Macmillan and Company, 1883), no. 22, pp. 280-84 . Return to the table of contents . Lazy Maria USA Once upon a time there lived a man with three daughters, who, as he thought, were old enough to look out for themselves. So he called them to him, and said, "It is time to go out in the world and seek your fortune. I'll start the oldest first. Go and see what luck you have in the world!" So the oldest girl took her bundle of clothes tied up in a big kerchief, and away she went. After a while, just as she was beginning to feel hungry, she saw standing right near her a cow. The cow said: Milk me, milk me, or my bag will bust! Milk me, milk me, or my bag will bust! No sooner had the cow said this, and the girl was wishing for something to milk the cow into, than she espied right near the cow an oven. From it came a voice, which said: Take me out or I'll burn up! Take me out or I'll burn up! The girl looked inside the oven to see what was talking, and there was a fine loaf of bread. She took it out, dug the center out of it, and filled the hollow with milk from the cow, then had a meal of bread and milk. She said, "The old man sent me out, and I must be doing well." After she had eaten all the bread and milk she wanted, she went on her way. Pretty soon she came to an apple-tree full of apples. Shake me, shake me, or my limbs will break! Shake me, shake me, or my limbs will break!" said the apple-tree. So the girl shook the tree until her lap was full of apples. When she had eaten all the apples she wanted, she put some in her kerchief and went on her way. Towards dusk she came to a fine-looking mansion, and she thought she would inquire if they (the occupants) wanted anybody to work for them. Seeing a man standing in front of the house, she called out, "Halloo!" "Halloo!" answered the man, who liked the girl's looks. "Do you want a girl to work for you?" asked the girl. "I think we do need one," answered the man; "but my master isn't home tonight, so you had better stay all night. Which door would you like to enter? One is a gold door: if you go in through it, you will be covered from head to foot with gold. The other is a tar door: if you go in through it, you will be covered with tar." "Oh, I don't mind!" replied the girl. "I had just as soon be covered with tar as with gold." "You are so humble, you deserve to go through the golden door." "I don't care," repeated the girl. Thereupon the man led her through the golden door; and the gold clung to her nose, her fingers, her ears, to every part of her, until she was completely covered with gold. When she was well inside the house, the man said, "We have two places where we put those who come here. Will you sleep under the ladder with the cats and dogs, or will you sleep in the high bed with all your gold and glitter?" "I'd just as soon crawl under the ladder with the cats and dogs as to sleep in the high bed." "Being as you are so humble, I'll put you in the high bed with all your gold and glitter." When she reached the room where the high bed was, she saw that everything was of gold. The gold from everything she touched stuck to her, even the golden sheets; and in the morning, with the golden sheets clinging fast to her, she thought she was rich enough to go home. So home she went. When the family saw her coming, her father said, "What! Is that lazy whelp coming back? I'll get the horse-whip and whip her to death!" The girl, however, as soon as she came near enough to make herself heard, cried out, "O father! I'm rich, rich!" And sure enough, the father had never seen so much gold in his life as he now saw on his daughter. As soon as he touched her, the gold fell off from her to the ground. The father ordered the girl to tell where she had been. When he heard the story, he decided to send the second daughter to try her luck in the same way. The second daughter had precisely the same experiences as her sister, and she too returned home "rich, rich!" Then the father said, "Now for Lazy Maria! She's never been good for anything yet. Let's see what she can do!" To her he said, "Even if you are our baby, you must go." So Lazy Maria took her bundle on her shoulder and started. Soon she came to the cow, which said: Milk me, milk me, or my bag will bust! Milk me, milk me, or my bag will bust! "Go along, you old bitch! I don't care if it does," replied the girl. Then the voice from within the oven cried out: Take me out or I'll burn up! Take me out or I'll burn up! "Burn up, then! I won't touch you. I won't work when I'm all tired out," complained the girl, and went on her way. When she came to the apple-tree, it cried: Shake me, shake me, or my limbs will break! Shake me, shake me, or my limbs will break!" "Let your limbs break, then! I sha'n't shake you," said the girl, and went on. When she came to the mansion, the man on guard told her of the two doors, and asked her through which she wanted to enter. "I want to go through the golden door," said the girl. "All right!" and the man pushed her through the tar door. The tar stuck to her hair, filled her eyes, and covered her from head to foot. "Oh, my father will kill me!" she cried. "Where will you sleep, under the ladder with the cats, or in the high bed?" asked the man. "In the high bed, tar and all," at once decided the girl. "All right! Creep under the ladder." And the man pushed her among the cats and dogs. "You must be more humble," said he, "if you would get on in the world." The next morning the poor girl, all covered with tar as she was, started for home. When the family saw her coming, they rushed out to see the gold; but when they discovered that she was covered with tar instead of gold, they cried, "Let's whip her!" "Oh, no!" said her father. "Let's scrub the tar off!" but, scrub as they would, they couldn't get it off, because, you see, it had been put on by a witch. They scraped and scraped until they scraped the hair off her head, and the skin off her fingers and toes. At last they scraped off one of her warts, and there lay the witch. At that all the tar fell off, and Lazy Maria was free once more. But while her two sisters were rich and could go and come as they liked, Lazy Maria always had to stay at home, poor. Source (books.google.com): Emelyn E. Gardner, "Folk-Lore from Schoharie County, New York," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 27 (1914), no. 3, pp. 307-310 . Source (jstor): Emelyn E. Gardner, "Folk-Lore from Schoharie County, New York," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 27 (1914), no. 3, pp. 307-310 . Note by Gardner: This tale and the two which follow were told to me by Mrs. William Buell. Other members of the same family spell the name Bull. Mrs. Buell is related to the Brink family, of which many members have been great story-tellers, fortune-tellers, witch doctors, and, as Mrs. B. says, unusual people. Mrs. B. learned these stories from hearing her mother tell them; and, as she has a most retentive memory, I doubt not that they are very nearly as she heard them. She thinks that her mother was German. The story is a variant of "Mother Holle," in the Grimm collection. Return to the table of contents . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 5, 2019. Friday: A Russian Folktale of Type 778J* Friday A Russian Folktale of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 779J* edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2019 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. There was once a certain woman who did not pay due reverence to Mother Friday, but set to work on a distaff full of flax, combing and whirling it. She span away till dinner time, then suddenly sleep fell upon her -- such a deep sleep! And when she had gone to sleep, suddenly the door opened and in came Mother Friday, before the eyes of all who were there, clad in a white dress, and in such a rage! And she went straight up to the woman who had been spinning, scooped up from the floor a handful of the dust that had fallen out of the flax, and began stuffing and stuffing that woman's eyes full of it! And when she had stuffed them full, she went off in a rage -- disappeared without saying a word. When the woman awoke, she began squalling at the top of her voice about her eyes, but couldn't tell what was the matter with them. The other women, who had been terribly frightened, began to cry out, "Oh, you wretch, you! You've brought a terrible punishment on yourself from Mother Friday." Then they told her all that had taken place. She listened to it all, and then began imploring, "Mother Friday, forgive me! Pardon me, the guilty one! I'll offer you a taper, and I'll never let friend or foe dishonor you, Mother!" Well, what do you think? During the night, back came Mother Friday and took the dust out of that woman's eyes, so that she was able to get about again. It's a great sin to dishonor Mother Friday -- combing and spinning flax, forsooth! Source (books.google.com): W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1873), p. 200 . Source (Internet Archive): W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1873), p. 200 . Ralston's source: Aleksandr Afanasyev. Afanasyev (the transliteration Afanas'ev as well as other spellings are also used) was the Slavic counterpart to the brothers Grimm. Between the years 1855 and 1873 he published some 640 Russian and Ukrainian folktales. Note by Ralston: "Friday ... was undoubtedly consecrated by the old Slavonians to some goddess akin to Venus or Freyja, and her worship in ancient times accounts for the superstitions now connected with the name of Friday." (p. 198) Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 6, 2019. Fridleif the Dragon Slayer Fridleif the Dragon Slayer edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Fridleif ... set forth on his [courtship] voyage; and his fleet being becalmed, he invaded some villages to look for food; where, being received hospitably by a certain Grubb, and at last winning his daughter in marriage, he begat a son named Olaf. After some time had passed he also won Frogertha; but, while going back to his own country, he had a bad voyage, and was driven on the shores of an unknown island. A certain man appeared to him in a vision, and instructed him to dig up a treasure that was buried in the ground, and also to attack the dragon that guarded it, covering himself in an ox-hide to escape the poison; teaching him also to meet the envenomed fangs with a hide stretched over his shield. Therefore, to test the vision, he attacked the snake as it rose out of the waves, and for a long time cast spears against its scaly side; in vain, for its hard and shelly body foiled the darts flung at it. But the snake, shaking its mass of coils, uprooted the trees which it brushed past by winding its tail about them. Moreover, by constantly dragging its body, it hollowed the ground down to the solid rock, and had made a sheer bank on either hand, just as in some places we see hills parted by an intervening valley. So Fridleif, seeing that the upper part of the creature was proof against attack, assailed the lower side with his sword, and piercing the groin, drew blood from the quivering beast. When it was dead, he unearthed the money from the underground chamber and had it taken off in his ships. Source: The First Nine Books of the Danish History of Saxo Grammaticus [Gesta Danorum] , translated by Oliver Elton (London: David Nutt, 1894), p. 222 . Saxo Grammaticus lived between about 1150 and 1220. Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Dragon Slayers: An Index Page . Revised December 27, 2009. Frog Kings: Folktales about Slimy Suitors Frog Kings folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 440 about slimy suitors translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2022 Contents The Frog King; or, Iron Heinrich (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Germany). The Frog Prince . The first English translation of the above tale. Edgar Taylor, the translator, not only changed the title, but altered the ending in a substantial and interesting manner. The Frog Prince (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Germany). The Enchanted Frog (Carl and Theodor Colshorn, Germany). The Singing Frog (Evald Tang Kristensen, Denmark). The Wonderful Frog (W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, Hungary). The Princess and the Frog ( The Schools' Collection , Ireland). A Story: The Girl and the Frog ( The Schools' Collection , Ireland). A Story: A King in Ireland Who Had Three Daughters ( The Schools' Collection , Ireland). The Queen Who Sought a Drink from a Certain Well (J. F. Campbell, Scotland). The Paddo (Robert Chambers, Scotland). The Well of the World's End ( The Schools' Collection , Ireland). The Well of the World's End (Joseph Jacobs, Scotland). The Maiden and the Frog (James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, England). The Frog Gentleman (H. B. C., England). The Kind Stepdaughter and the Frog (W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, England). The Frog Prince (H. Parker, Sri Lanka). A Frog for a Husband (William Elliot Griffis, Korea). Links to Related Sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Frog King; or, Iron Heinrich Germany Once upon a time there was a princess who went out into a forest and sat next to a cool well. She took great pleasure in throwing a golden ball into the air and catching it, but once it went too high. She held out her hand with her fingers curved to catch it, but it fell to the ground and rolled and rolled right into the water. Horrified, the princess followed it with her eyes, but the well was so deep that she could not see its bottom. Then she began to cry bitterly, "I'd give anything, if only I could get my ball back: my clothes, my precious stones, my pearls, anything in the world." At this a frog stuck his head out of the water and said, "Princess, why are you crying so bitterly?" "Oh," she said, "you ugly frog, how can you help me? My golden ball has fallen into the well." The frog said, "I do not want your pearls, your precious stones, and your clothes, but if you'll accept me as a companion and let me sit next to you and eat from your plate and sleep in your bed, and if you'll love and cherish me, then I'll bring your ball back to you." The princess thought, "What is this stupid frog trying to say? After all, he does have to stay here in the water. But still, maybe he can get my ball. I'll go ahead and say yes," and she said aloud, "Yes, for all I care. Just bring me back my golden ball, and I'll promise everything." The frog stuck his head under the water and dove to the bottom. He returned a short time later with the golden ball in his mouth and threw it onto the land. When the princess saw her ball once again, she rushed toward it, picked it up, and was so happy to have it in her hand again, that she could think of nothing else than to run home with it. The frog called after her, "Wait, princess, take me with you like you promised," but she paid no attention to him. The next day the princess was sitting at her table when she heard something coming up the marble steps: plop, plop. Then there came a knock at the door, and a voice called out, "Princess, princess, open the door for me!" She ran and opened the door. It was the frog, whom she had put completely out of her mind. Frightened, she slammed the door shut and returned to the table. The king saw that her heart was pounding and asked, "Why are you afraid?" "There is a disgusting frog out there," she said, "who got my golden ball out of the water. I promised him that he could be my companion, but I didn't think that he could leave his water, but now he is just outside the door and wants to come in." Just then there came a second knock at the door, and a voice called out: Youngest daughter of the king, Open up the door for me, Don't you know what yesterday, You said to me down by the well? Youngest daughter of the king, Open up the door for me. The king said, "What you have promised, you must keep. Go and let the frog in." She obeyed, and the frog hopped in, then followed her up to her chair. After she had sat down again, he called out, "Lift me up onto your chair and let me sit next to you." The princess did not want to, but the king commanded her to do it. When the frog was seated next to her he said, "Now push your golden plate closer. I want to eat from it." She had to do this as well. When he had eaten all he wanted, he said, "Now I am tired and want to sleep. Take me to your room, make your bed, so that we can lie in it together." The princess was horrified when she heard that. She was afraid of the cold frog and did not dare to even touch him, and yet he was supposed to lie next to her in her bed; she began to cry and didn't want to at all. Then the king became angry and commanded her to do what she had promised. There was no helping it; she had to do what her father wanted, but in her heart she was bitterly angry. She picked up the frog with two fingers, carried him to her room, and climbed into bed, but instead of laying him next to herself, she threw him bang! against the wall. "Now you will leave me in peace, you ugly frog!" But when the frog came down onto the bed, he was a handsome young prince, and he was her dear companion, and she held him in esteem as she had promised, and they fell asleep together with pleasure. The next morning the prince's faithful Heinrich arrived in a splendid carriage drawn by eight horses and decorated with feathers and glistening with gold. He had been so saddened by the prince's enchantment that he had had to place three iron bands around his heart to keep it from bursting in sorrow. The prince climbed into the carriage with the princess. His faithful servant stood at the rear to drive them to his kingdom. After they had gone a short distance, the prince heard a loud crack. He turned around and said: "Heinrich, the carriage is breaking apart." "No, my lord, the carriage it's not, But one of the bands surrounding my heart, That suffered such great pain, When you were sitting in the well, When you were a frog." Once again, and then once again the prince heard a cracking sound and thought that the carriage was breaking apart, but it was the bands springing from faithful Heinrich's heart because his master was now redeemed and happy. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Froschkönig oder der eiserne Heinrich," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, 1st ed., vol. 1 (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 1, pp. 1-5 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Links to the German text (final edition, 1857): Books.google.com: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Froschkönig oder der eiserne Heinrich," Kinder und Hausmärchen , vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 1, pp. 1-5 . Internet Archive: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Froschkönig oder der eiserne Heinrich," Kinder und Hausmärchen , vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 1, pp. 1-5 . Return to the table of contents . The Frog Prince A translation of the Grimms' "Frog King" by Edgar Taylor One fine evening a young princess went into a wood, and sat down by the side of a cool spring of water. She had a golden ball in her hand, which was her favorite plaything, and she amused herself with tossing it into the air and catching it again as it fell. After a time she threw it up so high that when she stretched out her hand to catch it, the ball bounded away and rolled along upon the ground, till at last it fell into the spring. The princess looked into the spring after her ball; but it was very deep, so deep that she could not see the bottom of it. Then she began to lament her loss, and said, "Alas! If I could only get my ball again, I would give all my fine clothes and jewels, and everything that I have in the world." Whilst she was speaking a frog put its head out of the water and said, "Princess, why do you weep so bitterly?" "Alas! said she, "What can you do for me, you nasty frog? My golden ball has fallen into the spring." The frog said, "I want not your pearls and jewels and fine clothes; but if you will love me and let me live with you, and eat from your little golden plate, and sleep upon your little bed, I will bring you your ball again." "What nonsense," thought the princess, "This silly frog is talking! He can never get out of the well. However, he may be able to get my ball for me; and therefore I will promise him what he asks." So she said to the frog, "Well, if you will bring me my ball, I promise to do all you require." Then the frog put his head down, and dived deep under the water; and after a little while he came up again with the ball in his mouth, and threw it on the ground. As soon as the young princess saw her ball, she ran to pick it up, and was so overjoyed to have it in her hand again, that she never thought of the frog, but ran home with it as fast as she could. The frog called after her, "Stay, princess, and take me with you as you promised." But she did not stop to hear a word. The next day, just as the princess had sat down to dinner, she heard a strange noise, tap-tap, as if somebody was coming up the marble staircase. And soon afterwards something knocked gently at the door, and said, Open the door, my princess dear, Open the door to thy true love here! And mind the words that thou and I said By the fountain cool in the greenwood shade. Then the princess ran to the door and opened it, and there she saw the frog, whom she had quite forgotten. She was terribly frightened, and shutting the door as fast as she could, came back to her seat. The king, her father, asked her what had frightened her. "There is a nasty frog," said she, "at the door, who lifted my ball out of the spring this morning. I promised him that he should live with me here, thinking that he could never get out of the spring; but there he is at the door and wants to come in!" While she was speaking the frog knocked again at the door, and said, Open the door, my princess dear, Open the door to thy true love here! And mind the words that thou and I said By the fountain cool in the greenwood shade. The king said to the young princess, "As you have made a promise, you must keep it. So go and let him in." She did so, and the frog hopped into the room, and came up close to the table. "Pray lift me upon a chair," said he to the princess, "and let me sit next to you." As soon as she had done this, the frog said, "Put your plate closer to me that I may eat out of it." This she did. And when he had eaten as much as he could, he said, "Now I am tired. Carry me upstairs and put me into your little bed." And the princess took him up in her hand and put him upon the pillow of her own little bed, where he slept all night long. As soon as it was light he jumped up, hopped downstairs, and went out of the house. "Now," thought the princess, "he is gone, and I shall be troubled with him no more." But she was mistaken; for when night came again, she heard the same tapping at the door, and when she opened it, the frog came in and slept upon her pillow as before till the morning broke. And the third night he did the same; but when the princess awoke on the following morning, she was astonished to see, instead of the frog, a handsome prince gazing on her with the most beautiful eyes that ever were seen, and standing at the head of her bed. He told her that he had been enchanted by a malicious fairy, who had changed him into the form of a frog, in which he was fated to remain till some princess should take him out of the spring and let him sleep upon her bed for three nights. "You," said the prince, "have broken this cruel charm, and now I have nothing to wish for but that you should go with me into my father's kingdom, where I will marry you, and love you as long as you live." The young princess, you may be sure, was not long in giving her consent; and as they spoke a splendid carriage drove up with eight beautiful horses decked with plumes of feathers and golden harness, and behind rode the prince's servant, the faithful Henry, who had bewailed the misfortune of his dear master so long and bitterly that his heart had well nigh burst. Then all set out full of joy for the prince's kingdom, where they arrived safely, and lived happily a great many years. Source (books.google.com): German Popular Stories, translated [by Edgar Taylor] from the Kinder und Haus Märchen, collected by M. M. Grimm, from Oral Tradition (London: C. Baldwyn, 1823), pp. 205-210 . The above book was the first translation of the Grimms' folktales into English. Edgar Taylor, the translator of "The Frog King," departs from his source in substantial ways. Not only does he change the title, but he totally revises the ending, replacing the Grimms' violent resolution with one of passivity. It appears that, in his judgment, the English readers of the 1820's, unlike their German counterparts, would not accept a heroine who throws her frisky bed companion against the wall. Return to the table of contents The Frog Prince Germany Once upon a time there was a king who had three daughters. In his courtyard there was a well with wonderful clear water. One hot summer day the oldest daughter went down and drew herself a glassful, but when she held it to the sun, she saw that it was cloudy. This seemed strange to her, and she was about to pour it back when a frog appeared in the water, stuck his head into the air, then jumped out onto the well's edge, saying: If you will be my sweetheart dear, Then I will give you water clear. "Ugh! Who wants to be the sweetheart of an ugly frog!" exclaimed the princess and ran away. She told her sisters about the amazing frog down at the well who was making the water cloudy. The second one was curious, so she too went down and drew herself a glassful, but it was so cloudy that she could not drink it. Once again the frog appeared at the well's edge and said: If you will be my sweetheart dear, Then I will give you water clear. "Not I!" said the princess, and ran away. Finally the third sister came and drew a glassful, but it was no better than before. The frog also said to her: If you will be my sweetheart dear, Then I will give you water clear. "Why not! I'll be your sweetheart. Just give me some clean water," she said, while thinking, "There's no harm in this. You can promise him anything, for a stupid frog can never be your sweetheart." The frog sprang back into the water, and when she drew another glassful it was so clear that the sun glistened in it with joy. She drank all she wanted and then took some up to her sisters, saying, "Why were you so stupid as to be afraid of a frog?" The princess did not think anything more about it until that evening after she had gone to bed. Before she fell asleep she heard something scratching at the door and a voice singing: Open up! Open up! Youngest daughter of the king. Remember that you promised me While I was sitting in the well, That you would be my sweetheart dear, If I would give you water clear. "Ugh! That's my boyfriend the frog," said the princess. "I promised, so I will have to open the door for him." She got up, opened the door a crack, and went back to bed. The frog hopped after her, then hopped onto her bed where he lay at her feet until the night was over and the morning dawned. Then he jumped down and disappeared out the door. The next evening, when the princess once more had just gone to bed, he scratched and sang again at the door. The princess let him in, and he again lay at her feet until daylight came. He came again on the third evening, as on the two previous ones. "This is the last time that I'll let you in," said the princess. "It will not happen again in the future." Then the frog jumped under her pillow, and the princess fell asleep. She awoke in the morning, thinking that the frog would hop away once again, but now a beautiful young prince was standing before her. He told her that he had been an enchanted frog and that she had broken the spell by promising to be his sweetheart. Then they both went to the king who gave them his blessing, and they were married. The two other sisters were angry with themselves that they had not taken the frog for their sweetheart. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Froschprinz," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 1st ed., vol. 2 (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1815), no. 13, pp. 91-93. Because of its close similarity with "The Frog King," this tale was omitted from all future editions of the Grimms' collection. Curiously, the first English translator of the Grimms' tales, Edgar Taylor, combined the two versions. He called the story "The Frog Prince," giving it the beginning of the Grimms' "The Frog King" and the conclusion of the Grimms' "The Frog Prince." Return to the table of contents . The Enchanted Frog Germany Once upon a time there was a merchant who had three daughters, but his wife was with God. Once he planned a journey across the ocean to a foreign land in order to bring back gold and other valuable things. He consoled his weeping children, saying, "I will bring back something beautiful for you. What do you want?" The oldest asked for a silk dress, "and it must be made of three kinds of silk." The second desired a feathered hat, "and it must have three kinds of feathers." The youngest finally said, "Bring me a rose, dear father, and it must be fresh and have three colors." The merchant promised to do this, kissed his daughters, and departed. After arriving in the foreign land, he ordered the dress of three kinds of silk for his oldest daughter and the hat with three kinds of feathers for the second one. Both were soon finished, and of seldom splendor. Then he sent messengers throughout the entire country to seek a three-colored rose for his youngest and dearest daughter, but they all returned empty handed, even though the merchant had promised a high price, and even though there were more roses there than there are daisies here. Sadly he set off for home and was downhearted the entire voyage. This side of the ocean he came to a large garden in which there was nothing but roses and roses. He went inside and looked, and behold, on a slender bush in the middle of the garden there was a three-colored rose. Filled with joy, he plucked it, and was about to leave, when he was magically frozen in place. A voice behind him cried out, "What do you want in my garden?" He looked up. A large frog was sitting there on the bank of a clear pond staring at him with its goggle-eyes. It said, "You have broken my dear rose. This will cost you your life unless you give me your youngest daughter to wife." The merchant was terrified. He begged and he pleaded, but all to no avail, and in the end he had to agree to marry his dearest daughter to the ugly frog. He could now move his feet, and he freely walked out of the garden. The frog called out after him, "In seven days I shall come for my wife!" With great sorrow the merchant gave his youngest daughter the fresh rose and told her what had happened. When the terrible day arrived, she crept under her bed, for she did not at all want to go. At the hour of noon a stately carriage drove up. The frog sent his servants into the house, and they immediately went to the bedroom and dragged the screaming maiden from beneath her bed, then carried her to the carriage. The horses leaped forward, and a short time later they were in the blossoming rose garden. In the middle of the garden, immediately behind the clear pond, there stood a small house. They took the bride into the house and laid her on a soft bed. The frog, however, sprang into the water. Darkness fell, and after the maiden had awakened from her unconsciousness, she heard the frog outside singing wonderfully sweet melodies. As midnight approached, he sang ever more sweetly, and came closer and closer to her. At midnight the bedroom door opened, and the frog jumped onto her bed. However, he had touched her with his sweet songs, and she took him into bed with her and warmly covered him up. The next morning when she opened her eyes, behold, the ugly frog was now the handsomest prince in the world. He thanked her with all his heart, saying, "You have redeemed me and are now my wife!" And they lived long and happily together. Source (books.google.com): Carl and Theodor Colshorn, "Der verwunschene Frosch," Märchen und Sagen (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), , no. 42, pp. 139-41 . Source (Internet Archive): Carl and Theodor Colshorn, "Der verwunschene Frosch," Märchen und Sagen (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), , no. 42, pp. 139-41 . The Colshorns' source: "Oral in Platendorf and in Hannover." Return to the table of contents . The Singing Frog Denmark There was once a priest who had two daughters. They went out into service, and the one became a servant at the king's castle. One day they went with each other down to the beach to bathe. There they heard someone singing beautifully. The sister who was the king's servant wished she could have a husband who could sing so beautifully. Then a frog jumped out of the water onto her lap and said, "Do you want me for your husband?" She answered no. When he asked the same thing again, her sister told her that she could make the promise, for it would not mean anything. She therefore answered yes when the frog asked the third time if she wanted him for a husband. The girl then went back to the king's castle. The frog jumped along after her. When she went inside and slammed the door in front of him, he sang: Open the door for me, my sweet little woman, For the sake of your rose-colored blood! Do you remember what you promised me At the beach when you were bathing? She would not open the door. Then the king came by and asked why she did not open the door. The girl said it that was only a frog who was not worth opening the door for. The king said that she should open the door. She then opened it, and the frog jumped in, singing: Pull up a chair for me, my sweet little woman, For the sake of your rose-colored blood! Do you remember what you promised me At the beach when you were bathing? The girl did not want to do this, and she said that it was a strange thing to offer a chair to such a slimy thing; but the king said she should do so, and then he himself pulled up a chair. The girl put the chair in front of the frog. He jumped up and sat down; then he sang: Spread a tablecloth for me, my sweet little woman, For the sake of your rose-colored blood! Do you remember what you promised me At the beach when you were bathing? At first the girl did not want to do this. Then the king said that she should do so, and he himself brought forth a tablecloth. She spread tablecloth before the frog, and he sang: Put food on it for me, my sweet little woman For the sake of your rose-colored blood! Do you remember what you promised me At the beach when you were bathing? The girl again objected; but the king said that she should do so. He himself brought forth some food, and the girl placed it before the frog. Then the frog sang: Bring me some beer, my sweet little woman, For the sake of your rose-colored blood! Do you remember what you promised me At the beach when you were bathing? Beer was brought to him, and after he had eaten and drunk, he sang: Make a bed for me, my sweet little woman, For the sake of your rose-colored blood! Do you remember what you promised me At the beach when you were bathing? The girl thought that it would not be right to make a bed for such a wet, slimy thing. But the king said that she should not refuse, and he himself brought in the bedding. After the girl had had made the bed, the frog sang: Pull up a chair for me, my sweet little woman, For the sake of your rose-colored blood! Do you remember what you promised me At the beach when you were bathing? The frog could not jump up into bed without first jumping up onto the chair. Once in bed he sang: Come to bed with me, my sweet little woman, For the sake of your rose-colored blood! Do you remember what you promised me At the beach when you were bathing? The girl was angry and did not want to do this, but the king told her to do so. She did not dare to lie alone with the frog, but she could take her boyfriend Per the servant with her. Once the frog was in bed with her, he asked her to poke three holes into his right front leg with a needle and thus draw three drops of blood. The girl did this, and the frog was transformed into a handsome prince. The frog-skin flew up through the chimney. It turned out that the frog was the king's son who had been bewitched many years ago. The prince then married the girl and became king after his father. In compensation Per the servant was awarded a principality, because he had to give up his girlfriend to the prince. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Den syngende frø," Skattegraveren: Et Tidsskrift , vol. 9 (January-June, 1888), no. 331, pp. 106-108 . Kristensen's source: Jens Jakobsen, who heard the tale from an old woman in Mejlby. Mejlby is a village about 20 kilometers north of Aarhus in Jutland, Denmark. Link to another Danish version of this tale (books.google.com): Svend Grundtvig, "Skruptudsen," Gamle danske Minder I Folkemunde: Folkeæventyr, Folkeviser, Folkesagn , vol. 3 (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversens Forlagshandel, 1861), no. 38, pp. 66-68 . Return to the table of contents . The Wonderful Frog Hungary There was once, I don't know where, a man who had three daughters. One day the father thus spoke to the eldest girl, "Go, my daughter, and fetch me, some fresh water from the well." The girl went, but when she came to the well a huge frog called out to her from the bottom, that he would not allow her to draw water in her jug until she threw him down the gold ring on her finger. "Nothing else? Is that all you want?" replied the girl. "I won't give away my rings to such an ugly creature as you." And she returned as she came with the empty pitchers. So the father sent the second girl, and she fared as the first; the frog would not let her have any water, as she refused to throw down her gold ring. Her father gave his two elder daughters a good scolding, and then thus addressed the youngest, "You go, Betsie, my dear, you have always been a clever girl. I'm sure you will be able to get some water, and will not allow your father to suffer thirst. So, shame your sisters!" Betsie picked up the pitchers and went, but the frog again refused the water unless she threw her ring down; but she, as she was very fond of her father, threw the ring in as demanded, and returned home with full pitchers to her father's great delight. In the evening, as soon as darkness set in, the frog crawled out of the well, and thus commenced to shout in front of Betsie's father's door, "Father-in-law! Father-in-law! I should like something to eat." The man got angry, and called out to his daughters; "Give something in a broken plate to that ugly frog to gnaw." "Father-in-law! Father-in-law! This won't do for me; I want some roast meat on a tin plate," retorted the frog. "Give him something on a tin plate then, or else he will cast a spell on us," said the father. The frog began to eat heartily, and, having had enough, again commenced to croak: "Father-in-law! Father- in-law! I want something to drink." "Give him some slops in a broken pot," said the father. "Father-in-law! Father-in-law! I won't have this; I want some wine in a nice tumbler." "Give him some wine then," angrily called out the father. He guzzled up his wine and began again, "Father-in-law! Father-in-law! I would like to go to sleep." "Throw him some rags in a corner," was the reply. "Father-in-law! Father-in-law! I won't have that; I want a silk bed," croaked the frog. This was also given to him; but no sooner has he gone to bed than again he began to croak, "Father-in-law! Father-in-law! I want a girl, indeed." "Go, my daughter, and lie by the side of him," said the father to the eldest. "Father-in-law! Father-in law! I don't want that, I want another." The father sent the second girl, but the frog again croaked: "Father-in-law! Father-in-law! I don't want that, Betsie is the girl I want." "Go, my Betsie," said the father, quite disheartened, "else this confounded monster will cast a spell on us." So Betsie went to bed with the frog, but her father thoughtfully left a lamp burning on the top of the oven; noticing which, the frog crawled out of bed and blew the lamp out. The father lighted it again, but the frog put it out as before, and so it happened a third time. The father saw that the frog would not yield, and was therefore obliged to leave his dear little Betsie in the dark by the side of the ugly frog, and felt great anxiety about her. In the morning, when the father and the two elder girls got up, they opened their eyes and mouths wide in astonishment, because the frog had disappeared, and by the side of Betsie they found a handsome Magyar lad, with auburn locks, in a beautiful costume, with gold braid and buttons and gold spurs on his boots. The handsome lad asked for Betsie's hand, and, having received the father's consent, they hastened to celebrate the wedding, so that christening might not follow the wedding too soon. The two elder sisters looked with invidious eyes on Betsie, as they also were very much smitten with the handsome lad. Betsie was very happy after, so happy that if anyone doubt it he can satisfy himself with his own eyes. If she is still alive, let him go and look for her, and try to find her in this big world. Source (books.google.com): W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, The Folk-Tales of the Magyars (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), pp. 224-26 . Source (Internet Archive): W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, The Folk-Tales of the Magyars (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), pp. 224-26 . Return to the table of contents . The Princess and the Frog Ireland Once upon a time there lived a king and his daughter. She was about twenty years of age. One day as she was playing [with] a golden ball. There was a pond of water outside the palace. As she was playing, the ball fell into the pond, and she began to cry. Then a frog came up and asked why she was crying. She said her ball fell into the pond. "If you give me three wishes I will bring it up to you," said the frog. When she got the ball she ran away, but the frog was calling her. The next day the frog came to the door, and the servant opened it. "Is the king's youngest daughter inside?" said the frog. When the daughter came out she closed the door, and the king asked her where did she see the frog? She said she was playing [with] a ball, and it fell into the pond, and the frog brought it up. The king said that she would have to drink from the one cup, and to eat from the one plate, and she would have to go to bed with the frog. She did not like that. She went to bed, but she did not like to bring the frog, but she had to do so. She threw the frog on the floor, but she was not sleeping. So she got up, and she threw the frog into the bed. The frog began to tickle her toes, and the next morning who was in it but a fine young man. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Galway >> Cill Chuana, pp. 167-68 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Informant: Martin Dooley, aged 50 years, a farmer in Kilcoona, County Galway. Return to the table of contents . A Story: The Girl and the Frog Ireland Once upon a time there was a girl playing be the side of a river. She was playing with a golden ball. And all of a sudden the ball fell into the river and she began weeping. When all of a sudden a frog put up his head from over the water and said, "If I catch you the ball, what will you give me?" "I will you whatever you ask." So the frog ducked down under the water and brought her up the ball. As soon as she got the ball off she went across the fields home to her father's house. She went upstairs eating her dinner no sooner had she been upstairs and seated on her chair to eat her dinner when a knock came to the door. The father went up to open it, and when he saw the frog he was amazed and asked him what he wanted, and he said that his daughter had promised him whatever he asked if he got a ball, and when I got the ball off she went and left me there. "Well," said the father. "you must keep your promise." So she went to the frog and asked what he would like, and he said, "Let me eat off your plate and sleep in your bed and sit on your chair." So she shivered at the thought, but she had to keep her promise, so he ate off her plate, and when the night came he slept on her bed, and when morning came he went out, and the princess thought she was relieved of him, but it was all in vain. When night came the frog came back again and on her pillow all night long for three nights in succession until the third morning there beside her in the bed a lovely prince instead of a frog, and she was frightened very much. And he told her all the story of what happened, and he said that of hundred years ago there lived an old witch and turned me into a frog by her bad evil. And she said that he could not be released until a king's daughter would come and speak to him and let him eat off her plate and sleep on her pillow and sit on her chair, and as soon as this was done he was turned to his right shape. Then they fell in love and got married and lived happily ever afterwards. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Roscommon >> Páirc an Iarla, pp. 90-91 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Informant: Martin Murray, aged 30, farmer; Rathpeak, County Roscommon. Return to the table of contents . A Story: A King in Ireland Who Had Three Daughters Ireland Once upon a time there lived a king in Ireland who had three daughters. The youngest daughter was a beautiful girl. Every day she would go to a pond which was near the castle and play with her golden ball under the shade of the trees. One day as she was playing with her pet dog, she dropped her ball into the water. She did not know how she would get it out again, and her father would behead her if she went home without her golden ball. She began to weep. Suddenly she heard a voice, and on looking, she saw a frog near. The frog said to her. "Why do you weep, daughter of a king." The princess said her ball fell into the water, and she could not go home to her father without it. "I will fish it out to you," said the frog, "if you promise me three wishes. You must take me home with you, you must let me eat on your [table] and sleep in your bed." The frog took the ball out of the water and gave it to the princess. She ran home to her dinner, but the frog came after her. Before the dinner was over, a knock came to the door. The king told the princess to answer the call. He asked her who was at the door and she said it was a frog. She told the king what had happened. The king told her to let in the frog as she promised. Very reluctantly the princess obeyed. The frog hopped up on her chair and began to eat off her plate. He then hopped on to her bed. At this the princess became angry. She took the frog and threw him against the floor. Immediately the frog was changed into a beautiful young prince. She was surprised to see what had happened. The prince said he was bewitched and was put into that pond to be released by a king's daughter. He married the princess and they both lived in his father's castle. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Sligo >> Bunninadden, pp. 294-96 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Collector: Margaret McDonagh. Informant: Mrs. James Gallagher, Spotfield, County Sligo. Return to the table of contents . The Queen Who Sought a Drink from a Certain Well Scotland There was before now, a queen who was sick, and she had three daughters. Said she to the one who was eldest, "Go to the well of true water, and bring to me a drink to heal me." The daughter went, and she reached the well. A losgann (frog or toad) came up to ask her if she would wed him, if she should get a drink for her mother. "I will not wed thee, hideous creature! on any account," said she. "Well then," said he, "thou shalt not get the water." She went away home, and her mother sent away her sister that was nearest to her, to seek a drink of the water. She reached the well, and the toad came up and asked her if she would marry him if she should get the water. "I won't marry thee, hideous creature!" said she. "Thou shalt not get the water then," said he. She went home, and her sister that was youngest went to seek the water. When she reached the well the toad came up as he used, and asked her if she would marry him if she should get the water. "If I have no other way to get healing for my mother, I will marry thee," said she; and she got the water, and she healed her mother. They had betaken themselves to rest in the night when the toad came to the door saying: A chaomhag, a chaomhag, An cuimhneach leat An gealladh beag A thug thu aig An tobar dhomh? A ghaoil, a ghaoil! Gentle one, gentle one, Rememberest thou The little pledge Thou gavest me Beside the well? My love, my love! When he was ceaselessly saying this, the girl rose and took him in, and put him behind the door, and she went to bed; but she was not long laid down, when he began again saying, everlastingly: A hàovaig, a hàovaig, An cuineach leat An geallug beag A hoog oo aig An tobar gaw, A géule, a géule. Then she got up and she put him under a noggin [small wooden pail]. That kept him quiet a while. But she was not long laid down when he began again, saying: A hàovaig, a hàovaig, An cuineach leat An geallug beag A hoog oo aig An tobar gaw, A géule, a géule. She rose again, and she made him a little bed at the fireside. But he was not pleased, and he began saying, "A chaoimheag, a chaoimheag, an cuimhneach leat an gealladh beag a thug thu aig an tobar dhomh, a ghaoil, a ghaoil." Then she got up and made him a bed beside her own bed. But he was without ceasing, saying, "A chaoimheag, a chaoimheag, an cuimhneach leat an gealladh beag a thug thu aig an tobar dhomh, a ghaoil, a ghaoil." But she took no notice of his complaining, till he said to her, "There is an old rusted glave [sword] behind thy bed, with which thou hadst better take off my head than be holding me longer in torture." She took the glave and cut the head off him. When the steel touched him, he grew a handsome youth; and he gave many thanks to the young wife, who had been the means of putting off him the spells under which he had endured for a long time. Then he got his kingdom, for he was a king; and he married the princess, and they were long alive and merry together. Source (books.google.com): J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), no. 33, pp. 130-32 . Source (Internet Archive): J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), no. 33, pp. 130-32 . Campbell's source: Mrs. MacTavish, Port Ellen, Islay. From Campbell's notes to this tale ( pp. 133-34 ): The lady who has been so kind as to write down this, and other stories, is one of my oldest friends. She has brought up a large family, and her excellent memory now enables her to remember tales, which she had gathered during a long life passed in the West Highlands, where her husband was a respected minister. The story is evidently a Celtic version of the "Wearie Well at the Warldis End," of which Chambers has published one Scotch version, to which Grimm refers in notes "Der Froschkönig," in his third volume. There are many versions still current in Scotland, told in broad Scots; and it can be traced back to 1548. According to Grimm it belongs to the oldest in Germany. This version clearly belongs to the Gaelic language, for the speech of the frog is an imitation of the gurgling and quarking of spring frogs in a pond, which I have vainly endeavored to convey to an English reader by English letters; but which is absurdly like, when repeated in Gaelic with this intention. The persevering, obstinate repetition of the same sounds is also exceedingly like the habit of frogs, when disturbed, but not much frightened. Let anyone try the experiment of throwing a stone into the midst of a frog concert, and he will hear the songsters, after a moment of stillness, begin again. First a half-smothered guark guark; then another begins, half under water, with a gurgle, and then more and more join in till the pond is in full chorus once again. Guark, guark, gooill -- -- gooark gooill -- --. Holy healing wells are common all over the Highlands; and people still leave offerings of pins and nails, and bits of rag, though few would confess it. There is a well in Islay where I myself have, after drinking, deposited copper caps amongst a board of pins and buttons, and similar gear, placed in chinks in the rocks and trees at the edge of the "Witches' Well." There is another well with similar offerings, freshly place beside it in an island in Loch Maree in Ross-shire; and similar wells are to be found in many other places in Scotland. For example, I learn from Sutherland, that "a well in the black Isle of Cromarty near Rosehaugh has miraculous healing powers. A country woman tells me that about forty years ago she remembers it being surrounded by a crowd of people every first Tuesday in June who bathed or drank of it before sunrise. Each patient tied a string or rag to one of the trees that overhung it before leaving. It was sovereign for headaches. Mr. __ remembers to have seen a well here called Mary's Well, hung round with votive rags." Return to the table of contents . The Paddo Scotland A poor widow was one day baking bannocks, and sent her dochter wi' a dish to the well to bring water. The dochter gaed, and better gaed, till she came to the well, but it was dry. Now, what to do she didna ken, for she couldna gang back to her mother without water; sae she sat down by the side o' the well, and fell a-greeting. A paddo [frog] then came loup-loup-louping out o' the well, and asked the lassie what she was greeting for; and she said she was greeting because there was nae water in the well. "But," says the paddo, "an ye'll be my wife, I'll gie ye plenty o' water." And the lassie, no thinking that the poor beast could mean anything serious, said she wad be his wife, for the sake o' getting the water. So she got the water into her dish, and gaed away hame to her mother, and thought nae mair about the paddo, till that night, when, just as she and her mother were about to go their beds, something came to the door, and when they listened, they heard this sang: O open the door, my hinnie, my heart, O open the door, my ain true love; Remember the promise that you and I made, down i' the meadow, where we twa met. Says the mother to the dochter, "What noise is that at the door?" "Hout," says the dochter, "it's naething but a filthy paddo." "Open the door," says the mother, "to the poor paddo." So the lassie opened the door, and the paddo came loup-loup-louping in, and sat down by the ingle-side. Then he sings: O gie me my supper, my hinnie, my heart, O gie me my supper, my ain true love; Remember the promise that you and I made, Down i' the meadow, where we twa met. "Hout," quo' the dochter, 'wad I gie a filthy paddo his supper?" "O ay," said the mother, "e'n gie the poor paddo his supper." So the paddo got his supper; and after that he sings again: O put me to bed, my hinnie, my heart, O put me to bed, my ain true love; Remember the promise that you and I made, Down i' the meadow, where we twa met. "Hout," quo' the dochter, "wad I put a filthy paddo to bed?" "O ay," says the mother, "put the poor paddo to bed." And so she put the paddo to his bed. (Here let us abridge a little.) Then the paddo sang again: Now fetch me an axe, my hinnie, my heart, Now fetch me an axe, my ain true love; Remember the promise that you and I made, Down i' the meadow, where we twa met. Well, the lassie chappit aff his head; and no sooner was that done, than he started up the bonniest young prince that ever was seen. And the twa lived happy a' the rest o' their days. Source (books.google.com): Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), pp. 87-89 . Source (Internet Archive): Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), pp. 87-89 . Note by Chambers concerning his source: "The above is ... from the memory of the late Charles K. Sharpe, Esq., who would be sitting at the knee of Nurse Jenny, his father's house of Hoddam in Dumfriesshire, about the year 1784." Chambers' note within his text "Here let us abridge a little" apparently alludes to material deemed inappropriate for his sensitive readers. Return to the table of contents . The Well of the World's End Scotland Once upon a time, and a very good time it was, though it wasn't in my time, nor in your time, nor anyone else's time, there was a girl whose mother had died, and her father had married again. And her stepmother hated her because she was more beautiful than herself, and she was very cruel to her. She used to make her do all the servant's work, and never let her have any peace. At last, one day, the stepmother thought to get rid of her altogether; so she handed her a sieve and said to her, "Go, fill it at the Well of the World's End and bring it home to me full, or woe betide you" For she thought she would never be able to find the Well of the World's End, and, if she did, how could she bring home a sieve full of water? Well, the girl started off, and asked everyone she met to tell her where was the Well of the World's End. But nobody knew, and she didn't know what to do, when a queer little old woman, all bent double, told her where it was, and how she could get to it. So she did what the old woman told her, and at last arrived at the Well of the World's End. But when she dipped the sieve in the cold, cold water, it all ran out again. She tried and she tried again, but every time it was the same; and at last she sate down and cried as if her heart would break. Suddenly she heard a croaking voice, and she looked up and saw a great frog with goggle eyes looking at her and speaking to her. "What's the matter, dearie?" it said. "Oh, dear, oh dear," she said, "my stepmother has sent me all this long way to fill this sieve with water from the Well of the World's End, and I can't fill it no how at all." "Well," said the frog, " if you promise me to do whatever I bid you for a whole night long, I'll tell you how to fill it." So the girl agreed, and then the frog said: Stop it with moss and daub it with clay, And then it will carry the water away; and then it gave a hop, skip and jump, and went flop into the Well of the World's End. So the girl looked about for some moss, and lined the bottom of the sieve with it, and over that she put some clay, and then she dipped it once again into the Well of the World's End; and this time, the water didn't run out, and she turned to go away. Just then the frog popped up its head out of the Well of the World's End, and said, "Remember your promise." "All right," said the girl; for thought she, "What harm can a frog do me?" So she went back to her stepmother, and brought the sieve full of water from the Well of the World's End. The stepmother was fine and angry, but she said nothing at all. That very evening they heard something tap tapping at the door low down, and a voice cried out: Open the door, my hinny, my heart, Open the door, my own darling; Mind you the words that you and I spoke, Down in the meadow, at the World's End Well. "Whatever can that be?" cried out the stepmother, and the girl had to tell her all about it, and what she had promised the frog. "Girls must keep their promises," said the stepmother. "Go and open the door this instant." For she was glad the girl would have to obey a nasty frog. So the girl went and opened the door, and there was the frog from the Well of the World's End. And it hopped, and it skipped, and it jumped, till it reached the girl, and then it said: Lift me to your knee, my hinny, my heart; Lift me to your knee, my own darling; Remember the words you and I spoke, Down in the meadow by the World's End Well. But the girl didn't like to, till her stepmother said, "Lift it up this instant, you hussy! Girls must keep their promises!" So at last she lifted the frog up on to her lap, and it lay there for a time, till at last it said: Give me some supper, my hinny, my heart, Give me some supper, my darling; Remember the words you and I spake, In the meadow, by the Well of the World's End. Well, she didn't mind doing that, so she got it a bowl of milk and bread, and fed it well. And when the frog had finished, it said: Go with me to bed, my hinny, my heart, Go with me to bed, my own darling; Mind you the words you spake to me, Down by the cold well, so weary. But that the girl wouldn't do, till her stepmother said, "Do what you promised, girl; girls must keep their promises. Do what you're bid, or out you go, you and your froggie." So the girl took the frog with her to bed, and kept it as far away from her as she could. Well, just as the day was beginning to break what should the frog say but: Chop off my head, my hinny, my heart, Chop off my head, my own darling; Remember the promise you made to me, Down by the cold well so weary. At first the girl wouldn't, for she thought of what the frog had done for her at the Well of the World's End. But when the frog said the words over again, she went and took an axe and chopped off its head, and lo! and behold, there stood before her a handsome young prince, who told her that he had been enchanted by a wicked magician, and he could never be unspelled till some girl would do his bidding for a whole night, and chop off his head at the end of it. The stepmother was that surprised when she found the young prince instead of the nasty frog, and she wasn't best pleased, you may be sure, when the prince told her that he was going to marry her stepdaughter because she had unspelled him. So they were married and went away to live in the castle of the king, his father, and all the stepmother had to console her was, that it was all through her that her stepdaughter was married to a prince. Source (books.google.com): Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 215-19 . Source (Internet Archive): Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 215-19 . Return to the table of contents . The Well of the World's End Ireland Once upon a time a widow sent her daughter to a well called the ''well of the world's end'' for a bucket of water as she wanted to make an oat meal cake. The girl took the bucket, but when she came to the well it was empty. A frog which was near the well told her that he would fill the well if she promised to marry him. After the girl had promised to marry him, the frog jumped into the well and in a minute the well was full of water. The girl filled her bucket and went home. On the following night the frog came to the girl's house and asked her to cut of his head. The girl did so, and a beautiful prince stood before her. The girl and the prince were married soon after. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Canan >> Drumkilly, p. 348 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Informant: Mr. Patrick Galligan. Return to the table of contents . The Maiden and the Frog England Many years ago there lived on the brow of a mountain, in the north of England, an old woman and her daughter. They were very poor, and obliged to work very hard for their living, and the old woman's temper was not very good, so that the maiden, who was very beautiful, led but an ill life with her. The girl, indeed, was compelled to do the hardest work, for her mother got their principal means of subsistence by traveling to places in the neighborhood with small articles for sale, and when she came home in the afternoon she was not able to do much more work. Nearly the whole domestic labor of the cottage devolved therefore on the daughter, the most wearisome part of which consisted in the necessity of fetching all the water they required from a well on the other side of the hill, there being no river or spring near their own cottage. It happened one morning that the daughter had the misfortune, in going to the well, to break the only pitcher they possessed, and having no other utensil she could use for the purpose, she was obliged to go home without bringing any water. When her mother returned, she was unfortunately troubled with excessive thirst, and the girl, though trembling for the consequences of her misfortune, told her exactly the circumstance that had occurred. The old woman was furiously angry, and so far from making any allowances for her daughter, pointed to a sieve which happened to be on the table, and told her to go at once to the well and bring her some water in that, or never venture to appear again in her sight. The young maiden, frightened almost out of her wits by her mother's fury, speedily took the sieve, and though she considered the task a hopeless one to accomplish, almost unconsciously hastened to the well. When she arrived there, beginning to reflect on the painful situation in which she was placed, and the utter impossibility of her obtaining a living by herself, she threw herself down on the brink of the well in an agony of despair. Whilst she was in this condition, a large from came up to the top of the water, and asked her for what she was crying so bitterly. She was somewhat surprised at this, but not being the least frightened, told him the whole story, and that she was crying because she could not carry away water in the sieve. "Is that all?" said the frog; "cheer up, my hinny! for if you will only let me sleep with you for two nights, and then chop off my head, I will tell you how to do it." The maiden thought the frog could not be in earnest, but she was too impatient to consider much about it, and at once made the required promise. The frog then instructed her in the following words: Stop with fog (moss), And daub with clay; And that will carry The water away. Having said this, he dived immediately under the water, and the girl, having followed his advice, got the sieve full of water, and returned home with it, not thinking much of her promise to the frog. By the time she reached home the old woman's wrath was appeased, but as they were eating their frugal supper very quietly, what should they hear but the splashing and croaking of a frog near the door, and shortly afterwards the daughter recognized the voice of the frog of the well saying: Open the door, my hinny, my heart, Open the door, my own darling; Remember the word you spoke to me In the meadow by the well-spring. She was now dreadfully frightened, and hurriedly explained the matter to her mother, who was also so much alarmed at the circumstance, that she dared not refuse admittance to the frog, who, when the door was opened, leapt into the room, exclaiming: Go wi' me to bed, my hinny, my heart, Go wi' me to bed, my own darling; Remember the words you spoke to me, In the meadow by the well-spring. This command was also obeyed, although as may be readily supposed, she did not much relish such a bedfellow. The next day, the frog was very quiet, and evidently enjoyed the fare they placed before him, the purest milk and the finest bread they could procure. In fact, neither the old woman nor her daughter spared any pains to render the frog comfortable. That night, immediately supper was finished, the frog again exclaimed: Go wi' me to bed, my hinny, my heart, Go wi' me to bed, my own darling; Remember the words you spoke to me, In the meadow by the well-spring. She again allowed the frog to share her couch, and in the morning, as soon as she was dressed, he jumped towards her, saying: Chop off my head, my hinny, my heart, Chop off my head, my own darling; Remember the words you spoke to me, In the meadow by the well-spring. The maiden had no sooner accomplished this last request, than in the stead of the frog there stood by her side the handsomest prince in the world, who had long been transformed by a magician, and who could never have recovered his natural shape until a beautiful virgin had consented, of her own accord, to make him her bedfellow for two nights. the joy of all parties was complete; the girl and the prince were shortly afterwards married, and lived for many years in the enjoyment of every happiness. Source (books.google.com): James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to the Nursery Rhymes of England (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), pp. 43-47 . Source (Internet Archive): James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to the Nursery Rhymes of England (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), pp. 43-47 . Return to the table of contents . The Frog Gentleman England There was a farmer that had an only daughter; and she was very handsome, but proud. One day, when the servants were all afield, her mother sent her to the well for a pitcher of water. When she had let down the bucket, it was so heavy that she could hardly draw it up again; and she was going to let loose of it, when a voice in the well said, "Hold tight and pull hard, and good luck will come of it at last." So she held tight and pulled hard; and when the bucket came up there was nothing in it but a frog, and the frog said, "Thank you, my dear; I've been a long while in the well, and I'll make a lady of you for getting me out." So when she saw it was only a frog, she took no notice, but filled her pitcher and went home. Now, when they were at supper, there came a knock at the door, and somebody outside said: Open the door, my dearest sweet one, And think of the well in the wood; Where you and I were together, love a keeping, And think of the well in the wood. So she looked out of the window, and there was the frog in boots and spurs. So says she, "I sha'n't open the door for a frog." Then says her father, "Open the door to the gentleman. Who knows what it may come to at last?" So she opened the door, and the frog came in. Then says the frog: Set me a chair, my dearest sweet one, And think of the well in the wood; Where you and I were together, love a keeping, And think of the well in the wood. "I'm sure I sha'n't set a chair; the floor's good enough for a frog." The frog makes many requests, to all of which the lady returns uncivil answers. He asks for beer, and is told, "Water is good enough for a frog;" to be put to bed, but, "The cistern is good enough for a frog to sleep in." The father, however, insists on her compliance; and even when the frog says, "Cuddle my back, my dearest sweet one," orders her to do so, "For who knows what it may come to at last?" And in the morning, when she woke, she saw by her side the handsomest gentleman that ever was seen, in a scarlet coat and top-boots, with a sword by his side and a gold chain round his neck, and gold rings on his fingers; and he married her and made her a lady, and they lived very happy together. Source (books.google.com): Notes and Queries , vol. 5, no. 133 (May 15, 1852), p. 460 . Source (Internet Archive): Notes and Queries , vol. 5, no. 133 (May 15, 1852), p. 460 . The narrator of this tale (identified only as H. B. C.) does not give the story a title, identifying it only as "a version of the Froschkönig " from Oxfordshire. Return to the table of contents . The Kind Stepdaughter and the Frog England I have often had this tale told to me by my nurse when a child, and heard the following version a short time ago in Holderness [Yorkshire], and was informed it had been told thus for ages: There was a stepmother who was very unkind to her stepdaughter and very kind to her own daughter; and used to send her stepdaughter to do all the dirty work. One day she sent her to the pump for some water when a little frog came up through the sink and asked her not to pour dirty water down, as his drawing room was there. So she did not; and as a reward, he said pearls and diamonds should drop from her mouth when she spoke. When she returned home it happened as he said; and the stepmother, learning how it had come about, sent her own daughter to the pump. When she got there the little frog spoke to her and asked her not to throw dirty water down, and she replied, "Oh! you nasty, dirty little thing, I won't do as you ask me." Then the frog said, "Whenever you speak, frogs, and toads, and snakes shall drop from your mouth." She went home and it happened as the frog had said. At night when they were sitting at the table a little voice was heard singing outside: Come bring me my supper, My own sweet, sweet one. When the stepdaughter went to the door, there was the little frog. She brought him in in spite of her stepmother, took him on her knee, and fed him with bits from her plate. After a while he sang: Come, let us go to bed, My own sweet, sweet one. So, unknown to her stepmother, she laid him at the foot of her bed, as she said he was a poor, harmless thing. Then she fell asleep and forgot all about him. Next morning there stood a beautiful prince, who said he had been enchanted by a wicked fairy and was to be a frog till a girl would let him sleep with her. They were married, and lived happily in his beautiful castle ever after. This is one of the few folk stories I have been able to collect from the lips of a living storyteller in England. Source (books.google.com): W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, The Folk-Tales of the Magyars (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), pp. 404-405 . Source (Internet Archive): W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, The Folk-Tales of the Magyars (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), pp. 404-405 . This tale, and the statement concerning its provenance, were written by W. Henry Jones as a commentary to the Hungarian story The Wonderful Frog . He does not give his English version a title. This story includes elements from other traditional folktales: Underground People Disturbed by Farm Waste , Christiansen migratory legend type 5075. The Kind and the Unkind Girls , Aarne-Thompson-Uther folktale type 480. Return to the table of contents . The Frog Prince Sri Lanka (Northwestern Province) At a city there is a certain king; a widow lives at a house near his palace. She subsists by going to this royal palace and pounding rice there; having handed it over, she takes away the rice powders and lives on it. During the time while she was getting a living in this way, she bore a frog, which she reared there. When it was grown up, the king of that city caused this proclamation to be made by beat of tom-toms, "I will give half my kingdom, and goods amounting to an elephant's load to the person who brings the Jeweled Golden Cock that is at the house of the Rakshasi (ogress). The frog took the bundle of rice, and hanging it from his shoulder, went to an indi (wild date) tree, scraped the leaf off a date spike (the mid-rib of the leaf), and strung the rice on it. While going away after stringing it, the frog then became like a very good-looking royal prince, and a horse and clothing for him made their appearance there. Putting on the clothes he mounted the horse, and making it bound along he went on till he came to a city. Hearing that he had arrived, the king of that city prepared quarters for this prince to stay at, and having given him ample food and drink, asked, "Where art thou going?" Then the prince said, "The king of our city has made a proclamation by beat of tom-toms, that he will give half his kingdom and an elephant's load of gold to the person who brings him the Jeweled Golden Cock that is at the Rakshasi's house. Because of it I am going to fetch the Jeweled Golden Cock." The king, being pleased with the prince on account of it, gave him a piece of charcoal. "Should you be unable to escape from the Rakshasi while returning after taking the Jeweled Golden Cock, tell this piece of charcoal to be created a fire-fence, and cast it down," he said. Taking it, he went to another city. The king of that city in that very manner having prepared quarters, and made ready and given him food and drink, asked, "Where art thou going?" The prince replied in the same words, "I am going to bring the Jeweled Golden Cock that is at the house of the Rakshasi." That king also being pleased on account of it, gave him a stone, "Should you be unable to escape from the Rakshasi, tell this stone to be created a mountain, and cast it down," he said. Taking the charcoal and the stone which those two kings gave him, he went to yet another city. The king also in that very manner having given him quarters, and food and drink, asked, "Where art thou going?" The prince in that very way said, "I am going to bring the Jeweled Golden Cock." That king also being greatly pleased gave him a thorn. "Should you be unable to escape from the Rakshasi, tell a thorn fence to be created, and cast down this thorn," he said. On the next day he went to the house of the Rakshasi. She was not at home; the Rakshasi's daughter was there. That girl having seen the prince coming and not knowing him, asked "Elder brother, elder brother, where are you going?" The prince said, "Younger sister, I am not going anywhere whatever. I came to beg at your hands the Jeweled Golden Cock which you have got." To that she replied, "Elder brother, today indeed I am unable to give it. Tomorrow I can. Should my mother come now she will eat you; for that reason come and hide yourself." Calling him into the house, she put him in a large trunk at the bottom of seven trunks, and shut him up in it. After a little time had passed, the Rakshasi came back. Having come and seen that the prince's horse was there, she asked her daughter, "Whose is this horse?" Then the Rakshasi's daughter replied, "Nobody's whatever. It came out of the jungle, and I caught it to ride on." The Rakshasi having said, "If so, it is good," came in. While lying down to sleep at night, the sweet odor of the prince having reached the Rakshasi, she said to her daughter, "What is this, Bola ? A smell of a fresh human body is coming to me." Then the Rakshasi's daughter said, "What, mother! Do you say so? You are constantly eating fresh bodies; how can there not be an odor of them?" After that, the Rakshasi, taking those words for the truth, went to sleep. At dawn on the following day, as soon as she arose, the Rakshasi went to seek human flesh for food. After she had gone, the Rakshasa-daughter, taking out the prince who was shut up in the box, told that prince a. device on going away with the Jeweled Golden Cock: "Elder brother, if you. are going away with the cock, take some cords and fasten them round my shoulders. Having put them round me, take the cock, and having mounted the horse, go off, making him bound quickly. When you have gone, I shall cry out. Mother comes when I give three calls. After she has come, loosening me will occupy much time; then you will be able to get away." In the way she said, the prince tied the Rakshasa-daughter, and taking the Jeweled Golden Cock mounted the horse, and making it bound quickly came away. As that Rakshasa-daughter said, while she was calling out, the Rakshasi came. Having come, after she looked about (she found that) the Rakshasa-daughter was tied, and the Jeweled Golden Cock had been taken away. After she had asked, "Who was it? Who took it?" the Rakshasa-daughter said, "I don't know who it was." After that, she very quickly unfastened the Rakshasa-daughter, and both of them came running to eat that prince. The prince was unable to go quickly. While going, the prince turned round, and on looking back saw that this Rakshasi and the Rakshasa-daughter were coming running to eat that prince. After that, he cast down the thorn which the above-mentioned king of the third city gave him, having told a thorn fence to be created. A thorn fence was created. Having jumped over it, they came on. After that, when he had put down the piece of stone which the king of the second city gave him, and told a mountain to be created a mountain was created. They sprang over that mountain also, and came on. After that, he cast down the charcoal which the king of the first city gave him, having told a fire fence to be created. In that very manner, a fire fence was created. Having come to it, while jumping over it, both of them were burnt and died. From that place, the prince came along. While coming, he arrived at the Indi tree on which he had threaded the rice, and having taken off it all that dried-up rice, he began to eat it. On coming to the end of it, the person who was like that prince again became a frog. After he became a frog, the clothes that he was wearing, and the horse, and the Jeweled Golden Cock vanished. Out of grief on that account, that frog died at that very place. Source (Internet Archive): H. Parker, Village Folk-Tales of Ceylon , vol. 1 (London: Luzac and Company, 1910), pp. 67-70 . "Bola" is a word without any special meaning in English, often used in addressing a person familiarly and somewhat disrespectfully. [footnote by Parker] Return to the table of contents . A Frog for a Husband Korea Off in a valley, among very stony mountains, lived an old farmer named Pak We and his wife. His land was poor and he had to toil from sunrise to sunset and often in the night, when the moon was shining, to get food. No child had ever come to his home and he was in too great straits of poverty to adopt a son. So he took his amusement in fishing in the pond higher up on the hills that fed the stream which watered his millet and rice fields. Being very skilful, he often caught a good string of fish and these he sold in the village nearby to get for himself and his wife the few comforts they needed. Thus the old couple kept themselves happy, despite their cheerless life, though they often wondered what would become of them when they got too old to work. But one summer Pak noticed that there were fewer fish in the pond, and that every day they seemed to be less in number. Where he used to catch a stringful in an hour, he could hardly get half that many during a whole day. What was the matter? Was he getting less skilful? Was the bait poor? Not at all! His worms were as fat, his hooks and lines in as good order, and his eyesight was as keen as ever. When Pak noticed also that the water was getting shallower, he was startled. Could it be that the pond was drying up? Things grew worse day by day until at last there were no fish. Where once sparkled the wavelets of a pond was now an arid waste of earth and stones, over which trickled hardly more than a narrow rill, which he could jump over. No fish and no pond meant no water for his rice fields. In horror at the idea of starving, or having to move away from his old home and become a pauper, Pak looked down from what had been the banks of the pond to find the cause of all this trouble. There in the mud among the pebbles he saw a bullfrog, nearly as big as an elephant, blinking at him with its huge round eyes. In a rage the farmer Pak burst out, charging the frog with cruelty in eating up all the fish and drinking up all the water, threatening starvation to man and wife. Then Pak proceeded to curse the whole line of the frog's ancestors and relatives, especially in the female line, for eight generations back, as Koreans usually do. But instead of being sorry, or showing any anger at such a scolding, the bullfrog only blinked and bowed, saying, "Don't worry, Farmer Pak. You'll be glad of it, by and by. Besides, I want to go home with you and live in your house." "What! Occupy my home, you clammy reptile! No you won't," said Pak. "Oh! but I have news to tell you and you won't be sorry, for you see what I can do. Better take me in." Old Pak thought it over. How should he face his wife with such a guest? But then, the frog had news to tell and that might please the old lady, who was fond of gossip. Since her husband was not very talkative, she might be willing to harbor so strange a guest. So they started down the valley. Pak shuffled along as fast as his old shins could move, but the bullfrog covered the distance in a few leaps, for his hind legs were three feet long. Arrived at his door, Mrs. Pak was horrified at the prospect of boarding such a guest. But when the husband told her that Froggie knew all about everybody and could chat interestingly by the hour, she changed her manner and bade him welcome. Indeed, she so warmed in friendliness that she gave him one of her best rooms. All the leaves, grass, and brushwood that had been gathered in the woodshed to supply the kitchen fire and house flues, was carried into the room. There it was doused with tubs of water to make a nice soft place such as bullfrogs like. After this he was fed all the worms he wanted. Then after his dinner and a nap, Mrs. Pak and Mr. Pak donned their best clothes and went in to make a formal call on their guest. Mr. Pak put on his horsehair hat and long white coat, as white as snow, which had been starched and beaten by his loving wife, until it glistened all over like hoar frost. Mr. Bullfrog was so affable and charming in conversation, besides telling so many good stories and serving up so many dainty bits of gossip, that Mrs. Pak was delighted beyond expression. Indeed, she felt almost like adopting Froggie as her son. The night passed quietly away, but when the first rays of light appeared, Froggie was out on the porch singing a most melodious tune to the rising sun. When Mr. and Mrs. Pak rose up to greet their guest and to hear his song, they were amazed to find that the music was bringing them blessings. Everything they had wished for, during their whole lives, seemed now at hand, with more undreamed of coming in troops. In the yard stood oxen, donkeys, and horses loaded with every kind of box, bale, and bundle, waiting to be unloaded, and more were coming; stout men porters appeared and began to unpack, while troops of lovely girls in shining white took from the men's hands beautiful things made of jade, gold, and silver. There were fine clothes and hats for Mr. Pak, jade-tipped hairpins, tortoise-shell and ivory combs, silk gowns, embroidered and jeweled girdles, and every sort of frocks and woman's garments for Mrs. Pak, besides inlaid cabinets, clothes racks, and wardrobes. Above all, was a polished metal mirror that looked like the full autumn moon, over which Mrs. Pak was now tempted to spend every minute of her time. Four or five of the prettiest maidens they had ever seen in all their lives danced, sang and played sweetest music. The unpacking of boxes, bales, and bundles continued. Tables of jade and finest sandalwood were spread with the richest foods and wines. Soon, under the skilful hands of carpenters and decorators, instead of oiled paper on the floors, covering old bricks and broken flat stones set over the flues, and smoky rafters and mud walls poorly papered, there rose a new house. It had elegant wide halls and large rooms with partitions made of choicest joiner work. It was furnished with growing flowers, game boards for chess, and had everything in it like a palace. As for the riches of the larder and the good things to eat daily laid on the table, no pen but a Korean's can tell of them all. In the new storehouse were piles of dried fish, edible seaweed, bags of rice, bins of millet, tubs of kim-chee made of various sorts of the pepper-hash, and Korean hot pickle in which the natives delight, to say nothing of peaches, pears, persimmons, chestnuts, honey, barley, sugar, candy, cake, and pastry, all arranged in high piles and gay colors. The old couple seemed able to eat and enjoy twice as big dinners as formerly, for all the while the adopted bullfrog was very entertaining. Mr. and Mrs. Pak laughed continually, declaring they had never heard such good stories as he told. The good wife was, however, quite equal to her guest in retailing gossip. One of her favorite subjects, of which she never tired, was the beauty and charm of Miss Peach. She was the accomplished daughter of the big Yang-ban, or nobleman, Mr. Poom, who lived in a great house, with a host of servants and retainers in the next village, and Mrs. Pak insisted there was no young woman in the world like her. It was noticed that Mr. Bullfrog was particularly interested when Miss Peach Poom was the subject of the old lady's praises. After a week of such luxury, during which Mr. and Mrs. Pak seemed to dwell in the Nirvana, or Paradise, which the good priests often talked about, Mr. Pak's full cup of joy was dashed to earth when the bullfrog informed him that he intended to marry, and that Mr. Pak must get him a wife. Still worse than that, Pak was informed by the frog that he would have no one but Miss Peach, the daughter of Poom, so renowned for her beauty and graces. At this, old Pak nearly went wild. He begged to be excused from the task, but the bullfrog was inexorable. So, after imprecating his wife's tongue, for her ever putting it into the frog's head to marry Miss Peach, he donned his fine clothes and set out to see Mr. Poom. He expected to be beaten to death for his brazen effrontery in asking a noble lady to marry a frog. Now this Mr. Poom had long been the magistrate of a district, who had squeezed much money wrongly from the poor people over whom he ruled, and having won great wealth, had retired and come back to his native place to live. Yet to keep up his old habits, he still kept a cross bench on which common people who offended him were thrown and beaten with paddles, until often they went away bleeding cripples. This man had two daughters married, but the third, the youngest and most beautiful, Miss Peach, now eighteen years old, was the only one Mr. Bullfrog would have for his bride. Arriving at the Pooms' grand mansion, Mr. Pak told of the suitor's wealth, power and fame, high position and promise, and how he had made the old couple happy. Old Poom had pricked up his ears from the first mention of riches and power, and became highly interested as Pak went on sounding the praises of his prospective son-in-law. "And what is his name?" asked Mr. Poom. Here Pak was in a quandary. He knew that the frog family was the oldest and most numerous in the world and was famous for fine voices. He fell into a brown study for a few minutes. Then, looking up, he declared that he had so long thought of the suitor's graces and accomplishments, that he had forgotten his name and could not then recall it. So Mr. Poom, in order to help Pak out, ran over the list of famous families in Korea, reciting the names of the Kims, Sims, Mins, the Hos, Chos, Kos, Quongs, and Hongs, etc., etc., for Mr. Poom was an authority on the Korean peerage. "It is none of these," said Pak. "I deeply regret that I cannot recall the name." "Strange," said Mr. Poom. "I have named all the families of any standing in the kingdom. What is his office or rank and where do his relations live?" Pak was pressed so hard by Mr. Poom's searching questions that at last he had to confess that the suitor for the beautiful maiden was not a man but a frog. "What! Do you want me to marry my daughter to a pond-croaker? You shall suffer for thus insulting me in my own house. Slaves, bring the cross bench and give this wretch twenty blows." Forthwith, while four men brought out the whipping bench, three others seized poor Pak, stripped off his coat, and bound him with feet and arms stretched out to the bench. Then a tall, stalwart fellow raised the huge paddle of wood to let fall with all his might on the bare flesh of the old man. But all this while the sky was darkening, and, before the first blow was given, the lightning flashed, the thunder rolled, and floods of rain fell that threatened to overwhelm house, garden, and all in a deluge. The hail, which began to pelt the cattle, was first the size of an egg and then of stones, like cannon balls. "Hold," cried the frightened Mr. Poom. "I'll wait and ask further." Thereupon the lightning and thunder ceased, the sun burst out in splendor. Mightily impress by this, Mr. Poom at last agreed to let his daughter become the bride of the frog, not telling her who her husband was to be. Within an hour, while she was getting ready, a string of fine horses and donkeys with palanquins loaded with presents for the bride and her family appeared. Besides boxes of silk dresses and perfumes, headgear and articles for a lady's boudoir, there were troops of maidens to wait on the bride. Arraying Miss Peach in the loveliest of robes, they also dressed her hair, until, what with satin puffs and frame, jade-tipped silver hairpins, rosettes, and flowers, her headgear stood over a foot high above her forehead, on which was the bride's red round spot. Then, when the happy maiden had sufficiently admired herself in the metal mirror and heard the praises of her attendant virgins, she entered the bridal palanquin -- a gorgeous mass of splendor. According to custom, her eyes were sealed shut and covered with wax, for a Korean bride sees nothing of her husband until the end of the feast, when she meets him in the bridal chamber. So to his house she was carried in great pomp and with gay attendance of brilliantly arrayed maidens. The marriage ceremony and the grand supper were happy affairs for all the guests, even though the bride, according to Korean etiquette, was as if blind, quietly and patiently waiting sightless throughout the whole joyful occasion. The actual ceremony was witnessed only by the foster parents and the bridegroom. When in the bridal chamber, the bride having unsealed her eyes, and her vision being clear, she looked up at the one she had married and found not a man, but a frog, she was furiously angry. She burst out into a protest against having such a bridegroom. Gently and in tenderest tones the bridegroom attempted first to comfort her. Then, handing her a pair of scissors, he begged her to rip open the skin along his back from shoulder to thigh, for it was very tight and he was suffering pain from it. In her bitter disappointment at being married to a frog, she seized the scissors and almost viciously began to cut from nape to waist. Her surprise was great to find what seemed to be silk underneath the speckled skin. When she had slit down two yards or so, her husband the frog stood upon his hind legs. He twisted himself about as if in a convulsion, pulled his whole speckled hide hard with his front paws, and then jumping out of his skin, stood before his bride a prince. Fair, tall, of superb figure, and gorgeously arrayed, he was the ideal of her dreams. A jeweled baldric bound his waist, embroidery of golden dragons on his shoulders and breast told of his rank, while on his head was the cap of royalty with a sparkling diamond in the centre. Yet no clothes, handsome as they were, could compare in beauty with his glorious manhood. Never had she seen so fair a mortal. Happy was the bride whose feelings were thus changed in a moment from repulsion and horror to warmest affection and strongest veneration. The next morning when, to the amazement of his foster father and mother, Mr. and Mrs. Pak, the prince presented himself and his bride at breakfast, he told the story of his life. As son of the King of the Stars he had committed some offense, in punishment for which his father condemned him to live upon the earth in the form of a frog. Furthermore he had laid upon his son the duty of performing three tasks. These must be done before he should be allowed to come back and live in Star Land. These were, to drink up all the water in the lake, to eat all the fish, and to win a human bride, the handsomest woman in the world. All the precious things which he had presented to Pak and his wife to make their old days comfortable, and the gifts sent to the bride's house before her wedding day, had come by power from the skies. Now, leaving his foster parents on earth to enjoy their gifts, he must return home to his father, taking his bride with him. Scarcely had he spoken these words than a chariot and horses, silver bright, appeared at the door of the house. Bowing low to his foster parents, and stepping in with his bride, the pair disappeared beyond the clouds. From this time forth a new double star was seen in the sky. Source (books.google.com): William Elliot Griffis, The Unmannerly Tiger, and Other Korean Tales (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Company, 1911), pp. 112-125 . Source (Internet Archive): William Elliot Griffis, The Unmannerly Tiger, and Other Korean Tales (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Company, 1911), pp. 112-125 . Return to the table of contents . Links to Related Sites A comparison of the Grimms' 1812 and 1857 versions of "The Frog King" (in English translation): The Frog King; or, Iron Henry by the Brothers Grimm: A Comparison of the Versions of 1812 and 1857 . A comparison of the Grimms' 1812 and 1857 versions of "The Frog King" (in the original German): Der Froschkönig; oder, Der eiserne Heinrich von den Brüdern Grimm: Ein Vergleich der Fassungen von 1812 und 1857 . The Frog Prince , Wikipedia . Der Froschkönig oder der eiserne Heinrich , Wikipedia . Frog King: Annotated Tale , SurLaLune . Frog King in Pictures, Illustrations, and Drawings , Top Illustrations . Grimm Brothers Home Page . More animal bridegroom stories: Beauty and the Beast (Jeanne-Marie LePrince de Beaumont) . Hog Bridegrooms . Snake and Serpent Bridegrooms . East of the Sun and West of the Moon (Norway). Married to Magic: Animal Brides and Bridegrooms by Terri Windling. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Folk and Fairy Tale Links. Return to the table of contents . Revised January 10, 2022. The Frog King The Frog King or Iron Heinrich by the Brothers Grimm a comparison of the versions of 1812 and 1857 compiled and translated by D. L. Ashliman Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts . First edition, 1812 Final edition, 1857 The Frog King; or, Iron Heinrich The Frog King; or, Iron Heinrich Once upon a time there was a princess who went out into a forest and sat next to a cool well. In olden times, when wishing still did some good, there lived a king whose daughters were all beautiful, but the youngest was so beautiful that the sun itself, who, indeed, has seen so much, marveled every time it shone upon her face. In the vicinity of the king's castle there was a large, dark forest, and in this forest, beneath an old linden tree, there was a well. In the heat of the day the princess would go out into the forest and sit on the edge of the cool well. She took great pleasure in throwing a golden ball into the air and catching it, but once it went too high. She held out her hand with her fingers curved to catch it, but it fell to the ground and rolled and rolled right into the water. To pass the time she would take a golden ball, throw it into the air, and then catch it. It was her favorite plaything. Now one day it happened that the princess's golden ball did not fall into her hands, that she held up high, but instead it fell to the ground and rolled right into the water Horrified, the princess followed it with her eyes, but the well was so deep that she could not see its bottom. The princess followed it with her eyes, but the ball disappeared, and the well was so deep that she could not see its bottom. Then she began to cry bitterly, "I'd give anything, if only I could get my ball back: my clothes, my precious stones, my pearls, anything in the world." Then she began to cry. She cried louder and louder, and she could not console herself. At this a frog stuck his head out of the water and said, "Princess, why are you crying so bitterly?" As she was thus lamenting, someone called out to her, "What is the matter with you, princess? Your crying would turn a stone to pity." "Oh," she said, "you ugly frog, how can you help me? My golden ball has fallen into the well." She looked around to see where the voice was coming from and saw a frog, who had stuck his thick, ugly head out of the water. "Oh, it's you, old water-splasher," she said. "I am crying because my golden ball has fallen into the well." The frog said, "I do not want your pearls, your precious stones, and your clothes, but if you'll accept me as a companion and let me sit next to you and eat from your plate and sleep in your bed, and if you'll love and cherish me, then I'll bring your ball back to you." "Be still and stop crying," answered the frog. I can help you, but what will you give me if I bring back your plaything?" "Whatever you want, dear frog," she said, "my clothes, my pearls and precious stones, and even the golden crown that I am wearing." The frog answered, "I do not want your clothes, your pearls and precious stones, nor your golden crown, but if you will love me and accept me as a companion and playmate, and let me sit next to you at your table and eat from your golden plate and drink from your cup and sleep in your bed, if you will promise this to me, then I'll dive down and bring your golden ball back to you." The princess thought, "What is this stupid frog trying to say? After all, he does have to stay here in the water. But still, maybe he can get my ball. I'll go ahead and say yes," and she said aloud, "Yes, for all I care. Just bring me back my golden ball, and I'll promise everything." "Oh, yes," she said, "I promise all of that to you if you will just bring the ball back to me." But she thought, "What is this stupid frog trying to say? He just sits here in the water with his own kind and croaks. He cannot be a companion to a human." The frog stuck his head under the water and dove to the bottom. As soon as the frog heard her say "yes" he stuck his head under and dove to the bottom. He returned a short time later with the golden ball in his mouth and threw it onto the land. He paddled back up a short time later with the golden ball in his mouth and threw it onto the grass. When the princess saw her ball once again, she rushed toward it, picked it up, and was so happy to have it in her hand again, that she could think of nothing else than to run home with it. The princess was filled with joy when she saw her beautiful plaything once again, picked it up, and ran off. The frog called after her, "Wait, princess, take me with you like you promised," but she paid no attention to him. "Wait, wait," called the frog, "take me along. I cannot run as fast as you." But what did it help him, that he croaked out after her as loudly as he could? She paid no attention to him, but instead hurried home and soon forgot the poor frog, who had to return again to his well. The next day the princess was sitting at her table when she heard something coming up the marble steps: plip, plop. The next day the princess was sitting at the table with the king and all the people of the court, and was eating from her golden plate when something came creeping up the marble steps: plip, plop, plip, plop. Then there came a knock at the door, and a voice called out, "Princess, youngest, open the door for me!" As soon as it reached the top, there came a knock at the door, and a voice called out, "Princess, youngest, open the door for me!" She ran and opened the door. It was the frog, whom she had put completely out of her mind. She ran to see who was outside. She opened the door, and the frog was sitting there. Frightened, she slammed the door shut and returned to the table. Frightened, she slammed the door shut and returned to the table. The king saw that her heart was pounding and asked, "Why are you afraid?" The king saw that her heart was pounding and asked, "My child, why are you afraid? Is there a giant outside the door who wants to get you?" "There is a disgusting frog out there," she said, "who got my golden ball out of the water. I promised him that he could be my companion, but I didn't think that he could leave his water, but now he is just outside the door and wants to come in." "Oh, no," she answered. "it is a disgusting frog." "What does the frog want from you?" "Oh, father dear, yesterday when I was sitting near the well in the forest and playing, my golden ball fell into the water. And because I was crying so much, the frog brought it back, and because he insisted, I promised him that he could be my companion, but I didn't think that he could leave his water. But now he is just outside the door and wants to come in." Just then there came a second knock at the door, and a voice called out: Just then there came a second knock at the door, and a voice called out: Youngest daughter of the king, Open up the door for me, Don't you know what yesterday, You said to me down by the well? Youngest daughter of the king, Open up the door for me, Youngest daughter of the king, Open up the door for me, Don't you know what yesterday, You said to me down by the well? Youngest daughter of the king, Open up the door for me, The king said, "What you have promised, you must keep. Go and let the frog in." The king said, "What you have promised, you must keep. Go and let the frog in." She obeyed, and the frog hopped in, then followed her up to her chair. She went and opened the door, and the frog hopped in, then followed her up to her chair. After she had sat down again, he called out, "Lift me up onto your chair and let me sit next to you." He sat there and called out, "Lift me up next to you." The princess did not want to, but the king commanded her to do it. She hesitated, until finally the king commanded her to do it. When the frog was seated next to her he said, "Now push your golden plate closer. I want to eat from it." When the frog was seated next to her he said, "Now push your golden plate closer, so we can eat together." She had to do this as well. She did it, but one could see that she did not want to. When he had eaten all he wanted, he said, "Now I am tired and want to sleep. Take me to your room, make your bed, so that we can lie in it together." The frog enjoyed his meal, but for her every bite stuck in her throat. Finally he said, "I have eaten all I want and am tired. Now carry me to your room and make your bed so that we can go to sleep." The princess was horrified when she heard that. She was afraid of the cold frog and did not dare to even touch him, and yet he was supposed to lie next to her in her bed; she began to cry and didn't want to at all. The princess began to cry and was afraid of the cold frog and did not dare to even touch him, and yet he was supposed to sleep in her beautiful, clean bed. Then the king became angry and commanded her to do what she had promised. The king became angry and said, "You should not despise someone who has helped you in time of need." There was no helping it; she had to do what her father wanted, but in her heart she was bitterly angry. She picked up the frog with two fingers, carried him to her room, and climbed into bed, but instead of laying him next to herself, she threw him bang! against the wall. She picked him up with two fingers, carried him upstairs, and set him in a corner. As she was lying in bed, he came creeping up to her and said, "I am tired, and I want to sleep as well as you do. Pick me up or I'll tell your father." With that she became bitterly angry and threw him against the wall with all her might. "Now you will leave me in peace, you disgusting frog!" "Now you will have your peace, you disgusting frog!" But when the frog came down onto the bed, he was a handsome young prince, and he was her dear companion, and she held him in esteem as she had promised, and they fell asleep together with pleasure. But when he fell down, he was not a frog, but a prince with beautiful friendly eyes. And he was now, according to her father's will, her dear companion and husband. He told her how he had been enchanted by a wicked witch, and that she alone could have rescued him from the well, and that tomorrow they would go together to his kingdom. Then they fell asleep. The next morning the prince's faithful Heinrich arrived in a splendid carriage drawn by eight horses, decorated with feathers and glistening with gold. The next morning, just as the sun was waking them, a carriage pulled up, drawn by eight horses. They had white ostrich feathers on their heads and were outfitted with chains of gold. At the rear stood the young king's servant, faithful Heinrich. He had been so saddened by the prince's transformation that he had had to place three iron bands around his heart to keep it from bursting in sorrow. Faithful Heinrich had been so saddened by his master's transformation into a frog that he had had to place three iron bands around his heart to keep it from bursting in grief and sorrow. The prince climbed into the carriage with the princess. His faithful servant stood at the rear to drive them to his kingdom. The carriage was to take the king back to his kingdom. Faithful Heinrich lifted them both inside and took his place at the rear. He was filled with joy over the redemption. After they had gone a short distance, the prince heard a loud crack from behind. After they had gone a short distance, the prince heard a crack from behind, as though something had broken. He turned around and said: "Heinrich, the carriage is breaking apart." "No, my lord, the carriage it's not, But one of the bands surrounding my heart, That suffered such great pain, When you were sitting in the well, When you were a frog." He turned around and said: "Heinrich, the carriage is breaking apart." "No, my lord, the carriage it's not, But one of the bands surrounding my heart, That suffered such great pain, When you were sitting in the well, When you were a frog." Once again, and then once again the prince heard a cracking sound and thought that the carriage was breaking apart, but it was the bands springing from faithful Heinrich's heart because his master was now redeemed and happy. Once again, and then once again the prince heard a cracking sound and thought that the carriage was breaking apart, but it was the bands springing from faithful Heinrich's heart because his master was now redeemed and happy. Links Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Der Froschkönig von den Br&uumldern Grimm. A comparison of the versions of 1812 and 1857, in the original German. Frog Kings: Folktales of Aarne-Thompson Type 440 . The Grimm Brothers' Home Page . Revised November 30, 2005. Der Froschkönig oder der eiserne Heinrich Der Froschkönig oder Der eiserne Heinrich von den Brüdern Grimm Ein Vergleich der Fassungen von 1812 und 1857 zusammengestellt von D. L. Ashliman Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts . The Frogking by the brothers Grimm . A comparison of the versions of 1812 and 1857, in English translation. Grimm Brothers Home Page . Erstausgabe 1812 Ausgabe letzter Hand 1857 Der Froschkönig oder der eiserne Heinrich Der Froschkönig oder der eiserne Heinrich Es war einmal eine Königstochter, die ging hinaus in den Wald und setzte sich an einen kühlen Brunnen. In den alten Zeiten, wo das Wünschen noch geholfen hat, lebte ein König, dessen Töchter waren alle schön, aber die jüngste war so schön, daß die Sonne selber, die doch so vieles gesehen hat, sich verwunderte, sooft sie ihr ins Gesicht schien. Nahe hei dem Schlosse des Königs lag ein großer dunkler Wald, und in dem Walde unter einer alten Linde war ein Brunnen; wenn nun der Tag recht heiß war, so ging das Königskind hinaus in den Wald und setzte sich an den Rand des kühlen Brunnens; Sie hatte eine goldene Kugel, die war ihr liebstes Spielwerk, die warf sie in die Höhe und fing sie wieder in der Luft und hatte ihre Lust daran. und wenn sie Langeweile hatte, so nahm sie eine goldene Kugel, warf sie in die Höhe und fing sie wieder; und das war ihr liebstes Spielwerk. Einmal war die Kugel gar hoch geflogen, sie hatte die Hand schon ausgestreckt und die Finger gekrümmt, um sie wieder zu fangen, da schlug sie neben vorbei auf die Erde, rollte und rollte und geradezu in das Wasser hinein. Nun trug es sich einmal zu, daß die goldene Kugel der Königstochter nicht in ihr Händchen fiel, das sie in die Höhe gehalten hatte, sondern vorbei auf die Erde schlug und geradezu ins Wasser hineinrollte. Die Königstochter blickte ihr erschrocken nach, der Brunnen war aber so tief, daß kein Grund zu sehen war. Die Königstochter folgte ihr mit den Augen nach, aber die Kugel verschwand, und der Brunnen war tief, so tief, daß man keinen Grund sah. Da fing sie an jämmerlich zu weinen und zu klagen: "ach! wenn ich meine Kugel wieder hätte, da wollt' ich alles darum geben, meine Kleider, meine Edelgesteine, meine Perlen und was es auf der Welt nur wär'." Da fing sie an zu weinen und weinte immer lauter und konnte sich gar nicht trösten. Wie sie so klagte, steckte ein Frosch seinen Kopf aus dem Wasser und sprach: "Königstochter, was jammerst du so erbärmlich?" -- Und wie sie so klagte, rief ihr jemand zu: "Was hast du vor, Königstochter, du schreist ja, daß sich ein Stein erbarmen möchte." "Ach", sagte sie, "du garstiger Frosch, was kannst du mir helfen! meine goldne Kugel ist mir in den Brunnen gefallen." -- Sie sah sich um, woher die Stimme käme, da erblickte sie einen Frosch, der seinen dicken häßlichen Kopf aus dem Wasser streckte. "Ach, du bist's, alter Wasserpatscher", sagte sie, "ich weine über meine goldene Kugel, die mir in den Brunnen hinabgefallen ist." Der Frosch sprach: "deine Perlen, deine Edelgesteine und deine Kleider, die verlang ich nicht, aber wenn du mich zum Gesellen annehmen willst, und ich soll neben dir sitzen und von deinem goldnen Tellerlein essen und in deinem Bettlein schlafen und du willst mich werth und lieb haben, so will ich dir deine Kugel wiederbringen." "Sei still und weine nicht", antwortete der Frosch, "ich kann wohl Rat schaffen, aber was gibst du mir, wenn ich dein Spielwerk wieder heraufhole?" "Was du haben willst, lieber Frosch", sagte sie, "meine Kleider, meine Perlen und Edelsteine, auch noch die goldene Krone, die ich trage." Der Frosch antwortete: "Deine Kleider, deine Perlen und Edelsteine, und deine goldene Krone, die mag ich nicht; aber wenn du mich liebhaben willst, und ich soll dein Geselle und Spielkamerad sein, an deinem Tischlein neben dir sitzen, von deinem goldenen Tellerlein essen, aus deinem Becherlein trinken, in deinem Bettlein schlafen: wenn du mir das versprichst, so will ich hinuntersteigen und dir die goldene Kugel wieder heraufholen." Die Königstochter dachte, was schwätzt der einfältige Frosch wohl, der muß doch in seinem Wasser bleiben, vielleicht aber kann er mir meine Kugel holen, da will ich nur ja sagen; und sagte: "ja meinetwegen, schaff mir nur erst die goldne Kugel wieder, es soll dir alles versprochen seyn." "Ach ja", sagte sie, "ich verspreche dir alles, was du willst, wenn du mir nur die Kugel wiederbringst." Sie dachte aber: Was der einfältige Frosch schwätzt, der sitzt im Wasser bei seinesgleichen und quakt und kann keines Menschen Geselle sein. Der Frosch steckte seinen Kopf unter das Wasser und tauchte hinab, es dauerte auch nicht lange, so kam er wieder in die Höhe, hatte die Kugel im Maul und warf sie ans Land. Der Frosch, als er die Zusage erhalten hatte, tauchte seinen Kopf unter, sank hinab, und über ein Weilchen kam er wieder heraufgerudert, hatte die Kugel im Maul und warf sie ins Gras. Wie die Königstochter ihre Kugel wieder erblickte, lief sie geschwind darauf zu, hob sie auf und war so froh, sie wieder in ihrer Hand zu halten, daß sie an nichts weiter gedachte, sondern damit nach Hause eilte. Die Königstochter war voll Freude, als sie ihr schönes Spielwerk wieder erblickte, hob es auf und sprang damit fort. Der Frosch rief ihr nach: "warte, Königstochter, und nimm mich mit, wie du versprochen hast"; aber sie hörte nicht darauf. "Warte, warte", rief der Frosch, "nimm mich mit, ich kann nicht so laufen wie du." Aber was half ihm, daß er ihr sein quak, quak so laut nachschrie, als er konnte! Sie hörte nicht darauf, eilte nach Haus und hatte bald den armen Frosch vergessen, der wieder in seinen Brunnen hinabsteigen mußte. Am andern Tage saß die Königstochter an der Tafel, da hörte sie etwas die Marmortreppe heraufkommen, plitsch, platsch! bald darauf klopfte es auch an der Thüre und rief: "Königstochter, jüngste, mach mir auf!" Am andern Tage, als sie mit dem König und allen Hofleuten sich zur Tafel gesetzt hatte und von ihrem goldenen Tellerlein aß, da kam, plitsch, platsch, plitsch platsch, etwas die Marmortreppe heraufgekrochen, und als es oben angelangt war, klopfte es an der Tür und rief: "Königstochter, jüngste, mach mir auf." Sie lief hin und machte die Thüre auf, da war es der Frosch, an den sie nicht mehr gedacht hatte; ganz erschrocken warf sie die Thüre hastig zu und setzte sich wieder an die Tafel. Sie lief und wollte sehen, wer draußen wäre, als sie aber aufmachte, so saß der Frosch davor. Da warf sie die Tür hastig zu, setzte sich wieder an den Tisch, und war ihr ganz angst. Der König aber sah, daß ihr das Herz klopfte, und sagte: "warum fürchtest du dich?" -- Der König sah wohl, daß ihr das Herz gewaltig klopfte, und sprach: "Mein Kind, was fürchtest du dich, steht etwa ein Riese vor der Tür und will dich holen?" "Draußen ist ein garstiger Frosch", sagte sie, "der hat mir meine goldne Kugel aus dem Wasser geholt, ich versprach ihm dafür, er sollte mein Geselle werden, ich glaubte aber nimmermehr, daß er aus seinem Wasser heraus könnte, nun ist er draußen vor der Thür und will herein." "Ach nein", antwortete sie, "es ist kein Riese, sondern ein garstiger Frosch." "Was will der Frosch von dir?" "Ach lieber Vater, als ich gestern im Wald bei dem Brunnen saß und spielte, da fiel meine goldene Kugel ins Wasser. Und weil ich so weinte, hat sie der Frosch wieder heraufgeholt, und weil er es durchaus verlangte, so versprach ich ihm, er sollte mein Geselle werden, ich dachte aber nimmermehr, daß er aus seinem Wasser heraus könnte. Nun ist er draußen und will zu mir herein." Indem klopfte es zum zweitenmal und rief: Indem klopfte es zum zweitenmal und rief: "Königstochter, jüngste, mach mir auf, weißt du nicht, was gestern du zu mir gesagt bei dem kühlen Brunnenwasser? Königstochter, jüngste, mach mir auf." "Königstochter, jüngste, mach mir auf, weißt du nicht, was gestern du zu mir gesagt bei dem kühlen Brunnenwasser? Königstochter, jüngste, mach mir auf." Der König sagte: "was du versprochen hast, mußt du halten, geh und mach dem Frosch die Thüre auf." Da sagte der König: "Was du versprochen hast, das mußt du auch halten; geh nur und mach ihm auf." Sie gehorchte und der Frosch hüpfte herein, und ihr auf dem Fuße immer nach, bis zu ihrem Stuhl, Sie ging und öffnete die Türe, da hüpfte der Frosch herein, ihr immer auf dem Fuße nach, bis zu ihrem Stuhl. und als sie sich wieder gesetzt hatte, da rief er: "heb mich herauf auf einen Stuhl neben dich." Da saß er und rief: "Heb mich herauf zu dir." Die Königstochter wollte nicht, aber der König befahl es ihr. Sie zauderte, bis es endlich der König befahl. Wie der Frosch oben war, sprach er: "nun schieb dein goldenes Tellerlein näher, ich will mit dir davon essen." Als der Frosch erst auf dem Stuhl war, wollte er auf den Tisch, und als er da saß, sprach er: "Nun schieb mir dein goldenes Tellerlein näher, damit wir zusammen essen." Das mußte sie auch thun. Das tat sie zwar, aber man sah wohl, daß sie's nicht gerne tat. Wie er sich satt gegessen hatte, sagte er: "nun bin ich müd' und will schlafen, bring mich hinauf in dein Kämmerlein, mach dein Bettlein zurecht, da wollen wir uns hineinlegen." Der Frosch ließ sich's gut schmecken, aber ihr blieb fast jedes Bißlein im Halse. Endlich sprach er: "Ich habe mich satt gegessen und bin müde, nun trag mich in dein Kämmerlein und mach dein seiden Bettlein zurecht, da wollen wir uns schlafen legen." Die Königstochter erschrack, wie sie das hörte, sie fürchtete sich vor dem kalten Frosch, sie getraute sich nicht ihn anzurühren und nun sollte er bei ihr in ihrem Bett liegen, sie fing an zu weinen und wollte durchaus nicht. Die Königstochter fing an zu weinen und fürchtete sich vor dem kalten Frosch, den sie nicht anzurühren getraute und der nun in ihrem schönen reinen Bettlein schlafen sollte. Da ward der König zornig und befahl ihr bei seiner Ungnade, zu thun, was sie versprochen habe. Der König aber ward zornig und sprach: "Wer dir geholfen hat, als du in der Not warst, den sollst du hernach nicht verachten." Es half nichts, sie mußte thun, wie ihr Vater wollte, aber sie war bitterböse in ihrem Herzen. Sie packte den Frosch mit zwei Fingern und trug ihn hinauf in ihre Kammer, legte sich ins Bett und statt ihn neben sich zu legen, warf sie ihn bratsch! an die Wand; Da packte sie ihn mit zwei Fingern, trug ihn hinauf und setzte ihn in eine Ecke. Als sie aber im Bett lag, kam er gekrochen und sprach: "Ich bin müde, ich will schlafen so gut wie du: heb mich herauf, oder ich sag's deinem Vater." Da ward sie erst bitterböse, holte ihn herauf und warf ihn aus allen Kräften wider die Wand. "da nun wirst du mich in Ruh lassen, du garstiger Frosch!" "Nun wirst du Ruhe haben, du garstiger Frosch." Aber der Frosch fiel nicht todt herunter, sondern wie er herab auf das Bett kam, da wars ein schöner junger Prinz. Der was nun ihr lieber Geselle, und sie hielt ihn werth wie sie versprochen hatte, und sie schliefen vergnügt zusammen ein. Als er aber herabfiel, war er kein Frosch, sondern ein Königssohn mit schönen und freundlichen Augen. Der war nun nach ihres Vaters Willen ihr lieber Geselle und Gemahl. Da erzählte er ihr, er wäre von einer bösen Hexe verwünscht worden, und niemand hätte ihn aus dem Brunnen erlösen können als sie allein, und morgen wollten sie zusammen in sein Reich gehen. Dann schliefen sie ein, Am Morgen aber kam ein prächtiger Wagen mit acht Pferden bespannt, mit Federn geputzt und goldschimmernd, dabei war der treue Heinrich des Prinzen, und am andern Morgen, als die Sonne sie aufweckte, kam ein Wagen herangefahren, mit acht weißen Pferden bespannt, die hatten weiße Straußfedern auf dem Kopf und gingen in goldenen Ketten, und hinten stand der Diener des jungen Königs, das war der treue Heinrich. der hatte sich so betrübt über die Verwandlung desselben, daß er drei eiserne Bande um sein Herz legen mußte, damit es vor Traurigkeit nicht zerspringe. Der treue Heinrich hatte sich so betrübt, als sein Herr war in einen Frosch verwandelt worden, daß er drei eiserne Bande hatte um sein Herz legen lassen, damit es ihm nicht vor Weh und Traurigkeit zerspränge. Der Prinz setzte sich mit der Königstochter in den Wagen, der treue Dieber aber stand hinten uaf, so wollten sie in sein Reich fahren. Der Wagen aber sollte den jungen König in sein Reich abholen; der treue Heinrich hob beide hinein, stellte sich wieder hinten auf und war voller Freude über die Erlösung. Und wie sie ein Stück Weges gefahren waren, hörte der Prinz hinter sich ein lautes Krachen, da drehte er sich um und rief: Und als sie ein Stück Wegs gefahren waren, hörte der Königssohn, daß es hinter ihm krachte, als wäre etwas zerbrochen. Da drehte er sich um und rief: "Heinrich, der Wagen bricht!" "Nein, Herr, der Wagen nicht, es ist ein Band von meinem Herzen, das da lag in großen Schmerzen, als Ihr in dem Brunnen saßt, als Ihr eine Fretsche (Frosch) was't (wart)." "Heinrich, der Wagen bricht." "Nein, Herr, der Wagen nicht, es ist ein Band von meinem Herzen, das da lag in großen Schmerzen, als Ihr in dem Brunnen saßt, als Ihr eine Fretsche (Frosch) wast (wart)." Noch einmal und noch einmal hörte es der Prinz krachen, und meinte: der Wagen bräche, aber es waren nur die Bande, die vom Herzen des treuen Heinrich absprangen, weil sein Herr erlöst und glücklich war. Noch einmal und noch einmal krachte es auf dem Weg, und der Königssohn meinte immer, der Wagen bräche, und es waren doch nur die Bande, die vom Herzen des treuen Heinrich absprangen, weil sein Herr erlöst und glücklich war. Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. The Frog King by the brothers Grimm. A comparison of the versions of 1812 and 1857, in English translation. Stand: 30. November 2005. The Two Frogs: Fables of Types 278A, 278A*, and Related Tales The Two Frogs Fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Types 278A, 278A*, and Related Tales edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2020 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Two Neighbour-Frogs (Aesop -- Roger L'Estrange). The Two Frogs Who Were Neighbours (Aesop -- George Fyler Townsend). Two Frogs That Wanted Water (Aesop -- Roger L'Estrange). The Two Frogs (Aesop -- George Fyler Townsend). How a Tortoise Came to Grief Because He Loved His Home Too Much ( The Jataka ). The Three Fishes ( The Masnavi ). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Two Neighbour-Frogs Aesop There were two neighbour-frogs. One of them liv'd in a pond, and the other in the highway hard-by. The pond-frog, finding the water begin to fail upon the road, would fain have gotten t'other frog over to her in the pool, where she might have been safe; but she was wonted to the place, she said, and would not remove. And what was the end on't now, but the wheel of a cart drove over her a while after, and crush'd her to pieces. The Moral: Some people are so listless and slothful that they'd rather lie still and die in a ditch, then stir one finger to help themselves out on't. Source (books.google.com): Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists with Morals and Reflexions (London, 1692), fable 165, p. 138 . Source (Internet Archive): Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists with Morals and Reflexions (London, 1692), fable 165, p. 138 . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 278A. Perry index 69. Return to the table of contents . u The Two Frogs Who Were Neighbours Aesop Two frogs were neighbours. The one inhabited a deep pond, far removed from public view; the other lived in a gully containing little water, and traversed by a country road. He that lived in the pond warned his friend, and entreated him to change his residence, and to come and live with him, saying that he would enjoy greater safety from danger and more abundant food. The other refused, saying that he felt it so very hard to remove from a place to which he had become accustomed. A few days afterwards a heavy wagon passed through the gully, and crushed him to death under its wheels. A wilful man will have his way to his own hurt. Source (books.google.com): George Fyler Townsend, Three Hundred Æsop's Fables , literally translated from the Greek (London: George Routledge and Sons, 1867), p. 134 . Source (Internet Archive): George Fyler Townsend, Three Hundred Æsop's Fables , literally translated from the Greek (London: George Routledge and Sons, 1867), p. 134 . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 278A. Perry index 69. Return to the table of contents . Two Frogs That Wanted Water Aesop Upon the drying up of a lake, two frogs were forc'd to quit, and to seek for water elsewhere. As they were upon the search, they discover'd a very deep well. Come (says one to t'other), let us e'en go down here, without looking any further. You say well, says her companion, but what if the water should fail us here too? How shall we get out again? The Moral: 'Tis good advice to look before we leape. Source (books.google.com): Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists with Morals and Reflexions (London, 1692), fable 142, p. 129 . Source (Internet Archive): Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists with Morals and Reflexions (London, 1692), pp. xxx . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 278A*. Perry index 43. Return to the table of contents . The Two Frogs Aesop Two frogs dwelt in the same pool. The pool being dried up under the summer's heat, they left it, and set out together for another home. As they went along they chanced to pass a deep well, amply supplied with water, on seeing which one of the frogs said to the other, "Let us descend and make our abode in this well. It will furnish us with shelter and food." The other replied with greater caution, "But suppose the water should fail us, how can we get out again from so great a depth?" Do nothing without a regard to the consequences. Source (books.google.com): George Fyler Townsend, Three Hundred Æsop's Fables , literally translated from the Greek (London: George Routledge and Sons, 1867), p. 104 . Source (Internet Archive): George Fyler Townsend, Three Hundred Æsop's Fables , literally translated from the Greek (London: George Routledge and Sons, 1867), p. 104 . Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 278A*. Perry index 43. Return to the table of contents . How a Tortoise Came to Grief Because He Loved His Home Too Much The Jataka Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta was born in a village as a potter's son. He plied the potter's trade, and had a wife and family to support. At that time there lay a great natural lake close by the great river of Benares. When there was much water, river and lake were one; but when the water was low, they were apart. Now fish and tortoises know by instinct when the year will be rainy and when there will be a drought. So at the time of our story the fish and tortoises which lived in that lake knew there would be a drought; and when the two were one water, they swam out of the lake into the river. But there was one tortoise that would not go into the river, because, said he, "Here I was born, and here I have grown up, and here is my parents' home; leave it I cannot!" Then in the hot season the water all dried up. He dug a hole and buried himself, just in the place where the Bodhisatta was used to come for clay. There the Bodhisatta came to get some clay; with a big spade he dug down, till he cracked the tortoise' shell, turning him out on the ground as though he were a large piece of clay. In his agony the creature thought, "Here I am, dying, all because I was too fond of my home to leave it!" And in the words of these verses following he made his moan: Here was I born, and here I lived; my refuge was the clay; And now the clay has played me false in a most grievous way; Thee, thee I call, O Bhaggava; hear what I have to say! Go where thou canst find happiness, where'er the place may be; Forest or village, there the wise both home and birthplace see; Go where there's life; nor stay at home for death to master thee. So he went on and on, talking to the Bodhisatta, till he died. The Bodhisatta picked him up, and collecting all the villagers addressed them thus: Look at this tortoise. When the other fish and tortoises went into the great river, he was too fond of home to go with them, and buried himself in the place where I get my clay. Then as I was digging for clay, I broke his shell with my big spade, and turned him out on the ground in the belief that he was a large lump of clay. Then he called to mind what he had done, lamented his fate in two verses of poetry, and expired. So you see he came to his end because he was too fond of his home. Take care not to be like this tortoise. Don't say to yourselves, "I have sight, I have hearing, I have smell, I have taste, I have touch, I have a son, I have a daughter, I have numbers of men and maids for my service, I have precious gold." Do not cleave to these things with craving and desire. Each being passes through three stages of existence." Thus did he exhort the crowd with all a Buddha's skill. The discourse was bruited abroad all over India, and for full seven thousand years it was remembered. All the crowd abode by his exhortation; and gave alms and did good until at last they went to swell the hosts of heaven. Source (books.google.com): The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, translated by W. H. D. Rouse, vol. 2 (Cambridge: At the University Press, 1895), no. 178, pp. 55-56 . Source (Internet Archive): The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, translated by W. H. D. Rouse, vol. 2 (Cambridge: At the University Press, 1895), no. 178, pp. 55-56 . Link to additional Jataka Tales . Return to the table of contents . The Three Fishes The Masnavi There was in a secluded place a lake, which was fed by a running stream, and in this lake were three fishes, one very wise, the second half wise, and the third foolish. One day some fishermen passed by that lake, and having espied the fish, hastened home to fetch their nets. The fish also saw the fishermen and were sorely disquieted. The very wise fish, without a minute's delay, quitted the lake and took refuge in the running stream which communicated with it, and thus escaped the impending danger. The half wise fish delayed doing anything till the fishermen actually made their appearance with their nets. He then floated upon ths surface of the water, pretending to be dead, and the fisherman took him up and threw him into the stream, and by this devise he saved his life. But the foolish fish did nothing but swim wildly about, and was taken and killed by the fishermen. Source (Internet Archive): Masnavi i Ma'Navi: The Spiritual Couplets of Maulána Jalálu-'d-Dín Muhammad i Rúmí , translated and abridged by E. H. Whinfield (London: Trübner and Company, 1887), pp. 198-99 . Link to the Wikipedia articla on The Masnavi , a Persian poem written between about 1258 and 1273. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 30, 2020. Gambara and the Longbeards (Langobards) Gambara and the Longbeards (Langobards) edited and translated by D. L. Ashliman © 1997-2001 The Vinils, increased in the islands of Scandinavia to such an extent that they could no longer live there together. Thus they divided themselves into three groups and drew lots. When the lots were cast and a third of the Vinils had to leave their homeland and seek new lives abroad, they were led by two brothers Ibor and Ayo, energetic young men. Their mother, whose name was Gambara, was an intelligent and clever woman, whose wise counsel they heeded in time of need. In their search for a country where they might settle they came to the region called Schoringen, and remained there several years. The Vandals, a rugged and warlike people, lived nearby. They heard of their arrival and sent messengers to them, proclaiming that the Vinils either would have to pay tribute to the Vandals or face them in battle. Ibor and Ayo sought counsel from their mother Gambara, and they all agreed that it would be better to fight for their freedom than to contaminate it with tribute, and they communicated this to the Vandals. Now the Vinils were brave and powerful warriors, but they were few in number. The Vandals approached Wodan, beseeching from him victory over the Vinils. The god answered: "I will grant victory to the first ones I see at sunrise." Gambara, on the other hand, approached Frea, Wodan's wife, and beseeched from her victory for the Vinils. Frea responded with the advice that the Vinil women should untie their hair and arrange it across their face like a beard, and that they should thus accompany their men in the early morning to the window from which Wodan customarily looked out. They did as they were advised, and at sunrise, Wodan, upon looking out, shouted: "Who are these Longbeards?" Frea replied: "To the ones you give a name, you must also give victory." And thus Wodan gave them the victory, and from that time forth the Vinils have been called Longbeards (Langobards). Ultimately they founded a permanent settlement in Italy. Source: Abstracted from Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Deutsche Sagen (1816/1818), nos. 388, 390. The Grimms' source is Paulus Diaconus (ca. 725-ca. 799). This is one of the few ancient stories about Germanic gods to survive outside of Scandinavia. Frea is better known as Frigg in Scandinavian sources. Wodan is better known as Odin in Scandinavian sources. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 25, 2001. Gefion's Home Page Gefion's Home Page assembled by D. L. Ashliman University of Pittsburgh © 1998-2023 Return to folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Gefion, the Norse Goddess of Unmarried Women According to The Prose Edda of Snorri Sturluson, Gefion (also spelled Gefjon) was the fourth goddess of the Æsir, following Frigg (the wife of Odin), Sága, and Eir (the best of physicians). Gefion, we are told, was a virgin, and was thus served by women who died unmarried. This statement, however, is contradicted in The Prose Edda itself as well as in other sources. As you will read in the two accounts below, early in her career Gefion had four oxen-sons by a giant. Later she married Odin's son Skjold and settled in Leire, Denmark. Further complicating Gefion's story is the fact that "Gefn" is one of the many names given to Freyja, the Norse goddess of love and procreation. "Gefn" may be a shortened form of "Gefion," and thus Gefion may be an alter ego of Freyja, who in turn may be an alter ego of Frigg, the wife of Odin. Gefion creates the Island of Zealand From The Prose Edda of Snorri Sturluson King Gylfi ruled the lands that are now called Sweden. It is told of him that he gave a ploughland in his kingdom, the size four oxen could plough in a day and a night, to a beggar-woman as a reward for the way she had entertained him. This woman, however, was of the family of the Æsir. Her name was Gefion. From the north of Giantland she took four oxen and yoked them to a plough, but those were her sons by a giant. The plough went in so hard and deep that it loosened the land and the oxen dragged it westwards into the sea, stopping in a certain sound. There Gefion set the land for good and gave it a name, calling it Zealand. But the place where the land had been torn up was afterwards a lake. It is now known in Sweden as "The Lake." And there are as many bays in "The Lake" as there are headlands in Zealand. As the poet Bragi the Old says: Gefion dragged with laughter from Gylfi liberal prince What made Denmark larger, so that beasts of draught the oxen reeked with sweat; four heads they had, eight eyes to boot who went before broad island-pasture ripped away as loot. Notes: Source: Snorri Sturluson, "The Deluding of Gylfi" from The Prose Edda (Cambridge, England: Bowes & Bowes Publishers, 1954), p. 29. Zealand, also spelled Sealand ( Sjælland in Danish), is the island where Copenhagen is located. Sweden's largest lake, Lake Vänern, does indeed resemble the island of Sjælland, both in size and in shape, as you can see from a map of the Baltic Sea Area. Copenhagen's largest monument is the Gefion Fountain ( Gefionspringvandet ), located near the statue of H. C. Andersen's "Little Mermaid." The fountain's statues depict a woman guiding a plow being drawn by four great oxen, with water spurting forth on all sides. Click here for a photograph of the Gefion Fountain . From the Ynglinga Saga of Snorri Sturluson When Odin looked into the future and worked magic, he knew that his offspring would dwell and till in the northern parts of the earth. He, therefore, set his brothers Ve and Vili over Asagarth [in the land of the Turks] and he himself went away and with him went all the priests and many of his folk. First he went to Gardarik [Russia] and from there he went south to Saxland [Germany]. He had many sons; he won kingdoms far over Saxland and set his sons as rulers over them. From there he fared north to the sea and found himself a dwelling on an island which is now called Odensö in Fyn [Funen]. Then he sent Gefion northeast over the sound to look for land; she then came to Gylfi, who gave her a ploughland. Next she went to a giant's home and there begot four sons with a giant. She shaped them in the likeness of oxen, yoked them to a plough and broke up the land into the sea westwards opposite Odensö; it was called Selund [an old spelling for Zealand], and there she dwelt afterwards. Skjold, Odin's son, took her to wife and they lived in Leidra. There where she ploughed is now a lake or sea called Löginn; the fjords in Löginn answer to the nesses in Selund. Thus said Bragi the Old: Gefion drew with gladness From the gold-rich Gylfi Denmark's new increase (So that it reeked from the beasts). The oxen bore eight eyes And four heads. There they went forth, Far over Vinö's bay. Notes: Source: Snorre [Snorri] Sturlason, Heimskringla; or, the Lives of the Norse Kings, edited with notes by Erling Monsen and translated into English with the assistance of A. H. Smith (Cambridge, England: W. Heffer & Sons, 1932), pp. 3-4. Odin's name is still carried by Fyn's most important city, Odense, the birthplace of Hans Christian Andersen. Leidre, also spelled Leire or Lejre is near Roskilde on the island of Zealand. Today it is the site of a reconstructed iron age village. Odin's son Skjold who married Gefion is said to be the founder of the Danish Skjoldung royal dynasty and is identified with Scyld Sceafing mentioned in Beowulf. Return to The top of Gefion's Home Page . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 16, 2010. Haunted by the Ghost of a Murdered Child Haunted by the Ghost of a Murdered Child migratory legends of type 4025 trnaslated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2022 Contents Mother Mine, in the Fold, Fold (Iceland). I Should Have Gotten Married (Iceland). The Child Murderer (Denmark). The Child Phantom (Sweden). Short-Hoggers o' Whittinghame (Scotland). Fine Flowers in the Valley (Scotland). Lady Anne (Scotland). The Infanticide Mother (England). The Crying Child (Poland). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Mother Mine, in the Fold, Fold Iceland A young woman who lived on a farm became pregnant. After giving birth to the child she set it out to die of exposure, not an uncommon act in this country before it became punishable by severe penalties. Now one day it happened that the young woman was invited to a dancing party. However, she had no good clothes, so she stayed at home in a sour mood. That evening, while milking the ewes in the fold, she complained aloud that for the want of a proper dress she could not go to the party. She had scarcely spoken when she heard the following song: Mother mine, in the fold, fold You need not be so sad, sad. You can wear my castoff rags, So you can dance, And dance. The young woman who had let her child die of exposure thought that she recognized its voice. She took such a fright that she lost her mind and remained insane the rest of her life. Source (books.google.com): Jón Árnason, "Móðir mín, í kví, kví," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 225 . Source (Internet Archive): Jón Árnason, Íslenzkar Þjóþsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 225 . Retold by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. Return to the table of contents . I Should Have Gotten Married Iceland Once there was a woman who had a child whom she abandoned outside to die. Later she had another child, a little girl. She did not abandon this girl, who grew up until she was of marriageable age. A man asked her to marry him. Many people were at the wedding. In the middle of the festivities they heard someone chanting through the window: I should have come of age, And had a suitor too, I should have gotten married, Just like you. The guests thought that this verse was meant for the bride and that it was sung by her sister, who had been abandoned outside to die. Source (books.google.com): Jón Árnason, Íslenzkar Þjóþsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 225 . Source (Internet Archive): Jón Árnason, Íslenzkar Þjóþsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 225 . Retold by D. L. Ashliman. © 2016. This legend features prominently in Sér grefur gröf (2006), translated as My Soul to Take: A Novel of Iceland (2009), by Yrsa Sigurdardóttir. Return to the table of contents . The Child Murderer Denmark At the manor Serridslevgaard near Horsens there is a large brewer's kettle that used to sit in the wall. A wicked girl threw her infant child into this kettle. She had secretly given birth to the child. After this misdeed a child's cries were constantly heard from the kitchen, so that no one dared to be there. All the girls were interrogated about this, and the guilty one confessed. Thus she came to be punished for her guilt. Source (books.google.com): J. M. Thiele, "Barnemordersken," Danske Folkesagn , vol. 4 (Copenhagen: Andreas Seidelin, 1823), p. 96 . Source (Internet Archive): J. M. Thiele, "Barnemordersken," Danske Folkesagn , vol. 4 (Copenhagen: Andreas Seidelin, 1823), p. 96 . Return to the table of contents . The Child Phantom Sweden Many years ago there died on the estate of Sundshult, in the parish of Nafverstad, a child of illegitimate birth, which, because of this, was not christened and could not be accorded Christian burial, or a place in heaven, and whose spirit, therefore, was left to wander the earth, disturbing the rest and making night uncomfortable for the people of the neighborhood. One time, just before Christmas, the parish shoemaker, on his rounds, was detained at the house of a patron, and, having much work before him, he was still sewing late into the night, when he was unexpectedly startled from his employment by a little child appearing before him, which said, "Why do you sit there? Move aside." "For what?" asked the shoemaker. "Because I wish to dance," said the specter. "Dance away, then!" said the shoemaker. When the child had danced some time, it disappeared, but returned soon and said, "I will dance again, and I'll dance your light out for you." "No," said the shoemaker, "let the light alone. But who are you that you are here in this manner?" "I live under the lower stone of the steps to the porch." "Who put you there?" asked the shoemaker. "Watch when it dawns, and you will see my mother coming, wearing a red cap. But help me out of this, and I'll never dance again." This the shoemaker promised to do, and the specter vanished. The next day a servant girl from the neighboring estate came, who wore upon her head a red handkerchief. Digging was begun under the designated step, and in time the skeleton of a child was found, encased in a wooden tub. The body was that day taken to the churchyard, and the mother, who had destroyed her child, turned over to the authorities. Since then the child specter has danced no more. Source (books.google.com): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago, Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 105-106 . Source (Internet Archive): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago, Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 105-106 . Link to this legend in the original Swedish: Herman Hofberg, "Mylingen," Svenska Folksägner (Stockholm: Fr. Skoglunds Förlag, 1882)), pp. 91-92 . Return to the table of contents . Short-Hoggers o' Whittinghame Scotland It is little more than half a century since the good people of Whittinghame got happily quit of a ghost, which, in the shape of an "unchristened wean," had annoyed them for many years. An unnatural mother having murdered her child at a large tree, not far from the village, the ghost of the deceased was afterwards seen, on dark nights, running in a distracted manner between the said tree and the church-yard, and was occasionally heard to greet. It was understood by the villagers, that it was obliged thus to take the air, and bewail itself, on account of wanting a name -- no anonymous person, it seems, being able to get a proper footing in the other world. Nobody durst speak to the unhappy little spirit, out of a superstitious dread of dying immediately after; and, to all appearance, the village of Whittinghame was destined to be haunted till the end of time, for want of an exorcist. At length, however, it providentially happened, that a drunkard, one night, in reeling home, encountered it; and, being fearless in the strength of John Barleycorn, did not hesitate to address it in the same familiar style as if it had been one of his own flesh and blood fellow topers. "How's a' wi' ye this morning, Short-Hoggers?" cried the courageous villager, when the ghost immediately ran away, joyfully exclaiming: Oh weel's me noo, I've gotten a name; They ca' me Short-Hoggers o' Whittinghame! And, since that time, it has never been either seen or heard of. The name which the drunkard applied to it denotes that the ghost wore short stockings without feet, a proabable supposition, considering the long series of years during which it had walked. Our informant received this story, with the rhyme, from the lips of an old woman of Whittinghame, who had seen the ghost. Source (books.google.com): Robert Chambers, The Popular Rhymes of Scotland, with Illustrations: Chiefly Collected from Oral Sources (Edinburgh: William Hunter; London: James Duncan, 1826), pp. 9-11 . Source (Internet Archive): Robert Chambers, The Popular Rhymes of Scotland, with Illustrations: Chiefly Collected from Oral Sources (Edinburgh: William Hunter; London: James Duncan, 1826), pp. 9-11 . Return to the table of contents . Fine Flowers in the Valley Scotland She sat down below a thorn, Fine flowers in the valley, And there she has her sweet babe born, And green leaves they grow rarely. Smile na sae sweet, my bonie babe, Fine flowers in the valley, And ye smile sae sweet, ye'll smile me dead, And the green leaves they grow rarely. She's taen out her little penknife, Fine flowers in the valley, And twinn'd the sweet babe o' its life, And green leaves they grow rarely. She's howket a grave by the light o' the moon, Fine flowers in the valley, And there she's buried her sweet babe in, And green leaves they grow rarely. As she was going to the church, Fine flowers in the valley, She saw a sweet babe in the porch, And green leaves they grow rarely. O sweet babe and thou were mine, Fine flowers in the valley, I wad cleed thee in the silk so fine, And green leaves they grow rarely. O mother dear, when I was thine, Fine flowers in the valley, You did na prove to me sae kind, And green leaves they grow rarely. Source (books.google.com): James Johnson, The Scotts Musical Museum , vol. 4 (Edinburgh: James Johnson, 1792), no. 320, p. 331 . Source (Internet Archive): James Johnson, The Scotts Musical Museum , vol. 4 (Edinburgh: James Johnson, 1792), no. 320, p. 331 . Return to the table of contents . Lady Anne Scotland Fair Lady Anne sate in her bower, Down by the greenwood side, And the flowers did spring, and the birds did sing, 'Twas the pleasant May-day tide. But fair Lady Anne on Sir William call'd, With the tear grit in her ee, "O though thou be fause, may Heaven thee guard, In the wars ayont the sea!" -- Out of the wood came three bonnie boys, Upon the simmer's morn, And they did sing and play at the ba', As naked as they were born. "O seven lang years wad I sit here, Amang the frost and snaw, A' to hae but ane o' these bonnie boys, A playing at the ba'" -- Then up and spake the eldest boy, "Now listen, thou fair ladie, And ponder well the rede that I tell, Then make ye a choice of the three. "'Tis I am Peter, and this is Paul, And that ane, sae fair to see, But a twelve-month sinsyne to paradise came, To join with our companie." -- "O I will hae the snaw-white boy, The bonniest of the three." -- "And if I were thine, and in thy propine, O what wad ye do to me? " -- "'Tis I wad clead thee in silk and gowd, And nourice thee on my knee." -- "O mither! mither! when I was thine, Sic kindness I couldna see. "Beneath the turf, where now I stand, The fause nurse buried me; The cruel penknife sticks still in my heart, And I come not back to thee." -- Source (books.google.com): Francis James Child, English and Scottish Ballads , vol. 1 [comprising vols. 1 and 2] (Boston: Houghton, Osgood, and Company, 1880), pp. 262-64 . Source (Internet Archive): Francis James Child, English and Scottish Ballads , vol. 1 [comprising vols. 1 and 2] (Boston: Houghton, Osgood, and Company, 1880), pp. 262-64 . Return to the table of contents . The Infanticide Mother England In passing a cottage [in Northumberland] I remembered that an old woman had dwelt who was suspected of having caused the death of one of her children. I inquired of a person, a native of the village, who was with me, if he knew anything of the circumstance, and received from him the following account: I knew the woman, who is now where the Lord pleases, very well. She was the wife of a day-tale * man, and they had more small bairns than they could well provide for; and in harvest she used to go out a-shearing. One year, about the harvest time, she had a young bairn at the breast, which she thought was one too many; and that she might not be hindered of the shearing by staying at home with it, and that she might get rid of it altogether, she smothered it in the cradle. There was no public inquiry made, nor inquest held, but all her neighbours, especially the women folk, believed that the bairn was wilfully made away with, for she had the character of being a cold-hearted mother. She never did well, though she lived for nearly forty years afterwards. She fell into a low way, and was, at times, almost clean past herself. She was always at the worst about the time of the harvest moon; and would then often walk about the house, and sometimes go out and wander about the common, all night, moaning and greeting in a fearful way. I have many a time seen her holding her head atween her hands, rocking herself backwards and forwards on a low chair, groaning and sighing, and every now and then giving an awful sort of shriek, which folks, who knew her best, said was her way when she fancied that she heard the bairn cry out in the same way that it did when she was smooring it. About the harvest time, she often used to see the spirit of the innocent that she had put to death, and her neighbours often heard her talking to it, bidding it to be gone, and not to torment her longer with its cries. She is now dead and in her grave, and has been many years; and whatever may be her punishment in the next world for taking away the life of a harmless bairn of her own flesh and blood, she certainly dreed a heavy penance in this. *A day-tale man is a labourer not engaged by a master for a certain time, but working for any person who will employ him by the day or by the week. Source (books.google.com): William Andrew Chatto, Rambles in Northumberland and on the Scottish Border , by Stephen Oliver, the Younger [pseudonym] (London: Chapman and Hall, 1835), pp. 94-96 . Source (Internet Archive): William Andrew Chatto, Rambles in Northumberland and on the Scottish Border , by Stephen Oliver, the Younger [pseudonym] (London: Chapman and Hall, 1835), pp. 94-96 . Return to the table of contents . The Crying Child Poland In Krosnowo a servant girl had a child. In order to hide her shame she suffocated it immediately following its birth, then buried it in a turf shed. That same evening a man walked by the turf shed and heard pitiable crying. Others who passed this place experienced the same thing. People say that the poor child will have to continue crying until it is dug up and buried in a consecrated graveyard. Source (books.google.com): Otto Knoop, "Das weinende Kind," Volkssagen, Erzählungen, Aberglauben, Gebräuche und Märchen aus dem östlichen Hinterpommern (Posen: Verlag von Joseph Jolowicz, 1885), p. 14 . Source (Internet Archive): Otto Knoop, "Das weinende Kind," Volkssagen, Erzählungen, Aberglauben, Gebräuche und Märchen aus dem östlichen Hinterpommern (Posen: Verlag von Joseph Jolowicz, 1885), p. 14 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. Krosnowo is a village in northern Poland. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 1, 2022. Ghosts: Folktales of Types 1676 and 1676B Real Ghosts and Fake Ghosts folktales of types 1676 and 1676B translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2021 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Two Spirits (Belgium). Do Not Disturb the Rest of the Dead (Germany). A Ghostly Council Meeting (Germany). The Death Shroud (Germany). The Scoffer of Herzberg (Germany). The Peasant and the Owls (Germany). The Preacher and the Ghost (Sweden). The Blacksmith (Ireland). A Ghost Story (Ireland). Meg of Meldon (England). The Chivalrous Devil (England). Links to Additional Ghost Stories . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Two Spirits Belgium A woman in Kortrijk was a free spirited person, but never sacrilegious, like so many people are. On the other hand, her husband was a wild type who mocked everything and everyone. One Saturday the woman was late in returning home, and her husband thought that he would play a trick on her and frighten her. To do so he wrapped himself in a white cloth and waited at the crucifix in the graveyard where his wife would have to pass by. After ten o'clock his wife came by, accompanied by a neighbor woman. The man stood up in his white cloth and remained there standing still. "Just look," said the neighbor. "There's a spirit." "Let him be," said the wife. "We'll say the Lord's Prayer for him." "For God's sake," said the neighbor after they had walked on a few steps. "Now there's another one. Now I can see two of them!" The wife did not answer, but she prayed. The man heard what the neighbor woman had said, and a shudder went through his whole body. Nonetheless, he wanted to convince himself before he took flight. Turning his head a little he saw a skeleton wrapped in a shroud standing next to him. Then he lost all courage and took off running after the women as fast as he could. The frightened women ran ahead and locked themselves inside the house. "Wife, open the door!" cried the husband. "It's me!" But the wife did not open the door. Overcome by fear and dread, he fell down unconscious, and did not awaken until the next morning. Source (books.google.com): Johannes Wilhelm Wolf, "Zwei Geister," Deutsche Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1845), no. 136, pp. 241-42 . Source (Internet Archive): Johannes Wilhelm Wolf, "Zwei Geister," Deutsche Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1845), no. 136, pp. 241-42 . Return to the table of contents . Wolf's source: "Oral." Do Not Disturb the Rest of the Dead Germany In Mommenheim a young woman had been buried, and that night the young people who had accompanied her to the grave were now sitting together in the spinning room. The conversation turned to fear, and a girl said to everyone that she was afraid of nothing, whatever it might be. The others asked her if right now she dared to go to the graveyard by herself. "Why not?" she said. "And to show you that I've been there I'll bring back the cross with the wreath that we set up today on Fränzel's grave." The others were amazed at this boldness. And indeed, the girl did go forth without a light and by herself. When she failed to return they became ill at ease. A few youths took a lantern and went to the graveyard. There they found the girl sitting on the grave with her hand on the crucifix. She was dead. Her head had been twisted around her neck. Note by Stöber: Twisting someone's head around their neck is normally attributed to the devil or the wild huntsman, if one calls on him or if one gives an answer to his call. Source (books.google.com): August Stöber, "Störe die Ruhe der Todten nicht!" Die Sagen des Elsasses (St. Gallen: Scheitlin und Zollikofer, 1851), no. 201, p. 263 . Source (Internet Archive): August Stöber, "Störe die Ruhe der Todten nicht!" Die Sagen des Elsasses (St. Gallen: Scheitlin und Zollikofer, 1852), no. 201, p. 263 . Return to the table of contents . A Ghostly Council Meeting Germany Late one night in a spinning room in Eppingen someone asked the question, who would dare to enter the old and reputedly haunted town hall. One girl volunteered to do this, and she took with her a switch and a black cat. Entering the council chamber she saw twelve ghostly councilmen seated around the table. They said to her, "If you hadn't brought the switch and the black cat with you, we would be saying something different to you!" The terrified girl fled, and she died that same night. Source (books.google.com): Bernhard Baader, "Gespenstige Rathsversammlung," Neugesammelte Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: A. Gessner'sche Buchhandlung, 1859), no. 132, p. 100 . Source (Internet Archive): Bernhard Baader, "Gespenstige Rathsversammlung," Neugesammelte Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: A. Gessner'sche Buchhandlung, 1859), no. 132, p. 100 . Return to the table of contents . The Death Shroud Germany Every midnight a dead person appeared in the old graveyard in Gross-Woltersdorf. He would lay his shroud at the gate to the graveyard and then wander about frightening the villagers. A servant once said to his companions that he would take the shroud away from the wandering dead man. They warned him against taking such a risk, but he did it nonetheless. The dead man suddenly appeared and demanded his shroud. The servant escaped into the church and barred the door. The dead man whined and pled for his shroud, but did not receive it. Finally he asked the servant to at least stick a corner of it through the keyhole, so that he could tear off a piece. The servant did this, and the door flew open with a thunder-like crash. The servant was found inside the church, almost dead. He became sick and suffered an early death. Source (books.google.com): Karl Eduard Haase, "Das Totenhemde," Volkstümliches aus der Grafschaft Ruppin und Umgegend , vol. 1: Sagen (Neu-Ruppin: Verlag von Rud. Petrenz, 1887), no. 49, p. 53 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Eduard Haase, "Das Totenhemde," Volkstümliches aus der Grafschaft Ruppin und Umgegend , vol. 1: Sagen (Neu-Ruppin: Verlag von Rud. Petrenz, 1887), no. 49, p. 53 . Haase's source: "Communicated by Teacher Fehse in Dierberg." Return to the table of contents . The Scoffer of Herzberg Germany Once a number of young people were walking across the graveyard at midnight. One of them called out, "You dead ones, stand up and come to your judgement!" The next day the scoffer became ill and died soon afterward. Source (books.google.com): Karl Eduard Haase, "Der Spötter von Herzberg," Volkstümliches aus der Grafschaft Ruppin und Umgegend , vol. 1: Sagen (Neu-Ruppin: Verlag von Rud. Petrenz, 1887), no. 63, p. 65 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Eduard Haase, "Der Spötter von Herzberg," Volkstümliches aus der Grafschaft Ruppin und Umgegend , vol. 1: Sagen (Neu-Ruppin: Verlag von Rud. Petrenz, 1887), no. 63, p. 65 . Haase's source: "Communicated by Teacher Fehse in Dierberg." Return to the table of contents . The Peasant and the Owls Germany If one goes through the woods at nighttime calling out, "Owl, owl, come along, come along!" the owls will come and peck out one's eyes. One night a peasant was walking through the woods, and he thought, "I want to see if what they say about the owls is true." So he called out, and behold, the owls came flying by from all sides and pecked away at him. The next morning he still had his eyesight, but he was found in the woods badly pecked and covered with blood. Source (books.google.com): Karl Eduard Haase, "Der Bauer und die Eulen," Volkstümliches aus der Grafschaft Ruppin und Umgegend , vol. 1: Sagen (Neu-Ruppin: Verlag von Rud. Petrenz, 1887), no. 111, p. 111 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Eduard Haase, "Der Bauer und die Eulen," Volkstümliches aus der Grafschaft Ruppin und Umgegend , vol. 1: Sagen (Neu-Ruppin: Verlag von Rud. Petrenz, 1887), no. 111, p. 111 . Haase's source: "Oral, from Brunne." Return to the table of contents . The Preacher and the Ghost Sweden About three hundred years ago a pious man by the name of Melchior was the preacher at Veckholm. Every evening, whatever the season or weather, it was his custom to go to the church and pray at the altar. His wife could not stand this, so she said to her servant, "Listen, Lorenz, at midnight go to my husband on his way home, and attempt to frighten him." He did just that. He covered himself in a white sheet and appeared before the preacher. The preacher stepped up to him and said, "Who are you?" but he received no answer. He asked the same question a second time, but now the servant began to sink into the earth, while begging forgiveness for his sacrilege. To this the preacher replied, "I cannot save you. It is too late!" And then the servant sank completely beneath the earth. Source (books.google.com): Arvid August Afzelius, Volkssagen und Volkslieder aus Schwedens älterer und neuerer Zeit , vol. 3 (Leipzig: Chr. E. Kollmann, 1842), p. 245 . Source (Internet Archive): Arvid August Afzelius, Volkssagen und Volkslieder aus Schwedens älterer und neuerer Zeit , vol. 3 (Leipzig: Chr. E. Kollmann, 1842), p. 245 . Link to this legend in the original Swedish: Arvid August Afzelius, "Melchior, Pastor i Weckholm," Swenska Folkets Sago-Häfder , vol. 3 (Stockholm: Zacharias Haeggström, 1845), p. 135 . Return to the table of contents . The Blacksmith Ireland There was a man one time that was a blacksmith, and he used to go every night playing cards, and for all his wife could say he wouldn't leave off doing it. So one night she got a boy to go stand in the old churchyard he'd have to pass, and to frighten him. So the boy did so, and began to groan and to try to frighten him when he came near. But it's well known that nothing of that kind can do any harm to a blacksmith. So he went in and got hold of the boy, and told him he had a mind to choke him, and went his way. But no sooner was the boy left alone than there came about him something in the shape of a dog, and then a great troop of cats. And they surrounded him and he tried to get away home, but he had no power to go the way he wanted but had to go with them. And at last they came to an old forth and a faery bush, and he knelt down and made the sign of the cross and said a great many "Our Fathers," and after a time they went into the faery bush and left him. And he was going away and a woman came out of the bush, and called to him three times, to make him look back. And he saw that it was a woman that he knew before, that was dead, and so he knew that she was amongst the faeries. And she said to him, "It's well for you that I was here, and worked hard for you, or you would have been brought in among them, and be like me." So he got home. And the blacksmith got home too and his wife was surprised to see he was no way frightened. But he said, "You might know that there's nothing of that sort could harm me." For a blacksmith is safe from all, and when he goes out in the night he keeps always in his pocket a small bit of wire, and they know him by that. So he went on playing, and they grew very poor after. Source (books.google.com): Isabella Augusta, Lady Gregory, Visions and Beliefs in the West of Ireland , 2nd series (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1920), pp. 239-40 . Source (Internet Archive): Isabella Augusta, Lady Gregory, Visions and Beliefs in the West of Ireland , 2nd series (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1920), pp. 239-40 . Lady Gregory (1852-1932) was an Irish dramatist and folklorist. She worked closely with William Butler Yeats (1865-1939). Return to the table of contents . A Ghost Story Ireland One time there was a man in this part of the country who used to go out every night to frighten another man. He would put a white sheet around him, and everyone was talking about the ghost. This was going for a long time and everyone was afraid to go by there, and one night he went as usual to frighten this man, and when the man came down he saw two ghosts tonight instead of one, and he said, "O God bless us there is two ghosts tonight instead of one," and at that the fellow with the sheet looked around he saw a real ghost standing beside him, and he got a great fright and he ran away home and never tried the trick again. This is the finish up of the story told by the old people, and it stopped the trick of playing ghosts at night in this part of the country. John Heery. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Cavan >> Ballinamona, pp. 3-4 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Meg of Meldon England According to tradition, Meg of Meldon was stigmatized as a witch during her lifetime in seventeenth-century Northumberland. After her death she reappeared as a ghost at regular intervals, apparently with the only goal to frighten people. An individual, well known for his skepticism in regard to ghosts, had frequently heard of Meg's achievements in frightening people, but would not credit them. He, however, had no scruple in perpetuating the belief among the credulous, so one mirk night, dressed in white, he placed himself on the parapet wall of Meldon Bridge, and there sat awaiting passers-by. He had not stayed long till he found Meg herself seated alongside of him. "You've come to fley [frighten]," said she, "and I've come to fley, let's baith fley thegither." At the same time she drew herself a little nearer him, while he, jealous of a too familiar intimacy, moved still further along. Meg repeated her movement, and he still shrunk from her approach. She at length came so close as to give him a push, which he hastily attempted to shun, but lost balance, and fell headlong into the water. Let us hope that Meg was rewarded with a respite for ducking the rival ghost. Another adventure in which Meg was concerned was sent me in 1877 by a clergyman in that neighborhood, in the hand writing of the narrator, a tradesman, I believe, in Whalton. I shall reproduce it pretty nearly in the language in which it was told. Two dwellers in the hamlet of Thornton who believed in Meg's appearance as a ghost, and a friend of theirs, a Scotchman, who could not be brought to credit it, sat one night after having been at the smithy, in a public house at Meldon, disputing as to her existence or non existence as a spiritual visitant. They then left in company for Thornton. At a certain part of the road one of the two believers, named Todd, gave some chains he was carrying from the smith's shop to his mate and fell behind. As soon as the other two were out of sight and hearing, he took a shortcut across a corner of a field and placed himself behind a hedge at the foot of a bank, a favorite haunt of Meg, and getting himself into the most ghostly style he could assume, he awaited their arrival. The Scotchman came up first, shouting, "Where are ye, Meg? Let's see you, Meg!" when Todd stepped out into view, saying, "Here's Meg, what want ye wi' Meg?" The other lad dropped the chains and made off, and the Scotchman after him. Todd, thinking he had overdone the thing, picked up the chains and ran after them to stop them, but the faster he ran the faster ran they, the tinkling of the chains behind keeping up their terror. The two lads had got upon Meldon Bridge over the Wansbeck, which was then a very narrow and steep structure. At the one end of it they disturbed a kyloe [a breed of Scottish highland cattle] that had got out of a field. This started out as Todd was passing, and "gave a rout," and ran headlong across the bridge behind him. Todd, taking the beast for Meg, increased his speed, the most frightened of the three. Thus there were three men and a kyloe all terrified and running at their utmost pith. The three men arrived home in a serious state of fear, from which they were long recovering. The narrator adds a remark of identification. "Todd was said to be the father or grandfather to Jack Todd, the wood wagoner. Both the public houses in Meldon were closed before my day." Source (books.google.com): Michael Aislabie Denham, The Denham Tracts: A Collection of Folklore , vol. 2, edited by James Hardy (London: Published for The Folklore Society by David Nutt, 1895), pp. 251-53 . Source (Internet Archive): Michael Aislabie Denham, The Denham Tracts: A Collection of Folklore , vol. 2, edited by James Hardy (London: Published for The Folklore Society by David Nutt, 1895), pp. 251-53 . Return to the table of contents . The Chivalrous Devil England About half-a-century ago there lived, in a lane leading away from a little village near Garstang, a poor idiot named Gregory. He was at once the sport and the terror of the young folks. Uniformly kind to them, carefully convoying them to the spots where, in his lonely rambles, he had noticed birds' nests, or pressing upon them the wildflowers he had gathered in the neighboring woods and thickets, he received at their ungrateful hands all kinds of ill treatment, not always stopping short of personal violence. In this respect, however, the thoughtless children only followed the example set them by their elders, for seldom did poor Gregory pass along the row of cottages, dignified by the name of street, which constituted the village, without an unhandsome head being projected from the blacksmith's or cobbler's shop, or from a doorway, and a cruel taunt being sent after the idiot, who, in his ragged clothing, with his handful of harebells and primroses, and a wreath of green leaves round his battered, old hat, jogged along towards his mother's cottage, singing as he went, in a pathetic monotone, a snatch of an old Lancashire ballad. In accordance with that holy law which, under such circumstances, influences woman's heart, the mother loved this demented lad with passionate fondness, all the tenderness with which her nature had been endowed having been called forth by the needs of the afflicted child, whose only haven of refuge from the harshness of his surroundings and the cruelty of those who, had not they been as ignorant as the hogs they fed, would have pitied and protected him, was her breast. Lavishing all her affection upon the poor lad, she had no kindness to spare for those who tormented him; and abstaining from any of those melodramatic and vulgar curses with which a person of less education would have followed those who abused her child, she studiously held herself aloof from her neighbors, and avoided meeting them, except when she was compelled to purchase food or other articles for her little household. This conduct gave an excuse for much ill feeling, and as the woman had no need to toil for her daily bread, and as her cottage was the neatest in the district, there was much jealousy. One night, at a jovial gathering, it was arranged that a practical joke, of what was considered a very humorous kind, should be played upon the idiot. The boors selected one of their party, whose task it should be to attire himself in a white sheet, and to emerge into the lane when the poor lad should make his appearance. In accordance with this plan the pack of hobbledehoys watched the cottage night after night, in the hope of seeing the idiot leave the dwelling, and at length their patience was rewarded. They immediately hid themselves in the ditch, while the mock ghost concealed himself behind the trunk of a tree. The lad, not suspecting any evil, came along, humming, in his melancholy monotone, the usual fragment, and just before he reached the tree the sheeted figure slowly stepped forth to the accompaniment of the groanings and bellowings of his associates. They had expected to see the idiot flee in terror; but instead of so doing, he laughed loudly at the white figure, and then suddenly, as the expression of his face changed to one of intense interest, he shouted, "Oh, oh! A black one! A black one!" Sure enough, a dark and terrible figure stood in the middle of the road. The mock ghost fled, with his companions at his heels, the real specter chasing them hotly, and the idiot bringing up the rear, shouting at the top of his voice, "Run, black devil! Catch white devil!" They were not long in reaching the village, down the street of which they ran faster than they ever had run before. Several of them darted into the smithy, where the blacksmith was scattering the sparks right and left as he hammered away at the witch-resisting horseshoes, and others fled into the inn, where they startled the gathered company of idle gossips; but the mock ghost kept on wildly, looking neither to the left nor to the right. The idiot had kept close behind the phantom at the heels of the mock ghost, and when at the end of the village the specter vanished as suddenly as it had appeared, the lad ran a little faster and took its place. Of this, however, the white-sheeted young fellow was not aware, and, fearing every moment that the shadow would catch him in its awful embrace, he dashed down a by lane. Before he got very far, however, the idiot, who had gradually been lessening the distance between them, overtook and seized him by the neck. With a terrible cry the rustic fell headlong into the ditch, dragging Gregory with him as he fell. The latter was soon upon his feet, and dancing about the lane as he cried, "Catch white devil! Catch white devil!" The mock ghost, however, lay quiet enough among the nettles. Roused by the story told by the affrighted ones who had rushed so unceremoniously into their presence, as well as by the startling cry of "Run, black devil! Catch white devil!" which the idiot had shouted as he sped past the door, several of the topers emerged from their abiding place; and as nothing could be seen of either mock ghost, specter, or idiot, they bravely determined to go in search of them. As they passed along the road from the village, their attention was attracted by the cries which seemed to come from the lonely lane, and somewhat nervously making their way along it, they soon saw the idiot dancing about the side of the ditch. With a sudden access of courage, due to the presence of anything human, however weak, they hurried along, and as they drew nearer, the idiot paused in his gambols, and pointed to the mock ghost, who lay stretched in the shadow of the hedgerow. He was soon carried away to the village, where he lay ill for weeks. The kindness of Gregory's mother to the sick lad's parents, who were very poor and could ill afford to provide the necessary comforts his condition required, caused public feeling to turn in her favor, and those who formerly had been loudest in defaming her became her warmest eulogists. Between the idiot and the young fellow, too, a strange friendship sprang up, and the pair might often be seen passing along the lanes, the idiot chanting his melancholy fragments to the companion whose cap he had adorned with wreaths of wildflowers. With such a protector the idiot was quite safe, and, indeed, had the village children been wishful to torment Gregory, if the presence of this companion had not sufficed to restrain them, they had only to remember that it was in defense of poor Gregory the Evil One himself had raced through the village. Source (Internet Archive): James Bowker, Goblin Tales of Lancashire (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1883), pp. 97-103 . Return to the table of contents . Links to Additional Ghost Stories Haunted by the Ghost of a Murdered Child . Wild Huntsman Legends . Dishonest Surveyor and Plowman Legends . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 4, 2021. Girl with White Hands The Girl with White Hands a Zobell family legend retold by D. L. Ashliman In midsummer of 1814 in the village of Hørby on the island of Sjælland in the Kingdom of Denmark, a handsome carriage stopped at the cottage where the wheelwright Anders Olsen lived with his wife Anne Katrine. A fine lady, with the help of her footman, stepped from the carriage and approached the cottage. She was carrying a newborn child. Saying that she had errands in the vicinity, the lady engaged the wheelwright's wife to watch the baby for a few hours. Anne Katrine gladly accepted, not only because the promised pay was generous, but also because Anders and Anne Katrine had no children of their own, and her maternal instincts were strong. With the pride and awe of a new mother, Anne Katrine uncovered the baby and admired her face, her arms, and her hands. She was perfect in every way, except -- except for her hands. They had no color. They were totally white. June days are long in Denmark, so the wheelwright and his wife were not concerned when evening came without the fine lady's return. Finally the gray of a northern summer night fell over their cottage, bringing with it anxious feelings, first of fear, and then of hope, and again of fear. The fine lady did not return for the girl with white hands. On June 29, 1814, in a simple ceremony held in the wheelwright's cottage, the girl with white hands was christened Kirstine Andersdatter: Kirstine, the daughter of Anders. On October 9, 1814, the christening was formalized in the Hørby church. Friends from neighboring villages served as witnesses. In 1818 the wheelwright and his family moved to the city of Kalundborg, halfway across the island. Kirstine Andersdatter was my great-great grandmother. My cousin Duane Dalley, who knows his way around Danish archives, discovered the place names and the dates, but the heart of the story comes from my mother, Elgarda Zobell Ashliman (1915-2004). She vouches for its truth, because she heard it from her aunt, Josepha Marie Zobell Clinger (1871-1962). Anyone who knew Aunt Seph, as we called her, remembers well that she could always tell a good story, but never a lie. Aunt Seph, while still a young girl, learned the story of the abandoned child from her grandmother, a small blond woman from the Old Country, a woman with glistening white hands. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 6, 2023. The Girl without Hands The Girl without Hands folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 706 and related stories translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2018 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Biancabella (Giovanni Francesco Straparola, The Facetious Nights ). Penta the Handless (Giovanni Battista Basile, Il Pentamerone ). The Innkeeper's Beautiful Daughter (Italy). The Girl without Hands (Italy / Austria). Beautiful Magdalene (Germany). The Girl without Hands (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm -- 1812). The Girl without Hands (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm -- 1857). The Daughter Who Was Promised to the Devil (Germany). The Girl without Hands (Finland). The Girl without Hands (Hungary). William of the Tree (Ireland). The Bad Stepmother (Ireland). The Cruel Stepmother (Scotland). Anecdote of a Charitable Woman ( The 1001 Nights ). The Girl without Legs (Somalia). Blessing or Property (Swahili). The Sun and the Moon (Eskimo). Sun and Moon (Eskimo). Wild Sanctuary: The Handless Maiden (Link to an essay by Terri Windling with art by Jeanie Tomanek). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Biancabella Giovanni Francesco Straparola, The Facetious Nights Biancabella, the daughter of Lamberico, Marquis of Monferrato, is sent away by the stepmother of Ferrandino, King of Naples, in order that she may be put to death; but the assassins only cut off her hands and put out her eyes. Afterward she, her hurts having been healed by a snake, returns happily to Ferrandino. It is praiseworthy, or even absolutely necessary, that a woman, of whatever state or condition she may be, should bear herself with prudence in each and every undertaking she may essay, for without prudence nothing will bring itself to a commendable issue. And if a certain stepmother, of whom I am about to tell you, had used it with due moderation when she plotted wickedly to take another's life, she would not herself have been cut off by divine judgment in such fashion as I will now relate to you. Once upon a time, now many years ago, there reigned in Monferrato a marquis called Lamberico, very puissant, both on account of his lordships and his great wealth, but wanting in children to carry on his name. He was, forsooth, mighty anxious for progeny, but this bounty of heaven was denied to him. Now one day it chanced that the marchioness his wife was walking for her pleasure in the palace garden, and, being suddenly overcome by sleep, she sat down at the foot of a tree and slumber fell upon her. While she slept gently there crept up to her side a very small snake, which, having passed stealthily under her clothes without arousing her by its presence, made its way into her body, and by subtle windings penetrated even into her womb, and there lay quiet. Before long time had elapsed the marchioness, with no small pleasure to herself, and with the highest delight of all the state, proved to be with child, and, when the season of her lying-in came, she was delivered of a female child, round the neck of which there was coiled three times something in the similitude of a serpent. When the midwives, who were in attendance upon the marchioness, saw this, they were much affrighted; but the snake, without causing any hurt whatsoever, untwined itself from the infant's neck, and, winding itself along the floor and stretching itself out, made its way into the garden. Now when the child had been duly cared for and clothed, the nurses having washed it clean in a bath of clear water and swathed it in snow-white linen, they began to see, little by little, that round about its neck was a collar of gold, fashioned with the most subtle handiwork. So fine was it, and so lovely, that it seemed to shed its lustre from between the skin and the flesh, just as the most precious jewels are wont to shine out from a closure of transparent crystal, and, moreover, it encircled the neck of the infant just as many times as the little serpent had cast its fold thereabout. The little girl, to whom, on account of her exceeding loveliness, the name of Biancabella was given, grew up in such goodliness and beauty that it seemed as if she must be sprung from divine and not from human stock. When she had come to the age of ten years it chanced that one day she went with her nurse upon a terrace, from whence she observed a fair garden full of roses and all manner of other lovely flowers. Then, turning towards the nurse who had her in charge, she demanded of her what garden that was which she had never seen before. To this the nurse replied that it was a place which her mother called her own garden, and one, moreover, in which she was wont often to take her recreation. Then said the child to her: "I have never seen anything so fair before, and I had fain go into it and walk there." Then the nurse, taking Biancabella by the hand, led her into the garden, and, having suffered the child to go a little distance apart from her, she sat down under the shade of a leafy beech tree and settled herself to sleep, letting the little girl take her pleasure the while in roaming about the garden. Biancabeila, who was altogether charmed with the loveliness of the place, ran about, now here and now there, gathering flowers, and, at last, when she felt somewhat tired, she sat down under the shadow of a tree. Now scarcely had the child seated herself upon the ground when there appeared a little snake, which crept up close to her side. Biancabeila, as soon as she saw the beast, was mightily alarmed, and was about to cry out, when the snake thus addressed her: "Cry not, I beg you, neither disturb yourself, nor have any fear, for know that I am your sister, born on the same day as yourself and at the same birth, and that Samaritana is my name. And I now tell you that, if you will be obedient to what I shall command you, I will make you happy in your life; but if, on the other hand, you disobey me, you will come to be the most luckless, the most wretched woman the world has ever yet seen. Wherefore, go your way now, without fear of any sort, and tomorrow cause to be brought into this garden two vessels, of which let one be filled with pure milk, and the other with the finest water of roses. Then you must come to me by yourself without companions." When the serpent was gone the little girl rose up from her seat and went back to seek her nurse, whom she found still sleeping, and, having aroused her, she returned with her to the palace without saying aught of what had befallen her. And when the morrow had come Biancabella chanced to be with her mother alone in the chamber, and the mother remarked that the child bore upon her face a melancholy look. Whereupon she said: "Biancabella, what ails you that you put on so discontented a face? You are wont to be lively and merry enough, but now you seem all sad and woebegone." To this Biancabella replied: "There is nothing amiss with me; it is only that I want to have taken into the garden two vessels, of which one shall be filled with pure milk and the other of the finest water of roses." The mother answered: "And why do you let yourself be troubled by so small a matter as this, my child? Do you not know that everything here belongs to you?" Then the marchioness caused to be brought to her two vessels, large and beautiful, filled, the one with milk and the other with rose water, and had them carried into the garden. When the hour appointed by the serpent had come, Biancabella, without taking any other damsel to bear her company, repaired to the garden, and, having opened the door thereof, she went in and made fast the entrance, and then seated herself upon the ground at the spot where the two vessels had been placed. Almost as soon as she had sat down the serpent appeared and came near her, and straightway commanded her to strip off all her clothes, and then, naked as she was, to step into the vessel which was filled with milk. When she had done this, the serpent twined itself about her, thus bathing her body in every part with the white milk and licking her all over with his tongue, rendering her pure and perfect in every part where, peradventure, aught that was faulty might have been found. Next, having bid her come out of the vessel of milk, the serpent made her enter the one which was filled with rose water, whereupon all her limbs were scented with odours so sweet and restorative that she felt as if she were filled with fresh life. Then the serpent bade her put on her clothes once more, giving her at the same time express command that she should hold her peace as to what had befallen her, and to speak no word thereanent even to her father and mother. For the serpent willed that no other woman in all the world should be found to equal Biancabella in beauty or in grace. And finally, after she had bestowed upon her very good quality, the serpent crept away to its hiding-place. When this was done Biancabella left the garden and returned to the palace. Her mother, when she perceived how her daughter had become more lovely and gracious than ever, and fairer than any other damsel in the world, was astonished beyond measure and knew not what to say. Wherefore she questioned the young girl as to what she had done to indue herself with such surpassing loveliness; but Biancabella had no answer to give her. Hereupon the marchioness took a comb and began to comb and dress her daughter's fair locks, and forthwith from the girl's hair there fell down pearls and all manner of precious stones, and when Biancabella went to wash her hands roses and violets and lovely flowers of all sorts sprang up around them, and the odours which arose from these were so sweet that it seemed as if the place had indeed become an earthly paradise. Her mother, when she saw this marvel, ran to find Lamberico her husband, and, full of maternal pride, thus addressed him: "My lord, heaven has bestowed upon us a daughter who is the sweetest, the loveliest, and the most exquisite work nature ever produced. For besides the divine beauty and grace in her, which is manifest to all eyes, pearls and gems and all other kinds of precious stones fall from her hair, and -- to name something yet more marvellous -- round about her white hands spring up roses and violets and all manner of flowers which give out the sweetest odours to all those who may come near her to wonder at the sight. All this I tell to you I assuredly would never have believed had I not looked thereon with my own eyes." Her husband, who was of an unbelieving nature, was at first disinclined to put faith in his wife's words, and treated her speech as a subject for laughter and ridicule, but she went on plying him without ceasing with accounts of what she had witnessed, so that he determined to see for himself how the matter really stood. Then, having made them bring his daughter into his presence, he found about her even more marvellous things than his wife had described, and on account of what he saw he rejoiced exceedingly, and in his pride swore a great oath that there was in the whole world no man worthy to be united to her in wedlock. Very soon the fame and glory of the supreme and immortal beauty of Biancabella began to spread itself through the whole world, and many kings and princes and nobles came together from all parts in order to win her love and favour and have her to wife, but not one of all these suitors was counted worthy to enjoy her, inasmuch as each one of them proved to be lacking in respect of one thing or another. But at last one day there came a-wooing Ferrandino, King of Naples, who by his prowess and by his illustrious name blazed out resplendent like the sun in the midst of the smaller luminaries, and, having presented himself to the marquis, demanded of him the hand of his daughter in marriage. The marquis, seeing that the suitor was seemly of countenance, and well knit in person, and full of grace, besides being a prince of great power and possessions and wealth, gave his consent to the nuptials at once, and, having summoned his daughter, without further parleying the two were betrothed by joining of hands and by kissing one another. Scarcely were the rites of betrothal completed, when Biancabella called back to mind the words which her sister Samaritana had so lovingly spoken to her, wherefore she withdrew herself from the presence of her spouse under the pretext that she had certain business of her own to see to, and, having gone to her own chamber, made fast the door thereof from within, and then passed by a secret thoroughfare into the garden. When she had come into the garden, she began to call upon Samaritana in a low voice. But the serpent no more manifested herself as heretofore, and Biancabella, when she perceived this, was mightily astonished, and, after she had searched through every part of the garden without finding a trace of Samaritana, a deep grief fell upon her, for she knew that this thing had happened to her because she had not given due attention and obedience to the commands which her sister had laid upon her. Wherefore, grieving and bewailing heavily on account of the mischance that had befallen her, she returned into her chamber, and having opened the door, she went to rejoin her spouse, who had been waiting a long time for her, and sat down beside him. When the marriage ceremonies were completed, Ferrandino led his bride away with him to Naples, where, with sumptuous state and magnificent festivities and the sound of trumpets, they were welcomed by the whole city with the highest honour. It happened that there was living at Naples Ferrandino's stepmother, who had two daughters of her own, both of them deformed and ugly; but, notwithstanding this, she had set her heart on marrying one of them to the king. But now, when all hope was taken from her of ever accomplishing this design of hers, her rage and anger against Biancabella became so savage that she could scarcely endure to look upon her. But she was careful to conceal her animosity, feigning the while to hold Biancabella in all love and affection. Now by a certain freak of fortune the King of Tunis at this time began to set in array a mighty force of armed men for service by land and likewise on sea, in order that he might incite Ferrandino to make war (whether he did this because Ferrandino had won Biancabella to wife, or for some other reason I know not), and at the head of a very powerful army he had already passed the bounds of the kingdom of Naples. On this account it was necessary that Ferrandino should straightway take up arms for the defence of his realm, and hurry to the field to confront his foe. Therefore, having settled his affairs, and made provision of all things necessary for Biancabella (she being now with child), he gave her over to the care of his stepmother and set forth with his army. Ferrandino had not long departed when this malevolent and froward-minded woman made a wicked design on Biancabella's life, and, having summoned into her presence certain retainers who were entirely devoted to her, she charged them to conduct Biancabella with them to some place or other -- feigning that what they were doing was done for her recreation -- and that they should not leave her until they had taken her life. Moreover, in order that she might be fully assured that they had discharged their duty, they were to bring back to her some sign of Biancabella's death. These ruffians, prompt for any sort of ill-doing, at once prepared to carry out the commands of their mistress, and making pretence of conducting Biancabella to some place where she might recreate herself, they carried her away into a wood, and forthwith began to make preparation to kill her. But when they perceived how lovely she was, and gracious, they were moved to pity and had not the heart to take her life. So they cut off both her hands and tore her eyes out of her head, and these they carried back to the stepmother as certain proofs that Biancabella had been killed by them. When this impious and cruel woman saw what they brought in their hands, her joy and satisfaction were unbounded, and, scheming still in her wicked heart to carry out her nefarious designs, she spread through all the kingdom a report that both her own daughters were dead, the one of a continued fever, and the other of an imposthume of the heart, which had caused her death by suffocation. Moreover, she went on to declare that Biancabella, disordered by grief at the king's departure, had miscarried of a child, and had likewise been seized with a tertian fever which had wasted her so completely that there was more cause to fear her death than to hope for her recovery. But the scheme of this wicked cunning woman was to keep one of her own daughters in the king's bed, maintaining the while that she was Biancabella, shrunken and distempered by the fever. Ferrandino, after he had attacked and put to rout the army of his foe, marched homeward in all the triumph of victory, hoping to find his beloved Biancabella full of joy and happiness, but in lieu of this he found her (as he believed) lying in bed shrivelled, pale, and disfigured. Then he went up to the bed and gazed closely at her face, and was overcome with astonishment when he looked upon the wreck she had become, and could hardly persuade himself that the woman he saw there could really be Biancabella. Afterwards he bade her attendants comb her hair, and, in place of the gems and the precious jewels which were wont to fall from the fair locks of his wife, there came forth great worms which had been feeding on the wretched woman's flesh, and from the hands there came forth, not the roses and the sweet-smelling flowers which ever sprang up around Biancabella's, but a foulness and filth which caused a nauseous sickness to all who came near her. But the wicked old stepmother kept on speaking words of consolation to him, declaring that all this distemper sprang from nothing else than the lengthened course of the ailment which possessed her. In the meantime the ill-fated Biancabella, bereft of her hands and blind in both her eyes, was left alone in that solitary place, and, finding herself in such cruel affliction, she called over and over again upon her sister Samaritana, beseeching her to come to her rescue; but no answer came to her except from the resounding voice of Echo, who cried aloud through all the place. And while the unhappy Biancabella was left in the agony of despair, conscious that she was cut off from all human aid, there came into the wood a venerable old man, kindly of aspect and no less kindly in his heart. And he, when he listened to the sad and mournful voice which smote upon his hearing, made his way step by step towards the place whence it came, and stopped when he found there a blind lady with her hands cut off who was bitterly mourning the sad fate which had overtaken her. When the good old man looked upon her, and saw how sad was her condition, he could not bear to leave her thus in this wilderness of broken trees and thorns and brambles, but, overcome by the fatherly pity within him, he led her home with him to his house, and gave her into the charge of his wife, commanding her very strictly to take good care of the sufferer. Then he turned towards his three daughters, who verily were as beautiful as three of the brightest stars of heaven, and exhorted them earnestly to keep her company, and to render to her continually any loving service she might require, and to take care that she wanted for nothing. But the wife, who had a hard heart, and none of the old man's pity, was violently moved to anger by these words of her husband, and, turning towards him, cried out: "Husband, what is this you would have us do with this woman, all blind and maimed as she is? Doubtless she has been thus treated as a punishment for her sins, and for no good behaviour." In reply to this speech the old man spake in an angry tone: "You will carry out all the commands I give you. If you should do aught else, you need not look to see me here again." It happened that while the unhappy Biancabella was left in charge of the wife and the three daughters, conversing with them of various things, and meditating over her own great misfortunes, she besought one of the maidens to do her a favour and comb her hair a little. But when the mother heard this she was much angered, forasmuch as she would not allow either of her children to minister in any way to the unfortunate sufferer. But the daughter's heart was more given to pity than was her mother's, and moreover she called to mind what her father's commands had been, and was conscious of some subtle air of dignity and high breeding which seemed to emanate from Biancabella as a token of her lofty estate. So she straightway unfastened the apron from her waist, and, having spread it on the floor beside Biancabella, began to comb her hair softly and carefully. Scarcely had she passed the comb thrice through the blond tresses before there fell out of them pearls and rubies and diamonds and all sorts of precious stones. Now the mother, when she saw what had happened, was seized with dread, and stood as one struck with amazement; moreover, the great dislike which at first she had harboured towards Biancabella, now gave way to a feeling of kindly affection. And when the old man had come back to the house they all ran to embrace him, rejoicing with him greatly over the stroke of good fortune which had come to deliver them from the bitter poverty which had hitherto oppressed them. Then Biancahella asked them to bring her a bucket of clear water, and bade them wash therewith her face and her maimed arms, and from these, while all were standing by, roses and violets and other flowers in great plenty fell down; whereupon they all deemed she must be some divine personage, and no mortal woman. Now after a season it came to pass that Biancabella felt a desire to return to the spot where first the old man had found her. But he and his wife and his daughters, seeing how great were the benefits they gathered from her presence, loaded her with endearments, and besought her very earnestly that she would on no account depart from them, bringing forward many reasons why she should not carry out her wish. But she, having resolutely made up her mind on this point, determined at all hazards to go away, promising at the same time to return to them hereafter. The old man, when he saw how firmly she was set on her departure, took her with him without any further delay back to the place where he had come upon her. And when they had reached this spot she gave directions to the old man that he should depart and leave her, bidding him also to come back there when evening should have fallen, in order that she might return with him to his house. As soon as the old man had gone his way the ill-fated Biancabella began to wander up and down the gloomy wood, calling loudly upon Samaritana, so that her cries and lamentations rose up even to the high heavens. But Samaritana, though she was all the while nigh to her sister, and had never for one moment abandoned her, refused as yet to answer to her call. Whereupon the wretched Biancabella, deeming that she was scattering her words upon the heedless winds, cried out, "Alas! what further concern have I in this world, seeing that I have been bereft of my eyes and of my hands, and now at last all human help is denied to me." And as she thus spoke there came upon her a sort of frenzy, which took away from her all hope of deliverance from her present evil case, and urged her, in despair, to lay hands upon her own life. But because there was at hand no means by which she could put an end to her miserable being, she found her way to a pool of water, which lay not far distant, in the mind there to drown herself. But when she had come to the shore of the pool, and stood thereon ready to cast herself down into the water, there sounded in her ears a voice like thunder, saying: "Alas, alas, wretched one! Keep back from self-murder, nor desire to take your own life, which you ought to preserve for some better end." Whereupon Biancaliella, alarmed by this mighty voice, felt as it were every one of her hairs standing erect on her head, but after a moment it seemed to her that she knew the voice; so, having plucked up a little courage, she said: "Who are you who wander about these woods, proclaiming your presence to me by your kindly and pitiful words?" Then the same voice replied: "I am Samaritana, your sister, for whom you have been calling so long and painfully." And Biancabella, when she listened to these words, answered in a voice all broken by agonized sobs, and said: "Alas, my sister! Come to my aid, I beseech you; and if at any past time I have shown myself disregardful of your counsel, I pray you to pardon me. Indeed I have erred, and I confess my fault, but my misdeed was the fruit of my ignorance, and not of my wickedness; for be sure, if it had come from wickedness, divine justice would not have suffered me, as the author of it, so long to cumber the earth." Samaritana, when she heard her sister's woes set forth in this pitiful story, and witnessed the cruel wrongs that had been done her, spake some comforting words, and then, having gathered divers medicinal herbs of wonderful power and virtue, she spread these over the places where Biancabella's eyes had been. Then she brought to her sister two hands, and having joined these on to the wounded wrists, at once made them whole and sound again. And when she had wrought this marvellous feat Samaritana threw off from herself the scaly skin of the serpent, and stood revealed as a maiden of lovely aspect. The sun had already begun to veil its glittering rays, and the evening shadows were creeping around, when the old man with anxious hasty steps returned to the wood, where he found Biancabella sitting beside a maiden well-nigh as lovely as herself. And he gazed steadily into her beauteous face, standing the while like to a man struck with wonder, and could scarcely believe it was Biancabella he looked upon. But when he was sure it was really she, he cried: "My daughter, were you not this morning blind and bereft of your hands? How comes it that you have been thus speedily made whole again?" Biancabella answered him: "My cure has been worked, not by anything I myself have done, but by the virtue and the kind ministering of this my dear sister who sits here beside me." Whereupon both the sisters arose from the place where they were seated, and rejoicing greatly they went together with the old man to his house, where the wife and the three daughters gave them a most loving and hospitable welcome. It came to pass after the lapse of many days that Samaritana and Biancahella, and the old man with his wife and his three daughters, left their cottage and betook themselves to the city of Naples, purposing to dwell there, and, when they had entered the city, they chanced to come upon a vacant space hard by the palace of the king, where they determined to make their resting-place. And when the dark night had fallen around them. Samaritana took in her hand a twig of laurel and thrice struck the earth therewith, uttering certain mystic words the while, and almost before the sound of these words had ceased there sprang up forthwith before them a palace, the most beautiful and sumptuous that ever was seen. The next morning Ferrandino the king went early to look out of the window, and when he beheld the rich and marvellous palace standing where there had been nothing the night before, he was altogether overcome with amazement, and called his wife and his stepmother to come and see it; but these were greatly disturbed in mind at the sight thereof, for a boding came upon them that some ill was about to befall them. While Ferrandino was standing, scanning closely the palace before him, and examining it in all parts, he lifted his eyes to a certain window, and there, in the chamber inside, he beheld two ladies of a beauty more rich and dazzling than the sun. And no sooner had his eyes fallen upon them than he felt a tempest of passion rising in his heart, for he assuredly recognized in one of them some similitude of that loveliness which had once been Biancabella's. And when he asked who they were, and from what land they had come, the answer which was given him was that they were two ladies who had been exiled from their home, and that they had journeyed from Persia, with all their possessions, to take up their abode in the noble city of Naples. When he heard this, Ferrandino sent a messenger to inquire whether he would be doing them any pleasure in waiting upon them, accompanied by the ladies of his court, to pay them a visit of welcome, and to this gracious message they sent an answer, saying that it would indeed be a very precious honour to be thus visited by him, but that it would be more decorous and respectful if they, as subjects, should pay this duty to him, than that he, as lord and king, should visit them. Hereupon Ferrandino bade them summon the queen and the other ladies of the court, and with these (although at first they refused to go, being so greatly in fear of their impending ruin) he betook himself to the palace of the two ladies, who, with all friendly signs of welcome and with modest bearing, gave him the reception due to a highly honoured guest, showing him the wide loggias, and the roomy halls, and the richly ornamented chambers, the walls of which were lined with alabaster and fine porphyry, while about them were to be seen on all sides carven figures which looked like life. And when they had exhibited to the king all parts of the sumptuous palace, the two fair young women approached Ferrandino and besought him most gracefully that he would deign to come one day with his queen and dine at their table. The king, whose heart was not hard enough to remain unaffected by all he had seen, and who was gifted moreover with a magnanimous and liberal spirit, graciously accepted the invitation. And when he had tendered his thanks to the two ladies for the noble welcome they had given him, he and the queen departed together and returned to their own palace. When the day fixed for the banquet had come, the king and the queen and the stepmother, clad in their royal robes and accompanied, by some of the ladies of the court, went to do honour to the magnificent feast set out in the most sumptuous fashion. And after he had given them water to wash their hands, the seneschal bade them conduct the king and queen to a table apart, set somewhat higher, but at the same time near to the others, and having done this, he caused all the rest of the guests to seat themselves according to their rank, and in this fashion they all feasted merrily and joyfully together. When the stately feast had come to an end and the tables had been cleared, Samaritana rose from her seat, and turning towards the king and the queen, spake thus: "Your majesties, in order that the time may not be irksome to us, as it may if we sit here idle, let one or other of us propose something in the way of diversion which will let us pass the day pleasantly." And when the guests heard what Samaritana said, they all agreed that she had spoken well, but yet there was found no one bold enough to make such a proposition as she had called for. Whereupon Samaritana, when she perceived they were all silent, went on: "Since it appears that no one of this company is prepared to put forward anything, I, with your majesty's leave, will bid come hither one of our own maidens, whose singing perchance will give you no little pleasure." And having summoned the damsel, whose name was Silveria, into the banqueting-room, Samaritana commanded her to take a lyre in her hand and to sing thereto something in honour of the king which should be worthy of their praise. And the damsel, obedient to her lady's command, took her lyre, and, having placed herself before the king, sang in a soft and pleasant voice while she touched the resounding strings with the plectrum, telling in her chant the story of Biancabella from beginning to end, but not mentioning her by name. When the whole of the story had been set forth, Samaritana again rose to her feet, and demanded of the king what would be the fitting punishment, what torture would be cruel enough for those who had put their hands to such an execrable crime. Then the stepmother, who deemed that she might perchance get a release for her misdeeds by a prompt and ready reply, did not wait for the king to give his answer, but cried out in a bold and confident tone, "Surely to be cast into a furnace heated red hot would be but a light punishment for the offences of such a one." Then Samaritana, with her countenance all afire with vengeance and anger, made answer to her: "Thou thyself art the very same guilty and barbarous woman, through whose nefarious working all these cruel wrongs have been done; and thou, wicked and accursed one, hast condemned thyself to a righteous penalty out of thine own mouth." Then Samaritana, turning towards the king with a look of joy upon her face, said to him, "Behold! this is your Biancabella, this is the wife you loved so dearly, this is she without whom you could not live." Then, to prove the truth of her words, Samaritana gave the word to the three daughters of the old man that they should forthwith, in the presence of the king, begin to comb Biancabella's fair and wavy hair, and scarcely had they begun when (as has been told before) there fell out of her tresses many very precious and exquisite jewels, and from her hands came forth roses exhaling the sweet scents of morning, and all manner of odoriferous flowers. And for yet greater certainty she pointed out to the king how the snow-white neck of Biancabeila was encircled by a fine chain of the most delicately wrought gold, which grew naturally between the skin and the flesh, and shone out as through the clearest crystal. When the king perceived by these manifest and convincing signs that she was indeed his own Biancabella, he began to weep for the joy he felt, and to embrace her tenderly. But before he left that place he caused to be heated hot a furnace, and into this he bade them cast the stepmother and her two daughters. Thus their repentance for their crimes came too late, and they made a miserable end to their lives. And after this the three daughters of the old man were given honourably in marriage, and the King Ferrandino with Biancabelia and Samaritana lived long and happily, and when Ferrandino died his son succeeded to his kingdom. Source (books.google.com): The Italian Novelists , translated into English by W. G. Waters, vol. 1, The Facetious Nights of Straparola (London: Privately printed for member of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901), night 3, fable 3, pp. 302-337 . Source (Internet Archive): The Italian Novelists , translated into English by W. G. Waters, vol. 1, The Facetious Nights of Straparola (London: Privately printed for member of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901), night 3, fable 3, pp. 302-337 . Giovanni Francesco Straparola lived in Italy between about 1485 and 1558. His collection of tales Le Piacevoli Notti ( The Facetious Nights ) was published in two volumes in Venice between 1550 and 1553. Link to the Wikipedia article about The Facetious Nights of Straparola . Return to the table of contents . Penta the Handless Giovanni Battista Basile, Il Pentamerone Second Diversion of the Third Day Penta scorneth to wed her brother, and cutting off her hands, sendeth them to him as a present. He commandeth that she should be put within a chest and thrown into the sea. The tide casteth her upon a seashore. A sailor findeth her, and leadeth her to his home, but his wife thrusts her again into the same chest and into the sea. She is found by a king, and he taketh her to wife; but by the wickedness of the same woman, Penta is expelled from that kingdom. After sore troubles and travail she is recovered by her husband and her brother. The King of Preta-Secca having been bereft of his wife, the evil one entered his head, and suggested that he should take his sister Penta to wife. For this reason, sending for her one day, he met her alone, and said, "Tis not a matter, O my sister, to be done by a man with sound judgment, to let the good which he hath in his own house depart; and besides one knoweth not how it will be, when one alloweth strange people to put their feet in one's house; therefore having well digested this business, I came to the resolution, and I purpose to take thee to wife, because thou art made of mine own breath, and I know thy nature. Be thou content therefore to be tied in this knot, to be set in this setting, to join this partnership, to enter into this uniantur acta , this mixture, et fiat potio , and let it be done, as both of us will do a good day's work." Penta, hearing this thrust in fifth, stood nearly out of her mind, and her colour came and went, and she could scarce believe her own ears, thinking it impossible that her brother could jump to this height, and try to sell her a pair of rotten eggs when he needed an hundred fresh ones. Remaining silent for a while, thinking how she should answer to such an impertinent question, and out of purpose, at last, unloading the fardel of patience, she said, "If thou hast lost thy wits, I will not lose my shame. I am in a transport of surprise at thee, that thou allowest such words to escape thy mouth, which if said in joke befit an ass, and if in earnest stink of lecherousness. I regret that, if thou hast tongue to speak such outrageous language, I have not ears to hearken thereto. I thy wife? Yes 'tis done for thee: oh, smell thy fill: Since when dost thou these foul tricks? This olla podrida? These mixtures? And where are we? In the ice? His sister, O baked-cheese! Ask thy priest to correct thee, and never allow such words to escape thy lips, or else I will do incredible things, and whilst thou esteem me not as a sister, I will not hold thee for what thou art to me." And thus saying, she departed, and entering a chamber, locked and bolted the door, and saw not the face of her brother for more than a month, leaving the wretched king, who had listened with an hardened brow, to tire out the shot, scorned as a child who hath broken the juglet, and confounded as a cookmaid when the cat hath stolen the meat. After some days were past, the king again gave vent to his licentious desires, and she desiring to know what had caused her brother such great longing, and what was in her person that should put such a thought in his head, came forth out of her chamber, and went to him, and said, "O my brother, I have admired myself and looked at myself in the mirror, and I cannot find anything in my face which could deserve and inspire such love as thine, as I am not such a sweet morsel to cause folk to pant and long for me." And answered the king, "Penta mine, thou art beauteous and accomplished from head to foot, but thine hand is the thing which above all others causeth me to faint with excessive desire: That hand is the fork which extracteth from the pot of this breast my heart and entrails: That hand is the hook, which lifteth from the cistern of my life the pail of my soul: That hand is the pincers, wherein is held my spirit whilst love is filing it. O hand, O beauteous hand, spoon, which administereth the soup of sweetness: nippers, which nip my longing and desire: shovel, which casteth dust within my heart!" And he would have said more, but Penta replied, "Thou mayest go, I have heard thee; we will meet again;" and entering her chamber, she sent for a witless slave, and giving him a large knife and an handful of coins, said to him, "Ali mine, cut off mine hands, I wish to make them beautiful in secret, and whiter." The slave, believing he was doing her pleasure, with two blows cut them off. Then she had them laid in a faenza basin and sent them covered with a silken napkin to her brother, with a message that she hoped he would enjoy what he coveted most, and desiring him good health and twins, she saluted him. The king, beholding such a deed, was wroth with exceeding wrath, and he waxed furious, and ordered that a chest should be made straightway, well tarred outside, and commanded that his sister should be put therein, and cast into the sea. And this was done, and the chest sailed on battered by the waves until the tide projected it upon a seashore, where, found by some sailors who had been casting their nets, it was opened, and therein they beheld Penta, far more beautiful than the moon when it riseth after having spent its lenten time at Taranto. Masiello, who was the chief and the most courageous of those folk, carried her home, bidding Nuccia his wife to entreat her with kindness. But no sooner had her husband gone forth, than she, who was the mother of suspicion and jealousy, put Penta again within the chest, and cast her once more into the sea, where beaten by the waves, and buffeted here and there, it was at last met by a large vessel, on board of which was the King of Terra-Verde. Perceiving this chest floating about, the king instructed the sailors to strike sail and lay to, and ordering the small boat to be lowered, sent some of the sailors to pick up the chest. When they brought it on board, they opened it, and discovered therein the unhappy damsel, and the king, beholding this beauty alive within a coffin for the dead, believed that he had found a great treasure, although his heart wept because the casket of so many gems of love was found without handles. Taking her to his realm, the king gave her as maid of honour to the queen; and she did all possible services to the queen, as sew, thread the needle, starch the collars, and comb the queen's hair, with her feet, for which reason, no less than for her goodness, youth and beauty, she was held dear as the queen's own daughter. Now after a month or so was past, the queen was called to appear before the judgment seat of destiny to pay the debt to nature, and she asked the king to her bedside, and said to him, "But a short while can my soul remain till she looseth the matrimonial knot between herself and the body; therefore hearten thy heart, O my husband, and strengthen thy soul. But if thou lovest me, and desirest that I should go content and consoled and comforted into the next world, thou must grant me a boon." "Command, O mine heart," said the king, "that if I cannot give thee proof whilst in life of my great love, I may give thee a sign of the affection I bear thee even after death." Replied the queen, "Now listen, as thou hast promised. As soon as mine eyes will be closed in the dust, thou must marry Penta, although we know not who she is, nor whence she came: yet by good breeding and fine bearing is known a steed of good race." Answered the king, "Live thou an hundred years; but even if thou shouldst say good-night to give me the evil day, I swear to thee that I shall take her to wife, and I care not that she is without hands and short of weight, for of the bad ones one must always take the least." But these last words were uttered in an undertone so that his wife should not hear them. And as soon as the candle of the queen's days was put out, he took Penta to wife; and the first night that he lay with her she conceived. But after a time the king was obliged to sail for the kingdom of Anto-Scuoglio, and farewelling Penta, he weighed anchor. The nine months being over, Penta brought to the light a beauteous man-child, and all the city was illumined and tables spread in honour of the newborn babe, and the ministers and counsellors quickly dispatched a felucca to advise the king of what had taken place. Now the ship met stormy weather on the way, so that one moment it seemed as if she would meet the stars, and another moment that she would plunge into the very bottom of the ocean. At last, by the grace of heaven, she went ashore in the same place where Penta had been found, and had met with kindness and compassion from the chief of the sailors, and had been cast again into the sea by a woman's cruelty. As ill-fortune would have it, the same Nuccia was washing the linen of her child at the seashore, and curious to know the business of other people, as 'tis the nature of women, enquired of the felucca's master whence he came, and whither he was bound, and who had sent him. And the master answered, "I come from Terra-Verde, and am going to Anto-Scuoglio to find the king of that country, to give him a letter, and for this I have been sent on purpose. I believe 'tis his wife that hath written to him. But I could not tell thee clearly what is the message." Replied Nuccia, "And who is the wife of this king?" And the master rejoined, 'From what I have heard said, she is a beauteous young dame, and she is hight Penta the Handless, as she hath lost both her hands. And I have heard them saying that she was found within a chest in the midst of the sea, and by her good fortune and destiny she hath become the king's wife, and I know not why she is writing to him in such haste that I needs must run against time and tide to reach him quickly." Hearing these words, that jewess of a Nuccia invited the master to come and drink a glass in her house, and she plied him with liquor till he was dead drunk, and then taking the letter out of his pocket, she called a scribe and bade him read it. All the time the man read, she was dying with envy, and every syllable made her sigh deeply, and at the last she bade the same scribe to falsify the writing, and write to the king that the queen had given birth to a dog, and they awaited his orders to know what they should do with it. After it was written they sealed it, and she put it in the sailor's pocket, and when he awakened and beheld the weather changed, he weighed anchor, and tacked the ship, and fared with a light wind for Anto-Scuoglio. Arriving thereto, he presented the letter to the king, who, after reading it, answered, that they should keep the queen in cheerful spirits, so that she should not be troubled at all, for these things came through heaven's commandments, and a good man should not rebel against the stars' decree. And the master departed, and in a few days arrived at the same place, where Nuccia met him, and entreating him with exceeding great kindness, and giving him wine of extra good vintage, he fell to the ground intoxicated once more. And he slept heavily, and Nuccia putting her hand in his pocket found the answer; and calling the scribe bade him read it, and again bade him falsify a reply for the ministers and counsellors of Terra-Verde, which was, that they should burn at once mother and son. When the master got over his drinking bout, he departed; and arriving at Terra-Verde, presented the letter to the counsellors, and they opened it. When they had mastered its contents, there was a murmuring and whispering among those old sages; and they conversed at length about this matter, and concluded at last that either the king must be going mad, or that some one had cast a spell upon him, for when he had such a pearl of a wife and a gem of an heir, he ordered to make powder of them for death's teeth. So they took the middle course, and decided to send the queen and her son away from the city, where no news could ever be heard of them: And so, giving her some money so as to keep body and soul together, they sent out of the house a treasure, and from the city a great light, and from the husband the two props uplifting his hopes. The unhappy Penta, perceiving that they had expelled her, although she was not a dishonest woman, nor related to bandits, nor a fastidious student, taking the child in arms, whom she watered with her tears, and fed with her milk, departed, and fared toward Lago-Truvolo where dwelt a magician, and he beholding this beautiful maimed damsel who moved the hearts to compassion, this beauty who made more war with her maimed arms than Briareus with his hundred hands, asked her to relate to him the whole history of her misadventures. And she related to him how her brother, because she would not satisfy his lust of her flesh, sent her to be food for the fishes, and she continued her story up to the day in which she had set her foot in his kingdom. The magician, hearing this sad tale, wept with ceaseless weeping; and the compassion which entered through the ear-holes issued in sighs from the mouth; at last comforting her with kind words, he said, "Keep a good heart, O my daughter, for no matter how rotten is the soul's home, it can be supported with the props of hope; and therefore let not thy spirit go forth, as heaven sometimes sendeth great trouble and travail, so as to make appear all the greater the marvellous coming of success. Doubt not, therefore, thou hast found father and mother here, and I will help thee with my own blood." The sad-hearted Penta thanked him gratefully, and said, "I care not now for aught. Let heaven rain misfortunes upon my head, and let a storm of ruin come, now that I am under thy shelter I fear naught as thou wilt protect me with thy grace as thou canst and wilt; and I feel like under the spell of childhood." And after a thousand words of kindness on one side and thanks on the other, the magician allotted her a splendid apartment in his palace, and bade that she should be entreated as his own daughter. The next morning he sent for the crier and commanded that a ban should be published, that whosoever would come and relate at his court the greatest misfortune, he would present them with a crown and sceptre of gold, of the worth of a kingdom. And the news of this edict flew to all parts of Europe, and to that court came folk more than broccoli to gain such great riches, and one related that he had served at court all the days of his life, and had found that he had lost the water and the soap, his youth and health, and had been paid with a form of cheese. And another, that he had met with injustice from a superior, which he could not resent; and that he had been obliged to swallow the pill, and could not give vent to his anger. One lamented that he had put all his substance within a vessel, and owing to contrary winds had lost the cooked and the raw. Another complained that he had spent all his years in the exercise of his pen and had had so little fortune, that never had it brought him any gain, and he despaired of himself, seeing that matters of pen and ink were so fortunate in the world, whilst his only failed. Such was their case. In the meanwhile the King of Terra-Verde had returned to his kingdom; and finding this fine sirup at home, he became frantic, and acted as a mad unchained lion, and would have slain all the ministers and counsellors, if they had not shown him his own letter, and perceiving that it had been counterfeited, he sent for the ship's master, and bade him relate to him what had occurred in the voyage. And the king keenly divined that Masiello's wife must have worked him this evil; and arming and equipping a galley, he departed and sailed for that coast, and arriving there he sought and found the woman, and with kindly words he drew out from her the whole intrigue, and thus ascertaining that envy and jealousy had been the cause of this great misfortune, he commanded that the woman should be punished: and they well anointed her with wax and tallow, and put her among a heap of wood, setting fire thereto. And the king stood and watched till he beheld that the fire with its red tongues had licked up that wretched woman. He then ordered the sailors to weigh anchor and depart. And whilst sailing amid the sea, his craft was met by a large vessel, and on enquiry being made he found that on board of it was the King of Preta-Secca. They exchanged a thousand ceremonious compliments, and the King of Preta-Secca informed the King of Terra-Verde that he was sailing towards Lago-Truvolo, as the king of that kingdom had published a certain ban, and he was going to tempt his fortune, as he did not yield to any in misfortune, being the most sorrow-stricken man in all the world. Answered the King of Terra-Verde, "If 'tis for such case thou goest, I can surpass thee, or at least equal thee, and I can give fifteen for a dozen, and excel the most unfortunate, whoever he be, and where the others measure their cark and care with a small lantern, I can measure it even to the grave. Therefore I will also come with thee, and let us act as gentlemen, each one of us, and whoso shall win of us two shall divide the winnings with the other, even to a fennel." "I agree to it," answered the King of Preta-Secca, and plighting their word between them, they sailed together for Lago-Truvolo, where they disembarked, and fared to the royal palace, and presented themselves before the magician. And when he knew who they were, he entreated them with honour as due to kings, and bade them be seated under the dais, and said, "Well come, and a thousand times welcome!" And hearing that they also had come to the trial of wretchedness and unhappiness of men, the magician enquired what great sorrow had subjected them to the south wind of sighs. And the King of Preta-Secca first began to tell of his love, and the wrong done to his own flesh and blood, and the honourable deed of a virtuous woman done by his sister, and his own dogheartedness in shutting her up into the chest, and casting her into the sea. And he grieved with exceeding grief as his conscience reproached him of his own error, and his sorrow was great, passing all distress, for the loss of his sister. In one way he was tormented by shame, in the other by the great loss: so that all the cark and care of the most great affliction in others was in him like hell compared to a lantern, and the quintessence of sorrow was as naught, compared with the anguish which gnawed at his heart. Having ended his say, the King of Terra-Verde began to relate, saying, "Alas! thy sorrow and trouble are like small lumps of sugar, and cakes, and sweetmeats compared with mine, because that very Penta the Handless of whom thou hast spoken, and whom I found in that chest, like a Venice wax torch to burn at my funeral, I took to wife. And she conceived, and bare me a son of passing beauty, and by the envy and malignity of an hideous witch, both had nearly been slain. But, O sore nail to my heart, O anguish and sore affliction, I can never find peace and rest in this world! They were both expelled from my kingdom: and I have taste for naught, and I know not how under the heavy load of such cark and care, doth not fall the ass of this weary life." The magician, having heard both their say, understood at once from the points of their noses that one of them was the brother, and the other the husband, of Penta, and sending for Nufriello the son, said to him, "Go and kiss thy sire and lord's feet;" and the child obeyed the magician, and the father seeing the good breeding and beauty and grace of the little child threw a gold chain round his neck. And this done, the magician said again to the child, "Go and kiss thy uncle's hand, O beauteous boy mine," and the child obeyed at once. The uncle marvelling with exceeding marvel at the wit and spirit of the little one, presented him with a valuable gem, and enquired of the magician if he were his son, and he answered that they must enquire of his mother. Penta, who had been hid behind a curtain, and had heard the whole business, now came forth, and like a little dog who, having been lost, and after some days finding his master again, barks, and wags its tail, and bounds, and licks his hand, and gives a thousand signs of its delight: Thus it was with her, now going to the brother, and then to her husband, now clasped by the love of the one, and then drawn by the blood's instinct of the other, she embraced first one and then the other, and their delight, and joy, and happiness knew no bounds. Ye must suppose that it was a concert in three of broken words and interrupted sighs; but having ended this music, they then returned to caress the child, first the father, and then the uncle, clasped him, and kissed him, and embraced him. After that from both sides all was said and done, the magician concluded with these words, "Heaven knoweth how this heart fluttereth with joy in beholding the happiness of all, and the lady Penta comforted, who for her own good deeds deserveth to be held in the palm of the hand, and by this scheme I tried to draw to this kingdom her husband and her brother, and to one and the other I submit myself their slave; but as man bindeth himself with words, and the ox is bound by the horns, and the promise of a worthy man is his bond, judging that the King of Terra-Verde was in sooth the one most likely to burst with grief, I will maintain my promise to him, and therefore I give him not only the crown and sceptre as hath been published by the ban, but my kingdom also. And as I have neither chick nor child, by your good grace I desire to take as my adopted children this handsome couple, husband and wife, and ye will be dear unto me as the eyeball of mine eyes; and because there should be naught left for Penta to desire, let her put her maimed limbs between her legs, and she will withdraw them with a pair of hands more beauteous than she had before." And this being done, and all happening as the magician had said, the joy was great: They were out of mind with delight. The husband esteemed this the greater good fortune, more than the other kingdom given to him by the magician; and for a few days there were great joyances and feasting, and then the King of Preta-Secca returned to his kingdom, and the King of Terra-Verde sent his brother-in-law to his realm, bidding his younger brother take his place, and he and his wife remained with the magician, forgetting in joy and delight the past travail, and taking the world to witness, that: There is naught sweet and dear Unless one hath been first tried by the bitter. Source: Giovanni Battista Basile, Il Pentamerone; or, The Tale of Tales , translated by Richard Burton, vol. 2 (London: Henry and Company, 1893), pp. 249-62 . Giambatista Basile (1566-1632) was an Italian (Neopolitan) poet and folktale collector. His collection Il Pentamerone was published posthumously in two volumes in 1634 and 1636. Link to the Wikipedia article on the Pentamerone . Return to the table of contents . The Innkeeper's Beautiful Daughter Italy Once upon a time there was a woman who had an inn where she provided shelter to travelers. She had a daughter who was so beautiful that one could not imagine anyone more beautiful. The mother could not stand her, precisely because she was so beautiful, and always kept her locked up in a room so no one could see her. The only person who knew about her was the maid who brought food to her every day. One day it happened that the king wanted to spend the night at the inn. He arrived just as the maid was bringing food to the girl. Someone called the maid, and she forgot to close the door behind her. Noticing this, the innkeeper's daughter became curious and wanted to see the king. She stepped into the doorway, but when the king walked down the hall she quickly stepped back into the room. However, he saw her, and was completely blinded with her beauty. "Where is the beautiful girl whom I saw in the hallway?" he asked the maid who was serving him. "Oh, your majesty," she answered, "that is the innkeeper's daughter, and she is just as good as she is beautiful. But her mother keeps he locked up so that no one can see her." The king was so enchanted with her beauty that he wanted to marry her. Because he could not ask the mother for her hand, he called for the maid and said, "I shall remain here for a few days. Go to the daughter and ask her if she will be my wife." The maid went to the girl and said, "Just think, miss, the king wants to marry you, and he wants to know if you will flee with him and escape from this house where you are treated so badly." "Oh," answered the poor girl, "how would I be able to flee? My mother keeps such a strict watch over me." "Just leave it to me," answered the faithful maid. She then went to the king and said, "I know what you can do. Leave here tomorrow, as though you were returning to your home. Stop somewhere nearby. The girl will pretend to be sick, and I'll tell her mother that it is because she is always locked indoors. If she will let her go outside then I'll bring her to you. Take me with you, because I'll not be able to return without the girl." The king promised to do this, and the next day the king pretended to leave. However, he went only a short distance, then stopped at another inn, but without letting it be known that he was the king. The innkeeper's daughter pretended to be sick and refused to eat anything, losing more and more weight. "Just what does the girl have that makes her so ill?" asked the mother. "Of course the poor child is sick," answered the maid. She is always kept inside never gets any fresh air. Tomorrow let her go to the fair with me. Those few steps will bring her back to health." The mother agreed to this, and the next morning the maid and the daughter left for the fair. They were scarcely out of the mother's view when they rushed to the king, whose carriage was ready to go. He lifted the beautiful girl inside, and they rode away. He gave the faithful maid so much money that she was able to move to a different country with her entire family. The king arrived at his castle and introduced his fiancée to his mother. "This is my dear fiancée," he said, "and now we want to have a splendid wedding." The girl was so beautiful that the old queen accepted her immediately. There was a splendid wedding, and the king and his young wife lived together happily and contentedly. Nearly a year had passed when war broke out, and the king had to go off to battle. He said to the old queen, "Mother, dear, I must go away. I entrust my dear wife to you. If she should have a baby, let me know immediately, and take good care of it." With that he embraced his mother and his wife, and departed. Not long afterward the young queen gave birth to her first son, and the old queen took good care of her. She immediately wrote a letter to the king telling him of the birth of his son. The messenger carrying the letter to the king stopped to rest at the inn owned by the young queen's mother. Upon arriving there he ordered something to eat, and while he was eating, the innkeeper asked him where he was from and where he was going. He explained how he had been sent to report to the king the happy birth of his son. Hearing this, the innkeeper resolved to take revenge against her daughter for having escaped. The messenger lay down and fell asleep, whereupon the innkeeper took the letter from his pocket and replaced it with a different one, claiming that the young queen had been guilty of the worst infidelity and deserved the strictest punishment. This was the letter that the messenger brought to the king. This letter saddened the king greatly because he was so in love with his wife. Nonetheless, he wrote to the old queen that she should take good care of his wife and do nothing until he had returned. The messenger departed with this letter. Arriving at the inn, he once again ordered something to eat. The innkeeper asked if the king had sent a response with him. "Yes," he answered, "the letter is in my pocket." The messenger once again fell asleep after eating, and the innkeeper replaced the king's letter with a different one, wherein it was written that the young queen's hands should be chopped off, the child should be tied to her maimed arms, and that the two of them should be thus exiled into the wide world. After receiving this letter the old queen cried bitterly, for she dearly loved her daughter-in-law. However, the young queen meekly said, "I shall do whatever my lord and husband commands!" With that she had her own hands chopped off. The child was then tied to her arms so that she could nurse it. She then embraced the old queen and wandered away, far away into a dark forest. After wandering a great while she came to a little brook. Because she was very tired she sat down. "Oh," she thought, "if only I had my hands I would not be so helpless. Then I could wash out my child's diaper and dress him with clean clothes. As it is, my innocent child shall soon die." As she thus spoke and wept, an old and distinguished man suddenly appeared before her and asked why she was crying. She told him of her sorrow and how she innocently had been inflicted with such severe punishment. "Don't cry," said the old man. "Come with me, and all will go well with you." He led her a little further into the woods, then he struck the ground with his staff, and suddenly a castle appeared, much grander than the king's castle. A garden was there as well, and the king himself did not have a better one. The old man was Saint Joseph, and he had come to the aid of the innocent young queen. The young queen and her child lived with Saint Joseph in the beautiful castle, and because she was so good, Saint Joseph caused her hands to grow back. The child grew large and strong, and every day became more beautiful. But now we shall leave the queen and see what is happening with the king. The war ended, and the king sorrowfully returned to his castle. His wife's infidelity broke his heart. "What have you done with my wife?" he asked his mother. "Oh, you wicked man," answered the queen, weeping, "how could you cause your innocent wife to suffer so greatly?" "What!" he cried. "Did you not write to me that she was guilty of great infidelity." "You say that I wrote that to you?" said the queen. "I reported the happy birth of your son, and you replied that I should have her hands chopped off and exiled into the wide world with her child." "I wrote no such thing!" cried the king. Then the two of them brought forth the letters, and said that they had not written them. "Oh, my dear innocent child!" sobbed the old queen. "Now you are surely dead!" Great sadness fell over the castle, and the king was so miserable that he turned seriously ill. He finally recovered but remained wretchedly unhappy. One day the old queen said to him, "My son, the weather is beautiful, why don't you go hunting? Perhaps it will distract you." So the king mounted his horse and sadly rode into the woods, but without hunting. Because of his grief he did not pay attention to where he was going, and soon found himself lost in the dense forest. His attendants did not dare to say anything to him. As it was growing dark the king wanted to turn back, but no one knew the right way, so they blundered ever deeper into the woods. Finally they saw a light in the distance, and following it they came to the beautiful castle where the young queen was living. They knocked, and Saint Joseph opened the door and asked what they wanted. "Oh, my good old man," answered the king. "Could you give us shelter for the night? We are lost and cannot find our way back home." Saint Joseph invited them in, fed them, and offered them good beds. However, the young queen and her son did not show themselves. The next morning, while the king was at breakfast, Saint Joseph went to the young queen and said, "The king has spent the night here. Now is the moment when your sorrows shall cease." The queen dressed her son in his best clothes, and Saint Joseph had him go to the king, kiss his hand, and say, "Good morning, papa, I would like to eat breakfast with you." Seeing the beautiful child, the king was very moved, but did not know why. Then the door opened and the young queen entered with Saint Joseph. She bowed before the king. He recognized his beloved wife and embraced her and his little son. Saint Joseph approached them, saying, "All your sorrows are now at an end. Live happily and contentedly, and if ever you have a wish, just call on me, for I am Saint Joseph." With that he blessed them and disappeared. The castle disappeared at the same time, leaving the king, the queen, their son and the attendants all standing in the woods. Before them they saw the pathway that led out of the woods and back to their castle. They came to the old queen who was happy from the bottom of her heart to see once again her beloved daughter-in-law and her little grandson. Then all together they lived happily and contentedly, but we, we went away with nothing. Source (books.google.com): Laura Gonzenbach, "Von der schönen Wirthstochter," Sizilianische Märchen: Aus dem Volksmund gesammelt , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1870), no. 24, pp. 148-53 . Source (Internet Archive): Laura Gonzenbach, "Von der schönen Wirthstochter," Sizilianische Märchen: Aus dem Volksmund gesammelt , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1870), no. 24, pp. 148-53 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2018. Return to the table of contents . The Girl without Hands Italy / Austria Once upon a time there was a woman innkeeper who had a daughter. Whenever guests came there they said, "The innkeeper is in truth the most beautiful woman in all the land." But when they saw her daughter they could not take their eyes from her, and they said, "The innkeeper is beautiful, but her daughter is much more beautiful." The innkeeper was proud of her beauty and would liked to have been the most beautiful. It made her ill to hear people say that her daughter was more beautiful than she was. Every day the girl became more and more beautiful until the mother could no longer contain her envy and anger. She hired a man and ordered him to take the girl into the mountains and kill her. As proof he was to bring back her heart. The man took the girl into the mountains and told her what the mother had demanded. The girl wept bitterly, fell to her knees, and begged him to spare her young life. The man was moved and spared her life on the condition that she would go away into foreign lands and never again return home. He brought back a dog's heart to the innkeeper. Sadly the girl went into the wide world, arriving finally in a city where she remained for some time as a servant girl. However, she was always sad, thinking constantly about her homeland and her wicked mother. She could not believe that her mother could be so cruel, and said to herself, "For sure she is filled with regret and now weeps sorrowfully and silently because of my presumed death." Finally she no longer could withstand her longing, and she set forth for her homeland. Her mother received her with angry surprise. The proud woman summoned the man once again and reproved him for his previous disobedience. Once again she told him to take the girl into the mountains and kill her. This time he was to bring back her chopped off hands as proof of her death. The man took the girl into the mountains, and she again fell to her knees and begged him to spare her life. The man was indeed moved, but he feared the innkeeper's anger. "What can I do?" he said. "Your mother has demanded that I bring her your hands. I have to obey her." The girl looked painfully toward heaven and said, "I would sooner lose my hands than my life. Chop off my hands, but spare my life!" She laid her hands onto a tree stump, and the horrible thing happened. The man helped her to bind up her bleeding arms, than told her to go far away, making her swear that she never again would return home. In unspeakable pain the girl went far into the dark woods. She prayed that God might heal her and protect her, and her prayer was not in vain. Soon her wounds began to heal, and she found nourishment from herbs, roots, and fruits of the forest. The wild animals did not threaten her life. At first she lived in a cave, but then she found an old willow tree with a rotten inside. With great difficulty and stress she hollowed it out. Here she was better protected against heat, cold, and wild animals. When her wounds pained her, and she despaired over what might become of her, she prayed and wept, and her prayers and tears comforted her. An inner voice cried out to her, "God will not forsake you!" Even the poorest and the most miserable individual who listens to and believes in such a voice will find comfort. One day it happened that the king's son from a somewhat distant city who was hunting in these mountains became separated from his companions. Wandering alone through the woods he suddenly caught sight of the beautiful maiden. At first he thought it was a beautiful, strange animal. Wanting to capture it alive, he did not shoot an arrow at it. When she saw him, she ran away like a deer. He chased after her and saw that she fled into the hollow willow tree. He approached it and commanded her to step outside. To his surprise he saw a beautiful maiden with chopped off hands standing before him. "Who are you, my child, and why are you here? Who cut off your hands?" She wept and said nothing. Falling in love with her, he said, "I see that you must have fallen into the hands of wicked people. I will rescue you. Now you shall experience better days. Come with me into the city." Then he blew into his hunting horn, and it sounded through the woods, echoing from the cliffs. Not long afterward his companions and servants approached. They fashioned a litter. The prince lifted the maiden onto it and covered her with his cloak. After arriving at the palace in the city he had rooms made ready for her, then provided her with servants and costly clothing and took care of her in the best possible manner. One day he went to her and asked her if she did not want to become his wife. She blushed and said, "That cannot be." Sadly, he asked her why. "How can I, a poor girl without hands become your wife?" she replied. "What would your mother say?" "Don't worry about that," he said. "I am my own master and follow my heart's voice, which tells me that you will make me happy. I love you truly and sincerely, even if you cannot love me." Hearing these words, her face turned fire-red and her heart beat loudly. She dropped to her knees before him and covered his hands with kisses and hot tears. "You are now my bride before God and before the people," he cried with joy. Lifting her up he pressed a kiss onto her pure white forehead. The he went to his mother and explained to her that he wanted to marry the maiden. The mother was a proud woman and for a long time had secretly assumed that her son would marry the world's most beautiful and wealthiest princess. Therefore the prince's proposal made her exceedingly angry. "Are you out of your mind?" she shouted at him. "You want to make a vagabond low-class girl without hands into my daughter-in-law and the people's queen?" But the prince remained steadfast. He forced his mother to tame, or at least to hide her anger, and he wed the maiden. The people did not complain; to the contrary, they loved the young queen more and more, for in a short time she did more for them without hands than the old queen had done for them in her entire lifetime with her healthy hands. The couple's happiness lasted only a few months, for war broke out, and the prince had to go to battle with his army. He ordered all his servants to care for his wife and to assure that no harm would come to her. Then he fondly bad her farewell and departed with his army. More months passed by, and the young queen gave birth to two beautiful boys. The old queen was beside herself with anger and would have pulled the children away from her, but the servants, true to their master, kept watch over the young queen and her children, not leaving them alone for even a moment. The old queen sent a trusted messenger to the prince with the claim that his wife had given birth to two children that looked like dogs. The people were revolting, and he therefore should order what was to be done. She believed that her son would give the order to have the young mother and her children killed, but she was wrong. The prince ordered that no one should do anything to his wife or the children until after he had returned home. This angered the old queen all the more, and she sent the same messenger to the prince with the claim that the people were threatening a revolution, and that she therefore saw no other remedy but to publicly burn to death the young mother and her children. And she would have had this done, but the young queen discovered her plan in time. In the middle of the night she took both children into her arms and secretly fled from the palace and from the city. "God will not abandon me and my poor little ones!" she thought as she went on her way. She walked until she came to a valley in a forest wilderness. Then two honorable men approached her and asked, "Have these children been baptized?" "No," she replied and then told them of her escape and of her difficulties. Then the one man said, "I'll baptize the children. What names shall I give them?" "Whatever ones you like," she said. "Good," replied the man. "The one shall be named Johannes and the other one Joseph." And he baptized them with the water from the river that flowed through the valley. The two men were none other than Saint Johannes and Saint Joseph themselves. Then the first man said, "Take your children to the far edge of the valley. There you will find a lovely house supplied with everything that you need for yourself and your children. Do not leave the house, and do not open the door for anyone unless he addresses you by the five wounds of our savior." Relieved, she promised this, thanked he men graciously, and went on her way. She than came upon a beautiful woman who looked at her kindly and said, "My poor woman, you have no hands." The young mother wept. The beautiful woman was none other than Saint Mary, and she said, "Stick your arms into the water of this river." She did this, and when she pulled her arms out, she once again had her healthy hands. Weeping with joy she thanked heavenly woman, who then said to her in parting, "Go to that house and faithfully heed what the two saints have told you. Then things will go well for you and your children, for you have always been pious and in your need have trusted in heaven. With a joyful heart she went on her way and found the promised house. There they remained by themselves, for no other human soul was to be found near and far. There she had everything that she needed. The two boys grew and were soon running cheerfully around in the woods. The mother kept her promise, and they were pious and good, praying morning and evening to God that he would bless and protect them. Six years passed. Meanwhile the prince had returned from the wars and had become king. He was always sad, for he often thought about his wife and his children, who he assumed were dead. He had banned his mother from the court. One time he went hunting and lost his way in the woods. Night was approaching and it had begun to storm. Without success he sought shelter beneath the old trees; the wind whipped rain into his face, it thundered without pause, and lightning lit up the entire area. Then he saw the house where his wife and children were living. He knocked on the door, but no one opened it for him. The weather became more and more angry, and lighting struck once again. In great fear he cried out, "By the five wounds of our savior, open the door!" Hearing these words, the queen opened the door and let him enter. "Give me shelter for the night," he cried out. "I am dead tired and soaked through." She recognized him immediately. He too thought that this was he wife, and he wanted to cry out with joy, but the sight of her hands told him that he was mistaken, for his wife had no hands. She controlled herself and did not tell him who she was. She led him to the hearth, stirred up the flames, and brought food and drink to him. At first two children did not dare look at the strange man, for until now they had never seen a human being, except for their mother. Finally, encouraged by their mother they shyly approached the stranger, then, snuggled against their mother's arms, they stared at him with wide-open eyes, and he looked back with kindness. With tears in his eyes he thought, "My children would be just this age, if they were still alive." The king sat by the fire and dried his clothes. Then sleep overcame him, and he closed his eyes. Seeing that he was asleep, she told her children that this man was their father. Therefore, when he awoke, they should be very friendly toward him. Then it happened that the sleeping king's hat fell off his head to the floor. "Johannes," said the mother, "pick up your father's hat." The boy obeyed. The king was half awake and heard what was said. "What is this?" he thought to himself. "I'll pretend to be asleep and let my hat fall again." A little later the hat fell to the floor again. "Joseph," said the mother, "pick up your father's hat." Hearing this, the king got up and said, "Woman, why do you call me father?" She smiled and said, "Look at me closely!" He broke out in tears and said, "Yes, you look like dear wife, but it is not possible that you are she, for my dear wife had no hands." She cried out, "But it is possible, my beloved husband. God has given me back my hands, and these boys are your children. Then they embraced one another until their hearts almost broke for joy. He took the two boys into his arms and could not stop looking at them and kissing them; all the while tears of joy were running down his cheeks. They stayed together the entire night, telling each other what had happened to them. The next morning he wanted to take her and the boys to the city, but she said, "My dear husband, the saints have commanded that I remain here forever, and I must obey them." He did not object, but kissed her and the boys in parting, and said, "I'll come back to you soon." He returned to the city. There he gave up the crown and the kingship, sold all of his belongings, chose the most faithful of his servants, then returned to his wife and his children. They lived together many long years in that beautiful, peaceful mountain valley. They enjoyed in the largest measure that happiness which mankind can only achieve through sacred peace of mind. Source (books.google.com): Christian Schneller, "Das Mädchen ohne Hände, Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), no. 50, pp. 137-43 . Source (Internet Archive): Christian Schneller, "Das Mädchen ohne Hände, Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), no. 50, pp. 137-43 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2018. This story is from South Tyrol, an alpine region in northern Italy but with historical and cultural ties to Austria. Return to the table of contents . Beautiful Magdalene Germany There was once a woman innkeeper who kept an inn in a remote place. She was a widow and had a daughter whose name was Beautiful Magdalene. The daughter was so beautiful that a suitor from the city presented himself and wanted to marry her as soon as possible. However, the mother, still in her best years, would have liked to marry this suitor herself. Because he had taken special interest in the daughter's beautiful arms, the mother convinced the executioner to chop off Beautiful Magdalene's arms, in order to make her unattractive to the suitor. The mother led the girl into a forest where the executioner was lying in wait. He chopped off her arms. While the executioner and the mother were burying the arms, Beautiful Magdalena ran away from them, swearing never again to be seen by her mother. In great pain she went deeper into the woods. Finally she came out of the forest and to a high mountain. She climbed upward until she spotted a castle with a garden. She approached the castle and attempted to get into the garden, finally succeeding to get over the fence. As she walked around inside the garden the prince, who was standing at a castle window, saw her beauty but noticed at the same time that she had no arms. He called to his mother, saying, "Mother, look! There is a beautiful woman in the garden, but she has no arms." The queen looked out the window and saw the beautiful girl without arms fluttering around in the garden like a magnificent butterfly. Seeing that her son was attracted to her, she said, "Go and bring the girl into the castle." The prince went to her in the garden. Seeing that the prince was approaching her, she attempted to run away. He caught up with her and took her into the castle. The prince's mother asked how she had lost her arms and where she had come from. Sobbing, she related everything that had happened to her. The prince fell in love with her and confessed to his mother that he wanted to marry her. The mother loved her son very much, and seeing how beautiful the girl was, she immediately agreed to the marriage. The wedding was held, and the mother had her son crowned as king. They lived happily together, but soon the young king had to go off to war. In the meantime Beautiful Magdalene gave birth to a little prince. The king's mother was delighted and wanted to share the good news with her son. She wrote a letter and gave it to a trusted servant to deliver to the king. Unfortunately, the servant came to the same inn that had been Beautiful Magdalene's home. The innkeeper was still unmarried, for the suitor had not returned after the daughter's disappearance. She questioned the servant and soon discovered from his talk about the queen without arms that her daughter had become queen. She put a sleeping potion in his drink, then replaced his letter with a false one stating that the king's wife had given birth to a poodle-dog, and that the old queen could not sleep at night because of the dog's whining. Nonetheless, the prince was pleased with the news of the birth and wrote back to the mother that she should take good care of his wife until he returned home. Furthermore, she should keep the young dog. Returning to the castle, the servant stopped once again at the old woman's inn. She was curious how the king had answered the letter and again put a sleeping potion into his wine. While he slept she opened the letter. Again she put a false one in its place, wherein it was stated that the king's mother should send his wife into exile immediately. If she were still there upon his return, he would have her burned at the stake, because in the meantime he had chosen a new wife whom he would be bringing home with him. This letter saddened the old queen greatly. The young queen was curious and demanded to know what the letter contained. The old queen told her what had been written, and from that hour onward Beautiful Magdalene wanted to leave the castle. The old queen wrapped the child in a cloak and tied the bundle onto the mother's back. Thus Beautiful Magdalene made her way into the wide world. Some time later she found herself in a dense forest where a valley stretched forth on the one side. Her child cried, but she could not nurse him because she could not hold him with her arm-stump. Suddenly she heard a terrible roar close by, and she saw that it was a lion that had a thorn stuck in its paw. With her mouth she untied the bundle that held her child to her back, then lay him on the ground next to her. Beautiful Magdalene kneeled down before the lion and tried to pull out the thorn with her mouth, but without success. Then she suddenly heard a voice. Looking around in the woods she saw no one, nor did she hear anything else. But soon thereafter she heard the voice once again, and she clearly understood the words: "Beautiful Magdalene, go down into the valley. Kneel down in the water and immerse your shoulder blades. Do this, and you shall again have your arms." Descending into the valley, Beautiful Magdalene heard the rustling water. She kneeled down in it and immersed her shoulder blades. When she pulled them up her beautiful arms were there once again. She rushed back to her child, whom the lion had been watching over like a guardian angel. First she picked up and nursed the baby, while the lion waited patiently. Then she lay the child back on the ground and pulled the thorn from the lion's paw. After this she put the child back on her back then followed the health-giving stream, thinking that it would lead to someone's dwelling. When night fell she arrived at a house and went inside, where she found two chairs and a table set with food. After she had refreshed herself somewhat, a little white dwarf appeared, but he was terribly afraid of the lion who was lying at Beautiful Magdalene's feet. She told the dwarf that he should not fear the lion, so he came nearer, then asked where she had come from. She told him everything that had happened, upon which the little white dwarf told her that she should remain there, and that he would care for her. Whenever she was hungry, she should say: Table, set yourself; Glass, fill yourself, and everything that she might want would appear. She did this, and whenever she said the charm, the most delicious food and the most expensive wine appeared on the table. There was even some marzipan there. For some time she lived there in the house, and she was usually quite lonely, for the little white dwarf was mostly away. In the meantime her husband returned home from the war and deduced what had happened. Finding no peace, the king sponsored a great hunt. He lost his way and was separated from his servants and companions, but at nightfall he fortunately saw a light in the house where Beautiful Magdalene was staying. He knocked on the door, and Beautiful Magdalene immediately recognized his voice. However, the lion did not want to allow the king inside. She hit the lion; he became still, and the king stepped inside. He asked her where she had come from and why she was living in this little house. She told him everything that had happened. Then the king recognized his wife and was beside himself with joy that a miracle had restored her arms. He kissed her arms passionately, and he kissed her mouth. And thus they carried on for a long time. He stayed that night with his wife in the little white dwarf's house. The next morning he took her back to his castle. The lion came along as well, quite majestically. He conferred with his mother as to how the old innkeeper should be punished. She advised that the guilty one should be placed in a barrel studded with nails and then rolled down a mountain. And thus the old woman was rolled down a mountain in a barrel. The ravens that saw it called out: "Caw! Caw!" With that they were saying: "Justice has been served!" The king sent his people to find the world's most precious armbands. A page returned with the most precious ones, and the king himself put them onto Beautiful Magdalene's arms. However, the very best thing was that now the queen could properly put her arms around her husband. Source (books.google.com): Heinrich Pröhle, "Die schöne Magdalene," Kinder- und Volksmärchen (Leipzig: Avenarius und Mendelssohn, 1853), no. 36, pp. 122-27 . Source (Internet Archive): Heinrich Pröhle, "Die schöne Magdalene," Kinder- und Volksmärchen (Leipzig: Avenarius und Mendelssohn, 1853), no. 36, pp. 122-27 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2018. Return to the table of contents . The Girl without Hands Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm (1812) A miller, who was so poor that he had nothing more than his mill and a large apple tree which stood behind it, went into the forest to gather wood. There he was approached by an old man, who said, "Why do you torment yourself so? I will make you rich if you will sign over to me that which is standing behind your mill. I will come and claim it in three years." The miller thought, "That is my apple tree," agreed, and signed it over to the man. When he came home, his wife said to him, "Miller, where did all the wealth come from that suddenly has filled every chest and cupboard in our house?" "I received it from an old man in the forest by signing over to him that which is standing behind the mill." "Husband!" said the woman, terrified. "This is going to be very bad. The old man was the devil, and he had our daughter in mind, who was just then standing behind the mill sweeping the yard." Now the miller's daughter was very beautiful and pious. Three years later when the devil came, early in the morning, and wanted to take her, she had drawn a circle around herself with chalk and had washed herself clean. Therefore the devil could not approach her, and angrily he said to the miller, "Keep wash-water away from her, so she cannot wash herself any more, and I can have power over her." The miller was frightened and did what he was told. The next day the devil returned, but she had wept into her hands and washed herself with her tears, and was entirely clean. Because the devil still could not approach her, he was very angry, and ordered the miller, "Chop off her hands, so I can get to her." The miller was horrified and answered, "How could I chop off my dear child's hands? No, I will not do it." "Then do you know what? I will take you, if you don't do it!" That frightened the miller terribly, and driven by fear he promised to do what the devil had ordered. He went to his daughter and said, "My child, the devil will take me if I don't chop off both your hands, and I have promised him that I will do it. I beg for your forgiveness." "Father," she said, "do with me what you will," stretched forth her hands, and let him chop them off. The devil came a third time, but she had wept so long onto her stumps, that she was still entirely clean, and the devil had lost all power over her. The miller, because he had become so wealthy through her, promised to take the best care of her for the rest of her life, but she did not want to remain there. "I must leave here," she said. "Compassionate people will give me enough to keep me alive." She had the chopped-off hands tied to her back, and she set forth with the rising sun, walking the entire day until evening, when she came to the king's garden. There was a gap in the garden hedge. She went inside, found a fruit tree, shook it with her body until the apples fell to the ground, bent over and picked them up with her teeth, and ate them. Thus she lived for two days, but on the third day the garden watchmen saw her, captured her, and threw her into prison. The next morning she was brought before the king and sentenced to be banished from the land, but the prince said, "Wait, wouldn't it be better to let her tend the chickens in the courtyard?" So she stayed there for a time and tended the chickens. The prince saw her often and grew very fond of her. Meanwhile the time came when he was to get married. Messengers were sent everywhere in the world to find him a beautiful bride. "You needn't look so far and wide," he said. "I know where one is very nearby." The old king pondered this back and forth, but he could not think of a single maiden in his kingdom who was both beautiful and rich. "You surely don't want to marry the one who tends the chickens in the courtyard?" But his son declared that he would marry no one else, so finally the king had to agree. Soon afterward he died, and the prince succeeded him as king and lived happily for a time with his wife. Once the king had to go away to war, and during his absence his wife gave birth to a beautiful child. She sent a messenger with a letter telling her husband the joyful news. On the way the messenger stopped to rest by a brook and fell asleep. The devil, who was still trying to harm her, came to him and exchanged the letter with one that stated that the queen had given birth to a changeling. The king was very saddened to read this, but he wrote that the queen and the child should be well cared for until his return. The messenger started back with this letter. When he stopped to rest at the same spot and fell asleep, the devil again appeared, this time exchanging the king's letter with one that ordered the queen and the child to be driven from the kingdom. This had to be done, however much the people all wept with sorrow. "I did not come here to become queen," she said. "I have no luck, and I demand none. Just tie my child and my hands onto my back, and I will set forth into the world." That evening she came to a place in a thick forest where a good old man was sitting by a spring. "Be so kindhearted as to hold my child to my breast until I have nursed him," she said. The man did that, after which he said to her, "Go to that thick tree over there and wrap your maimed arms around it three times!" And when she had done this, her hands grew back on. Then he showed her a house. "You can live there," he said, "but do not go outside, and do not open the door for anyone unless he asks three times to come in, for God's sake." Meanwhile the king returned home and discovered how he had been deceived. Accompanied by a single servant he set forth, and after a long journey he finally happened, one night, into the same forest where the queen was living, but he did not know that she was so close to him. "There is a little light from a house back there," said his servant. "We can rest there." "No," said the king. "I do not want to rest so long, but rather to continue searching for my wife. I cannot rest until I find her." But the servant begged so much and complained so about his weariness that out of compassion, the king gave in. When they came to the house, the moon was shining, and they saw the queen standing by the window. "That must be our queen; she looks just like her," said the servant, "but I see now that she is not the one, for this one has hands." The servant asked her for shelter, but she refused, because he had not asked "for God's sake." He was about to go on and seek another place for their night's lodging when the king himself came up and said, "Let me in, for God's sake!" "I cannot let you in until you have asked me three time, for God's sake," she replied. And after the king had asked two more times, she opened the door. His little son ran to him and led him in to his mother. The king recognized her immediately as his beloved wife. The next morning they all journeyed together back to their kingdom, and as soon as they had left the house, it disappeared behind them. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Mädchen ohne Hände," Kinder- und Hausmärchen [Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales], 1st edition, vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 31, pp. 132-38 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2012. Return to the table of contents . The Girl without Hands Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm (1857) A miller fell slowly but surely into poverty, until finally he had nothing more than his mill and a large apple tree which stood behind it. One day he had gone into the forest to gather wood, where he was approached by an old man, whom he had never seen before, and who said, "Why do you torment yourself with chopping wood? I will make you rich if you will promise me that which is standing behind your mill." "What can that be but my apple tree?" thought the miller, said yes, and signed it over to the strange man. The latter, however, laughed mockingly and said, "I will come in three years and get what belongs to me," then went away. When he arrived home, his wife came up to him and said, "Miller, tell me, where did all the wealth come from that is suddenly in our house? All at once all the chests and boxes are full, and no one brought it here, and I don't know where it came from." He answered, "It comes from an strange man whom I met in the woods and who promised me great treasures if I would but sign over to him that which stands behind the mill. We can give up the large apple tree for all this." "Oh, husband!" said the woman, terrified. "That was the devil. He didn't mean the apple tree, but our daughter, who was just then standing behind the mill sweeping the yard." The miller's daughter was a beautiful and pious girl, and she lived the three years worshipping God and without sin. When the time was up and the day came when the evil one was to get her, she washed herself clean and drew a circle around herself with chalk. The devil appeared very early in the morning, but he could not approach her. He spoke angrily to the miller, "Keep water away from her, so she cannot wash herself any more. Otherwise I have no power over her." The miller was frightened and did what he was told. The next morning the devil returned, but she had wept into her hands, and they were entirely clean. Thus he still could not approach her, and he spoke angrily to the miller, "Chop off her hands. Otherwise I cannot get to her." The miller was horrified and answered, "How could I chop off my own child's hands!" Then the evil one threatened him, saying, "If you do not do it, then you will be mine, and I will take you yourself." This frightened the father, and he promised to obey him. Then he went to the girl and said, "My child, if I do not chop off both of your hands, then the devil will take me away, and in my fear I have promised him to do this. Help me in my need, and forgive me of the evil that I am going to do to you." She answered, "Dear father, do with me what you will. I am your child," and with that she stretched forth both hands and let her father chop them off. The devil came a third time, but she had wept so long and so much onto the stumps, that they were entirely clean. Then he had to give up, for he had lost all claim to her. The miller spoke to her, "I have gained great wealth through you. I shall take care of you in splendor as long as you live." But she answered, "I cannot remain here. I will go away. Compassionate people will give me as much as I need." Then she had her mutilated arms tied to her back, and at sunrise she set forth, walking the entire day until it was night. She came to a royal garden, and by the light of the moon she saw that inside there were trees full of beautiful fruit. But she could not get inside, for there it was surrounded by water. Having walked the entire day without eating a bite, she was suffering from hunger, and she thought, "Oh, if only I were inside the garden so I could eat of those fruits. Otherwise I shall perish." Then she kneeled down and, crying out to God the Lord, she prayed. Suddenly an angel appeared. He closed a head gate, so that the moat dried up, and she could walk through. She entered the garden, and the angel went with her. She saw a fruit tree with beautiful pears, but they had all been counted. She stepped up to the tree and ate from it with her mouth, enough to satisfy her hunger, but no more. The gardener saw it happen, but because the angel was standing by her he was afraid and thought that the girl was a spirit. He said nothing and did not dare to call out nor to speak to the spirit. After she had eaten the pear she was full, and she went and lay down in the brush. The king who owned this garden came the next morning. He counted the fruit and saw that one of the pears was missing. He asked the gardener what had happened to it. It was not lying under the tree, but had somehow disappeared. The gardener answered, "Last night a spirit came here. It had no hands and ate one of the pears with its mouth." The king said, "How did the spirit get across the water? And where did it go after it had eaten the pear?" The gardener answered, "Someone dressed in snow-white came from heaven and closed the head gate so the spirit could walk through the moat. Because it must have been an angel I was afraid, and I asked no questions, and I did not call out. After the spirit had eaten the pear it went away again." The king said, "If what you said is true, I will keep watch with you tonight." After it was dark the king entered the garden, bringing a priest with him who was to talk to the spirit. All three sat down under the tree and kept watch. At midnight the girl came creeping out of the brush, stepped up to the tree, and again ate off a pear with her mouth. An angel dressed in white was standing next to her. The priest walked up to them and said, "Have you come from God, or from the world? Are you a spirit or a human?" She answered, "I am not a spirit, but a poor human who has been abandoned by everyone except God." The king said, "Even if you have been abandoned by the whole world, I will not abandon you." He took her home with him to his royal castle, and because she was so beautiful and pure he loved her with all his heart, had silver hands made for her, and took her as his wife. After a year the king had to go out into the battlefield, and he left the young queen in the care of his mother, saying, "If she has a child, support her and take good care of her, and immediately send me the news in a letter." She gave birth to a beautiful son. The old mother quickly wrote this in a letter, giving the joyful news to the king. Now on the way the messenger stopped at a brook to rest. Tired from his long journey, he fell asleep. Then the devil came to him. He still wanted to harm the pious queen, and he took the letter, putting in its place one that stated that the queen had brought a changeling into the world. When the king read this letter he was frightened and saddened, but nevertheless he wrote an answer that they should take good care of the queen until his return. The messenger returned with this letter, but he rested at the same place, and again fell asleep. The devil came again and placed a different letter in his bag. This letter said that they should kill the queen with her child. The old mother was terribly frightened when she received this letter. She could not believe it, and wrote to the king again, but she got back the same answer, because each time the devil substituted a false letter. And the last letter even stated that they should keep the queen's tongue and eyes as proof. The old mother lamented that such innocent blood was to be shed, and in the night she had a doe killed, cut out its tongue and eyes, and had them put aside. Then she said to the queen, "I cannot have you killed as the king has ordered, but you can no longer stay here. Go out into the wide world with your child, and never come back." The old mother tied the queen's child onto her back, and the poor woman went away with weeping eyes. She came to a great, wild forest where she got onto her knees and prayed to God. Then the angel of the Lord appeared to her and led her to a small house. On it was a small sign with the words, "Here anyone can live free." A snow-white virgin came from the house and said, "Welcome, Queen," then led her inside. She untied the small boy from her back, held him to her breast so he could drink, and then laid him in a beautiful made-up bed. Then the poor woman said, "How did you know that I am a queen?" The white virgin answered, "I am an angel, sent by God to take care of you and your child." She stayed in this house for seven years, and was well taken care of. And through the grace of God and her own piety her chopped-off hands grew back. The king finally came back home from the battlefield, and the first thing he wanted to do was to see his wife and their child. Then the old mother began to weep, saying, "You wicked man, why did you write to me that I was to put two innocent souls to death," and she showed him the two letters that the evil one had counterfeited. Then she continued to speak, "I did what you ordered," and showed him as proof the eyes and the tongue. Then the king began to weep even more bitterly for his poor wife and his little son, until the old woman had mercy and said to him, "Be satisfied that she is still alive. I secretly had a doe killed and took the proofs from it. I tied your wife's child onto her back and told her to go out into the wide world, and she had to promise never to come back here, because you were so angry with her." Then the king said, "I will go as far as the sky is blue, and will neither eat nor drink until I have found my dear wife and my child again, provided that in the meantime they have not died or perished from hunger." Then the king traveled about for nearly seven years, searching in all the stone cliffs and caves, but he did not find her, and he thought that she had perished. He neither ate nor drank during the entire time, but God kept him alive. Finally he came to a great forest, where he found a little house with a sign containing the words, " Here anyone can live free." The white virgin came out, took him by the hand, led him inside, and said, "Welcome, King," then asked him where he had come from. He answered, "I have been traveling about for nearly seven years looking for my wife and her child, but I cannot find them." The angel offered him something to eat and drink, but he did not take it, wanting only to rest a little. He lay down to sleep, covering his face with a cloth. Then the angel went into the room where the queen was sitting with her son, whom she normally called "Filled-with-Grief." The angel said to her, "Go into the next room with your child. Your husband has come." She went to where he was lying, and the cloth fell from his face. Then she said, "Filled-with-Grief, pick up the cloth for your father and put it over his face again." The child picked it up and put it over his face again. The king heard this in his sleep and let the cloth fall again. Then the little boy grew impatient and said, "Mother, dear, how can I cover my father's face? I have no father in this world. I have learned to pray, 'Our father which art in heaven,' and you have said that my father is in heaven, and that he is our dear God. How can I know such a wild man? He is not my father." Hearing this, the king arose and asked who she was. She said, "I am your wife, and this is your son Filled-with-Grief." He saw her living hands and said, "My wife had silver hands." She answered, "Our merciful God has caused my natural hands to grow back." The angel went into the other room, brought back the silver hands, and showed them to him. Now he saw for sure that it was his dear wife and his dear child, and he kissed them, and rejoiced, and said, "A heavy stone has fallen from my heart." Then the angel of God gave them all something to eat, and then they went back home to his old mother. There was great joy everywhere, and the king and the queen conducted their wedding ceremony once again, and they lived happily until their blessed end. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Das Mädchen ohne Hände," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm [Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales], 7th edition, vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 31, pp. 162-68 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Das Mädchen ohne Hände," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm [Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales], 7th edition, vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 31, pp. 162-68 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2018. Return to the table of contents . The Daughter Who Was Promised to the Devil Germany Saddened at the loss of his wealth, a miller went into the woods where he met a strange man who asked him why he was so sad. The miller told him the cause of his sorrow, upon which the stranger promised him a large sum of money in return for whatever was just now behind his mill. Thinking that it was nothing more than the dust that settled there from the milling, he accepted the offer, signing the contract with his blood. He received the money and returned home with it, then told his wife how he had come by it. She told him that he had promised his daughter to the devil. At the fateful moment she had been behind the mill separating grain kernels from the dust, prior to cooking them to eat. They were greatly saddened, but decided to tell their daughter nothing. That night the Evil One came to the mill and knocked on the door. The daughter opened it, but because she was a pious girl, at bedtime having sprinkled herself with holy water in the names of the three Holiest Ones, the devil was not able to take her away. Instead he just pushed her away. The same thing happened the following night, after which the miller -- as commanded by the Evil One -- did away with the holy water. On the third night, having no holy water, the girl blessed herself with water that had condensed on the window. As a result, when the devil returned that night he was again unable to do anything to her. The next morning she told her parents what had happened in the previous three nights, whereupon they revealed everything to her. With that she laid her hand on a block and with an axe chopped it off herself. Then she had her other hand chopped off and granted both hands to the devil, upon which they immediately disappeared. She then left home, praying fervently and crossing herself with her arms. She came to a beautiful garden next to the royal palace. In order to still her hunger she picked up a few apples with her mouth and ate them. Her wounds were still bleeding, and thus the prince discovered her tracks. He followed them for two days without success, but on the third day -- with the help of his dog -- he found the girl peacefully sleeping in the brush. She pleased him so much that he married her. She did not become proud, remaining instead her pious and humble self. Some time later he had to go off to war, and during his absence she gave birth to twin boys. She informed the prince of the good news in a letter. The messenger carrying the letter fell asleep at a forest spring. The Evil One came and substituted the princess's letter with one describing the most terrible things that the princess ostensibly had done. The prince wrote back that one should treat his wife with the utmost respect, but the messenger again fell asleep at the spring, and the devil again substituted a false letter for the true one. The false letter commanded that the princess and her children be driven out. This was done, with one child tied to her breast and the other one tied to her back. Suffering from thirst, she came to a spring, but because of the children she could not bend down to drink. She called upon God for help, and at once a man approached her. He untied the children and told her to lay her arms on the stump that suddenly appeared before her. On it were her chopped-off hands. She did what the man told her to, and he healed her. Immediately she was able to use her hands again. She then came to a wilderness where there was no shelter. She prayed fervently, and behold, suddenly a little hut was standing there, complete with furnishings and provisions. With thanks she settled there, living the pious life of a hermit. Whenever she ran out of food, her prayers were answered, and fresh food appeared. Years passed, and one evening a man came to her hut and asked for shelter. Because she had only one bed, she had him sleep on a bench. In the night he heard how the children said to each other, "If only we could see our father." In the morning he asked her about this, and learned from her how she had been driven out. "If you had no hands, I would think that you were my wife, who was driven away without cause. Since the war I have been seeking her for many years," he said. She then told him how she had received her hands again, showing him how they had healed. They then recognized each other, and together with their children they all rejoiced. The prince decided to share a hermit's life with her. In answer to the wife's prayers a larger hut suddenly stood in place of the smaller one, with more furnishings and provisions. And here they served God until their blessed end. Source (books.google.com): Bernhard Baader, "Tochter dem Teufel verschrieben," Neugesammelte Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: A. Gessner'sche Buchhandlung, 1859), no. 131, pp. 97-100 . Source (Internet Archive): Bernhard Baader, "Tochter dem Teufel verschrieben," Neugesammelte Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: A. Gessner'sche Buchhandlung, 1859), no. 131, pp. 97-100 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2018. Return to the table of contents . The Girl without Hands Finland (Wuokkiniemi) Once upon a time there were a man and a woman who had two beautiful and well-behaved children, a son and a daughter. The man, who was very old suddenly became ill and died. Soon after his death the woman too began to fade, becoming so weak that she felt her end was near. Lying on her deathbed she admonished her children, saying, "Live peacefully together, my dear children! I must leave you now." She had scarcely said her farewell when she too died. The boy and the girl stayed in their old home and lived peacefully together. Some time later the brother became lonely and he decided to get married. "Bless me on my journey, little sister. I'm going to seek myself a wife." "Yes, get married, get married, dear brother," said the sister to him, and wished him luck on his journey. The brother took leave from his sister and went on his way. He happened to meet a witch who asked to be his wife. Not knowing who she was, he accepted her and took her to his house. For a time they all lived peacefully together, as well as one could wish for. Although the brother now had a wife, he loved his sister as much as before, and he let her do whatever she wanted to in the house. The witch did not like this; it angered her that she was not in charge of the household. One day the man wanted to go into the woods, and first of all he took leave from his sister, saying, "Bless me, little sister. I'm going out into the woods." "Be on your way, be on your way!" answered the sister. Then the man left, without saying anything to his wife about where he was going. The witch became angrier and angrier because he had not confided in her. Her hatred toward the sister grew ever stronger in her heart. What should she do? While the man was in the woods the witch went to the stall and killed the cows, sheep, horses, and everything. When she saw the man returning home she ran to him at the gate and shouted, "Just ask for your sister's blessing another time! While you were gone she killed the cows, sheep, horses, and everything that was in the farmyard. "She can kill the animals," answered the man. "They belonged to her." And he did not think anything more about the situation. Some time passed before the man had to go into the woods again, and once more he asked his sister for her blessing without telling his wife where he was going. Then his wife broke all the kitchenware in the house, everything except a single spoon and a bag and a basket made of birchbark. When the man returned from the woods she ran to him, saying, "Just ask for you sister's blessing another time! She smashed all the kitchenware, everything except a single spoon and a bag and a basket made of birchbark." However, the man did not get upset. He said, "Let her smash everything. It all belongs to her." Some time passed, and once again the man took leave from his wife and went into the woods without telling his wife what he was doing. Now his wife had just given birth to a son. She killed her own child, then when her husband returned she accused the sister of the crime, saying, "This is what you get for favoring your sister! While you were away she killed your only son that I gave birth to!" The man finally became angry with his sister, believing that she had murdered his child. Sadly he asked, "How should we punish this miserable creature? Should we kill her, just as she has killed our child?" "We'll think up a punishment," said the wife. "Let's take her out to pick berries, then cut off her hands and leave her in the woods." The man was so sad that he couldn't say anything against his wife, and he let her have her way. Then all three rowed to an island to pick berries. They gathered them for some time, and finally the brother said to his sister, "Little Sister, come with me to the beach. We didn't pull the boat up onto the shore, and I'm afraid that the wind might blow it away." The sister went with her brother to the beach and attempted to pull up the boat. In that same moment the brother grabbed an axe and chopped off both of her hands on the edge of the boat. Then he abandoned the poor mutilated girl on the deserted island and rowed home with his wife. The poor abandoned girl could not just stay there and die. In her sorrow she walked about on the island, wandering aimlessly in the woods. After walking some distance she came to a beautiful orchard filled with all kinds of fruit trees. She climbed through the fence and sat down in the shade of the trees to rest. She lived in this orchard for some time. When she was hungry she snapped with her mouth at the sweet berries that grew round about. When the birds ate fruit from the trees, with her hand-stumps she grabbed the scraps that they dropped. Thus she stayed alive. The orchard that the girl had stumbled onto belonged to a prince. One time this prince dreamed that he was strolling in the orchard where he found a beautiful girl. Awaking the next morning he remembered the dream and hurried to the orchard, where he had not been for a long time. He walked among the trees and behold! He saw a young girl sitting in the shade and now and then picking berries with her mouth. The prince wondered who this stranger might be. He greeted her friendlily, asking, "Have you no hands? Are you blind? Or deaf? Why are sitting here all alone?" Seeing the prince so frightened the girl that she was unable to say anything, but instead hid her arms between the bushes. The prince came closer to her and recognized her as the girl he had seen in his dream. She was perfectly beautiful, although she had no hands and looked terribly sad. The prince spoke lovingly to the girl, and she gradually lost her fear of him, then told him how they had chopped off her hands and how she had wandered into the orchard. After she had finished, the prince came close to her and said, "My brave girl, you have suffered so much! Come with me to my castle, and you shall become my wife!" "Oh, prince, don't make fun of me! You are not speaking the truth!" "But surely I am speaking the truth!" assured the prince. "Do come with me, sweet girl, please come!" The girl still resisted, begging, "Don't make fun of me, my king!" The prince asked and pled so long that the girl finally gave in and promised to go with him. And thus the prince took to girl without hands to his home. Arriving together at the castle, the youth went to his parents and said, "Father, Mother, give me your blessing to get married, as God has led me to such a wonderfully beautiful bride!" Now what? The parents saw that the girl was not only beautiful, but also well mannered, and they gave their permission for their son's marriage. The wedding was celebrated at the castle, and thus the prince ennobled to royalty the girl he had found in the orchard. They lived together for some time in luck and happiness. Everyone in the castle was impressed with the young wife's beauty and virtue. Never before had such a beautiful and gentle being been seen in the castle. But it was such a shame that the poor one had no hands! Then it happened that prince had to travel to another castle on pressing business, leaving his young wife at home, although she was pregnant. On the way he happened to stay overnight at the farmstead where his wife had been born. Her brother and the witch were still living there as before. After they had sat for some time in the living room, the witch asked, "Would the traveler like a bath?" "Indeed the traveler would like a bath!" replied the prince, and went into the bathroom. Just then a messenger came from the castle with a report that the prince's wife had given birth to a son, so beautiful that his equal could not be found anywhere on earth. Golden are his hands, His legs silver to his loins, His head glistens like sunshine, Moonlight crowns his forehead, The big dipper shines from his shoulders, The milky way from his armpits , And Pleiades from his back. The witch took the letter from the messenger, opened it, quickly read it, and threw it into the fire. She then wrote a new letter stating that the young queen had given birth to a dog. The prince returned from his bath, read the fake letter, and was so sad that he cried bitterly and for a long time was unable to speak. Finally he sent the messenger back to the castle with a letter stating, "Whatever my wife gave birth to, keep both her and her offspring alive until I return." Once again the witch was able to intercept the letter. She threw it into the fire and wrote a forged letter ordering that without delay the mother and her child should be put into a cask and thrown into the sea. The messenger rushed back to the castle and delivered the letter. What sorrow ruled in the king's house! Everyone was sorry for the young wife. Even the king wept as he said to his daughter-in-law, "My daughter, it has been ordered to put you and your child into a cask and throw you into the sea. Not even I can save you, you poor one! I must obey this order although it breaks my heart to do so!" The young queen was certainly sorrowful about her harsh lot -- that she and her child were to die in the cask -- but she yielded to her husband's command. The king had a large iron cask built and outfitted it in the best possible manner. Then the young wife and here child were put into it and thrown into the sea. The cask tossed to and fro on the waves. For three years it drifted about, and the woman's child grew. Suddenly the cask struck something. Then again and again it struck something. The two inside the cask did not know what was happening. Finally the boy asked, "Mother, don't you have a needle. I want to bore a hole into the cask in order to look out and see what we are bumping up against." "Here is a needle," said the mother, reaching one to him as a joke. It was scarcely in his hands before he began to bore. He bored and bored until he had a hole in the side of the cask. He looked out through this peep-hole and saw a cliff in the ocean against which the cask was bumping. Excitedly he said to his mother, "I want to knock the bottom out of this cask; then we can climb out onto the cliff." "Don't knock the bottom out, or we will fall into the ocean!" warned the mother. But the boy had already broken the cask to pieces, and mother and son rescued themselves onto the cliff. But what should they do now? The cliff was barren. Suddenly a giant wave arose. It flooded over the stone, carrying away the boy. The poor mother saw with bitter grief how her only son disappeared into the waves. There was nothing that she could do. Only with great exertion was she herself able to land onto the slippery rock. She prayed to God for help, calling out, "Oh, my God, help me onto the shore, as you have already spared my life!" Once again a giant wave arose. It washed the woman from the cliff and carried her to the shore of the mainland. The poor woman sat there in deep sorrow, not knowing what to do, for she did not recognize the desolate shore. Then she happened to notice a pike swimming near the shore, lost among the stones and unable to find its way out. The woman captured it with her arm-stumps. The pike suddenly spoke to her, asking: "O, you good woman, do not kill me! I will show you something amazing!" "More than enough amazing things have happened to me," replied the young woman sadly. She did not kill the pike, but released it back into the sea. The thankful pike raised its head out of the water and said, "Don't be sad, good woman. Walk along the shore a little way. You will find a mass of sea-foam next to a cliff. Wash your stumps with it, and your chopped-off hands will grow back immediately. Then rub your healed hands together, and your son, who was carried away by the waves, will be returned to you." She did what that pike had told her to do. She washed her stumps with the foam, and her hands grew back. And as she was rubbing the foam between her hands, her son, whom she had given up as lost, suddenly appeared before her. "Wow, wow! I slept for a week!" said the boy to his mother. "Without me you would have slept for many a week, my son!" answered the mother. She told him how the pike had helped her in her time of need. The two of them wandered aimlessly along the seashore, hoping to discover some human habitation. Finally they came to a farmstead and stepped into the living room. Behold, it was the young woman's former home, where her brother and his wife still lived as before. The prince, underway on one of his accustomed trading journeys, had stopped overnight at the familiar farmstead. He was sitting in the living room when the young woman stepped inside with her son. No one recognized her, for grief and great suffering had changed her, and her clothing was tattered and torn; but she immediately recognized all the others. She quietly whispered to her son who they were, pointing out her husband, her brother, and the witch. They did not know who the strangers were, assuming that they were beggars. But they were amazed at the boy, who was so good-looking that no words could describe his beauty: Golden are his hands, His legs silver to his loins, His head glistens like sunshine, Moonlight crowns his forehead, The big dipper shines from his shoulders, The milky way from his armpits, And Pleiades from his back. The boy walked bravely around the room, looking carefully at each person present. As he moved he lit up the room, such brilliance radiated from him. The brother's wife and the prince spoke to him cordially, saying, "You, dear boy, tell us a story. You must know a lot, having wandered about so far in the world." "If I am to tell my story," replied the boy, "then you must place guards at the door so that no one can get in or out." They placed guards at the door and ordered the boy to tell his story. Standing next to his mother, he began to relate the course of his life. The witch saw what was happening and demanded that he stop talking. However, the mother would not be deterred, and she narrated their experiences to the end. Now they all recognized the prince's wife and wondered how she had recovered her hands. She explained how the pike had helped her in her time of need. There arose such jubilation in the brother's house that it cannot be described. Everyone went to the castle with the prince, and they lived happily together. However, the witch was bound to the tails of wild stallions and ripped to pieces. And that's the end of the story. Source (books.google.com): Emmy Schreck, "Das Mädchen ohne Hände," Finnische Märchen (Weimar: Hermann Böhlau, 1887), no. 12, pp. 98-107 . Source (Internet Archive): Emmy Schreck, "Das Mädchen ohne Hände," Finnische Märchen (Weimar: Hermann Böhlau, 1887), no. 12, pp. 98-107 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2018. Return to the table of contents . The Girl without Hands Hungary There was once, I don't know where, a king whose only son was an exceedingly handsome and brave fellow, who went far into the neighbouring country to fight. The old king used to send letters to his son into the camp, through an old faithful servant. Once it happened that the letter-carrying old servant took a night's lodging in a lonely house, which was inhabited by a middle-aged woman and her daughter, who was very pretty. The people of the house had supper prepared for the messenger, and during the meal the woman questioned him whether he thought her or her daughter to be the prettier, but the messenger did not like to state the exact truth, as he did not wish to appear ungrateful for their hospitality, and only said, "Well, we can't deny but must confess it that we old people cannot be so handsome as the young ones." The woman made no reply; but as soon as the messenger had left she gave her servant orders to take her daughter into the wood and kill her, and to bring her liver, lungs, and two hands back with him. The man servant took the pretty girl with him, and, having gone a good distance, he stopped, and told the girl of her mother's commands. "But," continued he, "I haven't got the heart to kill you, as you have always been very kind to me; there is a small dog which has followed us, and I will take his liver and lungs back to your mother, but I shall be compelled to cut off your hands, as I can't go back without them." The servant did as he proposed; he took out the small dog's lungs and liver, and cut off the girl's hands, much as it was against his wish. He carefully covered the stumps of her arms with a cloth, and sent the girl away and went back to his mistress. The woman took the lungs and liver, put them into her mouth, and said, "You have come out of me, you must return into me," and swallowed them. The two hands she threw up into the loft. The servant left the woman's house in a great hurry at the earliest opportunity, and never returned again. In the meantime the girl without hands wandered about in unknown places. Fearing that she would be discovered in the daytime, she hid herself in the wood, and only left her hiding place at night to find food, and if she chanced to get into an orchard she ate the fruit she could reach with her mouth. At last she came to the town where the king lived; the prince had by this time returned from the war. One morning, the king was looking out of his window, and to his great annoyance discovered that, again, there were less pears on a favourite tree in the orchard than he had counted the previous day. In a great rage he sent for the gardener, whose special business it was to take care of the orchard; but he excused himself on the ground that while he was watching the orchard at night an irresistible desire to sleep came over him, the like of which he had never experienced before, and which he was quite unable to shake off. The king, therefore, ordered another man to keep watch under the tree the next night, but he fared in the same way as the first; the king was still more angry. On the third night, the prince himself volunteered to keep watch, and promised to guard the fruit of the favourite tree; he laid down on the lawn under the tree, and did not shut his eyes. About midnight, the girl without hands came forth from a thicket in the garden, and, seeing the prince, said to him, "One of your eyes is asleep, the other one must go to sleep too, at once." No sooner had she uttered these words than the prince fell fast asleep, and the girl without hands walked under the tree, and picked the fruit with her mouth. But as there were only a few more pears left on the boughs which she could get at, she was obliged, in order to satisfy her hunger, to step on a little mound, and stand on tiptoe that she might reach the fruit; whilst standing in this position she slipped, and, having no hands to hold on with, she fell on the sleeping prince. The shock awoke the prince at once, and, grasping the girl firmly with his arms, he kept her fast. Next morning the king looking out of his window discovered to his astonishment that no pears were missing, and therefore sent a messenger into the garden to his son to inquire what had happened? As soon as dawn began to break, the prince saw the girl's beautiful face; the king's messenger had by this time reached the prince, who in reply to his query, said, "Tell my father that I have caught the thief, and I will take care not to let her escape. If my father, the king, will not give me permission to marry her, I will never enter his house again; tell him also, that the girl has no hands." The king did not oppose his son's desire, and the girl without hands became the prince's wife, and they lived happily together for a time. It happened, however, that war broke out again with the sovereign of the neighbouring country, and the prince was once more obliged to go with his army. While he was away the princess was confined, and bore two children with golden hair. The old king was highly delighted, and at once wrote to his son informing him of the happy event. The letter was again entrusted to the same man, who took the messages during the first war; he on his way remembered the house where he was so well received on a previous occasion, and arranged that he should spend the night there. This time he found the old woman only. He got into conversation with her, and she asked him where he was going, and what news he had from the royal town; the messenger told her how the prince had found a beautiful girl without hands, whom he had married, and who had had two beautiful children. The woman at once guessed that it was her own daughter, and that she had been deceived by her servant; she gave her guest plenty to eat and drink, till he was quite drunk and went to sleep. Whereupon the woman searched the messenger's bag, found the king's letter, opened it and read it. The gist of the letter was this, "My dear son, you have brought to my house a dear and beautiful wife, who has borne you a beautiful golden-haired child." The woman instantly wrote another letter, which ran thus: "You have brought to my house a prostitute, who has brought shame upon you, for she has been confined of two puppies." She folded the letter, sealed it as the first had been, and put it into the messenger's bag. Next morning the messenger left, having first been invited to spend the night at her house on his return, as the wicked mother was anxious to know what the prince's answer would be to the forged letter. The messenger reached the prince, handed him the letter, which gave him inexpressible grief; but as he was very fond of his wife he only replied, that, whatever the state of affairs might be, no harm was to happen to his wife until his return. The messenger took the letter back and again called upon the old woman, who .was not chary to make him drunk again and to read the reply clandestinely. She was angry at the prince's answer, and wrote another letter in his name, in which she said, that if matters were as they had been represented to him in the letter, his wife must get out of the house without delay, so that he might not see her upon his return. The messenger, not suspecting anything, handed the letter to the king, who was very much upset, and read it to his daughter-in-law. The old king pitied his pretty and good natured daughter deeply, but what could he do? They saddled a quiet horse, put the two golden-haired princes in a basket and tied it in front of the princess; and thus the poor woman was sent away amidst great lamentations. She had been travelling without ceasing for three days, till on the third day she came into a country where she found a lake full of magic water, which had the power of reviving and making good the maimed limbs of any crippled man or beast who bathed in it. So the woman without hands took a bath in the lake, and both her hands were restored. She washed her children's clothes in the same lake, and again continued her journey. Not long after this the war with the neighbouring king was over, and the prince returned home. On hearing what had happened to his wife he fell into a state of deep grief, and became so ill that his death was expected daily. After a long illness, however, his health began to improve, but only very slowly, and years elapsed before his illness and his great grief had so far been conquered that he had strength or inclination to go out. At last he tried hunting, and spent whole days in the forest. One day as he was thus engaged he followed a stag, and got deeper and deeper into the thick part of the wood; in the meantime the sun had set and darkness set in. The prince, having gone too far, could not find his way back. But as good luck would have it he saw a small cottage, and started in its direction to find a night's lodging. He entered, and found a woman with two children -- his wife and two sons. The woman at once recognised the prince, who, however, did not even suspect her to be his wife, because her hands were grown again; but, at the same time, the great likeness struck him very much, and at first sight he felt a great liking for the woman. On the next day he again went out hunting with his only faithful servant, and purposely allowed darkness to set in so that he might sleep at the cottage. The prince felt very tired and laid down to sleep, while his wife sat at the table sewing, and the two little children played by her side. It happened that in his sleep the prince dropped his arm out of bed. One of the children noticing this called his mother's attention to it, whereupon the woman said to her son, "Place it back, my son, place it back, it's the hand of your royal father." The child approached the sleeping prince and gently lifted his arm back again. After a short time the prince dropped his leg from the bed while asleep; the child again told his mother of it, and she said, "Place it back, my son, pnt it back, it's your father's leg." The boy did as he was told, but the prince knew nothing of it. It happened, however, that the prince's faithful servant was awake and heard every word the woman said to the child, and told the story to his master the next day. The prince was astonished, and no longer doubted that the woman was his wife, no matter how she had recovered her hands. So the next day he again went out hunting, and, according to arrangement, stayed late in the wood and had to return to the cottage again. The prince, having gone to bed, feigned sleep, and dropped his arm over the bed. His wife, seeing this, again said, " Put it back, my son, put it back, it's your royal father's arm." Afterwards he dropped his other arm, and then his two legs purposely; and the woman in each case bade her son put them back, in the same words. At last he let his head hang over the bedside, and his wife said to her son, "Lift it back, my son, lift it back; it's your royal father's head." But the little fellow, getting tired of all this, replied, "I shan't do it; you better do it yourself this time, mother." "Lift it back, my son," again said the mother, coaxingly; but the boy would not obey, whereupon the woman herself went to the bed, in order to lift the prince's head. But no sooner had she touched him than her husband caught hold of her with both his hands, and embraced her. ''Why did you leave me?" said he, in a reproachful tone. "How could I help leaving you," answered his wife, "when you ordered me out of your house?" "I wrote in the letter," said the prince, "this and this;" and told her what he had really written; and his wife explained to him what had been read to her from the letter that had been changed. The fraud was thus discovered, and the prince was glad beyond everything that he had found his wife and her two beautiful children. He at once had all three taken back to the palace, where a second wedding was celebrated, and a great festival held. Guests were invited from the 77th country, and came to the feast. Through the letter-carrying messenger it became known that the cause of all the mischief was no one else than the princess's envious mother. But the prince forgave her all at the urgent request of his wife; and the young couple lived for a great many years in matrimonial bliss, their family increasing greatly. At the old king's death the whole realm fell to the happy couple, who are still alive, if they have not died since. Source (books.google.com): Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, Folk-Tales of the Magyars: Collected by Kriza, Erdélyi, Pap, and Others (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), pp. 182-88 . Source (Internet Archive): Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, Folk-Tales of the Magyars: Collected by Kriza, Erdélyi, Pap, and Others (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), pp. 182-88 . Return to the table of contents . William of the Tree Ireland In the time long ago there was a king in Erin. He was married to a beautiful queen, and they had but one only daughter. The queen was struck with sickness, and she knew that she would not be long alive. She put the king under gassa (mystical injunctions) that he should not marry again until the grass should be a foot high over her tomb. The daughter was cunning, and she used to go out every night with a scissors, and she used to cut the grass down to the ground. The king had a great desire to have another wife, and he did not know why the grass was not growing over the grave of the queen. He said to himself: "There is some. body deceiving me." That night he went to the churchyard, and he saw the daughter cutting the grass that was on the grave. There came great anger on him then, and he said: "I will marry the first woman I see, let she be old or young." When he went out on the road he saw an old hag. He brought her home and married her, as he would not break his word. After marrying her, the daughter of the king was under bitter misery at (the hands of) the hag, and the hag put her under an oath not to tell anything at all to the king, and not to tell to any person anything she should see being done, except only to three who were never baptised. The next morning on the morrow, the king went out a hunting, and when he was gone, the hag killed a fine hound the king had. When the king came home he asked the old hag "who killed my hound!" "Your daughter killed it," says the old woman. "Why did you kill my hound?" said the king. "I did not kill your hound," says the daughter, "and I cannot tell you who killed him." "I will make you tell me," says the king. He took the daughter with him to a great wood, and he hanged her on a tree, and then he cut off the two hands and the two feet off her, and left her in a state of death. When he was going out of the wood there went a thorn into his foot, and the daughter said: "That you may never get better until I have hands and feet to cure you." The king went home, and there grew a tree out of his foot, and it was necessary for him to open the window, to let the top of the tree out. There was a gentleman going by near the wood, and he heard the king's daughter a-screeching. He went to the tree, and when he saw the state she was in, he took pity on her, brought her home, and when she got better, married her. At the end of three quarters (of a year), the king's daughter had three sons at one birth, and when they were born, Granya Öi came and put hands and feet on the king's daughter, and told her, "Don't let your children be baptised until they are able to walk. There is a tree growing out of your father's foot; it was cut often, but it grows again, and it is with you lies his healing. You are under an oath not to tell the things you saw your stepmother doing to anyone but to three who were never baptised, and God has sent you those three. When they will be a year old bring them to your father's house, and tell your story before your three sons, and rub your hand on the stump of the tree, and your father will be as well as he was the first day." There was great wonderment on the gentleman when he saw hands and feet on the king's daughter. She told him then every word that Granya Öi said to her. When the children were a year old, the mother took them with her, and went to the king's house. There were doctors from every place in Erin attending on the king, but they were not able to do him any good. When the daughter came in, the king did not recognise her. She sat down, and the three sons round her, and she told her story to them from top to bottom, and the king was listening to her telling it. Then she left her hand on the sole of the king's foot and the tree fell off it. The day on the morrow he hanged the old hag, and he gave his estate to his daughter and to the gentleman. Source (books.google.com): Douglas Hyde, Beside the Fire: A Collection of Irish Gaelic Folk Stories (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 167-69 . Source (Internet Archive): Douglas Hyde, Beside the Fire: A Collection of Irish Gaelic Folk Stories (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 167-69 . Return to the table of contents . The Bad Stepmother Ireland Once there was aa king, and he had two fine children, a girl and a boy; but he married again after their mother died, and a very wicked woman she was that he put over them. One day when he was out hunting, the stepmother came in where the daughter was sitting all alone, with a cup of poison in one hand and a dagger in the other, and made her swear that she would never tell any one that ever was christened what she would see her doing. The poor young girl -- she was only fifteen -- took the oath, and just after the queen took the king's favourite dog and killed him before her eyes. When the king came back, and saw his pet lying dead in the hall, he flew into a passion, and axed who done it; and says the queen, says she, "Who done it but your favourite daughter? There she is. Let her deny it if she can!" The poor child burst out a crying, but wasn't able to say anything in her own defence bekase of her oath. Well, the king did not know what to do or to say. He cursed and swore a little, and hardly ate any supper. The next day he was out a hunting the queen killed the little son, and left him standing on his head on the window-seat of the lobby. Well, whatever way the king was in before, he went mad now in earnest. "Who done this?" says he to the queen. "Who, but your pet daughter?" "Take the vile creature," says he to two of his footmen, "into the forest, and cut off her two hands at the wrists, and maybe that'll teach her not to commit any more murders. Oh, Vuya, Vuya!" says he, stamping his foot on the boarded floor, "what a misfortunate king I am to lose my childher this way, and had only the two. Bring me back the two hands, or your own heads will be off before sunset." When he stamped on the floor a splinter ran up into his foot through the sole of his boot; but he didn't mind it at first, he was in such grief and anger. But when he was taking off his boots, he found the splinter fastening one of them on his foot. He was very hardset to get it off, and was obliged to send for a surgeon to get the splinter out of the flesh; but the more he cut and probed, the further it went in. So he was obliged to lie on a sofia all day, and keep it poulticed with bowl-almanac or some other plaster. Well, the poor princess, when her arms were cut off, thought the life would leave her; but she knew there was a holy well off in the wood, and to it she made her way. She put her poor arms into the moss that was growing over it, and the blood stopped flowing, and she was eased of the pain, and then she washed herself as well as she could. She fell asleep by the well, and the spirit of her mother appeared to her in a dream, and told her to be good, and never forget to say her prayers night and morning, and that she would escape every snare that would be laid for her. When she awoke next morning she washed herself again, and said her prayers, and then she began to feel hungry. She heard a noise, and she was so afraid that she got into a low broad tree that hung over the well. She wasn't there long till she saw a girl with a piece of bread and butter in one hand, and a pitcher in the other, coming and stooping over the well. She looked down through the branches, and if she did, so sure the girl saw her face in the water, and thought it was her own. She looked at it again and again, and then, without waiting to eat her bread or fill her pitcher, she ran back to the kitchen of a young king's palace that was just at the edge of the wood. "Where's the water?" says the housekeeper. "Wather!" says she; "it 'ud be a purty business for such handsome girl as I grew since yesterday, to be fetchin' wather for the likes of the people that's here. It's married to the young prince I ought to be." "Oh! to Halifax with you," says the housekeeper, "I'll soon cure your impedence." So she locked her up in the storeroom, an' kep' her on bread and water. To make a long story short, two other girls were sent to the well, and all were in the same story when they cum back. An' there was such a thravally [corruption of "reveillé"] ruz in the kitchen about it at last, that the young king came to hear the rights of it. The last girl told him what happened to herself, and nothing would do the prince but go to the well to see about it. When he came he stooped and saw the shadow of the beautiful face; but he had sense enough to look up, and he found the princess in the tree. Well, it would take me too long to tell yez all the fine things he said to her, and how modestly she answered him, and how he handed her down, and was almost ready to cry when he seen her poor arms. She would not tell him who she was, nor the way she was persecuted on account of her oath; but the short and the long of it was, that he took her home, and couldn't live if she didn't marry him. Well, married they were; and in course of time they had a fine little boy; but the strangest thing of all was that the young queen begged her husband not to have the child baptized till he'd be after coming home from the wars that the King of Ireland had just then with the Danes. He agreed, and set off to the camp, giving a beautiful jewel to her just as his foot was in the stirrup. Well, he wrote to her every second day, and she wrote to him every second day, and dickens a letter ever came to the hands of him or her. For the wicked stepmother had her watched all along, from the very day she came to the well till the king went to the wars; and she gave such a bribe to the postman (!) that she got all the letters herself. Well, the poor king didn't know whether he was standing on his head or his feet, and the poor queen was crying all the day long. At last there was a letter delivered to the king; and this was wrote by the wicked stepmother herself, as if it was from the young queen to one of the officers, asking him to get a furlough, and come and meet her at such a well, naming the one in the forest. He got this officer, that was as innocent as the child unborn, put in irons, and sent two of his soldiers to put the queen to death, and bring him his young child safe. But the night before, the spirit of the queen's mother appeared to her in a dream, and told her the danger that was coming. "Go," said she, "with your child tomorrow morning to the well, and dress yourself in your maid's clothes before you leave the house; wash your arms in the well once more, and take a bottle of the water with you, and return to your father's palace. Nobody will know you. The water will cure him of a disorder he has, and I need not say any more." Just as the young queen was told, just so she done; and when she was after washing her face and arms, lo and behold! her nice soft hands were restored; but her face that was as white as cream was now as brown as a berry. So she fell on her knees and said her prayers, and then she filled her bottle, and set out for her father's court with her child in her arms. The sentries at the palace gates let her pass when she said she was coming to cure the king; and she got to where he was lying in pain before the stepmother knew anything about it, for herself was sick at the time. Before she opened her mouth the king loved her, she looked so like his former queen and his lost daughter, though her face was so swarthy. She hardly washed his wound with the water of the holy well when out came the splinter, and he was as strong on his limbs as a new ditch. Well, hadn't he great cooramuch about the brown-faced woman and her child, and nothing that the wicked queen could do would alter his opinion of her. The old rogue didn't know who she was, especially as she wasn't without the hands; but it was her nature to be jealous of every one that the king cared for. In two or three weeks the wars was over, and the young king was returning home, and the road he took brought him by his father-in-law's. The old king would not let him pass by without giving him an entertainment for all his bravery again' the Danes, and there was great huzzaing and cheering as he was riding up the avenue and through the courtyard. Just as he was alighting, his wife held up his little son to him, with the jewel in his little hand. He got a wonderful fright. He knew his wife's features, but they were so tawny, and her pretty brown hands were to the good, and the child was his own picture, but still she couldn't be his false princess. He kissed the child, and passed on, but hardly said a word till dinner was over. Then says he to the old king, "Would you allow a brown woman and her child that I saw in the palace yard, to be sent for, till I speak to her?" "Indeed an' I will," said the other. "I owe my life to her." So she came in, and the young king made her sit down very close to him. "Young woman," says he, "I have a particular reason for asking who you are, and who is the father of that child." "I can't tell you that, sir," said she, "because of an oath I was obliged to take never to tell my story to any one that was christened. But my little boy was never christened, and to him I'll tell everything. My little son, you must know that my wicked stepmother killed my father's favourite dog, and killed my own little brother, and made me swear never to tell any one that ever received baptism, about it. She got my own father to have my hands chopped off, and I'd die only I washed them in the holy well in the forest. A king's son made me his wife, and she got him by forged letters to send orders to have me killed. The spirit of my mother watched over me; my hands were restored; my father's wound was healed; and now I place you in your own father's arms. Now, you may be baptized, thank God! And that's the story I had to tell you." She took a wet towel, and wiped her face, and she became as white and red as she was the day of her marriage. She had like to be hurt with her husband and her father pulling her from each other; and such laughing and crying never was heard before or since. If the wicked stepmother didn't make her escape, she was torn between wild horses; and if they all didn't live happy after -- that you and I may! Source (books.google.com): Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 17-22 . Source (Internet Archive): Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 17-22 . Return to the table of contents . The Cruel Stepmother Scotland About the year 800, there lived a rich nobleman in a sequestered place of Scotland, where he wished to conceal his name, birth, and parentage, as he had fled from the hands of justice to save his life for an action he had been guilty of committing in his early years. It was supposed, and not without some good show of reason, that his name was Malcolm, brother to Fingal, King of Morven. Be this as it may, it so happened that he had chosen a pious and godly woman for his consort; who, on giving birth to a daughter, soon after departed this life. Malcolm (as we shall call him, for the better understanding of his history) lived a widower for the space of sixteen years, when thinking that his daughter now became of such age as to leave him, if she got a good offer. With these thoughts full in his head, he went to a distant place of the country where the thane of Mull dwelt, and made love to one of his daughters, whom he afterwards married and brought to his own domain. The new come bride had no sooner fixed her eyes on Beatrix, (for that was his daughter's name) than she conceived the most deadly hatred imaginable; so much so, that it almost deprived her of her rest, meditating schemes how to get rid of her, as she envied her for her superior beauty. One day on her husband going ahunting, she took the young lady and bound her by an oath that whatever she saw or heard her do or say, she would conceal the same from her father. The oath being extorted from her by threatening her with death and destruction, if she did not comply. The first act of the stepmother was to go into the garden and cut down a favourite tree which was in full blossom, and so destroyed the root and beauty of the branches by burning the same. On Malcolm's return, he immediately discovered the want of his favourite tree, and getting into such a passion, few could approach the place where he was for a considerable length of time. When his passion had somewhat subsided, he asked his wife what had become of it, or how it had been destroyed, but she desired him to ask his daughter, as she knew nothing about it herself. Beatrix was then summoned before him, and interrogated with all the rigour of a passionate father, as to her knowledge of the destruction of his tree. Her only answer was, that He was above who knew all about it. No more satisfaction would she give him. A second time he went from home, and on his return found his favourite hound weltering in his blood. This again renewed his passion, but who was the guilty person he could never learn; on enquiring at his daughter, he received the same answer as formerly. A third time he went ahunting, and on his return found his favourite hawk lying dead; but the perpetrators of these horrid deeds he could not discover. On applying to his wife, he was requested to ask his daughter; and on consulting her, her answer was as at the first. His wife thereby seeing that all the stratagems which she had devised for her destruction had proved abortive; to gratify her mortal hatred, rather than suffer her to live, she would sacrifice everything she had in the world. One year had scarcely passed in this disagreeable manner, when the lady was delivered of a fine boy, which soon became the darling of his father. This was too glaring not to be easily perceived by the mother; but rather than live the life which she had done since they had been married, with the envious venom rankling in her breast, she would destroy her own child and offspring. This being determined upon, one night when Beatrix was in bed soundly sleeping, dreading no harm, this bad woman, her stepmother, took a knife, bereaved the sweetly smiling young thing of its life, and laid it with the knife reeking in gore, into the arms of the innocent Beatrix. After having been in bed for some time with her husband, she started as from some frightful dream, crying, "O, my child, what has become of my lovely child!" This alarmed the father, who, on looking for the child, it was not to be found. The mother then said, she was much afraid that Beatrix had stole it away from them while they slept, and had murdered it. The father, by no means could be made to believe this; but upon examining her bed, the child was discovered horribly mangled, and the knife beside it. He was now petrified with horror, and could ask nor answer anything. It was in vain for the young lady to plead ignorance, or deny the guilty deed, the proofs were too strong, as certainly no one could have suspected the unnatural mother of such cruel barbarity; and no one else had access to the place where it lay but Beatrix. Her father then having determined to put her to the most cruel torture for the death of his beloved child; she was now charged with all the other bad deeds which had been committed for the space of the bygone twelve months in his house and premises, which caused him to take her to a wood, and after having cut off her right hand and arm, he next cut off her right leg. She still pleaded her innocence, but rather than perjure herself, she would suffer all that he choosed to inflict upon her; but as proof of her innocence, she told him on his way homewards, a thorn would so stick in his foot that none but herself could extract, and that only after her arm and leg had been reunited to her body as before. He paid no attention to this, but next cut out her tongue, and left her to perish, or to be destroyed by wild beasts in the wood. She had not, however, lain long in this humiliating posture, till a knight came riding that way, when, on observing her, he alighted from his horse, and enquired the nature of her sufferings As she could not speak, she made signs to him for pen, ink, and paper, when she wrote an account of the whole. He then took her on his horse behind him and carried her home to his mother, who being acquainted with the virtues of the water of a particular well near by, she soon restored to her the full use of her amputated limbs; but her tongue still continued useless. The knight, notwithstanding the deficiency of the want of her tongue and speech, took such a liking to her that they were shortly after married, and lived in the greatest peace and pleasure, till one day that he was necessitated to leave his country on some very urgent business. Previously to his setting off, he had matters so arranged, that by giving certain directions to his wife, she might write to him by her page. All things being prepared, the knight went away with a sorrowful heart. He had not been long away till his wife became sick at heart (being pregnant), and longed to see her esteemed lord. A message was then sent to the place of his residence with a request that he would return immediately home. The messenger was her own page, who was enjoined to make every dispatch, and not to tarry on the way; but these instructions he soon forgot when out of sight and reach of his mistress. As he journeyed on his way, it so happened that he should take up his abode for the night in the very house of Beatrix's father. His lady, observing the stranger, was desirous of knowing his errand, and so prevailed upon him to give her a sight of the letter which he carried from Beatrix to her husband. By her fair speeches, she so won his heart, that he gave it to her. On opening it she soon discovered from whom it came, and tore it, and wrote in its place one, as if come from his mother, requesting him to put away or destroy the bad woman he had brought unto her. To this letter he made no reply, when a second one was written by his wife, not knowing the cause of his delay; but it shared the same fate as the former, and another of like tenor, breathing the bitterest enmity and hatred against his beloved and virtuous wife, put in its place. On receiving this second menacing letter, he hurried home, and finding his wife in the house, without any provocation or enquiry, he immediately dragged her forth, and abused her very unmercifully, till having driven her into a ditch to get quit of her altogether, a powerful herb happened to get into her mouth in the course of her struggle, which at once restored to her the use of her speech. It now became her turn to interrogate him, and ask why he had used her so cruelly without a cause. He then showed her the letters which he had received purporting to be from his mother. She said they were not written by his mother, as they lived on the most friendly terms imaginable. It was then referred to his mother, who, on seeing them, was no less surprised than vexed at them, and at his maltreating his wife so basely. The page was then called and examined, when he confessed what he had done. The knight, without further enquiry into the matter, took his sword and cut off his head, and threw it away, as a warning to all others not to betray their trust, but behave in a more upright and honourable manner. As it was at length discovered that the cruel stepmother had been the sole cause of the whole of Beatrix's misfortunes, she was adjudged to be put to an ignominious death by the most cruel torture, which was put into execution immediately after, as a just reward for her hatred and cruelty. Beatrix then relieved her father from the pain which he suffered in his foot by a thorn which stuck in it, and baffled all the medical skill of that part of the country. They afterwards lived to a good old age and died in peace. Source: Peter Buchan, Ancient Scottish Tales: An Unpublished Collection Made by Peter Buchan , introduction by John A. Fairley (Peterhead, 1908), pp. 25-28 . Return to the table of contents . Anecdote of a Charitable Woman The 1001 Nights It is related that a certain king said to the people of his dominions, "If any one of you give aught in alms, I will assuredly cut off his hand." So all the people refrained from alms-giving, and none could bestow upon another. And it happened that a beggar came to a woman one day, and hunger tormented him, and he said to her, "Give me somewhat as an alms." "How," said she, "can I bestow an alms upon thee when the king cutteth off the hand of every one who doth so?" But he rejoined, "I conjure thee by God (whose name be exalted!) that thou give me an alms." So when he conjured her by God, she was moved with pity for him, and bestowed upon him two cakes of bread. And the news reached the king; whereupon he gave orders to bring her before him; and when she came, he cut off her hands. And she returned to her house. Then the king, after a while, said to his mother, "I desire to marry; therefore marry me to a comely woman." And she replied, "There is, among our female slaves, a woman than whom none more beautiful existeth; but she hath a grievous defect." "And what is it?" he asked. She answered, "She is maimed of the two hands." The king however said, "I desire to see her." Wherefore she brought her to him, and when he saw her, he was tempted by her beauty, and married her. And that woman was she who bestowed upon the beggar the two cakes of bread, and whose hands were cut off on that account. But when he had married her, her fellow-wives envied her, and wrote to the king, telling him that she was unchaste; and she had given birth to a son. And the king wrote a letter to his mother, in which he commanded her to go forth with her to the desert, and to leave her there, and return. His mother therefore did so; she took her forth to the desert, and returned. And that woman began to weep for the misfortune that had befallen her, and to bewail violently, with a wailing not to be exceeded. And while she was walking, with the child upon her neck, she came to a river, and kneeled down to drink, because of the violence of the thirst that had affected her from her walking and fatigue and grief; and when she stooped her head, the child fell into the water. So she sat weeping violently for her child; and while she wept, lo, there passed by her two men, who said to her, "What causeth thee to weep?" She answered, "I had a child upon my neck, and he fell into the water." And they said, "Dost thou desire that we rescue him, and restore him to thee?" She answered, "Yes." And upon this they supplicated God (whose name be exalted!), and the child came forth to her safe and unhurt. Then they said to her, "Dost thou desire that God should restore to thee thy hands as they were?" She answered, "Yes." And they supplicated God (whose perfection be extolled, and whose name be exalted!); whereupon her hands returned to her in the most perfect state. After this they said to her, "Knowest thou who we are?" "God," she replied, "is all-knowing." And they said, "We are thy two cakes of bread which thou gavest as an alms to the beggar, and which alms occasioned the cutting off of thy hands. Therefore praise God (whose name be exalted!) that he hath restored to thee thy hands and thy child. And she praised God (whose name be exalted!), and glorified him. Source (books.google.com): The Thousand and One Nights: The Arabian Nights' Entertainments , edited by Stanley Lane-Poole, vol. 2 (London: George Bell and Sons, 1906), pp. 375-76 . Source (Internet Archive): The Thousand and One Nights: The Arabian Nights' Entertainments , edited by Stanley Lane-Poole, vol. 2 (London: George Bell and Sons, 1906), pp. 375-76 . Links to Richard Burton's translation of this tale: The Woman Whose Hands Were Cut Off for Giving Alms to the Poor (books.google.com). The Woman Whose Hands Were Cut Off for Giving Alms to the Poor (Internet Archive). Return to the table of contents . The Girl without Legs Somalia A Sultan had a daughter, and the daughter used to be taught the Koran. One day the Sultan went on a pilgrimage, and entrusted his daughter to a priest and said, "Continue to teach that girl the Koran." The priest coveted the girl, wishing to lie with her, but the girl refused. One day she said, "Come to me tomorrow." On the day arranged she removed from the house the ladder by which the priest used to ascend. He then sent a letter to her father, and he wrote, "Your daughter has become a whore." The Sultan returned from the pilgrimage, and he was angry with the girl, and he handed her over to some slaves, and he said, "Cut that girl's throat." Then the slaves took the girl, and brought her to a wooded place, and they cut off her legs while they dug her grave. While they were digging the grave she crawled away, and went into some trees and hid. When the slaves had dug the grave, they looked in the place where she had lain and could not find her. Then they slew a gazelle, and the gazelle's blood they poured into a bottle, and brought the blood to the Sultan and said, "We have slain the girl." One day later a caravan passed by the place and camped where the girl lay. In the afternoon as the party were loading up the camels, they saw the girl sitting under a tree. A man took the girl, and put her on a camel, and brought her to the town they came to. The man who took the girl put her to live in a house. Later on the son of the Sultan saw the girl's face, and the young man saw that her face was beautiful, and he said to the man whose house she dwelt in, "Let me marry that girl from you." And the man said, "The girl has no legs." Then the Sultan's son said, "I will marry her, give her to me." And so the man said, "Well and good." And the Sultan's son married her. She bore two children, and while she was with child the young man said, "I am going on a pilgrimage." And he left her a ram, and went on the pilgrimage. While he was away on the pilgrimage his wife had a dream, and she dreamed that two birds sat upon her two legs, and her legs had grown out, and that she made the pilgrimage. In the morning at break of day she saw the two birds sitting upon her two legs, and the legs had grown out. After daylight she took her two children and the ram and the two birds and went on the pilgrimage. She came to a building at the half way, and there came to her her father and her brother and the priest and her husband, none of whom knew her. She told stories to her children, and she related all that had happened to her, and her father heard and the priest. Then the priest tried to run away, but the Sultan said, "Sit down until the story is finished." Then the Sultan, the girl's father, cut the priest's throat, and the girl and her father and husband they went on together and made the pilgrimage. And so the girl and her father were reconciled. Source (books.google.com): J. W. C. Kirk, "Specimens of Somali Tales," Folk-Lore: Transactions of the Folk-Lore Society, a Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 15 (1904), no. 3, pp. 319-21 . Source (Internet Archive): J. W. C. Kirk, "Specimens of Somali Tales," Folk-Lore: Transactions of the Folk-Lore Society, a Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 15 (1904), no. 3, pp. 319-21 . Kirk's source: "Mohammed Jibril, Habr Toljaala, Musa Abokr, clerk, aged about 26." Return to the table of contents . Blessing or Property Swahili There was a man and his wife, and they prayed to God to get a child; and they got first a son and next a daughter. And their father's employment was to cut up firewood. And they remained till the children were grown up. And their father was seized by disease. And he called his children, and asked them, "Will you have blessing or property?" And the son said, "I will have property." And the daughter said, "I will have blessing." And her father gave her much blessing. And her father died. And they kept the mourning, and when they arose their mother fell sick; and she called her children and said to them, "Will you have blessing or property?" And the son said, "I will have property." And the daughter said, "I will have blessing." And her mother gave her blessing. And their mother died. And they kept their mourning, and when they arose the seventh day was come. And the son went and told the woman, his sister, "Put out all my father's and mother's things." And the woman put them out, without his leaving her anything. And he took them all away. And people said to him, "Will you not leave even any little thing for this your sister?" And he said, "I shall not. I asked for the property, and she for a blessing." And he left her a cooking pot, and a mortar for cleaning corn; he did not leave her even a little food. Her neighbours used to come and borrow the mortar, and clean their corn, and then they gave her a little grain, and she cooked and ate it. And others used to come and borrow her cooking pots, and cook with them, and then they gave her too a little food. And this was every day her employment. And she searched about in her father and mother's house, without finding anything except a pumpkin seed. And she took it and went and planted it under the well. And a plant sprung up, and bore many pumpkins. Her brother had no news of her, and he asked people, "Where does my sister get food?" And they told him, "People borrow her mortar, and they clean their corn, and give her too a little food; and people borrow her cooking pots, and cook with them, and give her too a little food." And her brother arose and went and robbed her of the mortar and cooking pots. And then she awoke in the morning and sought for food, and could not get it. And she stayed till nine o'clock, and said, "I will go and look at my pumpkin, whether it has grown." And she went, and saw that many pumpkins had come. And she was comforted. And she gathered the pumpkins, and went and sold them, and got food. And this was her employment every day, to gather and go and sell. And when the third day came, everyone who ate those pumpkins found them exceedingly sweet. And everybody used to take grain and go to her place and buy. And many days passed, and she got property. Her brother's wife heard that news, and sent her slave with grain to go and buy a pumpkin. And she said, "They are finished." And when she knew it was her brother's wife's slave, she told him, "Take this one, and take back your grain." And she went and cooked it, and found it very sweet. The next day she sent some one again. And she said, "There are none at all today." And he went and told his mistress, and she was exceedingly vexed. When her husband came and asked her, "What is the matter with you, my wife?" She told him, "I sent some one to your sister with my grain, to go and ask for pumpkins. She did not send them, and told me, 'There are none'; and other people all buy of her." And he said to his wife, "Let us sleep till tomorrow. I will go and pull up her pumpkin plant." When the morning dawned, he went to his sister and said to her, "When my wife sent grain, you refused to sell her a pumpkin." And she said, "They are finished; the day before yesterday she sent someone, and I gave to him for nothing." And he said, "Why are you selling to other people?" And she said, "They are finished, there are no more, they are not yet come." And her brother said to her, "I shall go and cut up your pumpkin." And she said, "You dare not, unless indeed you cut my hand off first; then you may cut up the pumpkin." And her brother took hold of her right hand and cut it off, and went and cut up her pumpkin plant, every bit of it. The woman set on hot water, and put in her arm, and put medicine also, and bound on a cloth. And he took away from her everything, and put her out of the house. And his sister wandered about in the forest, and this her brother sold the house, and gathered much property, and remained spending it. And she wandered in the forest, till on the seventh day she came out upon another town. And she climbed up into a great tree, and ate the fruit of the tree, and in the morning she slept there in the tree. On the next day the son of the king came out shooting birds, he and his people. About twelve o'clock he was tired, and said, "I will go there by the tree, that I may rest, and you shoot birds." And he sat under the tree, he and his slave. And the young woman cried till her tears fell upon the king's son below. And he said to his slave, "Look outside; is it not raining?" And he said, "It is not, master." And he said, "Then climb up into the tree, and look what bird is casting its droppings upon me." And his slave climbed up, and he saw an exceedingly beautiful woman crying, and without saying a word, he got down. And he told his master, "There is a most beautiful young woman. I did not venture to say a word to her." And his master asked him, "Why?" And he said, "I found her crying; perhaps you should go yourself." And his master climbed up, and went and saw her, and said to her, "What is the matter with you, my mistress? Are you a person or a spirit?" And she said, "I am a person." And he said, "What are you crying about?" And she said, "I am thinking of things; I am a person as you are." And he said, "Come down and let us go to our home." And she said to him, "Where is your home?" And he said, "With my father and mother; I am a king's son." And she said, "What did you come to do here?" And he said, "I come to shoot birds, month by month; this is our employment. I came with my companions." And she said, "I do not like to be seen by anybody." And that woman had told the king's son. And he said, "We shall not be seen by any one." And she came down. And he sent his slave, "Go into the town quickly, and bring me a masheela . And his slave went at once and returned with a masheela and four people, and they carried him. And he put the woman into it, and told his slave, "Fire a gun, that all the company may know." And he fired a gun, and his companions came, and they said to him, "What is the matter with you, son of the king?" And he said, "I am cold, and I want to go my way into the town." And they carried the game they had got, and went away. And the king's son had got into the masheela , he and that young woman. And his companions knew nothing of it. And they went to their city, and reached his house. And he said to a man, "Go and tell my mother and father, I have fever today, I want gruel quickly; let them send it to me." And his mother and father were troubled, and gruel was cooked for him, and sent to him. And his father went with his vizirs and went to see him. And at night his mother went with her people to see him. The next day he went out, and went and told his mother and father, "I have picked up a young woman, I want you to marry me to her, but she has lost one hand?" And they said, "Why?" And he said, "I wish it just as it is." And the Sultan loved his only son much, and he made a wedding and married him. And the people heard in the town, "The Sultan's son has married a young woman, she has lost one hand." And they remained until his wife became pregnant, and bore a son, and his parents rejoiced exceedingly. And the Sultan's son went on a journey, and went to travel about in the towns of his father. There behind her brother came out; he had nothing to spend, and was going begging. Till one day he heard people conversing, "The Sultan's son has married a woman who has lost one hand." And her brother asked, "Where did he get the girl, this child of the Sultan?" And they told him, "He picked her up in the forest." And he knew she was his sister. And he went to the king. And he went and said, "Your child has married a woman who has lost a hand. She was put out of their town because she was a witch; every husband who marries her, she kills." And the king went and told his wife, and they said, "What plan can we act on?" And they loved much their only child, and they said, "Let us put her out of the town." And her brother said to them, "Kill her, for there at home she had her hand cut off, and here kill her." And they said, "We cannot kill her, we will put her out of the town." And they went and put her out of the town, her and her son. And she was comforted. And she went out, and carried a little earthen pot, and went her way into the forest; she knew not where she was going or whence she came. And she sat down, and showed her child, and casting her eyes, she saw a snake come fast towards her, and she said, "Today I am dead." And the snake said to her, "Child of Adam, open your earthern pot that I may go in. Save me from sun, and I will save you from rain." And she opened the pot, and it went in, and she covered it. And she looked and saw another snake coming fast, and it said to her, "Has not my companion passed?" And she said, "It is going." And it passed quickly. The snake which was in the pot said to her, "Uncover me." And she uncovered it, and it was comforted, and said to that child of Adam, "Where are you going?" And she said, "I know not where I am going, I am wandering in the wood." And the snake said to her, "Follow me, and let us go home." And they went together till on the road they saw a great lake. And the snake said to her, "Child of Adam, let us sit and rest, the sun is fierce; go and bathe in the lake with your child." And she carried her boy, and went to wash him, and he fell in and she lost him in the lake. And it asked her, "What is the matter with you there, child of Adam?" And she said, " My child is lost in the water." And it said, " Look for him well." And she sought for him for a whole hour without finding him. And it said, "Put in the other hand." And she said, "You snake are making game of me." And it asked "How?" And she said, "I have put in this sound one, and I have not found him; what is the use of this spoilt one?" And the snake said to her, "Only you put in both." And the child of Adam put them in, and went and found her son and laid hold of him, and drew out her hand sound again. And it said, "Have you found him?" And she said, "I have found him, and have got my hand sound again." And she rejoiced much. And the snake said, "Now let us go away to my elders, and let me repay your kindness." And she said, " This is enough, getting my hand." And it said, "Not yet; let us go to my elders." And they went till they arrived, and they rejoiced much, and loved that young woman. And she remained, eating and drinking many days. And her husband returned from his journey. And his elders had caused two tombs to be made, one of his wife and one of his child. And her brother had become a great man with the king. And her husband, the king's son, came. And he asked, "Where is my wife?" And they said to him, "She is dead." "And where is my child?" And they answered him, "He is dead." And he asked, "Where are their graves?" And they took him to go and see them. And when he saw them he wept much. And he made a mourning. And he was comforted. Many days had passed. And the young woman in the forest said to her friend the snake, "I want to go away, home." And it said, "Take leave of my mother and father. When they give you leave to go, if they give you a present, accept only the father's ring and the mother's casket." And she went and took leave of them, and they gave her much wealth, and she refused and said, I, one person, how shall I carry this wealth?" And they said, "What will you have?" And she said, "You, father, I want your ring; and you, mother, I want your casket." And they were very sorry, and asked her, "Who told you about this?" And she said, "I know it myself." And they said, "Not so; it is this your brother who told you." And he took the ring and gave her, and said to her, "I give you this ring. If you want food, if you want clothes, if you want a house for sleeping, tell the ring; it will produce it for you by the blessing of God and of me your father." And her mother gave her the casket, and told her such and such things. And they gave her their blessing. And she went out and went away, till there by the town of her husband, without reaching her husband's house. When she reached the outskirts, she told the ring, "I want you to produce for me a great house." And it produced a house, and the furniture of the house and slaves. And she stayed, she and her son. And her son had become a great lad. And the king got news of there being a large house in the outskirts, and he sent people to go and look, and they answered him, "It is true." And the sultan arose with his vizirs and his son. And they went and drew near, and the woman looked through a telescope and saw her husband, and her husband's father, and many people, and her brother among them. And she told the people, "Prepare food quickly." And they prepared, and laid the table. And they arrived and were invited in, and went inside, and they asked her the news. And she said, "Good." And she said to them, "Eat of the food. I come from a distance; when you have done with the food let me give you my news." And they ate the food, till when they had finished she told them, from the beginning when she was born, she and her brother, till all were finished, as they had been. And the king's son went to embrace his wife, and they wept much, and all who were there wept, and they knew her brother was not good. And the king asked her, "What shall we do to your brother?" And she said, "Only put him out of the town." And she dwelt with her husband till the end in joy. Source (books.google.com): Edward Steere, Swahili Tales: As Told by Natives of Zanzibar , with an English translation (London: Bell and Daldy, 1870), pp. 393-409 . Source (Internet Archive): Edward Steere, Swahili Tales: As Told by Natives of Zanzibar , with an English translation (London: Bell and Daldy, 1870), pp. 393-409 . Another version of this story: Andrew Lang, "The One-Handed Girl," The Lilac Fairy Book (New York, London, Bombay, and Calcutta; 1910), pp. 185-208 (books.google.com). Andrew Lang, "The One-Handed Girl," The Lilac Fairy Book (New York, London, Bombay, and Calcutta; 1910), pp. 185-208 (Internet Archive). Return to the table of contents . The Sun and the Moon Eskimo [This tale, one of the few already mentioned by other authors on Greenland, has been translated from one of the oldest manuscripts.] An old married couple remained at home while their children travelled about all the summer. One day the wife was left alone as usual while the husband was out kayaking. On hearing something moving about close by, she hastened to hide beneath her coverlet, and after a little while, when she ventured to peep above it, she saw a little snow-bunting (Plectrophanes nivalis) hopping about on the floor and chirping, "Another one will soon enter, who is going to tell thee something." In a little while she was alarmed by a still greater noise ; and looking up again, she beheld a kusagtak (another little bird -- the wheat-ear -- Saxicola ænanthe ), likewise hopping on the floor and singing, "Somebody shall soon enter and tell thee something." It left the room, and was soon followed by a raven; but soon after it had gone she heard a sound like the steps of people, and this time she saw a very beautiful woman, who entered. On asking whence she came, the stranger told: In bygone days we often used to assemble in my home to divert ourselves at different plays and games, and in the evening, when it was all ended, the young girls generally remained out, and the young men used to pursue and court us; but we could never manage to recognise them in the dark. One night I was curious to know the one who had chosen me, and so I went and daubed my hands with soot before I joined the others. When our play had come to an end, I drew my hands along his back, and left him, and was the first who entered the house. The young people came in, one after another undressed, but for some time I observed no marks. Last of all my brother entered, and I saw at once that the back of his white jacket was all besmeared with soot. I took a knife, and sharpened it, and proceeded to cut off my two breasts, and gave him them, saying, "Since my body seems to please thee, pray take these and eat them." He now began to speak indecently to me, and courted me more than ever, and while we raced about the room he caught hold of some bad moss and lit it, but I took some that was good, and also lit mine. He ran out, and I ran after him; but suddenly I felt that we were lifted up, and soared high up in the air. When we got more aloft my brother's light was extinguished, but mine remained burning, and I had become a sun. Now I am on my way higher up the skies, that I may give warmth to the orphans (viz., going to make summer). Finally she said, "Now close thy eyes." The woman turned her eyes downwards; but perceiving that she was about to leave the house, she gave her one look, and observed that at her back she was a mere skeleton. Soon after she had left the house the old husband returned. Note: Among the rare cases which we have of any Eskimo tradition from the west about Behring Straits, the above legend is reported as known at Point Barrow, and was communicated to John Simpson, surgeon on board the Plover. In this the sister says to the brother, " Ta-man' g-ma mam-mang-mang-an' g-ma nigh'-e-ro ," which corresponds to the Greenlandish tamarma mamarmat âma neriuk , "My whole person being delicious, eat this also" -- almost the same words as in one of the copies from Greenland. Source (books.google.com): Henry Rink, Tales and Traditions of the Eskimo, with a Sketch of Their Habbits, Religion, Language, and Other Peculiarities , translated from the Danish by the author; edited by Robert Brown (Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1875), no. 35, pp. 236-37 . Source (Internet Archive): Henry Rink, Tales and Traditions of the Eskimo, with a Sketch of Their Habbits, Religion, Language, and Other Peculiarities , translated from the Danish by the author; edited by Robert Brown (Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1875), no. 35, pp. 236-37 . Return to the table of contents . Sun and Moon Eskimo The heavenly bodies were once ordinary Eskimos, living upon the earth, who, for one reason or an other, have been translated to the skies. The sun was a fair woman, and the moon her brother, and they lived in the same house. She was visited every night by a man, but could not tell who it was. In order to find out, she blackened her hands with lamp-soot, and rubbed them upon las back. When the morning came, it turned out to be her brother, for his white reindeer-skin was all smudged; and hence come the spots on the moon. The sun seized a crooked knife, cut off one of her breasts, and threw it to him, crying: "Since my whole body tastes so good to you, eat this." Then she lighted a piece of lamp-moss and rushed out; the moon did likewise and ran after her, but his moss went out, and that is why he looks like a live cinder. He chased her up into the sky, and there they still are. Source (books.google.com): Fridtjof Nansen, Eskimo Life , translated by William Archer, 2nd edition (London and New York: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1894), pp. 275-76 . Source (Internet Archive): Fridtjof Nansen, Eskimo Life , translated by William Archer, 2nd edition (London and New York: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1894), pp. 275-76 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 25, 2018. Godfather Death: Folktales of Type 332 Godfather Death tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 332 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2022 Contents Godfather Death (Germany). The Doctor and Death (Denmark). The Boy with the Ale Keg (Norway). Story (Ireland). The Just Man (France). The Godson of Death (France). Juan Holgado and Death (Spain). Dr. Urssenbeck, Physician of Death (Austria). Godmother Death (Moravia). The Poor Man and Death (Hungary). Godfather Death (Italy). The Just Man (Italy). Godfather Charon (Greece). Related Links . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Godfather Death Germany Once upon a time there was an old man who already had twelve children, and when the thirteenth was born he did not know where to turn for help. In desperation he went into the woods. There the Good Lord happened upon him and said to him, "I feel sorry for you, poor man. I will lift your child from his baptism and take care of him. He will be happy on earth." The man answered, "I do not want you as a godfather. You give to the rich and let the poor starve." With that he left him standing there and continued on his way. Soon thereafter Death happened upon him and also said to him, "I will be godfather for you and pick up your child. And if he has me as a friend, he will lack nothing. I will make a doctor of him." The man said, "I am satisfied with that, for without distinction you take the rich as well as the poor. Tomorrow is Sunday, when the child will be baptized. Be on time." The next day Death arrived and held the child for his baptism. After he had grown up, Death came again and took his godchild into the woods, and said to him, "Now you are to become a doctor. You must only pay attention when you are called to a sick person and see if I am standing at his head. If so, without further ado let him smell from this flask, then anoint his feet with its contents, and he soon will regain his health. But if I am standing at his feet, then he is finished, for I will soon take him. Do not attempt to begin a cure." With that Death gave him the flask, and he became a renowned doctor. He only needed to see a patient, and he could immediately predict whether he would regain his health or die. Once he was summoned to the king, who was suffering from a serious illness. When the doctor approached him, he saw Death standing at the king's feet, and his flask would be of no use. But it occurred to him that he might deceive Death. Thus he took hold of the king and turned him around, so that Death was now standing at his head. It succeeded, and the king regained his health. After the doctor returned home, Death came to him, made angry and grim faces at him, and said, "If you ever again attempt to deceive me, I shall wring your neck." Soon afterward the king's beautiful daughter took ill. No one on earth could help her. The king wept day and night, until finally he proclaimed that whoever could cure her could have her as a reward. The doctor came and saw Death standing at her feet. Astonished at her beauty, he forgot the warning, turned her around, let her smell from the healing flask, and anointed the soles of her feet with its contents. He had scarcely returned home when Death with his terrifying face appeared before him, seized him, and carried him to an underground cavern where many thousand lights were burning. "Look!" said Death. "These are all the living. And here is a light that will burn only a little longer, and then go out. This is your life! Take heed!" Source (Deutsches Textarchiv): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Gevatter Tod," Kinder- und Haus-Märchen: Gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm (Berlin: in der Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 44, pp. 193-98 . Source (Wikisource): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Gevatter Tod," Kinder- und Haus-Märchen: Gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm (Berlin: in der Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 44, pp. 193-98 . The Grimms altered this tale somewhat in later editions. Link to an English translation of the 1857 version " Godfather Death ." The Grimms included another tale of type 332 in their Kinder- und Haus-Märchen : " Der Herr Gevatter " (no. 42). Link to an English translation " The Godfather ". Return to the table of contents . The Doctor and Death Denmark There was a very poor man who had to make arrangements for his child's baptism. But did not know where he was going, nor whom he might find to serve as godparents. At last he met a person who asked him where he was going. He was looking for godparents. "Then you can just ask me," said the stranger. Yes, that would do, but the man wanted to know who the stranger was. "I'm the one they call the Devil," he said. "No, I do not want you, for you are evil. You only want to hurt people." Then the two parted. He went on his way again, and someone else approached him. The stranger asked him where he was going. He was looking for godparents. "Then you can just as well ask me as anyone else." Of course he wanted to know who the stranger was. He was the one they call Our Lord. "No, I do not want you, because you make people different. You make both the poor and the rich, and you do not care." Then he went on his way again, thinking: "I must be able to find someone who is suitable for me." Then he met a third person, who asked him the same question, and then said: "You can just as well ask me as anyone else." He wanted to know who this stranger was. He always had this question. He was Death. "You are the one I want, for you are an honest man, and no one passes you by. You take everyone with you, both poor and rich. Death was was pleased that he had been invited, and he wanted to wish him well. "Yes, God help me," said the Man, "but I do not know what I want." "Well, for example, you could want to be a Doctor." "I do not know about medicine or anything like that." "Well, that doesn't matter. I will tell you just one thing. Now you know who I am, and when you are called to the sick and see me sitting at the head of the bed, you must not bother to treat them, for they shall die. However, if am sitted at their feet, they will revover, no matter what you give them." So he pretended to be a doctor, and everyone came to him to be cured. He had been very poor before, but now he became wealthy. He was famous, and wherever he went there was no one like him. Once he was called on to treat a king from a foreign land who had lain ill for many years. When he came in to the sick man, Death was seated at the head of the bed. Now he did not want the king to die, for he had long since been overcome by the lust for money and fame. So he ordered that the sick king should be turned around, and the king did indeed recover, for Death was now seated at his feet. For this service he got everything he could want, and more. Then he returned home, and for a time lived in wealth at his own estate. Then Death came to him once more, saying that now he should die. He pleaded to be allowed to live a little longer. No, that was not possible, for he had deceived Death with the king. "May I not be allowed to read the Lord's Prayer before I die?" Yes, for it would be a sin to deny him that. "Then, in truth, it will be a long time before I read it." Now he was on his feet again and could cure as usual. Everyone who came to him was cured. However, it was wrong that he could not read the Lord's Prayer. He longed terribly to do so. Then one day he met a little herder boy. He asked the boy if he could read something. "Only a little," replied the boy. That was not much of an answer. Could he read the Lord's Prayer? He was not sure. He had known it, but now he hardly knew if he could still do so. So the boy was supposed to read it, but he could not begin. Then the doctor took over and said: "Our father...." The boy could not continue, so the doctor had to keep saying the prayer word for word until he came to the end. Then Death suddenly appeared to him again, and this time he had to give up his life. He now had become an old, decrepit man. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Doktoren og Døden," Æventyr fra Jylland , vol. 3 (Kjøbenhavn: Karl Schønberg, 1895), no. 46, pp. 251-53 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Doktoren og Døden," Æventyr fra Jylland , vol. 3 (Kjøbenhavn: Karl Schønberg, 1895), no. 46, pp. 251-53 . Kristensen's source: Jens Mark, Vogslev. Return to the table of contents . The Boy with the Ale Keg Norway Once upon a time there was a boy who had served a man in the northern mountains for a long time. This man was a master at ale brewing. It was so uncommonly good, the like of it was not to be found. So, when the boy was to leave his place and the man was to pay him the wages he had earned, he would take no other pay than a keg of Yule-ale. Well, he got it and set off with it, and he carried it both far and long, but the longer he carried the keg the heavier it got, and so he began to look about to see if anyone were coming with whom he might have drink, that the ale might lessen and the keg lighten. And after a long, long time, he met an old man with a big beard. "Good day," said the man. "Good day to you," said the boy. "Where are you going?" asked the man. "I'm looking for someone to drink with me, and lighten my keg," said the boy. "Can't you drink with me as well as with anyone else?" said the man. "I have traveled both far and wide, and I am both tired and thirsty." "Well, why shouldn't I?" said the boy. "But tell me, where are you from, and what sort of man are you?" "I am the Lord, and come from Heaven," said the man. "I will not drink with you," said the boy, "for you make such distinction between persons here on earth, and you divide rights so unevenly that some get so rich and some so poor. No, I will not drink with you!" And having said this he trudged off again with his keg. When he had gone a bit farther the keg grew too heavy again. He thought he could not carry it any longer unless someone came with whom he might drink, and so lessen the ale in the keg. Yes, he met an ugly, scrawny man who came rushing along. "Good day," said the man. "Good day to you," said the boy. "Where are you going?" asked the man. "Oh, I'm looking for someone to drink with, and lighten my keg," said the boy. "Can't you drink with me as well as with anyone else?" said the man. "I have traveled both far and wide, and I am tired and thirsty." "Well, why not?" said the boy. "But who are you, and where do you come from?" "Who am I? I am the Devil, and I come from Hell, that's where I come from," said the man. "No!" said the boy. "You only torment and plague poor folk, and if there is any unhappiness astir, they always say it is your fault. I will not drink with you." So he went far and farther than far again with his ale keg on his back, until he thought it grew so heavy there was no carrying it any farther. He began to look around again if anyone were coming with whom he could drink and lighten his keg. So after a long, long time, another man came, and he was so dried up and scrawny it was a wonder that his bones hung together. "Good day," said the man. "Good day to you," said the boy. "Where are you going?" asked the man. "Oh, I was only looking about to see if I could find someone to drink with, that my keg might be lightened a little, it is so heavy to carry." "Can't you drink with me as well as with anyone else?" said the man. "Yes, why not?" said the boy. "But what sort of man are you?" "They call me Death," said the man. "I will gladly drink with you.," said the boy. And as he said this he put down his keg and began to tap the ale into a bowl. "You are a good man, for you treat all alike, both rich and poor." So he drank to his health, and Death drank to his health, and Death said he had never tasted such drink, and as the boy was fond of him, they drank bowl after bowl until the ale was lessened, and the keg grew light. At last Death said, "I have never known drink which tasted better, or did me so much good as this ale that you have given me, and I scarce know what to give you in return." But after he had thought awhile, he said the keg should never get empty, however much they drank out of it, and the ale that was in it should become a healing drink, by which the boy could make the sick whole again better than any doctor. And he also said that when the boy came into a sick man's room, Death would always be there, and show himself to him, and it should be to him a sure sign if he saw Death at the foot of the bed that he could cure the sick with a draft from the keg; but if he sat by the pillow, there was no healing nor medicine, for then the sick person belonged to Death. Well, the boy soon grew famous, and was summoned far and near, and he helped many to health again who had been given up. When he came in and saw how Death sat by a sick man's bed, he foretold either life or death, and his foretelling was never wrong. He became both a rich and powerful man, and at last he was summoned to a king's daughter far, far away in the world. She was so dangerously ill that no doctor thought he could do her any good, and so they promised him all that he might ask for if he would only save her life. Now, when he came into the princess's room, there sat Death at her pillow; but as he sat he dozed and nodded, and while he did this she felt better. "Now, life or death is at stake," said the doctor; "and I fear, from what I see, there is no hope." But they said he must save her, if it cost land and realm. So he looked at Death, and while he sat there and dozed again, he made a sign to the servants to turn the bed around so quickly that Death was left sitting at the foot, and at the very moment they turned the bed, the doctor gave her the draft, and her life was spared. "Now you have cheated me," said Death, "and we are quits." "I was forced to do it," said the doctor, "unless I wished to lose land and realm." "That shall not help you much," said Death. "Your time is up, for now you belong to me." "Well," said the boy, "what must be must be. But you'll let me have time to read the Lord's Prayer first?" Yes, he might have leave to do that. But he took very good care not to read the Lord's Prayer. He read everything else, but the Lord's Prayer never crossed his lips, and at last he thought he had cheated Death for good and all. But when Death thought he had really waited too long, he went to the boy's house one night, and hung up a large tablet with the Lord's Prayer painted on it over against his bed. So when the boy woke in the morning he began to read the tablet, and did not quite see what he was doing until he came to Amen. But then it was just too late, and Death had him. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Gutten med øldunken , Norske Folkeeventyr . I have used the edition Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: David Douglass, 1888). Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. Dasent gives this tale the more traditional title "Death and the Doctor." I have restored Asbjørnsen's and Moe's original title. Return to the table of contents . Story Ireland (County Mayo) Once upon a time, there lived a man and his wife who had only one son. When the son was born, his father said he would have to get an honest man to stand for the child. He set out on his journey early in the morning. When he went some distance he met a man who asked him where was he going. "I am going to get an honest man to stand for my child," said he. "Will I do?" said the man. "Who are you?" he inquired. "I am God," said the man. "Well you won't do, because you are too good to some people, and bad to others." So he went another bit of the way, and he met another man, who asked him where was he going. "I am going in search of an honest man to stand for my child," he said. "Maybe I'd do," said the man. "Who are you," he said. "I am the devil," the man said. "God himself is fairer than you," he said and away he went. He met another man who asked him where was he going. "I am going in search of an honest man to stand for my child, who is after being born," he said. "Will I do?" asked the man. "Who are you?" he asked. "I am Death," he said. "Well you are a fair man anyway because you bring the poor along with you as well as the rich." He said he would stand for the child, but that when the child would come to a certain age he would have to go to College in order to be a doctor. When he came to be a doctor he met Death one day. He said to the doctor that when ever he went attending the sick if he saw him at the head of the person's bed they would not be cured, but if he saw him at the foot of the bed the person would be cured. One day he heard of a great princess being sick and there was a great reward for what ever doctor would cure her. The doctor went to the palace of the princess and saw her there ready to die. Death was at her head, so he saw that she could not be cured. Then he changed her in the bed, by putting her feet where her head was and then she was cured. He got his money, but he met Death at the gate. Death said to him that he would have to die instead of the princess. The doctor said he would die, but to give him time to say a few certain prayers, so death said he would. "Alright," he said, "you will wait a long time before I will say them." It happened one night that the young doctor was going along the road when he found an old man lying on the side of the road moaning. He went to the old man and asked him what was wrong with him. The old man told him that he had some certain prayers to say, and he was not able to say them, so the young doctor took pity on him and said them for him. The prayers that he said were the same ones that Death gave him to say, so as soon as he had the last of them said, the old man stood up and said to the young doctor, "I am Death, so now you must die." Collector: Beatrice Casey, female. Informant: Mattie Casey, male, age 52. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Mayo >> Loch Measca, pp. 418-20 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Link to additional Godfather Death Tales in The Schools' Collection , both in English and in Irish. Return to the table of contents . The Just Man France (Lower Brittany) There was once a poor man whose wife had just given birth to a son. He wanted his child to have a just man as godfather, and he set out to find him. As he was walking, his stick in his hand, he first met a stranger, who looked like an honest man, and who asked him: "Where are you going, my good man?" -- I'm looking for a godfather for my new son. -- Well! Do you want me? I am at your disposal, if you please. -- Yes, but... I want a just man. -- Well! you could not have timed better; I am your man. -- So who are you?" -- I am the good Lord. -- You just? Lord God!... No! No! Everywhere on earth I hear people complaining about you. -- Why ist that, if you please? -- Why? For a thousand and a thousand different reasons.... Some complain because you sent them to this world weak, disabled, or sickly, while others are strong and full of health, but are not more deserving than the sickly ones. Furthermore, there are very honest people, I know more than one, who work like dogs continually, but you leave them poor and miserable, while their wasteful, heartless, good-for-nothing neighbors.... No, hold on, you won't be my son's godfather. Goodbye!... And the fellow went on his way, grumbling. A little further on he met a tall old man with a long white beard. "Where are you going, my good man?" asked the old man. -- Looking for a godfather for my newborn son. -- I'm quite willing to act as his godfather, if you like. Would that suit you? -- Yes, but I must tell you first that I want my son's godfather to be a just man. -- A just man? Well I am, I think. -- So who are you? -- Saint Peter. -- The gatekeeper of paradise, the one who holds the keys? -- Yes, that very one. -- Well! But you're not just either. -- "I am not just? Me!" replied Saint Peter with ill humor. "And, my good man, please tell me why not. -- Why not? Ah! I will tell you: I have been told that you refuse your door to honest people, hard-working men like myself for petty offences. And why? Because, after working hard all week, they may drink a pint too much of cider on Sundays,... and then, need I say any more? You are the prince of the apostles, the head of the Church, are you not? Saint Peter nodded, in agreement. -- Well, in your church it's like everywhere else: Nothing there is more important than money. The rich come before the poor like everywhere else.... No, you won't be my son's godfather either. Goodbye!... And he went on his way, still grumbling. He then met an unpleasant-looking fellow. He was carrying a large scythe over his shoulder, like a reaper going to his work. -- Where are you going, my good man?" the stranger asked him. -- To find a godfather for my newborn son. -- Do you want me as your godfather? -- First I must tell you that I want a just man. -- A just man! You will never find anyone more just than I am. -- Everyone tells me that. But who are you? -- I am Death. -- Ah, yes! You are really just. You have no preference for anyone, and you do your job honestly. Rich and poor, noble and common, king and subject, young and old, weak and strong.... You take them all when their time has come. You do not let yourself be softened or weakened by tears, threats, prayers, or gold. Yes, you are truly just, and you will be my son's godfather. Come with me. And the man returned to his cottage, taking with him the godfather he had chosen for his son. Death held the infant at the baptismal font, and afterwards there was a little meal in the poor man's cottage, where they drank cider and ate white bread, unlike their everyday fare. Before leaving, the godfather said to his friend: "You are very good people, your wife and you; but you are very poor! As you have chosen me to be the godfather of your son, I want to express my gratitude to you by revealing a secret that will make you earn a lot of money. You, friend, you are going to become a doctor now, and this is how you should behave: When you are called to a sick person, if you see me at the head of the bed, you can affirm that you will cure him, and give him anything as a remedy, even plain water. If you do so, he will always recover. If, to the contrary, you see me with my scythe at the foot of the bed, there will be nothing you can do. The patient will surely die, whatever you do to try to save him. Here, then, is our fake medical doctor, putting into practice the system of his friend Death, and predicting, always with certainty, when his patients will recover or die. Because he was never mistaken, and, moreover, because the remedies did not cost him dearly, since he only gave plain water to his patients, whatever the disease, he was highly sought after and soon became rich. However, Death, when he had occasion to pass by, came in from time to time to see his godson and talk with his friend. The child grew and developed wonderfully, but the doctor, to the contrary, grew older and weaker every day. One day Death said to him: "I always come to see you when I pass by here, but you've not yet come to my house. You must come and visit me, so that I can in turn be your host and show you my home." "I'm in no hurry to visit you," replied the doctor, "because I know that once someone is at your place, comrade, they don't come back the way they want to." -- Don't worry about that. I won't detain you until your time has come. You know that I am the most just of all men. So the doctor left one night to visit his friend. They went overland for a long time: over hill and dale, crossing arid plains, forests, rivers, rivers, and regions completely unknown to the doctor. Finally, Death stopped in front of an old castle surrounded by high walls, in the middle of a dark forest, and said to his companion: "It is here." They entered. The master of the gloomy manor first entertained his guest magnificently, then, on leaving the table, he led him into an immense room where millions of candles of all sizes were burning: long, medium, and short. They burned more or less steadily, and cast light more or less clearly. Our man was at first astonished, dazzled, and speechless before this spectacle. Then, when he could speak: "What do all these lights mean, my friend?" he asked. -- These are the lights of life, my friend. -- The lights of life? What do they mean? -- All humans who now live on earth have candles there, to which their lives are attached. -- But there are long ones, medium ones, short ones, bright ones, dull ones, dying ones... Why? -- Yes, it's like all human lives: some are just beginning; others are in their prime with all their brilliance; others are weak and wavering; others finally are about to die out.... -- Why is this one so long and tall? -- It is that of a child who has just been born. -- And this other one, how brilliant and beautiful this light is! -- It is that of someone in the prime of life. -- Here's one that's going to die out for want of wax. -- He is an old man who is dying. -- And mine, where is it? I would like to see it. -- Here it is, near you. -- That one? Ah! My God, it is almost completely consumed! It will go out! -- Yes, you only have three more days to live! -- What are you saying? What, only three days!... But since I am your friend, and you are the master here, could you not make my candle last a little longer -- for example, by taking a little from that long one and adding it to mine?... -- The long one is your son's, and if I did as you are asking, I would no longer be the just person you were looking for. "That is true," replied the doctor, calming himself and heaving a deep sigh.... And he then returned home, put his affairs in order, called the priest of his parish, and died three days later -- just as his friend Death had predicted. Told by J. Corvez, from Plourin, Finistère, 1876. Source (books.google.com): François-Marie Luzel, "L'homme juste," Légendes chrétiennes de la Basse-Bretagne (Paris: Maisonneuve et Cie., 1881), pp. 335-43 . Source (Internet Archive): François-Marie Luzel, "L'homme juste," Légendes chrétiennes de la Basse-Bretagne (Paris: Maisonneuve et Cie., 1881), pp. 335-43 . Return to the table of contents . The Godson of Death France A Legend from Dauphiné Once upon a time there was a man who had twelve children, and a thirteenth came to him. Very sadly he was walking along the path. He met a tall woman: It was Death. She said to him: "What is it, my friend, that you are so sad?" "In order to have my child baptized, I am looking for godfathers and godmothers, and I cannot find any." The tall woman said, "Well! I will be your little one's godmother." When the child was grown, he was very intelligent. His godmother had him raised to be a doctor. She gave him the gift of being a skilled doctor. Before he went to his first patient, Death gave him this secret: "My godson, if you see me at the head of the bed, you can say that the patient will not recover, but if you see me at the foot of the bed, you can say with complete certainty that you will heal him." This secret gave the doctor a great reputation, and the king heard about his great skill. The king's daughter became ill. The king summoned the doctor and said to him: "If you cure my daughter, I will give her to you in marriage." When the doctor came to the patient, Death was at her head. The doctor thought: "What should I do?" He immediately brought in four men and had them turn the bed so that Death was now at the foot. Thus the skillful doctor cured the king's daughter, and the king showered him with riches. However, Death called him to the underground where the candles of life were, and admonished him that if he ever returned, he would die. Death forgave him the first time. Then the king became ill, and he called the doctor back. Death was at the head of the bed. The doctor used the same stratagem as for the girl: He turned the foot of the bed to the head, and Death thus found himself at the foot. The king was healed. However, Death called the skillful doctor back to the underground and told him that he had broken his promise and abused her kindness. Death showed him his candle which was burnt up. The doctor had to die. All his gifts and all his fortune were of no use to him against Death. Source (books.google.com): Auguste Ferrand, "Le filleul de la Mort," Revue des traditions populaires , vol. 10 (1895), p. 594 . Source (Internet Archive): Auguste Ferrand, "Le filleul de la Mort," Revue des traditions populaires , vol. 10 (1895), p. 594 . Return to the table of contents . Juan Holgado and Death Spain Once upon a time there was a certain man named Juan Holgado ( i.e. , John Well-Off ); and truly nobody could have less deserved such a name, for morning nor evening, as a rule, could the poor fellow get enough to satisfy his hunger. Moreover he had a heap of youngsters with gullets like sharks. One day Juan Holgado said to his wife: "These brats are a pack of gluttons, and are capable of swallowing oilcloth itself. I should like to eat a hare by myself, at my pleasure, and without those young mastiffs to take it out of my mouth." His wife, -- who was a sweet woman, and always endeavouring to improve matters, in order not to worry the children, -- sold a dozen of eggs, which her hens had just laid, bought a hare with the money, cooked it with some meat broth, and early in the morning on the following day said to her husband: "Here in this pan is a cooked hare and half a loaf of bread; go and eat them in the field and much good may it do you." Juan Holgado was not deaf, but seized the pan and ran off without waiting to see which way he was going. After he had gone about a league and a half, he sat down beneath the shade of an olive-tree, more contented than a king, and, recommending himself to our Lady of Loneliness, drew forth the bread, and putting down the pipkin with the hare in it, prepared for the feast. But just imagine his feelings when he suddenly saw, seated in front of him, an old woman dressed in black, and as ugly as -- an unwilling gift! She was yellower and as skinny as lawyer's parchment; her eyes were as sunken and ghastly as a burnt-out lamp; her mouth was like a basket, whilst as for a nose -- well, she had none, not even the memory of one. The grace which Juan Holgado said when he beheld this companion, dropped as it seemed from the clouds, was not a benediction. But what was to be done? He was not quite a barbarian, so he asked her if she would like to eat. As the old woman wished for nothing else, she answered that, rather than be unmannerly, she would partake of his meal. She seated herself and began to eat. Good gracious! It was not eating, but devouring. What a gullet! In a twinkling she had put the whole hare out of sight. "By all that is holy!" said Juan Holgado to himself; "it would have been better to have had my children to eat the hare than this old she demon! When one is unlucky, nothing ever goes right." When the old woman had finished -- and not even the hare's tail was left -- she said: "Juan Holgado, I liked that hare very much." "So I have seen!" replied Juan Holgado. "I wish to repay the favour." "May you live a thousand years!" slily remarked Juan, as he noticed the old lady's decrepitude. "Doubtless I shall," responded she, "as I am Death herself." Juan Holgado gave a very uneasy start, as he invoked Heaven. "Do not disturb yourself, Juan Holgado, that need not trouble you. In order to repay you your favour, I am going to give you some advice. Become a doctor; for, according to my experience, there is no such a profession in the world as that, for becoming famous and gaining money. "Madam Death, I should be very contented if, instead of that, you would oblige me with a good crop of years for myself; besides, the medical business is not in my line." "Why not, man?" "Because I have never studied it." "That is nothing." "Madam, I know neither Latin nor Greek." "It does not matter." "Madam, I know nothing of Geography." "That does not affect the question." "Madam, I cannot count beyond one." "It is all the same." "Madam, my hand trembles so that I can not write; nor can I read without getting into a brown study." "Nonsense, fibber, nonsense!" said Death. "I am getting impatient at so many difficulties. Strange too with a fellow like you, Juan Holgado, who has a good sound headpiece! Have I not been saying for the last hour, that it does not matter? I tell you, I would not give a penny whistle for all the doctors know: I neither come nor go because they call me, or know me. I please myself, and laugh at the doctors; and when I like, I lay hold of one by the ear and carry him off. When the world was first peopled there were no doctors, and then things went on comfortably and pleasantly, but as soon as doctors were invented there were no more Methuselahs. You shall be a doctor, without any more fuss; and if you refuse, you shall come with me now, as sure as I am Death. Now attend to me, and be silent. In your whole life you have never prescribed anything but pure water, have you?" "There you are right," answered Juan Holgado, who was more prepared to assent to what Death said than to listen to her. "If, when you enter a room, you see me seated at the head of the invalid, you may be sure that the person will die, that there is no remedy, and that you may prepare the person for me. If, on the contrary, I am not there, you may assure the invalid of recovery, and prescribe pure water." With these words the very ugly old woman took leave, after making a profound courtesy. "Good madam," said Juan Holgado, "I did not wish to take leave of you with that ' Until we meet again; ' and I hope that your ladyship will have little desire of visiting me, because I have not always got a hare with which to regale myself, and when I had this one, the old thief carried it off." "Don't be troubled, Juan Holgado," said Death, "whilst your house is not dilapidated I will not call there." Juan Holgado returned home and related to his wife what had passed; and his wife, who was more quickwitted than he, said to him, that whatsoever the old woman had said to him he might believe, because there was no one more truthful and certain than Death. And she soon spread about that her husband was a skilful doctor, and that he had only to look at an invalid in order to be able to know whether he would die or recover. One Sunday there were a bevy of young girls, as merry as kittens, standing at the door of a house as Juan Holgado passed by. "Here comes Juan Holgado," said one of them," who at the end of his days sets up for a doctor. It is as if one went in for salad soup at the end of a feast! And so now he is to be called Don Juan , and the Don becomes him about as well as a high-crowned hat would a mule!" And they all began to sing ironically. "Let us have a joke with this conceited fellow!" said one of the girls. "I will pretend to be ill, and see if he will believe it." No sooner said than done. The girls left a basket of figs that they were eating from, and before you could say "Jack Robinson," the girl who devised the scheme was in bed, and all of the others were pretending to bemoan her. Choking with laughter, they ran off to call Juan Holgado. He came, and as he entered he noticed at the street door a great heap of figskins. Inside the door, the first person to greet him was his compatriot Death, who was seated at the head of the bed, more serious than an empty bottle. "She is very ill," then said Juan Holgado, and was going away. "What is the matter with her?" said the girls, who could scarcely refrain from laughter. "She has a surfeit of figs," replied he. Juan Holgado went away, and in two hours the girl was dead. The reputation which this gave to our doctor may be imagined. When ever any one was ill in future, Juan Holgado was called in; and he gained guineas so quickly that he did not know what to do with them. He bought a title for his family, and some orders of knighthood for his sons. In the meanwhile he was satisfied with things as they went, so that he grew so fat and round that it did one good to see him; his face was like the full moon; his legs like pillars, and his fingers like sausages. All this time Juan Holgado was very careful of his house. When the youngsters did any little injury to any part of it, he inflicted corporal punishment on them. He always retained a mason in his employ, whom he paid by the year, to keep the house in order, for he remembered that Death had told him that whilst he kept his house free from dilapidation she would not call there. The years passed by, and each time ran faster than before, like a stone running down hill. The last brought a bad state of affairs. Juan Holgado received them very ungraciously, and in revenge one carried away his hair, another his teeth, another bent his backbone nearly double, and another obliged him with a limp. One day he was very bad, and Death sent him a warning by a bat, for which Juan Holgado was not very thankful. Another day he was suffering from phlegm, and Death sent to say, by an agent, that she was ready to visit him. Juan Holgado said to the messenger that it was all make-believe with him. Another day an accident happened, and Death sent word by a dog, which howled outside his door, in the street. Juan Holgado took his crutch to the dog, and gave it a hard whack. The invalid grew worse, and Death called at the door. Juan ordered it to be barred, and that it should not be opened to her; but she managed to get in through a crack. "Madam Death," said Juan Holgado to her, with a very bad grace," you said that you would not come for me whilst my house house was free from dilapidation; thus it is, that in spite of your messages, I have not expected you." "What!" exclaimed Death." Don't you know that you have lost your powers? Don't you see that you have lost your teeth and your hair? Your body is your house." "I did not know that, madam," said the invalid; "thus it is that I trusted in your words, and your arrival takes me by surprise." "So much the worse for you, Juan Holgado," replied Death, "for he who is always forewarned is never surprised nor troubled at my coming; but you were blind, when you did not know that you were born to die; and you die in order to gain rest." Source (books.google.com): Fernán Caballero, The Bird of Truth and Other Fairy Tales (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, [1883]), pp. 162-71 . Source (Bodleian Libraries, University of Oxford): Fernán Caballero, The Bird of Truth and Other Fairy Tales (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, [1883]), pp. 162-71 . The tale in Spanish: Books.google.com: Fernán Caballero, "Juan Holgado y la Muerte," Cuentos y poesías populares andaluces (Sevilla: Revista Mercantil, 1859), pp. 138-47 . Internet Archive: Fernán Caballero, "Juan Holgado y la Muerte," Cuentos y poesías populares andaluces (Sevilla: Revista Mercantil, 1859), pp. 138-47 . The concluding episode is a type 335 folktale, "Death's Messengers." Return to the table of contents . Dr. Urssenbeck, Physician of Death Austria The city of Vienna has always been distinguished for its famous physicians. Around the year 1482 one such well-known physician was Dr. Paul Urssenbeck, Rector of the University. His fame came from his ability to predict with certainty whether a patient would recover his or her health or would die. He thus became known as the doctor of death. The following story is told as to how he achieved this remarkable gift: In his earlier years he followed the trade of a poor but honest weaver in the town of Deckendorf near Straudigen in Bavaria. It was a time of famine, and he, his wife, and their eleven children were in great need. Then a twelfth child was born, and they could find no one to serve as its godparent. As a last chance, the poor weaver walked to a nearby village and asked an old friend to serve as godfather, but met only rejection. Disappointed and frustrated the poor man made his back to his family. While walking sorrowfully through the dense forest toward his home, he said: "If I only could die." Suddenly a tall figure dressed in a dark cloak appeared before him, saying: "You called me. I am Death. What can I do for you?" As much as the man had previously wanted to die, he now wanted to live. "I am seeking a godfather for my youngest child. But I cannot find anyone who will serve as his godparent," answered the weaver sadly. "I will accept this responsibility," said Death. And thus it happened. Following the baptism the mysterious godfather took the father aside and said: "Since I possess neither gold nor silver to give to your child as a baptism present, I will make you into the most famous doctor of all times. Whenever you are called to a sick person, I -- invisible to others -- will seat myself either to the head or to the feet of the patient. If I am seated at the head, then this will show you that hope for recovery exists. If I am seated at the feet, then the patient will die. Through this gift the weaver was able to cure many illnesses, for he knew whether the patient who had sought his treatment would be helped by medications, or whether he would die. Soon the previously poor weaver became a wealthy and respected physician. However, his increased wealth made him ever-more greedy One day a very wealthy man fell seriously ill, but when Dr. Urssenbeck was called in, and he saw that Death was already seated at the patient's feet. Upon hearing the diagnosis, the next of kin could not be comforted, and they offered the physician a fortune if he could heal the prince. Then Urssenbeck resorted to trickery. He quickly had the patient's bed turned around, so that Death was now seated at his head. Thus the man was rescued from Death, and he regained his health. On the physician's way home Death suddenly appeared before him. "You unfortunate one, why have you deceived me? In return for the life that you have given back to the rich man, you yourself must now die" spoke the reaper with a threatening voice, and disappeared. Dr. Urssenbeck suddenly found himself in a large room where thousands of candles were burning. Death said to him, "Each of these candles represents someone's life. This tiny stump that is about to go out is yours." Terrified, Dr. Urssenbeck reached for a taller candle, wanting to take some wax from it to replenish his stump, but in so doing he touched his own candle, and it went out, and he fell to the floor dead. That evening his body was found in a ravine. He was buried in the graveyard of Saint Stephen's Cathedral. Source: Abstracted from J. W. Holczabek and A. Winter, "Gevatter Tod," Sagen und Geschichten der Stadt Wien , vol. 1 (Vienna: Verlag von Carl Graeser, 1886), no. 7, pp. 43-48 . Return to the table of contents . Godmother Death Moravia There was a man, very poor in this world's goods, whose wife presented him with a baby boy. No one was willing to stand sponsor, because he was so very poor. The father said to himself: "Dear Lord, I am so poor that no one is willing to be at my service in this matter; I'll take the baby, I'll go, and I'll ask the first person I meet to act as sponsor, and if I don't meet anybody, perhaps the sexton will help me." He went and met Death, but didn't know what manner of person she was; she was a handsome woman, like any other woman. He asked her to be godmother. She didn't make any excuse, and immediately saluted him as parent of her godchild, took the baby in her arms, and carried him to church. The little lad was properly christened. When they came out of church, the child's father took the godmother to an inn, and wanted to give her a little treat as godmother. But she said to him, " Gossip , leave this alone, and come with me to my abode." She took him with her to her apartment, which was very handsomely furnished. Afterwards she conducted him into great vaults, and through these vaults they went right into the underworld in the dark. There tapers were burning of three sizes -- small, large, and middle-sized; and those which were not yet alight were very large. The godmother said to the godchild's father: "Look, Gossip, here I have the duration of everybody's life." The child's father gazed thereat, found there a tiny taper close to the very ground, and asked her: "But, Gossip, I pray you, whose is this little taper close to the ground?" She said to him: "That is yours! When any taper whatsoever burns down, I must go for that man." He said to her: "Gossip, I pray you, give me somewhat additional." She said to him: "Gossip, I cannot do that!" Afterwards she went and lighted a large new taper for the baby boy whom they had had christened. Meanwhile, while the godmother was not looking, the child's father took for himself a large new taper, lit it, and placed it where his tiny taper was burning down. The godmother looked round at him and said: "Gossip, you ought not to have done that to me; but if you have given yourself additional lifetime, you have done so and possess it. Let us go hence, and we'll go to your wife." She took a present, and went with the child's father and the child to the mother. She arrived, and placed the boy on his mother's bed, and asked her how she was, and whether she had any pain anywhere. The mother confided her griefs to her, and the father sent for some beer, and wanted to entertain her in his cottage, as godmother, in order to gratify her and show his gratitude. They drank and feasted together. Afterwards the godmother said to her godchild's father: "Gossip, you are so poor that no one but myself would be at your service in this matter; but never mind, you shall bear me in memory! I will go to the houses of various respectable people and make them ill, and you shall physic and cure them. I will tell you all the remedies. I possess them all, and everybody will be glad to recompense you well, only observe this: When I stand at anyone's feet, you can be of assistance to every such person; but if I stand at anybody's head, don't attempt to aid him." It came to pass. The child's father went from patient to patient, where the godmother caused illness, and benefited every one. All at once he became a distinguished physician. A prince was dying -- nay, he had breathed his last -- nevertheless, they sent for the physician. He came, he began to anoint him with salves and give him his powders, and did him good. When he had restored him to health, they paid him well, without asking how much they were indebted. Again, a count was dying. They sent for the physician again. The physician came. Death was standing behind the bed at his head. The physician cried: "It's a bad case, but we'll have a try." He summoned the servants, and ordered them to turn the bed round with the patient's feet towards Death, and began to anoint him with salves and administer powders into his mouth, and did him good. The count paid him in return as much as he could carry away, without ever asking how much he was indebted; he was only too glad that he had restored him to health. When Death met the physician, she said to him: "Gossip, if this occurs to you again, don't play me that trick any more. True, you have done him good, but only for a while; I must, none the less, take him off whither he is due." The child's father went on in this way for some years; he was now very old. But at last he was wearied out, and asked Death herself to take him. Death was unable to take shim, because he had given himself a long additional taper; she was obliged to wait till it burned out. One day he drove to a certain patient to restore him to health, and did so. Afterwards Death revealed herself to him, and rode with him in his carriage. She began to tickle and play with him, and tap him with a green twig under the throat; he threw himself into her lap, and went off into the last sleep. Death laid him in the carriage, and took herself off. They found the physician lying dead in his carriage, and conveyed him home. The whole town and all the villages lamented: "That physician is much to be regretted. What a good doctor he was! He was of great assistance; there will never be his like again!" His son remained after him, but had not the same skill. The son went one day into church, and his godmother met him. She asked him: "My dear son, how are you?" He said to her: "Not all alike; so long as I have what my dad saved up for me, it is well with me, but after that the Lord God knows how it will be with me." His godmother said: "Well, my son, fear nought. I am your christening mamma; I helped your father to what he had, and will give you, too, a livelihood. You shall go to a physician as a pupil, and you shall be more skilful than he, only behave nicely." After this she anointed him with salve over the ears, and conducted him to a physician. The physician didn't know what manner of lady it was, and what sort of son she brought him for instruction. The lady enjoined her son to behave nicely, and requested the physician to instruct him well, and bring him into a good position. Then she took leave of him and departed. The physician and the lad went together to gather herbs, and each herb cried out to the pupil what remedial virtue it had, and the pupil gathered it. The physician also gathered herbs, but knew not, with regard to any herb, what remedial virtue it possessed. The pupil's herbs were beneficial in every disease. The physician said to the pupil: "You are cleverer than I, for I diagnose no one that comes to me; but you know herbs counter to every disease. Do you know what? Let us join partnership. I will give my doctor's diploma up to you, and will be your assistant, and am willing to be with you till death." The lad was successful in doctoring and curing till his taper burned out in limbo. Source (books.google.com): A. H. Wratislaw, Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources (London: Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 8, pp. 52-55 . Source (Internet Archive): A. H. Wratislaw, Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources (London: Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 8, pp. 52-55 . Footnote: The Slavonians are rich in terms, both masculine and feminine, expressing the various relationships between godparents and godchildren and their parents. We have only one form, "gossip," which thus has to do duty for both the godmother and the father of the godchild. Return to the text. . Return to the table of contents . The Poor Man and Death Hungary Where was it? Where was it not? Once upon a time there was a poor man who had as many children as there are holes in a sieve, even more. When his last one was born, he could no longer find a godfather, for everyone he knew was already a godfather. So he went away and wandered through seven countries, and then seven more, to see if he could find a godfather somewhere. Walking without stopping to rest, he suddenly came upon the Lord Jesus, who asked him: "Where are you going, poor man?" "I'm looking for a godfather for my little child," he replied. "I hope that I can find one." "Listen," said the Lord Jesus to him. "Don't look any further. I will serve as your little child's godfather right away." Then the poor man said: "Who are you then?" "I am Jesus." "Oh!" said the poor man. "I can't use you. You only love the good ones." So he went on again without stopping to rest, and then he came upon Death. Death spoke to him: "Where are you going, poor man?" "I'm looking for a godfather for my son," he replied. "I hope that I can find one." Then Death said to him: "Listen. Don't look any further. I will serve as your son's godfather right away." Then the poor man said: "Who are you? "I am Death." "All right," said the poor man. "I will take you for my son's godfather, for you love the bad as well as the good." Then Death said to him: "Come walk along with me a little longer. I want to change into my Sunday clothes; otherwise people will recognize me straight away." So the poor man went to Death's house. Here he was very frightened, because many large and small lights were burning in the house. He asked Death: "What are all those lights?" Death said: "These are the lights of life. Every human being has one here, and they can only live as long as their light burns." Then the poor man said to Death: "Be so kind as to show me mine." Death showed him one that could only burn for a very little while longer. Then the poor man said to Death: "Listen, Godfather! Add a little candle-stub to my light; otherwise it soon will go out." But Death said, "That's not possible, comrade! I mustn't make the lights burn any longer. That would make Resurrection angry with me, for then she would not find anyone to awaken." But the poor begged and begged, until Death finally added a candle-stub to his light. Death next went to the poor man's house, where there was a tremendous baptismal feast. Death got a little drunk. He was so merry that he gave the poor man power to heal any sick person (even one close to death), if he but touched their bed, or stood in front of them. However, if would ever say the Lord's Prayer or Amen, then he himself would soon die. Because of his great power the poor man soon became very famous. He was called everywhere to heal the sick: to noble lords and to kings. He became very rich. When Death took leave from him, he told him to visit him quite often. But now it was a few years later, and he had not yet visited Death. Finally he thought that it was time for him to visit Death. He had his beautiful silvery-white horses harnessed to the glass carriage (for he had become very rich), and galloped to Death. Approaching Death's house, he found a child crying in the street; he immediately took him into the carriage and asked him why he was crying. "Oh," said the little child, "I'm crying because my dear father hit me because I didn't know a word when I was praying." The man asked: "What was the word? Our father ?" "No, that wasn't it," said the child. The man then said all the words of the Lord's Prayer to the end -- but the forgotten word wasn't there. At last he said: "Was it Amen ?" "Yes, that's it," said Death, for it was really him in the form of a crying child. " Amen for you, comrade. Amen! " Then the man died on the spot. But his sons shared the great wealth and are still alive if they have not died. Source (books.google.com): Georg Gaal, "Der Arme und der Tod," Ungarische Volksmärchen (Pest: Verlag von Gustav Heckenast, 1857), no. 4, pp. 30-33 . Source (Internet Archive): Georg Gaal, "Der Arme und der Tod," Ungarische Volksmärchen (Pest: Verlag von Gustav Heckenast, 1857), no. 4, pp. 30-33 . Return to the table of contents . Godfather Death Italy (Sicily) Once upon a time there was a man who had an only child. Now in those days some people did not have their children baptized while they were little, but waited until they were older. So this child was already seven years old, and the father had not yet had him baptized. When the good Lord saw this from heaven, he was annoyed and called Saint John and said to him: "Listen, John, go to such and such a man and ask him why he hasn't had his son baptized yet." So Saint John came down to earth and knocked on the man's door. "Who's there?" asked the man. "It's me, Saint John!" "What do you want from me?" the man asked. "The good Lord sent me," said the saint. "He wants to know why you haven't had your son baptized yet?" "I haven't been able to find a good godparent," answered the man. "Well, if that's so," said Saint John, then I'll be your child's godfather." "Thank you," said the man, "but that can't be. If you were my child's godfather, you would have only one wish: to take him to paradise as soon as possible, and I don't want that." So Saint John had to go back to heaven without having achieved anything. Then the good Lord sent out Saint Peter to warn the man. But he didn't do any better. The man gave him the same answers that he had given to Saint John, and he did not want Saint Peter to be his son's godfather. Then the good Lord thought: "Just what does he have in mind? He must want to give his son immortality, so I will have to send Death to him." Then the good Lord called Death and sent him to the man to ask why he had not yet had the child baptized. So Death came to the man and knocked. "Who's there?" asked the man. "God sent me," replied Death. "He wants to know why your child hasn't been baptized yet." "Tell God," said the man, "I haven't found a suitable godparent yet." "Do you want me to be his godfather?" asked Death. "Who are you then?" "I am Death." "Yes," cried the man, "I would like you to be my child's godfather, and we shall have him baptized at once." So the child was baptized. A few months later Godfather Death suddenly came back to the man. The man received him kindly and wanted to serve him all sorts of good things. But Death spoke: "Don't go to so much trouble, I just came to take you away." "What?" cried the man in astonishment, "I chose you to be my child's godfather, so that you would spare me and my wife and my son." "That's not possible," replied Death. "The sickle cuts any grass that it finds in its path. I cannot spare you." Then Death took the man into a dark cellar, where a large number of lamps were burning on all the walls. "You see," he said, "those are lights of life; every human has such a light, and when it goes out, they must die. "Which one is my light?" asked the man. Then Death showed him a little lamp in which there was almost no oil left, and when it went out the man fell over and was dead. Did Death have the son die as well? Yes, of course. Death can spare no one. When his time was up, the son had to die also. Source (books.google.com): Laura Gonzenbach, "Gevatter Tod," Sicilianische Märchen , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1870), no. 19, pp. 123-24 . Source (Internet Archive): Laura Gonzenbach, "Gevatter Tod," Sicilianische Märchen , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1870), no. 19, pp. 123-24 . Return to the table of contents . The Just Man Italy Once upon a time there was a peasant and his wife who had a child that they would not baptize until they could find a just man for his godfather. The father took the child in his arms and went into the street to look for this just man. After he had walked along a while, he met a man, who was our Lord, and said to him, "I have this child to baptize, but I do not want to give him to anyone who is not just. Are you just?" The Lord answered, "But -- I don't know whether I am just." Then the peasant passed on and met a woman, who was the Madonna, and said to her, "I have this child to baptize and do not wish to give him to anyone who is not just. Are you just?" "I don't know," said the Madonna. "But go on, for you will find someone who is just." He went his way and met another woman, who was Death, and said to her, "I have been sent to you, for I have been told that you are just, and I have this child to baptize, and do not wish to give it to one who is not just. Are you just?" Death said, "Yes, I believe I am just! Let us baptize the child, and then I will show you whether I am just." Then they baptized the child, and afterwards Death led the peasant into a very long room, where there were many lights burning. "Godmother," said the man, astonished at seeing all the light, "what are all these lights?" Death said, "These are the lights of all the souls in the world. Would you like to see, friend? This is yours and this is your son's" When the peasant saw that his light was about to expire, he said, "And when the oil is all consumed, godmother?" "Then," answered Death, "you must come with me, for I am Death." "Oh! for mercy's sake," cried the peasant, "let me at least take a little oil from my son's lamp and put it in mine!" "No, no, godfather," said Death. "I don't do anything of that sort. You wished to see a just person, and a just person you have found. And now go home and arrange your affairs, for I am waiting for you." Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 67, pp. 226-27 . Note that the "just man" in this tale is a woman. Return to the table of contents . Godfather Charon Greece (Lesbos) Once upon a time there was a very poor man who wished to take Charon as his godfather, and actually did so. Because he was now so poor, Charon advised him to become a doctor. In this way he would become wealthy. Charon said: "If you see me sitting at the foot of the sick man, give him a few drops of colored water, and he will recover. If you see me sitting next to his body, do the same. But if you see me sitting close to his head, then you must say: 'The sick person will die; he cannot recover,' and go away." The man did so. He became a famous doctor and acquired untold wealth. One day he he asked Godfather Charon: "You are not going to take me away now, are you?" "No," Charon answered him, "I'll not take you away until three years from now." Then the man left his homeland to escape from Charon, and after a year's wanderings he arrived in a place where he thought Charon would not find him. However, just three years after he had left home, while he was drinking coffee in a coffee house, Charon suddenly appeared before him and said: "Hello, godson! I haven't seen you for three years! It is now time for me to take your soul." The doctor answered: "No, dear godfather, no, dear Charon, don't take my soul. Let me live!" But Charon replied: "No, I have no choice. God sent me." And without further ado Charon took his soul. He was not even able to finish his coffee. Charon recognizes neither friendship nor kinship nor mercy. All people are equal in his eyes, and wherever they may flee, Charon knows how to find them. Source (books.google.com): Bernhard Schmidt, "Gevatter Charos," Griechische Märchen, Sagen und Volkslieder (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1877), pp. 117-18 . Source (Internet Archive): Bernhard Schmidt, "Gevatter Charos," Griechische Märchen, Sagen und Volkslieder (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1877), pp. 117-18 . Return to the table of contents . Related Links Aging and Death in Folklore . An essay by D. L. Ashliman, with supporting texts from proverbs, folktales, and myths from around the world. Death's Messengers: Folktales of Type 335 . Death in Folklore and Fairy Tales by Terri Windling. Godfather Death: Annotated Tale from SurLaLune by Heidi Anne Heiner. Return to the table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 1, 2022. Lady Godiva Lady Godiva the legend from Coventry, England edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002 Contents Lady Godiva (Roger of Wendover). Godiva (Alfred, Lord Tennyson). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Lady Godiva Roger of Wendover The Countess Godiva, who was a great lover of God's mother, longing to free the town of Coventry from the oppression of a heavy toll, often with urgent prayers besought her husband that, from regard to Jesus Christ and his mother, he would free the town from that service and from all other heavy burdens; and when the Earl sharply rebuked her for foolishly asking what was so much to his damage, and always forbade her evermore to speak to him on the subject; and while she, on the other hand, with a woman's pertinacity, never ceased to exasperate her husband on that matter, he at last made her this answer: "Mount your horse and ride naked, before all the people, through the market of this town from one end to the other, and on your return you shall have your request." On which Godiva replied, "But will you give me permission if I am willing to do it?" "I will," said he. Whereupon the Countess, beloved of God, loosed her hair and let down her tresses, which covered the whole of her body like a veil, and then, mounting her horse and attended by two knights, she rode through the marketplace without being seen, except her fair legs, and having completed the journey, she returned with gladness to her astonished husband and obtained of him what she had asked, for Earl Leofric freed the town of Coventry and its inhabitants from the aforesaid service, and confirmed what he had done by a charter. Source: Edwin Widney Hartland, English Fairy and other Folk Tales (London: Walter Scott Publishing Company, n.d. [ca. 1890], pp. 55-56. Hartland's source: Roger of Wendover (d. 1236), Chronica (under the year 1057). The incident of "Peeping Tom" was not added to this legend until the seventeenth century. The Old English form of Lady Godiva's name is Godgifu. She lived in Coventry, Warwickshire, between about 1040 and 1080. Her husband was Earl Leofric of Mercia. According to some accounts Saint George the Dragon Slayer was also born in Coventry. Return to the table of contents . Godiva Alfred, Lord Tennyson I waited for the train at Coventry; I hung with grooms and porters on the bridge, To watch the three tall spires; and there I shaped The city's ancient legend into this: Not only we, the latest seed of Time, New men, that in the flying of a wheel Cry down the past, not only we, that prate Of rights and wrongs, have loved the people well, And loathed to see them overtax'd; but she Did more, and underwent, and overcame, The woman of a thousand summers back, Godiva, wife to that grim Earl, who ruled In Coventry: for when he laid a tax Upon his town, and all the mothers brought Their children, clamoring, "If we pay, we starve!" She sought her lord, and found him, where he strode About the hall, among his dogs, alone, His beard a foot before him and his hair A yard behind. She told him of their tears, And pray'd him, "If they pay this tax, they starve." Whereat he stared, replying, half-amazed, "You would not let your little finger ache For such as these?" -- "But I would die," said she. He laugh'd, and swore by Peter and by Paul; Then fillip'd at the diamond in her ear; "Oh ay, ay, ay, you talk!" -- "Alas!" she said, "But prove me what I would not do." And from a heart as rough as Esau's hand, He answer'd, "Ride you naked thro' the town, And I repeal it;" and nodding, as in scorn, He parted, with great strides among his dogs. So left alone, the passions of her mind, As winds from all the compass shift and blow, Made war upon each other for an hour, Till pity won. She sent a herald forth, And bade him cry, with sound of trumpet, all The hard condition; but that she would loose The people: therefore, as they loved her well, From then till noon no foot should pace the street, No eye look down, she passing; but that all Should keep within, door shut, and window barr'd. Then fled she to her inmost bower, and there Unclasp'd the wedded eagles of her belt, The grim Earl's gift; but ever at a breath She linger'd, looking like a summer moon Half-dipt in cloud: anon she shook her head, And shower'd the rippled ringlets to her knee; Unclad herself in haste; adown the stair Stole on; and, like a creeping sunbeam, slid From pillar unto pillar, until she reach'd The Gateway, there she found her palfrey trapt In purple blazon'd with armorial gold. Then she rode forth, clothed on with chastity: The deep air listen'd round her as she rode, And all the low wind hardly breathed for fear. The little wide-mouth'd heads upon the spout Had cunning eyes to see: the barking cur Made her cheek flame; her palfrey's foot-fall shot Light horrors thro' her pulses; the blind walls Were full of chinks and holes; and overhead Fantastic gables, crowding, stared: but she Not less thro' all bore up, till, last, she saw The white-flower'd elder-thicket from the field, Gleam thro' the Gothic archway in the wall. Then she rode back, clothed on with chastity; And one low churl, compact of thankless earth, The fatal byword of all years to come, Boring a little auger-hole in fear, Peep'd -- but his eyes, before they had their will, Were shrivel'd into darkness in his head, And dropt before him. So the Powers, who wait On noble deeds, cancell'd a sense misused; And she, that knew not, pass'd: and all at once, With twelve great shocks of sound, the shameless noon Was clash'd and hammer'd from a hundred towers, One after one: but even then she gain'd Her bower; whence reissuing, robed and crown'd, To meet her lord, she took the tax away And built herself an everlasting name. This poem was written in 1842 by Alfred, Lord Tennyson (1809-1892). Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 6, 2002. Golden Fowls Golden Fowls Aesop's "Goose That Laid the Golden Eggs" and other tales of magical birds edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2019 Contents The Goose That Laid the Golden Eggs (Aesop). The Goose and the Golden Eggs (Aesop). The Golden Mallard (from The Jataka; or, Stories of The Buddha's Former Births ). The Lucky-Bird Humá (Kashmir). The Duck That Laid Golden Eggs (Russia). The Golden Goose (Germany). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Goose That Laid the Golden Eggs Aesop A man and his wife had the good fortune to possess a goose which laid a golden egg every day. Lucky though they were, they soon began to think they were not getting rich fast enough, and, imagining the bird must be made of gold inside, they decided to kill it in order to secure the whole store of precious metal at once. But when they cut it open they found it was just like any other goose. Thus, they neither got rich all at once, as they had hoped, nor enjoyed any longer the daily addition to their wealth. Much wants more and loses all. Source: Æsop's Fables, a new translation by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: W. Heinemann, 1912), p. 2. Return to the table of contents . The Goose and the Golden Eggs Aesop One day a countryman going to the nest of his goose found there an egg all yellow and glittering. When he took it up it was as heavy as lead, and he was going to throw it away, because he thought a trick had been played upon him. But he took it home on second thoughts, and soon found to his delight that it was an egg of pure gold. Every morning the same thing occurred, and he soon became rich by selling his eggs. As he grew rich he grew greedy; and thinking to get at once all the gold the goose could give, he killed it and opened it only to find -- nothing. Greed oft o'erreaches itself. Source: The Fables of Æsop , selected, told anew, and their history traced by Joseph Jacobs (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), no. 57, pp. 134-35 . Return to the table of contents . The Golden Mallard from The Jataka Once upon a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta was born a Brahmin, and growing up was married to a bride of his own rank, who bore him three daughters named Nanda, Nanda-vati, and Sundari-nanda. The Bodhisatta dying, they were taken in by neighbors and friends, whilst he was born again into the world as a golden mallard endowed with consciousness of its former existences. Growing up, the bird viewed its own magnificent size and golden plumage, and remembered that previously it had been a human being. Discovering that his wife and daughters were living on the charity of others, the mallard bethought him of his plumage like hammered and beaten gold and how by giving them a golden feather at a time he could enable his wife and daughters to live in comfort. So away he flew to where they dwelt and alighted on the top of the central beam of the roof. Seeing the Bodhisatta, the wife and girls asked where he had come from; and he told them that he was their father who had died and been born a golden mallard, and that he had come to visit them and put an end to their miserable necessity of working for hire. "You shall have my feathers," said he, "one by one, and they will sell for enough to keep you all in ease and comfort." So saying, he gave them one of his feathers and departed. And from time to time he returned to give them another feather, and with the proceeds of their sale these Brahmin women grew prosperous and quite well to do. But one day the mother said to her daughters, "There's no trusting animals, my children. Who's to say your father might not go away one of these days and never come back again? Let us use our time and pluck him clean next time he comes, so as to make sure of all his feathers." Thinking this would pain him, the daughters refused. The mother in her greed called the golden mallard to her one day when he came, and then took him with both hands and plucked him. Now the Bodhisatta's feathers had this property that if they were plucked out against his wish, they ceased to be golden and became like a crane's feathers. And now the poor bird, though he stretched his wings, could not fly, and the woman flung him into a barrel and gave him food there. As time went on his feathers grew again (though they were plain white ones now), and he flew away to his own abode and never came back again. Source: Th e Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , (Cambridge: Cambridge University, 1895), no. 136, vol. 1, pp. 293-294. Translated from the Pali by Robert Chalmers. Return to the table of contents . The Lucky-Bird Humá Kashmir There was once a poor man, who used to earn a few pánsas [copper coins] by cutting and selling wood. It was a hard struggle to support himself and wife and seven daughters. Never a bit of meat touched his lips, never a shoe covered his feet, and only a rag covered his back. One day, when not feeling very well, he lay down under a tree to rest. The Lucky-Bird Humá happened to be flying about the place at the time, and, noticing the man's poverty and sickness, pitied him. So it flew down beside him and deposited a golden egg by his bundle of wood. In a little while the woodcutter awoke, and seeing the egg, picked it up and wrapped it in his cummerbund. He then took up his load and went to the woni [shopkeeper] who generally bought it. He sold him the egg for a trifle. He did not know what a wonderful egg it was, but the woni knew, and asked him to go and get the bird that laid it, and he would give him a rupee as a gift. The man promised, and on the following day went to the jungle as usual to prepare his load of wood. On the way back he sat down to rest under the tree where he had found the egg, and pretended to sleep. The bird Humá came again, and noticing that he was still as poor and as ill-looking as before, thought that he had not seen the egg, and therefore went and laid another close by him, in such a spot that he could not possibly miss seeing it; whereupon the woodcutter caught the bird, and rose up to carry it to the woni . "Oh! What are you going to do with me? Do not kill me. Do not imprison me, but set me free," cried the bird. "You shall not fail of a reward. Pluck one of my feathers and show it to the fire, and you shall at once arrive at my country, Koh-i-Qáf, where my parents will reward you. They will give you a necklace of pearls, the price of which no king on earth could give." But the poor ignorant woodcutter would not listen to the bird's pleadings. His mind was too much occupied with the thought of the rupee that he felt certain of getting, and therefore he fastened the bird in his wrap, and ran off to the woni as fast as his load would permit. Alas, however, the bird died on the way from suffocation. "What shall I do now?" thought the woodcutter. "The woni will not give me a rupee for a dead bird. Ha! Ha! I will show one its feathers to the fire. Perhaps the bird being dead will not make any difference." Accordingly he did so, and immediately found himself on the Koh-i-Qáf, where he sought out the parents of the bird and told them all that had happened. Oh, how the parents and other birds wept when they saw the dead body of their beloved relative! Attracted by the noise, a strange bird that happened to be passing at the time came in and inquired what was the matter. This bird carried a piece of grass in its beak, with which it could raise the dead. "Why do you weep?" it said to the sorrowful company. "Because our relative is dead. We shall never speak to it again," they replied. "Weep not," said the strange bird. "Your relative shall live again." Whereupon it placed the piece of grass in the mouth of the corpse, and it revived. When the bird Humá revived and saw the woodcutter, it severely upbraided him for his faithlessness and carelessness. "I could have made you great and happy," it said, "but now get you back to your burden of wood and humble home." On this the poor man found himself back again in the jungle, and standing by the load of wood that he had prepared before he was transported to Koh-i-Qáf. He sold his wood, and then went home in a very sad frame of mind to his wife and daughters. He never saw the bird Humá again. Source: J. Hinton Knowles, Folk-Tales of Kashmir , 2nd ed., (London: Kegan Paul, Tranch, Trübner, and Company, 1893), pp. 11-13 . This story is one episode from a longer tale entitled "Good King Hátam" (pp. 11-15). Knowles' source: Qádir, a barber living by Amírá Kadal, Sprínagar. Knowles' footnote concerning the Lucky-Bird Humá: A fabulous bird of happy omen peculiar to the East. It haunts the mountain Qáf. It is supposed that every head it overshadows will wear a crown. The Arabs call it 'anqá, and the Persians símurgh (lit. of the size of thirty birds). Knowles' footnote concerning the country Koh-i-Qáf: Another name is Koh-i-Akhzar, another Koh-i-Zamurrad (lit. the green or emerald mountain). The Mohammedans believe that these mountains encircle the world , and that they are inhabited by demons. They think that this mountain range of emerald gives an azure hue to the sky. Hence in Persian az qáf tá qáf means the whole world. The name is also used for Mount Caucasus. Cf. also Wide-Awake Stories [by Flora Annie Steel and R. C. Temple], pp. 34, 37, 316. Return to the table of contents . The Duck That Laid Golden Eggs Russia There lived once an old man and his wife. The man was called Abrosim, and his wife Fetinia. They were very poor and miserable, and had a son named Little Ivan, who was fifteen years old. One day old Abrosim brought a crust of bread home for his wife and son. He had scarcely begun to eat, however, when Krutschina (Sorrow) sprang up from behind the stove, seized the crust out of his hand, and ran away behind the stove again. The old man made a bow to Krutschina, and begged her to give him the crust back again, as he and his wife had nothing else to eat. "I will not give you the crust again," said Krutschina, " but instead of it I will give you a duck which lays a gold egg every day." "Very well," said Abrosim. " I shall be supperless tonight. Do not deceive me, but tell me where I shall find the duck." "Early tomorrow morning," said Krutschina, " when you are up, go into the town; there you will see a duck in a pond, catch it, and carry it home." When Abrosim heard this he lay down and went to sleep. The next morning he rose early, and went to the town, and was very much pleased to see the duck swimming about on a pond. He called it to him, carried it off to his home, and gave it to his wife Fetinia. They were both delighted, and put the duck in a big basin, placing a sieve over it. In an hour's time they went to look at it, and discovered that the duck had laid a golden egg. Then they took the duck out, and let it walk a little on the floor, and the old man, taking the egg, set off to town. There he sold the egg for a hundred rubles, took the money, and, going to the market, bought different kinds of vegetables and set off home. The next day the duck laid another egg like the first, which Abrosim sold in the same manner. So the duck went on laying a golden egg every day, and the old man became, in a short time, very rich. He bought a large house, a great many shops, all kinds of wares, and set up in business. His wife Fetinia made a favorite of a young clerk in her husband's employ, and used to supply him with money. One day when Abrosim was away from home, buying some goods, the clerk called to have a talk with Fetinia, and it chanced that he then saw the duck that laid the golden eggs. He was pleased with the bird, and, examining it, found written under its wing in gold letters "Whoever eats this duck will be a Czar." He did not say anything to Fetinia about what he had seen, but asked her to roast the duck for him. Fetinia said she could not kill the duck, for all their fortune depended on it, but the clerk begged her so earnestly that she at last consented and killed it, and put it in the oven. The clerk then went off saying he would return soon, and Fetinia also went out in the town. While they were gone in came little Ivan. He felt very hungry, and, looking about him for something to eat, he chanced to see the roast duck in the oven, so he took it out and ate all of it but the bones. Then he went off again to the shop. In a little while the clerk came back, and, having called Fetinia, asked her to bring out the duck. The woman went to the oven, but when she saw that the duck was not there, she was terribly put out, and told the clerk that the duck had disappeared. At that the clerk flew into a great rage, and said, "You have eaten the duck yourself, of course," and he got up and walked out of the house. In the evening Abrosim and his son, Little Ivan, came home. When Abrosim did not see the duck, he asked his wife where it was, and she told him that she did not know. Then Little Ivan said to his father, "My dear father, when I came home, in the middle of the day, for dinner; my mother was not in, so I looked in the oven, and there found a roast duck. I took it out and ate it all but the bones, but I do not know whether it was our duck or a strange one." Then old Abrosim was in such a rage that he thrashed his wife till she was half dead, and he turned Little Ivan out of doors. Little Ivan began his journey. Where should he go? He determined to follow his nose. For ten days and nights he went on. Then he came to a town, and as he stepped to the gate he saw a great many people assembled together. Now these folk had been taking council, their Czar being dead, as to who should succeed him. In the end they agreed that the first person who came in at the city gate should be made Czar. Just then in came Little Ivan through the gate, so all the people cried out together, "Here is our Czar!" The chief folk took Little Ivan by the arms, conducted him to the royal apartments, put on him the Czar's robes, seated him on the throne, made obeisance to him as to their Czar, and waited for his commands. Then Little Ivan thought he must surely be asleep and dreaming all this; but at last he knew that he must be really Czar. He was heartily pleased, began to rule over the people, and to appoint his officers. A short time after he called one of them, named Luga, to him, and said, "My true friend and good knight Luga, I want you to do me a service. Go to my own country, go to the Czar, salute him from me, and ask him to deliver to you the shopkeeper Abrosim and his wife, so that you may bring them to me. If he will not deliver them up to you, tell him that I will lay waste his country with fire, and will make him himself my prisoner." When the servant Luga was come into Little Ivan's country he went to the Czar and asked him to let Abrosim and Fetinia go away with him. The Czar was unwilling to let Abrosim go, for he wanted to keep the rich merchant in his own country. He knew, however, that Ivan's kingdom was very large and populous, and being therefore afraid, he let Abrosim and Fetinia depart. Luga received them from the Czar, and conducted them to his own native country. When he brought them to Little Ivan, the Czar said to his father, "Yes, father, you turned me away from your house, and I therefore bring you to mine. Come, live with me, you and my mother, till the end of your days." Abrosim and Fetinia rejoiced exceedingly to find that their son was become Czar, and they lived with him many years, until they died. Little Ivan ruled for thirty years in good health, and was very happy, and all his people loved him sincerely to the last hour of his life. Source: Anonymous, Folk-Lore and Legends: Russian and Polish (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippencott Company, 1891), pp. 53-57 . The introduction is signed by C. J. T. Return to the table of contents . The Golden Goose Germany In Petersberg Mountain there is a golden goose sitting on twelve golden eggs. Many have tried to dig them up, but no one has found them. Source (books.google.com): A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Die goldene Gans," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg, Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), p. 208 . Source (Internet Archive): A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Die goldene Gans," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg, Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), p. 208 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "Oral." Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. September 4, 2019. Grimm 200: The Golden Key 200 The Golden Key Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once in the wintertime when the snow was very deep, a poor boy had to go out and fetch wood on a sled. After he had gathered it together and loaded it, he did not want to go straight home, because he was so frozen, but instead to make a fire and warm himself a little first. So he scraped the snow away, and while he was thus clearing the ground he found a small golden key. Now he believed that where there was a key, there must also be a lock, so he dug in the ground and found a little iron chest. "If only the key fits!" he thought. "Certainly there are valuable things in the chest." He looked, but there was no keyhole. Finally he found one, but so small that it could scarcely be seen. He tried the key, and fortunately it fitted. Then he turned it once, and now we must wait until he has finished unlocking it and has opened the lid. Then we shall find out what kind of wonderful things there were in the little chest. Source: Der goldene Schlüssel , Kinder- und Hausmärchen , no. 200. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. This story was added to the Grimms' collection as no. 161 (the final tale) of their second edition (1819). Their immediate source was a Hessian story told to them by family friend Marie Hassenpflug. From the second edition onward this story has occupied the last position in the collection (excluding the appendix of ten Children's Legends ). By closing their collection with this enigmatic tale without an end, the Grimms seem to be saying that folktales, too, are endless. There is no final word. Aarne-Thompson type 2260. Related links D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Grimm Brothers' Home Page . The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Fairy Tales). Unfinished Stories . Folktales of Aarne-Thompson types 2250, 2251, 2260, 2271, and 2300. Revised December 19, 2005. The Grateful Animals and the Ungrateful Man: Fables of Type 160 The Grateful Animals and the Ungrateful Man Fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 160 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2014 Contents The Grateful Animals and the Ungrateful Man (India, The Panchatantra ). The Traveler and the Goldsmith (India, Kalila and Dimna ). Story of the Grateful Animals and the Ungrateful Woman (India, The Kathasaritsagara ). The Grateful Animals and the Ungrateful Man (Tibet). Vitalis and the Woodcutter (England, attributed to Richard the Lionheart ( Richard Coeur de Lion ). Of Ingratitude ( Gesta Romanorum ). Adrian and Bardus (England, John Gower). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Grateful Animals and the Ungrateful Man India, The Panchatantra In a certain place there lived a Brahmin whose name was Jadschnjadatta [Given to Sacrifice]. His wife, overcome by poverty, every day would say: "Oh, you cowardly, heard-hearted Brahmin. Do you not see how your children are tormented by hunger, while you stand by without caring! Set forth from here and with all your strength seek a way to get some food, then come back as soon as possible." Exhausted from her complaints, he set forth on a lengthy journey. After a few days he found himself in a great forest. Tormented by hunger he began to look for water when he saw a deep pit covered over with leaves. At the bottom of the pit he saw a tiger, a monkey, snake, and a man; and they saw him as well. Perceiving that he was a man, the tiger said, "Oh, you honorable one, remember that it is a great virtue to rescue a living being, and pull me out, so that I can return to the circle of my dear friends, my wife, and my family!" The Brahmin said, "The mere mention of your name brings fear to all living creatures. Should not I too be afraid of you?" The tiger replied, "Repentance is possible for the murderer of a Brahmin, for drunkards, hooligans, thieves, and promise-breakers, but not for those who are ungrateful. I swear with a three-fold oath that you have no cause to fear me. Therefore have mercy on me and pull me out!" The Brahmin thought to himself, "Death would bring salvation, if suffered while saving the life of another living being," and he helped the tiger out of the pit. Then the monkey said to him, "My good man, help me out too!" Hearing this, the Brahmin pulled him out. The snake said, "Oh, consecrated one, pull me out too." The Brahmin replied, "Just saying your name causes one to tremble, much less touching you!" The snake said, "We do not act arbitrarily. We only bite if we are provoked into doing so. I swear with a three-fold oath that you have no cause to fear me." After hearing this the Brahmin pulled the snake out. Then they all said to him, "The man down there embraces every kind of sin. Take note of this, and do not help him out. Do not trust him." Then the tiger spoke up again, "My den is in a crack in the cliff on the north side of the many-peaked mountain that you can see. You must come to me there so I can repay you and not be in your debt in a future life." Having said this he departed for his home. Then the monkey said, "I live next to a waterfall in the vicinity of the tiger's den. You must visit me there!" And with that he went on his way. The snake said, "If your life is ever threatened, just think of me!" And he went on his way. Then the man in the pit cried out repeatedly, "Oh, Brahmin, help me out!" Overcome by pity, the Brahmin finally pulled him out too. "I am a goldsmith," said the rescued man, "and if you ever need any gold-work done, just bring it to me." Then he too went on his way. The Brahmin wandered about without finding anything to eat. Tormented by hunger he turned towards home, but then remembered what the monkey had said and went to him instead. The monkey gave him fruits as sweet as ambrosia, saying, "Whenever you have need of fruit, just come back to me." Then the consecrated one said, "You have done well. Now show me the way to the tiger." The monkey led him to the tiger's den. Recognizing him, the tiger gave the Brahmin a gold necklace along with other ornaments in payment for his good deed. The tiger explained: "A certain prince, whose horse ran away with him, came under my claws, and I killed him. These things came from him, and I brought them here for you. Take them and go in peace!" The Brahmin remembered the goldsmith and thought, "He will know who I am, and will help me sell this gold." The goldsmith received him with every courtesy: foot-washing, refreshment, and so forth, then said, "Just let me know what I can do for you." The consecrated one said, "I have brought gold that you should sell for me." The goldsmith said, "Show me the gold!" The Brahmin showed him the pieces, and the goldsmith recognized them as work that he himself had done for the king's son. "Just wait here," he said, "while I show the gold to someone." Then he went to the palace and showed the gold to the king. "Where did you get this?" asked the king. "There is a Brahmin in my house who brought it to me." The king thought, "He is the villain who killed my son. He shall pay for that!" The king had his watchmen bind the Brahmin, with the order that he was to be impaled at the break of day. As he was being bound, the Brahmin remembered the snake, and in that same instant the snake appeared before him, and said, "How can I serve you?" The consecrated one said, "Set me free." The snake replied, "I shall bite the king's favorite wife. Neither the incantations of the greatest sorcerers nor the medications of the best physicians shall free her from the poison. It will only go away when you touch her with your hand. And then you shall be set free." After saying this, the snake bit the queen. A cry of despair arose at the palace, and the entire city was in shock. Sorcerer, healers, magicians, and physicians all tried to cure her, but their efforts had no effect on the poison. Answering the call of the public drummer, the consecrated one said, "I can free her from the poison." Thus the Brahmin was taken from prison and led to the king, who said, "Free her from the poison!" The Brahmin went to the queen, and with a mere touch of his hand he freed her from the poison. Seeing his wife alive and well once again, he approached the Brahmin with honor and respect. "Where did you get the gold?" he asked. The consecrated one related to him everything that had happened, from the very beginning. Now knowing the truth of the matter, the king had the goldsmith thrown into prison and he appointed the Brahmin as his minister and gave him a thousand villages. The Brahmin summoned his family and lived happily with his friends, taking pleasure in good works and enjoying the fruits of a virtuous preexistence. Source: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen , translated from the Sanskrit by Theodor Benfey; vol. 2 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), pp. 128-32 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. The genders of the tiger, monkey, and snake are not clear from Benfey's German translation. I have arbitrarily made them male. Link to another translation of this story: "The Ungrateful Man," The Panchatantra , translated from the Sanskrit by Arthur W. Ryder (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1925), pp. 112-17 . Return to the table of contents . The Traveler and the Goldsmith Kalila and Dimna A number of persons dug a pit, and there fell into it a goldsmith, a serpent, a monkey, and a tiger; and a traveler, who was passing by, stood over the pit, and saw the man and his companions, and said to himself, "I cannot perform any deed that will plead more strongly in my favor in the life to come, than by saving this man from the enemies by whom he is surrounded." So he took a rope, and let it down into the pit; and the monkey, owing to his dexterity and nimbleness, was the first to cling to it, and climb up; he then let it down a second time, and the serpent twisted himself round it, and came out; then a third time, and the tiger took hold of it, and he drew him up. Then the three beasts thanked him for his having assisted them to escape, but begged him not to release the goldsmith, adding, that men in general, and especially the person in question, were incapable of gratitude. And the monkey said to him, "I live on a mountain near a city called Nawadarkht." The tiger said, "I live in a wood close by this city." And the serpent, "I dwell in the walls of the city, and if you pass in our neighborhood at any time, and have occasion for our services, call to us, and we will come and reward you for the kindness which you have shown us." But the traveler paid no attention to what they had told him of the ingratitude of the man, but let down the rope again, and brought out the goldsmith, who thanked him for what he had done, and said, "If ever you come to Nawadarkht, enquire for my house; I am a goldsmith, and shall be happy to be of any use to you I can for the service you have rendered me." Then the goldsmith returned to the city, and the traveler continued his journey. Some time after the traveler had occasion to go to Nawadarkht, and as he was walking along, the monkey met him, and saluted him, and kissed his feet, and made apologies for the inability of monkeys to do much for a friend, but begged him to sit down, and wait till he returned; then the monkey went away, and very soon came back, bringing some choice fruit, which he placed before the traveler, who having eaten as much as he chose, continued his journey. And as he approached the gate of the city, the tiger advanced towards him, and placing himself in an humble posture before him, said, "Wait a moment, and I will very soon come back to you." Then the tiger went away, and entered the city by one of the walls, and killed the king's daughter, and tore off her trinkets, and brought them to the traveler, without informing him by what means he had procured them. Then the traveler said to himself, "These beasts have rewarded me very handsomely, and I am now curious to see what the goldsmith will do. If he is poor, and has no means of showing his gratitude, he may at least sell these trinkets for their full value, with which of course he is acquainted, and divide with me the sum of money which he obtains for them." So he went to the goldsmith, who, as soon as he saw him, saluted him, and made him enter his house; and observing the trinkets, he immediately recognized them to be those which he had made for the daughter of the king. He then told the traveler that he had no provisions in the house good enough for him, but if he would wait a little while, he would fetch him something to eat. Then he went out, and said to himself, "This is an opportunity not to be lost; I will go to the king, and inform him of the discovery I have made, and he will no doubt acknowledge and reward my zeal." Then he went to the antechamber of the king, and announced himself by a message to the following purport: "The person who has killed your majesty's daughter and stolen her trinkets is at this moment in my house." Then the king desired the traveler, to be brought before him, and as soon as he saw the jewels in his possession, he immediately ordered him to be put to the torture, and after that to be led through the city, and in the end put to death. Whilst the punishment was being executed, the traveler began to weep, and cry out with a loud voice, "If I had attended to the hints which the monkey, the serpent, and the tiger gave me of the ingratitude of this man, I should have escaped this misfortune." And as he repeated the same words several times, the serpent heard what he said, and came out from her hole, and knew her benefactor again, and was so distressed at the situation in which she found him, that she immediately thought of some contrivance to release him, and went and stung the son of the king; and the king called together the wise men of his kingdom, who endeavored to charm the bite by their incantations and magical arts, but all to no purpose. Now the serpent had a sister, who was one of the Genii; so she went to her, and informed her of the kindness she had experienced from the traveler, and of the misfortune into which he was fallen; and the sister felt pity for him, and went to the king's son, and rendering herself invisible told him that he would not get well, unless the man who had been punished so undeservedly pronounced an incantation over him. Then the serpent went to the traveler in prison, and reproached him for not having attended to her advice concerning the goldsmith; and she gave him leaves, which she told him served as an antidote to her poison, and desired him, when he was called to charm the bite which the king's son had received, to make the young prince drink a decoction of the leaves, which would cure him; and if the king enquired into his circumstances, he must give a true account of himself, and by the favor of heaven he would by these means escape. Then the king's son told his father, that he had heard the voice of someone speaking, who said to him, that he would not get well, unless the man who had been unjustly imprisoned charmed the sting of the serpent; upon which the king ordered the traveler to be sent for, and desired him to charm his son. The traveler replied, "Incantations will be of no use to him, but if he drinks a decoction of these leaves, he will with the assistance of heaven be cured." Then he made him drink, and the child got well, to the great joy and satisfaction of his father; and the king desired the traveler to give some account of himself, and the latter related his history. Then the king thanked him, and made him a handsome present, and commanded that the goldsmith should be put to death in his stead; and the sentence was carried into execution, as a just punishment for the false evidence which he had given, and the bad return he had made to a good action. So in the ingratitude of the goldsmith towards the traveler, and the gratitude on the other hand of the beasts towards their benefactor, by the means of one of whom he escaped from the danger which threatened him, is contained a salutary lesson for those who will listen to instruction, and matter of reflection for the considerate man, who will learn from this example to select, from motives of prudence as well as interest, those only as objects of his generosity and favor, who are possessed of integrity and honorable sentiments, in whatever rank or condition of life he may find them. Source: Kalila and Dimna; or, The Fables of Bidpai , translated from the Arabic by Wyndham Knatchbull (Oxford: Printed by W. Baxter, 1819), no. 17, pp. 346-54 . Kalila and Dimna , based on the Indian Panchatantra , was translated into Arabic in 750 AD by the Persian scholar Abdullah Ibn al-Muqaffa. Return to the table of contents . Story of the Grateful Animals and the Ungrateful Woman The Kathasaritsagara Story of the Grateful Animals and the Ungrateful Woman There was a certain man of noble soul, who was an incarnation of a portion of a Bodhisattva, whose heart was melted by compassion only, who had built a hut in a forest and lived there, performing austerities. He, while living there, by his power rescued living beings in distress, and Pisachas and others he gratified by presents of water and jewels. One day, as he was roaming about in the wood to assist others, he saw a great well and looked into it. And a woman, who was in it, said to him in a loud voice: "Noble sir, here are four of us, myself a woman, a lion, and a golden-crested bird, and a snake, fallen into this well in the night; so take us out; have mercy upon us." When he heard this, he said: "Granted that you three fell in because the darkness made it impossible for you to see your way, but how did the bird fall in?" The woman answered him: "It fell in by being caught in a fowler's net." Then the ascetic tried to lift them out by the supernatural power of his asceticism, but he could not; on the contrary, his power was gone. He reflected: "Surely this woman is a sinner, and owing to my having conversed with her, my power is gone from me. So I will use other means in this case." Then he plaited a rope of grass, and so drew them all four up out of the well, and they praised him. And in his astonishment he said to the lion, the bird and the snake: "Tell me, how come you to have articulate voice, and what is your history?" Then the lion said: " We have articulate speech and remember our former births, and we are mutual enemies; hear our stories in turns." So the lion began to tell his own story as follows: The Lion's Story There is a splendid city on the Himalayas, called Vaiduryasringa; and in it there is a prince of the Vidyadharas named Padmavesa, and to him a son was born named Vajravega. That Vajravega, while he dwelt in the world of the Vidyadharas, being a vainglorious person, quarreled with anybody and everybody, confiding in his courage. His father ordered him to desist, but he paid no attention to his command. Then his father cursed him, saying: "Fall into the world of mortals." Then his arrogance was extinguished, and his knowledge left him, and smitten with the curse he wept, and asked his father to name a time when it should end. Then his father Padmavesa thought a little, and said immediately: "You shall become a Brahmin's son on the earth, and display this arrogance once more, and by your father's curse you shall become a lion and fall into a well. And a man of noble character, out of compassion, shall draw you out, and when you have recompensed him in his calamity, you shall be delivered from this curse." This was the termination of the curse which his father appointed for him. Then Vajravega was born in Malava as Devaghosha, the son of Harighosha, a Brahmin. And in that birth also he fought with many, confiding in his heroism, and his father said to him: "Do not go on in this way quarrelling with everybody." But he would not obey his father's orders, so his father cursed him: "Become immediately a foolish lion, over-confident in its strength." In consequence of this speech of his father's, Devaghosha, that incarnation of a Vidyadhara, was again born as a lion in this forest. Story of the Grateful Animals and the Ungrateful Woman "Know that I am that lion. I was wandering about here at night, and as chance would have it, I fell into this well; and you, noble sir, have drawn me up out of it. So now I will depart, and, if you should fall into any difficulty, remember me; I will do you a good turn and so get released from my curse." After the lion had said this, he went away, and the golden-crested bird, being questioned by that Bodhisattva, told his tale. The Golden-Crested Bird's Story There is on the Himalayas a king of the Vidyadharas, named Vajradamshtra. His queen gave birth to five daughters in succession. And then the king propitiated Siva with austerities and obtained a son, named Rajatadamshtra, whom he valued more than life. His father, out of affection, bestowed the knowledge of the sciences upon him when he was still a child, and he grew up, a feast to the eyes of his relations. One day he saw his eldest sister, by name Somaprabha, playing upon a pinjara . In his childishness he kept begging for the pinjara , saying: "Give it me, I too want to play on it." And when she would not give it him, in his flightiness he seized the pinjara , and flew up to heaven with it in the form of a bird. Then his sister cursed him, saying: "Since you have taken my pinjara from me by force, and flown away with it, you shall become a bird with a golden crest." When Rajatadamshtra heard this, he fell at his sister's feet, and entreated her to fix a time for his curse to end, and she said: "When, foolish boy, you fall, in your bird-form, into a blind well, and a certain merciful person draws you out, and you do him a service in return, then you shall be released from this curse." When she had said this to her brother, he was born as a bird with a golden crest. Story of the Grateful Animals and the Ungrateful Woman "I am that same golden-crested bird, that fell into this pit in the night, and have now been drawn out by you, so now I will depart. Remember me when you fall into calamity, for by doing you a service in return, I shall be released from my curse." When the bird had said this, he departed. Then the snake, being questioned by that Bodhisattva, told his story to that great-souled one. The Snake's Story Formerly I was the son of a hermit in the hermitage of Kasyapa. And I had a companion there who was also the son of a hermit. And one day my friend went down into the lake to bathe, and I remained on the bank. And while I was there, I saw a serpent come with three heads. And, in order to terrify that friend of mine in fun, I fixed the serpent immovable on the bank, opposite to where he was, by the power of a spell. My friend got through his bathing in a moment, and came to the bank, and unexpectedly seeing that great serpent there, he was terrified and fainted. After some time I brought my friend round again, but he, finding out by meditation that I had terrified him in this way, became angry, and cursed me, saying: "Go and become a similar great snake with three crests." Then I entreated him to fix an end to my curse, and he said: "When, in your serpent condition, you fall into a well, and at a critical moment do a service to the man who pulls you out, then you shall be freed from your curse." Story of the Grateful Animals and the Ungrateful Woman "After he had said this, he departed, and I became a serpent, and now you have drawn me out of the well; so now I will depart. And when you think of me I will come; and by doing you a service I shall be released from my curse." When the snake had said this, he departed, and the woman told her story. The Woman's Story I am the wife of a young Kshatriya in the king's employ, a man in the bloom of youth, brave, generous, handsome and high-minded. Nevertheless I was wicked enough to enter into an intrigue with another man. When my husband found it out, he determined to punish me. And I heard of this from my confidante, and that moment I fled, and entered this wood at night, and fell into this well, and was dragged out by you. Story of the Grateful Animals and the Ungrateful Woman "And thanks to your kindness I will now go and maintain myself somewhere. May a day come when I shall be able to requite your goodness." When the sinful woman had said this to the Bodhisattva, she went to the town of a king named Gotravardhana. She obtained an interview with him, and remained among his attendants, in the capacity of maid to the king's principal queen. But because that Bodhisattva talked with that woman, he lost his power, and could not procure fruits and roots and things of that kind. Then, being exhausted with hunger and thirst, he first thought of the lion. And, when he thought of him, he came and fed him with the flesh of deer, and in a short time he restored him to his former health with their flesh; and then the lion said: "My curse is at an end, I will depart." When he had said this, the Bodhisattva gave him leave to depart, and the lion became a Vidyadhara and went to his own place. Then that incarnation of a portion of a Bodhisattva, being again exhausted by want of food, thought upon that golden-crested bird, and he came, when thought of by him. And when he told the bird of his sufferings, the bird went and brought a casket full of jewels and gave it him, and said: ''This wealth will support you for ever, and so my curse has come to an end, now I depart; may you enjoy happiness!" When he had said this, he became a young Vidyadhara prince, and went through the air to his own world, and received the kingdom from his father. And the Bodhisattva, as he was wandering about to sell the jewels, reached that city where the woman was living whom he had rescued from the well. And he deposited those jewels in an out-of-the-way house belonging to an old Brahmin woman, and went to the market, and on the way he saw coming towards him the very woman whom he had saved from the well, and the woman saw him. And the two fell into a conversation, and in the course of it the woman told him of her position about the person of the queen. And she asked him about his own adventures. So the confiding man told her how the golden-crested bird had given him the jewels. And he took her and showed her the jewels in the house of the old woman, and the wicked woman went and told her mistress, the queen, of it. Now it happened that the golden-crested bird had managed artfully to steal this casket of jewels from the interior of the queen's palace, before her eyes. And when the queen heard from the mouth of that woman, who knew the facts, that the casket had arrived in the city, she informed the king. And the king had the Bodhisattva pointed out by that wicked woman, and brought by his servants as a prisoner from that house with the ornaments. And after he had asked him the circumstances, though he believed his account, he not only took the ornaments from him, but he put him in prison. Then the Bodhisattva, terrified at being put in prison, thought upon the snake, who was an incarnation of the hermit's son, and the snake came to him. And when the snake had seen him, and inquired what his need was, he said to the good man: "I will go and coil round the king from his head to his feet. And I will not let him go until I am told to do so by you. And you must say here, in the prison: 'I will deliver the king from the serpent.' And when you come and give me the order, I will let the king go. And when I let him go, he will give you half his kingdom." After he had said this, the snake went and coiled round the king, and placed his three hoods on his head. And the people began to cry out: "Alas I the king is bitten by a snake." Then the Bodhisattva said: "I will deliver the king from this snake." And the king's servants, having heard this, informed him. Thereupon the king, who was in the grasp of the snake, had the Bodhisattva summoned, and said to him: "If you deliver me from this snake, I will give you half my kingdom, and these my ministers are your guarantees that I will keep my promise." When his ministers heard this, they said, "Certainly," and then the Bodhisattva said to that snake: "Let the king go at once." Then the snake let the king go, and the king gave half his kingdom to that Bodhisattva, and thus he became prosperous in a moment. And the serpent, as its curse was at an end, became a young hermit, and he told his story in the presence of the court and went back to his hermitage. Thus you see that good fortune certainly befalls those of good dispositions. And transgression brings suffering even upon the great. And the mind of women cannot be relied upon; it is not touched even by such a service as rescue from death; so what other benefit can move them? Source: Ocean of Story: Being C. H. Tawney's Translation of Somadeva's Katha Sarit Sagara (Or Ocean of Streams of Story) , vol. 5 (London: Privately printed for subscribers only, 1926), no. 148, pp. 157-64 . According the the Internet Archive , this book is not in copyright. The Katha Sarit Sagara , also spelled Kathasaritsagara , is an eleventh-century collection of Indian tales as retold by a Brahmin named Somadeva. Return to the table of contents . The Grateful Animals and the Ungrateful Man Tibet In long past times King Brahmadatta came to the throne in Varanasi. A man, who had gone with his axe and wood-basket into the forest to fetch wood, was frightened by a lion while looking for wood, and in running away fell into a pit. Into it fell likewise the lion which was intending to devour him. A mouse, which had been frightened by a snake, ran away from it, and a falcon pursued the mouse, in order to devour it. They all four fell into the pit, and they all entertained the evil design of putting each other to death. But the lion said, "O honored ones, ye are all comrades of mine. As things are so, and we are suffering intolerable pain from woe, it is now no time for us to expose one another to danger. Therefore sit quietly without disturbing yourselves." By the dispensation of destiny a hunter, who was looking for gazelles, came to that spot, and while he was looking at that pit, all those creatures exclaimed in confused words, "Ho, friend, rescue us!" Understanding what they said, the hunter drew out first of all the lion. It touched his feet and said, "I shall prove grateful to you. But do not draw out that black-headed one who forgets accepted benefits." Having thus spoken, the lion departed. The hunter then proceeded to extricate them all by degrees from the pit. One day the hunter came again to that spot when the lion had killed a gazelle. The lion recognized the man, and touched his feet, and gave him the gazelle. At another time King Brahmadatta had gone into the park with his spouse, and, after enjoying himself there, had lain down to sleep. Left at their ease, the women took off their clothes and exposed them to the air. And they laid aside their ornaments in divers places and roamed about, or sat, reposed, and slept in the grove. When one of the wives had laid aside her ornaments at a certain spot, and had gone to sleep, the falcon carried them off, and gratefully presented them to the hunter. When the king awoke from his sleep he went swiftly to Varanasi And away went quickly also the wives, princes, ministers, townspeople, and country-folk. The wife, who looked for her ornaments but could not find them, said to the king, "O king, my ornaments are lost in the park." The king gave orders to his ministers, saying, "O honored ones, as the ornaments are lost, find out who has carried them off." When they began to make inquiries, the black-headed man, who had visited the hunter from time to time and knew that he was in possession of the ornaments, came with ungrateful heart and told the king. Then the king was very angry. And the king's men summoned the hunter, and said to him, "Ho, friend, you stole the ornaments out of the park." The hunter was terrified and related what had taken place. The ornaments were restored to the king. But the hunter was bound and cast into prison. Then the mouse went to the snake and said, "By the contrivance of the black-headed sinner has our benefactor been bound and cast into prison." The snake said, "O hunter, I will bite the king today. Then do you heal him with this spell and this remedy. If that is done, no doubt the king will set you at liberty, and will confer upon you gifts and good things." The hunter said, "Good, so be it!" The snake bit the king, and the hunter came and healed him with the spell and the remedy. Then the king joyfully released him from the prison, and bestowed upon him gifts and good things. Source: Kanjur, Tibetan Tales Derived from Indian Sources ; translated from the Tibetan of the Kay-Gyur [Kanjur] by F. Anton von Schiefner; done into English from the German by W. R. S. Ralston. (London: Trübner and Company, 1882), no. 26, pp. 309-310 . Return to the table of contents . Vitalis and the Woodcutter Attributed to Richard the Lionheart ( Richard Coeur de Lion ) About this time [1195 A.D.] a remarkable circumstance happened to a rich and miserly Venetian, which we think it worth while to insert in this place: His name was Vitalis; and when he was on the point of giving his daughter in marriage, he went into a large forest near the sea to provide delicacies for the table. As he wandered alone through the forest, with his bow and arrows ready, and intent on taking venison, he suddenly fell into a pitfall which had been cunningly set for the lions, bears, and wolves, out of which he found it impossible to escape, because the bottom of it was so wide and the mouth so narrow. Here he found two fierce animals, a lion and a serpent, which had also by accident fallen in; and Vitalis signing himself with the cross, neither of them, though fierce and hungry, ventured to attack him. All that night he spent in this pit, crying and moaning, and expecting with lamentations the approach of so base a death. A poor woodcutter, passing by chance that way to collect faggots, heard his cries, which seemed to come from beneath the ground, and following the sound till he came to the pit's mouth, he looked in and called out, "Who is there?" Vitalis sprang up, rejoiced beyond measure, and eagerly replied, "It is I, Vitalis, a Venetian, who knowing nothing of these pitfalls, fell in, and shall be devoured by wild beasts, besides which I am dying of hunger and terror. There are two fierce animals here, a lion and a serpent, but, by God's protection and the sign of the cross, they have not yet hurt me, and it remains for you to save me, that I may afterwards show you my gratitude. If you will save me, I will give you half of all my property, namely, five hundred talents; for I am worth a thousand." The poor man answered, "I will do as you request, if you will be as good as your word." Upon this Vitalis pledged himself on oath to do as he had promised. Whilst they were speaking, the lion by a bland movement of his tail, and the serpent by a gentle hissing, signified to the poor man their approbation, and seemed to join in Vitalis's request to be delivered. The poor man immediately went home for a ladder and ropes, with which he returned and let the ladder down into the pit, without anyone to help him. Immediately the lion and serpent, striving which should be first, mounted by the rounds of the ladder and gave thanks to the poor man, crouching at his feet, for their deliverance. The woodcutter, approaching Vitalis, kissed his hand, saying, "Long live this hand! I am glad to say that I have earned my bargain," and with these words he conducted Vitalis until they came to a road with which he was acquainted. When they parted, the poor man asked when and where Vitalis would discharge his promise. "Within four days," said Vitalis, "in Venice, in my own palace, which is well known and easy to find." The countryman returned home to dinner, and as he was sitting at table, the lion entered with a dead goat, as a present in return for his deliverance, and having laid it down, took his leave without doing any hurt. The countryman, however, wishing to see where so tame an animal lay, followed him to his den, the lion all the time licking his feet, and then came back to his dinner. The serpent now came also, and brought with him in his mouth a precious stone which he laid in the countryman's plate. The same proceedings again took place as before. After two or three days the rustic, carrying the jewel with him, went to Venice, to claim from Vitalis his promise. He found him feasting with his neighbors in joy for his deliverance and said to him, "Friend, pay me what you owe me." "Who art thou!" replied Vitalis, "and what dost thou want!" "I want the five hundred talents you promised me." "Do you expect," replied Vitalis, "to get so easily the money which I have had so much difficulty to amass!" and, as he said these words, he ordered his servants to cast the rash man into prison. But the rustic by a sudden spring escaped out of the house and told what had happened to the judges of the city. When, however, they were a little incredulous, he showed them the jewel which the serpent had given him, and immediately one of them, perceiving that it was of great value, bought it of the man at a high price. But the countryman further proved the truth of his words by conducting some of the citizens to the dens of the lion and the serpent, when the animals again fawned on him as before. The judges were thus convinced of his truth, and compelled Vitalis to fulfil the promise which he had given, and to make compensation for the injury which he had done the poor man. This story was told by King Richard to expose the conduct of ungrateful men. Source: Roger of Wendover Flowers of History: Comprising the History of England from the Descent of the Saxons to A.D. 1235 , translated from the Latin by J. A. Giles; vol. 2 (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1849), pp. 143-45 . Roger of Wendover died in 1236. This story was inserted into Roger of Wendover's account by Matthew Paris (ca. 1200-1259). King Richard the Lionheart lived between 1157 and 1199. Return to the table of contents . Of Ingratitude Gesta Romanorum In the reign of a certain king there lived a proud and oppressive seneschal. Now, near the royal palace was a forest well stocked with game; and by the direction of this person various pits were dug there, and covered with leaves, for the purpose of entrapping the beasts. It happened that the seneschal himself went into this forest, and with much exaltation of heart exclaimed internally, "Lives there a being in the empire more powerful than I am?" This braggart thought was scarcely formed, ere he rode upon one of his own pitfalls, and immediately disappeared. The same day had been taken a lion, a monkey, and a serpent. Terrified at the situation into which fate had thrown him, he cried out lustily, and his noise awoke a poor man called Guido, who had come with his ass into that forest to procure firewood, by the sale of which he got his bread. Hastening to the mouth of the pit, he was promised great wealth if he would extricate the seneschal from his perilous situation. "My friend," answered Guido, "I have no means of obtaining a livelihood except by the faggots which I collect. If I neglect this for a single day, I shall be thrown into the greatest difficulties." The seneschal reiterated his promises of enriching him; and Guido went hack to the city, and returned with a long cord, which he let down into the pit, and bade the seneschal bind it round his waist. But before he could apply it to the intended purpose, the lion leaped forward, and seizing upon the cord, was drawn up in his stead. Immediately, exhibiting great signs of pleasure, the beast ran off into the wood. The rope again descended, and the monkey, having noticed the success of the lion, vaulted above the man's head, and shaking the cord, was in like manner set at liberty, and hurried off to his haunts. A third time the cord was let down, and the serpent, twining around it, was drawn up, gave signs of gratitude, and escaped. "Oh, my good friend," said the seneschal, "the beasts are gone, now draw me up quickly, I pray you." Guido complied, and afterwards succeeded in drawing up his horse, which the seneschal instantly mounted and rode back to the palace. Guido returned home; and his wife observing that he had come without wood, was very dejected, and inquired the cause. He related what had occurred, and the riches he was to receive for his service. The wife's countenance brightened. Early in the morning her husband went to the palace. But the seneschal denied all knowledge of him, and ordered him to be whipped for his presumption. The porter executed the directions, and beat him so severely that he left him half dead. As soon as Guido's wife understood this, she saddled their ass, and brought him home in a very infirm state. The sickness which ensued consumed the whole of their little property; but as soon as he had recovered, he returned to his usual occupation in the wood. Whilst he was thus employed, he beheld afar off ten asses laden with packs, and a lion following close on them, pursuing the path which led towards Guido. On looking narrowly at this beast, he remembered that it was the same which he had freed from its imprisonment in the pit. The lion signified with his foot that he should take the loaded asses, and go home. This Guido did, and the lion followed. On arriving at his own door, the noble beast fawned upon him, and wagging his tail as if in triumph, ran back to the woods. Guido caused proclamation to be made in different churches, that if any asses had been lost, the owners should come to him; but no one appearing to demand them, he opened the packages, and, to his great joy, discovered them full of money. On the second day Guido returned to the forest, but forgot an iron instrument to cleave the wood. He looked up, and beheld the monkey whose liberation he had effected; and the animal, by help of teeth and nails, accomplished his desires. Guido then loaded his asses and went home. The next day he renewed his visit to the forest; and sitting down to prepare his instrument, discerned the serpent, whose escape he had aided, carrying a stone in its mouth of three colors; on one side white, on another black, and on the third red. It opened its mouth and let the stone fall into Guido's lap. Having done this, it departed. Guido took the stone to a skillful lapidary, who had no sooner inspected it than he knew its virtues, and would willingly have paid him an hundred florins for it. But Guido refused; and by means of that singular stone obtained great wealth, and was promoted to a military command. The emperor having heard of the extraordinary qualities which it possessed, desired to see it. Guido went accordingly; and the emperor was so struck with its uncommon beauty, that he wished to purchase it at any rate; and threatened, if Guido refused compliance, to banish him the kingdom. "My lord," answered he, "I will sell the stone; but let me say one thing -- if the price be not given, it shall be presently restored to me." He demanded three hundred florin, and then, taking it from a small coffer, put it into the emperor's hands. Full of admiration, he exclaimed, "Tell me where you procured this beautiful stone." This he did; and narrated from the beginning the seneschal's accident and subsequent ingratitude. He told how severely he had been injured by his command; and the benefits he had received from the lion, the monkey, and serpent. Much moved at the recital, the emperor sent for the seneschal and said, "What is this I hear of thee?" He was unable to reply. "O wretch!" continued the emperor -- "monster of ingratitude! Guido liberated thee from the most imminent danger, and for this thou hast nearly destroyed him. Dost thou see how even irrational things have rendered him good for the service he performed? but thou hast returned evil for good. Therefore I deprive thee of thy dignity, which I will bestow upon Guido; and I further adjudge you to be suspended on a cross." This decree infinitely rejoiced the noblemen of the empire; and Guido, full of honors and years, ended his days in peace. Application: My beloved, the emperor is God; the pauper, man. The forest is the world, which is full of pits. The lion is the Son of God, who assumed humanity; the monkey is conscience; and the serpent is a prelate or confessor. The cord is Christ's passion; the loaded asses are the divine precepts. Source: Gesta Romanorum , translated from the Latin by Charles Swan (London: George Bell and Sons, 1906), no. 119, pp. 212-16 . The Gesta Romanorum ( Deeds of the Romans ) was compiled in Latin about 1300 AD. Different scholars identify its compiler as of English, French, or German nationality. Return to the table of contents . Adrian and Bardus England, John Gower Adrian, a great lord of Rome, while hunting in a forest, fell into a pit. He cried for help all day, but none heard till evening, when one Bardus, a woodcutter, came by with his ass, and heard Adrian promise to give half his goods to him who should help him. He let down a rope, and first an ape and then a serpent was drawn up by it. Bardus was terrified, but still the voice implored help, and at length Adrian was drawn up. At once this lord departed without thanks, and threatened Bardus with vengeance if ever he should claim the promise. The poor man went home, not daring to speak more, and on the next day, going to get wood, he found that the ape had requited his kindness by gathering for him a great heap of sticks, and so continued to do day by day; and the serpent brought him a precious stone in her mouth. This last he sold to a jeweler and afterwards found it again in his purse, and as often as he sold it, the same thing followed. At length this came to be known, and the Emperor heard of it. Calling Bardus before him he listened to his tale, and gave judgment that Adrian should fulfil his promise. Source: Confessio Amantis , The Complete Works of John Gower: The English Works , edited by G. C. Macaulay (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1901), p. lxxi . This is Macaulay's summary, in modern English, of Gower's longer tale in Middle English. Link to a somewhat more detailed summary: William Alexander Clouston, Popular Tales and Fictions: Their Migrations and Transformations , vol. 1 (Edinburgh and London: William blackwood and Sons, 1887), pp. 224-26 . Link to the full-length Middle English text: Confessio Amantis , The Complete Works of John Gower: The English Works , edited by G. C. Macaulay (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1901), book 5, pp. 81-87 . Gower's Confessio Amantis was written between about 1386 and 1390. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 18, 2014. The Grateful Dead: Folktales of Type 505 The Grateful Dead folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 505 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2008 Contents Sila Tsarevich and Ivashka with the White Smock (Russia). The Three Pennies (Denmark). Links to additional stories . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Sila Tsarevich and Ivashka with the White Smock Russia There was once a tsar, named Chotei, who had three sons -- the first, Aspar Tsarevich; the second, Adam Tsarevich; and the third and youngest son, Sila Tsarevich. The two eldest brothers entreated their father's permission to travel in foreign countries and see the world. Then the youngest brother, Sila Tsarevich, also begged the tsar's permission to travel with his brothers. But Chotei said, "My dear son, you are still young, and not used to the difficulties of traveling; remain at home, and think no more of this fancy you have taken." But Sila Tsarevich had a great longing to see foreign lands, and entreated his father so much that at length the tsar consented, and gave him a ship likewise. As soon as the three brothers embarked, each on board his ship, they all gave orders to set sail. And when they were out on the open sea, the eldest brother's ship sailed first, the second brother's next, and Sila Tsarevich sailed last. On the third day of the voyage they saw a coffin with iron bands floating on the waves. The two eldest brothers sailed past without heeding it, but as soon as Sila Tsarevich saw the coffin, he ordered the sailors to pick it up, lay it on board his ship, and carry it to land. The next day a violent storm arose, by which Sila's ship was driven out of its course, and cast upon a steep shore in an unknown country. Then Sila ordered his sailors to take the coffin and to carry it on shore, whither he himself followed, and buried it in the earth. Thereupon Sila Tsarevich ordered the captain to remain upon the spot where the ship was stranded, and await his return for three years; but adding that, should he not come back in that time, he should be free to set sail and return home. So saying, Sila took leave of his captain and his crew, and went forthwith, journeying on and on. He wandered about for a long while, without seeing anyone; at length he heard a man running after him, dressed all in white. Then Sila Tsarevich turned round and saw the man following him; whereupon he instantly drew his sword to be upon his guard. But no sooner did the man come up to him than he fell on his knees and thanked Sila for having saved him. And Sila asked the man what he had done to deserve his thanks. Then the stranger stood up and answered, "Ah, Sila Tsarevich, how can I thank you enough? There I lay in the coffin, which you picked up at sea and buried; and had it not been for you I might have remained floating about for a hundred years." "But how did you get into the coffin?" asked Sila. "Listen, and I will tell you the whole story," replied Ivashka. "I was a great magician; my mother was told that I did great mischief to mankind by my arts, and therefore ordered me to be put into the coffin and set adrift on the open sea. For more than a hundred years I have been floating about, and no one has ever picked me up; but to you I owe my rescue, and I will therefore serve you, and render you all the help in my power. Let me ask you whether you have not a wish to marry. I know the beautiful Queen Truda, who is worthy of being your wife." Sila replied that if this queen were indeed beautiful, he was willing to marry her; and Ivashka told him she was the most beautiful woman in the world. When Sila heard this, he begged Ivashka to accompany him to her kingdom. So they set out and traveled on and on till they reached that country. Now, Queen Truda's kingdom was surrounded by a palisade; and upon every stake was stuck a man's head, except one, which had no head. When Sila saw this, he was terrified, and asked Ivashka what it meant; and Ivashka told him that these were the heads of heroes who had been suitors to Queen Truda. Sila shuddered on hearing this, and wished to return home without showing himself to the father of Truda. But Ivashka told him to fear nothing and go with him boldly, so Sila went on. When they entered the kingdom, Ivashka said, "Hearken Sila Tsarevich, I will be your servant, and when you enter the royal halls, salute King Salom humbly. Then he will ask you whence you came, and whose son you are, what is your name and business. Tell him everything and conceal nothing; but say that you are come to sue for his daughter's hand. He will give her to you with great joy." So Sila Tsarevich went into the palace, and, as soon as Prince Salom saw him, he went himself to meet him, took him by his white hands, led him into the marble halls, and asked him, "Fair youth, from what country do you come, whose son are you, what is your name, and what is your business?" "I am from the kingdom of my father the Tsar Chotei," replied Sila. "My name is Sila Tsarevich, and I am come to sue for your daughter, the beautiful Queen Truda." King Salom was overjoyed that the son of such a renowned tsar should be his son-in-law, and immediately ordered his daughter to prepare for the wedding. And when the day for the marriage came, the king commanded all his princes and boyars to assemble in the palace; and they all went in procession to the church, and Sila Tsarevich was married to the fair Queen Truda. Then they returned to the palace, seated themselves at table, and feasted and made merry. When the time came to retire to rest, Ivashka took Sila aside and whispered to him, "Hark, ye, Sila Tsarevich, when you go to rest, beware lest you speak a word to your bride or you will not remain alive, and your head will be stuck on the last stake. She will in every way try to make you embrace her, but attend to what I say." Then Sila Tsarevich enquired why he warned him thus, and Ivashka replied, "She is in league with an evil spirit, who comes to her every night in the shape of a man, but flies through the air in the shape of a six-headed dragon. Now, if she lays her hand upon your breast and presses it, jump up and beat her with a stick until all her strength is gone. I will meanwhile remain on watch at the door of your apartment." When Sila Tsarevich heard this, he went with his wife to rest, and Queen Truda tried in every way to get him to kiss her, but Sila lay quite still and spoke not a word. Then Truda laid her hand upon his breast and pressed him so hard that he could scarcely breathe. But up jumped Sila Tsarevich and seized the stick which Ivashka had laid there ready for him, and fell to beating her as hard as he could. On a sudden there arose a storm, and a six-headed dragon came flying into the room and was going to devour Sila Tsarevich, but Ivashka seized a sharp sword and attacked the dragon, and they fought three hours, and Ivashka struck off two of the dragon's heads, whereupon the monster flew away. Then Ivashka desired Sila Tsarevich to go to sleep and fear nothing. Sila obeyed him, laid himself down, and fell asleep. Early in the morning King Salom went to be informed whether his dear son still lived, and when he heard that Sila was alive and well, the king rejoiced, since he was the first who had been saved from his daughter; and he instantly ordered Sila to be called, and the whole day was spent in merrymaking. The following night Ivashka gave Sila Tsarevich the same caution as before, not to speak a word to his wife, and he placed himself on watch at the door. Then it fell out as before, and when Sila Tsarevich began to beat the queen, on a sudden the dragon came flying in, and was going to devour Sila Tsarevich. But Ivashka rushed from behind the door, sword in hand, and fought with the dragon and struck off two more of his heads. Then the dragon flew away, and Sila Tsarevich lay down to sleep. Early in the morning the king commanded Sila to be invited, and they spent this day in the same pleasures as before. The third night the same happened again, and Ivashka cut off the last two heads of the dragon, and he burnt all the heads and strewed the ashes in the fields. Thus time passed on, and Sila Tsarevich lived with his father-in-law a whole year, without speaking to his wife or gaining her love. Then Ivashka told him one day to go to King Salom and ask permission to return to his native country. So Sila went to the king, who dismissed him, and gave him two squadrons of his army to accompany him as an escort. Then Sila took leave of his father-in-law, and set out with his wife on their journey to his own country. When they had gone half way, Ivashka told Sila Tsarevich to halt and pitch his tent. So Sila obeyed and ordered the tent to be put up. The next day Ivashka laid pieces of wood in front of Sila's tent and set fire to them. Then he led Queen Truda out of the tent, unsheathed his sword, and cut her in twain. Sila Tsarevich shuddered with terror and began to weep; but Ivashka said, "Weep not, she will come to life again." And presently all sorts of evil things came forth from the body, and Ivashka threw them all into the fire. Then he said to Sila Tsarevich, "See you not the evil spirits which troubled your wife? She is now relieved from them." And, so saying, he laid the parts of Truda's body together, sprinkled them with the water of life, and the queen was instantly sound and whole as before. Then said Ivashka, "Now, farewell, Sila Tsarevich, you will find that your wife loves you truly, but you will never see me more." And so saying he vanished. Sila Tsarevich ordered the tent to be struck, and journeyed on to his native country. And when he came to the place where his ship was waiting for him, he went onboard with the fair Queen Truda, dismissed the escort which accompanied him, and set sail. And on arriving at his own kingdom, he was welcomed with salvos of cannon, and Tsar Chotei came out of his palace and took him and the beautiful Queen Truda by their lily-white hands, led them into the marble halls, placed them at table, and they feasted and made merry. Sila Tsarevich lived with his father two years. Then he returned to the kingdom of King Salom, received from him the crown, and ruled over the country with his Queen Truda in great love and happiness. Source: Robert Steele, The Russian Garland of Fairy Tales: Being Russian Folk Legends Translated from a Collection of Chapbooks Made in Moscow (New York: Robert M. McBride and Co., 1916), pp. 194-201. Return to the table of contents . The Three Pennies Denmark Many years ago an old soldier was discharged from the army. He received in consideration of his excellent and faithful service a small loaf of rye bread and three pennies, whereupon he was at liberty to go whither he pleased. As he was walking along the highroad, he met three men. The one carried shovel, the second a pickaxe, and the third a spade. The soldier stopped, looked at them, and said, "Where are you going?" "I will tell you," answered one of them. "Today there was buried a man who owed each of us one penny, and now we will dig him up, since we are determined upon getting our dues." "What an idea!" returned the soldier. "You had better leave the dead man alone. At any rate, he is at present unable to pay you even one penny, so don't disturb his peace!" "It is all very fine for you to talk," answered the man. "But we must have the money, and up he must come." When the soldier felt that his fair words could not settle the matter, he said, "Here, I have two pennies. Will you take them and promise to leave the dead man undisturbed?" "Two pennies are not to be refused," said the man again, "but they will pay only two of us. What can you give the third one, since he is bent upon having his share?" As the soldier saw that there was no dealing with these three wretches, he resumed, "Since you are so desperately determined, here is my third and last penny. Take it, and be content." Now all three were well satisfied, so they pursued their way with the three pennies in their pockets. When the soldier had advanced a distance, a stranger came walking along. He looked rather pale, but saluted the soldier in a very civil manner, and followed him along the road without uttering a single sound. At last they reached a church, and here the stranger turned to his companion, saying, "Let us walk in!" The soldier looked wistfully at him, and answered, "That would not do. What business have we in the church at midnight?" "I tell you," replied the stranger, "we must walk in!" Upon this they entered the church and walked straight up to the altar. There was an old woman sitting with a burning light in her hand. "Take a hair from her head, and smell at it!" commanded the stranger. The soldier complied, but nothing remarkable happened. The stranger asked him to repeat the action, which he did; but there was no effect. The third time, however, when he tore a whole tuft of hair from the woman's head, she became so furious that she darted off, out above the church, carrying the whole leaden vault with her. The two men went out of the church and down to the beach, where they found the whole leaden vault. Turning to the soldier, the stranger said, "Sit up. We will put to sea!" "Is that so?" remarked the soldier, who understood nothing of all this. "I see no ship, however." "Let me manage it all," says the stranger. "Just seat yourself by me on the vault! Beyond the sea there is a princess of whom it was predicted that she would be married only to a man who should come across the sea in a leaden ship. Here you will be able to make your fortune." The leaden vault now floated out upon the open sea, and landed them safely on the other side. Great was the joy and happiness throughout the country, and the marriage between the soldier and the princess was celebrated with such pomp and splendor as was never seen, before or after. When the ceremony had been performed, and the carriage was standing in front of the church door, bride and groom entered, with the stranger who had followed the soldier all along. The coachman asked to what place he might drive them. "Drive away, as fast as you can, towards the side where the sun will rise," said the stranger, and in a little while they were carried along at a furious rate. Somewhere they saw a large herd of cattle. They stopped, and the soldier called the herdsman to the carriage door, asking who he was. "I am the Count of Ravensburg," answered the shepherd, "and yonder is my castle." The stranger again bid the coachman drive as fast as possible. In a little while they rushed up to Ravensburg Castle. As they were ready to alight from the carriage, there was someone who knocked hard at the gate. It was the herdsman, who was anxious to come in. The stranger walked to the gate, inquiring what, he could do for him. He wished to come into the castle, he said, for it belonged to him, and he had a right to demand admittance. The stranger meditated a little, whereupon he told the herdsman, who was a conjurer, that he might be allowed to come in, but first he must suffer the whole fate of the rye. "The fate of the rye!" repeated the conjurer. "What do you mean by that?" "I mean," answered the stranger, "that next fall you must be sown deep in the ground, and towards spring, when you come up, you must ripen in the sunshine and grow in the rain until you are ready for the harvest. Then you will be mowed and dried, and kept in the barn, until at length you will be threshed." "How is that!" cried the conjurer. "Am I to be threshed?" "Of course you are," replied the stranger. "First you will be threshed, and then taken to the mill and ground." "Ground, too!" shouted the conjurer. "Will I be ground also?" "Yes, both ground and sifted," answered the stranger. But the conjurer, hearing this, became so furious that he burst all into flint-stones. The stranger now bid good-bye to the princess and the soldier, shook hands with them, and said, "Now I have seen you married to the princess. The troll of Ravensburg is dead and gone, and his castle, with all its treasures, is yours. I was as good to you as you were to me when you gave away your three pennies for my sake!" "What do you say?" exclaimed the soldier. "I never thought of those three pennies again!" "I know that," answered the stranger, "and otherwise I would not have been able to help you. However, I bid farewell to you and your, wife, for I must return to the place where I belong." Source: J. Christian Bay, Danish Fairy and Folk Tales (New York and London: Harper and Brothers Publishers, 1899), pp. 23-27 . Bay's source appears to have been Svend Grundtvig, "De tre Mark," Gamle danske Minder i Folkemunde: Folkeæventyr, Folkeviser, Folkesagn og andre Rester af Fortidens Dictnung og Tro (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversens Forlag, 1855), pp. 105-108 . Return to the table of contents . Links to Additional Stories Links open in new windows. Most links lead to volumes in the digital library books.google.com . Andersen, Hans Christian. Reisekammeraten (1835). This link leads to a Danish-language site sponsored by Det Kongelige Bibliotek . Andersen, Hans Christian. The Travelling Companion . Andersen, Hans Christian. The Travelling Companions [sic]. In Fairy Tales from Hans Christian Andersen , pp. 361-78. London: J. M. Dent and Co., 1907. Asbjørnsen, Peter Christen. The Companion . In Tales from the Fjeld: A Second Series of Popular Tales , pp. 71-88. Translated by G. W. Dasent. London: Chapman and Hall, 1874. Campbell, J. F. The Barra Widow's Son . In Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 2, pp. 110-2.1 Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860. Crane, Thomas Frederick. Fair Brow . In Italian Popular Tales , no. 35, pp. 131-36. Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1885. Curtin, Jeremiah. Shaking Head . A Forgotten Books electronic publication. This story originally appeared in Myths and Folk-Lore of Ireland , pp. 186-203. Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1890. Gale, James S. The Grateful Ghost . In Korean Folk Tales Imps, Ghosts and Fairies Translated from the Korean of Im Bang and Yi Ryuk , no. 18, pp. 80-82. London: J. M. Dent & Sons, Ltd. New York: E. P. Dutton & Co., 1913. Gerould, Gordon Hall. The Grateful Dead: The History of a Folk Story . London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1908. Groome, Francis Hindes. The Dead Man's Gratitude [Turkish-Gypsy]. In Gypsy Folk-Tales , pp. 1-4. London: Hurst and Blackett, Limited, 1899. Grundtvig, Svend. De tre Mark . In Gamle danske Minder i Folkemunde: Folkeæventyr, Folkeviser, Folkesagn og andre Rester af Fortidens Dictnung og Tro , pp. 105-108. Copenhagen: C. G. Iversens Forlag, 1855. Grundtvig, Svend. The Three Pennies . In J. Christian Bay, Danish Fairy and Folk Tales , translated by J. Christian Bay, pp. 23-27. New York and London: Harper and Brothers Publishers, 1899. Kennedy, Patrick. Jack the Master and Jack the Servant . In Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts , pp. 32-39. London: Macmillan and Co., 1866. Lorimer, D. L. R. and E. O. The Story of the Grateful Corpse . In Persian Tales , pp. 169-75. London: Macmillan and Co., 1919. MacManus, Seumas. The Snow, the Crow, and the Blood . In Donegal Fairy Stories , pp. 153-74. New York: McClure, Phillips, and Co., 1900. Spence, Lewis. The Man of Honour . In Legends and Romances of Brittany , pp. 147-55. New York: Frederick A. Stokes Co., [1917] Straparola, Giovanni Francesco (or Gianfrancesco). Night 11, Fable 2 . In The Facetious Nights of Straparola , translated by W. G. Waters, vol. 4, pp. 19-39. London: Privately Printed for Members of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901. Tobit. Article in Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia about The Book of Tobit , a scriptural account with parallels to the "grateful dead" folktales. Wolf, Johann Wilhelm. Des Todten Dank . In Deutsche Hausmärchen , pp. 243-50. Göttingen: Dieterich'sche Buchhandlung, 1851. Wratislaw, Albert Henry. The Spirit of a Buried Man . In Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources , pp. 121- 25. London: Elliot Stock, 1889. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 19, 2013. Greed Greed folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 68A edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2001-2009 Contents The Boy and the Filberts (Aesop). Capturing Monkeys (India). The Greedy Monkey (Pakistan). The Monkey and the Nuts (USA, Ambrose Bierce). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Boy and the Filberts Aesop A boy put his hand into a jar of filberts and grasped as many as his fist could possibly hold. But when he tried to pull it out again, he found he couldn't do so, for the neck of the jar was too small to allow of the passage of so large a handful. Unwilling to lose his nuts but unable to withdraw his hand, he burst into tears. A bystander, who saw where the trouble lay, said to him, "Come, my boy, don't be so greedy. Be content with half the amount, and you'll be able to get your hand out without difficulty." Do not attempt too much at once. Source: Æsop's Fables , translated by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: W. Heinemann, 1912), p. 61. Return to the table of contents . Capturing Monkeys India The mango trees [at Muddunpillay] were the resort of a great colony of monkeys, and we were told that the natives had caught many of them by placing on the ground coconuts in which holes had been cut, and which they had half filled with grain. These holes were only just large enough to admit the monkey's open hand. It was said that when Jockoo had grasped a good fistful of grain and could not withdraw it, the natives rushed out from an ambush close by, threw a cumbly (native blanket) over his head, and captured him, as he could not draw out his fist full , and would not let go his lawful prize of grain! This is the story as told to us; but, in the interests of my veracity, I must say that we did not ourselves see the thing done. Source: Edmund Francis Burton, Reminiscences of Sport in India (London: W. H. Allen and Company, 1885), p. 123 . Return to the table of contents . The Greedy Monkey Pakistan Once upon a time a monkey noticed some wheat which had fallen into a small hollow in a rock. Thrusting in his hand, he filled it with the grain, but the entrance was so narrow that he was unable to draw it out without relinquishing most of his prize. This, however, he was unwilling to do, greedily desiring to have it all. So the consequence was that he remained without any, and finally went hungry away. Source: Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 4, p. 7 . Return to the table of contents . The Monkey and the Nuts USA, Ambrose Bierce A certain city desiring to purchase a site for a public deformatory procured an appropriation from the government of the country. Deeming this insufficient for purchase of the site and payment of reasonable commissions to themselves, the men in charge of the matter asked for a larger sum, which was readily given. Believing that the fountain could not be dipped dry, they applied for still more and more yet. Wearied at last by their importunities, the government said it would be damned if it gave anything. So it gave nothing and was damned all the harder. Source: Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), pp. 193-94 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised July 5, 2009. Grimm Brothers' Home Page Grimm Brothers' Home Page compiled by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2013 Contents Chronology of their life . What they wrote . Major joint publications of the "Brothers Grimm" . Major individual works of Jacob Grimm . Major individual works of Wilhelm Grimm . The Grimms' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms Fairy Tales) compiled, translated, and classified by D. L. Ashliman. (This is a separate file, and opens in a new window.) Grimms' Fairy Tales in English , an Internet bibliography. (This is a separate file, and opens in a new window.) Links to external sites relating to the Brothers Grimm General . Studies of specific tales . Electronic texts of the Grimms' tales and legends. Journals and Encyclopedias. Web sites associated with academic journals and reference works that often include articles about the Grimms' tales. Return to: The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales) compiled, translated, and classified by D. L. Ashliman. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Folk and Fairy Tales: Web Site Links . Germanic Myths, Legends, and Sagas . Chronology of their life 1785 . Jacob Ludwig Carl Grimm is born January 4, 1785, in Hanau, Germany, son of Philipp Wilhelm Grimm (a lawyer and court official) and his wife Dorothea Grimm, née Zimmer. 1786 . Wilhelm Carl Grimm is born February 24, 1786, in Hanau, Germany, son of Philipp Wilhelm Grimm and Dorothea Grimm. The children of Philipp Wilhelm Grimm and Dorothea Grimm Friedrich Hermann Georg Grimm (1783-1784) Jacob Ludwig Carl Grimm (1785-1863) Wilhelm Carl Grimm (1786-1859) Carl Friedrich Grimm (1787-1852) Ferdinand Philipp Grimm (1788-1844) Ludwig Emil Grimm (1790-1863) Friedrich Grimm (1791-1792) Charlotte (Lotte) Amalie Hassenpflug, neé Grimm (1793-1833) Georg Eduard Grimm (1794-1795) 1791. The Grimm family moves to Steinau. 1796 . Philipp Wilhelm Grimm, father of eight Grimm brothers and one Grimm sister, dies January 10, 1796, at the age of 44. Three of his nine children have preceded him in death. His oldest surviving child, Jacob, is 11 years old. 1798 . Jacob and Wilhelm move to Kassel, their mother's home city, to enter secondary school. The 13 and 14 year old boys will live with an aunt. 1802 . Jacob begins his study of law at the University of Marburg. 1803 . Wilhelm begins his study of law at the University of Marburg. 1806 . Jacob and Wilhelm, influenced by the folk poetry collection of Clemens Brentano and Achim von Arnim, Des Knaben Wunderhorn , begin to collect folktales ( Märchen ). 1808 . Dorothea Grimm, mother of eight Grimm brothers and one Grimm sister, dies May 27, 1808, at the age of 52. In order to support his younger brothers and sister, Jacob takes a position as a librarian at Kassel. Wilhelm will follow soon. 1812 . The Grimm brothers publish volume one of Kinder- und Hausmärchen ( Children' and Household Tales -- commonly known as Grimms' Fairy Tales ), an unpretentious book containing 86 numbered folktales. 1814 . Volume two of Kinder- und Hausmärchen appears in print, pre-dated 1815, adding 70 stories to the previous collection. This famous work will see six additional editions during the Grimms' lifetime. In its final version it will contain 200 numbered stories plus 10 "Children's Legends." It is destined to become the best known and most influential book ever created in the German language. 1816, 1818 . The Grimms publish two volumes of Deutsche Sagen , a collection totalling 585 German legends. 1819 . Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm receive honorary doctorates from the University of Marburg. Their scholarly work on linguistics, folklore, and medieval studies continues, resulting in many publications. 1825 . Wilhelm Grimm marries Henriette Dorothea (Dortchen) Wild, who -- together with other members of her family -- had provided the Jacob and Wilhelm with many of their best folktale texts. 1829-1830 . The Grimms resign their positions as librarians in Kassel and accept positions at the University of Göttingen as librarians and professors. 1837-1841 . Professors Grimm join five of their university colleagues in a formal protest against a constitutional violation of Ernst August, King of Hannover. The seven professors (Die Göttinger Sieben) are fired. The Grimm brothers receive many offers for new positions, and finally accept appointments at the University of Berlin. 1842-1852 . The Grimms continue their scholarly work and political activities, but finally give up their formal appointments at the University of Berlin (Jacob in 1848, Wilhelm in 1852) in order to dedicate themselves to their own studies and research. 1859 . Wilhelm Grimm dies December 16, 1859, at the age of 73. 1863 . Jacob Grimm dies September 20, 1863, at the age of 78. Return to the table of contents . What they wrote In addition to the works listed below, the Grimms (especially Jacob) wrote many substantive articles, reviews, forewords, and chapters, and published numerous editions and translations. Their achievements as pioneering folklorists, linguists, and medievalists are astounding by any measure. Major joint publications of the "Brothers Grimm" The Grimms' first collection of folktales was not published during their lifetime. It was a manuscript containing 53 stories, some written out in detail, others sketched in brief outline form. In December 1810 they submitted this collection to Clemens Brentano and Achim von Arnim for inclusion in a planned third volume to their successful collection of folk poetry entitled Des Knaben Wunderhorn (The Boy's Magic Horn, 3 volumes, 1806, 1808, 1808), which was to be dedicated to folktales. This fairy-tale volume never materialized, and the manuscript was not returned to its authors, but the Grimms' interest in collecting and editing folklore did not die. In 1812 they came out with their own fairy-tale collection. Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales), vol. 1, 1812; vol. 2, 1814 (pre-dated 1815). The standard abbreviation for the collection is KHM , from the German title. 2nd edition, 1819. volume 3, Anmerkungen (Commentary), 1822. 3rd edition, 1837. 4th edition, 1840. 5th edition, 1843. 6th edition, 1850. 7th edition, 1857. This final version is the basis for most editions and translations published after the Grimms' death. Scanned text of volume 1 (books.google.com): Kinder und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm . Erster Band. Große Ausgabe. Siebente Auflage. Göttingen. Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung. 1857 . This volume contains stories 1-86. Scanned text of volume 2 (books.google.com): Kinder und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm . Zweiter Band. Große Ausgabe. Siebente Auflage. Göttingen. Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung. 1857 . This volume contains storis 87-200 plus Kinderlegenden (Children's Legends) 1-10. Altdeutsche Wälder (Old German Forests), 3 volumes, 1813, 1815, 1816. Miscellaneous writings on linguistics, folklore, and medieval studies. Der arme Heinrich von Hartmann von der Aue (Poor Heinrich by Harmann von der Aue), 1815. An edition with commentary of an important medieval German epic. Lieder der alten Edda (Lays from the Elder Edda), 1815. Deutsche Sagen (German Legends), 2 volumes, 1816, 1818. Scanned text of volume 1 (books.google.com): Deutsche Sagen . Herausgegeben von den Brüdern Grimm. Berlin. In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung. 1816 . This volume contains legends 1-362. Please note that the numbering here varies somewhat from that in later editions. Scanned text of volume 2 (books.google.com): Deutsche Sagen . Herausgegeben von den Brüdern Grimm. Zweiter Theil. Berlin. In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung. 1818 . This volume contains legends 363-448. Please note that the numbering here varies somewhat from that in later editions. Irische Elfenmärchen (Irish Fairy Tales), 1826. This is a translation, with a long and insightful introductory essay, of Thomas Crofton Croker's book Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland (London, 1825). Deutsches Wörterbuch (German Dictionary), 32 volumes, 1852-1960. The Grimms themselves saw only the entries A through Forsche of this monumental historical dictionary published during their lifetime. The remaining parts were published by several generations of scholars over a 100 year span. Return to the table of contents . Major individual works of Jacob Grimm Deutsche Grammatik (German Grammar), 4 volumes, 1819, 1826, 1831, 1837. Deutsche Rechtsaltertümer (German Legal Antiquities), 1828. 2nd edition, 1854. Deutsche Mythologie (German Mythology -- also translated as Teutonic Mythology), 1835. 2nd edition, 2 volumes, 1844. 3rd edition, 1854. Geschichte der deutschen Sprache (History of the German Language), 2 volumes, 1848. 2nd edition, 1853. Return to the table of contents . Major individual works of Wilhelm Grimm Altdänische Heldenlieder, Balladen und Märchen (Old Danish Heroic Lays, Ballads, and Folktales), 1811. A translation. Über deutsche Runen (On German Runes), 1821. Die deutsche Heldensage (The German Heroic Legend), 1829. Return to the table of contents . Links to external sites relating to the Grimm Brothers General English-language sites Brothers Grimm from Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia . National Geographic's Grimms' Fairy Tales: From Folklore to Forever . German-language sites Brüder Grimm from Wikipedia, die freie Enzyklopädie . Brüder Grimm-Museum Kassel , home page of the Museum of the Brothers Grimm, sponsored by the Brüder Grimm Gesellschaft. Kassel, die Hauptstadt der "Deutschen Märchenstraße" , where the Grimms lived and worked from 1798 until 1830, and where they produced their best-known works. Deutsche Märchenstraße . A tourist route in Germany connecting the principal cities associated with the Grimms and their tales. Brüder Grimm , articles about the Grimm brothers sponsored by Hanau, Germany, the city of their birth. Return to the table of contents . Studies of specific tales The number preceding each title represents the tale's KHM number, i.e., the tale's number in the Grimms' final edition (1857) of their Kinder- und Hausmärchen . 1. The Frog King; or, Iron Henry (Der Froschkönig oder der eiserne Heinrich) The Frog King or Iron Heinrich by the Brothers Grimm . A comparison of the versions of 1812 and 1857. Frog Kings . Folktales about slimy suitors from around the world. Der Froschkönig oder der eiserne Heinrich von den Brüdern Grimm . Ein Vergleich der Fassungen von 1812 und 1857. 2. Cat and Mouse in Partnership (Katze und Maus in Gesellschaft) Cat and Mouse . Fables about cats and mice. 21. Cinderella (Aschenputtel) Cinderella . Aarne-Thompson-Uther folktale type 510A and related stories of persecuted heroines translated. Cinderella Stories . From the Children's Literature Web Guide of David K. Brown, University of Calgary. 26. Little Red-Cap (Rotkäppchen) Little Red Riding Hood and other tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 333. 27. The Bremen Town Musicians (Die Bremer Stadtmusikanten) Animals in Exile : Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 130. 28. The Singing Bone (Der singende Knochen) The Singing Bone and other tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 780. 38. Mrs. Fox's Wedding (Die Hochzeit der Frau Füchsin) Widows in (Short-Lived) Mourning . Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 65, 1350, 1352*, and 1510. 39. The Elves (Die Wichtelmänner) Midwife (or Godparent) for the Elves : Fairy tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 476* and migratory legends of Christiansen type 5070. Changelings . 42. The Godfather (Der Herr Gevatter) Godfather Death . 43. Frau Trude Witchcraft Legends . 44. Godfather Death (Der Gevatter Tod) Godfather Death . 46. Fitcher's Bird (Fitchers Vogel) How the Devil Married Three Sisters and Other Type 311 Tales . 48. Old Sultan (Der alte Sultan) Old Dogs Learn New Tricks , fables of type 101. 50. Little Briar-Rose (Dornröschen) Sleeping Beauty , folktales of type 410. 52. King Thrushbeard (K&oumlnig Drosselbart) Taming a Shrewish Wife , folktales of type 900. 53. Little Snow-White (Sneewittchen) Snow White and other tales of type 709 Snow White by Kay E. Vandergrift, Rutgers University. Death of the Seven Dwarfs , a folk legend from Switzerland with an ending quite different from that of the familiar fairy tale by the Grimm brothers. 55. Rumpelstiltskin (Rumpelstilzchen) Rumpelstilzchen , ein Vergleich der Fassungen von 1810, 1812 und 1819. The Name of the Helper . Folktales of type 500, and related tales, in which a mysterious and threatening helper is defeated when the hero or heroine discovers his name. 63. The Three Feathers (Die drei Federn) Animal Brides . Folktales of type 402. 65. All-Kinds-of-Fur (Allerleirauh) The Father Who Wanted to Marry His Daughter : Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 510B. Incest in Indo-European Folktales . 66. The Hare's Bride (Häsichenbraut) How the Devil Married Three Sisters and Other Type 311 Tales . 88. The Singing, Springing Lark (Das singende springende Löweneckerchen) Beauty and the Beast . Tales of type 425C. 101. Bearskin (Der Bärenhäuter) Bearskin and other tales of type 361. 106. The Poor Miller's Boy and the Cat (Der arme Müllerbursch und das Kätzchen) Animal Brides. Folktales of type 402. 108. Hans-My-Hedgehog (Hans mein Igel) Hog Bridegrooms . Tales of type 441, in which a beautiful maiden is forced to marry a hog or a hedgehog. 110. The Jew in the Thorns (Der Jude im Dorn) Anti-Semitic Legends . 116. The Blue Light (Das blaue Licht) The Blue Light . A comparison of the versions of 1815 and 1857. The Blue Light: Folktales of Type 562 . 117. The Willful Child (Das eigensinnige Kind) The Hand from the Grave . Folktales and legends of type 779. 179. The Goose-Girl at the Well (Die Gänsehirtin am Brunnen) Love Like Salt . Folktales of types 923 and 510. 182. The Little Folks' Presents (Die Geschenke des kleinen Volkes) Fairy Gifts . Folktales and legends of type 503. 187. The Hare and the Hedgehog (Der Hase und der Igel) The Tortoise and the Hare and Other Races between Unequal Contestants . Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 275A, 275A*, and 1074. Return to the table of contents . Electronic texts of the Grimms' tales and legends English-language sites The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales) , compiled, translated, and classified by D.L. Ashliman, University of Pittsburgh. Tales Collected by the Brothers Grimm , based on Margaret Hunt's translation. A project directed by William Barker, Memorial University of Newfoundland. Fairy Tales by the Grimm Brothers . This site includes both German and English versions of selected fairy tales, along with illustrations from 19th-century editions. Presented by Robert Godwin-Jones, Virginia Commonwealth University. Household Tales . A selection of 42 tales from the Harvard Classics, vol. 17, part 2. This site is part of Great Books Online from bartleby.com. German-language sites Jacob und Wilhelm Grimm: Märchen . Carefully edited texts, including the first edition of 1812/15 and the final edition of 1857, sponsored by Zeno.org. Kinder- und Hausmärchen (1812/15) . Kinder- und Hausmärchen (1857) . Jacob und Wilhelm Grimm: Sagen . Carefully edited texts, based on the third edtion of 1891. Märchen der Brüder Grimm , edited by Kurt Derungs. This site is part of the Märchenlexikon sponsored by edition amalia . It includes German-language texts of most of the tales, plus information about the Grimms' sources and the tales' Aarne-Thompson-Uther type numbers. Brüder Grimm: Irische Elfenmärchen . The Grimm brothers' translation of Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland by Thomas Crofton Croker. These texts are sponsored by Projekt Gutenberg-DE, die digitale Bibliothek . Projekt Gutenberg-DE also offers the Grimm brothers' Kinder- und Hausmärchen and Deutsche Sagen , but the versions by Zeno.org are much more reliable. Sagen der Brüder Grimm , edited by Kurt Derungs. This site is part of the Märchenlexikon sponsored by edition amalia . It includes German-language texts of most of the legends, arranged in alphabetical order. Journals and Encylopedias The following journals and reference works often include articles about the Grimm brothers. Fabula: Zeitschrift für Erzählforschung/Journal of Folktale Studies/Revue d'Etudes sur le Conte Populaire , edited by Rolf Wilhelm Brednich and Ulrich Marzolph. Marvels & Tales: Journal of Fairy-Tale Studies , edited by Donald Haase (Wayne State University). Enzyklopädie des Märchens. The web site (in the German language) of the leading reference work dedicated to the study of folk and fairy tales. The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Folktales and Fairy Tales , edited by Donald Haase. Westport, Connecticut; London: Greenwood Press, 2008. Return to: Table of Contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Folk and Fairy Tales: Web Site Links . Germanic Myths, Legends, and Sagas . Revised October 1, 2013. Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales) The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales) compiled, translated, and classified by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2020 Return to: Grimm Brothers Home Page . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Indo-European Folk and Fairy Tale Links. No . English Title German Title Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type Type titles not given resemble the tales' titles 1 The Frog King, or Iron Heinrich Der Froschkönig oder der eiserne Heinrich Type 440 2 Cat and Mouse in Partnership Katze und Maus in Gesellschaft Type 15, Stealing the Partner's Butter 3 Mary's Child Marienkind Type 710 4 The Story of a Boy Who Went Forth to Learn Fear Märchen von einem, der auszog das Fürchten zu lernen Type 326 5 The Wolf and the Seven Young Kids Der Wolf und die sieben jungen Geißlein Type 123 6 Faithful Johannes Der treue Johannes Type 516 7 The Good Bargain Der gute Handel Type 1642. Includes an episode of type 1610, Sharing Strokes with the King's Guard 8 The Strange Musician Der wunderliche Spielmann Type 151, Music Lessons for Wild Animals. Cf. type 1159, Catching the Would-Be Musician in a Crack 9 The Twelve Brothers Die zwölf Brüder Type 451, The Brothers Who Were Turned into Birds 10 The Pack of Scoundrels Das Lumpengesindel Type 210, The Traveling Animals and the Wicked Man 11 Little Brother and Little Sister Brüderchen und Schwesterchen Type 450 12 Rapunzel Rapunzel Type 310, The Maiden in the Tower 13 The Three Little Men in the Woods Die drei Männlein im Walde Type 403B, The Black and the White Bride. Includes an episode of type 480, The Kind and the Unkind Girls 14 The Three Spinning Women Die drei Spinnerinnen Type 501 15 Hansel and Gretel Hänsel und Gretel Type 327A. Includes an episode of type 1121, Burning the Witch in Her Own Oven 16 The Three Snake-Leaves Die drei Schlangenblätter Type 612 17 The White Snake Die weiße Schlange Type 673. Includes an episode of type 554, The Grateful Animals 18 Straw, Coal, and Bean Strohhalm, Kohle und Bohne Type 295 19 The Fisherman and His Wife Von dem Fischer un syner Fru Type 555 20 The Brave Little Tailor Das tapfere Schneiderlein Type 1640. Includes episodes of type 1060, Squeezing Water from a Stone; type 1062, A Contest in Throwing Stones; type 1052, A Contest in Carrying a Tree; type 1051, Springing with a Bent Tree; type 1115, Attempting to Kill the Hero in His Bed 21 Cinderella Aschenputtel Type 510A 22 The Riddle Das Rätsel Type 851, Winning the Princess with a Riddle 23 The Mouse, the Bird, and the Sausage Von dem Mäuschen, Vögelchen und der Bratwurst Type 85 24 Frau Holle Frau Holle Type 480, The Kind and the Unkind Girls 25 The Seven Ravens Die sieben Raben Type 451, The Brothers Who Were Turned into Birds 26 Little Red Cap Rotkäppchen Type 333, Red Riding Hood 27 The Bremen Town Musicians Die Bremer Stadtmusikanten Type 130, Outcast Animals Find a New Home 28 The Singing Bone Der singende Knochen Type 780 29 The Devil with the Three Golden Hairs Der Teufel mit den drei goldenen Haaren Type 461, Three Hairs from the Devil; type 930, The Prophecy That a Poor Boy Will Marry a Rich Girl 30 Little Louse and Little Flea Läuschen und Flöhchen Type 2022, An Animal Mourns the Death of a Spouse 31 The Girl without Hands Das Mädchen ohne Hände Type 706 32 Clever Hans Der gescheite Hans Type 1696, What Should I Have Said (or Done)? 33 The Three Languages Die drei Sprachen Type 671 34 Clever Elsie Die kluge Else Type 1450. Ends with an episode of type 1383, A Woman Does Not Know Herself 35 The Tailor in Heaven Der Schneider im Himmel Type 800 36 Table-Be-Set, Gold-Donkey, and Cudgel-out-of-the-Sack Tischchendeckdich, Goldesel und Knüppel aus dem Sack Type 563, introduced by type 212, The Goat That Lied 37 Thumbthick Daumesdick Type 700, Tom Thumb. Includes an episode of type 41, Overeating in the Pantry 38 Mrs. Fox's Wedding Die Hochzeit der Frau Füchsin Two tales. Type 65, Mrs. Fox's Suitors. 39 The Elves Die Wichtelmänner Three tales. Tale one: type 503*, Helpful Elves . Also categorized as a migratory legend, type 7015. Tale two: type 476*, A Midwife (or Godmother) for the Elves. Also categorized as a migratory legend, type 5070. Tale three: migratory legend, type 5085, The Changeling. 40 The Robber Bridegroom Der Räuberbräutigam Type 955 41 Herr Korbes Herr Korbes Type 210, The Traveling Animals and the Wicked Man 42 The Godfather Der Herr Gevatter Type 332, Godfather Death 43 Frau Trude Frau Trude Type 334, At the Witch's House 44 Godfather Death Der Gevatter Tod Type 332 45 Thumbling's Travels Type 700, Tom Thumb 46 Fitcher's Bird Fitchers Vogel Type 311, The Heroine Rescues Herself and Her Sisters. Similar to type 312, Bluebeard 47 The Juniper Tree Von dem Machandelboom Type 720, My Mother Killed Me; My Father Ate Me 48 Old Sultan Der alte Sultan Type 101, The Old Dog Rescues the Child. Concludes with an episode of type 103, Wild Animals Hide from an Unfamiliar Animal , and of type 104, War between the Village Animals and the Forest Animals 49 The Six Swans Die sechs Schwäne Type 451, The Brothers Who Were Turned into Birds 50 Little Brier-Rose Dornröschen Type 410, Sleeping Beauty 51 Foundling-Bird Fundevogel Type 313, The Girl Helps the Hero Flee 52 King Thrushbeard König Drosselbart Type 900 53 Little Snow-White Sneewittchen Type 709 54 The Knapsack, the Hat, and the Horn Der Ranzen, das Hütlein und das Hörnlein Type 569 54a Hans Dumb Hans Dumm Type 675. This tale was included only in the first edition. 55 Rumpelstiltskin Rumpelstilzchen Type 500, Guessing the Helper's Name 56 Sweetheart Roland Der Liebste Roland Type 1119, Ogres Kill Their Own Children, followed by type 313, The Girl Helps the Hero Flee; the Forgotten Fiancée 57 The Golden Bird Der goldene Vogel Type 550 58 The Dog and the Sparrow Der Hund und der Sperling Type 248, The Man, the Dog, and the Bird 59 Freddy and Katy Lizzy Der Frieder und das Catherlieschen Types 1387, A Woman Draws Beer in the Cellar; 1385*, A Woman Loses Her Husband's Money; 1291B, A Fool Greeses the Cracked Earth with Butter; 1291, Sending One Cheese After Another; 1653A, Securing the Door; 1653, The Robbers under the Tree; 1383, A Woman Does Not Know Herself; 1791, Dividing Up the Dead 60 The Two Brothers Die zwei Brüder Type 567A, The Magic Bird Heart; followed by type 303, The Blood Brothers. Includes an episode of type 300, The Dragon Slayer 61 The Little Peasant Das Bürle Type 1535, The Rich Peasant and the Poor Peasant . Includes an episode of type 1737, Trading Places with the Trickster in a Sack. Similar to type 1539, Tricksters and Their Victims 62 The Queen Bee Die Bienenkönigin Type 554, The Grateful Animals 63 The Three Feathers Die drei Federn Type 402, The Animal Bride 64 The Golden Goose Die goldene Gans Type 571, All Stick Together, plus an episode of type 513B, The Land and Water Ship 65 All-Kinds-Of-Fur Allerleirauh Type 510B, A King Tries to Marry His Daughter 66 The Hare's Bride Häsichenbraut Type 311, The Heroine Rescues Herself and Her Sisters 67 The Twelve Huntsmen Die zwölf Jäger Type 884, The Forsaken Fiancée 68 The Thief and His Master De Gaudeif un sien Meester Type 325, The Magician and His Pupil 69 Jorinde and Joringel Jorinde und Joringel Type 405 70 The Three Children of Fortune Die drei Glückskinder Type 1650, Three Brothers Inherit a Rooster, a Scythe, and a Cat. Includes episodes of types 1202, Harvesting Grain with a Cannon; 1651, Dick Whittington and His Cat; and 1281, Burning the Barn to Destroy an Unknown Animal 71 How Six Men Got On in the World Sechse kommen durch die ganze Welt Type 513A 72 The Wolf and the Man Der Wolf und der Mensch Type 157, Learning to Fear Man 73 The Wolf and the Fox Der Wolf und der Fuchs Type 41, Overeating in the Pantry 74 The Fox and His Cousin Der Fuchs und die Frau Gevatterin Type 152A*, The Scalded Wolf, followed by type 4, Getting a Ride by Pretending to Be Injured 75 The Fox and the Cat Der Fuchs und die Katze Type 105, The Cat's Only Trick 76 The Carnation Die Nelke Type 652, The Boy Whose Wishes Always Come True 77 Clever Gretel Das kluge Gretel Type 1741, The Guest Flees to Save His Ears 78 The Old Grandfather and His Grandson Der alte Großvater und der Enkel Type 980, The Ungrateful Son 79 The Water Nixie Die Wassernixe Type 313, The Girl Helps the Hero Flee 80 The Death of the Little Hen Von dem Tode des Hühnchens Type 2021. Includes an episode of type 2021A The Cock Seeks Help for the Choking Hen 81 Brother Merry Bruder Lustig Includes episodes of type 785, Who Ate the Lamb's Heart?; type 753A, The Unsuccessful Resuscitation; type 330B, The Devil in the Sack; type 330*, Entering Heaven by a Trick; 82 Gambling Hansel De Spielhansl Type 330A, The Smith's Three Wishes 83 Hans in Luck Hans im Glück Type 1415 84 Hans Gets Married Hans heiratet Types 859B, The Penniless Wooer: Money in Hand, and 859A, The Penniless Wooer: Patch of Land 85 The Gold-Children Die Goldkinder Type 555, The Fisherman and His Wife, followed by type 303, Blood Brothers 86 The Fox and the Geese Der Fuchs und die Gänse Type 227, The Geese's Eternal Prayer 87 The Poor Man and the Rich Man Der Arme und der Reiche Type 750A, Good Wishes and Foolish Wishes 88 The Singing, Springing Lark Das singende springende Löweneckerchen Type 425C, Beauty and the Beast 89 The Goose-Girl Die Gänsemagd Type 533 90 The Young Giant Der junge Riese Type 650A . Introduced with an episode of type 700, Tom Thumb 91 The Gnome Dat Erdmänneken Type 301A, The Quest for the Vanished Princesses 92 The King of the Golden Mountain Der König vom goldenen Berge Type 401A, The Enchanted Princess in Her Castle. Introduced with an episode of type 810, The Devil Loses a Soul That Was Promised Him. Includes episodes of type 560, The Magic Ring, and type 518, Quarreling Giants Lose Their Magic Objects 93 The Raven Die Rabe Type 401. The Girl Transformed into an Animal. Includes an episode of type 518, Quarreling Giants Lose Their Magic Objects 94 The Peasant's Clever Daughter Die kluge Bauerntochter Type 875 95 Old Hildebrand Der alte Hildebrand Type 1360C 96 The Three Little Birds De drei Vügelkens Type 707, The Dancing Water, the Singing Apple, and the Speaking Bird 97 The Water of Life Das Wasser des Lebens Type 551 98 Dr. Know-All Doktor Allwissend Type 1641 99 The Spirit in the Glass Bottle Der Geist im Glas Type 331 100 The Devil's Sooty Brother Des Teufels rußiger Bruder Type 475, Heating Hell's Kitchen 101 Bearskin Der Bärenhäuter Type 361 102 The Wren and the Bear Der Zaunkönig und der Bär Type 222, The War between the Birds and the Beasts 103 Sweet Porridge Der süße Brei Type 565, The Magic Mill 104 The Clever People Die klugen Leute Type 1384, A Man Seeks Someone as Stupid as His Wife. Includes episodes of type 1385, A Woman Accepts Her Own Cow as Security, and type 1540, The Man from Paradise 105 Tales of the Toad Märchen von der Unke Three tales. Tale 1: type 285, The Child and the Snake. Tale 2: type 672B, The Toad's Crown. Tale 3: type 2075 Imitating Animal Sounds 106 The Poor Miller's Boy and the Cat Der arme Müllerbursch und das Kätzchen Type 402, The Animal Bride 107 The Two Travelers Die beiden Wanderer Type 613, followed by type 554, The Grateful Animals 108 Hans-My-Hedgehog Hans mein Igel Type 441 109 The Burial Shirt (The Little Shroud) Das Totenhemdchen Type 769 110 The Jew in the Thorns Der Jude im Dorn Type 592, Dancing in Thorns 111 The Trained Huntsman Der gelernte Jäger Type 304 112 The Threshing-Flail from Heaven Der Dreschflegel vom Himmel A combination of types 1960A, The Giant Animal; 1960G, The Giant Plant; and 1889K , A Rope Made of Chaff 113 The Two Kings' Children De beiden Künigeskinner Type 313, The Girl Helps the Hero Flee; the Forgotten Fiancée 114 The Clever Little Tailor Vom klugen Schneiderlein An expurgated version of type 850, The Princess's Birthmarks. Includes episodes of type 1061, Biting Stones and 1159, Catching the Would-Be Musician in a Crack (expurgated) 115 The Bright Sun Will Bring It to Light Die klare Sonne bringt's an den Tag Type 960, The Sun Brings All to Light 116 The Blue Light Das blaue Licht Type 562, The Spirit in the Blue Light 117 The Willful Child Das eigensinnige Kind Type 779, Divine Rewards and Punishments 118 The Three Army Surgeons Die drei Feldscherer Type 660, The Three Doctors 119 The Seven Swabians Die sieben Schwaben Several episodes, mostly of type 1321, Fools Are Frightened. One episode is type 1231, Planning the Attack on a Hare. Conclusion belongs to type 1297*, Fools Walk into a River and Drown 120 The Three Journeymen Die drei Handwerksburschen Type 360, The Three Apprentices and the Devil. Similar to type 1697, We Three, for Money 121 The King's Son Who Is Afraid of Nothing Der Königssohn, der sich vor nichts fürchtet Type 590, The Magic Belt; and type 401A, The Enchanted Princess in Her Castle 122 The Cabbage-Donkey Der Krautesel Type 567, The Magic Bird Heart. Similar to type 566, Fruit That Grows Horns (Fortunatus) 123 The Old Woman in the Woods Die Alte im Wald Type 442 124 The Three Brothers Die drei Brüder Type 654, Which Brother Has the Best Skill? 125 The Devil and His Grandmother Der Teufel und seine Großmutter Type 812, The Devil's Riddle 126 Ferdinand the Faithful and Ferdinand the Unfaithful Ferenand getrü un Ferenand ungetrü Type 531 127 The Iron Stove Der Eisenofen Type 425A, The Animal Bridegroom 128 The Lazy Spinning Woman Die faule Spinnerin Type 1405 129 The Four Skillful Brothers Die vier kunstreichen Brüder Type 653 130 One-Eye, Two-Eyes, and Three-Eyes Einäuglein, Zweiäuglein und Dreiäuglein Type 511 131 Fair Katrinelje and Pif Paf Poltrie Die schöne Katrinelje und Pif Paf Poltrie Type 2019 132 The Fox and the Horse Der Fuchs und das Pferd Type 47A, Catching a Horse by the Tail 133 The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces Die zertanzten Schuhe Type 306, The Danced-Out Shoes 134 The Six Servants Die sechs Diener Type 513A, Six Go through the Whole World 135 The White Bride and the Black Bride Die weiße und die schwarze Braut Type 403A, The Black and the White Bride: The Wishes 136 Iron Hans Der Eisenhans Type 502, The Wild Man as a Helper 137 The Three Black Princesses De drei schwatten Prinzessinnen Similar to type 401A, The Enchanted Princess in Her Castle 138 Knoist and His Three Sons Knoist un sine dre Sühne Type 1965. Includes an episode of type 1963, Sailing in a Bottomless Boat 139 The Girl from Brakel Dat Mäken von Brakel Type 1476A, Praying to the Statue's Mother 140 Household Servants Das Hausgesinde Type 1940, Extraordinary Names 141 The Little Lamb and the Little Fish Das Lämmchen und Fischchen Type 450, Little Brother, Little Sister 142 Simeli Mountain Simeliberg Type 676, Open Sesame 143 Going Traveling Up Reisen gohn Type 1696, What Should I Have Said? 144 The Little Donkey Das Eselein Type 430, The Donkey Bridegroom 145 The Ungrateful Son Der undankbare Sohn Type 980D, A Toad in the Face of an Ungrateful Son 146 The Turnip Die Rübe Types 1960D, The Giant Vegetable; and 1689A, Two Presents for the King. Includes an episode of type 1737, Trading Places with the Trickster in a Sack 147 The Little Old Man Made Young by Fire Das junggeglühte Männlein Type 753, Christ and the Smith 148 The Lord's Animals and the Devil's Des Herrn und des Teufels Getier Unclassified 149 The Rooster Beam Der Hahnenbalken Type 987, False Magician Exposed by Clever Girl . Includes an episode similar to type 1290, A Fool Mistakes a Flax Field for a Lake 150 The Old Beggar Woman Die alte Bettelfrau Unclassified 151 The Three Lazy Ones Die drei Faulen Type 1950, A Contest in Laziness 151* The Twelve Lazy Servants Die zwölf faulen Knechte Type 1950, A Contest in Laziness 152 The Little Shepherd Boy Das Hirtenbüblein Type 922, The King, the Abbot, and the Shepherd 153 The Star Talers Die Sterntaler Type 779, Divine Rewards and Punishments 154 The Stolen Farthing Der gestohlene Heller Type 769, A Child Returns from the Dead 155 Choosing a Bride Die Brautschau Type 1452, Choosing a Bride by How She Cuts Cheese 156 The Hurds Die Schlickerlinge Type 1451, A Suitor Chooses the Thrifty Girl 157 The Sparrow and His Four Children Der Sperling und seine vier Kinder Similar to type 157, Learning to Fear Man 158 The Tale of Cockaigne Das Märchen vom Schlauraffenland Type 1930 159 The Tall Tale from Ditmarsh Das Diethmarsische Lügenmärchen Type 1930, Schlaraffenland 160 A Riddling Tale Rätselmärchen Type 407, The Girl as a Flower 161 Snow-White and Rose-Red Schneeweißchen und Rosenrot Type 426, The Two Girls, the Bear, and the Dwarf 162 The Clever Servant Der kluge Knecht Similar to type 1681B, The Fool as a Housekeeper 163 The Glass Coffin Der gläserne Sarg Type 410, Sleeping Beauty 164 Lazy Heinz Der faule Heinz Type 1430, Air Castles 165 The Griffin Der Vogel Greif Types 610, Fruit to Cure the Princess; 461, Three Hairs from the Devil ; and 570, The Rabbit Herd 166 Strong Hans Der starke Hans Type 650A, The Young Giant; and type 301A, The Quest for the Vanished Princesses 167 The Peasant in Heaven Das Bürle im Himmel Type 802 168 Lean Lisa Die hagere Liese Type 1430, Air Castles . Includes an episode of type 2411, Counting Imagined Wealth . 169 The Hut in the Woods Das Waldhaus Type 431 170 Sharing Joy and Sorrow Lieb und Leid teilen Similar to type 921D*, Witty Answers 171 The Wren Der Zaunkönig Type 221, The Wren Becomes King of the Birds 172 The Flounder Die Scholle Type 250A, The Flounder's Crooked Mouth 173 The Bittern and Hoopoe Rohrdommel und Wiedehopf Type 236*, Imitating Bird Sounds. Compare type 2075, Imitating Animal Sounds 174 The Owl Die Eule Type 1281, Burning the Barn to Destroy an Unknown Animal 175 The Moon Der Mond Unclassified 176 The Duration of Life Die Lebenszeit Types 173 and 828, Men, Animals, and the Span of Life. (Categorized under two different numbers by Aarne-Thompson) 177 Death's Messengers Die Boten des Todes Type 335 178 Master Pfriem Meister Pfriem Type 801. Includes an episode of type 1248, Loading a Beam Crosswise on a Wagon 179 The Goose-Girl at the Well Die Gänsehirtin am Brunnen Type 923, Love Like Salt 180 Eve's Unequal Children Die ungleichen Kinder Evas Type 758 181 The Nixie in the Pond Die Nixe im Teich Type 316 182 The Gifts of the Little People Die Geschenke des kleinen Volkes Type 503, The Hunchbacks and the Elves 183 The Giant and the Tailor Der Riese und der Schneider Type 1049, The Heavy Ax; 1053, Shooting Wild Boars; and 1051, Springing with a Bent Tree 184 The Nail Der Nagel Type 2039, The Lost Horseshoe Nail 185 The Poor Boy in the Grave Der arme Junge im Grab Episodes include type 1876, Chickens on a String, and type 1313, The Man Who Thought He Was Dead 186 The True Bride Die wahre Braut Type 510, The Persecuted Heroine; followed by type 884, The Forsaken Fiancée 187 The Hare and the Hedgehog Der Hase und der Igel . This link is to a High German translation of the Grimms' original Low German text. Type 275A*, The Race between the Hedgehog and the Hare. Compare type 1074, A Race Is Won by a Look-Alike Helper 188 Spindle, Shuttle, and Needle Spindel, Weberschiffchen und Nadel Type 585 189 The Peasant and the Devil Der Bauer und der Teufel Type 1030, Man and Ogre Share the Harvest 190 The Crumbs on the Table Die Brosamen auf dem Tisch Type 236*, Imitating Bird Sounds. Compare type 2075, Imitating Animal Sounds 191 The Rabbit Das Meerhäschen Type 554, The Grateful Animals. Similar to 851, Winning the Princess with a Riddle 192 The Master Thief Der Meisterdieb Type 1525A, Stealing the Count's Horse, Sheet, and Parson 193 The Drummer Der Trommler Type 400, The Quest for a Lost Bride; and type 313, The Girl Helps the Hero Flee; the Forgotten Fiancée. Includes an episode of type 518, Quarreling Giants Lose Their Magic Objects 194 The Ear of Grain Die Kornähre Type 779, Divine Rewards and Punishments 195 The Grave Mound Der Grabhügel Similar to type 815, Keeping Watch at a Rich Man's Grave. Contains an episode of type 1130, A Boot Full of Money 196 Old Rinkrank Oll Rinkrank Similar to type 311, The Heroine Rescues Herself and Her Sisters 197 The Crystal Ball Die Kristallkugel Type 552A, The Girls Who Married Animals. Includes episodes of type 302, The Giant Whose Heart Was in an Egg, and type 518, Quarreling Giants Lose Their Magic Objects 198 Maid Maleen Jungfrau Maleen Type 870, The Entombed Princess 199 The Boot of Buffalo Leather Der Stiefel von Büffelleder Type 952, The King and the Soldier 200 The Golden Key Der goldene Schlüssel Type 2260 201 St. Joseph in the Woods Der heilige Joseph im Walde Type 480, The Kind and the Unkind Girls 202 The Twelve Apostles Die zwölf Apostel Similar to type 766, The Magic Sleep 203 The Rose Die Rose Unclassified 204 Poverty and Humility Lead to Heaven Armut und Demut führen zum Himmel Unclassified 205 God's Food Gottes Speise Type 751G*, Bread Turned to Stone 206 The Three Green Branches Die drei grünen Zweige Type 756A, Green Leaves on a Dry Stick 207 Our Lady's Little Glass Muttergottesgläschen Unclassified 208 The Aged Mother Die alte Mütterchen Unclassified 209 The Heavenly Wedding Die himmlische Hochzeit Type 767, Food for the Crucifix 210 The Hazel Switch Die Haselrute Unclassified For more information about folktale types see: Hans-Jörg Uther, The Types of International Folktales: A Classification and Bibliography , 3 vols. FF Communications, nos. 284-86. Helsinki: Soumalainen Tiedeakatemia, 2004. Antti Aarne and Stith Thompson, The Types of the Folktale: A Classification and Bibliography . FF Communications, no. 184. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 1961. D. L. Ashliman, A Guide to Folktales in the English Language . New York; Westport Connecticut; and London: Greenwood Press, 1987. Reidar Th. Christiansen, The Migratory Legends . FF Communications, no. 175. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 1958. Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Grimm Brothers' Home Page . The top of this document . Revised January 18, 2025. Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales) The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales) compiled, translated, and classified by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2020 Return to: Grimm Brothers Home Page . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Indo-European Folk and Fairy Tale Links. No . English Title German Title Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type Type titles not given resemble the tales' titles 1 The Frog King, or Iron Heinrich Der Froschkönig oder der eiserne Heinrich Type 440 2 Cat and Mouse in Partnership Katze und Maus in Gesellschaft Type 15, Stealing the Partner's Butter 3 Mary's Child Marienkind Type 710 4 The Story of a Boy Who Went Forth to Learn Fear Märchen von einem, der auszog das Fürchten zu lernen Type 326 5 The Wolf and the Seven Young Kids Der Wolf und die sieben jungen Geißlein Type 123 6 Faithful Johannes Der treue Johannes Type 516 7 The Good Bargain Der gute Handel Type 1642. Includes an episode of type 1610, Sharing Strokes with the King's Guard 8 The Strange Musician Der wunderliche Spielmann Type 151, Music Lessons for Wild Animals. Cf. type 1159, Catching the Would-Be Musician in a Crack 9 The Twelve Brothers Die zwölf Brüder Type 451, The Brothers Who Were Turned into Birds 10 The Pack of Scoundrels Das Lumpengesindel Type 210, The Traveling Animals and the Wicked Man 11 Little Brother and Little Sister Brüderchen und Schwesterchen Type 450 12 Rapunzel Rapunzel Type 310, The Maiden in the Tower 13 The Three Little Men in the Woods Die drei Männlein im Walde Type 403B, The Black and the White Bride. Includes an episode of type 480, The Kind and the Unkind Girls 14 The Three Spinning Women Die drei Spinnerinnen Type 501 15 Hansel and Gretel Hänsel und Gretel Type 327A. Includes an episode of type 1121, Burning the Witch in Her Own Oven 16 The Three Snake-Leaves Die drei Schlangenblätter Type 612 17 The White Snake Die weiße Schlange Type 673. Includes an episode of type 554, The Grateful Animals 18 Straw, Coal, and Bean Strohhalm, Kohle und Bohne Type 295 19 The Fisherman and His Wife Von dem Fischer un syner Fru Type 555 20 The Brave Little Tailor Das tapfere Schneiderlein Type 1640. Includes episodes of type 1060, Squeezing Water from a Stone; type 1062, A Contest in Throwing Stones; type 1052, A Contest in Carrying a Tree; type 1051, Springing with a Bent Tree; type 1115, Attempting to Kill the Hero in His Bed 21 Cinderella Aschenputtel Type 510A 22 The Riddle Das Rätsel Type 851, Winning the Princess with a Riddle 23 The Mouse, the Bird, and the Sausage Von dem Mäuschen, Vögelchen und der Bratwurst Type 85 24 Frau Holle Frau Holle Type 480, The Kind and the Unkind Girls 25 The Seven Ravens Die sieben Raben Type 451, The Brothers Who Were Turned into Birds 26 Little Red Cap Rotkäppchen Type 333, Red Riding Hood 27 The Bremen Town Musicians Die Bremer Stadtmusikanten Type 130, Outcast Animals Find a New Home 28 The Singing Bone Der singende Knochen Type 780 29 The Devil with the Three Golden Hairs Der Teufel mit den drei goldenen Haaren Type 461, Three Hairs from the Devil; type 930, The Prophecy That a Poor Boy Will Marry a Rich Girl 30 Little Louse and Little Flea Läuschen und Flöhchen Type 2022, An Animal Mourns the Death of a Spouse 31 The Girl without Hands Das Mädchen ohne Hände Type 706 32 Clever Hans Der gescheite Hans Type 1696, What Should I Have Said (or Done)? 33 The Three Languages Die drei Sprachen Type 671 34 Clever Elsie Die kluge Else Type 1450. Ends with an episode of type 1383, A Woman Does Not Know Herself 35 The Tailor in Heaven Der Schneider im Himmel Type 800 36 Table-Be-Set, Gold-Donkey, and Cudgel-out-of-the-Sack Tischchendeckdich, Goldesel und Knüppel aus dem Sack Type 563, introduced by type 212, The Goat That Lied 37 Thumbthick Daumesdick Type 700, Tom Thumb. Includes an episode of type 41, Overeating in the Pantry 38 Mrs. Fox's Wedding Die Hochzeit der Frau Füchsin Two tales. Type 65, Mrs. Fox's Suitors. 39 The Elves Die Wichtelmänner Three tales. Tale one: type 503*, Helpful Elves . Also categorized as a migratory legend, type 7015. Tale two: type 476*, A Midwife (or Godmother) for the Elves. Also categorized as a migratory legend, type 5070. Tale three: migratory legend, type 5085, The Changeling. 40 The Robber Bridegroom Der Räuberbräutigam Type 955 41 Herr Korbes Herr Korbes Type 210, The Traveling Animals and the Wicked Man 42 The Godfather Der Herr Gevatter Type 332, Godfather Death 43 Frau Trude Frau Trude Type 334, At the Witch's House 44 Godfather Death Der Gevatter Tod Type 332 45 Thumbling's Travels Type 700, Tom Thumb 46 Fitcher's Bird Fitchers Vogel Type 311, The Heroine Rescues Herself and Her Sisters. Similar to type 312, Bluebeard 47 The Juniper Tree Von dem Machandelboom Type 720, My Mother Killed Me; My Father Ate Me 48 Old Sultan Der alte Sultan Type 101, The Old Dog Rescues the Child. Concludes with an episode of type 103, Wild Animals Hide from an Unfamiliar Animal , and of type 104, War between the Village Animals and the Forest Animals 49 The Six Swans Die sechs Schwäne Type 451, The Brothers Who Were Turned into Birds 50 Little Brier-Rose Dornröschen Type 410, Sleeping Beauty 51 Foundling-Bird Fundevogel Type 313, The Girl Helps the Hero Flee 52 King Thrushbeard König Drosselbart Type 900 53 Little Snow-White Sneewittchen Type 709 54 The Knapsack, the Hat, and the Horn Der Ranzen, das Hütlein und das Hörnlein Type 569 54a Hans Dumb Hans Dumm Type 675. This tale was included only in the first edition. 55 Rumpelstiltskin Rumpelstilzchen Type 500, Guessing the Helper's Name 56 Sweetheart Roland Der Liebste Roland Type 1119, Ogres Kill Their Own Children, followed by type 313, The Girl Helps the Hero Flee; the Forgotten Fiancée 57 The Golden Bird Der goldene Vogel Type 550 58 The Dog and the Sparrow Der Hund und der Sperling Type 248, The Man, the Dog, and the Bird 59 Freddy and Katy Lizzy Der Frieder und das Catherlieschen Types 1387, A Woman Draws Beer in the Cellar; 1385*, A Woman Loses Her Husband's Money; 1291B, A Fool Greeses the Cracked Earth with Butter; 1291, Sending One Cheese After Another; 1653A, Securing the Door; 1653, The Robbers under the Tree; 1383, A Woman Does Not Know Herself; 1791, Dividing Up the Dead 60 The Two Brothers Die zwei Brüder Type 567A, The Magic Bird Heart; followed by type 303, The Blood Brothers. Includes an episode of type 300, The Dragon Slayer 61 The Little Peasant Das Bürle Type 1535, The Rich Peasant and the Poor Peasant . Includes an episode of type 1737, Trading Places with the Trickster in a Sack. Similar to type 1539, Tricksters and Their Victims 62 The Queen Bee Die Bienenkönigin Type 554, The Grateful Animals 63 The Three Feathers Die drei Federn Type 402, The Animal Bride 64 The Golden Goose Die goldene Gans Type 571, All Stick Together, plus an episode of type 513B, The Land and Water Ship 65 All-Kinds-Of-Fur Allerleirauh Type 510B, A King Tries to Marry His Daughter 66 The Hare's Bride Häsichenbraut Type 311, The Heroine Rescues Herself and Her Sisters 67 The Twelve Huntsmen Die zwölf Jäger Type 884, The Forsaken Fiancée 68 The Thief and His Master De Gaudeif un sien Meester Type 325, The Magician and His Pupil 69 Jorinde and Joringel Jorinde und Joringel Type 405 70 The Three Children of Fortune Die drei Glückskinder Type 1650, Three Brothers Inherit a Rooster, a Scythe, and a Cat. Includes episodes of types 1202, Harvesting Grain with a Cannon; 1651, Dick Whittington and His Cat; and 1281, Burning the Barn to Destroy an Unknown Animal 71 How Six Men Got On in the World Sechse kommen durch die ganze Welt Type 513A 72 The Wolf and the Man Der Wolf und der Mensch Type 157, Learning to Fear Man 73 The Wolf and the Fox Der Wolf und der Fuchs Type 41, Overeating in the Pantry 74 The Fox and His Cousin Der Fuchs und die Frau Gevatterin Type 152A*, The Scalded Wolf, followed by type 4, Getting a Ride by Pretending to Be Injured 75 The Fox and the Cat Der Fuchs und die Katze Type 105, The Cat's Only Trick 76 The Carnation Die Nelke Type 652, The Boy Whose Wishes Always Come True 77 Clever Gretel Das kluge Gretel Type 1741, The Guest Flees to Save His Ears 78 The Old Grandfather and His Grandson Der alte Großvater und der Enkel Type 980, The Ungrateful Son 79 The Water Nixie Die Wassernixe Type 313, The Girl Helps the Hero Flee 80 The Death of the Little Hen Von dem Tode des Hühnchens Type 2021. Includes an episode of type 2021A The Cock Seeks Help for the Choking Hen 81 Brother Merry Bruder Lustig Includes episodes of type 785, Who Ate the Lamb's Heart?; type 753A, The Unsuccessful Resuscitation; type 330B, The Devil in the Sack; type 330*, Entering Heaven by a Trick; 82 Gambling Hansel De Spielhansl Type 330A, The Smith's Three Wishes 83 Hans in Luck Hans im Glück Type 1415 84 Hans Gets Married Hans heiratet Types 859B, The Penniless Wooer: Money in Hand, and 859A, The Penniless Wooer: Patch of Land 85 The Gold-Children Die Goldkinder Type 555, The Fisherman and His Wife, followed by type 303, Blood Brothers 86 The Fox and the Geese Der Fuchs und die Gänse Type 227, The Geese's Eternal Prayer 87 The Poor Man and the Rich Man Der Arme und der Reiche Type 750A, Good Wishes and Foolish Wishes 88 The Singing, Springing Lark Das singende springende Löweneckerchen Type 425C, Beauty and the Beast 89 The Goose-Girl Die Gänsemagd Type 533 90 The Young Giant Der junge Riese Type 650A . Introduced with an episode of type 700, Tom Thumb 91 The Gnome Dat Erdmänneken Type 301A, The Quest for the Vanished Princesses 92 The King of the Golden Mountain Der König vom goldenen Berge Type 401A, The Enchanted Princess in Her Castle. Introduced with an episode of type 810, The Devil Loses a Soul That Was Promised Him. Includes episodes of type 560, The Magic Ring, and type 518, Quarreling Giants Lose Their Magic Objects 93 The Raven Die Rabe Type 401. The Girl Transformed into an Animal. Includes an episode of type 518, Quarreling Giants Lose Their Magic Objects 94 The Peasant's Clever Daughter Die kluge Bauerntochter Type 875 95 Old Hildebrand Der alte Hildebrand Type 1360C 96 The Three Little Birds De drei Vügelkens Type 707, The Dancing Water, the Singing Apple, and the Speaking Bird 97 The Water of Life Das Wasser des Lebens Type 551 98 Dr. Know-All Doktor Allwissend Type 1641 99 The Spirit in the Glass Bottle Der Geist im Glas Type 331 100 The Devil's Sooty Brother Des Teufels rußiger Bruder Type 475, Heating Hell's Kitchen 101 Bearskin Der Bärenhäuter Type 361 102 The Wren and the Bear Der Zaunkönig und der Bär Type 222, The War between the Birds and the Beasts 103 Sweet Porridge Der süße Brei Type 565, The Magic Mill 104 The Clever People Die klugen Leute Type 1384, A Man Seeks Someone as Stupid as His Wife. Includes episodes of type 1385, A Woman Accepts Her Own Cow as Security, and type 1540, The Man from Paradise 105 Tales of the Toad Märchen von der Unke Three tales. Tale 1: type 285, The Child and the Snake. Tale 2: type 672B, The Toad's Crown. Tale 3: type 2075 Imitating Animal Sounds 106 The Poor Miller's Boy and the Cat Der arme Müllerbursch und das Kätzchen Type 402, The Animal Bride 107 The Two Travelers Die beiden Wanderer Type 613, followed by type 554, The Grateful Animals 108 Hans-My-Hedgehog Hans mein Igel Type 441 109 The Burial Shirt (The Little Shroud) Das Totenhemdchen Type 769 110 The Jew in the Thorns Der Jude im Dorn Type 592, Dancing in Thorns 111 The Trained Huntsman Der gelernte Jäger Type 304 112 The Threshing-Flail from Heaven Der Dreschflegel vom Himmel A combination of types 1960A, The Giant Animal; 1960G, The Giant Plant; and 1889K , A Rope Made of Chaff 113 The Two Kings' Children De beiden Künigeskinner Type 313, The Girl Helps the Hero Flee; the Forgotten Fiancée 114 The Clever Little Tailor Vom klugen Schneiderlein An expurgated version of type 850, The Princess's Birthmarks. Includes episodes of type 1061, Biting Stones and 1159, Catching the Would-Be Musician in a Crack (expurgated) 115 The Bright Sun Will Bring It to Light Die klare Sonne bringt's an den Tag Type 960, The Sun Brings All to Light 116 The Blue Light Das blaue Licht Type 562, The Spirit in the Blue Light 117 The Willful Child Das eigensinnige Kind Type 779, Divine Rewards and Punishments 118 The Three Army Surgeons Die drei Feldscherer Type 660, The Three Doctors 119 The Seven Swabians Die sieben Schwaben Several episodes, mostly of type 1321, Fools Are Frightened. One episode is type 1231, Planning the Attack on a Hare. Conclusion belongs to type 1297*, Fools Walk into a River and Drown 120 The Three Journeymen Die drei Handwerksburschen Type 360, The Three Apprentices and the Devil. Similar to type 1697, We Three, for Money 121 The King's Son Who Is Afraid of Nothing Der Königssohn, der sich vor nichts fürchtet Type 590, The Magic Belt; and type 401A, The Enchanted Princess in Her Castle 122 The Cabbage-Donkey Der Krautesel Type 567, The Magic Bird Heart. Similar to type 566, Fruit That Grows Horns (Fortunatus) 123 The Old Woman in the Woods Die Alte im Wald Type 442 124 The Three Brothers Die drei Brüder Type 654, Which Brother Has the Best Skill? 125 The Devil and His Grandmother Der Teufel und seine Großmutter Type 812, The Devil's Riddle 126 Ferdinand the Faithful and Ferdinand the Unfaithful Ferenand getrü un Ferenand ungetrü Type 531 127 The Iron Stove Der Eisenofen Type 425A, The Animal Bridegroom 128 The Lazy Spinning Woman Die faule Spinnerin Type 1405 129 The Four Skillful Brothers Die vier kunstreichen Brüder Type 653 130 One-Eye, Two-Eyes, and Three-Eyes Einäuglein, Zweiäuglein und Dreiäuglein Type 511 131 Fair Katrinelje and Pif Paf Poltrie Die schöne Katrinelje und Pif Paf Poltrie Type 2019 132 The Fox and the Horse Der Fuchs und das Pferd Type 47A, Catching a Horse by the Tail 133 The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces Die zertanzten Schuhe Type 306, The Danced-Out Shoes 134 The Six Servants Die sechs Diener Type 513A, Six Go through the Whole World 135 The White Bride and the Black Bride Die weiße und die schwarze Braut Type 403A, The Black and the White Bride: The Wishes 136 Iron Hans Der Eisenhans Type 502, The Wild Man as a Helper 137 The Three Black Princesses De drei schwatten Prinzessinnen Similar to type 401A, The Enchanted Princess in Her Castle 138 Knoist and His Three Sons Knoist un sine dre Sühne Type 1965. Includes an episode of type 1963, Sailing in a Bottomless Boat 139 The Girl from Brakel Dat Mäken von Brakel Type 1476A, Praying to the Statue's Mother 140 Household Servants Das Hausgesinde Type 1940, Extraordinary Names 141 The Little Lamb and the Little Fish Das Lämmchen und Fischchen Type 450, Little Brother, Little Sister 142 Simeli Mountain Simeliberg Type 676, Open Sesame 143 Going Traveling Up Reisen gohn Type 1696, What Should I Have Said? 144 The Little Donkey Das Eselein Type 430, The Donkey Bridegroom 145 The Ungrateful Son Der undankbare Sohn Type 980D, A Toad in the Face of an Ungrateful Son 146 The Turnip Die Rübe Types 1960D, The Giant Vegetable; and 1689A, Two Presents for the King. Includes an episode of type 1737, Trading Places with the Trickster in a Sack 147 The Little Old Man Made Young by Fire Das junggeglühte Männlein Type 753, Christ and the Smith 148 The Lord's Animals and the Devil's Des Herrn und des Teufels Getier Unclassified 149 The Rooster Beam Der Hahnenbalken Type 987, False Magician Exposed by Clever Girl . Includes an episode similar to type 1290, A Fool Mistakes a Flax Field for a Lake 150 The Old Beggar Woman Die alte Bettelfrau Unclassified 151 The Three Lazy Ones Die drei Faulen Type 1950, A Contest in Laziness 151* The Twelve Lazy Servants Die zwölf faulen Knechte Type 1950, A Contest in Laziness 152 The Little Shepherd Boy Das Hirtenbüblein Type 922, The King, the Abbot, and the Shepherd 153 The Star Talers Die Sterntaler Type 779, Divine Rewards and Punishments 154 The Stolen Farthing Der gestohlene Heller Type 769, A Child Returns from the Dead 155 Choosing a Bride Die Brautschau Type 1452, Choosing a Bride by How She Cuts Cheese 156 The Hurds Die Schlickerlinge Type 1451, A Suitor Chooses the Thrifty Girl 157 The Sparrow and His Four Children Der Sperling und seine vier Kinder Similar to type 157, Learning to Fear Man 158 The Tale of Cockaigne Das Märchen vom Schlauraffenland Type 1930 159 The Tall Tale from Ditmarsh Das Diethmarsische Lügenmärchen Type 1930, Schlaraffenland 160 A Riddling Tale Rätselmärchen Type 407, The Girl as a Flower 161 Snow-White and Rose-Red Schneeweißchen und Rosenrot Type 426, The Two Girls, the Bear, and the Dwarf 162 The Clever Servant Der kluge Knecht Similar to type 1681B, The Fool as a Housekeeper 163 The Glass Coffin Der gläserne Sarg Type 410, Sleeping Beauty 164 Lazy Heinz Der faule Heinz Type 1430, Air Castles 165 The Griffin Der Vogel Greif Types 610, Fruit to Cure the Princess; 461, Three Hairs from the Devil ; and 570, The Rabbit Herd 166 Strong Hans Der starke Hans Type 650A, The Young Giant; and type 301A, The Quest for the Vanished Princesses 167 The Peasant in Heaven Das Bürle im Himmel Type 802 168 Lean Lisa Die hagere Liese Type 1430, Air Castles . Includes an episode of type 2411, Counting Imagined Wealth . 169 The Hut in the Woods Das Waldhaus Type 431 170 Sharing Joy and Sorrow Lieb und Leid teilen Similar to type 921D*, Witty Answers 171 The Wren Der Zaunkönig Type 221, The Wren Becomes King of the Birds 172 The Flounder Die Scholle Type 250A, The Flounder's Crooked Mouth 173 The Bittern and Hoopoe Rohrdommel und Wiedehopf Type 236*, Imitating Bird Sounds. Compare type 2075, Imitating Animal Sounds 174 The Owl Die Eule Type 1281, Burning the Barn to Destroy an Unknown Animal 175 The Moon Der Mond Unclassified 176 The Duration of Life Die Lebenszeit Types 173 and 828, Men, Animals, and the Span of Life. (Categorized under two different numbers by Aarne-Thompson) 177 Death's Messengers Die Boten des Todes Type 335 178 Master Pfriem Meister Pfriem Type 801. Includes an episode of type 1248, Loading a Beam Crosswise on a Wagon 179 The Goose-Girl at the Well Die Gänsehirtin am Brunnen Type 923, Love Like Salt 180 Eve's Unequal Children Die ungleichen Kinder Evas Type 758 181 The Nixie in the Pond Die Nixe im Teich Type 316 182 The Gifts of the Little People Die Geschenke des kleinen Volkes Type 503, The Hunchbacks and the Elves 183 The Giant and the Tailor Der Riese und der Schneider Type 1049, The Heavy Ax; 1053, Shooting Wild Boars; and 1051, Springing with a Bent Tree 184 The Nail Der Nagel Type 2039, The Lost Horseshoe Nail 185 The Poor Boy in the Grave Der arme Junge im Grab Episodes include type 1876, Chickens on a String, and type 1313, The Man Who Thought He Was Dead 186 The True Bride Die wahre Braut Type 510, The Persecuted Heroine; followed by type 884, The Forsaken Fiancée 187 The Hare and the Hedgehog Der Hase und der Igel . This link is to a High German translation of the Grimms' original Low German text. Type 275A*, The Race between the Hedgehog and the Hare. Compare type 1074, A Race Is Won by a Look-Alike Helper 188 Spindle, Shuttle, and Needle Spindel, Weberschiffchen und Nadel Type 585 189 The Peasant and the Devil Der Bauer und der Teufel Type 1030, Man and Ogre Share the Harvest 190 The Crumbs on the Table Die Brosamen auf dem Tisch Type 236*, Imitating Bird Sounds. Compare type 2075, Imitating Animal Sounds 191 The Rabbit Das Meerhäschen Type 554, The Grateful Animals. Similar to 851, Winning the Princess with a Riddle 192 The Master Thief Der Meisterdieb Type 1525A, Stealing the Count's Horse, Sheet, and Parson 193 The Drummer Der Trommler Type 400, The Quest for a Lost Bride; and type 313, The Girl Helps the Hero Flee; the Forgotten Fiancée. Includes an episode of type 518, Quarreling Giants Lose Their Magic Objects 194 The Ear of Grain Die Kornähre Type 779, Divine Rewards and Punishments 195 The Grave Mound Der Grabhügel Similar to type 815, Keeping Watch at a Rich Man's Grave. Contains an episode of type 1130, A Boot Full of Money 196 Old Rinkrank Oll Rinkrank Similar to type 311, The Heroine Rescues Herself and Her Sisters 197 The Crystal Ball Die Kristallkugel Type 552A, The Girls Who Married Animals. Includes episodes of type 302, The Giant Whose Heart Was in an Egg, and type 518, Quarreling Giants Lose Their Magic Objects 198 Maid Maleen Jungfrau Maleen Type 870, The Entombed Princess 199 The Boot of Buffalo Leather Der Stiefel von Büffelleder Type 952, The King and the Soldier 200 The Golden Key Der goldene Schlüssel Type 2260 201 St. Joseph in the Woods Der heilige Joseph im Walde Type 480, The Kind and the Unkind Girls 202 The Twelve Apostles Die zwölf Apostel Similar to type 766, The Magic Sleep 203 The Rose Die Rose Unclassified 204 Poverty and Humility Lead to Heaven Armut und Demut führen zum Himmel Unclassified 205 God's Food Gottes Speise Type 751G*, Bread Turned to Stone 206 The Three Green Branches Die drei grünen Zweige Type 756A, Green Leaves on a Dry Stick 207 Our Lady's Little Glass Muttergottesgläschen Unclassified 208 The Aged Mother Die alte Mütterchen Unclassified 209 The Heavenly Wedding Die himmlische Hochzeit Type 767, Food for the Crucifix 210 The Hazel Switch Die Haselrute Unclassified For more information about folktale types see: Hans-Jörg Uther, The Types of International Folktales: A Classification and Bibliography , 3 vols. FF Communications, nos. 284-86. Helsinki: Soumalainen Tiedeakatemia, 2004. Antti Aarne and Stith Thompson, The Types of the Folktale: A Classification and Bibliography . FF Communications, no. 184. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 1961. D. L. Ashliman, A Guide to Folktales in the English Language . New York; Westport Connecticut; and London: Greenwood Press, 1987. Reidar Th. Christiansen, The Migratory Legends . FF Communications, no. 175. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 1958. Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Grimm Brothers' Home Page . The top of this document . Revised January 18, 2025. Grimms' Fairy Tales in English Grimms' Fairy Tales in English an Internet bibliography assembled by D. L. Ashliman © 2012-2023 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Kinder- und Hausmärchen , collected by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, was first published in 1812, with a second volume following in 1814 (pre-dated 1815). A revised edition appeared in 1819. The last German edition to appear during the Grimm brothers' lifetime was the seventh (1857). Although the most accurate translation of the Grimms' title would be Children's and Household Tales , most English readers know these stories as Grimms' Fairy Tales , or all-too often, ungrammatically as Grimm's Fairy Tales . Unless otherwise noted, the following links lead to books digitized by Google Books or the Internet Archive . 1823. German Popular Stories . Translated [by Edgar Taylor] from the Kinder und Haus-Mährchen, collected by M. M. Grimm, from oral tradition. [Illustrations by George Cruikshank.] London: C. Baldwyn. 1826. German Popular Stories . Translated [by Edgar Taylor] from the Kinder und Haus-Mährchen, collected by M. M. Grimm, from oral tradition. [Illustrations by George Cruikshank.] Vol. 2. London: James Robins; Dublin: Joseph Robins, Jun. Facsimile reprint London: Frowde, 1904. 1828. German Popular Stories . Translated from the Rinder [Kinder] und Hans [Haus] Märchen. Collected by M.M. Grimm, from oral tradition. With original etchings by Cruikshank. New York: Charles S. Francis; Boston Munroe and Francis. 1839. Gammer Grethel [translated by Edgar Taylor]. London: J. Green. 1843. Popular Tales and Legends . London: I. Burns. Includes stories from various sources. 1853. Household Stories . Collected by the Brothers Grimm. Newly Translated. With 240 illustrations by Edward H. Wehnert. Vol. 1. London: Addey and Company. 1853. Household Stories . Collected by the Brothers Grimm. Newly Translated. With 240 illustrations by Edward H. Wehnert. Vol. 2. London: Addey and Company. 1855. Home Stories . Collected by the Brothers Grimm. Newly translated by Matilda Louisa Davis. Illustrated by George Thompson. London: G. Routledge and Company. 1857. Household Stories . Collected by the Brothers Grimm. Newly translated. With 240 illustrations by E. H. Wehnert. Complete in one volume. London: David Bogue. 1861. Household Stories . Collected by the brothers Grimm. Newly translated. Illustrations by E. H. Wehnert. New edition. London: Routledge, Warne, and Routledge. 1862. German Popular Tales and Household Stories . Collected by the Brothers Grimm. Newly translated. With illustrations by Edward H. Wehnert. 2nd series. Boston: Crosby and Nichols. 1864. German Tairy Tales and Popular Stories, as Told by Gammer Grethel . Translated from the collection of MM. Grimm by Edgar Taylor. With illustrations from designs by George Cruikshank and Ludwig Grimm. London: H. G. Bohn. 1867. Grimm's Goblins . Selected from the Household Stories of the Brothers Grimm. With illustrations in colors from Cruikshank's designs. Boston: Ticknor and Fields. [1868]. Grimm's Fairy Tales . A new translation by Mrs. H. B. Paull. Specially adapted and arranged for young people. London: Frederick Warne and Company, n.d. [1869]. German Popular Stories . With illustrations after the original designs of George Cruikshank. Edited by Edgar Taylor. With introduction by John Ruskin, M.A. London: John Camden Hotten, n.d. Added title page: German Popular Stories . In two series. 1869. German Popular Tales and Household Stories . Collected by the Brothers Grimm. With illustrations by Edward H. Wehnert. First series. Philadelphia: Porter and Coates. 1870. The Fairy Book: The Best Popular Stories Selected and Rendered Anew . New York: Harper and Brothers. Includes stories from different sources. 1872. German Popular Stories and Fairy Tales, as Told by Gammer Grethel . From the collection of MM. Grimm. Revised translation by Edgar Taylor. With illustrations from designs by George Cruikshank and Ludwig Grimm. London: Bell and Daldy, 1872. 1875. German Popular Stories . With illustrations after the original designs of George Cruikshank. Edited by Edgar Taylor. With introduction by John Ruskin, M.A. London: Chatto and Windus. 1876. Grimm's Goblins: Grimm's Household Stories . Translated from the Kinder und Haus Marchen by E. Taylor. Twenty-four illustrations after George Cruikshank. With original notes by E. Taylor, etc., etc. London: R. Meek and Company. Added title page: Grimm's Goblins: German Popular Stories . Translated from the Kinder und Haus Marchen collected by M. M. Grimm from oral tradition. 1879. The Soaring Lark and Other Tales . Collected by the Brothers Grimm. With illustrations by E. H. Wehnert. The Grimm library. London and New York: George Routledge and Sons. 1881. Grimm's Fairy Tales and other Popular Stories . With numerous illustrations [by Bertall]. London: Ward, Lock, and Company. 1882. Grimm's Fairy Tales . Translated from the German by Lucy Crane. Done into pictures by Walter Crane. New York: Hurst and Company, n.d. From the 1920 edition: "First edition printed 1882. Reprinted 1892, 1899, 1906, 1909, 1912, 1914, 1916, 1917, 1920." 1884. Grimm's Household Tales . With the author's notes. Translated from the German and edited by Margaret Hunt. With an introduction by Andrew Lang, M.A. Vol. 1. London: George Bell and Sons. 1884. Grimm's Household Tales . With the author's notes. Translated from the German and edited by Margaret Hunt. With an introduction by Andrew Lang, M.A. Vol. 2. London: George Bell and Sons. 1888. German Popular Stories and Fairy Tales, as Told by Gammer Grethel . From the collection of MM Grimm. Revised translation by Edgar Taylor. With illustrations from designs by George Cruikshank and Ludwig Grimm. London: George Bell and Sons. [1890]. Household Stories . From the collection of Grimm Brothers. Translated from the German by Lucy Crane. Chicago and New York: Rand, McNally, and Company, n.d. 1892. Grimm's Fairy Tales . Volume 1. Edited by Mara L. Pratt. Illustrated by Edith F. Foster. Young Folks' Library of Choice Literature. Boston, New York, and Chicago: Educational Publishing Company. 1894. Grimm's Fairy Tales . Part 1. Edited by Sara E. Wiltse, author of "Stories for Kindergarten," etc. Ilustrated by Caroline S. King. Boston, New York, Chicago, and London: Ginn and Company. 1894. Classic Stories for the Little Ones . Adapted from the tales of Andersen, Grimm Brothers, and others by Mrs. Lida Brown McMurry, primary training teacher in De Kalb, Illinois, State Normal School. Bloomington, Illinois: Public School Publishing Company. 1896. Grimm's Fairy Tales . Translated from the German. Illustrated by Walter Crane and E. H. Wehnert. Chicago: Donohue, Henneberry and Company. 1897. German Popular Stories and Fairy Tales, as Told by Gammer Grethel . From the collection of M. M. Grimm. Rev. translation by Edgar Taylor. With illustrations from designs by George Cruikshank and Ludwig Grimm. London: G. Bell and Sons. 1897. German Household Tales . By Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. Told again in English. The Riverside Literature Series. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. [ca. 1897] German Popular Tales . By Andersen and Grimm. 4th series. Boston: J. E. Tilton and Company, n.d. 1899. Grimm's Fairy Tales . Edited by Sara E. Wiltse, author of "Stories for Kindergartens," etc. Illustrated by Caroline S. King. Part 1. Boston: Ginn and Company. Copyright 1894. 1901. German Popular Stories and Fairy Tales, as Told by Gammer Grethel . From the collection of MM. Grimm. Revised translation by Edgar Taylor. With illustrations from designs by George Cruikshank and Ludwig Grimm. London: George Bell and Sons. 1902. Grimm Tales Made Gay . By Guy Wetmore Carry. Pictures by Albert Leverling. Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company. 1903. Grimm's Fairy Tales . Selected and edited for primary reader grades by Edna Henry Lee Turpin. New York: Maynard, Merrill, and Company. 1905. The Fairy Reader . Adapted from Grimm and Andersen by James Baldwin, author of "Fairy Stories and Fables," "Baldwin's Readers," etc. New York, Cincinnati, and Chicago: American Book Company. 1908. German Popular Stories and Fairy Tales, as Told by Gammer Grethel . From the collection of MM Grimm. Revised translation by Edgar Taylor. With illustrations from designs by George Cruikshank and Ludwig Grimm. London: George Bell and Sons. 1908. Grimm's Fairy Tales . A selection from the "Household Stories" of the Brothers Grimm. Edited for schools by A. Trice Martin, M.A., Headmaster of Bath College. London: Macmillan and Company. 1909. Grimm's Animal Stories [translated by Lucy Crane]. New York: Duffield and Company. 1909. Folk-Lore and Fable: Æsop, Grimm, Andersen . The Harvard Classics, vol. 17. Edited by Charles W. Eliot. New York: P. F. Collier and Son Company. Grimm's Household Tales are found on pages 47-218. 1909. The Fairy Tales of the Brothers Grimm . Illustrated by Arthur Rackham. Translated by Mrs. Edgar Lucas. New York: Doubleday, Page, and Company. 1911. Grimm's Animal Stories [translated by Lucy Crane]. New York: Duffield and Company. 1912. Grimm's Household Tales . Edited and partly translated anew by Marian Ewards. With illustrations by R. Anning Bell. London: J. M. Dent and Sons; New York: E. P. Dutton and Company. Forty-nine tales. Based on the Edgar Taylor translation, published in the Bohn Library. 1913. Folk Tales from Grimm: A Dramatic Reader for Third and Fourth Grades . By Ethelyn Abbott. Illustrated by Dorothy Dulin. Chicago: A. Flanagan Company. 1913. Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs . A fairy tale play based on the story of the Brothers Grimm. By Jessie Braham White. With Music by Edmund Rickett and numerous illustrations by Charles B. Falls. New York: Dodd, Mead, and Company. [1916]. Household and Fairy Tales . By the Brothers Grimm. Translated by Mrs. [Edgar] Lucas, Lucy Crane, and M[arian] Edwardes. Washington Square Classics. Philadelphia: George W. Jacobs and Company, n.d. 1917. Little Brother & Little Sister and Other Tales by the Brothers Grimm . Illustrated by Arthur Rackham. New York: Dodd, Mead and Company. Forty stories, based on the translation of Margaret Hunt. Digital copy: University of Florida, Baldwin Library of Historical Children's Literature. 1919. A Child's Book of Stories . Selected and arranged by Penrhyn W. Coussens, editor of "Poems Children Love." With pictures by Jessie Willcox Smith. New York: Duffield and Company. Copyright 1911. Includes stories from various sources. 1920. Hansel & Grethel & Other Tales . By the Brothers Grimm. Illustrated by Arthur Rackham. New York: E. P. Dutton and Company. Originally published in Grimm's Fairy Tales illustrated by Arthur Rackham, 1909. Reissued separately, 1920. 1922. Household Stories . From the collection of the Bros. Grimm. Translated from the German by Lucy Crane, and done into pictures by Walter Crane. London: Macmillan and Company. First edition printed 1882. Reprinted 1892, 1899, 1906, 1909, 1912, 1914, 1916, 1917, 1920. 1922. Grimm's Fairy Tales . Edited by Frances Jenkins Olcott. Illustrated by Rie Cramer. Philadelphia: The Penn Publishing Company. 1927. Grimm's Fairy Tales . Edited by Frances Jenkins Olcott. Illustrated by Rie Cramer. Philadelphia: The Penn Publishing Company. [1900s]. Grimm's Fairy Tales . Illustrated in color by Noel Pocock. New York: George H. Doran Company, n.d. [1900s]. Grimms' Fairy Tales . The Hamlyn Classics. London: Andrew Dakers Limited, n.d. [1900s]. Grimm's Complete Fairy Tales . Garden City, New York: International Collectors Library, n.d. Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Grimm Brothers' Home Page . The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales , compiled, translated, and classified. Revised April 13, 2023. Hand from the Grave The Hand from the Grave folk legends from Germany, Poland, and Switzerland of Aarne-Thompson type 779 edited and translated by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2000 Contents The Willful Child (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Hand on the Grave (J. D. H. Temme). The Parent Murderer of Salzwedel (J. D. H. Temme). The Hand in Mellenthin (A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz). A Hand Grows from the Grave (A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz). A Hand Grows from the Grave: Three Legends from Mecklenburg (Karl Bartsch). The Withered Hand in the Church at Bergen (A. Haas). The Cursed Hand (Karl Haupt). A Hand Grows from the Grave (Bernhard Baader). The Hand That Grew from the Grave (J. G. Th. Grässe). A Child's Hand That Wrongly Attacked a Mother Grows Out of the Grave (Friederich Wagenfeld). A Mother Disciplines Her Deceased Child (Switzerland, Franz Niderberger). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Willful Child Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once upon a time there was a child who was willful and did not do what his mother wanted. For this reason God was displeased with him and caused him to become ill, and no doctor could help him, and in a short time he lay on his deathbed. He was lowered into a grave and covered with earth, but his little arm suddenly came forth and reached up, and it didn't help when they put it back in and put fresh earth over it, for the little arm always came out again. So the mother herself had to go to the grave and beat the little arm with a switch, and as soon as she had done that, it withdrew, and the child finally came to rest beneath the earth. Source: Das eigensinnige Kind , Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales), no. 117. Although the Grimms' precise source is unknown, this tale, usually told as a local legend, is widely distributed throughout northern Germany. For more examples see The Hand from the Grave . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. This tale, in a slightly different version, was introduced to the Grimms' collection in vol. 2 of the first edition (1815, no. 31). One small but significant change: The first edition states only that the child "became ill," not that "God ... caused him to become ill," as recorded in later editions. I have arbitrarily assigned male gender to the child, whose sex cannot be determined by the German text. Titles used by other translators: "The Stubborn Child," "The Wayward Child," "The Naughty Child." Return to the table of contents . The Hand on the Grave J. D. H. Temme In the village church at Groß-Redensleben, one hour from Seehausen, immediately inside the entrance, on the left side of the door hanging on a stone pillar there is a wooden tablet, painted black, and with the following inscription: Exodus XX Behold, thou wicked child What is here displayed: A hand that does not decay, For he, whose hand it was, Was a wayward child, Such as exist even today. This son struck his father, And he has as a reward, That his hand is hanging here. Guard thyself from such shame. On the tablet's edge, encircling the inscription, are the words: Thou shalt honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. Beneath the tablet there is an iron chain, about a half yard long, from which is hanging a human hand, which was cut off at its root. Its color is ashen gray; its skin and flesh are totally dry. The following legend is told about it: Before the Thirty Years' War there lived in Groß-Rebensleben a pious man who had a very wayward son. This son not only ridiculed his father's admonitions, but his belligerence went so far that he abused his own father. Once he even lifted his hand against him as the father was praying to God for his repentance. And it came to pass that the wayward son suddenly fell dead to the earth, as a visible sign that Heaven would not allow his wickedness to go unpunished. He was buried the next day, and then an even greater miracle occurred. Suddenly a hand appeared from the grave, the same hand with which he had struck his father, as if it could find no rest beneath the earth. All who saw this happen fled in terror, and no one dared return to the churchyard, for the hand did not return to beneath the earth. It was a gruesome sight, the way it extended from the grave, stiff, pale, cold, and silent, but still an articulate witness as to how the Lord punishes sin. At last the authorities ordered that the hand be whipped with switches, in the belief that such a punishment would suffice and would lead to redemption. The order was carried out, and the hand bled until the earth turned red, but it would not return to the grave. Then they had it chopped off and hung it in the church with the tablet described above so that it could serve as a lesson for future generations. Source: "Die Hand auf dem Grabe," J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen der Altmark, mit einem Anhange von Sagen aus den übrigen Marken und aus dem Magdeburgischen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1839), no. 56, pp. 48-49. According to Temme, this legend also was told frequently in Szamaiten and in Poland. The inscription on the tablet rhymes in the original German. Return to the table of contents . The Parent Murderer of Salzwedel J. D. H. Temme More than two hundred years ago, it was on April 15, 1614, that a horrible murder was committed in the old part of Salzwedel just off the street leading to Saint Ann's Convent, that formerly stood there. A merchant's servant by the name of Dietrich Schulze stabbed his father and his mother to death. He stabbed the father four times, and when the mother came to the father's aid, he stabbed her three times. He was sentenced to die, and the sentence was carried out on the fourth of May of the same year. First his right hand, with which he had committed the horrible deed, was cut off. Then he was tortured three times with red-hot pincers, first in the marketplace, second in front of the house where the murder was committed, and finally in the tower itself. Then he was dragged to the place of execution and placed on the wheel upside down, half sitting and half lying. It was miraculous and horrible to see how the hand with which he had committed this terrible deed continued to bleed for three days on the wheel. Source: "Der Elternmörder in Salzwedel," J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen der Altmark, mit einem Anhange von Sagen aus den übrigen Marken und aus dem Mageburgischen (Berlin: in der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1839), p. 32. This legend does not contain the "hand from the grave" motif that is central to the other accounts in this group. It does, however, bear a strong resemblance, both in content and in tone, to those stories. Return to the table of contents . The Hand in Mellenthin A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz In Mellenthin there was once a girl who, while she was still alive, always struck her mother, and after she died, her hand came out of her grave. However often the Mellenthin peasants reburied it, it came out again. Finally they cut it off, and since the Mellenthin church was just being built, they put a stone behind the altar, and laid the hand under it, and it is lying there still. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräche aus Meklenburg, Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen , aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 28, pp. 22-23. Return to the table of contents . A Hand Grows from the Grave A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz In the church at Lunow, three quarters of a mile from Oderberg, there is a chopped off, dried up hand on display. It is clenched into a fist and holds a switch between its fingers. It comes from a son who in a godless manner had once struck his father. God himself punished him, for when he died and was buried, his hand emerged from the grave. However often they reburied it, it always reappeared. Finally they beat it with a switch, thinking that it would then return to beneath the earth, but that did not help. Therefore they chopped off the hand, put the switch in its fist, and placed it in the church at Lunow as an eternal warning to godless children. Source: "Hand wächst aus dem Grabe," A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg, Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen , aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 46, pp. 44-45. Return to the table of contents . A Hand Grows from the Grave: Three Legends from Mecklenburg Karl Bartsch 1. Once there was a boy who struck his mother, whereupon he died. After he was buried, his hand grew out of the earth. Then the mother was told that she should beat the hand with a switch. The mother did this, and the dead boy pulled his hand back under. But the next day the hand was always there again. Finally the executioner had to come and chop off the hand. They put it in a box and kept it in the church. 2. A child's hand, wrapped in a silk cloth, is kept behind the alter in the church at Petschow, between Tessin and Rostock. The people there tell how a wayward child had lifted his hand against his parents. The child died soon afterward and was buried. The hand that had been lifted against the parents grew out of the grave. They placed it back beneath the earth several times, but it always reappeared, until they finally chopped it off. 3. In the church at Garwitz, a village in the vicinity of Parchim, behind the altarpiece there is a hand that was chopped off just beneath the joint. The following legend is told about it: A girl abused her parents, and even struck her mother so hard that the mother died of the consequences. Soon after the mother's death, the girl herself died. She had lain in the grave for only a few days when her wicked hand emerged. The villagers beat it with whips and a few times it withdrew back beneath the earth. Finally, because it ceased retreating from the whips' blows, they chopped it off. It is preserved even to this day. The flesh has dried firmly onto the bones, and the entire hand has a black appearance. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), vol. 1, pp. 459-460. Legend 1 was recorded in Low German; legends 2 and 3 in High German. The gender of the child in Legend 2 cannot be determined from the original text. Return to the table of contents . The Withered Hand in the Church at Bergen A. Haas A withered hand was kept in the church at Bergen into the first half of the nineteenth century. It came from a father murderer. After the murderer's death, the hand is said to have emerged from the grave. However often they reburied the hand, it always came out again, until finally they chopped it off and put it in the church. Punishment such as this always befalls those who raise a hand against their own parents. Source: A. Haas, Rügensche Sagen und Märchen (Stettin: Johs. Burmeister's Buchhandlung, 1903), no. 212, p. 196. Bergen is a city on the German island of Rügen in the Baltic Sea. Haas states that a similar legend is told of two wayward children in Stettin, whose hands are kept at the Peter's and Paul's Church in that city. Return to the table of contents . The Cursed Hand Karl Haupt In the year 1572, on January 22, a mother murderer from Gersdorf was punished with red-hot pincers, first at the marketplace in Lauban, and then at every cross street. Afterward his right hand was cut off, then his heart was pulled from his body, and finally he was quartered and the four parts of his body were hung on four posts near the gallows. The cut-off hand was nailed up as well. Although the birds pulled the other pieces apart and ate them, they did not touch the hand. Still entirely uninjured, it was taken down and buried in the year 1577 before the arrival of Emperor Rudolph II. Source: Karl Haupt, Sagenbuch der Lausitz (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1862), no. 332, p. 261. Haupt's source: Roch's Chronika , p. 399. Return to the table of contents . A Hand Grows from the Grave Bernard Baader About four hundred years ago in Heidelberg it happened that a hand grew out of the grave of a newly buried child, who was eight years old. In response to this miracle the clergy conducted prayers and processions and investigated the child's life, discovering that he had often struck his parents. His mother was now sentenced to make up for the delayed discipline. She was required to beat the child's hand thoroughly with a thick switch, and after she had done this for a time, the hand withdrew back into the grave and stayed there from that time forth. Source: Bernhard Baader, Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: Verlag der Herder'schen Buchhandlung, 1851), no. 354, p. 319. I have arbitrarily assigned the male gender to the deceased child. Baader's text uses the pronoun es , which can be either male or female. Return to the table of contents . The Hand That Grew from the Grave J. G. Th. Grässe In Danzig a child struck his mother. He died soon afterward and took the curse of this act with him to his grave. As punishment his hand soon afterward grew out of the grave. A large stone lay on the grave, and his fingers forced themselves into it. This stone, with traces of the five fingers, can still be seen the Parish Church in a chapel not far from the alter. Source: J. G. Th. Grässe, "Hand aus dem Grabe gewachsen," Sagenbuch des preußischen Staats , vol. 2 (Glogau: Verlag von Carl Flemming, 1871), no. 607, p. 582). Danzig is the German name for Gdansk, a Baltic seaport in Poland, but formerly belonging to Prussia. I have arbitrarily assigned the male gender to the deceased child. Grässe's text uses the pronoun es , which can be either male or female. Return to the table of contents . A Child's Hand That Wrongly Attacked a Mother Grows Out of the Grave Friederich Wagenfeld In the beginning of the fourteenth century a poor widow lived just outside the Doven Gate [in Bremen] in the vicinity of Jodenberg. She occupied a cottage that had been given to her by the wealthy Frau Schwanke, the wife of Conrad von Verden. For many long years she had served Frau Schwanke's parents as a faithful and industrious maid, and for this reason Frau Schwanke provided her with various means of support, even in her old age. To be sure, the old widow had a daughter who was married to a wealthy tanner in the city, but the daughter had a hard and proud personality, and when the council at that time gave tanners the right to have their own guild in the future, the devil of arrogance so overcame the tanner-master's wife that she became ashamed of her mother, and in the end she even forbade her to enter her house. The old woman was slow and frail, and she could no longer manage to provide for herself, even by spinning. She would have perished had it not been for the help of others. But this help came to a terrible end when Conrad von Verden, who together with his wealthy cousins had committed a number of acts of violence, was driven from the city along with all of his relatives. The old woman could no longer take her pot to Frau Schwanke to get leftovers from their noon meal, as she had been accustomed to do for a year and a day. Bitter necessity now drove her to turn to her daughter for charity. It was a difficult step for her. With a shaking hand she reached for the staff which for a long time now she had been forced to rely on to support her unsteady gait. Underway she stopped several times. She feared an angry confrontation with her daughter, and reflected if it would not be better to take her problems to someone other than her own child. Suddenly she found herself standing in front of her son-in-law's house. She hesitated another moment, then took courage and stepped inside. "After all, she is my daughter, my only child," she murmured quietly to herself. "God and Saint Willhadus will soften her harshness." She entered the parlor, where the entire family had gathered to eat their noon meal. At first she was very embarrassed, standing there in her poor clothing surrounded by expensive household furnishings and utensils, and she struggled unsuccessfully for words with which to express her plea. Having collected herself somewhat, she most movingly described in simple and unassuming language the hopelessness of her plight. Tears came to her son-in-law's eyes, but he was a weak man who was completely dominated by his wife, and for nothing in the world would he have made an independent decision, directed only by his heart. He would have taken the helpless old woman into his house with pleasure, if it had depended upon him alone. But as it was, he cast a questioning glance toward his wife to assure himself of her approval. Fear overcame him when he saw her face. It was nothing new for him that she should become angry, even in unimportant matters, but never before had he seen such fury, such an ugly distortion of her features. It was as though upon the sight of her mother she had become possessed of an evil spirit. The redness of her raging anger gave way to a corpse-like paleness. With sparking animal-like eyes she appeared to want to penetrate the being to whom she owed her life and existence and who had protected her with maternal nurture in her youth and had cared for her in sickness. Terrified, the old woman looked around for a chair, for her strength threatened to leave her. For a moment the man's human feelings overcame his fear of his wife, and he rushed forward to catch the half-unconscious woman. Until now the tanner-master's wife had sat there quietly without saying a word, or without even moving. But now her anger suddenly exploded like a crashing thunder-storm that had been threatening in the skies for some time. With superhuman strength she pushed her husband aside and like a wild animal threw herself furiously at her own mother, in order to punish her for having dared to come here, although she had been expressly forbidden to do so. Striking at her with her fists, she finally drove her out of the parlor door. The old woman lay on the hallway floor with her face to the ground. She did not move, and the daughter's demands that she stand up were in vain. The daughter's unnatural anger suddenly dissipated at this pitiful sight. It was as though a curtain had been drawn from her eyes and that she could finally see whom she had directed her blind fury against. "Mother!" she cried, horrified at what she had done. "Forgive me! Come to your sinful and repentant daughter. Before God and all the saints, if the most tender attention and the most loving care can erase this terrible sin from your memory, then you shall forget it." Gripped by the deepest sympathy, she bent over the unfortunate woman in order to lift her up. She wanted never again to be separated from her, never again to cause her concern. But this change of disposition came too late, and with horror she saw that she was wasting her loving caresses on a corpse. The tanner-master's wife was spared by an earthly judge, for it was determined that the old woman did not die only as a result of the attack, but even more from fear and terror. But there is also a judge who dwells above the clouds who does not make his determinations according to earthly expectations and sophistry. The tanner-master's wife died suddenly thereafter, and a few days after her burial, the gravedigger noticed with horror that the buried woman's hands -- with which she had attacked her mother -- were extending from the grave. And this miracle can be seen to this day, eternalized in stone in the ambulatory of the cathedral. Source: Friederich Wagenfeld, "Kindeshand, die sich an der Mutter vergreift, wächst zum Grabe heraus," Bremer Volkssagen , 2nd ed., edited by Karl Eichwald (Bremen: Verlag von Karl Tannen, 1878), no. 2, pp. 9-13. First published 1845 in Bremen. Return to the table of contents . A Mother Disciplines Her Deceased Child Switzerland, Franz Niderberger In a house in Obwalden there once lived an eight or nine year old child who was very disobedient and rebellious. The mother recognized her child's stubbornness but could not find it in her heart to discipline him. Thus this child lived for some time and did many bad things. Then he took sick and died. After the burial the child broke through his coffin and stuck his right arm out of the grave, causing fear and amazement among the people. The parents attempted everything to get their child to pull his arm back, but nothing helped. Finally someone said to the deeply concerned parents, "You spared the rod too much. As punishment for this, the mother must go to the grave every day and beat the hand with a switch until he pulls it back." The mother did this, and this course of action brought the desired results. Source: Franz Niderberger, Sagen und Gebräuche aus Unterwalden (Sarnen, 1924), pp. 183-184. The narrator in this legend refers to the child with the personal pronoun "es." Thus the child could be either a girl or a boy. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Hand of Glory . Another group of gory legends about human hands. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Grimm Brothers' Home Page . The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales). Return to the table of contents . Revised March 30, 2000. Hand of Glory Legends The Hand of Glory and other legends about human hands folktales of type 958E* edited and/or translated by D. L. Ashliman University of Pittsburgh © 1997-2019 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Hand of Glory (Sabine Baring-Gould). The Hand of Glory (Francis Grose). The Inn of Spital on Stanmore (England). The Hand of Glory (England). The Hand of Glory in Herefordshie (England). Thief's Foot -- Thief's Hand -- Thief's Finger (Netherlands). Thieves' Thumbs (Germany, Jacob Grimm). Thieves' Lights (Germany, Ernst Moritz Arndt). Spell and Counter-Spell (Germany, Adalbert Kuhn). Thieves' Lights (Germany, Karl Bartsch). The Hands of Unbaptized Children (Switzerland). The Finger of Sin (Poland). Notes and Bibliography . The Hand of Glory Sabine Baring-Gould The Hand of Glory .. is the hand of a man who has been hung, and it is prepared in the following manner: Wrap the hand in a piece of winding-sheet, drawing it tight, so as to squeeze out the little blood which may remain; then place it in an earthenware vessel with saltpeter, salt, and long pepper, all carefully and thoroughly powdered. Let it remain a fortnight in this pickle till it is well dried, then expose it to the sun in the dog-days, till it is completely parched, or, if the sun be not powerful enough, dry it in an oven heated with vervain and fern. Next make a candle with the fat of a hung man, virgin-wax, and Lapland sesame. Observe the use of this herb: The hand of glory is used to hold this candle when it is lighted. Douster Swivel, in The Antiquary [by Sir Walter Scott] adds, "You do make a candle, and put into de hand of glory at de proper hour and minute, with de proper ceremonisth; and he who seeksh for treasuresh shall find none at all!" [Robert] Southey places it in the hands of the enchanter Mohareb, when he would lull to sleep Yohak, the giant guardian of the caves of Babylon. He -- From his wallet drew a human hand, Shrivel'd, and dry, and black; And fitting, as he spake, A taper in his hold, Pursued: "A murderer on the stake had died; I drove the vulture from his limbs, and lopt The hand that did the murder, and drew up The tendon strings to close its grasp; And in the sun and wind Parch'd it, nine weeks exposed. The taper . . . But not here the place to impart, Nor hast thou undergone the rites That fit thee to partake the mystery. Look! It burns clear, but with the air around, Its dead ingredients mingle deathliness." Several stories of this terrible hand are related in [William] Henderson's Folklore of the Northern Counties of England . I will only quote one, which was told me by a laboring man in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and which is the same story as that given by Martin Anthony Delrio in his Disquisitiones Magicæ , in 1593, and which is printed in the Appendix to that book of M. Henderson. One dark night, after the house had been closed, there came a tap at the door of a lone inn, in the midst of a barren moor. The door was opened, and there stood without, shivering and shaking, a poor beggar, his rags soaked with rain, and his hands white with cold. He asked piteously for a lodging, and it was cheerfully granted him; though there was not a spare bed in the house, he might lie along on the mat before the kitchen fire, and welcome. All in the house went to bed except the servant lassie, who from the kitchen could see into the large room through a small pane of glass let into the door. When everyone save the beggar was out of the room, she observed the man draw himself up from the floor, seat himself at the table, extract a brown withered human hand from his pocket, and set it upright in the candlestick; he then anointed the fingers, and, applying a match to them, they began to flame. Filled with horror, the girl rushed up the back stairs, and endeavored to arouse her master and the men of the house; but all in vain, they slept a charmed sleep; and finding all her efforts ineffectual, she hastened downstairs again. Looking again through the small window, she observed the fingers of the hand flaming, but the thumb gave no light: this was because one of the inmates of the house was not asleep. The beggar began collecting all the valuables of the house into a large sack -- no lock withstood the application of the flaming hand. Then, putting it down, the man entered an adjoining apartment. The moment he was gone, the girl rushed in, and seizing the hand, attempted to extinguish the quivering yellow flames, which wavered at the fingers' ends. She blew at them in vain; she poured some drops from a beer-jug over them, but that only made the fingers burn the brighter; she cast some water upon them, but still without extinguishing the light. As a last resource, she caught up a jug of milk, and dashing it over the four lambent flames, they went out immediately. Uttering a piercing cry, she rushed to the door of the room the beggar had entered, and locked it. The whole house was aroused, and the thief was secured and hung. We must not forget Tom [Thomas] Ingoldsby's rendering of a similar legend: Open, lock, To the Dead Man's knock! Fly, bolt, and bar, and band! Nor move, nor swerve, Joint, muscle, or nerve, At the spell of the Dead Man's hand! Sleep, all who sleep! -- Wake, all who wake! But be as the dead for the Dead Man's sake! Now lock, nor bolt, nor bar avails, Nor stout oak panel thick-studded with nails. Heavy and harsh the hinges creak, Though they had been oil'd in the course of the week. The door opens wide as wide may be, And there they stand, That murderous band, Lit by the light of the Glorious Hand, By one! -- by two! -- by three! But, instead of pursuing the fable through its further ramifications, let us apply the schamir of comparative mythology to the myth itself, and see whether before it the bolts do not give way, and the great doors of the cavern of mysteries expand, and discover to us the origin of the superstitious belief in this sea-prince's worm, the stone of wisdom, sesame, forget-me-not, or the hand of glory. What are its effects? It bursts locks, and shatters stones, it opens in the mountains the hidden treasures hitherto concealed from men, or it paralyzes, lulling into a magic sleep, or, again, it restores to life. Source: Sabine Baring-Gould, Curious Myths of the Middle Ages , new edition (London, Oxford, and Cambridge: Rivingtons, 1873), pp. 405-410 . This piece is extracted from a larger chapter entitled "Schamir." Return to the table of contents . The Hand of Glory France, Germany, and Spain To conclude this article, and my book, I shall transcribe a foreign piece of superstition, firmly believed in many parts of France, Germany, and Spain. The account of it, and the mode of preparation, appears to have been given by a judge. In the latter, there is a striking resemblance to the charm in Macbeth. Of the hand of glory, which is made use of by housebreakers, to enter into houses at night, without fear of opposition. I acknowledge that I never tried the secret of the hand of glory, but I have thrice assisted at the definitive judgment of certain criminals, who, under the torture, confessed having used it. Being asked what it was, how they procured it, and what were its uses and properties, they answered, first, that the use of the hand of glory was to stupify those to whom it was presented, and to render them motionless, insomuch that they could not stir, any more than if they were dead; secondly, that it was the hand of a hanged man; and thirdly, that it must be prepared in the manner following: Take the hand, left or right, of a person hanged, and exposed on the highway; wrap it up in a piece of a shroud, or winding sheet, in which let it be well squeezed, to get out any small quantity of blood that may have remained in it; then put it into an earthen vessel, with zimat, saltpeter, salt, and long pepper, the whole well powdered; leave if fifteen days in that vessel; afterwards take it out, and expose it to the noontide sun in the dog days, till it is thoroughly dry; and if the sun is not sufficient, put it into an oven heated with fern and vervain; then compose a kind of candle with the fat of a hanged man, virgin wax, and sisame [sesame] of Lapland. The hand of glory is used as a candlestick to hold this candle, when lighted. Its properties are, that wheresoever anyone goes with this dreadful instrument, the persons to whom it is presented will be deprived of all power of motion. On being asked if there was no remedy, or antidote, to counteract this charm, they said the hand of glory would cease to take effect, and thieves could not make use of it, if the threshold of the door of the house, and other places by which they might enter, were anointed with an unguent composed of the gall of a black cat, the fat of a white hen, and the blood of a screech owl; which mixture must necessarily be prepared during the dog days. Source: Francis Grose, A Provincial Glossary, with a Collection of Local Proverbs, and Popular Superstitions , new edition (London: S. Hooper, 1787), pp. 73-75 . Return to the table of contents . The Inn of Spital on Stanmore England This inn of Spital on Stanmore was kept, in the year 1797, by one George Alderson. He, his wife, and son managed the business of this lonely hostel themselves, with the help of a maid named Bella. The inn was a long, narrow building, and turned one end towards the great high road which crossed Stanmore on its way from York to Carlisle. The lower story of the house was used as stabling, for the stage coaches changed horses at the inn and brought all the last news of the day. The upper part of the solid stone building was reached by a flight of ten or twelve stone steps leading up from the road to a stout oaken door, and the windows, deeply recessed in the thick walls, were strongly barred with iron. One cold October night the red curtains were drawn across the windows, and a huge log fire sputtered and crackled on the broad hearth, and lighted up the faces of George Alderson and his son as they sat talking of their gains at the fair of Broughton Hill; these gains, representing a large sum of money, being safely stowed away in a cupboard in the landlord's bedroom. Mrs. Alderson and Bella sat a little way off spinning by firelight, for the last coach had gone by and the house door was barred and bolted for the night. Outside the wind and rain were having a battle; there came fierce gusts which made the old casements rattle and stirred the red curtains, and then a torrent of rain swept smartly across the window, striking the glass so angrily that it seemed as if the small panes must shatter under its violence. Into the midst of this fitful disturbance, only varied by the men's voices beside the hearth, there came a knock at the door. "Open t' door, lass," said Alderson. "Ah wadna keep a dog out sik a neet as this." "Eh! best slacken t' chain, lass," said the more cautious landlady. The girl went to the door, but when she saw that the visitor was an old woman she opened the door wide and bade her come in. There entered a bent figure dressed in a long cloak and hood; this last was drawn over her face; and, as she walked feebly to the armchair which Alderson pushed forward, the rain streamed from her clothing and made a pool on the oaken floor. She shivered violently, but refused to take off her cloak and have it dried. She also refused the offer of food or a bed. She said she was on her way to the north, and must start as soon as there was daylight. All she wanted was a rest beside the fire. She could get the sleep she needed in her armchair. The innkeeper and his wife were well used to wayfarers, and they soon said "Good-night" and went to bed; so did their son. Bella was left alone with the shivering old woman. The girl had kept silence, but now she put her wheel away in its corner and began to talk. She only got surly answers, and although the voice was low and subdued, the girl fancied that it did not sound like a woman's. Presently the wayfarer stretched out her feet to warm them, and Bella's quick eyes saw under the hem of the skirts that the stranger wore horseman's gaiters. The girl felt uneasy, and, instead of going to bed, she resolved to stay up and watch. "Ah'm sleepy," she said, gaping, but the figure in the chair made no answer. Presently Bella lay down on a long settle beyond the range of the firelight and watched the stranger while she pretended to fall asleep. All at once the figure in the chair stirred, raised its head, and listened; then it rose slowly to its feet, no longer bent, but tall and powerful-looking. It stood listening for some time. There was no sound but Bella's heavy breathing and the wind and the rain beating on the windows. Then the woman took from the folds of her cloak a brown withered human hand; next she produced a candle, lit it from the fire, and placed it in the hand. Bella's heart beat so fast that she could hardly keep up the regular deep breathing of pretended sleep; but now she saw the stranger coming towards her with this ghastly chandelier, and she closed her lids tightly. She felt that the woman was bending over her, and that the light was passed slowly before her eyes, while these words were muttered in the strange masculine voice that had first roused her suspicions: Let those who rest more deeply sleep; Let those awake their vigils keep. The light moved away, and through her eyelashes Bella saw that the woman's back was turned to her, and that she was placing the hand in the middle of the long oak table, while she muttered this rhyme: O Hand of Glory shed thy light; Direct us to our spoil tonight. Then she moved a few steps away and undrew the window curtain. Coming back to the table she said: Flash out thy blaze, O skeleton hand, And guide the feet of our trusty band. At once the light shot up a bright livid gleam, and the woman walked to the door; she took down the bar, drew back the bolts, unfastened the chain, and Bella felt a keen blast of cold night air rush in as the door was flung open. She kept her eyes closed, however, for the woman at that moment looked back at her, and then drawing something from her gown she blew a long shrill whistle; she then went out at the door and down a few of the steps, stopped and whistled again, but the next moment a vigorous push sent her spinning down the steps on to the road below. The door was closed, barred, and bolted, and Bella almost flew to her master's bedroom and tried to wake him. In vain. He and his wife slept on, while their snores sounded loudly through the house. The girl felt frantic. She then tried to rouse young Alderson, but he slept as if in a trance. Now a fierce battery on the door and cries below the windows told that the band had arrived. A new thought came to Bella. She ran back to the kitchen. There was the Hand of Glory, still burning with a wonderful light. The girl caught up a cup of milk that stood on the table, dashed it on the flame and extinguished it -- in one moment, as it seemed to her, she heard footsteps coming from the bedrooms, and George Alderson and his son rushed into the room with firearms in their hands. As soon as the robbers heard his voice bidding them depart they summoned the landlord to open his doors and produce his valuables. Meanwhile young Alderson had opened the window, and for answer he fired his blunderbuss down among the men below. There was a groan, a fall, then a pause, and, as it seemed to the besieged, some sort of discussion. Then a voice called out, "Give up the Hand of Glory, and we will not harm you." For answer young Alderson fired again, and the party drew off. Seemingly they had trusted entirely to the Hand of Glory, or else they feared a long resistance, for no further attack was made. The withered hand remained in possession of the Aldersons for sixteen years after. This story was told to my informant, Mr. Atkinson, by Bella herself when she was quite an old woman. Source: Thomas and Katharine Macquoid, About Yorkshire (London: Chatto and Windus, 1883), pp. 65-70 . This tale is part of a longer narrative, and does not have a title. Return to the table of contents . The Hand of Glory England Narrative 1 One evening, between the years 1790 and 1800, a traveler, dressed in woman's clothes, arrived at the Old Spital Inn, the place where the mail coach changed horses, in High Spital, on Bowes Moor. The traveler begged to stay all night, but had to go away so early in the morning that if a mouthful of food were set ready for breakfast there was no need the family should be disturbed by her departure. The people of the house, however, arranged that a servant maid should sit up till the stranger was out of the premises, and then went to bed themselves. The girl lay down for a nap on the longsettle by the fire, but before she shut her eyes she took a good look at the traveler, who was sitting on the opposite side of the hearth, and espied a pair of man's trousers peeping out from under the gown. All inclination for sleep was now gone; however, with great self-command, she feigned it, closed her eyes, and even began to snore. On this the traveler got up, pulled out of his pocket a dead man's hand, fitted a candle to it, lighted the candle, and passed hand and candle several times before the servant girl's face, saying as he did so: "Let all those who are asleep be asleep, and let those who are awake be awake." This done, he placed the light on the table, opened the outer door, went down two or three of the steps which led from the house to the road, and began to whistle for his companions. The girl (who had hitherto had presence of mind enough to remain perfectly quiet) now jumped up, rushed behind the ruffian, and pushed him down the steps. She then shut the door, locked it, and ran upstairs to try and wake the family, but without success: calling, shouting, and shaking were alike in vain. The poor girl was in despair, for she heard the traveler and his comrades outside the house. So she ran down again, and seized a bowl of blue (i.e., skimmed milk), and threw it over the hand and candle; after which she went upstairs again, and awoke the sleepers without any difficulty. The landlord's son went to the window, and asked the men outside what they wanted. They answered that if the dead man's hand were but given them, they would go away quietly, and do no harm to anyone. This he refused, and fired among them, and the shot must have taken effect, for in the morning stains of blood were traced to a considerable distance. These circumstances were related to my informant, Mr. Charles Wastell, in the spring of 1861, by an old woman named Bella Parkin, who resided close to High Spital, and was actually the daughter of the courageous servant girl. Narrative 2 Two magicians, having come to lodge in a public house with a view to robbing it, asked permission to pass the night by the fire, and obtained it. When the house was quiet, the servant girl, suspecting mischief, crept downstairs and looked through the keyhole. She saw the men open a sack, and take out a dry, withered hand. They anointed the fingers with some unguent, and lighted them. Each finger flamed, but the thumb they could not light; that was because one of the household was not asleep. The girl hastened to her master, but found it impossible to arouse him. She tried every other sleeper, but could not break the charmed sleep. At last, stealing down into the kitchen, while the thieves were busy over her master's strongbox, she secured the hand, blew out the flames, and at once the whole household was aroused. Narrative 3 One dark night, when all was shut up, there came a tap at the door of a lone inn in the middle of a barren moor. The door was opened, and there stood without, shivering and shaking, a poor beggar, his rags soaked with rain, and his hand white with cold. He asked piteously for a lodging, and it was cheerfully granted him; there was not a spare bed in the house, but he could lie on the mat before the kitchen fire, and welcome. So this was settled, and everyone in the house went to bed except the cook, who from the back kitchen could see into the large room through a pane of glass let into the door. She watched the beggar, and saw him, as soon as he was left alone, draw himself up from the floor, seat himself at the table, extract from his pocket a brown withered human hand, and set it upright in the candlestick. He then anointed the fingers, and applying a match to them, they began to flame. Filled with horror, the cook rushed up the back stairs, and endeavored to arouse her master and the men of the house. But all was in vain--they slept a charmed sleep; so in despair she hastened down again, and placed herself at her post of observation. She saw the fingers of the hand flaming, but the thumb remained unlighted, because one inmate of the house was awake. The beggar was busy collecting the valuables around him into a large sack, and having taken all he cared for in the large room, he entered another. On this the woman ran in, and, seizing the light, tried to extinguish the flames. But this was not so easy. She blew at them, but they burnt on as before. She poured the dregs of a beer jug over them, but they blazed up the brighter. As a last resource, she caught up a jug of milk, and dashed it over the four lambent flames, and they died out at once. Uttering a loud cry, she rushed to the door of the apartment the beggar had entered, and locked it. The whole family was aroused, and the thief easily secured and hanged. This tale is told in Northumberland. Source: Edwin Sidney Hartland, English Folk and other Fairy Tales (London: Walter Scott Publishing Company, [1906]), pp. 196-99 . Hartland's source for narrative 1 is: William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders , (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1879), pp. 241-42 . Hartland's source for narrative 2 is S. Baring-Gould. Return to the table of contents . The Hand of Glory in Herefordshire England The "hand of glory" was probably once made and used in Herefordshire. A Crasswall woman remembers among her great-uncle's "silly old tales" one of a witch who made a hand of glory, or "dead man's candle," from the hand of a corpse on the gibbet at Crasswall, in order to put a spell on some people who had ducked her in a horsepond. Source (HathiTrust Digital Library): Ella Mary Leather, The Folk-Lore of Herefordshire: Collected from Oral and Printed Sources (Hereford: Jakeman and Carver; London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1912), p. 55 . Return to the table of contents . Thief's Foot -- Thief's Hand -- Thief's Finger Netherlands In West Flanders, not far from Bailleul, a thief was taken, on whom was found the foot of one that had been hanged, which he used for the purpose of putting people to sleep. Two fellows once came to Huy, who pretended to be exceedingly fatigued, and when they had supped would not retire to a sleeping room, but begged their host would allow them to take a nap on the hearth. But the maidservant, who did not like the looks of the two guests, remained by the kitchen door and peeped through a chink, when she saw that one of them drew a thief's hand from his pocket, the fingers of which, after having rubbed them with an ointment, he lighted, and they all burned except one. Again they held this finger to the fire, but still it would not burn, at which they appeared much surprised, and one said, "There must surely be some one in the house who is not yet asleep." They then hung the hand with its four burning fingers by the chimney, and went out to call their associates. But the maid followed them instantly and made the door fast, then ran upstairs, where the landlord slept, that she might wake him, but was unable, notwithstanding all her shaking and calling. In the meantime the thieves had returned and were endeavoring to enter the house by a window, but the maid cast them down from the ladder. They then took a different course, and would have forced an entrance, had it not occurred to the maid that the burning fingers might probably be the cause of her master's profound sleep. Impressed with this idea she ran to the kitchen, and blew them out, when the master and his men-servants instantly awoke, and soon drove away the robbers. In the village of Alveringen there formerly lived a sorceress, who had a thief's finger, over which nine masses had been read. For being acquainted with the sacristan, she had wrapt it in a cloth and laid it on the altar, telling him it was a relic. With this finger she performed wonderful things. When she had lighted it -- for such fingers burn like a candle -- everyone in the house where she might be was put to sleep. She would then steal money and everything else that she fancied, until she was at last detected, and the stolen property found in her possession. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 3 (London: Edward Lumley, 1852), pp. 274-75 . Return to the table of contents . Thieves' Thumbs Germany Thieves cut off the thumb of an unborn child and light it as a candle. As long as it is burning, everyone in the house will remain asleep. Source: Jacob Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie , 4th edition, vol. 3 (Berlin: Ferd. Dümmlers Verlagsbuchhandlung Harrwitz und Gossmann, 1878), p. 311 . Return to the table of contents . Thieves' Lights Germany There are many curious and miraculously unusual happenings and things in nature, of which no human understands how they occur or how they relate to other things, but they exist nonetheless. And when people hear stories about them, they are amazed and terrified, but they cannot comprehend them. Thus it is with the Raven Stone, which many people talk about, but no one knows anything about with certainty. But it is known for sure that Raven Stones exist. You have heard about Thieves' Lights. They are similar to the Raven Stone and other invisible thieves' lanterns. It is gruesome to relate how Thieves' Lights are obtained. They are the fingers of unborn, innocent little children. For these purposes the fingers of already born and baptized children cannot be used. And what sort of unborn little children are they? And how does one obtain the lights? When a female thief or murderer hangs or drowns herself, or is hanged or beheaded, and she is carrying a child inside her body, then you must go forth at midnight on the devil's roads, not on God's roads, with incantations and magic, not with prayer and blessings, and you must take an axe or a knife that has been used by an executioner, and with it you must open up the poor sinner's belly, take out the child, cut off its fingers, and take them with you. But this absolutely must all be done at midnight in the most perfect solitude and silence. Not even the softest sound, no "oh" and no sigh can escape the lips of the seeker. In this manner you obtain the lights, which you can burn whenever you want to. And however short they are, they will never burn up, but will always remain the same length. These magic lights have the unusual nature and property that they ignite whenever and wherever their thievish owner wants them to. And they extinguish themselves as fast as his wish and thought. With their help he can see everything, even in the densest and darkest night, whenever and wherever he wants. But they shine only for him and for no one else. He himself remains invisible, even though they illuminate everything else. Further, the horror within them gives them a mysterious power over sleep. In any room where they are lit a sleeper will snore so soundly that one could set off ten thunderbolts over his head without waking him. Just think how easy it is to steal things and carry them off under these conditions! Source: Ernst Moritz Arndt, "Der Rabenstein," Mährchen und Jugenderinnerungen vol. 2 (Berlin: G. Reimer, 1843), pp. 348-49 . In later editions, Arndt's editors softened this account by omitting the requirement that the dead person's fingers used for thieves lights must be from an unborn child, stating only that they come from an unbaptized child. See, for example, "Der Rabenstein," Mährchen und Jugenderinnerungen vol. 2, 3rd edition (Leipzig: Kommissions-Verlag von Karl Fr. Pfau, 1902), pp. 335-36 . The Raven Stones mentioned at the beginning of the above piece have similar qualities to the Thieves' Lights. They too emit a light visible only to their owners, but their origin is not quite as horrible as that of the Thieves' Lights. Raven Stones are undigested remains of the eyes of executed criminals. Arndt, in the chapter cited above, gives substantial detail about how these stones can be obtained from the ravens that picked out the eyes of the criminals on the gallows. Return to the table of contents . Spell and Counter-Spell Germany Once there was a wealthy peasant who died without children, leaving all his possessions to his wife. One evening an old stranger came to her house and asked for shelter for the night, even if he had to sleep in the hayloft. At first the woman did not want to take him in, but finally she agreed to do so, when the old man said, "Madame, I am a poor and unassuming man, but you cannot know how I can help you if you allow me to stay here." During the night when everyone in the house was asleep, the old man was still lying awake in the loft when he heard footsteps in the entryway. Thinking that this was suspicious, he krept from his bed in the hay and saw below him three pitch-black fellows with unusual candles in their hands moving about the main room. The old man immediately knew what was happening. The black companions were intent on robbery. Their candles were the toes of unborn children, and as long as they were burning everyone would remain in the deepest sleep -- a spell which the robbers themselves as well as our old man were protected against through a counter-spell. While the black fellows were busy emptying trunks and chests the old man quietly climbed down the ladder, found the thieves and murmured a charm that held them all fast. Then he extinguished their candles and woke the woman and the servants. They came with lights. "Madame," said the old man, "have these fellows washed up so we can see their actual faces." This was done, and the widow did not believe her eyes when the layer of soot was removed, revealing her brothers-in-law. "My good man," she said to the old man, "you captured these, my dear relatives, and you will be able to release them as well. Please do so! They will thank you and do us no more harm." The old man released them with a charm, and the widow told her brothers-in-law to be on their way. Deeply shamed, they crept away. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, "Zauber und Gegenzauber," Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen vol. 1 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), no. 149d, pp. 145-46 . Kuhn's source: "From Hemer, submitted by [Friedrich Leopold] Woeste." Footnote by Kuhn: "With the hand of an unbaptized child thieves can open locks and enter houses without being noticed. (Montanus, p. 88)" Return to the table of contents . Thieves' Lights Germany Narrative 1 In former times thieves made lights for themselves which had the power to keep the inhabitants of a house asleep as long as the lights were burning. If the rogues knew how many people there were in the house that they wanted to rob, then they would ignite that number of lights, and no one would be able to wake up as long as the lights were burning. These lights were made from unborn children which had been cut from the womb. Therefore it occurred not infrequently that pregnant women were sold to bandits for high prices. That very thing happened once at a mill. A servant girl who was pregnant worked for the miller. Her fiancé came to visit her one night. He saw a wagon standing before the door of the miller's house. It was covered with a tarp. He heard a stifled groaning sound coming from beneath the tarp. The servant rushed to the living-room window, and inside he saw several fellows with the miller. They were counting out a large pile of silver coins onto the table. The servant immediately became suspicious and rushed back to investigate the wagon. He pulled his own fiancée from beneath the wagon tarp. Her mouth had been bound with a cloth. The servant carried her to safety and then untied her hands and feet. The robbers soon emerged from the house and drove off as fast as their horses could run, thinking that they were carrying with them a rich booty. Narrative 2 Once a rogue slipped into a house during the day. The inhabitants of the house saw him, but although they searched high and low, they could not find him. At nightfall the inhabitants went to bed, but the servant girl could not fall asleep. She was afraid of the stranger, and wanted to look around carefully one last time. To her fright she discovered him hiding in the stove. The girl then pretended to fall asleep. Now that all was quiet in the house, the rogue climbed out of the stove and ignited as many lights as there were people in the house. But one of the lights would not burn. He believed that the girl was not yet asleep and held a burning light against her feet. However, in her fear she withstood the pain and did not move. Now satisfied, the rogue placed all the lights on the table and went outside to summon his fellow robbers. The girl jumped up and barred the door shut behind him. She attempted to awaken the people in the house, but to no avail. She then tried to extinguish the lights, but failed to do this as well. The rogue came to the window and demanded his lights, promising to leave once he had them. The servant girl answered that she could not reach them out to him while there were burning. She said that she had been unable to put them out and asked him what to do. He told her to submerge them in fresh milk. That is exactly what she wanted to know. She submerged them in fresh milk, and the lights went out. She shouted at the fellow that he was not going to get his lights back, and he then did indeed have to made a hasty retreat, for as soon as the lights were extinguished, everyone in the house awoke, and they all came running to see what was the matter. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg] , vol. 2 (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1880), no. 1608, pp. 332-33 . Return to the table of contents . The Hands of Unbaptized Children Switzerland The body of a deceased, unbaptized child should be buried at night so that no one will know where the grave is. The hands of such children can open any lock. Furthermore, a thief who possesses the hand from such a corpse can tell whether anyone is awake in a house that he intends to rob. He has only to light the fingers. If they all burn then everyone in the house is asleep, and will no awaken as long as the fingers are burning. The number of fingers not burning shows how many of the house's inhabitants are awake. Source: J. E. Rothenbach, Volksthümliches aus dem Kanton Bern: Localsagen und Satzungen des Aberglaubens (Zürich: Verlag von Cäsar Schmidt, 1876), pp. 11-12 . Rothenbach's sources: Jakob Ryser and Friedrich Stettler. Return to the table of contents . The Finger of Sin Poland A merchant in a town in Hinterpommern had a finger of sin (a finger from an executed person) hidden in the container used to dispense alcohol. Because of this customers streamed to him in great numbers, and his business thrived. While cleaning the cask a servant noticed the chalk-white and bleached-out finger and reported his master to the authorities. The latter was severely punished, and the finger was confiscated from him. After having completed his prison sentence the merchant attempted to reestablish his business, but luck was not with him. Customers stayed away, and he had to make his living through begging. Source: Otto Knoop, "Der Sündenfinger," Blätter für pommersche Volkskunde , vol. 1 (Stettin: Johs. Burmeister's Buchhandlung, 1893), p. 64 . Hinterpommern (also known in English as Farther Pomerania or Eastern Pomerania), a region east of the Oder River, is in present-day Poland. Return to the table of contents . Notes and Bibliography For additional "Hand of Glory" narratives and commentary see: Ainsworth, William Harrison. Rockwood: A Romance (London: George Routledge and Sons, n.d.), pp. 11-12 . First published in 1834. Albertus, Lucius Parvus. "La main gloire," Secrets merveilleux de la magie naturelle et cabalistique du Petit Albert (Lyon: Chez les héritiers de Beringos Frates, 1752), pp. 109-111 . Baker, Frank. "Anthropological Notes on the Human Hand," The American Anthropologist , vol. 1, no. 1 (Jan. 1888), pp. 51-75 . See especially pp. 55-61 . Baring-Gould, Sabine. "A Strange Crime," The Gentleman's Magazine (April 1887), pp. 313-25 . Briggs, Katharine M. "The Hand of Glory," A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales , pt. B, v. 2 (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1985), pp. 534-37. Erk, Ludwig. "Müllertücke," Deutscher Liederhort (Berlin: Verlag von Th. Chr. Fr. Enslin, 1856), no. 39b, pp. 135-36 . In this German folk ballad a wicked miller sells his pregnant wife to three robbers, who then murder her, presumably for the body of her unborn child. Hand of Glory , an article from Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia . Ingoldsby, Thomas [Richard Harris Barham]. "The Nurse's Story: The Hand of Glory," The Ingoldsby Legends; or, Mirth and Marvels , 1st series (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1852), pp. 51-59 . Piggot, John. "Hand of Glory," Notes and Queries , series 4, vol. 9 (January - June 1872), p. 376 . Raven, Jon. "The Mummified Arm," The Folklore of Staffordshire , (Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman and Littlefield, 1978), p. 18. Rowling, Marjorie. "The Hand of Glory," The Folklore of the Lake District (Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman and Littlefield, 1976), pp. 25-26. Scott, Sir Walter. Waverley Novels, vol. 5: The Antiquary , vol. 1 (Boston: Samuel H. Parker, 1830), pp. 177-79 . First published in 1816. Southey, Robert. Thalaba the Destroyer , 2nd edition. vol. 1 (London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme, 1809), p. 234 . See also Southey's comment on "the salutary spell," pp. 263-64 . Trethewy, G. W. "Farrukhabad -- Thieves' Superstitions," North Indian Notes and Queries , vol. 2, no. 12 (March 1893), p. 215 . "Hand of Glory" legends are classified as type 958E* tales in the Aarne-Thompson-Uther folktale classification system. For more information about folktale types see: Aarne, Antti, and Thompson, Stith. The Types of the Folktale: A Classification and Bibliography . FF Communications, no. 184. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 1961. Ashliman, D. L. A Guide to Folktales in the English Language . New York; Westport Connecticut; and London: Greenwood Press, 1987. Uther, Hans-Jörg. The Types of International Folktales: A Classification and Bibliography . 3 vols. FF Communications, nos. 284-86. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 2004. For more legends about human hands see: The Hand from the Grave. Return to Table of Contents D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 19, 2019. Hanging Game: Folktales of Type 1066 The Hanging Game folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1343 (formerly Aarne-Thompson type 1066) translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2022 Contents The White Hare (Denmark). The Limping Hare (Germany). The Hanging Game (Switzerland). The Hanging Game (England). The Shifty Lad (Scotland). The Two Thieves (Scotland). Boys Try Beheading (Poland). Children Play at Slaughtering (Germany). Playing at Hanging (China). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The White Hare Denmark Two farmboys wanted to hang themselves for fun. They drew lots as to who should be first. The one who won the drawing stood up on a milking stool, tied a rope around a beam, put his neck in the noose, and said to his companion: "Now I'll kick the stool away, but when I start spluttering, you must put the stool back under me." The other fellow stood there with the stool in his hand, ready to look after his companion; but just then a white hare came hopping very slowly through the cowshed. The fellow thought he could catch it, but he didn't succeed. Out of breath, he had to give up the hunt. When he came back to his hanging companion, he was dead. It must have been the devil, disguised as a hare, who lured the living fellow away. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Sagn (Aarhus: Jacob Zeuners Bogtrykkeri, 1900), no. 430, p. 150 . Kristensen's source: F. Wennerwald. Kristensen does not give this legend a title. Return to the table of contents . The Limping Hare Germany One fall in Wolfenhausen near Rottenburg some boys were playing "hanging" in a meadow. One of them was to let himself be hanged. The boldest of them volunteered. In jest they tied him up high, but while they were so doing, a three-legged hare came running by. The boys ran after it, but however close they came to it, it always jumped away from them. And thus they forgot about their comrade. When they came back to him, he was dead. It is said that the hare was not of this world, that it must have been the Evil One. Source (books.google.com): Anton Birlinger, "Hinkender Hase," Volksthümliches aus Schwaben , vol. 1 (Freiburg im Breisgau: Herder'sche Verlagshandlung, 1861), no. 154, p. 108 . Source (Internet Archive): Anton Birlinger, "Hinkender Hase," Volksthümliches aus Schwaben , vol. 1 (Freiburg im Breisgau: Herder'sche Verlagshandlung, 1861), no. 154, p. 108 . Return to the table of contents . The Hanging Game Switzerland In Würenlos [in the canton of Aargau] the village boys idling in the meadow were talking about a game that they might play until the end of the long day. Because they could think of nothing new, they decided that the one of them who always lost at their previous games should let himself be hanged for a short while as a penalty. He agreed, under the condition that they would immediately help him as soon as he let his feet swing. He climbed a nearby willow tree and let them tie him to a branch. At that same moment a magnificent bird with glistening feathers flew out of the willow tree. The boys who first saw it chased after it, and the others heard music that was so seductively tempting that they ran to the place where the sound seemed to be coming from. When both groups disappointedly returned to the meadow, their comrade was hanging motionless from the cord. Source (books.google.com): H. Herzog, "Das Erhängenspielen," Schweizersagen: Für Jung und Alt dargestellt (Aarau: Druck und Verlag von H. R. Sauerländer, 1871), no. 7, p. 8 . Source (Internet Archive): H. Herzog, "Das Erhängenspielen," Schweizersagen: Für Jung und Alt dargestellt (Aarau: Druck und Verlag von H. R. Sauerländer, 1871), no. 7, p. 8 . Return to the table of contents . The Hanging Game England Some years ago, when driving past a gallows standing in a field at Melton Ross, an old man told me a curious tale. He said: Some hundred of years ago, three or four boys were playing at hanging, and seeing who could hang the longest in a tree. Just as one of them got up and put the noose on, a three-legged hare (the devil, sir) came limping past, and off the other lads ran after him, and forgot their comrade. They very nearly caught the hare several times, but he got away. And when they came back the lad in the tree was dead. That's what the gallows was put up for. Source (books.google.com): W. H. Jones, Lincolnshire Notes and Queries , v. 1 (January 1, 1888 to October 1, 1889), p. 166 . Source (Internet Archive): W. H. Jones, Lincolnshire Notes and Queries , v. 1 (January 1, 1888 to October 1, 1889), p. 166 . Jones does not give this local legend a title. Return to the table of contents . The Shifty Lad Scotland The Black Rogue and the Shifty Lad went on stealing till they had got much money, and they thought that they had better buy a drove (of cattle) and go to the fair with it to sell, and that people would think that it was at drovering they had made the money that they had got. The two went, and they bought a great drove of cattle, and they went to a fair that was far on the way from them. They sold the drove, and they got the money for them, and they went away to go home. When they were on the way, they saw a gallows on the top of a hill, and the Shifty Lad said to the Black Rogue, "Come up till we see the gallows; some say that the gallows is the end for the thieves at all events." They went up where the gallows was, and they were looking all about it. Said the Shifty Lad, "Might we not try what kind of death is in the gallows, that we may know what is before us, if we should be caught at roguery. I will try it myself first." The Shifty Lad put the cord about his own neck, and he said to the Black Rogue, "Here, draw me up, and when I am tired above, I will shake my legs, and then do thou let me down." The Black Rogue drew the cord, and he raised the Shifty Lad aloft off the earth, and at the end of a little blink the Shifty Lad shook his legs, and the Black Rogue let him down. The Shifty Lad took the cord off his neck, and he he said to the Black Rogue, "Thou thyself hast not ever tried anything that is so funny as hanging. If thou wouldst try once, thou wouldst have no more fear for hanging. I was shaking my legs for delight, and thou wouldst shake thy legs for delight too if thou wert aloft." Said the Black Rogue, "I will try it too, so that I may know what it is like." "Do," said the Shifty Lad; "and when thou art tired above, whistle, and I will let thee down." The Black Rogue put the cord about his neck, and the Shifty Lad drew him up aloft; and when the Shifty Lad found that the Black Rogue was aloft against the gallows, he said to him, "Now, when thou wantest to come down, whistle, and if thou art well pleased where thou art, shake thy legs." When the Black Rogue was a little blink above, he began to shake his legs and to kick; and the Shifty Lad would say, "Oh! Art thou not funny! Art thou not funny! Art thou not funny! When it seems to thee that thou art long enough above, whistle." But the Black Rogue has not whistled yet. The Shifty Lad tied the cord to the lower end of the tree of the gallows till the Black Rogue was dead. Then he went where he was, and he took the money out of his pouch, and he said to him, "Now, since thou hast no longer any use for this money, I will take care of it for thee." And he went away, and he left the Black Rogue hanging there. Source (books.google.com): J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 1 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 327-29 . Source (Internet Archive): J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 1 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 327-29 . The preceding adventure is but one of the many episodes included in the longer "Tale of the Shifty Lad, the Widow's Son" ( pp. 320-38 ). Return to the table of contents . The Two Thieves Scotland Two thieves once came to a gallows, and the one said to the other, "We have often heard about this thing, now let us try how it feels. I will put the rope about my neck, and do thou hang me, and when I have had enough, I will grin and then thou shalt let me down." So the first thief was hanged, and when the rope tightened he grinned horribly, and was let down by his comrade as they had agreed. "Well," said he, "What was it like?" "Not so bad as I expected," said the other. "Now I will hang thee and when thou hast enough, whistle." So the second agreed, and he was strung up in his turn, and he grinned too; but because he would not whistle, his friend let him hang, and when he was tired of waiting, he emptied his pockets and left him there. Source (books.google.com): J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 257-58 . Source (Internet Archive): J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 257-58 . Return to the table of contents . Boys Try Beheading Poland In Damsdorf [Niezabyszewo] many years ago some boys were tending cattle in a field. Early one Sunday morning Farmer Bruhnke was suddenly overcome by an uncanny fear, and he rushed out to the field to see what the herders were doing. He had scarcely left the village when a little man came his way who asked him where he was going. Bruhnke told him, and the little man replied that he had just passed the boys, who were passing the time by playing a game. Bruhnke was relieved, but as he took leave of the little man, he noticed that the latter had a chicken's foot. He ran as fast as his feet would carry him to the herding place, but it was too late. The head of one of the herders was already rolling on the ground. The boys had wanted to see what beheading was like. For this they had built an actual guillotine, fastening an old blade from a flax cutter onto a platform to serve as an ax. They all had tried it, but just as they tied the last one to the block, a three-legged hare came limping by, and the boys ran after it, completely forgetting their comrade and the cattle. The prisoner tried to free himself of his bonds, but his motions released the blade, and the unfortunate boy paid for this game with his life. Source (books.google.com): Otto Knoop, "Knaben probieren das Köpfen," Volkssagen, Erzählungen, Aberglauben, Gebräuche und Märchen aus dem östlichen Hinterpommern (Posen: [Poznań]: Verlag von Joseph Jolowicz, 1885), no. 41, pp. 24-25 . Source (Internet Archive): Otto Knoop, "Knaben probieren das Köpfen," Volkssagen, Erzählungen, Aberglauben, Gebräuche und Märchen aus dem östlichen Hinterpommern (Posen [Poznań]: Verlag von Joseph Jolowicz, 1885), no. 41, pp. 24-25 . Return to the table of contents . Children Play at Slaughtering Germany I. In a town called Franecker, located in West Friesland, it happened that young children, five and six year-old, girls and boys, were playing together. They determined that one boy would be the butcher, another boy would be the cook, and a third boy would be a sow. And they determined that one girl would be a cook, and another one would be an assistant cook. The assistant cook was to receive the sow's blood in a little dish, so that sausages could be made. The butcher, as agreed, approached the little boy who was supposed to be the sow, pulled him down, and cut his throat with a little knife. The assistant cook collected the blood in her little dish. A councilman who happened to pass by saw this tragedy. He immediately took the butcher with him to the mayor's house, who then called together the entire town council. They did not know how to treat this case, for they recognized full well that it was done as child's play. One of them, an old white-haired man, gave the advice that the chief judge should take a beautiful red apple in one hand and a gold coin in the other. He should then call the child to him and stretch out both hands towards him. If the child were to take the apple, then he would be declared innocent. But if he should take the gold coin, he should be executed. They did just that. The child laughed and took hold of the apple, and thus he was freed from all punishment. II. Once a householder slaughtered a pig. His children saw it. When they wanted to play together in the afternoon, one child said to the other: "You be the little pig and I'll be the butcher." He took a naked knife and thrust it into his little brother's neck. The mother, who was sitting upstairs in the room bathing her youngest child in a tub, heard her other child crying, ran downstairs at once, and when she saw what was happening, she pulled the knife out of the child's neck and in anger thrust it into the heart of the other child, who was playing the butcher. Then she immediately ran upstairs to see what her child was doing in the bathtub, who in the meantime had drowned in the bath. The heart-broken woman could not be comforted by her servants, and in desperation she hanged herself. The man came from the field and when he saw all this, he became so sad that he died shortly afterwards. Source (Wikisource): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Wie Kinder Schlachtens mit einander gespielt haben," Kinder- und Haus-Märchen (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 22, pp. 101-103 . These tales were excluded from all succeeding editions of the Grimms' Children's and Household Tales . Return to the table of contents . Playing at Hanging China A number of wild young fellows were one day out walking when they saw a young lady approach, riding on a pony. One of them said to the others, "I'll back myself to make that girl laugh," and a supper was at once staked by both sides on the result. Our hero then ran out in front of the pony, and kept on shouting "I'm going to die! I'm going to die!" at the same time pulling out from over the top of a wall a stalk of millet, to which he attached his own waistband, and tying the latter round his neck, made a pretence of hanging himself. The young lady did laugh as she passed by, to the great amusement of the assembled company; but as when she was already some distance off their friend did not move, the others laughed louder than ever. However, on going up to him they saw that his tongue protruded, and that his eyes were glazed; he was, in fact, quite dead. Was it not strange that a man should be able to hang himself on a millet stalk? It is a good warning against practical joking. Source (books.google.com): Herbert A. Giles, Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio , vol. 1 (London: Thomas de la Rue and Company, 1880), no. 52, p. 354 . Source (Internet Archive): Herbert A. Giles, Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio , vol. 1 (London: Thomas de la Rue and Company, 1880), no. 52, p. 354 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 9, 2022. Hansel and Gretel by the Grimm Brothers: A comparison of the versions of 1812 and 1857 Hansel and Gretel Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm a comparison of the versions of 1812 and 1857 compiled and translated by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2002 First edition, 1812 Final edition, 1857 Hansel and Gretel Hansel and Gretel Next to a great forest there lived a poor woodcutter who had come upon such hard times that he could scarcely provide daily bread for his wife and his two children, Hansel and Gretel. Finally he could no longer even manage this, and he did not know where to turn for help. Next to a great forest there lived a poor woodcutter with his wife and his two children. The boy's name was Hansel and the girl's name was Gretel. He had but little to eat, and once, when a great famine came to the land, he could no longer provide even their daily bread. One evening as he was lying in bed worrying about his problems, his wife said to him, "Listen, man, early tomorrow take the two children, give each of them a little piece of bread, then lead them into the middle of thickest part of the woods, make a fire for them, and leave them there, for we can no longer feed them." One evening as he was lying in bed worrying about his problems, he sighed and said to his wife, "What is to become of us? How can we feed our children when we have nothing for ourselves?" "Man, do you know what?" answered the woman. "Early tomorrow morning we will take the two children out into the thickest part of the woods, make a fire for them, and give each of them a little piece of bread, then leave them by themselves and go off to our work. They will not find their way back home, and we will be rid of them." "No, woman," said the man, "I cannot bring myself to abandon my own children to wild animals that would quickly tear them to pieces." "No, woman," said the man. "I will not do that. How could I bring myself to abandon my own children alone in the woods? Wild animals would soon come and tear them to pieces." "If you don't do it," said the woman, "all of us will starve together," and she gave him no peace until he said yes. "Oh, you fool," she said, "then all four of us will starve. All you can do is to plane the boards for our coffins." And she gave him no peace until he agreed. "But I do feel sorry for the poor children," said the man. The two children were still awake from hunger and heard everything that the mother had said to the father. The two children had not been able to fall asleep because of their hunger, and they heard what the stepmother had said to the father. Gretel thought that she was doomed and began to cry pitifully, but Hansel said, "Be quiet, Gretel, and don't worry. I know what to do." Gretel cried bitter tears and said to Hansel, "It is over with us!" "Be quiet, Gretel," said Hansel, "and don't worry. I know what to do." With that he got up, pulled on his jacket, opened the lower door, and crept outside. And as soon as the adults had fallen asleep, he got up, pulled on his jacket, opened the lower door, and crept outside. The moon was shining brightly, and the white pebbles were glistening like silver coins. Hansel bent over and filled his jacket pockets with them, as many as would fit. The moon was shining brightly, and the white pebbles in front of the house were glistening like silver coins. Hansel bent over and filled his jacket pockets with them, as many as would fit. Then he went back into the house and said, "Don't worry, Gretel. Sleep well." Then he went back to bed, and fell asleep. Then he went back into the house and said, "Don't worry, Gretel. Sleep well. God will not forsake us." Then he went back to bed. The next morning the mother came and woke them both before sunrise, "Get up, you children. We are going into the woods. Here is a little piece of bread. Take care and save it until midday." At daybreak, even before sunrise, the woman came and woke the two children. "Get up, you lazybones. We are going into the woods to fetch wood." Then she gave each one a little piece of bread, saying, "Here is something for midday. Don't eat it any sooner, for you'll not get any more." Gretel put the bread under her apron, because Hansel's pockets were full of stones, and they set forth into the woods. Gretel put the bread under her apron, because Hansel's pockets were full of stones. Then all together they set forth into the woods. After they had walked a little way, Hansel began stopping again and again and looking back toward the house. After they had walked a little way, Hansel began stopping again and again and looking back toward the house. The father said, "Hansel, why are you stopping and looking back? Pay attention now, and keep up with us." The father said, "Hansel, why are you stopping and looking back? Pay attention now, and don't forget your legs." "Oh, father, I am looking at my white cat that is sitting on the roof and wants to say good-bye to me." "Oh, father," said Hansel, "I am looking at my white cat that is sitting on the roof and wants to say good-bye to me." The mother said, "You fool, that isn't your cat. That's the morning sun shining on the chimney." The woman said, "You fool, that isn't your cat. That's the morning sun shining on the chimney." However, Hansel had not been looking at his cat but instead had been dropping the shiny pebbles from his pocket onto the path. However, Hansel had not been looking at his cat but instead had been dropping the shiny pebbles from his pocket onto the path. When they arrived in the middle of the woods, the father said, "You children gather some wood, and I will make a fire so we won't freeze." When they arrived in the middle of the woods, the father said, "You children gather some wood, and I will make a fire so you won't freeze." Hansel and Gretel gathered together some twigs, a pile as high as a small mountain Hansel and Gretel gathered together some twigs, a pile as high as a small mountain They set it afire, and when the flames were burning well, the mother said, "Lie down by the fire and sleep. We will go into the woods to cut down trees. Wait until we come back and get you." The twigs were set afire, and when the flames were burning well, the woman said, "Lie down by the fire and rest. We will go into the woods to cut wood. When we are finished, we will come back and get you." Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire until midday, and then ate their bread. Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire. When midday came each one ate his little piece of bread. They sat on until evening, but the mother and father did not return, and no one came to get them. Because they could hear the blows of an ax, they thought that the father was nearby. However, it was not an ax. It was a branch that he had tied to a dead tree and that the wind was beating back and forth. After they had sat there a long time, their eyes grew weary and closed, and they fell sound sleep. When it became dark, Gretel began to cry, but Hansel said, "Wait a little until the moon comes up." When they finally awoke, it was dark at night. Gretel began to cry and said, "How will we get out of woods?" Hansel comforted her, "Wait a little until the moon comes up, and then we'll find the way." After the moon had come up, he took Gretel by the hand. After the full moon had come up, Hansel took his little sister by the hand. The pebbles were lying there like newly minted coins. Glistening, they showed them the way. They followed the pebbles that glistened there like newly minted coins, showing them the way. They walked throughout the entire night, and as morning was breaking, they arrived at the father's house. They walked throughout the entire night, and as morning was breaking, they arrived at the father's house. The father was overjoyed when he saw his children once more, for he had not wanted to leave them alone. The mother pretended that she too was happy, but secretly she was angry. They knocked on the door, and when the woman opened it and saw that it was Hansel and Gretel, she said, "You wicked children, why did you sleep so long in the woods? We thought that you did not want to come back." But the father was overjoyed when he saw his children once more, for he had not wanted to leave them alone. Not long afterward there was once again no bread in the house, and one evening Hansel and Gretel heard the mother say to the father, "The children found their way back once, and I let it be, but again we have only a half loaf of bread in the house. Tomorrow you must take them deeper into the woods, so they cannot find their way home. Otherwise there will be no help for us." Not long afterward there was once again great need everywhere, and one evening the children heard the mother say to the father, "We have again eaten up everything. We have only a half loaf of bread, and then the song will be over. We must get rid of the children. We will take them deeper into the woods, so they will not find their way out. Otherwise there will be no help for us." The man was very disheartened, and he thought it would be better to share the last bit with the children, but because he had done it once, he could not say no. The man was very disheartened, and he thought, "It would be better to share the last bit with the children." But the woman would not listen to him, scolded him, and criticized him. He who says A must also say B, and because he had given in the first time, he had to do so the second time as well. Hansel and Gretel heard the parents' conversation. The children were still awake and had overheard the conversation. Hansel got up and wanted to gather pebbles once again, but when he came to the door, he found that the mother had locked it. When the adults were asleep, Hansel got up again and wanted to gather pebbles as he had done before, but the woman had locked the door, and Hansel could not get out. Still, he comforted Gretel and said, "Just go to sleep, Gretel dear. God will help us." But he comforted his little sister and said, "Don't cry, Gretel. Sleep well. God will help us." Early the next morning they received their little pieces of bread, even less than the last time. Early the next morning the woman came and got the children from their beds. They received their little pieces of bread, even less than the last time. On the way, Hansel crumbled his piece in his pocket, then often stood still, and threw crumbs onto the ground. On the way to the woods, Hansel crumbled his piece in his pocket, then often stood still, and threw crumbs onto the ground. "Why are you always stopping and looking around?" said his father. "Keep walking straight ahead." "Hansel, why are you always stopping and looking around?" said his father. "Keep walking straight ahead." "Oh!, I can see my pigeon sitting on the roof. It wants to say good-bye to me." "I can see my pigeon sitting on the roof. It wants to say good-bye to me." "You fool," said his mother, "that isn't your pigeon. That's the morning sun shining on the chimney." "Fool," said the woman, "that isn't your pigeon. That's the morning sun shining on the chimney." But Hansel crumbled all of his bread and dropped the crumbs onto the path. But little by little Hansel dropped all the crumbs onto the path. The mother took them deeper into the woods than they had ever been in their whole lifetime. The woman took them deeper into the woods than they had ever been in their whole lifetime. There they were told to sleep by a large fire, and that the parents would come and get them in the evening. Once again a large fire was made, and the mother said, "Sit here, children. If you get tired you can sleep a little. We are going into the woods to cut wood. We will come and get you in the evening when we are finished." At midday Gretel shared her bread with Hansel, because he had scattered all of his along the path. When it was midday Gretel shared her bread with Hansel, who had scattered his piece along the path. Midday passed, and evening passed, but no one came to get the poor children. Then they fell asleep, and evening passed, but no one came to get the poor children. Hansel comforted Gretel and said, "Wait, when the moon comes up I will be able to see the crumbs of bread that I scattered, and they will show us the way back home." It was dark at night when they awoke, and Hansel comforted Gretel and said, "Wait, when the moon comes up I will be able to see the crumbs of bread that I scattered, and they will show us the way back home." The moon came up, but when Hansel looked for the crumbs, they were gone. The many thousands of birds in the woods had found them and pecked them up. When the moon appeared they got up, but they could not find any crumbs, for the many thousands of birds that fly about in the woods and in the fields had pecked them up. Hansel thought that he would still be able to find the way home, and he and Gretel set forth, but they soon became totally lost in the great wilderness. Hansel said to Gretel, "We will find our way," but they did not find it. They walked through the night and the entire next day, and then, exhausted, they fell asleep. They walked another day, but they could not find their way out of the woods. They walked through the entire night and the next day from morning until evening, but they did not find their way out of the woods. They were terribly hungry, for they had eaten only a few small berries that were growing on the ground. They were terribly hungry, for they had eaten only a few small berries that were growing on the ground. And because they were so tired that their legs would no longer carry them, they lay down under a tree and fell asleep. On the third day they walked until midday when they came to a little house built entirely from bread with a roof made of cake, and the windows were made of clear sugar. It was already the third morning since they had left the father's house. They started walking again, but managed only to go deeper and deeper into the woods. If help did not come soon, they would perish. At midday they saw a little snow-white bird sitting on a branch. It sang so beautifully that they stopped to listen. When it was finished it stretched its wings and flew in front of them. They followed it until they came to a little house. The bird sat on the roof, and when they came closer, they saw that the little house was built entirely from bread with a roof made of cake, and the windows were made of clear sugar. "Let's sit down and eat our fill," said Hansel. "I'll eat from the roof, and Gretel, you eat from the window. That will be nice and sweet for you." "Let's help ourselves to a good meal," said Hansel. "I'll eat a piece of the roof, and Gretel, you eat from the window. That will be sweet." Hansel had already eaten a piece from the roof and Gretel had eaten a few round windowpanes, and she had just broken out another one when she heard a gentle voice calling out from inside: Nibble, nibble, little mouse, Who is nibbling at my house? Hansel reached up and broke off a little of the roof to see how it tasted, while Gretel stood next to the windowpanes and was nibbling at them. Then a gentle voice called out from inside: Nibble, nibble, little mouse, Who is nibbling at my house? The children answered: The wind, the wind, The heavenly child. They continued to eat, without being distracted. Hansel, who very much like the taste of the roof, tore down another large piece, and Gretel poked out an entire round windowpane. Hansel and Gretel were so frightened that they dropped what they were holding in their hands, and immediately they saw a little woman, as old as the hills, creeping out the door. Suddenly the door opened, and a woman, as old as the hills and leaning on a crutch, came creeping out. Hansel and Gretel were so frightened that they dropped what they were holding in their hands. She shook her head and said, "Oh, you dear children, where did you come from? Come inside with me, and you will be just fine." But the old woman shook her head and said, "Oh, you dear children, who brought you here? Just come in and stay with me. No harm will come to you." She took them by the hand and led them into her house. She took them by the hand and led them into her house. Then she served them a good meal: pancakes with sugar, apples, and nuts; and made two nice beds for them. Then she served them a good meal: milk and pancakes with sugar, apples, and nuts. Afterward she made two nice beds for them, decked in white. Hansel and Gretel went to bed, thinking it was though they were in heaven. Hansel and Gretel went to bed, thinking they were in heaven. But the old woman was a wicked witch who was lying in wait there for children. But the old woman had only pretended to be friendly. She was a wicked witch who was lying in wait there for children. She had built her house of bread in order to lure them to her, and if she captured one, she would kill him, cook him, and eat him; and for her that was a day to celebrate. She had built her house of bread only in order to lure them to her, and if she captured one, she would kill him, cook him, and eat him; and for her that was a day to celebrate. Witches have red eyes and cannot see very far, but they have a sense of smell like animals, and know when humans are approaching. So she was overjoyed that Hansel and Gretel had found their way to her. When Hansel and Gretel came near to her, she laughed wickedly and spoke scornfully, "Now I have them. They will not get away from me again." Early the next morning, before they awoke, she got up, went to their beds, and looked at the two of them lying there so peacefully. Early the next morning, before they awoke, she got up, went to their beds, and looked at the two of them lying there so peacefully, with their full red cheeks. "They will be a good mouthful," she thought. "They will be a good mouthful," she mumbled to herself. She grabbed Hansel and put him in a little stall, and when he awoke, he found himself in a cage, locked up like a young dog, and he could walk only a few steps. Then she grabbed Hansel with her withered hand and carried him to a little stall, where she locked him behind a cage door. Cry as he might, there was no help for him. Then she shook Gretel and cried, "Get up, lazybones! Fetch water. Go into the kitchen and cook something to eat. Your brother is locked in that stall there. I want to fatten him up, and when he is fat I am going to eat him. For now, you have to feed him." Then she shook Gretel and cried, "Get up, lazybones! Fetch water and cook something good for your brother. He is locked outside in the stall and is to be fattened up. When he is fat I am going to eat him." Gretel was frightened and cried, but she had to do what the witch demanded. Gretel began to cry, but it was all for nothing. She had to do what the witch demanded. Now Hansel was given the best things to eat every day, so he would get fat, but Gretel received nothing but crayfish shells. Now Hansel was given the best things to eat every day, but Gretel received nothing but crayfish shells. Every day the old woman came and said, "Hansel, stick out your finger, so I can feel if you are fat enough yet." Every morning the old woman crept out to the stall and shouted, "Hansel, stick out your finger, so I can feel if you are fat yet." But Hansel always stuck out a little bone, and she wondered why he didn't get any fatter. But Hansel stuck out a little bone, and the old woman, who had bad eyes and could not see the bone, thought it was Hansel's finger, and she wondered why he didn't get fat. After four weeks, one evening she said to Gretel, "Hurry up and fetch some water. Whether your brother is fat enough now or not, tomorrow I am going to slaughter him and boil him. In the meantime I want to start the dough that we will bake to go with him." When four weeks had passed and Hansel was still thin, impatience overcame her, and she would wait no longer. "Hey, Gretel!" she shouted to the girl, "Hurry up and fetch some water. Whether Hansel is fat or thin, tomorrow I am going to slaughter him and boil him." With a sad heart Gretel fetched the water in which Hansel was to be boiled. Oh, how the poor little sister sobbed as she was forced to carry the water, and how the tears streamed down her cheeks! "Dear God, please help us," she cried. "If only the wild animals had devoured us in the woods, then we would have died together." "Save your slobbering," said the old woman. "It doesn't help you at all." The next morning Gretel had to get up early, make a fire, and hang up the kettle with water. The next morning Gretel had to get up early, hang up the kettle with water, and make a fire. "Watch it until it boils," said the witch. "I am going to make a fire in the oven and put the bread into it." "First we are going to bake," said the old woman. "I have already made a fire in the oven and kneaded the dough." Gretel stood in the kitchen and cried tears of blood and thought that it would have been better if wild animals had devoured them in the woods, for then they would at least have died together and would not now be suffering so, and she herself would not have to be boiling the water that would kill her dear brother; and she prayed, "Dear God, save us poor children." Then the old woman called, "Gretel, come here right now to the oven." She pushed poor Gretel outside to the oven, from which fiery flames were leaping. And when Gretel came, she said, "Look inside and see if the bread is nicely brown and done, for my eyes are weak, and I can't see that far. If you can't see that far either, then sit on the board, and I'll push you inside, then you can walk around inside and take a look." "Climb in," said the witch, "and see if it is hot enough to put the bread in yet." But once Gretel was inside, the witch intended to close the door, and bake her in the hot oven, and eat her as well. That is what the wicked witch was thinking, and that is why she called Gretel. And when Gretel was inside, she intended to close the oven, and bake her, and eat her as well. However, God let Gretel know this, so she said, "I don't know how to do that. First show me. You sit on the board, and I will push you inside." But Gretel saw what she had in mind, so she said, "I don't know how to do that. How can I get inside?" So the old woman sat on the board, and since she was light, Gretel pushed her all the way inside, then quickly closed the door and secured it with an iron bar. "Stupid goose," said the old woman. "The opening is big enough. See, I myself could get in." And she crawled up stuck her head into the oven. Then Gretel gave her a shove, causing her to fall in. Then she closed the iron door and secured it with a bar. The old woman in the hot oven began to cry and to wail, but Gretel ran away, and the old woman burned up miserably. The old woman began to howl frightfully. But Gretel ran away, and the godless witch burned up miserably. Gretel ran to Hansel and unlocked his door. Gretel ran straight to Hansel, unlocked his stall, and cried, "Hansel, we are saved. The old witch is dead." He jumped out, and they kissed each other and were overjoyed. Then Hansel jumped out, like a bird from its cage when someone opens its door. How happy they were! They threw their arms around each other's necks, jumped with joy, and kissed one another. The whole house was filled with precious stones and pearls. Because they now had nothing to fear, they went into the witch's house. In every corner were chests of pearls and precious stones. They filled their pockets, then ran away and found their way back home. "These are better than pebbles," said Hansel, filling his pockets. Gretel said, "I will take some home with me as well," and she filled her apron full. "But now we must leave," said Hansel, "and get out of these witch-woods." After walking a few hours they arrived at a large body of water. "We cannot get across," said Hansel. "I cannot see a walkway or a bridge." "There are no boats here," answered Gretel, "but there is a white duck swimming. If I ask it, it will help us across." Then she called out: Duckling, duckling, Here stand Gretel and Hansel. Neither a walkway nor a bridge, Take us onto your white back. The duckling came up to them, and Hansel climbed onto it, then asked his little sister to sit down next to him. "No," answered Gretel. "That would be too heavy for the duckling. It should take us across one at a time." That is what the good animal did, and when they were safely on the other side, and had walked on a little while, the woods grew more and more familiar to them, and finally they saw the father's house in the distance. They began to run, rushed inside, and threw their arms around the father's neck. The father rejoiced when he saw them once more, for he had not had a happy day since they had been gone, and now he was a rich man. However, the mother had died. The man had not had even one happy hour since he had left the children in the woods. However, the woman had died. Gretel shook out her apron, scattering pearls and precious stones around the room, and Hansel added to them by throwing one handful after the other from his pockets. Now all their cares were at an end, and they lived happily together. My tale is done, A mouse has run. And whoever catches it can make for himself from it a large, large fur cap. The Grimms' specific source is unclear. Although they state that it derives "from various stories from Hessen," a handwritten marginal note in the Grimms' personal copy of the first edition reveals that in 1813 Henriette Dorothea (Dortchen) Wild contributed the children's verse answer to the witch, "The wind, the wind,/ The heavenly child," which rhymes in German: "Der Wind, der Wind,/ Das himmlische Kind." It is likely that the Grimms heard the entire story in the Wild household. Wilhelm Grimm married Dortchen Wild in 1825. "Hansel and Gretel" is the classic version of an Aarne-Thompson type 327A tale. The episode of burning the witch in her own oven is classified as type 1121. Another type 327A tale known to the Grimms is "Ninnillo and Nennella" from The Pentamerone (day 5, tale 8) of Giambattista Basile (1575-1632). Also closely related is the type 327B tale "Little Thumb" by Charles Perrault (1628-1703). Summary of the differences between the Grimms' versions of 1812 and 1857 Wilhelm Grimm was the principal editor of the Children's and Household Tales following their inititial publication. The most significant changes were made already in the second edition (1819), although Wilhelm continued to revise the stories until their final edition (1857). The most substantive alteration in the text of "Hansel and Gretel" is transformation of the children's mother into a stepmother. In both the manuscript version (1810) and the first printed edition (1812) of this well-known tale, the woodcutter's wife is identified unambiguously and repeatedly as "the mother." The second edition (1819), which saw numerous changes in the formulation of many tales, is equally clear in identifying the woodcutter's wife as Hansel's and Gretel's mother. However, with the fourth edition (1840) the Grimms introduced the word "stepmother," although they retained the word "mother" in some passages. The Grimms' final version of the famous tale (seventh edition, 1857) refers to the woodcutter's wife once as "the stepmother," twice as "the mother," and about a dozen times generically as "the woman." Whereas the children's mother/stepmother grows harsher in succeeding editions, their father grows more introspective and milder, perhaps too mild, for he is unwilling or unable to stand up to his domineering wife. "It would be better to share the last bit with the children." he thinks, in a passage added already in the 1819 edition, but his wife will not listen to him. In keeping with revisions made to other tales, Wilhelm added numerous small embellishments to "Hansel and Gretel," making the tale more dramatic, more literary, and more sentimental in succeeding editions. The most prominent example in this regard is the addition of the episode describing the children's escape from the sinister woods across a large body of water, one at a time, on the back of a duck. Translator's note In the first edition the Grimms spell their heroes' names "Hänsel" and "Gretel." In the second edition, "Hänsel" and "Grethel." All modern German editions use the spellings "Hänsel" and "Gretel." There is no reason to include the Umlaut (whether spelled "Hänsel" or "Haensel") in an English translation of the name "Hansel," nor is there any justification for an English translator to revert to the obsolete spelling "Grethel." The phrase "die Frau" occurs fequently in "Hansel and Gretel," especially in the final edition. This phrase can be translated as "his wife," "the wife," "his woman," or "the woman." In my judgment, the generic "the woman" best fits the story's child's-eye perspective and tone. The traditional translation of the witch's verse query "Nibble, nibble, little mouse,/ Who is nibbling at my house?" is too good to abandon, although the original German "Knuper, knuper, kneischen,/ Wer knupert an meinem Häuschen?" does not specifically mention a mouse. Links to related sites Hansel and Gretel by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. A file containing the version of 1857 alone. Hänsel und Gretel . The German-language text of the version of 1857. The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales). Link to another famous tale about child abandonment: Little Thumb (Charles Perrault). The Grimm Brothers' Home Page . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 6, 2002. Hansel and Gretel, and other folktales about abandoned children Hansel and Gretel and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 327, 327A, 327B, and 327C about abandoned children edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2007-2023 Contents Hansel and Gretel (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Ninnillo and Nennella (Italy, Giambattista Basile). Little Thumb (France, Charles Perrault). An Old Story (Ireland). Molly Whuppie (England). Jan and Hanna (Poland). The House of Candy (Czechia, Božena Němcová). Old Grule (Moravia). The Little Boy and the Wicked Stepmother (Romania). The Witch (Russia). Magic Flight (African American). The Children and the Witch (Jamaica). Juan and Maria (Philippines). Links to related tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Hansel and Gretel Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Next to a great forest there lived a poor woodcutter with his wife and his two children. The boy's name was Hansel and the girl's name was Gretel. He had but little to eat, and once, when a great famine came to the land, he could no longer provide even their daily bread. One evening as he was lying in bed worrying about his problems, he sighed and said to his wife, "What is to become of us? How can we feed our children when we have nothing for ourselves?" "Man, do you know what?" answered the woman. "Early tomorrow morning we will take the two children out into the thickest part of the woods, make a fire for them, and give each of them a little piece of bread, then leave them by themselves and go off to our work. They will not find their way back home, and we will be rid of them." "No, woman," said the man. "I will not do that. How could I bring myself to abandon my own children alone in the woods? Wild animals would soon come and tear them to pieces." "Oh, you fool," she said, "then all four of us will starve. All you can do is to plane the boards for our coffins." And she gave him no peace until he agreed. "But I do feel sorry for the poor children," said the man. The two children had not been able to fall asleep because of their hunger, and they heard what the stepmother had said to the father. Gretel cried bitter tears and said to Hansel, "It is over with us!" "Be quiet, Gretel," said Hansel, "and don't worry. I know what to do." And as soon as the adults had fallen asleep, he got up, pulled on his jacket, opened the lower door, and crept outside. The moon was shining brightly, and the white pebbles in front of the house were glistening like silver coins. Hansel bent over and filled his jacket pockets with them, as many as would fit. Then he went back into the house and said, "Don't worry, Gretel. Sleep well. God will not forsake us." Then he went back to bed. At daybreak, even before sunrise, the woman came and woke the two children. "Get up, you lazybones. We are going into the woods to fetch wood." Then she gave each one a little piece of bread, saying, "Here is something for midday. Don't eat it any sooner, for you'll not get any more." Gretel put the bread under her apron, because Hansel's pockets were full of stones. Then all together they set forth into the woods. After they had walked a little way, Hansel began stopping again and again and looking back toward the house. The father said, "Hansel, why are you stopping and looking back? Pay attention now, and don't forget your legs." "Oh, father," said Hansel, "I am looking at my white cat that is sitting on the roof and wants to say good-bye to me." The woman said, "You fool, that isn't your cat. That's the morning sun shining on the chimney." However, Hansel had not been looking at his cat but instead had been dropping the shiny pebbles from his pocket onto the path. When they arrived in the middle of the woods, the father said, "You children gather some wood, and I will make a fire so you won't freeze." Hansel and Gretel gathered together some twigs, a pile as high as a small mountain The twigs were set afire, and when the flames were burning well, the woman said, "Lie down by the fire and rest. We will go into the woods to cut wood. When we are finished, we will come back and get you." Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire. When midday came each one ate his little piece of bread. Because they could hear the blows of an ax, they thought that the father was nearby. However, it was not an ax. It was a branch that he had tied to a dead tree and that the wind was beating back and forth. After they had sat there a long time, their eyes grew weary and closed, and they fell sound sleep. When they finally awoke, it was dark at night. Gretel began to cry and said, "How will we get out of woods?" Hansel comforted her, "Wait a little until the moon comes up, and then we'll find the way." After the full moon had come up, Hansel took his little sister by the hand. They followed the pebbles that glistened there like newly minted coins, showing them the way. They walked throughout the entire night, and as morning was breaking, they arrived at the father's house. They knocked on the door, and when the woman opened it and saw that it was Hansel and Gretel, she said, "You wicked children, why did you sleep so long in the woods? We thought that you did not want to come back." But the father was overjoyed when he saw his children once more, for he had not wanted to leave them alone. Not long afterward there was once again great need everywhere, and one evening the children heard the mother say to the father, "We have again eaten up everything. We have only a half loaf of bread, and then the song will be over. We must get rid of the children. We will take them deeper into the woods, so they will not find their way out. Otherwise there will be no help for us." The man was very disheartened, and he thought, "It would be better to share the last bit with the children." But the woman would not listen to him, scolded him, and criticized him. He who says A must also say B, and because he had given in the first time, he had to do so the second time as well. The children were still awake and had overheard the conversation. When the adults were asleep, Hansel got up again and wanted to gather pebbles as he had done before, but the woman had locked the door, and Hansel could not get out. But he comforted his little sister and said, "Don't cry, Gretel. Sleep well. God will help us." Early the next morning the woman came and got the children from their beds. They received their little pieces of bread, even less than the last time. On the way to the woods, Hansel crumbled his piece in his pocket, then often stood still, and threw crumbs onto the ground. "Hansel, why are you always stopping and looking around?" said his father. "Keep walking straight ahead." "I can see my pigeon sitting on the roof. It wants to say good-bye to me." "Fool," said the woman, "that isn't your pigeon. That's the morning sun shining on the chimney." But little by little Hansel dropped all the crumbs onto the path. The woman took them deeper into the woods than they had ever been in their whole lifetime. Once again a large fire was made, and the mother said, "Sit here, children. If you get tired you can sleep a little. We are going into the woods to cut wood. We will come and get you in the evening when we are finished." When it was midday Gretel shared her bread with Hansel, who had scattered his piece along the path. Then they fell asleep, and evening passed, but no one came to get the poor children. It was dark at night when they awoke, and Hansel comforted Gretel and said, "Wait, when the moon comes up I will be able to see the crumbs of bread that I scattered, and they will show us the way back home." When the moon appeared they got up, but they could not find any crumbs, for the many thousands of birds that fly about in the woods and in the fields had pecked them up. Hansel said to Gretel, "We will find our way," but they did not find it. They walked through the entire night and the next day from morning until evening, but they did not find their way out of the woods. They were terribly hungry, for they had eaten only a few small berries that were growing on the ground. And because they were so tired that their legs would no longer carry them, they lay down under a tree and fell asleep. It was already the third morning since they had left the father's house. They started walking again, but managed only to go deeper and deeper into the woods. If help did not come soon, they would perish. At midday they saw a little snow-white bird sitting on a branch. It sang so beautifully that they stopped to listen. When it was finished it stretched its wings and flew in front of them. They followed it until they came to a little house. The bird sat on the roof, and when they came closer, they saw that the little house was built entirely from bread with a roof made of cake, and the windows were made of clear sugar. "Let's help ourselves to a good meal," said Hansel. "I'll eat a piece of the roof, and Gretel, you eat from the window. That will be sweet." Hansel reached up and broke off a little of the roof to see how it tasted, while Gretel stood next to the windowpanes and was nibbling at them. Then a gentle voice called out from inside: Nibble, nibble, little mouse, Who is nibbling at my house? The children answered: The wind, the wind, The heavenly child. They continued to eat, without being distracted. Hansel, who very much like the taste of the roof, tore down another large piece, and Gretel poked out an entire round windowpane. Suddenly the door opened, and a woman, as old as the hills and leaning on a crutch, came creeping out. Hansel and Gretel were so frightened that they dropped what they were holding in their hands. But the old woman shook her head and said, "Oh, you dear children, who brought you here? Just come in and stay with me. No harm will come to you." She took them by the hand and led them into her house. Then she served them a good meal: milk and pancakes with sugar, apples, and nuts. Afterward she made two nice beds for them, decked in white. Hansel and Gretel went to bed, thinking they were in heaven. But the old woman had only pretended to be friendly. She was a wicked witch who was lying in wait there for children. She had built her house of bread only in order to lure them to her, and if she captured one, she would kill him, cook him, and eat him; and for her that was a day to celebrate. Witches have red eyes and cannot see very far, but they have a sense of smell like animals, and know when humans are approaching. When Hansel and Gretel came near to her, she laughed wickedly and spoke scornfully, "Now I have them. They will not get away from me again." Early the next morning, before they awoke, she got up, went to their beds, and looked at the two of them lying there so peacefully, with their full red cheeks. "They will be a good mouthful," she mumbled to herself. Then she grabbed Hansel with her withered hand and carried him to a little stall, where she locked him behind a cage door. Cry as he might, there was no help for him. Then she shook Gretel and cried, "Get up, lazybones! Fetch water and cook something good for your brother. He is locked outside in the stall and is to be fattened up. When he is fat I am going to eat him." Gretel began to cry, but it was all for nothing. She had to do what the witch demanded. Now Hansel was given the best things to eat every day, but Gretel received nothing but crayfish shells. Every morning the old woman crept out to the stall and shouted, "Hansel, stick out your finger, so I can feel if you are fat yet." But Hansel stuck out a little bone, and the old woman, who had bad eyes and could not see the bone, thought it was Hansel's finger, and she wondered why he didn't get fat. When four weeks had passed and Hansel was still thin, impatience overcame her, and she would wait no longer. "Hey, Gretel!" she shouted to the girl, "Hurry up and fetch some water. Whether Hansel is fat or thin, tomorrow I am going to slaughter him and boil him." Oh, how the poor little sister sobbed as she was forced to carry the water, and how the tears streamed down her cheeks! "Dear God, please help us," she cried. "If only the wild animals had devoured us in the woods, then we would have died together." "Save your slobbering," said the old woman. "It doesn't help you at all." The next morning Gretel had to get up early, hang up the kettle with water, and make a fire. "First we are going to bake," said the old woman. "I have already made a fire in the oven and kneaded the dough." She pushed poor Gretel outside to the oven, from which fiery flames were leaping. "Climb in," said the witch, "and see if it is hot enough to put the bread in yet." And when Gretel was inside, she intended to close the oven, and bake her, and eat her as well. But Gretel saw what she had in mind, so she said, "I don't know how to do that. How can I get inside?" "Stupid goose," said the old woman. The opening is big enough. See, I myself could get in." And she crawled up stuck her head into the oven. Then Gretel gave her a shove, causing her to fall in. Then she closed the iron door and secured it with a bar. The old woman began to howl frightfully. But Gretel ran away, and the godless witch burned up miserably. Gretel ran straight to Hansel, unlocked his stall, and cried, "Hansel, we are saved. The old witch is dead." Then Hansel jumped out, like a bird from its cage when someone opens its door. How happy they were! They threw their arms around each other's necks, jumped with joy, and kissed one another. Because they now had nothing to fear, they went into the witch's house. In every corner were chests of pearls and precious stones. "These are better than pebbles," said Hansel, filling his pockets. Gretel said, "I will take some home with me as well," and she filled her apron full. "But now we must leave," said Hansel, "and get out of these witch-woods." After walking a few hours they arrived at a large body of water. "We cannot get across," said Hansel. "I cannot see a walkway or a bridge." "There are no boats here," answered Gretel, "but there is a white duck swimming. If I ask it, it will help us across." Then she called out: Duckling, duckling, Here stand Gretel and Hansel. Neither a walkway nor a bridge, Take us onto your white back. The duckling came up to them, and Hansel climbed onto it, then asked his little sister to sit down next to him. "No," answered Gretel. "That would be too heavy for the duckling. It should take us across one at a time." That is what the good animal did, and when they were safely on the other side, and had walked on a little while, the woods grew more and more familiar to them, and finally they saw the father's house in the distance. They began to run, rushed inside, and threw their arms around the father's neck. The man had not had even one happy hour since he had left the children in the woods. However, the woman had died. Gretel shook out her apron, scattering pearls and precious stones around the room, and Hansel added to them by throwing one handful after the other from his pockets. Now all their cares were at an end, and they lived happily together. My tale is done, A mouse has run. And whoever catches it can make for himself from it a large, large fur cap. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Hänsel und Grethel," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm [Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales], vol. 1, 7th ed. (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 15, pp. 79-87 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2000-2002. The Grimms' specific source is unclear. Although they state that it derives "from various stories from Hessen," a handwritten marginal note in the Grimms' personal copy of the first edition reveals that in 1813 Henriette Dorothea (Dortchen) Wild contributed the children's verse answer to the witch, "The wind, the wind,/ The heavenly child," which rhymes in German: "Der Wind, der Wind,/ Das himmlische Kind." It is likely that the Grimms heard the entire story in the Wild household. Wilhelm Grimm married Dortchen Wild in 1825. "Hansel and Gretel" is the classic version of an Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 327A tale. The episode of burning the witch in her own oven is classified as type 1121. Another type 327A tale known to the Grimms is "Ninnillo and Nennella" from The Pentamerone (day 5, tale 8) of Giambattista Basile (1575-1632). Also closely related is the type 327B tale "Little Thumb" by Charles Perrault (1628-1703). Both tales are in the present collection. See the table of contents . Notes on the translation: In the first edition the Grimms spell their hero's and heroine's names "Hänsel" and "Gretel." In the second edition, "Hänsel" and "Grethel." All modern German editions use the spellings "Hänsel" and "Gretel." There is no reason to include the Umlaut (whether spelled "Hänsel" or "Haensel") in an English translation of the name "Hansel," nor is there any justification for an English translator to revert to the obsolete spelling "Grethel." The phrase "die Frau" occurs fequently in "Hansel and Gretel," especially in the final edition. This phrase can be translated as "his wife," "the wife," "his woman," or "the woman." In my judgment, the generic "the woman" best fits the story's child's-eye perspective and tone. The traditional translation of the witch's verse query "Nibble, nibble, little mouse,/ Who is nibbling at my house?" is too good to abandon, although the original German "Knuper, knuper, kneischen,/ Wer knupert an meinem Häuschen?" does not specifically mention a mouse. Links to related sites: Hansel and Gretel . The above text in a single file. Hansel and Gretel by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. A comparison of the versions of 1812 and 1857 . Hänsel und Gretel . The German-language text of the version of 1857. The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales). The Grimm Brothers' Home Page . Return to the table of contents . Nennillo and Nennella Giambattista Basile Woe to him who thinks to find a governess for his children by giving them a stepmother! He only brings into his house the cause of their ruin. There never yet was a stepmother who looked kindly on the children of another; or if by chance such a one were ever found, she would be regarded as a miracle, and be called a white crow. But beside all those of whom you may have heard, I will now tell you of another, to be added to the list of heartless stepmothers, whom you will consider well deserving the punishment she purchased for herself with ready money. There was once a good man named Jannuccio, who had two children, Nennillo and Nennella, whom he loved as much as his own life. But Death having, with the smooth file of Time, severed the prison bars of his wife's soul, he took to himself a cruel woman, who had no sooner set foot in his house than she began to ride the high horse, saying, "Am I come here indeed to look after other folk's children? A pretty job I have undertaken, to have all this trouble and be for ever teased by a couple of squalling brats! Would that I had broken my neck ere I ever came to this place, to have bad food, worse drink, and get no sleep at night! Here's a life to lead! Forsooth I came as a wife, and not as a servant; but I must find some means of getting rid of these creatures, or it will cost me my life: better to blush once than to grow pale a hundred times; so I've done with them, for I am resolved to send them away, or to leave the house myself forever." The poor husband, who had some affection for this woman, said to her, "Softly, wife! Don't be angry, for sugar is dear; and tomorrow morning, before the cock crows, I will remove this annoyance in order to please you." So the next morning, ere the Dawn had hung out the red counterpane at the window of the East to air it, Jannuccio took the children, one by each hand, and with a good basketful of things to eat upon his arm, he led them to a wood, where an army of poplars and beech trees were holding the shades besieged. Then Jannuccio said, "My little children, stay here in this wood, and eat and drink merrily; but if you want anything, follow this line of ashes which I have been strewing as we came along; this will be a clue to lead you out of the labyrinth and bring you straight home." Then giving them both a kiss, he returned weeping to his house. But at the hour when all creatures, summoned by the constables of Night, pay to Nature the tax of needful repose, the two children began to feel afraid at remaining in that lonesome place, where the waters of a river, which was thrashing the impertinent stones for obstructing its course, would have frightened even a hero. So they went slowly along the path of ashes, and it was already midnight ere they reached their home. When Pascozza, their stepmother, saw the children, she acted not like a woman, but a perfect fury; crying aloud, wringing her hands, stamping with her feet, snorting like a frightened horse, and exclaiming, "What fine piece of work is this? Is there no way of ridding the house of these creatures? Is it possible, husband, that you are determined to keep them here to plague my very life out? Go, take them out of my sight! I'll not wait for the crowing of cocks and the cackling of hens; or else be assured that tomorrow morning I'll go off to my parents' house, for you do not deserve me. I have not brought you so many fine things, only to be made the slave of children who are not my own." Poor Jannuccio, who saw that matters were growing rather too warm, immediately took the little ones and returned to the wood; where giving the children another basketful of food, he said to them, "You see, my dears, how this wife of mine -- who is come to my house to be your ruin and a nail in my heart -- hates you; therefore remain in this wood, where the trees, more compassionate, will give you shelter from the sun; where the river, more charitable, will give you drink without poison; and the earth, more kind, will give you a pillow of grass without danger. And when you want food, follow this little path of bran which I have made for you in a straight line, and you can come and seek what you require." So saying, he turned away his face, not to let himself be seen to weep and dishearten the poor little creatures. When Nennillo and Nennella had eaten all that was in the basket, they wanted to return home; but alas! a jackass -- the son of ill-luck -- had eaten up all the bran that was strewn upon the ground; so they lost their way, and wandered about forlorn in the wood for several days, feeding on acorns and chestnuts which they found fallen on the ground. But as Heaven always extends its arm over the innocent, there came by chance a prince to hunt in that wood. Then Nennillo, hearing the baying of the hounds, was so frightened that he crept into a hollow tree; and Nennella set off running at full speed, and ran until she came out of the wood, and found herself on the seashore. Now it happened that some pirates, who had landed there to get fuel, saw Nennella and carried her off; and their captain took her home with him where he and his wife, having just lost a little girl, took her as their daughter. Meantime Nennillo, who had hidden himself in the tree, was surrounded by the dogs, which made such a furious barking that the prince sent to find out the cause; and when he discovered the pretty little boy, who was so young that he could not tell who were his father and mother, he ordered one of the huntsmen to set him upon his saddle and take him to the royal palace. Then he had him brought up with great care, and instructed in various arts, and among others, he had him taught that of a carver; so that, before three or four years had passed, Nennillo became so expert in his art that he could carve a joint to a hair. Now about this time it was discovered that the captain of the ship who had taken Nennella to his house was a sea-robber, and the people wished to take him prisoner; but getting timely notice from the clerks in the law courts, who were his friends, and whom he kept in his pay, he fled with all his family. It was decreed, however, perhaps by the judgment of Heaven, that he who had committed his crimes upon the sea, upon the sea should suffer the punishment of them; for having embarked in a small boat, no sooner was he upon the open sea than there came such a storm of wind and tumult of the waves, that the boat was upset and all were drowned, all except Nennella, who having had no share in the corsair's robberies, like his wife and children, escaped the danger; for just then a large enchanted fish, which was swimming about the boat, opened its huge throat and swallowed her down. The little girl now thought to herself that her days were surely at an end, when suddenly she found a thing to amaze her inside the fish: beautiful fields and fine gardens, and a splendid mansion, with all that heart could desire, in which she lived like a princess. Then she was carried quickly by the fish to a rock, where it chanced that the prince had come to escape the burning heat of a summer, and to enjoy the cool sea breezes. And whilst a great banquet was preparing, Nennillo had stepped out upon a balcony of the palace on the rock to sharpen some knives, priding himself greatly on acquiring honor from his office. When Nennella saw him through the fish's throat, she cried aloud, Brother, brother, your task is done, The tables are laid out every one; But here in the fish I must sit and sigh, Oh brother, without you I soon shall die. Nennillo at first paid no attention to the voice, but the prince, who was standing on another balcony and had also heard it, turned in the direction whence the sound came, and saw the fish. And when he again heard the same words, he was beside himself with amazement, and ordered a number of servants to try whether by any means they could ensnare the fish and draw it to land. At last, hearing the words "Brother, brother!" continually repeated, he asked all his servants, one by one, whether any of them had lost a sister. And Nennillo replied, that he recollected, as a dream, having had a sister when the prince found him in the wood, but that he had never since heard any tidings of her. Then the prince told him to go nearer to the fish, and see what was the matter, for perhaps this adventure might concern him. As soon as Nennillo approached the fish, it raised up its head upon the rock, and opening its throat six palms wide, Nennella stepped out, so beautiful that she looked just like a nymph in some interlude, come forth from that animal at the incantation of a magician. And when the prince asked her how it had all happened, she told him a part of her sad story, and the hatred of their stepmother; but not being able to recollect the name of their father nor of their home, the prince caused a proclamation to be issued, commanding that whoever had lost two children, named Nennillo and Nennella, in a wood, should come to the royal palace, and he would there receive joyful news of them. Jannuccio, who had all this time passed a sad and disconsolate life, believing that his children had been devoured by wolves, now hastened with the greatest joy to seek the prince, and told him that he had lost the children. And when he had related the story, how he had been compelled to take them to the wood, the prince gave him a good scolding, calling him a blockhead for allowing a woman to put her heel upon his neck till he was brought to send away two such jewels as his children. But after he had broken Jannuccio's head with these words, he applied to it the plaster of consolation, showing him the children, whom the father embraced and kissed for half an hour without being satisfied. Then the prince made him pull off his jacket, and had him dressed like a lord; and sending for Jannuccio's wife, he showed her those two golden pippins, asked her what that person would deserve who should do them any harm, and even endanger their lives. And she replied, "For my part, I would put her into a closed cask, and send her rolling down a mountain." "So it shall be done!" said the prince. "The goat has butted at herself. Quick now! you have passed the sentence, and you must suffer it, for having borne these beautiful stepchildren such malice." So he gave orders that the sentence should be instantly executed. Then choosing a very rich lord among his vassals, he gave him Nennella to wife, and the daughter of another great lord to Nennillo; allowing them enough to live upon, with their father, so that they wanted for nothing in the world. But the stepmother, shut into the cask and shut out from life, kept on crying through the bunghole as long as she had breath: To him who mischief seeks, shall mischief fall; There comes an hour that recompenses all. Source: Giambattista Basile, The Pentamerone; or, The Story of Stories , translated from the Neapolitan by John Edward Taylor (London: David Bogue, 1848), day 5, tale 8, pp. 370-78 . Basile's was published posthumously in two volumes titled Lo cunto de li cunti overo lo trattenemiento de peccerille ( The Tale of Tales; or, Entertainment for Little Ones , 1634-36). The edition of 1674 appeared under the title Il Pentamerone , in recognition of the work's structure's similarity to that of Boccaccio's Decamerone . Basile's work is arguably the first European fairy-tale collection. Return to the table of contents . Little Thumb Charles Perrault Once upon a time there lived a woodcutter and his wife; they had seven children, all boys. The eldest was but ten years old, and the youngest only seven. People were astonished that the woodcutter had had so many children in such a short time, but his wife was very fond of children, and never had less than two at a time. They were very poor, and their seven children inconvenienced them greatly, because not one of them was able to earn his own way. They were especially concerned, because the youngest was very sickly. He scarcely ever spoke a word, which they considered to be a sign of stupidity, although it was in truth a mark of good sense. He was very little, and when born no bigger than one's thumb, for which reason they called him Little Thumb. The poor child bore the blame of everything that went wrong in the house. Guilty or not, he was always held to be at fault. He was, notwithstanding, more cunning and had a far greater share of wisdom than all his brothers put together. And although he spoke little, he listened well. There came a very bad year, and the famine was so great that these poor people decided to rid themselves of their children. One evening, when the children were all in bed and the woodcutter was sitting with his wife at the fire, he said to her, with his heart ready to burst with grief, "You see plainly that we are not able to keep our children, and I cannot see them starve to death before my face. I am resolved to lose them in the woods tomorrow, which may very easily be done; for, while they are busy in tying up the bundles of wood, we can leave them, without their noticing." "Ah!" cried out his wife; "and can you yourself have the heart to take your children out along with you on purpose to abandon them?" In vain her husband reminded her of their extreme poverty. She would not consent to it. Yes, she was poor, but she was their mother. However, after having considered what a grief it would be for her to see them perish with hunger, she at last consented, and went to bed in tears. Little Thumb heard every word that had been spoken; for observing, as he lay in his bed, that they were talking very busily, he got up softly, and hid under his father's stool, in order to hear what they were saying without being seen. He went to bed again, but did not sleep a wink all the rest of the night, thinking about what he had to do. He got up early in the morning, and went to the riverside, where he filled his pockets with small white pebbles, and then returned home. They all went out, but Little Thumb never told his brothers one syllable of what he knew. They went into a very thick forest, where they could not see one another at ten paces distance. The woodcutter began his work, and the children gathered up the sticks into bundles. Their father and mother, seeing them busy at their work, slipped away from them without being seen, and returned home along a byway through the bushes. When the children saw they had been left alone, they began to cry as loudly as they could. Little Thumb let them cry, knowing very well how to get home again, for he had dropped the little white pebbles all along the way. Then he said to them, "Don't be afraid, brothers. Father and mother have left us here, but I will lead you home again. Just follow me." They did so, and he took them home by the very same way they had come into the forest. They dared not go in, but sat down at the door, listening to what their father and mother were saying. The woodcutter and his wife had just arrived home, when the lord of the manor sent them ten crowns, which he had owed them a long while, and which they never expected. This gave them new life, for the poor people were almost famished. The woodcutter sent his wife immediately to the butcher's. As it had been a long while since they had eaten, she bought three times as much meat as would be needed for two people. When they had eaten, the woman said, "Alas! Where are our poor children now? They would make a good feast of what we have left here; but it was you, William, who decided to abandon them. I told you that we would be sorry for it. What are they now doing in the forest? Alas, dear God, the wolves have perhaps already eaten them up. You are very inhuman to have abandoned your children in this way." The woodcutter at last lost his patience, for she repeated it more than twenty times, that they would be sorry for it, and that she was right for having said so. He threatened to beat her if she did not hold her tongue. It was not that the woodcutter was less upset than his wife, but that she was nagging him. He, like many others, was of the opinion that wives should say the right thing, but that they should not do so too often. She nearly drowned herself in tears, crying out, "Alas! Where are now my children, my poor children?" She spoke this so very loud that the children, who were at the gate, began to cry out all together, "Here we are! Here we are!" She immediately ran to open the door, and said, hugging them, "I am so glad to see you, my dear children; you are very hungry and tired. And my poor Peter, you are horribly dirty; come in and let me clean you." Now, you must know that Peter was her eldest son, whom she loved above all the rest, because he had red hair, as she herself did. They sat down to supper and ate with a good appetite, which pleased both father and mother. They told them how frightened they had been in the forest, speaking almost always all together. The parents were extremely glad to see their children once more at home, and this joy continued while the ten crowns lasted; but, when the money was all gone, they fell again into their former uneasiness, and decided to abandon them again. This time they resolved to take them much deeper into the forest than before. Although they tried to talk secretly about it, again they were overheard by Little Thumb, who made plans to get out of this difficulty as well as he had the last time. However, even though he got up very early in the morning to go and pick up some little pebbles, he could not do so, for he found the door securely bolted and locked. Their father gave each of them a piece of bread for their breakfast, and he fancied he might make use of this instead of the pebbles, by throwing it in little bits all along the way; and so he put it into his pocket. Their father and mother took them into the thickest and most obscure part of the forest, then, slipping away by an obscure path, they left them there. Little Thumb was not concerned, for he thought he could easily find the way again by means of his bread, which he had scattered along the way; but he was very much surprised when he could not find so much as one crumb. The birds had come and had eaten every bit of it up. They were now in great distress, for the farther they went the more lost and bewildered they became. Night now came on, and there arose a terrible high wind, which made them dreadfully afraid. They fancied they heard on every side of them the howling of wolves coming to eat them up. They scarcely dared to speak or turn their heads. After this, it rained very hard, which drenched them to the skin; their feet slipped at every step they took, and they fell into the mire, getting them muddy all over. Their hands were numb with cold. Little Thumb climbed to the top of a tree, to see if he could discover anything. Turning his head in every direction, he saw at last a glimmering light, like that of a candle, but a long way from the forest. He came down, but from the ground, he could no longer see it no more, which concerned him greatly. However, after walking for some time with his brothers in the direction where he had seen the light, he perceived it again as he came out of the woods. They came at last to the house where this candle was, but not without many fearful moments, for every time they walked down into a hollow they lost sight of it. They knocked at the door, and a good woman opened it. She asked them what they wanted. Little Thumb told her they were poor children who had been lost in the forest, and begged her, for God's sake, to give them lodging. The woman, seeing that they were good looking children, began to weep, and said to them, "Alas, poor babies, where are you from? Do you know that this house belongs to a cruel ogre who eats up little children?" "Ah! dear madam," answered Little Thumb (who, as well as his brothers, was trembling all over), "what shall we do? If you refuse to let us sleep here then the wolves of the forest surely will devour us tonight. We would prefer the gentleman to eat us, but perhaps he would take pity upon us, especially if you would beg him to." The ogre's wife, who believed she could hide them from her husband until morning, let them come in, and had them to warm themselves at a very good fire. There was a whole sheep on the spit, roasting for the ogre's supper. After they warmed up a little, they heard three or four great raps at the door. This was the ogre, who was come home. Hearing him, she hid them under the bed and opened the door. The ogre immediately asked if supper was ready and the wine drawn, and then sat down at the table. The sheep was still raw and bloody, but he preferred it that way. He sniffed about to the right and left, saying, "I smell fresh meat." His wife said, "You can smell the calf which I have just now killed and flayed." "I smell fresh meat, I tell you once more," replied the ogre, looking crossly at his wife, "and there is something here which I do not understand." As he spoke these words he got up from the table and went directly to the bed. "Ah, hah!" he said. "I see then how you would cheat me, you cursed woman; I don't know why I don't eat you as well. It is fortunate for you that you are tough old carrion. But here is good game, which has luckily arrived just in time to serve to three ogre friends who are coming here to visit in a day or two." With that he dragged them out from under the bed, one by one. The poor children fell upon their knees, and begged his pardon; but they were dealing with one of the cruelest ogres in the world. Far from having any pity on them, he had already devoured them with his eyes. He told his wife that they would be delicate eating with good savory sauce. He then took a large knife, and, approaching the poor children, sharpened it on a large whetstone which he held in his left hand. He had already taken hold of one of them when his wife said to him, "Why do it now? Is it not tomorrow soon enough?" "Hold your chatter," said the ogre; "they will be more tender, if I kill them now." "But you have so much meat already," replied his wife. "You have no need for more. Here are a calf, two sheep, and half a hog." "That is true," said the ogre. "Feed them so they don't get too thin, and put them to bed." The good woman was overjoyed at this, and offered them a good supper, but they were so afraid that they could not eat a bit. As for the ogre, he sat down to drink, being highly pleased that now had something special to treat his friends. He drank a dozen glasses more than ordinary, which went to his head and made him sleepy. The ogre had seven little daughters. These young ogresses all had very fine complexions, because they ate fresh meat like their father; but they had little gray eyes, quite round, hooked noses, and very long sharp teeth, well spaced from each other. As yet they were not overly mischievous, but they showed great promise for it, for they had already bitten little children in order to suck their blood. They had been put to bed early, all seven in a large bed, and each of them wearing a crown of gold on her head. The ogre's wife gave the seven little boys a bed just as large and in the same room, then she went to bed to her husband. Little Thumb, who had observed that the ogre's daughters had crowns of gold upon their heads, and was afraid lest the ogre should change his mind about not killing them, got up about midnight, and, taking his brothers' caps and his own, went very softly and put them on the heads of the seven little ogresses, after having taken off their crowns of gold, which he put on his own head and his brothers', that the ogre might take them for his aughters, and his daughters for the little boys whom he wanted to kill. All of this happened according to his plan for, the ogre awakened about midnight and, regretting that he had put off until morning that which he might have done tonight, he hastily got out of bed and picked up his large knife. "Let us see," he said, "how our little rogues are doing! We'll not make that mistake a second time!" He then went, groping all the way, into his daughters' room. He came to the bed where the little boys lay. They were all fast asleep except Little Thumb, who was terribly afraid when he felt the ogre feeling about his head, as he had done about his brothers'. Feeling the golden crowns, the ogre said, "That would have been a terrible mistake. Truly, I did drink too much last night." Then he went to the bed where the girls lay. Finding the boys' caps on them, he said, "Ah, hah, my merry lads, here you are. Let us get to work." So saying, and without further ado, he cut all seven of his daughters' throats. Well pleased with what he had done, he went to bed again to his wife. As soon as Little Thumb heard the ogre snore, he wakened his brothers and told them to put on their clothes immediately and to follow him. They stole softly down into the garden, and climbed over the wall. They kept running nearly the whole night, trembling all the while, and not knowing which way they were going. The ogre, when he awoke, said to his wife, "Go upstairs and dress those young rascals who came here last night." The ogress was very much surprised at this goodness of her husband, not dreaming how he intended that she should dress them, thinking that he had ordered her to go and put their clothes on them, she went up, and was horribly astonished when she saw her seven daughters with their throats cut and lying in their own blood. She fainted away, for this is the first expedient almost all women find in such cases. The ogre, fearing his wife would be too long in doing what he had ordered, went up himself to help her. He was no less amazed than his wife at this frightful spectacle. "What have I done?" he cried. "Those wretches shall soon pay for this!" He threw a pitcher of water on his wife's face, and, having brought her to herself, cried, "Bring me my seven-league boots at once, so that I can catch them." He went out, and ran this way and that over a vast amount of ground. At last he came to the very road where the poor children were, and not more than a hundred paces from their father's house. They saw the ogre coming, who was stepping from mountain to mountain, and crossing over rivers as easily as if they were little streams. Little Thumb hid himself and his brothers in a nearby hollow rock, all the while keeping watch on the ogre. The ogre was very tired from his long and fruitless journey (for seven-league boots are very tiring to wear), and decided to take a rest. By chance he sat on the rock where the little boys had hid themselves. He was so tired that he fell asleep, and began to snore so frightfully that the poor children were no less afraid of him than when he had held up his large knife and was about to cut their throats. However, Little Thumb was not as frightened as his brothers were, and told them that they immediately should run away towards home while the ogre was asleep so soundly, and that they should not worry about him. They took his advice, and soon reached home. Little Thumb came up to the ogre, pulled off his boots gently and put them on his own feet. The boots were very long and large, but because they were enchanted, they became big or little to fit the person who was wearing them. So they fit his feet and legs as well as if they had been custom made for him. He immediately went to the ogre's house, where he saw his wife crying bitterly for the loss of her murdered daughters. "Your husband," said Little Thumb, "is in very great danger. He has been captured by a gang of thieves, who have sworn to kill him if he does not give them all his gold and silver. At the very moment they were holding their daggers to his throat he saw me, and begged me to come and tell you the condition he is in. You should give me everything he has of value, without keeping back anything at all, for otherwise they will kill him without mercy. Because his case is so very urgent, he lent me his boots (you see I have them on), that I might make the more haste and to show you that he himself has sent me to you." The good woman, being sadly frightened, gave him all she had, for although this ogre ate up little children, he was a good husband. Thus Little Thumb got all the ogre' s money. He returned with it to his father's house, where he was received with great joy. There are many people who do not agree with this last detail. They claim that Little Thumb never robbed the ogre at all, that he only made off with the seven-league boots, and that with a good conscience, because the ogre's only use of them was to pursue little children. These folks affirm that they are quite sure of this, because they have often drunk and eaten at the woodcutter's house. These people claim that after taking off the ogre's boots, Little Thumb went to court, where he learned that there was much concern about the outcome of a certain battle and the condition of a certain army, which was two hundred leagues off. They say that he went to the king, and told him that, if he desired it, he would bring him news from the army before night. The king promised him a great sum of money if he could do so. Little Thumb was as good as his word, and returned that very same night with the news. This first feat brought him great fame, and he could then name his own price. Not only did the king pay him very well for carrying his orders to the army, but the ladies of the court paid him handsomely to bring them information about their lovers. Occasionally wives gave him letters for their husbands, but they paid so poorly, that he did not even bother to keep track of the money he made in this branch of his business. After serving as a messenger for some time and thus acquiring great wealth, he went home to his father, where he was received with inexpressible joy. He made the whole family very comfortable, bought positions for his father and brothers, all the while handsomely looking after himself as well. Moral: It is no affliction to have many children, if they all are good looking, courteous, and strong, but if one is sickly or slow-witted, he will be scorned, ridiculed, and despised. However, it is often the little urchin who brings good fortune to the entire family. Source: Andrew Lang, The Blue Fairy Book , 5th edition (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1891 [first published 1889]), pp. 231-41 . Lang's source: Charles Perrault, Histoires ou contes du temps passé, avec des moralités: Contes de ma mère l'Oye (Paris, 1697). Edited by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002. Entitled "Le petit Pouçet" in French, this tale is also known in English as "Hop o' My Thumb," or as "Little Tom Thumb." Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 327B. Links to related sites: Little Thumb . The above tale in a single file. Le petit pouçet . The above tale in the original French. Charles Perrault's Mother Goose Tales . Information about Perrault and his famous collection Histoires ou contes du temps passé, avec des moralités: Contes de ma mère l'Oye , including links to individual tales. Les contes de Perrault . A French-language site featuring Perrault's tales. Return to the table of contents . An Old Story Ireland Once upon a time there was a cruel father and he had two little children, a boy and a girl. He led them into a large wood. They walked through the wood for a while, and the father asked the children if they were feeling hungry, and they said they were. The father said he would go and get something for them to eat. He went away, and never returned, and the children wandered through the wood, and after a while died with starvation. It is said that the robins brought leaves and covered their dead bodies. Written by Rupert Elliott. Told by my Mother. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Cavan >> Blacklion, p. 237 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Molly Whuppie England Once upon a time there was a man and a wife had too many children, and they could not get meat for them, so they took the three youngest and left them in a wood. They traveled and traveled and could never see a house. It began to be dark, and they were hungry. At last they saw a light and made for it; it turned out to be a house. They knocked at the door, and a woman came to it, who said, "What do you want?" They said, "Please let us in and give us something to eat." The woman said, "I can't do that, as my man is a giant, and he would kill you if he comes home." They begged hard. "Let us stop for a little while," said they, "and we will go away before he comes." So she took them in, and set them down before the fire, and gave them milk and bread; but just as they had begun to eat, a great knock came to the door, and a dreadful voice said: Fee, fie, fo, fum, I smell the blood of some earthly one. "Who have you there, wife?" "Eh," said the wife, "it's three poor lassies cold and hungry, and they will go away. Ye won't touch, 'em, man." He said nothing, but ate up a big supper, and ordered them to stay all night. Now he had three lassies of his own, and they were to sleep in the same bed with the three strangers. The youngest of the three strange lassies was called Molly Whuppie, and she was very clever. She noticed that before they went to bed the giant put straw ropes round her neck and her sisters', and round his own lassies' necks, he put gold chains. So Molly took care and did not fall asleep, but waited till she was sure everyone was sleeping sound. Then she slipped out of bed, and took the straw ropes off her own and her sisters' necks, and took the gold chains off the giant's lassies. She then put the straw ropes on the giant's lassies and the gold on herself and her sisters, and lay down. And in the middle of the night up rose the giant, armed with a great club, and felt for the necks with the straw. It was dark. He took his own lassies out of the bed on to the floor, and battered them until they were dead, and then lay down again, thinking he had managed finely. Molly thought it time she and her sisters were off and away, so she wakened them and told them to be quiet, and they slipped out of the house. They all got out safe, and they ran and ran, and never stopped until morning, when they saw a grand house before them. It turned out to be a king's house; so Molly went in, and told her story to the king. He said, "Well, Molly, you are a clever girl, and you have managed well; but, if you would manage better, and go back, and steal the giant's sword that hangs on the back of his bed, I would give your eldest sister my eldest son to marry." Molly said she would try. So she went back, and managed to slip into the giant's house, and crept in below the bed. The giant came home, and ate up a great supper, and went to bed. Molly waited until he was snoring, and she crept out, and reached over the giant and got down the sword; but just as she got it out over the bed it gave a rattle, and up jumped the giant, and Molly ran out at the door and the sword with her; and she ran, and he ran, till they came to the "Bridge of one hair"; and she got over, but he couldn't and he says, "Woe worth ye, Molly Whuppie! never ye come again." And she says: "Twice yet, carle," quoth she, "I'll come to Spain." So Molly took the sword to the king, and her sister was married to his son. Well, the king he says, "Ye've managed well, Molly; but if ye would manage better, and steal the purse that lies below the giant's pillow, I would marry your second sister to my second son." And Molly said she would try. So she set out for the giant's house, and slipped in, and hid again below the bed, and waited till the giant had eaten his supper, and was snoring sound asleep. She slipped out and slipped her hand below the pillow, and got out the purse; but just as she was going out the giant wakened, and ran after her; and she ran, and he ran, till they came to the "Bridge of one hair," and she got over, but he couldn't, and he said, "Woe worth ye, Molly Whuppie! never you come again." "Once yet, carle," quoth she, "I'll come to Spain." So Molly took the purse to the king, and her second sister was married to the king's second son. After that the king says to Molly, "Molly, you are a clever girl, but if you would do better yet, and steal the giant's ring that he wears on his finger, I will give you my youngest son for yourself." Molly said she would try. So back she goes to the giant's house, and hides herself below the bed. The giant wasn't long ere he came home, and, after he had eaten a great big supper, he went to his bed, and shortly was snoring loud. Molly crept out and reached over the bed, and got hold of the giant's hand, and she pulled and she pulled until she got off the ring; but just as she got it off the giant got up, and gripped her by the hand and he says, "Now I have caught you, Molly Whuppie; and, if I done as much ill to you as ye have done to me, what would ye do to me?" Molly says, "I would put you into a sack, and I'd put the cat inside wi' you, and the dog aside you, and a needle and thread and shears, and I'd hang you up upon the wall, and I'd go to the wood, and choose the thickest stick I could get, and I would come home, and take you down, and bang you till you were dead." "Well, Molly," says the giant, "I'll just do that to you. So he gets a sack, and puts Molly into it, and the cat and the dog beside her, and a needle and thread and shears, and hangs her up upon the wall, and goes to the wood to choose a stick. Molly she sings out, "Oh, if ye saw what I see." "Oh," says the giant's wife, "what do you see, Molly?" But Molly never said a word but, "Oh, if ye saw what I see!" The giants wife begged that Molly would take her up into the sack till she would see what Molly saw. So Molly took the shears and cut a hole in the sack, and took out the needle and thread with her, and jumped down and helped the giants wife up into the sack, and sewed up the hole. The giant's wife saw nothing, and began to ask to get down again; but Molly never minded, but hid herself at the back of the door. Home came the giant, and a great big tree in his hand, and he took down the sack, and began to batter it. His wife cried, "It's me, man"; but the dog barked and the cat mewed, and he did not know his wife's voice. But Molly came out from the back of the door, and the giant saw her and he ran after her; and he ran, and she ran, till they came to the "Bridge of one hair," and she got over, but he couldn't; and he said, "Woe worth you, Mollie Whuppie! never you come again." "Never more, carle," quoth she, "will I come again to Spain." So Molly took the ring to the king, and she was married to his youngest son, and she never saw the giant again. Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 22, pp. 125-30 . Jacobs' source: W. Gregor, "Mally Whuppy," Folk-Lore Journal , vol. 2, part 3 (March 1884), pp. 68-71 . Gregor's source: "The following folk-tales have been communicated to me by Mr. Moir, Rector of the Grammar School, Aberdeen. He had them from his mother, who kindly wrote out "Mally Whuppie" and "The Red Calf" at my request. Jacobs' revisions to Gregor's text consist primarily of changing the name Mally Whuppy to Molly Whuppy , and substituting standard English terms for the various Scottish dialect expressions used in the original. The tale "Molly Whuppie" combines elements from several traditional folktale types: Type 327, "The Children and the Ogre" (a generic heading). Type 327A, "Hansel and Gretel" (children abandoned by their parents). Type 327B, "The Brothers [here sisters] and the Ogre" (an ogre tricked into killing his own children). Type 328, "The Boy [here girl] Steals the Ogre's Treasure." Type 1119, "The Ogre Kills His Mother or Wife." Return to table of contents . Jan and Hanna Poland Now once upon a time there were a father and a mother who had a large flock of children. The father went to town and bought a scoopful of peas and gave each child one pea, but Jan and Hanna did not get any. This made them cry. The father said, "Be quiet and don't cry. I am going into the forest to chop wood. You can come along and look for berries." The father took a breadboard and a rolling pin with him and hung them on a tree. He said to Jan and Hanna, "Just go and pick berries. You can pick berries as long as I am chopping wood." The wind blew the breadboard and the rolling pin against each other, and they thought their father was still chopping wood, so they continued to pick berries. After they had eaten until they were full and had filled their little buckets as well, they went and looked for their father. They came to the place where the breadboard and the rolling pin were hanging, but no father was there. They cried, then ran about in the woods shouting, but they did not find anyone. Suddenly they came to a little gingerbread house. They began to crumble off some little pieces: crumble, crumble from Old Vera's little house! Then Old Vera came running out. "Who's there?" They quickly hid themselves so she could not find them. But they continued to crumble little pieces off the little house: crumble, crumble from Old Vera's little house. Then she ran out very fast and caught them. She took them inside and said, "Now I am going to fatten you up," and she locked them into a little stall and gave them nothing but bread and milk to eat. After a while she wanted to see if they were fattened up enough. "Jan, stick out your finger. Are you fattened up yet?" But he stuck out the little whistle he had brought from home. She made a cut in it. "Oh, you are not fat enough yet." "Hanna, you stick out your finger. Are you fattened up yet?" But she stuck out a finger that had a ring on it. Old Vera made a cut in the ring. "Oh, you are not fat enough yet either." Then they cried a lot, and Jan lost his little whistle, and Hanna lost her ring. Old Vera came again to see if they were fattened up enough. "Jan, stick out your finger." Old Vera made a cut in it, and it bled a little. "Hanna, you stick out your finger." Old Vera made a cut in it, and it bled a little. "Yes, you are fattened up enough. Now I am going to roast you." She heated up her oven very hot, took Jan and Hanna and said, "Sit on the bread pusher." They sat on the bread pusher, now this way, and now that way. Vera told them how they were supposed to sit, but every time they fell off. "We don't know how we are supposed to sit. You show us." Then Old Vera sat on the bread pusher, and bang! they pushed her into the glowing oven. Old Vera burned up completely, so the little gingerbread house was theirs, and if they haven't sold it, they still have it to this very day. Source: Karl Haupt, "Hänschen und Hannchen," Sagenbuch der Lausitz , part 2 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1863), no. 315, pp. 215-16 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2007. This tale is a Slavic story from Lusatia (Lausitz), a historical area in present-day eastern Germany and western Poland, with a mixed Slavic and German population. Return to the table of contents . The House of Candy Czechia Once upon a time there was a poor father, who had two children, Jan and Marie. His daily work was to cut wood in the forest. He was very, very poor. He had no one to take care of the children. They were all alone. As he was away all day, he felt that he should marry again, so that the children should have a mother's care. But the stepmother proved to be a very cruel, neglectful woman who did not want to work. Not only did she not love the children, but she wanted to get rid of them, so she gave her husband no peace. She made up all kinds of lies about the wickedness of the children and said that he must get rid of them. She commanded him to take them to the woods and leave them there. He was afraid of her and at last consented. Therefore one day, he said to the children with a sad heart, "Take your little baskets and come with me to the woods to pick strawberries." They jumped with joy and at once taking their little baskets, they went most happily with their father to the woods. When they were deep in the forest, the father led them to an open place where there were many berries, in fact the place was red with the luscious fruit. "Now, dear ones," he said, "Pick all the berries you please, while I am away. As long as you hear me cutting wood, you will know that I am nearby." The children began eagerly to pick berries, and the father went a little ways on, where he bound his mallet on a tree. It swung back and forth in the wind, hitting the tree and making a noise like the cutting of wood. When this had been done, the father returned home, leaving the children in the woods. When Jan and Marie had their baskets full of berries, and had eaten their fill, they began to think of looking for their father. They went to the place where they heard the sound of the swinging mallet, but they saw nothing of their father, only the mallet hitting against the tree. This mallet was a big hammer which he used for driving in the wedges to split the logs. "Where is father?" asked Jan. "Perhaps he has gone home and forgotten us." Now Marie had perfect trust in her father. She could not think that he would wilfully desert them. She said to Jan, "Why do you think that? Surely he is somewhere near and will come for us, no doubt." So they waited for quite a while. They ate from their little baskets, till the berries were all gone. Then they filled them again. And so the time was flying. Before it grew quite dark, the sound of the mallet ceased, and the children began to be frightened. They took their baskets and once more looked for father. The sun had set and evening had come. They called, "Father, where are you?" but no sound came to answer them. Marie who was older and wiser than Jan, but just as much afraid, would not let him see that tears were so near her eyes. Then she tried to comfort him, by saying, "Wait a minute, I will climb up in a tree from which I can perhaps see a light. Then we will go towards it." Up the tree she scrambled. It was so high that she could see from its top in all directions. After a while she saw a light gleaming in the distance. "Oh, Jan! I see a light! Let's go towards it." Down she came and they started. Following the light, they came to a tiny little house. It was such a funny little house; they felt of it with their hands, and then they saw that it was made of candy. Jan was delighted. Now he felt that he could have all the candy he wanted. At once he scrambled up on the roof to break some off to throw down to Marie, who was still afraid that some harm might come to them. But Jan was already on the roof and had peeled off some candy, which he had thrown down to her. They went to its little window and peeked in. There they saw an old man and woman sitting by the fire. At first they thought they would knock and ask for something to eat, but Marie was afraid. The moment the candy was broken off, the old woman said, "What is that? I hear a noise. Surely someone is breaking into our house. See who's there." The old man went out and saw a little girl under their window. "What are you doing here? Are you trying to break into our house?" he asked her. "Oh, no, Grandfather. It is the wind," said Marie, her childish voice trembling with fear. With this the old man was satisfied, and he went back into the house. The children had eaten enough, and they nestled to sleep in each other's arms, under the window of the house of candy. In the morning Jan climbed up on the roof to get another piece of candy. Again the old woman sent the man out to see what was going on. Marie thought to get rid of the old man once more, but this time, he saw two children. Then he went back to tell the old woman. "Quick, quick, dear Jan," called Marie, "we must run away at once, or something terrible will happen to us," for she had heard the old woman command the man to catch the children, so that she could roast them for her dinner. Jan leaped down from the roof. Marie snatched his hand and they ran away as fast as they could. Suddenly Jan and Marie came upon a woman in a field of flax. Panting and out of breath, "Tell us please, mother, where we can hide. A bad old man from the house of candy is trying to catch us. He wants to take us home, so that they can roast us for their dinner, because we have taken a piece of candy from their roof." The woman in the field was a good fairy and loved all little children. She was determined to help Jan and Marie, so she said, "Go this way a little distance into the woods. I will see what I can do with the old man." Then she showed the children the path, along which they ran as fast as their little legs could take them. After a little while, the old man came along, panting and blowing. Seeing the woman in the field, he called out, "Woman, have you seen two children go by and which way did they go?" The woman pretended that she was deaf, and she answered, "I am in the flax field pulling up the weeds." "Woman, I ask you, if you have seen two children pass this way." But she continued, "I shall weed the flax, until it is ripe." Raising his voice, "Listen to me", woman, have you seen two children go by here?" "When we shall have gathered the crop, we shall clean the seeds, and then moisten the flax," said the woman. This time the man fairly shouted, "Stupid, don't you understand me? Have you seen two children pass this way?" "When we have moistened the flax, we shall spread it out in the sun to dry," she kept on. "Woman, are you deaf? Have you seen two children pass this way?" "After the flax is dried, we shall comb and then hackle it." "Don't you hear? Have you seen two children?" "Then when the flax is hackled, we shall bind it on the distaff ready for spinning." "I don't care anything about that. Have you seen two children pass by here?" and with each question, he grew more and more angry. "And after we have spun some fine garters, we will wind the rest of the thread on spools." "Tell me, woman, have you seen two children pass this way?" "When we have wound the thread on spools, we shall then weave some beautiful fine linen." 'I don't care any thing about the linen. I ask you again, have you seen two children go by here?" "When we have woven the linen, we shall bleach it. Then we shall cut it out for little shirts, swaddling clothes, skirts, and aprons." "Are you deaf?" he yelled. "Have you seen two children go by?" "Oh yes, oh yes. What are we going to do with it? Finally we shall make tinder from it. Then the flint, when it strikes will make a tiny spark. The fire of God will not consume it. The fire will become smoke, the smoke wind. That is the end of my story." "I did not ask you any thing about that," thundered the old man. What I want to know, did you see two children pass this way?" "Children, children? You should have told me that in the first place. Of course I saw them. They went that way, by the path through the fields, down to the brook where the willows are, but you will never catch them, for they flew like hawks." At this the woman showed the man the opposite side to which she had directed the children. Then the old man recognized that he had been outwitted. He frothed with rage and turned back home. When he had gone, the woman disappeared from the field, and the children reached home in safety. The father was very glad to get them back. Source (Internet Archive): Božena Němcová, The Disobedient Kids and Other Czecho-Slovak Fairy Tales (Prague: B. Koči, 1921), unpaginated . Return to the table of contents . Old Grule Moravia Once upon a time there were a father and a mother who had two children, a girl and a boy. The girl's name was Gretel, and the boy's name was Hans. The children were disobedient, and often received beatings. One day they wanted to go into the woods to pick strawberries, but their mother said, "You are not allowed to go out today. A thunderstorm is approaching, so you have to stay at home." But the children did not obey. While their mother was busy working, the children took their little baskets from the wall and went into the woods. There they picked strawberries, but they had scarcely begun when it grew dark. A storm arose that whipped the trees fiercely against each other until the branches came flying down. It began to thunder and lightning, followed by hail and rain. The frightened children were sorry that they had not obeyed their mother and remained at home. Fortunately they found a rocky cave, and they crept inside and waited until the rain stopped. After the thunderstorm had passed, they wanted to go home, but -- oh dear -- they no longer knew the way. They walked and walked, but instead of going out of the woods, they only went deeper and deeper into the woods. They grew terribly afraid and called out, "Father! Mother!" but no one heard them. Night fell, and they saw with terror that they would have to sleep in the woods. Then Gretel said, "Hans, do you know what? Climb a tree. You like to climb trees, and you can look around. Maybe you'll see a light where we can go." Hans did this, and he did indeed see a light in the distance. He came down from the tree, took Gretel by the hand, and led her in the direction of the light he had seen. When they arrived there, they saw a little house from which the light was glistening. Looking more closely, they found that it was made of gingerbread. The walls were of gingerbread and the roof of marzipan. They looked around for a ladder, and finding one, they leaned it on the roof and climbed up. There they made themselves comfortable and began breaking off one marzipan shingle after the other and eating them, until there was a hole clear through the roof. Now a witch named Grule lived in this little house, and she liked to eat children more than anything else. She was just about to go to bed when she heard something on her roof. Running outside, she said with a deep voice, "Who is robbing my house?" "The wind, the wind," was Gretel's reply, with a very gentle voice. Satisfied, she went back inside and went to bed. In the meantime the moon had risen, and when the witch put out her light she noticed a large hole in the roof above her bed, and a child's head looking around. She jumped up, ran outside, pulled the children down from the roof, and said, "Just wait, you worthless brats. I'll teach you to ruin my house. Get inside. You can't leave." And with these words she put them in an empty chicken coop and locked the door. The next days, and for some time afterward, the witch brought the children good things to eat, for she wanted to fatten them up in order to have a good roast from them. She brought the children all the things they liked to eat: cake, sweets, fruit, and many other things. When she thought that the children must be fat enough, she took a knife to the coop. First she went to Gretel and said, "Girl, stick out your little finger, but Gretel thought, "No way," and held out her apron string. Grule cut into it a little, and said, "Skinny, skinny." Then she went to Hans and said, "Boy, stick out your little finger," and Hans held out his trouser string. She likewise cut into it and said, "Skinny, skinny," then went away. After this she thought, "What should I give the children to eat to make them fat? Good things don't make them fat. I'll try something else." And from then on she gave them nothing but flour porridge, which the children soon grew to hate. Some time later the witch again came to the coop with a knife and said to Gretel, "Girl, stick out your little finger," and this time Gretel held out her finger. Old Grule cut into it a little, and a drop of blood appeared. Then the witch said, "Fat, fat." Then she went to Hans and told him to hold out his finger as well, which he did, just as Gretel had done. She cut into it too, and when it bled a little, she again said, "Fat, fat." She went to her kitchen and made a fire in her oven. After it had burned down she took a wooden crook and with it spread the coals evenly across the oven's entire surface. After a while she took a wet straw whisk and swept the coals to the front of the oven, then took them out. Then she went to the coop, opened it, and said, "Come, children, I have some baked plums in the oven. You can get them out for me." The two ran for joy into the kitchen with Old Grule, thinking that at last they were going to get something other than the eternal flour porridge. Arriving there, the witch got a baker's peel and told the children to sit on it, so she could push them into the oven. But while Grule was gone, Gretel looked into the oven and saw that there were no plums in it at all. So when Old Grule told her to sit on the peel first, she pretended to be so awkward that she fell off. Then she said, "My dear Grule, I don't understand how I am supposed to sit on it. Show me, so I can see how." Then Old Grule pulled her skirts together, sat down on the baker's peel, and said, "See. This is how to do it." And while she was thus sitting there, Gretel gave a sign to Hans, and bang, the children pushed the witch into the oven, and Old Grule burned up miserably. Gretel and Hans returned home. Their parents were very happy to see them, for they thought their children had died, but still each of them was given a beating for being disobedient. Source: Marie Kosch, "Von der alten Grule," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Mähren (Kremsier: Druck und Commissionsverlag Heinrich Gusek, 1899), pp. 92-95. Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2007. Moravia, a traditional kingdom and region in central Europe with mixed Slavic and German populations, was incorporated in the twentieth century into Czechoslovakia, and subsequently into the Czech Republic. Return to the table of contents . The Little Boy and the Wicked tepmother Romania Once upon a time there was a poor man, who had a wife and two children, a boy and a girl. He was so poor that he possessed nothing in the world but the ashes on his hearth. His wife died, and after a time he married another woman, who was cantankerous and bad natured, and from morning till evening, as long as the day lasted, she gave the poor man no peace, but snarled and shouted at him. The woman said to him, "Do away with these children. You cannot even keep me. How then can you keep all these mouths?" for was she not a stepmother? The poor man stood her nagging for a long time, but then, one night, she quarreled so much that he promised her that he would take the children into the forest and leave them there. The two children were sitting in the corner but held their peace and heard all that was going on. The next day, the man, taking his ax upon his shoulder, called to the children and said to them, "Come with me into the forest. I am going to cut wood." The little children went with him, but before they left, the little girl filled her pocket with ashes from the hearth, and as she walked along she dropped little bits of coal the way they went. After a time they reached a very dense part of the forest, where they could not see their way any longer, and there the man said to the children, "Wait here for a while. I am only going to cut wood yonder. When I have done I will come back and fetch you home." And leaving the children there in the thicket, he went away, heavy hearted, and returned home. The children waited for a while, and seeing that their father did not return, the girl knew what he had done. So they slept through the night in the forest, and the next morning, taking her brother by the hand, she followed the trace of the ashes which she had left on the road, and thus came home to their own house. When the stepmother saw them, she did not know what to do with herself. She went almost out of her mind with fury. If she could, she would have swallowed them in a spoonful of water, so furious was she. The husband, who was a weakling, tried to pacify her, and to endeavor to get the children away by one means or another, but did not succeed. When the stepmother found that she could not do anything through her husband, she made up her mind that she herself would get rid of them. So one morning, when her husband had gone away, she took the little boy, and without saying anything to anybody, she killed him and gave him to his sister to cut him up, and prepare a meal for all of them. What was she to do? If she was not to be killed like her brother, she had to do what her stepmother told her. And so she cut him up and cooked him ready for the meal But she took the heart, and hid it away in a hollow of a tree. When the stepmother asked her where the heart was, she said that a dog had come and taken it away. In the evening, when the husband came home, she brought the broth with the meat for the husband to eat, and she sat down and ate of it, and so did the husband, not knowing that he was eating the flesh of his child. The little girl refused to eat it. She would not touch it. After they had finished, she gathered up all the little bones and hid them in the hollow of the tree where she had put the heart. The next morning, out of that hollow of the tree there came a little bird with dark feathers, and sitting on the branch of a tree, began to sing, "Cuckoo! My sister has cooked me, and my father has eaten me, but I am now a cuckoo and safe from my stepmother." When the stepmother, who happened to be near the tree, heard what that little bird was singing, in her fury and fright she took a heavy lump of salt which lay near at hand, and threw it at the cuckoo. But instead of hitting it, the lump fell down on her head and killed her on the spot. And the little boy has remained a cuckoo to this very day. Source: "Why Does the Cuckoo Call 'Cuckoo'? The Story of the Little Boy and the Wicked Step-Mother," M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 74, pp. 225-27 . This story merges a tale of type 327A (Hansel and Gretel) with a tale of type 720 (The Juniper Tree). Link to an additional tale of type 720: The Juniper Tree by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. Return to the table of contents . The Witch Russia Once upon a time there was a peasant whose wife died, leaving him with two children -- twins -- a boy and a girl. For some years the poor man lived on alone with the children, caring for them as best he could; but everything in the house seemed to go wrong without a woman to look after it, and at last he made up his mind to marry again, feeling that a wife would bring peace and order to his household and take care of his motherless children. So he married, and in the following years several children were born to him; but peace and order did not come to the household. For the stepmother was very cruel to the twins, and beat them, and half starved them, and constantly drove them out of the house; for her one idea was to get them out of the way. All day she thought of nothing but how she should get rid of them; and at last an evil idea came into her head, and she determined to send them out into the great gloomy wood where a wicked witch lived. And so one morning she spoke to them, saying: "You have been such good children that I am going to send you to visit my granny, who lives in a dear little hut in the wood. You will have to wait upon her and serve her, but you will be well rewarded, for she will give you the best of everything." So the children left the house together; and the little sister, who was very wise for her years, said to the brother: "We will first go and see our own dear grandmother, and tell her where our stepmother is sending us." And when the grandmother heard where they were going, she cried and said: "You poor motherless children! How I pity you; and yet I can do nothing to help you! Your stepmother is not sending you to her granny, but to a wicked witch who lives in that great gloomy wood. Now listen to me, children. You must be civil and kind to everyone, and never say a cross word to anyone, and never touch a crumb belonging to anyone else. Who knows if, after all, help may not be sent to you?" And she gave her grandchildren a bottle of milk and a piece of ham and a loaf of bread, and they set out for the great gloomy wood. When they reached it they saw in front of them, in the thickest of the trees, a queer little hut, and when they looked into it, there lay the witch, with her head on the threshold of the door, with one foot in one corner and the other in the other corner, and her knees cocked up, almost touching the ceiling. "Who's there?" she snarled, in an awful voice, when she saw the children. And they answered civilly, though they were so terrified that they hid behind one another, and said: "Good morning, granny; our stepmother has sent us to wait upon you, and serve you." "See that you do it well, then," growled the witch. "If I am pleased with you, I'll reward you; but if I am not, I'll put you in a pan and fry you in the oven -- that's what I'll do with you, my pretty dears! You have been gently reared, but you'll find my work hard enough. See if you don't." And, so saying, she set the girl down to spin yarn, and she gave the boy a sieve in which to carry water from the well, and she herself went out into the wood. Now, as the girl was sitting at her distaff, weeping bitterly because she could not spin, she heard the sound of hundreds of little feet, and from every hole and corner in the hut mice came pattering along the floor, squeaking and saying: Little girl, why are your eyes so red? If you want help, then give us some bread. And the girl gave them the bread that her grandmother had given her. Then the mice told her that the witch had a cat, and the cat was very fond of ham; if she would give the cat her ham, it would show her the way out of the wood, and in the meantime they would spin the yarn for her. So the girl set out to look for the cat, and, as she was hunting about, she met her brother, in great trouble because he could not carry water from the well in a sieve, as it came pouring out as fast as he put it in. And as she was trying to comfort him they heard a rustling of wings, and a flight of wrens alighted on the ground beside them. And the wrens said: Give us some crumbs, then you need not grieve. For you'll find that water will stay in the sieve. Then the twins crumbled their bread on the ground, and the wrens pecked it, and chirruped and chirped. And when they had eaten the last crumb they told the boy to fill up the holes of the sieve with clay, and then to draw water from the well. So he did what they said, and carried the sieve full of water into the hut with out spilling a drop. When they entered the hut the cat was curled up on the floor. So they stroked her, and fed her with ham, and said to her: "Pussy, grey pussy, tell us how we are to get away from the witch?" Then the cat thanked them for the ham, and gave them a pocket handkerchief and a comb, and told them that when the witch pursued them, as she certainly would, all they had to do was to throw the handkerchief on the ground and run as fast as they could. As soon as the handkerchief touched the ground a deep, broad river would spring up, which would hinder the witch's progress. If she managed to get across it, they must throw the comb behind them and run for their lives, for where the comb fell a dense forest would start up, which would delay the witch so long that they would be able to get safely away. The cat had scarcely finished speaking when the witch returned to see if the children had fulfilled their tasks. "Well, you have done well enough for today," she grumbled; "but tomorrow you'll have something more difficult to do, and if you don't do it well, you pampered brats, straight into the oven you go." Half dead with fright, and trembling in every limb, the poor children lay down to sleep on a heap of straw in the corner of the hut; but they dared not close their eyes, and scarcely ventured to breathe. In the morning the witch gave the girl two pieces of linen to weave before night, and the boy a pile of wood to cut into chips. Then the witch left them to their tasks, and went out into the wood. As soon as she had gone out of sight the children took the comb and the handkerchief, and, taking one another by the hand, they started and ran, and ran, and ran. And first they met the watchdog, who was going to leap on them and tear them to pieces; but they threw the remains of their bread to him, and he ate them and wagged his tail. Then they were hindered by the birch trees, whose branches almost put their eyes out. But the little sister tied the twigs together with a piece of ribbon, and they got past safely, and, after running through the wood, came out on to the open fields. In the meantime in the hut the cat was busy weaving the linen and tangling the threads as it wove. And the witch returned to see how the children were getting on; and she crept up to the window, and whispered: "Are you weaving, my little dear?" "Yes, granny, I am weaving," answered the cat. When the witch saw that the children had escaped her, she was furious, and, hitting the cat with a porringer, she said: "Why did you let the children leave the hut? Why did you not scratch their eyes out?" But the cat curled up its tail and put its back up, and answered: "I have served you all these years and you never even threw me a bone, but the dear children gave me their own piece of ham." Then the witch was furious with the watchdog and with the birch trees, because they had let the children pass. But the dog answered: "I have served you all these years and you never gave me so much as a hard crust, but the dear children gave me their own loaf of bread." And the birch rustled its leaves, and said: "I have served you longer than I can say, and you never tied a bit of twine even round my branches; and the dear children bound them up with their brightest ribbons." So the witch saw there was no help to be got from her old servants, and that the best thing she could do was to mount on her broom and set off in pursuit of the children. And as the children ran they heard the sound of the broom sweeping the ground close behind them, so instantly they threw the handkerchief down over their shoulder, and in a moment a deep, broad river flowed behind them. When the witch came up to it, it took her a long time before she found a place which she could ford over on her broomstick; but at last she got across, and continued the chase faster than before. And as the children ran they heard a sound, and the little sister put her ear to the ground, and heard the broom sweeping the earth close behind them; so, quick as thought, she threw the comb down on the ground, and in an instant, as the cat had said, a dense forest sprung up, in which the roots and branches were so closely intertwined, that it was impossible to force a way through it. So when the witch came up to it on her broom she found that there was nothing for it but to turn round and go back to her hut. But the twins ran straight on till they reached their own home. Then they told their father all that they had suffered, and he was so angry with their stepmother that he drove her out of the house, and never let her return; but he and the children lived happily together; and he took care of them himself, and never let a stranger come near them. Source: Andrew Lang, The Yellow Fairy Book , new impression (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1906 [first published 1894]), pp. 216-21 . Type 313H*. This tale is also known by the title "The Baba Yaga." Return to the table of contents . Magic Flight African American Was a little girl named Katie; and an old woman lived in a house by herself, and everybody believed she was a witch. As Katie was passin' by, the old woman opened the door and told her to come in, and the little girl went in and saw a beautiful room with lots of pretty pictures; and the old woman said she would give her some apples to eat. And after she finished eating the apples, the old woman told her to stay with her all the time. An' then Katie remembered that her mother sent her on an errand to get something for supper. She told the ol' woman that she would stay, but she had to get something for her mother for supper, else she wouldn' have anything. An' she told her she could have anything she wanted; and she took a wand and hit the table, an' in Katie's mother's house there came lots of good things, and she was wonderin' where they came from. And Katie 'greed to stay with her for a week. An' at the end of the week she had a dream. She dreamed that a elf came and told her that the witch was goin' to kill her. The next night she dreamed the same thing. The elf left her a comb and a handkerchief, and told her to drop them when the witch came after her. She jumped out the window in the middle of the night; and as she was almos' nearin' home, she looked behind and saw the witch comin' after her. So she dropped her comb, an' a fores' grew up; and it took the witch a long time to get through. Then, after she got through, Katie dropped her handkerchief, and a river came. An' the witch had to cross the river. As she was almos' home, she came to a woods where a wood-cutter was cuttin' down some trees. The woodcutter saw the witch, so he cut off her haid. He took Katie home. And her mother told her that came of children that disobeyed. Source: A. M. Bacon and E. C. Parsons, "Folk-Lore from Elizabeth City County, Virginia," Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 35, no. 137 (July - September 1922), pp. 280-81 . Note by Bacon and Parsons: Informant, Thelma Cannady of Hampton. She heard the story from her grandmother, who lives at Newport News. Type 313H*. Return to the table of contents . The Children and the Witch Jamaica There was a poor man and his wife and two children. He had nothing to give them but a slice of bread and cold water for the day. So one day he got up, took the children into the bush and pretended to be chopping the tree; then, as the children were playing, slipped away. When the wife asked for the children, he told her he had left them in the bush and she fretted and worried all day. Life became easier for them day by day, and the man became sorry that he had left them in the wood. The children, when they missed their father, started to travel through the wood to see if they could find their way home. A little black bird said to them, "Follow me and I will show you your way home!" but this little black bird was an Old Witch. It carried them to a house made out of nothing but cakes, sweets and all manner of nice things, and then the bird vanished away from them. But they were so glad to get the cakes and sweets that they began eating at once. Immediately as they touched the first cake, the door of the house opened and a very ugly-looking blind old woman came out to them and asked them what they were doing there; so they told her how they had been lost in the bush. She took them into the house, put one in a cage and had one to do all the work of the house. Every evening she went to feed the one in the cage, and asked him to stick out his hand to see if he was getting fat; so the one left in the house gave him a bone to stretch out instead, because the Old Witch was blind and could only feel. The one in the cage was getting very fat and rosy. One day she went to the cage and asked him to stretch out his hand and the child stretched out the bone; so she became very impatient, said she couldn't wait any longer and would kill him that very day for dinner, and asked the one in the house to heat up the oven. Then the Witch told the one in the house to see if the oven was hot enough; the Witch was going to shut the door on her and let her stay in there and bake. But the girl was smart and said she did not know how to get into it, she must show her the way. As the Witch went into the oven, she pushed her in and shut the door, and the Witch stood in there squealing till she was burned to death. Then the girl ran and took the boy out of the cage, took some of the cakes and nice things off the house, and ran to their own home. The parents were so glad to see them that they kept a ball for them that night, and they told the story how they had killed the Witch. Source (Internet Archive): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 110, pp. 146-47 . Source (Sacred Texts): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 110, pp. 146-47 . Beckwith's informant: Emily Alexander, Manderville. Return to the table of contents . Juan and Maria Philippines Once there lived in a barrio an old beggar couple. They had a son named Juan, and a daughter Maria. The proceeds from their begging were hardly enough to support the family. One day, after the old man had returned home from town, he ordered his wife to cook the rice that had been given him. The old woman obeyed him. When he saw that the rice was not enough for him and his wife and children, he angrily said to her, "From now on, don't let me see our children in this house. Chase them as far as you can, and let them find their own food." The old mother wept when she heard the words of her cruel husband. She did not want to be separated from her children; but she feared that she would be whipped if she kept them, so she obeyed the cruel order. At first the poor children did not want to go away; but, when they saw that their bad father was going to kick them, they ran off crying. Soon the children came to a wild forest. "Maria, what will become of us here?" said Juan. "I am very hungry," said the little girl. "I don't think that I can get you any food in this wilderness," said the kind brother, "but let me see!" He then looked around. By good luck he found a guava tree with one small fruit on it. He immediately climbed up for the guava, and gave it to his hungry sister. Then the two children resumed their journey. As they were walking along, Maria found a hen's egg on the grass. She picked it up and carried it along with her in her dirty ragged skirt. At last they saw a very small hut roofed with dry talahib (coarse, long grass). An old woman in the hut welcomed them, and asked them where they were going. After Juan had told her their story, she invited the tired children to stay in the hut with her. She promised that she would treat them as her little son and daughter. From that time on, Juan and Maria lived with the kind old woman. Juan grew to be a strong fine man, and Maria became a beautiful young woman. Juan spent almost all his time hunting in the mountains and woods. One morning he caught a black deer. While he was taking the animal home, the deer said to him, "Juan, as soon as you reach your home, kill me, eat my flesh, and put my hide in your trunk. After three days open your trunk, and you will see something astonishing." When Juan reached home, he did as the deer had told him to do. On the third day he found in the trunk golden armor. He was greatly delighted by the precious gift. Maria had not been living long with the old woman when she found that the egg had hatched into a chick, which soon grew into a fine fighting cock. One morning the cock crowed, "Tok-to-ko-kok! Take me to the cockpit. I'll surely win!" Maria told the old woman what the cock had said, and the next Sunday Juan took the fighting cock to the cockpit. There the rooster was victorious, and won much money for Juan. One day Juan heard that a tournament would be held in front of the king's palace. The winner of the contest was to become the husband of the princess, and would inherit the throne. Juan quickly put on his golden armor, and hastened to the palace to try his skill. He defeated all his opponents. The next day his bridal ceremony was celebrated, and the crown was placed on his head. That very day he ascended the throne to rule over the kingdom. Although Juan was now king, he was not proud. He and the queen visited Maria to get her to live in the palace; but the old woman would not allow her to go with her brother, as she had no other companion in the hut. One day a prince was lost in the forest. He happened to come across the hut in which Maria was living. He fell in love with her, and wanted to marry her. As the old woman offered no objections to the proposal of the prince, the following day Maria became a queen, just as her brother had become king. Although the parents of Juan and Maria had been very cruel, yet the king and queen did not forget them. The brother and sister visited their father and mother, whom they found in the most wretched condition. When the father saw that his children had become king and queen, he wept greatly for his former cruelty to them. Source: Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania: American Folk-lore Society, 1921), no. 40, pp. 295-301 . Note by Fansler: Narrated by Anicio Pascual of Arayat, Pampanga, who says, "This story is often told by Pampangan grandmothers to their grandchildren. I have heard it many times. Lately it was told to me again by an old woman." Return to the table of contents . Links to related tales Mr. Miacca , Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 30, pp. 164-66. Johnnie and Grizzle , Joseph Jacobs, Europa's Fairy Book (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), no. 22, pp. 180-87, Maol a Chliobain , J. F. Campbell, Popular Tale of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 1 (edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 251-56. The Enchanted Mountain , Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales with Other Traditional Remains: Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby, and Nottingham (London: David Nutt, 1895), no. 5, pp. 6-7. Jack the Butter-Milk , Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales with Other Traditional Remains: Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby, and Nottingham (London: David Nutt, 1895), no. 6, pp. 7-9. Buttercup , Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), no. 15, pp. 117-22). The Singing Sack , Fernan Caballero [Cecilia Francisca J. Arrom de Ayala], The Bird of Truth and Other Fairy Tales (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1883), pp. 53-56. Lál Bádscháh, the Red King; or, the Two Little Princesses , Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 81, pp. 330-42. Pedro and the Witch , Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 36, pp. 279-80. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 11, 2023. Hávamál Hávamál The Words of Odin the High One from the Elder or Poetic Edda (Sæmund's Edda) translated by Olive Bray and edited by D. L. Ashliman Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts . Germanic Myths, Legends, and Sagas . Odin's Home Page . Contents Wisdom for Wanderers and Counsel to Guests (verses 1-79) Maxims for All Men (verses 80-88) Lessons for Lovers (verses 89-93) Odin's Love Quests (verses 94-100) Odin's Quest after the Song Mead (verses 101-108) The Counseling of the Stray-Singer (verses 109-136) Odin's Quest after the Runes (verses 137-144) The Song of Spells (verses 145-164) Wisdom for Wanderers and Counsel to Guests 1. At every door-way, ere one enters, one should spy round, one should pry round for uncertain is the witting that there be no foeman sitting, within, before one on the floor 2. Hail, ye Givers! a guest is come; say! where shall he sit within? Much pressed is he who fain on the hearth would seek for warmth and weal. 3. He hath need of fire, who now is come, numbed with cold to the knee; food and clothing the wanderer craves who has fared o'er the rimy fell. 4. He craves for water, who comes for refreshment, drying and friendly bidding, marks of good will, fair fame if 'tis won, and welcome once and again. 5. He hath need of his wits who wanders wide, aught simple will serve at home; but a gazing-stock is the fool who sits mid the wise, and nothing knows. 6. Let no man glory in the greatness of his mind, but rather keep watch o'er his wits. Cautious and silent let him enter a dwelling; to the heedful comes seldom harm, for none can find a more faithful friend than the wealth of mother wit. 7. Let the wary stranger who seeks refreshment keep silent with sharpened hearing; with his ears let him listen, and look with his eyes; thus each wise man spies out the way. 8. Happy is he who wins for himself fair fame and kindly words; but uneasy is that which a man doth own while it lies in another's breast. 9. Happy is he who hath in himself praise and wisdom in life; for oft doth a man ill counsel get when 'tis born in another's breast. 10. A better burden can no man bear on the way than his mother wit; 'tis the refuge of the poor, and richer it seems than wealth in a world untried. 11. A better burden can no man bear on the way than his mother wit: and no worse provision can he carry with him than too deep a draught of ale. 12. Less good than they say for the sons of men is the drinking oft of ale: for the more they drink, the less can they think and keep a watch o'er their wits. 13. A bird of Unmindfulness flutters o'er ale feasts, wiling away men's wits: with the feathers of that fowl I was fettered once in the garths of Gunnlos below. 14. Drunk was I then, I was over drunk in that crafty Jötun's court. But best is an ale feast when man is able to call back his wits at once. 15. Silent and thoughtful and bold in strife the prince's bairn should be. Joyous and generous let each man show him until he shall suffer death. 16. A coward believes he will ever live if he keep him safe from strife: but old age leaves him not long in peace though spears may spare his life. 17. A fool will gape when he goes to a friend, and mumble only, or mope; but pass him the ale cup and all in a moment the mind of that man is shown. 18. He knows alone who has wandered wide, and far has fared on the way, what manner of mind a man doth own who is wise of head and heart. 19. Keep not the mead cup but drink thy measure; speak needful words or none: none shall upbraid thee for lack of breeding if soon thou seek'st thy rest. 20. A greedy man, if he be not mindful, eats to his own life's hurt: oft the belly of the fool will bring him to scorn when he seeks the circle of the wise. 21. Herds know the hour of their going home and turn them again from the grass; but never is found a foolish man who knows the measure of his maw. 22. The miserable man and evil minded makes of all things mockery, and knows not that which he best should know, that he is not free from faults. 23. The unwise man is awake all night, and ponders everything over; when morning comes he is weary in mind, and all is a burden as ever. 24. The unwise man weens all who smile and flatter him are his friends, nor notes how oft they speak him ill when he sits in the circle of the wise. 25. The unwise man weens all who smile and flatter him are his friends; but when he shall come into court he shall find there are few to defend his cause. 26. The unwise man thinks all to know, while he sits in a sheltered nook; but he knows not one thing, what he shall answer, if men shall put him to proof. 27. For the unwise man 'tis best to be mute when he come amid the crowd, for none is aware of his lack of wit if he wastes not too many words; for he who lacks wit shall never learn though his words flow ne'er so fast. 28. Wise he is deemed who can question well, and also answer back: the sons of men can no secret make of the tidings told in their midst. 29. Too many unstable words are spoken by him who ne'er holds his peace; the hasty tongue sings its own mishap if it be not bridled in. 30. Let no man be held as a laughing-stock, though he come as guest for a meal: wise enough seem many while they sit dry-skinned and are not put to proof. 31. A guest thinks him witty who mocks at a guest and runs from his wrath away; but none can be sure who jests at a meal that he makes not fun among foes. 32. Oft, though their hearts lean towards one another, friends are divided at table; ever the source of strife 'twill be, that guest will anger guest. 33. A man should take always his meals betimes unless he visit a friend, or he sits and mopes, and half famished seems, and can ask or answer nought. 34. Long is the round to a false friend leading, e'en if he dwell on the way: but though far off fared, to a faithful friend straight are the roads and short. 35. A guest must depart again on his way, nor stay in the same place ever; if he bide too long on another's bench the loved one soon becomes loathed. 36. One's own house is best, though small it may be; each man is master at home; though he have but two goats and a bark-thatched hut 'tis better than craving a boon. 37. One's own house is best, though small it may be, each man is master at home; with a bleeding heart will he beg, who must, his meat at every meal. 38. Let a man never stir on his road a step without his weapons of war; for unsure is the knowing when need shall arise of a spear on the way without. 39. I found none so noble or free with his food, who was not gladdened with a gift, nor one who gave of his gifts such store but he loved reward, could he win it. 40. Let no man stint him and suffer need of the wealth he has won in life; oft is saved for a foe what was meant for a friend, and much goes worse than one weens. 41. With raiment and arms shall friends gladden each other, so has one proved oneself; for friends last longest, if fate be fair who give and give again. 42. To his friend a man should bear him as friend, and gift for gift bestow, laughter for laughter let him exchange, but leasing pay for a lie. 43. To his friend a man should bear him as friend, to him and a friend of his; but let him beware that he be not the friend of one who is friend to his foe. 44. Hast thou a friend whom thou trustest well, from whom thou cravest good? Share thy mind with him, gifts exchange with him, fare to find him oft. 45. But hast thou one whom thou trustest ill yet from whom thou cravest good? Thou shalt speak him fair, but falsely think, and leasing pay for a lie. 46. Yet further of him whom thou trusted ill, and whose mind thou dost misdoubt; thou shalt laugh with him but withhold thy thought, for gift with like gift should be paid. 47. Young was I once, I walked alone, and bewildered seemed in the way; then I found me another and rich I thought me, for man is the joy of man. 48. Most blest is he who lives free and bold and nurses never a grief, for the fearful man is dismayed by aught, and the mean one mourns over giving. 49. My garments once I gave in the field to two land-marks made as men; heroes they seemed when once they were clothed; 'tis the naked who suffer shame! 50. The pine tree wastes which is perched on the hill, nor bark nor needles shelter it; such is the man whom none doth love; for what should he longer live? 51. Fiercer than fire among ill friends for five days love will burn; bun anon 'tis quenched, when the sixth day comes, and all friendship soon is spoiled. 52. Not great things alone must one give to another, praise oft is earned for nought; with half a loaf and a tilted bowl I have found me many a friend. 53. Little the sand if little the seas, little are minds of men, for ne'er in the world were all equally wise, 'tis shared by the fools and the sage. 54. Wise in measure let each man be; but let him not wax too wise; for never the happiest of men is he who knows much of many things. 55. Wise in measure should each man be; but let him not wax too wise; seldom a heart will sing with joy if the owner be all too wise. 56. Wise in measure should each man be, but ne'er let him wax too wise: who looks not forward to learn his fate unburdened heart will bear. 57. Brand kindles from brand until it be burned, spark is kindled from spark, man unfolds him by speech with man, but grows over secret through silence. 58. He must rise betimes who fain of another or life or wealth would win; scarce falls the prey to sleeping wolves, or to slumberers victory in strife. 59. He must rise betimes who hath few to serve him, and see to his work himself; who sleeps at morning is hindered much, to the keen is wealth half-won. 60. Of dry logs saved and roof-bark stored a man can know the measure, of fire-wood too which should last him out quarter and half years to come. 61. Fed and washed should one ride to court though in garments none too new; thou shalt not shame thee for shoes or breeks, nor yet for a sorry steed. 62. Like an eagle swooping over old ocean, snatching after his prey, so comes a man into court who finds there are few to defend his cause. 63. Each man who is wise and would wise be called must ask and answer aright. Let one know thy secret, but never a second, -- if three a thousand shall know. 64. A wise counselled man will be mild in bearing and use his might in measure, lest when he come his fierce foes among he find others fiercer than he. 65. Each man should be watchful and wary in speech, and slow to put faith in a friend. for the words which one to another speaks he may win reward of ill. 66. At many a feast I was far too late, and much too soon at some; drunk was the ale or yet unserved: never hits he the joint who is hated. 67. Here and there to a home I had haply been asked had I needed no meat at my meals, or were two hams left hanging in the house of that friend where I had partaken of one. 68. Most dear is fire to the sons of men, most sweet the sight of the sun; good is health if one can but keep it, and to live a life without shame. 69. Not reft of all is he who is ill, for some are blest in their bairns, some in their kin and some in their wealth, and some in working well. 70. More blest are the living than the lifeless, 'tis the living who come by the cow; I saw the hearth-fire burn in the rich man's hall and himself lying dead at the door. 71. The lame can ride horse, the handless drive cattle, the deaf one can fight and prevail, 'tis happier for the blind than for him on the bale-fire, but no man hath care for a corpse. 72. Best have a son though he be late born and before him the father be dead: seldom are stones on the wayside raised save by kinsmen to kinsmen. 73. Two are hosts against one, the tongue is the head's bane, 'neath a rough hide a hand may be hid; he is glad at nightfall who knows of his lodging, short is the ship's berth, and changeful the autumn night, much veers the wind ere the fifth day and blows round yet more in a month. 74. He that learns nought will never know how one is the fool of another, for if one be rich another is poor and for that should bear no blame. 75. Cattle die and kinsmen die, thyself too soon must die, but one thing never, I ween, will die, -- fair fame of one who has earned. 76. Cattle die and kinsmen die, thyself too soon must die, but one thing never, I ween, will die, -- the doom on each one dead. 77. Full-stocked folds had the Fatling's sons, who bear now a beggar's staff: brief is wealth, as the winking of an eye, most faithless ever of friends. 78. If haply a fool should find for himself wealth or a woman's love, pride waxes in him but wisdom never and onward he fares in his folly. 79. All will prove true that thou askest of runes -- those that are come from the gods, which the high Powers wrought, and which Odin painted: then silence is surely best. Maxims for All Men 80. Praise day at even, a wife when dead, a weapon when tried, a maid when married, ice when 'tis crossed, and ale when 'tis drunk. 81. Hew wood in wind, sail the seas in a breeze, woo a maid in the dark, -- for day's eyes are many, -- work a ship for its gliding, a shield for its shelter, a sword for its striking, a maid for her kiss; 82. Drink ale by the fire, but slide on the ice; buy a steed when 'tis lanky, a sword when 'tis rusty; feed thy horse neath a roof, and thy hound in the yard. 83. The speech of a maiden should no man trust nor the words which a woman says; for their hearts were shaped on a whirling wheel and falsehood fixed in their breasts. 84. Breaking bow, or flaring flame, ravening wolf, or croaking raven, routing swine, or rootless tree, waxing wave, or seething cauldron, 85. flying arrows, or falling billow, ice of a nighttime, coiling adder, woman's bed-talk, or broken blade, play of bears or a prince's child, 86. sickly calf or self-willed thrall, witch's flattery, new-slain foe, brother's slayer, though seen on the highway, half burned house, or horse too swift -- be never so trustful as these to trust. 87. Let none put faith in the first sown fruit nor yet in his son too soon; whim rules the child, and weather the field, each is open to chance. 88. Like the love of women whose thoughts are lies is the driving un-roughshod o'er slippery ice of a two year old, ill-tamed and gay; or in a wild wind steering a helmless ship, or the lame catching reindeer in the rime-thawed fell. Lessons for Lovers 89. Now plainly I speak, since both I have seen; unfaithful is man to maid; we speak them fairest when thoughts are falsest and wile the wisest of hearts. 90. -- Let him speak soft words and offer wealth who longs for a woman's love, praise the shape of the shining maid -- he wins who thus doth woo. 91. -- Never a whit should one blame another whom love hath brought into bonds: oft a witching form will fetch the wise which holds not the heart of fools. 92. Never a whit should one blame another for a folly which many befalls; the might of love makes sons of men into fools who once were wise. 93. The mind knows alone what is nearest the heart and sees where the soul is turned: no sickness seems to the wise so sore as in nought to know content. Odin's Love Quests 94. This once I felt when I sat without in the reeds, and looked for my love; body and soul of me was that sweet maiden yet never I won her as wife. 95. Billing's daughter I found on her bed, fairer than sunlight sleeping, and the sweets of lordship seemed to me nought, save I lived with that lovely form. 96. "Yet nearer evening come thou, Odin, if thou wilt woo a maiden: all were undone save two knew alone such a secret deed of shame." 97. So away I turned from my wise intent, and deemed my joy assured, for all her liking and all her love I weened that I yet should win. 98. When I came ere long the war troop bold were watching and waking all: with burning brands and torches borne they showed me my sorrowful way. 99. Yet nearer morning I went, once more, -- the housefolk slept in the hall, but soon I found a barking dog tied fast to that fair maid's couch. 100. Many a sweet maid when one knows her mind is fickle found towards men: I proved it well when that prudent lass I sought to lead astray: shrewd maid, she sought me with every insult and I won therewith no wife. Odin's Quest after the Song Mead 101. In thy home be joyous and generous to guests discreet shalt thou be in thy bearing, mindful and talkative, wouldst thou gain wisdom, oft making me mention of good. He is "Simpleton" named who has nought to say, for such is the fashion of fools. 102. I sought that old Jötun, now safe am I back, little served my silence there; but whispering many soft speeches I won my desire in Suttung's halls. 103. I bored me a road there with Rati's tusk and made room to pass through the rock; while the ways of the Jötuns stretched over and under, I dared my life for a draught. 104. 'Twas Gunnlod who gave me on a golden throne a draught of the glorious mead, but with poor reward did I pay her back for her true and troubled heart. 105. In a wily disguise I worked my will; little is lacking to the wise, for the Soul-stirrer now, sweet Mead of Song, is brought to men's earthly abode. 106. I misdoubt me if ever again I had come from the realms of the Jötun race, had I not served me of Gunnlod, sweet woman, her whom I held in mine arms. 107. Came forth, next day, the dread Frost Giants, and entered the High One's Hall: they asked -- was the Baleworker back mid the Powers, or had Suttung slain him below? 108. A ring-oath Odin I trow had taken -- how shall one trust his troth? 'twas he who stole the mead from Suttung, and Gunnlod caused to weep. The Counseling of the Stray-Singer 109. 'Tis time to speak from the Sage's Seat; hard by the Well of Weird I saw and was silent, I saw and pondered, I listened to the speech of men. 110. Of runes they spoke, and the reading of runes was little withheld from their lips: at the High One's hall, in the High One's hall, I thus heard the High One say: -- 111. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: rise never at nighttime, except thou art spying or seekest a spot without. 112. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: thou shalt never sleep in the arms of a sorceress, lest she should lock thy limbs; 113. So shall she charm that thou shalt not heed the council, or words of the king, nor care for thy food, or the joys of mankind, but fall into sorrowful sleep. 114. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: seek not ever to draw to thyself in love-whispering another's wife. 115. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: should thou long to fare over fell and firth provide thee well with food. 116. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: tell not ever an evil man if misfortunes thee befall, from such ill friend thou needst never seek return for thy trustful mind. 117. Wounded to death, have I seen a man by the words of an evil woman; a lying tongue had bereft him of life, and all without reason of right. 118. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: hast thou a friend whom thou trustest well, fare thou to find him oft; for with brushwood grows and with grasses high the path where no foot doth pass. 119. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: in sweet converse call the righteous to thy side, learn a healing song while thou livest. 120. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: be never the first with friend of thine to break the bond of fellowship; care shall gnaw thy heart if thou canst not tell all thy mind to another. 121. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: never in speech with a foolish knave shouldst thou waste a single word. 122. From the lips of such thou needst not look for reward of thine own good will; but a righteous man by praise will render thee firm in favour and love. 123. There is mingling in friendship when man can utter all his whole mind to another; there is nought so vile as a fickle tongue; no friend is he who but flatters. 124. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: oft the worst lays the best one low. 125. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: be not a shoemaker nor yet a shaft maker save for thyself alone: let the shoe be misshapen, or crooked the shaft, and a curse on thy head will be called. 126. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: when in peril thou seest thee, confess thee in peril, nor ever give peace to thy foes. 127. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: rejoice not ever at tidings of ill, but glad let thy soul be in good. 128. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: look not up in battle, when men are as beasts, lest the wights bewitch thee with spells. 129. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: wouldst thou win joy of a gentle maiden, and lure to whispering of love, thou shalt make fair promise, and let it be fast, -- none will scorn their weal who can win it. 130. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: I pray thee be wary, yet not too wary, be wariest of all with ale, with another's wife, and a third thing eke, that knaves outwit thee never. 131. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: hold not in scorn, nor mock in thy halls a guest or wandering wight. 132. They know but unsurely who sit within what manner of man is come: none is found so good, but some fault attends him, or so ill but he serves for somewhat. 133. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: hold never in scorn the hoary singer; oft the counsel of the old is good; come words of wisdom from the withered lips of him left to hang among hides, to rock with the rennets and swing with the skins. 134. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: growl not at guests, nor drive them from the gate but show thyself gentle to the poor. 135. Mighty is the bar to be moved away for the entering in of all. Shower thy wealth, or men shall wish thee every ill in thy limbs. 136. I counsel thee, Stray-Singer, accept my counsels, they will be thy boon if thou obey'st them, they will work thy weal if thou win'st them: when ale thou quaffest, call upon earth's might -- 'tis earth drinks in the floods. Earth prevails o'er drink, but fire o'er sickness, the oak o'er binding, the earcorn o'er witchcraft, the rye spur o'er rupture, the moon o'er rages, herb o'er cattle plagues, runes o'er harm. Odin's Quest after the Runes 137. I trow I hung on that windy Tree nine whole days and nights, stabbed with a spear, offered to Odin, myself to mine own self given, high on that Tree of which none hath heard from what roots it rises to heaven. 138. None refreshed me ever with food or drink, I peered right down in the deep; crying aloud I lifted the Runes then back I fell from thence. 139. Nine mighty songs I learned from the great son of Bale-thorn, Bestla's sire; I drank a measure of the wondrous Mead, with the Soulstirrer's drops I was showered. 140. Ere long I bare fruit, and throve full well, I grew and waxed in wisdom; word following word, I found me words, deed following deed, I wrought deeds. 141. Hidden Runes shalt thou seek and interpreted signs, many symbols of might and power, by the great Singer painted, by the high Powers fashioned, graved by the Utterer of gods. 142. For gods graved Odin, for elves graved Daïn, Dvalin the Dallier for dwarfs, All-wise for Jötuns, and I, of myself, graved some for the sons of men. 143. Dost know how to write, dost know how to read, dost know how to paint, dost know how to prove, dost know how to ask, dost know how to offer, dost know how to send, dost know how to spend? 144. Better ask for too little than offer too much, like the gift should be the boon; better not to send than to overspend. ........ Thus Odin graved ere the world began; Then he rose from the deep, and came again. The Song of Spells 145. Those songs I know, which nor sons of men nor queen in a king's court knows; the first is Help which will bring thee help in all woes and in sorrow and strife. 146. A second I know, which the son of men must sing, who would heal the sick. 147. A third I know: if sore need should come of a spell to stay my foes; when I sing that song, which shall blunt their swords, nor their weapons nor staves can wound. 148. A fourth I know: if men make fast in chains the joints of my limbs, when I sing that song which shall set me free, spring the fetters from hands and feet. 149. A fifth I know: when I see, by foes shot, speeding a shaft through the host, flies it never so strongly I still can stay it, if I get but a glimpse of its flight. 150. A sixth I know: when some thane would harm me in runes on a moist tree's root, on his head alone shall light the ills of the curse that he called upon mine. 151. A seventh I know: if I see a hall high o'er the bench-mates blazing, flame it ne'er so fiercely I still can save it, -- I know how to sing that song. 152. An eighth I know: which all can sing for their weal if they learn it well; where hate shall wax 'mid the warrior sons, I can calm it soon with that song. 153. A ninth I know: when need befalls me to save my vessel afloat, I hush the wind on the stormy wave, and soothe all the sea to rest. 154. A tenth I know: when at night the witches ride and sport in the air, such spells I weave that they wander home out of skins and wits bewildered. 155. An eleventh I know: if haply I lead my old comrades out to war, I sing 'neath the shields, and they fare forth mightily safe into battle, safe out of battle, and safe return from the strife. 156. A twelfth I know: if I see in a tree a corpse from a halter hanging, such spells I write, and paint in runes, that the being descends and speaks. 157. A thirteenth I know: if the new-born son of a warrior I sprinkle with water, that youth will not fail when he fares to war, never slain shall he bow before sword. 158. A fourteenth I know: if I needs must number the Powers to the people of men, I know all the nature of gods and of elves which none can know untaught. 159. A fifteenth I know, which Folk-stirrer sang, the dwarf, at the gates of Dawn; he sang strength to the gods, and skill to the elves, and wisdom to Odin who utters. 160. A sixteenth I know: when all sweetness and love I would win from some artful wench, her heart I turn, and the whole mind change of that fair-armed lady I love. 161. A seventeenth I know: so that e'en the shy maiden is slow to shun my love. 162. These songs, Stray-Singer, which man's son knows not, long shalt thou lack in life, though thy weal if thou win'st them, thy boon if thou obey'st them thy good if haply thou gain'st them. 163. An eighteenth I know: which I ne'er shall tell to maiden or wife of man save alone to my sister, or haply to her who folds me fast in her arms; most safe are secrets known to but one- the songs are sung to an end. 164. Now the sayings of the High One are uttered in the hall for the weal of men, for the woe of Jötuns, Hail, thou who hast spoken! Hail, thou that knowest! Hail, ye that have hearkened! Use, thou who hast learned! Source: The Elder or Poetic Edda, commonly known as Sæmund's Edda, part I: The Mythological Poems, edited and translated by Olive Bray (London: Printed for the Viking Club, 1908), pp. 61-111. Return to: Table of Contents . D. L. Ashliman's Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts . D. L. Ashliman's Germanic Myths, Legends, and Sagas . Odin's Home Page . Revised March 28, 2003. Hello, House! Folktales of type 66A Hello, House! Folktales of type 66A edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2010 Contents The Hare and the Lion (Zanzibar). The Alligator and the Jackal (India). Heyo, House! (African-American). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Hare and the Lion Zanzibar [After several unsuccessful attempts to capture the hare, the lion asked some people], "Where is the hare's house?" And they told him, "We do not know." And the hare had said to his wife, "Let us remove from this house." And they removed. And the lion went asking, and people told him, "That is his house on the top of the mountain." And the lion went, and when he arrived, the hare was not there. And he said, "I will hide myself inside the house, till when the hare comes with his wife, I will eat them both." And the hare came, he and his wife. He had heard nothing, till on the road he saw the lion's feet, and he said to his wife, "You go back, the lion has passed this way looking for me." And she said, "I will not go back, I will follow you, my husband." And he said, "You have friends to go to, go back." And she went back. And the hare went on and followed the feet, and saw that they went into his house. And he said [to himself], "Oho, lion! you are inside." And he went back cautiously, and went and stood at a distance, and said, "Salaam house! Salaam house! Salaam house!" And he heard no reply. And the hare said, "How is this? Every day as I pass this place, if I say, 'Salaam,' the house answers me; but today perhaps there is someone inside it." The lion was deceived, and replied, "Salaam." And he said to him, "Oho, lion! you are inside, you want to eat me, your son. And where did you hear of a house's talking?" And the lion said, "Wait for me, that's all." And the hare ran off, and they chased one another till the lion was tired. And he said to the people, "The hare has beaten me; there, I do not want him any more." And he went back. Source: Edward Steere, Swahili Tales, as Told by Natives of Zanzibar (London: Bell and Daldy, 1870), pp. 375-77 . Swahili and English on facing pages. This episode is extracted from a longer tale ( pp. 369-77 ). Return to the table of contents . The Alligator and the Jackal India [After several unsuccessful attempts to capture the jackal], the alligator said to himself, "I will not allow that little wretch to make fun of me another time, and then run away out of reach; I will show him that I can be more cunning than he fancies." And early the next morning he crawled as fast as he could to the jackal's den (which was a hole in the side of a hill) and crept into it, and hid himself, waiting for the jackal, who was out, to return home. But when the jackal got near the place he looked about him and thought, "Dear me, the ground looks as if some heavy creature had been walking over it, and here are great clods of earth knocked down from each side of the door of my den, as if a very big animal had been trying to squeeze himself through it. I certainly will not go inside until I know that all is safe there." So he called out, "Little house, pretty house, my sweet little house, why do you not give an answer when I call? If I come, and all is safe and right, you always call out to me. Is anything wrong that you do not speak?" Then the alligator, who was inside, thought, "If that is the case I had better call out, that he may fancy all is right in his house." And in as gentle a voice as he could, he said, "Sweet little jackal." At hearing these words the jackal felt quite frightened, and thought to himself, "So the dreadful old alligator is there. I must try to kill him if I can, for if I do not he will certainly catch and kill me some day." He therefore answered, "Thank you, my dear little house. I like to hear your pretty voice. I am coming in in a minute, but first I must collect firewood to cook my dinner." And he ran as fast as he could, and dragged all the dry branches and bits of stick he could find, close up to the mouth of the den. Meantime the alligator inside kept as quiet as a mouse, but he could not help laughing a little to himself, as he thought, "So I have deceived this tiresome little jackal at last. In a few minutes he will run in here, and then won't I snap him up." When the jackal had gathered together all the sticks he could find, and put them round the mouth of his den, he set them on fire and pushed them as far into it as possible. There was such a quantity of them that they soon blazed up into a great fire, and the smoke and flames filled the den and smothered the wicked old alligator, and burnt him to death, while the little jackal ran up and down: outside, dancing for joy and singing: "How do you like my house, my friend? Is it nice and warm? Ding, dong! ding, dong! The alligator is dying! ding, dong, ding, dong! He will trouble me no more. I have defeated my enemy! Ring a ting! ding a ting! ding, ding, dong!" Source: M[ary Eliza Isabella] Frere, Old Deccan Days; or, Hindoo Fairy Legends Current in Southern India (London: John Murray, 1868), pp. 313-14 . This episode is extracted from a longer tale ( pp. 309-14 ). Return to the table of contents . Heyo, House! African American One day whiles ole Miss Rabbit en de little Rabs is out pickin' sallid fer dinner, he [Brer Wolf] went in de house, he did, en wait fer Brer Rabbit ter come home. Brer Rabbit had his hours, en dis wuz one un um, en't wan't long 'fo' here he come. He got a mighty quick eye, mon, en he tuck notice dat ev'ything mighty still. When he got little nigher, he tuck notice dat de front door wuz on de crack, en dis make 'im feel funny, kaze he know dat when his ole 'oman en de chillun out, dey allers pulls de door shet en ketch de latch. So he went up a little nigher, en he step thin ez a battercake. He peep here, en he peep dar, yit he ain't see nothin'. He lissen in de chimbley cornder, en he lissen und' de winder, yit he ain't hear nothin'. Den he sorter wipe his mustach en study. He 'low ter hisse'f, "De pot-rack know what gwine on up de chimbley, de rafters know who's in de loft, de bed-cord know who und' de bed. I ain't no pot-rack, I ain't no rafter, en I ain't no bed-cord, but, please gracious! I 'm gwine ter fin' who's in dat house, en I ain't gwine in dar nudder. Dey mo' ways ter fin' out who fell in de mill-pond widout fallin' in yo'se'f." "Some folks," Uncle Remus went on, "would 'a' rushed in dar, en ef dey had, dey would n't 'a' rushed out no mo', kaze dey wouldn't 'a' been nothin' 't all lef un um but a little scrap er hide en a han'ful er ha'r." Brer Rabbit got better sense dan dat. All he ax anybody is ter des gi' 'im han'-roomance, en dem what kin ketch 'im is mo' dan welly-come ter take 'im. Dat 'zackly de kinder man what Brer Rabbit is. He went off a little ways fum de house en clum a 'simmon stump en got up dar en 'gun ter holler, "He'low, Heyo, house!" De house ain't make no answer, en Brer Wolf, in dar behime de door, open his eyes wide. He ain't know what ter make er dat kinder doin's. Brer Rabbit holler, "Heyo, house! Why n't you heyo?" House ain't make no answer, en Brer Wolf in dar behime de door sorter move roun' like he gittin' restless in de min'. Brer Rabbit out dar on de 'simmon stump holler mo' louder dan befo', "Heyo, house! Heyo!" House stan' still, en Brer Wolf in dar behime de door 'gun ter feel col' chills streakin' up and down his back. In all his born days he ain't never hear no gwines on like dat. He peep thoo de crack er de door, but he can't see nothin'. Brer Rabbit holler louder, "Heyo, house! Ain't you gwine ter heyo? Is you done los' what little manners you had?" Brer Wolf move 'bout wuss'n befo'. He feel des like some un done hit 'im on de funny-bone. Brer Rabbit holler hard ez he kin, but still he ain't git no answer, en den he 'low, "Sholy sump'n nudder is de matter wid dat house, kaze all de times befo' dis, it been holler'n back at me, 'Heyo, yo'se'f!'" Den Brer Rabbit wait little bit, en bimeby he holler one mo' time, "Heyo, house!" Ole Brer Wolf try ter talk like he speck a house 'ud talk, en he holler back, "Heyo, yo'se'f!" Brer Rabbit wunk at hisse'f. He low, "Heyo, house! why n't you talk hoarse like you got a bad col'?" Den Brer Wolf holler back, hoarse ez he kin, "Heyo, yo'se'f!" Dis make Brer Rabbit laugh twel a little mo' en he 'd a drapt off'n dat ar 'simmon stump en hurt hisse'f. He 'low, "Eh-eh, Brer Wolf! dat ain't nigh gwine ter do. You 'll hatter stan' out in de rain a mighty long time 'fo' you kin talk hoarse ez dat house!" "I let you know," continued Uncle Remus, laying his hand gently on the little boy's shoulder, "I let you know, Brer Wolf come a-slinkin' out, en made a break fer home. Atter dat, Brer Rabbit live a long time wid'out any er de yuther creeturs a-pesterin un 'im!" Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus and His Friends: Old Plantation Stories, Songs, and Ballads, with Sketches of Negro Character (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1892), pp. 143-46 . This episode is extracted from a longer tale ( pp. 142-46 ). Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 21, 2010. Hertha Lake, a Legend from Northern Germany Hertha Lake A Legend from Northern Germany translated by D. L. Ashliman © 1996-2010 In the part of the Island of Rügen named Jasmund, not far from Stubbenkammer, one can still see remnants--especially the outer wall--of Hertha Castle, which has stood there for many centuries, ever since the days of heathenism. In this castle the heathens of Rügen worshipped an idol that they called Hertha, whom they perceived to be Mother Earth. Not far from Hertha Castle there is a deep, black lake, surrounded by woods and hills. The goddess bathed there several times each year. She rode there in a carriage covered with a mysterious veil and drawn by two cows. Only her consecrated priest was allowed to accompany her. Slaves were also brought along to lead the draft animals, but they were drowned in the lake immediately upon completing their task, because any unconsecrated person who caught sight of the goddess would have to die. For this reason nothing more is known about the worship of this goddess. There are all kinds of stories about uncanny happenings near this lake. Some believe that these are caused by the devil, who, in the form of the goddess Hertha, was worshipped by the heathens and who therefore still lays claim to the lake. Others believe that these happenings are caused by an ancient queen or princess who had been banished to this place. Especially when the moon is shining brightly, a beautiful woman is often seen emerging from the woods adjacent to Hertha Castle. She proceeds to the lake, where she bathes herself. She is surrounded by many female servants, who accompany her into the water. Then they all disappear, but they can be heard splashing about. After a while they all appear again, and they can be seen returning to the woods dressed in long white veils. It is very dangerous for a wanderer to observe this, for he will be drawn by force into the lake where the white woman is bathing, and as soon as he touches the water, he will be powerless; the water will swallow him up. They say that the woman has to lure one human into the water every year. No one is allowed to use boats or nets on this lake. Some time ago some people dared to bring a boat to the lake. They left it afloat overnight, and when they returned the next morning, it had disappeared. After a long search, they found it atop a beech tree on the bank. It was spirits of the lake that had put it up there during the night, for when the people were getting it back down, they heard a spiteful voice calling to them from beneath the lake, saying: "My brother Nickel and I did it!" Source: J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen von Pommern und Rügen (Berlin, In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1840), no. 38, pp. 65-66 . See also Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Deutsche Sagen (1816/1818), no. 365. Rügen is a German island in the Baltic Sea. Hertha may be the earth goddess referred to by Tacitus in his treatise on the Germans, written in the year 98. Hertha is also known by the names Ertha and Nerthus, among others. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Tabulation by WebCounter . Revised June 26, 2010. Hildebrandslied Hildebrandslied Freely translated by D. L. Ashliman. Copyright 1997. Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Germanic Myths, Legends, and Sagas. I have heard tell, that two chosen warriors, Hildebrand and Hadubrand, met one another, between two armies. Father and son, the champions examined their gear, prepared their armor, and buckled their swords over their chain mail, before riding out to battle. Hildebrand, the older and more experienced man, spoke first, asking, with few words who his father was and from which family he came. "Tell me the one, young man, and I'll know the other, for I know all great people in this kingdom." Hadubrand, the son of Hildebrand, replied: "Old and wise people who lived long ago told me that my father's name was Hildebrand. My name is Hadubrand. Long ago he rode off into the East with Dietrich, and his many warriors, fleeing Otacher's wrath. He rode off into the East, leaving his wife at home with a small child, deprived of his inheritance. Dietrich, a man with but few friends, came to rely upon my father. His feud with Otacher grew more intense, and my father became his best-loved warrior. He was at the front of every battle, wanting to be in every duel. ..... Brave men knew him well. ..... " "With Almighty God in Heaven for a witness, may you never go to battle against your next of kin." And he took from his arm a band of rings, braided from the emperor's gold, which the King of the Huns had given to him. "I give you this in friendship." Hadubrand, the son of Hildebrand, replied: "A gift should be received with a spear, point against point. You are a cunning old Hun, leading me into a trap with your words, only to throw your spear at me. You have grown old by practicing such treachery. Sailors traveling westward across the Mediterranean Sea told me that he fell in battle. Hildebrand, the son of Heribrand, is dead." Hildebrand, the son of Heribrand, replied: "I see from your battle gear that you have a good master at home, and that you have never been banished by your prince. ..... Alas, Lord God, fate has struck. Sixty times I have seen summer turn to winter and winter to summer in a foreign land. I was always placed on the front lines; I was never killed while storming a fortress, and now my own child should strike me with his sword and hit me with his ax, if I don't kill him first. But if you have the courage, you can easily win the armor from an old man like me, and take away the spoils, if you have any right to them. ..... Not even the worst of the men from the East would turn down the the chance to fight with you, with your desire to duel. Cost what it may, let us see who will boast of this gear and who will lay claim to these two suits of chain mail." Then they let sail their ashen spears, Sharp showers, sticking in their shields. They came closer on foot, splitting each other's bright boards, striking fiercely until their weapons shattered their shields. ..... Notes Composed in alliterative verse during the second half of the 8th century, this poem was recorded in Old High German about 810 a.d. at the Fulda Monastery in southern Germany. The manuscript was used as the binding for a theological treatise. Translated here into free verse. No attempt has been made to reproduce the original meter or alliteration. The poem's conclusion is lost. Parallel traditions suggest that the father killed his son. However, a ballad from the 13th century, the so-called "Younger Hildebrandslied," ends with a reconciliation between father and son. The five dots indicate that part of the text is missing or unreadable. Two seasons per year times sixty seasons equals thirty years. This was a standard way to reckon time in medieval northern Europe. Return to the top of this document. Hildebrandslied-Homepage. This German-language cite includes the Old High German text of "Hildebrandslied," a translation of the poem into modern German, and photographs of the two-page manuscript. Revised September 17, 2013. The Himphamp: Folktales of Type 571B The Himphamp folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 571B and other stories about illicit lovers who are magically stuck together edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2014-2020 Contents The Himphamp (Scandinavia). The Smith and the Priest (Germany). The Story of the Himphamp (Germany). Stupid Hans (Germany / Poland). The Count and the Smith (Poland). The Tale of the Basin (England). Jack Horner and the Innkeeper's Wife (England). Link to The Enchanted Piss-Pot (England). This link leads to the Folklife West Journal , no. 6, p. 7 (April 1, 2011), and opens in a new window. The Plaisham (Ireland). The Raja's Son and the Kotwal's Son (India). The Love of Ares and Aphrodite (Homer, The Odyssey ). Vulcan, Mars, and Venus (Ovid, The Metamorphoses ). Vulcan, Mars, and Venus ( The Romance of the Rose ). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Himphamp Scandinavia Once upon a time there was a king who had nothing better to do than to become friendly with a blacksmith's wife who lived in the vicinity of the castle. The king visited her often, but her husband was in his way, so he decided to get rid of him. Therefore one day the king commanded the poor fellow to make him a magnificent castle standing on four pillars, and it had to be finished in three days, or else the blacksmith would lose his life. The blacksmith saw that he was doomed, and in despair wandered into the woods. At last he came to an old woman who asked what was troubling him. He told her of the kings hardheartedness and asked for advise. Then the old woman taught him the magic that he would need to finish the castle. When the king saw the castle, he was amazed and angry, and now he commanded the blacksmith to dig a great moat around the new castle and to build four bridges over the moat, with a gate for each one, and all that within three days. The blacksmith, using the old woman's magic, completed this task in three days as well. The king was even more amazed and more angry, because now he did not know what kind of a difficult and impossible task he would be able to give the blacksmith in order to find an excuse to take his life. Finally the king, quite beside himself, declared, "If you don't want to lose your life, you must make a himphamp for me in three days!" The smith did not even know what a himphamp was, so more desperate than ever, he walked away. Once again he found the old woman, who said to him, "Make a chamber pot of iron and place it under your bed. Then hide, and when you see anyone touch it, just say hold fast quietly to yourself, and you will soon see a himphamp!" The blacksmith did what the old woman said. One evening the king came, as usual, to visit the blacksmiths wife, and the smith hid himself where he could watch. The lovers got undressed, and the wife got into bed. Before following her, the king had to use the pot. As soon as he touched the iron pot, the smith whispered, "Hold fast," and the king, wearing only his nightshirt, stuck to the pot. The wife jumped out of bed and tried to tear the pot loose, but as soon as she touched it, the smith whispered "hold fast," and she too became stuck. The king was enraged at this tomfoolery, and the smith's wife began to cry. Her maid heard the commotion and, half asleep and stark naked, came running to help them. But she too became stuck, just like the others. Then the smith stepped forward and drove all three from the house with an iron club. It was almost daytime, and the embarrassed maid picked up a bundle of hay and tried to cover her shame with it. A cow came by and wanted to get at the hay, but the smith said "hold fast!" and it also became attached. Then a bull came by and mounted the cow, and the smith called out once more, "Hold fast!" He drove them -- all stuck to the iron pot -- up one street and down another. The people were just beginning to stir, and they all laughed and jeered. A small boy looked out from his window and shouted, "What a himphamp!" The townspeople joined the smith, and together they drove the entire himphamp into the deep moat at the castle. Then they made the clever blacksmith their new king. Retold from Scandinavian sources, including: Sweden: Pher Arvid Säve, " Hympä-Gympä," Gotländska sagor , edited by Herbert Gustavson (Uppsala, 1955), vol. 1, no. 84, pp. 240-41. Collected in the mid-nineteenth century in Gotland. Denmark: Evald Tang Kristensen, "En Himstergimster," Efterslæt til "Skattegraveren" (Kolding: Sjodt og Weiss, 1890), no. 25, pp. 44-46 . Denmark: Evald Tang Kristensen, "Per Smeds Pisk," Æventyr fra Jylland , vol. 3. Series: Jylke Folkeminder , vol. 12 (Copenhagen: Karl Schønberg, 1895), no. 54, pp. 299-304 . Return to the table of contents . The Smith and the Priest Germany There was a wayward priest who had fallen for a smith's wife, and she for him. They feared that the husband might notice something, so the priest came up with a plan to get the smith out of the way. Thus one day the priest went to the nobleman and said, "In your village there is a very talented smith who can make anything that he wants to. His skill is so great that within one night he could build a palace in your courtyard. However, you will have to threaten him with body and soul, otherwise he will refuse." The nobleman summoned the smith and said, "I have heard so much about your skill that I want to put it to the test. Build a palace for me in my courtyard, and it must be finished in one night." "Oh God," said the smith, "that is not possible. I cannot do that." "I am telling you," cried the nobleman, "if the palace is not finished by tomorrow morning I shall have you hanged without mercy." The smith sadly returned home to his wife. "Wife," he said, "I am supposed to build a palace for the nobleman tonight, and if I do not succeed I am to die." The wife said, "The only thing that you can do is to go away this very evening." "Yes," he said, "I'd sooner go away as far as my feet can carry me than to lose my life." So he tied together a bundle, sadly took leave of his wife, and went on his way, thinking that he would never return. And that is just what his wife and the priest wanted. At nightfall the smith came into a forest where he was met by a gray man who greeted him and asked, "Where to, my dear smith?" "Oh," said the smith, "I was supposed to build a palace for the nobleman tonight. He commanded me to do this under the threat of death, and because I am unable to do so I am running away as far as my feet can carry me." "Just go back home," said the gray man. "I shall take care of things for you. The palace will be finished tomorrow morning in due time." So the smith returned home to his wife. She was just about to fetch the priest when she saw her husband approaching, and she cried out with surprise, "Oh God, you have come back home. What will happen when the palace is not finished in the morning?" "Let happen what will happen," said the smith. "I cannot stand being away from you and from home for so long." With that he went to bed and fell asleep. The next morning the nobleman arose very early and looked out his window. He could scarcely believe his eyes, for a magnificent palace was standing there, glistening in the first rays of morning sunshine. When the priest learned what had happened and saw that his plan had failed, he went back to the nobleman and said, "Now you know how skilled the smith is. This time tell him to bring a himphamp to the palace before tomorrow morning. You have to command him under the threat of body and soul, or he will not do it." Then the nobleman summoned the smith to appear before him a second time, saying, "You built the palace entirely to my satisfaction; now you must bring a himphamp to the palace by tomorrow morning. With your skill that should be an easy task for you." "My lord," said the smith, "how can I bring you a himphamp when I don't even know what one is? I cannot do it." "That makes no difference," said the nobleman. "If there is no himphamp before my palace tomorrow morning I shall have you hanged without mercy." Then the smith sadly went back home to his wife. "Oh God, wife," he said, "now the nobleman wants me to get a himphamp by tomorrow morning, and if I cannot do so he will have me hanged without mercy." The wife said, "The only thing that you can do is to go away this very evening." "Yes," he said, "I'd sooner go away as far as my feet can carry me than to lose my life." So he tied together a bundle, sadly took leave of his wife, and went on his way, thinking that he would never return. That is just what his unfaithful wife and the priest wanted, and the smith had scarcely left when the priest sneaked into his house to be with the wife. Meanwhile the smith once again came into the woods and was again was met by the gray man, who asked, "Where to, my dear smith?" "Oh," said the smith, "now that the nobleman has the palace he also wants a himphamp, and because I cannot get one for him I am going as far as my feet can carry me." "No one other than the priest has put him up to this," said the gray man. "He wants your wife and is trying to get you out of the way. Just go back home. The two of them are there together, and when you see the priest giving your wife a kiss, just say 'Hold fast!' Then take your whip and drive the two of them out of your house along the street to the nobleman's palace. Whenever anyone comes and tries to pull them apart, just say 'Hold fast!" and they will all be stuck together until you say 'Let go!' That will turn into a wonderful himphamp." The smith thanked the gray man and returned home. It was early morning when he arrived at his village, and he sneaked into his house just as the priest was giving his wife a kiss. "Hold fast!" cried the smith. Hearing the smith's voice, the priest tried to run away, but -- oh dear! -- it was as if he were glued to the woman. Then the smith took his whip from the wall and drove the two of them out of the house and along the street. They came to the priest's house just as his servant girl with her apron full of hay was about to feed the cow. Seeing her master in a bad situation she quickly ran up and took hold of him in order to get him into his own house, so that no one would see his shame. "Hold fast!" cried the smith, and the priest's servant girl stuck to the others and had to go along with them. At the same time a herder boy came by, playing his pipe and driving his herd along before him. An old cow wanted to eat the hay that the priest's servant girl was carrying in her apron. "Hold fast!" cried the smith, and the old cow also stuck to the others and had to go along with them. All this was seen by a baker who had just heated his oven and was about to rake out the coals. He quickly ran up and hit the cow with his long oven-rake. "Hold fast!" cried the smith, and the baker with his long oven-rake also stuck to the others and had to go along with them. That morning the nobleman got up early; he looked out the window into the courtyard just as the smith came up with his himphamp. When he saw it the nobleman began to laugh, and said, "You have done well, my dear smith. That is a wonderful himphamp that you have brought to me, but turn them loose now, so they can go back home." Then the smith said, "Let go!" and with that they all ran back where they had come from: the priest, the wife, the servant girl, the cow, and the baker with his long oven-rake. However, the priest was so shamed that he never again returned to the smith's house. Source: Wilhelm Busch, "Der Schmied und der Pfaffe," Ut ôler Welt: Volksmärchen, Sagen, Volkslieder und Reime (Munich: Lothar Joachim Verlag, 1910), no. 29, pp. 74-76 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Himphamp Germany Once upon a time there was a sexton who went from house to house in the village for his noon-time meals. He like nothing better than to stop at the smith's house, for the smith's wife always had a well-filled frying pan and a good drink in the pitcher. Now the sexton showed up at the smith's house more often than he should have for his meals, for he always got a tasty bit from the smith's wife, and something better as well. The smith was normally a kind-hearted man, but did not like how the sexton was behaving, so one day he made it clear to him that he was not to come to eat at the smith's house any more often than he did so at the other villagers, warning him that if he showed up out of turn the smith would throw him out the door. "Is that how you are going to treat me?" said the sexton to himself. "I'll show you!" He then went straight to the manor house and told the nobleman why the latter should be getting more out of his people. For example, he said that there was a smith in the village who could do more than just eat bread. It would be easy for him in one night to thresh and clean all the grain in the nobleman's barn. The nobleman held the sexton to be an intelligent and experienced man, so he believed his malicious claim. He immediately sent for the smith, who had no choice but to appear before him. "My dear craftsman," said the lord, "I have learned that you are more skillful than others. Here is a threshing flail. If you haven't threshed and cleaned all the grain in my barn before sunrise tomorrow, I'll have you driven out of the village with shame and curses. Then just try to find another position somewhere else. The smith swore by heaven and earth that the nobleman had been wrongly informed, but nothing he could say was of any help. He was led into the barn, the threshing flail was handed to him, and the barn door was locked behind him. He stood there cursing his fate while the sexton was at the smith's house feasting on roasted chicken and drinking strong beer with the smith's young wife, laughing about his cunning until he almost burst. At nightfall a small gray man suddenly approached the smith and said, "Why are you just standing here and not beginning your work? Climb up into the loft and throw the sheaves down to me. I'll help you." The smith did what he was asked to. The little gray man struck each sheaf once with the flail, and the grain and the chaff flew into separate piles on the threshing floor. It all went so fast that the smith could not throw down the sheaves quickly enough. Then the little man helped to throw down the sheaves, and all so terribly fast that long before sunrise all the grain had been threshed and cleaned, just as the nobleman had ordered. Finally the little man produced a huge sack, filled it with the grain, then stood it in front of the manor house so that the lord would see it in the morning as soon as he got out of bed. At sunrise the sexton himself came to the manor house to be present when the smith was driven from the village. When he saw the huge sack filled with threshed grain he at first did not believe his eyes; but then he turned green and yellow with anger, got ahold of himself, wished the smith a good morning, and rushed to the nobleman's room. "Now, honorable sir, you can see for yourself," said the malicious man, "if the peasants in the village are doing enough for you. The smith did what you commanded him to do. Not a single kernel from the threshed grain is missing in the sack. How would it be if you were to give him an even more difficult task for the coming night? Have him carry away the large pile of stones that is in front of the manor house and replace it with a pond filled with the most beautiful goldfish." This made the nobleman's mouth water, because the pile of stones had annoyed him for a long time, and he would love to have a goldfish pond in front of his house. Therefore he went out and praised the smith for having fulfilled the first task, but then ordered him during the following night to replace the pile of stones with a goldfish pond. If he did not do so he would be driven away with shame and curses. The sexton laughed quietly, because the smith would never be able to fulfill this task. Happily he went to the smith's house and let the young wife serve him a delicious meal. At the same time the smith himself was sadly hammering away at the stones with a sledgehammer, but however hard he tried he could not break off even a single chip. As it grew dark the little gray man appeared again and said, "Smith, you are not getting anywhere! Stand aside, or a flying stone might hit you in the head!" The smith had scarcely stepped back when the little man struck in the middle of the stones with the hammer, and they flew apart like the wind blows through a pile of chaff, and the smith was happy that he escaped injury. The gray man's blows also dug out a deep hole in the earth. Before long clouds descended over the hole. Alder and birch trees sprouted forth on the banks, as did all kinds of beautiful flowers. Before the smith knew what was happening the pond was finished, and the greatest miracle of all was that it was teeming with the most beautiful shimmering, glistening goldfish. "Show that to his honorable lordship tomorrow morning," said the gray man, "and ask him if he is satisfied." With that he disappeared. The lord of the manor was indeed satisfied, and he openly praised the smith. The sexton looked on grimly, for his wicked proposals had come to nothing. But he put on a happy face, and with the most honest appearance in the world said to the nobleman, "Yes, indeed, the smith did was he was supposed to do. But your lordship should require one more task from him. Have this skillful man forge a himphamp, without iron and steel, without fire and anvil, and -- of course -- in one night. That is the greatest masterpiece that the smith knows how to create. If he refuses to forge a himphamp, it is only because of his wickedness -- willfully denying your lordship the right to see such a masterpiece." The sexton's speech made the nobleman curious, and he said to the smith, "Your skill has brought me great pleasure. Now I want to know how you forge a himphamp without steel and iron and without fire and anvil." "Oh, your honor," cried the smith, "I will do anything for you, but as long as I live I cannot possible forge a himphamp without steel and iron and without fire and anvil." "Silence!" said the lord. "If you can thresh all of my grain in one night and create a magnificent goldfish pond in place of a pile of stones, then you can also forge a himphamp for me without steel and iron, without fire and anvil. Get busy now. Tomorrow morning I want to see your work." The poor man stood there not knowing what to do. At midnight the little gray man came to him and said, "Idiot, a himphamp is the easiest thing to make. Go home and get your large bullwhip, then hide under your bed without letting your wife know that you are there. Keep your eyes and ears open. As soon as you see something that you don't like just call out 'Himp, hamp, stick together!' and you will soon have a himphamp without steel and iron, without fire and anvil. But don't forget to use your whip." The smith promised the little gray man faithfully to follow his instructions. On tiptoes he sneaked into his house, took the large bullwhip down from its nail, then crept under the bed. Scarcely a quarter of an hour had passed when his wife set the table, loading it with a fine pork roast, white bread, and good strong beer. A little later the sexton came in, sat down next to the smith's wife, and began to feast. Then he put his arm around the young woman, drank to her health, and described with laughter the task that he tricked the nobleman into giving her husband. Finishing his story, he gave her a kiss. This was too much for the smith hiding under the bed, and he called out "Himp, hamp, stick together!" And behold, although the two of them, upon hearing the smith's voice, wanted more than anything else to jump out the window, they had to stay where they were. It was as though they had grown together. Then the smith stepped forth from his hiding place -- you saw that coming, didn't you -- and went after the godless couple with his bullwhip. They howled and cried and begged for forgiveness, but to no avail. The next morning, just at sunrise, he drove them out of the house toward the manor house. Underway they came to some oxen from the estate; these turned wild and wanted to gore them. "Himp, hamp, stick together!" cried the smith angrily, and the oxen stuck to the sexton and the woman, and they had to go along too. Finally, they came to two servants who were blocking their way with a load of hay. "Himp, hamp, stick together!" was again the cry, and they too had to go along toward the manor house. When they appeared before the nobleman the smith said, "Look here, my lord, I have forged a himphamp for you, without steel and iron, without fire and anvil." And with that he beat at the godless couple so fiercely that they both fell down dead. Now the nobleman know for sure why the sexton had praised the smith's abilities so highly. Source: Ulrich Jahn, "Das Märchen vom Himphamp," Volksmärchen aus Pommern und Rügen , part 1 (Norden and Leipzig: Diedrich Soltau's Verlag, 1891), no. 44, pp. pp. 239-42 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Return to the table of contents . Stupid Hans Germany / Poland Hans was the son of a poor widow. When he was young, the children of wealthy peasants teased him because he was modest and reserved and never repaid evil with evil. Soon everyone in the village called him Stupid Hans. Later he was hired as a farmhand by a wealthy landowner. His master was pleased with his good work, and some time later he proposed that Hans should work an additional seven years, after which he would receive the landowner's daughter as a wife. Hans had long been attracted to the good-looking girl, so he joyfully agreed to the arrangement, then worked with renewed energy and loyalty. Following his example, the other servants worked all the more diligently, and the estate prospered greatly. The landowner's added wealth swelled him with pride, although he owed it almost entirely to his faithful servant Hans, and he soon forgot his promise. At the conclusion of seven years he arranged for his daughter to marry a neighboring wealthy landowner. This breach of promise angered Hans greatly, but he said nothing, waiting instead for the wedding day when he would avenge himself. It happened that he had come into possession of a magic charm in the following manner: Once when he was hauling wood from the forest his wagon-shaft had broken. He fashioned a new one but was unable to attach it to the wagon. After numerous unsuccessful attempts he was about to give up when he heard a small voice behind him saying, "Hold fast, hold fast!" and the shaft immediately attached itself to the wagon. Hans looked about with amazement, but no one was to be seen. Afterward Hans experimented often with this magical charm, and he now planned to use it for his revenge. The wedding day arrived with a great celebration. The father of the bride spared no expense to make himself look important to his neighbors. In the evening the young couple slipped away from the festivities and retired to their bedroom. Hans followed them without being seen. The young bridegroom, suspecting nothing, embraced his blushing bride, when Hans softly spoke out, "Hold fast, hold fast!" The young couple could not separate themselves from his embrace. Hans retired quietly to his own bed in the stall. The parents did not discover the young couple's plight until the next morning. They cried out miserably, then sent Hans to the pastor, thinking that through prayer the pastor could cast out the devil who held the poor ones captive. It was a rainy day, and Hans was walking behind the pastor, who lifted his robe whenever he had to wade through a puddle. At such a moment Hans whispered a mighty "Hold fast, hold fast!" and the pastor was unable to release his robe, but had to continue holding it high. At the house he said a number of prayers, but they did not help, so Hans was sent to fetch a cunning-woman. Their way back led them through a broad ditch filled with water. When the cunning-woman approached it she lifted up her skirts in order to walk across. Hans murmured softly, "Hold fast, hold fast!" and the cunning-woman was forced to continue on her way while holding her skirts high. The news of the young couple's enchantment brought many neighbors to the scene, and everyone felt sorry for them. When the cunning-woman, weirdly holding up her skirts, approached the wedding house, a brash peasant touched her naked thigh with his tobacco pipe. Hans quickly said, "Hold fast, hold fast!" and the peasant had to follow her. When the bride's father saw that Hans was laughing mockingly while everyone else was sadly standing by, he cried out, "This evil was caused by no one other than Hans. It is his revenge. Come, let's beat the daylight out of him!" All hands immediately grabbed him and threw him over a bundle of straw, but when they raised their sticks Hans shouted, "Hold fast, hold fast!" and not a one of them could move an arm. Recognizing the power of his magic charm, they begged Hans to free them. They promised him a rich land holding and many other valuables. Hans made them swear to this and then called out, "Let go, let go!" Suddenly they were all free: the young couple, the pastor, the cunning woman, the brash peasant, and the angry neighbors. They all begged Hans never again to make use of the magic charm, which he promised. He received the property and the other valuables as agreed, and he died a wealthy and respected landowner. Source: Otto Knoop, Sagen und Erzauml;hlungen aus der Provinz Posen (Posen: Historische Gesellschaft für die Provinz Posen, 1893), pp. 202-204 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Posen was a province of Prussia from 1848 until 1918. The land comprising the former province now belongs to Poland. Most ethnic Germans living in the area were expelled following Germany's World War II defeat in 1945. Return to the table of contents . The Count and the Smith Poland Once upon a time there was a count, a very wicked man who tormented his people whenever he was able to. He especially vindictive against his smith, whom he despised. One day he said to him, "On this hill you are to build me a castle, or I will have you torn to pieces." When the man came home and told his wife what task had been given to him, the woman gave him a rope and said, "Go into the woods and hang yourself, then you will be safe from the count's demands." Seeing that he had no other choice, he took the rope and went into the woods. On the way he met a stranger who spoke to him, saying, "I know what you plan to do, but instead, come with me." He let him to a haystack and told him to lay down and go to sleep. The man did so. When he awoke, on the hill there was a castle surrounded by a deep moat. He quickly went to the count and showed him the castle. The count was very eager to get a closer look at the castle, and he walked up to it. However, as he was about to cross over the bridge, it collapsed, and he drowned. So the smith took possession of the castle, and he himself became a count. Source: Otto Knoop, "Der Graf und der Schmied," Ostmärkische Sagen, Märchen und Erzählungen (Lissa im Posen: Oskar Eulitz' Verlag, 1909), no. 60, p. 117 . Return to the table of contents . The Tale of the Basin England A Prose Summary of the Middle-English Ballad There were once two brothers, the one had inherited the father's house and land; the other became a parson, and through his own good management became quite wealthy. The former married a slovenly woman, whose wasteful ways soon brought them into need, and with time their only hope was to borrow money from the good and thrifty pastor. But they quickly squandered this new-found wealth, and the married brother returned to the good parson requesting additional help. Questioned by the pastor as to the conditions in their household, the husband admitted that a priest, known by the name Sir John, was often a guest in their home. "I suspect that this Sir John may be up to no good," warned the pastor, then outlined a plan to his gullible brother to reveal the true purpose of the priest's visits. Accordingly, the husband took the chamber pot from his own bedroom to the pastor, who spoke a charm over it; and the pot was then returned to its normal place beside the married couple's bed. Announcing that he would be away for some time, the husband took leave of his wife. No sooner had he disappeared from view than the wife sent for Sir John and began to prepare a feast for the two of them. Then having eaten their fill, they retired to the bedroom. In the middle of the night the priest arose to make water and picked up the chamber pot with his two hands, but to his alarm he discovered that some mysterious power held him fast to the basin. "Woman, help me!" he cried to his bed partner. She jumped to his aid, but immediately found herself stuck to him and to the pot as well. Their combined cries awakened the servant girl who ran, stark-naked, to help her mistress, but she too stuck to the pot. What followed was quite a dance: The three of them spilled onto the street just at daybreak, and one after another different villagers tried to pull them apart, only to become stuck to the procession themselves. Finally they were approached by the husband and his brother the parson. The cuckolded husband demanded payment of one hundred pounds from Sir John, threatening to cut of the latter's "equipment," unless he complied. Sir John, valuing his private parts, agreed to pay the proposed fine. Hearing these vows, the pastor spoke a charm over the basin, and its prisoners found themselves freed. The shamed priest left forthwith for a different country, and as for the husband and wife, from that time onward they lived together without strife. Source: The Tale of the Basin , edited by Melissa M. Furrow (Middle English Texts Series, Univerity of Rochester). Furrow's text comes from a late fifteenth-century manuscript. Various editors have given this anonymous and untitled poem different titles, for example: The Enchanted Basyn (Robert Jamieson, 1806). The Tale of the Basyn (Charles Henry Hartshorne, 1829; Thomas Wright, 1836; William Carew Haslitt, 1866) The Tale of the Basin (Janay Y. Downing, 1969; Melissa M. Furrow, 1985). Retold by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Return to the table of contents . Jack Horner and the Innkeeper's Wife England An honest man an inkeeper, And friend to honest Jack, Who was alas, in debt so far, That he was like to crack. This man he had a handsome wife, Sweet fair and youthful too, A Quaker lov'd her as his life, An this Jack Horner knew. This Quaker was a 'Squire born, Who did in wealth abound, Thought Jack I'll catch him in the corn, Then put him in the pound. First to the inn-keeper I'll go, And whe I do him find, He soon shall understand and know, I will be truly kind: He met me in a narrow lane, And said, My Friend, good-morrow, The Inn-keeper replied again, My heart is full of sorrow, Two hundred pounds I am in debt, Which I should pay next week, It makes me sigh, lament and fret Having the coin to seek. Quoth Jack if you'll be rul'd by me, I'll put you in a way, How you yourself from debt may free, And all that money pay. Nay, this is joyful news, he cry'd Thou art a friend indeed, Thy wit whall be my rule and guide, For never was more need. Go tell thy loving wife said he, Thy joy and heart's delight, That thou must ride mildes forty three, And shan't be home to night. Then mind the council which I give, And be no ways afraid, For why I tell you as I live, Your debts shall soon be paid. Mount your bay nag and take your cloak With your warm morning-gown, And lodge within a hollow oak, A mile out of the town: There may you sleep in sweet content All night and take your rest, And leave it to my management, Then Sir, a pleasant jest, Next morning you shall there behold, The like ne'er seen before, Which shall produce a sum of Gold, Nay likewise silver store: The Inn-keeper said, Honest John Since you this promise make, Believe me, as I am a man, I will thy council take. Unto his Wife in haste he went And told her he must go A journey, saying be content, For why it must be so. She seemingly began to weep, And with sad sighs reply'd, You know alas! I cannot sleep Without you by my side. Said he kind Wife, do not repine, Why should You sigh and grieve? I go out to a friend jof mine, Some money to receive. This said, with woman's fond deceit, She straitway ceas'd to mourn, And gave him twenty kisses sweet, Wishing his safe return. So soon as he was out of sight, She to the Quaker sent, And order'd him to come at night, That to their heart's content They might be merry sport and play, Her husband being from home, The Quaker said, by Yea and Nay, I sill not fail to come. A sucking pib and capon too, For him she did prepare, For why alas, full well she knew He lov'd such dainty fare. Now just about the close of day, They both to supper fall; Now Jack was there as well as they And walk'd about the hall. He did her fond behaviour note, She on her friend did lean; Jack having his inchanted coat, He was not to be seen. He perfectly did hear and see How they did toy and play, Thought he I will revenged be Before the morning day. Her servant-maid she sent to bed When it grew somewhat late; This done, her Friend she likewise led Up to her chamber straight, Where he did soon strip off his cloaths, Stark-naked to his shirt, And into bed with her he goes, Concluding this not hurt. Jack in the chamber did abide 'Till it was almost day, Where coming to the curtains' side, He heard the Quaker say, That he had now a need to piss, And to the pot must go, Thought Jack I do rejoice at this, A pleasant joke I'll show. The Quaker thinking little harm, Unto the pot he came, While Jack having a cunning charm, He locks him to the same. The good wife often to him cries, Whe sits thou in the cold, Quoth he, I sticks between my thighs, I cannot loose my hold. Quoth she, What is the man a fool, And strait to he she got Then laid one hand upon his tool, And t'other on the pot. There did she tug and pull amain, In hopes to set him free, Yet all their labour prov'd in vain, She stuck as fast as he. They being both in sad distress, Strait for the maid did knock, Who never stood herself to dress, But came up in her smock: The sight she saw was a surprize, So see such noble swingers, She clapt her hands before her eyes, Yet peep'd between her fingers. You saucy slut, then said her dame, Come help us from the pot, The damsel said, I blush for shame To see what he has got: What has he got you saucy sow, Whey do you stand to prate? Come hither soon and help us now, Or 'faith I'll break your pate. Because her mistress should be pleas'd She strove to set them free, But strait the charm the damsel seiz'd, And there they stuck all three. It being now just break of day, And they all linked fast, Jack on his Pipe began to play, And down the stairs he pass'd. The Quaker, Mistress, and her Maid, When they the Pipe did hear, All caper'd to the tune he play'd, And eke their course did steer Into the street, where they advanc'd Naked, save smock and shirt, Like morris-dancers did they prance Up to the knees in dirt: They caper'd high, the piss did fly, Over their heads and ears, And then did run violently Like drops of brinish tears. The Quaker said, by Yea and Nay, We are bewitch'd all three, I hear a pair of bag-pipes play, Yet no one can I see. He brought them to the very oak Where the Inn-keeper lay, Jack for a while he never spoke, But on his pipe did play. The good Man in the hollow tree, Immediately peep'd out, His Neighbour, Wife, and Maid he see All dance and jump about. Who's hear, my kind and loving wife, Likewise my maid young Sue, My Quaking neighbour too ads'life, A jovial whoring crew. Jack broke the Charm, and then the pot Soon loosen'd from their hands, And they were made quite reeking hot With skipping o'er the lands. The Inn-keeper said, Note it well, I'll geld you e'er you go; The Quaker on his knees he fell, And cried some pity show. My precious nutmegs do not wound, For fear I should not live, I'll pay you down one hundred pounds If you will me forgive. No no, quoth Jack we will have two, In lawful ready gold, Or else we will not pardon you, We have you fast in hold. I'll freely give they they demand, But yet take care I pray, The wicked does not understand, That I have walk'd astray. No, no, he dry'd, and home they went, Where they the gold receive; The Inn-keeper is well content, He has no cause to grieve. Then did he lead a happy life, He neither toils nor frets, Thanks to Jack Horner and his Wife, Their wits have paid the debts. Source: "Jack's Kindness to his old Friend the Innkeeper whom he put in a Way to pay his Debts," The Pleasant History of Jack Horner (London: J. Drewry, [1781]), ch. 6-7, pp. 13-20 . Return to the table of contents . The Plaisham Ireland Nancy and Shamus were man and wife, and they lived all alone together for forty years; but at length a good-for-nothing streel of a fellow named Rory, who lived close by, thought what a fine thing it would be if Shamus would die, and he could marry Nancy, and get the house, farm, and all the stock. So he up and said to Nancy: "What a pity it is for such a fine-looking woman as you to be bothered with that ould, complainin', good-for-nothing crony of a man that's as full of pains and aches as an egg's full of meat. If you were free of him the morrow, the finest and handsomest young man in the parish would be proud to have you for a wife." At first Nancy used to laugh at this; but at last, when he kept on at it, it began to prey on Nancy's mind, and she said to young Rory one day: "I don't believe a word of what you say. Who would take me if Shamus was buried the morra?" "Why," says Rory, "you'd have the pick of the parish. I'd take you myself." "Is that true?" says Nancy. "I pledge you my word," says Rory, "I would." "Oh, well, even if you would yourself," says Nancy, "Shamus won't be buried tomorrow, or maybe, God help me, for ten years to come yet." "You've all that in your own hands," says Rory. "How's that?" says Nancy. "Why, you can kill him off," says Rory. "I wouldn't have the ould crature's blood on my head," says Nancy. "Neither you need," says Rory. And then he sat down and began to tell Nancy how she could do away with Shamus and still not have his blood on her head. Now there was a prince called Connal, who lived in a wee sod house close by Nancy and Shamus, but whose fathers before him, ere their money was wasted, used to live in a grand castle. So, next day, over Nancy goes to this prince, and to him says: "Why, Prince Connal, isn't it a shame to see the likes of you livin' in the likes of that house?" "I know it is," said he, "but I cannot do any better." "Botheration," says Nancy, "you easily can." "I wish you would tell me how," says Prince Connal. "Why," says Nancy, "there's my Shamus has little or nothing to do, an' why don't you make him build you a castle?" "Ah," says the prince, laughing, "sure, Shamus couldn't build me a castle." Says Nancy: "You don't know Shamus, for there's not a thing in the wide world he couldn't do if he likes to; but he's that lazy, that if you don't break every bone in his body to make him do it, he won't do it." "Is that so?" says Prince Connal. "That's so," says Nancy. "So if you order Shamus to build you a castle an' have it up in three week, or that you'll take his life if he doesn't, you'll soon have a grand castle to live in," says she. "Well, if that's so," says Prince Connal, "I'll not be long wanting a castle." So on the very next morning, over he steps to Shamus's, calls Shamus out, and takes him with him to the place he had marked out for the site of his castle, and shows it to Shamus, and tells him he wants him to have a grand castle built and finished on that spot in three weeks' time. "But," says Shamus, says he, "I never built a castle in my life. I know nothing about it, an' I couldn't have you a castle there in thirty-three years, let alone three weeks." "O!" says the prince, says he, "I'm toul' there's no man in Ireland can build a castle better nor faster than you, if you only like to; and if you haven't that castle built on that ground in three weeks," says he, "I'll have your life. So now choose for yourself." And he walked away, and left Shamus standing there. When Shamus heard this, he was a down-hearted man, for he knew that Prince Connal was a man of his word and would not stop at taking any man's life any more than he would from putting the breath out of a beetle. So down he sits and begins to cry; and while Shamus was crying there, up to him comes a Wee Red Man, and says to Shamus: "What are you crying about?" "Ah, my poor man," says Shamus, says he, "don't be asking me, for there's no use in telling you, you could do nothing to help me." "You don't know that," says the Wee Red Man, says he. "It's no harm to tell me anyhow." So Shamus, to relieve his mind, ups and tells the Wee Red Man what Prince Connal had threatened to do to him if he had not a grand castle finished on that spot in three weeks. Says the little man, says he: "Go to the Fairies' Glen at moonrise the night, and under the rockin' stone at the head of the glen you'll find a white rod. Take that rod with you, and mark out the plan of the castle on this ground with it; then go back and leave the rod where you got it, and by the time you get back again your castle will be finished." At moonrise that night Shamus, as you may be well assured, was at the rockin' stone at the head of the Glen of the Fairies, and from under it he got a little white rod. He went to the hill where the Prince's castle was to be built, and with the point of the rod he marked out the plan of the castle, and then he went back and left the rod where he got it. The next morning, when Prince Connal got up out of bed and went out of his little sod hut to take the air, his eyes were opened, I tell you, to see the magnificent castle that was standing finished and with the coping-stones on it on the hill above. He lost no time till he went over to thank Shamus for building him such a beautiful castle; and when Nancy heard that the castle was finished, it was she that was the angry woman. She went out and looked at the castle, and she wondered and wondered, too, but she said nothing. She had a long chat with Rory that day again, and from Rory she went off to Prince Connal, and says she: "Now, didn't I tell you right well what Shamus could do?" "I see you did," says Prince Connal, "and it is very thankful to you I am. I'm contented now for life," says he, "and I'll never forget yourself and Shamus." "Contented!" says she; "why, that place isn't half finished yet." "How's that?" says Prince Connal. "Why," says she, "you need a beautiful river flowing past that castle, with lovely trees, and birds singing in the branches, and you should have the ocean roaring up beside it." "But still," says Prince Connal, says he, "one can't have everything. This is a hundred miles from a river and a hundred miles from an ocean, and no trees ever grew on this hill, nor ever could grow on it, and no bird ever sang on it for the last three hundred years." "Then all the more reason," says she, "why you should have all them things." "But I can't have them," says Prince Connal. "Can't you?" says she. "Yes, you can. If you promise to have Shamus's life unless he has you all those things by your castle in three days, you'll soon have all you want," says Nancy. "Well, well, that's wonderful," says Prince Connal, says he, "and I'll do it." So he sets out, and goes to Shamus's house, and calls Shamus out to him to tell him that his castle was very bare-looking without something about it. Says he: "Shamus, I want you to put a beautiful river flowing past it, with plenty of trees and bushes along the banks, and also birds singing in them; and I want you to have the ocean roaring up by it also." "But, Prince Connal," says Shamus, says he, "you know very well that I couldn't get you them things." "Right well I know you can," says Prince Connal, "and I'll give you three days to have all them things done; and if you haven't them done at the end of three days, then I'll have your life" And away goes Prince Connal. Poor Shamus, he sat down and began to cry at this, because he knew that he could not do one of these things. And as he was crying and crying he heard a voice in his ear, and looking up he saw the Wee Red Man. "Shamus, Shamus," says he, "what's the matter with you?" "O," says Shamus, says he, "there's no use in telling you what's the matter with me this time. Although you helped me before, there's not a man in all the world could do what I've got to do now." "Well, anyhow," says the Wee Red Man, "if I can't do you any good, I'll do you no harm." So Shamus, to relieve his mind, ups and tells the Wee Red Man what's the matter with him. "Shamus," says the Wee Red Man, says he, "I'll tell you what you'll do. When the moon's rising tonight, be at the head of the Glen of the Fairies, and at the spring well there you'll find a cup and a leaf and a feather. Take the leaf and the feather with you, and a cup of water, and go back to the castle. Throw the water from you as far as you can throw it, and then blow the leaf off your right hand, and the feather off your left hand, and see what you'll see." Shamus promised to do this. And when the moon rose that night, Shamus was at the spring well of the Glen of the Fairies, and he found there a cup, a leaf, and a feather. He lifted a cup of water and took it with him, and the leaf and the feather, and started for the castle. When he came there, he pitched the cup of water from him as far as he could pitch it, and at once the ocean, that was a hundred miles away, came roaring up beside the castle, and a beautiful river that had been flowing a hundred miles on the other side of the castle came flowing down past it into the ocean. Then he blew the leaf off his right hand, and all sorts of lovely trees and bushes sprang up along the river banks. Then he blew the feather off his left hand, and the trees and the bushes were filled with all sorts and varieties of lovely singing birds, that made the most beautiful music he ever had heard. And maybe that was not a surprise to Prince Connal when he got up in the morning and went out. Off he tramped to Shamus's to thank Shamus and Nancy, and when Nancy heard this she was the angry woman. That day she had another long confab with Rory, and from him she went off again to Prince Connal, and asked him how he liked his castle and all its surroundings. He said he was a pleased and proud man, that he was thankful to her and her man, Shamus, and that he would never forget it to them the longest day of his life. "O, but," says she, "you're not content. This night you'll have a great gathering of princes and lords and gentlemen feasting in your castle, and you'll surely want something to amuse them with. You must get a plaisham." "What's a plaisham?" said Prince Connal. "O," says Nancy, "it's the most wonderful and most amusing thing in the world; it will keep your guests in good humor for nine days and nine nights after they have seen it." "Well," says Prince Connal, "that must be a fine thing entirely, and I'm sure I would be might anxious to have it. But," says he, "where would I get it or how would I get it?" "Well," says Nancy, "that's easy. If you order Shamus to bring a plaisham to your castle by supper time this night, and promise to have his life if he hasn't it there, he'll soon get it for you." "Well, if that's so," says Prince Connal, "I'll not be long wanting a plaisham." So home went Nancy rejoicing this time, for she said to herself that poor old Shamus would not be long living now, because there was no such thing known in the whole wide world as a plaisham; and though Shamus might build castles, and bring oceans and rivers and trees and birds to them, all in one night, he could not get a thing that did not exist and was only invented by Rory. Well, off to Shamus went Prince Connal without much loss of time, and called Shamus out of his little cabin. He told him he was heartily well pleased with all he had done for him. "But there's one thing more I want you to do, Shamus, and then I'll be content," says he. "This night I give a grand supper to the lords, ladies, and gentry of the country, and I want something to amuse them with; so at supper time you must bring me a plaisham." "A plaisham! What's that?" says Shamus. "I don't know," says Prince Connal. "No more do I," says Shamus, "an' how do you expect me to fetch it to you then?" "Well," says Prince Connal, says he, "this is all there is to be said about it -- if you haven't a plaisham at my castle door at supper time the night, you'll be a dead man." "O, O," says Shamus, says he, and sat down on the ditch and began to cry, while Prince Connal went off home. "Shamus, Shamus," says a voice in his ears, "what are you cryin' about now?" Poor Shamus lifted his head and looked around, and there beside him stood the Wee Red Man. "O!" says Shamus, says he, "don't mind asking me," he says, "for it's no use in telling you what's the matter with me now. You may build a castle for me" says he, "and you may bring oceans and rivers to it, and trees and birds; but you couldn't do anything to help me now." "How do you know that?" said the Wee Red Man. "Oh, I know it well," says Shamus, says he, "you couldn't give me the thing that never was an' never will be!" "Well," says the Wee Red Man, says he, "tell me what it is anyhow. If I can't do you any good, sure I can't do you any harm." So, to relieve his mind, Shamus ups and tells him that Prince Connal had ordered him, within twenty-four hours, to have at his castle door a plaisham. "But," says Shamus, says he, "there never was such a thing as that." "Sure enough," says the Wee Red Man, "there never was. But still, if Prince Connal wants it, we must try to get it for him. This night, Shamus," says the Wee Red Man, says he, "go to the head of the Glen of the Fairies, to the sciog bush [Fairy thorn], where you'll find a bone ring hanging on a branch of the thorn. Take it with you back home. When you get home, young Rory will be chatting with your wife in the kitchen. Don't you go in there, but go into the byre [cowshed], and put the ring in the cow's nose; then lie quiet, and you'll soon have a plaisham to drive to Prince Connal's castle door." Shamus thanked the Wee Red Man, and that night he went to the head of the Glen of the Fairies, and sure enough, he found the ring hanging from one of the branches of the sciog bush. He took it with him, and started for home. When he looked in through the kitchen window, there he saw Nancy and Rory sitting over the fire, chatting and confabbing about how they would get rid of him; but he said nothing, only went into the byre. He put the ring into the brannet cow's nose, and as soon as the ring went into it, the cow began to kick and rear and create a great tenherary of a noise entirely. Then Shamus got in under some hay in the corner. It was no time at all until Nancy was out to find what was wrong with the brannet cow. She struck the cow with her fist to quiet her, but when she hit her, her fist stuck to the cow, and she could not get away. Rory had come running out after Nancy to help her, and Nancy called: "Rory, Rory, pull me away from the cow." Rory got hold of her to pull her away, but as he did so his hands stuck to Nancy, and he could not get away himself. Up then jumped Shamus from under the hay in the corner. "Hup, hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." And out of the byre starts the cow with Nancy stuck to her, and Rory stuck to that, and heads toward the castle, with the cow rearing and rowting, and Nancy and Rory yelling and bawling. They made a terrible din entirely, and roused the whole countryside, who flocked out to see what was the matter. Down past Rory's house the cow went, and Rory's mother, seeing him sticking to Nancy, ran out to pull him away; but when she laid her hand on Rory, she stuck to him; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." So on they went. And Rory's father ran after them to pull the mother away; but when he laid his hand on the mother, he stuck to her; and "Hup, hup!" says Shamus, "drive on the plaisham." On again they went, and next they passed where a man was cleaning out his byre. When the man saw the ridiculous string of them, he flung a graip [fork] and a graipful of manure at them, and it stuck to Rory's father; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." But the man ran after to save his graip, and when he god hold of the graip, he stuck to it; and "Hup, hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." On they went; and a tailor came flying out of his house with his lap-board in his hand. He struck the string of them with the lap-board, the lap-board stuck to the last man, and the tailor stuck to it; and "Hup, hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." Then they passed a cobbler's. He ran out with his heel-stick, and struck the tailor; but the heel-stick stuck to the tailor, and the cobbler stuck to the heel-stick; and "Hup, hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." Then on they went, and they next passed a blacksmith's forge. The blacksmith ran out, and struck the cobbler with his sledge. The sledge stuck to the cobbler, and the blacksmith stuck to the sledge; and "Hup, hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." When they came near the castle, they passed a great gentleman's house entirely, and the gentleman came running out, and got hold of the blacksmith to pull him away; but the gentleman stuck to the blacksmith, and could not get away himself; and "Hup, hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." The gentleman's wife, seeing him stuck, ran after her man to pull him away; but the wife stuck to the gentleman; and "Hup, hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." Then their children ran after them to pull the mother away, and they stuck to the mother; and "Hup, hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." Then the butler ran to get hold of the children, and he stuck to them; and the footman ran to get hold of the butler, and tuck to him; and the cook ran to get hold of the footman, and stuck to him; and the servants all ran to get hold of the cook, and they stuck to her; and "Hup, hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." And on they went; and when they came up to the castle, the plaisham was a mile long, and the yelling and bawling and noise that they made could be heard anywhere within the four seas of Ireland. The racket was so terrible that Prince Connal and all his guests and all his servants and all in his house came running to the windows to see what was the matter, at all, at all; and when Prince Connal saw what was coming to his house, and heard the racket they were raising, he yelled to his Prime Minister to go and drive them off with a whip. The Prime Minister ran meeting them, and took the whip to them; but the whip stuck to them, and he stuck to the whip; and "Hup, hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." Then Prince Connal ordered out all his other ministers and all of his servants to head it off and turn it away from his castle; but every one of the servants that got hold of it stuck to it; and "Hup, hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." And the plaisham moved on still for the castle. Then Prince Connal himself, with all his guests, ran out to turn it away; but when Prince Connal laid hands on the plaisham, he stuck to it; and when his guests laid hand on him, they stuck one by one to him; and "Hup, hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." And with all the racket and all the noise of the ranting, roaring, rearing, and rawting, in through the castle hall-door drove the plaisham, through and through and out at the other side. The castle itself fell down and disappeared, the bone ring rolled away from the cow's nose, and the plaisham all at once broke up, and when Prince Connal looked around, there was no castle at all, only the sod hut, and he went into it a sorry man. And all the others slunk off home, right heartily ashamed of themselves, for the whole world was laughing at them. Nancy, she went east; and Rory, he went west; and neither one of them was ever heard of more. As for Shamus, he went home to his own little cabin, and lived all alone, happy and contented, for the rest of his life, and may you and I do the same. Source: Seumas MacManus, Donegal Fairy Stories (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, Page, and Company, 1915), pp. 1-28 . Link to this tale contained in a single file: The Plaisham . Return to the table of contents . The Raja's Son and the Kotwal's Son India Once upon a time, there lived a raja's son and a kotwal's [local leader's] son who were great friends. They stayed together, and sat together, and, in truth, were quite devoted to one another. One day, the kotwal's son said to the prince, "Come, Brother Prince, let us go and visit our fathers-in-law." The other replied, "Most willingly." Then the kotwal's son said again, ''Let us both go to the house of each of our fathers-in-law, and introduce one another." "Very well," replied the prince. "Let us start at once, then," said the kotwal's son, "and, first, let us go to my father-in-law's." "Certainly, there's no harm in that," answered the prince. Forthwith they took leave of their parents, and started to pay their visits. As agreed, they went first to the house of the father-in-law of the kotwal's son. When they arrived there, the kotwal's son went straight into the house, while the prince stood waiting outside. His father-in-law was overjoyed at seeing the kotwal's son, and welcomed him most heartily. Then the young man said to the people of the house, "Outside there I have a servant; let some little attention be paid to him." The prince was near enough to hear what he said. Thereupon he said, "I'm rightly served for my folly in doing as I have done. However, I'll wait and see what more is fated to befall me." Some time after, it happened that there was no grass for the kotwal's son's horse. When this was told him, the kotwal's son said: "Put a sickle into the hands of that man of mine there, and let him cut some grass and fetch it to the horse." The people of the house did as he said; a sickle was put into the prince's hands, and he was bidden go and cut grass. The prince took the sickle, thinking, "What am I to do now?" But he could not help himself, so he set off to cut the grass. He had not been long at work before he cut his finger so badly that it streamed with blood. The prince began to weep bitterly. Just at this moment, Bhagavati and Siva happened to pass along that road. Bhagavati said, "Thakur, let us see who that is that's weeping there." Mahadeva answered, "This is always the way with you. You can't walk along a road without asking questions without end. Who is weeping? Why is he weeping? and so forth -- all such things have continually to be explained to you. Come on, never mind that just now." "No, no," said Bhagavati, "you must tell me." What could Mahadeva do? There was nothing for it but to tell her the whole story. Then she said, "Let us go to the prince." "Very well," answered Mahadeva, "come along." With these words, they both walked up to the prince, and Bhagavati asked him, "Who are you?" The prince at once told her all about himself. Thcn the goddess said, "Don't be afraid. Touch with your hand the finger that has been cut and say: 'Tis Siv and Durga's order. Quick And firmly, both together stick. The prince did so, and, forthwith, his finger was completely healed. He then sang praises to the god and goddess, while they, after granting him the boon, departed on their way. Having finished cutting, the prince lifted up the bundle of grass upon his head and returned to the house. Many days passed, and still the toils and sufferings of the prince were as great and painful as ever. Accordingly, he said to himself one day, "I'll teach these people a lesson." The night following, when the kotwal's son and his wife went to their own room, he took his stand in a secret place so as to be able to watch them. The kotwal's son took up his hookah, and was just beginning to smoke. At that very moment, the prince said: 'Tis Siv and Durga's order. Quick And firmly, both together stick. Immediately, the kotwal's son's mouth became inseparably joined to the mouthpiece of the hookah. Then his wife went to take the hookah from him, but, just as her fingers clasped the wooden stem, the prince again repeated the spell: 'Tis Siv and Durga's order. Quick And firmly, both together stick. In an instant, her fingers and the hookah stem were securely fastened together. She now called for help to the whole household, and everybody came running to the room. They all began to make great efforts to pull the hookah away. But, as soon as anybody touched it, the prince recited the charm, and hands and hookah were at once glued together. They were all now in a terrible fix. They didn't know what to do. At length the master of the house said, "Let somebody go and tell the family priest what has happened." But almost everyone but the prince was fastened to the hookah; so he had to be sent with the message. He was not long in reaching the priest, and told him that the master of the house wished him to come as quick as ever he could. The priest started up in a great hurry. His wife said, "I will come too." "How in the world can you come at this time of night?" he answered. But she said, "I'm sure that some merriment must be going on at the master's house. That's why you have been sent for; so I'll not stay here alone, let me tell you." In this way, his wife kept urging the priest for leave to accompany him, until, at length, he said, "Well, come along, then." They dismissed the messenger, and, forthwith, started, themselves. It chanced that, at one place, a little stream flowed across the road. When they came to this stream, the priest's wife said to him, "At this time of night, it's quite impossible for me to cross on foot." Now the prince had waited for them there, and was sitting by the side of the stream. Hearing the woman speak, he said to the priest, "Venerable sir, take up my venerable mother on your shoulders and so carry her over. The water here is very shallow." "That is a very good idea," said the priest's wife to her husband. "I'll get upon your back, and you'll take me across to the other side and set me down there." What could the poor Brahman do? Seeing no help for it, he took his wife upon his back, and waded with her through the stream to the other side. But, while he was doing so, before he had got across, the prince took care to repeat the spell again: 'Tis Siv and Durga's order. Quick And firmly, both together stick. The Brahman, having reached the bank, told his wife to get down, but she couldn't. As often as he said, "Get down, get down," she answered, "I can't get down; I tell you, I can't get down." Here was another terrible fix. At last the Brahman, with his wife on his back, had to trudge on to his master's house. When he arrived there, the people of the house, seeing the plight he was in, all began to laugh. They asked him, "Venerable sir, why have you our venerable mother on your back?" The Brahman answered angrily, "How should I know? I never saw such a disobedient and unmanageable woman." Then they said, "Venerable mother, come down." She answered, "I can't come down." Hearing this, they said, "You're in the very same plight as ourselves. What was the good of our sending for you? The exorcist we sent for to drive out the devils, turns out to be possessed, himself. Where can we go for help now?" Hereupon they all began to ask, "Where is that servant?" The priest said, "It was he who came to call me." Hearing this, the master of the house ordered him to be brought at once. He soon appeared, and the master said to him, "Tell us what you know about this affair." He answered, "I'm only a servant, what should I know?" But the master continued to urge and entreat him, till, at length, he said, "It is by your own son-in-law's fault that all this has happened. This is what has come of his making me cut grass for his horse." Then, taking pity upon them, the prince recited this charm: 'Tis Siv and Durga's order, ye That fast were bound, now loosened be. As soon as he had spoken, they were all set free in a moment. And, now that the master of the house knew who the prince was, he showed him all possible respect and attention, and begged him to pardon his having neglected him before. Soon after, the prince returned home to his parents. Source: William McCulloch, Bengali Household tales (London, New York, and Toronto: Hodder and Stoughton, 1919), , no. 22, pp. 212-17 . Siv (usually spelled Shiva ) is one of the principal deities of Hinduism. Durga is an important incarnation of the Hindu Mother Goddess Devi. Return to the table of contents . The Love of Ares and Aphrodite Homer, The Odyssey The blind bard and famous harper Demodocus tells the story in song of: Hephaestrus [Vulcan] (the betrayed husband), a crippled smith. Greek god of blacksmiths, artisans, metallurgy, fire, and volcanoes. Aphrodite [Venus], his faithless wife. Ares [Mars], the intruding lover. Now as the minstrel touched the lyre, he lifted up his voice in sweet song, and he sang of the love of Ares and Aphrodite, of the fair crown, how at the first they lay together in the house of Hephaestus privily; and Ares gave her many gifts, and dishonored the marriage bed of the lord Hephaestus. And anon there came to him one to report the thing, even Helios, that had seen them at their pastime. Now when Hephaestus heard the bitter tidings, he went his way to the forge, devising evil in the deep of his heart, and set the great anvil on the stithy, and wrought fetters that none might snap or loosen, that the lovers might there unmovably remain. Now when he had forged the crafty net in his anger against Ares, he went on his way to the chamber where his marriage bed was set out, and strewed his snares all about the posts of the bed, and many too were hung aloft from the main beam, subtle as spiders' webs, so that none might see them, even of the blessed gods: so cunningly were they forged. Now after he had done winding the snare about the bed, he made as though he would go to Lemnos, that stablished castle, and this was far the dearest of all lands in his sight. But Ares of the golden rein kept no blind watch, what time he saw Hephaestus, the famed craftsman, depart afar. So he went on his way to the house of renowned Hephaestus, eager for the love of crowned Cytherea. Now she was but newly come from her sire, the mighty Cronion, and as it chanced had sat her down; and Ares entered the house, and clasped her hand, and spake, and hailed her: "Come, my beloved, let us to bed, and take our pleasure of love, for Hephaestus is no longer among his own people; methinks he is already gone to Lemnos, to the Sintians, men of savage speech." So spake he, and a glad thing it seemed to her to lie with him. So they twain went to the couch, and laid them to sleep, and around them clung the cunning bonds of skilled Hephaestus, so that they could not move nor raise a limb. Then at the last they knew it, when there was no way to flee. Now the famous god of the strong arms drew near to them, having turned him back ere he reached the land of Lemnos. For Helios had kept watch, and told him all. So heavy at heart he went his way to his house, and stood at the entering in of the gate, and wild rage gat hold of him, and he cried terribly, and shouted to all the god: "Father Zeus, and ye other blessed gods, that live for ever, come hither, that ye may see a mirthful thing and a cruel, for that Aphrodite, daughter of Zeus, ever dishonors me by reason of my lameness, and sets her heart on Ares the destroyer, because he is fair and straight of limb, but as for me, feeble was I born. Howbeit, there is none to blame but my father and mother, -- would they had never begotten me! But now shall ye see where these have gone up into my bed, and sleep together in love; and I am troubled at the sight. Yet, methinks, they will not care to lie thus even for a little while longer, despite their great love. Soon will they have no desire to sleep together, but the snare and the bond shall hold them, till her sire give back to me the gifts of wooing, one and all, those that I bestowed upon him for the hand of his shameless girl; for that his daughter is fair, but without discretion." So spake he; and lo, the gods gathered together to the house of the brazen floor. Poseidon came, the girdler of the earth, and Hermes came, the bringer of luck, and prince Apollo came, the archer. But the lady goddesses abode each within her house for shame. So the gods, the givers of good things, stood in the porch: and laughter unquenchable arose among the blessed gods, as they beheld the sleight of cunning Hephaestus. And thus would one speak, looking to his neighbor: "Ill deed, ill speed! The slow catcheth the swift! Lo, how Hephaestus, slow as he is, hath overtaken Ares, albeit he is the swiftest of the gods that hold Olympus, by his craft hath he taken him despite his lameness; wherefore surely Ares oweth the fine of the adulterer." Thus they spake one to the other. But the lord Apollo, son of Zeus, spake to Hermes: "Hermes, son of Zeus, messenger and giver of good things, wouldst thou be fain, aye, pressed by bonds though it might be, to lie on the couch by golden Aphrodite?" Then the messenger, the slayer of Argos, answered him: "I would that this might be, Apollo, my prince of archery! So might thrice as many bonds innumerable encompass me about, and all ye gods be looking on and all the goddesses, yet would I lie by golden Aphrodite." So spake he, and laughter rose among the deathless gods. Howbeit Poseidon laughed not, but was instant with Hephaestus, the renowned artificer, to loose the bonds of Ares: and he uttered his voice, and spake to him winged words: "Loose him, I pray thee, and I promise even as thou biddest me, that he shall himself pay all fair forfeit in the presence of the deathless gods." Then the famous god of the strong arms answered him: "Require not this of me, Poseidon, girdler of the earth. Evil are evil folk's pledges to hold. How could I keep thee bound among the deathless gods, if Ares were to depart, avoiding the debt and the bond ?" Then Poseidon answered him, shaker of the earth: "Hephaestus, even if Ares avoid the debt and flee away, I myself will pay thee all." Then the famous god of the strong arms answered him: "It may not be that I should say thee nay, neither is it meet." Therewith the mighty Hephaestus loosed the bonds, and the twain, when they were freed from that strong bond, sprang up straightway, and departed, he to Thrace, but laughter-loving Aphrodite went to Paphos of Cyprus, where is her precinct and fragrant altar. There the Graces bathed and anointed her with oil imperishable, such as is laid upon the everlasting gods. And they clad her in lovely raiment, a wonder to see. This was the song the famous minstrel sang. Source: The Odyssey of Homer , done into English Prose by S. H. Butcher and A. Lang; 3rd edition (New York: Macmillan and Company, 1888), pp. 123-26 . The Roman counterparts to the principal gods in Homer's story are: Hephaestus = Vulcan. Aphrodite = Venus. Ares = Mars. Return to the table of contents . Vulcan, Mars, and Venus Ovid, The Metamorphoses The Sun, who rules all things by his ethereal light, ... is supposed to have been the first to see the adultery of Venus with Mars; this God is the first to see everything. He was grieved at what was done, and showed to the husband [Vulcan], the son of Juno, the wrong done to his bed, and the place of the intrigue. Both his senses, and the work which his skillful right hand was then holding, quitted him on the instant. Immediately he files out some slender chains of brass, and nets, and meshes, which can escape the eye. The finest threads cannot surpass that work, nor yet the cobweb that hangs from the top of the beam. He makes it so, too, as to yield to a slight touch, and a gentle movement, and skillfully arranges it drawn around the bed. When the wife and the gallant come into the same bed, being both caught through the artifice of the husband, and chains prepared by this new contrivance, they are held fast in the very midst of their embraces. The Lemnian God immediately threw open the folding doors of ivory, and admitted the Deities. There they lay disgracefully bound. And yet many a one of the Gods, not the serious ones, could fain wish thus to become disgraced. The Gods of heaven laughed, and for a long time was this the most noted story in all heaven. Source: The Metamorphoses of Ovid , translated by Henry T. Riley, vol. 1 (Philadelphia: David McKay, 1899), pp. 144-45 . The Metamorphoses is a narrative poem written by by Roman poet Ovid in about the year 8 AD, in which the author retells more than 250 stories from Greek and Roman mythology. Return to the table of contents . Vulcan, Mars, and Venus The Romance of the Rose How Vulcan once espied his wife Engaged with Mars in amorous strife. When cunningly he threw a snare Around the fond but guilty pair. Whene'er Dan Vulcan, dunderhead, Had spied the amorous twain in bed, Around the couch a net he threw (Which was an foolish thing to do; For little wotteth he of life Who thinks he only hath his wife), And then the gods did he convoke, Who crowded round with gibe and joke, Beholding how the pair were ta'en. But many 'mong the host, with pain, Beheld dame Venus' sore distress, While marveling at her loveliness; Nor heard unmoved her bitter cries At suffering such indignities Before her peers in open day. Yet 'twas no marvel, one would say, That Venus unto Mars should give men Herself -- for could she care to live With Vulcan, black from head to foot, Hands, face, and throat begrimed with soot? Such things in Venus' breast must rouse Disgust, though Vulcan were her spouse. Nay, even though she had been paired With Absalom the golden-haired, Or lovely Paris, Priam's son, She scarce had been content with one, For ever would that beauteous queen Do what all women love I ween. Women as free as men are born; It is the law alone hath torn Their charter, and that freedom riven From out their hands by Nature given. For Nature is not such a fool As order, by unbending rule, Margot to keep to Robichon, Nor yet for him the only one To be Marie or fair Perrette, Jane, Agnes, or sweet Mariette, But as, dear son, I scarce need teach, Made each for all and all for each, And every one for all alike, E'en as the taste and fancy strike. So that (although by marriage law They are assigned like things of straw), To satisfy Dame Nature's call, To which they hearken one and all, And strifes and murders to avoid, Whereto they well might be decoyed, Ever have women, foul or fair, Whether the name of maid they bear, Or wife, done all within their power To win back freedom as their dower; Though at great hazards they maintain Their rights, and evils thick as rain Have happed both now and formerly. Ten, nay, a hundred easily, Could I of instances set forth; But let them pass as nowise worth My pains to tell or yours to hear, You'd weary ere the end came near. ... Therefore, dear son, should we be slow Venus and Mars to blame, I trow. And though the Gods in mockery laughed To see the pair by Vulcan's craft Ensnared, yet many a one full fain Had been, could he the place have ta'en Of Mars, in Venus' fond embrace, While Vulcan, mad with his disgrace, Two thousand marks had rather given Than cuckold stand before high heaven. The pair he thus exposed to shame, Reckless of scorn henceforth became, And boldly practiced that which they Strove erst to hide from light of day, Shame and decorum cast aside. And then the Gods told far and wide The tale, till all through heaven 'twas known, From mouth to mouth mid laughter thrown. And Vulcan stormed with rage to think The draught he brewed he needs must drink, Since for his folly naught could he Find balsam, salve, or remedy. Rather than trap the twain, indeed, 'Twere wiser to have given no heed, But silently resolve in mind To be to Venus' failings blind, So long as she towards him behaved With kindness, granting all he craved. From this, let no man e'er forget That grievous folly 'tis to set A trap whereby a wife may be Convicted of inconstancy; For if she find her thus exposed, The door of virtue feels she closed Behind her, and the unhappy wretch, Whom evil-eyed suspicions stretch Upon the rack, when he hath caught His wife, shall ne'er again know aught Of peace or happiness, but die The prey of cruel Jealousy. Source: Guillaume (de Lorris) and Jean de Meun, The Romance of the Rose , vol. 2 (London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1900), , ch. 74, pp. 234-36, 244-45 . This excerpt is from the Roman de la Rose a medieval French poem written in two stages, the first part by Guillaume de Lorris about 1230, and the second part by Jean de Meun about 1275. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 23, 2020. Hog Bridegrooms Hog Bridegrooms tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 441 in which a beautiful maiden is forced to marry a hog or a hedgehog edited and/or translated by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2018 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents King Pig (Italy, Giovanni Francesco Straparola). Hans-My-Hedgehog (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Wild Pig (Germany, J. W. Wolf). The Hedgehog That Married the King's Daughter (Lithuania, A. Leskien and K. Brugman). Prince Hedgehog (Russia, Louise Seymour Houghton). The Hedgehog, the Merchant, the King, and the Poor Man (Hungary, Jeremiah Curtin). The Enchanted Pig (Romania). Links to related sites . King Pig Italy, Giovanni Francesco Straparola Galeotto, King of Anglia, has a son who is born in the shape of a pig. This son marries three wives, and in the end, having thrown off his semblance, becomes a handsome youth. Fair ladies, if man were to spend a thousand years in rendering thanks to his creator for having made him in the form of a human and not of a brute beast, he could not speak gratitude enough. This reflection calls to mind the story of one who was born as a pig, but afterwards became a comely youth. Nevertheless, to his dying day he was known to the people over whom he ruled as King Pig. You must know, dear ladies, that Galeotto, King of Anglia, was a man highly blest in worldly riches, and in his wife Ersilia, the daughter of Matthias, King of Hungary, a princess who, in virtue and beauty, outshone all the other ladies of the time. And Galeotto was a wise king, ruling his land so that no man could hear complaint against him. Though they had been several years married they had no child, wherefore they both of them were much aggrieved. While Ersilia was walking one day in her garden she felt suddenly weary, and remarking hard by a spot covered with fresh green turf, she went up to it and sat down thereon, and, overcome with weariness and soothed by the sweet singing of the birds in the green foliage, she fell asleep. And it chanced that while she slept there passed by three fairies who held mankind somewhat in scorn, and these, when they beheld the sleeping queen, halted, and gazing upon her beauty, took counsel together how they might protect her and throw a spell upon her. When they were agreed, the first cried out, "I will that no man shall be able to harm her, and that, the next time she lie with her husband, she may be with child and bear a son who shall not have his equal in all the world for beauty." Then said the second, "I will that no one shall ever have power to offend her, and that the prince who shall be born of her shall be gifted with every virtue under the sun." And the third said, "And I will that she shall be the wisest among women, but that the son whom she shall conceive shall be born in the skin of a pig, with a pig's ways and manners, and in this state he shall be constrained to abide till he shall have three times taken a woman to wife." As soon as the three fairies had flown away Ersilia awoke, and straightway arose and went back to the palace, taking with her the flowers she had plucked. Not many days had passed before she knew herself to be with child, and when the time of her delivery was come, she gave birth to a son with members like those of a pig and not of a human being. When tidings of this prodigy came to the ears of the king and queen they lamented sore thereanent, and the king, bearing in mind how good and wise his queen was, often felt moved to put this offspring of hers to death and cast it into the sea, in order that she might be spared the shame of having given birth to him. But when he debated in his mind and considered that this son, let him be what he might, was of his own begetting, he put aside the cruel purpose which he had been harboring, and, seized with pity and grief, he made up his mind that the son should be brought up and nurtured like a rational being and not as a brute beast. The child, therefore, being nursed with the greatest care, would often be brought to the queen and put his little snout and his little paws in his mother's lap, and she, moved by natural affection, would caress him by stroking his bristly back with her hand, and embracing and kissing him as if he had been of human form. Then he would wag his tail and give other signs to show that he was conscious of his mother's affection. The pigling, when he grew older, began to talk like a human being, and to wander abroad in the city, but whenever he came near to any mud or dirt he would always wallow therein, after the manner of pigs, and return all covered with filth. Then, when he approached the king and queen, he would rub his sides against their fair garments, defiling them with all manner of dirt, but because he was indeed their own son they bore it all. One day he came home covered with mud and filth, as was his wont, and lay down on his mother's rich robe, and said in a grunting tone, "Mother, I wish to get married." When the queen heard this, she replied, "Do not talk so foolishly. What maid would ever take you for a husband, and think you that any noble or knight would give his daughter to one so dirty and ill-savored as you?" But he kept on grunting that he must have a wife of one sort or another. They queen, not knowing how to manage him in this matter, asked the king what they should do in their trouble, "Our son wishes to marry, but where shall we find anyone who will take him as a husband?" Every day the pig would come back to his mother with the same demand, "I must have a wife, and I will never leave you in peace until you procure for me a certain maiden I have seen today, who pleases me greatly." It happened that this maiden was a daughter of a poor woman who had three daughters. When the queen heard this, she had brought before her the poor woman and her eldest daughter, and said, "Good mother, you are poor and burdened with children. If you will agree to what I shall say to you, you will be rich. I have this son who is, as you see, in form a pig, and I would fain marry him to your eldest daughter. Do not consider him, but think of the king and of me, and remember that your daughter will inherit this whole kingdom when the king and I shall be dead." When the young girl listened to the words of the queen she was greatly disturbed in her mind and blushed red for shame, and then said that on no account would she listen to the queen's proposition; but the poor mother besought her so pressingly that at last she yielded. When the pig came home one day, all covered with dirt as usual, his mother said to him, "My son, we have found for you the wife you desire." And then she caused to be brought in the bride, who by this time had been robed in sumptuous regal attire, and presented her to the pig prince. When he saw how lovely and desirable she was he was filled with joy, and, all foul and dirty as he was, jumped round about her, endeavoring by his pawing and nuzzling to show some sign of his affection. But she, when she found he was soiling her beautiful dress, thrust him aside; whereupon the pig said to her, "Why do you push me thus? Have I not had these garments made for you myself?" Then she answered disdainfully, "No, neither you nor any other of the whole kingdom of hogs has done this thing." And when the time for going to bed was come the young girl said to herself, "What am I to do with this foul beast? This very night, while he lies in his first sleep, I will kill him." The pig prince, who was not far off, heard these words, but said nothing, and when the two retired to their chamber he got into the bed, stinking and dirty as he was, and defiled the sumptuous bed with his filthy paws and snout. He lay down by his spouse, who was not long in falling to sleep, and then he struck her with his sharp hoofs and drove them into her breast so that he killed her. The next morning the queen went to visit her daughter-in-law, and to her great grief found that the pig had killed her; and when he came back from wandering about the city he said, in reply to the queen's bitter reproaches, that he had only wrought with his wife as she was minded to deal with him, and then withdrew in an ill humor. Not many days had passed before the pig prince again began to beseech the queen to allow him to marry one of the other sisters, and because the queen at first would not listen to his petition he persisted in his purpose, and threatened to ruin everything in the place if he could not have her to wife. The queen, when she heard this, went to the king and told him everything, and he made answer that perhaps it would be wiser to kill their ill-fated offspring before he might work some fatal mischief in the city. But the queen felt all the tenderness of a mother toward him, and loved him very dearly in spite of his brutal person, and could not endure the thought of being parted from him; so she summoned once more to the palace the poor woman, together with her second daughter, and held a long discourse with her, begging her the while to give her daughter in marriage. At last the girl assented to take the pig prince for a husband; but her fate was no happier than her sister's, for the bridegroom killed her, as he had killed his other bride, and then fled headlong from the palace. When he came back dirty as usual and smelling so foully that no one could approach him, the king and queen censured him gravely for the outrage he had wrought; but again he cried out boldly that if he had not killed her she would have killed him. As it had happened before, the pig in a very short time began to importune his mother again to let him have to wife the youngest sister, who was much more beautiful than either of the others; and when this request of his was refused steadily, he became more insistent than ever, and in the end began to threaten the queen's life in violent and bloodthirsty words, unless he should have given to him the young girl for his wife. The queen, when she heard this shameful and unnatural speech, was well-nigh broken hearted and like to go out of her mind; but, putting all other considerations aside, she called for the poor woman and her third daughter, who was named Meldina, and thus addressed her, "Meldina, my child, I should be greatly pleased if you would take the pig prince for a husband; pay no regard to him, but to his father and to me; then, if you will be prudent and bear patiently with him, you may be the happiest woman in the world." To this speech Meldina answered, with a grateful smile upon her face, that she was quite content to do as the queen bade her, and thanked her humbly for deigning to choose her as a daughter-in-law; for, seeing that she herself had nothing in the world, it was indeed great good fortune that she, a poor girl, should become the daughter-in-law of a potent sovereign. The queen, when she heard this modest and amiable reply, could not keep back her tears for the happiness she felt; but she feared all the time that the same fate might be in store for Meldina as her sisters. When the new bride had been clothed in rich attire and decked with jewels, and was awaiting the bridegroom, the pig prince came in, filthier and more muddy than ever; but she spread out her rich gown and besought him to lie down by her side. Whereupon the queen bade her to thrust him away, but to this she would not consent, and spoke thus to the queen, "There are three wise sayings, gracious lady, which I remember to have heard. The first is that it is folly to waste time in searching for that which cannot be found. The second is that we should believe nothing we may hear, except those things which bear the marks of sense and reason. The third is that, when once you have got possession of some rare and precious treasure, prize it well and keep a firm hold upon it." When the maiden had finished speaking, the pig prince, who had been wide awake and had heard all that she had said, got up, kissed her on the face and neck and bosom and shoulders with his tongue, and she was not backward in returning his caresses; so that he was fired with a warm love for her. As soon as the time for retiring for the night had come, the bride went to bed and awaited her unseemly spouse, and, as soon as he came, she raised the coverlet and bade him lie near to her and put his head upon the pillow, covering him carefully with the bedclothes and drawing the curtains so that he might feel no cold. When morning had come the pig got up and ranged abroad to pasture, as was his wont, and very soon after the queen went to the bride's chamber, expecting to find that she had met with the same fate as her sisters; but when she saw her lying in the bed, all defiled with mud as it was, and looking pleased and contented, she thanked God for this favor, that her son had at last found a spouse according to his liking. One day, soon after this, when the pig prince was conversing pleasantly with his wife, he said to her, "Meldina, my beloved wife, if I could be fully sure that you could keep a secret, I would now tell you one of mine; something I have kept hidden for many years. I know you to be very prudent and wise, and that you love me truly; so I wish to make you the sharer of my secret." "You may safely tell it to me, if you will," said Meldina, "for I promise never to reveal it to anyone without your consent." Whereupon, being now sure of his wife's discretion and fidelity, her straightway shook off from his body the foul and dirty skin of the pig, and stood revealed as a handsome and well shaped young man, and all that night rested closely folded in the arms of his beloved wife. But he charged her solemnly to keep silence about this wonder she had seen, for the time had not yet come for his complete delivery from this misery. So when he left the bed he donned the dirty pig's hid once more. I leave you to imagine for yourselves how great was the great joy of Meldina when she discovered that, instead of a pig, she had gained a handsome and gallant young prince for a husband. Not long after this she proved to with child, and when the time her delivery came she gave birth to a fair and shapely boy. The joy of the king and queen was unbounded, especially when they found that the newborn child had the form of a human being and not that of a beast. But the burden of the strange and weighty secret which her husband had confided to her pressed heavily upon Meldina, and one day she went to her mother-in-law and said, "Gracious queen, when first I married your son I believed I was married to a beast, but not I find that you have given me the comeliest, the worthiest, and the most gallant young man ever born into the world to be my husband. For know that when he comes into my chamber to lie by my side, he casts off his dirty hide and leaves it on the ground, and is changed into a graceful handsome youth. No one could believe this marvel save they saw it with their own eyes." When the queen heard these words she deemed that her daughter-in-law must be jesting with her, but Meldina still persisted that what she said was true. And when the queen demanded to know how she might witness with her own eyes the truth of this thing, Meldina replied, "Come to my chamber tonight, when we shall be in our first sleep; the door will be open, and you will find that what I tell you is the truth." That same night, when the looked-for time had come, and all were gone to rest, the queen let some torches be kindled and went, accompanied by the king, to the chamber of her son, and when she had entered she saw the pig's skin lying on the floor in the corner of the room, and having gone to the bedside, found therein a handsome young man in whose arms Meldina was lying. And when they saw this, the delight of the king and queen was very great, and the king gave order that before anyone should leave the chamber the pig's hide should be torn to shreds. So great was their joy over the recovery of their son that they well-nigh died thereof. And King Galeotto, when he saw that he had so fine a son, and a grandchild likewise, laid aside his diadem and his royal robes, and advanced to his place his son, whom he let be crowned with the greatest pomp, and who was ever afterwards known as King Pig. Thus, to the great contentment of all the people, the young king began his reign, and he lived long and happily with Meldina his beloved wife. Source: Giovanni Francesco Straparola, The Facetious Nights , translated by W. G. Waters (London: Privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901), vol. 1, pp. 133-150 (night 2, tale 1) . We know almost nothing about the personal life of Giovanni Francesco [also spelled Gianfrancesco] Straparola (ca. 1480 - ca. 1557). His two-volume work Le piacevoli notti (1550-1553), called in English The Facetious Nights of Straparola or simply The Nights of Straparola , contains some 75 novellas and fairy tales, some of oriental origin. Obviously patterning his collection after Boccaccio's Decamerone , Straparola depicts here thirteen nights of revelry in a luxurious villa on the island of Murano near Venice. The participants add to the entertainment by telling one another stories. Included are tales of magic and the supernatural as well as bawdy jokes and anecdotes. Straparola's work is one of Europe's earliest collections of stories based largely on folklore, and as such is an important cultural monument. Return to the table of contents . Hans-My-Hedgehog Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once upon a time there was a peasant who had money and land enough, but as rich as he was, there was still something missing from his happiness: He had no children with his wife. Often when he went to the city with the other peasants, they would mock him and ask him why he had no children. He finally became angry, and when he returned home, he said, "I will have a child, even if it is a hedgehog." Then his wife had a baby, and the top half was a hedgehog and the bottom half a boy. When she saw the baby, she was horrified and said, "Now see what you have wished upon us!" The man said, "It cannot be helped. The boy must be baptized, but we cannot ask anyone to be his godfather." The woman said, "And the only name that we can give him is Hans-My-Hedgehog." When he was baptized, the pastor said, "Because of his quills he cannot be given an ordinary bed." So they put a little straw behind the stove and laid him in it. And he could not drink from his mother, for he would have stuck her with his quills. He lay there behind the stove for eight years, and his father grew tired of him, and thought, "if only he would die." But he did not die, but just lay there. Now it happened that there was a fair in the city, and the peasant wanted to go. He asked his wife what he should bring her. "A little meat, some bread rolls, and things for the household," she said. Then he asked the servant girl, and she wanted a pair of slippers and some fancy stockings. Finally, he also said, "Hans-My-Hedgehog, what would you like?" "Father," he said, "bring me some bagpipes." When the peasant returned home he gave his wife what he had brought for her, meat and bread rolls. Then he gave the servant girl the slippers and fancy stockings. And finally he went behind the stove and gave Hans-My-Hedgehog the bagpipes. When Hans-My-Hedgehog had them, he said, "Father, go to the blacksmith's and have my cock-rooster shod, then I will ride away and never again come back." The father was happy to get rid of him, so he had his rooster shod, and when it was done, Hans-My-Hedgehog climbed on it and rode away. He took pigs and donkeys with him, to tend in the forest. In the forest the rooster flew into a tall tree with him. There he sat and watched over the donkeys and the pigs. He sat there for years, until finally the herd had grown large. His father knew nothing about him. While sitting in the tree, he played his bagpipes and made beautiful music. One day a king came by. He was lost and heard the music. He was amazed to hear it, and sent a servant to look around and see where it was coming from. He looked here and there but only saw a little animal sitting high in a tree. It looked like a rooster up there with a hedgehog sitting on it making the music. The king said to the servant that he should ask him why he was sitting there, and if he knew the way back to his kingdom. Then Hans-My-Hedgehog climbed down from the tree and told him that he would show him the way if the king would promise in writing to give him the first thing that greeted him at the royal court upon his arrival home. The king thought, "I can do that easily enough. Hans-My-Hedgehog cannot understand writing, and I can put down what I want to." Then the king took pen and ink and wrote something, and after he had done so, Hans-My-Hedgehog showed him the way, and he arrived safely at home. His daughter saw him coming from afar, and was so overjoyed that she ran to meet him and kissed him. He thought about Hans-My-Hedgehog and told her what had happened, that he was supposed to have promised the first thing that greeted him to a strange animal that rode a rooster and made beautiful music. But instead he had written that this would not happen, for Hans-My-Hedgehog could not read. The princess was happy about this, and said that it was a good thing, for she would not have gone with him in any event. Hans-My-Hedgehog tended the donkeys and pigs, was of good cheer, and sat in the tree blowing on his bagpipes. Now it happened that another king came this way with his servants and messengers. He too got lost and did not know the way back home because the forest was so large. He too heard the beautiful music from afar, and asked one of his messengers to go and see what it was and where it was coming from. The messenger ran to the tree where he saw Hans-My-Hedgehog astride the cock-rooster. The messenger asked him what he was doing up there. "I am tending my donkeys and pigs. What is it that you want?" replied Hans-My-Hedgehog. The messenger said that they were lost and could not find their way back to their kingdom, and asked him if he could not show them the way. Then Hans-My-Hedgehog climbed down from the tree with his rooster and told the old king that he would show him the way if he would give him the thing that he first met at home before the royal castle. The king said yes and signed a promise to Hans-My-Hedgehog. When that was done, Hans-My-Hedgehog rode ahead on his rooster showing them the way, and the king safely reached his kingdom. When the king arrived at his court there was great joy. Now he had an only daughter who was very beautiful. She ran out to him, threw her arms around his neck and kissed him, and was ever so happy that her old father had returned. She asked him where he had been during his long absence, and he told her how he had lost his way and almost not made it home again, but that as he was making his way through a great forest he had come upon a half hedgehog, half human astride a rooster sitting in a tall tree and making beautiful music who had shown him the way, but whom he had promised whatever first met him at the royal court, and it was she herself, and he was terribly sorry. But she promised that she would go with him when he came, for the love of her old father. Hans-My-Hedgehog tended his pigs, and the pigs had more pigs, until there were so many that the whole forest was full. Then Hans-My-Hedgehog let his father know that they should empty out all the stalls in the village, because he was coming with such a large herd of pigs that everyone who wanted to would be able to take part in the slaughter. It saddened the father to hear this, for he thought that Hans-My-Hedgehog had long since died. But Hans-My-Hedgehog mounted his cock-rooster, drove the pigs ahead of himself into the village, and had them butchered. What a slaughter! What a commotion! They could hear the noise two hours away! Afterward Hans-My-Hedgehog said, "Father, have my cock-rooster shod a second time at the blacksmith's. Then I will ride away and not come back again as long as I live." So the father had the cock-rooster shod, and was happy that Hans-My-Hedgehog was not coming back. Hans-My-Hedgehog rode into the first kingdom. The king had ordered that if anyone should approach who was carrying bagpipes and riding on a rooster, that he should be shot at, struck down, and stabbed, to prevent him from entering the castle. Thus when Hans-My-Hedgehog rode up, they attacked him with bayonets, but he spurred his rooster on, flew over the gate and up to the king's window. Landing there, he shouted to him, to give him what he had promised, or it would cost him and his daughter their lives. Then the king told the princess to go out to him, in order to save his life and her own as well. She put on a white dress, and her father gave her a carriage with six horses, magnificent servants, money, and property. She climbed aboard and Hans-My-Hedgehog took his place beside her with his rooster and bagpipes. They said farewell and drove off. The king thought that he would never see them again. However, it did not go as he thought it would, for when they had traveled a short distance from the city, Hans-My-Hedgehog pulled off her beautiful clothes and stuck her with his quills until she was bloody all over. "This is the reward for your deceit. Go away. I do not want you." With that he sent her back home, and she was cursed as long as she lived. Hans-My-Hedgehog, astride his cock-rooster and carrying his bagpipes, rode on to the second kingdom where he had also helped the king find his way. This one, in contrast, had ordered that if anyone looking like Hans-My-Hedgehog should arrive, he should be saluted and brought to the royal castle with honors and with a military escort. When the princess saw him she was horrified, because he looked so strange, but she thought that nothing could be done about it, because she had promised her father to go with him. She welcomed Hans-My-Hedgehog, and they were married. Then he was taken to the royal table, and she sat next to him while they ate and drank. That evening when it was time to go to bed, she was afraid of his quills, but he told her to have no fear, for he would not hurt her. He told the old king to have four men keep watch by their bedroom door. They should make a large fire. He said that he would take off his hedgehog skin after going into the bedroom, and before getting into bed. The men should immediately pick it up and throw it into the fire, and then stay there until it was completely consumed by the fire. When the clock struck eleven, he went into the bedroom, took off the hedgehog skin, and laid it down by the bed. The men rushed in, grabbed it, and threw it into the fire, and as soon as the fire consumed it, he was redeemed, and he lay there in bed entirely in the shape of a human. But he was as black as coal, as though he had been charred. The king sent for his physician, who washed him with good salves and balms. Then he became white and was a handsome young gentleman. When the princess saw what had happened, she was overjoyed, and they got up and ate and drank. Now their wedding was celebrated for real, and Hans-My-Hedgehog inherited the old king's kingdom. Some years later he traveled with his wife to his father, and said that he was his son. But the father said that he did not have a son. He had had one, but he had been born with quills like a hedgehog and had gone off into the world. Then he said that he was the one, and the old father rejoiced and returned with him to his kingdom. My tale is done, And has gone To Gustchen's home . Source: Hans mein Igel , Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales), no. 108. The Grimms' source: Dorothea Viehmann (1755-1815). The Grimms first published this tale in 1815 in volume 2 (no. 22) of their Kinder- und Hausmärchen. From the second edition onward it was given number 108. Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2000. Type 441. The Grimms made only a few revisions (mostly stylistic) to this tale between the first and the last editions. Two changes worth noting are: In the first and second editions, before punishing the first princess by pricking her with his quills, "he undressed her." In the final (7th) edition, "he pulled off her clothes." Because I do not have access to editions 3-6, I cannot ascertain exactly when this change was made. In the first edition, Hans-My-Hedgehog goes to bed with the second princess before there is any mention of marriage. In the second and following editions, the Grimms added the phrase "and they were married" before sending the couple off to bed. Link to a file containing only the Grimms' Hans-My-Hedgehog . Return to the table of contents . The Wild Pig Germany, J. W. Wolf Once upon a time there was a king. His wife bore him only one son, and he had not much pleasure with him, for a wicked witch had transformed him into a wild pig. The king and queen were very sad about this, but because things that have happened cannot be changed, they finally came to terms with the situation. They allowed the wild pig to run about the courtyard and the palace garden, where he behaved himself very well and did no one any harm. Not far from the king's castle there was another castle where a rich lord lived who had three daughters, each one more beautiful than the others. One day the wild pig ran off further than usual and saw the oldest daughter as she was picking flowers in a field. She pleased him so much that he fell head over heels in love with her, and with all his might he wanted to marry her. The king tried to convince him, that this would not be possible, but to no avail. The wild pig would hear none of this, saying further that if she would not become his wife then he would die of grief. So the king sent someone to the lord of the castle and informed him how things stood. At first the lord was not very pleased with the proposal, but after considering that the prince would otherwise die, he gave his consent. However, the daughter did not approve and said -- to the contrary -- that she would rather do God-knows-what than to have a disgusting pig for a husband. But that did not help her, and over her objections, the king forced her to accept, and the wedding was celebrated with the greatest pomp in the world. When it got late, and everyone was going to bed, the bride too lay herself down to sleep. The wild pig wanted to lie next to her, but when he jumped into bed, he unfortunately struck her on the neck with his heavy feet, and -- she was dead. No pen can describe how sad were the wild pig and the king and the parents of the bride. One year later the wild pig ran astray once again and found the rich lord's second daughter in the field. She pleased him so much that he wanted to marry her, whatever it might cost. The king made many excuses, but it was like throwing oil into the fire, and in the end there was nothing left to do but to talk with the lord about it. He did not want to hear anything about it, and he opposed the marriage with all his power, saying that he had not raised his daughters for pigs and the like. The king reported this to his son, who insisted even more fervently than before. Thus the king had to force the parents to marry off their daughter. With tears and crying the bride was taken from her castle and dragged to the wedding. It was a sad affair, as though each of the guests could foresee that the second bride would fare no better than had the first one. And that is exactly what happened, because when the bridegroom wanted to jump into bed, he hit her on the neck with his plump feet, and -- she was dead. The sorrow cannot be described that ruled in the king's castle as well as in the other castle. The wild pig was beside himself because of what had happened, and he struck his head against the walls as if he were tired of living. The bride's parents could not be consoled. Of three daughters, they now had only one, who was still a tender young girl, and they were afraid of losing her as they had the others. Thus they wanted to pack their belongings and move to a foreign country. When the king heard this, he became even sadder than before, and even angrier with his son. He asked the rich lord to remain in his castle and promised him that he would drive away the wild pig immediately. And he kept this promise. The poor prince was driven out of the castle without pity or compassion, and he ran into a nearby forest. The rich lord's third daughter was a beautiful girl, and because she was as good as an angel, her parents no longer thought about the terrible way they had lost their other daughters. One day everyone left castle to go walking in the woods. The girl liked the beautiful wildflowers so much that she could not pick enough of them, and the birds sang so beautifully that she could not hear them enough. She picked and picked, and listened and listened. Thus she fell further behind the others until she was finally all by herself. While she sat there picking flowers, a wild pig suddenly ran up to her, took her on his back, and ran away with her. Her father and mother called and called, and the other people looked everywhere, but the girl could not be found, and that evening they had to return to the castle without the poor girl. The wild pig did not eat her up, but instead carried her a long way off to a deep cave, where no person would dare to enter. He set the girl down quietly and gently and made a bed for her from soft moss. He ran back into the woods and returned with flowers and strawberries. In short, he did everything he could to please the girl, as far as he could tell from her eyes. Now I don't have to tell you that the wild pig was none other than the enchanted prince. The girl felt more and more at ease, and finally she began to stroke the wild pig's coarse bristly head with her hands. He licked her hands and was so happy that tears ran from his eyes. "Why are you crying?" asked the girl. "Why should I not cry?" said the wild pig. "You could redeem me, but I know that you will not do so." This saddened the girl, and she herself began to cry, saying, "Oh yes, I want to redeem you, wild pig, just tell me what I have to do." The pig answered, "And what if I tell you, and you still don't do it? But I will tell you: You must take me as your husband, and marry me, and be my wife." With that the girl laughed and jumped up and said, "If that is all I have to do, then I will redeem you." When the wild pig heard this he jumped up three times with joy. Then he ran off and brought back enough soft green moss to make a bed in which they could comfortably sleep together. That night the girl had an unusual dream. She thought that someone told her to get up early the next morning and take the large pelt that she would find next to the bed. Then she should leave the cave, close it off with a stone, and on this stone burn the pelt to ashes. This seemed very strange to her. At the day's first dawning she looked out of the bed and did indeed see a large pelt, like one from a wild pig, lying there. The girl took courage, went to the cave's entrance, and with all the power she could muster rolled a heavy stone that lay nearby to the entrance. Then she made a large fire, and as soon as it was burning well, she threw the pelt into it. It had scarcely begun to burn when a pitiful crying and moaning sounded from within the cave. The girl would have liked to open the cave, but the stone had become too hot, and she would have burned her hands terribly on it. After the fire was out and the stone had cooled off a little, she shoved the stone aside, as best she could. The most handsome prince that one can imagine stood before her. He threw his arms around her neck and cried, "Now do you see that you have redeemed me? You are mine and I am yours, and if your two sisters had been as willing as you, then they would not be dead!" The prince left the cave with the girl and went to the king's castle and explained everything to him and to the queen. The girl's parents were summoned from the other castle, and he explained everything to them. Three days later they held the wedding with great pomp and ceremony, and one has never seen a more handsome bridegroom than the prince or a more beautiful bride than the girl. Not long afterward the old king died. The prince came to the throne, and the girl became his queen, and if they have not stood up from throne, then they are still seated upon it. Source: J. W. Wolf, "Das wilde Schwein," Deutsche Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1845), no. 3, pp. 16-21 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Return to the table of contents . The Hedgehog That Married the King's Daughter Lithuania Once upon a time there was a man who had no children. One day he went into the woods and found a hedgehog, which he took home with him. One day the hedgehog said to him, "I want to drive our sow out into the woods and tend her." The old man replied, "What! You can do that? You hardly do anything here!" However, the hedgehog did drive the sow into the woods and tended her there for three years without returning home. The sow had piglets, and the piglets in turn had more piglets until finally there was a great herd of pigs. Once an officer came into the woods hunting, and he lost his way. Seeing the pigs, he wanted to know where the swineherd was. He saw the hedgehog lying under a fir tree and asked him, "Where is the swineherd who is looking after these pigs?" The hedgehog answered, "I am the swineherd for these pigs." "Where must I go to get out of these woods?" "If you will give me your daughter, I will lead you out of the woods." "Show me the way, and you can have my daughter," said the officer, and the hedgehog led him out of the woods and then returned to his pigs. Another time a prince came into the woods while hunting, and he too lost his way. He saw the pigs and wanted to find the swineherd. Seeing the hedgehog, who again was lying under the fir tree, he asked, "Where is the swineherd who is tending these pigs?" "I am the swineherd for these pigs," answered the hedgehog. The prince asked, "Can you show me the way out of these woods?" He answered, "If you will give me your daughter then I will lead you out of the woods." "Good," said the prince. "I will give you my daughter if only you will lead me out of the woods. The hedgehog led him out of the woods, then let him continue on his way by himself. The next day the king himself came into the woods hunting, and he too -- like the officer and the prince -- lost his way. He saw the pigs and wanted to find the swineherd. Seeing the hedgehog lying beneath the fir tree, he asked, "Could you show me the way out of these woods?" "I can do that," answered the hedgehog, "If you will give me your daughter." The king said, "Good, you can have her. Just lead me out of these woods." So the hedgehog led him out of the woods and then returned to his pigs. Soon afterward he drove the pigs home, and the old man saw how large the herd had become. The stall, into which they wanted to drive them, was not nearly large enough, so they had to drive them into another stall. The old man was pleased that the hedgehog had brought so many pigs back to him. Now the hedgehog said to the old man, "Feed the rooster there. I want to ride to my girl." The old man did this, and the hedgehog rode on the rooster to the officer. He said to him, "Well, now give me your daughter." The officer asked him, "What do you need for a dowry?" "A team of horses, a coach, and the coach must be filled with gold." The officer put the gold into the coach, the horses were harnessed, and they set the girl on top of the gold. And thus the hedgehog drove off with her. Underway he said his girl, "You can return to your father if you want to, or you can come with me." The girl said, "I'd sooner go back home to my father," and she went back home to him. But the hedgehog drove to his own house with his gold. The next day the hedgehog rode on his rooster to the prince. And the same thing happened with the second bride as with the first one. On the third day he rode to the third bride. Approaching the king, he said, "Well, now give me your daughter for my wife." The king gave him everything that he demanded. This time the hedgehog did not ask the king's daughter if she wanted to return to her father, but instead took her to his home where they were married. The old man then purchased a noble estate with many fields, and with many horses and oxen. He hired maids and farmhands, and had all the fields cultivated. From now on he lived like a lord. The hedgehog and the king's daughter stayed with the old man, and they lived together happily and royally for many years, and then they died. Source (books.google.com): A. Leskien and A. Brugman, "Vom Igel, der die Königstochter zur Frau bekam," Litauische Volkslieder und Märchen (Strassburg: Verlag von Karl J. Trübner, 1882), pp. 355-57 . Source (books.google.com): A. Leskien and A. Brugman, "Vom Igel, der die Königstochter zur Frau bekam," Litauische Volkslieder und Märchen (Strassburg: Verlag von Karl J. Trübner, 1882), pp. 355-57 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2018. Return to the table of contents . Prince Hedgehog Russia Once upon a time there was an emperor and an empress who for many years had been childless. One day the empress wished for a son, were he no bigger than a hedgehog. The proverb says, "What one wishes for, that one gets," and so it was with her, for she shortly gave birth to a son who looked exactly like a hedgehog and was covered all over with sharp spines. Far and wide the news was spread abroad through the world, and the parents were much ashamed of such a son. Nevertheless, they had him educated in all useful knowledge, and he had so clever a head that by the time he was fourteen he knew all knowledge through and through. By this time his parents could no longer endure him near them, and they assigned to him a great forest as a place of abode, feeling certain that he would then fall a prey to a wolf or a fox or some sort of a beast. They strictly commanded him not to return before the expiration of seven years. They gave him permission, however, to take with him anything that he especially cared for; but he would take nothing with him except a sow and a great cock upon which he was wont to ride. With these he went away into the forest. Year out, year in, Prince Hedgehog remained in the forest, and he raised so many swine that at last they were too many for even him to count. Finally he thought to himself, "My seven years are up; I will go back home." So he quickly gathered his swine together and drove them to the city of his parents. When they perceived afar off the immense drove of swine, they thought, "Here comes a wealthy swine-drover." But soon they recognized their son, who was riding upon his cock behind the swine and making straight for the imperial castle. So they received him into the castle and showed him the best of hospitality, dividing his swine among different pens, for they filled every swine-pen in the city. While they were at table they asked their son how he enjoyed himself in the forest, and said that if he wished to go back there they would give him a goat this time. But he declared that he was not going back, for he had made up his mind to marry. The astonished parents replied, "Why, what maiden would love you and take you for a husband?" The poor youth knew no answer to this question, so he mounted his cock and rode away. Now the parents thought he would never come back again. But he was a clever fellow, and he went as a suitor to the king of a neighboring country who had three unmarried daughters. When he found himself near the city the cock flew up with him to the window of the room in which the company were assembled enjoying themselves. The cock crowed with all his might, until the chamberlain went to the window and asked what he wanted. The hedgehog answered, " I come a-wooing." Then the king permitted him to come into the room, and offered him the welcome-cup, according to ancient manner and custom. Then the king again asked him what business brought him, and Hedgehog, the imperial prince, answered him shortly and to the point, "I come a-wooing." The king immediately assured him that he had only to choose one of the three unmarried daughters. The Hedgehog chose the youngest, but she would not have him for a husband until her father threatened to have her shot unless she gave a cheerful consent. She saw no help for it, and thought to herself, "I can never get out of this scrape; come what may, I'll take him. We have gold and treasure in abundance, and we shall easily get along through life." When the hedgehog had received her consent he went back to his parents and told them what had happened to him. His parents would not believe him, and sent the chamberlain to inquire if it was true that the emperor's son, the hedgehog, was to marry the king's daughter. When the chamberlain returned and told the emperor that his son had spoken the truth, the emperor ordered his horses to be harnessed, and went with his wife to visit the king, riding in their carriage, while their son rode behind on his cock. When they arrived they found everything ready for the wedding. But, according to custom, the bridal party were obliged to go to the church a few days before the marriage to pray and confess to the priest. When the young lady came to confession she asked the priest how she might manage to get rid of the prince and not be obliged to marry him. The priest gave her a sound scolding, and said in conclusion, "Just keep quiet and all will end well. Mark what I say, and remember it well. When you are come into the church and are taking your place in the sacristy, do you follow close behind the others. When you get to the high altar sprinkle your bridegroom thrice with holy- water, and be careful to prick yourself each time with one of his spines. Then three drops of blood will trickle out of your hand, and you must let these also fall upon him." After confession the bridal pair went home to breakfast. The next day -- it was a Sunday -- the bridal party went at half past eleven into the church, and the bride did in every respect as the priest had counselled. And, behold, the hedgehog was transformed into a beautiful youth whose like was not to be found in all the world. Then the bridal party sat down upon the benches and heard mass, and the priest united them and preached them a sermon how they should cleave to each other all their lives long. After that they went back to the house, and the wedding feast lasted until late in the night. The wine was very good. I sat at the head of the last table, drank yellow wine out of a painted cup and ate half a swine all by myself. Source: Louise Seymour Houghton, The Russian Grandmother's Wonder Tales (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1913), pp. 205-211 . Return to the table of contents . The Hedgehog, the Merchant, the King, and the Poor Man Hungary Where there was, where there was not, it is enough that there was once a merchant, there were also a king, and a poor man. One day the merchant went out to hunt, and he traveled and journeyed till, oh! my lord's son, he found himself in such a thick forest that he saw neither the sky nor the earth; he just groped around like a blind man. Here, 'pon my soul! whether the merchant tried to free himself by turning to the left or the right, he only went into a thicker place. When he was there five days, in hunger and thirst, stumbling about in the great wild wood without liberation, the merchant called out, "Oh, my God, if anyone would take me out of this great wild thicket to the right road, I would give him the best of my three daughters, and as a wedding gift three sacks of coin." "I'll lead thee out right away," said someone before him. The merchant looked to the right, to the left, but not a soul did he see. "Don't look around," said the certain one again. "Look under thy feet." The merchant then looked in front and saw that near his feet was a little hedgehog, and to him he directed then his word and speech. "Well, if thou wilt lead me out, I will give thee my best daughter and three sacks of coin; the first will be gold, the second silver, and the third copper." The hedgehog went on ahead, the merchant walked after. Soon they came out of the great wild wood. Then the hedgehog went back, and the merchant turned his wagon-tongue homeward. Now the king went to hunt, went in the same way as the merchant; and he too was lost in the great wild wood. The king went to the right and the left, tried in every way to free himself; all he gained was that he came to a thicker and a darker place. He too stumbled around five days in the thick wood, without food or drink. On the sixth morning the king cried out, "Oh, my God! If any one would free me from this dense wood, even if a worm, I would give him the most beautiful of my daughters, and as a wedding gift three coaches full of coin." "I'll lead thee out right away," said someone near him. The king looked to the right, to the left, but saw not a soul. "Why stare around? Look at thy feet; here I am." The king then looked at his feet and saw a little hedgehog stretched out, and said to him, " Well, hedgehog, if thou wilt lead me forth, I'll give thee the fairest of my daughters and three coaches full of coin: the first gold, the second silver, the third copper." The hedgehog went ahead, the king followed, and in this way they soon came out of the great wild wood. The hedgehog went back to his own place; the king reached home in safety. Very well, a poor man went out for dry branches. He went like the merchant and king, and he got astray, so that he wandered dry and hungry for five days in the great wild wood; and whether he turned to the right or the left he gained only this, that he went deeper into the denseness. "My God," cried the poor man at last, "send me a liberator! If he would lead me out of this place, as I have neither gold nor silver, I would take him as a son, and care for him as my own child." "Well, my lord father, I'll lead thee out; only follow." "Where art thou, dear son?" "Here, under thy feet; only look this way, my lord father." The poor man looked near his feet, and saw a little hedgehog stretched out. "Well, my dear son, lead me out and I'll keep my promise." The hedgehog went ahead, the poor man followed, and soon they came out of the great wild wood. The hedgehog then went back to his own place, and the poor man strolled home. Well, things remained thus till once after bedtime there was a knocking at the poor man's door. "My lord father, rise up, open the door." The poor man, who was lying on the stove, heard only that some one was knocking at the door. "My lord father, rise up, open the door." The poor man heard, and heard that some one was knocking and as he thought calling out, "My lord father, rise up, open the door." But in his world life he had never had a son. The third time he heard clearly, "My lord father, rise up, open the door." The poor man did not take this as a joke. He rose up and opened the door. My lord's son, who came in to him? No one else than the little hedgehog. "God give a good evening to my lord father and to my mother as well," said the hedgehog. "God receive thee, my dear son. Hast thou come then?" "I have indeed, as thou seest, my lord father; but I am very tired, therefore wake up my mother and let her make a bed for me in my chamber." What was the poor man to do? He woke up his wife; she made a towering bed, and the hedgehog lay in it. In the morning the poor man and his wife sat down to breakfast. They did not wish to forget their adopted son, but gave him food on a wooden plate under a bench by the fire. The hedgehog did not touch it. "Well, my son," asked the poor man, "why not eat?" "I do not eat, my lord father, because it is not proper to treat an adopted son like some orphan or another; therefore it beseems me not to eat all alone from a wooden plate under a bench at the fire. Seat me nicely at the table by thy side, put a tin plate before me, and place my food on it." What was the poor man to do? He seated the hedgehog at his side, put a tin plate before him, and measured out food on it; then the hedgehog ate with his father and mother. When they had finished breakfast the hedgehog spoke thuswise, "Well, my lord father, hast thou a couple of thalers?" "I have." "I suppose thou art keeping them to buy salt and wood with?" "Yes, my son." "I speak not of that, I am speaking of this: lend me the money; I will return it a thousand-fold. Set not thy mind much on salt and wood now; but go, my lord father, to the market. In such and such a place an old woman has a black cock for sale; buy him of her. If she asks a small price, give her double; for that will be my steed. When thou hast bought the cock for two prices, in such and such a place is a saddler; go to him. In a corner of his shop is a castaway, thrown-away, ragged, torn saddle; buy that for me, but give him two prices also. If he asks little, give him double." The poor man put on his coat, put the two thalers in his pocket, went to the market, bought the black cock and the cast-away, thrown-away saddle for two prices; each one for two small bits of money. The hedgehog then saddled the black cock with the cast-away, thrown-away saddle, sat upon him, and went to the court of the rich merchant whom he had led out of the great wild wood. He knocked at the door and called, "Hei, father-in-law, open the gate, let me in!" The rich merchant opened the gate in great wonder. Who was coming? No one other than our hedgehog, riding on a black cock. "Hear me, rich merchant," began the hedgehog; "knowest thou thy promise? When I led thee out of the great wild wood, dost remember thy promise to give me the best of thy three daughters and three sacks of coin? Now I have come for the maid and the money." What could the rich merchant do? He called his three daughters into the white chamber, and turned to the hedgehog, saying, "Well, choose among the three the one who pleases thy eye, thy mouth, and thy heart." The hedgehog chose the second daughter, for she was the most beautiful of the three. The merchant then measured out three sacks of coin. In the first, as he had said, there was gold, in the second silver, in the third copper; then he put his daughter and the three sacks of coin in a coach, to which four horses were attached, and he sent on her way his most beautiful daughter, with the hedgehog. They traveled and journeyed till the hedgehog, who was riding at the side of the coach on his black cock, came up, looked in through the window, and saw that the bride was in tears. "Why dost thou cry, why dost thou weep, my heart's beautiful love?" asked the hedgehog of the maiden. "Why should I not cry, why should I not weep, when God has punished me with such a nasty thing as thee? For I know not whether thou art a man or a beast." "If this is thy only trouble, my heart's beautiful love, we can easily cure it; I'll keep the three sacks of coin for myself, and thee I'll send back to thy father, for I see that of me thou art not worthy." Thus was it settled; the hedgehog kept the three sacks of coin, but the merchant's daughter he sent back to her father. The hedgehog then took the coin to the poor man, who became so rich that I think another could not be found like him in seven villages. Now the hedgehog plucked up courage, saddled his black cock, sat on him, and rode away to the king, stood before him, and spoke in this fashion, "Dost thou remember, king, that when I brought thee out of the great wild wood, thou didst promise that if I would show the right road thou wouldst give me the most beautiful of thy three daughters and fill for me three coaches, the first with gold, the second with silver, and the third with copper coin? I am here so that thou mayest keep thy word." The king called his three daughters to the white chamber and said, "I made a promise, and this is it: to give one of my three daughters to this hedgehog as wife. I promised because the hedgehog led me out of a great wild wood, in which I wandered for five days without food or drink, and he saved me from certain death. Therefore say, my dear daughters, which of you will agree to marry the hedgehog." The eldest daughter turned away, the second turned away also; but the youngest and fairest spoke thus, "If thou, my father the king, hast made such a promise, I will marry him. Let the will of God be done if he has appointed such a husband for me." "Thou art my dearest and best daughter," said the king; and he kissed her again and again. Then the king measured out three coaches of coin, seated the princess in a chariot of gold and glass and started her on her journey, amid bitter tear-shedding, with the hedgehog, who rode at the side of the chariot on his black cock. They traveled and journeyed across forty-nine kingdoms till the hedgehog rode up to the chariot, opened the window, looked in, and saw that the princess was not weeping, but was in the best cheerful humor. "Oh, my heart's beautiful love," said the princess, "why art thou riding on that black cock? Better come here and sit at my side on the velvet cushion." "Thou art not afraid of me?" "I am not afraid." "Thou art not disgusted with me? " "No; if God has given thee to me, then thou shouldst be mine." "Thou art my only and most beloved wife!" said the hedgehog; and with that he shook himself, and straightway turned into such a pearl-given, charming, twenty-four-years-old king's son that tongue could not tell: golden-haired, golden-mouthed, golden-toothed. And the black cock shook himself three times, and became such a golden-haired magic steed that his equal would have to be sought for; the castaway, thrown-away saddle became golden; everything on it was gold to the last buckle. The king's son then picked out the most beautiful place in the kingdom; standing in the middle of this he thought once, and suddenly that instant there stood before him a copper-roofed marble palace, turning on a cock's foot, and in it every kind of the most varied and beautiful golden furniture. Everything and everything was of gold, beginning with the mirror frame and ending with the cooking spoon. The king's son conducted the beautiful golden bird -- the fair princess -- into the pearl-given palace, where, like birds in a nest, they lived in quiet harmony. When the merchant's three daughters and the two elder princesses heard of the happiness of the youngest princess, -- how well she had married, -- in their sorrow one of them jumped into a well, another drowned herself in a hemp-pond, and a third was drawn dead out of the river Tisza (Theiss). In this way four of the maidens came to an evil end; but the second daughter of the merchant gritted her teeth venomously at the princess, and made a firm and merciless resolve that she would embitter her life's happiness. She went therefore to the palace, and found service in the guise of an old woman. She, the devil-given, came at a critical time; for the Burkus [Prussian] king had declared war against the king's son, and the princess, while her husband was in the field, was left to the care of the merchant's daughter, disguised as an old woman. Milk might as well be confided to a cat as the princess to that cockroach of the underground kingdom. While the king's son was gone, the Lord gave the princess two beautiful children. The old woman packed them into a basket, put them under a tree in the woods, then ran back to the princess, who, recovering from a faint into which she had fallen, asked the old woman to give her the children so that she might embrace and kiss them. "High queen," answered the old woman, "what is the use in delay or denial? They were two untimely, hairy monsters, and to save thee from terror at sight of them, I threw both into the river." The two children slept quietly under the tree till a white deer burst with great noise through the thicket, went straight as if sent, and taking the basket hung it on his antlers; then the white deer disappeared in the forest, went on till he came to the bank of a stream, where he called three times. The Forest Maiden appeared as if by magic, took the basket with great delight, and ran panting into her own palace. The two children were seven years with the Forest Maiden, who reared them as carefully as if they had been her own. Here, 'pon my soul, what came of the affair, or what did not, the Forest Maiden once sent the little girl with a green jug for water, and enjoined on her rigorously to be careful not to break the jug. The little girl did not let this be said twice; she was obedient and attentive. She took the jug, and was at the well in a moment. When she came, she saw a little golden bird flying around the well. Being a child, she wanted to catch the golden bird, therefore ran around with the jug in her hand till at last she saw that only the handle was left. The little girl, terrified, burst into tears, sat at the edge of the well, and cried there. The Forest Maiden waited and waited; but she could not wait longer, therefore she sent the little brother with a second jug, and told him sternly to be careful not to break the jug. The little brother went in the same way, for he also, like children of that age, barely saw the golden bird when he wanted to strike it with the jug, which he whirled around till only the handle remained in his hand; then he burst into tears, sat by his sister, and there the two were crying at the edge of the well. Here, 'pon my soul, the golden bird pitied the children, and asked, "Why do ye cry? Why do ye weep, pretty children?" "Oh, pretty bird," answered the boy, who had more sense than his sister, "why should we not cry? Why should we not weep? We shall be flogged for breaking the green jugs; our dear mother will whip us." "Oh, my children, she is not your own mother! She is only your foster mother. Your father and mother live far from here, beyond those green mountains; so if ye will follow, I'll lead you home." The two children wanted nothing else. They went back no more to their foster mother, for they would be flogged; but they followed the golden bird, which went always before them. And they traveled and journeyed till once in a forest they came upon a great heap of gold; near the gold was a number of dice, as if some one had been playing there. The little boy and girl each took a handful of gold, and went farther. They traveled and journeyed till they came to an inn; since they were wearied, and it was evening, they went in to ask lodging. In the inn three lords were playing dice; the two children at first merely noticed that they were playing. At last the boy took from his pocket the handful of gold, and began to play in such fashion that he won all the money of the three lords; and then one of them spoke thuswise, "Well, my dear son, I see that thou hast good luck. I have in a certain place a charming flower garden; in the middle of the garden is a marble palace, and the palace has this peculiarity: if it is struck on the side three times with this golden rod, it will turn into a golden apple; and thou mayest put down the marble palace and the flower garden in any part of the world if thou wilt strike the golden apple with the small end of the golden rod. I will bet now this flower garden and this marble palace. If thou canst win, they'll be thine." The little boy agreed; and he won fortunately the flower garden and the marble palace. The other then gave him the golden rod, and showed him where the garden and the palace were. Next morning the children sought out the garden and the palace, which the boy struck three times on the side, and it turned to a golden apple; he put the apple in his pocket, and strolled on homeward. The little golden bird flew always ahead of them. They traveled and journeyed till one time the golden bird stopped and said, "Well, dear children, now we are at home; put down the golden apple on this spot and strike it three times with the rod, and ye will see what a beautiful marble palace and flowery garden there will be, speaking to the seven kingdoms. The report of the palace and garden will circulate immediately, and the king himself will come to look at them. Him ye must honor as your father, for thou my little boy art the king's son, and thou my little girl the king's daughter. Dear children, here in a golden frame is a picture which gives your arms and name. Hang in the palace this picture, in the best place; but lest it be seen, cover it with velvet, and show it to no man save your own father. When he asks what that picture is, draw the velvet from it, and the rest will follow." So it happened; the two children hung up the picture in the best room of the marble palace, and covered it with velvet. Now, the report ran to distant parts of the kingdom that there was a charming and wonderful marble palace in such and such a place, and people hastened from the seventh province distant to look at it; so that the report came to the ears of the king himself. The king decided straightway to look at the flowery garden and marble palace; but he had hardly conceived the idea when the old woman gave him a drug. The king fell ill, and could not see the flowery garden and marble palace; and then the old woman, without invitation, stood before the king and said, "High king, if thou art so curious to see this flowery garden and marble palace, then I will go and see if they are as beautiful as report says, and tell the story to thy Highness." The king in one way or another agreed, and the old woman went, not to see the garden, but to bring the two children to evil destruction; the wicked creature tried but succeeded not, for her weapons broke. Not to confound one word with another, I will tell the whole tale in order and accuracy. The old witch had barely reached the famous flower garden when the two children hurried before her and showed everything from root to top, and the old piece of leather began to talk thus, "It is true that the garden is beautiful, but it would be seven times more beautiful if ye would bring the world-sounding tree." "What must be done to get that? " asked the little boy. "Not other than this," answered the old skeleton, "In such and such a place, in an enchanted palace, is the world-sounding tree; but ye must go for it and bring it." With that the old witch took farewell of the two children, and strolled home; but the boy had no peace from that hour. He wanted to go and bring the world-sounding tree; therefore taking farewell of his sister with bitter tear-shedding he set out for the tree. He was going and traveling across forty-nine kingdoms till he came to a dark castle; this was the first enchanted castle. A big, lame, hairy devil stood there on guard with a fearful whip, so that no man might enter. The hairy devil shouted very angrily at our boy, "Stop! Who is there?" "I," answered the little boy. "Who is I? Art thou Yanoshka? " asked the devil. "I am." "What journey art thou on?" "I am looking for the world-beautifully sounding tree. Hast thou not heard of it, my lord elder brother?" "I have not heard of it; but in such and such a place my brother stands guard, and if he has not heard of it, then no one in the world has." Yanoshka went forward on the right road in search of the world-sounding tree. He traveled and journeyed till he came to another enchanted dark castle; there a big, lame, hairy devil was standing on guard who shouted to our Yanoshka in great anger. Our Yanoshka was much braver now, for he knew he had nothing to fear. "Who is it?" called out the devil. "I." "Art thou Yanoshka?" "I am, at the service of my lord elder brother." "Why art thou journeying here in this strange land, where even a bird does not go?" "I am looking for the world-beautifully sounding tree. Hast thou not heard of it, my lord elder brother?" "What is the use in delay or denial? I have not heard; but in such and such a place my eldest brother is on guard, and if he knows nothing of it, then no one in the world knows." With this Yanoshka moved on towards the third enchanted castle; when he came, there was a big, lame, hairy devil on guard, who called out in great anger to Yanoshka, "Who is that?" "I." "Thou art Yanoshka?" "I am." "Why art thou journeying here in this strange land, where even a bird does not go?" "I am looking for the world-beautifully sounding tree. Hast thou not heard of it, my lord elder brother?" "Ho, ho, Yanoshka! of course I have; it is here in the garden of this enchanted palace. Thou mayest take it, but only if thou obey my words. If thou dost not value them or dost not observe them, thou wilt never see God's bright sky or the shining day again. I only want to say this: Here is a golden rod; strike the wall of the enchanted castle with it three times. Straightway a door will open before thee. In the very middle of the garden thou wilt find the world-beautifully sounding tree. Go around it three times and then hurry like a shot arrow, with the speed of a dog, or the stone wall will close, and thou wilt remain inside; and if thou art once shut in, God have mercy and pity on thee, for that instant thou wilt be turned to stone. This is my word and speech; if thou cling to it, thou wilt be lucky; if not, thou wilt be wretched forever." The boy took the golden rod and struck the side of the enchanted castle with it. That instant the door opened before him. The king's son did not inquire much whether he might enter or not; in a moment he ran in through the door and straight to the garden. Every kind of singing and dancing maidens came to meet him, -- some with citharas and harps; some played on cymbals and begged him to play and dance with them; some offered rich food and drink of every kind agreeable to the taste. But the king's son had no mind to eat or drink; he pushed aside the maidens and ran to the very center of the garden, where the world-beautifully sounding tree was; then he went around it three times, turning toward the point whence he had come. That done he rushed from the garden, and a thousand times lucky was he. It was not the same for him to be a few minutes later, for the door closed and bit off the heel of his boot; but he did not care much about the heel of his boot. He ran home on the same road over which he had come; and when he arrived, the world-beautifully sounding tree was in the middle of the flowery garden. Hitherto the flowery garden had been in good fame, but now the fame was seven times greater, so that people came from seven worlds to look at the tree; and the report of it reached the king himself, who determined in his mind if he had not seen it yet he would now at least go to see it. As soon as the old witch divined his thought she put a powder in his coffee so that he became sick, and was not able to leave the room; then she stood before him without invitation, and said, "High king, as thy Highness is sick, I will go to see if the world- sounding tree is as beautiful as reported, and will soon bring back word." The king in one way or another agreed to the old witch's proposal, and let her go to see the world-beautifully sounding tree. She had barely put foot in the flowery garden when the two children ran out to her to hear what the old woman would say this time. "Beautiful children," said she, "beautiful is the garden of itself, beautiful is the sounding tree, but still seven times more beautiful would it be if the world-sweetly speaking bird were to sing upon it." "What must I do?" asked the little boy. "Nothing else," answered the old witch, "than this: In such and such a place is an enchanted castle, and thence it would be necessary to bring the world-sweetly speaking bird." Then she went back; and from that hour the king's son could not remain at home, but planned to go for the world-sweetly speaking bird. Therefore, parting with his sister amidst bitter tear-shedding, he started through the kingdom and the world to bring home the sweetly speaking bird; but he enjoined on his sister that if the third day he were not at home, she should set out to seek him over a certain road, -- and with that the king's son went his way. He journeyed and traveled across forty-nine kingdoms to the first enchanted castle, where there stood on guard a big hairy devil, who had a terribly large whip in his hand, to kill, without pity or mercy, every man going up or down. Now, the hairy devil attacked Yanoshka sharply and roughly, thus, "Who art thou?" "I, my lord elder brother." "Who art thou?" asked the devil again. "I." "Art thou Yanoshka?" "I am." "Why art thou here in this strange land, where even a bird does not go?" "I am going for the world-sweetly speaking bird. Hast thou heard of it, my lord elder brother?" "What is the use in delay or denial? I have not indeed heard. But over there lives my elder brother; if he knows nothing of it, then no one in the world knows." Now the king's son came to the second enchanted castle; the second devil sent him to his eldest brother, the big lame devil. When Yanoshka came to the third castle, the devil asked, "Why art thou here in this strange land, where even a bird does not go?" "I am looking for the world-sweetly speaking bird. Hast thou not heard of it, lord elder brother, in thy world-beautiful life?" "Of course I have; it is here in this enchanted castle. Thou mayest take it away if thou wilt listen to my word; if not, better thou hadst never been born. For if thou wilt not observe my words, thou wilt never see God's bright sun again. I only wish to say: Here is a golden rod; take it, and with it strike the wall of the enchanted castle three times. Straightway the door will open before thee; pass in, run to the end of the glass corridor and across eight chambers. In the ninth chamber is the world-sweetly speaking bird in a rusty cage. Thou wilt find there every kind of beautiful and more beautiful golden birds, but look not at them, listen not to them, take no one of them, but take the sweetly speaking bird sitting sadly in the rusty cage. Snatch the cage in an instant, and rush from the enchanted castle as if thou hadst been shot from a cannon." The king's son took the golden rod and struck the wall of the enchanted castle with it three times, and in a twinkle the door opened before him. The king's son then asked few questions. Whether it was permitted or not he ran into the room in an instant. While he was running to the end of the glass corridor he was called by name, from the right to the left, to stop. It is true that he was frightened, but he paid no heed. He ran straight to the first chamber. Every kind of flowers, more and more beautiful, were in golden pots; but the king's son did not touch them. He ran to the second chamber. In that were all kinds of swords and guns, but he did not choose from them. He entered the third, fourth, fifth, and in this way till he came to the ninth chamber. The ninth chamber, as the devil had told him, was full of all kinds of golden and silver cages, and in them golden-feathered birds, more and more beautiful, were singing; but the world-sweetly speaking bird was drooping there sadly in a rusty cage, and was not singing. As the world-sweetly speaking bird was not golden-feathered like the others, it did not please the king's son, and he did not take it, but chose from among the many golden-feathered birds the prettiest, and wished to take that; but as he reached towards it, suddenly, in the twinkle of an eye, he was turned to stone, and the door of the stone wall closed before him. Now, the little princess every God-given day spread the table for her good brother, but he did not come. Every God-given evening she went out before the house and waited till nearly midnight; then she spread the bed for him, but he did not lie in it. So the first day passed, and the second, and the third, -- day after day, but still the dear brother came not; therefore the princess, crying and weeping, went out to look for her brother. She journeyed and traveled upon his trail till she came to the first enchanted castle, and the second, and at last the third. The devil there stood on guard, with a great whip like a chain, so as to strike on the head, without pity or mercy, everyone going up or down; and he shouted angrily at the little girl, " Who art thou? " "I." "Thou art Marishka?" For meanwhile, let it be said, this was the name of the king's son's sister. "I am." "Why art thou traveling in this strange land, where not even a bird goes?" "I am looking for my brother. Hast thou not heard of him, lord elder brother?" "Of course I have heard, -- of course! He is in this enchanted castle, turned into stone; he had to be, for he would not obey me. Thou wilt go that way, too, if thou wilt not hold to my word." Now the little girl took the golden rod from the devil, who told her what to do with it, and struck the wall of the enchanted castle with it three times. The door opened before her in a twinkle, the princess ran in; but she looked neither to the right nor the left. She ran straight to the ninth chamber; there she took the rusty cage, struck her brother three times on the side with the rod, then ran as if shot from a cannon. And a thousand-fold was her luck that she did not delay an eye-twinkle longer, for the stone-wall door, as it was, cut the edge of her skirt off when it closed. The princess had barely come out of the enchanted castle when she heard behind her frightful thundering, hammering and blowing, swearing and cursing, with threats. They shouted after her, "Wait, thou! This-and-that-kind-of-wretch, it will soon be bitter for thee!" But she did not turn to them; she ran like a hunted deer till she reached home. Who was waiting for her there? No one else but her dear brother. The brother and sister then put up the sweetly speaking bird on the world-beautifully sounding tree, and the sweetly speaking bird spoke, sang more sweetly than any cithara, so that whoever heard it became ten years younger. If the flowery garden had been famous before, it now stood in seven times greater fame, so that from seven kingdoms the people came to look at it; and the king, hearing of the fair fame of the flowery garden, resolved in his mind that, though he had not gone yet, he would go to see it now. The old witch barely divined this intention of the king when she gave him powders in black coffee, from which the king became so sick that this time, too, his visit to the beautiful garden came to nothing. And then the old woman, without invitation, stood before him, and said, "High king, thou hast such a great desire to see the flowery garden, I will go at once, and bring back word if its beauty is as great as its fame." The king agreed, and the old woman went to see the flowery garden. She had barely put foot in it when the two children ran out to meet her, received her very cordially, and did not know where to seat her. "Beautiful children," began the old sinner, "the marble palace is beautiful, the flowery garden is beautiful, the world-sweetly speaking bird is beautiful; but the flowery garden would be still more beautiful if the silver lake were flowing in it, and in the lake golden fish were playing." "What must I do to get the lake?" asked the king's son. "Only this," answered the old skeleton. "In a certain place, in an enchanted castle, is the world-silver lake, and in it the world-golden fish; it is only necessary to go for the silver lake, for the golden fish will come in it. All that is needed is to bring the lake." Then the old woman took leave of the pair pleasantly, and went home. But the king's son from that day had no rest, so he took leave of his dear sister, and went out into the world for the silver lake. He traveled and journeyed across forty-nine kingdoms, and the Operentsia Sea, till he came to the first enchanted castle. A devil was guarding there, who sent him to his elder brother, and he to his eldest. The king's son arrived at the third enchanted palace. A devil stood guard there, with an enormous knotty club, to hit every man going up or down, without mercy or pity. "God give thee good evening, my lord elder brother." "God receive thee, Yanoshka; whither art thou faring in this strange land, where not even a bird goes?" "I am looking for the world-silver lake. Hast thou not heard of it, lord elder brother?" "Of course I have heard, -- of course; it is here in this enchanted castle. But, my younger brother, thou wilt have to tie up thy drawers well if 't is thy wish to take that away; for if thou dost not obey my word, I tell thee, on my true soul, that thou wilt reach Pilate by supper-time. I wish to say this: Here is a golden rod; strike the side of the enchanted palace with it, and suddenly the door will open before thee, run in straight to the garden. Thou wilt hear thy name called, but listen not. Every kind of beautiful maiden will come before thee, offering meat and drink; but eat not, neither drink. Thou wilt find on the way every kind of rich thing, -- gold, silver, diamonds, -- but touch nothing. Then every kind of disgusting snake and toad will come out, but be not afraid; run straight to the silver lake, which flows in the garden, run around it three times towards home, and then run out as thou didst go in" Well, the king's son took the golden rod, struck the side of the enchanted castle three times, and the door opened before him; scarcely had he put foot inside when maidens called him by name. "This way, this way, Yanoshka! Eat, drink, with relish, Yanoshka! This way, Yanoshka, my embracing two arms are open to thee, run no farther!" The king's son, as if deaf, did not listen, but ran farther. Then maidens more and more beautiful came before him. Some sprang at him, dangled their golden hair in his face; the king's son did not stop, but struck at them rudely, rushing on. He had barely left the maidens when he fell on to piles of treasure thrown in his way: beaten gold was piled high, and milk-white silver coin, -- here every kind of diamond ring, there swords set in diamonds; but the king's son touched nothing, and ran on. Then every kind of crawling, creeping thing swarmed around him, -- here hissing snakes, there warty toads. Yanoshka looked not under his feet, but ran till he came to the silver lake, around which he rushed three times, and went out as he had come. A thousand-fold was his fortune, for had he been an instant later the stone wall would have closed before him; as it was it took the heel off his boot, but he cared nothing for that. He left his boots there and ran home barefoot; when he reached home the silver lake was already flowing through the flowery garden, and in it all kinds of precious golden fish were jumping. Hitherto the marble palace and the flowery garden with the sounding tree and the sweetly speaking bird had been in fair fame, but now, when the silver lake was flowing through the garden, and golden fish playing in it, now I say their fame spoke to the seven worlds, and people came to look at them. When this reached the ears of the king he resolved that he would neither eat nor drink till he saw the marble palace with all its wonders. Though the old witch offered him black coffee repeatedly, the king did not take it; but sitting in the golden carriage with his wife, he drove to see the flowery garden. Scarcely had the king and queen entered the flowery garden when the brother and sister ran out before them, panting, and kissed their hands. "Oh, father, this little girl is like thee!" cried the queen; "She is thy carved second!" "And the little boy looks like thee," answered the king. Well, the king and the queen went around the garden in order, and they could not do justice to its beauty; when they saw the sounding tree and the sweetly speaking bird, they clapped their hands. The boy went up in a moment on the sounding tree, plucked from it a couple of golden apples, gave one to the king and the other to the queen, who could not praise sufficiently his kindness. Then the king and queen looked at the silver lake and the golden fish in it; they visited the marble palace, and went from chamber to chamber till they had gone through seven in order. The king and queen were unable to praise sufficiently the beauty of the rooms; but when they came to the most beautiful of all, the king found this to say, speaking speech, " Well, my little servant, wilt thou not answer a question of mine?" "And what is it?" asked the prince. "I should like to know why that picture is covered with velvet, and what it depicts." One word is not much, but the king's little son did not say that much; speechless he drew the velvet covering aside. The king and queen were amazed, and knew their own children, whom they had never seen before. One embraced one of them, and the other the other; they could not speak, but they wept and laughed, and then the world-sounding tree and the sweetly speaking bird were heard. Great was the rejoicing of every kind, but sad grew the old sinner when the king seized her, made her fast to a tree, and piled up beneath her a fire of sulfur. Source: Jeremiah Curtin, Myths and Folk-Tales of the Russians, Western Slavs, and Magyars (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1903), pp. 517-545 . Return to the table of contents . The long episode following the hedgehog's transformation and marriage is a variant of a type 707 folktale. The Enchanted Pig Romania Once upon a time there lived a king who had three daughters. Now it happened that he had to go out to battle, so he called his daughters and said to them, "My dear children, I am obliged to go to the wars. The enemy is approaching us with a large army. It is a great grief to me to leave you all. During my absence take care of yourselves and be good girls; behave well and look after everything in the house. You may walk in the garden, and you may go into all the rooms in the palace, except the room at the back in the right-hand corner; into that you must not enter, for harm would befall you." "You may keep your mind easy, father," they replied. "We have never been disobedient to you. Go in peace, and may heaven give you a glorious victory!" When everything was ready for his departure, the king gave them the keys of all the rooms and reminded them once more of what he had said. His daughters kissed his hands with tears in their eyes, and wished him prosperity, and he gave the eldest the keys. Now when the girls found themselves alone they felt so sad and dull that they did not know what to do. So, to pass the time, they decided to work for part of the day, to read for part of the day, and to enjoy themselves in the garden for part of the day. As long as they did this all went well with them. But this happy state of things did not last long. Every day they grew more and more curious, and you will see what the end of that was. "Sisters," said the eldest princess, "all day long we sew, spin, and read. We have been several days quite alone, and there is no corner of the garden that we have not explored. We have been in all the rooms of our father's palace, and have admired the rich and beautiful furniture; why should not we go into the room that our father forbad us to enter?" "Sister," said the youngest, "I cannot think how you can tempt us to break our father's command. When he told us not to go into that room he must have known what he was saying, and have had a good reason for saying it." "Surely the sky won't fall about our heads if we do go in," said the second princess. "Dragons and such like monsters that would devour us will not be hidden in the room. And how will our father ever find out that we have gone in?" While they were speaking thus, encouraging each other, they had reached the room; the eldest fitted the key into the lock, and snap! the door stood open. The three girls entered, and what do you think they saw? The room was quite empty, and without any ornament, but in the middle stood a large table, with a gorgeous cloth, and on it lay a big open book. Now the princesses were curious to know what was written in the book, especially the eldest, and this is what she read, "The eldest daughter of this king will marry a prince from the East." Then the second girl stepped forward, and turning over the page she read, "The second daughter of this king will marry a prince from the West." The girls were delighted, and laughed and teased each other. But the youngest princess did not want to go near the table or to open the book. Her elder sisters however left her no peace, and will she, nill she, they dragged her up to the table, and in fear and trembling she turned over the page and read, "The youngest daughter of this king will be married to a pig from the North." Now if a thunderbolt had fallen upon her from heaven it would not have frightened her more. She almost died of misery, and if her sisters had not held her up, she would have sunk to the ground and cut her head open. When she came out of the fainting fit into which she had fallen in her terror, her sisters tried to comfort her, saying, "How can you believe such nonsense? When did it ever happen that a king's daughter married a pig?" "What a baby you are!" said the other sister; "has not our father enough soldiers to protect you, even if the disgusting creature did come to woo you?" The youngest princess would fain have let herself be convinced by her sisters' words, and have believed what they said, but her heart was heavy. Her thoughts kept turning to the book, in which stood written that great happiness waited her sisters, but that a fate was in store for her such as had never before been known in the world. Besides, the thought weighed on her heart that she had been guilty of disobeying her father. She began to get quite ill, and in a few days she was so changed that it was difficult to recognize her; formerly she had been rosy and merry, now she was pale and nothing gave her any pleasure. She gave up playing with her sisters in the garden, ceased to gather flowers to put in her hair, and never sang when they sat together at their spinning and sewing. In the meantime the king won a great victory, and having completely defeated and driven off the enemy, he hurried home to his daughters, to whom his thoughts had constantly turned. Everyone went out to meet him with cymbals and fifes and drums, and there was great rejoicing over his victorious return. The king's first act on reaching home was to thank Heaven for the victory he had gained over the enemies who had risen against him. He then entered his palace, and the three princesses stepped forward to meet him. His joy was great when he saw that they were all well, for the youngest did her best not to appear sad. In spite of this, however, it was not long before the king noticed that his third daughter was getting very thin and sad looking. And all of a sudden he felt as if a hot iron were entering his soul, for it flashed through his mind that she had disobeyed his word. He felt sure he was right; but to be quite certain he called his daughters to him, questioned them, and ordered them to speak the truth. They confessed everything, but took good care not to say which had led the other two into temptation. The king was so distressed when he heard it that he was almost overcome by grief. But he took heart and tried to comfort his daughters, who looked frightened to death. He saw that what had happened had happened, and that a thousand words would not alter matters by a hair's breadth. Well, these events had almost been forgotten when one fine day a prince from the East appeared at the court and asked the king for the hand of his eldest daughter. The king gladly gave his consent. A great wedding banquet was prepared, and after three days of feasting the happy pair were accompanied to the frontier with much ceremony and rejoicing. After some time the same thing befell the second daughter, who was wooed and won by a prince from the West. Now when the young princess saw that everything fell out exactly as had been written in the book, she grew very sad. She refused to eat, and would not put on her fine clothes nor go out walking, and declared that she would rather die than become a laughing-stock to the world. But the king would not allow her to do anything so wrong, and he comforted her in all possible ways. So the time passed, till lo and behold! one fine day an enormous pig from the North walked into the palace, and going straight up to the king said, "Hail! oh king. May your life be as prosperous and bright as sunrise on a clear day!" "I am glad to see you well, friend," answered the king, "but what wind has brought you hither?" "I come a wooing," replied the pig. Now the king was astonished to hear so fine a speech from a pig, and at once it occurred to him that something strange was the matter. He would gladly have turned the pig's thoughts in another direction, as he did not wish to give him the princess for a wife; but when he heard that the court and the whole street were full of all the pigs in the world he saw that there was no escape, and that he must give his consent. The pig was not satisfied with mere promises, but insisted that the wedding should take place within a week, and would not go away till the king had sworn a royal oath upon it. The king then sent for his daughter, and advised her to submit to fate, as there was nothing else to be done. And he added, "My child, the words and whole behavior of this pig are quite unlike those of other pigs. I do not myself believe that he always was a pig. Depend upon it some magic or witchcraft has been at work. Obey him, and do everything that he wishes, and I feel sure that Heaven will shortly send you release." "If you wish me to do this, dear father, I will do it," replied the girl. In the meantime the wedding day drew near. After the marriage, the pig and his bride set out for his home in one of the royal carriages. On the way they passed a great bog, and the pig ordered the carriage to stop, and got out and rolled about in the mire till he was covered with mud from head to foot; then he got back into the carriage and told his wife to kiss him. What was the poor girl to do? She bethought herself of her father's words, and, pulling out her pocket handkerchief, she gently wiped the pig's snout and kissed it. By the time they reached the pig's dwelling, which stood in a thick wood, it was quite dark. They sat down quietly for a little, as they were tired after their drive; then they had supper together, and lay down to rest. During the night the princess noticed that the pig had changed into a man. She was not a little surprised, but remembering her father's words, she took courage, determined to wait and see what would happen. And now she noticed that every night the pig became a man, and every morning he was changed into a pig before she awoke. This happened several nights running, and the princess could not understand it at all. Clearly her husband must be bewitched. In time she grew quite fond of him, he was so kind and gentle. One fine day as she was sitting alone she saw an old witch go past. She felt quite excited, as it was so long since she had seen a human being, and she called out to the old woman to come and talk to her. Among other things the witch told her that she understood all magic arts, and that she could foretell the future, and knew the healing powers of herbs and plants. "I shall be grateful to you all my life, old dame," said the princess, "if you will tell me what is the matter with my husband. Why is he a pig by day and a human being by night?" "I was just going to tell you that one thing, my dear, to show you what a good fortuneteller I am. If you like, I will give you a herb to break the spell." "If you will only give it to me," said the princess, "I will give you anything you choose to ask for, for I cannot bear to see him in this state." "Here, then, my dear child," said the witch, "take this thread, but do not let him know about it, for if he did it would lose its healing power. At night, when he is asleep, you must get up very quietly, and fasten the thread round his left foot as firmly as possible; and you will see in the morning he will not have changed back into a pig, but will still be a man. I do not want any reward. I shall be sufficiently repaid by knowing that you are happy. It almost breaks my heart to think of all you have suffered, and I only wish I had known it sooner, as I should have come to your rescue at once." When the old witch had gone away the princess hid the thread very carefully, and at night she got up quietly, and with a beating heart she bound the thread round her husband's foot. Just as she was pulling the knot tight there was a crack, and the thread broke, for it was rotten. Her husband awoke with a start, and said to her, "Unhappy woman, what have you done? Three days more and this unholy spell would have fallen from me, and now, who knows how long I may have to go about in this disgusting shape? I must leave you at once, and we shall not meet again until you have worn out three pairs of iron shoes and blunted a steel staff in your search for me." So saying he disappeared. Now, when the princess was left alone she began to weep and moan in a way that was pitiful to hear; but when she saw that her tears and groans did her no good, she got up, determined to go wherever fate should lead her. On reaching a town, the first thing she did was to order three pairs of iron sandals and a steel staff, and having made these preparations for her journey, she set out in search of her husband. On and on she wandered over nine seas and across nine continents; through forests with trees whose stems were as thick as beer barrels; stumbling and knocking herself against the fallen branches, then picking herself up and going on; the boughs of the trees hit her face, and the shrubs tore her hands, but on she went, and never looked back. At last, wearied with her long journey and worn out and overcome with sorrow, but still with hope at her heart, she reached a house. Now who do you think lived there? The moon. The princess knocked at the door, and begged to be let in that she might rest a little. The mother of the moon, when she saw her sad plight, felt a great pity for her, and took her in and nursed and tended her. And while she was here the princess had a little baby. One day the mother of the moon asked her, "How was it possible for you, a mortal, to get hither to the house of the moon?" Then the poor princess told her all that happened to her, and added "I shall always be thankful to Heaven for leading me hither, and grateful to you that you took pity on me and on my baby, and did not leave us to die. Now I beg one last favor of you; can your daughter, the moon, tell me where my husband is?" "She cannot tell you that, my child," replied the goddess, "but, if you will travel towards the East until you reach the dwelling of the sun, he may be able to tell you something." Then she gave the princess a roast chicken to eat, and warned her to be very careful not to lose any of the bones, because they might be of great use to her. When the princess had thanked her once more for her hospitality and for her good advice, and had thrown away one pair of shoes that were worn out, and had put on a second pair, she tied up the chicken bones in a bundle, and taking her baby in her arms and her staff in her hand, she set out once more on her wanderings. On and on and on she went across bare sandy deserts, where the roads were so heavy that for every two steps that she took forwards she fell back one; but she struggled on till she had passed these dreary plains; next she crossed high rocky mountains, jumping from crag to crag and from peak to peak. Sometimes she would rest for a little on a mountain, and then start afresh always farther and farther on. She had to cross swamps and to scale mountain peaks covered with flints, so that her feet and knees and elbows were all torn and bleeding, and sometimes she came to a precipice across which she could not jump, and she had to crawl round on hands and knees, helping herself along with her staff. At length, wearied to death, she reached the palace in which the sun lived. She knocked and begged for admission. The mother of the sun opened the door, and was astonished at beholding a mortal from the distant earthly shores, and wept with pity when she heard of all she had suffered. Then, having promised to ask her son about the princess's husband, she hid her in the cellar, so that the sun might notice nothing on his return home, for he was always in a bad temper when he came in at night. The next day the princess feared that things would not go well with her, for the sun had noticed that some one from the other world had been in the palace. But his mother had soothed him with soft words, assuring him that this was not so. So the princess took heart when she saw how kindly she was treated, and asked, "But how in the world is it possible for the sun to be angry? He is so beautiful and so good to mortals." "This is how it happens," replied the sun's mother. "In the morning when he stands at the gates of paradise he is happy, and smiles on the whole world, but during the day he gets cross, because he sees all the evil deeds of men, and that is why his heat becomes so scorching; but in the evening he is both sad and angry, for he stands at the gates of death; that is his usual course. From there he comes back here." She then told the princess that she had asked about her husband, but that her son had replied that he knew nothing about him, and that her only hope was to go and inquire of the wind. Before the princess left the mother of the sun gave her a roast chicken to eat, and advised her to take great care of the bones, which she did, wrapping them up in a bundle. She then threw away her second pair of shoes, which were quite worn out, and with her child on her arm and her staff in her hand, she set forth on her way to the wind. In these wanderings she met with even greater difficulties than before, for she came upon one mountain of flints after another, out of which tongues of fire would flame up; she passed through woods which had never been trodden by human foot, and had to cross fields of ice and avalanches of snow. The poor woman nearly died of these hardships, but she kept a brave heart, and at length she reached an enormous cave in the side of a mountain. This was where the wind lived. There was a little door in the railing in front of the cave, and here the princess knocked and begged for admission. The mother of the wind had pity on her and took her in, that she might rest a little. Here too she was hidden away, so that the wind might not notice her. The next morning the mother of the wind told her that her husband was living in a thick wood, so thick that no axe had been able to cut a way through it; here he had built himself a sort of house by placing trunks of trees together and fastening them with withes and here he lived alone, shunning human kind. After the mother of the wind had given the princess a chicken to eat, and had warned her to take care of the bones, she advised her to go by the Milky Way, which at night lies across the sky, and to wander on till she reached her goal. Having thanked the old woman with tears in her eyes for her hospitality, and for the good news she had given her, the princess set out on her journey and rested neither night nor day, so great was her longing to see her husband again. On and on she walked until her last pair of shoes fell in pieces. So she threw them away and went on with bare feet, not heeding the bogs nor the thorns that wounded her, nor the stones that bruised her. At last she reached a beautiful green meadow on the edge of a wood. Her heart was cheered by the sight of the flowers and the soft cool grass, and she sat down and rested for a little. But hearing the birds chirping to their mates among the trees made her think with longing of her husband, and she wept bitterly, and taking her child in her arms, and her bundle of chicken bones on her shoulder, she entered the wood. For three days and three nights she struggled through it, but could find nothing. She was quite worn out with weariness and hunger, and even her staff was no further help to her, for in her many wanderings it had become quite blunted. She almost gave up in despair, but made one last great effort, and suddenly in a thicket she came upon the sort of house that the mother of the wind had described. It had no windows, and the door was up in the roof. Round the house she went, in search of steps, but could find none. What was she to do? How was she to get in? She thought and thought, and tried in vain to climb up to the door. Then suddenly she bethought her of the chicken bones that she had dragged all that weary way, and she said to herself, "They would not all have told me to take such good care of these bones if they had not had some good reason for doing so. Perhaps now, in my hour of need, they may be of use to me." So she took the bones out of her bundle, and having thought for a moment, she placed the two ends together. To her surprise they stuck tight; then she added the other bones, till she had two long poles the height of the house; these she placed against the wall, at a distance of a yard from one another. Across them she placed the other bones, piece by piece, like the steps of a ladder. As soon as one step was finished she stood upon it and made the next one, and then the next, till she was close to the door. But just as she got near the top she noticed that there were no bones left for the last rung of the ladder. What was she to do? Without that last step the whole ladder was useless. She must have lost one of the bones. Then suddenly an idea came to her. Taking a knife she chopped off her little finger, and placing it on the last step, it stuck as the bones had done. The ladder was complete, and with her child on her arm she entered the door of the house. Here she found everything in perfect order. Having taken some food, she laid the child down to sleep in a trough that was on the floor, and sat down herself to rest. When her husband, the pig, came back to his house, he was startled by what he saw. At first he could not believe his eyes, and stared at the ladder of bones, and at the little finger on the top of it. He felt that some fresh magic must be at work, and in his terror he almost turned away from the house; but then a better idea came to him, and he changed himself into a dove, so that no witchcraft could have power over him, and flew into the room without touching the ladder. Here he found a woman rocking a child. At the sight of her, looking so changed by all that she had suffered for his sake, his heart was moved by such love and longing and by so great a pity that he suddenly became a man. The princess stood up when she saw him. and her heart beat with fear, for she did not know him. But when he had told her who he was, in her great joy she forgot all her sufferings, and they seemed as nothing to her. He was a very handsome man, as straight as a fir tree. They sat down together and she told him all her adventures, and he wept with pity at the tale. And then he told her his own history. "I am a king's son. Once when my father was fighting against some dragons, who were the scourge of our country, I slew the youngest dragon. His mother, who was a witch, cast a spell over me and changed me into a pig. It was she who in the disguise of an old woman gave you the thread to bind round my foot. So that instead of the three days that had to run before the spell was broken, I was forced to remain a pig for three more years. Now that we have suffered for each other, and have found each other again, let us forget the past." And in their joy they kissed one another. Next morning they set out early to return to his father's kingdom. Great was the rejoicing of all the people when they saw him and his wife; his father and his mother embraced them both, and there was feasting in the palace for three days and three nights. Then they set out to see her father. The old king nearly went out of his mind with joy at beholding his daughter again. When she had told him all her adventures, he said to her, "Did not I tell you that I was quite sure that that creature who wooed and won you as his wife had not been born a pig? You see, my child, how wise you were in doing what I told you." And as the king was old and had no heirs, he put them on the throne in his place. And they ruled as only kings rule who have suffered many things. And if they are not dead they are still living and ruling happily. Source: Andrew Lang, The Red Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1895), pp. 104-115 . The second half of this tale belongs to type 425 (The Search for the Lost Husband). Link to another translation of this tale: Ignácz Kúnos, "The Enchanted Hog," Turkish [and Romanian] Fairy Tales and Folk Tales , translated from the Hungarian version by R. Nisbet Bain (London: Lawrence and Bullen, 1896), pp. 222-43 . Lang's source: Mite Kremnitz, Rumänische Märchen (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich, 1882), no. 5, pp. 48-66 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites A file containing only the Grimms' Hans-My-Hedgehog . Another group of animal bridegroom stories: Frog Kings: Folktales about Slimy Suitors. The following "Monkey Bridegroom" tale bears a strong resemblance to the Grimms' "Hans-My-Hedgehog": Juan Wearing a Monkey's Skin (Philippines). Grimm Brothers Home Page. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 20, 2018. Catching a Horse by Its Tail: Folktales of type 47A Catching a Horse by Its Tail folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 47A translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2013 Contents The Fox and the Horse (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Reynard Wants to Tast Horseflesh (Norway, Peter Christen Asbjørnsen). Fox and Wolf (Netherlands, G. J. Boekenoogen). Brother Fox Catches Mr. Horse (African America, Joel Chandler Harris). The Fox and the Wolf (Native American--Chickasaw) Related links . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Fox and the Horse Germany A peasant had a faithful horse which had grown old and could do no more work, so his master no longer wanted to give him anything to eat and said, "I can certainly make no more use of you, but still I mean well by you, and if you prove yourself still strong enough to bring me a lion here, I will maintain you. But for now get out of my stable." And with that he chased him into the open field. The horse was sad, and went to the forest to seek a little protection there from the weather. There the fox met him and said, "Why do you hang your head so, and go about all alone?" "Alas," replied the horse, "greed and loyalty do not dwell together in one house. My master has forgotten what services I have performed for him for so many years, and because I can no longer plow well, he will give me no more food, and has driven me out." "Without giving you a chance?" asked the fox. "The chance was a bad one. He said, if I were still strong enough to bring him a lion, he would keep me, but he well knows that I cannot do that." The fox said, "I will help you. Just lie down, stretch out as if you were dead, and do not stir." The horse did what the fox asked, and then the fox went to the lion, who had his den not far off, and said, "A dead horse is lying out there. Just come with me, and you can have a rich meal." The lion went with him, and when they were both standing by the horse the fox said, "After all, it is not very comfortable for you here -- I tell you what -- I will fasten it to you by the tail, and then you can drag it into your cave and eat it in peace." This advice pleased the lion. He positioned himself, and in order that the fox might tie the horse fast to him, he kept completely quiet. But the fox tied the lion's legs together with the horse's tail, and twisted and fastened everything so well and so strongly that no amount of strength could pull it loose. When he had finished his work, he tapped the horse on the shoulder and said, "Pull, white horse, pull!" Then up sprang the horse at once, and pulled the lion away with him. The lion began to roar so that all the birds in the forest flew up in terror, but the horse let him roar, and drew him and dragged him across the field to his master's door. When the master saw the lion, he was of a better mind, and said to the horse, "You shall stay with me and fare well." And he gave him plenty to eat until he died. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Der Fuchs und das Pferd , Kinder und Hausmärchen , vol. 2 (1815), no. 46. In later editions this tale is number 132. Translated by Margaret Hunt (1885). Translation revised and corrected by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. The Grimms' source: the von Haxthausen family. Link to a separate file of this tale: The Fox and the Horse by the Grimm brothers. Return to the table of contents . Reynard Wants to Taste Horseflesh Norway One day the bear was lying eating a horse which he had killed. Reynard was about again and came slinking along, his mouth watering for a tasty bit of the horseflesh. He sneaked in and out and round about till he came up behind the bear, when he made a spring to the other side of the carcass, snatching a piece as he jumped across. The bear was not slow either. He made a dash after Reynard and caught the tip of his red tail in his paw. Since that time the fox has always had a white tip to his tail. "Wait a bit, Reynard, and come here," said the bear, "and I'll teach you how to catch horses." Yes, Reynard was quite willing to learn that, but he didn't trust himself too near the bear. "When you see a horse lying asleep in a sunny place," said the bear, "you must tie yourself fast with the hair of his tail to your brush, and then fasten your teeth in his thigh," he said. Before long the fox found a horse lying asleep on a sunny hillside, and so he did as the bear had told him. He knotted and tied himself well to the horse with the hair of the tail and then fastened his teeth into his thigh. Up jumped the horse and began to kick and gallop, so that Reynard was dashed against stock and stone, and was so bruised and battered that he nearly lost his senses. All at once a hare rushed by. "Where are you off to in such a hurry, Reynard?" asked the hare. "I'm having a ride, Bunny!" said the fox. The hare sat up on his hind legs and laughed till the sides of his mouth split right up to his ears, at the thought of Reynard having such a grand ride; but since then the fox has never thought of catching horses again. That time it was Bruin who for once had the better of Reynard. Otherwise, they say the bear is as simple minded as the trolls. Source: P. C. Asbjørnsen, Fairy Tales from the Far North , translated from the Norwegian by H. L. Brækstad (New York: A. L. Burt Company, n.d.), pp. 169-171. Translator's preface dated London, September 1897. Link to the tale in Norwegian: Bjørnen og reven: Mikkel vil smake hestekjøtt . Return to the table of contents . Fox and Wolf Netherlands A fox and a wolf found an old horse in a mire. They wanted to take it with them and asked one another how they might manage. The fox said, "You are the strongest. Tie the horse's tail around your body and pull, while I prod the horse with a stick." That happened, and soon the horse was out of the mud, but it then ran off with the wolf tied to its tail. "Claw your paws into the ground!" cried the fox. "But I can see neither heaven nor earth!" answered the wolf. Finally the wolf succeeded in breaking loose, and he and the fox continued on their way, but without the horse. Source: A. M. A. Cox-Leick and H. L. Cox, "Fuchs und Wolf," Märchen der Niederlande (Düsseldorf: Eugen Diederichs Verlag, 1977), no. 64, p. 213. © 1964 by Eugen Diederichs Verlag. Cox-Leick's and Cox's source: G. J. Boekenoogen, Volkskunde , vol. 15 (1903), pp. 112-113. Collected 1894 in Beilen, province of Drente. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. The type 47A episode given above is part of a longer tale. Link to the entire tale Fox and Wolf . Return to the table of contents . Brother Fox Catches Mr. Horse African American One day Brer Rabbit was going along the road studying how he was going to hold his own with Brer Fox when he saw a great big horse lying stretched out flat on his side in the pasture. He crept up, he did, to see if this horse had gone and died. He crept up, and he crept around, and by and by he saw the horse switch his tail, and then Brer Rabbit knew he wasn't dead. With that, Brer Rabbit loped back to the big road, and almost the first man he saw going by was Brer Fox. Brer Rabbit, he took after him, and hollered, "Brer Fox! O Brer Fox! Come back! I've got some good news for you. Come back, Brer Fox," he said. Brer Fox, he turned around, he did, and when he saw who was calling him he came galloping back, because it seemed like this was just as good a time as any to nab Brer Rabbit. But before he got within nabbing distance, Brer Rabbit, he up and said, "Come on, Brer Fox! I just found the place where you can lay in fresh meat enough to last you plumb until the middle of next year," he said. Brer Fox, he asked where it was, and Brer Rabbit, he said, "Right over there in the pasture," and Brer Fox asked what it was, and Brer Rabbit said it was a whole horse lying down on the ground where they could catch him and tie him up. With that, Brer Fox said, "Come on," and off they went. When they got there, sure enough, they lay the horse all stretched out in the sun fast asleep, and then Brer Fox and Brer Rabbit had a dispute about how they were going to fix the horse so he could not get loose. One said one way and the other said another way, and so it was until after a while Brer Rabbit said, "The only plan I can think of, Brer Fox, is for you to go down there and let me tie you to the horse's tail," he said. "If I were a big man like you are," said Brer Rabbit, "you could tie me to the horse's tail, and if I didn't hold him down, then Joe's dead and Sal's a widow. I just know that you can hold him down," said Brer Rabbit. "But if you are afraid, we had just better drop this idea and study out some other plan," he said. Brer Fox was sort of dubious about this, but it pleased him to play biggity in front of Brer Rabbit, and he agreed to the plan. Then Brer Rabbit, he took and tied Brer Fox to the horse's tail, and after he had him tied there hard and fast, he sort of stepped back, he did, and put his hands akimbo, and grinned, and then he said, "If there ever was a caught horse then it is this one that we caught. It sort of looks like we put the bridle on the wrong end." With that Brer Rabbit cut himself a long switch and trimmed it up. When he had it fixed, he stepped up and hit the horse a rap -- pow! The horse was so surprised at this that he made one jump and landed on his feet. When he did that, there was Brer Fox dangling in the air. Brer Rabbit, he darted out of the way and hollered, "Hold him down, Brer Fox! Hold him down! I'll stand out here and not get in your way. Hold him down, Brer Fox! Hold him down!" Of course, when the horse felt Brer Fox hanging there on his tail, he thought something was the matter, and this made him jump and rear worse and worse, and he shook up Brer Fox just like he was a rag in the wind, and Brer Rabbit, he jumped and hollered, "Hold him down, Brer Fox! Hold him down! You've got him now! Hold your grip, and hold him down!" he said. The horse, he jumped ,and he jumped, and he ripped, and he reared, and he snorted, and he tore. But Brer Fox kept hanging on, and Brer Rabbit kept skipping around hollering, "Hold him down, Brer Fox! You've got him where he can't get away. Hold him down, Brer Fox!" he said. By and by, when Brer Fox got the chance, he hollered back, he did, "How in the name of goodness am I going to hold the horse down unless I get my claws in the ground?" Then Brer Rabbit, he stood back a little further and hollered a little louder, "Hold him down, Brer Fox! Hold him down! You've got him now! Hold him down!" By and by the horse began to kick with his hind legs, and the first thing you know, he fetched Brer Fox a lick in the stomach that fairly made him squall, and then he kicked him again, and this time he broke Brer Fox loose, and sent him a-whirling; and Brer Rabbit, he kept on a-jumping around and hollering, "Hold him down, Brer Fox!" "Did the fox get killed, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy. "He wasn't exactly killed, honey," replied the old man, "but he was next door to it. He was all broken up, and while he was getting well, it sort of came across his mind that Brer Rabbit and done and played a trick on him." Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Nights with Uncle Remus: Myths and Legends of the Old Plantation (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1883), no. 2, pp. 8-12 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Nights with Uncle Remus contains an additional story of Aarne-Thompson type 47A, "Brother Wolf Falls a Victim" ( no. 36, pp. 208-14 ). Return to the table of contents . The Fox and the Wolf Native American (Chickasaw) The fox and the wolf were friends. One time they agreed to go hunting. The fox went off in one direction, and so did the wolf in another direction. The fox traveled in a circle, and by and by ran across the wolf. He asked him what luck he had had. The wolf told him that he had met with a dog, and asked the dog why he liked to stay around human beings. Said the dog, "I like them because they defend me." Then he asked the dog how they defended him. Said he, "Look behind that tree!" Now, there stood a man with a gun. Then the wolf was terrified, ran off, and forgot about hunting until he met the fox. Now, the fox told what luck he had had. He had had good luck. He told the wolf that he found a dead horse; but the horse was lying very near a road, and he was afraid to tackle him alone. He told the wolf, however, that if he would help him carry the horse off, they would have a feast. The wolf agreed, and they went to where the dead horse was. They stopped near by. The wolf wouldn't believe the horse was dead. He told the fox to bring him a handful of hair. The fox brought him a handful of hair, and the wolf smelled it. Said he, "Yes, he's been dead quite a while." So now the wolf and fox consulted how to carry the dead horse away. The wolf allowed the fox to tie his tail to the dead horse's tail, and the fox took hold of his head to pull him off. When the wolf was securely tied to the horse's tail, the fox went over to his place near the head to get hold. Then suddenly he scratched the horse on the nose; and being, in truth, only asleep, the horse woke up, and dashed away, dragging the wolf. Then the fox shouted to the wolf, "Hurrah for me, my friend!" But the wolf cried in despair, "How can I hurrah, when I'm up in the air?" Source: F. G. Speck, "European Tales among the Chickasaw Indians," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 26 (1913), p. 292 . Speck's source: Josiah Mikey, a Chickasaw Indian living in Oklahoma. Return to the table of contents . Related links The Fox, the Wolf, and the Horse and other fables of Aarne-Thompson type 47E. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 6, 2013. Hot and Cold with the Same Breath: Folktales of Type 1342 Hot and Cold with the Same Breath foltales of type 1342 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2010-2016 Contents The Man and the Satyr (Aesop). The Satyr and the Traveler (Jean de La Fontaine). The Peasant and the Satyrs (Flanders). The Peasant and the Student (Germany). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Man and the Satyr Aesop A man and a satyr once poured out libations together in token of a bond of alliance being formed between them. One very cold wintry day, as they talked together, the man put his fingers to his mouth and blew on them. On the satyr inquiring the reason of this, he told him that he did it to warm his hands, they were so cold. Later on in the day they sat down to eat, the food prepared being quite scalding. The man raised one of the dishes a little towards his mouth and blew in it. On the satyr again inquiring the reason of this, he said that he did it to cool the meat, it was so hot. "I can no longer consider you as a friend," said the Satyr, "a fellow who with the same breath blows hot and cold." Source: Three Hundred Æsop's Fables , literally translated from the Greek by George Fyler Townsend (London and New York: George Routledge and Sons, 1871), p. 181 . Return to the table of contents . The Satyr and the Traveler Jean de La Fontaine Within a savage forest grot A satyr and his chips Were taking down their porridge hot; Their cups were at their lips. You might have seen in mossy den, Himself, his wife, and brood; They had not tailor-clothes, like men, But appetites as good. In came a traveller, benighted, All hungry, cold, and wet, Who heard himself to eat invited With nothing like regret. He did not give his host the pain His asking to repeat; But first he blew with might and main To give his fingers heat. Then in his steaming porridge dish He delicately blew. The wondering satyr said, "I wish The use of both I knew." "Why, first, my blowing warms my hand, And then it cools my porridge." "Ah!" said his host, "then understand I cannot give you storage. To sleep beneath one roof with you, I may not be so bold. Far be from me that mouth untrue Which blows both hot and cold." Source: The Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright(London: George Bell and Sons, 1888), book 5, fable 7, pp. 108-109 . Link to La Fontaine's fable in the original French: "Le Satyre et le Passant," Œuvres complètes de Jean de La Fontaine (Paris: Firmin Didot Frères, 1840), livre 5, fable 7, pp. 47-48 . Return to the table of contents . The Peasant and the Satyrs Flanders One cold winter's day a peasant set out on a journey which led him through the depths of a forest into which he had not hitherto been. The result was that he lost his way, and after wandering about for many hours in the hope of finding it again, he found himself, just as dusk was coming on, in a little clearing where he was overjoyed to see a small house with a cheerful light in the window. "Here is a chance of supper and a bed," thought the peasant, and he made haste to go up to the cottage door. Now this house in the clearing was not inhabited by men, but by some strange forest folk who were called satyrs. If you want to know what they were like, you must look at the pictures. Certainly the peasant had never seen anything like them before, although he had often heard of them, and when he nearly tumbled over the little satyr children who were playing in the snow outside the house door, he was the most surprised man in all those parts. It was too late to draw back however, so he went boldly up to the door and gave a loud knock. "Come in!" cried a gruff voice, and the peasant accordingly went in and found himself facing the father of all the satyrs, who had a long beard and a pair of horns jutting from his forehead. The poor fellow's knees trembled underneath him for fright, especially when he saw all the other satyrs, the mother and the uncles and the aunts, glowering at him. "Please forgive me for my intrusion," said he, "but I have lost my way in the woods, and I am half dead with hunger and cold. It would be an act of great kindness if you would give me some food and allow me to take shelter for the night." So saying, to give point to his remarks, he set to work to blow upon his chilled fingers, which indeed were blue with the cold. "Why are you blowing your fingers?" asked the father of all the satyrs curiously. "Why, to warm them," answered the peasant, and he blew harder than before. "Well, sit down," said the satyr. "As it happens we are just about to have supper, and you are welcome to share it with us." So the peasant sat down to supper, and all the satyr family sat down too, and watched him with big unblinking eyes, so that he felt very uncomfortable. A big basin of soup was set before him, and finding it very hot, he began to blow upon it. At this all the satyr family cried out in surprise, and the father satyr said, " Why are you blowing your soup?" "To cool it," answered the peasant. "It is too hot, and I am afraid it may scald my mouth." Another and a louder cry of surprise came from all the satyrs, but the father cried out loudest of all, and seemed very indignant. "Come," he said, advancing to the peasant and taking him by the collar. "Out you go! There is no place in my house for a man who can blow hot and cold with the same breath. That smells too much of sorcery or magic. Out you go, I say, and practise your spells in the forest." So the poor peasant had to go supperless and spend the night in the woods, with no shelter but the trees, and the snow for coverlet. And, if you wish to know when all this happened, all I can tell you is that it was a very long time ago, in the days when fishes flew, and cats had wings. Source: Jean de Bosschère, Folk Tales of Flanders (New York: Dodd, Mead, and Company, 1918), pp. 159-62 . Flanders is the northern part of Belgium, where the native language is Flemish (Dutch). Return to the table of contents . The Peasant and the Student Germany Once in wintertime a student found shelter with a peasant. Taking a place next to the stove, the student blew onto his hands. The peasant asked him why he was doing that, to which the student answered that he was warming his hands with his breath. The peasant then invited him to stay for dinner. The student blew on his soup, and the peasant asked him why was doing that. "To cool off the soup with my breath," was the answer. "Oho!" said the peasant. "Are you one of those who can blow hot and cold out of their mouths? Be on your way! I learned from my father to be wary of anyone who blows hot and cold out of his mouth." Source: Conrad Purselt, Fons Aquae Triplici Scaturigine Salientis in Vitam Aeternam: Dritte Quell Sonntäglicher Predigen (Augsburg and Dillingen: In Verlag Johann Caspar Bencards, 1707), vol. 3, p. 118 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 12, 2016. The Husband Who Was to Mind the House The Husband Who Was to Mind the House Norway Once upon a time there was a man who was so bad tempered and cross that he never thought his wife did anything right in the house. One evening, in haymaking time, he came home, scolding and swearing, and showing his teeth and making a commotion. "Dear love, don't be so angry. That's a good man," said his wife, "tomorrow let's change jobs. I'll go out with the mowers and mow, and you can mind the house at home." Yes, the husband thought that would do very well. He was quite willing, he said. So early the next morning, his wife took a scythe over her neck, and went out into the hay field with the mowers and began to mow. But the man was to mind the house and do the work at home. First of all he wanted to churn the butter. But when he had churned a while, he got thirsty and went down to the cellar to tap a barrel of ale. He had just knocked in the bung and was putting in the tap, when he heard the pig come into the kitchen above. As fast as he could, he ran up the cellar steps, with the tap in his hand, to keep the pig from upsetting the churn. But when he got there he saw that the pig had already knocked the churn over, and was standing there routing and grunting in the cream which was running all over the floor. He got so angry that he quite forgot the ale barrel and ran at the pig as hard as he could. He caught it, too, just as it ran out of doors, and gave it such a powerful kick that he killed it on the spot. Then he remembered he had the tap in his hand. But when he returned to the cellar, all the ale had run out of the barrel. Then he went into the milk-shed and found enough cream left to fill the churn again, and so he began to churn, for they had to have butter for dinner. When he had churned a bit, he remembered that their milk cow was still shut up in the barn and hadn't had a bit to eat or a drop to drink all morning, although the sun was high. It occurred to him that it was too far to take her down to the meadow, so he'd just get her up onto the roof, for it was a sod roof, and a fine crop of grass was growing there. The house was close against a steep hill, and he thought if he laid a plank across to the back of the roof he'd easily get the cow up. But he couldn't leave the churn, for his little baby was crawling about on the floor. "If I leave it," he thought, "the child will tip it over." So he put the churn on his back, and went out with it. But then he thought he'd better first water the cow before he put her onto the roof, so he picked up a bucket to draw water out of the well. But as he stooped over the edge of the well all the cream ran out of the churn over his shoulder and down into the well. Now it was nearly dinner time, and he hadn't even finished the butter yet, so he thought he'd best boil the porridge. He filled the pot with water and hung it over the fire. When he had done that, it occurred to him that the cow might fall off the roof and break her legs or her neck, so he climbed up onto the house to tie her up. He tied one end of the rope around the cow's neck. He slipped the other end down the chimney and tied it around his own leg. Then he had to hurry, for the water was now boiling in the pot, and he still had to grind the oatmeal. He began to grind away; but while he was hard at it, the cow fell off the roof, dragging the man up the chimney by the rope. There he stuck fast. As for the cow, she hung halfway down the wall, swinging between heaven and earth, for she could neither get down nor up. Now the wife waited seven lengths and seven breadths for her husband to come and call her home to dinner, but he never came. At last she thought she'd waited long enough, and she went home. But when she arrived home and saw the cow hanging there, she ran up and cut the rope with her scythe. When she did this, her husband fell down from within the chimney. When the old woman came inside, she found him with his head in the porridge pot. Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Mannen som skulle stelle hjemme , Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiania [Oslo], 1842-1852), translated by George Webb Dasent (1859). Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman . © 2001. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1408, The Man Who Did His Wife's Work . Related links D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Trading Places . Additional folktales in which family members exchange jobs with disastrous results. The Mouse, the Bird, and the Sausage by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. In this fable three family members exchange jobs. Revised October 30, 2008. Human Sacrifice in Legends and Myths Human Sacrifice in Legends and Myths translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2023 Contents Human Sacrifice among the Gauls (France, Julius Caesar). King Aun Sacrifices Nine Sons to Odin (Sweden, Snorri Sturluson). Buried Alive (Sweden, Herman Hofberg). Copenhagen's Ramparts (Denmark, J. M. Thiele). The Churchyard on the Island of Fur (Denmark, J. M. Thiele). An Old Belief (Germany, Friedrich Wagenfeld). The Höxter Ghost (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Entombment (Germany, Friedrich Panzer). The Entombed Child (Germany, A. Haas). The Ghost at Spyker (Germany, A. Haas). Sacrificing Virgins to Lakes (Germany, A. Haas). The Old Church at Kohlstädt (Germany, A. Kuhn). The Name Greene (Germany, A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz). An Infant Speaks (Germany, Karl Bartsch). The Secured Foundation Stone (Germany, J. W. Wolf). Plesse Castle (Germany, Georg Schambach and Wilhelm Müller). Link to Merlin the Magician Saves King Vortigern: Why the Red Dragon Is the Emblem of Wales . In this Welsh legend the child Merlin is nearly sacrificed to protect a building under construction. This link will take you to a separate file. Sacrifice, Human (England). London Bridge Is Falling Down (an Irish-American nursery rhyme). Link to The Magdeburg Bridge -- Die Magdeburger Brücke (a nursery rhyme from Germany). This is a separate file. Story of the Bridge (Turkey -- Gypsy, Francis Hindes Groome). Rumors of Foundation Sacrifice (India). How the Cannibals Drove the People from Insofan Mountain to the Cross River (Nigeria). Link to Jephthah and His Daughter (Book of Judges). This link will take you to a separate file. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Human Sacrifice among the Gauls The nation of all the Gauls is extremely devoted to superstitious rites; and on that account they who are troubled with unusually severe diseases and they who are engaged in battles and dangers, either sacrifice men as victims, or vow that they will sacrifice them, and employ the Druids as the performers of those sacrifices; because they think that unless the life of a man be offered for the life of a man, the mind of the immortal gods cannot be rendered propitious, and they have sacrifices of that kind ordained for national purposes. Others have figures of vast size, the limbs of which formed of osiers they fill with living men, which being set on fire, the men perish enveloped in the flames. They consider that the oblation of such as have been taken in theft, or in robbery, or any other offence, is more acceptable to the immortal gods; but when a supply of that class is wanting, they have recourse to the oblation of even the innocent. Source: Caesar's Commentaries on the Gallic War , translated by Edward Brooks, Jr. (Chicago: Farquhar and Albrecht, 1896) ch. 16, pp. 202-203 . Return to the table of contents . King Aun Sacrifices Nine Sons to Odin Sweden King Aun returned to Uppsala when he was sixty years of age. He made a great sacrifice, and in it offered up his son to Odin. Aun got an answer from Odin, that he should live sixty years longer; and he was afterwards king in Uppsala for twenty-five years. Now came Ale the Bold, a son of King Fridleif, with his army to Svithiod against King Aun.... Then Aun fled a second time to West Gautland; and for twenty-five years Ale reigned in Uppsala, until he was killed by Starkad the Old. After Ale's fall, Aun returned to Uppsala and ruled the kingdom for twenty-five years. Then he made a great sacrifice again for long life, in which he sacrificed his second son, and received the answer from Odin, that he should live as long as he gave him one of his sons every tenth year, and also that he should name one of the districts of his country after the number of sons he should offer to Odin. When he had sacrificed the seventh of his sons he continued to live for ten years; but so that he could not walk, but was carried on a chair. Then he sacrificed his eighth son, and lived thereafter ten years, lying in his bed. Now he sacrificed his ninth son, and lived ten years more; but so that he drank out of horn like an infant. He had now only one son remaining, whom he also wanted to satrifice, and to give Odin Uppsala and the domains thereunto belonging, under the name of the Tenth Land, but the Sweedes would not allow it; so there was no sacrifice, and King Aun died, and was buried in a mound at Uppsala. Since that time it is called Aun's sickness when a man dies, without pain, of extreme old age. Thiodolf tells of this: In Uppsala town the cruel king Slaughtered his sons at Odin's shrine -- Slaughtered his sons with cruel knife, To get from Odin length of life He lived until he had to turn His toothless mouth to the deer's horn; And he who shed his children's blood Sucked through the ox's horn his food, At length fell Death has tracked him down, Slowly, but sure, in Uppsala town. Source: Snorri Sturluson, Heimskringla; or, The Sagas of the Norse Kings , translated from the Icelandic by Samuel Laing; 2nd edition, revised, with notes by Rasmus B. Anderson, vol. 1 (London: John C. Nimmo, 1889), pp. 301-302 . This work was written in about 1235. Return to the table of contents . Buried Alive Sweden Many years ago an epidemic swept over Dalland, to which thousands of persons fell victims. Many people fled to the forests, or to other regions. The churches were deserted, and those remaining were not enough to bury the dead. At this stage an old Finlander came along, who informed the few survivors that they need not hope for cessation of the scourge until they had buried some living thing. The advice was followed. First a cock was buried alive, but the plague continued as violent as ever. Next, a goat, but this also proved ineffectual. At last a poor boy, who frequented the neighborhood, begging, was lured to a wood-covered hill at the point where the river Daleborg empties into Lake Venem. Here a deep hole was dug, the boy meantime sitting near, enjoying a piece of bread and butter that had been given him. When the grave was deep enough, the boy was dropped into it and the diggers began hurriedly to shovel the dirt upon him. The lad begged and prayed them not to throw dirt upon his bread and butter, but the spades flew faster, and in a few minutes, still alive, he was entirely covered and left to his fate. Whether this stayed the plague is not know, but many who after night pass the hill, hear, it is said, a voice as if from a dying child, crying, "Buried alive! Buried Alive!" Source (books.google.com): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago, Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), p. 140 . Source (Internet Archive): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago, Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), p. 140 . The original Swedish text: (books.google.com): Herman Hofberg, "Qvick i jord," Svenska Folkägner (Stockholm: Fr. Skoglunds Förlag, 1882), p. 122 . Footnote in the original: "As late as 1875 a farmer near Mariestad, during an epidemic among his cattle, buried alive a cow in the ground. Whether this cruel expedient was effective the author is not informed." Return to the table of contents . Copenhagen's Ramparts Denmark Many ages ago the ramparts around Copenhagen were constantly collapsing, and it was not possible to make them stand firm. Then they took a small young innocent girl, set her on a chair at a table, and gave her toys and treats. While she sat there enjoying herself, twelve masons built a vault above her. When it was completed, music was played while they built ramparts over the vault. They were now sure that the ramparts would be secure! Source (books.google.com): J. M. Thiele, "Kiøbenhavns Volde," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 1 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), p. 147 . Source (Internet Archive): J. M. Thiele, "Kiøbenhavns Volde," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 1 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), p. 147 . Return to the table of contents . The Churchyard on the Island of Fur Denmark No one is buried on the eastern side of the churchyard on the island of Fur in the Limfjord, because when the black death raged there in the country, a living child was buried there, in order to stop the infection. Source (books.google.com): J. M. Thiele, "Om Pesten," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), p. 63 . Source (Internet Archive): J. M. Thiele, "Om Pesten," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), p. 63 . Return to the table of contents . An Old Belief Germany The people of Bremen formerly believed that their fortifications could be made invincible by entombing an innocent child inside a wall. Indeed, it is said that the remains of a child were found when the Bridge Gate was demolished a few years ago. Source (books.google.com): Friedrich Wagenfeld, "Alter Glaube," Bremen's Volkssagen , booklet 7 (Bremen: Verlag von Wilh. Kaiser, 1845), no. 14, p. 27 . Source (Internet Archive): Friedrich Wagenfeld, "Alter Glaube," Bremen's Volkssagen , booklet 7 (Bremen: Verlag von Wilh. Kaiser, 1845), no. 14, p. 27 . Return to the table of contents . The Höxter Ghost Germany When Höxter was being fortified, a small child was entombed in the wall near the Ovenhausen Gate in order to make the town invincible. Even today the child can be heard crying every seven years. Source: Unpublished papers of Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Staatsbibliothek, Berlin. No title is provided in the manuscript. Return to the table of contents . Entombment Germany In the small village of Vestenberg, 2 1/2 hours from Ansbach, there is a large hill, surrounded by a deep moat. Traces of ancient towers are still visible there. Remnants of grave containers can be found just below the earth's surface. A beautiful oak forest lies adjacent to the hill. The names of some of the places in this forest are Himmelreich, Helgraben, and Gründlein. By the beginning of the middle ages Vestenberg was already the seat of the noble family by the same name. The Vestenbergs were among the most widely spread and wealthiest families of Franconia.... The narration of an eighty-year-old woman: When Vestenberg Castle was being built, the mason built a seat into the wall. A child was placed on the seat to be sealed into the wall. The child cried, so to pacify it, they gave it a beautiful red apple. The unmarried woman, whose child it was, had given it up for a large sum of money. After the mason had finished mortaring the child into the wall, he gave the mother a hard slap on the face, saying: "It would have been better if you had begged your way throughout the country with your child." ... A superstitious man claimed that the railroad bridge over the Göltsch Valley near Reichenbach in Saxony cannot be completed. They cannot find firm ground. Whatever they build during the day disappears the following night. The work will not succeed until they sacrifice seven humans to the Evil One for it. They have already entombed one child in it. People suspected this, and for this reason the schoolmasters were asked to count their children, and it turned out that one child was missing. The narrator heard this account in a tavern in Nürnberg. In Hof a rumor was circulating among the superstitious that a man was seeking a child to entomb in the Göltsch Bridge. A gymnastics teacher, wearing his white gymnast's suit and carrying a rope in his hand, chanced to walk down the disreputable Fisher Street in Hof, where he so frightened the children that they all fled screaming into their houses. Between Breitenbrunn and Wollmetshofen in Swabia lies the Hartenberg Forest. A hill there was being excavated for gravel for road construction. All sorts of things were found there: charcoal, bones, broken containers, etc. A human skeleton was also excavated, which was not lying, but rather standing upright. According to legend there was a castle at Hartenberg. A donkey carried water to this castle. Once when the animal had not been seen for several days the peasants suspected that something had happened at Hartenberg, and they went there. To their astonishment they could see nothing of the castle, for it had sunk into the earth. Three days later they heard a rooster crowing from the depths. Source: Einmauern . In Friedrich Panzer, Bayerische Sagen und Bräuche: Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie (München: Christian Kaiser, 1855), vol. 2, ch. 20, pp. 254-56 . Return to the table of contents . The Entombed Child Germany When Christianity was introduced to Rügen, they wanted to build a church in Vilmnitz. However, the builders could not complete their task, because whatever they put up during day was torn down again by the Devil that night. Then they purchased a child, gave it a bread-roll in one hand, a light in the other, and set it in a cavity in the foundation, which they quickly mortared shut. Now the Devil could no longer disrupt the building's progress. It is also said that a child was entombed in the church at Bergen under similar circumstances. Source: A. Haas, "Das eingemauerte Kind," Rügensche Sagen und Märchen (Stettin: Johs. Burmeister's Buchhandlung, 1903), no. 195, p. 173 . Return to the table of contents . The Ghost at Spyker Germany Uncanny things happen at Spyker, the ancient castle of the Wrangels. The tower there is haunted. It is said that while they were building it, every night it would collapse, until they entombed a human within its walls. He now wanders about. According to others there is a haunted chamber there where someone met his death, and he is the one who wanders about. Source: A. Haas, "Der Spuk in Spyker," Rügensche Sagen und Märchen (Stettin: Johs. Burmeister's Buchhandlung, 1903), no. 128, pp. 116-117 . Return to the table of contents . Sacrificing Virgins to Lakes Germany There is a lake where every year a virgin is sacrificed. If this does not happen then the water becomes unruly, the waves grow larger and larger, then rise higher and higher until they finally flood the entire land. There is also a city whose citizens have a virgin entombed within a wall every year. But today no one knows exactly where this is or why it is done. Some claim that this girl is also a sacrifice to a large lake, which otherwise would swallow up the city. Source: A. Haas, "Jungfrauenopfer an Seen," Rügensche Sagen und Märchen (Stettin: Johs. Burmeister's Buchhandlung, 1903), no. 93, p. 86 . Return to the table of contents . The Old Church at Kohlstädt Germany Next to the brook beneath Kohlstädt there is an old wall which is called the Old Church. It is said that during heathen times children were sacrificed there and that Weinberg Hill got its name from the children's crying mothers who watched the sacrifice from there. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, "Alte Kirche zu Kohlstädt," Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen und einigen andern, besonders den angrenzenden Gegenden Norddeutschlands , vol. 1 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), no. 253, pp. 223-24 . Kuhn lists his source simply as "oral." Translator's note: The suffix Wein- in the name Weinberg can either be translated as "wine," or -- as the legend claims -- it could derive from the verb weinen, "to cry." Kohlstädt is midway between the North German cities of Detmold and Paderborn. Link to to a page describing a castle ruin (complete with a photograph) at Kohlstädt, almost certainly the "Old Church" featured in the above legend: Burg Kohlstädt . Return to the table of contents . The Name Greene Germany It is said that in ancient times they once sacrificed a child on the mountain above Greene. It is no longer known what the occasion was. The child grinned beneath the butcher-knife, and one of the executioners said: "It is still grinning!" (Es greint noch!) From that they named the place that was soon built at that location "Greine" or "Greene." Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Der Name von Greene," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 276, p. 247 . Greene is a village on the Leine River, not far from Gandersheim. Return to the table of contents . An Infant Speaks Germany Ages ago the cruel custom ruled of entombing infants in the foundations of castles and fortresses in order to provide protection against storms, weather, and the dangers of war. The infants were purchased from their mothers for large sums of money. Once a fortified castle was to be thusly built in the Stargard region. An infant had already been purchased. Before committing the cruel deed, the masons who had been engaged for the construction were talking with one another: "What is sweeter than a mother's nipple?" The answer came to them from the infant's mouth: "The grace of God!" Taken aback, the workmen laid down their tools and refused to proceed with the wicked building. The castle was never completed. Source: Karl Bartsch, "Säugling spricht," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg] , vol. 1 (Wien: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), no. 372, p. 283 . Return to the table of contents . The Secured Foundation Stone Germany High water and ice on the Haun River so damaged a miller's spillway every winter that he was no longer able to raise the funds to repair it. Dismayed, one day he was standing at the spillway when he was approached by a drunkard who offered him advice. He promised to make the spillway so secure that it would never again be damaged, but the miller would have to pay him well. The miller agreed, and the drunkard said, "Find a boy for us. We will bury him alive beneath the foundation stone, and I guarantee the durability of the spillway." The miller shuddered, but when the drunkard offered to provide a boy for fifteen pecks of groats, he entered into the agreement, and forthwith they dug the grave. The next day the child cried in vain. The two men pushed him into the pit, threw stones in on top of him, and soon the spillway was ready. Soon thereafter the drunkard's corpse was pulled from the Haun River. The miller's conscience so gnawed at him that he wasted away and then died. From that time forth the miller wanders about, attempting to pull passersby into the river. Every year he must lure at least one person into the river. Usually they are drunkards. He is on the lookout for them, because it was one of their kind who brought misfortune upon him. Source: J. W. Wolf, "Der gefestete Grundstein," Hessische Sagen (Göttingen, Dieterichsche Buchhandlung, 1853), no. 218, pp. 136-37 . Return to the table of contents . Plesse Castle Germany At the time Plesse Castle was to be built people generally believed that a castle could not be conquered if a living child had been entombed in its foundation. Therefore a child was to be entombed alive in the foundation of Plesse Castle. It was proclaimed in all municipalities a sum of money would be given to anyone who would surrender a child for this purpose. For a long time no willing person could be found, but finally a woman from Reiershausen sold her deaf-and-dumb three-year old child for 300 three-pfennig coins. On the day that the child was to be entombed it was suddenly able to speak, and said, "Mother's breast was softer than a pillow, but mother's heart was harder than a stone." And with that the child was entombed. Source: Georg Schambach and Wilhelm Müller, "Die Plesse," Niedersächsische Sagen und Märchen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht's Verlag, 1855), no. 6, pp. 4-5 . Plesse Castle was constructed before 1015, abandoned in 1660, then partially restored in the nineteenth century. It stands on a hill overlooking the village of Bovenden about seven km north of Göttingen, Germany. Link to the Wikipedia article Plesse Castle . Return to the table of contents . Sacrifice, Human England Castles remarkable for size, strength, and antiquity are, by the common people, commonly attributed to the Picts, or Pechs, who are not supposed to have trusted solely to their skill in masonry in constructing these edifices, but are believed to have bathed the foundation-stone with human blood, in order to propitiate the spirit of the soil. Similar to this is the Gaelic tradition, according to which St. Columba is supposed to have been forced to bury St. Oran alive beneath the foundation of his monastery, in order to propitiate the spirits of the soil, who demolished by night what was built during the day. Source: "Place Legends and Traditions," Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning Nuthumberland , collected by M. C. Balfour and edited by Northcote W. Thomas. County Folk-Lore , vol. 4 (London: David Nutt, 1904), p. 147 . Balfour's source: "Richardson, Legendary , vol. ii., p. 168, 2. Alnmouth. 1789." Return to the table of contents . London Bridge Is Falling Down Irish-American London Bridge is falling down, etc., My fair lady! How shall we build it up again? -- Build it up with lime and stone. -- Stone and lime would wash away. -- Build it up with iron bars. -- Iron bars would bend and break. -- Build it up with gold and silver. -- Gold and silver would be stole away. -- Get a watch to watch all night. -- Suppose the watch should fall asleep? -- Get him a pipe to smoke all night. -- Suppose the pipe should fall and break? -- Get a dog to bark all night. -- Suppose the dog should get a bone? -- Get a cock to crow all night. -- Suppose the cock should fly away? -- What has this poor prisoner done? -- He's broke my box and stole my keys. -- A hundred pounds will set him free. -- A hundred pounds he has not got. -- Off to prison he must go. -- My fair lady! Source: William Wells Newell, Games and Songs of American Children , (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1883), pp. 209-210 . Newell's source: "From the convent-school of Savannah, and, although recited by a girl of American birth, is of Irish origin. For additional versions of "London Bridge" and commentaries see: William Wells Newell, Games and Songs of American Children , (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1883), pp. 204-212 . Alice Bertha Gomme, The Traditional Games of England, Scotland, and Ireland . With tunes, singing-rhymes, and methods of playing according to the variants extant and recorded in different parts of the kingdom. Vol. 1: Accroshay - Nuts in May (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 333-50 . Henry Bett, Nursery Rhymes and Tales: Their Origin and History, 2nd edition (London: Methuen and Company, 1924), pp. 35-37. William S. Baring-Gould and Ceil Baring-Gould, The Annotated Mother Goose: Nursery Rhymes Old and New (New York: New American Library, 1967), pp. 254-25. Iona and Peter Opie, The Oxford Dictionary of Nursery Rhymes (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991), pp. 270-77. Return to the table of contents . Story of the Bridge Turkey (Gypsy) In olden days there were twelve brothers And the eldest brother, the carpenter Manoli, was making the long bridge. One side he makes; one side falls. The twelve brothers had one mistress, and they all had to do with her. The called her to them, "Dear bride." On her head was a tray. In her hands was a child. Whoseso wife came first. She will come to the twelve brothers. Said his wife, "Thou hast not eaten bread with me. What has befallen thee that thou eatest not bread with me? My ring has fallen into the water. Go and fetch my ring." Her husband said, "I will fetch thy ring out of the water." Up to his two breasts came the water in the depth of the bridge there. He came into the fountain. He was drowned. Beneath, he became a talisman, the innermost foundation of the bridge. Manoli's eyes became the great open arch of the bridge. "God send a wind to blow, that the tray may fall from the head of her who bears it in front of Lénga." A snake crept out before Lénga, and she feared, and said, "Now have I fear at sight of the snake, and I am sick. Now is it not bad for my children?" Another man seized her, and sought to drown her, Manoli's wife. She said, "Drown me not in the water. I have little children." She bowed herself over the sea, where the carpenter Manoli made the bridge. Another man called Manoli's wife. With him she went on the road. There, when they went on the road, he went to the tavern. He was weary. The man went, drank the juice of the grape, got drunk. Before getting home, he killed Manoli's wife, Lénga. Source: Francis Hindes Groome, Gypsy Folk-Tales (London: Hurst and Blackett, 1899), no. 4, pp. 12-13 . Groome's commentary on this story: I hesitated whether to give this story. It is so hopelessly corrupt, it seems such absolute nonsense. Yet it enshrines beyond question, however confusedly, the widespread and ancient belief that to ensure one's foundation, one should wall up a human victim. So St. Columba buried St. Oran alive in the foundation of his monastery. In western folklore, however, the victim is usually an infant -- a bastard sometimes, in one case (near Göttingen) a deaf mute. But in southeastern Europe it is almost always a woman -- the wife of the master builder, whose name, as here, is Manoli. Reinhold Köhler has treated the subject admirably in his Aufsätze über Märchen und Volkslieder (Berlin, 1894), pp. 36-47 . There one finds much to enlighten the darkness of our original. "God send a wind," etc., is the husband's prayer as he sees his wife coming towards him, and hopes to avert her doom. "My ring has fallen into the water," etc., must also be his utterance when he finds that it is hopeless, that she has to die. The Gypsy story is probably of high antiquity, for two at least of the words in it were quite or almost meaningless to the nomad Gypsy who told it (Paspati, p. 190). The masons of southeastern Europe are, it should be noticed, largely Gypsies, and a striking Indian parallel may be pointed out in the Santal story of "Seven Brothers and their Sister" (Campbell's Santal Folk Tales , [Pokhuria: Santal Mission Press, 1891], pp. 106-110 ). Here seven brothers set to work to dig a tank, but find no water, so, by the advice of a yogi , give their only sister to the spirit of the tank. "The tank was soon full to the brim, and the girl was drowned." And then come a curious mention of a Dom, or Indian vagrant musician, whose name is probably identical with Doum, Lom, or Rom, the Gypsy of Syria, Asia Minor, and Europe. Return to the table of contents . Rumors of Foundation Sacrifice India The Publicity Bureau has issued the following note: Foolish rumors have been about Madras now for a week to the effect that a child was to be sacrificed at the site of the new bridge. The rumors apparently took their rise in the fact that one Muhammadan and three Hindu children have been missing in Madras and have not yet been traced, though the circumstances attending their disappearance did not suggest foul play. But once rumor had got about, false alarms began to be raised whenever a child slipped out of sight for a few minutes. Thus people's minds became excited and they fell into a panic. As a result, in the last two days several innocent people have been savagely assulted by excited crowds in different parts of the town, having come under suspicion for perfectly innocent actions. Thus, one man seen carrying his own child on a motorcycle was stopped and assulted. A person appears to have been beaten to death. The Commissioner of Police has taken all possible steps to restore confidence, and the Coproration has been invited to assist. It is hoped that all members of the public will help in allaying this foolish panic which has already had such tragic consequences. Investigations show no reason to suppose that any gang of kidnappers is at work in Madras. To calm the public alarm special precautions are being taken and special vigilance is being exercised. Source: Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1920), v. 31, p. 238. Folk-Lore's source for this news release is the Madras Mail, March 20, 1920. I have taken the liberty to change Folk-Lore's original title, which reads -- I believe misleadingly -- "A Case of Foundation Sacrifice." Return to the table of contents . How the Cannibals Drove the People from Insofan Mountain to the Cross River (Ikom) Nigeria Very many years ago, before the oldest man alive at the present time can remember, the towns of Ikom, Okuni, Abijon, Insofan, Obokum, and all the other Injor towns were situated round and near the Insofan Mountain, and the head chief of the whole country was called Agbor. Abragba and Enfitop also lived there, and were also under King Agbor. The Insofan Mountain is about two days' march inland from the Cross River, and as none of the people there could swim, and knew nothing about canoes, they never went anywhere outside their own country, and were afraid to go down to the big river. The whole country was taken up with yam farms, and was divided amongst the various towns, each town having its own bush. At the end of each year, when it was time to dig the yams, there was a big play held, which was called the New Yam feast. At this festival there was always a big human sacrifice, fifty slaves being killed in one day. These slaves were tied up to trees in a row, and many drums were beaten; then a strong man, armed with a sharp machete, went from one slave to another and cut their heads off. This was done to cool the new yams, so that they would not hurt the stomachs of the people. Until this sacrifice was made no one in the country would eat a new yam, as they knew, if they did so, they would suffer great pain in their insides. When the feast was held, all the towns brought one hundred yams each as a present to King Agbor. When the slaves were all killed fires were lit, and the dead bodies were placed over the fires to burn the hair off. A number of plantain leaves were then gathered and placed on the ground, and the bodies, having been cut into pieces, were placed on the plantain leaves. When the yams were skinned, they were put into large pots, with water, oil, pepper, and salt. The cut-up bodies were then put in on top, and the pots covered up with other clay pots and left to boil for an hour. The king, having called all the people together, then declared the New Yam feast had commenced, and singing and dancing were kept up for three days and nights, during which time much palm wine was consumed, and all the bodies and yams, which had been provided for them, were eaten by the people. The heads were given to the king for his share, and, when he had finished eating them, the skulls were placed before the Ju Ju with some new yams, so that there should be a good crop the following season. But although these natives ate the dead bodies of the slaves at the New Yam feast, they did not eat human flesh during the rest of the year. This went on for many years, until at last the Okuni people noticed that the graves of the people who had been buried were frequently dug open and the bodies removed. This caused great wonder, and, as they did not like the idea of their dead relations being taken away, they made a complaint to King Agbor. He at once caused a watch to be set on all newly dug graves, and that very night they caught seven men, who were very greedy, and used to come whenever a body was buried, dig it up, and carry it into the bush, where they made a fire, and cooked and ate it. When they were caught, the people made them show where they lived, and where they cooked the bodies. After walking for some hours in the forest, they came to a place where large heaps of human bones and skulls were found. The seven men were then securely fastened up and brought before King Agbor, who held a large palaver of all the towns, and the whole situation was discussed. Agbor said that this bad custom would necessitate all the towns separating, as they could not allow their dead relations to be dug up and eaten by these greedy people, and he could see no other way to prevent it. Agbor then gave one of the men to each of the seven towns, and told some of them to go on the far side of the big river and make their towns there. The others were to go farther down the river on the same side as Insofan Mountain, and when they found suitable places, they were each to kill their man as a sacrifice and then build their town. All the towns then departed, and when they had found good sites, they built their towns there. When they had all gone, after a time Agbor began to feel very lonely, so he left the site of his old town and also went to the Cross River to live, so that he could see his friends. After that the New Yam feast was held in each town, and the people still continued to kill and eat a few slaves at the feast, but the bodies of their relations and friends were kept for a long time above ground until they had become rotten, so that the greedy people should not dig them up and eat them. This is why, even at the present time, the people do not like to bury their dead relations until they have become putrid. Source: Elphinstone Dayrell, Folk Stories from Southern Nigeria, West Africa (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1910), no. 31, pp. 115-18 . Links to additional folktales from Nigeria . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 14, 2023. Iceland Accepts Christianity Iceland Accepts Christianity abstracted from Njal's Saga by D. L. Ashliman © 2001 Shortly after Olaf Tryggvason became King of Norway he decreed that the old faith should be discarded and replaced with Christianity. His decree extended also to the islands of Shetland, Orkney, and Faroe. When news of Norway's conversion reached Iceland, it was received by many with great anger. "It is monstrous," they said, "to forsake our ancient beliefs." But Njal, a respected leader known for his ability to foresee the future, replied, "I support the new faith. I believe that Christianity is a better religion than our old one. Those who accept it will be happy." King Olaf of Norway made preparations to convert Iceland. To this end he sent Thangbrand, son of Count Willibald of Saxony, on a mission to Iceland. Accompanied by the Icelander Gudleif Arason, a renowned warrior, Thangbrand set sail for Iceland aboard a ship named The Bison . They landed in the eastern fjords at a place called Gautavik. They were met there with hostility. Most Icelanders of that district refused to sell them provisions or to trade with them, but Hall of Sida opened his house to them and offered them hospitality. One morning -- it was an important feast day -- Thangbrand sang mass, and Hall asked him, "In whose honor is this ceremony?" "In honor of the angel Michael," answered Thangbrand. "Does he have great power?" asked Hall. "Yes, he has great power," replied Thangbrand, then continued, "The angel Michael will be your friend and guardian if you will promise yourself to him in God's name." "That I shall do," promised Hall, and a short time afterward he and his entire household were baptized. The next spring Thangbrand, accompanied by the warrior Gudleif and the new convert Hall, preached Christianity throughout the land. At Stafafell a farmer named Thorkel challenged Thangbrand to a duel. Thangbrand accepted the challenge and went to battle using a crucifix for a shield. Victory went to Thangbrand, and he killed Thorkel. Then Thangbrand and his companions continued to travel from district to district, converting many prominent families to the new faith. Frightened at the Christians' success, the heathens at Kerlingardale hired a sorcerer named Hedin to kill their leader Thangbrand. The sorcerer accordingly went to the Arnarstakk Heath where he conducted a great sacrifice. At the time Thangbrand was riding westwards, and the ground suddenly opened up beneath his horse. The horse disappeared into the earth, but Thangbrand miraculously pulled himself to safety. Thangbrand's companion Gudleif searched out Hedin the sorcerer and killed him with a spear. Next they preached the new faith at Fljotshlid, where they met great opposition from Vetrlidi the Poet, so they killed him. From there they went to Bergthorsknoll, where Njal and his entire household were baptized. At Grimsness Thorvald the Ailing had gathered a large band of Icelanders against the missionaries. They attempted to ambush the Christians, but one of their number warned the missionary group. Forewarned, Thangbrand, Gudleif, and their followers rushed the would-be ambushers. Thangbrand threw a spear through Thorvald, then Gudleif cut off his arm, and Thorvald died. The missionaries then rode on to the Althing. Thorvald's kinsmen had assembled there to avenge the death of their relative, but Njal kept the two warring groups apart. At the Althing Hjalti Skeggjason, a new convert to Christianity, composed a poem that stated in verse: I dare mock the gods. I believe that Freyja is a bitch, And that Odin in a dog, Or else the other way around. Later that summer Thangbrand's ship, The Bison , was wrecked. It is not stated whether Thangbrand himself was aboard at the time, but in any event, he continued his missionary activities. This shipwreck caused some heathens to claim that their god Thor's giant-killing hammer had struck dead the Christian bison, thus proving that Christ was powerless to confront a challenge from Thor. To this Thangbrand replied, "Thor lives only at the will of the Christian God. Without my God's permission, Thor would be nothing but dust and ashes." At Hagi a man named Gest Oddleifsson held a feast for Thangbrand and sixty of his followers. Some two hundred heathens had gathered there as well. They expected to be joined by a berserk named Otrygg. It was said that Otrygg feared neither fire nor sword. Thangbrand declared that he would use the berserk to test the power of Christianity over that of the old religion. "We shall light three fires," he proposed. "I shall bless the first one, you heathens shall bless the second one, and the third one shall remain without a blessing. If the berserk walks through your fire unharmed, but is afraid of my fire, then you must accept Christianity." Gest, the leader of the heathens, believing that the fearless berserk would walk through all the fires, accepted this challenge. When Otrygg the berserk was seen approaching the house, the three fires were lit, and two of them were blessed according to plan. Without hesitating, the berserk walked through the fire blessed by the heathens, but he stopped at the Christian-blessed fire. Agonizing with unknown pain, Otrygg raised his sword to strike out at his foes, but as he swung the sword upward, it caught against one of the crossbeams of the house. Thangbrand struck him on the arm with a crucifix, causing Otrygg's sword to fall to the ground, and then ran a sword into the berserk's chest. Gudleif attacked him as well, cutting off Otrygg's arm. Others entered the fray and helped to kill the heathen berserk. Having thus seen the power of Christianity, many leading households were now baptized. In the meantime, the chieftains meeting at the Althing outlawed Hjalti Skeggjason for having blasphemed Freyja and Odin by calling them a bitch and a dog in his poem. Thangbrand's ship had now been repaired, and he returned to Norway. He reported to King Olaf the ill treatment he had received in Iceland, stressing especially the heathen sorcery that had caused the very earth to open up beneath his horse. Thangbrand's account so angered the king that Olaf had all Icelanders in Norway thrown into dungeons. He threatened to have them all put to death, but was dissuaded from this act when two Icelanders, Gizur the White and Hjalti Skeggjason agreed to return to Iceland and to there renew the missionary effort among their countrymen. Arriving in Iceland, Gizur and Hjalti were met by many fellow Christians, and in a large band they rode to the Althing. It appeared that a great battle would break out between the opposing sides. But when Thorgeir, a heathen priest, spoke out, everyone listened. "We cannot live in a divided land," he said. "There will never be peace unless we have a single law. I ask you all -- heathens and Christians alike -- to accept the one law that I am about to proclaim." All agreed, pledging under oath to abide by his judgement. He then proclaimed, "Our first principle of law is that all Icelanders shall henceforth be Christian. We shall believe in one God -- Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. We shall renounce the worship of idols. We shall no longer expose unwanted children. We shall no longer eat horsemeat. Anyone who does these things openly shall be punished with outlawry, but no punishment will follow if they are done in private." Within a few years these heathen practices were prohibited in private as well as in public. The heathens felt that Thorgeir, one of their own priests, had betrayed them, but they had pledged to follow his proclamation, and thus Christianity became the religion of all Iceland. Notes and Links Njal's Saga was written in about 1280 by an unknown Icelandic author. The above account was abstracted from chapters 100-105. Olaf Tryggvason was born about 964 and died in 1000. He was King of Norway between 995 and 1000. Snorri Sturluson (1179-1241), medieval Iceland's greatest poet and historian, also recorded Thangbrand's mission to Iceland: Thangbrand the Priest Goes to Iceland . Henry Wadsworth Longfellow composed a ballad describing the mission to Iceland of Thangbrand the Priest . In medieval Scandinavia berserks reportedly were ferocious fighters, feeling no pain and having no fear. They were valued by royalty and the wealthy as bodyguards and special warriors. From their name (the term berserk comes from an Old Norse word for bear shirt ) the original berserks achieved their ferocity by putting on a bearskin shirt, much as werewolves became wolf-like by putting on a magical strap of wolfskin. Iceland's Althing (General Assembly), a parliament of chieftains and landowners, was established in the year 930. Outlawry was the ultimate legal punishment in medieval Scandinavia. A person sentenced to outlawry lost all protection under the law and was thus open to attack by robbers and assassins of any sort. The conversion of Iceland to Christianity was formalized at the Althing in the year 1000. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 19, 2001. Ingratitude Is the World's Reward: Folktales of Type 155 Ingratitude Is the World's Reward folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 155 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2014 Contents The Crocodile, the Brahman, and the Fox (India, The Southern Panchatantra ). The Camel Driver and the Adder (Bidpai). The Brahman, the Tiger, and the Six Judges (India). The Tiger, the Brahman, and the Jackal (India). The Farmer, the Crocodile, and the Jackal (Pakistan). The Young Man and the Snake (Pakistan). The Jackal's Judgment (Sri Lanka) The Unmannerly Tiger (Korea). The Snake's Thanks (Jewish). Inside Again (Europe). Of Nature and the Returns of Ingratitude (England, Gesta Romanorum ). The Reward of Good Deeds (Denmark). The Reward of Kindness (Finland). The Man, the Serpent, and the Fox (Greece). The Ingrates (Italy). The Lion, the Horse, and the Fox (Italy). Ingratitude Is the World's Reward (Moravia). The World's Reward (Russia). The Peasant, the Snake, and King Solomon (Romania). Brother Wolf Still in Trouble (African-American). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Crocodile, the Brahman, and the Fox India A crocodile beseeched a Brahman to carry it to Benares, so it could live in the Ganges. Touched with compassion, the Brahman put the crocodile into his bag and carried it to the holy river. However, just as he was about to release the crocodile into the water, the latter seized him, and was about to kill him. The Brahman accused his captor of ingratitude, who in turn replied that virtue and custom allowed one to eat the person who had sustained him. The Brahman insisted that three impartial judges should decide the case, and declared himself willing to abide by their decision. They turned first to a mango tree, whom the Brahman asked if it were permitted to repay a good deed with evil. The mango tree replied that such was the treatment he and his kind always received from humans. "They partake of our fruits and of our shade, and then uproot us," it said. Next they turned to an old cow. She too said that humans had abandoned her after she was of no more use to them. Any moment she expected to fall prey to a wild animal. They still needed a third judgment, and for this they turned to a fox. He too seemed inclined against the Brahman, but before finalizing his decision, he wanted to see how the two had journeyed together. To demonstrate, the unsuspecting crocodile crept back into the Brahman's bag. Acting on a cue from the fox, the Braham struck the now helpless crocodile dead with a stone, and the fox ate it up. Source: Theodor Benfey, Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 1, pp. 113-14 . The text above is D. L. Ashliman's translation of Benfey's abstract of a story contained in the so-called Southern Panchatantra , but not in other versions. © 1999. The Panchatantra , also spelled Pañca-tantra , is a collection of tales and fables compiled between 100 BC and AD 500. Return to the table of contents . The Camel Driver and the Adder Bidpai A camel driver, crossing the plains, stopped to rest where a caravan had halted and built a fire the night before; in the morning they had moved on before it had died out. As the night wind arose, it fanned the sparks and soon set all the brushwood around on fire. In the midst of the brushwood lay coiled an adder, fast asleep. The flames, however, soon awoke him, but not until he was completely encircled by the fire. He was about to despair of his life, when he saw the camel driver and called upon him for aid. At first the camel driver hesitated, for he remembered the poisonous sting of the adder. Still, he could not bear to see any living creature suffer, so he promised to help the adder. He had a bag beneath his saddle. This he now drew forth and tied to the end of his spear. He then reached it over into the midst of the burning brush; the adder crawled inside, and the camel driver drew him safely out of the fire. "Now go your way," said the camel driver, loosening the neck of the bag so that the adder could glide out. "Only remember the kindness which I have shown to you, and do you hereafter be kind to men in your turn." "I confess," replied the adder, slipping out on the ground, "that you have been kind to me, and yet I shall not go away until I have stung both you and your camel. I only leave it to you to decide whether I shall sting you first or the camel." "What a monster of ingratitude you are!" cried the camel driver. "Is it right to return evil for good?" Such is the custom of men," said the adder. "You are not only ungrateful, but untruthful as well," the camel driver made reply. "It would be hard indeed for you to prove these words of yours. There is no other creature in the world, I venture to say, who will agree with you. If you can find out one other, I will allow you to sting me." "Very well," responded the adder; "let us put the question to yonder cow." The cow stopped chewing her cud. "If you mean what is man's custom," she began, in answer to their question, "I must answer to my sorrow that he is wont to repay evil for good. For many years I have been the faithful servant of a farmer. Every day I have supplied him with milk to drink and rich cream for his butter. Now I am old and no longer able to serve him. So he has put me out in this pasture that I may grow fat, and only yesterday he brought the butcher to see me. Tomorrow I am to be sold for beef. Surely this is repaying my kindness with evil." "You see," said the adder to the camel driver, "that what I said is true. Get ready for me to sting you. Shall it be you or the camel first?" "Hold," replied the camel driver. "In court a decree is not passed without the testimony of two witnesses. Bring another witness, and if he agrees with the cow, you may do with me as you please." The adder looked about him and saw that they were standing beneath a huge palm tree. "Let us put the question to the tree," he said. When the palm had heard their question, he shook his great branches sadly. "Experience has taught me," he moaned, "that for every favor you do to men, you must expect some injury in return. I stand here in the desert, doing harm to none and good to many. Every traveler who comes by can rest beneath my shade. I bear dates for his refreshment, and gladly give my sap to quench his thirst. Yet when the traveler has eaten and slept beneath my shade, he looks up into my branches and says to himself, 'That branch would make me a good cane, or handle for my ax,' or 'What splendid wood there is in this tree! I must cut off a limb to make some new doors for my house.' And I must consent to this without a murmur. Thus is my kindness returned by men." "The two witnesses have now testified," spoke the adder, "and agree. Which shall I bite first, you or the camel?" But just at that moment a fox ran by, and the camel driver pleaded that they might hear one more testimony. The adder was so pleased with what the cow and the tree had said, that he readily agreed to listen to the fox. When the camel driver had finished telling the whole tale to the fox, the fox laughed out loud. "You seem to be a clever fellow," he replied to the camel driver. "Why do you tell me such a falsehood?" "Indeed, he is telling you nothing but the truth," the adder hastened to assure the fox. Again the fox laughed outright. "Do you mean to tell me," he asked scornfully, "that such a large adder as you could possibly get into such a small bag?" "If you do not believe it, I will crawl in again and show you," answered the adder. "Well," responded the fox, thoughtfully, "if I see you in there with my own eyes, then I will consent to give my answer to your question." The camel driver straightway held the bag open, and the adder crept in and coiled up in the bottom. "Be quick now," cried the fox, "and draw the string. Any creature so lacking in gratitude as this adder deserves nothing but death." Source: The Tortoise and the Geese and other Fables of Bidpai , retold by Maude Barrows Dutton (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1908), pp. 118-25 . Dutton does not identify the text upon which she based her retelling. Bidpai, according to tradition, was the compiler of the Indian book of wisdom, the Panchatantra , also spelled Pañca-tantra . This collection of tales and fables was compiled between 100 BC and 500 AD. Return to the table of contents . The Brahman, the Tiger, and the Six Judges India Once upon a time a Brahman, who was walking along the road, came upon an iron cage, in which a great tiger had been shut up by the villagers who caught him. As the Brahman passed by, the tiger called out and said to him, "Brother Brahman, brother Brahman, have pity on me, and let me out of this cage for one minute only, to drink a little water, for I am dying of thirst." The Brahman answered, "No, I will not; for if I let you out of the cage you will eat me." "O father of mercy," answered the tiger, "in truth that will not. I will never be so ungrateful. Only let me out, that I may drink some water and return." Then the Brahman took pity on him, and opened the cage door; but no sooner had he done so than the tiger, jumping out, said, "Now, I will eat you first, and drink the water afterwards." But the Brahman said, "Only do not kill me hastily. Let us first ask the opinion of six, and if all of them say it is just and fair that you should put me to death, then I am willing to die." "Very well," answered the tiger, "it shall be as you say. We will first ask the opinion of six." So the Brahman and the tiger walked on till they came to a banyan tree; and the Brahman said to it, "Banyan tree, banyan tree, hear and give judgment." "On what must I give judgment ?" asked the banyan tree. "This tiger," said the Brahman," begged me to let him out of his cage to drink a little water, and he promised not to hurt me if I did so. But now that I have let him out he wishes to eat me. Is it just that he should do so, or no?" The banyan tree answered, "Men often come to take refuge in the cool shade under my boughs from the scorching rays of the sun; but when they have rested, they cut and break my pretty branches, and wantonly scatter the leaves that sheltered them. Let the tiger eat the man, for men are an ungrateful race." At these words the tiger would have instantly killed the Brahman; but the Brahman said, "Tiger, tiger, you must not kill me yet, for you promised that we should first hear the judgment of six." "Very well," said the tiger, and they went on their way. After a little while they met a camel. "Sir camel, sir camel," cried the Brahman, "hear and give judgment." "On what shall I give judgment?" asked the camel. And the Brahman related how the tiger had begged him to open the cage door, and promised not to eat him if he did so; and how he had afterwards determined to break his word, and asked if that were just or not. The camel replied, "When I was young and strong, and could do much work, my master took care of me and gave me good food; but now that I am old, and have lost all my strength in his service, he overloads me, and starves me, and beats me without mercy. Let the tiger eat the man, for men are an unjust and cruel race." The tiger would then have killed the Brahman, but the latter said, "Stop, tiger, for we must first hear the judgment of six." So they both went again on their way. At a little distance they found a bullock lying by the roadside. The Brahman said to him, "Brother bullock, brother bullock, hear and give judgment." "On what must I give judgment?" asked the bullock. The Brahman answered, "I found this tiger in a cage, and he prayed me to open the door and let him out to drink a little water, and promised not to kill me if I did so; but when I had let him out he resolved to put me to death. Is it fair he should do so or not?" The bullock said, "When I was able to work, my master fed me well and tended me carefully, but now I am old he has forgotten all I did for him, and left me by the roadside to die. Let the tiger eat the man, for men have no pity." Three out of the six had given judgment against the Brahman, but still he did not lose all hope, and determined to ask the other three. They next met an eagle flying through the air, to whom the Brahman cried, "O eagle, great eagle, hear and give judgment." "On what must I give judgment?" asked the eagle. The Brahman stated the case, but the eagle answered, "Whenever men see me they try to shoot me; they climb the rocks and steal away my little ones. Let the tiger eat the man, for men are the persecutors of the earth." Then the tiger began to roar, and said, "The judgment of all is against you, O Brahman!" But the Brahman answered, "Stay yet a little longer, for two others must first be asked" After this they saw an alligator, and the Brahman related the matter to him, hoping for a more favorable verdict. But the alligator said, "Whenever I put my nose out of the water, men torment me, and try to kill me. Let the tiger eat the man, for as long as men live we shall have no rest." The Brahman gave himself up as lost; but once more he prayed the tiger to have patience, and to let him ask the opinion of the sixth judge. Now the sixth was a jackal. The Brahman again told his story, and said to him, "Mama jackal, mama jackal, say what is your judgment?" The jackal answered, "It is impossible for me to decide who is in the right and who in the wrong, unless I see the exact position in which you were when the dispute began. Show me the place." So the Brahman and the tiger returned to the place where they first met, and the jackal went with them. When they got there, the jackal said, "Now, Brahman, show me exactly where you stood." "Here," said the Brahman, standing by the iron tiger cage. "Exactly there, was it?" asked the jackal. "Exactly here," replied the Brahman. "Where was the tiger then?" asked the jackal. "In the cage," answered the tiger. "How do you mean?" said the jackal. "How were you within the cage? Which way were you looking?" "Why, I stood so," said the tiger, jumping into the cage, "and my head was on this side." "Very good," said the jackal. "But I cannot judge without understanding the whole matter exactly. Was the cage door open or shut?" "Shut, and bolted," said the Brahman. "Then shut and bolt it," said the jackal. When the Brahman had done this, the jackal said, "Oh, you wicked and ungrateful tiger, when the good Brahman opened your cage door, is to eat him the only return you would make? Stay there, then, for the rest of your days, for no one will ever let you out again. Proceed on your journey, friend Brahman. Your road lies that way, and mine this." So saying, the jackal ran off in one direction, and the Brahman went rejoicing on his way in the other. Source: Mary Frere, Old Deccan Days; or, Hindoo Fairy Legends Current in Southern India , 5th impression (London: John Murray, 1898), no. 14, pp. 135-38 . First published 1868 . Return to the table of contents . The Tiger, the Brahman, and the Jackal India Once upon a time, a tiger was caught in a trap. He tried in vain to get out through the bars, and rolled and bit with rage and grief when he failed. By chance a poor Brahman came by. "Let me out of this cage, oh pious one!" cried the tiger. "Nay, my friend," replied the Brahman mildly, "you would probably eat me if I did." "Not at all!" swore the tiger with many oaths. "On the contrary, I should be for ever grateful, and serve you as a slave!" Now when the tiger sobbed and sighed and wept and swore, the pious Brahman's heart softened, and at last he consented to open the door of the cage. Out popped the tiger, and, seizing the poor man, cried, "What a fool you are! What is to prevent my eating you now, for after being cooped up so long I am just terribly hungry!" In vain the Brahman pleaded for his life. The most he could gain was a promise to abide by the decision of the first three things he chose to question as to the justice of the tiger's action. So the Brahman first asked a pipal tree what it thought of the matter, but the pipal tree replied coldly, "What have you to complain about? Don't I give shade and shelter to everyone who passes by, and don't they in return tear down my branches to feed their cattle? Don't whimper. Be a man!" Then the Brahman, sad at heart, went further afield till he saw a buffalo turning a well wheel. But he fared no better from it, for it answered, "You are a fool to expect gratitude! Look at me! Whilst I gave milk they fed me on cotton seed and oil cake, but now I am dry they yoke me here and give me refuse as fodder!" The Brahman, still more sad, asked the road to give him its opinion. "My dear sir," said the road, "how foolish you are to expect anything else! Here am I, useful to everybody, yet all, rich and poor, great and small, trample on me as they go past, giving me nothing but the ashes of their pipes and the husks of their grain!" On this the Brahman turned back sorrowfully, and on the way he met a jackal, who called out, "Why, what's the matter, Mr. Brahman? You look as miserable as a fish out of water!" The Brahman told him all that had occurred. "How very confusing!" said the jackal, when the recital was ended. "Would you mind telling me over again, for everything has got so mixed up?" The Brahman told it all over again, but the jackal shook his head in a distracted sort of way, and still could not understand. "It's very odd," said he, sadly, "but it all seems to go in at one ear and out at the other! I will go to the place where it all happened, and then perhaps I shall be able to give a judgment." So they returned to the cage, by which the tiger was waiting for the Brahman, and sharpening his teeth and claws. "You've been away a long time!" growled the savage beast, "but now let us begin our dinner." " Our dinner!" thought the wretched Brahman, as his knees knocked together with fright. "What a remarkably delicate way of putting it!" "Give me five minutes, my lord!" he pleaded, "in order that I may explain matters to the jackal here, who is somewhat slow in his wits." The tiger consented, and the Brahman began the whole story over again, not missing a single detail, and spinning as long a yarn as possible. "Oh, my poor brain! Oh, my poor brain!" cried the jackal, wringing its paws. "Let me see! How did it all begin? You were in the cage, and the tiger cam walking by --" "Pooh!" interrupted the tiger, "what a fool you are! I was in the cage." "Of course!" cried the jackal, pretending to tremble with fright. "Yes! I was in the cage -- no I wasn't -- dear! dear! where are my wits? Let me see -- the tiger was in the Brahman, and the cage came walking by -- no, that's not it, either! Well, don't mind me, but begin your dinner, for I shall never understand!" "Yes, you shall!" returned the tiger, in a rage at the jackal's stupidity. "I'll make you understand! Look here -- I am the tiger --" "Yes, my lord!" "And that is the Brahman --" "Yes, my lord!" "And that is the cage --" "Yes, my lord!" "And I was in the cage. Do you understand?" "Yes -- no -- please, my lord --" "Well?" cried the tiger impatiently. "Please, my lord! How did you get in?" "How! Why in the usual way, of course!" "Oh, dear me! -- My head is beginning to whirl again! Please don't be angry, my lord, but what is the usual way?" At this the tiger lost patience, and, jumping into the cage, cried, "This way! Now do you understand how it was?" "Perfectly!" grinned the jackal, as he dexterously shut the door, "and if you will permit me to say so, I think matters will remain as they were!" Source: Joseph Jacobs, Indian Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1892), no. 9, pp. 66-69 . Jacobs' source: F. A. Steel and R.C. Temple, Wide-Awake Stories: A Collection of Tales Told by Little Children Between Sunset and Sunrise (Bombay: Education Society's Press; London: Trübner and Company, 1884), pp. 116-20 . First published in The Indian Antiquary: A Journal of Oriental Research , vol. 12 (1883), pp. 176-77 . Return to the table of contents . The Farmer, the Crocodile, and the Jackal Pakistan There was once a wily old crocodile who dwelt in a tank [pond] hard by a village, and he was sometimes so ferocious that he would seize children who used to go for water there, then drown and eat them. He had become, in fact, the terror of the place. One year there was a very great drought, and the tank by degrees began to dry up, and at last it got quite dry, and the crocodile was to be seen grilling and roasting in the sun. He used to call out to the passers-by, "Oh! pray take pity upon me and show me where I can go for water, for I am dying in this heat." "No, indeed! they all said. "We are glad to see you suffering, for have you not often made us suffer by taking our goats, and sometimes even our children? We shall not help you in any way." At last an old man passed by, and the crocodile appealed to him, and at first he replied as the others did, but afterwards he relented and said, "Well, if you will follow me I will take you to a tank which is never dry." So the crocodile followed him, and he showed him a tank no great distance off, which was filled with water. The old man went first into the tank himself, and calling to the crocodile, he said, "See here, how deep it is!" No sooner had the crocodile had a good drink, than he made a grab at the old man's leg. "Ah-ho! Ah-ho!" said the old man. "What are you doing?" "Well," replied the crocodile, "I have had a good drink, thanks to you, and as I have had no food for many days, I am going to make a meal of you. That is what I am going to do." "You wretched and ungrateful brute!" said the old man. "Is this the way you reward me?" At that moment a jackal hove in sight, coming for a drink (the jackals, we know, are the most cunning of all animals), and the old man said, "I will put my case before him, and if he says you are to eat me, very good, so you shall." The old man then beckoned to the jackal to come close up to the tank, and told him all the facts of the case. The jackal said, "You know I am always a just judge, and if you want me to decide, you must show me the place from whence you brought the crocodile." So they all three wended their way back to the tank near the village, and the jackal said, "Show me the exact spot where you first found the crocodile," and when they got there the jackal said, "Now I am going to give you my judgment, so prepare to listen." Then turning to the old man, he said quietly, "You silly old idiot! What made you ever help a crocodile? Now, you run one way, and I will run the other." The jackal gave a skip, and was soon off out of sight, and the old man took to his heels also, and soon got away. The wily old crocodile, now balked of his prey, said to himself, "I know my way back to that water tank, and I will someday have my revenge on that jackal, for he is sure to come there to lap water." So back he went, and as there were many trees near the tank, some of whose roots went beneath the water, the crocodile lay in ambush there. By and by the jackal came to drink water, and the crocodile made a sudden snap at his leg, and held it. "Oh, you foolish crocodile!" the jackal said, "you think you have got hold of my leg, do you? But it is only the root of a tree." Hearing this, the crocodile released his hold, and the jackal jumped off in high glee out of his reach. The crocodile then determined that he would try some other plan of entrapping him. So, as there were great numbers of a small fruit falling from one of the trees, which he knew the jackal came to eat, he one night piled up a heap and hid himself beneath it, leaving only his eyes uncovered. Presently the jackal came prowling along, and noticing the pile of fruit he felt inclined to partake of some, but he drew near very cautiously, and in a moment he caught sight of the two eyes of the crocodile glistening in the moonlight, when he called out, "Oh, I see you!" and scampered off. After this, the crocodile saw that it was no use to try himself to catch the jackal, "for," said he, "he is too cunning for me. I must employ someone who comes to get water here." So one day he saw a farmer, and said to him, "If you will catch a jackal for me, I will make you a rich man, for I will give you several jewels which people have dropped in this tank for years and years, and they are lying here at the bottom." "Oh!" replied the farmer, "that is easily done." So that very night he went into the jungle and lay down as if dead. Presently the jackal made his appearance, and smelling along he came close up to the body. Then he hesitated and said, "I wonder if this is really a dead body or not." He then called out audibly, "If it is really dead it will shake its leg, and if it is alive it won't do so." This he said so quickly and so artfully that the farmer was taken aback, and to make him believe he was dead he at once stupidly shook his leg, and off skipped the jackal, saying, "I caught you there," and was lost to view in an instant. The farmer, who was very avaricious, and wanted the jewels badly, made up his mind that he would by hook or by crook make sure of the jackal on the next occasion. So this time he prepared of the softest wax a doll the size of a child, and digging a small grave and covering it over with leaves and mud, he waited in hiding to see the result. Shortly after sunset the jackal began to prowl about as usual, and coming on the new grave he said to himself, "Ah! This is someone lately buried. I will try my luck here." He then began to scratch with his paw, and presently one paw got caught in the wax, and in trying to get that away, all four became stuck with the wax, when in a moment out came the farmer from his hiding place and said, "Ah! At last I have got you, and you are my prisoner!" The jackal yelled and howled, and endeavored to escape, but was hindered by the wax on his feet. So then he took to frightening the farmer, and said, "If you do not get me out of this scrape I will call all the jackals in a moment of time, and they will destroy you forever, for do you not know that I am the king of the jackals?" "What am I to do?" asked the farmer. "Go!" he said. "Go and get some oil, and rub it all over me. Then get a fowl, and tie it about fifty yards away, and bring two men with hatchets to stand over me, so that if I attempt to get away they may chop me to pieces!" This being done by the farmer, the jackal while being held in his hands sought his opportunity, and being well greased all over, he made a violent spring and so got clear of the farmer. Then he dashed between the legs of the men with hatchets, when they made a plunge at him, but they only succeeded in hurting their own legs. So the jackal got finally off, and picking up the fowl, he was soon lost to view, and so won the day. Source: J. F. A. McNair and Thomas Lambert Barlow, Oral Tradition from the Indus (Brighton: Cranbourne Printing Works, 1908), pp. 54-58. This tale includes episodes of the following Aarne-Thompson-Uther types: Type 155: The rescued crocodile threatens to eat his benefactor, but is then returned to captivity. Type 5: The jackal, his leg caught in the crocodile's jaws, claims "You are biting a root, not my leg!" and the crocodile releases him. Type 66B: The trickster farmer plays dead in order to capture the jackal, who in turn tricks him into showing signs of life. Type 175: The farmer captures his victim with a doll made of sticky wax. The best-know variant of this tale is Joel Chandler Harris's Uncle Remus story of "The Wonderful Tar-Baby." Return to the table of contents . The Young Man and the Snake Pakistan There was once a farmer who was extremely poor. It happened that when his poverty was greatest a son was born to him, and this son was such a lucky child that his father speedily became quite as rich as he was before poor, and obtained a great name over all the country. After a certain time the farmer thought to himself, "I must get my son betrothed somewhere. I was poor once, but I am now rich, and my son is lucky. It is right that he should be betrothed to the daughter of some rich man like myself." It was long before he found a suitable match, but at last he betrothed the boy to a girl who lived in a distant town. The ceremony came on, much money was spent, many guests were invited, and much food was given away. In short, the betrothal was splendid. The son had scarcely grown to manhood when the father died, leaving him in the world alone. The parents of his betrothed, when they heard the sad news, felt very sorry for him, and at first they would have brought him to live at their own house. But the mother said, "He is old enough now to come and take our daughter home with him, so let us send for him that he may do so. No friend like a good wife." A messenger was accordingly sent off, and the lad, when he received the invitation, dressed himself up in his best, and, mounting his mare, set off. On the way he came to a lonely jungle, in which he saw a mongoose and a snake of enormous dimensions, engaged in deadly combat. He reined up his horse to look on. The mongoose soon began to wear out his adversary, and to inflict such wounds as would have put an end to its life in a short time. Seeing which, the boy considered to himself, "When two are contending, it is an act of charity to separate them." So he tried to separate the combatants, but every time he failed, as the mongoose again and again sprang upon his adversary in spite of him. Finding he could not prevail, he drew his sword and dealt the warlike little mongoose his death-blow. After this he went on again, but he had not proceeded far when he found that the snake had rushed round and intercepted him. Then began the boy to remonstrate. "I did you good service," said he. "Why, then, have you pursued me?" "It is true," answered the snake, "that you saved me from my enemy. But I shall not let you go. I shall eat you." "Surely," replied the lad, "one good turn deserves another. Will you injure me because I assisted you? In my country we do not deal with each other thus." "In these parts," said the snake, "the custom is different. Everyone here observes the rule of returning evil for good." The boy then began to argue with the snake, but he argued in vain, for the snake was determined to eat him. At last he said, "Very well, snake, you can eat me. But first give me eight days to go about my business, after which I shall come back." With this request the snake complied, saying, "Be it so. In eight days you must return to me." The snake, which had coiled himself round about the boy's body, now released his hold and suffered him to depart. So he rode on once more and completed his journey. All his friends were very glad to see the young bridegroom, and especially his little wife, and at his father-in-law's house he remained for several days. But as he was always downcast and sad, they asked him, "Why are you so sorrowful?" For six days they asked in vain. On the seventh they spoke to their daughter, "Is he angry? What is the matter with him" But she also asked him in vain. When the eight day came, he said, "Now let me go home." The father and mother then gave the daughter her portion, and, having placed them both in a bullock cart, they sent the young couple away. So the two traveled until they had left the village far behind them. Then said the lad to his wife and to her servants, "Return now back again to your own home. As for me, it is decreed that I shall die on the way." All the servants, being alarmed, at once returned, but his young wife said, "Where you fall, I shall fall. What am I to do at my house?" So she continued to accompany her husband. When he arrived at the spot appointed, he dismounted from his horse and called forth the snake. "I have come," said he, "in accordance with my promise. If you wish to eat me, come and eat me now!" His wife, hearing his ominous words, descended also, and came and stood by her husband's side. By and by a dreadful hissing sound was heard, and the snake crawled out from the jungle, and was preparing to devour the unfortunate boy, when the girl exclaimed, "Why are you going to eat this poor youth?" The snake then told her the whole story, how he was fighting with a mongoose, and how her husband interfered and killed his adversary. "And in this country," continued he, "our custom is to return evil for good!" The young wife now tried all the arguments she could think of to divert the monster from his purpose, but he was deaf to her pleadings and refused to listen to them. Then said she, "You say that in this country people do evil in return for good. This is so strange a custom, and so very unreasonable, that I would fain know the history of it. How did it all come about?" "Do you see those five talli trees?" answered the snake. Go you to them and cry out to them, 'What is the reason that in this country folks do evil in return for good?' and see what they will say to you!" The girl went and did as she was bidden, addressing her request to the middle of the five. The tree straightway answered her: Count us! We are now five, but once we were six -- three pairs. The sixth tree was hollow, having a vast cavity in its trunk. It happened once upon a time, many years ago, that a certain thief went and robbed a house, and that the people followed him. He ran and ran and ran, and at last he came in among us. It was night, but the moon was shining, and the thief hid himself in the hollow talli tree. Hearing his pursuers close at hand, he besought the tree, saying, "O tree, tree, save me!" When the talli tree heard his miserable cry it closed up its old sides upon him, and hid him in a safe embrace, so that the people searched for him in vain, and they had to return without him. When all pursuit was over, the tree once more opened and let him go. Now, in this old talli tree there was sandal wood, and the thief, when he went forth, had the scent of sandal wood so permanently fixed upon him that wherever he was, and wherever he appeared, he diffused a delightful fragrance. It so happened that he visited the city of a certain king, and a man passing him on the road suddenly stopped, and asked him, "Where did you get this beautiful scent?" "You are mistaken," answered the thief. "I have no scent." "If you will give me this scent," said the man, "I will pay you its value." Again the thief answered, "I have no scent -- none." Then the man, who was shrewd and intelligent, went his way to the king and told him, "There is a stranger arrived here who possesses a most wonderful scent. To your highness, perhaps, he might be induced to give it up." The king then ordered the thief into his presence, and said to him, "Show me the scent you have." "I have none," said he. "If you will give it up to me quietly," said the king, "you shall be rewarded. If not, you shall be put to death." When the thief heard this he got frightened and said, "Do not kill me, and I will tell the whole story." So he told the king how his life was preserved in the heart of the talli tree, and how the scent of sandal wood had never left him since. Then said the king, "Come along and show me that wonderful tree of which you tell me." Arriving at this very spot, the king instantly gave orders to his followers to cut the tree down and to carry it to his palace. But when the talli tree heard his order, and when it understood the reason of it, it cried aloud, "I have saved the life of a man, and for this I am to lose my own life. For the future, therefore, let it be decreed within this jungle that whosoever dares to do good, to him it shall be repaid in evil!" The girl, having heard this doleful story, returned once more to her husband's side. "Well," said the snake, "have you consulted the talli tree? And do you find that our custom here is even as I told you?" She was compelled to admit that it was so. But as the monster advanced to his victim, she wept and said, "What will become of me? If you must eat my husband, you must begin by eating me!" The snake objected to an arrangement so unreasonable. "You?" cried he. "But you have never done me the smallest good. You have not even done me harm. How, then, can I be expected to eat you?" "But if you kill my husband," replied she, "what's left for me? You acknowledge yourself that I have done you no good, and yet you would inflict this injury upon me." When the snake heard these words he stopped, and began to grow remorseful, especially as she wept more copiously than ever. That the boy must be eaten was certain, but how should he comfort the girl? Wishing to devise something, he crept back to his hole, and in a few minutes he returned with two magic globules or pills. "Here, foolish woman," said he, "take these two pills and swallow them, and you will have two sons to whom you can devote yourself, and who will take good care of you!" The girl accepted the pills, but, with the cunning natural to a woman, said, "If I take these two pills, doubtless two sons will be born. But what about my good name?" The snake, who knew not that she was already wed, hearing her speech, became exasperated with her. "Women are preposterous beings," cried he, and he crept back once more to his hole. This time he brought out two more pills, and when handing them to the disconsolate girl he said, "Revenge will sweeten your lot. When any of your neighbors revile you on account of your sons, take one of these pills between finger and thumb, hold it over them, rubbing it gently so that some of the powder may fall on them, and immediately you will see them consume away to ashes." Tying the former pills in her cloth, the girl looked at the other pills incredulously, and then, with a sudden thought, she gently rubbed them over the snake, saying with an innocent air, "O snake, explain this mystery to me again! Is this the way I am to rub them?" The moment an atom of the magic powder had touched the snake, he was set on fire, and in another instant he was merely a long wavy line of gray dust lying on the ground. Then with a glad face the little wife turned to her husband and said, "Whosoever does good to anyone, in the end good will be done to him. And whosoever does evil to anyone, in the end evil will be done to him. You did good, and lo! you are rewarded. The snake did evil, and evil befell him. All things help each other. The Almighty brings everything to rights at last." After this the two went on their way to their own home, where they lived in happiness and contentment for many a year. Source: Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment: Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 42, pp. 133-38 . Return to the table of contents . The Jackal's Judgment Sri Lanka A crocodile made his burrow in the embankment of a tank near a village. Afterwards the mud dried and became hard, so the crocodile was unable to get out of the hole. He was going to die. A man passed by on his was to fetch a midwife to attend to his wife. The crocodile heard him and said, "Save me by breaking up the earth, so that I may get out." The man broke up the earth and let him out. As there was no water left in the tank, the man placed the crocodile on his shoulder and went to the edge of the river. He then placed the crocodile into the water, but no sooner had he done so than the crocodile seized him by the arm and was about to eat him. "Why are you going to eat me?" he asked. "Do you not know how I helped you? And still you are going to eat me!" The crocodile said, "It is true, indeed, that you helped me. But I am going to eat you, because I am hungry." The man said, "It is good. You may eat me, but first let as ask two or three persons as witnesses." So they went to ask the witnesses about it. They came to a kumbuk tree, and the man said to it, "This crocodile is going to eat me. I am asking your opinion of it." "What is it all about?" The man said, "This crocodile was going to die. I saved him. Now he is going to eat me. Is that right?" The kumbuk tree said, "O crocodile, do not let that man go. There is no animal so wicked as that man. He stays near a tree in its shade, then he breaks off its bark and leaves and takes them away. In the end he cuts it down and takes the whole tree." From there he went and asked a cow, "O cow, I saved this crocodile from death. He is now going to eat me. Do you think that is right?" The cow said, "O crocodile, do not let that man go. That man is a wicked man. He takes our milk, and in the end he kills and eats us. Do not let him go." After that he asked a jackal about it. The jackal asked, "What is it all about?" He said to the jackal, "O jackal, I saved this crocodile instead of letting him die. Now he is going to eat me." The jackal said, "I cannot give you a decision without knowing the whole story. You must show me the whole affair from the beginning." So the man placed the crocodile on his shoulder and carried him back to his home. He put it back in its burrow and packed the soil in around him. The jackal said, "Don't be afraid. I am on your side." Then the man said, "Jackal, hear this case." The jackal said, "I am both the judge and the witness. Now take up a cudgel and beat him until he is dead. I saw your excellence and his wickedness." Source: H. Parker, Village Folk-Tales of Ceylon , vol. 1 (London: Luzac and Company, 1910), no. 63, pp. 339-40 . Retold by D. L. Ashliman. Parker's translation follows his Sinhalese sources so closely that English syntax is violated in almost every sentence. I have cautiously attempted to bring his narrative closer to idiomatic English. Return to the table of contents . The Unmannerly Tiger Korea "Mountain Uncle" was the name given by the villagers to a splendid striped tiger that lived among the highlands of Kang Wen, the long province that from its cliffs overlooks the Sea of Japan. Hunters rarely saw him, and among his fellow tigers the Mountain Uncle boasted that, though often fired at, he had never been wounded; while as for traps -- he knew all about them and laughed at the devices used by man to catch him and to strip him of his coveted skin. In summer he kept among the high hills and lived on fat deer. In winter, when heavy snow, biting winds, and terrible cold kept human beings within doors, old Mountain Uncle would sally forth to the villages. There he would prowl around the stables, the cattle enclosures, or the pigpens, in hopes of clawing and dragging out a young donkey, a fat calf, or a suckling pig. Too often he succeeded, so that he was the terror of the country for leagues around. One day in autumn, Mountain Uncle was rambling among the lower hills. Though far from any village, he kept a sharp lookout for traps and hunters, but none seemed to be near. He was very hungry and hoped for game. But on coming round a great rock, Mountain Uncle suddenly saw in his path some feet ahead, as he thought, a big tiger like himself. He stopped, twitched his tail most ferociously as a challenge, showed fight by growling, and got ready to spring. What was his surprise to see the other tiger doing exactly the same things. Mountain Uncle was sure that there would be a terrible struggle, but this was just what he wanted, for he expected of course to win. But after a tremendous leap in the air, he landed in a pit and all of a heap, bruised and disappointed. There was no tiger to be seen, but instead a heavy lid of logs had closed over his head with a crash and he lay in darkness. Old Mountain Uncle at last was caught. Yes, the hunter had concealed the pit with sticks and leaves, and on the upright timbers, covered with vines and brushwood, had hung a bit of looking-glass. Mountain Uncle had often beheld his own face and body in the water, when he stooped to drink, but this time, not seeing any water, he was deceived into thinking a real tiger wanted to fight him. By and by a Buddhist priest came along, who believed in being kind to all living creatures. Hearing an animal moaning, he opened the trap and lifting the lid saw old Mountain Uncle at the bottom licking his bruised paw. "Oh, please, Mr. Man, let me get out. I'm hurt badly," said the tiger. Thereupon the priest lifted up one of the logs and slid it down, until it rested on the bottom of the pit. Then the tiger climbed up and out. Old Mountain Uncle expressed his thanks volubly, saying to the shaven head, "I am deeply grateful to you, sir, for helping me out of my trouble. Nevertheless, as I am very hungry, I must eat you up." The priest, very much surprised and indignant, protested against such vile ingratitude. To say the least, it was very bad manners and entirely against the law of the mountains, and he appealed to a big tree to decide between them. The spirit in the tree spoke through the rustling leaves and declared that the man should go free and that the tiger was both ungrateful and unmannerly. Old Mountain Uncle was not satisfied yet, especially as the priest was unusually fat and would make a very good dinner. However, he allowed the man to appeal once more and this time to a big rock. "The man is certainly right, Venerable Mountain Uncle, and you are wholly wrong," said the spirit in the rock. "Your master, the Mountain Spirit, who rides on the green bull and the piebald horse to punish his enemies, will certainly chastise you if you devour this priest. You will be no fit messenger of the Mountain Lord if you are so ungrateful as to eat the man who saved you from starvation or death in the trap. It is shockingly bad manners even to think of such a thing." The tiger felt ashamed, but his eyes still glared with hunger; so, to be sure of saving his own skin, the priest proposed to make the toad a judge. The tiger agreed. But the toad, with his gold-rimmed eyes, looked very wise, and instead of answering quickly, as the tree and rock did, deliberated a long time. The priest's heart sank, while the tiger moved his jaws as if anticipating his feast. He felt sure that Old Speckled Back would decide in his favor. "I must go and see the trap before I can make up my mind," said the toad, who looked as solemn as a magistrate. So all three leaped, hopped, or walked to the trap. The tiger, moving fast, was there first, which was just what the toad, who was a friend of the priest, wanted. Besides, Old Speckled Back was diligently looking for a crack in the rocks nearby. So, while the toad and the tiger were studying the matter, the priest ran off and saved himself within the monastery gates. When at last Old Speckled Back decided against Mountain Uncle and in favor of the man, he had no sooner finished his judgment than he hopped into the rock crevice, and, crawling far inside, defied the tiger, calling him an unmannerly brute and an ungrateful beast, and daring him to do his worst. Old Mountain Uncle was so mad with rage and hunger that his craftiness seemed turned into stupidity. He clawed at the rock to pull it open to get at the toad to tear him to pieces. But Speckled Back, safe within, only laughed. Unable to do any harm, the tiger flew into a passion of rage. The hotter his temper grew, the more he lost his wit. Poking his nose inside the crack, he rubbed it so hard on the rough rock that he soon bled to death. When the hunter came along, he marveled at what he saw, but he was glad to get rich by selling the tiger's fur, bones, and claws ; for in Korea nothing sells so well as a tiger. As for the toad, he told to several generations of his descendants the story of how he outwitted the old Mountain Uncle. Source: William Elliot Griffis, The Unmannerly Tiger, and Other Korean Tales (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1911), pp. 1-6 . Return to the table of contents . The Snake's Thanks Jewish The following story was told at the court of David, King of Israel. It happened in those good times that an old man was walking along the road on a bitterly cold winter's day. He was feeble and had to support his old body upon a thick stick. On the side of the road he saw a snake, frozen with the cold. He felt very sorry to see one of God's creatures in pain. He went up to it and saw its eyes open and close. "Poor thing," said he, "it will soon die if it remain here much longer. Do we not read in God's Holy Bible that we must be merciful to all things which he has made? I will pick up the poor snake and try to revive it." He hastened to take it up, and in order to give it a little warmth he put it under his coat close to his chest. It did not take very many minutes to warm it. The man was soon aware of the snake's recovery, for it began to coil its slimy body around him. Its pressure became gradually greater and greater till the man cried out in alarm: "Hold on! What art thou doing? Why dost thou squeeze me to death? Had it not been for my kindness and sympathy thou wouldst by now have perished on the roadside. When I picked thee up thou wast almost frozen to death. I have given thee back thy life and in return thou seekest to kill me. Is it right to return evil for good? Is this thy way of thanking those who help thee?" "Thou art a very nice old man. But thou dost not seem to remember what I am. Tell me that first." "Thou art a snake." "Exactly. I am therefore quite in order in killing thee and any man. Snakes are made to kill the children of men." "Come, Master Snake. Let us put our case before a judge and let us hear what he has to say." "Very well, I agree to do this. Before whom shall we state our case?" "Before the first creature that we meet on the road." On and on they went till at last they saw an ox coming along. The old man was pleased and called out: "Please, Master Ox, oblige this snake on my neck and me by standing here for a few minutes." "What do ye want?" "We wish thee to judge between us." "What's the matter?" "I found this snake perishing with cold. To save its life I put it on my chest under my coat." "That was indeed most kind," said the ox. "I then found that as soon as the snake revived it wanted to strangle me. Please decide whether that was right, and if not, kindly order the snake to release its hold on me and to depart in peace." "Now, Master Snake, what hast thou to say for thyself?" "Yes, I admit that this good man speaks the truth. But I am quite right in trying to kill him." "How so?" "Because it is written in God's book: I will put hatred between mankind and the serpent. " "Now," said the ox, "I have duly heard both sides. I find that the snake is in the right. It makes no difference that thou hast done it a good service and in return it kills thee. The world always returns evil for good. That is the way of life as far as I know it. Just see how I fare at the hands of my master. I work for him in his field from sunrise to sunset. At night I am shut up in a cold shed with a little hay and some oats for my food. My master sits in his cozy room with a lovely bright fire to warm him. He has a nice supper of fine fish and good meat. He even drinks sweet wine whereas I only get cold water. He sleeps in a clean soft bed whilst I have not even a coverlet over my back. In a year or two when I am no longer able to work in the field he will sell me to the butcher who will kill me." These words grieved the poor old man very much. "I am not satisfied with this judge," he cried aloud. Leaving the ox behind he went on his way with the snake coiled around his neck. "Let us try again, if it please thee," said the snake. "We will ask the next creature that we meet. I am sure I will win the case." "Wait and see, Master Snake. Ah! here comes thy friend the ass. We will ask him to be the judge." "By all means." They both told their story in turn to the ass, just as they had told the ox. The ass also quoted the same words of the Bible as the ox. After a long tale of his own sorrows at the hands of ungrateful man, the ass decided that the snake was in the right. "See!" cried the snake, "Did I not say that I should win? I shall now kill thee and know that I am doing the right thing." "Stay, Master Snake, let us be fair. We have asked two animals to judge between us. Let us also put the case before a man. It is natural that animals should judge in thy favor, for they are thy kinsmen. Come before David, King of Israel. He is a good man and will speak as is right." "Very good, I agree." When they came before the king, he listened very attentively to both of them. Turning to the old man, David said: "Why hast thou not kept the Holy Law! It tells us that God has put hatred between thee and the serpent. Thou hast forgotten this, and now I fear I cannot help thee." "Ah!" cried the snake in a spiteful voice, "I am in the right." The poor man left the king's presence with a very sad heart, for the snake was beginning to squeeze him more tightly than ever. He had now given up all hope. He feared that the snake would kill him before nightfall. On and on he wandered with a heavy step, leaning heavily on his stick. At last he felt so wretched that he sat down by the side of a well saying to himself, "I will die here, and the snake may fall into the well and get drowned." He saw a handsome lad near by who came running up to him and said: "Peace be unto thee." "Peace be also unto thee, my son." "What aileth thee, for thy face is as white as a sheet!" "I am nigh unto death." "Can I fetch thee a little water!" "Nay, dear son, many thanks. I have just left King David. Alas! he cannot save my life, and I must die." "Tell me thy trouble. Perhaps I can help thee." The old man then told him all about the snake and showed him how it had entwined itself around his neck. "Just wait here for a few minutes and then I will go with thee to King David. Thy case shall be retried, and justice will be done. I must just stay a little while here by the well. My stick fell into it, and I told my attendants to dig up the ground yonder where the source of the well lies. This will cause the water in the well to increase. My stick, of course, floats on the surface. As soon as the water rises near the top of the well I can reach it, and as soon as I get it we will go to the King." This action of the lad seemed very clever in the eyes of the old man. He therefore resolved to return with him to the king. At last they came before David. The lad, who was Solomon, the king's son, fell on his face to the ground. His father told him to rise up. He did so and kissed the king's hand. "May I speak, dear father?" "Speak, my son." "Why didst thou not decide this man's case in his favor?" "Because it serves him right to find himself in his present unfortunate state." "How so, father dear?" "Because he did not act according to the teaching of the Holy Law." "O father, give me, I beseech thee, permission to sit in judgment in this case." "Most gladly will I do so, if thou wilt be able to prove to me that I have not done justice to this unlucky man. Come, beloved son, and sit on my chair of state. I will listen to thy words of wisdom. May the God of my fathers be with thee in judgment!" Solomon sat on his father's chair and began to say to the snake: "Tell me, why dost thou do evil to one who has dealt kindly with thee?" "God has commanded me to do so." "Where!" "In his Law." "Dost thou agree to abide by the teaching of the Law!" "Of course I do." "Now at once get off this man and stand on the ground even as he does." "Why should I?" "Because the Holy Law demands that those who have a quarrel shall stand before the judge." [Deuteronomy 19:17] "I quite agree to do this. Now wilt thou judge between me and this man." The snake uncoiled its body and placed itself beside the old man. Solomon then turned to the old man and said: "The Holy Law has also a command for thee. It tells thee that thou shalt bruise the serpent's head. Do now according to the word of thy God." The old man no sooner heard Solomon's words than he raised his stick on which he was leaning and smote the snake a deadly blow on its head. The next second it was dead. King David and his courtiers were astonished at the wonderful wisdom of Solomon, whose fame soon spread throughout the land. The old man thanked the prince and the king for saving his life and went his way in peace. Source: Gerald Friedlander The Jewish Fairy Book (New York: Frederick A. Stokes, 1920), no. 15, pp. 137-44 . Friedlander's source: " Chap-Book , ed. Rodelheim, f. 43b." Return to the table of contents . Inside Again Europe A man was walking through the forest one day when he saw a funny black thing like a whip wriggling about under a big stone. He was curious to know what it all meant. So he lifted up the stone and found there a huge black snake. "That's well," said the snake. "I have been trying to get out for two days, and, Oh, how hungry I am. I must have something to eat, and there is nobody around, so I must eat you." "But that wouldn't be fair," said the man with a trembling voice. "But for me you would never have come out from under the stone." "I do not care for that," said the snake. "Self preservation is the first law of life; you ask anybody if that isn't so." "Anyone will tell you," said the man, "that gratitude is a person's first duty, and surely you owe me thanks for saving your life." "But you haven't saved my life, if I am to die of hunger," said the snake. "Oh yes, I have," said the man; "all you have to do is to wait till you find something to eat." "Meanwhile I shall die, and what's the use of being saved!" So they disputed and they disputed whether the case was to be decided by the claims of gratitude or the rights of self-preservation, till they did not know what to do. "I tell you what I'll do," said the snake, "I'll let the first passer-by decide which is right." "But I can't let my life depend upon the word of the first comer." "Well, we'll ask the first two that pass by." "Perhaps they won't agree," said the man; "what are we to do then? We shall be as badly off as we are now." "Ah, well," said the snake, "let it be the first three. In all law courts it takes three judges to make a session. We'll follow the majority of votes." So they waited till at last there came along an old, old horse. And they put the case to him, whether gratitude should ward off death. "I don't see why it should," said the horse. "Here have I been slaving for my master for the last fifteen years, till I am thoroughly worn out, and only this morning I heard him say, 'Roger' -- that's my name -- 'is no use to me any longer; I shall have to send him to the knacker's and get a few pence for his hide and his hoofs.' There's gratitude for you." So the horse's vote was in favor of the snake. And they waited till at last an old hound passed by limping on three legs, half blind with scarcely any teeth. So they put the case to him. "Look at me," said he; "I have slaved for my master for ten years, and this very day he has kicked me out of his house because I am no use to him any longer, and he grudged me a few bones to eat. So far as I can see nobody acts from gratitude." "Well," said the snake, "there's two votes for me. What's the use of waiting for the third? he's sure to decide in my favor, and if he doesn't it's two to one. Come here and I'll eat you!" "No, no," said the man, "a bargain's a bargain; perhaps the third judge will be able to convince the other two and my life will be saved." So they waited and they waited, till at last a fox came trotting along; and they stopped him and explained to him both sides of the case. He sat up and scratched his left ear with his hind paw, and after a while he beckoned the man to come near him. And when he did so the fox whispered, "What will you give me if I get you out of this?" The man whispered back, "A pair of fat chickens." "Well," said the fox, "if I am to decide this case I must clearly understand the situation. Let me see! If I comprehend aright, the man was lying under the stone and the snake -- -- " "No, no," cried out the horse and the hound and the snake. "It was the other way." "Ah, ha, I see! The stone was rolling down and the man sat on it, and then -- -- " "Oh, how stupid you are," they all cried; "it wasn't that way at all." "Dear me, you are quite right. I am very stupid, but, really, you haven't explained the case quite clearly to me." "I'll show you," said the snake, impatient from his long hunger; and he twisted himself again under the stone and wriggled his tail till at last the stone settled down upon him and he couldn't move out. "That's the way it was." "And that's the way it will be," said the fox, and, taking the man's arm, he walked off, followed by the horse and the hound. "And now for my chickens." "I'll go and get them for you," said the man, and went up to his house, which was near, and told his wife all about it. "But," she said, "why waste a pair of chickens on a foxy old fox! I know what I'll do." So she went into the back yard and unloosed the dog and put it into a meal-bag and gave it to the man, who took it down and gave it to the fox, who trotted off with it to his den. But when he opened the bag out sprung the dog and gobbled him all up. There's gratitude for you. Source: Joseph Jacobs, Europa's Fairy Book [also published under the title European Folk and Fairy Tales ], restored from various sources and retold by Joseph Jacobs (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), no. 20, pp. 165-69 . The concluding episode, in which the fox is given a dog in a sack instead of the agreed upon chickens, is classified as Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 154. Link to additional tales of type 154 . Return to the table of contents . Of Nature and the Returns of Ingratitude Gesta Romanorum An emperor rode out in the afternoon to hunt. Happening to pass a certain wood, he heard a serpent, which some shepherds had caught and bound firmly to a tree, making a most horrible clamor. Moved by pity, he loosed it, and warmed its frozen body in his own bosom. No sooner, however, did the animal find itself recovered, than it began to bite its benefactor, and shot a flood of poison into the wound. "What have you done?" said the emperor. "Wherefore have you rendered evil for good?" The serpent, like the ass of Balaam, being suddenly endowed with voice, replied, "The propensities which nature has implanted no one can destroy. You have done what you could; and I have only acted according to my nature. You exhibited towards me all the kindness in your power, and I have recompensed you as well as I might. I offered poison, because, except poison, I had nothing to offer. Moreover, I am an enemy to man; for through him I became punished with a curse." As they thus contended, they entreated a philosopher to judge between them, and to state which was in the wrong. "I know this matter," answered the umpire, "only by your relation; but I should like to see the thing itself upon which I am to pronounce judgment. Let the serpent, therefore, be bound to the tree, as he was in the first instance, and let my lord the emperor remain unbound; I shall then determine the matter between you." This was done accordingly. "Now you are bound," said the philosopher, addressing the serpent, loose yourself if you can." "I cannot," said the serpent; "I am bound so fast that I can scarcely move." "Then die," rejoined the philosopher, "by a just sentence. You were always ungrateful to man, and you always will be. My lord, you are now free. Shake the venom from your bosom, and go your way. Do not repeat your folly. Remember that the serpent is only influence by his natural propensities." The emperor thanked the philosopher for his assistance and advice, and departed. Application: My beloved, the emperor is any good ecclesiastic, the wood is the world, and the serpent is the devil. The shepherds are the prophets, patriarchs, Christian preachers, etc. The philosopher is a discreet confessor. Source: Gesta Romanorum , translated by Charles Swan (London: George Bell and Sons, 1906), no. 174, pp. 336-37 . About the collection Gesta Romanorum : Only a few of the 283 entries of the Gesta Romanorum (Deeds of the Romans), written in Latin by an anonymous English scribe about 1330, deal with the Romans. Instead, the work presents a mixture of anecdotes, legends, and fables, all with appended morals, called "applications." In some instances the connection between the stories and their claimed moral application is tenuous at best. The awkward moralizing notwithstanding, this collection provided material for numerous writers of later generations, including William Shakespeare, Lope de Vega, Jean de La Fontaine, and Gotthold Ephraim Lessing. Return to the table of contents . The Reward of Good Deeds Denmark There was once a man who went into the woods to cut some firewood. He went from one tree to another, but they were all too good for his purpose, as they would make good timber if allowed to stand. At last he found a tree which seemed good for nothing; it was gnarled and partly decayed, so he began to hew away at it. But just as he began to cut, he heard a voice calling to him, "Help me out, my good man." And as he turned he saw a large viper that was caught in a cleft of the tree and could not free itself. "No, I will not help you," said the man, "for you would harm me." But the viper said that it would not hurt him, if he would only free it. Then the man put his axe into the cleft under the snake, and so freed it. But hardly was it free, when it coiled itself up, hissed, put out its tongue and prepared to strike him. "Did I not tell you," said the man, "that you were a rascal who would reward good with evil!" "Yes," answered the viper, "you may well say that; but so it is in the world, that all good deeds are rewarded with evil." "That is not true," said the man, "good deeds are rewarded with good." "You will not find anybody to agree with you there," said the viper. "I know better how it goes in the world." "Let us inquire about it," said the man. "Very well," said the viper. So it did not bite him, but went with him through the forest until they came to an old, worn out horse that was grazing. It was lame, and blind in one eye, and had only a few broken teeth in its mouth. They asked him whether good deeds were rewarded with good, or with evil. "They are rewarded with evil," said the horse. "For twenty years I have served my master faithfully; I have carried him on my back, and drawn his wagon, and have taken care not to stumble lest he fall. As long as I was young and strong, I had kind treatment; I had a good stall, and plenty of food, and was well curried. But now that I am old and weak, I must work in the treadmill the livelong day; I never have a roof to cover me, and all the food I have is what I get for myself. No, indeed, good deeds are rewarded only with evil." "There now, you hear," said the viper, "Now I shall bite you." "Oh, no! wait a moment," said the man, "there comes the fox; let us ask him for his opinion." The fox came up and stopped and looked at them, for he saw that the man was in serious trouble. Then the viper asked the fox whether good deeds were rewarded with evil or with good. "Say 'with good,'" whispered the man, "and I will give you two fat geese." Then the fox said, "Good deeds are rewarded with good," and as he said that he jumped on the viper and bit its neck so that it fell to the ground. But as it was dying it insisted, "No, good deeds are rewarded with evil; that I have experienced, I, who spared the man's life, who has now cheated me out of mine." Now the viper was dead and the man was free. Then he said to the fox, "Come home with me and get your geese." "No, I thank you," said the fox, "I will not go to town, for there the dogs would get me." "Then wait here until I come with the geese," said the man. He ran home and said to his wife, "Hasten and put two fat geese into a sack, for I have promised them to the fox for his breakfast today." The woman took a sack and put something into it; but it was not geese she put in, but two fierce dogs. The man then ran out with the bag to the fox, and said, "Here you have your reward." "Thank you," said the fox, "then it was not a lie after all, what I said first -- that good deeds are rewarded with good." Then taking the bag on his back he ran off into the woods. "That sack is heavy," said the fox, so he sat down and tore it open with his sharp teeth. But as he did so the two dogs leaped from the bag and fixed their teeth in his throat. There was no escape from them, so he was bitten to death, but not until he had said, "No, what I said first was a lie, after all; good deeds are rewarded with evil." Source: Sven Grundtvig, Danish Fairy Tales , translated by J. Grant Cramer (Boston: Richard G. Badger, The Gorham Press, 1912), pp. 119-22 . The concluding episode, in which the fox is given fierce dogs in a sack instead of the agreed upon geese, is classified as Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 154. Link to additional tales of type 154 . Return to the table of contents . The Reward of Kindness Finland Osmo, the bear, used to go day after day to a field of growing rye and eat as much as he wanted. The farmer noticed from the bear's tracks that he always came by the same route. "I'll teach that bear a lesson!" the farmer thought to himself. So he set a snare made of a strong net and carefully covered it over with leaves and branches. That day Osmo, when he came as usual to the field, got entangled in the net and was unable to escape. The farmer when he came and found him securely caught was overjoyed. "Now, you brute!" he said, "I've got you and I'm going to kill you!" "Oh, master, don't do that!" the bear implored. "Don't kill me!" "Why shouldn't I kill you?" the farmer asked. "Aren't you destroying my rye?" "Let me off this time!" Osmo begged, "and I'll reward you! I swear I will!" He begged and begged until at last he prevailed upon the farmer to open the net and let him out. "Now then," the farmer said as soon as the bear was freed, "how are you going to reward me?" Osmo put a heavy paw on the farmer's shoulder. "This is how I'm going to reward you," he said: "I'm going to eat you up !" "What!" the farmer exclaimed. "Is that your idea of a reward for kindness?" "Exactly!" Osmo declared. "In this world that is the reward kindness always gets! Ask anyone!" "I don't believe it! I don't believe it!" the farmer cried. "Very well. I'll prove to you that I'm right. We'll ask the first person we meet." The first person they met was an old horse. They put their case to him. "The bear is right," the old horse said. "Look at me. For thirty years I gave my master faithful service and just this morning I heard him say, 'It's time we killed that old plug! He's no good for work any more and he's only eating his head off!'" The bear squinted his little eyes. "You see!" "No, I don't see!" the farmer insisted. "We must ask someone else." They walked on a little farther until they met an old dog. They put their case to him and at once the dog said, "The bear is right! Look at me. I gave my master a life time of faithful service and just this morning I overheard him say: 'It's time we killed that old dog!' Alas, alas, in this wicked world goodness is always so rewarded!" But still the farmer was unsatisfied and to humor him Osmo said that he was willing that they should put their case once more to the judgment of an outsider. The next person they met was Mikko, the fox. Mikko listened carefully and then drawing the farmer aside he whispered, "If I give judgment in your favor will you let me carry off all the chickens in your henhouse?" "Indeed I will!" the farmer promised. Then Mikko cleared his throat importantly and said, "H'm! H'm! To give fair judgment in this case I must go over all the ground. First show me the field of rye and the damage Osmo did." So they went to the field and the fox, after he had appraised the damage, shook his head seriously. "It was certainly wicked of Osmo eating all that rye!... Now show me the net." So they went to the snare and the fox examined it carefully. "You say the bear got entangled in this snare. I want to see just how he did it." Osmo showed just how he had been caught. "Get all the way in," the fox said. "I want to make sure that you couldn't possibly get out unaided." So the bear entangled himself again in the net and proved that he couldn't possibly get out unaided. "Well," said Mikko, the rascal, "you deserved to get caught the first time and now that you're in there again you can just stay there! Come on, Mr. Farmer." So Mikko and the farmer went off leaving Osmo to his fate. That night the fox went to the farmer's henhouse to claim his reward. When he came in the chickens, of course, set up an awful squawking that aroused the family. The farmer stayed in bed but he sent his wife out with a stout club. "It sounds to me," he said, "as if some rascally fox is trying to steal our hens. If you catch him, don't be gentle with him!" "Gentle!" repeated the wife significantly. She hurried out to the henhouse and when she found Mikko inside she gave him an awful beating. In fact he barely escaped with his life. "Ah!" he said to himself as he limped painfully home, "to think that this is the reward my kindness has received! Oh, what a wicked, wicked world this is!" Source: Parker Fillmore, Mighty Mikko: A Book of Finnish Fairy and Folk Tales (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company, 1922), pp. 301-305 . Return to the table of contents . The Man, the Serpent, and the Fox Greece There was once a huntsman, who, in passing a quarry, found a serpent under a large stone. The serpent asked the hunter to liberate him, but the latter said, "I will not free you, for you will eat me." The serpent replied, "Liberate me, for I will not eat you." When the hunter had set the serpent at liberty, the latter wanted to devour him, but the hunter said, "What are you doing? Did you not promise me that you would not eat me?" The serpent replied that hunger did not observe promises. The hunter then said, "If you have no right to eat me, will you do it?" "No," answered the serpent. "Let us go, then," said the hunter, "and ask three times." They went into the woods and found a greyhound, and asked him, and he replied, "I had a master, and I went hunting and caught hares, and when I carried them home my master had nothing too good to give me to eat. No, when I cannot overtake even a tortoise, because I am old, my master wishes to kill me. For this reason I condemn you to be eaten by the serpent, for he who does good finds evil." "Do you hear? We have one judge," said the serpent. They continued their journey, and found a horse, and asked him, and he too replied that the serpent was right to eat the man, "for," he said, "I had a master who fed me when I could travel. Now that I can do so no longer, he would like to hang me." The serpent said, "Behold, two judges!" They went on and found a fox. The huntsman said, "Fox, you must aid me. Listen: I was passing quarry and found this serpent dying under a large stone, and he asked aid from me, and I released him, and now he wants to eat me." The fox answered, "I will be the judge. Let us return to the quarry to see how the serpent was." They went there and put the stone on the serpent, and the fox asked, "Is that the way you were?" "Yes," answered the serpent. "Very well then, stay so always!" said the fox. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 49, p. 354 . Crane's source: Giuseppe Morosi, Studi sui Dialetti Greci della Terra d'Otranto: Preceduto da una raccolta di Canti, Leggende, Proverbi, e Indovinelli (Lecce: Tip. Editrice Salentina, 1870), p. 75 . Return to the table of contents . The Ingrates Italy There was once a man who went into the forest to gather wood, and saw a snake crushed under a large stone. He raised the stone a little with the handle of his axe, and the snake crawled out. When it was at liberty, it said to the man, "I am going to eat you." The man answered, "Softly. First let us hear the judgment of someone, and if I am condemned, then you shall eat me." The first one they met was a horse as thin as a stick, tied to an oak tree. He had eaten the leaves as far as he could reach, for he was famished. The snake said to him, "Is it right for me to eat this man who has saved my life?" The nag answered, "More than right. Just look at me! I was one of the finest horses. I have carried my master so many years, and what have I gained? Now that I am so badly off that I can no longer work they have tied me to this oak, and after I have eaten these few leaves I shall die of hunger. Eat the man, then. For he who does good is ill rewarded, and he who does evil must be well rewarded. Eat him, for you will be doing a good day's work." They afterwards happened to find a mulberry tree, all holes, for it was eaten by old age. And the snake asked it if it was right to eat the man who had saved its life. "Yes," the tree answered at once, "for I have given my master so many leaves that he has raised from them the finest silkworms in the world. Now that I can no longer stand upright, he has said that he is going to throw me into the fire. Eat him, then, for you will do well." Afterwards they met the fox. The man took her aside and begged her to pronounce in his favor. The fox said, "The better to render judgment I must see just how the matter has happened." They all returned to the spot and arranged matters as they were at first. But as soon as the man saw the snake under the stone he cried out, "Where you are, there I will leave you." And there the snake remained. The fox wished in payment a bag of hens, and the man promised them to her for the next morning. The fox went there in the morning, and when the man saw her he put some dogs in the bag, and told the fox not to eat the hens close by, for fear the mistress of the house would hear it. So the fox did not open the bag until she had reached a distant valley. Then the dogs came out and ate her. And so it is in the world. For who does good is ill rewarded, and who does evil is well rewarded. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 38, pp. 150-51 . The concluding episode, in which the fox is given dogs in a sack instead of the agreed upon hens, is classified as Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 154. Link to additional tales of type 154 . Return to the table of contents . The Lion, the Horse, and the Fox Italy The lion once got caught in a rocky cleft and could not get out again. A horse came by, and the lion called to him, "Help me out of this cleft." "I'll do that," answered the horse, "but you must promise not to eat me." The lion promised, and the horse dug with his hooves until he had freed the lion. However, as soon as the lion saw that he was free, he said, "Now I am going to eat you." "What were the conditions?" said the horse. "Did we not agree that you would not eat me?" "That makes no difference now," shouted the lion. "But if you want to, we can go before a judge." "Good," replied the horse. "But whom shall we choose?" "The fox," said the lion. The horse agreed to this, so they went to the fox, and the lion presented him with the question. "Yes," answered the fox, "it seems to me that you must be right, Mr. Lion, but I cannot finalize my judgment until I have seen how the two of you were standing." So all three of them went to the rocky cleft, and the horse positioned himself in the same place he had stood. Then the fox told the lion to force himself back into the cleft. "Is that how you were standing?" he asked. "This leg was a little more twisted," answered the lion. "Then push yourself in a little more tightly. You must be in exactly the same position as you were when you asked the horse for help." The lion pushed himself in a little more, and the fox asked again, "Is that exactly how you were standing?" "This front leg was a little further inside." "Then push yourself in still a little more." Finally the lion had pushed himself in so tightly that he could not get out again. "So," said the fox. "now you are exactly where you were before. Now the horse can decide whether he will help you out again." The horse, however, did not want to do so, but instead threw stones at the lion until he was dead. Yes, indeed, the fox is sly! Source: Laura Gonzenbach, "Vom Löwen, Pferd und Fuchs," Sicilianische Märchen, aus dem Volksmund gesammelt (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1870), vol. 2, no. 69, pp. 77-78 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. Return to the table of contents . Ingratitude Is the World's Reward Moravia A peasant in his field once heard a voice calling, "Help me! Help me!" He looked around but saw no one. Finally he discovered that the voice was coming from below, from beneath a large stone. Rolling it onto its side he saw a hole where there was a large snake. It slithered out and was about to tear the peasant to pieces. "What!" said the peasant. "My reward for having freed you from your prison is be torn to pieces?" "Didn't you know," replied the snake, "that ingratitude is the world's reward?" "I do not believe that," said the peasant. "Come, let us go together to a judge who will decide if you have the right to tear me to pieces." So the went to seek a judge. After going a little way they came to a tree onto which was tied an old horse. "What are you doing there?" the peasant asked the horse. "Who tied you here?" "Oh," it said, "my master has gone to fetch a knacker who is to kill me, for I am too old and week to pull the plow and other loads. When I was young and strong, my master had only praise for me, but now he has no use for me, and thus I will have to die." "You see, peasant," said the snake, "there you have proof that ingratitude is the world's reward. Now I am going to tear you to pieces." "No," said the peasant. "Let us go to another judge." So they went further. A dog came ran up to them and sought the peasant's protection against his master, who was about to shoot him. He had now grown unable to watch over the house, and he told the peasant that his master had held him dearly when he was young and could watch over the house and the yard, but now that he was old and weak, he had acquired another dog and wanted to shoot him. "There you have the second proof that ingratitude is the world's reward," said the snake. "You must admit that I have the right to tear you apart." But the peasant did not want to admit this, and while they were arguing about it, a fox came their way and asked why they were quarreling. "Wait," thought the peasant. "The fox is very sly. He could be our judge." He explained the case to him, who then took the peasant aside and said to him, "If you will promise me two roosters then I'll free you from the snake." "They will be yours," said the peasant. "Now," said the fox, "if I am to be your judge then I must see the hole where the snake was caught. I cannot make a judgment until I have seen it." So they turned around and went back to the hole. Upon seeing it, the fox said, "What? Such a large snake was caught in this small hole? I do not believe it. It is entirely impossible! First you must convince me that there is room for you there. Snake, crawl inside and show me that you really were caught there." The snake crawled inside, and he had scarcely done so when then fox quickly rolled the stone back in place, capturing him again, however much he cried out "Help me!" The peasant was very happy and told the fox to come that evening to fetch the roosters. He would leave the back gate to his yard open so he could get in. The fox came that evening when everyone was eating supper. He found the back gate open and crept inside. But when he neared the chicken coop, the chickens saw him and cried out. The peasant's wife heard the noise, went to see what was wrong, and discovered the fox. "Wait," she said, "I'll light the way home for you." She ran into the kitchen, picked up a burning piece of wood, ran back to the chicken coop, and hit the fox so long with it until his pelt was all burned up. Crying out, he ran away. When he was halfway out he shouted "Ingratitude is still the world's reward." Source: Marie Kosch, Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Mähren (Kremsier: Heinrich Gusek, 1899), pp. 107-109 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Moravia is in today's Czech Republic. Return to the table of contents . The World's Reward Russia Once upon a time when a peasant was carrying wood from a forest he got tired and throwing the wood on the ground he sat down on a stone to rest. That minute he heard a cry, and someone called, "Oh, good man, take pity on me! Roll off the stone and save my life. Free me, and I will pay you as the world pays best!" The peasant rolled the stone away, and out of the hole a great snake crawled, wound himself into a spiral, raised up his head, and said, "Know, man, that I am Yaza! Get ready, you must die." The peasant was terribly frightened, and lamenting he reproached the snake with ingratitude. "Didn't you call for help? Haven't I saved your life?" asked he. "Of course," replied the snake, "but I am only doing what I promised; I am paying you as the world pays best." After a long discussion the snake agreed to let another settle the dispute, and they went together in search of a judge. After a while they came to where an old dog was tied to a fence. "How are you, faithful guardian of a house?" asked the peasant. "As you see," replied the dog. "Be so kind as to be our judge; we have a dispute." And the peasant told the whole story. "Wasn't it so and so?" asked he, turning to the snake. "It was," answered the snake. The dog thought a while, then said to the man, "My friend, you must die, for this is just how the world pays best. When I was young I was my master's favorite. He wore the skins of the wolves and foxes which I caught; I guarded his house from thieves. My master was fond of me. When offered a carriage and horses he refused to sell me. But now, when I am old and weak and can neither run nor bark, he has led me out here and tied me to the fence to stay till some man kills me for my skin. This is the world's reward." The peasant, seeing that he had lost his case, begged to look for another judge. The snake consented and they went through forests and across fields till they came to an old half-starved horse. His head was hanging down, his sides had fallen in, and he was covered with flies which he had not strength to drive away. "How are you, noble beast?" asked the peasant. "As you see," replied the horse. The peasant told him the story and begged him to decide for them. The horse listened patiently to the man's complaint, then decided in favor of the snake, saying, "This is the world's reward. "When I was young," said he, "I had every comfort. When I was led out of the stable every one admired me. I carried my master to war. More than once, by my swiftness, I saved his life and helped him to fame. Two men cared for me; they curried me twice each day and gave me the best of oats and hay. My stable was like a parlor. In summer they covered me with a net that flies might not bite me. My master wouldn't have sold me for a whole village. But when I grew old he starved me, didn't even give me straw to eat. And now he has led me out to this barren field to be killed by the wolves. This is how the world pays best." "What more do you want, man?" asked the snake. The peasant begged the snake to let him try a third and last judge. He consented and they went on till at the edge of a forest they saw a fox, running along. "Oh, Master Fox, wait and be our judge!" called the peasant. "We have a question to decide." The fox, a cunning fellow, listened to the story, then winked to the peasant, and whispered, aside, "If you will give me all of your hens I will help you out of your trouble." "What are hens!" said the man. "I will give you the geese too, and if need be all I have in the world." The fox, pretending to be an impartial judge, said, "This is an important case: one of life and death. The first who judged, judged lightly. In justice the case can only be decided on the spot where everything took place. We will go there." When they came to the place, the fox said, "We must begin at the beginning. Do you, man, sit down on the stone, and you, snake, crawl into the hole where you were lying." When they had done as he told them, and the snake was back in the hole, he winked at the man, and said, "Roll the stone over, quickly." The peasant didn't wait to be told twice. When the hole was covered, and the snake couldn't get out, the peasant thanked the fox for salvation from death. The fox answered, "But do not forget that I have earned the hens. Tomorrow before daylight, I will come for my breakfast." The peasant went home as delighted as if he had been born a second time. He told his wife what had happened, praised the wisdom of the fox, and added that he had promised him all the hens, and that the next morning he would come for them. The woman was glad that her husband was saved, but she was very sorry to lose her hens. The next morning, early, she went to the window and seeing a fox in the yard she called to her husband, "Do you hear, old man? There is a fox in the yard!" "Oh, that is the fox that saved me. He has come for the hens!" "Just as if I were crazy enough to give him my hens!" cried the woman. "The Lord be praised that you are alive; but take the gun and kill the fox. You will get good money for his pelt." The peasant obeyed his wife. He took the gun and firing from the window killed the fox. Dying, the fox said in a mournful voice, "This is how the world pays best." Source: Jeremiah Curtin, Fairy Tales of Eastern Europe (New York: McBride, Nast and Company, 1914), pp. 24-28 . Return to the table of contents . The Peasant, the Snake, and King Solomon Romania Once upon a time, when King Solomon the wise ruled over the people, some shepherds gathered under a tree and lit a fire, not for any special reason, but just to pass their time, as they often do. When they left, they did not take care to put the fire out. It was left burning under the ashes. Spreading slowly, it caught the great tree, which soon afterwards became a mass of living flames. A snake had crept onto that tree before and found itself now in danger of perishing in the flames. Creeping upwards to the very top of the tree, the snake cried as loud as it could, for she felt her skin scorched by the fire. At that moment a man passed by, and hearing the shrieking of the snake, who begged him to save her from the flames, he took pity on her, and cutting a long stick, he reached with it up to the top of the tree for the snake to glide down on it. But he did not know the mind of the cunning beast, which had aforetime deceived his forefather Adam, for, instead of gliding down to the ground, no sooner did the snake reach the neck of the good man than she coiled herself round and round his neck. In vain did he remind her that he had saved her life. She would not hear of anything, for she said, "My skin is dearer to me than to you, and I remain where I am. You cannot shake me off." Finding that he could not get rid of the snake, the man went from judge to judge, from king to king, to decide between them, but no one could help him. At last, hearing of the wisdom of King Solomon, he came to him and laid his case before him. But King Solomon said, "I am not going to judge between you unless you both first promise to abide by my word." Both did so. Turning to the snake, King Solomon then said, "You must uncoil yourself and get down on the earth, for I cannot judge fairly between one who is standing on the ground and one who is riding." Cunning though the snake may be, she did not understand the wisdom of King Solomon, and therefore, uncoiling herself, she glided down and rested on the ground. Turning to the man, King Solomon said, "Do you not know that you must never trust a snake?" The man at once understood what the king meant, and taking up a stone, he bruised the snake's head. And thus justice was done. Source: M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 112, pp. 325-26 . Return to the table of contents . Brother Wolf Still in Trouble African-American Brer Rabbit was walking down the road, talking and laughing to himself, when he heard something. He stopped talking and began to hum a tune, but he didn't meet anyone. Then he stopped and listened, and he heard something holler, "Oh, Lordy! Lordy! Won't somebody come and help me?" Brer Rabbit heard this, and he stopped and listened. It wasn't long before something or the other hollered out, "O, Lordy, Lordy! Please, somebody, come and help me." Brer Rabbit, he hoisted up his ears, he did, and he answered back, "Who are you, anyhow, and what in the name of goodness is the matter?" "Please, somebody, run here!" Brer Rabbit, he took and stood on three legs to make sure of getting a good start if there was any need of it, and he hollered back, "Whereabouts are you, and how come you are there?" "Do, please, somebody, run here and help a poor miserable creature. I'm down here in the big gully under this here big rock." Old Brer Rabbit crept down to the big gully and looked in, and who in the name of goodness do you suspect he saw down there? -- Nobody in the round world but that there old Brer Wolf was down there in the big gully. And, bless gracious, on top of him was a great big rock. And if you want to know the reason that the great big rock hadn't totally killed Brer Wolf, then you'll have to ask someone who knows more about it than what I do, because it looks to me like it should have smashed him flat. Yet there he was, and not only had he not been killed, but he had strength enough left to make folks a mile off hear him hollering. And he was hollering so lonesome that it made Brer Rabbit feel might sorry, and no sooner was he feeling sorry, than he held his coattails out of the way and slid down the bank in order to see what he could do. When he got down there, Brer Wolf asked him, please, sir, couldn't he help him remove that there rock. And Brer Rabbit allowed he suspected he could. And with that, Brer Wolf hollered and told him for mercy's sake, wouldn't he hurry and do it. With that, Brer Rabbit took hold of the rock and humped himself, and it wasn't long before he got some purchase on it, and bless your soul, he lifted it up, just like someone at log-rolling. It turned out that Brer Wolf wasn't hurt much, and when he found this out, he took and grabbed Brer Rabbit by the nap of the neck and the small of the back. Brer Rabbit, he kicked and squealed, but it didn't do any manner of good, because the more he kicked, the tighter Brer Wolf clamped him, and he squeezed him so hard that Brer Rabbit was afraid he was going to cut off his breath. Brer Rabbit, he allowed, "Well then, Brer Wolf! Is this here the way you thank folks for saving your life?" Brer Wolf grinned big, and then he up and allowed, "I'll thank you, Brer Rabbit, and then I'll make fresh meat out of you." Brer Rabbit allowed, he did, "If you talk that way, Brer Wolf, I'll never do you another good turn as long as I live." Brer Wolf, he grinned some more, and allowed, "That you won't, Brer Rabbit. That you won't. You won't do me any more good turns until you are dead." Brer Rabbit, he sort of studied to himself, he did, and then he allowed, "Where I come from, Brer Wolf, it's against the law for folks to kill those that have done them a good turn, and I suspect it's against the law around here as well." Brer Wolf said he wasn't right sure about that. Brer Rabbit said he was willing to leave the whole case with Brer Terrapin, and Brer Wolf said he was agreeable. With that, they put out, they did, and made their way to where old Brer Terrapin was staying. When they got there, Brer Wolf, he took and told his side, and then Brer Rabbit, he took and told his side. Old Brer Terrapin put on his spectacles and cleared up his throat, and then he allowed, "Something is mixed up in this here dispute, and before I can take any side, you'll just have to take me to see the place where Brer Wolf was when Brer Rabbit found him," he said. Sure enough, they took old Brer Terrapin down the big road until they came to the big gully, and then they took him to where Brer Wolf got caught under the big rock. Old Brer Terrapin, he walked around, he did, and poked at the place with the end of his cane. By and by he shook his head, he did, and he allowed, "I hate mightily to put you gents to so much trouble, yet there are no two ways about it. I'll have to see just how Brer Wolf was caught, and just how the rock was lying on top of him," he said. "The older folks get, the more trouble they are," he said, "and I am ripening just like a persimmon that's been struck with the frost," he said. Then Brer Wolf, he took and lay down where he was when Brer Rabbit found him, and the others, they up and rolled the rock on top of him, and there he was. Brer Terrapin, he walked all around and looked at him. Then he sat down, he did, and made marks in the sand with his cane like he was studying about something or the other. By and by Brer Wolf, he opened up, "Ow, Brer Terrapin! This here rock is getting mighty heavy!" Brer Terrapin, he marked in the sand, and studied, and studied. Brer Wolf hollered, "Ow, Brer Terrapin! This here rock is mashing the breath out of me." Brer Terrapin, he reared back, he did, and he allowed, "Brer Rabbit, you were in the wrong. You didn't have any business to come along and bother Brer Wolf when he wasn't bothering you. He was tending to his own business, and you ought to have been tending to yours." This made Brer Rabbit look ashamed of himself, but Brer Terrapin talked right along, "When you were going down this here road this morning, you surely must have been going somewhere. If you were going somewhere, you had better be going on. Brer Wolf, he wasn't going anywhere then, and he's not going anywhere now. You found him under that rock, and you should leave him under that rock." And bless gracious, those creatures walked off from there and left old Brer Wolf under that there rock. Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Nights with Uncle Remus: Myths and Legends of the Old Plantation (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Company, 1883), no. 46, pp. 274-79 . Slightly abridged, and dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 26, 2014. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Ireland: A Digital Library Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Ireland a digital library assembled by D. L. Ashliman © 2009-2021 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Unless otherwise noted all links lead to books digitized by books.google.com . Anonymous [C. J. T.]. Folk-Lore and Legends: Ireland . London: W. W. Gibbings, 1889. Anonymous [C. J. T.]. Irish Fairy Tales, Folklore, and Legends . London: W. W. Gibbings, 1904. Bardan, Patrick. The Dead-Watchers, and Other Folk-Lore Tales of Westmeath . Mullingar: Printed at the "Westmeath Guardian" office, and published for the author, 1891. Carleton, William. Tales and Sketches, Illustrating the Character, Usages, Traditions, Sports, and Pastimes of the Irish Peasantry . Dublin: James Duffy, 1845. Colum, Padraic. The King of Ireland's Son . Illustrations and decorations by Willy Pogány. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1921. Copyright 1916. Colum, Padraic. The Boy Whow Knew What the Birds Said . Illustrated by Dugald Stewart Walker. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1934. Copyright 1918. [Croker, Thomas Crofton]. Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland . London: Printed by Thomas Davison, [1825]. Missing title page. [Croker, Thomas Crofton]. Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland . 2nd edition. London: John Murray, 1826. [Croker, Thomas Crofton]. Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland . Part 2. London: John Murray, 1828. [Croker, Thomas Crofton]. Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland . Part 3. London: John Murray, 1828. [Croker, Thomas Crofton]. Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland . London: John Murray, 1834. Croker, Thomas Crofton. Killarney Legends: Arranged as a Guide to the Lakes . London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853. Croker, Thomas Crofton. Researches in the South of Ireland: Illustrative of the Scenery, Architectural Remains, and the Manners and Superstitions of the Peasantry . London: John Murray, 1824. Cruck-a-Leaghan [pseud.] and Slieve Gallion. Lays and Legends of the North of Ireland . London: Houlston and Sons; Eninburgh and Glasgow: J. Menzies and Company; Dublin: M. H. Gill and Son, 1884. Curtin, Jeremiah. Hero-Tales of Ireland . Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1894. Curtin, Jeremiah. Tales of the Fairies and of the Ghost World Collected from Oral Tradition in South-West Munster . Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1895. Curtin, Jeremiah. Myths and Folk-Lore of Ireland . Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1917. De Vere, Aubrey. The Legends of Saint Patrick. Oiseen the Bard and Saint Patrick. Legends of Ireland's Heroic Age. Early Irish Records . New Edition. London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1895. dúchas.ie : The Main Manuscript Collection . Irish folklore compiled by schoolchildren in the 1930s. Gomme, Alice Bertha. The Traditional Games of England, Scotland, and Ireland . With tunes, singing-rhymes, and methods of playing according to the variants extant and recorded in different parts of the kingdom. Vol. 1: Accroshay - Nuts in May. London: David Nutt, 1894. Graves, Alfred Perceval. The Irish Fairy Book . London: T. Fisher Unwinn, 1909. This digital copy is presented by the Internet Archive . Gregory, Isabella Augusta. Visions and Beliefs in the West of Ireland, Collected and Arranged by Lady Gregory, with Two Essays and Notes by W. B. Yeats . 1st Series. New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1920. Gregory, Isabella Augusta. Visions and Beliefs in the West of Ireland, Collected and Arranged by Lady Gregory, with Two Essays and Notes by W. B. Yeats . 2nd Series. New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1920. Hardy, Philip Dixon. Legends, Tales, and Stories of Ireland . Illustrated with ten characteristic engravings. Dublin: John Cumming, 1837. Hunt, Brampton. Folk Tales of Breffny . London: Macmillan and Company, 1912. Hyde, Douglas. Beside the Fire: A Collection of Irish Gaelic Folk Stories . London: David Nutt, 1890. This digital copy is presented by the Internet Archive . Hyde, Douglas. Legends of Saints and Sinners . London: T. Fisher Unwin, [1915]. This digital copy is presented by the Internet Archive . Jacobs, Joseph. Celtic Fairy Tales . London: David Nutt, 1892. Jacobs, Joseph. More Celtic Fairy Tales . London: David Nutt, 1894. Joyce, P. W. Old Celtic Romances . Translated from the Gaelic. London: C. Kegan Paul and Company, 1879. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology . Vol. 1. London: William Harrison Ainsworth, 1828. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries . Vol. 2. London: Whittaker, Treacher, and Company, 1833. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries . A new edition, revised and greatly enlarged. London: H. G. Bohn, 1851. Kennedy, Patrick. The Banks of the Boro: A Chronicle of the County of Wexford . London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Company, 1867. Kennedy, Patrick. Evenings in the Duffrey . New edition. Dublin: McGlashan and Gill, 1875. Kennedy, Patrick. The Fireside Stories of Ireland . Dublin. M'Glashan and Gill, 1870. Kennedy, Patrick. Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts . 1st edition. London: Macmillan and Company, 1866. Kennedy, Patrick. Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts . 2nd edition. London: Macmillan and Company, 1891. Larminie, William. West Irish Folk-Tales and Romances . With introduction and notes, and appendix containing specimens of the Gaelic originals phonetically spelt. London: Elliot Stock, 1898. This digital copy is presented by the Internet Archive . Lover, Patrick. Legends and Stories of Ireland . 3rd edition. Dublin: W. F. Wakeman; London: Baldwin and Cradock, 1834. Lover, Patrick. Legends and Stories of Ireland . 2nd series. London: Baldwin and Cradock, 1837. Lover, Samuel. Legends and Stories of Ireland, to Which Is Added Illustrations of National Proverbs and Irish Sketches . Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1902. MacDonagh, Michael. Irish Life and Character . London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1898. MacManus, Seumas. Donegal Fairy Stories . Garden City, New York: Doubleday, Page, and Company, 1915. O'Connor, Barry. Turf-Fire Stories and Fairy Tales of Ireland . New York: P. J. Kenedy, 1890. O'Hanlon, John. Irish Folk Lore: Traditions and Superstitions of the Country; with Humorous Tales . By "Lageniensis." Glasgow and London: Cameron and Ferguson, 1870. Seymour, St. John D. Irish Witchcraft and Demonology . Baltimore: Norman, Remington, and Company, 1913. Stephens, James. Irish Fairy Tales . Illustrated by Arthur Rackham. London: Macmillan and Company, 1920. Stephens, James. Irish Fairy Tales . New York: The Macmillan Company, 1934. Wallace, Kathryn. Folk-Lore of Ireland: Legends, Myths, and Fairy Tales . Chicago: J. S. Hyland and Company, 1910. Whitney, Harry. Legends of Mount Leinster: Three Months in Kildare-Place; Bantry and Duffrey Traditions; The Library in Patrick-St. Dublin: P. Kennedy, 1855. Wilde, Jane Francesca Elgee. Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland: With Sketches of the Irish Past, by Lady Wilde . Boston: Ticknor and Company, 1888. Wilde, Jane Francesca Elgee. Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland: With Sketches of the Irish Past, by Lady Wilde . A new edition. London: Chatto and Windus, 1902. Wilde, William Robert. Irish Popular Superstitions . Dublin: James McGlashan, 1852. Wentz, W. Y. The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries . London: Oxford University Press, 1911. Yeats, William Butler. The Celtic Twilight . London: A. H. Bullen, 1902. Yeats, William Butler. Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry . London: Walter Scott, 1888. Yeats, William Butler. Irish Fairy Tales . London: T. F. Unwin, 1892. This digital copy is presented by the Internet Archive . Yeats, William Butler. Visions and Beliefs in the West of Ireland, Collected and Arranged by Lady Gregory, with Two Essays and Notes by W. B. Yeats . 2nd Series. New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1920. Young, Ella. Celtic Wonder-Tales . Retold by Ella Young. Illustrated and decorated by Maud Gonne. Dublin: Maunsel and Company, 1910. Links to related sites England. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from England . Grimm. Grimms' Fairy Tales in English . Man. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from the Isle of Man . Scandinavia and Finland. Scandinavia and Finland: A Digital Library of Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales . Scotland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Scotland . Slavic. Slavic and Other Eastern European Folk and Fairy Tales . Wales. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Wales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 31, 2021. Jack and the Beanstalk Jack and the Beanstalk eight versions of an English fairy tale (Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 328) edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2022 Contents Jack and the Beanstalk, as recorded by Joseph Jacobs (1860/1890). Jack and the Beanstalk, as recorded by Andrew Lang (1890). Jack and the Beanstalk, as recorded by Edwin Sidney Hartland (1890). Jack and the Bean-Pole, as recorded by Elsie Clews Parsons (Pennsylvania, 1917). Jand and the Bean-Stalk, as recorded by Martha Warren Beckwith (Jamaica, 1924). Link to The History of Jack and the Bean-Stalk: Printed from the Original Manuscript, Never Before Published (London: B. Tabart, 1807). This is first known printed version of this tale (presented here by The Hockliffe Project ). Link to Jack and the Bean-Stalk . Source: The Child's Own Book , 9th edition (London: William Tegg, 1861), pp. 214-29). Link to Jack and the Beanstalk, as retold by Flora Annie Steel . Source: Flora Annie Steel, English Fairy Tales (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1918), pp. 136-53. Link to Jack and the Bean Tree . Source: Richard Chase, The Jack Tales: Folk Tales from the Southern Appalachians (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2003), pp. 29-37. First published 1943. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Jack and the Beanstalk As recorded by Joseph Jacobs There was once upon a time a poor widow who had an only son named Jack, and a cow named Milky-White. And all they had to live on was the milk the cow gave every morning, which they carried to the market and sold. But one morning Milky-White gave no milk, and they didn't know what to do. "What shall we do, what shall we do?" said the widow, wringing her hands. "Cheer up, mother, I'll go and get work somewhere," said Jack. "We've tried that before, and nobody would take you," said his mother. "We must sell Milky-White and with the money start a shop, or something." "All right, mother," says Jack. "It's market day today, and I'll soon sell Milky-White, and then we'll see what we can do." So he took the cow's halter in his hand, and off he started. He hadn't gone far when he met a funny-looking old man, who said to him, "Good morning, Jack." "Good morning to you," said Jack, and wondered how he knew his name. "Well, Jack, and where are you off to?" said the man. "I'm going to market to sell our cow there." "Oh, you look the proper sort of chap to sell cows," said the man. "I wonder if you know how many beans make five." "Two in each hand and one in your mouth," says Jack, as sharp as a needle. "Right you are," says the man, "and here they are, the very beans themselves," he went on, pulling out of his pocket a number of strange-looking beans. "As you are so sharp," says he, "I don't mind doing a swap with you -- your cow for these beans." "Go along," says Jack. "Wouldn't you like it?" "Ah! You don't know what these beans are," said the man. "If you plant them overnight, by morning they grow right up to the sky." "Really?" said Jack. "You don't say so." "Yes, that is so. And if it doesn't turn out to be true you can have your cow back." "Right," says Jack, and hands him over Milky-White's halter and pockets the beans. Back goes Jack home, and as he hadn't gone very far it wasn't dusk by the time he got to his door. "Back already, Jack?" said his mother. "I see you haven't got Milky-White, so you've sold her. How much did you get for her?" "You'll never guess, mother," says Jack. "No, you don't say so. Good boy! Five pounds? Ten? Fifteen? No, it can't be twenty." "I told you you couldn't guess. What do you say to these beans? They're magical. Plant them overnight and -- " "What!" says Jack's mother. "Have you been such a fool, such a dolt, such an idiot, as to give away my Milky-White, the best milker in the parish, and prime beef to boot, for a set of paltry beans? Take that! Take that! Take that! And as for your precious beans here they go out of the window. And now off with you to bed. Not a sup shall you drink, and not a bit shall you swallow this very night." So Jack went upstairs to his little room in the attic, and sad and sorry he was, to be sure, as much for his mother's sake as for the loss of his supper. At last he dropped off to sleep. When he woke up, the room looked so funny. The sun was shining into part of it, and yet all the rest was quite dark and shady. So Jack jumped up and dressed himself and went to the window. And what do you think he saw? Why, the beans his mother had thrown out of the window into the garden had sprung up into a big beanstalk which went up and up and up till it reached the sky. So the man spoke truth after all. The beanstalk grew up quite close past Jack's window, so all he had to do was to open it and give a jump onto the beanstalk which ran up just like a big ladder. So Jack climbed, and he climbed, and he climbed, and he climbed, and he climbed, and he climbed, and he climbed till at last he reached the sky. And when he got there he found a long broad road going as straight as a dart. So he walked along, and he walked along, and he walked along till he came to a great big tall house, and on the doorstep there was a great big tall woman. "Good morning, mum," says Jack, quite polite-like. "Could you be so kind as to give me some breakfast?" For he hadn't had anything to eat, you know, the night before, and was as hungry as a hunter. "It's breakfast you want, is it?" says the great big tall woman. "It's breakfast you'll be if you don't move off from here. My man is an ogre and there's nothing he likes better than boys broiled on toast. You'd better be moving on or he'll be coming." "Oh! please, mum, do give me something to eat, mum. I've had nothing to eat since yesterday morning, really and truly, mum," says Jack. "I may as well be broiled as die of hunger." Well, the ogre's wife was not half so bad after all. So she took Jack into the kitchen, and gave him a hunk of bread and cheese and a jug of milk. But Jack hadn't half finished these when thump! thump! thump! the whole house began to tremble with the noise of someone coming. "Goodness gracious me! It's my old man," said the ogre's wife. "What on earth shall I do? Come along quick and jump in here." And she bundled Jack into the oven just as the ogre came in. He was a big one, to be sure. At his belt he had three calves strung up by the heels, and he unhooked them and threw them down on the table and said, "Here, wife, broil me a couple of these for breakfast. Ah! what's this I smell? Fee-fi-fo-fum, I smell the blood of an Englishman, Be he alive, or be he dead, I'll have his bones to grind my bread." "Nonsense, dear," said his wife. "You' re dreaming. Or perhaps you smell the scraps of that little boy you liked so much for yesterday's dinner. Here, you go and have a wash and tidy up, and by the time you come back your breakfast'll be ready for you." So off the ogre went, and Jack was just going to jump out of the oven and run away when the woman told him not. "Wait till he's asleep," says she; "he always has a doze after breakfast." Well, the ogre had his breakfast, and after that he goes to a big chest and takes out a couple of bags of gold, and down he sits and counts till at last his head began to nod and he began to snore till the whole house shook again. Then Jack crept out on tiptoe from his oven, and as he was passing the ogre, he took one of the bags of gold under his arm, and off he pelters till he came to the beanstalk, and then he threw down the bag of gold, which, of course, fell into his mother's garden, and then he climbed down and climbed down till at last he got home and told his mother and showed her the gold and said, "Well, mother, wasn't I right about the beans? They are really magical, you see." So they lived on the bag of gold for some time, but at last they came to the end of it, and Jack made up his mind to try his luck once more at the top of the beanstalk. So one fine morning he rose up early, and got onto the beanstalk, and he climbed, and he climbed, and he climbed, and he climbed, and he climbed, and he climbed till at last he came out onto the road again and up to the great tall house he had been to before. There, sure enough, was the great tall woman a-standing on the doorstep. "Good morning, mum," says Jack, as bold as brass, "could you be so good as to give me something to eat?" "Go away, my boy," said the big tall woman, "or else my man will eat you up for breakfast. But aren't you the youngster who came here once before? Do you know, that very day my man missed one of his bags of gold." "That's strange, mum," said Jack, "I dare say I could tell you something about that, but I'm so hungry I can't speak till I've had something to eat." Well, the big tall woman was so curious that she took him in and gave him something to eat. But he had scarcely begun munching it as slowly as he could when thump! thump! they heard the giant's footstep, and his wife hid Jack away in the oven. All happened as it did before. In came the ogre as he did before, said, "Fee-fi-fo-fum," and had his breakfast off three broiled oxen. Then he said, "Wife, bring me the hen that lays the golden eggs." So she brought it, and the ogre said, "Lay," and it laid an egg all of gold. And then the ogre began to nod his head, and to snore till the house shook. Then Jack crept out of the oven on tiptoe and caught hold of the golden hen, and was off before you could say "Jack Robinson." But this time the hen gave a cackle which woke the ogre, and just as Jack got out of the house he heard him calling, "Wife, wife, what have you done with my golden hen?" And the wife said, "Why, my dear?" But that was all Jack heard, for he rushed off to the beanstalk and climbed down like a house on fire. And when he got home he showed his mother the wonderful hen, and said "Lay" to it; and it laid a golden egg every time he said "Lay." Well, Jack was not content, and it wasn't long before he determined to have another try at his luck up there at the top of the beanstalk. So one fine morning he rose up early and got to the beanstalk, and he climbed, and he climbed, and he climbed, and he climbed till he got to the top. But this time he knew better than to go straight to the ogre's house. And when he got near it, he waited behind a bush till he saw the ogre's wife come out with a pail to get some water, and then he crept into the house and got into the copper. He hadn't been there long when he heard thump! thump! thump! as before, and in came the ogre and his wife. "Fee-fi-fo-fum, I smell the blood of an Englishman," cried out the ogre. "I smell him, wife, I smell him." "Do you, my dearie?" says the ogre's wife. "Then, if it's that little rogue that stole your gold and the hen that laid the golden eggs he's sure to have got into the oven." And they both rushed to the oven. But Jack wasn't there, luckily, and the ogre' s wife said, "There you are again with your fee-fi-fo-fum. Why, of course, it's the boy you caught last night that I've just broiled for your breakfast. How forgetful I am, and how careless you are not to know the difference between live and dead after all these years." So the ogre sat down to the breakfast and ate it, but every now and then he would mutter, "Well, I could have sworn --" and he'd get up and search the larder and the cupboards and everything, only, luckily, he didn't think of the copper. After breakfast was over, the ogre called out, "Wife, wife, bring me my golden harp." So she brought it and put it on the table before him. Then he said, "Sing!" and the golden harp sang most beautifully. And it went on singing till the ogre fell asleep, and commenced to snore like thunder. Then Jack lifted up the copper lid very quietly and got down like a mouse and crept on hands and knees till he came to the table, when up he crawled, caught hold of the golden harp and dashed with it towards the door. But the harp called out quite loud, "Master! Master!" and the ogre woke up just in time to see Jack running off with his harp. Jack ran as fast as he could, and the ogre came rushing after, and would soon have caught him, only Jack had a start and dodged him a bit and knew where he was going. When he got to the beanstalk the ogre was not more than twenty yards away when suddenly he saw Jack disappear like, and when he came to the end of the road he saw Jack underneath climbing down for dear life. Well, the ogre didn't like trusting himself to such a ladder, and he stood and waited, so Jack got another start. But just then the harp cried out, "Master! Master!" and the ogre swung himself down onto the beanstalk, which shook with his weight. Down climbs Jack, and after him climbed the ogre. By this time Jack had climbed down and climbed down and climbed down till he was very nearly home. So he called out, "Mother! Mother! bring me an ax, bring me an ax." And his mother came rushing out with the ax in her hand, but when she came to the beanstalk she stood stock still with fright, for there she saw the ogre with his legs just through the clouds. But Jack jumped down and got hold of the ax and gave a chop at the beanstalk which cut it half in two. The ogre felt the beanstalk shake and quiver, so he stopped to see what was the matter. Then Jack gave another chop with the ax, and the beanstalk was cut in two and began to topple over. Then the ogre fell down and broke his crown, and the beanstalk came toppling after. Then Jack showed his mother his golden harp, and what with showing that and selling the golden eggs, Jack and his mother became very rich, and he married a great princess, and they lived happy ever after. Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 13, pp. 59-67 . Jacobs' source: "I tell this as it was told me in Australia, somewhere about the year 1860." Return to the table of contents . Jack and the Beanstalk As recorded by Andrew Lang Jack Sells the Cow Once upon a time there was a poor widow who lived in a little cottage with her only son Jack. Jack was a giddy, thoughtless boy, but very kind hearted and affectionate. There had been a hard winter, and after it the poor woman had suffered from fever and ague. Jack did no work as yet, and by degrees they grew dreadfully poor. The widow saw that there was no means of keeping Jack and herself from starvation but by selling her cow; so one morning she said to her son, "I am too weak to go myself, Jack, so you must take the cow to market for me, and sell her." Jack liked going to market to sell the cow very much; but as he was on the way, he met a butcher who had some beautiful beans in his hand. Jack stopped to look at them, and the butcher told the boy that they were of great value and persuaded the silly lad to sell the cow for these beans. When he brought them home to his mother instead of the money she expected for her nice cow, she was very vexed and shed many tears, scolding Jack for his folly. He was very sorry, and mother and son went to bed very sadly that night; their last hope seemed gone. At daybreak Jack rose and went out into the garden. "At least," he thought, "I will sow the wonderful beans. Mother says that they are just common scarlet runners, and nothing else; but I may as well sow them." So he took a piece of stick, and made some holes in the ground, and put in the beans. That day they had very little dinner, and went sadly to bed, knowing that for the next day there would be none, and Jack, unable to sleep from grief and vexation, got up at day-dawn and went out into the garden. What was his amazement to find that the beans had grown up in the night, and climbed up and up until they covered the high cliff that sheltered the cottage and disappeared above it! The stalks had twined and twisted themselves together until they formed quite a ladder. "It would be easy to climb it," thought Jack. And, having thought of the experiment, he at once resolved to carry it out, for Jack was a good climber. However, after his late mistake about the cow, he thought he had better consult his mother first. Wonderful Growth of the Beanstalk So Jack called his mother, and they both gazed in silent wonder at the beanstalk, which was not only of great height, but was thick enough to bear Jack's weight. "I wonder where it ends," said Jack to his mother. "I think I will climb up and see." His mother wished him not to venture up this strange ladder, but Jack coaxed her to give her consent to the attempt, for he was certain there must be something wonderful in the beanstalk; so at last she yielded to his wishes. Jack instantly began to climb, and went up and up on the ladder-like beanstalk until everything he had left behind him -- the cottage, the village, and even the tall church tower -- looked quite little, and still he could not see the top of the beanstalk. Jack felt a little tired, and thought for a moment that he would go back again; but he was a very persevering boy, and he knew that the way to succeed in anything is not to give up. So after resting for a moment he went on. After climbing higher and higher, until he grew afraid to look down for fear he should be giddy, Jack at last reached the top of the beanstalk, and found himself in a beautiful country, finely wooded, with beautiful meadows covered with sheep. A crystal stream ran through the pastures; not far from the place where he had got off the beanstalk stood a fine, strong castle. Jack wondered very much that he had never heard of or seen this castle before; but when he reflected on the subject, he saw that it was as much separated from the village by the perpendicular rock on which it stood as if it were in another land. While Jack was standing looking at the castle, a very strange looking woman came out of the wood, and advanced towards him. She wore a pointed cap of quilted red satin turned up with ermine. Her hair streamed loose over her shoulders, and she walked with a staff. Jack took off his cap and made her a bow. "If you please, ma'am," said he, "is this your house?" "No," said the old lady. "Listen, and I will tell you the story of that castle:" Once upon a time there was a noble knight, who lived in this castle, which is on the borders of fairyland. He had a fair and beloved wife and several lovely children; and as his neighbors, the little people, were very friendly towards him, they bestowed on him many excellent and precious gifts. Rumor whispered of these treasures; and a monstrous giant, who lived at no great distance, and who was a very wicked being, resolved to obtain possession of them. So he bribed a false servant to let him inside the castle, when the knight was in bed and asleep, and he killed him as he lay. Then he went to the part of the castle which was the nursery, and also killed all the poor little ones he found there. Happily for her, the lady was not to be found. She had gone with her infant son, who was only two or three months old, to visit her old nurse, who lived in the valley; and she had been detained all night there by a storm. The next morning, as soon as it was light, one of the servants at the castle, who had managed to escape, came to tell the poor lady of the sad fate of her husband and her pretty babes. She could scarcely believe him at first, and was eager at once to go back and share the fate of her dear ones. But the old nurse, with many tears, besought her to remember that she had still a child, and that it was her duty to preserve her life for the sake of the poor innocent. The lady yielded to this reasoning, and consented to remain at her nurse's house as the best place of concealment; for the servant told her that the giant had vowed, if he could find her, he would kill both her and her baby. Years rolled on. The old nurse died, leaving her cottage and the few articles of furniture it contained to her poor lady, who dwelt in it, working as a peasant for her daily bread. Her spinning wheel and the milk of a cow, which she had purchased with the little money she had with her, sufficed for the scanty subsistence of herself and her little son. There was a nice little garden attached to the cottage, in which they cultivated peas, beans, and cabbages, and the lady was not ashamed to go out at harvest time, and glean in the fields to supply her little son's wants. Jack, that poor lady is your mother. This castle was once your father's, and must again be yours. Jack uttered a cry of surprise. "My mother! Oh, madam, what ought I to do? My poor father! My dear mother!" "Your duty requires you to win it back for your mother. But the task is a very difficult one, and full of peril, Jack. Have you courage to undertake it?" "I fear nothing when I am doing right," said Jack. "Then," said the lady in the red cap, "you are one of those who slay giants. You must get into the castle, and if possible possess yourself of a hen that lays golden eggs, and a harp that talks. Remember, all the giant possesses is really yours." As she ceased speaking, the lady of the red hat suddenly disappeared, and of course Jack knew she was a fairy. Jack determined at once to attempt the adventure; so he advanced, and blew the horn which hung at the castle portal. The door was opened in a minute or two by a frightful giantess, with one great eye in the middle of her forehead. As soon as Jack saw her he turned to run away, but she caught him, and dragged him into the castle. "Ho, ho!" she laughed terribly. "You didn't expect to see me here, that is clear! No, I shan't let you go again. I am weary of my life. I am so overworked, and I don't see why I should not have a page as well as other ladies. And you shall be my boy. You shall clean the knives, and black the boots, and make the fires, and help me generally when the giant is out. When he is at home I must hide you, for he has eaten up all my pages hitherto, and you would be a dainty morsel, my little lad." While she spoke she dragged Jack right into the castle. The poor boy was very much frightened, as I am sure you and I would have been in his place. But he remembered that fear disgraces a man, so he struggled to be brave and make the best of things. "I am quite ready to help you, and do all I can to serve you, madam," he said, "only I beg you will be good enough to hide me from your husband, for I should not like to be eaten at all." "That's a good boy," said the giantess, nodding her head; "it is lucky for you that you did not scream out when you saw me, as the other boys who have been here did, for if you had done so my husband would have awakened and have eaten you, as he did them, for breakfast. Come here, child; go into my wardrobe. He never ventures to open that . You will be safe there." And she opened a huge wardrobe which stood in the great hall, and shut him into it. But the keyhole was so large that it admitted plenty of air, and he could see everything that took place through it. By and by he heard a heavy tramp on the stairs, like the lumbering along of a great cannon, and then a voice like thunder cried out. Fe, fa, fi-fo-fum, I smell the breath of an Englishman. Let him be alive or let him be dead, I'll grind his bones to make my bread. "Wife," cried the giant, "there is a man in the castle. Let me have him for breakfast." "You are grown old and stupid," cried the lady in her loud tones. "It is only a nice fresh steak off an elephant that I have cooked for you which you smell. There, sit down and make a good breakfast." And she placed a huge dish before him of savory steaming meat, which greatly pleased him and made him forget his idea of an Englishman being in the castle. When he had breakfasted he went out for a walk; and then the giantess opened the door, and made Jack come out to help her. He helped her all day. She fed him well, and when evening came put him back in the wardrobe. The Hen That Lays Golden Eggs The giant came in to supper. Jack watched him through the keyhole, and was amazed to see him pick a wolf's bone and put half a fowl at a time into his capacious mouth. When the supper was ended he bade his wife bring him his hen that laid the golden eggs. "It lays as well as it did when it belonged to that paltry knight," he said. "Indeed, I think the eggs are heavier than ever." The giantess went away, and soon returned with a little brown hen, which she placed on the table before her husband. "And now, my dear," she said, "I am going for a walk, if you don't want me any longer." "Go," said the giant. "I shall be glad to have a nap by and by." Then he took up the brown hen and said to her, "Lay!" And she instantly laid a golden egg. "Lay!" said the giant again. And she laid another. "Lay!" he repeated the third time. And again a golden egg lay on the table. Now Jack was sure this hen was that of which the fairy had spoken. By and by the giant put the hen down on the floor, and soon after went fast asleep, snoring so loud that it sounded like thunder. Directly Jack perceived that the giant was fast asleep, he pushed open the door of the wardrobe and crept out. Very softly he stole across the room, and, picking up the hen, made haste to quit the apartment. He knew the way to the kitchen, the door of which he found was left ajar. He opened it, shut and locked it after him, and flew back to the beanstalk, which he descended as fast as his feet would move. When his mother saw him enter the house she wept for joy, for she had feared that the fairies had carried him away, or that the giant had found him. But Jack put the brown hen down before her, and told her how he had been in the giant's castle, and all his adventures. She was very glad to see the hen, which would make them rich once more. The Money Bags Jack made another journey up the beanstalk to the giant's castle one day while his mother had gone to market. But first he dyed his hair and disguised himself. The old woman did not know him again and dragged him in as she had done before to help her to do the work; but she heard her husband coming, and hid him in the wardrobe, not thinking that it was the same boy who had stolen the hen. She bade him stay quite still there, or the giant would eat him. Then the giant came in saying: Fe, fa, fi-fo-fum, I smell the breath of an Englishman. Let him be alive or let him be dead, I'll grind his bones to make my bread. "Nonsense!" said the wife, "it is only a roasted bullock that I thought would be a tit-bit for your supper; sit down and I will bring it up at once." The giant sat down, and soon his wife brought up a roasted bullock on a large dish, and they began their supper. Jack was amazed to see them pick the bones of the bullock as if it had been a lark. As soon as they had finished their meal, the giantess rose and said:, "Now, my dear, with your leave I am going up to my room to finish the story I am reading. If you want me call for me." "First," answered the giant, "bring me my money bags, that I may count my golden pieces before I sleep." The giantess obeyed. She went and soon returned with two large bags over her shoulders, which she put down by her husband. "There," she said; "that is all that is left of the knight's money. When you have spent it you must go and take another baron's castle." "That he shan't, if I can help it," thought Jack. The giant, when his wife was gone, took out heaps and heaps of golden pieces, and counted them, and put them in piles, until he was tired of the amusement. Then he swept them all back into their bags, and leaning back in his chair fell fast asleep, snoring so loud that no other sound was audible. Jack stole softly out of the wardrobe, and taking up the bags of money (which were his very own, because the giant had stolen them from his father), he ran off, and with great difficulty descending the beanstalk, laid the bags of gold on his mother's table. She had just returned from town, and was crying at not finding Jack. "There, mother, I have brought you the gold that my father lost." "Oh, Jack! You are a very good boy, but I wish you would not risk your precious life in the giant's castle. Tell me how you came to go there again." And Jack told her all about it. Jack's mother was very glad to get the money, but she did not like him to run any risk for her. But after a time Jack made up his mind to go again to the giant's castle. So he climbed the beanstalk once more, and blew the horn at the giant's gate. The giantess soon opened the door. She was very stupid, and did not know him again, but she stopped a minute before she took him in. She feared another robbery; but Jack's fresh face looked so innocent that she could not resist him, and so she bade him come in, and again hid him away in the wardrobe. By and by the giant came home, and as soon as he had crossed the threshold he roared out: Fe, fa, fi-fo-fum, I smell the breath of an Englishman. Let him be alive or let him be dead, I'll grind his bones to make my bread. "You stupid old giant," said his wife, "you only smell a nice sheep, which I have grilled for your dinner." And the giant sat down, and his wife brought up a whole sheep for his dinner. When he had eaten it all up, he said, "Now bring me my harp, and I will have a little music while you take your walk." The giantess obeyed, and returned with a beautiful harp. The framework was all sparkling with diamonds and rubies, and the strings were all of gold. "This is one of the nicest things I took from the knight," said the giant. "I am very fond of music, and my harp is a faithful servant." So he drew the harp towards him, and said, "Play!" And the harp played a very soft, sad air. "Play something merrier!" said the giant. And the harp played a merry tune. "Now play me a lullaby," roared the giant, and the harp played a sweet lullaby, to the sound of which its master fell asleep. Then Jack stole softly out of the wardrobe, and went into the huge kitchen to see if the giantess had gone out. He found no one there, so he went to the door and opened it softly, for he thought he could not do so with the harp in his hand. Then he entered the giant's room and seized the harp and ran away with it; but as he jumped over the threshold the harp called out, "Master! Master!" And the giant woke up. With a tremendous roar he sprang from his seat, and in two strides had reached the door. But Jack was very nimble. He fled like lightning with the harp, talking to it as he went (for he saw it was a fairy), and telling it he was the son of its old master, the knight. Still the giant came on so fast that he was quite close to poor Jack, and had stretched out his great hand to catch him. But, luckily, just at the moment he stepped upon a loose stone, stumbled, and fell flat on the ground, where he lay at his full length. This accident gave Jack time to get on the beanstalk and hasten down it; but just as he reached their own garden he beheld the giant descending after him. "Mother! mother!" cried Jack, "make haste and give me the ax." His mother ran to him with a hatchet in her hand, and Jack with one tremendous blow cut through all the stems except one. "Now, mother, stand out of the way!" said he. Jack's mother shrank back, and it was well she did so, for just as the giant took hold of the last branch of the beanstalk, Jack cut the stem quite through and darted from the spot. Down came the giant with a terrible crash, and as he fell on his head, he broke his neck, and lay dead at the feet of the woman he had so much injured. Before Jack and his mother had recovered from their alarm and agitation, a beautiful lady stood before them. "Jack," said she, "you have acted like a brave knight's son, and deserve to have your inheritance restored to you. Dig a grave and bury the giant, and then go and kill the giantess." "But," said Jack, "I could not kill anyone unless I were fighting with him; and I could not draw my sword upon a woman. Moreover, the giantess was very kind to me." The fairy smiled on Jack. "I am very much pleased with your generous feeling," she said. "Nevertheless, return to the castle, and act as you will find needful." Jack asked the fairy if she would show him the way to the castle, as the beanstalk was now down. She told him that she would drive him there in her chariot, which was drawn by two peacocks. Jack thanked her, and sat down in the chariot with her. The fairy drove him a long distance round, until they reached a village which lay at the bottom of the hill. Here they found a number of miserable-looking men assembled. The fairy stopped her carriage and addressed them. "My friends," said she, "the cruel giant who oppressed you and ate up all your flocks and herds is dead, and this young gentleman was the means of your being delivered from him, and is the son of your kind old master, the knight." The men gave a loud cheer at these words, and pressed forward to say that they would serve Jack as faithfully as they had served his father. The fairy bade them follow her to the castle, and they marched thither in a body, and Jack blew the horn and demanded admittance. The old giantess saw them coming from the turret loop hole. She was very much frightened, for she guessed that something had happened to her husband; and as she came downstairs very fast she caught her foot in her dress, and fell from the top to the bottom and broke her neck. When the people outside found that the door was not opened to them, they took crowbars and forced the portal. Nobody was to be seen, but on leaving the hall they found the body of the giantess at the foot of the stairs. Thus Jack took possession of the castle. The fairy went and brought his mother to him, with the hen and the harp. He had the giantess buried, and endeavored as much as lay in his power to do right to those whom the giant had robbed. Before her departure for fairyland, the fairy explained to Jack that she had sent the butcher to meet him with the beans, in order to try what sort of lad he was. "If you had looked at the gigantic beanstalk and only stupidly wondered about it," she said, "I should have left you where misfortune had placed you, only restoring her cow to your mother. But you showed an inquiring mind, and great courage and enterprise, therefore you deserve to rise; and when you mounted the beanstalk you climbed the Ladder of Fortune." She then took her leave of Jack and his mother. Source: Andrew Lang, The Red Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1895), pp. 133-45 . First published 1890. Return to the table of contents . Jack and the Beanstalk As recorded by Edwin Sidney Hartland There lived a poor widow, whose cottage stood in a country village a long distance from London, for many years. The widow had only a child named Jack, whom she gratified in everything. The consequence of her partiality was that Jack paid little attention to anything she said, and he was heedless and extravagant. His follies were not owing to bad disposition but to his mother never having chided him. As she was not wealthy, and he would not work, she was obliged to support herself and him by selling everything she had. At last nothing remained, only a cow. The widow, with tears in her eyes, could not help reproaching Jack. "Oh! You wicked boy," said she. "By your prodigal course of life you have now brought us both to fall! Heedless, heedless boy! I have not money enough to buy a bit of bread for another day. Nothing remains but my poor cow, and that must be sold, or we must starve!" Jack was in a degree of tenderness for a few minutes, but soon over. And then becoming very hungry for want of food, he teased his poor mother to let him sell the cow, to which at last she reluctantly consented. As he proceeded on his journey he met a butcher, who inquired why he was driving the cow from home. Jack replied he was going to sell it. The butcher had some wonderful beans of different colors in his bag which attracted Jack's notice. This the butcher saw, who, knowing Jack's easy temper, resolved to take advantage of it, and offered all the beans for the cow. The foolish boy thought it a great offer. The bargain was momently struck, and the cow exchanged for a few paltry beans. When Jack hastened home with the beans and told his mother, and showed them to her, she kicked the beans away in a great passion. They flew in all directions, and were extended as far as the garden. Early in the morning Jack arose from his bed, and seeing something strange from the window, he hastened downstairs into the garden, where he soon found that some of the beans had grown in root and sprung up wonderfully. The stalks grew in an immense thickness and had so entwined that they formed a ladder like a chain in view. Looking upwards, he could not descry the top. It seemed to be lost in the clouds. He tried it, discovered it firm and not to be shaken. A new idea immediately struck him. He would climb the beanstalk and see to whence it would lead. Full of this plan, which made him forget even his hunger, Jack hastened to communicate his intention to his mother. He instantly set out, and after climbing for some hours reached the top of the beanstalk, fatigued and almost exhausted. Looking round, he was surprised to find himself in a strange country. It looked to be quite a barren desert. Not a tree, shrub, house, or living creature was to be seen. Jack sat himself pensively upon a block of stone and thought of his mother. His hunger attacked him, and now he appeared sorrowful for his disobedience in climbing the beanstalk against her will, and concluded that he must now die for want of food. However, he walked on, hoping to see a house where he might beg something to eat. Suddenly he observed a beautiful young female at some distance. She was dressed in an elegant manner, and had a small white wand in her hand, on the top of which was a peacock of pure gold. She approached and said, "I will reveal to you a story your mother dare not. But before I begin, I require a solemn promise on your part to do what I command. I am a fairy, and unless you perform exactly what I direct you to do, you will deprive me of the power to assist you, and there is little doubt but that you will die in the attempt." Jack was rather frightened at this caution, but promised to follow her directions. Your father was a rich man, with a disposition greatly benevolent. It was his practice never to refuse relief to the deserving in his neighborhood, but, on the contrary, to seek out the helpless and distressed. Not many miles from your father's house lived a huge giant who was the dread of the country around for cruelty and oppression. This creature was moreover of a very envious disposition, and disliked to hear others talked of for their goodness and humanity, and he vowed to do him a mischief, so that he might no longer hear his good actions made the subject of everyone's conversation. Your father was too good a man to fear evil from others. Consequently it was not long before the cruel giant found an opportunity to put his wicked threats into practice, for hearing that your parents were passing a few days with a friend at some distance from home, he caused your father to be waylaid and murdered, and your mother to be seized on their way homeward. At the time this happened you were but a few months old. Your poor mother, almost dead with affright and horror, was borne away by the cruel giant's emissaries to a dungeon under his house, in which she and her poor babe were both long confined as prisoners. Distracted at the absence of your parents, the servants went in search of them, but no tidings of either could be obtained. Meantime he caused a will to be found making over all your father's property to him as your guardian, and as such he took open possession. After your mother had been some months in prison the giant offered to restore her to liberty, on condition that she would solemnly swear that she would never divulge the story of her wrongs to anyone. To put it out of her power to do him any harm, should she break her oath, the giant had her put on shipboard and taken to a distant country, where he had her left with no more money for her support than what she obtained from the sale of a few jewels she had secreted in her dress. I was appointed your father's guardian at his birth, but fairies have laws to which they are subject as well as mortals. A short time before the giant assassinated your father I transgressed. My punishment was a suspension of my power for a limited time, an unfortunate circumstance, as it entirely prevented my assisting your father, even when I most wished to do so. The day on which you met the butcher, as you went to sell your mother's cow, my power was restored. It was I who secretly prompted you to take the beans in exchange for the cow. By my power the beanstalk grew to so great a height and formed a ladder. The giant lives in this country. You are the person appointed to punish him for all his wickedness. You will have dangers and difficulties to encounter, but you must persevere in avenging the death of your father, or you will not prosper in any of your undertakings. As to the giant's possessions, everything he has is yours, though you are deprived of it. You may take, therefore, what part of it you can. You must, however, be careful, for such is his love for gold that the first loss he discovers will make him outrageous and very watchful for the future. But you must still pursue him, for it is only by stratagem that you can ever hope to overcome him and become possessed of your rightful property, and the means of retributive justice overtaking him for his barbarous murder. One thing I desire is, do not let your mother know you are acquainted with your father's history till you see me again. Go along the direct road. You will soon see the house where your cruel enemy lives. While you do as I order you I will protect and guard you. But remember, if you disobey my commands, a dreadful punishment awaits you." As soon as she had concluded she disappeared, leaving Jack to follow his journey. He walked on till after sunset, when to his great joy he espied a large mansion. This pleasant sight revived his drooping spirits. He redoubled his speed and reached it shortly. A well-looking woman stood at the door. He accosted her, begging she would give him a morsel of bread and a night's lodging. She expressed the greatest surprise at seeing him and said it was quite uncommon to see any strange creature near their house, for it was mostly known that her husband was a very cruel and powerful giant, and one that would eat human flesh if he could possibly get it. This account terrified Jack greatly, but still, not forgetting the fairy's protection, he hoped to elude the giant, and therefore he entreated the woman to take him in for one night only and hide him where she thought proper. The good woman at last suffered herself to be persuaded, for her disposition was remarkably compassionate, and at last led him into the house. First they passed an elegant hall, finely furnished. They then proceeded through several spacious rooms, all in the same style of grandeur, but they looked to be quite forsaken and desolate. A long gallery came next. It was very dark, just large enough to show that instead of a wall on each side there was a grating of iron, which parted off a dismal dungeon, for whence issued the groans of several poor victims whom the cruel giant reserved in confinement for his voracious appetite. Poor Jack was in a dreadful fright at witnessing such a horrible scene, which caused him to fear that he would never see his mother, but be captured lastly for the giant's meat. But still he recollected the fairy, and a gleam of hope forced itself into his heart. The good woman then took Jack to a spacious kitchen, where a great fire was kept. She bade him sit down and gave him plenty to eat and drink. In the meantime he had done his meal and enjoyed himself, but was disturbed by a hard knocking at the gate, so loud as to cause the house to shake. Jack was concealed in the oven, and the giant's wife ran to let in her husband. Jack heard him accost her in a voice like thunder, saying, "Wife! Wife! I smell fresh meat!" "Oh! My dear," replied she, "it is nothing but the people in the dungeon." The giant seemed to believe her, and at last seated himself by the fireside, whilst the wife prepared supper. By degrees Jack endeavored to look at the monster through a small crevice. He was much surprised to see what an amazing quantity he devoured, and supposed he would never have done eating and drinking. After his supper was ended a very curious hen was brought and placed on the table before him. Jack's curiosity was so great to see what would happen. He observed that it stood quiet before him, and every time the giant said, "Lay!" the hen laid an egg of solid gold. The giant amused himself a long time with his hen. Meanwhile his wife went to bed At length he fell asleep and snored like the roaring of a cannon. Jack, finding him still asleep at daybreak, crept softly from his hiding place, seized the hen, and ran off with her as fast as his legs could possibly allow him. Jack easily retraced his way to the beanstalk and descended it better quicker than he expected. His mother was overjoyed to see him. "Now, mother," said Jack, "I have brought you home that which will make you rich." The hen produced as many golden eggs as they desired. They sold them and soon became possessed of as much riches as they wanted. For a few months Jack and his mother lived very happy, but he longed to pay the giant another visit. Early in the morning he again climbed the beanstalk and reached the giant's mansion late in the evening. The woman was at the door as before. Jack told her a pitiful tale and prayed for a night's shelter. She told him that she had admitted a poor hungry boy once before, and the little ingrate had stolen one of the giant's treasures, and ever since that she had been cruelly used. She, however, led him to the kitchen, gave him supper, and put him in a lumber closet. Soon after, the giant came in, took his supper, and ordered his wife to bring down his bags of gold and silver. Jack peeped out of his hiding place and observed the giant counting over his treasures, and after which he carefully put them in bags again, fell asleep, and snored as before. Jack crept quietly from his hiding place and approached the giant, when a little dog under the chair barked furiously. Contrary to his expectation, the giant slept on soundly, and the dog ceased. Jack seized the bags, reached the door in safety, and soon arrived at the bottom of the beanstalk. When he reached his mother's cottage he found it quite deserted. Greatly surprised, he ran into the village, and an old woman directed him to a house, where he found his mother apparently dying. On being informed of our hero's safe return, his mother revived and soon recovered. Jack then presented two bags of gold and silver to her. Her mother discovered that something preyed upon his mind heavily and endeavored to discover the cause, but Jack knew too well what the consequence would be should he discover the cause of his melancholy to her. He did his utmost therefore to conquer the great desire which now forced itself upon him in spite of himself for another journey up the beanstalk. On the longest day Jack arose as soon as it was light, ascended the beanstalk and reached the top with some little trouble. He found the road, journey, etc., the same as on the former occasions. He arrived at the giant's house in the evening and found his wife standing as usual at the door. Jack now appeared a different character, and had disguised himself so completely that she did not appear to have any recollection of him. However, when he begged admittance, he found it very difficult to persuade her. At last he prevailed, was allowed to go in, and was concealed in the copper. When the giant returned, he said, as usual, "Wife! Wife! I smell fresh meat!" But Jack felt quite composed, as he had said so before, and had soon been satisfied. However, the giant started up suddenly, and notwithstanding all his wife could say, he searched all round the room. Whilst this was going forward, Jack was much terrified, and ready to die with fear, wishing himself at home a thousand times. But when the giant approached the copper and put his hand upon the lid, Jack thought his death was certain. Fortunately the giant ended his search there without moving the lid, and seated himself quietly by the fireside. When the giant's supper was over he commanded his wife to fetch down his harp. Jack peeped under the copper lid, and soon saw the most beautiful one that could be imagined. It was put by the giant on the table, who said, "Play," and it instantly played of its own accord. The music was uncommonly fine. Jack was delighted and felt more anxious to get the harp into his possession than either of the former treasures. The giant's soul was not attuned to harmony, and the music soon lulled him into a sound sleep. Now, therefore, was the time to carry off the harp, as the giant appeared to be in a more profound sleep than usual. Jack soon made up his mind, got out of the copper, and seized the harp, which, however, being enchanted by a fairy, called out loudly, "Master, master!" The giant awoke, stood up, and tried to pursue Jack, but he had drank so much that he could not stand. Jack ran as quick as he could. In a little time the giant recovered sufficiently to walk slowly, or rather to reel after him. Had he been sober, he must have overtaken Jack instantly. But as he then was, Jack contrived to be first at the top of the beanstalk. The giant called to him all the way along the road in a voice like thunder, and was sometimes very near to him. The moment Jack down the beanstalk he called out for a hatchet. One was brought him directly. Just at that instant the giant began to descend, but Jack with his hatchet cut the beanstalk close off at the root, and the giant fell headlong into the garden. The fall instantly killed him. Jack heartily begged his mother's pardon for all the sorrow and affliction he had caused her, promising most faithfully to be dutiful and obedient to her in future. He proved as good as his word and became a pattern of affectionate behavior and attention to his parent. Source: Edwin Sidney Hartland, English Fairy and Other Folk Tales (London: The Walter Scott Publishing Company, n.d. [ca. 1890], pp. 35-46 . Hartland's source: "From a chap book." Return to the table of contents . Jack and the Bean-Pole Pennsylvania, as recorded by Elsie Clews Parsons Jack an' his mother lived together, an' they had planted some beans. And it seemed that one bean had strayed off from the rest, an' it grew up right alongside of the house. Their house was right below a hill, and Jack had always wondered what was on top of the hill. So one day Jack climbed a bean-pole to get up to the top of the hill. So, when he had got to the top, he saw a palace, an' he went to this place to see who lived there. So, when he had got there, he found it was a giant's castle, but the giant wasn't at home. But his wife was. Jack was tired and hungry. So he asked the lady to take him in and give him something to eat. So she did so. But she told him not to let her husband catch him there. So, while Jack was eating, the giant came to the door. She told Jack to hide, an' Jack hid in the chest behind the door. So the giant came in. He said: Fe, fi, fo, fum, I smell the blood of an Englishmune. He said: Be he alive or be he dead, Fe, fi, fo, fum! But his wife told him that he didn't, that it was only some mutton that she was cooking. So the giant sat down to eat his supper; and after he had finished eating, he called to his wife, and told her to bring him the wonder-box, which he was supposed to have taken from Jack's father before Jack's father died. So, while the giant was sitting there looking in the box, he fell asleep. An' Jack slipped out of the chest behind the door, an' took the wonder-box home to his mother. So it wasn't very long till Jack made up his mind to make another trip back to the castle of the giant. So, when Jack went back this time, he tried to put on like another poor little boy that was half starved. So he begged entrance at the door of the castle from the wife. And she didn't want to have him in, and she told him about the boy that had took the wonder-box from her husband. So he begged so hard that she left him in, an' she gave him some bread and milk to eat. And again, while Jack was eating, the giant came. And as he came in the door, he said: Fe, fi, fo, fum, I smell the blood of an Englishmune. He said: Be he alive or be he dead, Fe, fi, fo, fum! And Jack jumped in the salt-cellar. His wife said, "No, there hasn't been any one here today." She says, "I'm only roastin' some pork for your supper." So, after he ate his supper, the giant sent for his golden hen that lay the golden egg. So his wife went and brought it for him. And while the giant was playing with the egg that the hen had laid, he fell fast asleep. An' Jack carried off the hen and the egg down the beanstalk to where his mother lived. But Jack still thought that he wanted to visit the castle again. So this time, when he went up the beanstalk to the giant's castle, he was in the appearance of a newsboy selling papers. So, while the wife went to get the money to buy a paper, the giant appeared, and Jack hid in the closet. And the giant repeated again: Fe, fi, fo, fum, I smell the blood of an Englishmune. He said: Be he alive or be he dead, Fe, fi, fo, fum! So the wife said, "No, there hasn't been any one here today." And after the giant had ate his supper, he called for his harp, the only thing that he had left, an' this was a magic harp. So it commenced to play, an' it played so sweetly that the giant fell fast asleep and commenced to snore. And as the harp stopped playing, Jack came out of the closet, took the harp, and started to the door. But the harp began to play, and it woke the giant up. An' the giant followed Jack out of the door, an' Jack run as fast as he could down the beanstalk, an' the giant started to follow. But as the giant reached the top, Jack cut down the beanstalk with an axe; an' as the giant stepped on, he fell down an' broke his neck. An' Jack and his mother always lived happy afterward with the property of the father which the giant had stolen an' Jack had restored again. Source: Elsie Clews Parsons, "Tales from Maryland and Pennsylvania," The Journal of Ameerican Folklore , vol. 30, no. 116 (April - June, 1917), pp. 212-13 . Parsons' source: Mary Smith of Lincoln, Pennsylvania. Return to the table of contents . Jack and the Bean-Stalk Jamaica, as recorded by Martha Warren Beckwith Jack's father died an' leave he an' his mother. And all them money finish an' they didn't have more than one cow leave. An' the mother gave him to go to the market an' sell it. When he catch part of the way, he swap it for a cap of bean. When he get home, the mother get annoyed and t'row away the bean, so he get dread if the mother beat him. He went away an' sat by the roadside, an' he saw an old lady coming, 'he beg him something, 'he show him a house on a high hill, an' him tol' him de man live up dere is de man rob all him fader riches an' he mus' go to him an' he get somet'ing. An' so he went home back. An' so in de morning, he see one of de bean-tree grow a large tree outside de window, an' 'tretch forth over de giant house; an' he went up till he reach to de giant house. An' when he go, de giant was not at home an' he ax de giant wife to put him up an' give him something to eat. De wife tell him she will give him something to eat, but she can't put him up, for anywhere him put him de giant will find him when him come home. He said to de giant wife him must tek a chance. De wife put him into a barrel. When de giant come home, de giant smelled him. He ax him wife where him get fresh blood. So she told him she have a little somet'ing to make a pudding for him tomorrow. Said 'he mus' bring it. Said no, better to have fresh pudding tomorrow than to have it tonight. After de giant finish his dinner, started to count his money. He fall asleep on de table, an' Jack went down take be bag of money an' went away to his house. He climb on de bean-tree right outside his window an' went home back an' gave his mother the money. Source (Internet Archive): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 114, p. 149 . Source (Sacred Texts): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 114, p. 149 . Beckwith's informant: Clarence Tathum, Mandeville. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 27, 2022. The Jackal and the Farmer and other Folktales of Type 154 The Jackal and the Farmer and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 154 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2013 Contents The Jackal and the Farmer (North Africa, Kabyl). Well Done and Ill Paid (Norway). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Jackal and the Farmer North Africa (Kabyl) A farmer plowed with two oxen from morning until evening. One evening a lion came and said, "Give me one of your two oxen or I'll kill you and both of the oxen." The farmer was terrified. He unhitched one of the oxen and gave it to the lion. The lion took it and dragged it away. The farmer went home with the remaining ox and bought a second one that same evening so that the next day he would be able to plow again. The next day the farmer plowed again from morning morning until evening, and when it was evening the lion came again and said, "Farmer, give me one of your two oxen or I'll kill both of them and you as well." Again the farmer gave him an ox. That evening he bought another ox so that he would be able to plow again the next day. The next evening the lion came again and demanded an ox. The farmer gave the lion an ox every evening. One evening the jackal came by as the farmer was driving his single ox home. The jackal said, "Every morning I see you leave the farmyard with two oxen and every evening I see you coming back with only one. Why is that?" The farmer said, "Every evening when I am finished with the day's work the lion comes and demands one of my oxen and threatens to kill me and both oxen if I don't grant his wish." The jackal said, "If you promise to give me a sheep I will free you from the lion." The farmer answered, "If you can free me from the lion I will gladly promise you a sheep." The jackal said, "Tomorrow I will call out with a disguised voice from up there on the hill and ask who is speaking with you. Then you answer that it is only an Asko (a block of wood to be split). Have a hatchet at hand. Do you understand me?" The farmer said, "Certainly, I understand you." The next day the farmer took a hatchet with him to the field and plowed as usual with the two oxen from morning till eve. When it was evening the lion came and said, "Farmer, give me an ox or I shall kill both oxen and you as well." When the lion had said that a deep voice spoke from the hill and said, "Farmer, who is talking with you?" The lion was afraid, ducked down, and said in a frightened voice, "That is god." But the farmer replied loudly, "It is only an Asko." The voice answered loudly, "Then take your hatchet and split the block of wood." The lion said softly, "Just hit me gently, farmer," and with that he bowed his head. The farmer gripped his hatchet and struck at the lion's skull with all his force so that he split it, and the lion died at once. The jackal came down from the hill and said, "I have done what I promised. The lion is finished. Tomorrow I will come again to fetch the sheep that you promised me." The farmer said, "You shall have it." The farmer came home. He said to his wife, "The jackal has freed me from the lion. Now I will give him a ram. I will kill it. You pack it up so that I can take it with me to the field tomorrow." The man killed the ram. As his wife was packing it up she said, "Why shouldn't we eat the good ram ourselves?" She put the ram into a leather sack. She laid the leather sack in a wicker basket. But she had their dog to lie down in the basket beside the leather sack. She said to the farmer, "If the jackal does not take the ram during the day, then bring it home again. Otherwise the animals that have done nothing for you will eat it during the night. Set the basket down in the field just as it is and then let happen what will." The farmer went to the field. He put the basket down on the field and shouted, "Jackal here is your ram!" Then he went to work, plowing from morning until evening without further concerning himself about the basket, the ram, or the jackal. However, the jackal approached the basket in order to get the ram. When he stuck his nose into the basket the dog leaped up. The jackal ran away as fast as he could. The dog ran after him for a while but seeing that the jackal was too fast, he gave up and ran home. The jackal swore never to help men again. In the evening the farmer came. He looked into the basket and found the ram still untouched. So he picked up the basket again with the ram in it, brought it home, and said, "The jackal has not called for his ram. Now we can eat it ourselves!" Source: Leo Frobenius, "Der Schakal und der Bauer," Volksmärchen der Kabylen , Band 3: Das Fabelhafte (Jena: Eugen Diederichs, 1921), no. 7, pp. 24-26 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. The Kabyl people belong to the Berbers of North Africa. They are native to the Djurdjura Mountains of Algeria. Return to the table of contents . Well Done and Ill Paid Norway Once on a time there was a man, who had to drive his sledge to the wood for fuel. So a bear met him. "Out with your horse," said the bear, "or I'll strike all your sheep dead by summer." "Oh! heaven help me then," said the man. "There's not a stick of firewood in the house. You must let me drive home a load of fuel, else we shall be frozen to death. I'll bring the horse to you tomorrow morning." Yes, on those terms he might drive the wood home. That was a bargain. But Bruin said if he didn't come back, he should lose all his sheep by summer. So the man got the wood on the sledge and rattled homewards, but he wasn't over pleased at the bargain you may fancy. So just then a fox met him. "Why, what's the matter?" said the fox. "Why are you so down in the mouth?" "Oh, if you want to know," said the man, "I met a bear up yonder in the wood, and I had to give my word to him to bring Dobbin back tomorrow, at this very hour; for if he didn't get him, he said he would tear all my sheep to death by summer." "Stuff, nothing worse than that," said the fox. "If you'll give me your fattest wether, I'll soon set you free. See if I don't." Yes, the man gave his word, and swore he would keep it too. "Well, when you come with Dobbin tomorrow for the bear," said the fox, "I'll make a clatter up in that heap of stones yonder, and so when the bear asks what that noise is, you must say 'tis Peter the Marksman, who is the best shot in the world. And after that you must help yourself." Next day off set the man, and when he met the bear, something began to make a clatter up in the heap of stones. "Hist! What's that?" said the bear. "Oh! that's Peter the Marksman, to be sure," said the man. "He's the best shot in the world. I know him by his voice." "Have you seen any bears about here, Eric?" shouted out a voice in the wood. "Say No!" said the bear. "No, I haven't seen any," said Eric. "What's that then that stands alongside your sledge?" bawled out the voice in the wood. "Say it's an old fir stump," said the bear. "Oh, it's only an old fir stump," said the man. "Such fir stumps we take in our country and roll them on our sledges," bawled out the voice. "If you can't do it yourself, I'll come and help you." "Say you can help yourself, and roll me up on the sledge," said the bear. "No, thank ye, I can help myself well enough," said the man, and rolled the bear onto the sledge. "Such fir stumps we always bind fast on our sledges in our part of the world," bawled out the voice. "Shall I come and help you?" "Say you can help yourself, and bind me fast, do." said the bear. "No, thanks, I can help myself well enough," said the man, who set to binding Bruin fast with all the ropes he had, so that at last the bear couldn't stir a paw. "Such fir stumps we always drive our axes into in our part of the world," bawled out the voice, "for then we guide them better going down the steep pitches." "Pretend to drive your axe into me, do now," said the bear. Then the man took up his axe, and at one blow split the bear's skull, so that Bruin lay dead in a trice, and so the man and the fox were great friends, and on the best terms. But when they came near the farm, the fox said, "I've no mind to go right home with you, for I can't say I like your tykes, so I'll just wait here, and you can bring the wether to me, but mind and pick out one nice and fat." Yes, the man would be sure to do that, and thanked the fox much for his help. So when he had put up Dobbin, he went across to the sheep stall. "Whither away, now?" asked his old dame. "Oh!" said the man, "I'm only going to the sheep stall to fetch a fat wether for that cunning fox who set our Dobbin free. I gave him my word I would." "Wether, indeed," said the old dame. "Never a one shall that thief of a fox get. Haven't we got Dobbin safe and the bear into the bargain. And as for the fox, I'll be bound he's stolen more of our geese than the wether is worth. And even if he hasn't stolen them, he will. No, no; take a brace of your swiftest hounds in a sack, and slip them loose after him. And then, perhaps, we shall be rid of this robbing Reynard." Well, the man thought that good advice; so he took two fleet red hounds, put them into a sack, and set off with them. "Have you brought the wether?" said the fox. "Yes, come and take it," said the man, as he untied the sack and let slip the hounds. " Huff!" said the fox, and gave a great spring. "True it is what the old saw says, 'Well done is often ill paid.' And now, too, I see the truth of another saying, 'The worst foes are those of one's own house.'" That was what the fox said as he ran off, and saw the red fox hounds at his heels. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Vel gjort og ille lønnet , Norske Folkeeventyr . I have followed the translation of George Webbe Dasent, Popular Tales from the Norse , (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), no. 35, pp. 298-302 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 155, in which an ungrateful beast is tricked back into captivity, often end with an episode of type 154, for example: Inside Again (Europe, Joseph Jacobs). The Reward of Good Deeds (Denmark, Sven Grundtvig). The Ingrates (Italy, Thomas Frederick Crane). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 30, 2013. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Japan: A Digital Library Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Japan a digital library assembled by D. L. Ashliman © 2015 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Unless otherwise noted all links lead to books digitized by books.google.com . Adachi, Kinnosuké. Iroka: Tales of Japan . New York: Doubleday and McClure Company, 1900. Aston, William George. A History of Japanese Literature . London: William Heinemann, 1908. Ayrton, M. Chaplin. Child-Life in Japan and Japanese Child-Stories . With many illustrations, including seven full-page pictures drawn and engraved by Japanese artists. London: Griffith and Farran, 1879. Bacon, Alice Mabel. In the Land of the Gods: Some Stories of Japan . Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1905. Batchelor, John. The Ainu of Japan: The Religion, Superstitions, and General History of the Hairy Aborigines of Japan . With 80 illustrations. London: Religious Tract Society, 1892. Batchelor, John. The Ainu and Their Folk-Lore . With 137 illustrations from photgraphs, and from sketches by the author. London: Religious Tract Society, 1901. Brauns, David August. Japanische Märchen und Sagen . Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich, 1885. Chamberlain, Basil Hall. Aino Folk-Tales . With introduction by Edward B. Tylor. Privately printed for the Folk-Lore Society, 1888. Champney, Elizabeth W., and Frère Champney. Romance of Old Japan . With 96 illustrations. New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1917. Davis, F. Hadland. Myths and Legends of Japan . With 32 full-page illustrations by Evelyn Paul. London: George G. Harrap, 1912. ( Internet Archive .) Griffis, William Elliot. Japanese Fairy World: Stories from the Wonder-Lore of Japan . Illustrated by Ozawa, of Tokio. Schenectady: James H. Barhyte, 1880. Griffis, William Elliot. Japan in History, Folk Lore, and Art . Revised and enlarged edition. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1906. Griffis, William Elliot. The Fire-Fly's Lovers and Other Fairy Tales of Old Japan . New York: T. Y. Crowell and Company, 1908. Hearn, Lafcadio. Gleanings in Buddha-Fields . Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1897. Hearn, Lafcadio. In Ghostly Japan . Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1899. Hearn, Lafcadio. A Japanese Miscellany . Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1905. Copyright 1901. Hearn, Lafcadio. Kwaidan: Stories and Studies of Strange Things . Leipzig: Bernhard Tauchnitz, 1907. Hearn, Lafcadio. Kokoro: Hints and Echoes of Japanese Inner Life . Leipzig: Bernhard Tauchnitz, 1907. Hearn, Lafcadio. Japanese Fairy Tales . By Lafcadio Hearn and others [Grace James and Basil Hall Chamberlain]. New York: Boni and Liveright, 1918. James, Grace. Green Willow and Other Japanese Fairy Tales . With illustrations in colour by Warwick Goble. London: Macmillan and Company, 1912. ( Internet Archive .) Mackenzie, Donald A. Myths of China and Japan . With illustrations in colour and monochrome after paintings and photographs. London: Gresham Publishing Company, [1923]. ( Internet Archive .) Mitford, A. B. Tales of Old Japan . In two volumes. Vol. 1. With illustrations, drawn and cut on wood by Japanese artists. London: Macmillan, 1871. Mitford, A. B. Tales of Old Japan . In two volumes. Vol. 2. With illustrations, drawn and cut on wood by Japanese artists. London: Macmillan, 1871. Mitford, A. B. Tales of Old Japan . With illustrations drawn and cut on wood by Japanese artists. London and New York: Macmillan, 1890. Nixon-Roulet, Mary F. Japanese Folk Stories and Fairy Tales . New York, Cincinnati, and Chicago: American Book Company, 1908. Ozaki, Yei Theodora. The Japanese Fairy Book . Westminster: Archibald Constable and Company, 1903. Ozaki Yei Theodora. Warriors of Old Japan and Other Stories . Illustrated by Shusui Okakura and other Japanese artists. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1909. ( Internet Archive .) Rinder, Frank. Old-World Japan: Legends of the Land of the Gods . Retold by Frank Rinder, with illustrations by T. H. Robinson. London: George Allen, 1895. Smith, R. Gordon. Ancient Tales and Folklore of Japan . London: A. and C. Black, 1908. ( Internet Archive .) Smith, R. Gordon. Ancient Tales and Folklore of Japan . London: A. and C. Black, 1908. Williston, Teresa Peirce. Japanese Fairy Tales . Retold by Teresa Peirce Williston. Illustrated by Sanchi Ogawa. Chicago, New York, and London: Rand McNally and Company, 1904. Links to related sites Folktales from Japan , selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman. The Tongue-Cut Sparrow , a fairy tale from Japan. Japanese Legends about Supernatural Sweethearts . England. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from England . Grimm. Grimms' Fairy Tales in English . Ireland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Ireland. Man. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from the Isle of Man . Scandinavia. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Scandinavia and Finland (Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, and Finland). Scotland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Scotland . Slavic. Slavic and Other Eastern European Folk and Fairy Tales . Wales. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Wales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 5, 2015. Japanese Folktales Folktales from Japan selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2015 Contents The Two Frogs . The Mirror of Matsuyama . Visu the Woodsman and the Old Priest . The Adventures of Little Peachling . The Tongue-Cut Sparrow . A Woman and the Bell of Miidera . The Stonecutter . Danzayémon, Chief of the Etas . Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Two Frogs Once upon a time in the country of Japan there lived two frogs, one of whom made his home in a ditch near the town of Osaka, on the sea coast, while the other dwelt in a clear little stream which ran through the city of Kyoto. At such a great distance apart, they had never even heard of each other; but, funnily enough, the idea came into both their heads at once that they should like to see a little of the world, and the frog who lived at Kyoto wanted to visit Osaka, and the frog who lived at Osaka wished to go to Kyoto, where the great Mikado had his palace. So one fine morning in the spring they both set out along the road that led from Kyoto to Osaka, one from one end and the other from the other. The journey was more tiring than they expected, for they did not know much about traveling, and halfway between the two towns there arose a mountain which had to be climbed. It took them a long time and a great many hops to reach the top, but there they were at last, and what was the surprise of each to see another frog before him! They looked at each other for a moment without speaking, and then fell into conversation, explaining the cause of their meeting so far from their homes. It was delightful to find that they both felt the same wish--to learn a little more of their native country--and as there was no sort of hurry they stretched themselves out in a cool, damp place, and agreed that they would have a good rest before they parted to go their ways. "What a pity we are not bigger," said the Osaka frog; "for then we could see both towns from here, and tell if it is worth our while going on." "Oh, that is easily managed," returned the Kyoto frog. "We have only got to stand up on our hind legs, and hold onto each other, and then we can each look at the town he is traveling to." This idea pleased the Osaka frog so much that he at once jumped up and put his front paws on the shoulder of his friend, who had risen also. There they both stood, stretching themselves as high as they could, and holding each other tightly, so that they might not fall down. The Kyoto frog turned his nose towards Osaka, and the Osaka frog turned his nose towards Kyoto; but the foolish things forgot that when they stood up their great eyes lay in the backs of their heads, and that though their noses might point to the places to which they wanted to go, their eyes beheld the places from which they had come. "Dear me!" cried the Osaka frog, "Kyoto is exactly like Osaka. It is certainly not worth such a long journey. I shall go home!" "If I had had any idea that Osaka was only a copy of Kyoto I should never have traveled all this way," exclaimed the frog from Kyoto, and as he spoke he took his hands from his friend's shoulders, and they both fell down on the grass. Then they took a polite farewell of each other, and set off for home again, and to the end of their lives they believed that Osaka and Kyoto, which are as different to look at as two towns can be, were as alike as two peas. Source: Andrew Lang, The Violet Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green and Co., 1901), pp. 125-26 . Lang's source: David Brauns, "Die beiden Frösche," Japanische Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Freidrich, 1885), pp. 91-92 . Return to the table of contents . The Mirror of Matsuyama In ancient days there lived in a remote part of Japan a man and his wife, and they were blessed with a little girl, who was the pet and idol of her parents. On one occasion the man was called away on business in distant Kyoto. Before he went he told his daughter that if she were good and dutiful to her mother he would bring her back a present she would prize very highly. Then the good man took his departure, mother and daughter watching him go. At last he returned to his home, and after his wife and child had taken off his large hat and sandals he sat down upon the white mats and opened a bamboo basket, watching the eager gaze of his little child. He took out a wonderful doll and a lacquer box of cakes and put them into her outstretched hands. Once more he dived into his basket, and presented his wife with a metal mirror. Its convex surface shone brightly, while upon its back there was a design of pine trees and storks. The good man's wife had never seen a mirror before, and on gazing into it she was under the impression that another woman looked out upon her as she gazed with growing wonder. Her husband explained the mystery and bade her take great care of the mirror. Not long after this happy homecoming and distribution of presents the woman became very ill. Just before she died she called to her little daughter, and said: "Dear child, when I am dead take every care of your father. You will miss me when I have left you. But take this mirror, and when you feel most lonely look into it and you will always see me." Having said these words she passed away. In due time the man married again, and his wife was not at all kind to her stepdaughter. But the little one, remembering her mother's words, would retire to a corner and eagerly look into the mirror, where it seemed to her that she saw her dear mother's face, not drawn in pain as she had seen it on her deathbed, but young and beautiful. One day this child's stepmother chanced to see her crouching in a corner over an object she could not quite see, murmuring to herself. This ignorant woman, who detested the child and believed that her stepdaughter detested her in return, fancied that this little one was performing some strange magical art--perhaps making an image and sticking pins into it. Full of these notions, the stepmother went to her husband and told him that his wicked child was doing her best to kill her by witchcraft. When the master of the house had listened to this extraordinary recital he went straight to his daughter's room. He took her by surprise, and immediately the girl saw him she slipped the mirror into her sleeve. For the first time her doting father grew angry, and he feared that there was, after all, truth in what his wife had told him, and he repeated her tale forthwith. When his daughter had heard this unjust accusation she was amazed at her father's words, and she told him that she loved him far too well ever to attempt or wish to kill his wife, who she knew was dear to him. "What have you hidden in your sleeve?" said her father, only half convinced and still much puzzled. "The mirror you gave my mother, and which she on her deathbed gave to me. Every time I look into its shining surface I see the face of my dear mother, young and beautiful. When my heart aches--and oh! it has ached so much lately--I take out the mirror, and mother's face, with sweet, kind smile, brings me peace, and helps me to bear hard words and cross looks." Then the man understood and loved his child the more for her filial piety. Even the girl's stepmother, when she knew what had really taken place, was ashamed and asked forgiveness. And this child, who believed she had seen her mother's face in the mirror, forgave, and trouble forever departed from the home. Source: F. Hadland Davis, Myths and Legends of Japan (London: George G. Harrap and Company, 1912), pp. 196-98 . Return to the table of contents . Visu the Woodsman and the Old Priest Many years ago there lived on the then barren plain of Suruga a woodsman by the name of Visu. He was a giant in stature, and lived in a hut with his wife and children. One day Visu received a visit from an old priest, who said to him: "Honorable woodsman, I am afraid you never pray." Visu replied: "If you had a wife and a large family to keep, you would never have time to pray." This remark made the priest angry, and the old man gave the woodcutter a vivid description of the horror of being reborn as a toad, or a mouse, or an insect for millions of years. Such lurid details were not to Visu's liking, and he accordingly promised the priest that in future he would pray. "Work and pray," said the priest as he took his departure. Unfortunately Visu did nothing but pray. He prayed all day long and refused to do any work, so that his rice crops withered and his wife and family starved. Visu's wife, who had hitherto never said a harsh or bitter word to her husband, now became extremely angry, and, pointing to the poor thin bodies of her children, she exclaimed: "Rise, Visu, take up your ax and do something more helpful to us all than the mere mumbling of prayers!" Visu was so utterly amazed at what his wife had said that it was some time before he could think of a fitting reply. When he did so his words came hot and strong to the ears of his poor, much-wronged wife. "Woman," said he, "the Gods come first. You are an impertinent creature to speak to me so, and I will have nothing more to do with you!" Visu snatched up his ax and, without looking round to say farewell, he left the hut, strode out of the wood, and climbed up Fujiyama, where a mist hid him from sight. When Visu had seated himself upon the mountain he heard a soft rustling sound, and immediately afterward saw a fox dart into a thicket. Now Visu deemed it extremely lucky to see a fox, and, forgetting his prayers, he sprang up, and ran hither and thither in the hope of again finding this sharp-nosed little creature. He was about to give up the chase when, coming to an open space in a wood, he saw two ladies sitting down by a brook playing go. The woodsman was so completely fascinated that he could do nothing but sit down and watch them. There was no sound except the soft click of pieces on the board and the song of the running brook. The ladies took no notice of Visu, for they seemed to be playing a strange game that had no end, a game that entirely absorbed their attention. Visu could not keep his eyes off these fair women. He watched their long black hair and the little quick hands that shot out now and again from their big silk sleeves in order to move the pieces. After he had been sitting there for three hundred years, though to him it was but a summer's afternoon, he saw that one of the players had made a false move. "Wrong, most lovely lady!" he exclaimed excitedly. In a moment these women turned into foxes and ran away. When Visu attempted to pursue them he found to his horror that his limbs were terribly stiff, that his hair was very long, and that his beard touched the ground. He discovered, moreover, that the handle of his ax, though made of the hardest wood, had crumbled away into a little heap of dust. After many painful efforts Visu was able to stand on his feet and proceed very slowly toward his little home. When he reached the spot he was surprised to see no hut, and, perceiving a very old woman, he said: "Good lady, I am amazed to find that my little home has disappeared. I went away this afternoon, and now in the evening it has vanished!" The old woman, who believed that a madman was addressing her, inquired his name. When she was told, she exclaimed: "Bah! You must indeed be mad! Visu lived three hundred years ago! He went away one day, and he never came back again." "Three hundred years!" murmured Visu. "It cannot be possible. Where are my dear wife and children?" "Buried!" hissed the old woman, "and, if what you say is true, you children's children too. The Gods have prolonged your miserable life in punishment for having neglected your wife and little children." Big tears ran down Visu's withered cheeks as he said in a husky voice: "I have lost my manhood. I have prayed when my dear ones starved and needed the labor of my once strong hands. Old woman, remember my last words: "If you pray, work too!" We do not know how long the poor but repentant Visu lived after he returned from his strange adventures. His white spirit is still said to haunt Fujiyama when the moon shines brightly. Source: F. Hadland Davis, Myths and Legends of Japan (London: George G. Harrap and Company, 1912), pp. 136-39 . This is a type 766 folktale. Davis entitles the story "The Rip van Winkle of Old Japan." Return to the table of contents . The Adventures of Little Peachling Many hundred years ago there lived an honest old woodcutter and his wife. One fine morning the old man went off to the hills with his billhook, to gather a faggot of sticks, while his wife went down to the river to wash the dirty clothes. When she came to the river, she saw a peach floating down the stream; so she picked it up, and carried it home with her, thinking to give it to her husband to eat when he should come in. The old man soon came down from the hills, and the good wife set the peach before him, when, just as she was inviting him to eat it, the fruit split in two, and a little puling baby was born into the world. So the old couple took the babe, and brought it up as their own; and, because it had been born in a peach, they called it Momotaro, or Little Peachling. By degrees Little Peachling grew up to be strong and brave, and at last one day he said to his old foster parents: "I am going to the ogres' island to carry off the riches that they have stored up there. Pray, then, make me some millet dumplings for my journey." So the old folks ground the millet, and made the dumplings for him; and Little Peachling, after taking an affectionate leave of them, cheerfully set out on his travels. As he was journeying on, he fell in with a monkey, who gibbered at him, and said: "Kia! kia! kia! where are you off to, Little Peachling?" "I'm going to the ogres' island, to carry off their treasure," answered Little Peachling. "What are you carrying at your girdle?" "I'm carrying the very best millet dumplings in all Japan." "If you'll give me one, I will go with you," said the monkey. So Little Peachling gave one of his dumplings to the monkey, who received it and followed him. When he had gone a little further, he heard a pheasant calling: "Ken! ken! ken! where are you off to, Master Peachling?" Little Peachling answered as before; and the pheasant, having begged and obtained a millet dumpling, entered his service, and followed him. A little while after this, they met a dog, who cried: "Bow! wow! wow! whither away, Master Peachling?" "I'm going off to the ogres' island, to carry off their treasure." "If you will give me one of those nice millet dumplings of yours, I will go with you," said the dog. "With all my heart," said Little Peachling. So he went on his way, with the monkey, the pheasant, and the dog following after him. When they got to the ogres' island, the pheasant flew over the castle gate, and the monkey clambered over the castle wall, while Little Peachling, leading the dog, forced in the gate, and got into the castle. Then they did battle with the ogres, and put them to flight, and took their king prisoner. So all the ogres did homage to Little Peachling, and brought out the treasures which they had laid up. There were caps and coats that made their wearers invisible, jewels which governed the ebb and flow of the tide, coral, musk, emeralds, amber, and tortoise shell, besides gold and silver. All these were laid before Little Peachling by the conquered ogres. So Little Peachling went home laden with riches, and maintained his foster parents in peace and plenty for the remainder of their lives. Source: A. B. Mitford, Tales of Old Japan , vol. 1 (London: Macmillan, 1871), pp. 267-69 . Return to the table of contents . The Tongue-Cut Sparrow Once upon a time there lived an old man and an old woman. The old man, who had a kind heart, kept a young sparrow, which he tenderly nurtured. But the dame was a cross-grained old thing; and one day, when the sparrow had pecked at some paste with which she was going to starch her linen, she flew into a great rage, and cut the sparrow's tongue and let it loose. When the old man came home from the hills and found that the bird had flown, he asked what had become of it; so the old woman answered that she had cut its tongue and let it go, because it had stolen her starching-paste. Now the old man, hearing this cruel tale, was sorely grieved, and thought to himself: "Alas! Where can my bird be gone? Poor thing! Poor little tongue-cut sparrow! Where is your home now?" and he wandered far and wide, seeking for his pet, and crying: "Mr. Sparrow! Mr. Sparrow! Where are you living?" One day, at the foot of a certain mountain, the old man fell in with the lost bird; and when they had congratulated one another on their mutual safety, the sparrow led the old man to his home, and, having introduced him to his wife and chicks, set before him all sorts of dainties, and entertained him hospitably. "Please partake of our humble fare," said the sparrow. Poor as it is, you are very welcome." "What a polite sparrow!" answered the old man, who remained for a long time as the sparrow's guest, and was daily feasted right royally. At last the old man said that he must take his leave and return home; and the bird, offering him two wicker baskets, begged him to carry them with him as a parting present. One of the baskets was heavy, and the other was light; so the old man, saying that as he was feeble and stricken in years he would only accept the light one, shouldered it, and trudged off home, leaving the sparrow family disconsolate at parting from him. When the old man got home, the dame grew very angry, and began to scold him saying: "Well, and pray where have you been this many a day? A pretty thing, indeed, to be gadding about at your time of life!" "Oh!" replied he, "I have been on a visit to the sparrows; and when I came away, they gave me this wicker basket as a parting gift." Then they opened the basket to see what was inside, and, lo and behold, it was full of gold and silver and precious things. When the old woman, who was as greedy as she was cross, saw all the riches displayed before her, she changed her scolding strain, and could not contain herself for joy. "I'll go and call upon the sparrows, too," said she, "and get a pretty present." So she asked the old man the way to the sparrows' house, and set forth on her journey. Following his direction, she at last met the tongue-cut sparrow, and exclaimed: "Well met! Well met, Mr. Sparrow! I have been looking forward to the pleasure of seeing you." So she tried to flatter and cajole the sparrow by soft speeches. The bird could not but invite the dame to its home; but it took no pains to feast her, and said nothing about a parting gift. She, however, was not to be put off; so she asked for something to carry away with her in remembrance of her visit. The sparrow accordingly produced two baskets, as before, and the greedy old woman, choosing the heavier of the two, carried it off with her. But when she opened the basket to see what was inside, all sorts of hobgoblins and elves sprang out of it, and began to torment her. But the old man adopted a son, and his family grew rich and prosperous. What a happy old man! Source: A. B. Mitford, Tales of Old Japan , vol. 1 (London: Macmillan and Company, 1871), pp. 249-50 . This tale resembles folktale type 480. Return to the table of contents . A Woman and the Bell of Miidera In the ancient monastery of Miidera there was a great bronze bell. It rang out every morning and evening, a clear, rich note, and its surface shone like sparkling dew. The priests would not allow any woman to strike it, because they thought that such an action would pollute and dull the metal, as well as bring calamity upon them. When a certain pretty woman who lived in Kyoto heard this, she grew extremely inquisitive, and at last, unable to restrain her curiosity, she said: "I will go and see this wonderful bell of Miidera. I will make it send forth a soft note, and in its shining surface, bigger and brighter than a thousand mirrors, I will paint and powder my face and dress my hair." At length this vain and irreverent woman reached the belfry in which the great bell was suspended, at a time when all were absorbed in their sacred duties. She looked into the gleaming bell and saw her pretty eyes, flushed cheeks, and laughing dimples. Presently she stretched forth her little fingers, lightly touched the shining metal, and prayed that she might have as great and splendid a mirror for her own. When the bell felt this woman's fingers, the bronze that she touched shrank, leaving a little hollow, and losing at the same time all its exquisite polish. Source: F. Hadland Davis, Myths and Legends of Japan (London: George G. Harrap and Company, 1917), pp. 141-42 . Return to the table of contents . The Stonecutter Once upon a time there lived a stonecutter, who went every day to a great rock in the side of a big mountain and cut out slabs for gravestones or for houses. He understood very well the kinds of stones wanted for the different purposes, and as he was a careful workman he had plenty of customers. For a long time he was quite happy and contented, and asked for nothing better than what he had. Now in the mountain dwelt a spirit which now and then appeared to men, and helped them in many ways to become rich and prosperous. The stonecutter, however, had never seen this spirit, and only shook his head, with an unbelieving air, when anyone spoke of it. But a time was coming when he learned to change his opinion. One day the stonecutter carried a gravestone to the house of a rich man, and saw there all sorts of beautiful things, of which he had never even dreamed. Suddenly his daily work seemed to grow harder and heavier, and he said to himself: "Oh, if only I were a rich man, and could sleep in a bed with silken curtains and golden tassels, how happy I should be!" And a voice answered him: "Your wish is heard; a rich man you shall be!" At the sound of the voice the stonecutter looked around, but could see nobody. He thought it was all his fancy, and picked up his tools and went home, for he did not feel inclined to do any more work that day. But when he reached the little house where he lived, he stood still with amazement, for instead of his wooden hut was a stately palace filled with splendid furniture, and most splendid of all was the bed, in every respect like the one he had envied. He was nearly beside himself with joy, and in his new life the old one was soon forgotten. It was now the beginning of summer, and each day the sun blazed more fiercely. One morning the heat was so great that the stonecutter could scarcely breathe, and he determined he would stop at home till the evening. He was rather dull, for he had never learned how to amuse himself, and was peeping through the closed blinds to see what was going on in the street, when a little carriage passed by, drawn by servants dressed in blue and silver. In the carriage sat a prince, and over his head a golden umbrella was held, to protect him from the sun's rays. "Oh, if I were only a prince!" said the stonecutter to himself, as the carriage vanished around the corner. "Oh, if I were only a prince, and could go in such a carriage and have a golden umbrella held over me, how happy I should be!" And a prince he was. Before his carriage rode one company of men and another behind it; servants dressed in scarlet and gold bore him along, the coveted umbrella was held over his head, everything his heart could desire was his. But yet it was not enough. He looked around still for something to wish for, and when he saw that in spite of the water he poured on the grass the rays of the sun scorched it, and that in spite of the umbrella held over his head each day his face grew browner and browner, he cried in his anger: "The sun is mightier than I; oh, if I were only the sun!" And the mountain spirit answered: "Your wish is heard; the sun you shall be." And the sun he was, and felt himself proud in his power. He shot his beams above and below, on earth and in heaven; he burnt up the grass in the fields and scorched the faces of princes as well as of poorer folk. but in a short time he began to grow tired of his might, for there seemed nothing left for him to do. Discontent once more filled his soul, and when a cloud covered his face, and hid the earth from him, he cried in his anger: "Does the cloud hold captive my rays, and is it mightier than I? Oh, that I were a cloud, and mightier than any!" And the mountain spirit answered: "Your wish is heard; a cloud you shall be!" And a cloud he was, and lay between the sun and the earth. He caught the sun's beams and held them, and to his joy the earth grew green again and flowers blossomed. But that was not enough for him, and for days and week he poured forth rain till the rivers overflowed their banks, and the crops of rice stood in water. Towns and villages were destroyed by the power of the rain, only the great rock on the mountainside remained unmoved. The cloud was amazed at the sight, and cried in wonder: "Is the rock, then, mightier than I? Oh, if I were only the rock!" And the mountain spirit answered; "Your wish is heard; the rock you shall be!" And the rock he was, and gloried in his power. Proudly he stood, and neither the heat of the sun nor the force of the rain could move him. "This is better than all!" he said to himself. But one day he heard a strange noise at his feet, and when he looked down to see what it could be, he saw a stonecutter driving tools into his surface. Even while he looked a trembling feeling ran all through him, and a great block broke off and fell upon the ground. Then he cried in his wrath: "Is a mere child of earth mightier than a rock? Oh, if I were only a man!" And the mountain spirit answered: "Your wish is heard. A man once more you shall be!" And a man he was, and in the sweat of his brow he toiled again at his trade of stone cutting. His bed was hard and his food scanty, but he had learned to be satisfied with it, and did not long to be something or somebody else. And as he never asked for things he did not have, or desired to be greater and mightier than other people, he was happy at last, and never again heard the voice of the mountain spirit. Source: Andrew Lang, The Crimson Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1903), pp. 192-97 . Lang's source: David Brauns, "Der Steinhauer," Japanische Märchen (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich, 1885), pp. 87-89 . This story is similar to the Grimm brothers' The Fisherman and His Wife and other type 555 folktales . Return to the table of contents . Danzayémon, Chief of the Etas At Asakusa, in Yedo, there lives a man called Danzayémon, the chief of the Etas. This man traces his pedigree back to Minamoto no Yoritomo, who founded the Shogunate in the year 1192 A.D. The whole of the Etas in Japan are under his jurisdiction; his subordinates are called Koyagashira, or "chiefs of the huts"; and they constitute the government of the Etas. In the "Legacy of Iyéyasu," the 36th Law provides as follows: All wandering mendicants, such as male sorcerers, female diviners, hermits, blind people, beggars, and tanners (Etas), have had from of old their respective rulers. Be not disinclined, however, to punish any such who give rise to disputes, or who overstep the boundaries of their own classes and are disobedient to existing laws. The occupation of the Etas is to kill and flay horses, oxen, and other beasts, to stretch drums and make shoes; and if they are very poor, they wander from house to house, working as cobblers, mending old shoes and leather, and so earn a scanty livelihood. Besides this, their daughters and young married women gain a trifle as wandering minstrels, called Torioi, playing on the shamisen, a sort of banjo, and singing ballads. They never marry out of their own fraternity, but remain apart, a despised and shunned race. At execution by crucifixion it is the duty of the Etas to transfix the victims with spears; and, besides this, they have to perform all sorts of degrading offices about criminals, such as carrying sick prisoners from their cells to the hall of justice, and burying the bodies of those that have been executed. Thus their race is polluted and accursed, and they are hated accordingly. Now this is how the Etas come to be under the jurisdiction of Danzayémon: When Minamoto no Yoritomo was yet a child, his father, Minamoto no Yoshitomo, fought with Taira no Kiyomori, and was killed by treachery: so his family was ruined; and Yoshitomo's concubine, whose name was Tokiwa, took her children and fled from the house, to save her own and their lives. But Kiyomori, desiring to destroy the family of Yoshitomo root and branch, ordered his retainers to divide themselves into bands, and seek out the children. At last they were found; but Tokiwa was so exceedingly beautiful that Kiyomori was inflamed with love for her, and desired her to become his own concubine. Then Tokiwa told Kiyomori that if he would spare her little ones she would share his couch; but that if he killed her children she would destroy herself rather than yield to his desire. When he heard this, Kiyomori, bewildered by the beauty of Tokiwa, spared the lives of her children, but banished them from the capital. So Yoritomo was sent to Hirugakojima, in the province of Idzu; and when he grew up and became a man, he married the daughter of a peasant. After a while Yoritomo left the province, and went to the wars, leaving his wife pregnant; and in due time she was delivered of a male child, to the delight of her parents, who rejoiced that their daughter should bear seed to a nobleman; but she soon fell sick and died, and the old people took charge of the babe. And when they also died, the care of the child fell to his mother's kinsmen, and he grew up to be a peasant. Now Kiyomori, the enemy of Yoritomo, had been gathered to his fathers; and Yoritomo had avenged the death of his father by slaying Munémori, the son of Kiyomori; and there was peace throughout the land. And Yoritomo became the chief of all the noble houses in Japan, and first established the government of the country. When Yoritomo had thus raised himself to power, if the son that his peasant wife had born to him had proclaimed himself the sons of the mighty prince, he would have been made lord over a province; but he took no thought of this, and remained a tiller of the earth, forfeiting a glorious inheritance; and his descendants after him lived as peasants in the same village, increasing in prosperity and in good repute among their neighbors. But the princely line of Yoritomo came to an end in three generations, and the house of Hojo was all-powerful in the land. Now it happened that the head of the house of Hojo heard that a descendant of Yoritomo was living as a peasant in the land, so he summoned him and said: "It is a hard thing to see the son of an illustrious house live and die a peasant. I will promote you to the rank of Samurai." Then the peasant answered: "My lord, if I become a Samurai, and the retainer of some noble, I shall not be so happy as when I was my own master. If I may not remain a husbandman, let me be a chief over men, however humble they may be." But my lord Hojo was angry at this, and thinking to punish the peasant for his insolence, said: "Since you wish to become a chief over men, no matter how humble, there is no means of gratifying your strange wish but by making you chief over the Etas of the whole country. So now see that you rule them well." When he heard this, the peasant was afraid; but because he had said that he wished to become a chief over men, however humble, he could not choose but become chief of the Etas, he and his children after him for ever; and Danzayémon, who rules the Etas at the present time, and lives at Asakusa, is his lineal descendant. Source: A. B. Mitford, Tales of Old Japan , vol. 1 (London: Macmillan, 1871), pp. 242-45 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Japan . A digital library. The Tongue-Cut Sparrow . Muliple versions of a famous Japanese fairy tale. Japanese Legends about Supernatural Sweethearts . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 5, 2015. Japanese Legends about Supernatural Sweethearts Japanese Legends about Supernatural Sweethearts selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2015 Contents The Robe of Feathers . The Snow Bride . Willow Wife . The White Butterfly . The Vampire Cat . The Firefly . The Princess Peony . Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Robe of Feathers It was springtime, and along Mio's pine-clad shore there came a sound of birds. The blue sea danced and sparkled in the sunshine, and Hairukoo, a fisherman, sat down to enjoy the scene. As he did so he chanced to see, hanging on a pine tree, a beautiful robe of pure white feathers. As Hairukoo was about to take down the robe he saw coming toward him from the sea an extremely lovely maiden, who requested that the fisherman would restore the robe to her. Hairukoo gazed upon the lady with considerable admiration. Said he, "I found this robe, and I mean to keep it, for it is a marvel to be placed among the treasures of Japan. No, I cannot possibly give it to you." "Oh," cried the maiden pitifully, "I cannot go soaring into the sky without my robe of feathers, for if you persist in keeping it I can never more return to my celestial home. Oh, good fisherman, I beg of you to restore my robe!" The fisherman, who must have been a hard-hearted fellow, refused to relent. "The more you plead," said he, "the more determined I am to keep what I have found." Thus the maiden made answer: Speak not, dear fisherman! Speak not that word! Ah! know'st thou not that, like the hapless bird Whose wings are broke, I seek, but seek in vain, Reft of my wings, to soar to heav'n's blue plain? After further argument on the subject the fisherman's heart softened a little. "I will restore your robe of feathers," said he, "if you will at once dance before me." Then the maiden replied, "I will dance it here -- the dance that makes the Palace of the Moon turn round, so that even poor transitory man may learn its mysteries. But I cannot dance without my feathers." "No," said the fisherman suspiciously. "If I give you this robe, you will fly away without dancing before me." This remark made the maiden extremely angry. "The pledge of mortals may be broken," said she, "but there is no falsehood among the heavenly beings." These words put the fisherman to shame, and, without more ado, he gave the maiden her robe of feathers. When the maiden had put on her pure white garment she struck a musical instrument and began to dance, and while she danced and played she sang of many strange and beautiful things concerning her faraway home in the moon. She sang of the might Palace of the Moon, where thirty monarchs ruled, fifteen in robes of white when that shining orb was full, and fifteen robed in black when the moon was waning. As she sang and played and danced she blessed Japan, "that earth may still her proper increase yield!" The fisherman did not long enjoy this kindly exhibition of the Moon Lady's skill, for very soon her dainty feet ceased to tap upon the sand. She rose into the air, the white feathers of her robe gleaming against the pine trees or against the blue sky itself. Up, up she went, still playing and singing, past the summits of the mountains, higher and higher, until her song was hushed, until she reached the glorious Palace of the Moon. Source: F. Hadland Davis, Myths and Legends of Japan (London: G. G. Harrap and Company, 1913), pp. 127-129. Return to the table of contents . The Snow Bride Mosaku and his apprentice Minokichi journeyed to a forest, some little distance from their village. It was a bitterly cold night when they neared their destination, and saw in front of them a cold sweep of water. They desired to cross this river, but the ferryman had gone away, leaving his boat on the other side of the water, and as the weather was too inclement to admit of swimming across the river they were glad to take shelter in the ferryman's little hut. Mosaku fell asleep almost immediately he entered this humble but welcome shelter. Minokichi, however, lay awake for a long time listening to the cry of the wind and the hiss of the snow as it was blown against the door. Minokichi at last fell asleep, to be soon awakened by a shower of snow falling across his face. He found that the door had been blown open, and that standing in the room was a fair woman in dazzlingly white garments. For a moment she stood thus; then she bent over Mosaku, her breath coming forth like white smoke. After bending thus over the old man for a minute or two she turned to Minokichi and hovered over him. He tried to cry out, for the breath of this woman was like a freezing blast of wind. She told him that she had intended to treat him as she had done the old man at his side, but forbore on account of his youth and beauty. Threatening Minokichi with instant death if he dared to mention to anyone what he had seen, she suddenly vanished. Then Minokichi called out to his beloved master, "Mosaku, Mosaku, wake! Something very terrible has happened!" But there was no reply. He touched the hand of his master in the dark, and found it was like a piece of ice. Mosaku was dead! During the next winter, while Minokichi was returning home, he chanced to meet a pretty girl by the name of Yuki. She informed him that she was going to Yedo, where she desired to find a situation as a servant. Minokichi was charmed with this maiden, and he went so far as to ask if she were betrothed, and hearing that she was not, he took her to his own home, and in due time married her. Yuki presented her husband with ten fine and handsome children, fairer of skin than average. When Minokichi's mother died, her last words were in praise of Yuki, and her eulogy was echoed by many of the country folk in the district. One night, while Yuki was sewing, the light of a paper lamp shining upon her face, Minokichi recalled the extraordinary experience he had had in the ferryman's hut. "Yuki," said he, "you remind me so much of a beautiful white woman I saw when I was eighteen years old. She killed my master with her ice-cold breath. I am sure she was some strange spirit, and yet tonight she seems to resemble you." Yuki flung down her sewing. There was a horrible smile on her face as she bent close to her husband and shrieked, "It was I, Yuki-Onna, who came to you then, and silently killed your master! Oh, faithless wretch, you have broken your promise to keep the matter secret, and if it were not for our sleeping children I would kill you now! Remember, if they have aught to complain of at your hands I shall hear, I shall know, and on a night when the snow falls I will kill you!" Then Yuki-Onna, the Lady of the Snow, changed into a white mist, and, shrieking and shuddering, passed through the smoke-hole, never to return again. Source: F. Hadland Davis, Myths and Legends of Japan (London: G. G. Harrap and Company, 1913), pp. 150-151. Return to the table of contents . Willow Wife In a certain Japanese village there grew a great willow tree. For many generations the people loved it. In the summer it was a resting place, a place where the villagers might meet after the work and heat of the day were over, and there talk till the moonlight streamed through the branches. In winter it was like a great half-opened umbrella covered with sparkling snow. Heitaro, a young farmer, lived quite near this tree, and he, more than any of his companions, had entered into a deep communion with the imposing willow. It was almost the first object he saw upon waking, and upon his return from work in the fields he looked out eagerly for its familiar form. Sometimes he would burn a joss-stick beneath its branches and kneel down and pray. One day an old man of the village came to Heitaro and explained to him that the villagers were anxious to build a bridge over the river, and that they particularly wanted the great willow tree for timber. "For timber?" said Heitaro, hiding his face in his hands. "My dear willow tree for a bridge, one to bear the incessant patter of feet? Never, never, old man!" When Heitaro had somewhat recovered himself, he offered to give the old man some of his own trees, if he and the villagers would accept them for timber and spare the ancient willow. The old man readily accepted this offer, and the willow tree continued to stand in the village as it had stood for so many years. One night while Heitaro sat under the great willow he suddenly saw a beautiful woman standing close beside him, looking at him shyly, as if wanting to speak. "Honorable lady," said he, "I will go home. I see you wait for some one. Heitaro is not without kindness towards those who love." "He will not come now," said the woman, smiling. "Can he have grown cold? Oh, how terrible when a mock love comes and leaves ashes and a grave behind!" "He has not grown cold, dear lord." "And yet he does not come! What strange mystery is this?" "He has come! His heart has been always here, here under this willow tree." And with a radiant smile the woman disappeared. Night after night they met under the old willow tree. The woman's shyness had entirely disappeared, and it seemed that she could not hear too much from Heitaro's lips in praise of the willow under which they sat. One night he said to her, "Little one, will you be my wife -- you who seem to come from the very tree itself?" "Yes," said the woman. "Call me Higo ("Willow") and ask no questions, for love of me. I have no father or mother, and someday you will understand." Heitaro and Higo were married, and in due time they were blessed with a child, whom they called Chiyodo. Simple was their dwelling, but those it contained were the happiest people in all Japan. While this happy couple went about their respective duties great news came to the village. The villagers were full of it, and it was not long before it reached Heitaro's ears. The ex-Emperor Toba wished to build a temple to Kwannon [goddess of mercy] in Kyoto, and those in authority sent far and wide for timber. The villagers said that they must contribute towards building the sacred edifice by presenting their great willow tree. All Heitaro's argument and persuasion and promise of other trees were ineffectual, for neither he nor anyone else could give as large and handsome a tree as the great willow. Heitaro went home and told his wife. "Oh, wife," said he, "they are about to cut down our dear willow tree! Before I married you I could not have borne it. Having you, little one, perhaps I shall get over it someday." That night Heitaro was aroused by hearing a piercing cry. "Heitaro," said his wife, "it grows dark! The room is full of whispers. Are you there, Heitaro? Hark! They are cutting down the willow tree. Look how its shadow trembles in the moonlight. I am the soul of the willow tree. The villagers are killing me. Oh, how they cut and tear me to pieces! Dear Heitaro, the pain, the pain! Put your hands here, and here. Surely the blows cannot fall now!" "My Willow Wife! My Willow Wife!" sobbed Heitaro. "Husband," said Higo, very faintly, pressing her wet, agonized face close to his, "I am going now. Such a love as ours cannot be cut down, however fierce the blows. I shall wait for you and Chiyodo -- My hair is falling through the sky! My body is breaking!" There was a loud crash outside. The great willow tree lay green and disheveled upon the ground. Heitaro looked round for her he loved more than anything else in the world. Willow Wife had gone! Source: F. Hadland Davis, Myths and Legends of Japan (London: G. G. Harrap and Company, 1913), pp. 177-180. Davis's source: R. Gordon Smith, Ancient Tales and Folk-Lore of Japan (London: A. and C. Black, 1908), pp. 12-18. Return to the table of contents . The White Butterfly An old man named Takahama lived in a little house behind the cemetery of the temple of Sozanji. He was extremely amiable and generally liked by his neighbors, though most of them considered him to be a little mad. His madness, it would appear, entirely rested upon the fact that he had never married or evinced desire for intimate companionship with women. One summer day he became very ill, so ill, in fact, that he sent for his sister-in-law and her son. They both came and did all they could to bring comfort during his last hours. While they watched, Takahama fell asleep; but he had no sooner done so than a large white butterfly flew into the room and rested on the old man's pillow. The young man tried to drive it away with a fan; but it came back three times, as if loath to leave the sufferer. At last Takahama's nephew chased it out into the garden, through the gate, and into the cemetery beyond, where it lingered over a woman's tomb, and then mysteriously disappeared. On examining the tomb the young man found the name "Akiko" written upon it, together with a description narrating how Akiko died when she was eighteen. Though the tomb was covered with moss and must have been erected fifty years previously, the boy saw that it was surrounded with flowers, and that the little water tank had been recently filled. When the young man returned to the house he found that Takahama had passed away, and he returned to his mother and told her what he had seen in the cemetery. "Akiko?" murmured his mother. "When your uncle was young he was betrothed to Akiko. She died of consumption shortly before her wedding day. When Akiko left this world your uncle resolved never to marry, and to live ever near her grave. For all these years he has remained faithful to his vow, and kept in his heart all the sweet memories of his one and only love. Every day Takahama went to the cemetery, whether the air was fragrant with summer breeze or thick with falling snow. Every day he went to her grave and prayed for her happiness, swept the tomb and set flowers there. When Takahama was dying, and he could no longer perform his loving task, Akiko came for him. That white butterfly was her sweet and loving soul." Source: F. Hadland Davis, Myths and Legends of Japan (London: G. G. Harrap and Company, 1913), pp. 218-219. Return to the table of contents . The Vampire Cat The Prince of Hizen, a distinguished member of the Nabéshima family, lingered in the garden with O Toyo, the favorite among his ladies. When the sun set they retired to the palace, but failed to notice that they were being followed by a large cat. O Toyo went to her room and fell asleep. At midnight she awoke and gazed about her, as if suddenly aware of some dreadful presence in the apartment. At length she saw, crouching close beside her, a gigantic cat, and before she could cry out for assistance the animal sprang upon her and strangled her. The animal then made a hole under the verandah, buried the corpse, and assumed the form of the beautiful O Toyo. The prince, who knew nothing of what had happened, continued to love the false O Toyo, unaware that in reality he was caressing a foul beast. He noticed, little by little, that his strength failed, and it was not long before he became dangerously ill. Physicians were summoned, but they could do nothing to restore the royal patient. It was observed that he suffered most during the night, and was troubled by horrible dreams. This being so, his councilors arranged that a hundred retainers should sit with their lord and keep watch while he slept. The watch went into the sickroom, but just before ten o'clock it was overcome by a mysterious drowsiness. When all the men were asleep the false O Toyo crept into the apartment and disturbed the prince until sunrise. Night after night the retainers came to guard their master, but always they fell asleep at the same hour, and even three loyal councilors had a similar experience. During this time the prince grew worse, and at length a priest named Ruiten was appointed to pray on his behalf. One night, while he was engaged in his supplications, he heard a strange noise proceeding from the garden. On looking out of the window he saw a young soldier washing himself. When he had finished his ablutions he stood before an image of Buddha, and prayed most ardently for the recovery of the prince. Ruiten, delighted to find such zeal and loyalty, invited the young man to enter his house, and when he had done so inquired his name. "I am Ito Soda," said the young man, "and serve in the infantry of Nabéshima. I have heard of my lord's sickness and long to have the honor of nursing him; but being of low rank it is not meet that I should come into his presence. I have, nevertheless, prayed to the Buddha that my lord's life may be spared. I believe that the Prince of Hizen is bewitched, and if I might remain with him I would do my utmost to find and crush the evil power that is the cause of his illness." Ruiten was so favorably impressed with these words that he went the next day to consult with one of the councilors, and after much discussion it was arranged that Ito Soda should keep watch with the hundred retainers. When Ito Soda entered the royal apartment he saw that his master slept in the middle of the room, and he also observed the hundred retainers sitting in the chamber quietly chatting together in the hope that they would be able to keep off approaching drowsiness. By ten o'clock all the retainers, in spite of their efforts, had fallen asleep. Ito Soda tried to keep his eyes open, but a heaviness was gradually overcoming him, and he realized that if he wished to keep awake he must resort to extreme measures. When he had carefully spread oil-paper over the mats he stuck his dirk into his thigh. The sharp pain he experienced warded off sleep for a time, but eventually he felt his eyes closing once more. Resolved to outwit the spell which had proved too much for the retainers, he twisted the knife in his thigh, and thus increased the pain and kept his loyal watch, while blood continually dripped upon the oil-paper. While Ito Soda watched he saw the sliding doors drawn open and a beautiful woman creep softly into the apartment. With a smile she noticed the sleeping retainers, and was about to approach the prince when she observed Ito Soda. After she had spoken curtly to him she approached the prince and inquired how he fared, but the prince was too ill to make a reply. Ito Soda watched every movement, and believed she tried to bewitch the prince, but she was always frustrated in her evil purpose by the dauntless eyes of Ito Soda, and at last she was compelled to retire. In the morning the retainers awoke, and were filled with shame when they learnt how Ito Soda had kept his vigil. The councilors loudly praised the young soldier for his loyalty and enterprise, and he was commanded to keep watch again that night. He did so, and once more the false O Toyo entered the sickroom, and, as on the previous night, she was compelled to retreat without being able to cast her spell over the prince. It was discovered that immediately the faithful Soda had kept guard, the prince was able to obtain peaceful slumber, and, moreover, that he began to get better, for the false O Toyo, having been frustrated on two occasions, now kept away altogether, and the guard was not troubled with mysterious drowsiness. Soda, impressed by these strange circumstances, went to one of the councilors and informed him that the so-called O Toyo was a goblin of some kind. That night Soda planned to go to the creature's room and try to kill her, arranging that in case she should escape there should be eight retainers outside waiting to capture her and dispatch her immediately. At the appointed hour Soda went to the creature's apartment, pretending that he bore a message from the prince. "What is the message?" inquired the woman. "Kindly read this letter," replied Soda, and with these words he drew his dirk and tried to kill her. The false O Toyo seized a halberd and endeavored to strike her adversary. Blow followed blow, but at last perceiving that flight would serve her better than battle, she threw away her weapon, and in a moment the lovely maiden turned into a cat and sprang onto the roof. The eight men waiting outside in case of emergency shot at the animal, but the creature succeeded in eluding them. The cat made all speed for the mountains, and caused trouble among the people who lived in the vicinity, but was finally killed during a hunt ordered by the Prince of Hizen. The prince became well again, and Ito Soda received the honor and reward he so richly deserved. Source: F. Hadland Davis, Myths and Legends of Japan (London: G. G. Harrap and Company, 1913), pp. 265-268. This legend is also recorded in A. B. Mitford, Tales of Old Japan (London: Macmillan and Co., 1871), v. 2, pp. 73-84. Return to the table of contents . The Firefly A young man of Matsue was returning home from a wedding party when he saw, just in front of his house, a firefly. He paused a moment, surprised to see such an insect on a cold winter's night with snow on the ground. While he stood and meditated, the firefly flew toward him, and the young man struck at it with his stick, but the insect flew away and entered the garden adjoining his own. The next day he called at his neighbor's house, and was about to relate the experience of the previous night when the eldest daughter of the family entered the room, and exclaimed, "I had no idea you were here, and yet a moment ago you were in my mind. Last night I dreamt that I became a firefly. It was all very real and very beautiful, and while I was darting hither and thither I saw you, and flew toward you, intending to tell you that I had learnt to fly, but you thrust me aside with your stick, and the incident still frightens me." The young man, having heard these words from the lips of his betrothed, held his peace. Source: F. Hadland Davis, Myths and Legends of Japan (London: G. G. Harrap and Company, 1913), p. 286. Hadland entitles this story "A Strange Dream." Return to the table of contents . The Princess Peony Many years ago at Gamogun, in the province of Omi, was a castle called Adzuchi-no-shiro. It was a magnificent old place, surrounded by walls and a moat filled with lotus lilies. The feudal lord was a very brave and wealthy man, Yuki Naizen-no-jo. His wife had been dead for some years. He had no son; but he had a beautiful daughter aged eighteen, who (for some reason which is not quite clear to me) was given the title of Princess. For a considerable period there had been peace and quiet in the land; the feudal lords were on the best of terms, and everyone was happy. Amid these circumstances Lord Naizen-no-jo perceived that there was a good opportunity to find a husband for his daughter Princess Aya; and after a time the second son of the Lord of Ako, of Harima Province, was selected, to the satisfaction of both fathers, the affair having little to do with the principals. Lord Ako's second son had viewed his bride with approval, and she him. One may say that young people are bound to approve each other when it is the parents' wish that they be united. Many suicides result from this. Princess Aya made her mind up to try and love her prospective husband. She saw nothing of him; but she thought of him, and talked of him. One evening when Princess Aya was walking in the magnificent gardens by the moonlight, accompanied by her maids-in-waiting, she wandered down through her favorite peony bed to the pond where she loved to gaze at her reflection on the nights of the full moon, to listen to frogs, and to watch the fireflies. When nearing the pond her foot slipped, and she would have fallen into the water had it not been that a young man appeared as if by magic and caught her. He disappeared as soon as he had put her on her feet again. The maids-of-honor saw her slip; they saw a glimmer of light, and that was all. But Princess Aya had seen more. She had seen the handsomest young man she could imagine. "Twenty-one years old," she said to O Sadayo San, her favorite maid, "he must have been -- a samurai of the highest order. His dress was covered with my favorite peonies, and his swords were richly mounted. Oh that I could have seen him a minute longer, to thank him for saving me from the water! Who can he be? And how could he have got into our gardens, through all the guards?" So spoke the princess to her maids, directing them at the same time that they were to say a word to no one, for fear that her father should hear, find the young man, and behead him for trespass. After this evening Princess Aya fell sick. She could not eat or sleep, and turned pale. The day for her marriage with the young Lord of Ako came and went without the event; she was far too sick for that. The best of the doctors had been sent from Kyoto, which was then the capital; but none of them had been able to do anything, and the maid grew thinner and thinner. As a last resource, the Lord Naizen-no-jo, her father, sent for her most confidential maid and friend, O Sadayo, and demanded if she could give any reason for his daughter's mysterious sickness. Had she a secret lover? Had she a particular dislike for her betrothed? "Sir," said O Sadayo, "I do not like to tell secrets; but here it seems my duty to your lordship's daughter as well as to your lordship. Some three weeks ago, when the moon was at its full, we were walking in the peony beds down near the pond where the princess loves to be. She stumbled and nearly fell into the water, when a strange thing happened. In an instant a most beautiful young samurai appeared and helped her up, thus preventing her from falling into the pond. We could all see the glimmer of him; but your daughter and I saw him most distinctly. Before your daughter could thank him he had disappeared. None of us could understand how it was possible for a man to get into the gardens of the princess, for the gates of the castle are guarded on all sides, and the princess's garden is so much better guarded than the rest that it seems truly incredible that a man could get in. We maids were asked to say nothing for fear of your lordship's anger. Since that evening it is that our beloved princess Aya has been sick, sir. It is sickness of the heart. She is deeply in love with the young samurai she saw for so brief a space. Indeed, my lord, there never was such a handsome man in the world before, and if we cannot find him the young princess, I fear, will die." "How is it possible for a man to get into the grounds?" said Lord Yuki Naizen-no-jo. "People say foxes and badgers assume the figures of men sometimes; but even so it is impossible for such supernatural beings to enter my castle grounds, guarded as it is at every opening." That evening the poor princess was more wearily unhappy than ever before. Thinking to enliven her a little, the maids sent for a celebrated player on the biwa, called Yashaskita Kengyo. The weather being hot, they were sitting on the gallery (engawa); and while the musician was playing "Dannoura" there appeared suddenly from behind the peonies the same handsome young samurai. He was visible to all this time -- even the peonies embroidered on his dress. "There he is! There he is!" they cried; at which he instantly disappeared again. The princess was highly excited, and seemed more lively than she had been for days; the old Daimio grew more puzzled than ever when he heard of it. Next night, while two of the maids were playing for their mistress -- O Yae San the flute, and O Yakumo the koto -- the figure of the young man appeared again. A thorough search having been made during the day in the immense peony beds with absolutely no result, not even the sign of a footmark, the thing was increasingly strange. A consultation was held, and it was decided by the lord of the castle to invite a veteran officer of great strength and renown, Maki Hiogo, to capture the youth should he appear that evening. Maki Hiogo readily consented, and at the appointed time, dressed in black and consequently invisible, concealed himself among the peonies. Music seemed to have a fascination for the young samurai. It was while music was being played that he had made his appearances. Consequently, O Yae and O Yakumo resumed their concert, while all gazed eagerly towards the peony beds. As the ladies played a piece called "Sofuren," there, sure enough, arose the figure of a young samurai, dressed magnificently in clothes which were covered with embroidered peonies. Everyone gazed at him, and wondered why Maki Hiogo did not jump up and catch him. The fact was that Maki Hiogo was so much astonished by the noble bearing of the youth that at first he did not want to touch him. Recovering himself, and thinking of his duty to his lord, he stealthily approached the young man, and, seizing him round the waist, held him tight. After a few seconds Maki Hiogo felt a kind of wet steam falling on his face; by degrees it made him faint; and he fell to the ground, still grasping the young samurai, for he had made up his mind that he would secure him. Everyone had seen the scuffle, and some of the guards came hurrying to the place. Just as they reached the spot Maki Hiogo came to his senses, and shouted "Come, gentlemen! I have caught him. Come and see!" But on looking at what he held in his arms he discovered it to be only a large peony! By this time the Lord Naizen-no-jo had arrived at the spot where Maki Hiogo lay, and so had the Princess Aya and her maids. All were astounded and mystified except the Daimio himself, who said "Ah! It is as I said. No fox or badger spirit could pass our guards and get into this garden. It is the spirit of the peony flower that took the form of a prince." Turning to his daughter and her maids, he said, "You must take this a compliment, and pay great respect to the peony, and show the one caught by Maki Hiogo kindness as well by taking care of it." The Princess Aya carried the flower back to her room, where she put it in a vase of water and placed it near her pillow. She felt as if she had her sweetheart with her. Day by day she got better. She tended the peony herself, and, strange to say, the flower seemed to get stronger and stronger, instead of fading. At last the princess recovered. She became radiantly beautiful, while the peony continued to remain in perfect bloom, showing no sign of dying. The Princess Aya being now perfectly well, her father could no longer put off the wedding. Consequently, some days later, the Lord of Ako and his family arrived at the castle, and his second son was married to the princess. As soon as the wedding was over the peony was found still in its vase -- but dead and withered. The villagers always after this, instead of speaking of the Princess Aya, or Aya Hime, called her Botan Hime or Peony Princess. Source: Richard Gordon Smith, Ancient Tales and Folklore of Japan (London: A. and C. Black, 1908), no. 46, pp. 291-296. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Folktales from Japan . The Tongue-Cut Sparrow . Multiple versions of a famous Japanese fairy tale. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 5, 2015. Jataka Tales The Jataka Tales a selection edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2020 Contents About the Jataka Tales The Future Buddha as a Wise Judge . The Mosquito and the Carpenter . The Golden Mallard . The Tortoise That Loved His Home Too Much . How a Parrot Told Tales of His Mistress and Had His Neck Wrung . The Monkey's Heart . The Talkative Tortoise . The People Who Saw the Judas Tree . The Timid Hare and the Flight of the Beasts . How a Vain Woman Was Reborn As a Dung-Worm . The Language of Animals . Sulasa and Sattuka . How an Ungrateful Son Planned to Murder His Old Father . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. About the Jataka Tales Part of the canon of sacred Buddhist literature, this collection of some 550 anecdotes and fables depicts earlier incarnations -- sometimes as an animal, sometimes as a human -- of the being who would become Siddhartha Gautama, the future Buddha. Traditional birth and death dates of Gautama are 563-483 BC. The Jataka tales are dated between 300 BC and 400 AD. Many of the tales are set in or near Benares, now called Varanasi, a city in north central India on the Ganges River. One of the world's oldest cities, Varanasi is the most sacred place for Hindus. Buddhists and Muslims also have important religious sites nearby. According to tradition, Buddha began his teaching at Sarnath a short distance from this city. Return to the table of contents . The Future Buddha as a Wise Judge A woman, carrying her child, went to the future Buddha's tank to wash. And having first bathed the child, she put on her upper garment and descended into the water to bathe herself. Then a Yakshini, seeing the child, had a craving to eat it. And taking the form of a woman, she drew near, and asked the mother, "Friend, this is a very pretty child. Is it one of yours?" And when she was told it was, she asked if she might nurse it. And this being allowed, she nursed it a little, and then carried it off. But when the mother saw this, she ran after her, and cried out, "Where are you taking my child to?" and caught hold of her. The Yakshini boldly said, "Where did you get the child from? It is mine!" And so quarreling, they passed the door of the future Buddha's Judgment Hall. He heard the noise, sent for them, inquired into the matter, and asked them whether they would abide by his decision. And they agreed. Then he had a line drawn on the ground; and told the Yakshini to take hold of the child's arms, and the mother to take hold of its legs; and said, "The child shall be hers who drags him over the line." But as soon as they pulled at him, the mother, seeing how he suffered, grieved as if her heart would break. And letting him go, she stood there weeping. Then the future Buddha asked the bystanders, "Whose hearts are tender to babes? Those who have borne children, or those who have not?" And they answered, "Oh sire! The hearts of mothers are tender." Then he said, "Who, think you, is the mother? She who has the child in her arms, or she who has let go?" And they answered, "She who has let go is the mother." And he said, "Then do you all think that the other was the thief?" And they answered, "Sire! We cannot tell." And he said, "Verily, this is a Yakshini, who took the child to eat it." And he replied, "Because her eyes winked not, and were red, and she knew no fear, and had no pity, I knew it." And so saying, he demanded of the thief, "Who are you?" And she said, "Lord! I am a Yakshini." And he asked, "Why did you take away this child?" And she said, "I thought to eat him, Oh my Lord!" And he rebuked her, saying, "Oh foolish woman! For your former sins you have been born a Yakshini, and now do you still sin!" And he laid a vow upon her to keep the Five Commandments, and let her go. But the mother of the child exalted the future Buddha, and said, "Oh my Lord! Oh great physician! May your life be long!" And she went away, with her babe clasped to her bosom. Source: Buddhist Birth-Stories; or, Jataka Tales: The Oldest Collection of Folk-Lore Extant , edited by V. Fausbøll and translated by T. W. Rhys Davids, vol. 1 (London: Trübner and Company, 1880), pp. xiv-xvi . A type 926 folktale. Link to additional tales of this type: Child Custody . A wise judge identifies the rightful mother. Return to the table of contents . The Mosquito and the Carpenter Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta gained his livelihood as a trader. In these days in a border village in Kasi there dwelt a number of carpenters. And it chanced that one of them, a bald gray-haired man, was planing away at some wood with his head glistening like a copper bowl, when a mosquito settled on his scalp and stung him with its dart like sting. Said the carpenter to his son, who was seated hard by, "My boy, there's a mosquito stinging me on the head. Do drive it away." "Hold still then father," said the son. "One blow will settle it." (At that very time the Bodhisatta had reached that village in the way of trade, and was sitting in the carpenter's shop.) "Rid me of it!" cried the father. "All right, father," answered the son, who was behind the old man's back, and, raising a sharp ax on high with intent to kill only the mosquito, he cleft his father's head in two. So the old man fell dead on the spot. Thought the Bodhisatta, who had been an eye witness of the whole scene, "Better than such a friend is an enemy with sense, whom fear of men's vengeance will deter from killing a man." And he recited these lines: Sense-lacking friends are worse than foes with sense; Witness the son that sought the gnat to slay, But cleft, poor fool, his father's skull in two. So saying, the Bodhisatta rose up and departed, passing away in after days to fare according to his deserts. And as for the carpenter, his body was burned by his kinsfolk. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895), no. 44, pp. 116-17 . Translated from the Pali by Robert Chalmers. A type 1586 folktale. Link to addtional tales of this type: The Foolish Friend . A fool kills an insect resting on someone's head, with catastrophic consequences. Return to the table of contents . The Golden Mallard Once upon a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta was born a Brahmin, and growing up was married to a bride of his own rank, who bore him three daughters named Nanda, Nanda-vati, and Sundari-nanda. The Bodhisatta dying, they were taken in by neighbors and friends, whilst he was born again into the world as a golden mallard endowed with consciousness of its former existences. Growing up, the bird viewed its own magnificent size and golden plumage, and remembered that previously it had been a human being. Discovering that his wife and daughters were living on the charity of others, the mallard bethought him of his plumage like hammered and beaten gold and how by giving them a golden feather at a time he could enable his wife and daughters to live in comfort. So away he flew to where they dwelt and alighted on the top of the central beam of the roof. Seeing the Bodhisatta, the wife and girls asked where he had come from; and he told them that he was their father who had died and been born a golden mallard, and that he had come to visit them and put an end to their miserable necessity of working for hire. "You shall have my feathers," said he, "one by one, and they will sell for enough to keep you all in ease and comfort." So saying, he gave them one of his feathers and departed. And from time to time he returned to give them another feather, and with the proceeds of their sale these Brahmin women grew prosperous and quite well to do. But one day the mother said to her daughters, "There's no trusting animals, my children. Who's to say your father might not go away one of these days and never come back again? Let us use our time and pluck him clean next time he comes, so as to make sure of all his feathers." Thinking this would pain him, the daughters refused. The mother in her greed called the golden mallard to her one day when he came, and then took him with both hands and plucked him. Now the Bodhisatta's feathers had this property that if they were plucked out against his wish, they ceased to be golden and became like a crane's feathers. And now the poor bird, though he stretched his wings, could not fly, and the woman flung him into a barrel and gave him food there. As time went on his feathers grew again (though they were plain white ones now), and he flew away to his own abode and never came back again. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , vol. 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University, 1895), no. 136, pp. 293-94 . Translated from the Pali by Robert Chalmers. A type 219E** folktale. Link to additional folktales of this type: Golden Fowls . Aesop's "Goose That Laid the Golden Eggs" and other tales of magical birds abused by the beneficiaries. Return to the table of contents . The Tortoise That Loved His Home Too Much Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta was born in a village as a potter's son. He plied the potter's trade, and had a wife and family to support. At that time there lay a great natural lake close by the great river of Benares. When there was much water, river and lake were one; but when the water was low, they were apart. Now fish and tortoises know by instinct when the year will be rainy and when there will be a drought. So at the time of our story the fish and tortoises which lived in that lake knew there would be a drought; and when the two were one water, they swam out of the lake into the river. But there was one tortoise that would not go into the river, because, said he, "here I was born, and here I have grown up, and here is my parents' home. Leave it I cannot!" Then in the hot season the water all dried up. He dug a hole and buried himself, just in the place where the Bodhisatta was used to come for clay. There the Bodhisatta came to get some clay. With a big spade he dug down, until he cracked the tortoise's shell, turning him out on the ground as though he were a large piece of clay. In his agony the creature thought, "Here I am, dying, all because I was too fond of my home to leave it!" And in the words of these following verses, he made his moan: Here was I born, and here I lived; my refuge was the clay; And now the clay has played me false in a most grievous way; Thee, thee I call, oh Bhaggava; hear what I have to say! Go where thou canst find happiness, where'er the place may be; Forest or village, there the wise both home and birthplace see; Go where there's life; nor stay at home for death to master thee. So he went on and on, talking to the Bodhisatta, until he died. The Bodhisatta picked him up, and collecting all the villagers addressed them thus: "Look at this tortoise. When the other fish and tortoises went into the great river, he was too fond of home to go with them, and buried himself in the place where I get my clay. Then as I was digging for clay, I broke his shell with my big spade, and turned him out on the ground in the belief that he was a large lump of clay. Then he called to mind what he had done, lamented his fate in two verses of poetry, and expired. So you see he came to his end because he was too fond of his home. Take care not to be like this tortoise. Don't say to yourselves, 'I have sight, I have hearing, I have smell, I have taste, I have touch, I have a son, I have a daughter, I have numbers of men and maids for my service, I have precious gold.' Do not cleave to these things with craving and desire. Each being passes through three stages of existence." Thus did he exhort the crowd with all a Buddha's skill. The discourse was bruited abroad all over India, and for full seven thousand years it was remembered. All the crowd abode by his exhortation, and gave alms, and did good until at last they went to swell the hosts of heaven. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895), no. 178, pp. 55-56 . Translated from the Pali by W. H. D. Rouse. A type 278A folktale. Link to additional type 278A folktales . Return to the table of contents . How a Parrot Told Tales of His Mistress and Had His Neck Wrung Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta came into the world as a young parrot. His name was Radha, and his youngest brother was named Potthapada. While they were yet quite young, both of them were caught by a fowler and handed over to a Brahmin in Benares. The Brahmin cared for them as if they were his children. But the Brahmin's wife was a wicked woman. There was no watching her. The husband had to go away on business, and addressed his young parrots thus: "Little dears, I am going away on business. Keep watch on your mother in season and out of season. Observe whether or not any man visits her." So off he went, leaving his wife in charge of the young parrots. As soon as he was gone, the woman began to do wrong. Night and day the visitors came and went. There was no end to them. Potthapada, observing this, said to Radha, "Our master gave this woman into our charge, and here she is doing wickedness. I will speak to her." "Don't," said Radha. But the other would not listen. "Mother," said he, "why do you commit sin?" How she longed to kill him! But making as though she would fondle him, she called him to her. "Little one, you are my son! I will never do it again! Here, then the dear!" So he came out. Then she seized him, crying, "What! You preach to me ! You don't know your measure!" And she wrung his neck, and threw him into the oven. The Brahmin returned. When he had rested, he asked the Bodhisatta, "Well, my dear, what about your mother? Does she do wrong, or no?" And as he asked the question, he repeated the first couplet: I come, my son, the journey done, and now I am at home again," Come tell me, is your mother true? Does she make love to other men? Radha answered, "Father dear, the wise speak not of things which do not conduce to blessing, whether they have happened or not." And he explained this by repeating the second couplet: For what he said he now lies dead, burnt up beneath the ashes there. It is not well the truth to tell, lest Potthapada's fate I share. Thus did the Bodhisatta hold forth to the Brahmin. And he went on, "This is no place for me to live in either." Then bidding the Brahmin farewell, he flew away into the woods. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895), no. 198, pp. 92-94 . Translated from the Pali by W. H. D. Rouse. A type 243A folktale. Links to similar tales: The Parrot That Talked Too Much , folktales of type 237. Hear No Evil; See No Evil; Speak No Evil , folktales of type 243A. The Parrot and the Adulterous Woman , folktales of type 1422. Return to the table of contents . The Monkey's Heart Once upon a time, while Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta came to life at the foot of the Himalayas as a monkey. He grew strong and sturdy, big of frame, well to do, and lived by a curve of the river Ganges in a forest haunt. Now at that time there was a crocodile dwelling in the Ganges. The crocodile's mate saw the great frame of the monkey, and she conceived a longing to eat his heart. So she said to her lord, "Sir, I desire to eat the heart of that great king of the monkeys!" "Good wife," said the crocodile, "I live in the water and he lives on dry land. How can we catch him?" "By hook or by crook," she replied, "he must be caught. If I don't get him, I shall die." "All right," answered the crocodile, consoling her, "don't trouble yourself. I have a plan. I will give you his heart to eat." So when the Bodhisatta was sitting on the bank of the Ganges, after taking a drink of water, the crocodile drew near, and said, "Sir Monkey, why do you live on bad fruits in this old familiar place? On the other side of the Ganges there is no end to the mango trees, and labuja trees, with fruit sweet as honey! Is it not better to cross over and have all kinds of wild fruit to eat?" "Lord Crocodile," the monkey answered. "The Ganges is deep and wide. How shall I get across?" "If you want to go, I will let you sit upon my back, and carry you over." The monkey trusted him, and agreed. "Come here, then," said the crocodile. "Up on my back with you!" and up the monkey climbed. But when the crocodile had swum a little way, he plunged the monkey under the water. "Good friend, you are letting me sink!" cried the monkey. "What is that for?" The crocodile said, "You think I am carrying you out of pure good nature? Not a bit of it! My wife has a longing for your heart, and I want to give it to her to eat.!" "Friend," said the monkey, "it is nice of you to tell me. Why, if our heart were inside us, when we go jumping among the tree tops it would be all knocked to pieces!" "Well, where do you keep it?" asked the crocodile. The Bodhisatta pointed out a fig tree, with clusters of ripe fruit, standing not far off. "See," said he, "there are our hearts hanging on yonder fig tree." "If you will show me your heart," said the crocodile, "then I won't kill you." "Take me to the tree, then, and I will point it out to you." The crocodile brought him to the place. The monkey leapt off his back, and, climbing up the fig tree, sat upon it. "Oh silly crocodile!" said he. "You thought that there were creatures that kept their hearts in a treetop! You are a fool, and I have outwitted you! You may keep your fruit to yourself. Your body is great, but you have no sense." And then to explain this idea he uttered the following stanzas: Rose-apple, jack-fruit, mangoes, too, across the water there I see; Enough of them, I want them not; my fig is good enough for me! Great is your body, verily, but how much smaller is your wit! Now go your ways, Sir Crocodile, for I have had the best of it. The crocodile, feeling as sad and miserable as if he had lost a thousand pieces of money, went back sorrowing to the place where he lived. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895), no. 208, pp. 110-112 . Translated from the Pali by W. H. D. Rouse. A type 91 folktale. Link to additional tales of this type: The Monkey's Heart . Return to the table of contents . The Talkative Tortoise The Jataka Tales Once on a time Brahmadatta was king of Benares, and the Bodhisatta, being born to one of the king's court, grew up, and became the king's adviser in all things human and divine. But this king was very talkative; and when he talked there was no chance for any other to get in a word. And the Bodhisatta, wishing to put a stop to his much talking, kept watching for an opportunity. Now there dwelt a tortoise in a certain pond in the region of Himalaya. Two young wild geese, searching for food, struck up an acquaintance with him; and by and by they grew close friends together. One day these two said to him: "Friend Tortoise, we have a lovely home in Himalaya, on a plateau of Mount Cittakuta, in a cave of gold! Will you come with us?" "Why," said he, "how can I get there?" "Oh, we will take you, if only you can keep your mouth shut, and say not a word to anybody." "Yes, I can do that," says he. "Take me along!" So they made the tortoise hold a stick between his teeth; and themselves taking hold so of the two ends, they sprang up into the air. The village children saw this, and exclaimed: "There are two geese carrying a tortoise by a stick!" (By this time the geese flying swiftly had arrived at the space above the palace of the king, at Benares.) The Tortoise wanted to cry out: "Well, and if my friends do carry me, what is that to you, you caitiffs?" And he let go the stick from between his teeth, and falling into the open courtyard he split in two. What an uproar there was! "A tortoise has fallen in the courtyard, and broken in two!" they cried. The king, with the Bodhisatta, and all his court, came up to the place, and seeing the tortoise asked the Bodhisatta a question. "Wise Sir, what made this creature fall?" "Now's my time!" thought he. "For a long while I have been wishing to admonish the king, and I have gone about seeking my opportunity. No doubt the truth is this: The tortoise and the geese became friendly; the geese must have meant to carry him to Himalaya, and so made him hold a stick between his teeth, and then lifted him into the air; then he must have heard some remark, and wanted to reply; and not being able to keep his mouth shut he must have let himself go; and so he must have fallen from the sky and thus come by his death." So thought he; and addressed the king: "O king, they that have too much tongue, that set no limit to their speaking, ever come to such misfortune as this." And he uttered the following verses: The tortoise needs must speak aloud, Although between his teeth A stick he bit; yet, spite of it He spoke -- and fell beneath And now, O mighty master, mark it well. See thou speak wisely, see thou speak in season. To death the tortoise fell; He talked too much. That was the reason. "He is speaking of me!" the king thought to himself; and asked the Bodhisatta if it was so. "Be it you, O great king, or be it another," replied he, "whosoever talks beyond measure comes by some misery of this kind." And so he made the thing manifest. And thenceforward the king abstained from talking, and became a man of few words. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895), no. 215, pp. 123-24 . Translated from the Pali by W. H. D. Rouse. A type 225A folktale. Link to similar tales: The Tortoise That Wanted to Fly . Return to the table of contents . The People Who Saw the Judas Tree Once on a time Bramadatta, the King of Benares, had four sons. One day they sent for the charioteer and said to him, "We want to see a Judas tree [ butea frondosa ]. Show us one!" "Very well, I will," the charioteer replied. But he did not show it to them all together. He took the eldest at once to the forest in the chariot, and showed him the tree at the time when the buds were just sprouting from the stem. To the second he showed it when the leaves were green. To the third at the time of blossoming. And to the fourth when it was bearing fruit. After this it happened that the four brothers were sitting together and someone asked, "What sort of a tree is the Judas tree?" Then the first brother answered, "Like a burnt stump!" And the second cried, "Like a banyan tree!" And the third, "Like a piece of meat!" And the fokuth said, "Like the acacia!" They were vexed at each other's answers, and ran to find their father. "My Lord," they asked, "what sort of a tree is the Judas tree?" "What did you say to that?" he asked. They told him the manner of their answers. Said the king, "All four of you have seen the tree. Only when the charioteer showed you the tree, you did not ask him, 'What is the tree like at such a time, or at such another time?' You made no distinctions, and that is the reason of your mistake." And he repeated the first stanza: All have seen the Judas tree. What is your perplexity? No one asked the charioteer What its form the livelong year!" Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895), no. 248, pp. 184-85 . Translated from the Pali by W. H. D. Rouse. This parable conveys a similar message to that of the famouse tale of The Blind Men and the Elephant . Return to the table of contents . The Timid Hare and the Flight of the Beasts Once upon a time when Brahmadatta reigned in Benares, the Bodhisatta [the future Buddha] came to life as a young lion. And when fully grown he lived in a wood. At this time there was near the Western Ocean a grove of palms mixed with vilva trees. A certain hare lived here beneath a palm sapling, at the foot of a vilva tree. One day this hare, after feeding, came and lay down beneath the young palm tree. And the thought struck him, "If this earth should be destroyed, what would become of me?" And at this very moment a ripe vilva fruit fell on a palm leaf. At the sound of it, the hare thought, "This solid earth is collapsing," and starting up he fled, without so much as looking behind him. Another hare saw him scampering off, as if frightened to death, and asked the cause of his panic flight. "Pray, don't ask me," he said. The other hare cried, "Pray, sir, what is it?" and kept running after him. Then the hare stopped a moment and without looking back said, "The earth here is breaking up." And at this the second hare ran after the other. And so first one and then another hare caught sight of him running, and joined in the chase till one hundred thousand hares all took to flight together. They were seen by a deer, a boar, an elk, a buffalo, a wild ox, a rhinoceros, a tiger, a lion, and an elephant. And when they asked what it meant and were told that the earth was breaking up, they too took to flight. So by degrees this host of animals extended to the length of a full league. When the Bodhisatta saw this headlong flight of the animals, and heard the cause of it was that the earth was coming to an end, he thought, "The earth is nowhere coming to an end. Surely it must be some sound which was misunderstood by them. And if I don't make a great effort, they will all perish. I will save their lives." So with the speed of a lion he got before them to the foot of a mountain, and lion-like roared three times. They were terribly frightened at the lion, and stopping in their flight stood all huddled together. The lion went in amongst them and asked why there were running away. "The earth is collapsing," they answered. "Who saw it collapsing?" he said. "The elephants know all about it," they replied. He asked the elephants. "We don't know," they said, "the lions know." But the lions said, "We don't know, the tigers know." The tigers said, "The rhinoceroses know." The rhinoceroses said, "The wild oxen know." The wild oxen, "the buffaloes." The buffaloes, "the elks." The elks, "the boars." The boars, "the deer." The deer said, "We don't know; the hares know." When the hares were questioned, they pointed to one particular hare and said, "This one told us." So the Bodhisatta asked, "Is it true, sir, that the earth is breaking up?" "Yes, sir, I saw it," said the hare. "Where," he asked, "were you living, when you saw it?" "Near the ocean, sir, in a grove of palms mixed with vilva trees. For as I was lying beneath the shade of a palm sapling at the foot of a vilva tree, methought, 'If this earth should break up, where shall I go?' And at that very moment I heard the sound the breaking up of the earth, and I fled." Thought the lion, "A ripe vilva fruit evidently must have fallen on a palm leaf and made a 'thud,' and this hare jumped to the conclusion that the earth was coming to an end, and ran away. I will find out the exact truth about it." So he reassured the herd of animals, and said, "I will take the hare and go and find out exactly whether the earth is coming to an end or not, in the place pointed out by him. Until I return, do you stay here." Then placing the hare on his back, he sprang forward with the speed of a lion, and putting the hare down in the palm grove, he said, "Come, show us the place you meant." "I dare not, my lord," said the hare. "Come, don't be afraid," said the lion. The hare, not venturing to go near the vilva tree, stood afar off and cried, "Yonder, sir, is the place of dreadful sound," and so saying, he repeated the first stanza: From the spot where I did dwell Issued forth a fearful "thud"; What it was I could not tell, Nor what caused it understood. After hearing what the hare said, the lion went to the foot of the vilva tree, and saw the spot where the hare had been lying beneath the shade of the palm tree, and the ripe vilva fruit that fell on the palm leaf, and having carefully ascertained that the earth had not broken up, he placed the hare on his back and with the speed of a lion soon came again to the herd of beasts. Then he told them the whole story, and said, "Don't be afraid." And having thus reassured the herd of beasts, he let them go. Verily, if it had not been for the Bodhisatta at that time, all the beasts would have rushed into the sea and perished. It was all owing to the Bodhisatta that they escaped death. Alarmed at sound of fallen fruit A hare once ran away, The other beasts all followed suit Moved by that hare's dismay. They hastened not to view the scene, But lent a willing ear To idle gossip, and were clean Distraught with foolish fear. They who to Wisdom's calm delight And Virtue's heights attain, Though ill example should invite, Such panic fear disdain. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 3 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1897), no. 322, pp. 49-52 . Translated from the Pali by H. T. Francis and R. A. Neil. A type 20 folktale. Link to additional tales of this type: The End of the World: The Sky Is Falling . Storytellers from around the world make light of paranoia and mass hysteria. Return to the table of contents . How a Vain Woman Was Reborn As a Dung-Worm Once upon a time, there was a king Assaka reigning in Potali, which is a city of the kingdom of Kasi. His queen consort, named Ubbari, was very dear to him; she was charming, and graceful, and beautiful passing the beauty of women, though not so fair as a goddess. She died; and at her death the king was plunged in grief, and became sad and miserable. He had the body laid in a coffin, and embalmed with oil and ointment, and laid beneath the bed; and there he lay without food, weeping and wailing. In vain did his parents and kinsfolk, friends and courtiers, priests and laymen, bid him not to grieve, since all things pass away; they could not move him. As he lay in sorrow, seven days passed by. Now the Bodhisatta was at that time an ascetic, who had gained the Five Supernatural Faculties and the Eight Attainments; he dwelt at the foot of Himalaya. He was possessed of perfect supernatural insight, and as he looked round India with his heavenly vision, he saw this king lamenting, and straightway resolved to help him. By his miraculous power he rose in the air, and alighted in the king's park, and sat down on the ceremonial stone, like a golden image. A young brahmin of the city of Potali entered the park, and seeing the Bodhisatta, he greeted him and sat down. The Bodhisatta began to talk pleasantly with him. "Is the king a just ruler?" he asked. "Yes, sir, the king is just," replied the youth; "but his queen is just dead; he has laid her body in a coffin, and lies down lamenting her; and today is the seventh day since he began. Why do you not free the king from this great grief? Virtuous beings like you ought to overcome the king's sorrow." "I do not know the king, young man," said the Bodhisatta; "but if he were to come and ask me, I would tell him the place where she has now come into the flesh again, and make her speak herself." "Then, holy sir, stay here until I bring the king to you," said the youth. The Bodhisatta agreed, and he hastened into the king's presence, and told him about it. "You should visit this being with the divine insight!" he told the king. The king was overjoyed at the thought of seeing Ubbari; and he entered his chariot and drove to the place. Greeting the Bodhisatta, he sat down on one side, and asked, "Is it true, as I am told, that you know where my queen has come into being again?" "Yes, I do, my lord king," replied he. Then the king asked where it was. The Bodhisatta replied, "O king, she was intoxicated with her beauty, and so fell into negligence and did not do fair and virtuous acts; so now she has become a little dung-worm in this very park." "I don't believe it!" said the king. "Then I will show her to you, and make her speak," answered the Bodhisatta. "Please make her speak!" said the king. The Bodhisatta commanded: "Let the two that are busy rolling a lump of cow-dung, come forth before the king!" and by his power he made them do it, and they came. The Bodhisatta pointed one out to the king: "There is your queen Ubbari, O king! she has just come out of this lump, following her husband the dung-worm. Look and see." "What! My queen Ubbari a dung-worm? I don't believe it!" cried the king. "I will make her speak, O king!" "Pray make her speak, holy sir!" said he. The Bodhisatta by his power gave her speech. "Ubbari!" said he. "What is it, holy sir?" she asked, in a human voice. "What was your name in your former character?" the Bodhisatta asked her. "My name was Ubbari, sir," she replied, "the consort of King Assaka." "Tell me," the Bodhisatta went on, "which do you love best now -- king Assaka, or this dung-worm?" "O sir, that was my former birth," said she. "Then I lived with him in this park, enjoying shape and sound, scent, savor and touch; but now that my memory is confused by rebirth, what is he? Why, now I would kill king Assaka, and would smear the feet of my husband the dung-worm with the blood flowing from his throat!" and in the midst of the king's company, she uttered these verses in a human voice: Once with the great king Assaka, who was my husband dear, Beloving and beloved, I walked about this garden here. But now new sorrows and new joys have made the old ones flee, And dearer far than Assaka my worm is now to me. When king Assaka heard this, he repented on the spot; and at once he caused the queen's body to be removed, and washed his head. He saluted the Bodhisatta, and went back into the city, where he married another queen, and ruled in righteousness. And the Bodhisatta, having instructed the king, and set him free from sorrow, returned again to the Himalayas. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 2, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895), no. 207, pp. 108-110 . Translated from the Pali by W. H. D. Rouse. Return to the table of contents . The Language of Animals Once upon a time when a king named Senaka was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta was Sakka. The king Senaka was friendly with a certain naga king. This naga king, they say, left the naga world and ranged the earth seeking food. The village boys seeing him said, "This is a snake," and struck him with clods and other things. The king, going to amuse himself in his garden, saw them, and being told they were beating a snake, said, "Don't let them beat him. Drive them away." And this was done. So the naga king got his life, and when he went back to the naga world. He took many jewels, and coming at midnight to the king's bedchamber he gave them to him, saying, "I got my life through you." So he made friendship with the king and came again and again to see him. He appointed one of his naga girls, insatiate in pleasures, to be near the king and protect him, and he gave the king a charm, saying, "If ever you do not see her, repeat this charm." One day the king went to the garden with the naga girl and was amusing himself in the lotus tank. The naga girl seeing a water snake quitted her human shape and made love with him. The king not seeing the girl said, "Where is she gone?" and repeated the spell. Then he saw her in her misconduct and struck her with a piece of bamboo. She went in anger to the naga world, and when she was asked, "Why are you come?" she said, "Your friend struck me on the back because I did not do his bidding," showing the mark of the blow. The naga king, not knowing the truth, called four naga youths and sent them with orders to enter Senaka's bedchamber and destroy him like chaff by the breath of their nostrils. They entered the chamber at the royal bedtime. As they came in, the king was saying to the queen, "Lady, do you know where the naga girl has gone?" "King, I do not." "Today when we were bathing in the tank, she quitted her shape and misconducted herself with a water snake. I said, 'Don't do that,' and struck her with a piece of bamboo to give her a lesson. And now I fear she may have gone to the naga world and told some lie to my friend, destroying his goodwill to me." The young nagas hearing this turned back at once to the naga world and told their king. He being moved went instantly to the king's chamber, told him all and was forgiven. Then he said, "In this way I make amends," and gave the king a charm giving knowledge of all sounds. "This, O king, is a priceless spell. If you give anyone this spell you will at once enter the fire and die." The king said, "It is well," and accepted it. From that time he understood the voice even of ants. One day he was sitting on the dais eating solid food with honey and molasses, and a drop of honey, a drop of molasses, and a morsel of cake fell on the ground. An ant seeing this comes crying, "The king's honey jar is broken on the dais, his molasses cart and cake cart are upset. Come and eat honey and molasses and cake." The king hearing the cry laughed. The queen being near him thought, "What has the king seen that he laughs?" When the king had eaten his solid food and bathed and sat down cross-legged, a fly said to his wife, "Come, lady, let us enjoy love." She said, "Excuse me for a little, husband. They will soon be bringing perfumes to the king. As he perfumes himself some powder will fall at his feet. I will stay there and become fragrant, then we will enjoy ourselves lying on the king's back." The king hearing the voice laughed again. The queen thought again, "What has he seen that he laughs?" Again when the king was eating his supper, a lump of rice fell on the ground. The ants cried, "A wagon of rice has broken in the king's palace, and there is none to eat it." The king hearing this laughed again. The queen took a golden spoon and helping him reflected, "Is it at the sight of me that the king laughs?" She went to the bedchamber with the king and at bedtime she asked, "Why did you laugh, O king?" He said, "What have you to do with why I laugh?" But being asked again and again he told her. Then she said, "Give me your spell of knowledge." He said, "It cannot be given." But though repulsed she pressed him again. The king said, "If I give you this spell, I shall die." "Even though you die, give it me." The king, being in the power of womankind, saying, "It is well," consented and went to the park in a chariot, saying, "I shall enter the fire after giving away this spell." At that moment Sakka, king of gods, looked down on the earth and seeing this case said, "This foolish king, knowing that he will enter the fire through womankind, is on the way; I will give him his life." So he took Suja, daughter of the Asuras, and went to Benares. He became a he-goat and made her a she-goat, and resolving that the people should not see them, he stood before the king's chariot. The king and the Sindh asses yoked in the chariot saw him, but none else saw him. For the sake of starting talk he was as if making love with the she-goat. One of the Sindh asses yoked in the chariot seeing him said, "Friend goat, we have heard before, but not seen, that goats are stupid and shameless. But you are doing, with all of us looking on, this thing that should be done in secret and in a private place, and are not ashamed. What we have heard before agrees with this that we see." And so he spoke the first stanza: "Goats are stupid," says the wise man, and the words are surely true: This one knows not he's parading what in secret he should do. The goat hearing him spoke two stanzas: O, sir donkey, think and realize your own stupidity, You're tied with ropes, your jaw is wrenched, and very downcast is your eye. When you're loosed, you don't escape, sir, that's a stupid habit too: And that Senaka you carry, he's more stupid still than you. The king understood the talk of both animals, and hearing it he quickly sent away the chariot. The ass hearing the goat's talk spoke the fourth stanza: Well. sir king of goats, you fully know my great stupidity: But how Senaka is stupid, prithee do explain to me. The goat explaining this spoke the fifth stanza: He who his own special treasure on his wife will throw away, Cannot keep her faithful ever and his life he must betray. The king hearing his words said, "King of goats, you will surely act for my advantage. Tell me now what is right for me to do." Then the goat said, "King, to all animals no one is dearer than self. It is not good to destroy oneself and abandon the honor one has gained for the sake of anything that is dear." So he spoke the sixth stanza: A king, like thee, may have conceived desire And yet renounced it if his life's the cost. Life is the chief thing. What can man seek higher? If life's secured, desires need ne'er be crossed. So the Bodhisatta exhorted the king. The king, delighted, asked, "King of goats, whence come you?" "I am Sakka, O king, come to save you from death out of pity for you." "King of gods, I promised to give her the charm. What am I to do now?" "There is no need for the ruin of both of you. You say, 'It is the way of the craft,' and have her beaten with some blows. By this means she will not get it." The king said, "It is well," and agreed. The Bodhisatta after exhortation to the king went to Sakka's heaven. The king went to the garden, had the queen summoned and then said, "Lady, will you have the charm?" "Yes, lord." "Then go through the usual custom." "What custom?" "A hundred stripes on the back, but you must not make a sound." She consented through greed for the charm. The king made his slaves take whips and beat her on both sides. She endured two or three stripes and then cried, "I don't want the charm." The king said, "You would have killed me to get the charm," and so flogging the skin off her back he sent her away. After that she could not bear to talk of it again. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 3 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1897), no. 386, pp. 174-77 . Translated from the Pali by H. T. Francis and R. A. Neil. A type 670 folktale. Links to additional tales of this type: The Language of Animals . Return to the table of contents . Sulasa and Sattuka Once upon a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, there was a beautiful woman of the town, called Sulasa, whose price was a thousand pieces a night. There was in the same city a robber named Sattuka, as strong as an elephant, who used to enter rich men's houses at night and plunder at will. One day he was captured. Sulasa was standing at her window when the soldiers led Sattuka, his hands bound behind his back, down the street toward the place of execution. She fell in love with him on sight, and said, "If I can free that stout fighting man, I will give up this bad life of mine and live respectably with him." She sent a thousand pieces to the chief constable, and thus gained his freedom. They lived together in delight and harmony for some time, but after three or four months, the robber thought, "I shall never be able to stay in this one place. But one can't go empty handed. Her ornaments are worth a hundred thousand pieces. I will kill her and take them." So he said to her one day, "Dear, when I was being hauled along by the king's men, I promised an offering to a tree deity on a mountain top, who is now threatening me because I have not paid it. Let us make an offering." She consented to accompany her husband to the mountain top to make the offering. She should, he said, to honor the deity, wear all of her ornaments. When they arrived at the mountain top, he revealed his true purpose: "I have not come to present the offering. I have come with the intention of killing you and going away with all your ornaments. Take them all off and make a bundle of them in your outer garment." "Husband, why would you kill me?" "For your money." "Husband, remember the good I have done you. When you were being hauled along in chains, I paid a large sum and saved your life. Though I might get a thousand pieces a day, I never look at another man. Such a benefactress I am to you. Do not kill me. I will give you much money and be your slave." But instead of accepting her entreaties, he continued his preparations to kill her. "At least let me salute you," she said. "I am going to make obeisance to you on all four sides." Kneeling in front of him, she put her head to his foot, repeated the act at his left side, then at his right side, then from behind. Once behind him, she took hold of him, and with the strength of an elephant threw him over a cliff a hundred times as high as a man. He was crushed to pieces and died on the spot. Seeing this deed, the deity who lived on the mountain top spoke this stanza: Wisdom at times is not confined to men; A woman can show wisdom now and then. So Sulasa killed the robber. When she descended from the mountain and returned to her attendants, they asked where her husband was. "Don't ask me," she said, and mounting her chariot she went on to the city. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 3 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1897), no. 419, pp. 660-63 . Translated from the Pali by H. T. Francis and R. A. Neil. Slightly shortened. In a postscript to this tale, the tree deity is identified as the future Buddha. A type 955 folktale. Links to addition tales of this type: The Robber Bridegroom . Return to the table of contents . How an Ungrateful Son Planned to Murder His Old Father Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was King of Benares, there was in a family of a certain village of Kasi an only son named Vasitthaka. This man supported his parents, and after his mother's death, he supported his father as has been described in the introduction. But there is this difference. When the woman [Vasitthaka's wife] said, "Look there! That is your father's doing! I am constantly begging him not to do this and that, and he only gets angry!" she went on, "My lord, your father is fierce and violent, forever picking quarrels. A decrepit old man like that, tormented with disease, is bound to die soon; and I can't live in the same house with him. He will die of himself before many days are out. Well, take him to a cemetery, and dig a pit, throw him in, and break his head with the spade; and when he is dead, shovel the earth upon him, and leave him there." At last, by dint of this dinning in his ears, said he, "Wife, to kill a man is a serious matter. How can I do it?" "I will tell you of a way," quoth she. "Say on, then." "Well, my lord, at break of day, go to the place where your father sleeps. Tell him very loud, that all may hear, that a debtor of his is in a certain village, that you went and he would not pay you, and that if he dies the man will never pay at all. And say that you will both drive there together in the morning. Then at the appointed time get up, and put the animals to the cart, and take him in it to the cemetery. When you get there, bury him in a pit, make a noise as if you had been robbed, wound and wash your head, and return." "Yes, that plan will do," said Vasitthaka. He agreed to her proposal, and got the cart ready for the journey. Now the man had a son, a lad of seven years, but wise and clever. The lad overheard what his mother said. "My mother," thought he, "is a wicked woman, and is trying to persuade father to murder his father. I will prevent my father from doing this murder." He ran quickly, and lay down beside his grandsire. Vasitthaka, at the time suggested by the wife, prepared the cart. "Come, father, let us get that debt!" said he, and placed his father in the cart. But the boy got in first of all. Vasitthaka could not prevent him, so he took him to the cemetery with them. Then, placing his father and his son together in a place apart, with the cart, he got down, took spade and basket, and in a spot where he was hidden from them began to dig a square hole. The boy got down and followed him, and as though ignorant what was afoot, opened a conversation by repeating the first stanza: No bulbs are here, no herbs for cooking meat, No cat-mint, nor no other plant to eat. Than father, why this pit, if need be none, Delve in Death's acre mid the woods alone? This his father answered by repeating the second stanza: Thy grandsire, son, is very weak and old, Oppressed by pain from ailments manifold. Him will I bury in a pit today. In such a life I could not wish him stay. Hearing this, the boy answered by repeating a half stanza: Thou has done sinfully in wishing this, And for the deed, a cruel deed it is. With these words, he caught the spade from his father's hands, and at no great distance began to dig another pit. His father approaching asked why he dug that pit, to whom he made reply by finishing the third stanza: I too, when thou art aged, father mine, Will treat my father as thou treatest thine; Following the custom of the family Deep in a pit I too will bury thee. To this the father replied by repeating the fourth stanza: What a harsh saying for a boy to say, And to upbraid a father in this way! To think that my own son would rail at me, And to his truest friend unkind should be! When the father had thus spoken, the wise lad recited three stanzas, one by way of answer, and two as an holy hymn: I am not harsh, my father, nor unkind, Nay, I regard thee with a friendly mind. But this thou dost, this act of sin, thy son Will have no strength to undo again, once done. Whoso, Vasittha, hurts with ill intent His mother or his father, innocent, He, when the body is dissolved, shall be In hell for his next life undoubtedly. Whoso with meat and drink, Vasittha, shall His mother or his father feed withal, He, when the body is dissolved, shall be In heaven for his next life undoubtedly. The father, after hearing his son thus discourse, repeated the eighth stanza: Thou art no heartless ingrate, son, I see, But kindly hearted, O my son to me. 'Twas in obedience to thy mother's word I thought to do this horrid deed abhorred. Said the lad, when he heard this, "Father, women, when a wrong is done and they are not rebuked, again and again commit sin. You must bend my mother, that she may never again do such a deed as this." And he repeated the ninth stanza: That wife of yours, that ill-conditioned dame, My mother, she that brought me forth, that same, Let us from out our dwelling far expel, Lest she work other woe on thee as well. Hearing the words of his wise son, well pleased was Vasitthaka, and saying, "Let us go, my son!" he seated himself in the cart with son and father. Now the woman too, this sinner, was happy at heart; for, thought she, this ill-luck is out of the house now. She plastered the place with wet cow dung, and cooked a mess of rice porridge. But as she sat watching the road by which they would return, she espied them coming, "There he is, back with old ill-luck again!" thought she, much in anger. "Fie, good-for-nothing! cried she. "What, bring back the ill-luck you took away with you!" Vasitthaka said not a word, but unyoked the cart. Then said he, "Wretch, what is that you say?" He gave her a sound drubbing, and bundled her head over heels out of doors, bidding her never darken his door again. Then he bathed his father and his son, and took a bath himself, and the three of them ate the rice porridge. The sinful woman dwelt for a few days in another house. Then the son said to his father, "Father, for all this, my mother does not understand. Now let us try to vex her. You give out that in such and such a village lives a niece of yours, who will attend upon your father and your son and you. So you will go and fetch her. Then take flowers and perfumes, and get into your cart, and ride about the country all day, returning in the evening." And so he did. The women in the neighbor's family told his wife this. "Have you heard," said they, "that your husband has gone to get another wife in such a place?" "Ah, then I am undone!" quoth she, "and there is no place for me left." But she would inquire of her son. So quickly she came to him, and fell at his feet, crying, "Save thee, I have no other refuge! Henceforward I will tend your father and grandsire as I would tend a beauteous shrine! Give me entrance into this house once more!" "Yes, mother," replied the lad, "if you do no more as you did, I will. Be of good cheer!" And at his father's coming he repeated the tenth stanza: That wife of yours, that ill-conditioned dame, My mother, she that brought me forth, that same, Like a tamed elephant, in full control, Let her return again, that sinful soul. So said he to his father, and then went and summoned his mother. She, being reconciled to her husband and her husband's father, was thenceforward tamed, and endued with righteousness, and watched over her husband and his father and her son. And these two, steadfastly following their son's advice, gave alms and did good deeds, and became destined to join the hosts of heaven. The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, v. 4, translated by W. H. D. Rouse (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1901), no. 446, pp. 27-31. The wise boy featured in the story was the future Buddha in one of his many reincarnations. A type 980 folktale. Links to tales with a similar message: Old Grandfathers and Their Grandsons . Type 980 tales in which old people are saved by their grandsons. Killing of Old Men . Type 981 tales about geronticide. Ungrateful Heirs . Type 982 tales about old people who trick their ungrateful children into caring for them. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 30, 2020. Jephthah and His Daughter Jephthah and His Daughter The Book of Judges Chapter 11 Then the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jephthah, and he passed over Gilead, and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over unto the children of Ammon. And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou shalt without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands, Then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall surely be the Lord's, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering. So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight against them; and the Lord delivered them unto his hands. And he smote them from Aroer, even until thou come to Minnith, even twenty cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very great slaughter. Thus the children of Ammon were subdued before the children of Israel. And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances: and she was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter. And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and said, Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art one of them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back. And she said unto him, My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth unto the Lord, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy mouth; forasmuch as the Lord hath taken vengeance for thee of thine enemies, even of the children of Ammon. And she said unto her father, Let this thing be done for me: let me alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and bewail my virginity, I and my fellows. And he said, Go. And he sent her away for two months: and she went with her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains. And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned unto her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed: and she knew no man. And it was a custom in Israel, That the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year. Source: Book of Judges 11:29-40 (King James translation). Link to Human Sacrifice in Legends and Myths . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 20, 2009. Kora and His Sister: An Indian Folktale about Brother-Sister Incest Kora and His Sister India There were once seven brothers and they had one sister who was the youngest of the family. The six eldest brothers were married but no wife had been found for the youngest; for three years enquiries were made to try and find a suitable bride for him, but all in vain. At last the young man, whose name was Kora, told his parents and brothers not to trouble any more, as he would find a wife for himself; he intended to bring a flowering plant from the forest and plant it by the stand on which the watering pots were kept, and then he would marry any maiden who picked one of the flowers and put it in her hair. His father and mother approved of this proposal, so the next day he brought some sort of flowering plant and planted it by the water-pot stand. He charged all his family to be most careful that no one of his own relations picked the flower and also to warn any of the village girls who wanted to pick it, that if she did so and put it in her hair, she would thereby become his wife; but if, knowing this, anyone wished to do so, they were not to prevent her. The neighbours soon got to hear what the plant meant and used often to come and look at it, and Kora watched it growing, till after a time it produced a bud and then a beautiful and sweet-scented flower. All the village girls came to see the beautiful flower; and one day Kora's sister when she went to the water-stand to get some water to drink, caught hold of it and longed to pick it, it looked so pretty. Her mother saw what she was doing and scolded her for touching the forbidden flower, but the girl begged to see what it would look like in her hair; there could be no harm done if she pulled the whole plant up by its roots and put it in her hair and then replanted it; no one would know what had happened. In spite of her mother's remonstrances she insisted on doing this and having seen how the flower looked in her hair carefully replanted it. Soon afterwards Kora came home and went to see his flower; he knew at once that some one had worn it and called to his mother and asked who it was. She protested that she knew nothing about the matter, but Kora said that he could tell by the smell that it had been worn and then he showed that there was also a hair sticking to the flower. Then his mother admitted that in spite of all she could say, his sister had worn the flower and planted it again in the ground. When she saw that she was found out, the girl began to cry, but her father said that it was clearly fated that she and Kora should marry and this was the reason why they had been unable to find any other bride; so they must now arrange for the wedding. Accordingly rice was got ready and all the usual preparations made for a marriage. The unfortunate girl saw that flight was her only means of escape from such a fate, so one day she ran away; all she took with her was a pet parrot. For many days she travelled on and one day she stopped by a pool to bathe and as she rubbed her limbs she collected the scurf that she rubbed off her skin and put in on the ground in one place; then she went on with her bathing; but at the place where she had put the scurf of her skin, a palm tree sprang up and grew so rapidly, that, by the time she came out of the water, it had become a large tree. The girl was struck by this strange sight and at once thought that the tree would afford her a safe refuge; so she climbed up it with her parrot in her hand and when safely seated among the leaves she begged the palm tree to grow so tall that no one would be able to find her, and the tree grew till it reached an unusual height. So the girl stayed in the tree top and the parrot used to go every day and bring her food. Meanwhile her parents and brothers searched high and low for her for two or three days, for the wedding day was close at hand, but their search was of course in vain; and they concluded that the girl must have drowned herself in some river. Time passed and one day at noon a Mohuli girl, who was taking her basket-ware to market, stopped to rest in the shade of the palm tree; and as she sat there, Kora's sister called to her from the top of the tree and asked her to give her a small winnowing fan in exchange for a bracelet. The Mahuli girl told her to throw the bracelet down first. Kora's sister made no objection to this, and when she had got the bracelet, the Mahuli girl threw up a winnowing fan which soared right up to where Kora's sister was sitting. Before the Mahuli girl went on her way, Kora's sister made her promise never to let anyone see the bracelet when she went about selling her baskets as otherwise it would be stolen from her; and secondly on no account to let it be known that there was anyone in the palm tree, on pain of death. The Mahuli girl kept her promise and whenever she went out selling baskets she used to keep her bracelet covered with her cloth. One day it chanced that she went to the house where Kora lived to sell her wares and they asked her why it was that she kept her arm covered; she told them that she had a sore on it; they wanted to see how big the sore was, but she refused to show it, saying that if she showed it she would die. They laughed at such a ridiculous story and at last forced her to show her arm, which of course was quite well; but they at once recognised the bracelet and asked where she had got it from. The Mahuli girl refused to tell them and said that if she did, she would die. "What a foolish girl you are" they objected "first you say you will die if you show us your arm and then if you tell us where you got this bracelet from; it belonged to our daughter whom we have lost, and so you must tell us! Come, we will give you a basket full of rice if you tell us." The Mahuli girl could not resist this offer, and when the basket of rice was produced, she told them where the palm tree was, in which Kora's sister was hiding. In all haste the father and mother went to the tree and found that it was much too high for them to climb; so they begged their daughter to come down and promised not to marry her to her brother; but she would not come down. Then they sang: You have made a palm tree from the scrapings of your skin, And have climbed up into it, daughter! Come daughter, come down. But she only answered: Father and mother, why do you cry? I must spend my life here: Do you return home. So they went home in despair. Then her sisters-in-law came in their turn and sang: Palm tree, palm tree, give us back our sister; The brother and sister have got to be married. But she would not answer them nor come down from the tree, so they had to go home without her. Then all her other relations came and besought her to come down, but she would not listen to them. So they went away and invoked a storm to come to their aid. And a storm arose and cold rain fell, till the girl in the palm tree was soaked and shivering, and the wind blew and swayed the palm tree so that its top kept touching the ground. At last she could bear the cold and wet no more and, seizing an opportunity when the tree touched the ground, she slipped off. Her relations had made all the villagers promise on no account to let her into their houses; so when she went into the village and called out at house after house no one answered her or opened to her. Then she went to her own home and there also they refused to open to her. But Kora had lit a big fire in the cow house and sat by it warming himself, knowing that the girl would have to come to him; and as she could find no shelter elsewhere she had to go to his fire, and then she sat and warmed herself and thought "I fled for fear of this man and now I have come back to him; this is the end, I can no longer stay in this world; the people will not even let me into their houses. I have no wish to see them again." So she sat and thought, and when she was warmed, she lay down by the side of Kora; and he wore tied to his waist a nail-cutter; she unfastened this and cut her throat with it as she lay. Her death struggles aroused Kora, and he got up and saw the ground covered with her blood and he saw that she had killed herself with his nail-cutter; then he took counsel with himself and also cut his throat in the same way. In the morning the two corpses were found lying side by side, and it was seen that their blood refused to mingle but had flowed in opposite directions. So they took the bodies away to burn them and laid them on one pyre; and when the fire was lit, it was seen that the smoke from the two bodies rose separately into the air. Then all who saw it, said "We wished to marry brother and sister but Chando would not approve of it; see how their blood would not mingle though spilt on the same floor, and how the smoke from the pyre rises in two separate columns; it is plain that the marriage of brother and sister is wrong." From that time such mariages have been discontinued. Source: Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 50, pp. 163-68 . Edited by D. L. Ashliman. Return to: The Father Who Wanted to Marry His Daughter , folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 510B. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 14, 2013. Andrew Lang's Colored Fairy Books Andrew Lang's Colored Fairy Books Links to original texts, assembled by D. L. Ashliman © 2011 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The years of first publication are given in parentheses. Links open in new windows. Blue Fairy Book (1889). Red Fairy Book (1890). Green Fairy Book (1892). Yellow Fairy Book (1894). Pink Fairy Book (1897). Grey Fairy Book (1900). Violet Fairy Book (1901). Crimson Fairy Book (1903). Brown Fairy Book (1904). Orange Fairy Book (1906). Olive Fairy Book (1907). Lilac Fairy Book (1910). Link to the Wikipedia article on Andrew Lang's Colored Fairy Books . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 20, 2011. Language of Animals: Folktales about Wife Beating The Language of Animals folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 670 about wife beating selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2022 Contents The Language of Animals (from The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births ). The King and His Inquisitive Queen (India). The Billy Goat and the King (India). Ramai and the Bonga (India). The King Who Learnt the Speech of Animals (Sri Lanka). The Bull, the Donkey, and the Husbandman (from The 1001 Nights ). The Merchant Who Knew the Language of Beasts (Palestine). The Snake's Gift: Language of Animals (Serbia). The Language of Animals (Bulgaria). The Language of Beasts (Bulgaria). Woman's Curiosity (Hungary). The Dog and the Cock (Denmark). The Wicked Wife (Germany). Frederigo da Pozzuolo Is Pressed by His Wife to Tell a Secret (Italy, Giovanni Francesco Straparola). The Language of Beasts (Jamaica). Return to folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Language of Animals from The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births Once upon a time when a king named Senaka was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta was Sakka. The king Senaka was friendly with a certain naga king. This naga king, they say, left the naga world and ranged the earth seeking food. The village boys seeing him said, "This is a snake," and struck him with clods and other things. The king, going to amuse himself in his garden, saw them, and being told they were beating a snake, said, "Don't let them beat him. Drive them away." And this was done. So the naga king got his life, and when he went back to the naga world. He took many jewels, and coming at midnight to the king's bedchamber he gave them to him, saying, "I got my life through you." So he made friendship with the king and came again and again to see him. He appointed one of his naga girls, insatiate in pleasures, to be near the king and protect him, and he gave the king a charm, saying, "If ever you do not see her, repeat this charm." One day the king went to the garden with the naga girl and was amusing himself in the lotus tank. The naga girl seeing a water snake quitted her human shape and made love with him. The king not seeing the girl said, "Where is she gone?" and repeated the spell. Then he saw her in her misconduct and struck her with a piece of bamboo. She went in anger to the naga world, and when she was asked, "Why are you come?" she said, "Your friend struck me on the back because I did not do his bidding," showing the mark of the blow. The naga king, not knowing the truth, called four naga youths and sent them with orders to enter Senaka's bedchamber and destroy him like chaff by the breath of their nostrils. They entered the chamber at the royal bedtime. As they came in, the king was saying to the queen, "Lady, do you know where the naga girl has gone?" "King, I do not." "Today when we were bathing in the tank, she quitted her shape and misconducted herself with a water snake. I said, 'Don't do that,' and struck her with a piece of bamboo to give her a lesson. And now I fear she may have gone to the naga world and told some lie to my friend, destroying his goodwill to me." The young nagas hearing this turned back at once to the naga world and told their king. He being moved went instantly to the king's chamber, told him all and was forgiven. Then he said, "In this way I make amends," and gave the king a charm giving knowledge of all sounds. "This, O king, is a priceless spell. If you give anyone this spell you will at once enter the fire and die." The king said, "It is well," and accepted it. From that time he understood the voice even of ants. One day he was sitting on the dais eating solid food with honey and molasses, and a drop of honey, a drop of molasses, and a morsel of cake fell on the ground. An ant seeing this comes crying, "The king's honey jar is broken on the dais, his molasses cart and cake cart are upset. Come and eat honey and molasses and cake." The king hearing the cry laughed. The queen being near him thought, "What has the king seen that he laughs?" When the king had eaten his solid food and bathed and sat down cross-legged, a fly said to his wife, "Come, lady, let us enjoy love." She said, "Excuse me for a little, husband. They will soon be bringing perfumes to the king. As he perfumes himself some powder will fall at his feet. I will stay there and become fragrant, then we will enjoy ourselves lying on the king's back." The king hearing the voice laughed again. The queen thought again, "What has he seen that he laughs?" Again when the king was eating his supper, a lump of rice fell on the ground. The ants cried, "A wagon of rice has broken in the king's palace, and there is none to eat it." The king hearing this laughed again. The queen took a golden spoon and helping him reflected, "Is it at the sight of me that the king laughs?" She went to the bedchamber with the king and at bedtime she asked, "Why did you laugh, O king?" He said, "What have you to do with why I laugh?" But being asked again and again her told her. Then she said, "Give me your spell of knowledge." He said, "It cannot be given." But though repulsed she pressed him again. The king said, "If I give you this spell, I shall die." "Even though you die, give it me." The king, being in the power of womankind, saying, "It is well," consented and went to the park in a chariot, saying, "I shall enter the fire after giving away this spell." At that moment Sakka, king of gods, looked down on the earth and seeing this case said, "This foolish king, knowing that he will enter the fire through womankind, is on the way; I will give him his life." So he took Suja, daughter of the Asuras, and went to Benares. He became a he-goat and made her a she-goat, and resolving that the people should not see them, he stood before the king's chariot. The king and the Sindh asses yoked in the chariot saw him, but none else saw him. For the sake of starting talk he was as if making love with the she-goat. One of the Sindh asses yoked in the chariot seeing him said, "Friend goat, we have heard before, but not seen, that goats are stupid and shameless. But you are doing, with all of us looking on, this thing that should be done in secret and in a private place, and are not ashamed. What we have heard before agrees with this that we see." And so he spoke the first stanza: "Goats are stupid," says the wise man, and the words are surely true: This one knows not he's parading what in secret he should do. The goat hearing him spoke two stanzas: O, sir donkey, think and realize your own stupidity, You're tied with ropes, your jaw is wrenched, and very downcast is your eye. When you're loosed, you don't escape, sir, that's a stupid habit too: And that Senaka you carry, he's more stupid still than you. The king understood the talk of both animals, and hearing it he quickly sent away the chariot. The ass hearing the goat's talk spoke the fourth stanza: Well. sir king of goats, you fully know my great stupidity: But how Senaka is stupid, prithee do explain to me. The goat explaining this spoke the fifth stanza: He who his own special treasure on his wife will throw away, Cannot keep her faithful ever and his life he must betray. The king hearing his words said, "King of goats, you will surely act for my advantage. Tell me now what is right for me to do." Then the goat said, "King, to all animals no one is dearer than self. It is not good to destroy oneself and abandon the honor one has gained for the sake of anything that is dear." So he spoke the sixth stanza: A king, like thee, may have conceived desire And yet renounced it if his life's the cost. Life is the chief thing. What can man seek higher? If life's secured, desires need ne'er be crossed. So the Bodhisatta exhorted the king. The king, delighted, asked, "King of goats, whence come you?" "I am Sakka, O king, come to save you from death out of pity for you." "King of gods, I promised to give her the charm. What am I to do now?" "There is no need for the ruin of both of you. You say, 'It is the way of the craft,' and have her beaten with some blows. By this means she will not get it." The king said, "It is well," and agreed. The Bodhisatta after exhortation to the king went to Sakka's heaven. The king went to the garden, had the queen summoned and then said, "Lady, will you have the charm?" "Yes, lord." "Then go through the usual custom." "What custom?" "A hundred stripes on the back, but you must not make a sound." She consented through greed for the charm. The king made his slaves take whips and beat her on both sides. She endured two or three stripes and then cried, "I don't want the charm." The king said, "You would have killed me to get the charm," and so flogging the skin off her back he sent her away. After that she could not bear to talk of it again. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births (Cambridge: The Cambridge University Press, 1897), no. 386, vol. 3. pp. 174-77 . Translated from the Pali by H. T. Francis and R. A. Neil. Return to the table of contents . The King and His Inquisitive Queen India There was a certain king known by the name of Huntsman, on account of his expertness in the chase. One day when returning from the forest where he had been hunting he found a serpent and a lizard fighting on the path along which he was moving. As they were blocking the way he ordered them to stand aside and allow him to pass, but they gave no heed to what he said. King Huntsman then began to beat them with his staff. He killed the lizard, but the serpent fled, and so escaped. The serpent then went to Monsha, the king of the serpents, and complained of the treatment the lizard and himself had received at the hands of king Huntsman. The next day king Monsha went and met king Huntsman on his way home from the forest, and blocked his way so that he could not pass. King Huntsman being angry said, "Clear the way, and allow me to pass, or else I shall send an arrow into you. Why do you block my way?" King Monsha replied, "Why did you assault the lizard and the serpent, with intent to kill them both?" King Huntsman answered, "I ordered them to get out of my way, but they would not, I therefore assaulted them, and killed one. The other saved himself by flight." King Monsha hearing this explanation said, "Very good, the fault was theirs, not yours." King Huntsman then petitioned the king of the serpents to bestow upon him the gift of understanding the language of animals and insects. King Monsha acceded to his request, and gave him the gift he desired. A few days after this event king Huntsman went to the forest, and after hunting all day returned home in the evening. Having washed his hands and feet, he sat down to his meal of boiled rice. When the rice was being served to the king a few grains fell on the ground, and a fly and an ant began to dispute as to who should carry them away. The fly said, "I will take them to my children." The ant replied, "No, I will take them to mine." Hearing the two talk thus, the king was amused, and began to smile. The queen, who was standing by, said to him, "Tell me what has made you laugh." On being thus addressed the king became greatly confused, for at the time the gift of understanding the language of animals and insects was bestowed upon him, king Monsha had forbidden him to make it known to anyone. He had said, "If you tell this to any one, I shall eat you." Remembering this the king feared to answer the question put to him by the queen. He tried to deceive her by saying, "I did not laugh, you must have been mistaken." She would not, however, be thus put off, so the king was obliged to tell her that if he answered her question his life would be forfeited. The queen was inexorable, and said, "Whether you forfeit your life or not, you must tell me." The king then said, "Well, if it must be so, let us make ready to go to the bank of the Ganges. There I shall tell you, and when I have done so you must push me into the river, and then return home." The king armed himself, and the two set out for the river. When they had reached it, they sat down to rest under the shade of a tree A flock of goats was grazing near to where they were seated, and the king's attention was arrested by a conversation which was being carried on between an old she- goat and a young he-goat. The former addressed the latter thus, "There is an island in the middle of the Ganges, and on that island there is a large quantity of good sweet grass. Get the grass for me, and I shall give you my daughter in marriage." The he-goat was not thus to be imposed upon. He angrily addressed his female friend as follows, "Do not think to make me like this foolish king, who vainly tries to please a woman. He has come here to lose his own life at the bidding of one. You tell me to go and bring you grass out of such a flood as this. I am no such fool. I do not care to die yet. There are many more quite as good as your daughter." The king understood what passed between them, and admitted to himself the truth of what the he-goat had said. After considering a short time he arose, and having made a rude sacrificial altar, said to the queen, "Kneel down, and do me obeisance, and I shall tell you what made me laugh." She knelt down, and the king struck off her head and burnt her body upon the altar. Returning home he performed her funeral ceremonies, after which he married another wife. He reigned prosperously for many years, and decided all disputes that were brought before him by animals or insects. Source: A. Campbell, Santal Folk Tales (Pokhuria: Santal Mission Press, 1891), pp. 22-24 . Return to the table of contents . The Billy Goat and the King India, Andrew Lang Once there lived a certain king who understood the language of all birds and beasts and insects. This knowledge had of course been given him by a fairy godmother; but it was rather a troublesome present, for he knew that if he were ever to reveal anything he had thus learned he would turn into a stone. How he managed to avoid doing so long before this story opens I cannot say, but he had safely grown up to manhood, and married a wife, and was as happy as monarchs generally are. This king, I must tell you, was a Hindu; and when a Hindu eats his food he has a nice little place on the ground freshly plastered with mud, and he sits in the middle of it with very few clothes on -- which is quite a different way from ours. Well, one day the king was eating his dinner in just such a nice, clean, mud-plastered spot, and his wife was sitting opposite to wait upon him and keep him company. As he ate he dropped some grains of rice upon the ground, and a little ant, who was running about seeking a living, seized upon one of the grains and bore it off towards his hole. Just outside the king's circle this ant met another ant, and the king heard the second one say, "Oh, dear friend, do give me that grain of rice, and get another one for yourself. You see my boots are so dirty that, if I were to go upon the king's eating place, I should defile it, and I can't do that, it would be so very rude." But the owner of the grain of rice only replied, "If you want rice go and get it. No one will notice your dirty boots; and you don't suppose that I am going to carry rice for all our kindred?" Then the king laughed. The queen looked at herself up and down, but she could not see or feel anything in her appearance to make the king laugh, so she said, "What are you laughing at?" "Did I laugh?" replied the king. "Of course you did," retorted the queen; "and if you think that I am ridiculous I wish you would say so, instead of behaving in that stupid way! What are you laughing at?" "I'm not laughing at anything," answered the king. "Very well, but you did laugh, and l want to know why." "Well, I'm afraid I can't tell you," said the king. "You must tell me," replied the queen impatiently. "If you laugh when there's nothing to laugh at you must be ill or mad. What is the matter? Still the king refused to say, and still the queen declared that she must and would know. For days the quarrel went on, and the queen gave her husband no rest, until at last the poor man was almost out of his wits, and thought that, as life had become for him hardly worth living while this went on, he might as well tell her the secret and take the consequences. "But," thought he, "if I am to become a stone, I am not going to lie, if I can help it, on some dusty highway, to be kicked here and there by man and beast, flung at dogs, be used as the plaything of naughty children, and become generally restless and miserable. I will be a stone at the bottom of the cool river, and roll gently about there until I find some secure resting place where I can stay for ever." So he told his wife that if she would ride with him to the middle of the river he would tell her what he had laughed at. She thought he was joking, and laughingly agreed; their horses were ordered and they set out. On the way they came to a fine well beneath the shade of some lofty, wide-spreading trees, and the king proposed that they should get off and rest a little, drink some of the cool water, and then pass on. To this the queen consented; so they dismounted and sat down in the shade by the well-side to rest. It happened that an old goat and his wife were browsing in the neighbourhood, and, as the king and queen sat there, the nanny goat came to the well's brink and peering over saw some lovely green leaves that sprang in tender shoots out of the side of the well. "Oh!" cried she to her husband, "come quickly and look. Here are some leaves which make my mouth water; come and get them for me!" Then the billy goat sauntered up and looked over, and after that he eyed his wife a little crossly. "You expect me to get you those leaves, do you? I suppose you don't consider how in the world I am to reach them? You don't seem to think at all; if you did you would know that if I tried to reach those leaves I should fall into the well and be drowned!" "Oh," cried the nanny goat, "why should you fall in? Do try and get them!" "I am not going to be so silly," replied the billy goat. But the nanny goat still wept and entreated. "Look here," said her husband, "there are plenty of fools in the world, but I am not one of them. This silly king here, because he can't cure his wife of asking questions, is going to throw his life away. But I know how to cure you of your follies, and I'm going to." And with that he butted the nanny goat so severely that in two minutes she was submissively feeding somewhere else, and had made up her mind that the leaves in the well were not worth having. Then the king, who had understood every word, laughed once more. The queen looked at him suspiciously, but the king got up and walked across to where she sat. "Are you still determined to find out what I was laughing at the other day?" he asked. "Quite," answered the queen angrily. "Because," said the king, tapping his leg with his riding whip, "I've made up my mind not to tell you, and moreover, I have made up my mind to stop you mentioning the subject any more." "What do you mean?" asked the queen nervously. "Well," replied the king, "I notice that if that goat is displeased with his wife, he just butts her, and that seems to settle the question." "Do you mean to say you would beat me?" cried the queen. "I should be extremely sorry to have to do so," replied the king; "but I have to persuade you to go home quietly, and to ask no more silly questions when I say I cannot answer them. Of course, if you will persist, why --" And the queen went home, and so did the king; and it is said that they are both happier and wiser than ever before. Source: Andrew Lang, The Olive Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1907), pp. 211-15 . Note by Lang: Punjabi story, Major Campbell, Feroshepore. Return to the table of contents . Ramai and the Bonga India Once a bonga haunted the house of a certain man and became such a nuisance that the man had him exorcised and safely pegged down to the ground; and they fenced in the place where the bonga lay with thorns and put a large stone on the top of him. Just at the place was a clump of "Kite's claws" bushes and one day when the berries on the bushes were ripe, a certain cowherd named Ramai went to pick them and when he came round to the stone which covered the bonga he stood on it to pick the fruit, and the bonga called out to him to get off the stone. Ramai looked about and seeing no one said "Who is that speaking?" and the voice said "I am buried under the stone; if you will take it off me I will give you whatever boon you ask." Ramai said that he was afraid that the bonga would eat him but the bonga swore to do him no harm, so he lifted up the stone and the bonga came out and thanking Ramai told him to ask a boon. Ramai asked for the power to see bongas and to understand the language of ants. "I will give you the power," said the bonga , "but you must tell no one about it, not even your wife; if you do you will lose the power and in that case you must not blame me," Then the bonga blew into his ear and he heard the speech of ants; and the bonga scratched the film of his eye balls with a thorn and he saw the bongas : and there were crowds of them living in villages like men. In December when we thresh the rice the bongas carry off half of it; but Ramai could see them and would drive them away and so was able to save his rice. Once a young fellow of his own age was very ill; and his friends blew into his ears and partially brought him to his senses and he asked them to send for Ramai; so they called Ramai and he had just been milking his cows and came with the tethering rope in his hand; and when he entered the room he saw a bonga sitting on the sick man's chest and twisting his neck; so he flogged it with the rope till it ran away and he pursued it until it threw itself into a pool of water; and then the sick man recovered. But Ramai soon lost his useful power; one day as he was eating his dinner he dropped some grains of rice, and two ants fell to quarrelling over one grain, and Ramai heard them abusing each other and was so amused that he laughed out loud. His wife asked why he laughed, and he said at nothing in particular, but she insisted on knowing and he said that it was at some scandal he had heard in the village; but she would not believe him and worried him until he told her that it was at the quarrel of the ants. Then she made him tell her how he gained the power to understand what they said. But from that moment he lost the powers which the bonga had conferred on him. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 157, pp. 393-95 . A bonga is a household spirit, comparable to a brownie. Return to the table of contents. The King Who Learnt the Speech of Animals Sri Lanka In a certain country a king was rearing wild animals. The king had learnt in a thorough manner the speech of animals. One day at that time the fowls were saying, "Our king assists us very much; he gives us food and drink." They thanked the king very much. The king having heard their talk, the king laughed with pleasure. The royal queen having been near, asked, "What did you laugh at?" "I merely ( nikan ) laughed," the king said. Should he explain and give the talk to any person the king will die. Because of it he did not explain and give it. That the king knows the speech of animals he does not inform anyone. The royal queen says, "There is no one who laughs in that way without a reason. Should you not say the reason I am going away, or having jumped into a well I shall die." Thereupon the king, because he was unable to be released from [the importunity of] the queen, thought, "Even if I am to die I must explain and give this." Thinking thus, he went to give food to the animals. Then it was evident to those animals that this king is going to die. Out of the party of animals first a cock says, "His majesty our king is going to be lost. We don't want the food. We shall not receive assistance. Unless his majesty the king perish thus we shall not perish. In submission to me there are many hens. When I have called them the hens come. When I have told them to eat they eat. When I have told them to go they go. The king, having become submissive in that manner to the thing that his wife has said, is going to die." The king having heard it, laughed at it also. Then, also, the royal queen asked, "What did you laugh at?" Thereupon, not saying the [true] word, the king said, "Thinking of constructing a tank, I laughed." Then the queen said, "Having caused the animals that are in this Lankawa (Ceylon) to be brought, let us build a tank." Then the king having said, "It is good," caused the animals to be brought. The king having gone with the animals, showed them a place [in which] to build a tank; and telling them to build it came away. The animals, at the king's command being unable to do anything, all together began to struggle on the mound of earth. Those which can take earth in the mouth take it in the mouth. All work in this manner. The jackal, not doing work, having bounded away remained looking on. After three or four days, the king having gone [there] trickishly stayed looking on. The king saw that the other animals are all moving about as though working. The jackal, only, having bounded off is looking on. Having seen it he asked the jackal, "The others are all working. Thou, only, art looking upward. Why?" Thereupon the jackal said, "No, O lord, I looked into an account." Then the king asked, "What account art thou looking at?" The jackal says, "I looked whether in this country the female3s are in excess or the males are in excess." The king asked, "By the account which thou knowest, are the females in excess or the males in excess?" The jackal said, "So far as I can perceive, the females are in excess in this country." Then the king said that men are in excess. Having said it the king said, "I myself having gone home and looked at the books, if males are in excess I shall give thee a good punishment." The king having come home and looked at the books, it appeared that the males were in excess. Thereupon the king called the jackal, and said, "Bola, males are in excess." Then the jackal says, "No, O lord, your majesty, they are not as many as the females. Having also put down to the female account the males who hearken to the things that females say, after they counted them the females would be in excess." Then the jackal said, "Are the animals able to build tanks? How shall they carry the earth?" Thereupon the king having considered it, and having said, "Wild animals, wild animals, you are to go to the midst of the forest," came home. At that time, the queen asked, "Is the tank built and finished?" Then the king, taking a cane, began to beat the queen. Thereupon the queen, having said, "Ané! O lord, your majesty, I will never again say anything, or even ask anything," began to cry aloud. The king got to know that the jackal was a wise animal. Western Province. Source: H. Parker, Village Folk-Tales of Ceylon , vol. 3 (London: Luzac and Company, 1914), no. 238, pp. 258-60 . I follow Parker's use of square brackets and parentheses. Return to the table of contents . The Bull, the Donkey, and the Husbandman The 1001 Nights Once Allah endowed a wealthy husbandman with the ability to understand the language of every kind of beast and bird, commanding him, under pain of death, never to divulge this gift. Fearing for his life, the husbandman guarded the secret well. One day while observing his animals, he heard a bull say to a donkey, "Lucky one, you enjoy the best of care, while I suffer all manner of ill treatment. I toil under the yoke by day, receive but a meager ration of beans and straw, and must lie at night in a filthy stall. You, by comparison, eat well and lie about at ease unless the master chooses to ride you into town, which happens seldom enough, and even then he returns with you straight-away." "You fool," replied the donkey. "You could have an easier life, if you would only feign illness. When they next take you to your stall, fall to the ground, puff out your belly, and refuse to eat. This will surely bring a reprieve from your accustomed blows and toil." The bull did as the donkey recommended and pretended to be sick. However, the master, who had overheard their conversation, responded by binding the wily donkey to the plow and forcing him to do the bull's work. The donkey, unaccustomed to such labor, suffered greatly under the yoke and the plowman's stick, while the bull enjoyed a day of rest. At day's end, the donkey, nearly dead from exertion and blows, came quickly to a new plan. "My friend," he said to the bull, "you have a bleak future if you do not soon recover your strength. I heard the master say that he intends to deliver you to the butcher, who will turn your flesh into meat for the poor and your hide into a leather mat." The husbandman heard this all. The next morning the husbandman, accompanied by his wife, approached the bull in his stall. The beast gave a great show of health and vigor, whisking his tail, farting, and frisking lustily about. The master, greatly amused at the turn of events, broke into laughter. "Why do you laugh?" asked his wife. "I cannot tell you, lest I die." replied the man. "So be it," answered the woman, "but I must know why you laughed." She continued to wheedle and to beg, until he, sensing that he could not forever resist her unrelenting pleas, resigned himself to his fate. He brought his affairs to order, then prepared to reveal his secret and to die. Now the husbandman had some fifty hens, all serviced by one rooster. The rooster, lustily mounting one hen after the other, was interrupted by one of the farm dogs, who said, "For shame, that you thus satisfy your lust on this day that our master is to die." The rooster replied, "What sort of master do we have, who cannot manage a single wife? I control fifty hens." "And what should the master do?" asked the dog. "He should cut a branch from yonder mulberry tree then use it on her back and ribs until she repents. Then let him give her another beating for good measure, and henceforth he will sleep well and enjoy life." The husbandman heard this conversation between the dog and the rooster, and he took it to heart. He cut a branch from the mulberry tree and proceeded with it to his wife's room. Locking the door behind him, he announced that he was about to reveal his secret to her, but then began to beat her soundly about her back, shoulders, ribs, arms, and legs, all the while saying, "Are you ever again going to ask questions about matters that do not concern you?" Nearly senseless, she finally cried out, "I repent! With Allah as a witness, I will never again question you." She then kissed his hands and his feet, and he led her from the room as submissive as a wife should be. Her parents and other members of the family rejoiced at the turn of events. Thus the husbandman learned family discipline from his rooster, and he and his wife lived together the happiest of lives until they died. Source: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night , translated by Richard F. Burton, vol. 1 (Privately printed, 1885), pp. 16-23 . Translation revised and slightly abridged by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. This story combines Aarne-Thompson-Uther folktale types 207A (the bull and the ass) and 670 (the man who understood the language of animals). Return to the table of contents . The Merchant Who Knew the Language of Beasts Palestine There was once a merchant who knew the language of beasts. But this knowledge had been granted him only upon condition that, if he told the secrets learnt by its means, he should instantly die. No one, not even his wife, was aware that he was gifted beyond the common. One evening, standing near his stables, he heard an ox, which had just returned from plowing, complaining bitterly of his hard labor, and asking the ass on which the merchant rode to business how he might lighten it. The ass advised him to be very ill, to leave his food untouched and roll on the ground in pain when the plowman came to take him to the field. The ox took this advice, and next day his master was told he was too ill to work. The merchant prescribed rest and extra food for the ox, and ordered that the donkey, which was strong and fat, should be yoked to the plow in his place. That evening the merchant stood again by the stable, listening. When the ass came in from plowing, the ox thanked him for his advice, and expressed his intention to act upon it again next morning. "I don't advise you to do that," said the ass, "if you value your life. Today while I was plowing, your master came and told the plowman to take you to the butcher's tomorrow, as you seemed ailing, and have you killed to save your life. For should you sicken and die, he would lose the value of your carcass." "What shall I do?" cried the ox in terror. "Be well and strong tomorrow morning," said the ass. At that the merchant, unaware that his wife stood near him, laughed aloud, and excited her curiosity. His evasive answers only made her more inquisitive; and when he absolutely refused to satisfy her, she lost her temper, and went to complain of him to her relations, who soon threatened him with a divorce. The poor man, who really loved his wife, in despair resolved to tell her all and die. So he put his affairs in order, made his will, and promised to content her on the morrow. Next morning, at a window overlooking the stable yard, where the cock was gallanting with a number of hens, he heard his watchdog reprove the bird for such light conduct on a day of grief. "Why! What is the matter?" inquired the cock. The dog told the story of their master's trouble, when the cock exclaimed, "Our master is a fool. He cannot keep one wife in order while I have no trouble with twenty. He has only to take a stick and give his mistress a sound thrashing to make her amiable." These words came as light to the merchant's gloom. Forthwith he called his wife into an inner room, and there chastised her within an inch of her life. And from that hour she gave him no more trouble. Source: J. E. Hanauer, Folk-Lore of the Holy Land: Moslem, Christian and Jewish , edited by Marmaduke Pickthall (London: Duckworth and Company, 1907), pp. 258-60 . This story, like its counterpart from The 1001 Nights printed above, combines folktale types 207A (the bull and the ass) and 670 (the man who understood the language of animals). Return to the table of contents . The Snake's Gift: Language of Animals Serbia Once upon a time there lived a shepherd who served his master faithfully and honestly. One day whilst keeping the sheep in the forest, he heard a hissing, and wondered what the noise could be. So he went farther into the wood to try and find out. There he saw that the forest was on fire, and a snake was hissing in the midst of the flames. The shepherd watched to see what the snake would do, for it was quite surrounded by the fire, which approached it nearer and nearer. Then the snake cried out, "For God's sake, good shepherd, save me from the fire!" So the shepherd stretched his crook across the flames and the snake glided rapidly over the staff and up his arm onto his shoulder, till at last it wound itself round his neck. Then the shepherd was terrified and exclaimed, "What shall I do? What an unlucky wretch I am! I saved you, and now your are about to kill me!" The snake answered, "Do not be afraid. Only take me to the house of my father. My father is the king of snakes." But the shepherd, being already in great fear, began to excuse himself, saying he must not leave his sheep. Then the snake said, "Nothing will happen to your sheep. Do not be anxious about them. But let us hurry home." So the shepherd went on with the snake through the forest, until they came to a gate made entirely of snakes. Then the snake on the neck of the shepherd hissed, and instantly the snakes untwined themselves, so that the man could pass through. As soon as they had gone through, the snake said to him, "When you reach my father's house he will offer to give you whatever you like -- gold, silver, or precious stones. Do not, however, take any of these things. Choose, instead, the language of animals. He will hesitate at first, but at last he will give it you." Meanwhile they arrived at the palace, and the king of snakes said, weeping, "For God's sake, my child, where were you?" Thereupon the snake told him all that had happened, how he had been surrounded by fire, and the shepherd had saved him. Then the snake king said to the shepherd, "What do you wish that I should give you for saving my son?" The shepherd answered, "I desire nothing but the language of animals." The snake king, however, said, "That is not good for you, for if I give it you, and you tell anyone about it, you will instantly die. Therefore it is better that you ask me for something else." "If you wish to give me anything," replied the shepherd, "give me the language of animals. If you will not give me that, I want nothing -- so good-bye," and he turned to go away. Then the snake king called him back, saying, "If you indeed wish it so much, take it. Open your mouth." The shepherd did so, and the snake king blew into his mouth, and said, "Now blow once yourself in my mouth." The Shepherd did so, and then the snake king blew again into his mouth, and this they did three times. After that the snake said, "Now you possess the language of animals. Go, in God's name, but do not for the world tell anyone about it. If you tell anyone you will instantly die." The shepherd returned across the forest, and, passing through it, he understood everything the birds and animals, and even the plants were saying to each other. When he came to his sheep he found them all there, safe and sound, so he laid himself down to rest a little. Hardly had he done so before two or three ravens settled on a tree near him, and began to converse together, saying, "If that shepherd only knew that just on the spot where the black sheep is lying there is, deep in the earth, a cave full of gold and silver!" When the shepherd heard that he went off to his master and told him. The master brought a cart, and dug down to the cave, and carried the treasure away home. But the master was honest, so he gave up the whole of the treasure to the shepherd, saying, "Here my son, all this wealth belongs to you. For to you God gave it. Build a house, marry, and live upon the treasure." So the shepherd took the money, built a house, and married, and by and by he became the richest man in the whole neighborhood. He kept his own shepherd, and cattle driver, and swineherd. In short, he had great property and made much money. Once, just at Christmas, he said to his wife, "Get ready some wine and other food, and tomorrow we will feast the shepherds." The wife did so, and in the morning they went to their farm. Towards evening the master said to the shepherds, "Come here, all of you. You shall eat, drink, and make merry together, and I will go myself this night to watch the sheep." So the master went to watch his sheep, and, about midnight, the wolves began to howl and the dogs to bark. The wolves spoke, in wolf language, "May we come and take something? You also, shall get a part of the prey." And the dogs answered, in dog language, "Come! We also are ready to eat something." But there was one old dog there who had only two teeth left. This old dog shouted furiously, "Come on, you miserable wretches, if you dare. So long as I have these two teeth left you shall not do any damage to my master's property." All this the master heard and understood. Next day he ordered all the dogs to be killed except that old one. The servants began to remonstrate, saying, "For God's sake, master, it is a pity to do this." But the master answered, "Do as I have ordered you," and started with his wife to go home. They rode on horseback, he on a fine horse and his wife on a handsome mare. But the master's horse went so fast that the wife remained a little behind. Then the master's horse neighed, and said to the mare, "Come on, why do you stay behind?" And the mare answered, "Ah, to you it is easy -- you are carrying only one weight, and I am carrying three." Thereupon the man turned his head and laughed. The wife saw him laughing, and urged the mare on quicker till she came up to her husband, and asked him, "Why were you laughing?" He said merely, "I had good reason to laugh!" But the wife was not satisfied, and again begged he would tell her why he laughed. He excused himself, exclaiming, "Give up questioning me. What has come to you, my wife? I forget now why it was I laughed." But the more he refused to tell her, the more she wished to know. At last the man said, "If I tell you I shall die immediately!" That, however, did not quiet her, and she kept on asking, saying to him, "You must tell me." In the meantime they reached their house. When they had done so the man ordered a coffin to be made, and, when it was ready, had it placed in front of the house, and laid himself down in it. Then he said to his wife, "Now I will tell you why I laughed, but the moment I tell you I shall die." So he looked around once more, and saw that the old dog had come from the field, and had taken his stand over his head, and was howling. When the man noticed this he said to his wife, "Bring a piece of bread for this poor dog." The wife brought a piece and threw it to the dog, but the dog did not even look at it, and a cock came near and began to peck at it. Then the dog said to the cock, "You think only about eating. Do you know that our master is going to die?" And the cock answered, "Well, let him die, since he is so stupid. I have a hundred wives, and often at nights I gather them all round a grain of corn, and, when they are all there, I pick it up myself. If any of them are angry, I peck them. That is my way of keeping them quiet. Only look at the master, however. He is not able to rule one single wife!" The man, hearing that, got out of the coffin, took a stick, and called his wife to him, saying, "Come now, and I will tell you what you want to know." The wife, seeing she was in danger of getting a beating, left him in peace, and never asked him again why it was he laughed. Source: Csedomille Mijatovies, Serbian Folk-Lore (London: W. Isbister and Company, 1874), pp. 37-42 . Link to another version of this tale: Parker Fillmore, "Lord and Master: The Story of the Man Who Understood the Language of Animals," The Laughing Prince: A Book of Jugoslav Fairy Tales and Folk Tales (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company, 1921), pp. 253-66 . Return to the table of contents . The Language of Animals Bulgaria A certain man had a shepherd, who served him faithfully and honestly for many years. This shepherd, when he was once upon a time following the sheep, heard a whistling on the hill, and, not knowing what it was, went off to see. When he got to the place, there was a conflagration, and in the middle of it a serpent was squeaking. When he saw this, he waited to see how the serpent would act, for all around it was burning, and the fire had almost come close to it. When the serpent saw him, it screamed, "Dear shepherd, do a good action; take me out of this fire." The shepherd took pity on its words, and reached it his crook, and it crawled out upon it. When it had crawled out, it coiled itself round his neck. When the shepherd saw this, he was frightened, and said, "Indeed you are a wretch! Is that the way you are going to thank me for rescuing you? So runs the proverb: 'Do good, and find evil.'" The serpent answered him, "Don't fear. I shall do you no harm. Only carry me to my father; my father is the emperor of the serpents." The shepherd begged pardon, and excused himself, "I can't carry you to your father, because I have no one to leave in charge of my sheep." The serpent said to him, "Don't fear for your sheep; nothing will happen to them. Only carry me to my father, and go quickly." Then there was no help for it, so he started with it over the hill. When he came to a door, which was formed of nothing but serpents intertwined, and went up to it, the serpent which was coiled round his neck gave a whistle, and the serpents, which had twined themselves into the form of a door, immediately untwined, and made way for them to enter. As the shepherd and the serpent entered the palace, the serpent called to the shepherd, "Stop! Let me tell you something: when you come into my father's palace, he will promise you what you desire, silver and gold; but don't you accept anything, only ask him to give you such a tongue that you will be able to understand all animals. He will not give you this readily, but at last grant it you he will." The shepherd went with it into its father's palace, and its father, on seeing it, shed tears, and asked it, "Hey, my son, where have you been till now?" It replied, and told him everything in order: what had taken place, and how it had taken place, and how the shepherd had rescued it. Then the emperor of the serpents turned to the shepherd, and said to him, "Come, my son, what do you wish me to give you in recompense for rescuing my child?" The shepherd replied to him, "Nothing else, only give me such a tongue that I can understand all animals." The emperor of the serpents said to him, "That is not a proper gift for you, my son, because, if I give you anything of the kind, you will betray yourself in somebody's presence by boasting of it, and then you will die immediately. Ask something else." The shepherd replied to him, "I wish for nothing else. If you will give it me, give it; if not, farewell!" He turned to go; but the emperor of the serpents cried out, "Stay! Return! If you ask this, come, that I may give it you. Open your mouth." The shepherd opened his mouth, and the emperor of the serpents spat into it, and told him to spit also into his mouth. And thus they spat thrice into each other's mouths. When this was done, the emperor of the serpents said to the shepherd, "Now you have the tongue which you desired. Go, and farewell! But it is not permitted you to tell anybody, because, if you do, you will die. I am telling you the truth." The shepherd then departed. As he went over the hill, he understood the conversation of the birds, and, so to speak, of everything in the world. When he came to his sheep, he found them correct in number, and sat down to rest. But scarcely had he lain down, when two crows flew up, perched on a tree hard by him, and began to converse in their language, "If that shepherd knew that just where that black lamb lies a vault full of silver and gold is buried in the ground, he would take its contents." When he heard this, he went and told his master, and he brought a cart, and they broke open the door of the vault, and took out its valuable contents. His master was a righteous man, and said to him, "Well, my son, this is all yours; the Lord has given it you. Go, provide a house, get married, and live comfortably." The shepherd took the property, went away, provided a house, got married, and lived very comfortably. This shepherd, after a little time, became so rich and prosperous that there was nobody richer than he in his own or the neighboring villages. He had shepherds, cowherds, swineherds, grooms, and everything on a handsome scale. Once upon a time this shepherd ordered his wife on New Year's Eve to provide wine, brandy, and everything requisite, and to go the next morning to his cattle, to take the provisions to the herdsmen, that they, too, might enjoy themselves. His wife obeyed him, and did as her husband ordered her. The next day they got up, got ready, and went. When they arrived where the cattle were, the master said to his shepherds, "Lads, assemble together, and sit down to eat and drink your fill, and I will watch the cattle tonight." This was done; they assembled together, and he went out to sleep by the cattle. In the course of the night, after some time, the wolves began to howl and speak in their language, and the dogs to bark and speak in theirs. The wolves said, "Can we capture any young cattle?" The dogs answered in their language, "Come in, that we, too, may eat our fill of flesh." But among the dogs there was one old dog, who had only two teeth left. This dog spoke and answered the wolves, "In faith, as long as these two teeth of mine last, you shan't come near to do harm to my master." In the morning, when it dawned, the master called the herdsmen, and told them to kill all the dogs except that old one. His servants began to implore him, "Don't, master! Why? It's a sin." But he said to them, "Do just as I ordered you, and not otherwise." Then he and his wife mounted their horses and went off. His wife rode a mare, and he a horse. As they went, the master's horse outstripped the wife's mare, and began to say to her in their language, "Go quicker. Why do you hang back?" The mare's reply in defense of her lagging pace was so amusing that the man laughed out loud, turned his head, and looked behind him with a smile. His wife observed him smiling, whipped her mare to catch him up, and then asked him to tell her why he smiled. He said to her, "Well, suppose I did? Something came into my head." This answer did not satisfy her, but she began to worry him to tell her why he smiled. He said this and that to her to get out of it, but the more he said to get out of it, the more did she worry him. At length he said to her that, if he told her, he would die immediately. But she had no dread of her husband's dying, and went on worrying him: "There is no alternative, but tell me you must." When they got home, they dismounted from their horses, and as soon as they had done so, her husband ordered a grave to be dug for him. It was dug, and he lay down in it, and said to his wife, "Did you not press me to tell you why I smiled? Come now, that I may tell you; but I shall die immediately." On saying this, he gave one more look round him, and observed that the old dog had come from the cattle. Seeing this, he told his wife to give him a piece of bread. She gave it him, but the dog would not even look at it, but shed tears and wept. But the cock, seeing it, ran up and began to peck it. The dog was angry, and said, "As if you'd die hungry! Don't you see that our master is going to die?" "What a fool he is! Let him die! Whose fault is it? I have a hundred wives. When I find a grain of millet, I call them all to me, and finally eat it myself. If one of them gets cross at this, I give her one or two pecks, and she lowers her tail. But this man isn't equal to keeping one in order." When the man heard the cock say this, he jumped up at once out of the grave, seized a stick, chased his wife over hill and dale, and at last settled her completely, so that it never entered her head any more to ask him why he smiled. Source: A. H. Wratislaw, transl. Sixty Folk-Tales of from Exclusively Slavonoc Sources (London: Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 39, pp. 199-203 . Return to the table of contents . The Language of Beasts Bulgaria, Andrew Lang Once upon a time a man had a shepherd who served him many years faithfully and honestly. One day, whilst herding his flock, this shepherd heard a hissing sound, coming out of the forest nearby, which he could not account for. So he went into the wood in the direction of the noise to try to discover the cause. When he approached the place he found that the dry grass and leaves were on fire, and on a tree, surrounded by flames, a snake was coiled, hissing with terror. The shepherd stood wondering how the poor snake could escape, for the wind was blowing the flames that way, and soon that tree would be burning like the rest. Suddenly the snake cried, "O shepherd! for the love of heaven save me from this fire!" Then the shepherd stretched his staff out over the flames and the snake wound itself round the staff and up to his hand, and from his hand it crept up his arm, and twined itself about his neck. The shepherd trembled with fright, expecting every instant to be stung to death, and said, "What an unlucky man I am! Did I rescue you only to be destroyed myself?" But the snake answered, "Have no fear; only carry me home to my father who is the King of the Snakes." The shepherd, however, was much too frightened to listen, and said that he could not go away and leave his flock alone; but the snake said, "You need not be afraid to leave your flock, no evil shall befall them; but make all the haste you can." So he set off through the wood carrying the snake, and after a time he came to a great gateway, made entirely of snakes intertwined one with another. The shepherd stood still with surprise, but the snake round his neck whistled, and immediately all the arch unwound itself. "When we are come to my father's house," said his own snake to him, "he will reward you with anything you like to ask -- silver, gold, jewels, or whatever on this earth is most precious; but take none of all these things, ask rather to understand the language of beasts. He will refuse it to you a long time, but in the end he will grant it to you." Soon after that they arrived at the house of the King of the Snakes, who burst into tears of joy at the sight of his daughter, as he had given her up for dead. "Where have you been all this time?" he asked, directly he could speak, and she told him that she had been caught in a forest fire, and had been rescued from the flames by the shepherd. The King of the Snakes, then turning to the shepherd, said to him, "What reward will you choose for saving my child?" "Make me to know the language of beasts," answered the shepherd, "that is all I desire." The king replied, "Such knowledge would be of no benefit to you, for if I granted it to you and you told any one of it, you would immediately die; ask me rather for whatever else you would most like to possess, and it shall be yours." But the shepherd answered him, "Sir, if you wish to reward me for saving your daughter, grant me, I pray you, to know the language of beasts. I desire nothing else"; and he turned as if to depart. Then the king called him back, saying, "If nothing else will satisfy you, open your mouth." The man obeyed, and the king spat into it, and said, "Now spit into my mouth." The shepherd did as he was told, then the King of the Snakes spat again into the shepherd's mouth. When they had spat into each other's mouths three times, the king said, "Now you know the language of beasts, go in peace; but, if you value your life, beware lest you tell anyone of it, else you will immediately die." So the shepherd set out for home, and on his way through the wood he heard and understood all that was said by the birds, and by every living creature. When he got back to his sheep he found the flock grazing peacefully, and as he was very tired he laid himself down by them to rest a little. Hardly had he done so when two ravens flew down and perched on a tree nearby, and began to talk to each other in their own language, "If that shepherd only knew that there is a vault full of gold and silver beneath where that lamb is lying, what would he not do?" When the shepherd heard these words he went straight to his master and told him, and the master at once took a wagon, and broke open the door of the vault, and they carried off the treasure. But instead of keeping it for himself, the master, who was an honorable man, gave it all up to the shepherd, saying, "Take it, it is yours. The gods have given it to you." So the shepherd took the treasure and built himself a house. He married a wife, and they lived in great peace and happiness, and he was acknowledged to be the richest man, not only of his native village, but of all the countryside. He had flocks of sheep, and cattle, and horses without end, as well as beautiful clothes and jewels. One day, just before Christmas, he said to his wife, "Prepare everything for a great feast, tomorrow we will take things with us to the farm that the shepherds there may make merry." The wife obeyed, and all was prepared as he desired. Next day they both went to the farm, and in the evening the master said to the shepherds, "Now come, all of you, eat, drink, and make merry. I will watch the flocks myself tonight in your stead." Then he went out to spend the night with the flocks. When midnight struck the wolves howled and the dogs barked, and the wolves spoke in their own tongue, saying, "Shall we come in and work havoc, and you too shall eat flesh?" And the dogs answered in their tongue, "Come in, and for once we shall have enough to eat." Now amongst the dogs there was one so old that he had only two teeth left in his head, and he spoke to the wolves, saying, "So long as I have my two teeth still in my head, I will let no harm be done to my master." All this the master heard and understood, and as soon as morning dawned he ordered all the dogs to be killed excepting the old dog. The farm servants wondered at this order, and exclaimed, "But surely, sir, that would be a pity?" The master answered, "Do as I bid you"; and made ready to return home with his wife, and they mounted their horses, her steed being a mare. As they went on their way, it happened that the husband rode on ahead, while the wife was a little way behind. The husband's horse, seeing this, neighed, and said to the mare, "Come along, make haste; why are you so slow?" And the mare answered, "It is very easy for you, you carry only your master, who is a thin man, but I carry my mistress, who is so fat that she weights as much as three." When the husband heard that he looked back and laughed, which the wife perceiving, she urged on the mare till she caught up with her husband, and asked him why he laughed. "For nothing at all," he answered; "just because it came into my head." She would not be satisfied with this answer, and urged him more and more to tell her why he had laughed. But he controlled himself and said, "Let me be, wife; what ails you? I do not know myself why I laughed." But the more he put her off, the more she tormented him to tell her the cause of his laughter. At length he said to her, "Know, then, that if I tell it you I shall immediately and surely die." But even this did not quiet her; she only besought him the more to tell her. Meanwhile they had reached home, and before getting down from his horse the man called for a coffin to be brought; and when it was there he placed it in front of the house, and said to his wife, "See, I will lay myself down in this coffin, and will then tell you why I laughed, for as soon as I have told you I shall surely die." So he lay down in the coffin, and while he took a last look around him, his old dog came out from the farm and sat down by him, and whined. When the master saw this, he called to his wife, "Bring a piece of bread to give to the dog." The wife brought some bread and threw it to the dog, but he would not look at it. Then the farm cock came and pecked at the bread; but the dog said to it, "Wretched glutton, you can eat like that when you see that your master is dying?" The cock answered, "Let him die, if he is so stupid. I have a hundred wives, which I call together when I find a grain of corn, and as soon as they are there I swallow it myself; should one of them dare to be angry, I would give her a lesson with my beak. He has only one wife, and he cannot keep her in order." As soon as the man understood this, he got up out of the coffin, seized a stick, and called his wife into the room, saying, "Come, and I will tell you what you so much want to know"; and then he began to beat her with the stick, saying with each blow, "It is that, wife, it is that!" And in this way he taught her never again to ask why he had laughed. Source: Andrew Lang, The Crimson Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1903), pp. 55-61 . Return to the table of contents . Woman's Curiosity Hungary A shepherd saved the life of the daughter of the king of snakes, the princess narrowly escaping being burnt to death. To show him her gratitude she taught him the language of animals, and he was able to understand them. One day his donkey said something that made him smile; whereupon his wife commenced to tease him, and wanted to know the joke, but the shepherd was unable to gratify her wish, as his betraying the secret would have immediately been followed by the penalty of sudden death. However the wife would not give in and leave him in peace, but continued to torment her husband with so many questions that he at last determined to die rather than to bear his wife's ill temper any longer. With this view he had his coffin made and brought to his house; he laid down in the coffin quite prepared for death and ready to divulge the secret. His faithful dog sat mournfully by his side watching, while the cock belonging to the house merrily hopped about in the room. The dog remonstrated with the cock and said that this was not the time for merriment, seeing how near their master was to death. But the cock replied quite curtly, "It's master's own fault! Why is he such a great fool and coward? Look at me! I have fifty wives, and they all do as I tell them to do! If I can get on with so many, surely he ought to be able to manage one!" Hearing this the shepherd jumped out of the coffin, seized a wet rope end and gave the woman a sound thrashing. Peace was restored, and they lived happily together ever after. Source: Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, transl. The Folk-Tales of the Magyars, Collected by Kriza, Erdély, Pap, and Others (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), pp. 301-302 . Return to the table of contents . The Dog and the Cock Denmark One day the dog and the cock were walking in the farmyard. The cock was cheerful, flapping his wings and crowing lustily, but the dog hung his tail and appeared to be buried in sad thoughts. Angry at the cock's cheerfulness, he said, "I cannot understand how you can be so happy!" "Why not?" asked the cock. "Can't you see," said the dog, "that our master has been going around with a long face for a few days now? I think that we should be sharing his concerns." "What are his concerns?" asked the cock. "About his wife," said the dog. "She is so bad that he never gets a good word from her. She is never satisfied with anything he does or says. A woman like that can be the death of a man!" "She wouldn't be the death of me," answered the cock. "I have seventy wives, and if I ever had to hang my head because something went wrong, the devil would be in charge, not I. No, I handle them differently. My wives receive blows if they are stubborn and don't want to listen to me. And if they get in each others' hair, I pull them apart. In this manner I get along splendidly with my seventy wives, and if our master can't deal with his one wife, then he is a sorry fellow indeed!" And with that the cock proudly and cheerfully went on his way. Now the master had been listening in on this entire conversation, so he went to his wife. Once again she had bad words for him, so he answered her with an appropriate measure of blows, and from that time onward she was as tame and agreeable as never before. Source: Svendt Grundtvig, "Hunden og Hanen," Gamle danske Minder i Folkemunde (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversen, 1856), pp. 117-18 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Return to the table of contents . The Wicked Wife Germany Once there was very clever man, for he understood the language of animals, but however clever he was, he was unable to control his wicked wife. Now one day he was listening to the animals in his farmyard when one of them said something funny, and he laughed out loud. His wife observed this, and she insisted that he tell her why he had laughed, for she was very curious. He would have liked to tell her, in order to keep her quiet, but he was not allowed to, for it would have cost him his life. Therefore he refused, and she became all the more impatient and angry heaping many curses and accusations upon him and saying that he always kept secrets from her. Thus it continued from one day to the next. This saddened the man so much that he walked around with his head sunk in sorrow trying to think of a way to change the situation. He wandered into the farmyard and saw how the rooster was happily strutting about while loudly calling out "cock-a-doodle-doo." However, the dog was quite still until he said to the rooster, "How can you be so cheerful while our master is so sad because of his wicked wife who will give him no peace?" The rooster replied, "I think that he could change things if he would only take an example from me. I have more than a hundred wives, and woe be unto any one of them who does not obey me. I would immediately peck her eyes out of her head. He has only the one wife and is unable to deal with her." The man heard all this with pleasure, for he saw that the rooster was right. Therefore he immediately went into his house, picked up a whip and began to beat his wife with it, all the time asking her if she still wanted to know why he had laughed. She finally gave in, and never again, as long as she lived, did she ask to know her husband's secrets. From then on they lived happily and contented until they died. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, "Die böse Frau," Märkische Sagen und Märchen nebst einem Anhange von Gebräuchen und Aberglauben (Berlin: Druck und Verlag von G. Reimer, 1843), pp. 268-70 . Kuhn's source: "Oral, from Gross-Kreutz near Brandenburg." Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2015. Return to the table of contents . The Wicked Wife Germany Once there was very clever man, for he understood the language of animals, but however clever he was, he was unable to control his wicked wife. Now one day he was listening to the animals in his farmyard when one of them said something funny, and he laughed out loud. His wife observed this, and she insisted that he tell her why he had laughed, for she was very curious. He would have liked to tell her, in order to keep her quiet, but he was not allowed to, for it would have cost him his life. Therefore he refused, and she became all the more impatient and angry heaping many curses and accusations upon him and saying that he always kept secrets from her. Thus it continued from one day to the next. This saddened the man so much that he walked around with his head sunk in sorrow trying to think of a way to change the situation. He wandered into the farmyard and saw how the rooster was happily strutting about while loudly calling out "cock-a-doodle-doo." However, the dog was quite still until he said to the rooster, "How can you be so cheerful while our master is so sad because of his wicked wife who will give him no peace?" The rooster replied, "I think that he could change things if he would only take an example from me. I have more than a hundred wives, and woe be unto any one of them who does not obey me. I would immediately peck her eyes out of her head. He has only the one wife and is unable to deal with her." The man heard all this with pleasure, for he saw that the rooster was right. Therefore he immediately went into his house, picked up a whip and began to beat his wife with it, all the time asking her if she still wanted to know why he had laughed. She finally gave in, and never again, as long as she lived, did she ask to know her husband's secrets. From then on they lived happily and contented until they died. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, "Die böse Frau," Märkische Sagen und Märchen nebst einem Anhange von Gebräuchen und Aberglauben (Berlin: Druck und Verlag von G. Reimer, 1843), pp. 268-70 . Kuhn's source: "Oral, from Gross-Kreutz near Brandenburg." Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2015. Return to the table of contents . Frederigo da Pozzuolo Is Pressed by His Wife to Tell a Secret Giovanni Francesco Straparola Federigo da Pozzuolo, a man learned in the language of animals, is earnestly pressed by his wife to tell her a certain secret, but in lieu of this be beats her in strange fashion. It is the duty of all wise and prudent men to hold their wives in due fear and subjection, and on no account to be induced by them to wear their breeches as head gear. If indeed they should be led to follow other courses than these, they will of a surety have good cause to repent in the end. It happened one day that Federigo da Pozzuolo, a young man of great parts and prudence, was riding towards Naples on a mare of his which was in foal, carrying behind him on the crupper his wife, who was also pregnant. Likewise there was a young colt which followed the mare its mother, and, having been left some distance behind on the road, it began to neigh, and to cry out in its own language, "Mother, mother, go slowly, I pray you; because I, being very young and tender, and only just a year old, am not able in my pace to follow in your footsteps." Hearing this the mare pricked up her ears, and, sniffing the air with her nostrils, began also to neigh loudly, and said in answer to her colt, "I have to carry my mistress, who is with child, and in addition to this I bear a young brother of yours in my womb; while you, who are young and brisk, carry no burden of any sort strapped on your back, and yet you declare that you cannot travel. Come on, if you wish to come; but if not, go and do whatever pleases you." The young man, when he understood the meaning of these words (for be it known he was well skilled in the utterances of birds and of all the animals that live on earth), smiled somewhat; whereupon his wife, who was greatly filled with wonder thereanent, questioned him as to the reason why he smiled. To this her husband made answer that he had laughed spontaneously; but that, if in any event he should be led to tell her the cause of his laughter, she might take it for certain that the Fates would without more ado cut the thread of his life, and that he would die on the spot. But the importunate woman was not satisfied with this, and replied that she wanted, at all hazard, to know the reason why he had thus laughed; adding that if he would not tell her she would lay hold of him by the weazand. Then the husband, finding himself thus placed in a position of difficulty and danger, answered her, speaking thus, "When we shall have returned to Pozzuolo you shall set in order all my affairs, and make all the necessary provisions both for my body and my soul after death. Then I will make known to you all you want to learn." As soon as her husband had given her this promise the wicked and malicious woman was silent, and when they were returned to Pozzuolo she quickly recalled to mind the promise which had been made to her, and forthwith besought her husband to be as good as his word. Whereupon Federigo replied by charging her to go at once and fetch the priest, forasmuch as, seeing that he must needs die on account of this matter, he was anxious first to confess himself, and to recommend himself to his Maker. As soon as she should have done this, he would tell her all. Thereupon the wife, who was determined to see her husband lying dead rather than give up aught of her pestilent wishes, went forthwith to summon the confessor. At this moment, while Federigo was lying in his bed, overcome with grief, he heard his dog address certain words to his cock, who was crowing aloud, "Are you not ashamed of yourself, wretch and ribald that you are, to crow thus? Our good master is lying very near his last breath, and you, who ought to be sorrowful and full of melancholy, keep on crowing as if you rejoiced thereat." To these words the cock promptly made answer, "And supposing that our master should die, what have I to do with that? Am I, indeed, to be charged with causing his death? He wishes to die of his own accord. Do you not know what is written in the first book of the Politics [by Aristotle], 'The wife and the servant stand on the same footing.' Seeing, therefore, that the husband is the head of the wife, it is her bounden duty to regard the usages and customs of her husband as the laws of her life. I, forsooth, have a hundred wives, and, through the workings of fear, I make them all most obedient to my commandments, castigating now one and now another, and giving pecks wherever I may think they are deserved. And this master of ours has only a single wife, yet he knows naught how to manage her, and to make her obedient to his commands. Let him die forthwith. Do you not believe that our mistress will soon find for herself another husband? So let it be with him, seeing that he is a man of such little account, and one disposed to give way to the foolish and unbridled will of his wife." The young man, when he had comprehended and well considered in his mind the words he had just listened to, at once altered his purpose, and felt deeply grateful to the cock for what he had said. The wife, after she had come back from seeking the priest, was still pertinacious to learn the cause of her husband's laughter; wherefore he, having seized her by the hair, began to beat her, and gave her so many and lusty blows that he nearly left her for dead. This fable did not vastly please those of the listeners who were ladies, especially when they heard tell of the sound basting which Federigo gave his wife. Nevertheless, they grieved amain when they heard how she would fain have been the cause of her husband's death. Source: Straparola, The Facetious Nights , translated by W. G. Waters, vol. 4 (London: Privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliphiles, 1891), day 12, tale 2, pp. 96-102 . Title provided by D. L. Ashliman. Straparola's Le piacevoli notti ( The Facetious Nights ), first published in two volumes (1550-53), is one of Europe's oldest fairy tale or folktale collections. Return to the table of contents . The Language of Beasts Jamaica One boy was along wid a man. He was a shepherd boy; every Wednesday he go in de wilderness go look after his master sheep. He saw one snake. De snake said, "Do, I beg you carry me go to me fader; but when you go, if me fader give you money, don' you tek it, but ax him to give you de knowledge of every animal." So de boy tek de snake to his fader. When he go, de snake ax him if he want money. He said, "No, I wan' to understan' de knowledge of every animal." De snake tol' him to lie down, an' he spit in his mouth an' tol' him whatever animal dat he hear talk he mus' not tell it to nobody, fo' de day he venture to talk it he shall surely die. De odder Wednesday he went de same place, he saw some pigeon on one tree. De pigeon was cooing, an' de pigeon tell him he mus' come an' dig under de tree an' he will fin' a lot of money. De boy went an' dig, an' he fin' de money. He tek it home to his master. His master deliver all dat money to him, he tek it, settle himself an' married a wife. One evening him an' his wife went for a ride. He was before, de lady was behin'. De horse turn round and whicker to de mare which de lady was riding. De mare answer him an' said, "I kyan' go wid you; for you, it is two of you, but me, it is four of us. I have to carry meself an' me colt, de missis an' de missis baby in her, so I cannot walk fas' as you." De man turn roun' an' laugh. De lady said, "Why de reason let de two animal whicker an' you look pon me an' laugh? Der is somet'ing in dis matter!" She nag her husband to tell her de meaning why mek him laugh. De husband said to her, "De day dat I tell you, I will surely die. Sen' for a carpenter mek me box an' den I wi' tell you!" De carpenter come mek de box, an' he went an' lie down in it. He got one rooster in his yard. De rooster come near de box an' begin to crow. De missis said, "Oh, go away! makin' such a noise over yo' master head!" De master said, "Let de bird stay!" De rooster said to his master, "Master, you fool to gi' up yo' life fo' de count of woman! Look how much wife I have in de worl', an' de least nonsense all of dem come round me, I begin to peck 'em an' walk away from dem. So, Master, you come out of de box an' tek yo' supple-jack an' go in de house give yo' wife two good lick, an' den you fin' if she would 'noy you again." De man do so. He got up, he went in de house, he tek de supple-jack an' hit her free lick over de shoulder; an' from dat day de woman never ax him a word again. Source (Internet Archive): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 121, pp. 154-55 . Source (Sacred Texts): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 121, pp. 154-55 . Beckwith's informant: Richard Morgan, Santa Cruz Mountains. Return to the table of contents . Return to: The table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 27, 2022. The Leprechaun: Ireland's Fairy Shoemaker The Leprechaun Ireland's Fairy Shoemaker edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2016 Contents Variant spellings and designations . Lepreghaun (Lady Morgan Sydney). The Field of Boliauns [Ragweed] (Thomas Crofton Croker). The Little Shoe (Thomas Crofton Croker). Cluricaune or Leprehaune (Thomas Crofton Croker). The Three Leprechauns (Thomas Keightley). The Kildare Lurikeen (Patrick Kennedy). The Leprehaun (Lady Wilde). The Solitary Fairies: Lepracaun, Cluricaun, Far Darrig (William Butler Yeats). The Maker of Brogues (Brampton Hunt). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Variant spellings and designations Cluricaune Leipreachán Lepracaun Leprawhaun Leprechan Leprechaun Leprechawn Leprehaun Leprehaune Leprighaun Logheriman Lurikeen Lepreghaun Lady Morgan Sydney It would be extremely difficult to class this supernatural agent, who holds a distinguished place in the Irish " Faerie ." His appearance, however, is supposed to be that of a shrivelled little old man, whose presence marks a spot where hidden treasures lie concealed, which were buried there in " the troubles ." He is, therefore, generally seen in lone and dismal places, out of the common haunts of man; and though the night-wanderer may endeavour to mark the place where he beheld the guardian of the treasures perched, yet when he returns in the morning with proper implements to turn up the earth, the thistle, stone, or branch, he had placed as a mark, is so multiplied, that it is no longer a distinction, and the disappointments occasioned by the malignity of the little Lepreghaun render him a very unpopular fairy. His name is never applied but as a term of contempt. Source (books.google.com): Lady Morgan Sydney (late Miss Owenson), O'Donnel: A National Tale , new edition, vol. 2 (London: Henry Colburn, 1815), pp. 328-29 . Return to the table of contents . The Field of Boliauns [Ragweed] Thomas Crofton Croker Tom Fitzpatrick was the eldest son of a comfortable farmer who lived at Ballincollig. Tom was just turned of nine-and-twenty, when he met the following adventure, and was as clever, clean, tight, good-looking a boy as any in the whole county Cork. One fine day in harvest -- it was indeed Lady-day in harvest, that every body knows to be one of the greatest holidays in the year -- Tom was taking a ramble through the ground, and went sauntering along the sunny side of a hedge, thinking in himself, where would be the great harm if people, instead of idling and going about doing nothing at all, were to shake out the hay, and bind and stook the oats that was lying on the ledge, 'specially as the weather had been rather broken of late, he all of a sudden heard a clacking sort of noise a little before him, in the hedge. "Dear me," said Tom, "but isn't it surprising to hear the stonechatters singing so late in the season?" So Tom stole on, going on the tops of his toes to try if he could get a sight of what was making the noise, to see if he was right in his guess. The noise stopped; but as Tom looked sharply through the bushes, what should he see in a nook of the hedge but a brown pitcher that might hold about a gallon and a half of liquor; and by and by a little wee diny dony bit of an old man, with a little motty of a cocked hat stuck upon the top of his head, and a deeshy daushy leather apron hanging before him, pulled out a little wooden stool, and stood up upon it and dipped a little piggin into the pitcher, and took out the full of it, and put it beside the stool, and then sat down under the pitcher, and began to work at putting a heel-piece on a bit of a brogue just fitting for himself. "Well, by the powers!" said Tom to himself, "I often heard tell of the Cluricaune; and, to tell God's truth, I never rightly believed in them -- but here's one of them in real earnest. If I go knowingly to work, I'm a made man. They say a body must never take their eyes off them, or they'll escape.'' Tom now stole on a little farther, with his eye fixed on the little man just as a cat does with a mouse, or, as we read in books, the rattle-snake does with the birds he wants to enchant. So when he got up quite close to him, "God bless your work, neighbour," said Tom. The little man raised up his head, and "Thank you kindly," said he. "I wonder you'd be working on the holyday?" said Tom. "That's my own business, not yours," was the reply. "Well, may be you'd be civil enough to tell us what you've got in the pitcher there?" said Tom. "That I will, with pleasure," said he: "It's good beer." "Beer!" said Tom: "Thunder and fire! Where did you get it?" "Where did I get it, is it? Why, I made it. And what do you think I made it of?" "Devil a one of me knows," said Tom, "but of malt, I suppose; what else?" "There you're out. I made it of heath ." "Of heath!" said Tom, bursting out laughing: "Sure you don't think me to be such a fool as to believe that?" "Do as you please," said he, "but what I tell you is the truth. Did you never hear tell of the Danes?" "And that I did," said Tom: "Weren't them the fellows we gave such a licking when they thought to take Limerick from us?" "Hem!" said the little man drily -- "Is that all you know about the matter?" "Well, but about them Danes?" said Tom. "Why, all the about them there is, is that when they were here they taught us to make beer out of the heath, and the secret's in my family ever since." "Will you give a body a taste of your beer?" said Tom. "I'll tell you what it is, young man -- It would be fitter for you to be looking after your father's property than to be bothering decent, quiet people with your foolish questions. There now, while you're idling away your time here, there's the cows have broke into the oats, and are knocking the corn all about." Tom was taken so by surprise with this, that he was just on the very point of turning round when he recollected himself; so, afraid that the like might happen again, he made a grab [grasp] at the Cluricaune, and caught him up in his hand; but in his hurry he overset the pitcher, and spilt all the beer, so that he could not get a taste of it to tell what sort it was. He then swore what he would not do to him if he did not show him where his money was. Tom looked so wicked and so bloody-minded, that the little man was quite frightened; so, says he, "Come along with me a couple of fields off, and I'll show you a crock of gold." So they went, and Tom held the Cluricaune fast in his hand, and never took his eyes from off him, though they had to cross hedges, and ditches, and a crooked bit of bog (for the Cluricaune seemed, out of pure mischief, to pick out the hardest and most contrary way), till at last they came to a great field all full of boliaun buies (ragweed), and the Cluricaune pointed to a big boliaun, and, says he, "Dig under that boliaun, and you'll get the great crock all full of guineas." Tom in his hurry had never minded the bringing a spade with him, so he thought to run home and fetch one; and that he might know the place again, he took off one of his red garters, and tied it round the boliaun. "I suppose," said the Cluricaune, very civilly, "you've no farther occasion for me?" "No," says Tom; "you may go away now, if you please, and God speed you, and may good luck attend you wherever you go." "Well, good-bye to you, Tom Fitzpatrick," said the Cluricaune, "and much good may do you, with what you 'll get." So Tom ran, for the dear life, till he came home, and got a spade, and then away with him, as hard as he could go, back to the field of boliauns; but when he got there, lo, and behold! not a boliaun in the field but had a red garter, the very identical model of his own, tied about it; and as to digging up the whole field, that was all nonsense, for there was more than forty good Irish acres in it. So Tom came home again with his spade on his shoulder, a little cooler than he went; and many's the hearty curse he gave the Cluricaune every time he thought of the neat turn he had served him. The following is the account given by Lady Morgan, of the Cluricaune or Leprechan, in her excellent novel of O'Donnell (vol. II. p. 246.) which has been referred to in a preceding note. "It would be extremely difficult," says her ladyship, "to class this supernatural agent, who holds a distinguished place in the Irish 'fairies.' His appearance, however, is supposed to be that of a shrivelled little old man, whose presence marks a spot where hidden treasures lie concealed, which were buried there in ' the troubles .' He is therefore generally seen in lone and dismal places, out of the common haunts of man; and though the night wanderer may endeavour to mark the place where he beheld the guardian of the treasures perched, yet when he returns in the morning with proper implements to turn up the earth, the thistle, stone, or branch he had placed as a mark is so multiplied, that it is no longer a distinction; and the disappointments occasioned by the malignity of the little Leprechan render him a very unpopular fairy: His name is never applied but as a term of contempt." Source (books.google.com): Thomas Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland (London: John Murray, 1825), pp. 199-205 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland (London: John Murray, 1825), pp. 199-205 . Return to the table of contents . The Little Shoe Thomas Crofton Croker "Now tell me, Molly," said Mr. Coote to Molly Cogan, as he met her on the road one day, close to one of the old gateways of Kilmallock, "did you ever hear of the Cluricaune?" "Is it the Cluricaune? Why, then, sure I did, often and often; many's the time I heard my father, rest his soul! tell about, 'em over and over again." "But did you ever see one, Molly -- did you ever see one yourself?" "Och! no, I never see one in my life; but my grandfather, that's my father's father, you know, he see one, one time, and caught him too." "Caught him! Oh! Molly, tell me how was that?" "Why, then, I'll tell you:" My grandfather, you see, was out there above in the bog, drawing home turf, and the poor old mare was tired after her day's work, and the old man went out to the stable to look after her, and to see if she was eating her hay; and when he came to the stable-door there, my dear, he heard something hammering, hammering, hammering, just for all the world like a shoemaker making a shoe, and whistling all the time the prettiest tune he ever heard in his whole life before. Well, my grandfather, he thought it was the Cluricaune, and he said to himself, says he, "I'll catch you, if I can, and then I'll have money enough always." So he opened the door very quietly, and didn't make a bit of noise in the world that ever was heard; and he looked all about, but the never a bit of the little man he could see any where, but he heard him hammering and whistling, and so he looked and looked, till at last he see the little fellow; and where was he, do you think, but in the girth under the mare; and there he was with his little bit of an apron on him, and his hammer in his hand, and a little red nightcap on his head, and he making a shoe; and he was so busy with his work, and he was hammering and whistling so loud, that he never minded my grandfather till he caught him fast in his hand. "Faith, I have you now," says he, "and I'll never let you go till I get your purse -- that's what I won't; so give it here to me at once, now." "Stop, stop," says the Cluricaune, "stop, stop, says he, till I get it for you." So my grandfather, like a fool, you see, opened his hand a little, and the little fellow jumped away laughing, and he never saw him any more, and the never a bit of the purse did he get, only the Cluricaune left his little shoe that he was making; and my grandfather was mad enough angry with himself for letting him go; but he had the shoe all his life, and my own mother told me she often see it, and had it in her hand, and 'twas the prettiest little shoe she ever saw. "And did you see it yourself, Molly?" "Oh! no, my dear, it was lost long afore I was born; but my mother told me about it often and often enough." There is nothing very strange in the circumstance of Molly's grandfather becoming the possessor of a Cluricaune's shoe, for even in the present century, when these little people are supposed to have grown more shy and cautious of letting themselves be seen or heard, persons have been fortunate enough to get their shoes, though the purse still eludes them. In a Kilkenny paper, published not more than three years ago, there was a paragraph (which paragraph was copied into most of the Irish papers) stating that a peasant returning home in the dusk of the evening, discovered one of these little folk at work, and as the workman, as usual, contrived to make his escape, the peasant secured the shoe to bear witness of the fact, which shoe, to satisfy public curiosity, lay for inspection at the office of the said paper. It is therefore not impossible that this specimen of Cluricaune cordwainry may still exist. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland (London: John Murray, 1825), pp. 211-14 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland (London: John Murray, 1825), pp. 211-14 . Return to the table of contents . Cluricaune or Leprehaune Thomas Crofton Croker Cluricaune or Leprehaune is the name given to the Irish Puck. The character of this goblin is a compound of that of the Scotch Brownie and the English Robin Goodfellow. He is depicted (for engraved portraits of the Irish Leprehaune are in existence) as a small and withered old man, completely equipped in the costume of a cobler, and employed in repairing a shoe. A paragraph recently appeared in a Kilkenny paper stating, that a labourer, returning home in the dusk of the evening, discovered a Leprehaune at work, from whom he bore away the shoe which he was mending; as a proof of the veracity of his story it was further stated, that the shoe lay for the inspection of the curious at the newspaper office. The most prominent feature in the vulgar creed respecting the Leprehaune is, his being the possessor of a purse, supposed to be, like that of Fortunatus, inexhaustible; and many persons, who have surprized one of these fairies occupied in shoe-making, have endeavoured to compel him to deliver it; this he has ingeniously avoided, averting the eye of his antagonist by some stratagem, when he disappears, which it seems he has not the power of doing as long as any person's gaze is fixed upon him. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Crofton Croker, Researches in the South of Ireland, Illustrative of the Scenery, Architectural Remains, and the Manners and Superstitions of the Peasantry (London: John Murray, 1824), p. 84 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Crofton Croker, Researches in the South of Ireland, Illustrative of the Scenery, Architectural Remains, and the Manners and Superstitions of the Peasantry (London: John Murray, 1824), p. 84 . Return to the table of contents . The Three Leprechauns Thomas Keightley The Cluricaune, called in Leinster Leprechaun, in Ulster Logheriman, seems a being peculiar to Ireland. There is a curious anomaly in his character. His habits and occupation are what we might be apt to term social, and yet he in general avoids society, and works at his eternal brogues in lonely glens, bleak bogs, or the middle of fields, and never seems to approach nearer than the garden, of human habitations. Yet it is an error to suppose that the Leprechauns are never seen in company. The following account, given by an old woman to the writer's sister, is direct and unimpeachable evidence to the contrary. As in narrating stories of Irish Fairies, the approved and the best receipt is to give the whole scene of the narrative with its accompaniments, we shall not here depart from established precedents. The Three Leprechauns Mrs. L. having heard that Molly Toole, an old woman who held a few acres of land from Mr. L., had seen Leprechauns, resolved to visit her, and learn the truth from her own lips. Accordingly, one Sunday, after church, she made her appearance in Molly's residence, which was -- no very common thing -- extremely neat and comfortable. As she entered every thing looked gay and cheerful. The sun shone bright in through the door on the earthen floor. Molly was seated at the far side of the fire in her arm-chair; her daughter Mary, the prettiest girl on the lands, was looking to the dinner that was boiling; and her son Mickey, a young man of about two-and-twenty, was standing lolling with his back against the dresser. The arrival of the mistress disturbed the stillness that had hitherto prevailed. Mary, who was a great favourite, hastened to the door to meet her, and shake hands with her. Molly herself had nearly got to the middle of the floor when the mistress met her, and Mickey modestly staid where he was till he should catch her attention. "O then, musha! but isn't it a glad sight for my old eyes to see your own self under my roof? Mary, what ails you, girl? And why don't you go into the room and fetch out a good chair for the mistress to sit down upon and rest herself?" "'Deed faith, mother, I'm so glad I don't know what I'm doing. Sure you know I did not see the mistress since she came down afore." Mickey now caught Mrs. L.'s eye, and she asked him how he did. "By Gorra, bravely, ma'am, thank you," said he, giving himself a wriggle, while his two hands and the small of his back rested on the edge of the dresser. "Now, Mary, stir yourself," said the old woman, "and get out the bread and butter. Sure you know the mistress can't but be hungry after her walk." "O, never mind it, Molly; it's too much trouble." "Trouble, indeed! It's as nice butter, ma'am, as ever you put a tooth in; and it was Mary herself that made it." "O, then I must taste it." A nice half griddle of whole-meal bread and a print of fresh butter were now produced, and Molly helped the mistress with her own hands. As she was eating, Mary kept looking in her face, and at last said, "Ah then, mother, doesn't the mistress look mighty well? Upon my faikins, ma'am, I never seen you looking half so handsome." "Well! and why wouldn't she look well? And never will she look better nor be better nor I wish her." "Well, Molly, I think I may return the compliment, for Mary is prettier than ever; and as for yourself, I really believe it's young again you're growing." "Why, God be thanked, ma'am, I'm stout and hearty; and though I say it myself, there 's not an old woman in the county can stir about better nor me, and I'm up every morning at the peep of day, and rout them all up out of their beds. Don't I?" said she, looking at Mary. "Faith, and sure you do, mother," replied Mickey; "and before the peep of day, too; for you have no mercy in you at all at all." "Ah, in my young days," continued the old woman, "people weren't slugabeds; out early, home late -- that was the way with them." "And usedn't people to see Leprechauns in them days, mother?" said Mickey, laughing. "Hold your tongue, you saucy cub, you," cried Molly. "What do you know about them?" " Leprechauns?" said Mrs. L., gladly catching at the opportunity. "Did people really, Molly, see Leprechauns in your young days?" "Yes, indeed, ma'am; some people say they did," replied Molly, very composedly. "O come now, mother," cried Mickey, "don't think to be going it upon us that way. You know you seen them one time yourself, and you had not the gumption in you to catch them, and get their crocks of gold from them." "Now, Molly, is that really true that you saw the Leprechauns?" "'Deed, and did I, ma'am; but this boy's always laughing at me about them, and that makes me rather shy of talking of them." "Well, Molly, I won't laugh at you; so, come, tell me how you saw them." "Well, ma'am, you see it was when I was just about the age of Mary, there. I was coming home late one Monday evening from the market; for my aunt Kitty, God be merciful to her! kept me to take a cup of tea. It was in the summer-time you see, ma'am, much about the middle of June, and it was through the fields I came. Well, ma'am, as I said, it was late in the evening, that is, the sun was near going down, and the light was straight in my eyes, and I came along through the bog-meadow; for it was shortly after I was married to him that's gone, and we were living in this very house that you're now in; and then when I came to the castle-field -- the pathway you know, ma'am, goes right through the middle of it -- and it was then as fine a field of wheat, just shot out, as you'd wish to look at; and it was a pretty sight to see it waving so beautifully with every air of wind that was going over it, dancing like to the music of a thrush, that was singing down below in the hedge. Well, ma'am, I crossed over the style that's there yet, and went along fair and easy, till I was near about the middle of the field, when something made me cast my eyes to the ground, a little before me; and then I saw, as sure as I 'm sitting here, no less nor three of the Leprechauns, all bundled together like so many tailors, in the middle of the path before me. They were not hammering their pumps, or making any kind of noise whatever; but there they were, the three little fellows, with their cocked hats upon them, and their legs gothered up under them, working away at their trade as hard as may be. If you were only to see, ma'am, how fast their little elbows went as they pulled out their ends! Well, every one of them had his eye cocked upon me, and their eyes were as bright as the eye of a frog, and I could not stir one step from the spot for the life of me. So I turned my head round, and prayed to the Lord in his mercy to deliver me from them, and when I went to look at them again, ma'am, not a sight of them was to be seen: They were gone like a dream." "But, Molly, why did you not catch them?'' "I was afeard, ma'am, that's the truth of it; but maybe I was as well without them. I never heard tell of a Leprechaun yet that was not too many for any one that cotch him." "Well, and Molly, do you think there are any Leprechauns now?" "It's my belief, ma'am, they 're all gone out of the country, clever and clean, along with the Fairies; for I never hear tell now of them at all." Mrs. L. having now attained her object, after a little more talk with the good old woman, took her leave, attended by Mary, who would see her a piece of the way home. And Mary being asked what she thought of the Leprechauns, confessed her inability to give a decided opinion: Her mother, she knew, was incapable of telling a lie, and yet she had her doubts if there ever were such things as Leprechauns. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries , vol. 2 (London: Whittaker, Treacher, and Company, 1833), pp. 179-86 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries , vol. 2 (London: Whittaker, Treacher, and Company, 1833), pp. 179-86 . Return to the table of contents . The Kildare Lurikeen Patrick Kennedy A young girl that lived in sight of Castle Carberry, near Edenderry, was going for a pitcher of water to the neighbouring well one summer morning, when who should she see sitting in a sheltery nook under an old thorn, but the Lurikeen, working like vengeance at a little old brogue only fit for the foot of a fairy like himself. There he was, boring his holes, and jerking his waxed ends, with his little three-cornered hat with gold lace, his knee-breeches, his jug of beer by his side, and his pipe in his mouth. He was so busy at his work, and so taken up with an old ballad he was singing in Irish, that he did not mind Breedheen till she had him by the scruff o' the neck, as if he was in a vice. "Ah, what are you doin'?" says he, turning his head round as well as he could. "Dear, dear! to think of such a purty colleen ketchin' a body, as if he was afther robbin' a hen roost! What did I do to be thrated in such an undecent manner? The very vulgarest young ruffin in the townland could do no worse. Come, come, Miss Bridget, take your hands off, sit down, and let us have a chat, like two respectable people." "Ah, Mr. Lurikeen, I don't care a wisp of borrach [course tow] for your politeness. It's your money I want, and I won't take hand or eye from you till you put me in possession of a fine lob of it." "Money, indeed! Ah! Where would a poor cobbler like me get it? Anyhow there's no money hereabouts, and if you'll only let go my arms, I'll turn my pockets inside out, and open the drawer of my seat, and give you leave to keep every halfpenny you'll find." "That won't do; my eyes'll keep going through you like darning needles till I have the gold. Begonies, if you don't make haste, I'll carry you, head and pluck, into the village, and there you'll have thirty pair of eyes on you instead of one." "Well, well! Was ever a poor cobbler so circumvented! And if it was an ignorant, ugly bosthoon that done it, I would not wonder; but a decent, comely girl, that can read her 'Poor Man's Manual' at the chapel, and -- --" "You may throw your compliments on the stream there; they won't do for me, I tell you. The gold, the gold, the gold! Don't take up my time with your blarney." "Well, if there's any to be got, it's undher the ould castle it is; we must have a walk for it. Just put me down, and we'll get on." "Put you down indeed! I know a trick worth two of that; I'll carry you." "Well, how suspicious we are! Do you see the castle from this?" Bridget was about turning her eyes from the little man to where she knew the castle stood, but she bethought herself in time. They went up a little hill-side, and the Lurikeen was quite reconciled, and laughed and joked; but just as they got to the brow, he looked up over the ditch, gave a great screetch, and shouted just as if a bugle horn was blew at her ears -- "Oh, murdher ! Castle Carberry is afire." Poor Biddy gave a great start, and looked up towards the castle. The same moment she missed the weight of the Lurikeen, and when her eyes fell where he was a moment before, there was no more sign of him than if everything that passed was a dream. This passage in the natural history of the Lurikeen is furnished by the chronicler of the "Rath C.-Pooka." The only instance of a Wexford Lurikeen that we can recall, differs only slightly from this. Wexford Molly was as vigilant as Kildare Biddy, and never took eye or hand off him till he pointed out the very stalk of booliaun bui under which the treasure lay. There was no other weed of the kind within half the field of it at the moment, but when Molly returned in half an hour, attended by father and brothers with spades and picks, all round the spot, to a considerable distance, was as thick with booliauns as a plantation with young trees. Source (books.google.com): Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 130-32 . Source (Internet Archive): Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 130-32 . Return to the table of contents . The Leprehaun Lady Wilde The Leprehauns are merry, industrious, tricksy little sprites, who do all the shoemaker's work and the tailor's and the cobbler's for the fairy gentry, and are often seen at sunset under the hedge singing and stitching. They know all the secrets of hidden treasure, and if they take a fancy to a person will guide him to the spot in the fairy rath where the pot of gold lies buried. It is believed that a family now living near Oastlerea came by their riches in a strange way, all through the good offices of a friendly Leprehaun. And the legend has been handed down through many generations as an established fact. There was a poor boy once, one of their forefathers, who used to drive his cart of turf daily back and forward, and make what money he could by the sale; but he was a strange boy, very silent and moody, and the people said he was a fairy changeling, for he joined in no sports and scarcely ever spoke to any one, but spent the nights reading all the old bits of books he picked up in his rambles. The one thing he longed for above all others was to get rich, and to be able to give up the old weary turf cart, and live in peace and quietness all alone, with nothing but books round him, in a beautiful house and garden all by himself. Now he had read in the old books how the Leprehauns knew all the secret places where gold lay hid, and day by day he watched for a sight of the little cobbler, and listened for the click, click of his hammer as he sat under the hedge mending the shoes. At last, one evening just as the sun set, he saw a little fellow under a dock leaf, working away, dressed all in green, with a cocked hat on his head. So the boy jumped down from the cart and seized him by the neck. "Now, you don't stir from this," he cried, "till you tell me where to find the hidden gold." "Easy now," said the Leprehaun, "don't hurt me, and I will tell you all about it. But mind you, I could hurt you if I chose, for I have the power; but I won't do it, for we are cousins once removed. So as we are near relations I'll just be good, and show you the place of the secret gold that none can have or keep except those of fairy blood and race. Come along with me, then, to the old fort of Lipenshaw, for there it lies. But make haste, for when the last red glow of the sun vanishes the gold will disappear also, and you will never find it again." "Come off, then," said the boy, and he carried the Leprehaun into the turf cart, and drove off. And in a second they were at the old fort, and went in through a door made in the stone wall. "Now, look round," said the Leprehaun; and the boy saw the whole ground covered with gold pieces, and there were vessels of silver lying about in such plenty that all the riches of all the world seemed gathered there. "Now take what you want," said the Leprehaun, "but hasten, for if that door shuts you will never leave this place as long as you live." So the boy gathered up his arms full of gold and silver, and flung them into the cart; and was on his way back for more when the door shut with a clap like thunder, and all the place became dark as night. And he saw no more of the Leprehaun, and had not time even to thank him. So he thought it best to drive home at once with his treasure, and when he arrived and was all alone by himself he counted his riches, and all the bright yellow gold pieces, enough for a king's ransom. And he was very wise and told no one; but went off next day to Dublin and put all his treasures into the bank, and found that he was now indeed as rich as a lord. So he ordered a fine house to be built with spacious gardens, and he had servants and carriages and books to his heart's content. And he gathered all the wise men round him to give him the learning of a gentleman; and he became a great and powerful man in the country, where his memory is still held in high honour, and his descendants are living to this day rich and prosperous; for their wealth has never decreased though they have ever given largely to the poor, and are noted above all things for the friendly heart and the liberal hand. But the Leprehauns can be bitterly malicious if they are offended, and one should be very cautious in dealing with them, and always treat them with great civility, or they will take revenge and never reveal the secret of the hidden gold. One day two young lad was out in the fields at work when he saw a little fellow, not the height of his hand, mending shoes under a dock leaf. And he went over, never taking his eyes off him for fear he would vanish away; and when he got quite close he made a grab at the creature, and lifted him up and put him in his pocket. Then he ran away home as fast as he could, and when he had the Leprehaun safe in the house, he tied him by an iron chain to the hob. "Now, tell me," he said, "where am I to find a pot of gold? Let me know the place or I'll punish you." "I know of no pot of gold," said the Leprechaun; "but let me go that I may finish mending the shoes." "Then I'll make you tell me," said the lad. And with that he made down a great fire, and put the little fellow on it and scorched him. "Oh, take me off, take me off!" cried the Leprehaun, "and I'll tell you. Just there, under the dock leaf, where you found me, there is a pot of gold. Go; dig and find." So the lad was delighted, and ran to the door; but it so happened that his mother was just then coming in with the pail of fresh milk, and in his haste he knocked the pail out of her hand, and all the milk was spilled on the floor. Then, when the mother saw the Leprehaun, she grew very angry and beat him. "Go away, you little wretch!" she cried, " You have overlooked the milk and brought ill-luck." And she kicked him out of the house. But the lad ran off to find the dock leaf, though he came back very sorrowful in the evening, for he had dug and dug nearly down to the middle of the earth; but no pot of gold was to be seen. That same night the husband was coming home from his work, and as he passed the old fort he heard voices and laughter, and one said: "They are looking for a pot of gold; but they little know that a crock of gold is lying down in the bottom of the old quarry, hid under the stones close by the garden wall. But whoever gets it must go of a dark night at twelve o'clock, and beware of bringing his wife with him." So the man hurried home and told his wife he would go that very night, for it was black dark, and she must stay at home and watch for him, and not stir from the house till he came back. Then he went out into the dark night alone. "Now," thought the wife, when he was gone, "if I could only get to the quarry before him I would have the pot of gold all to myself; while if he gets it I shall have nothing. And with that she went out and ran like the wind until she reached the quarry, and than she she began to creep down very quietly in the black dark. But a great stone was in her path, and she stumbled over it, and fell down and down till she reached the bottom, and there she lay groaning, for her leg was broken by the fall. Just then her husband came to the edge of the quarry and began to descend. But when he heard the groans he was frightened. "Cross of Christ about us!" he exclaimed; "What is that down below? Is it evil, or is it good?" "Oh, come down, come down and help me!" cried the woman. "It's your wife is here, and my leg is broken, and I'll die if you don't help me." "And is this my pot of gold?" exclaimed the poor man. "Only my wife with a broken leg lying at the bottom of the quarry." And he was at his wits' end to know what to do, for the night was so dark he could not see a hand before him. So he roused up a neighbour, and between them they dragged up the poor woman and carried her home, and laid her on the bed half dead from fright, and it was many a day before she was able to get about as usual; indeed she limped all her life long, so that the people said the curse of the Leprechaun was on her. But as to the pot of gold, from that day to this not one of the family, father or son, or any belonging to them, ever set eyes on it. However, the little Leprehaun still sits under the dock leaf of the hedge and laughs at them as he mends the shoes with his little hammer -- tick tack, tick tack -- but they are afraid to touch him, for now they know he can take his revenge. Source (books.google.com): Lady Wilde, Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland , vol. 1 (London: Ward and Downey, 1887), pp. 103-108 . Source (Internet Archive): Lady Wilde, Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland , vol. 1 (Boston: Ticknor and Company, 1887), pp. 103-108 . Return to the table of contents . The Solitary Fairies: Lepracaun, Cluricaun, Far Darrig William Butler Yeats "The name Lepracaun ," Mr. Douglas Hyde writes to me, "is from the Irish leith brog -- i.e. , the One-shoemaker, since he is generally seen working at a single shoe. It is spelt in Irish leith bhrogan , or leith phrogan , and is in some places pronounced Luchryman, as O' Kearney writes it in that very rare book, the Feis Tigh Chonain ." The Lepracaun , Cluricaun , and Far Darrig . Are these one spirit in different moods and shapes? Hardly two Irish writers are agreed. In many things these three fairies, if three, resemble each other. They are withered, old, and solitary, in every way unlike the sociable spirits of the first sections. They dress with all unfairy homeliness, and are, indeed, most sluttish, slouching, jeering, mischievous phantoms. They are the great practical jokers among the good people. The Lepracaun makes shoes continually, and has grown very rich. Many treasure-crocks, buried of old in war-time, has he now for his own. In the early part of this century, according to Croker, in a newspaper office in Tipperary, they used to show a little shoe forgotten by a Lepracaun. The Cluricaun , ( Clobhair-ceann , in O'Kearney) makes himself drunk in gentlemen's cellars. Some suppose he is merely the Lepracaun on a spree. He is almost unknown in Connaught and the north. The Far Darrig ( fear dearg ), which means the Red Man, for he wears a red cap and coat, busies himself with practical joking, especially with gruesome joking. This he does, and nothing else. Source (books.google.com): William Butler Yeats, Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry (London: Walter Scott, 1888), p. 80 . Source (Internet Archive): William Butler Yeats, Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry (London: Walter Scott, 1888), p. 80 . Return to the table of contents . The Maker of Brogues Brampton Hunt There was a young lad travelling the road to a fair, and he passed convenient to a field had a sand pit in the middle of it. What did he see, sitting up in that place with his legs dangling over the edge of the pit, only a little wee man making brogues. The lad took one leap into the field and he walked up to the cobbler. "Good-morning, mister!" says he. "Might I make so bold as to ask what work you are doing this hour of the morning dew, and what makes you fancy the edge of a pit for a seat?" "'Tis making brogues I am," says the leprachaun," and they for the Good People's wear." "I'm thinking you're watching a treasure," says the lad. "I'm not," says the leprachaun. "But I know where there's plenty hid." "You be to discover it for me," says the lad. "Let you wait till this one pair of brogues is made," says the fairy. So the lad agreed and he sat down to watch him at work. "Begob," says he, "I never seen any person could hammer in nails such a rate." "It's a slow worker I'm counted in these parts," says the leprachaun. "Let you look down into the pit at the man is cobbling below. I warrant it's three nails he's driving for each one of mine." The lad looked over the edge. "There is no man in it at all!" says he. With that the leprachaun let a laugh. "There is not," says he. "There's a sore chastisement waiting on you for deceiving me," answers the other. But when he stood on his feet and looked round wasn't the leprachaun gone. "I'm the fool of the whole wide world," says the lad, and he travelled away to the fair. Source (books.google.com): Brampton Hunt, Folk Tales of Breffny (London: Macmillan and Company, 1912), no. 26, pp. 195-96 . Source (Internet Archive): Brampton Hunt, Folk Tales of Breffny (London: Macmillan and Company, 1912), no. 26, pp. 195-96 . Return to the table of contents . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 29, 2016. The Lion in the Water: Fables of type 92 The Lion in the Water fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 92 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2018 Contents The Lion and the Hare (India, The Panchatantra ). The Lion and the Hare (Bidpai). The Lion Whose Name Was Pingala (India). Singh Rajah [Lion King] and the Cunning Little Jackals (India). The Killing of the Rakhas (India). The Lion and the Hare (India). The Tiger and the Shadow (Malaya). The Tiger and the Hare (Pakistan). The Tiger and the Fox (Pakistan). The Hare and the Lions (Tibet). Brother Rabbit Conquers Brother Lion (African-American, Joel Chandler Harris). Lion Brooks No Rival (African-American). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Lion and the Hare India, The Panchatantra In the middle of a forest there lived a lion by the name of Bhâsuraka (Heroic One). In consequence of his great strength he unceasingly killed many gazelles, hares, and other animals. One day all the forest creatures assembled. Gazelles, boars, buffalo, wild oxen, hares, and so forth, went to him and said, "Sir, why are you unnecessarily murdering all the wild animals, when one animal would be sufficient to fill you? Therefore enter into an agreement with us. From this day forth you may sit here quietly, and every day one animal will come to you, as his turn comes up, and allow you to eat him. In this manner you can effortlessly acquire your nourishment, and we will not be wholly exterminated. That is the right of a king, and let it thus be carried out." After hearing their words, Bhâsuraka said, "What you say is true. But if ever an animal fails to come to me here, then I will surely devour all of you." They sealed their promise with the words, "So be it!" and now, free of danger, they moved fearlessly about the forest. However, every day, in turn, one animal came to the lion: an old one, one who had renounced all earthly affairs, one who was torn by grief, or one who feared he might lose his wife and children. One animal presented himself to the lion every noon to serve as his meal. Following the predetermined order, it became the hare's turn, and however little he liked it, he was sent to the lion by the other animals. He walked as slowly as possible and thus missed the established deadline. With a fearful heart he sought a way to escape death. Toward the end of the day he finally arrived. The lion, famished from his long wait, was filled with anger. Licking the corners of his mouth, he thought, "Aha! Tomorrow I shall kill all the creatures in the forest." Just as he was thinking this the hare walked up, bowed, and stood before him. When the lion saw that this creature, who otherwise was so light-footed, was the one who had arrived so late, he was filled with anger and spoke threateningly, "Hey, you miserable little hare. It had to be you who come so long after the appointed time, you who otherwise are the most light-footed of them all! Because of your failure, after I have killed you, tomorrow I am going to exterminate all the rest of the animals." To this the hare bowed and spoke humbly, "Sir, it is neither my fault nor the fault of the other animals. Would you like to hear the cause of my tardiness?" The lion said, "Speak quickly, before you find yourself between my teeth!" The hare said, "Sir, after learning from the other animals that today was my turn, I was sent away with four hares. On my way here I was approached by another large lion, who came from his den and said to me, 'Hey there! Where are you going? Pay homage to your guardian angel!' I answered, 'We are going, in keeping with our contract, to our lord Bhâsuraka, in order to serve as his meal.' To that he said, 'If that is so, then all of the animals must also enter into a contract with me, because this forest belongs to me. This Bhâsuraka is a miserable thief. But if he is king here, then leave the four hares here as hostages, and demand that he come here as quickly as possible, so that the one of us who can prove himself king through his strength will be able to eat all the animals here.' Then following his order I came here. That is the reason why I am late. Now your order is my command!" Having heard this, Bhâsuraka said, "My dear, if this is the case then quickly show me this rogue of a lion so I can vent my anger against the other animals on him and become myself once again." The hare said, "Sir, you are right. We warriors go to battle to protect our homeland and to fight against evil. This enemy lives in a castle. If he attacks us from his castle, we'll be threatened, but if he stays in his castle, he'll be difficult to overcome." Bhâsuraka answered, "My dear, lead me to this rogue. Even if he is in a castle, I will kill him." The hare said, "But I have seen that he is very powerful. Sir, it is not good for you to go without knowing his strength." Bhâsuraka said, "Ha! What is this to you? Lead me to him, even if he does live in a castle." The hare said, "If you insist, come with me, sir." After saying this he set forth and went to a well. There he said to Bhâsuraka, "Sir, who is able to withstand your majesty? This rogue saw you coming from afar and has retreated into his castle. Come here and I will show him to you." After hearing this Bhâsuraka said, "My dear, show me his castle at once!" Then the hare showed him the well. The foolish lion, seeing his own reflection in the middle of the well, roared fiercely. A doubly loud roar echoed up from within the well. Hearing this, he thought, "He is very powerful," and he threw himself on him, and thus he lost his life. The hare, on the other hand, after having cheerfully reported back to the other animals, was greatly praised by them, and he lived happily in the forest. Source: The Panchatantra , book 1. I have used the following edition: "Der Löwe und der Hase," Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey, vol. 2 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), pp. 62-67 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2002. I have omitted from this translation the lengthy philosophical digressions dealing with the nature and limitations of a monarch's power. About The Panchatantra : One of India's most influential contributions to world literature, The Panchatantra (also spelled Pañcatantra or Pañca-tantra ) consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled in their current form between the third and fifth centuries AD. It is believed that even then the stories were already ancient. The tales' self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes The Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai, which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of The Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced medieval writers of fables. Link to additional Tales from the Panchatantra . Return to the table of contents . The Lion and the Hare Bidpai In the neighborhood of Baghdad there was a beautiful meadow, which was the home of many wild animals. They would have lived very happily there had it not been for one mischief-loving lion. Every day this lion wandered about, killing many helpless creatures for the mere sport of the slaying. To put an end to this, the animals gathered in a body, and going to the lion, spoke to him in this manner, "King lion, we are proud to have such a brave and valiant beast to rule over us. But we do not think that it is fitting for one of your rank to hunt for his own food. We therefore wait upon you with this request: Henceforth do you remain quietly at home, and we your subjects will bring to your lair such food as it is fitting that a king should eat." The lion, who was greatly flattered, immediately accepted their offer. Thus every day the animals drew lots to decide who among their number should offer himself for the lion's daily portion. In due time it came about that the lot fell upon the hare. Now the hare, when he learned that it was his turn to die, complained bitterly. "Do you not see that we are still tormented by that lion?" he asked the other animals. "Only leave it to me, and I will release you for all time from his tyranny." The other animals were only too glad at these words, and told the hare to go his way. The hare hid for some time in the bushes, and then hurried to the lion's lair. By this time the lion was as angry as he was hungry. He was snarling, and lashing his yellow tail on the ground. When he saw the hare, he called out loudly, "Who are you, and what are my subjects doing? I have had no morsel of food today!" The hare besought him to calm his anger and listen to him. "The lot fell today," he began, "on another hare and myself. In good season we were on our way here to offer ourselves for your dinner, when a lion sprang out of the bushes and seized my companion. In vain I cried to him that we were destined for the king's table, and, moreover, that no one was permitted to hunt in these royal woods except your majesty. He paid no heed to my words save to retort, 'You do not know what you are saying. I am the only king here. That other lion, to whom you all bow down, is a usurper.' Dumb with fright, I jumped into the nearest bush." The lion grew more and more indignant as he listened to the hare's tale. "If I could once find that lion," he roared, "I would soon teach him who is king of these woods." "If your majesty will trust me," answered the hare, humbly, "I can take you to his hiding place." So the hare and the lion went out together. They crossed the woods and the meadow, and came to an ancient well, which was full of clear, deep water. "Yonder is the home of your enemy," whispered the hare, pointing to the well. "If you go near enough, you can see him. But," he added, "perhaps you had better wait until he comes out before you attack him." These words only made the lion more indignant. "He shall not live a moment after I have laid eyes upon him," he growled. So the hare and the lion approached stealthily to the well. As they bent over the edge and looked down into the clear water, they saw themselves reflected there. The lion, thinking that it was the other lion with the other hare, leaped into the well, never to come out again. Source: The Tortoise and the Geese and other Fables of Bidpai , retold by Maude Barrows Dutton (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1908), pp. 90-94. Bidpai, according to Arabic tradition, was the compiler of the Indian collection The Panchatantra . The name Bidpai probably derives from a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." Return to the table of contents . The Lion Whose Name Was Pingala India In a forest called Madhara lived a lion whose name was Pingala. He was the terror of all the beasts in the forest, for he used to wander about and kill one after another. So they met together and made a bargain with him, that if he would leave them alone, they would supply him every day with one beast for his dinner. At last a hare's turn came to satisfy the lion's hunger and he declined to carry out the agreement. The other animals remonstrated with him and said: "You must go, or we shall have the lion eating up all the beasts as he used to do." The hare replied: "Don't trouble yourselves! He won't eat up many more." So at about midday he appeared before the lion, going very slowly, and said: "Sir! I was travelling along the road to come to you, when I was seized and kept a prisoner by one of your enemies; so I am afraid I am a little late!" "One of my enemies!" exclaimed the lion. "And pray where is he? Let me see him at once." The cunning hare led the lion into an enclosure where there was a well, and looking down into the water the lion saw his own reflection. The foolish lion thereupon in a great rage jumped down into the water and was drowned. For it has been said: Wisdom, not force, is the support of a people in fear: Just as a mighty lion was killed by an insignificant hare. The arrow shot by a mighty archer may or may not kill: But the deliberations of a crafty minister will overturn both kingdom and people. Source: The Enchanted Parrot : Being a Selection from the "Suka Saptati," or, The Seventy Tales of a Parrot, translated from the Sanskrit text by B. Hale Wortham (London: Luzac and Company, 1911), story 31, pp. 75-76 . Return to the table of contents . Singh Rajah and the Cunning Little Jackals India Once upon a time, in a great jungle, there lived a great lion. He was rajah of all the country round; and every day he used to leave his den, in the deepest shadow of the rocks, and roar with a loud, angry voice. And when he roared, the other animals in the jungle, who were all his subjects, got very much frightened, and ran here and there. And Singh Rajah [Lion King] would pounce upon them, and kill them, and gobble them up for his dinner. This went on for a long, long time, until, at last, there were no living creatures left in the jungle but two little jackals, a rajah jackal and a ranee jackal, husband and wife. A very hard time of it the poor little jackals had, running this way and that to escape the terrible Singh Rajah. And every day the little ranee jackal would say to her husband, "I am afraid he will catch us today. Do you hear how he is roaring? Oh dear, oh dear!" And he would answer her, "Never fear. I will take care of you. Let us run on a mile or two. Come, come, -- quick, quick, quick!" And they would both run away as fast as they could. After some time spent in this way, they found, however, one fine day, that the lion was so close upon them that they could not escape. Then the little ranee jackal said, "Husband, husband! I feel very frightened. The Singh Rajah is so angry he will certainly kill us at once. What can we do?" But he answered, "Cheer up. We can save ourselves yet. Come, and I'll show you how we may manage it." So what did these cunning little jackals do, but they went to the great lion's den; and when he saw them coming, he began to roar and shake his mane, and he said, "You little wretches, come and be eaten at once! I have had no dinner for three whole days, and all that time I have been running over hill and dale to find you. Ro-a-ar! Ro-a-ar! Come and be eaten, I say!" And he lashed his tail and gnashed his teeth, and looked very terrible indeed. Then the jackal rajah, creeping quite close up to him, said, "O great Singh Rajah, we all know you are our master, and we would have come at your bidding long ago; but indeed, sir, there is a much bigger rajah even than you in this jungle, and he tried to catch hold of us and eat us up, and frightened us so much that we were obliged to run away." "What do you mean?" growled Singh Rajah. "There is no king in this jungle but me!" "Ah, sire," answered the jackal, "in truth one would think so, for you are very dreadful. Your very voice is death. But it is as we say, for we, with our own eyes, have seen one with whom you could not compete; whose equal you can no more be than we are yours; whose face is as flaming fire, his step as thunder, and his power supreme." "It is impossible!" interrupted the old lion. "But show me this rajah of whom you speak so much, that I may destroy him instantly!" Then the little jackals ran on before him until they reached a great well, and, pointing down to his own reflection in the water, they said, "See, sire, there lives the terrible king of whom we spoke." When Singh Rajah looked down the well he became very angry, for he thought he saw another lion there. He roared and shook his great mane, and the shadow lion shook his, and looked terribly defiant. At last, beside himself with rage at the insolence of his opponent, Singh Rajah sprang down to kill him at once, but no other lion was there -- only the treacherous reflection. And the sides of the well were so steep that he could not get out again, to punish the two jackals, who peeped over the top. After struggling for some time in the deep water, he sank to rise no more. And the little jackals threw stones down upon him from above, and danced round and round the well, singing, "Ao! Ao! Ao! Ao! The king of the forest is dead, is dead. We have killed the great lion who would have killed us! Ao! Ao! Ao! Ao! Ring-a-ting -- ding-a-ting! Ring-a-ting -- ding-a-ting! Ao! Ao! Ao!" Source: Mary Frere, Old Deccan Days; or, Hindoo Fairy Legends Current in Southern India (London: John Murray, 1868), no. 11, pp. 172-74 . Return to the table of contents . The Killing of the Rakhas India Once upon a time a certain country was ravaged by a Rakhas to such an extent that there were only the Raja and a few ryots left. When things came to this pass, the Raja saw that something must be done: for he could not be left alone in the land. Ryots need a Raja and a Raja needs ryots: if he had no ryots where was he to get money for his support: and he repeated the verse of the poet Kalidas: When the jungle is destroyed, the deer are in trouble without jungle: When the Raja is destroyed, the ryots are in trouble without their Raja: When the good wife of the house is destroyed, good fortune flees away. So thinking the Raja made a proclamation throughout all the land that if any one could kill the Rakhas he would reward him with the hand of one of his daughters and half his kingdom. This proclamation was read out by the headman of a certain village to the assembled villagers and among the crowd was a mischievous youth, named Jhalka, who when he heard the proclamation called out that he could kill the Rakhas in ten minutes. The villagers turned on him, "Why don't you go and do so: then you would marry the Raja's daughter and we should all bow down to you." At the thought of this Jhalka began to skip about crying, "I will finish him off in no time." The headman heard him and took him at his word and wrote to the Raja that in his village there was a man who undertook to kill the Rakhas. When Jhalka heard this he hurried to the headman and explained that he had only been joking. "I cannot treat such things as a joke," answered the headman. "Don't you know that this is a Raja's matter: to deal with Rajas is the same as to deal with bongas : you may make a promise to the bongas in jest, but they will not let you off it on that plea. You are much too fond of playing the fool." Ten or twelve days later sipahis came from the Raja to fetch Jhalka: he told them that he had only spoken in jest and did not want to go to the Raja, but they took him away all the same. Before he started he picked out a well-tempered battle axe and begged his father to propitiate the bongas and pray that he might be saved from the Rakhas. When he was produced before the Raja, Jhalka again tried to explain that there had been a mistake, but the Raja told him that he would be taken at his word and must go and kill the Rakhas. Then he saw that there was nothing left for him but to put his trust in God: so he asked that he might be given two mirrors and a large box and when these were brought he had the box taken to the foot of a large banyan tree which grew by a ford in the river which flowed by the hill in which the Rakhas lived: it was at this ford that the Rakhas used to lie in wait for prey. Left alone there Jhalka put one of the mirrors into the box and then tightened his cloth and climbed the banyan tree with his battle axe and the other mirror. He was not at all happy as he waited for the Rahkas, thinking of all the people who had been killed as they passed along the road below the tree: however he was determined to outwit the Rakhas if he could. All night long he watched in vain but just at dawn the Rakhas appeared. At the sight of him Jhalka shook so much with fright that the branches of the tree swayed. The Rakhas smelt that there was a human being about and looking up into the tree saw the branches waving. "Ha," said he, "here is my breakfast." Jhalka retorted "Ha! here is another Rakhas to match those I have got." "What are you talking about?" asked the Rakhas. "I am glad to have met you at last" returned Jhalka. "Why?" asked the Rakhas, "and what are you trembling for?" "I am trembling with rage: we shall now see whether I am to eat you or you are to eat me." "Come down and try." "No, you come up here and try." Jhalka would not leave the tree, and the Rakhas would not climb it: so they waited. At last the Rahhas asked, "Who are you? I have seen a thousand men like you." And Jhalka answered, "Who are you? I have seen a thousand like you." At this the Rakhas began to hesitate and wonder whether Jhalka was really his equal in strength, so he changed the subject and asked what the big box was. "That is the box into which I put Rakhases like you when I catch them; I have got plenty more at home." "How many are there in the box?" "Two or three." The Rakhas asked to see them, but Jhalka would not leave the tree until the Rakhas had sworn an oath to do him no harm; then he came down and opened the box and made the Rakhas look into the mirror inside the box; and he also held up the second mirror saying that there was another Rakhas. The Rakhas was fascinated at the sight of his own reflection; when he grinned or opened his mouth the reflection did the same; and while he was amusing himself with making different grimaces Jhalka suddenly cut him down with the battle axe, and he fell down dead. Then Jhalka cut off the ears and tongue and toes and hastened with them to the Raja. When it was found that the Rakhas was really dead the Raja assembled all his subjects and in their presence married Jhalka to his daughter and made over to him half the kingdom and gave him horses and elephants and half of everything in his palace. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 95, pp. 286-89 . Return to the table of contents . The Lion and the Hare India Once upon a time there was a lion, who used daily to devour one of the beasts of the forest. They had to come up one after another, when called for. At last it came to the hare's turn to be eaten, and he did not want to be eaten at all. He lingered and he dallied, and when at last he plucked up courage to come, he was very late. The lion, when he saw the hare coming, bounded towards him. The hare said, "Uncle Lion, I know I am late, and you have cause to be angry. But really it is not my fault. There is another lion in our part of the jungle, and he says that he is master, and you are nobody. In fact, when I showed him that I positively would come to you he was very angry." "Ha!" said the lion, roaring. "Who says he is my master? Show him to me. I'll teach him who rules the forest." "Come along then," said the hare. They went a long way, until they came to a well. The hare looked down into the well. "He was here just now," said he. The Lion looked in, and at the bottom he saw what looked like a lion in the water. He shook his mane -- the other lion shook his mane. He roared -- the echo of a roar came up from the bottom of the well. "Let me get at him!" roared the lion. In he jumped -- splash! Nothing more was ever heard of that lion, and the beasts of the forest were glad to be left in peace. They put their heads together, and composed a verse of poetry, which is always sung in that forest on Sundays: The hare is small, but by his wit He now has got the best of it; By folly down the lion fell, And lost his life within the well. Source: The Talking Thrush and Other Tales from India , collected by W. Crooke and retold by W. H. D. Rouse (New York: E. P. Dutton and Company; London: J. M. Dent and Sons, 1922), pp. 130-31 . Return to the table of contents . The Tiger and the Shadow Malaya There was a saltlick in the jungle to which all the beasts of the forest resorted, but they were greatly afraid by reason of an old tiger which killed one of them every day. At length, therefore, Plando the mouse-deer said to the tiger, "Why not permit me to bring you a beast every day, to save you from hunting for your food?" The tiger consented, and Plando went off to make arrangement with the beasts. But he could not persuade any of them to go, and after three days he set off, taking nobody with him but Kuwis the smallest of the flying squirrels. On their arrival Plando said to the tiger, "I could not bring you any of the other beasts because the way was blocked by a fat old tiger with a flying squirrel sitting astride its muzzle." On hearing this the tiger exclaimed, "Let us go and find it and drive it away." The three therefore set out, the flying squirrel perched upon the tiger's muzzle and the mouse-deer sitting astride upon its hind quarters. On reaching the river, the mouse-deer pointed to the tiger's likeness in the water and exclaimed, "Look there! That is the fat old tiger that I saw." On hearing this, the tiger sprang into the river to attack his own shadow [reflection], and was drowned immediately. Source: Walter Skeat, Fables and Folk-Tales from an Eastern Forest (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1901), pp. 28-29 . Skeat's source: "This tale is from Ulu Kedah." I have shortened the hero's name, which Skeats gives as P'lando'. Return to the table of contents . The Tiger and the Hare Pakistan In a certain forest there once lived a fierce tiger, which was in the habit of hunting down the rest of the animals for mere sport, whether hunger impelled him thereto or not. All the animals, therefore, met together by common consent to consider their grievances. "Let us agree," said the jackal, "that one of us shall be chosen by lot day by day as a sacrifice to the tiger." "All right," assented the others, "but first let us see the tiger, and let us offer him a petition." So they all marched together to the tiger's den and humbly sought him to refrain from indiscriminate slaughter, and to be satisfied with the animal which should voluntarily come to him day by day. "Do not hunt us poor fellows down," said they, "for one of us will always come to be devoured by you, and this plan will save you trouble as well." "No, no," cried the tiger. "I shall use my claws and my teeth, and so eat my food." "But," answered the animals, "God has said that we ought to live in hope." "True," answered the tiger, "but he has also bidden everyone to earn his own bread." At last, after much argument, the tiger suffered himself to be persuaded, and made a solemn promise to remain at home in his den. Thenceforward every day an animal chosen by lot went to the den to be eaten. But when the hare's turn came, she flatly said, "I shall not go. I shall live my life." In vain the other animals tried to persuade or coerce her. Twelve o'clock, the tiger's usual feeding time, came and went, then came one, two, and three. At last the hare suddenly started up, and exclaiming "Now I'm off!" she set out for the den. As she drew near she noticed the famished tiger tearing up the earth in fury, and heard him bellowing, "Who is this ridiculous hare to keep me waiting?" "But I have an excuse," protested the hare. "What excuse can you have?" demanded the tiger. "Today," said the hare, "it was not my turn to come at all. It was my brother's. I am thin, but my brother is plump and fat. My brother had started for your den, but on the way he fell in with another tiger which wanted to eat him, and, in fact, he caught him and was carrying him away, when I came up and said to him, 'This country is not your country, but the country of another tiger who will punish you.' To which the strange tiger answered, 'You go at once and call that tiger of yours out, and then he and I shall have a fight.' So here I am, sir, sent to deliver his challenge. Come and kill the villain for us." Full of rage and jealousy, the tiger said to the hare, "Lead on!" and the pair started forth to seek the rival tiger. As they went along, the hare began to look alarmed and shrink back, and made as though she would have hidden herself in a thicket. "What is the matter now?" inquired the tiger. "What are you afraid of?" "I am afraid," answered she, "because the other tiger's den lies close in front of us." "Where? Where?" cried the tiger, peering forward with searching eyes. "I see no den whatever." "It is there. See!" answered the hare. "Almost at your very feet!" "I can see no den," said the tiger. "Is there no means of persuading you to come forward and show me the place?" "Yes," replied the hare, "if you will please carry me under your arm." So the tiger lifted the cunning hare under his arm, and, guided by her directions, he unexpectedly found himself at the edge of a large deep well. "The is the den I told you of," whispered the hare. "Look in and you will see the robber." Standing on the brink and looking down into the clear depths, the tiger saw at the bottom the reflected image of himself and the hare, and imagining that he saw his enemy in proud possession of the fat brother, he dropped the nimble hare, which easily escaped, and with a roar leaped down, where, after struggling in the water for many hours, he finally expired, and thus the forest was at last rid of the tyrant. Source: Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 3, pp. 4-6 . Return to the table of contents . The Tiger and the Fox Pakistan In a certain wood, where dwelt many jackals and foxes, a tiger came and took up his abode. And what did he do? This is what he used to do. Every day he would kill a jackal or two. So the jackals and foxes gathered together, and said, "If he goes on this way he will destroy us all, so, as we are now assembled here, let us agree that each will take his turn to be devoured." And so they did. Every day they used to give to the tiger the one whose turn it was. One day it was a fox's turn. At first he hid himself, but then he thought, "Now I have to go, for I am hemmed in on both sides. I'll go, but I'll try by some trick to keep my breath in me." So on he went, shivering as he went, till he came to the tiger's presence. "Ah!" says the tiger, "You fox, why have you been so long?" "Sire," said the fox, "another tiger has come to live in your country." "Where is that tiger?" said the tiger. "Come with me," said the fox, "and I will show him to you." So the fox went in front and the tiger went behind, and they went on till they came to a well. They came and stood at the mouth of the well, and then the fox said, "Oh, my lord tiger! That other tiger has just come home after feeding on a jackal, and he is now sitting inside this well." Then the tiger said, "What kind of tiger can he be to come to my country! Either I must stay here alone, or he can stay alone, but we cannot live together." Then he went up to the well and looked in, and saw a tiger sitting there. But really it was only his own shadow [reflection], and no tiger. With that he leapt into the well, and there was drowned and perished. Then the fox went back to his home, jumping for joy as he went. He called out to his brethren, "Come here, foxes and jackals!" They came up at his call, and were very angry, and said, "You fox, it was your turn to be eaten by the tiger! Why have you come back? Now the tiger will be in a rage and will come and kill two or three jackals and two or three foxes." But the fox answered them, "Don't you be afraid. I have killed that tiger." They all said, "You are a fox, and he is a tiger. How then could you kill him?" He said, "Come, and I'll show him to you." They set out in great fear after the fox, and trembling with fright, they came and stoood at the mouth of the well. The fox gave a shout and said, "Come and see how I have slain the tiger and cast him into this well." They peeped in, and said that it was the truth, and that the tiger was lying dead in the well. And they all rejoiced exceedingly. Source: M. Longworth Dames, "Balochi Tales," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 3 (1892), pp. 517-18 . Return to the table of contents . The Hare and the Lions Tibet Once upon a time there lived a lion and a lioness who inhabited a den amongst some rocks on the slopes of a mountain. They were both very fine, well-grown animals, and they used to prey upon all the smaller beasts in that part of the country; until at last they became so powerful that no other animal was safe from their clutches, and the wild beasts of the neighborhood lived in a continual state of terror. It chanced one day that while the lion was hunting for something to eat, he came across a hare sleeping behind a boulder; and seizing the hare in his great paws he was just about to devour him, when the hare spoke as follows: "Oh! Uncle Lion," said he, "before eating me I just want to tell you about another animal who lives in that pond down there in the valley. He is very big and fierce, and I think he must be even stronger than you are. But if you will allow me to do so I will show you where he lives, and if you can succeed in killing him, he will make a very much better meal for you than a poor little beast like me." On hearing this the lion was very indignant. "What!" said he, "do you mean to tell me that there is any animal in this country stronger and more powerful than I am? Don't you know that I am the lord of this district, and that I should never allow anyone else to dispute the mastery with me. Show me at once where this creature lives, and I will show you how I shall deal with him." "Oh! Uncle Lion," said the hare, "let me beg you to be careful. You have no idea what a big, strong creature this is; you must on no account allow yourself to be injured by fighting with him. Think what a grief it would be to us all if you were to come to any harm." This remark of the hare's made the lion more angry than before, and he insisted that the hare should at once lead him down and show him where the other animal lived. So the hare, after again begging him to be careful of himself, preceded him down the hill until they arrived at the edge of a square-built stone tank, which was nearly full of water. "Now, Uncle Lion," said the hare, "if you will go to the edge of that tank and look down into the water you will see the animal I speak of." So saying he moved on one side, and the lion, stalking to the edge, peered down into the tank. The water was very smooth, and on the clear surface he saw his own head reflected. "There he is," called out the hare from the background; "there he is, Uncle Lion, I can see him quite plainly in the water. You see how fierce he is looking; please be careful not to start fighting with him." These remarks made the lion more angry than ever, and he moved up and down on the brink of the tank, glaring fiercely at his own reflection in the water, and growling and showing his teeth at it. "That's right, Uncle Lion," called out the hare; "I am so glad you are taking good care of yourself. Don't on any account come to grips with that beast in the water, or he might do you an injury. You are certainly much safer on the bank, and no doubt you will frighten him if you continue to growl and show your teeth." These last observations of the hare goaded the lion to desperation, and with a fierce roar he sprang straight at the image in the water. Once in the tank he was unable to get out, for its sides were built of masonry, and it was impossible for him to climb them. So he swam about for some time in the tank, whilst the hare, sitting on the bank, threw stones at him and made nasty remarks; and finally, when quite wearied out, he sank to the bottom and was drowned. The hare was very pleased at having accomplished the destruction of the lion, and he now turned his attention to the lioness. It happened that nearby there was a thick wall standing, which was part of the remains of a ruined castle; and in one portion of the wall there was a hole, very large at one end and tapering down to quite a small opening at the other. The hare, having studied his ground, went off next morning to find the lioness. He soon came across her stalking up and down near her den, very much perturbed at the disappearance of her lord and master. "Good-morning, Aunt Lioness," said the hare, going up cautiously towards her; "what is the matter with you this morning? How is it I find you pacing here in front of your den instead of hunting your prey as usual on the hillside?" The lioness took no notice of the hare, except to growl at him in an angry manner, and to lash her sides with her tail. "I suppose," went on the hare, "you are anxious about Mr. Lion, but I am sorry to tell you that you are not likely to see him again for some time. The fact is, he and I had a little argument yesterday, in which we both lost our tempers. It ended in our having a free fight, and I regret to say that I was obliged to injure Mr. Lion rather severely before I could make him see reason, and he is now lying in a dying state in the valley below." This impudence so enraged the lioness that she sprang towards the hare and endeavoured to seize him; but he eluded her and galloped off down the hill hotly pursued by the angry beast. The hare made straight for the ruined wall, and entering the breach in the wall at the large end he emerged safely at the other side by the smaller recess, which was just large enough for him to pass through. The lioness, following closely at his heels, was so blind with rage that she did not see that she was being led into a trap; so she rushed head-foremost into the opening in the wall, and before she had time to stop herself was wedged tightly in the tapering hole. She struggled violently, trying to extricate herself, but all in vain. Meanwhile the hare, having cantered round to the other side, took up its position in rear of the lioness, and began pelting her with stones and calling her all the bad names he could think of. When he was tired of this he went off home very pleased with himself, and the lioness, being unable to free herself from the trap she was in, shortly afterwards starved to death. Source: W. F. O'Connor, Folk Tales from Tibet (London: Hurst and Blackett, 1906), no. 9, pp. 51-55 . Return to the table of contents . Brother Rabbit Conquers Brother Lion African American There was a time when Brer Lion was sort of playing overseer with the other creatures. It seems like he got the idea that all of them had to pay him a toll, because he was the strongest and the most ferocious. He claimed one out of every family: one sheep from the sheep, one goat from the goats, and one from all the kinds. By and by, after a long time, he sent word to Brer Rabbit that his turn had come, and Brer Rabbit sent back word that everything was all right. Of course this made old Mrs. Rabbit and the children feel mighty bad. The children sat around whimpering and sniffling, and old Mrs. Rabbit went about crying and wiping her eyes on her apron. But Brer Rabbit, he sat up and smoked his cigar and told them to quit worrying and to learn how to not be afraid. He said, "Old woman, if I'm not back by suppertime, just set my vittles down there on the hearth so they'll keep sort of warm." Old Mrs. Rabbit said that instead of wanting vittles, he'd be vittles himself, and then she sniffled worse and worse. But Brer Rabbit just hooted at her, and then he took down his walking cane and set out to see Brer Lion. The little rabbits hollered out, "Good-bye, daddy!" and Brer Rabbit hollered back, "So long!" Old Mrs. Rabbit looked after him, she did, and then she flung her apron over her head and just boo-hooed. But Brer Rabbit marched down the road as happy if he were going to a frolic. He marched on, he did, and just before he got to the place where old Brer Lion stayed, he hid his walking cane in the fence corner, rumpled up his hair, and drew himself in until he looked like he wasn't any bigger than a pound of soap after a hard day's washing. Then he went where there was a big, deep spring a little piece away from the road, and he looked at himself in the water. He sort of pulled back his ears and made himself look topsy-turvy, and then he closed one eye and shook his fist at his reflection in the water. He went back to the big road, he did, and crept along like he was ailing -- limping first on one foot and then on the other one, and by and by he came to the place where old Brer Lion was staying. Brer Rabbit sort of dragged himself along and made a bow. Brer Lion looked at him sideways and asked him where he was going. Brer Rabbit said he was all the more willing to come, became it was his turn, and he had been feeling poorly for a long time. He talked mighty weak and trembly. Brer Lion looked at him closely and said, "You won't make a mouthful. It's time that I eat you. I'm just getting good and hungry." Brer Rabbit said, "Yes, sir. I know I'm not fat, and I suspect I have lots of fleas on me, but I'm mighty willing. I've got a bad cough, and I'm tired of being sick. I'm just about as fat as the mule the man had, and he had to tie a knot in its tail to keep it from slipping through the collar." Brer Lion looked at him and thought that Brer Rabbit was so scared he was talking weaker and weaker. Brer Rabbit said, "While I was coming along just now I saw a creature that was almost as big and fat as you are, and I said to myself that I wished to goodness that I was as fat as he was, so Brer Lion could have a good dinner." Brer Lion said, "Who was he?" Brer Rabbit said, "I didn't ask him his name. He refused to respond to my howdy, and he looked so ferocious that I got out of there." Brer Lion said, "Come, show me where he is." Brer Rabbit said, "I'd do it in a minute, Brer Lion, but I'm afraid he'll hurt you." Brer Lion sort of bristled up at that. He said, "Hurt whom? Come on and go with me to where he is, and I'll show you who'll get hurt, and that in short order!" Brer Rabbit shook his head. He said, "You'd better eat me, Brer Lion. I'm not much, but I'm something, and that other creature that I saw will surely hurt you. He's got claws and he's got teeth, because I saw them. Don't go where he is, Brer Lion, if you have any friendly feelings for your family. That creature will surely cripple you!" This made Brer Lion mighty mad. He said, "Get right into the road and show me where he is!" Brer Rabbit said, "Well, if I need to go, Brer Lion, I'll go. I told you so, and that's all I can do." They went on, they did, and Brer Rabbit took Brer Lion to the spring. When they got there, Brer Rabbit looked around and said, "He was right around here somewhere, and he's not so mighty far off now, because I feel it in my bones." Then he crept up, he did, and looked into the spring. As he did this, he let out a yell and jumped back. "Ouch, Brer Lion! He's in there! Let's run! He'll get us for sure!" Brer Lion walked up to the spring and looked in. Sure enough, there was a big creature looking back at him. Brer Lion hollered at him. The creature in the spring didn't say anything. Brer Lion shook his head. The creature shook his. Brer Lion showed his teeth. The creature grinned at him. They kept on this way until by and by Brer Lion got so mad that he jumped into the spring head foremost. When he was in there, he couldn't get out again, and so there he was, strangled with water and drowned for the want of sense and breath. Brer Rabbit capered around there some little time, and then he put out for home, and when he got there, he took his children on his knee and told them a mighty tale about how he made out with old Brer Lion. Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus and His Friends: Old Plantation Stories, Songs, and Ballads with Sketches of Negro Character (Boston: Houghton Mifflin and Company, 1892), no. 18, pp. 134-41 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 2002. Return to the table of contents . Lion Brooks No Rival African-American Lion was supposed to be the head of all the beast in that place. He got so lazy ev'ry day, he had an animal come in ev'ry day so he could eat it. Ev'yday animal went in. So finally it came the rabbit's turn to go in. He was one of the wisest animals of that time. He was supposed to be there at twelve o'clock. He came hoppin' along the road, stoppin' everywhere, lookin' at everything, until it threw him off time. Wonders, whey he goin', what could he do to keep the lion from gettin' so angry with him. So finally he came across a well. The thought came to him as he looked into the well, he saw his shader, he had a scheme to fool the lion. He had been told by the other animals that any way he could get rid of the lion, they would pay him, give him praise of being the wisest animal of the forest. He entered the lion's room pretendin' he had been runnin', doin' all he could to get there on time. The lion asked him why he was so late. The rabbit began to tell him the story why he was so late. So he tol' the lion, if he didn' believe what he had tol' him, to follow him, and he would show him. So the lion went with the rabbit to the well. The rabbit tol' the lion to get up on the curb of the well and look down into the well, and he would see what had delayed him. So he did. When he looked into the water, he saw another face, not knowing that it was himself. He frowned, he grit his teeth, and the other lion did the same thing. The lion on top, thinking that he was master of all the beasts of the forest, jumped into the well, and that was the last of the lion. And the rabbit got the praise of being the wisest beast of the forest. Source: A. M. Bacon and E. C. Parsons, "Folk-Lore from Elizabeth City County, Virginia," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 35, no. 137 (July - September, 1922), p. 264 . Bacon's and Parsons' source: "William Franklin of Montgomery County, Alabama." Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 16, 2018. Curing a Sick Lion: Fables of type 50 Curing a Sick Lion fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 50 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2008 Contents The Lion, the Wolf, and the Fox (Aesop). The Lion, Wolf, and Fox (Jean de La Fontaine). The Hyena Outwitted (India). The King of the Tigers Is Sick (Malaya). Return to folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Lion, the Wolf, and the Fox Aesop A lion, infirm with age, lay sick in his den, and all the beasts of the forest came to inquire after his health, with the exception of the fox. The wolf thought this was a good opportunity for paying off old scores against the fox, so he called the attention of the lion to his absence, and said, "You see, sire, that we have all come to see how you are except the fox, who hasn't come near you, and doesn't care whether you are well or ill." Just then the fox came in and heard the last words of the wolf. The lion roared at him in deep displeasure, but he begged to be allowed to explain his absence, and said, "Not one of them cares for you so much as I, sire, for all the time I have been going round to the doctors and trying to find a cure for your illness." "And may I ask if you have found one?" said the lion. "I have, sire," said the fox, "and it is this: You must flay a wolf and wrap yourself in his skin while it is still warm." The lion accordingly turned to the wolf and struck him dead with one blow of his paw, in order to try the fox's prescription. But the fox laughed and said to himself, "That's what comes of stirring ill-will." Source: Æsop's Fables , translated by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: W. Heinemann, 1912), pp. 293- 294. Return to the table of contents . The Lion, Wolf, and Fox Jean de La Fontaine A feeble lion, gouty, given o'er, Desired some remedy for his old age. Tell kings that remedy avails no more, 'Tis waste of words, that but excites their rage. Ours ordered doctors in of every kind, For skilled there are in every branch we find. They to the lion came from their retreats, From every side came givers of receipts. Among the visitors to show their skill, The fox dispensed with going, and lay still. Hence fawned the wolf, his absent friend belied, As the king went to bed, when quick he cried: "He shall be stifled in his room with smoke! First bring him here." The fox appeared and spoke, Knowing the wolf had injured him at court: "Sire, I'm afraid that some unfair report May for contempt have taken my delay Thus to condole with you, and homage pay. I've been, dread sire, on pilgrimage by stealth, To pay the vows I promised for your health. Wise men and skilful met I on the way; And your own fears from danger but too great. Sire, all you want, they said, is heat, Which age in you has quenched within; Of a wolf flayed alive, then, wear the skin, Quite hot and smoking from his body peeled; A secret doubtless ne'er before revealed: It gives to wasting nature life and ease. Here good Sir Wolf will serve you, if you please, With chamber robe so very choice." The monarch relished the advice: The wolf was flayed, and cut up in a trice; Warm in his skin the king wrapt up, Upon his body straight sat down to sup. Cease, courtiers, cease to work each other's woe, And while ye flatter, deal no treacherous blow: Quadruple wrath may wait you on the throne, Which ye think calumny has made your own. Ye run a race, and as the swiftest choose, Nothing is pardoned to the men that lose. Source: The Fables of La Fontaine: Translated from the French [mainly by Robert Thomson] (London: J. C. Nimmo and Bain, 1884), pp. 166-67 (book 8, fable 3). Link to this fable in the original French "Le Lion, le Loup et le Renard": Fables de La Fontaine (Tours: Alfred Mame et Fils, 1888), pp. 232-33 . Return to the table of contents . The Hyena Outwitted India Once upon a time there was a great tiger who lived in a forest; and all the other animals that lived in the forest treated him as their Raja, down to the very birds. They all felt safe under his protection, because he was so much feared that no men dared hunt in that forest. One day it happened that this Raja tiger killed a man and made such a enormous meal on the flesh, that he got very bad indigestion. The pain grew worse and worse, till he felt sure that his last hour was come. In his agony he sent for a hyena and offered to make him his dewan [chief minister], if only he would call all the other animals of the forest to come and pay a farewell visit to their lord. The hyena readily agreed but thought it would be better to send another messenger, while he stayed by the tiger to see that all the animals duly presented themselves. Just then a crow flew overhead; so they called him and deputed him to summon all the animals. The crow flew off and in a short time all the animals assembled before the tiger and paid their respects to him and expressed wishes for his speedy recovery -- all except the jackals. They had been summoned along with the others; but somehow they paid no attention and only remembered about it in the afternoon. Then they were very frightened as to what would be the consequence of their remissness; but one chief jackal stood up and told them not to fear, as he would contrive a way of getting the better of the hyena. There was nothing else to be done, so they had to put what trust they could in their chief and follow him to the tiger. On his way the chief jackal picked up a few roots, and took them with him. When they reached the place where the suffering monarch lay, the hyena at once began to abuse them for being late, and the tiger also angrily asked why they had not come before; then the chief jackal began humbly "O Maharaja, we were duly summoned; your messenger is not to blame; but we reflected that it was useless merely to go and look at you when you were so ill: that could do you no good; so we bestirred ourselves to try and find some medicine that would cure you. We have searched the length and breadth of the jungle and have found all that is necessary, except one thing and that we have failed to find." "Tell me what it is," said the hyena, "and I will at once dispatch all these animals to look for it and it will surely be found." "Yes," echoed the tiger, "what is it?" "Maharaja," said the jackal, "when you take these medicines, you must lie down on the fresh skin of a hyena, which has been flayed alive; but the only hyena we can find in the forest is your dewan " "The world can well bear the loss of one hyena," said the tiger: "take him and skin him." At these words all the animals set upon the hyena and flayed him alive; and the tiger lay down on the skin and took the medicines brought by the jackal; and as he was not seriously ill, his pain soon began to pass away. "That is a lesson to the hyena not to scold us and get us into trouble," said the jackal, as he went home. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 119, pp. 335-36. Return to the table of contents . The King of the Tigers Is Sick Malaya When the great king of all the tigers was sick, the tiger crown prince made obeisance and said, "If my lord will taste of the flesh of every beast of the field peradventure my lord may recover." To the great king commanded the crown prince to summon every kind of beast into his presence, and as they appeared, the king ate them. Only the mouse-deer, who was likewise summoned, refused to appear. Therefore the great king's wrath was kindled against the mouse-deer, and in the end he too was fain to appear. And when he appeared he was questioned by the king, "Why did you not attend at the first when we had summoned hither every kind of beast that lives in the field?" The mouse-deer replied, "Your slave could not approach your majesty because of a dream of certain medicine that would make your majesty well." The king replied, "What medicine was this of which you dreamed?" "Your slave dreamed that the only remedy for you majesty's sickness was for you majesty to seize and devour that which is nearest your majesty ." Immediately on hearing this, the great king of the tigers seized the prince of the tigers and devoured him also. And straightway the king was cured, and the mouse-deer himself became crown prince in turn. Source: Walter Skeat, Fables and Folk-Tales from an Eastern Forest (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1901), no. 2, pp. 3-4 . Skeat's source: "A Kelantan Malay named Che Busu, one of the following of the Raja Muda of Patani. The mouse-deer, the trickster-hero of this tale, is featured in many Malayan fables. This story was collected on the Tembeling River in Ulu Pahang. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 29, 2008. Llewellyn and His Dog Gellert: Fables of Type 178A Llewellyn and His Dog Gellert and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 178A selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2014 Contents The Brahman's Wife and the Mongoose (India, The Panchatantra ). The Dog and the Snake and the Child (India, The Book of Sindibad ). The Brahman's Wife and the Mongoose (India, Georgiana Kingscote). The Greyhound, the Serpent, and the Child ( The Seven Wise Masters ). Folliculus and His Greyhound ( Gesta Romanorum ). Beth Gellert (Wales, Joseph Jacobs). The Dog Gellert (Wales, Horace E. Scudder). The Farmer and His Dog (a modern fable). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Brahman's Wife and the Mongoose India, The Panchatantra In a certain city there lived a Brahman by the name of Devasarman. His wife gave birth to a son, and then to a mongoose. Full of love for her children, she cared for the mongoose like a son, nursing him at her breast, rubbing him with salve, and so forth. However, she did not trust him, thinking that in keeping with the evil nature of his species he might harm her son. As is rightly said: A son will bring joy to his parents' heart, even if he is uneducated, bad, malformed, foolish, and sinful. And as also is said: Sandalwood salve cools and soothes, but a son's embrace far excels sandalwood salve. The relationship with one's son is more important than that with a best friend, a good father, or any other person. One day, after nicely tucking the boy into his bed, she took the water pitcher and said to her husband, "Listen, master, I am going to the pond to fetch water. You must protect our son from the mongoose." After she departed, the Brahman went off somewhere to collect alms, leaving the house empty. In the meantime a black snake crept out of its hole and -- as fate would have it -- approached the boy's bed. However, the mongoose confronted this, his natural enemy, and fearing that it might kill his brother, the mongoose attacked the wicked snake, tore it to bits, and threw the pieces far and wide. Proud of his valor and his face covered with blood, the mongoose approached the mother to tell her what had happened. However, the mother, seeing his blood-spattered face and sensing his excitement, feared, "without doubt this evildoer has devoured our son." Driven by anger and without further investigation she threw the water-filled pitcher at the mongoose, killing the him instantly. Paying no further attention to the mongoose, she rushed into the house where she found the boy still asleep. Near the bed she saw a large black snake, torn to bits. Then her heart was overcome with sorrow because of the thoughtless murder of her praiseworthy son, the mongoose, and she beat herself on the head, the breast, and her other body parts. While this was happening the Brahman returned home with alms from wherever he had been begging. "See there!" she cried, overcome with grief for her son, the mongoose. "Oh, you greedy one! Because you let greed rule you instead of doing what I told you to, you now must taste the fruit of your own tree of sin, the pain of your son's death." Source: The Panchatantra , book 5, story 2. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 326-27. Translation © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. The Brahman's name, Devasarman, means "having the luck of the gods," or "blessed by the gods." India's most influential contribution to world literature, the Panchatantra (also spelled Pañcatantra or Pañca-tantra ) consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled, in their current form, between the third and fifth centuries AD. It is believed that even then the stories were already ancient. The tales' self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes the Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai, which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of the Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced medieval writers of fables. Return to the table of contents . The Brahman's Wife and the Mongoose India, Georgiana Kingscote On the banks of the Ganges, which also flows by the most holy city of Benares, there is a town named Mithila, where dwelt a very poor Brahman called Vidyadhara. He had no children, and to compensate for this want, he and his wife tenderly nourished in their house a mongoose -- a species of weasel. It was their all in all -- their younger son, their elder daughter -- their younger son, their elder daughter -- their elder son, their younger daughter, so fondly did they regard that little creature. The god Visvesvara and his spouse Visalakshi observed this and had pity for the unhappy pair; so by their divine power they blessed them with a son. This most welcome addition to their family did not alienate the affections of the Brahman and his wife from the mongoose; on the contrary, their attachment increased, for they believed that it was because of their having adopted the pet that a son had been born to them. So the child and the mongoose were brought up together, as twin brothers, in the same cradle. It happened one day when the Brahman had gone out to beg alms of the pious and charitable, that his wife went into the garden to cull some pot-herbs, leaving the child asleep in his cradle, and by his side the mongoose kept guard. An old serpent, which was living in the well in the garden, crept into the house and under the cradle, and was beginning to climb into it to bite the child when the mongoose fiercely attacked it and tore it into several pieces, thus saving the life of the Brahman's little son, and the venomous snake, that came to slay, itself lay dead beneath the cradle. Pleased at having performed such an exploit, the mongoose ran into the garden to show the Brahman's wife its blood-smeared mouth, but she rashly mistook the deliverer of her child for his destroyer, and with one stroke of the knife in her hand with which she was cutting herbs she killed the faithful creature, and then hastened into the house to see her dead son. But there she found the child in his cradle alive and well, only crying at the absence of his little companion, the mongoose, and under the cradle lay the great serpent cut to pieces. The real state of affairs was now evident, and the Brahman presently returning home, his wife told him of her rash act and then put an end to her life. The Brahman, in his turn, disconsolate at the death of the mongoose and his wife, first slew his child and then killed himself. Source: Tales of the Sun; or, Folklore of Southern India , collected by Mrs. Howard [Georgiana] Kingscote and Pandit Natêsá Sástrî (London and Calcutta: W. H. Allen and Company, 1890), pp. 162-64. Return to the table of contents . The Greyhound, the Serpent, and the Child The Seven Wise Masters In Rome there lived a gentleman that had but one son, who was carefully nursed in his own house. He had also a greyhound, so good that he never ran at any game but he took it; besides some other extraordinary qualities, that his master much admired him for. It happened one day that there was a running at tilt and tournament in the public place appointed for that purpose, to which this gentleman, amongst others, resorted. And no sooner was he gone, but his lady, with her maidens also, went to see it; the nurse also, to satisfy her curiosity, went privately, and left the child lying in the cradle in the hall, and the greyhound in the room. The gentleman's house being out of repair, in the very room where the child was issued out of a hole a great and horrible serpent, which approaching the cradle with all speed, to slay the child. The greyhound perceived it and flew at the serpent to preserve the child; and so furious was the engagement that the cradle was overturned with the child in it, the bottom upwards, but without any harm to the child, because the clothes fell underneath, and the cradle stood on the four pummels. The dog being enraged, as well at the wounds he received of the serpent, as the wrong designed his young master, fell with redoubled fury upon the serpent, and at last remained victorious, tearing the serpent in such a manner that he was all besmeared with his blood; and then he laid himself down in his place and licked his wounds. Not long after this, the tilting being ended, the nurse came into the chamber and saw the cradle turned upside down, compassed round about with blood, and the greyhound likewise all bloody; and without looking any further tore her clothes, and in a fright, with outrageous cries, carried the sad new to her lay, that the greyhound had slain the child. Hereupon the mother, full of despair and grief for the loss of her only son, likewise rent he clothes and broke out into dismal exclamations, and her maidens who had accompanied her, adding to the lamentation, made the whole house ring; and yet not any of them had the wit to go and turn the cradle up to see what had happened, continuing their outcries, till the gentleman returned from the tournament, to whom the lady, with tears and aggravations, related what she had imagined by the nurse's discourse. The knight, hearing these sad tidings, full of rage and grief, went into the hall; where meeting the poor greyhound, who came fawning upon him, as he used to do, and seeing him all bloody, he immediately concluded that all they had told him was true; and drawing out his sword he run him quite through the windpipe and neck, so that the poor dog fell down dead at the feet of his mistaken master. No sooner had the angry knight done this, but he went and took up the cradle, and there he found his son alive and well, and seeing then the slaughtered serpent, which nobody has minded before, he perceived the greyhound had killed the serpent in defense of the child. Whereupon, being full of grief, he sorrowfully cried out, "Ah! Poor dog! That thy friendship and loyalty should be so unfortunate to thee to cause they death, instead of recompense, which thou didst deserve for preserving my little child. And saying this, he broke his sword in pieces, and went towards the Holy Land and abode there all the days of his life; and all this was occasioned by giving too much credit to the words of a rash woman. Source: Roman Stories; or, The History of the Seven Wise Masters of Rome , 33rd edition (Berwick: W. Phorson, 1785), pp. 24-26 . The Seven Wise Masters , also known as The Seven Sages or The Seven Viziers is a cycle of stories presumably of Indian origin. The collection became known in medieval Europe by way of Persion and Arabic translations. Return to the table of contents . Folliculus and His Greyhound England, Gesta Romanorum Folliculus, a knight, was fond of hunting and tournaments. He had an only son, for whom three nurses were provided. Next to this child he loved his falcon and his greyhound. It happened one day that he was called to a tournament, whither his wife and domestics went also, leaving the child in the cradle, the greyhound lying by him, and the falcon on his perch. A serpent that inhabited a hole near the castle, taking advantage of the profound silence that reigned, crept from his habitation and advanced towards the cradle to devour the child. The falcon, perceiving the danger, fluttered with his wings till he awoke the dog, who instantly attacked the invader, and after a fierce conflict, in which he was sorely wounded, killed him. He then lay down on the ground to lick and heal his wounds. When the nurses returned they found the cradle overturned, the child thrown out, and the ground covered with blood, as well as the dog, who, they immediately concluded, had killed the child. Terrified at the idea of meeting the anger of the parents, they determined to escape, but in their flight fell in with their mistress, to whom they were compelled to relate the supposed murder of the child by the greyhound. The knight soon arrived to hear the sad story, and, maddened with fury, rushed forward to the spot. The poor wounded and faithful animal made an effort to rise, and welcome his master with his accustomed fondness; but the enraged knight received him on the point of his sword, and he fell lifeless to the ground. On examination of the cradle the infant was found alive and unhurt, and the dead serpent lying by him. the knight now perceived what had happened, lamented bitterly over his faithful dog, and blamed himself for having depended too hastily on the words of his wife. Abandoning the profession of arms, he broke his lance in three pieces, and vowed a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, where he spent the rest of his days in peace. Source: Gesta Romanorum , translated from the Latin by Charles Swan; revised and corrected by Wynnard Hooper (London: George Bell and Sons, 1906), notes to chapter 32, pp. xlii-xliii . The Gesta Romanorum or Deeds of the Romans was compiled in Latin in the early fourteenth century by an English cleric. It was first published about 1473. Its title notwithstanding, only a few of the work's some 283 stories deal with the Romans. Instead, the work presents a mixture of anecdotes, legends, and fables, gleaned from many sources and presented in a context appropriate for incorporation into Christian sermons. Various manuscript versions exist. The story of Folliculus is found in the manuscript known as "The English Gesta." Return to the table of contents . Beth Gellert Wales Prince Llewellyn had a favorite greyhound named Gellert that had been given to him by his father-in-law, King John. He was as gentle as a lamb at home but a lion in the chase. One day Llewellyn went to the chase and blew his horn in front of his castle. All his other dogs came to the call but Gellert never answered it. So he blew a louder blast on his horn and called Gellert by name, but still the greyhound did not come. At last Prince Llewellyn could wait no longer and went off to the hunt without Gellert. He had little sport that day because Gellert was not there, the swiftest and boldest of his hounds. He turned back in a rage to his castle, and as he came to the gate, who should he see but Gellert come bounding out to meet him. But when the hound came near him, the prince was startled to see that his lips and fangs were dripping with blood. Llewellyn started back and the greyhound crouched down at his feet as if surprised or afraid at the way his master greeted him. Now Prince Llewellyn had a little son a year old with whom Gellert used to play, and a terrible thought crossed the prince's mind that made him rush towards the child's nursery. And the nearer he came the more blood and disorder he found about the rooms. He rushed into it and found the child's cradle overturned and daubed with blood. Prince Llewellyn grew more and more terrified, and sought for his little son everywhere. He could find him nowhere but only signs of some terrible conflict in which much blood had been shed. At last he felt sure the dog had destroyed his child, and shouting to Gellert, "Monster, thou hast devoured my child," he drew out his sword and plunged it in the greyhound's side, who fell with a deep yell and still gazing in his master's eyes. As Gellert raised his dying yell, a little child's cry answered it from beneath the cradle, and there Llewellyn found his child unharmed and just awakened from sleep. But just beside him lay the body of a great gaunt wolf all torn to pieces and covered with blood. Too late, Llewellyn learned what had happened while he was away. Gellert had stayed behind to guard the child and had fought and slain the wolf that had tried to destroy Llewellyn's heir. In vain was all Llewellyn's grief; he could not bring his faithful dog to life again. So he buried him outside the castle walls within sight of the great mountain of Snowdon, where every passerby might see his grave, and raised over it a great cairn of stones. And to this day the place is called Beth Gellert, or the Grave of Gellert. Source: Joseph Jacobs, Celtic Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1892), no. 21, pp. 192-94 . Jacobs' notes to this story: pp. 259-64 . Jacobs' source: "Beth Gêlert, or the Grave of the Greyhound," a poem by W. R. Spencer privately printed as a broadsheet in 1800. A note by Spencer: "The story of this ballad is traditionary in a village at the foot of Snowdon where Llewellyn the Great had a house. The Greyhound named Gêlert was given him by his father-in-law, King John, in the year 1205, and the place to this day is called Beth-Gêlert, or the grave of Gêlert." The modern Welsh spelling of the place where Llewellyn's dog is buried is Beddgelert. Return to the table of contents . The Dog Gellert Wales In the mountains of Wales there lived a prince named Llewellyn. He had a fine castle, but the most precious thing in his castle was his little child. All the servants were devoted to the child, but his most constant friend, play mate, and guardian was the great dog Gellert. He was a powerful hound, and he needed to be, for there were wolves and other wild beasts in the forest about the castle. Llewellyn had perfect confidence in the dog Gellert, and one day when he went out hunting he told Gellert to stay at home and take care of his little master. So Gellert lay down by the side of the cradle and stretched his great paws out, as if to say: "No one shall come near my little master." The afternoon went by, the hunt was over, and Llewellyn drew near his castle. He sounded his horn, and threw himself from his horse at the door. Gellert came bounding out, but to his horror Llewellyn saw that his mouth was dripping with blood, and there were marks of blood all about. "O faithless hound!" he cried, "Is this the way you guard your little master?" And he drew his sword and with one blow laid the hound dead at his feet. Then he rushed into the house. Everything was in confusion. The cradle was empty, and the clothes were thrown about. He stood still, ready to faint, when he heard a little sound. Perhaps his son still lived. He went to the cradle, and there on the floor behind it was his little boy, laughing, and pulling the hair of a great shaggy wolf that lay stretched out dead beside him. Then the whole story was clear to him. The wolf had come in through the open door, had stolen toward the cradle, when Gellert had sprung upon the wolf, had fought with him and slain him. O happy father! O unhappy prince! To have his child back again, and to have slain that child's faithful guardian! He could not bring the hound back to life, but he dug his grave and built above it a beautiful monument, and the place is called Beth Gellert to this day. Source: Horace E. Scudder, The Book of Legends: Told Over Again (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1899), pp. 26-27 . Return to the table of contents . The Farmer and His Dog A Modern Fable A farmer who had just stepped into his field to mend a gap in one of his fences found at his return the cradle where he had left his only child asleep turned upside down, the clothes all torn and bloody, and his dog lying near it besmeared also with blood. Immediately conceiving that the creature had destroyed his child, he instantly dashed out his brains with the hatchet in his hand. When turning turning up the cradle, he found his child unhurt and an enourmous serpent lying dead on the floor, killed by that faithful dog, whose courage and fidelity in preserving the life of his son, deserved another kind of reward. These affecting circumstances afforded him a striking lesson, how dangerous it is too hastily to give way to the blind impulse of a sudden passion. Moral: The greater room there appears for resentment, the more careful should we be not to accuse an innocent person. Source: Selected Fables of Esop and Other Fabulists by R. Dodsley, a new edition (London: J. Dodsley, 1781), book 2: Fables from the Moderns , no. 32, p. 117 . Dodsley gives the moral to this "modern fable" in his index, p. 241 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 29, 2014. Norse Ballads of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow Norse Ballads of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman Contents The Challenge of Thor. Thangbrand the Priest. The Skeleton in Armor. Tegner's Drapa [on the death of Balder the Beautiful]. A List of Germanic Poems by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. Related Links. The Challenge of Thor Henry Wadsworth Longfellow I AM the God Thor, I am the War God, I am the Thunderer! Here in my Northland, My fastness and fortress, Reign I forever! Here amid icebergs Rule I the nations; This is my hammer, Miölner the mighty; Giants and sorcerers Cannot withstand it! These are the gauntlets Wherewith I wield it, And hurl it afar off; This is my girdle; Whenever I brace it, Strength is redoubled! The light thou beholdest Stream through the heavens, In flashes of crimson, Is but my red beard Blown by the night-wind, Affrighting the nations! Jove is my brother; Mine eyes are the lightning; The wheels of my chariot Roll in the thunder, The blows of my hammer Ring in the earthquake! Force rules the world still, Has ruled it, shall rule it; Meekness is weakness, Strength is triumphant, Over the whole earth Still is it Thor's-Day! Thou art a God too, O Galilean! And thus singled-handed Unto the combat, Gauntlet or Gospel, Here I defy thee! Notes: Source: "The Saga of King Olaf" from "The Musician's Tale" from "Tales of a Wayside Inn." For more information about the Norse Thunder God, see Thor's Home Page Thangbrand the Priest Henry Wadsworth Longfellow SHORT of stature, large of limb, Burly face and russet beard, All the women stared at him, When in Iceland he appeared. "Look!" they said, With nodding head, "There goes Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest." All the prayers he knew by rote, He could preach like Chrysostome, From the Fathers he could quote, He had even been at Rome. A learned clerk, A man of mark, Was this Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest. He was quarrelsome and loud, And impatient of control, Boisterous in the market crowd, Boisterous at the wassail-bowl, Everywhere Would drink and swear, Swaggering Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest. In his house this malcontent Could the King no longer bear, So to Iceland he was sent To convert the heathen there, And away One summer day Sailed this Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest. There in Iceland, o'er their books Pored the people day and night, But he did not like their looks, Nor the songs they used to write. All this rhyme Is waste of time! " Grumbled Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest. To the alehouse, where he sat, Came the Scalds and Saga men; Is it to be wondered at, That they quarrelled now and then, When o'er his beer Began to leer Drunken Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest? All the folk in Altafiord Boasted of their island grand; Saying in a single word, "Iceland is the finest land That the sun Doth shine upon!" Loud laughed Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest. And he answered: "What's the use Of this bragging up and down, When three women and one goose Make a market in your town! " Every Scald Satires scrawled On poor Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest. Something worse they did than that! And what vexed him most of all Was a figure in shovel hat, Drawn in charcoal on the wall; With words that go Sprawling below, "This is Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest." Hardly knowing what he did, Then he smote them might and main, Thorvald Veile and Veterlid Lay there in the alehouse slain. "To-day we are gold, To-morrow mould!" Muttered Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest Much in fear of axe and rope, Back to Norway sailed he then. "O, King Olaf! little hope Is there of these Iceland men!" Meekly said, With bending head, Pious Thangbrand, Olaf's Priest. Notes: Source: "The Saga of King Olaf" from "The Musician's Tale" from "Tales of a Wayside Inn." For a medieval Norse version of the above account, see Thangbrand the Priest Goes to Iceland, written about 1225 by Snorri Sturluson. The conversion of Iceland to Christianity is described in substantial detail in Njal's Saga, chapters 100-105. The Skeleton in Armor Henry Wadsworth Longfellow [The following Ballad was suggested to me while riding on the seashore at Newport. A year or two previous a skeleton had been dug up at Fall River, clad in broken and corroded armor; and the idea occurred to me of connecting it with the Round Tower at Newport, generally known hitherto as the Old Wind-Mill, though now claimed by the Danes as a work of their early ancestors. Professor Rafn, in the Mémoires de la Socéité Royale des Antiquaires du Nord for I838-I839, says:-- "There is no mistaking in this instance the style in which the more ancient stone edifices of the North were constructed, the style which belongs to the Roman or ante-Gothic architecture, and which, especially after the time of Charlemagne, diffused itself from Italy over the whole of the West and North of Europe, where it continued to predominate until the close of the 12th century; that style, which some authors have, from one of its most striking characteristics, called the round-arch style, the same which in England is denominated Saxon and sometimes Norman architecture. "On the ancient structure in Newport there are no ornaments remaining, which might possibly have served to guide us in assigning the probable date of its erection. That no vestige whatever is found of the pointed arch, nor any approximation to it, is indicative of an earlier rather than of a later period. From such characteristics as remain, however, we can scarcely form any other inference than one, in which I am persuaded that all, who are familiar with Old-Northern architecture, will concur, THAT THIS BUILDING WAS ERECTED AT A PERIOD DECIDEDLY NOT LATER THAN THE 12TH CENTURY. This remark applies, of course, to the original building only, and not to the alterations that it subsequently received, for there are several such alterations in the upper part of the building which cannot be mistaken, and which were most likely occasioned by its being adapted in modern times to various uses, for example as the substructure of a windmill, and latterly as a hay magazine. To the same times may be referred the windows, the fireplace, and the apertures made above the columns. That this building could not have been erected for a wind-mill is what an architect will easily discern." I will not enter into a discussion of the point. It is sufficiently well established for the purposes of a ballad; though doubtless many an honest citizen of Newport, who has passed his days within sight of the Round Tower, will be ready to exclaim with Sancho, "God bless me I did I not warn you to have a care of what you were doing, for that it was nothing but a wind-mill; and nobody could mistake it, but one who had the like in his head."] SPEAK! speak! thou fearful guest, Who, with thy hollow breast Still in rude armor drest, Comest to daunt me! Wrapt not in Eastern balms, But with thy fleshless palms Stretched, as if asking alms, Why dost thou haunt me?" Then, from those cavernous eyes Pale flashes seemed to rise, As when the Northern skies Gleam in December; And, like the water's flow Under December's snow, Came a dull voice of woe From the heart's chamber. "I was a Viking old! My deeds, though manifold, No Skald in song has told, No Saga taught thee! Take heed, that in thy verse Thou dost the tale rehearse, Else dread a dead man's curse For this I sought thee. "Far in the Northern Land, By the wild Baltic's strand, I, with my childish hand, Tamed the gerfalcon; And, with my skates fast-bound, Skimmed the half-frozen Sound, That the poor whimpering hound Trembled to walk on. "Oft to his frozen lair Tracked I the grisly bear, While from my path the hare Fled like a shadow; Oft through the forest dark Followed the were-wolf's bark, Until the soaring lark Sang from the meadow. "But when I older grew, Joining a corsair's crew, O'er the dark sea I flew With the marauders. Wild was the life we led; Many the souls that sped, Many the hearts that bled By our stern orders. "Many a wassail-bout Wore the long Winter out; Often our midnight shout Set the cocks crowing, As we the Berserk's tale Measured in cups of ale, Draining the oaken pail, Filled to o'erflowing. "Once as I told in glee Tales of the stormy sea, Soft eyes did gaze on me, Burning yet tender; And as the white stars shine On the dark Norway pine, On that dark heart of mine Fell their soft splendor. "I wooed the blue-eyed maid, Yielding, yet half afraid, And in the forest's shade Our vows were plighted. Under its loosened vest Fluttered her little breast, Like birds within their nest By the hawk frighted. "Bright in her father's hall Shields gleamed upon the wall, Loud sang the minstrels all, Chaunting his glory; When of old Hildebrand I asked his daughter's hand, Mute did the minstrels stand To hear my story. "While the brown ale he quaffed, Loud then the champion laughed. And as the wind gusts waft The sea-foam brightly, So the loud laugh of scorn, Out of those lips unshorn, From the deep drinking-horn Blew the foam lightly. "She was a Prince's child, I but a Viking wild, And though she blushed and smiled, I was discarded! Should not the dove so white Follow the sea-mew's flight Why did they leave that night Her nest unguarded? "Scarce had I put to sea, Bearing the maid with me,-- Fairest of all was she Among the Norsemen!-- When on the white sea-strand, Waving his armèd hand, Saw we old Hildebrand, With twenty horsemen. "Then launched they to the blast, Bent like a reed each mast, Yet we were gaining fast, When the wind failed us, And with a sudden flaw Came round the gusty Skaw, So that our foe we saw Laugh as he hailed us. "And as to catch the gale Round veered the flapping sail, Death! was the helmsman's hail, Death without quarter! Mid-ships with iron keel Struck we her ribs of steel; Down her black hulk did reel Through the black water! "As with his wings aslant, Sails the fierce cormorant, Seeking some rocky haunt, With his prey laden, So toward the open main, Beating to sea again, Through the wild hurricane Bore I the maiden. "Three weeks we westward bore, And when the storm was o'er, Cloud-like we saw the shore Stretching to lee-ward; There for my lady's bower Built I the lofty tower, Which, to this very hour, Stands looking seaward. "There lived we many years; Time dried the maiden's tears; She had forgot her fears, She was a mother; Death closed her mild blue eyes, Under that tower she lies; Ne'er shall the sun arise On such another! "Still grew my bosom then, Still as a stagnant fen! Hateful to me were men The sunlight hateful! In the vast forest here, Clad in my warlike gear, Fell I upon my spear, O, death was grateful! "Thus, seamed with many scars Bursting these prison bars, Up to its native stars My soul ascended! There from the flowing bowl Deep drinks the warrior's soul, Skoal! to the Northland! Skoal! " --Thus the tale ended. In Scandinavia this [ Skoal ] is the customary salutation when drinking a health. I have slightly changed the orthography of the word, in order to preserve the correct pronunciation. [Footnote by Longfellow] Notes: Source: " Ballads and other Poems." For additional information see Vikings in America Tegner's Drapa Henry Wadsworth Longfellow I HEARD a voice, that cried, "Balder the Beautiful Is dead, is dead!" And through the misty air Passed like the mournful cry Of sunward sailing cranes. I saw the pallid corpse Of the dead sun Borne through the Northern sky. Blasts from Niffelheim Lifted the sheeted mists Around him as he passed. And the voice forever cried, "Balder the Beautiful Is dead, is dead!" And died away Through the dreary night, In accents of despair. Balder the Beautiful, God of the summer sun, Fairest of all the Gods! Light from his forehead beamed, Runes were upon his tongue, As on the warrior's sword. All things in earth and air Bound were by magic spell Never to do him harm; Even the plants and stones; All save the mistletoe, The sacred mistletoe! Hoeder, the blind old God, Whose feet are shod with silence, Pierced through that gentle breast With his sharp spear, by fraud, Made of the mistletoe! The accursed mistletoe! They laid him in his ship, With horse and harness, As on a funeral pyre. Odin placed A ring upon his finger, And whispered in his ear. They launched the burning ship! It floated far away Over the misty sea, Till like the sun it seemed, Sinking beneath the waves. Balder returned no more! So perish the old Gods! But out of the sea of Time Rises a new land of song, Fairer than the old. Over its meadows green Walk the young bards and sing. Build it again, O ye bards, Fairer than before; Ye fathers of the new race, Feed upon morning dew, Sing the new Song of Love! The law of force is dead! The law of love prevails! Thor, the thunderer, Shall rule the earth no more, No more, with threats, Challenge the meek Christ. Sing no more, O ye bards of the North, Of Vikings and of Jarls! Of the days of Eld Preserve the freedom only, Not the deeds of blood! Notes: Source: "The Seaside and the Fireside." Esias Tegner (1782-1846) was an influential Swedish poet. A drapa is an Old Norse poetic form used for hymns of praise. Link to Balder's Home Page . A List of Germanic Poems by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow From "Tales of a Wayside Inn" The Musician's Tale: The Saga of King Olaf The Challenge of Thor King Olaf's Return Thora of Rimol Queen Sigrid the Haughty The Skerry of Shrieks The Wraith of Odin Iron-Beard Gudrun Thangbrand the Priest Raud the Strong Bishop Sigurd at Salten Fiord King Olaf's Christmas The Building of the Long Serpent The Crew of the Long Serpent A Little Bird in the Air Queen Thyri and the Angelica Stalks King Svend of the Forked Beard King Olaf and Earl Sigvald King Olaf's War-Horns Einar Tamberskelver King Olaf's Death-Drink The Nun of Nidaros From "Voices of the Night" The Grave (from the Anglo-Saxon) King Christian (a national song of Denmark, from the Danish of Johannes Evald) The Happiest Land (fragment of a modern ballad, from the German) The Wave (from the German of Tiedge) The Dead (from the German of Klopstock) The Bird and the Ship (from the German of Müler) Wither? (from the German of Müler) Beware! (from the German) Song of the Bell (from the German) The Castle by the Sea (from the German of Uhland) The Black Knight (from the German of Uhland) Song of the Silent Land (from the German of Salis) From "Ballads and Other Poems" The Skeleton in Armor The Luck of Edenhall (from the German of Uhland) The Elected Knight (from the Danish) The Children of the Lord's Supper (from the Swedish of Bishop Tegnéer) From "The Belfry of Bruges and Other Poems" Carillon The Belfry of Bruges To an Old Danish Song Book Walter von der Vogelweid The Hemlock Tree (from the German) Annie of Tharaw (from the Low German of Simon Dach) The Statue Over the Cathedral Door (from the German of Julius Mosen) The Legend of the Crossbill (from the German of Julius Mosen) The Sea Hath Its Pearls (from the German of Heinrich Heine) Poetic Aphorisms (from the Sinngedichte of Friedrich von Logau, seventeenth century) From "The Seaside and the Fireside" King Witlaf's Drinking Horn Tegner's Drapa Miscellaneous The Discoverer of the North Cape: A Leaf from King Alfred's Orosius Nuremberg Related Links The Bell of Atri by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. Return to the top of this document. Folklore Ballads of John Greenleaf Whittier . Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts . Germanic Myths, Legends, and Sagas . Balder's Home Page . Thor's Home Page . Vikings in America . Revised October 14, 2005. Lorelei Lorelei Legends and Ballads about the Rhine River Nymph translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2024 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Alternate Spellings Legends Lore Lay (Clemens Brentano). The Lorelei (Paul Zaunert). Lurlei (Ludwig Bechstein). The Maiden on the Lorelei (Karl Wehrhan). The Lorelei (Lewis Spence). Lorlei Castle (Philipp von Steinau). Balladen, in deutscher Sprache Zu Bacharach am Rheine (Clemens Brentano). Waldgespräch (Joseph von Eichendorff). Loreley: Eine Sage vom Rhein (Otto Heinrich Graf von Loeben). Ich weiß nicht, was soll es bedeuten (Heinrich Heine). Der Handstand auf der Loreley (Nach einer wahren Begebenheit) (Erich Kästner). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Alternate Spellings Lorelei Loreley Lorlei Lurlei Lore Lay Lore Ley Return to the table of contents . Legends Lore Lay Clemens Brentano Her beauty was her undoing. Lore Lay was not willfully seductive, but men could not resist her charms, and she could not resist their advances. She was bringing scandal and disgrace to the respectable town of Bacharach on the Rhine. There was even talk that she must be a witch or a woman possessed of the devil. The bishop, however, would not hear of an execution without due process, and he summoned her to his court. His questions were at first stern and severe. Her answers were simple and sincere. The bishop's severity, his piety, and his priesthood, however, did not prevail, and in the end he pronounced her free of all guilt. "I cannot continue like this!" she cried. "My eyes are the destruction of every man who looks into them. I have loved only one man, and he abandoned me and left for a distant land. Please let me die!" But the good bishop, entranced by her beauty, could not bring himself to pronounce a death sentence. Instead, he proposed that she dedicate herself to God, and called three knights to accompany her to the convent. Arrangements were made forthwith, and the three knights were soon underway with their beautiful ward. When their path led them past a high cliff overlooking the Rhine, Lore Lay had one last request of her escorts. "Please," she said, "let me climb the cliff and have one last look into the Rhine." Unable to deny her this wish, the three knights tethered their horses, and the four of them climbed to the top of the cliff. Standing at the edge of the precipice, Lore Lay said, "See that boat on the Rhine. The boatman is my lover!" And with no further warning, she jumped from the cliff into the Rhine. The three knights also met their death there, without a priest and without a grave. Who is the singer of this song? A boatman on the Rhine, And we always hear the echo Of the Three-Knight-Stone: Lore Lay Lore Lay Lore Lay As though there were three of us. Retold in prose from the ballad Loreley by Clemens Brentano (1801). © by D. L. Ashliman, 2011. Return to the table of contents . The Lorelei Paul Zaunert The boatmen and the raftsmen of the Rhine feared the pagan Lorelei more than anything else on the Rhine voyage, even more than the Bingen Hole [ das Binger Loch , a narrow passage that limited shipping on the Rhine]. She was more dangerous because she misled and lured the boatman with wonderful voices from the rocks, so that he forgot to be careful and played with the echo. The unique echo and the raging current on the low-lying rocks -- these two things have been reported in travel accounts in poetry and prose since about the sixteenth century. Of course, 150 years ago the old people there believed that the echo used to be much clearer and more than five times louder. Furthermore, the whirlpools kept the boatmen believing for a long time that there was a bottomless depth there. Today's songs and legends about the Lorelei had precursers in the learned humanists of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. In describing the echo at the Lorelei, they reported that "people used to believe that forest gods and oreads lived there," that is: field and forest spirits and wild women. An example of the latter are the blessed maidens [ salige Fräulein ] of Tyrol. Recent folk legends tell how that at times they sit in front of their rock dwellings, let out their beautiful long hair, bask in the sun on their treasure, and irresistibly attract people with their wonderful song. This would also support the old belief that the Lorelei cliff is hollow (which of course formerly was used to explain the echo). More recent folk legends also speak of " Hanselmännchen, " that is, field and forest spirits, little elves who live in the cave there. Or is Lorelei a mermaid? Similar things are said about water women as well as those who live in the rocks and forests. It is likely that Lorelei's nature, like her name, should remain a secret to us, and we will not try to guess or guess at it any more. The Witch of Bacharach The person who created the modern Lorelei was Clemens Brentano. His Lorelei is a human woman, a witch from Bacharach, who enchanted all men, but could not keep the one she loved herself. She was so beautiful that even the spiritual judge, the bishop, did not want to pronounce her death sentence and only banished her to the monastery, although she herself wanted to die. The three knights who were supposed to accompany her there also fell for her, and when she wanted to climb the high cliff above the Rhine and look for her unfaithful lover who was sailing below, they had to let it happen, Lorelei threw herself from the cliff, and the three had to follow her. When a young, vibrant human being dies from lovesickness and other great pain, the place where it happened remains a horror. Anyone who passes by is touched by it. According to old popular belief, which still lives on today, this poor soul has not yet found rest; one hears and sees her at certain times at the place. Sometimes it even happens that the dead woman herself becomes a nymph among the water women. It is easy to spin the threads from Brentano's Lorelei to other folk beliefs. The Devil and the Lorelei The devil once came up the Rhine, and he was angry about the magnificent rock there by the river, because all the people were praising the creator himself in this miracle of creation. He therefore wanted to destroy it. He couldn't move it with his fists, so he braced himself against it with his back. At that moment, however, he heard the Lorelei singing and was spellbound. Her song penetrated his very marrow. He was without a drop of strength and could not move from the spot as long as she sang. But as soon as she was silent, he tore himself off and flew away. The imprint of his backside is said to have remained in the rock. Source (books.google.com): Paul Zaunert, "Die Lorelei," Rheinland Sagen , vol. 2 (Jena: Verlegt bei Eugen Diederichs, 1924), pp. 40-42 . Source (Internet Archive): Paul Zaunert, "Die Lorelei," Rheinland Sagen , vol. 2 (Jena: Verlegt bei Eugen Diederichs, 1924), pp. 40-42 . Return to the table of contents . Lurlei Ludwig Bechstein Where the river valley of the Rhine is most narrow downstream from Kaub, echo-rich rock walls of slate rock stand tall and craggy on both sides, black and eerily high. The stream rushes faster there. The waves roar louder, bounce off the rock and form foaming eddies. It is uncanny in this gorge above these rapids. The beautiful mermaid of the Rhine, the dangerous Lurlei or Lorelei, is banished into the rocks, but she often appears to the boatmen, combing her long flaxen hair with a golden comb and singing a sweetly bewitching song. Many who were lured by it and wanted to climb the rock found their death in the swirling waves. Up and down the Rhine, no legend is more on everyone's lips than that of the Lurlei, but it is like the echo of the rocks on the bank, which rolls and breaks in many ways and repeats itself. Many poets have embellished the legend almost beyond recognition. Lurlei is the Rhine Undine. Whoever sees her, whoever hears her song, will have his heart pulled out of his chest. She stands high on the highest peak of her rock, in a white dress, with a flying veil, with flowing hair, with waving arms. But no one comes close to her. Even if someone climbs the rocky peak, she retreats from him. She floats away. She lures him with her magical beauty, right up to the precipitous edge of the abyss. He sees only her. He believes she is in front of him on solid ground. He advances and falls shattering into the depths. A more colorful legend than all the others, which -- even if they are not alike in other respects -- are nevertheless similar in the melancholy coloring and the gloomy ending, is this: The devil once sailed on the Rhine and came between the Lurlei rocks; The passage seemed too narrow to him. He wanted either to move the colossus of rock opposite from its place or to break it into such chunks that they would completely block the river and make it unnavigable. Thus he leaned his back against the Lurlei-Cliff and lifted and pushed and shook the mountain opposite. It already began to move when Lurlei began to sing. The devil heard the singing and lost courage. He stopped what he was doing and almost couldn't stand it any longer. He would have liked to take Lurlei away as his lover, but he had no power over her. He became so hot with love that he was steaming. When Lurlei ceased singing, the devil hurried away. He had already thought that he might have been banned into the rock. But after he left, oh wonder, his entire figure, including his tail, appeared burned black into the rock face, immortalizing his encounter with Lurlei. Afterwards the devil was very careful not to come close to the siren of the Rhine again. He was afraid that if he were captivated by her again he would lose all of his satanic power. Lurlei still sings in quiet moonlit nights. She still appears on the rocky peak, awaiting salvation. The lovers who allowed themselves to be seduced by her have all died. Today's world has no time to climb its rock or to approach it on moonlit nights. The fast steamship with its paddle-wheels rushes past without stopping. Its noise drowns out the voices of song and legend. Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Bechstein, "Lurlei," Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 95, pp. 87-88 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludwig Bechstein, "Lurlei," Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 95, pp. 87-88 . Return to the table of contents . The Maiden on the Lorelei Karl Wehrhan At certain times a beautiful pale maiden sits on the Lorelei, combing her blonde hair, which shines in the bright sun, with a golden comb and seducing the boatman sailing below with her singing. Thus he does not pay attention to the shallows of the river, and his boat crashes into the cliffs. Then the maiden pulls him into the depths of the whirlpool and into her subterranean water kingdom. Source (books.google.com): Karl Wehrhan, "Die Jungfrau auf der Lorelei," Sagen aus Hessen und Nassau (Leipzig-Gohlis: Hermann Eichblatt Verlag, 1922), no. 85, p. 59 . Return to the table of contents . The Lorelei Lewis Spence Many are the legends which cluster round the name of the Lorelei. In some of the earlier traditions she is represented as an undine, combing her hair on the Loreleiberg and singing bewitching strains wherewith to lure mariners to their death, and one such legend relates how an old soldier named Diether undertook to capture her. Graf Ludwig, son of the Prince Palatine, had been caught in her toils, his frail barque wrecked, and he himself caught in the whirlpool and drowned. The prince, grievously stricken at the melancholy occurrence, longed to avenge his son's death on the evil enchantress who had wrought such havoc. Among his retainers there was but one who would undertake the venture -- a captain of the guard named Diether -- and the sole reward he craved was permission to cast the Lorelei into the depths she haunted should he succeed in capturing her. Diether and his little band of warriors ascended the Lorelei's rock in such a way as to cut off all retreat on the landward side. Just as they reached the summit the moon sailed out from behind a cloud, and behold, the spirit of the whirlpool was seen sitting on the very verge of the precipice, binding her wet hair with a band of gleaming jewels. "What wouldst thou with me?" she cried, starting to her feet. "To cast thee into the Rhine, sorceress," said Diether roughly, "where thou hast drowned our prince." " Nay," returned the maid, "I drowned him not. 'Twas his own folly which cost him his life." As she stood on the brink of the precipice, her lips smiling, her eyes gleaming softly, her wet dark hair streaming over her shoulders, some strange, unearthly quality in her beauty, a potent spell fell upon the little company, so that even Diether himself could neither move nor speak. "And wouldst thou cast me in the Rhine, Diether?" she pursued, smiling at the helpless warrior. "'Tis not I who go to the Rhine, but the Rhine that will come to me." Then loosening the jewelled band from her hair, she flung it on the water and cried aloud : "Father, send me thy white steeds, that I may cross the river in safety." Instantly, as at her bidding, a wild storm arose, and the river, overflowing its banks, foamed right up to the summit of the Lorelei Rock. Three white-crested waves, resembling three white horses, mounted the steep, and into the hollowed trough behind them the Lorelei stepped as into a chariot, to be whirled out into the stream. Meanwhile Diether and his companions were almost overwhelmed by the floods, yet they were unable to stir hand or foot. In mid-stream the undine sank beneath the waves: the spell was broken, the waters subsided, and the captain and his men were free to return home. Nevermore, they vowed, would they seek to capture the Lorelei. Source (Internet Archive): Lewis Spence, Hero Tales and Legends of the Rhine (New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, [1915]), pp. 59-61 . Source (Sacred Texts): Lewis Spence, Hero Tales and Legends of the Rhine (New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, [1915]), pp. 59-61 . Return to the table of contents . Lorlei Castle Philipp von Steinau A beautiful maiden had her castle on the steep Lorlei mountain in the Rhineland. Here she lived and practiced magic. Whoever saw her sitting on the steps of her magnificent palace on a moonlit evening had to follow her there, and never return home again. Sometimes the maiden came to the banks of the Rhine, threw a net into the water and caught fish. Lorlei sang beautiful songs. Whoever saw her fell painfully in love with her beauty, especially with her golden hair. No maiden of the Rhine sang more beautifully than Lorlei. No ship sailed without stopping at the cliff to see if the sorceress would appear and sing. When the clock struck midnight, her tones suddenly died away and she disappeared from the cliff. Once a young knight sailed past the Lorlei mountain. He had come to see the beautiful maiden, of whom he had heard much. It was evening, and she appeared. First she sang in a bright, sweet voice, then she sat down on the mountainside and curled her long hair, which shimmered like gold in the moonlight. A boundless longing drove the knight toward her. He wanted to jump from the boat onto the shore, but the waves of the river crashed over him and buried him. When the unfortunate lover did not return home, his father, who believed that the sorceress Lorlei was the cause of his loss, sent out soldiers to climb the magical mountain and destroy the seductive maiden. The soldiers saw the sorceress on the Lorlei Heights. She called out to them that she knew who they were looking for. Then she threw a shinging coral necklace into the river, and called out in a loud voice: "Quickly, father, quickly, the white horses for your child!" Suddenly the Rhine roared and rose high in wild waves of foam. From the spray two snowy horses climbed up the rocks, and the maiden disappeared with them. The warriors saw this in amazement, and terrified by the magic maiden's miracle, they fled back to their master's castle. Arriving there, they found the young knight again. It is said that Lorlei can still be seen on the top of the mountain, although only rarely. When people passing by in boats call out her name, the echo returns the call. Source (books.google.com): Philipp von Steinau, "Lorlei-Schloss," Volkssagen der Deutschen (Zeitz: Druck und Verlag von Julius Schieferdecker, 1838), pp. 46-47 . Source (Münchener DigitalisierungsZentrm): Philipp von Steinau, "Lorlei-Schloss," Volkssagen der Deutschen (Zeitz: Druck und Verlag von Julius Schieferdecker, 1838), pp. 46-47 . Return to the table of contents . Balladen Zu Bacharach am Rheine Clemens Brentano Violette sang folgendes Lied: -- Zu Bacharach am Rheine Wohnt eine Zauberin, Die war so schön und feine Und riß viel Herzen hin. Und brachte viel zu Schanden Der Männer rings umher, Aus ihren Liebesbanden War keine Rettung mehr. Der Bischof ließ sie laden Vor geistliche Gewalt -- Und mußte sie begnaden, So schön war ihr' Gestalt. Er sprach zu ihr gerühret: "Du arme Lore Lay! Wer hat dich dann verführet Zu böser Zauberei?" "Herr Bischof laßt mich sterben, Ich bin des Lebens müd, Weil jeder muß verderben, Der meine Augen sieht! Die Augen find zwei Flammen, Mein Arm ein Zauberstab -- O legt mich in die Flammen! O brechet mir den Stab!" "Ich kann dich nicht verdammen, Bis du mir erst bekennt, Warum in deinen Flammen Mein eigen Herz schon brennt. Den Stab kann ich nicht brechen, Du schöne Lore Lay! Ich müßte dann zerbrechen Mein eigen Herz entzwei." "Herr Bischof mit mir Armen Treibt nicht so bösen Spott, Und bittet um Erbarmen Für mich den lieben Gott. Ich darf nicht länger leben, Ich liebe keinen mehr -- Den Tod sollt ihr mir geben, Drum kam ich zu euch her. -- Mein Schatz hat mich betrogen, Hat sich von mir gewandt, Ist fort von mir gezogen, Fort in ein fremdes Land. Die Augen sanft und wilde, Die Wangen roth und weiß, Die Worte still und milde, Das ist mein Zauberkreis. Ich selbst muß drinn verderben, Das Herz thut mir so weh, Vor Jammer möcht' ich sterben, Wenn ich mein Bildniß seh. Drum laßt mein Recht mich finden, Mich sterben, wie ein Christ, Denn alles muß verschwinden, Weil er nicht bey mir ist." Drei Ritter läßt er holen: "Bringt sie ins Kloster hin, Geh, Lore! -- Gott befohlen Sey dein berückter Sinn. Du sollst ein Nönnchen werden, Ein Nönnchen schwarz und weiß, Bereite dich auf Erden Zu deines Todes Reis'." Zum Kloster sie nun ritten Die Ritter alle drei, Und traurig in der Mitten Die schöne Lore Lay. "O Ritter laßt mich gehen, Auf diesen Felsen groß, Ich will noch einmal sehen Nach meines Lieben Schloß. Ich will noch einmal sehen Wol in den tiefen Rhein, Und dann ins Kloster gehen Und Gottes Jungfrau seyn." Der Felsen ist so jähe, So steil ist seine Wand, Doch klimmt sie in die Höhe, Bis daß sie oben stand. Es binden die drei Ritter, Die Rosse unten an, Und klettern immer weiter, Zum Felsen auch hinan. Die Jungfrau sprach: "Da gehet Ein Schifflein auf dem Rhein, Der in dem Schifflein stehet, Der soll mein Liebster seyn. Mein Herz wird mir so munter, Er muß mein Liebster seyn!" -- Da lehnt sie sich hinunter Und stürzet in den Rhein. Die Ritter mußten sterben, Sie konnten nicht hinab, Sie mußten all verderben, Ohn Priester und ohn Grab. Wer hat dies Lied gesungen? Ein Schiffer auf dem Rhein, Und immer hats geklungen Von dem drei Ritterstein: Lore Lay! Lore Lay! Lore Lay! Als wären es meiner drei! Fußnote von Brentano: "Bei Bacharach steht dieser Felsen, Lore Lay genannt, alle vorbeifahrende Schiffer rufen ihn an, und freuen sich des vielfachen Echo's." Quelle (books.google.com): Clemens Brentano, Godwi; oder, Das steinerne Bild der Mutter: Ein verwilderter Roman von Maria (Bremen: Bei Friedrich Wilmans, 1801), Bd. 2 S. 392-96 . Quelle (Internet Archive): Clemens Brentano, Godwi; oder, Das steinerne Bild der Mutter: Ein verwilderter Roman von Maria (Bremen: Bei Friedrich Wilmans, 1801), Bd. 2 S. 392-96 . Return to the table of contents . Waldgespräch Joseph von Eichendorff Es ist schon spät, es wird schon kalt, Was reit'st Du einsam durch den Wald? Der Wald ist lang, Du bist allein, Du schöne Braut! Ich führ' Dich heim! "Groß ist der Männer Trug und List, Vor Schmerz mein Herz gebrochen ist, Wohl irrt das Waldhorn her und hin, O flieh! Du weißt nicht, wer ich bin." So reich geschmückt ist Roß und Weib, So wunderschön der junge Leib, Jezt kenn' ich Dich -- Gott steh' mir bei! Du bist die Hexe Loreley. "Du kennst mich wohl -- von hohem Stein, Schaut still mein Schloß tief in den Rhein. Es ist schon spät, es wird schon kalt, Kommst nimmermehr aus diesem Wald!" Quelle (books.google.com): Joseph von Eichendorff, Gedichte (Berlin: Verlag von Duncker und Humblot, 1837), p. 427 . Quelle (Internet Archive): Joseph von Eichendorff, Gedichte , (Berlin: W. Simion, 1843), p. 431 . Vertonung: Robert Schumann ( Liederkreis , opus 39). Return to the table of contents . Ich weiß nicht, was soll es bedeuten Heinrich Heine Ich weiß nicht, was soll es bedeuten, Daß ich so traurig bin; Ein Mährchen aus alten Zeiten, Das kommt mir nicht aus dem Sinn. Die Luft ist kühl und es dunkelt, Und ruhig fließt der Rhein; Der Gipfel des Berges funkelt Im Abendsonnenschein. Die schönste Jungfrau sitzet Dort oben wunderbar Ihr gold'nes Geschmeide blitzet, Sie kämmt ihr gold'nes Haar. Sie kämmt es mit gold'nem Kamme, Und singt ein Lied dabei; Das hat eine wundersame, Gewaltige Melodei. Den Schiffer im kleinen Schiffe Ergreift es mit wildem Weh; Er schaut nicht die Felsenriffe, Er schaut nur hinauf in die Höh'. Ich glaube, die Wellen verschlingen Am Ende Schiffer und Kahn; Und das hat mit ihrem Singen Die Lore-Ley gethan. Quelle (books.google.com): Heinrich Heine, "Ich weiß nicht, was soll es bedeuten," Buch der Lieder (Hamburg: Hoffmann und Campe, 1827), pp. 178-79 . Quelle (Internet Archive): Heinrich Heine, "Ich weiß nicht, was soll es bedeuten," Buch der Lieder (Hamburg: Hoffmann und Campe, 1827), pp. 178-79 . Vertonung: Friedrich Silcher . Return to the table of contents . Loreley: Eine Sage vom Rhein Otto Heinrich Graf von Loeben Da wo der Mondschein blitzet Um's höchste Felsgestein, Das Zauberfräulein sitzet Und schauet auf den Rhein. Es schauet herüber, hinüber, Es schauet hinab, hinauf, Die Schifflein ziehn vorüber, Lieb' Knabe, sieh nicht auf! Sie singt dir hold zum Ohre, Sie blickt dich thoricht an, Sie ist die schöne Lore, Sie hat dir's angethan. Sie schaut wohl nach dem Rheine, Als schaute sie nach dir, Glaub's nicht, daß sie dich meine, Sieh nicht, horch nicht nach ihr! So blickt sie wohl nach allen Mit ihrer Augen Glanz, Läßt her die Locken wallen Im wilden goldnen Tanz. Doch wogt in ihrem Blicke Nur blauer Wellen Spiel, Drum scheu die Wassertücke, Denn Flut bleibt falsch und kühl! Quelle (books.google.com): Urania: Taschenbuch auf das Jahr 1821 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1821), S. 325-28 . Quelle (Internet Archive): Urania: Taschenbuch auf das Jahr 1821 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1821), S. 325-28 . Return to the table of contents . Der Handstand auf der Loreley (Nach einer wahren Begebenheit) Erich Kästner Die Loreley, bekannt als Fee und Felsen, ist jener Fleck am Rhein, nicht weit von Bingen, wo früher Schiffer mit verdrehten Hälsen, von blonden Haaren schwärmend, untergingen. Wir wandeln uns. Die Schiffer inbegriffen. Der Rhein ist reguliert und eingedämmt. Die Zeit vergeht. Man stirbt nicht mehr beim Schiffen, bloß weil ein blondes Weib sich dauernd kämmt. Nichtsdestotrotz geschieht auch heutzutage, noch manches, was der Steinzeit ähnlich sieht. So alt ist keine deutsche Heldensage, daß sie nicht doch noch Helden nach sich zieht. Erst neulich machte auf der Loreley hoch überm Rhein ein Turner einen Handstand! Von allen Dampfern tönte Angstgeschrei, als er kopfüber oben auf der Wand stand. Er stand, als ob er auf dem Barren stünde. Mit hohlem Kreuz. Und lustbetonten Zügen. Man fragte nicht: Was hatte er für Gründe? Er war ein Held. Das dürfte wohl genügen. Er stand, verkehrt, im Abendsonnenscheine. Da trübte Wehmut seinen Turnerblick. Er dachte an die Loreley von Heine. Und stürzte ab. Und brach sich das Genick. Er starb als Held. Man muß ihn nicht beweinen. Sein Handstand war vom Schicksal überstrahlt. Ein Augenblick mit zwei gehobnen Beinen ist nicht zu teuer mit dem Tod bezahlt! P.S. Eins wäre allerdings noch nachzutragen: Der Turner hinterließ uns Frau und Kind. Hinwiederum, man soll sie nicht beklagen. Weil im Bezirk der Helden und der Sagen die &UUMLberlebenden nicht wichtig sind. Source (lyrikline.org): Erich Kästner: Der Handstand auf der Loreley . Return to the table of contents . Related Sites Links open in new windows. Water Spirit Legends 1 . Water Spirit Legends 2: "The Hour Is Come, but the Man Is Not." Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 934K (also categorized as Christiansen migratory legends type 4050). Melusina (Melusine, Mélusine) . Legends about mermaids, water sprites, and forest nymphs who marry mortal men. The Mermaid Wife . Legends of Christiansen type 4080. The Sea Nymph . A legend from Sweden. Lorelei . Wikipedia . Mermaid . Wikipedia . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman"s folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 15, 2024. Grimm German Legend 562: Dr. Luther at the Wartburg German Legends, no. 562 Doctor Luther at the Wartburg Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Doctor Luther sat at the Wartburg translating the Bible. The Devil did not like this and wanted to disturb the sacred work, but when he tried to tempt him, Luther grabbed the ink pot from which he was writing, and threw it at the Evil One's head. Still today they show the room and the chair where Luther was sitting, and the spot on the wall made by the flying ink. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Doktor Luther zu Wartburg , Deutsche Sagen (German Legends), vol. 2 (1818), no. 562. Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2000. Martin Luther (1483-1546) was the most important leader of the Protestant reformation in Germany. His translation of the Bible into German remains one of Germany's most enduring religious, cultural, and linguistic monuments. He completed the New Testament (from Greek) in 1522 and the Old Testament (from Hebrew) in 1534. The Wartburg is a fortified castle overlooking the town of Eisenach in Thüringen (Thuringia). Friedrich III, Elector of Saxony, sheltered Luther at the Wartburg between May 1521 and March 1522. It was here that Luther began his translation of the New Testament into German. Related links D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Grimm Brothers' Home Page . The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales). Revised January 12, 2000. Lying Tales Lying Tales self-contradictory stories of Aarne-Thompson type 1965 and similar playful lies translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999 Contents Lying Tale (England). Sir Gammer Vans (England). One Dark Night (USA). Knoist and His Three Sons (Germany). The Three Brothers (Italy). Related links . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Lying Tale England (Yorkshire) There were once five men. The one had no eyes, the second had no legs, the third was dumb, the fourth had no arms, the fifth was naked. The blind man exclaimed, "Eh, lads, I see a bird!" The dumb man said, "I'll shoot it!" The man without legs said, "I'll run after it!" The man without arms said, "I'll pick it up!" And the naked man said, "I'll put it in my pocket!" Chorus of Yorkshire children: "Eh! That is a lie!" Source: Source: S. Baring-Gould, Appendix to William Henderson, Notes on the Folk Lore of the Northern Counties of England (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866, no. 12, p. 337. Dialect cautiously normalized by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . Sir Gammer Vans England Last Sunday morning at six o'clock in the evening as I was sailing over the tops of the mountains in my little boat, I met two men on horseback riding on one mare. So I asked them, could they tell me whether the little old woman was dead yet who was hanged last Saturday week for drowning herself in a shower of feathers? They said they could not positively inform me, but if I went to Sir Gammer Vans he could tell me all about it. "But how am I to know the house?" said I. "Ho, 'tis easy enough," said they, "for 'tis a brick house, built entirely of flints, standing alone by itself in the middle of sixty or seventy others just like it." "Oh, nothing in the world is easier," said I. "Nothing can be easier," said they. So I went on my way. Now this Sir G. Vans was a giant, and a bottle maker. And as all giants who are bottle makers usually pop out of a little thumb-bottle from behind the door, so did Sir G. Vans. "How d'ye do?" says he. "Very well, I thank you," says I. "Have some breakfast with me?" "With all my heart," says I. So he gave me a slice of beer, and a cup of cold veal. And there was a little dog under the table that picked up all the crumbs. "Hang him," says I. "No, don't hang him," says he, "for he killed a hare yesterday. And if you don't believe me, I'll show you the hare alive in a basket." So he took me into his garden to show me the curiosities. In one corner there was a fox hatching eagle's eggs. In another there was an iron apple tree, entirely covered with pears and lead. In the third there was the hare which the dog killed yesterday alive in the basket. And in the fourth there were twenty-four hipper switches threshing tobacco, and at the sight of me they threshed so hard that they drove the plug through the wall, and through a little dog that was passing by on the other side. I, hearing the dog howl, jumped over the wall and turned it as neatly inside out as possible, when it ran away as if it had not an hour to live. Then he took me into the park to show me his deer. And I remembered that I had a warrant in my pocket to shoot venison for his majesty's dinner. So I set fire to my bow, poised my arrow, and shot amongst them. I broke seventeen ribs on one side, and twenty-one and a half on the other, but my arrow passed clean through without ever touching it, and the worst was I lost my arrow. However, I found it again in the hollow of a tree. I felt it. It felt clammy. I smelt it. It smelt honey. "Oh, ho," said I. "Here's a bee's nest," when out sprang a covey of partridges. I shot at them. Some say I killed eighteen, but I am sure I killed thirty-six, besides a dead salmon which was flying over the bridge, of which I made the best apple pie I ever tasted. Source: Joseph Jacobs, More English Fairy Tales (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, n.d.), pp. 43-45. First published 1894. Jacobs' source: J. O. Halliwell-Phillips, Nursery Rhymes and Nursery Tales (London, 1843). Aarne-Thompson type 1965. The tall tale episode of the hunter's lucky shot is classified as Aarne-Thompson type 1890. Return to the table of contents . One Dark Night USA (Idaho) One dark night in the middle of the day, Two dead boys came out to play. Back to back they faced each other, Drew their swords and shot each other. A deaf policeman heard the noise, Came inside and shot the two dead boys. Source: Personal recollection. I learned this verse from my mother Elgarda Zobell Ashliman in Idaho in the 1940's. Aarne-Thompson type 2335. Return to the table of contents . Knoist and His Three Sons Germany Between Werl and Soest there lived a man whose name was Knoist, and he had three sons. One was blind, the other lame, and the third stark naked. Once they were walking across a field, where they saw a hare. The blind one shot it, the lame one caught it, and the naked one put it in his pocket. Then they came to a tremendously large body of water, on which there were three ships. One leaked, one sank, the third had no bottom in it. All three got into the one with no bottom. Then they came to a tremendously large forest in which there was a tremendously large tree. In the tree was a tremendously large chapel. In the chapel was a sexton of hornbeam wood and a parson of boxwood, who were passing out holy water with cudgels. Blessed is he Who from this holy water can flee. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Knoist un sine dre Sühne , Kinder- und Hausmärchen (1st edition, 1815, vol. 2, no. 52). In later editions the tale is number 138. The Grimms' source: One of the sisters Anna von Haxthausen or Ludowine von Haxthausen. Translated from the Low German by D. L. Ashliman . © 1999. The dialect forms of the place names mentioned in the story's opening sentence are Werrel and Soist. Aarne-Thompson type 1965. The episode of sailing in a bottomless boat is classified as Aarne-Thompson type 1963. Return to the table of contents . The Three Brothers Italy Once upon a time there were three brothers. Two had no clothes and one no shirt. The weather was very bad, and they make up their minds to go shooting. So they took down three guns -- two were broken and one had no barrel -- and walked and walked until they came at last to a meadow, where they saw a hare. They began to fire at it, but could not catch it. "What shall we do?" said one of them. They remembered that nearby a godmother of theirs lived. So they went and knocked at her door and asked her to lend them a pot to cook the hare they had not caught. The godmother was not at home, but nevertheless she answered, "My children, go in the kitchen and there you will find three pots, two broken and one with no bottom. Take whichever you wish." "Thanks, godmother!" They went into the kitchen and chose the one without a bottom and put the hare in it to cook. While the hare was cooking, one said, "Let ask our godmother whether she has anything in her garden." So they asked her, and she said, "I have three walnut trees. Two are dead and one has never borne any nuts. Knock off as many as you wish." One went and shook the tree that had never borne nuts, and a little nut fell on his hat and broke his heel. Thereupon they picked up the nuts and went to get the hare, which meanwhile was cooked, and said, "What shall we do with so much stuff?" So they went to a village where there were many ill, and they put up a notice in the street that whoever wished might, at such and such a place, get broth given him in charity. Everyone went to get some, and they took it in the salad basket, and it was given to them with a skimmer. One who did not belong to the village drank so much of this broth that he was at the point of death. Then they went for three physicians. One was blind, one deaf, and one dumb. The blind man went in and said, "Let me look at your tongue." The deaf man said, "How are you?" The dumb said, "Give me some paper, pen, and ink." They gave them to him, and he said, Go to the apothecary, For he knows the business. Buy two cents' worth of I know not what. Put it wherever you wish. He will get well I know not when, I will leave and commend him to you. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1885), no. 84, pp. 263-264. Aarne-Thompson type 1965. Return to the table of contents . Related links D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Grimm Brothers' Home Page . The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Fairy Tales). Return to the table of contents . Revised December 28, 1999. The Magdeburg Bridge (Die Magdeburger Brücke) The Magdeburg Bridge (Die Magdeburger Brücke) edited and translated by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2019 I want to cross the Magdeburger Bridge. It is broken down. "Who broke it down?" The goldsmith, the goldsmith With his youngest daughter. "Have it built again." But with what? But with what? "With chains and with poles." All creep through, all creep through, The last one we will capture. Ich wollte gern über die Magdeburger Brück. Die ist zerbrochen. "Wer hat sie zerbrochen?" Der Goldschmied, der Goldschmied Mit seiner jüngsten Tochter. "Laßt sie doch wieder bauen." Mit was denn? Mit was denn? "Mit Ketten und mit Stangen." Kriecht alle durch, kriecht alle durch, Den letzten wollen wir fangen. Source: Karl Simrock, Das deutsche Kinderbuch: Altherkömmliche Reime, Lieder, Erzählungen, Uebungen, Räthsel und Scherze für Kinder (Frankfurt am Main: H. L. Brönner, 1848), no. 462, pp. 168-69. Return to Devil's Bridge Legends . Folktales of type 1191, in which the devil builds a bridge, but is then cheated out of the human soul he expected as payment. Human Sacrifice in Legends and Myths . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 4, 2019. Magic Books: Legends from Northern Europe Magic Books legends from Northern Europe selected and translated by D. L. Ashliman © 2003-2022 Contents Books on Black Art (Ireland). The Wondrous Michael Scott (Scotland). The Magic Book (Germany). The Magic Book and the Crows (Germany). The Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses (Germany). The Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses (Germany / Poland). The Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses (Germany). The Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses (Germany). The Black Book (Germany). Faust's Book of Hell's Charms (Germany). Dr. Faust's Hell-Master (Germany). The Book of Cyprianus (Denmark). The Milkmaid from Listrup (Denmark). The Court Tutor at Tøjstrup Manor (Denmark). Cyprianus (Denmark). Folk Beliefs about the Cyprianus (Denmark). The Devil Is Given a Task (Denmark). The Book of Magic (Russia). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Books on Black Art Ireland Books on Black Art were got in Scotland by those who went to work there during the Harvest. It was against the law to sell or buy these but it was done. A £1 was left on a certain place and while one watched a hand appeared took the money and shortly afterwards put the required book in its place. At the beginning of each book these words were written: Read me through But pursue me not, For if you do Hell and damnation will be your lot. Mrs. M. A. McAdoo (56) Liseveny, Parish of Ematris, Barony of Dartrey. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Monaghan >> Nart, pp. 201-202 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . The Wondrous Michael Scott Scotland Sir Michael Scott of Balwearie flourished during the 13th century.... He was a man of much learning, chiefly acquired in foreign countries. He wrote a commentary upon Aristotle, printed at Venice in 1496; and several treatises upon natural philosophy, from which he appears to have been addicted to the abstruse studies of judicial astrology, alchymy, physiognomy, and chiromancy. Hence he passed among his contemporaries for a skilful magician. Dempster informs us , that he remembers to have heard in his youth , that the magic books of Michael Scott were still in existence, but could not be opened without danger, on account of the fiends who were thereby invoked. Dempsteri Historia Ecclesiastica, 1627, lib. xii. p. 495. Lesly characterises Michael Scott as " singulari philosophiæ, astronomiæ, ac medicinæ laude prestans; dicebatur penitissimos magiæ recussus indagasse. " A personage, thus spoken of by biographers and historians, loses little of his mystical fame in vulgar tradition. Accordingly, the memory of Sir Michael Scott survives in many a legend; and in the south of Scotland, any work of great labour and antiquity is ascribed, either to the agency of Auld Michael, of Sir William Wallace, or of the devil. Tradition varies concerning the place of his burial: some contend for Holme Coltrame, in Cumberland; others for Melrose Abbey. But all agree, that his books of magic were interred in his grave, or preserved in the convent where he died. Source (books.google.com): Walter Scott, The Lay of the Last Minstrel: A Poem (London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme; Edinburgh: Constable and Company, 1805), notes, pp. 234-35 . Source (Internet Archive): Walter Scott, The Lay of the Last Minstrel: A Poem (London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme; Edinburgh: Constable and Company, 1805), notes, pp. 234-35 . Return to the table of contents . The Magic Book Germany It is said that eighteen years ago an old shepherd from Mödiskruge, County of Guben, possessed a book containing all kinds of secrets. He wanted to get rid of it and tried to cut it into pieces, burn it, and give it away, but nothing succeeded until the pastor in Fünfeichen took it from him in the church. Children were told to walk around the old man three time if they wanted to speak to him. Otherwise he could harm them, put a spell on them, or something similar. Source (books.google.com): Karl Gander, "Das Zauberbuch," Niederlausitzer Volkssagen vornehmlich aus dem Stadt- und Landkreise Guben (Berlin: Deutsche Schriftsteller-Genossenschaft, 1894), no. 62, p. 24 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Gander, "Das Zauberbuch," Niederlausitzer Volkssagen vornehmlich aus dem Stadt- und Landkreise Guben (Berlin: Deutsche Schriftsteller-Genossenschaft, 1894), no. 62, p. 24 . Return to the table of contents . The Magic Book and the Crows Germany A peasant in Breslack had an old book. Whenever he would read in it the entire room was suddenly filled with crows. He gave the book to the pastor, who removed the curse from him. Source (books.google.com): Karl Gander, "Das Zauberbuch und die Krähen," Niederlausitzer Volkssagen vornehmlich aus dem Stadt- und Landkreise Guben (Berlin: Deutsche Schriftsteller-Genossenschaft, 1894), no. 63, p. 24 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Gander, "Das Zauberbuch und die Krähen," Niederlausitzer Volkssagen vornehmlich aus dem Stadt- und Landkreise Guben (Berlin: Deutsche Schriftsteller-Genossenschaft, 1894), no. 63, p. 24 . Gander's source: "Oral, from a peasant woman." Return to the table of contents . The Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses Germany A woman in Fünfeichen was said to possess the sixth and seventh books of Moses. When asked how she would cure a mad dog, she replied that she would say: "Devil, depart from this animal. For that I give you body and soul!" But then she added: "This will restore the dog's health, but if it is a female dog, all of her pups will turn mad." Source (books.google.com): Karl Gander, "Das sechste und siebente Buch Mosis," Niederlausitzer Volkssagen vornehmlich aus dem Stadt- und Landkreise Guben (Berlin: Deutsche Schriftsteller-Genossenschaft, 1894), no. 64, p. 24 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Gander, "Das sechste und siebente Buch Mosis," Niederlausitzer Volkssagen vornehmlich aus dem Stadt- und Landkreise Guben (Berlin: Deutsche Schriftsteller-Genossenschaft, 1894), no. 64, p. 24 . Gander's source: "Oral." Return to the table of contents . The Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses Germany / Poland The most important magic books are the sixth and seventh books of Moses. Because their contents bring misfortune, they were excluded from the Bible. However, they are still found now and again, pastors having kept them in their churches. If one throws such books into the fire, they will not burn. A journeyman miller owned such a magic book. Once when he had gone to church the master came by and read in the book, which he had left lying on the table. The master very much liked the stories he was reading, but while he was reading, numerous lords came in through the door, sat down at the table, and demanded work. This terrified the master, and he sent someone to the church to fetch the journeyman. The journeyman read everything backwards that the master had read forwards, and with that the spirits disappeared. Nevertheless, the journeyman was very angry at the master's audacity, scolded him, and told him never again to touch his books. Source (books.google.com): Ulrich Jahn, "Das sechste und siebente Buch Moses," Volkssagen aus Pommern und Rügen (Stettin: Verlag von H. Dannenberg, 1886), no. 437, pp. 347-48. . Source (Internet Archive): Ulrich Jahn, "Das sechste und siebente Buch Moses," Volkssagen aus Pommern und Rügen (Stettin: Verlag von H. Dannenberg, 1886), no. 437, pp. 347-48. . Return to the table of contents . Kuhn's source: "From Meesow [Mieszewo], Country of Regenwalde: Communicated by Prof. E. Kuhn." The Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses Chemnitz, Germany There is no longer any magic or witchcraft. That is because the sixth and the seventh books of Moses can no longer be used. Witchcraft, magic, and incantations were all exactly described and recorded there. These two books are now secured at Wittenberg. They can still be seen as curiosities, but can no longer be used. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Das sechste und siebente Buch Mosis," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 100, p. 90 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "Oral from Chemnitz." Return to the table of contents . The Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses Rügen, Germany Many years ago there lived in Trent an old master tailor whose wife had inherited an unusual book from her mother. They say she had the sixth and the seventh books of Moses. Whenever the woman read in the book, deer, wolves, hares, and other animals would come to her, lie down at her feet, and play with her children. All these animals would disappear as soon as the book was closed. One day while the woman was reading the book, she was surprised by her husband. He grabbed the book and threw it into the stove. But behold! The fire went out, and the book remained undamaged. The tailor did not want to have this book in his house any longer, so, acting on the advice of some old people, he had a boy who was born on a Sunday during the sermon throw the book into the stove. That worked, for the book was immediately consumed by the flames. Source: A. Haas, "Das sechste und siebente Buch Mose," Rügensche Sagen und Märchen (Stettin: Johs. Burmeister's Buchhandlung, 1903), no. 101, p. 90 . Haas's source: "Associate Headmaster P. Grützmacher from Trent." Return to the table of contents . The Black Book Rügen. Germany In Sabitz near Bergen there formerly lived a number of peasants who, it was said, possessed a black book. With its help they were able to acquire substantial wealth, and if they did anything bad to a neighbor, they always went unpunished. Whoever wanted to use the black book had to read the text forwards and backwards. The devil gained control of anyone who failed to read it backwards. It was no longer known where the book came from. The oldest people knew only that they had come into its possession through an inheritance. Sometimes the book caused its owners much grief, so finally they tried to dispose of it. For a long time these attempts were to no avail, until they sought the advise of a pastor. He freed them from the book by nailing shut the drawer in which it was being stored. Source: A. Haas, "Das schwarze Buch," Rügensche Sagen und Märchen (Stettin: Johs. Burmeister's Buchhandlung, 1903), no. 102, pp. 90-91 . Haas's source: "Oral from Strüßendorf." Return to the table of contents . Faust's Book of Hell's Charms Zellerfeld, Germany The Book of Hell's Charms is in the church at Zellerfeld, secured by an iron chain. It was written by Doctor Faust. Only a few people can read it, and it is extremely dangerous to read it. To read it without losing one's life, one must be able to read it forwards and backwards. If one reads it forwards, the devil will appear. If one reads it backwards, he will leave. If anyone has read the Book of Hell's Charms forwards and cannot read it backwards, then the devil will do the rest. Source: Hermann Harrys, "Fausts Höllenzwang," Volkssagen, Märchen und Legenden Niedersachsens , vol. 2 (Celle: Verlag von E. H. C. Schulze, 1840) no. 13, p. 20 . Harrys' source: "Oral." The magic book in this legend is called the Höllenzwang , which translates literally as "hell's compulsion," i.e. a book of charms that will compel hell to do one's bidding. This legend's final statement "The devil will do the rest" is somewhat ambiguous. Although it could be interpretted "The devil will read it backwards," a more logical conclusion is "The devil will take possession of the careless reader." Return to the table of contents . Dr. Faust's Hell-Master Germany According to legend, there is a book, named Dr. Faust's Hell-Master, which teaches the art of controling spirits, even of making the devil subservient to oneself. It is said to be buried beneath a thorn bush behind the Chemnitz Castle, on the road to the Küch Forest. Many advocates of the black art have unsuccessfully attempted to find this book. Source: Joh. Aug. Ernst Köhler, "Dr. Faust's Höllenzwang," Sagenbuch des Erzgebirges (Schneeberg and Schwarzenberg: Verlag und Druck von Carl Moritz Gärtner, 1886), no. 277, p. 229 . Return to the table of contents . The Book of Cyprianus Denmark Cyprianus was a student, and by nature a gentle and orderly person, but he had passed through the Black School in Norway, and was therefore engaged to the devil to apply his learning and extraordinary faculties to the perpetration of evil. This grieved him in his latter years, his heart being good and pious; so to make the evil good again, he wrote a book, wherein he first shows how evil is to be done, and then how it may be remedied. The book begins by explaining what sorcery is, and with a warning against it. It is divided into three heads, viz. Cyprianus, Dr. Faustus, and Jacob Ramel. The last two parts are written in characters which are said to be Persian or Arabic, and also in ordinary characters. In this book are taught exorcising, laying and raising of spirits, and all that of which mention is made in the 5th book of Moses (XVIII: 10-12). Whether this book has been printed is uncertain, but manuscript copies of it are concealed here and there among the common people, who regard it as something sacred. Those who possess the book of Cyprianus need never want money; they can read the devil to them and from them, and no one can harm them, not even the devil himself. But whoever possesses the book cannot get rid of it; for whether he sells, burns or buries it, it will come back; and if a person cannot dispose of it before his death, it will go badly with him. The only method is, to write his name in it in his own blood, and lay it in a secret place in the church, together with four shillings clerk's fee. The following is the German tradition of Cyprianus: In ancient times there lived in one of the Danish isles a man named Cyprianus, who was worse than the devil; consequently, after he was dead and gone to hell, he was again cast forth by the devil and replaced on his isle. There he wrote nine books, in the old Danish tongue, on witchcraft and magical spells. Whosoever has read all these nine books through becomes the property of the devil. From the original work three (or nine) copies are said to have been made by a monk, and mutilated copies of these to have been dispersed all over the world. A count, who resided in the castle of Plön, is said to have possessed a perfect copy, which he caused to be fastened with chains and buried under the castle; because in reading through eight books he was so troubled and terrified that he resolved on concealing it from the sight of the world. One of these books still exists in Flensburg. Some spells from the nine books are still known among aged people. Whoever wishes to be initiated therein must first renounce his Christianity. Two miles from Horsens there dwelt a miller, who was a master in the black art and possessed the book of Cyprianus. A peasant having once stolen an axe from him, was obliged to bring it back at midnight, and was, moreover, borne so high in the air that his feet rattled among the tops of the trees in Bierre forest. This miller in fact performed so many wonderful things that all his neighbors were astonished at his feats. Impelled by curiosity, a journeyman miller once slipped into his master's private room, where having found an old quaint-looking volume, he began to read in it, when the horrible Satan appeared before him and asked his commands. The man, who was not aware that it was necessary to give the fiend some stiff job to execute, fell down in terror deprived of speech, and it would, no doubt, have been all over with him, had not his master entered at the moment and seen how matters stood. Snatching up the book, the miller instantly began to read in another place, in order, if possible, to drive the fiend away; but things had already gone too far, and nothing remained to be done but to give him something to do, so taking a sieve, he commanded him to bale water with it from the millpond; but being unable to do so, he was obliged to take his departure through the air, and left behind him a most loathsome stench. Cyprian's book is also known in Normandy, where a similar story is told under the title of Le Grimoire du Curé . Calderon has made Cyprian the hero of one of his dramas, in which he appears as a native of Antioch. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), pp. 186-88 . Footnote by Thorpe: "The count here alluded to was, no doubt, Duke Hans Adolf of Holstein-Plön, who was a great magician, and was finally carried off by the devil, through a window, though the matter was hushed up. He lived in the seventeenth century." Return to the table of contents . The Milkmaid from Listrup Denmark One evening a milkmaid from Listrup,was out in the woods at Ellekrattet to milk, when she saw the elf king sleeping by a tree stump, with a Cyprianus under his chin. He had a long beard which hung down over the book. She saw the book anyway and took it home with her. From that time on she could conjure, but she wasn't right in her head. The priest from Karleby heard something about this, and he went to her. He immediately recognized what the problem was, and took the Cyprianus from her. She recovered immediately; but since that time the priest was much wiser than before. Source (books.google.com): Svend Grundtvig, Gamle danske Minder i Folkemunde: Folkeæventyr, Folkeviser, Folkesagn (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversen, 1857), p. 101 . Return to the table of contents . The Court Tutor at Tøjstrup Manor Denmark At the Tøjstrup Manor in the old days there was a court tutor who owned a Cyprianus . Once it was lying in the servants' hall, when the farmhands came in after work in the evening. One of the men picked up the book and began to read in it. But then so many chickens came in that the whole room was full of them from the floor to the ceiling. Then then the tutor came back. He understood how to read the Cyprianus , and he read all the chickens out again. Another time, old Frits' master mason happened to get hold of a Cyprianus , and he too began to read in it, for he did not know that it was a Cyprianus When he had read a little, an old gray-bearded man appeared. He was so cold over his whole body that he could not keep a limb still. He asked Frits what he wanted. Frits did not answer. The court tutor, who owned a Cyprianus , perceived that something was wrong. He then got up and read the old gray-bearded man out again. When he left, he slammed the door behind him so hard that it shook all of Tøjstrup. Source (books.google.com): Svend Grundtvig, Gamle danske Minder i Folkemunde: Folkeæventyr, Folkeviser, Folkesagn (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversen, 1857), pp. 237-38 . Return to the table of contents . Cyprianus Denmark A woman once died in Holmsland who was known by everyone for her decent and honest character. No one had ever heard anything bad about her. However, the night after she was buried, her husband, to his horror, saw her standing in front of an open chest of drawers in the living room and rummaging through some papers. She went away immediately afterwards. The man then thought that there was something in the chest of drawers that she wanted to take with her, and that she would not return. However, the next night she came back and again was busy with the papers in the chest of drawers. The following morning, the man searched the drawers and found a small book with red letters. He had never seen this book before, but he probably understood that it was a Cyprianus . He thought that his wife could not be saved because she had had this book, so he went to the priest with it. The priest comforted him, but also said that it had been a great mistake on the part of the wife that she had not gotten rid of the book while she was still alive. Now she would not be able to rest until the book was rendered harmless. The priest then took the book, threw it into running water, and read a blessing over it. It helped, and the wife got peace. Source (books.google.com): Jens Kamp, "Cyprianus," Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R. Nielsens Forlag, 1877), no. 36, p. 28 . Source (Internet Archive): Jens Kamp, "Cyprianus," Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R. Nielsens Forlag, 1877), no. 36, p. 28 . Return to the table of contents . Folk Beliefs about the Cyprianus Denmark I. (West Jutland) Cyprianus was the name of a man who lived in ancient times. He did many evil things during his lifetime, and he wrote the book that is named after him. In it he taught his own evil ways to others. In his old age he repented of his sins, and then wrote another book, in which he taught how all the old things he had written about in the first book could be prevented. Some have the first book and do evil with it. Others -- and these are the good "sorcerers" -- have the second book and thus prevent evil. Only a few have them both. II. (West Jutland) There is another book of witchcraft which is called The Black Book . It is not known where it came from. It is not as powerful as the Cyprianus . It is said that an old woman, who was a witch, had only The Black Book . Therefore she had to give way to another witch who was in possession of a Cyprianus> . III. (West Jutland) You can easily get rid of a Cyprianus if a priest throws it into running water and and then reads a blessing over it. Otherwise it always comes back no matter how you try to get rid of it. If a man dies who owned the book, it must be put into his coffin. If his children keep it after his death, they will not be able to get rid of it. Some even think that they then will belong to the evil one. I have the testimony of trustworthy people that several times in West Jutland this book is placed in a dead person's coffin. Thus copies of the Cyprianus are not as rare as is usually assumed. IV. (West Jutland) In Horne Parish near Varde, there was once a boy who got hold of a Cyprianus . He read so long in this dangerous book that he gained "wisdom" to do both evil and good. "The cunning boy," as he was called, once came to a farm in Strellev Parish and asked for a night's shelter. Yes, he could get that. Then he sat down on the bench by the table and talked with the people about the evening. However, the daughter of the house teased him all evening and would not let him be the center of attention. The boy was angry at this, and in the morning before left he, he promised her that she would come to regret her behavior. From that day onward the girl was never at peace. Wherever she was, upstairs or downstairs, she was followed by such fearful sounds that she was about to run away from everything and everyone. Her father then sent for a "cunning" priest, who came and heard how things were. He then ordered that all the straw in her bed be taken out and burned. Not a single straw was to be left. This was done. That same day "the cunning boy" fainted and died, and the girl recovered. V. (Thy) A few years ago a "cunning" man died in Thy. He left a Cyprianus , but his surviving family did not dare to keep it. They sold it for thirty thalers to another "cunning" man. However, soon afterward a third person, also known to be a "cunning" man, offered fifty thalers for the book, but the first buyer did not want to let it go. VI. (East Jutland) A poor peasant in Aarhus told me in 1872 that he had "so shamefully regretted" that he had sold a Cyprianus which he had once owned. "For since then I have lived only in poverty all my time and brought up many children. But when I had this book we never lacked bread in the house. Now we have only rubbish!" VII. In the area around Vejle it is said that the Cyprianus consists basically of three books: the actual Cyprianus as well as the Tertullianus and the Aabrianus . In West Funen it is stated that the Cyprianus consists of twelve books, each one stronger than the next. If you read the last one, you can bind the devil, but most people do not have the power and "cunning" to read and use more than the first books. VIII. (East Funen) The book called Cyprianus is part of the Revelation of St. John . However, it was not included in the common Bible, so that evil men would not be tempted to misuse it. IX. (East Funen) If someone has a Cyprianus , he can get rid of it only by selling for less than he himself paid for it. If he cannot thus get rid of the book, he will belong to the evil one when he dies. If he himself has purchased it for one shilling, then he must sell it for a half shilling. No matter how many times the devil is thus cheated out of his catch, there will always be someone who cannot sell the book for less than he himself paid for it, and this person will be lost. X. (East Funen) A tailor had a Cyprianus . One day when the master was not at home, his apprentice got hold of the book and read a passage out of it. Then there came such a multitude of large black flies that he could not stand to be in the same room with them. Then the master arrived back home out of breath. He tore the book from the boy and began to read backwards what the boy had read. With much effort the master finally managed to drive away the fly-shaped devils. XI. (Langeland) On Mount Sinai, our Lord gave the promise to Moses that "everything he said or wrote should be true and happen as he wanted," and that everything he himself asked for, or taught people to ask for, should be fulfilled. But then the devil tempted Moses. Thus, in addition to the five books of Moses, which only contain what is good, he wrote a sixth book of Moses, and it is the one that has since been called Cyprianus . What is written in this book has power because it was written by Moses according to the Lord's promise. In the area around Skjælskør I have recorded the same folk belief in a darker form. Here it seems to have been a popular belief that what Moses wrote in the Book of Moses was the secret wisdom he had learned in Egypt and which, according to the Lord's promise to him, had remained in power. XII. (Langeland) A priest went to church one Sunday to lead the service. Meanwhile, the servant girl entered his study and caught sight of an old, dusty book, which she had never noticed before. She picked up it to dust it off and began to read in it. She had read for only moment, when the priest stood before her, took the book, and said that she must never touch that book again, for otherwise a misfortune would befall her and the house. In the church the priest had sensed that something was wrong, and to the astonishment of the congregation he had rushed out of the church and home. XIII. (Langeland) There was once a farmer in this country who had a Cyprianus , but he never did any harm with it. One Sunday he and his wife had gone to church. The priest was in the middle of his sermon, and everything was going well, when the farmer got up and walked out of the church. Everyone thought something was wrong with him. Something was wrong indeed, because his children, who were home alone, had got hold of the bad book and started reading it. So many little devils came swarming about that the whole room was full of them when he got home. They threatened that misfortune would befall him and the children if they soon didn't get something to do. In his distress, the man grabbed a bushel of peas and vetch that stood in the living room, poured them out on the floor and ordered the devils to pick them apart and say how many there were of each kind. Meanwhile, the man had time to read them out one by one. Similar legends about deceiving a devil by giving him an impossible task: Deceiving the Devil with a Rope of Sand , folktales of type 1174. Straightening a Curly Hair , folktales of type 1175. Deceiving the Devil by Breaking Wind , folktales of type 1176. XIV. (Langeland) If one has a Cyprianus and wants to get rid of it, it doesn't help to give it away, burn it, or throw it away; for it will always return unscathed to its owner. One can only get rid of it by selling it to someone else. XV. In West Zealand it is said that the Cyprianus is part of the Bible. In this country [Denmark], the book is not allowed to be printed and is therefore not found in ordinary Bibles. A priest in Norway once had the book printed, and a few of these must still exist. XVI. (West Zealand) Kristen Hjulmand in R... has a Cyprianus . It was actually in the house when he bought it, and he thus inadvertently came to buy the book as well. Since then he has not been able to get rid of it in any way. He once threw it into a red-hot oven, but even then it came back. XVII. (West Zealand) When my father lived in Vemmelev there was a man who had a Cyprianus . People in the parish were very afraid of him and angry with him, especially because in the autumn he conjured all the people's geese to him. As soon as we let the geese out onto the path, they flew off the long distance to his farmyard. The worst thing about him was that more people entered his farm than ever left it. Once this cunning man was in Slagelse when one of his servant girls got hold of his Cyprianus and read in it, not knowing what kind of a book it was. After she had read a little, a few big red roosters came into the living room, and they turned into the angriest trolls. There were so many of them that she couldn't even turn around, and even more of them were coming. The man in Slagelse then sensed that something was wrong and rushed back home. He tore the book from the girl and boxed her ears, so that she fainted. She never learned how he gained power over the trolls, because when she came to herself again, they had all disappeared. XVIII. (West Zealand) A man had a Cyprianus and always kept it safe. However, one day when the servant girl was cleaning, she found the book in a secluded place and began to read it. Immediately the devil stood before her and asked: "What shall I do, what shall I do?" The girl realized how serious this was. There was a sieve nearby, and she gave it to the devil, telling him to fill it with water. This kept the devil busy until the man came home and was able to conjure him away. Similar legends about deceiving the devil by giving him an impossible task: Deceiving the Devil with a Rope of Sand , folktales of type 1174. Straightening a Curly Hair , folktales of type 1175. Deceiving the Devil by Breaking Wind , folktales of type 1176. XIX. (Copenhagen) In ancient times, when the library was in the attic of the "Round Church," a Cyprianus was hidden there. Once someone read in it and went astray. Therefore the book was chained to a large stone and dropped to the bottom of the hollow core of the Round Tower, and there it still lies. Source (books.google.com): Jens Kamp, "Folketro om Cyprianus ," Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R. Nielsens Forlag, 1877), nos. 273-91, pp. 104-108 . Source (Internet Archive): Jens Kamp, "Folketro om Cyprianus ," Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R. Nielsens Forlag, 1877), nos. 273-91, pp. 104-108 . Return to the table of contents . The Devil Is Given a Task Denmark A woman in Ølsted near Horsens [in Jutland] once came to read a book of witchcraft, without knowing that it was such a book. She thus conjured the devil to her. He immediately asked why she had called and what he was supposed to do. Although she was startled, and at first did not know what to do. But then she grabbed a bucket and ordered him to scoop all the water from the Ølsted River. Thus she got rid of him, because the devil couldn't do that. Source (books.google.com): Jens Kamp, "Fanden sættes i Arbejde," Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R. Nielsens Forlag, 1877), no. 313, p. 120 . Source (Internet Archive): Jens Kamp, "Fanden sættes i Arbejde," Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R. Nielsens Forlag, 1877), no. 313, p. 120 . Similar legends about deceiving the devil by giving him an impossible task: Deceiving the Devil with a Rope of Sand , folktales of type 1174. Straightening a Curly Hair , folktales of type 1175. Deceiving the Devil by Breaking Wind , folktales of type 1176. Return to the table of contents . The Book of Magic Russia A soldier was quartered in a certain town. He had taken to study the Black Art, and had got possession of books which dealt therewith. One day, during his absence from his quarters, one of his comrades came to see him. Not finding him at home, the visitor took up one of the soldier's books, and for want of other occupation began to read it. It was in the evening, and he read by the light of a lamp. The book was full of names and nothing else. He had read about half of the names when he raised his head, and looking around him, saw that the room was full of diabolical looking beings. The soldier was struck with terror, and not knowing what to do, began again to read the book. After reading for some little time, he again looked round him; the number of spirts had increased. Again he read, and having finished the book, looked again around him. By this time the number of demons had so much increased that there was barely space for them in the room. They sat upon each other's shoulders, and pressed continually forward round the reader. The soldier saw that the situation was serious; he shut the book, closed his eyes, and anxiously awaited his comrade. The spirits pressed closer and closer upon him, crying, "Give us work to do -- quick!" The soldier reflected awhile, and then said, "Fill up the cisterns of all the baths in the town with water brought thither in a sieve." The demons flew away. In two minutes they returned and said, "It is done! Give us some more work to do -- quick!" "Pull the Voivode's [Governor's] house down, brick by brick; but take care you do not touch or disturb the inmates; then build it up again as it was before." The goblins disappeared, but in two minutes returned. "It is done!" they cried. "Give us more work -- quick!" "Go," said the soldier, "and count the grains of sand that lie at the bottom of the Volga, the number of drops of water that are in the river, and of the fish that swim in it, from its source to its mouth." The spirits flew away; but in another minute they returned, having executed their task. Thus, before the soldier could think of some new labor to be done, the old one was completed, and the demons were again at his side demanding more work. When he began to think what he should give them, they pressed round him, and threatened him with instant death if he did not give them something to do. The soldier was becoming exhausted, and there was yet no sign of his comrade's return. What course should he take? How deliver himself from the evil spirits? The soldier thought to himself, "While I was reading the book, not one of the demons came near me. Let me try to read it again; perhaps that will keep them off." Again he began to read the book of magic, but he soon observed that as he read the number of phantoms increased, so that soon such a host of the spirit-world surrounded him that the very lamp was scarcely visible. When the soldier hesitated at a word, or paused to rest himself, the goblins became more restless and violent, demanding, "Give us work to do! Give us work!" The soldier was almost worn out, and unhappily knew not how to help himself. Suddenly a thought occurred to him, "The spirits appeared when I read the book from the beginning; let me now read it from the end, perhaps this well send them way." He turned the book round and began to read it from the end. After reading for some time he observed that the number of spirits decreased; the lamp began again to burn brightly, and there was an empty space around him. The soldier was delighted, and continued his reading. He read and read until he had read them all away. And thus he saved himself from the demons. His comrade came in soon afterwards. The soldier told him what had happened. "It is fortunate for you," said his comrade, "that you began to read the book backwards in time. Had you not thus read them away by midnight they would have devoured you." Source: John Naaké, Slavonic Fairy Tales , collected and translated from the Russian, Polish, Servian [Serbian], and Bohemian (London: Henry S. King and Company, 1874), pp. 190-93 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites . Targets open in new windows. The Black School . Migratory legends of type 3000, in which a wizard in training escapes from his satanic teacher, albeit with the loss of his shadow. Faust Legends . Stories about mortals who enter into contracts with the demonic powers. Foolish Wishes . Tales of type 750A and other stories about the foolish use of magic wishes. The Sorcerer's Apprentice . Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 325* and migratory legends of Christiansen type 3020. Goethe's ballad "Der Zauberlehrling." The original German text. Goethe's ballad translated into English: The Magician's Apprentice . Why the Sea Is Salty . Folktales of type 565. Deceiving the Devil with a Rope of Sand . Folktales of type 1174. Straightening a Curly Hair . Folktales of type 1175, in which a demon is defeated because he cannot straighten a curly hair. Deceiving the Devil by Breaking Wind . Folktales of type 1176. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 21, 2022. Man and Serpent: Tales of Type 285D Man and Serpent folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 285D translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2014 Contents The Gold-Giving Snake (The Panchatantra). Of Good Advice (Gesta Romanorum). The Man and the Serpent (Aesop). The Rattlesnake's Vengeance (Native American, Cherokee) Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Gold-Giving Snake The Panchatantra In a certain place there lived a Brahman by the name of Haridatta. He tilled the soil, but his time in the field brought him no harvest. Then one day, as the hottest hours were just over, tormented by the heat, he lay down in the shade of a tree in the middle of his field for a sleep. He saw a frightful snake, decorated with a large hood, crawl from an anthill a little way off, and thought to himself, "This is surely the goddess of the field, and I have not once paid her homage. That is why the field remains barren. I must bring her an offering." After thus thinking it over, he got some milk, poured it into a basin, then went to the anthill, and said, "Oh, protector of this field, for a long time I did not know that you live here. For this reason I have not yet brought you an offering. Please forgive me!" Having said this, he set forth the milk, and went home. The next day he returned to see what had happened, and he found a dinar in the basin. And thus it continued day by day. He brought the snake milk, and always found a dinar there the next morning. One day the Brahman asked his son to take the milk to the anthill, and he himself went into the village. The son brought the milk, set it there, and returned home. When he came back the next day and found a dinar, he said to himself, "This anthill must be full of gold dinars. I will kill the snake and take them all at once!" Having decided this, the Brahman's son returned the next day with the milk and a club. As he gave the milk to the snake, he struck her on the head with the club. The snake, as fate willed it, escaped with her life. Filled with rage, she bit the boy with her sharp, poisoned teeth, and the boy fell dead at once. His people built a funeral pyre not far from the field and cremated him. Two days later his father returned. When he discovered under what circumstances his son had died, he said that justice had prevailed. The next morning, he once again took milk, went to the anthill, and praised the snake with a loud voice. A good while later the snake appeared in the entrance to the anthill, and said, "You come here from greed, letting even your grief for your son pass by. From now on friendship between you and me will no longer be possible. Your son, in his youthful lack of understanding, struck me. I bit him. How can I forget the club's blow? How can you forget the pain and sorrow for your son?" After saying this she gave him a costly pearl for a pearl chain, said, "Do not come back," and disappeared into her cave. The Brahman took the pearl, cursed his son's lack of understanding, and returned home. Source: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen , translated from the Sanskrit into German by Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), v. 2, book 3, story 5, pp. 244-47 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Links to other translations of this tale: "The Gold-Giving Serpent," Indian Fairy Tales , selected and edited by Joseph Jacobs (London: David Nutt, 1892), pp. 112-14 . "The Snake Who Paid Cash," The Panchatantra , translated from the Sanskrit by Arthur W. Ryder (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1925), pp. 331-32 . About the Panchatantra : One of India's most influential contributions to world literature, the Panchatantra (also spelled Pañcatantra or Pañca-tantra ) consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled, in their current form, between the third and fifth centuries AD. The German Sanskrit scholar Johannes Hertel (1872-1955) believed that the original collection was compiled in Kashmir about 200 BC, and that at this time many of the stories were already ancient. The work's self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes the Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai, which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of the Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced medieval writers of fables. Return to the table of contents . Of Good Advice Gesta Romanorum In the reign of the Emperor Fulgentius, a certain knight, named Zedechias, married a very beautiful but imprudent wife. In a certain chamber of their mansion a serpent dwelt. Now, the knight's vehement inclination for tournaments and jousting brought him to extreme poverty. He grieved immoderately, and, like one who was desperate, walked backward and forward, ignorant of what he should do. The serpent, beholding his misery, like the ass of Balaam, was on that occasion miraculously gifted with a voice, and said to the knight, "Why do you lament? Take my advice, and you shall not repent it. Supply me every day with a certain quantity of sweet milk, and I will enrich you." This promise exhilarated the knight, and he faithfully followed the instructions of his subtle friend. The consequence was that he had a beautiful son, and became exceedingly wealthy. But it happened that his wife one day said to him, "My lord, I am sure that serpent has great riches hidden in the chamber where he dwells. Let us kill him and get possession of the whole." The advice pleased the knight, and at the request of his wife he took a hammer to destroy the serpent, and a vessel of milk. Allured by the milk, it put its head out of the hole, as it had been accustomed; and the knight lifted the hammer to strike it. The serpent, observing his perfidy, suddenly drew back its head; and the blow fell upon the vessel. No sooner had he done this, than his offspring died, and he lost everything that he formerly possessed. The wife, taught by their common loss, said to him, "Alas! I have ill counseled you; but go now to the hole of the serpent, and humbly acknowledge your offense. Peradventure you may find grace." The knight complied, and standing before the dwelling place of the serpent, shed many tears, and entreated that he might once more be made rich. "I see," answered the serpent, "I see now that you are a fool, and will always be a fool. For how can I forget that blow of the hammer which you designed me, for which reason I slew your son and took away your wealth? There can be no real peace between us." The knight, full of sorrow, replied thus, "I promise the most unshaken fidelity, and will never meditate the slightest injury, provided I may this once obtain your grace." "My friend," said the serpent, "it is the nature of my species to be subtle and venomous. Let what I have said suffice. The blow offered at my head is fresh upon my recollection; get you gone before you receive an injury." The knight departed in great affliction, saying to his wife, "Fool that I was to take your counsel!" But ever afterwards they lived in the greatest indigence. Application: My beloved, the king is God; the knight is Adam, who by following his wife's advice lost Paradise. The serpent in the chamber signifies Christ retained in the human heart, by virtue of baptism. Source: Gesta Romanorum , translated by Charles Swan, revised and corrected by Wynnard Hooper (London: George Bell and Sons, 1906), no. 141, pp. 246-47 . Return to the table of contents . The Man and the Serpent Aesop A countryman's son by accident trod upon a serpent's tail, which turned and bit him so that he died. The father in a rage got his ax, and pursuing the serpent, cut off part of its tail. So the serpent in revenge began stinging several of the farmer's cattle and caused him severe loss. Well, the farmer thought it best to make it up with the serpent, and brought food and honey to the mouth of its lair, and said to it, "Let's forget and forgive. Perhaps you were right to punish my son, and take vengeance on my cattle, but surely I was right in trying to revenge him. Now that we are both satisfied, why should not we be friends again?" "No, no," said the serpent. "Take away your gifts. You can never forget the death of your son, nor I the loss of my tail. Injuries may be forgiven, but not forgotten. Source: Joseph Jacobs, The Fables of Æsop, Selected, Told Anew, and Their History Traced (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), no. 6, pp. 12-13 . Return to the table of contents . The Rattlesnake's Vengeance Native American (Cherokee) One day in the old times when we could still talk with other creatures, while some children were playing about the house, their mother inside heard them scream. Running out she found that a rattlesnake had crawled from the grass, and taking up a stick she killed it. The father was out hunting in the mountains, and that evening when coming home after dark through the gap he heard a strange wailing sound. Looking about he found that he had come into the midst of a whole company of rattlesnakes, which all had their mouths open and seemed to be crying. He asked them the reason of their trouble, and they told him that his own wife had that day killed their chief, the Yellow Rattlesnake, and they were just now about to send the Black Rattlesnake to take revenge. The hunter said he was very sorry, but they told him that if he spoke the truth he must be ready to make satisfaction and give his wife as a sacrifice for the life of their chief. Not knowing what might happen otherwise, he consented. They then told him that the Black Rattlesnake would go home with him and coil up just outside the door in the dark. He must go inside, where he would find his wife awaiting him, and ask her to get him a drink of fresh water from the spring. That was all. He went home and knew that the Black Rattlesnake was following. It was night when he arrived and very dark, but he found his wife waiting with his supper ready. He sat down and asked for a drink of water. She handed him a gourd full from the jar, but he said he wanted it fresh from the spring, so she took a bowl and went out of the door. The next moment he heard a cry, and going out he found that the Black Rattlesnake had bitten her and that she was already dying. He stayed with her until she was dead, when the Black Rattlesnake came out from the grass again and said his tribe was now satisfied. He then taught the hunter a prayer song, and said, "When you meet any of us hereafter sing this song and we will not hurt you; but if by accident one of us should bite one of your people then sing this song over him and he will recover." And the Cherokee have kept the song to this day. Source: James Mooney, Myths of the Cherokee , no. 58, pp. 305-306 . Mooney's collection of Cherokee myths is contained in: J. W. Powell, Nineteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology to the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, 1897-98 , part 1 (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1900), pp. 305-306 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 29, 2014. The Man, the Boy, and the Donkey: Folktales of Type 1215 The Man, the Boy, and the Donkey Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 1215 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009 Contents The Man, the Boy, and the Donkey (Aesop). The Lady's Nineteenth Story (Turkey). It Is Difficult to Please Everyone (Turkey). Of the Olde Man and His Sonne That Brought His Asse to the Towne to Sylle (England). An Unusual Ride (Switzerland/Germany). Link to Jean de La Fontaine, "The Miller, His Son, and the Ass," The Fables of La Fontaine (London: J. C. Nimmo and Bain, 1884), book 3, fable 1, pp. 59-60 . Link to Jean de La Fontaine, "Le meunier, son fils et l'âne," Fables de La Fontaine (Tours: Alfred Mame et Fils, 1888), book 3, fable 1, pp. 92-95 . Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Man, the Boy, and the Donkey Aesop A man and his son were once going with their donkey to market. As they were walking along by his side a countryman passed them and said, "You fools, what is a donkey for but to ride upon?" So the man put the boy on the donkey, and they went on their way. But soon they passed a group of men, one of whom said, "See that lazy youngster, he lets his father walk while he rides." So the man ordered his boy to get off, and got on himself. But they hadn't gone far when they passed two women, one of whom said to the other, "Shame on that lazy lout to let his poor little son trudge along." Well, the man didn't know what to do, but at last he took his boy up before him on the donkey. By this time they had come to the town, and the passersby began to jeer and point at them. The man stopped and asked what they were scoffing at. The men said, "Aren't you ashamed of yourself for overloading that poor donkey of yours -- you and your hulking son?" The man and boy got off and tried to think what to do. They thought and they thought, until at last they cut down a pole, tied the donkey's feet to it, and raised the pole and the donkey to their shoulders. They went along amid the laughter of all who met them until they came to a bridge, when the donkey, getting one of his feet loose, kicked out and caused the boy to drop his end of the pole. In the struggle the donkey fell over the bridge, and his forefeet being tied together, he was drowned. Try to please everyone, and you will please no one. Source: Joseph Jacobs, The Fables of Æsop (London: Macmillan and Company, 1902), no. 63, pp. 149-51 . Return to the table of contents . The Lady's Nineteenth Story Turkey In the by-gone time an old gardener had mounted his son upon an ass and was proceeding to the garden, himself on foot. They met some men who said, "See this old pederast, how he has mounted the boy upon the ass; and is himself running alongside." Whenever the old man heard this he made the boy alight and mounted himself. Again they met some other folk, these likewise said, "Look at this heartless old man, he rides the ass himself and makes the poor child go on foot." Whenever the old man heard this he took his son up in front of him. Then some people saw them and said, "See this old pederast, how he has taken the boy up in front of him." The old man heard this, and he put his son up behind him. Again certain folks saw them and said, "See this old catamite, how he has taken the boy up behind him." The old man knew not what to do, so he put his son down and alighted himself and drove the ass before them. The garden was near, and both of them were on foot, and they reached the garden before meeting with any others. Source: Sheykh-Zada, The History of the Forty Vezirs; or, The Story of the Forty Morns and Nights , translated by E. J. W. Gibb (London: George Redway, 1886), pp. 218-19 . Return to the table of contents . It Is Difficult to Please Everyone Turkey One day Nasreddin Hodja went to market, taking his son with him. There he bought a donkey, and on the way home he let his son ride while he himself walked alongside on foot. After they had gone some distance they came upon some people who began talking about the pair. "The world is getting crazier and crazier," they said. "That lout of a son is sitting there at ease on the donkey, making his old father walk alongside dripping with sweat." Nasreddin Hodja heard this comment and had his son climb down, and he himself took a seat on the donkey's back. "Now the people will be satisfied," he murmured. Soon they came upon another group who likewise were expressing their thoughts about Nasreddin and his donkey, and indeed, loudly enough that the Hodja could hear them. "Have you ever seen anything like that? That must be an unnatural father who makes his poor boy run on foot while he himself rides proudly along on the donkey!" The Hodja momentarily halted the donkey. "Climb up here with me!" he said to his son. A short distance later they came upon another party, who likewise expressed their opinion clearly. "Such animal abuse! Isn't that shameless, for a cleric to torment such a poor donkey! Couldn't the two of you use your own legs and give the donkey a little rest?" The Hodja stopped once again. "Let's climb off!" he said to his son. They both dismounted and walked along on foot beside the donkey. But they had not gone far when they came upon another group of people who also had something to say about them. They heaped ridicule upon them: "Such a cheapskate! It's just like him to buy a donkey and is then too stingy to use the animal." "He must be afraid that he will rub the fur off its body." "Which of the three is the greatest donkey?" "They just might as well carry the donkey home." No sooner said than done! Nasreddin Hodja followed this advice. As soon as the people had gone on their way he said to his son, "If you ever should come into the possession of a donkey, never trim its tail in the presence of other people. Some will say that you have cut off too much, and others that you have cut off too little. If you want to please everyone, in the end your donkey will have no tail at all." Source: Ali Nouri, "Es ist schwer, allen gerecht zu werden," Nasreddin Khodjas Schwänke und Streiche: Türkische Geschichten aus Timurlenks Tagen (Breslau [Wroclaw]: Schlesische Verlags-Anstalt von S. Schottlaender, 1904), pp. 57-61 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. Return to the table of contents . Of the Olde Man and His Sonne That Brought His Asse to the Towne to Sylle England An olde man on a tyme, and a lyttell boye his sonne droue a litel asse before them, whiche he purposed to sylle at the markette towne that they went to. And bicause he so dyd, the folkes that wrought by the way syde, blamed hym. wherfore he set vp his sonne, and went hym selfe on fote. Other that sawe that, called hym foole, by cause he lette the yonge boye ryde, and he beynge so aged to goo a foote. Than he toke downe the boye, and lepte vp, and rode hym selfe. whanne he hadde rydden a lyttell waye, he harde other that blamed hym, bycause he made the lyttell yonge boye ronne after as a seruaunte, and he his father to ryde. Than he sette vppe the boye behynde hym, and so rode forthe. Anone he mette with other, that asked hym if the asse were his owne: By whiche wordes he coniected, that he did nat wel so to ouercharge the lyttell sely asse, that vnethe was able to b'eare one. Thus he troubled with their dyuers and manyfolde opinions: whiche neither with his asse vacant, nor he alone, nor his sonne alone, nor bothe to gether rydyng at ones on the asse, coulde passe forth with out detraction and blame: wherfore at last he bounde the asse feet to gether, and put through a staffe, and so he and his sonne began to beare the asse betwene them on their shulders to the towne. The nouelte of whiche syght caused euery body to laughe and blame the folysshenes of them both. The sely olde man was so sore agreued, that as he sat and rested hym on a ryuers syde, he threwe his asse in to the water. And so whan he had drowned his asse, he tourned home agayne. Thus the good man desyrynge to please euerye bodye, contentynge none at all, loste his asse. By this tale appereth playnelye, that they whiqhe commyt them selfe to the opinion of the common people, ben oppressed with great myserye and seruage: For how is it possible to please all, whan euery man hath a dyuers opinion, and dyuerslye iudgeth? And that was well knowen to the poet, whan he sayde, Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus. And as Cicero, Persius, and Flaccus say: As many men so many myndes: as many heedes so many wyttes. That, that pleaseth one, displeaseth an other: Fewe alowe that that they loue nat: and that that a man aloweth, he thynketh good. Therfore the beste is, that euery man lyue well, as a good Christen man shulde, and care nat for the vayne wordes, and ianglynge of the people. For bablynge (as Plutarchus sayth) is a greuous disease, and hard to be remedied. For that that shulde heale it (which is wordes of wisdome) cureth them that harkneth there vnto: but pratlers wille here none but them selfe. Source: The Hundred Merry Tales; or, Shakspeare's Jest Book (London: J. Chidley, 1831), pp. 62-64 . Based on a book written in the fifteenth or sixteenth century. I have retained the archaic orthography and punctuation. Return to the table of contents . An Unusual Ride Switzerland/Germany A man was riding home on his donkey, while his boy walked beside them. A traveler came along and said, "Father, it is not right for you to ride while you make your boy walk. You have stronger limbs." So the father climbed off the donkey and let his son ride. Another traveler came along and said, "Boy, it is not right for you to ride while you make your father go on foot. You have younger legs." So they both mounted the donkey and road on a little way. A third traveler came along and said, "How stupid! Two fellows on one weak animal. Someone should take a stick and knock you off its back!" So they both climbed off, and all three went along on foot, the father and son left and right, and the donkey in the middle. A fourth traveler came along and said, "You are three strange companions. Isn't it enough if two of you were to go on foot? Wouldn't it be easier if one of you would ride?" So the father tied the donkey's front legs together, and the son tied its back legs together. Then they put a strong pole that was lying beside the road through its legs and carried the donkey home on their shoulders. That's how far it can go if one tries to please everyone. Source: Johann Peter Hebel, "Seltsamer Spazierritt," Sämmtliche Werke, dritter Band: Erzählungen des rheinländischen Hausfreundes (Karlsruhe: Verlag der Chr. Fr. Müller'schen Hofbuchhandlung, 1838), pp. 11-12 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Two tales about foolish men who try to please two women. The Man and His Two Wives (Aesop). The Middle-Ages Man and the Two Widows (Jean de La Fontaine). More stories about Nasreddin Hodja . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 28, 2009. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from the Isle of Man: A Digital Library Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from the Isle of Man a digital library assembled by D. L. Ashliman © 2010-2013 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Unless otherwise noted all links lead to books digitized by books.google.com . Cumming, Joseph George. The Isle of Man: Its History, Physical, Ecclesiatical, Civil, and Legendary . London: John van Voorst, 1848. Books.google.com . Internet Archive . Evans-Wentz, W. Y. The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries . London: H. Frowde, Oxford University Press, 1911. This digital text is presented by the Internet Archive . Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology . Vol. 1. London: William Harrison Ainsworth, 1828. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries . Vol. 2. London: Whittaker, Treacher, and Company, 1833. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries . A new edition, revised and greatly enlarged. London: H. G. Bohn, 1851. Leney, I. H. (Mrs. J. W. Russell). Shadowland in Ellan Vannin; or, Folk Tales of the Isle of Man . London: Elliot Stock, 1890. Moore, A. W. The Folk-Lore of the Isle of Man, Being an Account of Its Myths, Legends, Superstitions, Customs, and Proverbs . Isle of Man: Brown and Son; London: D. Nutt, 1891. Morrison, Sophia. Manx Fairy Tales . London: David Nutt, 1911. This digital text is presented by the Internet Archive . Rhys, John. Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx . Vol. 1. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1901. Rhys, John. Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx . Vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1901. Waldron, George. A Description of the Isle of Man with Some Useful and Entertaining Reflections on the Laws, Customs, and Manners of the Inhabitants . Printed for the widow and orphans, 1831. Edited, with an introductory notice and notes by William Harrison. Douglas: Manx Society, 1865. Wentz, W. Y. Evans. See Evans-Wentz, W. Y. Links to related sites England. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from England . Grimm. Grimms' Fairy Tales in English . Ireland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Ireland . Scotland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Scotland . Slavic. Slavic and Other Eastern European Folk and Fairy Tales . Wales. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Wales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 15, 2013. Mastermaid Mastermaid Norway Once upon a time there was a king who had several sons. I don't know exactly how many there were. The youngest had no rest at home, for nothing would please him but to go out into the world and try his luck. After a long time the king was had to let him go. After he had traveled some days, he came to a giant's house, and there he got a place in the giant's service. In the morning the giant went off to herd his goats, and as he left the yard he told the prince to clean out the stable. He said, "After you have finished, you can have the rest of the day off, for you must know that you have come to an easy master. But when you are asked to do something, you must do it well, and don't even think of going into any of the rooms that are beyond the one where you slept last night, for if you do, it will cost you your life." "I surely do have an easy master," said the prince to himself, as he walked up and down the room humming and singing, for he thought there was plenty of time to clean out the stable. "But it would be good to take just a peep into his other rooms, for there must be something in them that he doesn't want me to see, since he won't allow me to enter them." He went into the first room, and there was a pot boiling on a hook by the wall, but the prince saw no fire underneath it. "I wonder what is inside it," he thought. He dipped a lock of his hair into it, and the hair seemed to have turned to copper. "What a strange stew," he said. "If you tasted it, it would do something to your gullet." With that he went into the next room. There, too, was a pot hanging by a hook. It, too, was bubbling and boiling, although there was also no fire under it. "I may as well try this too," said the prince. He put another lock into the pot, and it came out looking like silver. "We don't have such expensive stew at my father's house," said the prince. "But the important thing is how it tastes." With that he went into the third room. There, too, hung a pot, boiling just as he had seen in the two other rooms, and the prince wanted to test this one as well, so he dipped a lock of hair into it, and it came out looking like pure gold, so that it gleamed. "Is this getting worse and worse, or better and better?" asked the prince. "If he is cooking up gold in here, I wonder what he is cooking up in the next room." He wanted to see, so he went through the door into the fourth room. Well, there was no pot to be seen in there, but there was a girl seated on a bench. -- She had to be a princess. Whoever she was, she was so beautiful that the prince had never seen anyone like her all his born days. "Oh, in Jesus' name," she said, "what are you doing here?" "I entered service here yesterday," said the prince. "Service indeed! May God help you out of it!" she said. "Well, I think I've got an easy master. He hasn't given me much to do today. My day's work is finished as soon as I have cleaned out the stable." "Yes, but how will you do it?" she said; "for if you set to work to clean it like other people, ten pitchforks full will come back in for every one that you throw out. But I will teach you what to do. Turn the fork upside down, and throw with the handle, and then everything will fly out by itself." He said that he would do it that way, and then he sat there the whole day, for he and the princess soon decided that they wanted to get married. Thus, the first day of his service with the giant went by very quickly indeed. As evening approached, she said that he should go and clean out the stable before the giant came home. He went out to the stable, and thought he would just see if what she had said were true, and so he began to work like he had seen the servants in his father's stable do; but he soon had to stop, for he hadn't worked a minute before the stable was so full of dung that he hadn't room to stand. Then he did what the princess had told him to do: He turned the fork upside down and worked with the handle. In an instant the stable was as clean as if it had been scoured. When he was finished he went back to the room that the giant had given him, and began to walk up and down, humming and singing. After a while, the giant came home with his goats. "Have you cleaned the stable?" asked the giant. "Yes, master, it's all spic-and-span," answered the prince. "I'll soon see if it is," growled the giant, and strode off to the stable, where he found it just as the prince had said. "You've been talking to my Mastermaid, I can see," said the giant; "for you didn't suck this knowledge out of your own breast." "Mastermaid!" said the prince, playing dumb, "what sort of thing is that, master? I'd like to see one." "Well!" said the giant, "you'll see her soon enough." The next day the giant again went out with his goats. Before leaving he told the prince to bring in his horse, which was out grazing on the pasture, and when he had done that he could take the rest of the day off. "For you must know that you have come to an easy master," said the giant; "but if you go into any of the rooms I spoke of yesterday, I'll rip your head off." Then off he went with his flock of goats. "You are indeed an easy master," said the prince; "but I still I would like to have a chat with your Mastermaid. Maybe she'd just as soon be mine as yours!" So he went to her, and she asked him what he had to do that day. "Oh, nothing to be afraid of," he said. "I only have to go up to the pasture and bring in his horse." "Very well, and how will you go about doing it?" "Well, there's nothing very difficult about riding a horse home. I have ridden many a frisky horse before now," said the prince. "This task will not be as easy as you think, "she said, "but I'll teach you how to do it. When you see it, it will come up to you breathing fire and flame out of its nostrils like a pitch torch. You must take the bit that is hanging behind the door over there. Throw it into his mouth, and he will grow so tame that you can do anything that you want to with him." He said that he would do that and so he sat there the whole day, talking and chatting with Mastermaid about one thing and another. But they talked about how happy they would be if they could only get married, and get away from the giant. To tell the truth, the prince would have forgotten both the horse and the pasture if Mastermaid hadn't reminded him of them as evening was approaching. She told him that he had better go out bring the horse in before the giant came home. So he set off. Taking the bit which hung in the corner, he ran up to the pasture, and it wasn't long before he met the horse, with fire and flame blowing out of its nostrils. But he took his time, and when the horse came up to him, with its jaws wide apart, he threw the bit into its mouth, and the horse became as gentle as a lamb. After that it was not at all difficult to ride it home and put it into the stable. Then the prince went to his room, and began to hum and sing. When the giant came home that evening with his goats, the first words that he said were, "Have you brought my horse down from the pasture?" "Yes, master, that I have," said the prince; "and although it is a wonderful riding horse, I rode it straight home to the stable." "I'll just check on that," said the giant, and ran out to the stable. The horse was standing there just as the prince had said. "You've been talking to my Mastermaid, you have!" said the giant again. "You haven't sucked this out of your own breast." "Yesterday master talked of this Mastermaid, and today it's the same story. God bless you, master! Won't you show me the thing at once? I really would like to see it," said the prince, pretending to be simple-minded and stupid. "You'll get to see her soon enough," said the giant. On the third day at dawn the giant went out into the woods again with his goats. Before leaving he said to the prince, "Today you must go to Hell and get my fire tax. When you have done that you can have the rest of the day off, for you must know that you have come to an easy master." And with that off he went. "Easy master, indeed!" said the prince. "You may be easy, but you give me hard tasks all the same. I may as well see if I can find your Mastermaid. You claim that she belongs to you, but I'll see if she won't tell me what to do," and so he went to her once again. Mastermaid asked what the giant had asked him to do that day, and he told her how he was to go to Hell and fetch the fire tax. "And how will you go about it?" asked Mastermaid. "You will have to tell me," said the prince, "for I have never been to Hell in my life. Even if I knew the way, I wouldn't know how much I am to ask for." "Well, I'll tell you," said Mastermaid. "Go to the steep cliff over there beyond the pasture. Take the club that is lying there and knock on the face of the cliff. Someone who is all glowing with fire will come out. Tell him about your errand. When he asks you how much you need, say, 'As much as I can carry.'" He said that he would do just that, and then he sat there with Mastermaid all that day too. Although evening was approaching, he would have sat there until now, if Mastermaid had not reminded him that it was time to be off to Hell to fetch the giant's fire tax before he came home. So he went on his way, and did just as Mastermaid had told him. When he reached the rock he picked up the club and gave a great thump. The cliff opened, and out came a person whose face was aglow, and from whose eyes and nostrils flew sparks of fire. "What do you want?" he said. "I've come from the giant to fetch his fire tax," said the prince. "How much do you need?" said the other. "I never ask for more than I am able to carry," said the prince. "Lucky for you that you did not ask for a whole horseload," said the man from the cliff; "but come now into the cliff with me, and you shall have it." So the prince went inside with him, and what heaps and heaps of gold and silver he saw lying in there, just like stones in a gravel pit. He got a load just as big as he was able to carry, and set off for home with it. When the giant came home with his goats that evening, the prince went into his room, and began to hum and sing just as he had done the evenings before. "Have you been to Hell after my fire tax?" roared the giant. "Oh yes, that I have, master," answered the prince. "Where did you put it?" said the giant. "The sack is on the bench over there," said the prince. "I'll check on that," said the giant, and went to the bench. There he saw that the sack was so full that the gold and silver dropped out on the floor as soon as he untied the string. "You've been talking to my Mastermaid, that I can see," said the giant; "and if you have, I'll rip your head off." "Mastermaid!" said the prince; "yesterday master talked of this Mastermaid, and today he talks of her again, and the day before yesterday it was the same story. I only wish I could see what sort of thing she is, I do!" "Well, wait until tomorrow," said the giant, "and then I'll take you in to her myself." "Thank you kindly, master," said the prince; "but I'll bet that master is only joking." The next day the giant took him in to Mastermaid, and said to her, "You must cut his throat, and boil him in the great big pot, you know the one I mean, and when the stew is ready just give me a call." Then he lay down on the bench to sleep, and began to snore so loud that it sounded like thunder in the mountains. Mastermaid took a knife and cut the prince in his little finger, and let three drops of blood fall on a stool. Then she took all the old rags and soles of shoes, and all the rubbish she could lay her hands on, and put it all into the pot. She then filled a chest full of ground gold, and took a lump of salt, and a flask of water that hung behind the door, and she took, besides, a golden apple, and two golden chickens, and off she went with the prince, away from the giant's house as fast as they could. When they had gone a little way they came to the sea, and after that they sailed over the sea; but I do not know where they got the ship from. After the giant had slept a good bit, he began to stretch as he lay on the bench, and called out, "Will it soon be done?" "Only just begun," answered the first drop of blood on the stool. So the giant went back to sleep, and slumbered a long, long time. At last he began to toss about a little, and cried out, "Do you hear what I say? Will it soon be done?" But he did not look up this time any more than the first, for he was still half asleep. "Half done," said the second drop of blood. The giant again thought it was Mastermaid, so he turned over on his other side, and fell asleep again. When he had slept for many hours, he began to stir and stretch his old bones, and he called out, "Isn't it done yet?" "Done to a turn," said the third drop of blood. So the giant got up, and began to rub his eyes, but he couldn't see who it was that was talking to him. He searched and called for Mastermaid, but no one answered. "Ah, well! I dare say she's just gone outside for a bit," he thought, and took up a spoon and went up to the pot to taste the stew. There he found nothing but shoe soles, and rags, and such stuff, all boiled up together, so that he couldn't tell the thick from the thin. As soon as he saw this, he realized what had happened, and he became so angry that he barely knew which leg to stand upon. Away he went after the prince and Mastermaid, until the wind whistled behind him; but he soon came to the water and couldn't cross it. "Never mind," he said; "I can fix this. I'll just call on my stream-sucker." So he called on his stream-sucker, and he came and stooped down, and took one, two, three, gulps; and then the water fell so much in the sea that the giant could see Mastermaid and the prince sailing in their ship. "Throw out the lump of salt!" said Mastermaid. So the prince threw it overboard, and it grew up into a mountain so high, right across the sea, that the giant couldn't pass it, and the stream-sucker couldn't help him by swallowing up any more water. "Never mind," cried the giant. "There's a fix for this too." So he called on his hill-borer to come and bore through the mountain, so the stream-sucker might crawl through and take another swallow; but just as they had made a hole through the hill, and the stream-sucker was about to drink, Mastermaid told the prince to pour a drop or two out of the flask into the sea, and then the sea was just as full as ever, and before the stream-sucker could take another gulp, they reached the land and were saved from the giant. So they made up their minds to go home to the prince's father; but the prince would not hear of Mastermaid's walking, for he did not think it would be appropriate, neither for her nor for him. "Just wait here ten minutes," he said, "while I go home after the seven horses which stand in my father's stall. It's not very far, and I won't be gone very long; I will not hear of my sweetheart walking to my father's palace." "No!" said Mastermaid, "please don't leave me, for once you are home in your palace you'll forget me outright; I know you will." "Oh!" said the prince, "how can I forget you; you with whom I have gone through so much, and whom I love so dearly?" There was no stopping him, he insisted on going home to fetch the coach and seven horses, and she was to wait for him by the seaside. Finally Mastermaid gave in. "But when you get home," she warned, "don't even take the time to greet anyone, but go straight to the stable, hitch up the horses, and drive back as quickly as you can. They will all come to you, but you must pretend that you cannot see them; and above all else, do not eat anything, for if you do, we shall both come to grief." The prince promised all of this. Now, just as he came home to the palace, one of his brothers was preparing to get married. The bride, with all her relatives, had just arrived at the palace. They all thronged around him, and asked about this thing and that, and wanted him to go inside with them. He pretended that he could not see them, and went straight to the stall and began to hitch up the horses. When they saw they could not get him to go inside, they came out to him with food and drink, the best of everything they had prepared for the feast, but the prince would not taste a thing, but busied himself with the horses. Finally the bride's sister rolled an apple across the yard to him, saying, "Well, if you won't eat anything else, at least take a bite of this, for you must be hungry and thirsty after your long journey." So he picked up the apple and took a bite out of it. He barely had the piece in his mouth before he forgot Mastermaid, and that he was going to drive back for her. "I must be crazy," he said. "What am I doing here with this coach and horses?" So he put the horses back into the stable, and went along with the others into the palace, and it was soon settled that he should marry the bride's sister, who had rolled the apple to him. Mastermaid sat by the seashore, and waited and waited for the prince, but the prince did not come. Finally she left the shore, and walked a while until she came to a little hut, which stood by itself in a grove near the king's palace. She went in and asked if she might stay there. The hut belonged to an old woman, who was a disgusting and cranky old hag. At first she would not hear of Mastermaid's lodging in her house, but finally, in exchange for kind words and high rent, Mastermaid was permitted to stay there. The hut was as dark and dirty as a pigsty, so Mastermaid said she would clean it up a little, so that their house might look like other people's. The old hag did not like this either, and complained and became angry; but Mastermaid did not pay any attention to her. She took her chest of gold, and threw a handful or so into the fire. The gold melted and bubbled over out of the grate, spreading itself over the whole hut, until it was entirely plated with gold, both outside and in. But as soon as the gold began to bubble up, the old hag became so afraid that she ran out as if the evil one were after her. As she ran through the door, she forgot to stoop down, and she crushed her head against the door frame. The next morning the sheriff passed that way. He could scarce believe his eyes when he saw the golden hut shining and glistening there in the grove; but he was still more astonished when he went in and saw the lovely maiden who was sitting there. He fell in love with her at once, and begged her on the spot to marry him. "Very well, but do you have a lot of money?" asked Mastermaid. He said that he had plenty, and he went home to fetch it. That evening he came back with a half-bushel sack filled with money, and set it down on the bench. Mastermaid said that he was rich enough and that she would have him. They went to bed together, but they had barely lain down before she said she must get up again, because she had forgotten to bank up the fire. "Please don't get up," said the sheriff; "I'll take care of it." He jumped out of bed, and ran to the hearth. "Tell me as soon as you have taken hold of the poker," said Mastermaid. "I'm holding it now," said the sheriff. Then Mastermaid said, "God grant that you may hold the poker and that the poker may hold you, and may you heap hot burning coals over yourself until morning." So the sheriff had to stand there all night long, shoveling hot burning coals over himself. He begged, and prayed, and wept, but none of this made the coals a bit colder. As soon as day broke, and he finally was able to rid himself of the poker, he set off as though the bailiff or the devil were after him. Everyone who met him stared at him, for he acted like a madman, and looked like he had been flayed and tanned. They wondered what had happened to him, but he was too ashamed to tell anyone. The next day the district judge passed by the place where Mastermaid lived, and he too saw how it gleamed and glistened in the grove, and he went inside to find out who lived there. When he saw the beautiful maiden, he fell even more madly in love with her than had the sheriff, and he immediately began to woo her. Mastermaid responded to him, as she had responded to the sheriff, by asking if he had a lot of money. The judge replied that he was wealthy enough, and to prove it he went home to fetch his money. That evening he came back with a large sack of money -- I think that the sack held a whole bushel -- and set it down on the bench. So she accepted him, and they went to bed. But Mastermaid had forgotten to shut the outside door, and she would have to get up and lock it for the night. "What! You should do that!" said the judge. "No, you lie here, and I'll go and take care of it." He jumped up like a pea on a drumhead, and ran into the hallway. "Tell me when you have hold of the door latch" said Mastermaid. "I've got hold of it now," said the judge. "Then may you hold the door, and may the door hold you, and may you go back and forth until morning!" said Mastermaid. And so the judge had to dance the whole night through. He had never experienced such a waltz before, and would not want to experience such a waltz again. He pulled the door one way, and then the door pulled him back the other; and so it went on and on. First he was dashed into one corner of the hallway, and then into the other, until he was almost battered to death. At first he cursed and swore; then he begged and prayed, but the door cared for nothing but holding its own until the break of day. As soon as it let him go, the judge ran off, leaving his money behind to pay for his night's lodging, and forgetting his courtship altogether, for -- to tell the truth -- he was afraid that the door might come dancing after him. Everyone who met him stared and gaped at him, for he too acted like a madman, and he would not have looked worse if he had spent the whole night butting against a flock of rams. On the third day the bailiff passed that way, and he too saw the golden hut, and went inside to find out who lived there. He had barely set eyes on Mastermaid before he began to woo her. So she responded to him as she had with the other two. If he had lots of money she would have him; if not, he might as well go about his business. Well, the bailiff said that he wasn't so badly off, and that he would go home and fetch the money. When he came back that evening, he had a bigger sack even than the judge had had -- it must have been at least a bushel and a half -- , and put it down on the bench. So it was soon settled that he was to have Mastermaid, but they had barely gone to bed before Mastermaid said she had forgotten to bring the calf home from the meadow, so she would have to get up and drive him into the stall. "No!" swore the bailiff. He would go and take care of it. And stout and fat as he was, he jumped up as nimbly as a young boy. "Tell me when you've got hold of the calf's tail," said Mastermaid. "I have hold of it now," said the bailiff. "Then may you hold the calf's tail, and may the calf's tail hold you, and may you tour the world together until morning." The race began at once. Away they went, he and the calf, over high and low, across hill and dale, and the more the bailiff cursed and swore, the faster the calf ran and jumped. By dawn the poor bailiff had nearly collapsed, and he was so glad to be able to let go of the calf's tail that he forgot his sack of money and everything else. He was a large man, and he went home a little slower than the judge and the sheriff had done, and the slower he went the more time people had to gape and stare at him; and I must say they made good use of their time, for he was terribly tattered and torn from his dance with the calf. The next day there was to be a wedding at the palace, the elder prince to be married. And the younger one, the one who had lived with the giant, was to marry the bride's sister. They had just got into the coach and were about to drive off, when one of the harness pins snapped off. They put in another, and then a third, but they all broke, whatever kind of wood they used to make them with. It all took a long time, and they couldn't get to church, and everyone became very unhappy. All at once the sheriff said -- for he too had been invited to the wedding -- that a maiden lived over there in the grove, "And if you can only get her to lend you her fireplace poker, I know very well that it will hold." They sent a messenger at once, and he asked the maiden very politely if she would not mind lending them the poker that the sheriff had spoken of. The maiden said "yes," they might have it; so they got a harness pin which wasn't likely to break. But just as they were driving off, the bottom of the coach fell apart. They set to work to make a new bottom as best they could; but however many nails they used nor whatever kind of wood they chose, as soon as they put a new bottom into the coach, it fell apart again as soon as they drove off, so they were even worse off than when they had broken the harness pin. Then the judge said -- for if the sheriff was there, you may be sure that the judge was there too -- "A maiden lives over there in the grove, and if you could only get her to lend you half of her outside door, I know it would hold together." They sent another message to the grove, and he asked very politely if they couldn't borrow the golden door that the judge had described; and they got it on the spot. They were just setting out, but now the horses were not strong enough to draw the coach, though there were six of them; then they put on eight, and ten, and twelve, but the more they put on, and the more the coachman whipped, the more the coach wouldn't stir an inch. By this time it was late in the day, and everyone about the palace was very unhappy; they had to make it to the church, and yet it looked as if they would never get there. Then the bailiff said that a maiden lived in the golden hut over there in the grove, and if they could only borrow her calf, "I know it can pull the coach, even if it were as heavy as a mountain." Well, they all thought it would look silly to be drawn to church by a calf, but there was nothing they could do about it, so they had to send a third time, and ask very politely in the king's name, if he couldn't borrow the calf the bailiff had spoken of, and Mastermaid let them have it on the spot, for she was not going to say "no" this time either. So they put the calf on before the horses, and waited to see if it would do any good, and away went the coach over high and low, and stock and stone, so that they could barely catch their breath; sometimes they were on the ground, and sometimes up in the air, and when they reached the church, the calf began to run around and around it like a spinning wheel, so that they had a hard time getting out of the coach, and into the church. On the way back home they went even faster, and they reached the palace almost before they knew they had set out. Now when they sat down to dinner, the prince -- the one who had been with the giant -- said he thought they ought to ask the maiden who had lent them her poker, her door, and her calf, to come up to the palace. "For," he said he, "if we hadn't got these three things, we would still be stuck here." The king thought that that was only right and fair, so he sent five of his best men down to the golden hut to greet the maiden from the king, and to ask her if she wouldn't be so good as to come and dine at the palace. "Send the king my greetings," said Mastermaid, "and tell him, if he's too good to come to me, then I am too good to go to him." So the king had to go himself, and then Mastermaid went with him without any more bother; and as the king thought she was more than she seemed to be, he sat her down in the highest seat by the side of the youngest bridegroom. Now, when they had sat a little while at the table, Mastermaid took out her golden apple, and the golden cock and hen, which she had carried off from the giant, and put them down on the table before her, and the cock and hen began at once to peck at one another, and to fight for the golden apple. "Just look," said the prince; "and see how those two are struggling for the apple." "Yes, just as we two had to struggle to escape from the cliff," said Mastermaid. Then the spell was broken, and the prince knew her again, and he was very glad indeed. But as for the witch who had rolled the apple over to him, he had her tied to twenty-four horses and torn to pieces, so that there was not a bit of her left. Then they celebrated the wedding for real. And even though they were still stiff and sore, the sheriff, the judge, and the bailiff kept it up with the best of them. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Mestermø , Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiania [Oslo], 1842-1852), translated by George Webb Dasent (1859). Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman . © 2020. Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 313, 882A* Related links D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 21, 2020 Master Builder Legends Master Builders and Their Supernatural Helpers migratory legends of type 7065 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2024 Contents Loki and the Master Builder (From The Prose Edda of Snorri Sturluson. King Olaf and the Giant (Norway/Sweden). The Giant Finn and Lund's Cathedral (Sweden). Esbern Snare and the Kalundborg Church (Denmark). The Builder Zi (Denmark). Who Built the Reynir Church? (Iceland). The Devil's Church near Dembe (Poland). Why the North Tower of Saint Stephen's Cathedral Remains Unfinished (Austria). Saint Michael's Church in Steyr (Austria). Construction of Saint Lawrence's Church near Altheim (Austria). The Two Master Builders at Wasserburg (Germany). The Master Builder of the Würzburg Cathedral (Germany). The Master Builder of the Bamberg Cathedral (Germany). Related Links. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Loki and the Master Builder From The Prose Edda of Snorri Sturluson (Iceland) In the early days of the settlement of the gods, when they had established Midgard and made Valhalla, a builder came to them and offered to make a stronghold so excellent that it would be safe and secure against cliff giants and frost ogres, even if they got inside Midgard. He stipulated that as his reward he was to have Freyja as his wife and possession of the sun and moon besides. The Æsir had a conference, and they struck this bargain with the builder. He should receive what he asked for, if he succeeded in building the stronghold in one winter. But if, on the first day of summer, any part of it was unfinished, he was to forfeit his reward; nor was he to receive anyone's help in the work. When they told him these terms, however, he asked them to let him have the help of his horse, which was called Svadilfari, and acting on the advice of Loki, the gods granted this to him. He began building the stronghold the first day of winter, and by night used his horse for hauling the stones for it. The Æsir were astonished at the size of the huge boulders the horse hauled. It performed twice as much of that tremendous task as the builder. Now there were strong witnesses to their bargain. It had been confirmed with many oaths, because the giant had not considered it safe to be among the Æsir without promise of safe-conduct, if Thor should come home. At that time he had gone into the east to fight trolls. As winter drew to an end, the building of the stronghold had made good progress. It was so high and strong that it could not be taken. By three days before summer the work was almost finished. The gods then sat down in their judgment seats and sought for a way out. They recalled that it had been Loki who had given the advice to marry Freyja into Giantland and also to ruin the sky and heaven by giving the sun and moon to the giants. They threatened him with an evil death if he did not devise a plan whereby the builder would forfeit his wages. Loki swore that he would do this, no matter what it might cost him. That same evening, when the builder was driving out after stones with his stallion Svadilfari, a mare ran out of a wood up to the horse and whinnied to him. The stallion became frantic and ran into the wood after the mare. The two these horses galloped about all night, and the work was delayed. The next day, when the builder saw that the work would not be finished, he flew into a rage. As soon as the Æsir saw for certain that it was a giant who had come there, they disregarded their oaths and called on Thor. He came at once and raised the hammer Mjölnir aloft. Thor paid the builder his wages, and it was not the sun and the moon. He struck him such a blow that his skull shivered into fragments, and he sent him down to Niflhel. Loki, however, had had such dealings with Svadilfari that some time later he bore a foal. It was gray and had eight legs, and amongst gods and men that horse is the best. Source: Abstracted from Snorri Sturluson, The Prose Edda , translated from the Icelandic by Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur (New York: The American-Scandinavian Foundation, 1916), pp. 53-55 . Midgard (also spelled Miðgarð) is the "middle kingdom" of Norse mythology, the dwelling place of the gods. Valhalla is the home of fallen warriors in Norse mythology. Freyja is the Norse goddess of love. The Æsir (singular Áss) were the most important family of gods in Norse mythology. Loki appears repeatedly in Norse myths. His role is that of trickster, shape-shifter, liar, and general troublemaker. Thor is the Norse god of thunder. Armed with his battle hammer Mjölnir, he was a sworn enemy of giants, trolls, and dark elves. For more information see Thor's Home Page. Niflhel is apparently a synonym for Niflheim, the Norse underworld and future-life abode of the wicked. Marked by cold and damp, it is overseen by Loki's daughter Hel. The eight-legged horse borne by Loki was named Sleipnir and became a prized possession of Odin. A picture of Odin astride Sleipnir is featured on the famous Tjängvide picture stone from the Island of Gotland (Sweden). Return to the table of contents . King Olaf and the Giant Norway King Olaf of Norway, engrossed in thought, wandered between mountain and valley. He wanted to build a church whose equal could not be found far and wide, but he realized that he could not do so without severely taxing his kingdom. While sadly pondering this problem he met a man of curious appearance, who asked him why he was so contemplative. Olaf revealed the problem to him, and the giant (or troll) offered to accomplish the task for him within a certain time. His reward would be the sun and the moon or Saint Olaf himself. Olaf entered into this agreement, but then drew up plans that he thought would be impossible to execute. The church was to be so large that seven priests would be able to preach in it at one time without disturbing one another. The pillars and decorations, both inside and out, were to be of hard flint, and so forth. Soon such a church was standing there, complete except for roof and steeple. Deeply concerned, Olaf again wandered through the mountains and valleys. Suddenly, from within a mountain, he a child crying and a giantess comforting it with the words: Shush, shush, tomorrow your father, Wind and Weather, will come home, and he will bring you the sun and the moon or Saint Olaf himself! Olaf returned home, elated with this discovery (for one can destroy an evil spirit's power with his name). Everything was finished. The steeple had just been set into place. Then Olaf called out: Vind och Veder! du har satt spiran sneder! (Wind and Weather, you have set the steeple on crooked!) The giant fell from the top of the church with a horrible crash, and burst into many pieces of flintstone. Source: Jacob Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie , 4th ed., vol. 1 (Berlin: Ferd. Dümmlers Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1875), pp. 454-55 . First published 1835. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. In other variants the troll's name is Skaane, Tvester, Bläster, or Slätt. The troll-built church is variously located in Seljord or Trondheim (Norway), in Lund (Sweden) or in Kalundborg (Denmark). These legends are related to the type 500 fairy tales in which magic helpers lose power over their beneficiaries/victims when the latter discover their names. Examples include "Tom Tit Tot" (England) and "Rumpelstiltskin" (Germany). Return to the table of contents . The Giant Finn and Lund's Cathedral Sweden In the days long gone by there lived in Helgonabacken -- the Hills of Helgona -- near Lund, a family of giants who one day heard, with great anxiety and consternation, that a holy man had come into the country, from Saxony, to build a church to the White Christ. While Laurentius, such was the holy man's name, was selecting his site and laying out the plans for the temple, there stood at his side, one day, none other than Finn, the giant of Helgonabacken, who thus addressed him, "Truly the White Christ is a God worthy of such a temple, and I will build it for you, if, when it is finished, you will tell me what my name is. But, mark well my condition, oh, wise man: If you cannot tell me, you must give to my little ones the two small torches -- the sun and the moon -- that travel yonder over heaven's expanse." Now, it is so ordered in the giant world that it is of vital importance the name of the giant should be kept from mankind. Should it be revealed, the giant must die, and man is freed from all obligations that may have been imposed upon him by compact with the giant. Laurentius could not reasonably promise so much, but anxious to have the church built, he offered, instead, his eyes, trusting to fortune to discover to him the giant's name before the completion of the church. The giant, satisfied with the bargain, entered at once upon his work, and with wonderful rapidity the church grew upward. Soon there remained nothing more to complete it than to set one stone on the tower. The day preceding that on which it was expected this last stone would be put in place, Laurentius stood on Helgonabacken in deep melancholy. It seemed inevitable that he must lose his eyes, and that he was now taking his last look at the light of heaven and all that had made the world and life so attractive to him. Next day all would be darkness and sorrow. During these gloomy reflections he heard the cry of a child from within the hill, and the voice of the giant mother endeavoring to quiet it with a song, in which he clearly distinguished the words, "Silent, silent, little son of mine. Morning will bring your father Finn, with either moon and sun or the priest Laurentius' eyes." Beside himself with joy, Laurentius hastened to the church. "Come down, Finn!" he cried. "The stone that now remains we ourselves can set. Come down, Finn, for we no longer need your help!" Foaming with rage, the giant rushed from the tower to the ground, and laying hold of one of the pillars tried to pull the church down. At this instant his wife with her child joined him. She, too, grasped a pillar and would help her husband in the work of destruction, but just as the building was tottering to the point of falling, they were both turned to stones, and there they lie today, each embracing a pillar. Source: Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago, Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 17-19 . This tale is from the province of Skåne. Footnote in the original: Similar legends are connected with a number of our churches, as the cathedral of Trondheim [Norway], where the troll is called Skalle. Also with Eskellsätter's church in the department of Näs in Vermland [Sweden], where the giant architect is called Kinn, who fell from the tower when the priest Eskil called, "Kinn, set the point right!" Again, with a church in Norrland [Sweden], where the troll is called Wind and Weather, and concerning whom the legend relates that just as the giant was putting up the cross, St. Olaf said, "Wind and Weather, you have set the spire awry." Of the church at Kalundborg in Sjælland [Denmark], whose designer Esbern Snare, it is said, entered into a contract much the same as that made with the giant Finn by the holy Laurentius. Return to the table of contents . Esbern Snare and the Kalundborg Church Denmark When Esbern Snare was about building a church in Kalundborg, he saw clearly that his means were not fully adequate to the task. But a troll came to him and offered his services; and Esbern Snare made an agreement with him on these conditions, that he should be able to tell the troll's name when the church was finished; or in case he could not, that he should give him his heart and his eyes. The work now went on rapidly, and the troll set the church on stone pillars; but when all was nearly done, and there was only half a pillar wanting in the church, Esbern began to get frightened, for the name of the troll was yet unknown to him. One day he was going about the fields all alone, and in great anxiety on account of the perilous state he was in; when, tired, and depressed, by reason of his exceeding grief and affliction, he laid him down on Ulshøj bank to rest himself a while. While he was lying there, he heard a troll-woman within the hill saying these words: Lie still, baby mine! Tomorrow cometh Fin, Father thine, And giveth thee Esbern Snare's eyes and heart to play with. When Esbern heard this, he recovered his spirits, and went back to the church. The troll was just then coming with the half pillar that was wanting from the church; but when Esbern saw him, he hailed him by his name, and called him "Fin." The troll was so enraged at this, that he went off with the half pillar through the air, and this is the reason that the church has but three pillars and a half. Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), pp. 116-17 . This story is also told by H. A. Guerber in her Myths of the Norsemen from the Eddas and Sagas (London: George G. Harrap and Company, 1909), pp. 240-41 , and in a ballad entitled "Kallundborg Church" by John Greenleaf Whittier (1807-1892). Kalundborg (also spelled Kallundborg) is a city in northwestern Sjælland (Zealand). Esbern Snare's famous church, the Frue Kirke, built in 1170, still stands. Link to a home page (in Danish), including a photograph of Vor Frue Kirke in Kalundborg. The female troll's verse in Danish is: Tie stille, barn min! Imorgen kommer Fin, Fa'er din, Og gi'er dig Esbern Snares øine og hjerte at lege med. Return to the table of contents . The Builder Zi Denmark A man had undertaken to build the church at Eckwadt by a certain day, but was soon sensible that it was not in his power to fulfil his contract. One night, while wandering about out of humour and pondering as to the course he should pursue, a little hill-man accosted him, and offered him his services. The builder at first listened contemptuously to the little man's magniloquent speech, but at length it was settled between them, that the dwarf should erect the church within the given space, and that the builder should by that time ascertain his name; if he failed in so doing, he should, body and soul, belong to the little man. Rejoiced at heart the builder went home; for he thought: "If he himself will not tell me his name, I can, at all events, extract it from his work-people." But it fell out quite contrary to his expectations; for the little man used neither workmen nor laborers, but finished everything himself with incredible rapidity; so that the builder clearly saw that all would be complete by the time agreed on. Sadder than the first time, he was again wandering about the fields, when, in passing by a mount, he heard a crying within it, and on listening more attentively, distinguished the following words: Vys! vaer still Baen mint, Maaen kommer Faer Zi Mae Christen Bloi te dae. Hush! Be still, my child, Tomorrow comes thy father Zi With Christian blood for thee. Now was the builder overjoyed, for he well knew to whom the words alluded, and hastened home. It was just the morning of the day on which the church should be ready, and the dwarf was busied on placing the last stone -- for he worked only during the night -- when the builder called to him from a distance: God Maaen, Zi! God Maaen, Zi! Saetter du nu den sidste Steen i? Good morning, Zi! Good morning, Zi! Are you now placing the last stone? When the goblin heard himself addressed by name he was furious, and hurling away the stone that he was in the act of placing, retired within his cave. The hole which was thus left could never be filled up. In the night everything was cast out. A mason, that once endeavored to build it up, was attacked by a wasting malady. At a later period, a window was placed there, which the goblin suffered to remain. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology: Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 3 (London: Edward Lumley, 1852), pp. 38-39 . Eckwadt (German spelling; Danish spelling not known) was a church parish near Aabenraa (German spelling Apenrade), Denmark. Footnote in the original: The church at Munkbrarup, in Angeln, was built in like manner. The miserable builder hears a child crying under the earth, and the mother saying to it: "Hush, thou little creature! This evening thy father Sipp will come, and give thee Christian blood to drink." Return to the table of contents . Who Built the Reynir Church? Iceland A certain farmer once lived at Reynir, in the district of Myrdal. He was ordered by the bishop to build a good church near his farmhouse, but had so much difficulty in getting enough timber before the hay making season, and then so much trouble in finding proper builders, that he feared he should be unable to finish the work before the winter. One day as he was walking in his field, thinking sadly over the matter, and how he should excuse himself to the bishop for failing to obey his bidding, a strange man, whom he had never seen before, met him, and stopping him, offered him his services in building the church, declaring that he should require the services of no other workman. Then the farmer asked him what payment he would require for such labor, and the man made the following condition -- that the farmer should either find out his name before he had finished the church, or else give him his son, who was then a little boy six years old. The farmer thought these easy terms enough, and laughing in his sleeve, gladly consented to them. So the strange builder set to work, and worked with a will, by day and by night, speaking but little to anybody, until the church rose beneath his hands as quickly as if by magic, and the farmer plainly foresaw that it would be finished even before the hay making was over. But by this time he had rather changed his mind about the payment he had before thought so easy, and was very far from feeling glad that the end of the church building was so near; for do what he would, ask whom he would, and search the country round as he would, and had done, he could not, for the life of him, find out the name of his quick-handed mason. Still the church went on not a whit slower for his anxiety, and autumn came, and a very little more labor would finish the building. One day, the last day of the work, he happened to be wandering outside his field, brooding in deep grief over what now seemed to be the heavy price he would have to pay to his master builder, and threw himself down upon a grass mound which he came to. He had scarcely lain there a minute, when he heard someone singing, and listening, he found that the voice was that of a mother lulling her child, and came from inside the mound upon which he had flung himself down. This is what it said: Soon will thy father Finnur come from Reynir, Bringing a little playmate for thee, here. And these words were repeated over and over again; but the farmer, who pretty soon guessed what they meant, did not wait to hear how many times the mother thought fit to sing them, or what the child seemed to think of them, but started up and ran with all speed, his heart filled with joy, to the church, in which he found the builder just nailing the last plank over the altar. "Well done, friend Finnur!" said he, "how soon you have finished your work!" No sooner had these words passed his lips than friend Finnur, letting the plank fall from his hand, vanished, and was never seen again. Source: Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 49-51 . Translation slightly revised by D. L. Ashliman. Link to this legend in the original Icelandic: Jón Árnason, "Kirkjusmiðurinn á Reyni," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 58 . Reynir is near the town of Vík on the coast of south central Iceland. Return to the table of contents . The Devil's Church near Dembe Poland Many years ago in the woods near Dembe in the vicinity of Czarnków there lived a hermit who was in league with the devil and who also had sold his soul to him. When he realized that he was soon to die, and being afraid of hell, he summoned the devil and told him that he could have his soul only if he would fulfill a few wishes. The devil agreed to this, upon which the hermit asked the devil to fell the oak forest and from the wood to build a church and a coffin for him. All this was to be completed during the bewitching hour. He was permitted to have two companions help him with the work, but no more. The devil agreed to this, and started to work. However, he did not finish within the prescribed time, for just as he was beginning to build the tower, the clock struck twelve, and he had to leave. As a consequence of the fear he had suffered, the hermit fell ill, but he recovered again, and his health improved. In the following week he went to the priest and told him his story. At first the priest wanted to have the church torn down that had been built by the devil, but then he decided to complete its construction. From that time on the church was called the devil's church, but it did not stand long, for that same year it was struck by lightning and burned completely to the ground. It is said that during the bewitching hour at the place where it stood the devil can be heard, howling with anger because the hermit's soul escaped from him. No one dares to settle there for fear that some misfortune might befall him. Source: Otto Knoop, "Die Teufelskirche bei Dembe," Ostmärkische Sagen, Märchen und Erzählungen (Lissa im Posen: Oskar Eulitz' Verlag, 1909), no. 35, pp. 53-54. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Czarnków is a port on the Notec River in west central Poland. Prior to 1945 this region's population included a substantial minority of ethnic Germans. Return to the table of contents . Why the North Tower of Saint Stephen's Cathedral Remains Unfinished Austria Hans Puchsbaum, a journeyman mason in the Viennese Cathedral Construction Guild of Saint Stephen, was in love with Maria, the beautiful daughter of Master Builder Hans von Brachawitz, who since the year 1430 had been directing the construction of the south tower. The proud builder had selected the son of a wealthy burgher to marry his daughter and was thoroughly opposed to her affinity for Hans Puchsbaum. "If you can finish the north tower at the same hour that I complete the south tower, then you may take Maria to wife," thundered hard-hearted Brachawitz to his journeyman. This condition was practically impossible. No one would be able to complete such a construction project in so short a time. The hopes and dreams of poor Puchsbaum disappeared. In despair he stood there and murmured to himself: "Only the devil could complete such a masterpiece. I shall leave this city, and Maria will belong to another man." He had scarcely spoken these words when the Evil One appeared before him. "I will help you build the tower, but during the entire construction time you may not utter the name of God nor that of any of any of His saints, otherwise your soul will belong to me," was the offer made to him by the Spirit of Hell. Plagued with a bad conscience, Hans asked himself if he should build a house of God with the help of Satan. But his love of Maria conquered all doubts, and he entered into the pact with the devil. The townspeople of Vienna watched in amazement as the north tower scaffolding grew upward and the construction advanced rapidly. Puchsbaum himself was the most industrious of all the workers. Day and night he mixed mortar and set stones into place. The tower, growing ever higher, was decorated by the most glorious stone figures. Puchsbaum adhered rigorously to the conditions set by the devil, and it appeared less and less likely that the builder would have to surrender his soul. Then the Evil One resorted to trickery. Assuming Maria's shape, he walked across Saint Stephen's Square with his head bowed. Hans Puchsbaum, who was standing high above on the scaffolding, recognized Maria. Forgetting his oath, he called out her name. Immediately the heavy beams broke apart and Puchsbaum fell to the ground. The tower remained unfinished. No one dared continue with the devil's work. Abstracted from the following sources: Johann Nepomuk Vogl, "Meister Hans Puchsbaum," Dom-Sagen (Vienna: Verlag der Carl Has'schen Buchhandlung, 1845), pp. 69-74 . J. Günther, "Meister Hans Puchsbaum," Großes poetisches Sagenbuch des deutschen Volks , vol. 2 (Jena: Friedrich Mauke, 1846), pp. 112-13 . Elisabeth Jaindl, "Hans Puchsbaum, der Baumeister von St. Stephan," Der Stephansdom im alten Wien: Geschichte und Geschichten (Korneuburg: Kellner Verlagsgesellschaft, n.d.), pp. 27-28. Links to additional German-language versions of this legend: Meister Hans Puchsbaum . Buxbaums Sturz vom Stephansturm . Return to the table of contents . Saint Michael's Church in Steyr Austria It is said that the devil built Saint Michael's Church in Steyr. After finishing the building he left the church through a hole. The person relating this story assures us that the hole still can be seen. Another person reports the following account: Some distance from Steyr is the devil's "hoarding place," where he hoards money. With an oath a priest forced the devil to deliver all this money gradually into Saint Michael's Church. After arriving with the last load, the devil departed through the hole behind the alter. Source (books.google.com): P. Amand Baumgarten, "Die Michaelerkirche in Steyer," Aus der volksmässigen Ueberlieferung der Heimat (Linz: Oberösterreichischer Musealverein, 1864), p. 120 . Return to the table of contents . Construction of Saint Lawrence's Church near Altheim Austria Saint Lawrence's Church near Altheim was built under the following circumstances: The master builder made a pact with the devil, that if the latter would help with the construction, upon the church's successful completion the devil would receive the soul of the master builder and also that of a second person. When the church was completed, and the cross was about to be installed, the carpenter, who had climbed onto the tower, found two holes. He shouted down to the master builder: which of the two holes he should put the cross into. The master builder answered: "It's finished!" An in that instant he fell down dead. With that the carpenter fell from the tower, breaking his neck. And a mass of toads crept out of the dead master's mouth. Source (books.google.com): P. Amand Baumgarten, "Der Bau der Kirche St. Laurenz unweit Altheim," Aus der volksmässigen Ueberlieferung der Heimat (Linz: Oberösterreichischer Musealverein, 1864), p. 121 . Return to the table of contents . The Two Master Builders at Wasserburg Germany The Wasserburg town hall was built more than 600 years ago. A legend is connected to the history of this building. At Wasserburg they were building a church and a town hall at the same time. Thus they engaged many masons and construction workers, and instructed the masters to not delay. Two diligent stonemasons, named Hans and Stephan, took charge of the work. The older one, Hans, supervised the construction of the church; the younger one, Stephen, the town hall. Both were experienced in the art of building, having participated together in the construction of many a marvelous structure, also in southern Europe. They proceeded once again together with the plans, extending to one another the hand of true friendship and swearing that they would help each other like good brothers, without hate and without envy. Because every good work should be rewarded, if it is to advance and succeed, the man who finished his project first was promised a reward, provided that the work was worthy and without blemish. Do you want to know what kind of reward it was to be? A very unusual reward, neither of gold and silver, nor a medal of honor: It was the mayor's beautiful daughter. Both stonemasons had cast their eyes on the girl at the same time, and this was no secret to her father. Because both were skilled and upright people, the mayor did not care if his daughter would take the one or the other as a bridegroom. Thus he promised her to the one who would first complete his building. However, the bride-to-be was not consulted in this matter. In her heart she had already chosen Stephen, the younger man. As luck would have it, Stephan completed his building first. The town hall was finished, but the church tower's steeple was still missing. The competition was over. Stephan was to take home the mayor's wealthy and beautiful daughter as his bride. This was a difficult test of friendship. Hans accepted his fate without envy and complaint, devoting himself to his friend as before. But Stephan could not see it the same way. He did not feel right surrounded by good fortune while his friend was unhappy. Thus he walked about sadly and despondent, thinking to himself how he might be freed of his misery. One day he disappeared. In his room, instead of himself, there was a stone statue of him and a written message, in which he extended his final greetings to his friend and to his bride-to-be. He revealed to them his decision to join a distant monastery. The legend does not tell us if Hans took home the abandoned bride. However, the friend appears to have lost all joy in his work, because the church tower's steeple is missing even today. The statue of loyal Stephen is still preserved in the town hall of Wasserburg. Source: Alexander Schöppner, Die beiden Baumeister zu Wasserburg," Sagenbuch der bayerischen Lande: Aus dem Munde des Volkes, der Chronik und der Dichter , vol. 3 (München: M. Rieger'sche Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1866), no. 1264, pp. 264-65 . Link to another German-language version of the above legend: Die Baumeister von Wasserburg . Return to the table of contents . The Master Builder of the Würzburg Cathedral Germany Like so many other master builders , the master builder of the Würzburg Cathedral completed his temple contruction with the help of the devil. In order to eternalize himself, and in an act of proud arrogance, he sculpted himself and his wife in bed on the ceiling of the right aisle of the cathedral. After completing this work he sprained his foot while climbing down. He cursed his sculpture, and for this reason the devil carried him away. The depiction the the master builder next to his wife in their marriage bed is still there, but it can be seen only on Sundays and holidays at half past ten in the morning when the sun illuminates the picture in the corner. Source: Alexander Schöppner, "Der Baumeister des Doms zu Würzburg," Sagenbuch der bayerischen Lande: Aus dem Munde des Volkes, der Chronik und der Dichter , vol. 2 (München: M. Rieger'sche Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1866), no. 746, p. 269 . Return to the table of contents . The Master Builder of the Bamberg Cathedral Germany The construction of the Bamberg Cathedral was entrusted to a Greek master builder. A young man came to him and asked to be taken on as an assistant, claiming that two would certainly make more progress than a single person in carrying out the gigantic project. The master builder agreed to the proposal and gave his assistant the task of building the Saint Peter's Tower, while he himself took on the Saint George's Tower. The two worked tirelessly on the project, each one trying to outdo the other in terms of speed and efficiency. But it was soon noticed that the Saint George's Tower was being built much more quickly. This annoyed the young man, and when he no longer knew what to do, he promised his soul to the devil so that he could help him. From that moment on, things changed. The Saint Peter's Tower rose more quickly, while no progress was noticeable on the Saint George's Tower. What was achieved there during the day fell away again at night, for two huge animals, half toad, half lion, were stalking the building and undermining the work of the cathedral's master builder. When the devil thought that he had fulfilled his promise and satisfied the young man's ambition, he invited him one day to climb with him to the top of St. Peter's Tower and look at the building from above. The young man followed. When he was at the top, the devil seized him and suddenly hurled him down from the height. Source (books.google.com): Alexander Schöppner, "Der Dombaumeister zu Bamberg," Sagenbuch der bayerischen Lande: aus dem Munde des Volkes, der Chronik und der Dichter , vol. 3 (Munich: Verlag der Matth. Rieger'schen Buchhandlung, 1853), no. 1042, p. 95 . Source (Internet Archive): Alexander Schöppner, "Der Dombaumeister zu Bamberg," Sagenbuch der bayerischen Lande: aus dem Munde des Volkes, der Chronik und der Dichter , vol. 3 (Munich: Verlag der Matth. Rieger'schen Buchhandlung, 1853), no. 1042, p. 95 . Return to the table of contents . Related Links Devil's Bridge Legends . Folktales of type 1191, in which the devil builds a bridge, but is then cheated out of the human soul he expected as payment. Faust Legends , in which a mortal enters into a contract with the devil, have much in common with the master-builder stories. The Name of the Helper. Folktales of type 500, in which a mysterious and threatening helper is defeated when the hero or heroine discovers his name. Texts at this site include "Rumpelstiltskin" from Germany and "Tom Tit Tot" from England. Return to: Table of Contents. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 6, 2024. Melusina (Melusine, Mélusine) Melusina (Melusine, Mélusine) legends about mermaids, water sprites, and forest nymphs who marry mortal men, translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2024 Contents Water People (Paracelsus). The True Melusina (Paracelsus). The Fair Melusina (Albania, Horace E. Scudder). Legend of Melusina (France, Thomas Keightley). The Legend of Beautiful Melusina, the Ancestress of Luxembourg Counts (Luxembourg). Melusina (Soldiers' Legend) (Luxembourg). The Mysterious Maiden Mélusine (Luxembourg). Melusina (Germany, Ludwig Bechstein). Herr Peter Dimringer von Staufenberg (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Water Maid (Germany, August Ey). Brauhard's Mermaid (Germany, A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz). Melusina (Germany, Joh. Aug. Ernst Köhler). Links . Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Water Spirit Legends. Water People Paracelsus Water people can come to us from their waters, let themselves be seen, deal with us, and be with us, and then go back into their waters. They have the appearance of humans, but like animals, they have no souls. However, if a marriage takes place between a mermaid and a man from Adam, and she keeps house with him, and gives birth, then these children take after the man. Because the father is a man from Adam, a soul is poured into such a child and it becomes a real human being, who has a soul and eternal life. Now if a mermaid marries a man from Adam, she also receives a soul, so that like other women she is redeemed by God and through God. Before such a marriage, mermaids have the appearance of humans, but they have no soul. However, if they enter into a covenant with man, God gives them a soul. Source (books.google.com): Paracelsus, " Liber de Nymphis, Sylphis, Pygmæis et Salamandris, et de cæteris Spiritibus ," Bücher und Schriften , vol. 9 (Basel: Conrad Waldkirch, 1591), pp. 61-62 . Paracelsus (original name: Philippus Aureolus Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim) was born about 1493 in Einsiedeln, Switzerland, and died 1541 in Salzburg, Austria. According to Paracelsus, each of the four traditionl elements (water, air, earth, and fire) was was inhabited by a class of invisible beings, respectively: Nymphs, Sylphs, Pygmies, and Salamanders . The water people ( Nymphs ) were also called Undines . Return to the table of contents . The True Melusina Paracelsus You should know the story of the Melusinas, who swim on the water and yet live in the air and not in the water and are not endowed with shame. There you would read about the true Melusina, who had children with a Christian in France in the Château de Lusignan, how she became a monstrous animal every Saturday, which was a fish beneath her navel and a human above. If you do not want to believe this, then because of your unbelief you are accusing God the Creator of lying. Any such person will have to answer to God. Source (Internet Archive): Paracelsus, Sämtliche Werke , vo. 14 (Munich and Berkub: R. Oldenbourg, 1933), pp. 575-76 . Return to the table of contents . The Fair Melusina Albania There was a king who ruled over Albania, and he was very sad, for his wife had died. He kept by himself, and would not be comforted; but at last his courtiers coaxed him to go a-hunting, and so dearly did he love the chase that he forgot his grief. Now one day in the woods he was thirsty, and drew near a spring to quench his thirst. And as he drew near, he heard a sweet voice singing, and it was none other than the voice of the fairy Pressina. He was alone, and he sat long listening to her song. That was how at first he came to know the fairy. And she was so sweet and gentle that by and by he persuaded her to be his wife. It was not a very wise thing for a fairy to wed a mortal, and Pressina promised only on condition that he should never come to see her when she had children. The king gladly promised, and meant to keep his word; but one day, the king's son by his former wife came hastily to him, and told him that Pressina had given birth to three daughters. The king was overjoyed. He forgot his promise and flew to her chamber, where he found her bathing her three daughters. Pressina cried bitterly that he had broken his word, and he should see her no more. She took her three daughters and disappeared. Where did she go? Why, to the Lost Island. That was so called because it was only by chance that one ever found it, and even if one found it once, he might easily lose it, and never find it again. Here she reared her children, and when they were grown, she took them every day to the top of a mountain, whence they could look down upon Albania. "My children," she would say, "you see that distant, beautiful country. There your father lives. He is king of the land, and there you might now be living happily if he had not broken his word to me, and I could no longer live with him, for I had warned him of this, and a fairy may not break her word." This went on year after year, and at last when they were fifteen years old, Melusina, who was the first to be born, begged her mother to tell them what was the word their father gave, and how he came to break it. And when she heard the story, she was filled with wrath, and laid a plot with her sisters for revenge upon their father. The three maidens said nothing to Pressina, but secretly set out for Albania. As they were half fairies, they could use the fairies' charms, and this they did. They seized the king their father, and shut him up forever in the heart of a mountain. Then they went back in triumph, and told their mother what they had done. But Pressina was not at all pleased. She did not wish the king, her husband, thus put out of the way, and she punished her children for what they had done. The other two she punished lightly, but she condemned Melusina to become, every Saturday, a serpent from her waist downward. The only escape for her was to find a husband, who would promise never to look upon her on a Saturday, and who would keep his word. So long as he was faithful, all would be well. The fair Melusina now began to roam through the world in search of this faithful husband. She was most beautiful to behold, and had every grace to make her winsome; but it was long before she could meet the man of her search. She passed through the Black Forest, and at last came to a place known as the Fountain of the Fairies, for there were many fairies about the place; it was called also the Fountain of Thirst. It chanced that Count Raymond strayed that way one moonlight night, and there he saw three fairies dancing, but the most beautiful of the three was the fair Melusina. She was so sweet and gentle that he fell madly in love with her, and begged her to marry him. The fair Melusina knew that she had at last found the man for whom she had been waiting and looking. Yes, she would marry him, but on one condition only. He must never look upon her on a Saturday. And Count Raymond solemnly promised that he never would. All went well for a while. They were happy together, but the evil that the fair Melusina had done lived on. For as each child was born into the world, it was crooked and ill to look on. Yet this did not lessen Count Raymond's love for the fair Melusina. All might still have gone well had not someone whispered to the count that it would be wise for him to see what Melusina was doing on Saturday. It was a foolish count. He became more and more curious, and at last one Saturday he hid himself where he could see, and not be seen, and thus he watched for Melusina in her chamber. O pity of pities! He saw her, the fair Melusina, but from the waist down she was a serpent, with silvery scales, tipped with white. He covered his eyes. It was too late, and he was seized with horror, not so much at what he had seen as at the thought of how he had broken his faith. Perhaps he might yet have kept silence. But a great evil fell upon him. One of his sons had cruelly killed a brother, and Count Raymond was beside himself with grief. Suddenly he thought how all his children had been born crooked, and how it must have been because of some wicked thing their mother had done. And as he was thus weeping and wailing in the midst of his courtiers, the fair Melusina came in to comfort him. When he saw her, he burst into a rage, and cried out aloud: "Away! Out of my sight, thou hateful serpent! Thou wicked woman!" Down to the ground dropped the fair Melusina in a swoon; and when she came to herself, she looked with sad eyes on her lord. She knew, then, that her time had come, and that she could not escape her punishment. The man she had been faithful to had not kept his word. "Farewell! Farewell!" she moaned. "Alas for the misery I am in. I had hoped that thou hadst been faithful, and that I might escape my doom. It may not be. The mortal in me dies, but in my fairy life I must forever fleet about the earth as a poor lost spirit." And at that, with a little faint cry, her body fell again, but there was a rustling in the air as the fair Melusina set forth on her lone wandering. Count Raymond and those about him saw her no more. But whenever in after years there was a new lord over the castle, the country folk said that she hovered about the Fountain of Thirst, a poor forlorn wraith. Source: Horace E. Scudder, The Book of Legends: Told Over Again (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1899), pp. 65-70 . Return to the table of contents . Legend of Melusina France Elinas, King of Albania, to divert his grief for the death of his wife, amused himself with hunting. One day, at the chase, he went to a fountain to quench his thirst. As he approached it he heard the voice of a woman singing, and on coming to it he found there the beautiful fay Pressina. After some time the fay bestowed her hand upon him, on the condition that he should never visit her at the time of her lying-in. She had three daughters at a birth: Melusina, Melior, and Palatina. Nathas, the king's son by a former wife, hastened to convey the joyful tidings to his father, who, without reflection, flew to the chamber of the queen, and entered as she was bathing her daughters. Pressina, on seeing him, cried out that he had broken his word, and she must depart. And taking up her three daughters, she disappeared. She retired to the Lost Island, so called because it was only by chance any, even those who had repeatedly visited it, could find it. Here she reared her children, taking them every morning to a high mountain, whence Albania might be seen, and telling them that but for their father's breach of promise they might have lived happily in the distant land which they beheld. When they were fifteen years of age, Melusina asked her mother particularly of what their father had been guilty. On being informed of it, she conceived the design of being revenged on him. Engaging her sisters to join in her plans, they set out for Albania. Arrived there, they took the king and all his wealth, and, by a charm, enclosed him in a high mountain, called Brandelois. On telling their mother what they had done, she, to punish them for the unnatural action, condemned Melusina to become every Saturday a serpent, from the waist downwards, till she should meet a man who would marry her under the condition of never seeing her on a Saturday, and should keep his promise. She influenced other judgements on her two sisters, less severe in proportion to their guilt. Melusina now went roaming through the world in search of the man who was to deliver her. She passed through the Black Forest, and that of Ardennes, and at last she arrived in the forest of Colombiers, in Poitou, where all the fays of the neighborhood came before her, telling her they had been waiting for her to reign in that place. Raymond having accidentally killed the count, his uncle, by the glancing aside of his boar-spear, was wandering by night in the forest of Colombiers. He arrived at a fountain that rose at the foot of a high rock. This fountain was called by the people the Fountain of Thirst, or the Fountain of the Fays, on account of the many marvelous things which had happened at it. At the time, when Raymond arrived at the fountain, three ladies were diverting themselves there by the light of the moon, the principal of which was Melusina. Her beauty and her amiable manners quickly won his love. She soothed him, concealed the deed he had done, and married him, he promising on his oath never to desire to see her on a Saturday. She assured him that a breach of his oath would forever deprive him of her whom he so much loved, and be followed by the unhappiness of both for life. Out of her great wealth she built for him, in the neighborhood of the Fountain of Thirst, where he first saw her, the castle of Lusignan. She also built La Rochelle, Cloitre Malliers, Mersent, and other places. But destiny, that would have Melusina single, was incensed against her. The marriage was made unhappy by the deformity of the children born of one that was enchanted. But still Raymond's love for the beauty that ravished both heart and eyes remained unshaken. Destiny renewed her attacks. Raymond's cousin had excited him to jealousy and to secret concealment, by malicious suggestions of the purport of the Saturday retirement of the countess. He hid himself; and then saw how the lovely form of Melusina ended below in a snake, gray and sky-blue, mixed with white. But it was not horror that seized him at the sight, it was infinite anguish at the reflection that through his breach of faith he might lose his lovely wife forever. Yet this misfortune had not speedily come on him, were it not that his son, Geoffroi with the Tooth [a boar's tusk projected from his mouth], had burned his brother Freimund, who would stay in the abbey of Malliers, with the abbot and a hundred monks. At which the afflicted father, Count Raymond, when his wife Melusina was entering his closet to comfort him, broke out into these words against her, before all the courtiers who attended her, "Out of my sight, thou pernicious snake and odious serpent! thou contaminator of my race!" Melusina's former anxiety was now verified, and the evil that had lain so long in ambush had now fearfully sprung on him and her. At these reproaches she fainted away; and when at length she revived, full of the profoundest grief, she declared to him that she must now depart from him, and, in obedience to a decree of destiny, fleet about the earth in pain and suffering, as a specter, until the day of doom; and that only when one of her race was to die at Lusignan would she become visible. Her words at parting were these, "But one thing will I say unto thee before I part, that thou, and those who for more than a hundred years shall succeed thee, shall know that whenever I am seen to hover over the fair castle of Lusignan, then will it be certain that in that very year the castle will get a new lord; and though people may not perceive me in the air, yet they will see me by the Fountain of Thirst; and thus shall it be so long as the castle stand in honor and flourishing -- especially on the Friday before the lord of the castle shall die." Immediately, with wailing and loud lamentation, she left the castle of Lusignan, and has ever since existed as a specter of the night. Raymond died as a hermit on Monserrat. Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology, Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), pp. 480-82 . Return to the table of contents . The Legend of Beautiful Melusina, the Ancestress of Luxembourg Counts Luxembourg Many hundreds of years ago a noble knight, Count Siegfried, lived at Körich Castle. Once he lost his way while hunting, and toward evening he found himself in a narrow, deep, and wildly overgrown valley. This was the Valley of the Alzette at the place where today the suburbs of Luxembourg City picturesquely blend with the cliffs. Rising before him, the count could see sheer rock cliffs, upon which stood the ruins of an ancient Roman castle. Suddenly the sounds of wonderful singing fell upon the startled knight's ears. After listening for a time, the count hurried in the direction that the sounds were coming from, and soon he discovered a maiden sitting among the castle's ruins. Captivated by her beauty, he stood still. It was Melusina, the Nixie of the Alzette. With a fixed gaze Siegfried stared at the otherworldly vision. Seeing the handsome knight, the maiden covered her face with her green veil, then disappeared with the last rays of the evening sun. Overcome with fatigue, Count Siegfried lay down beneath a tree and fell asleep. The next morning the song of a bird awoke him from a blissful dream. He got up and followed the river. He soon found himself in the familiar vicinity of Weimerskirch, and from there he returned straight away to his homeland. The vision of the beautiful maiden and her wonderful singing had mightily captivated the count's soul. He often returned to the place, now very dear to him, in order to see her and hear her again. Once he met her in the valley, for she took pleasure in the count's visits, and she had fallen in love with the handsome knight. He rushed toward her, declared his love for her, and asked her to become his wife. She consented under the condition that she not be required to leave the cliffs, and that he would never ask to see her on Saturdays, when she wished to be alone. Under oath the count promised this to her. Siegfried entered into an agreement with the Abbot of St. Maximin near Trier to trade the former's fruitful commune of Feulen near Ettelbruck for the latter's infertile rocky cliffs and their surrounding woodlands. Because it would have taken years of time and great expense to build a castle on the rocky cliffs, where he could take Melusina home as his wife, Siegfried gladly accepted the help of Satan, who offered to build the castle for him and make him exceedingly wealthy if the count would surrender himself after thirty years. At the top of the cliffs a magnificent castle appeared overnight, proudly looking down on the valley below. Siegfried married the beautiful Melusina and lived happily with her. Melusina presented him with seven children. However, every Saturday the nixie remained hidden from all eyes, retiring to her room and locking the door. This proceeded for many long years without her husband asking her what she was doing on those days. However, his friends, who with time learned about the situation, planted seeds of distrust in the count against his good wife. Now, at any price, Siegfried wanted to know why Melusina withdrew from him every Saturday. The next Saturday he secretly approached her room. From inside he could hear the sound of rushing and splashing water. Looking into the room through the keyhole he saw his wife in her bathtub combing her long blond hair with a golden comb. Her beautiful limbs ended with a horrible fishtail, with which she was splashing waves. The count uttered a cry of horror, and in the same moment Melusina sank into the depths of the cliffs. Siegfried had lost her forever. They say that the nurse who was caring for Siegfried's and Melusina's youngest child often saw a white figure enter the room at night and rock the child to sleep. Every seven years Melusina appears in human form in the upper world above the cliffs, asking the passers-by to redeem her. If this does not happen, the white figure soars over the city crying, "Not for another seven years!" then sinks back into the cliffs. For this reason, when Luxembourg was still a fortress, sentry duty was so feared that even the bravest soldiers were terrified when they had to keep watch at night. One time a courageous soldier who had traded shifts with a comrade was standing guard on the cliff-top between twelve and two o'clock in the night. Melusina appeared to him in the form of a beautiful maiden and asked him to redeem her. She told him that it would be a difficult, but not impossible, task. However, he should not attempt it if he thought that he might not succeed, because if he failed she would sink three times deeper into the earth. While she was thus speaking there arose a mighty rumbling sound around the cliffs, causing the soldier to fear that they were about to collapse. The soldier promised to fulfill Melusina's wish, whatever he might have to do. She said that for the nine following days, every night at exactly twelve o'clock -- neither one minute earlier nor one minute later -- he would have to appear behind the altar of the Dominican Church. After he had done this nine times, on the tenth evening she would appear to him in the form of a fiery serpent with a key in her mouth. With his mouth he would have to take the key from her mouth and then throw it into the Alzette River, which would accomplish her redemption. This act would also restore the Roman castle atop the cliff in its former state. For eight nights the soldier stood behind the appointed altar at precisely twelve o'clock, but on the ninth night he arrived late. Returning to his quarters he heard such howling and screeching coming from the cliffs that he thought all the wild animals were fighting one another in the air. However, no other person heard the noise. It is also said that whenever Luxembourg City is threatened by danger or mishap, Melusina circles the cliffs while crying out mournfully. Thus even to this day Melusina has not been redeemed. Woe unto the Luxembourg City if she is not someday redeemed. She will be redeemed only when she finishes the shirt that she is working on, gathering flax from the naked cliffs and adding one stitch every seven years when she appears on the cliffs. However, the ruins of the city will serve as her gravestone. Source: N. Gredt, "Die Sage von der schönen Melusina, der Ahnfrau der Luxemburger Grafen," Sagenschatz des Luxemburger Landes (Luxembourg: Druck von B. Bück, 1883), pp. 7-9 . Gredt's source: "Gonner's Mitteilingen and oral." Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2015. Return to the table of contents . Melusina (Soldiers' Legend) Luxembourg Once at midnight Melusina approached a sentry beneath the Castle Gate Bridge. She asked him to redeem her. For this to succeed, the following midnight she would appear to him in the form of a serpent with a key in her mouth. He was to take the key into his mouth and then lay it on the altar of the Dominican Church. Then she would become his bride, and all her treasures would belong to him. When she thus appeared to him, the soldier turned ice cold, and he was overcome with shuddering. The following day the death-bell tolled down from the old cathedral, and in the cemetery a grave was dug for the young warrior. Source: N. Gredt, "Die Sage von der schönen Melusina, der Ahnfrau der Luxemburger Grafen," Sagenschatz des Luxemburger Landes (Luxembourg: Druck von B. Bück, 1883), p. 9 . Gredt's source: Theodor von Cederstolpe, Sagen von Luxemburg, poetisch bearbeitet , (Luxembourg: Franz Rehm, 1850), pp. 5-6 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2015. Return to the table of contents . The Mysterious Maiden Mélusine Luxembourg Mélusine is said to have been the wife of the founder of Luxembourg, Count Siegfried. When they married, she requested Siegfried to leave her alone for one full day and night every month, and that he should not ask or try to find out what she was doing. Siegfried accepted this wish, and all went well for years. On the first Wednesday of the month, Mélusine would retire into her chambers in the "casemates," a network of caverns underneath the city, not to be seen again until early light on Thursday. But one day, Siegfried's curiosity got the better of him. Wondering what his wife might be doing alone all the time, he peeped through the keyhole, and was shocked to see that Mélusine was lying in the bathtub, with a fishtail hanging over the rim. Realizing that her husband had come to know the truth about her, she jumped out of the window into the river Alzette below, never to be seen again. Every now and then, people claim to have seen a beautiful girl's head pop out of the river, and a fishtail rippling the calm waters of the river Alzette. According to another legend, Mélusine is imprisoned within the rock that helped form Luxembourg City's tremendous defenses. She passes the time by knitting, but thankfully she manages only one stitch each year, because should she finish her knitting before she's released, all of Luxembourg and its people will vanish into the rock with her! Once every seven years, Mélusine returns, either as a serpent with a golden key in its mouth or as a beautiful woman. All it will take to win her freedom is for some brave soul to kiss the womanly vision or take the key from the serpent's mouth. That brave soul has yet to appear, and in the meantime Luxembourg prays for her to drop a stitch or two, so that whatever it is she's knitting will take a very long time to complete! Source: http://luxembourgish.blogspot.com/2006/11/mysterious-maiden-mlusine.html , last accessed August 2, 2013. [No longer active.] Return to the table of contents . Melusina Germany In Baden there is a forest named Stollenwald, and in this forest, atop Stollenberg Mountain, are the ruins of an old castle. Stauffenberg Palace stands nearby. In this palace there once lived a magistrate's son who took great pleasure in capturing birds. One day he went into the woods to trap titmice. There he heard a beautiful voice descending from Stollenberg mountain. Following it, he saw the most lovely image of a woman, which called out to him: Redeem me, redeem me! Just kiss me three times three! "Who are you then?" called the youth, and the specter said: Melusina is my name, The daughter of heavenly song! Early in the ninth hour, Fearlessly kiss my mouth and my cheeks, Then I shall be redeemed, And be with you, my beloved bridegroom! Looking at the miraculous being more closely, the youth saw that Melusina had a marvelously beautiful face, blue eyes, and blond hair. Her upper body too was wonderfully proportioned, but not her hands and feet. Her hands had no fingers, resembling instead small open bags, and she had no feet at all, but rather a snake's body. Nonetheless, the youth fearlessly gave the specter the first three kisses. She expressed joy in this, like the maiden in the heathen's cave with her first kiss, and then she disappeared. The next morning the lover returned and followed the seductively sweet song that sounded toward him. Finding her, he saw that she now had wings. Her snake's body was speckled green and ended with a dragon's tail. But Melusina's eyes and face emanated such beauty, and her mouth was so seductive, that he was overcome by desire, and he again gave her three kisses. She quivered with lust and desire, flapping her wings about his head. That night the youth could scarcely close his eyes. All his thoughts were with the glowing, sensuously beautiful figure. Before daybreak he went into the woods and followed the sweet songful voice. But alas! Where was the lovely angel face? It was transformed and looked just like the maiden on the toad-chair, for Melusina now had a toad's head, and the lover was supposed to kiss it as though nothing had happened. But instead, he turned his heels and ran away as fast as he could. Behind him he heard a rushing sound and cries of anguish. He never again went to Stollenberg Mountain. On the contrary, he became engaged to a girl who, although not as magically beautiful as Melusina, nonetheless did not have a toad's head and a snake's body. The wedding feast at Stauffenberg Palace was ready, and everyone was celebrating, when a small crack opened in the ceiling. A dew-like drop fell into the serving dish, but no one saw it. And anyone who took a bite onto which the drop had fallen fell down dead. And from above a small snake's tail emerged through the crack in the ceiling. That was the end of the wedding celebration. On another occasion Melusina appeared to a shepherd girl. At length she led the girl into Stollenberg Mountain. Showing her underground treasures, she told the shepherd girl that they would be hers if she could bring about her disenchantment. The girl was unable to keep this secret, and the priest threatened her with church sanctions if she continued to commune with the specter. This silenced the shepherd girl, and the disenchantment was not fulfilled. A double fir tree growing from a single root still stands near the place they call "the twelve stones." It is called "the Melusina tree." In keeping with this Swabian legend, the name Melusina refers not only to water sprites but to mountain and forest sprites as well. Source: Ludwig Bechstein, "Melusine," Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand), 1853), no. 894, pp. 729-30 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Return to the table of contents . Herr Peter Dimringer von Staufenberg Germany Staufenberg, the ancestral castle of the knight Peter Dimringer -- the subject of legend -- is in Ortenau not far from Offenburg. Early one Whitsunday the knight had his servant saddle his horse, for he wanted to ride from his fortress to Nussbach to hear the morning prayers. The boy rode ahead. As he entered the forest he saw a beautiful, richly bejeweled maiden sitting all alone on a rock. She greeted him, and the servant rode on. Soon thereafter Herr Peter himself came by, looked at her with pleasure, then greeted the maiden and spoke to her cordially. She bowed to him and said, "God thank you for your greeting." Then Peter dismounted his horse. She offered her hands to him. He lifted her from the rock and put his arms around her. They sat in the grass and talked about what she was doing. "Pardon me, my beautiful lady, may I ask you a sincere question? Tell me, why are you sitting here alone with no one near you?" "I tell you friend, on my honor, I have been waiting here for you. I have loved you since you first learned to ride a horse. I have secretly watched over you and protected you with my own hand, keeping you from harm in battles and in wars, on roads and on byways." The knight answered virtuously, "Nothing better could have happened to me than to have met you. My desire is to be with you until death." "That can be," said the maiden, "if you will follow my words. If you want to love me then you must take no other woman in marriage. If you were to do so, you would die on the third day. Whenever you are alone and desire me, I will be with you immediately, and you will live happily and with pleasure." Herr Peter said, "My lady, is that all true?" With God as her witness, she swore it was true. Then he promised to be hers, and they exchanged vows with each other. The lady asked that the wedding be held at Staufenberg. She gave him a beautiful ring. They laughed together virtuously and embraced, and then Herr Peter continued on his way. He attended mass in the village and said his own prayers, then returned home to his fortress. As soon as he was alone in his bower, he thought to himself, "If only I had my dear bride here with me, whom I found out there on the rock!" As soon as he said these words she stood there before his eyes. They kissed one another and were together with pleasure. Thus they lived for a while. In addition, she gave him money and property, so that he could have a good life on earth. Later he went abroad, and wherever he went, his wife was with him whenever he wished for her. Finally he returned to his homeland. His brothers and friends insisted that he take himself a wife. He was taken back and tried to make an excuse. They applied even more pressure through a wise man, one of his relatives. Herr Peter answered, "I will have my body cut into strips before I marry." That evening after they had left, his wife already knew what they were trying to do, and he repeated his pledge to her. At that time the German king was to be elected in Frankfurt, and Herr von Staufenberg, accompanied by many servants and noblemen, journeyed there. He distinguished himself so greatly at the tournament that he attracted the king's attention, and in the end the king offered him the hand in marriage of his aunt from Kärnten [Carinthia]. Herr Peter, filled with concern, rejected the proposal. This caused a great stir among the princes, who wanted to know his reason. Finally he told them that he already had a beautiful wife who was exceedingly good to him, and on account of whom he could not take another one, or within three days he would be dead. Then the bishop said, "Herr, let me see the woman." He said, "She does not allow herself to be seen by anyone but me." "Then she is not a true woman," they all said, "but from the devil. And if you are making love with a she-devil more than with pure women, that will corrupt your name and your reputation before the whole world." Confused by this talk, Herr von Staufenberg said that he wanted to do whatever the king desired of him, and he was forthwith betrothed to the maiden and given costly royal gifts. In accordance with Peter's wishes, the wedding was to take place in Ortenau. The next time his wife came to him she reproached him sadly for having violated her prohibition and his promise, for which he would now forfeit his young life. "I will give you the following sign: When, at your wedding celebration, you together with the other men and women see my foot then you must immediately confess your sins and prepare yourself for death." With that Peter thought about the clergyman's words, that perhaps she was only trying to enchant him with these threats and that it was all only a lie. The young bride was soon brought to Staufenberg, and a great feast was held. The knight was seated across from her at the table when they suddenly saw something push through the ceiling: a beautiful human foot, up to the knee, as white as ivory. The knight turned pale and cried out, "Oh, my friends, you have destroyed me. In three days I shall be dead." The foot disappeared without leaving a hole in the ceiling. The piping, dancing, and singing ceased, and a clergyman was summoned. The knight took leave from his bride, confessed his sins, and then his heart ruptured. His young wife retreated to a convent and prayed to God for his soul. The valiant knight was mourned in all the German lands. In the sixteenth century, according to the testimony of Fischart, people throughout the entire region still knew the story of Peter from Staufenberg and the beautiful sea sprite, as they called her in those days. To this day the Zwölfstein [Twelve-Stone] can be seen between Staufenberg, Nussbach, and Weilershofen, where she first appeared to him. And in the castle they still show the room where she stayed from time to time. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Herr Peter Dimringer von Staufenberg," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 2 (Berlin: in der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1818), no. 522, pp. 249-53 . In later editions this legend is numbered 528. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Return to the table of contents . The Water Maid Germany At the time when there was nothing in the Harz but virgin forest, a knight came here to hunt. Before he could orient himself, he became lost, and he wandered about for several days without finding a path. Finally he came upon a beautiful castle situated in a large meadow and surrounded with water. A pathway led to a drawbridge, which had been suspended. He called out; he whistled; he waited. He didn't hear anything from within. It was as though the castle had died out. "Wait," he thought. "The castle cannot be empty. Someone will have to appear shortly. Just sit here and wait until someone comes." So he sat and waited, but the castle remained silent. Finally his patience wore out, and he was just making preparations to leave when he saw a beautiful girl emerge from the forest and walk toward the bridge. "Wait," he thought. "She knows her way around here. She is going inside." And that is what happened. When she was within a few steps of him, he spoke to her, telling her that he had lost his way in the Harz Forest, that he had camped out eight days in the open, and that he was eager at last to spend a night under a proper roof. He had already sat here for three hours asking for admission, but no one had shown himself or let himself be heard. Further, he asked if she would be so good to ask permission for him to enter once she was inside. She said that that would not be necessary. He could come with her. She did not need to ask anyone for permission, for she herself was in charge here. With that she stepped on a stone that was mortared into the earth in front of the bridge, and the bridge immediately descended. Then she took out a large key and unlocked the gate. Together they walked through a large courtyard and into the castle. She led the knight into a beautiful room and asked him to make himself comfortable. She told him that before anything else, she wanted to go and prepare a proper evening meal. Surely he would like something hot to eat, she said, adding that she too was hungry. Because she had no servants, she would have to take care of everything by herself. With that she left the room. A short time later she returned with a beautiful roast, cakes, and many other delicious things. She set the table and invited her guest to help himself. He did not need to be asked a second time. After they had eaten, they sat together and talked with one another. The knight said that he felt sorry for the friendly girl, because she lived here all alone, observing that time must pass very slowly for her. "Oh no," she said. "Time does not pass slowly for me," adding that nonetheless she sometimes did wish for company, but if she did not have any, she could still manage just fine. The knight answered that if she did not mind, he would stay here a few days and keep her company. The hostess replied that she would be happy if he would do so. The guest remained one, two, three days, and they became so accustomed to one another that in the end the knight asked her if she did not want to become his wife. The girl was pleased with this, and she said that she would love to do so, if he would only promise her that every Friday she would be able to go out and do whatever she wanted to, and that he would not try to follow her or look after her. This he promised her, and they became a couple. They lived together a long time, satisfied with one another. They produced lovely children, and in their happiness they lacked nothing. One day a strange knight came and was given lodging. It was on a Friday, and he asked about the lady of the house, because she had not made an appearance. The master of the house told him that his wife was never to be seen on a Friday, and that he -- in keeping with his promise -- had never sought after her. With that the strange knight asked what kind of a housewife would not tell her husband where she could be found. Nothing good could come from such behavior. This conversation so alarmed the master of the house that he immediate set out to find his wife. After a long search, he finally came to the cellar, where he found a door. Opening it, he saw his wife, half fish and half human, swimming in a small pond. When she saw her husband, she cast a sad and serious glance at him, and then disappeared. The bewildered man went back upstairs to tell the strange knight what he had experience, but he too had disappeared. Now the poor man realized that he and his wife had been cruelly deceived and victimized by the stranger. He grieved so much for his good wife that he died soon afterward. The lovely children also died one after the other, and the castle fell into ruins. It is not even known where it formerly stood. Only the story remains. Source: August Ey, "Die Wasserjungfer," Harzmärchenbuch; oder, Sagen und Märchen aus dem Oberharze (Stade: Verlag von Fr. Steudel, 1862), pp. 173-76 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. The Harz is a forested, mountainous region in north central Germany. Its highest mountain, the Brocken, is -- according to legend -- the site of a great gathering of witches on the eve of the first day in May each year. Return to the table of contents . Brauhard's Mermaid Germany Many years ago a man named Brauhard lived in Lauterberg. He had been far away across the water and had brought home a mermaid, whom he married. Her top half was human, but her bottom half was formed like a fish. She lived in a tub in his house. However, his friends could not stand the malformed woman, and so they finally poisoned her. He did not remarry, and he contributed the money he had received as her dowry to the poor. That is the source of the Brauhard Fund which to this day is administered by the Scharzfeld Jurisdiction for the support of the poor in the surrounding villages. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Brauhards Seejungfer," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 259, pp. 232-33 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "Oral tradition from Steina." Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Return to the table of contents . Melusina Germany In Bäringen during a wind storm they say that "Melusina is crying for her children." This must be true, because otherwise on Christmas Eve, at which time one is supposed to eat nine kinds of food, they would not shake the leftovers from the tablecloth onto a bush so that Melusina, sometimes also known as St. Melusina, might also have something to eat. Source: Joh. Aug. Ernst Köhler, Sagenbuch des Erzgebirges (Schneeberg and Schwarzenberg: Verlag und Druck von Carl Moritz Gärtner, 1886), no. 201, p. 155 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Return to the table of contents . Links Targets open in new windows. General Water Spirit Legends . Legends and beliefs. Ballads The Mermaid (Sir Walter Scott). Changeling Legends The Nixie Changelings from the Saal River (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm) Changelings in the Water (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm) The Nickert (A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz) Literary texts in the German Language -- Literarische Texte in deutscher Sprache Brentano, Clemens. Loreley (Ballade). Eichendorff, Josef von. Waldgespräch (Ballade) Fouqué, Friedrich de la Motte. Undine (Erzählung) Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von. Der Fischer (Ballade) Die neue Melusine (Erzählung) Heine, Heinrich. Ich weiß nicht, was soll es bedeuten (Die Lorelei) Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 15, 2024. Merlin the Magician Rescues King Vortigern: Why the Red Dragon Is the Emblem of Wales Merlin the Magician Rescues King Vortigern Why the Red Dragon Is the Emblem of Wales W. Jenkyn Thomas After the Treachery of the Long Knives, King Vortigern called together his twelve wise men and asked them what he should do. They said to him, "Retire to the remote boundaries of your kingdom, and there build and fortify a city to defend yourself. The Saxon people you have received are treacherous, and they are seeking to subdue you by guile. Even during your life they will, if they can, seize upon all the countries which are subject to your power. How much more will they attempt it after your death?" The king was pleased with this advice, and departing with his wise men traveled through many parts of his territories in search of a convenient place for building a citadel. Far and wide they traveled, but nowhere could they find a suitable place until they came to the mountains of Eryri, in Gwynedd. On the summit of one of these, which was then called Dinas Ffaraon, they discovered a fine place to build a fortress. The wise men said to the king, "Build here a city, for in this place you will be secure against the barbarians." Then the king sent for artificers, carpenters, and stonemasons, and collected all the materials for building. In the night, however, the whole of these disappeared, and by morning nothing remained of all that had been provided. Materials were procured from all parts a second time, but a second time they disappeared in the night. A third time everything was brought together for building, but by morning again not a trace of them remained. Vortigern called his wise men together and asked them the cause of this marvel. They replied: "You must find a child born without a father, put him to death, and sprinkle with his blood the ground on which the citadel is to be built, or you will never accomplish your purpose." This did not appear such strange advice to King Vortigern as it does to us. In olden times there were very cruel practices in connection with building. Sometimes a human victim was sacrificed in order that his blood might be used as cement. At other times a living person was walled in a new building -- often an innocent little child. The king thought the advice of his wise men was good and sent messengers throughout Britain in search of a child born without a father. After having inquired in vain in all the provinces, they came to a field in Bassaleg, where a party of boys were playing at ball. Two of them were quarrelling, and one of them said to the other, "0 boy without a father, no good will ever happen to you." The messengers concluded that this was the boy they were searching for. They had him led away and conducted him before Vortigern the king. The next day the king, his wise men, his soldiers and retinue, his artificers, carpenters, and stonemasons, assembled for the ceremony of putting the boy to death. Then the boy said to the king, "Why have your servants brought me hither?" "That you may be put to death," replied the king, "and that the ground on which my citadel is to stand may be sprinkled with your blood, without which I shall be unable to build it." "Who," said the boy, "instructed you to do this?" "My wise men," replied the king. "Order them hither," returned the boy. This being done, he thus questioned the wise men: "By what means was it revealed to you that this citadel could not be built unless the spot were sprinkled with my blood? Speak without disguise, and declare who discovered me to you." Then turning to the king, "I will soon," said he, "unfold to you everything; but I desire to question your wise men and wish them to disclose to you what is hidden underneath this pavement." They could not do so and acknowledged their ignorance. Thereupon the boy said, "There is a pool; come and dig." They did so, and found a pool, even as the boy had said. "Now," he continued, turning to the wise men again, "tell me what is in the pool." But they were ashamed and made no reply. "I," said the boy, "can discover it to you if the wise men cannot. There are two vases in the pool." They examined and found that it was so. Continuing his questions, " What is in the vases? " he asked. They were again silent. "There is a tent in them," said the boy. "Separate them and you shall find it so." This being done by the king's command, there was found in them a folded tent. The boy, going on with his questions, asked the wise men what was in it. But they knew not what to reply. "There are," said he, "two serpents, one white and one red. Unfold the tent." They obeyed, and two sleeping serpents were discovered. "Consider attentively," said the boy, "what the serpents do." They began to struggle with each other, and the white one, raising himself up, threw down the other into the middle of the tent and sometimes drove him to the edge of it, and this was repeated thrice. At length the red one, apparently the weaker of the two, recovering his strength, expelled the white one from the tent, and the latter, being pursued through the pool by the red one, disappeared. Then the boy asked the wise men what was signified by this wonderful omen, but they had again to confess their ignorance. "I will now," said he to the king, "unfold to you the meaning of this mystery. The pool is the emblem of this world, and the tent that of your kingdom. The two serpents are two dragons; the red serpent is your dragon, but the white serpent is the dragon of the Saxons, who occupy several provinces and districts of Britain, even almost from sea to sea. At length, however, our people shall rise and drive the Saxon race beyond the sea whence they have come. But do you depart from this place where you are not permitted to erect a citadel, you must seek another spot for laying your foundations." Vortigern, perceiving the ignorance and deceit of the magicians, ordered them to be put to death, and their graves were dug in a neighboring field. The boy's life was spared. He became known to fame afterwards as the great magician Myrddin Emrys (or Merlin, as he is called in English), and the mountain on which he proved his mighty power was called in after time Dinas Emrys instead of Dinas Ffaraon. He remained in the Dinas for a long time, until he was joined by Aurelius Ambrosius, who persuaded him to go away with him. When they were about to set out, Myrddin placed all his treasure in a golden cauldron and hid it in a cave. On the mouth of the cave he rolled a huge stone, which he covered up with earth and green turf, so that it was impossible for anyone to find it. This wealth he intended to be the property of some special person in a future generation. This heir is to be a youth with yellow hair and blue eyes, and when he comes to the Dinas a bell will ring to invite him into the cave, which will open out of its own accord as soon as his foot touches it. Source: W. Jenkyn Thomas, The Welsh Fairy Book (London: T. Fisher Unwin, Ltd., n.d. [first published 1907]), pp. 66-70. Edited by D. L. Ashliman . Thomas's title for this legend is "Why the Red Dragon Is the Emblem of Wales." This legend is also told by Geoffrey of Monmouth in his Historia Regum Britanniae (ca. 1136). Link to an English translation of this work: The British History of Geoffrey of Monmouth , translated from he Latin by A. Thompson (London: James Bohn, 1842). The episode under discussion is found in book 6, ch. 17-19 (pp. 127-30) . Link to additionals legends about human sacrifice . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 24, 2010. Mermaid Wife The Mermaid Wife Migratory legends of Christiansen type 4080 and related tales translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2024 Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Captured Mermaid (Isle of Man). The Mermaid and the Shepherd (Isle of Man). The Mermaid Wife (Shetland Islands). The Silkie Wife (Shetland and Orkney Islands). Herman Perk and the Seal (Shetland Islands). The Goodman of Wastness (Orkney Islands). The Mermaid of Lochinver (Scotland). The Sealskin (Iceland). Touched by Iron (Wales). The Mermaid of Zennor (Cornwall). Tom Moore and the Seal (Ireland). The Lady of Gollerus (Ireland). The Mermaid (Ireland). Legend of O' Dowd of Inniscrone Castle and the Mermaid (Ireland). The Mermaid (Ireland). Brauhard's Mermaid (Germany). Links to related sites . Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Captured Mermaid Isle of Man As at my first coming to the island, I was extremely sollicitous in diving into the manners and humour of a people, which seemed so altogether new, and different from all the other Europeans I had ever seen; I went to Port Iron, the first season for fishery, after my arrival: where, falling into discourse with some of the inhabitants, I had an account given me, which, I think, would be doing something of injustice to the publick to conceal. I believe there are few people, who have not heard of mermaids and mermen , tho' I never met with any, who looked on them as any thing more than the chimerical Tritons and Amphitrites of the poets, till accidentally falling in company with an old Manks man, who had used the sea many years, he told me he had frequently seen them, and endeavoured to make me believe his assertion true; by a thousand oaths and imprecations. I happening to mention this at Port Iron, they seemed to wonder at my incredulity, and gave me the following narration: In the time, said they, that Oliver Cromwell usurped the protectorship of England, few or no ships resorted to this island, and that uninterruption and solitude of the sea, gave the mermen and mermaids (who are enemies to any company but those of their own species) frequent opportunities of visiting the shore, where, in moonlight nights, they have been seen to sit, combing their heads, and playing with each other; but as soon as they perceived any body coming near them, jumped into the water, and were out of sight immediately. Some people, who lived near the coast, having observed their behaviour, spread large nets, made of small, but very strong cords, upon the ground, and watched at a convenient distance for their approach. The night they had laid this snare, but one happened to come, who was no sooner set down, than those who held the strings of the net, drew them with a sudden jirk, and enclosed their prize beyond all possibility of escaping. On opening the net, and examining their captive, by the largeness of her breasts, and the beauty of her complexion, it was found to be a female; nothing, continued my author, could be more lovely, more exactly formed, in all parts above the waist, resembing a compleat young woman, but below that, all fish, with fins, and a huge spreading tail. She was carried to a house, and used very tenderly, nothing but liberty being denied. But tho' they set before her the best provision the place afforded, she would not be prevailed on to eat, or drink, neither could they get a word from her, tho' they knew these creatures were not without the gift of speech, having heard them talk to each other, when sitting regaling themselves on the seaside. They kept her in this manner three days, but perceiving she began to look very ill with fasting, and fearing some calamity would befall the island if they should keep her till the died, they agreed to let her return to the element she liked best, and the third night set open their door; which, as soon as she beheld, she raised herself from the place where she was then lying, and glided with incredible swiftness, on her tail, to the seaside. They followed at a distance, and saw her plunge into the water, where she was met by a great number of her own species, one of whom asked what she had observed among the people of the earth; nothing very wonderful, answer'd she, but that they are so very ignorant, as to throw away the water they have boiled eggs in. This question, and her reply, they told me, was distinctly heard by those who stood on the shore to watch what passed. Source (books.google.com): George Waldron, The History and Description of the Isle of Man (London: W. Bickerton, 1744), pp. 105-108 . Source (Internet Archive): George Waldron, The History and Description of the Isle of Man (London: W. Bickerton, 1744), pp. 106-108 . Return to the table of contents . The Mermaid and the Shepherd Isle of Man In a creek, between two high rocks, which overlook the sea on this side of the island, they tell you also, that mermen and mermaids have been frequently seen. Many surprizing stories of these amphibious creatures have I been told here, as well as at Port Iron; but the strangest of all, is this: A very beautiful mermaid , say they, became so much enamour'd of a young man who used to tend his sheep on these rocks, that she would frequently come and sit down by him, bring him pieces of coral, fine pearls, and what were yet greater curiosities, and of infinitely more value, had they fallen into the hands of a person who knew their worth, shells of various forms and figures, and so glorious in their colour, and chine, that they even dazzled the eye that looked upon them. Her presents were accompanied with smiles, pattings of the cheek, and all the marks of a most sincere and tender passion; but one day throwing her arms more than ordinarily eager about him, he began to be frighted, that she had a design to draw him into the sea, and struggled till he disengaged himself, and then ran a good many paces from her; which behaviour she resented so highly, it seems, that she took up a stone, and after throwing it at him, glided into her more proper element, and was never seen on land again. But the poor youth, tho' but slightly hit with the stone, felt from that moment so excessive a pain in his bowels, that the cry was never out of his mouth for seven days, at the end of which he died. Source (books.google.com): George Waldron, The History and Description of the Isle of Man (London: W. Bickerton, 1744), pp. 130-32 . Source (Internet Archive): George Waldron, The History and Description of the Isle of Man (London: W. Bickerton, 1744), pp. 130-32 . Return to the table of contents . The Mermaid Wife Shetland Islands A story is told of an inhabitant of Unst, who, in walking on the sandy margin of a voe [a deep inlet], saw a number of mermen and mermaids dancing by moonlight, and several sealskins strewed beside them on the ground. At his approach they immediately fled to secure their garbs, and, taking upon themselves the form of seals, plunged immediately into the sea. But as the Shetlander perceived that one skin lay close to his feet, he snatched it up, bore it swiftly away, and placed it in concealment. On returning to the shore he met the fairest damsel that was ever gazed upon by mortal eyes, lamenting the robbery, by which she had become an exile from her submarine friends, and a tenant of the upper world. Vainly she implored the restitution of her property. The man had drunk deeply of love, and was inexorable; but he offered her protection beneath his roof as his betrothed spouse. The merlady, perceiving that she must become an inhabitant of the earth, found that she could not do better than accept of the offer. This strange attachment subsisted for many years, and the couple had several children. The Shetlander's love for his merwife was unbounded, but his affection was coldly returned. The lady would often steal alone to the desert strand, and, on a signal being given, a large seal would make his appearance, with whom she would hold, in an unknown tongue, an anxious conference. Years had thus glided away, when it happened that one of the children, in the course of his play, found concealed beneath a stack of corn a seal's skin; and, delighted with the prize, he ran with it to his mother. Her eyes glistened with rapture -- she gazed upon it as her own -- as the means by which she could pass through the ocean that led to her native home. She burst forth into an ecstasy of joy, which was only moderated when she beheld her children, whom she was now about to leave; and, after hastily embracing them, she fled with all speed towards the seaside. The husband immediately returned, learned the discovery that had taken place, ran to overtake his wife, but only arrived in time to see her transformation of shape completed -- to see her, in the form of a seal, bound from the ledge of a rock into the sea. The large animal of the same kind with whom she had held a secret converse soon appeared, and evidently congratulated her, in the most tender manner, on her escape. But before she dived to unknown depths, she cast a parting glance at the wretched Shetlander, whose despairing looks excited in her breast a few transient feelings of commiseration. "Farewell!" said she to him "and may all good attend you. I loved you very well when I resided upon earth, but I always loved my first husband much better." Unst is the northernmost of the Shetland Islands. Source: [C. J. T.], Folk-Lore and Legends: Scotland (London: W. W. Gibbings, 1889), pp. 86-88 . This legend is reprinted in George Douglas, Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales (London: Walter Scott, [1901]), pp. 153-55 . (Hathitrust). Return to the table of contents . The Silkie Wife Shetland and Orkney Islands Those in the Shetland and Orkney Islands who know no better, are persuaded that the seals, or silkies, as they call them, can doff their coverings at times, and disport themselves as men and women. A fisher once turning a ridge of rock, discovered a beautiful bit of green turf adjoining the shingle, sheltered by rocks on the landward side, and over this turf and shingle two beautiful women chasing each other. Just at the man's feet lay two sealskins, one of which he took up to examine it. The women, catching sight of him, screamed out, and ran to get possession of the skins. One seized the article on the ground, donned it in a thrice, and plunged into the sea; the other wrung her hands, cried, and begged the fisher to restore her property; but he wanted a wife, and would not throw away the chance. He wooed her so earnestly and lovingly, that she put on some woman's clothing which he brought her from his cottage, followed him home, and became his wife. Some years later, when their home was enlivened by the presence of two children, the husband, awakening one night, heard voices in conversation from the kitchen. Stealing softly to the room door, he heard his wife talking in a low tone with someone outside the window. The interview was just at an end, and he had only time to ensconce himself in bed, when his wife was stealing across the room. He was greatly disturbed, but determined to do or say nothing till he should acquire further knowledge. Next evening, as he was returning home by the strand, he spied a male and female phoca sprawling on a rock a few yards out at sea. The rougher animal, raising himself on his tail and fins, thus addressed the astonished man in the dialect spoken in these islands, "You deprived me of her whom I was to make my companion; and it was only yesternight that I discovered her outer garment, the loss of which obliged her to be your wife. I bear no malice, as you were kind to her in your own fashion; besides, my heart is too full of joy to hold any malice. Look on your wife for the last time." The other seal glanced at him with all the shyness and sorrow she could force into her now uncouth features; but when the bereaved husband rushed toward the rock to secure his lost treasure, she and her companion were in the water on the other side of it in a moment, and the poor fisherman was obliged to return sadly to his motherless children and desolate home. Source: Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts , collected and narrated by Patrick Kennedy (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 122-24 . Return to the table of contents . Herman Perk and the Seal Shetland Islands It was believed at one time that the Finns [Sami] frequently came over to Shetland taking the form of seals. In this connection a remarkable tale was told in Papa Stoor ["Big Priest" Island]. The islanders were often in the habit of visiting the outlying Vee Skerries for the purpose of hunting seals. On one occasion a man named Herman Perk, accompanied by others, left for the skerries in a small boat. When they arrived there Herman was landed on the rocks, but his companions remained in the boat to prevent it getting damaged. It happened, however, that a severe storm burst without warning, and the men found after several daring attempts, that it was quite impossible to get Herman off again. The storm was increasing in severity, and latterly they were compelled, for their own safety, to attempt getting back to Papa. After a terrible passage they succeeded in reaching the island, and their first act was to proceed to the home of their ill-fated companion to tell his folk what had befallen him. Imagine their surprise, however, on finding him comfortably seated at his fireside. Herman had a strange story to tell them. Shortly after the boat left the skerries, he observed a large seal coming up, and as he watched its progress, it suddenly raised itself in the angry sea, and he became aware that it was speaking to him. "Herman Perk," it said, "you have destroyed many of our folks in your time, yet nevertheless if you will undertake to do me a service, I will carry you in safety to Papa tonight. Some time ago my wife Maryara was made captive in Papa. Her skin is now hanging in the skio (hut for drying fish) at Nortoos, and without it she cannot return with me to Finmark [in northern Norway]. It is the third skin from the door, and I wish you to bring it to me." Herman had readily agreed to this proposition, whereupon he was told to cut two slits in the seal's back as supports for his feet, and then place his arms firmly round the animal's neck. The latter immediately took to the water, and in a remarkably short time Herman had the gratification of landing safely in Papa. True to his promise, he went to the skio indicated, where he found the skin without any difficulty, and carried it down to the beach. The seal was waiting his coming, and at its side was the most beautiful woman he had ever beheld. The seal gave the skin to its lovely companion, and then apparently left its own body behind, and the happy pair immediately took their departure over the sea. The following morning Herman went again to Nortoos. There, sure enough, lay the skin of a large seal, and it had two cuts behind the flippers. He placed it where he had taken the other from. After that Herman was a prosperous man, but he was never known to visit the Vee Skerries again. Source (books.google.com): John Nicolson, Some Folk-Tales and Legends of Shetland , (Edinburgh: Thomas Allan and Sons, 1920), pp. 62-63 . Return to the table of contents . The Goodman of Wastness Scotland (Orkney Islands) Versions of the story I am now to tell were at one time rife in every Orkney island: It happened one day that the goodman of Wastness was down on the ebb (that portion of the shore left dry at low water) when he saw at a little distance a number of selkie folk on a flat rock. Some were lying sunning themselves while others jumped and played about in great glee. They were all naked and had skins as white as his own. The rock on which they sported had deep water on its seaward side and on its shore side a shallow pool. The goodman of Wastness crept unseen till he got to the edge of the shallow pool; he then rose and dashed through the pool to the rock on its other side. The alarmed selkie folk seized their seal skins and in mad haste jumped into the sea. Quick as they were the goodman was also quick and he seized one of the skins belonging to an unfortunate damsel who in terror of flight neglected to clutch it as she sprang into the water. The selkie folk swam out a little distance then turning set up their heads and gazed at the goodman. He noticed that one of them had not the appearance of seals like the rest. He then took the captured skin under his arm and made for home but before he got out of the ebb he heard a most doleful sound of weeping and lamentation behind him. He turned to see a fair woman following him. It was that one of the selkie folk whose seal skin he had taken. She was a pitiful sight; sobbing in bitter grief holding out both hands in eager supplication while the big tears followed each other down her fair face. And ever and anon she cried out: "O bonnie man! If there's onie mercy i' thee human breast gae back me skin! I cinno' cinno' cinno' live i' the sea without it. I cinno' cinno' cinno' bide among me ain folk without my ain seal skin. Oh pity a peur distressed forlorn lass gin doo wad ever hope for mercy theesel'!" The goodman was not too soft-hearted yet he could not help pitying her in her doleful plight. And with his pity came the softer passion of love. His heart that never loved women before was conquered by the sea-nymph's beauty. So after a good deal of higgling and plenty of love-making he wrung from the sea-lass a reluctant consent to live with him as his wife. She chose this as the least of two evils. Without the skin she could not live in the sea, and he absolutely refused to give up the skin. So the sea-lass went with the goodman and stayed with him for many days being a thrifty frugal and kindly good wife. She bore her goodman seven children four boys and three lasses and there were not bonnier lasses or statelier boys in all the isle. And though the goodwife of Wastness appeared happy and was sometimes merry yet there seemed at times to be a weight on her heart; and many a long longing look did she fix on the sea. She taught her bairns many a strange song that nobody on earth ever heard before. Albeit she was a thing of the sea yet the goodman led a happy life with her. Now it chanced one fine day that the goodman of Wastness and his three eldest sons were off in his boat to the fishing. Then the goodwife sent three of the other children to the ebb to gather limpits and wilks. The youngest lass had to stay at home for she had a beelan (suppurating) foot. The goodwife then began under the pretence of house-cleaning a determined search for her long-lost skin. She searched up and she searched down; she searched but and she searched ben; she searched out and she searched in but never a skin could she find while the sun wore to the west. The youngest lass sat in a stool with her sore foot on a cringlo (a low straw stool). She says to her mother: "Mam what are doo leukan for?" "O bairn deu no tell," said her mother, "but I'm leukan for a bonnie skin tae mak a rivlin (shoe or sandal) that wad ceur thee sare fit." Says the lass: "May be I ken whar hid is. Ae day whin ye war a' oot an' ded tought I war sleepan i' the bed he teuk a bonnie skin doon; he gloured at it a peerie minute dan folded hid and led hid up under dae aisins abeun dae bed." (Under the aisins -- space left by slope of roof over wall-head when not beam-filled.) When her mother heard this she rushed to the place and pulled out her long-concealed skin. "Fareweel peerie buddo!" (a term of endearment), said she to the child and ran out. She rushed to the shore flung on her skin and plunged into the sea with a wild cry of joy. A male of the selkie folk there met and greeted her with every token of delight. The goodman was rowing home and saw them both from his boat. His lost wife uncovered her face, and thus she cried to him: "Goodman o' Wastness fareweel tae thee! I liked dee weel doo war geud tae me; bit I lo'e better me man o' the sea!" And that was the last he ever saw or heard of his bonnie wife. Often did he wander on the seashore hoping to meet his lost love, but never more saw he her fair face. Source (books.google.com): A. W. Cornelius Hallen, Scottish Antiquary; or, Northern Notes and Queries , vol. 7 (Edinburgh: T. and A. Constable, 1893), pp. 173-75 . Source (Internet Archive): A. W. Cornelius Hallen, Scottish Antiquary; or, Northern Notes and Queries , vol. 7 (Edinburgh: T. and A. Constable, 1893), pp. 173-75 . Return to the table of contents . The Mermaid of Lochinver Scotland A mermaid fell in love with a fisherman of Lochinver. Her lover was enamoured, but he had heard how youths ensnared by mermaids had found a watery grave. It became necessary then to make his own terms, and to arrange matters so as to secure himself. To rule a mermaid it is necessary to possess yourself, not of her person, but of the pouch and belt which mermaids wear. This carries the glass, comb, and other articles well-known to be indispensable to the lady's comfort, but also as a sort of life-preserver helps them to swim. By fair means or foul this cautious swain got hold of the pouch, and the mermaid became in consequence his bride and his bonds-woman. There was little happiness in such a union for the poor little wife. She wearied of a husband, who, to tell the truth, thought more of himself than of her. He never took her out in his boat when the sun danced on the sea, but left her at home with the cows, and on a croft which was to her a sort of prison. Her silky hair tangled. The dogs teased her. Her tail was really in the way. She wept incessantly while rude people mocked at her. Nor was there any prospect of escape after nine months of this wretched life. Her powers of swimming depended on her pouch, and that was lost. What was more, she now suspected the fisherman of having cozened her out of it. One day the fisherman was absent, and the labourers were pulling down a stack of corn. The poor mermaid watched them weeping, when to her great joy she espied her precious pouch and belt, which had been built in and buried among the sheaves. She caught it, and leapt into the sea, there to enjoy a delicious freedom. J. MacLeod, Laxford. Source (books.google.com): Miss [Charlotte Louisa Hawkins] Dempster, "The Folk-Lore of Sutherlandshire," The Folk-Lore Journal , vol. 6, part 3 (July to September 1888), no. 14, pp. 165-66 . Source (Internet Archive): Miss [Charlotte Louisa Hawkins] Dempster, "The Folk-Lore of Sutherlandshire," The Folk-Lore Journal , vol. 6, part 3 (July to September 1888), no. 14, pp. 165-66 . Return to the table of contents . The Sealskin Iceland Early one morning before people had gotten up, a man from Myrdal in the east was walking past some cliffs when he came to the entrance to a cave. He could hear that there was merrymaking and dancing going on inside the hill, and outside he saw a large number of sealskins. He picked up one of them, took it home, and locked it in his trunk. Some time later, in the course of the day, he went back to the cave's entrance. A beautiful young girl was sitting there. She was entirely naked and crying bitterly. She was the seal to whom the skin belonged that the man had taken. The man gave the girl some clothing, comforted her, and took her home with him. Later she came to accept him, but never got along very well with other people. She would often just sit there and look out to sea. After some time the man took her as his wife. They lived well together and had many children. The peasant hid the skin, locking it securely in his trunk, and he carried the key with him everywhere he went. Many years later he rowed out fishing and forgot the key at home under his pillow. However, others say that the peasant went to a Christmas service with his people, but that his wife had been sick and was unable to go with them. They say that he forgot to take the key out of the pocket of his everyday clothes when he changed. When he arrived home that evening the trunk was open, and his wife had disappeared with the skin. She had found the key, out of curiosity looked through the trunk, and found the skin. She could not resist the temptation. She said farewell to her children, put on the skin, and threw herself into the sea. Before the woman jumped into the sea, it is reported that she said: This I want, and yet I want it not, -- Seven children have I at the bottom of the sea, Seven children have I as well here above. It is said that this touched the peasant's heart. After this, when he rowed out fishing, a seal often swam around his boat, and it seemed that tears were running from its eyes. From this time on he was always successful catching fish, and luck often came to his beach. People frequently saw this couple's children walking on the beach while a seal swam along out in the sea accompanying them. It would throw colorful fish and pretty shells to them. But the mother never again returned to land. Source (books.google.com): Åge Avenstrup and Elisabeth Treitel, "Das Seehundsfell," Isländische Märchen und Volkssagen (Berlin: Axel Juncker Verlag, 1919), pp. 258-59 . Source (Internet Archive): Åge Avenstrup and Elisabeth Treitel, "Das Seehundsfell," Isländische Märchen und Volkssagen (Berlin: Axel Juncker Verlag, 1919), pp. 258-59 . This legend in the original Icelandic: Books.google.com: Jón Árnason, "Selshamurinn," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), pp. 632-33 . Internet Archive: Jón Árnason, "Selshamurinn," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), pp. 632-33 . Return to the table of contents . Touched by Iron Wales The son of a farmer on Drws Coed farm was one foggy day looking after his father's sheep, when crossing a marshy meadow he beheld a little lady behind some rising ground. She had yellow hair, blue eyes and rosy cheeks. He approached her, and asked permission to converse; whereupon she smiled sweetly and said to him, "Idol of my hopes, you have come at last!" They there and then began to "keep company," and met each other daily here and there along the farm meadows. His intentions were honorable; he desired her to marry him. He was sometimes absent for days together, no one knew where, and his friends whispered about that he had been witched. Around the Turf Lake (Llyn y Dywarchen) was a grove of trees, and under one of these one day the fairy promised to be his. The consent of her father was now necessary. One moonlight night an appointment was made to meet in this wood. The father and daughter did not appear till the moon had disappeared behind the hill. Then they both came. The fairy father immediately gave his consent to the marriage, on one condition, namely, that her future husband should never hit her with iron. "If ever thou dost touch her flesh with iron she shall be no more thine, but she shall return to her own." They were married -- a good-looking pair. Large sums of money were brought by her, the night before the wedding, to Drws Coed. The shepherd lad became wealthy, had several handsome children, and they were very happy. After some years, they were one day out riding, when her horse sank in a deep mire, and by the assistance of her husband, in her hurry to remount, she was struck on her knee by the stirrup of the saddle. Immediately voices were heard singing on the brow of the hill, and she disappeared, leaving all her children behind. She and her mother devised a plan by which she could see her beloved, but as she was not allowed to walk the earth with man, they floated a large turf on the lake, and on this turf she stood for hours at a time holding converse with her husband. This continued until his death. Source: Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions , 2nd edition (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), pp. 44-45 . Sikes does not give this account a title. Return to the table of contents . The Mermaid of Zennor Cornwall Zennor folks tell the following story, which, according to them, accounts for a singular carving on a bench-end in their church. Hundreds of years ago a very beautiful and richly attired lady attended service in Zennor Church occasionally -- now and then she went to Morvah also; -- her visits were by no means regular, -- often long intervals would elapse between them. Yet whenever she came the people were enchanted with her good looks and sweet singing. Although Zennor folks were remarkable for their fine psalmody, she excelled them all; and they wondered how, after the scores of years that they had seen her, she continued to look so young and fair. No one knew whence she came nor whither she went; yet many watched her as far as they could see from Tregarthen Hill. She took some notice of a fine young man, called Mathey Trewella, who was the best singer in the parish. He once followed her, but he never returned; after that she was never more seen in Zennor Church, and it might not have been known to this day who or what she was but for the merest accident. One Sunday morning a vessel cast anchor about a mile from Pendower Cove; soon after a mermaid came close alongside and hailed the ship. Rising out of the water as far as her waist, with her yellow hair floating around her, she told the captain that she was returning from church, and requested him to trip his anchor just for a minute, as the fluke of it rested on the door of her dwelling, and she was anxious to get in to her children. Others say that while she was out on the ocean a-fishing of a Sunday morning, the anchor was dropped on the trap-door which gave access to her submarine abode. Finding, on her return, how she was hindered from opening her door, she begged the captain to have the anchor raised that she might enter her dwelling to dress her children and be ready in time for church. However it may be, her polite request had a magical effect upon the sailors, for they immediately "worked with a will," hove anchor and set sail, not wishing to remain a moment longer than they could help near her habitation. Sea-faring men, who understood most about mermaids, regarded their appearance as a token that bad luck was near at hand. It was believed they could take such shapes as suited their purpose, and that they had often allured men to live with them. When Zennor folks learnt that a mermaid dwelt near Pendower, and what she had told the captain, they concluded it was this sea-lady who had visited their church, and enticed Trewella to her abode. To commemorate these somewhat unusual events they had the figure she bore -- when in her ocean home -- carved in holy-oak, which may still be seen. Source (books.google.com): William Bottrell, Traditions and Hearthwide Stories of West Cornwall , second series (Penzance: Printed for the author by Beare and Son, 1873), pp. 288-89 . Source (Internet Archive): William Bottrell, Traditions and Hearthwide Stories of West Cornwall , second series (Penzance: Printed for the author by Beare and Son, 1873), pp. 288-89 . Link to the Wikipedia article Mermaid of Zennor . The mermaid carving on the bench-end in St. Senara's church in Zennor can be seen to this day. Return to the table of contents . Tom Moore and the Seal Woman Ireland Apropos of the following tale, I may say: The intermarriage with and descent of men from beings not human touches upon one of the most interesting and important points in primitive belief. Totemism among savage races in our day, and descent from the gods in antiquity are the best examples of this belief; derived from it, in all probability but remotely, are family escutcheons with their animals and birds and the emblematic beasts and birds of nations, such as the Roman eagle, the British lion, the American eagle, the Russian bear. The Roman eagle and the wolf which suckled Romulus may have been totems, if not for the Romans, at least for some earlier people. The lion, eagle, and bear of England, America, and Russia are of course not totemic, though adopted in imitation of people who, if they had not totems, had as national emblems birds or beasts that at some previous period were real totems for some social body. There is a tale in Scotland concerning people of the clan MacCodrum, who were seals in the daytime, but men and women at night. No man of the MacCodrums, it is said, would kill a seal. The MacCodrums are mentioned in Gaelic as "Clann Mhic Codruim nan rón" (Clan MacCodrum of the seals). In the village of Kilshanig, two miles northeast of Castlegregory, there lived at one time a fine, brave young man named Tom Moore, a good dancer and singer. 'Tis often he was heard singing among the cliffs and in the fields of a night. Tom's father and mother died, and he was alone in the house and in need of a wife. One morning early, when he was at work near the strand, he saw the finest woman ever seen in that part of the kingdom, sitting on a rock, fast asleep. The tide was gone from the rocks then, and Tom was curious to know who was she or what brought her, so he walked toward the rock. "Wake up!" cried Tom to the woman. "If the tide comes 'twill drown you." She raised her head and only laughed. Tom left her there, but as he was going he turned every minute to look at the woman. When he came back be caught the spade, but couldn't work; he had to look at the beautiful woman on the rock. At last the tide swept over the rock. He threw the spade down and away to the strand with him, but she slipped into the sea and he saw no more of her that time. Tom spent the day cursing himself for not taking the woman from the rock when it was God that sent her to him. He couldn't work out the day. He went home. Tom could not sleep a wink all that night. He was up early next morning and went to the rock. The woman was there. He called to her. No answer. He went up to the rock. "You may as well come home with me now," said Tom. Not a word from the woman. Tom took the hood from her head and said, "I'll have this!" The moment be did that she cried, "Give back my hood, Tom Moore!" "Indeed I will not, for 'twas God sent you to me, and now that you have speech I'm well satisfied!" And taking her by the arm he led her to the house. The woman cooked breakfast, and they sat down together to eat it. "Now," said Tom, "in the name of God you and I'll go to the priest and get married, for the neighbors around here are very watchful; they'd be talking." So after breakfast they went to the priest, and Tom asked him to marry them. "Where did you get the wife?" asked the priest. Tom told the whole story. When the priest saw Tom was so anxious to marry be charged £5, and Tom paid the money. He took the wife home with him, and she was as good a woman as ever went into a man's house. She lived with Tom seven years, and had three sons and two daughters. One day Tom was plowing, and some part of the plow rigging broke. He thought there were bolts on the loft at home, so he climbed up to get them. He threw down bags and ropes while he was looking for the bolts, and what should he throw down but the hood which he took from the wife seven years before. She saw it the moment it fell, picked it up, and hid it. At that time people heard a great seal roaring out in the sea. "Ah," said Tom's wife, "that's my brother looking for me." Some men who were hunting killed three seals that day. All the women of the village ran down to the strand to look at the seals, and Tom's wife with the others. She began to moan, and going up to the dead seals she spoke some words to each and then cried out, "Oh, the murder!" When they saw her crying the men said, "We'll have nothing more to do with these seals." So they dug a great hole, and the three seals were put into it and covered. But some thought in the night, "'Tis a great shame to bury those seals, after all the trouble in taking them." Those men went with shovels and dug up the earth, but found no trace of the seals. All this time the big seal in the sea was roaring. Next day when Tom was at work his wife swept the house, put everything in order, washed the children and combed their hair; then, taking them one by one, she kissed each. She went next to the rock, and, putting the hood on her head, gave a plunge. That moment the big seal rose and roared so that people ten miles away could hear him. Tom's wife went away with the seal swimming in the sea. All the five children that she left had webs between their fingers and toes, halfway to the tips. The descendants of Tom Moore and the seal woman are living near Castlegregory to this day, and the webs are not gone yet from between their fingers and toes, though decreasing with each generation. Source: Jeremiah Curtin, Tales of Fairies and of the Ghost World Collected from Oral Tradition in South-West Munster (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1895), pp. 150-54 . Return to the table of contents . The Lady of Gollerus Ireland On the shore of Smerwick harbor, one fine summer's morning, just at daybreak, stood Dick Fitzgerald "shoghing the dudeen," which may be translated, smoking his pipe. The sun was gradually rising behind the lofty Brandon, the dark sea was getting green in the light, and the mists clearing away out of the valleys went rolling and curling like the smoke from the corner of Dick's mouth. "'Tis just the pattern of a pretty morning," said Dick, taking the pipe from between his lips, and looking towards the distant ocean, which lay as still and tranquil as a tomb of polished marble. "Well, to be sure," continued he, after a pause, "'tis mighty lonesome to be talking to one's self by way of company, and not to have another soul to answer one -- nothing but the child of one's own voice, the echo! I know this, that if I had the luck, or maybe the misfortune," said Dick, with a melancholy smile, "to have the woman, it would not be this way with me! And what in the wide world is a man without a wife? He's no more, surely, than a bottle without a drop of drink in it, or dancing without music, or the left leg of a scissors, or a fishing line without a hook, or any other matter that is no ways complete. Is it not so?" said Dick Fitzgerald, casting his eyes towards a rock upon the strand, which, though it could not speak, stood up as firm and looked as bold as ever Kerry witness did. But what was his astonishment at beholding, just at the foot of that rock, a beautiful young creature combing her hair, which was of a sea-green color; and now the salt water shining on it, appeared, in the morning light, like melted butter upon cabbage. Dick guessed at once that she was a merrow, although he had never seen one before, for he spied the cohuleen druith , or little enchanted cap, which the sea people use for diving down into the ocean, lying upon the strand near her; and he had heard that if once he could possess himself of the cap, she would lose the power of going away into the water; so he seized it with all speed, and she, hearing the noise, turned her head about as natural as any Christian. When the merrow saw that her little diving cap was gone, the salt tears -- doubly salt, no doubt, from her -- came trickling down her cheeks, and she began a low mournful cry with just the tender voice of a newborn infant. Dick, although he knew well enough what she was crying for, determined to keep the cohuleen druith , let her cry never so much, to see what luck would come out of it. Yet he could not help pitying her; and when the dumb thing looked up in his face, and her cheeks all moist with tears, 'twas enough to make anyone feel, let alone Dick, who had ever and always, like most of his countrymen, a mighty tender heart of his own. "Don't cry, my darling," said Dick Fitzgerald; but the merrow, like any bold child, only cried the more for that. Dick sat himself down by her side, and took hold of her hand, by way of comforting her. 'Twas in no particular an ugly hand, only there was a small web between the fingers, as there is in a duck's foot; but 'twas as thin and as white as the skin between egg and shell. "What's your name, my darling?" says Dick, thinking to make her conversant with him; but he got no answer; and he was certain sure now, either that she could not speak, or did not understand him. He therefore squeezed her hand in his, as the only way he had of talking to her. It's the universal language; and there's not a woman in the world, be she fish or lady, that does not understand it. The merrow did not seem much displeased at this mode of conversation; and, making an end of her whining all at once, "Man," says she, looking up in Dick Fitzgerald's face, "Man, will you eat me?" "By all the red petticoats and check aprons between Dingle and Tralee," cried Dick, jumping up in amazement, "I'd as soon eat myself, my jewel! Is it I eat you, my pet? Now, 'twas some ugly ill-looking thief of a fish put that notion into your own pretty head, with the nice green hair down upon it, that is so cleanly combed out this morning!" "Man," said the merrow, "what will you do with me, if you won't eat me?" Dick's thoughts were running on a wife. He saw, at the first glimpse, that she was handsome; but since she spoke, and spoke too like any real woman, he was fairly in love with her. 'Twas the neat way she called him "man" that settled the matter entirely. "Fish," says Dick, trying to speak to her after her own short fashion. "Fish," says he, "here's my word, fresh and fasting, for you this blessed morning, that I'll make you Mistress Fitzgerald before all the world, and that's what I'll do." "Never say the word twice." says she. "I'm ready and willing to be yours, Mister Fitzgerald; but stop, if you please, 'till I twist up my hair." It was some time before she had settled it entirely to her liking, for she guessed, I suppose, that she was going among strangers, where she would be looked at. When that was done, the merrow put the comb in her pocket, and then bent down her head and whispered some words to the water that was close to the foot of the rock. Dick saw the murmur of the words upon the top of the sea, going out towards the wide ocean, just like a breath of wind rippling along, and, says he, in the greatest wonder, "Is it speaking you are, my darling, to the saltwater?" "It's nothing else," says she, quite carelessly, "I'm just sending word home to my father, not to be waiting breakfast for me, just to keep him from being uneasy in his mind." "And who's your father, my duck?" says Dick. "What!" said the merrow, "Did you never hear of my father? He's the king of the waves, to be sure!" "And yourself, then, is a real king's daughter?" said Dick, opening his two eyes to take a full and true survey of his wife that was to be. "Oh, I'm nothing else but a made man with you, and a king your father. To be sure he has all the money that's down in the bottom of the sea!" "Money," repeated the merrow, "what's money?" "'Tis no bad thing to have when one wants it," replied Dick; "and maybe now the fishes have the understanding to bring up whatever you bid them?" "Oh! yes," said the merrow, "they bring me what I want." "To speak the truth," said Dick, "'tis a straw bed I have at home before you, and that, I'm thinking, is no ways fitting for a king's daughter; so if 'twould not be displeasing to you, just to mention, a nice featherbed, with a pair of new blankets -- but what am I talking about? Maybe you have not such things as beds down under the water?" "By all means," said she, "Mr. Fitzgerald -- plenty of beds at your service. I've fourteen oyster beds of my own, not to mention one just planting for the rearing of young ones." "You have," says Dick, scratching his head and looking a little puzzled. "'Tis a featherbed I was speaking of, but clearly, yours is the very cut of a decent plan, to have bed and supper so handy to each other, that a person, when they'd have the one, need never ask for the other." However, bed or no bed, money or no money, Dick Fitzgerald determined to marry the merrow, and the merrow had given her consent. Away they went, therefore, across the strand, from Gollerus to Ballinrunnig, where Father Fitzgibbon happened to be that morning. "There are two words to this bargain, Dick Fitzgerald," said his Reverence, looking mighty glum. "And is it a fishy woman you'd marry? The Lord preserve us! Send the scaly creature home to her own people, that's my advice to you, wherever she came from." Dick had the cohuleen druith in his hand, and was about to give it back to the merrow, who looked covetously at it, but he thought for a moment, and then, says he, "Please your Reverence, she's a king's daughter." "If she was the daughter of fifty kings," said Father Fitzgibbon, "I tell you, you can't marry her, she being a fish." "Please your Reverence," said Dick again, in an undertone, "she is as mild and as beautiful as the moon." "If she was as mild and as beautiful as the sun, moon, and stars, all put together, I tell you, Dick Fitzgerald," said the priest, stamping his right foot, "you can't marry her, she being a fish!" "But she has all the gold that's down in the sea only for the asking, and I'm a made man if I marry her; and," said Dick, looking up slyly, "I can make it worth any one's while to do the job." "Oh! That alters the case entirely," replied the priest. "Why there's some reason now in what you say. Why didn't you tell me this before? Marry her by all means, if she was ten times a fish. Money, you know, is not to be refused in these bad times, and I may as well have the hansel of it as another, that maybe would not take half the pains in counseling you as I have done." So Father Fitzgibbon married Dick Fitzgerald to the merrow, and like any loving couple, they returned to Gollerus well pleased with each other. Everything prospered with Dick. He was at the sunny side of the world; the merrow made the best of wives, and they lived together in the greatest contentment. It was wonderful to see, considering where she had been brought up, how she would busy herself about the house, and how well she nursed the children; for, at the end of three years, there were as many young Fitzgeralds -- two boys and a girl. In short, Dick was a happy man, and so he might have continued to the end of his days, if he had only the sense to take proper care of what he had got. Many another man, however, beside Dick, has not had wit enough to do that. One day when Dick was obliged to go to Tralee, he left the wife minding the children at home after him, and thinking she had plenty to do without disturbing his fishing tackle. Dick was no sooner gone than Mrs. Fitzgerald set about cleaning up the house, and chancing to pull down a fishing net, what should she find behind it in a hole in the wall but her own cohuleen druith. She took it out and looked at it, and then she thought of her father the king, and her mother the queen, and her brothers and sisters, and she felt a longing to go back to them. She sat down on a little stool and thought over the happy days she had spent under the sea; then she looked at her children, and thought on the love and affection of poor Dick, and how it would break his heart to lose her. "But," says she, "he won't lose me entirely, for I'll come back to him again, and who can blame me for going to see my father and my mother after being so long away from them?" She got up and went towards the door, but came back again to look once more at the child that was sleeping in the cradle. She kissed it gently, and as she kissed it a tear trembled for an instant in her eye and then fell on its rosy cheek. She wiped away the tear, and turning to the eldest little girl, told her to take good care of her brothers, and to be a good child herself until she came back. The merrow then went down to the strand. The sea was lying calm and smooth, just heaving and glittering in the sun, and she thought she heard a faint sweet singing, inviting her to come down. All her old ideas and feelings came flooding over her mind. Dick and her children were at the instant forgotten, and placing the cohuleen druith on her head, she plunged in. Dick came home in the evening, and missing his wife, he asked Kathelin, his little girl, what had become of her mother, but she could not tell him. He then enquired of the neighbors, and he learned that she was seen going towards the strand with a strange looking thing like a cocked hat in her hand. He returned to his cabin to search for the cohuleen druith. It was gone, and the truth now flashed upon him. Year after year did Dick Fitzgerald wait, expecting the return of his wife, but he never saw her more. Dick never married again, always thinking that the merrow would sooner or later return to him, and nothing could ever persuade him but that her father the king kept her below by main force; "for," said Dick, "she surely would not of herself give up her husband and her children." While she was with him, she was so good a wife in every respect, that to this day she is spoken of in the tradition of the country as the pattern for one, under the name of the Lady of Gollerus. Source: Thomas Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland , vol. 2 (London: John Murray, 1828), pp. 3-13 . Smerwick Harbor is at the tip of Dingle Peninsula in southwest Ireland. Gollerus is a small village on the eastern side of the harbor. Croker gives the name of the enchanted cap as cohuleen driuth , but I have preferred the more standard spelling cohuleen druith. Return to the table of contents . The Mermaid Ireland The mermaid lives in the sea, she is like a fish from her waist down and the rest is like a woman. A story is told about a man who was fishing at the sea, and he saw a beautiful lady sitting on a rock combing her hair. At once he guessed it was a mermaid. She had left her mantle down beside her, and the man stole up to the rock where it was left and took it with him. When she missed it she followed the man, but as soon as she touched dry land she changed into a human woman. She followed the man to his house, but he would not give her the mantle. She could not go back until she got it, so she married the man. They had seven children, and one day the youngest boy saw his father put a beautiful mantle into a stack of oats. He told his mother about it. She searched the stack, and when she got it she went to the sea. The seven children followed her, and she changed them into seven stones. Later there were only six to be seen. And it was supposed that it was the boy who told her about the mantle she brought to live with her. Informant: Michael Walsh, Gowlaun, Co. Mayo. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Mayo >> Caonach, pp. 319-320 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Legend of O' Dowd of Inniscrone Castle and the Mermaid Ireland One fine summer morning the O'Dowd was walking on the shore and he saw a beautiful mermaid asleep on the rocks. She had long golden hair and a red cloak beside her. O'Dowd took the red cloak and hid it in a stack of turf at the castle. She woke up but as she had not her mermaid cloak, she was a mermaid no longer but was a woman. After this O'Dowd married her and they had seven sons. The mermaid made O'Dowd promise that he would not go to sea again. He broke the promise and went to sea. When he was gone one of her sons told her that he often saw his father looking at a beautiful red cloak. She knew it was her own and asked him where it was hidden. When she got it she made up her mind to "take" to sea and become a mermaid again. She could not bring her sons with her into the sea as they were half human beings, so with a wave of her red cloak she turned them into seven rocks and so then returned to the sea. These rocks are to be seen in Scurmore woods, and it is believed that these rocks bleed every seven years if they are tipped with something sharp. Collector: Connie Carroll, Frankford, Co. Sligo. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Sligo >> Mairnéulaigh, p. 309 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . The Mermaid Ireland The mermaid is half a woman and half a fish. A mermaid appeared in Ballyheigue a few years ago. A man seeing her on the rocks brought her home. She never spoke while in the house, and she had a little wand called the "slatín sraoideachta." The man took the wand and hid from the mermaid. One day he went to town and his mother was tidying the loft and in the rubbish she found the wand and she threw it down to the kitchen. The mermaid who was in the kitchen found it and she laughed and ran away. Collector: Nora Mary McCarthy, Lixnaw, Co. Kerry. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Kerry >> Clochar na Toirbhirte, Lic Snámha, p. 303 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Brauhard's Mermaid Germany Many years ago a man named Brauhard lived in Lauterberg. He had been far away across the water and had brought home a mermaid, whom he married. Her top half was human, but her bottom half was formed like a fish. She lived in a tub in his house. However, his friends could not stand the malformed woman, and so they finally poisoned her. He did not remarry, and he contributed the money he had received as her dowry to the poor. That is the source of the Brauhard Fund which to this day is administered by the Scharzfeld Jurisdiction for the support of the poor in the surrounding villages. Source (books.google.com): A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Brauhards Seejungfer," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 259, pp. 232-33 . Source (Internet Archive): A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Brauhards Seejungfer," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 259, pp. 232-33 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "Oral tradition from Steina." Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Each link opens in a new window. Close the targeted window to return to this page. Water Spirit Legends . Swan Maidens . Folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 400*, in which a man gains control over a swan maiden by stealing her feathered garb. Melusina . Legends about mermaids, water sprites, and forest nymphs who marry mortal men. Mermaid , from Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised July 2, 2024. Merseburg Incantations Merseburg Incantations Merseburger Zaubersprüche freely translated from Old High German by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2021 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. 1. Once the Idisi set forth, to this place and that; Some fastened fetters; some hindered the horde, Some loosed the bonds from the brave -- Leap forth from the fetters! Escape from the foes! 2. Phol and Wodan rode into the woods, There Balder's foal sprained its foot. It was charmed by Sinthgunt, her sister Sunna; It was charmed by Frija, her sister Volla; It was charmed by Wodan, as he well knew how: Bone-sprain, like blood-sprain, Like limb-sprain: Bone to bone; blood to blood; Limb to limb -- like they were glued. Revised April 23, 2021. Charms against Sprains Charms against Sprains Edited by D. L. Ashliman Copyright 1997-2021 Contents Cure for the Sprain (Ireland). Sprain Thread (Ireland). Straining Thread (Ireland). The Wristing or Wresting Thread (Orkney Islands). When a Person Has Received a Sprain (Shetland Islands). Link to the second Merseburg Incantation -- Merseburger Zauberspruch -- (Germany). Opens in a new window. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Cure for the Sprain Ireland A number of people in this district have this cure. The injured joint is rubbed with the bare hand, no oil or salve is used. The "doctor" repeats some words under his breath which one does not hear and which are guarded jealously as a family secret. Three visits are made by the patient to get this cure. It is usually a success. People who have this cure: David Wales, Crappagh (age: 62 years), Doohat P O, Newbliss Co. Monaghan. Mrs. Catherine Monahan, Crover (age: 75 years), Newbliss. Miss A. Abbott, Lisnaveane, Parish of Ematris, Barony of Dartrey. (age 70 yrs.) Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Monaghan >> Nart, pp. 160-61 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Link to additional accounts of Sprain Cures in The Schools' Collection . Return to the table of contents . Sprain Thread Ireland Thomas McHale of Belcarra died last year (1937) aged 86 years. He was a weaver. He always had a quantity of the sprain thread ready in the house. If a person sprained an ankle or anything, that person would go to Thomas and say "Thomas I got a hurt," but never ask him for the thread. Or somebody else would go instead of him: but in no circumstance must the thread be asked for. Thomas would understand, and give him a piece of the sprain thread. That piece of thread would be tied round the hurt limb, and the limb would get alright. It was only a piece of the wool-thread that the weaver used in to the loom. Pieces of the sprain thread have often been sent to England to cure boys from Belcarra district who suffered from sprain in England where they went to work. Information from Thomas McHale. Micheál Ó Gealbháin. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Mayo >> Clochar, pp. 63-64 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Straining Thread Ireland The "straining thread," a thin thread of hemp made with certain prayers, now lost, is usually kept for a cure for sprains and strains. Not every one made them. A local weaver named Murray used to make them. He is dead thirty years or so. Informant: M. McGlynn, aged 45. Killynagh More, County Roscommon. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Roscommon >> Cluain Uí Chuinn, p. 280 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . The Wristing or Wresting Thread Orkney Islands (Sanday) The following charm was used for the cure of sprains. A linen thread is tied around the injured part, after the solemn repetion of the charm: Our Savior rade, His fore-foot slade; Our Savior lichtit down. Sinew to sinew, vein to vein, Joint to joint, and bane to bane, Mend thou in God's name! During the time of repeating this charm nine knots must be tied on the thread, at regular distances, and to ensure success the charm should be repeated at every knot. Source (books.google.com): County Folk-Lore , vol. 3: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands , collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1903), p. 144 . Source (Internet Archive): County Folk-Lore , vol. 3: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands , collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1903), p. 144 . Black's source: W. H. Fotheringham, "Orkney Charms," Notes and Queries, series 1, vol. 10, pp. 220-221. In 1848 Mr. Fotheringham communicated these charms to the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland ( MS. Communications, vol 8, 1842-1852), with the statement that they were found among the family papers of the Traills of Westray. Return to the table of contents . When a Person Has Received a Sprain Shetland Islands When a person has received a sprain, it is customary to apply to an individual practiced in casting the "wresting thread." This is a thread spun from black wool, on which are cast nine knots, and tied round a sprained leg or arm. During the time the operator is putting the thread round the affected limb, he says, but in such a tone of voice as not to be heard by the bystanders, nor even by the person operated upon: The Lord rade, And the foal slade; He lighted. And he righted. Set joint to joint, Bone to bone, And sinew to sinew. Heal in the Holy Ghost's Name! Source (books.google.com): County Folk-Lore , vol. 3: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands , collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1903), p. 144 . Source (Internet Archive): County Folk-Lore , vol. 3: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands , collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1903), p. 144 . Black's source: The New Statistical Account of Scotland, (Edinburgh, 1845), vol. 15 (Shetland), p. 141. Return to the table of contents . Revised May 1, 2021. Midas, and other Folktales of Type 782 Midas and other folktales of type 782 about humans with animal ears or horns selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2004 Contents Midas (Greece). The Goat's Ears of the Emperor Trojan (Serbia). The King with the Horse's Ears (Ireland). March's Ears (1) (Wales). March's Ears (2) (Wales). The Child with the Ears of an Ox (India). The Presidente Who Had Horns (Philippines). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Midas Greece Bacchus, on a certain occasion, found his old schoolmaster and foster-father, Silenus, missing. The old man had been drinking, and in that state wandered away, and was found by some peasants, who carried him to their king, Midas. Midas recognized him, and treated him hospitably, entertaining him for ten days and nights with an unceasing round of jollity. On the eleventh day he brought Silenus back, and restored him in safety to his pupil. Whereupon Bacchus offered Midas his choice of a reward, whatever he might wish. He asked that whatever he might touch should be changed into gold. Bacchus consented, though sorry that he had not made a better choice. Midas went his way, rejoicing in his new-acquired power, which he hastened to put to the test. He could scarce believe his eyes when he found a twig of an oak, which he plucked from the branch, become gold in his hand. He took up a stone; it changed to gold. He touched a sod; it did the same. He took up an apple from the tree; you would have thought he had robbed the garden of the Hesperides. His joy knew no bounds, and as soon as he got home, he ordered the servants to set a splendid repast on the table. Then he found to his dismay that whether he touched bread, it hardened in his hand; or put a morsel to his lip, it defied his teeth. He took a glass of wine, but it flowed down his throat like melted gold. In consternation at the unprecedented affliction, he strove to divest himself of his power; he hated the gift he had lately coveted. But all in vain; starvation seemed to await him. He raised his arms, all shining with gold, in prayer to Bacchus, begging to be delivered from his glittering destruction. Bacchus, merciful deity, heard and consented. "Go," said he, "to River Pactolus, trace its fountain-head, there plunge yourself and body in, and wash away your fault and its punishment." He did so, and scarce had he touched the waters before the gold-creating power passed into them, and the river sands became changed into gold, as they remain to this day. Thenceforth Midas, hating wealth and splendor, dwelt in the country, and became a worshipper of Pan, the god of the fields. On a certain occasion Pan had the temerity to compare his music with that of Apollo, and to challenge the god of the lyre to a trial of skill. The challenge was accepted, and Tmolus, the mountain god, was chosen umpire. The senior took his seat, and cleared away the trees from his ears to listen. At a given signal Pan blew on his pipes, and with his rustic melody gave great satisfaction to himself and his faithful follower Midas, who happened to be present. Then Tmolus turned his head toward the Sun-god, and all his trees turned with him. Apollo rose, his brow wreathed with Parnassian laurel, while his robe of Tyrian purple swept the ground. In his left hand he held the lyre, and with his right hand struck the strings. Ravished with the harmony, Tmolus at once awarded the victory to the god of the lyre, and all but Midas acquiesced in the judgment. He dissented, and questioned the justice of the award. Apollo would not suffer such a depraved pair of ears any longer to wear the human form, but caused them to increase in length, grow hairy, within and without, and movable on their roots; in short, to be on the perfect pattern of those of an ass. Mortified enough was King Midas at this mishap: but he consoled himself with the thought that it was possible to hide his misfortune, which he attempted to do by means of an ample turban or head-dress. But his hairdresser of course knew the secret. He was charged not to mention it, and threatened with dire punishment if he presumed to disobey. But he found it too much for his discretion to keep such a secret; so he went out into the meadow, dug a hole in the ground, and stooping down, whispered the story, and covered it up. Before long a thick bed of reeds sprang up in the meadow, and as soon as it had gained its growth, began whispering the story, and has continued to do so, from that day to this, every time a breeze passes over the place. Source: Thomas Bulfinch, The Age of Fable (1855), chapter 6. Bulfinch's source: Ovid, Metamorphoses , book 11, and other classical writers. Return to the table of contents . The Goat's Ears of the Emperor Trojan Serbia Once upon a time there lived an emperor whose name was Trojan, and he had ears like a goat. Every morning, when he was shaved, he asked if the man saw anything odd about him, and as each fresh barber always replied that the emperor had goat's ears, he was at once ordered to be put to death. Now after this state of things had lasted a good while, there was hardly a barber left in the town that could shave the emperor, and it came to be the turn of the Master of the Company of Barbers to go up to the palace. But, unluckily, at the very moment that he should have set out, the master fell suddenly ill, and told one of his apprentices that he must go in his stead. When the youth was taken to the emperor's bedroom, he was asked why he had come and not his master. The young man replied that the master was ill, and there was no one but himself who could be trusted with the honor. The emperor was satisfied with the answer, and sat down, and let a sheet of fine linen be put round him. Directly the young barber began his work, he, like the rest, remarked the goat's ears of the emperor, but when he had finished and the emperor asked his usual question as to whether the youth had noticed anything odd about him, the young man replied calmly, "No, nothing at all." This pleased the emperor so much that he gave him twelve ducats, and said, "Henceforth you shall come every day to shave me." So when the apprentice returned home, and the master inquired how he had got on with the emperor, the young man answered, "Oh, very well, and he says I am to shave him every day, and he has given me these twelve ducats"; but he said nothing about the goat's ears of the emperor. From this time the apprentice went regularly up to the palace, receiving each morning twelve ducats in payment. But after a while, his secret, which he had carefully kept, burnt within him, and he longed to tell it to somebody. His master saw there was something on his mind, and asked what it was. The youth replied that he had been tormenting himself for some months, and should never feel easy until some one shared his secret. "Well, trust me," said the master, "I will keep it to myself; or, if you do not like to do that, confess it to your pastor, or go into some field outside the town and dig a hole, and, after you have dug it, kneel down and whisper your secret three times into the hole. Then put back the earth and come away." The apprentice thought that this seemed the best plan, and that very afternoon went to a meadow outside the town, dug a deep hole, then knelt and whispered to it three times over, "The Emperor Trojan has goat's ears." And as he said so a great burden seemed to roll off him, and he shoveled the earth carefully back and ran lightly home. Weeks passed away, and there sprang up in the hole an elder tree which had three stems, all as straight as poplars. Some shepherds, tending their flocks near by, noticed the tree growing there, and one of them cut down a stem to make flutes of; but, directly he began to play, the flute would do nothing but sing: "The Emperor Trojan has goat's ears." Of course, it was not long before the whole town knew of this wonderful flute and what it said; and, at last, the news reached the emperor in his palace. He instantly sent for the apprentice and said to him, "What have you been saying about me to all my people?" The culprit tried to defend himself by saying that he had never told anyone what he had noticed; but the emperor, instead of listening, only drew his sword from its sheath, which so frightened the poor fellow that he confessed exactly what he had done, and how he had whispered the truth three times to the earth, and how in that very place an elder tree had sprung up, and flutes had been cut from it, which would only repeat the words he had said. Then the emperor commanded his coach to be made ready, and he took the youth with him, and they drove to the spot, for he wished to see for himself whether the young man's confession was true; but when they reached the place only one stem was left. So the emperor desired his attendants to cut him a flute from the remaining stem, and, when it was ready, he ordered his chamberlain to play on it. But no tune could the chamberlain play, though he was the best flute player about the court -- nothing came but the words, "The Emperor Trojan has goat's ears." Then the emperor knew that even the earth gave up its secrets, and he granted the young man his life, but he never allowed him to be his barber any more. Source: Andrew Lang, The Violet Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1901), pp. 52-54. Lang's source: Volksmärchen der Serben . Return to the table of contents . The King with the Horse's Ears Ireland The story I'm going to tell you is not to be met every day. I heard little Tom Kennedy, the great schoolmaster of Rossard, say that he read it in the history of Ireland, and that it happened before the people were Christian. It is about a king who had his hair cut only once a year. He lived in some old city on the borders of Carlow and Kilkenny, and his name was a queer one: Lora Lonshach it was. So, as I said, he got his hair cut only once a year, and afterward nothing more was ever heard of the barber who did it. This happened to about seven unlucky fellows, and then no barber would come close the castle for love or money. So the king proclaimed that all the barbers in the country were to draw lots, and if the one who got the short straw would dare to refuse, he would be put to death. The short straw was drawn by a poor widow's son named Thigueen. Fearing that she would never again see her son, the mother ran to the castle and beseeched the king to spare him the fate of the previous barbers. "You'll get your boy back safe and sound," promised the king. The next day the frightened barber reported for duty. "My good fellow," said the king, "you'll be at liberty to go wherever you please after cutting my hair, but you must swear Dar lamh an Righ (by the king's hand) that you'll never tell anything that has ears and tongue what you see here today." The king sat down on his throne and took off his hood, revealing two brown horse's ears, quite as long as those of an ass. "Pick up your scissors and do your job!" he ordered. The poor lad did as best he could, taking special care not to nick the king's ears. When the job was finished, the king paid him, saying, "Now, my lad, if I ever hear word of this, I'll make you wish that you had never been born." The boy returned to his mother, only to fall into bed, deathly ill. She asked him what ailed him, but he gave no answer. Two days later the doctor came. "I have a secret," said poor Thigueen. If I cannot tell it, I'll die, and if I do tell it, I'll not be allowed to live." When the doctor heard that the secret was not to be told to anyone with a tongue or ears, he said, "Go into the woods, make a split in the bark of one of the trees, tell your secret into the cut." The doctor was hardly out of the house when Thigueen got up and went into the woods, not stopping until he reached the middle, a place where two paths crossed one another. At this spot he found a healthy tree, cut a gash in its bark, and then whispered into it, "Da Chluais Chapail ar Labhradh Loingseach," which means, "The two ears of a horse has Lora Lonshach." The poor fellow had hardly whispered these words when he felt as if a mountain had been lifted off his back. Before a year passed, when again it would be time for the king's haircut, a great harp-playing match was announced, a contest between Craftine, the king's harper, and anyone who dared play against him. The other four kings of Ireland were invited, as well as all the lords and ladies who chose to travel so far. One week before the appointed day, Craftine found a crack in his harp, so he went into the forest to look for wood for a new one. Where should bad luck send him but to the very tree that Thigueen had told his secret to! Craftine cut it down and fashioned it into the finest harp you have ever seen, and when he tried it, he himself was enchanted with its beautiful music. The great day came at last, and the big hall in the palace was crammed. The king was on his high throne, with the four other kings before him. On either side were all the great lords and ladies, around the open place in the center where the harpers were sitting. Craftine began. He first played so mournfully that all who heard him were grief-stricken. Then he played a merry jig, and because there was no room to dance, everyone shouted out for joy. Next came a war-like march, and everyone who had room drew his sword and waved it over his head, each one crying out the war-cry of his own chief or king. Finally he played a beautiful heavenly tune, and they all closed their eyes, hoping that the beautiful music would never come to an end. When Craftine finally ceased playing, gold and silver were thrown in showers to him. Then the harpers of Leinster, Munster, Connaught, and Ulster tried their hands, and, sure enough, they played very well, but not nearly as well as Craftine. When they were finished, the king said to Craftine, "Give us one more tune to finish decently, and put all that we invited in good humor for their dinner." "I am afraid of my harp," answered Craftine. "It wasn't my fingers that struck out the music, but the music that stirred my fingers. There is magic in that harp, and I fear it will play us some trick." "Trick be hanged!" said the king. "Play away!" The harper had to obey his king, and he took up his harp, but he had hardly touched the strings, when a loud voice came from them, shouting, "Da Chluais Chapail ar Labhradh Loingseach!" The startled king put his hands to his head, not knowing what he was doing, and in his fumbling he loosened the bands of his hood, revealing the two long hairy ears. What a roar came from the crowd! King Lora was not able to stand it, and in a trance he fell down from his throne. In a few minutes he had the hall to himself, except for his harper and some of his old servants. They say that when he came to himself, he was very sorry for all the poor barbers that he had put out of the way, and that he pensioned their wives and mothers. From then on Thigueen was no more concerned about giving the king a haircut than he would have been about giving one to you or to me. Source: Abstracted from Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts , 2nd edition (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1891, pp. 219-225. Return to the table of contents . March's Ears (1) Wales One of Arthur's warriors, whose name was March (or Parch) Amheirchion, was lord of Castellmarch in Lleyn. This man had horse's ears (resembling Midas), and lest anybody should know it, he used to kill every man he sought to shave his beard, for fear lest he should not be able to keep the secret; and on the spot where he was wont to bury the bodies there grew reeds, one of which somebody cut to make a pipe. The pipe would give no other sound than "March Amheirchion has horse's ears." When the warrior heard this, he would probably have killed the innocent man on that account, if he had not himself failed to make the pipe produce any other sound. But after hearing where the reed had grown, he made no further effort to conceal either the murders or his ears. Source: John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1901), v. 1, pp. 233-234. Rhys gives both oral and printed sources for this tale, including the periodical Y Brython (edited by D. S. Evans) for 1860, p. 431, and a document written in 1693 by Edward Llyd. Amheirchion , as Rhys explains in a footnote, is a linguistic variation of ab Meirchion . Return to the table of contents . March's Ears (2) Wales March ab Meirchion was lord of Castellmarch, in Lleyn. He ruled over leagues of rich land, tilled by hundreds of willing and obedient vassals. He had great possessions, fleet horses, greyhounds, hawks, countless black cattle and sheep, and a great herd of swine. (But few possessed pigs at that time, and their flesh was esteemed better than the flesh of oxen. Arthur himself sought to have one of March's sows.) In his palace he had much treasure of gold, silver, and Conway pearls, and all men envied him. But March was not happy. He had a secret, and day and night he was torn with dread lest it should be discovered. He had horse's ears! To no one was the secret known except his barber. This man he compelled to take a solemn oath that he would not reveal his deformity to any living soul. If he wittingly or unwittingly should let anyone know that March's ears were other than human, March swore that he would cut his head off. The barber became as unhappy as March. Indeed his wretchedness was greater, because his fate would be worse if the secret were revealed. March would undergo ridicule, which is certainly a serious thing, but the barber would undergo decapitation, which is much more serious. The secret disagreed with his constitution so violently that he lost his appetite and his color, and began to fall into a decline. So ill did he become that he had to call in a physician. This man was skilled in his craft, and he said to the barber, "You are being killed by a suppressed secret. Unless you communicate it to someone you will soon be in your grave." This announcement did not give the barber much consolation. He explained to the physician that if he did as he was directed he would lose his head. If in any event he had to come to the end of his earthly career, he preferred being interred with his head joined to, rather than separated from, his trunk. The physician then suggested that he should tell his secret to the ground. The barber thought there was not much danger to his cervical vertebrae (this is the learned name for neck bones) if he did this, and adopted the suggestion. He was at once relieved. His color and appetite gradually came back, and before long he was as strong and well as he had ever been. Now it happened that a fine crop of reeds grew on the spot where the barber whispered his secret to the ground. March prepared a great feast, and sent for one of Maelgwn Gwynedd's pipers, who was the best piper in the word, to make music for his guests. On his way to Castellmarch, the piper observed these fine reeds, and as his old pipe was getting worn out, he cut them and made an excellent new pipe. When his guests had eaten and drunk, March ordered the piper to play. What was the surprise of all when the pipe gave out no music, but only the words, "Horse's ears for March ab Meirchion, horse's ears for March ab Meirchion," over and over again. March drew his sword and would have slain the piper, but the hapless musician begged for mercy. He was not to blame, he said. He had tried to play his wonted music, but the pipe was charmed, and do what he would, he could get nothing out of it but the words, "Horse's ears for March ab Meirchion." March tried the pipe himself, but even he could not elicit any strains from it, but only the words, "Horse's ears for March ab Meirchion." So he forgave the piper and made no further effort to conceal his deformity. Source: W. Jenkyn Thomas, The Welsh Fairy Book (London: T. Fisher Unwin, Ltd., [1908], pp. 93-95. Return to the table of contents . The Child with the Ears of an Ox India Once upon a time a son was born to a certain raja, and the child had the ears of an ox. The raja was very much ashamed and let no one know. But the secret could not be kept from the barber who had to perform the ceremony of shaving the child's head. However, the raja made the barber vow not to tell anyone of what he had seen. So the barber went away, but the secret which he might not tell had an unfortunate effect. It made his stomach swell to an enormous size. As the barber went along in this unhappy condition he met a Dom [member of a low caste, comprising scavangers, basketmakers, and drummers] who asked why his stomach was so swollen. The barber said that it was because he had shaved the raja's child and had seen that it had the ears of an ox. Directly he had broken his vow and blurted out the secret, his stomach returned to its usual size. The Dom went his way and cut down a tree and made a drum out of the wood, and went about playing on the drum and begging. He came to the raja's palace, and there he drummed and sang: The son of the raja Has the ears of an ox. When the raja heard this, he was very angry, and swore to punish the barber who must have broken his vow. But the Dom assured the raja that he knew nothing about the matter, that it was the drum that sang the words and not he, and that he had no idea what they meant. So the raja was pacified, and the barber was not punished. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 53, p. 171. Return to the table of contents . The Presidente Who Had Horns Philippines (Ilocano) Once there was a presidente [headman of a town] who was very unjust to his people, and one day he became so angry that he wished he had horns so that he might frighten them. No sooner had he made this rash wish, than horns began to grow on his head. He sent for a barber who came to his house to cut his hair, and as he worked the presidente asked, "What do you see on my head?" "I see nothing," answered the barber; for although he could see the horns plainly, he was afraid to say so. Soon, however, the presidente put up his hands and felt the horns, and then when he inquired again the barber told him that he had two horns. "If you tell anyone what you have seen, you shall be hanged," said the presidente as the barber started away, and he was greatly frightened. When he reached home, the barber did not intend to tell anyone, for he was afraid; but as he thought of his secret more and more, the desire to tell someone became so strong that he knew he could not keep it. Finally he went to the field and dug a hole under some bamboo, and when the hole was large enough he crawled in and whispered that the presidente had horns. He then climbed out, filled up the hole, and went home. By and by some people came along the road on their way to market, and as they passed the bamboo they stopped in amazement, for surely a voice came from the trees, and it said that the presidente had horns. These people hastened to market and told what they had heard, and the people there went to the bamboo to listen to the strange voice. They informed others, and soon the news had spread all over the town. The councilmen were told, and they, too, went to the bamboo. When they had heard the voice, they ran to the house of the presidente. But his wife said that he was ill and they could not see him. By this time the horns had grown until they were one foot in length, and the presidente was so ashamed that he bade his wife tell the people that he could not talk. She told this to the councilmen when they came on the following day, but they replied that they must see him, for they had heard that he had horns, and if this were true he had no right to govern the people. She refused to let them in, so they broke down the door. They saw the horns of the head of the presidente and killed him. For, they said, he was no better than an animal. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Company, 1916), pp. 181-182. Note by Cole: Here we have an excellent illustration of how a story brought in by the Spaniards has been worked over into Philippine setting. This is doubtless the classical story of Midas, but since the ass is practically unknown in the Philippines, horns (probably carabao horns) have been substituted for the ass's ears, which grew on Midas' head. Likewise the bamboo, which grows in abundance, takes the place of the reeds in the original tale. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites The Singing Bone and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 780. Stories about murder victims, whose body parts literally sing out for justice. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 20, 2004. Midwife (or Godparent, or Nurse) for the Elves Midwife (or Godparent, or Nurse) for the Elves fairy tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 476*, 476**, and migratory legends of Christiansen type 5070 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2024 Contents The Troll Labor (Sweden, Peter Rahm). The Clergyman's Wife (Sweden). Midwife for a Mermaid (Germany, Johannes Praetorius). The Water-Nix Takes a Midwife to His Wife (Germany, Johann Jacob Bräuner). The Servant Girl and the Elves (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Godmother (Switzerland, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Straw into Gold (Germany, Gustav Schwab). The Water-Man (Germany, Ludwig Bechstein). The Woman among the Elves (Germany, Karl Lyncker). The Dwarfs in Schalk Mountain and Wohlden Mountain (Germany, Carl and Theodor Colshorn). An Underground Woman in Labor (Germany, Karl Bartsch). Midwife for a Nixie (Germany, Adalbert Kuhn and Wilhelm Schwartz). The Midwife of Hafoddydd (Wales, John Rhys). The Fairy Nurse (Ireland, W. R. Wilde). The Fairy Nurse (Ireland, Patrick Kennedy). The Midwife of Listowel (Ireland, Jeremiah Curtin). The Midwife (Ireland, The Schools' Collection). Fairy Ointment (England, Anna Eliza Bray). Fairy Ointment (England, Joseph Jacobs). Link to another collection of legends about humans who are spirited away by underground people: Abducted by Aliens . Notes and Bibliography . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Troll Labor Sweden In the year 1660, when I and my wife had gone to my farm ( fäboderne ), which is three quarters of a mile from Ragunda parsonage, and we were sitting there and talking a while, late in the evening, there came a little man in at the door, who begged of my wife to go and aid his wife, who was just then in the pains of labor. The fellow was of small size, of a dark complexion, and dressed in old gray clothes. My wife and I sat a while, and wondered at the man; for we were aware that he was a troll, and we had heard tell that such like, called by the peasantry Vettar (spirits), always used to keep in the farmhouses, when people left them in harvest time. But when he had urged his request four or five times, and we thought on what evil the country folk say that they have at times suffered from the Vettar , when they have chanced to swear at them, or with uncivil words bid them go to hell, I took the resolution to read some prayers over my wife, and to bless her, and bid her in God's name go with him. She took in haste some old linen with her, and went along with him, and I remained sitting there. When she returned, she told me, that when she went with the man out at the gate, it seemed to her as if she was carried for a time along in the wind, and so she came to a room, on one side of which was a little dark chamber, in which his wife lay in bed in great agony. My wife went up to her, and, after a little while, aided her till she brought forth the child after the same manner as other human beings. The man then offered her food, and when she refused it, he thanked her, and accompanied her out, and then she was carried along, in the same way in the wind, and after a while came again to the gate, just at ten o'clock. Meanwhile, a quantity of old pieces and clippings of silver were laid on a shelf, in the sitting room, and my wife found them next day, when she was putting the room in order. It is to be supposed that they were laid there by the Vettar . That it in truth so happened, I witness, by inscribing my name. Ragunda, the 12th of April, 1671. Pet. Rahm. Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology, Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), pp. 122-23 . Return to the table of contents . The Clergyman's Wife Sweden(Lapland) A clergyman's wife in Swedish Lappmark, the cleverest midwife in all Sweden, was summoned one fine summer's evening to attend a mysterious being of Troll race and great might, called Vitra. At this unusual call she took counsel with her husband, who, however, deemed it best for her to go. Her guide led her into a splendid building, the rooms whereof were as clean and elegant as those of very illustrious folk; and in a beautiful bed lay a still more beautiful woman, for whom her services were required, and who was no other than Vitra herself. Under the midwife's care Vitra speedily gave birth to a fair girl, and in a few minutes had entirely recovered, and fetched all sorts of refreshments, which she laid before her benefactress. The latter refused to eat, in spite of Vitra's reassuring persuasion, and further refused the money which the troll-wife pressed upon her. Vitra then sent her home, bidding her look on the table when next she entered her cowherd hut and see what she would find there. She thought no more of the matter until the following spring, when on entering the hut she found on the table half a dozen large spoons of pure silver with her name engraved thereon in neat letters. These spoons long remained an heirloom in the clergyman's family to testify the truth of the story. Source: Edwin Sidney Hartland: The Science of Fairy Tales: An Inquiry into Fairy Mythology (London: Walter Scott, 1891), p. 38 . Return to the table of contents . Midwife for a Mermaid Germany Here in Leipzig a nobleman told me how a noblewoman of the Hahnen family was compelled by a mermaid's servant girl to go beneath the river with her and serve as a midwife. It so happened that the water separated, and the two of them went deep underground on an airy path. Here the noblewoman found a little woman in labor. She quickly assisted her in successfully giving birth. She then asked to take leave, as she wanted to hurry back to her own home. When she was about to depart a little water sprite brought her a bowl filled with ashes and told her to take as much as she wanted for her reward. She refused, saying that she wanted nothing. With that the man said: "God told you to say that. Otherwise I would have had to kill you." The previous servant girl took her back home. Arriving there, the servant gave the noblewoman three pieces of gold. She should guard this treasure very carefully and not let it leave the hands of her family. This would bring wealth and well-being to the family, but otherwise they would be ruined by poverty. With this warning the servant girl went away. After the noblewoman's death it is said that her three sons equally shared the gold pieces, along with the warning. Two of the sons still own their share, and they are flourishing magnificently. The third, on the other hand, is said to have recently been brought to ruin by a woman. They finally died a miserable death in Prague, thus putting an end to their line. I have heard exactly the same story not only from credible pastors in my own country, Kalbe on the Milde, but also in Werder in the old Brandenburg region. Source (books.google.com): Johannes Praetorius, Anthropodemus Plutonicus, das ist: Eine neue Weltbeschreibung von allerley wunderbahren Menschen (Magdeburg: In Verlegung Johann Lüderwalds, 1666), pp. 100-101 . Source (Deutsche digitale Bibliothek): Johannes Praetorius, Anthropodemus Plutonicus, das ist: Eine neue Weltbeschreibung von allerley wunderbahren Menschen (Magdeburg: In Verlegung Johann Lüderwalds, 1666), pp. 100-101. Return to the table of contents . The Water-Nix Takes a Midwife to His Wife Germany Near the Elbe, where a small stream flows into it, which flows from Köthen to Barby and then joins the Saale, it is said that a man, dressed lika a peasant, came to a nearby village and humbly asked the midwife there to go with him and to help his wife deliver a baby. For this he promised her a good reward. The midwife was willing, and in good faith she went with the man on his way. However, when he turned off the road, the midwife became concerned and asked where he was taking her and where he lived. She knew the roads and the pathways as well as any person in the country. The man very kindly assured her. Finally, just at nightfall they came to the little stream. Here he said to her: "Midwife, have no fear. No harm will come to you. Just trust me and follow me." With that he struck the water with his stick, and it parted. The midwife thought she was going downwards, as if into a cellar. Finally, she and the man came into a poor peasant room, where a lamp and another light were burning. She saw no one there except for a poor peasant woman lying on a pile of straw, suffering from labor pains. The frightened midwife did what she could to assist with the delivery. The peasant, who had brought here here, helped by handing things to her. Finally a little girl was born. She had a thick fat head, a bent nose, and sausage-like lips. After everything had been done and the child had been wrapped in coarse swaddling clothes, the midwife requested, despite the fact that it was night, that the man should now take her back out onto the street. But he said: "You cannot go until you have received your wages." With that he brought forth a linen sack full of money: all kinds of large and small gold and silver pieces. He poured a good-sized heap onto the table. He said: "Here, woman, take whatever wages you like." However, the timid midwife took only a four-groschen piece, and said: "That much is mine. That is what other peasants' wives give." The man was satisfied with this, and with a very dark lantern he brought her back to the shore. He said: "Go with this. A good spirit has told you not to take any more. Otherwise you would never have seen your home again." Then he gave her a silver coin, weighing about four lots , but with no recognizable imprint. With this, this frightened woman hurried back to her village in the dark of night for about three quarters of an hour and returned home safely. When she told her neighbors what had happened to her, they confirmed that they had seen a pregnant woman in the same area some time ago, but did not recognize her. Almost everyone would agree that this story resembles a fairy tale, if the midwife had not shown everyone the little piece of old silver money. Many different opinions arise about this event, some consider it a devilish illusion and trickery, others believe it to be a true story, and claim that the ones involved were changelings. Source (books.google.com): Johann Jacob Bräuner, "Wasser-Nix hohlet eine Hebamme zu seinem Weibe," Physicalisch- und hietorisch-erörterte Curiositæten (Frankfurt am Main: Verlegt von Johann David Jung, 1737), pp. 34-36 . Return to the table of contents . The Servant Girl and the Elves Germany Once upon a time there was a poor servant girl who was diligent and neat. Every day she swept out the house and shook the sweepings onto a large pile outside the door. One morning just as she was beginning her work she found a letter on the pile of sweepings. She could not read, so she stood her broom in the corner and took the letter to her employers. It was an invitation from the elves, asking the girl to serve as godparent at the baptism of one of their children. At first the girl did not know what she should do, but finally they convinced her to accept. It would not be right, they said, to decline such an invitation. Three elves came and led her to a hollow mountain where the little people lived. Everything there was small, but more ornate and splendid than can be described. The new mother was lying in a bed of ebony decorated with pearl buttons. The covers were embroidered with gold. The cradle was made of ivory, and the bathtub of gold. The girl stood in as godparent, and then wanted to go back home, but the elves asked her fervently to stay with them for three days. She agreed to do so, and the time passed with pleasure and joy. The little people did everything to make her happy. Finally she wanted to return home. They filled her pockets with gold and led her outside the mountain. She arrived home. Wanting to begin her work, she picked up the broom that was still standing in the corner and started to sweep. Then some strange people came out of the house and asked her who she was and what she was doing there. It was not three days, as she thought, that she had spent in the mountain with the little men, but rather seven years. In the meantime her former employers had died. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Wichtelmänner: Zweites Märchen," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 39/2, pp. 207-208. . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Wichtelmänner: Zweites Märchen," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 39/2, pp. 207-208. . Note the close similarity between this story and The Dwarfs in Schalk Mountain , as recorded by Carl and Theodor Colshorn, and included in the present collection. Return to the table of contents. The Godmother Switzerland Two girls, all dressed up, were walking along playfully and mischievously one evening when suddenly a gigantic fat toad waddled across their path. The girls joked about the large animal: One of them said that if it ever had a baby, she would be its godmother. The other one quickly added that she would cook for the occasion. A few days afterward, late in the evening, an old woman knocked at the cottage door of the two girls, reminded them of their promise, and asked them to come to the baptism of the toad's child. They hesitated a long time, but fear finally drove the mischievous pair out into the night and the fog. The old woman led them to a remote place where the ceremony was taking place. A woman was there with a newborn child, and surrounded by all kinds of strange and unusual guests. Sighing, the two girls did what they had promised to do. As they were discharged from their duties, the woman thanked them kindly and gave them an apron filled with coal from the fireplace. The girls did not dare to throw the unwanted gift away, but as they quickly made their way homeward, they let most of the coal fall to the ground, paying no attention to a voice that repeatedly sounded from behind: The more you throw away, The less you will have! When they arrived at home, the little bit of coal that they still had was nothing but pure gold. Source: Jacob und Wilhelm Grimm, Märchen aus dem Nachlaß , edited by Heinz Rölleke (Bonn: Bouvier Verlag Herbert Grundmann, 1979), Nr. 25, p. 65. Rölleke's source: Unpublished papers of Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Staatsbibliothek Berlin. A marginal note, in the handwriting of Jacob Grimm, on this manuscript states: "oral, from Switzerland, with no specific location." It is possible that the Grimms received this account from Wilhelm Wackernagel, the source of many of their Swiss tales and legends. Return to the table of contents. Straw into Gold Germany Once a small resident of the Mummelsee lake, dressed in rat fur, came to the mountain village of Kappel and fetched a midwife to assist his gnome wife in giving birth. The water parted in front of his birch rod. He led the astonished woman down an alabaster spiral staircase to a bed of carbuncles in a luxurious golden room. Here the midwife delivered the child, and the gnome returned her to the upper world. He offered her a bundle of straw as a reward, which she impulsively threw away. Later she discovered that a straw that had stuck to her dress had transformed into pure gold. Source (books.google.com): Gustav Schwab, Wanderungen durch Schwaben (Leipzig: Georg Wigand's Verlag, 1840), p. 218 . Source (Internet Archive): Gustav Schwab, Wanderungen durch Schwaben (Leipzig: Georg Wigand's Verlag, 1840), p. 218 . Return to the table of contents . The Water-Man Germany In Unterpreilipp, a village beneath Kulm Heights, which stretches down to the banks of the Saale, and where there is an ancient little church with exquisite carved images and a hand organ that Duke Ernst the Pious is said to have played himself, one night there was a knock at the midwife's door. A little man stood outside and called for her. When she came out, he led her to the lower village towards the Saale and tied a blindfold over her eyes. He then struck the water with a stick. The water parted, and the two of them went down some steps and finally came to a little room, where the little man took the cloth from from her eyes. She saw a little woman lying in a little bed who urgently needed her help. Then the man left the room. The midwife performed her service with great success, whereupon the little woman said: "I was baptized a Christian like you, but the horrible water sprite replaced me with a changeling when I was only six weeks old. He devours all my children on the third day. He will come back soon and offer you a lot of money, but don't take more than others give you. I know that your kind like to take as much as possible. Don't take any bread with you either, and don't drink any wine if he offers it to you, or he'll wring your neck afterwards." The midwife followed these instructions exactly and was led back safely to dry land. As she was leaving, the water sprite roared: "You did well not to take more than you deserved!" Afterward the midwife no longer accepted food and drink where she was called to serve, nor did she take food home after delivering a baby. Furthermore, she did not ask for large payments from poor people. Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Bechstein, "Der Wassermann," Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 528, pp. 450-51 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludwig Bechstein, "Der Wassermann," Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 528, pp. 450-51 . Bechstein's apparent sources: Johannes Praetorius, Anthropodemus Plutonicus, das ist Eine Neue Weltbeschreibung (Magdeburg: In Verlegung Johann Lüderwalds, 1666), pp. 480-82 . Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Wassermann," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 49, pp. 61-63 . Return to the table of contents . The Woman among the Elves Germany Not long ago there lived in Frankenberg a midwife who could tell many amazing things about the elves, for once she had spent an entire eight days among them observing their deeds and ways. One dark night when all the neighbors were sound asleep a loud knocking at the house door had awakened the woman. She jumped up and peered through the window, but she could see nothing except for a lantern in front of the house. Then a voice called out, "Throw on your clothes and come with me. A woman is in need of your service!" The midwife did what she had been asked, went down, and with hesitating steps followed the lantern, which was already one street ahead of her. She could not see the person who was carrying it. Thus it went through several streets, then out through the convent gate, and then a good way beyond the town. Finally the light stopped moving. A hidden trapdoor opened, and many steps led underground. Trembling and praying, the midwife followed her mysterious leader, and before long she found herself in a roomy chamber surrounded by elves, who cordially welcomed her. Before she had time to recover from her surprise, one of the little people stepped up to her and asked her to follow him to the woman for whose sake she had been summoned. Soon afterward a tiny, cute elf came to the world. Since mother and child were both doing well, the midwife hoped that she would be able to return to her own people the next morning. But that was not so. The elves did not want to let her go. Each day they treated her better than the day before, giving her everything that she could want. During this time the elves often went out, not returning unless they were loaded down with all kinds of pretty things. Before leaving they always rubbed their eyes with a liquid which they kept in a glass. The old woman noticed this, and once when the little people had gone out she found the glass and put a little of its contents on her right eye. In the meantime eight days had passed, and the elves no longer resisted the old woman's request. As soon as it was dark they allowed her to return home, saying, "For your reward take along those sweepings behind the door!" Smart enough to not despise the unusual gift, she brushed the sweepings into her apron. Then with good cheer she followed the lantern, which -- as had happened eight days earlier -- was carried on ahead by an invisible hand. A half hour later she arrived safely at home, much to the amazement of her husband, who for eight days had been terribly worried over her disappearance. She told him everything that had happened and then shook the sweepings that she was carrying in her apron onto the table before him. Oh, how the old people's hearts leapt for joy! How their eyes gleamed! How they stood there in silence, fearing that one little word of gladness might cause the dream to vanish that now so enraptured them! Finally they found their tongues. Their amazement turned to words, and they saw that it was no dream. It was pure reality. Lying on the table was a pile of glistening gold pieces! Some time later there was a fair in Frankenberg. The midwife, who had suddenly become rich, walked among the market booths looking and from time to time making a purchase. Suddenly she saw the elves scattered throughout the crowd. Unseen by others they were skillfully plundering the tables and booths. This she could see with her right eye, which she had rubbed with the liquid at the time she was with the elves. She could not stand to see the little thieves freely getting away with this, so she called out, "Hey! What are you doing?" The elves recognized her and asked, "Which eye can you see us with?" She answered, "With the right one." Then they blew into her right eye, and in that instant it became like a black night. She never saw the elves again, and for as long as she lived she remained blind in her right eye. Source (books.google.com): Karl Lyncker, "Die Frau unter den Wichtelmännchen," Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Kassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 71, pp. 45-47 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Lyncker, "Die Frau unter den Wichtelmännchen," Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Kassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 71, pp. 45-47 . Return to the table of contents . The Dwarfs in Schalk Mountain and Wohlden Mountain Germany Schalk Mountain (Schalksberg), between Ettenbüttel and Wilsche, near Gilde on the Aller River, is only a little mole hill today, but formerly it was a high and narrow mountain in which the dwarf people made their home. At that time no people lived here yet, and the dwarfs liked that, for they could carry on as they wished either above or below ground, and not be disturbed. They had a good life. For them every day was Sunday, with a holiday in the middle of each week. They ate and drank, played and danced, and at times did metalsmithing as well. Even today people often find the slag from the hard coal that they used in their work. When the first herder came to this region he found nothing but fields of peas surrounding the mountain, and the most beautiful music sounded from within the mountain without interruption. However, when his sheep approached the pea fields, they jumped about as though someone were secretly pinching them. Moreover, his dog would often begin to yelp, and refused to approach the place again. However, more and more people came here, establishing villages and conducting business. They often came into contact with the dwarfs, who were sometimes friendly and sometimes hostile, just as it happened. The underground people complained most of all about the humans' noisy activities, and, on the other hand, the humans complained about the thefts commtted by the underground people. But still, they often lent one another a helping hand, and whenever the humans did something for the dwarfs, they were rewarded with red gold. Thus there was once a poor but pious servant girl who was busy cleaning out the house. Just as she about to carry the sweepings outside, she discovered a letter lying in her dustpan. It was addressed to her. Standing her broom against the wall, she read it. In the letter she was summoned to stand in as a godparent for a dwarf child the next day, and was promised that no harm would come to her. She did not want to do this, but her employers told her that she must not decline, for if she did so, it would not go well for her. Thus she went forth that night, for that was when she was told to come. At twelve o'clock the mountain opened, and now she was just as pleased as she earlier had been afraid, for down there it was magnificent. Everything was made of pure gold, and everyone was friendly and well disposed toward her. After giving the child a name, they laid it into a golden cradle, and the musicians played until it fell asleep again. Then they had the best things to eat and drink, after which they danced and sang until morning on a large meadow. After they were tired, the girl said that she wanted to return home, but the dwarfs begged and begged until she finally agreed to stay three more days, and all three days were filled with pleasure and joy. When she finally started out for home, the dwarfs rewarded her most generously and told her that the golden cradle would be saved for her forever. Then they opened the mountain and let her go. The servant girl went home and took the broom from the wall in order to sweep out the entranceway. But behold, the house had changed completely during the three days. The entranceway was completely different. The cows had a different sound and a different color, and her good old white horse was gone. Some people approached her, but she did not know any of them. They spoke differently and wore different clothing styles. And no one knew anything about her. She told them all about her employers, but no one remembered them. And they all stared at her. Now in Gilde there lived an old shepherd who himself did not know how old he was, and no one else knew it either. When he heard about the girl, he came over and said that his grandfather had told him that when his father was young, a girl had gone to the dwarfs and had not returned. That instant the girl turned into an ancient woman, collapsed, and was dead. Schalk Mountain is now almost completely gone. The dwarfs departed, but they left behind the cradle filled with gold. Many have searched and dug for it, but no one has found it. Someday, however, a swineherd, the servant girl's last relative, will drive his herd this way, and a sow will root out the cradle, and with part of the gold the herder will have a church built in Ettenbüttel. Its tower will be higher than the Andreas Tower in Braunschweig, in other words, just as high as Schalk Mountain formerly was. He will present the golden cradle to the king, and with the remaining money he will live comfortably until he dies. Source (books.google.com): Carl and Theodor Colshorn, "Die Zwerge im Schalks- und im Wohldenberge," Märchen und Sagen (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), no. 36, pp. 114-17 . Source (Internet Archive): Carl and Theodor Colshorn, "Die Zwerge im Schalks- und im Wohldenberge," Märchen und Sagen (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), no. 36, pp. 114-17 . Note the close similarity between this tale and The Servant Girl and the Elves , as recorded by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, and included in the present collection. Return to the table of contents. An Underground Woman in Labor Germany A woman who died at Neu-Bukow in 1841 at the age of 118 told that when she was a child underground people lived in a mountain near her home town (the name is not given). She herself and other children often saw them, but they always ran away from them. One night an underground man knocked at their door and asked the mother to go with him. His wife was in labor. He also asked to borrow a kettle. The mother went with him and was gone the entire night. She returned the next morning and reported that a little boy had been born. Source: Karl Bartsch, "Unterirdische in Kindesnöthen," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg] , vol. 1 (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), p. 88 . Bartsch's source is a Frau Weinberg from Rostock. Return to the table of contents. Midwife for a Nixie Germany A midwife in Westerhausen was sitting one evening at home when someone knocked on her window and shouted that she should come outside. She did so, and there stood a nix, who told her to follow him. They walked to the Beck [a deep pond near Westerhausen], and the nix took a rod and struck the water with it. The water separated, and with dry feet they walked to the bottom. Here the woman helped the nix's wife deliver a child. To thank the midwife, the nixie told her that when the nix asked her how she should be paid, instead of money, she should ask for some of the sweepings. Then the midwife bathed the new baby, and while doing so she heard the nix's other children -- there were five of them -- running around and asking their father, "Shall we pinch her? Shall we pinch her?" But the father told them not to. When the midwife was finished the nix asked, "What shall I pay you?" Following the wife's advice, she requested some of the sweepings from behind the door. "God told you to say that," said the nix, giving her what she wanted. Then he took her back home, and when she looked at the sweepings, they had turned to pure gold. Source: Adalbert Kuhn and Wilhelm Schwartz, Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 173-74 . This is the third legend in a group titled collectively "Der Nickelmann." The individual legends are not given separate titles. Westerhausen is a village near Halberstadt in northern Germany. The water spirit in this legend is identified in the original German as the Nickelmann , translated here as the generic nix (female nixie ). Return to the table of contents . The Midwife of Hafoddydd Wales Once on a time, when a midwife from Nanhwynan had newly got to the Hafoddydd Brithion to pursue her calling, a gentleman came to the door on a fine gray steed and bade her come with him at once. Such was the authority with which he spoke, that the poor midwife durst not refuse to go, however much it was her duty to stay where she was. So she mounted behind him, and off the went, like the flight of a swallow, through Cwmllan, over the Bwlch, down Nant yr Aran, and over the Gader to Cwm Hafod Ruffydd, before the poor woman had time even to say "Oh!" When they reached there, she saw before her a magnificent mansion, splendidly lit up with such lamps as she had never seen before. They entered the court, and a crowd of servants in expensive liveries came to meet them, and she was at once led through the great hall into a bed-chamber, the like of which she had never seen. There the mistress of the house, to whom she had been fetched, was awaiting her. The midwife got through her duties successfully, and stayed there until the lady had completely recovered, nor had she spent any part of her life so merrily, for there naught but festivity went on day and night: dancing, singing, and endless rejoicing reigned there. But merry as it was, she found that she must go, and the nobleman gave her a large purse, with the order not to open it until she had got into her own house. Then he bade one of his servants escort her the same way that she had come. When she reached home she opened the purse, and, to her great joy, it was full of money. She lived happily on those earnings to the end of her life. Source: John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx , vol. 1 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1901), pp. 98-99 . Return to the table of contents. The Fairy Nurse Ireland There lived a woman in Innish Shark -- one of the group of islands on the eastern coast -- named Biddy Mannion, as handsome and likely a fisherman's wife as you would meet in a day's walk. She was tall, and fair in the face, with skin like an egg, and hair that might vie with the gloss of the raven's wing. She was married about a twelvemonth, when the midwife presented her husband, Patsy-Andrew M'Intire, with as fine a man-child as could be found between Shark and America, and sure they are the next parishes, with only the Atlantic for a mearing between them. The young one throve apace, and all the women and gossips said the Biddy Mannion was the lucky woman, and the finest nurse seen in the island for many a day. Now the king of the fairies had a child about the same age, or a little older. But the queen was not able to nurse it, for she was might weakly after her lying-in, as her husband had a falling-out with another fairy potentate that lives down one side of the Giant's Causeway, who, by the force of magic and pishrogues , banished the suck from the Connaught princess for spite. The gentry had their eye upon Biddy Mannion for a long time, but as she always wore a gospel round her neck, and kept an errub and a bit of a burnt sod from St. John's Night sewed up in her clothes, she was proof against all their machinations and seductions. At long run, however, she lost this herb, and one fine summer's night the young gaurlaugh [infant], being mighty cross with the teeth, wouldn't sleep in the cradle at all, but was evermore starting and crying, as if the life was leaving him, so she got up at last, determined to take him to bed to herself, and she went down to the kitchen to light a candle. Well, just as she was blowing a coal, three men caught a hold of her before she could bless herself, and she was unable to shout or say a word, so they brought her out of the house quite easy, and put her upon a pillion, behind one of themselves, on a fine black horse that was ready waiting outside the door. She was no sooner seated behind one of the men than away they all galloped, without saying a word. It was as calm and beautiful a night as ever came out of the sky, just before the moon rose "between day and dark," with the gloom of parting twilight softening every break upon the surrounding landscape, and not a breath of air was to be felt. They rode on a long time, and she didn't know where they were going to; but she thought to herself they must be on the mainland, for she heard the frogs croaking in ditches. [There are no frogs in these small islands.] The bunnaun lena [bittern] was sounding away in the bogs, and the minnaun airigh [clocking snipe] was wheeling over their heads. [Neither of these birds are found in the small islands of the west.] At last the horse stopped of itself all of a sudden before the gate of a big house at the butt of a great hill, with trees growing all round it, where she had never been before in her life. There was much light in the house, and presently a grand looking gentleman dressed all in scarlet, with a cocked hat on his head and a sword by his side, and his fingers so covered with rings that they shone like lassar lena [ ranunculus flammea , a brilliant yellow flower] in a bog-hole, lifted her off the pillion as polite as possible, handed her into the house, and bid her a cead mile failte , just the same as if he had known her all his lifetime. The gentleman left her sitting in one of the rooms, and when he was gone she saw a young woman standing at the thrashal of the door, and looking very earnestly at her, as if she wanted to speak to her. "Troth, I'll speak, anyway," says Biddy Mannion, "for if I didn't, I'm sure I'd burst." And with that she bid her the time of day, and asked her why she was looking at her so continuously. The woman then gave a great sigh, and whispered to her, "If you take my advice, Biddy Mannion, you'll not taste bit, bite, or sup, while you are in this house, for if you do you'll be sorry for it, and maybe never get home again to your child or husband. I ate and drank my fill, forrior geraugh [an expression denoting great regret], the first night I came, and that's the reason that I am left here now in this enchanted place, where everything you meet is bewitched, even to the meat itself. But when you go home, send word to them that's after me, Tim Conneely, that lives one side of the Killaries, that I am here, and may be he'd try what Father Pat Prendergast, the blessed abbot of Cong, could do to get me out of it." Biddy was just going to make further inquiries, when in the clapping of your hand the woman was gone, and the man with the scarlet coat came back, and the same strange woman, bringing a young child in her arms. The man took the child from the woman, and gave it to Biddy to put it to the breast, and when it had drank its fill he took it away, and invited her into another room, where the queen -- a darling, fine-looking lady as you'd meet in a day's walk -- was seated in an armchair, surrounded by a power of quality, dressed up for all the world like judges with big wigs, and red gowns upon them. There was a table laid out with all sorts of eating, which the man in the cocked hat pressed her to take. She made answer that she was no ways hungry, but that if they could give her a cure for a little girl belonging to one of her neighbors, who was mighty dauny , and never well in herself since she had a fit of the feur-gurtagh [literally, "hungry grass," a weakness, the result of sudden hunger, said to come on persons in consequence of treading on a particular kind of fairy-enchanted grass], while crossing the Minaune Pass in Achill, and to send herself home to Shark, she would be forever obliged to them. The king, for that was the gentleman with the cocked hat, said he had ne'er a cure. "Indeed, then," said the mother of the child, "as I was the cause of your coming here, honest woman, you must get the cure; go home," says she, speaking for all the world like an Englishwoman, "and get ten green rishes from the side of the well of Aughavalla [a holy well in the barony of Murrisk, not far from Croagh Patrick]. Throw the tenth away, and squeeze the juice of the rest of them into the bottom of a teacup, and give it to the colleen to drink, and she will get well in no time." The king then put a ring on her finger and told her not to lose it by any manner of means, and that as long as she wore this ring no person could hurt or harm her. He then rubbed a sort of an ointment on her eyes, and no sooner had he done so that she found herself in a frightful cave where she couldn't see her hand before her. "Don't be any ways afraid," says he. "This is to let you know what kind of a people we are that took you away. We are the fallen angels that the people up above upon the earth call the fairies." And then after a while she began to see about her, and the place was full of dead men's bones, and had a terribly musty smell. And after a while he took her into another room where there was more light, and here she found a wonderful sight of young children, and them all blindfolded, and doing nothing but sitting upon pookauns [mushrooms, fairy-stools, or puff-balls] These were the souls of infants that were never baptized, and are believed "to go into naught." After that he showed her a beautiful garden, and at the end of it there was a large gate, which he opened with a key that was hung to his watch chain. "Now," says he, "you are not far from you own house," so he let her out; and then says he, "Who is that that is coming down the boreen?" And when she turned her back to look who it was, behold the man with the red coat and the cocked hat had disappeared. Biddy Mannion could not see anybody, but she knew full well the place where she was in a minute, and that it was the little road the led down to the annagh [a cut away bog] just beside her own house, and when she went up to the door she met another woman the very moral of herself, just as fair as if she saw her in the looking-glass, who said to her as she passed, "What a gomal your husband is that didn't know the difference between you and me." She said no more, but Biddy went in and found her child in a beautiful sleep, with his face smiling, like the buttercups in May. Source: W. R. Wilde, Irish Popular Superstitions (Dublin: James McGlashan, 1852), pp. 131-35 . Link to additional legends about the Origin of Underground People . Return to the table of contents . The Fairy Nurse Ireland There was once a little farmer and his wife living near Coolgarrow. They had three children, and my story happened while the youngest was on the breast. The wife was a good wife enough, but her mind was all on her family and her farm, and she hardly ever went to her knees without falling asleep, and she thought the time spent in the chapel was twice as long as it need be. So, begonies, she let her man and her two children go before her one day to mass, while she called to consult a fairy-man about a disorder one of her cows had. She was late at the chapel, and was sorry all the day after, for her husband was in grief about it, and she was very fond of him. Late that night he was wakened up by the cries of his children calling out, "Mother, mother!" When he sat up and rubbed his eyes, there was no wife by his side, and when he asked the little ones what was become of their mother, they said they saw the room full of nice little men and women, dressed in white and red and green, and their mother in the middle of them, going out by the door as if she was walking in her sleep. Out he ran, and searched everywhere round the house, but neither tale nor tidings did he got of her for many a day. We.. the poor man was miserable enough, for he was as fond of his woman as she was of him. It used to bring the salt tears down his cheeks to see his poor children neglected and dirty, as they often were, and they'd be bad enough only for a kind neighbor that used to look in whenever she could spare time. The infant was out with a wet nurse. About six weeks after -- just as he was going out to his work one morning -- a neighbor, that used to mind women at their lying-in, came up to him, and kept step by step with him to the field, and this is what she told him: Just as I was falling asleep last night I hears a horse's tramp in the bawn, and a knock at the door, and there, when I cam out, was a fine-looking dark man mounted on a black horse, and he told me to get ready in all haste, for a lady was in great want of me. As soon as I put on my cloak and things, he took me by the hand, and I was sitting behind him before I felt myself stirring. "Where are we going, sir?" says I. "You'll soon know," says he, and he drew his fingers across my eyes, and not a stim remained in them. I kept a tight grip of him, and the dickens a knew I knew whether he was going backwards or forwards, or how long we were about it, till my hand was taken again, and I felt the ground under me. The fingers went the other way across my eyes, and there we were before a castle door, and in we went through a big hall and great rooms all painted in fine green colors, with red and gold bands and ornaments, and the finest carpets and chairs and tables and window curtains, and fine ladies and gentlemen walking about. At last we came to a bedroom, with a beautiful lady in bed, and there he left me with her; and, bedad, it was not long till a fine bouncing boy came into the world. The lady clapped her hands, and in came Fear Doircha (Dark Man), and kissed her and his son, and praised me, and gave me a bottle of green ointment to rub the child all over. Well, the child I rubbed, sure enough; but my right eye began to smart me, and I put up my finger and gave it a rub, and purshuin to me if ever I was so frightened. The beautiful room was a big rough cave, with water oozing over the edges of the stones and through the clay. And the lady, and the lord, and the child, wizened, poverty-bitten creatures -- nothing but skin and bone, and the rich dresses were old rags. I didn't let on that I found any difference, and after a bit says Fear Doircha , "Go before me to the hall door, and I will be with you in a few moments and see you safe home." Well, just as I turned into the outside cave, who should I see but poor Molly. She looked round all frightened and says to me in a whisper, "I'm brought here to give suck to the child of the king and the queen of the fairies. But there is one chance of saving me. All the court will pass the cross near Templeshambo next Friday night on a visit to the fairies of Old Ross. If John can catch me by hand or cloak when I ride by, and has courage not to let go his grip, I'll be safe. Here's the king. Don't open your mouth to answer. I saw what happened with the ointment." Fear Doircha didn't once cast his eye towards Molly, and he seemed to have no suspicion of me. When we came out I looked about me, and where do you think we were but in the dike of the Rath of Cromogue. I was on the horse again, which was nothing but a big boolian bui (ragweed), and I was in dread every minute I'd fall off. But nothing happened till I found myself in my own bawn. The king slipped five guineas into my hand as soon as I was on the ground, and thanked me, and bade me good night. I hope I'll never see his face again. I got into bed and couldn't sleep for a long time. And when I examined my five guineas this morning, that I left in the table drawer the last thing, I found five withered leaves of oak -- bad scran to the giver!" Well, you may all think the fright, and the joy, and the grief the poor man was in when the woman finished her story. They talked, and they talked, but we needn't mind what they said till Friday night came, when both were standing where the mountain road crosses the one going to Ross. There they stood looking toward the bridge of Thuar, and I won't keep you waiting, as they were in the dead of the night, with a little moonlight shining from over Kilachdiarmid. At last she gave a start, and "By this and by that," says she, "here they come, bridles jingling, and feathers tossing." He looked, but could see nothing. And she stood trembling, and her eyes wide open, looking down the way to the ford of Ballinacoola. "I see your wife," says she, "riding on the outside just so as to rub against us. We'll walk on promiskis-like, as if we suspected nothing, and when we are passing I'll give you a shove. If you don't do your duty then, dickens cure you!" Well, they walked on easy, and the poor hearts beating in both their breasts; and though he could see nothing, he heard a faint jingle, and tramping, and rustling, and at last he got the push that she promised. He spread out his arms, and there was his wife's waist within them, and he could see her plain, but such a hullabaloo rose as if there was an earthquake; and he found himself surrounded by horrible-looking things, roaring at him, and striving to pull his wife away. But he made the sign of the cross, and bid them be gone in God's name, and held his wife as if it was iron his arms were made of. Bedad, in one moment everything was as silent as the grave, and the poor woman lying in a faint in the arms of her husband and her good neighbor. Well, all in good time she was minding her family and her business again, and I'll go bail, after the fright she got, she spent more time on her knees, and avoided fairy-men all the days of the week, and particularly Sunday. It is hard to have anything to do with the good people without getting a mark from them. My brave midwife didn't escape no more nor another. She was one Thursday at the market of Enniscorthy, when what did she see walking among the tubs of butter but Fear Doirche , very hungry looking, and taking a scoop out of one tub and out of another. "Oh, sir," says she, very foolish, "I hope your lady is well, and the young heir." "Pretty well, thank you," says he, rather frightened like. "How do I look in this new suit?" says he, getting to one side of her. "I can't see you plain at all, sir," says she. "Well, now," says he, getting round her back to the other side. "Musha, indeed, sir, your coat looks no better nor a withered dock-leaf." "Maybe, then," says he, "it will be different now," and he struck the eye next him with a switch. Begonies, she never saw a stim after with that one till the day of her death. Source: Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 106-10 . This story is also found in Andrew Lang, The Lilac Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1910), pp. 54-61 . Return to the table of contents . The Midwife of Listowel Ireland "Why do you call the fairies 'good people?'" asked I. "I don't call them the good people myself," answered Duvane, "but that is what the man called them who told me the story. Some call them the good people to avoid vexing them. I think they are called the good people mostly by pious men and women, who say that they are some of the fallen angels." "How is that?" "They tell us that when the Lord cast down the rebel angels the chief of them all and the ringleaders went to the place of eternal punishment, but that the Lord stopped His hand while a great many were on the way. Wherever they were when He stopped His hand there they are to this day. Some of these angels are under the earth; others are on the earth, and still others in the air. People say that they are among us at all times, that they know everything that is going on, that they have great hope of being forgiven at the day of judgment by the Lord and restored to heaven, and that if they hadn't that hope they would destroy this world and all that's in it." At this juncture the mason called out, "I will not say whether I think the fairies are fallen angels or who they are, but I remember a case in whic h a woman lost an eye through the fairies." "If you do," said I, "I hope you will tell it." "I will indeed," said he. There was an old woman, a midwife, who lived in a little house by herself between this and Listowel. One evening there was a knock at the door; she opened it, and what should she see but a man who said she was wanted, and to go with him quickly. He begged her to hurry. She made herself ready at once, the man waiting outside. When she was ready the man sprang on a fine, large horse, and put her up behind him. Away raced the horse then. They went a great distance in such a short time that it seemed to her only two or three miles. They came to a splendid large house and went in. The old woman found a beautiful lady inside. No other woman was to be seen. A child was born soon, and the man brought a vial of ointment, told the old woman to rub it on the child, but to have a great care and not touch her own self with it. She obeyed him and had no intention of touching herself, but on a sudden her left eye itched. She raised her hand, and rubbed the eye with one finger. Some of the ointment was on her finger, and that instant she saw great crowds of people around her, men and women. She knew that she was in a fort among fairies, and was frightened, but had courage enough not to show it, and finished her work. The man came to her then, and said, "I will take you home now." He opened the door, went out, sprang to the saddle, and reached his hand to her, but her eye was opened now and she saw that in place of a horse it was an old plow beam that was before her. She was more in dread then than ever, but took her seat, and away went the plow beam as swiftly as the very best horse in the kingdom. The man left her down at her own door, and she saw no more of him. Some time after there was a great fair at Listowel. The old midwife went to the fair, and there were big crowds of people on every side of her. The old woman looked around for a while and what did she see but the man who had taken her away on a plow beam. He was hurrying around, going in and out among the people, and no one knowing he was in it but the old woman. At last the finest young girl at the fair screamed and fell in a faint -- the fairy had thrust something into her side. A crowd gathered around the young girl. The old woman, who had seen all, made her way to the girl, examined her side, and drew a pin from it. The girl recovered. A little later the fairy made his way to the old woman. "Have you ever seen me before?" asked he. "Oh, maybe I have," said she. "Do you remember that I took you to a fort to attend a young woman?" "I do." "When you anointed the child did you touch any part of yourself with the ointment I gave you?" "I did without knowing it; my eye itched and I rubbed it with my finger." "Which eye?" "The left." The moment she said that he struck her left eye and took the sight from it. She went home blind of one eye, and was that way the rest of her life. Source: Jeremiah Curtin, Tales of the Fairies and of the Ghost World: Collected from Oral Tradition in South-West Munster (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1895), pp. 42-45 . Link to additional legends about the Origin of Underground People . Return to the table of contents . The Midwife Ireland In every locality in Ireland there was an experienced woman who was the midwife or "rabbit catcher" as they called her. The following story was related by the old woman Eibhlín ní Cróinín, 89 bliana d'aois: It was the custom for the man whose wife was sick to bring a horse for the midwife. She rode behind the man on the pillon. One night a call was given at the midwife's house, she got up, dressed and went on horse back. They went on and on until he reaches a lios [fairy fort]. The door or entrance was open, outside the door was a girl, who spoke to the woman and told her not to eat anything, and when she was leaving not to accept any payment, but to ask for a plaster for her sick daughter. When the midwife entered, there was great feasting and enjoyment, she was asked to partake of something, but she refused. She asked for the woman in labour and one of the inhabitants conducted her to the room. Soon after, the baby was born, and there was a great rí-rá amongst the inhabitants of the lios. There was drinking, singing and dancing there, but the woman refused to join in the carousal. She said that when the woman was all right she would go home. The man of the lios offered her money, but she would not accept; she asked in return a plaster for her sick daughter, who was ill for a long time. This request caused murmur a least some excitement, and they turned at the woman (the midwife), and said that, how badly off the dirty tripe (the daughter) was, who came up to the kitchen the other night when themselves were cooking their supper, and pissed into the ash hole near them. However she got the plaster, and when applied to the daughter's leg a piece of saucer came out, and the girl was well again. The fairy folk, who were feasting, threw [had thrown] a broken saucer after the girl when she was going back to her room and it [had] struck her in the leg. The girl whom she met at the entrance was her other daughter, who had died previously. Informant: Eibhlin Ni Cróinín, Aghabullogue, Co. Cork. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Cork >> Áth Dúna, pp. 435-36 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . The episode of a human inadvertenly polluting a fairy's dwelling is classified as a type 5075 migratory legend. Fairy Ointment England Once upon a time there was, in this celebrated town [Tavistock], a Dame Somebody, I do not know her name, and as she is a real character, I have no right to give her a fictitious one. All I with truth can say, is, that she was old, and nothing the worse for that; for age is, or ought to be, held in honor as the source of wisdom and experience. Now this good old woman lived not in vain, for she had passed her days in the useful capacity of a nurse; and as she approached the term of going out of the world herself, she was still useful in her generation, by helping others into it -- she was, in fact, the Sage-femme of the village; for though I have the utmost dislike to mixing up French, or any foreign words, with the good, plain English of my native land, I here for once venture on a French expression, because it is, in certain particulars, considered as a refinement so much in fashion, that I must not venture to neglect it. One night, about twelve o'clock in the morning, as the good folks say who tell this tale, Dame Somebody had just got comfortably into bed, when rap, rap, rap came on her cottage door, with such bold, loud, and continued noise, that there was a sound of authority in every individual knock. Startled and alarmed by the call, she arose from her bed, and soon learnt that the summons was a hasty one to bid her attend on a patient who needed her help. She opened her door; when the summoner appeared to be a strange, squint-eyed, little, ugly, old fellow, who had a look, as she said, very like a certain dark personage, who ought not at all times to be called by his proper name. Not at all prepossessed in favor of the errand by the visage of the messenger, she nevertheless could not, or dared not resist the command to follow him straight, and attend upon "his wife." "Thy wife!" thought the good dame. "Heaven forgive me; but as sure as I live I be going to the birth of a little divel." A large coal-black horse, with eyes like balls of fire, stood at the door. The ill-looking old fellow, without more ado, whisked her up on a high pillion in a minute, seated himself before her, and away went horse and riders, as if sailing through the air, rather than trotting on the ground. How Dame Somebody got to the place of her destination she could not tell; but it was a great relief to her fears when she found herself set down at the door of a neat cottage, saw a couple of tidy children, and remarked her patient to be a decent-looking woman, having all things about her fitting the time and the occasion. A fine, bouncing babe soon made its appearance, who seemed very bold on its entry into life, for it gave the good dame a box on the ear, as, with the coaxing and cajolery of all good old nurses, she declared the "sweet little thing to be very like its father." The mother said nothing to this, but gave nurse a certain ointment with directions that she should "strike the child's eyes with it." Now you must know that this word strike in our Devonshire vocabulary, does not exactly mean to give a blow, but rather what is opposite, to rub, smooth down, or touch gently. The nurse performed her task, though she thought it an odd one; and as it is nothing new that old nurses are generally very curious, she wondered what it could be for; and thought that, as no doubt it was a good thing, she might just as well try it upon her own eyes as well as those of the baby; so she made free to strike one of them by way of trial; when, O! ye powers of fairyland, what a change was there! The neat, but homely cottage, and all who were in it, seemed all on a sudden to undergo a mighty transformation; some for the better, some for the worse. The new-made mother appeared as a beautiful lady attired in white; the babe was seen wrapped in swaddling clothes of a silvery gauze. It looked much prettier than before, but still maintained the elfish cast of the eye, like his redoubted father: whilst two or three children more had undergone a metamorphosis as uncouth as that recorded by Ovid when the Cercopians were transformed into apes. For there sat on either side the bed's head, a couple of little flat-nosed imps, who with "mops and mows," and with many a grimace and grin, were "busied to no end" in scratching their own polls, or in pulling the fairy lady's ears with their long and hairy paws. The dame, who beheld all this, fearing she knew not what in the house of enchantment, got away as fast as she could, without saying one word about "striking" her own eye with the magic ointment, and what she had beheld in consequence of doing so. The sour-looking old fellow once more handed her up on the coal-black horse, and sent her home in a whip-sissa . Now what a whip-sissa means is more than I can tell, though I consider myself to be tolerably well acquainted with the tongues of this "West Countrie." It may mean, perhaps, "Whip, says he," in allusion to some gentle intimation being feelingly given by the rider to the horse's sides with a switch, that he should use the utmost dispatch; but my derivation of the word, like that of some better etymologists on difficult occasions, may be a little far fetched. I, therefore, leave the point to be settled by the learned. Certain it is, the old woman returned home much faster than she went. But mark the event. On the next market day, when she sallied forth to sell her eggs, who should she see but the same, wicked-looking old fellow, busied, like a rogue as he was, in pilfering sundry articles from stall to stall. "O! ho!" thought the dame, "have I caught you, you old thief? But I'll let you see I could set master mayor and the two town constables on your back, if I chose to be telling." So up she went, and with that bold free sort of air, which persons, who have learnt secrets that ought not to be known, are apt to assume when they address any great rogue hitherto considered as a superior, she inquired carelessly after his wife and child, and hoped both were as well as could be expected. "What!" exclaimed the old pixy thief, "do you see me today?" "See you! To be sure I do, as plain as I see the sun in the skies; and I see you are busy into the bargain." "Do you so! " cried he. "Pray with which eye do you see all this?" "With the right eye to be sure." "The ointment! The ointment!" exclaimed the old fellow. "Take that for meddling with what did not belong to you -- you shall see me no more." He struck her eye as he spoke, and from that hour till the day of her death she was blind on the right side; thus dearly paying for having gratified an idle curiosity in the house of a pixy. Source: Anna Eliza Bray, Traditions, Legends, Superstitions, and Sketches of Devonshire on the Borders of the Tamar and the Tavy , vol. 1 (London: John Murray, 1838), pp. 183-88 . Bray does not give this account a title. Footnote by Bray: It has been the popular belief of all ages that no mortal can see a fairy without his eyes being rubbed with a magic ointment. Cornelius Agrippa, if I remember right, though it is long since I have seen his book, gives a very amusing receipt for compounding such a salve. This tale is retold by Joseph Jacobs in the following story. Return to the table of contents . Fairy Ointment England Dame Goody was a nurse that looked after sick people and minded babies. One night she was woke up at midnight, and when she went downstairs, she saw a strange squinny-eyed, little ugly old fellow, who asked her to come to his wife who was too ill to mind her baby. Dame Goody didn't like the look of the old fellow, but business is business; so she popped on her things, and went down to him. And when she got down to him, he whisked her up on to a large coal-black horse with fiery eyes, that stood at the door; and soon they were going at a rare pace, Dame Goody holding on to the old fellow like grim death. They rode, and they rode, till at last they stopped before a cottage door. So they got down and went in and found the good woman abed with the children playing about; and the babe, a fine bouncing boy, beside her. Dame Goody took the babe, which was as fine a baby boy as you'd wish to see. The mother, when she handed the baby to Dame Goody to mind, gave her a box of ointment, and told her to stroke the baby's eyes with it as soon as it opened them. After a while it began to open its eyes. Dame Goody saw that it had squinny eyes just like its father. So she took the box of ointment and stroked its two eyelids with it. But she couldn't help wondering what it was for, as she had never seen such a thing done before. So she looked to see if the others were looking, and, when they were not noticing, she stroked her own right eyelid with the ointment. No sooner had she done so, than everything seemed changed about her. The cottage became elegantly furnished. The mother in the bed was a beautiful lady, dressed up in white silk. The little baby was still more beautiful then before, and its clothes were made of a sort of silvery gauze. Its little brothers and sisters around the bed were flat-nosed imps with pointed ears, who made faces at one another, and scratched their polls. Sometimes they would pull the sick lady's ears with their long and hairy paws. In fact, they were up to all kinds of mischief; and Dame Goody knew that she had got into a house of pixies. But she said nothing to nobody, and as soon as the lady was well enough to mind the baby, she asked the old fellow to take her back home. So he came round to the door with the coal-black horse with eyes of fire, and off they went as fast as before, or perhaps a little faster, till they came to Dame Goody's cottage, where the squinny-eyed old fellow lifted her down and left her, thanking her civilly enough, and paying her more than she had ever been paid before for such service. Now next day happened to be market-day, and as Dame Goody had been away from home, she wanted many things in the house, and trudged off to get them at the market. As she was buying the things she wanted, who should she see but the squinny-eyed old fellow who had taken her on the coal-black horse. And what do you think he was doing? Why he went about from stall to stall taking things from each, here some fruit, and there some eggs, and so on; and no one seemed to take any notice. Now Dame Goody did not think it her business to interfere, but she thought she ought not to let so good a customer pass without speaking. So she ups to him and bobs a curtsey and said, "Gooden, sir, I hopes as how your good lady and the little one are as well as --" But she couldn't finish what she was a-saying, for the funny old fellow started back in surprise, and he says to her, says he, "What! do you see me today?" "See you," says she, "why, of course I do, as plain as the sun in the skies, and what's more," says she, "I see you are busy, too, into the bargain." "Ah, you see too much." said he. "Now, pray, with which eye do you see all this?" "With the right eye to be sure," said she, as proud as can be to find him out. "The ointment! The ointment!" cried the old pixy thief. "Take that for meddling with what don't concern you. You shall see me no more." And with that he struck her on the right eye, and she couldn't see him any more. And, what was worse, she was blind on the right side from that hour till the day of her death. Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales , (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 40, pp. 211-14 . Jacobs' source: "Mrs. Bray, The Tamar and the Tavy , i. 74 (letters to Southey), as quoted by Mr. Hartland in Folk-Lore , I, 207-208." Jaocobs notes further: "I have christened the anonymous midwife and euphemized her profession." ( p. 251 ) Jacobs' source is reproduced in the previous story of the present collection. Return to the table of contents . Notes and Bibliography "Midwife (or Godparent) for the Elves" tales are classified as type 476* tales in the Aarne-Thompson-Uther folktale classification system, or as a migratory legend type 5070. For more information about folktale types see: Aarne, Antti, and Thompson, Stith. The Types of the Folktale: A Classification and Bibliography . FF Communications, no. 184. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 1961. Ashliman, D. L. A Guide to Folktales in the English Language . New York; Westport Connecticut; and London: Greenwood Press, 1987. Christiansen, Reidar Th. The Migratory Legends . FF Communications, no. 175. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 1958. Uther, Hans-Jörg. The Types of International Folktales: A Classification and Bibliography Based on the System of Antti Aarne and Stith Thompson . FF Communications, nos. 284-86. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 2004. Return to Table of Contents D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised July 1, 2024. Monkey Bridegrooms Monkey Bridegrooms folktales selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman copyright 1998 Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts . Animal Brides and Animal Bridegrooms : an index page of folktales about marriage with a beast. Contents The Monkey Boy (India) The Monkey and the Girl (India) The Monkey Husband (India) Juan Wearing a Monkey's Skin (Philippines) The Enchanted Prince (Philippines) Link to Chonguita the Monkey Wife (Philippines) Mr. Monkey, the Bridegroom (French Louisiana) The Monkey Boy India There was once a man who had six sons and two daughters, and he died leaving his wife pregnant of a ninth child. And when the child was born it proved to be a monkey. The villagers and relations advised the mother to make away with it, but she refused, saying, "Chando [the supreme god of the Santals] knows why he has given me such a child, but as he has done so, I will rear it." All her relations said that if she chose to rear a monkey they would turn her out of the family. However, she persisted that she would do so at all costs. So they sent her to live with her child in a hut outside the village, and the monkey boy grew up and learned to talk like a human being. One day his elder brothers began to clear the jungle for cultivation, and the monkey boy took a hatchet and went with them. He asked where he could clear land for himself, and in fun they showed him the place where the jungle was thickest. So he went there and drove his hatchet into the trunk of a tree and then returned and watched his brothers working hard clearing the scrub, and when they had finished their work, he went and fetched his hatchet and returned home with them. Every day he did the same. And one day his brothers asked why he spent all his time with them, but he said that he only came to them when he was tired of cutting down trees. They laughed at this and said that they would like to see his clearing, so he took them to the place, and to their astonishment they saw a large clearing, bigger than they had been able to make for themselves. Then the brothers burnt the jungle they had cut down and began to plow the land. But the monkey boy's mother had no plow or cattle nor any seed rice. The only thing in the house was a pumpkin, so he took the seed out of the pumpkin and sowed it in his clearing. His brothers asked what he had sown, and he told them, "Rice." The brothers plowed and sowed and used to go daily to watch the growing crop, and one day they went to have a look at the monkey boy's crop, and they saw that it was pumpkins and not rice, and they laughed at him. When their crop was ripe the brothers prepared to offer the first fruits, and the monkey boy watched them that he might observe the same ceremonies as they. One day they brought home the first fruits and offered them to the bongas , and they invited the monkey boy and his mother to come to the feast which followed the offering. They both went and enjoyed themselves; and two or three days later the monkey boy said that he would also have a feast of first fruits, so he told his mother to clear the courtyard, and invited his brothers, and he purified himself and went to his clearing and brought home the biggest pumpkin that had grown there. This he offered to the spirits. He sliced off the top of it as if it were the head of a fowl, and as he did so he saw that the inside was full of rice. He called his mother, and they filled a winnowing fan with the rice, and there was enough besides to nearly fill a basket. They were delighted at this windfall but kept the matter secret lest they should be robbed. The monkey boy told his mother to be sure and cook enough rice so that his brothers and their wives might have as much as ever they could eat, and not merely a small helping such as they had given him, and if necessary he would go and fetch another pumpkin. So his mother boiled the rice. When the time fixed for the feast came, nothing was to be seen of the brothers because they did not expect that there would really be anything for them to eat. So the monkey boy went and fetched them, and when they came to the feast they were astonished to have as much rice as they could eat. When the crop was quite ripe the monkey boy gathered all the pumpkins and got sufficient rice from them to last for the whole year. After this the brothers went out to buy horses, and the monkey boy went with them, and as he had no money he took nothing but a coil of rope. His brothers were ashamed to have him with them and drove him away, so he went on ahead and got first to the place where the horse dealer lived. The brothers arrived late in the evening and decided to make their purchases the following morning and ride their horses home, so they camped for the night. The monkey boy spent the night hiding on the rafters of the stable. And in the night the horses began to talk to each other and discussed which could gallop farthest, and one mare said, "I can gallop twelve kos on the ground and then twelve kos in the air." [One kos equals about two miles.] When the monkey boy heard this he got down and lamed the mare by running a splinter into her hoof. The next morning the brothers bought the horses which pleased them and rode off. Then the monkey boy went to the horse dealer and asked why the mare was lame and advised him to apply remedies. But the dealer said that that was useless; when horses got ill they always died. Then the monkey boy asked if he would sell the mare and offered to give the coil of rope in exchange. The dealer, thinking that the animal was useless, agreed. So the monkey boy led it away, but when he was out of sight he took out the splinter, and the lameness at once ceased. Then he mounted the mare and rode after his brothers, and when he had nearly overtaken them he rose into the air and flew past his brothers and arrived first at home. There he tied up the mare outside his house and went and bathed and had his dinner and waited for his brothers. They did not arrive for a full hour afterwards, and when they saw the monkey boy and his mount they wanted to know how he had got home first. He boasted of how swift his mare was, and so they arranged to have a race and match their horses against his. The race took place two or three days later, and the monkey boy's mare easily beat all the other horses. She galloped twelve kos on the ground and twelve kos in the air. Then they wanted to change their horses for his, but he said they had had first choice and he was not going to change. In two or three years the monkey boy became rich, and then he announced that he wanted to marry. This puzzled his mother for she thought that no human girl would marry him while a monkey would not be able to talk. So she told him that he must find a bride for himself. One day he set off to look for a wife and came to a tank in which some girls were bathing, and he took up the cloth belonging to one of them and ran up a tree with it, and when the girl missed it and saw it hanging down from the tree, she borrowed a cloth from her friends and went and asked the monkey boy for her own. He told her that she could only have it back if she consented to marry him. She was surprised to find that he could talk, and as he conversed she was bewitched by him and let him pull her up into the tree by her hair, and she called out to her friends to go home and leave her where she was. Then he took her on his back and ran off home with her. The girl's father and relations turned out with bows and arrows to look for the monkey who had carried her off, but he had gone so far away that they never found him. When the monkey boy appeared with his bride all the villagers were astonished that he had found anyone to marry him, but everything was made ready for the marriage as quickly as possible, and all the relations were invited, and the wedding took place, and the monkey boy and his wife lived happily ever after. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 15, pp. 56-60. The episode in which the hero gains control over his future bride by stealing an item of her clothing plays an integral role in most swan maiden tales . Return to the table of contents . The Monkey and the Girl India Once upon a time the boys and girls of a village used to watch the crops of but [a kind of grain] growing by a river, and there was a Hanuman monkey who wished to eat the but , but they drove him away. So he made a plan. He used to make a garland of flowers and go with it to the field, and, when he was driven away, he would leave the flowers behind. And the children were pleased with the flowers and ended by making friends with the monkey and did not drive him away. There was one of the young girls who was fascinated by the monkey and promised to marry him. Some of the other children told this in the village, and the girl's father and mother came to hear of it and were angry, and the father took some of the villagers and went and shot the monkey. Then they decided not to throw away the body, but to burn it like the corpse of a man. So they made a pyre and put the body on it and set fire to it. Just then the girl came, and they told her to go away, but she said that she wished to see whether they really burned him like a man. So she stood by, and when the pyre was in full blaze, she called out, "Oh look what is happening to the stars in the sky!" At this everyone looked up at the sky. Then she took some sand which she had in the fold of her cloth and threw it into the air, and it fell into their eyes and blinded them. While they were rubbing the sand out of their eyes the girl leapt onto the pyre, and was burned along with the monkey and died a sati [also spelled suttee -- a Hindu widow's suicidal cremation on her husband's funeral pyre as a demonstration of devotion]. Her father and brothers were very angry at this and said that the girl must have had a monkey's soul, and so she was fascinated by him. And so saying they bathed and went home. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 32, pp. 128-129. Return to the table of contents . The Monkey Husband India One very hot day some children were bathing in a pool, when a Hanuman monkey snatched up the cloth which one of the girls had left on the bank, and ran up a tree with it. When the children came out of the water and went to take up their clothes, they found one missing, and looking about, they saw the monkey in the tree with it. They begged the Hanuman to give it back, but the monkey only said, "I will not give it unless its owner consents to marry me." Then they began to throw sticks and stones at him, but he climbed to the top of the tree out of the way. Then they ran and told the parents of the girl whose cloth had been stolen. And they called their neighbors and went with bows and arrows and threatened to shoot the monkey if he did not give up the cloth, but he still said that he would not, unless the girl would marry him. Then they shot all their arrows at him, but not one of them hit him. Then the neighbors said, "This child is fated to belong to the monkey, and that is why we cannot hit him." Then the girl's father and mother began to cry and sang: Give the girl her cloth Her silk cloth, monkey boy. And he answered: If she consents to marry me, I will give it. If she consents, I will put it in her hand. And as he did not listen to the father and mother, her father's younger brother and his wife sang the same song, but in vain. And then the girl herself begged for it, and thereupon the monkey let down one end of the cloth to her; and when she caught hold of it, he pulled her up into the tree, and there made her put on her cloth, and ran off with her on his back. The girl was quite willing to go with him and called out as she was carried away, "Never mind, father and mother. I am going away." The Hanuman took her to a cave in the mountains, and they lived on fruit: mangoes or jack or whatever fruit was in season. The monkey climbed the trees and shook the fruit down. But if the girl saw by the marks of teeth that the monkey had bitten off any fruit, instead of only shaking it down, she would not eat it, and pretended that she had had enough, for she would not eat the leavings of the monkey. At last the girl got tired of having only fruit to eat, and demanded rice. So the monkey took her to a bazaar, and leaving her on the outskirts of the village under a tree, he went and stole some pots from a potter and rice and salt and turmeric and pulse and sweetmeats from other shops, and brought them to the girl. Then she collected sticks and lit a fire and cooked a meal. And the monkey liked the cooked food, and asked her to cook for him every day. So they stayed there several days. Then the girl asked for more clothes, and the monkey tried to steal them too, but the shopkeepers were on the watch and drove him away. The girl soon got tired of sleeping under a tree, so they went back to the cave, and the monkey gathered mangoes and jack-fruit and told her to go and sell them in the market, and then she would be able to buy cloth. But when she had sold the fruit, she stayed in the village and took service with a well-to-do shopkeeper, and never returned to the monkey. The monkey watched for her and searched for her in vain, and returned sorrowfully to his hill. But the girl stayed on in the village and eventually married one of the villagers. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 70, pp. 212-214. The episode in which the hero gains control over his future bride by stealing an item of her clothing also plays an integral role in most swan maiden tales . Return to the table of contents . Juan Wearing a Monkey's Skin Philippines Once upon a time there was a couple which was at first childless. The father was very anxious to have a son to inherit his property, so he went to the church daily, and prayed God to give him a child, but in vain. One day, in his great disappointment, the man exclaimed without thinking, "O great God! Let me have a son, even if it is in the form of a monkey!" And only a few days later his wife gave birth to a monkey. The father was so much mortified that he wanted to kill his son; but finally his better reason prevailed, and he spared the child. He said to himself, "It is my fault, I know; but I uttered that invocation without thinking." So instead of putting the monkey to death, the couple just hid it from visitors; and whenever anyone asked for the child, they merely answered, "Oh, he died long ago." The time came when the monkey grew to be old enough to marry. He went to his father, and said, "Give me your blessing, father! for I am going away to look for a wife." The father was only too glad to be freed from this obnoxious son, so he immediately gave him his blessing. Before letting him go, however, the father said to the monkey, "You must never come back again to our house." "Very well, I will not," said the monkey. The monkey then left his father's house, and went to find his fortune. One night he dreamed that there was a castle in the midst of the sea, and that in this castle dwelt a princess of unspeakable beauty. The princess had been put there so that no one might discover her existence. The monkey, who had been baptized two days after his birth and was named Juan, immediately repaired to the palace of the king. There he posted a letter which read as follows: "I, Juan, know that your majesty has a daughter." Naturally the king was very angry to have his secret discovered. He immediately sent soldiers to look for Juan. Juan was soon found, and brought to the palace. The king said to him, "How do you know that I have a daughter? If you can bring her here, I will give her to you for a wife. If not, however, your head shall be cut off from your body." "O your majesty!" said Juan, "I am sure that I can find her and bring her here. I am willing to lose my head if within three days I fail to fulfil my promise." After he had said this, Juan withdrew, and sadly went out to look for the hidden princess. As he was walking along the road, he heard the cry of a bird. He looked up, and saw a bird caught between two boughs so that it could not escape. The bird said to him, "O monkey! if you will but release me, I will give you all I have." "Oh, no!" said the monkey. "I am very hungry, and would much rather eat you." "If you will but spare my life," said the bird, "I will give you anything you want." "On one condition only will I set you free," said the monkey. "You must procure for me the ring of the princess who lives in the midst of the sea." "Oh, that's an easy thing to do," said the bird. So the monkey climbed the tree and set the bird free. The bird immediately flew to the island in the sea, where fortunately it found the princess refreshing herself in her garden. The princess was so charmed with the song of the bird that she looked up and said, "O little bird! if you will only promise to live with me, I will give you anything you want." "All right, said the bird. "Give me your ring, and I will forever live with you." The princess held up the ring; and the bird suddenly snatched it and flew away with it. It gave the ring to the monkey, who was, of course, delighted to get it. Now the monkey jogged along the road until finally he saw three witches. He approached them and said to them, "You are the very beings for whom I have spent the whole day looking. God has sent me here from heaven to punish you for your evil doings toward innocent persons. So I must eat you up." Now, witches are said to be afraid of ill-looking persons, although they themselves are the ugliest beings in all the world. So these three were terribly frightened by the monkey's threat, and said, "O sir! spare our lives, and we will do anything for you!" "Very well, I will spare you if you can execute my order. From this shore you must build a bridge which leads to the middle of the sea, where the castle of the princess is situated." "That shall be speedily done," replied the witches; and they at once gathered leaves, which they put on their backs. Then they plunged into the water. Immediately after them a bridge was built. Thus the monkey was now able to go to the castle. Here he found the princess. She was very much surprised to see this evil-looking animal before her; but she was much more frightened when the monkey showed her the ring which the bird had given him, and claimed her for his wife. "It is the will of God that you should go with me," said the monkey, after the princess had shown great repugnance towards him. "You either have to go with me or perish." Thinking it was useless to attempt to resist such a mighty foe, the princess finally yielded. The monkey led her to the king's palace and presented her before her parents; but no sooner had the king and queen seen their daughter in the power of the beast, than they swooned. When they had recovered, they said simultaneously, "Go away at once, and never come back her again, you girl of infamous taste! Who are you? You are not the princess we left in the castle. You are of villain's blood, and the very air which you exhale does suffocate us. So with no more ado depart at once!" The princess implored her father to have pity, saying that it was the will of God that she should be the monkey's wife. "Perhaps I have been enchanted by him, for I am powerless to oppose him." But all her remonstrance was in vain. the king shut his ears against any deceitful or flattering words that might fall from the lips of his faithless and disobedient daughter. Seeing that the king was obstinate, the couple turned their backs on the palace and decided to find a more hospitable home. So the monkey now took his wife to a neighboring mountain, and here they settled. One day the monkey noticed that the princess was very sad and pale. He said to her, "Why are you so sad and unhappy, my darling? What is the matter?" "Nothing. I am just sorry to have only a monkey for my husband. I become sad when I think of my past happiness." "I am not a monkey, my dear. I am a real man, born of human parents. Didn't you know that I was baptized by the priest, and that my name is Juan?" As the princess would not believe him, the monkey went to a neighboring hut and there cast off his disguise ( balit cayu ). He at once returned to the princess. She was amazed to see a sparkling youth of not more than twenty years of age -- nay, a prince -- kneeling before her. "I can no longer keep you in ignorance," he said. "I am your husband, Juan." "Oh, no! I cannot believe you. Don't try to deceive me! My husband is a monkey. But, with all his defects, I still cling to him and love him. Please go away at once, lest my husband find you here! He will be jealous, and my kill us both." "Oh, no! my darling, I am your husband, Juan. I only disguised myself as a monkey." But still the princess would not believe him. At last she said to him, "If you are my real husband, you must give me a proof of the fact." So Juan (we shall hereafter call him by this name) took her to the place where he had cast off his monkey-skin. The princess was now convinced, and said to herself, "After all, I was not wrong in the belief I have entertained from the beginning, that it was the will of God that I should marry this monkey, this man." Juan and the princess now agreed to go back to the palace and tell the story. So they went. As soon as the king and queen saw the couple, they were very much surprised. But to remove their doubt, Juan immediately related to the king all that had happened. Thus the king and queen were finally reconciled to the at first hated couple. Juan and his wife succeeded to the throne on the death of the king, and lived peacefully and happily during their reign. The story is now ended. Thus we see that God compensated the father and mother of Juan for their religious zeal by giving them a son, but punished them for not being content with what he gave them by taking the son away from them again, for Juan never recognized his parents. Source: Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 19, pp. 178-182. Fansler's source: "Narrated by Lorenzo Licup, a Pampango from Angeles, Pampanga." Copyright 1921 by the American Folk-Lore Society. The beginning of this tale is reminiscent of the opening episodes of Hans-My-Hedgehog by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. Return to the table of contents . The Enchanted Prince Philippines Many years ago there lived a very rich king in a beautiful city near a wild forest, the home of many wicked witches. The king had a gallant son named Ucay, who fell in love with a beautiful young witch, the daughter of the most bitter enemy of his father. When Ucay became old enough to marry, his father requested him to select the most beautiful lady in the city for his wife; but the prince would neither select one, nor would he tell his father about his love for the witch. So the rich king ordered his soldiers to bring to the palace all the beautiful women that could be found in the kingdom. His order was soon obeyed, but none of the girls suited the prince. So the king took the matter of selection into his own hands; and, after choosing a very handsome girl, he forced his son to marry her. Out of fear, Ucay consented to do as his father bade him. But the beautiful young witch to whom he had already pledged his love became angry with him for his timidity, and so she resolved to change the city into a forest of beautiful trees. Her fickle lover she transformed into a monkey, who should live in the tallest tree, and who should not be able to recover his human shape till five centuries had past, when a charming girl would live with him and love him more than anything else. Moreover, she changed the king's subjects into other animals as she pleased. No sooner had the marriage of the prince been proclaimed, then, than the desire of the witch was accomplished, to the great surprise of the neighboring cities. Four centuries had already passed. The wonderful disappearance of the city was already forgotten, and people from other places began to build houses in the enchanted city. The monkey-prince was always watching for an opportunity to catch a beautiful girl who should break the spell that kept him in his miserable condition. Soon a church was built near the foot of the tree in which he lived. He had already succeeded in capturing two ladies, but they had died of fear. After incalculable suffering and extraordinary patience, the time for his recovery came at last. One Sunday morning before the mass was over, a very beautiful girl, the daughter of a poor man, came out of the church and sat at the foot of the tree. She had been disappointed in her love with a rich man's son, who had forsaken her in order to marry the daughter of a rich man. So she wished to die. When the monkey-prince saw her sitting there alone, he noiselessly went down, carefully took her by the right hand, and carried her to the top of the tree. She would have died of fright, as was the fate of the two former women, had she not seen in the monkey's eyes a noble look that filled her with wonder and sympathy. As days went by, she lived on delicious fruits which were entirely strange to her; and her love for the poor creature grew greater and greater, until at last she loved him more than anything else. On the evening of the tenth day she was surprised to find herself beside a gallant prince in a richly decorated room. At first she thought that she was dreaming; but when the prince woke up, kissed her, and then told her the history of his life, she knew that it was real. She was so astonished, that she exclaimed, "Ah, me! God is wise!" The next morning she was crowned queen of her husband's happy subjects, whom she had restored from the enchantment of the wicked witch. Everyone in the kingdom loved his new queen as long as he lived. Source: Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 41, pp. 301-303. Fansler's source: "Narrated by Pedro D. L. Sorreta, a Bicol from Virac, Albay, who heard the story from his grandfather." Copyright 1921 by the American Folk-Lore Society. Return to the table of contents . Mr. Monkey, the Bridegroom French Louisiana There was a monkey which fell in love with a beautiful young girl. He dressed as a man and went to call on her. He was so well received that one day he took his best friend with him to see his lady-love. The young girl's father asked Mr. Monkey's friend some questions about his daughter's lover. The friend said that Mr. Monkey was good and rich, but there was a secret about him. The father wanted to know the secret, but the friend said he would tell him another day. Mr. Monkey was finally engaged to the young lady, and the night of the wedding he invited his friend to the supper. The latter was jealous of Mr. Monkey, and at the end of the supper he began to sing. This was a song that made all monkeys dance, whether they wished to or not, so Mr. Monkey looked at his friend and beckoned him to stop singing. He continued, however, to sing, and all at once Mr. Monkey got up and began to dance. He jumped about so wildly that his tail came out of his clothes, and everyone saw that he was a monkey. The father understood the secret, and beat him dreadfully. His friend, however, ran off, dancing and singing. Source: Alcée Fortier, Louisiana Folk-Tales in French [Creole] Dialect and English Translation (Boston and New York: Published for the American Folk-Lore Society by Houghton, Mifflin and Company, 1895), no. 9, pp. 27-29. Fortier's source: "Informant, Méranthe, colored nurse, Hospital Street, New Orleans." Return to the table of contents . Revised April 30, 1998. The Monkey's Heart: Folktales of type 91 The Monkey's Heart folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 91 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2013 Contents The Monkey's Heart (India, Jataka Tales ). The Monkey and the Crocodile (India, Suka Saptati; or, Seventy Tales of a Parrot ) The Foolish Dragon (China). The Monkey and the Jellyfish (Japan). The Jellyfish and the Monkey (Japan). The Heart of a Monkey (Africa, Swahili). Brother Rabbit and the Gizzard-Eater. (African-American, Joel Chandler Harris). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Monkey's Heart India, Jataka Tales Once upon a time, while Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta came to life at the foot of the Himalayas as a monkey. He grew strong and sturdy, big of frame, well to do, and lived by a curve of the river Ganges in a forest haunt. Now at that time there was a crocodile dwelling in the Ganges. The crocodile's mate saw the great frame of the monkey, and she conceived a longing to eat his heart. So she said to her lord, "Sir, I desire to eat the heart of that great king of the monkeys!" "Good wife," said the crocodile, "I live in the water and he lives on dry land. How can we catch him?" "By hook or by crook," she replied, "he must be caught. If I don't get him, I shall die." "All right," answered the crocodile, consoling her, "don't trouble yourself. I have a plan. I will give you his heart to eat." So when the Bodhisatta was sitting on the bank of the Ganges, after taking a drink of water, the crocodile drew near, and said, "Sir Monkey, why do you live on bad fruits in this old familiar place? On the other side of the Ganges there is no end to the mango trees, and labuja trees, with fruit sweet as honey! Is it not better to cross over and have all kinds of wild fruit to eat?" "Lord Crocodile," the monkey answered. "The Ganges is deep and wide. How shall I get across?" "If you want to go, I will let you sit upon my back, and carry you over." The monkey trusted him, and agreed. "Come here, then," said the crocodile. "Up on my back with you!" and up the monkey climbed. But when the crocodile had swum a little way, he plunged the monkey under the water. "Good friend, you are letting me sink!" cried the monkey. "What is that for?" The crocodile said, "You think I am carrying you out of pure good nature? Not a bit of it! My wife has a longing for your heart, and I want to give it to her to eat.!" "Friend," said the monkey, "it is nice of you to tell me. Why, if our heart were inside us, when we go jumping among the tree tops it would be all knocked to pieces!" "Well, where do you keep it?" asked the crocodile. The Bodhisatta pointed out a fig tree, with clusters of ripe fruit, standing not far off. "See," said he, "there are our hearts hanging on yonder fig tree." "If you will show me your heart," said the crocodile, "then I won't kill you." "Take me to the tree, then, and I will point it out to you." The crocodile brought him to the place. The monkey leapt off his back, and, climbing up the fig tree, sat upon it. "Oh silly crocodile!" said he. "You thought that there were creatures that kept their hearts in a treetop! You are a fool, and I have outwitted you! You may keep your fruit to yourself. Your body is great, but you have no sense." And then to explain this idea he uttered the following stanzas: Rose-apple, jack-fruit, mangoes, too, across the water there I see; Enough of them, I want them not; my fig is good enough for me! Great is your body, verily, but how much smaller is your wit! Now go your ways, Sir Crocodile, for I have had the best of it. The crocodile, feeling as sad and miserable as if he had lost a thousand pieces of money, went back sorrowing to the place where he lived. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895), book 2, no. 208. Return to the table of contents . The Monkey and the Crocodile India, Suka Saptati; or, Seventy Tales of a Parrot In a forest called Pushpâkara, lived a small monkey whose name was Vanapriya. One day he was walking close to the river bank, when he saw a crocodile basking in the sun. "Friend Crocodile," said he, "are you tired of life that you have come so close into land?" The crocodile heard what the monkey said and replied: "He who has a situation that suits him, he who receives due wages for his services, is perfectly content with the place in which he happens to be. For it has been said: Lanka is altogether made of gold, yet I care nothing for it. Ayodhya, the home of my fathers, is but poor, yet I delight in it. But there is something more than that, for your acquaintance has added additional pleasure to my existence. For it is written: A sacred bathing-place is only profitable sometimes. But the mere sight of a good man is always a source of purification. So now a piece of luck has happened to me, in that I have come across one who speaks such kindly words as you." "My dear Crocodile," answered the monkey," from this day forward I shall be entirely devoted to you, for your words are indeed the words of friendship. As it has been said: Friendship, in the opinion of wise men, is the society of the good. Therefore," continued the monkey, "let me offer you such hospitality as I am capable of." So saying he brought the crocodile some ripe fruit as sweet as nectar. So after this every day the monkey used to bring his friend the crocodile plaintain fruit, and the crocodile took it home to his wife. One day she asked him where this fruit came from, and he told her the whole story, exactly as it all happened. She thought to herself, "This monkey seems to enjoy excellent fruit, I wonder what his ordinary food is like," and so, being in a condition which gave her a craving for all sorts of strange out-of-the-way things, she said to her husband: "I must have some of that fruit which the monkey is always eating; if you don't get it for me I shall certainly die." So off the crocodile started on his errand, and soon arrived at the river bank where he had met the monkey the first time. The monkey was there, and the crocodile said to him, "My dear friend! Your brother's wife is very anxious to see you; will you come with me to our house?" The monkey accepted the invitation, and without any hesitation mounted the crocodile's back, and they started on their journey. On the way the monkey became a little anxious, and said: "It has occurred to me how am I to find my way back?" The crocodile recognized the monkey's difficulty, and explained carefully to him the way home. The monkey replied, "My good crocodile! It is of no use your telling me all this, I am sure I should not recollect it. Besides, I think my affection for you has something lessened, so it is of no use my going home with you." The crocodile rejoined, "Well, where shall I put you down?" "My dear friend!" answered the monkey, "haven't you heard the saying: My heart is always in the fig tree; my desire always for the sacred fig ? If you know what that means you will take me back at once." The stupid crocodile at these words turned round and took the monkey back to the river bank, and as soon as they had got there, the monkey jumped off the crocodile's back, and scrambled up into the tree. When he was well out of reach, he turned round and said with a jeer, "Go along with you! As long as I am up here I am out of your clutches. Wise men say, There can be no friendship between creatures that live on land and those that live in the water. " So the crocodile turned back and went sadly home, and the moral is: That he who has wit enough, can get out of difficulties, whatever they may be. Source: The Enchanted Parrot: Being a Selection from the "Suka Saptati," or, The Seventy Tales of a Parrot , translated by B. Hale Wortham (London: Luzac and Company, 1912), story 67, pp. 117-120 . Return to the table of contents . The Foolish Dragon China The part of the great Buddha legend referring to the dragon is as follows: In years gone by, a dragon living in the great sea saw that his wife's health was not good. He, seeing her color fade away, said, "My dear, what shall I get you to eat?" Mrs. Dragon was silent. "Just tell me and I will get it," pleaded the affectionate husband. "You cannot do it; why trouble?" quoth she. "Trust me, and you shall have your heart's desire," said the dragon. "Well," I want a monkey's heart to eat." "Why, Mrs. Dragon, the monkeys live in the mountain forests! How can I get one of their hearts?" "Well, I am going to die; I know I am." Forthwith the dragon went on shore, and, spying a monkey on the top of a tree, said, "Hail, shining one, are you not afraid you will fall?" "No, I have no such fear." "Why eat of one tree? Cross the sea and you will find forests of fruit and flowers." "How can I cross?" "Get on my back." The dragon with his tiny load went seaward, and then suddenly dived down. "Where are you going?" said the monkey, with the salt water in his eyes and mouth. "Oh! my dear sir! my wife is very sad and ill, and has taken a fancy to your heart." "What shall I do?" thought the monkey. He then spoke, "Illustrious friend, why did not you tell me? I left my heart on the top of the tree; take me back, and I will get it for Mrs. Dragon." The dragon returned to the shore. As the monkey was tardy in coming down from the tree, the dragon said, "Hurry up, little friend, I am waiting." Then the monkey thought within himself, "What a fool this dragon is!" Then Buddha said to his followers, "At this time I was the monkey." Source: E. T. C. Werner, Myths and Legends of China (London: G. Harrap and Company, 1922), pp. 211-212. Return to the table of contents . The Monkey and the Jellyfish Japan Children must often have wondered why jellyfishes have no shells, like so many of the creatures that are washed up every day on the beach. In old times this was not so; the jellyfish had as hard a shell as any of them, but he lost it through his own fault, as may be seen in this story. The sea-queen Otohime grew suddenly very ill. The swiftest messengers were sent hurrying to fetch the best doctors from every country under the sea, but it was all of no use; the queen grew rapidly worse instead of better. Everyone had almost given up hope, when one day a doctor arrived who was cleverer than the rest, and said that the only thing that would cure her was the liver of an ape. Now apes do not dwell under the sea, so a council of the wisest heads in the nation was called to consider the question how a liver could be obtained. At length it was decided that the turtle, whose prudence was well known, should swim to land and contrive to catch a living ape and bring him safely to the ocean kingdom. It was easy enough for the council to entrust this mission to the turtle, but not at all so easy for him to fulfil it. However, he swam to a part of the coast that was covered with tall trees, where he thought the apes were likely to be; for he was old, and had seen many things. It was some time before he caught sight of any monkeys, and he often grew tired with watching for them, so that one hot day he fell fast asleep, in spite of all his efforts to keep awake. By and by some apes, who had been peeping at him from the tops of the trees, where they had been carefully hidden from the turtle's eyes, stole noiselessly down, and stood round staring at him, for they had never seen a turtle before, and did not know what to make of it. At last one young monkey, bolder than the rest, stooped down and stroked the shining shell that the strange new creature wore on its back. The movement, gentle though it was, woke the turtle. With one sweep he seized the monkey's hand in his mouth, and held it tight, in spite of every effort to pull it away. The other apes, seeing that the turtle was not to be trifled with, ran off, leaving their young brother to his fate. Then the turtle said to the monkey, "If you will be quiet, and do what I tell you, I won't hurt you. But you must get on my back and come with me." The monkey, seeing there was no help for it, did as he was bid; indeed he could not have resisted, as his hand was still in the turtle's mouth. Delighted at having secured his prize, the turtle hastened back to the shore and plunged quickly into the water. He swam faster than he had ever done before, and soon reached the royal palace. Shouts of joy broke forth from the attendants when he was seen approaching, and some of them ran to tell the queen that the monkey was there, and that before long she would be as well as ever she was. In fact, so great was their relief that they gave the monkey such a kind welcome, and were so anxious to make him happy and comfortable, that he soon forgot all the fears that had beset him as to his fate, and was generally quite at his ease, though every now and then a fit of homesickness would come over him, and he would hide himself in some dark corner till it had passed away. It was during one of these attacks of sadness that a jellyfish happened to swim by. At that time jellyfishes had shells. At the sight of the gay and lively monkey crouching under a tall rock, with his eyes closed and his head bent, the jellyfish was filled with pity, and stopped, saying, "Ah, poor fellow, no wonder you weep; a few days more, and they will come and kill you and give your liver to the queen to eat." The monkey shrank back horrified at these words and asked the jellyfish what crime he had committed that deserved death. "Oh, none at all," replied the jellyfish, "but your liver is the only thing that will cure our queen, and how can we get at it without killing you? You had better submit to your fate, and make no noise about it, for though I pity you from my heart there is no way of helping you." Then he went away, leaving the ape cold with horror. At first he felt as if his liver was already being taken from his body, but soon he began to wonder if there was no means of escaping this terrible death, and at length he invented a plan which he thought would do. For a few days he pretended to be gay and happy as before, but when the sun went in, and rain fell in torrents, he wept and howled from dawn to dark, till the turtle, who was his head keeper, heard him, and came to see what was the matter. Then the monkey told him that before he left home he had hung his liver out on a bush to dry, and if it was always going to rain like this it would become quite useless. And the rogue made such a fuss and moaning that he would have melted a heart of stone, and nothing would content him but that somebody should carry him back to land and let him fetch his liver again. The queen's councilors were not the wisest of people, and they decided between them that the turtle should take the monkey back to his native land and allow him to get his liver off the bush, but desired the turtle not to lose sight of his charge for a single moment. The monkey knew this, but trusted to his power of beguiling the turtle when the time came, and mounted on his back with feelings of joy, which he was, however, careful to conceal. They set out, and in a few hours were wandering about the forest where the ape had first been caught, and when the monkey saw his family peering out from the tree tops, he swung himself up by the nearest branch, just managing to save his hind leg from being seized by the turtle. He told them all the dreadful things that had happened to him, and gave a war cry which brought the rest of the tribe from the neighboring hills. At a word from him they rushed in a body to the unfortunate turtle, threw him on his back, and tore off the shield that covered his body. Then with mocking words they hunted him to the shore, and into the sea, which he was only too thankful to reach alive. Faint and exhausted he entered the queen's palace, for the cold of the water struck upon his naked body, and made him feel ill and miserable. But wretched though he was, he had to appear before the queen's advisers and tell them all that had befallen him, and how he had suffered the monkey to escape. But, as sometimes happens, the turtle was allowed to go scot-free, and had his shell given back to him, and all the punishment fell on the poor jellyfish, who was condemned by the queen to go shieldless for ever after. Source: Andrew Lang, The Violet Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1901), pp. 275-280. Lang identifies his source only as a book entitled Japanische Märchen . Return to the table of contents . The Jellyfish and the Monkey Japan Long, long ago, in old Japan, the Kingdom of the Sea was governed by a wonderful king. He was called Rin Jin, or the Dragon King of the Sea. His power was immense, for he was the ruler of all sea creatures both great and small, and in his keeping were the Jewels of the Ebb and Flow of the Tide. The Jewel of the Ebbing Tide when thrown into the ocean caused the sea to recede from the land, and the Jewel of the Flowing Tide made the waves to rise mountains high and to flow in upon the shore like a tidal wave. The palace of Rin Jin was at the bottom of the sea, and was so beautiful that no one has ever seen anything like it even in dreams. The walls were of coral, the roof of jadestone and chrysoprase, and the floors were of the finest mother-of-pearl. But the Dragon King, in spite of his widespreading kingdom, his beautiful palace and all its wonders, and his power, which none disputed throughout the whole sea, was not at all happy, for he reigned alone. At last he thought that if he married he would not only be happier, but also more powerful. So he decided to take a wife. Calling all his fish retainers together, he chose several of them as ambassadors to go through the sea and seek for a young Dragon Princess who would be his bride. At last they returned to the palace bringing with them a lovely young dragon. Her scales were of a glittering green like the wings of summer beetles, her eyes threw out glances of fire, and she was dressed in gorgeous robes. All the jewels of the sea worked in with embroidery adorned them. The king fell in love with her at once, and the wedding ceremony was celebrated with great splendour. Every living thing in the sea, from the great whales down to the little shrimps, came in shoals to offer their congratulations to the bride and bridegroom and to wish them a long and prosperous life. Never had there been such an assemblage or such gay festivities in the fish-world before. The train of bearers who carried the bride's possessions to her new home seemed to reach across the waves from one end of the sea to the other. Each fish carried a phosphorescent lantern and was dressed in ceremonial robes, gleaming blue and pink and silver; and the waves as they rose and fell and broke that night seemed to be rolling masses of white and green fire, for the phosphorus shone with double brilliancy in honour of the event. Now for a time the Dragon King and his bride lived very happily. They loved each other dearly, and the bridegroom day after day took delight in showing his bride all the wonders and treasures of his coral palace, and she was never tired of wandering with him through its vast halls and gardens. Life seemed to them both like a long summer's day. Two months passed in this happy way, and then the Dragon Queen fell ill and was obliged to stay in bed. The king was sorely troubled when he saw his precious bride so ill, and at once sent for the fish doctor to come and give her some medicine. He gave special orders to the servants to nurse her carefully and to wait upon her with diligence, but in spite of all the nurses' assiduous care and the medicine that the doctor prescribed, the young Queen showed no signs of recovery, but grew daily worse. Then the Dragon King interviewed the doctor and blamed him for not curing the queen. The doctor was alarmed at Rin Jin's evident displeasure, and excused his want of skill by saying that although he knew the right kind of medicine to give the invalid, it was impossible to find it in the sea. "Do you mean to tell me that you can't get the medicine here?" asked the Dragon King. "It is just as you say!" said the doctor. "Tell me what it is you want for the queen?" demanded Rin Jin. "I want the liver of a live monkey!" answered the doctor. "The liver of a live monkey! Of course that will be most difficult to get," said the king. "If we could only get that for the queen, Her Majesty would soon recover," said the doctor. "Very well, that decides it; we must get it somehow or other. But where are we most likely to find a monkey?" asked the king. Then the doctor told the Dragon King that some distance to the south there was a Monkey Island where a great many monkeys lived. "If only you could capture one of those monkeys?" said the doctor. "How can any of my people capture a monkey?" said the Dragon King, greatly puzzled. "The monkeys live on dry land, while we live in the water; and out of our element we are quite powerless! I don't see what we can do!" "That has been my difficulty too," said the doctor. "But amongst your innumerable servants, you surely can find one who can go on shore for that express purpose!" "Something must be done," said the king, and calling his chief steward he consulted him on the matter. The chief steward thought for some time, and then, as if struck by a sudden thought, said joyfully: "I know what we must do! There is the kurage (jellyfish). He is certainly ugly to look at, but he is proud of being able to walk on land with his four legs like a tortoise. Let us send him to the Island of Monkeys to catch one." The jellyfish was then summoned to the king's presence, and was told by His Majesty what was required of him. The jellyfish, on being told of the unexpected mission which was to be entrusted to him, looked very troubled, and said that he had never been to the island in question, and as he had never had any experience in catching monkeys he was afraid that he would not be able to get one. "Well," said the chief steward, "if you depend on your strength or dexterity you will never catch a monkey. The only way is to play a trick on one!" "How can I play a trick on a monkey? I don't know how to do it," said the perplexed jellyfish. "This is what you must do," said the wily chief steward. "When you approach the Island of Monkeys and meet some of them, you must try to get very friendly with one. Tell him that you are a servant of the Dragon King, and invite him to come and visit you and see the Dragon King's palace. Try and describe to him as vividly as you can the grandeur of the Palace and the wonders of the sea so as to arouse his curiosity and make him long to see it all!" "But how am I to get the monkey here? You know monkeys don't swim!" said the reluctant jellyfish. "You must carry him on your back. What is the use of your shell if you can't do that!" said the chief steward. "Won't he be very heavy?" queried kurage again. "You mustn't mind that, for you are working for the Dragon King!" replied the chief steward. "I will do my best then," said the jellyfish, and he swam away from the palace and started off towards the Monkey Island. Swimming swiftly he reached his destination in a few hours, and was landed by a convenient wave upon the shore. On looking round he saw not far away a big pine tree with drooping branches and on one of those branches was just what he was looking for -- a live monkey. "I'm in luck!" thought the jellyfish. "Now I must flatter the creature and try to entice him to come back with me to the palace, and my part will be done!" So the jellyfish slowly walked towards the pine tree. In those ancient days the jellyfish had four legs and a hard shell like a tortoise. When he got to the pine tree he raised his voice and said: "How do you do, Mr. Monkey? Isn't it a lovely day?" "A very fine day," answered the monkey from the tree. "I have never seen you in this part of the world before. Where have you come from and what is your name?" "My name is kurage or jellyfish. I am one of the servants of the Dragon King. I have heard so much of your beautiful island that I have come on purpose to see it," answered the jellyfish. "I am very glad to see you," said the monkey. "By-the-bye," said the jellyfish, "have you ever seen the palace of the Dragon King of the Sea where I live?" "I have often heard of it, but I have never seen it!" answered the monkey. "Then you ought most surely to come. It is a great pity for you to go through life without seeing it. The beauty of the palace is beyond all description -- it is certainly to my mind the most lovely place in the world," said the jellyfish. "Is it so beautiful as all that?" asked the monkey in astonishment. Then the jellyfish saw his chance, and went on describing to the best of his ability the beauty and grandeur of the Sea King's palace, and the wonders of the garden with its curious trees of white, pink, and red coral, and the still more curious fruits like great jewels hanging on the branches. The monkey grew more and more interested, and as he listened he came down the tree step by step so as not to lose a word of the wonderful story. "I have got him at last!" thought the jellyfish, but aloud he said: "Mr. Monkey, I must now go back. As you have never seen the palace of the Dragon King, won't you avail yourself of this splendid opportunity by coming with me? I shall then be able to act as guide and show you all the sights of the sea, which will be even more wonderful to you -- a land-lubber." "I should love to go," said the monkey, " but how am I to cross the water? I can't swim, as you surely know!" "There is no difficulty about that. I can carry you on my back." "That will be troubling you too much," said the monkey. "I can do it quite easily. I am stronger than I look, so you needn't hesitate," said the jellyfish, and taking the monkey on his back he stepped into the sea. "Keep very still, Mr. Monkey," said the jellyfish. "You mustn't fall into the sea; I am responsible for your safe arrival at the King's palace." "Please don't go so fast, or I am sure I shall fall off," said the monkey. Thus they went along, the jellyfish skimming through the waves with the monkey sitting on his back. When they were about half-way, the jellyfish, who knew very little of anatomy, began to wonder if the monkey had his liver with him or not! "Mr. Monkey, tell me, have you such a thing as a liver with you?" The monkey was very much surprised at this queer question, and asked what the jellyfish wanted with a liver. "That is the most important thing of all," said the stupid jellyfish, "so as soon as I recollected it, I asked you if you had yours with you?" "Why is my liver so important to you?" asked the monkey. "Oh! you will learn the reason later," said the jellyfish. The monkey grew more and more curious and suspicious, and urged the jellyfish to tell him for what his liver was wanted, and ended up by appealing to his hearer's feelings by saying that he was very troubled at what he had been told. Then the jellyfish, seeing how anxious the monkey looked, was sorry for him, and told him everything. How the Dragon Queen had fallen ill, and how the doctor had said that only the liver of a live monkey would cure her, and how the Dragon King had sent him to find one. "Now I have done as I was told, and as soon as we arrive at the palace the doctor will want your liver, so I feel sorry for you!" said the silly jellyfish. The poor monkey was horrified when he learnt all this, and very angry at the trick played upon him. He trembled with fear at the thought of what was in store for him. But the monkey was a clever animal, and he thought it the wisest plan not to show any sign of the fear he felt, so he tried to calm himself and to think of some way by which he might escape. "The doctor means to cut me open and then take my liver out! Why I shall die!" thought the monkey. At last a bright thought struck him, so he said quite cheerfully to the jellyfish: "What a pity it was, Mr. Jellyfish, that you did not speak of this before we left the island!" "If I had told you why I wanted you to accompany me you would certainly have refused to come," answered the jellyfish. "You are quite mistaken," said the monkey. "Monkeys can very well spare a liver or two, especially when it is wanted for the Dragon Queen of the Sea. If I had only guessed of what you were in need, I should have presented you with one without waiting to be asked. I have several livers. But the greatest pity is, that as you did not speak in time, I have left all my livers hanging on the pine tree." "Have you left your liver behind you?" asked the jellyfish. "Yes," said the cunning monkey, "during the daytime I usually leave my liver hanging up on the branch of a tree, as it is very much in the way when I am climbing about from tree to tree. Today, listening to your interesting conversation, I quite forgot it, and left it behind when I came off with you. If only you had spoken in time I should have remembered it, and should have brought it along with me!" The jellyfish was very disappointed when he heard this, for he believed every word the monkey said. The monkey was of no good without a liver. Finally the jellyfish stopped and told the monkey so. "Well," said the monkey, "that is soon remedied. I am really sorry to think of all your trouble; but if you will only take me back to the place where you found me, I shall soon be able to get my liver." The jellyfish did not at all like the idea of going all the way back to the island again; but the monkey assured him that if he would be so kind as to take him back he would get his very best liver, and bring it with him the next time. Thus persuaded, the jellyfish turned his course towards the Monkey Island once more. No sooner had the jellyfish reached the shore than the sly monkey landed, and getting up into the pine tree where the jellyfish had first seen him, he cut several capers amongst the branches with joy at being safe home again, and then looking down at the jellyfish said: "So many thanks for all the trouble you have taken! Please present my compliments to the Dragon King on your return!" The jellyfish wondered at this speech and the mocking tone in which it was uttered. Then he asked the monkey if it wasn't his intention to come with him at once after getting his liver. The monkey replied laughingly that he couldn't afford to lose his liver; it was too precious. "But remember your promise!" pleaded the jellyfish, now very discouraged. "That promise was false, and anyhow it is now broken!" answered the monkey. Then he began to jeer at the jellyfish and told him that he had been deceiving him the whole time; that he had no wish to lose his life, which he certainly would have done had he gone on to the Sea King's palace to the old doctor waiting for him, instead of persuading the jellyfish to return under false pretences. "Of course, I won't give you my liver, but come and get it if you can!" added the monkey mockingly from the tree. There was nothing for the jellyfish to do now but to repent of his stupidity, and return to the Dragon King of the Sea and confess his failure, so he started sadly and slowly to swim back. The last thing he heard as he glided away, leaving the island behind him, was the monkey laughing at him. Meanwhile the Dragon King, the doctor, the chief steward, and all the servants were waiting impatiently for the return of the jellyfish. When they caught sight of him approaching the palace, they hailed him with delight. They began to thank him profusely for all the trouble he had taken in going to Monkey Island, and then they asked him where the monkey was. Now the day of reckoning had come for the jellyfish. He quaked all over as he told his story. How he had brought the monkey half-way over the sea, and then had stupidly let out the secret of his commission; how the monkey had deceived him by making him believe that he had left his liver behind him. The Dragon King's wrath was great, and he at once gave orders that the jellyfish was to be severely punished. The punishment was a horrible one. All the bones were to be drawn out from his living body, and he was to be beaten with sticks. The poor jellyfish, humiliated and horrified beyond all words, cried out for pardon. But the Dragon King's order had to be obeyed. The servants of the Palace forthwith each brought out a stick and surrounded the jellyfish, and after pulling out his bones they beat him to a flat pulp, and then took him out beyond the palace gates and threw him into the water. Here he was left to suffer and repent his foolish chattering, and to grow accustomed to his new state of bonelessness. From this story it is evident that in former times the jellyfish once had a shell and bones something like a tortoise, but, ever since the Dragon King's sentence was carried out on the ancestor of the jelly fishes, his descendants have all been soft and boneless just as you see them today thrown up by the waves high upon the shores of Japan. Source: Yei Theodora Ozaki, The Japanese Fairy Book (Westminster: Archibald Constable and Company, 1903), pp. 189-202 . Return to the table of contents . The Heart of a Monkey Africa, Swahili A long time ago a little town made up of a collection of low huts stood in a tiny green valley at the foot of a cliff. Of course the people had taken great care to build their houses out of reach of the highest tide which might be driven on shore by a west wind, but on the very edge of the town there had sprung up a tree so large that half its boughs hung over the huts and the other half over the deep sea right under the cliff, where sharks loved to come and splash in the clear water. The branches of the tree itself were laden with fruit, and every day at sunrise a big gray monkey might have been seen sitting in the topmost branches having his breakfast, and chattering to himself with delight. After he had eaten all the fruit on the town side of the tree the monkey swung himself along the branches to the part which hung over the water. While he was looking out for a nice shady place where he might perch comfortably, he noticed a shark watching him from below with greedy eyes. "Can I do anything for you, my friend?" asked the monkey politely. "Oh! if you only would throw me down some of those delicious things, I should be so grateful," answered the shark. "After you have lived on fish for fifty years you begin to feel you would like a change. And I am so very, very tired of the taste of salt." "Well, I don't like salt myself," said the monkey, "so if you will open your mouth I will throw this beautiful juicy kuyu into it," and, as he spoke, he pulled one off the branch just over his head. But it was not so easy to hit the shark's mouth as he supposed, even when the creature had turned on his back, and the first kuyu only struck one of his teeth and rolled into the water. However, the second time the monkey had better luck, and the fruit fell right in. "Ah, how good!" cried the shark. "Send me another, please," and the monkey grew tired of picking the kuyu long before the shark was tired of eating them. "It is getting late, and I must be going home to my children," he said, at length, "but if you are here at the same time tomorrow I will give you another treat." "Thank you, thank you," said the shark, showing all his great ugly teeth as he grinned with delight. "You can't guess how happy you have made me," and he swam away into the shadow, hoping to sleep away the time till the monkey came again. For weeks the monkey and the shark breakfasted together, and it was a wonder that the tree had any fruit left for them. They became fast friends, and told each other about their homes and their children, and how to teach them all they ought to know. By and by the monkey became rather discontented with his green house in a grove of palms beyond the town, and longed to see the strange things under the sea which he had heard of from the shark. The shark perceived this very clearly, and described greater marvels. And the monkey, as he listened, grew more and more gloomy. Matters were in this state when one day the shark said, "I really hardly know how to thank you for your kindness to me during these weeks. Here I have nothing of my own to offer you, but if you would only consent to come home with me, how gladly would I give you anything that might happen to take your fancy." "I should like nothing better," cried the monkey, his teeth chattering, as they always did when he was pleased. "But how could I get there? Not by water, Ugh! It makes me ill to think of it!" "Oh! don't let that trouble you," replied the shark. "You have only to sit on my back and I will undertake that not a drop of water shall touch you." So it was arranged, and directly after breakfast next morning the shark swam close up under the tree, and the monkey dropped neatly on his back, without even a splash. After a few minutes -- for at first he felt a little frightened at his strange position -- the monkey began to enjoy himself vastly, and asked the shark a thousand questions about the fish and the seaweeds and the oddly shaped things that floated past them, and as the shark always gave him some sort of answer, the monkey never guessed that many of the objects they saw were as new to his guide as to himself. The sun had risen and set six times when the shark suddenly said, "My friend, we have now performed half our journey, and it is time that I should tell you something." "What is it?" asked the monkey. "Nothing unpleasant, I hope, for you sound rather grave." "Oh, no! Nothing at all. It is only that shortly before we left I heard that the sultan of my country is very ill, and that the only thing to cure him is a monkey's heart." "Poor man, I am very sorry for him," replied the monkey; "but you were unwise not to tell me till we had started." "What do you mean?" asked the shark. But the monkey, who now understood the whole plot, did not answer at once, for he was considering what he should say. "Why are you so silent?" inquired the shark again. "I was thinking what a pity it was you did not tell me while I was still on land, and then I would have brought my heart with me." "Your heart! Why isn't your heart here?" said the shark, with a puzzled expression. "Oh, no! Of course not. Is it possible you don't know that when we leave home we always hang up our hearts on trees, to prevent their being troublesome? However, perhaps you won't believe that, and will just think I have invented it because I am afraid, so let us go on to your country as fast as we can, and when we arrive you can look for my heart, and if you find it you can kill me." The monkey spoke in such a calm indifferent way that the shark was quite deceived, and began to wish he had not been in such a hurry. "But there is no use going on if your heart is not with you," he said at last. "We had better turn back to the town, and then you can fetch it." Of course, this was just what the monkey wanted, but he was careful not to seem too pleased. "Well, I don't know," he remarked carelessly. "It is such a long way; but you may be right." "I am sure I am," answered the shark, "and I will swim as quickly as I can," and so he did, and in three days they caught sight of the kuyu tree hanging over the water. With a sigh of relief the monkey caught hold of the nearest branch and swung himself up. "Wait for me here," he called out to the shark. "I am so hungry I must have a little breakfast, and then I will go and look for my heart," and he went further and further into the branches so that the shark could not see him. Then he curled himself up and went to sleep. "Are you there?" cried the shark, who was soon tired of swimming about under the cliff, and was in haste to be gone. The monkey awoke with a start, but did not answer. "Are you there ?" called the shark again, louder than before, and in a very cross voice. "Oh, yes. I am here," replied the monkey; "but I wish you had not wakened me up. I was having such a nice nap." "Have you got it?" asked the shark. "It is time we were going." "Going where ?" inquired the monkey. "Why, to my country, of course, with your heart. You can't have forgotten!" "My dear friend," answered the monkey, with a chuckle, "I think you must be going a little mad. Do you take me for a washerman's donkey?" "Don't talk nonsense," exclaimed the shark, who did not like being laughed at. "What do you mean about a washerman's donkey? And I wish you would be quick, or we may be too late to save the sultan." "Did you really never hear of the washerman's donkey?" asked the monkey, who was enjoying himself immensely. "Why, he is the beast who has no heart. And as I am not feeling very well, and am afraid to start while the sun is so high lest I should get a sunstroke, if you like, I will come a little nearer and tell you his story." "Very well," said the shark sulkily, "if you won't come, I suppose I may as well listen to that as do nothing." So the monkey began. A washerman once lived in the great forest on the other side of the town, and he had a donkey to keep him company and to carry him wherever he wanted to go. For a time they got on very well, but by and by the donkey grew lazy and ungrateful for her master's kindness, and ran away several miles into the heart of the forest, where she did nothing but eat and eat and eat, till she grew so fat she could hardly move. One day as she was tasting quite a new kind of grass and wondering if it was as good as what she had had for dinner the day before, a hare happened to pass by. "Well, that is a fat creature," thought she, and turned out of her path to tell the news to a lion who was a friend of hers. Now the lion had been very ill and was not strong enough to go hunting for himself, and when the hare came and told him that a very fat donkey was to be found only a few hundred yards off, tears of disappointment and weakness filled his eyes. "What is the good of telling me that?" he asked in a weepy voice. "You know I cannot even walk as far as that palm." "Never mind," answered the hare briskly. "If you can't go to your dinner, your dinner shall come to you," and nodding a farewell to the lion she went back to the donkey. "Good morning," said she, bowing politely to the donkey, who lifted her head in surprise. "Excuse my interrupting you, but I have come on very important business." "Indeed," answered the donkey, "it is most kind of you to take the trouble. May I inquire what the business is?" "Certainly," replied the hare. "It is my friend the lion who has heard so much of your charms and good qualities that he has sent me to beg that you will give him your paw in marriage. He regrets deeply that he is unable to make the request in person, but he has been ill and is too weak to move." "Poor fellow! How sad!" said the donkey. "But you must tell him that I feel honored by his proposal and will gladly consent to be Queen of the Beasts." "Will you not come and tell him so yourself?" asked the hare. Side by side they went down the road which led to the lion's house. It took a long while, for the donkey was so fat with eating she could only walk very slowly, and the hare, who could have run the distance in about five minutes, was obliged to creep along till she almost dropped with fatigue at not being able to go at her own pace. When at last they arrived the lion was sitting up at the entrance, looking very pale and thin. The donkey suddenly grew shy and hung her head, but the lion put on his best manners and invited both his visitors to come in and make themselves comfortable. Very soon the hare go up and said, "Well, as I have another engagement I will leave you to make acquaintance with your future husband," and winking at the lion she bounded away. The donkey expected that as soon as they were left alone the lion would begin to speak of their marriage, and where they should live, but as he said nothing she looked up. To her surprise and terror she saw him crouching in the corner, his eyes glaring with a red light, and with a loud roar he sprang towards her. But in that moment the donkey had had time to prepare herself, and jumping on one side dealt the lion such a hard kick that he shrieked with the pain. Again and again he struck at her with his claws, but the donkey could bite too, as well as the lion, who was very weak after his illness, and at last a well planted kick knocked him right over, and he rolled on the floor, groaning with pain. The donkey did not wait for him to get up, but ran away as fast as she could and was lost in the forest. Now the hare, who knew quite well what would happen, had not gone to do her business, but hid herself in some bushes behind the cave, where she could hear quite clearly the sounds of the battle. When all was quiet again she crept gently out, and stole round the corner. "Well, lion, have you killed her?" asked she, running swiftly up the path. "Killed her, indeed!" answered the lion sulkily, "it is she who has nearly killed me. I never knew a donkey could kick like that, though I took care she should carry away the marks of my claws." "Dear me! Fancy such a great fat creature being able to fight!" cried the hare. "But don't vex yourself. Just lie still, and your wounds will soon heal," and she bade her friend good-bye, and returned to her family. Two or three weeks passed, and only bare places on the donkey's back showed where the lion's claws had been, while, on his side, the lion had recovered from his illness and was now as strong as ever. He was beginning to think that it was almost time for him to begin hunting again, when one morning a rustle was heard in the creepers outside, and the hare's head peeped through. "Ah! there is no need to ask how you are," she said. "Still you mustn't overtire yourself, you know. Shall I go and bring you your dinner?" "If you will bring me that donkey I will tear it in two," cried the lion savagely, and the hare laughed and nodded and went on her errand. This time the donkey was much further than before, and it took longer to find her. At last the hare caught sight of four hoofs in the air, and ran towards them. The donkey was lying on a soft cool bed of moss near a stream, rolling herself backwards and forwards from pleasure. "Good morning," said the hare politely, and the donkey got slowly onto her legs, and looked to see who her visitor could be. "Oh, it is you , is it?" she exclaimed. "Come and have a chat. What news have you got?" "I mustn't stay," answered the hare; "but I promised the lion to beg you to pay him a visit, as he is not well enough to call on you." "Well, I don't know," replied the donkey gloomily. "The last time we went he scratched me very badly, and really I was quite afraid." "He was only trying to kiss you," said the hare, "and you bit him, and of course that made him cross." "If I were sure of that ," hesitated the donkey. "Oh, you may be quite sure," laughed the hare. "I have a large acquaintance among lions. But let us be quick," and rather unwillingly the donkey set out. The lion saw them coming and hid himself behind a large tree. As the donkey went past, followed by the hare, he sprang out, and with one blow of his paw stretched the poor foolish creature dead before him. "Take this meat and skin it and roast it," he said to the hare; "but my appetite is not so good as it was, and the only part I want for myself is the heart. The rest you can either eat yourself or give away to your friends." "Thank you," replied the hare, balancing the donkey on her back as well as she was able, and though the legs trailed along the ground she managed to drag it to an open space some distance off, where she made a fire and roasted it. As soon as it was cooked, the hare took out the heart and had just finished eating it when the lion, who was tired of waiting, came up. "I am hungry," said he. "Bring me the creature's heart. It is just what I want for supper." "But there is no heart," answered the hare, looking up at the lion with a puzzled face. "What nonsense!" said the lion. "As if every beast had not got a heart. What do you mean?" "This is a washerman's donkey," replied the hare gravely. "Well, and suppose it is?" "Oh, fie!" exclaimed the fare. "You, a lion and a grown-up person, and ask questions like that. If the donkey had had a heart would she be here now? The first time she came she knew you were trying to kill her, and ran away. Yet she came back a second time. Well, if she had had a heart would she have come back a second time? Now would she?" And the lion answered slowly, "No, she would not." "So you think I am a washerman's donkey?" said the monkey to the shark, when the story was ended. "You are wrong. I am not. And as the sun is getting low in the sky, it is time for you to begin your homeward journey. You will have a nice cool voyage, and I hope you will find the sultan better. Farewell!" And the monkey disappeared among the green branches, and was gone. Source: Andrew Lang, The Lilac Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1910), pp. 42-53. Lang's source: Swahili Tales by Edward Steere. The story within a story about "The Washerman's Donkey" belongs to Aarne-Thompson type 52. The version related here assumes that intelligence is seated in the heart. Other versions of this story feature the victim's brain. Return to the table of contents . Brother Rabbit and the Gizzard-Eater Joel Chandler Harris Brer Rabbit was a mighty man at a frolic. I don't expect he'd show up much in these days, but in the times when the creatures were bossing their own jobs, Brer Rabbit was up for pretty nigh everything that was going on, if there wasn't too much work in it. There couldn't be a dance or a quilting anywhere around but what he'd be there. He was the first to come and the last to go. Well, there was one time when he went too far and stayed too late, because a big rain came during the time when they were playing and dancing, and when Brer Rabbit put out for home, he found that a big freshet had come and gone. The drains had got to be creeks, the creeks had got to be rivers, and the rivers -- well, I'm not going to tell you what the rivers were, because you'd think that I'd told the truth good-bye. By making big jumps and going out of his way, Brer Rabbit managed to get as close to home as the creek, but when he got there, the creek was so wide that it made him feel like he'd been lost so long that his family had forgotten him. Many and many a time he'd crossed that creek on a log, but the log was gone, and the water was spread out all over creation. The water was wide, but that wasn't more than half -- it looked like it was the wettest water that Brer Rabbit had ever laid eyes on. There was a ferry there for times like this, but it looked like it was a bigger freshet than what they had counted on. Brer Rabbit, he sat on the bank and wiped the damp out of his face and eyes, and then he hollered for the man that ran the ferry. He hollered and hollered, and by and by he heard someone answer him, and he looked a little closer, and there was the man -- his name was Jerry -- way up in the top limbs of a tree. And he looked still closer, and he saw that Jerry had company, because there was old Brer Bear sitting at the foot of the tree waiting for Jerry to come down, so he could tell him howdy. Well, sir, Brer Rabbit took notice that there was something more than dampness between them, and he started to holler again, and he hollered so loud and he hollered so long that he woke up old Brer Alligator. Now it didn't make old Brer Alligator feel good to be woken up at that hour, because he'd just had a nice supper of pine-nuts and sweet potatoes and was lying out at full length on his mud bed. He allowed to himself, he did, "Who in the nation is this trying to holler the bottom out of the creek?" He listened, and then he turned over and listened again. He shut one eye, and then he shut the other one, but there was no sleeping in that neighborhood. Jerry in the tree, he hollered back, "Can't come -- got company!" Brer Alligator, he heard this, and he said to himself that if nobody else can come, he can, and he rose to the top with no more fuss than a featherbed makes when you leave it alone. He rose, he did, and his two eyes looked exactly like two bullets floating on the water. He rose and winked his eye and asked Brer Rabbit howdy, and more especially how was his daughter. Brer Rabbit, he said that there was no telling how his daughter was, because when he left home her head was swelling. He said that some of the neighbors' children had come and flung rocks at her and one of them had hit her on top of the head right where the cowlick is, and he had had to run after the doctor. Brer Alligator allowed, "You don't tell me, Brer Rabbit, that it's come to this! Your children getting chunked by your neighbors' children. Well, well, well! I wish you'd tell me where it's all going to end. Why it'll get after a while that there's no peace anywhere except at my house in the bed of the creek." Brer Rabbit said, "Isn't it the truth? And not only do Brer Fox's children chunk my children on their cowlicks, but no sooner have I gone after the doctor than here comes the creek a-rising. I may be wrong, but I'm not scared to say that it beats anything I have ever laid eyes on. Over yonder in the far wood is where my daughter is lying with a headache, and here is her pa, and between us is the boiling creek. If I were to try to wade, ten to one the water would be over my head, and if that's not bad, all the pills that the doctor gave me would melt in my pocket. And they might poison me, because the doctor didn't say that they were to be taken outside." Old Brer Alligator floated on the water like he didn't weigh more than one of these here postage stamps, and he tried to drop a tear. He groaned, he did, and floated backwards and forwards like a tired canoe. He said, "Brer Rabbit, if there ever was a rover, you are one. Up you come and off you go, and there is no more keeping up with you than if you had wings. If you think you can stay in one place long enough, I'll try to put you across the creek." Brer Rabbit kind of rubbed his chin while he wiggled his nose. He allowed, said he, "Brer Gator, how deep is that water that you are floating in?" Brer Alligator said, "Brer Rabbit, if my old woman and I were to join heads, and I were to stand on the tip end of my tail, there'd still be room enough for all of my children before we touched bottom." Brer Rabbit, he fell back like he was going to faint. He allowed, "Brer Gator, you don't tell me! You surely don't mean those last words! Why you make me feel like I'm further from home than those who are done lost for good! How in the name of goodness are you going to put me across this slippery water?" Brer Alligator, he blew a bubble or two out of his nose, and then he said, "If you can stand still in one place long enough, I'm going to take you across on my back. You needn't say "thank you," but I want you to know that I'm not everybody's water-horse." Brer Rabbit allowed, said he, "I can well believe that, Brer Gator, but somehow I kind of got a notion that your tail is mighty limber. I hear old folks say that you can knock a chip from the back of your head with the tip end of your tail and never half try." Brer Alligator smacked his mouth and said, "Limber my tail may be, Brer Rabbit, and far reaching, but don't blame me. It was that way when it was given to me. It's all jointed up according to nature." Brer Rabbit, he studied and he studied, and the more he studied, the worse he liked it. But he pleased to go home -- there were no two ways about that -- and he allowed, said he, "I suspect what you say is somewhere in the neighborhood of the truth, Brer Gator, and more than that, I believe that I'll go along with you. If you'll ride up a little closer, I'll make up my mind, so I won't keep you waiting." Brer Alligator, he floated by the side of the bank the same as a cork out of a pickle bottle. He didn't do like he was in a hurry, because he dropped a word or two about the weather, and he said that the water was mighty cold down there in the slushes. But Brer Rabbit took notice that when he smiled one of his smiles, he showed up a double row of tusks that looked like they'd do mighty good work in a sawmill. Brer Rabbit, he began to shake like he was having a chill. He allowed, "I feel that damp, Brer Gator, that I might just as well be in water up to my chin!" Brer Alligator didn't say anything, but he couldn't hide his tusks. Brer Rabbit looked up, he looked down, and he looked all around. He scarcely knew what to do. He allowed, "Brer Gator, your back is mighty rough. How am I going to ride on it?" Brer Alligator said, "The roughness will help you to hold on, because you'll have to ride a-straddle. You can just get your feet on the bumps and kind of brace yourself when you think you see a log floating at us. You can just sit up there the same as if you were sitting at home in your rocking chair. Brer Rabbit shook his head, but he got on, he did, and he had no sooner gotten on than he wished mighty hard that he was off. Brer Alligator said, "You can pant if you want to, but I'll do the paddling," and he slipped through the water just like he was greased. Brer Rabbit sure was scared, but he kept his eyes open, and by and by he took notice that Brer Alligator wasn't making for the place where the landing was at, and he up and said so. He allowed, "Brer Gator, if I'm not much mistaken, you're not heading for the landing." Brer Alligator said, "You sure have got mighty good eyes, Brer Rabbit. I've been waiting for you a long time, and I'm the worst kind of waiter. I must know you haven't forgot that day in the stubble when you said you were going to show me Old Man Trouble. Well, you didn't only show him to me, but you made me shake hands with him. You set the dry grass afire and burned me scandalously. That's the reason my back is so rough, and that's the reason my hide is so tough. Well, I've been a-waiting since that time, and now here you are. You burned me until I had to quench the burning in the big quagmire." Brer Alligator laughed, but he had the laugh all on his side, because that was one of the times when Brer Rabbit didn't feel like giggling. He sat there a-shaking and a-shivering. By and by he allowed, said he, "What are you going to do, Brer Gator?" Brer Alligator said, "It looks to me like since you set the dry grass afire, I've been having symptoms. That's what the doctor said. He looked at my tongue, and he felt my pulse, and he shook his head. He said that beings he's my friend, he didn't mind telling me that my symptoms are getting worse than what they have been, and if I don't take something I'll be falling into one of these here inclines that make folks flabby and weak." Brer Rabbit, he shook and he shivered. He allowed, "What else did the doctor say, Brer Gator?" Brer Alligator kept on a-slipping along. He said, "The doctor didn't only look at my tongue. He measured my breath, and he hit me on my bosom -- tip-tap-tap! -- and he said there was but one thing that will cure me. I asked him what it is, and he said it's rabbit gizzard." Brer Alligator slipped and slid along and waited to see what Brer Rabbit was going to say to that. He didn't have to wait long, because Brer Rabbit did his thinking like one of these here machines that has lightning in it. He allowed, he said, "It's a mighty good thing you struck up with me this day, Brer Gator, because I have exactly the kind of physic you are looking for. All the neighbors say I'm mighty queer, and I suspect I am, but queer or not queer, I've long been looking for the gizzard-eater." Brer Alligator didn't say anything. He just slid through the water and listened to what Brer Rabbit was saying. Brer Rabbit allowed, he said, "The last time I took sick the doctor came in a hurry, and he sat up with me all night -- not a wink of sleep did that man get. He said he could tell by the way I was going on, rolling and tossing, and moaning and groaning, that no physic was going to do me any good. I've never seen a doctor scratch his head like that doctor did. He acted like he was stumped, he sure did. He said he had never seen anybody with my kind of trouble, and he went off and called in one of his brer doctors, and the two knocked their heads together, and they said my trouble all comes from having a double gizzard. When my old woman heard that she just flung her apron over her head and fell back in a dead faint, and a little more and I'd have had to pay a doctor bill on her account. When she squalled, some of my children got scared and took to the wood, and they hadn't all got back when I left home last night." Brer Alligator, he just went a-slipping along through the water. He listened, but he didn't say anything. Brer Rabbit allowed, said he, "It's the fatal truth, all this that I'm a-telling you. The doctor, he flew around until he fetched my old woman to, and then he said there was no need to be skittish on account of my having a double gizzard, because all I had to do was to be kind of careful with my chewings and gnawings, and my comings and goings. He said that I'd have to suffer with it until I find the gizzard-eater. I asked him whereabouts he is, and he said that I'd know him when I see him, and if I fail to know him, he'll make himself known to me. This kind of irritates me, because when a man's a doctor, and he's got the idea of curing anybody, there is no need of dealing in riddles. But he said that there was no use in telling all you know, especially before dinner." Brer Alligator went a-sliding along through the water. He listened and smacked his mouth, but he didn't say anything. Brer Rabbit, he talked on. He allowed, said he, "And there was one thing he told me plainer than all the rest. He said that when anybody was afflicted with the double gizzard, they daresn't cross water with it, because if there's anything that a double gizzard won't stand, it's the smell of water." Brer Alligator went slipping along through the water, but he felt like the time had come when he pleased to say something. He said, "How come you are crossing water now, if the doctor told you that?" This made Brer Rabbit laugh. He allowed, "Maybe I oughtn't tell you, but before I can cross water, that double gizzard has got to come out. The doctor told me that if she ever smells water, there'll be such a swelling up that my skin won't hold me. And no longer ago than last night, before I came to cross this creek -- it was a creek then, whatsoever you may call it now -- I took out my double gizzard and hid it in a hickory hollow. And if you are the gizzard-eater, now is your chance, because if you put it off, you may rue the day. If you are in the notion, I'll take you right there and show you the stump where I hid it at -- and if you want to be lonesome about it, I'll let you go by yourself and I'll stay right here." Brer Alligator, he slipped and slid through the water. He said, "Where'd you say you'd stay?" Brer Rabbit allowed, said he, "I'll stay right here, Brer Gator, or anywhere else you may choose. I don't care much where I stay or what I do, so long as I get rid of that double gizzard that's been a-terrifying me. You better go by yourself, because bad as that double gizzard has done me, I got kind of a tendersome feeling for it, and I'm afraid if I were to go along with you and see you grab it, there'd be some boo-hooing done. If you go by yourself, just rap on the stump and say, 'If you are ready, I'm ready and a little more so,' and you won't have any trouble with her. She's hid right in those woods yonder, and the hollow hickory stump isn't so mighty far from where the bank of the creek ought to be." Brer Gator didn't have much more sense than what it'd take to climb a fence after someone had pulled it down, and so he kind of slewed himself around and steered for the woods -- the same woods where there are so many trees, and where old Sis Owl starts all the whirlwinds by fanning her wings. Brer Alligator swam and steered until he came close to land, and when he did that, Brer Rabbit made a big jump and landed on solid ground. He might have got his feet wet, but if he did, that was all. He allowed, said he: You poor old Gator, if you'd have known A from Izzard, You'd know mighty well that I'd keep my Gizzard. And with that he was done gone -- done clean gone! Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Told by Uncle Remus: New Stories of the Old Plantation (New York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1905), no. 14, pp. 243-65 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. The allusion to Brer Alligator's burned back refers to the tale "Why the Alligator's Back Is Rough" in Joel Chandler Harris, Nights with Uncle Remus: Myths and Legends of the Old Plantation (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Company, 1889), no. 26, pp. 143-49 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 16, 2013. The Moon in the Well: Folktales of Type 1335A The Moon in the Well Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 1335A translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2008 Contents Nasreddin Hodja Rescues the Moon (Turkey). The Monkeys and the Moon (Tibet). Links to longer tales containing episodes about fools trying to rescue the moon's reflection from a pond or a well: Joel Chandler Harris, "The Moon in the Mill-Pond," Nights with Uncle Remus: Myths and Legends of the Old Plantation (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1883), no. 19, pp. 100-107 . Joseph Jacobs, "The Three Sillies," English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 9-14 . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Nasreddin Hodja Rescues the Moon Turkey One day the Hodja went to the well to draw some water. There he saw the moon's reflection. Thinking it fallen into the well, he said, "I will have to pull it out immediately." He took a rope with a hook fastened to one end and lowered it into the well. The hook caught on a rock, and the rope broke, causing the Hodja to fall onto his back. Lying there he saw the moon in the heaven and cried out, "Praise and honor Allah! I injured myself, but at least the moon is back where it belongs." Source: Albert Wesselski, Der Hodscha Nasreddin , vol. 1 (Weimar: Alexander Duncker Verlag, 1911), no. 124, p. 64 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. For two additional formulations of this story see: George Borrow, The Turkish Jester; or, The Pleasantries of Cogia Nasr Eddin Effendi (Ipswich: W. Webber, 1894), pp. 51-52 . W. A. Clouston, The Book of Noodles: Stories of Simpletons; or, Fools and Their Follies (London: Elliot Stock, 1888), p. 92 . Link to more stories about Nasreddin Hodja . Return to the table of contents . The Monkeys and the Moon Tibet In long-past times there lived a band of monkeys in a forest. As they rambled about they saw the reflection of the moon in a well, and the leader of the band said, "O friends, the moon has fallen into the well . The world is now without a moon. Ought not we to draw it out?" The monkeys said, "Good; we will draw it out." So they began to hold counsel as to how they were to draw it out. Some of them said, "Do not you know? The monkeys must form a chain, and so draw the moon out." So they formed a chain, the first monkey hanging on to the branch of a tree, and the second to the first monkey's tail, and a third one in its turn to the tail of the second one. When in this way they were all hanging on to one another, the branch began to bend a good deal. The water became troubled, the reflection of the moon disappeared, the branch broke, and all the monkeys fell into the well and were disagreeably damaged. A deity uttered this verse, "When the foolish have a foolish leader, they all go to ruin, like the monkeys which wanted to draw the moon up from the well." Source: F. Anton von Schiefner, Tibetan Tales Derived from Indian Sources , translated from the German by W. R. S. Ralston (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, and Company, 1906), no. 45, p. 353 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 16, 2008. Every Mother Thinks Her Child Is the Most Beautiful Every Mother Thinks Her Child Is the Most Beautiful fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 247 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2019 Contents The Eagle and the Owl (Jean de La Fontaine). Prose Summary of La Fontaine's Verse Fable (D. L. Ashliman). One's Own Children Are Always Prettiest (Norway). The Crow and Its Ugly Fledglings (Romania). Why Is There Enmity Between the Crow and the Hawk? (Romania). Jupiter and the Monkey (Aesop). Jupiter and the Baby Show (Ambrose Bierce). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Eagle and the Owl Jean de La Fontaine The eagle and the owl, resolved to cease Their war, embraced in pledge of peace. On faith of king, on faith of owl, they swore That they would eat each other's chicks no more. "But know you mine?" said Wisdom's bird." Not I, indeed," the eagle cried. "The worse for that," the owl replied: "I fear your oath's a useless word; I fear that you, as king, will not Consider duly who or what: You kings and gods, of what's before ye, Are apt to make one category. Adieu, my young, if you should meet them!" "Describe them, then, or let me greet them, And, on my life, I will not eat them," The eagle said. The owl replied: "My little ones, I say with pride, For grace of form cannot be match'd, -- The prettiest birds that e'er were hatch'd; By this you cannot fail to know them; 'Tis needless, therefore, that I show them. Pray don't forget, but keep this mark in view, Lest fate should curse my happy nest by you." At length God gives the owl a set of heirs, And while at early eve abroad he fares, In quest of birds and mice for food, Our eagle haply spies the brood, As on some craggy rock they sprawl, Or nestle in some ruined wall, (But which it matters not at all,) And thinks them ugly little frights, Grim, sad, with voice like shrieking sprites. "These chicks," says he, "with looks almost infernal, Can't be the darlings of our friend nocturnal. I'll sup of them." And so he did, not slightly: -- He never sups, if he can help it, lightly. The owl return'd; and, sad, he found Nought left but claws upon the ground. He pray'd the gods above and gods below To smite the brigand who had caused his woe. Quoth one, "On you alone the blame must fall; Or rather on the law of nature, Which wills that every earthly creature Shall think its like the loveliest of all. You told the eagle of your young ones' graces; You gave the picture of their faces: -- Had it of likeness any traces?" Source (books.google.com): Jean de La Fontaine, The Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright (London: George Bell and Sons, 1888), book 5, fable 18, pp. 116-17. . Source (Internet Archive): Jean de la Fontaine, The Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by E. Wright (London: Ingram, Cooke, and Company, 1853), p. 162 . Link to this fable in the original French (books.google.com): L'aigle et le hibou . Link to this fable in the original French (Internet Archive): L'aigle et le hibou . Summary in English prose of La Fontaine's fable: The eagle and the owl entered into a treaty with one another, each taking a solemn oath that neither would ever harm the chicks of the other. "But do you know what my chicks look like?" asked the mother owl, fearing that the eagle might attack them by mistake. "No," said the eagle. "Describe them, so that I will know to spare them." "They cannot be mistaken for any other bird," returned the proud mother owl. "They are small and ever so beautiful, by far the prettiest of any baby bird." One evening, while scouting for food, the eagle came upon a nest filled with screeching baby birds. "Surely these do not belong to my friend, the owl," said the eagle. "No, for hers are things of great beauty, but these are hideous, ugly creatures." And he swept down and devoured them every one. Returning to her nest, the mother owl found only the feet of her offspring. "How can the eagle have violated our bond?" she asked herself in grief. Did he not hear me describe my little ones as the most beautiful chicks of all? Moral: Every mother thinks that her own children are the prettiest of all. Return to the table of contents . One's Own Children Are Always Prettiest Norway A sportsman went out once into a wood to shoot, and he met a snipe. "Dear friend," said the snipe, "don't shoot my children!" "How shall I know your children?" asked the sportsman; "what are they like?" "Oh!" said the snipe, " mine are the prettiest children in all the wood." "Very well," said the sportsman, "I'll not shoot them; don't be afraid." But for all that, when he came back, there he had a whole string of young snipes in his hand which he had shot. "Oh, oh!" said the snipe, "why did you shoot my children after all?" "What! these your children!" said the sportsman; "why, I shot the ugliest I could find, that I did!" "Woe is me!" said the snipe; "don't you know that each one thinks his own children the prettiest in the world?" Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , [translated by] George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), p. 187 . Source (Internet Archive): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , [translated by] George Webbe Dasent (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1859), p. 164 . Link to the tale in the original Norwegian Hver synes best om sine barn . Return to the table of contents . The Crow and Its Ugly Fledglings Romania Of all the birds the crow is considered the ugliest, especially its young fledglings. The legend tells that sometime after God had created all the living beings, he called everyone to see them and their offspring. He wanted to see how the young birds and animals looked, and then to give them suitable gifts, and food for their little ones. They came one by one, and God looked at them, patted some and stroked others, and was very pleased with every one of them, for each one had something of beauty in it. And so he blessed them and gave them food by which to live. The last to come was the crow, bringing her little brood with her, very proud of them. When God cast his eyes upon the young crows, he spat in astonishment, and said, "Surely these are not my creatures. I could not have made such ugly things. Every one of my creatures has such beautiful young ones that they are a pleasure to look at, but yours are so ugly that it makes one sick to look at them. Where did you get this one?" "Where should I get them from?" replied the crow. "It is my very own young child," she added with pride. "You had better go back and bring me another one. This is much too ugly. I cannot look at it." Annoyed at the words of God, the crow went away and flew all over the earth to search for another young one that would be more beautiful than the one she had brought to God. But no other young bird appeared so beautiful in her eyes as her own. So she returned back to God and said, "I have been all over the world, and I have searched high and low, but young birds more beautiful and more dainty than mine I have not been able to find." Then God smilingly replied, "Quite right. Just so are all mothers. No other child is so beautiful in their eyes as their own." Then he blessed the little crows and sent them away into the world with his gifts. Source (Internet Archive): M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Sidgwick and Jackson, 1915), no. 46, pp. 170-71 . Return to the table of contents . Why Is There Enmity Between the Crow and the Hawk? Romania The crow was in very great distress, for however she tried and whatever she did, she could not rear a family. No sooner were the young hatched, than the hawk would come and pick them up. In vain did she try to hide her nest in the hollows of a tree or in the thickets of a bush. As sure as death would the hawk find them and eat them. Not knowing what to do, she bethought herself and said, "How would it do if I try and get the hawk to be godmother? For then, being a near relation, she is sure to spare my little ones." Said and done. She went out of her place to search for the hawk, and finding her, she said, "Good morning, sister." "Good morning," replied the hawk. "How pleased I should feel," said the crow, "if you would become godmother to my children." "With pleasure," replied the hawk. "Why not?" And so they made up a covenant of friendship and of good fellowship between them. Before leaving the hawk, the crow said to her, "Now, sister, I have one request to make." "Granted," replied the hawk. "What is it?" "I only beg of you to spare my children. Do not eat them when you have found them." "All right," replied the hawk. "I shall certainly not touch them. But tell me how they look, so that in case I meet them, I may spare them." "Oh," replied the crow, "mine are the most beautiful creatures in the world. They are more lovely than any other bird can boast of." "Very well. Rest assured. Go in peace." And they parted. The crow, being quite satisfied with the hawk's promise, began flying about the next day trying to find something with which to feed her children. The hawk the next morning went about her own business and tried to find some nice little young ones to eat. Flying about, she saw the young ones of the thrush, the blackbird, and of other beautiful birds, and she said to herself, "Surely these are the children of the crow. Look how lovely and beautiful they are. I am not going to touch them." She went all day without finding any little birds but these. And she said to herself, "I must keep my word to my sister. I am not going to touch them." And she went to bed hungry. The next day the same thing happened, and still the hawk kept her word and would not touch them. On the third day she was so hungry that she could scarcely see out of her eyes. Roaming about, the hawk suddenly lighted upon the nest of the crow. Seeing the little, miserable, ugly things in the nest, the hawk at first would not touch them, although she never dreamt that these ugly things were the children of the crow, so much praised by her for their beauty, and thought they must belong to some hideous bird. But what is one to do when one is hungry? One eats what one gets, and not finding anything better, she sat down and gobbled them up one by one, and then flew away. Not long after the hawk had left, the crow came in, feeling sure this time to find her little ones unhurt. But how great was her dismay when she found the nest empty! First she thought the little birds had tried their wings and were flying about in the neighborhood, and she went in search of them. Not finding them, she began to be a little more anxious, and hunting a little more closely, found on the ground near some rushes some tufts of feathers with little bones and blood. She knew at once that the hawk had again been there, feeding on her children. Full of wrath and fury, she went to find the hawk. Meeting her, she said, "A nice sister and godmother you are! After you had promised most faithfully not to touch my children, no sooner had I turned my back on them, then you come again and eat them." "I do not understand what you are saying," replied the hawk. "It is your own fault. You told me your children were the most beautiful in the world, and those which I have eaten were monsters of hideousness. If I had not felt the pinch of hunger so strong, I would not have touched them, not for anything, such ugly things they were! They nearly made me sick." "Is that the way you keep your promise?" replied the angry crow. "After having eaten them, you even have the impudence to tell lies and insult me. Off with you! And woe betide you if I ever catch you, I will teach you to behave properly." From that day on, the hawk, if it gets near the crows, attacks them. And from that day on there is implacable hatred between the crows and the hawks. Source (Internet Archive): M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Sidgwick and Jackson, 1915), no. 47, pp. 172-73 . Return to the table of contents . Jupiter and the Monkey Aesop Jupiter issued a proclamation to all the beasts, and offered a prize to the one who, in his judgment, produced the most beautiful offspring. Among the rest came the monkey, carrying a baby monkey in her arms, a hairless, flat-nosed little fright. When they saw it, the gods all burst into peal on peal of laughter. But the monkey hugged her little one to her, and said, "Jupiter may give the prize to whomsoever he likes. But I shall always think my baby the most beautiful of them all." Source (Internet Archive): Æsop's Fables , a new translation by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: William Heinemann; New York: Doubleday, Page, and Company, 1916), p. 48 . Return to the table of contents . Jupiter and the Baby Show Ambrose Bierce Jupiter held a baby show, open to all animals, and a monkey entered her hideous cub for a prize, but Jupiter only laughed at her. "It is all very well," said the monkey, "to laugh at my offspring, but you go into any gallery of antique sculpture and look at the statues and busts of the fellows that you begot yourself." "Sh! don't expose me," said Jupiter, and awarded her the first prize. Source (books.google.com): Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), p. 160 . Source (Internet Archive): Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), p. 160 . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 18, 2019. Mother Killed Me, Father Ate Me: Tales of Type 720 Mother Killed Me Father Ate Me folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 720 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2007-2008 Contents The Juniper Tree (Germany). The Girl and the Boy (Austria). The Crow's Nest (Hungary). The Rose-Tree . (England). The Satin Frock . (England). The Milk-White Doo [Dove] (Scotland). The Little Boy and the Wicked Stepmother (Romania). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Juniper Tree Germany Long ago, at least two thousand years, there was a rich man who had a beautiful and pious wife, and they loved each other dearly. However, they had no children, though they wished very much to have some, and the woman prayed for them day and night, but they didn't get any, and they didn't get any. In front of their house there was a courtyard where there stood a juniper tree. One day in winter the woman was standing beneath it, peeling herself an apple, and while she was thus peeling the apple, she cut her finger, and the blood fell into the snow. "Oh," said the woman. She sighed heavily, looked at the blood before her, and was most unhappy. "If only I had a child as red as blood and as white as snow." And as she said that, she became quite contented, and felt sure that it was going to happen. Then she went into the house, and a month went by, and the snow was gone. And two months, and everything was green. And three months, and all the flowers came out of the earth. And four months, and all the trees in the woods grew thicker, and the green branches were all entwined in one another, and the birds sang until the woods resounded and the blossoms fell from the trees. Then the fifth month passed, and she stood beneath the juniper tree, which smelled so sweet that her heart jumped for joy, and she fell on her knees and was beside herself. And when the sixth month was over, the fruit was thick and large, and then she was quite still. And after the seventh month she picked the juniper berries and ate them greedily. Then she grew sick and sorrowful. Then the eighth month passed, and she called her husband to her, and cried, and said, "If I die, then bury me beneath the juniper tree." Then she was quite comforted and happy until the next month was over, and then she had a child as white as snow and as red as blood, and when she saw it, she was so happy that she died. Her husband buried her beneath the juniper tree, and he began to cry bitterly. After some time he was more at ease, and although he still cried, he could bear it. And some time later he took another wife. He had a daughter by the second wife, but the first wife's child was a little son, and he was as red as blood and as white as snow. When the woman looked at her daughter, she loved her very much, but then she looked at the little boy, and it pierced her heart, for she thought that he would always stand in her way, and she was always thinking how she could get the entire inheritance for her daughter. And the Evil One filled her mind with this until she grew very angry with the little boy, and she pushed him from one corner to the other and slapped him here and cuffed him there, until the poor child was always afraid, for when he came home from school there was nowhere he could find any peace. One day the woman had gone upstairs to her room, when her little daughter came up too, and said, "Mother, give me an apple." "Yes, my child," said the woman, and gave her a beautiful apple out of the chest. The chest had a large heavy lid with a large sharp iron lock. "Mother," said the little daughter, "is brother not to have one too?" This made the woman angry, but she said, "Yes, when he comes home from school." When from the window she saw him coming, it was as though the Evil One came over her, and she grabbed the apple and took it away from her daughter, saying, "You shall not have one before your brother." She threw the apple into the chest, and shut it. Then the little boy came in the door, and the Evil One made her say to him kindly, "My son, do you want an apple?" And she looked at him fiercely. "Mother," said the little boy, "how angry you look. Yes, give me an apple." Then it seemed to her as if she had to persuade him. "Come with me," she said, opening the lid of the chest. "Take out an apple for yourself." And while the little boy was leaning over, the Evil One prompted her, and crash! she slammed down the lid, and his head flew off, falling among the red apples. Then fear overcame her, and she thought, "Maybe I can get out of this." So she went upstairs to her room to her chest of drawers, and took a white scarf out of the top drawer, and set the head on the neck again, tying the scarf around it so that nothing could be seen. Then she set him on a chair in front of the door and put the apple in his hand. After this Marlene came into the kitchen to her mother, who was standing by the fire with a pot of hot water before her which she was stirring around and around. "Mother," said Marlene, "brother is sitting at the door, and he looks totally white and has an apple in his hand. I asked him to give me the apple, but he did not answer me, and I was very frightened." "Go back to him," said her mother, "and if he will not answer you, then box his ears." So Marlene went to him and said, "Brother, give me the apple." But he was silent, so she gave him one on the ear, and his head fell off. Marlene was terrified, and began crying and screaming, and ran to her mother, and said, "Oh, mother, I have knocked my brother's head off," and she cried and cried and could not be comforted. "Marlene," said the mother, "what have you done? Be quiet and don't let anyone know about it. It cannot be helped now. We will cook him into stew." Then the mother took the little boy and chopped him in pieces, put him into the pot, and cooked him into stew. But Marlene stood by crying and crying, and all her tears fell into the pot, and they did not need any salt. Then the father came home, and sat down at the table and said, "Where is my son?" And the mother served up a large, large dish of stew, and Marlene cried and could not stop. Then the father said again, "Where is my son?" "Oh," said the mother, "he has gone across the country to his mother's great uncle. He will stay there awhile." "What is he doing there? He did not even say good-bye to me." "Oh, he wanted to go, and asked me if he could stay six weeks. He will be well taken care of there." "Oh," said the man, "I am unhappy. It isn't right. He should have said good-bye to me." With that he began to eat, saying, "Marlene, why are you crying? Your brother will certainly come back." Then he said, "Wife, this food is delicious. Give me some more." And the more he ate the more he wanted, and he said, "Give me some more. You two shall have none of it. It seems to me as if it were all mine." And he ate and ate, throwing all the bones under the table, until he had finished it all. Marlene went to her chest of drawers, took her best silk scarf from the bottom drawer, and gathered all the bones from beneath the table and tied them up in her silk scarf, then carried them outside the door, crying tears of blood. She laid them down beneath the juniper tree on the green grass, and after she had put them there, she suddenly felt better and did not cry anymore. Then the juniper tree began to move. The branches moved apart, then moved together again, just as if someone were rejoicing and clapping his hands. At the same time a mist seemed to rise from the tree, and in the center of this mist it burned like a fire, and a beautiful bird flew out of the fire singing magnificently, and it flew high into the air, and when it was gone, the juniper tree was just as it had been before, and the cloth with the bones was no longer there. Marlene, however, was as happy and contented as if her brother were still alive. And she went merrily into the house, sat down at the table, and ate. Then the bird flew away and lit on a goldsmith's house, and began to sing: My mother, she killed me, My father, he ate me, My sister Marlene, Gathered all my bones, Tied them in a silken scarf, Laid them beneath the juniper tree, Tweet, tweet, what a beautiful bird am I. The goldsmith was sitting in his workshop making a golden chain, when he heard the bird sitting on his roof and singing. The song seemed very beautiful to him. He stood up, but as he crossed the threshold he lost one of his slippers. However, he went right up the middle of the street with only one slipper and one sock on. He had his leather apron on, and in one hand he had a golden chain and in the other his tongs. The sun was shining brightly on the street. He walked onward, then stood still and said to the bird, "Bird," he said, "how beautifully you can sing. Sing that piece again for me." "No," said the bird, "I do not sing twice for nothing. Give me the golden chain, and then I will sing it again for you." The goldsmith said, "Here is the golden chain for you. Now sing that song again for me." Then the bird came and took the golden chain in his right claw, and went and sat in front of the goldsmith, and sang: My mother, she killed me, My father, he ate me, My sister Marlene, Gathered all my bones, Tied them in a silken scarf, Laid them beneath the juniper tree, Tweet, tweet, what a beautiful bird am I. Then the bird flew away to a shoemaker, and lit on his roof and sang: My mother, she killed me, My father, he ate me, My sister Marlene, Gathered all my bones, Tied them in a silken scarf, Laid them beneath the juniper tree, Tweet, tweet, what a beautiful bird am I. Hearing this, the shoemaker ran out of doors in his shirtsleeves, and looked up at his roof, and had to hold his hand in front of his eyes to keep the sun from blinding him. "Bird," said he, "how beautifully you can sing." Then he called in at his door, "Wife, come outside. There is a bird here. Look at this bird. He certainly can sing." Then he called his daughter and her children, and the journeyman, and the apprentice, and the maid, and they all came out into the street and looked at the bird and saw how beautiful he was, and what fine red and green feathers he had, and how his neck was like pure gold, and how his eyes shone like stars in his head. "Bird," said the shoemaker, "now sing that song again for me." "No," said the bird, "I do not sing twice for nothing. You must give me something." "Wife," said the man, "go into the shop. There is a pair of red shoes on the top shelf. Bring them down." Then the wife went and brought the shoes. "There, bird," said the man, "now sing that piece again for me." Then the bird came and took the shoes in his left claw, and flew back to the roof, and sang: My mother, she killed me, My father, he ate me, My sister Marlene, Gathered all my bones, Tied them in a silken scarf, Laid them beneath the juniper tree, Tweet, tweet, what a beautiful bird am I. When he had finished his song he flew away. In his right claw he had the chain and in his left one the shoes. He flew far away to a mill, and the mill went clickety-clack, clickety-clack, clickety-clack. In the mill sat twenty miller's apprentices cutting a stone, and chiseling chip-chop, chip-chop, chip-chop. And the mill went clickety-clack, clickety-clack, clickety-clack. Then the bird went and sat on a linden tree which stood in front of the mill, and sang: My mother, she killed me, Then one of them stopped working. My father, he ate me, Then two more stopped working and listened, My sister Marlene, Then four more stopped, Gathered all my bones, Tied them in a silken scarf, Now only eight only were chiseling, Laid them beneath Now only five, the juniper tree, Now only one, Tweet, tweet, what a beautiful bird am I. Then the last one stopped also, and heard the last words. "Bird," said he, "how beautifully you sing. Let me hear that too. Sing it once more for me." "No," said the bird, "I do not sing twice for nothing. Give me the millstone, and then I will sing it again." "Yes," he said, "if it belonged only to me, you should have it." "Yes," said the others, "if he sings again he can have it." Then the bird came down, and the twenty millers took a beam and lifted the stone up. Yo-heave-ho! Yo-heave-ho! Yo-heave-ho! The bird stuck his neck through the hole and put the stone on as if it were a collar, then flew to the tree again, and sang: My mother, she killed me, My father, he ate me, My sister Marlene, Gathered all my bones, Tied them in a silken scarf, Laid them beneath the juniper tree, Tweet, tweet, what a beautiful bird am I. When he was finished singing, he spread his wings, and in his right claw he had the chain, and in his left one the shoes, and around his neck the millstone. He flew far away to his father's house. In the room the father, the mother, and Marlene were sitting at the table. The father said, "I feel so contented. I am so happy." "Not I," said the mother, "I feel uneasy, just as if a bad storm were coming." But Marlene just sat and cried and cried. Then the bird flew up, and as it seated itself on the roof, the father said, "Oh, I feel so truly happy, and the sun is shining so beautifully outside. I feel as if I were about to see some old acquaintance again." "Not I," said the woman, "I am so afraid that my teeth are chattering, and I feel like I have fire in my veins." And she tore open her bodice even more. Marlene sat in a corner crying. She held a handkerchief before her eyes and cried until it was wet clear through. Then the bird seated itself on the juniper tree, and sang: My mother, she killed me, The mother stopped her ears and shut her eyes, not wanting to see or hear, but there was a roaring in her ears like the fiercest storm, and her eyes burned and flashed like lightning. My father, he ate me, "Oh, mother," said the man, "that is a beautiful bird. He is singing so splendidly, and the sun is shining so warmly, and it smells like pure cinnamon." My sister Marlene, Then Marlene laid her head on her knees and cried and cried, but the man said, "I am going out. I must see the bird up close." "Oh, don't go," said the woman, "I feel as if the whole house were shaking and on fire." But the man went out and looked at the bird. Gathered all my bones, Tied them in a silken scarf, Laid them beneath the juniper tree, Tweet, tweet, what a beautiful bird am I. With this the bird dropped the golden chain, and it fell right around the man's neck, so exactly around it that it fit beautifully. Then the man went in and said, "Just look what a beautiful bird that is, and what a beautiful golden chain he has given me, and how nice it looks." But the woman was terrified. She fell down on the floor in the room, and her cap fell off her head. Then the bird sang once more: My mother killed me. "I wish I were a thousand fathoms beneath the earth, so I would not have to hear that!" My father, he ate me, Then the woman fell down as if she were dead. My sister Marlene, "Oh," said Marlene, "I too will go out and see if the bird will give me something." Then she went out. Gathered all my bones, Tied them in a silken scarf, He threw the shoes down to her. Laid them beneath the juniper tree, Tweet, tweet, what a beautiful bird am I. Then she was contented and happy. She put on the new red shoes and danced and leaped into the house. "Oh," she said, "I was so sad when I went out and now I am so contented. That is a splendid bird, he has given me a pair of red shoes." "No," said the woman, jumping to her feet and with her hair standing up like flames of fire, "I feel as if the world were coming to an end. I too, will go out and see if it makes me feel better." And as she went out the door, crash! the bird threw the millstone on her head, and it crushed her to death. The father and Marlene heard it and went out. Smoke, flames, and fire were rising from the place, and when that was over, the little brother was standing there, and he took his father and Marlene by the hand, and all three were very happy, and they went into the house, sat down at the table, and ate. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Von dem Machandelboom , Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales), no. 47. The Grimms' source for this tale, recorded in wonderfully simple, but poetic Low German, was the romantic painter Philipp Otto Runge (1777-1810). Runge's version was first published in 1808 in the journal Zeitung für Einsiedler , edited by Achim von Arnim. The Grimms, who knew other versions of the tale as well, included Runge's telling in the first edition (and -- with stylistic and dialect variations -- all succeeding editions) of their Kinder- und Hausmärchen. A somewhat different version of Runge's story was published by Johann Gustav Büsching under the title "Von dem Mahandel Bohm" in his Volks-Sagen, Märchen und Legenden (Leipzig: Carl Heinrich Reclam, 1812), no. 57, pp. 245-58. Büsching 's work appeared before the Grimm's collection, which was published later the same year. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2002. Return to the table of contents . The Girl and the Boy Austria There once lived near a thick forest a woodcutter who had a wicked wife and two good children. Now the woodcutter was very poor and had scarcely enough bread to still his own hunger and that of his family. One day the father had again gone into the woods, and the wicked mother was alone in their small hut. The wicked mother said to the children, "Go into the forest and collect some wood. The first one of you to return home will get a very beautiful apple." The girl and the boy went out into the forest to collect wood and hurriedly gathered up two bundles of twigs. Having tied up the bundles, they quickly turned their steps toward home. But as they approached their hut the more uneasy they grew. It was as though they had stones on their hearts. As they were walking along, the boy's shoulder strap broke, and he asked his sister, "Wait for me. My shoulder strap broke, and I have to tie it together." But the girl thought about the beautiful apple that their mother had promised, and she hurried onward. She had gone only a little way when her shoulder strap broke as well. Her brother caught up with her, panting under his heavy burden of wood. The girl now asked him, "Wait for me. My shoulder strap broke, and I have to tie it together." But the boy had no ears for his sister's request, and he replied, "You didn't wait for me. Now I'm going to get the apple." The boy ran and ran, finally arriving at home. Throwing his bundle of wood into the empty kitchen, he asked his mother for the promised apple. "Go upstairs to the storeroom. The apples are there in the chest. You can get three of them," said the mother. They boy was not happy with this answer and told his mother that he wanted her to fetch the apples, as she did other times. The mother finally gave in to the boy's wishes, and they went together to the storeroom and to the chest where the apples were. The boy was overjoyed at the sight of the apples. He clapped his hands, then leaned over into the chest to get his apples. While he was happily looking at them, his mother suddenly slammed the lid shut. The poor boy's head rolled into the chest, and his body lay there on the floor motionless and lifeless. The wicked mother took the corpse and hung it on a nail behind the storeroom door. In the meantime the girl, who had fixed her broken shoulder strap, arrived with her bundle of wood. She unloaded it in the kitchen and asked her mother for an apple. The mother was very friendly, beckoned her nearer, and gave her a red apple. The girl bit into the apple, and the mother went to the hearth to fix a noon meal for the father, who was chopping wood in the forest. "Go upstairs to the storeroom and fetch me some flour and lard," said the mother to the girl. "But do not look behind the door." The poor little sister went upstairs to the storeroom, and she did look behind the door, and she saw her poor dead brother hanging there. The girl cried so bitterly that a stone would have felt sorry for her. Tears dripped to the floor. Finally she had to go downstairs to her mother, and crying, she brought her the flour and lard she had asked for. "Did you look behind the door?" the wicked mother asked the crying girl. "Oh no," replied the poor child, crying even harder and holding her worn-out blue apron in front of her face. The mother was satisfied with her answer and sent the sobbing girl out into the dark woods with the father's noon meal. Today the girl took no pleasure in the squirrels that were climbing about in the fir trees, nor in the pinecones and wildflowers, but instead went her way quietly crying. She finally came to her father, who quickly reached for the soup, for he was hungry. He was very surprised to see meat in his soup today, because for a long time he had not even seen a little piece of meat, much less had one in his mouth. He sat down beneath a large, beautiful beech tree and began to eat. He took the first piece of meat onto his bone spoon and was about to put it into his mouth when a little bird flew to the tree and began to sing: Tweet, tweet, my mother is a worthless woman, My mother cut off my head, My sister carried me out, My father gnawed my bones clean, Tweet, tweet, my mother is a worthless woman. The woodcutter found this very strange, and the little bird gave him no peace, singing over and over again: Tweet, tweet, my mother is a worthless woman, My mother cut off my head, My sister carried me out, My father gnawed my bones clean, Tweet, tweet, my mother is a worthless woman. The father felt more and more ill at ease, until even the rustling of the leaves frightened him. Then he went home with the poor girl, who was very sad and spoke not a word. Meanwhile the wicked mother had busied herself packing away and hiding the dead boy. However, many, many little birds flattered around her, leaving her no peace and singing in a very sorrowful tone: Tweet, tweet, my mother is a worthless woman, My mother cut off my head, My sister carried me out, My father gnawed my bones clean, Tweet, tweet, my mother is a worthless woman. She wanted to drive away the innocent little creatures, but as she was shooing them away and chasing after them, the heavy storeroom door fell shut and cut off the wicked mother's head. The father arrived at home, and inside everything was quiet and still. Only the birds were singing: Tweet, tweet, my mother is a worthless woman, My mother cut off my head, My sister carried me out, My father gnawed my bones clean, Tweet, tweet, my mother is a worthless woman. The father went upstairs into the storeroom, and opening the door he found his wicked wife and his poor little son, both lying dead on the floor. And the story is done, So you must go home! Or should I tell you another About peas and fodder? Source: Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle, "Mädchen und Bübchen" Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1852), no. 12, pp. 64-68 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2007. Return to the table of contents . The Crow's Nest Hungary There was once in the world a poor man who had a wife and two children, the elder a girl, the younger a boy. The poor man went out one day plowing with two wretched little oxen, his only property; his wife remained at home to do the cooking. The girl, being the older of the two children, was often sent out on short errands; upon the present occasion, too, she was away from the house, her mother having sent her out to borrow a peel, the dough for the bread being very nearly spoilt for having been kept too long in the trough. Availing herself of the girl's absence, the mother killed the poor little boy and hid him in a pot of stewed cabbage. By the time that the girl returned, her dear little brother was half stewed. When the mess was quite done, the woman poured it into a smaller pot, placed the small pot into a sling, and sent the food by her daughter to her husband who was in the field. The man liked the dish very much, and asked the girl, "What kind of meat is this? It is very nice." "I believe, dear father, mother had to kill a small lamb last night, and no doubt she cooked it for you," replied the girl. But somehow or other the girl learned the true state of things, and the news nearly broke her heart. She immediately went back to the field, gathered up the bones of her little brother, carefully wrapped them into a beautiful piece of new white linen and took them into the nearest forest, where she hid them in a hollow tree. Nobody can foretell what will happen, and so it came to pass that the bones did not remain very long in the hollow of the tree. Next spring a crow came and hatched them, and they became exactly such a boy as they were before. The boy would sometimes perch on the edge of the hollow, and sing to a beautiful tune the following words: My mother killed me, My father ate me, My sister gathered up my bones, She wrapped them in clean white linen, She placed them in a hollow tree, And now, behold, I'm a young crow. Upon one occasion, just as he was singing this song, a man with a cloak strolled by. "Go on, my son," he said, "repeat that pretty song for me! I live in a big village, and have traveled a good deal in my lifetime, but I have never heard such a pretty song." So the boy again commenced to sing: My mother killed me, My father ate me, My sister gathered up my bones, She wrapped them in clean white linen, She placed them in a hollow tree, And now, behold, I'm a young crow. The man with the cloak liked the song very much, and made the boy a present of his cloak. Then a man with a crutch-stick hobbled by. "Well, my boy," he said, "sing me that song again. I live in a big village, have traveled far, but have never heard such a pretty tune." And the boy again commenced to sing: My mother killed me, My father ate me, My sister gathered up my bones, She wrapped them in clean white linen, She placed them in a hollow tree, And now, behold, I'm a young crow. The man with the crutch-stick, too, liked the song immensely, and gave the boy his crutch-stick. The next one to pass was a miller. He also asked the boy to repeat the pretty tune, and as the boy complied with his request the miller presented him with a millstone. Then a sudden thought flashed across the boy's head, and he flew to his father's house, settled on the roof, and commenced to sing: My mother killed me, My father ate me, My sister gathered up my bones, She wrapped them in clean white linen, She placed them in a hollow tree, And now, behold, I'm a young crow. The woman was terrified, and said to her daughter, "Go and drive away that bird, I don't like its croaking." The girl went out and tried to drive away the bird, but instead of flying away the young crow continued to sing the same song, and threw down the cloak to his sister. The girl was much pleased with the present, ran into the house and exclaimed, "Look here what a nice present that ugly bird has given to me!" "Very nice indeed; very nice indeed. I will go out too," said her father. So he went out, and the bird threw down to him the crutch-stick. The old man was highly delighted with the gift; he was getting very weak, and the crutch-stick came in useful to him as a support. "Look here what a strong crutch-stick he has given to me ! It will be a great help to me in my old age." Then his mother jumped up from behind the oven and said, "I must go out too; if presents won't shower at least a few might drivel to me." So she went out and looked up to the roof, and the boy gave her a present for which she had not bargained. He threw the millstone at her, which killed her on the spot. Thus far goes our tale. Here it ends. Source: W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, The Folk-Tales of the Magyars (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), pp. 298-301 . Return to the table of contents . The Rose Tree England (Devonshire) There was upon a time a good man who had two children: a girl by a first wife, and a boy by the second. The girl was as white as milk, and her lips were like cherries. Her hair was like golden silk, and it hung to the ground. Her brother loved her dearly, but her wicked stepmother hated her. "Child," said the stepmother one day, "go to the grocer's shop and buy me a pound of candles." She gave her the money, and the little girl went, bought the candles, and started on her return. There was a stile to cross. She put down the candles while she got over the stile. Up came a dog and ran off with the candles. She went back to the grocer's, and she got a second bunch. She came to the stile, set down the candles, and proceeded to climb over. Up came the dog and ran off with the candles. She went again to the grocer's, and she got a third bunch, and just the same event happened. Then she came to her stepmother crying, for she had spent all the money and had lost three bunches of candles. The stepmother was angry, but she pretended not to mind the loss. She said to the child, "Come, lay your head on my lap that I may comb your hair." So the little one laid her head in the woman's lap, who proceeded to comb the yellow silken hair. And when she combed, the hair fell over her knees and rolled right down to the ground. Then the stepmother hated her more for the beauty of her hair, so she said to her, "I cannot part your hair on my knee. Fetch a billet of wood." So she fetched it. Then said the stepmother, "I cannot part your hair with a comb. Fetch me an ax." So she fetched it. "Now," said the wicked woman, "Lay your head down on the billet while I part your hair." Well! She laid down her little golden head without fear; and whist! down came the ax, and it was off. So the mother wiped the ax and laughed. Then she took the heart and liver of the little girl, and she stewed them and brought them into the house for supper. The husband tasted them and shook his head. He said they tasted very strangely. She gave some to the little boy, but he would not eat. She tried to force him, but he refused, and ran out into the garden, and took up his little sister, and put her in a box, and buried the box under a rose tree; and every day he went to the tree and wept, till his tears ran down on the box. One day the rose tree flowered. It was spring, and there among the flowers was a white bird; and it sang, and sang, and sang like an angel out of heaven. Away it flew, and it went to a cobbler's shop, and perched itself on a tree hard by; and thus it sang: My wicked mother slew me, My dear father ate me, My little brother whom I love Sits below, and I sing above Stick, stock, stone dead. "Sing again that beautiful song," asked the shoemaker. "If you will first give me those little red shoes you are making." The cobbler gave the shoes, and the bird sang the song, then flew to a tree in front of a watchmaker's and sang: My wicked mother slew me, My dear father ate me, My little brother whom I love Sits below, and I sing above Stick, stock, stone dead. "Oh, the beautiful song! Sing it again, sweet bird," asked the watchmaker. "If you will give me first that gold watch and chain in your hand." The jeweler gave the watch and chain. The bird took it in one foot, the shoes in the other, and flew away, after having repeated the song, to where three millers were picking a millstone. The bird perched on a tree and sang: My wicked mother slew me, My dear father ate me, My little brother whom I love Sits below, and I sing above Stick! Then one of the men put down his tool and looked up from his work, Stock! Then the second miller's man laid aside his tool and looked up, Stone! Then the third miller's man laid down his tool and looked up, Dead! Then all three cried out with one voice, "Oh, what a beautiful song! Sing it sweet bird, again." "If you will put the millstone round my neck," said the bird. The men complied with the bird's request, and away to the tree it flew with the millstone round his neck, the red shoes in the grasp of one foot, and the gold watch and chain in the grasp of the other. He sang the song and then flew home. It rattled the millstone against the eaves of the house, and the stepmother said, "It thunders." Then the little boy ran out to see the thunder, and down dropped the red shoes at his feet. It rattled the millstone against the eaves of the house once more, and the stepmother said again, "It thunders." Then the father ran out, and down fell the chain about his neck. In ran father and son, laughing and saying, "See, the thunder has brought us these fine things!" Then the bird rattled the millstone against the eaves of the house a third time, and the stepmother said, "It thunders again. Perhaps the thunder has brought something for me," and she ran out. But the moment she stepped outside the door, down fell the millstone on her head. And so she died. Source: S. Baring-Gould, "Household Tales," an appendix to William Henderson, Notes on the Folk Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Longmans, Green and Company, 1866), no. 1, pp. 314-17 . Language and punctuation cautiously modernized by D. L. Ashliman. © 2007. Return to the table of contents . The Satin Frock England (Yorkshire) There was once a little girl called Mary who had a satin frock, and her mother told her that if she got a dirty mark on it she would kill her. One day as Mary was going a walk, some cows that were passing by splashed her frock with mud. Then Mary went and sat on a doorstep and began to cry. The woman in the house hearing her cry came out, and Mary told her that she dare not go home because she had got her frock dirty, and that her mother had threatened to kill her if she got it dirty. So the woman took her in and washed the mud from her frock, and then dried it. She then sent the little girl on her way, telling her to mind and not get it dirty again, and then her mother would not kill her. So Mary went on her way, but lower down the road a horse that was running by splashed her frock again. When she got home her mother took her in the cellar and cut her head off, and hung it on the wall. When her father came home he said, "Where is our Mary?" Her mother told him she had gone to her grandmother's to stay all night. When bedtime came he said, "I will fetch the sticks up;" but his wife said, "No, I will;" but he said, "No, I will fetch them up;" and she said, "No, I will;" but he would not let her fetch them. When he had got down in the cellar he saw the head hung up, so when he had come out of the cellar he asked his wife what it was. She told him that it was a sheep's head that she was going to make some broth of for tomorrow's dinner. When he came home to dinner next day, he said, "This broth is nice, but it does taste like our Mary." When his wife heard this she was very frightened; but when her husband found out what had been done he took her in the cellar and killed her. Source: S. O. Addy, "Four Yorkshire Folktales," Folklore , vol. 8, no. 4 (December 1897), pp. 393-96. 394-95 . Addy's source: "Told to C. R. Hirst in Shieffield by a girl aged about 13, and repeated by him to me, June 1896." Return to the table of contents . The Milk-White Doo [Dove] Scotland There was once a man that worked in the fields, and had a wife, and a son, and a daughter. One day he caught a hare, and took it home to his wife, and asked her to make it ready for his dinner. While it was on the fire the goodwife tasted and tasted at it, till she had tasted it all away, and she did not know what to do for her goodman's dinner. So she called her son Johnny to come in and get his head combed, and when she was combing his head, she killed him and put him into the pot. Well, the goodman came home to his dinner, and his wife set down Johnny, well boiled, in front of him. And when he was eating, he took up a foot and said, "That's surely my Johnny's foot." "Such nonsense! It's one of the hare's," said the goodwife. Then he took up a hand and said, "That's surely my Johnny's hand." "You're talking foolishness, goodman. It's another of the hare's feet. So when the goodman had eaten his dinner, little Katy, Johnny's sister, gather all the bones and buried them beneath a stone just outside the door: Where they grew, and they grew, To a milk-white doo [dove], That took its wings, And away it flew. And it flew till it came to where two women were washing clothes, and it sat down on a stone and cried: Pew, pew, My minny me slew, My daddy me chew, My sister gathered by banes, And put them between twa milk-white stanes; And I grew, and I grew, To a milk-white doo, And I took to my wings, and away I flew. "Say that over again, my bonny bird, and we'll give you all these clothes," said the women. Pew, pew, My minny me slew, My daddy me chew, My sister gathered by banes, And put them between twa milk-white stanes; And I grew, and I grew, To a milk-white doo, And I took to my wings, and away I flew. And it got the clothes; and then flew till it came to a man counting a great heap of silver, and it sat down and cried: Pew, pew, My minny me slew, My daddy me chew, My sister gathered by banes, And put them between twa milk-white stanes; And I grew, and I grew, To a milk-white doo, And I took to my wings, and away I flew. Say that again, my bonny bird, and I'll give you all this silver," said the man. Pew, pew, My minny me slew, My daddy me chew, My sister gathered by banes, And put them between twa milk-white stanes; And I grew, and I grew, To a milk-white doo, And I took to my wings, and away I flew. And it got all the silver, and then it flew till it came to two millers grinding corn, and it cried: Pew, pew, My minny me slew, My daddy me chew, My sister gathered by banes, And put them between twa milk-white stanes; And I grew, and I grew, To a milk-white doo, And I took to my wings, and away I flew. Say that again, my bonny bird, and I'll give you this millstone, said the miller. Pew, pew, My minny me slew, My daddy me chew, My sister gathered by banes, And put them between twa milk-white stanes; And I grew, and I grew, To a milk-white doo, And I took to my wings, and away I flew. And it got the millstone. And then it flew till it lit on its father's housetop. It threw small stones down the chimney, and Katy came out to see what was the matter, and the dove threw all the clothes to her. Then the father came out, and the dove threw all the silver to him. And then the mother came out, and the dove threw down the millstone upon her and killed her. And at last it flew away, and the goodman and his daughter after that, Lived happy, and died happy, And never drank out of a dry cappy. Source: Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. & R. Chambers, 1870), pp. 49-50 . Dialect cautiously normalized by D. L. Ashliman. I have left the dialect intact in the rhymed verses. © 2007. Return to the table of contents . The Little Boy and the Wicked Stepmother Romania Once upon a time there was a poor man, who had a wife and two children, a boy and a girl. He was so poor that he possessed nothing in the world but the ashes on his hearth. His wife died, and after a time he married another woman, who was cantankerous and bad natured, and from morning till evening, as long as the day lasted, she gave the poor man no peace, but snarled and shouted at him. The woman said to him, "Do away with these children. You cannot even keep me. How then can you keep all these mouths?" for was she not a stepmother? The poor man stood her nagging for a long time, but then, one night, she quarreled so much that he promised her that he would take the children into the forest and leave them there. The two children were sitting in the corner but held their peace and heard all that was going on. The next day, the man, taking his ax upon his shoulder, called to the children and said to them, "Come with me into the forest. I am going to cut wood." The little children went with him, but before they left, the little girl filled her pocket with ashes from the hearth, and as she walked along she dropped little bits of coal the way they went. After a time they reached a very dense part of the forest, where they could not see their way any longer, and there the man said to the children, "Wait here for a while. I am only going to cut wood yonder. When I have done I will come back and fetch you home." And leaving the children there in the thicket, he went away, heavy hearted, and returned home. The children waited for a while, and seeing that their father did not return, the girl knew what he had done. So they slept through the night in the forest, and the next morning, taking her brother by the hand, she followed the trace of the ashes which she had left on the road, and thus came home to their own house. When the stepmother saw them, she did not know what to do with herself. She went almost out of her mind with fury. If she could, she would have swallowed them in a spoonful of water, so furious was she. The husband, who was a weakling, tried to pacify her, and to endeavor to get the children away by one means or another, but did not succeed. When the stepmother found that she could not do anything through her husband, she made up her mind that she herself would get rid of them. So one morning, when her husband had gone away, she took the little boy, and without saying anything to anybody, she killed him and gave him to his sister to cut him up, and prepare a meal for all of them. What was she to do? If she was not to be killed like her brother, she had to do what her stepmother told her. And so she cut him up and cooked him ready for the meal But she took the heart, and hid it away in a hollow of a tree. When the stepmother asked her where the heart was, she said that a dog had come and taken it away. In the evening, when the husband came home, she brought the broth with the meat for the husband to eat, and she sat down and ate of it, and so did the husband, not knowing that he was eating the flesh of his child. The little girl refused to eat it. She would not touch it. After they had finished, she gathered up all the little bones and hid them in the hollow of the tree where she had put the heart. The next morning, out of that hollow of the tree there came a little bird with dark feathers, and sitting on the branch of a tree, began to sing, "Cuckoo! My sister has cooked me, and my father has eaten me, but I am now a cuckoo and safe from my stepmother." When the stepmother, who happened to be near the tree, heard what that little bird was singing, in her fury and fright she took a heavy lump of salt which lay near at hand, and threw it at the cuckoo. But instead of hitting it, the lump fell down on her head and killed her on the spot. And the little boy has remained a cuckoo to this very day. Source: "Why Does the Cuckoo Call 'Cuckoo'? The Story of the Little Boy and the Wicked Step-Mother," M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 74, pp. 225-27. This story merges a tale of type 327A (Hansel and Gretel) with a tale of type 720 (My Mother Killed Me, My Father Ate Me). Link to additional tales of type 327A: Hansel and Gretel and Other Tales about Abandoned Children . Return to the table of contents . Return to The table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 5, 2008. The Iron-Eating Mice: Folktales of Type 1592 The Iron-Eating Mice Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 1592 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2014 Contents Miracle upon Miracle (India, The Panchantantra ). The Mice That Ate an Iron Balance (India, The Kátha Sarit Ságara; or, Ocean of the Streams of Story ). The Iron Weights and Scales Which Were Eaten by Mice (India, The "Suka Saptati," or, The Seventy Tales of Parrot . The Faithless Depositary (France, Jean de La Fontaine). The Two Merchants (Russia, Leo Tolstoy). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Miracle upon Miracle India In a certain place there once lived a merchant by the name of Nanduka, which means "cheerful one" and a merchant by the name of Lakschmana, which means "fortunate one." The latter, who had lost all his wealth, decided to travel abroad. For it is said: A person who has lived well in a particular place, but who stays there after he has lost his wealth, is of common mind. And further: A person who, reduced to misery, remains at a place where he once was happy, is worthy of reproach. In his house there was a large set of heavy iron scales that had been acquired by his ancestors. He gave these to the guild-master Nanduka for safekeeping, and set forth for foreign lands. After he had pursued his desires for a long time abroad, he returned to his homeland, and said to the guild-master Nanduka, "Guild-master, give me back the scales that I left here for safekeeping." Nanduka replied, "Oh, your scales are no longer here. The mice ate them up." When he heard this, Lakschmana said, "Well, Nanduka, if the mice ate them up, then it is through no fault of yours. That is the way of the world. Nothing in it is eternal. But now I would like to bathe myself in the river. Send your child with me, the boy named Dhanadeva, to carry my bathing things." Nanduka, fearing Lakschama because of the theft he had committed against him, said to his son, "Child, your uncle Lakschmana wants to take a bath in the river. Go with him and carry his bathing things." Yes, with truth they say: No one does a favor for another, unless driven by fear, greed, or some other purpose. And further: If someone shows you unusual courtesy, be cautious, lest it lead to a bad end. Nanduka's son, carrying the bathing things, set forth happily with Lakschmana. After taking his bath, Lakschmana threw Nanduka's son Dhanadeva into a cave on the bank of the river, and sealed the opening with a large stone. Then he rushed back to Nanduka's house. The merchant asked him, "Speak up, Lakschmana! Tell me, where is my child who went to the river with you?" Lakschmana said, "He was taken away from the river's bank by a falcon." The merchant cried, "You liar! How in the world can a falcon steal a boy? Give me back my son, or I will bring action against you at the king's court." Lakschmana said, "Oh, you who always speak the truth! A falcon can carry away a boy, if mice can eat a large set of heavy iron scales. If you want your son back, then give me my scales!" Thus quarreling one with another, they went to the king's gate, where Nanduka cried out loudly, "A dastardly crime has happened here! This thief has robbed me of my child!" Hearing this, the judges said to Lakschmana, "Return the guild-master's son to him!" Lakschmana answered, "What can I do? Before my very eyes a falcon carried him away from the bank of the river." Hearing this, they said, "You do not tell the truth. How could a falcon be capable of carrying off a fifteen-year-old boy?" Lakschmana answered, laughing, "Ha! Listen to this proverb: When mice can eat a thousand pounds of iron, then a falcon can carry away an elephant, to say nothing of a little boy. " The judges said, "What do you mean by that?" Then Lakschmana told the whole story about the scales. After hearing this, they laughed at what Nanduka and Lakschmana had done, reconciled the two with each other, and made them respectively return the scales and the boy. Source: The Panchatantra , book 1, story 21. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 120-22 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. Link to additional tales from The Panchatantra . Return to the table of contents . The Mice That Ate an Iron Balance India Once on a time the was a merchant's son, who had spent all his father's wealth, and had only an iron balance left to him. Now the balance was made of a thousand palas of iron; and depositing it in the care of a certain merchant, he went to another land. And when, on his return, he came to that merchant to demand back his balance, the merchant said to him, "It has been eaten by mice." He repeated, "It is quite true, the iron, of which it was composed, was particularly sweet, and so the mice ate it." This he said with an outward show of sorrow, laughing in his heart. Then the merchant's son asked him to give him some food, and he, being in a good temper, consented to give him some. Then the merchant's son went to bathe, taking with him the son of that merchant, who was a mere child, and whom he persuaded to come with him by giving him a dish of ámalakas . And after he had bathed, the wise merchant's son deposited the boy in the house of a friend, and returned alone to the house of that merchant. And the merchant said to him, "Where is that son of mine?" He replied, "A kite swooped down from the air and carried him off." The merchant in a rage said, "You have concealed my son," and so he took him into the king's judgment hall; and there the merchant's son made the same statement. The officers of the court said, " This is impossible, how could a kite carry off a boy?" But the merchant's son answered, " In a country where a large balance of iron was eaten by mice, a kite might carry off an elephant, much more a boy." When the officers heard that, they asked about it, out of curiosity, and made the merchant restore the balance to the owner, and he, for his part, restored the merchant's child. Source: Somadeva Bhatta, The Kátha Sarit Ságara; or, Ocean of the Streams of Story , vol. 2. Translated from the original Sanskrit by C. H. Tawney (Calcutta: Printed by J. W. Thomas at the Baptist Mission Press, 1884), pp. 41-42 . Return to the table of contents . The Iron Weights and Scales Which Were Eaten by Mice India There was a merchant of the name of Bhudhara who lived in a town called Kundina. Unfortunately he lost all his money, and though it was not through any fault of his own, he was cut by all his family and relations. As it has been said "A rich man is wise; a rich man is generous; a rich man is the incarnation of virtue; a rich man is thought much of, and has no end of friends. But if his money go, everything else goes with it." So this Bhudhara having lost everything that he possessed except some weights and scales, went away to another country, leaving the relics of this property in the care of a friend, who was also a merchant. After a time he made another fortune and returned to his own country. The first thing he did was to go to his friend and ask for the weights and scales. The merchant did not want to give them up, and after some demur he said: "Really I am very sorry, but they have been eaten by the mice." Bhudhara said nothing but bided his time, and one day soon after this he was walking by the merchant's house, and saw his boy playing outside. Bhudhara promptly kidnapped the boy. The merchant was in a terrible state at the loss of his son, and started off with his whole family to try and find him. One of the neighbors met the party, who were full of weeping and lamentations, and said (hearing the cause of all this grief): "Oh! I know where the boy is; I saw him with Bhudhara." So they went to Bhudhara's house, and the father asked Bhudhara to give him up his son. "My dear friend," replied Bhudhara, "I am really very sorry, but I cannot! Your boy was with me, we were walking along the bank of the river, when an eagle came and carried him off." On this the father grew very angry and had Bhudhara up before the magistrates, on the charge of having made away with his son. Bhudhara appeared to answer the charge, and when the judge asked him what he had to say, he replied: "My lord! in a place where the mice can eat up weights and scales of iron, an eagle might easily carry off an elephant -- much more a boy." The magistrate who heard the case decided that when the merchant returned the weights and scales his boy should be restored to him, and so the end of it was that Bhudhara got back his weights and scales, and the merchant, though he recovered his boy, was punished for the theft. Source: The Enchanted Parrot: Being a Selection from the "Suka Saptati," or, The Seventy Tales of Parrot . Translated from the Sanskrit by B. Hale Wortham (London: Luzac and Company, 1911), no. 39, pp. 84-86 . Return to the table of contents . The Faithless Depositary Jean de La Fontaine The story goes: A man of trade, In Persia, with his neighbor made Deposit, as he left the state, Of iron, say a hundredweight. Return'd, said he, "My iron, neighbor." "Your iron! you have lost your labor; I grieve to say it, -- 'pon my soul, A rat has eaten up the whole. My men were sharply scolded at, But yet a hole, in spite of that, Was left, as one is wont to be In every barn or granary, By which crept in that cursed rat." Admiring much the novel thief, The man affected full belief. Ere long, his faithless neighbor's child He stole away, -- a heavy lad, -- And then to supper bade the dad, Who thus plead off in accents sad: "It was but yesterday I had A boy as fine as ever smiled, An only son, as dear as life, The darling of myself and wife. Alas! we have him now no more, And every joy with us is o'er." Replied the merchant, "Yesternight, By evening's faint and dusky ray, I saw a monstrous owl alight, And bear your darling son away To yonder tott'ring ruin gray." "Can I believe you, when you say An owl bore off so large a prey? How could it be?" the father cried; "The thing is surely quite absurd; My son with ease had kill'd the bird." "The how of it," the man replied, "Is not my province to decide; I know I saw your son arise, Borne through the air before my eyes. Why should it seem a strange affair, Moreover, in a country where A single rat contrives to eat A hundred pounds of iron meat, That owls should be of strength to lift ye A booby boy that weighs but fifty?" The other plainly saw the trick, Restored the iron very quick, And got, with shame as well as joy, Possession of his kidnapp'd boy. Source: Jean de La Fontaine, The Fables of La Fontaine . Translated from the French by Elizur Wright. A new edition with notes by J. W. M. Gibbs (London: George Bell and Sons, 1888), book 9, fable 1, pp. 220-23 . Link to the original French text: Le dépositaire infidèle . Return to the table of contents . The Two Merchants Russia, Leo Tolstoy Before leaving on a journey a poor merchant left his ironware with a rich merchant for safekeeping. Upon returning he came to the rich merchant and asked for the return of his goods. However, the rich merchant had sold everything, and to defend himself he said, "Something unfortunate happened to your goods." "What?" "I stored your ironware in my granary where there are a lot of mice, and they gnawed it all to pieces. If you don't believe me, come and see for yourself." The poor merchant did nothing. "Why bother?" he said. "I believe it. Mice are always eating iron. Good-bye." The poor merchant went away. On the street he saw a little boy playing; it was the rich merchant's son. Caressing him, he took the boy by the hand he and took him home with him. The next day the rich merchant met and told him about his misfortune, asking him if he knew anything about his missing son. The poor man responded, "Yes, I saw him yesterday just as I was leaving your house. A hawk flew down and carried your son away." "Don't make fun of me!" cried the rich merchant with anger. "No one can believe that a hawk could carry off a child." "I am not making fun of you. It should surprise no one that a hawk could carry off a child. If mice can eat a hundred pounds of iron anything is possible." The rich merchant understood what he meant. "The mice did not eat your iron," he said. "I sold it, and I shall reimburse you double its value." "If that's the way it is, the hawk did not carry off your son. I shall return him to you." Source: Léon Tolstoï [Leo Tolstoy], "Les deux marchands: Fable," Contes et fables . Traduit avec l'autorisation de l'auteur par E. Halpérine-Kaminsky (Paris: E. Plon, Nourrit et Cie., 1883), pp. 66-68 . Translated from the French by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. This piece is from Tolstoy's First Reader , 1872. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 24, 2014. The Mouse Who Was to Marry the Sun: Fables of type 2031C The Mouse Who Was to Marry the Sun fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 2031C edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2014 Contents The Transformed Mouse Seeks a Bridegroom (India, The Panchatantra ). A Story on Caste (India). The Rats and Their Daughter (Japan). A Bridegroom for Miss Mole (Korea). The Most Powerful Husband in the World (French North Africa). The Vole Who Sought a Wife (Marie de France). The Mouse Metamorphosed into a Maid (Jean de La Fontaine). The Story of the Rat and Her Journey to God (Romania). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Transformed Mouse Seeks a Bridegroom India ( The Panchatantra ) On the shore of the Ganges there was a hermitage filled with holy men dedicated to prayer, self denial, repentance, the study of holy scriptures, fasting, and meditation. They drank only small amounts of very pure water, and mortified their bodies with a diet of bulbs, roots, fruits, and water plants. Their only clothing were loincloths made from tree bark. The father of the hermitage was named Yajnavalkya. He had just finished bathing in the Ganges and was about to rinse out his mouth when a little mouse fell from a falcon's beak into his hand. After looking at it, he set it onto a fig leaf, bathed himself once more, rinsed out his mouth, and performed his penitential and other rituals. Then through the power of his holiness he transformed the mouse into a girl. Taking her home with him to his hermitage, he said to his wife, who was childless, "My dear, take her in place of a daughter. Bring her up with care!" Thereafter she was reared, loved, and nurtured. When she was twelve years old, and the wife saw that she was ready for marriage, she said to her husband, "Listen, husband, do you not see that it is past time for our daughter's marriage?" He said, "What you say is quite right! So if she is willing, I will summon the exalted sun god and present her to him as a wife. His wife said, "What could be said against that? Do it!" Through the power of prayer and incantations the sun appeared without delay, saying, "Holy man, why do you summon me?" The man answered, "Behold! Here stands my little daughter. If she will have you, take her as a wife!" Having said this, he said to his daughter, "Daughter, does this exalted one please you, this sun god who illuminates the three worlds?" The daughter said, "Father, he is too hot. I do not want him. Summon a better one!" Hearing this, the wise man said to the sun, "Exalted one, is there a being more powerful than you?" The sun answered, "Yes, there is a stronger one than I. The cloud, through whose cover I become invisible." Then the wise man summoned the cloud and said to his daughter, "Daughter, shall I give you to this one as a wife?" She answered, "He is black and cold. Therefore give me to another powerful being!" Upon this the wise man asked the cloud, "Listen, cloud! Is there anyone more powerful than you?" The cloud answered, "The wind is more powerful than I! Driven by the wind, I am scattered into a thousand pieces." After hearing this, the wise man summoned the wind and said, "Daughter, does the wind please you most of all as a husband?" She answered, "Father! He is entirely too inconstant. Summon a more powerful one instead!" The wise man said, "Wind, is there anyone more powerful than you?" The wind said, "The mountain is more powerful than I, for however strong I am, he still stands firmly against me." Then the wise man summoned the mountain and said to the girl, "Daughter, shall I give you to this one in marriage?" She answered, "Father, he is hard and rigid. Therefore give me to another one." The wise man asked the mountain, "Listen, king of the mountains, is there anyone more powerful than you?" The mountain answered, "The mice are more powerful than I, for they make holes in my body with violence." With that the wise man summoned a mouse and showed him to her, saying, "Daughter, shall I give you to him as a wife? Does this mouse king please you?" Seeing him, she thought, "He is of my own kind." Her hair stood on end with pleasure, making her even more beautiful, and she said, "Father, make me into a mouse and give me to him as a wife so I can fulfill the domestic duties prescribed for my kind!" Through the power of his holiness he transformed her into a little mouse and gave her to the other mouse as a wife. Source: The Panchatantra , book 3. I have used the following edition: "Die verwandelte Maus soll sich einen Bräutigam wählen," Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen , aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey, vol. 2 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), pp. 262-66 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. In addition to making a few minor stylistic changes, I have omitted from my translation a lengthy discourse in verse, presented by the wise man to his wife, on the supposed benefits of child marriage. About The Panchatantra One of India's most influential contributions to world literature, The Panchatantra (also spelled Pañcatantra or Pañca-tantra ) consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled in their current form between the third and fifth centuries AD. It is believed that even then the stories were already ancient. The tales' self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes The Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai, which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of The Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced medieval writers of fables. Link to additional Tales from the Panchatantra . Return to the table of contents . A Story on Caste India There was once a village inhabited only by Musahars. Among them was one girl who was so beautiful that she seemed more than human. Her father and mother were so proud of her looks that they determined not to marry her to a man of their own caste. They were constantly discussing whom they should choose as a son-in-law; one day they began to consider who were the greatest persons in the world. The old woman was of opinion that there was no one greater than Chando, the Sun God, and suggested that they should marry the girl to him. Her husband agreed and off they set and presented themselves before Chando. Chando asked why they had come. "O Chando, we understand that you are the greatest being in the world and we have come to marry our daughter to you." Chando answered, "I fancy there is some one greater than I." "Who is he?" asked the parents. "The cloud is greater than I, for it can hide my face and quench my rays." At this the father and mother hurried off with their daughter in search of the cloud, and when they found him, told him that they had brought their daughter to give him to wife, as he was the greatest being in the world. "I may be great," said the cloud, "but there is a greater than I, the wind. The wind rises and blows me away in a minute." So they went in search of the wind and when they found him, explained to him why they had brought him their daughter. The wind said, "I am strong but there are stronger than I. The mountains are stronger. I can blow things down or whirl them away, but I cannot move the mountains." So on they went to the mountain and explained their errand. The mountain said, "I am great but there are more powerful than I. The ground-rat is more powerful, for however high I may be the ground-rats burrow holes in me and I cannot resist them." The poor parents by this time began to feel rather discouraged, but still they made up their minds to persevere and went on to look for the ground-rat. They found him and offered him their daughter in marriage, but the ground-rat denied that he was the most powerful being on earth. The Musahars were more powerful for they lived by digging out ground-rats and eating them. The hapless couple went home very dejectedly, reflecting that they had begun by despising their own caste and had gone in search of something greater and had ended where they began. So they arranged to marry their daughter to a man of their own caste after all. Moral. You should not despise your own caste or race; you cannot help what caste you are born into. A Santal may learn to read and write and associate with men of good position and thereby his mind may be perverted. He may wish to change his caste and become a Sadhu, or a Kherwar, or a Boistab, or a Mussulman, or a Christian or anything else; but people will still know him for a beef-eating Santal. If he becomes a Christian, no one will think him the equal of a Saheb or a Brahman; no Saheb will marry his daughter or give him his daughter in marriage. Remember what happened to the Musahar, who despised his own caste. God caused you to be born in a certain caste. He and not we made the different castes, and He knows what is good and bad for us. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 51, pp. 168-70 . Return to the table of contents . The Rats and Their Daughter Japan Once near a lonely farmhouse surrounded by rice fields there lived a rat couple. They were highly regarded by their own kind and very prosperous. One day, in addition to their many other children, a little daughter was born to them. She was so dainty with her shiny gray fur, her broad little upright ears, and her glistening eyes, that her parents became quite proud of their little daughter. Day in and day out their only thoughts were how they might prepare a magnificent future for her. When the little rat came of age, both parents came to the conclusion that only the most powerful being in the entire world should be her husband. Once they were discussing this matter with a neighbor, and he said, "If you want to give your daughter in marriage to the most powerful being, you must choose the sun as your son-in-law, for without question, no one equals the sun in power. The rat couple saw that this was true, and without hesitation they made their way to the sun and presented to him their proposal that he should marry their daughter. The sun replied, "I am much indebted to you that you have come so far, and that you have the kind intention to give me your daughter in marriage, but please tell me just why you have chosen me to be your son-in-law." The rats said, "We would like to give our daughter in marriage to the most powerful being in the world, and without dispute you are that one. Therefore we have chosen you to be our son-in-law." Then the sun said, "What you say is not without foundation, but there is a being more powerful than I, and it is he to whom you must give your daughter." The rats replied, "Can there in truth be someone more powerful than you?" The sun said, "When I want to shine on the earth, a cloud often comes by and covers me up, and my rays are unable either to penetrate it or to frighten it away. I am powerless against the cloud. Thus you must go to the cloud and make him your son-in-law." The rats saw that it was so, and they went to the cloud. After they had presented their proposal to him, the cloud said, "You are in error if you think that I am the most powerful being. I do indeed have the power to cover the sun, but I am powerless against the wind. When he begins to blow, he drives me away and tears me to pieces. There is nothing I can do against him." So the rats went to the wind and made the proposal to him that he should marry their daughter, whom they wanted to give in marriage to the most powerful being. But the wind said, "You are in error. I do indeed have the power to drive away the cloud, but I am powerless against the wall that people build to hold me back. I can neither blow through it nor do anything to it. The wall is much more powerful than I." So the rats again set forth and came to the wall, to whom, in a similar manner, they made their request. The wall replied, "It is indeed true that I have the power to resist the wind, but there is a rat that is undermining me, boring into me and making holes throughout me, and there is nothing I can do to stop him. I am powerless against the rat. It would be better for you to take the rat for your son-in-law than to choose me!" This pleased the rats, for they saw that the wall was right. They returned home and married their dear daughter to a handsome young rat. They never regretted this, for their daughter lived happily and contentedly with a man of her own kind. And the parents, who once had wanted to elevate her so high, shared in her happiness and satisfaction. Source: David Brauns, "Die Ratten und ihr Töchterlein," Japanische Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich, 1885), pp. 85-87 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. Link to additional Folktales from Japan . Return to the table of contents . A Bridegroom for Miss Mole Korea By the river Kingin stands the great stone image, or Miryek, that was cut out of the solid rock ages ago. Its base lies far beneath the ground and around its granite cap, many feet square, the storm clouds gather and play as they roll down the mountain. Down under the earth, near this mighty colossus, lived a soft-furred mole and his wife. One day a daughter was born to them. It was the most wonderful mole baby that ever was known. The father was so proud of his lovely offspring that he determined to marry her only to the grandest thing in the whole universe. Nothing else would satisfy his pride in the beautiful creature he called his own. Father Mole sought long and hard to find out where and what, in all nature, was considered the most wonderful. He called in his neighbors and talked over the matter with them. Then he visited the king of the moles and asked the wise ones in his court to decide for him. One and all agreed that the Great Blue Sky was above everything else in glory and greatness. So up to the Sky the Mole Father went and offered his daughter to be the bride of the Great Blue, telling how, with his vast azure robe, the Sky had the reputation, both on the earth and under it, of being the greatest thing in the universe. But, much to the Mole Father's surprise, the Sky declined. "No, I am not the greatest. I must refer you to the Sun. He controls me, for he can make it day or night as he pleases. Only when he rises, can I wear my bright colors. When he goes down, darkness covers the world, and men do not see me at all, but the stars instead. Better take your charming daughter to him." So to the Sun went Mr. Mole and though afraid to look directly into his face, he made his plea. He would have the Sun marry his attractive daughter. But the mighty luminary, that usually seemed so fierce, dazzling men's eyesight and able to burn up the very grass of the field, seemed suddenly very modest. Instead of accepting at once the offer, the Sun said to the father, "Alas! I am not master. The Cloud is greater than I, for he is able to cover me up and make me invisible for days and weeks. I am not as powerful as you think me to be. Let me advise you to offer your daughter to the Cloud." Surprised at this, the Mole Father looked quite disappointed. Now he was in doubt as to what time he had best propose to the Cloud, -- when it was silvery white and glistening in a summer afternoon, or when it was black and threatening a tempest. However, his ambition to get for his daughter the mightiest possible bridegroom prompted him to wait until the lightnings flashed and the thunder rolled. Then, appearing before the terrible dark Cloud that shot out fire, he told of the charms of his wonderful daughter and offered her as bride. "And why do you come to me?" asked the Cloud, its face inky black with the wrath of a storm and its eyes red with the fires of lightning. "Because you are not only the greatest thing in the universe, but you have proved it by your terrible power," replied the Father Mole. At this the Cloud ceased its rolling, stopped its fire and thunder and almost laughed. "So far from being the greatest thing in the world, I am not even my own master. See already how the Wind is driving me. Soon I shall be invisible, dissolved in air. Let me commend you to the Wind. The Master of the Cloud will make a grand son-in-law." Thereupon Papa Mole waited until the Wind calmed down, after blowing away the clouds. Then telling of his daughter's accomplishments and loveliness, he made proffer of his only child as bride to the Wind. But the Wind was not half so proud as the Mole Father had expected to find him. Very modest, almost bashful seemed the Wind, as he confessed that before Miryek, the colossal stone image, his power was naught. "Why, I smite that Great Stone Face and its eyes do not even blink. I roar in his ears, but he minds it not. I try to make him sneeze, but he will not. Smite him as I may, he still stands unmoved and smiling. Alas, no. I am not the grandest thing in the universe, while Miryek stands. Go to him. He alone is worthy to marry your daughter." By this time the Mole Father was not only footsore and weary, but much discouraged also. Evidently all appreciated his shining daughter; but would he be able, after all, to get her a worthy husband? He rested himself a while and then proceeded to Miryek, the colossus of granite as large as a lighthouse, its head far up in the air, but with ears ready to hear. The Mole Father squeaked out compliments to the image as being by common confession the greatest thing on earth. He presented his request for a son-in-law and then in detail mentioned the accomplishments of his daughter, sounding her praises at great length. Indeed, he almost ruined his case by talking so long. With stony patience, Miryek listened to the proud father with a twinkle in his white granite eyes. When his lips moved, he was heard to say, "Fond Parent, what you say is true. I am great. I care not for the sky day or night, for I remain the same in daylight and darkness. I fear not the sun, that cannot melt me, nor the frost that is not able to make me crumble. Cold or hot, in summer or in winter time, I remain unchanged. The clouds come and go, but they cannot move me. Their fire and noise, lightning and thunder, I fear not. Yes, I am great." Then the stone lips closed again. "You will make, then, a good bridegroom for my daughter? You will marry her, I understand?" asked the proud father as his hopes began to rise, though he was still doubtful. "I would gladly do so, if I were greatest. But I am not," said Miryek. "Down under my feet is the Mole. He digs with his shovel-like hands and makes burrows day and night. His might I cannot resist. Soon he shall undermine my base and I shall topple down and lie like common stone along the earth. Yes I by universal confession, the Mole is the greatest thing in the universe and to him I yield. Better marry your daughter to him." So after all his journeying, the lovely daughter's father sought no further. Advised on all sides, and opinion being unanimous, he found out that the Mole was the greatest thing in the universe. His daughter's bridegroom was found at home and of the same family of creatures. He married her to a young and handsome Mole, and great was the joy and rejoicing at the wedding. The pair were well-mated and lived happily ever afterward. Source: William Elliot Griffis, The Unmannerly Tiger and Other Korean Tales (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Company, 1911), pp. 50-55 . Return to the table of contents . The Most Powerful Husband in the World French North Africa It is said that a monk, whose prayers were always answered, was one day seated on the seashore, when he saw a kite fly holding in one of its claws a little mouse, which escaped and fell on the monk. Touched with compassion for the mouse, he took it, wrapped it up in a leaf, and carried it home with him. Fearing that his people would not be very eager to care for it, he prayed his Lord to change it into a young girl; and immediately it became a young girl gifted with great beauty. The monk led her to his wife, and said to the latter, "Here is a girl who belongs to me, and I desire that you shall treat her as my own child." When she had come to the age of womanhood, the monk said to her, "My dear daughter, you are quite grown up, and you absolutely must have a husband; choose then, one to suit yourself, so that I may unite you to him." "Since you leave me free to choose," she replied, "I wish for my husband, he who is the most powerful in the world." "Perhaps you would like the sun?" said he; and he went to find the sun, and said to it, "O! thou who art so essentially great, I have a daughter who desires to have for a husband he who is the most powerful in the world; would you be willing to marry her?" "I will show you someone who is more powerful than I," said the sun. "It is the cloud which obscures me, and makes my rays pale and tarnishes the splendor of my fires." The monk went to the cloud and repeated to him the sun's words." "And I," said the cloud, "I will show you someone more powerful than I. Go find the wind which makes me come and go, which drives me from east to west." The monk went to find the wind, and said to him the same things which he had said to the cloud; but the wind said to him also, "I will show you someone more powerful than I. It is the mountain that I cannot move." Then the monk went to speak to the mountain, which made him this reply, "I will show you someone more powerful than I. It is the rat, against which I cannot defend myself, when he bores into me and makes his home in me." At last the monk went and said to the rat, "Do you wish to marry my young daughter?" "And how could I do so?" cried the rat. "My hole is narrow, and a rat only marries a mouse." The monk then prayed his Lord to change the young girl into a mouse, as she was before, and this to the entire contentment of the young girl. Immediately she resumed her original shape, and she ran away with the rat. Source: Martha Ward Carey, transl. Fairy Legends of the French Provinces (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell and Co., 1887), pp. 118-20 . The stories in this collection were gathered from the French folklore journal Mélusine and Paul Sébillot's Contes des provinces de la France. This tale is identified as "An Arabian Story," suggesting that its origin is one of the former French colonies in North Africa. Return to the table of contents . The Vole Who Sought a Wife Marie de France Once there was a proud vole (a kind of mouse) that wanted to marry, but would not have a bride from his own lineage, wanting instead the daughter of a most high being. Thus he went to the sun, whom he held to be the mightiest being of all, and asked for the hand of his daughter. The sun replied, "But there is one even mightier than I: the cloud, for he is able to cover my brightness entirely." So the vole went to the cloud, addressed him as "the mightiest one," and asked to wed his daughter. The cloud responded that the vole would find an even stronger being in the wind, who had the power to push the cloud away at will. Next the vole journeyed to the wind, explaining that he understood him to be the most powerful creature of all, and wishing therefore to marry his daughter. "You are mistaken," answered the wind. "The wall is stronger than I. He can withstand my mightiest blast." "Then I withdraw my request for you daughter's hand," replied the vole. I will marry only into the mightiest family." And he went forthwith to the wall. Upon hearing the vole's request to marry his daughter, and the explanations thereto, the wall replied, "You have been misled, my friend. There is a creature still mightier than I." "Who, then?" asked the vole. "He must be the strongest in the world." "Quite so," said the wall. "It's the mouse who has a nest inside of me. No mortar can withstand her gnawing. With time she'll be the death of me. However far you go, you'll find no better wife than this little lady mouse." And thus it is with the proud and the arrogant who strive beyond their rightful place, and end up even lower than where they started. Source: Retold from the Anglo-Norman verse fable: "Dou Muset ki quist Fame," Poésies de Marie de France , vol. 2 (Paris: Chasseriau, 1820), no. 64, pp. 274-80 . © D. L. Ashliman, 2014. Little is known about the life of the medieval poet Marie de France, except that she probably was born in France and lived in England during the late 12th century. Return to the table of contents . The Mouse Metamorphosed into a Maid Jean de La Fontaine A mouse once from an owl's beak fell; I'd not have pick'd it up, I wis; A Brahmin did it: very well; Each country has its prejudice. The mouse, indeed, was sadly bruised. Although, as neighbors, we are used To be more kind to many others, The Brahmins treat the mice as brothers. The notion haunts their heads, that when The soul goes forth from dying men, It enters worm, or bird, or beast, As Providence or Fate is pleased; And on this mystery rests their law, Which from Pythagoras they're said to draw. And hence the Brahmin kindly pray'd To one who knew the wizard's trade, To give the creature, wounded sore, The form in which it lodged before. Forthwith the mouse became a maid, Of years about fifteen; A lovelier was never seen. She would have waked, I ween, In Priam's son, a fiercer flame Than did the beauteous Grecian dame. Surprised at such a novelty, The Brahmin to the damsel cried, "Your choice is free; For every he Will seek you for his bride." Said she, "Am I to have a voice? The strongest, then, shall be my choice." "O sun!" the Brahmin cried, "this maid is thine, And thou shalt be a son-in-law of mine." "No," said the sun, "this murky cloud, it seems, In strength exceeds me, since he hides my beams; And him I counsel you to take." Again the reverend Brahmin spake -- "O cloud, on-flying with thy stores of water, Pray wast thou born to wed my daughter?" "Ah, no, alas! for, you may see, The wind is far too strong for me. My claims with Boreas' to compare, I must confess, I do not dare." "O wind," then cried the Brahmin, vex'd, And wondering what would hinder next, -- "Approach, and, with thy sweetest air, Embrace -- possess -- the fairest fair." The wind, enraptured, thither blew; -- A mountain stopp'd him as he flew, To him now pass'd the tennis-ball, And from him to a creature small. Said he, "I'd wed the maid, but that I've had a quarrel with the rat. A fool were I to take the bride From one so sure to pierce my side." The rat! It thrill'd the damsel's ear; The name at once seem'd sweet and dear. The rat! 'Twas one of Cupid's blows; The like full many a maiden knows; But all of this beneath the rose. One smacketh ever of the place Where first he show'd the world his face. Thus far the fable's clear as light; But, if we take a nearer sight, There lurks within its drapery Somewhat of graceless sophistry; For who, that worships e'en the glorious sun, Would not prefer to wed some cooler one? And doth a flea's exceed a giant's might, Because the former can the latter bite? And, by the rule of strength, the rat Had sent his bride to wed the cat; From cat to dog, and onward still To wolf or tiger, if you will: Indeed, the fabulist might run A circle backward to the sun. -- But to the change the tale supposes, -- In learned phrase, metempsychosis. The very thing the wizard did Its falsity exposes -- If that indeed were ever hid. According to the Brahmin's plan, The proud aspiring soul of man, And souls that dwell in humbler forms Of rats and mice, and even worms, All issue from a common source, And, hence, they are the same of course. -- Unequal but by accident Of organ and of tenement, They use one pair of legs, or two, Or e'en with none contrive to do, As tyrant matter binds them to. Why, then, could not so fine a frame Constrain its heavenly guest To wed the solar flame? A rat her love possess'd. In all respects, compared and weigh'd, The souls of men and souls of mice Quite different are made, -- Unlike in sort as well as size. Each fits and fills its destined part As Heaven doth well provide; Nor witch, nor fiend, nor magic art, Can set their laws aside. Source: Jean de La Fontaine, The Fables of Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright; a new edition with notes by J. W. M. Gibbs (London: George Bell and Sons, 1888), book 9, fable 7, pp. 231-33 . Link to this fable in the original French: La souris métamorphosée en fille . Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Rat and Her Journey to God Romania In a mill a rat once lived and prospered. It took after the miller, and from day to day its paunch grew bigger. It became as round as a cucumber and as fat as a candle. One day, looking at its round, sleek figure, the rat said to itself, "Behold I am so beautiful and strong. Why should I not go and pay a visit to God? He is sure to receive me." No sooner said than done. Leaving the mill, he started on his journey to God. After traveling a few days and not coming nearer to God, he stopped and said, "Methinks that either God lives much farther away than I believed, or I have lost my way. I will go to the sun and ask where God is." Coming to the sun, the rat asked, "Where is God?" "Off with you," shouted the sun. "I have no time for idle talkers." The rat went to the clouds and asked them, "Where is God?" "We cannot stop to bandy words with the like of you." Away the rat went and came to the wind. "Where is God?" asked the rat. "There," replied the wind, whistling, and getting hold of the rat hurled him down onto an ant-heap, and there he found his level. Source: M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 109, p. 318 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Texts of additional chain tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 30, 2014. Town Mouse and Country Mouse Town Mouse and Country Mouse fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 112 and related tales selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2024 Contents The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse (Aesop). The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse (Horace). The Town Rat and the Country Rat (La Fontaine). The Story of the Town Mouse and the Field Mouse (Romania). The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse (Norway). A Mouse in the Hill and a Mouse in a Farm (Scotland). The Greedy and Ambitious Cat (India). The Dog That Went Abroad (India). The Mouse Who Went to the Country (James Thurber). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse Aesop Now you must know that a town mouse once upon a time went on a visit to his cousin in the country. He was rough and ready, this cousin, but he loved his town friend and made him heartily welcome. Beans and bacon, cheese and bread, were all he had to offer, but he offered them freely. The town mouse rather turned up his long nose at this country fare, and said, "I cannot understand, cousin, how you can put up with such poor food as this, but of course you cannot expect anything better in the country; come you with me and I will show you how to live. When you have been in town a week you will wonder how you could ever have stood a country life." No sooner said than done: The two mice set off for the town and arrived at the town mouse's residence late at night. "You will want some refreshment after our long journey," said the polite town mouse, and took his friend into the grand dining room. There they found the remains of a fine feast, and soon the two mice were eating up jellies and cakes and all that was nice. Suddenly they heard growling and barking. "What is that?" said the country mouse. "It is only the dogs of the house," answered the other. "Only," said the country mouse, "I do not like that music at my dinner!" Just at that moment the door flew open; in came two huge mastiffs; and the two mice had to scamper down and run off. "Good-bye, cousin," said the country mouse. "What! Going so soon?" said the other. "Yes," he replied. "Better beans and bacon in peace than cakes and ale in fear." Source: Joseph Jacobs, The Fables of Aesop (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), no. 7, pp. 15-17 . Return to the table of contents . The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse Horace One day a country mouse in his poor home Received an ancient friend, a mouse from Rome: The host, though close and careful, to a guest Could open still, so now he did his best. He spares not oats or vetches: in his chaps Raisins he brings and nibbled bacon-scraps, Hoping by varied dainties to entice His town-bred guest, so delicate and nice, Who condescended graciously to touch Thing after thing, but never would take much, While he, the owner of the mansion, sate On threshed-out straw, and spelt and darnels ate. At length the townsman cries: "I wonder how You can live here, friend, on this hill's rough brow: Take my advice, and leave these ups and downs, This hill and dale, for humankind and towns. Come now, go home with me: remember, all Who live on earth are mortal, great and small: Then take, good sir, your pleasure while you may; With life so short, 'twere wrong to lose a day." This reasoning made the rustic's head turn round; Forth from his hole he issues with a bound, And they two make together for their mark, In hopes to reach the city during dark. The midnight sky was bending over all, When they set foot within a stately hall, Where couches of wrought ivory had been spread With gorgeous coverlets of Tyrian red, And viands piled up high in baskets lay, The relics of a feast of yesterday. The townsman does the honours, lays his guest At ease upon a couch with crimson dressed, Then nimbly moves in character of host, And offers in succession boiled and roast; Nay, like a well-trained slave, each wish prevents, And tastes before the tit-bits he presents. The guest, rejoicing in his altered fare, Assumes in turn a genial diner's air, When hark! a sudden banging of the door: Each from his couch is tumbled on the floor: Half dead, they scurry round the room, poor things, While the whole house with barking mastiffs rings. Then says the rustic: "It may do for you, This life, but I don't like it; so adieu: Give me my hole, secure from all alarms, I'll prove that tares and vetches still have charms. Source: The Satires, Epistles, and Art of Poetry of Horace , translated into English verse by John Conington; 4th edition (London: George Bell and Sons, 1874), Satires , book 2, no. 6, pp. 84-86 . Link to this fable in the original Latin (lines 79-117): Quintus Horatius Flaccus, Sermones , Liber II, Sermo VI . Return to the table of contents . The Town Rat and the Country Rat Jean de La Fontaine A rat from town, a country rat Invited in the civilest way; For dinner there was just to be Ortolans and an entrement. Upon a Turkey carpet soft The noble feast at last was spread; I leave you pretty well to guess The merry, pleasant life they led. Gay the repast, for plenty reigned, Nothing was wanting to the fare; But hardly had it well begun Ere chance disturbed the friendly pair. A sudden racket at the door Alarmed them, and they made retreat; The city rat was not the last, His comrade followed fast and fleet. The noise soon over, they returned, As rats on such occasions do; "Come," said the liberal citizen, "And let us finish our ragout." "Not a crumb more," the rustic said; "Tomorrow you shall dine with me; Don't think me jealous of your state, Or all your royal luxury; But then I eat so quiet at home, And nothing dangerous is near; Good-bye, my friend, I have no love For pleasure when it's mixed with fear." Source: Jean de La Fontaine (1621-1695), Fables , book 1, fable 9. Translated by Walter Thornbury. Link to this fable in the original French: Le rat de ville et le rat des champs . Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Town Mouse and the Field Mouse Romania A mouse living in the town one day met a mouse which lived in the field. "Where do you come from?" asked the latter when she saw the town mouse. "I come from yonder town," replied the first mouse. "How is life going there with you?" "Very well, indeed. I am living in the lap of luxury. Whatever I want of sweets or any other good things is to be found in abundance in my master's house. But how are you living?" "I have nothing to complain of. You just come and see my stores. I have grain and nuts, and all the fruits of the tree and field in my storehouse." The town mouse did not quite believe the story of her new friend, and, driven by curiosity, went with her to the latter's house. How great was her surprise when she found that the field mouse had spoken the truth; her garner was full of nuts and grain and other stores, and her mouth watered when she saw all the riches which were stored up there. Then she turned to the field mouse and said, "Oh, yes, you have here a nice snug place and something to live upon, but you should come to my house and see what I have there. Your stock is as nothing compared with the riches which are mine." The field mouse, who was rather simple by nature and trusted her new friend, went with her into the town to see what better things the other could have. She had never been into the town and did not know what her friend could mean when she boasted of her greater riches. So they went together, and the town mouse took her friend to her master's house. He was a grocer, and there were boxes and sacks full of every good thing the heart of a mouse could desire. When she saw all these riches, the field mouse said she could never have believed it, had she not seen it with her own eyes. While they were talking together, who should come in but the cat. As soon as the town mouse saw the cat, she slipped quietly behind a box and hid herself. Her friend, who had never yet seen a cat, turned to her and asked her who that gentleman was who had come in so quietly. "Do you not know who he is? Why, he is our priest, and he has come to see me. You must go and pay your respects to him and kiss his hand. See what a beautiful glossy coat he has on, and how his eyes sparkle, and how demurely he keeps his hands in the sleeves of his coat." Not suspecting anything, the field mouse did as she was told and went up to the cat. He gave her at once his blessing, and the mouse had no need of another after that. The cat gave her extreme unction there and then. That was just what the town mouse had intended. When she saw how well stored the home of the field mouse was, she made up her mind to trap her and to kill her, so that she might take possession of all that the field mouse had gathered up. She had learned the ways of the townspeople and had acted up to them. Source: M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 105, pp. 311-12 . Return to the table of contents . The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse Norway Once upon a time a town mouse met a country mouse on the outskirts of a wood. The country mouse was sitting under a hazel thicket plucking nuts. "Busy harvesting, I see," said the town mouse. "Who would think of our meeting in this out-of-the-way part of the world?" "Just so," said the country mouse. "You are gathering nuts for your winter store?" asked the town mouse? "I am obliged to do so if we intend having anything to live upon during the winter," said the country mouse. "The husk is big and the nut full this year, enough to satisfy any hungry body," said the town mouse. "Yes, you are right there," said the country mouse. And then she related how well she lived and how comfortable she was at home. the town mouse maintained that she was the better off, but the country mouse said that nowhere could one be so well off as in the woods and hills. The town mouse, however, declared she was best off. And as they could not agree on this point they promised to visit one another at Christmas, then they could see for themselves which was really the most comfortable. The first visit was to be paid by the town mouse. Now, although the country mouse had moved down form the mountains for the winter, the road was long and tiring, and one had to travel up hill and down dale. The snow lay thick and deep, so the town mouse found it hard work to get on, and she became both tired and hungry before she reached the end of her journey. "How nice it will be to get some food," she thought. The country mouse had scraped together the best she had. There were nut kernels, polypoly and other sorts of roots, and many other good things which grow in woods and fields. She kept it all in a hole far under the ground, so the frost could not reach it, and close by was a running spring, open all the winter, so she could drink as much water as she liked. There was an abundance of all she had, and they ate both well and heartily. But the town mouse thought it was very poor fare indeed. "One can, of course, keep boy and soul together on this," said she, "but I don't think much of it. Now you must be good enough to visit me and taste what we have." Yes, that she would, and before long she set out. The town mouse had gathered together all the scraps from the Christmas fare which the woman of the house had dropped on the floor during the holidays -- bits of cheese, butter and tallow ends, cake crumbs, pastry, and many other good things. In the dish under the ale tap she had drink enough. In fact, the place was full of all kinds of dainties. They ate and fared well. The country mouse seemed never to have had enough. She had never tasted such delicacies. But then she became thirsty, for she found the food both strong and rich, and now she wanted something to drink. "We haven't far to go for the beer we shall drink," said the town mouse, and jumped upon the edge of the dish and drank until she was no longer thirsty. She did not drink too much, for she knew the Christmas beer was strong. The country mouse, however, thought the beer a splendid drink. She had never tasted anything but water, so she took one sip after another, but as she could not stand strong drink she became tipsy before she left the dish. The drink got into her head and down into her toes, and she began running and jumping about from one beer barrel to the other, and to dance and tumble about on the shelves among the cups and mugs. She squeaked and screeched as if she were both drunk and mad. About her being drunk there was very little doubt. "You must not carry on as if you had just come from the backwoods and make such a row and noise," said the town mouse. "The master of the house is a bailiff, and he is very strict indeed," she added. The country mouse said she didn't care either for bailiffs or beggars. But the cat sat at the top of the cellar steps, lying in wait, and heard all the chatter and noise. When the woman of the house went down to draw some beer and lifted the trapdoor, the cat slipped by into the cellar and struck its claws into the county mouse. Then there was quite another sort of dance. The town mouse slid back into her hole and sat in safety looking on, while the country mouse suddenly became sober, when she felt the claws of the cat in her back. "Oh, my dear bailiff, of dearest bailiff, be merciful and spare my life, and I will tell you a fairy tale," she said. "Well, go on," said the cat. "Once upon a time there were two little mice," said the country mouse, squeaking slowly and pitifully, for she wanted to make the story last as long as she could. "Then they were not lonely," said the cat dryly and curtly. "And they had a steak which they were going to fry." "Then they could not starve," said the cat. "And they put it out on the roof to cool," said the country mouse. "Then they did not burn themselves," said the cat. "But there came a fox and a crow and ate it all up," said the country mouse. "Then I'll eat you," said the cat. But just at that moment the woman shut the trapdoor with a slam, which so startled the cat that she let ho her hold of the mouse. One bound and the country mouse found herself in the hole with the town mouse. From there a passage led out into the snow, and you may be sure the country mouse did not wait long before she set out homeward. "And this is what you call living well and being best off," she said to the town mouse. "Heaven preserve me from having such a fine place and such a master! Why I only just got away with my life!" Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Fairy Tales from the Far North , translated by H. L. Brækstad (London: David Nutt, 1897), pp. 116-21 . Brækstad uses the familiar English title "The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse" instead of the more accurate "The House Mouse and the Highland Mouse." Link to the tale in the original Norwegian: Hjemmusa og fjellmusa , Norske Folkeeventyr . Return to the table of contents . A Mouse in the Hill, and a Mouse in a Farm Scotland There was a mouse in the hill, and a mouse in a farm. "It were well," said the hill mouse, "to be in the farm where one might get things." Said the farm mouse, "'S fhearr an t-sith." Better is peace. Source (books.google.com): John Francis Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , new edition, vol. 1 (London: Alexander Gardner, 1890), pp. 287-88 . Source (Internet Archive): John Francis Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , new edition, vol. 1 (London: Alexander Gardner, 1890), pp. 287-88 . Return to the table of contents . The Greedy and Ambitious Cat India There was formerly an old woman in a village, extremely thin, half-starved, and meagre. She lived in a little cottage as dark and gloomy as a fool's heart, and withal as close shut up as a miser's hand. This miserable creature had for the companion of her wretched retirements a cat meagre and lean as herself; the poor creature never saw bread, nor beheld the face of a stranger, and was forced to be contented with only smelling the mice in their holes, or seeing the prints of their feet in the dust. If by some extraordinary lucky chance this miserable animal happened to catch a mouse, she was like a beggar that discovers a treasure; her visage and her eyes were inflamed with joy, and that booty served her for a whole week; and out of the excess of her admiration, and distrust of her own happiness, she would cry out to herself, "Heavens! Is this a dream, or is it real?" One day, however, ready to die for hunger, she got upon the ridge of her enchanted castle, which had long been the mansion of famine for cats, and spied from thence another cat, that was stalking upon a neighbor's wall like a lion, walking along as if she had been counting her steps, and so fat that she could hardly go. The old woman's cat, astonished to see a creature of her own species so plump and so large, with a loud voice, cries out to her pursy neighbor, "In the name of pity, speak to me, thou happiest of the cat kind! Why, you look as if you came from one of the Khan of Kathai's feasts. I conjure ye, to tell me how or in what region it is that you get your skin so well stuffed?" "Where?" replied the fat one. "Why, where should one feed well but at a king's table? I go to the house," continued she, "every day about dinner-time, and there I lay my paws upon some delicious morsel or other, which serves me till the next, and then leave enough for an army of mice, which under me live in peace and tranquillity; for why should I commit murder for a piece of tough and skinny mouse-flesh, when I can live on venison at a much easier rate?" The lean cat, on this, eagerly inquired the way to this house of plenty, and entreated her plump neighbor to carry her one day along with her. "Most willingly," said the fat puss; "for thou seest I am naturally charitable, and thou art so lean that I heartily pity thy condition." On this promise they parted; and the lean cat returned to the old woman's chamber, where she told her dame the story of what had befallen her. The old woman prudently endeavored to dissuade her cat from prosecuting her design, admonishing her withal to have a care of being deceived. "For, believe me," said she, "the desires of the ambitious are never to be satiated, but when their mouths are stuffed with the dirt of their graves. Sobriety and temperance are the only things that truly enrich people. I must tell thee, poor silly cat, that they who travel to satisfy their ambition, have no knowledge of the good things they possess, nor are they truly thankful to heaven for what they enjoy, who are not contented with their fortune." The poor starved cat, however, had conceived so fair an idea of the king's table, that the old woman's good morals and judicious remonstrances entered in at one ear and went out at the other; in short, she departed the next day with the fat puss to go to the king's house; but, alas before she got thither, her destiny had laid a snare for her. For being a house of good cheer, it was so haunted with cats, that the servants had, just at this time, orders to kill all the cats that came near it, by reason of a great robbery committed the night before in the king's larder by several grimalkins. The old woman's cat, however, pushed on by hunger, entered the house, and no sooner saw a dish of meat unobserved by the cooks, but she made a seizure of it, and was doing what for many years she had not done before, that is, heartily filling her belly; but as she was enjoying herself under the dresser-board, and feeding heartily upon her stolen morsels, one of the testy officers of the kitchen, missing his breakfast, and seeing where the poor cat was solacing herself with it, threw his knife at her with such an unlucky hand, that it struck her full in the breast. However, as it has been the providence of nature to give this creature nine lives instead of one, poor puss made a shift to crawl away, after she had for some time shammed dead. But, in her flight, observing the blood come streaming from her wound, "Well," said she, "let me but escape this accident, and if ever I quit my old hold and my own mice for all the rarities in the king's kitchen, may I lose all my nine lives at once!" Source (books.google.com): The Instructive and Entertaining Fables of Pilplay, an Indian Philosopher , 6th edition (London: 1789), fable 3, pp. 26-28 . Source (Internet Archive): The Instructive and Entertaining Fables of Pilplay, an Indian Philosopher , 6th edition (London: 1789), fable 3, pp. 26-28 . Link to an earlier edition of this work: The Fables of Pilpay, a Famous Indian Phylosopher Containing Many Useful Rules for the Conduct of Humane Life / Made English and Address'd to His Highness the Duke of Gloucester. (London: 1699), pp. 21-24 . Return to the table of contents . The Dog That Went Abroad India In a certain place there once lived a dog by the name of Tschitranga, which means "having a spotted body." A lengthy famine set in. Because they had no food, the dogs and other animals began to leave their families. Tschitranga, whose throat was emaciated with hunger, was driven by fear to another country. There in a certain city he went to a certain house day after day where, due to the carelessness of the housekeeper, many good things to eat were left lying about, and he ate his fill. However, upon leaving the house, other vicious dogs surrounded him on all sides and tore into him on all parts of his body with their teeth. Then he reconsidered his situation, and said, "It is better at home. Even during a famine you can live there in peace, and no one bites you to pieces. I will return to my own city." Having thus thought it through, he set forth to his own city. When he arrived there, all of his relatives asked him, "Tschitranga, tell us about where you have been. What is the country like? How do the people behave? What do they eat? What do they do?" He answered, "How can I explain to you the essence of a foreign place? There are good things to eat in great variety, and housekeepers who do not keep watch! There is only one evil in a foreign country: You will be hated there because of who you are!" Source (books.google.com): "Der Hund in der Fremde," Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen , aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt von Theodor Benfey, vol. 2 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), pp. 319-20 . Source (Internet Archive): "Der Hund in der Fremde," Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen , aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt von Theodor Benfey, vol. 2 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), pp. 319-20 . Link to another translation of this fable: "The Dog Who Went Abroad," The Panchatantra , translated from the Sanskrit by Arthur W. Ryder (Chicago: © University of Chicago Press, 1925), pp. 421-22 . India's most influential contribution to world literature, the Panchatantra consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled, in their current form, between the third and fifth centuries AD. It is believed that even then the stories were already ancient. The tales' self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes the Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai (sometimes spelled Pilpay), which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of the Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced medieval writers of fables. Return to the table of contents . The Mouse Who Went to the Country James Thurber Once upon a Sunday there was a city mouse who went to visit a country mouse. He hid away on a train the country mouse had told him to take, only to find that on Sundays it did not stop at Beddington. Hence the city mouse could not get off at Beddington and catch a bus for Sibert's Junction, where he was to be met by the country mouse. The city mouse, in fact, was carried on to Middleburg, where he waited three hours for a train to take him back. When he got back to Beddington he found that the last bus for Sibert's Junction had just left, so he ran and he ran and he ran and he finally caught the bus and crept aboard, only to find that it was not the bus for Sibert's Junction at all, but was going in the opposite direction through Pell's Hollow and Grumm to a place called Wimberby. When the bus finally stopped, the city mouse got out into a heavy rain and found that there were no more buses that night going anywhere. "To the hell with it," said the city mouse, and he walked back to the city. Moral: Stay where you are, you're sitting pretty. Source (books.google.com): James Thurber, Fables for Our Time and Famous Poems (© Harper Collins, 1983), p. 1 . Source (Internet Archive): James Thurber, Fables for Our Time and Famous Poems (© Harper Collins, 1983), p. 1. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Targets open in new windows. Cat and Mouse . Fables about cats and mice. Folktales for Travelers . Additional folktales about humans and animals who leave home seaking a better life. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised July 4, 2024 Multiple Births in Legend and Folklore Multiple Births in Legend and Folklore translated and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2016 Multiple births have not always been considered to be a blessing. Indeed, as the following legends show, in times past they were sometimes seen to be a sign of the mother's infidelity or other sin, with potentially fatal consequences for the children. Contents The Birth of Aistulf (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). As Many Children As There Are Days in the Year (The Netherlands, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Woman with Three Hundred and Sixty-Six Children (Netherlands, William Elliot Griffis). The Boy in the Fishpond (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Origin of the Welfs (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Wölpe (Germany, A. Kuhn and W. Schwarz). Donkey Meadow and the Nine Brunos (Germany, A. Kuhn and W. Schwarz). Nine Children at One Time (Germany, Ludwig Bechstein). The Entombed Noblewoman (Austria, Johann Adolf Heyl). The Dogs (Germany, Karl Lyncker) The Nine Children (Germany, Karl Lyncker). Twelve Children Born at One Time (Scandinavia). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Birth of Aistulf Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm The following legend is told about King Aistulf, who ruled the Langobards in the middle of the eighth century: It is said that his mother brought five children to the world in one hour's time. The king only wanted to let one child live, and he said, "The child that takes hold of my spear shall live. The other four shall be set out!" One child reached out for the spear. The king named him Aistulf and allowed him to live. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Aistulfs Geburt," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 2 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1818), no. 406, p. 379 . In later editions, this legend is number 411. The German word aussetzen , literally "to set out," carried with it the meaning of abandoning a child so he or she would die of exposure. Return to the table of contents . As Many Children as There Are Days in the Year Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Loosduynen (Leusden) is a small village one mile from The Hague. In the church there they still point out two baptismal fonts with the inscription, "In deze twee beckens zyn alle deze kinderen ghedoopt [All the children were baptized in these two fonts]." A plaque hanging nearby, inscribed with Latin and Dutch verses, commemorates the event described in the following popular legend: Many years ago there lived in the village a Countess Margaretha (according to others her name was Mathilde), wife of Count Hermann of Henneberg. Sometimes she is referred to simply as the Countess of Holland. One day a poor woman carrying twins in her arms approached her and asked for charity. The countess scolded her, saying, "Get away, you shameless beggar! It is impossible for a woman to have two children at once from just one father!" The poor woman replied, "Then may God let you have as many children as there are days in the year!" Some time later the countess became pregnant and on one day gave birth to 365 children. This happened in the year 1270 (1276), in the countess's forty-third year. These children were all baptized alive by Guido, the Bishop of Utrecht, in two bronze fonts. All the boys were named Johannes and the girls Elizabeth. However, within one day they all died, together with their mother, and all lie buried in one grave in the village church. It is said that there is also a monument to this event in the church at Delft. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "So viel Kinder, als Tag' im Jahr," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 2 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1818), no. 578, pp. 374-75 . In later editions this legend is number 584. Aarne-Thompson-Uther folktale type 762. Additional folktales of this type (both in the German language): Karoly Gaál, "Die Bestrafung der geizigen Königin," Die Volksmärchen der Magyaren im südlichen Burgenland (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co., 1970), Nr. 34. Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "So viele Kinder als Monate," Märchen aus dem Nachlaß (Bonn: Bouvier Verlag Herbert Grundmann, 1979), Nr. 28. Return to the table of contents . The Woman with Three Hundred and Sixty-Six Children Netherlands Long, long ago, before the oldest stork was young and big deer and little fawns were very many in the Dutch forests, there was a pond, famous for its fish, which lay in the very heart of Holland, with woods nearby. Hunters came with their bows and arrows to hunt the stags. Or, out of the bright waters, boys and men in the sunshine drew out the fish with shining scales, or lured the trout, with fly-bait, from their hiding places. In those days the fish-pond was called the Vijver, and the woods where the deer ran, Rensselaer, or the Deer's Lair. So, because the forests of oak, and beech, and alder trees were so fine, and game on land and in water so plentiful, the lord of the country came here and built his castle. He made a hedge around his estate, so that the people called the place the Count's Hedge; or, as we say, The Hague. Even today, within the beautiful city, the forests, with their grand old trees, still remain, and the fish-pond, called the Vijver, is there yet, with its swans. On the little island, the fluffy, downy cygnets are born and grow to be big birds, with long necks, bent like an arch. In another part of the town, also, with their trees for nesting, and their pond for wading, are children of the same storks, whose fathers and mothers lived there before America was discovered. By and by, many people of rank and fortune came to The Hague, for its society. They built their grand houses at the slope of the hill, not far away from the Vijver, and in time a city grew up. It was a fine sight to see the lords and ladies riding out from the castle into the country. The cavalcade was very splendid, when they went hawking. There were pretty women on horseback, and gentlemen in velvet clothes, with feathers in their hats, and the horses seemed proud to bear them. The falconers followed on foot, with the hunting birds perched on a hoop, which the man inside the circle carried round him. Each falcon had on a little cap or hood, which was fastened over its head. When this was taken off, it flew high up into the air, on its hunt for the big and little birds, which it brought down for its masters. There were also men with dogs, to beat the reeds and bushes, and drive the smaller birds from shelter. The huntsmen were armed with spears, lest a wild boar, or bear, should rush out and attack them. It was always a merry day, when a hawking party, in their fine clothes and gay trappings, started out. There were huts, as well as palaces, and poor people, also, at The Hague. Among these, was a widow, whose twin babies were left without anything to eat -- for her husband and their father had been killed in the war. Having no money to buy a cradle, and her babies being too young to be left alone, she put the pair of little folks on her back and went out to beg. Now there was a fine lady, a Countess, who lived with her husband, the Count, near the Vijver. She was childless and very jealous of other women who were mothers and had children playing around them. On this day, when the beggar woman, with her two babies on her back, came along, the grand lady was in an unusually bad temper. For all her pretty clothes, she was not a person of fine manners. Indeed, she often acted more like a snarling dog, ready to snap at any one who should speak to her. Although she had cradles and nurses and lovely baby clothes all ready, there was no baby. This spoiled her disposition, so that her husband and the servants could hardly live with her. One day, after dinner, when there had been everything good to eat and drink on her table, and plenty of it, the Countess went out to walk in front of her house. It was the third day of January, but the weather was mild. The beggar woman, with her two babies on her back and their arms round her neck, crying with hunger, came trudging along. She went into the garden and asked the Countess for food or an alms. She expected surely, at least a slice of bread, a cup of milk, or a small coin. But the Countess was rude to her and denied her both food and money. She even burst into a bad temper, and reviled the woman for having two children, instead of one. "Where did you get those brats? They are not yours. You just brought them here to play on my feelings and excite my jealousy. Be gone!" But the poor woman kept her temper. She begged piteously and said: "For the love of Heaven, feed my babies, even if you will not feed me." "No! they are not yours. You're a cheat," said the fine lady, nursing her rage. "Indeed, Madame, they are both my children and born on one day. They have one father, but he is dead. He was killed in the war, while serving his grace, your husband." "Don't tell me such a story," snapped back the Countess, now in a fury. "I don't believe that any one, man or woman, could have two children at once. Away with you," and she seized a stick to drive off the poor woman. Now, it was the turn of the beggar to answer back. Both had lost their temper, and the two angry women seemed more like she-bears robbed of their whelps. "Heaven punish you, you wicked, cruel, cold-hearted woman," cried the mother. Her two babies were almost choking her in their eagerness for food. Yet their cries never moved the rich lady, who had bread and good things to spare, while their poor parent had not a drop of milk to give them. The Countess now called her men-servants to drive the beggar away. This they did, most brutally. They pushed the poor woman outside the garden gate and closed it behind her. As she turned away, the poor mother, taking each of her children by its back, one in each hand, held them up before the grand lady and cried out loudly, so that all heard her: "May you have as many children as there are days in the year." Now with all her wrath burning in her breast, what the beggar woman really meant was this: It was the third of January, and so there were but three days in the year, so far. She intended to say that, instead of having to care for two children, the Countess might have the trouble of rearing three, and all born on the same day. But the fine lady, in her mansion, cared nothing for the beggar woman's words. Why should she? She had her lordly husband, who was a count, and he owned thousands of acres. Besides, she possessed vast riches. In her great house, were ten men-servants and thirty-one maid-servants, together with her rich furniture, and fine clothes and jewels. The lofty brick church, to which she went on Sundays, was hung with the coats of arms of her famous ancestors. The stone floor, with its great slabs, was so grandly carved with the crests and heraldry of her family, that to walk over these was like climbing a mountain, or tramping across a ploughed field. Common folks had to be careful, lest they should stumble over the bosses and knobs of the carved tombs. A long train of her servants, and tenants on the farms followed her, when she went to worship. Inside the church, the lord and lady sat, in high seats, on velvet cushions and under a canopy. By the time summer had come, according to the fashion in all good Dutch families, all sorts of pretty baby clothes were made ready. There were soft, warm, swaddling bands, tiny socks, and long white linen dresses. A baptismal blanket, covered with silk, was made for the christening, and daintily embroidered. Plenty of lace, and pink and blue ribbons -- pink for a girl and blue for a boy -- were kept at hand. And, because there might be twins, a double set of garments was provided, besides baby bathtubs and all sorts of nice things for the little stranger or strangers -- whether one or two -- to come. Even the names were chosen -- one for a boy and the other for a girl. Would it be Wilhelm or Wilhelmina? It was real fun to think over the names, but it was hard to choose out of so many. At last, the Countess crossed off all but forty-six; or the following; nearly every girl's name ending in je , as in our "Polly," "Sallie." Girls Boys Magtel Catharyna Gerrit Gysbert Nelletj Alida Cornelis Jausze Zelia Annatje Volkert Myndert Jannetje Christina Kilian Adrian Zara Katrina Johannes Joachim Marytje Bethje Petrus Arendt Willemtje Eva Barent Dirck Geertruy Dirkje Wessel Nikolaas Petronella Mayken Hendrik Staats Margrieta Hilleke Teunis Gozen Josina Bethy Wouter Evert Willemtje Japik But before the sun set on the expected day, it was neither one boy nor one girl, nor both; nor were all the forty-six names chosen sufficient; for the beggar woman's wish had come true, in a way not expected. There were as many as, and no fewer children than, there were days in the year; and, since this was leap year, there were three hundred and sixty-six little folks in the house; so that other names, besides the forty-six, had to be used. Yet none of these wee creatures was bigger than a mouse. Beginning at daylight, one after another appeared -- first a girl and then a boy; so that after the forty-eighth, the nurse was at her wit's end, to give them names. It was not possible to keep the little babies apart. The thirty-one servant maids of the mansion were all called in to help in sorting out the girls from the boys; but soon it seemed hopeless to try to pick out Peter from Henry, or Catalina from Annetje. After an hour or two spent at the task, and others coming along, the women found that it was useless to try any longer. It was found that little Piet, Jan and Klaas, Hank, Douw and Japik, among the boys; and Molly, Mayka, Lena, Elsje, Annatje and Marie were getting all mixed up. So they gave up the attempt in despair. Besides, the supply of pink and blue ribbons had given out long before, after the first dozen or so were born. As for the, baby clothes made ready, they were of no use, for all the garments were too big. In one of the long dresses, tied up like a bag, one might possibly, with stuffing, have put the whole family of three hundred and sixty-six brothers and sisters. It was not likely such small fry of human beings could live long. So, the good Bishop Guy, of Utrecht, when he heard that the beggar woman's curse had come true, in so unexpected a manner, ordered that the babies should be all baptized at once. The Count, who was strict in his ideas of both custom and church law, insisted on it too. So nothing would do but to carry the tiny infants to church. How to get them there, was a question. The whole house had been rummaged to provide things to carry the little folks in: but the supply of trays, and mince pie dishes, and crocks, was exhausted at the three hundred and sixtieth baby. So there was left only a Turk's Head, or round glazed earthen dish, fluted and curved, which looked like the turban of a Turk. Hence its name. Into this, the last batch of babies, or extra six girls, were stowed. Curiously enough, number 366 was an inch taller than the others. To thirty house maids was given a tray, for each was to carry twelve manikins, and one the last six, in the Turk's Head. Instead of rich silk blankets a wooden tray, and no clothes on, must suffice. In the Groote Kerk, or Great Church, the Bishop was waiting, with his assistants, holding brass basins full of holy water, for the christening. All the town, including the dogs, were out to see what was going on. Many boys and girls climbed up on the roofs of the one-story houses, or in the trees to get a better view of the curious procession -- the like of which had never been seen in The Hague before. Neither has anything like it ever been seen since. So the parade began. First went the Count, with his captains and the trumpeters, blowing their trumpets. These were followed by the men-servants, all dressed in their best Sunday clothes, who had the crest and arms of their master, the Count, on their backs and breasts. Then came on the company of thirty-one maids, each one carrying a tray, on which were twelve manikins, or minikins. Twenty of these trays were round and made of wood, lined with velvet, smooth and soft; but ten were of earthenware, oblong in shape, like a manger. In these, every year, were baked the Christmas pies. At first, all went on finely, for the outdoor air seemed to put the babies asleep and there was no crying. But no sooner were they inside the church, than about two hundred of the brats began wailing and whimpering. Pretty soon, they set up such a squall that the Count felt ashamed of his progeny and the Bishop looked very unhappy. To make matters worse, one of the maids, although warned of the danger, stumbled over the helmet of an old crusader, carved in stone, that rose some six inches or so above the floor. In a moment, she fell and lay sprawling, spilling out at least a dozen babies. "Heilige Mayke" (Holy Mary!), she cried, as she rolled over. "Have I killed them?" Happily the wee ones were thrown against the long-trained gown of an old lady walking directly in front of her, so that they were unhurt. They were easily picked up and laid on the tray again, and once more the line started. Happily the Bishop had been notified that he would not have to call out the names of all the infants, that is, three hundred and sixty-six; for this would have kept him at the solemn business all day long. It had been arranged that, instead of any on the list of the chosen forty-six, to be so named, all the boys should be called John, and all the girls Elizabeth; or, in Dutch, Jan and Lisbet, or Lizbethje. Yet even to say "John" one hundred and eighty times, and "Lisbet" one hundred and eighty-six times, nearly tired the old gentleman to death, for he was fat and slow. So, after the first six trays full of wee folks had been sprinkled, one at a time, the Bishop decided to "asperse" them, that is, shake, from a mop or brush, the holy water, on a tray full of babies at one time. So he called for the "aspersorium." Then, clipping this in the basin of holy water, he scattered the drops over the wee folk, until all, even the six extra girl babies in the Turk's Head, were sprinkled. Probably, because the Bishop thought a Turk was next door to a heathen, he dropped more water than usual on these last six, until the young ones squealed lustily with the cold. It was noted, on the contrary, that the little folks in the mince pie dishes were gently handled, as if the good man had visions of Christmas coming and the good things on the table. Yet it was evident that such tiny people could not bear what healthy babies of full size would think nothing of. Whether it was because of the damp weather, or the cold air in the brick church, or too much excitement, or because there were not three hundred and sixty-six nurses, or milk bottles ready, it came to pass that every one of the wee creatures died when the sun went down. Just where they were buried is not told, but, for hundreds of years, there was, in one of The Hague churches, a monument in honor of these little folks, who lived but a day. It was graven with portraits in stone of the Count and Countess and told of their children, as many as the days of the year. Nearby, were hung up the two basins, in which the holy water, used by the Bishop, in sprinkling the babies, was held. The year, month and day of the wonderful event were also engraved. Many and many people from various lands came to visit the tomb. The guide books spoke of it, and tender women wept, as they thought how three hundred and sixty-six little cradles, in the Count's castle, would have looked, had each baby lived. Source: William Elliot Griffis, Dutch Fairy Tales for Young Folks (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1918), pp. 92-104. Aarne-Thompson-Uther folktale type 762. Return to the table of contents . The Boy in the Fishpond Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm In the times of Agelmund, the King of the Langobards, it happened that a woman of this tribe gave birth to seven baby boys at one time. Being more brutal than wild animals, she threw them all into a fishpond to escape the shame. Just then the king rode past the pond, and he saw the miserable children floating there. Stopping his horse, he turned them from one side to the other with the spear he held in his hand. One of the children grasped the royal spear firmly with his little hand. The king recognized in this event a sign that this child was to become a special man. He ordered that he be pulled from the fishpond and turned him over to a wet nurse for care. Because he had pulled him from a fishpond, which in their language was called a lama , he named the child Lamissio. He grew up and became a valiant hero. Following the death of Agelmund he became King of the Langobards. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Knabe im Fischteich," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 2 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1818), no. 392, p. 30 . In later editions this legend is number 393. Return to the table of contents . The Origin of the Welfs Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Warin was a count of Altorf and Ravensburg in Swabia. His son's name was Isenbart, and the son's wife's name was Irmentrut. It happened that not far from Altorf a poor woman brought three children to the world at the same time. When Countess Irmentrut heard this, she exclaimed, "It is impossible that this woman had three children from one husband without committing adultery." She said this publicly in the presence of her husband Count Isenbart and court officials, adding that this adulteress deserved nothing more than to be sewn into a sack and drowned. The next year the countess herself became pregnant and, during the count's absence, gave birth to twelve babies, all boys. Shaking and trembling that she, according to her own words, would be accused of adultery, she ordered a servant woman to take eleven of the babies (for she kept one) to the nearest brook and to drown them. The old woman put the eleven innocent boys into a large tub to carry them to the brook, named Scherz Brook. But as God willed it, Isenbart himself came by and asked the old woman what she was carrying. She answered that she had some whelps or young puppies. "Let me see is some of them can be used later for breeding," said the count. "Oh, you have dogs enough," said the old woman, backing away. "It would give you the creeps to see this messy tangle of dogs." But the count did give in and forced her to uncover the children and show them to him. Seeing the eleven babies, small but still of noble form and manner, he asked her immediately and sternly whose children they were. The old woman told him everything, how his wife had had the babies and why they were to be killed. The count then ordered that these "whelps" [welfs] be brought to a rich miller who lived in the vicinity and who would raise them. He further ordered the old woman to return to her mistress without fear or embarrassment and to tell her nothing except that her errand had been carried out. Six years later the count brought the eleven boys, nobly dressed and groomed, to his castle (where the convent vineyard now stands). He invited all his friends and was making merry. When the meal was nearly over he had the eleven children brought in, all dressed in red. They all had the same complexion, build, size, and form as the twelfth child that the countess had kept. Everyone could see that they had all been produced by the same father and been carried beneath the heart of the same mother. Then the count stood up and ceremoniously asked his friends what sort of death a woman deserved who would attempt to kill eleven such magnificent boys. Hearing these words, the countess fell to the floor powerless and unconscious, for her heart told her that this was her flesh and blood. After she had been brought back to consciousness, she fell crying at the count's feet, and begged him pitifully for mercy. The friends too intervened on her behalf, and so the count forgave her of the simplicity and childlike naiveté that had led to the crime. Thank God that the children lived. As an eternal reminder of this miraculous event the count decreed, in the presence of his friends, that his progeny should no longer be known as the Counts of Altorf, but instead as the Welfs, and that his entire lineage should be known as the Welfs. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Ursprung der Welfen," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 2 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1818), no. 515, pp. 233-36 . In later editions this legend is number 521. Return to the table of contents . Wölpe A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz The present day district (and formerly castle) of Wölpe lies near Nienburg on the Weser River. In olden times a Count Erich (others say he was a court official) lived there. His wife gave birth to twelve boys at one time, and was so cruel that she ordered her servant girl to set one aside and to drown the remaining eleven in a brook that flowed past the castle. The servant girl, intending to carry out this order, put the little ones into a basket and went outside. However, as she walked up onto the earthwork, she was met by Count Erich who asked her what she had in the basket. To escape detection, she said it was young wolves, which at that time were still plentiful in that area. The count insisted upon seeing the animals and discovered the eleven little boys, each one identical to the others. He then commanded the servant girl to follow him and to tell no one what he was about to do. With that he found various foster homes in the vicinity for the children, and they stayed there until their confirmation. After their confirmation he had the eleven boys dress up exactly like the twelfth, took them to the countess, and asked her to select her own son from among them, but she was not able to do this. Now earlier he had once asked her what should happen to a mother who killed her own children. She had answered that such a woman should be thrown into boiling oil or something similar. The count now reminded her of what she had said and told her that these were the twelve children that she had given birth to, and that he had rescued eleven of them and had had them raised. But he did not carry out the judgment that she had spoken against herself, allowing her instead to live, so that she could rejoice over her children. And that is what happened. He lived with her and their twelve children a long time, and the place, because of this unusual occurrence, has since then been called Wölpe. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwarz, "Wölpe," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg, Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen, aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 289, pp. 257-258 . Return to the table of contents . Donkey Meadow and the Nine Brunos A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz Many long years ago a Count Bruno lived in the castle at Querfurt. He was a great converter of the heathens, and made many trips to them. Now he had a wife who once scolded a beggar woman for having so many children while not knowing how to feed them. The beggar woman cursed her, and the next time she gave birth, she had nine boys at the same time. Count Bruno had just set forth on a trip to the heathens, but when he came to a meadow just outside the town gate, his donkey stood still and refused to proceed. Try as he might, he could not get the donkey to move. Then he perceived that this was a sign from God that he should not undertake the trip, and he turned around. In the meantime, the countess, fearing that her husband would think ill of her when he learned that she had given birth to nine children at one time, ordered the midwife to put eight of them into a kettle and to drown them. The latter was carrying the kettle toward the spring near the castle -- which to this day is called Bruno's Spring -- when she was met by Count Bruno, who was just returning to the castle. Hearing one of the baby boys crying , he asked her what she had in the kettle. She could not keep it a secret, and told him everything that had happened. He commanded her to keep secret what he was going to do, and told her to tell his wife that she had drowned the children. He took the children to different people who lived in the same street -- the street is still called Bruno Street -- and had them raised there. One day after they had grown, he had the eight boys dress up exactly like the ninth one. He then asked the countess what a mother would deserve who drowned her own children, saying that such a case had come before him, and he did not know the right punishment. She said that such a woman should be forced to stand in red hot shoes. Scarcely had she said this when her nine children -- which the count had kept hidden until now -- stepped before her. He asked her to identify her own child from among them. She could not do this, and he subjected her to the judgment that she herself had spoken. To commemorate the fact that a donkey had prevented him from continuing on his journey, he had a chapel built in meadow where this happened, and the meadow is still called Donkey Meadow. Every year during the Easter week a fair was held and a great dispensation was granted there. The fair still takes place every year, and in the castle they still have the kettle and the iron shoes in which the countess suffered her punishment. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwarz, "Die Eselswiese und die neun Bruno's," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg, Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen, aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 234, pp. 208-209 . Return to the table of contents . Nine Children at One Time Ludwig Bechstein A count by the name of Gebhard resided at Querfurt. His brother was Saint Bruno, who along with Saint Adalbert was an apostle to the heathen Prussians. Count Gebhard was a strict and serious lord with a stubborn mind and a quick response. Once, when he had been away from his realm for some time, his wife, a noblewoman from Saxony, gave birth at the Querfurt residence to nine babies at one time. She and her attendants were terrified at this overly rich blessing, and they feared the worst from their count and lord, for he was temperamental and had often spoken unfavorably about women who had given birth to more than one child -- say two or three at one time -- and here there were fully three times three. He could well think that this was altogether too many and hence react in an unpleasant manner. Thus they took council with one another and decided to keep but one of the babies, the first and strongest, and to do away with the remaining eight. One of the servant women was ordered to carry the eight babies away in a kettle. She was to load the kettle with stones and sink it in the nearby castle pond. This woman met Saint Bruno, who was living in Querfurt at the time. That early morning he was walking back and forth near a beautiful spring saying his prayers. Hearing a baby cry, he asked the woman what she was carrying. Terrified, the woman said, "Young whelps," and attempted to hurry on her way. However, Bruno made her take the cover off the kettle, saw the eight babies, and forced the woman to tell to whom they belonged. She told him the whole truth. Bruno swore her to secrecy, even with regards to the mother. At the spring he baptized the children in the copper kettle in which they were lying, naming each one Bruno after himself. He then gave them to good and loyal people for care and upbringing. This all he kept a deep secret until the time came for him to return to Prussia. The ninth boy, the one that was kept, was named Burkhart, and with time he became the grandfather of Emperor Lothar. Because Bruno was about to go abroad, he revealed the secret to his brother, making him promise to not hold this sinful act against his wife, who believed that the children were dead. In the intervening years she had felt the deepest regret and the most painful sorrow. He then had the eight boys, all dressed alike, brought to the castle and introduced to their parents, who recognized from their appearance and gestures that they were the true brothers of the ninth boy. Sorrow and joy ruled at the same time. However, Count Gebhard did not allow his wife to go entirely unpunished. He had a new pair of shoes made for her, not from leather but from iron. He had the iron heated until it glowed. The countess had to put on these red-hot shoes for a time for having agreed to the advise to murder the children. These same shoes and the baptismal kettle are still on display in the church at Querfurt. To this day the spring is called "Bruno's Spring," and the pond where the whelps were to have been drowned is still called "Wolf Pond." Source: Ludwig Bechstein, "Neun Kinder auf einmal," Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 417, pp. 352-53 . Return to the table of contents . The Entombed Noblewoman Johann Adolf Heyl Approximately a quarter hour west of the parsonage of Enneberg stands Asch, the knightly ancestral home of the Lords of Prack. The Cadorinis are said to have set it afire during their military attack in the year 1487. It still stands as it was rebuilt afterward. Adjacent to the castle is a garden, surrounded by a wall that is overgrown with elderberry and currant bushes. Not far from this seat of nobility flows the brook Rü Fortiang toward St. Vigiler's Brook. The following legend deals with this place. A Knight Prack went to war, leaving his expectant wife at home. One day a beggar woman came to Castle Asch and asked for alms. The noblewoman was hardhearted and had the old woman turned away. The woman left angrily, shouting up to the windows, "As punishment you shall bring twelve children into the world at one time." And thus it happened. The woman brought twelve boys into the world at one time, but she kept only one of them, the one who pleased her most. She ordered a maidservant to drown the others in a nearby brook. At the same time the knight returned home from the field. He met the maidservant with the eleven children in her apron. He asked her what she was carrying away, and the maidservant told him everything. The knight had the eleven boys raised by strangers. At home he acted as if he knew nothing about the event. He caressed the boy that his wife had kept and attended to his knightly upbringing. When the sons had grown up he sponsored a splendid feast and told his wife that he had invited eleven magnificent knights. The woman considered herself fortunate to be able to host such distinguished guests. She did everything to prepare a distinguished meal. The eleven knights finally made their entry, and the feast began. As they ate, the knight entertained his guests with stories of his war deeds. Finally he turned the conversation to a discussion of various kinds of misdeeds. Soon thereafter the knight began telling a story, "Once there was a raven-mother who brought twelve boys into the world. She wanted to kill eleven of them and to keep and raise only one. However, without her knowledge, she was hindered in her criminal intentions. The eleven boys were rescued and brought up away from home. What punishment would such a woman deserve?" The wife, who had no idea that anyone knew anything about her secret except for the maidservant, and who thought that her eleven boys had long been dead, replied with indignation, "Such a raven-mother should be entombed alive." With that the knight turned to her and said calmly, "You yourself are this raven-mother, and my eleven knightly guests are our sons whom you wanted to drown. God decreed otherwise, and fortunately they are still alive. Your own judgment will now be carried out on you." The wife confessed her dastardly intentions, embraced and kissed her twelve sons, and was led away without resistance. Her husband allowed her to select the place where she would be entombed. She chose the garden wall of their castle, and asked that she be allowed to put into her mouth a hollowed-out elderberry branch, such as grew on the garden wall, so that she could breathe. If the branch were to grow into an independent elderberry bush, then she was saved. If, however, it were to wither, then she was condemned to the torments of hell. Then she was entombed. "Thank God," added hard-of-hearing old Frau Agreiter, who told me this story, "as you can see, the elderberry twig has grown into a splendid bush. The poor woman has done her penance and is now in heaven, for that was a long time ago." Nonetheless, it can be spooky from time to time at Castle Asch, especially in the subterranean chambers. It is said that the great treasure of the Bracuns, an immeasurable amount of gold, is buried there, and also Saint George's saddle, upon which he sat when he killed the dragon. When the Pracks rode in that saddle they were said to be invincible. Source: Johann Adolf Heyl, "Die eingemauerte Burgfrau," Volkssagen, Bräuche und Meinungen aus Tirol (Brixen: Verlag der Buchhandlung des Kath.-polit. Pressvereins, 1897), pp. 576-77 . Return to the table of contents . The Dogs Karl Lyncker In the vicinity of Niedenstein there lived in ancient times a wealthy nobleman, who occupied himself hunting. At home he had a beautiful but proud wife. One morning when the noblewoman was home alone a poor woman knocked at her door. She was holding one child by the hand, carrying one on her arm, and had yet another one beneath her heart. She asked for alms. "Get out of here!" cried out the hard-hearted noblewoman. "Why must you poor people have so many children, if you can't afford to feed them?" The woman turned away, saying as she left, "May one day you be given seven at one time!" Not long afterward the noblewoman did indeed give birth to seven boys at one time. In her fear, she commanded her servant girl to put six of the boys into a basket and to carry them away and throw them into the water before her husband returned home. "If on your way anyone questions you," she said, "just tell them that you have some young dogs to be drowned; but on your life, do not open the lid." The servant girl did as she had been ordered, but as fate would have it, the first person she met was the nobleman, who was just returning home. "What do you have in the basket?" he asked. The servant girl answered uneasily, "Young dogs. My mistress ordered me to throw them into the water." "Let me see the dogs," said the nobleman. Whatever excuses the servant girl made, and however she tried to refuse, it was all to no avail, and in the end she had to open the basket. Instead of dogs, the nobleman was startled to see six healthy boys. They reached out their arms toward him and look up at him imploringly with their large blue eyes. He forced the servant girl to tell her secret and made her swear that she would report back at home that she had carried out her errand. He then took the basket and went to the pastor in the next village. "Would you baptize six young dogs for me?" he asked the pious man, who was outraged at such disrespect and sent the nobleman away. The same thing happened at a second pastor. However, the third pastor he sought out said that he was willing to baptize the dogs. Each of the boys was given the name "Dog." The nobleman made a donation to the pastor at Metz which even today is at the parsonage and is called the "dog-tithe." The nobleman found a different foster home for each of the boys, but he always made sure that each one was dressed in the same way that the boy was dressed who had been kept by his wife. After they had grown up he summoned them all to his castle. The proud wife was startled to see them, but even more when her husband asked her what a mother would deserve who tried to drown six such splendid boys. She composed herself quickly and responded with impudence, "She would deserve to be placed in a barrel studded with nails, and then rolled down a mountain." "You have spoken your own judgment," said the nobleman, "for these are your children who were rescued for me by a fortunate coincidence from the death that you prepared for them. And he had the judgment carried out. Source: Karl Lyncker, "Die Hunde," Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Cassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 208, pp. 138-40 . Related to Aarne-Thompson-Uther folktale type 762. Return to the table of contents . The Nine Children Karl Lyncker In the old convent church at Möllenbeck on the Weser River in the district of Schaumburg there is a wooden statue of a female saint carrying a church on her arm. The legend states: Once Count Uffo was returning to his homeland following a long absence in foreign lands. While en route he dreamed that his wife Hildburg had given birth to nine children in his absence. Startled, he quickened his pace. Hildburg met him with joy and with the words, "I believed you were dead. But I have not been alone. I have given birth to nine daughters, and they are all dedicated to God." Uffo answered, "Your children are also my children. I will care for them." But they were nine churches, including the convent at Möllenbeck, which the pious woman had built and endowed. Source: Karl Lyncker, "Die neun Kinder," Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Cassel [Kassel]: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 272, p. 196 . Return to the table of contents . Twelve Children Born at One Time Scandinavia A woman did not get married until she was fifty years old, because she did not want to have any children, but she did not avoid her fate. Soon after marrying, she had twelve children all at once, the number she would have had if she had married at the right time. The twelve tiny babies all appeared to be dead, but someone laid them in a warm oven, and one of them came to life. It is said that he grew up to be a fine man. Source: Retold from various sources. Compare, for example: "Twelve Children on a Platter," Jacqueline Simpson, Scandinavian Folktales , (London: Penguin Books, 1988) p. 72. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Links open in new windows. Desperate Father or Murderous Fool? The Genesis of One Migratory Legend of Poverty, Fecundity and Multiple Birth , an article by Sarah J. Davies, University of the West of England (published in Folk Life: Journal of Ethnological Studies , 2016, pp. 1-17). The Singing Bones (French Louisiana) . This terrifying story's cast of characters includes a murderous mother, a naive husband, and twenty-five offspring. "The Twin Brothers" (Nigeria). This tale takes place in Africa at a time when "it was the universal custom to destroy twins immediately at birth." Source: M. I. Ogumefu, Yoruba Legends (London: The Sheldon Press, 1929), no. 18, pp. 33-36. Reprint: London: Abela Publishing, 2010, pp. 41-43 . Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Table of Contents Revised November 20, 2016. D. L. Ashliman's Home Page Professor D. L. Ashliman retired May 1, 2000, from the University of Pittsburgh He now conducts his folklore research from southern Utah. He can be contacted at ashliman at hotmail dot com. (Use traditional e-mail punctuation and spacing.) WWW sites Folklinks: Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites . Folktexts: A Library of Folktales, Folklore, Fairy Tales, and Mythology . Germany Discovers America. An annotated bibliography [in progress] of German-American travel narratives, 1800-1918. Monographs Fairy Lore: A Handbook . Westport (Connecticut), New York, and London: Greenwood Press, 2005. ISBN 0-313-33349-1. 229 pages. Folk and Fairy Tales: A Handbook . Westport (Connecticut), New York, and London: Greenwood Press, 2004. ISBN 0-31332810-2. 256 pages. Aesop's Fables . Edited and with an introduction and notes by D. L. Ashliman. Translated by V. S. Vernon Jones. Illustrations by Arthur Rackham. New York: Barnes & Noble Classics, 2003. ISBN 1-59308-062-X. xxxiv, 269 pp. Voices from the Past: The Cycle of Life in Indo-European Folktales , second edition, expanded and revised. Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company, 1995. ISBN 0-7872-1503-1. 495 pages. First edition 1993. Once upon a Time: The Story of European Folktales . Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, External Studies Program, 1994. 235 pages. A Guide to Folktales in the English Language: Based on the Aarne-Thompson Classification System . Bibliographies and Indexes in World Literature , vol. 11. Westport (Connecticut), New York, and London: Greenwood Press, 1987. ISBN 0-313-25961-5. xvi, 384 pages. Designated as an "outstanding reference source" by the American Library Association. Ph.D. dissertation: The American West in Nineteenth-Century German Literature . Rutgers University, 1969. Dissertation Abstracts 2959-A. University Microfilms, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Order number 7000572. v, 288 pp. Recent Articles Archetypes and Motifs in Folklore and Literature: a Handbook . Edited by Jane Garry and Hasan El-Shamy. Armonk (New York) and London: M. E. Sharpe, 2005. "Origins of Inequality," pp. 50-56. "Tabu: Forbidden Chambers," pp. 118-21. "Magic Invulnerability," pp. 154-59. "Wishes," pp. 172-77. "Water Spirits," pp. 210-16. "Identity Tests," pp. 235-42. "Contests Won by Deception," pp. 273-77. "Thief Escapes Detection," pp. 278-82. "Entrance into Girl's (Man's) Room (Bed) by Trick," pp. 289-94. "Step Relatives," pp. 362-67. "Cruel Parents," pp. 391-97. "Cruel Spouses," pp. 398-403. "Incest," pp. 432-41. The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Folktales and Fairy Tales . 3 vols. Edited by Donald Haase. Westport (Connecticut) and London: Greenwood Press, 2008. "Age," pp. 20-21. "Brothers," pp. 140-42. "Chain Tale," p. 176. "Clergy," pp. 215-17. "Cumulative Tale," p. 245. "Editing, Editors," p. 288. "Family," pp. 327-29. "Father," pp. 334-36. "Magic Object," pp. 598-99. "Marriage," pp. 605-607. "Nonsense Tale," pp. 679-80. "Prince," pp. 770-71. "Princess," pp. 771-73. "Punishment and Reward," pp. 786-90. "Soldier," pp. 890-91. "Spinning," pp. 912-16. "Tailor," pp. 936-37. "Twins," p. 999. "Unfinished Tale," pp. 1002-1003. Guest Professorships Universität Augsburg , Germany (1992, 1996, 1997, 1998, 2006). Education University of Utah , B.A. Rutgers University , M.A., Ph.D. Georg-August Universität , Göttingen, Germany. Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität , Bonn, Germany. Updated November 3, 2019. Folklinks: Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites Folklinks Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites © 1996-2020 compiled by D. L. Ashliman as a companion to Folk and Fairy Tales: A Handbook Greenwood Press Linked sites will open in a new window. Return to this page by closing the targeted window. Return to Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Contents Search Engines . Encyclopedias and General Reference Works . Research Libraries . Electronic Text Indexes . Directories of Electronic Text Sites (All Subjects) . Directories of Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites . Libraries of Electronic Texts . General Fairy-Tale Sites . Individual Stories and Types . Film and Fairy Tales . Storytelling . For Children, Parents, and Teachers . Organizations and Journals . Foreign-Language Sites . Danish/Norwegian Dutch French German Russian Turkish Search Engines The best tool for Internet research is not a comprehensive list of favorite sites, but rather a repertory of a few efficient search engines and reliable indexes, together with a basic understanding of how to use them. The starting place for almost any Internet search is Google . This site's use of keywords is simple and efficient. Word groups set off by quotation marks are treated as single units. Thus the search term "fairy tales" will find only web sites containing that phrase, but not the same words appearing separately. The keywords "little mermaid" copenhagen will find sites containing Copenhagen and Little Mermaid in any order, but Little Mermaid must appear as an unbroken phrase. Google, like most search engines, is not case sensitive; lower-case letters can substitute for upper-case ones, and vice versa. Although Google is very thorough, one can usually locate further sites by conducting the same search with additional engines. The following are proven performers: Excite . Lycos . Teoma . Webcrawler . Yahoo! . Return to the table of contents . Encyclopedias and General Reference Works Folktale and fairy-tale researchers should not overlook general encyclopedias as sources for basic information about authors, collectors, movements, genres, and the like. The user-generated Internet encyclopedia Wikipedia contains a wealth of information and is generally reliable. Return to the table of contents . Research Libraries Online catalogs of large libraries are excellent sources of bibliographic information about published folktale books. However, please note that these catalogs do not provide access to the books themselves. The following electronic catalogs are well designed and provide information about immense collections: COPAC , a union catalog combining the resources the largest university libraries in the United Kingdom and Ireland plus the British Library. Library of Congress . Of special interest at the Library of Congress is the Folklife Sourcebook . Indiana University Libraries . One of the world's largest folklore collections. Melvyl , the online catalog of the University of California Libraries. Return to the table of contents . Electronic Text Indexes Thousands of books and shorter pieces, many of them relevant to folk and fairy-tale studies, are available gratis on the Internet as electronic texts. The most comprehensive index of such texts in English is the University of Pennsylvania's Online Books , which currently lists over 20,000 titles. It also includes links to numerous foreign-language electronic libraries. To assist in finding a desired text among their thousands of listed titles, Online Books includes a number of search tools. Two hints for browsing: Search for the word fairy, folk, folktale, folktales, tale, or tales in the title field . Note that the search function uses only whole words, so a search for tale will not find a title with the plural form tales. Browse in the subject-matter section under the Library of Congress classification GR , folklore. The Online Books data base is also available through the World eBook Library , which includes links to a large number of reference works (dictionaries, multilingual dictionaries, thesauri, encyclopedias), academic libraries worldwide, and other research tools. The Digital Book Index combines and integrates the free books listed through Online Books with commercial titles available for a fee. The subject-matter search tool is very useful. A search under the category "folklore, myths, legends, fables" yielded over 100 titles. This site requires a sign-on procedure, but its use is without charge. Return to the table of contents . Libraries of Electronic Texts Each of following electronic text libraries contains a substantial collection of works relating to folk and fairy tales. Arthur's Classic Novels includes numerous traditional and literary fairy tales, mostly borrowed from other Internet sites then attractively reformatted. The Baldwin Project , according to its mission statement, brings yesterday's classics to today's children. It currently lists nearly 2,000 stories, many of them folk and fairy tales. The site is indexed by grade level, genre (including fables, fairy tales, and legends), book title, and other categories. The texts are handsomely formatted and easy to read. Bartleby.com is one of the pioneering electronic text sites. Its strong points include a very useful search mechanism, a large collection of integrated reference works, plus a good assortment of carefully edited classics. Bibliomania lists more than 2,000 classic texts. Children's Books Online (the Rosetta Project) is a large collection of illustrated children's books, mostly from the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The books are reproduced as single-page, full-color image files, resulting in accurate and appealing replicas of the originals. An added attraction are the text-file translations of many of the stories into various languages. ClassicReader.com contains books and short stories by more than 200 authors. The children's section includes numerous collections of traditional fairy tales, and the short-story section contains many literary fairy tales. The Electronic Text Center at the University of Virginia is a pioneer in the editing and distribution of electronic texts in various formats. Included in the section for young readers are many folk and fairy-tale related items. Folktexts , compiled and edited by D. L. Ashliman, University of Pittsburgh, offers a variety of folklore and mythology texts, arranged in groups of closely related stories. The Hockliffe Project is centered around the Hockliffe Collection of early British children's books held by De Montfort University in Leicester and Bedford, England. The books are scanned into image files, rather than text files, yielding exact replicas of each page. The Kellscraft Studio specializes in illustrated books from the period 1890-1920, including many fairy-tale collections. Take special notice of two books beautifully illustrated by Blanche McManus: The True Mother Goose and Told in the Twilight. The Perseus Digital Library , sponsored by Tufts University, is an extensive and well-engineered site combining images, texts, and scholarship. The principal fields represented are Greek and Roman civilization and the English Renaissance. Of special interest to students of folktales are the fables of Phaedrus. Project Gutenberg , begun in 1971, is the Internet's oldest producer of free electronic books, and with over 6,000 online books is among the largest. With the help of many volunteers the library is expanding at the rate of about one new book per day. Project Gutenberg's text-only and easily downloadable files are among the most carefully scanned and proof-read digital texts available. Sacred Text Archive . This remarkable site's name does not say it all. In addition to housing the scriptures of many religions, it contains mythology and folklore texts from around the world. Each of the following topics, selected from a list at the lower left side of the site's index page, yields a number of folklore texts: African, Americana, Australia, Buddhism, Celtic, Egyptian, England, Greek/Roman, Hinduism, Judaism, Legends/Sagas (includes the Thousand and One Nights ), Native American, Pacific, and Tolkien. Return to the table of contents . General Fairy-Tale Sites Fairy Tales, Folk Tales, and Mythology WebRing . A collection of sites linked into a ring. SurLaLune Fairy Tale Pages is an attractive, extensive, and well-organized site maintained by Heidi Anne Heiner. Included are essays, illustrations, annotated texts, links to outside sites, and a discussion bulletin board. Return to the table of contents . Individual Stories and Types Cinderella: A Bibliography . A thorough and scholarly annotated bibliography of texts, analogues, criticism, modern versions, parodies -- ranging from ancient folklore through recent popular culture, modern scholarship and pornographic films. Organized by Russell A. Peck, University of Rochester. Cinderella . A selection of folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 510A and related stories about persecuted heroines, edited by D. L. Ashliman. The Annotated Cinderella , from the SurLaLune Fairy Tales by Heidi Anne Heiner. Noodleheads . The wisdom of fools in folktales. Return to the table of contents . Film and Fairy Tales A good place to begin research on the use of fairy-tale topics in film and television is the Internet Movie Database . Tom Davenport is an American filmmaker who has created a successful series of short films placing familiar Grimm fairy tales in settings from the American south. Return to the table of contents . Storytelling Storyteller.net . A center for news, essays, texts, and contacts for storytellers. Return to the table of contents . For Children, Parents, and Teachers Andersen Fairy Tales , in English or French. Animated Tall Tales , featuring the exploits of Paul Bunyan. Grimm Fairy Tales , in English or French. Myths, Folktales, and Fairy Tales , resources for teachers of grades 1-8, sponsored by Scholastic, Inc. Internet Public Library: Story Hour , sponsored by the University of Michigan. Return to the table of contents . Organizations and Journals American Folklife Center . at the Library of Congress. American Folklore Society . Folklore Fellows at the Kalevala Institute of the University of Turku, Finland. An important contribution of this organization is its ongoing monograph series Folklore Fellows' Communications , established in 1910. Folklore Society (UK) . Founded in 1878, this is one of the first organizations in the world devoted to the study of traditional culture. Marvels & Tales , a journal of fairy-tale studies. Modern Language Association of America . Founded in 1883, this organization promotes the study of languages and literature. Return to the table of contents . Foreign-Language Sites Danish/Norwegian H. C. Andersen . Links to Andersen's works in Danish. This site is sponsored by the Royal Library (det Kongelige Bibliotek) of Denmark. H. C. Andersen-Centret . A treasure trove of information from the H. C. Andersen Center in Odense, Denmark. Click the British flag for an English-language version of this site. Norske Folkeeventyr , the Norwegian texts of 152 tales by Asbjørnsen and Moe, sponsored by Project Runeberg. Return to the table of contents . Dutch Vlaamse Volksverhalenbank . A collection of Flemish folk legends. Return to the table of contents . French A la découverte de Jean de La Fontaine . Annotated texts of La Fontaine's fables, plus much supplementary information. Contes de Perrault . Texts of ten fairy tales by Charles Perrault. Il était une fois... Les contes de fées . A very attractive, well engineered, and authoritative fairy-tale study, sponsored by the Bibliothèque nationale de France. Les contes de Madame d'Aulnoy . A biography of Marie-Cathérine le Jumel de Barneville de la Motte, Comtesse d' Aulnoy, plus the texts of twelve of her tales. Return to the table of contents . German Europäische Märchengesellschaft . The European Fairy-Tale Society. Märchenlexikon , edited by Kurt Derungs. Projekt Gutenberg-DE . A massive German-language site sponsored by the news magazine Der Spiegel and containing thousands of electronic texts. Folk and fairy tale collections within the Projekt Gutenberg-DE include: Brüder Grimm . Fabel . Märchen . Sage, Legende, Überlieferung . Sagen.at . A large collection of legends and folktales, mostly from Austria, edited by Wolfgang Morscher, University of Innsbruck. Return to the table of contents . Russian Russian Folklore . Return to the table of contents . Turkish Uysal-Walker Archive of Turkish Oral Narrative , Texas Tech University. An immense collection of Turkish folklore, including many tales translated into English. Return to the table of contents . Revised October 27, 2020. D. L. Ashliman's Home Page Professor D. L. Ashliman retired May 1, 2000, from the University of Pittsburgh He now conducts his folklore research from southern Utah. He can be contacted at ashliman at hotmail dot com. (Use traditional e-mail punctuation and spacing.) WWW sites Folklinks: Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites . Folktexts: A Library of Folktales, Folklore, Fairy Tales, and Mythology . Germany Discovers America. An annotated bibliography [in progress] of German-American travel narratives, 1800-1918. Monographs Fairy Lore: A Handbook . Westport (Connecticut), New York, and London: Greenwood Press, 2005. ISBN 0-313-33349-1. 229 pages. Folk and Fairy Tales: A Handbook . Westport (Connecticut), New York, and London: Greenwood Press, 2004. ISBN 0-31332810-2. 256 pages. Aesop's Fables . Edited and with an introduction and notes by D. L. Ashliman. Translated by V. S. Vernon Jones. Illustrations by Arthur Rackham. New York: Barnes & Noble Classics, 2003. ISBN 1-59308-062-X. xxxiv, 269 pp. Voices from the Past: The Cycle of Life in Indo-European Folktales , second edition, expanded and revised. Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company, 1995. ISBN 0-7872-1503-1. 495 pages. First edition 1993. Once upon a Time: The Story of European Folktales . Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, External Studies Program, 1994. 235 pages. A Guide to Folktales in the English Language: Based on the Aarne-Thompson Classification System . Bibliographies and Indexes in World Literature , vol. 11. Westport (Connecticut), New York, and London: Greenwood Press, 1987. ISBN 0-313-25961-5. xvi, 384 pages. Designated as an "outstanding reference source" by the American Library Association. Ph.D. dissertation: The American West in Nineteenth-Century German Literature . Rutgers University, 1969. Dissertation Abstracts 2959-A. University Microfilms, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Order number 7000572. v, 288 pp. Recent Articles Archetypes and Motifs in Folklore and Literature: a Handbook . Edited by Jane Garry and Hasan El-Shamy. Armonk (New York) and London: M. E. Sharpe, 2005. "Origins of Inequality," pp. 50-56. "Tabu: Forbidden Chambers," pp. 118-21. "Magic Invulnerability," pp. 154-59. "Wishes," pp. 172-77. "Water Spirits," pp. 210-16. "Identity Tests," pp. 235-42. "Contests Won by Deception," pp. 273-77. "Thief Escapes Detection," pp. 278-82. "Entrance into Girl's (Man's) Room (Bed) by Trick," pp. 289-94. "Step Relatives," pp. 362-67. "Cruel Parents," pp. 391-97. "Cruel Spouses," pp. 398-403. "Incest," pp. 432-41. The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Folktales and Fairy Tales . 3 vols. Edited by Donald Haase. Westport (Connecticut) and London: Greenwood Press, 2008. "Age," pp. 20-21. "Brothers," pp. 140-42. "Chain Tale," p. 176. "Clergy," pp. 215-17. "Cumulative Tale," p. 245. "Editing, Editors," p. 288. "Family," pp. 327-29. "Father," pp. 334-36. "Magic Object," pp. 598-99. "Marriage," pp. 605-607. "Nonsense Tale," pp. 679-80. "Prince," pp. 770-71. "Princess," pp. 771-73. "Punishment and Reward," pp. 786-90. "Soldier," pp. 890-91. "Spinning," pp. 912-16. "Tailor," pp. 936-37. "Twins," p. 999. "Unfinished Tale," pp. 1002-1003. Guest Professorships Universität Augsburg , Germany (1992, 1996, 1997, 1998, 2006). Education University of Utah , B.A. Rutgers University , M.A., Ph.D. Georg-August Universität , Göttingen, Germany. Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität , Bonn, Germany. Updated November 3, 2019. Folklinks: Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites Folklinks Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites © 1996-2020 compiled by D. L. Ashliman as a companion to Folk and Fairy Tales: A Handbook Greenwood Press Linked sites will open in a new window. Return to this page by closing the targeted window. Return to Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Contents Search Engines . Encyclopedias and General Reference Works . Research Libraries . Electronic Text Indexes . Directories of Electronic Text Sites (All Subjects) . Directories of Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites . Libraries of Electronic Texts . General Fairy-Tale Sites . Individual Stories and Types . Film and Fairy Tales . Storytelling . For Children, Parents, and Teachers . Organizations and Journals . Foreign-Language Sites . Danish/Norwegian Dutch French German Russian Turkish Search Engines The best tool for Internet research is not a comprehensive list of favorite sites, but rather a repertory of a few efficient search engines and reliable indexes, together with a basic understanding of how to use them. The starting place for almost any Internet search is Google . This site's use of keywords is simple and efficient. Word groups set off by quotation marks are treated as single units. Thus the search term "fairy tales" will find only web sites containing that phrase, but not the same words appearing separately. The keywords "little mermaid" copenhagen will find sites containing Copenhagen and Little Mermaid in any order, but Little Mermaid must appear as an unbroken phrase. Google, like most search engines, is not case sensitive; lower-case letters can substitute for upper-case ones, and vice versa. Although Google is very thorough, one can usually locate further sites by conducting the same search with additional engines. The following are proven performers: Excite . Lycos . Teoma . Webcrawler . Yahoo! . Return to the table of contents . Encyclopedias and General Reference Works Folktale and fairy-tale researchers should not overlook general encyclopedias as sources for basic information about authors, collectors, movements, genres, and the like. The user-generated Internet encyclopedia Wikipedia contains a wealth of information and is generally reliable. Return to the table of contents . Research Libraries Online catalogs of large libraries are excellent sources of bibliographic information about published folktale books. However, please note that these catalogs do not provide access to the books themselves. The following electronic catalogs are well designed and provide information about immense collections: COPAC , a union catalog combining the resources the largest university libraries in the United Kingdom and Ireland plus the British Library. Library of Congress . Of special interest at the Library of Congress is the Folklife Sourcebook . Indiana University Libraries . One of the world's largest folklore collections. Melvyl , the online catalog of the University of California Libraries. Return to the table of contents . Electronic Text Indexes Thousands of books and shorter pieces, many of them relevant to folk and fairy-tale studies, are available gratis on the Internet as electronic texts. The most comprehensive index of such texts in English is the University of Pennsylvania's Online Books , which currently lists over 20,000 titles. It also includes links to numerous foreign-language electronic libraries. To assist in finding a desired text among their thousands of listed titles, Online Books includes a number of search tools. Two hints for browsing: Search for the word fairy, folk, folktale, folktales, tale, or tales in the title field . Note that the search function uses only whole words, so a search for tale will not find a title with the plural form tales. Browse in the subject-matter section under the Library of Congress classification GR , folklore. The Online Books data base is also available through the World eBook Library , which includes links to a large number of reference works (dictionaries, multilingual dictionaries, thesauri, encyclopedias), academic libraries worldwide, and other research tools. The Digital Book Index combines and integrates the free books listed through Online Books with commercial titles available for a fee. The subject-matter search tool is very useful. A search under the category "folklore, myths, legends, fables" yielded over 100 titles. This site requires a sign-on procedure, but its use is without charge. Return to the table of contents . Libraries of Electronic Texts Each of following electronic text libraries contains a substantial collection of works relating to folk and fairy tales. Arthur's Classic Novels includes numerous traditional and literary fairy tales, mostly borrowed from other Internet sites then attractively reformatted. The Baldwin Project , according to its mission statement, brings yesterday's classics to today's children. It currently lists nearly 2,000 stories, many of them folk and fairy tales. The site is indexed by grade level, genre (including fables, fairy tales, and legends), book title, and other categories. The texts are handsomely formatted and easy to read. Bartleby.com is one of the pioneering electronic text sites. Its strong points include a very useful search mechanism, a large collection of integrated reference works, plus a good assortment of carefully edited classics. Bibliomania lists more than 2,000 classic texts. Children's Books Online (the Rosetta Project) is a large collection of illustrated children's books, mostly from the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The books are reproduced as single-page, full-color image files, resulting in accurate and appealing replicas of the originals. An added attraction are the text-file translations of many of the stories into various languages. ClassicReader.com contains books and short stories by more than 200 authors. The children's section includes numerous collections of traditional fairy tales, and the short-story section contains many literary fairy tales. The Electronic Text Center at the University of Virginia is a pioneer in the editing and distribution of electronic texts in various formats. Included in the section for young readers are many folk and fairy-tale related items. Folktexts , compiled and edited by D. L. Ashliman, University of Pittsburgh, offers a variety of folklore and mythology texts, arranged in groups of closely related stories. The Hockliffe Project is centered around the Hockliffe Collection of early British children's books held by De Montfort University in Leicester and Bedford, England. The books are scanned into image files, rather than text files, yielding exact replicas of each page. The Kellscraft Studio specializes in illustrated books from the period 1890-1920, including many fairy-tale collections. Take special notice of two books beautifully illustrated by Blanche McManus: The True Mother Goose and Told in the Twilight. The Perseus Digital Library , sponsored by Tufts University, is an extensive and well-engineered site combining images, texts, and scholarship. The principal fields represented are Greek and Roman civilization and the English Renaissance. Of special interest to students of folktales are the fables of Phaedrus. Project Gutenberg , begun in 1971, is the Internet's oldest producer of free electronic books, and with over 6,000 online books is among the largest. With the help of many volunteers the library is expanding at the rate of about one new book per day. Project Gutenberg's text-only and easily downloadable files are among the most carefully scanned and proof-read digital texts available. Sacred Text Archive . This remarkable site's name does not say it all. In addition to housing the scriptures of many religions, it contains mythology and folklore texts from around the world. Each of the following topics, selected from a list at the lower left side of the site's index page, yields a number of folklore texts: African, Americana, Australia, Buddhism, Celtic, Egyptian, England, Greek/Roman, Hinduism, Judaism, Legends/Sagas (includes the Thousand and One Nights ), Native American, Pacific, and Tolkien. Return to the table of contents . General Fairy-Tale Sites Fairy Tales, Folk Tales, and Mythology WebRing . A collection of sites linked into a ring. SurLaLune Fairy Tale Pages is an attractive, extensive, and well-organized site maintained by Heidi Anne Heiner. Included are essays, illustrations, annotated texts, links to outside sites, and a discussion bulletin board. Return to the table of contents . Individual Stories and Types Cinderella: A Bibliography . A thorough and scholarly annotated bibliography of texts, analogues, criticism, modern versions, parodies -- ranging from ancient folklore through recent popular culture, modern scholarship and pornographic films. Organized by Russell A. Peck, University of Rochester. Cinderella . A selection of folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 510A and related stories about persecuted heroines, edited by D. L. Ashliman. The Annotated Cinderella , from the SurLaLune Fairy Tales by Heidi Anne Heiner. Noodleheads . The wisdom of fools in folktales. Return to the table of contents . Film and Fairy Tales A good place to begin research on the use of fairy-tale topics in film and television is the Internet Movie Database . Tom Davenport is an American filmmaker who has created a successful series of short films placing familiar Grimm fairy tales in settings from the American south. Return to the table of contents . Storytelling Storyteller.net . A center for news, essays, texts, and contacts for storytellers. Return to the table of contents . For Children, Parents, and Teachers Andersen Fairy Tales , in English or French. Animated Tall Tales , featuring the exploits of Paul Bunyan. Grimm Fairy Tales , in English or French. Myths, Folktales, and Fairy Tales , resources for teachers of grades 1-8, sponsored by Scholastic, Inc. Internet Public Library: Story Hour , sponsored by the University of Michigan. Return to the table of contents . Organizations and Journals American Folklife Center . at the Library of Congress. American Folklore Society . Folklore Fellows at the Kalevala Institute of the University of Turku, Finland. An important contribution of this organization is its ongoing monograph series Folklore Fellows' Communications , established in 1910. Folklore Society (UK) . Founded in 1878, this is one of the first organizations in the world devoted to the study of traditional culture. Marvels & Tales , a journal of fairy-tale studies. Modern Language Association of America . Founded in 1883, this organization promotes the study of languages and literature. Return to the table of contents . Foreign-Language Sites Danish/Norwegian H. C. Andersen . Links to Andersen's works in Danish. This site is sponsored by the Royal Library (det Kongelige Bibliotek) of Denmark. H. C. Andersen-Centret . A treasure trove of information from the H. C. Andersen Center in Odense, Denmark. Click the British flag for an English-language version of this site. Norske Folkeeventyr , the Norwegian texts of 152 tales by Asbjørnsen and Moe, sponsored by Project Runeberg. Return to the table of contents . Dutch Vlaamse Volksverhalenbank . A collection of Flemish folk legends. Return to the table of contents . French A la découverte de Jean de La Fontaine . Annotated texts of La Fontaine's fables, plus much supplementary information. Contes de Perrault . Texts of ten fairy tales by Charles Perrault. Il était une fois... Les contes de fées . A very attractive, well engineered, and authoritative fairy-tale study, sponsored by the Bibliothèque nationale de France. Les contes de Madame d'Aulnoy . A biography of Marie-Cathérine le Jumel de Barneville de la Motte, Comtesse d' Aulnoy, plus the texts of twelve of her tales. Return to the table of contents . German Europäische Märchengesellschaft . The European Fairy-Tale Society. Märchenlexikon , edited by Kurt Derungs. Projekt Gutenberg-DE . A massive German-language site sponsored by the news magazine Der Spiegel and containing thousands of electronic texts. Folk and fairy tale collections within the Projekt Gutenberg-DE include: Brüder Grimm . Fabel . Märchen . Sage, Legende, Überlieferung . Sagen.at . A large collection of legends and folktales, mostly from Austria, edited by Wolfgang Morscher, University of Innsbruck. Return to the table of contents . Russian Russian Folklore . Return to the table of contents . Turkish Uysal-Walker Archive of Turkish Oral Narrative , Texas Tech University. An immense collection of Turkish folklore, including many tales translated into English. Return to the table of contents . Revised October 27, 2020. Name of the Helper The Name of the Helper Folktales of type 500, and related tales, in which a mysterious and threatening helper is defeated when the hero or heroine discovers his name translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2022 Contents Rumpelstiltskin , version of 1812 (Germany). Link to the version of 1857: Rumpelstiltskin . Link to the Rumpelstilzchen von den Brüdern Grimm , ein Vergleich der Fassungen von 1810, 1812 und 1819. Link to the German-language version of 1857: Rumpelstilzchen . Doubleturk (Germany). Mistress Beautiful (Germany). Dwarf Holzrührlein Bonneführlein (Germany). Nägendümer (Germany). Kugerl (Germany). Hoppetînken (Germany). Zirkzirk (Germany). Purzinigele (Austria). Tarandandò (Italy). Winterkölbl (Hungary). Kruzimugeli (Austria). Hottetejlil (Denmark). Gundeli (Denmark). The Girl Who Could Spin Gold from Clay and Long Straw (Sweden). Tom Tit Tot (England). Duffy and the Devil (England). Whuppity Stoorie (Scotland). Peerie Fool [Peerifool] (Orkney Islands). Gwarwyn-a-throt (Wales). Penelop (Wales). Silly go Dwt (Wales). The Rival Kempers (Ireland). Tríopla Trúpla (Ireland). Kinkach Martinko (A Slav Folktale). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Rumpelstiltskin Germany Once upon a time there was a miller who was poor, but who had a beautiful daughter. Now it happened that he got into a conversation with the king and said to him: "I have a daughter who knows the art of turning straw into gold." So the king immediately sent for the miller's daughter and ordered her to turn a whole room full of straw into gold in one night. And if she could not do it, she would have to die. She was locked in the room, and she sat there and cried, because for her life she did not know how the straw would turn into gold. Then suddenly a little man appeared before her, and said: "What will you give me, if I turn this all into gold?" She took off her necklace and gave it to the little man, and he did what he had promised. The next morning the king found the room filled with gold, and his heart became even more greedy. He put the miller's daughter into an even larger room filled with straw, and told her to turn it into gold. The little man came again. She gave him a ring from her hand, and he turned it all into gold. The third night the king had her locked in a third room, which was larger than the first two, and entirely filled with straw. "If you succeed this time, I'll make you my wife," he said. Then the little man came and said, "I'll do it again, but you must promise me the first child that you have with the king." In her distress she made the promise, and when the king saw that this straw too had been turned into gold, he took the miller's daughter as his wife. Soon thereafter the queen delivered a child. Then the little man appeared before her and demanded the child that had been promised him. The queen begged him to let her keep the child, offering him great riches in its place. Finally he said, "I'll be back to get the child in three days. But if by then you know my name, you can keep the child!" For two days the queen pondered what the little man's name might be, but she could not think of anything, and became very sad. On the third day the king came home from a hunt and told her how, two days earlier, while hunting deep in a dark forest, he had come upon a little house. A comical little man was there, jumping about as if on one leg, and crying out: Today I'll bake; tomorrow I'll brew. Then I'll fetch the queen's new child. It is good that no one knows Rumpelstiltskin is my name. The queen was overjoyed to hear this. Then the dangerous little man arrived and asked: "Your majesty, what is my name?" "Is your name Conrad?" "No." "Is your name Heinrich?" "No." "Then could your name be Rumpelstiltskin?" "The devil told you that!" shouted the little man. He ran away angrily, and never came back. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Rumpelstilzchen," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, 1st ed. (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), v. 1, no. 55, pp. 253-55. The Grimms dressed this tale up considerably in succeeding editions. The most notable change is the introduction of the spinning wheel as a device for turning straw into gold. Further, in later editions the queen discovers the dwarf's name through a messenger whom she herself sends forth to collect strange names, not through her husband's chance meeting with the little man. Link to the German-language version of 1857 (the Grimms' last version): Rumpelstilzchen . Link to an English translation of the version of 1857: Rumpelstiltskin . Return to the table of contents . Mistress Beautiful Germany In a city there was a wonderfully beautiful but poor girl. A merchant fell in love with her and asked her to marry him. However, because merchants expect a rich dowry, before the wedding she gave herself over to the devil. Thus the devil brought her great wealth under the condition that she would have to discover his name within one year, otherwise the devil would take her. The year's end was approaching, and she still did not know the devil's name. One night a shepherd was lying in his hut just outside the city when he saw a fire not far away. Walking toward the fire, he came to a hill. There he saw various beings dancing around. One of them was particularly cheerful as he jumped around the fire, singing: It is good; it is good, That Mistress Beautiful does not know, That my name is Hipche, Hipche. The next day the shepherd want to the merchant's wife and told her what he had seen and heard. She took note of the name, and when the year had come to an end, the devil appeared before her, and she stated the name: Hipche. Thus the devil was defeated, and Mistress Beautiful lived happily and prosperously with her merchant. With the money that she had received from the devil, their trade expanded across the land and over the sea. Source(books.google.com): Heinrich Pröhle, "Jungfer Schön," Kinder- und Volksmärchen (Leipzig: Avenarius und Mendelssohn, 1853), no. 23, p. 76 . Source (Internet Archive): Heinrich Pröhle, "Jungfer Schön," Kinder- und Volksmärchen (Leipzig: Avenarius und Mendelssohn, 1853), no. 23, p. 76 . Return to the table of contents . Doubleturk Germany Once a prominent dwarf fell in love with a beautiful girl and wanted to force her to marry him. To be sure, the girl had a great aversion toward him because he was so small and not at all good looking, and she would not agree to marry him. However, he won over her father by offering him much money and land, so she finally had to accept his proposal. Nevertheless, he agreed to release her from her promise and to leave her alone if she could succeed in discovering his name. The girl searched a long time, but to no avail. However, in the end fate came to her aid. One night a fish dealer was traveling along the road to Greifswald. Coming to a place where he saw a large number of dwarfs joyfully dancing and jumping about in the moonlight, he stopped with amazement. Then he suddenly heard one of the dwarfs call out with joy, "If my bride knew that my name is Doubleturk, she wouldn't take me!" The next day the fish dealer related this experience in a tavern in Greifswald. The bride heard about it from the tavern keeper's daughter. She immediately assumed that it had been her lover, and when he came to her, she called him Doubleturk. Then the dwarf disappeared in great anger, and that was the end of their courtship. Source: J. D. H. Temme, Die Erdgeister in Greifswald , Die Volkssagen von Pommern und Rügen (Berlin: In der Nikolaischen Buchhandlung, 1840), no. 216, pp. 255-256. Temme does not give this tale a title. It is part of a larger section entitled "The Earth Spirits in Greifswald." Temme's source: "Oral." Greifswald, a city in northeast Germany, lies near the mouth of the Ryck River, which empties into Greifswalder Bay on the Baltic Sea. Return to the table of contents . Dwarf Holzrührlein Bonneführlein Germany In a great forest there once lived a cowherd and a shepherd, and they helped one another in times of need. The cowherd had a daughter and the shepherd a son. From their childhood on they were inseparable, and the older they became the fonder they grew of each other. Thus, when they came of age the shepherd's son proposed to the shepherd's daughter, and she was promised to him in marriage. Some time later an ugly dwarf approached the cowherd and asked for the daughter's hand in marriage. He brought many valuable presents for the mother and the daughter. The daughter could not stand the dwarf, because he was so ugly, and she did not want to marry a dwarf in any event. The mother did not like him either, but that did not stop her from accepting his presents. One day he returned, again with many costly things, but this time the mother said, "You are not going to get my daughter, no matter how many presents you bring." The daughter added, "I do not want your presents at all, and I want you even less!" Then the dwarf became very angry, threw the costly things on the floor, and replied to the mother, "It's not that simple to get rid of me! Earlier you accepted my presents, and I want to be paid for them. I will return tomorrow at noon. If by then you know my name, then you may keep your daughter, otherwise I will take her by force!" With that the dwarf disappeared. Great concern now ruled the cowherd's household. Now the shepherd's son, while watching over his sheep in the forest, had often seen the dwarf, but every time he had approached him, the dwarf had disappeared. On this day he was watching over his sheep in the vicinity of a cave, and this was the dwarf's cave. The shepherd stood there, leaning on his staff, when suddenly the dwarf came by, as though he were being driven through the forest by a windstorm, and he disappeared into the cave. At the cave's entrance there was a yellow flower that the shepherd's son had often admired because of its unusual color and shape. Before entering the cave, the dwarf had touched the flower. A loud sound came from within the cave. The shepherd's son listened, and he heard the dwarf sing: Here I sit, Carving gold, My name is Holzrührlein Bonneführlein. If the mother knew that, She could keep her daughter. The shepherd's son took note of the name, because it seemed so very unusual to him. That evening when he visited his sweetheart, and noticed her concern, he told her everything that had happened, and comforted her. The mother repeated the name over and over again until it came easily to her, and now they were no longer fearful about the dwarf's return. The next day at noon he appeared as announced. He stepped up to the mother and said sarcastically, "Now my dear lady, do you know my name?" The mother pretended to be afraid and answered, "Oh, what could your name be? Are you not called Mäuserich?" The dwarf laughed and said, "Not even close!" "Is your name perhaps Ruppsteert?" "Wrong again!" laughed the dwarf. "Oh, what are you called then? Your name wouldn't be Holzrührlein Bonneführlein, now would it?" The dwarf disappeared in an instant, and he was never heard from nor seen again. The shepherd's son married the cowherd's daughter, and they lived long and happy lives together. Source: Carl and Theodor Colshorn, Zwerg Holzrührlein Bonneführlein , Märchen und Sagen aus Hannover (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), no. 29, pp. 88-89. Return to the table of contents . Nägendümer Germany Once upon a time there was a girl whose task it was to spin a certain quantity of flax every day. However, she could never complete her work. Then one day a man came to her who promised her that he would spin the flax for her every day if she could guess his name. But the girl could not guess his name. Then the man went away and turned himself into a bird. Flying happily back and forth it cried out: God is dat, god is dat, Dat de Diern nich weet, Dat ick Nägendümer heet. It is good, it is good, That the girl does not know That my name is Nägendümer. A shepherd who was herding his flock nearby heard this, and he told it to the girl. Sometime later the man returned to the girl and repeated his offer. She said to him, "Your name is Nägendümer!" The man answered, "A bad person told you that!" But he kept his promise, and from then on he spun all her flax every day. Source: A. Haas, "Nägendümer," Rügensche Sagen und Märchen (Stettin: Johs. Burmeister's Buchhandlung, 1903), no. 223, pp. 221-222. Haas's source: "Received from Putbus by O. Haas." Return to the table of contents . Kugerl Germany A long time ago near Sandbühl there lived an elf. He was scarcely three spans tall. He often ran around dressed in only a shirt, which angered the people, but otherwise he did not get in their way. On the contrary did them many favors. He cut straw for them, tended their cows, and helped them with work at home and in the field. He also provided the sick with healing herbs and rescued many children from death. One time a beautiful peasant girl was gored by a steer. She screamed aloud and called for help. The friendly elf came immediately, comforted her, and promised to help and rescue her, if she would marry him and go with him to the elf kingdom. She had no choice but to say yes, and upon her agreement the elf rescued her. Now she was supposed to go with the dwarf into the mountain, but she did not at all want to. She therefore asked the elf if he would not release her, promising him a beautiful red jacket if he would do so. The dwarf said, "I can easily get a red jacket. However, if you can guess my name within three days, you shall be released from you promise." The girl was satisfied with this answer, and she went home. She thought the entire night about the dwarf's name, but it did not come to her. The next day the girl went out to the sand hill where the elf stayed. She said all kinds of names, but none was the right one, and the dwarf said, "Go home and think about it some more." The girl returned home and thought day and night about what the little man's name might be. The following day she went out to the sand hill again, where she found the dwarf. Then she said many, many names, but none was the right one. The dwarf said, "Go home and think about it better, or tomorrow you will be my wife." So the girl, with her head hanging, returned home sad and dejected. She had given up hope of guessing the dwarf's name. But where the need is greatest, there help will come the soonest. A peasant boy was working near the sand hill, and at noontime he lay down behind the brush to rest. The elf came out of his hole in the ground, and thinking that no one was there, he clapped his hands and danced around in his little shirt while singing, Gott sei Lob und Dank, Daß meine Braut nicht weiß, Daß ich Kugerl heiß. Praise and thanks to God, That my bride does not know, That I am called Kugerl. Then he jumped up, shouted for joy, and sang anew, Gott sei Lob und Dank, Daß meine Braut nicht weiß, Daß ich Kugerl heiß. Praise and thanks to God, That my bride does not know, That I am called Kugerl. The peasant boy was amused by the dwarf's antics, and that evening when he went to the girl's house to visit, he laughingly told her what he had seen and heard that day in the meadow near Sandbühl. The girl was now happy beyond measure and no longer had any fears or concerns. Early in the morning of the following day she went up to the sand hill. She took a red jacket for the dwarf, for she wanted to give him something for rescuing her. When the tiny little man saw her coming he was filled with joy, and said, "Now tell me, what is my name?" The girl said, "Putzli." Then the dwarf laughed and asked her once again. The girl said, "Nudi." Then the elf laughed until he shook, and said, "Guess once again!" Then the girl answered, "Would your name be Kugerl?" and gave him the red jacket. Then the dwarf began to cry and to moan, and carrying the jacket he went out into the woods. Since that hour he has not been seen again, and no one knows where he went. Source: Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle, Kugerl , Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus Süddeutschland (Regensburg: Verlag von Friedrich Pustet, 1854), pp. 278-280. The Zingerles' source: "Oral, in Höttingen." Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . Hoppetînken Germany They tell the story in Iserlohn that once a mine-dwarf (Bergmännchen) helped a spinning girl do her work in the most miraculous manner, in return for which he demanded the young girl's hand in marriage. The girl agreed to this proposal, thinking that he was not serious. One evening she called out to her fiancé, who had just arrived, "Look, is your name not Hoppetînken." Turning red with anger, the dwarf said, "The devil told you that." From that time onward he abandoned the spinning girl, and never again helped her. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen , vol. 1 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), no. 154, p. 151. Iserlohn is a city in the German province Nordrhein-Westfalen. Return to the table of contents . Zirkzirk Germany Once there was a woman who did not want to do any spinning. Her husband often scolded her for not accomplishing anything. Saddened by this, she was walking along thinking about her situation when suddenly a dwarf appeared before her. He asked her what was wrong with her and if he could not help her. She told him everything, and the dwarf said that he would help her if she would give him what she was carrying under her apron. However, if she could guess his name then she would not need to give him anything. The woman did not think about this very long before saying yes, for she did not believe that she had anything under her apron. From that time onward she always had yarn enough, and every Saturday when her husband came to see what she had done, there was always an abundance. She was happy and satisfied, but before long all this changed, for she was about to deliver a child, and she now realized what the dwarf had meant. Filled with grief, she told her husband everything. One day when he was walking over a mountain he heard the humming of a spinning wheel from within the mountain, and a dwarf singing: Dat is gaut dat de gnädige Frû nich weit dat ik Zirkzirk heit. It is good that the honorable lady does not know that Zirkzirk is my name. He joyfully returned home and reported this to his wife. After she delivered her child the dwarf appeared to her, in order to collect that which had been promised to him. She told him what his name was, and he never again returned. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen , vol. 1 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), no. 337, pp. 298-299. Kuhn's source: a shepherd from Bardenhagen, a village in northern Germany situated between Lüneburg and Uelzen. Return to the table of contents . Purzinigele Austria Ages ago, in olden times, there lived a powerful count. All the lands far and wide belonged to him, and he had everything that his heart desired. He shared his wealth and his happiness with a good wife, who was as beautiful as the day and as dear as an angel. They had lived together happily together for several months, and the days seemed to them to be as short as minutes. One day the count was out hunting and went deeper and deeper into the forest. In the heat of the hunt he went further than ever before, and he became separated a good distance from the rest of his party. As he stood there alone in the forest, a dwarf suddenly appeared before him. The little forest dweller was only three feet tall, and his full beard reached his knees. Angrily he rolled his fiery red eyes and said, "What are you doing here? This is my realm, and you must pay a penalty to me. If you do not give me your wife, you shall not leave this forest alive." The count was considerably frightened by the dwarf's appearance and his angry words, for he had often heard all kinds of spooky stories about strength and the wickedness of the little man of the forest. His old nurse had told him these stories when he was but a child. What was he to do? This was a critical situation. The frightened count did not know how to escape other than to try to beg and talk his way out. "Forgive me," said the count, "that I have trespassed upon your realm. I did not know that it was yours, and I will certainly never do it again." But the wild dwarf would not be pacified, and he said, "What I have said to you must happen. Either you or she." "Demand what else you will, and I shall give it to you," said the count, "but do not insist upon this." Then the little man appeared to reconsider, and he said, "If must be so, then I will place your fate in your wife's hands. I will give you both one month's time. If she is able, in three attempts, to guess my name then she shall be yours and free -- otherwise she shall belong to me." The count was somewhat comforted with this, but still his heart was burdened. He made his way toward home, accompanied by the little man of the forest. Both were serious, and neither spoke a word. After they had gone some distance they came to an ancient gray-bearded fir tree. The dwarf stopped here and said, "This is the boundary of my realm. I will await your wife here at this fir tree, which is nine times older than the other trees. Three times she may have three guesses! But if you do not keep your word it will go badly for both of you." The count now walked slowly homeward, for his heart was heavy, and the closer he came to his castle, the gloomier and sadder he became. As he approached the gate, the countess, who had seen him from her window, came out to meet him. She was filled with joy and happiness, for her husband was home again. But she soon noticed that he was not happy, as he usually was, but instead looked like seven days of rainy weather. This made her sad and concerned, and she asked the count what was wrong with him. As soon as they entered the castle and were in the sitting room, the tired and sad count told her how he had met the dwarf and how he had wanted take the countess, and what conditions he had at last agreed to. When the countess heard this, she became as pale as a corpse, and her beautiful, fine cheeks were wet with tears. Happiness and joy had now disappeared from the castle, and everyone there became silent and sad. The countess most often sat in an alcove thinking and thinking how short her happiness had been, or she went to the castle chapel where she prayed and cried. The count no longer went out hunting nor to the jousting matches but sat instead on his old chair, richly decorated with carvings, on which his ancestors had also sat. Supporting his head with his right hand, he contemplated, but he himself did not know about what. Thus passed day after day and week after week, until finally there were three days left in the month. The count and countess went out into the forest, then further and further until they could see the old gray-bearded fir tree in the distance. The count stayed behind, and the countess proceeded alone. Otherwise it was beautiful in the forest. The birds were singing; the squirrels were jumping about or sitting there splitting pine cones; and the wild roses were blossoming so beautifully white and red. But the countess had a heavy heart as never before, and she sadly walked on until she came to the fir tree. The dwarf, beautifully dressed in green and red, was waiting for her. A mischievous pleasure overcame him when he saw the countess, for she pleased him greatly. "Now guess my name, Lady Countess!" he said quickly, as though he hardly expected her to do so. Then the countess guessed, "Fir, Spruce, Pine," because she thought that for living in the forest he would certainly have the name of a tree. The dwarf had hardly heard this when he broke out laughing and rejoicing until the entire forest resounded. "You have not guessed it!" he said gleefully. "See if you can do any better tomorrow than you did today. Otherwise you will become my wife!" The countess, sadder still, walked away from the fir tree with downcast eyes. The dwarf stood there and smiled at her, taking pleasure in her grief. She soon found her husband, and told him how she had guessed so badly. They returned to their castle even sadder than they had left. The rest of the day passed too fast, although it was a sad one. Evening was soon there, and night followed quickly. It was a sad and hopeless night, and neither sleep nor dreams entered the count's room. When the first larks began to sing the next morning, the count and countess were already up and concerned about their plight. They went to the castle chapel to pray, and afterward went out into the dark green forest, then further and deeper until they saw the old gray-bearded fir tree in the distance. The count stayed behind and the countess proceeded alone. Otherwise it was beautiful out there in the forest. The birds were singing; the flowers were laughing and giving off their sweet scent; the squirrels were standing up like little men. But the countess had a heavy heart as never before, and with tears in her eyes she walked on until she came to the fir tree. She had scarcely arrived there when the little man of the forest walked up, dressed beautifully in blue and red. A mischievous pleasure overcame him when he saw the countess, for she pleased him greatly. "Now guess my name, Lady Countess!" he said quickly, and smiled. Then the countess guessed, "Oat, Buckwheat, Maize," for she thought that he might have the name of a grain. The little elf had hardly heard this when he broke out laughing and rejoicing until the entire forest resounded. "You have not guessed it!" he said gleefully. "You must do better tomorrow, or you will belong to me, and tomorrow will be my wedding." The countess, sadder than ever before, walked away from the fir tree with wet eyes. The dwarf stood there impishly smiling at her. She soon found her husband, and told him how badly she had done. They returned to their castle even more gloomily than they had left. The rest of the day passed under a shadow of sorrow. Evening was there before they realized it, and the dark night followed quickly. It was again a sad night, in which neither the count nor the countess closed their eyes. As morning dawned, the count and countess were already up. They went to the castle chapel and prayed fervently. Then they went out into the beautiful green forest. It was still early, early in the morning, and many of the birds were still lying asleep in their nests. Only the brooks were rustling and murmuring, and the morning breezes were whispering through the tree branches. Otherwise it was quiet -- as quiet as in a church. The count and countess walked until they saw the old gray-bearded fir tree in the distance. There the count kissed his beautiful countess, and a tear dropped onto his beard, for he did not know if he would ever see her again. The countess, however was more composed today, and her heart was not beating as quickly as it had done on the earlier occasions. She said good-bye to her husband and walked toward the fir tree. All soul alone, she stood there next to the old tree, but the dwarf was nowhere to be seen. On either side there were wild rosebushes, and they made a beautiful fence. She walked along the path and soon came to a beautiful little valley. The most beautiful flowers were there, with vineyards and fig trees growing on the hillsides. In the middle of the field stood a neat little cottage. Its little windows glistened happily in the morning sunshine. Blue smoke curled upward from the little chimney, and a song sounded from within. The countess forgot her pain and grief when she saw the little valley and the cottage. She crept up and, on tip-toes, looked inside the window to see if it was as beautiful inside as it was outside. She saw a lovely little kitchen, with things cooking and frying in pots and pans. The little man of the forest was standing at the hearth, first tending to one thing and then to another, at the same time singing with a smiling mouth: Boil my oats, bubble my cabbage; It is good that Lady Countess does not know That Purzinigele is my name. The countess had heard enough. She crept away and hurried back to the fir tree, so that the dwarf would not overtake her. Joyfully standing there, she could almost not wait for the dwarf to arrive. It was not long before the little man arrived. Today he was dressed even more beautifully than before. His clothing was embroidered with red and gold, and it glistened like a sunrise. "Guess now for the last time," said the little elf to the countess, as though he had wanted to say, "This bird will not escape from my trap." The countess started to say "Pur," while carefully observing her questioner. "Not right! You have two guesses left!" said the little man. "Goat," replied the countess. With that the dwarf blushed a little and seemed to pause and think. Then he said, "Guess quickly! You have one more chance." "Purzinigele!" cried out the countess, filled with joy. Upon hearing his name, the dwarf angrily rolled his fiery red eyes, clenched his fists tightly, then grumbling disappeared into the thicket. The freed countess hurried back to the place where the count was impatiently waiting for her. There was such joy when the two found one another again. To the joy of their people, the count and countess returned to their castle. They lived there many, many years as the happiest couple that anyone ever knew. And what became of Purzinigele? He was so angry that he ran away, and was never seen again. Source: Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle, Purzinigele , Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1852), no. 36, pp. 225-232. Concerning the countess's second guess on her last day: The word for goat in German is "Ziege," which approximates the second part of Purzinigele's name. This explains why he blushes and pauses to think after hearing the countess's first two guesses on the last day. Return to the table of contents . Tarandandò Italy Once upon a time there was a mother who had but one daughter. She was not an ugly girl, but she had the flaw that she was always too smart for her own good and that she would rather eat and be lazy than work. Such daughters bring little joy to their mothers, and so it was here as well. The daughter could do nothing right for her mother, who for an entire year never stopped scolding her. Once the mother left early for the field, telling the daughter, who was still in bed, "Near noontime cook some soup and put a couple of kernels of rice in it so there will be something for me to eat when I get home. Now "a couple" was a common way of saying "not too much and not too little," but the girl did not understand that. She put a kettle of water on the fire, picked out two kernels of rice and threw them in. What a soup that was when the mother arrived home! She scolded, but to no avail. She had to pour out the water and make her own soup, if she wanted anything to eat. Another time the mother went away again, and said, "Boil some meat for our noon meal." "How much should I use?" asked the girl. "Whatever is honest!" replied the mother, and left. "Just what is honest?" thought the girl over and over. Then it occurred to her that their donkey, standing in the stall, was named Honest. "Yes, indeed, mother meant him," she cried. "To be sure, he is old and is no longer worth much. I'll not get a scolding this time." So she went to the stall, struck the poor donkey dead, and chopped him up in pieces. Then she put a large washtub on the fire, threw the pieces into the water, and let it boil until it was hissing and bubbling. When the mother arrived home and saw what had happened she was beside herself and began to hit at her daughter with both fists. But that did not bring the poor donkey back to life. And his meat was so tough that it could not be eaten. So she threw it out to the dogs, and they were only able to eat it only because they were bitterly hungry and had sharp teeth. Later the mother went away again and told the daughter, "For our noon meal cook some mush, but do it right." The daughter cooked a lot of mush, and she herself ate seven dishes full. The eighth dish, the smallest one, she saved for her mother. When she came home and learned that the girl had already eaten seven dishes of mush, she became angry and began to scold loudly and intensely. At that same moment a distinguished gentleman passed by the house, heard the scolding, and entered. "Why are you scolding this poor girl so?" he asked. The mother was ashamed and quickly replied, "I am scolding her because she works too much. Today she has spun seven spindles full, and I do not want her to overtire herself." "Can she really spin so well?" asked the gentleman. "There is no one far and wide in the entire country who can spin as well as my daughter," answered the mother. Then the gentleman said, "If that is so, then you can give her to me for my wife. I want to have a wife who works well, and I shall never find one who is better or more industrious." Mother and daughter agreed happily. The wedding took place, and the gentleman took his young wife home with him. A few days later he had a large pile of flax brought in and said, "Listen, wife, I will be out hunting the entire day. By tomorrow evening you are to have spun this flax." She made a sour face and said, "Husband, my lord, that is not possible." Then he became angry and repeated to her, "Do you think that I took you for a wife so you would not have to work? If you want to be lazy then you can go back to your own house." With that he went forth to hunt. The wife was beside herself. The pile of flax was so large that even with a hundred maids she would not have been able to spin it in two days. While she was standing there in desperation, a dwarf crept up to her. He was dressed in red and wore a little crown on his head. He said, "Why are you so sad? What will you give me if I spin the flax?" The wife did not answer, and the red dwarf continued, "I will spin the flax, but only under the condition that you guess my name within three tries. If you fail to do so, you will be mine and must come with me." In her desperation the wife said yes, and immediately there appeared countless little dwarfs, and they carried all the flax away until not a single strand was left behind. That evening the gentleman returned home from hunting. Seeing his wife quiet and still, he thought that she must be tired from spinning. Before they went to bed he told her, "Just think about what happened to me today. When I was up on the mountain and it was just getting dark, I came to a split in the earth. I looked down and saw beneath me a large room where many hundreds of little devils were hurriedly spinning flax. It was a joy to watch them. In the middle there stood a throne, and on it sat a dwarf dressed in red and wearing a little crown on his head. He was continuously clicking his tongue and crying out: What will she do, what will she say, When tomorrow we take it to her? Then she will guess so and so. But my name is Tarandandò. Then the wife became happy once again, and said, "Dear husband, my lord, what did the crazy dwarf say?" And when he repeated it, she secretly wrote down the name and went to bed feeling relieved. The next morning the gentleman went hunting again. Then the red dwarf arrived with hundreds of little devils, who were carrying the flax, all finely and neatly spun, and not even a hair of it was missing. Then the red dwarf approached the wife and said with a scornful smile, "Here is the flax. Now guess what my name is." Pretending to be at a loss for words, the wife said, "Is your name perhaps Peter?" "No," cried the dwarf, laughing. With an even sadder face she asked, "Is you name perhaps Toni?" "No," repeated the dwarf and laughed even more scornfully. Then she pretended to be thinking deeply and to have fallen into despair. But finally she said, "Is your name perhaps -- Tarandandò?" "Curses!" cried the red dwarf, as though he had been stung by a viper. He slapped her hard on the cheek, and then he and his little devils departed into the air with such a sound of whistling and rushing that it was like a windstorm in the fall swirling the dry leaves about and blowing them through the woods. When the gentleman arrived home that evening, his wife showed him the spun flax, and he was uncommonly satisfied. "But why is your cheek so swollen?" he asked. "Oh, dear husband, my lord," she said, "that comes from spinning." Soon afterward he had an even larger pile of flax brought in and ordered his wife to spin it within a few days. She was beside herself, but then it occurred to her that she had an aunt who was an uncommonly sly and clever woman who had helped many a relative out of difficulty. She went to her and told her of her troubles. "Just let me deal with it," said the aunt. "Go home, and this evening when your husband is at home I shall come and pay you a visit. Then you'll see." When it was evening she took a dead hen, filled it with blood and grease, put it under her arm between her skin and her undershirt, and went to her niece. She entered the room where the husband and wife were, and the latter approached her, saying, "Greetings, dear aunt. It is so good that you can visit us." "Yes, yes, I have been looking forward to this for a long time," said the aunt, and pressed her arm against her body until the blood and grease ran out onto the floor, while she stood there all bent over. "Oh, good woman, what are you doing there?" said the gentleman. The sly woman looked casually at the blood drops on the floor, then complained loudly, "Oh, my ailment! My old ailment! I have a large boil under my arm. That's where the blood is coming from." "How did you get such an ailment?" asked the gentleman with sympathy. "Do you know, my lord," she replied, "when I was young and beautiful I always had to spin, and that is what brought on my ailment. How it grieved my dear departed husband. I believe it was the cause of his early death." When the gentleman heard this he turned to his wife and said, "Listen, wife, you shall never touch another spindle. I can no longer stand spinning!" That was fine with her. From that time forth she had the best and the most comfortable life, and if she hasn't died, she is still living lazily forth. Source: Christian Schneller, "Tarandandò," Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), no. 55, pp. 158-162. This story is from South Tyrol, an alpine region in northern Italy but with historical and cultural ties to Austria. This tale combines elements of three Aarne-Thompson types: The opening episodes where the girl follows her mother's orders literally, much to the mother's regrets, are reminiscent of type 1000 tales, where a master and a servant engage in similar conflicts. The main body of the story, where the heroine gains control over a supernatural helper by discovering his name, is a type 500 tale. The concluding episode, where a cunning old aunt convinces the heroine's husband that spinning will damage his wife's beauty, belongs to type 501 . Return to the table of contents . Winterkölbl German Hungary A poor woodcutter once lived on the edge of a great forest with his wife and his small daughter. He often did not know how he might still their hunger, and so he decided to lead his daughter into the forest and abandon her there. When he once again had nothing for himself or for his family to eat, and he could find no work, he took his child with him into the woods and left her in a beautiful forest meadow with the promise to return soon. To deceive the child he tied a piece of wood to a tree with a string in such a way that the wind swung it back and forth. Hitting against the tree, it made a sound like someone chopping wood with an axe. The child was thus deceived. She looked for strawberries, played with flowers, and after a while fell asleep -- tired from all the running about. When she awoke the moon was already high in the sky, and her father had not yet come. The child began to cry fervently, then ran deeper into the forest looking for her father. Suddenly she saw a little fire with a number of little pot-shaped containers standing nearby. Curiously, she ran up to them, laid some dry twigs on the fire, which was about to go out, and blew with all her strength in order to make it burn. Turning around, she saw a little man who was smiling at her good naturedly. He was entirely gray, and his white beard, which stuck out from his gray jacket in a strange manner, reached down over his chest. The little girl was afraid and was about to run away, but the dwarf called her back. The child reluctantly obeyed. The old man stroked her cheeks and spoke in such a friendly manner that she lost all fear, and helped him with his cooking. The gray man asked her her name and who her father was. With tears in her eyes she told him, and he comforted her and told her she should stay with him and become his daughter. The child accepted, and the old man led her into his home. It was in a large hollow tree. A pile of leaves served as his bed. The little man prepared a second bed so that the tired child could lie down and rest. The next morning the dwarf wakened the girl and said that he had to go away. She was to take care of the house -- as he called the tree -- while he was away. He returned soon and showed her everything, teaching her to cook and to do the other household chores. Thus the day passed quickly, and night was there before she knew it. They lived several years happily and contentedly, and the girl had grown up so much that was now nearly a head taller than her foster father. Then one evening he told her that it was now time for him to make preparations for her future. "The queen," he said, "who lives in the area needs a faithful servant. I was there and recommended you to her, and she is inclined to take you on." He added that if she would behave properly it would go well with her the rest of her life. The next morning they went together to the castle. The maiden was introduced to the queen, and accepted by her. She cordially took leave of her foster father, and he promised to visit her every Sunday. She had not worked there long before the young king, who had been waging war against another king, returned home victoriously. The young king was attracted to the girl and wanted to marry her. His mother, who also liked the maiden, gave her approval. When the Gray Man -- as they called him at the castle -- came again to visit his daughter, the queen told him that her son would like to marry his daughter, that she had given her approval, and that it thus now up to him to express his wishes. The old man said sourly, "The king can marry my little daughter if and only if he can guess my name." With that he left the castle and returned to the woods. As usual, he made a fire and began to cook. While he was cooking he hopped around the fire singing: Boil, pot, boil, So the king will not know That my name is Winterkölbl. The king was very concerned, and he sent out a servant to discover the old man's name. The servant overheard the old man and rushed back to the castle. He told the name and was rewarded with many gold pieces. When the dwarf returned the king greeted him with the words "Welcome, Father Winterkölbl!" The old man saw that he had been outsmarted and gave his consent. The wedding was festively celebrated, and even Winterkölbl was there. But he could not be talked into moving into the castle, and he continued to live, as before, in his tree. Source: Theodor Vernaleken, Winterkölbl , Kinder- und Hausmärchen, dem Volke treu nacherzählt (Vienna and Leipzig: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1896), no. 2, pp. 6-8. This story combines elements of type 500 tales with those of type 327A (Hansel and Gretel) and type 709 (Snow-White). Return to the table of contents . Kruzimugeli Lower Austria There was once a king who wanted to marry, but he had decided to take no woman for a wife who did not have pitch-black hair and eyes of the same color. It made no difference to him whether she was of high or low birth. Thus he had proclaimed throughout the entire country that all girls with these qualities should report to him. Many presented themselves, but in some instances the blackness did not reach the degree desired by the king, in other instances the hair was wrong, and -- in short -- there was a problem with each and every one. A charcoal burner was walking along the path with his daughter. Seeing the crowd of people before the king's castle, she asked her father what it meant. He told her how the king wanted to marry someone with black hair and black eyes, but that he could not find anyone who had them to his satisfaction. The charcoal burner's daughter had both. Therefore she said to her father, "May I go there?" He replied, "Are you so stupid that you think the king would take you for his wife?" She told him that she would like to go and just look around the palace a little. He gave his permission, and she walked toward the palace. On the way she met a little man, who called out to her, "Hey, girl, what will you give me if you become queen?" She answered, "Hey, little man, what can I give you? I have nothing." The little man continued, "You will become queen, but in three years you must still remember that my name is Kruzimugeli. If you don't know that, then you'll be mine." "If that's all you want from me, I'll remember it," replied the charcoal burner's daughter, and ran to the castle. She took no more heed of the little man who stared after her, rubbing his hands together with satisfaction. As soon as the king saw the charcoal burner's daughter he decided to marry her, for her hair glistened and her eyes sparked with blackness. So she married the king and lived happily together with him. In her happiness she almost failed to notice that the three years were coming to an end, and -- oh fright! -- she had forgotten the little man's name. Now she was always sad and spent every day crying. The king, who loved her dearly, attempted to cheer her up with festivities, but all to no avail. Whenever he asked her why she was so sad, she always answered that she could not tell him. One day the royal forester was out in the woods in search of game for the king's table. Going deeper into the woods, he saw a little man who had made a fire and was jumping over it with spiteful joy, singing the whole time: How good it is That the young queen doesn't know That my name is Kruzimugeli. The hunter listened to this and then went back home. He met the queen in the palace garden, where -- filled with sorrow -- she was taking a walk. He told her immediately about the event in the woods, and as soon as she heard the name Kruzimugeli she was almost beside herself with joy. The next day was the last day of the third year, and the little man would be coming to ask the queen for his name. The little man did indeed come the next day, and he asked the queen, "Now, Your Highness, do you still know my name? You may guess three times, and if you are not right, then you belong to me." The queen answered, "I think your name is Steffel." Hearing this, the little man jumped into the air with joy, and shouted with all his might, "Not right!" The queen then said, "Then your name must be Veitl." The little man made another leap, and called out once more, "Not right!" Now the queen said very quietly, "Then your name must be Kruzimugeli." Hearing this, and without answering, the little man jumped with a roar through the wall to the outside. All attempts to repair the hole that he made in the wall remained fruitless. But the queen and her husband lived happily and contentedly for a long time. Source: Theodor Vernaleken, Kruzimugeli , Kinder- und Hausmärchen, dem Volke treu nacherzählt (Vienna and Leipzig: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1896), no. 3, pp. 9-11. Return to the table of contents . Hottetejlil Denmark In the Mols hills east of Knebel near the farm road there is a dolmen. A circular area about twenty steps across on average is surrounded by twenty-two large boulders. In the middle is a burial chamber, consisting of six large stones with a huge capstone. A dozen adults can probably stand upright inside the burial chamber. Once it must have been covered by a mound, and a troll family lived inside the mound. The wife from the farm Poskjær farm in Knebel once went to the troll wife and asked her to spin wool for her. The troll wife agreed to do this, and if the Poskjær wife could guess or find out what her name was before she returned the spinning wheel, she would not have to pay anything for the work. The Poskær wife told this to her husband. One evening he went out to the hill, and he heard the troll wife rocking and singing to her child. It was a verse she sang, and in the verse was the name he wanted to know: Hottetejlil. A few days later the troll wife came with the spinning wheel. "Good day," she said. "Good day, Hottetejlil!" replied the Poskjær wife. When the troll wife heard her name mentioned, she hurried back to the hill and got no more work from Poskjær. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Sagn (Aarhus: Folkeblads Trykkeri, 1892-1901), no. 259, pp. 58-59 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Sagn (Aarhus: Folkeblads Trykkeri, 1892), no. 259, pp. 58-59 . Kristensen's source: J. Grönborg Pedersen. Return to the table of contents . Gundeli Denmark Once upon a time there were two young people who had not been married very long. One day the husband said to his wife: "Now it's probably best that you get some cloth made, so that I can have some new clothes!" The wife was so lazy that she didn't want to do anything but lie in bed from morning to night. She didn't know what she was supposed to do in order to finish the cloth. She then became so sick with grief that she couldn't manage to get anything done. Then one day an ugly troll woman came to her. The wife was lying in bed as usual. The troll woman said that she had heard that the wife should have some cloth made, and that she could do this for her. "You'll not have to pay anything for the cloth, but when I bring it to you, you must guess my name, and if you cannot do this, then you must follow me and always belong to me." The wife turned a few times in bed, did not know what to do, but at last agreed to the troll woman's offer. It was decided that in three weeks the troll woman should come with the cloth. Then the troll woman went away. The lazy wife lay in bed and listed all the names she could think of, but she only got so far. The appointed time was approaching, and the wife could neither eat nor drink. The husband was very worried. He could not understand what was wrong with his wife. One day he was hunting up in the mountains when he heard a song coming from the ground below him. He listened and heard someone singing while she wove: "Hi-e, hi-e, ha-e, a, that farmer's wife doesn't know my name, but my name is Gundeli." The man looked around and then discovered a crack in the ground. He thought about this strange thing. Then with a piece of chalk he wrote on his coat what he had heard, so that he could remember it. The lazy woman grew sicker and sicker as the day approached when she was to guess the troll woman's name. The day before the troll woman was to come, the man asked his wife if she didn't want to tell him what she had done wrong, She then told him what had happened. The man immediately remembered what he had heard the day he was hunting, grabbed his hunting coat and read the name. The wife was so happy that she immediately jumped out of bed and was now completely well again. The next day the troll woman came and stepped on the ground so hard that it practically shook. She had hardly entered the room before the lazy woman shouted: "Gundeli!" The troll woman let out a scream that shook the house, and then immediately disappeared into the ground. Since that day the wife was no longer lazy. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Sagn (Aarhus: Folkeblads Trykkeri, 1892-1901), no. 261, pp. 59-60 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Sagn (Aarhus: Folkeblads Trykkeri, 1892), no. 261, pp. 59-60 . Kristensen's source: Recorded in Kragelund. Jens Jensen, Refshalegård. Return to the table of contents . The Girl Who Could Spin Gold from Clay and Long Straw Sweden (Upland) There was once an old woman who had an only daughter. The lass was good and amiable, and also extremely beautiful, but at the same time so indolent that she would hardly turn her hand to any work. This was a cause of great grief to the mother, who tried all sorts of ways to cure her daughter of so lamentable a failing. But there was no help. The old woman then thought no better plan could be devised than to set her daughter to spin on the roof of their cottage, in order that all the world might be witness of her sloth. But her plan brought her no nearer the mark. The girl continued as useless as before. One day, as the king's son was going to the chase, he rode by the cottage where the old woman dwelt with her daughter. On seeing the fair spinner on the roof, he stopped and inquired why she sat spinning in such an unusual place. The old woman answered, "Aye, she sits there to let all the world see how clever she is. She is so clever that she can spin gold out of clay and long straw." At these words the prince was struck with wonder, for it never occurred to him that the old woman was ironically alluding to her daughter's sloth. He therefore said, "If what you say is true, that the young maiden can spin gold from clay and long straw, she shall no longer sit there, but shall accompany me to my palace and be my consort." The daughter thereupon descended from the roof and accompanied the prince to the royal residence, where, seated in her maiden-bower, she received a pail full of clay and a bundle of straw, by way of trial, whether she were so skillful as her mother had said. The poor girl now found herself in a very uncomfortable state, knowing but too well that she could not spin flax, much less gold. So, sitting in her chamber, with her head resting on her hand, she wept bitterly. While she was thus sitting, the door was opened, and in walked a very little old man, who was both ugly and deformed. The old man greeted her in a friendly tone, and asked why she sat so lonely and afflicted. "I may well be sorrowful," answered the girl. "The king's son has commanded me to spin gold from clay and long straw, and if it be not done before tomorrow's dawn, my life is at stake." The old man then said, "Fair maiden, weep not, I will help you. Here is a pair of gloves. When you have then on you will be able to spin gold. Tomorrow night I will return, when, if you have not found out my name, you shall accompany me home and be my wife." In her despair she agreed to the old man's condition, who then went his way. The maiden now sat and span, and by dawn she had already spun up all the clay and straw, which had become the finest gold it was possible to see. Great was the joy throughout the whole palace, that the king's son had got a bride who was so skillful and, at the same time, so fair. But the young maiden did nothing but weep, and the more the time advanced the more she wept, for she thought of the frightful dwarf who was to come and fetch her. When evening drew nigh, the king's son returned from the chase, and went to converse with his bride. Observing that she appeared sorrowful, he strove to divert her in all sorts of ways, and said he would tell her of a curious adventure, provided only she would be cheerful. The girl entreated him to let her hear it. Then said the prince, "While rambling about in the forest today I witness an odd sort of thing. I saw a very, very little old man dancing round a juniper bush and singing a singular song." "What did he sing?" asked the maiden inquisitively, for she felt sure that the prince had met with the dwarf. "He sang these words, answered the prince, I dag skall jag maltet mala, I morgon skall mitt bröllopp vara. Och jungfrun sitter i buren och gråter; Hon ver inte havad jag heter. Jag heter Titteli Ture. Jag heter Titteli Ture. Today I the malt shall grind, Tomorrow my wedding shall be. And the maiden sits in her bower and weeps; She knows not what I am called. I am called Titteli Ture. I am called Titteli Ture. Was not the maiden now glad? She begged the prince to tell her over and over again what the dwarf had sung. He then repeated the wonderful song, until she had imprinted the old man's name firmly in her memory. She then conversed lovingly with her betrothed, and the prince could not sufficiently praise his young bride's beauty and understanding. But he wondered why she was so overjoyed, being like everyone else, ignorant of the cause of her past sorrow. When it was night, and the maiden was sitting alone in her chamber, the door was opened, and the hideous dwarf again entered. On beholding him the girl sprang up, and said, "Titteli Ture! Titteli Ture! Here are your gloves." When the dwarf heard his name pronounced, he was furiously angry, and hastened away through the air, taking with him the whole roof of the house. The fair maiden now laughed to herself and was joyful beyond measure. She then lay down to sleep, and slept till the sun shone. The following day her marriage with the young prince was solemnized, and nothing more was ever heard of Titteli Ture. Source (books.google.com): Benjamin Thorpe, Yule-Tide Stories: A Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions, from the Swedish, Danish, and German (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853), pp. 168-70 . Source (Internet Archive): Benjamin Thorpe, Yule-Tide Stories: A Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions, from the Swedish, Danish, and German (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853), pp. 168-70 . Language cautiously modernized by D. L. Ashliman. Thorpe's source: Books.google.com: Gunnar Olof Hyltén-Cavallius and George Stephens, "Flickan, som kunde spinna guld utaf Ler och Lång-Halm," Svenska Folk-Sagor och Äfventyr (Stockholm: A. Bohlins Förlag, 1844), no. 10, pp. 169-72 . Internet Archive: Gunnar Olof Hyltén-Cavallius and George Stephens, "Flickan, som kunde spinna guld utaf Ler och Lång-Halm," Svenska Folk-Sagor och Äfventyr (Stockholm: A. Bohlins Förlag, 1844), no. 10, pp. 169-72 . Return to the table of contents . Tom Tit Tot England Once upon a time there was a woman, and she baked five pies. And when they came out of the oven, they were that overbaked the crusts were too hard to eat. So she says to her daughter: "Darter," says she, "put you them there pies on the shelf, and leave 'em there a little, and they'll come again." -- She meant, you know, the crust would get soft. But the girl, she says to herself: "Well, if they'll come again, I'll eat 'em now." And she set to work and ate 'em all, first and last. Well, come supper-time the woman said: "Go you, and get one o' them there pies. I dare say they've come again now." The girl went and she looked, and there was nothing but the dishes. so back she came, and says she: "Noo, they ain't come again." "Not one of 'em?" says the mother. "Not one of 'em," says she. "Well, come again, or not come again," said the woman, "I'll have one for supper." "But you can't, if they ain't come," said the girl. "But I can," says she. "Go you, and bring the best of 'em." Best or worst," says the girl, "I've ate 'em all, and you can't have one till that's come again." Well, the woman she was done, and she took her spinning to the door to spin, and as she span she sang: My darter ha' ate five, five pies today. My darter ha' ate five, five pies today. The king was coming down the street, and he heard her sing, but what she sang he couldn't hear, so he stopped and said: "What was that you were singing, my good woman?" The woman was ashamed to let him hear what her daughter had been doing, so she sang, instead of that: My darter ha' spun five, five skeins today. My darter ha' spun five, five skeins today. "Stars o' mine!" said the king, "I never heard tell of anyone that could do that." Then he said: "Look you here, I want a wife, and I'll marry your daughter. But look you here," says he, "eleven months out of the year she shall have all she likes to eat, and all the gowns she likes to get, and all the company she likes to keep; but the last month of the year she'll have to spin five skeins every day, and if she don't, I shall kill her." "All right," says the woman; for she thought what a grand marriage that was. And as for the five skeins, when the time came, there'd be plenty of ways of getting out of it, and likeliest, he'd have forgotten all about it. Well, so they were married. And for eleven months the girl had all she liked to eat, and all the gowns she liked to get, and all the company she liked to keep. But when the time was getting over, she began to think about the skeins and to wonder if he had 'em in mind. But not one word did he say about 'em, and she thought he'd wholly forgotten 'em. However, the last day of the last month he takes her to a room she'd never set eyes on before. There was nothing in it but a spinning wheel and a stool And says he: "Now, my dear, here you'll be shut in tomorrow with some victuals and some flax, and if you haven't spun five skeins by the night, your head'll go off." And away he went about his business. Well, she was that frightened, she'd always been such a gatless [careless] girl, that she didn't so much as know how to spin, and what was she to do tomorrow with no one to come nigh her to help her? She sat down on a stool in the kitchen, and law! how she did cry! However, all of a sudden she heard a sort of a knocking low down on the door. She upped and oped it, and what should she see but a small little black thing with a long tail. That looked up at her right curious, and that said: "What are you a-crying for?" "What's that to you?:" says she. "Never you mind," that said, "but tell me what you're a-crying for." "That won't do me no good if I do," says she. "You don't know that," that said, and twirled that's tail round. "well," says she, "that won't do no harm, if that don't do no good," and she upped and told about the pies, and the skeins, and everything. "This is what I'll do," says the little black thing, "I'll come to your window every morning and take the flax and bring it spun at night." "What's your pay?" says she. That looked out the corner of that's eyes, and that said: "I'll give you three guesses every night to guess my name, and if you haven't guessed it before the month's up, you shall be mine. Well, she thought she'd be sure to guess that's name before the month was up. "All right," says she, "I agree." "All right," that says, and law! how that twirled that's tail. Well, the next day, her husband took her into the room, and there was the flax and the day's food. "Now there's the flax," says he, and if that ain't spun up this night, off goes your head." And then he went out and locked the door. He'd hardly gone, when there was a knocking against the window. She upped and she oped it, and there sure enough was the little old thing sitting on the ledge. "Where's the flax?" says he. "Here it be," says she. And she gave it to him. Well, come the evening a knocking came again to the window. She upped and she oped it, and there was the little old thing with five skeins of flax on his arm. "Here it be," says he, and he have it to her. "Now, what's my name" says he. What, is that Bill?" says she. "Noo, that ain't," says he, and he twirled his tail. "Is that Ned?" says she. "Noo, that ain't," says he, and he twirled his tail. "Well, is that Mark?" says she. "Noo, that ain't," says he, and he twirled his tail harder, and away he flew. Well, when her husband came in, there were the five skeins ready for him. "I see I shan't have to kill you tonight, my dear," says her; "you'll have your food and your flax in the morning," says he, and away he goes. Well every day the flax and the food were brought, and every day that there little black impet used to come mornings and evenings. And all the day the girl sate trying to think of names to say to it what it came at night. But she never hit on the right one. And as it got towards the end of the month, the impet began to look so maliceful, and that twirled that's tail faster and faster each time she gave a guess. At last it came to the last day but one. The impet came at night along with the five skeins, and that said: "What, ain't you got my name yet?" "Is that Nicodemus?" says she. "Noo, 'tain't," that says. "Is that Sammle?" says she. "Noo, 'tain't," that says. "A-well, is that Methusalem?" says she. "Noo, 'tain't that neither," that says. Then that looks at her with that's eyes like a coal o' fire, and that says: "Woman, there's only tomorrow night, and then you'll be mine?" And away it flew. Well, she felt that horrid. However, she heard the king coming along the passage. In he came, and when he sees the five skeins, he says, says he: "Well, my dear," says he. "I don't see but what you'll have your skeins ready tomorrow night as well, and as I reckon I shan't have to kill you, I'll have supper in here tonight." So they brought supper, and another stool for him, and down the two sate. Well, he hadn't eaten but a mouthful or so, when he stops and begins to laugh. "What is it?" says she. "A-why," says he, I was out a-hunting today, and I got away to a place in the wood I'd never seen before. And there was an old chalk pit. And I heard a kind of a sort of a humming. So I got off my hobby, and I went right quiet to the pit, and I looked down. Well, what should there be but the funniest little black thing you ever set eyes on. And what was that doing but that had a little spinning wheel, and that was spinning wonderful fast, and twirling that's tail. And as that span that sang: Nimmy nimmy not My name's Tom Tit Tot. Well, when the girl heard this, she felt as if she could have jumped out her skin for joy, but she didn't say a word. Next day that there little thing looked so maliceful when he came for the flax. And when night came, she heard that knocking against the window panes. She oped the window, and that come right in on the ledge. That was grinning from ear to ear, and Oo! that's tail was twirling round so fast. "What's my name?" that says, as that gave her the skeins. "Is that Solomon?" she says, pretending to be afeard. "Noo, 'tain't," that says, and that come further into the room. "Well, is that Zebedee?" says she again. "Noo, 'tain't," says the impet. And then that laughed and twirled that's tail till you couldn't hardly see it. "Take time, woman," that says; "next guess, and you're mine." And that stretched out that's black hands at her. Well, she backed a step or two, and she looked at it, and then she laughed out, and says she, pointing her finger at it: Nimmy nimmy not Your name's Tom Tit Tot. Well, when that heard her, that gave an awful shriek and away that flew into the dark, and she never saw it any more. Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1898), pp. 1-8. Jacobs' note on his source: Contributed by Mrs. Walter-Thomas (née Fison) to the "Suffolk Notes and Queries" of the Ipswich Journal, 1877, and reprinted by Mr. E. Clodd in a paper on "The Philosophy of Rumpelstiltskin" in Folk-Lore Journal, vii [1889], 138-43. I have reduced the Suffolk dialect.... One of the best folk-tales that have ever been collected, far superior to any of the continental variants of this tale with which I am acquainted. Mr. Clodd sees in the class of name-guessing stories, a "survival" of the superstition that to know a man's name gives you power over him, for which reason savages object to tell their names. Return to the table of contents . Duffy and the Devil England (Cornwall) Many of the superstitions of our ancestors are preserved in quaint, irregular rhymes, the recitation of which was the amusement of the people in the long nights of winter. These were sung, or rather said, in a monotone, by the professional drolls, who doubtless added such things as they fancied would increase the interest of the story to the listeners. Especially were they fond of introducing known characters on the scene, and of mixing up events which had occurred within the memory of the old people, with the more ancient legend. The following story, or rather parts of it, formed the subject of one of the Cornish Christmas plays. When I was a boy, I well remember being much delighted with the coarse acting of a set of Christmas players, who exhibited in the "great hall" of a farmhouse at which I was visiting, and who gave us the principal incidents of Duffy and the Devil Terrytop; one of the company doing the part of Chorus, and filling up by rude descriptions -- often in rhyme -- the parts which the players could not represent. It was cider-making time. Squire Lovel of Trove, or more correctly, Trewoof, rode up to Burian Churchtown to procure help. Boys and maidens were in request, some to gather the apples from the trees, others to carry them to the cider mill. Passing along the village as hastily as the dignity of a squire would allow him, his attention was drawn to a great noise -- scolding in a shrill treble voice, and crying -- proceeding from Janey Chygwin's door. The squire rode up to the cottage, and he saw the old woman beating her stepdaughter Duffy about the head with the skirt of her swing-tail gown, in which she had been carrying out the ashes. She made such a dust, that the squire was nearly choked and almost blinded with the wood ashes. "What cheer, Janey?" cries the squire. "What's the to-do with you and Duffy?" "Oh, the lazy hussy!" shouts Janey, "is all her time courseying and courranting [running and chasing] with the boys! She will never stay in to boil the porridge, knit the stockings, or spin the yarn." "Don't believe her, your honor," exclaims Duffy. "My knitting and spinning is the best in the parish." The war of tongues continued in this strain for some time, the old squire looking calmly on, and resolving in his mind to take Duffy home with him to Trove, her appearance evidently pleasing him greatly. Squire Lovel left the old and young woman to do the best they could, and went round the village to complete his hiring. When he returned, peace had been declared between them, but when Lovel expressed his desire to take Duffy home to his house to help the housekeeper to do the spinning, "A pretty spinner she is!" shouted old Janey at the top of her voice. "Try me, your honor," said Duffy, curtsying very low. "My yarns are the best in the parish." "We'll soon try that," said the squire. "Janey will be glad to get quits of thee, I see, and thou'lt be nothing loath to leave her. So jump up behind me, Duffy." No sooner said than done. The maid Duffy, without ceremony, mounted behind the squire on the horse, and they jogged silently down to Trove. Squire Lovel's old housekeeper was almost blind -- one eye had been put out by an angry old wizard, and through sympathy she was rapidly losing the power of seeing with the other. This old dame was consequently very glad of someone to help her in spinning and knitting. The introduction over, the housekeeper takes Duffy up into the garret where the wool was kept, and where the spinning was done in the summer, and requests her to commence her work. The truth must be told. Duffy was an idle slut. She could neither knit nor spin. Well, here she was left along, and, of course, expected to produce a good specimen of her work. The garret was piled from the floor to the key-beams with fleeces of wool. Duffy looked despairingly at them, and then sat herself down on the "turn" -- the spinning wheel -- and cried out, "Curse the spinning and knitting! The devil may spin and knit for the squire for what I care." Scarcely had Duffy spoken these words than she heard a rustling noise behind some wool-packs, and forth walked a queer-looking little man, with a remarkable pair of eyes, which seemed to send out flashes of light. There was something uncommonly knowing in the twist of his mouth, and his curved nose had an air of curious intelligence. He was dressed in black, and moved towards Duffy with a jaunty air, knocking something against the floor at every step he took. "Duffy dear," said this little gentleman, "I'll do all the spinning and knitting for thee." "Thank 'e," says Duffy, quite astonished. "Duffy dear, a lady shall you be." "Thank 'e, your honor," smiled Duffy. "But, Duffy dear, remember," coaxingly said the queer little man, "remember, that for all this, at the end of three years, you must go with me, unless you can find out my name." Duffy was not the least bit frightened, nor did she hesitate long, but presently struck a bargain with her kind but unknown friend, who told her she had only to wish, and her every wish should be fulfilled. And as for the spinning and knitting, she would find all she required under the black ram's fleece. He then departed. How, Duffy could not tell, but in a moment the queer little gentleman was gone. Duffy sung in idleness, and slept until it was time for her to make her appearance. So she wished for some yarns, and looking under the black fleece she found them. Those were shown by the housekeeper to the squire, and both declared they had never seen such beautiful yarns. The next day Duffy was to knit this yarn into stockings. Duffy idled, as only professed idlers can idle. But in due time, as if she had been excessively industrious, she produced a pair of stockings for the old squire. If the yarn was beautiful, the stocking were beyond all praise. They were as fine as silk, and as strong as leather. Squire Lovel soon gave them a trial; and when he came home at night after hunting, he declared he would never wear any other than Duffy's stocking. He had wandered all day through brake and briar, furze and brambles. There was not a scratch on his legs, and he was as dry as a bone. There was no end to his praise of Duffy's stockings. Duffy had a rare time of it now. She could do what she pleased and rove where she willed. She was dancing on the mill-bed half the day with all the gossiping women who brought their grist to be ground. In those "good old times" the ladies of the parish would take their corn to mill, and serge the flour themselves. When a few of them met together, they would either tell stories or dance whilst the corn was grinding. Sometimes the dance would be on the mill-bed, sometimes out on the green. On some occasions the miller's fiddle would be in request, at others the "crowd" [a sieve covered with sheepskin] was made to do the duty of a tambourine. So Duffy was always finding excuses to go to mill, and many "a round" would she dance with the best people in the parish. Old Bet, the miller's wife, was a witch, and she found out who did Duffy's work for her. Duffy and old Bet were always the best of friends, and she never told anyone about Duffy's knitting friend, nor did she ever say a word about the stockings being unfinished. There was always a stitch down. On Sundays the people went to Burian Church from all parts to look at the squire's stockings. And the old squire would stop at the cross, proud enough to show them. He could hunt Through brambles and furze in all sorts of weather; His old shanks were as sound as if bound up in leather. Duffy was now sought after by all the young men of the country; and at last the squire, fearing to lose a pretty girl, and one who was so useful to him, married her himself, and she became, according to the fashion of the time and place, Lady Lovel. But she was commonly known by her neighbors as the Duffy Lady. Lady Lovel kept the devil hard at work. Stockings, all sorts of fine underclothing, bedding, and much ornamental work, the like of which was never seen, was produced at command and passed off as her own. Duffy passed a merry time of it, but somehow or other she was never happy when she was compelled to play the lady. She passed much more of her time with the old crone at the mill than in the drawing room at Trove. The squire sported and drank, and cared little about Duffy, so long as she provided him with knitted garments. The three years were nearly at an end. Duffy had tried every plan to find out the devil's name, but had failed in all. She began to fear that she should have to go off with her queer friend, and Duffy became melancholy. Old Bet endeavored to rouse her, persuading her that she could, from her long experience and many dealings with the imps of darkness, at the last moment put her in the way of escaping her doom. Duffy went day after day to her garret, and there each day was the devil gibing and jeering till she was almost mad. There was but another day. Bet was seriously consulted now, and -- as good as her word -- she promised to use her power. Duffy Lady was to bring down to the mill that very evening a jack [leather jug] of the strongest beer she had in the cellar. She was not to go to bed until the squire returned from hunting, no matter how late, and she was to make no remark in reply to anything the squire might tell her. The jack of beer was duly carried to the mill, and Duffy returned home very melancholy to wait up for the squire. No sooner had Lady Lovel left the mill than old Bet came out with the "crowd" over her shoulders, and the blackjack [tar-coated leather jug] in her hand. She shut the door, and turned the water off the mill-wheel, threw her red cloak about her, and away. She was seen by her neighbors going towards Boleit. A man saw the old woman trudging past the Pipers, and through the Dawnse Main into the downs, but there he lost sight of her, and no one could tell where old Bet was gone to at that time of night. Duffy waited long and anxiously. By and by the dogs came home alone. They were covered with foam, their tongues were hanging out of their mouths, and all the servants said they must have met the devil's hounds without heads. Duffy was seriously alarmed. Midnight came but no squire. At last he arrived, but like a crazy, crack-brained man, he kept singing: Here's to the devil, With his wooden pick and shovel. He was neither drunk nor frightened, but wild with some strange excitement. After a long time Squire Lovel sat down, and began, "My dear Duffy, you haven't smiled this long time. But now I'll tell 'e something that would make ye laugh if ye're dying. If you'd seen what I've seen tonight, ha, ha, ha! Here's to the devil, With his wooden pick and shovel." True to her orders, Duffy said not a word, but allowed the squire to ramble on as he pleased. At length he told her the following story of his adventures, with interruptions which have not been retained, and with numerous coarse expressions which are best forgotten: The squire's story of the meeting of the witches in the Fugoe Hole: Duffy dear, I left home at break of day this morning. I hunted all the moors from Trove to Trevider, and never started a hare all the livelong day. I determined to hunt all night, but that I'd have a brace to bring home. So, at nightfall I went down Lemorna Bottoms, then up Brene Downses, and as we passed the Dawnse Main up started a hare, as fine a hare as ever was seen. She passed the Pipers, down through the Reens, in the mouth of the dogs half the time, yet they couldn't catch her at all. As fine a chase as ever was seen, until she took into the Fugoe Hole. In went the dogs after her, and I followed, the owls and bats flying round my head. On we went, through water and mud, a mile or more, I'm quite certain. I didn't know the place was so long before. At last we came to a broad pool of water, when the dogs lost the scent and ran back past me howling and jowling, terrified almost to death! A little farther on I turned round a corner, and saw a glimmering fire on the other side the water, and there were St. Leven witches in scores. Some were riding on ragwort, some on brooms, some were floating on their three-legged stools, and some, who had been milking the little good cows in Wales, had come back astride of the largest leeks they could find. Amongst the rest there was our Bet of the mill, with her "crowd" in her hand, and my own blackjack slung across her shoulders. In a short time the witches gathered round the fire, and blowed it up, after a strange fashion, till it burned up into a brilliant blue flame. Then I saw amongst the rest a queer little man in black, with a long forked tail, which he held high in the air, and twirled around. Bet struck her "crowd" as soon as he appeared, and beat up the tune: Here's to the devil, With his wooden pick and shovel, Digging tin by the bushel, With his tail cock'd up! Then the queer little devil and all danced like the wind, and went faster and faster, making such a clatter, "as if they had on each foot a pewter platter." Every time the man in black came round by old Bet, he took a good pull from my own blackjack, till at last, as if he had been drinking my best beer, he seemed to have lost his head, when he jumped up and down, turned round and round, and roaring with laughter, sung: Duffy, my lady, you'll never know -- what? -- That my name is Terrytop, Terrytop -- top! When the squire sung those lines, he stopped suddenly, thinking that Duffy was going to die. She turned pale, and red, and pale again. However, Duffy said nothing, and the squire proceeded: After the dance, all the witches made a ring around the fire, and again blew it up, until the blue flames reached the top of the Zawn [a cavernous gorge]. Then the devil danced through and through the fire, and springing ever and anon amongst the witches, kicked them soundly. At last -- I was shaking with laughter at the fun -- I shouted, "Go it, Old Nick!" and lo, the lights went out, and I had to fly with all my speed, for every one of the witches were after me. I scampered home somehow, and here I am. Why don't you laugh, Duffy? Duffy did laugh, and laugh right heartily now, and when tired of their fun, the squire and the lady went to bed. The three years were up within an hour. Duffy had willed for an abundant supply of knitted things, and filled every chest in the house. She was in the best chamber trying to cram some more stockings into a big chest, when the queer little man in black appeared before her. "Well, Duffy, my dear," said he, "I have been true to my word and served you truly for three years as we agreed, so now I hope you will go with me, and make no objection." He bowed very obsequiously, almost to the ground, and regarded Duffy Lady with a very offensive leer. "I fear," smiled Duffy, "that your country is rather warm, and might spoil my fair complexion." "It is not so hot as some people say, Duffy," was his reply. "But come along. I've kept my word, and of course a lady of your standing will keep your word also. Can you tell me my name?" Duffy curtsied, and smilingly said, "You have behaved like a true gentleman, yet I wouldn't like to go so far." The devil frowned and approached as if he would lay forcible hands upon her. "Maybe your name is Lucifer?" He stamped his foot and grinned horridly. "Lucifer! Lucifer! He's no other than a servant to me in my own country." Suddenly calming again, he said, quietly, "Lucifer! I would scarcely be seen speaking to him at court. But come along. When I spin for ladies I expect honorable treatment at their hands. You've two guesses more. But they're of little use. My name is not generally known on earth." "Perhaps," smiled Duffy again, "my lord's name is Beelzebub?" How he grinned, and his sides shook with convulsive joy. "Beelzebub!" says he. "I believe he's some sort of a cousin -- a Cornish cousin you know." "I hope your honor," curtsied Duffy, "will not take offence. Impute my mistake to ignorance." Our demon was rampant with joy. He danced around Duffy with delight, and was, seeing that she hesitated, about to seize her somewhat roughly. "Stop! Stop!" shouts Duffy. "Perhaps you will be honest enough to admit that your name is Terrytop." The gentleman in black looked at Duffy, and she steadily looked him in the face. "Terrytop! Deny it if you dare," says she. "A gentleman never denies his name," replied Terrytop, drawing himself up with much dignity. "I did not expect to be beaten by a young minx like you, Duffy. But the pleasure of your company is merely postponed." With this Terrytop departed in fire and smoke, and all the devil's knitting suddenly turned to ashes. Squire Lovel was out hunting, away far on the moors. The day was cold and the winds piercing. Suddenly the stockings dropped from his legs and the homespun from his back, so that he came home with nothing on but his shirt and his shoes, almost dead with cold. All this was attributed by the squire to the influence of old Bet, who, he thought, had punished him for pursuing her with his dogs when she had assumed the form of a hare. The story, as told by the drolls, now rambles on. Duffy cannot furnish stockings. The squire is very wroth. There are many quarrels -- mutual recriminations. Duffy's old sweetheart is called in to beat the squire, and eventually peace is procured, by a stratagem of old Bet's, which would rather shock the sense of propriety in these our days. Source: Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall (London: John Camden Hotten, 1871), pp. 239-247. A footnote by Hunt concerning the Fugoe Hole: There is a tradition, firmly believed on the lower side of the Burian, that the Fugoe Hole extends from the cliffs underground so far that the end of it is under the parlor of the Tremewen's house in Trove, which is the only remaining portion of the old mansion of the Lovels. Here the witches were in the habit of meeting the devil, and holding their Sabbath. Often his dark highness has been heard piping while the witches danced to his music. A pool of water some distance from the entrance prevents any adventurer from exploring the "Hole" to its termination. Hares often take refuge in the Fugoe Hole, from which they have never been known to return. Return to the table of contents . Whuppity Stoorie Scotland I see that you are fond of talks about fairies, children; and a story about a fairy and the goodwife of Kittlerumpit has just come into my mind; but I can't very well tell you now whereabouts Kittlerumpit lies. I think it is somewhere in the Debatable Ground. Anyway, I shall not pretend to know more than I do, like everybody nowadays. I wish they would remember the ballad we used to sing long ago: Mony ane sings the gerss, the gerss, And mony ane sings the corn; And mony ane clatters o' bold Robin Hood, Ne'er kent where he was born. But howsoever about Kittlerumpit. The goodman was a rambling sort of body; and he went to a fair one day, and not only never came home again, but nevermore was heard of. Some said he 'listed, and others that the tiresome press-gang snatched him up, though he was furnished with a wife and a child to boot. Alas! that wretched press-gang! They went about the country like roaring lions, seeking whom they might devour. Well do I remember how my eldest brother Sandy was all but smothered in the meal-chest, hiding from those rascals. After they were gone, we pulled him out from among the meal, puffing and crying, and as white as any corpse. My mother had to pick the meal out of his mouth with the shank of a horn spoon. Ah well, when the goodman of Kittlerumpit was gone, the goodwife was left with small means. Little resources had she, and a baby boy at her breast. All said they were sorry for her; but nobody helped her -- which is a common case, sirs. Howsoever, the goodwife had a sow, and that was her only consolation; for the sow was soon to farrow, and she hoped for a good litter. But we all know hope is fallacious. One day the woman goes to the sty to fill the sow's trough; and what does she find but the sow lying on her back, grunting and groaning, and ready to give up the ghost. I trow [trust, believe] this was a new pang to the goodwife's heart; so she sat down on the knocking stone [a stone with a hollow in it for pounding grain, so as to separate the husks from the kernels], with her bairn [child] on her knee, and cried sorer than ever she did for the loss of her own goodman. Now I premise that the cottage of Kittlerumpit was built on a brae [hillside], with a large fir wood behind it, of which you may hear more ere we go far on. So the goodwife, when she was wiping her eyes, chances to look down the brae; and what does she see but an old woman almost like a lady, coming slowly up the road. She was dressed in green, all but a short white apron and a black velvet hood, and a steeple-crowned beaver hat on her head. She had a long walking staff, as long as herself, in her hand -- the sort of staff that old men and old women helped themselves with long ago. I see no such staffs now, sirs. Ah well, when the goodwife saw the green gentlewoman near her, she rose and made a curtsy; and "Madam," quoth she, weeping, "I am one of the most misfortunate women alive." "I don't wish to hear pipers' news and fiddlers' tales, goodwife," quoth the green woman. "I know you have lost your goodman -- we had worse losses at the Sheriff Muir [a common saying, in response to a complaint about a trifle]; and I know that your sow is unco [strangely, extremely] sick. Now what will you give me if I cure her?" "Anything your ladyship's madam likes," quoth the witless goodwife, never guessing whom she had to deal with. "Let us wet thumbs on that bargain," quoth the green woman; so thumbs were wetted, I warrant you; and into the sty madam marches. She looks at the sow with a long stare, and then began to mutter to herself what the goodwife couldn't well understand; but she said it sounded like Pitter patter, Holy water. Then she took out of her pocket a wee bottle, with something like oil in it; and she rubs the sow with it above the snout, behind the ears, and on the tip of the tail. "Get up, beast," quoth the green woman. No sooner said than done. Up jumps the sow with a grunt, and away to her trough for her breakfast. The goodwife of Kittlerumpit was a joyful goodwife now, and would have kissed the very hem of the green woman's gown-tail, but she wouldn't let her. "I am not so fond of ceremonies," quoth she; "but now that I have righted your sick beast, let us end our settled bargain. You will not find me an unreasonable, greedy body. I like ever to do a good turn for a small reward. All I ask, and will have, is that baby boy in your bosom." The goodwife of Kittlerumpit, who now knew her customer, gave a shrill cry like a stuck swine. The green woman was a fairy, no doubt; so she prays, and cries, and begs, and scolds; but all wouldn't do. "You may spare your din," quoth the fairy, "screaming as if I was as deaf as a doornail. But this I'll let you know: I cannot, by the law we live under, take your bairn till the third day; and not then, if you can tell me my right name." So madam goes away round the pigsty end; and the goodwife falls down in a swoon behind the knocking stone. Ah well, the goodwife of Kittlerumpit could not sleep any that night for crying, and all the next day the same, cuddling her bairn till she nearly squeezed its breath out. But the second day she thinks of taking a walk in the wood I told you of. And so with the bairn in her arms, she sets out, and goes far in among the trees, where was an old quarry hole, grown over with grass, and a bonny spring well in the middle of it. Before she came very near, she hears the whirring of a flax wheel, and a voice singing a song; so the woman creeps quietly among the bushes, and peeps over the brow of the quarry; and what does she see but the green fairy tearing away at her wheel, and singing like any precentor: Little kens [knows] our guid dame at hame, That Whuppity Stoorie is my name. "Ha, ha!" thinks the woman, "I've got the mason's word at last. The devil give them joy that told it!" So she went home far lighter than she came out, as you may well guess -- laughing like a madcap with the thought of cheating the old green fairy. Ah well, you must know that this goodwife was a jocose woman, and ever merry when her heart was not very sorely overladen. So she thinks to have some sport with the fairy; and at the appointed time she puts the bairn behind the knocking stone, and sits on the stone herself. Then she pulls her cap over her left ear and twists her mouth on the other side, as if she were weeping; and an ugly face she made, you may be sure. She hadn't long to wait, for up the brae climbs the green fairy, neither lame nor lazy; and long ere she got near the knocking stone she screams out, "Goodwife of Kittlerumpit, you know well what I come for. Stand and deliver!" The woman pretends to cry harder than before, and wrings her hands, and falls on her knees with "Och, sweet madam mistress, spare my only bairn, and take the wretched sow!" "The devil take the sow, for my part," quoth the fairy. "I come not here for swine's flesh. Don't be contramawcious, huzzy, but give me the child instantly!" "Ochone, dear lady mine," quoth the crying goodwife; "forgo my poor bairn, and take me myself!" "The devil is in the daft jade," quoth the fairy, looking like the far end of a fiddle. "I'll bet she is clean demented. Who in all the earthly world, with half an eye in his head, would ever meddle with the likes of thee?" I trow this set up the woman of Kittlerumpit's bristle, for though she had two blear eyes and a long red nose besides, she thought herself as bonny as the best of them. So she springs off her knees, sets the top of her cap straight, and with her two hands folded before her, she makes a curtsy down to the ground, and, "In troth, fair madam," quoth she, "I might have had the wit to know that the likes of me is not fit to tie the worst shoestrings of the high and mighty princess, Whuppity Stoorie ." If a flash of gunpowder had come out of the ground it couldn't have made the fairy leap higher than she did. Then down she came again plump on her shoe-heels; and whirling round, she ran down the brae, screeching for rage, like an owl chased by the witches. The goodwife of Kittlerumpit laughed till she was like to split; then she takes up her bairn, and goes into her house, singing to it all the way: A goo and a gitty, my bonny wee tyke, Ye'se noo ha'e your four-oories; Sin' we've gien Nick a bane to pyke, Wi' his wheels and his Whuppity Stoories. Source: John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1901), vol. 2, pp. 585-590. Rhys's source: Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland (Edinburgh, 1858), pp. 221-115. Rhys normalizes the Scottish dialect, with the following comment: "The Scotch is so broad, that I think it advisable, at the risk of some havoc to the local coloring, to southronize it somewhat." Return to the table of contents . Peerie Fool [Peerifool] Orkney Islands There was once a king and queen in Rousay who had three daughters. The king died, and the queen was living in a small house with her daughters. They kept a cow and a kale yard. They found their cabbage was all being taken away. The eldest daughter said to the queen, she would take a blanket about her and would sit and watch what was going away with the kale. So when the night came, she went out to watch. In a short time a very big giant came into the yard. He began to cut the kale and throw it in a big cubby [straw basket]. So he cut till he had it well filled. The princess was always asking why he was taking her mother's kale. He was saying to her, if she was not quiet he would take her too. As soon as he had filled his cubby, he took her by a leg and an arm and threw her on the top of his cubby of kale, and away home he went with her. When he got home he told her what work she had to do. She had to milk the cow and put her up to the hills called Bloodfield, and then she had to take wool, and wash and tease it, and comb and card, and spin and make claith [cloth]. When the giant went out she milked the cow and put her to the hills. Then she put on the pot and made porridge to herself. As she was supping it, a great many peerie [little] yellow-headed folk came running, calling out to give them some. She said, Little for one, and less for two, And never a grain have I for you. When she came to work the wool , none of that work could she do at all. The giant came home at night and found she had not done her work. He took her and began at her head, and peeled the skin off all the way down her back and over her feet. Then he threw her on the couples [rafters] among the hens. The same adventure befell the second girl. If her sister could do little with the wool, she could do less. When the giant came home he found her work not done. He began at the crown of her head and peeled a strip of skin all down her back and over her feet, and threw her on the couples beside her sister. They lay there and could not speak nor come down. The next night the youngest princess said she would take a blanket about her and go to watch what had gone away with her sisters. Ere long, in came a giant with a big cubby, and began to cut the kale. She was asking why he was taking her mother's kale. He was saying, if she was not quiet he would take her too. He took her by a leg and an arm and threw her on the top of his cubby and carried her away. Next morning he gave her the same work as he had given her sisters. When he was gone out, she milked the cow and put her to the high hills. Then she put on the pot and made porridge to herself. When the peerie yellow-headed folk came asking for some, she told them to get something to sup with. Some got heather cows [brooms made from twigs of heather] and some got broken dishes. Some got one thing, and some another, and they all got some of her porridge. After they were all gone, a peerie yellow-headed boy came in and asked her if she had any work to do; he could do any work with wool. She said she had plenty, but would never be able to pay him for it. He said all he was asking for it was to tell him his name. She thought that would be easy to do, and gave him the wool. When it was getting dark, an old woman came in and asked her for lodging. The princess said she could not give her that, but asked her if she had any news. But the old woman had none, and went away to lie out. There is a high knowe [knoll] near the place, and the old woman sat under it for shelter. She found it very warm. She was always climbing up, and when she came to the top, she heard someone inside saying, Tease, teasers, tease; Card, carders, card; Spin, spinners spin, For Peerie Fool is my name There was a crack in the knowe, and light coming out. She looked in and saw a great many peerie folk working, and a peerie yellow-headed boy running around them, calling out that. The old woman thought she would get lodging if she went to give this news, so she came back and told the princess the whole of it. The princess went on saying, "Peerie Fool, Peerie Fool," till the yellow-headed boy came with all the wool made into claith. He asked what was his name, and she guessed names, and he jumped about and said, "No." At last she said, "Peerie Fool is your name." He threw down the wool and ran off very angry. As the giant was coming home he met a great many peerie yellow-headed folk, some with their eyes hanging on their breasts. He asked them what was the matter. They told him it was working so hard, pulling wool so fine. He said he had a good wife at home, and if she was safe, never would he allow her to do any work again. When he came home she was all safe, and had a great many webs lying all ready, and he was very kind to her. Next day when he went out, she found her sisters and took them down from the couples. She put the skin on their backs again, and she put her eldest sister in a cazy [straw basket], and put all the fine things she could find with her, and grass on the top. When the giant came home, she asked him to take the cazy to her mother with some food for her cow. He was so pleased with her, he would do anything for her, and took it away. Next day she did the same with her other sister. She told him she would have the last of the food she had to send her mother for the cow ready next night. She told him she was going a bit from home, and would leave it ready for him. She got into the cazy with all the fine things she could find, and covered herself with grass. He took the cazy and carried it the queen's house. She and her daughters had a big boiler of boiling water ready. They couped [overturned, emptied] it about him when he was under the window, and that was the end of the giant. Source: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney and Shetland Islands , collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas: County Folk-Lore , vol. 3, printed extracts, no. 5 (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1903), pp. 222-226. Black's source: "Taken down from the recitation of an Orkney woman by Mr. D. J. Robertson. Printed in Longman's Magazine , vol. 14, pp. 331-334." This tale combines folktale type 500 (The Name of the Helper) with type 311 (The Heroine Rescues Herself and Her Sisters). Return to the table of contents . Gwarwyn-a-throt Wales Long ago there was in service at a Monmouthshire farm a young woman who was merry and strong. Who she was or whence she came nobody knew, but many believed that she belonged to the old breed of Bendith y Mamau . Some time after she had come to the farm, the rumor spread that the house was sorely troubled by a spirit. But the girl and the elf understood one another well, and they became the best of friends. So the elf proved very useful to the maid, for he did everything for her -- washing, ironing, spinning, and twisting wool. In fact, they say that he was remarkably handy at the spinning wheel. Moreover, he expected only a bowlful of sweet milk and wheat bread, or some flummery, for his work. So she took care to place the bowl with his food at the bottom of the stairs every night as she went to bed. It ought to have been mentioned that she was never allowed to catch a sight of him, for he always did his work in the dark. Nor did anybody know when he ate his food. She used to leave the bowl there at night, and it would be empty by the time when she got up in the morning, the bwca having cleared it. But one night, by way of cursedness, what did she do but fill the bowl with some stale urine which they used in dyeing wool and other things about the house. But heavens! it would have been better for her not to have done it, for when she got up next morning what should he do but suddenly spring from some corner and seized her by the neck! He began to beat her and kick her from one end of the house to the other, while he shouted at the top of his voice at every kick: Y faidan din dwmp-- Yn rhoi bara haið a thrwnc I'r bwca! The idea that the thick-buttocked lass Should give barley bread and p-- To the bogie! Meanwhile she screamed for help, but none came for some time. When, however, he heard the servant men getting up, he took to his heels as hard as he could; and nothing was heard of him for some time. But at the end of two years he was found to be at another farm in the neighborhood, called Hafod yr Ynys, where he at once became great friends with the servant girl, for she fed him like a young chicken by giving him a little bread and milk all the time. So he worked willingly and well for her in return for his favorite food. More especially, he used to spin and wind the yarn for her; but she wished him in time to show his face, or to tell her his name. He would by no means do either. One evening, however, when all the men were out, and when he was spinning hard at the wheel, she deceived him by telling him that she was also going out. He believed her; and when he heard the door shutting, he began to sing as he plied the wheel: Hi warða'n iawn pe gypa hi, Taw Gwarwyn-a-throt yw'm enw i. How she would laugh, did she know that Gwarwyn-a-throt is my name! "Ha! ha!" said the maid at the bottom of the stairs. "I know thy name now." "What is it, then?" he asked. She replied, "Gwarwyn-a-throt"; and as soon as she uttered the words he left the wheel where it was, and off he went. Source: John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1901), vol. 2, pp. 593-595. Return to the table of contents . Penelop Wales In the northwest corner of the parish of Beddgelert there is a place which used to be called by the old inhabitants the Land of the Fairies , and it reaches from Cwm Hafod Ruffydd along the slope of the mountain of Drws y Coed as far as Llyn y Dywarchen. The old people of former times used to find much pleasure and amusement in this district in listening every moonlight night to the charming music of the fair family, and in looking at their dancing and their mirthful sports. One on a time, a long while ago, there lived at upper Drws y Coed a youth, who was joyous and active, brave and determined of heart. This young man amused himself every night by looking on and listening to them. One night they had come to a field near the house, near the shore of Llyn y Dywarchen, to pass a merry night. He went, as usual, to look at them, when his glances at once fell on one of the ladies, who possessed such beauty as he had never seen in a human being. Her appearance was like that of alabaster; her voice was as agreeable as the nightingale's, and as unruffled as the zephyr in a flower garden at the noon of a long summer's day; and her gait was pretty and aristocratic; her feet moved in the dance as lightly on the grass as the rays of the sun had a few hours before on the lake hard by. He fell in love with her over head and ears, and in the strength of that passion -- for what is stronger than love! -- he rushed, when the bustle was at its height, into the midst of the fair crowd, and snatched the graceful damsel in his arms, and ran instantly with her to the house. When the fair family saw the violence used by a mortal, they broke up the dance and ran after her toward the house; but, when they arrived, the door had been bolted with iron, wherefore they could not get near her or touch her in any way; and the damsel had been placed securely in a chamber. The youth, having her now under his roof, as is the saying, endeavored, with all his talent, to win her affection and to induce her to wed. But at first she would on no account hear of it. On seeing his persistence, however, and on finding that he would not let her go to return to her people, she consented to be his servant if he could find out her name; but she would not be married to him. As he thought that was not impossible, he half agreed to the condition; but, after bothering his head with all the names known in that neighborhood, he found himself no nearer his point, though he was not willing to give up the search hurriedly. One night, as he was going home from Carnarvon market, he saw a number of the fair folks in a turbary not far from his path. They seemed to him to be engaged in an important deliberation, and it struck him that they were planning how to recover their abducted sister. He thought, moreover, that if he could secretly get within hearing, he might possibly find her name out. On looking carefully around, he saw that a ditch ran through the turbary and passed near the spot where they stood. So he made his way round to the ditch, and crept, on all fours, along it until he was within hearing of the family. After listening a little, he found that their deliberation was as to the fate of the lady he had carried away, and he heard one of them crying, piteously, "O Penelop, O Penelop, my sister, why didst thou run away with a mortal!" "Penelop," said the young man to himself, "that must be the name of my beloved; that is enough." At once he began to creep back quietly, and he returned home safely without having been seen by the fairies. When he got into the house, he called out to the girl, saying, "Penelop, my beloved one, come here!" and she came forward and asked, in astonishment, "O mortal, who has betrayed my name to thee?" Then, lifting up her tiny folded hands, she exclaimed, "Alas, my fate, my fate!" But she grew contented with her fate, and took to her work in earnest. Everything in the house and on the farm prospered under her charge. There was no better or cleanlier housewife in the neighborhood around, or one that was more provident than she. The young man, however, was not satisfied that she should be a servant to him, and, after he had long and persistently sought it, she consented to be married, on the one condition, that, if ever he should touch her with iron, she would be free to leave him and return to her family. He agreed to that condition, since he believed that such a thing would never happen at his hands. So they were marred, and lived several years happily and comfortably together. Two children where born to them, a boy and a girl, the picture of their mother and the idols of their father. But one morning, when the husband wanted to go to the fair at Carnarvon, he went out to catch a filly that was grazing in the field by the house; but for the life of him he could not catch her, and he called to his wife to come to assist him. She came without delay, and they managed to drive the filly to a secure corner, as they thought; but, as the man approached to catch her, she rushed past him. In his excitement, he threw the bridle after her; but who should be running in the direction of it, but his wife! The iron bit struck her on the cheek, and she vanished out of sight on the spot. Her husband never saw her any more; but one cold frosty night, a long time after this event, he was awakened from his sleep by somebody rubbing the glass of his window, and, after he had given a response, he recognized the gentle and tender voice of his wife saying to him: Lest my son should find it cold, Place on him his father's coat; Lest the fair one find it cold, Place on her my petticoat. It is said that the descendants of this family still continue in these neighborhoods, and that they are easy to be recognized by their light and fair complexion. Source: John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1901), vol. 1, pp. 86-89. Return to the table of contents . Silly go Dwt Wales A farmer's wife who lived at the Nant, in the parish of Llaniestin, was frequently visited by a fairy who used to borrow paddett a gradett [a round flat iron and a pan used for baking] from her. These she used to get, and she returned them with a loaf borne on her head in acknowledgement. But one day she came to ask for the loan of her troett bach , or wheel for spinning flax. When handing her this, the farmer's wife wished to know her name, as she came so often, but she refused to tell her. However, she was watched at her spinning, and overheard singing to the whir of the wheel: Bychan a wyða' hi Mai Sili go Dwt Yw f'enw i. Little did she know That Silly go Dwt Is my name. Source: John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1901), v. 1, pp. 229-230. Rhys's source: Evan Williams, a smith who lived at Yr Arð Las on Rhos Hirwaen. Return to the table of contents . The Rival Kempers Ireland In the north of Ireland there are spinning meetings of unmarried females frequently held at the houses of farmers, called kemps . Every young woman who has got the reputation of being a quick and expert spinner attends where the kemp is to be held, at an hour usually before daylight, and on these occasions she is accompanied by her sweetheart or some male relative, who carries her wheel, and conducts her safely across the fields or along the road, as the case may be. A kemp is, indeed, an animated and joyous scene, and one, besides which is calculated to promote industry and decent pride. Scarcely anything can be more cheering and agreeable than to hear at a distance, breaking the silence of morning, the light-hearted voices of many girls either in mirth or song, the humming sound of the busy wheels -- jarred upon a little, it is true, by the stridulous noise and checkings of the reels, and the voices of the reelers, as they call aloud the checks, together with the name of the girl and the quantity she has spun up to that period; for the contest is generally commenced two or three hours before daybreak. This mirthful spirit is also sustained by the prospect of a dance -- with which, by the way, every kemp closes; and when the fair victor is declared, she is to be looked upon as the queen of the meeting, and treated with the necessary respect. But to our tale. Everyone knew Shaun Buie M'Gaveran to be the cleanest, best-conducted boy, and the most industrious too, in the whole parish of Faugh-a-ballagh. Hard was it to find a young fellow who could handle a flail, spade, or reaping-hook in better style, or who could go through his day's work in a more creditable or workmanlike manner. In addition to this, he was a fine, well-built, handsome young man as you could meet in a fair; and so, sign was on it, maybe the pretty girls weren't likely to pull each other's caps about him Shaun, however, was as prudent as he was good looking; and although he wanted a wife, yet the sorrow one of him but preferred taking a well-handed, smart girl, who was known to be well behaved and industrious, like himself. Here, however, was where the puzzle lay on him; for instead of one girl of that kind, there were in the neighborhood no less than a dozen of them -- all equally fit and willing to become his wife, and all equally good looking. There were two, however, whom he thought a trifle above the rest; but so nicely balanced were Biddy Corrigan and Sally Gorman, that for the life of him he could not make up his mind to decide between them. Each of them had won her kemp; and it was currently said by them who ought to know, that neither of them could overmatch the other. No two girls in the parish were better respected, or deserved to be so; and the consequence was, they had everyone's good word and good wish. Now it so happened that Shaun had been pulling a cord with each; and as he knew not how to decide between, he thought he would allow them to do that themselves if they could. He accordingly gave out to the neighbors that he would hold a kemp on that day week, and he told Biddy and Sally especially that he had made up his mind to marry whichever of them won the kemp, for he knew right well, as did all the parish, that on of them must. The girls agreed to this very good-humoredly, Biddy telling Sally that she (Sally) would surely win it; and Sally not to be outdone in civility, telling the same thing to her. Well, the week was nearly past, there being but two days till that of the kemp, when, about three o'clock, there walks into the house of old Paddy Corrigan a little woman dressed in high-heeled shoes and a short red cloak. There was no one in the house but Biddy at the time, who rose up and placed a chair near the fire, and asked the little red woman to sit down and rest herself. She accordingly did so, and in a short time a lively chat commenced between them. "So," said the strange woman, "there's to be a great kemp in Shaun Buie M'Gaveran's?" "Indeed there is that, good woman," replied Biddy, smiling and blushing to back of that again, because she knew her own fate depended on it. "And," continued the little woman, "whoever wins the kemp wins a husband?" "Aye, so it seems." "Well, whoever gets Shaun will be a happy woman, for he's the moral of a good boy." "That's nothing but the truth, anyhow," replied Biddy, sighing, for fear, you may be sure, that she herself might lose him; and indeed a young woman might sigh from many a worse reason. "But," said she, changing the subject, "you appear to be tired, honest woman, an' I think you had better eat a bit, an' take a good drink of buinnhe ramwher (thick milk) to help you on you journey." "Thank you kindly, a colleen," said the woman; "I'll take a bit, of you plase, hopin', at the same time, that you won't be the poorer of it this day twelve months." "Sure," said the girl, "you know that what we give from kindness ever an' always leaves a blessing behind it." "Yes, acushla, when it is given from kindness." She accordingly helped herself to the food that Biddy placed before her, and appeared, after eating, to be very much refreshed. "Now," said she, rising up, "you're a very good girl, an' if you are able to find out my name before Tuesday, the kemp-day, I tell you that you'll win it, and gain the husband." "Why," said Biddy, "I never saw you before. I don't know who you are, nor where you live; how then can I ever find out your name?" "You never saw me before, sure enough," said the old woman, "an' I tell you that you never will see me again but once; an' yet if you have not my name for me at the close of the kemp, you'll lose all, an' that will leave you a sore heart, for well I know you love Shaun Buie." So saying, she went away, and left poor Biddy quite cast down at what she had said, for, to tell the truth, she loved Shaun very much, and had no hopes of being able to find out the name of the little woman, on which, it appeared, so much to her depended. It was very near the same hour of the same day that Sally Gorman was sitting alone in her father's house, thinking of the kemp, when who should walk in to her but our friend the little red woman. "God save you, honest woman," said Sally, "this is a fine day that's in it, the Lord be praised!" "It is," said the woman, "as fine a day as one could wish for; indeed it is." "Have you no news on your travels?" asked Sally. "The only news in the neighborhood," replied the other, "is this great kemp that's to take place a Shaun Buie B'Gaveran's. They say you're either to win him or lose him then," she added, looking closely at Sally as she spoke. "I'm not very much afraid of that," said Sally, with confidence; "but even if I do lose him, I may get as good." "It's not easy gettin' as good," rejoined the old woman, "an' you ought to be very glad to win him, if you can." "Let me alone for that," said Sally. "Biddy's a good girl, I allow; but as for spinnin', she never saw the day she could leave me behind her. Won't you sit an' rest you?" she added; "maybe you're tired." "It's time for you to think of it," thought the woman, but she spoke nothing; "but," she added to herself on reflection, "it's better late than never -- I'll sit awhile, till I see a little closer what she's made of." She accordingly sat down and chatted upon several subjects such as young women like to talk about, for about half an hour; after which she arose, and taking her little staff in hand, she bade Sally good-bye, and went her way. After passing a little from the house she looked back, and could not help speaking to herself as follows: She's smooth and smart, But she wants the heart; She's tight and neat, But she gave no meat. Poor Biddy now made all possible inquiries about the old woman, but to no purpose. Not a soul she spoke to about her had ever seen or heard of such a woman. She felt very dispirited, and began to lose heart, for there is no doubt that if she missed Shaun it would have cost her many a sorrowful day. She knew she would never get his equal, or at least anyone that she loved so well. At last the kemp day came, and with it all the pretty girls of the neighborhood to Shaun Buie's. Among the rest, the two that were to decide their right to him were doubtless the handsomest pair by far, and everyone admired them. To be sure, it was a blithe and merry place, and many a light laugh and sweet song rang out from pretty lips that day. Biddy and Sally, as everyone expected were far ahead of the rest, but so even in their spinning that the reelers could not for the life of them declare which was the better. It was neck-and-neck and head-and-head between the pretty creatures, and all who were at the kemp felt themselves would up to the highest pitch of interest and curiosity to know which of them would be successful. The day was now more than half gone, and no difference was between them, when, to the surprise and sorrow of everyone present, Biddy Corrigan's heck broke in two, and so to all appearance ended the contest in favor of her rival; and what added to her mortification, she was ignorant of the little red woman's name as ever. What was to be done? All that could be done was done. Her brother, a boy of about fourteen years of age, happened to be present when the accident took place, having been sent by his father and mother to bring them word how the match went on between the rival spinsters. Johnny Corrigan was accordingly dispatched with all speed to Donnel M'Cusker's, the wheelwright, in order to get the heck mended, that being Biddy's last but hopeless chance. Johnny's anxiety that his sister should win was of course very great, and in order to lose as little time as possible he struck across the country, passing through, or rather close by, Kilrudden forth, a place celebrated as a resort of the fairies. What was his astonishment, however, as he passed a white-thorn tree, to hear a female voice singing, in accompaniment to the sound of a spinning wheel, the following words: There's a girl in this town doesn't know my name; But my name's Even Trot -- Even Trot. "There's a girl in this town," said the lad, "who's in great distress, for she has broken her heck, and lost a husband. I'm now goin' to Donnel M'Cusker's to get it mended." "What's her name?" said the little red woman. "Biddy Corrigan." The little woman immediately whipped out the heck from her own wheel, and giving it to the boy, desired him to take it to his sister, and never mind Donnel M'Cusker. "You have little time to lose," she added, "so go back and give her this; but don't tell her how you got it, nor, above all things, that it was Even Trot that gave it to you." The lad returned, and after giving the heck to his sister, as a matter of course told her that it was a little red woman called Even Trot that sent it to her, a circumstance which made tears of delight start to Biddy's eyes, for she know now that Even Trot was the name of the old woman, and having know that she felt that something good would happen to her. She now resumed her spinning, and never did human fingers let down the thread so rapidly. The whole kemp were amazed at the quantity which from time to time filled her pirn. The hearts of her friends began to rise, and those of Sally's party to sink, as hour after hour she was fast approaching her rival, who now spun if possible with double speed on finding Biddy coming up with her. At length they were again even, and just at that moment in came her friend the little red woman, and asked aloud, "Is there anyone in this kemp that knows my name?" This question she asked three times before Biddy could pluck up courage to answer her. She at last said: There's a girl in this town does know my name -- Your name is Even Trot -- Even Trot. "Aye," said the old woman, "and so it is; and let that name be your guide and your husband's through life. Go steadily along, but let your step be even; stop little; keep always advancing; and you'll never have cause to rue the day that you first saw Even Trot." We need scarcely add that Biddy won the kemp and the husband, and that she and Shaun lived long and happily together; and I have only now to wish, kind reader, that you and I may live longer and more happily still. Source: W. B. Yeats, Irish Fairy Tales (1892). Yeats's source: William Carleton, The Traits and Stories of the Irish Peasantry . Return to the table of contents . Tríopla Trúpla Ireland A Story There was a woman there long ago and the one fault she had was laziness. She was married to a farmer. She had a lot of flax but she was too lazy to spin it. One day she was inside alone, when, who should come into her but a woman, who said she would spin all her linen for her if she could tell her name, but if the woman of the house could not tell the stranger's name she should go away with her the following day. The woman of the house was satisfied and she gave the flax to the stranger, who went off. The same evening the man of the house was taking his horses to the well, for a drink. He heard some noise in a fort which was near the well. When he looked, what should he see but a woman and she spinning flax at her full best and she humming "If Mrs. Lazybones knew that Tríopla Trúpla, was my name it is fine she would sleep to night and I finishing the flax for her." The man opened his mouth in amazement but he did not speak a word or interfere with the work. He went home and the first question he asked his wife was, "Where is the flax?" The wife confessed that she gave it to a woman who came to the house the previous day, and "I must go away with her tomorrow if I do not know her name." He said, "Tríopla Trúpla is her name, my dear." The stranger came the following day, and when the woman of the house saw her, she said, "Welcome, Tríopla Trúpla." On hearing these words the other woman threw the linen on the floor. She raised her two claws, let an awful scream out of her, and went off like the wind. Collector: Noreen Keane Address: Ballydehob, Co. Cork. Informant: Mr. P. Donovan Address: Ballydehob, Co. Cork. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Cork >> Béal Átha an Dá Chab, pp. 243-44 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Kinkach Martinko A Slav Folktale Once upon a time there was a poor woman who had an only daughter, named Helen, a very lazy girl. One day when she had refused to do a single thing, her mother took her down to the banks of a stream and began to strike her fingers with a flat stone, just as you do in beating linen to wash it. The girl cried a good deal. A prince, Lord of the Red Castle, happened at that moment to pass by, and inquired as to the cause of such treatment, for it horrified him that a mother should so ill-use her child. "Why should I not punish her?" answered the woman. "The idle girl can do nothing but spin hemp into gold thread." "Really?" cried he. "Does she really know how to spin gold thread out of hemp? If that be so, sell her to me." "Willingly; how much will you give me for her?" "Half a measure of gold." "Take her," said the mother; and she gave him her daughter as soon as the money was paid. The prince placed the girl behind him on the saddle, put spurs to his horse, and took her home. On reaching the Red Castle, the prince led Helen into a room filled from floor to ceiling with hemp, and having supplied her with distaff and spinning wheel, said, "When you have spun all this hemp into gold thread I will make you my wife." Then he went out, locking the door after him. On finding herself a prisoner, the poor girl wept as if her heart would break. Suddenly she saw a very odd looking little man seated on the window sill. He wore a red cap, and his boots were made of some strange sort of material. "Why do you weep so?" he asked. "I cannot help it," she replied, "I am but a miserable slave. I have been ordered to spin all this hemp into gold thread, but it is impossible, I can never do it, and I know not what will become of me." I will do it for you in three days, on condition that at the end of that time you guess my right name, and tell me what the boots I am wearing now are made of." Without for one moment reflecting as to whether she would be able to guess aright she consented. The uncanny little man burst out laughing, and taking her distaff set to work at once. All day as the distaff moved the hemp grew visibly less, while the skein of gold thread became larger and larger. The little man spun all the time, and, without stopping an instant, explained to Helen how to make thread of pure gold. As night drew on he tied up the skein, saying to the girl, "Well, do you know my name yet? Can you tell me what my boots are made of?" Helen replied that she could not, upon which he grinned and disappeared through the window. She then sat and looked at the sky, and thought, and thought, and thought, and lost herself in conjecturing as to what the little man's name might be, and in trying to guess what was the stuff his boots were made of. Were they of leather? or perhaps plaited rushes? or straw? or cast iron? No, they did not look like anything of that sort. And as to his name -- that was a still more difficult problem to solve. "What shall I call him?" said she to herself -- "John? Or Henry? Who knows? perhaps it is Paul or Joseph." These thoughts so filled her mind that she forgot to eat her dinner. Her meditations were interrupted by cries and groans from outside, where she saw an old man with white hair sitting under the castle wall. "Miserable old man that I am," cried he; "I die of hunger and thirst, but no one pities my sufferings." Helen hastened to give him her dinner, and told him to come next day, which he promised to do. After again thinking for some time what answers she should give the little old man, she fell asleep on the hemp. The little old man did not fail to make his appearance the first thing next morning, and remained all day spinning the gold thread. The work progressed before their eyes, and it was only when evening came that he repeated his questions. Not receiving a satisfactory answer, he vanished in a fit of mocking laughter. Helen sat down by the window to think; but think as she might, no answer to these puzzling questions occurred to her. While thus wondering the hungry old man again came by, and she gave him her dinner. She was heart-sick and her eyes were full of tears, for she thought she would never guess the spinner's name, nor of what stuff his boots were made, unless perhaps God would help her. "Why are you so sad?" asked the old man when he had eaten and drunk; "tell me the cause of you grief, dear lady." For a long time she would not tell him, thinking it would be useless; but at last, yielding to his entreaties, she gave a full account of the conditions under which the gold thread was made, explaining that unless she could answer the little old man's questions satisfactorily she feared some great misfortune would befall her. The old man listened attentively, then, nodding his head, he said: "In coming through the forest today I passed close to a large pile of burning wood, round which were placed nine iron pots. A little man in a red cap was running round and jumping over them, singing these words: My sweet friend, fair Helen, at the Red Castle near, Two days and two nights seeks my name to divine, She'll never find out, so the third night 'tis clear My sweet friend, fair Helen, can't fail to be mine. Hurrah! for my name is Kinkach Martinko, Hurrah! for my boots are of doggies' skin O! "Now that is exactly what you want to know, my dear girl; so do not forget, and you are saved." And with these words the old man vanished. Helen was greatly astonished, but she took care to fix in her memory all that the good fellow had told her, and then went to sleep, feeling that she could face tomorrow without fear. One the third day, very early in the morning, the little old man appeared and set busily to work, for he knew that all the hemp must be spun before sunset, and that then he should be able to claim his rights. When evening came all the hemp was gone, and the room shone with the brightness of the golden thread. As soon as his work was done, the queer little old man with the red cap drew himself up with a great deal of assurance, and with his hand in his pockets strutted up and down before Helen, ordering her to tell him his right name and to say of what stuff the boots were made; but he felt certain that she would not be able to answer aright. "Your name is Kinkach Martinko, and your boots are made of dogskin," she replied without the slightest hesitation. At these words he spun round on the floor like a bobbin, tore out his hair and beat his breast with rage, roaring so that the very walls trembled. "It is lucky for you that you have guessed. If you had not, I should have torn you to pieces on this very spot:" so saying he rushed out of the window like a whirlwind. Helen felt deeply grateful towards the old man who had told her the answers, and hoped to be able to thank him in person. But he never appeared again. The Prince of the Red Castle was very pleased with her for having accomplished her task so punctually and perfectly, and he married her as he had promised. Helen was truly thankful to have escaped the dangers that had threatened her, and her happiness as a princess was greater than she had dared hope. She had, too, such a good stock of gold thread that she never had occasion to spin any more all her life long. Source: Alex. Chodsko, Fairy Tales of the Slav Peasants and Herdsmen, translated by Emily J. Harding (New York: Dodd Mead & Co., and London: George Allen, 1896), pp. 325-332. Return to the table of contents . Links to Related Sites King Olaf and the Giant. In this legend from Norway and Sweden, King Olaf gains control over a sinister giant by discovering that his name was Wind and Weather. In some variants of this legend the giant's (or troll's) name is Skaane, Tvester, Bläster, or Slätt. Esbern Snare and the Kalundborg Church. This legend from Denmark is similar to the Norwegian story above, but here the demonic being is a troll named Fin. The Werewolf of Vietlübbe (Germany). A farmer gains control over a werewolf by calling out his human name (Irnst Jacobs) three times. A Witch as Werewolf (Germany). A man suspected that his wife had transformed herself into a wolf. He called out "Marie, Marie, what are you doing here?" and before his eyes she turned herself back into her human form. The Werewolf: Another Legend (Germany). A woman provided meat for every meal by hunting as a werewolf. On one of her hunts she was attacked by dogs, and her husband -- observing from a short distance away -- cried out her name "Margaret!" With that the wolf disappeared, and the woman was left standing naked in the field. The Black Dog (Shetland Islands). A witch transforms herself into a black dog in order to do mischief. A neighbor recognizes her and calls out her name "Minnie Merran," strikes her with a pair of tongs, and drives her away. The Mårt . Superstitions from northern Germany about the supernatural beings that cause bad dreams. Note items 9 and 10, each of which state that the demon must retreat if you call it by name. Tapai and the Brahman (India). A Brahman gains control over a demon by discovering his ancestors' names. The Hippopotamus and the Tortoise . A folktale from Nigeria in which a hippopotamus offers to give a big feast to anyone who can guess his name. Return to: Table of Contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 14, 2024 Master Who Gave Strange Names to Things in His House The Master Who Gave Strange Names to Things in His House folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1562A edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2010 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Clever Apprentice (Scotland). Master of All Masters (England). Enigmas (India). Link to Pre Papiro Makes Pretence of Great Learning, but in Truth Knows Nothing (Italy, Giovanni Francesco Straparola, The Facetious Nights , Night 9, Tale 4). The Clever Apprentice Scotland A shoemaker once engaged an apprentice. A short time after the apprenticeship began the shoemaker asked the boy what he would call him in addressing him. "Oh, I would just call you master," answered the apprentice. "No," said the master, "you must call me master above all masters." Continued the shoemaker, "What would you call my trousers?" Apprentice: "Oh, I would call them trousers." Shoemaker: "No, you must call them struntifers. And what would you call my wife?" Apprentice: "Oh, I would call her mistress." Shoemaker: "No, you must call her the Fair Lady Permoumadam. And what would you call my son?" Apprentice: "Oh, I would call him Johnny." Shoemaker: "No, you must call him John the Great. And what would you call the cat?" Apprentice: "Oh, I would call him pussy." Shoemaker: "No, you must call him Great Carle Gropus. And what would you call the fire?" Apprentice: "Oh, I would call it fire." Shoemaker: "No, you must call it Fire Evangelist. And what would you call the peat stack?" Apprentice: "Oh, I would just call it peat stack." Shoemaker: "No, you must call it Mount Potago. And what would you call the well?" Apprentice: "Oh, I would call it well." Shoemaker: "No, you must call it the Fair Fountain. And, last of all, what would you call the house?" Apprentice: "Oh, I would call it house." Shoemaker: "No, you must call it the Castle of Mungo." The shoemaker, after giving this lesson to his apprentice, told him that the first day he had occasion to use all these words at once, and was able to do so without making a mistake, the apprenticeship would be at an end. The apprentice was not long in making an occasion for using the words. One morning he got out of bed before his master and lighted the fire. He then tied some bits of paper to the tail of the cat and threw the animal into the fire. The cat ran out with the papers all in a blaze, landed in the peat stack, which caught fire. The apprentice hurried to his master and cried out, "Master above all masters, start up and jump into your struntifers, and call upon Sir John the Great and the Fair Lady Permoumadam, for Carle Gropus has caught hold of Fire Evangelist, and he is out to Mount Potago, and if you don't get help from the Fair Fountain, the whole of Castle Mungo will be burned to the ground." Source: W. Gregor, Folk-Lore Journal , vol. 7 (1889), pp. 166-67 . Gregor's source: Mr. A. Copland, a schoolmaster in Tyrie, Aberdeenshire. Return to the table of contents . Master of All Masters England A girl once went to the fair to hire herself for servant. At last a funny-looking old gentleman engaged her and took her home to his house. When she got there he told her that he had something to teach her, for that in his house he had his own names for things. He said to her, "What will you call me?" "Master or mister, or whatever you please, sir," says she. He said, "You must call me master of all masters. And what would you call this?" pointing to his bed. "Bed or couch, or whatever you please, sir." "No, that's my barnacle. And what do you call these?" said he, pointing to his pantaloons. "Breeches or trousers, or whatever you please, sir." "You must call them squibs and crackers. And what would you call her?" pointing to the cat. "Cat or kit, or whatever you please, sir." "You must call her white-faced simminy. And this now," showing the fire, "what would you call this?" "Fire or flame, or whatever you please, sir." "You must call it hot cockalorum, and what this?" he went on, pointing to the water. "Water or wet, or whatever you please, sir." "No, pondalorum is its name. And what do you call all this?" asked he as he pointed to the house. "House or cottage, or whatever you please, sir." "You must call it high topper mountain." That very night the servant woke her master up in a fright and said, "Master of all masters, get out of your barnacle and put on your squibs and crackers. For white-faced simminy has got a spark of hot cockalorum on its tail, and unless you get some pondalorum, high topper mountain will be all on hot cockalorum." That's all. Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales , 3rd edition, revised (London: David Nutt, 1898), no. 42, pp. 220-21 . Return to the table of contents . Enigmas India Once upon a time a man and his son went on a visit to the son's father-in-law. They were welcomed in a friendly way; but the father-in-law was much put out at the unexpected visit as he had nothing ready for the entertainment of his guests. He took an opportunity to go into the house and said to one of his daughters-in-law. "Now, my girl, fill the little river and the big river while I am away; and polish the big axe and the little axe and dig out five or six channels, and put hobbles on these relations who have come to visit us and bar them into the cow house. I am going to bathe and will come back with a pot full of the water of dry land, then we will finish off these friends." The two visitors outside overheard this strange talk and began to wonder what it meant. They did not like the talk about axes and digging channels, it sounded as if their host meant to kill them as a sacrifice and bury their bodies in a river bed; rich men had been known to do such things. With this thought in their minds they got up and began to run away as fast as their legs could carry them. But when the young woman saw what they were doing she ran after them and called them back. They reluctantly stopped to hear what she had to say; and when she came up they reproached her for not having warned them of the fate in store for them. But she only laughed at their folly and explained that what her father-in-law meant was that she should wash their feet and give them a seat in the cow house; and make ready two pots of rice beer and polish the big and little brass basins and make five or six leaf cups and he would bring back some liquor and they would all have a drink. At this explanation they had a hearty laugh and went back to the house. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 141, pp. 368-69 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 30, 2010. Nasreddin Hodja Nasreddin Hodja Tales of the Turkish Trickster retold by D. L. Ashliman © 2001-2009 Contents About Nasreddin Hodja Everyone Is Right Walnuts and Pumpkins Faith Moves Mountains The Smell of Food and the Sound of Money The Debt The Slap The Burqa Friday Night The Wife's Name The Older Wife The Favorite Wife The Contrary Mother-in-Law Eat, My Coat, Eat A Close Call The Robe Restoring the Moon The Hodja and His Eight Donkeys Flour on the Clothesline The Squeaky Shoe The Lost Shoe Allah's House The Cauldron That Died The Recipe The Last Laugh Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. About Nasreddin Hodja Nasreddin Hodja is Turkey's (and perhaps all of Islam's) best-known trickster. His legendary wit and droll trickery were possibly based on the exploits and words of a historical imam. Nasreddin reputedly was born in 1208 in the village of Horto near Sivrihisar. In 1237 he moved to Aksehir, where he died in the Islamic year 683 (1284 or 1285). As many as 350 anecdotes have been attributed to the Hodja, as he most often is called. Hodja is a title meaning teacher or scholar. He frequently is compared with the northern European trickster Till Eulenspiegel. The many spelling variations for Nasreddin include: Nasreddin, Nasrettin, Nasrudin, Nasr-id-deen, Nasr Eddin, Nasr-eddin, Nasirud-din, Nasr-ud-Din, Nasr-Eddin, and Nasr-Ed-Dine. The many spelling variations for Hodja include: Hodja, Hodscha, Hoca, Chotza, Cogia, Khodja, and Khoja. My sources for the following retold anecdotes include The Turkish Jester; or, The Pleasantries of Cogia Nasr Eddin Effendi , translated from the Turkish by George Borrow (Ipswich: W. Webber, 1884); The Tales of Nasrettin Hoca , told by Aziz Nesin, retold in English by Talat Halman (Istanbul: Dost Yayinlari, 1988); Allan Ramsay and Francis McCullagh, Tales from Turkey (London: Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, and Kent, 1914); Somnath Dhar, Folk Tales of Turkey (New Delhi: Sterling Publishers, 1989); Ali Nouri, Nasreddin Khodjas Schwänke und Streiche (Breslau: Schlesische Verlags-Anstalt von S. Schottlaender, 1904); Albert Wesselski, Der Hodscha Nasreddin , 2 vols. (Weimar: Alexander Duncker, 1911); and Herbert Melzig, Nasreddin Hodscha, Wer den Duft des Essens verkauft: Schwänke und Anekdoten des türkischen Eulenspiegel (Reinbek bei Hamburg: Rohwolt, 1988). Return to the table of contents . Everyone Is Right Once when Nasreddin Hodja was serving as qadi, one of his neighbors came to him with a complaint against a fellow neighbor. The Hodja listened to the charges carefully, then concluded, "Yes, dear neighbor, you are quite right." Then the other neighbor came to him. The Hodja listened to his defense carefully, then concluded, "Yes, dear neighbor, you are quite right." The Hodja's wife, having listened in on the entire proceeding, said to him, "Husband, both men cannot be right." The Hodja answered, "Yes, dear wife, you are quite right." Return to the table of contents . Walnuts and Pumpkins Nasreddin Hodja was lying in the shade of an ancient walnut tree. His body was at rest, but, befitting his calling as an imam, his mind did not relax. Looking up into the mighty tree he considered the greatness and wisdom of Allah. "Allah is great and Allah is good," said the Hodja, "but was it indeed wise that such a great tree as this be created to bear only tiny walnuts as fruit? Behold the stout stem and strong limbs. They could easily carry the pumpkins that grow from spindly vines in yonder field, vines that cannot begin to bear the weight of their own fruit. Should not walnuts grow on weakly vines and pumpkins on sturdy trees?" So thinking, the Hodja dosed off, only to be awakened by a walnut that fell from the tree, striking him on his forehead. "Allah be praised!" he exclaimed, seeing what had happened. "If the world had been created according to my meager wisdom, it would have been a pumpkin that fell from the tree and hit me on the head. It would have killed me for sure! Allah is great! Allah is good! Allah is wise!" Never again did Nasreddin Hodja question the wisdom of Allah. Return to the table of contents . Faith Moves Mountains The Hodja was boasting about the power of his faith. "If your faith is so strong, then pray for that mountain to come to you," said a skeptic, pointing to a mountain in the distance. The Hodja prayed fervently, but the mountain did not move. He prayed more, but the mountain remained unmoved. Finally the Hodja got up from his knees and began walking toward the mountain. "I am a humble man," he said, "and the faith of Islam is a practical one. If the mountain will not come to the Hodja, then the Hodja will go to the mountain." Return to the table of contents . The Smell of Soup and the Sound of Money A beggar was given a piece of bread, but nothing to put on it. Hoping to get something to go with his bread, he went to a nearby inn and asked for a handout. The innkeeper turned him away with nothing, but the beggar sneaked into the kitchen where he saw a large pot of soup cooking over the fire. He held his piece of bread over the steaming pot, hoping to thus capture a bit of flavor from the good-smelling vapor. Suddenly the innkeeper seized him by the arm and accused him of stealing soup. "I took no soup," said the beggar. "I was only smelling the vapor." "Then you must pay for the smell," answered the innkeeper. The poor beggar had no money, so the angry innkeeper dragged him before the qadi. Now Nasreddin Hodja was at that time serving as qadi, and he heard the innkeeper's complaint and the beggar's explanation. "So you demand payment for the smell of your soup?" summarized the Hodja after the hearing. "Yes!" insisted the innkeeper. "Then I myself will pay you," said the Hodja, "and I will pay for the smell of your soup with the sound of money." Thus saying, the Hodja drew two coins from his pocket, rang them together loudly, put them back into his pocket, and sent the beggar and the innkeeper each on his own way. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1804B. Return to the table of contents . The Debt Nasreddin was strolling through the marketplace when a shopkeeper accosted him, berating the Hodja loudly for his failure to pay a debt. "My dear friend," answered the Hodja, "just how much do I owe you?" "Seventy-five piasters," shouted the angry shopkeeper. "Now, now," replied the Hodja. "You must know that I intend to pay you thirty-five piasters tomorrow, and next month another thirty-five. That means that I owe you only five piasters. Are you not ashamed of yourself for accosting me so loudly in public for a debt of only five piasters?" Return to the table of contents . The Slap Nasreddin Hodja was standing in the marketplace when a stranger stepped up to him and slapped him in the face, but then said, "I beg your pardon. I thought that you were someone else." This explanation did not satisfy the Hodja, so he brought the stranger before the qadi and demanded compensation. The Hodja soon perceived that the qadi and the defendant were friends. The latter admitted his guilt, and the judge pronounced the sentence: "The settlement for this offense is one piaster, to be paid to the plaintiff. If you do not have a piaster with you, then you may bring it here to the plaintiff at your convenience." Hearing this sentence, the defendant went on his way. The Hodja waited for him to return with the piaster. And he waited. And he waited. Some time later the Hodja said to the qadi, "Do I understand correctly that one piaster is sufficient payment for a slap?" "Yes," answered the qadi. Hearing this answer, the Hodja slapped the judge in the face and said, "You may keep my piaster when the defendant returns with it," then walked away. Return to the table of contents . The Burqa Nasreddin Hodja's first marriage was an arranged marriage, and in keeping with the custom of the time, he did not see his unveiled bride until the wedding ceremony. Unfortunately, she did not have an attractive face. The next day when the bride was making preparations to go to market, she asked her husband, as was the custom, "Shall I wear my burqa? I do not wish to show my face to anyone against your wishes." Nasreddin answered, "Wear your burqa or leave it at home. It is all the same to me to whom you show your face in public. All I ask is that you keep your face covered when you are at home with me." Return to the table of contents . Friday Night The Hodja and his wife made an agreement to fulfill their marital duties every Friday night. "But with all my other obligations, how will I remember that it is Friday night?" asked Nasreddin. "Each week I shall place your turban on the large chest, so you will know that it is Friday," answered the wife. One night, not on a Friday, the wife desired to make love, so she placed Nasreddin's turban on the chest. The Hodja said, "But wife, this is not Friday night." She answered, "It is Friday night." He replied, "Wife, in this house either Friday shall wait for me, or I shall wait for Friday." Return to the table of contents . The Wife's Name Nasreddin Hodja and a friend were discussing their wives, when it occurred to the friend that Nasreddin had never mentioned his wife's name. "What is your wife's name?" he asked. "I do not know her name," admitted the Hodja. "What?" asked the friend in disbelief. "How long have you been married?" "Twenty years," answered the Hodja, then added, "At first I did not think that the marriage would last, so I did not take the effort to learn my bride's name." Return to the table of contents . The Older Wife Nasreddin Hodja had two wives, one much older than the other. "Which of us do you love the most?" asked the older wife one day. "I love you both the same," answered Nasreddin, wisely. Not satisfied with this answer, the older wife continued, "If the two of us wives fell out of a boat, which one of us would you rescue first?" "Well," replied Nasreddin, "you can swim a little, can't you?" Return to the table of contents . The Favorite Wife Nasreddin Hodja's two wives were constantly asking him which one of them was his favorite. "I love you both the same," was always his answer, but they did not accept this answer, and asked him repeatedly, "Which one of us do you love the most?" Finally he secretly gave each of them a blue bead, privately instructing each woman that she should tell no one of the gift. After that whenever either of the wives would ask him, "Which one of us is your favorite wife?" he would answer, "I love best the one to whom I gave the blue bead," and each was satisfied. Return to the table of contents . The Contrary Mother-in-Law A neighbor came running to Nasreddin's house with the news that the Hodja's mother-in-law had been washing her laundry in the river when she fell into the water and drowned. "And we cannot find her body," he continued. "We searched everywhere downstream for her, but all to no avail." "You should have searched upstream," replied the Hodja. "My mother-in-law is so contrary that she would never go with the flow." Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1365A. Return to the table of contents . Eat, My Coat, Eat The Hodja was invited to a banquet. Not wanting to be pretentious, he wore his everyday clothes, only to discover that everyone ignored him, including the host. So he went back home and put on his fanciest coat, and then returned to the banquet. Now he was greeted cordially by everyone and invited to sit down and eat and drink. When the soup was served to him he dunked the sleeve of his coat into the bowl and said, "Eat, my coat, eat!" The startled host asked the Hodja to explain his strange behavior. "When I arrived here wearing my other clothes," explained the Hodja, "no one offered me anything to eat or drink. But when I returned wearing this fine coat, I was immediately offered the best of everything, so I can only assume that it was the coat and not myself who was invited to your banquet." Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1558. Link to additional folktales of type 1558: Clothes Make the Man . Return to the table of contents . A Close Call One night Nasreddin awoke, thinking he had heard a strange noise outside his window. Looking out, he saw a suspicious white figure. "Who goes there?" shouted the Hodja. Hearing no reply, Nasreddin reached for his bow, set an arrow to the string, took aim, and shot in the direction of the mysterious figure. Satisfied that the intruder now would do him no harm, Nasreddin returned to bed and slept until dawn. By morning's light he examined the scene outside his window, only to discover his own white shirt hanging on the clothesline and pierced by the arrow that he had shot during the night. "That was a close call," murmured the Hodja. "My own shirt, shot through by an arrow! What if I had been wearing it at the time!" Return to the table of contents . The Robe The Hodja, bruised and limping, came upon a neighbor at the marketplace. "My dear friend, what happened to you?" asked the neighbor. The Hodja answered, "Last night my wife grew angry and kicked my robe down the stairs." "But how could that have caused your injuries?" continued the neighbor. "I was wearing the robe when she kicked it down the stairs," explained the Hodja. Return to the table of contents . Restoring the Moon One night the Hodja looked into his well and saw there the reflection of the full moon. "Oh no!" he exclaimed. "The moon has fallen from the sky and into my well!" He ran into his house and returned with a hook attached to a rope. He then threw the hook into the water and commenced to pull it up again, but it became stuck on the side of the well. Frantically the Hodja tugged and pulled with all his might. The hook suddenly came loose, and the Hodja fell over backwards, landing flat on his back. Scarcely able to move, he looked up into the sky and saw the full moon above him. "I may have injured myself in doing so," he said with satisfaction, "but at least I got the moon back into the sky where it belongs." Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1335A. Return to the table of contents . The Hodja and His Eight Donkeys The Hodja had eight donkeys; he mounted one of them. At the end of his ride he counted them, but he saw only seven. He forgot the one he was sitting on. After dismounting he counted eight. This so confused him that he asked a passerby, "Earlier there were only seven, but now there are suddenly eight!" "The one you were sitting on brought the number to eight." The Hodja answered, "But how was I to see what I had on my behind?" Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1228A. Link to additional tales of type 1228A: A Fool Does Not Count the Animal He Is Riding . Return to the table of contents . Flour on the Clothesline A neighbor came to the Hodja's door and asked to borrow a clothesline. "Let me ask my wife," replied the Hodja, disappearing inside. He returned a short time later with the answer, "I am sorry, dear friend, but we cannot lend you our clothesline, for we have sprinkled flour on it." "When would a person ever sprinkle flour on a clothesline?" asked the neighbor in disbelief. "When someone else wanted to borrow it," was the Hodja's answer. Return to the table of contents . The Squeaky Shoe A guest of the Hodja's broke wind, but he hid its sound by rubbing his shoe across the floor at the same time. "You did well by covering up that sound with your squeaky shoe," said Nasreddin. "But unfortunately you did not hide the smell." Link to related folktales: Breaking Wind: Legendary Farts . Return to the table of contents . The Lost Shoe In preparation for prayers the Hodja performed his ablution in a swiftly running brook. Just as he was finishing the ceremonial washing, the stream carried away one of his shoes that had been on the bank near the water. Angry at the loss of his shoe, the Hodja broke wind over the water, saying, "Brook, you can have back your ablution! Now give me back my shoe!" Note: According to Islamic tradition, breaking wind invalidates a ceremonial ablution. Link to related folktales: Breaking Wind: Legendary Farts . Return to the table of contents . Allah's House A beggar knocked on the Hodja's door and said, "Allah has directed me to this house for a good meal." "I am sorry, but you have the wrong house," replied the Hodja. Then pointing to a nearby mosque, he continued, "Allah lives over there." Return to the table of contents . The Cauldron That Died Nasreddin Hodja, having need for a large cooking container, borrowed his neighbor's copper cauldron, then returned it in a timely manner. "What is this?" asked his neighbor upon examining the returned cauldron. "There is a small pot inside my cauldron." "Oh," responded the Hodja. "While it was in my care your cauldron gave birth to a little one. Because you are the owner of the mother cauldron, it is only right that you should keep its baby. And in any event, it would not be right to separate the child from its mother at such a young age." The neighbor, thinking that the Hodja had gone quite mad, did not argue. Whatever had caused the crazy man to come up with this explanation, the neighbor had a nice little pot, and it had cost him nothing. Some time later the Hodja asked to borrow the cauldron again. "Why not?" thought the neighbor to himself. "Perhaps there will be another little pot inside when he returns it." But this time the Hodja did not return the cauldron. After many days had passed, the neighbor went to the Hodja and asked for the return of the borrowed cauldron. "My dear friend," replied the Hodja. "I have bad news. Your cauldron has died, and is now in her grave." "What are you saying?" shouted the neighbor. A cauldron does not live, and it cannot die. Return it to me at once!" "One moment!" answered the Hodja. "This is the same cauldron that but a short time ago gave birth to a child, a child that is still in your possession. If a cauldron can give birth to a child, then it also can die." And the neighbor never again saw his cauldron. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1592B. Link to additional tales of type 1592B: The Pot That Died . Return to the table of contents . The Recipe The Hodja purchased a piece of meat at the market, and on his way home he met a friend. Seeing the Hodja's purchase, the friend told him an excellent recipe for stew. "I'll forget it for sure," said the Hodja. "Write it on a piece of paper for me." The friend obliged him, and the Hodja continued on his way, the piece of meat in one hand and the recipe in the other. He had not walked far when suddenly a large hawk swooped down from the sky, snatched the meat, and flew away with it. "It will do you no good!" shouted the Hodja after the disappearing hawk. "I still have the recipe!" Return to the table of contents . The Last Laugh Nasreddin Hodja had grown old and was near death. His two grieving wives, knowing that his end was near, were dressed in mourning robes and veils. "What is this?" he said, seeing their sorrowful appearance. "Put aside your veils. Wash your faces. Comb your hair. Make yourselves beautiful. Put on your most festive apparel." "How could we do that?" asked the older of his wives, "with our dear husband on his deathbed?" With a wry smile he replied, speaking more to himself than to them, "Perhaps when the Angel of Death makes his entry he will see the two of you, all decked out like young brides, and will take one of you instead of me." With these final words he laughed quietly to himself, happily closed his eyes, and died. Return to the table of contents . See the article Nasreddin in Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia. (Opens in a new window.) Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 16, 2009. The Three Nephites The Three Nephites edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2020 According to the Book of Mormon (3 Nephi, ch. 28), a book given scriptural status by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, Jesus Christ appeared to the inhabitants of the western hemisphere immediately following his death and resurrection in Palestine and promised three of his New World believers that they would never taste of death. The following stories are typical of the numerous accounts recorded by faithful Mormons of appearances by one or more of these three deathless saints, known as "The Three Nephites." Contents An Experience of Mrs. Alyda Abbott Squires . Nephite Heals with Lard and Tobacco . The Hitchhiking "Ghost" Nephite . Nephite Assumes Animal Form . Rescued from a Mountain . They Helped Her . The Old Man on the Road . He Disappeared from the Back Seat (1) . He Disappeared from the Back seat (2) . On the Delta-Holden Road . An Incident in the Lives of William Henry and Mary Laidlaw Seegmiller . Links and Notes . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. An Experience of Mrs. Alyda Abbott Squires It was on a hot summer day in the year 1874 at WaWa Springs in the state of Utah. The springs being an oasis in the desert and nothing only sage and bunches of grass and hot sand it was here in a little lumber shack on their homestead Mr. and Mrs. Edwin Squires lived with their 3 small daighters. They owned horses and cattle and Mr. Squires had 2 or 3 men hired to help take care of these. And it was on this day in 1874 they had gon on around up leaving Mrs. Squires and the children a alone and they were miles from any one else and her husband had told her he would be back at a sertain time and to have dinner ready for them. And from the house they could see for miles in any direction. And it being about time for them to come she went to the spring for water and look in ever derection to see if they were comming but there was nothing in sight and she took the water in and set it down and turned around and there to her amazement was a man standing in the door and he ask her if she would kindly give him a bit to eat and altho she was frightened she set the table it was humble but good meal. I remember there was cheese bread butter cold milk and an apple pie and she told him to eat he was welcome and he did eat as though he was hungry. And while eating he conversed with her and said Sister you are not well and she said No I have had apain in under my shoulder. Which bothered me a great deal and he said that is your liver but you wont be bothered any more with that. Then he got up and started off and thanked her for her kindness and fine meal and said Got bless you sister You will never want for any thing you will always be blessed with plenty and he left. As soon as she thought he had had time to turn the corner of the house she went out to see in what direction he had gon and there was no sighn of him any where. This worried her more than ever. She went back in the house and to her suprize the table was just as she had set it And she had seen him eat and drink the milk. But it was there and she then thought how he looked and he was dressed so neet and his eyes were so bright and just twinkled when he talked and he had long white beard his hair was gray. She was still worring when her husband and the men came and she ask them if they had seen him but they hadent. She told them the story but she couldent get it off her mind and it went on for about 3 moths and her Mother Mrs. Abigal Abbott came to make her a visit and she told her the story and she smiled and said Why Lyda hove you forgote your Patriochal Blessing. You was promised that one of the Three Nephits would dine at your table thats who it was. Well, she never had any more trouble with her liver lived a good old age and always had plenty and her husband died first and when she died she left a good start to her children and we have right here in our town a family of grand-children there mother being a daughter. And dieng before her mother her children got her share and it set them all up in business. When she died she was 89 years old This story was told to me by my mother it was her fathers sister and she heard her tell it and also Mr Bowman he is the father of the family here in our town a son in law of Mrs Squires. A he also tell the same story. This story was written in 1943 by Mrs. Elsina Robison, Bunkerville, Nevada. (Her age was about fifty.) It is reproduced here exactly as the informant wrote it. Source: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore , Ph.D. dissertation, University of New Mexico (1947), no. 1, pp. 221-22. Also printed in: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore (Albuquerque: The University of New Mexico Press, 1949), pp. 17-18. Return to the table of contents . Nephite Heals with Lard and Tobacco My grandmother, Mary Biddlecome, was a famous midwife with an art of healing that amounted almost to a gift. Before she came to Ferron and Castle Dale, she lived in Nevada and was taking care of a woman whose breasts had caked. The woman was in great pain and nothing Grandmother did seemed to give her any relief. Grandmother was standing at the stove heating some water for hot packs when there came a knock at the door and an old man entered. He asked for something to eat and as he sat eating the lunch she set out for him, he asked what the trouble was in that house. Grandma told him and he said to take a piece of tobacco the size of his thumb and he measured off an exact amount and boil it in lard and rub that on the woman's breast. Grandma hurried to do it and didn't pay much attention to the old man. The woman was so immediately relieved that Grandma went to call her thank you to the old man and he had disappeared completely. The house sat out on a plain and she should have been able to see him. This is told as a Nephite story. Oral version written from notes. Green River, Utah, March 29, 1946. Informant: Mrs. Albert May. Collector: Pearl Baker. Source: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore , Ph.D. dissertation, University of New Mexico (1947), no. 28, pp. 260-61. Return to the table of contents . The Hitchhiking "Ghost" Nephite This story came from Clyde Trammel, of Grand Junction, and I haven't had an opportunity to check with him about it, but it seems that a friend of his and his friend's wife were driving by truck from Montrose to Grand Junction when they picked up an old man. They hauled him for a long way and he seemed to be very much read-up on the current events; he knew a great deal about the war, and he talked very interestingly. They came to a long, desolate stretch of road, and the old man wanted out, and they tried to dissuade him and told him that he should go on down to more civilization, but he insisted on being let off. And they let him out on this long stretch of road. As he got out of the truck he thanked them, and he said, "On your way back you will be hauling a dead man." And then he says, "I suppose there's something you want to know?" "Well, maybe the end of the war." He said, "The war will end in August." This was in 1944. Well, they went on, and they talked about the old man. And on the way back they picked up a dead man from a car wreck. There had been a wrecked car, and one of the fellows was killed, and they hauled the corpse back into Grand Junction. And of course it lent more credence to the old prediction of the end of the war. But August, '44, came and went, and the war still didn't end. However, in August, '45, the war ended, and they decided that the old man had been a Nephite. Q: They didn't decide that he was a Nephite until after the end of the war? A: Oh, yes. When they hauled the corpse back, they decided that he must have had some foreknowledge; and some of their friends had told them about the Nephites, and so they made up their minds that he was a Nephite. However, they began to doubt it when the war didn't end in August. Q: When did you first hear this story? A: This spring, 1946. And I heard it from Mrs. MacDougall, of Green River, Utah. Q: Was Mrs. MacDougall one of the persons concerned? A: No, she had heard the story from Clyde Trammel, who is a railroad man. And he, himself wasn't concerned in the story. It was some friends of his that had had the experience. Oral version transcribed from wire recorder. Salt Lake City, June 3, 1946. Informant: Pearl Baker (Age, about 45). Collector: Hector Lee. Source: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore , Ph.D. dissertation, University of New Mexico (1947), no. 57a, pp. 291-92. Also printed in: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore (Albuquerque: The University of New Mexico Press, 1949), pp. 147-148. Return to the table of contents . Nephite Assumes Animal Form Some people suggest that the Nephites can take forms other than human. It was just past midnight when a woman who was working a late shift found it necessary to walk home, as the last bus had already left. Often she had walked alone in the dark but this night she was frightened. As she approached the viaduct, a huge German police dog came toward her. She found the sight of the dog reassuring and wished it would walk home with her. When the dog was beside her, it turned and began trotting in the direction she was going. While they walked on the viaduct a car drove up, stopped beside her, and a man leaped out. The dog, which was walking a little ahead of the woman, turned and dashed toward the man, who jumped back into the car and drove away. When the woman reached her home, she called to her protector to come close so she could pet it, but it stood quietly a short distance away looking at her. She called through the door to her mother to come and see the beautiful creature, but as her mother opened the door, the dog vanished. She believed that a Nephite had taken the form of a dog to protect her. Manuscript version in Archives of the Utah Humanities Research Foundation. Written by Miss Monza Higgs. Source: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore , Ph.D. dissertation, University of New Mexico (1947), no. 87, pp. 327-28. Return to the table of contents . Rescued from a Mountain This story was told to Mrs. Eggett by Mr. Larsen who was a former bishop in Bountiful. The story was about two girls who were down in Southern Utah near Richfield. They were walking down a mountain where there was slate. It was late and had been raining so that the slate was slippery. It was dark and they had lost the trail and didn't know how they were going to get off the slate. A man appeared to them and said, "Follow me." He got them down the trail and when he was quite a ways ahead of them, he switched around the corner of the mountain. The girls went around the corner of the mountain to thank him and there was no one there. Oral version written from notes. Bountiful, Utah, February 6, 1945. Informant: Mrs. Orson Eggett. Collector: Miss Monza Higgs. Source: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore , Ph.D. dissertation, University of New Mexico (1947), no. 97a, pp. 338-39. Return to the table of contents . They Helped Her I used to know a woman who knew she had seen the three Nephites. That was old Sister Ashby. She was living alone at the time. They were all alone and the baby was awfully sick, and she couldn't get help of any kind. She said these three men came into the room. They didn't open the door at all, but just appeared in the room. And they administered to the sick child and prayed with her and helped her there a little. And then they left the same way. She was sure they were the Nephites, and I've heard her tell it. Q: And there were three of them all together? A: Yes, all three of them. Q: Where did this take place? A: That was in Holden. Of course Mrs. Ashby has been dead a long time now, but she told me about this herself. Oral version from notes. Fillmore, Utah, September 18, 1945). Informant: Mrs. E. B. Theobald. Source: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore , Ph.D. dissertation, University of New Mexico (1947), no. 104, p. 343. Also printed in: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore (Albuquerque: The University of New Mexico Press, 1949), p. 156. Return to the table of contents . The Old Man on the Road Seems like I did hear a story about one of the Nephites once. Don't know if I can remember it or not, though. It was along time ago when I heard it. It was out there on the road between Lyndal and Delta. You know what kind of country that is -- just flat desert for about forty miles. Well, this feller -- I think it was old John Rogers -- was goin' along and he saw an old man on the road. So he stopped and asked him if he wanted a ride; but he said no, he didn't want any ride. And seems like they talked there for quite awhile, and when old John Rogers had drove off -- maybe forty yards down the road -- he looked around and couldn't see the old feller nowhere. Q: Did the old man give him any advice or help or did he prophesy anything? A: Seems like he did. I think it was my Grandmother Melville told the story a long time ago. Maybe it was in church. Seems like she said he predicted something, but I can't remember what. Maybe it was that Delta would have the third largest population in the state. And when you count Topaz [Japanese relocation center] that almost makes it come true. Q: Did Rogers think it was one of the Nephites? A: Oh, yes. He said he was sure it was. Oral version from notes. Fillmore, Utah, September 16, 1945. Informant: Sheldon Trimble. Collector: Hector Lee. Source: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore , Ph.D. dissertation, University of New Mexico (1947), no. 136, pp. 378-79. Also printed in: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore (Albuquerque: The University of New Mexico Press, 1949), pp. 160-161. Return to the table of contents . He Disappeared from the Back Seat (1) Mr. Harrison said that he had heard many Nephite stories. He mentioned the one told by Mr. Claude Wright of Provo, Utah. According to Harrison, the story concerns some people who were driving on Highway 91 from Nephi to Cedar City. They picked up an elderly man who was hitchhiking. He rode in the back seat and conversed with them. Somewhere near Parowan they turned to speak with him but he had disappeared from the back seat of the car, which had not been stopped. They inquired about him a Parowan and were told that a person of the same description had previously appeared from nowhere and asked a lady for food and then had disappeared in open country when anyone might easily have been seen. It was thought by some that he was a Nephite. [Mr. Harrison lives in Provo. Filled a mission. According to Mr. Bryner, he was disfellowshipped from the L.D.S. Church. Very intelligent.] Oral version from notes. Helper, Utah, March 9, 1946. Informant: Mr. Harrison (Age, about 30). Collector: Hector Lee. Source: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore , Ph.D. dissertation, University of New Mexico (1947), no. 138a, p. 380. Also printed in: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore (Albuquerque: The University of New Mexico Press, 1949), p. 161. Return to the table of contents . He Disappeared from the Back Seat (2) Bishop Morgan was telling about a Greek family that weren't converts of the Church but were sure that they had met one of the Three Nephites.... They were riding from Price to Salt Lake around conference time and met an old man on the road around Soldier Summit. They offered him a ride. He got in and they pushed the catch on the door down because they were used to having children in the car. They got on the way and were talking among themselves and turned around and looked but they couldn't see him. He had said just before that he was going to the gathering of the Saints. They turned around and went all the way back to Soldier Summit but they couldn't find him. Oral version from shorthand notes. Price, Utah, July 24, 1946. Informant: Miss Warner (Age, about 35). Collectors: Austin and Alta Fife. Source: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore , Ph.D. dissertation, University of New Mexico (1947), no. 138b, p. 380. Return to the table of contents . On the Delta-Holden Road I heard about them [i.e., the Three Nephites] when I was here seven years ago. It was out on the road between Holden and Delta, where it is flat and you can see for miles around. Don't you remember it, mother? Somebody was going along that road and these Three Nephites suddenly appeared on the road and then disappeared. Q: All three of them? A: That's as I heard it, yes. It was quite a story, but I don't remember it. That's all I can remember about it. Oral version written from notes. Fillmore, Utah, September 18, 1945. Informant: Mrs. Leo Theobold. Collector: Hector Lee. Source: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore , Ph.D. dissertation, University of New Mexico (1947), no. 139, p. 381. Return to the table of contents . An Incident in the Lives of William Henry and Mary Laidlaw Seegmiller In the month of November 1867, my parents, William H. and Mary Laidlaw Seegmiller, were married in Salt Lake City. My father and mother were among a number of L.D.S. people who received calls to colonize the southeastern part of Nevada. The group settled on what was known as the Muddy River, in a place called St. Joseph, in the Moapa Valley, Nevada. Late one afternoon while my father was just outside their tent home chopping wood, he was approached by a rather distinguished-looking person of Jewish type, having a large Roman nose, who accosted father in the German language, father's parents being German, that language, as well as English, was familiar to him. The visitor asked for something to eat to take along in his bag that he carried across his shoulder, and also for some patches of cloth with which to mend his clothes. Father told the man they had not yet eaten their evening meal and for him to come in the tent and rest and mother would prepare supper and they would all eat together. To this the man replied he did not have to to stop and would prefer to have some food just to take along with him. Father asked him where he was going. He pointed to the southwest. Father then warned him not to go in that direction as it was barren desert and no water within sixty miles. To this the man replied, "I have traveled in the north, south, east and west, in heat and in cold, and I have no fear of suffering from thirst." Father then asked him his name, to which he replied, "They call me the Wandering Jew." The stranger was given the things he asked for and father stepped into the tent. Mother said, "Don't let that man start over the desert this late in the day." So father hurried out to call him back to spend the night with them. The road stretched out for miles without obstruction, but the man could not be seen. A neighbor, Brother Fairbanks, had also seen the man as he approached my parents' tent, but had no conversation with him. Father and mother always thought their visitor was John the Beloved, or one of the three Nephites, who had been promised by the Savior to tarry upon the earth until He returns again. --William A. Seegmiller. Published in Heart Throbs of the West , vol. 3 (1947), pp. 351-52. Compare with the published version: Austin E. Fife, Journal of American Folklore , vol. 53 (1940), pp. 30-31 . Another published version: Austin E. Fife, California Folklore Quarlerly , vol. 1, no. 1 (April 1942), pp. 124-25 . Source: Hector Lee, The Three Nephites: The Substance and Significance of the Legend in Folklore , Ph.D. dissertation, University of New Mexico (1947), no. 118, pp. 364-65. Return to the table of contents . Links and Notes Link to the Wikipedia article Three Nephites . Austin E. Fife, "The Legend of the Three Nephites among the Mormons," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 53, no. 207 (January - March 1940), pp. 1-49. Austin E. Fife, "Popular Legends of the Mormons," California Folklore Quarterly , vol. 1, no. 2 (April 1942), pp. 105-125. Many of the accounts above bear an obvious resemblance to the "Vanishing Hitchhiker" stories, one of the oldest and most durable families of urban legends. For examples and commentary see Jan Harold Brunvand, The Vanishing Hitchhiker: American Urban Legends and Their Meanings (New York and London: W. W. Norton and Company, 1981). Sleeping Hero Legends , folktales of type 766 and migratory legends about heroes who, instead of dying, lie asleep awaiting a time of special need when they will rise up and defeat their nations' enemies. The Wandering Jew , legends of type 777, depicting a Jew who must eternally wander about the earth. The Flying Dutchman , legends of type 777*, depicting a ship that must enternally sail the seven seas. Wild Huntsman Legends . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 1, 2020. The Nibelungenlied: A Summary in English Prose The Nibelungenlied a summary in English prose by D. L. Ashliman © 2009-2020 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Part One: Siegfried and Kriemhild 1 Ancient tales relate the marvels of great heroes -- their victories and, in some instances, their tragic deaths. Hear now one such tale: the story of the noble King Siegfried and of the fair Kriemhild, who caused the death of many brave knights. Kriemhild, with her three brothers Gunther, Gernot, and Giselher, grew up in Burgundy. Their father, King Dancrat, and their mother, Queen Uote, held court at Worms on the Rhine. Dancrat, no longer young, had passed the kingship to his three sons. Also featured in this tale is the vassal Hagen of Troneck, a valiant warrior. Kriemhild once dreamed that she reared a falcon, but that two eagles tore it apart. She related this event to her mother, who interpreted the dream: "The falcon is a noble man, whom you will marry, but soon afterward he will be taken from you." "No," replied the daughter, "I intend to remain a virgin. I will not let my life be ruined through the love of a man." "Be careful before making such a vow," replied Uote. "True happiness comes only from a man's love." The mother's prediction did come true. With time Kriemhild did indeed marry a noble warrior, only to lose him through treachery. Her vengeance for this wicked act brought death to many, including her closest kinsmen. 2 We turn now to the great hero Siegfried, who grew up in the city of Xanten on the Rhine, in the Netherlands. He was the son of King Siegmund and Queen Sieglind. The young prince was knighted at midsummer. Part of the celebration was a mass, sung to the glory of God. Afterward a glorious tournament was held. Never before had there been such a gathering of brave and chivalrous knights. A glorious feast followed the jousting, with wandering minstrels entertaining everyone royally. They received generous payment for their service: horses, clothes, and other rich gifts were presented in abundance. 3-4 Meanwhile, tidings of Princess Kriemhild's beauty and nobility spread abroad, and Prince Siegfried resolved that he would marry no one but her. Thus he set forth for Burgundy, accompanied by twelve warriors. Outfitted with the best armor and weapons, the wooing party made a great impression on the Burgundians. Although Hagen had never before seen him, he knew immediately who the foreign knight was. "This is mighty Siegfried," he said. "I do not know his purpose here, but we must treat him with respect. He is the great warrior who slew the Nibelungs, then took possession of their treasure, a hoard so immense that it filled a hundred freight wagons. In addition to gold and precious stones, the treasure also included the famous sword Balmung. The dwarf Alberich, keeper of the Nibelung treasure, attempted to avenge his former masters by attacking Siegfried, but to no avail. The brave prince overpowered him forthwith, then took from him the magic cloak of invisibility. Thereupon Alberich swore loyalty to Siegfried, the new lord of the Nibelung treasure, and thus continued his post as keeper of the treasure." Hagen continued telling what he knew about Siegfried: "Furthermore, the great hero slew a dragon and bathed in its blood, which made him invincible against all weapons. No mortal can defeat him in combat. We must receive him with chivalry and honor, and seek his friendship." Siegfried accepted the Burgundians' hospitality and lived at their court for an entire year, but not once during this time did he see the beautiful Princess Kriemhild. The royal Burgundian household often sponsored jousting tournaments, and Siegfried, time and again, proved his knightly abilities. An even greater test came when news arrived that the Saxons planned to attack the Burgundians. Siegfried came to the aid of his new allies and led the counter-attack against the Saxons, defeating them decisively. He returned to Burgundy to a hero's welcome. 5 King Dancrat ordered a great festival in celebration of the Burgundians' victory. It was here that Siegfried first saw the beautiful Kriemhild, standing at her window and observing the festivities below. Her beauty shone incomparably forth. Siegfried knew at once that this was the maiden of his dreams. He now found cause to visit her every day, and they passed the time together with great pleasure, but also with a painful foreboding of tragic events to come. 6 A new person now enters our story: Queen Brunhild of Iceland. Tidings of her great beauty had extended as far as Worms, and King Gunther resolved to win her as his wife. However, Brunhild was renowned not only for her beauty, but also for her vast strength, as well as for her skill at throwing the javelin, hurling a weight, and leaping a great distance. Any man who sought to marry her was required to better her in these three contests. The prize for victory would be Brunhild herself; but the penalty for defeat was the loss of one's head. Many would-be suitors had challenged the fair Brunhild in these three contests, but until now no one had defeated her, and all had lost their heads. Gunther announced his intention to woo fair Brunhild, but Siegfried, who knew well how powerful she was, advised against this undertaking. Gunther could not be dissuaded, so Siegfried, out of loyalty to his future brother-in-law (as he hoped) agreed to assist him in this dangerous venture. Making preparations for the journey, Siegfried carefully packed the magic cloak that he had taken from Alberich. Not only did this cloak make its wearer invisible, but it gave him the strength of twelve additional men. Yes, with the aid of this cloak he did win Brunhild for Gunther, but in the end he came to rue this act. A stout boat was built to carry the party downstream to the open sea, and Siegfried, who knew these waters well, was chosen as captain. On the twelfth day, we are told, they arrived at the great fortress of Isenstein. Siegfried recognized this at once as Brunhild's domain. 7-8 Wary of Brunhild's great power, Siegfried insisted that his own identity not be revealed. To preserve his anonymity he introduced himself as Gunther's vassal. Brunhild received the wooing party with outward courtesy, accompanied by the severe warning that should Gunther fail to defeat her in the contest, everyone accompanying him would die. As preparations were being made for the fateful event, Siegfried secretly returned to the ship and put on the magic cloak. Now invisible to all, he returned to the group. The first contest was to hurl a great spear, so heavy that three of Brunhild's men together could barely lift it. The fair queen lifted it with ease, then threw it at Gunther, who stood some distance from her. The spear struck his shield, piercing it with a shower of sparks. The invisible Siegfried stood next to Gunther and whispered instructions into his ear. Siegfried then picked up the spear (although Gunther appeared to be the one doing this) and hurled it back at Brunhild. Her shield and chain-mail protected her from the deadly blow, but it came with such force that the impact knocked her off her feet. Leaping up, she congratulated Gunther on the unexpectedly powerful return, then turned to the next event. Picking up a huge boulder, she hurled it a good twenty-four yards, then with one powerful bound, leaped even further. Gunther, approached the boulder, put his hands on it, but it was the invisible Siegfried who lifted it into the air and threw it an even greater distance than the one achieved by Brunhild. Then he took Gunther into his arms and leaped still further, carrying Gunther with him. 9 Brunhild now had no choice but to accept Gunther's marriage proposal, and she agreed to return to Burgundy with him. As the party approached Worms, Siegfried was sent ahead to announce the success of Gunther's venture. 10 Befitting her nobility, fame, and beauty, Brunhild was welcomed in Worms with great celebration. Jousting matches, feasts, and other ceremonies were held in her honor. Queen Uote and Princess Kriemhild were especially munificent in their reception of their new daughter-in-law and sister-in-law. Preparations were made for two royal weddings: Queen Brunhild of Iceland with King Gunther of Burgundy; and Princess Kriemhild of Burgundy with Prince Siegfried of Xanten. However, Brunhild did not see in Siegfried a man of royalty. She knew him only as Gunther's vassal, as he had been introduced to her in Iceland. "Why," she asked her future husband, "is your royal sister engaged to marry a mere vassal?" "He is a mighty king, as noble as myself," replied Gunther. "He has enormous power and great holdings." This answer quieted Brunhild, but it did not still the uneasiness within her heart. The two royal weddings transpired with equal splendor, but the two wedding nights were not at all the same. Brunhild, disquieted by suspicions about Siegfried's rank, refused to share Gunther's bed, unless he were to tell her all that he knew about Siegfried. Gunther insisted that there were no secrets to reveal. Alone in their bedroom, the two continued to quarrel. "Unless you tell me the truth about Siegfried, I shall remain a virgin," she threatened. Gunther grew angry, and forgetting her great strength, he attempted to take her by force. She resisted his awkward advances with ease. Taking the cord from her waist, she bound him hand and foot, then hung him from a nail on the wall, where he remained the entire night. The next morning the two royal bridegrooms greeted one another, and Gunther confessed that his wedding night had not at all met his expectations. With great embarrassment he revealed the misadventure to his new brother-in-law Siegfried. Once again Siegfried agreed to come to the aid of his hapless relative. That night, hidden under the cloak of invisibility, Siegfried entered the bed chamber of Gunther and Brunhild. "Stop rumpling my shift!" commanded the virgin queen, thinking that Gunther was once again harassing her. But this time it was not Gunther. It was the invisible Siegfried, and he wrestled her onto the bed and held her fast until she finally submitted to Gunther. This would have settled the issue, but the invisible Siegfried, whether from pride or some other motivation, took a golden ring from Brunhild's finger and an elaborately embroidered girdle from her waist, then left Gunther and his now subservient wife lying together. Later Siegfried gave these trophies to Kriemhild, but he came to rue the day that he did so. 11 Time passed. Siegfried returned with Kriemhild to the great city of Xanten. His aging father named him king, and his mother having recently died, his wife became queen. Here the two lived magnificently for ten years. Their marriage was blessed with a son, whom they named Gunther. In Worms Gunther and Brunhild had also had a son, and they named him Siegfried. 12 Meanwhile, Brunhild still suffered from the suspicion that her sister-in-law had married beneath her station. Siegfried, she believed, was merely her husband's vassal, and thus not entitled to marry into royalty. Eager to set her mind at ease, she proposed to her husband that Siegfried and Kriemhild be invited to a great festival. Gunther, not suspecting his wife's ulterior motives, agreed, and the invitation was extended. 13-14 Siegfried and Kriemhild returned to Worms, where they were greeted with every courtesy. However, in spite of outward friendship, Brunhild's jealousy toward Kriemhild soon manifested itself, and they fell to quarrelling about the rank and merits of their respective husbands. "Your husband calls himself a king," taunted Brunhild, "but he is nothing more than a vassal to my husband, a real king." "Your husband is neither a real king nor a real man," replied Kriemhild. "Your so-called husband was not even man enough to take your maidenhead on your wedding night. It was my husband who had to do that job for him!" "Prove it!" stammered Brunhild with anger. "Prove it I shall!" replied Kriemhild. "Here is the ring that he took from your finger that night, and here is the girdle that he took from your waist!" So saying, she took from her own finger and from her own waist the trophies that Siegfried secretly had taken from Brunhild on her wedding night. Brunhild, once a proud and powerful queen, now dissolved into tears. She confronted her husband with Kriemhild's accusations, but nothing that he said could comfort her. Hagen, King Gunther's faithful vassal, seeing his queen's distress swore revenge against the man who, as he saw it, had caused her this grief. "I shall kill him," he promised. 15 It was well known that Siegfried, having bathed in a dragon's blood was invincible against all normal weapons. However, it was rumored that in bathing he may have missed one spot, and if an enemy could discover its location, he would have a chance to mortally wound the famous warrior. Hagen vowed to discover Siegfried's one vulnerable spot. If it did indeed exist, his wife Kriemhild would know where it was. Sometime later Hagen approached Kriemhild. He directed their conversation to any apprehension that she might have about the dangers that Siegfried might face in time of war. "Because of the dragon's blood he is quite safe against any foe," replied the queen, with assurance. "Nonetheless," said the crafty Hagen, "I feel ill at ease for his sake. It is my responsibility to protect him from any danger, and I could better do this if I knew of any way that he might be wounded." "Perhaps you are right," responded the unsuspecting queen. "He does have one small vulnerable spot. While he was bathing himself in the dragon's blood a leaf fell from a tree onto his back, directly between his shoulder blades, keeping the blood from that one spot. He might be vulnerable there." "Could you sew a little mark on his clothing at that spot, so that I can shield him in the event of danger?" asked Hagen. Seeing no harm in this request, Kriemhild did indeed sew a tiny cross, too small for anyone to notice, at the critical spot on Siegfried's back. 16 Soon afterward the treacherous Hagen proposed a hunt for bear and boar in a nearby forest. He revealed to Gunther what his plans were concerning Siegfried. The night before the hunt Kriemhild dreamed that two boars had chased Siegfried over the heath, and that the wildflowers there had been dyed with blood. Relating this frightening dream to her husband, she urged him to stay with her, but he assured her that he was quite safe. Alas, in this he was quite wrong. She would never again see him alive. At first the hunt proceeded in an accustomed manner, and a number of game animals were slain. As the day advanced, everyone became thirsty from heat and exertion. Coming to a cool, rushing brook, they stopped to quench their thirst. Siegfried unstrapped his sword and leaned his spear against a tree, then bent over the brook to quench his thirst. Hagen pushed Siegfried's sword from his reach, picked up the spear, and hurled it at the cross embroidered on Siegfried's back. Blood spurted from the wound, splashing against Hagen's clothes. The dying hero reached for his sword, but not finding it, he attacked Hagen with his shield, nearly killing him with blows. Siegfried's strength faded quickly, and he soon fell among the wildflowers, blood still pouring from his wound. Together the hunters conspired to conceal what had actually happened. "Siegfried rode off by himself," they would claim, "and was killed by robbers." 17 They waited for nightfall to return to Worms. Then the cruel and vengeful Hagen had Siegfried's body laid on the threshold of Kriemhild's apartment so that she would discover it when she left for matins. The prayer bells rang, and Kriemhild saw her husband's body, red with gore. The wretched queen first fell speechless into a swoon, then coming to herself, she screamed aloud, "Hagen committed this bloody crime, and it was Brunhild who urged him to do so! The guilty ones shall surely die!" Hagen denied all guilt, and King Gunther supported his plea. "He was killed by robbers. Hagen did nothing wrong," he stated. This deceitful claim, however was soon proven to be false. After Siegfried's body had been placed on a bier in the cathedral, Kriemhild demanded that Hagen swear his innocence in the presence of the murdered man. It frequently happens even today that when a murderer approaches his victim's corpse, the dead man's wounds begin to bleed afresh. This miracle also occurred with Hagen and Siegfried. When the guilty Hagen approached the bier, blood flowed anew from Siegfried's wound. Kriemhild now knew without doubt who had killed her husband. Surrounded by Hagen's and Gunther's allies and relatives, she was powerless to achieve justice at this time, but she swore in her heart to avenge Siegfried's death, however long it might take. 18-19 Kriemhild remained at Worms, and on the surface her relationship with the Burgundians improved. Always plotting revenge against Hagen, she extended kindness to her in-laws, and they, in turn, returned the friendship, hoping thus to gain control over the immense Nibelung treasure that was now hers. Recognizing that wealth brings power, Kriemhild ordered that the treasure be brought to her from Nibelungland. So great was this hoard of gems and gold that it required a dozen wagons fully loaded four days and nights, making three trips each day to transport the treasure from the mountain where the dwarf Alberich had kept it safely hidden. With this immense treasure now at her disposal, Kriemhild began making generous gifts to many Burgundian knights, thus gaining their allegiance and favor. Hagen, sensing danger in these new alliances, urged the Burgundian kings to confiscate the treasure. Disregarding their natural allegiance to their widowed sister, they succumbed to Hagen's urging and took the vast hoard from Kriemhild. Soon afterward the three kings had a journey to make, and during their absence Hagen took the treasure and sank in the Rhine at Locheim. He intended to return someday and recover it, but this never happened. Part Two: Kriemhild's Revenge 20 The story now turns to Hungary, the domain of the great King Etzel. His wife having recently died, King Etzel desired to take a new queen. Tidings of the beautiful widow Kriemhild had reached his land, and he resolved to woo her, although he was a heathen and she was a Christian. Rüdiger, Margrave of Pöchlarn and a member of Etzel's court had known Kriemhild since childhood, and he volunteered to carry Etzel's marriage proposal to the widowed queen in Worms. Accompanied by 500 knights, Rüdiger made his way from Hungary to Vienna, then to his home at Pöchlarn, and from thence across Bavaria to the Rhine. Their journey lasted twelve days, and not once were they attacked by robbers. The Hunnish knights were received in Worms with great courtesy, their leader Rüdiger being well known to the three kings. They received King Etzel's marriage proposal with great favor. Only Hagen spoke out against it. "I predict," he warned, "that if Kriemhild marries King Etzel, she will use her newly gained power to do us great harm." However, the Burgundian kings saw only benefits in a marriage between their sister and the Hunnish king, and they urged her to accept the proposal. At first Kriemhild was reluctant, she being a Christian and Etzel being a heathen, but she soon came to see a great benefit in this marriage for her as well. Etzel's great power would help her avenge the death of her late husband. She accepted the proposal and forthwith made preparations for the trip to Hungary. 21 Their journey took them first to Pföring on the Danube, then to Passau (where the Inn joins the Danube), then onward toward Etzel's castle Etzelnburg by way of Eferding, Enns, Pöchlarn, Melk, Mautern, Traisenmauer, Tulln, Vienna, Old Hainburg, and Wieselburg. 22-23 Etzel and his entire court received their new queen with splendor, granting her every courtesy and honor. Etzel and Kriemhild married and they lived together in great luxury. In their seventh year together Kriemhild gave birth to a son, whom they named Ortlieb. Outwardly, Kriemhild was content in her queenship, but inwardly she never ceased brooding over the wrongs that had been committed against her at home, and in her mind she plotted revenge against those who had been responsible. To this end she decided to invite her brothers to visit her in Hungary. She selected two trusted minstrels, Werbel and Swemmel, to carry the invitation to Worms, instructing them that they must not tell her kinsmen that they had ever seen her sorrowing, and also that they must insist that Hagen accompany her brothers to Hungary. 24 Werbel and Swemmel, accompanied by twenty-four warriors, journeyed up the Danube as far as Passau, where they called on Bishop Pilgrim. I do not know what route they took from there to the Rhine, but no one robbed them of their goods underway. The Burgundians received them with courtesy and honor, presenting the two minstrels with generous gifts. King Gunther and most of his associates were inclined to accept the invitation to visit King Etzel and Queen Kriemhild in Hungary. Only Hagen spoke out against the venture: "I killed Kriemhild's husband with my own hand," he confessed, "and she will be seeking revenge against us all." "Our sister is no longer angry," replied Gunther. Giselher then added the taunt, "If you lack the courage to go with us, then you can stay here in safety." "I have never lacked courage," answered Hagen angrily. "I shall go with you." He then assembled an army of three thousand or more knights to accompany them on their journey. 25 Little did the Burgundians know the tragedy that awaited them, although they were forewarned by Queen Uote. "Do not go," she implored. "Last night I dreamed that all the birds in this land had died." Hagen answered, "We are moved by honor, not by dreams," and they continued their preparations for the journey ahead. The Nibelungs (as the Burgundians were now called) rode through Swabia, and no one robbed them. On the twelfth day they arrived at the Danube. The great river had overflowed its banks, and no ferries could be found. While looking for a possible fording place Hagen came upon a group of water-fairies bathing in the water. As he approached they fled, leaving their clothes behind, and the warrior immediately took possession of their garments. One of the nixies called to him, "Noble knight, give us back our clothes, and we will tell your fortune." He agreed to this, and one of the fairies said, "You can ride on with confidence. Great glory will come to you in Etzel's land." Satisfied with this prediction, Hagen returned the clothing to them. No sooner had they put on their marvelous garments than one of the fairies taunted, "My cousin lied to you. You are riding into a trap. None of you shall return alive from Hungary. Only King Gunther's chaplain shall be spared." Soon afterward the Nibelungs found a ferryman, but he was unwilling to take them across the swollen Danube. This angered Hagen, who struck off the ferryman's head, then confiscated his boat. One boatload at a time, he ferried the travelers across the river. Their horses swam across, and although the current carried them far downstream, not one of them was lost. The royal chaplain was in the last boat. Seeing him, Hagen remembered the nixie's prediction. "I shall prove her wrong," he said to himself, and threw him overboard. Others tried to rescue him, while Hagen repeatedly pushed him underwater. The struggling chaplain turned back toward the shore, although he could not swim. Miraculously he safely made his way to the bank. Seeing this, Hagen now knew that he and his fellow knights were doomed to die. After the ferryboat had been unloaded the last time, Hagen smashed it to pieces. The Nibelungs loaded their gear onto their horses and continued onward toward Hungary. The royal chaplain made his way back to Burgundy on foot. 26-28 Many days later the Nibelungs arrived in Hungary, and they were received, for the most part, with expected courtesy. When Kriemhild greeted the royal party she kissed only Giselher, her youngest brother. Hagen responded to this slight by tightening his helmet straps. Kriemhild then addressed Hagen, "What have you brought me from the Rhine? Where is the treasure of the Nibelungs? It is rightfully mine. That is what you should have brought here!" "My lords commanded that it be sunk in the Rhine," replied Hagen, "and there it shall remain forever!" 29-30 Tension between the Nibelungs and the Hungarians increased at every turn. Hagen, especially, became ever more reckless and provocative. He appeared in public wearing Siegfried's sword Balmung, which Kriemhild recognized at once. She confronted him forthwith. "Why did you slay my husband?" she demanded. "Yes, it was I who killed Siegfried. I did so for the pain that you caused my mistress Brunhild," admitted Hagen openly, then added, "And if anyone dare avenge this act, man or woman, then let him or her try!" 31 Meanwhile, King Etzel had prepared a jousting festival in honor of his guests. The celebration commenced on Midsummer's Day with a mass in the cathedral. However, being heathens, the Hungarians sang the mass differently than did the Christians. Then the jousting began, and at one of the first events a Burgundian knight named Volker, armed with a pointed spear (not a blunted one, as peaceful jousting requires), ran his Hunnish opponent through, killing him instantly. The dead knight's countrymen responded with a great outcry, and would have attacked the Burgundians forthwith had King Etzel not held them back. His sense of honor would not allow guests at his court to be harmed. "It was an accident," he insisted. "Volker's horse stumbled, causing the mishap." 32 Counter to her husband's attempts at peacemaking, Kriemhild continued to plot means to bring the Burgundians and the Hungarians into a full-pitched battle, and thus punish her brothers and Hagen for their complicity in the death of her husband and the theft of her treasure. Seeing no other way to start a fight between the two armies, she had her son Ortlieb brought forth. She knew that Hagen would react violently against the young prince, seeing in him a future enemy with great power, and one who would carry out his mother's wishes for revenge. 33-39 Kriemhild's dreadful prediction came true. For the reasons foreseen by her, Hagen flew into a rage when he saw her son. He drew his sword and with one blow cut off the boy's head. A great slaughter ensued: Hungarians and Nibelungs battled against each other. Each side lost many brave warriors, but the Nibelungs were greatly outnumbered, and in the end every one of them was killed. Gunther and Hagen were the last to die. Both were captured by the Hungarians. Kriemhild ordered that Gunther's head be cut off and then delivered to Hagen. Following this grisly act, Kriemhild herself, now armed with the sword Balmung, struck off Hagen's head. Her revenge was complete, although it had come at a terrible price. One old knight, Hildebrand by name, serving at Etzel's court, was horrified that such a brave warrior as Hagen be killed by a woman. He drew his own sword and killed Kriemhild. King Etzel mourned deeply. I do not know what happened afterward. Here ends the story of the Nibelungs' last stand. In creating this summary I have used the following edition: The Nibelungenlied , a new translation by A. T. Hatto (Penguin Books, © by A. T. Hatto, 1965, 1969). This work was composed about 1200 in Middle High German verse by an anonymous poet, probably at Passau, Germany. Link to a translation of the complete epic by Daniel Bussier Shumway (1909): The Nibelungenlied: Online Medieval and Classical Library . Link to a facsimile manuscript (version C) of the Nibelungenlied , housed in the Badische Landesbibliothek in Karlruhe, Germany: Die Nibelungen-Handschrift . Link to an overview (in German) at the University of Augsburg . This page includes links to transcriptions of three manuscripts from the 1200s plus the text edition by Karl Bartsch. Link to the Nibelungenlied article in Wikipedia . Link to two Icelandic versions of the same mythological material: The Treasure of the Niflungs , an excerpt from the Prose Edda of Snorri Sturluson. The Saga of the Volsungs , a summary in English . Link to Dragon Slayers: An Index Page . Persons Included in both the Prose Edda and the Nibelungenlied Prose Edda Nibelungenlied Sigurd Siegfried Brynhild Brunhild Andvari Alberich Gjuki Dancrat Grimhild Uote Gudrun Kriemhild Gunnar Gunther Hogni Gernot Gotthorm Giselher Atli Etzel Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 21, 2020. The Treasure of the Niflungs The Treasure of the Niflungs an excerpt from the Prose Edda of Snorri Sturluson edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2010-2012 contents Otter's Wergild . Sigurd Slays Fafnir . Sigurd and Brynhild . Atli Marries Gudrun . Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Otter's Wergild For what reason is gold called Otter's Wergild ? It is related that when certain of the Æsir, Odin and Loki and Hœnir, went forth to explore the earth, they came to a certain river, and proceeded along the river to a waterfall. And beside the fall was an otter, which had taken a salmon from the fall and was eating, blinking his eyes the while. Then Loki took up a stone and cast it at the otter, and struck its head. And Loki boasted in his catch, that he had got otter and salmon with one blow. Then they took up the salmon and the otter and bore them along with them, and coming to the buildings of a certain farm, they went in. Now the husbandman who dwelt there was named Hreidmar; he was a man of much substance, and very skilled in black magic. The Æsir asked him for a night's lodging, saying that they had sufficient food with them, and showed him their catch. But when Hreidmar saw the otter, straightway he called to him his sons, Fafnir and Regin, and told them that the otter their brother was slain, and who had done that deed. Now father and sons went up to the Æsir, seized them, bound them, and told them about the otter, how he was Hreidmar's son. The Æsir offered a ransom for their lives, as much wealth as Hreidmar himself desired to appoint; and a covenant was made between them on those terms, and confirmed with oaths. Then the otter was flayed, and Hreidmar, taking the otter skin, bade them fill the skin with red gold and also cover it altogether; and that should be the condition of the covenant between them. Thereupon Odin sent Loki into the Land of the Black Elves, and he came to the dwarf who is called Andvari, who was as a fish in the water. Loki caught him in his hands and required of him in ransom of his life all the gold that he had in his rock; and when they came within the rock, the dwarf brought forth all the gold he had, and it was very much wealth. Then the dwarf quickly swept under his hand one little gold ring, but Loki saw it and commanded him to give over the ring. The dwarf prayed him not to take the ring from him, saying that from this ring he could multiply wealth for himself if he might keep it. Loki answered that he should not have one penny left, and took the ring from him and went out; but the dwarf declared that that ring should be the ruin of every one who should come into possession of it. Loki replied that this seemed well enough to him, and that this condition should hold good provided that he himself brought it to the ears of them that should receive the ring and the curse. He went his way and came to Hreidmar's dwelling, and showed the gold to Odin; but when Odin saw the ring, it seemed fair to him, and he took it away from the treasure, and paid the gold to Hreidmar. Then Hreidmar filled the otter skin as much as he could, and set it up when it was full. Next Odin went up, having the skin to cover with gold, and he bade Hreidmar look whether the skin were yet altogether hidden. But Hreidmar looked at it searchingly, and saw one of the hairs of the snout, and commanded that this be covered, else their covenant should be at an end. Then Odin drew out the ring, and covered the hair, saying that they were now delivered from their debt for the slaying of the otter. But when Odin had taken his spear, and Loki his shoes, and they had no longer any need to be afraid, then Loki declared that the curse which Andvari had uttered should be fulfilled: that this ring and this gold should be the destruction of him who received it; and that was fulfilled afterward. Now it has been told wherefore gold is called Otter's Wergild , or Forced Payment of the Æsir , or Metal of Strife . Sigurd Slays Fafnir What more is to be said of the gold? Hreidmar took the gold for his son's wergild, but Fafnir and Regin claimed some part of their brother's blood-money for themselves. Hreidmar would not grant them one penny of the gold. This was the wicked purpose of those brethren: they slew their father for the gold. Then Regin demanded that Fafnir share the gold with him, half for half. Fafnir answered that there was little chance of his sharing it with his brother, seeing that he had slain his father for its sake; and he bade Regin go hence, else he should fare even as Hreidmar. Fafnir had taken the helmet which Hreidmar had possessed, and set it upon his head (this helmet was called the Helm of Terror, of which all living creatures that see it are afraid), and the sword called Hrotti. Regin had that sword which was named Refill. So he fled away, and Fafnir went up to Gnita Heath, and made himself a lair, and turned himself into a serpent, and laid him down upon the gold. Then Regin went to King Hjalprek at Thjod, and there he became his smith; and he took into his fostering Sigurd, son of Sigmund, Volsung's son, and of Hjordis, daughter of Eylimi. Sigurd was most illustrious of all Host-Kings in race, in prowess, and in mind. Regin declared to him where Fafnir lay on the gold, and incited him to seek the gold. Then Regin fashioned the sword Gram, which was so sharp that Sigurd, bringing it down into running water, cut asunder a flock of wool which drifted downstream onto the sword's edge. Next Sigurd clove Regin's anvil down to the stock with the sword. After that they went, Sigurd and Regin, to Gnita Heath, and there Sigurd dug a pit in Fafnir's way and laid himself in ambush therein. And when Fafnir glided toward the water and came above the pit, Sigurd straightway thrust his sword through him, and that was his end. Then Regin came forward, saying that Sigurd had slain his brother, and demanded as a condition of reconciliation that he take Fafnir's heart and roast it with fire; and Regin laid him down and drank the blood of Fafnir, and settled himself to sleep. But when Sigurd was roasting the heart, and thought that it must be quite roasted, he touched it with his finger to see how hard it was; and then the juice ran out from the heart onto his finger, so that he was burned and put his finger to his mouth. As soon as the heart's blood came upon his tongue, straightway he knew the speech of birds, and he understood what the nuthatches were saying which were sitting in the trees. Then one spake: There sits Sigurd Blood-besprinkled, Fafnir's heart With flame he roasteth: Wise seemed to me The Spoiler of Rings If the gleaming Life-fiber he ate. There lies Regin -- sang another -- Rede he ponders, Would betray the youth Who trusteth in him: In his wrath he plots Wrong accusation; The smith of bale Would avenge his brother. Then Sigurd went over to Regin and slew him, and thence to his horse, which was named Grani, and rode till he came to Fafnir's lair. He took up the gold, trussed it up in his saddlebags, laid it upon Grani's back, mounted up himself, and then rode his ways. Now the tale has been told why gold is called Lair or Abode of Fafnir , or Metal of Gnita Heath , or Grani's Burden . Sigurd and Brynhild Then Sigurd rode on till he found a house on the mountain, wherein a woman in a helmet and coat of chainmail lay sleeping. He drew his sword and cut the chainmail from her. She awoke then, and gave her name as Hild; she is called Brynhild, and was a Valkyrie. Sigurd rode away and came to the king who was named Gjuki, whose wife was Grimhild; their children were Gunnar, Hogni, Gudrun, Gudny; Gotthorm was Gjuki's stepson. Sigurd tarried there a long time, and then he obtained the hand of Gudrun, daughter of Gjuki, and Gunnar and Hogni swore oaths of blood brotherhood with Sigurd. Thereafter Sigurd and the sons of Gjuki went unto Atli [Attila the Hun], Budli's son, to sue for the hand of Brynhild his sister in marriage to Gunnar. Brynhild abode on Hinda-Fell, and about her hall there was a flaring fire; and she had made a solemn vow to take none but that man who should dare to ride through the flaring fire. Then Sigurd and the sons of Gjuki (who were also called Niflungs) rode up onto the mountain, and Gunnar should have ridden through the flaring fire; but he had the horse named Goti, and that horse dared not leap into the fire. So they exchanged shapes, Sigurd and Gunnar, and names likewise; for Grani would go under no man but Sigurd. Then Sigurd leapt onto Grani and rode through the flaring fire. That eve he was wedded with Brynhild. But when they came to bed, he drew the Sword Gram from its sheath and laid it between them. In the morning when he arose and clothed himself, he gave Brynhild as linen-fee the same gold ring which Loki had taken from Andvari, and took another ring from her hand for remembrance. Then Sigurd mounted his horse and rode to his fellows, and he and Gunnar changed shapes again and went home to Gjuki with Brynhild. Sigurd and Gudrun had two children, Sigmund and Svanhild. It befell on a time that Brynhild and Gudrun went to the water to wash their hair. And when they came to the river, Brynhild waded out from the bank well into the river, saying that she would not touch to her head the water which ran out of the hair of Gudrun, since herself had the more valorous husband. Then Gudrun went into the river after her and said that it was her right to wash her hair higher upstream, for the reason that she had to husband such a man as neither Gunnar nor any other in the world matched in valor, seeing that he had slain Fafnir and Regin and succeeded to the heritage of both. And Brynhild made answer: "It was a matter of greater worth that Gunnar rode through the flaring fire and Sigurd durst not." Then Gudrun laughed, and said: "Dost thou think that Gunnar rode through the flaring fire? Now I think that he who went into the bride-bed with thee was the same that gave me this gold ring; and the gold ring which thou bearest on thine hand and didst receive for linen-fee is called Andvari's Yield , and I believe that it was not Gunnar who got that ring on Gnita Heath." Then Brynhild was silent, and went home. After that she egged on Gunnar and Hogni to slay Sigurd; but because they were Sigurd's sworn blood-brothers, they stirred up Gotthorm their brother to slay him. He thrust his sword through Sigurd as he slept; but when Sigurd felt the wound, he hurled his sword Gram after Gotthorm, so that it cut the man asunder at the middle. There fell Sigurd and Sigmund, his son of three winters, whom they slew. Then Brynhild stabbed herself with a sword, and she was burned with Sigurd; but Gunnar and Hogni took Fafnir's heritage and Andvari's Yield, and ruled the lands thereafter. Atli Marries Gudrun King Atli, Budli's son, and brother of Brynhild, then wedded Gudrun, whom Sigurd had had to wife; and they had children. King Atli invited to him Gunnar and Hogni, and they came at his invitation. Yet before they departed from their land, they hid the gold, Fafnir's heritage, in the Rhine, and that gold has never since been found. Now King Atli had a host in readiness, and fought with Gunnar and Hogni; and they were made captive. King Atli bade the heart be cut out of Hogni alive, and that was his end. Gunnar he caused to be cast into a den of serpents. But a harp was brought secretly to Gunnar, and he struck it with his toes, his hands being bound; he played the harp so that all the serpents fell asleep, saving only one adder, which glided over to him and gnawed into the cartilage of his breastbone so far that her head sank within the wound, and she clove to his liver till he died. Gunnar and Hogni were called Niflungs and Gjukungs, for which reason gold is called Treasure, or Heritage, of the Niflungs . A little while after, Gudrun slew her two sons, and caused flagons to be made of their skulls, set with gold and silver. Then the funeral feast was held for the Niflungs; and at this feast Gudrun had mead poured into the flagons for King Atli, and the mead was mixed with the blood of the boys. Moreover, she caused their hearts to be roasted and set before the king, that he might eat of them. And when he had eaten, then she herself told him what she had done, with many scathing words. There was no lack of strong drink there, so that most of the company had fallen asleep where they sat. That night she went to the king while he slept, and Hogni's son with her; they smote the king, and that was the death of him. Then they set fire to the hall, and burned the folk that were within. After that she went to the shore and leaped into the sea, desiring to make an end of herself; but she was tossed by the billows over the firth, and was borne to King Jonak's land. And when he saw her, he took her to him and wedded her, and they had three sons, called Sorli, Hamdir, and Erp; they were all raven-black of hair, like Gunnar and Hogni and the other Niflungs. Source: Snorri Sturluson, The Prose Edda , translated from the Icelandic by Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur (New York: The American-Scandinavian Foundation, 1916), pp. 150-58 . Snorri Sturluson (1179-1241), an Icelandic poet and political leader, wrote the Prose Edda (also called the Younger Edda ) in about 1220. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Dragonslayers: An Index Page . The Saga of the Volsungs: A Summary . The Nibelungenlied: A Summary . Another account of the Niflungs (here called the Nibelungs). Persons Included in both the Prose Edda and the Nibelungenlied Prose Edda Nibelungenlied Sigurd Siegfried Brynhild Brunhild Andvari Alberich Gjuki Dancrat Grimhild Uote Gudrun Kriemhild Gunnar Gunther Hogni Gernot Gotthorm Giselher Atli Etzel Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 15, 2012. The Disobedient Daughter Who Married a Skull The Disobedient Daughter Who Married a Skull a Folktale from Nigeria edited by D. L. Ashliman Effiong Edem was a native of Cobham Town. He had a very fine daughter, whose name was Afiong. All the young men in the country wanted to marry her on account of her beauty; but she refused all offers of marriage in spite of repeated entreaties from her parents, as she was very vain, and said she would only marry the best-looking man in the country, who would have to be young and strong, and capable of loving her properly. Most of the men her parents wanted her to marry, although they were rich, were old men and ugly, so the girl continued to disobey her parents, at which they were very much grieved. The Skull who lived in the spirit land heard of the beauty of this Calabar virgin, and thought he would like to possess her; so he went about amongst his friends and borrowed different parts of the body from them, all of the best. From one he got a good head, another lent him a body, a third gave him strong arms, and a fourth lent him a fine pair of legs. At last he was complete, and was a very perfect specimen of manhood. He then left the spirit land and went to Cobham market, where he saw Afiong, and admired her very much. About this time Afiong heard that a very fine man had been seen in the market, who was better-looking than any of the natives. She therefore went to the market at once, and directly she saw the Skull in his borrowed beauty, she fell in love with him, and invited him to her house. The Skull was delighted, and went home with her, and on his arrival was introduced by the girl to her parents, and immediately asked their consent to marry their daughter. At first they refused, as they did not wish her to marry a stranger, but at last they agreed. He lived with Afiong for two days in her parents' house, and then said he wished to take his wife back to his country, which was far off. To this the girl readily agreed, as he was such a fine man, but her parents tried to persuade her not to go. However, being very headstrong, she made up her mind to go, and they started off together. After they had been gone a few days the father consulted his Ju Ju man, who by casting lots very soon discovered that his daughter's husband belonged to the spirit land, and that she would surely be killed. They therefore all mourned her as dead. After walking for several days, Afiong and the Skull crossed the border between the spirit land and the human country. Directly they set foot in the spirit land, first of all one man came to the Skull and demanded his legs, then another his head, and the next his body, and so on, until in a few minutes the Skull was left by itself in all its natural ugliness. At this the girl was very frightened, and wanted to return home, but the Skull would not allow this, and ordered her to go with him. When they arrived at the Skull's house they found his mother, who was a very old woman quite incapable of doing any work, who could only creep about. Afiong tried her best to help her, and cooked her food, and brought water and firewood for the old woman. The old creature was very grateful for these attentions, and soon became quite fond of Afiong. One day the old woman told Afiong that she was very sorry for her, but all the people in the spirit land were cannibals, and when they heard there was a human being in their country, they would come down and kill her and eat her. The Skull's mother then hid Afiong, and as she had looked after her so well, she promised she would send her back to her country as soon as possible, providing that she promised for the future to obey her parents. This Afiong readily consented to do. Then the old woman sent for the spider, who was a very clever hairdresser, and made him dress Afiong's hair in the latest fashion. She also presented her with anklets and other things on account of her kindness. She then made a Ju Ju and called the winds to come and convey Afiong to her home. At first a violent tornado came, with thunder, lightning and rain, but the Skull's mother sent him away as unsuitable. The next wind to come was a gentle breeze, so she told the breeze to carry Afiong to her mother's house, and said good-bye to her. Very soon afterwards the breeze deposited Afiong outside her home, and left her there. When the parents saw their daughter they were very glad, as they had for some months given her up as lost. The father spread soft animals' skins on the ground from where his daughter was standing all the way to the house, so that her feet should not be soiled. Afiong then walked to the house, and her father called all the young girls who belonged to Afiong's company to come and dance, and the feasting and dancing was kept up for eight days and nights. When the rejoicing was over, the father reported what had happened to the head chief of the town. The chief then passed a law that parents should never allow their daughters to marry strangers who came from a far country. Then the father told his daughter to marry a friend of his, and she willingly consented, and lived with him for many years, and had many children. Source: Elphinstone Dayrell, Folk Stories from Southern Nigeria, West Africa (London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1910), no. 8, pp.38-41. This tale bears a close relationship with Aarne-Thompson type 363 (The Vampire Suitor). Other folktales that depict a young woman's marriage with (and ultimate escape from) a sinister spouse include type 311 (The Heroine Rescues Herself and her Sisters), type 311 (Bluebeard), type 312A (The Girl Who Married a Tiger), and type 955 (The Robber Bridegroom). Links to additional folktales from Nigeria . Return to D. L. Ashliman's index of folklore and mythology electronic texts . Revised April 28, 1999. The Hippopotamus and the Tortoise The Hippopotamus and the Tortoise a folktale from Nigeria edited by D. L. Ashliman Many years ago the hippopotamus, whose name was Isantim, was one of the biggest kings on the land; he was second only to the elephant. The hippo had seven large fat wives, of whom he was very fond. Now and then he used to give a big feast to the people, but a curious thing was that, although everyone knew the hippo, no one, except his seven wives, knew his name. At one of the feasts, just as the people were about to sit down, the hippo said, "You have come to feed at my table, but none of you know my name. If you cannot tell my name, you shall all of you go away without your dinner." As they could not guess his name, they had to go away and leave all the good food and tombo [palm wine] behind them. But before they left, the tortoise stood up and asked the hippopotamus what he would do if he told him his name at the next feast. So the hippo replied that he would be so ashamed of himself, that he and his whole family would leave the land, and for the future would dwell in the water. Now it was the custom for the hippo and his seven wives to go down every morning and evening to the river to wash and have a drink. Of this custom the tortoise was aware. The hippo used to walk first, and the seven wives followed. One day when they had gone down to the river to bathe, the tortoise made a small hole in the middle of the path, and then waited. When the hippo and his wives returned, two of the wives were some distance behind, so the tortoise came out from where he had been hiding, and half buried himself in the hole he had dug, leaving the greater part of his shell exposed. When the two hippo wives came along, the first one knocked her foot against the tortoise's shell, and immediately called out to her husband, "Oh! Isantim, my husband, I have hurt my foot." At this the tortoise was very glad, and went joyfully home, as he had found out the hippo's name. When the next feast was given by the hippo, he made the same condition about his name; so the tortoise got up and said, "You promise you will not kill me if I tell you your name?" and the hippo promised. The tortoise then shouted as loud as he was able, "Your name is Isantim," at which a cheer went up from all the people, and then they sat down to their dinner. When the feast was over, the hippo, with his seven wives, in accordance with his promise, went down to the river, and they have always lived in the water from that day till now; and although they come on shore to feed at night, you never find a hippo on the land in the daytime. Source: Elphinstone Dayrell, Folk Stories from Southern Nigeria, West Africa (London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1910), no. 22, pp.79-80. The full title of this story is "The Affair of the Hippopotamus and the Tortoise; or, Why the Hippopotamus lives in the Water." This tale bears a relationship with Aarne-Thompson type 500 (The Name of the Helper), best known in the Grimms' version Rumpelstiltskin . Links to a collection of type 500 tales and to additional superstitions involving names . Links to additional folktales from Nigeria . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 16, 2003. Why Dead People Are Buried. A Folktale from Nigeria Why Dead People Are Buried a folktale from Nigeria edited by D. L. Ashliman In the beginning of the world when the Creator had made men and women and the animals, they all lived together in the creation land. The Creator was a big chief, past all men, and being very kindhearted, was very sorry whenever any one died. So one day he sent for the dog, who was his head messenger, and told him to go out into the world and give his word to all people that for the future whenever any one died the body was to be placed in the compound, and wood ashes were to be thrown over it; that the dead body was to be left on the ground, and in twenty-four hours it would become alive again. When the dog had traveled for half a day he began to get tired; so as he was near an old woman's house he looked in, and seeing a bone with some meat on it he made a meal off it, and then went to sleep, entirely forgetting the message which had been given him to deliver. After a time, when the dog did not return, the Creator called for a sheep, and sent him out with the same message. But the sheep was a very foolish one, and being hungry, began eating the sweet grasses by the wayside. After a time, however, he remembered that he had a message to deliver, but forgot what it was exactly; so as he went about among the people he told them that the message the Creator had given him to tell the people, was that whenever any one died they should be buried underneath the ground. A little time afterwards the dog remembered his message, so he ran into the town and told the people that they were to place wood ashes on the dead bodies and leave them in the compound, and that they would come to life again after twenty-four hours. But the people would not believe him, and said, "We have already received the word from the Creator by the sheep, that all dead bodies should be buried." In consequence of this, the dead bodies are now always buried, and the dog is much disliked and not trusted as a messenger, as if he had not found the bone in the old woman's house and forgotten his message, the dead people might still be alive. Source: Elphinstone Dayrell, Folk Stories from Southern Nigeria, West Africa (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1910), no. 23, pp. 81-82. Links to additional folktales from Nigeria . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 16, 2003. Night-Mares: Demons that Cause Nightmares Night-Mares legends and superstitions about the demons that cause nightmares translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2023 Contents Definitions. The Alp (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Alp (Germany, Johann August Ernst Köhler). Beliefs Concerning Alps and Maras (Germany, Karl Bartsch). The Mårt (Germany, A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz). A Mahrt Is Captured (Poland/Germany, A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz). An Alp Is Captured (Germany, Bernhard Baader). The Mahr (Germany, Wilhelm Busch). The Man Who Married a Mara (Denmark, Evald Tang Kristensen). The Mare (Denmark, Jens Kamp). Charm against Night-Mares (Germany, A. Kuhn). The Alp (Poland/Germany, J. D. H. Temme). A Charm to Control the Night-Mare (England, James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps). Nightmare Charm or Spell against the Mara (Shetland Islands, Biot Edmonston and Jessie M. E. Saxby). A Shetland Charm (Shetland Islands, Karl Blind). Vanlandi, King of Sweden, and Huld, the Witch Woman (Iceland, The Ynglinga Saga of Snorri Sturluson). Baku, Eater of Dreams (Japan, F. Hadland Davis). Links to Related Sites. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Definitions The mare in nightmare is not a female horse, but a mara, an Anglo-Saxon and Old Norse term for a demon that sat on sleepers' chests, causing them to have bad dreams. Dialect variants, as explained below, include the forms mara, mahr, mahrt, mårt, trud, drute, and others. In High German, the demon who causes bad dreams is most often called an Alp , a word that is etymologically related to elf . A mare-induced bad dream is called a nightmare in English, martröð (mare-ride) in Anglo-Saxon and Icelandic, mareridt (mare-ride) in Danish, mareritt (mara-ride) in Norwegian, mardröm (mare-dream) in Swedish, and Alpdruck (alp-pressure) or Alptraum (alp-dream) in German. Return to the table of contents . The Alp Germany Even though windows and doors may be tightly closed and locked to keep out the alps, they can still get in through the smallest holes, which they seek out with special pleasure. In the still of the night one can hear the sound that they make in the wall while getting in. If one gets up quickly and plugs up the hole, then they must stay in the room and cannot escape, even after the doors have been opened. Then, before setting them free, one must make them promise to never disturb the place again. On such occasions they have complained pitifully that they have little children at home who will perish if they do not leave. A trud or an alp often travels a great distance to make his nighttime visits. Once some herdsmen were out in the field in the middle of the night. They were watching their herds not far from a body of water. An alp came by, climbed into a boat, untied it from the bank, rowed it with an oar that he himself had brought along, climbed out, tied up the boat on the other side, and continued on his way. After a while he returned and rowed back. The herdsmen, however, after observing this for several nights, and allowing it to happen, decided to take the boat away. When the alp returned, he began to complain bitterly, and threatened the herdsmen that they would have to bring the boat back immediately if they wanted to have peace, and that is what they did. Some people have laid a hackle [an iron-toothed comb for the preparation of flax] on their bodies in order to keep alps away, but an alp often turns it over, pressing the points into the sleeper's body. A better precaution is to turn one's shoes around at the side of the bed, so that the hooks and the laces are next to you. When an alp is pressing against you, you can put your thumb in your hand, and he will have to retreat. Alps often ride your horses during the night, and the next morning you can see how exhausted they are. They can also be repelled with horse heads. If you don't move your chair before going to sleep, the mara will ride it during the night. They like to give people hair-snarls (called whole-grain braids or mara braids), by sucking on their hair then braiding it. When a nurse diapers a child, she must make the sign of the cross and open up a corner, otherwise the alp will re-diaper the child. If you say to an alp that is pressing upon you, "Trud, come tomorrow, and I will lend you something!" then he will immediately retreat and come the next day in the form of a human, in order to borrow something. Or you can call out to him, "Come tomorrow and drink with me," then the person who sent him will have to come. According to Prätorius, such a person's eyebrows grow together along one line. Others claim that such a person's eyebrows grow together on their forehead. There are others who can send an alp to those they hate or are angry with merely with their thoughts. He comes out of their eyebrows, looks like a small white butterfly, and sits on the breast of a sleeping person. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Alp," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 80, pp. 130-32 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Alp," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 80, pp. 130-32 . In future editions, this legend is numbered 81. Return to the table of contents . The Alp Germany The alp is a demonic being which presses upon sleeping people so that they cannot utter a sound. These attacks are called Alpdrücke (nightmares). A girl told how the alp came to her through a keyhole. She was not able to call for help. Later, she therefore asked her sister to call out her name in the night, and then the alp would go back out through the keyhole. In Zwickau they claim that the alp will go away if one invites him for coffee the following morning. It is also believed that the alp crushes animals to death. For example, if young geese, are placed in a pig pen and then die it is said that the alp crushed them to death. If rabbits die, and it appears that they have been crushed, a broom is placed in their pen, which protects them against the alp. Source (books.google.com): Joh. Aug. Ernst Köhler, "Der Alp," Sagenbuch des Erzgebirges (Schneeberg and Schwarzenberg: Verlag und Druck von Carl Moritz Gärtner, 1886), no. 200, pp. 154-55 . Source (Internet Archive): Joh. Aug. Ernst Köhler, "Der Alp," Sagenbuch des Erzgebirges (Schneeberg and Schwarzenberg: Verlag und Druck von Carl Moritz Gärtner, 1886), no. 200, pp. 154-55 . Return to the table of contents . Beliefs Concerning Alps and Maras Germany It is believed that by stopping up the keyhole, placing one's shoes with the toes facing the door, and then getting into bed backwards one can protect oneself against nightmares or "Mortriden." [mara rides]. Further, one can put something made from steel, for example an old pair of scissors, in one's bed straw. A person suffering from nightmares should urinate into a clean, new bottle, hang the bottle in the sun for three days, carry it -- without saying a word -- to a running stream, and then throw it over one's head into the stream. Source (books.google.com): Karl Bartsch, "Alp, Mahre," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1880), vol. 2, p. 3 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Bartsch, "Alp, Mahre," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1880), vol. 2, p. 3 . Return to the table of contents . The Mårt A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, Germany The name most often found in northern Germany ends with a pronounced "t," and can be grammatically either masculine or feminine. The compound "nightmårt" is also very common. The forms "mår" (masculine) and "måre" (feminine) also exist. The designation "alp" is recognized as well. All of these names are used to designate the spirit being that sits upon a sleeping person's chest, thus depriving him of motion and speech. The approaching being sounds like the gnawing of a mouse or the quiet creeping of a cat. The mårt can be captured by grasping it with an inherited glove or by closing up all of the room's openings as soon as the sleeping person begins to groan. Mårt-pressure (also called a mårt-ride) can be prevented by crossing one's arms and legs before falling asleep. In the Oldenburg district, in Saterland, and in East Friesland, the alp is called "wåridèrske" or "wäridèrske." In the vicinity of Wendisch-Buchholz the same being is called the "Murraue." The fear that it causes the sleeping person does not cease until it gets light in the room. Some pine trees have twigs that grow together in curls until they look almost like nests. During a rain storm, one must be careful to not stand beneath such a twig, because if rain drops fall on a person from such a nest, the murraue will surely sit on him during the night. A person whose eyebrows grow together is called a murraue. A murraue can be either a man or a woman, but only a person born on Sunday. If they are pressing against you, you should say that you want to give them something, then they will come the next day to get it. Braunsdorf near Fürstenwald. The murraue creeps up a sleeping person's body from below. First you feel her weight on your feet, next on your stomach, and finally on your chest, and then you cannot move a muscle. However, if you think that you know who she is, you must call her by name as soon as you perceive her, and she will have to retreat. Teupitz. If a mårt is pressing against you, and you presume that it is an acquaintance, you need only call him by name, and he will have to appear in his physical form. Once a mårt was pressing against a man. He called out the name of his beloved, and in an instant she was standing before him. From Elm. It helps to prevent being ridden by a nightmårt when in the evening one places one's shoes next to the bed with the toes pointing outward. Varneitze near Winsen on the Aller. If there are seven boys or seven girls in one family, then one of them will be a night-mare, but will know nothing about it. Moorhausmoor. On the island of Baltrum the male mara is called "wålrüder" and the female mara is called "rittmeije." Source (books.google.com): A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Mårt," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 418-20 . Source (Internet Archive): A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Mårt," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 418-20 . Return to the table of contents . A Mahrt Is Captured Poland/Germany Two farm workers slept together in one room. One of them was ridden by a mahrt so often that he finally asked his comrade the next time it happened to stop up the knothole in the door so they could capture the mahrt. The next time he was miserably moaning and groaning in his sleep, his comrade did what he had been asked, then called his friend by name. Awakening, he quickly reached out and grabbed a piece of straw in his hand. Although it twisted and turned, he held it tightly until his comrade had stopped up the knothole. He then laid the piece of straw on the table, and they both fell asleep until morning. When they awoke they saw a beautiful girl behind the stove. They nearly parted ways disputing whom she belonged to. The one who had stopped up the knothole said that she should be his, because if he had not done that, she would have escaped. The other one said that she belonged to him, because he had captured her. Finally the one who stopped up the knothole gave in, and the other one married the girl. They had children and lived together quite happily. However, the woman often begged her husband to show her the knothole where she had entered the room. She said that she would have no peace until she had seen it. The man resisted her pleas for a long time, but once she begged him especially earnestly, saying that she could hear her mother in England calling the pigs, and asked him to allow see her again just once. Finally he softened and gave in. He went with her and showed her where she had entered the room, but in that instant she flew out through the knothole and never returned. Source (books.google.com): A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Mahrt gefangen," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 14-15 . Source (Internet Archive): A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Mårt," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 14-15 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "Oral, from Swinemünde." Swinemünde is the German name for Swinoujscie, Poland, a city on the Baltic very near the current Polish border with Germany. Return to the table of contents . An Alp Is Captured Germany A cabinetmaker in Bühl slept in a bed in his workshop. Several nights in a row something laid itself onto his chest and pressed against him until he could hardly breathe. After talking the matter over with a friend, the next night he lay awake in bed. At the stroke of twelve a cat slipped in through a hole. The cabinetmaker quickly stopped up the hole, caught the cat, and nailed down one of its paws. Then he went to sleep. The next morning he found a beautiful naked woman in the cat's place. One of her hands was nailed down. She pleased him so much that he married her. One day, after she had borne him three children, she was with him in his workshop, when he said to her, "Look, that is where you came in!" and he opened the hole that had been stopped up until now. The woman suddenly turned into a cat, ran out through the opening, and she was never seen again. Source (books.google.com): Bernhard Baader, "Alp," Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: Verlag der Herder'schen Buchhandlung, 1851), no. 136, p. 126 . Source (Internet Archive): Bernhard Baader, "Alp," Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: Verlag der Herder'schen Buchhandlung, 1851), no. 136, p. 126 . Bühl is a town in southwest Germany. The closest larger city is Baden-Baden. Return to the table of contents . The Mahr Germany A young lad was oppressed and tormented by a mahr every night. So he asked a good friend to sleep with him. During the night the mahr did indeed came back; so the other fellow plugged up the hole in the door where the latch strap had been pulled through. Then the mahr became visible to both of them, appearing as a pretty girl. In a rage the lad she had so harassed first wanted to beat and abuse her; but because of her beauty he forgot his anger and took her as his wife. He lived with her for a year, and she had a child. Then when she was expecting another child, the lad said to her: "What do you think? In your present condition would you be able to go back through the hole where you came in to me at that time?" He had scarcely said this when the mahr disappeared through the strap-hole in the door, and she never came back. Source (books.google.com): Wilhelm Busch, Ut ôler Welt: Volksmärchen, Sagen, Volkslieder und Reime (München: Lothar Joachim Verlag, 1910), p. 125 . Source (Internet Archive): Wilhelm Busch, Ut ôler Welt: Volksmärchen, Sagen, Volkslieder und Reime (München: Lothar Joachim Verlag, 1910), p. 125 . Source (Wikisource): Wilhelm Busch, Ut ôler Welt: Volksmärchen, Sagen, Volkslieder und Reime (München: Lothar Joachim Verlag, 1910), p. 125 . Return to the table of contents . The Man Who Married a Mara Denmark There was a man who was ridden by a mara every night. One morning he drilled a hole through the door, plugged shut all the cracks, and made a stick that fit exactly into the hole in the door. He knew that maras could get in through even a very small hole, but not out again if all the openings were plugged shut. Then he said to the boy, that when he heard him moan, he should put the stick in the hole, because he wanted to capture her. In the morning there was a naked woman with a tuft of wool on her back in the room. However, the man did not know that if you catch a mara, you cannot get rid of her, and so he had to marry her. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Marer," Danske Sagn , vol. 2 (Aarhus: Jacob Zeuners Bogtrykkeri, 1893), pp. 244-45 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Marer," Danske Sagn , vol. 2 (Aarhus: Jacob Zeuners Bogtrykkeri, 1893), pp. 244-45 . Tang Kristensen's source: Niels Andersen, Ørslev ved Skjælskør. Return to the table of contents . The Mare Denmark A mother and her son slept in a room together, and the son was tormented by nightmares every night. Then one day the mother looked in the room to find the hole through which the mare came in. She found a small hole in the ceiling where a knot had come out of the tree. The following night, when the mare again tormented her son, the mother jumped out of bed and plugged the hole in the ceiling. The next morning they found a small, pretty, naked girl behind a chest. It was the mare, and she was now their prisoner. The girl stayed with them. She and the man became good friends. They married and had many children together. Everything would have gone well if the man had kept silent about what he knew. But many years later, one evening when they were together in the same room, the husband said to his wife: "Do you know what you are, and do you know where you came from?" No, his wife did not know. "You are a mare!" he said, and he then took the plug from the hole. "This is how you came in here." With that his wife disappeared like a mist before his eyes. She had turned into a mare again, and this was because he had not forgiven her. Source (books.google.com): Jens Kamp, "Maren," Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R. Nielsens Forlag, 1877), no. 867, p. 264 . Source (Internet Archive): Jens Kamp, "Maren," Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R. Nielsens Forlag, 1877), no. 867, p. 264 . Return to the table of contents . Charm against Night-Mares Germany I lay me here to sleep; No night-mare shall plague me, Until they swim all the waters That flow upon the earth, And count all the stars That appear in the firmament! Thus help me God Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen! Original German: Hier leg' ich mich schlafen, Keine Nachtmahr soll mich plagen, Bis sie schwemmen alle Wasser, Die auf Erden fließen, Und tellet alle Sterne, Die am Firmament erscheinen! Dazu helfe mir Gott Vater, Sohn und heiliger Geist. Amen! Source: Adalbert Kuhn, Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen und einigen andern, besonders den angrenzenden Gegenden Norddeutschlands (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, p. 191. This charm comes from from Wilhelmsburg in the vicinity of Paderborn. Return to the table of contents . The Alp Poland/Germany The alp, or as it is most often called, the "märt," is frequently encountered in Pomerania. A märt rides on sleeping people at night, pressing against them until at last they can no longer breathe. A märt is usually a girl who has a bad foot. Once in the village of Bork near Stargard there was a smith who had a daughter with a bad foot, and at that time an unusually large number of people complained that they were being ridden by a märt. Source: J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen von Pommern und Rügen (Berlin: In der Nikolaischen Buchhandlung, 1840), p. 341. Pomerania (Polish Pomorze , German Pommern ) is a historic region lying mostly in today's northwest Poland, but partly in northeast Germany. Stargard is the German name for the Szczecin, a Polish city on the Ina River. Return to the table of contents . A Charm to Control the Night-Mare England S. George, S. George, our ladies knight, He walkt by daie, so did he by night. Untill such time as he her found, He hir beat and he hir bound, Untill hir troth she to him plight, She would not come to him that night. Source: James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), p. 213. Halliwell-Phillipps' source is "Scot's Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584, p. 87." Return to the table of contents . Nightmare Charm or Spell against the Mara Shetland Islands (Unst) Pulling from my head the longest hair it possessed, and then going through the pantomime of binding a refractory animal, the nurse slowly chanted this spell: De man o' meicht He rod a' neicht We nedder swird Nor faerd nor leicht, He socht da mare, He fand da mare, He band da mare Wi' his ain hair, An' made her swear By midder's meicht, Dat shö wad never bide a neicht What he had rod, dat man o' meicht. There are different versions of this incantation, and I [Mrs. Saxby] forget which it was that the old nurse used on the occasion mentioned. Therefore I have given the one which is most familiar to me. Source: County Folk-Lore , vol. 3: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands, collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1903), p. 145. Black's source: Biot Edmonston and Jessie M. E. Saxby The Home of a Naturalist, (London, 1888), pp. 186-187. Return to the table of contents . A Shetland Charm Shetland Islands Arthur Knight He rade a' night, Wi' open swird An' candle light. He sought da mare; He fan' da mare; He bund da mare Wi' her ain hair. And made da mare Ta swear: 'At she should never Bide a' night Whar ever she heard O' Arthur Knight. Source: County Folk-Lore , vol. 3: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands, collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1903), p. 145. Black's source: Karl Blind Nineteenth Century, (1879), p. 1106. Return to the table of contents . Vanlandi, King of Sweden, and Huld, the Witch Woman From the Ynglinga Saga of Snorri Sturluson Svegdir's son was named Vanlandi, and he took the kingdom after him and ruled over the Wealth of Uppsala. He was a great warrior and went far over the land. He had stayed one winter in Finland with Snæ the Old, and there married his daughter Driva. In the spring he went away, whilst Driva stayed behind, and he promised to come back after three winters, but he came not for ten winters. Then Driva had Huld the witch woman called to her, and sent Visbur, hers and Vanlandi's son, to Sweden. Driva paid Huld the witch woman to draw Vanlandi to Finland with sorcery or else to kill him. When the spell was being furthered, Vanlandi was in Uppsala, and he had a longing to go to Finland, but his friends and advisers forbade him, and said that it certainly was Finnish witchcraft which caused his wanderlust. Then he became sleepy and said that the Mare was treading on him. His men sprang up and would help him, but when they came to his head she trod on his feet, so that they were nigh broken; then they resorted to the feet, but then she smothered the head, so that he died there. The Swedes took his body and burned it near a river which was called Skuta; there was his standing-stone set up. Thus says Tjodolv: But on the way To Vili's brother Evil wights Bore Vanlandi; Then there trod The troll-wise Sorceress On the warrior lord. And there was burned On the Skuta bank That generous man Whom the Mare killed. Source: Snorre [Snorri] Sturlason, Heimskringla; or, the Lives of the Norse Kings, edited with notes by Erling Monsen and translated into English with the assistance of A. H. Smith (Cambridge, England: W. Heffer & Sons, 1932), pp. 9-10. Snorri Sturlason (1179-1241) was an Icelandic political leader and writer. His best-known work is the Prose Edda , one of the best sources of Germanic mythology still extant. Tjodolv is Tjodolv of Kvin, an Old Norse poet. Vili's brother is Odin Return to the table of contents . Baku, Eater of Dreams Japan In Japan, among superstitious people, evil dreams are believed to be the result of evil spirits, and the supernatural creature called Baku is known as Eater of Dreams. The Baku, like so many mythological beings, is a curious mingling of various animals. It has the face of a lion, the body of a horse, the tail of a cow, the forelock of a rhinoceros, and the feet of a tiger. Several evil dreams are mentioned in an old Japanese book, such as two snakes twined together, a fox with the voice of a man, blood-stained garments, a talking rice-pot, and so on. When a Japanese peasant awakens from an evil nightmare, he cries: "Devour, O Baku! devour my evil dream." At one time pictures of the Baku were hung up in Japanese houses and its name written upon pillows. It was believed that if the Baku could be induced to eat a horrible dream, the creature had the power to change it into good fortune Source: F. Hadland Davis, Myths and Legends of Japan (London: G. G. Harrap, 1913), pp. 358-359. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites: The Nightmare by the Swiss-English artist Henry Fuseli (1741-1825). Notice the demon seated on the dreamer's chest in this famous painting. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Return to the table of contents . Revised January 27, 2023. The Njugl The Njugl Shetland Islands The njugl was a fabled animal corresponding to the Scottish water kelpie and the Old Norse nykur. In appearance it very much resembled a horse, although sometimes said to have a head like a human. It was generally seen near lochs [lakes] and burns [streams], and also frequented meadows and wet marshy ground. Sometimes it would appear very tame and docile, and it was then that weary travelers had to be on their guard. Should anyone mistake it for a horse and mount it, that person was undone. It would instantly start off at a terrific speed and rush for the nearest water, and there was no escape for the luckless rider who was certain to be drowned. There was once a belated traveler in Waas who chanced to encounter the njugl one dark night. It tried to waylay the traveler, but he knew that it was the njugl , and so its overtures were unsuccessful. The man carried a gun, and he tried to shoot the njugl , but the weapon always missed fire. At last he took a silver coin and bit it until the coin could go into the barrel of the gun. After that the firearm no longer refused duty, and the njugl vanished in a blue lowe [flame], and with a noise like thunder. The njugl was a source of much trouble and annoyance to people grinding at the watermills. Those quaint little buildings were once a familiar sight at the burnsides. They were of rude masonry and low-built with turf roofs. At one end was a rough platform on which the millstones were placed. Above these was a hopper suspended from the roof. The building consisted of an "upper hoose" and an "under hoose." The latter contained the tirl , an upright barrel-shaped contrivance, having slanting wooden blades. The tirl was connected with the upper millstone by means of an iron spindle, and was revolved by the water descending through a shoot underneath the mill. Some nights when everything was working smoothly, and there was music in the water as it splashed from the tirl blades, then Without warning, the mill would stop. The person in charge of the operations would hurry to adjust the lichtnin tree (appliance for regulating the pressure), but without success. Then he would know what the trouble was. The njugl was in the under hoose, and had taken hold of the tirl . Fire was the only remedy. He would take a half-burnt peat and drop it cautiously into the under hoose. Instantly there would follow a roar as of thunder, a blinding flash of bluish flame, and the mill would restart grinding. Source: John Nicolson, Some Folk-Tales and Legends of Shetland (Edinburgh: Thomas Allan and Sons, 1920), pp. 58-59. Edited by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002-2004. Return to: Water Spirit Legends . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 20, 2004. The Norse Creation Myth The Norse Creation Myth abstracted from The Prose Edda of Snorri Sturluson by D. L. Ashliman © 1997-2010 Muspell The first world to exist was Muspell, a place of light and heat whose flames are so hot that those who are not native to that land cannot endure it. Surt sits at Muspell's border, guarding the land with a flaming sword. At the end of the world he will vanquish all the gods and burn the whole world with fire. Ginnungagap and Niflheim Beyond Muspell lay the great and yawning void named Ginnungagap, and beyond Ginnungagap lay the dark, cold realm of Niflheim. Ice, frost, wind, rain and heavy cold emanated from Niflheim, meeting in Ginnungagap the soft air, heat, light, and soft air from Muspell. Ymir Where heat and cold met appeared thawing drops, and this running fluid grew into a giant frost ogre named Ymir. Frost ogres Ymir slept, falling into a sweat. Under his left arm there grew a man and a woman. And one of his legs begot a son with the other. This was the beginning of the frost ogres. Audhumla Thawing frost then became a cow called Audhumla. Four rivers of milk ran from her teats, and she fed Ymir. Buri, Bor, and Bestla The cow licked salty ice blocks. After one day of licking, she freed a man's hair from the ice. After two days, his head appeared. On the third day the whole man was there. His name was Buri, and he was tall, strong, and handsome. Buri begot a son named Bor, and Bor married Bestla, the daughter of a giant. Odin, Vili, and Vé Bor and Bestla had three sons: Odin was the first, Vili the second, and Vé the third. It is believed that Odin, in association with his brothers, is the ruler of heaven and earth. He is the greatest and most famous of all men. The death of Ymir Odin, Vili, and Vé killed the giant Ymir. When Ymir fell, there issued from his wounds such a flood of blood, that all the frost ogres were drowned, except for the giant Bergelmir who escaped with his wife by climbing onto a lur [a hollowed-out tree trunk that could serve either as a boat or a coffin]. From them spring the families of frost ogres. Earth, trees, and mountains The sons of Bor then carried Ymir to the middle of Ginnungagap and made the world from him. From his blood they made the sea and the lakes; from his flesh the earth; from his hair the trees; and from his bones the mountains. They made rocks and pebbles from his teeth and jaws and those bones that were broken. Dwarfs Maggots appeared in Ymir's flesh and came to life. By the decree of the gods they acquired human understanding and the appearance of men, although they lived in the earth and in rocks. Sky, clouds, and stars From Ymir's skull the sons of Bor made the sky and set it over the earth with its four sides. Under each corner they put a dwarf, whose names are East, West, North, and South. The sons of Bor flung Ymir's brains into the air, and they became the clouds. Then they took the sparks and burning embers that were flying about after they had been blown out of Muspell, and placed them in the midst of Ginnungagap to give light to heaven above and earth beneath. To the stars they gave appointed places and paths. The earth was surrounded by a deep sea. The sons of Bor gave lands near the sea to the families of giants for their settlements. Midgard To protect themselves from the hostile giants, the sons of Bor built for themselves an inland stonghold, using Ymir's eyebrows. This stonghold they named Midgard. Ask and Embla While walking along the sea shore the sons of Bor found two trees, and from them they created a man and a woman. Odin gave the man and the woman spirit and life. Vili gave them understanding and the power of movement. Vé gave them clothing and names. The man was named Ask [Ash] and the woman Embla [Elm?]. From Ask and Embla have sprung the races of men who lived in Midgard. Asgard In the middle of the world the sons of Bor built for themselves a stronghold named Asgard, called Troy by later generations. The gods and their kindred lived in Asgard, and many memorable events have happened there. In Asgard was a great hall named Hlidskjálf. Odin sat there on a high seat. From there he could look out over the whole world and see what everyone was doing. He understood everything that he saw. Odin, Frigg, and the Æsir Odin married Frigg, the daughter of Fjörgvin. From this family has come all the kindred that inhabited ancient Asgard and those kingdoms that belonged to it. Members of this family are called the Æsir, and they are all divinities. This must be the reason why Odin is called All-Father. He is the father of all the gods and men and of everything that he and his power created. Thor The earth was Odin's daughter and his wife as well. By her he had his first son, Thor. Might and strength were Thor's characteristics. By these he dominates every living creature. Bifröst As all informed people know, the gods built a bridge from earth to heaven called Bifröst. Some call it the rainbow. It has three colors and is very strong, made with more skill and cunning than other structures. But strong as it is, it will break when the sons of Muspell ride out over it. The gods are not to blame that this structure will then break. Bifröst is a good bridge, but there is nothing in this world that can be relied on when the sons of Muspell are on the warpath. Yggdrasil The chief sanctuary of the gods is by the ash tree Yggdrasil. There they hold their daily court. Yggdrasil is the best and greatest of all trees. Its branches spread out over the whole world and reach up over heaven. Link to the full text of The Prose Edda : Snorri Sturluson, The Prose Edda , translated from the Icelandic by Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur (New York: American-Scandinavian Foundation, 1916). In this translation the creation story, as abstracted above, is found on pages 17-30 . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 17, 2010. The Nurse and the Wolf: Fables of type 75* (Perry 158) The Nurse and the Wolf Fables attributed to Aesop, Babrius, Avianus, and Others Including a Modern Version by Ambrose Bierce. Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 75* Perry Type 158 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2021 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Fable of the Old Woman and of the Wulf (Aesop / Avianus -- printed by William Caxton, 1484). The Wolf and the Nurse (Babrius -- translated by James Davies). The Crying Babe (Geffrey Whitney). The Wolf, the Mother, and Her Child (Aesop -- retold by Jean de La Fontaine, translated by Elizur Wright). A Nurse and a Wolfe (Aesop -- translated by Roger L'Estrange). A Nurse and Froward Child (Aesop -- printed by Samuel Richardson). The Nurse and the Wolf (Aesop -- printed for Thomas Bewick). The Nurse and the Wolf (Aesop -- translated by Samual Croxall). The Mother and the Wolf (Aesop -- translated by George Fyler Townsend). The Nurse and the Wolf (Aesop -- retold by Joseph Jacobs). The Wolf, the Mother, and Her Child (Aesop -- translated by V. S. Vernon Jones). The Wolf and the Babe (Ambrose Bierce). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Fable of the Old Woman and of the Wulf Aesop / Avianus (printed by William Caxton, 1484) Men ought not byleve on al maner sprytes / As reherceth this fable of an old woman / which said to her child bicause that it wept / certeynly if thow wepst ony more / I shal make the to be ete of the wulf / & the wulf herying this old woman / abode styll to fore the yate / & supposed to have eten the old womans child / & by cause that the wulf had soo longe taryed there that he was hongry / he retorned and went ageyne in to the wood / And the shewulf demaunded of mym / why hast thow not brought to me some mete / And the wulf ansuerd / by cause / that the old woman hath begyled me / the whiche had promysed to me to gyve to me her child for to have ete hym / And at the laste I hadd hit not / And therfore men ought in no wyse to trust the woman / And he is wel a fole that setteth his hope and truste in a woman / And therfore truste them not / and thow shalt doo as the sage and wyse. Retold in modern English: One should not believe everything that one hears, as evidenced by this fable about the old woman who said to her crying child: "If you don't stop crying, I'll throw you to the wolf, and he'll eat you up!" Hearing this, the wolf stayed by the gate and hoped to eat the woman's child, but he only grew more and more hungry. Finally he gave up and returned to his den in the woods. The she-wolf berated him for not bringing home any meat. The wolf answered her: "It is because the old woman deceived me. She promised to give me her child to eat, but she never did so. Thus men should never trust a woman." It is only a fool who puts his hope and trust in a woman. Be wise and never trust them. Source (books.google.com): The Fables of Aesop as First Printed by William Caxton in 1484 with Those of Avian, Alfonso, and Poggio , now again edited and induced by Joseph Jacobs, vol. 2: Text and Glossary (London: D. Nutt, 1889), p. 216 . Source (Internet Archive): The Fables of Aesop as First Printed by William Caxton in 1484 with Those of Avian, Alfonso, and Poggio , now again edited and induced by Joseph Jacobs, vol. 2: Text and Glossary (London: D. Nutt, 1889), p. 216 . Caxton attributes this fable to Avianus, a Latin writer of fables (ca. 400 A.D.) Link to the Wikipedia article on William Caxton (ca. 1422 - ca. 1491) . Return to the table of contents . The Wolf and the Nurse Babrius (translated by James Davies) A country nurse, to fright her babe to peace, Said, "Wolf shall have thee, or thy cries must cease." The wolf o'erheard, believed the scolding crone, And stay'd in hopes to find the feast his own. But evening came; the babe was hush'd to rest: The wolf still gaped, with rav'ning hunger prest. At last his hopes to utter dulness grew: Then to his anxious helpmate he withdrew. "How cam'st thou empty?" said she. He replied, "Because upon a female I relied." Source (books.google.com): The Fables of Babrius , translated into English verse from the text of Sir G. C. Lewis by James Davies (London: Lockwood and Company, 1860), no. 16, p. 19 . Source (Internet Archive): The Fables of Babrius , translated into English verse from the text of Sir G. C. Lewis by James Davies (London: Lockwood and Company, 1860), no. 16, p. 19 . Link to the Wikipedia article on Babrius, the author of a collection of Greek fables , many of which have been attributed to Aesop. Return to the table of contents . The Crying Babe Geffrey Whitney The crying babe, the mother sharply threates, Except he ceas'd, he should to wolfe bee throwne: Which being hard, the wolfe at windowe waites, And made account that child should bee his owne: Till at the lengthe, agayne he hard her say Feare not sweete babe, thou shalt not bee his pray. For, if he come in hope so sucke thy blood, Wee wil him kill, before he shall departe: With that the wolfe retorned to the wood, And did exclayme thus wise with heavie hart: Oh Jupiter? What people now doe live, That promise much, and yet will nothing give. Source (Internet Archive): Geffrey [Geoffrey] Whitney, A Choice of Emblemes, and Other Devises (Leyden: Francis Raphelengius, 1586), p. 162 . Link to the Wikipedia article on Geoffrey Whitney (ca. 1548 - ca. 1601) . Return to the table of contents . The Wolf, the Mother, and Her Child Aesop (retold by Jean de La Fontaine, translated by Elizur Wright) This wolf another brings to mind, Who found dame Fortune more unkind, In that the greedy, pirate sinner, Was balk'd of life as well as dinner. As saith our tale, a villager Dwelt in a by, unguarded place; There, hungry, watch'd our pillager For luck and chance to mend his case. For there his thievish eyes had seen All sorts of game go out and in -- Nice sucking calves, and lambs and sheep; And turkeys by the regiment, With steps so proud, and necks so bent, They'd make a daintier glutton weep. The thief at length began to tire Of being gnaw'd by vain desire. Just then a child set up a cry: "Be still," the mother said, "or I Will throw you to the wolf, you brat!" "Ha, ha!" thought he, "what talk is that? The gods be thank'd for luck so good!" And ready at the door he stood, When soothingly the mother said, "Now cry no more, my little dear; That naughty wolf, if he comes here. Your dear papa shall kill him dead." "Humph!" cried the veteran mutton-eater. "Now this, now that! Now hot, now cool! Is this the way they change their metre? And do they take me for a fool? Some day, a natting in the wood, That young one yet shall be my food." But little time has he to dote On such a feast; the dogs rush out And seize the caitiff by the throat; And country ditchers, thick and stout, With rustic spears and forks of iron, The hapless animal environ. "What brought you here, old head?" cried one. He told it all, as I have done. "Why, bless my soul!" the frantic mother said, -- "You, villain, eat my little son! And did I nurse the darling boy, Your fiendish appetite to cloy?" With that they knock'd him on the head. His feet and scalp they bore to town, To grace the seigneur's hall, Where, pinn'd against the wall, This verse completed his renown: -- "Ye honest wolves, believe not all That mothers say, when children squall!" Source (books.google.com): The Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright, a new edition with notes by J. W. M. Gibbs (London: George Bell and Sons, 1888), book 4, fable 16, pp. 91-92 . Source (Internet Archive): Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright, 4th edition (Boston: Sanborn, Carter, and Bazin, 1856), book 4, fable 16, pp. 172-74 . Link to this fable in French: Le loup, la mère et l'enfant . Link to the Wikipedia article on Jean de La Fontaine (1621-1695) . Return to the table of contents . A Nurse and a Wolfe Aesop (translated by Roger L'Estrange) As a Wolfe was Hunting up and down for his Supper, he pass'd by a Door where a Little Child was Bawling, and an Old Woman Chiding it. Leave your Vixen-Tricks, says the Woman or I'l throw ye to the Wolfe. The Wolfe Over-heard her, and Waited a pretty While, in hope the Woman would be as good as her Word; but No Child coming, away goes the Wolfe for That Bout. He took his Walk the Same Way again toward the Evening, and the Nurse he found had Chang'd her Note; for she was Then Muzzling, and Cokesing of it. That's a Good Dear, says she, If the Wolf comes for My Child We'll e'en Beat his Brains out. The Wolf went Muttering away upon't. There's No Meddling with People, says he, that say One Thing and Mean Another. The MORAL 'Tis Fear more then Love that makes Good Men, as well as Good Children, and when Fair Words, and Good Councel will not Prevail upon us, we must be Frighted into our Duty. REFLEXION THE Heart and Tongue of a Woman are commonly a Great way asunder. And it may bear Another Moral; which is, that 'tis with Froward Men, and Froward Factions too, as 'tis with Froward Children, They'll be sooner Quieted by Fear, and Rough Dealing, then by any Sense of Duty or Good Nature. There would be no Living in This World without Penal Laws, and Conditions. And Do or Do not, This or That at your Peril, is as Reasonable, and Necessary in Families as it is in Governments. It is a Truth Imprinted in the Hearts of All Mankind, that the Gibbets, Pillories, and the Whipping-Posts make more Converts then the Pulpits : As the Child did more here for fear of the Wolfe, then for the Love of the Nurse. Source (books.google.com): Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop And other Eminent Mythologists: With Morals and Reflexions (London, 1692), no. 218, pp. 191-92 . Source (Internet Archive): Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop And other Eminent Mythologists: With Morals and Reflexions (London, 1692), no. 218, pp. 191-92 . Link to the Wikipedia article on Roger L'Estrange (1689-1761) . Return to the table of contents . A Nurse and Froward Child Aesop (printed by Samuel Richardson) A Wolf prowling about for his Supper, pass'd by a Door where a little Child was bawling, and a Nurse chiding it. "Leave your Vixen-Tricks," says the Woman, "or I'll throw you to the Wolf." The Wolf, hearing this, waited a pretty while, in hope the Woman would be as good as her Word. But the Child being frighted into better Temper, the Tone was turned, and he had the Mortification to hear the Nurse say, "That's a good Dear! If the Wolf comes for my Child, we'll e'en beat his Brains out." Upon which the Wolf went muttering away as fas as he could. Moral An ingenuous Spirit will be wrought upon by fair Words; but a perverse one must be terrified into its Duty, if soft means will not do. Reflection Terrors are as necessary to quiet froward Spirits, as Praises and Rewards are to encourage the Tractable. But yet we must apply this principally to grown Persons; for, as the Children or Infants, there cannot be a more pernicious Error than to terrify them, as is the comm Practice of foolish Nurses, with Bugbears, Hobgoblins, Raw-heads and Bloody-bones, &c. which often fix such Impressions of Fear and Apprehension on the Infant , as can never be rooted out of the Man . Source (books.google.com): Æsop's Fables: With Instructive Morals and Reflections, Abstracted from All Party Considerations, Adapted to All Capacities; and Design'd to Promote Religion, Morality, and Universal Benevolence (London: Printed by S. Richardson, 1753), no. 166, pp. 130-31 . Source (Internet Archive): Æsop's Fables: With Instructive Morals and Reflections, Abstracted from All Party Considerations, Adapted to All Capacities; and Design'd to Promote Religion, Morality, and Universal Benevolence (York: Printed for T. Wilson and R. Spence, ca.1790), no. 166, pp. 130-31 . Link to the Wikipedia article on Samuel Richardson (1616-1704) . Return to the table of contents . The Nurse and the Wolf Aesop (printed for Thomas Bewick) A Nurse, who was endeavouring to quiet a froward child, among other things threatened to throw it out of doors to the Wolf, if it did not leave off crying. A Wolf, who chanced to be prowling near the door just at the time, heard the expression, and believing the woman to be in earnest, waited a long while about the house, in expectation of having her words made good. But at last the child, wearied with its own perverseness, fell asleep, and the Wolf was forced to return back into the woods, empty and supperless. The Fox meeting him, and surprized to see him going home so thin and disconsolate, asked him what the matter was, and how he came to speed no better that night? "Ah! Do not ask me," says he. "I was so silly as to believe what the Nurse said, and have been disappointed." Application Many of the old moralists have interpreted this Fable as a caution never to trust a woman: a barbarous inference, which neither the obvious sense of the apologue, nor the disposition of the softer sex will warrant. For though some women may be fickle and unstable, yet the generality exceed their calumniators in truth and constancy, and have more frequently to complain of being the victims, than to be arraigned as the authors of broken vows. To us this Fable appears to mean little more than merely to shew how easily inclined we are, in all our various expectations through life, to delude ourselves into a belief of any thing which we desire to be true. The lover interprets every smile of his mistress in his own favour, and is then perhaps neglected. The beauty believes all mankind are dying for her, and is then deserted by her train of admirers. The followers of the great reckon a smile or a nod very auspicious omens, and deceive themselves with groundless hopes of employment or promotion, in expectation of which, they, like the Wolf at the Nurse's door, dangle away the time that might be usefully employed elsewhere, and at last are obliged to retire disappointed and hungry, crying out perhaps against the perfidy of those in power, instead of blaming their own sanguine credulity. Source (books.google.com): The Fables of Æsop, and Others , with designs on wood by Thomas Bewick (Newcastle: Printed by E. Walker for T. Bewick and son, 1818), pp. 265-66 . Source (Internet Archive): The Fables of Æsop, and Others , with designs on wood by Thomas Bewick (Newcastle: Printed by E. Walker for T. Bewick and son, 1818), pp. 265-66 . Link to the Wikipedia article on Thomas Bewick (1753-1828) . Return to the table of contents . The Nurse and the Wolf Aesop (translated by Samuel Croxall) A Nurse, who was endeavouring to quiet a wayward, self-willed child, among other attempts, threatened to throw him out of doors to the Wolf, if he did not leave off crying. A Wolf, who chanced to be prowling near the door just at that time, heard the words, and, believing the woman to be in earnest, waited a long while about the house in expectation of seeing her words made good. But at last the child, wearied with its own importunities, fell asleep, and the poor Wolf was forced to return again to the woods without his expected supper. The Fox meeting him, and surprised to see him going home so thin and disconsolate, asked him what was the matter, and how he came to speed no better that night. "Ah, do not ask me," says he; "I was so silly as to believe what the Nurse said, and have been disappointed." Moral Be not too ready to give credence to the assertions of an angry man. Application There is no custom more common, nor at the same time more hurtful and pernicious, than that which prevails among nurses and persons of inferior minds, of telling children false stories and resorting to threats, with the intention of frightening them into good conduct. This habit is sinful in itself, as a departure from the strictness of truth, and is often most fatal in its consequences. There are many well-authenticated instances on record in which a permanent injury in after years has been caused to the child; and many lasting fears, prejudices, and antipathies have arisen from the impressions created in the infant mind by these idle tales and threats. Dean Swift, in his account of the kingdom of Lilliput, relates that "nurses thus misconducting themselves were first soundly scourged, and then expelled from the island." Let it, then, be the first care of mothers or nurses never either to say to a child anything which is not strictly true, nor in a fit of anger to indulge in threats which they have no intention to carry out. If they adopt the conduct of this foolish Nurse in the fable, and conjure up an imaginary wolf or ghost to help them in the momentary emergency of a naughty fit, they will probably find, when it is too late, that they have thoughtlessly cowed the spirit of the child, and have planted in his mind thorns and fears which it will be beyond the power of their arguments or philosophy to modify or remove. One angry moment often does What we repent for years; It works the wrong we ne'er make right By sorrow or by tears. This fable, however, refers to the conduct of the Wolf rather than of the Nurse. It teaches the folly of those who take too much notice of words spoken in a passion. Angry persons say more than they mean, and generally, as soon as the moment of calm reflection comes, are themselves sorry for their violence and indiscretion. Oh, how the passions, insolent and strong, L'ear our weak minds their rapid course along! Source (books.google.com): The Fables of Æsop , translated into English by Samuel Croxall, with new applications, morals, etc. by George Fyler Townsend, 2nd edition (London: Frederick Warne and Company, 1869), no. 70, pp. 163-65. . Source (Internet Archive): The Fables of Æsop , translated into English by Samuel Croxall, with new applications, morals, etc. by George Fyler Townsend, 2nd edition (London: Frederick Warne and Company, 1866), no. 70, pp. 165-67. . Link to the Wikipedia article on Samuel Croxall (ca. 1690-1752) . Link to the Wikipedia article on George Fyler Townsend (1814-1900) . Return to the table of contents . The Mother and the Wolf Aesop (translated by George Fyler Townsend) A famished Wolf was prowling about in the morning in search of food. As he passed the door of a cottage built in the forest, he heard a Mother say to her child, "Be quiet, or I will throw you out of the window, and the Wolf shall eat you." The Wolf sat all day waiting at the door. In the evening he heard the same woman, fondling her child and saying: "He is quiet now, and if the Wolf should come, we will kill him." The Wolf, hearing these words, went home, gaping with cold and hunger. On his reaching his den, Mistress Wolf inquired of him why he returned wearied and supperless, so contrary to his wont. He replied: "Why, forsooth! -- because I gave credence to the words of a woman!" Source (books.google.com): Three Hundred Æsop's Fables , literally translated from the Greek by George Fyler Townsend (London: George Routledge and Sons), pp. 201-201 . Source (Internet Archive): Three Hundred Æsop's Fables , literally translated from the Greek by George Fyler Townsend (London: George Routledge and Sons), pp. 201-201 . Link to the Wikipedia article on George Fyler Townsend (1814-1900) . Return to the table of contents . The Nurse and the Wolf Aesop (retold by Joseph Jacobs) "Be quiet now," said an old Nurse to a child sitting on her lap. "If you make that noise again I will throw you to the Wolf." Now it chanced that a Wolf was passing close under the window as this was said. So he crouched down by the side of the house and waited. "I am in good luck today," thought he. "It is sure to cry soon, and a daintier morsel I haven t had for many a long day." So he waited, and he waited, and he waited, till at last the child began to cry, and the Wolf came forward before the window, and looked up to the Nurse, wagging his tail. But all the Nurse did was to shut down the window and call for help, and the dogs of the house came rushing out. "Ah," said the Wolf as he galloped away, "Enemies' promises were made to be broken." Source (books.google.com): The Fables of Æsop , selected, told anew, and their history traced by Joseph Jacobs (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), pp. 108-109 . Source (Internet Archive): The Fables of Æsop , selected, told anew, and their history traced by Joseph Jacobs (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), pp. 108-109 . Link to the Wikipedia article on Joseph Jacobs (1854-1916) . Return to the table of contents . The Wolf, the Mother, and Her Child Aesop (translated by V. S. Vernon Jones A hungry Wolf was prowling about in search of food. By and by, attracted by the cries of a Child, he came to a cottage. As he crouched beneath the window, he heard the Mother say to the Child, "Stop crying, do! or I'll throw you to the Wolf." Thinking she really meant what she said, he waited there a long time in the expectation of satisfying his hunger. In the evening he heard the Mother fondling her Child and saying, "If the naughty Wolf comes, he shan't get my little one: Daddy will kill him." The Wolf got up in much disgust and walked away. "As for the people in that house," said he to himself, "you can't believe a word they say." Source (Internet Archive): Æsop's Fables , a new translation by V. S. Vernon Jones, (London: William Heinemann, 1916), p. 89 . Return to the table of contents . The Wolf and the Babe Ambrose Bierce A Famishing Wolf, passing the door of a cottage in the forest, heard a Mother say to her babe: "Be quiet, or I will throw you out of the window, and the wolves will get you." So he waited all day below the window, growing more hungry all the time. But at night the Old Man, having returned from the village club, threw out both Mother and Child. Source (books.google.com): Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), p. 172 . Source (Internet Archive): Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), p. 172 . Link to the Wikipedia article on Ambrose Bierce (1842 - ca. 1914) . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 26, 2021. Oisin [Ossian] in Tir na n-Og Oisin in Tir na n-Og Oisin (also spelled Ossian), the legendary Celtic hero and poet, marries a princess who through a Druidic spell has been cursed with the head of a pig. edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999 There was a king in Tir na n-Og (the Land of Youth) who held the throne and crown for many a year against all comers. And the law of the kingdom was that every seventh year the champions and best men of the country should run for the office of king. Once in seven years they all met at the front of the palace and ran to the top of a hill two miles distant. On the top of that hill was a chair, and the man that sat first in the chair was the King of Tir na n-Og for the next seven years. After he had ruled for ages, the king became anxious. He was afraid that someone might sit in the chair before him, and take the crown off his head. So he called up his Druid one day and asked, "How long shall I keep the chair to rule this land, and will any man sit in it before me and take the crown off my head?" "You will keep the chair and the crown forever," said the Druid, "unless your own son-in-law takes them from you." The king had no sons and but one daughter, the finest woman in Tir na n-Og; and the like of her could not be found in Erin or any kingdom in the world. When the king heard the words of the Druid, he said, "I'll have no son-in-law, for I'll put the daughter in a way no man will marry her." Then he took a rod of Druidic spells, and calling the daughter up before him, he struck her with the rod, and put a pig's head on her in place of her own. Then he sent the daughter away to her own place in the castle, and turning to the Druid said, "There is not man that will marry her now." When the Druid saw the face that was on the princess with the pig's head that the father gave her, he grew very sorry that he had given such information to the king; and some time after he went to see the princess. "Must I be in this was forever?" asked she of the Druid? "You must," said he, "till you marry one of the sons of Fin MacCumhail in Erin. If you marry one of Fin's sons, you'll be freed from the blot that is on you now, and get back your own head and countenance." When she heard this she was impatient in her mind, and could never rest till she left Tir na n-Og and came to Erin. When she had inquired she heard that Fin and the Fenians of Erin were at that time living on Knock an Ar, and she made her way to the place without delay and lived there a while. And when she saw Oisin, he pleased her; and when she found out that he was a son of Fin MacCumhail, she was always making up to him and coming towards him. And it was usual for the Fenians in those days to go out hunting on the hills and mountains and in the woods of Erin, and when one of them went he always took five or six men with him to bring home the game. On a day Oisin set out with his men and dogs to the woods; and he went so far and killed so much game that when it was brought together, the men were so tired, weak, and hungry that they couldn't carry it, but went away home and left him with the three dogs, Bran, Sciolán, and Buglén, to shift for himself. Now the daughter of the king of Tir na n-Og, who was herself the Queen of Youth, followed closely in the hunt all that day, and when the men left Oisin she came up to him. And as he stood looking at the great pile of game and said, "I am very sorry to leave behind anything that I've had the trouble of killing," she looked at him and said, "Tie up a bundle for me, and I'll carry it to lighted the load off you." Oisin gave her a bundle of the game to carry, and took the remainder himself. The evening was very warm and the game heavy, and after they had gone some distance, Oisin said, "Let us rest a while." Both threw down their burdens and put their backs against a great stone that was by the roadside. The woman was heated and out of breath, and opened her dress to cool herself. Then Oisin looked at her and saw her beautiful form and her white bosom. "Oh, then," said he, "it's a pity you have the pig's head on you, for I have never seen such an appearance on a woman in all my life before." "Well," said she, "my father is the King of Tir na n-Og, and I was the finest woman in his kingdom and the most beautiful of all, till he put me under a Druidic spell and gave me the pig's head that's on me now in place of my own. And the Druid of Tir na n-Og came to me afterwards and told me that if one of the sons of Fin MacCumhail would marry me, the pig's head would vanish, and I should get back my face in the same form as it was before my father struck me with the Druid's wand. When I head this I never stopped till I came to Erin, where I found your father and picked you out among the sons of Fin MacCumhail, and followed you to see would you marry me and set me free." "If that is the state you are in, and if marriage with me will free you from the spell, I'll not leave the pig's head on you long." So they got married without delay, not waiting to take home the game or to lift it from the ground. That moment the pig's head was gone, and the king's daughter had the same face and beauty that she had before her father struck her with the Druidic wand. "Now," said the Queen of Youth to Oisin, "I cannot stay here long, and unless you come with me to Tir na n-Og we must part." "Oh," said Oisin, "wherever you go I'll go, and wherever you turn I'll follow." Then she turned, and Oisin went with her, not going back to Knock an Ar to see his father or his son. That very day they set out for Tir na n-Og and never stopped till they came to her father's castle. And when they came, there was a welcome before them, for the king thought his daughter was lost. That same year there was to be a choice of a king, and when the appointed day came at the end of the seventh year, all the great men and the champions, and the king himself, met together at the front of the castle to run and see who should be first in the chair on the hill. But before a man of them was halfway to the hill, Oisin was sitting above in the chair before them. After that time no one stood up to run for the office against Oisin, and he spent many a happy years as king in Tir no n-Og. Source: Jeremiah Curtin, Myths and Folk-Lore of Ireland (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1890), pp. 230-233. Link to additional stories about men who marry women formed like animals: Animal Brides: Folktales of Aarne-Thompson Type 402 and Related Stories . Return to D. L. Ashliman's index of folklore and mythology electronic texts . Revised July 12, 1999. Old Dogs Learn New Tricks: Fables of Type 101 Old Dogs Learn New Tricks Fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 101 Edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2008-2009 Contents Old Sultan (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Dog and the Wolf (Bohemia, Theodor Vernaleken). The Bear, the Dog, and the Cat (Russia, Alexander Afanasyev). The Sagacious Monkey and the Boar (Japan, Yei Theodora Ozaki). The Old Hound (Aesop). Links to related sites . Return to folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Old Sultan Germany A farmer had a faithful dog named Sultan, who had grown old and lost all his teeth, and could no longer hold onto anything. One day the farmer was standing with his wife before the house door, and said, "Tomorrow I intend to shoot Old Sultan. He is no longer of any use." His wife, who felt pity for the faithful animal, answered, "He has served us so long, and been so faithful, that we might well give him his keep." "What?" said the man. "You are not very bright. He doesn't have a tooth left in his mouth, and no thief is afraid of him. He can go now. If he has served us, he has eaten well for it." The poor dog, who was lying stretched out in the sun not far off, heard everything, and was sorry that tomorrow was to be his last day. He had a good friend, the wolf, and he crept out in the evening into the forest to him, and complained of the fate that awaited him. "Listen, kinsman," said the wolf, "be of good cheer. I will help you out of your trouble. I have thought of something. Tomorrow, early in the morning, your master is going with his wife to make hay, and they will take their little child with them, for no one will be left behind in the house. While they are at work they lay the child behind the hedge in the shade. You lie down there too, just as if you wanted to guard it. Then I will come out of the woods, and carry off the child. You must run swiftly after me, as if you would take it away from me. I will let it fall, and you will take it back to its parents, who will think that you have rescued it, and will be far too grateful to do you any harm. On the contrary, you will be treated royally, and they will never let you want for anything again." This idea pleased the dog, and it was carried out just as planned. The father screamed when he saw the wolf running across the field with his child, but when Old Sultan brought it back, he was full of joy, and stroked him and said, "Not a hair of yours shall be hurt. You shall eat free bread as long as you live." And to his wife he said, "Go home at once and make Old Sultan some bread soup that he will not have to bite. And bring the pillow from my bed. I will give it to him to lie on. From then on Old Sultan was as well off as he could possibly wish. Soon afterwards the wolf visited him, and was pleased that everything had succeeded so well. "But, kinsman," he said, "you will just close one eye if, when I have a chance, I carry off one of your master's fat sheep." "Don't count on that," answered the dog. "I will remain true to my master. I cannot agree to that." The wolf thought that this was not spoken in earnest, and he crept up in the night to take away the sheep. But the farmer, to whom the faithful Sultan had told the wolf's plan, was waiting for him and combed his hair cruelly with a flail. The wolf had to flee, but he cried out to the dog, "Just wait, you scoundrel. You'll regret this." The next morning the wolf sent the boar to challenge the dog to come out into the forest and settle the affair. Old Sultan could find no one to be his second but a cat with only three legs, and as they went out together the poor cat limped along, stretching its tail upward with pain. The wolf and his friend were already at the appointed place, but when they saw their enemy coming, they thought that he was bringing a saber with him, for they mistook the cat's outstretched tail for one. And when the poor animal hopped on three legs, they thought that each time it was picking up a stone to throw at them. Then they took fright. The wild boar crept into the underbrush and the wolf jumped up a tree. As the dog and the cat approached, they wondered why no one was to be seen. The wild boar, however, had not been able to hide himself completely in the leaves. His ears were still sticking out. While the cat was looking cautiously about, the boar wiggled his ears, and the cat, who thought it was a mouse, jumped on it and bit down hard. The boar jumped up screaming loudly, "The guilty one is up in the tree." The dog and cat looked up and saw the wolf, who was ashamed for having shown such fear, and who then made peace with the dog. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Der alte Sultan , Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales), no. 48. The Grimms' source: Johann Friedrich Krause, from the town of Hof in Hessen. Translated Margaret Hunt (1884). Translation revised and corrected by D. L. Ashliman . © 2000-2006. This tale, in a somewhat simpler form, was included in the first edition of Kinder- und Hausmärchen (1812). It was rewritten in its present form for the second edition (1819). The separate episodes are classified as follows: The Old Dog as Resuer of the Child , Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 101. War between Wild Animals and Domestic Animals , Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 103. Link to a separate file, containing only this tale: Old Sultan . Return to the table of contents . The Dog and the Wolf Bohemia There was once a peasant family; and, among other domestic animals, they had a house dog named Sultan. When the dog had grown old, the peasant drove him away, thinking that he could no longer properly attend to his duty. Quite downcast, with drooping head, the dog left the village, and complained to himself, "This is the way I am rewarded for my faithful and hard service; after having spent my years of youth and strength in toil, I am driven away in my weak old age, and no rest is allowed me." Sadly he went on, and wandered about for many days without finding a tolerable shelter. At last, lean and weak after his long wandering, he came to a forest. There came a wolf out of the forest, ran up to the poor dog, and cried, "Stop, old fellow, now thou art in my power, so get ready!" When Sultan heard the wolf speak thus, he was in terror, and said, "Dear friend, do but give a good look at me first, and then you will certainly lose all appetite for me; in me you will find the worst meat that you ever tasted, for I am nothing but skin and bone. However, I can give you some good advice." The wolf said, "I want no advice from you, wretched creature! Without your telling me, I know how it would run, namely, that I should spare your life. No! 'tis the old story, short and sweet, down my throat you go!" Then the dog replied, "I have no thought of the kind, for I would not live longer. Use your jaws so long as you enjoy yourself, but I only advise you for the best. Would it not be the best plan to feed me first, and after I have been fattened you might then gobble me up? The food would not be lost in this way, because you would find it all at one meal in me. There would be a fine dish of meat. What thinkest thou, brother wolf?" The wolf said, "Agreed, provided the feeding does not last long; follow me into my hut." The dog did this, and both now went deeper into the forest. Arrived at the hut, Sultan crept in, but the wolf went on to get some game for the poor weak dog. When he came back, he threw his bag before Sultan, and Sultan made a good supper. The next day the wolf came and said to the dog, "Yesterday you ate; today I will eat." The dog replied, "But what have you taken into your head, dear wolf? Why, as to yesterday's food, I scarce know that I had it." The wolf was very cross; but he had to put up with it, and go into the forest a second time to hunt down some fresh game for the dog. In this way Sultan contrived to put off the wolf so long, that at last he felt strong enough to take up the cudgels with him. The wolf kept on hunting, and brought his prey to the dog; but himself ate little or nothing that Sultan might get enough. And so it came to pass that the dog gained in flesh and strength, while the wolf equally fell off. On the sixth day the wolf came up to the dog and said, "Now, I think you are ripe!" Sultan replied, "O yes; in fact I feel myself so well that I will fight it out with you if you won't let me go." Said the wolf, "You jest! Consider I have fed you for six whole days, yes, and eaten nothing myself, and now you want me to go away empty? No, no, that will never do!" Then Sultan replied, "In one respect you are right, but how do you think you can be justified in eating me up?" "'Tis the right of the strong over the weak," said the wolf. "Good!" said the dog, you have given judgment against yourself." With these words he made a bold dash, and before the wolf knew where he was, he lay on the ground overcome by Sultan. "Because you spared my life, I will not now destroy you, but give you a chance for your own. So choose two comrades; I will do the same, and tomorrow meet me with them in the forest, and we will decide our dispute." They separated to seek their seconds. The wolf went wrathfully deeper into the forest; the dog hastened to the nearest village. After long talk with the growling bear and the sly fox, the wolf found two comrades. Sultan ran first to the parsonage, and got the great grey cat to go along with him. Thence he turned his steps to the court of the local magistrate, and found in the brave cock his second comrade. It was hardly daybreak when the dog was with his companions on the way. He all but surprised his enemies in a deep sleep. The wolf opened his eyes first, awoke his companions, and said to the bear, "You can climb trees, can't you? Be so good as to get up this tall fir tree, and look out and see whether our enemies are coming on." Up went the bear, and as soon as he had got to the top, he called down, "Run, our enemies are here, close at hand, and what mighty enemies! One rides proudly along, and carries many sharp sabers with him that glisten brightly in the morning sun; behind him there soberly advances another, dragging a long iron bar after him. O dear! O dear!" At these words the fox was so frightened that he thought it most advisable to take to his heels. The bear hastily scrambled down out of the tree, and crept into a dense thicket, so that only just the end of his tail peeped out. The foes came on. The wolf, seeing himself deserted by his companions, was about also to take to his heels, when Sultan confronted him. One spring, and the dog held the wolf by the throat, and put an end to him. Meanwhile the cat observed in the bushes the point of the bear's tail as it moved, and snapped at it, thinking to catch a mouse. In terror the bear came out of his hiding place, and fled in all haste up a tree, thinking that there he would be safe from foes. But he was deceived, for there was the cock before him. When the cock saw the bear on the tree, he sprang to the next bough, and to the next, and so on. The bear was beside himself, and in terror he fell down and lay dead as a door nail. So ended the battle. The news of Sultan's heroic deeds and those of his comrades spread far and wide, even to that village where Sultan had formerly served. The consequence was that the peasant family took back again their faithful house dog, and lovingly cared for him. Source: Theodor Vernaleken, In the Land of Marvels: Folk-Tales from Austria and Bohemia , translated by E. Johnson (London: Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1889), pp. 54-58 . Johnson's source: Theodor Vernaleken, "Der Hund und der Wolf," Österreichische Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1864), no. 9, pp. 39-43 . Bohemia is in today's Czech Republic. Return to the table of contents . The Bear, the Dog, and the Cat Russia Once there lived a peasant who had a good dog, and as the dog grew old it left off barking and guarding the yard and the storehouses. Its master would no longer nourish it, so the dog went into the wood and lay under a tree to die. Then a bear came up and asked him, " Hello, Dog, why are you lying here?" "I have come to die of hunger. You see how unjust people are. As long as you have any strength, they feed you and give you drink; but when your strength dies away and you become old they drive you from the courtyard." "Well, Dog, would you like something to eat?" "I certainly should." "Well, come with me; I will feed you." So they went on. On the way a foal met them. "Look at me," said the bear, and he began to claw the ground with his paws. "Dog, O dog !" "What do you want?" "Look, are my eyes beautiful?" "Yes, Bear, they are beautiful." So the bear began clawing at the ground more savagely still. " Dog, O dog, is my hair disheveled?" "It is disheveled, Bear." "Dog, O dog, is my tail raised?" "Yes, it is raised." Then the bear laid hold of the foal by the tail, and the foal fell to the ground. The bear tore her to pieces and said, "Well, Dog, eat as much as you will, and when everything is in order, come and see me." So the dog lived by himself and had no cares, and when he had eaten all and was again hungry, he ran up to the bear. "Well, my brother, have you done?" "Yes, I have done, and again I am hungry." "What! Are you hungry again? Do you know where your old mistress lives?" "I do." "Well, then, come; I will steal your mistress's child out of the cradle, and do you chase me away and take the child back. Then you may go back; she will go on feeding you as she formerly did, with bread." So they agreed, and the bear ran up to the hut himself and stole the child out of the cradle. The child cried, and the woman burst out, hunted him, hunted him, but could not catch him. So they came back, and the mother wept, and the other women were afflicted. From somewhere or other the dog appeared, and he drove the bear away, gook the child and brought it back. "Look," said the woman, "here is your old dog restoring your child!" So they ran to meet him, and the mother was very glad and joyous. "Now," she said, "I shall never discharge this old dog anymore." So they took him in, fed him with milk, gave him bread, and asked him only to taste the things. And they told the peasant, "Now you must keep and feed the dog, for he saved my child from the bear; and you were saying he had no strength!" This all suited the dog very well, and he ate his fill, and he said, "May God grant health to the bear who did not let me die of hunger!" And he became the bear's best friend. Once there was an evening party given at the peasant's house. At that time the bear came in as the dog's guest. "Hail, Dog, with what luck are you meeting? Is it bread you are eating?" "Praise be to God," answered the dog. "It is no mere living, it is butter week. And what are you doing? Let us go into the izbá [hut]. The masters have gone out for a walk and will not see what you are doing. You come into the izbá and go and hide under the stove as fast as you can. I will await you there and will recall you." "Very well." And so they went into the izbá . The dog saw that his master's guests had drunk too much, and made ready to receive his friend. The bear drank up one glass, then another, and broke it. The guests began singing songs, and the bear wanted to chime in. But the dog persuaded him, "Do not sing. It would only do harm." But it was no good, for he could not keep the bear silent, and he began singing his song. Then the guests heard the noise, laid hold of a stick and began to beat him. He burst out and ran away, and just got away with his life. Now the peasant also had a cat, which had ceased catching mice, and even playing tricks. Wherever it might crawl it would break something or spill something. The peasant chased the cat out of the house. But the dog saw that it was going to a miserable life without any food, and secretly began bringing it bread and butter and feeding it. Then the mistress looked on, and as soon as she saw this she began beating the dog, beat it hard, very hard, and saying all the time, "Give the cat no beef, nor bread." Then, three days later, the dog went to the courtyard and saw that the cat was dying of starvation. "What is the matter?" he said. "I am dying of starvation. I was able to have enough whilst you were feeding me." "Come with me." So they went away. The dog went on, until he saw a drove of horses, and he began to scratch the earth with his paws and asked the cat, "Cat, O cat, are my eyes beautiful?" "No, they are not beautiful." "Say that they are beautiful!" So the cat said, "They are beautiful." "Cat, O cat, is my fur disheveled?" "No, it is not disheveled." "Say, you idiot, that it is disheveled." "Well, it is disheveled." "Cat, O cat, is my tail raised?" "No, it is not raised." "Say, you fool, that it is raised." Then the dog made a dash as a mare, but the mare kicked him back, and the dog died. So the cat said, "Now I can see that his eyes are very red, and his fur is disheveled, and his tail is raised. Good-bye, brother Dog, I will go home to die." Source: Alexander Afanasyev, Russian Folk-Tales , translated by Leonard A Magnus (New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1916), pp. 13-16 . Return to the table of contents . The Sagacious Monkey and the Boar Japan Long, long ago, there lived in the province of Shinshin in Japan, a traveling monkey man, who earned his living by taking round a monkey and showing off the animal's tricks. One evening the man came home in a very bad temper and told his wife to send for the butcher the next morning. The wife was very bewildered and asked her husband, "Why do you wish me to send for the butcher?" " It's no use taking that monkey round any longer, he's too old and forgets his tricks. I beat him with my stick all I know how, but he won't dance properly. I must now sell him to the butcher and make what money out of him I can. There is nothing else to be done." The woman felt very sorry for the poor little animal, and pleaded for her husband to spare the monkey, but her pleading was all in vain, the man was determined to sell him to the butcher. Now the monkey was in the next room and overheard every word of the conversation. He soon understood that he was to be killed, and he said to himself, "Barbarous, indeed, is my master! Here I have served him faithfully for years, and instead of allowing me to end my days comfortably and in peace, he is going to let me be cut up by the butcher, and my poor body is to be roasted and stewed and eaten? Woe is me! What am I to do. Ah! A bright thought has struck me! There is, I know, a wild boar living in the forest nearby. I have often heard tell of his wisdom. Perhaps if I go to him and tell him the strait I am in he will give me his counsel. I will go and try." There was no time to lose. The monkey slipped out of the house and ran as quickly as he could to the forest to find the boar. The boar was at home, and the monkey began his tale of woe at once. "Good Mr. Boar, I have heard of your excellent wisdom. I am in great trouble, you alone can help me. I have grown old in the service of my master, and because I cannot dance properly now he intends to sell me to the butcher. What do you advise me to do? I know how clever you are!" The boar was pleased at the flattery and determined to help the monkey. He thought for a little while and then said, "Hasn't your master a baby?" "Oh, yes," said the monkey, "he has one infant son." " Doesn't it lie by the door in the morning when your mistress begins the work of the day? Well, I will come round early and when I see my opportunity I will seize the child and run off with it." "What then?" said the monkey. "Why the mother will be in a tremendous scare, and before your master and mistress know what to do, you must run after me and rescue the child and take it home safely to its parents, and you will see that when the butcher comes they won't have the heart to sell you." The monkey thanked the boar many times and then went home. He did not sleep much that night, as you may imagine, for thinking of the morrow. His life depended on whether the boar's plan succeeded or not. He was the first up, waiting anxiously for what was to happen. It seemed to him a very long time before his master's wife began to move about and open the shutters to let in the light of day. Then all happened as the boar had planned. The mother placed her child near the porch as usual while she tidied up the house and got her breakfast ready. The child was crooning happily in the morning sunlight, dabbing on the mats at the play of light and shadow. Suddenly there was a noise in the porch and a loud cry from the child. The mother ran out from the kitchen to the spot, only just in time to see the boar disappearing through the gate with her child in its clutch. She flung out her hands with a loud cry of despair and rushed into the inner room where her husband was still sleeping soundly. He sat up slowly and rubbed his eyes, and crossly demanded what his wife was making all the noise about. By the time that the man was alive to what had happened, and they both got outside the gate, the boar had got well away, got outside the gate, the boar had got well away, but they saw the monkey running after the thief as hard as his legs would carry him. Both the man and wife were moved to admiration at the plucky conduct of the sagacious monkey, and their gratitude knew no bounds when the faithful monkey brought the child safely back to their arms. " There!" said the wife. "This is the animal you want to kill -- if the monkey hadn't been here we should have lost our child forever." "You are right, wife, for once," said the man as he carried the child into the house. "You may send the butcher back when he comes, and now give us all a good breakfast and the monkey too." When the butcher arrived he was sent away with an order for some boar's meat for the evening dinner, and the monkey was petted and lived the rest of his days in peace, nor did his master ever strike him again. Source: Yei Theodora Ozaki, The Japanese Fairy Book , (Westminster: Archibald Constable and Company, 1903), pp. 148-52 . Return to the table of contents . The Old Hound Aesop A hound who had served his master well for years, and had run down many a quarry in his time, began to lose his strength and speed owing to age. One day, when out hunting, his master started a powerful wild boar and set the hound at him. The latter seized the beast by the ear, but his teeth were gone and he could not retain his hold; so the boar escaped. His master began to scold him severely, but the hound interrupted him with these words, "My will is as strong as ever, master, but my body is old and feeble. You ought to honor me for what I have been instead of abusing me for what I am." Source: Æsop's Fables , translated by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: W. Heinemann, 1912, p. 100. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Grimm Brothers' Home Page . War between Wild Animals and Domestic Animals , fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 103. Aging and Death in Folklore , an essay by D. L. Ashliman, with supporting texts from proverbs, folktales, and myths from around the world. Old Folks in Aesop's Fables . Return to folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 11, 2009. The Bremen Town Musicians The Bremen Town Musicians and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 130 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2024 Contents The Bremen Town Musicians (Germany). The Robber and the Farm Animals (Germany/Switzerland). The Sheep and the Pig Who Set Up House (Norway). The Six Male Animals (Denmark). The Animals and the Devil (Finland). The Choristers of St. Gudule (Flanders) The Story of the White Pet (Scotland). The Bull, the Tup, the Cock, and the Steg (England). Jack and His Comrades (Ireland). A Story (Ireland). How Jack Went to Seek His Fortune, version 1 (USA). How Jack Went to Seek His Fortune, version 2 (USA). The Dog, the Cat, the Ass, and the Cock (USA). Benibaire (Spain). The World's Reward (South Africa). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Bremen Town Musicians Germany A man had a donkey, who for long years had untiringly carried sacks to the mill, but whose strength was now failing, so that he was becoming less and less able to work. Then his master thought that he would no longer feed him, but the donkey noticed that it was not a good wind that was blowing and ran away, setting forth on the road to Bremen, where he thought he could become a town musician. When he had gone a little way he found a hunting dog lying in the road, who was panting like one who had run himself tired. "Why are you panting so, Grab-Hold?" asked the donkey. "Oh," said the dog, "because I am old and am getting weaker every day and can no longer go hunting, my master wanted to kill me, so I ran off; but now how should I earn my bread?" "Do you know what," said the donkey, "I am going to Bremen and am going to become a town musician there. Come along and take up music too. I'll play the lute, and you can beat the drums." The dog was satisfied with that, and they went further. It didn't take long, before they came to a cat sitting by the side of the road and making a face like three days of rainy weather. "What has crossed you, old Beard-Licker?" said the donkey. "Oh," answered the cat, "who can be cheerful when his neck is at risk? I am getting on in years, and my teeth are getting dull, so I would rather sit behind the stove and purr than to chase around after mice. Therefore my mistress wanted to drown me, but I took off. Now good advice is scarce. Where should I go?" "Come with us to Bremen. After all, you understand night music. You can become a town musician there." The cat agreed and went along. Then the three refugees came to a farmyard, and the rooster of the house was sitting on the gate crying with all his might. "Your cries pierce one's marrow and bone," said the donkey. "What are you up to?" "I just prophesied good weather," said the rooster, "because it is Our Dear Lady's Day, when she washes the Christ Child's shirts and wants to dry them; but because Sunday guests are coming tomorrow, the lady of the house has no mercy and told the cook that she wants to eat me tomorrow in the soup, so I am supposed to let them cut off my head this evening. Now I am going to cry at the top of my voice as long as I can." "Hey now, Red-Head," said the donkey, "instead come away with us. We're going to Bremen. You can always find something better than death. You have a good voice, and when we make music together, it will be very pleasing." The rooster was happy with the proposal, and all four went off together. However, they could not reach the city of Bremen in one day, and in the evening they came into a forest, where they would spend the night. The donkey and the dog lay down under a big tree, but the cat and the rooster took to the branches. The rooster flew right to the top, where it was safest for him. Before falling asleep he looked around once again in all four directions, and he thought that he saw a little spark burning in the distance. He hollered to his companions, that there must be a house not too far away, for a light was shining. The donkey said, "Then we must get up and go there, because the lodging here is poor." The dog said that he could do well with a few bones with a little meat on them. Thus they set forth toward the place where the light was, and they soon saw it glistening more brightly, and it became larger and larger, until they came to the front of a brightly lit robbers' house. The donkey, the largest of them, approached the window and looked in. "What do you see, Gray-Horse?" asked the rooster. "What do I see?" answered the donkey. "A table set with good things to eat and drink, and robbers sitting there enjoying themselves." "That would be something for us," said the rooster. "Ee-ah, ee-ah, oh, if we were there!" said the donkey. Then the animals discussed how they might drive the robbers away, and at last they came upon a plan. The donkey was to stand with his front feet on the window, the dog to jump on the donkey's back, the cat to climb onto the dog, and finally the rooster would fly up and sit on the cat's head. When they had done that, at a signal they began to make their music all together. The donkey brayed, the dog barked, the cat meowed and the rooster crowed. Then they crashed through the window into the room, shattering the panes. The robbers jumped up at the terrible bellowing, thinking that a ghost was coming in, and fled in great fear out into the woods. Then the four companions seated themselves at the table and freely partook of the leftovers, eating as if they would get nothing more for four weeks. When the four minstrels were finished, they put out the light and looked for a place to sleep, each according to his nature and his desire. The donkey lay down on the manure pile, the dog behind the door, the cat on the hearth next to the warm ashes, and the rooster sat on the beam of the roof. Because they were tired from their long journey, they soon fell asleep. When midnight had passed and the robbers saw from the distance that the light was no longer burning in the house, and everything appeared to be quiet, the captain said, "We shouldn't have let ourselves be chased off," and he told one of them to go back and investigate the house. The one they sent found everything still, and went into the kitchen to strike a light. He mistook the cat's glowing, fiery eyes for live coals, and held a sulfur match next to them, so that it would catch fire. But the cat didn't think this was funny and jumped into his face, spitting, and scratching. He was terribly frightened and ran toward the back door, but the dog, who was lying there, jumped up and bit him in the leg. When he ran across the yard past the manure pile, the donkey gave him a healthy blow with his hind foot, and the rooster, who had been awakened from his sleep by the noise and was now alert, cried down from the beam, "Cock-a-doodle-doo!" Then the robber ran as fast as he could back to his captain and said, "Oh, there is a horrible witch sitting in the house, she blew at me and scratched my face with her long fingers. And there is a man with a knife standing in front of the door, and he stabbed me in the leg. And a black monster is lying in the yard, and it struck at me with a wooden club. And the judge is sitting up there on the roof, and he was calling out, 'Bring the rascal here.' Then I did what I could to get away." From that time forth, the robbers did not dare go back into the house. However, the four Bremen Musicians liked it so well there, that they never left it again. And the person who just told that, his mouth is still warm. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Bremer Stadtmusikanten," Kinder- und Hausmärchen[Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales] , 7th edition (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 27, pp. 145-48 . The Grimms' source: Dorothea Viehmann (1755-1815). The Grimms first published this tale in the second edition of their Kinder- und Hausmärchen (1819). With the exception of a few minor stylistic changes, the story remained essentially unaltered in the editions that followed during the Grimms' lifetime. Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2001. Link to a file containing only this tale: The Bremen Town Musicians . Return to the table of contents . The Robber and the Farm Animals Germany/Switzerland Once upon a time there was a miller's servant who had served his master faithfully and diligently for many years. He had grown old in the mill, and the heavy work that he had to do there finally surpassed his strength. So one day he said to his master: "I can no longer serve you; I am too weak. I am therefore asking you for my dismissal and my wages." The miller said: "The time of wandering servants has passed. You are free to leave if you wish, but you will receive no wages. Now the old servant would sooner give up his wages than to continue to be tormented in the mill, so he took leave from his master. Before leaving home he went to the animals that until now he had fed and tended, in order to bid them farewell. While taking leave from the horse, it said to him: "Where are you going?" "I have to leave," he said. "I cannot take it here any longer." And when he set forth, the horse followed along after him. He then went to the ox, stroked him once again, and said: "God be with you, old fellow!" "Where are you going?" spoke the ox. "Oh, I must leave. I cannot take it here any longer," said the miller's servant and sadly went on his way to take leave from the dog. The ox followed along behind, just as the horse had done. And the other animals to whom he said farewell -- the dog, the cat, the goose, and the rooster -- all did the same thing. He made his way out into the country, where he first noticed that the faithful animals were following him. He spoke to them in a friendly manner, asking them to turn around and return home. "I have nothing more for myself," he said, "and I can no longer care for you." But the animals told him that they would not abandon him, and they contentedly followed along behind. After several days they came to a great forest. Here the horse and the ox found good grass, which the goose and the rooster enjoyed as well. However, the other animals -- the cat and the dog -- had to suffer hunger, as did the old miller's servant; but they did not grumble and complain. Finally, after having gone very deep into the forest, they suddenly saw a large, beautiful house before them. It was locked up securely. Only an empty stall was open, and from here they could go through the barn into the house itself. Because no one could be seen in the house, the servant decided to stay there with his animals, and he assigned each one to a place. He put the horse up front in the stall. He led the ox to the other side. The rooster was given a place on the roof, the dog on the manure pile, the cat on the hearth, and the goose behind the stove. Then he gave each one his feed, which was plentifully stored in the house. He himself ate and drank all he wanted, then fell asleep in a good bed, which was all made up in the bedroom. During the night, while he was fast asleep, the robber -- who owned the forest house -- returned. As he stepped into yard, the dog jumped on him furiously, and barked at him. The rooster cried down from the roof: "Cock-a-doodle-doo, cock-a-doodle-doo!" All this terrified the robber, for he had never seen farm animals that live with people, knowing instead only the wild animals of the forest. He fled hurriedly into the stall, but there the horse kicked out from behind, hitting him in the side. He staggered around and around, and only with difficulty could he retreat into the back part of the stall. He scarcely arrived there when the ox turned around and tried to pick him up on his horns. This frightened him anew, and he ran as fast as he could through the barn and into the kitchen, where he wanted to strike a light and see what was there. Feeling around the hearth, he touched the cat, which jumped on him and scratched him with its claws until jumped away head over heels, and tried to hide behind the stove in the main room. The goose jumped up, screaming and beating its wings. The terrified robber fled into the bedroom. There the miller's servant was snoring mightily like a purring spinning wheel, and the robber thought the entire room was filled with strangers. You had better believe that he was overcome by a terrible fear. He rushed out of the house and ran into the woods, not stopping until until he had found his fellow robbers. He began talking: "I don't know what has happened in our house. Some strange people are living there. When I stepped into the yard a large wildman jumped at me, yelling and bellowing so terribly that I thought he would kill me. An another one cheered him on, calling down from the roof: 'Hit him for me too! Hit him for me too!' The first one was bad enough; I wasn't going to wait for more of them to jump me, so I fled into the stall. There a shoemaker threw a last at my side, and I can still feel where it hit. I ran to the back of the stall. A pitchfork maker was standing there who tried to impale me on his pitchfork. I ran into the kitchen, where a hackle maker beat me with his hackle [a sharp-toothed tool for combing flax]. I tried to hide behind the stove, but there was a shovel maker there who beat me with his shovel. Finally I ran into the bedroom, but there were so many others snoring in there that was happy to escape with my life." When the robbers heard this, they were so horrified that not a one of them had any desire to enter the house. To the contrary, they believed that the entire region was threatened by these strange people. That same night they departed for another country, and they never returned. The miller's servant lived in peace in the robbers' house with his faithful animals. He no longer had to suffer in his old age, for the beautiful garden next to the house produced more fruit, vegetables, and all kinds of food every year than he and his animals could eat. Source: Ernst Meier, "Der Räuber und die Hausthiere," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 3, pp. 11-15 . This story is also printed in a collection of Swiss folktales: Otto Sutermeister, "Der Räuber und die Hausthiere," Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus der Schweiz (Aarau: H. R. Sauerländer, 1873), no. 29, pp. 91-94 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Return to the table of contents . The Sheep and the Pig Who Set Up House Norway Once on a time there was a sheep who stood in the pen to be fattened; so he lived well, and was stuffed and crammed with everything that was good. So it went on, till, one day, the dairymaid came and gave him still more food, and then she said, "Eat. away, sheep; you won't be much longer here; we are going to kill you tomorrow." It is an old saying, that women's counsel is always worth having, and that there is a cure and physic for everything but death. "But, after all," said the sheep to himself, "there may be a cure even for death this time." So he ate till he was ready to burst; and when he was crammed full, he butted out the door of the pen, and took his way to the neighboring farm. There he went to the pigsty to a pig whom he had known out on the common, and ever since had been the best friends with. "Good day!" said the sheep, "and thanks for our last merry meeting." "Good day!" answered the pig, "and the same to you." "Do you know," said the sheep, "why it is you are so well off, and why it is they fatten you and take such pains with you?" "No, I don't," said the pig. "Many a flask empties the cask; I suppose you know that," said the sheep. "They are going to kill and eat you." "Are they?" said the pig. "Well, I hope they'll say grace after meat." "If you will do as I do," said the sheep, "we'll go off to the wood, build us a house, and set up for ourselves. A home is a home be it ever so homely." Yes! The pig was willing enough. "Good company is such a comfort," he said, and so the two set off. So, when they had gone a bit they met a goose. "Good day, good sirs, and thanks for our last merry meeting," said the goose. "Whither away so fast today?" "Good day, and the same to you," said the sheep. "You must know we were too well off at home, and so we are going to set up for ourselves in the wood, for you know every man's house is his castle." "Well!" said the goose, "it's much the same with me where I am. Can't I go with you too, for it's child's play when three share the day." "With gossip and gabble is built neither house nor stable," said the pig. "Let us know what you can do." "By cunning and skill a cripple can do what he will," said the goose. "I can pluck moss and stuff it into the seams of the planks, and your house will be tight and warm." "Yes! They would give him leave, for above all things, piggy wished to be warm and comfortable. So, when they had gone a bit farther -- the goose had hard work to walk so fast -- they met a hare, who came frisking out of the wood. "Good day, good sirs, and thanks for our last merry meeting," she said. "How far are you trotting today?" "Good day, and the same to you," said the sheep. "We were far too well off at home, and so we're going to the wood, to build us a house, and set up for ourselves, for you know, try all the world round, there's nothing like home." "As for that," said the hare, "I have a house in every bush -- yes, a house in every bush; but, yet, I have often said, in winter, 'If I only live till summer, I'll build me a house.' And so I have half a mind to go with you and build one up, after all." "Yes!" said the pig. "If we ever get into a scrape, we might use you to scare away the dogs, for you don't fancy you could help us in house building." "He who lives long enough always finds work enough to do," said the hare. "I have teeth to gnaw pegs, and paws to drive them into the wall, so I can very well set up to be a carpenter, for 'good tools make good work,' as the man said, when he flayed the mare with a gimlet." Yes! He too got leave to go with them and build their house; there was nothing more to be said about it. When they had gone a bit farther they met a cock. "Good day, good sirs," said the cock, "and thanks for our last merry meeting. Whither are ye going today, gentlemen?" "Good day, and the same to you," said the sheep. "At home we were too well off, and so we are going off to the wood to build us a house, and set up for ourselves; for he who out of doors shall bake, loses at last both coal and cake." "Well! said the cock, "that's just my case; but it's better to sit on one's own perch, for then one can never be left in the lurch, and, besides, all cocks crow loudest at home. Now, if I might have leave to join such a gallant company, I also would like to go to the wood and build a house." "Ay! Ay!" said the pig. "Flapping and crowing sets tongues a-going; but a jaw on a stick never yet laid a brick. How can you ever help us to build a house?" "Oh!" said the cock, "that house will never have a clock, where there is neither dog nor cock. I am up early, and I wake every one." "Very true," said the pig. "The morning hour has a golden dower; let him come with us;" for, you must know, piggy was always the soundest sleeper. "Sleep is the biggest thief," he said. "He thinks nothing of stealing half one's life." So they all set off to the wood, as a band and brotherhood, and built the house. The pig hewed the timber, and the sheep drew it home; the hare was carpenter, and gnawed pegs and bolts, and hammered them into the walls and roof; the goose plucked moss and stuffed it into the seams; the cock crew, and looked out that they did not oversleep themselves in the morning; and when the house was ready, and the roof lined with birch bark, and thatched with turf. There they lived by themselves, and were merry and well. "Tis good to travel east and west," said the sheep, "but after all a home is best." But you must know that a bit farther on in the wood was a wolf's den, and there lived two graylegs. So when they saw that a new house had risen up hard by, they wanted to know what sort of folk their neighbors were, for they thought to themselves that a good neighbor was better than a brother in a foreign land, and that it was better to live in a good neighborhood than to know many people miles and miles off. So one of them made up an errand, and went into the new house and asked for a light for his pipe. But as soon as ever he got inside the door, the sheep gave him such a butt that he fell head foremost into the stove. Then the pig began to gore and bite him, the goose to nip and peck him, the cock upon the roost to crow and chatter; and as for the hare -- he was so frightened out of his wits, that he ran about aloft and on the floor, and scratched and scrambled in every corner of the house. So after a long time the wolf came out. "Well!" said the one who waited for him outside, "neighborhood makes brotherhood. You must have come into a perfect paradise on bare earth, since you stayed so long. But what became of the light, for you have neither pipe nor smoke." "Yes, yes!" said the other. "It was just a nice light and a pleasant company. Such manners I never saw in all my life. But then you know we can't pick and choose in this wicked world, and an unbidden guest gets bad treatment. As soon as I got inside the door, the shoemaker let fly at me with his last, so that I fell head foremost into the stithy fire; and there sat two smiths who blew the bellows and made the sparks fly, and beat and punched me with red hot tongs and pincers, so that they tore whole pieces out of my body. As for the hunter he went scrambling about looking for his gun, and it was good luck he did not find it. And all the while there was another who sat up under the roof, and slapped his arms and sang out, 'Put a hook into him and drag him hither; drag him hither.' That was what he screamed, and if he had only got hold of me, I should never have come out alive." Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Tales from the Fjeld: A Second Series of Popular Tales , translated by G. W. Dasent (London: Chapman and Hall, 1874), pp. 267-72 . Another translation (Internet Archive): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, "The Ram, and the Pig Who Went into the Woods to Live by Themselves," Fairy Tales from the Far North , translated by H. L. Brækstad (London: David Nutt, 1897), pp. 1-7 . Dasent's and Brækstad's source: Books.google.com: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, "Væderen og Grisen, som skulde til Skovs og bo for sig selv," Norske Folke-Eventyr , ny Samling, med Bedrag fra Jøgren Moes Reiser og Optegnelser (Christiania [Oslo]: Jak. Dybwad, 1871), no. 61, pp. 1-4 . Internet Archive: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, "Væderen og Grisen, som skulde til Skovs og bo for sig selv," Norske Folke-Eventyr , ny Samling, med Bedrag fra Jøgren Moes Reiser og Optegnelser (Christiania [Oslo]: Jak. Dybwad, 1871), no. 61, pp. 1-4 . Return to the table of contents . The Six Male Animals Denmark There was a farmer who thought that he would raise six male animals together to see how long each one could live. They were a bull, a ram, a dog, a cat, a cock, and a drake. After their birth each one became big and strong, especially the bull, who was now so manly that they could control him only with difficulty. One day a stranger came to visit the farmer. They went out to the field to see the animals, and they came across the mean bull. "What a hideous bull you have there!" said the stranger. "Will he become a breeding animal?" "Yes, he is hideous," said the farmer, "but he probably won't keep his freedom. I have taken care of these male animals to see how long each one would live, but now we probably will have the bull gelded, or maybe we should just slaughter him." Yes, the stranger thought that that would be the best thing to do. While the men were walking around looking for hay to pile up, the bull thought to himself: "Well, is that to be my fate? Thus far I have thrived, but now have only very little power. They lied to me about my long life." That evening after returning home, he talked to the other male animals about what he had heard. They too were afraid that on another occasion they might suffer the same fate, so they all decided to run away. They ran off as best they were able to, but as soon as they had left the field the drake got tired and said: "Sit, sit, sit, sit!" "No," said the bull. "That won't do. We have to leave, but I can help you. If you can't keep up, you will have to get on my back." That happened, and they traveled onward for a day. Finally the cock got tired. He ran along flapping his wings and saying: "Kokky, kokky, kokky!" "Yes, men," said the bull, "it may well be a bit warm for you. You can complain about it, but we have to continue onward." Then, without permission, the cock jumped onto the bull's back next to the drake, but the bull certainly could carry them both. Well, they went on like that until finally in the evening they approached a mill. They were hungry and tired, and they resolved to rest and have something to eat there. When they come closer to the mill, the miller and his wife came running out to them. The bull asked: "Could this be the miller?" "Yes, I'm the miller," he said. "Listen, could we get shelter in your mill tonight and get something to eat? We are very hungry." "Well, men, you can get something to eat now, but nighttime is not good. No one can be in the mill at night because of ghosts." "That's all right," said the bull. "We can stay there. We can deal with the ghosts." "All right," said the miller, "you may go down there if you dare to, but you yourselves are responsible for the consequences. You can tell my journeyman to give you the keys when he is finished for the day." Well, they went down to miller's journeyman and got instructions as to where they could get something to eat. The journeyman then left for his own supper and gave the keys to the bull. Next the bull arranged everything as to where they should spend the night. Outside there was an iron shed without a door where boots could be dried. The cock was to sit there and keep watch. The dog was to lie under the tile stove. The cat was to sit on the chimney. The ram was to sit in the oven. The bull and the drake went into the great room. They were all to stay awake, but the cock was so tired from his wandering that he immediately fell asleep. After midnight old Lucifer appeared, and he had another devil with him. When they arrived at the gate, he said to his companion: "Now you can go inside and light the candle, and then I will come." The companion went ahead, but he noticed nothing outside the door, because the cock was sleeping soundly. When he entered the living room, the dog jumped out from under the tile stove and angrily bared his teeth. He tore at the devil's trousers, ripping them to pieces. The devil escaped into the kitchen, where the cat flew at his head, spitting and scratching. The poor devil wasn't safe there, and he thought to himself: "Perhaps no one is in the oven." He climbed inside, but the powerful ram butted him from one side of the oven to the other, finally pushing him out. He made his way toward the door when the ram butted his behind, pushing him into the ashes in the fireplace. He got out of the fireplace, but then the cat jumped on him again, spitting and scratching. He made his way back through the living room, where the dog attacked him again, giving him a terrible bite. He absolutely had to get outside where he could be in peace. He went back through the great room, but the bull met him, butting him from the ground to the ceiling and from the ceiling to the ground with his horns, while the drake ran around the bull crying "Sit! Sit! Sit!" He finally managed to escape from the bull and the drake, and he wanted to return to the Old Man. At the same time, the cock, awakened by all the commotion, shouted: "Kokkelihyhaa!" The poor devil finally got back to the Old Man at the gate. Lucifer said: "What? You didn't light the candle!" "No," he said, "I had something else to think about. I tried to light the candle, and now you can try it." "What was the matter? Why couldn't you light the candle?" "I don't know what it was about. When I entered the living room a man came out from the tile stove, and he walked on all fours. He must have been a German, because I couldn't understand a word of what he said. He tore my trousers and bit my legs and gnashed his teeth. Finally I got away from him, but there was an old hag sitting in the ashes with a carding comb in each hand, and she flew at my head and carded me in the head with both carding combs, all the time spitting terribly. At last I escaped into the oven and wanted to try it there; but a giant came towards me with a club in his hand, and he knocked me from one side of the oven to the other. Finally I got out of there, but the old hag with the carding combs attacked me again. At last I got into the living room, but the old man who spoke German bit my legs terribly. Then I reached the front room. It was the only place in the house that was peaceful, because I hadn't noticed anything there when I first came. I just got inside the door, when a terrible large giant with a pitchfork in each hand attacked me. He forked me from the ground to the ceiling and from the ceiling to the ground, while a wretched little man ran around him shouting: 'I have a stick! I have a stick!' I escaped from there into the corridor, but it was just as bad there, because just as I was going out the door, a guard was standing there and shouted: 'I have a hook to poke in your behind, so you'd better put up your hands!'" Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "De segs Handyr," Æventyr fra Jylland, samlede af Folkemunde , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: Karl Schønbergs Boghandel, 1884), no. 46, pp. 311-15 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, "De segs Handyr," Æventyr fra Jylland, samlede af Folkemunde , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: Karl Schønbergs Boghandel, 1884), no. 46, pp. 311-15 . Return to the table of contents . The Animals and the Devil Finland Once upon a time there was an old man who owned three animals: a cat, a rooster, and an ox. One evening at supper time the man said to his servant, "Tomorrow morning you have to kill the cat." However, after the meal the servant warned the cat, "Flee, otherwise early tomorrow you'll be slaughtered." The cat took the warning to heart, and the next morning when they wanted to kill her, she had fled, and they heard nothing more from her. The next evening the man said, "Tomorrow morning we have to slaughter our rooster." The servant warned the rooster as well, and he too hurriedly left the farmyard. In like manner the ox ran away as well, and the three of them came together in the woods. They wandered on through the trees. A wolf approached them, and they asked him, "Where are you going?" "I'm headed for the herd over there," answered the wolf. "I'll try to catch a little lamb for a snack." "Don't go there!" replied the others. "They will kill you. Instead, come with us." The wolf agreed to this, and the four went on their way. A bear approached them, and they asked him, "Where are you going?" "To the village over there, where I'll get some oats to eat," answered the bear. "Don't go there; it's too dangerous," said the others. You'd better come with us instead." So the bear joined them, and after the five of them had gone a little further they came upon a hare. They convinced him to come with them as well. Coming to a village, and they approached a bath-house. A dog lay at its entrance, and he warned them, "Don't go inside. Evil spirits live there." But they went inside anyway. The bear laid himself down on the doorstep; the wolf between the doorposts; the ox found a corner for himself; the rooster flew onto a rafter; the cat lay on the hearth; the hare under the bench; and the dog in the middle of the room. The devil came to the bath-house and opened the door. The wolf immediately bit him in the leg; the bear hit him with his paw; the ox butted him with his horns; the rooster began to crow and the cat to meow; the hare jumped back and forth under the bench, and the dog ran around and around the room. Frightened by all the confusion, the devil fell over backwards. Picking himself up, he freed himself from his enemies' claws and fled out the door into the woods, where he claimed to his companions: "Don't go into the bath-house. Powerful strangers are there. On the doorstep a tailor stuck me with his needles. A rough-haired man hit me in the chest with his fists. A cobbler hit me with his gear-bag until I fell over backward. The apprentices ran around the room, jumping from one corner to the other with glowing eyes, trying to beat me, but they couldn't find me. One of them [the rooster] cried out to them as I was getting away: 'Grab the guy! Grab the guy!'" Source (books.google.com): Emmy Schreck, "Die Thiere und der Teufel," Finnische Märchen (Weimar: Hermann Böhlau, 1887), pp. 224-26 . Source (Internet Archive): Emmy Schreck, "Die Thiere und der Teufel, Finnische Märchen (Weimar: Hermann Böhlau, 1887), pp. 224-26 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2017. Return to the table of contents . The Choristers of St. Gudule Flanders The miller of Sandhills had a donkey which had served him well in its time, but was now too old to work. The miller was a careful man, who did not believe in feeding useless mouths, so he decided that he would sell the donkey for the price of its skin. "I do not suppose I shall get very much for the wretched beast," he said, regarding poor Grayskin as he stood with hanging head in his stall, "but I shall save the cost of his corn anyhow, and that is always something." Left alone, Grayskin reflected sadly upon the fate in store for him. "Such is the way of the world," he thought. "When I was young and hearty nothing was too good for me. Now I'm old and useless I am to be cast out. But am I so useless after all? True, I can no longer pull a cart to market, but I have a magnificent voice still. There must be a place somewhere for one who can sing as beautifully as I. I'll go to the Cathedral of St. Gudule in Brussels and offer myself as a chorister." Grayskin lost no time in acting upon his resolve, but left his stable immediately and set out on the road to Brussels. Passing the burgomaster's house he saw an old hound sitting disconsolately on the doorstep. "Hallo, friend!" said he. "What is the matter with you? You seem very sad this morning." "The matter is that I am tired of life," answered the dog. "I'm getting old and stiff, and I can no longer hunt hares for my master as I used to do. The result is that I am reckoned good for nothing, and they grudge me every morsel of food I put into my mouth." "Come, come, cheer up, my friend," said Grayskin. "Never say die! I am in a similar case to yourself and have just left my master for precisely the same reason. My plan is to go to the Cathedral of St. Gudule and offer my services to the master of the choir. If I may say so without conceit, I have a lovely voice -- one must make the most of one's gifts, you know -- and I ought to be able to command good pay." "Well, if it comes to that," said the dog, "I can sing too. I sang a lovely song to the moon last night, and if you'll believe me, all the people in our street opened their windows to listen. I sang for quite an hour, and I'd have gone on longer if some malicious person, who was no doubt jealous, had not thrown an old boot at my head." "Excellent," said Grayskin. "Come along with me. You shall sing tenor and I'll sing bass. We'll make a famous pair." So the dog joined company with Grayskin, and they went on together towards Brussels. A little farther down the road they saw a cat sitting on the rubbish heap outside a miserable hovel. The creature was half blind with age and had a face as long as a fiddle. "Why, what is the matter with you?" asked Grayskin, who had a tender heart. "Matter enough," said the cat. "I've just been turned out of house and home, and all because I took a little piece of bacon from the larder. Upon my honor, it was no bigger than a baby's fist, but they made as much fuss as though it had been a whole gammon. I was beaten and kicked out to starve. If I could catch mice as I used to do, it would not matter so much, but the mice are too quick for me nowadays. They laugh at me. Nothing remains for me but to die, and I hope it may be soon." "Nonsense," said Grayskin. "You shall live to laugh at all your troubles. Come along with us and sing in the choir at St. Gudule. Your voice is a little too thin for my own taste, but you'll make a very good soprano in a trio. What do you say?" "You give me new hopes," answered the cat. "Of course I'll join you," and so the three went on together. Towards nightfall they arrived at a farmyard, on the gate of which a cock was crowing lustily. "Hall!" said Grayskin. "What's all this about?" "I am singing my last song on earth," said the cock. "An hour ago I sang a song, although it is not my usual custom to crow in the afternoon, and as I ended I heard the farmer's wife say, 'Hearken to Chanticleer. He's crowing for fine weather tomorrow. I wonder if he'd crow so loudly if he knew that we had guests coming, and that he was going into the pot to make their soup!' She has a horrid laugh, that woman. I have always hated her!" "And do you mean to tell me," said Grayskin, "that you are going to stay here quite contentedly till they come to wring your neck?" "What else can I do?" asked Chanticleer. "Join us and turn your talents to account. We are all beautiful singers and we are going to Brussels to offer ourselves as choristers at St. Gudule. We were a trio before. With you we shall be a quartet, and that's one better!" Chanticleer was only too glad to find a means of escape, so he willingly joined the party, and they once more took the road. A little while afterwards they came to a thick wood, which was the haunt of a notorious band of robbers. There they decided to rest for the night, so Grayskin and the dog lay down beneath the shelter of a large beech tree, while the cat climbed onto one of the branches, and Chanticleer perched himself at the very top. From this lofty post he could see over the whole wood, and it was not long before he espied a light twinkling among the trees not far away. "There must be a house of some sort over there," he said to his companions. "Shall we go and see? We may find something to eat." "Or some straw to lie upon, at any rate," said Grayskin. "This damp ground gives me rheumatics in my old bones." "I was just thinking the same thing," said the dog. "Let us go." So the four choristers, led by the cock, walked in the direction from which the light came, and before long they found themselves in front of a little house, the windows of which were brilliantly lighted. In order to reach to the windows the animals made a tower of their bodies, with Grayskin at the bottom and Chanticleer at the top. Now this house was the abode of a band of robbers, who, at that very moment, were seated before a table laden with all kinds of food. There they sat and feasted, and poor Chanticleer's mouth watered as he watched them. "Is there anybody inside?" asked the dog, who was impatient. "Hush!" said Chanticleer. "Men! They're eating their dinner!" "I wish I was," said the dog. "What are they eating?" "All sorts of things -- sausage and fish ...." "Sausage!" said the dog. "Fish!" said the cat. "And ever so many other delicacies," Chanticleer went on. "Look here, friends. Wouldn't it be a fine thing if we could get a share of their meal? I confess that my stomach aches with hunger." "And mine too," said the dog. "I've never been so hungry in my life. But how are we to get the food?" "Let us serenade them, and perhaps they'll throw us something as a reward," said Grayskin. "Music, you know, has charms to soothe the savage breast." This seemed such a good idea that the choristers lost no time in putting it into execution. All four began to sing. They donkey hee-hawed, the dog howled, the cat meowed, and the cock crowed. From the noise they made one would have thought that the heavens were falling. The effect of this marvelous quartet upon the robbers was instantaneous. Leaping from their seats, they ran from place to place in mortal terror, tumbling over one another, oversetting chairs and adding to the racket by their shrieks and cries. At that moment the cock fell against the window, breaking the glass to smithereens. The donkey gave the frame a push, and all the four precipitated themselves into the room. This was the last straw. The robbers could stand no more. Half mad with fear they rushed to the door and fled into the forest. Then our four choristers drew up to the table and set to work upon the food with which it was laden. Their long walk had given them a good appetite, so that there was little left by the time they had finished. Feeling drowsy after their meal, they then settled themselves to sleep. The donkey made himself a bed on a heap of straw in the yard; the dog stretched himself out upon the mat by the house door; the cat lay among the warm cinders on the hearth; and the cock perched upon the rooftop. A few minutes more and they were all fast asleep. Meanwhile the robbers, who had retreated some distance into the forest, waited anxiously for something dreadful to happen. An hour passed by and there was neither sight nor sound to alarm them, so they began to feel a little ashamed of their cowardice. Creeping stealthily nearer to the cottage, they saw that everything was still, and that no light was showing from the windows. At last the robber chief sent his lieutenant to spy out the land, and this man, returning to the cottage without mishap, found his way into the kitchen and proceeded to light a candle. He had no matches, but he saw two sparks of fire among the cinders on the hearth, so he went forward to get a light from them. Now this light came from the cat's eyes, and as soon as puss felt the robber touch her, she sprang up, snarling and spitting, and scratched his face. With a scream of terror, he dropped his candle and rushed for the door, and as he passed, the dog bit him in the leg. By this time the noise had awakened Grayskin, who got upon his feet just as the man ran by, and helped him forward with a might kick, which sent him flying out into the roadway. Seeing this, the cock on the housetop spread his wings and crowed in triumph, "Cock-a-doodle-doo!" I wish you could have seen the way that robber ran! He covered the ground so quickly that he seemed like a flying shadow, and I am perfectly certain that not even a hare could have overtaken him. At last, panting for breath, he rejoined his comrades in the forest, who were eagerly awaiting his return. "Well," cried the chief, "is the way clear? Can we go back?" "Not on any account," cried the robber. "There's a horrible witch in the kitchen. Directly I entered she sprang at me and tore my face with her long claws, calling out at the same time to her creatures to come and devour me. As I ran through the door, one of them buried his fangs in my leg, and a little farther on, in the yard, a great black monster struck at me with an enormous club, giving me a blow that nearly broke my backbone. On the roof a little demon with wings and eyes that shone like coals of fire cried, 'Stop him! Eat him! Stop him! Eat him!' You may guess that I did not wait for more. It is a miracle that I have escaped with my life!" When they heard this terrible story the robbers lost no time in decamping, and such was their terror that they deserted the forest altogether and went away to another part of the country. The result was that our four friends were left to dwell in the cottage, where they lived happily for the rest of their lives, and as they had now everything they wanted, they quite gave up their idea of going to St. Gudule. Source: Jean de Bosschère, Folk Tales of Flanders (New York: Dodd, Mead, and Company, 1918), pp. 41-49 . The medieval principality of Flanders includes portions of modern France, Belgium, and the Netherlands. Return to the table of contents . The Story of the White Pet Scotland There was a farmer before now who had a White Pet (sheep), and when Christmas was drawing near, he thought that he would kill the White Pet. The White Pet heard that, and he thought he would run away; and that is what he did. He had not gone far when a bull met him. Said the bull to him, "All hail! White Pet, where are you going?" "I," said the White Pet, "am going to seek my fortune; they were going to kill me for Christmas, and I thought I had better run away." "It is better for me," said the bull, "to go with you, for they were going to do the very same with me." "I am willing," said the White Pet; "the larger the party the better the fun." They went forward until they fell in with a dog. "All hail! White Pet," said the dog. "All hail! dog." "Where are you going?" said the dog. "I am running away, for I heard that they were threatening to kill me for Christmas." "They were going to do the very same to me," said the dog, "and I will go with you." "Come, then," said the White Pet. They went then, until a cat joined them. "All hail! White Pet," said the cat. "All hail! oh cat." "Where are you going?" said the cat. "I am going to seek my fortune," said the White Pet, " because they were going to kill me at Christmas." "They were talking about killing me too," said the cat," and I had better go with you." "Come on then," said the White Pet. Then they went forward until a cock met them. "All hail! White Pet," said the cock. "All hail to yourself! oh cock," said the White Pet. "Where," said the cock," are you going?" "I," said the White Pet, "am going away, for they were threatening my death at Christmas." "They were going to kill me at the very same time," said the cock, " and I will go with you." "Come, then," said the White Pet. They went forward until they fell in with a goose. "All hail! White Pet," said the goose. "All hail to yourself! oh goose," said the White Pet. "Where are you going?" said the goose. "I," said the White Pet, "am running away, because they were going to kill me at Christmas." "They were going to do that to me too," said the goose, "and I will go with you." The party went forward until the night was drawing on them, and they saw a little light far away; and though far off, they were not long getting there. When they reached the house they said to each other that they would look in at the window to see who was in the house, and they saw thieves counting money; and the White Pet said, "Let every one of us call his own call. I will call my own call; and let the bull call his own call; let the dog call his own call; and the cat her own call; and the cock his own call; and the goose his own call." With that they gave out one shout -- Gaire! When the thieves heard the shouting outside, they thought the mischief was there; and they fled out, and they went to a wood that was near them. When the White Pet and his company saw that the house was empty, they went in and they got the money that the thieves had been counting, and they divided it among themselves; and then they thought that they would settle to rest. Said the White Pet, "Where will you sleep tonight, oh bull?" "I will sleep," said the bull, "behind the door where I used to be." "Where will you sleep, White Pet?" "I will sleep," said the White Pet, "in the middle of the floor where I used to be." "Where will you sleep, oh dog?" said the White Pet. "I will sleep beside the fire where I used to be," said the dog. "Where will you sleep, oh cat?" "I will sleep," said the cat, "in the candle press, where I like to be." "Where will you sleep, oh cock?" said the White Pet. "I," said the cock, " will sleep on the rafters where I used to be." "Where will you sleep, oh goose?" "I will sleep," said the goose, "on the manure pile, where I was accustomed to be." They were not long settled to rest, when one of the thieves returned to look in to see if he could perceive if any one at all was in the house. All things were still, and he went on forward to the candle press for a candle, that he might kindle to make him a light; but when he put his hand in the box the cat thrust her claws into his hand, but he took a candle with him, and he tried to light it. Then the dog got up, and he stuck his tail into a pot of water that was beside the fire; he shook his tail and put out the candle. Then the thief thought that the mischief was in the house, and he fled; but when he was passing the White Pet, he gave him a blow; before he got past the bull, he gave him a kick; and the cock began to crow; and when he went out, the goose began to belabor him with his wings about the shanks. He went to the wood where his comrades were, as fast as was in his legs. They asked him how it had gone with him. "It went," said he, "but middling; when I went to the candle press, there was a man in it who thrust ten knives into my hand; and when I went to the fireside to light the candle, there was a big black man lying there, who was sprinkling water on it to put it out; and when I tried to go out, there was a big man in the middle of the floor, who gave me a shove; and another man behind the door who pushed me out; and there was a little brat on the loft calling out Cuir-anees-an-shaw-ay-s-foni-mi-hayn-da -- Send him up here and I'll do for him; and there was a shoemaker, out on the manure pile, belaboring me about the shanks with his apron." When the thieves heard that, they did not return to seek their lot of money; and the White Pet and his comrades got it to themselves; and it kept them peaceably as long as they lived. Source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 1 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Doublas, 1860), pp. 194-97 . Campbell's source was a Mrs. MacTavish, who collected the story in Gaelic from a servant maid in at Port Ellen, Isaly, in 1859. A "white pet" is a lamb brought up by hand. Return to the table of contents . The Bull, the Tup, the Cock, and the Steg England A bull, a tup [ram], a cock, and a steg [gander] set out together to seek their fortune. When it got to night, they came to a house, and asked for a night's lodging, but the folks said no. However, at last they were let come into the kitchen. The bull said he would lie on the floor, the tup said he would lie by his side, the cock would perch on the rannel bank, and the steg would stand at t' back of the door. At midnight, when all was quiet, two men, meaning to rob the house, were heard parleying outside which should go in, and which watch outside. One went in, the bull got up and knocked him about, the tup did the same, and the cock said, "Fetch him here, I'll pick out his eyen." So he says, "I'd best be out of this." As he went to the door, the steg took him by the nose with its neb, and beat him with its wings. The other said when he got out, "What have you done?" "Done!" says he, "The devil knocked me about; when he'd done, one of his imps set on. A thin wi' glowering eyen said, 'Fetch him here,' etc. and when I got to the door, a blacksmith took me by the snout with his tongs, and flapped me by the lugs with his leather apron." Source: Folk-Lore: Transactions of the Folk-Lore Society , vol. 20, no. 1 (March 1909), pp. 75-76 . Collected in Gainford, County Durham, by Alice Ecleston, 1893 or earlier. Return to the table of contents . Jack and His Comrades Ireland Once there was a poor widow, and often there was, and she had one son. A very scarce summer came, and they didn't know how they'd live till the new potatoes would be fit for eating. So Jack said to his mother one evening, "Mother, bake my cake, and kill my cock, till I go seek my fortune; and if I meet it, never fear but I'll soon be back to share it with you." So she did as he asked her, and he set out at break of day on his journey. His mother came along with him to the bawn (yard) gate, and says she, "Jack, which would you rather have, half the cake and half the cock with my blessing, or the whole of 'em with my curse?" "O musha, mother," says Jack, "why do you ax me that question? Sure you know I wouldn't have your curse and Damer's estate along with it." "Well, then, Jack," says she, "here's the whole tote (lot) of 'em, and my thousand blessings along with them." So she stood on the bawn ditch (fence) and blessed him as far as her eyes could see him. Well, he went along and along till he was tired, and ne'er a farmer's house he went into wanted a boy. At last his road led by the side of a bog, and there was a poor ass up to his shoulders near a big bunch of grass he was striving to come at. "Ah, then, Jack asthore," says he, "help me out or I'll be dhrownded ." "Never say't twice," says Jack, and he pitched in big stones and scraws (sods) into the slob, till the ass got good ground under him. "Thank you, Jack," says he, when he was out on the hard road; "I'll do as much for you another time. Where are you going?" "Faith, I'm going to seek my fortune till harvest comes in, God bless it!" "And if you like," says the ass, "I'll go along with you; who knows what luck we may have!" "With all my heart; it's getting late, let us be jogging." Well, they were going through a village, and a whole army of gorsoons [ garçons ] were hunting a poor dog with a kittle tied to his tail. He ran up to Jack for protection, and the ass let such a roar out of him, that the little thieves took to their heels as if the ould boy (the devil) was after them. "More power to you, Jack!" says the dog. "I'm much obleeged to you; where is the baste and yourself going?" "We're going to seek our fortune till harvest comes in." "And wouldn't I be proud to go with you!" says the dog, "and get shut (rid) of them ill conducted boys; purshuin' to 'em!" "Well, well, throw your tail over your arm, and come along." They got outside the town, and sat down under an old wall, and Jack pulled out his bread and meat, and shared with the dog; and the ass made his dinner on a bunch of thistles. While they were eating and chatting, what should come by but a poor half-starved cat, and the moll-row he gave out of him would make your heart ache. "You look as if you saw the tops of nine houses since breakfast," says Jack; "here's a bone and something on it." "May your child never know a hungry belly!" says Tom; "it's myself that's in need of your kindness. May I be so bold as to ask where yez are all going?" "We're going to seek our fortune till the harvest comes in, and you may join us if you like." "And that I'll do with a heart and a half," says the cat, " and thank'ee for asking me." Off they set again, and just as the shadows of the trees were three times as long as themselves, they heard a great cackling in a field inside the road, and out over the ditch jumped a fox with a fine black cock in his mouth. "Oh you anointed villian !" says the ass, roaring like thunder. "At him, good dog!" says Jack, and the word wasn't out of his mouth when Coley was in full sweep after the Moddhera Rua (Red Dog). Reynard dropped his prize like a hot potato, and was off like shot, and the poor cock came back fluttering and trembling to Jack and his comrades. "O musha, naybours !" says he, "wasn't it the hoith o' luck that threw you in my way! Maybe I won't remember your kindness if ever I find you in hardship; and where in the world are you all going?" "We're going to seek our fortune till the harvest comes in; you may join our party if you like, and sit on Neddy's crupper when your legs and wings are tired." Well, the march began again, and just as the sun was gone down they looked around, and there was neither cabin nor farm house in sight. "Well, well," says Jack, "the worse luck now the better another time, and it's only a summer night after all. We'll go into the wood, and make our bed on the long grass." No sooner said than done. Jack stretched himself on a bunch of dry grass, the ass lay near him, the dog and cat lay in the ass's warm lap, and the cock went to roost in the next tree. Well, the soundness of deep sleep was over them all, when the cock took a notion of crowing. "Bother you, Cuileach Dhu (Black Cock)!" says the ass; "you disturbed me from as nice a wisp of hay as ever I tasted. What's the matter?" "It's daybreak that's the matter; don't you see light yonder?" "I see a light indeed," says Jack, "but it's from a candle it's coming, and not from the sun. As you've roused us we may as well go over, and ask for lodging." So they all shook themselves, and went on through grass, and rocks, and briars, till they got down into a hollow, and there was the light coming through the shadow, and along with it came singing, and laughing, and cursing. "Easy, boys!" says Jack; "walk on your tippy toes till we see what sort of people we have to deal with." So they crept near the window, and there they saw six robbers inside, with pistols, and blunderbushes , and cutlashes , sitting at a table, eating roast beef and pork, and drinking mulled beer, and wine, and whisky punch. "Wasn't that a fine haul we made at the Lord of Dunlavin's!" says one ugly-looking thief with his mouth full, "and it's little we'd get only for the honest porter; here's his purty health!" "The porter's purty health!" cried out every one of them, and Jack bent his finger at his comrades. "Close your ranks, my men," says he in a whisper, "and let every one mind the word of command." So the ass put his fore-hoofs on the sill of the window, the dog got on the ass's head, the cat got on the dog's head, and the cock on the cat's head. Then Jack made a sign, and they all sung out like mad. "Hee haw, hee-haw!" roared the ass; "bow-wow!" barked the dog; "meaw-meaw!" cried the cat; "cock-a-doodle-doo!" crowed the cock. "Level your pistols!" cried Jack, "and make smithereens of 'em. Don't leave a mother's son of 'em alive; present, fire!" With that they gave another halloo, and smashed every pane in the window. The robbers were frightened out of their lives. They blew out the candles, threw down the table, and skelped out at the back door as if they were in earnest, and never drew rein till they were in the very heart of the wood. Jack and his party got into the room, closed the shutters, lighted the candles, and ate and drank till hunger and thirst were gone. Then they lay down to rest -- Jack in the bed, the ass in the stable, the dog on the door mat, the cat by the fire, and the cock on the perch. At first the robbers were very glad to find themselves safe in the thick wood, but they soon began to get vexed. "This damp grass is very different from our warm room," says one; "I was obliged to drop a fine pig's crubeen (foot)," says another; " I didn't get a foy -spoonful of my last tumbler," says another; "and all the Lord of Dunlavin's goold and silver that we left behind!" says the last. "I think I'll venture back," says the captain, "and see if we can recover anything." "That's a good boy!" said they all, and away he went. The lights were all out, and so he groped his way to the fire, and there the cat flew in his face, and tore him with teeth and claws. He let a roar out of him, and made for the room door, to look for a candle inside. He trod on the dog's tail, and if he did, he got the marks of his teeth in his arms, and legs, and thighs. " Millia murdher (thousand murders)!" cried he; "I wish I was out of this unlucky house." When he got to the street door, the cock dropped down upon him with his claws and bill, and what the cat and dog done to him was only a flay -bite to what he got from the cock. "Oh, tattheration to you all, you unfeeling vagabones !" says he, when he recovered his breath; and he staggered and spun round and round till he reeled into the stable, back foremost, but the ass received him with a kick on the broadest part of his small clothes, and laid him comfortably on the dunghill. When he came to himself, he scratched his head, and began to think what happened him; and as soon as he found that his legs were able to carry him, he crawled away, dragging one foot after another, till he reached the wood. "Well, well," cried them all, when he came within hearing, "any chance of our property?" "You may say chance," says he, "and it's itself is the poor chance all out. Ah, will any of you pull a bed of dry grass for me? All the sticking-plaster in Inniscorfy (Enniscorthy) will be too little for the cuts and bruises I have on me. Ah, if you only knew what I have gone through for you! When I got to the kitchen fire, looking for a sod of lighted turf, what should be there but a colliach (old woman) carding flax, and you may see the marks she left on my face with the cards. I made to the room door as fast as I could, and who should I stumble over but a cobbler and his seat, and if he did not work at me with his awls and his pinchers you may call me a rogue. Well, I got away from him somehow, but when I was passing through the door, it must be the divel himself that pounced down on me with his claws, and his teeth, that were equal to sixpenny nails, and his wings -- ill luck be in his road! Well, at last I reached the stable, and there, by way of salute, I got a pelt from a sledge-hammer that sent me half a mile off. If you don't believe me, I'll give you leave to go and judge for yourselves." "Oh, my poor captain," says they, "we believe you to the nines . Catch us, indeed, going within a hen's race of that unlucky cabin!" Well, before the sun shook his doublet next morning, Jack and his comrades were up and about. They made a hearty breakfast on what was left the night before, and then they all agreed to set off to the castle of the Lord of Dunlavin, and give him back all his gold and silver. Jack put it all in the two ends of a sack, and laid it across Neddy's back, and all took the road in their hands. Away they went, through bogs, up hills, down dales, and sometimes along the yalla high road, till they came to the hall door of the Lord of Dunlavin, and who should be there, airing his powdered head, his white stockings, and his red breeches, but the thief of a porter. He gave a cross look to the visitors, and says he to Jack, "What do you want here, my fine fellow? There isn't room for you all." "We want," says Jack, "what I'm sure you haven't to give us -- and that is, common civility." "Come, be off, you lazy geochachs (greedy strollers)!" says he, "while a cat 'ud be licking her ear, or I'll let the dogs at you." "Would you tell a body," says the cock that was perched on the ass's head, "who was it that opened the door for the robbers the other night?" Ah! maybe the porter's red face didn't turn the colour of his frill, and the Lord of Dunlavin and his pretty daughter, that were standing at the parlour window unknownst to the porter, put out their heads. "I'd be glad, Barney," says the master, "to hear your answer to the gentleman with the red comb on him." "Ah, my lord, don't believe the rascal; sure I didn't open the door to the six robbers." "And how did you know there were six, you poor innocent?" said the lord. "Never mind, sir," says Jack, "all your gold and silver is there in that sack, and I don't think you will begrudge us our supper and bed after our long march from the wood of Athsalach (muddy ford)." "Begrudge, indeed! Not one of you will ever see a poor day if I can help it." So all were welcomed to their heart's content, and the ass, and the dog, and the cock got the best posts in the farmyard, and the cat took possession of the kitchen. The lord took Jack in hands, dressed him from top to toe in broadcloth, and frills as white as snow, and turnpumps, and put a watch in his fob. When they sat down to dinner, the lady of the house said Jack had the air of a born gentleman about him, and the lord said he'd make him his steward. Jack brought his mother, and settled her comfortably near the castle, and all were as happy as you please. The old woman that told me the story said Jack and the young lady were married ; but if they were, I hope he spent two or three years getting the edication of a gentleman. I don't think that a country boy would feel comfortable, striving to find discoorse for a well-bred young lady, the length of a summer's day, even if he had the Academy of Compliments and the Complete Letter Writer by heart.* *Footnote: Two chap or pedler's books, great favourites among our populace during the last century, and still finding some readers. The concluding observations, as well as the body of the story, are in the words of the original narrator. Source: Patrick Kennedy Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 5-12 . This story is also printed in: Joseph Jacobs, Celtic Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1892), pp. 112-20 . Return to the table of contents . A Story Ireland Once upon a time there was a sheep who stood in his pen to be fattened. When the maid came to feed him she said, "Eat away sheep you won't be here much longer. To morrow we are going to kill you." The sheep ate until he ate a good deal to much, and when he had finished he went out the door of his pen, and made his way to the neighbouring farm. There he went straight tot he pig-sty where there lived a pig whom he met out in the field. "Good day," said the sheep, "and thanks for your kindness last time we met." "Good day," said the pig, "and the same to you." "Do you know why they feed you so good," said the sheep. "No," said the pig. "Because they are going to kill you and eat you," said the sheep. "Much good may do them," said the pig. "Come to the wood and we will build a house for ourselves," said the sheep. "Good company is a fine thing," said the pig, and the too set off together. When they had gone a short distance they met a goose. "Good day," said the goose, "where are ye going to day." "Well," said they, "you must know we were not to well treated at home, and we are going to the wood to build a house for ourselves." "May I go with ye," said the goose, "for it's child's play when three share the [?]." "What can you do to build a house?" said the pig. "I can pull moss and [?] it in them cracks and make your house very comfortable," said the goose. "Very well," said the pig, "she might come with us," for above all things Mr. Piggy wished to be warm and comfortable. When our friends had gone a little farther, walking slowly, for the goose found it hard to keep up with them. they met a hare. "Good day sirs," said the hare, "how far are ye travelling to day," "Good day," said the sheep, "we were not very well off at home and so we are going to the wood to build a house." "Well," said the hare, "I have a home in every bush, but I often said in winter, If I live till summer I'll build a house," and so I have a good mind to go with you. "We might bring you with us to frighten away the dogs," said the pig with a grin, "but I don't know what you can do towards building a house." "Well," said the hare, "I have teeth to get pegs and paws to drive them intot he wall," "All right," they said the hare might go with them and help to build the house. When they had gone a bit farther they met a cock. "Good day sirs," said the cock, "where are ye going to day gentlemen. "Good day," said the sheep. "At home we were not to well off and we are going to build a house for ourselves." "Well," said the cock, "I would like to join such a gallant company. I also would like to build a house." "How can you ever help us to build a house," said the pig. "Ah," said the cock, "I am up early and can wake every one. "Very true," said the pig, "let him come with us." So they all set off together. When the house was finished they lived very well and merry ever afterwards. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Mayo >> N. Peadair, Caisleán an Bharraigh, pp. 479-82 . Collector: Brigid Moran. Informant: James Moran. The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . How Jack Went to Seek His Fortune USA Version 1 Once on a time there was a boy named Jack, and one morning he started to go and seek his fortune. He hadn't gone very far before he met a cat. "Where are you going, Jack?" said the cat. "I am going to seek my fortune." "May I go with you?" "Yes," said Jack, "the more the merrier." So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt. They went a little further and they met a dog. "Where are you going, Jack?" said the dog. "I am going to seek my fortune." "May I go with you?" "Yes," said Jack, "the more the merrier." So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt. They went a little further and they met a goat, "Where are you going, Jack?" said the goat. "I am going to seek my fortune." "May I go with you?" "Yes," said Jack, "the more the merrier." So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt. They went a little further and they met a bull. "Where are you going, Jack?" said the bull. "I am going to seek my fortune." "May I go with you?" "Yes," said Jack, "the more the merrier." So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt. They went a little further and they met a skunk. "Where are you going, Jack?" said the skunk. "May I go with you?" "Yes," said Jack, "the more the merrier." So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt. They went a little further and they met a rooster. "Where are you going, Jack?" said the rooster. "I am going to seek my fortune." "May I go with you?" "Yes," said Jack, "the more the merrier." So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt. Well, they went on till it was about dark, and they began to think of some place where they could spend the night. About this time they came in sight of a house, and Jack told them to keep still while he went up a looked in through the window. And there were some robbers counting over their money. Then Jack went back and told them to wait till he gave the word, and then to make all the noise they could. So when they were all ready Jack gave the word, and the cat mewed, and the dog barked, and the goat blatted, and the bull bellowed, and the rooster crowed, and all together they made such a dreadful noise that it frightened the robbers all away. And then they went in a took possession of the house. Jack was afraid the robbers would come back in the night, and so when it came time to go to bed he put the cat in the rocking-chair, and he put the dog under the table, and he put the goat upstairs, and he put the bull down cellar, and he put the skunk in the corner of the fireplace, and the rooster flew up onto the roof, and Jack went to bed. By and by the robbers saw it was all dark, and they sent one man back to the house to look after their money. Before long he came back in a great fright and told them his story. "I went back to the house," said he, "and went in an tried to sit down in the rocking-chair, and there was an old woman knitting, and she stuck her knitting needles into me. I went to the table to look after the money, and there was a shoemaker under the table, and he stuck his awl into me. I started to go upstairs, and there was a man up there threshing, and he knocked me down with his flail. I started to go down cellar, and there was a man down there chopping wood, and he knocked me up with his axe. I went to warm me at the fireplace, and there was an old woman washing dishes, and she threw her dishwater onto me. But I shouldn't have minded all that if it hadn't been for that little fellow on top of the house, who kept a hollering, 'Toss him up to me-e! Toss him up to me-e!'" Source: Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 1 (1888), pp. 227-28 . Contributed by Francis L. Palmer, Hartford, Connecticut, as told by his grandfather in Chicopee, Massachusetts. The same tale, slightly revised, is recorded in Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1898), pp. 24-27. Return to the table of contents . How Jack Went to Seek His Fortune USA Version 2 Once on a time there was a boy named Jack, who set out to seek his fortune. He had not gone but a little way when he came to a horse. The horse said, "Where are you going, Jack?" He said, "I'm going to seek my fortune. Won't you go along too?" "Don't know, guess I will." So they walked along together. By and by they came to a cow. The cow said, "Where are you going, Jack?" He said, "I'm going to seek my fortune. Won't you go along too?" "Don't know, guess I will." So they walked along together. By and by they came to a ram. The ram said, "Where are you going, Jack?" He said, "I'm going to seek my fortune. Won't you go along too?" "Don't know, guess I will." So they walked along together. By and by they came to a dog. The dog said, "Where are you going, Jack?" "I'm going to seek my fortune. Won't you go along too?" "Don't know, guess I will." So they all walked along together. By and by they came to a cat. The cat said, "Where are you going, Jack?" He said, "I'm going to seek my fortune. Won't you go along too?" "Don't know, guess I will." So they all walked along together. By and by they came to a rooster. The rooster said, "Where are you going, Jack?" "I'm going to seek my fortune. Won't you go along too?" "Don't know, don't care if I do." So they all walked along together. They traveled along until it began to grow dark, and then they were looking for a place to spend the night, when they saw a log cabin in the edge of a woods. Jack went up to the house and found the door unlocked, and went in. After looking about he found a good bed upstairs and plenty of good food in the cupboard. There was a fire on the hearth. As he could see no one living there, after he had eaten a good supper and fed all the animals, he began to make preparations for the night. First he led the horse out into the stable, and fed him some hay, for he found plenty of good hay on the mow. Then he took all the other animals into the house, and he found the door closed into the locker, so he stationed the dog under the table near the door, so that he mighty bite anyone who might chance to enter the house. The cat lay down on the hearth, and the rooster perched on a large crossbeam, and then he stationed the cow at the foot of the stairs, and the ram at the top of the stairs that led to the loft. Then he covered up the fire, put out the light, and went to bed, and was soon fast asleep. Now it happened that this valley was the home of two wicked robbers, who had gone out during the day in search of plunder. Late in the night Jack was awakened by a great noise, for the robbers had returned and opened the door, expecting to find things as usual. They were suddenly grabbed by the dog, who bit them furiously, barking all the while. At last they managed to escape from him, and started to the fireplace, thinking to strike a light. One of the robbers tried to light a match by a coal which he thought he saw shining in the ashes; but this was the cat's eye, and as soon as she was molested she flew on them and scratched their faces dreadfully, till they were glad to escape from the fireplace. They went from the fireplace toward the stairs, but as they passed under the rooster's perch he dropped very disagreeable material (these words to be whispered) upon them. The robbers groped their way through the dark to the foot of the stairs, meaning to creep up to the bed and rest till morning, but just as they reached the stairs they were suddenly caught on the horns of the cow, and tossed up in the air. The ram called out, "Toss 'em up to me!" Before they lighted he caught them on his horns and tossed them up in the air. And the cow called out, "Toss 'em down to me!" Before they lighted she caught them on her horns and tossed them up in the air. Then the ram called out, "Toss 'em up to me!" And before they lighted he caught them on his horns, etc. (to be repeated ad libitum ). And so they tossed them back and forth until they were all mangled and bloody. At last they managed to escape from the cow's horns, and thought they would crawl off to the barn and spend the rest of the night. As they passed the dog in going to the door he gave them a parting snip, but they escaped from him and found the way out to the barn. When they tried to creep in at the door the horse began to kick them so dreadfully that they had to give that up, and were only just able to creep off to a fence corner, where they laid down and died. As soon as Jack found that everything was quiet he went to sleep, and slept soundly till morn, after he got up and dressed himself. By and by he looked about and found there was a large bag of gold under his bed, which had been stolen from time to time by the robbers. So Jack kept the gold, was well provided for, and lived happily forever after with his faithful animals. Source: Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 1 (1888), pp. 228-30 . Contributed by Fannie D. Bergen, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Told in Mansfield, Ohio, about 1855. Return to the table of contents . The Dog, the Cat, the Ass, and the Cock USA Once upon a time, a long while ago, when beasts and fowls could talk, it happened that a dog lived in a farmer's barnyard. By and by he grew tired of watching the house all night and working hard all day, so he thought he'd go out into the world to seek his fortune. One fine day, when the farmer had gone away, he started off down the road. He hadn't gone far when he spied a cat curled up asleep on a door-stone in a farmer's yard, so he looked over the fence and called to the cat, "I'm going out into the world to seek my fortune. Don't you want to come along too?" But the cat said she was very comfortable where she was, and didn't think she cared to go traveling. But the dog told her that by and by when she got old the farmer wouldn't let her lie on his sunny door-stone, but would make her lie in the cold, no matter whether it snowed or not. So the cat concluded she'd go along too, and they walked down the road arm in arm. They hadn't gone far when they spied a jackass eating grass in a farmer's yard. So the dog looked over the fence and called to the jackass, "We're going out into the world to seek our fortune. Don't you want to come along too?" But the jackass said he was very comfortable where he was, and didn't think he cared to go traveling. But the dog told him that by and by, when he got old and stiff, he'd have to work early and late, year after year, for only just what he would eat, and short allowance at that. So the jackass concluded to go along too, and they all walked down the road arm in arm. They hadn't gone far when they spied a cock crowing in a farmer's yard, so the dog looked over the fence and called, "We're going out into the world to seek our fortune. Don't you want to come along too?" But the rooster said he was very comfortable where he was, and didn't think he cared to go traveling. But the dog told him that by and by, when it came Thanksgiving, pop would go his head, and he'd make a fine dinner for the farmer. So the rooster concluded he'd go along too, and they all walked down the road arm in arm. Now they had neglected to take anything to eat along with them, and when night overtook them, weary, footsore, and hungry, they were in a dense forest, and they all began to blame the dog for getting them into such a scrape. The ass proposed that the cock should fly to the top of a high tree to see if he could discover a place for them to lodge. He had scarcely perched on a limb before he called to his friends that a house was a little way off, for he could see a light in the window. The dog called to him to come down and lead the was to the house, and they all walked off arm in arm to the house. When they got there it was perfectly still about the house. They could hear no one inside. The ass kicked at the door, but no one answered. They looked about and found the house had only one window, and that was so high up they couldn't look in. He proposed that the jackass should stand on his hind legs, with his forelegs resting against the house, while the dog should clamber up his back and stand on his head, the cat run up the backs of both, and the rooster fly to the cat's head, and then he could just look in at the window. "Hurry and tell what you see," said the jackass, "for my neck is breaking off." "I see a fire on a hearth and a table loaded with all sorts of fine things to eat: turkey and plum pudding, and pan-dowdy, and a band of men sitting round the table." "Zounds!" said the dog, "we must get in." So the rooster flew against the window with such a crash that it scared the robbers -- for this was a band of robbers -- nearly to death. They jumped up from the table so quickly that they overturned their chairs and whisked out the candles, while in flew the rooster, the cat, and the dog at the window, while the jackass went round and waited at the door till the robbers came out and ran away. Then the beasts lighted the candles again, and picked up the chairs, and sat down and had a good supper. Then they began to look about to see how they should dispose of themselves for the night. The jackass went out in the barn to sleep in the hay, the dog lay on the rug by the hearth, the cat took up her bed among the warm ashes, and the rooster flew to the ridgepole of the house, and soon all were fast asleep, being very tired by their long day's journey. By and by the robbers plucked up courage, and about midnight came back to the house to see if perchance they had not been scared at their shadows. Two of them got in at the window to take a survey, and seeing the cat's glowing eyes in the ashes mistook them for coals, and scratching a match in them the cat sunk her claws in his hand, which terrified him so much that in attempting to escape he ran against the dog, and he in turn caught the robber by the leg and bit him. By this time the tumult had awakened the ass, and just as the robber rushed out at the door the jackass met him and kicked him ten feet in the air, while the rooster set up a hideous crowing. It took but a few minutes for the robbers to escape to the woods and find their companions, to whom they told a doleful tale, how in trying to light a match at the fireplace the devil with red-hot eyes stuck his claws into his hands, a second devil attacked him in the rear, while another devil kicked him into the air, and as he came down on the greensward, more dead than alive, another horrid demon form the housetop cried out, "Throw the rascal up her, through the rascal up here." The thieves could never be induced to go back to the house. They thought it haunted by devils. So our friends, the jackass, the dog, the cat, and the rooster, lived there happy forever after, preferring it to traveling about to see the world. Source: Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 1 (1888), pp. 230-33 . Contributed by Miss H. S. Thurston, as told in Salem, Massachusetts, about 1858. Return to the table of contents . Benibaire Spain Once upon a time there were three little kids who were very poor, and the eldest said: "What shall we do?" The second replied: "I don't know." And the third said: "I know what we will do. We will go to Benibaire's house and steal three flasks of oil." "Well thought of," said the others; "we will go there." After walking a league, they heard a voice crying: "Bah, bah." They saw a great sheep, and were afraid, and ran away, saying: "Fly, fly, it is going to attack us." But the sheep cried to them: "Don't be afraid. Where are you going?" "To Benibaire's house, to steal three flasks of oil," they answered. "Would you like me to go too?" said the sheep. "Oh, yes," they replied. They went another league, and heard a voice that said: "Mieaou, mieaou." And they saw a very great black cat, and were frightened, and ran away, saying: "Fly, fly, it is going to scratch us." But the cat cried to them: "Don't be frightened, I won't scratch you. Where are you going?" "To Benibaire's house, to steal three flasks of oil," they replied. "Would you like me to go too?" "Oh, do come," answered the kids. They went a league farther, and heard a voice crowing: "Cock-a-doodle-doo." And the saw a very fiery cock, and were frightened, and fled, saying: "Fly, fly, it is going to peck us." The cock said to them: "Don't be afraid, I won't peck you. Where are you going?" "To Benibaire's house, to steal three flasks of oil." "Would you like me to go?" "By all means," replied the kids. They went another league, and saw a packing needle, and were frightened, and ran away, saying: "Fly, fly, It will prick us." But the needle said: "Don't be afraid, I won't prick you. Where are you going?" "To Benibaire's house, to steal three flasks of oil." "Would you like me to go?" "Yes, come along." They went another league, and arrived at Benibaire's house; and as it was night, the door was closed. "How shall we get in?" said the little kids. To which the cock replied: "I will fly on to the roof, and get down the chimney." And he did so, and opened the door to them all. They entered the house, and said, "Where shall we hide ourselves?" The cock replied: "I have my place already; I will go into the chimney." The cat hid in the cinders; the needle put itself into the towel, and the sheep got behind the door. Then the kids went to the jars to draw the oil. Whilst they were drawing it they let the funnel fall, and this aroused Benibaire, who said: "Oh, Lord! thieves have got into my house." He got up and went to the chimney, and looked up the flue, to see if it were day. Whilst he was looking up, the cock dropped some lime into his eyes and blinded him. He ran to the towel to wipe his face, and as the needle was there, it pricked him; he went to kindle a fire by the eye of the cat in the ashes, and she darted out at him and scratched him; he went flying to the door, and when he got there the sheep gave him a push and he rolled into the street; he went to the mill, and fell into the river, and was drowned, and the three kids remained masters of the house, and had a very good time of it. Source: Fernan Caballero [Cecilia Francisca J. Arrom de Ayala], The Bird of Truth and Other Fairy Tales , translated by J. H. Ingram (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1883), pp. 204-208 . Return to the table of contents . The World's Reward South Africa Once there was a man that had an old dog, so old that the man desired to put him aside. The dog had served him very faithfully when he was still young, but ingratitude is the world's reward, and the man now wanted to dispose of him. The old dumb creature, however, ferreted out the plan of his master, and so at once resolved to go away of his own accord. After he had walked quite a way he met an old bull in the veldt. "Don't you want to go with me?" asked the dog. "Where?" was the reply. "To the land of the aged," said the dog, "where troubles don't disturb you, and thanklessness does not deface the deeds of man." "Good," said the bull, "I am your companion." The two now walked on and found a ram. The dog laid the plan before him, and all moved off together, until they afterwards came successively upon a donkey, a cat, a cock, and a goose. These joined their company, and the seven set out on their journey. Late one night they came to a house, and through the open door they saw a table spread with all kinds of nice food, of which some robbers were having their fill. It would help nothing to ask for admittance, and seeing that they were hungry, they must think of something else. Therefore the donkey climbed up on the bull, the ram on the donkey, the dog on the ram, the cat on the dog, the goose on the cat, and the cock on the goose, and with one accord they all let out terrible (threatening) noises (cryings). The bull began to bellow, the donkey to bray, the dog to bark, the ram to bleat, the cat to mew, the goose to giggle gaggle, and the cock to crow, all without cessation. The people in the house were frightened perfectly limp; they glanced out through the front door, and there they stared on the strange sight. Some of them took to the ropes over the back lower door, some disappeared through the window, and in a few counts the house was empty. Then the seven old animals climbed down from one another, stepped into the house, and satisfied themselves with the delicious food. But when they had finished, there still remained a great deal of food, too much to take with them on their remaining journey, and so together they contrived a plan to hold their position until the next day after breakfast. The dog said, "See here, I am accustomed to watch at the front door of my master's house," and thereupon flopped himself down to sleep; the bull said, "I go behind the door," and there he took his position; the ram said, I will go up on to the loft"; the donkey, "I at the middle door"; the cat, "I in the fireplace"; the goose, "I in the back door "; and the cock said, "I am going to sleep on the bed." The captain of the robbers after a while sent one of his men back to see if these creatures had yet left the house. The man came very cautiously into the neighborhood, listened and listened, but he heard nothing; he peeped through the window, and saw in the grate just two coals still glimmering, and thereupon started to walk through the front door. There the old dog seized him by the leg. He jumped into the house, but the bull was ready, swept him up with his horns, and tossed him on to the loft. Here the ram received him and pushed him off the loft again. Reaching ground, he made for the middle door, but the donkey set up a terrible braying and at the same time gave him a kick that landed him in the fireplace, where the cat flew at him and scratched him nearly to pieces. He then jumped out through the back door, and here the goose got him by the trousers. When he was some distance away the cock crowed. He thereupon ran so that you could hear the stones rattle in the dark. Purple and crimson and out of breath, he came back to his companions. "Frightful, frightful!" was all that they could get from him at first, but after a while he told them, "When I looked through the window I saw in the fireplace two bright coals shining, and when I wanted to go through the front door to go and look, I stepped into an iron trap. I jumped into the house, and there some one seized me with a fork and pitched me up on to the loft, there again someone was ready, and threw me down on all fours. I wanted to fly through the middle door, but there some one blew on a trumpet, and smote me with a sledge hammer so that I did not know where I landed; but coming to very quickly, I found I was in the fireplace, and there another flew at me and scratched the eyes almost out of my head. I thereupon fled out of the back door, and lastly I was attacked on the leg by the sixth with a pair of fire tongs, and when I was still running away, someone shouted out of the house, 'Stop him, stop h - i - m!'" Source: James A. Honeÿ, South-African Folk-Tales (New York: The Baker and Taylor Company, 1910), pp. 28-32 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. See also Aging and Death in Folklore . An essay by D. L. Ashliman, with supporting texts from proverbs, folktales, and myths from around the world. Revised January 11, 2024 Old, Older, and Oldest: Folktales of Type 726 Old, Older, and Oldest folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 726 about old men, their fathers, and their grandfathers selected and translated by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2018 Contents The Three Old Men (Germany). Old Age (Germany). The Seventh Father of the House (Norway). The Dwarf of Folkared's Cliff (Sweden). Harry Jenkins (England). The Three Old Men of Painswick (England). Searching for the Kingdom of the Green Mountains (Scotland). Old, Older, and Oldest (Ireland). Three Generations (USA). Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Aging and Death in Folklore . The Three Old Men Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm There are people still living today in the Duchy of Schleswig, in the region of the Angles, who remember the following story. They heard it from the mouth of Pastor Oest, who died some time ago and who is known for several scholarly works. However, it is not known if he himself experienced the events, or if it was a neighboring preacher. In the middle of the eighteenth century it happened that a new preacher was riding around the boundaries of his diocese in order to familiarize himself thoroughly with its circumstances. In a remote area there was a lonely farmstead, and the road led directly past the front yard of the farmhouse. An old man with snow-white hair was sitting there on a bench and crying bitterly. The pastor wished him a good evening and asked him what was wrong with him. "Oh," answered the old man, "my father gave me a beating." Surprised, the preacher tied up his horse and entered the house. He was met in the entryway by an old man even more aged than the first one. He was openly agitated and making angry gestures. The preacher addressed him kindly and asked him the cause of his anger. The old man spoke, "Oh, the boy dropped my father!" With that he opened the parlor door. The pastor was struck with silence and astonishment when he saw there an old man, bent over with age but still energetic, sitting in an easy chair next to the stove. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die drei Alten," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 362, p. 464 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die drei Alten," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 362, p. 464 . The Grimms' source: Schmidt from Lübeck, Der Freimüthige , no. 1 (1809). This legend is numbered 363 in later editions of the Grimms' Deutsche Sagen . Anglia is a small peninsula within the larger peninsula of Jutland in today's Schleswig-Holstein, Germany. This legend is also found in the following collection: Books.google.com: Müllenhoff, Karl Victor, "Die drei Alten," Sagen, Märchen und Lieder der Herzogthümer Schleswig, Holstein und Lauenburg (Kiel: Schwersche Buchhandlung, 1845), p. 98 . Internet Archive: Müllenhoff, Karl Victor, "Die drei Alten," Sagen, Märchen und Lieder der Herzogthümer Schleswig, Holstein und Lauenburg (Kiel: Schwersche Buchhandlung, 1845), p. 98 . Return to the table of contents . Old Age Germany, Johann Peter Hebel In Scotland there are people who grow very old. Once a traveler came upon an old man in his sixties who was crying. When asked what was wrong with him, he said that his father had slapped his face. The stranger could hardly believe that a man of his years would still have a living father and that he would still be under his discipline. When asked why he had been slapped, the man in his sixties said that he had carelessly dropped his grandfather while helping him into his bed. Upon hearing this the stranger asked to be taken to their house to see if the situation was as the old man stated. Yes, it was so. The boy was 62 years old, the father 96, and the grandfather 130. Afterward, while recounting the story, the stranger told how unusual it was to thus see 288 years together in one little room. Source (books.google.com): Johann Peter Hebel, "Hohes Alter," Schatzkästlein des rheinischen Hausfreundes , 2nd edition (Stuttgart and Tübingen: In der J. G. Cotta'schen Buchhandlung, 1818), p. 185 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Peter Hebel, "Hohes Alter," Schatzkästlein des rheinischen Hausfreundes , new edition (Stuttgart and Tübingen: In der J. G. Cotta'schen Buchhandlung, 1833), p. 185 . This account first appeared in Hebel's Der rheinländische Hausfreund; oder, Neuer Calender auf das Jahr 1809 . Return to the table of contents . The Seventh Father of the House Norway, Peter Christen Asbjørnsen Once upon a time there was a man who was traveling about, and he came at length to a big and fine farm. There was such a fine manor house there that it might well have been a little castle. "It would be a nice thing to get a night's rest here," said the man to himself, upon entering the gate. Close by stood an old man with gray hair and beard, chopping wood. "Good evening, father," said the traveler. "Can I get lodgings here tonight?" "I am not the father of the house," said the old man. "Go into the kitchen and speak to my father!" The traveler went into the kitchen. There he met a man who was still older, and he was lying on his knees in front of the hearth, blowing into the fire. "Good evening, father. Can I get lodgings here tonight?" asked the traveler. "I am not the father of the house," said the old man. "But go in and speak to my father. He is sitting at the table in the parlor." So the traveler went into the parlor and spoke to him who was sitting at the table. He was much older than the other two, and he sat there with chattering teeth, shaking, and reading in a big book, almost like a little child. "Good evening, father. Can you give me lodgings here tonight?" said the man. "I am not the father of the house. But speak to my father over there. He is sitting on the bench," said the man who was sitting at the table with chattering teeth, and shaking and shivering. So the traveler went to him who was sitting on the bench. He was getting a pipe of tobacco ready, but he was so bent with age, and his hands shook so much, that he was scarcely able to hold the pipe. "Good evening, father," said the traveler again. "Can I get lodgings here tonight?" "I am not the father of the house," said the old, bent-over man. "But speak to my father, who is in the bed over yonder." The traveler went to the bed, and there lay an old, old man, and the only thing about him that seemed to be alive was a pair of big eyes. "Good evening, father. Can I get lodgings here tonight?" said the traveler. "I am not the father of the house. But speak to my father, who lies in the cradle yonder," said the man with the big eyes. Yes, the traveler went to the cradle. There was a very old man lying, so shriveled up, that he was not larger than a baby, and one could not have told that there was life in him if it had not been for a sound in his throat now and then. "Good evening, father. Can I get lodgings here tonight?" said the man. It took some time before he got an answer, and still longer before he had finished it. He said, like the others, that he was not the father of the house. "But speak to my father. He is hanging up in the horn on the wall there." The traveler stared around the walls, and at last he caught sight of the horn. But when he looked for him who hung in it, there was scarcely anything to be seen but a lump of white ashes, which had the appearance of a man's face. Then he was so frightened, that he cried aloud, "Good evening, father. Will you give me lodgings here tonight?" There was a sound like a little tomtit's chirping, and he was barely able to understand that it meant, "Yes, my child." And now a table came in which was covered with the costliest dishes, with ale and brandy. And when he had eaten and drunk, in came a good bed with reindeer skins, and the traveler was very glad indeed that he at last had found the true father of the house. Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Round the Yule Log: Norwegian Folk and Fairy Tales , translated by H. L. Brækstad (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1881), pp. 108-110 . Source (Internet Archive): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Round the Yule Log: Norwegian Folk and Fairy Tales , translated by H. L. Brækstad (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1881), pp. 108-110 . Norwegian source: Books.google.com: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, "Den syvende Fa'r i Huset," Norske Folke-Eventyr: Ny Samling (Copenhagen: F. Hegel, 1876), no. 5, pp. 21-22 . Internet Archive: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, "Den syvende Fa'r i Huset," Norske Folke-Eventyr: Ny Samling (Copenhagen: F. Hegel, 1876), no. 5, pp. 21-22 . Translation modified by D. L. Ashliman. For example: Brækstad mistranslates the title "Den syvende Fa'r i Huset" as "The Seven Fathers in the House." Return to the table of contents . The Dwarf of Folkared's Cliff Sweden, Herman Hofberg It is probably that there are few places more gloomy and uninviting than certain parts of the parish of Sibbarp, in the Province of Halland. Dark heaths cover a good portion of the parish, and from their dull brown surface rises, here and there, a lonely, cheerless mountain. One of these is Folkared's Cliff, in the southern part of the parish, noted of old as the abiding place of little trolls and dwarfs. One chilly autumn day a peasant, going from Hogared, in Ljungby, to Folkared, in Sibbarp, in order to shorten his journey took a shortcut by way of the cliff, upon reaching which he perceived a dwarf about the size of a child seven or eight years old, sitting upon a stone crying. "Where is your home?" asked the peasant, moved by the seeming distress of the little fellow. "Here," sobbed the dwarf, pointing to the mountain. "How long have you lived here?" questioned the peasant in surprise. "Six hundred years." "Six hundred years! You lie, you rascal, and you deserve to be whipped for it." "Oh! Do not strike me," pleaded the dwarf, continuing to cry. "I have had enough of blows already today." "Who have you received them from?" asked the peasant. "From my father." "What capers did you cut up that you were thus punished?" "Oh, I was set to watch my old grandfather and when I chanced to turn my back he fell and hurt himself upon the floor." The peasant then understood what character of person he had met, and grasping his dirk he prepared to defend himself. But instantly he heard an awful crash in the mountain, and the dwarf had vanished. Source (books.google.com): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 86-88 . Source (Internet Archive): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 86-88 . Swedish source: Books.google.com: Herman Hofberg, "Pysslingarna i Folkareds Klef," Svenska Folksägner (Stockholm: Fr. Skoglunds Förlag, 1882), pp. 73-74 . Return to the table of contents . Harry Jenkins England Bolton-upon-Swale, a chapelry in the parish of Catterick, [is] famous for being the birth-place of Henry Jenkins, who affords such an astonishing instance of longevity, as to have been "the oldest man born upon the ruins of this postdiluvian world." He was born in the year 1500, and followed the employment of fishing for one hundred and forty years. When about eleven or twelve years old, he was sent to Northallerton with a horse-load of arrows for the army of the Earl of Surrey, on its march to the north, all the men being then employed at harvest. When he was more than one hundred years old, he used to swim and wade across the river with the greatest ease, and without catching cold. What is the most remarkable, he retained his sight to the last, having made without spectacles two artificial flies for fishing the year before he died; his hearing also continued till his death. Being summoned to give evidence in a tithe cause in 1667, between Charles Anthony, Vicar of Catterick, and Calvert Smithson, owner and occupier of lands in Kipling, he deposed, "That the tithes of wool, lamb, &c., mentioned in the interrogatories, were the vicar's, and had been paid to his knowledge six score years and more." And in another cause at York, between John Grubham Howe, Esq., and Mrs. Wastell of Eilerton, about the royalty of the river Swale, he gave evidence to one hundred and forty years. Previous to Jenkins's going to York, when the agent of Mrs. Wastell went to him, to find out what account he could give about the matter in dispute, he saw an old man sitting at the door, to whom he told his business. The old man said, "He could remember nothing about it, but that he would find his father in the house, who perhaps could satisfy him." When he went in he saw another old man sitting over the fire, bowed down with years, to whom he repeated his former question. With some difficulty he made him understand what he had said; and after a little time got the following answer which surprised him very much, "That he knew nothing about it, but that if he would go into the yard, he would meet with his father, who perhaps could tell him." The agent upon this thought that he had met with a race of antediluvians. However into the yard he went, and to his no small astonish ment found a venerable old man, with a long beard and a broad leathern belt about him, chopping sticks. To this man he again told his business and received such information as in the end recovered the royalty in dispute. As this was a singular piece of service to Mrs. Wastell's cause, which without this man's evidence must have been given to her antagonist, some little annuity might have been settled upon him; but so far from it, that in his old age he went about asking charity and lived the remainder of his life upon very coarse diet. Source (books.google.com): Christopher Clarkson, The History of Richmond in the County of York (Richmond: Printed for the author by Thomas Bowman, 1821), pp. 396-97 . Return to the table of contents . The Three Old Men of Painswick England (A Ballad Exemplifying the Longevity of that Famous Town 200 Years Ago.) Oh! Painswick is a healthful town. It hath a bracing breeze, Where men by nature's rules might live As long as e'er they please. Before the glass and baneful pipe Had robb'd man of his strength, And water only was his drink, He lived a greater length. Two hundred years, or more, ago A pilgrim passed that way; And what that pilgrim heard and saw I will relate today. And while he stopp'd outside the town To rest his weary bones. He saw a very aged man Upon a heap of stones. The pilgrim saw him with surprise, And surely thought he dream'd; The poor man was so very old, Methuselah he seem'd! He'd travelled o'er the wide, wide world. Amid its heat and cold, But he had never, never seen A man one-half so old. His face was wrinkled like a skin That's shrivell'd by the heat; His hair was whiter than the snow We tread beneath our feet. It made the pilgrim very sad. As he was passing by, To see his old eyes fill'd with tears. To hear him sob and cry. The man was crying like a child, His tears fell like the rain; The pilgrim felt for him, and ask'd, "Old man, are you in pain? "Oh, tell me, tell me, poor old man, Why do you sob and cry?" The old man rubb'd his eyes, and said, "Feethur's bin a byutting I!" "Old man, old man, you must be mad. For that can never be; Your father surely has been dead At least a century." "My feethur be alive and well, I wish that he weer dy'ud. For he ha bin and byut his stick About my face and yud." The pilgrim pick'd the old man up. And walk'd to Painswick town; "Oh show me where your father lives. And I will put you down. And I will tell the cruel man Such things must not be done, And I will say how wrong it is To beat his aged son." The pilgrim shook a garden gate. An old man ope'd the door; His back was bended like a bow, His white beard swept the floor. If Adam he had lived till now, And lengthen'd out his span, Then Adam really would have seem'd Another such a man! The pilgrim felt amazed, indeed, When he beheld his sire; He held a great stick in his hand, His face was flush'd with ire. "Old man, old man, put down your stick. Why do you beat your son?" "I'll cut the rascal to the quick If he does what he've done. Why up in yonder apple-tree Grandfeether risk'd his bones; And while the old man pick'd the fruit, The rascal dubb'd with stones." The pilgrim turn'd his head and saw, In a spreading apple-tree, A very, very aged man. The eldest of the three. The pilgrim was a holy man, Whose hopes were in the sky; He fled -- he thought it was a place Where man would never die. Source (books.google.com): Notes and Queries: A Medium of Intercommunication for Literary Men, General Readers, etc. , 4th series, vol. 10 (London, 1872), p. 162 . Source (Internet Archive): Notes and Queries: A Medium of Intercommunication for Literary Men, General Readers, etc. , 4th series, vol. 10 (London, 1872), p. 162 . The contributor of this piece is identified only as "H. Y. J. T., Upton St. Leonards." Return to the table of contents . Searching for the Kingdom of the Green Mountains Scotland The following episode is an extract from the longer tale "The Kingdom of the Green Mountains." He [the soldier] was going on, and inquiring for the road to the kingdom of the Green Mountains. He was told by those of whom he made inquiry that they had never heard of such a kingdom. He was travelling from place to place, but was getting no information about the kingdom. He was ridiculed for speaking at all of such a place. He came one day to houses, and saw an old man putting divots [turf for roofs of houses] on a house, and said to him, "Ah! how old you are! and yet you are putting divots on the house." The old man said, "I am old; but my father is older than I." "Ah!" said the soldier, "Is your father alive?" "He is," said the old man. "Where are you going?" I am going," said the soldier, "to the kingdom of the Green Mountains." "Well," said the old man, "I am old, but I have never heard of that kingdom. Perhaps my father knows about it." "Where is your father?" said the soldier. "He is conveying the divots to me," said the old man, and will be here in a short time, when you may speak to him about that kingdom." The man who was conveying the divots arrived; and the soldier said to him, "Ah! man, how old you are!" "By Mary, I am old; but my father is older than I," said the old man. "Is your father still alive?" said the soldier. "He is," said the old man. "Where is he?" said the soldier. "He is cutting the divots," said the old man. They then went to the man who was cutting the divots; and the soldier said, "Ah! man, how old you are! And yet you are cutting the divots." The old man said, "I am old; but my father is older than I." "Ah!" said the soldier. "Is your father, I wonder, still alive?" "He is," said he. "Where is he?" said the soldier. "He is hunting birds in the hill," said the old man. The soldier said to him, "Have you ever heard of the kingdom of the Green Mountains?" "I have not," said he; "but perhaps my father has; and when he comes home tonight you may ask him." He remained with the old man till evening, when the fowler came home. When the fowler came home the soldier said to him, "Ah! man, how old you are!" "I am old," said he; "but my father is older than I." "Ah!" said the soldier, "is your father, I wonder, still alive?" "By Mary! he is," said the fowler. "Where is he?" said the soldier. "He is in the house," said the fowler. The soldier said to him, "Have you ever heard of the kingdom of the Green Mountains?" "I have not," said he; "but perhaps my father has." They went down to the house ; and when they went in the old man was being rocked in a cradle. The soldier said to him, "Ah! man, what a great age has been granted to you!" "Well! Yes, a very great age," said he. The soldier said to him, "Have you ever heard of the kingdom of the Green Mountains ?" "Really," said the old man, "I have never heard of that kingdom." Source (books.google.com): MacInnes, D., Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition: Argyllshire Series, no. 2, Folk and Hero Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 143-49 (English and Gaelic on facing pages). Source (Internet Archive): MacInnes, D., Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition: Argyllshire Series, no. 2, Folk and Hero Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 143-49 (English and Gaelic on facing pages). Return to the table of contents . Old, Older, and Oldest Ireland The following note refers to the tale above Searching for the Kingdom of the Green Mountains . This is a very wide-spread incident, but, as the following extract from a letter of Dr. Hyde's will show, it is by no means necessary to assume borrowing to account for its appearance at different times and in different lands. Curiously enough, I met a doctor from County Sligo the very day before I received your proofs of this story, and he told me he had seen a very old man putting scraws (divots) on a house, and he said to him, "How old are you?' and the man said, "Ninety-six." "You're a great old man to be working like that," said the doctor. "No, but if you were to see my father, you'd say he was the great old man." The father came out, apparently as hale and hearty as the son, and he was 115 years old. I mention this as a curious coincidence, for next day I read your story. Source (books.google.com): MacInnes, D., Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition: Argyllshire Series, no. 2, Folk and Hero Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), p. 460 . Source (Internet Archive): ): MacInnes, D., Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition: Argyllshire Series, no. 2, Folk and Hero Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), p. 460 . Return to the table of contents . Three Generations United States of America A seventy-year old man visited a doctor for a routine examination. Impressed with his patient's vitality and health, the doctor decided to ask him some questions about his lifestyle. After hearing responses about diet and exercise, the physician continued: "And may I also ask about your sexual activity?" "Of course," answered the seventy-year-old. "I usually have sex three times a week." "That's remarkable," said the doctor. "Would you happen to know how late in life your father remained sexually active?" "Oh, Dad? He's a bit of an embarassment to us. He's ninety, and he visits a prostitute every week." "Ninety!" exclaimed the doctor. "You do have good genes. How old was your grandfather when he died?" "Granddad? He's still alive. He's 110 and getting married next week." "Getting married at 110! Why does he want to get married at that age?" "Oh, he doesn't want to get married. He has to!" Source: Oral transmission. Heard in Saint George, Utah, November 2006. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 13, 2018. Old Grandfathers and Their Grandsons Old Grandfathers and Their Grandsons folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 980 about old people who are saved by their grandsons translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2020 Contents How an Ungrateful Son Planned to Murder His Old Father (India, The Jataka ). A Lesson for Fathers (India, The Katha Manjari ). Don't Beat Grandfather (India, The Katha Manjari ). The Old Man, His Son, and His Grandson (Philippines). The Golden Rule (Philippines). Respect Old Age (Philippines). A Wicked Man (France, Jacques de Vitry). La Housse Partie [The Divided Horse-Blanket, summary] (France). The Divided Horse-Blanket (France). Let Him That Does Evil Expect Evil in Return (Italy, Ortensio Lando). Of the Old Man That Put Himself in His Son's Hands [1] (England). Of the Old Man That Put Himself in His Son's Hands [2] (England). Of the Old Man of Monmouth That Gave His Son All His Goods in His Lifetime (England). Of an Unnatural Son Who Fed His Aged Father upon Oats and Offal (England). Two Ells of Cloth (Germany, Johannes Pauli). Old Frühling (Germany, Heinrich Stilling). Half a Blanket (Germany, Des Knaben Wunderhorn ). The Old Grandfather and His Grandson (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). A Child's Thankfulness and Unthankfulness (Germany, Johann Peter Hebel). The Son Forgave His Father (Albania). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. How an Ungrateful Son Planned to Murder His Old Father India, The Jataka Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was King of Benares, there was in a family of a certain village of Kasi an only son named Vasitthaka. This man supported his parents, and after his mother's death, he supported his father as has been described in the introduction. But there is this difference. When the woman [Vasitthaka's wife] said, "Look there! That is your father's doing! I am constantly begging him not to do this and that, and he only gets angry!" she went on, "My lord, your father is fierce and violent, forever picking quarrels. A decrepit old man like that, tormented with disease, is bound to die soon; and I can't live in the same house with him. He will die of himself before many days are out. Well, take him to a cemetery, and dig a pit, throw him in, and break his head with the spade; and when he is dead, shovel the earth upon him, and leave him there." At last, by dint of this dinning in his ears, said he, "Wife, to kill a man is a serious matter. How can I do it?" "I will tell you of a way," quoth she. "Say on, then." "Well, my lord, at break of day, go to the place where your father sleeps. Tell him very loud, that all may hear, that a debtor of his is in a certain village, that you went and he would not pay you, and that if he dies the man will never pay at all. And say that you will both drive there together in the morning. Then at the appointed time get up, and put the animals to the cart, and take him in it to the cemetery. When you get there, bury him in a pit, make a noise as if you had been robbed, wound and wash your head, and return." "Yes, that plan will do," said Vasitthaka. He agreed to her proposal, and got the cart ready for the journey. Now the man had a son, a lad of seven years, but wise and clever. The lad overheard what his mother said. "My mother," thought he, "is a wicked woman, and is trying to persuade father to murder his father. I will prevent my father from doing this murder." He ran quickly, and lay down beside his grandsire. Vasitthaka, at the time suggested by the wife, prepared the cart. "Come, father, let us get that debt!" said he, and placed his father in the cart. But the boy got in first of all. Vasitthaka could not prevent him, so he took him to the cemetery with them. Then, placing his father and his son together in a place apart, with the cart, he got down, took spade and basket, and in a spot where he was hidden from them began to dig a square hole. The boy got down and followed him, and as though ignorant what was afoot, opened a conversation by repeating the first stanza: No bulbs are here, no herbs for cooking meat, No cat-mint, nor no other plant to eat. Than father, why this pit, if need be none, Delve in Death's acre mid the woods alone? This his father answered by repeating the second stanza: Thy grandsire, son, is very weak and old, Oppressed by pain from ailments manifold. Him will I bury in a pit today. In such a life I could not wish him stay. Hearing this, the boy answered by repeating a half stanza: Thou has done sinfully in wishing this, And for the deed, a cruel deed it is. With these words, he caught the spade from his father's hands, and at no great distance began to dig another pit. His father approaching asked why he dug that pit, to whom he made reply by finishing the third stanza: I too, when thou art aged, father mine, Will treat my father as thou treatest thine; Following the custom of the family Deep in a pit I too will bury thee. To this the father replied by repeating the fourth stanza: What a harsh saying for a boy to say, And to upbraid a father in this way! To think that my own son would rail at me, And to his truest friend unkind should be! When the father had thus spoken, the wise lad recited three stanzas, one by way of answer, and two as an holy hymn: I am not harsh, my father, nor unkind, Nay, I regard thee with a friendly mind. But this thou dost, this act of sin, thy son Will have no strength to undo again, once done. Whoso, Vasittha, hurts with ill intent His mother or his father, innocent, He, when the body is dissolved, shall be In hell for his next life undoubtedly. Whoso with meat and drink, Vasittha, shall His mother or his father feed withal, He, when the body is dissolved, shall be In heaven for his next life undoubtedly. The father, after hearing his son thus discourse, repeated the eighth stanza: Thou art no heartless ingrate, son, I see, But kindly hearted, O my son to me. 'Twas in obedience to thy mother's word I thought to do this horrid deed abhorred. Said the lad, when he heard this, "Father, women, when a wrong is done and they are not rebuked, again and again commit sin. You must bend my mother, that she may never again do such a deed as this." And he repeated the ninth stanza: That wife of yours, that ill-conditioned dame, My mother, she that brought me forth, that same, Let us from out our dwelling far expel, Lest she work other woe on thee as well. Hearing the words of his wise son, well pleased was Vasitthaka, and saying, "Let us go, my son!" he seated himself in the cart with son and father. Now the woman too, this sinner, was happy at heart; for, thought she, this ill-luck is out of the house now. She plastered the place with wet cow dung, and cooked a mess of rice porridge. But as she sat watching the road by which they would return, she espied them coming, "There he is, back with old ill-luck again!" thought she, much in anger. "Fie, good-for-nothing! cried she. "What, bring back the ill-luck you took away with you!" Vasitthaka said not a word, but unyoked the cart. Then said he, "Wretch, what is that you say?" He gave her a sound drubbing, and bundled her head over heels out of doors, bidding her never darken his door again. Then he bathed his father and his son, and took a bath himself, and the three of them ate the rice porridge. The sinful woman dwelt for a few days in another house. Then the son said to his father, "Father, for all this, my mother does not understand. Now let us try to vex her. You give out that in such and such a village lives a niece of yours, who will attend upon your father and your son and you. So you will go and fetch her. Then take flowers and perfumes, and get into your cart, and ride about the country all day, returning in the evening." And so he did. The women in the neighbor's family told his wife this. "Have you heard," said they, "that your husband has gone to get another wife in such a place?" "Ah, then I am undone!" quoth she, "and there is no place for me left." But she would inquire of her son. So quickly she came to him, and fell at his feet, crying, "Save thee, I have no other refuge! Henceforward I will tend your father and grandsire as I would tend a beauteous shrine! Give me entrance into this house once more!" "Yes, mother," replied the lad, "if you do no more as you did, I will. Be of good cheer!" And at his father's coming he repeated the tenth stanza: That wife of yours, that ill-conditioned dame, My mother, she that brought me forth, that same, Like a tamed elephant, in full control, Let her return again, that sinful soul. So said he to his father, and then went and summoned his mother. She, being reconciled to her husband and her husband's father, was thenceforward tamed, and endued with righteousness, and watched over her husband and his father and her son. And these two, steadfastly following their son's advice, gave alms and did good deeds, and became destined to join the hosts of heaven. The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 4, translated by W. H. D. Rouse (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1901), no. 446, pp. 27-31 . The introduction and conclusion to this tale, not given here, make it clear that the wise boy featured in the story was the future Buddha in one of his many reincarnations. Return to the table of contents . A Lesson for Fathers India A rich man was in the habit of giving his old father kanji (rice-water) out of a broken pot. One day his little boy took this pot and hid it. Some time after, this hard-hearted man began to beat his father because he could not find the pot, whereupon the little boy called out, "O father, don't beat my grandfather, for I have taken away the pot and hidden it. You know after I have become a great man I shall not buy any other pot for you." Hearing this the man was ashamed, and from that day he provided every needful comfort for his father. Source: "Stories from the Katamancari," The Orientalist: A Monthly Journal , vol. 1, part 7 (July 1884), p. 166 . Katamancari is also spelled Katha Manjari or Kathamanjari. Return to the table of contents . Don't Beat Grandfather India A rich man used to feed his father with congee [rice gruel] poured out on a potsherd [a piece of broken pottery]. The son of the former, observing this, took it away one day and hid it. The rich man asked his father where it was and began to beat him [for not telling where it was]. Thereupon the son exclaimed: "Don't beat grandfather, for it was I who took it away and hid it, thinking that when I grow up I might not be able to get another potsherd to feed you with." Upon this the rich man was covered with shame, and ever afterwards kept his father in comfort. Source: H. T. Rogers First Lessons in Telugu: Comprising Twenty-Five Short Stories ... with Copious Notes and Translation (Madras: C. Foster and Company, 1889), no. 8, pp. vi-vii . Rogers' source: The The Katha Manjari (also spelled Kathamanjari or Katamancari ). Return to the table of contents . The Old Man, His Son, and His Grandson Philippines In olden times, when men lived to be two or three hundred years old, there dwelt a very poor family near a big forest. The household had but three members: a grandfather, a father, and a son. The grandfather was an old man of one hundred and twenty-five years. He was so old, that the help of his housemates was needed to feed him. Many a time, and especially after meals, he related to his son and his grandson his brave deeds while serving in the king's army, the responsible positions he filled after leaving a soldier's life; and he told entertaining stories of hundreds of years gone by. The father was not satisfied with the arrangement, however, and planned to get rid of the old man. One day he said to his son, "At present I am receiving a peso daily, but half of it is spent to feed your worthless grandfather. We do not get any real benefit from him. Tomorrow let us bind him and take him to the woods, and leave him there to die." "Yes, father," said the boy. When the morning came, they bound the old man and took him to the forest. On their way back home the boy said to his father, "Wait! I will go back and get the rope." "What for?" asked his father, raising his voice. "To have it ready when your turn comes," replied the boy, believing that to cast every old man into the forest was the usual custom. "Ah! If that is likely to be the case with me, back we go and get your grandfather again." Source: Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 34b, p. 272 . Fansler's source: "Narrated by Eutiquiano Garcia of Mexico, Pampanga.... Mr. Garcia says that he heard the story told by his father at a gathering of a number of old storytellers at his home during the Christmas vacation in 1908." Return to the table of contents . The Golden Rule Philippines A long time ago there lived in a town a couple who had a son. The father of the husband lived with his son and daughter-in-law happily for many years. But when he grew very old, he became very feeble. Every time he ate at the table, he always broke a plate, because his hands trembled so. The old man's awkwardness soon made his son angry, and one day he made a wooden plate for his father to eat out of. The poor old man had to eat all his food from this wooden plate. When the grandson noticed what his father had done, he took some tools and went down under the house. There he took a piece of board and began to carve it. When his father saw him and said to him, "What are you doing, son?" the boy replied to him, "Father, I am making wooden plates for you and my mother when you are old." As the son uttered these words, tears gushed from the father's eyes. From that time on, the old man was always allowed to eat at the table with the rest of the family, nor was he made to eat from a wooden plate. Source: Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 34b, p. 271 . Fansler's source: "Narrated by Cipriano Seráfice, a Pangasinan from Mangaldan, Pangasinan." Return to the table of contents . Respect Old Age Philippines Once there lived a poor man who had to support his family, the members of which were a hot-headed wife who predominated over the will of her husband; a small boy of ten; and an old man of eighty, the boy's grandfather. This old man could no longer work, because of his feebleness. He was the cause of many quarrels between the husband and wife, but was loved by their son. One rainy morning the husband was forced by his wife to send his father away. He called his son, and ordered him to carry a basket full of food and also a blanket. He told the boy that they were to leave the old man in a hut on their farm some distance away. The boy wept, and protested against this harsh treatment of his grandfather, but in vain. He then cut the blanket into two parts. When he was asked to explain his action, he said to his father, "When you grow old, I will leave you in a hut, and give you this half of the blanket." The man was astonished, hurriedly recalled his order concerning his father, and thereafter took good care of him. Source: Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 34a, p. 271 . Fansler's source: "Narrated by José Ignacio, a Tagalog from Malabon, Rizal." Return to the table of contents . A Wicked Man Jacques de Vitry Summary A wicked man made his old father lie in a stable, and gave him a shabby cloak to wear. Now this wicked man had a son of his own who felt very sorry for the ill treatment his grandfather received, and going one day to his father, he said, "Father, buy me a cloak." His father answered, "Have you not good clothes; what do you wish with it?" "I shall keep it," he rreplied, "until you are old, and then I will give it to you, and do to you as you do to your father, who begot you and nourished you, and gave you all he had." Source: The Exempla; or, Illustrative Stories from the Sermones Vulgares of Jacques de Vitry , edited by Thomas Frederick Crane (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1890), no. 288, p. 260 . Link to the story in Latin: no. 288, p. 121 . Jacques de Vitry (ca. 1160-1240) was a French theologian. Return to the table of contents . La Housse Partie [The Divided Horse-Blanket] France Summary A father, having given his estate to his son at the time of the young man's marriage, becomes a burden in his old age, whereupon his ungrateful daughter-in-law conspires to drive him forth. It is cold, and the old man begs that at least he shall be provided with a garment against the weather. The unnatural son sends his own young boy to fetch the horse-blanket, and the child returns with but half of it. "Why did you cut it in two?" asks his father. To which the little one responds that he is keeping the other half for the day when he, too, will show his father the door. Whereupon the unnatural son repents, and full amends are made to the old man. Source: Annie Lemp Konta, The History of French Literature from the Oath of Strasburg to Chanticler (New York and London: D. Appleton and Company, 1910), pp. 37-38 . Attributed to a medieval French author named Bernier. Link to the complete text of this tale: "The Divided Blanket," Tales from the Old French , translated by Isabel Butler (London: Constable and Company; Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1910), pp. 111-24 . Return to the table of contents . The Divided Horse-Blanket France In goodly words and speech, it behooves every man, as best he may, to show and relate and tell clearly in the common tongue the adventures that befall in this world. For as a man goeth to and fro he heareth many a thing told that is good to tell again; and those who know and may venture the emprise, should give to it all care and heed and study, even as did those who came before us, the good masters of old time; for they who would live hereafter must be no wise idle. But in these present days, which are evil, men grow slothful, wherefore now the gentle minstrels will venture little; for know ye of a sooth it is no light thing to tell a goodly tale. Now will I show you an adventure that befell some seventeen years agone, or twenty mayhap. A rich man of Abbeville, well garnished with goods and gold, departed out of his town, both he and his wife and his son, because he had come into dispute with folk that were greater and stronger than he, and much he feared and dreaded to abide among his enemies. So from Abbeville he came unto Paris. There he lived peacefully, and did homage to the king and became his liegeman and burgess. Now inasmuch as the good man was discreet and courteous, and his dame of good disport, and the lad showed himself no wise foolish or discourteous or ill-taught, the neighbors in the street wherein they came to dwell were full glad of them, and often visited them and did them much honour. So many a one with no great endeavour on his part may make himself well loved, and by mere fair and pleasant speech win much praise of all; for whoso speaketh fair, getteth a fair answer, and whoso speaketh ill or doth ill, must perforce win evil for himself again; even so is it ofttimes seen and known, and the proverb saith, "Ye shall know the master by his works." So for seven years and more the good man lived at Paris, and bought and sold such goods as came in his way; and he so bartered here and there that always he saved what he had, and added somewhat more thereto. So he traded prosperously and lived plenteously until he lost his companion, whenas God wrought his will in the wife who had been his fellow for thirty years. No other child had they save the youth of whom I have told you, who now at his father's side was all woful and discomforted; often he swooned for grief and wept, and sorely he lamented the mother who had reared him full softly. But his father comforted him, saying: "Fair son, now thy mother is dead, let us pray God that he grant her pardon. Wipe thine eyes and dry thy face for nought will tears avail thee; know of a sooth we must needs all die, all must pass by the same road; none can thwart death, and from death there is no return. Yet is there comfort for thee, fair son, for thou art growing a comely youth, and art near of an age to marry; whereas I am waxing old. If I can compass for thee a union with persons of high estate, I will part with good share of my havings; for thy friends are afar off and no wise speedily couldst thou come by them at need, none hast thou in this land and if thou dost not win them by thine own might. Now if I may but find a dame well born and rich in kindred and friends, who hath brethren and uncles and aunts and cousins germain, of good lineage and of good estate, I would help thee to win that which would profit thee, nor would I forbear on the score of my moneys." Now, lordings, the story telleth us there were in that same land three knights who were brethren. On both father's side and mother's side they came of high parentage, and they were of much worship and honour in arms, but all their inheritance had been put in pawn, lands and forests and holdings, that they might follow tourneys; three thousand pounds at usury had they borrowed on their inheritance, whereby they were sore tormented. Now the eldest had a daughter born of his wife who was no longer living, and from her mother the damsel held a goodly house in Paris, face to face with the dwelling of the burgess of whom I have told you. This house did not pertain to the father, and the friends of the mother took good heed that he put it not in pawn, inasmuch as the rent thereof was reckoned at forty pounds of Paris, nor had he ever been at any pain or trouble for the ingathering of this sum. Now because this damsel, by reason of her kin, had friends and power, the good man sought her in marriage of her father and friends. The knights questioned him of his goods and havings, how great they might be, and readily he answered them: "What in chatel and what in moneys I have of pounds one thousand and five hundred; I were but a liar and if I boasted me of more, and at the most I would add thereto one hundred pounds of Paris; honourably have I come by my fortune, and the half thereof am I ready to give over to my son." But the knights made answer: "This we may not agree to, fair sir; for if you were to become a templar or a white monk or a black monk, anon you would leave all your havings to the temple or the monastery; wherefore no such covenant will we make with you; no, sir, no, in faith, fair sir." "What other covenant then, tell me now I pray you." "Right gladly, fair, dear sir," quoth they. "Whatsoever ye can render, we would that you should give your son outright, that you should make over all to him, and that he should be so invested therein that neither you, nor any other, may in any manner dispute it with him. And if ye will agree to this, the marriage shall be made, but other wise we would not that your son should have our daughter and niece." The good man bethought him for a space, and looked at his son; still he pondered, but little good did his thought bring him, for soon he answered them, saying: "Sirs, whatsoever ye demand even that will I fulfil, but it shall be on this covenant: let my son take your daughter to wife, and I will give to him all that is mine, and since ye will so have it that I withhold nothing, let him receive all and take it for his own, for with it I endow and invest him." So the good man stripped himself bare, and before all the folk there gathered, disinvested and disinherited himself of all that he had in the world; so was he left bare as a peeled wand, for, and if his son did not give it him, he had neither chatel nor denier with which to buy his bread. All he gave him and declared him free of all; and when the word was spoken, the knight straightway took his daughter by the hand and gave her to the young man, who forthwith espoused her. So for two years thereafter they lived content and at peace as husband and wife, at which time, meseemeth, the lady bore a fair son to the young master; heedfully was he reared and cherished, and the lady likewise was dearly cared for, and often went to the bath and enjoyed much ease. And still the good man abode with them, but he had done himself a mortal hurt when he stripped himself bare of all that he had to live at another's mercy. Yet for twelve years and over he dwelt in that house, until such time as the child was well grown and of wit to see what passed about him. Often he heard told what his grandfather had done for his father who thereby had espoused the dame his wife, and ever the child kept it in his memory. Meantime the good man had waxed in years, and age had so weakened him that now he must needs support himself with a staff; and right liefly would his son have bought his winding sheet, for it seemed to him the old man had tarried over late above ground, and his long life was grievous to him. And the wife, who was full of pride and disdain, could not let be, but held the good man always in despite, and bore him such malice that she could not withhold her from saying to her lord: "Sir, for love's sake I pray you send hence your father, for by the faith I owe my mother's soul, so long as I know him to be in this house, no morsel shall pass my lips, for full fain am I that ye drive him hence." "Dame," said he in answer, "even so will I do." So, for that he feared and doubted his wife, he went to his father and said to him forthright: "Father, father, now get thee gone, for I tell thee here is nought to make or mend with thee or with thy lodging; for these twelve years and over hath meat been given thee here in this hostel, but now rise up and that speedily; go seek other lodging, wheresoever else ye may find it, for so it must needs be." At these words the father wept full sorely, and often he cursed the day and the hour in that he had lived so long in the world. "Ah, fair, sweet son, what sayest thou? For God's sake do me so much honour that ye suffer me to abide within thy gates; no great place do I need for my bed, nor will I crave of thee fire or carpet or rich coverlet, but let there be spread for me a few handfuls of straw beneath the pent-house without there. Never cast me out from thy house for reason that I eat of thy bread; that my bed be made without yonder irketh me not, if ye do but grant me my victual, but nowise should ye deny me wherewithal to live; and soothly, if thou shouldst wear the hair, thou shalt not so well expiate thy sins as if thou dost some comfort to me." "Fair father," quoth the young man, "sermon me no sermons, but make haste and get thee gone, lest my wife goeth out of her wit." "Where would ye that I should turn, fair son, I that have not so much as a farthing in the world?" "Go ye out into the city wherein there are a good ten thousand that seek and find whereby to live; each one there abideth his adventure; great mischance it were and if you likewise did not find sustenance; and many a one that hath acquaintance with you will lend you hostel." "Lend me, son? Will chance folk so do, when thou thyself deniest me thine house? Since thou wilt give me no comfort, how should those that are nought to me grant me anything ungrudgingly, when thou that art my son, failest me?" "Father," quoth he, "no more can I do herein, and I take upon me all the burden; know ye that this is my will." Thereat was his father so in dole that his heart was near to bursting, and weak as he was, he riseth and goeth out of the house, weeping. "Son," said he, "I commend thee to God. But since ye are fain of my going, in God's name, give me a fragment of a strip of thy coverlet -- no very precious thing is that -- for in truth I am so scantly clad I may not endure the cold, and it is from this I most suffer; wherefore I ask of thee wherewith to cover me withal." But his son, who ever shrank from giving, made answer: "Father, I have none; this is not the season of gifts, and none shall ye get at this time, and if I am not robbed and pillaged." "But fair, sweet son, all my body is a-tremble and greatly do I doubt the cold; do but give me such a covering as thou usest for thy horse, that the frost may do me no hurt." And the young man who was fain of his departure, saw that he could not be quit of him and if he did not grant him somewhat; so, for that he desired to be rid of him, he bade his son give the old man what he asked. The child sprang up when he was called, "And what is your will, sir?" asked he. "Fair son," quoth the young master, "I would that if ye find the stable door open, ye give my father the blanket that is upon my black horse; give him the best, and if it be his will, he may make of it a covering or cloak or capuchon." "Fair grandfather, now come with me," said the child who was ready of wit. So the good man all in anger and sorrow departed with him. The child found the covering, and he took the newest and the best, the biggest and the widest, and folded it adown the middle, and as fair and even as he might, cut it atwain with his knife, and gave the half thereof to his grandfather. "Fair boy," quoth the old man, "what would ye? Thy father hath given the cloak to me, wherefore then hast thou cut it atwain? Herein hast thou done a great wrong, for thy father had commanded that I should have it whole and undivided, so now will I go my ways back to him again." "Go wheresoever it pleaseth you, for no more shall you get of me," saith the boy. So the good man issued out of the stable. "Son," quoth he, "all thy sayings and doings are as nought. Why dost thou not chastise thy son that he may hold thee in fear and dread? See ye not, he hath kept back one half of the blanket?" "Foul fall thee, boy," saith the young master, "now give him the whole thereof." "Certes, that will I not," quoth the child, "for then how would you be paid? This half will I lay by for you, and no more shall ye get from me. And when I come to the mastery here, I will turn you out, even as you now turn him. And as he gave you all he had, so I would fain have all, and you shall take from me only just so much as you now give him. And if it so be that ye let him die in want, even so will I let you, and if I live." The young man heareth him, and deeply he sigheth, and bethinketh and questioneth himself; great heed he gave to the words of the child. Then he turneth his eyes to his father, and saith: "Father, come hither again; it was sin and the devil that laid an ambush for me, but please God, this shall not be; rather I will make you from this day forth lord and master in my house. And if my wife will not keep peace, and if she will not suffer you, ye shall be served elsewhere. Hereafter, pillow and rich coverlet shall be given you for your ease, and I pledge you by Saint Martin, that I will never drink wine nor eat a rich morsel, but you shall have a better; and you shall dwell in a cieled chamber, and keep a good fire in the chimney place; and garments shall ye have, like unto mine. For ye dealt fairly by me, sweet father, and if I am now rich and puissant, it is by reason of thy silver." This tale showeth clear and beareth witness how the child turned his father from his ill intent. And moreover all they who have marriageable children should give heed to it. Do not after the manner of the good man, and when you are foremost, yield not up your place; give not so much to your son but that ye may recover somewhat again; set not your trust in him, for children are without pity, and speedily they weary of the father that waxeth helpless; and whoso falleth into the power of another in this world liveth in great torment. And he who liveth at the mercy of another, and looketh to another for his very sustenance, should be to you as a warning. Bernier told this ensample that teacheth so goodly matter, and of it he made what he might. Source: Tales from the Old French , translated by Isabel Butler (London: Constable and Company; Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1910), pp. 111-24 . Return to the table of contents . Let Him That Does Evil Expect Evil in Return Italy, Ortensio Lando Riccardo Capponi, a noble Florentine, having devoted himself in early life to trade, in the course of time realized a very handsome property. When advanced in years, he took his son, Vincenti, into partnership, and not long after gave up his whole mercantile concern into his hands; and falling into a bad state of health, owing either to his great exertions, or to his subsequent high living, he became unable to leave the house. His son, Vincenti, who was of an extremely avaricious disposition, finding his father continued to linger much beyond the period his covetous and ungrateful heart would have assigned him, and unwilling longer to support him, took measures, under pretense of obtaining for him better medical advice than he could at home provide, to have him conveyed to the city hospital. Yet his affairs were then in a flourishing state; and everything that he possessed he owed to his unhappy parent, whose age and infirmities, whose tears and entreaties, he alike disregarded. This unnatural son could not, however, contrive to conduct the matter so secretly as to elude the observation and the reproaches of all classes of people in the city. He at first tried to impose, both upon his friends and the public, by the false representations which he set on foot; but finding these could not avail him, he resolved, in order the better to disarm the popular voice against him, to send his own children with little presents to their grandfather. On one occasion he gave to his eldest boy, about six years of age, two fine cambric shirts, desiring him, early the next morning, to take them carefully to his poor grandfather in the hospital. The little boy, with an expression of great respect and tenderness in his countenance, promised that he would do so; and on his return the next day, his father, calling him into his presence, inquired whether he had delivered them safe into the hands of his grandfather. "I only gave him one, father," replied the little boy. "What!" exclaimed Vincenti, with an angry voice. "Did I not tell you both were for your grandfather?" "Yes," returned the little fellow, with a steady and undaunted look, "but I thought that I would keep one of them for you, father, against the time when I shall have to send you, I hope, to the hospital." "How!" exclaimed Vincenti, "would you ever have the cruelty to send me there, my boy?" "Why not?" retorted the lad; "Let him that does evil, expect evil in return. For you know you made your own father go there, old and ailing as he is, and he never did you any harm in his life, and do you think I shall not send you, when I am able? Indeed, father, I am resolved that I will; for, as I have said before, let him that does evil, expect evil in return." On hearing these words, Vincenti, giving signs of the utmost emotion, as if suddenly smitten by the hand of heaven, sorely repented of the heinous offence against humanity and justice which he had committed. He hastened himself to the hospital; he entreated his father's pardon on his knees, and had him conveyed instantly home; ever afterwards showing himself a gentle and obedient son, and frequently administering to his aged parent's wants with his own hands. This incident gave rise, throughout all Tuscany, to the well known proverb above mentioned, "Let him that does evil, expect evil in return" ( Chi la fa, l'aspetta ); and from Tuscany it passed into many other parts of Italy. Source: Thomas Roscoe, The Italian Novelists: Selected from the Most Approved Authors in That Language , vol. 3, 2nd edition (London: W. Simpkin and R. Marshall, 1836), no. 13, pp. 35-37 . Roscoe's source: Varii Componimenti (Venice, 1552), novella 13. A modern idiomatic translation of Chi la fa, l'aspetta might be: "What goes around comes around." Return to the table of contents . Of the Old Man That Put Himself in His Son's Hands England There was a certain old man, which let his son to marry, and to bring his wife and his children, to dwell with him, and to take all the house into his own hand and bidding. So a certain time the old man was set and kept the upper end of the table, afterward they set him lower, about the middle of the table, thirdly they set him at the nether end of the table, fourthly he was set among the servants, fifthly they made him a couch behind the hall door, and cast on him an old sackcloth. Not long after the old man died, when he was dead, the young man's son came to him and said, "Father I pray you, give me this old sackcloth, that was wont to cover my grandfather." "What wouldst thou do with it?" said his father? "Forsooth," said the child, "it shall serve to cover you when you be old, like as it did my grandfather." At which words of the child this man ought to have been ashamed and sorry. For it is written: Son, reverence and help thy father in his old age, and make him not thoughtful and heavy in his life, and though he dote forgive it him. He that honoreth his father, shall live the longer, and shall rejoice in his own children. Source: "Of the olde man that put him selfe in his sonnes handes," The Hundred Merry Tales; or, Shakspeare's Jest Book (London: J. Chidley, 1831), pp. 98-99 . Spelling modernized. Return to the table of contents . Of the Old Man That Put Himself in His Son's Hands England There was a certain old man which let his son to marry, and to bring his wife and his children to dwell with him, and to take all the house into his own hand and guiding; so a certain time the old man was set, and kept the upper end of the table; afterwards they set him lower, about the middle of the table; thirdly, they set him at the nether end of the table; fourthly, he was set among the servants; fifthly, they made him a couch behind the hall door, and cast on him an old sackcloth. Not long after, the old man died; when he was dead, the young man's son came to him, and said, "father, I pray you give me this old sackcloth that was wont to cover my grand father." "What wouldst thou do with it?" said his father. "Forsooth," said the child, "it shall serve to cover you when ye be old, like as it did my grandfather." At which words of the child this man ought to have been ashamed and sorry; for it is written, "son, reverence and help thy father in his old age, and make him not thoughtful and heavy in his life, and though he dotes, forgive him; he that honoureth his father shall live the longer, and shall rejoice in his own children." Source (books.google.com): Shakspeare's Merry Tales (London: G. Routledge, 1845), no. 53, pp. 201-202 . Source (Internet Archive): Shakspeare's Merry Tales (London: G. Routledge, 1845), no. 53, pp. 201-202 . [Damaged copy.] Return to the table of contents . Of the Old Man of Monmouth That Gave His Son All His Goods in His Lifetime England In Monmouth dwelt an ancient man, of fair possessions and great lands, having but one son to enjoy all his substance. His son being married, he gave him all that he had, and so would live free from all worldly matters, in his old age, with his son in his own house. After the deed of gift was made, awhile the old man sat at the upper end of the table; afterwards, they set him lower, about the middle of the table; next, at the table's end; and then, among the servants; and, last of all, they made him a couch behind the door and covered him with old sackcloth, where, with grief and sorrow, the old man died. When the old man was buried, the young man's eldest child said unto him, "I pray you, father, give me this old sackcloth." "What wouldst thou do with it?" said his father. "Forsooth," said the boy, "it shall serve to cover you, as it did my old grandfather." Source: W. Carew Hazlitt, "Of the olde man of Monmouth, that gave his sonne all his goods in his life time," Shakespeare Jest-Books (London: Willis and Sotheran, 1864), pp. 60-61 . Spelling modernized. Hazlitt's source: Pasquils Jests with Mother Bunches Merriments (various editions, dated 1604-1669). Link to another version of this tale: "Of the olde man that put him selfe in his sonnes handes," The Hundred Merry Tales; or, Shakspeare's Jest Book (London: J. Chidley, 1831), pp. 98-99 . Return to the table of contents . Of an Unnatural Son Who Fed His Aged Father upon Oats and Offal. England In Heron's collection of God's judgments on wicked acts, it is related of an unnatural son, who fed his aged father upon oats and offal, lodged him in a filthy and crazy garret, and clothed him in sackcloth, while he and his wife and children lived in luxury; that, having bought sackcloth enough for two dresses for his father, the children took away the part not made up, and hid it, and that, upon asking them what they would do this for, they told him that they meant to keep it for him, when he should become old and walk with a stick! This, the author relates, pierced his heart; and, indeed, if this failed, he must have had the heart of a tiger. Source: William Cobbett Advice to Young Men, and (Incidentally) to Young Women, in the Middle and Higher Ranks of Life (London: Published by the author, 1829), not paginated . Return to the table of contents . Two Ells of Cloth Germany A father had turned over his entire fortune to his son, but afterward the son thought nothing about his father's needs. The father asked the son to have a coat made for him. Instead, the son gave his father two ells of cloth and told the father to use the cloth to patch his old coat. Now the son himself had a three-year old child who came crying to him and said, "Father give me two ells of cloth as well." The father gave them to him. Then the child climbed into the attic where he hid the cloth. The father crept after the child to see what he was doing with the cloth. He said to the child, "Why did you put the cloth up here?" The child said, "I want to keep it until you are old, then I will give it to you to patch your coat with, just as you have done with my grandfather." Then the son corrected his ways. Source (books.google.com): Johannes Pauli, "Uf ein mal het ein vatter seinem sun all sein gut geben," Schimpf und Ernst , edited by Hermann Österley (Stuttgart: Gedruckt auf Kosten des Litterarischen Vereins, 1866), no. 436, pp. 260-61 . Source (Internet Archive): Johannes Pauli, "Uf ein mal het ein vatter seinem sun all sein gut geben," Schimpf und Ernst (Stuttgart: Gedruckt auf Kosten des Litterarischen Vereins, 1866), no. 436, pp. 260-61 . Source in modern German (books.google.com): Karl Simrock, Schimpf und Ernst nach Johannes Pauli (Heilbronn: Verlag von Gebr. Henninger, 1876), no. 335, p. 256 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2020. Johannes Pauli was born about 1455 and died sometime after 1530. Return to the table of contents . Old Frühling German After dinner Stilling assembled a number of children about him, went out with them into the fields, or to the edge of a brook, and then related to them all kinds of fine sentimental tales; and after his store was exhausted, others were obliged to do the same. Some of them were once together in a meadow, when a boy came to them, who began as follows: Hear me, children! I will tell you something. Near us lives old Frühling; you know how he totters about with his stick; be has no longer any teeth, and he cannot see or hear much. Now, when he sits at the dinner table, and trembles in such a manner, he always scatters much, and sometimes something falls out of his mouth again. This disgusted his son and his daughter-in-law; and, therefore, the old grandfather was at length obliged to eat in the corner, behind the stove; they gave him something to eat in an earthen dish, and that often not enough to satisfy him. I have seen him eating; and he looked so sad after dinner, and his eyes were wet with tears. Well, the day before yesterday he broke his earthen dish. The young woman scolded him severely, but he said nothing, and only sighed. They then bought him a wooden dish for a couple of farthings, and he was obliged to eat out of it yesterday for the first time. Whilst they were sitting thus at dinner, their little boy, who is three years and a half old, began to gather little boards together on the floor. Young Frühling said to him, "What are you doing there, Peter?" "Oh," said the child, "I am making a little trough, out of which my father and mother shall eat when I am grown up." Young Frühling and his wife looked at each other awhile; at length they began to weep, and immediately fetched the old grandfather to the table, and let him eat with them. The children sprang up, clapped their hands, and cried out, "That is very pretty. Did little Peter say so?" "Yes," rejoined the boy, "I stood by when it happened." Heinrich Stilling, however, did not laugh. He stood still, and looked down. The tale penetrated through him, even to his inmost soul. At length he began: "I believe if that had happened to my grandfather, he would have risen up from his wooden dish, gone into a corner of the room, and, having placed himself there, would have exclaimed, 'Lord, strengthen me at this time, that I may avenge myself of these Philistines!' He would then have laid hold of the corner posts, and have pulled the house down about them." "Gently, gently, Stilling!" said one of the tallest of the boys to him. "That would have been a little too bad of your grandfather." "You are in the right," said Heinrich; "but only think how Satanic it was! How often may old Frühling have had his boy in his lap, and put the best morsels into his mouth! It would not have been wonderful if some fiery dragon, at midnight, when the first quarter of the moon had just set, had hurled itself down the chimney of such a house, and poisoned all the food." Source: The Autobiography of Heinrich Stilling , translated from the German by S. Jackson (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1844), p. 25 . Heinrich Stilling is a pseudonym for the German author Johann Heinrich Jung (1740-1817). Link to another translation of this account: The Life of John Henry Stilling , translated by E. L. Hazelius (Gettysburg: Press of the Theological Seminary, 1831), pp. 63-65 . Link to the account in German: Johann Heinrich Jung's, genannt Stilling, sämmtliche Werke , vol. 1: Stilling's Lebensgeschichte (Stuttgart: J. Scheible's Buchhandlung, 1841), pp. 130-32 . Return to the table of contents . Half a Blanket Germany In France an old king, weak with age, gave his kingdom and all his lands to his son, who in return promised to personally care for him. Soon afterward the son took himself a wife, who did not like the father. Spitefully she said, "The old man is always coughing at the table until it takes away all my pleasure in eating." So to please her, the son gave his father a place to lie beneath the stairs. For many years he lay there on a bed of hay and straw like one they would make for the dogs. The queen gave birth to a son, who grew into a proud and virtuous lad. Recognizing the situation, he brought whatever food and drink he could find to his grandfather. One day the grandfather asked for an old horse blanket to protect him from the cold, and the virtuous youth ran off to fulfill his wish. In the stall he found a good horse blanket. He took it from the horse and ripped it in two. Seeing him, his father asked him what he was doing with the horse blanket. "I am taking half of it for your father's bed," he said. "The other half I'll save for you when you are sleeping there where you now have your father locked in." Source: Ludwig Achim von Arnim and Clemens Brentano, "Das vierte Gebot," Des Knaben Wunderhorn: Alte deutsche Lieder , vol. 2 (Heidelberg: Mohr und Zimmer, 1808), pp. 269-70 . Freely translated by D. L. Ashliman into prose from a ballad entitled "Das vierte Gebot" (The Fourth Commandment -- "Honor your father and your mother ....") Von Arnim's and Brentano's source: an "old manuscript." This story has circulated throughout Europe since the middle ages. Return to the table of contents . The Old Grandfather and His Grandson Germany Once upon a time there was an old man who could hardly walk. His knees shook. He could not hear or see very well, and he did not have any teeth left. When he sat at the table, he could scarcely hold a spoon. He spilled soup on the tablecloth, and, beside that, some of his soup would run back out of his mouth. His son and his son's wife were disgusted with this, so finally they made the old grandfather sit in the corner behind the stove, where they gave him his food in an earthenware bowl, and not enough at that. He sat there looking sadly at the table, and his eyes grew moist. One day his shaking hands could not hold the bowl, and it fell to the ground and broke. The young woman scolded, but he said not a word. He only sobbed. Then for a few hellers they bought him a wooden bowl and made him eat from it. Once when they were all sitting there, the little grandson of four years pushed some pieces of wood together on the floor. "What are you making?" asked his father. "Oh, I'm making a little trough for you and mother to eat from when I'm big." The man and the woman looked at one another and then began to cry. They immediately brought the old grandfather to the table, and always let him eat there from then on. And if he spilled a little, they did not say a thing. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der alte Großvater und der Enkel," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 1st edition (Berlin: In der Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 78, pp. 355-56. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. This translation is based on the Grimms' first edition (1812), which is stylistically somewhat different from their final edition (1857). Link to the Grimms' final version: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der alte Großvater und der Enkel," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 7th edition, vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 78, p. 398 . Return to the table of contents . A Child's Thankfulness and Unthankfulness Germany A grown man mistreated his aged and sickly father so much that the latter asked to be put into a local pauper's hospice. There he hoped for at least a little care and to be spared the scorn from his son that was now so plaguing his life. The ungrateful son was only too happy to hear this, and before sundown the old man's wish had been fulfilled. However, not everything in the hospice met the old man's hopes. He asked his son, at the very least, to send him a pair of sheets so he would not have to sleep on bare straw. The son sought out the worst ones he had then told his ten-year old son to take them to the old grumble-head in the hospice. To his surprise he observed that his son hid one of the sheets in a corner then took just one of them to the grandfather. When the boy returned his father asked, "Why did you do that?" "I'm preparing for the future," replied the boy coldly, "when I send you to the hospice." What do we learn from this? -- Honor your father and mother, so that later you yourself will be well treated. Source (books.google.com): Johann Peter Hebel, "Kindesdank und Undank," Schatzkästlein des rheinischen Hausfreundes , 2nd edition (Stuttgart and Tübingen: J. G. Cotta'sche Buchhandlung, 1818), pp. 39-40 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Peter Hebel, "Kindesdank und Undank," Schatzkästlein des rheinischen Hausfreundes , 2nd edition (Stuttgart and Tübingen: J. G. Cotta'sche Buchhandlung, 1818), pp. 39-40 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2020. Return to the table of contents . The Son Forgave His Father Albania In olden times it was the custom in a certain town that when the master of the house became old his son had to take him away and drown him. A young man's father became old, and he said to his father, "come with me. The time has come for you to be drowned." The poor old man followed along and the son led him to a hill. He was about to push him into the water when the old man said to him, "Son, don't drown me at this place, for this is where I drowned my father." Hearing this, the young man thought, "He drowned his father just as I am about to drown him, and in the same manner my son will drown me." Thus he forgave his father and did not drown him. The entire town heard what had happened to the old man and swore never again to drown their old men. Source (books.google.com): J. U. Jarnik, "Der Sohn verzieh dem Vater," Albanesische Märchen und Schwänke, Zeitschrift für Volkskunde in Sage und Mär, Schwank und Streich, Lied, Rätsel und Sprichwort, Sitte und Brauch , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Alfred Dörffel, 1890), p. 347 . Source (Internet Archive): J. U. Jarnik, "Der Sohn verzieh dem Vater," Albanesische Märchen und Schwänke, Zeitschrift für Volkskunde in Sage und Mär, Schwank und Streich, Lied, Rätsel und Sprichwort, Sitte und Brauch , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Alfred Dörffel, 1890), p. 347 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2019. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. See also Aging and Death in Folklore . An essay by D. L. Ashliman, with supporting texts from proverbs, folktales, and myths from around the world. Revised March 23, 2020. Old Parents and Their Ungrateful Children Old Parents and Their Ungrateful Children folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 980D edited and translated by D. L. Ashliman © 2019-2022 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Ungrateful Son (Europe). The Ungrateful Son (Martin Luther). A Terrifying Judgment of God (Croatia). The Ungrateful Daughter (Ukraine). The Origin of the Turtle (Russia). The Snake around His Neck (Germany). The Stingy Daughter (India). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Ungrateful Son Europe The old man, it seemed, always visited his son just at mealtime. "You needn't fix anything for me," he would say, looking hungrily on as the others prepared to eat. Of course they had to give him something. "This has to stop," said the old man's son on a day when they had killed a chicken for a special feast. "If the old man comes today, we will hide the pot." As expected, the old man knocked at the door just before mealtime. Hurriedly they hid the pot with the chicken, then acted as if they knew nothing of a forthcoming meal. The old man sniffed in the air, said something about the good smell, looked about, then seeing nothing to eat, he took leave and returned to his own house. "Now we can eat!" said the man, bringing the pot from its hiding place and taking off the lid. But to his terror, the chicken turned into a hideous toad before his very eyes. It jumped into his face, attaching itself firmly, and it did not come off as long as the man lived. Retold from varous European sources, including texts by Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof , Johannes Pauli , and Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm . Return to the table of contents . The Ungrateful Son Martin Luther We read about a father who gave all his goods to his children with the expectation that they would care for him and feed him for the rest of his life. But his children did not do this. After he had been with a child for one week they would say to him, "Now you should go somewhere else and eat there for the same amount of time." Once the father happened to come to a son who was just sitting down to eat a goose. On seeing his father, the son hid the goose under the table. After the father left, the son wanted to pick up the goose, but it had turned into a toad. The toad jumped into the son's face and ate its way into his flesh until he could not free himself from it. It stuck fast to him and devoured everything that the son tried to eat until he starved to death. This example shows how severely God punishes those who are thankless toward their parents. Source (books.google.com): D. Martin Luther's Tischreden oder Colloquia , edited by Karl Eduard Förstemann, vol. 1 (Leipzig: Gebauersche Buchhandlung, 1844), no. 73, pp. 206-207 . Source (Internet Archive): D. Martin Luther's Tischreden oder Colloquia , edited by Karl Eduard Förstemann, vol. 1 (Leipzig: Gebauersche Buchhandlung, 1844), no. 73, pp. 206-207 . Luther's Tischreden ( Table Talks ) were compiled by his students and first published in 1566. Return to the table of contents . A Terrifying Judgment of God Croatia In the year 1453 a terrifying judgment of God happened in the Istrian town of Motovun. An evil and undisciplined son had a good, old father who was very poor. He often had neither bread nor wine at home, and no one gave him alms. Sometimes he would go to his son and knock on the door. His son's wife would say, "Look, it's your father." The son would answer, "What in the devil's name does he want? Let him in and give him a little bread and some watered wine like they give to children." Thus it happened several times, and the old man patiently accepted this treatment. One day the son bought a good capon. They prepared it and sat down at the table to eat while it was still warm. The mean-spirited wife, prompted by the devil, said, "If only your father won't come by just now!" The son said, "I hope that we can eat the capon without being disturbed." Suddenly someone knocked on the door. The son looked out -- it was his father. "Curses that just now I have to open the door for him!" said the son. He quickly hid the capon in a chest. He gave the poor old man a little bread and cheese and a little wine, told him to eat quickly, and then sent him home. The father had scarcely left when the son went to the chest to fetch the capon. He lifted the lid. A large, terrible toad jumped out and into the son's face. Neither physicians nor medications could free him from it. The toad ate away his entire face so that he no longer could show himself to anyone. Source (Internet Archive): Oskar Dähnhardt, Natursagen: Eine Sammlung naturdeutender Sagen, Märchen, Fabeln und Legenden , vol. 4, part 2 (Leipzig and Berlin: B. G. Teubner, 1912), p. 264 . Return to the table of contents . The Ungrateful Daughter Ukraine An old mother came to visit her daughter. The daughter saw her coming and picked up a roasted chichen that she and her husband were about to eat. Covering it with a platter she hid the chicken in another room. The mother sat for a while and then returned to her own home. She had scarcely left when the daughter and her husband carried the chicken back to their table. But when they looked beneath the cover, it was a turtle. Thus the turtle, like the chicken between two platters, has a hard shell below and one above. Source (Internet Archive): Oskar Dähnhardt, Natursagen: Eine Sammlung naturdeutender Sagen, Märchen, Fabeln und Legenden , vol. 4, part 2 (Leipzig and Berlin: B. G. Teubner, 1912), p. 264 . Return to the table of contents . The Origin of the Turtle Russia A mother came to visit her married daughter. Through the window the daughter saw her coming, and with another plate she quickly covered the roasted chicken that she and her husband were eating, then hid it so they would not have to share it with the mother. The mother sat for a while and then went away without being offered anything to eat. The daughter immediately fetched the chicken to continue eating it. But when she tried to pick up the top plate it had grown onto the roast. In an instant the chicken and the two plates had been transformed into a turtle. Thus the turtle came into being. Source (Internet Archive): Oskar Dähnhardt, Natursagen: Eine Sammlung naturdeutender Sagen, Märchen, Fabeln und Legenden , vol. 4, part 2 (Leipzig and Berlin: B. G. Teubner, 1912), p. 264 . Return to the table of contents . The Snake around His Neck Germany Once there was a mother who gave all her property to her son, thinking that he was pious and good and would therefor treat her fairly. No! We should not give everything away before we die. After the son had taken possession of everything he got married, and his poor mother had to fend for herself. One day he was seated at the table with his wife. Before them they had a roasted chicken. The mother knocked on the door. He quickly called to his servant, "Hide the chicken in the chest until the old woman has left." The servant did just that. The hungry old mother came in. When she asked for a scrap of bread he sent her on her away with curse words. When she was gone he said to his servant, "Now go and bring the chicken back here." The servant went to the chest, but instead of a chicken lying on the plate there was a large snake. You can well imagine how the frightened servant cried out loud. The son did not want to believe that anything was wrong, so he sent the maid to the chest, but she too cried out and ran away. Then he became angry and said, "If the devil himself is on that plate, I shall fetch him." He went to the chest, opened it, and the snake jumped out and wrapped itself around his neck. From that time onward it ate with him and drank with him. And if the son refused to give it food, or if he attempted to take it off his neck, the snake pressed against him until he thought he would suffocate. He had to manage with the snake around his neck wherever he went, and all because he had treated his mother so badly. Source (books.google.com): Johannes Wilhelm Wolf, "Die Schlange am Halse," Deutsche Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1845), no. 35, pp. 153-54 . Source (Internet Archive): Johannes Wilhelm Wolf, "Die Schlange am Halse," Deutsche Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1845), no. 35, pp. 153-54 . Return to the table of contents . The Stingy Daughter India Once a man went to visit his married daughter: he intended to arrive in time for dinner; so though he passed some edible herbs on the way he did not stop to eat them. When he arrived he was duly welcomed and after some conversation he told his daughter that he must return the same day; she said, "All right, but wait till it gets hot." (The father understood this to be a metaphorical way of saying "Wait till the dinner is cooked.") But the daughter was determined not to cook the rice while her father was there; so they sat talking and when the sun was high the daughter went into the yard and felt the ground with her foot and finding it scorching she said, "Now father, it is time for you to be going; it has got hot." Then the old man understood that she was not going to give him his dinner. So he took his stick and got up to go. Now the son-in-law was a great hunter and that day he had killed and brought home a peacock. As he was leaving, the father said, "My daughter, if your husband ever brings home a peacock, I advise you to cook it with mowah oil cake; that makes it taste very nice." So directly her father had gone, the woman set to work and cooked the peacock with mowah oil cake; but when her husband and children began to eat it they found it horribly bitter, and she herself tasted it and found it uneatable. Then she told them that her father had made fun of her and made her spoil all the meat. Her husband asked whether she had cooked rice for her father; and when she said "No," he said that this was the way in which he had punished her. He had had nothing to eat, and so he had prevented their having any either. She should entertain all visitors and especially her father. So they threw away the meat and had no dinner. Source (Internet Archive): Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 125, pp. 345-46 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 21, 2022. Killing of Old People: Folktales of Type 981 Killing of Old People folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 981 and other legends about geronticide translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2019 Contents A Blessed and Happie People (Pliny the Elder). Why People Today Die Their Own Death (Retold by D. L. Ashliman). How the Killing of the Old Men Was Stopped (Serbia). Grandfather and Grandson (Serbia). A Story from the Time of the Romans (Romania -- Transylvania). The Old Man Who Solved Riddles (Macedonia). Killing of Old Men (Romania). Duck Under, Duck Under (Germany / Poland). A Wendish Legend (Germany / Poland). The Old Heathens (Germany). Gillings Bluff (Iceland). Kith-Rocks and Kith-Clubs (Sweden). The Man with the Hatchet (England). An Irish Deathbed Scene (Ireland). Link to The Mountain Where Old People Were Abandoned (Japan). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. A Blessed and Happie People Pliny the Elder Beyond the North pole there is a blessed and happie people (if wee may beleeve it) whom they call Hyperborei, who live exceeding long, and many fabulous and strange wonders are reported of them.... The countrey is open upon the Sunne, of a blissefull and pleasant temperature, void of all noisome wind and hurtfull aire. Their habitations be in woods and groves, where they worship the gods both by themselves, and in companies and congregations; no discord know they; no sicknesse are they acquainted with. They never die, but when they have lived long enough: for when the aged men have made good cheere, and annointed their bodies with sweet ointments, they leape from off a certaine rocke into the sea. This kind of sepulture, of all others is most happie. Source (books.google.com): Pliny the Elder, The Historie of the World: Commonly called, The Naturall Historie of C. Plinius Secundus , translated into English by Philemon Holland (London: Printed by Adam Islip, 1601), book 4, ch. 12, p. 84 . Source (Internet Archive): Pliny the Elder, The Historie of the World: Commonly called, The Naturall Historie of C. Plinius Secundus , translated into English by Philemon Holland (London: Printed by Adam Islip, 1634), book 4, ch. 12, p. 84 . Pliny the Elder (23-79 AD) was a Roman encyclopedist. Return to the table of contents . Why People Today Die Their Own Death Retold by D. L. Ashliman In ancient days people did not die their own death. Instead, law and tradition required that they be taken into the mountains and pushed over a sacred cliff when they reached a certain age. One family could not bring themselves to depart from their old grandfather, and so when his time came, they hid him in their cellar instead of taking him to the cliff of death. At this time there was a great famine in the land. The crops had failed, the food stores were exhausted, and indeed, no one even had grain left for seed. The grandfather, from his hiding place in the cellar, told his kin to remove the thatched roofs from their houses and rethresh the straw for any kernels of grain that may have been missed the first time. They did as he suggested, and harvested a good measure of forgotten grain. Acting again on the old man's advice, they sowed the newfound grain that very day. Miraculously their crop sprouted, matured, and was ready for harvest the next morning. The king, who quickly learned of this miracle, demanded an explanation. Thus the family was forced to admit how they had violated law and tradition by sparing their old grandfather. The king, impressed by the family's courage and by the old man's wisdom, decreed that from that day forth old people would be allowed to live until they died their own death. Source: Retold from various eastern European sources. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 981. Return to the table of contents . How the Killing of the Old Men Was Stopped Serbia In old times it was the habit to kill old men when they had passed fifty years. A man who was nearing his fiftieth year had a good son, who was very sorry for his father and hid him in a wine vat, in which he cared for him secretly. Once he bet with some of his neighbors who should see the first rising of the sun in the morning. The merciful son told his father of his bet, and his father said to him, "Be careful, and when you are at the place to see the rising of the sun take, the precaution not to look to the east as the others will do, but look instead to the west at the highest point of the mountains, and you will win the bet." The son did as his father had advised him, and so saw first the rising of the sun. When the neighbors asked him who had advised him what to do, he said it was his father, whom he must hide and protect from a forced death. The people were astonished at such clever advice and concluded that the old men are clever and that they do not deserve to be killed, but respected. Source: T. R. Georgevitch, Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1918), v. 29, p. 239. This story was first published 1899 in Kazadzic , a journal of Serbian folklore. It was submitted by Mr. I. L. Szeckovic from Paracin, a town on the river Morava. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 981. Return to the table of contents Grandfather and Grandson Serbia On the right bank of the river Mlava, near the village of Krepoljin, is situated a very high hill, Gradatr (Fort) by name, on which one can see the ruins of an old disabled and deserted fort. The popular tradition says that it was once a Roman or Latin fort. The Romans who occupied this fort were very bellicose people. Their leader ordered all the holders of the fort up to forty years of age to be active fighters, from forty to fifty to be guards of the fort, and after fifty to be killed, because they have no military value. Since that period the old men were killed. An old man who was nearing his fiftieth year had a grandson who was very fond of him. On the eve of the day on which the old man was ordered to be killed, the enemy attacked the fort. The grandson used this opportunity and forced his grandfather to fly. The old man fled and hid himself in a cave which was in the neighborhood. After the enemy were dispersed, and when the people looked for the old man, they could not find him. Some time after, the leader commanded them to be ready to go to war in a distant land. At the moment when the army was prepared to start, the grandfather appeared secretly to his grandson and said to him, "For this long way ride a mare which has a colt, and when you come to an unknown land, kill the colt, and then go farther. God protect you! Farewell!" The grandson obeyed the orders of his grandfather, rode a mare with a colt and went with the leader and his army to the war. They went for three days and then they came to a river, on the opposite side of which was a dense forest. The young man looked on all sides and was sure that he was in a perfectly unknown land. Then he secretly killed the colt. Crossing the river the army marched through the forest. After six days of traveling they came to a vast plain, where they found the enemy waiting for them. The fight was very severe, and at the end the leader and his army were defeated and forced to flee. The vanquished army did not know the way, but the mare of the young man went in the direction where her colt was lost and so led them to the river, from which they knew the way to their own country. Everybody was astonished, and the leader asked the young man who taught him to act so, and he, after some hesitation, told him that it was his grandfather. When they came home the leader invited the old man, recognized his cleverness, and ordered that further on the old men should not be killed, but respected, because they knew much more than the young men. Source: T. R. Georgevitch, Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1918), v. 29, pp. 239-241. Georgevitch does not give this legend a title. Title provided by D. L. Ashliman. This story was first published 1900 in Kazadzic , a journal of Serbian folklore. It was submitted by Mr. P. Variljevic from the village of Krepoljin in eastern Serbia, in the district of Omolje. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 981. Return to the table of contents . A Story from the Time of the Romans Romania (Transylvania) In olden times it was the custom to kill the old people because they were considered useless. A young man did not have the heart to kill his old father, but as he stood in fear of the others, he hid his father in the cellar in an empty cask. He gave him food and drink secretly, so that not a soul was able to discover his secret. There came suddenly the order that all men capable of bearing arms should get ready to fight a terrible monster which was spreading round its lair misery and trouble. The pious son did not know how to provide during his absence for the imprisoned father, so that he should not die of thirst and hunger. He brought all the victuals that were in the house, and he told his father of his trouble, inasmuch as he might never return, and that his beloved father would in consequence die a miserable death. The old man replied, "Should you not return, I willingly give up my wretched body to death. In order, however, that you should not die through this monster, listen to my advice. It will be a help to you. The cavern in which that monster lives has many hundred passages and corners which are crossing and re-crossing one another, so that even if you should succeed in killing the monster, you would never be able to find the way out, and you will all die of hunger and thirst. Take therefore our black mare with her foal with you to the mouth of the cave and there kill and bury the foal and take the mare with you. She is sure to bring you back after you have killed the monster." After the old man had thus spoken, the young man took leave of him with tears in his eyes and went away with the other men. They arrived at the mouth of the cave. He killed the foal as his father had advised him, but he did not tell the others why he did so. After a heavy fight they succeeded at last in killing the monster, but fear seized upon the warriors when they discovered that in spite of much searching they could not find the way out. Then the young man took the black mare and let her go on. He followed her and asked the others to follow him. The mare started neighing and looking for her foal and hit at once upon the right path, and after a while they reached the mouth of the cave. When the others saw that they had escaped an inevitable death through the cleverness of their brother in arms, they wanted to know how he came to discover this happy device. He feared that if he told the truth both he and his old father would lose their lives. But after they had promised him under oath that no harm would befall him, he spoke out firmly and told them that he had kept his father alive in the cellar and that his father had given him the advice about the mare when he went to take leave of him. On hearing this they were astounded, and one of them exclaimed, "Our forefathers have not acted well in teaching us to kill the old men. They have gained experience and they can help our people by their advice when the strength of our arm fails." Source: M. Gaster, Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1919), v. 30, pp. 136-138. Gaster's source: Arthur and Albert Schott, Walachische Mährchen (Stuttgart and Tübingen: J. G. Cotta'scher Verlag, 1845, p. 152. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 981. Return to the table of contents . The Old Man Who Solved Riddles Macedonia The custom in olden times was to take the old men to the mountain, where they were left to die of hunger or to be torn to pieces by wild beasts. This was done to prevent famine and starvation, and those children who did not do it were killed by the people. A young man was taking his father to the mountain when he started to cry. The son took pity on him and took him home and locked him up in the cellar. There came an order from the emperor to the villager to kill a she-bear which appeared above the village. The young man asked his father in the cellar what was the meaning of this order, and he answered, "It means the rock at the top of the hill." The young man went to the assembly of the villagers and told them the answer to the emperor's order. They were to say, "We will kill the she-bear, and we will wait for the emperor to come and flay her." On another occasion the emperor wanted them to bring him every kind of seed found in the neighborhood. The old man in the cellar told the young man to go to an anthill, there they would be sure to find them all. When the young man again repeated this advice to the men in the village assembly, they were all surprised at his cleverness, and asked him to tell them who it was that had given him such advice, for they knew that he must have learned it from someone else. He then told them what he had done. Since then they no longer kill the old men, because their wisdom is indispensable. Source: M. Gaster, Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1919), v. 30, pp. 138-139. Gaster does not give this story a title. Title provided by D. L. Ashliman. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 981. Return to the table of contents . Killing of the Old Men Romania In olden times in some distant country the young folk had come together and decided to get rid of the old men. They did not want their wisdom and their advice, for they were just as clever. They had lived their lives, and that was an end of it. Over that country there ruled a young king who gladly accepted the decision of the young people and gave strict orders that all the old men should be killed. The orders were carried out with the utmost severity. But there lived among these people a young man who had not the heart to kill his old father. Frightened at the consequences of disobeying the king's orders, he took his old father and hid him in the cellar under the house. There he fed him and looked after him, carefully visiting him only by night. For a while things went well. The country was prosperous, the earth yielded its produce, vineyards flourished, and the orchards were laden with fruit. But things did not remain in that state of prosperity. A summer came. There was such drought that for months not a drop of rain fell. The crops were burnt off the face of the earth. The trees withered, and there was dearth and famine in the land. This was followed by a severe winter so cold as he people had never experienced in their life. Heavy snow fell and covered the fields. No food was left, nay not even seed for sowing the field in the springtime. Starvation had set in, and the people did not know what to do, for they saw death before their eyes, for themselves and for their starved cattle. One night, when the son came as usual to his father, he could not bring more than a morsel of food. His father asked him what was the matter and why he looked so sad. The son told him what had happened. They had no seed to sow and did not know where to get any. There was nothing for them but rank starvation. They were all at their wits' end and had nowhere to turn for counsel or advice how to save themselves, and the father said, "My son, fear not. Take a plow and plow up the road in front of the house and the adjoining road, and do not reply to any questions." The son did as his father had bidden. The earth which had become moist and soft through the melting snow was easily plowed up, when lo! to their great amazement, when the time came all kinds of grains seemed to sprout and to grow up from the ground which had been tilled. Maize and corn and wheat were all growing up, and -- as the weather was favorable -- yielded a very good crop. His neighbors were greatly astonished at what they saw, and went and told the king what had happened. The king called the young man and said to him, "This doing is not of your own wisdom. No doubt your father has told you, whom you have kept alive. Speak the truth and I will spare your life." The young man owned that his father had advised him to plow up the thoroughfares and roads close to their house. The young king then sent for the old man and asked him what was the meaning of his advice. The old man replied, "All throughout the year carts laden with all manner of seeds and corn are passing to and fro. Some of the corn falls to the ground, and not a few of the seeds fall on the ground and are trodden into the earth by the passers-by. Left in that state they usually rot, but if the ground is plowed up, and is moist and favorable for the growth, no one passing over that part of the ground, some of the corn has a chance of growing. It is upon that chance that I relied, and thus it has come to pass that we have now a rich crop, not only for our necessities, but also to provide you all with enough necessary seed for your own fields in the future." When the king and the young people heard what the old man had to tell and saw his deep wisdom, they recognized their folly, they rescinded that resolution, and decided henceforth to allow the old people to live in peace and honor. And henceforth the old men are allowed to live to the end of their days. Source: M. Gaster, Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1921), v. 32, pp. 213-215. Gaster's source: Ion Creanga [Romanian Folk-Lore Review], November/December 1919, pp. 106-107. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 981. Another escape from the famine in tales of this type is the old man's proposal that straw roofs be dismantled and re-threshed for leftover grain. Return to the table of contents . Duck Under, Duck Under Germany / Poland Not too many years ago Gypsies would pass through Holstein and then set up their camp in the marshland near Kolmar [Chodzież]. According to legend they would drown their very old people who were no longer able to keep up with them and were only useless burdens. As they pushed them alive under the water they would chant this verse: Duuk ünner, duuk ünner; De Weld is di gramm. Duck under, duck under; The world is misery for you. Source (books.google.com): Johann Friedrich Schütze, "Duuk ünner, duuk ünner," Holsteinisches Idiotikon: Ein beitrag zur Volkssittengeschichte (Hamburg: Heinrich Ludwig Villaume, 1800), p. 267 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Friedrich Schütze, "Duuk ünner, duuk ünner," Holsteinisches Idiotikon: Ein beitrag zur Volkssittengeschichte (Hamburg: Heinrich Ludwig Villaume, 1800), p. 267 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . A Wendish Legend Germany / Poland During heathen times the Sorbian Wends of Lausitz practiced the shameful and gruesome custom of ridding themselves of their old people who were no longer able to contribute. A son would strike his own father dead when he became old and incompetent, or he would throw him into water, or he would push him over a high cliff. Indeed, there are many examples of this, even after the advent of Christianity. For example: Herr Levin von Schulenburg, a high official in Altmark, was traveling among the Wends in about 1580 when he saw an old man being led away by several people. "Where are you going with the old man?" he asked, and received the answer, "To God!" They were going to sacrifice him to God, because he was no longer able to earn his own sustenance. When the official grasped what was happening, he forced them to turn the old man over to him. He took him home with him and hired him as a gatekeeper, a position that he held for twenty additional years. Source: Karl Haupt, "Von der Grausamkeit der Wenden," Sagenbuch der Lausitz , v. 2 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1863), p. 9 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Lausitz (Lusatia) is a historical region in today's southeast Germany and western Poland. Return to the table of contents . The Old Heathens Germany Told by an old man in Steinfurt In olden times many heathens lived around here, and it is still told how they put to death old people who were over sixty years of age. They would chop them into many small pieces, which were then put into large jars. Then a little lamp was placed in each jar. They buried them in the earth. To this day such jars are frequently dug up. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, "Die alten Heiden," Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen und einigen andern, besonders den angrenzenden Gegenden Norddeutschlands , vol. 1 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859) no. 109, p. 106 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Steinfurt is a town about 20 km northwest of Münster. Return to the table of contents . Gillings Bluff Iceland There's a precipice called Gillings Bluff near the farm, and we call its peak Family Cliff. The drop's so great there's not a living creature could ever survive it. It's called Family Cliff simply because we use it to cut down the size of our family whenever something extraordinary happens, and in this way our elders are allowed to die straight off without having to suffer any illnesses. And then they can go straight to Odin, while their children are spared all the trouble and expense of having to take care of them. Every member of our family is free to use this facility offered by the cliff, so there's no need for any of us to live in famine or poverty, or put up with other misfortunes that might happen to us. Source (Ancestry): Gautrek's Saga , ch. 1. Link to the Wikipedia article Gautrek's Saga . Return to the table of contents . Kith-Rocks and Kith-Clubs Sweden A violent death was deemed so pleasing to the gods, that it was not sought for in the field of battle only; "to gash oneself to Odin with the sword" was deemed better than to die of sickness or of old age. Those who were advanced in years precipitated themselves from lofty cliffs, which thence received the appellation of kith-rocks, and so "fared to Valhalla." Three such cliffs in West-Gothland and Bleking still bear the latter name, and to another the remarkable statement attaches, that the people, after dances and sports, threw themselves headlong from its top into the lake, as the ancients relate of the Hyperboreans and Scythians. [Plin. Hist. Nat. iv. 12] Domestic legends even inform us, that if a man became bedridden and frail with age, his kinsmen would assemble and put him to death with a club, called a kith-club. Source (books.google.com): Eric Gustave Geijer, The History of the Swedes , translated from the Swedish by J. H. Turner, vol. 1 (London: Whittaker and Company, 1845), pp. 31-32 . Source (Internet Archive): Eric Gustave Geijer, The History of the Swedes , translated from the Swedish by J. H. Turner, vol. 1 (London: Whittaker and Company, 1845), pp. 31-32 . Return to the table of contents . The Man with the Hatchet England In the Bargates, Leominster, are four small almshouses; these were founded by a widow named Hester Clark in 1736, and have been since rebuilt. Tradition says that the foundress spent all her money on these almshouses, and that she became in consequence so poor that she had to occupy one herself. That is why there is in the centre of the building a figure of a man, very quaint and rudely carved, holding an axe in his hand with these lines beneath: He that gives away all before he is dead, Let 'em take this hatchet and knock him on ye head. The inscription on a stone on the front of the building contradicts the tradition, for it expressly states: "This Hospital was erected by Hester Clark and endowed at her death with 20 pounds per annum, to four decayed widows." This is a good example of the way in which a rhyme and folk-tale of great antiquity are as it were brought up to date and started on a new lease of life by being associated with some local hero or person of note ( see ante, Jack o' Kent ). Sir Laurence Gomme ( Folklore as an Historical Science , 66-78), has collected a number of parallel stories to this. He concludes that the tale has come down to us from a savage time when the mallet (in this case a hatchet) was actually used for killing off the aged. At Osnabrück, in front of a house (but sometimes at the city gate, as in several of the cities of Silesia and Saxony), there hangs a mallet with this inscription: Wer den kindern gibt das Brodt And selber dabei leidet Noth, Den schlagt mit dieser Kettle todt. Which Mr. Thoms has Englished thus: Who to his children gives his bread And thereby himself suffers need, With this mallet strike him dead. ( Gentleman's Magazine , 1850, 250-2) Sir Laurence Gomme concludes that life of the folk-tale commenced when the use or formula of the mallet ceased to be a part of the social institutions. The old customs which we have detailed as the true origin of the mallet and its hideous use in killing the aged and infirm had died out, but the symbol of them remained. To explain the symbol a myth was created, which kept sufficiently near to the original idea as to retain evidence of its close connection with the descent of property. He goes on to give reasons for his belief that this story dates from a pre-Celtic period. It clearly takes us back to practices very remote from the reverence for the parents' authority, which might perhaps have been expected from descendants of the Aryan household. In most of the stories the father takes the place given to the charitable Hester Clark at Leominster. Source (HathiTrust Digital Library): Ella Mary Leather, The Folk-Lore of Herefordshire: Collected from Oral and Printed Sources (Hereford: Jakeman and Carver; Sondon: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1912), pp. 171-72 . Return to the table of contents . An Irish Deathbed Scene Ireland In the year of grace 1793, an aged peasant, whose cabin neighboured my then residence, lay in extremis , lovingly tended by his wife and daughter. The Christmas Eve was nearing its close, and they religiously believed that, should he pass away at its synchronism with the Christmas morning, he would escape purgatory, and directly enter paradise. The church clock began to strike twelve . The wife took the bolster from under the dying man's head and pressed it down on his face; the daughter seated herself on his breast; and their purpose accomplished; no secret being made of the deed -- no wonder manifested -- no notice taken. Was this murder? So far from possessing murder's primary condition -- malice -- it was done in all affection and piety. The husband and father could not survive another hour; a moment's quickened suffering would secure to him (so the simple women imagined) a painless eternity. Can anybody tell me the origin of this superstition, which brings to one's mind the more gentle influence of Christmas Tide, as described in Hamlet ? Juverna. Source (books.google.com): Notes and Queries (May 21, 1859), pp. 414-415 . Source (Internet Archive): Notes and Queries (May 21, 1859), pp. 414-415 . Return to the table of contents . Return to: the table of contents . Aging and Death in Folklore . An essay by D. L. Ashliman, with supporting texts from proverbs, folktales, and myths from around the world. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 19, 2019. Ungrateful Heirs: Folktales of type 982 Ungrateful Heirs folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 982 about old people who trick their ungrateful children into caring for them translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2020 Contents How the Wicked Sons Were Duped (Kashmir). A Clever Stratagem (Sri Lanka). How the Daughter-in-Law Got the Coins (Sri Lanka). Old Mr. Lacy and His Three Sons (England). The Borrowed Guilder (Germany, Martin Luther). No Father Should Transfer All His Property to His Children While He Is Still Alive (Germany, Martin Luther). The Cudgel (Germany). The Cudgel on the Gate at Jüterbog (Germany). Grandfather's Bag of Gold (Scotland). John Bell (Scotland). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. How the Wicked Sons Were Duped Kashmir A very wealthy old man, imagining that he was on the point of death, sent for his sons and divided his property among them. However, he did not die for several years afterwards; and miserable years many of them were. Besides the weariness of old age, the old fellow had to bear with much abuse and cruelty from his sons. Wretched, selfish ingrates! Previously they vied with one another in trying to please their father, hoping thus to receive more money, but now they had received their patrimony, they cared not how soon he left them -- nay, the sooner the better, because he was only a needless trouble and expense. This, as we may suppose, was a great grief to the old man. One day he met a friend and related to him all his troubles. The friend sympathized very much with him, and promised to think over the matter, and call in a little while and tell him what to do. He did so; in a few days he visited the old man and put down four bags full of stones and gravel before him. "Look here, friend," said he. "Your sons will get to know of my coming here today, and will inquire about it. You must pretend that I came to discharge a long-standing debt with you, and that you are several thousands of rupees richer than you thought you were. Keep these bags in your own hands, and on no account let your sons get to them as long as you are alive. You will soon find them change their conduct towards you. Salám. I will come again soon to see how you are getting on." When the young men got to hear of this further increase of wealth they began to be more attentive and pleasing to their father than ever before. And thus they continued to the day of the old man's demise, when the bags were greedily opened, and found to contain only stones and gravel! Source: J. Hinton Knowles, Folk-Tales of Kashmir , 2nd edition (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, and Company, 1893), pp. 241-242 . This story is also contained in: Joseph Jacobs, Indian Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1892), pp. 221-22 . Return to the table of contents . A Clever Stratagem Sri Lanka Once upon a time there lived a widowed mother, who had a son and daughter to support her. In course of time the children married and were well settled in life. The old woman, thus left alone, being unable to maintain herself, resolved to live under her son's roof. Naturally enough, the son treated her with respect and kindness, but her daughter-in-law, who had a tongue which might goad a man to fury, seized every opportunity of ill-treating her. At every turn she would give her a sound scolding, and often ordered her out of doors. Small wonder was it, then, that the mother, unable to bear the severity of her son's wife, made up her mind to quit his house for her daughter's. When the son heard this, though cut to the quick, he was at a loss as to what he should do to remedy matters, for he was a hen-pecked husband. That night sleep fled from his eyes, and, as he lay awake pondering over this unfortunate state of affairs, a beautiful idea struck him, and he was anxiously waiting till it dawned to carry it out. Early in the morning, while his wife was yet sleeping, he called his mother aside, and giving her a bag bade her fill it with stones and when parting to make much ado and carry it away with her, pretending the while there was something valuable in it. When the time came she, with sufficient tact, wished them all manner of good and together with her bag full of treasures, wended her way to her daughter's abode. Scarce had she gone a few yards, when the son rated his wife soundly, and opened her eyes to her folly in allowing his mother to depart for, said he, "You saw ber carrying away that bag of gold, and now she would leave it all to my sister, and we would be such losers by it." When the wife heard this, her sorrow and mortification know no bounds, and she resolved to bring the old woman home at any cost. So, on the morrow, she prepared some rice-cakes and other sweetmeats and, with all possible haste, she went to her whom she had so cruelly driven away and with artful language coaxed her back. For, had she not a bag full of glittering gold! Ever afterwards she swallowed her wrath in silence and treated her with kind concern, attending to all her wants. One evening, the old woman took seriously ill, and the daughter-in-law, finding she was breathing her last, and her husband had run in search of medicine -- so great was her avarice and eagerness to get at the treasures ere his return -- rushed into an inner chamber and in the deep recesses of a wooden box found -- horror of horrors! -- the bag filled not with gold but with stones. Angry with herself, and angry with the man who had deceived her, she went out into the verandah of her house with her crying infant in her arms. After a while the poor woman expired and the neighbors had come to make preparations for the funeral. Seeing her mother also hurrying up and not wishing to outrage the feelings of those assembled by an open recital of the stratagem her husband had practised on her, and yet being impatient to acquaint her mother of it -- for she, too, was in the secret about the bag of gold -- she hushed the little one to sleep by chanting a nursery rhyme and artfully introducing into it the following line: Mother, the wretch, who gave the villain birth, Had but a bag of stones as hers on earth! Source: S. Helen Goonetilleke, "Sinhalese Folklore," The Orientalist: A Journal of Oriental Literature, Arts, and Sciences , vol. 4 (1890), pp. 121-22 . Return to the table of contents . How the Daughter-in-Law Got the Coins Sri Lanka In a certain city there was a nobleman. He had been very wealthy, but his goods were destroyed, and he became indigent, and in this condition he died. When his son came of full age, the mother said to him, "Son, I am now approaching old age, but you are unable to provide for me by yourself. Therefore you must take in marriage a woman from a suitable family." He married, but his wife did not exert herself for his mother. To counter this, the husband collected fragments of broken plates from the whole village. These he put in a bag made of skin. Then he said, "When you come near that woman, my wife, take this bag from its box as though there were great wealth in it, shake it, then put it away again." The mother took her son's words to heart. She shook the skin bag as he had told her to, so as to be noticed by his wife, and then carefully replaced it in the box. From that day on the son's wife began to exert herself for her mother-in-law. During this time leprosy attacked the mother-in-law. The son said, "Mother, place the skin bag near the place where you sleep, then say to your relatives and to my wife, 'I have saved the articles in this bag from the time I was very little until now, and for the sole purpose of giving them, at the end of my life, to a person who has most exerted herself for me.'" Then the mother gathered together her relatives and her daughter-in-law, and said to them what her son had proposed, that she would give the bag of coins to the person who most exerted herself for her. After this each one of them attended the leprous woman, and the son's mind was put at ease. A little later the leprous woman died. The son's wife stole the bag of coins and hid it. After the corpse was buried, the son's wife took out the bag of coins. Upon discovering that it contained only fragments of broken plates she was greatly saddened. At this time that woman's mother also arrived, and she noisily asked, "Did my daughter receive the bag of coins?" Her daughter told her that she had been cheated. She showed her the bag of plate fragments, and they both wept. That woman, now angry with her husband, separated from him, and returned to her own house. Source: H. Parker, Village Folk-Tales of Ceylon , vol. 3 (London: Luzac and Company, 1914), no. 234, pp. 240-42 . This tale is from the western part of Sri Lanka. Retold by D. L. Ashliman. Parker's translation follows his Sinhalese sources so closely that English syntax is violated in almost every sentence. I have cautiously attempted to bring his narrative closer to idiomatic English. Parker entitles this story "How the Daughter-in-Law Got the Masuran." Masuran (a plural form of the singular masurama ) were coins in use in Sri Lanka between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries. I have replaced the word masuran with coins throughout the tale. Return to the table of contents . Old Mr. Lacy and His Three Sons England They have a tradition at Winterton that there was formerly one Mr. Lacy, that lived there and was a very rich man, who, being grown very aged, gave all that he had away unto his three sons, upon condition that one should keep him one week, and another another. But it happened within a little while that they were all weary of him, after that they had got what they had, and regarded him no more than a dog. The old man perceiving how he was slighted, went to an attorney to see if his skill could not afford him any help in his troubles. The attorney told him that no law in the land could help him nor yield him any comfort, but there was one thing only which would certainly do, which, if he would perform, he would reveal to him. At this the poor old man was exceeding glad, and desired him for God's sake to reveal the same, for he was almost pined and starved to death, and he would willingly do it rather than live as he did. "Well," says the lawyer, "you have been a great friend of mine in my need, and I will now be one to you in your need. I will lend you a strongbox with a strong lock on it, in which shall be contained 1000 pounds. You shall on such a day pretend to have fetched it out of a closet, where it shall be supposed that you had hidden it, and carry it into one of your son's houses, and make it your business every week, while you are sojourning with such or such a son, to be always counting of the money, and rattling it about, and you shall see that, for love of it, they'll soon love you again, and make very much of you, and maintain you joyfully, willingly, and plentifully, unto your dying day." The old man, having thanked the lawyer for this good advice and kind proffer, received within a few days the aforesaid box full of money, and having so managed it as above, his graceless sons soon fell in love with him again, and made mighty much of him, and perceiving that their love to him continued steadfast and firm, he one day took it out of the house and carried it to the lawyer, thanking him exceedingly for the loan thereof. But when he got to his sons he made them believe that he had hidden it again, and that he would give it to him of them whom he loved best when he died. This made them all so observant of him that he lived the rest of his days in great peace, plenty, and happiness amongst them, and died full of years. But a while before he died, he upbraided them for their former ingratitude, told them the whole history of the box, and forgave them. Source: Eliza Gutch and Mabel Peacock, County Folk-Lore , vol. 5: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning Lincolnshire (London: David Nutt, 1908), pp. 362-63 . Gutch's and Peacock's source: Charles Jackson, ed., The Diary of Abraham de la Pryme, the Yorkshire Antiquary (Durham: Published for the Surtees Society by Andrews and Company, 1870), pp. 162-63 . Abraham de la Pryme was born in 1671 and died in 1704. Language cautiously revised by D. L. Ashliman. Gutch and Peacock do not give a title to this local legend ("a tradition at Winterton"). Return to the table of contents . The Borrowed Guilder Martin Luther, Table Talk A father, now aged, had given over all his property to his children, with the understanding that they would care for him as long as he lived. But they were thankless and soon grew tired of him. Considering him a nuisance, they gave him but little to eat. The father, who was an intelligent man, locked himself in a room, and as though he were counting out a large sum of money, made a ringing sound with some guilder that his neighbor had lent him. The children heard this and thereafter treated him with honor, hoping that he would leave this money to them. He returned the borrowed coins to his neighbor. When he died the children discovered that they had been deceived. Source (books.google.com): D. Martin Luther's Tischreden oder Colloquia , edited by Karl Eduard Förstemann, vol. 1 (Leipzig: Gebauersche Buchhandlung, 1844), p. 207 . Source (Internet Archive): D. Martin Luther's Tischreden oder Colloquia , edited by Karl Eduard Förstemann, vol. 1 (Leipzig: Gebauersche Buchhandlung, 1844), p. 207 . Return to the table of contents . No Father Should Transfer All His Property to His Children While He Is Still Alive Martin Luther, Table Talk A certain man complained to Dr. Martin Luther about his misery. He had provided generously for his children, indeed, he had transferred all of his property over to them, but now, in his old age, they had abandoned him. The doctor replied: Jesus Sirach [Ben Sira] gives parents the best advice when he says: "Do not give everything away while you are still alive, for then your children will not be faithful to you." As the proverb states: "One father can care for ten children, but ten children cannot care for one father." For this reason in times past there were many sermons about a children's thanklessness. Their father made made his last will and testament, then locked it into a chest together with a club and a slip of paper. On the slip of paper were these words: Welcher Vater das Seine gibet aus der Gewalt, Den soll man todtschlagen mit der Keule bald. A father who gives all away before he's dead Should be dispatched with a blow to his head. Source (books.google.com): D. Martin Luther's Tischreden oder Colloquia , edited by Karl Eduard Förstemann, vol. 1 (Leipzig: Gebauersche Buchhandlung, 1844), p. 206 . Source (Internet Archive): D. Martin Luther's Tischreden oder Colloquia , edited by Karl Eduard Förstemann, vol. 1 (Leipzig: Gebauersche Buchhandlung, 1844), p. 206 . Return to the table of contents . The Cudgel Germany A wealthy man had three daughters. He gave them marriage dowries and provided for their every need, but then he lived too long for them. They begged him to deed his property to them, promising that in return they would care for him the rest of his life. They would provide him with his own room and give him the best things to eat and drink. So the father deeded his property to them, and during the first year all went well. But the next year, when he spent more time with the one daughter than with the others, she said to him, "Father, you are a burden to me. Go to the others; they received just as much from you as I did." The good father could now see very well that he was no longer wanted, and asked a neighbor for advice. The neighbor gave him an old chest filled with sand and stones. The father had the chest carried to where he was staying, then asked his daughter to lend him a scoop and three candles, for he had something that he wanted to measure. He sat up half the night making a clinging sound as if it were gold coins. The next morning he gave the scoop back to the daughter, leaving one old Bohemian coin in it. She said, "Father, you were clinging in the night as if you were measuring gold coins. I heard it." He said, "I set aside some money for myself in a chest, and I am going to leave it to the one of you who is the most friendly toward me." Hearing this, all three wanted to have him, and each one tried to outdo the others in caring for him. When his time finally came to die, they went to the chest and discovered that it was filled with sand and stones, together with a cudgel, upon which was written, in the English language: "Be it known to all the world that anyone should be beaten with this cudgel who gives so much to his children that he himself suffers want." Source: Johannes Pauli, Schimpf und Ernst , edited by Hermann Österley (Stuttgart: Gedruckt auf Kosten des litterarischen Vereins, 1866), no. 435, p. 260 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Link to the text in modern German: Johannes Pauli, Schimpf und Ernst , edited by Karl Simrock (Heilbronn: Verlag von Gebrüder Henninger, 1876), no. 334, pp. 255-56 . Schimpf und Ernst was first published in Strasbourg in 1522. Return to the table of contents . The Cudgel on the Gate at Jüterbog Germany In Jüterbog a wooden cudgel, several feet in length, hangs from town gate. Beneath it is fastened a tablet upon which is written the following: Wer seinen Kindern gibt das Brot Und leidet nachher selber Not, Den schlag' man mit dieser Keule tot. He who gives his children bread And afterwards himself suffers need, With this cudgel shall be struck dead. About this it is told that there was once a rich man who had three sons. During his lifetime he gave them all his wealth, but afterward he himself suffered need, for not one of his children would support him. After he died, his children quickly appeared at court to see if there was not something else for them to inherit, but they found nothing but a large, heavy chest. Opening it, they found that it was filled with stones, beneath which were the cudgel, the tablet, and instructions that both should be hung from the town gate. And so it was done. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Die Keule am Thor zu Jüterbog," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 96, p. 88 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Jüterbog is about 50 km (30 miles) south of Berlin. Return to the table of contents . Grandfather's Bag of Gold Scotland There was a man at some time or other who was well off, and had many children. When the family grew up the man gave a well-stocked farm to each of his children. When the man was old his wife died, and he divided all that he had amongst his children, and lived with them, turn about, in their houses. The sons and daughters got tired of him and ungrateful, and tried to get rid of him when he came to stay with them. At last an old friend found him sitting tearful by the wayside, and learning the cause of his distress, took him home; there he gave him a bowl of gold and a lesson which the old man learned and acted. When all the ungrateful sons and daughters had gone to a preaching, the old man went to a green knoll where his grandchildren were at play, and pretending to hide, he turned up a flat hearthstone in an old stance [standing-place], and went out of sight. He spread out his gold on a big stone in the sunlight, and he muttered, "Ye are mouldy, ye are hoary, ye will be better for the sun." The grandchildren came sneaking over the knoll, and when they had seen and heard all that they were in tended to see and hear, they came running up with, "Grandfather, what have you got there?" "That which concerns you not; touch it not," said the grandfather; and he swept his gold into a bag and took it home to his old friend. The grandchildren told what they had seen, and henceforth the children strove who should be kindest to the old grandfather. Still acting on the counsel of his sagacious old chum, he got a stout little black chest made, and carried it always with him. When any one questioned him as to its contents, his answer was, "That will be known when the chest is opened." When he died he was buried with great honour and ceremony, and then the chest was opened by the expectant heirs. In it were found broken potsherds and bits of slate, and a long-handled, white wooden mallet with this legend on its head: So am favioche fiorum, Thabhavit gnoc annsa cheann, Do n'f hear nach gleidh maoin da' fein, Ach bheir a chuid go leir d'a chlann. Here is the fair mall To give a knock on the skull To the man who keeps no gear for himself, But gives all to his bairns. Source (books.google.com): George Laurence Gomme, Folklore as an Historical Science (London: Methuen and Company, 1908), pp. 67-68 Source (Internet Archive): George Laurence Gomme, Folklore as an Historical Science (London: Methuen and Company, 1908), pp. 67-68 Gomme's source: "Mr. J. F. Campbell printed [this] tale in the second volume of the Transactions of the Ethnological Society (p. 336), which had been sent to him in Gaelic by John Davan, in December 1862." Gomme does not give this tale a title. Return to the table of contents . John Bell Scotland He that gives all his geer to his bairns, Take up a beetle, and known out his harns [brains]. Taken from the history of one John Bell, who having given his whole substance to his children, was by them neglected; after he died there was found in his chest a mallet with this inscription: I John Bell, leaves here a mell [maul], the man to fell, Who gives all to his bairns, and keeps nothing to himself. English: He that gives his goods before he be dead, Take up a mallet and knock him on the head. Source (books.google.com): James Kelly, A Complete Collection of Scottish Proverbs, Explained and Made Intelligible to the English Reader (London: Printed for Rodwell and Martin, 1818), no. 224, p. 97 . Source (Internet Archive): James Kelly, A Complete Collection of Scottish Proverbs, Explained and Made Intelligible to the English Reader (London: Printed for Rodwell and Martin, 1818), no. 224, p. 97 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites . Old Grandfathers and Their Grandsons . Killing of Old Men . Legends about geronticide. Aging and Death in Folklore . An essay by D. L. Ashliman, with supporting texts from proverbs, folktales, and myths from around the world. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 13, 2020. Open Sesame! Folktales of Type 676 Open Sesame! folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 676 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2013-2022 Contents Link to Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves ( 1001 Nights ). The Robbers Robbed (Kashmir, James Hinton Knowles). The Two Brothers and the Forty-Nine Dragons (Greece, Edmund Martin Geldart). The Two Brothers (Slavic, Alexander Chodzko). Dummburg Castle (Germany, Johann Gustav Gottlieb Büsching). Simeli Mountain (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Open Simson! (Germany, Ernst Meier). Ali Baba and Kissem (Jamaica, Martha Warren Beckwith). How Black Snake Caught the Wolf (USA, Joel Chandler Harris). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Robbers Robbed Kashmir In olden times there lived a great and wealthy king, whose greatness and wealth were the envy of the world. Many kings had assayed to fight with him and had been defeated, till at last he began to think that he was unconquerable, and became careless and indifferent as to the state of his army. Meanwhile another powerful king had been carefully training his forces. He saw the condition of affairs, and determined to do battle with this king. The two armies met on a large plain, and fought bravely for several days. For some time the battle seemed to be equal, but at last the great and wealthy king was slain and his forces scattered. The strange king then entered the city and reigned in his stead. His first act was to banish the late king's wife and her two sons. They were sent out of the country without the least means of subsistence, so that the queen was obliged to pound rice for a ser of rice a day, while the two boys got what they could by begging. One day the woman advised one of her sons to go to the jungle and cut some bundles of wood for sale. The eldest went; and while he was engaged in cutting wood he saw at a little distance a small caravan of loaded camels and mules attended by several men, who evidently were robbers. The boy was frightened, because he thought they would kill him if they knew he was there. So he climbed up into a tree to hide himself. The caravan halted by a small hut in a part of the jungle near to this tree. He saw the men unload their beasts and place all the bundles inside the hut, the door of which opened and shut by itself at the mention of a certain charm that he heard quite plainly. He saw all this, and rememhered the words of the charm, and determined to enter the hut him self as soon as the robhers departed. Accordingly on the morrow, when the robbers were well out of sight and hearing, he came down from the tree, went to the hut, and uttered the words of the charm that he had heard. The door immediately opened to him, and he entered. He found immense piles of valuable treasure in the place -- gold and silver, and precious stones, and sundry articles of curious workmanship were stored up there in abundance. He arranged as much of the treasure as he could place on a camel that he found grazing near, and then, repeating the charm, shut the door and went home. His mother was delighted to see the result of her son's day's work. The following morning the younger prince thought that he also would visit this jungle and try his luck. So he quickly learnt the words of the charm and started. He arrived at the jungle, and climbed the same tree near the hut, and waited there patiently for the robbers' coming. Just before dark they appeared, bringing with them several loads of treasure. On reaching the hut they entered by means of the charm, as before. Great was their surprise and anger when they found that some person had been to the place and taken some of the things. They uttered such terrible oaths, and vowed such fearful vengeance on the offender, that the prince up in the tree trembled exceedingly, and began to repent his adventure. In the morning the robbers again left; and as soon as they were well out of the way the boy descended the tree and went and repeated the charm whereby the door of the hut was opened. The door obeyed, and he entered. But, alas! the door closed as soon as he was inside, and would not open again, although the boy shouted till he was hoarse, and begged and prayed that he might be set free. Evidently the poor boy had omitted or added something to the words of the charm, and thus brought this misfortune on himself. Terrible must have been his feelings as he counted the hours to the robbers' return, and tried to imagine what they would do to him, when they saw him there! It was vain to hope for escape. He was shut up in a prison of his own making, and must bear the consequences. Before nightfall sounds of approaching footsteps were heard, and presently the door opened and the robbers came in. A savage gleam of delight passed over their countenances as they saw the youngster crouching away in a corner and weeping. "Oh! oh!" they exclaimed. "This is the thief that dares to intrude into our quarters, is it? We'll cut him into pieces and strew them about the place, that others may fear to follow in his steps." This they really did, for they were bloodthirsty and had no feeling, and then went to sleep. The next day they started off on their marauding expeditions as usual, as if nothing had happened. While they were absent the eldest prince arrived to see what had become of his brother, and to help him in carrying away the spoil. His grief was inexpressible when he saw the pieces of flesh strewn about the place. "They shall rue this," he exclaimed, and caused the door of the hut to be opened by means of the charm and entered. He collected the most valuable articles that he could lay hands on and put them into a sack. Afterwards he emptied the contents of another sack on the ground outside the hut, and placed the pieces of his brother's corpse in it. And then, having repeated the charm and shut the door, he took up the two sacks, threw them over his shoulder, and walked home. On reaching home he had the pieces sewed up in a cloth and buried. When the robbers returned that evening and discovered what had happened they were very angry. They resolved to find the thief, and took an oath to rob no more until they had accomplished their desire. They went to the city, and lodged in different parts of the bázár , in order that they might ascertain if anyone was living there who had suddenly become rich. One of the robbers happened to meet with the tailor who had made the grave-clothes for the young prince who had been so foully slaughtered, and heard from him that the mother and brother of the boy seemed to have got a lot of money lately, but how he could not say. Some people said that they were members of some royal family, but he did not know. Accordingly the robber went and found out the house where the queen and prince were living. He marked it, so that he might know it again, and then hastened to inform the rest of the band. However, the prince had fortunately noticed the mark, and guessing what it meant, went and marked several of the adjoining houses in the same way. He thus thoroughly nonplussed the robbers. "This plan will not do," they said. "One of us had better get to know through the tailor where these people live, and then go to the house and cultivate their friendship. An opportunity for despatching the prince would soon be afforded." This was agreed to unanimously, and the leader of the robber band was voted to the work. He soon made friends with the young prince and his mother, and was received into the house at all times as a welcome guest. One day, however, the woman observed a dagger hidden beneath his coat, and from this and one or two other things that she afterwards noticed, decided in her mind that the man was no friend, but an enemy and a robber. She wished to be rid of him. Consequently one evening she suggested to her son and his friend that she should dance before them, and they agreed. In her hand she had a sword, which she waved about most gracefully. Now she approached the robber, and now she receded slowly and smoothly, and accommodated her gestures to a song, till at length she saw her opportunity, and running against the robber, struck off his head. "What have you done, mother?" exclaimed the prince, who was horror-struck. "I have simply changed places with our friend," she replied. "Instead of him murdering you, I have murdered him. Look! Behold the dagger with which he would have slain you." "O mother," said the prince, "how shall I ever he able to repay you for your watchfulness over me. I did not notice anything wrong about the man. I never saw his dagger before. This must be one of the robbers, come to wreak vengeance on me for taking some of their treasure." When the robber band knew of the death of their leader they divided the spoil and retired to their different villages. The young prince married, and became a banker and prospered exceedingly. Source: James Hinton Knowles, Folk-Tales of Kashmir (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, and Company, 1893), pp. 267-71 . Knowles's narrator: Shiva Báyú, Renawárí, Srínagar. Return to the table of contents . The Two Brothers and the Forty-Nine Dragons Greece (Syros) Once upon a time there were two brothers. One was very rich and had four children, the other was very poor and had seven children. One day the poor man's wife went to the rich man and said to him, "I am very wretched, for I have not enough bread for my children. I take a little meal and I mix it with a great deal of bran and so manage to make bread. It is well nigh a year since my children have had any relish with their meals; they get nothing but bread and water." He answered her: "And yet your children are so strong, while mine, with all their feeding and the comforts they enjoy, are always ailing!" The poor woman said, "God has given us poverty and hunger, but thanks be to Heaven, our children are hale and hearty. Now, therefore, I have come to beg you, if you have any work, not to send for anyone but me, so may God send health to your children!" and as she spoke these words, the tears ran from her eyes like a river. Then he called his wife and said to her: "Have we any work for her to come and do for us daily, so that she may not sit idle?" His wife answered him: "Let her come twice a week and knead bread for us." When she heard these words she was glad, for she thought at once, that when she kneaded that fine white bread they would give her some of it, and her poor children would eat and rejoice. So she rose to go away. And they said to her: "Good-bye, and remember to come tomorrow morning." Thus they bade her farewell without giving her a scrap of anything. As she set off home she said to herself, "Would that I were rich, that I might open my cupboard, and bring forth a bit of cheese, or a piece of bread, or at least a little rice, or such like household store to gladden the hearts of the poor!" and lifting her hands to heaven she said: "Why, oh my God, hast thou made me so poor?" And so she went weeping home where her children were waiting for her ever so eagerly, hoping she might bring them something. But alas, poor thing, she came with empty hands. The next day she went very early in the morning to the rich man's house to knead bread, and when she had kneaded it and ended her work, they bade her farewell and told her to be sure and come next time, without giving her so much as a cup of cold water. As soon as she came home the children said to her: " Have you brought us anything, mother?" "No!" she said. "Maybe, when they have done baking they will send us a bit of bread." But in vain she waited, and when evening came not a loaf nor a plate of anything to eat appeared. In two or three days they sent word for her to come and knead again, for they liked her kneading much. Then the poor woman arose and went again; and as she was kneading the thought came into her head, not to wash her hands till she got home, and then to wash them in a dish, and to give the wash to her children instead of plain water. So as soon as she had done kneading, she hurried away, and when she got home she said to her children, "Wait till I give you a little milk-soup." And washing her hands well of the dough, she filled a good dish, and gave each one a little to drink. And they liked it so much that they said, "Mother, whenever you go to knead, mind you bring us some of that broth to drink." A month passed while she went on at this work. And it seems that God blessed her children, for they grew fatter than ever. One day as the rich man was passing by the poor man's house, he put his head in at the door and said, "How do you do here?" Then he turns and looks at all the children, and is amazed to see how fat they seem; and going out at the door in a rage, he went home to his wife and called her: "Come here and tell me what you give to my sister-in-law who comes to knead for us." Now she was frightened at the way he shouted at her and said, "I never gave her anything yet, because I am so afraid of giving her too much and your scolding me." Says he, "You must have given her something, for her children are so fat they look as if they would burst." Then she swore an oath and said, "She takes nothing away with her but her unwashed hands and she washes them at home, and gives the wash to her children to drink." When he heard that he said, "Put a stop to that too." So the next day when the woman went to knead, her mistress waited until she had finished, and when she had done, said to her, "Wash your hands well and then go." When the poor woman heard that her countenance fell, and she quailed with grief to think how she should go to her children, and they would beg the milk-soup of her. When she came to her house her children were gathered together awaiting her, and as soon as they saw her come in they all cried with one voice: "What have you got, mother?" "Nothing, children; I forgot myself and washed my hands!" All the children began to weep and to cry, "How could you so forget us, as not to bring us that beautiful broth?" While they were thus weeping and wailing, the father entered the house and said, "What ails the children that they cry?" Then she told him all that had happened, and he was sorely grieved, and made up his mind to kill himself, and so that his wife might not guess his purpose, he asked her for a bag to go to the hill and gather herbs. She gave it him, and he went away. And as he wandered about bewildered for a long while, he found himself at the top of a high crag, and there he made up his mind to fling himself down and die. Then he spied facing the crag a great castle, and he said to himself, "Before I kill myself, I may as well go and see what that castle is like." And drawing near he saw a tree, and he climbed up into it to see who lived in the castle. After a little while he looked, and behold, a number of dragons came out ! He counted them, and they were forty-nine. When the dragons were gone, they left the door open, for that was always their custom. So he climbed down from the tree and went into the castle and walked about it, and saw that it contained much treasure. Then he took his bag and filled it with as much as his back could carry, and went away at once, for he feared lest the dragons should catch him. When they came back they perceived that a thief had been and stolen some of their money, and from henceforth they determined that one of them should always stay behind in the castle. The poor man returned to the town two days later, and found his wife weeping and refusing to be comforted, for she feared that his affliction had led him to go and kill himself. But when she saw him come back she praised God because he came alive. Then said her husband to her, "Wife, God has taken pity on our children and on you, who made bread so long at my brother's house, though they never gave you a morsel to feed our little ones. See, here we have enough to live for some time." And opening his bag he showed her the coins. She was a pious woman, so she said, "The first thing you must buy is some oil that we may light a lamp to our Lady, which we have not done for so long." And her husband hearkened unto her and straightway went and bought oil, and when they had lighted the lamp they prayed with all their hearts and with tears in their eyes. The next day her husband arose, and the first thing he did was to buy a house; and he moved into it with his homely furniture and his poor children. On the first evening he said to his wife, "From day to day we will buy what we want for the house, but nothing more, for we must bear in mind how you used to give milk-soup to the children to drink, to save them from dying of hunger." "Yes," said she, "I will never ask you for anything that we do not want." Two months passed during which these people lived happily. They did nothing else but go to church and help the poor. One day, then, the wife of the rich man came to visit her poor kinswoman, for she had heard from many that she was now well off, and she herself had begun to suffer misfortune; all her sheep had died, her fields had brought forth no crops, the frost had bitten many of her trees, and she had met with many other mishaps. When the poor woman saw her without being in the least affronted to think how little she had helped her in her own misery, she welcomed her joyfully, and gave her the best seat, and put before her the best things she had to eat in the house; whereas the other, when she went, had only received her in the kitchen, and never asked her to sit down! After some time, she said, "Sister, pray tell me, where has your husband found work, that my husband may try and find some too, for we have fallen into great distress." And the poor woman answered her, "My husband has not got any employment, but the day you made me wash my hands he went away -- " and then she told her all that had happened. Then the rich woman asked her to take her husband and show him the dragons. "Perhaps," said she, "we, too, may thus find succour." And the poor one said to her, "When my husband comes this evening I will tell him, and your husband can go tomorrow, with a bag, along with him." When the poor man came home at nightfall, his wife told him what had passed, and he said to her, "I will go and show him the place, but I will not go to gather more treasures for myself, for this which I have God blesses, and it grows from day to day." Next morning the rich man came with his bag on his back, and said to him, "Good morrow, brother, how do you do? Are you well?" Whereas at other times, if he saw his brother in the way he would turn his back upon him, or take another road, so as not to hear him say that he wanted any help. But when the poor man saw him he got up and kissed him, and said, "Welcome, brother; I daresay it's ten years since I had the happiness of seeing you enter my house." "Yes," said the rich one, "but now I have fallen into distress, and know not what to do." Says the poor man, "Let us go; perhaps you will have good luck yet, and get as rich as ever." So they set off for the hill. And when they got there he showed him the tree, and said to him, "Go aloft and sit in the tree, and soon the dragons will come out. Count them. If there are forty-nine you can come down and enter the castle free from fear; but if, peradventure, they are but forty-eight, do not go in." With these words he went away. In a little while the dragons came out, and he began to count them. But it seems he counted them wrong, and instead of saying forty-eight he said forty-nine. So he came down as fast as he could and went into the castle, and eagerly looked about to see where the treasure was, that he might fill his bag and be gone with all speed, and as he stood there he heard a voice saying, "So you are the thief, and have come back to steal more!" And lo! out comes the dragon which had been watching in a room close by, and seizes him by the head and makes four quarters of him, and hangs them up at the four corners of the dwelling. When the dragons came home, he said to them, "There's no need to keep watch any longer, for I have hung up the four quarters of the thief, and they will guard our castle for us!" And from that day forward they determined, none of them to stay at home, but all of them to go out, and so they began to do. When two days had passed away the wife of the rich man got restless, and went to the house of her brother-in-law to ask him what they had done with her husband. But the poor man told her what directions he had given him, and said, "I don't know whether he has counted the dragons right, but I will go and see." And off he went. When he came near to the castle, he got up into the tree, and when the dragons came out he counted them with great care, and they were forty-nine in all. Then he came down and went into the castle and looked right and left for his brother. And raising his eyes he looked aloft and beheld his brother hanging in four quarters, and he was sore amazed. Then he lost no time in taking him down, filling his bag with money and going away. When he got home he felt very weary and sad, and said to his wife, "Send someone to my sister-in-law's to tell her to come and take charge of her husband." And when she came she wept, and would not be comforted on beholding her husband cut into four quarters. Then she said to the poor man, "You must find me a tailor to sew him together, for I cannot bury him like that in four pieces." The poor man went out at once and got a tailor, who sewed him together. When they had buried and bewailed him, the poor man opened the bag and gave his sister-in-law half the money, and said to her, "Go and get succour for yourself and your children, and if you are in want again, do not blush to come and ask me for what you need." The widow went home with tears in her eyes. Let us leave them and return to the dragons. When they reached their castle and found the dead man was gone, they all cried aloud, "So the thief has an accomplice!" The next day, therefore, they went into the town and sought for a tailor to make them forty-nine coats and forty-nine pairs of shoes. So they said to the tailor, "Mind you sew them well so that the stitches don't come out and that they fit us nicely!" And they said it over and over again till the tailor got angry and said to them, "Here's a fuss! Why yesterday I had to sew a dead man, who was in four bits, together, and they were quite satisfied with the job, though it was out of my line, and you with your coats are like to craze me!" Then they said to him, "Pray do you know the man who brought you the dead man to sew?" Said he, "Of course I do, he lives quite close, and if you like I will show you his house, so that you can go and ask him, whether the dead man was well sewed or not." So he took a dragon with him, and after walking twenty good paces, he showed them the shop. Then they went away to a joiner's, and ordered forty-eight chests, just big enough for them to get into. When they were finished, the forty-eight dragons got inside, and the forty-ninth remained outside. And in the morning the dragon went to the poor man's place, and said to him, "I have had forty-eight chests sent me and I want you to be so kind as to let me leave them here for the night." "Not for one night only," he answered, "but let them stay as long as you like, and until it suits you to take them away." And he got porters to bring them in. Then the children of the poor man began to get upon the chests, and jump about, and play on them; and the dragons who were inside, from time to time, groaned and said, "Ah, would it were dark that we might eat them all." One of the children was playing hide-and-seek with the rest, and he heard these words and these groanings. So he ran to his father and said: "Those chests are bewitched; they are talking." Then the father thought a moment, and said, "Forty-eight! and the one that brought them makes forty-nine." And he went close up to the chests, and put his ear at the key-hole, and he, too, heard the groaning. So he said to himself, "Now, monsters, I'll make sure of you, now that I have got you in my power." So off he set at once, and went and bought forty-eight spits, and lighted his kitchen fire, and put them in, and made them red hot, and took them one by one, and thrust them into all the chests. Then he said to his servant, "Look here, my man, they have played us a trick, and put a dragon in a chest, and if we had not killed it, it would have eaten us all up." The servant was angry, and said to his master, "Give it me, and let me go sink it by the sea shore?" And he took it on his back, and threw it on to the beach. While he was on his way back, his master made ready another one, and said, "You did not throw it far enough out to sea, and it has come back." And as often as he returned he did the same with all, and threw them into the sea. But when he got to the last one he grew tired of always coming back and finding one there again, so he walked right into the sea, and plunged it in deep, and when he got back to the shop he called out: "Master, is it back again?" And his master answered, "No, no, it has not come back. You must have thrown it in very deep." "Aye, master," said he, "I went right into the sea, and plunged it in, and left it." In the morning the dragon came to see what had become of the chests, and the merchant cunningly told him that one chest was found open, "and I don't know," says he, "what you had inside." He was seized with fear, and went to look at the chests, which were in the back part of the shop. And he found the chest was indeed open, and he trembled. The merchant lost no time, but seized him and flung him into the chest, and made it fast forthwith, and straightway spitted him, and so they were all done for. And the man himself inherited the dragon's castle, and lived there as happy as a prince, and may we live happier still. Source: Edmund Martin Geldart, Folk-Lore of Modern Greece: The Tales of the People (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1884), pp. 9-17 . Return to the table of contents . The Two Brothers Slavic Once upon a time there were two brothers whose father had left them but a small fortune. The eldest grew very rich, but at the same time cruel and wicked, whereas there was nowhere a more honest or kinder man than the younger. But he remained poor, and had many children, so that at times they could scarcely get bread to eat. At last, one day there was not even this in the house, so he went to his rich brother and asked him for a loaf of bread. Waste of time! His rich brother only called him beggar and vagabond, and slammed the door in his face. The poor fellow, after this brutal reception, did not know which way to turn. Hungry, scantily clad, shivering with cold, his legs could scarcely carry him along. He had not the heart to go home, with nothing for the children, so he went towards the mountain forest. But all he found there were some wild pears that had fallen to the ground. He had to content himself with eating these, though they set his teeth on edge. But what was he to do to warm himself, for the east wind with its chill blast pierced him through and through. "Where shall I go?" he said; "what will become of us in the cottage? There is neither food nor fire, and my brother has driven me from his door." It was just then he remembered having heard that the top of the mountain in front of him was made of crystal, and had a fire for ever burning upon it. "I will try and find it," he said, "and then I may be able to warm myself a little." So he went on climbing higher and higher till he reached the top, when he was startled to see twelve strange beings sitting round a huge fire. He stopped for a moment, but then said to himself, "What have I to lose? Why should I fear? God is with me. Courage!" So he advanced towards the fire, and bowing respectfully, said: "Good people, take pity on my distress. I am very poor, no one cares for me, I have not even a fire in my cottage; will you let me warm myself at yours?" They all looked kindly at him, and one of them said: "My son, come sit down with us and warm yourself." So he sat down, and felt warm directly he was near them. But he dared not speak while they were silent. What astonished him most was that they changed seats one after another, and in such a way that each one passed round the fire and came back to his own place. When he drew near the fire an old man with long white beard and bald head arose from the flames and spoke to him thus: "Man, waste not thy life here; return to thy cottage, work, and live honestly. Take as many embers as thou wilt, we have more than we need." And having said this he disappeared. Then the twelve filled a large sack with embers, and, putting it on the poor man's shoulders, advised him to hasten home. Humbly thanking them, he set off. As he went he wondered why the embers did not feel hot, and why they should weigh no more than a sack of paper. He was thankful that he should be able to have a fire, but imagine his astonishment when on arriving home he found the sack to contain as many gold pieces as there had been embers; he almost went out of his mind with joy at the possession of so much money. With all his heart he thanked those who had been so ready to help him in his need. He was now rich, and rejoiced to be able to provide for his family. Being curious to find out how many gold pieces there were, and not knowing how to count, he sent his wife to his rich brother for the loan of a quart measure. This time the brother was in a better temper, so he lent what was asked of him, but said mockingly, "What can such beggars as you have to measure?" The wife replied, "Our neighbour owes us some wheat; we want to be sure he returns us the right quantity." The rich brother was puzzled, and suspecting something he, unknown to his sister-in-law, put some grease inside the measure. The trick succeeded, for on getting it back he found a piece of gold sticking to it. Filled with astonishment, he could only suppose his brother had joined a band of robbers; so he hurried to his brother's cottage, and threatened to bring him before the Justice of the Peace if he did not confess where the gold came from. The poor man was troubled, and, dreading to offend his brother, told the story of his journey to the Crystal Mountain. Now the elder brother had plenty of money for himself, yet he was envious of the brother's good fortune, and be came greatly displeased when he found that his brother won every one's esteem by the good use he made of his wealth. At last he determined to visit the Crystal Mountain himself. "I may meet with as good luck as my brother," said he to himself. Upon reaching the Crystal Mountain he found the twelve seated round the fire as before, and thus addressed them: "I beg of you, good people, to let me warm myself, for it is bitterly cold, and I am poor and homeless." But one of them replied, "My son, the hour of thy birth was favourable; thou art rich, but a miser; thou art wicked, for thou hast dared to lie to us. Well dost thou deserve thy punishment." Amazed and terrified he stood silent, not daring to speak. Meanwhile the twelve changed places one after another, each at last returning to his own seat. Then from the midst of the flames arose the white-bearded old man and spoke thus sternly to the rich man: "Woe unto the wilful! Thy brother is virtuous, therefore have I blessed him. As for thee, thou art wicked, and so shall not escape our vengeance." At these words the twelve arose. The first seized the unfortunate man, struck him, and passed him on to the second; the second also struck him and passed him on to the third; and so did they all in their turn, until he was given up to the old man, who disappeared with him into the fire. Days, weeks, months went by, but the rich man never returned, and none knew what had become of him. I think, between you and me, the younger brother had his suspicions but he very wisely kept them to himself. Source: Alexander Chodzko, Fairy Tales of the Slav Peasants and Herdsmen (London: George Allen, 1896), pp. 3-9 . Return to the table of contents . Dummburg Castle Germany With dread the wanderer approaches the ruins of the Dummburg. Terror seizes him if night overtakes him in its vicinity; for when the sun goes down and he treads on the site of the castle, he hears from beneath hollow moans and the clank of chains. At midnight he sees in the moonlight the spectres of knights of former days, who ruled the land with an iron sceptre. In solemn procession twelve tall white figures rise from amid the rocky fragments, bearing a large open coffin, which they place on the top of the hill, and then vanish. The skulls also move about, that lie scattered under the rock. For many years the Dummburg was the abode of robbers, who slew the passing travellers and merchants, whom they perceived on the road from Leipsig [Leipzig] to Brunswick [Braunschweig], and heaped together the treasures of the plundered churches and the surrounding country, which they concealed in subterranean caverns. Deep wells were choked up with their murdered victims; and in the frightful castle-dungeon, many miserable beings perished by the slower death of hunger. Long did this lurking-place of banditti continue undiscovered. At length the vengeance of the confederated princes reached them. The hoards of gold, silver, and precious stones still remain piled up in the ruined cellars and vaults of the Dummburg; but it is seldom granted to the wanderer to find the doors, even if here and there he may discover ruined entrances. Spectres in the form of monks, and also living monks, are often seen descending into the rock. A poor wood-cutter, who was about to fell a beech at the back of the scattered ruins, seeing a monk approach slowly through the forest, hid himself behind a tree. The monk passed by, and went among the rocks. The wood-cutter stole cautiously after him, and saw that he stopped at a small door, which had never been discovered by any of the villagers. The monk knocked gently and cried: "Little door, open!" -- and the door sprang open. "Little door, shut!" he also heard him cry, and the door was closed. Trembling in every limb, the wood-cutter marked the crooked path with twigs and heaps of stones. But from that time he could neither eat nor drink, nor sleep, so anxious was he to know what was contained in the cellars to which this wonderful door gave entrance. The following Saturday evening he fasted, and on the Sunday, rising with the sun, he took his rosary and proceeded to the rock. He now stood before the door, and his teeth chattered with fear, as he expected to see a spectre in the form of a monk -- but no spectre appeared. Trembling he approached the door; he listened long and heard nothing. In the anxiety of his heart he prayed to all the saints and to the Virgin, and then, without reflecting, tapped on the door, at the same time saying in a low tremulous voice: "Little door, open!" and the door opened, when he saw before him a narrow dim passage. He entered tottering, and found that it led into a spacious and rather light vault. "Little door, shut!" said he, almost unconsciously, and the door closed behind him. With fear he now walked forward, and found large open vessels and sacks full of old dollars and fine guilders, together with heavy gold pieces. Here were also many beautiful caskets filled with jewels and pearls, costly shrines, and decorated images of saints, which lay about or stood on tables of silver in the corners of the vault. The wood-cutter crossed himself, and wished himself a thousand miles from the enchanted spot, yet could not withstand the desire of taking some of the useless treasures, to enable him to clothe his wife and eight children more comfortably, as they had long been in rags. Shuddering, and with averted eyes, he stretched out his hand towards the sack that stood nearest to him, and took out a few guilders. Feeling now somewhat more composed, with less tremor and half closing his eyes he then took a few dollars, also a handful or two of the small copper coins, and again crossing himself, tottered back to the door. "Come again!" cried a hollow voice from the depth of the vault. As everything about him seemed to whirl round, he could scarcely stammer out: "Little door, open!" The door sprang open. In a livelier and louder voice he now cried out: "Little door, shut!" and it closed behind him. He ran home with the utmost speed, but uttered not a syllable about the treasures he had found; then went into the conventual church and offered up, for the church and for the poor, two-tenths of all that he had taken in the vault. The next day he went to the town, and bought some clothes for his wife and children. He had, he said, found an old dollar and a few guilders under the roots of the beech that he had felled. The following Sunday he went with firmer steps to the door in the rock, did as he had done the first time, and supplied himself better than on the former occasion; still with moderation and discretion. "Come again!" cried the same hollow voice. And he went on the third Sunday, and filled his pockets as before. He was now in his own estimation a rich man, but what could he do with his riches? He gave to the church and to the poor two-tenths of all he had, the rest he resolved to bury in his cellar, and from time to time fetch some as he required it. Yet he could not resist the desire first to measure his money; for as to counting it, that was an art he had never learned. He accordingly went to his neighbour, a very rich man, but who starved himself in the midst of his wealth. He hoarded up corn, deprived the labourer of his hire, extorted from the widow and orphan, and lent money on pledges. He had no children. From this man the wood-cutter borrowed a measure, measured his money, buried it, and returned the measure to its owner. The measure had some long cracks in it, through which the corn-dealer, when selling to the poor labourer, always shook some grains back to his own heap. In one of these cracks two or three of the small copper coins had lodged, which the wood-cutter, in throwing out the money, had not observed. But they did not so easily escape the vulture-eyes of his rich neighbour. He went in search of the wood-cutter, and asked him what he had been measuring. "Pine-cones and beans," answered he confusedly. The usurer shook his head, and showed him the copper coins, threatened him with the law, the torture, and, lastly, promised to give him all he could possibly wish for, if he would tell him the truth. Thus he extorted the secret out of the poor man, and learned from him the powerful words. The whole week the rich usurer employed in forming plans how he might at once get possession of all the treasures in the vault, as well as of those he thought might be concealed in the neighbouring vaults, or buried under the earth. He reckoned beforehand, that if he could get together all this money, he could by degrees, either purchase at a cheap rate from his neighbours, or extort from them. by false accusations and false witnesses, one acre and one hide of land after another, and thus make himself lord of the whole village, and, perhaps, of several of the neighbouring villages; then get ennobled by the emperor; and, as a robber-knight, lay the country around under contribution. It did not please the wood-cutter that his evil-disposed neighbour should visit the castle-vaults. He prayed him to desist from his purpose, and represented to him the fate of many luckless treasure-seekers. But who ever held back a miser from an open sack of gold? By threats and entreaties the wood-cutter was at length prevailed on to accompany him to the door; he was only to receive the sacks, which the miser would himself drag out, and conceal them among the bushes. For this service he was to have the half of all the treasure, and the church a tenth; all the poor also in the village should be newly clothed. So spake the usurer. In his heart he had resolved, when he no longer required his aid, to throw the wood-cutter headlong into a deep well which was near the castle, to give nothing to the poor, and to the church only a few copper coins. The following Sunday the extortioner, accompanied by the wood-cutter, set off before sunrise to the Dummburg. On his shoulder he carried a sack, which contained three bushels, into which he put twenty smaller ones, and in his hand a spade and a large axe. The wood-cutter warned him most strongly against covetousness, but in vain; he recommended him to offer up prayers to the saints for protection, but he would not. Muttering and gnashing his teeth, he walked on. They now arrived at the door. The wood-cutter, who did not feel very easy in the affair, but was held back by the fear of the torture, stood at some distance to receive the sacks. "Little door, open!" cried the miser in a hurried tone, and trembling with eagerness. The door then opened, and he entered. "Little door, shut!" cried he, and it closed after him. No sooner was he in the vault and saw all the vessels and sacks full of gold, and caskets of precious stones and pearls, and shining money, than he devoured them all with his eyes; then with trembling hands pulled the twenty sacks out of the large one, and began filling them. At this moment there came slowly from the depth of the vault a great black dog with fire-darting eyes, and laid himself on all the full sacks, and then on the money. "Away with thee, miser!" cried the dog, grinning fiercely at him. Trembling, the usurer fell to the ground, and crept on hands and knees to the door; but in his fear he forgot the words, "Little door, open," and continued calling out, "Little door, shut," and the door continued closed. The wood-cutter waited long with beating heart; at length he approached the door. It seemed to him that he heard groans and moaning and the hollow howl of a dog, and then all was silent. He now heard the sound of the mass-bell at the convent, and counted his beads; then gently knocked at the door, saying: "Little door, open!" The door opened, and there lay the bleeding body of his wicked neighbour stretched on his sacks; but the vessels of gold and silver, and diamonds and pearls, sank deeper and deeper before his eyes into the earth, till all had completely vanished. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, "The Dummburg," Yule-Tide Stories: A Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853), pp. 481-86 . Thorpe's source: Johann Gustav Gottlieb Büsching, "Die Dummburg," Volks-Sagen, Märchen und Legenden , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Carl Heinrich Reclam, 1812), no. 72, pp. 343-52 . Link to an abbreviated version of this story: "The Castle of Dummburg," Appendix to Richard F. Burton, Supplemental Nights to the Bok of the Thousand Nights and a Night , vol. 3 (Benares: Printed by the Kamashastra Society for private subscribers only, 1887), pp. 591-92 . Return to the table of contents . Simeli Mountain Germany There were two brothers; one was rich, the other poor. However, the rich one gave nothing to the poor one, who barely made a living as a grain dealer. Things often went so badly for him that he had no bread for his wife and children. One day he was pushing his cart through the forest when off to the side he saw a large bare mountain. He had never seen it before, so he stopped and looked at it with amazement. While he was standing there he saw twelve tall wild men approaching. Thinking that they were robbers, he pushed his cart into the thicket, climbed up a tree, and waited to see what would happen. The twelve men went to the mountain and cried out, "Mount Semsi, Mount Semsi, open up." The barren mountain immediately separated down the middle. The twelve men walked into it, and as soon as they were inside it shut. A little while later it opened again, and the men came out carrying heavy sacks on their backs. As soon as they were all back in the daylight they said, "Mount Semsi, Mount Semsi, close." Then the mountain went back together, and the entrance could no longer be seen. Then the twelve men went away. When they were completely out of sight, the poor man climbed down from the tree. He was curious to know what secret was hidden in the mountain, so he went up to it and said, "Mount Semsi, Mount Semsi, open up," and the mountain opened up for him as well. He went inside, and the entire mountain was a cavern full of silver and gold, and in the back of the cavern there lay great piles of pearls and sparkling jewels, piled up like grain. The poor man did not know what he should do, whether or not he could take any of these treasures for himself. At last he filled his pockets with gold, but he left the pearls and precious stones lying where they were. Upon leaving he too said, "Mount Semsi, Mount Semsi, close," and the mountain closed. Then he went home with his cart. He no longer had any cares, for with his gold he could buy bread for his wife and children, and wine as well. He lived happily and honestly, gave to the poor, and did good for everyone. When he ran out of money he went to his brother, borrowed a bushel, and got some more money, but did not touch any of the very valuable things. When he wanted to get some more money for the third time he again borrowed the bushel from his brother. However, the rich man had long been envious of his brother's wealth and of the fine household that he had furnished for himself. He could not understand where the riches came from, and what his brother wanted with the bushel. Then he thought of a trap. He covered the bottom of the bushel with pitch, and when he got the bushel back a gold coin was sticking to it. He at once went to his brother and asked him, "What have you been measuring in the bushel?" "Wheat and barley," said the poor brother. Then he showed him the gold coin and threatened that if he did not tell the truth he would bring charges against him before the court. Then the poor man then told him everything that had happened to him. The rich man immediately had his wagon hitched up and drove away, intending to do better than his brother had done, and to bring back with him quite different treasures. When he came to the mountain he cried out, "Mount Semsi, Mount Semsi, open up." The mountain opened, and he went inside. There lay the riches all before him, and for a long time he did not know what he should take hold of first. Finally took as many precious stones as he could carry. He wanted to carry his load outside, but as his heart and soul were entirely occupied with the treasures, he had forgotten the name of the mountain, and cried out, "Mount Simeli, Mount Simeli, open up." But that was not the right name, and the mountain did not move, remaining closed instead. He became frightened, and the longer he thought about it the more he became confused, and all of the treasures were of no use to him. In the evening the mountain opened up, and the twelve robbers came inside. When they saw him they laughed and cried out, "Bird, we have you at last. Did you think we did not notice that you came here twice? We could not catch you then, this third time you shall not get out again." He cried out, "I wasn't the one. It was my brother!" But however much he begged for his life, and in spite of everything that he said, they cut off his head. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Simeliberg," Kinder- und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm (Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales), vol. 2, 7th ed. (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 142, pp. 259-61 . The Grimms' source: Ludowine von Haxthausen (1795-1872), who heard the tale in the vicinity of Münster. This story first appeared in volume two (no. 56) of the first edition of the Grimms' Kinder- und Hausmärchen (1815). Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002. Link to a copy of this story in a separate file: Simeli Mountain . Return to the table of contents . Open Simson! Germany Once upon a time there were seven robbers who lived inside a mountain, and with them there was an enchanted prince who had to do all the lowest work. He had to carry wood, fetch coal, and tend the fire, and everything that a kitchen-maid ordinarily would do. The robbers called him "Hans Dunsele." One day the robbers brought into the mountain a princess whom they had abducted. Once while she was silently sitting in a corner she heard the enchanted prince singing to himself at his work: If only the queen knew That I am called Hans Dunsele! One day as the robbers were leaving, the princess hid herself and heard one of them call out: "Open Simson!" Then the mountain opened up, they went out, and the mountain closed itself again. She immediately told this to the prince, and the two of them decided to escape. They made preparations, and one day when the robbers were away, the princess said, "Open Simson!" The mountain opened up, and they could freely leave. They went far, far into the woods, which became thicker and thicker, until they could no longer find a pathway. Then the prince uttered the saying that he had so often sung to himself: If only the queen knew That I am called Hans Dunsele! Now the queen, his mother, had set forth in search of her enchanted son, and she just happened to be nearby while he was singing, and thus she learned the name that he had had with the robbers. She called out loudly and cheerfully: "Hans Dunsele!" With that the spell was broken; the woods thinned out, and they found the pathway homeward. Afterward he married the princess who had helped him escape from the mountain and had fled together with him, and he lived happily with her until he died. Source: Ernst Meier, Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 53, pp. 187-88 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2013. Return to the table of contents . Ali Baba and Kissem Jamaica Ali Baba was the brother of Kissem, but Ali Baba was a poor man and Kissem was a rich man. Ali Baba had two donkeys and an ox, -- all his living. Ali Baba was cutting wood one day, he heard a company of horse coming afar. Took his donkeys and hid them in the bush, hid himself in a tree. Forty men were coming on; the head man came right to the cave where he was. Name of the cave was "Sesame." This cave was shut, would open by the word "Open, Sesame." And they brought forty bags of gold an' put in. Shut without word. Ali Baba saw them from the tree-top. When gone, Ali Baba came down to the cave, said, "Open, Sesame, open!" Ali Baba took all the money he could, loaded it on the donkey. Must measure the money, but didn't have any measure. Brother said, "What Ali Baba got to measure?" Took stuck the measure. Ali Baba measure, measure, measure, measure thousands of dollars. One piece stuck on the bottom. Brother aska; Ali Baba tells all about it, teaches brother, "Open, Sesame, open." Next day, Kissem took wagon, oxen, servants, went to the place, said, "Open, Sesame, open!" When he went inside, cave shut. When he went on, saw all the money, he forgot the word, said, "Open, kem! Open, wem! Open, rim! Open, sim!" Forgot that word entirely, can't get out. The men came back; "Open, Sesame, open!" Find Kissem. "How came you here?" No answer. Cut Kissem up in five pieces, hung them up in the cave. Kissem's wife went to Ali Baba, said, "Kissem no come here yet!" Ali Baba went next day to the place. "Open, Sesame, open!" Finds the five pieces, takes them down, gets a cobbler to sew the five pieces up into a body. Robber comes back, finds body gone. Who took away that body, signifies some one knows the place; must find out who that is. Goes about town, finds a cobbler who said he joined five pieces into a body. Cobbler shows the house. He gets jars, puts a robber in each jar; one jar has oil. Takes the jars to Ali Baba, says will he buy oil. Ali Baba says yes. He makes sport for the great governor. Ali Baba had a maid by the name of Margiana, and she was very wittified, -- discovered the whole thing, but she didn't say anything. She danced so well, danced up to the governor to give her something. He put his hand in his pocket to get her something; Margiana get one dagger, killed the governor dead. Margiana got the oil red-hot, poured into all the jars that got men. Ali Baba said, "Well, Margiana, you saved my life and you shall have my son and as much money as you want, and as much money as will put you in heaven!" Source (Internet Archive): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 100, pp. 129-30 . Source (Sacred Texts): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 100, pp. 129-30 . Beckwith's informant: Alexander Townsend, Flamstead, St. Andrew. Return to the table of contents . How Black Snake Caught the Wolf USA "One time," said Uncle Remus, putting the "noses" of the chunks together with his cane, so as to make a light in his cabin: Brer Rabbit en ole Brer Wolf wuz gwine down de road terge'er, en Brer Wolf, he 'low dat times wuz mighty hard en money skace. Brer Rabbit, he 'gree 'long wid 'im, he did, dat times wuz mighty tight, en he up en say dat 't wuz in about much ez he kin do fer ter make bofe en's meet. He 'low, he did: "Brer Wolf, you er gittin' mighty ga'nt, en't won't be so mighty long 'fo' we'll hatten be tuck up en put in de po'-house. Wat make dis?" says Brer Rabbit, sezee: "I be bless ef I kin tell, kaze yer er all de creeturs gittin' ga'nt w'iles all de reptules is a-gittin' seal fat. No longer'n yistiddy, I wuz comin' along throo de woods, w'en who should I meet but ole Brer Snake, en he wuz dat put dat he ain't kin skacely pull he tail 'long atter he head. I 'low ter mese'f, I did, dat dish yer country gittin' in a mighty bad way w'en de creeturs is got ter go 'roun' wid der ribs growin' terge'er w'iles de reptules layin' up in de sun des nat' ally fattenin' on der own laziness. Yessar, dat w'at I 'lowed." Brer Wolf, he say, he did, dat if de reptules wuz gittin' de 'vantage er de creeturs dat away, dat hit wuz 'bout time fer ter clean out de reptules er leaf de country, en he 'low, fuddermo', dat he wuz ready fur ter jine in wid de patter-rollers en drive um out. But Brer Rabbit, he 'low, he did, dat de bes' way fer ter git 'long wuz ter fin' out whar'bouts de reptules hed der smoke-'house en go in dar en git some er de vittles w'at by good rights b'long'd ter de creeturs. Brer Wolf say maybe dis de bes' way, kaze ef de reptules git word dat de patter-rollers is a-comin' dey'll take en hide de ginger-cakes, en der simmon beer, en der w'atzisnames, so dat de creeturs can't git um. By dis time dey come ter de forks er de road, en Brer Rabbit he went one way, en Brer Wolf he went de yuther. Uncle Remus went on, with increasing gravity: Whar Brer Wolf went, de goodness knows, but Brer Rabbit, he went on down de road todes he own house, en w'iles he wuz lippitin' long, nibblin' a bite yer en a bite dar, he year a mighty kuse fuss in de woods. He lay low, Brer Rabbit did, en lissen. He look sharp, he did, en bimeby he ketch a glimp' er ole Mr. Black Snake gwine 'long thoo de grass. Brer Rabbit, he lay low en watch 'im. Mr. Black Snake crope 'long, he did, des like he wuz greased. Brer Rabbit say ter hisse'f: "Hi! dar goes one er de reptules, en ez she slips she slides 'long." Yit, still he lay low en watch. Mr. Black Snake crope 'long, he did, en bimeby he come whar dey wuz a great big poplar-tree. Brer Rabbit, he crope on his belly en follow 'long atter. Mr. Black Snake tuck 'n circle all 'roun' de tree, en den he stop en sing out: Watsilla, watsilla, Consario wo! Watsilla, watsilla, Consario wo! En den, mos' 'fo' Brer Rabbit kin wink he eye, a door w'at wuz in de tree flew'd open, en Mr. Black Snake tuck 'n crawl in. Brer Rabbit 'low, he did: "Ah-yi! Dar whar you stay! Dar whar you keeps yo' simmon beer! Dar whar you hides yo' backbone en spar' ribs. Ah-yi!" W'en Mr. Black Snake went in de house, Brer Rabbit crope up, he did, en lissen fer ter see w'at he kin year gwine on in dar. But he ain't year nothin'. Bimeby, w'iles he settin' 'roun' dar, he year de same song: Watsilla, watsilla, Consario wo! Watsilla, watsilla, Consario wo! En mos' 'fo' Brer Rabbit kin hide in de weeds, de door hit flew'd open, en out Mr. Black Snake slid. He slid out, he did, en slid off, en atter he git out er sight, Brer Rabbit, he tuck 'n went back ter de poplar-tree fer ter see ef he kin git in dar. He hunt 'roun' en he hunt 'roun', en yit ain't fin' no door. Den he sat up on he behin' legs, ole Brer Rabbit did, en low: "Hey! w'at kinder contrapshun dish yer? I seed a door dar des now, but dey ain't no door dar now." Ole Brer Rabbit scratch he head, he did, en bimeby hit come inter he min' dat maybe de song got sump'n 'n'er ter do wid it, en wid dat he chuned up, he did, en sing: Watsilla, watsilla, Bandario, wo-haw! Time he say fus' part, de door sorter open, but w'en he say de las' part hit slammed shet ag'in. Den he chune up some mo': Watsilla, watsilla, Bandario, wo-haw! Time he say de fus' part de door open little ways, but time he say de las' part hit slammed shet ag'in. Den Brer Rabbit 'low he 'd hang 'roun' dar en fin' out w'at kind er hinges dat er door wuz a-swingin' on. So he stays 'roun' dar, he did, twel bimeby Mr. Black Snake came 'long back. Brer Rabbit crope up, he did, en he year 'im sing de song: Watsilla, watsilla, Consario wo! Watsilla, watsilla, Consario wo! Den de door open, en Mr. Black Snake, he slid in, en Brer Rabbit, he lipped off in de bushes en sung de song by hisse'f. Den he went home en tuck some res', en nex' day he went back; en w'en Mr. Black Snake come out en went off, Brer Rabbit, he tuck 'n sing de song, en de door flewed open, en in he went. He went in, he did, en w'en he got in dar, he fin' lots er goodies. He fin' cakes en sausages, en all sort er nice doin's. Den he come out, en de nex' day he went he tole Ole Brer Wolf, en Brer Wolf, he 'low dat, bein' ez times is hard, he b'lieve he 'll go 'long en sample some er Mr. Black Snake's doin's. Dey went, dey did, en soon ez dey fin' dat Mr. Black Snake is gone, Brer Rabbit he sing de song, en de door open, en in he went. He went in dar, he did, en he gobbled up his belly ful, en w'iles he doin' dis Brer Wolf he gallop 'roun' en 'roun', tryin' fer ter git in. But de door done slam shet, en Brer Wolf ain't know de song. Bimeby Brer Rabbit he come out, he did, lickin' he chops en wipin' he mustash, en Brer Wolf ax 'im w'at de name er goodness is de reason he ain't let 'im go in 'long wid 'im. Brer Rabbit, he vow, he did, dat he 'spected any gump 'ud know dat somebody got ter stay outside en watch w'iles de yuther one wuz on de inside. Brer Wolf say he ain't thunk er dat, en den he ax Brer Rabbit fer ter let 'im in, en please be so good ez ter stay out dar en watch w'iles he git some er de goodies. Wid dat Brer Rabbit, he sung de song: Watsilla, watsilla, Consario wo! Watsilla, watsilla, Consario wo! He sung de song, he did, en de door flew'd open, en Brer Wolf he lipt in, en gun ter gobble up de goodies. Brer Rabbit, he stayed outside, en make like he gwine ter watch. Brer Wolf, he e't en e't, en he keep on a-eatin'. Brer Rabbit, he tuck en stan' off in de bushes, en bimeby he year Mr. Black Snake a-slidin' thoo de grass. Brer Rabbit, he ain't say nothin'. He 'low ter hisse'f, he did, dat he was dar ter watch, en dat w'at he gwine ter do ef de good Lord spar' 'im. So he set dar en watch, en Mr. Black Snake, he come a-slidin' up ter de house en sing de song, en den de door flew'd open en in he went. Watsilla, watsilla, Consario wo! Watsilla, watsilla, Consario wo! Brer Rabbit set dar en watch so hard, he did, dat it look like he eyes gwine to pop out. 'T want long 'fo' he year sump'n 'n'er like a scuffle gwine on in de poplar-tree, en, fus' news you know, Brer Wolf come tumberlin' out. He come tumberlin' out, he did, en down he fell, kaze Mr. Black Snake got 'im tie hard en fas' so he ain't kin run. Den, atter so long a time, Mr. Black Snake tuck 'n tie Brer Wolf up ter a lim', en dar dat creetur swung 'twixt de hevin en de yeth. He swung en swayed, en eve'y time he swung Mr. Black Snake tuck 'n lash 'im wid he tail, en eve'y time he lash 'im Brer Rabbit holler out, he did: "'Sarve 'im right! sarve 'im right!" "En I let you know," said the old man, refilling his pipe, "dat w'en Mr. Black Snake git thoo wid dat creetur, he ain't want no mo' goodies." Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Daddy Jake the Runaway: And Short Stories Told After Dark by Uncle Remus (New York: The Century Company, 1896), pp. 108-117 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 27, 2022. Origin of Underground People The Origin of Underground People Legends about fairies, elves, trolls, and other hidden creatures translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1997-2024 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Fallen Angels Origin of the Elves (Iceland). The Origin of Bergfolk (Denmark). When Satan Was Cast Out of Heaven (Sweden). The Origin of Fairies (Scotland). Angels Who Were Turned Out of Heaven (Ireland). The Fairy Race (Ireland). The Fairies as Fallen Angels (Ireland). The Tylwyth Teg (Wales). The Origin of the Elves (Switzerland). Lower Elemental Spirits (Bohemia). Eve's Unequal Children (Folktales of Type 758) The Genesis of the Hid-Folk (Iceland). The Origin of the Troll Folk (Denmark). The Hidden People in Valdres (Norway). The Origin of Fairies (Wales). The Baby Farmer (Wales). A Curious Legend (Slavonic). The Creation of the Underground People (Germany). Eve's Unequal Children (Germany). Eve's Children (Austria / Italy). The Offspring of Lilith, Adam's First Wife The Origin of the Tusser (Norway). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Fallen Angels Origin of the Elves Iceland A traveler once lost his way, and knew not whither to turn or what to do. At last, after wandering about for some time, he came to a hut, which he had never seen before; and on his knocking at the door, an old woman opened it, and invited him to come in, which he gladly did. Inside, the house seemed to be a clean and good one. The old woman led him to the warmest room, where were sitting two young and beautiful girls. Besides these, no one else was in the house. He was well received and kindly treated, and having eaten a good supper was shown to bed. He asked whether one of the girls might stay with him, as his companion for the night, and his request was granted. And now wishing to kiss her, the traveler turned towards her, and placed his hand upon her; but his hand sank through her, as if she had been of mist, and though he could well see her lying beside him, he could grasp nothing but the air. So he asked what this all meant, and she said, "Be not astonished, for I am a spirit. When the devil, in times gone by, made war in heaven, he, with all his armies, was driven into outer darkness. Those who turned their eyes to look after him as he fell, were also driven out of heaven; but those who were neither for nor against him, were sent to the earth and commanded to dwell there in the rocks and mountains. These are called elves and hidden people. They can live in company with none but their own race. They do either good or evil, which they will, but what they do they do thoroughly. They have no bodies as you other mortals, but can take a human form and be seen of men when they wish. I am one of these fallen spirits, and so you can never hope to embrace me." To this fate the traveler yielded himself, and has handed down to us this story. Source (books.google.com): Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 20-21 . Source (Internet Archive): Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 29-21 . Link to this legend in the original Icelandic: Books.google.com: Jón Árnason, "Uppruni álfa," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 5-6 . Internet Archive: Jón Árnason, "Uppruni álfa," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 5-6 . Return to the table of contents . The Origin of Bergfolk Denmark Bergmen originated in this way, that when Our Lord cast down the wicked angels from heaven they could not all get to hell together, and some of them settled in the mounds and banks. Brownies, bergmen, and such creatures originated in this way. When Our Lord cast the wicked angels down from heaven some of them fell on mounds and banks, and these became bergmen; some fell into woods and mosses, and these became fairies ( ellefolk ), while those that fell into buildings became brownies ( nisser ). They are just little devils, the whole lot of them. Source (books.google.com): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples (London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), p. 93 . Source (Internet Archive): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples (London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), p. 93 . Craigie's source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Bjærgfolks tilblivelse," Danske Sagn, som de har lydt i Folkemunde , vol. 1 (Aarhus: Folkeblads Trykkeri, 1892), pp. 3-4 . Return to the table of contents . When Satan Was Cast Out of Heaven Sweden Know that when Satan was cast out of heaven, on account of his pride, and fell to the earth, there were other spirits, which, like him, were also cast out. These spirits, in their fall, were borne hither and thither on the winds like the golden leaves in the autumn storm, falling to earth finally, some into the sea, some into the forests, and some upon the mountains. Where they fell there they remained, so the saying runs, and found there their field of action. After their abiding places they were given different names. Thus we have sea nymphs, mountain fairies, wood fairies, elves, and other spirits, all of which are described in the catechism. Source (books.google.com): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), p. 56 . Source (Internet Archive): Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), p. 56 . This excerpt is from a longer account entitled "Katrineholm Manor" (pp. 55-59) from the province of Småland in southern Sweden. Hofberg's source is "a good old woman, resident in the neighborhood." Hofberg does not give this excerpt a title. Link to this text in the original Swedish: Books.google.com: Herman Hofberg, Svenska Folksägner (Stockholm: Fr. Skoglunds Förlag, 1882), pp. 44-45 . Return to the table of contents . The Origin of Fairies Scotland Various theories have been advanced as to the origin of fairies and as to the belief in them. The most concrete form in which the belief has been urged has been by the Rev. Robert Kirk, minister of Aberfoyle, in Perthshire. Another theory of the origin of fairies I took down in the island of Miunghlaidh (Minglay; and, though I have given it in Carmina Gadelica , it is sufficiently interesting to be quoted here. During October 1871, Roderick Macneill, known as Ruaraidh mac Dhomhuil, then ninety-two years of age, told it in Gaelic to the late J. F. Campbell of Islay and the writer, when they were storm-stayed in the precipitous island of Miunghlaidh, Barra: The Proud Angel fomented a rebellion among the angels a of heaven, where he had been a leading light. He declared that he would go and found a kingdom for himself. When going out at the door of heaven the Proud Angel brought prickly lightning and biting lightning out of the doorstep with his heels. Many angels followed him -- so many that at last the Son called out, "Father! Father! the city is being emptied!" whereupon the Father ordered that the gates of heaven and the gates of hell should be closed. This was instantly done. And those who were in were in, and those who were out were out; while the hosts who had left heaven and had not reached hell flew into the holes of the earth, like the stormy petrels. These are the Fairy Folk -- ever since doomed to live under the ground, and only allowed to emerge where and when the King permits. They are never allowed abroad on Thursday, that being Columba's Day; nor on Friday, that being the Son's Day; nor on Saturday, that being Mary's Day; nor on Sunday, that being the Lord's Day. God be between me and every fairy, Every ill wish and every druidry; Today is Thursday on sea and land, I trust in the King that they do not hear me. On certain nights when their bruthain ( bowers ) are open and their lamps are lit, and the song and the dance are moving merrily, the fairies may be heard singing light-heartedly: Not of the seed of Adam are we, Nor is Abraham our father; But of the seed of the Proud Angel, Driven forth from Heaven. Source (books.google.com): W. Y. Evans Wentz, The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries (London, New York, Toronto, and Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 1911), pp. 84-86 . Source (Internet Archive): W. Y. Evans Wentz, The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries (London, New York, Toronto, and Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 1911), pp. 84-86 . Return to the table of contents . Angels Who Were Turned Out of Heaven Ireland It is said by those who ought to understand such things, that the good people, or the fairies, are some of the angels who were turned out of heaven, and who landed on their feet in this world, while the rest of their companions, who had more sin to sink them, went down further to a worse place. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireand (London: John Murray, 1825), p. 37 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireand (London: John Murray, 1825), p. 37 . Return to the table of contents . The Fairy Race Ireland The Sidhe , or spirit race, called also the Feadh-Ree , or fairies, are supposed to have been once angels in heaven, who were cast out by Divine command as a punishment for their inordinate pride. Some fell to earth, and dwelt there, long before man was created, as the first gods of the earth. Others fell into the sea, and they built themselves beautiful fairy palaces of crystal and pearl underneath the waves; but on moonlight nights they often come up on the land, riding their white horses, and they hold revels with their fairy kindred of the earth, who live in the clefts of the hills, and they dance to gether on the green sward under the ancient trees, and drink nectar from the cups of the flowers, which is the fairy wine. Other fairies, however, are demoniacal, and given to evil and malicious deeds; for when cast out of heaven they fell into hell, and there the devil holds them under his rule, and sends them forth as he wills upon missions of evil to tempt the souls of men downward by the false glitter of sin and pleasure. These spirits dwell under the earth, and impart their knowledge only to certain evil persons chosen of the devil, who gives them power to make incantations, and brew love potions, and to work wicked spells, and they can assume different forms by their knowledge and use of certain magical herbs. Source (books.google.com): Lady Wilde [Lady Jane Francesca Elgee Wilde], Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland , vol. 1 (London: Ward and Downey, 1887), pp. 68-69 . Source (Internet Archive): Lady Wilde [Lady Jane Francesca Elgee Wilde], Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland , vol. 1 (Boston: Ticknor and Company, 1887), pp. 68-69 . Return to the table of contents . The Fairies as Fallen Angels Ireland The islanders, like all the Irish, believe that the fairies are the fallen angels who were cast down by the Lord God out of heaven for their sinful pride. And some fell into the sea, and some on the dry land, and some fell deep down into hell, and the devil gives to these knowledge and power, and sends them on earth where they work much evil. But the fairies of the earth and the sea are mostly gentle and beautiful creatures, who will do no harm if they are let alone, and allowed to dance on the fairy raths in the moonlight to their own sweet music, undisturbed by the presence of mortals. Source (books.google.com): Lady Wilde [Lady Jane Francesca Elgee Wilde], Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland , (London: Ward and Downey, 1888), p. 89 . Source (Internet Archive): Lady Wilde [Lady Jane Francesca Elgee Wilde], Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland , (London: Ward and Downey, 1888), p. 89 . Return to the table of contents . The Tylwyth Teg Wales The common or popular theory is in Wales the poetico-religious one. This is, in a word, the belief that the Tylwyth Teg are the souls of dead mortals not bad enough for hell nor good enough for heaven. They are doomed to live on earth, to dwell in secret places, until the resurrection day, when they will be admitted into paradise. Meantime they must be either incessantly toiling or incessantly playing, but their toil is fruitless and their pleasure unsatisfying. A variation of this general belief holds these souls to be the souls of the ancient Druids, a fancy which is specially impressive, as indicating the duration of their penance, and reminds us of the Wandering Jew myth . It is confined mainly to the Coblynau, or dwellers in mines and caves. Another variation considers the fairies bad spirits of still remoter origin -- the same in fact who were thrown over the battlements of heaven along with Satan, but did not fall into hell -- landed on the earth instead, where they are permitted to tarry till doomsday as above. A detail of this theory is in explanation of the rare appearance of fairies nowadays; they are refraining from mischief in view of the near approach of the judgment, with the hope of thus conciliating heaven. Source (books.google.com): Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), pp. 134 . Source (Internet Archive): Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), pp. 134 . Return to the table of contents . The Origin of the Elves Switzerland When the fallen spirits were cast into hell, God gave them a deadline by which time all of them were to have arrived at this place. However, their number was so great that a thick crowd of them fell from heaven like snow. Like snowflakes, some of the spirits fell faster and arrived earlier; some fell slower and arrived later. In the instant of the deadline, some still falling between heaven and hell. These did not become devils, but rather elves, because they were left hanging on the earth. Source (books.google.com): Alois Lütolf, "Entstehung der Erdleutchen," Sagen, Bräuche und Legenden aus des fünf Orten Lucern, Uri, Schwyz, Unterwalden und Zug (Lucerne: Verlag von Frz. Jos. Schiffmann, 1865), no. 435, pp. 473-74 . Source (Internet Archive): Alois Lütolf, "Entstehung der Erdleutchen," Sagen, Bräuche und Legenden aus des fünf Orten Lucern, Uri, Schwyz, Unterwalden und Zug (Lucerne: Verlag von Frz. Jos. Schiffmann, 1865), no. 435, pp. 473-74 . Lütolf's source: Pastor Wing from Obwalden. Return to the table of contents . Lower Elemental Spirits Bohemia In addition to the gods, heathens knew a whole row of lower demons which can be placed together under the names sprites and elves. They constitute a distinct spirit realm on earth, independent of the world of humans. They possess supernatural powers with which they harm and help humans. However, they shy away from humans, because physically they are not our equals. In Bohemia they tell about the origin of these demons as follows: When God cast out the arrogant angels from heaven, they became the evil spirits that plague mankind day and night, tormenting us and inflicting us with harm. The ones who fell into hell and into caves and abysses became devils and death-maidens. However, those who fell onto the earth became goblins, imps, dwarfs, thumblings, alps, noon-and-evening-ghosts, and will-o'-the-wisps. Those who fell into the forests became the wood-spirits who live there: the hey-men, the wild-men, the forest-men, the wild-women, and the forest-women. Finally, those who fell into the water became water spirits: water-men, mermaids, and merwomen. Source (books.google.com): Josef Virgil Grohmann, "Niedere Elementargeister," Sagenbuch von Böhmen und Mähren , vol. 1: Sagen aus Böhmen (Prague: Verlag der J. G. Calve'schen k. k. Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1863), pp. 108-109 . Source (Internet Archive): Josef Virgil Grohmann, "Niedere Elementargeister," Sagenbuch von Böhmen und Mähren , vol. 1: Sagen aus Böhmen (Prague: Verlag der J. G. Calve'schen k. k. Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1863), pp. 108-109 . The German names of the spirits mentioned are: Teufel, Todmädchen, Kobolde, Schrätlein, Zwerge, Daumlinge, Alpe, Mittags- und Abendgespenster, Irrlichter, Waldgeister, Hemänner, wilde Männer, Waldmänner, wilde Weiber, Waldfrauen, Wassergeister, Wassermänner, Meerjungfern, Meerfrauen. The historical region of Bohemia is currently part of the Czech Republic. Return to the table of contents . Eve's Unequal Children (Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-UtherType 758) The Genesis of the Hid-Folk Iceland Once upon a time, God Almighty came to visit Adam and Eve. They received him with joy, and showed him everything they had in the house. They also brought their children to him, to show him, and these He found promising and full of hope. Then He asked Eve whether she had no other children than these whom she now showed him. She said "None." But it so happened that she had not finished washing them all, and, being ashamed to let God see them dirty, had hidden the unwashed ones. This God knew well, and said therefore to her, "What man hides from God, God will hide from man." These unwashed children became forthwith invisible, and took up their abode in mounds, and hills, and rocks. From these are the elves descended, but we men from those of Eve's children whom she had openly and frankly shown to God. And it is only by the will and desire of the elves themselves that men can ever see them. Source (books.google.com): Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 19-20 . Source (Internet Archive): Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 19-20 . Link to this legend in the original Icelandic: Books.google.com: Jón Árnason, "Huldumanna-Genesis," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 5 . Source (Internet Archive): Jón Árnason, "Huldumanna-Genesis," Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 5 . Return to the table of contents . The Origin of the Troll Folk Denmark One day Eve was washing her children at a spring when our Lord suddenly came to her. She was startled and hid the children who were not yet washed. Our Lord asked if all her children were present here. She answered "Yes," wanting to avoid his anger if he saw that some had not yet been washed. But then our Lord said that what she had hidden from him should henceforth also be hidden from mankind. In that same hour the unclean children disappeared and were hidden in the mountains. From them have descended all the underground folk. Source (books.google.com): J. M. Thiele, "Troldfolkets Oprindelse," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), pp. 175-76 . Source (Internet Archive): J. M. Thiele, "Troldfolkets Oprindelse," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), pp. 175-76 . Return to the table of contents . The Hidden People in Valdres Norway Eve, the wife of Adam, lived a long time and gave birth to many children, even after she should have had no more. She was ashamed for having so many in her old age. One day Our Lord came walking by and approached Eve. He asked to see her children. She brought out a whole flock, but she missed a few, because she was ashamed of having so many, being so old. Our Lord understood this, but he was offended, and said to Eve: "If you hide your children from me, then they will be hidden from you." Then Eve could no longer see these children. They became the haugafølk (hidden people) and the bergatrøll (mountain trolls). They do not want anyone to see them, although sometimes they are seen. People with foresight can see what they look like and what they are doing. There is no great difference between them and us, because the same one created them. However, they are not Christians like we are. Source (books.google.com): O. K. Ødegaard, "Meir um haugafølk i Valdres," Gamal tru o gamal skjikk (Kristiania [Oslo]: Olaf Norlis Forlag, 1917), pp. 102-103 . Return to the table of contents . The Origin of Fairies Wales The following is the account related in Wales of the origin of the fairies, and was told me by an individual from Anglesea: In our Saviour's time there lived a woman whose fortune it was to be possessed of near a score of children, . . . and as she saw our blessed Lord approach her dwelling, being ashamed of being so prolific, and that he might not see them all, she concealed about half of them closely, and, after his departure, when she went in search of them, to her surprise she found they were gone. They never afterwards could be discovered, for it was supposed that, as a punishment from heaven, for hiding what God had given her, she was deprived of them; and, it is said, these, her offspring, have generated the race of beings called fairies. Source (books.google.com): William Howells, "Cambrian Superstitions and Fugitive Pieces," The Cambrian Quarterly Magazine and Celtic Repertory , vol. 3 (London: H. Hughes and T. Hookham, 1831), p. 76 . Source (Internet Archive): William Howells, "Cambrian Superstitions and Fugitive Pieces," The Cambrian Quarterly Magazine and Celtic Repertory , vol. 3 (London: H. Hughes and T. Hookham, 1831), p. 76 . Return to the table of contents . The Baby Farmer Wales Old Kaddy was a baby-farmer, and one day she went to the woods to gather sticks for her fire, and whilst she was gathering the sticks she found a piece of gold, and took it home; but she never told anyone she had found the money, for she always pretended to be very poor. But though she was so poor, she used to dress two of her children in fine clothes; but the others, whom she did not like, she kept in the filthiest rags. One day a man knocked at her door, and asked to see the children. He sat down in her little room, and she went and brought the ragged little boy and girl, saying she was very poor, and couldn't afford to dress them better; for she had been careful to hide the well-dressed little boy and girl in a cockloft. After the stranger had gone she went to the cockloft to look for her well-dressed favorites, but they had disappeared, and they were never seen afterwards, for they were turned into fairies. Source (books.google.com): Peter Henry Emerson, Welsh Fairy-Tales and Other Stories (London: D. Nutt, 1894), p. 14 . Source (Internet Archive): Peter Henry Emerson, Welsh Fairy-Tales and Other Stories (London: D. Nutt, 1894), p. 14 . Explanation of baby farming from Wikipedia: Baby farming was a term used in late-Victorian Era Britain (and, less commonly, in Australia and the United States) to mean the taking in of an infant or child for payment; if the infant was young, this usually included wet-nursing (breast-feeding by a woman not the mother). Some baby farmers "adopted" children for lump-sum payments, while others cared for infants for periodic payments. Though baby farmers were paid in the understanding that care would be provided, the term "baby farmer" was used as an insult, and improper treatment was usually implied. Return to the table of contents . A Curious Legend Slavonic A curious legend exists among the Sclavonic nations by which the existence of elves is accounted for. It is said that Adam had by his wife Eve, thirty sons and thirty daughters. God asked him, one day, the number of his children. Adam was ashamed of having so many girls, so he answered, "Thirty sons and twenty-seven daughters." But from the eye of God nothing can be concealed, and He took from among Adam's daughters the three fairest, and He made them Willis or elves; they were good and holy, and therefore did not perish in the Deluge, but entered with Noah into the ark and were saved. Source (books.google.com): S. Baring-Gould, Legends of Old Testament Characters , vol. 1 (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1871), p. 55 . Source (Internet Archive): S. Baring-Gould, Legends of Old Testament Characters , vol. 1 (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1871), p. 55 . Return to the table of contents . The Creation of the Undergound People Germany Once our lord Christ was wandering upon the earth. He came to a house where a woman lived who had five beautiful and five ugly children. When the lord stepped into her house she hid the five ugly children in the cellar. The lord invited the children to come to him, and when he saw the five beautiful children he asked the woman where her other children were. The woman said: "I have no other children." Then the lord blessed the five beautiful children and cursed the five ugly ones, saying: "That which is below shall remain below, and that which is above shall remain above." When the woman returned to the cellar, the five children had disappeared. The underground people originated from them. Source (books.google.com): Karl Müllenhoff, "Die Erschaffung der Unterirdischen," Sagen, Märchen und Lieder der herzogthümer Schleswig, Holstein und Lauenburg (Kiel: Schwersche Buchhandlung, 1845), no. 379, p. 279 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Müllenhoff, "Die Erschaffung der Unterirdischen," Sagen, Märchen und Lieder der herzogthümer Schleswig, Holstein und Lauenburg (Kiel: Schwersche Buchhandlung, 1845), no. 379, p. 279 . Müllenhoff's source: Dr. Clement, from Amrum. Return to the table of contents . Eve's Unequal Children Germany When Adam and Eve were driven from paradise, they were forced to build a house for themselves on barren ground, and eat their bread by the sweat of their brow. Adam hoed the field, and Eve spun the wool. Every year Eve brought a child into the world, but the children were unlike each other. Some were good looking, and some ugly. After a considerable time had gone by, God sent an angel to them to announce that he himself was coming to inspect their household. Eve, delighted that the Lord should be so gracious, cleaned her house diligently, decorated it with flowers, and spread rushes on the floor. Then she brought in her children, but only the good-looking ones. She washed and bathed them, combed their hair, put freshly laundered shirts on them, and cautioned them to be polite and well-behaved in the presence of the Lord. They were to bow down before him courteously, offer to shake hands, and to answer his questions modestly and intelligently. The ugly children, however, were not to let themselves be seen. She hid one of them beneath the hay, another in the attic, the third in the straw, the fourth in the stove, the fifth in the cellar, the sixth under a tub, the seventh beneath the wine barrel, the eighth under an old pelt, the ninth and tenth beneath the cloth from which she made their clothes, and the eleventh and twelfth under the leather from which she cut their shoes. She had just finished when someone knocked at the front door. Adam looked through a crack, and saw that it was the Lord. He opened the door reverently, and the Heavenly Father entered. There stood the good-looking children all in a row. They bowed before him, offered to shake hands, and knelt down. The Lord began to bless them. He laid his hands on the first, saying, "You shall be a powerful king," did the same thing to the second, saying, "You a prince," to the third, "You a count," to the fourth, "You a knight," to the fifth, "You a nobleman," to the sixth, "You a burgher," to the seventh, "You a merchant," to the eighth, "You a scholar." Thus he bestowed his richest blessings upon them all. When Eve saw that the Lord was so mild and gracious, she thought, "I will bring forth my ugly children as well. Perhaps he will bestow his blessings on them too." So she ran and fetched them from the hay, the straw, the stove, and wherever else they were hidden away. In they came, the whole coarse, dirty, scabby, sooty lot of them. The Lord smiled, looked at them all, and said, "I will bless these as well." He laid his hands on the first and said to him, "You shall be a peasant," to the second, "You a fisherman," to the third, "You a smith," to the fourth, "You a tanner," to the fifth, "You a weaver," to the sixth, "You a shoemaker," to the seventh, "You a tailor," to the eighth, "You a potter," to the ninth, "You a teamster," to the tenth, "You a sailor," to the eleventh, "You a messenger," to the twelfth, "You a household servant, all the days of your life." When Eve had heard all this she said, "Lord, how unequally you divide your blessings. All of them are my children, whom I have brought into the world. You should favor them all equally." But God replied, "Eve, you do not understand. It is right and necessary that the entire world should be served by your children. If they were all princes and lords, who would plant grain, thresh it, grind and bake it? Who would forge iron, weave cloth, build houses, plant crops, dig ditches, and cut out and sew clothing? Each shall stay in his own place, so that one shall support the other, and all shall be fed like the parts of a body." Then Eve answered, "Oh, Lord, forgive me, I spoke too quickly to you. Let your divine will be done with my children as well." Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die ungleichen Kinder Evas," Kinder und Hausmärchen vol. 2, 7th edition (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), , no. 180, pp. 374-78 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die ungleichen Kinder Evas," Kinder und Hausmärchen vol. 2, 7th edition (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), , no. 180, pp. 374-78 . The Grimms' source: Hans Sachs (1494-1576). The Grimms attribute this tale to two of Sachs's comic dramas, both from the year 1553, as well as a verse anecdote by Sachs from the year 1558. Sachs's source was a Latin poem by Philipp Melanchthon (1497-1560). Translated by Margaret Hunt (1884). Translation revised and corrected by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Return to the table of contents . Eve's Children Austria / Italy Eve, the mother of our race had become quite old when our dear Lord asked her how many children she had. Not knowing the exact number, she stated a number that was several thousand too few. As a consequence the uncounted ones were all transformed into monkeys. Thus, monkeys are nothing other than banished humans. Source (books.google.com): Alois Menghin, "Eva's Kinder," Aus dem deutschen Südtirol (Merano: Verlag von Fr. Plant's Buchhandlung, 1884), pp. 87-88 . Return to the table of contents . The Offspring of Lilith, Adam's First Wife The Origin of the Tusser Norway There was a farm in the eastern highlands where the people often were visited by the tusser . One tusse in particular often borrowed something from a man. The pastor heard about this and went up to the farm to see what was happening. "Yes," said the man. "And if you will wait here for an hour you'll be able to see the tusse . He borrowed a pot of beer from me, and he'll return it here when the clock strikes." The pastor sat down, and when the clock struck, the tusse appeared. Seeing the stranger, he was afraid to speak. He set the pot on the table, bowed to the man, and wanted to leave immediately. The pastor ran to the door and blocked his way out. He spoke to the tusse , telling him about the New Testament and the little Christ Child. He explained the texts to him. He wanted to convert him, for he thought that he might be a devil. The tusse again tried to run away, but the pastor held the door shut and continued to explain the scriptures. The tusse said nothing to this, but finally he did answer: "I am not learned enough to talk with you. But if you will wait here for a little while, I'll fetch my brother. He is a pastor just like you." He promised that his brother would come, but the pastor was afraid that the tusse would only escape. "You can let him go," said the man. If he has promised that his brother will come, his brother will come. He never lies." The pastor let him go, then sat down and waited for a while. Then the tusse pastor came, with his robe and white collar, and with a Bible in his hand. "Do you know the Book of Creation?" asked the tusse . Yes, he knew it. "It says there that in the beginning God created man and woman. Do you know that?" Yes, he knew that as well. "But in the second chapter it says that God created a woman from Adam's rib. Do you know that?" Yes, he knew that. "Then Adam said, 'This time it is bone from my bone and flesh from my flesh.' Why did he say this time ? Do you know why?" This pastor did not know. Then the tusse said: "The woman created by God in the beginning was Adam's equal. She did not want to be subservient to him, for she thought that her creation had been just as good as Adam's. God saw that it was not good for man and woman to be equal, so he banished her and her offspring to live inside the mountains and hills. Being without sin, they are invisible and can only be seen if they themselves want to be seen. -- But in the second chapter God took a rib from Adam's side and created a woman from it. Then Adam said this time , because this time a woman had been created from a man. Their offspring are with sin, and therefore they need the New Testament. The tusse folk need only the Old Testament. The pastor had nothing to say against the tusse . He never again returned to his pulpit. The Bible does not give us the name of Adam's first wife. She was called Lilli, or perhaps Lillo. It really does not make a difference. This story was told to me by Sveinung Hass-Sta. Sveinung came from the east. I was old enough to go to the mill with him, and he told me this story on the way. Source (books.google.com): Johannes Skar, "Upphavi ti Tusso," Gamalt or Sætesdal , vol. 3 (Kristiania [Oslo]: Olaf Norsis Forlag, 1903), pp. 53-55 . Lilith is the standard English form of the name mentioned above as Lilli or Lillo . Link to the Wikipedia article about Lilith . The Norwegian word tusse (alternative spelling tuss ) is translate into English variously as gnome , goblin , troll , kobold , or sprite . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 6, 2024. Grimm German Legend 43: The Osenberg Dwarfs German Legends, no. 43 The Osenberg Dwarfs Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm In the year 1653 Winkelmann traveled from our land of Hessen to Oldenburg. While crossing over Mount Osenberg he was overtaken by nightfall in the village of Bümmerstedt. There a 100-year-old innkeeper told him that although his house had prospered at the time of his grandfather, they were now faring poorly. He said that whenever his grandfather brewed beer the earth people from Mount Osenberg would come and get some -- still warm -- from the keg. They would pay for it with money that was unfamiliar, but made of good silver. One time a little old man came on a hot summer day to get some beer. He was so thirsty that he drank some immediately, indeed, so much that it caused him to fall asleep. When he woke up and saw how late it was, the little old man began to cry bitterly, "Now my grandfather will beat me for staying away so long." Frightened, he jumped up and ran away, forgetting to take his beer pitcher with him. He never again returned. The innkeeper's father had received the pitcher, as had he himself, for his daughter's dowry. As long as the pitcher remained in the house the family prospered. However, a short time earlier it had been broken; and with it their fortune broke as well. From that time onward everything had gone awry. Source: "Die Osenberger Zwerge," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 43, p. 55 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2009. Related links D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Grimm Brothers' Home Page . The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales). The Luck of Edenhall (Eden Hall) . The fortune of an English estate is tied to a fairy goblet. Fairy Cup Legends . Additional stories about drinking vessels abandoned by or stolen from the underground people. The motif of an old man being punished by his grandfather is an integral episode in folktales of type 726, for example, Old, Older and Oldest . Revised May 14, 2009. Education of an Ox: Tales of type 1675 The Education of an Ox folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1675 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2014 Contents Peter Ox (Denmark). Pope Ox (Germany). How an Ox Became Mayor (Netherlands). How the Washerman's Ass Became a Qazi (India). The Priest, the Washerman, and the Ass (India). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Peter Ox Denmark There were once upon a time a peasant and his wife who lived in Jutland, but they had no children. They often lamented that fact and were also sad to think that they had no relatives to whom to leave their farm and other possessions. So the years went by and they became richer and richer, but there was no one to inherit their wealth. One year the farmer bought a fine calf which he called Peter, and it was really the finest animal that he had ever seen, and so clever that it seemed to understand nearly everything that one said to it. It was also very amusing and affectionate, so that the man and his wife soon became as fond of it as if it were their own child. One day the farmer said to his wife, "Perhaps the sexton of our church could teach Peter to talk then we could not do better than to adopt him as our child, and he could then inherit all our property." "Who can tell?" said the wife, "Our sexton is a learned man and perhaps he might be able to teach Peter to talk, for Peter is really very clever. Suppose you ask the sexton." So the farmer went over to the sexton and asked him whether he did not believe that he could teach his calf to talk, because he wanted to make the animal his heir. The crafty sexton looked around to see that no one was near, and then said that he thought he could do so. "Only you must not tell anybody," he said, "for it must be a great secret, and the minister in particular must not know anything about it, or I might get into serious trouble as such things are strictly forbidden. Moreover it will cost a pretty penny as we shall need rare and expensive books." The farmer said that he did not mind, and handing the sexton a hundred dollars to buy books with, promised not to say a word about the arrangement to anyone. That evening the man brought his calf to the sexton who promised to do his best. In about a week the farmer returned to see how his calf was getting on, but the sexton said that he did not dare let him see the animal, else Peter might become homesick and forget all that he had already learned. Otherwise he was making good progress, but the farmer must pay another hundred dollars, as Peter needed more books. The peasant happened to have the money with him, so he gave it to the sexton and went home filled with hope and pleasant anticipations. At the end of another week the man again went to make inquiry about Peter, and was told by the sexton that he was doing fairly well. "Can he say anything?" asked the farmer. "Yes, he can say 'ma,'" answered the sexton. "The poor animal is surely ill," said the peasant, "and he probably wants mead. I will go straight home and bring him a jug of it." So he fetched a jug of good, old mead and gave it to the sexton for Peter. The sexton, however, kept the mead and gave the calf some milk instead. A week later the farmer came again to find out what Peter could say now. "He still refuses to say anything but 'ma,'" said the sexton. "Oh! he is a cunning rogue;" said the peasant, "so he wants more mead, does he? Well, I'll get him some more, as he likes it so much. But what progress has he made?" "He is doing so well," answered the sexton, "that he needs another hundred dollars' worth of books, for he cannot learn anything more from those that he has now." "Well then, if he needs them he shall have them." So that same day the farmer brought another hundred dollars and a jug of good, old mead for Peter. Now the peasant allowed a few weeks to elapse without calling on Peter, for he began to be afraid that each visit would cost him a hundred dollars. In the meantime the calf had become as fat as he would ever be, so the sexton killed him and sold the meat carefully at a distance from the village. Having done that he put on his black clothes and went to call on the farmer and his wife. As soon as he had bid them good day he asked them whether Peter had reached home safe and sound. "Why no," said the farmer, "he has not run away, has he?" "I hope," said the sexton, "that after all the trouble I have taken he has not been so tricky as to run away and to abuse my confidence so shamefully. For I have spent at least a hundred dollars of my own money to pay for books for him. Now Peter could say whatever he wanted, and he was telling me only yesterday that he was longing to see his dear parents. As I wanted to give him that pleasure, but feared that he would not be able to find his way home alone, I dressed myself and started out with him. We were hardly in the street when I suddenly remembered that I had left my stick at home, so I ran back to get it. When I came out of the house again, I found that Peter had run on alone. I thought, of course, that he had gone back to your house. If he is not there, I certainly do not know where he can be." Then the people began to weep and lament that Peter was lost, now especially when they might have had such pleasure with him, and after paying out so much money for his education. And the worst of it was that they were again without an heir. The sexton tried to comfort them and was also very sorry that Peter had deceived them so. But perhaps he had only lost his way, and the sexton promised that he would ask publicly in church next Sunday whether somebody had not seen the calf. Then he bade the farmer and his wife good-bye and went home and had some good roast veal for dinner. One day the sexton read in the paper that a new merchant, named Peter Ox, had settled in the neighboring town. He put the paper into his pocket and went straight to the farmer and read this item of news to him. "One might almost believe," he said, "that this is your calf." "Why yes," said the farmer, "who else should it be?" Then his wife added, "Yes father, go at once to see him, for I feel sure that it can be no other than our dear Peter. But take along plenty of money for he probably needs it now that he has become a merchant." On the following morning the farmer put a bag of money on his shoulder, took with him some provisions, and started to walk to the town where the merchant lived. Early next morning he arrived there and went straight to the merchant's house. The servants told the man that the merchant had not gotten up yet. "That does not make any difference for I am his father; just take me up to his room." So they took the peasant up to the bedroom where the merchant lay sound asleep. And as soon as the farmer saw him, he recognized Peter. There were the same thick neck and broad forehead and the same red hair, but otherwise he looked just like a human being. Then the man went to him and bade him good morning and said, "Well, Peter, you caused your mother and me great sorrow when you ran away as soon as you had learned something. But get up now and let me have a look at you and talk with you." The merchant, of course, believed that he had a crazy man to deal with, so he thought it best to be careful. "Yes I will get up," he said, and jumped out of bed into his clothes as quickly as possible. "Ah!" said the peasant, "now I see what a wise man our sexton was; he has brought it to pass that you are like any other man. If I were not absolutely certain of it, I should never dream that you were the calf of our red cow. Will you come home with me?" The merchant said that he could not as he had to attend to his business. "But you could take over my farm and I would retire. Nevertheless if you prefer to stay in business, I am willing. Do you need any money?" "Well," said the merchant, "a man can always find use for money in his business." "I thought so," said the farmer, "and besides you had nothing to start with, so I have brought you some money." And with that he poured out on the table the bright dollars that covered it entirely. When the merchant saw what kind of a man his new found acquaintance was, he chatted with him in a very friendly manner and begged him to remain with him for a few days. "Yes indeed," said the farmer, "but you must be sure to call me father from now on." "But I have neither father nor mother living," answered Peter Ox. "That I know perfectly well," the peasant replied, "for I sold your real father in Copenhagen last Michaelmas, and your mother died while calving. But my wife and I have adopted you as our child and you will be our heir, so you must call me father." The merchant gladly agreed to that and kept the bag of money; and before leaving town the farmer made his will and bequeathed all his possessions to Peter after his death. Then the man went home and told his wife the whole story, and she was delighted to learn that the merchant Peter Ox was really their own calf. "Now you must go straight over to the sexton and tell him what has happened;" she said, "and be sure to refund to him the hundred dollars that he paid out of his own pocket for Peter, for he has earned all that we have paid him, because of the joy that he has caused us in giving us such a son and heir." Her husband was of the same opinion and went to call on the sexton, whom he thanked many times for his kindness and to whom he also gave two hundred dollars. Then the farmer sold his farm, and he and his wife moved into the town where the merchant was, and lived with him happily until their death. Source: Sven Grundtvig, Danish Fairy Tales , translated by J. Grant Cramer (Boston: Richard G. Badger, The Gorham Press, 1912), pp. 15-21 . Link to this tale in Danish: Sven Grundtvig, "Peder Oxe," Danske Folkeæventyr: Efter Utrykte Kilder (Copenhagen: J. Jørgensen, 1876), no. 18, pp. 214-21 . Jutland (Danish Jylland ) is the portion of Denmark that is attached to the main continent of Europe. Return to the table of contents . Pope Ox Germany A peasant hat an ox, a very handsome and intelligent animal. He and his wife liked the animal so much and held him in such high esteem that they decided have him pursue an advanced education. The peasant went to a merchant in the city and asked him for advice. The merchant thought to himself how he might take advantage of the peasant's stupidity, and encouraged him to pursue his plan. He then told him that he had a friend, a lawyer, who could give lessons to the ox. The merchant immediately went to the lawyer, and the two of them conspired to charge the peasant two hundred thalers, which they would share. They would slaughter the ox, and share its meat as well. The peasant and his wife were delighted that they had found a teacher for their ox so quickly, and they resolved to take him to the lawyer as soon as possible. The next day the peasant led the ox to the lawyer, who fed him some oats from a pewter dish, which pleased the peasant greatly. "So, my dear Össing," he said, "you're going to do a lot better than pulling a plow." With that he paid the two hundred thalers and made the lawyer promise to not mistreat the ox. The peasant had barely left when the lawyer informed the merchant what had happened. They divided the money, slaughtered ox, and laughed heartily about the stupid peasant. Some time later the peasant went to the lawyer and asked if would not be able to see his ox. "No, that is not possible," said the lawyer. "A visit would disturb him." But he assured the peasant that the ox was making good progress. The peasant returned a second and a third time, but he always received the same excuse. Finally, thinking that the peasant might become suspicious, the lawyer told him that his ox had become the pope in Rome. Amazed, the peasant asked how far it was to Rome. "It would take you an entire year to get there," was the answer. "Even if it were further away than that, I want to go," replied the peasant. He returned home and told his wife that he was going to Rome to bring back their ox. The next day he wrapped a piece of rope around his body and set forth for Rome. He arrived there a long time later and immediately asked where the pope lived. Someone pointed out a beautiful palace to him. Seeing this from afar, he took great pleasure in his ox's good fortune. He went directly to the palace and tried to go inside, but a guard blocked his way. The peasant said, "Don't you know who I am? I'm here to take the pope with me. His mother wants to see him." Because he looked so wild (he hadn't washed himself nor combed his hair during the entire long journey), and because he had spoken of taking someone away, the guard thought that the peasant was the devil, and he let him enter. The peasant went immediately to the pope's room, where he saw him at work writing. "Hello, my dear Össing," he called out. "It's good to see you again." With that he approached the pope and began petting him. He then unwrapped the rope from his body, put it around the pope's neck, and said, "Come along now, my dear Össing, your mother wants to see you." He pulled him across the room. The pope was speechless with fear, for he too believed that the devil was taking him away. In the meantime the guard had sounded the alarm, and a crowd gathered, and they were terrified when they saw the peasant with the pope. Only a few were brave enough to ask the devil to please release their pope. "No, he has to come with me," was the answer. "His mother wants to see him." They offered the peasant a great sum of money, then even more, and finally he released the pope. Then he asked just what the pope's duties were, and they told him that the pope ruled over all the kings, princes, and preachers. It pleased the old peasant that his ox had achieved such a high position. He made the people promise that they would do no harm to his ox, and then made his way homeward. Once at home, he showed his wife the money that he had been given and told her of the high honors their ox had won, adding that the people in Rome liked him so much that they would never allow him to leave. The old woman was just as happy as her husband, and the two of them boasted for a long time about their clever ox. Source: Karl Bartsch, "Papst Ochse," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg] , vol. 1 (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), pp. 494-95 . Another printed version: Paul Zaunert, "Papst Ochse," Deutsche Märchen seit Grimm , vol. 1 (Jena: Eugen Diederichs Verlag, 1922), pp. 57-59 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Return to the table of contents . How an Ox Became Mayor Netherlands Once upon a time there was a peasant who had a great deal of money but very little understanding. He was just plain stupid. He had no children, but he did have a wife, an ox, and a donkey. This peasant had heard a lot said about the university, and that one could learn a lot there, so he became more and more curious about it. One day he was talking about it with a joker, who said, "What people have told you about the university is nothing. Did you know that there they can make educated people out of dumb animals?" "You don't say so!" said the peasant. "I'm going to give that a try. My ox is so smart that when I say 'gideeup' to my donkey, he starts to walk as well." So the peasant went to Leiden with his ox. He rang at the university, and a student came to him, asking him what he wanted. "I would like to speak with the professor," said the peasant, "for my ox is going to go to the university." "Oh," said the student, "then just come along with me." Of course he did not take the peasant to a professor, but rather to one of his fellow students. After the peasant had explained why he was there, the student said it was good, and that he would be able to leave the ox there. Then they spoke about the tuition charges, and to start, the peasant had to pay seventy guilders. He thought that was expensive, but he paid it nonetheless, and left his ox in Leiden. A month later the peasant thought, "I really must go now and see how my student is doing," and he set forth on his way. To be sure, the ox was not at home. "He just went to a lecture," said the student. "But it is good that you came, because more money is due." The peasant paid and went home again. Every time that he came he received the same message, and he had to pay. He was told that the ox was learning well. This continued for about a year and a half, and it began to trouble the peasant that he always had to pay but was never able to see his animal. He became angry and said that he wanted to take back his ox. "Didn't he write to you that he is just beginning his examinations?" said the student. "He will pass them, but it all costs money." "Well," said the peasant, "in that case I'll pay another hundred guilders. But this is the very last time!" After again hearing nothing, the peasant one day went to Leiden with the firm resolve to take the ox home with him. When he told the student his intentions, the latter said to him, "I don't understand! Didn't he write to you? He passed his examinations with honors and now has a very good position. He is the mayor of Amsterdam." "That was inconsiderate of him not to write to me," said the peasant. "But I'll get hold of him!" So he went to Amsterdam. At that time, as it happened, there was a mayor there whose name was Ox. The student, of course, knew this. The peasant rang at his door and asked if the mayor was at home. "Yes," replied his servant. "What do you want?" The peasant explained that he was the mayor's owner, and had come to take him away. The servant did not understand this at all and thought he was dealing with a lunatic. The peasant persisted, and the two began cursing one another. Then the mayor happened by, and he told the servant to calm himself down. He invited the peasant to come in and say what he had to say. He told the entire story about the ox and the university. But it was too much for the mayor when the peasant said in conclusion, "Now I'm going to put a halter on you so my wife can get a look at you as well." And the mayor had him thrown out the door. So the peasant went away unsatisfied. Arriving home, he said to his wife, "Yes, it is true that they really can do things there in Leiden, for they made an educated man out of our ox. But there is not much in it for us." Source: G. J. Boekenoogen, "Van den os die burgemeester werd," Volkskunde: Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsche Folklore , vol. 16 (1904), pp. 53-54 . Boekenoogen's source: C. Bakker, who collected this tale in 1901 in Broek, Waterland. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Leiden is an important center of learning and culture in the Netherlands. The name in English is often spelled Leyden . Return to the table of contents . How the Washerman's Ass Became a Qazi India There was a certain school master who had a very stupid pupil. One day, when he did not know his lesson, the master called him "Ass." A fool of a washerman who was passing by, on hearing this, said: "Mr. Teacher, was this boy once a donkey?" "Yes," said the master, "he was a donkey, and my teaching has made a man of him." The washerman said: "I have nothing in the world but an ass, and if you can turn him into a man, I shall be delighted to bring him to you." "All right," said the teacher. "Go and bring him." So the washerman came up, thrashing his ass to make him come quickly; and asked the teacher: "How long will it take to turn my ass into a man?" "A year's time," replied the teacher. A year after he returned and asked the master where his ass was. The master replied: "Your ass has become the qazi of so-and-so city, and draws a salary of 1,000 rupees a month, and holds a court." By chance, when the washerman first went to the teacher, the qazi was in the school and knew all about the master. The washerman asked the way to the qazi's court and went on. The qazi did not know him and paid no attention to him. The washerman came back and said to the master: "In truth he has become a great man, and when I went into his court he did not even look at me." The master replied: "Of course, he won't notice you if you approach him in this way as he is a great officer on a high salary. But take a rope and hobble and go into his court and shake them and say: 'Have you forgotten the rope and hobble with which you used to be tied?'" He did as he was told, and then the qazi remembered the circumstance, and he thought: "If I don't get rid somehow of this fellow I shall become a laughingstock." So the qazi gave the washerman a thousand rupees and dismissed him. The washerman showed the master the money, and he took half of it as the feed of the ass. The washerman went home blessing his good luck, and in this way every year he used to receive a present from the qazi and lived a happy man for the rest of his days. Source: "A Folktale Told by Shekh Abdulla of Mirzapur," North Indian Notes and Queries , vol. 2, no. 10 (January 1893), item 642, p. 174 . A qazi (also spelled kazi, qadi, or kadi ) is a judge with jurisdiction in Islamic sharia law. Return to the table of contents . The Priest, the Washerman, and the Ass India There lived, many years ago, in the city of Azimgurh, in the northwest of India, a Moslem priest, or "mullah," who, as is usual with that class, added to his income by teaching the Mohammedan youths of the place. By chance an old washerman, or "dhobi," and his wife, while traveling homewards, came to the city and put up under a tree adjoining the mosque where the priest lived, and tied their ass to the tree. The old couple were rich, but were unfortunately childless. Some time during the day of their arrival, they caught a glimpse of a man who was gesticulating before the priest in a tone of violent complaint, and they could not help hearing all that he said, "You are the priest," he called out, "and I have paid you all the fees you asked, but you have taught my son nothing at all, and every day he is either idling or playing about in the dusty roads with other worthless urchins." Upon this the priest became greatly enraged, and retorted, "Not taught him anything! It is false. He has been educated like the rest." Yah Yah ka kulma partraya Gudhê sê admi bunaya. Which means, "I have taught him the creed of Yah Yah, or of the righteous ones, and though he came to me an ass, I have made him into a man. You ungrateful wretch! I will have nothing further to say to him, and you may take him out of the school." Upon this the man left the priest and went away down the road. The ignorant old washerman and his equally old and ignorant wife, having been silent listeners of all this conversation, put their heads together and began to talk of what they had heard. The washerman said to his wife, "Did you not hear the priest say that he had changed an ass into a man, and you know priests can do wonderful things! I am just thinking that if he could work a change in our ass and make out of him a son for us, what a blessing it would be! For we have only this one thing short of being completely happy." The old wife eagerly caught at the idea, and replied, "Yes! Allah has given us much wealth, but what good will it be to us when we die. Strangers will get it. But if we had a son, he would inherit it, and our cup of joy on earth would be full to the brim. Let us go to the priest and make a bargain with him, that the curse of having no son may no longer rest upon us." Whereupon they both sought an audience of the priest, and approaching him, said, "Oh, sir! We are both very old, as you see, but we have plenty of money. But, sir, saddest of all things to tell you is that we are childless. Now, sir, we overheard you say that you had transformed an ass into a man. We have an ass, but we have not a son. Would you be so good as to change him for us, and we will give you any sum that you like to name." The priest was struck all of a heap with surprise and astonishment at this preposterous request. He said nothing for some minutes, but simply stared at the aged old couple while he collected his thoughts. "These people must clearly have heard me speaking angrily to the father of the worthless scholar, and have taken my words altogether in a literal sense. But here is evidently a run of luck for me which must not be thrown away." Thus he soliloquized, and the old couplet fixed itself in his thoughts: Gân kê pooreh-get muth ki heenay Khuda tujhê deta-mai leta keunnahin. These are rich in purse but weak in intellect; Allah gives you the chance, why should you not take it? Then after this little pause he turned to them and said, "I have been considering what is best to be done for you. To comply with your request is indeed a difficult task, though not impossible. If you will tie your ass to that tree, and come to me a year hence, you shall have a son, for it will take all that time to make so complete a transformation. Give me now therefore one thousand rupees, and go back to your home, and be sure you return to me punctually in a year's time." The old people were only too pleased to close with the priest, so they paid him the money, tied the ass to the tree, wished him a hearty farewell, and went on their journey homewards. When a year had elapsed the old washerman and his wife, with their hearts bounding with delight at the prospect of welcoming a son and heir, started on their travels again to meet the priest, and in due time arrived at the mosque. "We have come, sir," they said, "according to promise, to claim our son." The priest replied, "You are indeed a couple of old fools. If you had been true to your time and had come a week ago, you would have seen him. But now, owing to his great learning, he as been appointed to the 'qazi' (doctor of Mohammedan law) at Jaunpur." The priest had hit upon this ruse, and had determined to play off a joke on this qazi, of whom he was extremely jealous. "But," replied the old couple, getting alarmed, "how is it possible that he will recognize us unless you accompany us?" "Don't distress yourselves. I cannot go, but if you will take this rope with which you always tethered your ass, and the 'tobrâ' or nosebag in which the ass had his grain, and go to Jaunpur, all your difficulties will vanish. Time your arrival in the city on a Friday at the hour of prayer in the mosque. You will see a large concourse of people being addressed by your son, who was, you know, your ass. Put yourselves in a position where the qazi can plainly see you, then keep shaking the rope and the nosebag, and he will soon discover who you are, and come and claim you as his father and mother." So off they went to the city of Jaunpur, reached it on a Friday, and went straight to the mosque, placed themselves in a conspicuous part of the outer building within sight of the qazi, and began, with a vengeance, to whisk before him the nosebag and the rope. In a very short time the qazi noticed this strange proceeding, and sent one of the congregation to find out the cause, but they told him to tell the qazi that they had a profound secret which could only be told to the qazi himself and to no other mortal. The qazi, impelled by curiosity, asked permission of his audience for a few moments of leave, and then taking the old couple aside, he begged of them to tell him the reason of their strange behavior. With bated breath, and with the deepest earnestness did the old washerman and his wife pour into the qazi's ears the whole of the strange story of his having once been their ass; how for years they had overloaded him with kindness, and never spared the cudgel when he had been obstinate; how they deeply regretted their conduct towards one now so exalted as they saw their son to be; how, but for the wonderful power of the Priest of Azimgurh such a blessing would never have come to them; and how their cup of happiness was now complete. The qazi at once took in the situation, and saw the plot that his arch enemy had so cleverly planned against him. And being a wise man, he thought to himself, "If I repudiate this absurd story, in the belief of which these ignorant people have bound up their lives, it will be sure to be published abroad, to my own annoyance, and from being respected I shall be mocked and turned into ridicule, and in fact be the laughingstock of the place. I am resolved what to do. I will quietly acquiesce in what they say, and so get rid of them." Turning to the old couple he said, "Yes, it is all too true, and from henceforth your interests are my interests. Your good name is identical with mine, and I will carry it on. But let me bind you by all that you hold sacred that you never breathe a word of this marvelous change that has taken place in my being and existence. If you never reveal this secret, I will be a dutiful son to you all my life." This the old washerman and his wife agreed to abide by in every iota, only stipulating that when they died, which in the course of nature was not far off, he would be present to see them interred according to Mohammedan rites. This the qazi on his part faithfully promised to do, and the old couple took their departure to their own home with every expression of joy and delight, and left all their money to him when they died. Source, J. F. A. McNair and Thomas Lambert Barlow, Oral Tradition from the Indus , revised and corrected (Brighton: R. Gosden, 1908), pp. 104-109 . Jaunpur is an important Islamic center in northern India. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 16, 2014. Panchatantra The Panchatantra a selection of tales from ancient India edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2014 Contents About the Panchatantra . The Enchanted Brahman's Son . The Foolish Friend . Dharmabuddhi and Pâpabuddhi . Miracle upon Miracle . The Bullock's Balls . The Gold-Giving Snake . The Old Husband and His Young Wife . The Dog That Went Abroad . The Brahman's Wife and the Mongoose . The Fish That Were Too Clever . The Two-Headed Weaver . The Broken Pot . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. About the Panchatantra One of India's most influential contributions to world literature, the Panchatantra (also spelled Pañcatantra or Pañca-tantra ) consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled, in their current form, between the third and fifth centuries AD. The German Sanskrit scholar Johannes Hertel (1872-1955) believed that the original collection was compiled in Kashmir about 200 BC, and that at this time many of the stories were already ancient. The work's self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes the Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai, which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of the Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced medieval writers of fables. Link to Arthur W. Ryder's English translation of the Panchatantra . Return to the table of contents . The Enchanted Brahman's Son In the city of Radschagriha there lived a Brahman by the name of Devasarman. His childless wife wept bitterly whenever she saw the neighbors' children. One day the Brahman said to her, "Dear one, stop your grieving. Behold, I was offering a sacrifice for the birth of a son when an invisible being said to me in the clearest words, 'Brahman, you shall be granted this son, and he shall surpass all men in beauty and virtue, and good fortune shall be his.'" After hearing this, the Brahman's wife was overjoyed, and she said, "Such promises must come true." In the course of time she became pregnant and gave birth to a snake. When her attendants saw it, they all cried out, "Throw it away!" However, she paid no attention to them, but instead picked it up, had it bathed, and -- filled with a mother's love toward her son -- laid it in a large, clean container, fed it milk, fresh butter, and the like, so that within a few days it had reached its full growth. Once when the Brahman's wife witnessed the wedding feast of a neighbor's son, her eyes clouded over with tears, and she said to her husband, "You treat me with contempt, because you are not making any effort at all to arrange a wedding for my dear child!" When he heard this, the Brahman said, "Honored one! To achieve that I would have to go to the depths of hell and beseech Pasuki, the King of Snakes, for who else, you fool, would give his daughter in marriage to a snake?" Having said this, he looked at his wife with her exceedingly sad face, and -- for the sake of her love and in order to pacify her -- he took some travel provisions and departed for a foreign land. After traveling about for several months he came to a place by the name of Kukutanagara. There, as evening fell, he was received by an acquaintance, a member of his caste. He was given a bath, food, and every necessity, and he spent the night there. The next morning he took leave and was preparing to set forth once again, when his host said, "What brought you to this place, and where are you going now." The Brahman answered, "I have come to seek an appropriate bride for my son." After hearing this, the host said, "If that is the case, then I have a very appropriate daughter. I have only respect for you. Take her for your son!" Acting upon these words, the Brahman took the girl, together with her servants, and returned to his home city. However, when the inhabitants of this region saw the girl, who was beautiful, gifted, and charming beyond comparison, they opened their eyes wide with love for her, and said to her attendants, "How could you deliver such a jewel of a girl to a snake?" After hearing this, all of her companions were horrified, and they said, "She must be rescued from the murderer set up by this old Brahman." Hearing this, the maiden said, "Spare me from such deception, for behold: Kings speak but once. The virtuous speak but once. A girl is promised in marriage but once. These three things happen but once. And further: Not even wise men and gods can change the decrees of fate. And moreover, my father shall not be reproached for his daughter's falseness." Having said that, and with the permission of her attendants, she married the snake. She showed him proper respect, and served him milk and similar things. One night the snake left his large basket, which was kept in the bedroom, and climbed into his wife's bed. She cried out, "Who is this creature, shaped like a man?" Thinking it was a strange man, she jumped up. Shaking all over, she tore open the door and wanted to rush away, when the snake said, "Dear one! Stay here! I am your husband!" To convince her of this, he once again entered the body that he had left in the basket, then left it again. He was wearing a magnificent diadem, rings, bands, and bracelets on his upper and lower arms. His wife fell at his feet. Then together they partook of the joys of love. His father, the Brahman, had arisen earlier than his son, and saw everything. He took the snake skin, which was lying in the basket, and burned it in the fire, saying, "He shall not enter it again." Later that morning, filled with joy, he presented his son to his family. Vitalized by unending love, he became an ideal son. Source: The Panchatantra , appendix to book 1, story 8. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 144-48 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 433, The Snake Husband. Link to additional tales about snake and serpant husbands . Return to the table of contents . The Foolish Friend A king, while visiting his wives' apartments, took a monkey from a neighboring stable for a pet. He kept him constantly close at hand for his amusement, for as it is said, parrots, partridges, doves, rams, monkeys, and such creatures are a king's natural companions. It goes without saying that the monkey, fed on the various dishes that the king gave him, grew large and was given respect by all who surrounded the king. Indeed, the king, due to his love and exceeding trust of the monkey, even gave him a sword to carry. In the vicinity of the palace the king had a grove artfully planted with many trees of various sorts. Early in the springtime the king noticed how beautiful the grove was. Its blossoms exuded a magnificent fragrance, while swarms of bees sang praise to the god of love. Thus overcome by love, he entered the grove with his favorite wife. He ordered all his servants to wait for him at the entrance. After having pleasantly strolling through and observing the grove, he grew tired and said to his monkey, "I want to sleep a little while in this arbor of flowers. Take care that nothing disturbs me!" Having said this, the king fell asleep. Presently a bee, pursuing the aroma of the flowers, betel, and musk, flew up and lit on his head. Seeing this, the monkey thought angrily, "What is this? Am I to allow this common creature to bite the king before my very eyes?" With that he proceeded to drive it away. However, in spite of the monkey's defense, the bee approached the king again and again. Finally, blinded by anger, the monkey drew his sword and struck down the bee with a single blow. However, the same blow also split the king's head. The queen, who was sleeping next to the king jumped up in terror. Seeing the crime, she said, "Oh, oh, you foolish monkey! What have you done to the king who placed such trust in you?" The monkey explained how it had happened, but thereafter he was shunned and scorned by everyone. Thus it is said, "Do not choose a fool for a friend, for the king was killed by a monkey." And I say, "It is better to have a clever enemy than a foolish friend." Source: The Panchatantra , book 1, story 12. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 154-55 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1586, The Fly on the Judge's Nose. Link to additional tales of type 1586 . Return to the table of contents . Dharmabuddhi and Pâpabuddhi In a certain place there lived two friends, Dharmabuddhi, which means "having a just heart" and Pâpabuddhi, which means "having an unjust heart." One day Pâpabuddhi thought to himself, "I am a simpleton, plagued with poverty. I am going to travel abroad with Dharmabuddhi, and earn money with his help. Then I will cheat him out of it and thus gain a good situation for myself." One day he said to Dharmabuddhi, "Listen, friend! When you are old, which of your deeds will you be able to remember? You have never seen a foreign country, so what will you be able to tell the young people? After all, don't they say: His birth has borne no fruit, who knows not foreign lands, many languages, customs, and the like. And also: One never properly grasps knowledge, wealth, and art, until joyfully one has wandered from one land to another. " Pâpabuddhi, as soon as he had heard these words, took leave from his parents with a joyful heart, and one happy day set forth for foreign lands. Through their diligence and skill, Dharmabuddhi and Pâpabuddhi acquired great wealth on their travels. Happy, but also filled with longing, they turned homeward with their great treasure. For it is also said: For those who gain wisdom, art, and wealth in foreign lands, the absence of one hour has the length of hundreds. As they approached their city, Pâpabuddhi said to Dharmabuddhi, "Friend, it is not prudent for us to return home with our entire treasure, for our families and relatives will want part of it. Therefore let us bury it somewhere here in the thick of the forest and take only a small part home with us. When the need arises, we can come back and get as much as we need from here. For they also say: A smart man does not show off his money, not even in small amounts, for the sight of gold will agitate even a good heart. And also: Like meat is devoured in the water by fish, on land by wild animals, and in the air by birds, he who owns money is everywhere at risk. " Upon hearing this, Dharmabuddhi said, "Yes, my friend, that is what we will do!" After having thus buried their treasure, they both returned home and lived happily together. However, one day at midnight Pâpabuddhi went back into the forest, took the entire treasure, refilled the hole, and returned home. Then he went to Dharmabuddhi and said to him, "Friend, each of us has a large family, and we are suffering because we have no money. Therefore, let us go to that place and get some money." Dharmabuddhi answered, "Yes, my friend, let us do it!" They went there and dug up the container, but it was empty. Then Pâpabuddhi struck himself on the head and cried out, "Aha! Dharmabuddhi! You and only you have taken the money, for the hole has been filled in again. Give me my half of what you have hidden, or I will bring action against you at the king's court." Dharmabuddhi said, "Do not speak like that, you evildoer. I am in truth Dharmabuddhi, the one with a just heart! I would not commit such an act of thievery. After all, it is said: The person with a just heart treats another man's wife like his own mother, another man's property like a clod of earth, and all beings like himself. " Quarreling thus, they proceeded to the court where they told their stories and brought action against one another. The top judges decreed that they submit to an Ordeal of God, but Pâpabuddhi said, "No! Such an ordeal is not just. After all, it is written: In a legal action one should seek documents. If there are no documents, then one should seek witnesses. If there are no witnesses, then wise men should prescribe an Ordeal of God. In this matter the goddess of the tree will serve as my witness. She will declare which one of us is a thief and which one an honest man." To this they all replied, "What you say is right, for it is also written: An Ordeal of God is inappropriate where there is a witness, be he even a man of the lowest caste, to say nothing of the case where he is a god. We too are very curious about this case. Tomorrow morning we shall go with you to that place in the forest." In the meanwhile, Pâpabuddhi returned home and said to his father, "Father! I have stolen this money from Dharmabuddhi, and one word from you will secure it for us. Without your word, we shall lose it, and I shall lose my life as well." The father said, "Child, just tell what I have to say in order to secure it!" Pâpabuddhi said, "Father, in thus and such a place there is a large mimosa tree. It has a hollow trunk. Go hide yourself in it. When I swear an oath there tomorrow morning, then you must reply that Dharmabuddhi is the thief." Having made these arrangements, the next morning Pâpabuddhi bathed himself, put on a clean shirt, and went to the mimosa tree with Dharmabuddhi and the judges. Once there, he spoke with a piercing voice, "Sun and moon, wind and fire, heaven and earth, heart and mind, day and night, sunrise and sunset, all of these, like dharma, know a man's deeds. Sublime goddess of the forest, reveal which of us is the thief!" Then Pâpabuddhi's father, who was standing in the hollow trunk of the mimosa tree, said, "Listen! Listen! The money was taken away by Dharmabuddhi!" Having heard this, the king's servants, their eyes opened wide with amazement, searched in their law books for an appropriate punishment for Dharmabuddhi's theft of the money. While they were thus engaged, Dharmabuddhi himself surrounded the tree's opening with flammable material, and set it on fire. When it was well ablaze, Pâpabuddhi's father emerged from the hollow tree. His eyes streaming, he cried out bitterly. "What is this?" they asked him. He confessed everything, and then died. The king's servants forthwith hanged Pâpabuddhi from a branch of the mimosa tree, but they had only words of praise for Dharmabuddhi. Source: The Panchatantra , book 1, story 19. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 114-18 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 613. Link to additional tales of type 613 . Return to the table of contents . Miracle upon Miracle In a certain place there once lived a merchant by the name of Nanduka, which means "cheerful one" and a merchant by the name of Lakschmana, which means "fortunate one." The latter, who had lost all his wealth, decided to travel abroad. For it is said: A person who has lived well in a particular place, but who stays there after he has lost his wealth, is of common mind. And further: A person who, reduced to misery, remains at a place where he once was happy, is worthy of reproach. In his house there was a large set of heavy iron scales that had been acquired by his ancestors. He gave these to the guild-master Nanduka for safekeeping, and set forth for foreign lands. After he had pursued his desires for a long time abroad, he returned to his homeland, and said to the guild-master Nanduka, "Guild-master, give me back the scales that I left here for safekeeping." Nanduka replied, "Oh, your scales are no longer here. The mice ate them up." When he heard this, Lakschmana said, "Well, Nanduka, if the mice ate them up, then it is through no fault of yours. That is the way of the world. Nothing in it is eternal. But now I would like to bathe myself in the river. Send your child with me, the boy named Dhanadeva, to carry my bathing things." Nanduka, fearing Lakschama because of the theft he had committed against him, said to his son, "Child, your uncle Lakschmana wants to take a bath in the river. Go with him and carry his bathing things." Yes, with truth they say: No one does a favor for another, unless driven by fear, greed, or some other purpose. And further: If someone shows you unusual courtesy, be cautious, lest it lead to a bad end. Nanduka's son, carrying the bathing things, set forth happily with Lakschmana. After taking his bath, Lakschmana threw Nanduka's son Dhanadeva into a cave on the bank of the river, and sealed the opening with a large stone. Then he rushed back to Nanduka's house. The merchant asked him, "Speak up, Lakschmana! Tell me, where is my child who went to the river with you?" Lakschmana said, "He was taken away from the river's bank by a falcon." The merchant cried, "You liar! How in the world can a falcon steal a boy? Give me back my son, or I will bring action against you at the king's court." Lakschmana said, "Oh, you who always speak the truth! A falcon can carry away a boy, if mice can eat a large set of heavy iron scales. If you want your son back, then give me my scales!" Thus quarreling one with another, they went to the king's gate, where Nanduka cried out loudly, "A dastardly crime has happened here! This thief has robbed me of my child!" Hearing this, the judges said to Lakschmana, "Return the guild-master's son to him!" Lakschmana answered, "What can I do? Before my very eyes a falcon carried him away from the bank of the river." Hearing this, they said, "You do not tell the truth. How could a falcon be capable of carrying off a fifteen-year-old boy?" Lakschmana answered, laughing, "Ha! Listen to this proverb: When mice can eat a thousand pounds of iron, then a falcon can carry away an elephant, to say nothing of a little boy. " The judges said, "What do you mean by that?" Then Lakschmana told the whole story about the scales. After hearing this, they laughed at what Nanduka and Lakschmana had done, reconciled the two with each other, and made them respectively return the scales and the boy. Source: The Panchatantra , book 1, story 21. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 120-22 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1592, The Iron-Eating Mice . Return to the table of contents . The Bullock's Balls In a certain place there lived a large bullock by the name of Tîkschnabrischana, which means "having substantial balls." Because of his excessive pride, he left his herd and wandered about in the forest, tearing up the banks as he pleased and devouring the emerald-colored grass. In this same forest there lived a jackal by the name of Pralobhaka, which means "the greedy one." One day he was sitting pleasantly with his wife on an island in the river. Tîkschnabrischana came up to this island to have a drink of water. When the jackal's wife saw the balls, she said to her husband, "Master, just look! This bullock has two pieces of meat hanging down. They will be falling off immediately, at the least in a few hours. Take heed of this, and follow him." The jackal answered, "Loved one, there is nothing certain about their falling off. Why do you ask me to set forth on such a futile task? Let me stay here with you, and together we can eat the mice that come here to drink. This is their pathway. If I leave you to follow the bullock, then someone else will come here and take over this spot. It is not a good idea, for it is said: He who gives up a sure thing for an uncertainty will lose the sure thing, and the uncertainty will remain just that. " The jackal's wife said, "Oh, you are a low-spirited creature. You are satisfied with the worst things that you can find. They also say: It is easy to fill a little brook and also the paws of a little mouse. Ordinary people are easily satisfied. They are pleased with the smallest things. For this reason a good man must always be active. They also say: With every beginning there is a will to act. Avoid idleness, and join the community of the intelligent and the powerful. Think not that fate alone rules. Cease not to work. Without effort the sesame seed will not give up its oil. And further: A foolish man is happy with little. His heart is satisfied just thinking of wealth. It is thus not appropriate for you to say, 'It is uncertain, whether or not they will fall off.' It is also said: Active people deserve praise. Those with pride will be praised. What sort of scoundrel will wait until Indra brings him water? Furthermore, I am mightily tired of eating mouse meat. These two pieces of meat look as though they will soon fall off. You must follow him. Nothing else will do!" After hearing all this, the jackal left his mouse catching, and followed after Tîkschnabrischana. They rightly say: A man is master in all things, until he lets his will be turned by a woman's words. And further: The impossible seems possible, the unachievable easily achieved, and the inedible edible to the man who is spurred on by a woman's words. Thus, together with his wife, he followed the bullock a long time, but the two balls did not fall off. In the fifteenth year, the jackal finally said wearily to his wife, "Fifteen years, my love, I have kept my eyes on those hanging things to see whether or not they are going to fall off, but they still hold fast. Nor will they fall off in the future. Let us return to catching mice!" Source: The Panchatantra , book 2, story 6. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 194-96 . Translated from German by D. L. Ashliman. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 115, Waiting for the Testicles to Fall . Link to a collection of related stories: The Fisherman and His Wife and Other Folktales about Dissatisfaction and Greed . Return to the table of contents . The Gold-Giving Snake In a certain place there lived a Brahman by the name of Haridatta. He tilled the soil, but his time in the field brought him no harvest. Then one day, as the hottest hours were just over, tormented by the heat, he lay down in the shade of a tree in the middle of his field for a sleep. He saw a frightful snake, decorated with a large hood, crawl from an anthill a little way off, and thought to himself, "This is surely the goddess of the field, and I have not once paid her homage. That is why the field remains barren. I must bring her an offering." After thus thinking it over, he got some milk, poured it into a basin, then went to the anthill, and said, "Oh, protector of this field, for a long time I did not know that you live here. For this reason I have not yet brought you an offering. Please forgive me!" Having said this, he set forth the milk, and went home. The next day he returned to see what had happened, and he found a dinar in the basin. And thus it continued day by day. He brought the snake milk, and always found a dinar there the next morning. One day the Brahman asked his son to take the milk to the anthill, and he himself went into the village. The son brought the milk, set it there, and returned home. When he came back the next day and found a dinar, he said to himself, "This anthill must be full of gold dinars. I will kill the snake and take them all at once!" Having decided this, the Brahman's son returned the next day with the milk and a club. As he gave the milk to the snake, he struck her on the head with the club. The snake, as fate willed it, escaped with her life. Filled with rage, she bit the boy with her sharp, poisoned teeth, and the boy fell dead at once. His people built a funeral pyre not far from the field and cremated him. Two days later his father returned. When he discovered under what circumstances his son had died, he said that justice had prevailed. The next morning, he once again took milk, went to the anthill, and praised the snake with a loud voice. A good while later the snake appeared in the entrance to the anthill, and said, "You come here from greed, letting even your grief for your son pass by. From now on friendship between you and me will no longer be possible. Your son, in his youthful lack of understanding, struck me. I bit him. How can I forget the club's blow? How can you forget the pain and sorrow for your son?" After saying this she gave him a costly pearl for a pearl chain, said, "Do not come back," and disappeared into her cave. The Brahman took the pearl, cursed his son's lack of understanding, and returned home. Source: The Panchatantra , book 3, story 5. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 244-47 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 285D, The Man and the Snake Become Enemies. Link to additional tales of type 285D . Return to the table of contents . The Old Husband and His Young Wife In a certain place there once lived an old merchant by the name of Kâmâtura, which means "lovesick." His wife having died, he fell deeply in love with the daughter of a poor merchant, gave a large sum of money for her, and married her. She, however, was overcome by sorrow, and did not even want to look at the old man. For is it not right, that: The white field of hair on an old man's head attracts the greatest contempt. To avoid it, a girl will take the widest detour, like someone crossing a graveyard strewn with bones. And further: The body is bent. The gait is broken. Teeth are lost. Vision is weak. Beauty is destroyed. The mouth is always filled with spit. Relatives do not follow his advice. His wife does not obey him. Alas! Alas! Even the son despises a man struck down by age! One night they were lying in bed together, her face turned away from him, when a thief broke into their house. When she saw the thief, she was overcome by fear, and, in spite of his age, she clasped her husband tightly in her arms. The surprise embrace caused every hair on his body to stand on end. He said to himself, "Why is she holding me?" Then looking around, he too discovered the thief crouched in the corner, and he realized, "She is embracing me, because she is afraid of him," and said aloud, "The woman who has always despised me is embracing me tightly tonight. Praise be to you, you granter of desire! Take whatever of mine that you want!" The thief answered, "I see nothing here that I would want to take. If in the future there is something worth taking, then I will return, but only when she is not embracing you so." Source: The Panchatantra , book 3, story 8. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 252-54 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. Medieval and Renaissance jests frequently depict conflicts arising from the marriage of an old man to a young woman, for example, Giovanni Boccaccio's story of Lydia and Pyrrhus ( The Decameron , day 7, tale 9) and Geoffrey Chaucer's "The Merchant's Tale." Return to the table of contents . The Dog That Went Abroad In a certain place there once lived a dog by the name of Tschitranga, which means "having a spotted body." A lengthy famine set in. Because they had no food, the dogs and other animals began to leave their families. Tschitranga, whose throat was emaciated with hunger, was driven by fear to another country. There in a certain city he went to a certain house day after day where, due to the carelessness of the housekeeper, many good things to eat were left lying about, and he ate his fill. However, upon leaving the house, other vicious dogs surrounded him on all sides and tore into him on all parts of his body with their teeth. Then he reconsidered his situation, and said, "It is better at home. Even during a famine you can live there in peace, and no one bites you to pieces. I will return to my own city." Having thus thought it through, set forth to his own city. When he arrived there, all of his relatives asked him, "Tschitranga, tell us about where you have been. What is the country like? How do the people behave? What do they eat? What do they do?" He answered, "How can I explain to you the essence of a foreign place? There are good things to eat in great variety, and housekeepers who do not keep watch! There is only one evil in a foreign country: You will be hated there because of who you are!" Source: The Panchatantra , book 4, story 11. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 319-20 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. Similar to Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 112, The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse. Link to additional tales of type 112 . Return to the table of contents . The Brahman's Wife and the Mongoose In a certain city there lived a Brahman by the name of Devasarman. His wife gave birth to a son, and then to a mongoose. Full of love for her children, she cared for the mongoose like a son, nursing him at her breast, rubbing him with salve, and so forth. However, she did not trust him, thinking that in keeping with the evil nature of his species he might harm her son. As is rightly said: A son will bring joy to his parents' heart, even if he is uneducated, bad, malformed, foolish, and sinful. And as also is said: Sandalwood salve cools and soothes, but a son's embrace far excels sandalwood salve. The relationship with one's son is more important than that with a best friend, a good father, or any other person. One day, after nicely tucking the boy into his bed, she took the water pitcher and said to her husband, "Listen, master, I am going to the pond to fetch water. You must protect our son from the mongoose." After she departed, the Brahman went off somewhere to collect alms, leaving the house empty. In the meantime a black snake crept out of its hole and -- as fate would have it -- approached the boy's bed. However, the mongoose confronted this, his natural enemy, and fearing that it might kill his brother, the mongoose attacked the wicked snake, tore it to bits, and threw the pieces far and wide. Proud of his valor and his face covered with blood, the mongoose approached the mother to tell her what had happened. However, the mother, seeing his blood-spattered face and sensing his excitement, feared, "without doubt this evildoer has devoured our son." Driven by anger and without further investigation she threw the water-filled pitcher at the mongoose, killing the him instantly. Paying no further attention to the mongoose, she rushed into the house where she found the boy still asleep. Near the bed she saw a large black snake, torn to bits. Then her heart was overcome with sorrow because of the thoughtless murder of her praiseworthy son, the mongoose, and she beat herself on the head, the breast, and her other body parts. While this was happening the Brahman returned home with alms from wherever he had been begging. "See there!" she cried, overcome with grief for her son, the mongoose. "Oh, you greedy one! Because you let greed rule you instead of doing what I told you to, you now must taste the fruit of your own tree of sin, the pain of your son's death." Source: The Panchatantra , book 5, story 2. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 326-27 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 178A, Llewellyn and His Dog Gellert. Link to additional tales of type 178A . The Brahman's name, Devasarman, means "having the luck of the gods," or "blessed by the gods." Return to the table of contents . The Fish That Were Too Clever Two fish lived in a pond. Their names were Satabuddhi (having the understanding of a hundred) and Sahasrabuddhi (having the understanding of a thousand). The two of them had a frog for a friend, whose name was Ekabuddhi (having the understanding of one). For a time they would enjoy friendly conversation on the bank, and then they would return to the water. One day when they had gathered for conversation, some fishermen came by just as the sun was setting. They were carrying nets in their hands and many dead fish on their heads. When the fishermen saw the pond, they said to one another, "There seem to be a lot of fish in this pond, and the water is very low. Let us come back here tomorrow morning!" After saying this, they went home. These words struck the three friends like a thunderbolt, and they took counsel with one another. The frog said, "Oh, my dear Satabuddhi and Sahasrabuddhi, what shall we do? Should we flee, or stay here?" Hearing this, Sahasrabuddhi laughed and said, "Oh, my friend, don't be afraid of words alone! They probably will not come back. But even if they do come back, I will be able to protect myself and you as well, through the power of my understanding, for I know many pathways through the water." After hearing this, Satabuddhi said, "Yes, what Sahasrabuddhi says is correct, for one rightly says: Where neither the wind nor the sun's rays have found a way, intelligent understanding will quickly make a path . And also: Everything on earth is subject to the understanding of those with intelligence . Why should one abandon the place of one's birth that has been passed down from generation to generation, just because of words? We must not retreat a single step! I will protect you through the power of my understanding." The frog said, "I have but one wit, and it is advising me to flee. This very day I shall go with my wife to another pond." After saying this, as soon as it was night, the frog went to another pond. Early the next day the fishermen came like servants of the god of death and spread their nets over the pond. All the fish, turtles, frogs, crabs, and other water creatures were caught in the nets and captured, also Satabuddhi and Sahasrabuddhi, although they fled, and through their knowledge of the various paths escaped for a while by swimming to and fro. But they too, together with their wives, fell into a net and were killed. That afternoon the fishermen happily set forth toward home. Because of his weight, one of them carried Satabuddhi on his head. They tied Sahasrabuddhi onto a string and dragged him along behind. The frog Ekabuddhi, who had climbed onto the bank of his pond, said to his wife, "Look, dear! Mr. Hundred-Wit lies on someone's head, and Mr. Thousand-Wit is hanging from a string. But Mr. Single-Wit, my dear, is playing here in the clear water." Source: The Panchatantra , book 5, story 6. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 337-38 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. Similar to Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 105, The Cat's Only Trick. Link to additional tales of type 105 . Return to the table of contents . The Two-Headed Weaver In a certain place there lived a weaver by the name of Mantharaka, which means "the simpleton." One day, while weaving cloth, the wooden pieces on his loom broke. He took an ax, and set forth to find some wood. He found a large sissoo tree at the ocean's shore, and said aloud, "Now this is a large tree. If I fell it, I will have wood enough for all my weaving tools." Having thus thought it through, he raised his ax to begin cutting. However, a spirit lived in this tree, and he said, "Listen! This tree is my home, and it must be spared in any event, because I like it here where my body can be stroked by the cool breezes that blow in from the ocean's waves." The weaver said, "Then what am I to do? If I don't find a good tree, then my family will starve. You will have to go somewhere else. I am going to cut it down." The spirit answered, "Listen, I am at your service. Ask whatever you would like, but spare this tree!" The weaver said, "If that is what you want then I will go home and ask my friend and my wife, and when I return, you must give me what I ask for." The spirit promised, and the weaver, beside himself with joy, returned home. Upon his arrival in his city he saw his friend, the barber, and said, "Friend, I have gained control over a spirit. Tell me what I should demand from him!" The barber said, "My dear friend, if that is so then you should demand a kingdom. You could be king, and I would be your prime minister, and we two would first enjoy the pleasures of this world and then those of the next one. For they say: A prince who piously gives to others, achieves fame in this world, and through these good deeds, he will arrive in heaven, equal to the gods themselves ." The weaver spoke, "Friend, so be it! But let us also ask my wife." The barber said, "One should never ask women for advice. They also say: A wise man gives women food, clothing, jewelry, and above all the duties of marriage, but he never asks for their advice. And further: That house must perish where a woman, a gambler, or a child is listened to. And: A man will advance and be loved by worthy people as long as he does not secretly listen to women. Women think only of their own advantage, of their own desires. Even if they love only their own son, still, he will serve their wishes. " The weaver spoke, "Even though this is true, she nonetheless must be asked, because she is subservient to her husband." Having said this, he went quickly to his wife and said to her, "Dear one, today I have gained control over a spirit who will grant me one wish. Hence I have come to ask for your advice. Tell me, what should I ask for? My friend the barber thinks that I should request a kingdom." She answered, "Oh, son of your excellence, what do barbers understand? You should never do what they say. After all, it is stated: A reasonable person will no sooner take advice from dancers, singers, the low born, barbers, or children, than from beggars. Furthermore, a king's life is an unending procession of annoyances. He must constantly worry about friendships, animosities, wars, servants, defense alliances, and duplicity. He never gets a moment's rest, because: Anyone who wants to rule must prepare his spirit for misfortune. The same container that is used for salve can also be used to pour out bad luck. Never envy the life of a king. " The weaver said, "You are right. But what should I ask for?" She answered, "You can now work on only one piece of cloth at a time. That is barely enough to pay for the necessities. You should ask for another pair of arms and a second head so that you can work on two pieces of cloth at once, one in front of you, and one behind you. We can sell the one for household necessities, and you can use the money from the second one for other things. You will thus gain the praise of your relatives, and you will make gains in both worlds." After hearing this he spoke with joy, "Good, you faithful wife! You have spoken well, and I will do what you say. That is my decision." With that he went to the spirit and let his will be known, "Listen, if you want to fulfill my wish, then give me another pair of arms and another head." He had barely spoken before he was two-headed and four-armed. Rejoicing, he returned home, but the people there thought that he was a demon and beat him with sticks and stones, until he fell over dead. And that is why I say: He who cannot think for himself and will not follow the advice of friends, he will push himself into misfortune, just like the weaver Mantharaka. Source: The Panchatantra , book 5, story 8. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 341-44 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. Similar to Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 750A, Good Wishes and Foolish Wishes . Link to additional tales of type 750A . Return to the table of contents . The Broken Pot In a certain place there lived a Brahman by the name of Svabhâvakripana, which means "luckless by his very nature." By begging he acquired a quantity of rice gruel, and after he had eaten what he wanted, there was still a potful left. He hung this pot on a nail in the wall above his bed. As night progressed, he could not take his eyes from the pot. All the while he was thinking: This pot is filled to overflowing with rice gruel. If a famine should come to the land, then I could sell it for a hundred pieces of silver. Then I could buy a pair of goats. They have kids every six months, so I would soon have an entire herd of goats. Then I would trade the goats for cattle. As soon as the cows had calved, I would sell the calves. Then I would trade the cattle for buffalo. And the buffalo for horses. And when the horses foaled, I would own many horses. From their sale I would gain a large amount of gold. With this gold I would buy a house with four buildings in a rectangle. Then a Brahman would enter my house and give me a very beautiful girl with a large dowry for my wife. She will give birth to a son, and I will give him the name Somasarman. When he is old enough to be bounced on my knee, I will take a book, sit in the horse stall, and read. In the meantime, Somasarman will see me and want to be bounced on my knee. He will climb down from his mother's lap and walk toward me, coming close to the horses hooves. Then, filled with anger, I will shout at my wife, "Take the child! Take the child!" But she, busy with her housework, will not hear me. So I will jump up and give her a kick! And, buried in his thoughts, he struck out with his foot, breaking the pot, and painting himself white with the rice gruel that had been in it. Therefore I say: He who dreams about unrealistic projects for the future will have the same fate as Somasarman's father: He will find himself lying there painted white with rice gruel. Source: The Panchatantra , book 5, story 9. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 345-46 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1430, Air Castles. Link to additional tales of type 1430 . Return to the table of contents . Link to Arthur W. Ryder's English translation of the Panchatantra . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 25, 2014. A Visitor from Paradise: Folktales of Type 1540 A Visitor from Paradise and other Aarne-Thompson type 1540 tales about tricksters who claim to bring messages from the dead translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2024 Contents A Visitor from Paradise (Europe). An Old Woman (Germany, Heinrich Bebel). The Travelling Scholar from Paradise (Germany, Hans Sachs). The Clever People (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Traveler from Heaven (Germany). All Women Are Alike (Norway). The Great Need: A Prankster Tale from Zealand (Denmark). The Man Who Fell from Heaven (Netherlands). Stupid Gretel (Switzerland). The Simple Wife (Italy). The Beggar from Paris (England). Jack Hannaford (England). The Roguish Peasant (Russia). The Story of the Messenger from Heaven (Moravia). The Era [Peasant] from the Other World (Serbia). The Story of a Man Who Had a Stupid Wife (Morocco). My Son Ali (Armenian-American). Anansi Seeks His Fortune (Jamaica). Shaikh Chilli and the Fakir (India). The Good Wife and the Bad Husband (India). The Millet Trader (Sri Lanka). Elova Gohin Melova Ava (Sri Lanka). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. A Visitor from Paradise Europe There was once a woman, good but simple, who had been twice married. One day when her husband was in the field -- of course that was her second husband, you know -- a weary tramp came trudging by her door and asked for a drink of water. When she gave it to him, being rather a gossip, she asked where he came from. "From Paris," said the man. The woman was a little bit deaf, and thought the man said from paradise. "From paradise! Did you meet there my poor dear husband, Lord rest his soul?" "What was his name?" asked the man. "Why, John Goody, of course," said the woman. "Did you know him in paradise?" "What, John Goody!" said the man. "Him and me was as thick as thieves." "Does he want for anything?" said the woman. "I suppose up in paradise you get all you want." "All we want! Why, look at me," said the man pointing to his rags and tatters. "They treat some of us right shabby up there." "Dear me, that's bad. Are you likely to go back?" "Go back to paradise, marm? I should say. We have to be in every night at ten." "Well, perhaps you wouldn't mind taking back some things for my poor old John," said the woman. "Of course, marm. Delighted to help my old chum John." So the woman went indoors and got a big pile of clothes and a long pipe and three bottles of beer, and a beer jug, and gave them to the man. "But," he said, "please marm, I can't carry all these by my own self. Ain't you got a horse or a donkey that I can take along with me to carry them? I'll bring him back tomorrow." Then the woman said, "There's our old Dobbin in the stable. I can't lend you mare Juniper 'cause my husband's plowing with her just now." "Ah, well, Dobbin'll do as it's only until tomorrow." So the woman got out Dobbin and saddled him, and the man took the clothes and the beer and the pipe and rode off with them. Shortly afterwards her husband came home and said, "What's become of Dobbin? He's not in the stable." So his wife told him all that had happened. And he said, "I don't like that. How do we know that he is going to paradise? And how do we know that he'll bring Dobbin back tomorrow? I'll saddle Juniper and get the things back. Which way did he go?" So he saddled Juniper and rode after the man, who saw him coming afar off and guessed what had happened. So he got off from Dobbin and drove him into a clump of trees near the roadside, and then went and laid down on his back and looked up to the sky. When the farmer came up to him he got down from Juniper and said, "What are you doing there?" "Oh, such a funny thing," said the man. "A fellow came along here on a horse with some clothes and things, and when he got to the top of the hill here he simply gave a shout and the horse went right up into the sky; and I was watching him when you came up." "Oh, it's all right then," said the farmer. "He's gone to paradise, sure enough," and went back to his wife. Next day they waited, and they waited for the man to bring back Dobbin; but he didn't come that day nor the next day, nor the next. So the farmer said to his wife, "My dear, we've been done. But I'll find that man if I have to trudge through the whole kingdom. And you must come with me, as you know him." "But what shall we do with the house?" said the wife. "You know there have been robbers around here, and while we are away they'll come and take my best china." "Oh, that's all right," said the farmer. "He who minds the door minds the house. So we'll take the door with us and then they can't get in." So he took the door off its hinges, and put it on his back and they went along to find the man from paradise. So they went along, and they went along, and they went along until night came, and they didn't know what to do for shelter. So the man said, "That's a comfortable tree there; let us roost in the branches like the birds." So they took the door up with them and laid down to sleep on it as comfortable, as comfortable can be. Now it happened that a band of robbers had just broken into a castle nearby and taken out a great lot of plunder; and they came under the very tree to divide it. And when they began to settle how much each should have they began to quarrel and woke up the farmer and his wife. They were so frightened when they heard the robbers underneath them that they tried to get up farther into the tree, and in doing so let the door fall down right on the robbers' heads. "The heavens are falling," cried the robbers, who were so frightened that they all rushed away. And the farmer and his wife came down from the tree and collected all the booty and went home and lived happy ever afterwards. It was and it was not. Source: Joseph Jacobs, Jacobs, Europa's Fairy Book (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), no. 19, pp. 159-64 . Jacobs has reconstructed this tale from multiple European sources. This book was also published under the title European Folk and Fairy Tales . The episode of fools securing a door by taking it with them is classified as Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1653A. The episode of the robbers under the tree is classified as type 1653. Return to the table of contents . An Old Woman Germany, Heinrich Bebel A poor traveler who was on his way to study in Paris was asked by an old woman where he was going. He answered "To Paris," but she understood "Paradise." She then told him about her husband, who had died a few days earlier, and asked the traveler if he would be willing to take some clothes, money, and other things to him. The traveler took everything that the old woman gave him and went on his way. Now supplied with many of life's necessities, he became a successful man. Source (books.google.com): Heinrich Bebel, "Von eim alten Weib," Heinrich Bebels Schwänke , edited by Albert Wesselski, vol. 1 (Munich and Leipzig: Georg Müller, 1907), p. 69 . Source (Internet Archive): Heinrich Bebel, "Von eim alten Weib," Heinrich Bebels Schwänke , edited by Albert Wesselski, vol. 1 (Munich and Leipzig: Georg Müller, 1907), p. 69 . Heinrich Bebel (1472-1518) was a German humanist. Return to the table of contents . The Travelling Scholar from Paradise Germany, Hans Sachs THE TRAVELLING SCHOLAR FROM PARADISE [October 8, 1550] THE PERSONS. The Travelling Scholar. The Farmer. The Farmer's Wife. Wife My breath is burdened with my sighs, While thoughts of bygone days arise When my first husband lived. Ah me, He loved me dearly, tenderly. As I loved him! He was most kind. Honest in thought, and calm in mind: With him the gladness of my life Died out though I became a wife Again, and try, through weary days, To love my man. Alas, always Remembrance comes to mar my plan! He is not like my first good man: This one is parsimonious, stern. Anxious more money still to earn; He would be rich; for mirth cares not -- Alas, how weary is my lot. Thinking of him now lost to me! Would I could show my memory To him, who made me laugh and sing! Oh, I would give him everything! [The Travelling Scholar comes.] Scholar Dear mother, pray may I come in? I would thy commendation win. Thy charitable hand and alms; I have much skill and many charms From books, and Venus' mountain know. Where I have Cupids seen, and so Can tell of marvels. Now I go Throughout the land, and to and fro; A traveller upon my way From Paris, here I may not stay -- Wife Dear sir! Dear sir! What dost thou say? From Paradise thou cam'st? I pray, Dear sir, thou wilt to me declare If thou didst see my husband there? He died -- O God, why was it so -- To my sore grief, a year ago. He was so honest, gentle, wise, I hope that he found Paradise. Scholar There were so many fair souls there! -- Tell me, what garments did he wear When he passed to eternity? And this may stir my memory. Wife Easy it is to tell thee this -- I hope that he is now in bliss! -- He wore a blue hat, and his dress A winding sheet, no more, nor less: The winding sheet was not so bad; I wish he had been better clad. Scholar Oh, my good dame, yes: that blue hat! How well do I remember that! No trowsers, shirt, nor shoes, he had; Just in his grave-cloth; it was sad: Howe'er he might that blue hat cock. And wrap his sheet, it was a mock. When others ate he could not join -- He had no heller, not a coin -- He looked at them with longing face. And lingered much about the place; Unless an alms some good soul gives The Lord alone knows how he lives! Good dame, it grieves me much to say He is in such a wretched wav. Wife Dear husband! What hard fate he hath. Not e'en a pfennig for a bath! How pitiful! What grief to me He in such poverty should be! Tell me, dear sir, more thanks to earn, Dost thou to Paradise return? Scholar Tomorrow I set forth, and fare For fourteen days, to bring me there. Wife Wilt thou a bundle from me bear, For my dear husband, with all care? Scholar Gladly will I; but do not waste My time; I am in utmost haste. Wife Dear sir, have patience: I will be But a short time while hurriedly I gather up such things as he May use in his necessity. [The Wife goes out.] Scholar She is a simple soul, and kind -- Too good to cheat -- but I must find Money and clothing, which I need; Then I will go away with speed Before her husband comes; for he May lack his wife's simplicity; So would he spoil the thing for me; Therefore I go while yet I can Become the heir of this dead man. [The Wife brings in a bundle.] Wife Good messenger, I beg of thee, Take these twelve gulden now from me -- This money so long hid away, My little all, for a dark day -- Take it, dear sir, to him, I pray. With this my hoard I gladly part To the true husband of my heart; The bundle, too, I pray thee, take To my dear husband for his sake: Therein are blue cloth, hose and shoes; The cloth he surely there can use For coat and trowsers: and, with these, Pocket and pocket-knife will please. Tell him, the next time I will try To send him a more full supply; For I will save up all I can. Thinking of him, my dear, good man. Now go at once, that sooner he May be relieved from poverty. [The Travelling Scholar takes up the bundle.] Scholar How will thy husband gaily think. When, on a feast-day, he will drink With friends his quart, how dear is she Who sends this cheer and revelry! Wife How long, dear messenger, I pray, Will be the time thou art away? Scholar It may be long: it cannot be That I shall come quite speedily. Wife Alas! if very long away His money will be spent: no play, Nor food, nor drink, nor bath! Alas, That this too soon may come to pass! This groschen is my last; take it; I have no more of coin, nor wit. When threshing time is o'er I can Steal some odd coins from my good man, And bury them, as once before. Just at inside of stable door; There they are safe -- my gulden fair I kept for months in safety there -- Accept this thaler for thy pay: Say greetings to my good man, pray! [The Travelling Scholar goes out.] Wife (singing) Peasant maiden, Love is bright; He may come to thee, tonight. Peasant maiden. Love is sweet; He may kneel before thy feet. Peasant wife, put Love away; He cares not for thee today. Farmer Dame, thou art merry: pray thee tell What is it pleaseth thee so well? Wife Dear husband, O rejoice with me! I tell my happiness to thee: Farmer Who hit this fool-calf in the eye? [A common inquiry among the peasantry, in the time of this drama, when one appeared unaccountably excited.] Wife It is a marvel! Passing by, A scholar stopped and spoke with me: From Paradise quite recently He wandered hither; and he told Of my first husband, poor and old: He only has his old blue hat And winding sheet. Oh, think of that! He hath no money, coat, nor shoes; No hose, nor anything to use Save hat and sheet -- no, nothing save What he took with him to the grave. Farmer Wilt thou not send him something fit? Wife Dear husband, yes; I thought of it: I sent our blue cloth, shirt and hose, And breeches. He doth need the clothes. I sent a gulden, too, that he Might not without a groschen be. Farmer Thou hast done well. But which way went The man by whom thy gifts were sent? Wife He went by the Low Road, and bore The bundle on his back. He wore Around his neck a yellow net. Farmer Yes, wife; and I will find him yet; Thou hast done well to give the stuff; But, of the money, not enough -- Not near enough; it will not last. Have my horse saddled to go fast. And I will ride the Low Road o'er. And give the man ten gulden more. Wife Before all things do I thank thee. That thou art now so good to me And my old husband. Tenderly I will deserve this love. Indeed All of my savings, in thy need, I'll give -- Farmer Cease babbling now to me! Have my horse saddled instantly, Or, in the fen-land, he will be Forever lost to me and thee. [The Wife goes out.] Farmer Ach Gott, how weak a wife have I! That she is fair none will deny; She cooks a sausage, cleans a dish, But, in her mind, is a stock-fish: Half fool! yes; more a fool than any Fools of our parish, who are many. She sends her husband, dead a year, Money and clothes, and hath no fear The scholar hath deceived her. Ah! To catch the rogue will I ride far; Then I will beat the rascal well, So each big bruise will surely tell That Paradise he hath not found; Then, while he grovels on the ground, Money and clothes will I retake, And bear them home. For safety's sake My wife must feel my fists; if she Have black eyes, to remember me And her own folly, it may be A lesson. Through her foolishness My fortune must grow less and less. Alas, that I, to please my eyes, Married this useless, comely prize! I shall repent me all my days: If she had shrewd though drunken ways, So were she better, and might be More of a helpmate unto me. [The Wife comes in.] Wife The horse is ready: mount! away! And God go with thee through the day! [The Farmer and his Wife go out ; the Travelling Scholar comes in with his pack.] Scholar How Fortune bids my star arise! Puts in my hand unlooked-for prize! Now I can live the winter through -- And there are other women, too. Foolish as this, who will as well Believe each tale that I may tell -- Others, like this, not over-wise. Who will send me to Paradise -- Odd-bobs! Here comes one riding fast; Behind the hedge my pack I cast; I doubt not this good man would take Bundle and coin for his wife's sake; He may not promptly be deceived; Nor his wife's Paradise believed. He cannot ride across the moor; The fen-land swamp would bog him sore -- Ah! he dismounts. I put away My net; and wait what he may say. Leaning on my poor stick, who can Suspect I am no peasant man? [The Farmer comes in with spurs on.] Farmer Good luck, my man! In this wild waste Hast seen one running in hot haste, With yellow neck-net? On his back A bundle blue, Uke peddler's pack ? Scholar Oh, yes ; I saw him passing here; He crossed the moor like hunted deer; Across the moor, and to the wood; A moment, resting there, he stood; Through these scrub bushes went his track; He had a bundle on his back; Weary he seemed as on he ran; You quickly may o'ertake the man. Farmer Upon my oath, it must be he! Good fellow, hold my horse for me; Through this soft moss I needs must run. To catch this crafty, thievish one; Then will I beat him black and blue -- A beating that he long shall rue. If he live long, which much I doubt. Hold fast the horse till I come out. Scholar I wait a priest, and so shall stay Until he soon may pass this way; I gladly hold your horse's rein If you will soon be back again. Farmer Earn thus a kreuzer. I am strong: Catching this thief will not take long. Scholar Go swiftly on, the moor across; And have no fear about your horse. [The Farmer goes out] Welcome is this fine horse to me: Fair Fortune smiles most graciously. And brings good luck still in my way; This is, indeed, my lucky day! The simple wife gave clothes and gold; Her husband gives his horse -- to hold; Which I will do: I need not walk; The man is kind, for all his talk: He sees I am a lazy man. And so he helps me all he can. The bog is dangerous and deep, And the safe pathway hard to keep; Unless he choose his footsteps nice He will be first in Paradise; For should he here a misstep make It were the last that he would take. Now I will strap my pack across The back of this convenient horse; I care not here to make long stay; But speedily will ride away. This husband will have searched in vain, And soon, perchance, be back again; He might be in such surly mood. My acts would be misunderstood; So, laden with my good supplies, I spur away to Paradise. While he still seeks his horse to win, I eat my roast fowl at an inn. [The Travelling Student rides off with his pack. The Wife comes in.] Wife It is a lonesome time today! Oh wherefore doth my husband stay! I fear that he has lost his way In bogs, so my old husband may Suffer in want from long delay -- I hear the evening pipe's loud blast; And home the pigs are running fast. [The Wife goes out, and the Farmer comes in and looks around.] Farmer Odds-bobs! Where is my horse? Not here? What a wise man am I! 'Tis clear: The rascal that deceived my wife Has now my horse. Upon my life, He has our money, clothes and horse, And I am left with triple loss! To trust that lying rogue, am I The biggest fool beneath the sky! Here comes my wife, and looks for me; I dare not tell this history: I threatened her with beating sore; Now I deserve that beating more; She lost the clothes -- small loss indeed -- But I have lost my good grey steed. She to no stratagems was schooled. While I suspected, yet was fooled. When I have thought a fool was she, I wise, it seems two fools are we. [The Wife comes in.] Wife On foot? Then thy good horse is sold. Found'st thou the man? and gav'st the gold? Farmer He said the way was very long, And he was weary, and not strong: So I gave up my horse that he In Paradise might sooner be: Thus will thy husband have our help And my good horse to ride, himself. Say, wife, have I in this done right? I sought to help thy man's sad plight. Wife Indeed thou hast. My husband, dear, I have not rightly known, I fear. Thy faithful heart. I do not jest: If thou wert dead, indeed my best I then would do to send to thee In Paradise, that thou might'st be Contented there: I would resign Goose, calf and pig, clothes, all our coin, Whatever useful thing was mine. That thou should'st know my faithful heart. How with my treasures I would part, That thus thou mightest have the best, Happy in Paradise to rest. Farmer I trust that here I long may stay. Nor need such help; but, wife, I pray. Of what has happened, nothing say. Wife Through all the village it is known. Farmer Who hath the news so quickly sown? Wife When thou wert gone, most gratefully I told our friends how good to me Thou art, of Paradise, and how My dear old husband is there now; How, by a messenger most wise, I sent him things to Paradise. It seemed that people laughed at me, And took the matter merrily. Farmer The Devil take their pleasantry, That dares to make a scoff of thee! -- Scoff of my wife! Dear God, I pray For patience! -- Hasten, wife, away, And bring a bowl of milk to me. Wife Yes, husband; follow presently. [The Wife goes out.] Farmer Why do I thus complain? My fate Hath given me a fool for mate; But yet a faithful fool. 'Tis true That lack of sense is nothing new; But she is silly past belief, And, for this fault, is no relief: I constantly must hold her rein. And her simplicity restrain; Must bear with her, for e'en today My foot from stirrup slipped away: Who doth the shuttlecock let fall Should not another clumsy call. Better it is I proved a fool, So cannot make a cruel rule, For, in her heart, she is so kind, My own to softness is inclined. Who falls a victim to deceit Should not find fault when others meet The like misfortune; but forgive, That all in peacefulness may live: Kind charity for faulty acts Redeems our own, remarks Hans Sachs. Source (Internet Archive): Hans Sachs, Merry Tales and Three Shrovetide Plays , translated into English verse by William Leighton (London: David Nutt, 1910), pp. 223-38 . Link to the text in the original German (1550): Der farendt Schuler im Paradeis . Return to the table of contents . The Clever People Germany One day a peasant took his good hazel stick out of the corner and said to his wife, "Trina, I am going across country, and shall not return for three days. If during that time the cattle dealer should happen to call and want to buy our three cows, you may strike a bargain at once, but not unless you can get two hundred talers for them, nothing less, do you hear." "In God's name, just go in peace," answered the woman, "I will manage that." "You, indeed," said the man. "You once fell on your head when you were a little child, and that affects you even now. But let me tell you this, if you do anything foolish, I will make your back black and blue, and not with paint, I assure you, but with the stick which I have in my hand. And the coloring shall last a whole year. You may rely on that." Having said that, the man went on his way. The next morning the cattle dealer came, and the woman had no need to say many words to him. When he had seen the cows and heard the price, he said, "I am quite willing to give that. Honestly speaking, they are worth it. I will take the animals away with me at once." He unfastened their chains and drove them out of the stall, but just as he was going out of the farmyard gate, the woman clutched him by the sleeve and said, "You must give me the two hundred talers now, or I cannot let the cows go." "Right," answered the man, "but I have forgotten to buckle on my money belt. Have no fear, however, you shall have security until I pay. I will take two cows with me and leave one, so you will have good collateral." The woman saw the wisdom of this, and let the man go away with the cows, and thought to herself, "How pleased Hans will be when he finds how cleverly I have managed." The peasant came home on the third day as he had said he would, and at once inquired if the cows were sold. "Yes, indeed, dear Hans," answered the woman, "and as you said, for two hundred talers. They are scarcely worth so much, but the man took them without making any objection." "Where is the money?" asked the peasant. "Oh, I have not got the money," replied the woman. "He had happened to forget his money belt, but he will soon bring it, and he left good security behind him." "What kind of security?" asked the man. "One of the three cows, which he shall not have until he has paid for the other two. I have managed very cunningly, for I have kept the smallest, which eats the least." The man was enraged and lifted up his stick, and was just going to give her the beating he had promised her, when suddenly he lowered the stick and said, "You are the stupidest goose that ever waddled on God's earth, but I am sorry for you. I will go out into the highway and wait for three days to see if I find anyone who is still stupider than you. If I succeed in doing so, you shall go free, but if I do not find him, you shall receive your well-deserved reward without any discount." He went out into the great highway, sat down on a stone, and waited for what would come along. Then he saw a farm wagon coming towards him, and a woman was standing upright in the middle of it, instead of sitting on the bundle of straw which was lying beside her, or walking near the oxen and leading them. The man thought to himself, "That is certainly one of the kind I am in search of," and jumped up and ran back and forth in front of the wagon like one who is not in his right mind. "What do you want, my friend?" said the woman to him. "I don't know you, where do you come from?" "I have fallen down from heaven," replied the man, "and don't know how to get back again. Couldn't you drive me up?" "No," said the woman, "I don't know the way. But if you come from heaven you can surely tell me how my husband is, who has been there these three years. You must have seen him." "Oh, yes, I have seen him, but not everyone can get on well. He herds sheep, and these creatures give him a great deal to do. They run up the mountains and lose their way in the wilderness, and he has to run after them and drive them together again. His clothes are all torn to pieces too, and will soon fall off his body. There is no tailor there, for Saint Peter won't let any of them in, as you know by the story." "Who would have thought it?" cried the woman. "I tell you what. I will fetch his Sunday coat which is still hanging at home in the cupboard. He can wear that and look respectable. You will be so kind as to take it with you." "That won't be possible," answered the peasant. "People are not allowed to take clothes into heaven. They are taken away at the gate." "Then listen to me," said the woman. "I sold my good wheat yesterday and got a lot of money for it. I will send that to him. If you hide the purse in your pocket, no one will know that you have it." "If you can't manage it any other way," said the peasant, "I will do you that favor." "Just sit still where you are," said she, "and I will drive home and fetch the purse. I shall soon be back again. I do not sit down on the bundle of straw, but stand up in the wagon, because it makes it lighter for the cattle." She drove her oxen away, and the peasant thought, "That woman has a perfect talent for folly. If she really brings the money, my wife may think herself fortunate, for she will get no beating." It was not long before she came in a great hurry with the money, and with her own hands put it in his pocket. Before she went away, she thanked him again a thousand times for his courtesy. When the woman got home again, she found her son who had come in from the field. She told him what unexpected things had befallen her, and then added, "I am truly delighted at having found an opportunity of sending something to my poor husband. Who would ever have imagined that he could be suffering for want of anything up in heaven?" The son was full of astonishment. "Mother," said he, it is not every day that a man comes from heaven in this way. I will go out immediately, and see if he is still to be found, he must tell me what it is like up there, and how the work is done. He saddled the horse and rode off with all speed. He found the peasant who was sitting under a willow tree, and was about to count the money in the purse. "Have you seen the man who has come from heaven?" cried the youth to him. "Yes," answered the peasant, "he has set out on his way back there, and has gone up that hill, from whence it will be rather nearer. You could still catch him up, if you ride fast." "Alas," said the youth, "I have been doing tiring work all day, and the ride here has completely worn me out. You know the man. Be so kind as to get on my horse, and go and persuade him to come here." "Aha," thought the peasant. "Here is another who has not no wick in his lamp." "Why should I not do you this favor?" said he, and mounted the horse and rode off at a quick trot. The youth remained sitting there until night fell, but the peasant never came back. "The man from heaven must certainly have been in a great hurry, and would not turn back," thought he, "and the peasant has no doubt given him the horse to take to my father." He went home and told his mother what had happened, and that he had sent his father the horse so that he might not have to be always running about. "You have done well," answered she. "You still have young legs and can go on foot." When the peasant got home, he put the horse in the stable beside the cow which had been left as security, and then went to his wife and said, "Trina, as your luck would have it, I have found two who are still more stupid fools than you. This time you escape without a beating. I will store it up for another occasion." Then he lighted his pipe, sat down in his grandfather's chair, and said, "It was a good stroke of business to get a sleek horse and a great purse full of money into the bargain, for two lean cows. If stupidity always brought in as much as that, I would be quite willing to hold it in honor." So thought the peasant, but you no doubt prefer the simpletons. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die klugen Leute," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 7th edition, vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 104, pp. 91-95 . I have used this translation: "Wise Folks," Grimm's Household Tales , translated by Margaret Hunt, vol. 2 (London: George Bell and Sons, 1884), no. 104, pp. 73-76 . Revised by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999-2002. This jest was added to the Grimms' collection only with the 7th edition (1857). Their immediate source was Wilhelm Grimm's wife, Dortchen Wild Grimm, who recorded it from oral tradition. This tale weaves together the following Aarne-Thompson-Uther types: Type 1385, a woman accepts her own cow as security. Type 1384, a man seeks someone as foolish as his wife. Type 1540, the man from paradise. Type 1242A, carrying the load to spare the horse. Typically a man on a horse carries a loaded sack on his own back to lighten the horse's load. Here, for the same purpose, the woman stands in her wagon instead of sitting down. Link to the text of this tale in a single file: The Clever People by the Grimm brothers. Return to the table of contents . The Traveler from Heaven Germany (Swabia) Once upon a time there was a cheerful wanderer who went into a tavern to drink a glass of wine. The hostess said, "Where are you coming from?" "I have just come from heaven!" said the stranger. "What do you say! You have come from heaven?" said the woman. "But of course," he replied. "Well, then," said the woman, "you must have seen my blessed husband. His name is Hans." "But of course I have seen him," said the stranger. "I know him very well. We have always been good friends with each other." "Good heavens!" said the woman. "What do you say! Have you really seen him? And spoken with him? And know him?" "Why not?" replied the man. "For heaven's sake!" said the woman. "How is he then?" "Oh, just so-so. Not the very best," said the stranger. "It is difficult to get by up there. He has to work hard, and the wages are very low. The last time I saw him he just about did not have a whole shirt on his body." "For pity's sake!" sobbed the woman. "If only I knew," she continued, "how I could send something back to him. I would like to give him something. I have enough here, thank heaven!" "Oh!" said the wanderer. "That would be good. I am going back right away, and I could take something to him, whatever you would like to send him. I would be glad to do it!" "Oh, my dear friend," said the woman, "you say that he no longer has a shirt on his body, a whole one? I just had a half dozen new ones made for my oldest son. They would also fit my blessed husband. Would you take them along?" "Gladly!" he said. "And these three hundred florins as well?" "Those as well," he said. "I can manage to carry them." "Oh heaven," she continued, "and I have half a ham and a few sausages -- he always liked them so much!" The stranger took these as well, and then, while saying a thousand thanks, he set forth on his journey. When the hostess's oldest son came home and learned from his mother what had happened, he quickly saddled his horse and chased after the traveler from heaven. The latter, in good spirits, had walked into the country and had just sat down at the edge of some woods. When he saw the rider galloping toward him he sensed that it meant trouble. He immediately set his hat on the ground and pretended to be carefully watching over it. When the rider came near he stopped and asked the wanderer if he was the man who was traveling to heaven. "Yes indeed," he said. "I am the one." "Then," he shouted, "give me at once the money that you were to take to my father!" "Whatever you want," said the traveler. "It is all the same to me. If you don't want your father to have it, then I won't have to carry it. But you will have to wait a little while. I have caught a very valuable and rare bird under my hat. It is worth at least three hundred florins. I sent a man into town to fetch a cage for me. Because he did not have anything to carry, I gave the man the three hundred florins that your father was to have. When he comes back with the cage then you will have to ride to town with me." The son agreed to do this, and he remained there. After a while the traveler from heaven said, "If you would watch over this bird very carefully then I could run after the man right now, otherwise he may not come back very soon. Or, it would be even faster if you would lend me your horse. Then I would be back immediately, and you could return home in good time." The son thought that this proposal made good sense. He agreed to it at once and let the traveler mount his horse. Meanwhile, he kept watch over the valuable bird under the hat. There he sat, and after sitting there for several hours the traveler from heaven still had not returned with the horse and the money. He could not leave his post because of the valuable bird, which he considered to be security for the three hundred florins. Evening came, and finally he decided to pick up the bird in his hand and take it into town himself. Very carefully he lifted the hat a little, so that he could reach his hand under it. It was not a bird that he took hold of, but something entirely different, something that he never told anyone about. Suddenly he decided to return home to his mother. She was surprised that he came home so late, and without his horse. He told her that he had decided to give the horse as well to the traveler from heaven, so that he could deliver the things more quickly to his father. She was satisfied with this answer. The son did not have anything further to say about the matter. Source: Ernst Meier, "Der Himmelsreisende," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben, aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 20, pp. 69-72 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002. The episode of the trickster placing his hat over a pile of dung, then tricking his victim into watching over it (very cautiously related in the above tale) is classified under Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1528. Return to the table of contents . All Women Are Alike Norway Once on a time there was a man, and he had a wife. Now this couple wanted to sow their fields, but they had neither seed-corn nor money to buy it with. But they had a cow, and the man was to drive it into town and sell it to get money to buy corn for seed. But when it came to the pinch, the wife dared not let her husband start, for fear he should spend the money in drink, so she set off herself with the cow, and took besides a hen with her. Close by the town she met a butcher, who asked, "Will you sell that cow, mother?" "Yes, that I will," she answered. "Well, what do you want for her?" "Oh! I must have five shillings for the cow, but you shall have the hen for ten pound." "Very good!" said the man; "I don't want the hen, and you'll soon get it off your hands in the town; but I'll give you five shillings for the cow." Well, she sold her cow for five shillings, but there was no one in the town who would give ten pound for a lean tough old hen, so she went back to the butcher, and said, "Do all I can, I can't get rid of this hen, master! You must take it too, as you took the cow." "Well," said the butcher, "come along and we'll see about it." Then he treated her both with meat and drink, and gave her so much brandy that she lost her head, and didn't know what she was about, and fell fast asleep. But while she slept, the butcher took and dipped her into a tar barrel, and then laid her down on a heap of feathers; and when she woke up she was feathered all over, and began to wonder what had befallen her. "Is it me, or is it not me? No, it can never be me. It must be some great strange bird. But what shall I do to find out whether it is me or not? Oh! I know how I shall be able to tell whether it is me. If the calves come and lick me, and our dog Tray doesn't bark at me when I get home, then it must be me and no one else." Now, Tray, her dog, had scarce set his eyes on the strange monster which came through the gate, than he set up such a barking, one would have thought all the rogues and robbers in the world were in the yard. "Ah! deary me!" said she, "I thought so. It can't be me surely." So she went to the straw-yard, and the calves wouldn't lick her, when they snuffed in the strong smell of tar. "No, no!" she said. "It can't be me. It must be some strange outlandish bird." So she crept up on the roof of the safe [storehouse] and began to flap her arms, as if they had been wings, and was just going to fly off. When her husband saw all this, out he came with his rifle, and began to take aim at her. "Oh!" cried his wife, "don't shoot, don't shoot! It is only me." "If it's you," said her husband, "don't stand up there like a goat on a house-top, but come down and let me hear what you have to say for yourself." So she crawled down again, but she hadn't a shilling to show, for the crown she had got from the butcher she had thrown away in her drunkenness. When her husband heard her story, he said "You're only twice as silly as you were before," and he got so angry that he made up his mind to go away from her altogether, and never to come back till he had found three other goodies [women] as silly as his own. So he toddled off, and when he had walked a little way he saw a goody, who was running in and out of a newly built wooden cottage with an empty sieve, and every time she ran in she threw her apron over the sieve, just as if she had something in it, and when she got in she turned it upside down on the floor. "Why, goody!" he asked, "what are you doing?" "Oh," she answered, "I'm only carrying in a little sun; but I don't know how it is, when I'm outside I have the sun in my sieve, but when I get inside, somehow or other I've thrown it away. But in my old cottage I had plenty of sun, though I never carried in the least bit. I only wish I knew some one who would bring the sun inside. I'd give him three hundred dollars and welcome." "Have you got an ax?" asked the man. "If you have, I'll soon bring the sun inside." So he got an ax and cut windows in the cottage, for the carpenters had forgotten them. Then the sun shone in, and he got his three hundred dollars. "That was one of them," said the man to himself, as he went on his way. After a while he passed by a house, out of which came an awful screaming and bellowing; so he turned in and saw a goody, who was hard at work banging her husband across the head with a beetle [wooden pestle], and over his head she had drawn a shirt without any slit for the neck. "Why, goody!" he asked, "will you beat your husband to death?" "No," she said, "I only must have a hole in this shirt for his neck to come through." All the while the husband kept on screaming and calling out, "Heaven help and comfort all who try on new shirts! If anyone would teach my goody another way of making a slit for the neck in my new shirts I'd give him three hundred dollars down, and welcome." "I'll do it in the twinkling of an eye," said the man, "if you'll only give me a pair of scissors." So he got a pair of scissors, and snipped a hole in the neck, and went off with his three hundred dollars. "That was another of them," he said to himself, as he walked along. Last of all, he came to a farm, where he made up his mind to rest a bit. So when he went in, the mistress asked him, "Whence do you come, master?" "Oh!" said he, "I come from Paradise Place," for that was the name of his farm. "From Paradise Place! " she cried, "you don't say so. Why, then, you must know my second husband Peter, who is dead and gone, God rest his soul!" For you must know this goody had been married three times, and as her first and last husbands had been bad, she had made up her mind that the second only was gone to heaven. "Oh! yes," said the man; "I know him very well." "Well," asked the goody, "how do things go with him, poor dear soul?" "Only middling," was the answer; "he goes about begging from house to house, and has neither food nor a rag to his back. As for money, he hasn't a sixpence to bless himself with." "Mercy on me!" cried out the goody; "he never ought to go about such a figure when he left so much behind him. Why, there's a whole cupboard full of old clothes upstairs which belonged to him, besides a great chest full of money yonder. Now, if you will take them with you, you shall have a horse and cart to carry them. As for the horse, he can keep it, and sit on the cart, and drive about from house to house, and then he needn't trudge on foot." So the man got a whole cart-load of clothes, and a chest full of shining dollars, and as much meat and drink as he would; and when he had got all he wanted, he jumped into the cart and drove off. "That was the third," he said to himself, as he went along. Now this goody's third husband was a little way off in a field plowing, and when he saw a strange man driving off from the farm with his horse and cart, he went home and asked his wife who that was that had just started with the black horse. "Oh, do you mean him?" said the goody; "why, that was a man from paradise, who said that Peter, my dear second husband, who is dead and gone, is in a sad plight, and that he goes from house to house begging, and has neither clothes nor money; so I just sent him all those old clothes he left behind him, and the old money box with the dollars in it." The man saw how the land lay in a trice, so he saddled his horse and rode off from the farm at full gallop. It wasn't long before he was close behind the man who sat and drove the cart; but when the latter saw this he drove the cart into a thicket by the side of the road, pulled out a handful of hair from the horse's tail, jumped up on a little rise in the wood, where he tied the hair fast to a birch, and then lay down under it, and began to peer and stare up at the sky. "Well, well, if I ever! " he said, as Peter the third came riding up. "No! I never saw the like of this in all my born days!" Then Peter stood and looked at him for some time, wondering what had come over him; but at last he asked, "What do you lie there staring at?" "No," kept on the man, "I never did see anything like it! Here is a man going straight up to heaven on a black horse, and here you see his horse's tail still hanging in this birch; and yonder up in the sky you see the black horse." Peter looked first at the man, and then at the sky, and said, "I see nothing but the horse hair in the birch; that's all I see." "Of course you can't where you stand," said the man; "but just come and lie down here, and stare straight up, and mind you don't take your eyes off the sky; and then you shall see what you shall see." But while Peter the third lay and stared up at the sky till his eyes filled with tears, the man from Paradise Place took his horse and jumped on its back, and rode off both with it and the cart and horse. When the hoofs thundered along the road, Peter the third jumped up, but he was so taken aback when he found the man had gone off with his horse, that he hadn't the sense to run after him till it was too late. He was rather down in the mouth when he got home to his goody; but when she asked him what he had done with the horse, he said, "I gave it to the man too for Peter the second, for I thought it wasn't right he should sit in a cart and scramble about from house to house; so now he can sell the cart and buy himself a coach to drive about in." "Thank you heartily!" said his wife. "I never thought you could be so kind." Well, when the man reached home, who had got the six hundred dollars and the cart-load of clothes and money, he saw that all his fields were ploughed and sown, and the first thing he asked his wife was, where she had got the seed-corn from. "Oh," she said, "I have always heard that what a man sows he shall reap, so I sowed the salt which our friends the north country men laid up here with us, and if we only have rain I fancy it will come up nicely." "You are crazy," said her husband, "and crazy you will be so long as you live. But that is all one now, for the others are not a bit better than you." Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), no. 21, pp. 178-86 . Although Dasent names this tale "Not a Pin to Choose between Them," the translation "All Women Are Alike" is closer to the Norwegian title. Link to another translation of this tale: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, "All Women Are Alike," Fairy Tales from the Far North , translated by H. L. Brækstad (London: David Nutt, 1897), pp. 67-76 . Link to the original Norwegian text: Somme kjerringer er slike . This tale weaves together episodes representing a number of Aarne-Thompson-Uther tale types: Type 1383, a woman does not know herself. Type 1384, a man seeks someone as foolish as his wife. Type 1245, a simpleton tries to carry sunlight into a windowless house. Type 1285, a simpleton attempts to put on a shirt that has no neck opening. Type 1540, the man from paradise. Type 1200, a simpleton plants salt, expecting it to grow. Return to the table of contents . The Great Need: A Prankster Tale from Zealand Denmark Once there was an old woman who was walking along a road, and there she met a man. He greeted her, and she asked: "Where are you from?" "From Gimlinge," said the man. "From Himmerige [Kingdom of Heaven]?" asked the woman. "Yes, I'm from there," he said. "Have you seen my son?" she asked. "He died a long time ago." "Yes, I have often spoken to him," said the man. "Well, how is he?" said the woman. "Does he get enough to eat? Does he have enough clothing?" "No," said the man, "he needs both. And he also needs some money." "Oh, then you must come home with me," said the woman, "and I will give you something for him, if you'll be good enough to take it with you. Then they went to her house, and the woman filled a bag with food and gave it to the man, and also some clothes and money for her son. And then she said: "Which way are you going on your way back to the Kingdom of Heaven?" "I'll be passing back through Rottingneby!" said the man. "Rottingneby!" she said. I know it well. Did you see my sister when you were last there?" "Yes", said the man, "but last year the pigs ate her up with the spoiled slop." "Yes, I can believe that," said the woman, "because every time I saw her, she was so so filthy dirty. But isn't there a pond in Rottingue Street?" "Yes, of course," said the man, but it caught fire last year and was put out with a long straw." "Yes, I can believe that," she said, "because it always rained so much. But isn't there a big stone in Rottingue Street?" "Yes," said the man, "but it flew away last year with the wild geese. "Yes, I can believe that," said the woman, "because the wild geese always flocked so much on that rock." When the woman had received all this good news about Rottingneby and about the road to heaven, she said farewell to the man and begged him to greet her son, and with that they parted. It was now evening, and her husband came home. The wife had found some more money in the cupboard, and therefore she asked: "What is that money for, father, which I found in the cupboard today?" "Ah, we must keep that for the great need", said the man. The next day a large beggar came to her. Then she immediately asked him if he was not Great Need. "Well, that's who I am, unfortunately for me!" he said. "Well, then I have a hundred thalers, which our father has put aside for you," said the woman. " "Very good, thank you, mother," said the beggar With that he took the money and went away with it. In the evening, when the man came home, the wife said to him: "Well, Great Need was here then, and I gave him the hundred dollars, and he was very happy." "No! God forbid! Woman, what have you done?" said the man, "Have you let someone run away with the hundred thalers?" "Yes", said the wife, "you said you had put the money aside for Great Need, and that is why I gave it to him. And now I will tell you something I received yesterday from our son, and, you know, he is not well off where he is, so I sent him some clothes and a bag of food and some money. Furthermore, you know, he is just as needy as was our son." Source (books.google.com): Svend Grundtvig, "Den store Nød," Gamle danske Minder i Folkemunde: olkeæventyr, Folkeviser, Folkesagn (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversen, 1854), no. 29, pp. 28-30 . Source (Internet Archive): Svend Grundtvig, "Den store Nød," Gamle danske Minder i Folkemunde: olkeæventyr, Folkeviser, Folkesagn (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversen, 1854), no. 29, pp. 28-30 . Grundtvig's source: "Recorded at Prestø by Baroness Jeanina Stampe from Nys&oslash." This story combines the following folktale types: Type 1540: "The Man from Paradise." Type 2335: "Contradictions." Type 1541: "For the Long Winter." Return to the table of contents . The Man Who Fell from Heaven Netherlands Once upon a time there was a peasant's wife, a good, simple soul who was just returning from the market. She had almost reached home when she met a young man on the road who was continuously looking up toward heaven. "What is the meaning of that?" thought the old woman, and when she came closer to him, she asked, "My friend, why are you looking up into the air? Did something happen up there?" "Dear woman," he said, "I just fell from heaven, and now I cannot find the hole again." "So," said the old woman, "if you just fell from heaven, then you must know your way around up there pretty well?" "Of course," said the young man. "Then perhaps you know my son Kees, who died last year?" "Kees," said the man. "Is he your son? And you ask me if I know him? My dear woman, he is my nearest neighbor!" "That is wonderful," said the old woman, "and how is he doing?" "Quite well! Quite well! But last week he was complaining that his stockings are worn out. And the sausage, the ham, and the butter are all gone, but other than that he is doing well." "Oh, man, oh, man! Isn't there anyone there who can take care of his clothes?" "No," said the man, "in heaven you have to take care of your own clothes." "Can't he buy sausage and butter?" "Yes, they are for sale, but everything is terribly expensive, and he cannot afford what is there." "Oh dear, it is too bad that Kees still has to be in need now that he is dead. And I could well afford to give him something!" Then the man told her exactly how Kees was doing, and what he was doing, and where he lived. Finally he said that he had to go, otherwise he would be late in returning to heaven. "Are you going back to heaven now?" asked the old woman. "Yes, indeed," he said. "Then because you know Kees so well, would you be so kind as to do me a great favor? Come home with me, and I will pack a few things that you can give to him." "Well," he said, "I will do it because it is for Kees, but I shall get my ears pulled for being away so long." They went together to the farmhouse, and the old woman prepared two packages: one for the man who had fallen from heaven, because he had been so friendly, and one for Kees, but the package for Kees was the larger one. She also gave him a bag of money for her son. Then he took leave in order to make his return trip. Thinking, "Kees will be so happy when his neighbor comes home, and Kees hears that he has been here," the old woman watched him until he was out of sight. She never learned if Kees received her package. A short time ago someone told me that this was because the man still has not found the hole through which he had fallen from heaven. Source: G. J. Boekenoogen, "Van den man die uit den hemel gevallen was," Volkskunde: Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsche Folklore , vol. 15 (1903), no. 41, pp. 187-88 . Boekenoogen recorded this tale in Rotterdam in 1894. Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2014. Return to the table of contents . Stupid Gretel Switzerland Stupid Gretel lived with her husband in a lonely little house just outside the village, and she did not deal with people very much. One day a hungry fellow came to her while her husband was in the field, and he asked her to give him something to eat, for he had gone hungry the entire day. He would be satisfied even if it were only a piece of meat, or half of one. Now her husband had slaughtered a pig only yesterday, so she went inside and brought back half of the pig. Yes, he could manage that, said the hungry man, and he loaded the burden onto his shoulders and went on his way. When Gretel's husband came home and learned what she had done, he ruffled his hair and said, "Gretel, my Gretel, when will you ever learn? Why didn't you just cut him a slice?" "Oh, dear husband," said Gretel, "you know that I cannot shed blood. How would I have been able to cut a slice out of that poor man?" The husband said, "Gretel, my Gretel, you will never learn! I am going to town now, and if I can find a woman there who is more stupid than you, then I'll spare your life, otherwise it will cost you your neck." So he went to town. The market had just begun, and as he, lost in his thoughts, approached an egg woman, he stumbled into her basket, breaking the eggs until the ground looked like it was plastered with pancakes made without lard. "Hey!" the egg woman jumped up shouting, "What kind of crazy man is that?" "Now, now," cried the man. "Clear out your mouth and speak differently. Who can see a miserable egg peddler if he has just fallen from heaven?" "Oh my dear God, you have come from heaven?" cried the woman. "How could I have known that? Tell me, have you seen my blessed husband Christian? God willing, he will have been there one year this Easter." "I hope to say I have seen him," answered the man. "Only yesterday we ate together. He is the best companion I have in all of heaven, and when I return, he is the first person I will seek out. But he's not doing too well polishing the stars. He has to clean the stars every night, and having only one shirt for Sundays and workdays alike is no fun." "Oh my dear God," cried the woman. "Is he doing so poorly, my dear Christian? In that case may God bless you if you will take him the piece of cloth that I bought for him before he died. It is as good as new." "If it's not too heavy, I will give it a try," said the man, and went with the woman to her house. She gave him the cloth, and she wouldn't stop until she had given him a basket full of eggs for her Christian as well. Then he set off toward home. As he approached home, Gretel became frightened, for she could only think that her last hour had struck. But her husband waved to her from afar and shouted, "Gretel, my Gretel, you are not yet the most stupid woman!" Then he told her about his dealings with the egg woman. He was very pleased with the new cloth and the gift of the eggs. And Gretel too was much relieved that this time, at least, it had not cost her her neck. Source: Otto Sutermeister, "Die dumme Grethe," Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus der Schweiz (Aarau: Druck und Verlag von H. R. Sauerländer, 1873), no. 23, pp. 70-72 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002. The episode of the man seeking someone as stupid as his wife is classified under Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1384. Return to the table of contents . The Simple Wife Italy There was a man and his wife who had a young daughter to marry; and there was a man who was seeking a wife. So the man who was seeking a wife came to the man who had a daughter to marry, and said, "Give me your daugh ter for a wife." "Yes," said the man who had a daughter to marry; "you'll do very well; you're just about the sort of son-in- law I want." And then he added: "If our daughter is to be betrothed today, it is the occasion for a feast." So to the wife he said, "Prepare the table; "and to the daughter he said, "Draw the wine." The daughter went down into the cellar to draw the wine. But as she drew the wine she began to cry, saying: "If I am to be married I shall have a child, and the child will be a son, and the son will be a priest, and the priest will be a bishop, and the bishop will be a cardinal, and the cardinal will be a pope." And she cried and cried, and the wine was running all the time, so that the bottle she was filling ran over, and went on running over. Then said the father and mother: "What can the girl be doing down in the cellar so long?" But the mother said: "I must go and see." So the mother went down to see why she was so long, but the moment she came into the cellar she, too, began to cry; so that the wine still went on running over. Then the father said: "What can the girl and her mother both be doing so long down in the cellar? I must go and see." So the father went down into the cellar; but the moment he got into the cellar he, too, began to cry, and could do nothing for crying; so the wine still went on running over. Then he who had come to seek a wife said: "What can these people all be doing so long down in the cellar?" So he, too, went down to see, and found them all crying in the cellar and the wine running over. Only when the wine was all run out they left off crying and came upstairs again. Then the betrothal and the marriage were happily celebrated. One day after they were married the husband went into the market to buy meat, and he bought a large provision because he had invited a friend to dinner. When the wife saw him buy such a quantity of meat she began to cry, saying: "What can we do with such a lot of meat?" "Oh, never mind, don't make a misery of it," said the husband; "put it behind you [never mind it]." The simple wife took the meat and went home, saying to her parents, and crying the while: "My husband says I am to put all this meat behind me! Do tell me what can I do?" "You can't put the whole lot of it behind you, that's certain," replied the equally simple mother; "but we can manage it between us." Then she took the meat and put all the hard, bony part on one chair, where she made the father sit down on it; all the fat, skinny part she put on another chair, and made the wife sit down on it; and the fleshy, meaty part she put on another chair, and sat down on that herself. Presently the husband came with his friend, ready for dinner, knocking at the door. None of the three dared to move, however, that they might not cease to be fulfilling his injunctions. Then he looked through the keyhole, and, seeing them all sitting down without moving when he knocked, he thought they must all be dead; so he ran and fetched a locksmith, who opened the door for him. "What on earth are you all doing there,"exclaimed the hungry husband, "instead of getting dinner ready?" "You told me to put the meat behind me, and I have done so," answered the simple wife. Then he saw they were sitting on the meat. Out of all patience with such idiocy, he exclaimed: "This is the last you'll ever see of me. At least I promise you not to come back till I have met three other people as idiotic as you, and that's hardly likely to occur." With that he took his friend to a tavern to dine, and then put on a pilgrim's dress and went wandering over the country. In the first city he came to there was great public rejoicing going on. The princess had just been married, and the court was keeping high festival. As he came up to the palace the bride and bridegroom were just come back from church. The bride wore one of those very high round headdresses that they used to wear in olden time, with a long veil hanging from it. It was so very high that she could not by any means get in at the door, and there she stuck, not knowing what to do. Then she began to cry, saying: "What shall I do? what shall I do?" "Shall I tell you what to do?"said the pilgrim-husband, drawing near. "Oh, pray do, if you can; I will give you a hundred scudi if you will only show me how to get in." So he went and made her go a few steps backward, and then bow her head very low, and so she could pass under the door. "Really, I have found one woman as simple as my people at home," said the pilgrim-husband, as he sat down to the banquet at the special invitation of the princess, in reward for his services. Afterwards she counted out a hundred scudi to him, and he went further. Further along the road he came to a farm, with barns and cattle and plenty of stock about, and a large well at which a woman was drawing water. Instead of dipping in the pail, she had got the well-rope knotted into a huge knot, which she kept dipping into the water and squeezing out into the pail, and she kept crying as she did so: "Oh, how long shall I be filling the pail! The pail will never be full!" "Shall I show you how to fill it?"asked the pilgrim-husband, drawing near. "Oh, yes, do show me if you can. I will give you a hundred scudi if you will only show me." Then he took all the knots out of the rope and let down the pail by it, and filled it in a minute. "Here's a second woman as stupid as my people at home," said the pilgrim-husband, as the farmer's wife asked him in to dinner in reward for his great services. "If I go on at this rate I shall have to return to her at last, in spite of my protestations." After that the farmer's wife counted out the hundred scudi of the promised reward, and he went on further, having first packed six eggs into his hollow staff as provision for the journey. Towards nightfall he arrived at a lone cottage. Here he knocked and asked a bed for his night's lodging. "I can't give you that," said a voice from the inside; "for I am a lone widow. I can't take a man in to sleep here." "But I am a pilgrim," replied he; "let me in at least to cook a bit of supper." "That I don't mind doing," said the good wife, and she opened the door. "Thanks, good friend!" said the pilgrim-husband as he sat down by the stove; "now add to your charity a couple of eggs in a pan." So she gave him a pan and two eggs, and a bit of butter to cook them in; but he took the six eggs out of his staff and broke them into the pan, too. Presently, when the good wife turned her head his way again, and saw eight eggs swimming in the pan instead of two, she said: "Lack-a-day! You must surely be some strange being from the other world. Do you know so-and-so there?" (naming her dead husband). "Oh, yes," said the pilgrim-husband, enjoying the joke. "I know him very well. He lives just next to me." "Only to think of that!" replied the poor woman. "And do tell me, how do you get on in the other world? What sort of a life is it?" "Oh, not so very bad. It depends what sort of a place you get. The part where we are is not very bad, except that we get very little to eat. Your husband, for instance, is nearly starved." "No, really! "cried the good wife, clasping her hands. "Only fancy! My good husband starving out there! So fond as he was of a good dinner, too!" Then she added, coaxingly: "As you know him so well, perhaps you wouldn't mind doing him the charity of taking him a little somewhat to give him a treat. There are such lots of things I could easily send him." "O, dear no, not at all. I'll do it with great pleasure,"answered he. "But I'm not going back till tomorrow; and if I don't sleep here I must go on further, and then I shan't come by this way." "That's true,"replied the widow. "Ah, well, I mustn't mind what the folks say, for such an opportunity as this may never occur again. You must sleep in my bed, and I must sleep on the hearth; and in the morning I'll load a donkey with provisions for my poor dear husband." "Oh, no,"replied the pilgrim. "You shan't be disturbed in your bed; only let me sleep on the hearth, that will do for me; and as I'm an early riser I can be gone before anyone's astir, so folks won't have anything to say." So it was done, and an hour before sunrise the woman was up loading the donkey with the best of her stores. There were ham, and maccaroni, and flour, and cheese, and wine. All this she committed to the pilgrim, saying: "You'll send the donkey back, won't you?" "Of course I would send him back, He'd be no use to us out there: but I shan't get out again myself for another hundred years or so, and I fear he won't find his way back alone, for it's no easy way to find." "To be sure not; I ought to have thought of that," replied the widow. "Ah, well, so as my poor husband gets a good meal never mind the donkey." So the pretended pilgrim from the other world went his way. He hadn't gone a hundred yards before the widow called him back. "Ah, she's beginning to think better of it!" said he to himself; and he continued his way, pretending not to hear. "Good pilgrim!" shouted the widow; "I forgot one thing. Would any money be of use to my poor dear husband?" "Oh dear yes, all the use in the world," replied the pilgrim; "you can always get anything for money everywhere." "Oh, do come back then, and I'll trouble you with a hundred scudi for him." The pretended pilgrim came back willingly for the hundred scudi, and the widow counted them out to him. "There is no help for it," soliloquised he as he went his way; "I must go back to those at home. I have actually found three women each more stupid than they." So he went home to live, and complained no more of the simplicity of his wife. Source (books.google.com): Rachel Harriette Busk, The Folk-lore of Rome: Collected by Word of Mouth from the People (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1874), pp. 357-63 . Source (Internet Archive): Rachel Harriette Busk, The Folk-lore of Rome: Collected by Word of Mouth from the People (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1874), pp. 357-63 . Return to the table of contents . The Beggar from Paris England A poore man travelling from door to door a begging, being lately come from Paris, a City in France, being invited by hunger to a good simple Country Swain's doore, to aske his almes; his wife asked him what he was, and from whence he came? Quoth the fellow, from Paris. From Paradise (quoth she) then thou knowest my old John there (meaning her former husband) I, quoth the fellow, that I doe. I pray thee (quoth she) how doth he doe? Faith (quoth the fellow) poore, he hath meat and drinke enough, but wants cloathes and mony. Alas, quoth she, I am sory for it, I pray thee stay a little; and, running up into her Chamber, fetcht downe her husbands new sute of cloathes, and five shillings in mony, and gave it to the fellow, saying, I pray thee remember me to my poore John, and give him this sute of clothes, and five shillings from me, and wrapt them up in a Fardle [a bundle], which the fellow took, and away he went. Presently her husband came home, and found her very pleasant and merry, singing up and downe the house, which she seldome used to doe, and he asked her the cause. Oh, husband, quoth she, I have heard from my old John to-day, he is in Paradise, and is very well, but wants clothes and mony, but I have sent him thy best sute, and five shillings in mony. Her husband seeing she was cozened, enquired of her which way the fellow went that had them. Yonder way, quoth she. He presently took his best horse, Hob, and rode after him for the clothes. The fellow seeing one ride so fast after him, threw the clothes into a ditch, and went softly forward. Her husband overtaking the fellow, said, Didst not see one go this way with a little fardle of clothes at his back? Yes, quoth the fellow, he is newly gone into yonder little Wood. Oh, hold my horse, quoth he, whilst I runne in and finde him out. I will, quoth the fellow, who presently, as soon as he was gone into the wood, took up his fardell, leapt on horseback, and away he went. The Man returning for his horse, his horse was gone; then going home to his wife, she asked him if he overtook the fellow. I, sweet heart, quoth he, and I have lent him my best horse to ride on, for it is a great long way to Paradise. Truly, husband, quoth she, and I shall love thee the better so long as I live, for making so much of my old John. Which caused much good laughter to all that heard it. Source (books.google.com): John Ashton, Humour, Wit, & Satire of the Seventeenth Century (London: Chatto and Windus, 1883), pp. 168-69 . Source (Internet Archive): John Ashton, Humour, Wit, & Satire of the Seventeenth Century (London: Chatto and Windus, 1883), pp. 168-69 . Ashton's sources: Doctor Merry-man: or Nothing but Mirth . Written by S. R. London. Printed for Samuell Rand, and are to be sold at his Shoppe neere Holborne bridge. 1616. Pasquil's Jests with the Merriments of Mother Bunch . Wittie pleasant, and delightfull. London. Printed by I. F., and are to be sold by William Gilbertson at the signe of the Bible in Giltspur-street. [Gilbertson published between 1640 and 1663.] Return to the table of contents . Jack Hannaford England (Devonshire) There was an old soldier who had been long in the wars -- so long, that he was quite out-at-elbows, and he did not know where to go to find a living. So he walked up moors, down glens, till at last he came to a farm, from which the good man had gone away to market. The wife of the farmer was a very foolish woman. The farmer was foolish enough, too, and it is hard to say which of the two was the most foolish. When you've heard my tale you may decide. Now before the farmer goes to market says he to his wife, "Here is ten pounds all in gold. Take care of it till I come home." If the man had not been a fool he would never have given the money to his wife to keep. Well, off he went in his cart to market, and the wife said to herself, "I will keep the ten pounds quite safe from thieves." So she tied it up in a rag, and she put the rag up the parlor chimney. "There," said she. "No thieves will ever find it now; that is quite sure." Jack Hannaford, the old soldier, came and rapped at the door. "Who is there?" asked the wife. "Jack Hannaford." "Where do you come from?" "Paradise." "Lord a' mercy! And maybe you've seen my old man there," alluding to her former husband. "Yes, I have." "And how was he a-doing?" asked the goody [woman]. "But middling. He cobbles old shoes, and he has nothing but cabbage for victuals." "Deary me!" exclaimed the woman. "Didn't he send a message to me?" "Yes, he did," replied Jack Hannaford. "He said that he was out of leather, and his pockets were empty, so you were to send him a few shillings to buy a fresh stock of leather." "He shall have them, bless his poor soul!" And away went the wife to the parlor chimney, and she pulled the rag with the ten pounds in it from the chimney, and she gave the whole sum to the soldier, telling him that her old man was to use as much as he wanted, and to send back the rest. It was not long that Jack waited after receiving the money. He went off as fast as he could walk. Presently the farmer came home and asked for his money. The wife told him that she had sent it by a soldier to her former husband in paradise, to buy him leather for cobbling the shoes of the saints and angels of heaven. The farmer was very angry, and he swore that he had never met with such a fool as his wife. But the wife said that her husband was a greater fool for letting her have the money. There was no time to waste words, so the farmer mounted his horse and rode off after Jack Hannaford. The old soldier heard the horse's hoofs clattering on the road behind him, so he knew it must be the farmer pursuing him. He lay down on the ground, and shading his eyes with one hand, looked up into the sky, and pointed heavenwards with the other hand. "What are you about there?" asked the farmer pulling up. "Lord save you!" exclaimed Jack. "I've seen a rare sight! A man going straight up into the sky, as if he were walking on a road." "Can you see him still?" "Yes, I can." "Where?" "Get off your horse and lie down." "If you will hold the horse." Jack did so readily. "I cannot see him," said the farmer. "Shade your eyes with your hand, and you'll soon see a man flying away from you." Sure enough he did so, for Jack leaped on the horse, and rode away with it. The farmer walked home without his horse. "You are a bigger fool than I am," said the wife, "for I did only one foolish thing, and you have done two." Source: S. Baring-Gould, appendix to William Henderson, Notes on the Folk Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders , first edition (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866), no. 3, pp. 319-20 . This appendix is not included in the second edition of Henderson's work (1879). Return to the table of contents . The Roguish Peasant Russia Once upon a time there lived in a Russian village an old peasant woman who had two sons. One, however, died; and the other was from home, but was soon expected to return to his native village. One evening, as the peasant woman was working in her little hut, a soldier walked in at the open door. "Good day, little mother!" he said. "Can I stay here the night?" "Yes, certainly, with pleasure, little father. But whence come you, and who are you?" "I am nobody in particular, little mother. I am an emigrant for the next world." "Ah! My precious soul! One of my sons died a little while ago. Did you happen to come across him?" "Why, yes, of course! We lived in the same sphere." "No, really! You don't mean it?" "He feeds and looks after the young cranes in the next world." "Oh, my precious soul! But where did he get them?" "Where did he get them! Why, the young cranes roam about among the sweet-briar!" "How did he look? What clothes had he on?" "Clothes!" He was all in tatters, and a pair of wings." "Poor fellow! Well, I have got about forty yards of gray cloth and a ten-ruble note. Take them, good man, and give them to my son." "With pleasure, little mother." Next morning the old woman gave the soldier the cloth and the money, and wished him a safe journey back. And she also begged him to come again soon and tell her how her son was getting on. She waited and waited for many a week, but the soldier did not return. At last the day arrived when her other son was expected home. "How are you, mother mine?" he exclaimed, coming into the hut and embracing his mother. "Have you any news?" "Yes, my boy. Not very long ago an emigrant from the other world came to stay the night here, and he brought some news of your brother, for they both lived in the same sphere. But he said that the poor fellow had nothing but a pair of wings, so I gave him forty yards of cloth and ten rubles." "Good gracious, mother, you have given away everything we had. And for what? Just because that man was artful enough to tell you a lot of lies. It really is most astonishing how confiding some people are! I think I will go into the wide world and tell a lot of lies, and see whether, after cheating everybody, I become a very rich man or not. If I succeed, I shall come home again, and then we can live happily together, and have food and money in plenty ever after." Next day the son went off to try his luck. He went on and on until he came to an estate belonging to a rich Russian barin or gentleman. He walked up to the lordly mansion and saw, in a garden near the house, a large pig with a number of little ones walking about. A thought struck him, and he went down on his knees before the pigs, and began making most polite bows to them. Now the mistress of the house, who was looking out of one of the windows, saw the performance, and was greatly amused. "Go," she said to one of her maids, "and ask the mujik [peasant] what he is bowing for." The maid went up to the peasant, saying, "Little mujik, tell me why you are on your knees before the pigs, and why you are bowing to them? My lady has sent me to ask." "Tell your mistress, my little dear, that yonder pig is my wife's sister, and my son is going to be married tomorrow, so I am asking her and her young ones to come to the wedding. That is all. And she has consented, on condition that your lady allows them. So go and ask your mistress whether she will let them come with me." The girl burst out laughing, and went straight to her mistress, who also began laughing heartily when she heard all the peasant had said. "What a donkey!" she cried. "Fancy asking the pigs to his son's wedding! Well, never mind. Let all his friends have a good laugh at him. Yes, he may take the pigs. But first dress them up in my shuba (fur coat), and let the coachman get my own little carriage and team ready, so that the pigs need not go to the wedding on foot." When the carriage was ready, they dressed the pig up in the lady's fur coat, and placed it in the carriage with the young ones, and gave the reins to the peasant, who at once rode away homewards. Now the master of the house, who was away shooting at the time, returned home a few minutes after the peasant had left. His wife ran out to meet him, laughing. "I am so glad you have returned, my dear!" she said, "as I am longing to have someone to laugh with. Such a funny thing happened while you were away. A peasant came here and began kneeling and bowing before our pigs. He declared that one of them was his wife's sister, and he was asking her and the little ones to come to his son's wedding!" "Yes," the husband replied. "and did you let her go?" "Of course I did. I even had the pig dressed in my best shuba , and had her put in my own little carriage and team, and let the peasant drive it himself. I think it was nothing but right for me to do so. The peasant was so very polite to the pigs. What do you think, my dear?" "What did I think? Well this: that the peasant was an ass, and you were another!" And the good man, like the rest of his sex, thought it was a splendid opportunity for flying into a rage. He told his wife that she had been cheated, and then rushing out of the house, he flung himself upon his horse and galloped off after the peasant, who, when he heard that he was being being pursued, conveyed the carriage and team into a dark forest hard by, and then going back, took off his cap, seated himself near the entrance of the forest, put the cap beside him on the ground, and waited until the horseman came up to him. "Hark you, little father!" cried the barin , "have you seen a peasant drive this way with a carriage and team and a number of pigs in it?" "See him? I should rather think I did! He rode past a long time ago." "In which direction did he drive? How had I better go? Do you think I am likely to overtake him?" "Yes, you could overtake him, I daresay. But the way he went by has many a turning, and you are sure to lose yourself. Is the road quite unknown to you?" "Yes, little brother. I think, if you don't mind, it would be better for you to go in search of him and bring him back to me, for you seem to know the way so well!" "No, brother, I could not possibly, for I have a falcon under my cap here and must watch it." "I can do that for you." "No, you are sure to let him out, and the bird is very valuable. Besides, if I lost it my master would never forgive me." "But how much is it worth?" "Three hundred rubles, I should think." "Very well then, if I lose the bird I will pay the money." "No, brother, if you really want me to go after the peasant, you had better give me the money now, for heaven knows what might happen afterwards. You might lose the bird, and then take your departure too, and I should never see either the falcon or the money!" "Oh, you incredulous man! Here, take the three hundred rubles anyhow!" The peasant took the money, and at the barin's wish mounted his horse and rode off into the forest, leaving the barin to watch over the empty cap. He waited and waited, but the peasant did not return, which he thought looked rather queer. The sun began to set. Still no peasant. "Stop!" thought the barin . "Let me look and see whether there really is a falcon under that cap. If there is, then the peasant may possibly return. If not, well, then it is of no use waiting here and wasting my time." He peeped under the cap, but no falcon was to be seen. "Ah, the wretch! he laughed. "I do believe that he was the very same man who cheated my wife out of her carriage and team, her shuba , and the pigs." He spat on the ground three times with vexation, and returned home to his wife penitent. Meanwhile our friend the peasant had long since got safely back to his mother with all his treasures. "Well, mother mine!" he cried, "this world of ours can certainly boast of some very good-natured fools. Just look, without any reason whatever, they gave me three horses, a carriage, three hundred rubles, and a pig with her little ones. Now we can live happily for some time at least, thanks to the stupidity of these people. It really is wonderful. Source: Edith M. S. Hodgetts, Tales and Legends from the Land of the Tzar: A Collection of Russian Stories , 2nd edition (London: Griffith Farran and Company, 1891), pp. 256-61 . Hodgetts, who was born and raised in Russia, does not give a specific source for this tale. In her introduction she states, with reference to her sources, "Some of these tales were dictated in the original Russian at school, others were related to me by my nurse and other servants of my father's household, while some are translations which I have made from various collections of Russian stories current among the people." ( p. vii ) The epsisode of the trickster asking his victim to guard an alleged bird under a hat is classified as Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1528. Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Messenger from Heaven Moravia Once a journeyman came to a peasant woman and asked her for a handout. She gave him something to eat and asked where he came from. "From Paris," he answered, but the peasant woman, who was somewhat hard of hearing, understood "from paradise." "Oh," she said, "if you come from paradise then for sure you must know my blessed first husband, who was released from purgatory long ago and by now must be in heaven." The journeyman, who caught on very quickly, said, "Of course, I know him very well. But he is suffering from the severe cold, and he asked me when I go to earth to look up his wife and ask her if she wouldn't send him a pair of boots and some warm clothes." So the peasant woman put together a bundle of clothes from her second husband: boots, jacket, trousers, vest, and hat. These she gave to journeyman so he could take them to her husband in paradise. And then the journeyman disappeared with the clothes. When her husband came home, the woman told him that a little while ago a journeyman had been here, and that she had given him boots and clothes for her blessed deceased husband, for the journeyman had come directly from paradise. The man cursed about her stupidity, and asked in which direction the journeyman had left, for he intended to pursue him and take the clothes away from him. In order to make better time, he chased after him on horseback. The journeyman had gone a good way down the main road when he saw a rider in the distance. Seeing that it was a peasant, he immediately assumed that he was being pursued. Therefore he quickly threw the boots and the clothing over a garden fence, then sat down next to the road and placed his hat next to him in the grass. When the peasant reached him, he asked him if he had seen a man carrying a bundle of clothes and a pair of boots. "Yes," said the sitting man, "I met him a little while ago, and he told me where he was going. But you will never catch him, because he will see from afar that you are chasing after him. But, do you know what? If you will look after the bird that I have here under my hat, I will get on your horse and ride after him and bring the clothes back to you. He won't run away from me." The peasant was very pleased with this, and he let the rascal mount his horse, while he sat down on the ground and watched the bird. Hour after hour passed by, and the horse and rider did not return. Finally the peasant began to see the light. Cautiously he lifted up the hat to see what kind of rare bird was under it. O horror! He held his nose and quickly put the hat back over the "bird." Sadly he returned home. He arrived home on foot and without his horse and without the clothes and boots. His wife asked him where he had left the horse, and where the clothes and boots were. "Oh," said the man, "he really was a messenger from heaven. I let him keep the clothes and gave him the horse so he could return to heaven faster." Source: Marie Kosch, "Die Geschichte vom Himmelsboten," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Mähren (Kremsier: Druck und Commissionsverlag Heinrich Gusek, 1899), pp. 110-11. Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002. Moravia is in today's Czech Republic. The episode of the trickster placing his hat over a pile of dung, then tricking his victim into watching over it (very cautiously related in the above tale) is classified under Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1528. Return to the table of contents . The Era [Peasant] from the Other World Serbia A Turk and his wife halted in the shadow of a tree. The Turk went to the river to water his horse, and his wife remained to await his return. Just then an Era [peasant] passed by and saluted the Turkish woman, "Allah help you, noble lady!" "May God aid you," she returned. "Where are you coming from?" "I come from the other world, noble lady." "As you have been in the other world, have you not, perchance, seen there my son Mouyo, who died a few months ago?" "Oh, how could I help seeing him? He is my immediate neighbor." "Happy me! How is he, then?" "He is well, may God be praised! But he could stand just a little more tobacco and some more pocket money to pay for black coffee." "Are you going back again? And if so, would you be so kind as to deliver to him this purse with his parent's greetings?" The Era took the money, protesting that he would be only too glad to convey so pleasant a surprise to the youth, and hurried away. Soon the Turk came back, and his wife told him what had transpired. He perceived at once that she had been victimized and without stopping to reproach her, he mounted his horse and galloped after the Era , who, observing the pursuit, and guessing at once that the horseman was the husband of the credulous woman, made all the speed that he could. There was a mill nearby, and making for it, the Era rushed in and addressed the miller with, "For Goodness' sake, brother, fly! There is a Turkish horseman coming with drawn sword. He will kill you. I heard him say so and have hurried to warn you in time." The miller had no time to ask for particulars. He knew how cruel the Turks were, and without a word he dashed out of the mill and fled up the adjacent rocks. Meantime the Era placed the miller's hat upon his own head and sprinkled flour copiously over his clothes, that he might look like a miller. No sooner was this done than the Turk came up. Alighting from his horse, he rushed into the mill and hurriedly asked the Era where he had hidden the thief. The Era pointed indifferently to the fleeing miller on the rock, whereupon the Turk requested him to take care of his horse while he ran and caught the swindler. When the Turk had gone some distance up the hill, our Era brushed his clothes, swiftly mounted the horse, and galloped away. The Turk caught the real miller, and demanded, "Where is the money you took from my wife, swindler?" The poor miller made the sign of the cross and said, "God forbid! I never saw your noble lady, still less did I take her money." After about half an hour of futile discussion, the Turk was convinced of the miller's innocence, and returned to where he had left his horse. But lo! There was no sign of a horse! He walked sadly back to his wife, and she, seeing that her husband had no horse, asked in surprise, "Where did you go, and what became of your horse?" The Turk replied, "You sent money to our darling son; so I thought I had better send him the horse that he need not go on foot in the other world!" Source: Woislav M. Petrovitch, Hero Tales and Legends of the Serbians (London: George G. Harrap and Company, first published 1914, reprinted 1916 and 1921), pp. 364-66 . The trickster in this tale is identified as an Era , a name given to the peasants of the district of Ouzitze in western Serbia. They, according to Petrovitch, "are supposed to be very witty and shrewd, and might be called the Irishmen of Serbia." Return to the table of contents . The Good Wife and the Bad Husband India In a remote village there lived a man and his wife, who was a stupid little woman and believed everything that was told her. Whenever people wanted anything from her they used to come and flatter her; but this had to be done in the absence of her husband, because he was a very miserly man, and would never part with any of his money, for all he was exceedingly rich. Nevertheless, without his knowledge cunning beggars would now and then come to his wife and beg of her, and they used generally to succeed, as she was so amenable to flattery. But whenever her husband found her out he would come down heavily upon her, sometimes with words and sometimes with blows. Thus quarrels arose, until at last, for the sake of peace, the wife had to give up her charitable propensities. Now there lived in the village a rogue of the first water, who had many a time witnessed what took place in the rich miser's family. Wishing to revive his old habit of getting what he wanted from the miser's wife he watched his opportunity and one day, when the miser had gone out on horseback to inspect his land, he came to his wife in the middle of the day and fell down at the threshold as if overcome by exhaustion. She ran up to him at once and asked him who he was. "I am a native of Kailâsa," said he, "sent down by an old couple living there, for news of their son and his wife." "Who are those fortunate dwellers on Shiva's mountain?" said she. On this the rogue gave the names of her husband's deceased parents, which he had taken good care, of course, to learn from the neighbors. "Do you really come from them?" said she. "Are they doing well there? Dear old people. How glad my husband would be to see you, were he here! Sit down please, and take rest awhile until he returns. How do they live there? Have they enough to eat and to dress themselves?" These and a thousand other questions she put to the rogue, who, for his part, wanted to get away as quick as possible, as he knew full well how he would be treated if the miser should return while he was there, so he said, "Mother, language has no words to describe the miseries they are undergoing in the other world. They have not a rag to cover themselves, and for the last six days they have eaten nothing, and have lived on water only. It would break your heart to see them." The rogue's pathetic words fully deceived the good woman, who firmly believed that he had come down from Kailâsa, sent by the old couple to her. "Why should they suffer so?" said she, "when their son has plenty to eat and to dress himself, and when their daughter-in-law wears all sorts of costly ornaments?" With that she went into the house and came out with two boxes containing all the clothes of herself and her husband, and gave the whole lot to the rogue, with instructions to take them to her poor old people in Kailâsa. She also gave him her jewel box for her mother-in-law. "But dress and jewels will not fill their hungry stomachs," said he. Requesting him to wait a little, the silly woman brought out her husband's cash chest and emptied the contents into the rogue's coat, who now went off in haste, promising to give everything to the good people in Kailâsa. Our good lady in accordance with etiquette, conducted him a few hundred yards along the road and sent news of herself through him to her relatives, and then returned home. The rogue now tied up all his booty in his coat and ran in haste towards the river and crossed over it. No sooner had our heroine reached home than her husband returned after his inspection of his lands. Her pleasure at what she had done was so great, that she met him at the door and told him all about the arrival of the messenger from Kailâsa, and how she had sent clothes, and jewels, and money through him to her husband's parents. The anger of her husband knew no bounds. But he checked himself for a while, and asked her which road the messenger from Kailâsa had taken, as he said he wanted to follow him and send some more news to his parents. To this she willingly agreed and pointed out the direction the rogue had gone. With rage in his heart at the trick played upon his stupid wife, our hero rode on in hot haste, and after a ride of two ghatikâs he caught sight of the departing rogue, who, finding escape hopeless, climbed up into a big pîpal tree. Our hero soon reached the bottom of the tree and shouted to the rogue to come down. "No, I cannot, this is the way to Kailâsa," said the rogue, and climbed up on the top of the tree. Seeing no chance of the rogue's coming down, and as there was no third person present to whom he could call for help, our hero tied his horse to an adjacent tree and began climbing up the pîpal tree himself. The rogue thanked all his gods when he saw this, and waited until his enemy had climbed nearly up to him, and then, throwing down his bundle of booty, leapt quickly from branch to branch until he reached the bottom. He then got upon his enemy's horse, and with his bundle rode into a dense forest in which no one was likely to find him. Our hero being much older in years was no match for the rogue. So he slowly came down, and cursing his stupidity in having risked his horse to recover his property, returned home at his leisure. His wife, who was waiting his arrival, welcomed him with a cheerful countenance and said, "I thought as much, you have sent away your horse to Kailâsa to be used by your father." Vexed as he was at his wife's words, our hero replied in the affirmative to conceal his own stupidity. Thus, some there are in this world, who, though they may not willingly give away anything, pretend to have done so when, by accident, or stupidity, they happen to lose it. Source: Mrs. Howard Kingscote and Pandit Natêsá Sástrî, Tales of the Sun; or, Folklore of Southern India (London: W. H. Allen and Company, 1890), no. 12, pp. 135-39 . Mount Kailash (spelled here Kailâsa ), a peak in Tibet, is the abode of Shiva, one of the most important deities of Hinduism. The mountain is also a holy site in Jainism and Buddhism. Return to the table of contents . The Story of a Man Who Had a Stupid Wife Morocco One day a man came home and said to his wife: "Here is some semolina. You should prepare couscous for Ramadan which is coming." She set to work, and when she had prepared everything she heard a noise behind her house. It was a thief. She went out, saw him, and asked him: "What is your name?" He replied: "Ramadan." Then she said to herself: "He is coming to get my provisions. She gave him all the couscous that she had prepared. When her husband returned, she said to him: "Ramadan has come, and I gave him all of the couscous. "What? Ramadan? Ramadan does not begin for two months." Finally, he understood that she had given everything to a man who went by that name. Then he became furious and swore not to return home unless he could find a woman even more foolish than his wife. And he left. He came to another country and saw a woman who said to him: "Where do you come from?" He replied: "From the other world." Then the woman said to him: "Didn't you see my son there and couldn't you give me some news about him?" He replied: Yes, but he is completely naked, and he lacks a coat and money." Then the stupid woman went home, took a new coat, some money, and gave everything to the man, asking him to offer a thousand greetings to her son in the other world. The man left immediately and headed back where he came from. When this woman's husband returned home, she told him that she had received news from the other world, and that she had sent her son a coat and money. Her husband became violently angry, mounted his horse, and set off in pursuit of the man. The latter, seeing a horseman galloping on the road, immediately understood what was happening. He stepped into a a field of ripe beans, hid his package and began to pick the beans. The husband came up to him and called out: "You, farmer, have you seen a man passing by who was wearing a coat like this one?" The man replied: "Yes, he passed here, but he was walking very fast. Take this side road, and you will catch up with him, but don't continue on horseback, because he will hear the sound of the hooves and hide." The husband, who took him for the owner of the field, entrusted him with his horse and took the side road. Then the man mounted the horse and returned quickly to his own home. When he arrived he said to his wife: "I am coming back to you, because I have found a woman even more foolish than you." As for the other woman's husband: He took the side road in vain, and he did not find the man he was pursuing. He returned to the bean field, but he found neither his horse nor the one he believed to be the owner of the field. Ashamed, he returned home, and said to his wife: "Woman, you were right. We can come back from the other world. I found the man from there who had given you news of our son. To help him return more quickly to our son, I gave him my horse as well." (Told by Si El-Hasen, Mou'eddin of Sidi Abd el-Aziz.) Source (books.google.com): Fran&ccedilleoise Légey, "Histoire de l'homme qui avait une femme sotte," Contes et légendes populaires du Maroc, recueillis à Marrakech (Paris: Éditions Ernest Leroux, 1926), no. 35, pp. 155-56 . This story combines the following folktale types: Type 1541: "For the Long Winter." Type 1384: "Seeking Someone as Foolish as One's Wife." Type 1540: "The Man from Paradise." Return to the table of contents . My Son Ali Armenian-American Once upon a time there was a girl whose name was Fatima, who lived with her mother and brother, for her father was dead. Not far from the house there flowed a river. Twice each day, early in the morning and at evening, Fatima took a large copper vessel, and went to the river to bring fresh drinking-water to the house. Early one beautiful morning she went as usual to bring her kettle of fresh water. She sat down under a great mulberry-tree which overhung the river. It was full of ripe fruit which hung far above her head. As she sat there enjoying the beautiful early morning and looking up into the tree laden with fine fruit which she, being a girl, could not reach, since she could not climb the tree, she fell a-thinking. She thought how some day perhaps she would be married and perhaps would have a little son and his name would be Ali, and after a time he would grow to be eight years old, and that then he could go to the river to bring fresh water in the morning. Then she thought how, when Ali had come to the mulberry-tree, he would climb up into the tree to pluck the delicious berries, and how at last the poor little boy would fall from the tree into the river and be drowned. Then Fatima sprang up crying, "Oh! Ali! Ali! My son! My son Ali!" And she ran home crying aloud, "My son Ali, my son Ali is dead!" As she ran along the street the people came out calling to her and asking what was the matter. She did not stop, but ran on crying, "Ali! Ali! My son Ali! My son Ali is dead!" until she reached her own home. Her mother, seeing the water vessel empty, and hearing her daughter crying aloud, said, "What is the matter? Why are you weeping? Why have you brought no fresh water this morning?" Then the girl told her mother how she had sat under the mulberry- tree, and had thought that perhaps some day she would be married and would have a little son and his name would be Ali, and when he had come to be eight years old he would go to draw the water for the family, and he would see the ripe mulberries hanging from the tree and would climb the tree to gather them, and he would fall into the river and be drowned. And again she burst out, "Oh! Ali! My son Ali! My son Ali is dead!" Then the mother also burst out crying, and the two sat there all day lamenting and weeping over the poor, drowned Ali. Late in the afternoon there came to the door begging bread a Chingana woman (gypsy). When she heard the great outcry and saw the two women weeping she asked, "What is the matter?" The mother told her the story, how her daughter had gone to draw water from the river, had sat down under the mulberry-tree, and all that she had imagined, how she came home crying, and how ever since they had been grieving over the lost Ali. The gypsy said, "I can tell you about your son, for you know my people can not only read the past and the future, but can see into the other world and tell what is going on there." "Oh," cried Fatima, springing up. "Can you give me some word of my son? Where is he? How is he? Is he happy? Is he well? How old is he?" And she stopped crying, and danced, laughing, about the room in expectation of hearing about her dear lost Ali. Then the cunning old Chingana said, "I see your son. He is now about twelve years old. He is not well. He is very poor and hungry. If anyone should give him one piece of bread, he would be so glad that he would jump ten times for joy. He is lying down, faint and weak, wanting food; but if you will give me food I will carry it to him, and soon he will be well and strong." Then the mother and daughter made themselves very busy preparing food to send by the Chingana woman to little Ali. Fatima hurried out to the shop to buy nuts and fruit. The mother brought some saddlebags, which they packed with bread and all kinds of delicacies. They also put in clothes that they thought a twelve-year-old boy could wear. By the time that all was ready the saddle-bags were so heavy that the Chingana said she could not carry them. She was very cunning, and as she had entered the house she had seen a fine horse standing in its stall at the side of the house. This horse belonged to Fatima's brother. The old woman said, "Have you not a horse that you could lend me to ride upon to carry the saddlebags to your Ali, for he is suffering, and I should hasten to bear your presents to him." "Yes, yes," cried Fatima and her mother. "We have a horse," and they hurried to lead forth the horse to the front of the house. The saddlebags were placed on the horse, and the old woman mounted and rode away. Not long after she left, Fatima's brother came home from his work. As he approached the house he heard great crying, for the women had again begun to weep after the departure of the Chingana. The brother heard his sister crying, "Ali! Ali! My son Ali is dead!" He came in, saying, "What is the matter? Where is my horse? Why are you crying like this?" Then Fatima and her mother together told him the sad story, how his sister had gone to the river to draw water, how she had sat under the tree and all she had imagined, and how she had come home crying, and how they were grieving over the poor drowned Ali. But he said, "Where is my horse? Tell me, where is my horse?" Then they told him of the visit of the Chingana, and how they had sent food to Ali, whom she had seen suffering. The brother said, "Tell me quick! Which way did she go?" and he scolded his sister for crying and being so foolish. They pointed out the direction taken by the gypsy woman, and the brother ran on at full speed. In about half an hour he came to a mill. He stopped here, thinking that the miller might give him information about the Chingana woman, who, he felt sure, meant to steal his horse. Now when the Chingana had reached the mill, fearing she might be overtaken, she had stopped and asked the miller to change clothes with her, and to conceal the horse in his stable. The miller was not a very wise man, and consented to do as the Chingana asked; so when Fatima's brother came to him, the miller was wearing the dress of the old woman as he worked at grinding the corn. The brother quickly spied the horse in a stall underneath the house, and as he talked with the miller, questioning him about the Chingana woman, he said, "Why, you are wearing the dress my sister described. You must have on the clothes of the gypsy." Just then, lifting his eyes, he saw in a tall tree above him a man looking down. This was the Chingana woman, for after putting on the clothes of the miller she had climbed the tree, hoping to conceal herself in the branches. The brother then told the miller he must confess the whole truth, for he felt sure that he knew all about the thief. After some urging, the miller told him how the Chingana woman had come to him, and asked him to change clothes and to conceal the horse. This he had done, meaning no harm. He then led out the horse, which the brother took possession of, but this did not satisfy him. He said the Chingana woman must go to prison. He bade the woman come down from the tree, but she refused to do this until officers came and commanded her to descend. She was then led away to prison. The brother mounted his horse and returned home. When he reached home the women were still crying. He said to Fatima, "Are you not ashamed to sit here crying and talking of your lost son Ali? You have no son; you are a young girl. You should be ashamed to be so foolish, and to cry aloud about your son Ali." His words had no effect upon Fatima, who continued to weep and cry aloud. At last the brother drove her out of the house, saying, "You shall not longer live in my house, you foolish girl, who sit crying about your son Ali." Fatima, weeping, went away to one of the neighbors, with whom she stayed two days. Then she came back, begging her brother's forgiveness, asking to be allowed to come back to her home, and promising that she would be quiet and gentle as before. She said, "I am sorry that I was so foolish. I did not know what I was about. I hope you will forgive me." This he did, and they lived in peace forever after. I see a small basket coming down from heaven. In it there are twelve pomegranates, five for me, one for you, Josephine, one for you, Pailoun, one for you, Arousyak, one for you, Diran, one for you, Augustina, one for you, Naomi, and one for you, George. Source (books.google.com): Fanny D. Bergen, "Borrowing Trouble," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 11, no. 40 (January - March 1898), pp. 56-59 . Source (JSTOR): Fanny D. Bergen, "Borrowing Trouble," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 11, no. 40 (January - March 1898), pp. 56-59 . Bergen's source: "I took down from the verbal narration of a young Armenian woman a folk-tale called "My Son Ali," with which she had been familiar from her childhood." Return to the table of contents . Anansi Seeks His Fortune Jamaica Anansi was very poor and he went out to seek his fortune, but he had no intention of working. He clad himself in a white gown. And he met a woman. She said to him, "Who are you, sah? an' whe' you from?" -- "I am jus' from heaven." The woman said, "Did you see my husban' dere?" He said, "Well, my dear woman, heaven is a large place; you will have to tell me his name, for perhaps I never met him." She said his name was James Thomas. Anansi said, "Oh, he is a good friend of mine! I know him well. He is a big boss up there and he's carrying a gang. But one trouble, he has no Sunday clo'es." The woman ran away and got what money she could together and gave it to Anansi to take to her husband. But he wasn't satisfied with that amount; he wanted some more. He went on a little further and saw a man giving a woman some money and telling her to put it up for "rainy day." After the man had left, Anansi went up to the woman and told her he was "Mr. Rainy Day." She said, "Well, it's you, sah? My husband been putting up money for you for ten years now. He has quite a bag of it, and I'm so afraid of robbers I'm glad you come!" So Anansi took the money and returned home and lived contentedly for the rest of his days. Source (Internet Archive): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 133, p. 163 . Source (Sacred Texts): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 133, p. 163 . Beckwith's informant: Stanley Jones, Claremont, St. Ann. Return to the table of contents . Shaikh Chilli and the Fakir India One day Shaikh Chilli was very sick and he vowed that if he got well he would feed a fakir. When he recovered he went out and meeting a fakir he said: "Will you kindly eat at my house today?" The fakir agreed and when the Shaikh asked him what he would eat, he said he would like an ounce of mung pulse. Shaikh Chilli went back to his wife and said: "A fakir will eat here today. Cook an ounce of mung pulse and you can give it to him. I perhaps shall not be home as I am going to the mosque to pray." She cooked the food and gave it to the fakir and then she asked: "Do you ever go to Khuda? If so perhaps you can tell me how my parents are getting on." "I go every day to Khuda," he replied, "and see your parents. They are miserable and get only bones to chow; but the parents of your husband get plenty of pulao. " So she gave him five hundred rupees and said: "Please take this money to my parents and let them get better food in future." When the Shaikh came back his wife said: "It is very hard that my parents should have to chew bones while yours get plenty of pulao. " When the Shaikh heard this he got on his horse and pursued the fakir. When the fakir saw him he climbed up a tree. The Shaikh climbed after him: and shouted: "Where is my money, you rascal?" The fakir went out along the branch and the Shaikh followed him. When he came over the place where the horse was tied the fakir jumped on it and rode away. When he came back his wife said: "Where is the horse?" "When I heard," said he "that my parents had such high rank in heaven, I thought it only proper that they should have a horse to ride there. So I sent them mine." (Told by Muhammad Halim and recorded by M. Ram Sahay of Lucknow.) Source (books.google.com): North Indian Notes and Queries , vol. 5, no. 12 (March 1896), p. 209 . Source (Internet Archive): North Indian Notes and Queries , vol. 5, no. 12 (March 1896), p. 209 . Return to the table of contents . Shaikh Chilli and the Fakir India One day Shaikh Chilli was very sick and he vowed that if he got well he would feed a fakir. When he recovered he went out and meeting a fakir he said: "Will you kindly eat at my house today?" The fakir agreed and when the Shaikh asked him what he would eat, he said he would like an ounce of mung pulse. Shaikh Chilli went back to his wife and said: "A fakir will eat here today. Cook an ounce of mung pulse and you can give it to him. I perhaps shall not be home as I am going to the mosque to pray." She cooked the food and gave it to the fakir and then she asked: "Do you ever go to Khuda? If so perhaps you can tell me how my parents are getting on." "I go every day to Khuda," he replied, "and see your parents. They are miserable and get only bones to chow; but the parents of your husband get plenty of pulao. " So she gave him five hundred rupees and said: "Please take this money to my parents and let them get better food in future." When the Shaikh came back his wife said: "It is very hard that my parents should have to chew bones while yours get plenty of pulao. " When the Shaikh heard this he got on his horse and pursued the fakir. When the fakir saw him he climbed up a tree. The Shaikh climbed after him: and shouted: "Where is my money, you rascal?" The fakir went out along the branch and the Shaikh followed him. When he came over the place where the horse was tied the fakir jumped on it and rode away. When he came back his wife said: "Where is the horse?" "When I heard," said he "that my parents had such high rank in heaven, I thought it only proper that they should have a horse to ride there. So I sent them mine." (Told by Muhammad Halim and recorded by M. Ram Sahay of Lucknow.) Source (books.google.com): North Indian Notes and Queries , vol. 5, no. 12 (March 1896), p. 209 . Source (Internet Archive): North Indian Notes and Queries , vol. 5, no. 12 (March 1896), p. 209 . Return to the table of contents . The Millet Trader Sri Lanka A millet trader, traveling from village to village, came to a house where a woman was weeping and weeping. "I have been to the other world and back," he said, to emphasize the length and difficulty of his journey. Then he added, "Why are you crying?" "My daughter died six days ago," said the woman. "My Latti is now in the other world. Did you meet her there?" The millet trader said, "Don't cry, mother. I did meet her there. She is now in the other world, and I am to marry that very Latti. In fact, I have come for Latti's necklaces and bracelets. She sent me for them." The woman quickly arose and cooked an abundant meal for the trader. "Mother," he said, "I must go immediately. Where is my father-in-law?" "He is plowing," she said. "Wait until he comes." "I cannot," he said. "Our wedding feast is tomorrow. I must be off now to go to the wedding." So the woman gave the trader her daughter's gold and silver necklaces and bracelets. These he took, along with his bundles of millet, and went away. When the woman's husband returned from plowing, he found her laughing. "What are you laughing at?" he asked. The woman replied, "Why shouldn't I laugh? Our son-in-law came." "What son-in-law?" the man asked. The woman said over and over again, "Latti's man came. Latti's man came. Our son-in-law, to whom our daughter is given in the other world. It is true." The man asked, "Can anyone in the other world come to this world? Did you cook for him and feed him?" The woman replied, "Of course I cooked for him and fed him! And he said that Latti had told him to fetch her necklaces and bracelets for her. So I gave them to him as well." Then the man said, "Where is our horse, and which way did the man go?" Mounting his horse he went to seek the millet trader. The trader, walking along in a rice field, looked back and saw a man approaching on horseback. He said, "That man is coming to seize me." The trader climbed into a nearby tree. The man tied his horse to a root of the tree and then climbed into the tree to catch the trader. But the trader dropped from the end of a branch, cut the horse's tether, placed his millet bundles and other goods on the horse, mounted it, and rode off. The man descended slowly from the tree and called out to the fleeing trader, "Tell Latti that your mother-in-law gave you a few things for her arms and neck, but that your father-in-law gave you a horse." Having returned home, he said to the woman, "It is true. He really is Latti's man. I gave him the horse, so he would not have to go on foot." The woman said, "Isn't it so indeed! I told you so." Then the millet trader returned to his own village, where he remained. Source: Henry Parker, Village Folk-Tales of Ceylon , vol. 1 (London: Luzac and Company, 1910), no. 6, pp. 72-78 . This tale is from the northwestern part of Sri Lanka. Retold by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002. Parker's translation follows his Sinhalese sources so closely that English syntax is violated in almost every sentence. I have cautiously attempted to bring his narrative a little closer to idiomatic English. Further, I have included only one episode, although the full story relates several of the rogue trader's tricks. Return to the table of contents . Elova Gohin Melova Ava Sri Lanka In the legendary ages of this island, a set of people called gamaralas, "village esquires," are said to have existed in different parts of the country. Their position and circumstances, if I understand rightly, were similar to those of the farmers who lived in England in the last century. But some of the gamaralas were conspicuous for their extreme stupidity. The following story will show how foolish a wife of one of these gamaralas was on one occasion. I heard the story related by an old woman, one of a class frequenting the houses of rich natives for gossip and a free meal. In order to render the story intelligible, it is necessary that I should explain the phrase which heads this paper. It is a common phrase among the Sinhalese, and is well understood by them. It literally means that one has gone to that world and returned to this world. " Elova, " "that world," means the next world, or the place whither the dead go; and " melova, " "this world," signifies the earth, where mankind dwell. The phrase is used in reference to one who, having been at the point of death, recovered unexpectedly. It appears, however, that there are some extremely ignorant people, who understand the phrase literally, and think that the person in reference to whom it is used has actually gone to a world which is beyond the grave, and has come back to this world. After this explanation, I shall proceed to narrate the story: There was once a gamarala in whose absence a beggar, who was very lean, weak, and worn-out by sickness, came to his house. The gamarala's wife wondered how he could be so disfigured, and said to him, "Dear me! What has happened to you?" The man replied, " Mama noboda elova gohin melova ava vada. " -- "Having lately gone to the other world I have come to this world," or in plain language, "I almost died and recovered." The woman understood the words literally, and thought within herself that the man went lately to the land of the departed souls, and then returned to this world. She was wonderstruck, and she listened to him with very great attention, with her mouth wide open and her eyes intently fixed upon him. She then very tenderly addressed him and said to him, "As you have come from the other world, you must have seen our daughter Kaluhami, who died and went to elova a few days ago. Pray tell me how she is." The man at once understood the woman's mistake and shrewdly answered, "Madam! She is my wife, and lives with me at present, and she has sent me to you for her geranam malla. " This is a bag in which young women in those times kept all that they considered valuable of their private property. The woman, believing the beggar to be her son-in-law, asked him very kindly to sit down and wait a few minutes, as the gamarala was expected to return by that time; but the man said that he could not prolong his stay as his wife, Kaluhami, would be impatiently waiting for his return. So saying, he requested her to give him the geranam malla. The woman placed before her supposed son-in-law a sumptuous breakfast, which he finished hastily, saying that he was anxious to get away without any loss of time. The woman then delivered to him the geranam malla, together with all the jewelry and such other articles that had been intended as presents to Kaluhami on her wedding day. The beggar, leaving the house with the valuables, was returning to his village as fast as he could, knowing that on the gamarala's return the woman would tell him all that had transpired at his house in his absence, and that he would then be irritated and would follow him for the purpose of arresting him and getting back the property. It was not long before his worst fears were realized. He saw the gamarala riding furiously after him calling out, "Stop you rogue! Stop scoundrel!" The cunning beggar ran up at once to a large tree that stood by the road-side and climbed it. The gamarala rode up to the spot and dismounting from the horse tied it to the tree and climbed it with great difficulty, whereupon the beggar hastily descended to the ground by means of a branch extending towards the opposite direction, and untying the horse and mounting on it galloped away as fast as he could. The gamarala then came down from the tree, and, seeing the man at such a distance that it was quite beyond his power to overtake him, called out to him and said, "My son-in-law, tell our daughter that the geranam malla and jewels are from her mother, and that the horse is from me." Source (books.google.com): C. Alwis, The Orientalist , vol. 1, part 3 (March 1884), pp. 62-63 . Return to the table of contents . Revised January 11, 2024. The Parrot That Talked Too Much The Parrot That Talked Too Much folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 237 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2022 Contents Of the Woman Who Stole Her Husband's Eel (France). The Magpie and the Eel (Germany, Hans Sachs). The Innkeeper and the Magpie (Germany / France, Hans Sachs). The Shamed Master Baker (Germany). The Parrot (Germany). "Bread in the Cupboard" (Denmark). The Mayor Buys Peat (Poland). The Parrot and the Servant Girl (Poland). The Parrot (England). In the following tales the parrot is guilty, not of talking too much, but of other infractions. The Parrot and the Oilman (Iran). Count Fiesco's Parrot (Italy). Links to related stories: Tales of types 243A and 1422 . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Of the Woman Who Stole Her Husband's Eel France There was a woman who had a magpie in a cage, and it would tell tales about what it saw people do. It happened that the husband kept a large eel in a little pond in his garden, with the intention of feeding it to friends when they came to visit him. However, once when the husband was out the wife said to her maid: "Let us eat the large eel, and we will tell my husband that the otter ate it." When the husband came home the magpie told him how the wife had eaten the eel. He went to the pond, but could not find the eel. He then asked his wife what had become of the eel. She tried to make an excuse for herself, but he said, "Don't make excuses, because I know that you have eaten it, for the magpie told me so." Then he scolded his wife severely for eating the eel. After the husband left the wife and her maid went to the magpie and plucked out all the feathers on its head, saying, "This is for telling on us about the eel." Thus the poor magpie had its head-feathers plucked out. From that time forth whenever the magie saw a bald man, or a woman with a high forehead, it would say: "You must have told about the eel." Source (books.google.com): Geoffroy IV de la Tour Landry, The Book of the Knight of La Tour-Landry , edited by Thomas Wright (London: Published for the Early English Text Society by Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner and Company, 1868), ch. 16, p. 22 . Source (Internet Archive): Geoffroy IV de la Tour Landry, The Book of the Knight of La Tour-Landry , edited by Thomas Wright (London: Published for the Early English Text Society by Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner and Company, 1868), p. 22 . English modernized by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. The Book of the Knight of La Tour-Landry (French title: Livre pour l'enseignement de ses filles du Chevalier de La Tour Landry ) was written between 1371 and 1372. It was translated into English by William Caxton in 1483. Return to the table of contents . The Magpie and the Eel Germany (Hans Sachs) [August 4, 1558] In Meissen happened on a time The story of this simple rhyme: A fine, fat eel one day was caught, And to a noble's castle brought. This high-born Epicurean sought For dainty things. Well pleased was he, Extending hospitality To friends who came to sup or dine With him on tidbits and choice wine. So he was greatly charmed to feel He had this marvel of an eel To make a feast that would not fail His choice companions to regale. For safety, in a box he stored His prize till it might grace his board; But first he showed his wife how fine The eel on which they were to dine When he returned from woodland ways With princely friends in a few days. When he, according to his wont, With noble friends had gone to hunt, His young wife, tempted, came to feel Insatiate craving for the eel, Which yet she did not dare to steal; Her courage was not quite enough; For her good spouse was sometimes rough; And well she knew he would not choose His feast upon the eel to lose. She had a gossip much more bold, The steward's wife, to whom she told Her longing; and that comrade bade Her lady let her heart be glad, For she would find an easy way To make excuse, and they could say An otter ate the eel, or that A beaver found the eel was fat: So did these women thus agree To cook the eel to nicety; Then ate the dainty greedily, Enjoying the delicious dish, For which the lady had such wish. From hunting, to his castle, came Its lord, his bags well filled with game. When boots and spurs were laid aside He stood by the hall-window wide, In which his pet, a magpie, swung, Her cage upon an antler hung. "Well, magpie," quoth the castle-lord, "What news, my bird, while I abroad Have been a-hunting?" This the bird Answered at once, "Oh, have you heard How mistress made a merry meal, Enjoying much the big fat eel, She and the steward's wife? The two Have made a fairy tale for you. " He doubted this; but when he knew The eel was gone he thought it true. Then to his wife he said, "My dear, Where is the eel that I left here?" She said, "Indeed I do not know How, from the box, thy eel could go: An otter, or a beaver, may Perchance have stolen it away." "Thou wast the otter, and 'tis true The steward's wife was beaver, too; These are the water-beasts that took My eel. Thou hast a guilty look!" Her lord exclaimed in waking ire, Her falsehood rousing anger's fire. The wife, with temper, tossed her head, And, full of scorn, indignant, said, How dar'st thou say such thing? O fie! Thou know'st the charge is stupid lie." Now, angered more, he slapped her cheek: "Thou huzzy! thou so dar'st to speak!" She, white with rage, caught in her clutch His beard, and pulled; it hurt him much; He seized her hair; then, blow on blow, They fought, and bruised each other so She loudly screamed, he roughly swore, As now they rolled upon the floor Until the servants came, and they, In shocking plight, were pulled away. Again a-hunting rode the lord; And, while her husband was abroad, The wife and gossip met once more, And talked the dreadful story o'er: "Who told of us?" the lady cried; "When I the fault at once denied He said that it was you and I." Quoth then the gossip "'Twas the pie; None other could have been the spy: She ever blabs to him each thing, Stories of every happening." "Oh!" cried the lady, "none but she Our feasting on the eel could see; She is the traitor, and must pay Treason's full price without delay." The gossip held the magpie's head; The lady plucked it while she said, -- As, one by one, she pulled and tore Each feather that the magpie wore Out of its head till it was bare -- "So! will you blab of eels? I swear You shall remember me, you spy, With a bald head, until you die! Now blab again of eels!" At last Into her cage the bird was cast With head quite bald; and, drooping there, Was heard to mutter, and to swear Never to blab. But when her eye A priest, or bald man, chanced to spy, In hoarse, rough voice, was heard her cry, "Oh, you and I are pretty pair! I lost my feathers, you your hair, By blabbing; so two fools are we: You babbled of an eel, like me. A blabber by his head one knows, For a bald head a babbler shows." Moral Tell not all things that you may see, Is this tale's wise morality; Blabbing may end in painful woe: The magpie lost her feathers though She merely gave an answer true; Such luck may chance to me, or you. Truth is a medicine so strong It often does not good, but wrong; It is not safe to give it pure, For it may kill instead of cure; And one may pinch his hand before He quite can close an open door. Of married folk, remember this, Though they may quarrel, they will kiss And make it up, while he who takes The part of either, often makes An enemy of both, and so Presents a very foolish show. Who chops for others finds his axe May cut himself, remarks Hans Sachs. Source (books.google.com): Hans Sachs, Merry Tales and Three Shrovetide Plays , translated by William Leighton (London: David Nutt, 1910), pp. 62-66 . Source (Internet Archive): Hans Sachs, Merry Tales and Three Shrovetide Plays , translated by William Leighton (London: David Nutt, 1910), pp. 62-66 . Links to the original German: Books.google.com: Hans Sachs, "Die edel fraw mit dem al," Sämtliche Fabeln und Schwänke von Hans Sachs , edited by Edmund Goetze, vol. 2 (Halle a. S.: Max Niemeyer, 1894), no. 214, pp. 46-49 . Internet Archive: Hans Sachs, "Die edel fraw mit dem al," Sämtliche Fabeln und Schwänke von Hans Sachs , edited by Edmund Goetze, vol. 2 (Halle a. S.: Max Niemeyer, 1894), no. 214, pp. 46-49 . Return to the table of contents . The Innkeeper and the Magpie Germany / France An innkeeper in Metz had a magpie. He taught it to call out: "Wine costs four. Wine costs four." However, wine became more expensive, so then he taught it to call out: "Wine costs six. Wine costs six." One market day the magpie forgot to call out: "Wine costs six," and returned instead to its old song: "Wine costs four. Wine costs four." Many people came inside thinking that the wine there was a very good buy. When the innkeeper wrote out their bills for six, everyone became angry and refused to pay more than what the magpie had called out. The innkeeper grabbed the magpie and threw it out onto the street, where it fell into the muck. It was just pulling itself from the mess when a filthy sow came walking by. The magpie said: "Oh, you poor sow, did you too call out the wine for four?" Source (books.google.com): Johannes Pauli, Schimpff und Ernst (1597), p. 89 . Return to the table of contents . The Shamed Master Baker Germany A baker baked two kinds of bread loaves: large ones and small ones. He gave the large ones to the people who always bought from him, and the small ones to the others. One day the authorities came to him and wanted to weigh his goods. He gave them the large loaves to be weighed, and the authorities found everything in order. Now the baker had a talking bird hanging in its cage, and the bird said to the authorities that there were other loaves of bread in the small closet, and that these too should be weighed. The authorities found the small loaves of bread, weighed them, and found them too light. Thus the baker had to pay a five-thaler fine. He got angry, seized the bird's cage, and threw it into the muck in front of the house. The pigs had been rolling in the mud all day, and when they came home that evening, the bird called out to them from the muck: "You pigs are filthy! Tell me, did you too tell the truth about our master's dishonesty? Did he throw you into the muck?" When the master baker heard this he was ashamed. He picked up the bird's cage and hung back it in its normal place. And he never again cheated his customers, as he had done before. Source (books.google.com): Heinrich Pröhle, "Der beschämte Bäckermeister," Märchen für die Jugend (Halle: Verlag der Buchhandlung des Waisenhauses, 1854), no. 53, p. 189 . Source (Internet Archive): Heinrich Pröhle, "Der beschämte Bäckermeister," Märchen für die Jugend (Halle: Verlag der Buchhandlung des Waisenhauses, 1854), no. 53, p. 189 . Return to the table of contents . The Parrot Germany A baker had a parrot that was very clever and could speak quite clearly. The baker was not always honest, for he baked two kinds of bread: one sort was full weight and was marked with his name, but the other sort was too light and bore no sign of his name. If someone came back with a loaf and complained that it was too light, the baker responded by saying: "This is not from my bread. My loaves are marked with my name and have full weight. For all I care, you can have your loaf weighed." One day a man who had been cheated with a bread that was too light came to the baker, and he brought a dragoon with him. The baker didn't admit that anything was wrong. They weighed all the loaves that could be found, and all were of the correct weight. They could not bring any charges against the baker. Then the parrot spoke up, calling out several times in a row: "The light bread is in the cellar!" The dragoon understood the situation and went into the cellar where he found about a hundred loaves of bread. None of them were marked with a name, and all of them were too light. This, of course, made the baker very angry. He was infuriated against the poor rascal, the parrot, who until now had been his darling. He took it out of the cage and fiercely beat it. Then, thinking the parrot was dead, he threw it out of the house. It was gently raining outside, and the parrot recovered. It sat up again, shook itself, and was very sorry that the rain had made it so ugly. Just then a cat came out of the garden. It too had gotten very wet from the rain and didn't look at all pretty. Then the parrot asked: "My poor cat, did you too tell about that light bread?" (Schwei.) Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Strackerjan, "Der Papagei," Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg , vol. 2 (Oldenburg: Gerhard Stalling, 1867), no. 398a, p. 105 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludwig Strackerjan, "Der Papagei," Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg , vol. 2 (Oldenburg: Gerhard Stalling, 1867), no. 398a, p. 105 . Schwei is a village in Lower Saxony. Return to the table of contents . "Bread in the Cupboard" Denmark The master and mistress of the house traveled to Copenhagen, as they often did in the summer. They left a servant girl at home to look after things. She had a boyfriend who would come to visit her. She had just baked some wheat bread, and she took one of the loaves and hid it in a cupboard to keep it for her boyfriend. There was a parrot in the house, and it saw that she had hidden the wheat bread. When the master and mistress returned home, the parrot was sitting up on a shelf. These animals can talk a little bit, and it told them: "Bread in the cupboard. Bread in the cupboard." The servant girl heard it and became mad at the parrot, but the master of the house probably wouldn't do anything aboug that. Some time later, when no one was looking, she grabbed the parrat and sewed two stitches over its behind. This didn't kill it, but it was never the same afterward. Whenever the master and mistress came in, the parrot would sit in its place and say: "The girl steals your bread! The girl steals your bread!" The girl heard this, and she did not know what she should do to get revenge, and to escape punishment. One day when no one was looking, she took the parrot and threw it out onto the manure pile. A little later an old sow came and lay down next to it. The parrot could not understand why it wanted to lie there, and said to it: "Have you also told about the bread in the cupboard? Have you also told about the bread in the cupboard?" Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Skjæmtesagn (Aarhus: Forfatterens Forlag, 1900), no. 299, pp. 152-53 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Skjæmtesagn (Aarhus: Forfatterens Forlag, 1900), no. 299, pp. 152-53 . Tang Kristensen's source: "J. Povlsen, Rødd." Return to the table of contents . The Mayor Buys Peat Poland A farmer from the area once brought a load of peat to Sianów to sell it there. The mayor's house appeared to be the grandest. He knocked politely on the door, but no one answered, so he opened the door and asked: "Do you want to buy some peat?" "Yes!" answered someone from behind the stove. "Shall I unload it in the courtyard?" asked the farmer. "Yes!" answered the same voice. The farmer was satisfied, brought his peat to the courtyard and stacked it into the shed. When he was done, he went back into the room to get his money. The mayor was now sitting at his desk and was very surprised when the farmer asked him for money for the peat. "I didn't buy any," he said. But the farmer insisted that the mayor had bought the peat and told how the deal had come about. "My parrot did that," said the mayor, laughing, and counted out the money for the farmer. Then he took a feather duster and began to beat the parrot, who was sitting on the back of a chair, laughing mockingly. With that the parrot crept sadly back to his favorite place behind the stove. In the afternoon the family was sitting in the same room over coffee. Earlier the cat had slyly licked the cream off the milk. Without further ado, the housewife stuck the cat's tail through the heart-shaped hole in the backrest of one of their old-fashioned household chairs, held its tail with her left hand and smacked its backside firmly with a slipper. "Ouch!" cried the cat, and with three leaps was behind the stove, where the parrot was still groaning and moaning. The parrot, who had seen what had happened, glanced over at the coffee table, and said: "You! Did you too sell some peat?" Source (books.google.com): W. Koglin, "Was sich die Leute von Zanow erzählen: Der Bürgermeister kauft Torf," Blätter für pommersche Volkskunde , vol. 1 (1892), pp. 149-50 . Return to the table of contents . The Parrot and the Servant Girl Poland A mayor of Sianów had a very clever parrot that could talk. The mayor had a servant girl who liked to snack on sugar, and she often did this while clearing away the coffee service. The parrot knew her name, and he always hopped back and forth in living room and told on her. The girl was angry about this, so one time she lifted her skirts above her head so that the parrot would not recognize her. However, the parrot knew what was happening, and it called out: "Funny! Funny! Fat thighs! Fat legs!" Source (books.google.com): "Der Papagei," Blätter für pommersche Volkskunde , vol. 5 (1897), p. 58 . Return to the table of contents . The Parrot England (Yorkshire) There was once a grocer who had a beautiful parrot with green feathers, and it hung in a cage at his shop door. It was a very shrewd, sensible bird, and very observing. But it was a female, and as such could not hold its tongue, but proclaimed aloud all that it knew, announcing to everyone who entered the shop the little circumstances which had fallen under its observation. One day the parrot observed its master sanding the sugar. Presently in came a woman and asked for some brown sugar. "Sand in the sugar! Sand in the sugar!" vociferated the bird, and the customer pocketed her money and rushed out of the shop. The indignant grocer rushed to the cage and shook it well. "You abominable bird, if you tell tales again, I will wring your neck!" And again he shook the cage till the poor creature was all ruffled, and a cloud of its feathers was flying about the shop. Next day it saw its master mixing cocoa powder with brick dust. Presently in came a customer for cocoa powder. "Brick dust in the cocoa!" cried the parrot, eagerly and repeatedly, till the astonished customer believed it, and went away without his cocoa. A repetition of the shaking of the cage ensued, with a warning that such another instance of tale-telling should certainly be punished with death. The parrot made internal resolutions never to speak again. Presently, however, it observed its master making shop butter of lard colored with a little turmeric. In came a lady and asked for butter. "Nice fresh butter, ma'am, fresh from the dairy," said the shopman "Lard in the butter! Lard in the butter!" said the parrot. "You scoundrel, you!" exclaimed the shopman, rushing at the cage. Opening it, drawing forth the luckless bird, and wringing its neck, he cast it into the ash pit. But Polly was not quite dead, and after lying quiet for a few minutes, she lifted up her head and saw a dead cat in the pit. "Halloo!" called the parrot. "What is the matter with you, Tom?" No answer, for the vital spark of heavenly flame had quitted the mortal frame of the poor cat. "Dead!" sighed the parrot. "Poor Tom! He too must have been afflicted with the love of truth. Ah me!" She sat up and tried her wings. "They are sound. Great is truth in my own country, but in this dingy England it is at a discount, and lies are at a premium." Then spreading her wings, Polly flew away. But whether she ever reached her own land, where truth was regarded with veneration, I have not heard. No, she flew twice round the world in search of it, and could not find it. I wonder whether she has found it now! Source (books.google.com): Sabine Baring-Gould, "Household Tales," an appendix to William Henderson, Notes on the Folk Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866), no. 8, pp. 331-32 . Source (Internet Archive): Sabine Baring-Gould, "Household Tales," an appendix to William Henderson, Notes on the Folk Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866), no. 8, pp. 331-32 . Link to another version of this tale: Alfred C. Fryer, "The Grocer and His Parrot," Book of English Fairy Tales from the North-Country (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1884), pp. 62-67 . Return to the table of contents . The Parrot and the Oilman Iran An oilman possessed a fine parrot, who amused him with her prattle and watched his shop during his absence. It chanced one day, when the oilman had gone out, that a cat ran into the shop in chase of a mouse, which so frightened the parrot that she flew about from shelf to shelf, upsetting several jars and spilling their contents. When her master returned and saw the havoc made among his goods he fetched the parrot a blow that knocked out all her head feathers, and from that day she sulked on her perch. The oilman, missing the prattle of his favorite, began to shower his alms on every passing beggar, in hopes that some one would induce the parrot to speak again. At length a bald-headed mendicant came to the shop one day, upon seeing whom, the parrot, breaking her long silence, cried out, "Poor fellow! Poor fellow! Hast thou, too, upset some oil-jar?" Source (books.google.com): W. A. Clouston, Flowers from a Persian Garden and Other Papers (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 114-15 . Source (Internet Archive): W. A. Clouston, Flowers from a Persian Garden and Other Papers (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 114-15 . Return to the table of contents . Count Fiesco's Parrot Italy A parrot belonging to Count Fiesco was discovered one day stealing some roast meat from the kitchen. The enraged cook, overtaking him, threw a kettle of boiling water at him, which completely scalded all the feathers from his head, and left the poor bird with a bare poll. Some time afterwards, as Count Fiesco was engaged in conversation with an abbot, the parrot, observing the shaven crown of his reverence, hopped up to him and said: "What! do you like roast meat too?" Source (books.google.com): W. A. Clouston, Flowers from a Persian Garden and Other Papers (London: David Nutt, 1890), p. 115, footnote . Source (Internet Archive): W. A. Clouston, Flowers from a Persian Garden and Other Papers (London: David Nutt, 1890), p. 115, footnote . Return to the table of contents . Links to related stories Hear No Evil, See No Evil, Speak No Evil . Folktales of type 243A. The Parrot and the Adulterous Woman . Folktales of type 1422. Return to: The table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 27, 2022. Hear no evil, see no evil, speak no evil Hear No Evil See No Evil Speak No Evil folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 243A edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2011 Contents A Brahmin Asks Two Parrots to Keep an Eye on His Wife (India, The Jataka ). How a Parrot Told Tales of His Mistress and Had His Neck Wrung (India, The Jataka ). Of Maintaining Truth to the Last (England, Gesta Romanorum ). The Three Roosters (Germany/France, Johannes Pauli). Links to related stories . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. A Brahmin Asks Two Parrots to Keep an Eye on His Wife The Jataka Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta was born a parrot. A certain Brahmin in the Kasi country was as a father to him and to his younger brother, treating them like his own children. Potthapada was the Bodhisatta's name, and Radha his brother's. Now the Brahmin had a bold bad wife. And as he was leaving home on business, he said to the two brothers, "If your mother, my wife, is minded to be naughty, stop her." "We will, papa," said the Bodhisatta, "if we can; but if we can't, we will hold our peace." Having thus entrusted his wife to the parrots' charge, the Brahmin set out on his business. Every day thenceforth his wife misconducted herself; there was no end to the stream of her lovers in and out of the house. Moved by the sight, Radha said to the Bodhisatta, "Brother, the parting injunction of our father was to stop any misconduct on his wife's part, and now she does nothing but misconduct herself. Let us stop her." "Brother," said the Bodhisatta, "your words are the words of folly. You might carry a woman about in your arms and yet she would not be safe. So do not essay the impossible." And so saying he uttered this stanza: How many more shall midnight bring? Your plan Is idle. Naught but wifely love could curb Her lust; and wifely love is lacking quite. And for the reasons thus given, the Bodhisatta did not allow his brother to speak to the Brahmin's wife, who continued to gad about to her heart's content during her husband's absence. On his return, the Brahmin asked Potthapada about his wife's conduct, and the Bodhisatta faithfully related all that had taken place. "Why, father," he said, "should you have anything more to do with so wicked a woman?" And he added these words, "My father, now that I have reported my mother's wickedness, we can dwell here no longer." So saying, he bowed at the Brahmin's feet and flew away with Kadha to the forest. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 1, translated from the Pali by Robert Chalmers (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895), no. 145, pp. 309-310 . Part of the canon of sacred Buddhist literature, this collection of some 550 anecdotes and fables depicts earlier incarnations -- sometimes as an animal, sometimes as a human -- of the Bodhisatta, the being who would become Siddhartha Gautama, the future Buddha. Traditional birth and death dates of Gautama are 563-483 BC. The Jataka tales are dated between 300 BC and 400 AD. In spite of the collection's sacred and didactic nature, it nonetheless includes elements -- obviously derived from ancient folktales -- whose primary function is entertainment. Now called Varanasi, Benares is a city in north central India on the Ganges River. One of the world's oldest cities, Varanasi is the most sacred place for Hindus. Buddhists and Muslims also have important religious sites nearby. According to tradition, Buddha began his teaching at Sarnath a short distance from this city. Return to the table of contents . How a Parrot Told Tales of His Mistress and Had His Neck Wrung The Jataka Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta came into the world as a young parrot. His name was Radha, and his youngest brother was named Potthapada. While they were yet quite young, both of them were caught by a fowler and handed over to a Brahmin in Benares. The Brahmin cared for them as if they were his children. But the Brahmin's wife was a wicked woman. There was no watching her. The husband had to go away on business, and addressed his young parrots thus: "Little dears, I am going away on business. Keep watch on your mother in season and out of season. Observe whether or not any man visits her." So off he went, leaving his wife in charge of the young parrots. As soon as he was gone, the woman began to do wrong. Night and day the visitors came and went. There was no end to them. Potthapada, observing this, said to Radha, "Our master gave this woman into our charge, and here she is doing wickedness. I will speak to her." "Don't," said Radha. But the other would not listen. "Mother," said he, "why do you commit sin?" How she longed to kill him! But making as though she would fondle him, she called him to her. "Little one, you are my son! I will never do it again! Here, then the dear!" So he came out. Then she seized him, crying, "What! You preach to me ! You don't know your measure!" And she wrung his neck, and threw him into the oven. The Brahmin returned. When he had rested, he asked the Bodhisatta, "Well, my dear, what about your mother? Does she do wrong, or no?" And as he asked the question, he repeated the first couplet: I come, my son, the journey done, and now I am at home again, Come tell me, is your mother true? Does she make love to other men? Radha answered, "Father dear, the wise speak not of things which do not conduce to blessing, whether they have happened or not." And he explained this by repeating the second couplet: For what he said he now lies dead, burnt up beneath the ashes there. It is not well the truth to tell, lest Potthapada's fate I share. Thus did the Bodhisatta hold forth to the Brahmin. And he went on, "This is no place for me to live in either." Then bidding the Brahmin farewell, he flew away into the woods. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 2, translated from the Pali by W. H. D. Rouse (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895), no. 198, pp. 92-94 . Return to the table of contents . Of Maintaining Truth to the Last Gesta Romanorum In the reign of Gordian, there was a certain noble soldier who had a fair but vicious wife. It happened that her husband having occasion to travel, the lady sent for her gallant. Now, one of her handmaids, it seems, was skillful in interpreting the song of birds; and in the court of the castle there were three cocks. During the night, while the gallant was with his mistress, the first cock began to crow. The lady heard it, and said to her servant, "Dear friend, what says yonder cock?" She replied, "That you are grossly injuring your husband." "Then," said the lady, "kill that cock without delay." They did so. But soon after, the second cock crew, and the lady repeated her question. "Madam," said the handmaid, "he says, 'My companion died for revealing the truth, and for the same cause, I am prepared to die.'" "Kill him," cried the lady, which they did. After this, the third cock crew. "What says he?" asked she again. "Hear, see, and say nothing, if you would live in peace." "Oh, oh!" said the lady. " Don't kill him." And her orders were obeyed. Application My beloved, the emperor is God; the soldier, Christ; and the wife, the soul. The gallant is the devil. The handmaid is conscience. The first cock is our Savior, who was put to death; the second is the martyrs; and the third is a preacher who ought to be earnest in declaring the truth, but, being deterred by menaces, is afraid to utter it. Source: Gesta Romanorum , translated by Charles Swan, revised and corrected by Wynnard Hooper (London: George Bell and Sons, 1906), no. 68, pp. 121-22 . The Gesta Romanorum or Deeds of the Romans was compiled in Latin in the early fourteenth century by an English cleric. It was first published about 1473. Its title notwithstanding, only a few of the work's some 283 stories deal with the Romans. Instead, the collection presents a mixture of anecdotes, legends, and fables, gleaned from many sources and presented in a context appropriate for incorporation into Christian sermons. Return to the table of contents . The Three Roosters Germany/France We read about three roosters that crowed in the night while the lady of the house was lying with an adulterer. Now the kitchen maid understood the language of birds. The first night the one rooster crowed, "My mistress is unfaithful to my master." The kitchen maid reported this to the lady of the house. The woman said, "That rooster must die," and the rooster was broiled. The next night the second rooster sang, and when the kitchen maid was asked about it, she said that the rooster had crowed, "My companion died for telling the truth." Then the lady of the house said, "He too shall die," and this rooster was immediately broiled. The next time the woman went to bed with her lover, the third rooster crowed, as interpreted by the kitchen maid, "See, hear, and remain silent, if you want to live in peace." Audi, vive, tace, Se vis vivere in pace. Source: Johannes Pauli, Schimpf und Ernst , selected and revised by Karl Simrock (Heilbronn: Verlag von Gebrüder Henninger, 1876), no. 8, pp. 7-8 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. Johannes Pauli was born about 1455 and died after 1530. His Schimpf und Ernst , a collection of 693 humorous anecdotes, was first published in 1522 in Strasbourg (Strassburg), Alsace. Return to the table of contents . Links to related stories The Parrot That Talked Too Much . Folktales of type 237. The Parrot and the Adulterous Woman . Folktales of type 1422. Return to: The table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 1, 2011. The Parrot and the Adulterous Woman: Folktales of type 1422 The Parrot and the Adulterous Woman folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1422 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2011-2014 Contents Example of the Man and the Woman and the Parrot and Their Maidservant ( The Book of Sindibâd ). The Tale of the Husband and the Parrot ( 1001 Nights ). Story of the Confectioner, His Wife, and the Parrot ( 1001 Nights ). The Second Vezir's Story (Turkey, History of the Forty Vezirs ). The Burgess, His Wife, and the Magpie ( Seven Wise Masters ). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Example of the Man and the Woman and the Parrot and Their Maidservant The Book of Sindibâd Lord, I have heard that (there was) a man who was jealous of his wife, and he bought a parrot and put it into a cage. And he placed it in his house, and he ordered it to tell him all that his wife should do, and never to conceal anything thereof from him; and afterwards he went away on business of his own. And a friend of hers entered the house where she was. The parrot saw all that they did; and when the good man came home, he sat down, unseen by his wife, and ordered the parrot to be brought, and asked him all that he had seen, and the parrot told him all that he had seen the woman do with her friend. And the good man was very much incensed against his wife, and went no longer into the place where she was (viz., the harem). And the wife believed truly that the maid had told about her. And then she called her and said: "Thou didst tell my husband all that I did." And the girl swore that she had not told it, but knew that the parrot had told it. And she [the wife] took it down and began to throw water upon it, just as if it were rain. And she took a mirror in her hand and held it over the cage, and in the other hand [she held] a candle, and she held that over [also]. And the parrot thought that it was lightning. And the wife began to move a grindstone, and the parrot thought that it was thunder. And she occupied herself all night doing this until morning. And after it was morning the husband came and asked the parrot: "Hast thou seen anything this night?" And the parrot said: "I could see nothing for the great rain and the thunder and lightning that there were this night." And the man said: "Hath what thou hast told me of my wife as much truth as this? There is nothing more lying than thou, and I will order thee to be killed." And he sent for his wife and pardoned her, and they made peace. And I, Lord, have told thee this example only that thou mayst know the deceit of women; that their arts are very strong, and are many, so that they have no end. Source: Domenico Comparetti Researches respecting the Book of Sindibâd (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1882), pp. 127-28 . Sindibâd (also spelled Sindibad, Sendabar, or Syntipas) was a legendary Indian philosopher and writer supposed to have lived around 100 BC. Stories ascribed to him are found in medieval European collections known variously as The Seven Wise Masters or The Seven Sages . Return to the table of contents . The Tale of the Husband and the Parrot ). 1001 Nights A certain man and a merchant to boot had married a fair wife, a woman of perfect beauty and grace, symmetry and loveliness, of whom he was mad-jealous, and who contrived successfully to keep him from travel. At last an occasion compelling him to leave her, he went to the bird market and bought him for one hundred gold pieces a she-parrot which he set in his house to act as duenna, expecting her to acquaint him on his return with what had passed during the whole time of his absence; for the bird was kenning and cunning and never forgot what she had seen and heard. Now his fair wife had fallen in love with a young Turk, who used to visit her, and she feasted him by day and lay with him by night. When the man had made his journey and won his wish he came home; and, at once causing the parrot to be brought to him, questioned her concerning the conduct of his consort whilst he was in foreign parts. Quoth she, "Thy wife hath a man friend who passed every night with her during thine absence." Thereupon the husband went to his wife in a violent rage, and bashed her with a bashing severe enough to satisfy anybody. The woman, suspecting that one of the slave girls had been tattling to the master, called them together and questioned them upon their oaths, when all swore that they had kept the secret, but that the parrot had not, adding, "And we heard her with our own ears." Upon this the woman bade one of the girls set a hand-mill under the cage and grind therewith, and a second to sprinkle water through the cage roof, and a third to run about, right and left, flashing a mirror of bright steel through the livelong night. Next morning, when the husband returned home after being entertained by one of his friends, he bade bring the parrot before him, and asked what had taken place whilst he was away. "Pardon me, O my master," quoth the bird, "I could neither hear nor see aught by reason of the exceeding murk and the thunder and lightning which lasted throughout the night." As it happened to be the summer-tide the master was astounded and cried, "But we are now in mid-Tammuz, and this is not the time for rains and storms." " Ay, by Allah," rejoined the bird, "I saw with these eyes what my tongue hath told thee." Upon this the man, not knowing the case nor smoking the plot, waxed exceeding wroth; and, holding that his wife had been wrongously accused, put forth his hand and pulling the parrot from her cage dashed her upon the ground with such force that he killed her on the spot. Some days afterwards one of his slave girls confessed to him the whole truth, yet would he not believe it till he saw the young Turk, his wife's lover, coming out of bared his blade and slew him by a blow on the back of the neck; and he did the same by the adulteress , and thus the twain, laden with mortal sin, went straightways to Eternal Fire. Then the merchant knew that the parrot had told him the truth anent all she had seen, and he mourned grievously for her loss when mourning availed him not. Source: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night , translated from the Arabic by Richard F. Burton, vol. 1 (London: H. S. Nichols, 1897), pp. 48-50 . Footnote by Burton: The young "Turk" is probably a late addition, as it does not appear in many of the MSS., e.g. , the Bresl. Edit. The wife usually spreads a cloth over the cage; this in the Turkish translation becomes a piece of leather. Return to the table of contents . Story of the Confectioner, His Wife, and the Parrot 1001 Nights Once upon a time there dwelt in Egypt a confectioner who had a wife famed for beauty and loveliness; and a parrot which, as occasion required, did the office of watchman and guard, bell and spy, and flapped her wings did she but hear a fly buzzing about the sugar. This parrot caused abundant trouble to the wife, always telling her husband what took place in his absence. Now one evening, before going out to visit certain friends, the confectioner gave the bird strict injunctions to watch all night and bade his wife make all fast, as he should not return until morning. Hardly had he left the door than the woman went for her old lover, who returned with her and they passed the night together in mirth and merriment, while the parrot observed all. Betimes in the morning the lover fared forth and the husband, returning, was informed by the parrot of what had taken place; whereupon he hastened to his wife's room and beat her with a painful beating. She thought in herself, "Who could have informed against me?" and she asked a woman that was in her confidence whether it was she. The woman protested by the worlds visible and invisible that she had not betrayed her mistress; but informed her that on the morning of his return home, the husband had stood some time before the cage listening to the parrot's talk. When the wife heard this, she resolved to contrive the destruction of the bird. Some days after, the husband was again invited to the house of a friend where he was to pass the night; and, before departing, he enjoined the parrot with the same injunctions as before; wherefore his heart was free from care, for he had his spy at home. The wife and her confidante then planned how they might destroy the credit of the parrot with the master. For this purpose they resolved to counterfeit a storm; and this they did by placing over the parrot's head a hand-mill (which the lover worked by pouring water upon a piece of hide), by waving a fan and by suddenly uncovering a candle hid under a dish. Thus did they raise such a tempest of rain and lightning, that the parrot was drenched and half-drowned in a deluge. Now rolled the thunder, then flashed the lightning; that from the noise of the hand-mill, this from the reflection of the candle; when thought the parrot to herself, "In very sooth the flood hath come on, such an one as belike Noah himself never witnessed." So saying she buried her head under her wing, a prey to terror. The husband, on his return, hastened to the parrot to ask what had happened during his absence; and the bird answered that she found it impossible to describe the deluge and tempest of the last night; and that years would be required to explain the uproar of the hurricane and storm. When the shopkeeper heard the parrot talk of last night's deluge, he said: "Surely O bird, thou art gone clean daft! Where was there, even in a dream, rain or lightning last night? Thou hast utterly ruined my house and ancient family. My wife is the most virtuous woman of the age and all thine accusations of her are lies." So in his wrath he dashed the cage upon the ground, tore off the parrot's head, and threw it from the window. Presently his friend, coming to call upon him, saw the parrot in this condition with head torn off, and without wings or plumage. Being informed of the circumstances he suspected some trick on the part of the woman, and said to the husband, "When your wife leaves home to go to the Hammam-bath, compel her confidante to disclose the secret." So as soon as his wife went out, the husband entered his harem and insisted on the woman telling him the truth. She recounted the whole story and the husband now bitterly repented having killed the parrot, of whose innocence he had proof. Source: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night , translated by Richard F. Burton, vol. 6 (Printed by the Borton Ethnological Society, for members only, n.d.), pp. 132-33 . Burton's source: "The Persian version of the story from the Book of Sindibad ." Return to the table of contents . The Second Vezir's Story Turkey ( History of the Forty Vezirs ) There was in Hindustan a khoja who had a beautiful wife. That woman had (God forefend the listeners!) a youthful lover. One day the khoja bought a parrot which knew well how to speak; and whenever it would speak, the khoja's heart reaped a hundred thousand joys and delights. One day the khoja went to a certain place and came not that night to his house. Forthwith the woman brought the youth to the house, and that night passed they in fun and frolic, and, joining soul to soul and heart to heart, both reaped their desires. The parrot watched this their secret from the cage, and when it was morning the youth went away and the khoja returned. As soon as it saw the khoja, the parrot said, "O khoja, this night till morning the lady was with a youth, eating, and drinking, and kissing, and clipping; lo, the youth is gone." When the khoja heard these words he said to his wife, "Out on thee, wife! Who is that youth?" The woman replied, "What manner of speech is this? Dost thou believe the word of a bird and act thereon?" And she fell to chattering and babbling, and convinced the khoja, and gave the lie to the parrot. One day the khoja again went to a certain place, and the woman, according to her wont, got the youth whom she told what the parrot had said to the khoja. The youth said, "Henceforward there can be no more frolic with thee. This parrot is a hindrance to us, and will make us disgraced before the world." Quoth the woman, "My lord, be not dismayed. See what a trick I will play the parrot." And she ordered the slave-girls and they brought a sieve, an earthenware jar, some water, and a piece of bullock hide. They put the hide over the parrot's cage, and one of the girls struck on it with a stick every now and again, while another sprinkled water through the sieve upon the parrot, and a third put a looking-glass into the jar which ever and anon she opened and closed before the cage. So again the woman and the youth made merry till the morning. When it was morning the youth went away and the khoja came; and as soon as the parrot saw him, it said, "Khoja, this night the lady and the youth ate and drank and made merry till the morning; but much did the rain rain and the thunder roar and the lightning flash." Then quoth the lady, "Dost thou see the parrot's lies? Did the rain rain, or the thunder roar, or the lightning flash this night?" "Nay," said the khoja. "And thou believedst the lie spoken by the bird," quoth the woman. And the poor khoja's trust was destroyed by this trick; and as often as he went away the woman invited that youth and made merry with him. And the parrot ever said so, but the khoja would not believe, and the woman would make mock of the parrot's words, and split the khoja's head by saying, "And thou didst libel me on this thing's word!'' Source: Sheykh-Zada, The History of the Forty Vezirs; or, The Story of the Forty Morns and Eves , translated by E. J. W. Gibb (London: George Redway, 1886), pp. 33-35 . Footnote by Gibbs: "A khoja is a master of a household, also a teacher; in the former acceptation it is somewhat equivalent to the old English goodman ." Return to the table of contents . The Burgess, His Wife, and the Magpie Seven Wise Masters There lived in a certain city of Rome a rich burgess, who had a magpye, which he loved so well, that he taught her to speak, so she might tell him all that she saw and heard. The burgess was married to a young wife, much more beautiful than honest; he loved her very well; but she requitted it with slight and disrespect, and made choice of a gallant in her husband's absence, to gratify her lustful appetite; which the magpye observing, told her master at his coming home; so that the report thereof spread itself through the whole city. Her husband thereupon upbraided her with disloyalty and adultery; to which she said, she was innocent, and that he was to blame to believe his magpye, and that as long as he continued so do there would be nothing but variance and discord betwixt them. But he replied, the pye could not lie, for that she saw and heard what she told him; and therefore he would believe her rather than his wife. It happened not long after, that this burgess travelled abroad, and was no sooner gone, but she sent to advise her friend he should come secretly to her that night, to enjoy her as he was accustomed. Being come, as he entered into the house, he said, "Dearest, I am afraid the magpye will discover us!" But she bid him not fear, for it was dark, and therefore the pye could not see them. The pye hearing this, said, "It is true, I see you not, but I can hear you, and know that you are naughty together, which I shall tell my master when he comes home." At which the lusty young man was startled; but she bid him be of good courage, and she would be revenged on the pye. So they went and lay together till about midnight, at which time the adultress arose, and calling her maid-servant, commanded her to fetch a ladder, which they set up to the roof of the house, and then they made a hole therein, just over the pye, through which they cast down water, gravel, and small stones, and the like; insomuch that the poor pye was almost killed. Upon the burgess's return, he went to visit his pye, asking how she fared in his absence; the pye replied, "Master I shall satisfy you in both. First I have the old news to tell you, that is, that you are a cuckold; of the very night after your departure, your wife entertained a young man all night in bed with her; notwithstanding, I told them I would inform you thereof. As to my welfare, that very night I had like to have died, it was so tempestuous, either raining, hailing, or snowing all the night." The wife hearing this, said to her husband, "You have hitherto believed in the pye; now, she saith, she had like to have died with rain, hail, and snow, that she accused me of adultery whereas, there was never any thing clearer, but my innocency." The good man, to be satisfied of the truth, enquired of the neighbours, whether that night was fair or foul. Who all affirmed, no night could be fairer. Then going to his wife, he acknowledged the fault of his cruelty, and after that went to the pye, and having railed at her, for sowing discord between man and wife, he wrung her neck off; the wife at the sight thereof was overjoyed; and when he had killed the pye, he looked up and saw a ladder, and a vessel of water, sand, and stones, which made him soon perceive the treachery of his wife; at which he grew so troubled, that for the words of his wife, he had killed the pye, that he sold off all he had, and went on pilgrimage. Source: Roman Stories; or, The History of the Seven Wise Masters of Rome , 33rd edition (Berwick: W. Phorson, 1805), pp. 41-43 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Additional tales of type 1422 "The Magpie" from Seven Wise Masters , George Ellis, Specimens of Early English Metrical Romances , vol. 3 (London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme, 1805), pp. 62-66 . "The Example of the Thyrde Mahyster," George Laurence Gomme, The History of the Seven Wise Master of Rome , printed from the edition of Wynkyn de Worde, 1520 (London: Villon Society, 1885), pp. 54-58 . "The History of the Husband and the Parrot," Oriental Fairy Tales , Library for Young People, vol. 5 (New York: P. F. Collier and Son, 1903), pp. 147-48 . Related tales The Parrot That Talked Too Much . Folktales of type 237. Hear No Evil, See No Evil, Speak No Evil . Folktales of type 243A. Commentary W. A. Clouston, "The Merchant, His Wife, and the Parrot," Popular Tales and Fictions: Their Migrations and Transformations , vol. 2 (Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1887), pp. 196-211 . The Seven Wise Masters , an article from Wikipedia about the story collection, also known as The Seven Sages or The Seven Sages of Rome . Syntipas , an article from Wikipedia about the Indian philosopher (also known as Sindibad or Sendabar), the reputed author of the story collection known in Europe as The Seven Wise Masters . Return to: The table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 28, 2014. Peacock Plumes: Fables of Type 244 Peacock Plumes fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 244 and other tales about plain creatures in fancy dress selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2020 Contents The Jay and the Peacock (Aesop). The Jackdaw and the Pigeons (Aesop). The Vain Jackdaw (Aesop). The Jay in the Feathers of the Peacock (Jean de La Fontaine). Jupiter and the Birds (Ambrose Bierce). The Painted Jackal (India). The Blue Jackal (Tibet). The Painted Jackal (Pakistan). The Jackal King (Kashmir). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Jay and the Peacock Aesop A jay venturing into a yard where peacocks used to walk, found there a number of feathers which had fallen from the peacocks when they were molting. He tied them all to his tail and strutted down towards the peacocks. When he came near them they soon discovered the cheat, and striding up to him pecked at him and plucked away his borrowed plumes. So the jay could do no better than go back to the other jays, who had watched his behavior from a distance. But they were equally annoyed with him, and told him, " It is not only fine feathers that make fine birds. " Source: The Fables of Æsop , selected, told anew, and their history traced by Joseph Jacobs (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), no. 21, p. 55 . Return to the table of contents . The Jackdaw and the Pigeons Aesop A jackdaw, watching some pigeons in a farmyard, was filled with envy when he saw how well they were fed, and determined to disguise himself as one of them, in order to secure a share of the good things they enjoyed. So he painted himself white from head to foot and joined the flock. And, so long as he was silent, they never suspected that he was not a pigeon like themselves. But one day he was unwise enough to start chattering, when they at once saw through his disguise and pecked him so unmercifully that he was glad to escape and join his own kind again. But the other jackdaws did not recognize him in his white dress, and would not let him feed with them, but drove him away. And so he became a homeless wanderer for his pains. Source: Æsop's Fables , translated by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: W. Heinemann; New York: Doubleday, Page and Company, 1916), pp. 58-59 . The jackdaw is a small black and gray bird related to the crow. Return to the table of contents . The Vain Jackdaw Aesop Jupiter announced that he intended to appoint a king over the birds, and named a day on which they were to appear before his throne, when he would select the most beautiful of them all to be their ruler. Wishing to look their best on the occasion they repaired to the banks of a stream, where they busied themselves in washing and preening their feathers. The jackdaw was there along with the rest, and realized that, with his ugly plumage, he would have no chance of being chosen as he was. So he waited till they were all gone, and then picked up the most gaudy of the feathers they had dropped, and fastened them about his own body, with the result that he looked gayer than any of them. When the appointed day came, the birds assembled before Jupiter's throne; and, after passing them in review, he was about to make the jackdaw king, when all the rest set upon the king-elect, stripped him of his borrowed plumes, and exposed him for the jackdaw that he was. Source: Æsop's Fables , translated by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: W. Heinemann; New York: Doubleday, Page and Company, 1916), pp. 68-69 . The jackdaw is a small black and gray bird related to the crow. Return to the table of contents . The Jay in the Feathers of the Peacock Jean de La Fontaine A peacock moulted: soon a jay was seen Bedeck'd with Argus tail of gold and green, High strutting, with elated crest, As much a peacock as the rest. His trick was recognized and bruited, His person jeer'd at, hiss'd, and hooted. The peacock gentry flock'd together, And pluck'd the fool of every feather. Nay more, when back he sneak'd to join his race, They shut their portals in his face. There is another sort of jay, The number of its legs the same, Which makes of borrow'd plumes display, And plagiary is its name. But hush! the tribe I'll not offend; 'Tis not my work their ways to mend. Source: Jean de La Fontaine (1621-95), The Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright (London: George Bell and Sons, 1888), book 4, fable 9, p. 83 . Link to the text of this fable in French: "Le geai paré des plumes du paon," Fables de La Fontaine (Tours: Alfred Mam et Fils, 1864), livre 4, fable 9 p. 129-30 . Return to the table of contents . Jupiter and the Birds Ambrose Bierce Jupiter commanded all the birds to appear before him, so that he might choose the most beautiful to be their king. The ugly jackdaw, collecting all the fine feathers which had fallen from the other birds, attached them to his own body and appeared at the examination, looking very gay. The other birds, recognising their own borrowed plumage, indignantly protested, and began to strip him. "Hold!" said Jupiter; "this self-made bird has more sense than any of you. He is your king." Source: Ambrose Bierce Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), p. 179 . Return to the table of contents . The Painted Jackal India A jackal had the habit of visiting the kitchens of several people at night and eating whatever it could find. One day, in visiting the house of a dyer, it put its head into a deep vessel containing blue dye, and, finding the mixture was not good to eat, tried to get its head out again, but could not do so for some time. When at last it managed to escape, its head was dyed a beautiful dark blue color. He ran away into the jungles, glad to escape, and unconscious of his strange appearance; but the other animals in the jungle thought some new animal had come, and were quite charmed, so that they created him their king. They divided up all the wild creatures, and put their new king next to the jackals, so that when they cried out at nights, he cried too, and nobody found out that he was only a jackal. But one day some young jackals made him angry, so he turned them out and ordered the wolves and foxes to remain nearest to him. That night, when he began to cry and howl, it was at once discovered that he was only a jackal; so all the animals ran at him, bit him, and turned him out. Source: Alice Elizabeth Dracott, Simla Village Tales; or, Folk Tales from the Himalayas (London: John Murray, 1906), pp. 198-99 . Return to the table of contents . The Blue Jackal Tibet In times long past there was a very greedy jackal, which used to roam in the forest, and even in places uninhabited by men. At length he made his way into the house of a dyer, and fell into an indigo vat. After he had escaped he lay down to sleep on a neighboring dunghill. Having tossed about thereon, so that his body became ever so unshapely, he jumped into the water. When he had come out, and had been exposed to the rays of the sun, he acquired the color of cyanite. When the other jackals saw him, they dispersed and stood afar off, and asked, "Who are you? Where do you come from?" He replied, "My name is Sataga, and I have been appointed king of the four-footed beasts by Sakra, the king of the gods." The jackals considered that, as his body was of a color never before seen, this must be true, and they made all the four-footed beast acquainted with the fact. The lions thought, "If someone is exalted above us and made the king of the beasts, we must go and carry this news to the chief of our band." So they told the news to the maned chief of their band, who dwelt in a certain hill district. He ordered the other beasts to go forth and find out whether any animal had seen this chieftain of the four-footed. So they betook themselves to where the jackal was, and made inquiries. And they perceived the jackal, like unto nothing ever seen before, surrounded by all the four-footed creatures except the lions. Then they returned to their chief and told him what they had seen. and he, when he had listened to them, betook himself, surrounded by the band of lions, to where the jackal was. The jackal, surrounded by many quadrupeds, rode along on an elephant, with the lions around him, and then the tigers and other quadrupeds. The jackals formed a circle round him at a greater distance. Now the jackal's mother dwelt in a certain mountain ravine. Her son sent a jackal to her, and invited her to come, now that he had obtained the sovereign power. She asked what was the nature of his surroundings. The messenger replied, "The inner circle is formed of lions, tigers, and elephants, but the outer of jackals." She said, "So much for things not following their proper order." She also said in verse: I live here comfortably in the mountain ravine, and amid cool waters enjoy my good fortune. So long as he utters no jackal's cry, the elephant will let him retain his prosperity. The messenger jackal said to the jackals, "This king of the four-footed is only another jackal. I have seen his mother who dwells in such a such a mountain ravine." They replied, "In that case we will test him and see whether he is a jackal or not." Now it is according to the nature of things that jackals, if they hear a jackal howl without howling themselves, lose their hair. So the jackal, when he heard the other jackals lift up their voices, said to himself, "If I utter no cry, my hair will certainly fall off. But if I get off the elephant and then begin to howl, he will kill me. So I will lift up my voice where I am." So soon as, sitting on the elephant, he began to lift up his voice, the elephant perceived that it was a jackal that was riding on his back, so he flung him off and trampled him underfoot. A deity uttered this verse: He who keeps at a distance those who should be near, and brings near those who should be at a distance, will be cast down, as the jackal was by the elephant. Source: Tibetan Tales, Derived from Indian Sources , translated from the Tibetan of the Kaygyur [Kanjur] by F. Anton von Schiefner, and from the German into English by W. R. S. Ralston (London: George Routledge and Sons, 1926. no. 36, pp. 336-38 . The Kanjur ("translated word") is a large collection of Buddhist teachings and tales, probably brought to Tibet by Indian refugees in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Depending on the edition, the Kanjur consists of 100, 102, or 108 folio volumes. The Kanjur plus the Tanjur ("translated treatises"), comprise the two parts of the official canon of Tibetan Buddhism. Return to the table of contents . The Painted Jackal Pakistan A prowling jackal once fell into a large vessel full of dye. When he returned home all his astonished friends said, "What has befallen you?" He answered, with a curl of his tail, "Was there ever anything in the world so fine as I am? Look at me! Let no one ever presume to call me jackal again." "What, then, are you to be called?" asked they. "'Peacock. You will henceforth call me peacock," replied the jackal, strutting up and down in all the glory of sky-blue. "But," said his friends, "a peacock can spread his tail magnificently. Can you spread your tail?" "Well, no, I cannot quite do that," replied the jackal. "And a peacock," continued they, "can make a fine melodious cry. Can you make a fine melodious cry?" "It must be admitted," said the pretender, "that I cannot do that either." "Then," retorted they, "it is quite evident that if you are not a jackal, neither are you a peacock." And they drove him out of their company. Source: Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 60. p. 245 . Return to the table of contents . The Jackal King Kashmir Once upon a time the jackals assembled together to elect a king for themselves. The lions had a king. The tigers had a king. The leopards had a king. The wolves had a king. The dogs and other animals had their kings. So they thought that they too ought to appoint one, who should be their chief, who should guide them in counsel and lead them forth to war. "Elect your king," cried the old jackal, anxious to begin the meeting. Whereupon all the jackals shouted, "You are our king! You are our king! You are our senior in age and superior in experience. Who is there so fit as yourself to rule over us?" And the old jackal consented, and by way of distinction allowed his fur to be dyed blue, and an old broken winnowing fan to be fastened round his neck. One day the king was walking about his dominions attended by a large number of his jackal subjects, when a tiger suddenly appeared and made a rush at them. The whole company fled and forgot their old king. His majesty tried to escape into a narrow cave, but alas, his head stuck in the hole, by reason of the winnowing fan that was around his neck. Seeing their leader thus, the tiger came and seized him and carried him away to his lair, where it fastened him by a rope so that he could not run away. In a short while, however, the jackal king did escape and get back to his subjects, who again wished him to be their king and to reign over them. But the jackal had had enough of it, and therefore replied, "No thank you. I am quite satisfied. Once being a king is quite sufficient for a man's lifetime. Source: J. Hinton Knowles, Folk-Tales of Kashmir , 2nd ed. (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner and Company, 1893), pp. 260-61 . Knowles' source: Makund Báyú, Suthú, Srinagar. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites The Wolf in Sheep's Clothing and the Ass in the Lion's Skin . Fables of type 123B and 214B. Clothes Make the Man . Folktales of type 1558. The Emperor's New Clothes . Folktales of type 1620. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 6, 2020. The Enchanted Pear Tree The Enchanted Pear Tree Boccaccio's Story of Lydia and Pyrrhus Chaucer's Merchant's Tale and other tales of type 1423 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2014 Contents The Story of Lydia and Pyrrhus (abstracted from The Decameron by Giovanni Boccaccio). The Merchant's Tale (abstracted from The Canterbury Tales by Geoffrey Chaucer). Story of the Credulous Husband ( 1001 Nights , translated by John Payne). The Tale of the Simpleton Husband ( 1001 Nights , translated by Richard Burton). The Twenty-Ninth Vizier's Story (Turkey, The History of the Forty Viziers ). Husband, Wife, Lover, and Mango Tree (Tibet/Nepal). The Fourth Lady, Her Husband, and the Brahmin (India/Persia). Vibhîtaka Tree (India). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Story of Lydia and Pyrrhus Giovanni Boccaccio Nicostratus, a wealthy patrician, married Lydia, a woman of great distinction and unsurpassed beauty. He was well advanced in years, while she was still a paragon of youth and vitality. Consequently, to state the matter delicately, their marriage did not leave the young wife entirely satisfied. Thus, it is quite understandable that Lydia found herself paying ever more attention to one of her husband's servants, Pyrrhus by name, who was elegant, handsome, young, and energetic. He was attracted to her as well, and gladly would have accepted her invitations to love, but the old man gave them no opportunity. What he lacked in vigor he made up with jealousy and perseverance, rarely leaving his beautiful young wife alone. Their unrequited passion aglow, Lydia and Pyrrhus devised a daring scheme through which, even in the master's presence, they might satisfy their longing for one another. Accordingly, one day when the three were walking in the garden, as they often did, Lydia requested a pear from a certain tree. Pyrrhus climbed after the fruit, but once in the tree, he called to his master, "Have you no shame, making love like that in broad daylight?" The master demanded an explanation for the strange remark, and Pyrrhus concluded that the pear tree was enchanted, giving the impression of unreal happenings below. To test the theory, he asked his master to climb the tree, and see if he too would behold impossible things below. His curiosity piqued, Nicostratus mustered enough strength to climb onto one of the pear tree's lower branches. Looking down, what did he behold but Pyrrhus and Lydia making fervent love. From his precarious perch, he shouted curses, threats, and insults at them. but they -- engaged with other pursuits -- quite ignored him. Nicostratus climbed down from the tree, only to find Pyrrhus and Lydia seated discretely on a garden bench. Their innocent demeanor convinced him that nothing unseemly had happened. Fearing that only a bedeviled tree could be responsible for the vile images that he had perceived, he sent for an ax and had it cut down immediately. From that time forth Nicostratus relaxed his watchful vigil over his young wife, and thus Pyrrhus and Lydia were able to pluck the fruits of their love at regular intervals, even without the help of their enchanted pear tree. Source: Giovanni Boccaccio, The Decameron , day 7, tale 9. Retold and shortened. © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. The Decameron (Il Decamerone) was written between 1350 and 1355. Link to the entire work: Giovanni Boccaccio, The Decameron; or, Ten Days of Entertainment (Cincinnati: Steward and Kidd Company, 1919), seventh day, novel 9, pp. 367-74 . Link to the work in Italian: Giovanni Boccaccio, Il Decamerone , vol. 2 (Paris: Libraire de Firmin Didot Frères, 1849), giornata settima, novella 9, p. 85-94. Return to the table of contents . The Merchant's Tale Geoffrey Chaucer In the town of Pavia in Lombardy there lived a worthy knight by the name of January. Although throughout his long and prosperous life he had partaken often of the fruits of love, he felt no need for marriage until he passed his sixtieth year, when suddenly he was overcome by a violent urge to become a wedded man. "A young and beautiful wife," he concluded, "would be the fulfillment of my wealth and glory. Obedient, loyal, and untiring, she would attend to my every need in my waning years, and further, she may well present me with an heir." "Not so!" argued some. "A wife's interest will be more toward your fortune than toward your well being, and further, her unbridled passions may place your honor at risk." But January listened not to these negative voices, paying heed instead to those who praised the virtues of womanhood and the benefits of marriage. And thus he soon announced to his friends his resolve to find a bride, "But," he asserted, "she must be under twenty years of age, for young veal is tastier than old beef." His friends tried to dissuade him from this resolve, but to no avail, and at last -- driven onward by unrelenting fantasies -- he found the woman who satisfied his dreams. Although not of high rank, she was young and beautiful, and, in his love-blinded perception, she was also compliant and self-disciplined. Further, like old January himself, she too bore the name of a season: May. Marriage documents were executed, the holy sacrament of marriage was duly performed, and the priest united January and May as husband and wife. One wedding guest was particularly moved, a robust young man named Damian, who served as a squire to Knight January. Ravished by May's fresh beauty, the squire fell madly in love with his master's young bride. No one knows what young May was thinking in her heart as old January -- with his beard of stubble and loose skin shaking about his throat -- labored in the field of love. But Damian's thoughts were not entirely secret. He poured out his soul with pen and ink, then managed to slip the letter into the hand of his beloved May without being seen by the ever-watchful January. May's only opportunity to read the letter came in that small place where everyone goes alone. There she committed Damian's message to memory, then tore the letter into pieces and threw them into the privy. But one thing is certain. She took no offense at the young squire's forwardness, for as soon as she could steal a few minutes' time, she composed a letter to the young squire, promising him the satisfaction he desired of her as soon as the time and place might present themselves. In the meantime old January's fortune turned against him, and he lost his sight. The curse of blindness increased the knight's possessiveness and jealousy toward his young wife. Fearing that she might succumb to some temptation under the cover of his darkness, he never let her go out unless he himself had her by the hand. Nevertheless, by using private hand signals and smuggled letters, she communicated her forbidden love to Damian, and invented a plan whereby it might be consummated. The tryst was to take place in a private garden where January and May often walked together. Following his beloved's plan, Damian let himself into the garden at the appointed time, then hid himself in the branches of a pear tree that grew there. A little later January and May, hand in hand, approached the tree, when May suddenly declared an intense appetite for a pear from the nearby tree. "Do let me climb the tree and pluck a pear," she begged of her husband. Then recalling his blind jealousy, she added, "You can hold your arms around the tree to make sure that I am alone." Not wanting to deny her this innocent request, he stooped over and let her step onto his back. Taking hold of a branch, she pulled herself into tree and into the arms of the waiting Damian. Now ladies, please take no offence, but I must tell the story as it actually happened. Damian forthwith lifted her smock and thrust away, with the deceived husband blindly hugging the tree beneath them. However, this shameful tryst was not entirely unseen. The king and queen of Fairyland saw all, and the king -- horrified at the cuckoldry -- resolved at once to restore the old knight's sight immediately and thus expose his wife's and his squire's faithlessness. "Do that!" replied the fairy king's wife. "But nothing bad will come to the young woman, for I will give her a bold and quick answer that will excuse her and her lover from all guilt." And thus it happened. As granted by the fairy king, sight miraculously returned to January's aging eyes. But his rejoicing was short lived, for looking up, the first thing he saw was his wife engaged in an act that polite words cannot describe. "Strumpet!" he called out angrily. "What are you up to?" Now it was the fairy queen's turn to ply her magic, and -- as promised -- she put a quick response onto the wayward wife's tongue. "Sir," replied May, "have patience. Don't you see what I have done? I was told that the only cure for your blindness would be for me to struggle with a man upon a tree." "Struggle?" said he. "It went right in!" "Oh no!" said she. "You caught a hazy glimpse, my good sir, but your sight is still poor. Things are not as they first appeared to you." Then she continued, "This slander is my reward for helping you to see." "Never mind!" said he. "Come down. But it did appear to me that Damian was enjoying you with your smock upon his breast." "Think what you will," said she, "but it was only a false vision following your long blindness." With that she jumped down from the tree, and January led her happily back home. Source: Geoffrey Chaucer, The Canterbury Tales , "The Merchant's Tale." Retold and shortened. © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. The tale above combines elements of folktale type 1423 (the enchanted pear tree) with those of type 1419M (a wife convinces her husband that her infidelity has saved him from a curse). Chaucer was born about the year 1340 and died in 1400. He began writing The Canterbury Tales in about 1386. The great work remained unfinished. Link to a Middle English text with an interlinear translation of The Marchantes Tale from the Geoffrey Chaucer Page at Harvard University. Link to a Middle English text of The Marchantes Tale from eChaucer, edited by Gerard NeCastro, University of Maine at Machias. Link to a modern translation of The Merchant's Tale from eChaucer, edited by Gerard NeCastro, University of Maine at Machias. Return to the table of contents . Story of the Credulous Husband 1001 Nights (translated by John Payne) There was once of old time a foolish, ignorant man, who had wealth galore, and his wife was a fair woman, who loved a handsome youth. The latter used to watch for her husband's absence and come to her, and on this wise he abode a long while. One day, as the woman was private with her lover, he said to her, "O my lady and my beloved, if thou desire me and love me, give me possession of thyself and accomplish my need in thy husband's presence; else will I never again come to thee nor draw near thee, what while I abide on life." Now she loved him with an exceeding love and could not brook his separation an hour nor could endure to vex him; so, when she heard his words, she said to him, "[So be it,] in God's name, O my beloved and solace of mine eyes, may he not live who would vex thee!" Quoth he, "Today?" And she said, "Yes, by thy life," and appointed him of this. When her husband came home, she said to him, "I desire to go a-pleasuring." And he said, "With all my heart." So he went, till he came to a goodly place, abounding in vines and water, whither he carried her and pitched her a tent beside a great tree; and she betook herself to a place beside the tent and made her there an underground hiding-place, [in which she hid her lover]. Then said she to her husband, "I desire to mount this tree." And he said, "Do so." So she climbed up and when she came to the top of the tree, she cried out and buffeted her face, saying, "Lewd fellow that thou art, are these thy usages? Thou sworest [fidelity to me] and liedst." And she repeated her speech twice and thrice. Then she came down from the tree and rent her clothes and said, "O villain, if these be thy dealings with me before my eyes, how dost thou when thou art absent from me?" Quoth he, "What aileth thee?" and she said, "I saw thee swive the woman before my very eyes." "Not so, by Allah!" cried he. "But hold thy peace till I go up and see." So he climbed the tree and no sooner did he begin to do so than up came the lover [from his hiding-place] and taking the woman by the legs, [fell to swiving her]. When the husband came to the top of the tree, he looked and beheld a man swiving his wife. So he said, "O strumpet, what doings are these?" And he made haste to come down from the tree to the ground; [but meanwhile the lover had returned to his hiding-place] and his wife said to him, "What sawest thou?" "I saw a man swive thee," answered he; and she said, "Thou liest; thou sawest nought and sayst this but of conjecture." On this wise they did three times, and every time [he climbed the tree] the lover came up out of the underground place and bestrode her, whilst her husband looked on and she still said, "O liar, seest thou aught?" "Yes," would he answer and came down in haste, but saw no one and she said to him, "By my life, look and say nought but the truth!" Then said he to her, "Arise, let us depart this place, for it is full of Jinn and Marids." [So they returned to their house] and passed the night [there] and the man arose in the morning, assured that this was all but imagination and illusion. And so the lover accomplished his desire. Source: John Payne, Tales from the Arabic of the Breslau and Calcutta (1814-18) Editions of the Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night Not Occurring in the Other Printed Texts of the Work . Now first done into English, vol. 1 (London: Printed for subscribers only, 1884), pp. 270-72 . Square brackets denote Payne's additions to a faulty original text. Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Simpleton Husband 1001 Nights (translated by Richard Burton) There was once in olden time a foolish man and an ignorant, who had abounding wealth, and his wife was a beautiful woman, who loved a handsome youth. The Cicisbeo [gallant] used to watch for her husband's absence and come to her, and on this wise he abode a long while. One day of the days, as the woman was closeted with her lover, he said to her, "O my lady and my beloved, an [if] thou desire me and love me, give me possession of thy person and satisfy my need in the presence of thy husband; otherwise I will never again come to thee nor draw near thee while I live my life." Now she loved him with exceeding love and c&uld not suffer his separation an hour nor could endure to anger him; so, when she heard his words, she said to him, "Bismillah, so be it, in Allah's name, O my darling and coolth of mine eyes: may he not live who would vex thee!" Quoth he, "Today?" And quoth she, "Yes, by thy life," and made an appointment with him for this. When her husband came home, she said to him, "I want to go a-pleasuring," and he said, "With all my heart." So he went, till he came to a goodly place, abounding in vines and water, whither he carried her and pitched her a tent by the side of a tall tree; and she betook herself to a place alongside the tent and made her there a Sarddb [an underground vault], in which she hid her lover. Then said she to her husband, "I want to climb this tree"; and he said, "Do so." So she clomb it and when she came to the tree-top, she cried out and slapped her face, saying, "O thou lecher, are these thy lewd ways? Thou swarest faith to me, and thou liedest." And she repeated her speech twice and thrice. Then she came down from the tree and rent her raiment and said, "O lecher, an [if] these be thy dealings with me before my eyes, how dost thou when thou art absent from me?" Quoth he, "What aileth thee?" and quoth she, "I saw thee futter the woman before my very eyes." Cried he, "Not so, by Allah! But hold thy peace till I go up and see." So he clomb the tree and no sooner did he begin to do so than out came the lover from his hiding place and taking the woman by the legs, fell to shagging her. When the husband came to the top of the tree, he looked and beheld a man futtering his wife; so he called out, "O whore, what doings are these?" and he made haste to come down from the tree to the ground. But meanwhile the lover had returned to his hiding place and his wife asked him, "What sawest thou?" and he answered, "I saw a man shag thee." But she said, "Thou liest; thou sawest naught and sayst this only by way of phantasy." The same they did three several times, and every time he clomb the tree the lover came up out of the underground place and mounted her, whilst her husband looked on and she still said, "Seest thou aught, O liar?" "Yes," would he answer, and came down in haste, but saw no one and she said to him, "By my life, look and speak naught but sooth!" Then he cried to her, "Arise, let us depart this place, for 'tis full of Jinn and Marids." Accordingly, they returned to their house and nighted there, and the man arose in the morning, assured that this was all but phantasy and fascination. And so the lover won his wicked will. Source: Richard F. Burton, Supplemental Nights to the Book of the Thousand and One Nights , vol. 1 (Printed by the Burton Club for private subscribers only, 1886), pp. 239-41 . Return to the table of contents . The Twenty-Ninth Vizier's Story Turkey There was in the palace of the world a grocer, and he had a wife, a beauty of the age, and that woman had a lover. One day this woman's lover said, "If your husband found us out, he would not leave either of us sound." The woman said, "I am able to manage that I shall make merry with you before my husband's eyes." The youth said, "Such a thing cannot be." The woman replied, "In such and such a place there is a large tree. Tomorrow I will go on an outing with my husband to the foot of that tree. Hide yourself in a secret place near that tree, and when I make a sign to you, come." As her lover left, her husband arrived. The woman said, "Man, I would like to go on an outing with you tomorrow to such and such a tree." The man replied, "So be it." When it was morning the woman and her husband went to that tree. The woman said, "They say that he who eats this sweetmeat sees single things as though they were double," and she ate some and gave her husband some to eat. Half an hour afterward the woman climbed up the tree and turned and looked down and began, "May you be struck blind! May God punish you! Man, what are you doing? Is there anyone who has ever done such a thing? You are making merry with a strange woman under the eyes of your wife. Quick, divorce me!" And she cried out. Her husband said, "What is with you, woman? Have you gone mad? There is no one with me." Said the woman, "Be silent, you unblushing and shameless fellow. The woman is with you, and you deny it." Her husband said, "Come down." She replied, "I will not come down so long as that woman is with you." Her husband began to swear, protesting, and the woman came down and said to him, "Where is that harlot? Quick, show her to me, or else!" Again the man swore, and the woman said, "Can it then be the work of the sweetmeat?" The man said, "May be." Said the woman, "You too go up and look down on me, and let us see." Her husband took hold of the tree, and while he was climbing, the woman made a sign to her lover. The man looked down and saw the woman making merry with a youth. This time the man cried out, "Away with you! What is with you, you shameless boy?" The woman said, "You are lying." But the man could not endure it and began to come down, and the youth ran off. Source: Sheykh-Zada, The History of the Forty Vezirs; or, The Story of the Forty Morns and Eves , translated by E. J. W. Gibb (London: George Redway, 1886), pp. 303-305 . Translation modernized by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Return to the table of contents . Husband, Wife, Lover, and Mango Tree Tibet/Nepal In a certain village lived an honest man who had a wife both beautiful and clever, but devoted to another man. One day she went by assignation to a grove of mango trees, and there dallied with her lover. But the husband also came. So the lover, seeing him approaching, jumped up hastily, and stepping aside, stood modestly concealed. Then the woman, seeing her lord, said to him, "Can I have a mango to eat?" He replied, "I will fetch you one." Quoth she: "My longing is to climb up myself and eat a mango." "Do so for yourself then," said he. So when she had climbed up the tree, she looked at her husband and said: "My dear, what do you mean by making love to another woman before my very eyes?" "What are you talking about?" said he. "There is no other woman." "Can this be the nature of the tree [so that one sees double]?" said she. "You come up and look at me standing on the ground." When so it was done, she called her paramour, and took her fill of love. Then said the husband: "Yes, indeed, it is the nature of the tree." Whereon the lover made off. Source: Cecil Bendall, "The Tantrakhyana, a Collection of Indian Folklore, from a Unique Sanskrit Manuscript Discovered in Nepal," tale 42, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland , new series, vol. 20 (London: Trübner and Company, 1888), pp. 500-501 . Bendall's source: A Tibetan manuscript dated A.D. 1484. Return to the table of contents . The Fourth Lady, Her Husband, and the Brahmin India/Persia Frame Story Five cunning women meet a handsome but naive Brahmin at a well in Benares [Veranasi], India, then lead him into a series of compromising situations, each claiming to be a lesson from the Tirrea Bede , (the fifth Veda), although in truth the Hindus recognize only four such sacred texts. Story 8 The fourth lady, ... having bestowed her attention on the pilgrim Brahmin, dispatched him to an orchard; and having gone home, said to her wise husband, "I have heard that in the orchard of a certain husbandman, there is a date tree, the fruit of which is of remarkably fine flavour; but what is yet stranger, whoever ascends it, sees many wonderful objects. If today, going to visit this orchard, we gather dates from this tree, and also see the wonders of it, it will not be unproductive of amusement." In short, she so worked upon her husband with flattering speeches and caresses, that nolens volens [unwillingly or willingly] he went to the orchard, and at the instigation of his wife, ascended the tree. At this instant she beckoned to the Brahmin, who was previously seated, expectantly, in a corner of the garden. The husband, from the top of the tree, beholding what was not fit to be seen, exclaimed in extreme rage, "Ah! thou shameless Russian-born wretch, what abominable action is this?" [ footnote ] The wife making not the least answer, the flames of anger seized the mind of the man, and he began to descend from the tree; when the Brahmin with activity and speed having hurried over the fourth section of the Tirrea Bede, went his way. VERSE. The road to repose is that of activity, and quickness! The wife, during her husband's descent from the tree having arranged her plan, said, "Surely, man, frenzy must have deprived thy brain of the fumes of sense, that having foolishly set up such a cry, and not reflecting. Upon thy own disgrace, (for here, excepting thyself, what male is present ?) thou wou'dst fix upon me the charge of infidelity?" The husband, when he saw no person near, was astonished, and said to himself, "Certainly, this vision must have been miraculous." The completely artful wife, from the hesitation of her husband, guessed the cause, and impudently began to abuse him. Then instantly tying her vest round her waist, she ascended the tree. When she had reached the topmost branch, she suddenly cried out, "O thou shameless man, what abominable action is this! If thy evil star hath led thee from the path of virtue, surely thou mightest have in secret ventured upon it. Doubtless to pull down the curtain of modesty from thy eyes, and with such impudence to commit such a wicked deed, is the very extreme of debauchery." The husband replied, "Woman, do not thus ridiculously cry out, but be silent; for such is the property of this tree, that whoever ascends it, sees man or woman below in such situations." The cunning wife now came down, and said to her husband, "What a charming garden and amusing spot is this! where one can gather fruit, and at the same time behold the wonders of the world." The husband replied, "Destruction seize the wonders which falsely accuse man of abomination!" In short, the devilish wife, notwithstanding the impudence of such an action, escaped safely to her house; and the next day, according to custom, attending at the well, introduced the Brahmin to the ladies, and informed them of her worthy contrivance. Source: Jonathan Scott, Bahar-Danush; or, Garden of Knowledge: An Oriental Romance , translated from the Persic of Einaiut Oollah [Inayat Allah], vol. 2 (Shrewsbury: Printed by J. and W. Eddowes for T. Cadell, jun., and W. Davies, in the Strand, London, 1799), story 8, lesson 4, pp. 64-68 . Footnote by Scott: "The Asiatics have a very contemptible opinion of the Russians, especially of the females, whom they believe to be void of common modesty." [ Return to the text. ] Einaiut Oollah, modern English spelling Inayat Allah , or in full: Shaikh Inayat Allah Kamboh , was born in 1608 and died in 1671 at Delhi. Return to the table of contents . The Vibhîtaka Tree India There is a large village called Kukhâddâ; in it dwelt a certain Jarasa, who was a great fool. His wife's name was Devikâ. She was a flighty, ill- conducted person, and had a lover -- a Brahman -- whom she used to meet under a Vibhîtaka tree, some way from the village. These meetings were a great subject of gossip in the place, and in course of time her husband heard of them. So he made up his mind to see into the matter himself and went and climbed into the tree. What he saw from his hiding-place fully justified all the gossip, and he called out to his wife: "You good-for-nothing hussy! You have been up to this game for some time past." She was put into somewhat of a difficulty and said: "I don't know what you mean!" "I will let you know what I mean," he answered, "if you will just wait till I come down." So she promised to wait till he came down from the tree, and meanwhile sent her lover away. At last her husband reached the ground. "It is of no use your making excuses," he said. "You have been caught in flagranti delicto. " "My dear husband!" she replied, "You must know that this tree has very peculiar properties: anyone who climbs up into it can see at once whether their husband or wife has attractions away from home." Her husband replied, "Well, you climb up and see if it is so." Which she did, and cried out: "You good-for-nothing wretch! You have been running after other women for days and days." As this was perfectly true the fool had nothing to say, and so he made it up with his wife and they went home together. Source: B. Hale Wortham, The Enchanted Parrot: Being a Selection from the "Suka Saptati," or, The Seventy Tales of a Parrot , translated from the Sanskrit (London: Luzac and Company, 1911), story 28, pp. 72-73 . The Suka Saptati , also spelled Sukasaptati , or Seventy Tales of a Parrot is a collection of Sanskrit stories dating from the 12th century or earlier. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 14, 2014. Charles Perrault's Mother Goose Tales Charles Perrault's Mother Goose Tales compiled by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2013 The Man Charles Perrault (1628-1703) was a member of the Académie Française and a leading intellectual of his time. Ironically, his dialogue Parallèles des anciens et des modernes (Parallels between the Ancients and the Moderns), 1688-1697, which compared the authors of antiquity unfavorably to modern writers, served as a forerunner for the Age of Enlightenment in Europe, an era that was not always receptive to tales of magic and fantasy. The Stories Perrault could have not predicted that his reputation for future generations would rest almost entirely on a slender book published in 1697 containing eight simple stories with the unassuming title: Stories or Tales from Times Past, with Morals , with the added title in the frontispiece, Tales of Mother Goose . The original title, in French, was Histoires ou contes du temps passé, avec des moralités: Contes de ma mère l'Oye . Charles Perrault, in a symbolically significant gesture, did not publish the book in question under his own name but rather under the name of his son Pierre. Perrault chose his stories well, and he recorded them with wit and style. His narratives belong to a story-telling tradition that has been shared by countless generations. He did not invent these tales -- even in his day their plots were well known -- but he gave them literary legitimacy. Stories or Tales from Times Past; or, Tales of Mother Goose (1697) Linked sites will open in a new window. Return to this page by closing the targeted window. English title French title Aarne-Thompson-Uther type no. The Sleeping Beauty in the Wood La belle au bois dormant Type 410 Little Red Riding Hood Le petit chaperon rouge Type 333 Blue Beard La Barbe bleüe Type 312 The Master Cat; or, Puss in Boots Le Maistre Chat, ou le Chat Botté Type 545B The Fairies Les Fées Type 480 Cinderella; or, The Little Glass Slipper Cendrillon, ou la petite pantoufle de verre Type 510A Ricky of the Tuft Riquet à la Houppe Type 711 Little Thumb Le petit Pouçet Type 327B Perrault's verse narratives Perrault's fairy-tale legacy includes three additional titles -- verse narratives published separately, in 1691, 1693, and 1694 respectively. English title French title Aarne-Thompson-Uther type no. Griselda Griselidis, Nouvelle Type 887 The Ridiculous Wishes Les Souhaits Ridicules, Conte Type 750A Donkey Skin Peau d' Asne, Conte Type 510B Links Linked sites will open in a new window. Return to this page by closing the targeted window. General Charles Perrault , from Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia. The Fairy Tales of Charles Perrault , from the SurLaLune fairy tale pages. Electronic texts Perrault's Fairy Tales . The texts of "Sleeping Beauty," "Blue Beard," "The Master Cat or Puss in Boots," "The Fairies," "Cinderella; or, The Little Glass Slipper," "Ricky of the Tuft," and "Little Tom Thumb," including illustrations by Gustave Doré. The Tales of Mother Goose by Charles Perrault . A Project Gutenberg ebook. Includes "Cinderella; or, the Little Glass Slipper," "The Sleeping Beauty in the Wood," "Little Thumb," "The Master Cat; or, Puss in Boots," "Riquet of the Tuft," "Blue Beard," "The Fairy," and "Little Red Riding-Hood." Les contes de Perrault . A French-language site featuring Perrault's tales. Scanned books in English Four and Twenty Fairy Tales , selected from those of Perrault and other popular writers, translated by J. R. Planché, with illustrations by Godwin, Corbould, and Harvey. London: G. Routledge and Company, 1858. The Tales of Mother Goose , as first collect by Charles Perrault in 1696. A new translation by Charles Welsh. Introduction by M. V. O'Shea. Illustrated by D. J. Munro after drawings by Gustave Doré. Boston: D. C. Heath and Company, 1901. Old-Time Stories told by Master Charles Perrault . Translated from the French by A. E. Johnson, with illustrations by W. Heath Robinson. New York: Dodd, Mead, and Company, 1921. The Fairy Tales of Charles Perrault . Illustrated by Harry Clarke with an introduction by Thomas Bodkin. Translated by Robert Samber. Translation revised and corrected by J. E. Mansion. London: George G. Harrap and Company, 1922. Scanned books in French Les Contes des Fées en Prose et en verse de Charles Perrault. Duxième édition, revue et corrig&eacutee sur les éditions originales et précédée d'une lettre critique par Ch. Giraud. Lyon: Louis Perrin, 1865. Contes de Fées , tirés de Claude [Charles] Perrault, de Mmes D'Aulnoy et Leprince de Beaumont et illustrés de 65 vignettes dessinées sur bois. Paris: Librairie Hachette, 1878. Les Contes de Perrault , d'après des textes originaux, avec notice, notes et variantes et une étude sur leurs origines et leur sens mythique par Frédéric Dillaye. Paris: Alphonse Lemerre, 1880. Perrault's Popular Tales , edited from the original editions, with introduction, etc., by Andrew Lang. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1888. For more information about folktale types see: Antti Aarne and Stith Thompson, The Types of the Folktale: A Classification and Bibliography . FF Communications, no. 184. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 1961. D. L. Ashliman, A Guide to Folktales in the English Language . New York; Westport Connecticut; and London: Greenwood Press, 1987. Hans-Jörg Uther, The Types of International Folktales: A Classification and Bibliography Based on the System of Antti Aarne and Stith Thompson . 3 vols. FF Communications, nos. 284-86. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 2004. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 8, 2013. Folktales from the Philippines Folktales from the Philippines Edited by D. L. Ashliman Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts Contents How the First Head Was Taken The Man with the Coconuts The Boy Who Became a Stone Dogedog The Carabao and the Shell Links How the First Head Was Taken Igorot One day the Moon, who was a woman named Kabigat, sat out in the yard making a large copper pot. The copper was still soft and pliable like clay, and the woman squatted on the ground with the heavy pot against her knees while she patted and shaped it. Now while she was working a son of Cal-chal, the Sun, came by and stopped to watch her mold the form. Against the inside of the jar she pressed a stone, while on the outside with a wooden paddle dripping with water she pounded and slapped until she had worked down the bulges and formed a smooth surface. The boy was greatly interested in seeing the jar grow larger, more beautiful, and smoother with each stroke, and he stood still for some time. Suddenly the Moon looked up and saw him watching her. Instantly she struck him with her paddle, cutting off his head. Now the Sun was not near, but he knew as soon as the Moon had cut off his son's head. And hurrying to the spot, he put the boy's head back on, and he was alive again. Then the Sun said to the Moon, "You cut off my son's head, and because you did this, ever after on the earth people will cut off each other's heads. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Company, 1916), pp.111-112. The term "Igorot" is applied, somewhat loosely, to the indigenous peoples of the four mountain provinces of Luzon: Benguet, Mountain Province, Ifugao, and Kalinga-Apayao. The Man with the Coconuts Tinguian One day a man who had been to gather his coconuts loaded his horse heavily with the fruit. On the way home he met a boy whom he asked how long it would take to reach the house. "If you go slowly," said the boy, looking at the load on the horse, "you will arrive very soon; but if you go fast, it will take you all day." The man could not believe this strange speech, so he hurried his horse. But the coconuts fell off and he had to stop to pick them up. Then he hurried his horse all the more to make up for lost time, but the coconuts fell off again. Many time he did this, and it was night when he reached home. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg, 1916), p. 88. The Boy Who Became a Stone Tinguian One day a little boy named Elonen sat out in the yard making a bird snare, and as he worked, a little bird called to him: "Tik-tik-lo-den" (come and catch me). "I am making a snare for you," said the boy; but the bird continued to call until the snare was finished. Then Elonen ran and threw the snare over the bird and caught it, and he put it in a jar in his house while he went with the other boys to swim. While he was away, his grandmother grew hungry, so she ate the bird, and when Elonen returned and found that his bird was gone, he was so sad that he wished he might go away and never come back. He went out into the forest and walked a long distance, until finally he came to a big stone and said: "Stone, open your mouth and eat me." And the stone opened its mouth and swallowed the boy. When his grandmother missed the boy, she went out and looked everywhere, hoping to find him. Finally she passed near the stone and it cried out: "Here he is." Then the old woman tried to open the stone but she could not, so she called the horses to come and help her. They came and kicked it, but it would not break. Then she called the carabao and they hooked it, but they only broke their horns. She called the chickens, which pecked it, and the thunder, which shook it, but nothing could open it, and she had to go home without the boy. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg, 1916), pp. 84-85. Dogedog Tinguian Dogedog had always been very lazy, and now that his father and mother were dead and he had no one to care for him, he lived very poorly. He had little to eat. His house was old and small and so poor that it had not even a floor. Still he would rather sit all day and idle away his time than to work and have more things. One day, however, when the rainy season was near at hand, Dogedog began thinking how cold he would be when the storms came, and he felt so sorry for himself that he decided to make a floor in his house. Wrapping some rice in a banana leaf for his dinner, he took his long knife and went to the forest to cut some bamboo. He hung the bundle of rice in a tree until he should need it; but while he was working a cat came and ate it. When the hungry man came for his dinner, there was none left. Dogedog went back to his miserable little house which looked forlorn to him even, now that he had decided to have a floor. The next day he went again to the forest and hung his rice in the tree as he did before, but again the cat came and ate it. So the man had to go home without any dinner. The third day he took the rice, but this time he fixed a trap in the tree, and when the cat came it was caught. "Now I have you!" cried the man when he found the cat; "and I shall kill you for stealing my rice." "Oh, do not kill me," pleaded the cat, "and I will be of some use to you." So Dogedog decided to spare the cat's life, and he took it home and tied it near the door to guard the house. Some time later when he went to look at it, he was very much surprised to find that it had become a cock. "Now I can go to the cock-fight at Magsingal," cried the man. And he was very happy, for he had much rather do that than work. Thinking no more of getting wood for his floor, he started out at once for Magsingal with the cock under his arm. As he was crossing a river he met an alligator which called out to him: "Where are you going, "Dogedog?" "To the cock-fight at Magsingal," replied the man as he fondly stroked the rooster. "Wait, and I will go with you," said the alligator; and he drew himself out of the water. The two walking together soon entered a forest where they met a deer and it asked: "Where are you going, Dogedog?" "To the cock-fight at Magsingal," said the man. "Wait and I will go with you," said the deer; and he also joined them. By and by they met a mound of earth that had been raised by the ants, and they would have passed without noticing it had it not inquired: "Where are you going, Dogedog?" "To the cock-fight at Magsingal," said the man once more; and the mound of earth joined them. The company then hurried on, and just as they were leaving the forest, they passed a big tree in which was a monkey. "Where are you going, Dogedog?" shrieked the monkey. And without waiting for an answer, he scrambled down the tree and followed them. As the party walked along they talked together, and the alligator said to Dogedog: "If any man wants to dive into the water, I can stay under longer than he." Then the deer, not to be outdone, said: "If any man wants to run, I can run faster." The mound of earth, anxious to show its strength, said: "If any man wants to wrestle, I can beat him." And the monkey said: "If any man wants to climb, I can go higher." They reached Magsingal in good time and the people were ready for the fight to begin. When Dogedog put his rooster, which had been a cat, into the pit, it killed the other cock at once, for it used its claws like a cat. The people brought more roosters and wagered much money, but Dogedog's cock killed all the others until there was not one left in Magsingal, and Dogedog won much money. Then they went outside the town and brought all the cocks they could find, but not one could win over that of Dogedog. When the cocks were all dead, the people wanted some other sport, so they brought a man who could stay under water for a long time, and Dogedog made him compete with the alligator. But after a while the man had to come up first. Then they brought a swift runner and he raced with the deer, but the man was left far behind. Next they looked around until they found a very large man who was willing to contend with the mound of earth, but after a hard struggle the man was thrown. Finally they brought a man who could climb higher than anyone else, but the monkey went far above him, and he had to give up. All these contests had brought much money to Dogedog, and now he had to buy two horses to carry his sacks of silver. As soon as he reached home, he bought the house of a very rich man and went to live in it. And he was very happy, for he did not have to work any more. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg, 1916), pp. 91-94. This tale is similar to Aarne-Thompson type 513. Note by Cole: "The story shows the influence of the Christianized native, among whom cock-fighting is a very popular sport. It is found only among those Tinguian who come into contact with this class." Addendum by Ashliman: Cock-fighting remains a very popular sport in the Philippines. The Carabao and the Shell Tinguian One very hot day, when a carabao went into the river to bathe, he met a shell and they began talking together. "You are very slow," said the carabao to the shell. "Oh, no," replied the shell. "I can beat you in a race." "Then let us try and see," said the carabao. So they went out on the bank and started to run. After the carabao had gone a long distance he stopped and called, "Shell!" And another shell lying by the river answered, "Here I am!" Then the carabao, thinking that it was the same shell with which he was racing, ran on. By and by he stopped again and called, "Shell!" And another shell answered, "Here I am!" The carabao was surprised that the shell could keep up with him. But he ran on and on, and every time he stopped to call, another shell answered him. But he was determined that the shell should not beat him, so he ran until he dropped dead. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg, 1916), p. 89. Note by Cole: "Another version of this tale is found in the British North Borneo in the story of the plandok and the crab." Addendum by Ashliman: Variants of this fable (Aarne-Thompson type 275A*) are found throughout Europe. Links D. L. Ashliman's Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts . Revised August 26, 2000. Pied Piper of Hameln The Pied Piper of Hameln and related legends from other towns translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2021 Contents Ratcatchers Who Abduct Children The Children of Hameln (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Pied Piper of Hamelin: A Child's Story (Robert Browning). A Miracle of God at Hameln (Graf Froben Christoph von Zimmern). A Miraculous Passage in Hamelen (James Howell). The Pide Piper (Richard Verstegan). The Pyed Piper (Nathaniel Wanley). A Marvellous Prank Plaid by the Devil at Hamelen, a Town in Germany (George Sinclair). Link to The Ratcatcher . The Grimms' "Children of Hameln" as retold by Charles Marelle. Source: Andrew Lang, The Red Fairy Book (London and New York: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1890), pp. 208-14 . Lang's source: Charles Marelle, " Le preneur de rats ," Affenschwanz, et cetera: Variantes orales de contes populaires français et étrangers (Braunschweig: George Westermann, 1888), pp. 53-59. The Magic Fife (Germany). The Ratcatcher of Korneuburg (Austria). The Pied Piper of Newtown (England). Ratcatchers (But No Abduction of Children) The Ratcatcher (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Rats in Neustadt-Eberswalde (J. D. H. Temme). Katzenveit as an Exterminator in Tripstrille (J. G. Th. Grässe). The Expulsion of Rats from the Island of Ummanz (A. Haas). Rübezahl Becomes a Ratcatcher (Moravia, Johannes Praetorius). The Ratcatcher of Freistadt (Austria). The Music Man (Austria). Mice in Glurns (Austria / Italy). Angionini the Magician (France). The Rat Hunter (Denmark). The Magician and the Rats (Ireland). Mice in Akureyar (Iceland). Avicenna and the Mouse Plague at Aleppo (Syria). Mysterious Disappearance of Children The Devil in Hameln (Hiob Fincelius). The Devil in Likeness of a Pied Piper (Robert Burton). Hurdy-Gurdy Player Abducts Children (A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz). Children's Pilgrimage (Ludwig Bechstein). The Children of Erfurt (Emil Sommer). The Dancing Children of Erfurt (J. G. Th. Grässe). Tradition's Hoary Legend (Northern Ireland, James Kirkpatrick). Related Links. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Ratcatchers Who Abduct Children The Children of Hameln Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm In the year 1284 a mysterious man appeared in Hameln. He was wearing a coat of many colored, bright cloth, for which reason he was called the Pied Piper. He claimed to be a ratcatcher, and he promised that for a certain sum he would rid the city of all mice and rats. The citizens struck a deal, promising him a certain price. The ratcatcher then took a small fife from his pocket and began to blow on it. Rats and mice immediately came from every house and gathered around him. When he thought that he had them all he led them to the River Weser where he pulled up his clothes and walked into the water. The animals all followed him, fell in, and drowned. Now that the citizens had been freed of their plague, they regretted having promised so much money, and, using all kinds of excuses, they refused to pay him. Finally he went away, bitter and angry. He returned on June 26, Saint John's and Saint Paul's Day, early in the morning at seven o'clock (others say it was at noon), now dressed in a hunter's costume, with a dreadful look on his face and wearing a strange red hat. He sounded his fife in the streets, but this time it wasn't rats and mice that came to him, but rather children: a great number of boys and girls from their fourth year on. Among them was the mayor's grown daughter. The swarm followed him, and he led them into a mountain, where he disappeared with them. All this was seen by a babysitter who, carrying a child in her arms, had followed them from a distance, but had then turned around and carried the news back to the town. The anxious parents ran in droves to the town gates seeking their children. The mothers cried out and sobbed pitifully. Within the hour messengers were sent everywhere by water and by land inquiring if the children -- or any of them -- had been seen, but it was all for naught. In total, one hundred thirty were lost. Two, as some say, had lagged behind and came back. One of them was blind and the other mute. The blind one was not able to point out the place, but was able to tell how they had followed the piper. The mute one was able to point out the place, although he [or she] had heard nothing. One little boy in shirtsleeves had gone along with the others, but had turned back to fetch his jacket and thus escaped the tragedy, for when he returned, the others had already disappeared into a cave within a hill. This cave is still shown. Until the middle of the eighteenth century, and probably still today, the street through which the children were led out to the town gate was called the bunge-lose (drumless, soundless, quiet) street, because no dancing or music was allowed there. Indeed, when a bridal procession on its way to church crossed this street, the musicians would have to stop playing. The mountain near Hameln where the children disappeared is called Poppenberg. Two stone monuments in the form of crosses have been erected there, one on the left side and one on the right. Some say that the children were led into a cave, and that they came out again in Transylvania. The citizens of Hameln recorded this event in their town register, and they came to date all their proclamations according to the years and days since the loss of their children. According to Seyfried the 22nd rather than the 26th of June was entered into the town register. The following lines were inscribed on the town hall: In the year 1284 after the birth of Christ From Hameln were led away One hundred thirty children, born at this place Led away by a piper into a mountain. And on the new gate was inscribed: Centum ter denos cum magus ab urbe puellos duxerat ante annos CCLXXII condita porta fuit. [This gate was built 272 years after the magician led the 130 children from the city.] In the year 1572 the mayor had the story portrayed in the church windows. The accompanying inscription has become largely illegible. In addition, a coin was minted in memory of the event. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Kinder zu Hameln," Deutsche Sagen , herausgegeben von den Brüdern Grimm (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 244, pp. 330-33 . In following editions this legend is numbered 245. Footnotes by the Grimms (included in later editions): Compare a similar legend in the fictional or composed Aventures du Mandarin Fum Hoam, 44 soirée , German translation, Leipzig, 1727, vol. 2, pp. 167-172. Chardin records only the name of the Tower of Forty Virgins. In opposition to Erich, Martin Schock, in his Fabula hamelensis , rejects the truth of this story. Inscription, in gold letters, on a house in Hameln: "In the year 1284 on the Day of John and Paul, the 26th of June, a piper wearing clothes of many colors abducted 130 children, born in Hameln and lost at Calvary on the Koppen." (Schöppach) In 1818 the Grimms published a second volume of Deutsche Sagen , herausgegeben von den Brüdern Grimm, zweiter Teil. Return to the table of contents. The Pied Piper of Hamelin: A Child's Story Robert Browning Hamelin town's in Brunswick, By famous Hanover city; The River Weser, deep and wide, Washes its wall on the southern side; A pleasanter spot you never spied; But, when begins my ditty, Almost five hundred years ago, To see townsfolk suffer so From vermin, was a pity. Rats! They fought the dogs, and killed the cats, And bit the babies in the cradles, And ate the cheeses out of the vats, And licked the soup from the cook's own ladles, Split open the kegs of salted sprats, Made nests inside men's Sunday hats, And even spoiled the women's chats, By drowning their speaking With shrieking and squeaking In fifty different sharps and flats. At last the people in a body To the Town Hall came flocking: "'Tis clear," cried they, "our Mayor's a noddy; And as for our Corporation -- shocking To think we buy gowns lined with ermine For dolts that can't or won't determine What's best to rid us of our vermin! You hope, because you're old and obese, To find in the furry civic robe ease? Rouse up, sirs! Give your brains a racking To find the remedy we're lacking, Or, sure as fate, we'll send you packing!" At this the Mayor and Corporation Quaked with a mighty consternation. An hour they sate in council, At length the Mayor broke silence: "For a guilder I'd my ermine gown sell, I wish I were a mile hence! It's easy to bid one rack one's brain -- I'm sure my poor head aches again I've scratched it so, and all in vain. Oh for a trap, a trap, a trap!" Just as he said this, what should hap At the chamber-door but a gentle tap? "Bless us," cried the Mayor, "What's that?" (With the Corporation as he sat, Looking little though wondrous fat; Nor brighter was his eye, nor moister Than a too-long-opened oyster, Save when at noon his paunch grew mutinous For a plate of turtle, green and glutinous.) "Only a scraping of shoes on the mat? Anything like the sound of a rat Makes my heart go pit-a-pat!" "Come in!" -- the Mayor cried, looking bigger: And in did come the strangest figure! His queer long coat from heel to head Was half of yellow and half of red; And he himself was tall and thin, With sharp blue eyes, each like a pin, And light loose hair, yet swarthy skin, No tuft on cheek nor beard on chin, But lips where smiles went out and in -- There was no guessing his kith and kin! And nobody could enough admire The tall man and his quaint attire. Quoth one: "It's as my great-grandsire, Starting up at the Trump of Doom's tone, Had walked this way from his painted tombstone!" He advanced to the council-table: And, "Please your honors," said he, "I'm able, By means of a secret charm, to draw All creatures living beneath the sun, That creep, or swim, or fly, or run, After me so as you never saw! And I chiefly use my charm On creatures that do people harm, The mole, and toad, and newt, and viper; And people call me the Pied Piper." (And here they noticed round his neck A scarf of red and yellow stripe, To match with his coat of selfsame cheque; And at the scarf's end hung a pipe; And his fingers, they noticed, were ever straying As if impatient to be playing Upon this pipe, as low it dangled Over his vesture, so old-fangled.) "Yet," said he "poor piper as I am, In Tartary I freed the Cham, Last June, from his huge swarms of gnats; I eased in Asia the Nizam Of a monstrous brood of vampire-bats: And, as for what your brain bewilders, If I can rid your town of rats Will you give me a thousand guilders?" "One? fifty thousand!" -- was the exclamation Of the astonished Mayor and Corporation. Into the street the Piper stept, Smiling first a little smile, As if he knew what magic slept In his quiet pipe the while; Then, like a musical adept, To blow the pipe his lips he wrinkled, And green and blue his sharp eyes twinkled Like a candle flame where salt is sprinkled; And ere three shrill notes the pipe uttered, You heard as if an army muttered; And the muttering grew to a grumbling; And the grumbling grew to a mighty rumbling; And out of the houses the rats came tumbling: Great rats, small rats, lean rats, brawny rats, Brown rats, black rats, grey rats, tawny rats, Grave old plodders, gay young friskers, Fathers, mothers, uncles, cousins, Cocking tails and pricking whiskers, Families by tens and dozens, Brothers, sisters, husbands, wives -- Followed the Piper for their lives. From street to street he piped, advancing, And step for step, they followed, dancing, Until they came to the river Weser Wherein all plunged and perished -- Save one who, stout as Julius Caesar, Swam across and lived to carry (As he the manuscript he cherished) To Rat-land home his commentary: Which was, "At the first shrill notes of the pipe, I heard a sound as of scraping tripe, And putting apples, wondrous ripe, Into a cider press's gripe: And a moving away of pickle-tub-boards, And a leaving ajar of conserve-cupboards, And the drawing the corks of train-oil-flasks, And a breaking the hoops of butter-casks; And it seemed as if a voice (Sweeter far than by harp or by psaltery Is breathed) called out, Oh rats, rejoice! The world is grown to one vast drysaltery! So munch on, crunch on, take your nuncheon, Breakfast, supper, dinner, luncheon! And just as a bulky sugar-puncheon, All ready staved, like a great sun shone Glorious scarce an inch before me, Just as methought it said, 'Come, bore me!' -- I found the Weser rolling o'er me." You should have heard the Hamelin people Ringing the bells till they rocked the steeple. "Go," cried the Mayor, "and get long poles! Poke out the nests and block up the holes! Consult with carpenters and builders, And leave in our town not even a trace Of the rats!" -- when suddenly up the face Of the Piper perked in the market-place, With a, "First, if you please, my thousand guilders!" A thousand guilders! The Mayor looked blue; So did the Corporation, too. For council dinners made rare havoc With Claret, Moselle, Vin-de-Grave, Hock; And half the money would replenish Their cellar's biggest butt with Rhenish. To pay this sum to a wandering fellow With a gypsy coat of red and yellow! "Beside," quoth the Mayor, with a knowing wink, "Our business was done at the river's brink; We saw with our eyes the vermin sink, And what's dead can't come to life, I think. So, friend, we're not the folks to shrink From the duty of giving you something for drink, And a matter of money to put in your poke; But, as for the guilders, what we spoke Of them, as you very well know, was in joke. Beside, our losses have made us thrifty: A thousand guilders! Come, take fifty!" The Piper's face fell, and he cried, "No trifling! I can't wait, beside! I've promised to visit, by dinner-time Bagdat, and accept the prime Of the Head Cook's pottage, all he's rich in, For having left, in the Caliph's kitchen, Of a nest of scorpions no survivor: With him I proved no bargain-driver, With you, don't think I'll bait a stiver! And folks who put me in a passion May find me pipe to another fashion." "How?" cried the Mayor, "d'ye think I brook Being worse treated than a cook? Insulted by a lazy ribald With idle pipe and vesture piebald? You threaten us, fellow? Do your worst, Blow your pipe there till you burst!" Once more he stept into the street; And to his lips again Laid his long pipe of smooth straight cane; And ere he blew three notes (such sweet Soft notes as yet musician's cunning Never gave the enraptured air) There was a rustling, that seemed like a bustling Of merry crowds justling at pitching and hustling, Small feet were pattering, wooden shoes clattering, Little hands clapping, and little tongues chattering, And, like fowls in a farm-yard when barley is scattering, Out came the children running. All the little boys and girls, With rosy cheeks and flaxen curls, And sparkling eyes and teeth like pearls, Tripping and skipping, ran merrily after The wonderful music with shouting and laughter. The Mayor was dumb, and the Council stood As if they were changed into blocks of wood, Unable to move a step, or cry To the children merrily skipping by, -- Could only follow with the eye That joyous crowd at the Piper's back. But how the Mayor was on the rack, And the wretched Council's bosoms beat, As the Piper turned from the High Street To where the Weser rolled its waters Right in the way of their sons and daughters! However he turned from South to West, And to Koppelberg Hill his steps addressed, And after him the children pressed; Great was the joy in every breast. "He never can cross that mighty top! He's forced to let the piping drop, And we shall see our children stop!" When, lo! as they reached the mountain-side, A wondrous portal opened wide, As if a cavern was suddenly hollowed; And the Piper advanced and the children followed, And when all were in to the very last, The door in the mountain-side shut fast. Did I say, all? No! One was lame, And could not dance the whole of the way; And in after years, if you would blame His sadness, he was used to say, -- "It's dull in our town since my playmates left! I can't forget that I'm bereft Of all the pleasant sights they see, Which the Piper also promised me; For he led us, he said, to a joyous land, Joining the town and just at hand, Where waters gushed and fruit-trees grew, And flowers put forth a fairer hue, And everything was strange and new; The sparrows were brighter than the peacocks here, And their dogs outran our fallow deer, And honey-bees had lost their stings, And horses were born with eagles' wings; And just as I became assured My lame foot would be speedily cured, The music stopped and I stood still, And found myself outside the hill, Left alone against my will, To go now limping as before, And never hear of that country more!" Alas, alas for Hamelin! There came into many a burgher's pate A text which says, that heaven's Gate Opes to the rich at as easy rate As the needle's eye takes a camel in! The Mayor sent East, West, North, and South To offer the Piper by word of mouth, Wherever it was men's lot to find him, Silver and gold to his heart's content, If he'd only return the way he went, And bring the children behind him. But when they saw 'twas a lost endeavor, And Piper and dancers were gone forever, They made a decree that lawyers never Should think their records dated duly If, after the day of the month and year, These words did not as well appear, "And so long after what happened here On the Twenty-second of July, Thirteen hundred and Seventy-six;" And the better in memory to fix The place of the children's last retreat, They called it, the Pied Piper's Street -- Where any one playing on pipe or tabor Was sure for the future to lose his labor. Nor suffered they hostelry or tavern To shock with mirth a street so solemn; But opposite the place of the cavern They wrote the story on a column, And on the great church-window painted The same, to make the world acquainted How their children were stolen away, And there it stands to this very day. And I must not omit to say That in Transylvania there's a tribe Of alien people that ascribe The outlandish ways and dress On which their neighbors lay such stress, To their fathers and mothers having risen Out of some subterraneous prison Into which they were trepanned Long time ago in a mighty band Out of Hamelin town in Brunswick land, But how or why, they don't understand. So, Willy, let you and me be wipers Of scores out with all men -- especially pipers; And, whether they pipe us free from rats or from mice, If we've promised them aught, let us keep our promise. Source: Robert Browning, The Pied Piper of Hamelin . Illustrated by Kate Greenaway (London and New York: Frederick Warne and Company, 1888). This poem was written in 1842. Return to the table of contents. A Miracle of God at Hameln Graf Froben Christoph von Zimmern Coming back to the subject of rats, I must relate a miracle of God that happened similar to the one previously described: the banishment of the rats from the town of Hameln in Westphalia, an unusual and noteworthy event worth remembering because of its testimony that the Almighty creates strange creatures devoid of human reasoning. Several hundered years ago the inhabitants of the town of Hameln in Westphalia were plagued with such a great number of rats that it became nearly unbearable. It happened -- by chance or through a gift from God -- that there arrived a stranger or a traveler, such as the former traveling students in our German lands. Hearing of the towspeople's complaints and troubles he offered to get rid of the rats in return for a certain payment. They happily agreed to this and settled on a payment of several hundred gulden. Thereupon he walked through all the town's streets with a pipe, which he put to his mouth and blew upon. Immediately all the rats in the entire town came from all the houses and followed at his feet in unbelievable numbers to the outskirts of the town. He banished them into the nearst sacred mountain, and from then onward there was no sign of the rats in the town. Now the townspeople had the promised money, but when he demanded it they hid it away and refused to pay him, claiming the task had cost him no effort or expense, adding that he had succeeded easily with the help of some strange art. He should not ask for so much, but shoud instead accept a lesser sum. The strange man would not withdraw from the original agreement, insisting that they pay him what they had promised. If they failed to do so they would regret it. The townspeople insisted that it was too much, and they no longer wanted to give it to him. When he saw that he was to receive nothing, he once again walked through all the town's streets with his pipe, as he had done before. This time a majority of the young children under eight or nine years, boys and girls, followed at his feet to the nearest mountain. Miraculously it opened up before them, and the stranger walked inside with the children. It immediately closed again, and neither the man nor the children were ever seen again. A great cry of grief emerged from the entire town, but they could do nothing other than commit themselves to the Allmighty and confess their own stupidity and greed which had caused this evil. This miraculous event will be remembered eternally, for everyone in the town writes in their letters the date according to the number of years following the birth of Jesus, but also the number of years "since the loss of our children." Source (books.google.com): Graf Froben Christoph von Zimmern, Zimmerische Chronik , herausgegeben von Dr. K. A. Barack, Band 3 (Tübingen: Für den Litterarischen Verein in Stuttgart, 1869), pp. 274-75 . Source (Internet Archive): Graf Froben Christoph von Zimmern, Zimmerische Chronik , herausgegeben von Dr. K. A. Barack, zweite verbesserte Auflage, Band 3 (Freiburg im Breisgau und Tübingen: Akademische Verlagsbuchhandlung von J. C. B. Mohr, 1881), pp. 198-200 . This chronicle dates from 1565. Return to the table of contents . A Miraculous Passage in Hamelen James Howell To Mr. E. P. Sir, I saw such prodigious things daily don these few yeers, that I had resolv'd with myself to give over wondering at any thing; yet a passage happen'd this week, that forc'd me to wonder once more, because it is without parallel. It was, that som odd fellows went skulking up and down London streets, and with Figs and Reasons allur'd little Children, and so pourloyn'd them away from their Parents, and carried them a Ship-board for beyond Sea, where by cutting their hair, and other devises, the so disguis'd them, that their Parents could not know them. This made me think upon that miraculous passage in Hamelen, a Town in Germany, which I hop'd to have pass'd through when I was in Hamburgh, had we return'd by Holland; which was thus, (nor would I relate it unto you wer ther not som ground of truth for it.) The said Town of Hamelen was annoyed with Rats and Mice; and it chanc'd, that a Pied-coated Piper came thither, who covenanted with the chief Burgers for such a reward, if he could free them quite from the said Vermin, nor would he demand it, till a twelve-month, and a day after: The agreement being made, he began to play on his Pipes, and all the Rats, and the Mice followed him to a great Lough hard by, where they all perish'd; so the Town was infected no more. At the end of the yeer, the Pied-Piper return'd for his reward, the Burgers put him off with slightings, and neglect, offring him som small matter, which he refusing, and staying som dayes in the Town, on Sunday morning at High Mass, when most peeple were at Church, he fell to play on his Pipes, and all the children up and down, follow'd him out of the Town to a great Hill not far off, which rent in two, and opened, and let him and the children in, and so clos'd up again: This happen'd, a matter of two hundred and fifty yeers since; and in that Town, they date their Bills and Bonds, and other Instruments in Law, to this day, from the yeer of the going out of their children: Besides, there is a great piller of stone at the foot of the said Hill, wheron this story is ingraven. No more now, for this is enough in conscience for one time: So I am Your most affectionat Servitor, J. H. Fleet, 1 Octo. 1643 Source (books.google.com): James Howell, Epistoæ Ho-Eliaæ: Familiar Letters , second edition, enlarged, vol. 2 (1650), pp. 241-42 . Return to the table of contents . The Pide Piper Richard Verstegan And now hath one digression drawne on another, for being by reason of speaking of these Saxons of Transilvania , put in mind of a most true and marvelous strange accident that hapned in Saxonie not manie ages past, I cannot omit for the strangenesse thereof briefely here by the way to set it downe. There came into the towne of Hamel in the countrie of Brunswicke an old kind of companion, who for the fantasticall coate which he wore being wrought with sundrie colours, was called the pide Piper; for a Piper he was, besides his other qualities. This fellow forsooth offered the townse-men for a certaine somme of money to rid the towne of all the rats that were in it (for at that time the Burgers were with that vermine greatly annoyed). The accord in fine being made; the pide Piper with a shrill pipe went piping through the streets, and forthwith the rats came all running out of the houses in great numbers after him; all which hee led into the river of Weaser and therein drowned them. This done, and no one rat more perceived to bee left in the towne; he afterward came to demand his reward according to his bargaine, but being told that the bargain was not made with him in good earnest, to wit, with an opinion that ever he could bee able to doe such a feat they cared not what they accorded unto, when they imagined it could never bee deserved, and so never to be demanded: but neverthelesse seeing he had done such an unlikely thing indeed, they were content to give him a good reward; and so offered him farre lesse then he lookt for; but hee therewith discontented, said he would have his full recompence according to his bargain, but they utterly denying to give it him, he threatened them with revenge; they bade him doe his worst, whereupon he betakes him againe to his pipe, and going through the streets as before, was followed of a number of boyes out at one of the gates of the Citie, and comming to a little hill, there opened in the side thereof a wid hole, into the which himselfe & all the children being in number one hundreth and thirtie, did enter; and being entred, the hill closed up againe, and became as before. A boy that being lame and came somewhat lagging behind the rest, seeing this that hapned, returned presently backe and told what he had seene, foorthwith began great lamentation among the Parents for their children, and men were sent out with all diligence, both by land and by water to inquire if ought could be heard of them, but with all the enquirie they could possibly use, nothing more then is aforesaid could of them be understood. In memorie whereof it was then ordained, that from thence-foorth no Drumme, Pipe or other instrument, should be sounded in the street leading to the gate through which they passed; nor no Osterie to be there holden. And it was also established, that from that time forward in all publike writings that should bee made in that towne, after the date therein set downe of the yeare of our Lord, the date of the yeare of the going foorth of their children should bee added, the which they have accordingly ever since continued. And this great wonder hapned on the 22. day of July in the yeare of our Lord, 1376. The occasion now why this matter came unto my remembrance in speaking of Translvania , was, for that some do report that there are divers found among the Saxons in Translvania that have like surnames unto divers of the Burgers of Hamel , and will therby seeme to inferre, that this Jugler or pide Piper, might by negromancy have transported them thither, but this carrieth litle appearence of truth; because it would have beene almost as great a wonder unto the Saxon of Transilvania to have had so many strange children brought among them, they knew not how, as it was to those of Hamel to lose them: and they could not but have kept memorie of so strange a thing, if indeed any such thing had there hapned. Source: Richard Verstegan, A Restitution of Decayed Intelligence in Antiquities (London: Printed by John Bill, 1628), pp. 85-87 . Return to the table of contents . The Pyed Piper Nathaniel Wanley At Hammel , a town in the Dutchy of Brunswick , in the year of Christ 1284, upon the 26. day of June , the Town being grievously troubled with Rats and Mice, there came to them a Piper, who promised upon a certain rate to free them from them all; it was agreed, he went from street to street, and playing upon his Pipe, drew after him out of the Town all that kind of Vermine, and then demanding his wages was denied it. Whereupon he began another tune, and there followed him one hundred thirty Boys to a Hill called Koppen , situate on the North by the Road, where they perished, and were never seen after. This Piper was called the pyed Piper, because his cloaths were of several colours. This story is writ and religiously kept by them in their Annals at Hammel , read in their Books, and painted in their Windows, and in their Churches, of which I am a Witness by my own sight. Their elder Magistrates, for the confirmation of the truth of this, are wont to write in conjunction in their publick Books, such a year of Christ, and such a year of the Transmigration of the children, &c. It's also observed in the memory of it, that in the street he passed out of, no Piper be admitted to this day. The street is called Burgelosestrasse ; if a Bride be in that street, till she is gone out of it there is no dancing to be suffered. Source (books.google.com): Nathaniel Wanley, The Wonders of the Little World; or, A General History of Man (London: Printed for T. Basset, 1678), p. 598 . Return to the table of contents . A Marvellous Prank Plaid by the Devil at Hamelen, a Town in Germany George Sinclair This City was annoyed with Rats and Mice. It happened that a Pied-Coated-Pyper came thither, who covenanted with the Chief Burgers for such a Reward, if he could free them from said Vermine, nor would he demand it, till a twelve Moneth and a day after. The Agreement being made, he befan to play on his Pipes, and all the Rats and Mice followed him to a great Lough hard by, where they all perished; so the Town was infected no more. At the end of the year the Piper returned for his reward. The Burgers put him off, with slightings and neglect, offering him some small matter, which he refused. And staying some dayes in Town, on a Sunday morning at high Mass, when most People were at Church, he fell to play on his Pipes, and the Children, up and down, followed him out of the Town to a great hill not far off, which rent in two, and opened, and let him and the Children in, and so closed up again. This happened about 250 years since. And in that Town they date their Bills and Bonds, and other Instruments in Law, to this day from the year of trheir going out of their Children. Besides, there is a great pillar of stone erected, at the foot of said hill, where this Story is ingraven. Source (books.google.com): George Sinclair, Satans Invisible World Discovered; or, a choice Collection of Modern Relations, proving evidently against the Saducees and Atheists of this present Age, that there are Devils, Spirits, Witches, and Apparitions, from Authentick Records, Attestations of Famous Witnesses, and undoubted Verity (Edinburgh: Printed by John Reid, 1685), relation 27, pp. 165-66 . Return to the table of contents . The Magic Fife Germany Ages ago there was a great lake in the vicinity of Lorsch now marked by the district of Seehof. The surrounding villages were once hit by an evil plague: a rain of ants so thick that the fields were crawling with the insects. Within a few days not a single green blade could be seen. In their need the inhabitants turned to the Bishop of Worms, hoping that through his prayers and blessings the plague might be overcome. The bishop advised them to form a procession through the fields while beseeching God to overcome the plague. This they did. When the procession paused at a field altar near the lake a hermit joined their ranks, saying, "The Lord has sent me to you, and if you promise to do what I say then all the ants will immediately die. Every village struck by the plague must give me one hundred guilders with which I shall build a chapel to the Lord." They all happily promised to do this, upon which the hermit took a little fife from his robe and blew on it. The ants all flew toward him, darkening the sky. They soon formed a black tower before the hermit, who with a final sound from his fife sunk them all into the lake. When the hermit came to the local authorities asking for God's payment they shouted that he was a sorcerer and deserved to be burned. This happened in all ten villages, but that did not frighten him. He told them sharply that they soon would receive their punishment. Approaching the last house in the last village he took his fife from his robe and began blowing on it. And behold, the hogs from the entire region broke loose from their pens and followed the hermit, who proceeded back through the ten villages. No one dared to say a word against him. Thus he led the herd of hogs to the lake where he disappeared with them. The next year a rain of crickets devastated the entire region. The peasants now recognized how great their sin had been, and again they turned to the Bishop of Worms for advice, but he wanted nothing more to do with them. Once again they formed a procession through the fields trying through prayer to redeem themselves from heaven's anger. When they arrived at the lake a charcoal burner approached them from the mountains. Bowing, he said to them all, "The punishment that has befallen you shall be removed if you will promise that every village shall pay to me five hundred guilders for the construction of a monastery." The villagers happily agreed and promised faithfully. With that the charcoal burner took a small fife from his bag and blew into it. The crickets immediately rose up and followed him to Tannenberg Mountain, where a gigantic fire consumed them all. When the charcoal burner came for God's payment he was not treated any better in the ten villages than had been the hermit. He did not receive a single red penny. "If that's what you want," he said quietly, then raised his fife, and all the sheep and goats from the entire region stood as though entranced. No one dared say anything. Then he advanced to the lake, where he disappeared with the herd. The following year came with a horde of mice, as though they had rained down from heaven. Plagued anew, the peasants penitently prayed once again and sorrowfully passed through their fields. When the procession reached the lake a little dwarf suddenly appeared in their midst. He said, "I will take away this plague immediately, but in return each village must pay me one thousand guilders. If you won't give your money for the love of God, then at least do so for your own benefit. With this money I shall build for you a dike from the mountain road of Hendesheim (Handschuhsheim near Heidelberg) to Ramstadt so that the mountain floods will no longer damage your fields." How quickly the peasants agreed to this! Equally fast the yellow dwarf raised his fife, and mice by the millions followed its sound. They all advanced to Tannenberg Mountain, which opened up, and when it closed again, there was no trace of either the dwarf or the mice. But thanklessness is the world's reward, and the dwarf did not fare any better than had the charcoal burner or the hermit. He too responded with punishment, and what a punishment it was! When he once again played on his fife all the children followed him; even infants pulled themselves from their mothers' breasts and toddled along after him. When the procession reached Tannenberg Mountain a great opening appeared. The dwarf and the children went inside, and the cliff closed up again, leaving no trace of the children. The bereaved peasants, not wanting to invite a new curse on themselves the following year, quickly raised the money and sent it to the Bishop of Worms. From that time onward they have experienced no more such plagues. Source (books.google.com): J. von Hefner and J. W. Wolf, "Die Zauberpfeife," Die Burg Tannenberg und ihre Ausgrabungen (Frankfurt am Main: Verlag der S. Schmerber'schen Buchhandlung, 1850), pp. 33-34 . Source (Internet Archive): J. von Hefner and J. W. Wolf, "Die Zauberpfeife," Die Burg Tannenberg und ihre Ausgrabungen (Frankfurt am Main: Verlag der S. Schmerber'schen Buchhandlung, 1850), pp. 33-34 . Return to the table of contents . The Ratcatcher of Korneuburg Austria [The city of Korneuburg adjacent to Vienna was conquered by the Swedes during the Thirty Years' War in 1646.] Following an occupation of six months Korneuburg was taken back by the imperial forces. The city had by that time expanded substantially, but many of its buildings lay buried in rubble. Vermin, especially rats, multiplied beneath the ruins of the destroyed buildings until no cellar and no food storage room was safe from their devastation. Neither cats, nor traps, nor poison could bring them under control, and the city's inhabitants felt forced to flee. A public meeting of the town council was held to decide once and for all whether to attempt continued but futile resistance against the animals or to simply abandon one's belongings, which in truth were no longer belongings at all. There were spirited arguments back and forth when suddenly and unexpectedly a man stepped before the judge's bench and stated that he possessed the means to put an end to the city's plague. No one knew him, but his offer was accepted with loud acclaim. Everyone looked forward with fond anticipation to the next morning, when the promised rescue was to take place. In return for his deed the rescuer was to be paid a large sum of money. As the cock crowed the man did indeed enter at the gate. He was wearing an unusual hunting outfit and carrying a very large hunter's bag. He pulled from the bag a small black transverse flute, upon which he played mournful melodies. Hoards of rats and mice followed the flute's sound, emerging in great masses from their holes in every corner of every house in the city. They followed the flute player, who walked directly toward the Danube. There he stepped into a boat and -- continuing to play the flute -- rode to the middle of the stream. Irresistibly attracted to the music, the rats attempted to swim after him, but they all drowned in the river's raging current. Thus Korneuburg was saved. The piper now returned and asked for the agreed payment. Someone asked him who he was. "I came here from Vienna," he said, "because I heard of your need. My name is Hans Mousehole, and I am the official rat killer of Magdalenengrund [a former suburb of Vienna, now part of the Mariahilf district]." "Any fool can say that," answered a most wise councilman. "We know full well that your help is not of this world. Are you in league with the Evil One? Now see here, there is no obligation to keep one's word with black magicians or kobolds, so just take your leave, or we will turn you over to a witches' court." "My dear people," replied the ratcatcher, "your sense of honor is remarkable, for it seems to be directed at saving you money. But hear me out. You have no right to question the means by which I saved your city from the plague. It is sufficient that it is free. I have no intention of allowing myself to be chased out of your city, and I am even less inclined to reveal to you the inner workings of my deeds, which seemed so miraculous to you. Take note that there are not merely evil, but also good higher powers. I used the latter to do good for you, for good things can come only from that which is good. But if you ungrateful people cheat me out of my well earned pay then you will come to know the evil powers as well. Thus take heed of my final word. In your city there is a recess in the wall of the house not far from the church and at its right side. Place the payment we agreed upon there before the next dawn. If you fail to do so, I will find my own reward." He departed, followed by the loud and derisive laughter of the councilmen. It should come as no surprise that the next morning there was no money lying in the niche. With the sun's first rays Korneuburg experienced its own drama. Hans Mousehole, dressed in a purple-red robe and playing a golden flute, stood at the marketplace in front of the town hall. The melodious tunes that he evoked from his instrument must have sounded like music from heaven to the children, for they gathered about the mysterious musician with joyful haste. Still playing, he walked toward the Danube, where a large and handsome ship awaited him. Led by the flute player, the procession boarded the ship. Its sails billowed, and it floated out to the middle of the stream. This time the ratcatcher did not return. To the contrary, the ship sailed further and further from the city, and neither it nor any who were aboard were ever seen there again. Many years later the horrified citizens of Korneuburg received news that in that same year a large number of children had been placed up for sale in the slave markets of Constantinople. They had no doubt that the children were theirs, and they rued their lack of honor, but too late. History has recorded that Korneuburg was freed of rats at the time stated above and by a ratcatcher from Vienna in the manner described. Until not long ago there was a small rectangular marble plaque on a house in Pfarrgäßchen Street. On it could be seen an upright rat, a weathered gothic inscription, and the designation of a year, of which only the number IV could be made out. Also -- in remembrance of the event -- herdsmen from the area called their cattle and sheep together by cracking a whip instead of blowing on a cow horn. Rats returned to the area with the great flood of 1801. Since then herdsmen have given their signals with a horn, as they had done ages ago. The story of the abducted children, which bears a close resemblance to the legend of the Ratcatcher of Hameln, is undoubtedly based on a factual event. It may well be that during the sad times of the Thirty Years' War a flashy army piper enticed the city's youth into military service and led them away with him, and that none of the recruits returned, for they met death on the battlefield. Source:Moritz Bermann [Albert A. Wenedikt], Geschichte der Wiener Stadt und Vorstädte (Viena: Druck von R. v. Waldheim, 1864), pp. 374-75 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2013. Korneuburg is a city on the Danube River, 12 kilometers northwest of Vienna. Return to the table of contents . The Pied Piper of Newtown England Newtown, or Franchville, as 'twas called of old, is a sleepy little town, upon the Solent shore. Sleepy as it is now, it was once noisy enough, and what made the noise was -- rats. The place was so infested with them as to be scarce worth living in. There wasn't a barn or a corn-rick, a storeroom or a cupboard, but they ate their way into it. Not a cheese but they gnawed it hollow, not a sugar puncheon but they cleared out. Why the very mead and beer in the barrels was not safe from them. They'd gnaw a hole in the top of the tun, and down would go one master rat's rail, and when he brought it up round would crowd all the friends and cousins, and each would have a suck at the tail. Had they stopped here it might have been borne. But the squeaking and shrieking, the hurrying and scurrying, so that you could neither hear yourself speak nor get a wink of good honest sleep the live-long night! Not to mention that mamma must needs sit up and keep watch and ward over baby's cradle, or there'd have been a big ugly rat running across the poor little fellow's face, and doing who knows what mischief. Why didn't the good people of the town have cats? Well they did, and there was a fair stand-up fight, but in the end the rats were too many, and the pussies were regularly driven from the field. Poison, I hear you say? Why, they poisoned so many that it fairly bred a plague. Ratcatchers! Why there wasn't a ratcatcher from John o' Groat's house to the Land's End that hadn't tried his luck. But do what they might, cats or poison, terrier or traps, there seemed to be more rats than ever, and every day a fresh rat was socking his tail or pricking his whiskers. The mayor and the town council were at their wits' end. As they were sitting one day in the town hall racking their poor brains and bewailing their hard fate, who should run in but the town beadle. "Please, your honor," says he, "here is a very queer fellow come to town. I don't rightly know what to make of him." "Show him in," said the mayor, and in he stepped. A queer fellow, truly, For there wasn't a color of the rainbow but you might find it in some corner of his dress, and he was tall and thin, and had keen piercing eyes. "I'm called the Pied Piper," he began. "And pray what might you be willing to pay me, if I rid you of every single rat in Franchville?" Well, much as they feared the rats, they feared parting with their money more, and fain would they have higgled and haggled. But the piper was not a man to stand nonsense, and the upshot was that fifty pounds were promised him (and it meant a lot of money in those old days) as soon as not a rat was left to squeak or scurry in Franchville. Out of the hall stepped the piper, and as he stepped he laid his pipe to his lips and a shrill keen tune sounded through street and house. And as each note pierced the air you might have seen a strange sight. For out of every hole the rats came tumbling. There were none too old and none too young, none too big and none too little to crowd at the piper's heels and with eager feet and upturned noses to patter after him as he paced the streets. Nor was the piper unmindful of the little toddling ones, for every fifty yards he'd stop and give an extra flourish on his pipe just to give them time to keep up with the older and stronger of the band. Up Silver Street he went, and down Gold Street, and at the end of Gold Street is the harbor and the broad Solent beyond. And as he paced along, slowly and gravely, the townsfolk flocked to door and window, and many a blessing they called down upon his head. As for getting near him there were too many rats. And now that he was at the water's edge he stepped into a boat, and not a rat, as he shoved off into deep water, piping shrilly all the while, but followed him, plashing, paddling, and wagging their tails with delight. On and on he played and played until the tide went down, and each master rat sank deeper and deeper in the slimy ooze of the harbor, until every mother's son of them was dead and smothered. The tide rose again, and the piper stepped on shore, but never a rat followed. You may fancy the townsfolk had been throwing up their caps and hurrahing and stopping up rat holes and setting the church bells a-ringing. But when the piper stepped ashore, and not so much as a single squeak was to be heard, the mayor and the council, and the townsfolk generally, began to hum and to haw and to shake their heads. For the town money chest had been sadly emptied of late, and where was the fifty pounds to come from? Such an easy job, too! Just getting into a boat and playing a pipe! Why the mayor himself could have done that if only he had thought of it. So he hummed and hawed and at last, "Come, my good man," said he. "You see what poor folk we are. How can we manage to pay you fifty pounds? Will you not take twenty? When all is said and done, 'twill be good pay for the trouble you've taken." "Fifty pounds was what I bargained for," said the piper shortly, "and if I were you I'd pay it quickly, for I can pipe many kinds of tunes, as folk sometimes find to their cost." "Would you threaten us, you strolling vagabond?" shrieked the mayor, and at the same time he winked to the council. "The rats are all dead and drowned," muttered he; and so, "You may do your worst, my good man," and with that he turned short upon his heel. "Very well," said the piper, and he smiled a quiet smile. With that he laid his pipe to his lips afresh, but now there came forth no shrill notes, as it were, of scraping and gnawing, and squeaking and scurrying, but the tune was joyous and resonant, full of happy laughter and merry play. And as he paced down the streets the elders mocked, but from schoolroom and playroom, from nursery and workshop, not a child but ran out with eager glee and shout following gaily at the piper's call. Dancing, laughing, joining hands and tripping feet, the bright throng moved along up Gold Street and down Silver Street, and beyond Silver Street lay the cool green forest full of old oaks and wide-spreading beeches. In and out among the oak trees you might catch glimpses of the pipers many-colored coat. You might hear the laughter of the children break and fade and die away as deeper and deeper into the lone green wood the stranger went, and the children followed. All the while, the elder watched and waited. They mocked no longer now. And watch and wait as they might, never did they set their eyes again upon the piper in his parti-colored coat. Never were their hearts gladdened by the song and dance of the children issuing forth from amongst the ancient oaks of the forest. Source: Joseph Jacobs, More English Fairy Tales (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons; London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 1-6 . Jacobs entitles this story simply "The Pied Piper." Jacobs' source: Abraham Elder, Tales and Legends of the Isle of Wight (London: Simpkin, Marshall, and Company, 1839), pp. 157-64 . Notes on the place names mentioned in the tale: Newtown (formerly called Franchville) is a small town on the Isle of Wight. The street names "Gold Street" and "Silver Street" are authentic. The Solent is the sound separating the Isle of Wight from the main island of Britain. John o' Groats is the northernmost point of mainland Scotland. Land's End is southernmost and westernmost tip of Cornwall. Return to the table of contents . Ratcatchers (But No Abduction of Children) The Ratcatcher Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm The ratcatcher knows a particular tone, which he sounds nine times on his fife, and then all rats follow after him, wherever he wants them to go, into a pond or a pool. Once a village could not be rid of its rats, and finally they sent for the ratcatcher. He prepared a hazel stick in such a manner that all rats were drawn toward it. They would then have to follow anyone who took hold of the stick. Waiting until a Sunday, he laid it in front of the church door. As the people were going home after the worship service, a miller came by, saw the good-looking stick lying there and said, "That will make a fine walking stick for me." He picked it up and left the village, walking toward his mill. Meanwhile a number of rats began to leave their cracks and corners and came running and jumping across the fields toward him. The miller, still carrying the stick, had no idea what was happening. When he came to a meadow, they ran from their holes and ran across the fields and pastures after him. Running ahead, they were inside his house before he himself was, and they stayed there as a plague that could not be overcome. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Rattenfänger," Deutsche Sagen , herausgegeben von den Brüdern Grimm (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 245, pp. 333-34 . In following editions this legend is numbered 246. The Grimms' source: "Oral, from German Bohemia." Return to the table of contents . The Rats in Neustadt-Eberswalde J. D. H. Temme It is very noteworthy that there are no rats at all in the city of Neustadt-Eberswalde. The explanation is as follows: In earlier times there were a great many rats there, especially in the town's grain mill, where they caused much damage. In about the year 1607 or 1608 a certain man presented himself to the council and offered to get rid of these vermin, claiming that no rats would return to the mill as long as it should stand. He did not ask for even the slightest payment until one year after he had done away with the rats. At that time his charge would be ten thalers, which was promised to him. The magistrate had him paid two thalers in advance. The man then placed something in the mill and something else in a secret place. The following day the people saw with amazement how the rats left the mill in a great swarm and swam out into the Finow River, that flows by there. Not a single rat was left behind. A year later the man returned to collect the eight thalers that were still owed him, and he was paid. From that time forth no trace of a rat has been seen there, neither in the mill, nor in the city. Source: J. D. H. Temme, "Die Ratzen in Neustadt-Eberswalde," Die Volkssagen der Altmark, mit einem Anhange von Sagen aus den übrigen Marken und aus dem Magdeburgischen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1839), no. 31, p. 114 . Return to the table of contents. Katzenveit as an Exterminator in Tripstrille Germany A sprite is often seen around Kohlberg Mountain near Zwickau. His name is Katzenveit and his merry pranks are similar to those of Rübezahl.... Once he came to Tripstrille as an exterminator, claiming that he could drive away rats and mice. For this they promised him a handsome sum of thalers. However, after he had driven out the vermin he was not paid. Then, similar to the ratcatcher of Hameln, he returned and led away all of the citizens' cats, said to have numbered 666. From that time onward no cats have left this city. Source (books.google.com): Johann Georg Theodor Grässe, "Der Katzenveit im Kohlberge bei Zwickau," Der Sagenschatz des Königreichs Sachsen (Dresden: Verlag von G. Schönfeld's Buchhandlung, 1855), no. 412, pp. 412-13 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Georg Theodor Grässe, "Der Katzenveit im Kohlberge bei Zwickau," Der Sagenschatz des Königreichs Sachsen (Dresden: Verlag von G. Schönfeld's Buchhandlung, 1855), no. 412, pp. 412-13 . Return to the table of contents . The Expulsion of Rats from the Island of Ummanz A. Haas Many years ago there were so many rats on the Island of Ummanz that the inhabitants could not find refuge from the vermin. Then a sorcerer from abroad presented himself, offering -- for a large sum of money -- to drive all the rats from the island. The people of Ummanz agreed to pay this very high price, even though he stated from the beginning that he would be able to ban the rats only for the lifetime of the population that currently lived there. Then the sorcerer drove all the rats to the southwestern point of Ummanz and into the water. This region is thus called the Rott even today. They say that the soil from this area formerly could be used as protection against rats. People who were plagued with rats would go to Ummanz and get a sack of soil from the Rott . A small handful of this soil shook into the rat holes would be sufficient to drive the rats away within a few hours. All this was credited to the foreign sorcerer. More recently, however, following the death of the earlier population and after many outsiders had come to Ummanz, rats found their way back to the island, and since then not even soil from the Rott will help to drive them away. Source: A. Haas, "Vertreibung der Ratten von der Insel Ummanz," Rügensche Sagen und Märchen (Stettin: Johs. Burmeister's Buchhandlung, 1903), no. 170, pp. 153-54 . Ummantz is part of Germany's Island of Rügen in the Baltic Sea. Return to the table of contents . Rübezahl Becomes a Ratcatcher Moravia, Johannes Praetorius We read that at Hameln ages ago a mouse-catcher presented himself and sold to the townspeople powder that rid the town of all the vermin. Rübezahl is said to have attempted the same thing in Moravia. Namely, he convinced the people that he had a special powder for rats with which he wanted to exterminate all the vermin. What happened? The people believed him and gave him a large sum of money. They spread the powder in their houses and afterward discovered a countless number of dead mice and rats lying everywhere. Then, as Rübezahl had expressly commanded, they collected all the dead vermin and stacked them in a pile in the middle of the marketplace. Some days later, after Rübezahl had gone away, they prepared to burn the dead vermin. And only then were the eyes opened of the deceived people. The supposed mice were nothing but small clods of dirt, little round sticks of wood, stones, and other such things. All this they had brought to the supposed mouse-pile at the marketplace, and now they were terribly ashamed. Some claim that at that time Rübezahl, in the form of Bishop Hattons of Mainz, presented himself on top of the mouse-pile and ridiculed and laughed at the townspeople about the supposed mice. Others tell this story as follows: Rübezahl promised, for a certain sum of money, to drive all the rats and mice out of the town. Afterward it happened that the vermin ran to him out of the nooks and corners in such great numbers, that they covered him. He grew larger and larger so that the mice would have space on him, growing finally to a large, tall tower. He was thickly covered with mice and rats from the soles of his feet to his neck. Only his head was free. Having thus collected all the vermin, he went on his way out of the town. But how did he make it through the town gate? Confirming the truthfulness of this story is the fact still today the marketplace in that town is called Mice-Market. Source (books.google.com): Johannes Praetorius, Des Rübezahls anderer, und ganz frischer historischer Theil (Leipzig: In Verlegung Johann Barthol Oelers Buchhändl, 1665), pp. 38-41 . Return to the table of contents . The Ratcatcher of Freistadt Austria Once there were so many mice and rats in Freistadt that no one knew what to do about them. Then a "herder" presented himself, claiming to be able to drive away the vermin. He stood in the marketplace and blew into his horn. The longer he blew, the more mice and rats crawled forth out of holes in the walls, cellar windows, and so forth. Finally he set forth out of the town, blowing his horn. The vermin followed him until he came to a pond. He waded in as far as he could, and they swam after him. Finally he stopped blowing his horn, and all the swimmers sank. Source (books.google.com): P. Armand Baumgarten, Aus der volksmässigen Ueberlieferung der Heimat vol 1: Zur volksthümlichen Naturkunde (Linz: Oberösterreichischer Musealverein, 1862), p. 83 . Freistadt is a small town in Oberösterreich (Upper Austria) near the border with the Czech Republic. Return to the table of contents . The Music Man Austria In the vicinity of Salzburg there once lived a musician who mastered his instrument like no one else. Whenever he played a piece everyone believed that the sounds were coming from the heavens. Sometimes the sounds penetrated the listeners' souls like a thunderstorm, but sometimes like sweetly endearing music. Brooks and rivers, trees and cliffs, humans and animals -- all were captivated by his fiddle. Whenever children looked out the window while he was playing nearby, they had to dance to his music and follow after him. In this manner he lured many children into Kindskogel Mountain. Eventually when he was thus playing his fiddle in the Tauern Mountains, villages and alpine huts, priests and dairymaids, judges and witches all danced together -- and even mice in the cellar, bats in the tower, and fish in Lake Zell were twisting and turning -- he himself was enchanted and as punishment was turned into stone. Source (books.google.com): Rudolf von Freisauff von Neudegg, "Der Spielmann," Salzburger Volkssagen (Vienna, Pest, and Leipzig: A. Hartleben's Verlag, 1880), p. 329 . Source (Internet Archive): Rudolf von Freisauff von Neudegg, "Der Spielmann," Salzburger Volkssagen (Vienna, Pest, and Leipzig: A. Hartleben's Verlag, 1880), p. 329 . Return to the table of contents . Mice in Glurns Austria / Italy In the vicinity of Glurns there is an ancient legend about mice that came to the Vinschgau district and were eating the peasants out of house and home. It is said that a traveling student then came and with an incantation ordered all the mice -- numbering in the millions -- into the valley and forced them to leave. The mice stood at attention and then marched in orderly columns, as in the military, out of the Vinschgau district. They rested for a few days and then disappeared altogether. Unfortunately the sorcerer disappeared with them, so the thankful inhabitants could not pay him the expected reward. No one knows the incantation, and in any event the entire legend is confused and mysterious. This may well result from the fact that it is told and retold in the village taverns, of which there are many in the countryside. Source (books.google.com): Johann Nepomuk Ritter von Alpenburg, "Mäuse in Glurns," Deutsche Alpensagen (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1861), no. 246, p. 239 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Nepomuk Ritter von Alpenburg, "Mäuse in Glurns," Deutsche Alpensagen (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1861), no. 246, p. 239 . Glurns is a village in South Tyrol, Italy, a region with historic and linguistic connections to Austria. The Italian name is Glorenza . Return to the table of contents . The Rat Hunter Denmark On the Alhede the people were grievously annoyed with rats, mice and other vermin, when there came an itinerant rat hunter who undertook to drive them all away. He first, however, inquired whether they had ever seen a dragon thereabouts, and on their answering in the negative, caused a pile to be raised on the middle of the heath, having kindled which he sat by it on a chair. While the fire was burning he took forth a book, out of which he read much, and while he read, rats and mice, serpents and various reptiles were seen to go into the fire. But at last there came a dragon, at the sight of which the man complained that he was betrayed and must now perish himself. The serpent then wound his tail round both the man and his chair, and thus entered the fire, where they both perished together. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), p. 219 . Return to the table of contents . The Magician and the Rats Ireland One time when the Hickmans were landlords of Kilmore estate, the whole lot of the surrounding townlands were plagued with rats. When they became too plentiful Mr. Hickman sent to England for a magician. When the magician came he wrote some magic words on a piece of paper. Then he put a razor on the trunk of a tree and he took a magic whistle from his pocket and blew upon it. Immediately all the rats from the Hickman estate appeared before the magician. Then the magician spoke to the rats and called out the oldest of them and put the piece of paper into his mouth. The old rat rubbed his neck to the edge of the razor. By doing so he cut his throat. When the other rats saw this they set up a loud cry which was heard for many miles around. There was so many rats there that it took several days to cart them away and bury them. From that day out the rats never got as plentiful again in the Hickman estate. I should have said above that when the old rat cut his neck on the razor all the other rats did likewise. Samuel Keane 3-11-34 Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Clare >> Knockerra (B.) Killimer, p. 31 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Samuel Keane does not give his narrative a title. Return to the table of contents . Mice in Akureyar Iceland Those who wish to injure their enemies send against them either the spirits called sendingar or animals known as stefnivargar. The word stefni-varg literally means a wolf ( varg ) that is directed ( stefna ) against something, but in this connection is used of animals which have power given to them by magic, and are then sent to do harm. There was once a rich man in Akureyar, who was a thorough miser, and would never give anything to the poor. To punish him for this, a certain wizard sent him so many "mice-wolves," that they destroyed all he had, and he finally died in the greatest poverty. For a long time after this the mice remained in the island, until the then owner sent for another wizard. He came, and got a whole leg of mutton roasted; then he sat down on the island, and began to eat this. In a moment the mice surrounded him in crowds to get a bit of it. The. wizard rose again, and with the leg of mutton in his hand, went back to the farm, and all through it, until he had gathered round him every mouse on the island. Then he threw the mutton into a deep pit, which he had got dug for the purpose. The mice all sprang into the pit, which was then closed up at once, and the wizard strictly forbade anyone to touch it in time coming. For a long time after this there were no mice in Akureyar, but many years later the proprietor of the islands had a foundation dug for some new building, and they were careless enough to open the pit again. In a moment the mice crowded out again, and have ever since been a plague to the islands, which otherwise are so excellent. Source (books.google.com): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples (Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), pp. 370-71 . Source (Internet Archive): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples (Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), pp. 370-71 . Craigie's source (books.google.com): Jón Árnason, Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 439 . Craigie's source (Internet Archive): Jón Árnason, Íslenzkar Þjóðsögur og Æfintýri (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), p. 439 . Link to a Swiss legend describing how the plague similarly was captured and then unwittingly released: The Wedged-In Plague Smoke . Return to the table of contents . Angionini the Magician France They tell the following legend in the village of Drancy-les-Nouis near Paris: In the year 1240 there was such a quantity of rats and mice that neither home nor field and neither humans nor cattle were safe from their voracious appetite. Nothing was effective against them. Finally it occurred to the townspeople to engage a Capuchin by the name of Friar Angionini, famous for his magic, and who might drive away the vermin with his miraculous powers. Soon afterward both parties agreed upon a certain reward. Thereupon the magician took a little demon from his bag, with whom he performed all kinds of hocus pocus. Then he took out a little book from which he read a number of incomprehensible charms. Finally he commanded all the rats and mice to gather around him. Behold, countless rats and mice obeyed and came forth immediately, awaiting his further orders. He then turned around and walked to the bank of the river. Throwing off his robe, he jumped into the waves. The entire pack of rodents followed him and drowned. Having achieved this miracle, the deserving Capuchin returned and demanded his money. However, the unthankful townspeople refused to pay. The wise man then took from his bag a small horn and blew into it. Immediately all the cows, hogs, sheep, horses, goats, geese, and ducks came forth and gathered around Friar Angionini. This time the wise friar did not advance toward the river but went off in the other direction with all of his spellbound followers. No one dared to challenge him. Thus is thanklessness rewarded! Source (books.google.com): Der Gesellschafter: Blätter für Geist und Herz (no. 192, December 1, 1824), p. 960 . Der Gesellchafter 's source: " Corsair. " Another version of this legend: Books.google.com: Otto Henne-Am Rhyn, Die deutsche Volkssage: Beitrag zur vergleichenden Mythologie (Leipzig: Verlag von Joh. Wilh. Krüger, 1874), p. 91. . Internet Archive: Otto Henne-Am Rhyn, Die deutsche Volkssage: Beitrag zur vergleichenden Mythologie (Leipzig: Verlag von Joh. Wilh. Krüger, 1874), p. 91. . Return to the table of contents . Avicenna and the Mouse Plague at Aleppo Syria In the city of Aleppo there was a king. As mice abounded in that city, the people complained of them every day. One day, while the king was conversing with Avicenna, they touched upon the mice. The king said, "O Avicenna, everyone complains of these mice. Would that we could find some remedy for them that everyone might be at ease." Avicenna answered, "I will make it happen that not a single one of them remain in this city. But with this condition, that you stand at the city gate, and beware, whatever wonder you see, that you not laugh." The king consented and was glad. Straightway he ordered that they prepare his horse, and he mounted and went to the gate. Avicenna, on his part, stood in a street and repeated a charm and called the mice. One of the mice came, and he caught it and killed it and put it in a coffin and made four mice bear that coffin. Then he repeated the charm and began to strike his hands one against the other; and these four mice began to march slowly along. And all the mice that were in the city attended that funeral, so that the streets were filled full of them. They came to the gate where the king was standing, some of them before the coffin and some of them behind. And while the king was looking on, he saw these mice with the coffin on their shoulders, and, unable to resist, he laughed. As soon as he laughed, the mice that were outside the gate all died, but those that were within the gate dispersed and ran off inside. Avicenna said, "O king, if you had kept my counsel and not laughed, not a single mouse would have remained in this city, but all of them would have gone out and died. And everyone would have been at ease." And the king repented of his having laughed. But what could he do? Repentance too late profits not. Source: Sheykh-Zada, "The Lady's Twenty-Eighth Story," The History of the Forty Vezirs; or, The Story of the Forty Morns and Eves , translated by E. J. W. Gibb (London: George Redway, 1886), pp. 300-302 . Title provided and language cautiously modernized by D. L. Ashliman. Aleppo (Arabic Halab ) is the principal city of northern Syria. Avicenna (Arabic Ibn Sina ) was the most influential philosopher-scientist of medieval Islam. An ethnic Persion, he was born in the year 980 in Bukhara, Iran and died in 1037 in Hamadan. Contrary to the above legend, his biographers claim that he spent his entire life in eastern and central Iran. Return to the table of contents . Mysterious Disappearance of Children The Devil in Likeness of a Pied Piper Robert Burton At Hammel in Saxony , An. 1284. 20. Junii , the Devil in likeness of a pied Piper, carried away 130 Children, that were never after seen. Source (books.google.com): Robert Burton, The Anatomie of Melancholy (1651), p. 52 . Return to the table of contents . The Devil in Hameln Germany Of the Devil's power and wickedness will I here tell a true history. About 180 years ago, on S. Mary Magdalene's Day, it came to pass at Hammel [Hameln] on the Weser in Saxony, that the Devil went about the streets visibly in human form, piped and allured many children, boys and girls, and led them through the town gate towards a mountain. When he arrived there he disappeared with the numerous children who had followed him, and nobody knew what became of the children. Thus did a girl who had followed them afar report to her parents, and thereupon diligent search and inquiry was soon made over land and water to find out whether the children had possibly been stolen and led away. But nobody could tell what had become of the children. This grieved the parents terribly, and is a fearful example of divine anger against sin. This is all written in the town-book of Hammel, where many persons of high standing have read and heard it. Source (JSTOR): Eliza Gutch, "The Pied Piper of Hamelin," Folklore , vol. 3, no. 2 (June 1892), pp. 238-39 . Source (books.google.com): Eliza Gutch, "The Pied Piper of Hamelin," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 3 (1892), pp. 238-39 . Gutch's source: Hiob Fincelius, Wunderzeichen (Nürnberg: Johann vom Berg und Ulrich Neuber, 1556), not paginated . Return to the table of contents . Hurdy-Gurdy Player Abducts Children A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz A man with a hurdy-gurdy once came to Brandenburg. He played and played, and such wonderful tones came out of his music box that all the city's children followed after him in a great swarm. He went out the gate to Marienberg (Mary's Mountain). It opened up and the man went inside with all the children. They were never seen again. Source: A Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Leiermann entführt Kinder," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen, aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 99, pp. 89-90 . Kuhn and Schwartz received this legend from "an oral source in Chemnitz." Return to the table of contents. Children's Pilgrimage Ludwig Bechstein In Schwäbisch-Hall on the Thursday following Pentecost in the year 1484 it happend that the town's boys suddenly were overcome with an obsession to make a pilgrimage to Mont Saint-Michel in Normandy. Against the will of their parents two hundred of them were thus inflamed and could not be restrained, even by their mothers. The few who were held back by force soon died. "Verily," in the words of an old chronicler, "it was a rare and miraculous frenzy." As the boys could not be held back, a schoolmaster and a donkey were provided for their well-being. They appear to have made the long journey and pilgrimage without mishap. After they left Schwäbisch-Hall a great plague struck their homeland, so it was perhaps the hand of God that prompted the boys to leave. It was a great mystery why the boys wanted to go so far away into a foreign land, for many of the best-known pilgrimage sites were in Swabia as well as in neighboring Franconia and Bavaria. Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Bechstein, "Kinder-Wallfahrt," Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 879, p. 717-18 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludwig Bechstein, "Kinder-Wallfahrt," Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 879, p. 717 . Return to the table of contents . The Children of Erfurt Germany In the year 1237, on the fifteenth of July, more than a thousand children assembled in Erfurt. They then crossed over the Waget and, dancing and playing, made their way to Arnstadt, miraculously meeting no one the entire day. There they remained overnight. The parents sought their children and raised a great clamor of despair until they discovered that the children had arrived at Arnstadt. Then they arranged for carts and wagons (for many of the children were very small) and had the children brought back home. Source (books.google.com): Emil Sommer, "Die Kinder von Erfurt," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Sachsen und Thüringen (Halle: Eduard Anton, 1846), no. 68, p. 79 . Source (Internet Archive): Emil Sommer, "Die Kinder von Erfurt," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Sachsen und Thüringen (Halle: Eduard Anton, 1846), no. 68, p. 79 . Return to the table of contents . The Dancing Children of Erfurt J. G. Th. Grässe In the year 1257 a miraculous event occurred in the city of Erfurt. More than 1000 children assembled there, and then all together they left the city, dancing and singing. They went through the Löber Gate and along Steiger Way. They finally arrived at Arnstadt, where the citizens there took them in. The people of Erfurt did not know where their children were until the people of Arnstadt notified them. Then the people of Erfurt brought their children back in carriages. No one ever discovered who had led them away. Source: Johann Georg Theodor Grässe, "Die tanzenden Kinder zu Erfuhrt," Sagenbuch des Preußischen Staats , vol. 1 (Glogau: Verlag von Carl Flemming, 1868), no. 386, p. 336 . Return to the table of contents. Tradition's Hoary Legend Northern Ireland, James Kirkpatrick Now from the ambient Land we smoothly steal, And level ev'ry Hill with ev'ry Vale, The Shores frequented, whilst detain'd, we leave, And 'mid'st the Waters sink the lofty Cave. Here, as Tradition's hoary Legend tells, A blinking Piper once, with magic Spells, And Strains beyond a vulgar Bagpipe's Sound, Gather'd the dancing Country wide around; When hither as he drew the tripping Rear (Dreadful to think, and di?cult to swear!) The gaping Mountain yawn'd, from Side to Side, A hideous Cavern, darksome, deep and wide: In skipt th' exulting Dæmon piping loud, With passive Joy suc'ceeded by the Croud; The winding Cavern, trembling as he play'd, With dreadful Echoes rung throughout it's Shade Then ?rm, and instant, clos'd the greedy Womb, Where wide-born Thousands met a common Tomb. Ev'n now the good Inhabitant relates, With serious Horror, their disastrous Fates; And, as the noted Spot he ventures near, His Fancy, strung with Tales, and shook with Fear, Sounds magic Concerts in his tingling Ear: With superstitious Awe, and solemn Face, Trembling he points, and thinks he points the Place. Source (books.google.com): J. Kirkpatrick, The Sea-Piece: A Narrative, Philosophical and Descriptive Poem in Five Cantos (London: Printed for M. Cooper and J. Buckland, 1750), pp. 3-4 . The featured mountain is near Belfast, Northern Ireland. Return to the table of contents . Related Links The Pied Piper of Hamelin , an article from Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia. A home page for the city of Hameln, Germany: Stadt Hameln . A home page for city of Korneuburg, Austria: Korneuburg . Wikipedia article for Newtown, Isle of Wight . Der Rattenfänger von Korneuburg , an account, in German, of the man who freed the Austrian town of Korneuburg of rats. This text is part of Wolfgang Morscher's extensive collection of German-language legends Sagen.at . Der Rattenfänger , a ballad by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. This ballad was set to music by Hugo Wolf in 1888. Der Rattenfänger von Hameln , a ballad from the folksong collection Des Knaben Wunderhorn by Clemens Brentano and Achim von Arnim. This collection was published in three volumes between 1806 and 1808. Grimm Brothers' Home Page . Cat and Mouse . Fables about cats and mice. Return to Table of Contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 10, 2021. Plague Legends COVID-19 ... Black Death ... Bubonic Plague ... Cholera ... Yellow Fever ... Smallpox ... Typhoid ... Diptheria ... Polio ... Influenze ... Flu ... Epidemic ... Pandemic ... Coronavirus Plague Legends Migratory Legends of Christiansen type 7080 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2020-2023 Plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Black Death in Denmark (Denmark). The Churchyard on the Island of Fur (Denmark). The Black Death in Iceland (Iceland). The Coffin (The Netherlands). The Best Physick Against the Plague (England, Daniel Defoe). A Most Excellent Preservative Against the Plague (England, Daniel Defoe). Protection from the Plague (England, Thomas Lupton). Protection from the Plague (England, John Brand). Cholera in London (England). The Monster Fed Felen (Wales). Sneezing (Scotland, Sir Walter Scott). The Churchyard of Crail (Scotland). The Galar Mor -- The Great Disease (Scotland). The Yellow Plague (Ireland). Plague Symbols (Cornwall / Poland). The Plague-Swarm (Poland). The Plague Maiden (Poland). The Locked-Up Plague (Poland). The Plague-Omen (Poland). The Plague in Hiiumaa (Estonia). The Plague (Russia). The Sacrifice (Austria). The Plague: Six Lusatian Legends (Germany /Poland). The Burning of the Jews in Strasbourg (Germany / France). Persecution of the Jews During the Plague (Germany). The Tall Man in the Murder Lane in Hof (Germany). The Last Plague Death in Motzlar (Germany). Mother Gauerken Brings the Plague (Germany). Plague-Flies (Germany). The Unfortunate Wedding at Grimma (Germany). Cholera (Germany). The Wedged-In Plague Smoke (Switzerland). The Plague Column in Auer (Italy). Astrological Portents (Italy / Spain / France). Amabie: The Ancient Beast Helping Japan Ward Off the Coronavirus (Japan). The Plague among the Beasts (Robert Dodsley). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Black Death in Denmark Denmark About 1350 raged the Black Death, of which history relates that it carried off four-fifths of the population in the Scandinavian countries, which, however, is not quite universally true. Nevertheless, even to this day may be heard faint echoes of the terror which that pestilence caused. It is said that children even avoided burying their parents' bodies, many houses stood empty, and the cattle roamed wild over the fields. A little girl was on one occasion pursued by a bull. While she was running, the pest took hold of her, and she fell dead, so quickly did it kill. The practice of saying "God help you," to one who sneezes, is by some referred to this time; sneezing was a sign of having caught the pest. The year before it, a vapour was seen to rise out of the ground, and spread itself over the whole country. In this pestilence all the people in Oster-Logum parish died out, with the exception of three ploughmen, who shut themselves up above an archway in the farm now owned by Nis Hansen in Havelund. They took with them provisions for six months, but every eighth day they went out and hoisted a piece of fresh beef on the end of a long pole. This hung for the next eight days, and was then taken down. For a long time the meat was always spoiled and black when they took it down, and this was a sign that the plague was still in the air. This went on until the meat was still fresh when they took it down, and they judged that there was no longer any danger. Then they said to each other, "Now we shall go and see our neighbours." But they went from house to house and found only the dead, both human beings and animals. In this way they went from village to village over the whole parish. The people lay dead on the fields beside their ploughs, and there was no living thing except eagles and beasts of prey. Houses and farms stood empty for twenty-five or thirty years after that time. A priest was brought out to the church from Aaben-raa, and offered up a prayer of thanksgiving for the cessation of the pestilence. Source (books.google.com): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples (Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), pp. 414-15 . Source (Internet Archive): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples (Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), pp. 414-15 . Return to the table of contents . The Churchyard on the Island of Fur Denmark No one is buried on the eastern side of the churchyard on the island of Fur in the Limfjord, because when the black death raged there in the country, a living child was buried there, in order to stop the infection. Source (books.google.com): J. M. Thiele, "Om Pesten," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), p. 63 . Source (Internet Archive): J. M. Thiele, "Om Pesten," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), p. 63 . Return to the table of contents . The Black Death in Iceland Iceland At the time when the Black Death began to rage, it was the custom of a certain farmer to hold prayers every morning at all seasons of the year. On one occasion they were busy gathering the hay together, as it looked like rain, when the farmer said they would go home to prayers. Some of the others objected to this, and said it would be more fitting for them to get the hay in, but the farmer insisted, and they all went to the house. During the day there came in sight two tiny tufts of cloud, which came nearer and increased in size till at last they appeared as a man and a woman riding on grey horses. They rode along above the farm, and the woman was heard to say, "Shall we visit here?" "No," said the man, "that was not commanded us." So the Black Death passed over without coming to the farm, and all the people there survived. Source (books.google.com): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples (Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), p. 416 . Source (Internet Archive): William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples (Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), p. 416 . Return to the table of contents . The Coffin The Netherlands Dr. Abraham Van der Meer, an upright and zealous reformer, relates in his memorabilia, that his grandmother, while residing at the Hague, being one summer night unable to sleep, placed herself, about four o'clock in the morning, at the window, and there saw a coffin coming up the Spui Straat, but without anyone else seeming to notice it. It moved on until it stood up erect before a house, where it vanished in an open window. Before six weeks had expired every inmate of that house had died of the plague. Source (books.google.com): Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology: Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstititions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 3 (London: Edward Lumley, 1852), pp. 281-82 . Source (Internet Archive): Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology: Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstititions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 3 (London: Edward Lumley, 1852), pp. 281-82 . Return to the table of contents . The Best Physick Against the Plague England It is my opinion, and I must leave it as a prescription, ( viz. ) that the best physick against the plague is to run away from it. I know people encourage themselves by saying, God is able to keep us in the midst of danger, and able to overtake us when we think ourselves out of danger; and this kept thousands in the town, whose carcases went into the great pits by cartloads; and who, if they had fled from the danger, had, I believe, been safe from the disaster; at least 'tis probable they had been safe. And were this very fundamental only duly considered by the people on any future occasion of this, or the like nature, I am persuaded it would put them upon quite different measures for managing the people from those that they took in 1665, or than any that have been taken abroad, that I have heard of; in a word, they would consider of separating the people into smaller bodies, and removing them in time farther from one another, and not let such a contagion as this, which is indeed chiefly dangerous to collected bodies of people, find a million of people in a body together, as was very near the case before, and would certainly be the case if it should ever appear again. The plague, like a great fire, if a few houses only are contiguous where it happens, can only burn a few houses; or if it begins in a single, or as we call it, a lone house, can only burn that lone house where it begins. But if it begins in a close built town or city, and gets ahead, there its fury increases, it rages over the whole place, and consumes all it can reach. Source (books.google.com): Daniel Defoe, A Journal of the Plague Year: Being Observations or Memorials of the Most Remarkable Occurrences, as Well Publick as Private, Which Happened in London During the Last Great Visitation in 1665 , written by a citizen who contained all the while in London (London, 1722), pp. 227-28 . Source (Internet Archive): Daniel Defoe, A Journal of the Plague Year: Being Observations or Memorials of the Most Remarkable Occurrences, as Well Publick as Private, Which Happened in London During the Last Great Visitation in 1665 , written by a citizen who contained all the while in London (London, 1722), pp. 227-28 . Return to the table of contents . A Most Excellent Preservative Against the Plague England One thing I could not help observing, what befell one of the quacks, who publish'd that he had a most excellent preservative against the plague, which whoever kept about them, should never be infected, or liable to infection; this man, who we may reasonably suppose, did not go abroad without some of this excellent preservative in his pocket, yet was taken by the distemper, and carry'd off in two or three days. Source (books.google.com): Daniel Defoe, A Journal of the Plague Year: Being Observations or Memorials of the Most Remarkable Occurrences, as Well Publick as Private, Which Happened in London During the Last Great Visitation in 1665 , written by a citizen who contained all the while in London (London, 1722), p. 275 . Source (Internet Archive): Daniel Defoe, A Journal of the Plague Year: Being Observations or Memorials of the Most Remarkable Occurrences, as Well Publick as Private, Which Happened in London During the Last Great Visitation in 1665 , written by a citizen who contained all the while in London (London, 1722), p. 275 . Return to the table of contents . Protection from the Plague England It is certainly and constantly affirmed, that on Midsummer Eve, that is, the day before the nativity of St. John Baptist there is found under the root of mugwort, a coal, which preserves or keeps them safe from the plague, carbuncle, lightning, the quartan ague, and from burning that bear the same about them: And Mizaldus, the writer hereof, saith, that he doth hear that it is to be found the same day under the root of plantane; which I know to be of truth, for I have found them the same day under the root of plantane. It is to be found at noon. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Lupton, A Thousand Notable Things on Various Subjects; Disclosed from the Secrets of Nature and Art; Practicable, Profitable, and of Great Advantage (Printed for T. French & W. Millar, 1795), p. 7 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Lupton, A Thousand Notable Things of Sundrie Sortes; Whereof Some Are Wonderfull, Some Strange, Some Pleasant, Divers Necessary, a Great Sort Profitable, and Many Very Precious (London: Printed for N. Fosbrooke, 1627), p. 11 . Midsummer Eve is the night between June 23 and June 24 (St. John's Day). Return to the table of contents . Protection from the Plague England Lupton, in his "Notable Things," b. i. 59, tells us: "It is certainly and constantly affirmed that on Midsummer Eve there is found, under the root of mugwort, a coal which saves or keeps them safe from the plague, carbuncle, lightning, the quartan ague, and from burning, that bear the same about them: and Mizaldus, the writer hereof, saith, that he doth hear that it is to be found the same day under the root of plantane, which I know to be of truth, for I have found them the same day under the root of plantane, which is especially and chiefly to be found at noon." In "Natural and Artificial Conclusions," by Thomas Hill, 12mo. Lond. 1650, we have: "The vertue of a rare cole, that is to be found but one houre in the day, and one day in the yeare. "Diverse authors," he adds, "affirm concerning the verity and vertue of this cole; viz. that it is onely to be found upon Midsummer Eve, just at noon, under every root of plantine and of mugwort; the effects whereof are wonderful; for whosoever weareth or beareth the same about with them, shall be freed from the plague, fever, ague, and sundry other diseases. And one author especially writeth, and constantly averreth, that he never knew any that used to carry of this marvellous cole about them, who ever were, to his knowledge, sick of the plague, or (indeed) complained of any other maladie." Source (books.google.com): John Brand, Observations on Popular Antiquities: Chiefly Illustrating the Origin of Our Vulgar Customs, Ceremonies, and Superstitions (London: Charles Knight and Company, 1841), pp. 170-71 . Source (Internet Archive): John Brand, Observations on Popular Antiquities: Chiefly Illustrating the Origin of Our Vulgar Customs, Ceremonies, and Superstitions , a new edition in three volumes, vol. 1 (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853), p. 334 . Return to the table of contents . Protection from the Plague England Lupton, in his "Notable Things," b. i. 59, tells us: "It is certainly and constantly affirmed that on Midsummer Eve there is found, under the root of mugwort, a coal which saves or keeps them safe from the plague, carbuncle, lightning, the quartan ague, and from burning, that bear the same about them: and Mizaldus, the writer hereof, saith, that he doth hear that it is to be found the same day under the root of plantane, which I know to be of truth, for I have found them the same day under the root of plantane, which is especially and chiefly to be found at noon." In "Natural and Artificial Conclusions," by Thomas Hill, 12mo. Lond. 1650, we have: "The vertue of a rare cole, that is to be found but one houre in the day, and one day in the yeare. "Diverse authors," he adds, "affirm concerning the verity and vertue of this cole; viz. that it is onely to be found upon Midsummer Eve, just at noon, under every root of plantine and of mugwort; the effects whereof are wonderful; for whosoever weareth or beareth the same about with them, shall be freed from the plague, fever, ague, and sundry other diseases. And one author especially writeth, and constantly averreth, that he never knew any that used to carry of this marvellous cole about them, who ever were, to his knowledge, sick of the plague, or (indeed) complained of any other maladie." Source (books.google.com): John Brand, Observations on Popular Antiquities: Chiefly Illustrating the Origin of Our Vulgar Customs, Ceremonies, and Superstitions (London: Charles Knight and Company, 1841), pp. 170-71 . Source (Internet Archive): John Brand, Observations on Popular Antiquities: Chiefly Illustrating the Origin of Our Vulgar Customs, Ceremonies, and Superstitions , a new edition in three volumes, vol. 1 (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853), p. 334 . Return to the table of contents . Cholera in London England Excerpt from a letter by Richard Harris Barham to Mrs. Hughes, July 19, 1832: I am sorry to say, from letters received from town this morning, that this horrible plague continues its ravages on the city. Of Dr. Davies's eight patients, four died the same day with my poor boy, and the others since; and I learn that twelve are now lying dead in the immediate neighbourhood of St. Paul's Churchyard. In the meantime Government are using all their influence with the Press to make as light as possible of the business, in order to prevent the necessity of declaring London a foul port. Source (books.google.com): The Life and Letters of the Rev. Richard Harris Barham (London: Richard Bentley, 1870), p. 209 . Source (Internet Archive): The Life and Letters of the Rev. Richard Harris Barham , vol. 1 (London: Richard Bentley, 1870), p. 209 . Return to the table of contents . The Monster Fed Felen Wales In an ancient MS. by Llywelyn Sion, of Llangewydd, there is mention of a frightful monster called the Fad Felen, which was seen through the key-hole of Rhos church by Maelgwn Gwynedd, who "died in consequence." This monster was predicted in a poem by Taliesin, as a "strange creature" which should come from the sea marsh, with hair and teeth and eyes like gold. The yellow fever plague, which raged in Wales during some five years in the sixth century, is the monster referred to in this legend. Source (books.google.com): Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions , 2nd edition (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), pp. 214-15 . Source (Internet Archive): Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions , 2nd edition (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), pp. 214-15 . Return to the table of contents . Sneezing Sir Walter Scott The custom of saying "God bless you" when a person in company sneezes is derived from sternutation being considered as a crisis of the plague at Athens, and the hope that, when it was attained, the patient had a chance of recovery. Source (books.google.com): Sir Walter Scott, Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft (London: John Murray, 1830), p. 96 . Source (Internet Archive): Sir Walter Scott, Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft (London: John Murray, 1830), p. 96 . Return to the table of contents . The Churchyard of Crail Scotland The Churchyard of Crail is peculiarly full of interest to the antiquary, and even to the moralist. Adjoining the main entrances into the churchyard, on the right hand, is the stately old tomb of the Lindsays of Wormiston, the first of whom purchased the estate 247 years ago. To the east of this tomb a small enclosed plot, where tradition asserts that, on more than one occasion, the "plague" was buried. This was done by our superstitious forefathers in the following approved fashion: It was an universal belief with them that the dreadful pestilences which were wont to decimate Scotland, had their seat in the air, and for the purpose of intercepting the deadly visitor, large wheaten loaves were raised high up on poles, which, after being so exposed for a length of time, were carefully buried where they should not be disturbed; for the wise people of those days firmly believed that the discoloration of the loaves showed the veritable presence of the pest, which, save for this antidote, would have spread death and ruin amongst the inhabitants. Source (books.google.com): M. F. Conolly, Fifiana: Memorials of the East of Fife (Glasgow: John Tweed, 1869), pp. 116-17 . Source (Internet Archive): M. F. Conolly, Fifiana: Memorials of the East of Fife (Glasgow: John Tweed, 1869), pp. 116-17 . Return to the table of contents . The Galar Mor -- The Great Disease Scotland Long, long ago, the Galar Mor -- the great disease, the plague -- ravaged Scotland with terrible severity. It was a dreadful affliction, which, once infesting a country, spared none. Like a blue "Haesp," it hovered in the air, and lowered inevitably on its victim. The only prevention, where it broke out, was to knock down the houses on all the inmates, infected or not, and bury it with them in the ruins. Well, the Galar Mor broke out at the old castle [Ceann-Drochaide, or Bridgend]. A company of artillery was ordered from Blair Castle. They came up through Athole. The road cut to allow the cannons to pass is yet pointed out by the old people in Glenfernat. On they came over the Cairnwal, and their way is again visible from cuttings above the Coldrach -- on over to Corriemulzie. Then they turned down Cornam-muc, and the cannons were put into position at Dalvreckachy. The queen stood in the castle door, combing her hair. The first round brought the walls down about her. None of those within escaped, and the noble towers were levelled to the ground. Many long years -- ay, ages after -- when the red-coats were stationed here, one of the soldiers was prevailed on, for a large sum of money, to explore the vaults. There was a hole open like a flue -- the mouth is yet to be seen-- into which, when a stone was thrown, it could be heard descending a flight of steps a long, long time. Down this hole he was lowered by a rope to the first steps, whence he proceeded, torch in hand, on his adventure. Pale and trembling, he was brought to the upper world again, and he vowed he had seen queer things, dreadful things, and that nothing should induce him to go back again. In one room or vault he had come on a ghastly company. They all sat round about as if living, with glittering ivory faces, dressed in strange garb, and silent, motionless, breathless, and dead. Years again afterwards, the Watsons -- a wealthy family, then living in Castletown -- began to clear out the ruins, and found numbers of old coins, broken vessels, iron doors, smashed grating, immense quantities of deers' horns, and bones of various animals. But a little old man, with a red cap, appeared to them and bade them desist if they valued their own welfare. Tradition reports that there are very many entire vaults below as yet; especially the stables, and a subterranean passage from them, by which the horses of the Castle could be watered at the Cluny without coming outside. From amongst the ruins, and around them, grew up a few trees to shelter the fallen greatness of Ceann-Drochaide Castle. The narrator of this legend, an old worthy of Braemar, concluded: I feel honoured by the attention given to my wandering narrative. My memory is failing me now, and I seem to recall the old tales of the country dimly -- as it were a glimpse through the mists of time. But no wonder. Like the old Castle, my best days are over, and my broken words are as the sounds issuing from the inner vaults, where many things unwot of may lie hid under the ruins of age. Source (books.google.com): John Grant, Legends of the Braes o' Mar (Aberdeen: Lewis and James Smith, 1861), pp. 20-21 . Source (Internet Archive): John Grant, Legends of the Braes o' Mar (Aberdeen: A. King and Company, 1876), pp. 22-24 . The episode of the "ghastly company" in the subterranean chamber is reminiscent of the Sleeping Hero Legends . Return to the table of contents . The Yellow Plague Ireland Long ago a disease broke out in this district and it was called the yellow plague. One evening a priest was crossing the hill reading his office. He was coming from Ardpatrick going westwards and as he came near a stream that is flowing through the glen on the western side of the hill he saw on the opposite bank a girl dressed in yellow. She spoke to him and asked him to help her across. He did so and then the girl said, "Do you know to whom you have rendered such service?" The priest said he did not, and she said "I am the queen of the yellow plague." He begged her to go back again and she did. When the people on the other side heard this they came to the eastern side to live. There are tracks of plots and ditches on the hill and it is supposed that that is where the people lived when they came to the eastern side of the hill. I got this tale from my father who lives in the townland of Bohernagore Ardpatrick. Maureen Clery, Bohernagore Ardpatrick. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Limerick >> Árd Phádraig, pp. 224-25 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Plague Symbols Cornwall / Poland It is curious that the symbol of the plague should be the same both in Slavonic and Celtic lands, the tall gaunt woman in her long white dress. I remember some twelve years ago a Cornish mining village being quite disturbed by the story of a tall woman in white having been seen on the moors, and prophesying to some miners that a pestilence was coming. Fortunately it remained a mere apparition, the prophesy not being fulfilled. In the Polish tale of the plague the pestilence appears personified also as a tall woman in white garments, with her hair floating about her, and is hunted by dogs. In another Polish variant of the same myth, the plague fixes on the back of a poor peasant whom she compels to carry her like the old man in Sinbad the Sailor, and forces the wretched fellow to carry her about from place to place. He bears with many a sight of misery which she works. At last he beholds his native village. He will not carry the plague there, but drowns himself in the Pruth. This evidently is a myth of the carrying of the seeds of infection. Many may carry the infection to others even without catching the disease themselves. Source (books.google.com): W. S. Lach-Szyrma, "Slavonic Folk-Lore," The Folk-Lore Record , vol. 4 (London: Printed for the Folk-Lore Society by Messrs. Nichols and Sons, 1881), p. 65 . Source (Internet Archive): W. S. Lach-Szyrma, "Slavonic Folk-Lore," The Folk-Lore Record , vol. 4 (London: Printed for the Folk-Lore Society by Messrs. Nichols and Sons, 1881), p. 65 . Return to the table of contents . The Plague-Swarm Poland A Ruthenian, having lost his wife and children by the plague, fled into the forest from his desolate cottage and sought safety there. He wandered about all day long; towards evening he constructed a booth of branches, lit a little fire, and fell asleep, wearied out. It was already after midnight when a mighty noise awoke him. He rose to his feet, listened, and heard a kind of songs in the distance, and accompanying the songs a sound of tambourines and fifes. He listened, in no small astonishment, that, when death was raging around, people were rejoicing there so merrily. The noise that he heard kept continually approaching, and the terrified Podolian [a Ruthenian by nationality, a Podolian by locality] espied a swarming multitude advancing along a wide road. It was a troop of strange looking spectres that circled round a carriage; the carriage was black and elevated, and in it sat the Plague. At every step the frightful company kept increasing; for on the road almost everything was transformed into a spectre. Feebly burned his little fire; a tolerably large firebrand was still smoking a little. Scarcely had the plague-swarm drawn near when the firebrand stood upon feet, extended two arms -- the burning part began to glitter with two glaring eyes -- it began to sing in concert with the others. The villager was stupefied; in speechless terror he seized his axe and was on the point of striking the nearest spectre, but the axe flew out of his hands, transformed itself into a tall woman with raven-black tresses, and, singing, vanished before his eyes. The plague-swarm proceeded onwards; and the Podolian saw how the trees, the bushes, the owls, the screech-owls, assuming tall shapes, increased the multitude, the terrible harbinger of a frightful death. He fell down powerless, and when in the morning the warmth of the sun awoke him, the vessels that he had brought with him were smashed and broken, the clothes torn to rags, the provisions spoilt. He perceived that no one but the plague-swarm had done him all this mischief, and, thanking God that he had at any rate escaped with life, proceeded further to seek shelter and food. Source (books.google.com): A. H. Wratislaw, Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources (London: Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 20, pp. 127-28 . Source (Internet Archive): A. H. Wratislaw, Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources (London: Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 20, pp. 127-28 . Return to the table of contents . The Plague Maiden Poland Because the evil plague was still rampant, all the villages were desolate; the roosters had all lost their voices -- not a one of them could crow. The watch-dogs could no longer bark as before. But they could smell the ghost and see it from afar. Then they would growl and attempt to attack it. The plague maiden teased them with truly malicious joy. A lad was asleep atop a tall haystack, and next to him stood a ladder. The moon shone brightly that night, and all was still. Suddenly a mighty roar was heard from the distance, as though carried by the wind. At the same time one recognized the angry growling and howling of the dogs. The lad stood up, and to his fear he saw a tall, white figure, dressed in white and with flowing hair, rushing toward him. A long, high fence was in the way, but the tall female figure jumped over it with one leap, then climbed up the ladder. Now safe from the dogs, she pointed a foot at them, and teasing the angry pack she called out again and again: "Look out, look out, the foot! Look out, look out, the foot!" The lad recognized the terrible maiden at once. He carefully approached the top rung, and with all his might pushed against the ladder. The tall female figure fell down, and the dogs attacked her. She threatened revenge and then disappeared. The lad did not die. However, for the rest of his life he would stick one foot out and repeat the maiden's words: "Look out, look out, the foot! Look out, look out, the foot!" Commentary The Russians, Serbs, and Poles -- like the Slovaks and Lithuanians -- perceive the plague in the form of a maiden. In Serbia and Slovenia this maiden is named Kuga. The old Polish legends tell of a plague maiden who drives about on a two-wheeled cart. Five years ago when cholera laid waste to large stretches of the countryside, I heard from Russian mountain people on the other side of the Prut River that a woman was carrying this sickness into the cities and villages. Mickiewiez relates the following about this woman: Ordinary people in Lithuania perceive the plague in the form of a maiden. Here I shall relate the content of a ballad that I once heard in Lithuania: The plague maiden appeared in a village and brought death to all the houses by putting her hand in through a door or a window and waving a red cloth. The villagers locked themselves inside their huts, but hunger and other needs soon forced them to abandon these safeguards. Everyone expected to die. In these fearful circumstances, a nobleman, who himself had the greatest store of provisions and was thus able hold out the longest, decided to sacrifice himself for his fellow humans. He picked up a sable on which the names of Jesu and Mary were engraved and then opened a window in his house. With one blow the nobleman struck off the hand of the terrible ghost and captured the red cloth. To be sure, he himself died with his entire family, but from that time onward they never again heard of the plague maiden in that village. Source (books.google.com): K. W. Wójcicki, "Die Pestjungfrau," Polnische Volkssagen und Märchen , aus dem Polnischen von Friedrich Heinrich Lewestam (Berlin: Schlesinger'sche Buch- und Musikhandlung, 1839), pp. 58-59 ; pp. 61-62 . Source (Internet Archive): K. W. Wójcicki, "Die Pestjungfrau," Polnische Volkssagen und Märchen , aus dem Polnischen von Friedrich Heinrich Lewestam (Berlin: Schlesinger'sche Buch- und Musikhandlung, 1839), pp. 58-59 ; pp. 61-62 . Adam Mickiewiez (1798-1855) was an important Polish literary figure. Another translation of the same tale: John T. Naaké, "The Plague," Slavonic Fairy Tales: Collected and Translated from the Russian, Polish, Servian, and Bohemian (London: Henry S. King and Company, 1874), pp. 95-96 (books.google.com.) John T. Naaké, "The Plague," Slavonic Fairy Tales: Collected and Translated from the Russian, Polish, Servian, and Bohemian (London: Henry S. King and Company, 1874), pp. 95-96 (Internet Archive). Return to the table of contents . The Locked-Up Plague Poland In the year 1709 when the plague was ravaging Prussia it also came to Konitz [Chojnice], killing many people. The citizens were beside themselves, fearing that the entire town would perish, when a strange man appeared and offered to ban the plague. His offer was accepted. He had a hole cut into a large linden tree growing in the Lutheran churchyard and made ready with a chock that fit exactly into the hole. He then led a solemn procession into the churchyard, banned the plague into the tree, then quickly drove the chock into the hole, locking the plague inside the tree. He warned the people against removing the chock, lest the plague should escape. From then onward the plague has not shown itself in Prussia. To the present day the tree with the chock is still standing. Source (books.google.com): W. J. A. von Tettau and J. D. H. Temme, "Die eingesperrte Pest," Die Volkssagen Ostpreußens, Litthauens und Westpreußens (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1837), no. 234, p. 222 . Source (Internet Archive): W. J. A. von Tettau and J. D. H. Temme, "Die eingesperrte Pest," Die Volkssagen Ostpreußens, Litthauens und Westpreußens (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1837), no. 234, p. 222 . Chojnice (German Konitz ), formerly in West Prussia, is a town in today's northern Poland. Return to the table of contents . The Plague-Omen Poland A peasant, having lost his wife and children by the plague, fled from his desolate hut and sought refuge in the forest. He wandered about the whole day; towards evening he made a hut of branches, lit a fire, and being tired soon fell asleep. It was already past midnight when he was awakened by a great noise. He jumped up and listened. He could hear, at a distance, merry songs, accompanied by the music of drums and pipes. He was greatly surprised at these rejoicings, especially when he remembered that the Plague was depopulating the country. The music approached, and the terror-stricken peasant saw Homen (so written in the original Polish) advancing through a wide road. "Homen" consisted of a number of spectres of the most extraordinary shapes and kinds. In the midst of them was a high, black waggon, on the top of which sat the Plague. The ghastly company increased at every step; for almost everything they met on the road changed into a spectre and followed the rest. The peasant's fire was nearly out -- there remained only a good sized, half-burnt stem. As soon as Homen approached, the fire-brand stood up, spread out two arms from its sides, and the red embers changed into two shining eyes. It joined at once the train of the Plague, and began also to sing. The peasant was thunderstruck. Almost beside himself with terror, he seized his axe and tried to strike the nearest spectre; but the axe fell from his hands, and was immediately changed into the shape of a tall woman. She shook her dark hair before his eyes, joined the throng, and began also to sing. Homen passed on; the astonished peasant saw how trees, bushes, even owls, and other night birds, assumed various forms, and swelled the horrible company -- the dreadful harbinger of wide-spread death. He fell senseless on the ground. In the morning, when the warm sun awakened him, he found that all he had brought with him was broken to pieces: his goods spoiled, his clothes torn. He knew at once that it was nothing else than Homen who had done him so much injury; and thanking Heaven that at least his life was spared, he went further on in search of food and shelter. Source (books.google.com): John T. Naaké, Slavonic Fairy Tales: Collected and Translated from the Russian, Polish, Servian, and Bohemian (London: Henry S. King and Company, 1874), pp. 19-21 . Source (Internet Archive): John T. Naaké, Slavonic Fairy Tales: Collected and Translated from the Russian, Polish, Servian, and Bohemian (London: Henry S. King and Company, 1874), pp. 19-21 . I have retained Naaké's spelling of Omen and Homen . Return to the table of contents . The Plague in Hiiumaa Estonia A foreign ship lay anchored near the island of Hiiumaa. A few peasants rowed out from the shore to bring provisions. As they were returning a small boy jumped into their boat. He was three-feet tall and dressed in a grey jacket, cut in the style of nobility, and with a three-cornered hat like those formerly worn by Swedish peasants in Hiiumaa. They threw him into the water, but he quickly reappeared and took his place in the boat. And that is how the plague came to the village of Kärdla. If the plague entered a house and the inhabitants called out the greeting, "God bless you!" then it had no power over them. However, if the plague greeted first, or if the inhabitants delayed their greeting, then they all would die. Thus the plage entered a house where everyone was asleep except for an old servant woman who was lying on the stove. The woman saw how the plague struck each person, one after the other, with a staff. A black-and-blue spot emerged from the spot where each one was struck. From this spot the sickness spread across the entire body, which killed the person in a short time. When the plague was about to leave, the servant woman called out, "Touch me with your staff as well." But the plague replied, "Your name is not recorded with the others." Thus she was the only person in the entire household to remain alive. Source (books.google.com): Carl Russwurm, "Die Pest auf Dagö," Sagen aus Hapsal, der Wiek, Ösel und Runö (Reval: Verlag von Franz Kluge, 1861), p. 79 . Source (Internet Archive): Carl Russwurm, "Die Pest auf Dagö," Sagen aus Hapsal, der Wiek, Ösel und Runö (Reval: Verlag von Franz Kluge, 1861), p. 79 . Return to the table of contents . The Plague Russia A Russian peasant sat out in the field. The sun was shining fiercely. In the distance the man saw something coming to him. It came nearer, and then he saw it was a woman. She was clad in a large cloak, and strode along with great strides. The man felt much afraid, and would have run away, but the phantom held him with its bare arms. "Do you know the Plague?" said she. "I am it. Take me on your shoulders and carry me through all Russia. Miss no village or town, for I must go everywhere. For yourself fear nothing. You shall live in the midst of death." She wrapt her long arms round the neck of the fearful peasant. The man went on, and was astonished to find that he felt no weight. He turned his head, and saw that the Plague was on his back. He first took her to a town, and when they came there there was joy in all the streets, dancing, music, and jollity. The peasant went on and stood in the market-place, and the woman shook her cloak. Soon the dance, joy, and merriment ceased. Wherever the man looked he saw terror. People carried coffins, the bells tolled, the burial-ground was full; there was at length no room for more to be buried in it. Then the people brought the dead to the market-place and left them there, having no place in which to bury them. The wretched man went on. Whenever he came to a village the houses were left deserted, and the peasants fled with white faces, and trembling with fear. On the roads, in the woods, and out in the fields, could be heard the groans of the dying. Upon a high hill stood the man's own village, the place in which he was born, and to this place the Plague began to direct his steps. There were the man's wife, his children, and his old parents. The man's heart was bleeding! When he came near his own village, he laid hold of the Plague so that she should not escape him, and held her with all his might. He looked before him and saw the blue Pruth flowing past, and beyond it were the green hills, and afar off the dark mountains with snow-capped tops. He ran quickly to the stream and leaped under its waters, wishing to destroy himself and his burden together, and so free his land from sorrow and the Plague. He himself was drowned, but the Plague, being as light as a feather, slipped off his shoulders, and so escaped. She was, however, so alarmed by this brave deed that she fled away and hid herself in the mountain forests. So the man saved his village, his parents, his wife, and his little children, and all that part of fair Russia through which the Plague had not passed. Source (books.google.com): [Charles John Tibbets], Folk-Lore and Legends: Russian and Polish (London: W. W. Gibbings), pp. 96-98 . Source (Internet Archive): [Charles John Tibbets], Folk-Lore and Legends: Russian and Polish (London: W. W. Gibbings), pp. 96-98 . No author's name is given on the title page. The Introduction is signed "C. J. T." Return to the table of contents . The Sacrifice Austria In Pusarnitz, on the northern boundary with Lurnfeld, there is a prominent grave mound in the old cemetery immediately behind the church. According to legend it came about as follows: Many years ago the plague was ravaging Pusarnitz, taking countless victims. The region was in danger of losing its entire population. Then one day a voice was heard in the air declaring that the pestilence would immediately be defeated if a human were buried alive. The people who heard this did not know where to turn. Not one of them wanted to die such a horrible death. Finally they decided that on the following Sunday the first person to leave the church after the mass would be the sacrifice. Two men stood watch in front of the church door when a young woman, a waitress at the Bogner Tavern, stepped out of the church. She had walked scarcely a few steps when the men took hold of her and dragged her to the grave that had been dug for this purpose. Wringing her hands, she begged the men to spare her. She said that she had the keys to the cellar with her, and that she had to hurry home. Nevertheless, before the others left the church she was lying in the grave, covered over with stones and earth. Thus she had to sacrifice her young life for the good of the remaining population. The plague's ravages ceased at once. As a sign that the sacrifice to the plague was buried there, an elderberry bush was planted on the grave mound. As the bush grew larger the people carefully trimmed it to keep it from sticking out over edge of the adjoining peddler's cottage. For, according to the legend, if it did so the plague would return. One year ago the bush was cut down. The legend further declares that the mound grew ever larger for some years following the death of the unfortunate young woman. A similar legend is told about Weitensfeld, a town in the Gurk Valley. There is a simple wood-framed fountain at the lower end of the town's marketplace. Above the fountain stands a column on which there is a large wooden statue of female figure wearing a broad-brimmed pointed hat. It is said that she represents a virgin who was buried alive in the marketplace in the middle ages. The townspeople believed that this was the best way to halt the pestilence that was then ravaging the countryside. And in this they were indeed successful. Later a statue of the virgin was erected above the market fountain as a monument to her love and to her sacrifice. Source (books.google.com): Georg Graber, Sagen aus Kärnten (Leipzig: Dieterich'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1914), no. 281, pp. 208-109 ; no. 576, pp. 422-23 . Source (Internet Archive): Georg Graber, Sagen aus Kärnten , 3rd printing (Leipzig: Dieterich'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1921), no. 281, pp. 208-109 ; no. 576, pp. 422-23 . Kärnten (Carinthia) is a state in southern Austria. Return to the table of contents . The Plague: Six Lusatian Legends Germany / Poland 1 When the plague threatens a village, one must draw a circle around it with the handle of a copper kettle which comes from a house where all the inhabitants have died. The plague cannot cross this circle unless it is dragged across by force. The people in a village near Cottbus learned that this is true. The plague was raging in the countryside, but the peasants of the village had protected themselves with the circle that they had drawn around the village. One day the miller drove from this village to his mill outside of the village. On his way back he saw a woman dressed in white lying by the side of the road. She urgently begged him to take her along on his cart, for she too wanted to go to the village. The miller accepted the woman's request. On the way she asked about all the members of his household. The miller mentioned all of their names, except for one, which he happened to forget. When they came to the ring that had been drawn around the village, the woman fell from the cart. The man helped her back onto the cart, but she fell off again. The miller wanted to leave the woman lying there, but she begged and wailed until he took her hand and dragged her behind his cart, which the horses had pulled a few steps further along. He then helped the woman back onto the cart and arrived home with her without further difficulties. When he stopped in his yard, he noticed that the woman was gone. At first the miller had no further problems from these events. He sat down at table with his family. Suddenly he heard the door open, and the woman dressed in white stepped into the room. She took a wooden ladle from under her apron and with it hit on the head the one whose name the miller had forgotten to mention. This victim suddenly began to complain of a headache, the first sign of the plague. The miller then realized what a disaster he had caused by bringing the white-clad woman into the village. The plague was now in the village and almost all of the inhabitants died soon thereafter. Branitz. 2 Once the plague moved into a city, and many people died. No remedy against the disease could be found. One day a girl heard a bird calling out "Valerian, valerian." She told this to other people. Thus it was decided to look for the plant. After finding it, they boiled the plant. They gave the resulting brew to the sick people. Everyone who drank it was cured. Leuthen [Lutynia]. 3 In Geierswalde in olden days a trench ran beneath a certain house. One could easily get into the trench. One day someone saw a ball in it. No one knew where it came from. On the day when the ball was noticed all the cattle in the village were attacked by an epidemic. Suspicions turned to the ball. To keep the cattle from dying the peasants rolled a large stone onto it. The epidemic died out immediately. Sometime later the house burned down. The trench caved in, but the stone and ball remained in place. A serious epidemic never again broke out in the village, but the after-effects of the ball still can be felt: Peasants who spread manure on a Saturday find that their cattle are struck with a disease. Because of this no one in the village dares to do such work on a Saturday. Geierswalde. 4 A peasant was driving home. His wagon was completely filled with people. On the way a woman standing at the side of the road asked for a ride. The peasant consented and made a place for her beside himself. However, he soon realized that something was not right with the woman. He asked her at least to do him no harm, and she promised to follow his wish. Then from beneath her clothes the woman pulled out a small wooden spoon and touched everyone on the wagon with it, one after the other. Everyone whom she touched with the spoon died. Ströbitz, 5 Once upon a time there were a king and queen who had no children. One day when they were walking in the forest they sat down together on a large black stone. The king said to his wife: "I would be happy if we had a child, whatever it was like." Then a voice rang out from the stone: "A year from now you shall have a child." The year passed, and the queen gave birth to a daughter as black as ebony. The princess died when she was twelve years old. Her body was carried in an open black coffin into the church and placed before the altar. A soldier stood guard in front of it. The next morning the princess was in the coffin, but the soldier had disappeared. A soldier had to stand watch the next night as well, but the following morning he too had disappeared. Thus it continued for an entire year. All the guards mysteriously disappeared, but the princess in the coffin remained unchanged. Finally a soldier had to stand guard again. This soldier had said goodbye to his family because he believed that the next morning he too would be gone. Standing alone by the coffin in church, all kinds of thoughts occurred to him. He thought about crawling under the coffin, and that is what he did -- right at the head of the coffin. The clock struck twelve, and the princess sat up, smacking her lips like a pig. She quickly jumped out of the coffin and wanted to eat the guard, but seeing no one, she said: "Didn't my father send me a sacrifice today?" Then she began to search. She finally found the soldier. Seeing him beneath the head of the coffin, she said: "You have redeemed me. I don't attack what is behind me. Do you know who I am? I am the plague." She uttered a great curse on the people, and then she disappeared. The next morning the soldier related everything he had experienced during the night. Vetschau. This story combines a type 307 folktale ("The Vampire Bride") with a plague legend. 6 At the end of the last century [1700s], the Missen peasants found in their field a sinister-looking, very old man. The old man said he was very weak because he had been underway a long time. He asked to be lifted onto a wagon or otherwise be carried into the village. But the peasants mercilessly left him lying there in the field. Another peasant came driving by with a load of firewood. The old man asked again: "Take me with you." This peasant took pity. He pushed the wood aside and helped the man onto the wagon. Arriving at home, the peasant made a bed for the old man and laid him on it. Then the old man said: "Out of gratitude that you brought me here, I want to save you from death. I am the forerunner of the plague. If you want to preserve your life and that of your family, leave Missen at once. Move into the open field near the river. Don't return to the village until a white goose approaches you swimming on the river." A short time later a deadly plague broke out in Missen. The peasant gathered up his things, and he and his family moved into the open field with their cattle and everything that they could carry away. The peasant must have spent many months there, when suddenly the water rose greatly in the river. The next day a white goose approached them, swimming on the river. Then the peasant moved back to Missen with his family. Meanwhile, three quarters of the Missen residents had died. The place where the peasant lived in the field is called "the shack" still today. Missen. Source (books.google.com): Edmund Veckenstedt, "Die Pest," Wendische Sagen, Märchen und abergläubische Gebräche (Graz: Verlag von Leuschner und Lubensky, 1880), pp. 336-40 . Source (Internet Archive): Edmund Veckenstedt, "Die Pest," Wendische Sagen, Märchen und abergläubische Gebräche (Graz: Verlag von Leuschner und Lubensky, 1880), pp. 336-40 . Lusatia is a historic region split between present-day eastern Germany and western Poland. Return to the table of contents . The Burning of the Jews in Strasbourg Germany / France According to the well-known legend, it was the Jews who caused the black death by poisoning and infecting the wells, thus bringing the plague to Christendom. It was said that relatively fewer Jews died from the plague. Everywhere they were persecuted, arrested, tortured, and burned to death by the thousand. Although the black death did not come to Strasbourg until the summer of 1349, already one year earlier the city council was pressured from various sides to attack the Jews living in the city with fire and sword. Enemies of the Jews felt that these attacks were too lenient. The community's uproar brought about a change in the city government. Under the administration of the new council, on February 14, Saint Valentine's Day, 1349, two thousand Jews were burned to death in their own cemetery near the northern boundary of the city. The plague broke out in Strasbourg on Saint John's day [June 24] of the same year. The street in which the Jews were burned to death is still today [1852] named Brandgasse [Fire-Alley]. Source (books.google.com): August Stöber, Die Sagen des Elsasses (St. Gallen: Verlag von Scheitlin und Zollikofer, 1852), pp. 307-308 . Source (Internet Archive): August Stöber, Die Sagen des Elsasses (St. Gallen: Verlag von Scheitlin und Zollikofer, 1852), pp. 307-308 . Link to the Wikipedia article on the Strasbourg Massacre . Link to the Wikipedia article Persecution of Jews during the Black Death . Link to additional Anti-Semitic Legends . Return to the table of contents . Persecution of the Jews During the Plague Germany In the fourteenth century the legend spread throughout all of Europe that the Jews had caused the black death by poisoning wells and waterways. It was claimed that this criminal activity was directed from Toledo through messengers and letters from secret leaders. It was claimed that letters had been discovered in such places as Ulm that were written at the time time of Christ's crucifixion by Jews in Jerusalem to their fellow Jews. The contents of these letters enflamed the vengeful mobs. The horrific consequences of this delusion are too well known to be recounted here. In Strasbourg 900 Jews were burned to death (of the 1884 who lived there). In Mainz the numerous Jews who lived in the city voluntarily met their deaths when their houses were set afire. Similarly, large numbers of Jews were burned to death in Augsburg, Ulm, Konstanz, Hall, Munich, Salzburg, Erfurt, and Eisenach. Source (books.google.com): "Die Pest," Die Gartenlaube: Illustrirtes Familienblatt (1879), p. 214 . Source (Internet Archive): "Die Pest," Die Gartenlaube: Illustrirtes Familienblatt (1879), p. 214 . Link to the Wikipedia article Persecution of Jews during the Black Death . Link to additional Anti-Semitic Legends . Return to the table of contents . Return to the table of contents . The Tall Man in the Murder Lane in Hof Germany From Enoch Widmann's Chronicle of Hof : In 1519, just before the plague killed so many people in Hof a large, tall black man was seen in Murder Lane. His wide-spread legs reached both sides of the street, and his head rose far above the housetops. My great-grandmother, Walburg Widmann, herself, saw how he walked along this street one evening with one foot at the tavern's entrance and the other foot across the street in front of the large house there. She was so frightened that she did know which way to go. In God's name and making the sign of the cross, she advanced in the middle of the street and passed between his legs. Had she not dared to do this the ghost would have followed her. She had barely escaped when the ghost clapped his legs together so hard that all the houses in Murder Lane nearly collapsed. Soon afterward the plague befell the city, and it was first felt in Murder Lane. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der lange Mann in der Mordgasse zu Hof," Deutsche Sagen, herausgegeben von den Brüdern Grimm , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 167, p. 243 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der lange Mann in der Mordgasse zu Hof," Deutsche Sagen, herausgegeben von den Brüdern Grimm , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 167, p. 243 . This legend is numbered 168 in later editions of the Grimms' Deutsche Sagen . Enoch Widmann was a school rector in Hof in 1596. Hof is a city in Bavaria. From its name, Murder Lane ( Mordgasse ) obviously had a sinister reputation even before the plague. The street is now named Auguststraße . Return to the table of contents . The Last Plague Death in Motzlar Germany When the Festival of Saint Mary of the Snows was first celebrated in Schleid nearly everyone from Motzlar went there to participate. Only a single peasant from the village remained behind, saying mockingly, "I'll not go to the Snow-Festival," then went to his field to plow. But things did not go well for him. When the others returned from the festival they heard him moaning and crying, "If I only had gone to the festival with you!" Afterward when his people entered his house they found him lying dead on the floor, black over his entire body. He was the last person in Motzlar to die from the plague. Source (books.google.com): Christian Ludwig Wucke, "Von dem letzten an der Pest Verstorbenen in Motzlar," Sagen der mittleren Werra, der angrenzenden Abhänge de Thüringer Waldes, der Vorder- und der Hohn Rhön, sowie aus dem Gebiete der fränkischen Saale , 2nd edition (Eisenach: Verlag von H. Kahle, 1891), no. 508, p. 317 . Source (Internet Archive): Christian Ludwig Wucke, "Von dem letzten an der Pest Verstorbenen in Motzlar," Sagen der mittleren Werra, der angrenzenden Abhänge de Thüringer Waldes, der Vorder- und der Hohn Rhön, sowie aus dem Gebiete der fränkischen Saale , 2nd edition (Eisenach: Verlag von H. Kahle, 1891), no. 508, p. 317 . Schleid is a municipality in Thuringia, Germany. Motzlar is a district within Schleid. The Festival of Saint Mary of the Snows, known popularly as the Schneefest has been celebrated in Schleid since 1626. Return to the table of contents . Mother Gauerken Brings the Plague Germany Once the plague broke out in Rankendorf and Grevenstein near Dassow. This is how it happened: One evening at the Grevenstein mill a journeyman and an apprentice were busy grinding flour to be taken to Pohnsdorf the next day. After dark the apprentice stuck his head out the door and heard the howling of dogs. "Listen," he called to the journeyman. "Mother Gauerken is coming with her dogs." The journeyman ran to the door and saw a raven-black cloud slowly descending over Pohnsdorf, and from the cloud he heard the cry: "Oh, Pohnsdorf, it's coming to you." The journeyman thought that because the people of Pohnsdorf had him grind their grain he did not want any evil to befall them. Therefore he called out to the cloud: "Hey! Just make your way toward Rankendorf and Grevenstein." Then the cloud burst apart, one part descending on Rankendorf and the other on Grevenstein. The next day the plague broke out in both places. The apprentice told everyone what had happened. The journeyman was captured and was to be burned at the stake. However, Mother Gauerken took pity on him, and the plague suddenly ceased. For joy they spared the journeyman's life. Source (books.google.com): Karl Bartsch, "Mutter Gauerken bringt die Pest," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg] , vol. 1 (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), pp. 25-26 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Bartsch, "Mutter Gauerken bringt die Pest," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg] , vol. 1 (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), pp. 25-26 . Bartsch's source: "Innkeeper Tretow in Tramm; communicated by Assistant Pastor Timmermann." The places named in this legend are in the northern German state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern. Mother Gauerken is a Germanic mythological figure possibly also identified as Frau Holle, Frau Holda, Frau Gauden, Perchta, or other names. Return to the table of contents . Plague-Flies Germany Flies are often carriers of the plague, and these are therefore called plague-flies. A plague that terribly ravaged the Oberpfalz [Upper Palatinate] was carried there by a journeyman tradesman who brought a plague-fly with him because of its glistening gold color. He did not know that it had been on a person sick with the plague. Near Windisch-Eschenbach a herder boy saw that a wooden chock had been driven into a boundary stone. Courious, he pulled it out, and out came a fly, followed by smoke. From this the plague came into the country. Sometime later the this herder boy noticed that the same fly came back to the boundary stone and flew inside. The boy quickly drove a wedge into the opening, and the plague ceased. The plague is often captured in this manner. On another occasion, when the plague was in Bärnau, someone saw how a plague-fly crawled into a hole in the ceiling beam. He quickly drove a chock in behind her, and from that time onward the plague did not return to Bärnau. In Roding someone sick with the plague caught a fly, and just to pass the time he wedged it inside a worm-hole in the wooden wall. He recovered from his sickness. Long afterward he wondered what had become of the captured fly. He had scarcely pulled out the chock when the plague struck him again, and for a second time death overtook the town. Source (books.google.com): Franz Schönwerth, "Die Pest," Aus der Oberpfalz: Sitten und Sagen , vol. 3 (Augsburg: Matth. Rieger'sche Buchhandlung, 1859), pp. 17-18 . Source (Internet Archive): Franz Schönwerth, "Die Pest," Aus der Oberpfalz: Sitten und Sagen , vol. 3 (Augsburg: Matth. Rieger'sche Buchhandlung, 1859), pp. 17-18 . Return to the table of contents . The Unfortunate Wedding at Grimma Germany On the 16th of October in the year 1637 a respected and educated man from Grimma gave his daughter in marriage to the rector of the Grimma school. A number of students from Leipzig were present at the wedding. One of them made up a very indecent wedding-poem and presented it to the guests. In this poem he included a disgraceful parody of the Christian burial hymn "Now Let Us Bury the Corpse," which he sang with the words: Nun lasset uns die Braut begraben, Und gar keine Zweifel haben, Daß Morgen sie wird auferstehen, Und auf zwei Weiberfüssen gehn. Now let us bury the bride, And we have no doubt at all, Tomorrow she shall rise again, But no longer as a maid. What happened next? They laughed about the burial hymn, but on the third day after the wedding the bride died from the plague. A few days later the bridegroom died as well, as well as two of the bride's brothers, who were students. They went, as it states in the chronical: a thalamo ad tumulum, a luxu ad luctum [from the bridal chamber to the grave, from celebration to sorrow]. Source (books.google.com): Johann Georg Theodor Grässe, "Die unglückliche Hochzeit zu Grimma," Der Sagenschatz des Königreichs Sachsen (Dresden: Verlag von G. Schönfeld's Buchhandlung, 1855), no. 295, p. 220 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Georg Theodor Grässe, "Die unglückliche Hochzeit zu Grimma," Der Sagenschatz des Königreichs Sachsen (Dresden: Verlag von G. Schönfeld's Buchhandlung, 1855), no. 295, p. 220 . Grimma is a town in the Free State of Saxony, Germany. Return to the table of contents . Cholera Germany Even today there are many people in Pomerania who believe that cholera was intentionally brought into the country in 1831. It is said that a Frenchman did this in order to depopulate the country, and thus make it easier to capture once again. To achieve this the French attempted to sneak into the country in many ways und with many disguises. The following account about Stettin is told even today: One day a man carrying a large chest on his back entered the city through the Berlin Gate. He looked about fearfully in all directions and attempted to pass by the sentinels without being seen. However, he was noticed and taken to the guard-house. They demanded that he open the chest. At first he refused, but finally he had to obey their commands. In the large chest they found a smaller one, and in this one a still smaller one. Thus it continued for a time, until at last they opened the smallest one. Here they found a tiny, tiny human. He was the Frenchman who wanted to bring cholera into the city. Source (books.google.com): J. D. H. Temme, "Die Cholera," Die Volkssagen von Pommern und Rügen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1840), no. 261, p. 309 . Source (Internet Archive): J. D. H. Temme, "Die Cholera," Die Volkssagen von Pommern und Rügen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1840), no. 261, p. 309 . Temme's source: "Oral." Return to the table of contents . The Wedged-In Plague Smoke Switzerland A devastating plague laid waste to the village of Weggen, one hour distant from Luzern. One day the inhabitants of an old wooden house on the lake shore saw a small blue wisp of smoke. It hovered about and then floated into a crack in the wall. "That is the plague," said someone who saw it, then went and drove a wedge into the opening. From that hour onward the pestilence ceased in the village. Many years later a member of the family enlisted in foreign military duty. When the soldier returned home again his eye fell on the one spot on the wall, and he remembered its history. "Let's see," he said jokingly, "if the little wisp of smoke is still there." Although someone begged him not to do so, he quickly pulled out the plug, and the blue smoke jetted out. The plague, liberated again, struck down the brash soldier as its first victim. Soon afterward everyone in the house died, and many others in the village perished as well. Source (books.google.com): Alois Lütolf, "Pestrauch verkeilt," Sagen, Bräuche, Legenden aus den fünf Orten, Lucern, Uri, Schwiz, Unterwalden und Zug (Luzern: Verlag von Frz. Jos. Schiffmann, 1862), pp. 114-15 . Source (Internet Archive): Alois Lütolf, "Pestrauch verkeilt," Sagen, Bräuche, Legenden aus den fünf Orten, Lucern, Uri, Schwiz, Unterwalden und Zug (Luzern: Verlag von Frz. Jos. Schiffmann, 1862), pp. 114-15 . A similar legend is told in Iceland, about how a plague of mice are banned into a hole, but then unwittingly released some years later: Mice in Akureyar . Return to the table of contents . The Plague Column in Auer Italy In the village of Auer there is a monument, the so-called plague column, which they had built in thanks for their liberation from the Black Death. Mysterious things often happen here, especially in the nights of the Ember Days. Large, dark masses roll moaning and groaning across the street or follow after the passers-by. Furthermore, other sinister beings are often seen next to the plague column. Once a headless giant attacked someone there. Source (books.google.com): Johann Adolf Heyl, "Die Pestsäule in Auer," Volkssagen, Bräuche und Meinungen aus Tirol (Brixen: Verlag der Buchhandlung des Kath.-polit. Pressvereins, 1897), p. 479 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Adolf Heyl, "Die Pestsäule in Auer," Volkssagen, Bräuche und Meinungen aus Tirol (Brixen: Verlag der Buchhandlung des Kath.-polit. Pressvereins, 1897), p. 479 . Auer (Italian Ora ) is a municipality in South Tyrol, northern Italy. Return to the table of contents . Astrological Portents Italy / Spain / France The year 1345 was considered by the astrologers as one full of evil portents. In it many conjunctions took place; notably one on the 8th of February, when Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, and Mercury were all standing in the same sign. Villani, in his Florentine Chronicle , testifies to the profound impression which these astrological conjunctions produced, and how much they were believed to have caused all the troubles which then visited Italy. The medical faculty of Paris declared these conjunctions to be one of the causes of the plague (the Black Death), and they repeat in their report almost the very words of the Toledo letter, without mentioning it by name. Source (books.google.com): M. Gaster, "The Letter of Toledo," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 13 (1902), p. 125 . Source (Internet Archive): M. Gaster, "The Letter of Toledo," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 13 (1902), p. 125 . Note by Gaster: In the year 1184 the world was startled by a letter purporting to come from the sages and astrologers of Toledo. It was sent to Pope Clement III and to other men of weight, informing them of impending doom. The world was to be destroyed in the year 1186 through wind and storms, drought and famine, pestilence and earthquake. (p. 115) Return to the table of contents . Amabie: The Ancient Beast Helping Japan Ward Off the Coronavirus Japan In Italy, they sing from balconies. In the UK, they place pictures of rainbows in windows. In India, they chant "Go corona." Around the world, solidarity in the face of the coronavirus is taking many forms. In Japan, that form has three legs, a beak, scaly skin and floor-length hair. Meet Amabie, the 19th century half-fish, half-human that's resurfaced to keep people safe. The mermaid-like creature began appearing on social media in Japan in early March and was soon being tagged in upwards of 30,000 posts a day. Manga artists rendered the creature in their own styles, sharing images alongside messages wishing for an end to the virus. Amabie then got official recognition when Japan's health ministry made it the face of its public safety campaign. After that, it started appearing on cookies, face masks, candy, bread rolls, the obligatory Starbucks logo pastiche, and even statues in parks. According to a woodblock-printed news sheet dated April 1846, the creature made its first and only appearance in the sea off Higo Province, now Kumamoto Prefecture, on the southern island of Kyushu. As the story goes, a government official went down to the beach to investigate reports of something shining in the water. When the official arrived, a mermaid-like creature emerged, introduced itself as "Amabie who lives in the sea," and issued two predictions. "For the next six years, there will be a bountiful harvest across Japan, but there will also be an epidemic." Amabie then told the official, "Quickly draw a picture of me and show it to people," and disappeared back into the sea. Nagano Eishun, librarian of the Fukui Prefectural Archives and an expert on ancient spirits, says Amabie is one of more than a dozen prophecy beasts reported during the Edo period, and it probably derives from an ape-like creature with a similar name. In 1843, three years before Amabie first appeared, there were reports of a three-legged simian in the same province. The furry beast went by the name Amabiko and its origin story was strikingly similar. A woodblock printed news sheet from the era said a man went down to the sea to investigate reports of glowing lights. Amabiko introduced itself, predicted a rich harvest and an epidemic, then claimed that people would survive and live long, healthy lives if they saw the creature's image. "The two have so much in common, it's natural to think that Amabiko was Amabie's former self," says Nagano. And he says the monkey was far more famous than the mer-creature in the 19th century. During times of plagues, such as cholera and dysentery, people used a picture of Amabiko as a good luck charm. Nagano says the creature probably changed form as its story spread across the country through drawings and people took liberties with their interpretations. He adds that commercial interests may have driven both the creativity and the creature's insistence that it had to be seen. "The woodblock printed news sheet, called kawaraban, was basically a single sheet of paper with a piece of illustrated news or gossip," he says. "The producers always wanted an interesting story to catch people's attention, so they got inventive, like perhaps letting a spirit warn people they'd get sick unless everyone had a copy of that image." After many decades out of the spotlight, Amabie is finally getting the attention it craves with some help from social media. It seems human nature hasn't changed much since the 19th century, and the image of this strange creature is still able to provide some kind of solace. But Nagano says there's a fundamental difference between then and now. "Back in the 19th century, those images were only supposed to save the person who bought the news sheet. But now people are spreading the images to protect everyone. I would say that shows we've made big progress." Source ( NHK (Japan Broadcasting Corporation) World-Japan): Yamamoto Saori, " Amabie: The Ancient Beast Helping Japan Ward Off the Coronavirus ." Accessed August 30, 2020. Return to the table of contents . The Plague among the Beasts Robert Dodsley A Mortal distemper once raged among the beasts, and swept away prodigious numbers. After it had continued some time without abatement, it was concluded in an assembly of the brute creation to be a judgment inflicted upon them for their sins, and a day was appointed for a general confession; when it was agreed, that he who appeared to be the greatest sinner, should suffer death, as an atonement for the rest. The Fox was appointed father confessor upon the occasion; and the Lion with great generosity condescended to be the first in making public confession. "For my part," said he, "I must own I have been an enormous offender; I have killed many innocent sheep in my time; nay once, but it was a case of necessity, I made a meal of the shepherd." The Fox, with much gravity, acknowledged that these in any other than the King would have been inexpiable crimes; but that his majesty had certainly a right to a few silly sheep, nay, and to the shepherd too, in a case of necesity. The judgment of the Fox was applauded by all the superior savages; and the Tyger, the Leopard, the Bear, and the Wolf, made confession of many enormities of the like sanguinary nature: which were all palliated or excused with the same lenity and mercy; and their crimes accounted so venial as scarce to deserve the name of offences. At last, a poor penitent Ass, with great contrition acknowledged, that once going thro' the parson's meadow, being very hungry, and tempted by the sweetness of the grass, he had cropt a little of it, not more however in quantity than the tip of his tongue: he was very sorry for the misdemeanour, and hoped -- "Hope!" exclaimed the Fox with singular zeal, "What canst thou hope for, after the commission of so heinous a crime? What! Eat the parson's grass! O sacrilege! This, this is the flagrant wickedness, my brethren, which has drawn the wrath of heaven upon our heads; and this the notorious offender, whose death must make atonement for all our transgressions." So saying, he ordered his entrails for sacrifice, and the rest of the beasts went to dinner upon his carcase. Source (books.google.com): Robert Dodsley, Select Fables of Esop and Other Fabulists (Birmingham: Printed by John Baskerville, [1761]), Modern Fables, no. 30, pp. 101-102 . Source (Internet Archive): Robert Dodsley, Select Fables of Esop and Other Fabulists (Birmingham: Printed by John Baskerville, 1764), , Modern Fables, no. 30, pp. 91-92 . Robert Dodsley (1703-1764) was an English bookseller and writer. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 5, 2023. Playing Dead: Folktales of type 1 Playing Dead folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1 and related stories selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2018 Contents Reynard Steals Fish (Europe, Joseph Jacobs). Two Foxes Steal Herrings (Scotland, J. F. Campbell). The Fox and the Lapp (Lapland, Andrew Lang). Mr. Fox Goes a-Hunting, but Mr. Rabbit Bags the Game (African-American, Joel Chandler Harris). How Brother Fox Was Too Smart (African-American, Joel Chandler Harris). Playing Dead Twice in the Road (Virginia, USA). The Fox (Palestine, J. E. Hanauer). Mantharaka's Rescue (India, The Panchatantra ). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Reynard Steals Fish Joseph Jacobs Reynard saw a man driving a cart full of fish, which made his mouth water. So he ran and he ran and he ran till he got far away in front of the cart and lay down in the road as still as if he were dead. When the man came up to him and saw him lying there dead, as he thought, he said to himself, "Why, that will make a beautiful red fox scarf and muff for my wife Ann." And he got down and seized hold of Reynard and threw him into the cart all along with the fish, and then he went driving on as before. Reynard began to throw the fish out till there were none left, and then he jumped out himself without the man noticing it, who drove up to his door and called out, "Ann, Ann, see what I have brought you." And when his wife came to the door she looked into the cart and said, "Why there is nothing there." Source: European Folk and Fairy Tales, restored and retold by Joseph Jacobs (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), p. 44. Jacobs, following a well established and ancient tradition, incorporates the above episode into a larger story featuring the trickster fox and his various gullible victims. The next episode, in keeping with tradition, tells how the fox uses his stolen fish to trick the bear into attempting to angle a similar catch by placing his tail into an ice hole (Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 2). The full account is titled "Reynard and Bruin" (pp. 42-50). Return to the table of contents . Two Foxes Steal Herrings Scotland A man was one day walking along the road with a creel of herrings on his back, and two foxes saw him, and the one, who was the biggest, said to the other, "Stop here and follow the man, and I will run round and pretend that I am dead." So he ran round and stretched himself on the road. The man came on, and when he saw the fox, he was well pleased to find so fine a beast, and he picked him up and threw him into the creel, and he walked on. But the fox threw the herrings out of the creel, and the other followed and picked them up. And when the creel was empty, the big fox leaped out and ran away. And that is how they got the herrings. Source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands (London: Alexander Gardner, 1890), vol. 1, p. 286. Campbell's source: John Mackinnon, a stable boy at Broadford in Skye. Campbell does not give this tale a title. Return to the table of contents . The Fox and the Lapp Andrew Lang Once upon a time a fox lay peeping out of his hole, watching the road that ran by at a little distance, and hoping to see something that might amuse him, for he was feeling very dull and rather cross. For a long while he watched in vain; everything seemed asleep, and not even a bird stirred overhead. The fox grew crosser than ever, and he was just turning away in disgust from his place when he heard the sound of feet coming over the snow. He crouched eagerly down at the edge of the road and said to himself, "I wonder what would happen if I were to pretend to be dead! This is a man driving a reindeer sledge; I know the tinkling of the harness. And at any rate I shall have an adventure, and that is always something!" So he stretched himself out by the side of the road, carefully choosing a spot where the driver could not help seeing him, yet where the reindeer would not tread on him; and all fell out just as he had expected. The sledge driver pulled up sharply, as his eyes lighted on the beautiful animal lying stiffly beside him, and jumping out he threw the fox into the bottom of the sledge, where the goods he was carrying were bound tightly together by ropes. The fox did not move a muscle though his bones were sore from the fall, and the driver got back to his seat again and drove on merrily. But before they had gone very far, the fox, who was near the edge, contrived to slip over, and when the Laplander saw him stretched out on the snow he pulled up his reindeer and put the fox into one of the other sledges that was fastened behind, for it was market day at the nearest town, and the man had much to sell. They drove on a little further, when some noise in the forest made the man turn his head, just in time to see the fox fall with a heavy thump onto the frozen snow. "That beast is bewitched!" he said to himself, and then he threw the fox into the last sledge of all, which had a cargo of fishes. This was exactly what the cunning creature wanted, and he wriggled gently to the front and bit the cord which tied the sledge to the one before it so that it remained standing in the middle of the road. Now there were so many sledges that the Lapp did not notice for a long while that one was missing. Indeed, he would have entered the town without knowing if snow had not suddenly begun to fall. Then he got down to secure more firmly the cloths that kept his goods dry, and going to the end of the long row, discovered that the sledge containing the fish and the fox was missing. He quickly unharnessed one of his reindeer and rode back along the way he had come, to find the sledge standing safe in the middle of the road; but as the fox had bitten off the cord close to the noose there was no means of moving it away. The fox meanwhile was enjoying himself mightily. As soon as he had loosened the sledge, he had taken his favorite fish from among the piles neatly arranged for sale, and had trotted off to the forest with it in his mouth. Source: Andrew Lang, The Brown Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1904), pp. 245-246. Lang identifies his source only as a book entitled Lappländische Mährchen . This tale, like the preceding version, follows the tradition of incorporating the fish episode into a larger story featuring the trickster fox and his various gullible victims. Here too the episode that follows tells how the fox uses his newly stolen fish to trick the bear into attempting to angle a similar catch by placing his tail into an ice hole (Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 2). Lapland extends across northern Norway, Sweden, Finland, and northwestern Russia. The Lapps (or Sami, as they prefer to be called) have inhabited this region -- most of which lies above the Arctic Circle -- for several thousand years. Return to the table of contents . Mr. Fox Goes a-Hunting, but Mr. Rabbit Bags the Game Joel Chandler Harris One day Brer Fox came along all rigged out and asked Brer Rabbit to go hunting with him, but Brer Rabbit, he sort of felt lazy, and he told Brer Fox that he had some other fish to fry. Brer Fox felt might sorry, he did, but he said he believed he would try his hand anyhow, and off he went. He was gone all day, and he had a monstrous streak of luck, Brer Fox did, and he bagged a sight of game. By and by, towards the shank of evening, Brer Rabbit sort of stretched himself, he did, and allowed that it was almost time for Brer Fox to be getting along home. Then Brer Rabbit, he went and mounted a stump to see if he could hear Brer Fox coming. He hadn't been there long when sure enough here came Brer Fox through the woods singing like a Negro at a frolic. Brer Rabbit, he leapt down off the stump, he did, and lay down in the road and made like he was dead. Brer Fox, he came along, he did, and saw Brer Rabbit lying there. He turned him over, he did, and examined him, and he said, "This here rabbit is dead. He looks like he's been dead a long time. He's dead, but he's mighty fat. He is the fattest rabbit that I ever saw, but he's been dead too long. I am afraid to take him home," he said. Brer Rabbit didn't say anything. Brer Fox, he sort of licked his chops, but he went on and left Brer Rabbit lying in the road. Directly he was out of sight, Brer Rabbit, he jumped up, he did, and ran around through the woods and got in front of Brer Fox again. Brer Fox, he came up and there lay Brer Rabbit, apparently cold and stiff. Brer Fox, he looked at Brer Rabbit, and he sort of studied. After a while he unslung his game bag, and he said to himself, "This here rabbit is going to waste. I'll just leave my game here, and I'll go back and get that other rabbit, and I'll make folks believe that I'm Old Man Hunter from Huntsville," he said. With that he dropped his game and loped back up the road after the other rabbit, and when he was out of sight, old Brer Rabbit, he snatched up Brer Fox's game and put out for home. The next time he saw Brer Fox he hollered out, "What did you kill the other day?" he said. Then Brer Fox, he sort of combed his flank with his tongue, and hollered back, "I caught a handful of hard sense, Brer Rabbit," he said. Then old Brer Rabbit, he laughed, he did, and up and responded, "If I'd have known you were after that, Brer Fox, I'd have loaned you some of mine," he said. Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus: His Songs and His Sayings: The Folk-Lore of the Old Plantation (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1881), no. 15, pp. 70-72 . First published in 1880. Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. This tale, like The Fox from Palestine, reproduced below, combines elements of Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 1 and 1525D. Type 1 tales emphasize a trickster's playing dead in order to accomplish a theft. In traditional tales of type 1525D the trickster leaves two boots on a trail at some distance from each other. A traveler sees the first boot, bemoans the fact that it has no mate, and tosses it aside. Upon discovering the second boot, he sets down what he is carrying and returns for the first boot. The trickster picks up the goods left behind by the traveler and disappears. Return to the table of contents . How Brother Fox Was Too Smart Joel Chandler Harris One day Brer Fox heard Mr. Man coming down the big road in a one-horse wagon carrying some chickens and some eggs and some butter to town. Brer Fox heard him coming, he did, and what did he do but go and lay down in the road in front of the wagon. Mr. Man, he drove along, he did, clucking to the horse and humming to himself, and when they got almost up to Brer Fox, the horse, he shied, he did, and Mr. Man, he took and hollered "whoa!" and the horse, he took and whoaed. Then Mr. Man, he looked down, and he saw Brer Fox lying out there on the ground, just like he was cold and stiff, and when Mr. Man saw this, he hollered out, "Heyo! There's the chap that's been nabbing up my chickens, and somebody's done gone and shot off a gun at him, which I wish it had been two guns -- that I do!" With that Mr. Man drove off and left Brer Fox lying there. Then Brer Fox, he got up and ran around through the woods and lay down in front of Mr. Man again, and Mr. Man came driving along, and he saw Brer Fox, and he said, "Heyo! You're the very chap that's been destroying my pigs. Somebody's done gone and killed him, and I wish they'd have killed him a long time ago." Then Mr. Man, he drove on, and the wagon wheel came mighty near mashing Brer Fox's nose. Yet, all the same, Brer Fox leaped up and ran around ahead of Mr. Man and lay down in the road, and when Mr. Man came along, there he was all stretched out like he was big enough to fill a two-bushel basket, and he looked like he was dead enough to be skinned. Mr. Man drove up, he did, and stopped. He looked down upon Brer Fox, and then he looked all around to see what the occasion was and why the fox was dead. Mr. Man looked all around, he did, but he didn't see anything, and neither did he hear anything. He sat there and studied, and by and by he decided to see what had got into the fox family, and with that he got down out of the wagon, and he felt Brer Fox's ears. Brer Fox's ears felt right warm. Then he felt Brer Fox's neck. Brer Fox's neck felt right warm. Then he felt Brer Fox's short ribs. Brer Fox's short ribs were sound. Then he felt Brer Fox's limbs. Brer Fox's limbs were sound. Then he turned Brer Fox over, and lo and behold, Brer Fox was right limber. When Mr. Man saw this, he said to himself, "Heyo, here! How come? This here chicken nabber looks like he's dead, but no bones are broken, and I can't see any blood, and neither can I see any bruises; and more than that, he is warm and limber. Something is wrong here for sure! This here pig grabber might be dead, and then again, he might not be. Just to make sure that he is, I'll give him a whack with my whip handle." And with that, Mr. Man drew back and fetched Brer Fox a clip behind the ears -- pow! -- and the lick came so hard and it came so quick that Brer Fox thought for sure that he was a goner. But before Mr. Man could draw back and fetch him another wipe, Brer Fox scrambled to his feet, he did, and did he make tracks away from there. Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Nights with Uncle Remus: Myths and Legends of the Old Plantation (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1883), no. 4, pp. 17-21 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Note that in traditional Indo-European versions of this tale the trickster fox succeeds in stealing goods from the man by playing dead. In the above African-American variant recorded by Joel Chandler Harris, the wily fox ends up tricking only himself. In most of Harris's tales it is the ostensibly gentle rabbit and not the carnivorous fox who is the successful trickster. Return to the table of contents . Playing Dead Twice in the Road Virginia, USA Version A Once a rabbit and wolf went out one day to catch some fish. The wolf caught all the fish, and the rabbit didn't catch any. So the rabbit said to himself, "I am going home to my wife." Then he said to the wolf, "Brer Wolf, you have caught all the fish, and I have not caught any; and tomorrow morning your wife will be eating fish, and mine will be qu'rrling." "I don't care," said Brer Wolf. "Please give me some fish for my wife!" " I'll not, Brer Rabbit." Then Brer Rabbit said to himself, "Never mind! I will go and lie in the road where Brer Wolf has got to come along." Brer Rabbit went and laid in the middle of the road. The wolf came along with his basket of fish. The old rabbit pretended to be dead. Brer Wolf kicked him over, and said, "Ha! here is an old dead rabbit," and passed on. The rabbit went under the hill and got in the road again, and lay in the road as if he was dead. The old wolf came on and kicked him over, and said, "Ha! here is another dead rabbit," and passed on. Brer Rabbit went around him and got into the road again. When Brer Wolf came along to this dead rabbit, he set his basket of fish down, and went back to get the first rabbit; and then the rabbit got his basket of fish. Version B A rabbit once said to a fox, "Let us go fishing!" "All right!" said the fox. The fox took the basket and went in the boat; while the rabbit sat upon the hill and played the violin, which she said would make the fish bite. When she saw that the fox had his basket full of fish, she ran down the path some distance, feigning to be dead. When the fox came along and saw her, he wondered, but passed on. After the fox had passed some way, the rabbit jumped up and ran through the bushes, heading the fox, and lay down in the road as before. And the rabbit did this way the third time; and when the fox found the third dead rabbit, he said that he would go back and count them. He put his fish down by this last dead rabbit, and went back to count; but when he returned, he had found no dead rabbits and his fish were gone; for, when he turned his back, the rabbit got up and took the basket of fish away. Version C Near St. Louis there lived a bear who loved to go a-fishing. Once he fished all day in the Mississippi River. A cunning little hare thought of a trick to play on the bear to rob him of his nice string of fish. He ran around in front of the bear, and lay down across his path as if he was dead. The bear kicked him, and, seeing he was stiff, jumped over him. The hare got up and ran around the bear, and lay down across his path again. "There lays another old dead hare," said the bear. The hare jumped up and ran around a third time, and lay down across the bear's path. "What a nice meal I should have if I had those two which are left behind!" said the bear. He laid down his fish and went back to get them. He could not find them; and when he hurried back to get his fish, there was no trace of them, nor of the hare which he had left with the fish. Version D Once a fox heard a rabbit had outwitted a wolf. He decided not to be friends to her any more. But Mis' Rabbit came and begged his pardon, and it was granted. Mr. Fox offered to go hunting with Mis' Rabbit; but the rabbit was lazy and played off sick, and stayed at Mr. Fox's house till he was very near ready to come back. Then she ran way down the road, and curled up and played off dead. Brer Fox came 'long and looked at her; but he thought probably she had been dead too long, so he passed on. As soon as Brer Fox was out of sight, Mis' Rabbit jumped up and ran through the field and got ahead of him, and laid down again to fake Mr. Fox. This time he looked at her and he looked into his bag. His bag was large enough to accommodate one or two more, so he put Mis' Rabbit in, and put his bag in the grass, and went back to get the other rabbit. Before he was around the corner Mis' Rabbit jumped up and ran home with Mr. Fox's game. So Mr. Fox found no game when he returned. But one day Mis' Rabbit was walking along, and she asked Mr. Fox what he killed. He said he killed a lot of game, but he had learned a headful of har' sense. She laughed and went on. Source: A. M. Bacon and E. C. Parsons, "Folk-Lore from Elizabeth City County, Virginia," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 35, no. 137 (July-September, 1922), pp. 275-76. Return to the table of contents . The Fox Palestine The fox is the most crafty and cunning of beasts. His tricks and wiles are innumerable. If there are partridges about, he notices the direction in which they will be likely to run, and then he runs ahead of them and lies down as if dead, foaming at the mouth. When the birds come to the spot, they think him dead, and peck at him. They dip their bills in the saliva running from his mouth, and then he snaps at and catches them. He one day played a similar trick on a peasant woman who was carrying a basketful of live fowls to market. Seeing the way she was going, he ran ahead and lay down as above described. When passing the spot she saw him, but did not think it worth her while to stop and skin him. As soon as she was out of sight the fox jumped up and, making a detour, again ran ahead of her and lay down a second time in the road at a point she would have to pass. She was surprised to see him, and said to herself, "Has a pestilence broken out amongst foxes? Had I skinned the first I saw lying by the roadside it would have been worth my while to stop for this one, but as I did not do so then, I shall not do so now." She went on her way, and her surprise was unbounded when, after a while, she noticed what she believed to be a third fox dead on the roadside. "Verily I have done wrong," thought she, "to neglect the good things Allah has placed in my way. I shall leave my fowls here and secure the pelts of the first two before the others take them." No sooner said than done; but before she had time to return wondering, but empty-handed, the cunning fox had secured his prey and departed. Source: J. E. Hanauer, Folk-Lore of the Holy Land: Moslem, Christian and Jewish , edited by Marmaduke Pickthall (London: Duckworth and Company, 1907), pp. 273-74 . This tale, like Joel Chandler Harris's Mr. Fox Goes a-Hunting, but Mr. Rabbit Bags the Game , reproduced above, combines elements of Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 1 and 1525D. Type 1 tales emphasize a trickster's playing dead in order to accomplish a theft. In traditional tales of type 1525D the trickster leaves two boots on a trail at some distance from each other. A traveler sees the first boot, bemoans the fact that it has no mate, and tosses it aside. Upon discovering the second boot, he sets down what he is carrying and returns for the first boot. The trickster picks up the goods left behind by the traveler and disappears. Return to the table of contents . Mantharaka's Rescue The Panchatantra There were once four friends, a deer named Citrânga (having a spotted body), a crow named Laghupatanaka (flying fast), a turtle named Mantharaka (moving slow), and a mouse named Hiranyaka (golden colored). One day a hunter captured the turtle, tied him to his bow with strands of grass, then set off toward home carrying his evening meal over his shoulder. Learning of their companion's capture, the three remaining friends quickly devised a scheme to set him free. The deer ran ahead of the hunter and laid himself in the path, pretending to be dead. The crow made the feigned death appear even more real by pecking lightly at the deer's head. The mouse hid himself beside the pathway and readied himself to gnaw away his captured friend's bonds. The scheme worked as planned. The hunter, bearing the captured turtle, saw the deer, apparently dead by the side of the pathway. Setting down his burden to free his hands, he advanced toward his unexpected find. As the hunter neared his prey, not only did the crow fly away, but the deer itself suddenly jumped up and bounded into the forest. Cursing his bad luck, the hunter retraced his steps to reclaim the captive turtle, but he found only the gnawed-off bonds. Mantharaka had disappeared into a nearby swamp. And thus were the four forest friends reunited. Source: Abstracted from The Panchatantra , book 2, story 5. This is but one episode in a long story constructed of many interwoven fables. I have used the following edition: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen . Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen von Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 204-207. © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. India's most influential contribution to world literature, The Panchatantra (also spelled Pañcatantra or Pañca-tantra ) consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled, in their current form, between the third and fifth centuries AD. It is believed that even then the stories were already ancient. The tales' self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes The Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai, which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of The Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced medieval writers of fables. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 17, 2018. The Plaisham: A Folktale from Donegal, Ireland The Plaisham A Folktale from Donegal, Ireland told by Seumas MacManus and edited by D. L. Ashliman Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. The Snow, the Crow, and the Blood. A Folktale from Donegal, Ireland, told by Seumas MacManus. Nancy and Shamus were man and wife, and they lived all alone together for forty years; but at length a good-for-nothing streel of a fellow named Rory, who lived close by, thought what a fine thing it would be if Shamus would die, and he could marry Nancy, and get the house, farm, and all the stock. So he up and said to Nancy: "What a pity it is for such a fine-looking woman as you to be bothered with that ould, complainin', good-for-nothing crony of a man that's as full of pains and aches as an egg's full of meat. If you were free of him the morrow, the finest and handsomest young man in the parish would be proud to have you for a wife." At first Nancy used to laugh at this; but at last, when he kept on at it, it began to prey on Nancy's mind, and she said to young Rory one day: "I don't believe a word of what you say. Who would take me if Shamus was buried the morra?" "Why," says Rory, "you'd have the pick of the parish. I'd take you myself." "Is that true?" says Nancy. "I pledge you my word," says Rory, "I would." "Oh, well, even if you would yourself," says Nancy, "Shamus won't be buried tomorrow, or maybe, God help me, for ten years to come yet." "You've all that in your own hands," says Rory. "How's that?" says Nancy. "Why, you can kill him off," says Rory. "I wouldn't have the ould crature's blood on my head," says Nancy. "Neither you need," says Rory. And then he sat down and began to tell Nancy how she could do away with Shamus and still not have his blood on her head. Now there was a prince called Connal, who lived in a wee sod house close by Nancy and Shamus, but whose fathers before him, ere their money was wasted, used to live in a grand castle. So, next day, over Nancy goes to this prince, and to him says: "Why, Prince Connal, isn't it a shame to see the likes of you livin' in the likes of that house?" "I know it is," said he, "but I cannot do any better." "Botheration," says Nancy, "you easily can." "I wish you would tell me how," says Prince Connal. "Why," says Nancy, "there's my Shamus has little or nothing to do, an' why don't you make him build you a castle?" "Ah," says the prince, laughing, "sure, Shamus couldn't build me a castle." Says Nancy: "You don't know Shamus, for there's not a thing in the wide world he couldn't do if he likes to; but he's that lazy, that if you don't break every bone in his body to make him do it, he won't do it." "Is that so?" says Prince Connal. "That's so," says Nancy. "So if you order Shamus to build you a castle an' have it up in three week, or that you'll take his life if he doesn't, you'll soon have a grand castle to live in," says she. "Well, if that's so," says Prince Connal, "I'll not be long wanting a castle." So on the very next morning, over he steps to Shamus's, calls Shamus out, and takes him with him to the place he had marked out for the site of his castle, and shows it to Shamus, and tells him he wants him to have a grand castle built and finished on that spot in three weeks' time. "But," says Shamus, says he, "I never built a castle in my life. I know nothing about it, an' I couldn't have you a castle there in thirty-three years, let alone three weeks." "O!" says the prince, says he, "I'm toul' there's no man in Ireland can build a castle better nor faster than you, if you only like to; and if you haven't that castle built on that ground in three weeks," says he, "I'll have your life. So now choose for yourself." And he walked away, and left Shamus standing there. When Shamus heard this, he was a down-hearted man, for he knew that Prince Connal was a man of his word and would not stop at taking any man's life any more than he would from putting the breath out of a beetle. So down he sits and begins to cry; and while Shamus was crying there, up to him comes a Wee Red Man, and says to Shamus: "What are you crying about?" "Ah, my poor man," says Shamus, says he, "don't be asking me, for there's no use in telling you, you could do nothing to help me." "You don't know that," says the Wee Red Man, says he. "It's no harm to tell me anyhow." So Shamus, to relieve his mind, ups and tells the Wee Red Man what Prince Connal had threatened to do to him if he had not a grand castle finished on that spot in three weeks. Says the little man, says he: "Go to the Fairies' Glen at moonrise the night, and under the rockin' stone at the head of the glen you'll find a white rod. Take that rod with you, and mark out the plan of the castle on this ground with it; then go back and leave the rod where you got it, and by the time you get back again your castle will be finished." At moonrise that night Shamus, as you may be well assured, was at the rockin' stone at the head of the Glen of the Fairies, and from under it he got a little white rod. He went to the hill where the Prince's castle was to be built, and with the point of the rod he marked out the plan of the castle, and then he went back and left the rod where he got it. The next morning, when Prince Connal got up out of bed and went out of his little sod hut to take the air, his eyes were opened, I tell you, to see the magnificent castle that was standing finished and with the coping-stones on it on the hill above. He lost no time till he went over to thank Shamus for building him such a beautiful castle; and when Nancy heard that the castle was finished, it was she that was the angry woman. She went out and looked at the castle, and she wondered and wondered, too, but she said nothing. She had a long chat with Rory that day again, and from Rory she went off to Prince Connal, and says she: "Now, didn't I tell you right well what Shamus could do?" "I see you did," says Prince Connal, "and it is very thankful to you I am. I'm contented now for life," says he, "and I'll never forget yourself and Shamus." "Contented!" says she; "why, that place isn't half finished yet." "How's that?" says Prince Connal. "Why," says she, "you need a beautiful river flowing past that castle, with lovely trees, and birds singing in the branches, and you should have the ocean roaring up beside it." "But still," says Prince Connal, says he, "one can't have everything. This is a hundred miles from a river and a hundred miles from an ocean, and no trees ever grew on this hill, nor ever could grow on it, and no bird ever sang on it for the last three hundred years." "Then all the more reason," says she, "why you should have all them things." "But I can't have them," says Prince Connal. "Can't you?" says she. "Yes, you can. If you promise to have Shamus's life unless he has you all those things by your castle in three days, you'll soon have all you want," says Nancy. "Well, well, that's wonderful," says Prince Connal, says he, "and I'll do it." So he sets out, and goes to Shamus's house, and calls Shamus out to him to tell him that his castle was very bare-looking without something about it. Says he: "Shamus, I want you to put a beautiful river flowing past it, with plenty of trees and bushes along the banks, and also birds singing in them; and I want you to have the ocean roaring up by it also." "But, Prince Connal," says Shamus, says he, "you know very well that I couldn't get you them things." "Right well I know you can," says Prince Connal, "and I'll give you three days to have all them things done; and if you haven't them done at the end of three days, then I'll have your life" And away goes Prince Connal. Poor Shamus, he sat down and began to cry at this, because he knew that he could not do one of these things. And as he was crying and crying he heard a voice in his ear, and looking up he saw the Wee Red Man. "Shamus, Shamus," says he, "what's the matter with you?" "O," says Shamus, says he, "there's no use in telling you what's the matter with me this time. Although you helped me before, there's not a man in all the world could do what I've got to do now." "Well, anyhow," says the Wee Red Man, "if I can't do you any good, I'll do you no harm." So Shamus, to relieve his mind, ups and tells the Wee Red Man what's the matter with him. "Shamus," says the Wee Red Man, says he, "I'll tell you what you'll do. When the moon's rising tonight, be at the head of the Glen of the Fairies, and at the spring well there you'll find a cup and a leaf and a feather. Take the leaf and the feather with you, and a cup of water, and go back to the castle. Throw the water from you as far as you can throw it, and then blow the leaf off your right hand, and the feather off your left hand, and see what you'll see." Shamus promised to do this. And when the moon rose that night, Shamus was at the spring well of the Glen of the Fairies, and he found there a cup, a leaf, and a feather. He lifted a cup of water and took it with him, and the leaf and the feather, and started for the castle. When he came there, he pitched the cup of water from him as far as he could pitch it, and at once the ocean, that was a hundred miles away, came roaring up beside the castle, and a beautiful river that had been flowing a hundred miles on the other side of the castle came flowing down past it into the ocean. Then he blew the leaf off his right hand, and all sorts of lovely trees and bushes sprang up along the river banks. Then he blew the feather off his left hand, and the trees and the bushes were filled with all sorts and varieties of lovely singing birds, that made the most beautiful music he ever had heard. And maybe that was not a surprise to Prince Connal when he got up in the morning and went out. Off he tramped to Shamus's to thank Shamus and Nancy, and when Nancy heard this she was the angry woman. That day she had another long confab with Rory, and from him she went off again to Prince Connal, and asked him how he liked his castle and all its surroundings. He said he was a pleased and proud man, that he was thankful to her and her man, Shamus, and that he would never forget it to them the longest day of his life. "O, but," says she, "you're not content. This night you'll have a great gathering of princes and lords and gentlemen feasting in your castle, and you'll surely want something to amuse them with. You must get a plaisham." "What's a plaisham?" said Prince Connal. "O," says Nancy, "it's the most wonderful and most amusing thing in the world; it will keep your guests in good humor for nine days and nine nights after they have seen it." "Well," says Prince Connal, "that must be a fine thing entirely, and I'm sure I would be might anxious to have it. But," says he, "where would I get it or how would I get it?" "Well," says Nancy, "that's easy. If you order Shamus to bring a plaisham to your castle by supper time this night, and promise to have his life if he hasn't it there, he'll soon get it for you." "Well, if that's so," says Prince Connal, "I'll not be long wanting a plaisham." So home went Nancy rejoicing this time, for she said to herself that poor old Shamus would not be long living now, because there was no such thing known in the whole wide world as a plaisham; and though Shamus might build castles, and bring oceans and rivers and trees and birds to them, all in one night, he could not get a thing that did not exist and was only invented by Rory. Well, off to Shamus went Prince Connal without much loss of time, and called Shamus out of his little cabin. He told him he was heartily well pleased with all he had done for him. "But there's one thing more I want you to do, Shamus, and then I'll be content," says he. "This night I give a grand supper to the lords, ladies, and gentry of the country, and I want something to amuse them with; so at supper time you must bring me a plaisham." "A plaisham! What's that?" says Shamus. "I don't know," says Prince Connal. "No more do I," says Shamus, "an' how do you expect me to fetch it to you then?" "Well," says Prince Connal, says he, "this is all there is to be said about it -- if you haven't a plaisham at my castle door at supper time the night, you'll be a dead man." "O, O," says Shamus, says he, and sat down on the ditch and began to cry, while Prince Connal went off home. "Shamus, Shamus," says a voice in his ears, "what are you cryin' about now?" Poor Shamus lifted his head and looked around, and there beside him stood the Wee Red Man. "O!" says Shamus, says he, "don't mind asking me," he says, "for it's no use in telling you what's the matter with me now. You may build a castle for me" says he, "and you may bring oceans and rivers to it, and trees and birds; but you couldn't do anything to help me now." "How do you know that?" said the Wee Red Man. "Oh, I know it well," says Shamus, says he, "you couldn't give me the thing that never was an' never will be!" "Well," says the Wee Red Man, says he, "tell me what it is anyhow. If I can't do you any good, sure I can't do you any harm." So, to relieve his mind, Shamus ups and tells him that Prince Connal had ordered him, within twenty-four hours, to have at his castle door a plaisham. "But," says Shamus, says he, "there never was such a thing as that." "Sure enough," says the Wee Red Man, "there never was. But still, if Prince Connal wants it, we must try to get it for him. This night, Shamus," says the Wee Red Man, says he, "go to the head of the Glen of the Fairies, to the sciog bush [Fairy thorn], where you'll find a bone ring hanging on a branch of the thorn. Take it with you back home. When you get home, young Rory will be chatting with your wife in the kitchen. Don't you go in there, but go into the byre [cowshed], and put the ring in the cow's nose; then lie quiet, and you'll soon have a plaisham to drive to Prince Connal's castle door." Shamus thanked the Wee Red Man, and that night he went to the head of the Glen of the Fairies, and sure enough, he found the ring hanging from one of the branches of the sciog bush. He took it with him, and started for home. When he looked in through the kitchen window, there he saw Nancy and Rory sitting over the fire, chatting and confabbing about how they would get rid of him; but he said nothing, only went into the byre. He put the ring into the brannet cow's nose, and as soon as the ring went into it, the cow began to kick and rear and create a great tenherary of a noise entirely. Then Shamus got in under some hay in the corner. It was no time at all until Nancy was out to find what was wrong with the brannet cow. She struck the cow with her fist to quiet her, but when she hit her, her fist stuck to the cow, and she could not get away. Rory had come running out after Nancy to help her, and Nancy called: "Rory, Rory, pull me away from the cow." Rory got hold of her to pull her away, but as he did so his hands stuck to Nancy, and he could not get away himself. Up then jumped Shamus from under the hay in the corner. "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." And out of the byre starts the cow with Nancy stuck to her, and Rory stuck to that, and heads toward the castle, with the cow rearing and rowting, and Nancy and Rory yelling and bawling. They made a terrible din entirely, and roused the whole countryside, who flocked out to see what was the matter. Down past Rory's house the cow went, and Rory's mother, seeing him sticking to Nancy, ran out to pull him away; but when she laid her hand on Rory, she stuck to him; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." So on they went. And Rory's father ran after them to pull the mother away; but when he laid his hand on the mother, he stuck to her; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, "drive on the plaisham." On again they went, and next they passed where a man was cleaning out his byre. When the man saw the ridiculous string of them, he flung a graip [fork] and a graipful of manure at them, and it stuck to Rory's father; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." But the man ran after to save his graip, and when he god hold of the graip, he stuck to it; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." On they went; and a tailor came flying out of his house with his lap-board in his hand. He struck the string of them with the lap-board, the lap-board stuck to the last man, and the tailor stuck to it; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." Then they passed a cobbler's. He ran out with his heel-stick, and struck the tailor; but the heel-stick stuck to the tailor, and the cobbler stuck to the heel-stick; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." Then on they went, and they next passed a blacksmith's forge. The blacksmith ran out, and struck the cobbler with his sledge. The sledge stuck to the cobbler, and the blacksmith stuck to the sledge; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." When they came near the castle, they passed a great gentleman's house entirely, and the gentleman came running out, and got hold of the blacksmith to pull him away; but the gentleman stuck to the blacksmith, and could not get away himself; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." The gentleman's wife, seeing him stuck, ran after her man to pull him away; but the wife stuck to the gentleman; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." Then their children ran after them to pull the mother away, and they stuck to the mother; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." Then the butler ran to get hold of the children, and he stuck to them; and the footman ran to get hold of the butler, and tuck to him; and the cook ran to get hold of the footman, and stuck to him; and the servants all ran to get hold of the cook, and they stuck to her; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." And on they went; and when they came up to the castle, the plaisham was a mile long, and the yelling and bawling and noise that they made could be heard anywhere within the four seas of Ireland. The racket was so terrible that Prince Connal and all his guests and all his servants and all in his house came running to the windows to see what was the matter, at all, at all; and when Prince Connal saw what was coming to his house, and heard the racket they were raising, he yelled to his Prime Minister to go and drive them off with a whip. The Prime Minister ran meeting them, and took the whip to them; but the whip stuck to them, and he stuck to the whip; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." Then Prince Connal ordered out all his other ministers and all of his servants to head it off and turn it away from his castle; but every one of the servants that got hold of it stuck to it; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." And the plaisham moved on still for the castle. Then Prince Connal himself, with all his guests, ran out to turn it away; but when Prince Connal laid hands on the plaisham, he stuck to it; and when his guests laid hand on him, they stuck one by one to him; and "Hup, Hup!" says Shamus, says he, "drive on the plaisham." And with all the racket and all the noise of the ranting, roaring, rearing, and rawting, in through the castle hall-door drove the plaisham, through and through and out at the other side. The castle itself fell down and disappeared, the bone ring rolled away from the cow's nose, and the plaisham all at once broke up, and when Prince Connal looked around, there was no castle at all, only the sod hut, and he went into it a sorry man. And all the others slunk off home, right heartily ashamed of themselves, for the whole world was laughing at them. Nancy, she went east; and Rory, he went west; and neither one of them was ever heard of more. As for Shamus, he went home to his own little cabin, and lived all alone, happy and contented, for the rest of his life, and may you and I do the same. Source: Seumas MacManus, Donegal Fairy Stories (Garden City, N. Y.: Doubleday, 1900), pp. 3-28. This story (type 571B) is found throughout northern Europe. The non-existing object is often called a "himp-hamp." Revised November 28, 1997. Dishonest Surveyor and Plowman Legends Dishonest Surveyor and Plowman Legends Folktales about dishonest surveyors and plowmen who encroach upon their neighbors' fields, translated and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2022 Contents The Cursed Land Surveyors (Germany). The Displaced Boundary Stone (Germany). Jörle Knix (Germany). The Dishonest Plowman (Germany). The Seven Steps (Germany). Land Plowed Away (Germany). Punishment for Removing Land-Marks (Denmark). The Glowing Surveyor (Netherlands). The Boundary Wrongdoer in Siggenthal (Switzerland). The Boundary Stone (Italy / Austria). Old Taylor's Ghost (England). Commentary . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Cursed Land Surveyors Germany Will-o'-the-Wisps that glide back and forth along river banks and the edges of fields are said to have been land surveyors who dishonestly measured the plot boundaries. After death they are therefore condemned to wander around and keep watch over those very boundaries. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die verwünschten Landmesser," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 284, p. 374 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die verwünschten Landmesser," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 284, p. 374 . The Grimms' source: "Oral, from Mecklenburg." In later editions this legend is numbered 285. Return to the table of contents . The Displaced Boundary Stone Germany A ghostly spirit in the form of a man is frequently seen in the fields surrounding Eger. The people call him "Squire Ludwig." It is said that a man by this name formerly lived here, and that he deceitfully moved the field's boundary stones. Soon after his death he began to wander about, appearing to many people and frightening them. This was experienced in more recent times by a girl from the town. One day she walked through the town gate by herself and happened into the infamous area. At the place where the boundary stone had been moved to (as was claimed), a man approached her. He had the appearance of the evil squire, as he had been described. He walked toward her, took hold of her breast with his fist, and then disappeared. She ran home in shock, and said to her family, "I'm done for!" They saw that her breast had turned black where the spirit had grabbed her. She immediately went to bed, and on the third day afterward she died. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der verrückte Grenzstein," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 285, pp. 274-75 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der verrückte Grenzstein," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 285, pp. 274-75 . In later editions this legend is numbered 286. Return to the table of contents . Jörle Knix Germany In Schmalkalden there once lived a man by the name of Jörle Knix. During his lifetime he repeatedly encroached upon his neighbors' adjoining fields by moving the boundary stones, thus dishonestly enlarging his own lands. After his death he was denied eternal peace, and until the present day Jörle Knix can be seen in his field as a fiery man with his head under his arm and a glowing hoe on his shoulder. There, without pause, he jumps over the boundary stones that he moved. Source: Karl Lyncker, "Jörle Knix," Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Cassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 176, p. 114 . Return to the table of contents . The Dishonest Plowman Germany In Ehringen, a village between Wolfhagen and Volkmarsen, there once lived a peasant who was hated and cursed by everyone, for it was his custom to plow one or more furrows into his neighbors' fields whenever he plowed his own lands, thus enriching himself. However, after his death he was punished for these acts. Every night he is now damned to wander about the fields that dishonestly enlarged in this manner. Source: Karl Lyncker, "Der ungetreue Ackermann," Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Cassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 177, p. 115 . Return to the table of contents . The Seven Steps Germany On the main road from Nenndorf to Hannover in the vicinity of the village of Eberloh, right next to the road, there can be seen seven upright stones spaced like footsteps. They have been carefully preserved even to this day. They are called the seven steps, and the following legend is associated with them: Many years ago two peasants came into conflict about the boundary between their adjoining fields. The one accused the other of plowing away some of his land. The accused man swore with an oath that he was innocent. Later the accuser wanted to prove that his neighbor had perjured himself, and invited the court to see the fields for themselves. The person who had sworn the oath appeared as well, and said, "If I have sworn falsely then may God grant that I take no more than seven steps." With his seventh step he disappeared, and was never seen again. Source: Karl Lyncker, "Die sieben Trappen," Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Cassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 178, p. 115 . Return to the table of contents . Land Plowed Away Germany In Klein-Paaren there was once a peasant who, during his lifetime, plowed away the edges of his neighbors' fields, then afterwards moved the boundary stones. Heaven punished him for this. He had scarcely died before he began appearing in the night at the place where he had sinned. He was seen there busily digging at the land he had plowed away. He was also often seen panting and carrying a heavy boundary stone about. He would call out in misery, "Where shall I set it down? Where shall I set it down?" This was often heard at midnight until finally the preacher went out to that place and said, "In God's name, set it back down where you found it." He did that, and since then he has not been seen again. It may be that he has found redemption. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Land abgepflügt," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg, Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen,Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen, aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 114, p. 99 . Return to the table of contents . Punishment for Removing Land-Marks Denmark Before the permanent allotment of lands, to every peasant, in sowing time, so much of the field or mark was assigned as was just and appropriate, and boundary posts were driven between his and his neighbor's allotment. Whoever removed such marks, though he might escape punishment in this world, could find no rest in the grave, but by way of penalty must plough every night on the spot where his sin lay hidden. Of such plowmen it is said, that when any person came near, they compelled him to drive their horses; and if any one were so forced into their service, there was no other way to get free again than to take notice of the place where he began, and after the first turn to cast away the reins. He might then pursue his way unscathed. Near Skive lies the manor of Krabbesholm, where there once dwelt a lady who wished to appropriate to herself an adjacent field, and therefore caused her overseer to put earth from the garden at Krabbesholm into his wooden shoes, with which he went to the field in dispute, and swore that he stood on the soil of Krabbesholm. The field was adjudged to the lady, but afterwards the overseer could not die before she had given it back; yet he, nevertheless, every night still goes round the field with earth in his wooden shoes. Three men belonging to Spandet, in North Schleswig, swore away the beautiful meadow of Elkjser from the village of Fjersted; in lieu of which the villagers got the inferior one of Sepkjser. They had also put earth in their shoes. After their death they were long to be seen wandering about the meadow, wringing their hands and crying: Med Ret og Skjel, Det ved vi vel, Elkjær ligger til Fjersted By, Sepkjær ligger til Spandet. By law and right, That know we well, Elkjær belongs to Fjersted town, Sepkjær belongs to Spandet. Near Ebeltoft dwelt a peasant who possessed land and cattle in superabundance, paid taxes both to church and state, brought his tithes at the right time, gave to the poor, and went every Sunday to church; yet, notwithstanding all this, there was not an individual in the whole neighborhood that placed any real confidence in him. He died and was buried, but after having lain in the earth until harvest time, he was heard at night crying piteously over the field, "Boundary here! boundary there!" Now people discovered how in his lifetime he had acquired his wealth. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), pp. 202-203 . Return to the table of contents . The Glowing Surveyor Netherlands A surveyor near Farsum was very dishonest during his lifetime. Whenever he measured a plot of land he accepted a bribe in order to make the plot larger than it should have been. For this reason he was cursed, and after his death he has to go about as a glowing man with a glowing surveyor's chain. Thus is he is measuring land every night, even to this day. Source (books.google.com): Johann Wilhelm Wolf, "Der glühende Landmesser," Niederländische Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1843), no. 440, p. 526 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Wilhelm Wolf, " Der glühende Landmesser," Niederländische Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1843), no. 440, p. 526 . Wolf's source: "Oral." Return to the table of contents . The Boundary Wrongdoer in Siggenthal Switzerland If someone plows away land from his neighbor, then after his death he appears every night as a fiery skeleton on the stolen land. And if one looks out a window at midnight, the skeleton will come up to the eaves, just wanting to be spoken to, for then he would be redeemed. In this regard they tell about the following event in Siggenthal: One night around midnight a traveling tailor was at work in a customer's house when his light went out. A fiery skeleton was standing just outside the window, and it moaned over and over again: "A hoe! A hoe!" The tailor wisely did not answer, but instead called the household together and asked them to give the skeleton what he wanted. They fetched a hoe and threw it out the window. The next morning they found it lying outside. The hoe's handle was badly burned, and the iron was still glowing. Source (books.google.com): Ernst Ludwig Rochholz, "Der Grenzfrevler im Siggenthal," Schweizersagen aus dem Aargau , vol. 2 (Aarau: Druck und Verlag von H. R. Sauerländer, 1856), no. 308, p. 77 . Source (Internet Archive): Ernst Ludwig Rochholz, "Der Grenzfrevler im Siggenthal," Schweizersagen aus dem Aargau , vol. 2 (Aarau: Druck und Verlag von H. R. Sauerländer, 1856), no. 308, p. 77 . Return to the table of contents . The Boundary Stone Italy / Austria In Ulten there is a meadow called the "Schwemm." There is a crucifix in this meadow, and the old-timers tell the following legend about its origin and meaning: Two farmers formerly owned this meadow. One of them was not satisfied with with his portion and began a dispute about the boundary. He claimed that the boundary originally had been almost in the middle of his neighbor's current portion. He said that the boundary's location had been forgotten through the carelessness of the shepherds. The dispute was brought before a judge. Because neither party could present witnesses, the judge did not have an easy decision. Finally the accuser's greed drove him to swear an oath: "I swear that I have told the truth. If I have told a lie, then may my head serve as a boundary stone!" The other farmer was terrified by such godless speech, and he said: "Neighbor, upon your oath I grant you the meadow. The future will show whether or not you have spoken the truth!" A short time later the untruthful farmer died, and the following day the shepherds found his head lying on the old legal boundary. They immediately recognized it as the head of the unjust neighbor. News of this soon spread down to the village. The dead man's body had already been buried, and in order to clarify matters, the grave was re-opened. In the coffin the body was indeed lying there without a head. The head was buried again with the body, but immediately it appeared back in the meadow. Prayers and blessings did not help. The head kept returning to the meadow until it finally decayed and fell to dust. The living neighbor once again took posession of his part of the meadow. He had a crucifix erected at the place where the head had formerly lain. Source (books.google.com): Ignaz Vincenz Zingerle, "Der Markstein," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Tirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1859), no. 261, pp. 151-52 . Source (Internet Archive Ignaz Vincenz Zingerle, "Der Markstein," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Tirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1859), no. 261, pp. 151-52 . Ulten (Italian, Ultimo ) is a municipality in the South Tyrol section of Italy. Return to the table of contents . Old Taylor's Ghost England "Nonagenarian" tells the story of another Hereford ghost,* who could not rest because he had moved a landmark. I have heard several similar stories, including one of a man who "wasted away like" until he died, through remorse, and afterwards could not rest until the landmark was replaced in its original position. The Nonagenarian's version is as follows: There was old Taylor's ghost, that used to walk about at the White Cross. He couldn't rest, because he had moved a landmark. He used to ride upon a little pony, and sometimes he would be seen sitting on a stile. I have never seen old Taylor myself, but have heard many say they had seen him. At last his ghost was laid. . . . One stormy night a fellow whose name I have forgotten, walked into the bar of the Nag's Head, and said he had seen old Taylor, and had promised to meet him in the Morning Pits that night at twelve. Of course nobody believed him, and as the night wore on the others jeered him, and said: "I would not go on such a night as this." He said he would not; but as the hour drew near he was obliged to go. Something forced him to run, so that he reached the Morning Pits as the clock struck twelve. There the old man was waiting. "Follow me," said he. The other followed him into some strange place, which they seemed to reach in a very short time. In the place were two immense stones. "Take up these stones," said Taylor. "I can't," said Denis (he was nick-named "Denis the Liar"). "You can," said Taylor. "Try." He tried, and tilted them easily. "Now come with me," said Taylor, "and place them where I shall show you." He carried them, and put them down with ease. "Now," said the other, "I caution you never tell anybody what you see here this night." He promised. "And now," said he,"lie down on your face, and as you value your life, don't attempt to look either way, until you hear music, and then get away as fast as you can." He lay a long time without hearing what he earnestly desired, but at last the welcome sound was heard. . . . He was a very different man after that, though he soon died from the effects of his fright.** * Hereford Times , April 15th, 1876. ** Hereford Times, loc. cit. Source (books.google.com): Ella Mary Leather, The Folk-Lore of Herefordshire (Hereford: Jakeman and Carver; London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1912), p. 32 . Source (Hathitrust): Ella Mary Leather, The Folk-Lore of Herefordshire (Hereford: Jakeman and Carver; London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1912), p. 32 . Return to the table of contents . Commentary The fear that one's land might be stolen by a neighbor moving boundary stones or plowing into an adjoining field must have been fairly common in pre-industrial Europe, for there are many accounts, similar to the ones above, that assign dire supernatural punishment to those who attempt such dishonesty. An important literary treatment of this deception (but without the supernatural consequences) is contained in the novella Romeo und Julia auf dem Dorfe (A Village Romeo and Juliet) by the Swiss writer Gottfried Keller. Click here for a link to this text (in German): Romeo und Julia auf dem Dorfe . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 3, 2022. The Pot That Died: Folktales of Type 1592B The Pot That Died folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 1592B in which a trickster steals a pot by convincing its owner that it has died edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2001-2009 Contents Nasreddin Hodja Borrows a Cauldron (Turkey). The Cogia Borrowed a Cauldron (Turkey). The Cauldron That Died (Palestine). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Nasreddin Hodja Borrows a Cauldron Turkey Nasreddin Hodja, having need for a large cooking container, borrowed his neighbor's copper cauldron, then returned it in a timely manner. "What is this?" asked his neighbor upon examining the returned cauldron. "There is a small pot inside my cauldron." "Oh," responded the Hodja. "While it was in my care your cauldron gave birth to a little one. Because you are the owner of the mother cauldron, it is only right that you should keep its baby. And in any event, it would not be right to separate the child from its mother at such a young age." The neighbor, thinking that the Hodja had gone quite mad, did not argue. Whatever had caused the crazy man to come up with this explanation, the neighbor had a nice little pot, and it had cost him nothing. Some time later the Hodja asked to borrow the cauldron again. "Why not?" thought the neighbor to himself. "Perhaps there will be another little pot inside when he returns it." But this time the Hodja did not return the cauldron. After many days had passed, the neighbor went to the Hodja and asked for the return of the borrowed cauldron. "My dear friend," replied the Hodja. "I have bad news. Your cauldron has died, and is now in her grave." "What are you saying?" shouted the neighbor. A cauldron does not live, and it cannot die. Return it to me at once!" "One moment!" answered the Hodja. "This is the same cauldron that but a short time ago gave birth to a child, a child that is still in your possession. If a cauldron can give birth to a child, then it also can die." And the neighbor never again saw his cauldron. Source: Retold from various Turkish sources, including Allan Ramsay and Francis McCullagh, Tales from Turkey (London: Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, and Kent, 1914). Nasreddin Hodja is Turkey's (and perhaps all of Islam's) best-known trickster. His legendary wit and droll trickery were possibly based on the exploits and words of a historical imam. Nasreddin reputedly was born in 1208 in the village of Horto near Sivrihisar. In 1237 he moved to Aksehir, where he died in the Islamic year 683 (1284 or 1285). The many spelling variations for Nasreddin include: Nasreddin, Nasrettin, Nasrudin, Nasr-id-deen, Nasr-eddin, Nasirud-din, Nasr-ud-Din, Nasr-Eddin, and Nasr-Ed-Dine. The many spelling variations for Hodja (a title meaning teacher or scholar) include: Hodja, Hodscha, Hoca, Chotza, Cogia, Khodja, and Khoja. Return to the table of contents . The Cogia Borrowed a Cauldron Turkey One day the Cogia borrowed a cauldron of a brazier, and carrying it home, put a little saucepan into it, and then carrying it back, returned it to its owner. The owner seeing a little saucepan in the cauldron, said, "What is this ?" "Why," cried the Cogia, "the cauldron has borne a child;" whereupon the owner took possession of the saucepan. One day the Cogia asked again for the cauldron, and having obtained it, carried it home. The owner of the cauldron waited one day and even five days for his utensil, but no cauldron coming, he went to the house of the Cogia and knocked at the door. The Cogia, coming to the door, said, "What do you want?" "The cauldron," said the man. "O set your heart at rest," said the Cogia. "The cauldron is dead." "O Cogia," said the man, "can a cauldron die?" "O," said the Cogia, "as you believed it could bear a child, why should you not believe that it can die? " Source: George Borrow, The Turkish Jester; or, The Pleasantries of Cogia Nasr Eddin Effendi , translated from the Turkish (Ipswich: W. Webber, 1884), p. 11 . Return to the table of contents . The Cauldron That Died Palestine One day Johha borrowed a large tanjera , or copper saucepan, from a neighbor for domestic use. Next day he returned it together with a very small but quite new one. "What is this?" asked the surprised owner. "Your tanjera gave birth to a young one during the night," replied the jester, and, in spite of the incredulity of the other man, maintained his assertion, refusing to take back the smaller tanjera , on the ground that the young belonged to the parent and the parent's owner. Besides, it was cruel to separate so young a child from its mother. After a deal of protestation, the neighbor, believing him mad, resolved to humor him, and took the small tanjera , greatly wondering at the jester's whim. Its point was revealed to his chagrin some days later, when Johha came and borrowed a large and valuable copper dist , or cauldron. This he did not return, but carried it off to another town, where he sold it. When its owner sent to Johha to reclaim it, the knave said that he regretted his inability to send it back, but the utensil had unfortunately died and been devoured by hyenas. "What!" exclaimed the owner angrily. "Do you think me fool enough to believe that?" "Well, my friend," was the reply, "wonderful things sometimes happen. You allowed yourself to be persuaded that your tanjera , for instance, gave birth to a young one. Why, then, should you not believe that your dist , which is simply a grown-up tanjera , should die?" In the circumstances, the argument seemed unanswerable, especially when, after searching through Johha's house, the cauldron could not be found. Source: J. E. Hanauer, Folk-Lore of the Holy Land: Moslem, Christian, and Jewish , edited by Marmaduke Pickthall (London: Duckworth and Company, 1907), pp. 86-87 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 22, 2013. The Princess and the Pea The Princess on the Pea folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 704 about the search for a sensitive wife translated and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2008 Contents The Princess on the Pea (Denmark, Hans Christian Andersen). The Most Sensitive Woman (Italy, Christian Schneller). The Three Delicate Wives of King Virtue-Banner: Which Is the Most Delicate? (India). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Princess on the Pea Denmark Once upon a time there was a prince who wanted to find a princess, but she would have to be a real princess. So he traveled all around the world to find one, but there was always something wrong. There were princesses enough, but he could never be sure that they were real ones. There was always something about them that was not quite right. So he came home again and was sad, for he so much wanted to have a real princess. One evening there was a terrible storm. It thundered and lightninged! The rain poured down! It was horrible! Then there was a knock at the city gate, and the old king went out to open it. A princess was standing outside. But my goodness, how she looked from the rain and the weather! Water ran down from her hair and her clothes. It ran into the toes of her shoes and out at the heels. And yet she said that she was a real princess. "Well, we shall soon find that out," thought the old queen. But she said nothing, went into the bedroom, took off all the bedding and laid a pea on the bottom of the bed. Then she took twenty mattresses and laid them on the pea, and then twenty featherbeds of eiderdown on top of the mattresses. That was where the princess was to sleep for the night. In the morning she was asked how she had slept. "Oh, horribly!" she said. "I hardly closed my eyes all night. Goodness knows what there was in the bed! I was lying on something hard, so that I am black and blue all over my body. It is horrible!" Now they could see that she was a real princess, because she had felt the pea right through the twenty mattresses and the twenty featherbeds. Nobody but a real princess could be that sensitive. So the prince took her for his wife, because now he knew that he had a real princess. And the pea was put in the art gallery where it can still be seen, unless someone has taken it. Now see, that was a real story! Source: Hans Christian Andersen, Prinsessen på ærten (1835). The final sentence, "Now see, that was a real story!" draws attention to the tale's self-conscious fictitiousness. Note that the following story uses a similar device as a concluding statement. Return to the table of contents . The Most Sensitive Woman Italy The parents of a prince wanted him to marry, but he said, "I will marry only such a woman about whom I can say with good conscience that she is the most sensitive woman in the world." His parents answered, "Then go and find her!" He went forth and came to a woman whose head was all bandaged up and who appeared to be suffering. "What is the matter with you?" he asked. "Oh," she said, "this morning my maid was combing my hair, and she pulled one out, which is causing me great pain." But the prince thought to himself, "She isn't the right one. I will seek further." He went on his way and found another woman. Her entire body was wrapped with the finest linen, and she looked very sad. "What is the matter with you?" he asked. "Oh," she said, "last night while I was in bed there was a little wrinkle in the sheet I was lying on, and it has made me sick." But the prince thought, "She is not the most sensitive one either. There must be a better one." He continued on his way and came to a third woman. She was sitting in an easy chair and had a bandaged foot. She was crying bright tears and was distorting her pretty face until one had to feel sorry for her. "What is the matter with you?" asked the prince. "Oh," she groaned, "this morning while I was strolling in the garden a little breeze came up and blew the petal of a jasmine blossom onto my foot." The prince thought about this a little while, and then said, "You are the right one, for there cannot be a more sensitive woman than you!" And he married her. Did he do the right thing? Unfortunately the storyteller does not know, for she has run out of yarn. Source: Christian Schneller, "Die Empfindlichste" (La più delicata), Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), no. 45, pp. 128-29 . (Links open in new windows.) This story is from South Tyrol, an alpine region in northern Italy but with historical and cultural ties to Austria. The story's final sentence, claiming that the storyteller has run out yarn, is wonderfully ambiguous, referring both to yarn as a raw material for storytelling and as the product of a principal activity of traditional European storytellers: spinning. Return to the table of contents . The Three Delicate Wives of King Virtue-Banner: Which Is the Most Delicate? India Then the king went to the sissoo tree, put the goblin on his shoulder once more, and started toward the monk. And as he walked along, the goblin on his shoulder said, "O King, I will tell you a strange story to relieve your weariness. Listen." There once was a king in Ujjain, whose name was Virtue-Banner. He had three princesses as wives, and loved them dearly. One of them was named Crescent, the second Star, and the third Moon. While the king lived happily with his wives, he conquered all his enemies, and was content. One day at the time of the spring festival, the king went to the garden to play with his three wives. There he looked at the flower-laden vines with black rows of bees on them ; they seemed like the bow of the god of love, all ready for service. He heard the songs of nightingales in the trees; they sounded like commands of Love. And with his wives he drank wine which seemed like Love's very life blood. Then the king playfully pulled the hair of Queen Crescent, and a lotus-petal fell from her hair into her lap. And the queen was so delicate that it wounded her, and she screamed and fainted. And the king was distracted, but when servants sprinkled her with cool water and fanned her, she gradually recovered consciousness. And the king took her to the palace and waited upon his dear wife with a hundred remedies which the physicians brought. And when the king saw that she was made comfortable for the night, he went to the palace balcony with his second wife Star. Now while she slept on the king's breast, the moonbeams found their way through the window and fell upon her. And she awoke in a moment, and started up, crying, "I am burned!" Then the king awoke and anxiously asked what the matter was, and he saw great blisters on her body. When he asked her about it, Queen Star said, "The moonbeams that fell on me did it." And the king was distracted when he saw how she wept and suffered. He called the servants and they made a couch of moist lotus leaves, and dressed her wounds with damp sandal paste. At that moment the third queen, Moon, left her room to go to the king. And as she moved through the noiseless night, she clearly heard in a distant part of the palace the sound of pestles grinding grain. And she cried, "Oh, oh! It will kill me!" She wrung her hands and sat down in agony in the hall. But her servants returned and led her to her room, where she took to her bed and wept. And when the servants asked what the matter was, she tearfully showed her hands with bruises on them, like two lilies with black bees clinging to them. So they went and told the king. And he came in great distress, and asked his dear wife about it. She showed her hands and spoke, though she suffered, "My dear, when I heard the sound of the pestles, these bruises came." Then the king made them give her a cooling plaster of sandal paste and other things. And the king thought, "One of them was wounded by a falling lotus petal. The second was burned by the moonbeams. The third had her hands terribly bruised by the sound of pestles. I love them dearly, but alas! The very delicacy which is so great a virtue, is positively inconvenient." And he wandered about in the palace, and it seemed as if the night had three hundred hours. But in the morning the king and his skilful physicians took such measures that before long his wives were well and he was happy. When he had told this story, the goblin asked, "O King, which of them was the most delicate?" And the king said, "The one who was bruised by the mere sound of the pestles, when nothing touched her. The other two who were wounded or blistered by actual contact with lotus petals or moonbeams, are not equal to her." When the goblin heard this, he went back, and the king resolutely hastened to catch him again. Source: Arthur William Ryder, transl. Twenty-Two Goblins (London and Toronto: J. M. Dent and Sons; New York: E. P. Dutton and Co., 1917), pp. 87-90 . (Links open in new windows.) Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 29, 2008. Puss in Boots: Straparola, Basile, and Perrault Puss in Boots Three Literary Fairy Tales Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 545B edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2016 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Costantino and His Cat (Fiovanni Francesco Straparola). Gagliuso (Giambattista Basile). The Master Cat; or, Puss in Boots (Charles Perrault). Links to additional tales of type 545B . Costantino and His Cat Fiovanni Francesco Straparola Fioriana dies and leaves three sons, Dusolino, Tesifone, and Costantino. The last-named, by the aid of his cat, gains the lordship of a powerful kingdom. It is no rare event, beloved ladies, to see a rich man brought to extreme poverty, or to find one who from absolute penury has mounted to high estate. And this last-named fortune befell a poor wight of whom I have heard tell, who from being little better than a beggar attained the full dignity of a king. There was once upon a time in Bohemia a woman, Soriana by name, who lived in great poverty with her three sons, of whom one was called Dusolino, and another Tesifone, and the third Costantino Fortunato. Soriana had naught of any value in the way of household goods save three things, and these were a kneading trough of the kind women use in the making of bread, a board such as is used in the preparation of pastry, and a cat. Soriana, being now borne down with a very heavy burden of years, saw that death was approaching her, and on this account made her last testament, leaving to Dusolino, her eldest son, the kneading trough, to Tesifone the paste board, and to Costantino the cat. When the mother was dead and duly buried, the neighbors round about would borrow now the kneading trough and now the paste board, as they might happen to want them, and as they knew that the young men were very poor, they gave them by way of repayment a cake, which Dusolino and Tesifone ate by themselves, giving nothing of it to Costantino, the youngest brother. And if Costantino chanced to ask them to give him aught they would make answer by bidding him to go to his cat, who would without fail let him have what he wanted, and on this account poor Costantino and his cat underwent much suffering. Now it chanced that this cat of Costantino's was a fairy in disguise, and the cat, feeling much compassion for him and anger at his two brothers on account of their cruel treatment of him, one day said to him, "Costantino, do not be cast down, for I will provide for your well-being and sustenance, and for my own as well." Whereupon the cat sallied forth from the house and went into the fields, where it lay down and feigned to be asleep so cleverly that an unsuspecting leveret came close up to where it was lying, and was forthwith seized and killed. Then, carrying the leveret, the cat went to the king's palace, and having met some of the courtiers who were standing about it, said that it wanted to speak to the king. When the king heard that a cat had begged an audience with him, he bade them bring it into his presence, and, having asked it what its business was, the cat replied that Costantino, its master, had sent a leveret as a present to the king, and begged his gracious acceptance of the same. And with these words it presented the leveret to the king, who was pleased to accept it, asking at the same time who this Costantino might be. The cat replied that he was a young man who for virtue and good looks had no superior, and the king, on hearing this report, gave the cat a kindly welcome, and ordered them to set before it meat and drink of the best. The cat, when it had eaten and drunk enough, dexterously filled the bag in which it had brought the leveret with all sorts of good provender, when no one was looking that way, and having taken leave of the king, carried the spoil back to Costantino. The two brothers, when they saw Costantino making good cheer over the victuals, asked him to let them have a share, but he paid them back in their own coin, and refused to give them a morsel, wherefore on this account the brothers hereafter were tormented with gnawing envy of Costantino's good fortune. Now Costantino, though he was a good-looking youth, had suffered so much privation and distress that his face was rough and covered with blotches, which caused him much discomfort; so the cat, having taken him one day down to the river, washed him and licked him carefully with its tongue from head to foot, and tended him so well that in a few days he was quite freed from his ailment. The cat still went on carrying presents to the royal palace in the fashion already described, and by these means got a living for Costantino. But after a time the cat began to find these journeyings to and from the palace somewhat irksome, and it feared more over that the king's courtiers might be come impatient thereanent; so it said to Costantino, "My master, if you will only do what I shall tell you, in a short time you will find yourself a rich man." "And how will you manage this?" said Costantino. Then the cat answered, "Come with me, and do not trouble yourself about anything, for I have a plan for making a rich man of you which cannot fail." Whereupon the cat and Costantino betook themselves to a spot on the bank of the river which was hard by the king's palace, and forthwith the cat bade its master to strip off all his clothes and to throw himself into the river. Then it began to cry and shout in a loud voice, "Help, help, run, run, for Messer Costantino is drowning!" It happened that the king heard what the cat was crying out, and bearing in mind what great benefits he had received from Costantino, he immediately sent some of his household to the rescue. When Costantino had been dragged out of the water and dressed by the attendants in seemly garments, he was led into the presence of the king, who gave him a hearty welcome, and inquired of him how it was that he found himself in the water; but Costantino, on account of his agitation, knew not what reply to make; so the cat, who always kept at his elbow, answered in his stead, "You must know, O king! that some robbers, who had learned by the agency of a spy that my master was taking a great store of jewels to offer them to you as a present, laid wait for him and robbed him of his treasure, and then, wishing to murder him, they threw him into the river, but by the aid of these gentlemen he has escaped death." The king, when he heard this, gave orders that Costantino should enjoy the best of treatment, and seeing that he was well made and handsome, and believing him to be very rich, he made up his mind to give him his daughter Elisetta to wife, and to endow her with a rich dowry of gold and jewels and sumptuous raiment. When the nuptial ceremonies were completed and the festivities at an end, the king bade them load ten mules with gold and five with the richest garments, and sent the bride, accompanied by a great concourse of people, to her husband's house. Costantino, when he saw himself so highly honored and loaded with riches, was in sore perplexity as to where he should carry his bride, and took counsel with the cat thereanent. Said the cat: "Be not troubled over this business, my master; we will provide for everything." So as they were all riding on merrily together the cat left the others and rode on rapidly in advance, and after it had left the company a long way behind, it came upon certain cavaliers whom it thus addressed: "Alas! you poor fellows, what are you doing here? Get hence as quickly as you can, for a great body of armed men is coming along this road and will surely attack and despoil you. See, they are now quite near; listen to the noise of the neighing horses." Whereupon the horsemen, overcome with fear, said to the cat: "What then shall we do?" And the cat made answer: "It will be best for you to act in this wise. If they should question you as to whose men you are, you must answer boldly that you serve Messer Costantino, and then no one will molest you." Then the cat left them, and, having ridden on still farther, came upon great flocks of sheep and herds of cattle, and it told the same story and gave the same counsel to the shepherds and drovers who had charge of these. Then going on still farther it spake in the same terms to whomsoever it chanced to meet. As the cavalcade of the princess passed on, the gentlemen who were accompanying her asked of the horsemen whom they met the name of their lord, and of the herdsmen who might be the owner of all these sheep and oxen, and the answer given by all was that they served Messer Costantino. Then the gentlemen of the escort said to the bridegroom: "So, Messer Costantino, it appears we are now entering your dominions?" and Costantino nodded his head in token of assent, and in like manner he made answer to all their interrogations, so that all the company on this account judged him to be enormously rich. In the meantime the cat had ridden on and had come to a fair and stately castle, which was guarded by a very weak garrison, and these defenders the cat addressed in the following words: "My good men, what is it you do? Surely you must be aware of the ruin which is about to overwhelm you." "What is the ruin you speak of?" demanded the guards. "Why, before another hour shall have gone by," replied the cat, "your place will be beleaguered by a great company of soldiers, who will cut you in pieces. Do you not already hear the neighing of the horses and see the dust in the air? Wherefore, unless you are minded to perish, take heed to my advice, which will bring you safely out of all danger. For if anyone shall demand of you whose this castle is, say that it belongs to Messer Costantino Fortunato." And when the time came the guards gave answer as the cat had directed; for when the noble escort of the bride had arrived at the stately castle, and certain gentlemen had inquired of the guards the name of the lord of the castle, they were answered that it was Messer Costantino Fortunato; and when the whole company had entered the castle they were honorably lodged therein. Now the lord of this castle was a certain Signor Valentino, a very brave soldier, who only a few days ago had left his castle to bring back thereto the wife he had recently espoused, but as ill fortune would have it, there happened to him on the road, somewhile before he came to the place where his beloved wife was abiding, an unhappy and unforeseen accident by which he straightway met his death. So Costantino Fortunato retained the lordship of Valentino's castle. Not long after this Morando, King of Bohemia, died, and the people by acclamation chose Costantino Fortunato for their king, seeing that he had espoused Elisetta, the late king's daughter, to whom by right the succession to the kingdom belonged. And by these means Costantino rose from an estate of poverty or even beggary to be a powerful king, and lived long with Elisetta his wife, leaving children by her to be the heirs of his kingdom. Source (books.google.com): Giovanni Francesco Straparola The Facetious Nights of Straparola , vol. 4 (London: Privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901), night 11, tale 1, pp. 6-18 . Source (Internet Archive): Giovanni Francesco Straparola The Facetious Nights of Straparola , vol. 4 (London: Privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901), night 11, tale 1, pp. 6-18 . Straparola's Le piacevoli notti ( The Facetious Nights ) was first published in two volumes in Italy between 1550 and 1553. In 1555 the collection appeared in a single volume. Return to the table of contents . Gagliuso Giambattista Basile There was one time in my dear city of Naples an old man who was as poor as poor could be. He was so wretched, so bare, so light, and with not a farthing in his pocket, that he went naked as a flea. And being about to shake out the bags of life, he called to him his sons, Oratiello and Pippo, and said to them, "I am now called upon by the tenor of my bill to pay the debt I owe to nature; and believe me I should feel great pleasure in leaving this abode of misery, but that I leave you here behind me, a pair of miserable fellows, without a stitch upon your backs, without so much as a fly can carry upon its foot; so that were you to run a hundred miles, not a farthing would drop from you. My ill fortune has indeed brought me to such beggary that I lead the life of a dog; for I have all along, as you well know, gaped with hunger and gone to bed without a candle. Nevertheless, now that I am dying, I wish to leave you some token of my love. So do you, Oratiello, who are my first-born, take the sieve that hangs yonder against the wall, with which you can earn your bread; and do you, little fellow, take the cat, and remember your daddy." So saying he began to whimper, and presently after said, "God be with you, for it is night!" Oratiello had his father buried by charity, and then took the sieve, and went riddling [sifting] here and there and everywhere to gain a livelihood; and the more he riddled the more he earned. And Pippo, taking the cat, said, "Only see now what a pretty legacy my father has left me! I, who am not able to support myself, must now provide for two. Whoever beheld such a miserable inheritance?" But the cat, who overheard this lamentation, said to him, "You are grieving without need, and have more luck than sense; but you little know the good fortune in store for you, and that I am able to make you rich if I set about it." When Pippo heard this, he thanked her pussyship, stroked her three or four times on the back, and commended himself warmly to her. So the cat took compassion upon poor Gagliuso, and every morning she betook herself either to the shore of the Chiaja or to the Fishrock, and catching a goodly gray mullet, or a fine dory, she bagged it, and carried it to the king, and said, "My lord Gagliuso, your majesty's most humble slave, sends you this fish with all reverence, and says, "A small present to a great lord.'" Then the king with a joyful face, as one usually shows to those who bring a gift, answered the cat, "Tell this lord, whom I do not know, that I thank him heartily." At another time the cat would run to the marshes or fields, and when the fowlers had brought down a blackbird, a snipe, or a lark, she caught it up, and presented it to the king with the same message. She repeated this trick again and again, until one morning the king said to her, "I feel infinitely obliged to this lord Gagliuso, and am desirous of knowing him, that I may make a return for the kindness he has shown me." And the cat replied, The desire of my lord Gagliuso is to give his life and blood for your majesty's crown, and tomorrow morning without fail, as soon as the sun has set fire to the stubble of the fields of air, he will come and pay his respects to you." So when the morning came the cat went to the king, and said to him, "Sire, my lord Gagliuso sends to excuse himself for not coming; as last night some of his servants robbed him and ran off, and have not left him a single shirt to his back." When the king heard this, he instantly commanded his servants to take out of his wardrobe a quantity of clothes and linen, and sent them to Gagliuso; and before two hours had passed Gagliuso went to the palace, conducted by the cat, where he received a thousand compliments from the king, who made him sit beside him, and gave him a banquet that would amaze you. While they were eating Gagliuso from time to time turned to the cat, and said to her, "My pretty puss, prithee take care that those rags don't slip through our fingers." Then the cat answered, "Be quiet, be quiet; don't be talking of these beggarly things." The king wishing to know what it was, the cat made answer that he had taken a fancy for a small lemon, whereupon the king instantly set out to the garden for a basketful. But Gagliuso returned to the same tune about the old clothes and shirts, and the cat again told him to hold his tongue. Then the king once more asked what was the matter, and the cat had another excuse ready to make amends for Gagliuso's rudeness. At last when they had eaten and had chatted for some time of one thing and another, Gagliuso took his leave; and the cat stayed with the king, describing the worth, and the genius, and the judgment of Gagliuso, and, above all, the great wealth he had in the plains of Rome and Lombardy, which well entitled him to marry into the family of a crowned king. Then the king asked what might be his fortune; and the cat replied that no one could ever count the movables, the immovables, and the household furniture of this immensely rich man, who did not even know what he possessed; and if the king wished to be informed of it, he had only to send people with her out of the kingdom, and she would prove to him that there was no wealth in the world equal to his. Then the king called some trusty persons, and commanded them to inform themselves minutely of the truth; so they followed in the footsteps of the cat, who, as soon as they had passed the frontier of the kingdom, from time to time ran on before, under the pretext of providing refreshments for them on the road; and whenever she met a flock of sheep, a herd of cows, a troop of horses, or a drove of pigs, she would say to the herdsmen and keepers, "Ho! Have a care! There's a troop of robbers coming to carry off everything in the country. So if you wish to escape their fury, and to have your things respected, say that they all belong to the lord Gagliuso, and not a hair will be touched." She said the same at all the farmhouses that she passed on the road; so that wherever the king's people came, they found the pipe tuned; for everything they met with, they were told, belonged to the lord Gagliuso. So at last they were tired of asking, and went back to the king, telling seas and mountains of the riches of lord Gagliuso. The king, hearing this report, promised the cat a good drink if she should manage to bring about the match; and the cat concluded the marriage. So Gagliuso came, and the king gave him his daughter and a large portion. At the end of a month of festivities Gagliuso said he wished to take his bride to his estates; so the king accompanied them as far as the frontiers, and he went to Lombardy, where, by the cat's advice, he purchased a quantity of lands and territories, and became a baron. Gagliuso, now seeing himself so extremely rich, thanked the cat more than words can express, saying that he owed his life and his greatness to her good offices, and that the ingenuity of a cat had done more for him than the wit of his father; therefore she might dispose of his life and property as she pleased; and he gave her his word that when she died, which he prayed might not be for a hundred years, he would have her embalmed and put into a golden coffin, and set in his own chamber, that he might keep her memory always before his eyes. The cat listened to these lavish professions, and before three days were over she pretended to be dead, and stretched herself at her full length in the garden; and when Gagliuso's wife saw her, she cried out, "O husband, what a sad misfortune! The cat is dead!" "Devil die with her!" said Gagliuso. "Better she than we!" "What shall we do with her?" asked the wife. "Take her by the leg," said he, "and fling her out of the window." Then the cat, who heard this fine reward when she least expected it, began to say, "Is this the return you make for my taking you from beggary? Is this the thanks I get for freeing you from rags that you might have hung distaffs with? Is this my reward for having put good clothes on your back, and fed you well when you were a poor, starved, miserable, tatter-brogued ragamuffin? But such is the fate of him who washes an ass's head. Go, a curse upon all I have done for you! You are not worth spitting upon in the face. A fine gold coffin you had prepared for me! A fine funeral you were going to give me! Go now, serve, labor, toil, sweat, to get this fine reward! Unhappy is he who does a good deed in hopes of a return! Well was it said by the philosopher, 'He who lies down an ass, an ass he finds himself.' But let him who does most expect least. Smooth words and ill deeds deceive alike both wise and fools." So saying she threw her cloak about her, and went her way; and all that Gagliuso with the utmost humility could do to soothe her was of no avail. She would not return, but kept running on without ever turning her head about, and saying, Heaven protect us from a rich man grown poor, And from a beggar who of wealth has got store. The poor cat was compassionated beyond measure for seeing herself so ill rewarded; but one of those present observed, that she might have found some consolation in not being alone; for at the present day ingratitude has become a domestic evil; and there are many others also who, after they have worked and toiled, and spent their money, and ruined their health, to serve this race of ungrateful people, and have fancied them selves sure of another and a better reward than a golden coffin, find themselves destined to be buried in the hospital. Source (books.google.com): Giambattista Basile, The Pentamerone; or, The Story of Stories , translated from the Neapolitan by John Edward Taylor; new edition revised and edited by Helen Zimmern (New York: Macmilland and Company; London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1894), pp. 80-87 . Source (Internet Archive): Giambattista Basile, The Pentamerone; or, The Story of Stories , translated from the Neapolitan by John Edward Taylor; new edition revised and edited by Helen Zimmern (New York: Macmilland and Company; London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1894), pp. 80-87 . Basile's Lo cunto de li cunti overo lo trattenemiento de peccerille ( The Tale of Tales; or, Entertainment for Little Ones , also known as Il Pentamerone ) was first published in two volumes in Naples between 1634 and 1636. Return to the table of contents . The Master Cat; or, Puss in Boots Charles Perrault A miller bequeathed to his three sons all he possessed of worldly goods, which consisted only of his mill, his ass, and his cat. It did not take long to divide the property, and neither notary nor attorney was called in; they would soon have eaten up the poor little patrimony. The eldest son had the mill; the second son, the ass; and the youngest had nothing but the cat. The latter was very disconsolate at having such a poor share of the inheritance. "My brothers," said he, "may be able to earn an honest livelihood by entering into partnership; but, as for me, when I have eaten my cat and made a muff of his skin, I must die of hunger." The cat, who had heard this speech, although he had not appeared to do so, said to him with a sedate and serious air, "Do not be troubled, master; you have only to give me a bag, and get a pair of boots made for me in which I can go among the bushes, and you will see that you are not left so badly off as you believe." Though his master did not place much reliance on the cat's words, he had seen him play such cunning tricks in catching rats and mice, when he would hang himself up by the heels, or hide in the ?our pretending to be dead, that he was not altogether without hope of being helped by him out of his distress. As soon as the cat had what he asked for, he boldly pulled on his boots, and, hanging his bag round his neck, he took the strings of it in his forepaws, and started off for a warren where there were a great number of rabbits. He put some bran and sow-thistles in his bag, and then, stretching himself out as if he were dead, he waited till some young rabbit, little versed in the wiles of the world, should come and poke his way into the bag, in order to eat what was inside it. He had hardly laid himself down before he had the pleasure of seeing a young scatterbrain of a rabbit get into the bag, whereupon Master Cat pulled the strings, caught it, and killed it without mercy. Proud of his prey, he went to the palace, and asked to speak to the king. He was ushered upstairs and into the state apartment, and, after making a low bow to the king, he said, "Sire, here is a wild rabbit, which my Lord the Marquis of Carabas -- for such was the title he had taken a fancy to give to his master -- has ordered me to present, with his duty, to your majesty." "Tell your master," replied the king, "that I thank him and am pleased with his gift." Another day he went and hid himself in the wheat, keeping the mouth of his bag open as before, and as soon as he saw that a brace of partridges had run inside, he pulled the strings, and so took them both. He went immediately and presented them to the king, as he had the rabbits. The king was equally grateful at receiving the brace of partridges, and ordered drink to be given him. For the next two or three months, the cat continued in this manner, taking presents of game at intervals to the king, as if from his master. One day, when he knew the king was going to drive on the banks of the river, with his daughter, the most beautiful princess in the world, he said to his master, "If you will follow my advice, your fortune is made; you have only to go and bathe in a part of the river I will point out to you, and then leave the rest to me." The Marquis of Carabas did as his cat advised him, without knowing what good would come of it. While he was bathing, the king passed by, and the cat began to call out with all his might, "Help! Help! My lord the Marquis of Carabas is drowning!" Hearing the cry, the king looked out of the coach window, and recognizing the cat who had so often brought him game, he ordered his guards to ?y to the help of my lord the Marquis of Carabas. Whilst they were getting the poor marquis out of the river, the cat went up to the royal coach, and told the king that, while his master had been bathing, some robbers had come and carried off his clothes, although he had shouted, "Stop thief," as loud as he could. The rogue had hidden them himself under a large stone. The king immediately ordered the officers of his wardrobe to go and fetch one of his handsomest suits for my lord the Marquis of Carabas. The king embraced him a thousand times, and as the ?ne clothes they dressed him in set off his good looks -- for he was handsome and well made -- the Marquis of Carabas quite took the fancy of the king's daughter, and after he had cast two or three respectful and rather tender glances towards her, she fell very much in love with him. The king insisted upon his getting into the coach, and accompanying them in their drive. The cat, delighted to see that his plans were beginning to succeed, ran on before, and coming across some peasants who were mowing a meadow, he said to them, "You, good people, who are mowing here, if you do not tell the king that this meadow you are mowing belongs to my lord the Marquis of Carabas, you shall all be cut in pieces as small as minced meat." The king did not fail to ask the peasants whose meadow it was they were mowing. "It belongs to my Lord the Marquis of Carabas," said they all together, for the cat's threat had frightened them. "You have a ?ne property there," said the king to the Marquis of Carabas. "As you say, sire," responded the Marquis of Carabas, "for it is a meadow which yields an abundant crop every year." Master Cat, who still kept in advance of the party, came up to some reapers, and said to them, "You, good people, who are reaping, if you do not say that all this corn belongs to my lord the Marquis of Carabas, you shall all be cut into pieces as small as minced meat." The king, who passed by a minute afterwards, wished to know to whom belonged all the corn ?elds he saw. "To my lord the Marquis of Carabas," repeated the reapers, and the king again congratulated the Marquis on his property. The cat, still continuing to run before the coach, uttered the same threat to everyone he met, and the king was astonished at the great wealth of my lord the Marquis of Carabas. Master Cat at length arrived at a ?ne castle, the owner of which was an ogre, the richest ogre ever known, for all the lands through which the king had driven belonged to the lord of this castle. The cat took care to ?nd out who the ogre was, and what he was able to do; then he asked to speak with him, saying that he did not like to pass so near his castle without doing himself the honor of paying his respects to him. The ogre received him as civilly as an ogre can, and made him sit down. "I have been told," said the cat, "that you have the power of changing yourself into all kinds of animals; that you could, for instance, transform yourself into a lion or an elephant." "'Tis true," said the ogre, abruptly, "and to prove it to you, you shall see me become a lion." The cat was so frightened when he saw a lion in front of him, that he quickly scrambled up into the gutter, not without difficulty and danger, on account of his boots, which were worse than useless for walking on the tiles. Shortly afterwards, seeing that the ogre had resumed his natural form, the cat climbed down again, and admitted that he had been terribly frightened. "I have also been assured," said the cat, " but I cannot believe it, that you have the power besides of taking the form of the smallest animal; for instance, that of a rat, or a mouse; I confess to you I hold this to be utterly impossible." "Impossible!" exclaimed the ogre, "You shall see!" and he immediately changed himself into a mouse, and began running about the ?oor. The cat no sooner caught sight of it, than he pounced upon it and ate it. In the meanwhile, the king, seeing the ?ne castle of the ogre as he was driving past, thought he should like to go inside. The cat, who heard the noise of the coach rolling over the draw-bridge, ran to meet it, and said to the king, "Your majesty is welcome to the Castle of my Lord the Marquis of Carabas!" "How, my Lord Marquis," exclaimed the king, "this castle belongs to you? Nothing could be ?ner than this courtyard, and all these buildings which surround it. Let us see the inside of it, if you please." The marquis handed out the young princess, and following the king, who led the way upstairs, they entered a grand hall, where they found prepared a magni?cent repast, which the ogre had ordered in expectation of some friends, who were to have visited him that very day, but who did not venture to enter when they heard the king was there. The king, as greatly delighted with the excellent qualities of my Lord the Marquis of Carabas as his daughter, who was more than ever in love with him, seeing what great wealth he possessed, said to him, after having drunk ?ve or six bumpers, "It depends entirely on yourself, my Lord Marquis, whether or not you become my son-in-law." The marquis, making several profound bows, accepted the honor the king offered him, and that same day was married to the princess. The cat became a great lord, and never again ran after mice, except for his amusement. Be the advantage never so great Of owning a superb estate, From sire to son descended, Young men oft find, on industry, Combined with ingenuity, They'd better have depended. If the son of a miller so quickly could gain The heart of a princess, it seems pretty plain, With good looks and good manners, and some aid from dress, The humblest need not quite despair of success. Source (books.google.com): Charles Perrault Tales of Passed Times (London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1900), pp. 43-51 . Source (Internet Archive): Charles Perrault Tales of Passed Times (London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1900), pp. 43-51 . Text in the original French: Le Maistre Chat; ou, Le Chat Botté . Charles Perrault's Histoires ou contes du temps passé ( Stories or Tales from Past Times ) -- also titled Les conte de ma Mère l'Oye ( Tales of My Mother Goose ) -- was first published in Paris in 1697. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 10, 2016. Puss in Boots: Folktales of type 545B Puss in Boots Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 545B edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2016 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Earl of Cattenborough (Europe). Puss in Boots (Germany). The Feather King (Transylvania). Prince Csihan (Nettles). (Hungary). The Palace That Stood on Golden Pillars (Sweden). Helge-Hal in the Blue Hill (Norway). Lord Peter (Norway). Mighty Mikko (Finland). Count Martin of the Cat (Italy / Austria). Don Joseph Pear (Italy). Boroltai Ku (Mongolia). Jogeshwar's Marriage (India). The Match-Making Jackal (India). The Weaver (India). The Clever Jackal (Kashmir). The Monkey and Juan Pusong Tambi-Tambi (Philippines). Andres the Trapper (Philippines). Links to three literary versions of this tale: Costantino and His Cat (Fiovanni Francesco Straparola) . Gagliuso (Giambattista Basile) . The Master Cat; or, Puss in Boots (Charles Perrault) . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Earl of Cattenborough Europe Once upon a time there was a miller who had three sons, Charles, Sam, and John. And every night when the servant went to bed he used to call out: "Good-night, missus; good-night, master; Good-night, Charles, Sam, John." Now after a time the miller's wife died, and, soon after, the miller, leaving only the mill, the donkey, and the cat. And Charles, as the eldest, took the mill, and Sam took the donkey and went off with it, and John was left with only the cat. Now how do you think the cat used to help John to live? She used to take a bag with a string around the top and place it with some cheese in the bushes, and when a hare or a partridge would come and try to get the piece of cheese -- snap! Miss Puss would draw the string and there was the hare or partridge for Master Jack to eat. One day two hares happened to rush into the bag at the same time. So the cat, after giving one to Jack, took the other and went with it to the king's palace. And when she came outside the palace gate she cried out, "Miaou." The sentry at the gate came to see what was the matter. Miss Puss gave him the hare with a bow and said: "Give this to the king with the compliments of the Earl of Cattenborough." The king liked jugged hare very much and was glad to get such a fine present. Shortly after this Miss Puss found a gold coin rolling in the dirt. And she went up to the palace and asked the sentry if he would lend her a corn measure. The sentry asked who wanted it. And Puss said: "My Master, the Earl of Cattenborough." So the sentry gave her the corn measure. And a little while afterwards she took it back with the gold coin, which she had found, fixed in a crack in the corn measure. So the king was told that the Earl of Cattenborough measured his gold in a corn measure. When the king heard this he told the sentry that if such a thing happened again he was to deliver a message asking the Earl to come and stop at the palace. Some time after the cat caught two partridges, and took one of them to the palace. And when she called out, "Miaou," and presented it to the sentry, in the name of the Earl of Cattenborough, the sentry told her that the king wished to see the Earl at his palace. So Puss went back to Jack and said to him: "The king desires to see the Earl of Cattenborough at his palace." "What is that to do with me?" said Jack. "Oh, you can be the Earl of Cattenborough if you like. I'll help you." "But I have no clothes, and they'll soon find out what I am when I talk." "As for that," said Miss Puss, "I'll get you proper clothes if you do what I tell you; and when you come to the palace I will see that you do not make any mistakes." So next day she told Jack to take off his clothes and hide them under a big stone and dip himself into the river. And while he was doing this she went up to the palace gate and said: "Miaou, miaou, miaou!" And when the sentry came to the gate she said: "My Master, the Earl of Cattenborough, has been robbed of all he possessed, even of his clothes, and he is hiding in the bramble bush by the side of the river. What is to be done? What is to be done?" The sentry went and told the king. And the king gave orders that a suitable suit of clothes, worthy of an Earl, should be sent to Master Jack, who soon put them on and went to the king's palace accompanied by Puss. When they got there they were introduced into the chamber of the king, who thanked Jack for his kind presents. Miss Puss stood forward and said: "My Master, the Earl of Cattenborough, desires to state to your Majesty that there is no need of any thanks for such trifles." The king thought it was very grand of Jack not to speak directly to him, and summoned his lord chamberlain, and from that time onward only spoke through him. Thus, when they sat down to dinner with the queen and the princess, the king would say to his chamberlain, "Will the Earl of Cattenborough take a potato?" Whereupon Miss Puss would bow and say: "The Earl of Cattenborough thanks his Majesty and would be glad to partake of a potato." The king was so much struck by Jack's riches and grandeur, and the princess was so pleased with his good looks and fine dress that it was determined that he should marry the princess. But the king thought he would try and see if he were really so nobly born and bred as he seemed. So he told his servants to put a mean truckle bed in the room in which Jack was to sleep, knowing that no noble would put up with such a thing. When Miss Puss saw this bed she at once guessed what was up. And when Jack began to undress to get into bed, she made him stop, and called the attendants to say that he could not sleep in such a bed. So they took him into another bedroom, where there was a fine four-poster with a dais, and everything worthy of a noble to sleep upon. Then the king became sure that Jack was a real noble, and married him soon to his daughter the princess. After the wedding feast was over the king told Jack that he and the queen and the princess would come with him to his castle of Cattenborough, and Jack did not know what to do. But Miss Puss told him it would be all right if he only didn't speak much while on the journey. And that suited Jack very well. So they all set out in a carriage with four horses, and with the king's life-guards riding around it. But Miss Puss ran on in front of the carriage, and when she came to a field where men were mowing down the hay she pointed to the life-guards riding along, and said: "Men, if you do not say that this field belongs to the Earl of Cattenborough those soldiers will cut you to pieces with their swords." So when the carriage came along the king called one of the men to the side of it and said, "Whose is this field?" And the man said, "It belongs to the Earl of Cattenborough." And the king turned to his son-in-law and said, "I did not know that you had estates so near us." And Jack said, "I had forgotten it myself." And this only confirmed the king in his idea about Jack's great wealth. A little farther on there was another great field in which men were raking hay. And Miss Puss spoke to them as before. So, when the carriage came up, they also declared that this field belonged to the Earl of Cattenborough. And so it went on through the whole drive. Then the king said, "Let us now go to your castle." Then Jack looked at Miss Puss, and she said: "If your Majesty will but wait an hour I will go on before and order the castle to be made ready for you." With that she jumped away and went to the castle of a great ogre and asked to see him. When she came into his presence she said: " I have come to give you warning. The king with all his army is coming to the castle and will batter its walls down and kill you if he finds you here." "What shall I do? What shall I do?" said the ogre. "Is there no place where you can hide yourself?" "I am too big to hide," said the ogre, but my mother gave me a powder, and when I take that I can make myself as small as I like." "Well, why not take it now?" said the cat. And with that he took the powder and shrunk into a little body no bigger than a mouse. And thereupon Miss Puss jumped upon him and ate him all up, and then went down into the great yard of the castle and told the guards that it now belonged to her Master the Earl of Cattenborough. Then she ordered them to open the gates and let in the king's carriage, which came along just then. The king was delighted to find what a fine castle his son-in-law possessed, and left his daughter the princess with him at the castle while he drove back to his own palace. And Jack and the princess lived happily in the castle. But one day Miss Puss felt very ill and lay down as if dead, and the chamberlain of the castle went to Jack and said: "My lord, your cat is dead." And Jack said: "Well, throw her out on the dunghill." But Miss Puss, when she heard it, called out: "Had you not better throw me into the mill stream?" And Jack remembered where he had come from and was frightened that the cat would say. So he ordered the physician of the castle to attend to her, and ever after gave her whatever she wanted. And when the king died he succeeded him, and that was the end of the Earl of Cattenborough. Source (books.google.com): Joseph Jacobs Europa's Fairy Book: Restored and Retold (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), no. 11, pp. 90-97 . Source (Internet Archive): Joseph Jacobs Europa's Fairy Book: Restored and Retold (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), no. 11, pp. 90-97 . Return to the table of contents . Puss in Boots Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm A miller had three sons, his mill, a donkey, and a cat. The sons worked the mill, the donkey fetched the grain and carried away the flour, and the cat caught mice. When the miller died the three sons divided the inheritance: The oldest received the mill, the second the donkey, and the third the cat, for nothing else was left for him. Sadly he said to himself, "I got the worst of everything. My oldest brother can grind grain, my second one can ride his donkey, but what can I do with the cat? If I have a pair of fur gloves made from his pelt, then there'll be nothing left." "Listen," said the cat, who had understood everything that he had said. "Don't kill me just to get a pair of inferior gloves from my pelt. Instead, have a pair of boots made for me so that I can go out and been seen by the people. Then I can come to your aid." The miller's son was amazed that the cat could thusly speak. Now the cobbler was just passing by, so he called him in and had him measure the cat for a pair of boots. When they were finished the cat pulled them on, took a sack with a some grain in the bottom and a string with which it could be tied shut, threw it over his shoulder, and walked out the door on two legs, just like a human. The ruler in the land at that time was a king who loved partridges. However, none were to be had. The woods were full of them, but they were so wary that no hunter could get to them. The cat knew this, and worked out a solution. Arriving in the woods he opened the sack, spread out the grain inside it, then laid the string in the grass, leading it behind a thicket. Then he hid himself, crept into the thicket and watched. The partridges soon came by, found the grain, and one after the other hopped into the sack. When a good number were inside, the cat pulled the string shut, ran up and wrung the partridges' necks, then threw the sack over his shoulder and went straightaway to the king's palace. The guard shouted, "Stop! Where to?" "To the king," answered the cat. "Are you crazy? A cat going to the king?" "Just let him go," said another guard. "The king is often bored. Perhaps the cat can entertain him with his tricks." The cat approached the king, bowed politely, and said, "My master, Count (and here he said a long and very distinguished name) extends his greetings to his majesty the king and sends him these partridges which he captured with snares." The king was amazed to see such fine, fat partridges and hardly knew how to contain his joy. He ordered the cat to take as much gold from the treasury as he could carry in his sack, then said, "Take it to you master and thank him many times for his gift." The poor miller's son was at home sitting at the window with his head in his hands. He had given everything he had for the cat's boots, and now he wondered what he might get in return. Just then the cat stepped inside, threw the sack from his back, untied the string, and spread the gold out in front of the miller. "Here is something for the boots. The king sends you his greetings and his thanks." The miller was delighted with the wealth, although he could not understand where it had come from. While taking off his boots, the cat explained everything to him, then added, "You now have plenty of money, but that's not enough. Tomorrow I'll pull my boots on again, and you shall become even more wealthy. I told the king that you are a count." The next day, just as he said he would, the cat, appropriately booted, went hunting again and took the captured game to the king. Thus it continued every day, and every day the cat returned home with more gold. He was now so favored by the king that he was allowed to come and go as he pleased and to prowl around the palace wherever he wanted to. One time the cat was warming himself by the fire in the king's birchen when the coachman came in cursing, "To the devil with the king and the princess! I wanted to go to the tavern for a drink and some card playing, but now I have to drive them to the lake." After hearing this, the cat sneaked home and said to his master, "If you want to become a wealthy count, come with me to the lake and go bathing there." The miller did not know what he should say to this, but he obeyed the cat, went with him to the lake, took off all his clothes, and jumped into the water. The cat picked up the clothes, carried them away, and hid them. He had scarcely done so when the king came riding by. The cat cried out pitifully, "Oh, your majesty! My master was bathing here in the lake when a thief came and stole his clothes that were lying here on the shore. Now the count cannot come out of the water. If he stays there any longer he will catch a cold and die." Hearing this, the king came to a stop and sent one of his people back to fetch some of the king's clothes. The count then put on these splendid clothes. Because the king already favored him because of the partridges, he invited him into the royal carriage and spoke to him in familiar terms. The princess had nothing against this, for the count was young and good looking, and she quite liked him. Now the cat had run on ahead and had arrived at a great meadow where more than a hundred people were making hay. "Whose meadow is this?" asked the cat. "It belongs to the great sorcerer." "Listen, the king will soon come this way, and when he asks whose meadow this is, you must answer, 'It belongs to the count.' If you do not do this, you'll all be killed." With that the cat went on further, coming to a field of grain so large that no one could see its end. More than two hundred people were there cutting the grain. "Who owns this grain, you people?" "The sorcerer." "Listen, the king will soon come this way, and when he asks whose grain this is, you must answer, 'It belongs to the count.' If you do not do this, you'll all be killed." Finally the cat came to a magnificent forest. More than three hundred people were there felling the great oak trees and making lumber. "Who owns this forest, you people?" "The sorcerer." "Listen, the king will soon come this way, and when he asks whose forest this is, you must answer, 'It belongs to the count.' If you do not do this, you'll all be killed." The cat continued on further. Everyone stared at him because he looked so unusual, walking along in boots like a human. And they were afraid of him. Soon he arrived at the sorcerer's place. He stepped boldly inside and walked up to the sorcerer, who looked at him scornfully. "What do you want?" The cat bowed politely and said, "I have heard that you can transform yourself any way that you please. I can well believe that you could transform yourself into an animal such as a dog, a fox, or even a wolf, but it seems to me that to transform yourself into an elephant would be quite impossible. I have come to see if you can do so." The sorcerer said proudly, "That's nothing for me," and he instantly transformed himself into an elephant. The cat pretended to be frightened and said, "That is unbelievable and unheard of. I would never have dreamed that you could do this. But even more difficult would be to transform yourself into a small animal, such as a mouse. You are certainly more powerful than any other sorcerer in the world, but that would be too much for you." The sweet talk turned the sorcerer very friendly, and he said, "Oh yes, my dear little cat, I can do that too," then suddenly he was jumping around in the room as a mouse. The cat ran after him, caught him with one leap, and ate him up. Meanwhile, the king had ridden along further with the count and the princess, coming to the great meadow. "Who owns this hay?" he asked. "The count," they all shouted. "You have a beautiful piece of land here, Lord Count," just as the cat had order them to do. Then they came to the great field of grain. "Who owns this grain, you people?" "The Lord Count. Yes, Lord Count, you have a wonderful farm here!" Then they came to the forest. "Who owns this forest, you people?" "The Lord Count." The king was all the more amazed, and said, "Lord Count, you must be a very wealthy man. I do not believe that I myself have such a magnificent forest." Finally they arrived at the palace. The cat was standing on the steps, and when the carriage came to a stop he jumped down, opened the door, and said, "Your majesty, you have arrived at the palace of my master, the count, and this honor will make him happy as long as he lives." The king climbed out of the carriage and marveled at the magnificent building. It was almost larger and more beautiful than his own castle. The count then led the princess up the stairway and into the main hall, that shimmered with gold and precious stones. Then the princess and the count were married, and when the king died the count became king with cat-in-boots as his prime minister. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der gestiefelte Kater," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm (Berlin: In der Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), vol. 1, no. 33, pp. pp. 147-55 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2016. The Grimms' source: Jeanette Hassenpflug. This tale, because of its similarity to Charles Perrault's version, was omitted from all future editions of the Grimms' famous collection of fairy tales. Link to the original German text (zeno.org): Der gestiefelte Kater . Return to the table of contents . The Feather King Transylvania Once upon a time there was a poor old couple working in the field, and they had their little child with them. He was lying in a hammock made of diapers hung on four sticks. One day a wildcat came out of the woods, took the child, and carried him away to her cave. She did not harm him, but rather brought him herbs, roots, and strawberries, so that he had what he needed. Thus the boy grew up in the cave, and when he came of age, the cat said to him, "You shall marry the king's daughter." "But I am naked," said the youth. "How can I go before the king!" "Don't worry, I'll get you some clothes." Then the cat ran into the woods. She had a little silver whistle. She blew into it once, then hissed, and rustled. At once many birds and wild animals approached. From every bird she took one feather and made from them a robe, which she took to the youth. Then she led the youth to the animals, saying, "I'm going now to the king. These animals must follow after you. Upon your arrival you are to say, 'Your majesty, the Feather King sends you this gift.'" Thus the youth went to the castle and said what the cat had told him to say. When the king saw the many animals, he rejoiced, and said, "This must be a wealthy king!" The following day the cat sent the youth back with many more animals, instructing him to say, "This is another gift from the Feather King!" The cat instructed him further: "And when the king is amazed, and says that he would like his daughter to marry such a wealthy king, you are to reply, 'Yes, the Feather King will gladly marry your daughter. In three days he shall come for the wedding ceremony.'" And that is what happened when the youth returned to the castle. The king was pleased with the new gifts, was very amazed, and said how much he would like his daughter to marry such a wealthy king. The youth replied, as the cat had instructed him, that the Feather King would come in three days to be married. When the time was up, the cat ran back into the forest and blew three times on the silver whistle, then hissed and rustled three times the way cats do. Then all the birds and wild animals came together, and the cat chose the finest and most colorful feathers, and made a cloak from them. It glittered and sparkled like the starry sky. She gave it to the youth. This time the cat went with the youth to the king. When they were not far from the castle, she said to the youth, "Now throw away your old feather robe. I will bring you beautiful clothes from the castle. You are to use the new feather robe only for decoration." With that the cat ran into the castle, and cried out, "Hurry! Bring me some royal clothing at once! The Feather King has fallen into a swamp and needs fresh clothes!" Then the king brought forth his best clothes, and the cat ran with them to the youth and dressed him. Thus he approached the castle, with all the animals following after him. Upon entering the castle, he put on the new feather robe, which glittered, and sparkled beyond belief. The king and the princess were overjoyed with the wealthy bridegroom. After the wedding ceremony the king said, "I would like to see your country and your palace. I will go with you." When the Feather King was seated with his young wife in the carriage, he kept looking at his own beautiful clothes and not at his wife. The cat noticed this, jumped onto his neck and scratched him once. "Look at your wife!" she whispered. "However, if you forget yourself, and you are asked why you are always looking at your beautiful clothes, just say that at home you have much more beautiful ones." With that the cat ran on ahead. Soon the Feather King was looking at his beautiful clothes again. His young wife asked him, "Why are you doing that?" He answered, "Because at home I have much more beautiful ones." Soon the cat came to a large flock of sheep. She ran to the shepherd and jumped onto his neck. Crack! She scratched him once and brought blood. "If anyone asks you to whom this flock belongs, you must answer, 'To the Feather King.' Otherwise I'll come back and scratch you all to pieces." When the king and the young couple arrived, the king asked the shepherd, "Who owns this wonderful flock of sheep?" The shepherd said, "They belong to the Feather King," for he did not want to be scratched again. "Yes, they are mine," said the youth at once, for he saw what the cat had done. Soon afterwards they came to a large buffalo herd. The cat had already been there. Here too, she had scratched the herdsman, telling him that if he did not say that the herd belonged to the Feather King, she would scratch him to pieces." When the king asked who owned this fine herd, the herdsman answered, "It belongs to the Feather King," for he did not want to be scratched again. "Yes, it is mine!" said the youth in the carriage. The king was amazed and said, "I would never have believed that you are so wealthy!" They also came to a herd of horses. The cat had been there as well, had scratched the herdsman, telling him when asked who owned the horses he was to say, "The Feather King, of course." Otherwise the cat would scratch him again. "Yes, they are mine as well!" said the youth in the carriage. "You must be even more wealthy than I am," said the king. "And at home everything must be even more beautiful than at my castle." They soon arrived at the sorcerer's palace. Everything was made of gold and silver, crystal and precious stones, and displayed ever so beautifully. The table was set. They seated themselves at once and began to eat. The cat, however, stood at the doorway and kept watch. The sorcerer suddenly appeared, storming and shouting, "There are robbers in my palace! And seated at my table! Aha! Woe unto you! The cat was standing in the doorway and would not let him enter. She said, "Are you truly the great sorcerer that everyone says you are? They say that you can transform yourself into animals both large and small." "There's nothing to that!" said the sorcerer, then at once transformed himself into a lion. The frightened cat jumped onto the roof. "That was a good trick!" shouted the cat. "But now I'd like to see if you can transform yourself into a small animal -- into a mouse. There's no way that you can do that. The sorcerer immediately transformed himself into a mouse, and the cat instantly jumped down from the roof and ripped him to pieces. She then called the youth out of the hall and said to him, "You no longer need my help. The castle and everything inside it and surrounding it are yours, including the great herds that you have seen. It's all really yours now, for I have killed the sorcerer to whom everything belonged. Now I demand one service from you: Take your sword and cut off my head." The youth refused to do this, saying, "How could I be so thankless!" "If you don't do it immediately, I'll scratch out your eyes!" So he took his sword, and with one blow the cat's head flew off. But behold, in that instant a beautiful woman stood before him. The youth took her by the arm and led her in to the table, then said, "This is my mother!" The old king liked the woman very much, and because his first wife had died he took her by the hand and said, "Should we not get married?" She was not opposed to this, and the celebration lasted eight days. Then the old king returned home with his new wife. The youth remained in the magic castle with the princess and was richer than seven kings. Source (books.google.com): Joseph Haltrich, "Der Federkönig," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus dem Sachsenlande in Siebenbürgen (Berlin: Vergag von Julius Springer, 1856), no. 13, pp. 63-67 . Source (Internet Archive): Joseph Haltrich, "Der Federkönig," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus dem Sachsenlande in Siebenbürgen (Berlin: Vergag von Julius Springer, 1856), no. 13, pp. 63-67 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2016. Return to the table of contents . Prince Csihan (Nettles) Hungary There was once -- I don't know where, at the other side of seven times seven countries, or even beyond them, on the tumble-down side of a tumble-down stove -- a poplar-tree, and this poplar-tree had sixty-five branches, and on every branch sat sixty-six crows; and may those who don't listen to my story have their eyes picked out by those crows! There was a miller who was so proud that had he stepped on an egg he would not have broken it. There was a time when the mill was in full work, but once as he was tired of his mill-work he said, "May God take me out of this mill!" Now, this miller had an auger, a saw, and an adze, and he set off over seven times seven countries, and never found a mill. So his wish was fulfilled. On he went, roaming about, till at last he found on the bank of the Gagy, below Martonos, a tumble-down mill, which was covered with nettles. Here he began to build, and he worked, and by the time the mill was finished all his stockings were worn into holes and his garments all tattered and torn. He then stood expecting people to come and have their flour ground; but no one ever came. One day the twelve huntsmen of the king were chasing a fox; and it came to where the miller was, and said to him: "Hide me, miller, and you shall be rewarded for your kindness." "Where shall I hide you," said the miller, "seeing that I possess nothing but the clothes I stand in?" "There is an old torn sack lying beside that trough," replied the fox. "Throw it over me, and, when the dogs come, drive them away with your broom." When the huntsmen came they asked the miller if he had seen a fox pass that way. "How could I have seen it; for, behold, I have nothing but the clothes I stand in?" With that the huntsmen left, and in a little while the fox came out and said, "Miller, I thank you for your kindness; for you have preserved me, and saved my life. I am anxious to do you a good turn if I can. Tell me, do you want to get married?" "My dear little fox," said the miller, "if I could get a wife, who would come here of her own free will, I don't say that I would not -- indeed, there is no other way of my getting one; for I can't go among the spinning-girls in these clothes." The fox took leave of the miller, and, in less than a quarter of an hour, he returned with a piece of copper in his mouth. "Here you are, miller," said he. "Put this away, you will want it ere long." The miller put it away, and the fox departed; but, before long, he came back with a lump of gold in his mouth. "Put this away, also," said he to the miller, "as you will need it before long." "And now," said the fox, "wouldn't you like to get married?" "Well, my dear little fox," said the miller, "I am quite willing to do so at any moment, as that is my special desire." The fox vanished again, but soon returned with a lump of diamond in his mouth. "Well, miller," said the fox, "I will not ask you any more to get married; I will get you a wife myself. And now give me that piece of copper I gave you." Then, taking it in his mouth, the fox started off over seven times seven countries, and travelled till he came to King Yellow Hammer's. "Good day, most gracious King Yellow Hammer," said the fox. "My life and death are in your majesty's hands. I have heard that you have an unmarried daughter. I am a messenger from Prince Csihan, who has sent me to ask for your daughter as his wife." "I will give her with pleasure, my dear little fox," replied King Yellow Hammer. "I will not refuse her; on the contrary, I give her with great pleasure; but I would do so more willingly if I saw to whom she is to be married -- even as it is, I will not refuse her." The fox accepted the king's proposal, and they fixed a day upon which they would fetch the lady. "Very well," said the fox; and, taking leave of the king, set off with the ring to the miller. ''Now then, miller," said the fox, "you are no longer a miller, but Prince Csihan, and on a certain day and hour you must be ready to start. But, first of all, give me that lump of gold I gave you that I may take it to His Majesty King Yellow Hammer, so that he may not think you are a nobody." The fox then started off to the king. "Good day, most gracious king, my father. Prince Csihan has sent this lump of gold to my father the king that he may spend it in preparing for the wedding, and that he might change it, as Prince Csihan has no smaller change, his gold all being in lumps like this." "Well," reasoned King Yellow Hammer, "I am not sending my daughter to a bad sort of place, for although I am a king I have no such lumps of gold lying about in my palace." The fox then returned home to Prince Csihan. "Now then, Prince Csihan," said he, "I have arrived safely, you see. Prepare yourself to start tomorrow." Next morning he appeared before Prince Csihan. "Are you ready?" asked he. "Oh! yes, I am ready; I can start at any moment, as I got ready long ago." With this they started over seven times seven lands. As they passed a hedge the fox said, "Prince Csihan, do you see that splendid castle?" "How could I help seeing it, my dear little fox." "Well," replied the fox, "in that castle dwells your wife." On they went, when suddenly the fox said, "Take off the clothes you have on, let us put them into this hollow tree, and then burn them, so that we may get rid of them." "You are right, we won't have them, nor any like them." Then said the fox, "Prince Csihan, go into the river and take a bath." Having done so the prince said, "Now I've done." "All right," said the fox; "go and sit in the forest until I go into the king's presence." The fox set off and arrived at King Yellow Hammer's castle. "Alas! my gracious king, my life and my death are in thy hands. I started with Prince Csihan with three loaded wagons and a carriage and six horses, and I've just managed to get the prince naked out of the water." The king raised his hands in despair, exclaiming, "Where hast thou left my dear son-in-law, little fox?" "Most gracious king, I left him in such-and-such a place in the forest." The king at once ordered four horses to be put to a carriage, and then looked up the robes he wore in his younger days and ordered them to be put in the carriage; the coachman and footman to take their places, the fox sitting on the box. When they arrived at the forest the fox got down, and the footman, carrying the clothes upon his arm, took them to Prince Csihan. Then said the fox to the servant, "Don't you dress the prince, he will do it more becomingly himself." He then made Prince Csihan arise, and said, "Come here, Prince Csihan, don't stare at yourself too much when you get dressed in these clothes, else the king might think you were not used to such robes." Prince Csihan got dressed, and drove off to the king. When they arrived, King Yellow Hammer took his son-in-law in his arms and said, "Thanks be to God, my dear future son-in-law, for that he has preserved thee from the great waters; and now let us send for the clergyman and let the marriage take place." The grand ceremony over, they remained at the court of the king. One day, a month or so after they were married, the princess said to Prince Csihan, "My dear treasure, don't you think it would be as well to go and see your realm?" Prince Csihan left the room in great sorrow, and went towards the stables in great trouble-to get ready for the journey he could no longer postpone. Here he met the fox lolling about. As the prince came his tears rolled down upon the straw. "Hollo! Prince Csihan, what's the matter?" cried the fox. "Quite enough," was the reply. "My dear wife insists upon going to see my home." "All right," said the fox; "prepare yourself, Prince Csihan, and we will go." The prince went off to his castle and said, "Dear wife, get ready; we will start at once." The king ordered out a carriage and six, and three wagons loaded with treasure and money, so that they might have all they needed. So they started off. Then said the fox, "Now, Prince Csihan, wherever I go you must follow." So they went over seven times seven countries. As they travelled they met a herd of oxen. "Now, herdsmen," said the fox, "if you won't say that this herd belongs to the Vasfogu Bába, but to Prince Csihan, you shall have a handsome present." With this the fox left them, and ran straight to the Vasfogu Bába. "Good day, my mother," said he. "Welcome, my son," replied she. "It's a good thing for you that you called me your mother, else I would have crushed your bones smaller than poppy-seed." "Alas! my mother," said the fox, "don't let us waste our time talking such nonsense, the French are coming!" "Oh! my dear son, hide me away somewhere!" cried the old woman. "I know of a bottomless lake," thought the fox; and he took her and left her on the bank, saying, "Now, my dear old mother, wash your feet here until I return." The fox then left the Vasfogu Bába, and went to Prince Csihan, whom he found standing in the same place where he left him. He began to swear and rave at him fearfully. "Why didn't you drive on after me? come along at once." They arrived at the Vasfogu's great castle, and took possession of a suite of apartments. Here they found everything the heart could wish for, and at night all went to bed in peace. Suddenly the fox remembered that the Vasfogu Bába had no proper abode yet, and set off to her. "I hear, my dear son," said she, "that the horses with their bells have arrived; take me away to another place." The fox crept up behind her, gave her a push, and she fell into the bottomless lake, and was drowned, leaving all her vast property to Prince Csihan. "You were born under a lucky star, my prince," said the fox, when he returned; "for see I have placed you in possession of all this great wealth." In his joy the prince gave a great feast to celebrate his coming into his property, so that the people from Bánczida to Zsukhajna were feasted royally, but he gave them no drink. "Now," said the fox to himself, "after all this feasting I will sham illness, and see what treatment I shall receive at his hands in return for all my kindness to him." So Mr. Fox became dreadfully ill, he moaned and groaned so fearfully that the neighbors made complaint to the prince. "Seize him," said the prince, "and pitch him out on the dunghill." So the poor fox was thrown out on the dunghill. One day Prince Csihan was passing that way. "You a prince!" muttered the fox; "you are nothing else but a miller; would you like to be a house-holder such as you were at the nettle-mill?" The prince was terrified by this speech of the fox, so terrified that he nearly fainted. "Oh! dear little fox, do not do that," cried the prince, "and I promise you on my royal word that I will give you the same food as I have, and that so long as I live you shall be my dearest friend and you shall be honored as my greatest benefactor." He then ordered the fox to be taken to the castle, and to sit at the royal table, nor did he ever forget him again. So they lived happily ever after, and do yet, if they are not dead. May they be your guests tomorrow! Source (books.google.com): W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, The Folk-Tales of the Magyars: Collected by Kriza, Erdélyi, Pap, and Others (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 1, pp. 1-6 . Source (Internet Archive): W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, The Folk-Tales of the Magyars: Collected by Kriza, Erdélyi, Pap, and Others (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 1, pp. 1-6 . Return to the table of contents . The Palace That Stood on Golden Pillars Sweden There was once a peasant, who with his wife lived very, very far in the woods. They had two children, a boy and a girl. They were very poor, all their wealth consisting in a cow and a cat. This peasant and his wife lived in a state of constant strife with each other, and you might have been sure, that if the old man desired one thing, the old woman always desired another. It happened one day that the old woman had boiled some porridge for supper, and when it was ready, and each had received a share, the old man would scrape the pot. This the old woman opposed with all her might, asserting that the right of scraping belonged to her, and her only. Hence a desperate quarrel ensued, neither being willing to yield to the other. The end was, that the old woman snatched up the pot and the ladle and ran off, the old man with a whip following close at her heels. And away they went over hill and dale, the old woman first, and the old man close behind her; but our history does not inform us which of the two finally obtained the scraping of the pot. When a considerable time had elapsed, and no tidings were heard of their parents, the children had no alternative but to go out into the wide world and seek their fortune. So they resolved on leaving their habitation, and dividing their inheritance. But, as it generally happens, the division was a mighty difficult affair; there being nothing to divide save the cow and the cat, and both being desirous of having the cow. While they were discussing the point, the cat, with a most insinuating mien, approaching the sister, gently rubbed her knee, and mewed: "Take me, take me." So, as the boy would not let go the cow, the girl gave up her pretension and contented herself with the cat. They then parted from each other, the boy with the cow going his way, and the girl with her cat wandering through the wood; but of her and her companion's adventures nothing has been related to me, until they came to a spacious and splendid palace, which lay at some distance before them. While both travelers were on their way to the beautiful palace, the cat began to converse with his mistress, and said: "If you will follow my advice, it shall bring you luck." The girl, who placed great confidence in her companion's prudence, promised to follow his directions. The cat thereupon desired her to take off her old garments, and climb up into a high tree, while he would go to the palace and say, that there was a princess, who had been attacked by robbers and stripped both of property and clothes. The girl did accordingly, threw off her old rags and placed herself in the tree. The cat then went; but the girl sat in a great fright, as to how the matter would turn out. When the king, who ruled the land, was informed that a foreign princess had suffered such violence, he was exceedingly troubled, and sent his servants to invite her to the palace. The young girl was now abundantly supplied with costly attire, and whatever else she required, and accompanied the royal messengers. On arriving at the palace, all were struck with her beauty and courteous manners; but the king's son paid her the most marked homage, and declared that he could not live without her. The queen, however, had her suspicions, and asked the beautiful princess where her residence was. The girl answered as she had been instructed by the cat: "I dwell very far from here, in a castle called Cattenburg." Still the old queen was not satisfied, but resolved with herself to ascertain whether the strange damsel were really a king's daughter or not. For this purpose she went to the guest-chamber, and made ready a bed for the peasant girl with soft silken bolsters, but laid secretly a bean under the sheet; "Because," thought she, " if she is a princess, she cannot fail to notice it." The young girl was then conducted to her apartment with great state. But the cat had observed the queen's stratagem, and apprized his mistress of it. In the morning, the old queen entered, and inquired how her guest had passed the night. The girl answered as the cat had instructed her: "All, yes, I have slept, for I was very weary after my journey; but it seemed as if I had a large mountain under me. I slept much better in my bed at Cattenburg." The queen now thought that the damsel must have been delicately bred; yet resolved on making one more trial. On the following evening the queen went again to the guest-chamber, and having prepared the peasant girl's bed as before, laid some peas under the first pillow; and when it was morning, entered and inquired of her guest how she had slept. But, following the cat's instructions, she answered: "Ah, yes, I have slept, for I was very tired; but it seemed as if I had large stones under me. I slept much better in my bed at Cattenburg." The old queen now thought that she had well stood the trial, yet could not entirely dismiss her suspicions, and therefore determined on a third attempt, for the purpose of finding out whether the strange damsel really were of such high birth as she pretended to be. When the third evening came, the queen went again to the guest-chamber, and, having prepared the bed as before, laid a straw under the second pillow; and when the queen came in the morning and inquired how she had slept, she again answered as the cat had instructed: "Ah, yes, I have slept; for I was very tired; but it seemed as if I had a large tree under me. I was much better served at Cattenburg." The queen now found that there was no sure way of arriving at the truth in this manner, and therefore resolved on keeping watch how the strange damsel conducted herself in other respects. On the following day the queen sent to her guest a costly dress, embroidered with silk, and with a very, very long train, such as were worn by women of high rank. The peasant girl thanked her for the present, and thought no more about it; but the cat, that was close at her elbow, apprized his mistress that the old queen would put her to another trial. When some time had passed, the queen sent to inquire whether the princess would accompany her on a walk. The peasant girl consented, and they set out. On entering a garden, the court ladies were very fearful lest they should soil their dresses, as it had rained during the night. But the strange damsel continued walking, with out heeding whether her long train was being dragged through the mud or not. Whereupon the queen said: "My dear princess, take care of your dress." To which the peasant girl proudly answered: "Oh, there must be more dresses to be had here besides this. I had much better when I was in my castle at Cattenburg." Now the old queen could not think otherwise than that the damsel was accustomed to wear silk-embroidered garments, and thence concluded that she must be a king's daughter; so could no longer entertain any objection to her son's marriage, to which the peasant girl also gave her consent. It happened one day, as the prince and his beloved were sitting conversing together, that the damsel, on looking through the window, saw her parents come running out of the wood, the old woman first with the pot, and the old man close at her heels with the ladle. At the sight the girl could not contain herself, but burst out into a loud laugh. On the prince inquiring why she laughed so heartily, she said, as the cat had instructed her: "I cannot help laughing when I think that your palace stands on stone pillars, while mine stands on golden ones." When the prince heard this he was greatly surprised, and said: "Your thoughts are always dwelling on the beautiful Cattenburg, and you seem to think that all things are better there than with us. We will go and see your splendid palace, let the distance be ever so great." At this the peasant's daughter was so alarmed that she would willingly have sunk into the earth, knowing well that she had not a house, much less a palace. But there being no remedy, she put a good face on the matter, saying that she would consider on what day they should commence their journey. When she found herself alone, she gave free vent to her trouble, and wept bitterly; for she thought of all the disgrace that would fall on her for her deceit and falsehood. While she thus sat and wept, in walked the sagacious cat, rubbed himself against her knee, and inquired the cause of her sorrow. "I may well be sorrowful," answered the peasant's daughter; "for the king's son says that we shall go to Cattenburg; so now I am like to pay dearly for having followed thy counsel." But the cat bade her be of good cheer, and added, that he would so manage matters, that everything should turn out better than she could imagine; at the same time telling her that the sooner they set out the better. Having had already so many proofs of the cat's wisdom, she followed his instructions, though this time with a heavy heart; for she could not free herself from the apprehension that their journey would have an unfortunate termination. Early on the following morning, the king's son ordered chariots and drivers, and everything besides which he thought necessary for their long journey to Cattenburg. The train then set out. The prince and his betrothed went first in a gilded chariot, attended by a numerous body of knights and squires; while the cat ran foremost of all to show them the way. After travelling for some time, the cat perceived some goatherds driving to the field a large flock of most beautiful goats; so going up to the men, he greeted them courteously, saying: "Good day, goatherds! When the king's son rides by and inquires to whom those fine goats belong, you must say they belong to the young princess at Cattenburg, who rides by the prince's side. If you do so, you shall be well rewarded; but if not, I will tear you in pieces." On hearing this the goatherds were much surprised, but promised to obey the cat's bidding. He then pursued his way. Shortly after came the king's son riding with all his train. On seeing such beautiful goats feeding in the field, he stopped his chariot, and inquired of the herdsmen to whom they belonged. They answered, as the cat had instructed them: "They belong to the young princess at Cattenburg, who rides by your side." At this the king's son wondered greatly, and thought that his betrothed must be a powerful princess; and the peasant girl was not a little glad at heart, and thought that she was not the losing party, when she divided the inheritance with her brother. They now continued their journey, the cat running foremost. After travelling for some time they came to where a number of persons were making hay in a pleasant field. These the cat saluted very courteously, saying as before: "Good day, good people! When the king's son comes by and inquires to whom this beautiful meadow belongs, you must answer that it belongs to the princess at Cattenburg, who rides by the prince's side. If you do so, you shall be well rewarded; but if you do not do as I have said, I will tear you to atoms." When the men heard this they were greatly surprised, and promised to say what the cat desired. The cat then ran on as before. Shortly after came the king's son in his chariot with his whole retinue. On seeing the fertile fields and the number of people, he caused his chariot to stop, and inquired who was the owner of the land. The men, following the cat's instructions, answered: "The fields belong to the young princess at Cattenburg, who rides by your side." The king's son was now yet more surprised, and thought that his bride must be immensely rich, seeing that she owned such beautiful hay-fields. Resuming their journey, and preceded by the cat, they approached at length a very extensive corn-field, which swarmed with men and women, all busily employed in reaping. Here the cat again ran forth, enjoining and threatening as on the former occasions; so that when the prince came by and inquired to whom the fields belonged, he received an answer similar to the foregoing. It was now late in the evening, and the prince stopped with his attendants for the purpose of resting during the night. But the cat took no rest, but ran hastily forwards, until he saw a beautiful castle with its towers and battlements, and supported by golden pillars. This splendid palace belonged to a fierce giant, who owned the entire neighboring country; but was at that time absent from home. The cat therefore passed through the castle gate, and transformed himself into a large loaf; then stationed himself in the key-hole, and awaited the giant's return. Early in the morning, before the dawn, the frightful giant, who was so huge and heavy that the earth shook under him as he walked, came jogging out of the forest. When he came to the castle gate, he could not open it, because of the great loaf that stuck in the key-hole. Thereupon he became exceedingly angry, and cried: " Unlock! unlock!" To which the cat answered: "Just wait a little, little moment, while I tell my story: "First they kneaded me as if they would knead me to death." "Unlock! unlock!" cried the giant again; but the cat answered as before: "Just wait a little, little moment, while I tell my story: "First they kneaded me as if they would knead me to death; Then they floured me as if they would flour me to death." "Unlock! unlock!" vociferated the giant in a towering passion; but the cat repeated: "Just wait a little, little moment, while I tell my story: "First they kneaded me as if they would knead me to death; Then they floured me as if they would flour me to death; Then they pricked me as if they would prick me to death." The giant was now beside himself with rage, and roared out so that the whole castle shook: "Unlock! unlock!" But the cat was not to be moved, and answered as before: "Just wait a little moment, while I tell my story: "First they kneaded me as if they would knead, me to death; Then they floured me as if they would flour me to death; Then they pricked me as if they would prick me to death; Then they baked me as if they would bake me to death." The giant now felt uneasy, and cried out quite gently: "Unlock! unlock!" but all in vain; the loaf remained quiet in the key-hole as before. At the same moment the cat cried out: "Only see what a beautiful girl is riding up in the sky!" As the Troll looked up, the sun had just risen above the forest, at the sight of which he fell back and split into shivers. Such was his end. The loaf then transformed itself again into a cat, and hastened to set everything in order for his guests. After some time, the king's son and his fair young bride arrived with all their train. The cat went out to receive them, and bid them welcome to Cattenburg. They were now entertained most sumptuously, and there was wanting neither meat nor drink, nor any costly luxury. The noble castle was full of gold and silver, and all kinds of precious things, such as the like was never seen before or since. Shortly after the marriage was solemnized between the prince and the fair young maiden; and all who saw her wealth, thought she had good reason for saying: "I had it otherwise in my castle at Cattenburg." The king's son and the peasant's daughter lived happily together for very many years; but I have never heard how it fared with the cat; though we may almost guess that he wanted for nothing. Source (books.google.com): Benjamin Thorpe, Yule-Tide Stories: A Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions, from the Swedish, Danish, and German (London: Henry G.Bohn, 1853), pp. 64-71 . Source (Internet Archive): Benjamin Thorpe, Yule-Tide Stories: A Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions, from the Swedish, Danish, and German (London: Henry G.Bohn, 1853), pp. 64-71 . Link to the tale in the original Swedish (books.google.com): Gunnar Olof Hyltén-Cavallius and George Stephens, "Slottet, som stod på Guld-stolpar," Svenska Folk-Sagor och Äfventyr: Efter Muntlig Öfverlemning , part 1, vol. 1 (Stockholm: På A. Bohlins Förlag, 1844), no. 12, pp. 179-88 . Link to the tale in the original Swedish (Internet Archive): Gunnar Olof Hyltén-Cavallius and George Stephens, "Slottet, som stod på Guld-stolpar," Svenska Folk-Sagor och Äfventyr: Efter Muntlig Öfverlemning , part 1, vol. 1 (Stockholm: På A. Bohlins Förlag, 1844), no. 12, pp. 179-88 . Link to additional tales (type 704) about testing a woman's quality by placing a small object under her mattress: The Princess and the Pea . Return to the table of contents . Helge-Hal in the Blue Hill Norway Once upon a time there was a sinister old couple, who lived out under the open sky. All that they had were three sons, an old cook-pot, an old frying-pan, and an old cat. Then the man died, and after a time his wife died, too. Now their estate was to be divided. So the oldest took the old cook-pot, and the second took the old frying-pan, and Ebe Ashpeter had no choice. He had to take the old cat, and they did not ask him whether he wanted to or not. "Brother Peter can scrape out the cook-pot after he has loaned it out," said Ebe. "Brother Paul gets a crust of bread when he lends out his frying-pan; but what am I to do with this wretched cat?" And he was angry and envious. Yet he scratched the cat and stroked it, and this pleased the cat so that she began to purr, and raised her tail in the air. "Wait, wait, I'll help you yet," said the cat. "Wait, wait, I'll help you yet!" There was nothing to bite or break in the hut. Brother Peter and Brother Paul had each of them gone off in a different direction. So Ebe set out, too, with the cat in the lead, himself following; but after a time he turned and went home again, to see whether the floor had been swept, and the cat tripped on alone. After she had gone her way, tipp, tapp, tipp, tapp, for a while, she came to a great rock, and there she met an enormous herd of reindeer. The cat crept softly around the herd, and then with one leap sprang between the horns of the finest buck. "If you do not go where I want you to, I'll scratch out your eyes, and drive you over rock and precipice!" said she. So the buck did not dare do anything save what the cat wished, and off they went over stick and stone, from cliff to cliff, close by Ebe, who was just polishing the door-sill of his house, and with one bound right into the castle. "I am to deliver a kind greeting from Ebe, and ask whether my lord king might care to have this buck reindeer to drive," said the cat. Yes, he could make good use of such a young, handsome animal, some time, when he had occasion to drive out to visit a neighboring king. "This Ebe must be a proud and powerful lord," said the king, "if he can make me such presents." "Yes, he is the greatest lord in all your land and kingdom," said the cat, but no matter how many questions the king asked, he learned nothing more. "Tell him that I am much obliged," said the king, and he sent him a whole cart-load of handsome presents. But Ebe looked past them and paid no attention to them. "Brother Peter can scrape out his cook-pot when he has loaned it out, and Brother Paul gets a crust of bread when he lends out his frying-pan; but what am I to do with this wretched cat!" said he, and felt angry and envious. But still he scratched the cat, and stroked her, and this pleased her so much that she began to purr, and raised her tail in the air. "Wait, wait, I will help you yet," said the cat. "Wait, wait, I will help you yet!" The next day they both set out again, the cat in the lead, and Ebe following. After a while he turned back to see whether the folding-table at home had been scoured. And the cat tripped on alone. After she had gone her way, tipp, tapp, tipp, tapp, for a while, she came to a dense forest slope. There she found an enormous herd of elk. The cat crept softly up, and suddenly there she sat between the horns of one of the stateliest of the bull elks. "If you do not go where I want you to, I will scratch out your eyes, and drive you over rock and precipice!" said the cat. The elk did not dare do anything save what the cat wished, and so off they went, like lightning, over stick and stone, from cliff to cliff, right past Ebe, who stood before the house scouring the shutters, and with one bound into the king's castle. "I am to deliver a kind greeting from Ebe, and ask whether my lord king might not care to have this bull elk for courier service." It was quite clear that should the king want a swift messenger, some time, he could not find a swifter in all his kingdom. "This Ebe must be a most distinguished lord, since he finds such presents for me," said the king. "Yes, indeed, one might call him a distinguished lord," said the cat. "His wealth is without end or limit." But no matter how many other questions the king asked, he received no more explicit information. "Tell him that I am much obliged, and to do me the honor to call when he is passing here some time," said the king, and sent him a robe as handsome as the one he himself was wearing, and three cartloads of handsome presents. But Ebe did not even want to put on the royal robe, and hardly looked at the other presents. "Brother Peter can scrape out his cook-pot when he has loaned it out, Brother Paul gets a crust of bread when he lends out his frying-pan; but of what use is this wretched cat to me!" he said, in spite of all. Yet he stroked the cat, and pressed her to his cheek, and scratched her, and this pleased the cat so very much that she purred more than on the other occasions, and stuck her tail up into the air as straight as a rod. "Wait, wait, I will help you yet," said the cat. "Wait, wait, I will help you yet!" On the third day they set out again, the cat in the lead, and Ebe following. After a time it occurred to him to go back and let the mice out of the house, so that they would not be altogether starved in the old hut; and the cat tripped on alone. After she had gone her way, tipp, tapp, tipp, tapp, for a while, she came to a dense pine forest, and there she met a father bear, a mother bear and a baby bear. The cat crept softly up to them, and all at once she was hanging by her claws to the father bear's head. "If you do not go where I want you to, I will scratch out your eyes, and drive you over rock and precipice!" said the cat, and spit and arched her back. Then the father bear did not dare do any thing save what the cat wished, and now they dashed past Ebe, who had just carried all the young mice over the threshold, like a storm, over stick and stone, from cliff to cliff, so that the earth trembled and shook. The king was just standing in the hallway, and was not a little surprised to see such guests arriving. "I am to deliver a kind greeting from Ebe, and ask whether my lord king might not care to have this bear for a general or royal counselor," said the cat. The king was more than pleased to secure such a creature for his nearest adviser, who could doubt it. "Tell him that I am much obliged, but that I do not at all know how to show my appreciation," said the king. "Well, he would like to marry your youngest daughter!" said the cat. "Yes, but that is asking a good deal," said the king. "He really ought to pay me a visit." "Ebe does not enter such plain houses," said the cat. "Has he a handsomer castle than this?" asked the king. "Handsomer? Why, your castle seems like the shabbiest hut in comparison with his!" was the cat's reply. "You dare come into my presence, and tell me that there is someone living in my kingdom who is more handsomely housed than I, the king!" shouted the king, beside himself with rage. He came near wringing the cat's neck. "You might wait until you see it," said the cat. And the king said yes, he would wait. "But if you have told me a falsehood, you shall die, and though you had seven lives," said he. In the morning the king and the whole court set out to travel to Ebe Ashpeter's castle. The cat was in the little hut, and called for Ebe, thinking it would be best if both of them got underway an hour earlier. After they had gone a while, they met some folk who were herding sheep; and the sheep were bleating and grazing over the whole plain. They were as large as full-grown calves, and their wool was so long that it dragged along the ground after them. "To whom do the sheep belong?" asked the cat. "To Helge-Hal in the Blue Hill," said the shepherds. "The court is coming past in a moment," said the cat, "and if then you do not at once say that they belong to Ebe, I will scratch out your eyes, and drive you over rock and precipice!" said the cat, and spat and arched her back, and showed her teeth. Then the shepherds were so frightened that they at once promised to do as the cat had ordered. "But to whom do all these sheep belong?" asked the king, when he came by with the court somewhat later. "They are every bit as handsome as my own!" "They belong to Ebe," said the shepherds. Then the cat and Ebe wandered on for a while, and came to a dense forest slope. There they met folk who were tending goats. The goats skipped and leaped about everywhere, and gave such fine milk that better could no where be found. "To whom do the goats belong?" asked the cat. "To Helge-Hal in the Blue Hill," said the herds men. Then the cat again went through her ferocious preparations, and the herdsmen were so frightened that they did not dare oppose her wishes. "Now who in the world can be the owner of so many goats?" asked the king. "I myself have none finer!" "They belong to Ebe," said the herdsmen. Then they wandered on for a while, and met folk who were tending cows. Wherever one looked the cows lowed and glistened, and each yielded milk enough for three. When the cat heard that these herdsmen were also in the service of Helge-Hal of the Blue Hill, she spat once more, and arched her back, and then all the herdsmen were ready that moment to say what she wished. "But in heaven's name, to whom do all these beautiful cattle belong?" asked the king. "There are no such cattle in my whole kingdom!" "They belong to Lord Ebe," said the herdsmen. Then they wandered on for a long, long time. At last they came to a great plain, and there they met horse-herders; and horses whinnied and disported themselves over the whole plain, and their coats were so fine that they glistened as though gilded, and each horse was worth a whole castle. "For whom do you herd these horses?" asked the cat. "For Helge-Hal in the Blue Hill," the herders replied. "Well, the court will come by here in a little while," said the cat, "and if you do not say you are herding them for Ebe, I will scratch out your eyes, and drive you over rock and precipice!" said the cat, and she spat, and showed her teeth and claws, and grew so angry her hair stood up all along her back. Then the herders were terribly frightened, and did not dare do anything but what the cat wished. "But in the name of heaven, to whom do all these horses belong?" asked the king, when he came by with his court. "They belong to Ebe," said the herders. "I never have seen or heard anything like it in all my life!" cried the king. "This Ebe is such a distinguished lord that it is past my understanding!" The cat and Ebe had long since gone on their way, and had wandered far and ever farther over hill and rock. In the evening, at dusk, they came to a royal castle that glittered and shimmered as though it were of the purest silver and gold -- which it was. Yet it was gloomy and depressing, and lonely and barren there, and nowhere was there a sign of life. Here they went in, and the cat stood with a cake of rye meal just below the door. Suddenly there came a thundering and a thumping so that the earth trembled, and the whole castle shook, and that was the troll who was coming home. And suddenly all was quiet again, and before they knew it, Helge-Hal in the Blue Hill had thrust his three great horrible heads in at the door. "Let me in! Let me in!" he cried, so that every one shivered. "Wait, wait a bit while I tell you what the rye had to go through before he was made into this cake," said the cat, and spoke to him in the sweetest way. "First he was threshed, and then he was beaten, and then he was pounded, and then he was thumped, and then he was thrown from one wall to another, and then he was sifted through a sieve...." "Let me in! Let me in, you chatterbox!" cried the troll, and he was so furious that the sparks flew from him. "Wait a bit, wait a bit. I will tell you what the rye had to go through before he was made into this cake!" said the cat, and he spoke to him still more sweetly. "First he was threshed, and then he was beaten, and then he was pounded, and then he was thumped, and then he was thrown from one wall to another, and then he was sifted through a sieve, and shaken here and there, and then he was put on the drying-board, and then in the stove, until it grew so hot that he puffed up more and more, and wanted to get out, but could not," said the cat, and took her time. "Get out of the way and let me in!" cried the troll once more, and nearly burst with rage. But the cat acted as though she did not hear him, and talked down the blue from the sky, and went up and down the while, and whenever the troll tried to come in, she met him beneath the door with the cake. "O, but do take a look at the shining maiden coming up there behind the mountain!" said the cat, after she had talked at length about the sufferings of the rye. And Helge-Hal in the Blue Hill turned his three heads around in order to see the beautiful maiden, too. Then the sun rose, and the troll stiffened into stone. Now Ebe obtained all the riches that the troll had possessed, the sheep and goats, the cows and all the spirited horses, and the handsome golden castle, and some big bags of money besides. "Here come the king and all his court," said the cat. "Just go out before the door and receive them!" So Ebe got up and went to meet them. "You are indeed a very distinguished lord!" said the king to him. "So far as I am concerned you may have the youngest princess!" Then they started brewing and baking on a large scale in the greatest haste, and everything was made ready for the wedding. On the first day of the feast the cat came and begged the bridegroom to cut off her head. This he did not at all want to do; but the cat spat and showed her teeth, and then Ebe did not dare disobey her. But when the head fell to the ground, the cat turned into a most handsome prince. He married the second princess, and as the wedding procession was on its way to church, they met a third prince who was looking for a wife, and he took the oldest princess. Then they all three celebrated their weddings so that the story went the rounds in twelve kingdoms. Spin, span, spun, Now our tale is done!" Source (books.google.com): Clara Stroebe, The Norwegian Fairy Book , translated [from the German] by Frederick H. Martens (New York: Frederick A. Stokes, 1922), no. 26, pp. 213-23 . Source (Internet Archive): Clara Stroebe, The Norwegian Fairy Book , translated [from the German] by Frederick H. Martens (New York: Frederick A. Stokes, 1922), no. 26, pp. 213-23 . Stroebe's source: Hallvard Bergh. Return to the table of contents . Lord Peter Norway Once on a time there was a poor couple, and they had nothing in the world but three sons. What the names the two elder had I can't say, but the youngest he was called Peter. So when their father and mother died, the sons were to share what was left, but there was nothing but a porridge-pot, a griddle, and a cat. The eldest, who was to have first choice, he took the pot. "For," said he, "whenever I lend the pot to anyone to boil porridge, I can always get leave to scrape it." The second took the griddle. "For," said he, "whenever I lend it to anyone, I'll always get a morsel of dough to make a bannock." But the youngest, he had no choice left him; if he was to choose anything it must be the cat. "Well!" said he, "if I lend the cat to any one I shan't get much by that; for if pussy gets a drop of milk she will want it all herself. Still, I'd best take her along with me; I shouldn't like her to go about here and starve." So the brothers went out into the world to try their luck, and each took his own way; but when the youngest had gone a while, the cat said, "Now you shall have a good turn, because you wouldn't let me stay behind in the old cottage and starve. Now, I'm off to the wood to lay hold of a fine fat head of game, and then you must go up to the king's palace that you see yonder, and say you are come with a little present for the king; and when he asks who sends it, you must say, 'Why, who should it be from but Lord Peter.'" Well! Peter hadn't waited long before back came the cat with a reindeer from the wood; she had jumped up on the reindeer's head, between his horns, and said, "If you don't go straight to the king's palace I'll claw your eyes out." So the reindeer had to go whether he liked it or no. And when Peter got to the palace he went into the kitchen with the deer and said, "Here I'm come with a little present for the king, if he won't despise it." Then the king went out into the kitchen, and when he saw the fine plump reindeer, he was very glad. "But, my dear friend," he said, "who in the world is it that sends me such a fine gift?" "Oh!" said Peter, "who should sent it but Lord Peter?" "Lord Peter! Lord Peter!" said the king. "Pray tell me where he lives; "for he thought it a shame not to know so great a man. But that was just what the lad wouldn't tell him; he daren't do, it he said, because his master had forbidden him. So the king gave him a good bit of money to drink his health, and bade him be sure and say all kind of pretty things, and many thanks for the present, to his master when he got home. Next day the cat went again into the wood, and jumped up on a red deer's head, and sat between his horns, and forced him to go to the palace. Then Peter went again into the kitchen, and said he was come with a little present for the king, if he would be pleased to take it. And the king was still more glad to get the red deer than he had been to get the reindeer, and asked again who it was that sent so fine a present. "Why, it's Lord Peter, of course," said the lad; but when the king wanted to know where Lord Peter lived, he got the same answer as the day before; and this day, too, he gave Peter a good lump of money to drink his health with. The third day the cat came with an elk. And so when Peter got into the palace kitchen, and said he had a little present for the king, if he'd be pleased to take it, the king came out at once into the kitchen; and when he saw the grand big elk, he was so glad he scarce knew which leg to stand on; and this day, too, he gave Peter many many more dollars -- at least a hundred. He wished now, once for all, to know where this Lord Peter lived, and asked and asked about this thing and that, but the lad said he daren't say, for his master's sake, who had strictly forbidden him to tell. "Well, then," said the king, "beg Lord Peter to come and see me." Yes, the lad would take that message; but when Peter got into the yard again, and met the cat, he said, "A pretty scrape you've got me into now, for here's the king, who wants me to come and see him, and you know I've nothing to go in but these rags I stand and walk in." "Oh, don't be afraid about that," said the cat. "In three days you shall have coach and horses, and fine clothes, so fine that the gold falls from them, and then you may go and see the king very well. But mind, whatever you see in the king's palace, you must say you have far finer and grander things of your own. Don't forget that." No, no, Peter would bear that in mind, never fear. So when three days were over, the cat came with a coach and horses, and clothes, and all that Peter wanted, and altogether it was as grand as any thing you ever set eyes on. So off he set, and the cat ran alongside the coach. The king met him well and graciously, but whatever the king offered him, and whatever he showed him, Peter said, 'twas all very well, but he had far finer and better things in his own house. The king seemed not quite to believe this, but Peter stuck to what he said, and at last the king got so angry, he couldn't bear it any longer. "Now I'll go home with you," he said, "and see if it be true what you've been telling me, that you have far finer and better things of your own. But if you've been telling a pack of lies, Heaven help you, that's all I say." "Now, you've got me into a fine scrape," said Peter to the cat, "for here's the king coming home with me; but my home, that's not so easy to find, I think." "Oh! never mind," said the cat. "Only do you drive after me as I run before." So off they set; first Peter, who drove after his cat, and then the king and all his court. But when they had driven a good bit, they came to a great flock of fine sheep, that had wool so long it almost touched the ground. "If you'll only say," said the cat to the shepherd, "this flock of sheep belongs to Lord Peter when the king asks you, I'll give you this silver spoon," which she had taken with her from the king's palace. Yes! He was willing enough to do that. So when the king came up, he said to the lad who watched the sheep, "Well, I never saw so large and fine a flock of sheep in my life! Whose is it, my little lad?" "Why," said the lad, "whose should it be but Lord Peter's?" A little while after they came to a great, great herd of fine brindled kine, who were all so sleek the sun shone from them. "If you'll only say," said the cat to the neat-herd, "this herd is Lord Peter's, when the king asks you, I'll give you this silver ladle." And the ladle too she had taken from the king's palace. "Yes! with all my heart," said the neat-herd. So when the king came up, he was quite amazed at the fine fat herd, for such a herd he had never seen before, and so he asked the neat-herd who owned those brindled kine. "Why! who should own them but Lord Peter?" said the neat-herd. So they went on a little further, and came to a great, great drove of horses, the finest you ever saw, six of each color, bay, and black, and brown, and chestnut. "If you'll only say this drove of horses is Lord Peter's when the king asks you," said the cat, "I'll give you this silver stoop." And the stoop too she had taken from the palace. Yes! the lad was willing enough; and so when the king came up, he was quite amazed at the grand drove of horses, for the matches of such horses he had never yet set eyes on, he said. So he asked the lad who watched them, whose all these blacks, and bays, and browns, and chestnuts were? "Whose should they be," said the lad, "but Lord Peter's?" So when they had gone a good bit farther, they came to a castle; first there was a gate of tin, and next there was a gate of silver, and next a gate of gold. The castle itself was of silver, and so dazzling white, that it quite hurt one's eyes to look at it in the sun beams which fell on it just as they reached it. So they went into it, and the cat told Peter to say this was his house. As for the castle inside, it was far finer than it looked outside, for everything was pure gold, -- chairs, and tables, and benches, and all. And when the king had gone all over it, and seen every thing high and low, he got quite shameful and downcast. "Yes," he said at last; "Lord Peter has every thing far finer than I have, there's no gainsaying that." And so he wanted to be off home again. But Peter begged him to stay to supper, and the king stayed, but he was sour and surly the whole time. So as they sat at supper, back came the troll who owned the castle, and gave such a great knock at the door. "WHO'S THIS EATING MY MEAT AND DRINKING MY MEAD LIKE SWINE IN HERE?" roared out the troll. As soon as the cat heard that, she ran down to the gate. "Stop a bit," she said, "and I'll tell you how the farmer sets to work to get in his winter rye." And so she told him such a long story about the winter rye: "First of all, you see, he ploughs his field, and then he dungs it, and then he ploughs it again, and then he harrows it." And so she went on till the sun rose. "Oh, do look behind you, and there you'll see such a lovely lady," said the cat to the troll. So the troll turned round, and, of course, as soon as he saw the sun he burst. "Now all this is yours," said the cat to Lord Peter. "Now, you must cut off my head; that's all I ask for what I have done for you." "Nay, nay," said Lord Peter, "I'll never do any such thing. That's flat." "If you don't," said the cat, "see if I don't claw your eyes out." Well! so Lord Peter had to do it, though it was sore against his will. He cut off the cat's head, but there and then she became the loveliest princess you ever set eyes on, and Lord Peter fell in love with her at once. "Yes! All this greatness was mine first," said the princess, "but a troll bewitched me to be a cat in your father's and mother's cottage. Now you may do as you please, whether you take me as your queen or not, for you are now king over all this realm." Well, well; there was little doubt Lord Peter would be willing enough to have her as his queen, and so there was a wedding that lasted eight whole days, and a feast besides; and after it was over, I stayed no longer with Lord Peter and his lovely queen, and so I can't say anything more about them. Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1859), no. 41, pp. 324-31 . Source (Internet Archive): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1859), no. 41, pp. 324-31 . Link to a different translation of this story (Internet Archive): Squire Peter , translated by H. L. Brækstad (1897). Link to the tale in the original Norwegian: "Herreper" . Return to the table of contents . Mighty Mikko Finland There was once an old woodsman and his wife who had an only son named Mikko. As the mother lay dying the young man wept bitterly. "When you are gone, my dear mother," he said, "there will be no one left to think of me." The poor woman comforted him as best she could and said to him: "You will still have your father." Shortly after the woman's death, the old man, too, was taken ill. "Now, indeed, I shall be left desolate and alone," Mikko thought, as he sat beside his father's bedside and saw him grow weaker and weaker. "My boy," the old man said just before he died, "I have nothing to leave you but the three snares with which these many years I have caught wild animals. Those snares now belong to you. When I am dead, go into the woods and if you find a wild creature caught in any of them, free it gently and bring it home alive." After his father's death, Mikko remembered the snares and went out to the woods to see them. The first was empty and also the second, but in the third he found a little red fox. He carefully lifted the spring that had shut down on one of the fox's feet and then carried the little creature home in his arms. He shared his supper with it and when he lay down to sleep the fox curled up at his feet. They lived together some time until they became close friends. "Mikko," said the fox one day, "why are you so sad?" "Because I'm lonely." "Pooh!" said the fox. "That's no way for a young man to talk! You ought to get married! Then you wouldn't feel lonely!" "Married!" Mikko repeated. "How can I get married? I can't marry a poor girl because I'm too poor myself and a rich girl wouldn't marry me." "Nonsense!" said the fox. "You're a fine well set up young man and you're kind and gentle. What more could a princess ask?" Mikko laughed to think of a princess wanting him for a husband. "I mean what I say!" the fox insisted. "Take our own princess now. What would you think of marrying her?" Mikko laughed louder than before. "I have heard," he said, "that she is the most beautiful princess in the world! Any man would be happy to marry her!" "Very well," the fox said, "if you feel that way about her then I'll arrange the wedding for you." With that the little fox actually did trot off to the royal castle and gain audience with the king. "My master sends you greetings," the fox said, "and he begs you to loan him your bushel measure." "My bushel measure!" the king repeated in surprise. "Who is your master and why does he want my bushel measure?" "Ssh!" the fox whispered as though he didn't want the courtiers to hear what he was saying. Then slipping up quite close to the king he murmured in his ear: "Surely you have heard of Mikko, haven't you? -- Mighty Mikko as he's called." The king had never heard of any Mikko who was known as Mighty Mikko but, thinking that perhaps he should have heard of him, he shook his head and murmured: "H'm! Mikko! Mighty Mikko! Oh, to be sure! Yes, yes, of course!" "My master is about to start off on a journey and he needs a bushel measure for a very particular reason." "I understand! I understand!" the king said, although he didn't understand at all, and he gave orders that the bushel measure which they used in the storeroom of the castle be brought in and given to the fox. The fox carried off the measure and hid it in the woods. Then he scurried about to all sorts of little out of the way nooks and crannies where people had hidden their savings and he dug up a gold piece here and a silver piece there until he had a handful. Then he went back to the woods and stuck the various coins in the cracks of the measure. The next day he returned to the king. "My master, Mighty Mikko," he said, "sends you thanks, O king, for the use of your bushel measure." The king held out his hand and when the fox gave him the measure he peeped inside to see if by chance it contained any trace of what had recently been measured. His eye of course at once caught the glint of the gold and silver coins lodged in the cracks. "Ah!" he said, thinking Mikko must be a very mighty lord indeed to be so careless of his wealth. "I should like to meet your master. Won't you and he come and visit me?" This was what the fox wanted the king to say, but he pretended to hesitate. "I thank your majesty for the kind invitation," he said, "but I fear my master can't accept it just now. He wants to get married soon and we are about to start off on a long journey to inspect a number of foreign princesses." This made the king all the more anxious to have Mikko visit him at once for he thought that if Mikko should see his daughter before he saw those foreign princesses he might fall in love with her and marry her. So he said to the fox: "My dear fellow, you must prevail on your master to make me a visit before he starts out on his travels! You will, won't you?" The fox looked this way and that as if he were too embarrassed to speak. "Your majesty," he said at last, "I pray you pardon my frankness. The truth is you are not rich enough to entertain my master and your castle isn't big enough to house the immense retinue that always attends him." The king, who by this time was frantic to see Mikko, lost his head completely. "My dear fox," he said, "I'll give you anything in the world if you prevail upon your master to visit me at once! Couldn't you suggest to him to travel with a modest retinue this time?" The fox shook his head. "No. His rule is either to travel with a great retinue or to go on foot disguised as a poor woodsman attended only by me." "Couldn't you prevail on him to come to me disguised as a poor woodsman?" the king begged. "Once he was here, I could place gorgeous clothes at his disposal." But still the fox shook his head. "I fear your majesty's wardrobe doesn't contain the kind of clothes my master is accustomed to." "I assure you I've got some very good clothes," the king said. "Come along this minute and we'll go through them and I'm sure you'll find some that your master would wear." So they went to a room which was like a big wardrobe with hundreds and hundreds of hooks upon which were hung hundreds of coats and breeches and embroidered shirts. The king ordered his attendants to bring the costumes down one by one and place them before the fox. They began with the plainer clothes. "Good enough for most people," the fox said, "but not for my master." Then they took down garments of a finer grade. "I'm afraid you're going to all this trouble for nothing," the fox said. "Frankly now, don't you realize that my master couldn't possibly put on any of these things!" The king, who had hoped to keep for his own use his most gorgeous clothes of all, now ordered these to be shown. The fox looked at them sideways, sniffed them critically, and at last said: "Well, perhaps my master would consent to wear these for a few days. They are not what he is accustomed to wear, but I will say this for him: he is not proud." The king was overjoyed. "Very well, my dear fox, I'll have the guest chambers put in readiness for your master's visit and I'll have all these, my finest clothes, laid out for him. You won't disappoint me, will you?" "I'll do my best," the fox promised. With that he bade the king a civil good day and ran home to Mikko. The next day as the princess was peeping out of an upper window of the castle, she saw a young woods man approaching accompanied by a fox. He was a fine stalwart youth, and the princess, who knew from the presence of the fox that he must be Mikko, gave a long sigh and confided to her serving maid: "I think I could fall in love with that young man if he really were only a woodsman!" Later when she saw him arrayed in her father's finest clothes -- which looked so well on Mikko that no one even recognized them as the king's -- she lost her heart completely, and when Mikko was presented to her she blushed and trembled just as any ordinary girl might before a handsome young man. All the court was equally delighted with Mikko. The ladies went into ecstasies over his modest manners, his fine figure, and the gorgeousness of his clothes, and the old graybeard councilors, nodding their heads in approval, said to each other: "Nothing of the coxcomb about this young fellow! In spite of his great wealth see how politely he listens to us when we talk!" The next day the fox went privately to the king, and said: "My master is the man of few words and quick judgment. He bids me tell you that your daughter, the princess, pleases him mightily and that, with your approval, he will make his addresses to her at once." The king was greatly agitated and began: "My dear fox --" But the fox interrupted him to say: "Think the matter over carefully and give me your decision tomorrow." So the king consulted with the princess and with his councilors and in a short time the marriage was arranged and the wedding ceremony actually per formed! "Didn't I tell you?" the fox said, when he and Mikko were alone after the wedding. "Yes," Mikko acknowledged, "you did promise that I should marry the princess. But, tell me, now that I am married what am I to do? I can't live on here forever with my wife." "Put your mind at rest," the fox said. "I've thought of everything. Just do as I tell you and you'll have nothing to regret. Tonight say to the king: 'It is now only fitting that you should visit me and see for yourself the sort of castle over which your daughter is hereafter to be mistress!'" When Mikko said this to the king, the king was overjoyed for now that the marriage had actually taken place he was wondering whether he hadn't perhaps been a little hasty. Mikko's words reassured him and he eagerly accepted the invitation. On the morrow the fox said to Mikko: "Now I'll run on ahead and get things ready for you." "But where are you going?" Mikko said, frightened at the thought of being deserted by his little friend. The fox drew Mikko aside and whispered softly: "A few days' march from here there is a very gorgeous castle belonging to a wicked old dragon who is known as the worm. I think the worm's castle would just about suit you." "I'm sure it would," Mikko agreed. "But how are we to get it away from the worm?" "Trust me," the fox said. "All you need do is this: lead the king and his courtiers along the main highway until by noon tomorrow you reach a crossroads. Turn there to the left and go straight on until you see the tower of the worm's castle. If you meet any men by the wayside, shepherds or the like, ask them whose men they are and show no surprise at their answer. So now, dear master, farewell until we meet again at your beautiful castle." The little fox trotted off at a smart pace and Mikko and the princess and the king attended by the whole court followed in more leisurely fashion. The little fox, when he had left the main highway at the crossroads, soon met ten woodsmen with axes over their shoulders. They were all dressed in blue smocks of the same out. "Good day," the fox said politely. "Whose men are you?" "Our master is known as the worm," the woodsmen told him. "My poor, poor lads!" the fox said, shaking his head sadly. "What's the matter?" the woodsmen asked. For a few moments the fox pretended to be too over come with emotion to speak. Then he said: "My poor lads, don't you know that the king is coming with a great force to destroy the worm and all his people?" The woodsmen were simple fellows and this news threw them into great consternation. "Is there no way for us to escape?" they asked. The fox put his paw to his head and thought. "Well," he said at last, "there is one way you might escape and that is by telling every one who asks you that you are the Mighty Mikko's men. But if you value your lives never again say that your master is the worm." "We are Mighty Mikko's men!" the woodsmen at once began repeating over and over. "We are Mighty Mikko's men!" A little farther on the road the fox met twenty grooms, dressed in the same blue smocks, who were tending a hundred beautiful horses. The fox talked to the twenty grooms as he had talked to the woodsmen and before he left them they, too, were shouting: "We are Mighty Mikko's men!" Next the fox came to a huge flock of a thousand sheep tended by thirty shepherds all dressed in the worm's blue smocks. He stopped and talked to them until he had them roaring out: "We are Mighty Mikko's men!" Then the fox trotted on until he reached the castle of the worm. He found the worm himself inside lolling lazily about. He was a huge dragon and had been a great warrior in his day. In fact his castle and his lands and his servants and his possessions had all been won in battle. But now for many years no one had cared to fight him and he had grown fat and lazy. "Good day," the fox said, pretending to be very breathless and frightened. "You're the worm, aren't you?" "Yes," the dragon said, boastfully, "I am the great worm!" The fox pretended to grow more agitated. "My poor fellow, I am sorry for you! But of course none of us can expect to live forever. Well, I must hurry along. I thought I would just stop and say good-by." Made uneasy by the fox's words, the worm cried out: "Wait just a minute! What's the matter?" The fox was already at the door but at the worm's entreaty he paused and said over his shoulder: "Why, my poor fellow, you surely know, don't you? that the king with a great force is coming to destroy you and all your people!" "What!" the worm gasped, turning a sickly green with fright. He knew he was fat and helpless and could never again fight as in the years gone by. "Don't go just yet!" he begged the fox. "When is the king coming?" "He's on the highway now! That's why I must be going! Good-by!" "My dear fox, stay just a moment and I'll reward you richly! Help me to hide so that the king won't find me! What about the shed where the linen is stored? I could crawl under the linen and then if you locked the door from the outside the king could never find me." "Very well," the fox agreed, "but we must hurry!" So they ran outside to the shed where the linen was kept and the worm hid himself under the linen. The fox locked the door, then set fire to the shed, and soon there was nothing left of that wicked old dragon, the worm, but a handful of ashes. The fox now called together the dragon's household and talked them over to Mikko as he had the woodsmen and the grooms and the shepherds. Meanwhile the king and his party were slowly covering the ground over which the fox had sped so quickly. When they came to the ten woodsmen in blue smocks, the king said: "I wonder whose woodsmen those are." One of his attendants asked the woodsmen and the ten of them shouted out at the top of their voices: "We are Mighty Mikko's men!" Mikko said nothing and the king and all the court were impressed anew with his modesty. A little farther on they met the twenty grooms with their hundred prancing horses. When the grooms were questioned, they answered with a shout: "We are Mighty Mikko's men!" "The fox certainly spoke the truth," the king thought to himself, "when he told me of Mikko's riches!" A little later the thirty shepherds when they were questioned made answer in a chorus that was deafening to hear: "We are Mighty Mikko's men!" The sight of the thousand sheep that belonged to his son-in-law made the king feel poor and humble in comparison and the courtiers whispered among themselves: "For all his simple manner, Mighty Mikko must be a richer, more powerful lord than the king himself! In fact it is only a very great lord indeed who could be so simple!" At last they reached the castle which from the blue smocked soldiers that guarded the gateway they knew to be Mikko's. The fox came out to welcome the king's party and behind him in two rows all the household servants. These, at a signal from the fox, cried out in one voice: "We are Mighty Mikko's men!" Then Mikko in the same simple manner that he would have used in his father's mean little hut in the woods bade the king and his followers welcome and they all entered the castle where they found a great feast already prepared and waiting. The king stayed on for several days and the more he saw of Mikko the better pleased he was that he had him for a son-in-law. When he was leaving he said to Mikko: "Your castle is so much grander than mine that I hesitate ever asking you back for a visit." But Mikko reassured the king by saying earnestly: "My dear father-in-law, when first I entered your castle I thought it was the most beautiful castle in the world!" The king was flattered and the courtiers whispered among themselves : 'How affable of him to say that when he knows very well how much grander his own castle is!" When the king and his followers were safely gone, the little red fox came to Mikko and said: "Now, my master, you have no reason to feel sad and lonely. You are lord of the most beautiful castle in the world and you have for wife a sweet and lovely princess. You have no longer any need of me, so I am going to bid you farewell." Mikko thanked the little fox for all he had done and the little fox trotted off to the woods. So you see that Mikko's poor old father, although he had no wealth to leave his son, was really the cause of all Mikko's good fortune, for it was he who told Mikko in the first place to carry home alive anything he might find caught in the snares. Source (books.google.com): Parker Fillmore, Mighty Mikko: A Book of Finnish Fairy Tales and Folk Tales (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company, 1922), pp. 25-45 . Source (Internet Archive): Parker Fillmore, Mighty Mikko: A Book of Finnish Fairy Tales and Folk Tales (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company, 1922), pp. 25-45 . Return to the table of contents . Count Martin of the Cat Italy / Austria An impoverished father died, leaving his two sons only a bench and a cat. As he closed his eyes he said, "Divide this small inheritance between the two of you. Let there be no dispute about it." The older brother said, "I'll take the bench, then at least I can sit down and rest as often as I like." "And I'll take the cat," said the younger one, whose name Martin. "She likes me, and is always following me everywhere." They went their separate ways into the world. The older brother carried the bench with him, and whenever he got tired he sat down on it and rested. Martin, however, went on his way with the cat, and had every reason to be happy about his choice. Whenever he got hungry, the cat went into a house where a table had been set, then before the eyes of the astonished people she carried food away to her master. Thus he never lacked food and drink. The cat also took care of his dress by stealing a beautiful piece of clothing here and there, and bringing it to him. Thus he was dressed like a real gentleman. Therefore the cat said to him, "When the people ask about your name, tell them that you are called Count Martin of the Cat. He liked this idea. "I would never have dreamed," he said, laughing to himself, "that with the help of my dear cat I should become a count." One day they came to a wide plain. There were beautiful green meadows and fields, and they asked the people to whom they belonged. "To such and such a count," they replied. They went onward, coming to magnificent forests and still more beautiful meadows with numerous flocks and shepherds. As often as they asked, everything belonged to that count. Finally they came to the palace where the rich old count himself lived with his wife. They were received there graciously. When the old gentlemen went to the cellar to get wine, the cat took the opportunity to creep after him, then strangled him in the cellar. The count's wife then went to the cellar to see what was keeping her husband so long. The cat jumped on her, and strangled her too. Then the cat went upstairs to her master and said, "The two old ones down in the cellar are dead. Now you are the master of the palace. You must behave as such. Leave all the rest to me." Then she ran out to the fields and meadows and forests, and everywhere she saw mowers, woodsmen, or shepherds, she cried, "The old count and his wife are dead, and have named my lord, Count Martin of the Cat, as their heir. He is now your rightful master. He has charged me with making this known to you, so that you may know his name and obey him alone." Everywhere the people replied, "We are your servants, Madame Cat. If our old master has died, then he died well. Long live our new master!" Count Martin of the Cat had now the most wonderful life in the world. One day his brother came to the castle, still carrying the bench with him, and still desperately poor. He did not recognize Martin, but the latter took him in and gave him a position as overseer in his court. He too now had a good life and could sit on his bench whenever he wanted to. Some time later the cat said to her master, "I feel that I'm getting old, and that my end is near. I have helped you to your good fortune, so show your thanks by having me buried with dignity and with a beautiful gravestone. I deserve this much." Then she secretly decided to put her master to the test. One day she lay down on the floor, pretending to be dead. When Martin saw her, he said, "So the disgusting animal is finally dead!" And he was about to throw he body out into the courtyard. Jumping to her feet, the cat cried out, "You unthankful one, is this how you are going to treat the one to whom you owe everything?" She continued with a stream of rebukes, all of which he silently accepted, for he knew that he deserved the condemnation. Finally he answered her, saying that he was sorry and asking for her forgiveness. "After you death of course I will have you buried with dignity and give you a beautiful gravestone," he solemnly promised. More time passed, and the cat did indeed die. Count Martin kept his promise and had her solemnly buried. I almost do not want to say so, but I was told that he had her buried in a church. He is said to have placed a beautiful gravestone in her honor, upon which her achievements were engraved in glowing words. Today the stone is no longer to be found, nor can anyone remember having seen it. Furthermore, no one knows what has become of it. Source (Internet Archive): Christian Schneller, Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol: Ein Beitrag zur deutschen Sagenkunde (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), no. 43, pp. 122-28 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2016. Return to the table of contents . Don Joseph Pear Italy There were once three brothers who owned a pear tree and lived on the pears. One day one of the brothers went to pick these pears, and found that they had been gathered. "Oh! my brothers! what shall we do, for our pears have been picked?" So the eldest went and remained in the garden to guard the pear tree during the night. He fell asleep, however, and the next morning the second brother came and said: "What have you done, my brother? Have you been sleeping? Do you not see that the pears have been picked? Tonight I will stay." That night the second brother remained. The next morning the youngest went there and saw more of the pears picked, and said: "Were you the one that was going to keep a good watch? Go, I will stay here tonight; we shall see whether they can cheat me to my face." At night the youngest brother began to play and dance under the pear tree; while he was not playing, a fox, believing that the youth had gone to sleep, came out and climbed the tree and picked the rest of the pears. When it was coming down the tree, the youth quickly aimed his gun at it and was about to shoot. The fox said: "Don't shoot me, Don Joseph; for I will have you called Don Joseph Pear, and will make you marry the king's daughter." Don Joseph answered: "And where shall I see you again? What has the king to do with you? With one kick that he would give you, you would never appear before him again." However, Don Joseph Pear from pity let her escape. The fox went away to a forest and caught all sorts of game: squirrels, hares, and quails, and carried them to the king; so that it was a sight. "Sir Majesty, Don Joseph Pear sends me; you must accept this game." The king said: "Listen, little fox, I accept this game; but I have never heard this Don Joseph Pear mentioned." The fox left the game there, and ran away to Don Joseph. "Softly, Don Joseph, I have taken the first step; I have been to the king, and carried him the first game; and he accepted it." A week later the fox went to the forest, caught the best animals: squirrels, hares, birds, and took them to the king. "Sir Majesty, Don Joseph Pear sends me to you with this game." The king said to the fox: "My daughter, I don't know who this Don Joseph Pear is; I am afraid you have been sent somewhere else! I will tell you what: Have this Don Joseph Pear come here, so that I can make his acquaintance." The fox wished to leave the game, and said: "I am not mistaken; my master sent me here; and for a token, he said that he wished the princess for his wife." The fox returned to Don Joseph Pear, and said to him: "Softly, things are going well; after I have been to the king again, the matter is settled." Don Joseph said: "I will not believe you until I have my wife." The fox now went to an ogress and said: "Friend, friend, have we not to divide the gold and silver?" "Certainly," said the ogress to the fox. "Go and get the measure and we will divide the gold from the silver." The fox went to the king and did not say: "The ogress wants to borrow your measure;" but she said: "Don Joseph Pear wants to borrow, for a short time, your measure to separate the gold from the silver." "What!" said the king. "Has this Don Joseph Pear such great riches? Is he then richer than I?" And he gave the fox the measure. When he was alone with his daughter he said to her, in the course of his conversation: "It must be that this Don Joseph Pear is very rich, for he divides the gold and silver." The fox carried the measure to the ogress, who began to measure and heap up gold and silver. When she had finished, the fox went to Don Joseph Pear and dressed him in new clothes, a watch with diamonds, rings, a ring for his betrothed, and everything that was needed for the marriage. "Behold, Don Joseph," said the fox, "I am going before you now; you go to the king and get your bride and then go to the church." Don Joseph went to the king; got his bride, and they went to the church. After they were married, the princess got into the carriage and the bridegroom mounted his horse. The fox made a sign to Don Joseph and said: "I will go before you; you follow me and let the carriages and horses come after." They started on their way, and came to a sheep farm which belonged to the ogress. The boy who was tending the sheep, when he saw the fox approach, threw a stone at her, and she began to weep. "Ah!" she said to the boy. "Now I will have you killed. Do you see those horsemen? Now I will have you killed!" The youth, terrified, said: "If you will not do anything to me I will not throw any more stones at you." The fox replied: "If you don't want to be killed, when the king passes and asks you whose is this sheep farm, you must tell him: 'Don Joseph Pear's,' for Don Joseph Pear is his son-in-law, and he will reward you." The cavalcade passed by, and the king asked the boy: "Whose is this sheep farm?" The boy replied at once: "Don Joseph Pear's." The king gave him some money. The fox kept about ten paces before Don Joseph, and the latter did nothing but say in a low tone: "Where are you taking me, fox? What lands do I possess that you can make me believed to be rich? Where are we going?" The fox replied: "Softly, Don Joseph, and leave it to me." They went on and on, and the fox saw another farm of cattle, with the herdsman. The same thing happened there as with the shepherd: the stone thrown and the fox's threat. The king passed. "Herdsman, whose is this farm of cattle?" "Don Joseph Pear's." And the king, astonished at his son-in-law's wealth, gave the herdsman a piece of gold. Don Joseph was pleased on the one hand, but on the other was perplexed and did not know how it was to turn out. When the fox turned around, Joseph said: "Where are you taking me, fox? You are ruining me." The fox kept on as if she had nothing to do with the matter. Then she came to another farm of horses and mares. The boy who was tending them threw a stone at the fox. She frightened him, and he told the king, when the king asked him, that the farm was Don Joseph Pear's. They kept on and came to a well, and near it the ogress was sitting. The fox began to run and pretended to be in great terror. "Friend, friend, see, they are coming! These horsemen will kill us! Let us hide in the well, shall we not?" "Yes, friend," said the ogress in alarm. "Shall I throw you down first?" said the fox. "Certainly, friend." Then the fox threw the ogress down the well, and then entered the ogress' palace. Don Joseph Pear followed the fox, with his wife, his father-in-law, and all the riders. The fox showed them through all the apartments, displaying the riches, Don Joseph Pear contented at having found his fortune, and the king still more contented because his daughter was so richly settled. There was a festival for a few days, and then the king, well satisfied, returned to his own country and his daughter remained with her husband. One day the fox was looking out of the window, and Don Joseph Pear and his wife were going up to the terrace. Don Joseph Pear took up a little dust from the terrace and threw it at the fox's head. The fox raised her eyes. "What is the meaning of this, after the good I have done you, miserable fellow?" said she to Don Joseph. "Take care or I will speak!" The wife said to her husband: "What is the matter with the fox, to speak thus?" "Nothing," answered her husband. "I threw a little dust at her and she got angry." Don Joseph took up a little more dust and threw it at the fox's head. The fox, in a rage, cried: "Joe, you see I will speak! And I declare that you were the owner of a pear tree!" Don Joseph was frightened, for the fox told his wife everything; so he took an earthen jar and threw it at the fox's head, and so got rid of her. Thus -- the ungrateful fellow that he was -- he killed the one who had done him so much kindness; but nevertheless he enjoyed all his wealth with his wife. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 33, pp. 127-31 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1885), no. 33, pp. 127-31 . Return to the table of contents . Boroltai Ku Mongolia Boroltai Ku lived in a hut on grass, and was clothed in a felt coat. His only possession was a girdle; once he saw a fox's hole, and dug out the fox. She said to him: "Don't kill me, and I will marry thee to a khan's daughter, and will make thee a khan." Boroltai Ku let the fox go. She ran to Gurbushten Khan, and says: "Boroltai Ku, the rich khan, wishes to marry thy daughter." "If Boroltai Ku is indeed a rich khan then let him procure me a leopard, a lion, and an elephant," said Gurbushten Khan. The fox ran to Boroltai Ku, and said: "Give me three strings." Boroltai Ku took from his girdle three strings. The fox took them and went at first to the leopard and said: "Gurbushten Khan and Boroltai Ku, the rich khan, prepare a summer feast; and, as you are a famous animal, the khan wishes to invite you." She placed on the leopard the string and led him forth. In like manner she bridled the lion and the elephant, and led them to Gurbushten Khan. The khan ordered an iron Baishen-house to be built, which was enclosed by three walls, and fettered the beasts with chains. Then he said: "If Boroltai Ku is indeed a rich khan, then let him drive his cattle and come here." The fox ordered Boroltai Ku to follow in her footsteps. Boroltai Ku went on foot in his bad coat. On the road to the khan they came to a river; the fox ordered Boroltai Ku to stay by the river, and herself ran on before to Gurbushten Khan, and says: "Boroltai Ku, the rich khan, is close at hand; but a misfortune has befallen him; all his cattle, his southern camels, all his silk garments and gold, at the time of his crossing sank -- Boroltai is left naked. Send him quickly silken raiment in which he may visit you." Silken raiment they sent; Boroltai Ku came to the khan's camp. The khan gave him his daughter and let him go home, and as a guide gave him his Noi-on.* The fox ran on ahead, and begged each herdsman on the road if a passer-by should ask them whose is this cattle? to reply, "It is the cattle of Boroltai Ku, the rich khan." The Noi-on dispatched by the khan received the same answer all along the road. The fox ran to the tent of the Khan Manguis, lay down at the door and groans. The khan asks: "What art thou groaning at, O fox? " "A misfortune will befall unfortunate me," said the fox; "a storm is coming." "Oh, dear, that is a misfortune to me, too," says the Khan Manguis. "How to you?" says the fox. "You can order a hole ten fathoms deep to be dug, and can hide in it." So he did. Boroltai Ku appeared in the tent of the Khan Manguis, as if it was his own. The fox assured the Noi-on of Gurbushten Khan that it was the house of Boroltai Ku, the rich khan. "There is only one defect here," says she. "What is that?" "Under the tent under the earth a demon inhabits. Won't you bring down lightning to slay him?" The Noi-on brought down lightning and it struck the Khan Manguis who was sitting in the hole; and Boroltai Ku became khan, and took all the possessions, the cattle, and the people of Manguis, and lived near Gurbushten Khan. Source (books.google.com): C. Gardner, "Folk-Lore in Mongolia," The Folk-Lore Journal , volume 4, part 1 (January - March, 1886), pp. 32-34 . Source (Internet Archive): C. Gardner, "Folk-Lore in Mongolia," The Folk-Lore Journal , volume 4, part 1 (January - March, 1886), pp. 32-34 . Gardner's source: " Daba, a Khalka man of Kêbe tushe gun Gachoun." Footnote: *Noi-on, perhaps Chinese Nei jen, attendant, one who holds office in the palace (?) Return to the table of contents . Jogeshwar's Marriage India Once upon a time there was a young man of the weaver caste, named Jogeshwar. He was an orphan and lived all alone. One summer he planted a field of pumpkins on the sandy bed of a river. The plants grew well and bore plenty of fruit; but when the pumpkins were ripe, a jackal found them out and went every night and feasted on them. Jogeshwar soon found out from the foot-marks who was doing the damage; so he set a snare and a few days later found the jackal caught in it. He took a stick to beat its life out, but the jackal cried: "Spare me and I will find you a wife." So Jogeshwar stayed his hand and released the jackal who promised at once to set off about the business. The jackal kept his word and went to a city where a raja lived. There he sat down on the bank of one of the raja's tanks. To this tank the servants from the palace brought the pots and dishes to be washed, and to this tank also came the rani and princesses to bathe. Whenever the servants came to wash their dishes, the jackal kept on repeating: "What sort of a raja is this whose plates are washed in water in which people have bathed? There is no raja like Raja Jogeshwar. He eats of golden plates and yet he never uses them a second time but throws them away directly he has eaten off them once." The servants soon carried word to the raja of the jackal who sat by the tank and of his story of Raja Jogeshwar. Then the raja sent for the jackal and asked why he had come. The jackal answered that he was looking for a bride for Raja Jogeshwar. Now the raja had three or four daughters and he thought that he saw his way to a fine match for one of them. So he sent for the young women and asked the jackal to say whether one of them would be a suitable bride for Raja Jogeshwar. The jackal chose the second sister and said that he would go and get the consent of Raja Jogeshwar. The jackal hurried back and told the astonished weaver that he had found a raja's daughter for him to marry. Jogeshwar had nothing to delay him and only asked that an early day might be fixed for the wedding. So the jackal went back to the raja and received from him the knotted string that fixed the date of the wedding. The jackal had now to devise some means by which Jogeshwar could go through the wedding ceremonies without his poverty being found out. He first went to the raja and asked how many attendants Raja Jogeshwar should bring with him, as he did not want to bring more than the bride's father could entertain. The raja was too proud to fix any number and said they could bring as many as they liked. Jogeshwar having no relations and no money, was quite unable to arrange for a grand procession to escort him. He could only just afford to hire a palki in which to be carried to the bride's house; so the jackal sent word to all the jackals and paddy birds of the neighborhood to come to a feast at the palace of the bride, an invitation which was eagerly accepted. At the time fixed they started off, with all the paddy birds riding on the backs of the jackals. When they came within sight of the palace, the jackal ran on ahead and invited the raja to come out and look at the procession as there was still time to send them back, if they were too many, but it would be a great disgrace if they were allowed to arrive and find no entertainment. The raja went out to look and when he saw the procession stretching away for a distance of two miles or more with all the paddy birds looking like white horsemen as they rode on the backs of the jackals, his heart failed him and he begged the jackal to send them away, as he could not entertain such a host. So then the jackal hurried back and turned them all away and Jogeshwar reached the palace, accompanied only by his palki bearers. Before the wedding feast, the jackal gave Jogeshwar some hints as to his behavior. He warned him that three of four kinds of meat and vegetables would be handed round with the rice, and bade him to be sure to help himself from each dish -- of course in his own house the poor weaver had never had more than one dish to eat with his rice -- and when pan was handed to him after the feast he was not to take any until he had a handful of money given him. By such behavior he would lead every one to think that he was really a prince. Jogeshwar did exactly as he was told and was thought a very grand personage. The next evening Jogeshwar set off homewards with his bride, the bride's brothers and attendants accompanying them. They travelled on and on till the bride's party began to grow tired and kept asking the jackal how much further they had to go. The jackal kept on putting them off, till at last they came in sight of a grove of palm trees, and he told them that Raja Jogeshwar's palace stood among the palm trees but was so old and weather worn that it could not be seen from a distance. When they reached the palm grove and found nothing but Jogeshwar's humble hut, the bride's brothers turned on the jackal and asked what he meant by deceiving them. The jackal protested that he had told no lies. The weaver ate every day off plates made of dry leaves and threw them away when done with and that was all he meant when he talked of golden plates. At this excuse they turned on him and wanted to beat him, but he ran away and escaped. The bride's friends went back and told the raja how things had turned out and as divorce was not lawful for them, the raja could only send for his daughter and her husband and give them an estate to live on. Source (Internet Archive): Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 55, pp. 173-76. . Return to the table of contents . The Match-Making Jackal India Once on a time there lived a weaver, whose ancestors were very rich, but whose father had wasted the property which he had inherited in riotous living. He was born in a palace-like house, but he now lived in a miserable hut. He had no one in the world, his parents and all his relatives having died. Hard by the hut was the lair of a jackal. The jackal, remembering the wealth and grandeur of the weaver's forefathers, had compassion on him, and one day coming to him, said, "Friend weaver, I see what a wretched life you are leading. I have a good mind to improve your condition. I'll try and marry you to the daughter of the king of this country." "I become the king's son-in-law!" replied the weaver. "That will take place only when the sun rises in the west." "You doubt my power?" rejoined the jackal. "You will see, I'll bring it about." The next morning the jackal started for the king's city, which was many miles off. On the way he entered a plantation of the piper betel plant, and plucked a large quantity of its leaves. He reached the capital, and contrived to get inside the palace. On the premises of the palace was a tank in which the ladies of the king's household performed their morning and afternoon ablutions. At the entrance of that tank the jackal laid himself down. The daughter of the king happened to come just at the time to bathe, accompanied by her maids. The princess was not a little struck at seeing the jackal lying down at the entrance. She told her maids to drive the jackal away. The jackal rose as if from sleep, and instead of running away, opened his bundle of betel-leaves, put some into his mouth, and began chewing them. The princess and her maids were not a little astonished at the sight. They said among themselves, "What an uncommon jackal is this! From what country can he have come? A jackal chewing betel-leaves! Why thousands of men and women of this city cannot indulge in that luxury. He must have come from a wealthy land." The princess asked the jackal, "Sivalu [A name for a jackal, not unlike Reynard in Europe], from what country do you come? It must be a very prosperous country where the jackals chew betel-leaves. Do other animals in your country chew betel-leaves?" "Dearest princess," replied the jackal, "I come from a land flowing with milk and honey. Betel-leaves are as plentiful in my country as the grass in your fields. All animals in my country -- cows, sheep, dogs -- chew betel-leaves. We want no good thing." "Happy is the country," said the princess, "where there is such plenty, and thrice happy the king who rules in it!" "As for our king," said the jackal, "he is the richest king in the world. His palace is like the heaven of Indra. I have seen your palace here; it is a miserable hut compared to the palace of our king." The princess, whose curiosity was excited to the utmost pitch, hastily went through her bath, and going to the apartments of the queen-mother, told her of the wonderful jackal lying at the entrance of the tank. Her curiosity being excited, the jackal was sent for. When the jackal stood in the presence of the queen, he began munching the betel-leaves. "You come," said the queen, "from a very rich country. Is your king married?" "Please your majesty, our king is not married. Princesses from distant parts of the world tried to get married to him, but he rejected them all. Happy will that princess be whom our king condescends to marry!" "Don't you think, Sivalu," asked the queen, "that my daughter is as beautiful as a Peri, and that she is fit to be the wife of the proudest king in the world?" "I quite think," said the jackal, "that the princess is exceedingly handsome; indeed, she is the handsomest princess I have ever seen; but I don't know whether our king will have a liking for her." "Liking for my daughter!" said the queen." You have only to paint her to him as she is, and he is sure to turn mad with love. To be serious, Sivalu, I am anxious to get my daughter married. Many princes have sought her hand, but I am unwilling to give her to any of them, as they are not the sons of great kings. But your king seems to be a great king. I can have no objection to making him my son-in-law." The queen sent word to the king, requesting him to come and see the jackal. The king came and saw the jackal, heard him describe the wealth and pomp of the king of his country, and expressed himself not unwilling to give away his daughter in marriage to him. The jackal after this returned to the weaver and said to him, "O lord of the loom, you are the luckiest man in the world. It is all settled; you are to become the son-in-law of a great king. I have told them that you are yourself a great king, and you must behave yourself as one. You must do just as I instruct you. otherwise your fortune will not only not be made, but both you and I will be put to death." "I'll do just as you bid me," said the weaver. The shrewd jackal drew in his own mind a plan of the method of procedure he should adopt, and after a few days went back to the palace of the king in the same manner in which he had gone before, that is to say, chewing betel-leaves and lying down at the entrance of the tank on the premises of the palace. The king and queen were glad to see him, and eagerly asked him as to the success of his mission. The jackal said, "In order to relieve your minds I may tell you at once that my mission has teen so far successful. If you only knew the infinite trouble I have had in persuading his Majesty, my sovereign, to make up his mind to marry your daughter, you would give me no end of thanks. For a long time he would not hear of it, but gradually I brought him round. You have now only to fix an auspicious day for the celebration of the solemn rite. There is one bit of advice, however, which I, as your friend, would give you. It is this. My master is so great a king that if he were to come to you in state, attended by all his followers, his horses and his elephants, you would find it impossible to accommodate them all in your palace or in your city. I would therefore propose that our king should come to your city, not in state, but in a private manner; and that you send to the outskirts of your city your own elephants, horses, and conveyances, to bring him and only a few of his followers to your palace." "Many thanks, wise Sivalu, for this advice. I could not possibly make accommodation in my city for the followers of so great a king as your master is. I should be very glad if he did not come in state; and trust you will use your influence to persuade him to come in a private manner; for I should be ruined if he came in state." The jackal then gravely said, "I will do my best in the matter," and then returned to his own village, after the royal astrologer had fixed an auspicious day for the wedding. On his return the jackal busied himself with making preparations for the great ceremony. As the weaver was clad in tatters, he told him to go to the washermen of the village and borrow from them a suit of clothes. As for himself, he went to the king of his race, and told him that on a certain day he would like one thousand jackals to accompany him to a certain place. He went to the king of crows, and begged that his corvine majesty would be pleased to allow one thousand of his black subjects to accompany him on a certain day to a certain place. He preferred a similar petition to the king of paddy-birds. At last the great day arrived. The weaver arrayed himself in the clothes which he had borrowed from the village washermen. The jackal made his appearance, accompanied by a train of a thousand jackals, a thousand crows, and a thousand paddy-birds. The nuptial procession started on their journey, and towards sundown arrived within two miles of the king's palace. There the jackal told his friends, the thousand jackals, to set up a loud howl; at his bidding the thousand crows cawed their loudest; while the hoarse screechings of the thousand paddy-birds furnished a suitable accompaniment. The effect may be imagined. They all together made a noise the like of which had never been heard since the world began. While this unearthly noise was going on, the jackal himself hastened to the palace, and asked the king whether he thought he would be able to accommodate the wedding-party, which was about two miles distant, and whose noise was at that moment sounding in his ears. The king said "Impossible, Sivalu; from the sound of the procession I infer there must be at least one hundred thousand souls. How is it possible to accommodate so many guests? Please, so arrange that the bridegroom only will come to my house." "Very well," said the jackal; "I told you at the beginning that you would not be able to accommodate all the attendants of my august master. I'll do as you wish. My master will alone come in undress. Send a horse for the purpose." The jackal, accompanied by a horse and groom, came to the place where his friend the weaver was, thanked the thousand jackals, the thousand crows and the thousand paddy-birds, for their valuable services, and told them all to go away, while he himself, and the weaver on horseback, wended their way to the king's palace. The bridal party, waiting in the palace, were greatly disappointed at the personal appearance of the weaver; but the jackal told them that his master had purposely put on a mean dress, as his would-be father-in-law declared himself unable to accommodate the bride groom and his attendants coming in state. The royal priests now began the interesting ceremony, and the nuptial knot was tied for ever. The bridegroom seldom opened his lips, agreeably to the instructions of the jackal, who was afraid lest his speech should betray him. At night when he was lying in bed he began to count the beams and rafters of the room, and said audibly, "This beam will make a first-rate loom, that other a capital beam, and that yonder an excellent sley." The princess, his bride, was not a little astonished. She began to think in her mind, "Is the man, to whom they have tied me, a king or a weaver? I am afraid he is the latter; otherwise why should he be talking of weaver's loom, beam, and sley? Ah, me! Is this what the fates kept in store for me?" In the morning the princess related to the queen-mother the weaver's soliloquy. The king and queen, not a little surprised at this recital, took the jackal to task about it. The ready-witted jackal at once said, "Your Majesty need not be surprised at my august master's soliloquy. His palace is surrounded by a population of seven hundred families of the best weavers in the world, to whom he has given rent-free lands, and whose welfare he continually seeks. It must have been in one of his philanthropic moods that he uttered the soliloquy which has taken your Majesty by surprise." The jackal, however, now felt that it was high time for himself and the weaver to decamp with the princess, since the proverbial simplicity of his friend of the loom might any moment involve him in danger. The jackal therefore represented to the king, that weighty affairs of state would not permit his august master to spend another day in the palace; that he should start for his kingdom that very day with his bride; and his master was resolved to travel incognito on foot, only the princess, now the queen, should leave the city in a palki. After a great deal of yea and nay, the king and queen at last consented to the proposal. The party came to the outskirts of the weaver's village. The palki hearers were sent away; and the princess, who asked where her husband's palace was, was made to walk on foot. The weaver's hut was soon reached, and the jackal, addressing the princess, said, "This, madam, is your husband's palace." The princess began to beat her forehead with the palms of her hands in sheer despair. "Ah, me! Is this the husband whom Prajapati [the god who presides over marriages] intended for me? Death would have been a thousand times better." As there was nothing for it, the princess soon got reconciled to her fate. She, however, determined to make her husband rich, especially as she knew the secret of becoming rich. One day she told her husband to get for her a pice-worth of flour. She put a little water in the flour, and smeared her body with the paste. When the paste dried on her body, she began wiping the paste with her fingers; and as the paste fell in small balls from her body, it got turned into gold. She repeated this process every day for some time, and thus got an immense quantity of gold. She soon became mistress of more gold than is to be found in the coffers of any king. With this gold she employed a whole army of masons, carpenters and architects, who in no time built one of the finest palaces in the world. Seven hundred families of weavers were sought for and settled round about the palace. After this she wrote a letter to her father to say that she was sorry he had not favored her with a visit since the day of her marriage, and that she would be delighted if he now came to see her and her husband. The king agreed to come, and a day was fixed. The princess made great preparations against the day of her father's arrival. Hospitals were established in several parts of the town for diseased, sick, and infirm animals. The beasts in thousands were made to chew betel-leaves on the wayside. The streets were covered with Cashmere shawls for her father and his attendants to walk on. There was no end of the display of wealth and grandeur. The king and queen arrived in state, and were infinitely delighted at the apparently bound less riches of their son-in-law. The jackal now appeared on the scene, and saluting the king and queen, said -- "Did I not tell you?" Here my story endeth, The Natiya-thorn withereth, etc. Source (books.google.com): Lal Behari Day, Folk-Tales of Bengal (London: Macmillan and Company, 1883), no. 18, pp. 226-35 . Source (Internet Archive): Lal Behari Day, Folk-Tales of Bengal (London: Macmillan and Company, 1883), no. 18, pp. 226-35 . Return to the table of contents . The Weaver India There was a weaver who was unmarried, and all that he could earn in a day, in exchange for the cloth he wove, only amounted to two pounds of either rice or other grain. One day he cooked some kitcherie [a dish made of rice and lentils cooked together with clarified butter or ghee, and then boiled], and, placing it in a plate, left it to get cool, and went out to sell his cloth. While he was away a jackal came and ate up the kitcherie; and on his return he found the jackal, so he tied it up and beat it severely. Then he cooked some bread, which he ate, and again beat the jackal. The poor creature thought: "Now my life will go, if this man keeps on beating me in this way." When the man next went out to dispose of his cloth, the jackal, tied up by itself, felt very lonely, especially as it could hear its companions howling in the jungles; so it began to howl too, and, hearing it, one of its friends came to see where it was, and finding it, said: "Brother, what are you doing here?" The poor jackal, bruised all over and swollen with the beating it had received, replied: "Friend, a man has caught me, and takes the greatest care of me; see how fat I have grown with eating all the hulwa-poories [another native dainty made with sugar, etc.] he gives me. If you will release me, I will tie you here, and you will get a share of the good things." So the two exchanged places, and the first jackal ran back gladly into the jungles. On the return of the weaver he, as usual, began to beat the poor creature, who then spoke, and said: "Why are you beating me?" The weaver, surprised, replied: "I have never heard this jackal speak before!" "That one has gone, and he tied me here in his place, and told me I should get all sorts of good things to eat; but if you will release me, I will arrange a marriage with a king's daughter for you." "What!" said the man, "I am only a poor weaver, and can you really get me married to a king's daughter?" "Yes," returned the jackal. So the weaver released it, and turning itself into a Brahmin, it crossed the river and presented itself at the court of a certain rajah, to whom it said: "O king, I have found a rich weaver-caste rajah, who wishes your daughter's hand in marriage." The rajah, much pleased, consented, and the Brahmin, on getting outside the palace, once more turned into a jackal, and returned to the weaver. "Follow me," said he, "and I will take you to the king's daughter." So the weaver took up his blanket, which was all he possessed. On their way they met a dhobie, or washerman, carrying his bundle of clothes. The jackal gave him a gold mohur, and told him to spread all the clean clothes he possessed upon the trees around. Further on they met a cotton-beater, or man who, in the East, beats cotton and prepares it to make up into pillows and quilts; to him they also gave a gold mohur, and asked in return for several large balls of cotton. These they carried on a large plate to the river; and the jackal, leaving the weaver, returned as a Brahmin to the rajah, who had seen the dhobie's clothes in the distance, and thought they were tents pitched by his daughter's future husband. The jackal had told the weaver to watch, and, as soon as he saw him enter the Palace, he was to take large lumps of cotton and throw them one by one into the river, so that they might be seen floating down the stream. "The bridegroom," explained the Brahmin, " has met with a terrible accident; all his possessions and his followers are lost in the river, and only he and I remain, dressed in the clothes in which we stand." Then the rajah ordered his musicians and followers to come out, and go with horses in great pomp to bring the weaver, who was forthwith married to the princess. After the marriage the Brahmin said: "This son-in-law of yours has lost all he had; what is the use of his returning to his country? Let him stay here with you." To this the rajah, who loved his daughter, gladly consented, and gave them a fine house and grounds. Now the weaver, who was not accustomed to good society, or to living with those above his station in life, made a salaam , or obeisance, such as a poor man is wont to do, to his wife every morning, and she began to suspect that he had deceived her, and was not a real rajah. So she asked him one day to tell her the whole truth about himself, and he did so. "Well," said she, "you have owned it to me, but do not let my father or mother know; for now that I am married to you, things cannot be altered, and it is better that they should remain in ignorance; but whatever my father may ask you to do, promise me that you will do it, always answering 'Yes, I will,' to anything he may suggest." To this the weaver agreed; and shortly afterwards the rajah called him and enquired if he was willing to help him, and, as promised, the man replied, "Yes, I will." Then he went to his wife and told her, and she commended him. Next day the king told him that two brothers, by name "Darya" and " Barjo," threatened to fight and take his kingdom from him, and he desired his son-in-law to go to the stables and select a horse on which to ride on the morrow to battle. In the stables was a horse that was standing on three legs. "This," thought the weaver, "will just suit me, for it seems lame and has only three legs to go on, and making this an excuse, I'll keep behind all the rest, and out of danger." Now this horse used to eat a quarter of a pound of opium daily, and could fly through the air, so that when the rajah heard of the selection he was very delighted, and said to himself: "What a clever man this is, that he is able to discover which is the best horse!" The day following he had the horse brought round, and mounted it in fear and trembling, having himself securely tied on lest he should fall off, while, to weight himself equally, he fastened a small millstone on either side. As soon as the groom released the horse, it flew up into the air, then down again, and then up through the branches of trees, which broke off and clung to the weaver's arms and body, so that he presented a strange spectacle. He was terrified, and kept on crying out: "O Darya! Barjo! for your sakes have I come to my death." The two princes, Darya and Barjo, seeing this strange horse flying through the air, and hearing their names coming from a queer object all covered with branches of trees, were very much alarmed, and said: "If more come like this, we shall indeed be lost; one is enough for us." So they wrote to the king, and said: "We have seen your warrior; stay in your country, and we will stay in ours. We cannot fight." And they sent him a peace-offering. Source (books.google.com): Alice Elizabeth Dracott, Simla Village Tales; or, Folk Tales from the Himalayas (London: John Murray, 1906), pp. 125-31 . Source (Internet Archive): Alice Elizabeth Dracott, Simla Village Tales; or, Folk Tales from the Himalayas (London: John Murray, 1906), pp. 125-31 . Return to the table of contents . The Clever Jackal Kashmir It was ploughing-time. A farmer started early for his fields, bidding his wife follow him soon with a pot of food. When the rice was ready the woman carried some to her husband, and put it down in the field at a little distance from him, saying, "Here is your food. I cannot stay now." In a little while, when the farmer went to look for his food, he found the pot empty. He was very angry at this, and when he got home in the evening sharply reproved his wife for playing tricks with him. She, of course, thought he was telling a lie, and felt very much aggrieved. On the following morning, before going out, he repeated his request that she would bring him some food, and not allow him to starve like a dog. That day she carried a double quantity of rice to him in a large earthen pot, and put it down in the field again, saying, "Look now, here is your dinner. Don't say I did not bring it. I cannot stay, as there is nobody left to look after the house." Thus saying, she went. In a little while a jackal came -- the same as came on the previous day and ate up the man's food -- and put its head into the pot. So eager was the beast to get at the rice, that it forced its head into the narrow neck of the pot, and could not take it out again. It was in a dreadful state. It ran about shaking its head and beating the pot against the ground to try and break it. At last the farmer saw what was the matter, and came running up with a knife, and exclaiming, "You thief! You stole my dinner, did you?" "Oh, let me go!" cried the jackal. "Get me out of this pot and I will give you anything you may wish for." "Very well," said the farmer, and at once smashed the pot and extricated the animal. "Thank you," said the jackal. "You shall not regret today's adventure." On this the beast wished the man "Good-day," and started for a king's palace some miles distant. "O king," it said on entering the royal chamber, "give me permission and I will arrange for your daughter's marriage. Be not angry with me. I should not have presumed to speak to your majesty on this matter if I had not lately seen one who is worthy in every way of the hand of the princess." "You can bring the man here," replied the king, "and I will see him." Then the jackal immediately started back for the farmer's house, and entering, asked him to prepare himself quickly for a visit to the king of the neighboring country, who was desirous of seeing him with a view of making him his son-in-law. At first the farmer demurred, on account of his ignorance and poverty. How would he know what to say to a king? How would he know how to behave in the company of so high a personage? And whence could he obtain suitable clothes for the visit But eventually the jackal prevailed on him to accept the king's invitation, and promised to help him in every possible way. So the jackal and the farmer started. When they arrived at the king's palace the jackal went in search of His Majesty, while the farmer squatted on the floor of the entrance-hall by the palace, where the shoes were kept, and waited. "I have brought the man of whom I spoke to your majesty the other day," said the jackal, going up to the king. "He has come in ordinary clothes and without any retinue or show, as he thought your majesty would be inconvenienced by having to arrange accommodation for so many people. Your majesty must not be offended in this thing, but the rather should see in it a proof of the man's good sense." "Most certainly," said the king, rising up. "Lead me to him." "There he is," said the jackal. "What! That man squatting by the shoes?" exclaimed His Majesty. "Friend, why do you sit in such a place?" he asked the farmer. "It is a nice clean place, your majesty, and good enough for a poor man like me," replied the farmer." Observe the humility of the man," interposed the jackal. "You will stay in the palace this evening," said the king. "There are a few matters concerning which I wish to converse with you. Tomorrow, if convenient, I shall go and see your abode." That evening the king, the farmer, and the jackal talked much together. As will be supposed, the farmer constantly betrayed his humble position, but the clever jackal contrived to arrange matters so that the king on the whole was rather favorable to the match. But what about the morrow? The jackal had been revolving the matter over in its mind during the night. As soon as the king and the farmer started it asked for permission to go on ahead. It ran as fast as it could to the farmer's house and set it on fire, and when they drew near, went forth to meet them, crying, "O king, come not any farther, I beseech you. The man's house and property are destroyed. Some enemy's hand must have done this. Both of you turn back, I pray you." So the poor simple king turned back. In due time he married his daughter to the ignorant farmer. Source (books.google.com): J. Hinton Knowles Folk-Tales of Kashmir (London: Trübner, and Company, 1888), pp. 186-88 . Source (Internet Archive): J. Hinton Knowles, Folk-Tales of Kashmir (London: Trübner, and Company, 1888), pp. 186-88 . Return to the table of contents . The Monkey and Juan Pusong Tambi-Tambi Philippines Tiring-tirang was a barrio in the town of Tang-Tang, situated at the foot of a hill which was called "La Campana" because of its shape. Around the hill, about a mile from the barrio, flowed the Malogo River, in which the people of the town used to bathe. It so happened that one time an epidemic broke out in the community, killing off all the inhabitants except one couple. This couple had an only son named Juan Pusong Tambi-Tambi. When Juan had reached his twelfth year, his father died. Consequently the boy had to go to work to earn money for the support of himself and his mother. At first Juan followed the occupation of his father, that of fisherman; but, seeing that he made little money from this, he decided to become a farmer. His mother had now reached the age of seventy (!), and was often sick. Juan frequently had to neglect his farm in order to take care of her. One day Juan went to Pit-Pit to buy medicine for his mother. On his way to the town he saw a flock of crows eating up his corn. He paid no attention to the birds; but on his way back, when he saw these same birds still eating his corn, he became angry. He picked up a stone about the size of his fist, and crept into a bush near by. He had hardly hidden himself when the birds heard a rustling, and began to fly off. Juan jumped up, and hurled his stone with such accuracy and force that one of the crows fell dead to the ground. He tied the dead crow to a bamboo pole, and planted it in the middle of his corn field. No sooner was he out of sight than the crows flew back to the field again; but when they saw their dead companion, they flew off, and never troubled Juan again. For six months Juan had no trouble from birds. He did not know, however, that not far from his field there was a monkey ( chongo ) living in a large tree. This monkey used to come to his field every day and steal two or three ears of corn. One day, as Juan was walking across his field, he saw many dead cornstalks. He said to himself, "I wonder who it is that comes here and steals my corn! I am no longer troubled by birds; and yet I find here many husks." He went home and made an image of a crooked old man like himself. This he covered with sticky wax. He placed it in the middle of the field. The next morning, when the sun was shining very brightly, the monkey felt hungry, so he ran towards the field to steal some corn to eat. There he saw the statue. Thinking that it was Juan, he decided to ask permission before he took any corn. "Good-morning, Juan!" said the monkey in a courteous tone; but the image made no reply. "You are too proud to bend your neck, Juan," continued the monkey. "I have only come to ask you for three or four ears of corn. I have not eaten since yesterday, you know; and if you deny me this request, I shall die before morning." The waxen statue still stood motionless. "Do you hear me, Juan?" said the monkey impatiently. Still the statue made no reply. "Since you are too proud to answer me, I will soon give you some presents. Look out!" he cried, and with his right paw he slapped the statue which he thought was Juan; but his paw stuck to the wax, and he could not get free. "Let my hand loose!" the monkey shouted, "or you will get another present." Then he slapped the statue with his left paw, and, as before, stuck fast. "You are foolish, Juan. If you do not let me go this very moment, I'll kick you." He did so, first with one foot, and then with the other. At last he could no longer move, and he began to curse the statue. Juan, who had been hiding in a bush near by, now presented himself, and said to the monkey, "Now I have caught you, you thief!" He would have killed the monkey at once, had not the monkey begged for mercy, and promised that he would at some future time repay him for his kindness if he would only spare his life. So Juan set the monkey free. It was now the month of April. The monkey, impatient to fulfil his word to Juan, went one day to the field, and there he found Juan hard at work. "Good-morning, Master Juan!" he cried. "I see that you are busy." "Busy indeed!" replied Juan. "Master Juan, do you want to marry the king's daughter? If you do, I'll arrange everything for you," said the monkey. Juan replied, "Yes," little thinking that what the monkey promised could be true. The monkey scampered off towards the market. When he entered the market, he saw a boy counting his money. The monkey pretended to be looking in the other direction, but walked towards the boy. When he saw that the money was fairly within his reach, he seized it and ran back to Juan. After telling his master what he had done, the monkey went to the king's palace, and said, "Sir, my master, Juan, wants to borrow your ganta , for he desires to measure his money." The king gave him the ganta . In three days the monkey appeared at the palace again to return the measure, in the bottom of which he stuck three centavos. "My master, Juan, thanks you for your kindness," said the monkey. The monkey was about to leave the room when the king perceived the three centavos sticking to the bottom of the measure. "Here, monkey, here are your three cents!" said the king. "Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh!" answered the monkey, laughing, "my master cares not for three cents. He has too much money. He is very, very rich." The king was much surprised to hear that there was a man richer than himself. Two weeks later the monkey returned to the palace again, and said, "Pray, king, my master, Juan, desires to borrow your ganta again. He wants to finish measuring his money." The king was filled with curiosity; and he said, "I'll let you borrow the ganta , monkey, but you must tell me first who is this Juan whom you call your master." "My master, Juan," replied the monkey, "is the richest man in the world." Before giving the measure to the monkey, the king went to his room and stuck four pieces of gold on the four corners of the ganta. "I'll find out who is the richer, Juan or I," he said to himself. The monkey took the measure, and left the hall with a polite bow. As he was walking towards Juan's farm, the monkey noticed the four pieces of gold sticking to the corners of the ganta . He knew that they had been artfully placed there by the king himself. Two weeks later he went back to the palace to return the measure, not forgetting to stick a gold dollar on each corner. "Good-afternoon, king!" said he, "my master, Juan, returns you your ganta with a thousand thanks." "Very well," replied the king; "but tell me all about this master of yours who measures his money. I am a king; still I only count my money." The monkey remained silent. Not receiving a prompt reply, the king turned to Cabal, one of his lords, and said in a whisper, "Do you know who this Juan is who measures his money?" "I have not heard of him," replied the lord, "except from this monkey and yourself." The king then turned to the monkey, and said, "Monkey, if you don't tell me who your master is, where he lives, and all about him, I'll hang you." Doubtless the king was jealous of Juan because of his great wealth. Fearing that he would lose his life, the monkey said to the king, "My master, Juan, the richest and best man in the world, lives in the town of XYZ. He goes to church every morning wearing his striped ( tambi-tambi ) clothes. This is why he is known among his people as Juan Pusong Tambi-Tambi. If you will just look out of your window tomorrow morning, you will see him pass by your garden." The king's anger was appeased by this explanation. Early the next morning he was at his window, anxious to get a glimpse of Juan. He had not been there long when his attention was attracted by the appearance of a crooked man dressed in striped clothes. "This must be the man whom the monkey described to me yesterday," he said to himself. Soon his servant entered the room, and said, "The monkey desires to see you." The king left the window and went to where the monkey was waiting for him. As soon as the monkey saw the king, he bowed politely, and said, "My master, Juan, sends me to tell you frankly that he loves your daughter, and that, if it pleases you, he will marry her." At first the king was angry to hear these words; but, being very desirous to get more money, he at last consented without even asking his daughter. "If my master does not call on you today, he will surely come tomorrow." So saying, the monkey left the palace, and ran about town, trying to think of some way he might escape the great danger he was in. It so happened that an old man who was carrying a bundle of clothes to his son in the mountains passed along the same road where the monkey was. The sun was very hot, so the old man decided to rest under a leafy tree. No sooner was he seated there than the cunning monkey climbed the tree, and shook the branches with such force that twigs and fruits fell all around the old man. Panic-stricken, he ran away as fast as his feet would carry him, leaving everything behind him. When the man was out of sight, the monkey climbed down the tree, picked up the bundle of clothes, and carried it to Juan. "Tomorrow, Juan," said the monkey, "you will marry the princess. I'll arrange everything for you if you will only follow my advice." Half doubting and half believing, Juan asked the monkey if he really meant what he said. "What do you think of me?" asked the monkey. Without waiting for a reply from Juan, the monkey left the hut, and ran towards the home of the Burincantadas who lived on the summit of the hill. As soon as he entered the gate, he began to scoop up the ground as fast as he could. The Burincantadas, who at that very moment were looking out of the window, saw the monkey. They rushed downstairs, and, half frightened, said to him, "What are you trying to do?" "Why, our king has been defeated in the war. The enemies have already taken possession of the crown. The princess is dead, and it is said that everybody will be killed before to morrow noon," replied the monkey, his teeth chattering. "I am resolved to hide myself under the ground to save my life." The three Burincantadas seized him by the arm, and said, "For mercy's sake, have pity on us! Tell us where we can hide!" They were already trembling with fear. "Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh! let me loose! The enemy are coming!" On hearing these words, the Burincantadas all shouted at once, "Tell us where to hide!" "If you will not let me scoop out a hole here, I'll jump into the well," said the monkey in a hoarse voice. As soon as the Burincantadas heard the word "well," they all ran as fast as they could, following the monkey. "Let me jump first!" said the monkey. "No, let us jump first!" shouted the Burincantadas; and so they did. The monkey made a motion as if he were going to follow; but, instead, he lifted up the biggest stone he could find and threw it down the well. "They are dead," he said to himself, laughing. "Ah, I have caught you! Ha, ha!" The Burincantadas now being dead, the monkey was at leisure to decide what to do next. He entered their palace, and there he found everything magnificent. "This is the very place where my master shall live!" He opened the first room, but there he found nothing but bones. He closed the door and opened the second, where he found many prisoners who were waiting to be eaten. He set them all free, and told them to clean up the palace at once. The prisoners set to work, not forgetting to thank the monkey for his kindness. Before he left the palace, he addressed the crowd as follows: "My brothers and sisters, if any one comes and asks you who your master is, tell him that he is Don Juan Pusong Tambi-Tambi." Then he left the crowd of people busy cleaning the palace, and went to the farm, where he found thousands of horses, cows, and sheep. "My master is indeed rich," he said to himself. He called the shepherd who was lying under the tree, and said to him, "Tell your other companions that, if any one comes and asks whose animals these are, they must answer that they all belong to Don Juan Pusong. Don Juan is your master now." After seeing that everything was in order, the monkey hastened to his master, who was still ploughing, and said, "Throw away your plough. Let's go to the king's palace, for tonight you will be married to the princess Doña Elena." Night came. The palace was splendidly adorned. The princess was sitting by her father, when Don Juan, dressed in his striped clothes and accompanied by the monkey, entered the gate of the palace. Soon the priest came, and the princess was called to the reception-hall. When she saw her bridegroom, she ran away in despair, and cried to her father, "Father, how dare you accept as my husband such a base, dirty, crooked man! Look at him! Why, he is the meanest of the mean." But the king replied, "He is rich. If you don't marry him, I'll punish you very severely." The princess had to obey her father; but, before giving her hand to Juan Pusong, she said, "O God! let me die." When the marriage ceremony was over, the king called the monkey, and asked, "Where is the couple going to live?" "In Don Juan's palace," was the reply of the monkey. The king immediately ordered carriages to be gotten ready. Then they started on their journey. Four hours passed, and still no palace was to be seen. The king became impatient, and said to the monkey, "Monkey, if what you have said to me is not true, your head shall answer for your lie." Hardly had he said these words when he beheld before him a number of men watching a herd of cattle. "I wonder who owns these, monkey!" said the king. The monkey made some signs, and soon three shepherds came running up to them. "Good-evening, king!" they said. "Good-evening!" replied the king. "Whose cattle are these?" "They are all owned by Don Juan Pusong," said the shepherds. The king nodded, and said to himself, "He is truly rich." The palace was now in sight. The king could hardly express his joy on seeing such a magnificent building. "Why, it is not a palace: it is heaven itself," he said. They were now upstairs. The king, on seeing still more beauties, said, "I confess, I am not the richest man on earth." Soon he died of joy, and his body was placed in a golden coffin and buried in the church. The couple inherited his dominion; but Queen Elena could not endure her ugly husband, and two weeks later she died broken-hearted. So Juan was left as sole ruler of two kingdoms. The monkey became his chief minister. This story shows that a compassionate man oftentimes gets his reward. Source (books.google.com): Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania; and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 48A, pp. 326-32 . Source (Internet Archive): Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania; and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 48A, pp. 326-32 . Return to the table of contents . Andres the Trapper Philippines Once upon a time there lived in a village a poor widow who had an only son named Andres. They lived in a small hut situated near the Patacbo forest. When Andres was between twelve and thirteen years old, his mother died. From now on he lived alone in his mean little hut, where he had to cook his own food and wash his clothes. One morning some boys invited Andres to go to the woods with them to trap. When they got to the forest, his companions set their traps in the places where the wild chickens used to feed. Then they went home. In the afternoon they returned to the woods, where they found that each trap had caught a wild cock. Now Andres became envious of his companions: so when he reached home, he took his knife and made two traps of his own. After he had finished them, he ran to the forest and set them. Early the next morning he went to the woods to see if he had caught anything. There he found two wild cocks snared. He took them home, sold one, and ate the other for his dinner. When he had finished eating, he made many traps, which he set up that afternoon. From now on he made his living by trapping, often catching as many as fifteen birds in a day. From the money he earned he was able to feed himself and buy clothes. One day, after Andres had been a trapper for many years, he went to the forest, as usual, to see what he had caught. He found that his traps had been moved, and that in one of them was a big monkey caught by the leg. As Andres was about to kill the monkey with a big stick which he picked up, the animal said to him, "My dear Andres, don't harm me! and I will be your helper by and by." Andres was much astonished to hear the monkey talk. He was moved to pity, and set the animal free. When he started toward his home, the monkey followed him. From now on they lived together. Soon the monkey learned how to sell wild chickens in the market. Now, in that town there lived a very rich man by the name of Toribio, who had a daughter named Aning. The people considered Aning the most beautiful lady in the province. However, none of the young men of the town courted Aning, for they felt unworthy and ashamed to woo the richest and most beautiful girl. One fine day the monkey went to town and sold wild chickens, as usual. On his way home he stopped at Don Toribio's house. Don Toribio asked what he wanted, and the monkey said that his master had sent him to borrow their money-measure. "Who is your master?" said Don Toribio. "Don't you know? Don Andres, a very rich, handsome young gentleman who lives in the valley of Obong," said the monkey. Don Toribio at once lent the ganta -measure to the monkey, who thanked him and hurried home. Before he returned it to the owner the next morning, he put a peso, a fifty-centavo piece, a peseta, and a media-peseta in the cracks of the measure. When the monkey handed the ganta back to Don Toribio, the man said, "Why do you return it? Has your master finished measuring his money?" "No, sir!" said the monkey, "we have not finished; but this box is too small, and it takes us too long to measure with it." "Well," said Don Toribio, "we have a bigger one than that; do you want to borrow it?" "Yes, I do, if you will let me keep it till tomorrow," said the monkey. Don Toribio then brought a cavan , which equals about twenty-five gantas. When the monkey reached home carrying the large measure, Andres said to him, "Where did you get that box?" The monkey said that it had been lent to him by the richest man in the town. "What did you tell the man that you were going to do with it?" said Andres. " I told him that you wanted to count your money," said the monkey. "Ah, me!" said Andres, "what money are you going to count? Don't you know that we are very poor?" "Let me manage things, Andres," said the monkey, "and I promise you that you shall marry the beautiful daughter of the rich man." The following day Andres caught many wild chickens. When the monkey had sold them all in the market, he went back to their hut, and took the cavan which he had borrowed. Before returning it to Don Toribio, he stuck money in the cracks, as he had done to the first measure. "Good-morning, Don Toribio!" said the monkey. Don Toribio was sitting in a chair by the door of his house. "Good-morning, monkey! How do you do?" replied the rich man. "Have you come to return the box?" "Yes, sir!" said the monkey. "We have finished. My master sends his thanks to you." When Don Toribio took the box and saw the money inside, he told the monkey about it; but the monkey said, "Never mind! we have plenty more in our house." "I am the richest man in town, yet I cannot throw money away like the master of this fellow," said Don Toribio to himself. "Perhaps he is even richer than I am." When the monkey was about to take his leave, the rich man told him to tell his master to come there on the third day. The monkey said that he would, and thanked Don Toribio for the invitation. On his way home, the monkey stopped at the market to buy a pair of shoes, some ready-made clothes, and a hat for Andres. He took these things home to his master, and in three days had taught Andres how to walk easily with shoes on, how to speak elegantly, how to eat with a spoon and fork and knife, and how to tell Don Toribio that he wanted to marry his daughter. When the time came, Andres and the monkey set out for the town. They were welcomed by Don Toribio and his daughter Aning. After a short talk, Andres spoke of his purpose in coming there. He said that he wanted to marry Don Toribio's daughter. Don Toribio gladly accepted the offer, and said that the wedding would be held the next morning. Hasty preparations were made for the ceremony. In the morning a priest came, and Andres and Aning were married. Many guests were present, and everybody had a good time. A few years later Don Toribio died, and Andres inherited all his wealth. He then became a very rich man. Source (books.google.com): Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania; and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 48B, pp. 332-35 . Source (Internet Archive): Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania; and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 48B, pp. 332-35 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 24, 2016. Rain or Sunshine? Fables from Aesop and Turkey Rain or Sunshine? Fables from Aesop and Turkey translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2008 Contents The Father and His Two Daughters (Aesop). Nasreddin Hodja and His Two Daughters (Turkey). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Father and His Two Daughters Aesop A man who had two daughters married one to a gardener, the other to a potter. After awhile he paid a visit to the gardener's, and asked his daughter how she was and how it fared with her. "Excellently well," said she; "we have everything that we want; I have but one prayer, that we may have a heavy storm of rain to water our plants." Off he set to the potter's, and asked his other daughter how matters went with her. "There is not a thing we want," she replied; "and I only hope this fine weather and hot sun may continue, to bake our tiles." "Alack," said the father, "if you wish for fine weather, and your sister for rain, which am I to pray for myself?" Source: Thomas James, Æsop's Fables: A New Version Chiefly from Original Sources (London: John Murray, 1848), no. 138, p. 148 . Return to the table of contents . Nasreddin Hodja and His Two Daughters Turkey The Hodja had two daughters. Once they both came to visit him, and he asked them, "What are you living from?" The one said, "My husband is a farmer. He planted a lot of grain, so if it rains he will earn so much that he can buy me some new clothes." The other one said, "My husband is a potter. He has made a lot of pots, so if it does not rain, he will earn so much that he can buy me some new clothes." To this the Hodja said, "One of you will get what she wants; but I do not know which one it will be." Source: Albert Wesselski, Der Hodscha Nasreddin , vol. 1 (Weimar: Alexander Duncker Verlag, 1911), no. 51, p. 26 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. For another formulation of this tale see George Borrow, The Turkish Jester; or, The Pleasantries of Cogia Nasr Eddin Effendi (Ipswich: W. Webber, 1884), pp. 17-18 . Link to additional stories about Nasreddin Hodja, the Turkish Trickster . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 15, 2008. The Rabbit Herd: Folktales of Type 570 The Rabbit Herd Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 570 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2014-2017 Contents The Rabbit Herd (Europe). The Hare Herder (Germany). The Green Fig (Germany). The King's Hares (Norway). Jesper the Hare Herder (Denmark). The Flute (Poland). The Magic Fife (Ukraine / Russia). Bibliography of additional tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Rabbit Herd Europe Once upon a time there was a king who had a daughter that would not laugh. His jugglers, clowns, and jesters performed their utmost for her, but she could not, or would not, even break a smile. Finally the king proclaimed that whatever man -- rich or poor, young or old, strong or frail -- could break his daughter's spell should take her to wife, and receive half the kingdom as well. Men and boys came from every direction to try their luck but no one was successful, until.... The news finally reached a remote corner of the kingdom where a poor peasant lived with his three sons. The youngest -- we'll call him Hans (although some say that his name was Jack, or Ivan, or Juan) -- decided that he too would try his luck at winning the hand of the princess. He was a droll sort -- some called him silly, others just plain stupid -- whose capers often brought the villagers to laughter. Yes, he would give it a try. And he set forth, pursued by the jeers of his older and wiser brothers, on the path that led to the king's palace. At midday he was looking for a shady spot where he could rest and eat the crust of bread he had brought, when suddenly he came upon an old man by the side of the road. "Would you share your bread with a weary traveler?" asked the stranger. "Half a dry crust is quite as good as a whole one," replied Hans, and broke off a piece for the old man. "Bless you, my son," responded the stranger. "I cannot reward you with gold, but this whistle will lead you to that, and more." So saying, he offered Hans a tiny silver flute. Hans put the flute to his lips, and it began to play, first a marching tune, then a cheerful air, and then a pensive hymn. Before he knew it, Hans had arrived at the palace, and the guards, charmed by his tuneful music, let him pass. His heart leapt for joy, and the flute broke into a lusty jig. The princess, hearing the tune, opened her window and looked out. She nodded her head to the beat, then gave a cautious grin, and then an open smile. She chuckled softly to herself, then broke into a happy laugh. The king, hearing her joyful laughter, was beside himself with glee, until -- that is -- until he saw the lad who was playing the flute. Hans, you see, did have the look of a peasant and of a simpleton, and the king, in spite of his promise, was hoping for a finer man. "That is all well and good," said the king to Hans, "but before you can receive the princess, there is yet another task that you must fulfill." He then had one hundred wild rabbits set loose in a nearby forest. "Keep these animals together in a herd," said the king, and in three days the princess and half the kingdom shall be yours. But if you lose a single rabbit, you shall forfeit everything. Even as they spoke the rabbits ran to the four winds, but Hans did not despair. He blew a few notes into the silver flute, and as if by magic, the hundred rabbits assembled at his feet. Reassured, he made himself comfortable in the shade of a large tree, and waited for the three days to pass. The king, seeing how easily Hans kept the herd together was filled with worry and anger. No other solution presented itself, so finally he sent his daughter into the woods, telling her to do whatever was necessary to get a rabbit away from the peasant herdsman. The princess presented herself to Hans, and asked him ever so politely if she might not purchase one of his rabbits. His answer made her blush. "You don't mean that I would have to ...," she said, and didn't know whether to pout or to smile. No, he would accept no other offer, said Hans. "Take it, or leave it." And so she took it. The princess left the woods carrying a rabbit in her basket. But well before she arrived home, Hans put the magic flute to his lips, and in an instant the rabbit jumped from her basket and raced back to the herd. The next day the king, ever more desperate, sent his own wife into the woods with instructions to bring home a rabbit, whatever the cost. When Hans named his price, the queen, like the princess before her, first pouted, then smiled, and then gave in. But she too lost her rabbit when Hans called it back with his magic flute. On the third day the king himself went into the woods to bargain for a rabbit. Hans, as before, was willing to trade, but this time the price -- no, I cannot bring myself to say more than that it involved a mare that was grazing in a nearby clearing. Red with shame, the king took his rabbit and started off for home, but again the flute called the rabbit back into the herd. The three days had passed, and the rabbit herd was still intact, but now the king found yet another task that Hans would have to fulfill before he could claim the princess and half the kingdom. "A trifle," explained the king. "Just sing three bags full." "I can manage that," said Hans. "Bring me three empty bags, and I'll sing them full to the top, but only in the presence of the finest lords and ladies of the kingdom. The king, believing that at last he would be rid of the peasant lad, assembled the lords and ladies in a great hall, then brought in Hans and three empty bags. Hans picked up a bag and started to sing: Our princess went into the woods; She thought she'd try her luck, ... "Stop!" called out the princess. That bag is full!" Hans obligingly stopped singing, tied a string around the mouth of the bag, picked up the next one, and started a new song: Our queen she went into the woods; She thought she'd try her luck, ... "Stop!" shouted the queen. That bag is full!" Hans stopped, tied this bag shut, picked up the last one, and commenced singing: Our king he went into the woods; He thought he'd try his luck, ... "Stop!" bellowed the king. The last bag is full!" With that, the king proclaimed that Hans had won the princess's hand in marriage and half the kingdom. The wedding was celebrated that same day. All the lords and ladies attended the great feast that followed. I too was invited, but I lost my way in the woods and arrived only as the last toast was being drunk. Retold. This tale, recorded with varying degrees of raciness, is found throughout Europe and the Americas. © D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Hare Herder Germany A wealthy king had a very beautiful daughter. When the time came for her to marry, all the suitors gathered in a large green meadow. She repeatedly threw a golden apple into the air, agreeing to marry the one who caught it and then fulfilled three tasks that she herself would assign. Many suitors caught the apple, including a good-looking, lively shepherd lad, but none of the others were able to fulfill the tasks. Finally it was the shepherd's turn, the last and the lowest of all the suitors. The first task was as follows: The king had a hundred hares in a stall. The shepherd was to drive them out to a pasture, herd them, then bring them all back home in the evening. When the shepherd heard this he wanted a day's time to think about whether or not he could undertake the venture. He wandered into the surrounding hills, filled with sorrow, for he was afraid that he would not succeed. Then he met a little old woman who asked him why he was sad. He said, "No one can help me." The little gray woman said, "Don't be so quick to judge. Tell me what is the matter, and perhaps I can help." So he explained the task to her. Then the woman gave him a little flute, saying, "Take good care of this. It will be of value to you." Before the lad could thank her, she disappeared. Now in good spirits, he went to the king and said, "I want to herd the hares." They were released from the stall, and by the time that the last one came out, the first one was nowhere to be seen. They had scattered in all directions. The lad went out, sat down on a green hill, and thought, "What should I do now?" Then he remembered his flute. He took it out and blew into it. Suddenly all hundred of the hares ran toward him and began to graze peacefully near him on the green hill. The king and the princess did not want him to fulfill the task because he was such a poor sucker, not high-born at all, and they thought about ways to prevent him from bringing all the hares back home. Thus the princess disguised herself and altered her appearance so that he would not know her, but he recognized her nonetheless. Seeing that all the hares were still there, she asked, "Could I buy one of the hares?" The lad said, "The hares are not for sale, but one can be earned." She asked further, "How am I to understand that?" The lad said, "If you will be my sweetheart and spend a cuddly hour with me!" She did not want to do this, but she did want one of the hares, so finally she gave in and did what the lad wanted. After he had cuddled with her and kissed her enough, he caught a hare for her and put it into her basket, and then she went away. A quarter-hour later the shepherd blew into his flute, and the hare pushed up the basket's lid, jumped out, and ran back to him. Not long afterward the old king, also disguised, came to the shepherd, but the lad recognized him as well. The king was riding a donkey with a basket hanging on either side. The king asked, "Will you sell me a hare?" "No, the hares are not for sale, but one can be earned." "How am I to understand that?" asked the king. "Just kiss the donkey beneath its tail," began the lad, "and you can have one." The king did not want to do this and offered the shepherd good money if he would sell him one, but the lad refused. Seeing that he could not buy a hare for money the king finally gave in and kissed the donkey a good one right beneath its tail. Then a hare was caught and put into one of the baskets on the donkey, and the king went on his way. He hadn't gone very far when the lad blew into his flute. The hare jumped out of the basket and ran back. Arriving home, the king said, "He is a stubborn fellow. I couldn't get a hare from him." But the king did not say what he had done. "Yes," answered the princess, "I couldn't get one either." But she too did not admit what she had done. That evening the lad returned with his hares and counted them for the king, all hundred of them were back in the stall. "You have fulfilled the first task," said the king, "and now for the second one. Pay attention! One hundred bushels of peas and one hundred bushels of lentils are lying in my loft. I had them all mixed up together. If you can separate them in one night, without light, then you will have fulfilled the second task." The lad said, "I can do it!" He was locked inside the loft, and the door was securely fastened. When everything was quiet in the castle, he blew into his flute, then many thousands of ants appeared and scurried back and forth until they had piled all the peas in one heap and all the lentils in a separate one. When the king looked in early the next morning and saw that the task had been fulfilled, he did not see any ants, for they had all gone away. Then he said, "In the coming night if you can eat your way through a large room filled with bread, so that nothing is left over, then you will have fulfilled the third task, and you can have my daughter." When it was dark the lad was put into the room filled with bread. It was so full that there was only a tiny space for him next to the door. When everything was quiet in the castle he once again blew into his flute, and so many mice appeared that it almost frightened him. At daybreak all the bread had been eaten, with not a single crumb left over. He pounded on the door and shouted, "Open up! I'm hungry!" And with that the third task had been fulfilled. However, the king said, "Just for the fun of it, tell us a sack full of lies, and then you can have my daughter." So the lad told them a terrible lie for half the day, but he could not fill the sack, so finally he related, "I have already spent a cuddly hour with the princess, my bride-to-be." Hearing these words, the princess turned fire-red. The king looked at her, and although it was supposed to be a lie, he believed it to be true, putting together in his own mind where and how it had happened. "The sack is not full yet!" he shouted. Then the lad began, "And furthermore, the king kissed ... " "It's full! It's full! Tie it shut!" shouted the king. He was ashamed and did not want anyone to know how the donkey had been honored with the king's royal mouth, for all of his courtiers were standing around in a circle. So the shepherd lad married the princess, and the wedding was celebrated for fourteen days. Such a grand time was had by all that the person who told this story wishes that he had been a guest there as well. Source: Ludwig Bechstein, "Der Hasenhüter," Deutsches Märchenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1847), pp. 128-31 . Bechstein's source: "Oral tradition from Franken [Franconia]." Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Return to the table of contents . The Green Fig Germany A king who had a beautiful daughter had an unusual idea. He proclaimed throughout the entire land that whoever could bring him a green fig at Christmas-time should receive the princess to wife. Now there was a country-dweller who had three sons. The oldest was a cobbler, the second a tailor, but the third one had no trade at all. He was nothing but a kitchen guy. One day around Christmas-time the boys' father found a tree in the woods with three green figs. He took them home, put one of them in a little basket, and said to his oldest son, "Put your best clothes on and take this fig to the king." The boy dressed up smartly and set forth. Coming into a great forest he met a little old man who asked him, "What do you have in your basket?" "What am I supposed to have in it? It's dung," said the cobbler. "So!" replied the little man. "If it is dung, then let it be dung!" The lad continued on his way, finally arriving at the royal palace. The guard asked him what he wanted. "I'm bringing a green fig to the king," he said. They let him enter. When he stepped before the king and gave him the basket, it turned out to be just as the little man had said. They gave him a good beating and sent him on his way. Back at home he said that his mission had been unsuccessful, but he did not admit what had actually happened. Then the tailor said, "You must have done something stupid. I will be more clever, if father will send me with another fig." The father gave his permission and put another fig in a basket for him. In the woods the same thing happened to the tailor. He answered the little old man even more rudely, and at the palace received an even harder beating than his brother had. Back at home he did not admit why he too had failed. Now the cinder-lad wanted to try his luck with the third fig. His brothers said, "You stupid devil, the guards will never let you in." The youth did not give his father any peace until he allowed him to try his luck with the third fig. He too met the little man in the woods. When he was asked what was in his basket, he said, honestly and politely, "A green fig that I am taking to the king." "Now, my son," said the little man, "if you have a green fig, then let it remain a green fig. And because you are such an honest fellow I want to give you something. Here is a little flute. If you play on it, everything that you want will come to you." Thanking the little man, the lad put the flute in his pocket and continued on to the royal palace. After a little difficulty he gained entrance. He gave the king the basket, and behold! The fig was still a fig. However, the princess was not happy about marrying the lad. She said, "I will marry you only under one condition. You must let the hundred hares that are in the stall graze in the woods for eight days without losing a single one." He accepted the task, and his little flute made it possible for him to bring all hundred back home on the first evening. Then the princess thought, "I have to be clever about this." The next day she disguised herself and went into the woods where he was herding. "Will you sell me a hare?" "I won't sell you one," he said, "but you can earn one from me." "How?" she asked. "The donkey that you're riding -- just kiss its behind," he said. "I'd rather do that than to marry this peasant," she thought, and did what he had demanded. He gave her a hare. When she had gone a little way he blew on his flute. The hare immediately freed itself and returned to its herder. Thus on the second evening he again returned with all hundred hares. The next day the queen came out in disguise, and the same thing happened to her. On the fourth day the king tried his luck, but he fared no better. At the end of eight days the youth thought that he had now earned the hand of the princess. But the king insisted on yet another task. "You must," he said, "bring me three sacks filled with truths." The lad asked for time to think things through, left the palace, and went out into the woods. No solution came to him, and he was about ready to give up all hope when the little man came to him and asked why he was so sad. After hearing the lad's response, the little man said, "Oh, that's nothing! Just tell them how you traded away the hares!" So the lad returned to the palace and said, "I have what you asked for." "Let us hear," said the king. "When I was herding the hares," began the youth, "on the second day the princess came to me and wanted a hare. But she didn't get one until she had kissed the donkey's b---" "Stop!" shouted the king. "One sack is full." "The next day the queen came to me and wanted ---" "Stop!" shouted the king. "The second sack is full." "On the following day," said the lad, "the ---" "Stop!" shouted the king. "The third sack is full." The king gave a wedding celebration with drinking a feasting. I too was there, but when I went into the kitchen and nibbled a bit on the roast, the cook gave me such a blow on my behind with a foam-spoon that I flew all the way from there to here. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, "Die grüne Feige," Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen , vol. 2 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), pp. 226-29 . Kuhn's source: "Deilinghofen." Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Return to the table of contents . The King's Hares Norway Once upon a time there was a man who lived in the little back room. He had given up his estate to the heir; but in addition he had three sons, who were named Peter, Paul, and Esben, who was the youngest. All three hung around at home and would not work, for they had it too easy, and they thought themselves too good for anything like work, and nothing was good enough for them. Finally Peter once heard that the king wanted a shepherd for his hares, and he told his father he would apply for the position, as it would just suit him, seeing that he wished to serve no one lower in rank than the king. His father, it is true, was of the opinion that there might be other work that would suit him better, for whoever was to herd hares would have to be quick and spry, and not a sleepy-head, and when the hares took to their heels in all directions, it was a dance of another kind than when one skipped about a room. But it was of no use. Peter insisted, and would have his own way, took his knapsack, and shambled down hill. After he had gone a while, he saw an old woman who had got her nose wedged in a tree-stump while chopping wood, and when Peter saw her jerking and pulling away, trying to get out, he burst into loud laughter. "Don't stand there and laugh in such a stupid way," said the woman, "but come and help a poor, feeble old woman. I wanted to split up some firewood, and caught my nose here, and here I have been standing for more than a hundred years, pulling and jerking, without a bit of bread to chew in all that time," said she. Then Peter had to laugh all the harder. He found it all very amusing, and said that if she had already been standing there a hundred years, then she could probably hold out for another hundred years or more. When he came to court they at once took him on as a herdsman. The place was not bad, there was good food, and good wages, and the chance of winning the princess besides; yet if no more than a single one of the king's hares were to be lost, they would cut three red strips from his back, and throw him into the snake-pit. As long as Peter was on the common or in the enclosure, he kept his hares together nicely, but later, when they reached the forest, they ran away from him across the hills. Peter ran after them with tremendous leaps, as long as he thought he could catch even a single hare, but when the very last one had vanished, his breath was gone, and he saw no more of them. Toward noon he went home, taking his time about it, and when he reached the enclosure, he looked around for them on all sides, but no hares came. And then, when he came to the castle, there stood the king with the knife in his hand. He cut three red strips from his back, and cast him into the snake-pit. After a while Paul decided to go to the castle and herd the king's hares. His father told him what he had told Peter, and more besides; but he insisted on going, and would not listen, and he fared neither better nor worse than Peter had. The old woman stood and pulled and jerked at her nose in the tree-trunk, and he laughed, found it very amusing, and let her stand there and torment herself. He was at once taken into service, but the hares all ran away across the hills, though he pursued them, and worked away like a shepherd dog in the sun, and when he came back to the castle in the evening minus his hares, there stood the king with the knife in his hand, cut three broad strips from his back, rubbed in pepper and salt, and flung him into the snake-pit. Then, after some time had passed, the youngest decided to set out to herd the king's hares, and told his father of his intention. He thought that would be just the work for him, to loaf about in forest and field, look for strawberry patches, herd a flock of hares, and lie down and sleep in the sun between times. His father thought that there was other work that would suit him better, and that even if he fared no worse than his brothers, it was quite certain that he would fare no better. Whoever herded the king's hares must not drag along as though he had lead in his soles, or like a fly on a lime-rod; and that when the hares took to their heels, it was a horse of an other color from catching flees with gloved hands; whoever wanted to escape with a whole back, would have to be more than quick and nimble, and swifter than a bird. But there was nothing he could do. Esben merely kept on saying that he wanted to go to court and serve the king, for he would not take service with any lesser master, said he; and he would see to the hares. They could not be much worse than a herd of goats or of calves. And with that he took his knapsack and strolled comfortably down the hill. After he had wandered a while, and began to feel a proper hunger, he came to the old woman who was wedged by the nose in the tree-trunk and who was pulling and jerking away, in order to get loose. "Good day, mother," said Esben, "and why are you worrying yourself so with your nose, you poor thing?" "No one has called me mother for the last hundred years," said the old woman, "but come and help me out, and give me a bite to eat; for I have not had a bit to eat in all that time. And I will do something for your sake as well," said she. Yes, no doubt she would need something to eat and drink badly, said Esben. Then he hewed the tree-trunk apart, so that she got her nose out of the cleft, sat down to eat, and shared with her. The old woman had a good appetite, and she received a good half of his provisions. When they were through she gave Esben a whistle which had the power that if he blew into one end, whatever he wished scattered was scattered to all the winds, and when he blew into the other, all came together again. And if the whistle passed from his possession, it would return as soon as he wished it back. "That is a wonderful whistle!" thought Esben. When he came to the castle, they at once took him on as a shepherd; the place was not bad, he was to have food and wages, and should he manage to herd the king's hares without losing one of them, he might possibly win the princess; but if he lost so much as a single hare, and no matter how small it might be, then they would cut three red strips from his back, and the king was so sure of his case that he went right off to whet his knife. It would be a simple matter to herd the hares, thought Esben; for when they went off they were as obedient as a herd of sheep, and so long as they were on the common, and in the enclosure, they even marched in rank and file. But when they reached the forest, and noontime came, and the sun burned down on hill and dale, they all took to their heels and ran away across the hills. "Hallo, there! So you want to run away!" called Esben, and blew into one end of his whistle, and then they scattered the more quickly to all the ends of the earth. But when he had reached an old charcoal-pit, he blew into the other end of his whistle, and before he knew it the hares were back again, and standing in rank and file so he could review them, just like a regiment of soldiers on the drill-ground. "That is a splendid whistle!" thought Esben; lay down on a sunny hillock, and fell asleep. The hares were left to their own devices, and played until evening; then he once more whistled them together, and took them along to the castle like a herd of sheep. The king and queen and the princess, too, stood in the hallway, and wondered what sort of a fellow this was, who could herd hares without losing a single one. The king reckoned and added them up, and counted with his fingers, and then added them up again; but not even the teeny-weeniest hare was missing. "He is quite a chap, he is," said the princess. The following day he again went to the forest, and herded his hares; but while he lay in all comfort beside a strawberry patch, they sent out the chambermaid from the castle to him, and she was to find out how he managed to herd the king's hares. He showed her his whistle, and blew into one end, and all the hares darted away across the hills in all directions, and then he blew into the other, and they came trotting up from all sides, and once more stood in rank and file. "That is a wonderful whistle," said the chambermaid. She would gladly give him a hundred dollars, if he cared to sell it. "Yes, it is a splendid whistle," said Esben, "and I will not sell it for money. But if you give me a hundred dollars, and a kiss with every dollar to boot, then I might let you have it." Yes, indeed, that would suit her right down to the ground; she would gladly give him two kisses with every dollar, and feel grateful, besides. So she got the whistle, but when she reached the castle, the whistle disappeared all of a sudden. Esben had wished it back again, and toward evening he came along, driving his hares like a herd of sheep. The king reckoned and counted and added, but all to no purpose, for not the least little hare was missing. When Esben was herding his hares the third day, they sent the princess to him to get away his pipe from him. She was tickled to death, and finally offered him two hundred dollars if he would let her have the whistle, and would also tell her what she had to do in order to fetch it safely home with her. "Yes, it is a very valuable whistle," said Esben, "and I will not sell it," but at last, as a favor to her, he said he would let her have it if she gave him two hundred dollars, and a kiss for every dollar to boot. But if she wanted to keep it, why, she must take good care of it, for that was her affair. "That is a very high price for a hare-whistle," said the princess, and she really shrank from kissing him, "but since we are here in the middle of the forest, where no one can see or hear us, I'll let it pass, for I positively must have the whistle," said she. And when Esben had pocketed the price agreed upon, she received the whistle, and held it tightly clutched in her hand all the way home; yet when she reached the castle, and wanted to show it, it disappeared out of her hands. On the following day the queen herself set out, and she felt quite sure that she would succeed in coaxing the whistle away from him. She was stingier, and only offered fifty dollars; but she had to raise her bid until she reached three hundred. Esben said it was a magnificent whistle, and that the price was a beggarly one; but seeing that she was the queen, he would let it pass. She was to pay him three hundred dollars, and for every dollar she was to give him a buss to boot, then she should have the whistle. And he was paid in full as agreed, since as regards the busses the queen was not so stingy. When she had the whistle in her hands, she tied it fast, and hid it well, but she fared not a whit better than either of the others; when she wanted to show the whistle it was gone, and in the evening Esben came home, driving his hares as though they were a well-trained flock of sheep. "You are stupid women!" said the king. "I suppose I will have to go to him myself if we really are to obtain this trumpery whistle. There seems to be nothing else left to do!" And the following day, when Esben was once more herding his hares, the king followed him, and found him at the same place where the women had bargained with him. They soon became good friends, and Esben showed him the whistle, and blew into one end and the other, and the king thought the whistle very pretty, and finally insisted on buying it, even though it cost him a thousand dollars. "Yes, it is a magnificent whistle," said Esben, "and I would not sell it for money. But do you see that white mare over yonder?" said he, and pointed into the forest. "Yes, she belongs to me, that is my Snow-Witch!" cried the king, for he knew her very well. "Well, if you will give me a thousand dollars, and kiss the white mare that is grazing on the moor by the big pine, to boot, then you can have my whistle !" said Esben. "Is that the only price at which you will sell!" asked the king. "Yes," said Esben. "But at least may I not put a silken handkerchief between?" asked the king. This was conceded him, and thus be obtained the whistle. He put it in the purse in his pocket, and carefully buttoned up the pocket. Yet when he reached the castle, and wanted to take it out, he was in the same case as the women, for he no longer had the whistle. And in the evening Esben came home with his herd of hares, and not the least little hare was missing. The king was angry, and furious because he had made a fool of them all, and had swindled the king's self out of the whistle into the bargain, and now he wanted to do away with Esben. The queen was of the same opinion, and said it was best to behead such a knave when he was caught in the act. Esben thought this neither fair nor just; for he had only done what he had been asked to do, and had defended himself as best he knew how. But the king said that this made no difference to him; yet if Esben could manage to fill the big brewing-cauldron with lies till it ran over, he would spare his life. The job would be neither long nor hard, said Esben, he thought he could warrant that, and he began to tell about the old woman with her nose in the tree-trunk, and in between he said, "I must make up plenty of stories, to fill the cauldron," -- and then he told of the whistle, and the chambermaid who came to him and wanted to buy the whistle for a hundred dollars, and about all the kisses that she bad had to give him to boot, up on the hillock by the forest; and then he told about the princess, how she had come and kissed him so sweetly for the whistle's sake, because no one could see or hear it in the forest -- "I must make up plenty of stories, in order to fill the cauldron," said Esben. Then he told of the queen, and of how stingy she had been with her money, and how liberal with her busses -- "for I must make up plenty of stories in order to fill the cauldron," said Esben. "But I think it must be full now!" said the queen. "O, not a sign of it!" said the king. Then Esben began to tell how the king had come to him, and about the white mare who was grazing on the moor, "and since he insisted on having the whistle he had to -- he had to -- well, with all due respect, I have to make up plenty of stories in order to fill the cauldron," said Esben. "Stop, stop! It is full, fellow!" cried the king. "Can't you see that it is running over!" The king and the queen were of the opinion that it would be best for Esben to receive the princess and half the kingdom; there did not seem anything else to do. "Yes, it was a magnificent whistle!" said Esben. Source: Klara Stroebe, The Norwegian Fairy Book , edited by Klara Stroebe, translated [from the German] by Frederick H. Martens (New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1922), no. 25, pp. 202-212 . Stroebe's source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, "Gjæte Kongens Harer," Norske Folke-Eventyr . Ny Samling. Med Bidrag fra Jøes Reiser og Optegnelser (Christiana [Oslo]: Jak. Dybwad, 1871), no. 96, pp. 190-98 . Return to the table of contents . Jesper the Hare Herder Denmark There was a king who had half a hundred hares. He also had a daughter who was exceptionally beautiful. Many suitors came to her, but none succeeded, for her father had decreed that he would give her in marriage only to the person who could tend half a hundred hares for three days in the woods, bringing them all back to the palace every evening. Anyone who attempted to do this, but failed, should have three strips of skin cut from his back, with salt and pepper sprinkled into the wound. He would then be banished from the land or be fined five hundred thalers. In spite of these harsh conditions a number of suitors tried their luck, but none of them succeeded. Now there was a man who had three sons: Povl, Per, and Jesper, and they wanted to try their luck. Povl, the oldest, presented himself first, and was accepted into service. The next morning he went out with the hares. As soon as they had closed the gate the king said, "You must take care of them," but they were hard animals to care for, because as soon as they were outside they scattered in all directions. Povl saw no more of them, although he ran hither and thither, both far and wide. He had brought a snack with him from the palace, so when he got hungry he sat down to eat. Then an old woman came up to him and said, "Won't you give me a bite from your snack, little chap?" "No, I won't. I don't have enough for myself," he said. "Just be on your way." "Yes, I'll have to be off again," she said, and went on her way." After Povl had eaten, he of course again began to think about collecting the hares. "It doesn't look good," he said to himself. "How shall I find the hares and gain control over them?" He ran, and he sought, but he could not round up the hares, and in the evening he came back to the palace empty-handed. Then three strips of skin were cut from his back; pepper and salt were sprinkled into the wound; and finally he was banished from the land, for he had no money to pay the fine. At home his parent heard the news, and they were very discouraged. Nonetheless, Per, the second brother, wanted to try his luck as well. He reported to the palace and was also accepted into service. The king told him that he was to take care of the hares as soon as the gate was opened. But the next morning when they opened the gate, whoosh, the hares scattered to all four corners of the world. And, briefly stated, it did not go one whit better with him than with his brother. The same old woman came to him and asked for food, but he also said to her, "No, be on your way. There's nothing here for you." In the end, three strips of skin were cut from his back; pepper and salt were sprinkled into the wound; and he was banished from the land. The old parents were terribly angered to learn this. But then Jesper, the youngest son, came to them and asked permission to try his luck. He felt sure that luck would be with him and that he would win the princess. Until now he had never asked anything of them. The mother, in truth, held him in the highest esteem, so he was allowed to set forth. Approaching the palace, Jesper met the king behind the barn, but he did not know that it was the king. Jesper said, "Will you go in to the king, greet him from me, and tell him that I would like to serve here as the hare herder?" Why?" asked the king. "The king has proclaimed that the one who can tend his fifty hares for three days shall have his daughter to wife, and I would like to have her. "So that's it," said the king, "but do you also know, that if you cannot tend them, three strips of flesh will be cut from your back? And you should know straightaway that I am king." And thus the situation was decided. Jesper's service was to begin the next day. The hares were driven out, and as soon as the gate was opened, whoosh, they scattered in all directions, and not a trace of them was to be seen anywhere. "This is crazy," thought Jesper. "What kind of hares are these? How is this going to end?" He wandered about in the woods with his lunch-bucket under his arm looking for the hares. Growing tired and hungry, he sat under a tree to eat his snack, when the old woman came up to him and asked if he would not give her a little piece of bread. "Yes," he said, "you may as well eat my entire snack. I probably cannot eat anyway, and here is a big piece of meat; you may have it as well." What is the matter with you?" she asked. "Oh, I have taken on myself to win the princess, and now all the hares have run away. I cannot find them, and because of that I must now be banished from the land and never again see my father and mother." "Right, but we can find some help for you, because you were so good to me. But let's eat first." When they had finished, she took the gnawed bone and gave it back to him, saying, "I have made a flute from it, and when you blow into one end you can bring all the hares to you whether they are ever so far away or whether they are than under lock and key, if they are still alive. But if you blow into the other end, they will run away again to all corners of the world so fast that no one can get hold of them. You must always keep the flute with you, and if you use it right, you probably will have the good fortune to win the princess." Then the old woman said farewell and thank you, and went her way. "Thanks also to you," said Jesper and I can believe that he was glad for this flute, thinking that his difficulties were now over. As soon as the old woman was gone he gave it a try, and everything went well enough. When he blew into one end, all fifty hares came running up to him at once, and when he blew into the other end, they fled away like the wind. When it was evening he blew hares together, and dancing around him they entered the king's gate. The king himself came out to count them, and they were all there. Then he went to the queen and talked to her about what should be done. "We cannot let it be known that such a fellow is getting our daughter." They put their heads together, and at last the king said that the next day the princess should disguise herself and go out to him and seek to buy a hare from him Thus he would be lacking one when they were counted. In the morning when the hares were let out they ran away as usual, but Jesper thought, "Let the critters run. I'll win the princess anyway." Soon afterward, while he was lost in his own thoughts, a ragged urchin girl came to him and asked if she could not buy one of his hares. Her parents, she said, had guests and nothing fresh to offer them. "No, I cannot sell you one," he said, "for they are not my own, and I need a full count in the evening when I get home." Yes, she knew that, but still she asked what he would take for one. Finally he said, "If I lose the princess it would be the worst thing that could befall me, but if you must have one, you will have to give me a kiss for it." Yes, she agreed to do this, and she gave him what he asked for. Then he blew the hares together and gave her one of them in her apron. She made her way homeward, happy about the arrangement that she had made, but just as she reached the gate, Jesper blew on his flute, and whoosh, the hare jumped from her apron and was gone. With a sad face the princess went to her mother and told her what had happened. But she said nothing at all about the kiss. So there was another discussion as to what should be done, and the king and the queen together decided that the queen should go out and give it a try. So that afternoon, disguised in old clothes, she went out into the woods to Jesper and asked if she could not buy a hare. "No," he said, that was not possible, for they were not his own. She begged and promised so well that he finally agreed to let her have one. He blew the hares together, picked up one of them by its hind legs, and said, "If you want this one you will have to lift up its tail and kiss its behind." The queen thought that this was disgusting, but she would have to go through with it rather than to let her daughter marry such a fellow and be plagued with him throughout her life. Furthermore, no one would see her do it. So she got the hare, put it in a sack, and walked toward home with the sack on her back. But just as she was entering the gate Jesper blew on his flute, and whish, the hare jumped from the sack, leaving her standing there with a very sad face. Then she went to the king and told him part of what had happened, adding, "Now you yourself must go there, and do better than we have done. It is all about our daughter's happiness. "Yes," said the king, "but let us see what happens this evening. It could be that he will not bring all of them home." But, in fact, he was tired of the game. "Am I some miserable wretch who cannot keep hold of a hare?" he thought. That evening Jesper blew his hares together, and they obediently followed him to the palace grounds. The king came down and counted them, and they were all there. Well, the third day arrived, and Jesper went out with his hares. A little later the king, disguised as a huntsman and riding a dapple-gray horse, went out as well. Meeting Jesper, he said, "You have many hares out here." "Yes, I have half a hundred," said Jesper. "Would it be possible for me to see one of them." "Yes." Jesper blew on his flute, and all the hares came running up to him.. "Could I buy one of them?" asked the huntsman. "No, that's not possible," said Jesper, "for they are not my own. They belong to the king, and I have agreed to the conditions that if I do not keep all of them, then I will be banished from the land and punished further as well." "Oh, it won't be that bad for you," said the huntsman. "I will pay you whatever you ask for." "I agree with that," said Jesper "Stand by your horse and kiss it right under its tail, and then I'll give you a hare." The king turned as red in the face as an angry turkey-cock. It was terrible that such a simple oaf would dare to say such a thing to him. But he held his temper and thought, "If no one sees it, there will be no shame in it. I'll do what he says." So he stood by the horse, lifted up its tail, and kissed the beast right in its behind. Afterward he got the hare and put it in his saddlebag, which he buckled tightly shut. "It will stay there," he thought. But just as he arrived at the gate and was about to ride through, Jesper gave his flute a little tweet and whish, the hare was gone. "He is a dangerous lad," thought the king, and he was quite abashed that he had had no better luck than the others. That evening the lad came home with the hares at his heels, jumping and dancing. It was a delight. The king came down and counted them, and of course they were all there. In the meantime the queen and the princess had spoken to the king, claiming that Jesper's task had been too easy. The king agreed with them, so after the hares had been counted, he said to Jesper, "By rights you should have my daughter, but I find that you have won her too easily. You must admit that she will bring you great happiness. Therefore it is not unjust that one of these days I should give you a new test. If you can fulfill it, you shall have my daughter. So it shall be." Of course Jesper was not pleased with this, but because he could do nothing about it, he decided that the best thing would be to accept it cheerfully. Now the new task was to be extremely difficult, so there was to be a council to judge it. The king issued an invitation to all the princes and great lords who were unmarried to a grand feast when he would give his daughter away. They came from far and near, and gathered in the palace on the appointed day. After all the guests had eaten, the king commanded that a large brewing vat be placed in the middle of the room. Then he said, "Now, princes and lords, bear witness that the one of you who can tell this vat full of truths, he shall have my daughter." Then they began to tell stories, one after the other, but nothing came from the contest. Finally the king said, "Yes, we probably should have called on Jesper the hare herder. Let him try his luck." So it was Jesper's turn. He was not very good at storytelling, he said, but that could not be helped, so he would just relate how it went the other day when he was looking after the king's hares for the first time: "A girl in ragged clothes came to me and wanted to get a hare from me. She begged long and hard, finally promising to give me a kiss for one. She got the hare, and I got the kiss. And this girl was the princess, is that not so?" They all looked at the princess, and she turned red in the face, but then stood up and said yes. "Do you want to hear more?" asked the boy. "Yes, the vat is not yet full," said the king. So he continued: "In the afternoon of the same day an old woman came to me, and she too wanted to get a hare from me. At first I said no, but she kept begging, and finally I promised her a hare on the condition that she kiss its behind, and she did it too. And that woman was the queen. " "What are you saying?" cried the king. He stood up, and they all stood up as all. "Oh, never mind, let him have our daughter," said the queen. Everyone stared at her, and the boy said, "Is it not true?" "Yes," she admitted, but did not relate the whole story. "Should I tell any more truths?" said the boy. "Yes, the vat is not yet full." So he began again: "On the third day I went out with the hares, and a huntsman came by, riding on a dapple-gray horse, and he wanted to buy a hare from me, offering me gold or whatever I wanted, if he could have one. We finally agreed on a price: He was to stand by his horse, lift up its tail, and kiss its behind. I could see that he did not want to do this, but finally he did so anyway. And this huntsman was no one other than ..." "Stop! Stop! That's enough! That's enough! The vat is now full," said the king. He had heard enough. So Jesper got the princess and half the kingdom. The king put on the wedding, and it was so joyful that it was heard throughout the land. Jesper sent for his parents, so they too could be present, and I was there as well. I did not leave until late at night. They did not let me go until they had given me some of the wedding feast. I got beer in a scarf and bread in a bottle. Then they gave me a paper gown, a hat made of butter, and a pair of glass clogs for my feet. As I went outside the door my butter hat melted, and it ran down around my ears; and when I reached the pavement my glass clogs shattered. Then the wind tore my paper gown apart. I was about to eat a piece of bread to give myself strength, but when I broke the bottle to get at it, the bread fell into the dirt in the street. When I opened the scarf to drink a drop of beer, the beer ran out into the gutter. So there I stood, naked and barefoot and hungry and thirsty. As I stood there they shot a cannon salute for Jesper and the princess. The cannonball came flying by, but I was quick and jumped on it, and thus I was shot home to the others in order to tell them this story. Source: Evald Tang Kristensen, "Jesper Harehyrde," Æventyr fra Jylland (Copenhagen: Karl Schønbergs Boghandel, 1881), no. 10, pp. 73-83 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Return to the table of contents . The Flute Poland Once there was a boy who was supposed to tend three hundred hares, and the king had proclaimed that if he succeeded in bringing all of them back home for three evenings then he should receive the princess. He drove them out early in the morning, but the hares immediately ran away. He cried bitterly. In the evening he was supposed to have all the hares, but now he did not have a single one. Then a little man came to him and asked, "Why are you crying so much?" He told the little man that he was supposed to bring all the hares back home in the evening, but that now he did not have a single one. Then the little man asked him if he had anything to eat, and the boy answered, "Just a bit of dry bread." After the two of them had eaten the bread, the little man gave a flute to the boy, saying, "When evening comes just play on this flute, and all the hares will come to you." The boy did just that, and all the hares came to him. When he arrived back in the village, everyone was standing in front of the palace to see if he would indeed bring all the hares back, and the boy did bring all three hundred back. The next day he drove them out again, and the little man returned. They ate breakfast together, and the little man asked, "Why are you so happy?" The boy said, "All my hares came back." The little man said, "Do the same thing again this evening." And in that manner all the hares returned for three evenings. However, the king did not want to give the boy his daughter, because another young gentleman was there. Finally it was determined that the young gentleman, the boy, and the princess should all sleep together in one bed. In the morning, the person whom the princess was facing should receive her. In the middle of the night the boy went next door to a store and bought all kinds of sweets, raisins, and almonds, then got back in bed. At midnight the young gentleman asked, "What is it that smells so good on you?" "Oh, I just went outside and ate some of my own dung." So the young gentleman went outside and smeared dung all over his face. Now everyone thought that the girl would be facing the young gentleman in the morning, but that was not the case. Thus the boy received the princess. Source: Willibald von Schulenburg, "Die Flöte," Wendisches Volksthum in Sage, Brauch und Sitte (Berlin: Nicolaische Verlags-Buchhandlung, 1882), pp. 41-42 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Return to the table of contents . The Magic Fife Ukraine / Russia Once in a certain empire, in certain kingdom, there was a lord, and there was also a peasant, and I cannot say how poor he was. The lord summoned him and said, "Listen, little peasant! You have not paid your debt, and one cannot get anything from you. Come and work for me for three years to pay off your debt." The peasant lived with him a first, a second, and a third year. The master, seeing that the peasant soon would have paid off his debt, thought to himself, "What fault could I invent in order to keep the peasant working here for another three years." The lord summoned him and said, "Listen, little peasant, here are ten hares. Take them out to graze in the meadow, and be very careful to bring them all back, otherwise I will keep you here with me for another three years." As the peasant began to drive the hares to the meadow they all fled in all directions. "What can I do?" he thought. Now I'm lost!" He sat down and cried. Coming from who knows where, an old man appeared, and asked, "Why are you crying, little peasant?" "How can I not cry, old man? My master gave me hares to graze, and they all ran away. Now my downfall is inevitable." The old man gave him a fife and said, "Here is a fife; when you play on it they will all come running back to you!" Thanking him, the peasant took the fife, and he had scarcely played on it when all the hares immediately ran back to him. He drove them home. The master counted the hares and exclaimed, "All ten!" Then the lord said to his wife, "Well, what shall we do? What fault can we now find with the peasant?" "Darling, here's what we shall do. Tomorrow, after he has taken the hares out to graze, I shall disguise myself with different clothes. Then I'll find him and buy a hare from him!" "Good!" The next morning the peasant took the hares out to graze, and no sooner had he arrived in the woods than they all ran off in different directions. But the peasant just sat on the grass and began to weave hemp shoes. Suddenly the lady approached in her carriage. She stopped, came up to him, and asked, "What are you doing there, little peasant?" "I'm grazing livestock." "What kind of livestock?" The peasant took his fife and played on it. All the hares ran up to him. "Ah, little peasant!" said the lady, sell me one of those hares." "Impossible! They are the lord's hares, and the lord is very strict with me! He would destroy me without mercy." The lady persisted: "I beg you to sell me one." Seeing her great desire to have a hare, the peasant said, "But, good lady, I have a rule." "What kid of rule? "I will give a hare to that person lets me f--- her." "Just ask for more money, little peasant!" "No, I do not want anything else '' So the lady (what else could she do?) let the peasant f--- her. He did his thing and then gave her a hare. "Hold it gently, lady, or you will strangle it." She took the hare, got into her carriage, and left. But when the peasant played his fife the hare heard it and escaped from the lady's hands and returned to the peasant. The lady arrived home. "Well, did you buy the hare?" "I bought it, I bought it, but when the peasant played his fife, the hare escaped from my hands and ran away." The following day the lady returned to the peasant. She approached him and again asked, "What are you doing, little peasant?" I'm weaving hemp shoes and grazing my master's livestock." "Where is the livestock?" The peasant played his fife and immediately all the hares ran up to him." The lady wanted to buy a hare. "I have a rule." "What is it?" "Let me f--- you." The lady let him f--- her a second time, and she received a hare, but when the peasant played the fife, the hare escaped and ran away from her. On the third day, the master, in disguise, went out himself. "What are you doing, little peasant?" "I'm grazing livestock." "And where is your livestock?" The peasant played his fife, and the hares came running towards him. "Sell me one of those hares!" "I do not sell them for money. I have a rule." "What rule?" "I'll give a hare to whomsoever will f--- a mare." So the lord mounted the mare and fornicated with her. The peasant gave him a hare and said, "Hold it carefully, lord; otherwise you will strangle it." The lord took the hare and went home, but the peasant played on his fife. The hare heard it and ran away to the peasant. The lord saw that he could do nothing more, and he let the peasant live in freedom. Source: "Le chalumeau merveilleux," Kryptadia: Contes secrets traduits du Russe , vol. 1 (1883), no. 53, pp. 187-91 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. The Russian Secret Tales were collected by the pioneering Russian folklorist Alexander Afanasyev (also anglicized Afanasief, Afanasiev, or Afanas'ev) and first published anonymously in Russian in the 1870s in Geneva, Switzerland. A French translation of all 77 tales was published in the journal Kryptadia in 1883. Link to an essay by Jack V. Haney about Afanasyev's secret tales: Mr. Afanasiev's Naughty Little Secrets: "Russkie zavetnye skazki" . Return to the table of contents . Additional tales of type 570 Afanasyev. "The Wonderful Whistle." Russian Secret Tales: Bawdy Folktales of Old Russia . New York: Brussel and Brussel, 1966. Pp. 169-72. Afanas'ev [Afanasyev], Aleksandr. "The Magic Fife." Erotic Tales of Old Russia . Oakland, California: Scythian Books, 1980. Pp. 41-44. Blecher, Lone Thygesen and George. "The King's Hares. Swedish Folktales and Legends . New York: Pantheon Books, 1993. Pp. 128-32. Calvino, Italo. "The King's Daughter Who Could Never Get Enough Figs." Italian Folktales . New York: Pantheon Books, 1980. No. 47, pp. 145-47. Chambers, Robert. "Jack and His Lulls (Pipe)." Popular Rhymes of Scotland . New edition. London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870 1870), Pp. 103-105 . Chase, Richard. "Fill, Bowl! Fill!" The Jack Tales . Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1971. No. 10, pp. 89-95. Delarue, Paul. "The Three May Peaches." French Folktales . Translated by Austin E. Fife. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1956. Pp. 3-9. Dorson, Richard M. "Ignez Was A Burro." Buying the Wind . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964. Pp. 423-27. Dorson's source: Zunser. Espinosa, Aurelio M. "The Riddle." Folklore of Spain in the American Southwest: Traditional Spanish Folk Literature in Northern New Mexico and Southern Colorado . Edited by J. Manuel Espinosa. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1985 . Pp. 178 ff. Grimm, Jacob and Wilhelm. "The Griffin." Grimm's Household Tales . Vol. 2. London: George Bell and Sons, 1884. No. 165, pp. 246-52 . Hardinge, Henry; and C. B. Going. "Provençal Folk-Tales: The Rabbit-Herd." Folk-Lore , vol. 49, no. 3 (September 1938). Pp. 292-95. Lang, Andrew. "Jesper Who Herded the Hares." The Violet Fairy Book . London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1901. Pp. 205-216 . Minford, John. "Aniz the Shepherd." Favourite Folktales of China . Beijing: New World Press, 1983. Pp. 95-100. Randolph. "Fill, Bowl, Fill!" Who Blowed Up the Church House? New York: Columbia University Press, 1952. Pp. 17-19; 185-86. Randolph, Vance. "Fill, Bowl, Fill." Pissing in the Snow and Other Ozark Folktales . New York: Avon Books, 1977. No. 29, pp. 93-96. Ranke, Kurt. "The Hare Herd." Folktales of Germany . Translated by Lotte Baumann. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966. No. 42, pp. 107-115. Sampson, John. "The Eighteen Rabbits." Gypsy Folk Tales. Salem, New Hampshire: Salem House, 1984. Pp. 66-71. Thompson, Stith. "The King's Hares" [Norway]. One Hundred Favorite Folktales . Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1974. No. 57, pp. 258-65. Thorpe, Benjamin. "Temptations" [Denmark]. Yule-Tide Stories: A Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions . London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853. Pp. 369-75 . Weinreich, Beatrice Silverman. "Forty Hares and a Princess." Yiddish Folktales . Translated by Leonard Wolf. New York: Pantheon Books, 1988. No. 44, pp. 130-35. Zunser, Helen. "Ignez era una Burra" [Ignez Was a Burro]. "A New Mexico Village" [Hot Springs]. Journal of American Folklore , vol. 48 (April - June 1935). Pp. 161-64. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 4, 2017. Rapunzel and Other Folktales of Type 310 Rapunzel And Other Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 310 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2008-2022 Contents Link to Rapunzel, the Grimm brothers' version of 1857 (opens in a new window). Link to Rapunzel, a comparison of the Grimm brothers' versions of 1812 and 1857 (opens in a new window). Parsley [Petrosinella] (Italy, Giambattista Basile). The Fair Angiola (Italy). Prunella (Italy). Persinette (France, Charlotte-Rose de Caumont de La Force). Parsillette (France). Blond Beauty (France. Juan and Clotilde (Philippines). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Parsley [Petrosinella] Italy There was once upon a time a woman named Pascadozzia. As she was standing one day at a window, which looked into the garden of an ogress, she saw a beautiful bed of parsley, for which she took such a longing that she was on the point of fainting away; and being unable to resist her desire, she watched until the ogress went out, and then plucked a handful of it. But when the ogress came home, and was going to cook her pottage, she found that some one had been at the parsley, and said, "Ill luck to me but I'll catch this long-fingered rogue, and make him repent it, and teach him to his cost that every one should eat off his own platter, and not meddle with other folks' cups." The poor woman went again and again down into the garden, until one morning the ogress met her, and in a furious rage exclaimed, "Have I caught you at last, you thief, you rogue? Prithee do you pay the rent of the garden, that you come in this impudent way and steal my plants? By my faith, but I'll make you do penance!" Poor Pascadozzia, in a terrible fright, began to make excuses, saying that neither from gluttony nor the craving of hunger had she been tempted by the devil to commit this fault, but fear she had lest the child should be born with a crop of parsley on its face; and she added that the ogress ought rather to thank her, for not having given her sore eyes. "Words are but wind," answered the ogress; "I am not to be caught with such prattle; you have closed the balance sheet of life, unless you promise to give me the child you bring forth, girl or boy, whichever it may be." Poor Pascadozzia, in order to escape the peril in which she found herself, swore with one hand upon another to keep the promise. So the ogress let her go free. But when her time was come, Pascadozzia gave birth to a little girl, so beautiful that she was a joy to look upon, who, from having a fine sprig of parsley on her bosom, was named Parsley. And the little girl grew from day to day, until when she was seven years old her mother sent her to school; and every time she went along the street and met the ogress, the old woman said to her, "Tell your mother to remember her promise." And she went on repeating this message so often, that the poor mother, having no longer patience to listen to the same tale, said one day to Parsley, "If you meet the old woman as usual, and she reminds you of the hateful promise, answer her, 'Take it!'" When Parsley, who dreamt of no ill, met the ogress again, and heard her repeat the same words, she answered innocently as her mother had told her; whereupon the ogress, seizing her by her hair, carried her off to a wood, which the sun never entered. Then she put the poor girl into a tower, which she caused to arise by her art, and which had neither gate nor ladder, but only a little window, through which she ascended and descended by means of Parsley's hair, which was very long, as the sailor is used to run up and down the mast of a ship. Now it happened one day, when the ogress had left the tower, that Parsley put her head out of the little window, and let loose her tresses in the sun; and the son of a prince passing by saw these two golden banners, which invited all souls to enlist under the standard of love; and beholding with amazement in the midst of those gleaming waves a siren's face, that enchanted all hearts, he fell desperately in love with such wonderful beauty; and sending her a memorial of sighs, she decreed to receive him into favor. Matters went on so well with the prince, that there was soon a nodding of heads and kissing of hands, thanks and offerings, hopes and promises, soft words and compliments. And when this had continued for several days, Parsley and the prince became so intimate that they made an appointment to meet, and agreed that it should be at night, and that Parsley should give the ogress some poppy juice, and draw up the prince with her tresses. So when the appointed hour came, the prince went to the tower, where Parsley, letting fall her hair at a given signal, he seized it with both his hands, and cried, "Draw up!" And when he was drawn up, he crept through the little window into the chamber. The next morning early, the prince descended by the same golden ladder, to go his way home. And having repeated these visits many times, a gossip of the ogress, who was for ever prying into things that did not concern her, and poking her nose into every corner, got to find out the secret, and told the ogress to be upon the lookout, for that Parsley was courted by a youth. The ogress thanked the gossip for the information, and said she would take good care to stop up the road; and as to Parsley, it was impossible for her to escape, as she had laid a spell upon her, so that, unless she had in her hand the three gallnuts which were in a rafter in the kitchen, it would be labor lost to attempt to get away. Whilst they were talking thus together, Parsley, who stood with her ears wide open, and had some suspicion of the gossip, overheard all that passed. And when night had spread out her black garments, and the prince had come as usual, she made him climb onto the rafters and find the gallnuts, knowing well what effect they would have, as she had been enchanted by the ogress. Then, having made a rope ladder, they both descended to the ground, took to their heels, and scampered off towards the city. But the gossip happening to see them come out, set up a loud halloo, and began to shout and make such a noise that the ogress awoke; and seeing that Parsley had fled, she descended by the same ladder, which was fastened to the window, and set off running after the lovers, who, when they saw her coming at their heels faster than a horse let loose, gave themselves up for lost. But Parsley, recollecting the gallnuts, quickly threw one on the ground, and lo! instantly a Corsican bulldog started up, -- a terrible beast! -- which with open jaws and barking loud flew at the ogress as if to swallow her at a mouthful. But the old woman, who was more cunning and spiteful than the devil, put her hand into her pocket, and pulling out a piece of bread, gave it to the dog, which made him hang his tail and allay his fury. Then she turned to run after the fugitives again; but Parsley, seeing her approach, threw the second gallnut on the ground, and lo! a fierce lion arose, who, lashing the earth with his tail, and shaking his mane, and opening wide his jaws a yard apart, was just preparing to make a slaughter of the ogress; when, turning quickly back, she stripped the skin off an ass that was grazing in the middle of a meadow, and ran at the lion, who, fancying it a real jackass, was so frightened that he bounded away as fast as he could. The ogress, having leaped over this second ditch, turned again to pursue the poor lovers, who, hearing the clatter of her heels and seeing the cloud of dust that rose up to the sky, conjectured that she was coming again. But the old woman, who was every moment in dread lest the lion should pursue her, had not taken off the ass's skin; and when Parsley now threw down the third gallnut, there sprang up a wolf, who, without giving the ogress time to play any new trick, gobbled her up just as she was, in the shape of a jackass. So the lovers, being now freed from danger, went their way leisurely and quietly to the kingdom of the prince, where, with his father's free consent, he took Parsley to wife; and thus, after all these storms of fate, they experienced the truth, that One hour in port, the sailor freed from fears Forgets the tempests of a hundred years. Zeza's story was listened to with such delight to the end, that, had it even continued for an hour longer, the time would have appeared only a moment. Source: Giambattista Basile, The Pentamerone; or, The Story of Stories , translated from the Neapolitan by John Edward Taylor, new edition revised and edited by Helen Zimmern (London: T. Tisher Unwin, 1894), pp. 56-62 . This story is the first tale of day two in Basile's famous collection, first published in Naples under the title Lo cunto de li cunti overo lo trattenemiento de pecceril ( The Tale of Tales; or, Entertainment for Little Ones ) in two volumes, 1634 and 1636. Return to the table of contents . The Fair Angiola Italy Once upon a time there were seven women, neighbors, all of whom were seized with a great longing for some jujubes which only grew in a garden opposite the place where they all lived, and which belonged to a witch. Now this witch had a donkey that watched the garden and told the old witch when any one entered. The seven neighbors, however, had such a desire for the jujubes that they entered the garden and threw the donkey some nice soft grass, and while he was eating it they filled their aprons with jujubes and escaped before the witch appeared. This they did several times, until at last the witch noticed that some one had been in her garden, for many of the jujubes were gone. She questioned the donkey, but he had eaten the nice grass and noticed nothing. Then she resolved the third day to remain in the garden herself. In the middle of it was a hole, in which she hid and covered herself with leaves and branches, leaving only one of her long ears sticking out. The seven neighbors once more went into the garden and began picking jujubes, when one of them noticed the witch's ear sticking out of the leaves and thought it was a mushroom and tried to pick it. Then the witch jumped out of the hole and ran after the women, all of whom escaped but one. The witch was going to eat her, but she begged hard for pardon and promised never to enter the garden again. The witch finally forgave her on the condition that she would give her her child, yet unborn, whether a boy or girl, when it was seven years old. The poor woman promised in her distress, and the witch let her go. Some time after the woman had a beautiful little girl whom she named Angiola. When Angiola was six years old, her mother sent her to school to learn to sew and knit. On her way to school she had to pass the garden where the witch lived. One day, when she was almost seven, she saw the witch standing in front of her garden. She beckoned to Angiola and gave her some fine fruits and said, "You see, fair Angiola, I am your aunt. Tell your mother you have seen your aunt, and she sends her word not to forget her promise." Angiola went home and told her mother, who was frightened and said to herself, "Ah! the time has come when I must give up my Angiola." Then she said to the child, "When your aunt asks you tomorrow for an answer, tell her you forgot her errand." The next day she told the witch as she was directed. "Very well," she replied, "tell her today, but don't forget." Thus several days passed; the witch was constantly on the watch for Angiola when she went to school, and wanted to know her mother's answer, but Angiola always declared that she had forgotten to ask her. One day, however, the witch became angry and said, "Since you are so forgetful, I must give you some token to remind you of your errand." Then she bit Angiola's little finger so hard that she bit a piece out. Angiola went home in tears and showed her mother her finger. "Ah!" thought her mother, "there is no help for it. I must give my poor child to the witch, or else she will eat her up in her anger." The next morning as Angiola was going to school, her mother said to her, "Tell your aunt to do with you as she thinks best." Angiola did so, and the witch said, "Very well, then come with me, for you are mine." So the witch took the fair Angiola with her and led her away to a tower which had no door and but one small window. There Angiola lived with the witch, who treated her very kindly, for she loved her as her own child. When the witch came home after her excursions, she stood under the window and cried, "Angiola, fair Angiola, let down your pretty tresses and pull me up!" Now Angiola had beautiful long hair, which she let down and with which she pulled the witch up. Now it happened one day when Angiola had grown to be a large and beautiful maiden, that the king's son went hunting and chanced to come where the tower was. He was astonished at seeing the house without any door, and wondered how the people got in. Just then the old witch returned home, stood under the window, and called, "Angiola, fair Angiola, let down your beautiful tresses and pull me up." Immediately the beautiful tresses fell down, and the witch climbed up by them. This pleased the prince greatly, and he hid himself near by until the witch went away again. Then he went and stood under the window and called, "Angiola, fair Angiola, let down your beautiful tresses and pull me up." Then Angiola let down her tresses and drew up the prince, for she believed it was the witch. When she saw the prince, she was much frightened at first, but he addressed her in a friendly manner and begged her to fly with him and become his wife. She finally consented, and in order that the witch should not know where she had gone she gave all the chairs, tables, and cupboards in the house something to eat; for they were all living beings and might betray her. The broom, however, stood behind the door, so she did not notice it, and gave it nothing to eat. Then she took from the witch's chamber three magic balls of yarn, and fled with the prince. The witch had a little dog that loved the fair Angiola so dearly that it followed her. Soon after they had fled, the witch came back, and called, "Angiola, fair Angiola, let down your beautiful tresses and draw me up." But the tresses were not let down for all she called, and at last she had to get a long ladder and climb in at the window. When she could not find Angiola, she asked the tables and chairs and cupboards, "Where has she fled?" But they answered, "We do not know." The broom, however, called out from the corner, "The fair Angiola has fled with the king's son, who is going to marry her." Then the witch started in pursuit of them and nearly overtook them. But Angiola threw down behind her one of the magic balls of yarn, and there arose a great mountain of soap. When the witch tried to climb it she slipped back, but she persevered until at last she succeeded in getting over it, and hastened after the fugitives. Then Angiola threw down the second ball of yarn, and there arose a great mountain covered all over with nails small and large. Again the witch had to struggle hard to cross it; when she did she was almost flayed. When Angiola saw that the witch had almost overtaken them again, she threw down the third ball, and there arose a mighty torrent. The witch tried to swim across it, but the stream kept increasing in size until she had at last to turn back. Then in her anger she cursed the fair Angiola, saying, "May your beautiful face be turned into the face of a dog!" and instantly Angiola's face became a dog's face. The prince was very sorrowful and said, "How can I take you home to my parents? They would never allow me to marry a maiden with a dog's face." So he took her to a little house, where she was to live until the enchantment was removed. He himself returned to his parents; but whenever he went hunting he visited poor Angiola. She often wept bitterly over her misfortunes, until one day the little dog that had followed her from the witch's said, "Do not weep, fair Angiola. I will go to the witch and beg her to remove the enchantment." Then the little dog started off and returned to the witch and sprang up on her and caressed her. "Are you here again, you ungrateful beast?" cried the witch, and pushed the dog away. "Did you leave me to follow the ungrateful Angiola?" But the little dog caressed her until she grew friendly again and took him up on her lap. "Mother," said the little dog," Angiola sends you greeting; she is very sad, for she cannot go to the palace with her dog's face and cannot marry the prince." "That serves her right," said the witch." Why did she deceive me? She can keep her dog's face now!" But the dog begged her so earnestly, saying that poor Angiola was sufficiently punished, that at last the witch gave the dog a flask of water, and said, "Take that to her and she will become the fair Angiola again." The dog thanked her, ran off with the flask, and brought it safely to poor Angiola. As soon as she washed in the water, her dog's face disappeared and she became beautiful again, more beautiful even than she had been before. The prince, full of joy, took her to the palace, and the king and queen were so pleased with her beauty that they welcomed her, and gave her a splendid wedding, and all remained happy and contented. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), pp. 26-30 . Crane's source: Laura Gonzenbach, "Von der schönen Angiola," Sicilianische Märchen: Aus dem Volksmund gesammelt , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1870), no. 53, pp. 339-44 . Return to the table of contents . Prunella Italy There was once upon a time a woman who had an only daughter. When the child was about seven years old she used to pass every day, on her way to school, an orchard where there was a wild plum tree, with delicious ripe plums hanging from the branches. Each morning the child would pick one, and put it into her pocket to eat at school. For this reason she was called Prunella. Now, the orchard belonged to a witch. One day the witch noticed the child gathering a plum, as she passed along the road. Prunella did it quite innocently, not knowing that she was doing wrong in taking the fruit that hung close to the roadside. But the witch was furious, and next day hid herself behind the hedge, and when Prunella came past, and put out her hand to pluck the fruit, she jumped out and seized her by the arm. "Ah! you little thief!" she exclaimed. "I have caught you at last. Now you will have to pay for your misdeeds." The poor child, half dead with fright, implored the old woman to forgive her, assuring her that she did not know she had done wrong, and promising never to do it again. But the witch had no pity, and she dragged Prunella into her house, where she kept her till the time should come when she could have her revenge. As the years passed Prunella grew up into a very beautiful girl. Now her beauty and goodness, instead of softening the witch's heart, aroused her hatred and jealousy. One day she called Prunella to her, and said, "Take this basket, go to the well, and bring it back to me filled with water. If you don't I will kill you." The girl took the basket, went and let it down into the well again and again. But her work was lost labor. Each time, as she drew up the basket, the water streamed out of it. At last, in despair, she gave it up, and leaning against the well she began to cry bitterly, when suddenly she heard a voice at her side saying, "Prunella, why are you crying?" Turning round she beheld a handsome youth, who looked kindly at her, as if he were sorry for her trouble. "Who are you," she asked, "and how do you know my name?" "I am the son of the witch," he replied, "and my name is Bensiabel. I know that she is determined that you shall die, but I promise you that she shall not carry out her wicked plan. Will you give me a kiss, if I fill your basket?" "No," said Prunella, "I will not give you a kiss, because you are the son of a witch." "Very well," replied the youth sadly. "Give me your basket and I will fill it for you." And he dipped it into the well, and the water stayed in it. Then the girl returned to the house, carrying the basket filled with water. When the witch saw it, she became white with rage, and exclaimed, "Bensiabel must have helped you." And Prunella looked down, and said nothing. "Well, we shall see who will win in the end," said the witch, in a great rage. The following day she called the girl to her and said, "Take this sack of wheat. I am going out for a little; by the time I return I shall expect you to have made it into bread. If you have not done it I will kill you." Having said this she left the room, closing and locking the door behind her. Poor Prunella did not know what to do. It was impossible for her to grind the wheat, prepare the dough, and bake the bread, all in the short time that the witch would be away. At first she set to work bravely, but when she saw how hopeless her task was, she threw herself on a chair, and began to weep bitterly. She was roused from her despair by hearing Bensiabel's voice at her side saying. "Prunella, Prunella, do not weep like that. If you will give me a kiss I will make the bread, and you will be saved." "I will not kiss the son of a witch," replied Prunella. But Bensiabel took the wheat from her, and ground it, and made the dough, and when the witch returned the bread was ready baked in the oven. Turning to the girl, with fury in her voice, she said. "Bensiabel must have been here and helped you;" and Prunella looked down, and said nothing. "We shall see who will win in the end," said the witch, and her eyes blazed with anger. Next day she called the girl to her and said, "Go to my sister, who lives across the mountains. She will give you a casket, which you must bring back to me." This she said knowing that her sister, who was a still more cruel and wicked witch than herself, would never allow the girl to return, but would imprison her and starve her to death. But Prunella did not suspect anything, and set out quite cheerfully. On the way she met Bensiabel. "Where are you going, Prunella?" he asked. "I am going to the sister of my mistress, from whom I am to fetch a casket." "Oh poor, poor girl!" said Bensiabel. "You are being sent straight to your death. Give me a kiss, and I will save you." But again Prunella answered as before, "I will not kiss the son of a witch." "Nevertheless, I will save your life," said Bensiabel, "for I love you better than myself. Take this flagon of oil, this loaf of bread, this piece of rope, and this broom. When you reach the witch's house, oil the hinges of the door with the contents of the flagon, and throw the loaf of bread to the great fierce mastiff, who will come to meet you. When you have passed the dog, you will see in the courtyard a miserable woman trying in vain to let down a bucket into the well with her plaited hair. You must give her the rope. In the kitchen you will find a still more miserable woman trying to clean the hearth with her tongue; to her you must give the broom. You will see the casket on the top of a cupboard, take it as quickly as you can, and leave the house without a moment's delay. If you do all this exactly as I have told you, you will not be killed." So Prunella, having listened carefully to his instructions, did just what he had told her. She reached the house, oiled the hinges of the door, threw the loaf to the dog, gave the poor woman at the well the rope, and the woman in the kitchen the broom, caught up the casket from the top of the cupboard, and fled with it out of the house. But the witch heard her as she ran away, and rushing to the window called out to the woman in the kitchen, "Kill that thief, I tell you!" But the woman replied, "I will not kill her, for she has given me a broom, whereas you forced me to clean the hearth with my tongue." Then the witch called out in fury to the woman at the well. "Take the girl, I tell you, and fling her into the water, and drown her!" But the woman answered, "No, I will not drown her, for she gave me this rope, whereas you forced me to use my hair to let down the bucket to draw water." Then the witch shouted to the dog to seize the girl and hold her fast; but the dog answered, "No, I will not seize her, for she gave me a loaf of bread, whereas you let me starve with hunger." The witch was so angry that she nearly choked, as she called out, "Door, bang upon her, and keep her a prisoner." But the door answered, "I won't, for she has oiled my hinges, so that they move quite easily, whereas you left them all rough and rusty." And so Prunella escaped, and, with the casket under her arm, reached the house of her mistress, who, as you may believe, was as angry as she was surprised to see the girl standing before her, looking more beautiful than ever. Her eyes flashed, as in furious tones she asked her, "Did you meet Bensiabel?" But Prunella looked down, and said nothing. "We shall see," said the witch, "who will win in the end. Listen, there are three cocks in the henhouse; one is yellow, one black, and the third is white. If one of them crows during the night you must tell me which one it is. Woe to you if you make a mistake. I will gobble you up in one mouthful." Now Bensiabel was in the room next to the one where Prunella slept. At midnight she awoke hearing a cock crow. "Which one was that?" shouted the witch. Then, trembling, Prunella knocked on the wall and whispered. "Bensiabel, Bensiabel, tell me, which cock crowed?" "Will you give me a kiss if I tell you?" he whispered back through the wall. But she answered "No." Then he whispered back to her. "Nevertheless, I will tell you. It was the yellow cock that crowed." The witch, who had noticed the delay in Prunella's answer, approached her door calling angrily, "Answer at once, or I will kill you." So Prunella answered. "It was the yellow cock that crowed." And the witch stamped her foot and gnashed her teeth. Soon after another cock crowed. "Tell me now which one it is," called the witch. And, prompted by Bensiabel, Prunella answered, "That is the black cock." A few minutes after the crowing was heard again, and the voice of the witch demanding, "Which one was that? "And again Prunella implored Bensiabel to help her. But this time he hesitated, for he hoped that Prunella might forget that he was a witch's son, and promise to give him a kiss. And as he hesitated he heard an agonized cry from the girl. "Bensiabel, Bensiabel, save me! The witch is coining, she is close to me, I hear the gnashing of her teeth!" With a bound Bensiabel opened his door and flung himself against the witch. He pulled her back with such force that she stumbled, and falling headlong, dropped down dead at the foot of the stairs. Then, at last, Prunella was touched by Bensiabel's goodness and kindness to her, and she became his wife, and they lived happily ever after. Source: Andrew Lang, The Grey Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1900), pp. 382-87 . Lang does not identify his source of this tale, but it appears to be: Domenico Comparetti and Alessandro d'Ancona, "Prezzemolina," Canti e Racconti del Popolo Italiano , vol. 7 (Turin and Rome: Ermanno Loescher, 1879), no. 20, pp. 110-15 . Return to the table of contents . Persinette France An English translation of this tale will be posted here in the near future. Source: Le cabinet des fées; ou, Collection choisie des contes des fées, et autres contes merveilleux , vol. 6 (Geneve: Barde, Manget & Compagnie, 1785), pp. 43-57 . Charlotte-Rose de Caumont de La Force, the French author of this tale was born about 1650 and died in 1724. Return to the table of contents . Parsillette France There was a gentleman and a lady. They had been married a long time, but had no children, which saddened them greatly. Then they were told to make a pilgrimage to achieve their wish. They went on this pilgrimage, travelling a long way from home. By the time they returned homeward the woman had become pregnant. On their way they saw a beautiful garden, and in this garden there were magnificent fruits. The wife said to her husband, "Oh, I would like to eat some of this fruit. I'll pick it myself." The husband said to her, "What if someone sees us!" But she said to him, "It doesn't matter. I'll go and get some." She went to the garden and ate some fruit, then returned to their cart. As she was about to leave, a little woman appeared and asked her why she had taken the fruit. So she told the little woman about her desire for the fruit. Then the woman said to her, "I will say nothing about your having stolen my fruit, but I want to be the godmother of your child. You will have a girl." The wife climbed back onto her wagon and said to her husband, "I promised that woman that she could be godmother, but it won't happen." Finally the day arrived when she delivered the child. She had a daughter, just as the woman had said. They had the child baptized, but did not invite the woman. The woman summoned her sisters; she had two sisters, and they were fairies. She said to them, "You know, the woman who stole my fruit gave birth to a child, but did not ask me to be godmother. She must be punished. We must take away her child." She departed with a large dog. She arrived at the woman's door and rang. No one would open the door. She commanded the dog to open the door, and it opened the door. The dog opened all the doors. She came to where the child was. She said to the dog, "Bring the child to me!" Then she said to the mother, "And you, madam, another time you will keep your promises. You shall never again see your daughter." Then the woman returned to her own home with the child. Once all the fairies in the country came together, and she was godmother to the child. She named her Parsillette. She gave her the ability to sing such that she could be heard for seven leagues. The others gave her all sorts of gifts; the gift of beauty -- in short, all kinds of gifts. Then she was given a nursemaid, and the best of everything was made ready for her. When she grew up, she was so beautiful that all the gentlemen who passed by stopped to look at her. She sang so well that everyone wanted to hear her sweet songs. The woman saw this and said to her sisters, "We must confine Parsillette in a tower; otherwise she will leave us." Then she took her to a tower three leagues distant from the house where she was. In this tower she had everything that she needed for her comfort and enjoyment, even a parrot to talk with her. Then the woman said to her, "Now when I come to bring you something I'll say to you, 'Parsillette, my goddaughter, let down your beautiful hair to me!' Then you are to open the door. That is the password." Now there was a prince in the vicinity, seven leagues away. He heard the singing from his home. He said, "Who is singing like that? I need to know." He asked about the place where the singing came from, and was told that a princess was there, locked in a tower. He said, "I have to go there and talk to her." Arriving at the tower, he heard someone say, "Parsillette, my goddaughter, let down your beautiful hair to me!" He wrote down the password, so that he too could say it. As soon as the woman left, he too said, "Parsillette, my goddaughter, let down your beautiful hair to me!" The girl, thinking it was her godmother, who had forgotten something, opened the door. Seeing the young man enter, she wanted to run away, but where to? And he, when he saw her, he fell so in love with her that he did not want to leave. He told her that if she would follow him, he would make her a queen. She was bored in this tower, always being alone with only her parrot for company. She promised him that she would go away with him; they would leave the next day. The woman approached, bringing food again. Seeing her godmother arrive, Parsillette hid the young man behind a curtain. Then the parrot said, "Godmother, a lover is hidden there!" Then the godmother said to her goddaughter, "What did your parrot say?' "Oh, godmother, he just said what I told him to." Then, suspecting nothing, the woman left. Then the woman began thinking about what the parrot had said. She said, "I think that the parrot told me the truth. I must be sure." She retraced her steps and arrived back at the tower. She called out, but no one responded. She climbed to the top of the tower. She saw Parsillette, who was clinging to the young man's arm. She struck out with her wand, and Parsillette became as ugly as she had been beautiful. All the gifts that had been given to her disappeared. The young man, seeing this change, did not know what to say; and Parsillette, seeing this, said to him, "I cannot go any further. Seeing how angry my godmother is, I must return to her and beg her pardon. The moment she said this, the young man was struck dead. She returned to her godmother and begged her pardon. Then all the gifts came back to her, and her godmother forgave her. She took Parsillette home with her, not back to the tower. Later Parsillette married a very wealthy prince, and she never knew her parents. Source: Revue des traditions populaires , vol. 6 (1891), pp. 590-93 . This story was told by Joséphine Maurel, who learned it from her grandfather Joseph Hubert, aged 78 years. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2015. Return to the table of contents . Blond Beauty France There was a young lady who wanted very much to have a child. She was pregnant, but very sad, because she had been told that her child would be a frog. How she grieved, but then she met a fairy who told her not to worry. The fairy would like to the godmother. The lady had a beautiful little girl. She was baptized with the name Blond Beauty and was raised by her godmother. The girl lived in a castle without doors; one had to enter through the windows. When the godmother arrived she would say, "Blond Beauty, let down your hair, so I can come up." But one day something different happened. A young king came by. He said, "Mademoiselle, you are so beautiful. Is there no way for me to come inside? How do you get out?" "Me, I never go out. When my godmother comes I let down my hair and let her climb up." "If you would let down your hair, I could climb up and keep you company!" So she let down her hair, and let him climb up. When the old fairy arrived she hid him in a barrel. "Blond Beauty, let down your hair, so I can come up." Then the parrot said over and over, "Her lover is in the barrel!" "Hey! What are you saying, parrot. Be quiet, you little blabber-mouth." The next day the young king took Blond Beauty away. When the fairy arrived, she said, "Blond Beauty, let down your hair, so I can come up." But Blond Beauty did not let down her hair. The fairy climbed into the castle, but Blond Beauty was not there. The parrot said, "I told you that her lover was in the barrel!" "Oh, you poor parrot! You told me so. But now, Blond Beauty, you shall now become as ugly as you were beautiful!" And Blond Beauty turned into a frog. Now the king had another son. He said that the one of them who would bring home the most beautiful woman should receive a portion of the kingdom. So Blond Beauty was forced to return to the fairy and beg her to make her beautiful again. "Oh Blond Beauty, you do not deserve it, but so be it!" And she became even more beautiful than before, and they won a portion of the kingdom. And then the king said that whoever should build the most beautiful castle for his wife, he would receive another portion of the kingdom So they had to find the fairy again. The other son had a castle made of copper, but the fairy made a castle of silver for them, and thus they won another portion of the kingdom. Source: Léon Pineau, "La Belle Blonde," Les Contes Populaires du Poitou (Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1891), pp. 91-93 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2015. The concluding episode in this narrative is a type 402 folktale ("The Animal Bride"). Link to additional tales of type 402 . Return to the table of contents . Juan and Clotilde Philippines In ages vastly remote there lived in a distant land a king of such prowess and renown, that his name was known throughout the four regions of the compass. His name was Ludovico. His power was increased twofold by his attachment to an aged magician, to whom he was tied by strong bonds of friendship. Ludovico had an extremely lovely daughter by the name of Clotilde. Ever since his arrival at the palace the magician had been passionately in love with her; but his extreme old age and his somewhat haughty bearing were obstacles in his path to success. Whenever he made love to her, she turned aside, and listened instead to the thrilling tales told by some wandering minstrel. The magician finally succumbed to the infirmities of old age, his life made more burdensome by his repeated disappointments. He left to the king three enchanted winged horses; to the princess, two magic necklaces of exactly the same appearance, of inimitable workmanship and of priceless worth. Nor did the magician fail to wreak vengeance on the cause of his death. Before he expired, he locked Clotilde and the three magic horses in a high tower inaccessible to any human being. She was to remain in this enchanted prison until some man succeeded in setting her free. Naturally, King Ludovico wanted to see his daughter before the hour of his death, which was fast approaching. He offered large sums of money, together with his crown and Clotilde's hand, to anybody who could set her free. Hundreds of princes tried, but in vain. The stone walls of the tower were of such a height, that very few birds, even, could fly over them. But a deliverer now rose from obscurity and came into prominence. This man was an uneducated but persevering peasant named Juan. He possessed a graceful form, herculean frame, good heart, and unrivalled ingenuity. His two learned older brothers tried to scale the walls of the tower, but fared no better than the others. At last Juan's turn came. His parents and his older brothers expostulated with him not to go, for what could a man unskilled in the fine arts do? But Juan, in the hope of setting the princess free, paid no attention to their advice. He took as many of the biggest nails as he could find, a very long rope, and a strong hammer. As he lived in a town several miles distant from the capital, he had to make the trip on horseback. One day Juan set out with all his equipment. On the way he met his disappointed second brother returning after a vain attempt. The older brother tried in every way he could to divert Juan from his purpose. Now, Juan's parents, actuated partly by a sense of shame if he should fail, and partly by a deep-seated hatred, had poisoned his food without his knowledge. When he felt hungry, he suspected them of some evil intention: so before eating he gave his horse some of his provisions. The poor creature died on the road amidst terrible sufferings, and Juan was obliged to finish the journey on foot. When he arrived at the foot of the tower, he drove a nail into the wall. Then he tied one end of his rope to this spike. In this way he succeeded in making a complete ladder of nails and rope to the top of the tower. He looked for Clotilde, who met him with her eyes flooded with tears. As a reward for his great services to her, she gave him one of the magic necklaces. While they were whispering words of love in each other's ears, they heard a deafening noise at the bottom of the tower. "Rush for safety to your ladder!" cried Clotilde. "One of the fiendish friends of the magician is going to kill you." But, alas! some wanton hand had pulled out the nails; and this person was none other then Juan's second brother. "I am a lost man," said Juan. "Mount one of the winged horses in the chamber adjoining mine," said Clotilde. So Juan got on one of the animals without knowing where to go. The horse flew from the tower with such velocity, that Juan had to close his eyes. His breath was almost taken away. In a few seconds, however, he was landed in a country entirely strange to his eyes. After long years of struggle with poverty and starvation, Juan was at last able to make his way back to his native country. He went to live in a town just outside the walls of the capital. A rich old man named Telesforo hired him to work on his farm. Juan's excellent service and irreproachable conduct won the good will of his master, who adopted him as his son. At about this time King Ludovico gave out proclamations stating that any one who could exactly match his daughter's necklace should be his son-in-law. Thousands tried, but they tried in vain. Even the most dexterous and experienced smiths were baffled in their attempts to produce an exact counterfeit. When word of the royal proclamations was brought to Juan, he decided to try. One day he pretended to be sick, and he asked Telesforo to go to the palace to get Clotilde's necklace. The old man, who was all ready to serve his adopted son, went that very afternoon and borrowed the necklace, so that he might try to copy it. When he returned with the magic article, Juan jumped from his bed and kissed his father. After supper Juan went to his room and locked himself in. Then he took from his pocket the necklace which Clotilde had given him in the tower, and compared it carefully with the borrowed one. When he saw that they did not differ in any respect, he took a piece of iron and hammered it until midnight. Early the next morning Juan wrapped the two magic necklaces in a silk handkerchief, and told the old man to take them to the king. "By the aid of the Lord!" exclaimed Clotilde when her father the king unwrapped the necklaces, "my lover is here again. This necklace," she said, touching the one she had given Juan, "is not a counterfeit: for it is written in the magician's book of black art that no human being shall be able to imitate either of the magic necklaces. -- Where is the owner of this necklace, old man?" she said, turning to Telesforo. "He is at home," said Telesforo with a bow. "Go and bring him to the palace," said Clotilde. Within a quarter of an hour Juan arrived. After paying due respect to the king, Juan embraced Clotilde affectionately. They were married in the afternoon, and the festivities continued for nine days and nine nights. Juan was made crown prince, and on the death of King Ludovico he succeeded to the throne. King Juan and Queen Clotilde lived to extreme old age in peace and perfect happiness. Source: Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, PA: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), pp. 355-59 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Targets open in new windows. Rapunzel, Rapunzel, Let Down Your Hair , an essay by Terri Windling. The Annotated Rapunzel , from the SurLaLune fairy tale pages by Heidi Anne Heiner. Rapunzel , an article in Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia. Puddocky , a folktale (type 402, "The Animal Bride") from Germany that contains the motif of a heroine's difficulties arising from her insatiable appetite for parsley. This is Andrew Lang's free translation (from his Green Fairy Book ) of "Das Mährchen von der Padde," first published by Johann Gustav Büsching in Volks-Sagen, Märchen und Legenden , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Carl Heinrich Reclam, 1812), no. 60, pp. 286-95 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 25, 2022. Little Red Riding Hood Little Red Riding Hood and other tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 333 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2021 Contents Little Red Riding Hood (Charles Perrault). Little Red Cap (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Little Red Hood (Germany/Poland). Little Red Hat (Italy/Austria). The Grandmother (France). The True History of Little Golden-Hood (Charles Marelles). Red Ridinghood (Ireland). The Little Girl and Her Grandmother (Ireland). Red Riding Hood (Ireland). The Old Man and the Wolf (Romania). The Tale of Jemima Puddle-Duck (Beatrix Potter). Links to additional texts and related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Little Red Riding Hood Charles Perrault Once upon a time there lived in a certain village a little country girl, the prettiest creature who was ever seen. Her mother was excessively fond of her; and her grandmother doted on her still more. This good woman had a little red riding hood made for her. It suited the girl so extremely well that everybody called her Little Red Riding Hood. One day her mother, having made some cakes, said to her, "Go, my dear, and see how your grandmother is doing, for I hear she has been very ill. Take her a cake, and this little pot of butter." Little Red Riding Hood set out immediately to go to her grandmother, who lived in another village. As she was going through the wood, she met with a wolf, who had a very great mind to eat her up, but he dared not, because of some woodcutters working nearby in the forest. He asked her where she was going. The poor child, who did not know that it was dangerous to stay and talk to a wolf, said to him, "I am going to see my grandmother and carry her a cake and a little pot of butter from my mother." "Does she live far off?" said the wolf "Oh I say," answered Little Red Riding Hood; "it is beyond that mill you see there, at the first house in the village." "Well," said the wolf, "and I'll go and see her too. I'll go this way and go you that, and we shall see who will be there first." The wolf ran as fast as he could, taking the shortest path, and the little girl took a roundabout way, entertaining herself by gathering nuts, running after butterflies, and gathering bouquets of little flowers. It was not long before the wolf arrived at the old woman's house. He knocked at the door: tap, tap. "Who's there?" "Your grandchild, Little Red Riding Hood," replied the wolf, counterfeiting her voice; "who has brought you a cake and a little pot of butter sent you by mother." The good grandmother, who was in bed, because she was somewhat ill, cried out, "Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up." The wolf pulled the bobbin, and the door opened, and then he immediately fell upon the good woman and ate her up in a moment, for it been more than three days since he had eaten. He then shut the door and got into the grandmother's bed, expecting Little Red Riding Hood, who came some time afterwards and knocked at the door: tap, tap. "Who's there?" Little Red Riding Hood, hearing the big voice of the wolf, was at first afraid; but believing her grandmother had a cold and was hoarse, answered, "It is your grandchild Little Red Riding Hood, who has brought you a cake and a little pot of butter mother sends you." The wolf cried out to her, softening his voice as much as he could, "Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up." Little Red Riding Hood pulled the bobbin, and the door opened. The wolf, seeing her come in, said to her, hiding himself under the bedclothes, "Put the cake and the little pot of butter upon the stool, and come get into bed with me." Little Red Riding Hood took off her clothes and got into bed. She was greatly amazed to see how her grandmother looked in her nightclothes, and said to her, "Grandmother, what big arms you have!" "All the better to hug you with, my dear." "Grandmother, what big legs you have!" "All the better to run with, my child." "Grandmother, what big ears you have!" "All the better to hear with, my child." "Grandmother, what big eyes you have!" "All the better to see with, my child." "Grandmother, what big teeth you have got!" "All the better to eat you up with." And, saying these words, this wicked wolf fell upon Little Red Riding Hood, and ate her all up. Moral: Children, especially attractive, well bred young ladies, should never talk to strangers, for if they should do so, they may well provide dinner for a wolf. I say "wolf," but there are various kinds of wolves. There are also those who are charming, quiet, polite, unassuming, complacent, and sweet, who pursue young women at home and in the streets. And unfortunately, it is these gentle wolves who are the most dangerous ones of all. Source: Andrew Lang, The Blue Fairy Book , 5th edition (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1891), pp. 51-53 . Lang's source: Charles Perrault, Histoires ou contes du temps passé, avec des moralités: Contes de ma mère l'Oye (Paris, 1697). The French title of this famous tale is "Le Petit Chaperon rouge." Link to a French-language text of Le Petit Chaperon rouge . Link to D. L. Ashliman's home page for Charles Perrault's Mother Goose Tales . Return to the table of contents Little Red Cap Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once upon a time there was a sweet little girl. Everyone who saw her liked her, but most of all her grandmother, who did not know what to give the child next. Once she gave her a little cap made of red velvet. Because it suited her so well, and she wanted to wear it all the time, she came to be known as Little Red Cap. One day her mother said to her, "Come Little Red Cap. Here is a piece of cake and a bottle of wine. Take them to your grandmother. She is sick and weak, and they will do her well. Mind your manners and give her my greetings. Behave yourself on the way, and do not leave the path, or you might fall down and break the glass, and then there will be nothing for your sick grandmother." Little Red Cap promised to obey her mother. The grandmother lived out in the woods, a half hour from the village. When Little Red Cap entered the woods a wolf came up to her. She did not know what a wicked animal he was, and was not afraid of him. "Good day to you, Little Red Cap." "Thank you, wolf." "Where are you going so early, Little Red Cap?" "To grandmother's." "And what are you carrying under your apron?" "Grandmother is sick and weak, and I am taking her some cake and wine. We baked yesterday, and they should give her strength." "Little Red Cap, just where does your grandmother live?" "Her house is a good quarter hour from here in the woods, under the three large oak trees. There's a hedge of hazel bushes there. You must know the place," said Little Red Cap. The wolf thought to himself, "Now there is a tasty bite for me. Just how are you going to catch her?" Then he said, "Listen, Little Red Cap, haven't you seen the beautiful flowers that are blossoming in the woods? Why don't you go and take a look? And I don't believe you can hear how beautifully the birds are singing. You are walking along as though you were on your way to school in the village. It is very beautiful in the woods." Little Red Cap opened her eyes and saw the sunlight breaking through the trees and how the ground was covered with beautiful flowers. She thought, "If a take a bouquet to grandmother, she will be very pleased. Anyway, it is still early, and I'll be home on time." And she ran off into the woods looking for flowers. Each time she picked one she thought that she could see an even more beautiful one a little way off, and she ran after it, going further and further into the woods. But the wolf ran straight to the grandmother's house and knocked on the door. "Who's there?" "Little Red Cap. I'm bringing you some cake and wine. Open the door for me." "Just press the latch," called out the grandmother. "I'm too weak to get up." The wolf pressed the latch, and the door opened. He stepped inside, went straight to the grandmother's bed, and ate her up. Then he took her clothes, put them on, and put her cap on his head. He got into her bed and pulled the curtains shut. Little Red Cap had run after flowers, and did not continue on her way to grandmother's until she had gathered all that she could carry. When she arrived, she found, to her surprise, that the door was open. She walked into the parlor, and everything looked so strange that she thought, "Oh, my God, why am I so afraid? I usually like it at grandmother's." Then she went to the bed and pulled back the curtains. Grandmother was lying there with her cap pulled down over her face and looking very strange. "Oh, grandmother, what big ears you have!" "All the better to hear you with." "Oh, grandmother, what big eyes you have!" "All the better to see you with." "Oh, grandmother, what big hands you have!" "All the better to grab you with!" "Oh, grandmother, what a horribly big mouth you have!" "All the better to eat you with!" And with that he jumped out of bed, jumped on top of poor Little Red Cap, and ate her up. As soon as the wolf had finished this tasty bite, he climbed back into bed, fell asleep, and began to snore very loudly. A huntsman was just passing by. He thought it strange that the old woman was snoring so loudly, so he decided to take a look. He stepped inside, and in the bed there lay the wolf that he had been hunting for such a long time. "He has eaten the grandmother, but perhaps she still can be saved. I won't shoot him," thought the huntsman. So he took a pair of scissors and cut open his belly. He had cut only a few strokes when he saw the red cap shining through. He cut a little more, and the girl jumped out and cried, "Oh, I was so frightened! It was so dark inside the wolf's body!" And then the grandmother came out alive as well. Then Little Red Cap fetched some large heavy stones. They filled the wolf's body with them, and when he woke up and tried to run away, the stones were so heavy that he fell down dead. The three of them were happy. The huntsman took the wolf's pelt. The grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine that Little Red Cap had brought. And Little Red Cap thought to herself, "As long as I live, I will never leave the path and run off into the woods by myself if mother tells me not to." They also tell how Little Red Cap was taking some baked things to her grandmother another time, when another wolf spoke to her and wanted her to leave the path. But Little Red Cap took care and went straight to grandmother's. She told her that she had seen the wolf, and that he had wished her a good day, but had stared at her in a wicked manner. "If we hadn't been on a public road, he would have eaten me up," she said. "Come," said the grandmother. "Let's lock the door, so he can't get in." Soon afterward the wolf knocked on the door and called out, "Open up, grandmother. It's Little Red Cap, and I'm bringing you some baked things." They remained silent, and did not open the door. The wicked one walked around the house several times, and finally jumped onto the roof. He wanted to wait until Little Red Cap went home that evening, then follow her and eat her up in the darkness. But the grandmother saw what he was up to. There was a large stone trough in front of the house. "Fetch a bucket, Little Red Cap," she said. "Yesterday I cooked some sausage. Carry the water that I boiled them with to the trough." Little Red Cap carried water until the large, large trough was clear full. The smell of sausage arose into the wolf's nose. He sniffed and looked down, stretching his neck so long that he could no longer hold himself, and he began to slide. He slid off the roof, fell into the trough, and drowned. And Little Red Cap returned home happily and safely. Source: "Rothkäppchen," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 1st ed. (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), v. 1, no. 26, pp. 113-18. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. The Grimms' source for the first variant (the main story) was Jeanette Hassenpflug (1791-1860). Marie Hassenpflug (1788-1856) provided them with the second variant (the concluding episode, introduced with the sentence "They also tell how Little Red Cap was taking some baked things to her grandmother another time...." The German title of this tale is Rotkäppchen ( Rothkäppchen in the nineteenth-century spelling of the Grimm brothers). Link to an English translation of the Grimms' final version (edition of 1857) of Little Red Cap . Link to the German text of the Grimms' final version: "Rothkäppchen," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , 7th edition, vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 26, pp. 140-44 . Link to the Grimm Brothers Home Page . Return to the table of contents . Little Red Hood Lower Lusatia Once upon a time, there was a little darling damsel, whom everybody loved that looked upon her, but her old granny loved her best of all, and didn't know what to give the dear child for love. Once she made her a hood of red samite, and since that became her so well, and she, too, would wear nothing else on her head, people gave her the name of "Red Hood." Once her mother said to Red Hood, "Go; here is a slice of cake and a bottle of wine; carry them to old granny. She is ill and weak, and they will refresh her. But be pretty behaved, and don't peep about in all corners when you come into her room, and don't forget to say 'Good-day.' Walk, too, prettily, and don't go out of the road, otherwise you will fall and break the bottle, and then poor granny will have nothing." Red Hood said, "I will observe everything well that you have told me," and gave her mother her hand upon it. But granny lived out in a forest, half an hour's walk from the village. When Red Hood went into the forest, she met a wolf. But she did not know what a wicked beast he was, and was not afraid of him. "God help you, Red Hood!" said he. "God bless you, wolf!" replied she. "Whither so early, Red Hood?" "To granny." "What have you there under your mantle?" "Cake and wine. We baked yesterday; old granny must have a good meal for once, and strengthen herself therewith." "Where does your granny live, Red Hood?" "A good quarter of an hour's walk further in the forest, under yon three large oaks. There stands her house; further beneath are the nut trees, which you will see there," said Red Hood. The wolf thought within himself, "This nice young damsel is a rich morsel. She will taste better than the old woman; but you must trick her cleverly, that you may catch both." For a time he went by Red Hood's side Then said he, "Red Hood! Just look! There are such pretty flowers here! Why don't you look round at them all? Methinks you don't even hear how delightfully the birds are singing! You are as dull as if you were going to school, and yet it is so cheerful in the forest!" Little Red Hood lifted up her eyes, and when she saw how the sun's rays glistened through the tops of the trees, and every place was full of flowers, she bethought herself, "If I bring with me a sweet smelling nosegay to granny, it will cheer her. It is still so early, that I shall come to her in plenty of time," and therewith she skipped into the forest and looked for flowers. And when she had plucked one, she fancied that another further off was nicer, and ran there, and went always deeper and deeper into the forest. But the wolf went by the straight road to old granny's, and knocked at the door. "Who's there?" "Little Red Hood, who has brought cake and wine. Open!" "Only press the latch," cried granny. "I am so weak that I cannot stand." The wolf pressed the latch, walked in, and went without saying a word straight to granny's bed and ate her up. Then he took her clothes, dressed himself in them, put her cap on his head, lay down in her bed and drew the curtains. Meanwhile little Red Hood was running after flowers, and when she had so many that she could not carry any more, she bethought her of her granny, and started on the way to her. It seemed strange to her that the door was wide open, and when she entered the room everything seemed to her so peculiar, that she thought, "Ah! My God! How strange I feel today, and yet at other times I am so glad to be with granny!" She said, "Good-day!" but received no answer. Thereupon she went to the bed and undrew the curtains. There lay granny, with her cap drawn down to her eyes, and looking so queer! "Ah, granny! Why have you such long ears?" "The better to hear you." "Ah, granny! Why have you such large eyes?" "The better to see you." "Ah, granny! Why have you such large hands?" "The better to take hold of you." "But, granny! Why have you such a terribly large mouth?" "The better to eat you up!" And therewith the wolf sprang out of bed at once on poor little Red Hood, and ate her up. When the wolf had satisfied his appetite, he lay down again in the bed, and began to snore tremendously. A huntsman came past, and bethought himself, "How can an old woman snore like that? I'll just have a look to see what it is." He went into the room, and looked into the bed; there lay the wolf. "Have I found you now, old rascal?" said he. "I've long been looking for you." He was just going to take aim with his gun, when he bethought himself, "Perhaps the wolf has only swallowed granny, and she may yet be released." Therefore he did not shoot, but took a knife and began to cut open the sleeping wolf's maw. When he had made several cuts, he saw a red hood gleam, and after one or two more cuts out skipped Red Hood, and cried, "Oh, how frightened I have been; it was so dark in the wolf's maw!" Afterwards out came old granny, still alive, but scarcely able to breathe. But Red Hood made haste and fetched large stones, with which they filled the wolf's maw, and when he woke he wanted to jump up and run away, but the stones were so heavy that he fell on the ground and beat himself to death. Now, they were all three merry. The huntsman took off the wolf's skin; granny ate the cake and drank the wine which little Red Hood had brought, and became strong and well again; and little Red Hood thought to herself, "As long as I live, I won't go out of the road into the forest, when mother has forbidden me." Source: A. H. Wratislaw, Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources (London: Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 15, pp. 97-100 . Lower Lusatia (German Niederlausitz , Polish Dolne Łużyce ) is a mixed German and Slavic historical and cultural region in today's eastern German and western Poland. Note by Wratslaw: "Little Red Hood," like many folklore tales, is a singular mixture of myth and morality. In Cox's Comparative Mythology , vol. ii., p. 831, note, Little Redcap, or Little Red Riding Hood, is interpreted as "the evening with her scarlet robe of twilight," who is swallowed up by the wolf of darkness, the Fenris of the Edda. It appears to me that this explanation may suit the color of her cap or hood, but is at variance with the other incidents of the story. I am inclined to look upon the tale as a lunar legend, although the moon is only actually red during one portion of the year, at the harvest moon in the autumn. Red Hood is represented as wandering, like Io, who is undoubtedly the moon, through trees, the clouds, and flowers, the stars, before she reaches the place where she is intercepted by the wolf. An eclipse to untutored minds would naturally suggest the notion that some evil beast was endeavoring to devour the moon, who is afterwards rescued by the sun, the archer of the heavens, whose bow and arrow are by a common anachronism represented in the story by a gun. Though the moon is masculine in Slavonic, as in German, yet she is a lady, "my lady Luna," in the Croatian legend no. 53, below [ "The Daughter of the King of the Vilas" ]. In the Norse mythology, when Loki is let loose at the end of the world, he is to "hurry in the form of a wolf to swallow the moon " (Cox ii., p. 200). The present masculine Slavonic word for moon, which is also that for month, mesic , or mesec , is a secondary formation, the original word having perished. In Greek and Latin the moon is always feminine. Return to the table of contents . Little Red Hat Italy/Austria Once there was an old woman who had a granddaughter named Little Red Hat. One day they were both in the field when the old woman said, "I am going home now. You come along later and bring me some soup." After a while Little Red Hat set out for her grandmother's house, and she met an ogre, who said, "Hello, my dear Little Red Hat. Where are you going?" "I am going to my grandmother's to take her some soup." "Good," he replied, "I'll come along too. Are you going across the stones or the thorns?" "I'm going across the stones," said the girl. "Then I'll go across the thorns," replied the ogre. They left. But on the way Little Red Hat came to a meadow where beautiful flowers of all colors were in bloom, and the girl picked as many as her heart desired. Meanwhile the ogre hurried on his way, and although he had to cross the thorns, he arrived at the house before Little Red Hat. He went inside, killed the grandmother, ate her up, and climbed into her bed. He also tied her intestine onto the door in place of the latch string and placed her blood, teeth, and jaws in the kitchen cupboard. He had barely climbed into bed when Little Red Hat arrived and knocked at the door. "Come in" called the ogre with a dampened voice. Little Red Hat tried to open the door, but when she noticed that she was pulling on something soft, she called out, "Grandmother, this thing is so soft!" "Just pull and keep quiet. It is your grandmother's intestine!" "What did you say?" "Just pull and keep quiet!" Little Red Hat opened the door, went inside, and said, "Grandmother, I am hungry." The ogre replied, "Go to the kitchen cupboard. There is still a little rice there." Little Red Hat went to the cupboard and took the teeth out. "Grandmother, these things are very hard!" "Eat and keep quiet. They are your grandmother's teeth!" "What did you say?" "Eat and keep quiet!" A little while later Little Red Hat said, "Grandmother, I'm still hungry." "Go back to the cupboard," said the ogre. "You will find two pieces of chopped meat there." Little Red Hat went to the cupboard and took out the jaws. "Grandmother, this is very red!" "Eat and keep quiet. They are your grandmother's jaws!" "What did you say?" "Eat and keep quiet!" A little while later Little Red Hat said, "Grandmother, I'm thirsty." "Just look in the cupboard," said the ogre. "There must be a little wine there." Little Red Hat went to the cupboard and took out the blood. "Grandmother, this wine is very red!" "Drink and keep quiet. It is your grandmother's blood! "What did you say?" "Just drink and keep quiet!" A little while later Little Red Hat said, "Grandmother, I'm sleepy." "Take off your clothes and get into bed with me!" replied the ogre. Little Red Hat got into bed and noticed something hairy. "Grandmother, you are so hairy!" "That comes with age," said the ogre. "Grandmother, you have such long legs!" "That comes from walking." "Grandmother, you have such long hands!" "That comes from working." "Grandmother, you have such long ears!" "That comes from listening." "Grandmother, you have such a big mouth!" "That comes from eating children!" said the ogre, and bam, he swallowed Little Red Hat with one gulp. Source: Christian Schneller, "Das Rothhütchen," Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol: Ein Beitrag zur deutschen Sagenkunde (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), no. 6, pp. 9-10 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2007. The Italian title of this story is "El cappelin rosso." Return to the table of contents . The Grandmother France There was a woman who had made some bread. She said to her daughter, "Go and carry a hot loaf and a bottle of milk to your grandmother." So the little girl set forth. Where two paths crossed she met the bzou [werewolf], who said to her, "Where are you going?" "I am carrying a hot loaf and a bottle of milk to my grandmother." "Which path are you taking? said the bzou. "The one of needles or the one of pins?" "The one of needles," said the little girl. "Good! I am taking the one of pins." The little girl entertained herself by gathering needles. The bzou arrived at the grandmother's house and killed her. He put some of her flesh in the pantry and a bottle of her blood on the shelf. The little girl arrived and knocked at the door. "Push on the door," said the bzou. "It is blocked with a pail of water." "Good day, grandmother. I have brought you a hot loaf and a bottle of milk." "Put it in the pantry, my child. Take some of the meat that is there, and the bottle of wine that is on the shelf." While she was eating, a little cat that was there said, "For shame! The slut is eating her grandmother's flesh and drinking her grandmother's blood." "Get undressed, my child," said the bzou, and come to bed with me." "Where should I put my apron?" "Throw it into the fire. You won't need it anymore." And for all her clothes -- her bodice, her dress, her petticoat, and her shoes and stockings -- she asked where she should put them, and the wolf replied, "Throw them into the fire, my child. You won't need them anymore." When she had gone to bed the little girl said, "Oh, grandmother, how hairy you are!" "The better to keep myself warm, my child." "Oh, grandmother, what long nails you have!" "The better to scratch myself with, my child!" "Oh, grandmother, what big shoulders you have!" "The better to carry firewood with, my child!" "Oh, grandmother, what big ears you have!" "The better to hear with, my child!" "Oh, grandmother, what a big nose you have!" "To better take my tobacco with, my child!" "Oh, grandmother, what a big mouth you have!" "The better to eat you with, my child!" "Oh, grandmother, I have to do it outside!" "Do it in the bed, my child!" "Oh no, grandmother, I really have to do it outside." "All right, but don't take too long." The bzou tied a woolen thread to her foot and let her go. As soon as the little girl was outside she tied the end of the thread to a plum tree in the yard. The bzou grew impatient and said, "Are you doing a load? Are you doing a load?" Not hearing anyone reply, he jumped out of bed and hurried after the little girl, who had escaped. He followed her, but he arrived at her home just as she went inside. Source: Conte de la mère-grand , from a website sponsored by the Bibliothèque nationale de France . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2007. Collected by folklorist Achille Millien (1838-1927) in the French province of Nivernais, about 1870. Return to the table of contents . The True History of Little Golden-Hood Charles Marelles You know the tale of poor Little Red Riding-Hood, that the wolf deceived and devoured, with her cake, her little butter can, and her grandmother. Well, the true story happened quite differently, as we know now. And first of all the little girl was called and is still called Little Golden-Hood; secondly, it was not she, nor the good grand-dame, but the wicked wolf who was, in the end, caught and devoured. Only listen. The story begins something like the tale. There was once a little peasant girl, pretty and nice as a star in its season. Her real name was Blanchette, but she was more often called Little Golden-Hood, on account of a wonderful little cloak with a hood, gold- and fire-colored, which she always had on. This little hood was given her by her grandmother, who was so old that she did not know her age; it ought to bring her good luck, for it was made of a ray of sunshine, she said. And as the good old woman was considered something of a witch, everyone thought the little hood rather bewitched too. And so it was, as you will see. One day the mother said to the child, "Let us see, my Little Golden-Hood, if you know now how to find your way by yourself. You shall take this good piece of cake to your grandmother for a Sunday treat tomorrow. You will ask her how she is, and come back at once, without stopping to chatter on the way with people you don't know. Do you quite understand?" "I quite understand," replied Blanchette gaily. And off she went with the cake, quite proud of her errand. But the grandmother lived in another village, and there was a big wood to cross before getting there. At a turn of the road under the trees, suddenly, "Who goes there?" "Friend wolf." He had seen the child start alone, and the villain was waiting to devour her; when at the same moment he perceived some woodcutters who might observe him, and he changed his mind. Instead of falling upon Blanchette he came frisking up to her like a good dog. "'Tis you! my nice Little Golden-Hood," said he. So the little girl stops to talk with the wolf, who, for all that, she did not know in the least. "You know me, then!" said she. "What is your name?" "My name is friend wolf. And where are you going thus, my pretty one, with your little basket on your arm?" "I am going to my grandmother, to take her a good piece of cake for her Sunday treat tomorrow." "And where does she live, your grandmother?" "She lives at the other side of the wood, in the first house in the village, near the windmill, you know." "Ah! yes! I know now," said the wolf. "Well, that's just where I'm going; I shall get there before you, no doubt, with your little bits of legs, and I'll tell her you're coming to see her; then she'll wait for you." Thereupon the wolf cuts across the wood, and in five minutes arrives at the grandmother's house. He knocks at the door: toc, toc. No answer. He knocks louder. Nobody. Then he stands up on end, puts his two forepaws on the latch and the door opens. Not a soul in the house. The old woman had risen early to sell herbs in the town, and she had gone off in such haste that she had left her bed unmade, with her great nightcap on the pillow. "Good!" said the wolf to himself, "I know what I'll do." He shuts the door, pulls on the grandmother's nightcap down to his eyes, then he lies down all his length in the bed and draws the curtains. In the meantime the good Blanchette went quietly on her way, as little girls do, amusing herself here and there by picking Easter daisies, watching the little birds making their nests, and running after the butterflies which fluttered in the sunshine. At last she arrives at the door. Knock, knock. "Who is there?" says the wolf, softening his rough voice as best he can. "It's me, Granny, your Little Golden-Hood. I'm bringing you a big piece of cake for your Sunday treat tomorrow." "Press your finger on the latch, then push and the door opens." "Why, you've got a cold, Granny," said she, coming in. "Ahem! a little, a little . . ." replies the wolf, pretending to cough. "Shut the door well, my little lamb. Put your basket on the table, and then take off your frock and come and lie down by me. You shall rest a little." The good child undresses, but observe this! She kept her little hood upon her head. When she saw what a figure her Granny cut in bed, the poor little thing was much surprised. "Oh!" cries she, "how like you are to friend wolf, Grandmother!" "That's on account of my nightcap, child," replies the wolf. "Oh! what hairy arms you've got, Grandmother!" "All the better to hug you, my child." "Oh! what a big tongue you've got, Grandmother!" "All the better for answering, child." "Oh ! what a mouthful of great white teeth you have, Grandmother!" "That's for crunching little children with!" And the wolf opened his jaws wide to swallow Blanchette. But she put down her head crying, "Mamma! Mamma!" and the wolf only caught her little hood. Thereupon, oh dear! oh dear! he draws back, crying and shaking his jaw as if he had swallowed red-hot coals. It was the little fire-colored hood that had burnt his tongue right down his throat. The little hood, you see, was one of those magic caps that they used to have in former times, in the stories, for making oneself invisible or invulnerable. So there was the wolf with his throat burnt, jumping off the bed and trying to find the door, howling and howling as if all the dogs in the country were at his heels. Just at this moment the grandmother arrives, returning from the town with her long sack empty on her shoulder. "Ah, brigand!" she cries, "wait a bit!" Quickly she opens her sack wide across the door, and the maddened wolf springs in head downwards. It is he now that is caught, swallowed like a letter in the post. For the brave old dame shuts her sack, so; and she runs and empties it in the well, where the vagabond, still howling, tumbles in and is drowned. "Ah, scoundrel! you thought you would crunch my little grandchild! Well, tomorrow we will make her a muff of your skin, and you yourself shall be crunched, for we will give your carcass to the dogs." Thereupon the grandmother hastened to dress poor Blanchette, who was still trembling with fear in the bed. "Well," she said to her, "without my little hood where would you be now, darling?" And, to restore heart and legs to the child, she made her eat a good piece of her cake, and drink a good draught of wine, after which she took her by the hand and led her back to the house. And then, who was it who scolded her when she knew all that had happened? It was the mother. But Blanchette promised over and over again that she would never more stop to listen to a wolf, so that at last the mother forgave her. And Blanchette, the Little Golden-Hood, kept her word. And in fine weather she may still be seen in the fields with her pretty little hood, the color of the sun. But to see her you must rise early. Source: Andrew Lang, The Red Fairy Book , 5th edition (London and New York: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1895), pp. 215-19 . Lang's source: Charles Marelles. Return to the table of contents . Red Ridinghood Ireland Once upon a time there lived a little girl called Red Ridinghood. Her grandmother was sick and her mother sent her with some food to her, and she told her not to speak to anyone on her way. She went along however, and it was not long until she met a wolf. He asked her where she was going, and she said that she was going to see her grandmother who was sick. The wolf said, "All right" and went away. He ran as quickly as he could, and he reached the house before her, and he went into the room and ate the grandmother. He then put on her hat and coat and went into the bed. When Red Ridinghood arrived she knocked at the door, and the wolf said, "Lift the catch and walk in." She did so and went into the room. When she saw the wolf inside she thought it was her grandmother, but she thought she had very big eyes and mouth. "Grandma what great big eyes you have," she said. "Just for to see you, my dear," said the wolf. "Grandma, what great ears you have." "Just for to hear my dear." "Grandma what great big mouth you have." "Just for to eat you my dear," and he jumped out of the bed and ate her. I got this story from Thomas Burke, Cluide, Corrandulla, Co. Galway. Aged 43 years. Annie O'Dowde Cluide, Corrandulla, Co. Galway. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Galway >> Caisleán hAicéid, pp. 129-30 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . The Little Girl and Her Grandmother Ireland One day a little girl was going to see her grandmother. She brought butter and eggs in a basket to her grandmother. Her mother told her to go the pathway, but she did not go the pathway, but she went through a wood, and while she was going a wolf saw her, and he knew where she was going, and he went off before her. When he came to the grandmothers he went in and he devoured her grandmother. When the little girl came to her grandmother's house she went into the kitchen. There was nobody there before her. Then she went into the room, and the wolf was inside in bed before her. She thought it was her grandmother, and she began talking to the wolf and she said to the wolf, "Isn't it great big ears you've got," and after a awhile she spoke again. She said, "Isn't it great big hands you've got." And then she said to the wolf again, "Isn't it a great big mouth you'e got," and then the wolf sprang, and he was going to eat the little girl, and the little girl began roaring, and there were men cutting wood in the wood, and they heard the roaring, and one of them ran to the house and cut off the wolf's head. The little girl escaped. Mary O'Brien Told by John Eustace Erribul, Erribul, Shanahea PO. Shanahea PO. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Clare >> Effernan, Cill an Dísirt, pp. 171-72 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Red Riding Hood Ireland One time there lived a little girl. Her name was Red Riding Hood. She was dressed in a coat of red, and she wore a hood on her head. That was why she was called Red Riding Hood. She lived beside a wood. This little girl had a granny who lived the far side of the wood. One day she was ill, and Red Riding Hood's mother sent her with a basket of goods to her granny. When she was going through the wood she met a wolf. The wolf asked her where she was going. She told him she was going to her granny who was ll. When the wolf heard the news he ran on before her and got into her granny's cottage and killed her. Then he got into the bed and put the granny's glasses on his eyes. Then he got her nightgown and put it on. Next he got her night cap and put it on his head. Then he got into the bed and covered himself up. After a while he heard a knock at the door. The wolf told the little girl to come in. When the little girl came in she wondered how strange looking her granny was. Before she had said the words the wolf leaped out of the bed. Then the little girl began to scream. Her father was cutting timber in the wood. When he heard the noise he ran in and killed the wolf. When he had the wolf killed the little girl's granny jumped out of the wolf's stomach again. Michaél O Loinseach, Crannagh, Co. Laois. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Laois >> Ballyadams, pp. 141-42 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . The Old Man and the Wolf Romania In a small hut far up in the mountains there lived an old man with four small children. They were his grandchildren. He loved them very much and took good care of them. Whenever he went into the village to buy food he would say to his grandchildren, "Dear little children! If anyone comes to the door do not let them inside. Some day the wolf might come by, and he would eat you up!" Once he went into the village, and the wolf did come to the door and called out, "Dear children, open the door for me!" The children thought about their grandfather's warning not to open the door, and they said nothing. Then the wolf said, "Open up! Your grandfather sent me!" Then the oldest child said, "Why did grandfather send you?" The wolf answered, "He sent a sweet cake for you!" The children could no longer resist. They opened the door. The wolf sprang inside and ate up all four of the children. He looked around in the room to see if he might find something else to eat. He found a large bottle filled with brandy. He put the bottle to his mouth and drank it empty. He became so drunk that he could not move from the spot and had to lie down in the hut. Toward evening the grandfather returned home and saw the snoring wolf lying on the floor in the middle of the room. At once he knew what had happened to his grandchildren. He took a sharp knife and slit open the wolf's belly. The children jumped out, and the grandfather hid them. Then the grandfather took some dry lime, filled the wolf's belly with it, and then sewed the opening shut. When the wolf woke up he was thirsty and ran to the brook, where he drank a lot of water. The lime in his belly began to boil and to burn. The wolf burst apart and died a miserable death. Source (books.google.com): Heinrich von Wlislocki, "Der alte Mann und der Wolf," Märchen und Sagen der transsilvanischen Zigeuner (Berlin: Nicolaische Verlags-Buchhandlung, 1886), no. 58, pp. 130-31 . Source (Internet Archive): Heinrich von Wlislocki, "Der alte Mann und der Wolf," Märchen und Sagen der transsilvanischen Zigeuner (Berlin: Nicolaische Verlags-Buchhandlung, 1886), no. 58, pp. 130-31 . Return to the table of contents . The Tale of Jemima Puddle-Duck Beatrix Potter What a funny sight it is to see a brood of ducklings with a hen! -- Listen to the story of Jemima Puddle-duck, who was annoyed because the farmer's wife would not let her hatch her own eggs. Her sister-in-law, Mrs. Rebeccah Puddle-duck, was perfectly willing to leave the hatching to some one else -- "I have not the patience to sit on a nest for twenty-eight days; and no more have you, Jemima. You would let them go cold; you know you would!" "I wish to hatch my own eggs; I will hatch them all by myself," quacked Jemima Puddle-duck. She tried to hide her eggs; but they were always found and carried off. Jemima Puddle-duck became quite desperate. She determined to make a nest right away from the farm. She set off on a fine spring afternoon along the cart-road that leads over the hill. She was wearing a shawl and a poke bonnet. When she reached the top of the hill, she saw a wood in the distance. She thought that it looked a safe quiet spot. Jemima Puddle-duck was not much in the habit of flying. She ran downhill a few yards flapping her shawl, and then she jumped off into the air. She flew beautifully when she had got a good start. She skimmed along over the tree-tops until she saw an open place in the middle of the wood, where the trees and brushwood had been cleared. Jemima alighted rather heavily, and began to waddle about in search of a convenient dry nesting-place. She rather fancied a tree-stump amongst some tall fox-gloves. But -- seated upon the stump, she was startled to find an elegantly dressed gentleman reading a newspaper. He had black prick ears and sandy coloured whiskers. "Quack?" said Jemima Puddle-duck, with her head and her bonnet on one side -- "Quack?" The gentleman raised his eyes above his newspaper and looked curiously at Jemima -- "Madam, have you lost your way?" said he. He had a long bushy tail which he was sitting upon, as the stump was somewhat damp. Jemima thought him mighty civil and handsome. She explained that she had not lost her way, but that she was trying to find a convenient dry nesting-place. "Ah! is that so? indeed!" said the gentleman with sandy whiskers, looking curiously at Jemima. He folded up the newspaper, and put it in his coat-tail pocket. Jemima complained of the superfluous hen. "Indeed! how interesting! I wish I could meet with that fowl. I would teach it to mind its own business!" "But as to a nest -- there is no difficulty: I have a sackful of feathers in my wood-shed. No, my dear madam, you will be in nobody's way. You may sit there as long as you like," said the bushy long-tailed gentleman. He led the way to a very retired, dismal-looking house amongst the fox-gloves. It was built of faggots and turf, and there were two broken pails, one on top of another, by way of a chimney. "This is my summer residence; you would not find my earth -- my winter house -- so convenient," said the hospitable gentleman. There was a tumble-down shed at the back of the house, made of old soap-boxes. The gentleman opened the door, and showed Jemima in. The shed was almost quite full of feathers -- it was almost suffocating; but it was comfortable and very soft. Jemima Puddle-duck was rather surprised to find such a vast quantity of feathers. But it was very comfortable; and she made a nest without any trouble at all. When she came out, the sandy whiskered gentleman was sitting on a log reading the newspaper -- at least he had it spread out, but he was looking over the top of it. He was so polite, that he seemed almost sorry to let Jemima go home for the night. He promised to take great care of her nest until she came back again next day. He said he loved eggs and ducklings; he should be proud to see a fine nestful in his wood-shed. Jemima Puddle-duck came every afternoon; she laid nine eggs in the nest. They were greeny white and very large. The foxy gentleman admired them immensely. He used to turn them over and count them when Jemima was not there. At last Jemima told him that she intended to begin to sit next day -- "and I will bring a bag of corn with me, so that I need never leave my nest until the eggs are hatched. They might catch cold," said the conscientious Jemima. "Madam, I beg you not to trouble yourself with a bag; I will provide oats. But before you commence your tedious sitting, I intend to give you a treat. Let us have a dinner-party all to ourselves! "May I ask you to bring up some herbs from the farm-garden to make a savoury omelette? Sage and thyme, and mint and two onions, and some parsley. I will provide lard for the stuff-lard for the omelette," said the hospitable gentleman with sandy whiskers. Jemima Puddle-duck was a simpleton: not even the mention of sage and onions made her suspicious. She went round the farm-garden, nibbling off snippets of all the different sorts of herbs that are used for stuffing roast duck. And she waddled into the kitchen, and got two onions out of a basket. The collie-dog Kep met her coming out, "What are you doing with those onions? Where do you go every afternoon by yourself, Jemima Puddle-duck?" Jemima was rather in awe of the collie; she told him the whole story. The collie listened, with his wise head on one side; he grinned when she described the polite gentleman with sandy whiskers. He asked several questions about the wood, and about the exact position of the house and shed. Then he went out, and trotted down the village. He went to look for two fox-hound puppies who were out at walk with the butcher. Jemima Puddle-duck went up the cart-road for the last time, on a sunny afternoon. She was rather burdened with bunches of herbs and two onions in a bag. She flew over the wood, and alighted opposite the house of the bushy long-tailed gentleman. He was sitting on a log; he sniffed the air, and kept glancing uneasily round the wood. When Jemima alighted he quite jumped. "Come into the house as soon as you have looked at your eggs. Give me the herbs for the omelette. Be sharp!" He was rather abrupt. Jemima Puddle-duck had never heard him speak like that. She felt surprised, and uncomfortable. While she was inside she heard pattering feet round the back of the shed. Some one with a black nose sniffed at the bottom of the door, and then locked it. Jemima became much alarmed. A moment afterwards there were most awful noises -- barking, baying, growls and howls, squealing and groans. And nothing more was ever seen of that foxy-whiskered gentleman. Presently Kep opened the door of the shed, and let out Jemima Puddle-duck. Unfortunately the puppies rushed in and gobbled up all the eggs before he could stop them. He had a bite on his ear and both the puppies were limping. Jemima Puddle-duck was escorted home in tears on account of those eggs. She laid some more in June, and she was permitted to keep them herself: but only four of them hatched. Jemima Puddle-duck said that it was because of her nerves; but she had always been a bad sitter. Source: Beatrix Potter, The Tale of Jemima Puddle-Duck (New York: Frederick Warne and Company, 1908). Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Additional texts Some items listed below are in copyright and available only in print form. Bates, Clara Doty. Little Red Riding-Hood . Versified by Mrs. Clara Doty Bates, illustrated by Mrs. C. D. Finley (Boston: D. Lothrop and Company, 1883). Barker, James N. "Little Red Riding Hood," Specimens of American Poetry with Critical and Biographical Notices , edited by Samuel Kettell, vol. 2 (Boston: S. G. Goodrich and Company, 1829), pp. 338-41 . Calvino, Italo. "The Wolf and the Three Girls," Italian Folktales (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 1992), no. 26, pp. 75-76. Carryl, Guy Wetmore. "The New Red Riding Hood," Public Opinion: A Comprehensive Summary of the Press throughout the World on All Important Current Topics , vol. 30 (January - June 1901), pp. 542-44 . First published in the Saturday Evening Post . Carryl, Guy Wetmore. "How Little Red Riding Hood Came to Be Eaten," Grimm Tales Made Gay (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1902), pp. 21-28 . Cattarinetta , a folktale from Italy of type 333A about a careless girl who is eaten up by a witch. Croser, Nigel. Little Red Riding Hood . Words by Nigel Croser, illustrated by Leanne Argent (Flinders Park, SA, Australia: Era Publications, 2003). Dahl, Roald, "Little Red Riding Hood and the Wolf," Fiction and Poetry Texts , year 5, edited by Julie Orrell and Eileen Jones (Cheltenham, U.K.: Nelson Thomes, 2004), p. 23 . Dundes, Alan, ed. Little Red Riding Hood: A Casebook , (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1989). Grimm, Jacob and Wilhelm. The Grimm Brothers' Little Red Cap, version of 1857 . This version is only slightly different from the version of 1812, translated above. Mieder, Wolfgang, "Little Red Riding Hood," Disenchantments: An Anthology of Modern Fairy Tale Poetry (Hanover [New Hampshire] and London: University Press of New England, 1985), ch. 7, pp. 95-114. The Rescue of Little Red Riding Hood: A Juvenile Operetta in Five Acts (Nashville: C. R. and H. H. Hatch, 1883). Riley, James Whitcomb. "Maymie's Story of Red Riding-Hood," The Complete Works of James Whitcomb Riley , collected and edited by Edmund Henry Eitel, vol. 4 (© 1913), pp. 412-18 . Ritz, Hans, Die Geschichte vom Rotkäppchen: Ursprünge, Analysen, Parodien eines Märchens (Emstal: Muriverlag, 1981), Thackeray, Miss [Anne Thackeray Ritchie]. Little Red Riding Hood (Boston: Loring, 1867). Thurber, James. "The Little Girl and the Wolf," Fables for Our Time and Famous Poems Illustrated (New York: Harper Collins, 1983), p. 3 . Tieck, Ludwig. Leben und Tod des kleinen Rothkäppchens (1800) . This is a large pdf file (8.54 megabytes) containing facsimiles of three dramas from Ludwig Tieck's Schriften , vol. 2 (Berlin: G. Reimer, 1828). His version of "Little Red Riding Hood" is found on pages 327-62. "The Wolf-King; or, Little Red-Riding-Hood: An Old Woman's Tale," Tales of Terror , 2nd edition (London, 1808), no. 4, pp. 22-28 . Zipes, Jack. The Trials and Tribulations of Little Red Riding Hood: Versions of the Tale in Sociocultural Context , (South Hadley, Massachusetts: Bergin and Garvey Publishers, 1983). Essays and Internet sites The Annotated Little Red Riding Hood from the SurLaLune Fairy Tale Pages by Heidi Anne Heiner. Little Red Riding Hood from Wikipedia . Le Petit Chaperon rouge , an article from the French-language Wikipedia . Rotkäppchen , an article from the German-language Wikipedia . Charles Perrault's Mother Goose Tales . Grimm Brothers' Home Page . Return to The table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 25, 2021. Revived from Apparent Death: Folktales of Type 990 Revived from Apparent Death by a Grave-Robber folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 990 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2014 Contents A Sign from God (Germany, Johann Gustav Büsching). A Terrible Experience (Scotland, Buckham Hugh Hossack). Buried in a Trance (Scotland, Andrew Jervise). A Ghoul-Like Deed (England, John Walker Ord). Lady Restored to Life (England, Beaver H. Blacker). Lady Mount Edgcumbe Buried Alive (England, Augustus J. C. Hare). Related links . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. A Sign from God Germany In Magdeburg they formerly showed (I do not know if they still do) a house with a plaque depicting a horse that was looking out the window of a house's upper story. The following legend explains this plaque: A man buried his wife with the pomp expected of his class, leaving on her finger a valuable diamond ring. The greedy gravedigger noticed this, and therefore returned that night to open the grave, pry up the coffin lid, and attempt to remove the ring from the dead woman. However, the ring was tight, and he had to push and twist and turn, which revived the woman, who was only in a trance. She sat up, giving the disloyal gravedigger such a fright that he fell down unconscious. The woman, herself frightened by her helpless condition, picked up the gravedigger's lantern and staggered toward her husband's house. She knocked. The servant asked, "Who is there?" "It's me," she answered, "the lady of the house. Open the door for me." Deathly pale, he ran to his master's room and told him the news. "My wife will never return from her grave," he answered, "any more than would my horses walk up the steps in order to look out the window." Then he heard clip clop up the steps. It was his horses. Then the man believed, went downstairs, opened the door, and received his wife, who he thought was dead. And he lived happily with her for many long years. Source: Johann Gustav Büsching, Volks-Sagen, Märchen und Legenden , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Carl Heinrich Reclam, 1812), no. 82, pp. 389-91 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Return to the table of contents . A Terrible Experience Scotland Margaret Halcro married, 1674, in her 27th year, the Rev. Henry Erskine, and died, 14th January 1725, in the house of her son, Rev. Ebenezer Erskine. She was buried at Scotland Wells, where her tombstone is still to be seen. Poor Mrs. Erskine had one terrible experience. The minister, a widower when he married Marion Halcro, was deeply attached to his young wife, and bitter was his anguish when, a few months after the marriage, she was cut off by a short illness. Mr. Erskine resolved that her trinkets and jewellery should be buried with her, and a valuable ring was left upon her finger. When John Carr, village carpenter, and sexton of Chirnside Parish Church, came to screw down the coffin lid, the minister, gazing on the features of his beloved wife, thought he saw the lips quiver. Every available test was vainly tried in the fond hope that life had not departed. But Carr had seen the jewellery, examined the bracelets, and had even tried whether the ring would slip off without difficulty, for he thought it a pity that such beautiful articles should be lost. To save himself subsequent labour and time, the nails were loosely screwed, and in late afternoon at the graveyard, consulting the feelings of the bereaved husband, the earth was lightly thrown in, the considerate sexton remarking that he could finish the work better in daylight. At night Carr returned to the burial ground, quickly removed the earth, and opened the coffin. The ring was first sought, but it refused to leave its place. Taking his knife, the operator placed the finger on the edge of the coffin and proceeded to amputation. With the opening of a vein vitality was restored, and Mrs. Erskine uttered a piercing shriek. Carr yelled and fled, leaving the lady to get out of the grave as best she might. Weak and cold as a corpse, she found her way home, but even at the manse her troubles were not over. The door was locked, though the inmates had not retired. The minister was strangely affected by the knock, which was exactly that of his late wife, and the old servant who opened the door fainted on seeing the apparition. But Margaret Halcro, even in such an emergency, was practical. The terrified husband could not believe the voice which declared that this was no ghost, but his own living and loving wife. While he stood helpless, Mrs. Erskine, shivering in her grave clothes, slipped past and hurried to the study, where there was a fire. Stimulants were administered, and the bed, warmed with hot bricks, soon restored her to comfort, and she was able to relate in detail her terrible experiences, through all of which she had been perfectly conscious. She told of her great effort to speak when her husband was looking at her in her coffin; of Carr's examination of the jewellery; and of her calculating on the sexton's return to the grave. Mrs. Erskine survived her husband twenty years. Source: Buckham Hugh Hossack, Kirkwall in the Orkneys (Kirkwall: William Peace and Son, 1900), p. 444 . Return to the table of contents . Buried in a Trance Scotland Only one tradition is known regarding the family of Edzell and this [burial] vault; and, as a matter of course, it is fraught with much of the romance incident to the dreamings of a remote age, but it is also told of other families. Divested, however, of its accustomed minuteness, story has failed to preserve the name of the heroine, but it is uniformly affirmed that she was the wife of one of the lairds, was buried in a trance, and so loaded with rich and valuable jewelry that the sexton's avariciousness got excited to the highest pitch. Bent on obtaining the treasure at all hazards, he stole under night to her lonely sanctuary, and soon succeeded in putting himself in possession of the whole, except the massive rings which girded her swollen fingers. These he eyed with great admiration, and having failed to gain them by ordinary means, he resolved to amputate the fingers. A slight movement of the body, and the faint exclamation of "Alas!" staggered his valour -- the knife dropped from his guilty hand -- he trembled from head to foot, and fell senseless on the cold damp floor, amidst crazy trestles and musty bones! Meanwhile, the lady, disentangling herself from her shroud, snatched the glimmering taper in one hand, and, raising her unexpected deliverer with the other, led him forth from the vault. Restored to consciousness, he craved mercy on bended knees; and, although the lady assured him of a handsome reward from her husband if he would accompany her to the castle, he begged for leave to flee from his native land; while she, with a heart grateful for the restoration of life, kindly permitted him to retain his sacrilegious spoil, and the greedy sexton was never heard of more! Source: Andrew Jervise, The History and Traditions of the Land of the Lindsays in Angus and Mearns , 2nd edition (Edinburgh: David Douglas, 1882), pp. 15-16 . Return to the table of contents . A Ghoul-Like Deed England An old gentleman in the village [Hutton Rudby] related a curious story of the ghoul-like deeds of a certain parish clerk, who officiated also as sexton, some years ago. It would appear that a married woman of the village having been given up for dead, was at length removed to the usual place of interment. Whether from some implied wish on her part, or difficulty in releasing it, the wedding ring was allowed to remain on the finger. This circumstance awakened the cupidity of the parish clerk, who, at the lone hour of midnight, crept cautiously to the new-made grave. Having removed the earth, and unscrewed the coffin, he proceeded to take off the ring, but from the contracted state of the fingers was unable to effect his purpose. Accordingly with his pocketknife he set about amputating the finger; but he had scarcely reached the bone, when, O horror! the corpse bolted nearly upright in its coffin, at the same time uttering a loud and dismal scream. The parish clerk, who, by the by, was a tailor, immediately darted homeward with the utmost speed, his hair bristling on end. Meantime the poor woman, who had been unconsciously buried in a trance, alarmed at her strange and peculiar situation, directed her steps to her husband's residence, and knocked loudly at the door. What was her husband's amazement and consternation to behold his buried wife, in her shroud and grave-clothes, standing at the door, calling for admittance! His first alarm having somewhat abated, he proceeded to make further inquiry, and was at length convinced that his true wife, in flesh and blood, had in reality returned from the tomb. Afterwards, the injured finger and the state of the grave, pointed suspicion to the parish clerk; but the husband, instead of punishing him for allowing his wife to return from her last resting place, actually presented him annually with a web of the finest linen (he being a linen manufacturer). Source: John Walker Ord, The History and Antiquities of Cleveland, Comprising the Wapentake of East and West Langbargh, North Riding, County York (London: Simpkin and Marshall, 1846), p. 470 . Return to the table of contents . Lady Restored to Life England I have met with the following statement: Eliza, the wife of Sir W. Fanshawe, of Woodley Hall, in Gloucestershire, was interred, having, at her own request, a valuable locket, which was her husband's gift, hung upon her breast. The sexton, proceeding to the vault at night, stole the jewel, and by the admission of fresh air restored the body, who had been only in a trance, and who, with great difficulty, reached Woodley Hall in the dead of night, to the general alarm of the servants. Sir William, being roused by their cries, found his lady, with bleeding feet and clothed in the winding-sheet, stretched upon the hall. She was put into a warm bed, and gave birth to several children after her recovery. On what authority, let me ask, has this statement been made? And, if true, when did the occurrence take place? Change the scene to the town of Drogheda, in Ireland, the lady's name to Harman, and the locket to a ring, and you have a tolerably accurate account of what occurred in the last century, and with the tradition of which I have been familiar from my childhood. Source: Beaver H. Blacker, ed., Gloucestershire Notes and Queries , vol. 1 (London: W. Kent and Company, 1881), pp. 2-3 . Return to the table of contents . Lady Mount Edgcumbe Buried Alive England The late Lord Mount Edgcumbe lived here [Stone Hall, Plymouth] for many years.... It was his mother [Sophia, daughter of the 2nd Earl of Buckinghamshire] who was buried alive and lived for many years afterwards. It was known that she had been put into her coffin with a very valuable ring upon her finger, and the sexton went in after the funeral, when the coffin was put into the vault, to get it off. He opened the coffin, but the ring was hard to move, and he had to rub the dead finger up and down. This brought Lady Mount Edgcumbe to life, and she sat up. The sexton fled, leaving the doors of the vault and church open. Lady Mount Edgcumbe walked home in her shroud, and appeared in front of the windows. Those within thought it was a ghost. Then she walked in at the front door. When she saw her husband, she fainted away in his arms. This gave her family time to decide what should be done, and they settled to persuade her it had been a terrible delirium. When she recovered from her faint, she was in her own bed, and she ever believed it had been a dream. Source: Augustus J. C. Hare, The Story of My Life , vol. 3 (New York: Dodd, Mead, and Company; London: George Allen, 1901), pp. 204-205 . Return to the table of contents . Related Links Another collection of folktales about grave-robbers: A Corpse Claims Its Property , ghost stories of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 366. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 20, 2014. Rígsþula: The Lay of Rig Rígsþula: The Lay of Rig from the Poetic Edda edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2010 The Birth of Thrall 1. Once walked, 'tis said, the green ways along, mighty and ancient, a god most glorious; strong and vigorous, striding, Rig. 2. Ever on he went in the middle of the way, till he came to a house with door unclosed. He entered straight; there was fire on the floor and a hoary couple sitting by the hearth, Great-grandfather and mother in ancient guise. 3. Well knew Rig how to give them counsel, he sat him down in the middle of the floor, with the home-folk twain upon either side. 4. Great-grandmother fetched a coarse-baked loaf, all heavy and thick and crammed with husk: she bore it forth in the middle of the dish, with broth in a bowl, and laid the board. 5. Thence Rig uprose, prepared to rest; -- well he knew how to give them counsel -- he laid him down in the middle of the bed and the home-folk twain upon either side. Thus he tarried three nights together, then on he strode in the middle of the road while thrice three moons were gliding by. 6. Great-grandmother bore a swarthy boy; with water they sprinkled him, called him Thrall. Forthwith he grew and well he throve, bur tough were his hands with wrinkled skin, with knuckles knotty and fingers thick; his face was ugly, his back was humpy, his heels were long. Straightway 'gan he to prove his strength, with bast a-binding loads a-making, he bore home faggots the livelong day. 7. There came to the dwellings a wandering maid, with wayworn feet, and sunburned arms, with down-bent nose,- the Bond-maid named. 8. She sat her down in the middle of the floor; beside her sat the son of the house: they chatted and whispered, their bed preparing -- Thrall and Bond-maid -- the long day through. 9. Joyous lived they and reared their children. Thus they called them: Brawler, Cowherd, Boor and Horsefly, Lewd and Lustful, Stout and Stumpy, Sluggard, Swarthy, Lout and Leggy. They fashioned fences, they dunged the meadows, swine they herded, goats they tended and turf they dug. 10. Daughters were there, -- Loggy and Cloggy, Lumpy-leggy, and Eagle-nose, Whiner, Bondwoman, Oaken-peggy, Tatter-coat and the Crane-shanked maid. Thence are come the generations of thralls. The Birth of Churl 11. Ever on went Rig the straight roads along till he came to a dwelling with door unclosed; he entered straight; there was fire in the floor; Grandfather and Grandmother owned the house. 12. The home-folk sat there hard a-working; by them stood on the floor a box; hewed the husband wood for a warp-beam; trim his beard and the locks o'er his brow, but mean and scanty the shirt he wore. 13. The wife sat by him plying her distaff, swaying her arms to weave the cloth, with snood on her head and smock on her breast, studs on her shoulders, and scarf on her neck. 14. Well knew Rig how to give them counsel; he sat him down in the middle of the floor, and the home-folk twain upon either side. 15. Grandmother set forth plenteous dishes; cooked was the calf, of dainties best. Thence Rig uprose prepared to rest. -- Well he knew how to give them counsel -- he laid him down in the middle of the bed and the home-folk twain upon either side. 16. Thus he tarried three nights together, then on he strode in the middle of the road while thrice three moons were gliding by. 17. A child had Grandmother, Churl they called him, and sprinkled with water and swathed in linen, rosy and ruddy, with sparkling eyes. He grew and throve, and forthwith 'gan he to break in oxen, to shape the harrow, to build him houses and barns to raise him, to fashion carts and follow the plough. 18. Then home they drove with a key-hung maiden in goat-skin kirtle, named Daughter-in-Law. They wed her to Churl in her bridal linen: the twain jade ready, their wealth a-sharing, kept house together, and joyous lived. 19. Children reared they thus they called them: Youth and Hero, Thane, Smith, Yeoman, Broad-limb, Peasant, Sheaf-beard, Neighbour, Farmer, Speaker and Stubbly-beard. 20. By other names were the daughters called: Dame, Bride, Lady, Gay, and Gaudy, Maid, Wife, Woman, Bashful, Slender. Thence are come the kindreds of churls. The Birth of Earl 21. Still on went Rig the straight roads along till he came to a hall whose gates looked south. Pushed was the door to, a ring in the post set: he forthwith entered the rush-strewn room. Each other eyeing, the home-folk sat there -- Father and Mother, -- twirling their fingers. There was the husband, string a-twining, shafting arrows and shaping bows: and there was the wife o'er her fair arms wondering, smoothing her linen, stretching her sleeves. A high-peaked coif and a breast-brooch wore she, trailing robes and a blue-tinged sark. Her brow was brighter, her breast was fairer, her throat was whiter than driven snow. 22. Well knew Rig how to give them counsel; he sat him down in the middle of the floor, and the home-folk twain upon either side. 23. Then took Mother a figured cloth, white, of linen, and covered the board; thereafter took she a fine-baked loaf, white of wheat and covered the cloth: next she brought forth plenteous dishes, set with silver, and spread the board with brown-fried bacon and roasted birds. There was wine in a vessel and rich-wrought goblets; they drank and revelled while day went by. 24. Well knew Rig how to give them counsel; he rose ere long and prepared his couch: he laid him down in the middle of the bed, and the home-folk twain upon either side. 25. Thus he tarried three nights together; then on he strode in the middle of the road while thrice three moons were gliding by. 26. Then a boy had Mother; she swathed him in silk, and with water sprinkled him; called him Earl. Light were his locks, and fair his cheeks, flashing his eyes like a serpent's shone. 27. Grew Earl forthwith in the halls and 'gan to swing the shield, to fit the string, to bend the bow, to shaft the arrow, to hurl the dart, to shake the spear, to ride the horse, to loose the hounds, to draw the sword, and to swim the stream. 28. Forth from the thicket came Rig a-striding, Rig a-striding, and taught him runes, his own name gave him, -- as son he claimed him, and bade him hold the ancestral fields, -- the ancestral fields -- and the ancient home. 29. Then on rode Earl through the murky wood, through the rimy fells till he reached a hall. His shaft he shook, his shield he brandished, his steed he galloped, his sword he drew; war he wakened, the field he reddened, the doomed he slew, and won him lands -- till alone he ruled over eighteen halls. Gold he scattered and gave to all men treasures and trinkets and slender-ribbed horses; wealth he strewed and sundered rings. 30. Along dewy roads his messengers drive till the hall they reached where Ruler dwelt. A daughter owned he, dainty fingered, fair and skilful, Erna called. 31. They wooed her and brought her home a-driving; to Earl they wed her in veil fine-woven: husband and wife lived happy together, their children waxed and life enjoyed. The Birth of King 32. Heir was the eldest, Bairn the second, Babe, Successor, Inheritor, Boy, Descendent, Offspring, Son, Youth, Kinsman; Kon the kingly was youngest born. 33. Forthwith grew up the sons of Earl; games they learned, and sports and swimming, taming horses, round shields bending, war shafts smoothing, ash spears shaking; but King the youngest alone knew runes, runes eternal and runes of life. Yet more he knew, -- how to shelter men, to blunt the sword-edge and calm the sea: he learnt bird language, to quench the fire flame, heal all sorrows and soothe the heart; strength and might of eight he owned. 34. Then he strove in runes with Rig, the Earl, crafty wiles he used and won, so gained his heritage, held the right thus Rig to be called and runes to know. 35. Young King rode once through thicket and wood, shooting arrows and slaying birds, till spake a crow, perched lone on a bough: "Why wilt thou thus kill birds, young King? 'Twould fit thee rather to ride on horses, to draw the sword and to slay the foe. 36. "Dan and Damp have dwellings goodlier, homesteads fairer than ye do hold; and well they know the keel to ride, the sword to prove and wounds to strike." Source: The Elder or Poetic Edda, Commonly Known as Sæmund's Edda , Part 1, The Mythological Poems, edited and translated by Olive Bray (London: The Viking Club, 1908), pp. 202-17 . Icelandic and English on facing pages. According to a prose preface to the poem Rígsþula , Rig is associated with -- perhaps another name for -- the god Heimdall. In any event, the god Rig is an enigma. Although name Rig is mentioned only in the poem Rígsþula , he was the progenitor of three social classes plus royalty, as related in the preceding account. Slaves and servants, the offspring of Thrall. Freemen and farmers, the offspring of Churl (Karl). Nobles, the offspring of Earl (Jarl). Royalty. The final birth described is that of the boy Kon (Konungr), whose name means "king." It is noteworthy that the name Rig signifies "king" in Irish. It is, of course, Rig's cohabitation in various settings that gives rise to all the social classes. The right of a guest to sleep with the host's wife or daughter, a major feature of the poem Rígsþula , is documented in a number of medieval Irish and nordic works. See, for example, legend number 2 under the title Origin of the Hidden People (Iceland). A spelling note: The letter "þ" in the Icelandic title of the poem Rígsþula is called "thorn" and is pronounced like the "th" in the word "thorn." Return to: the top of this document . Germanic Myths, Legends, and Sagas . D. L. Ashliman's index of Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts . March 30, 2010. Robber Bridegroom: Tales of Type 955 The Robber Bridegroom and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 955 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2001-2023 Contents Link to The Robber Bridegroom (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, versions of 1812 and 1857). Opens with a new page. The Robber's Bride (Germany). The Sweetheart in the Wood (Norway). The Robber Bridegroom (Denmark). The Story of Mr. Fox (England). The Oxford Student (England). The Girl Who Got Up a Tree (England). Bloody Baker (England). Bobby Rag (England). Captain Murderer (England, Charles Dickens). Laula (Wales). The History of Mr. Greenwood (Scotland). The Cannibal Innkeeper (Romania). Greenbeard (Lithuania). Sulasa and Sattuka (India, The Jataka ). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Robber's Bride Germany Once upon a time there were a man and a woman to whom the dear Lord had given a wonderfully beautiful daughter. The parents and the child prayed, and worked, and lived good and wholesome lives. One day when the daughter had just reached her fifteenth year a splendid carriage drove up to their little hut. A distinguished gentleman emerged from it and said to the parents, "Do you not have a daughter whom I could marry?" "No," was the answer. "To be sure, we do have a daughter, but she should not get married yet." However, the gentleman would not accept this response. He had his horses unhitched, and he stayed there for three days. During these three days he was so pious and polite, and furthermore he had so much money and other valuables, that he won the mother's approval already on the first day, on the second day that of the daughter, and finally on the third day that of the father as well. The father had repeatedly said to his wife, "I do not have a good feeling about this!" but she made him feel good about it, knowing how to coax him with sweet words into giving his approval. As evening of the third day approached they took leave of their daughter, and asked the distinguished gentleman to take good care of her. He promised to do so, as he hurried away with his beautiful bride. Now this distinguished gentleman was in truth a wild robber and cannibal. On their way he told the poor child nothing but horror stories, and when he pulled her from his carriage, he said to her, laughing, "Would you prefer to be boiled in oil or cooked in water? You are a delicious morsel, and because I am so fond of you, I will give you your choice." The terrified bride could not answer, and the cannibal pushed her into a cave, saying further, "Ask the dear Lord to give you a good idea, and during the night prepare yourself to die!" Then he went into an adjoining cave. When the girl came to her senses, she heard a terrible commotion in the next cave. The robber was beating his housekeeper, who in turn was scolding and scratching him. Now she was an old witch. She became very angry when he brought home a young girl, and for this she received a good beating. That is how the two of them behaved. That night the cannibal slept by himself in his cave, and the old witch stayed with the young bride. The latter, however, did not close her eyes, but instead prayed and wept continuously. The old witch was upset that she was not able to sleep. She was also somewhat touched and still angry with the cannibal. At last she croaked, "Stop your whimpering! Just what did that beast tell you?" The girl answered, "He asked me if I would prefer to be boiled in oil or cooked in water." The witch laughed and replied, "And you have no desire for either one, you poor little fool!" This sounded so heartless that it blocked the poor girl's throat. "Don't be so sensitive!" the old hag continued, when she received no answer. "Do you want me to tickle you?" And she scratched the girl until she cried out loudly. "You have a very good voice!" scoffed the witch, then continued, "What I am about to tell you is thanks to that ruthless tyrant's blows. Tomorrow morning when he asks you, answer that you would prefer to be cooked in water. Then you yourself will have to carry the water, for he is too proud to do so himself. I will pretend to be sick. When you reach the well, take off your clothes and put them on the well-pole as though you were dressing a real person, then hide yourself in the hollow tree, the seventh tree on the right-hand side of the path. Now give me some peace, or I myself will divulge the plan." Very early the next morning the cannibal came into the cave, and when the girl answered his question by saying that she would prefer to be cooked in water, he kicked the witch with his foot and shouted, "Go get some water while I slaughter my little dove." "Fetch your own water!" croaked the witch. "You have lamed both of my arms." The cannibal cursed and ordered his bride, "Take this bucket and get some water so that I can cook you!" She took the bucket, put her clothes onto the well-pole, and crept into the hollow tree. When she did not return, the robber shouted, "Are you waiting for your sweetheart there at the well? Is that why you are standing there without moving? If you don't come back immediately, I will see to it that he comes to you!" The pole did not pay the least attention to his scoffing, nor did it even turn around when the cannibal began to curse and threaten. When finally a shot from the cave hit the pole, it neither cried nor fell over. "Is that girl bulletproof?" shouted the cannibal, took a broadsword and ran to the well. How he seethed when he came closer and found the strange large doll! Boiling with rage, he ran with a few leaps back into his cave, tied his sword around his waist, mounted his faithful steed, shouted to the witch, "Fill the pot with oil and bring it to a boil!" and hurried away, accompanied by a large bloodhound. Soon he came to the hollow tree, where the dog stopped and barked and scratched. The robber drew his worthy sword and thrust it through the bark, cutting the maiden's right big toe. Bright blood flowed from it onto the sword, but when he pulled it out again, the blood had disappeared. So he rode on. When the girl could no longer hear the galloping horse and the barking dog she climbed out of the tree and crept into a deep ditch, then covered herself with twigs. A half hour later the angry robber returned. The dog stopped next to the ditch, and the robber thrust his sword into the twigs, cutting the same toe on its other side. Again blood flowed from it, but when he pulled back the sword, it was as clean as before. The poor bride put her ear against the side of the ditch, and when she could no longer hear the earth trembling, she wearily climbed out and limped to the well in order to dress herself a little. She had just washed herself when the robber returned. Seeing her, he shouted loudly for joy. He had just pulled out his worthy sword in order to cut off her head, when a bullet came out of the woods and struck him down. The prince had just been hunting in the vicinity, and he was the one who shot the cannibal. When he came nearer and saw the beautiful maiden, his heart burned with love for her. The robber was cursing and writhing in his own blood, and the prince had him thrown into the pot filled with oil. He took the maiden back to his castle as his wife, and there they lived long and happily together. Source: Carl and Theodor Colshorn, "Die Räuberbraut," Märchen und Sagen (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), no. 38, pp. 125-28 . The Colshorns heard this tale from "an oral source in Altenhagen," a village near Bielefeld in northern Germany. Return to the table of contents . The Sweetheart in the Wood Norway Once on a time there was a man who had a daughter, and she was so pretty her name was spread over many kingdoms, and lovers came to her as thick as autumn leaves. One of these made out that he was richer than all the rest; and grand and handsome he was too; so he was to have her, and after that he came over and over again to see her. As time went on, he said he should like her to come to his house and see how he lived; he was sorry he could not fetch her and go with her, but the day she came he would strew peas all along the path right up to his house door; but somehow or other it fell out that he strewed the peas a day too early. She set out and walked a long way, through wood and waste, and at last she came to a big grand house, which stood in a green field in the midst of the wood; but her lover was not at home, nor was there a soul in the house either. First, she went into the kitchen, and there she saw nothing but a strange bird which hung in a cage from the roof. Next she went into the parlour, and there everything was so fine it was beyond belief. But as she went into it, the bird called after her: "Pretty maiden, be bold, but not too bold." When she passed on into an inner room, the bird called out the same words. There she saw ever so many chests of drawers, and when she pulled open the drawers, they were filled with gold and silver, and everything that was rich and rare. When she went on into a second room the bird called out again: "Pretty maiden! be bold, but not too bold." In that room the walls were all hung round with women's dresses, till the room was crammed full. She went on into a third room, and then the bird screamed out: "Pretty maiden! Pretty maiden, be bold, but not too bold." And what do you think she saw there? Why! ever so many pails full of blood. So she passed on to a fourth room, and then the bird screamed and screeched after her: "Pretty maiden! Pretty maiden, be bold, but not too bold." That room was full of heaps of dead bodies, and skeletons of slain women, and the girl got so afraid that she was going to run away out of the house, but she had only got as far as the next room, where the pails of blood stood, when the bird called out to her: "Pretty maiden! Pretty maiden! Jump under the bed, jump under the bed, for now he's coming." She was not slow to give heed to the bird, and to hide under the bed. She crept as far back close to the wall as she could, for she was so afraid she would have crept into the wall itself, had she been able! So in came her lover with another girl; and she begged so prettily and so hard he would only spare her life, and then she would never say a word against him, but it was all no good. He tore off all her clothes and jewels, down to a ring which she had on her finger. That he pulled and tore at, but when he couldn't get it off he hacked off her finger, and it rolled away under the bed to the girl who lay there, and she took it up and kept it, Her sweetheart told a little boy who was with him to creep under the bed and bring out the finger. Yes! he bent down and crept under, and saw the girl lying there; but she squeezed his hand hard, and then he saw what she meant. "It lies so far under, I can't reach it," he cried. "Let it bide there till tomorrow, and then I'll fetch it out." Early next morning the robber went out, and the boy was left behind to mind the house, and he then went to meet the girl to whom his master was betrothed, and who had come, as you know, by mistake the day before. But before he went, the robber told him to be sure not to let her go into the two farthermost bedrooms. So when he was well off in the wood, the boy went and said she might come out now. "You were lucky, that you were," he said, "in coming so soon, else he would have killed you like all the others." She did not stay there long, you may fancy, but hurried back home as quick as ever she could, and when her father asked her why she had come so soon, she told him what sort of a man her sweetheart was, and all that she had heard and seen. A short time after her lover came passing by that way, and he looked so grand that his raiment shone again, and he came to ask, he said, why she had never paid him that visit as she had promised. "Oh!" said her father; "there came a man in the way with a sledge and scattered the peas, and she couldn't find her way; but now you must just put up with our poor house, and stay the night, for you must know we have guests coming, and it will be just a betrothal feast." So when they had all eaten and drunk, and still sat round the table, the daughter of the house said she had dreamt such a strange dream a few nights before. If they cared to hear it she would tell it them, but they must all promise to sit quite still till she came to the end. Yes! They were all ready to hear, and they all promised to sit still, and her sweetheart as well. "I dreamt I was walking along a broad path, and it was strewn with peas." "Yes! Yes!" said her sweetheart; "just as it will be when you go to my house, my love." "Then the path got narrower and narrower, and it went far far away through wood and waste." "Just like the way to my house, my love," said her sweetheart. "And so I came to a green field, in which stood a big grand house." "Just like my house, my love," said her sweetheart. "So I went into the kitchen, but I saw no living soul, and from the roof hung a strange bird in a cage, and as I passed on into the parlour, it called after me, 'Pretty maiden, be bold, but not too bold.'" "Just like my house that too, my love!" said her sweetheart. "So I passed on into a bedroom, arid the bird bawled after me the same words, and in there were so many chests of drawers, and when I pulled the drawers out and looked into them, they were filled with gold and silver stuffs, and everything that was grand." "That is just like it is at my house, my love," said her sweetheart. "I, too, have many drawers full of gold and silver, and costly things." "So I went on into another bedroom, and the bird screeched out to me the very same words; and that room was all hung round on the walls with fine dresses of women." "Yes, that too, is just as it is in my house," he said; "there are dresses and finery there both of silk and satin." "Well! when I passed on to the next bedroom, the bird began to screech and scream: 'Pretty maiden, pretty maiden! be bold, but not too bold!' and in this room were casks and pails all round the walls, and they were full of blood." "Fie," said her sweetheart, "how nasty. It isn't at all like that in my house, my love," for now he began to grow uneasy and wished to be off. "Why!" said the daughter, "it's only a dream, you know, that I am telling. Sit still. The least you can do is to hear my dream out." Then she went on: "When I went on into the next bedroom the bird began to scream out as loudly as before, the same words: 'Pretty maiden, pretty maiden! be bold, but not too bold.' And there lay many dead bodies and skeletons of slain folk." "No! no," said her sweetheart, "there's nothing like that in my house," and again he tried to run out. "Sit still, I say," she said, "it is nothing else than a dream, and you may very well hear it out. I, too, thought it dreadful, and ran back again, but I had not got farther than the next room where all those pails of blood stood, when the bird screeched out that I must jump under the bed and hide, for now he was coming; and so he came, and with him he had a girl who was so lovely I thought I had never seen her like before. She prayed and begged so prettily that he would spare her life. But he did not care a pin for all her tears and prayers; he tore off her clothes, and took all she had, and he neither spared her life nor aught else; but on her left hand she had a ring, which he could not tear off, so he hacked off her finger, and it rolled away under the bed to me." "Indeed! my love," said her sweetheart, "there's nothing like that in my house." "Yes, it was in your house," she said, "and here is the finger and the ring, and you are the man who hacked it off." So they laid hands on him, and put him to death, and burnt both his body and his house in the wood. Source: Peter Christian Asbjørnsen, Tales from the Fjeld , translated by G. W. Dasent (London: Chapman and Hall, 1874), pp. 231-37 . Link to the tale in Norwegian: Kjæresten i skogen . Return to the table of contents . The Robber Bridegroom Denmark There was a gentleman's daughter who was courted by many suitors, but she thought that none of them were good enough for her. Then one day a man came to them on horseback. He was very good looking, and she took a liking to him. He said that he had a farm out in the forest. Apart from this, no one knew anything about him. Her father said: "Oh, he must be a wonderful person, because you fell in love with him, even without knowing him." Yes, she had indeed fallen in love with him, so they began to make arrangements for the wedding, when and where it should take place. They wanted to know about his family. No, he didn't have a large family, but he had some men who lived with him. Then finally he said that she should go and see his house for herself. He told her that she would be able to find her way through the woods, because he would scatter some flowers and branches to mark the right path. She rode out on the day that they had set, and she found the right pathway. Finally she came to what looked like a small castle. She tied her horse to a garden gate, then walked through the garden, along a walkway, and finally up a large staircase. When she opened the door, she saw a bird in a cage. It said: "Don't walk so fast, little maiden! You will arrive in time." She gave it a piece of sugar, so that it would keep its mouth shut. Then she went into the living room. Everything there was magnificent, but no one was at home. She walked around and looked everywhere until she came to a chamber door that was open. A table and a chair and a made-up bed were inside. A plate of bread and butter plus a glass of beer were on the table. After taking a bite of the food and a sip of beer, she walked around to have a better look. She came to another door that was ajar. Inside this chamber hung a great many clothes of rich men and women. There were so many items that it was frightful. Then she went into the kitchen, which looked very good. There were enough provisions there to live on. Next she came to another chamber door that was ajar. There were barrels around the sides of the room. Curiously she looked into them and saw that they were filled with money and gold pieces. "Well, there is something here," she thought, and continued walking further into a long corridor leading to many doors along the way, but they were locked, and the keys had been removed. She managed to look through the keyholes, and inside she saw many dead bodies. This did not please her. Further along she came to another door where the key had been removed. Looking through this keyhole, she saw an ax lying on a large block, as well as many human heads next to it. Now she did not know where she was. Terrified, she went back to the room where the bread and butter were. There she considered what would be the wisest thing to do. If she were to go back out into the woods, then they could find her. She ate and drank some more, and then decided to creep under the bed and lie there until the people came home. Frightened and miserable, she lay there until the evening between bedtime and midnight, when the robber came home with his twelve comrades. To be sure, he was her lover. They came into the bedroom, and he said: "Look at the food. My lover has been here today." The others came in with a maiden who was screaming terribly, because she was about to die. They began to undress her. The girl under the bed heard everything. After they had undressed the screaming maiden, they saw a gold ring on her finger. It was so tight that they could not pull it off. They broke off her finger and threw it on the floor, and it fell under the bed. Then the men took her into the corridor and slit her throat. Fortunately for the girl under the bed, they didn't come back for the finger. They were hungry and thirsty and wanted to eat. The captain complained to himself that his lover had come out to see him in vain, but he could do nothing about that. Then he lay down on the bed. The other twelve men lay down on the ground outside, and they all fell asleep. When she felt that they were asleep and snoring, she planned to sneak out and escape. She climbed over one and then another, and it went well until she came to the last one. He was about to move, but she remained crouched by the door, and he thought that it was one of the others who had touched him. She safely escaped from the castle and got back to her horse and rode back home as best she could. And that was her visit to her bridegroom. The wedding day had already been set. The day came, and quite a few of the bride's family gathered together. The groom and his twelve men suddenly arrived on horseback. He said that he had no female relatives. While the wedding guests were gathering, the bride was inside getting dressed. The priest and the clerk were there, as well as many of the family. The twelve men were supposed to be in a room by themselves with the unmarried guests. They were now seated at the table to eat before going to church. Then her father said that he wanted to continue a familiar custom. It was a family tradition to sit at the table and entertain one another with stories and dreams and the like. Yes, then some of her family began to tell one story after another. When everyone had told a story, it came to the bride's turn. No, she she did not know a story to tell, but she could tell about a strange dream that she had had one night. She had dreamed that she was about to visit her lover. He had scattered flowers and branches along the pathway that she would have to follow. She was happy about that and found the castle easily enough. The bridegroom sat and smiled. Arriving at the garden gate, she had tied her horse and gone through the garden. A little bird was singing inside the door. The bridegroom laughed at that and said: "I myself have a bird like that." "But it's only a dream that I'm telling," she said. "Keep telling!" said the bridegroom, as well as the others. She continued to tell her story: "Then I entered a room where there was a big bed, and then I went into one where there were clothes in abundance, and then into one where there were many barrels filled with gold and precious things. But it was only a dream." The bridegroom sat and smiled at her story, and then said: "Yes, that is just like my castle. Have you really been there?" "No, I only saw it in my dream." "Tell us more!" "Then I entered a long corridor where there were many doors. All of them were locked but I looked through the keyholes." At this point the bridegroom began to squirm. When she told him what she had seen in there, this time he did not say that this was just like his castle. "It is good that it was only a dream," she said. "I don't want to tell any more." "Please," said the others, "you should tell us more." "Now, in this room there was a vat full of blood, and human heads, and a block with an ax." Hearing this, the bridegroom said that he felt ill and wanted to go out. But people were seated all around him, so he couldn't go anywhere. "Just stay seated," they said, "until her story is finished." When she got to the point where she was lying under the bed, and the twelve robbers came dragging in the maiden, the bridegroom wanted to jump over the table. He was now so sick that he could not stand to be inside. It was so nauseating that he did not know what to say. But he had to remain seated. She continued telling her story: "From under the bed, I saw that it was my lover who was the leader. He gave the order that the maiden should be undressed and beheaded. There was a ring on her finger which they could not remove, and they broke the finger off and threw it on the floor. They got the ring, but I picked up the finger. That was my dream." With that she took the finger out of her pocket and said: "Here is the proof of it! Now each of you can judge whether or not it was only a dream!" They immediately took hold of the robber. They captured the other twelve as well, and all of them were beheaded. The farm in the forest was examined, and all the valuables there were distributed to the poor. The girl herself got her share as a reward for having having exposed the robbers. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Røveren som Brudgom," Sagn fra Jylland: Samlede af Folkemunde (Copenhagen: Karl Schøngergs Forlag, 1880), no. 407, pp. 302-307 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Røveren som Brudgom," Sagn fra Jylland: Samlede af Folkemunde (Copenhagen: Karl Schøngergs Forlag, 1880), no. 407, pp. 302-307 . Return to the table of contents . The Story of Mr. Fox England Once upon a time there was a young lady called Lady Mary, who had two brothers. One summer they all three went to a country seat of theirs, which they had not before visited. Among the other gentry in the neighborhood who came to see them was a Mr. Fox, a bachelor, with whom they, particularly the young lady, were much pleased. He used often to dine with them, and frequently invited Lady Mary to come and see his house. One day that her brothers were absent elsewhere, and she had nothing better to do, she determined to go thither, and accordingly set out unattended. When she arrived at the house and knocked at the door, no one answered. At length she opened it and went in; over the portal of the door was written: "Be bold, be bold, but not too bold." She advanced; over the staircase was the same inscription. She went up; over the entrance of a gallery, the same again. Still she went on, and over the door of a chamber found written: Be bold, be bold, but not too bold, Lest that your heart's blood should run cold! She opened it; it was full of skeletons and tubs of blood. She retreated in haste, and, coming downstairs, saw from a window Mr. Fox advancing towards the house with a drawn sword in one hand, while with the other he dragged along a young lady by her hair. Lady Mary had just time to slip down and hide herself under the stairs before Mr. Fox and his victim arrived at the foot of them. As he pulled the young lady upstairs, she caught hold of one of the banisters with her hand, on which was a rich bracelet. Mr. Fox cut it off with his sword. The hand and bracelet fell into Lady Mary's lap, who then contrived to escape unobserved, and got safe home to her brothers' house. A few days afterwards Mr. Fox came to dine with them as usual. After dinner the guests began to amuse each other with extraordinary anecdotes, and Lady Mary said she would relate to them a remarkable dream she had lately had. "I dreamt," said she, "that as you, Mr. Fox, had often invited me to your house, I would go there one morning. When I came to the house I knocked at the door, but no one answered. When I opened the door, over the hall I saw written, 'Be bold, be bold, but not too bold.' But," said she, turning to Mr. Fox, and smiling, "It is not so, nor it was not so." Then she pursued the rest of the story, concluding at every turn with, "It is not so, nor it was not so," until she came to the room full of skeletons, when Mr. Fox took up the burden of the tale, and said: It is not so, nor it was not so, And God forbid it should be so! which he continued to repeat at every subsequent turn of the dreadful story, until she came to the circumstance of his cutting off the young lady's hand, when, upon his saying, as usual: It is not so, nor it was not so, And God forbid it should be so! Lady Mary retorts by saying: But it is so, and it was so, And here the hand I have to show! at the same moment producing the hand and bracelet from her lap, whereupon the guests drew their swords, and instantly cut Mr. Fox into a thousand pieces. Source: Edwin Sidney Hartland, English Fairy and Other Folk Tales (London: Walter Scott, [ca. 1890]), pp. 25-27 . Hartland's source is Malone's Shakspeare (1821), v. 7, p. 163. Additional note by Hartland: This story was contributed to Malone's Shakspeare by Blakeway, in elucidation of Benedict's speech in "Much Ado about Nothing," act 1, scene 1 -- "Like the old tale, my Lord: it is not so, nor 'twas not so; but indeed, God forbid it should be so!" Blakeway adds that this is evidently an allusion to the tale of "Mr. Fox," "which Shakspeare may have heard, as I have, related by a great-aunt in childhood." Essentially the same story is found in James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to the Nursery Rhymes of England (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), pp. 47-48 . Return to the table of contents . The Oxford Student England Many years ago there lived at the University of Oxford a young student, who, having seduced the daughter of a tradesman, sought to conceal his crime by committing the more heinous one of murder. With this view, he made an appointment to meet her one evening in a secluded field. She was at the rendezvous considerably before the time agreed upon for their meeting, and hid herself in a tree. The student arrived on the spot shortly afterwards, but what was the astonishment of the girl to observe that he commenced digging a grave. Her fears and suspicions were aroused, and she did not leave her place of concealment till the student, despairing of her arrival, returned to his college. The next day, when she was at the door of her father's house, he passed and saluted her as usual. She returned his greeting by repeating the following lines: One moonshiny night, as I sat high, Waiting for one to come by, The boughs did bend; my heart did ache To see what hole the fox did make. Astounded by her unexpected knowledge of his base design, in a moment of fury he stabbed her to the heart. This murder occasioned a violent conflict between the tradespeople and the students, the latter taking part with the murderer, and so fierce was the skirmish, that Brewer's Lane, it is said, ran down with blood. The place of appointment was adjoining the Divinity Walk, which was in time past far more secluded than at the present day, and she is said to have been buried in the grave made for her by her paramour. According to another version of the tale, the name of the student was Fox, and a fellow student went with him to assist in digging the grave. The verses in this account differ somewhat from the above: As I went out in a moonlight night, I set my back against the moon, I looked for one, and saw two come. The boughs did bend, the leaves did shake, I saw the hole the Fox did make. Source: James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to the Nursery Rhymes of England (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), pp. 49-50 . Return to the table of contents . The Girl Who Got Up the Tree England A girl who was leaving her master's service at a farm in the country told her sweetheart that she would meet him near a stile where they had met many times before. This stile was overhung by a tree. The girl got there before him and found a hole dug underneath the tree, and a pickaxe and spade lying by the side of the hole. She was much frightened at what she saw, and got up the tree. After she had been up the tree awhile her sweetheart came, and another man with him. Thinking that the girl had not yet come, the two men began to talk, and the girl heard her sweetheart say, "She will not come tonight. We'll go home now, and come back and kill her tomorrow night." As soon as they had gone the girl came down the tree and ran home to her father. When she had told him what she had seen, the father pondered awhile and then said to his daughter, "We will have a feast and ask our friends, and we will ask thy sweetheart to come and the man that came with him to the tree." So the two men came along with the other guests. In the evening they began to ask riddles of each other, but the girl who had got up the tree was the last to ask hers. She said: I'll rede you a riddle, I'll rede it you right, Where was I last Saturday night? The wind did blow, the leaves did shake, When I saw the hole the fox did make. When the two men who had intended to murder the girl heard this they ran out of the house. Source: Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales with other Traditional Remains: Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby, and Nottingham (London: David Nutt, 1895), no. 9, pp. 10-11 . Addy's source: "From North Derbyshire." Addy's note concerning the girl's riddle: The following variation occurs: One moonlight night as I sat high Waiting for one but two came by, The boughs did bend, my heart did quake To see the hole the fox did make. Return to the table of contents . Bloody Baker England I one day was looking over the different monuments in Cranbrook Church in Kent, when in the chancel my attention was arrested by one erected to the memory of Sir Richard Baker. The gauntlet, gloves, helmet, and spurs were (as is often the case in monumental erections of Elizabethan date) suspended over the tomb. What chiefly attracted my attention was the color of the gloves, which was red. The old woman who acted as my cicerone, seeing me look at them, said, "Aye, miss, those are Bloody Baker's gloves; their red color comes from the blood he shed." This speech awakened my curiosity to hear more, and with very little pressing I induced my old guide to tell me the following strange tale: The baker family had formerly large possessions in Cranbrook, but in the reign of Edward VI great misfortunes fell on them; by extravagance and dissipation they gradually lost all their lands, until an old house in the village (now used as the poor- house) was all that remained to them. The sole representative of the family remaining at the accession of Queen Mary was Sir Richard Baker. He had spent some years abroad in consequence of a duel; but when, said my informant, Bloody Queen Mary reigned, he thought he might safely return, as he was a Papist. When he came to Cranbrook he took up his abode in his old house. He only brought one foreign servant with him, and these two lived alone. Very soon strange stories began to be whispered respecting unearthly shrieks having been heard frequently to issue at nightfall from his house. Many people of importance were stopped and robbed in the Glastonbury woods, and many unfortunate travelers were missed and never heard of more. Richard Baker still continued to live in seclusion, but he gradually repurchased his alienated property, although he was known to have spent all he possessed before he left England. But wickedness was not always to prosper. He formed an apparent attachment to a young lady in the neighborhood, remarkable for always wearing a great many jewels. He often pressed her to come and see his old house, telling her he had many curious things he wished to show her. She had always resisted fixing a day for her visit, but happening to walk within a short distance of his house, she determined to surprise him with a visit. Her companion, a lady older than herself, endeavored to dissuade her from doing so, but she would not be turned from her purpose. They knocked at the door, but no one answered them; they, however, discovered it was not locked, and determined to enter. At the head of the stairs hung a parrot, which, on their passing, cried out: Peepoh, pretty lady, be not too bold, Or your red blood will soon run cold. And cold did run the blood of the adventurous damsel when, on opening one of the room doors, she found it filled with the dead bodies of murdered persons, chiefly women. Just then they heard a noise, and on looking out of the window saw Bloody Baker and his servant bringing in the murdered body of a lady. Nearly dead with fear, they concealed themselves in a recess under the staircase. As the murderers with their dead burden passed by them, the hand of the unfortunate murdered lady hung in the baluster of the stairs. With an oath Bloody Baker chopped it off, and it fell into the lap of one of the concealed ladies. As soon as the murderers had passed by, the ladies ran away, having the presence of mind to carry with them the dead hand, on one of the fingers of which was a ring. On reaching home they told their story, and in confirmation of it displayed the ring. All the families who had lost relatives mysteriously were then told of what had been found out, and they determined to ask Baker to a large party, apparently in a friendly manner, but to have constables concealed ready to take him into custody. He came, suspecting nothing, and then the lady told him all she had seen, pretending it was a dream. "Fair lady," said he, "dreams are nothing; they are but fables." "They may be fables," said she; "but is this a fable?" and she produced the hand and ring. Upon this the constables rushed in and took him; and the tradition further says, he was burnt, notwithstanding Queen Mary tried to save him, on account of the religion he professed. Source: Milledulcia: A Thousand Pleasant Things Selected from Notes and Queries (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1857), pp. 27-29 . Return to the table of contents . Bobby Rag English Yeahs an' yeahs an' double yeahs ago, deah wuz a nice young Gypsy gal playin' round an ole oak tree. An' up comed a squire as she wur a-playin', an' he fa1led in love wid her, an' asked her ef she'd go to his hall an' marry him. An' she says, "No, sir, you wouldn't have a pooah Gypsy gal like me." But he meaned so, an' stoled her away an' married her. Now when he bring'd her home, his mother warn't 'greeable to let hisself down so low as to marry a Gypsy gal. So she says, "You'll hev to go an' 'stry her in de Hundert Mile Wood, an' strip her star'-mother-naked, an' bring back her clothes and her heart and pluck wid you." And he took'd his hoss, and she jumped up behint him, and rid behint him into de wood. You 'll be shuah it wor a wood, an ole-fashioned wood we know it should be, wid bears an' eagles an' sneks an' wolfs into it. And when he took'd her in de wood he says, "Now, I 'll ha' to kill you here, an' strip you star'-mother-naked and tek back your clothes an' your heart an' pluck wid me, and show dem to my mammy." But she begged hard for herself, an' she says, "Deah's an eagle into dat wood, an' he's gat de same heart an' pluck as a Christ'n; take dat home an' show it to your mammy, an' I 'll gin you my clothes as well." So he stript her clothes affer her, an' he kilt de eagle, an' took'd his heart an' pluck home, an' showed it to his mammy, an' said as he'd kilt her. And she heared him rode aff, an' she wents an, an' she wents an, an' she wents an, an' she crep an' crep an her poor hens and knees, tell she fun' a way troo de long wood. You 'ah shuah she'd have hard work to fin' a way troo it; an' long an' by last she got to de hedge anear de road, so as she'd hear any one go by. Now, in de marnin' deah wuz a young genleman comed by an hoss-back, an' he couldn't get his hoss by for love nor money; an' she hed herself in under de hedge, for she wur afrightened 'twor de same man come back to kill her agin, an' besides you 'ah shuah she wor ashamed of bein' naked. An' he calls out, "Ef you 'ah a ghost, go way; but ef you 'ah a livin' Christ'n, speak to me." An' she med answer direc'ly, "I'm as good a Christ'n as you are, but not in parable [apparel]." An' when he sin her, he pull't his deah beautiful topcoat affer him, an' put it an her. An' he says, "Jump behint me." An' she jumped behint him, an' he rid wi' her to his own gret hall. An' deah wuz no speakin' tell dey gat home. He knowed she wuz deah to be kilt, an' he galloped as hard as he could an his blood-hoss, tell he got to his own hall. An' when he bring'd her in, dey wur all struck stunt to see a woman naked, wid her beautiful black hair hangin down her back in long rinklets. Deh asked her what she wuz deah fur, an' she tell'd dem, an' she tell'd dem. An' you 'ah shuah dey soon put clothes an her; an' when she wuz dressed up, deah warn't a lady in de land more han'some nor her. An' his folks wor in delight av her. "Now," dey says, "we'll have a supper for goers an' comers an' all gentry to come at." You 'ah shuah it should be a 'spensible supper an' no savation of no money. And deah wuz to be tales tell'd an' songs sing'd. An' every wan dat didn't sing't a song had to tell't a tale. An' every door wuz bolted for fear any wan would mek a skip out. An' it kem to pass to dis' Gypsy gal to sing a song; an' de gentleman dat fun' her says, "Now, my pretty Gypsy gal, tell a tale." An' de gentleman dat wuz her husband knowed her, an' didn't want her to tell a tale. And he says, "Sing a song, my pretty Gypsy gal." An' she says, "I won't sing a song, but I'll tell a tale." An' she says: Bobby rag! Bobby rag! Roun' de oak tree -- "Pooh! pooh!" says her husband, "dat tale won't do." (Now de ole mother an' de son, dey knowed what wuz comin' out.) "Go on, my pretty Gypsy gal," says de oder young genleman. "A werry nice tale indeed." So she goes on: Bobby rag! Bobby rag! Roun' de oak tree. A Gypsy I wuz born'd, A lady I wuz bred; Dey made me a coffin Afore I wuz dead. "An' dat's de rogue deah." An' she tell't all de tale into de party, how he wur agoin' to kill her an' tek her heart an' pluck home. An' all de gentry took't an' gibbeted him alive, both him an' his mother. An' dis young squire married her, an' med her a lady for life. Ah! ef we could know her name, an' what breed she wur, what a beautiful ting dat would be. But de tale doan' say. Source: Francis Hindes Groome, Gypsy Folk-Tales (London: Hurst and Blackett, 1899), no. 51, pp. 198-200 . Return to the table of contents . Captain Murderer England, Charles Dickens The first diabolical character that intruded himself on my peaceful youth (as I called to mind that day at Dullborough), was a certain Captain Murderer. This wretch must have been an offshoot of the Blue Beard family, but I had no suspicion of the consanguinity in those times. His warning name would seem to have awakened no general prejudice against him, for he was admitted into the best society and possessed immense wealth. Captain Murderer's mission was matrimony, and the gratification of a cannibal appetite with tender brides. On his marriage morning, he always caused both sides of the way to church to be planted with curious flowers; and when his bride said, "Dear Captain Murderer, I never saw flowers like these before: what are they called?" he answered, "They are called garnish for house-lamb," and laughed at his ferocious practical joke in a horrid manner, disquieting the minds of the noble bridal company, with a very sharp show of teeth, then displayed for the first time. He made love in a coach and six, and married in a coach and twelve, and all his horses were milk-white horses with one red spot on the back which he caused to be hidden by the harness. For, the spot would come there, though every horse was milk white when Captain Murderer bought him. And the spot was young bride's blood. (To this terrific point I am indebted for my first personal experience of a shudder and cold beads on the forehead.) When Captain Murderer had made an end of feasting and revelry, and had dismissed the noble guests, and was alone with his wife on the day month after their marriage, it was his whimsical custom to produce a golden rolling-pin and a silver pieboard. Now, there was this special feature in the Captain's courtships, that he always asked if the young lady could make pie-crust; and if she couldn't by nature or education, she was taught. Well. When the bride saw Captain Murderer produce the golden rolling-pin and silver pieboard, she remembered this, and turned up her laced-silk sleeves to make a pie. The Captain brought out a silver pie-dish of immense capacity, and the Captain brought out flour and butter and eggs and all things needful, except the inside of the pie; of materials for the staple of the pie itself, the Captain brought out none. Then said the lovely bride, "Dear Captain Murderer, what pie is this to be?" He replied, "A meat pie." Then said the lovely bride, "Dear Captain Murderer, I see no meat." The Captain humorously retorted, "Look in the glass." She looked in the glass, but still she saw no meat, and then the Captain roared with laughter, and, suddenly frowning and drawing his sword, bade her roll out the crust. So she rolled out the crust, dropping large tears upon, it all the time because he was so cross, and when she had lined the dish with crust and had cut the crust all ready to fit the top, the Captain called out, " I see the meat in the glass!" And the bride looked up at the glass, just in time to see the Captain cutting her head off; and he chopped her in pieces, and peppered her, and salted her, and put her in the pie, and sent it to the baker's, and ate it all, and picked the bones. Captain Murderer went on in this way, prospering exceedingly, until he came to choose a bride from two twin sisters, and at first didn't know which to choose. For, though one was fair and the other dark, they were both equally beautiful. But the fair twin loved him, and the dark twin hated him, so he chose the fair one. The dark twin would have prevented the marriage if she could, but she couldn't; however, on the night before it, much suspecting Captain Murderer, she stole out and climbed his garden wall, and looked in at his window through a chink in the shutter, and saw him having his teeth filed sharp. Next day she listened all day, and heard him make his joke about the house-lamb. And that day month, he had the paste rolled out, and cut the fair twin's head off, and chopped her in pieces, and peppered her, and salted her, and put her in the pie, and sent it to the baker's, and ate it all, and picked the bones. Now, the dark twin had had her suspicions much increased by the filing of the Captain's teeth, and again by the house-lamb joke. Putting all things together when he gave out that her sister was dead, she divined the truth, and determined to be revenged. So she went up to Captain Murderer's house, and knocked at the knocker and pulled at the bell, and when the Captain came to the door, said: "Dear Captain Murderer, marry me next, for I always loved you and was jealous of my sister." The Captain took it as a compliment, and made a polite answer, and the marriage was quickly arranged. On the night before it, the bride again climbed to his window, and again saw him having his teeth filed sharp. At this sight, she laughed such a terrible laugh, at the chink in the shutter, that the Captain's blood curdled, and he said: "I hope nothing has disagreed with me!" At that, she laughed again, a still more terrible laugh, and the shutter was opened and search made, but she was nimbly gone and there was no one. Next day they went to church in the coach and twelve, and were married. And that day month, she rolled the pie-crust out, and Captain Murderer cut her head off, and chopped her in pieces, and peppered her, and salted her, and put her in the pie, and sent it to the baker's, and ate it all, and picked the bones. But before she began to roll out the paste she had taken a deadly poison of a most awful character, distilled from toads' eyes and spiders' knees; and Captain Murderer had hardly picked her last bone, when he began to swell, and to turn blue, and to be all over spots, and to scream. And he went on swelling and turning bluer and being more all over spots and screaming, until he reached from floor to ceiling and from wall to wall; and then, at one o'clock in the morning, he blew up with a loud explosion. At the sound of it, all the milk-white horses in the stables broke their halters and went mad, and then they galloped over everybody in Captain Murderer's house (beginning with the family blacksmith who had filed his teeth) until the whole were dead, and then they galloped away. Hundreds of times did I hear this legend of Captain Murderer, in my early youth, and added hundreds of times was there a mental compulsion upon me in bed, to peep in at his window as the dark twin peeped, and to revisit his horrible house, and look at him in his blue and spotty and screaming stage, as he reached from floor to ceiling and from wall to wall. The young woman who brought me acquainted with Captain Murderer, had a fiendish enjoyment of my terrors, and used to begin, I remember --as a sort of introductory overture -- by clawing the air with both hands, and uttering a long low hollow groan. So acutely did I suffer from this ceremony in combination with this infernal Captain, that I sometimes used to plead I thought I was hardly strong enough and old enough to hear the story again just yet But she never spared me one word of it. Source: Charles Dickens, All the Year Round: A Weekly Journal , no. 72 (September 8, 1860), pp. 518-19 . This story, purportedly told to Dickens in his childhood by a nurse, was one of a number of tales and sketches incorporated into the collection The Uncommercial Traveller . Return to the table of contents . Laula Wales Three young ladies live at a castle. A gentleman comes to visit them daily. They know not who he is or where he lives. He asks the youngest to accompany him home. She goes with him, eats, drinks, and returns. She asks his coachman his master's name, "Laula." She thinks it a pretty name; her elder sister a bad one. Next evening she goes again. They eat, drink, and play cards. He leaves the room, and returns with a phial of blood. "Is your blood as red as this?" She pretends that he is jesting; but he cuts off her finger, opens the window, and throws it to the big dog, afterwards killing her. The tale goes on, "Who got the finger? The elder sister got it." It then explains how she had followed the pair by the track of the horse's feet, pacified the dog, and caught the finger (with ring on) thrown to him. She desires her father to issue invitations to a dinner. Everyone comes and has to tell a tale or sing a song. On Laula's plate is placed nothing but this finger. When the elder sister tells her tale, he grows uneasy, and says he must go outside. He twice interrupts thus, but is restrained by the other gentlemen. She gives him away, and at the old father's suggestion he is placed in a barrel filled with grease and burnt to death. Source: Francis Hindes Groome, Gypsy Folk-Tales (London: Hurst and Blackett, 1899), pp. 174-75 . Return to the table of contents . The History of Mr. Greenwood Scotland In the Western Isles of Scotland there lived a very rich man, of the name of Gregory, who had two beautiful daughters, to whom he was inordinately attached, but being vastly rich, he would not suffer either of them to go for an hour out of his presence without a strong detachment of the inmates of his house accompanying them wherever they went; and for the purpose of defending them from violent attacks that might be made upon them, or being carried off by the lawless banditti who at that time infested that part of the country. It happened, however, one day when they were at their usual walk and recreation, a little distance from their house, there came up to them a gentleman with his servant on horseback, who accosted them in a rather familiar way, asking them if those men they saw at a little distance were attendants of theirs? They were answered in the affirmative. He also put some other questions to them which they did not choose to answer. One of the ladies then wished to know how he was so impertinent; when he replied that, being much attached to the elder of the two, her beauty being so enchanting, he broke through the rules of good breeding. As flattery has too often the desired effect of gaining its purpose over silly minds, it wrought upon this lady like a charm, and made her the more attentive to his bewitching strain, Having so far gained her heart and confidence, he next got all the information that he wanted regarding her place of residence, and other particulars, with liberty to visit her as a suitor. These preliminaries having been settled, the ladies returned home, attended by the stranger gentleman, who gave his name as Mr. Greenwood, proprietor of an extensive tract of land on one of the neighbouring islands. His visits becoming so frequent, and himself so familiar, that at length he entreated the lady, his sweetheart, to pay a visit in return to his castle, as it was but a short way off, to which she consented. The necessary instructions were given her for finding the castle secretly, as she could not go openly for fear of her father, he not permitting her to go anywhere without her usual guard of attendants. She behoved, therefore, to steal away in his absence. The time for this purpose being agreed upon, as it was expected her father would leave home in a few days; but as some secret forebodings of evil preyed much upon her mind, she thought it advisable to go to the place he had appointed some days previous to the time they were to meet. The impropriety of venturing alone, and to a place she knew not, and to meet with one with whom she was so little acquainted, seemed very improper. Having deliberately weighed the matter in her own mind, she thought it better to go in disguise and reconnoitre his dwelling and circumstances. Accordingly, she got herself dressed in all the tattered and torn habiliments of an old beggar woman, and went as proposed, asking alms on her way thither. On her arriving at Greenwood's castle, she knocked loudly, but as no one appeared, she ventured in, as the door was unlocked, and destitute of a bolt for its security. Her first movement was to examine the contents of a pot which boiled on the fire, but on looking in, she saw such a sight as quite horrified her -- it was part of a human body! She next observed a bundle of rusty keys to lie on a table in the kitchen. When taking them up, she applied one of them to the door of a room which was adjoining the kitchen. In this room hung men's clothes of every description; out of each dress she cut a swatch, which having pocketed, she went to another room, when having opened it also, there she found women's dresses of great variety; some new, and some old. Out of each of them she cut again. Her next adventure was down a small trap-door, where, when she arrived at the bottom, she was up to the knees in blood, at which she greatly wondered ; but in the midst of her astonishment, from one of the dark corners of this dreadful vault, a voice said: O, dear lady Maisry, be not so bold, Lest your warm heart blood soon turn as cold. On hearing these words, she immediately fled from this ocean of blood, and ascended with a quick though palsied step, till she arrived at its summit. On beholding the light, she was put to her wits' end how she should make her escape from this place of skulls, which she never thought of till now. On ruminating on these things, her eyes were shocked with the cannibal owner of the place and his servant dragging triumphantly by the hair of the head, the dead body of a murdered female. As they came hurriedly into the room upon her, she had little time to seek a hiding place, or meditate her escape; so fled behind a door which stood half open between them, but so placed as she could hear and see what passed without being observed by the other party. Near this place lay a large bloodhound, to which she threw a piece of bread and thereby gained his favour. Greenwood then cut off one of the female's hands and threw it to the dog; but as Maisry had so lately given him a piece of bread, she was suffered to take it up and carry it away. Having continued in this precarious situation for a wearyful length of time, Greenwood remarked to his man, that he smelled fresh blood. The servant, with some difficulty, got him persuaded that the smell arose from the hand which he had so recently cut off from the dead body and thrown to the dog. He was also with some reluctance appeased in his rage towards one of his domestics that had offended him. However, he determined that on going to bed, all the doors should be well secured inside, so that none could make their escape ere morning, if any were in the house that did not belong to it; and for their better security, should have their beds made at one of the back doors of the castle. On their going to bed, as fate would have it, sleep took such strong hold of their senses that they were soon in the arms of the drowsy god and snored aloud. It was now time for the lady to think of saving herself by flight, which she accomplished in the following surprising manner. She opened the door, and at once made such a spring over both of their bodies, as cleared them and the place of her confinement. She then fled with the rapidity of lightning. The jump which she took awoke Greenwood, who said, surely someone had escaped; but the servant insisted that it was only the flutter of a bird that had passed the door. Unconcernedly they then went to sleep again. The lady having reached her father's house, caused a great party of her friends and acquaintances to be invited to a feast which was to be prepared for their entertainment, about the time that Greenwood had promised to give her a call. All things being ready, and the guests at supper set, Greenwood among the rest, when all were merry, and all seemed to enjoy the entertainment. Supper at length being ended, it was proposed that a few songs for the amusement of the company, should be sung by those who could, and those who could not sing should tell some story or tale. This being agreed upon by all, songs were sung and tales were told by all till it came to Maisry's turn, who said, as she could do neither she would tell a dream she dreamed last night; and looking over to Greenwood, remarked that it was concerning him. All seemed anxious to hear it, but none more so than Greenwood, when she began thus: I thought that I disguised myself as a common pauper, and went to your castle to ask alms, but after loudly knocking, and finding no one to make answer, I ventured in, and seeing a pot boiling on the fire, a thought struck me to look into it, I saw what I could scarcely believe, a part of a human body. This having raised my curiosity, I went a step farther and on finding a bunch of keys lying on a table near where I stood; I opened an apartment near the kitchen, and found a variety of men's clothes; next I went into another, where I found women's and cut a piece out of each of them, which I brought along. I also ventured down a small trap stair, when I found myself up to the knees among blood, and a voice saying: O, dear lady Maisry, be not so bold, Lest your warm heart blood soon turn as cold. Greenwood could contain himself no longer, but interrupting her said, "Women's dreams are fabulous, and so are women's thoughts. Jack, saddle your horse, and we will go ride." But she would not consent to this, but continued to tell the rest of her dream, much against his wish or inclination; but there was no avoiding hearing her out, so she went on, "On arriving at the top of the trap stair which I went down to the vault of blood, I observed you and your man dragging by the hair of her head, the body of a dead lady. You cut off one of her hands and threw it to a greedy bloodhound which lay near where I stood. The hand I took up, and see here it is," producing the bloody hand before them all; when, to his mortification and confusion, he and his servant were secured. He to be burned in the midst of his castle, which was in a remote and secret place of a large wood; the servant to be drowned; which were immediately put into execution, to the no small satisfaction and amazement of all who heard his murderous history. Source: Peter Buchan, Ancient Scottish Tales: An Unpublished Collection Made by Peter Buchan , with an introduction byu John A. Fairley (Peterhead: Reprinted from the Transactions of the Buchan Field Club, 1908), pp. 21-24 . Return to the table of contents . The Cannibal Innkeeper Romania Once there was a poor orphan girl who worked as a servant at the house of a rich man. Her dearest companion was a little dog that her parents had given her before they died. One day the chieftain of a robber band, disguised as an ordinary servant, came to the rich man's house and asked the girl to marry him. Sensing something sinister about him, the girl rejected the suitor's advances, so, with the assistance of his fellow robbers, he carried her away by force. Now a prisoner in the robber's house, the girl still refused to marry him, in spite of his friendly words, his threats, and his abuse. Finally he gave up his attempts to win her love, and sold her to a wild and cruel innkeeper. Now this innkeeper would rob travelers, kill them, cut them into pieces, and serve their cooked flesh to his other guests. He terrorized the poor girl by showing her the valuables he had stolen from his victims, the room where he murdered them, and the weapons he used for his wicked deeds. Then he locked her and her little dog in an adjoining room. Soon afterward he brought in a little boy whom he had captured in the woods gathering berries. He cut off the boy's head and cut him into pieces. Then he forced the girl to cook the boy's flesh and serve it to the innkeeper's guests. Some time later the innkeeper brought in a very old woman, ugly and wrinkled, and nothing but skin and bones. Perhaps wanting to fatten her up for later, he locked her in the room with the girl and her dog. After their captor had left, the old woman told the girl that the cannibal innkeeper was her own son, and that she, disguised so well that he could not recognize her, had come to punish him for his wickedness. Skilled in witchcraft, the old woman told the girl how she could escape. She would first have to kill her little dog and eat a piece of its heart. The girl did this, and then the old woman rubbed some ointment all over the girl's body, which transformed her into a duck. A little later the wild man opened the door, and the duck flew over his head, escaping into the open. The innkeeper ran from room to room looking for the girl, and his mother uttered a magic curse that caused the house to collapse upon him, killing him at once. The girl turned around and saw the heap of ruins, but as the old woman had not told her how she could again become a human being, she has remained a duck to this very day. Source: Abstracted from M. Gaster, "Why Does the Duck Feed on Refuse? The Story of the Cannibal Innkeeper," Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 85, pp. 259-61 . Return to the table of contents . Greenbeard Lithuania In a city there lived a very wealthy merchant who had a very beautiful daughter, and she said that she would marry only a man who had a green beard. Great forests surrounded the city, and twenty-four robbers lived together in these woods. The captain of these robbers had heard about the girl who would marry only a man with a green beard, so he asked his people if they did not know of a substance that would color a beard green, and they immediately procured such a dye for him. Then he dyed his beard green (otherwise he was a handsome man) and rode into the city to the merchant to court his daughter. The girl liked him, so he spent the night there. The next day they made arrangements for the girl to pay him a visit. He said that he possessed a large mansion in the woods. He told the girl to ride along the main road until she came to a bridge. The other side of the bridge she should turn left onto a path, then continue riding until she came to his mansion. Then Greenbeard departed. The merchant's daughter now made preparations for the journey. She had a good cake baked for her bridegroom, then mounted her horse and rode on her way. Arriving at the bridge she found the side path that Greenbeard had told her about. She rode along this path into the woods. The deeper she went into the woods the narrower the path became, until it was only a narrow footpath. What should she do now? She could not ride any further, so she dismounted, tied up her horse, and continued on foot. At the end of the pathway she saw a small house with two lions chained near the door. Approaching them she thought, "Should I go any further, or not?" The lions did nothing, so she went inside. In the first room there were beds and a number of flintlocks hanging on the wall. She went into another room where there was a table. A bird's cage with a little bird hung from a rafter. The bird said to her, "How did you get here? This is a robbers' house. You cannot get away right now, for if you go outside the lions will rip you apart. I will tell you what to do. Lie down under the bed. When the robbers come home they will get drunk and then fall asleep. Then you can escape. When you go outside throw a piece of cake to each of the lions, then you can run away." She did just that, and crawled under the bed. One after the other the robbers came home, saying, "It smells here like human flesh." The bird made excuses as best it could, and they stopped asking questions. The robbers had brought a girl with them. After eating their supper they chopped her into pieces, beginning with her little fingers. She had a ring on one of her fingers, and the finger with the ring rolled under the bed where the merchant's daughter was lying. She picked up the finger and put it into her pocket. When the robbers had finished their work they began to drink again, drinking so much that they knew nothing more of their sins, and they all fell asleep. When the girl thought that they were all fast asleep, she got up, gave the little bird a bit of sugar, then took a piece of cake in each hand. She threw the cake to the lions as she walked out. While they were devouring the cake she made her escape. However, they had scarcely finished the cake when they began to roar, bellowing so loudly that the forest shook. The robbers jumped up, and they immediately surmised that the girl had been there. They took after her, but she safely reached her horse. She rode home as fast as she could, arriving there as white as a corpse with fear. She was so sick that she had to lie down immediately. Greenbeard cut off his beard, then made plans to capture the girl. He ordered large wagons loaded with large barrels in which the robbers could hide. So outfitted he rode to the merchant. He offered him these wares, claiming to be a wholesale merchant from such and such a city. He had told his people that he would gain entrance into the merchant's house, and then would give them a sign when they should break their way out of the barrels, steal everything the merchant had, and take away the girl as well. However, one of the merchant's servants was walking about in the courtyard when he heard a voice from one of the barrels: "What is happening? It is taking a long time." He went inside and reported to his master: "Sir, what is happening? There are people inside the barrels." Then the merchant called up a number of strong men to capture the robbers. He forced the robber captain to stay seated inside with two strong men beside him. Then the girl came in and showed him the chopped off finger with the ring and asked him if he remembered it. Now he knew that he had been exposed, and he looked around for an escape route. But the merchant gave the men a sign, and they held him fast, then bound him hand and foot. In one of his boots he had hidden a long knife. After tying him securely, they went into the courtyard and capured the rest of them, one after the other. Then they took them all to prison. Thus all the robbers were captured and taken care of. The girl then led the people to the robbers' house. She kept the little bird for herself. Everything else was divided among the poor. They burned the house down. The merchant kept the lions. The robbers all died in prison. Thus everything was finished. And the girl no longer showed any desire for green beards. Source: August Schleicher, "Vom Grünbart," Litauische Märchen, Sprichworte, Rätsel und Lieder (Weimar: Hermann Bölau, 1857), pp. 22-25 . Return to the table of contents . Sulasa and Sattuka India, The Jataka Once upon a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, there was a beautiful woman of the town, called Sulasa, who had a train of five hundred courtesans, and whose price was a thousand pieces a night. There was in the same city a robber named Sattuka, as strong as an elephant, who used to enter rich men's houses at night and plunder at will. The townsmen assembled and complained to the king. The king ordered the city-watch to post bands here and there, have the robber caught and cut off his head. They bound his hands behind his back and led him to the place of execution, scourging him in every square with whips. The news that he was taken excited the whole city. Sulasa was standing at a window, and looking down on the street she saw the robber, loved him at sight and thought, "If I can free that stout fighting-man, I will give up this bad life of mine and live respectably with him." In the way described in the Kanavera Birth she gained his freedom by sending a thousand pieces to the chief constable of the city and then lived with him in delight and harmony. The robber after three or four months thought, "I shall never be able to stay in this one place: but one can't go empty-handed: Sulasa's ornaments are worth a hundred thousand pieces: I will kill her and take them." So he said to her one day, "Dear, when I was being hauled along by the king's men, I promised an offering to a tree-deity on a mountaintop, who is now threatening me because I have not paid it: let us make an offering." "Very well, husband, prepare and send it." "Dear, it will not do to send it: let us both go and present it, wearing all our ornaments and with a great retinue." "Very well, husband, we'll do so." He made her prepare the offering and when they reached the mountain-foot, he said, "Dear, the deity, seeing this crowd of people, will not accept the offering; let us two go up and present it." She consented, and he made her carry the vessel. He was himself armed to the teeth, and when they reached the top, he set the offering at the foot of a tree which grew beside a precipice a hundred times as high as a man, and said, "Dear, I have not come to present the offering, I have come with the intention of killing you and going away with all your ornaments: take them all off and make a bundle of them in your outer garment." "Husband, why would you kill me?" "For your money." "Husband, remember the good I have done you: when you were being hauled along in chains, I gave up a rich man's son for you and paid a large sum and saved your life: though I might get a thousand pieces a day, I never look at another man: such a benefactress I am to you: do not kill me, I will give you much money and be your slave." With these entreaties she spoke the first stanza: Here is a golden necklace, and emeralds and pearls, Take all and welcome: give me place among thy servant girls. When Sattuka had spoken the second stanza in accordance with his purpose, to wit: Fair lady, lay thy jewels down and do not weep so sore: I'll kill thee: else I can't be sure thou'lt give me all thy store: Sulasa's wits rose to the occasion, and thinking, "This robber will not give me my life, but I'll take his life first by throwing him down the precipice in some way," she spoke the two stanzas: Within my years of sense, within my conscious memory, No man on earth, I do protest, have I loved more than thee. Come hither, for my last salute, receive my last embrace: For never more upon the earth shall we meet face to face. Sattuka could not see her purpose, so he said, "Very well, dear; come and embrace me." Sulasa walked round him in respectful salutation three times, kissed him, and saying, "Now, husband, I am going to make obeisance to you on all four sides," she put her head on his foot, did obeisance at his sides, and went behind him as if to do obeisance there: then with the strength of an elephant she took him by the hinder parts and threw him head over heels down that place of destruction a hundred times as high as a man. He was crushed to pieces and died on the spot. Seeing this deed, the deity who lived on the mountain-top spoke these stanzas: Wisdom at times is not confined to men: A woman can shew wisdom now and then. Wisdom at times is not confined to men: Women are quick in counsel now and then. How quick and keen she was the way to know, She slew him like a deer with full-stretched bow. He that to great occasion fails to rise Falls, like that dull thief from the precipice. One prompt a crisis in his fate to see, Like her, is saved from threatening enemy. So Sulasa killed the robber. When she descended from the mountain and came among her attendants, they asked where her husband was. "Don't ask me," she said, and mounting her chariot she went on to the city. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 3 (Cambridge: at the University Press, 1897), no. 419, pp. 261-63 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Targets open in new windows. The Robber Bridegroom by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm (type 955). Blue Beard by Charles Perrault (type 312). Blue Beard, as retold by Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch . This link will take you to a text provided by bartleby.com , Great Books Online. Blue Beard. Additional folktales of types 312 and 312A . How the Devil Married Three Sisters and other folktales of type 311 . Fitcher's Bird by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm (type 311). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 17, 2023. Rübezahl Rübezahl Is Entertained by Musicians Johann Prätorius Translated by D. L. Ashliman Copyright 1997. This text may be freely used for any non-commercial purpose. Return to D. L. Ashliman's index of Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. One summer four musicians from Bohemia were making their way across the mountains when they were approached by a cavalier with two horses. They were sitting and resting, and the latter asked them what they were doing there. They replied that they were musicians, and that they had exhausted their provisions. If he would give them something, then they would play for him. He agreed and told them to play away. They played several cheerful pieces. His horse dropped four horse biscuits. Because there were four of them, he told each of them to take one of the horse biscuits, and to be satisfied with it. Then he rode away. The good people looked at their honorarium. Three of them left the biscuits lying there, but the fourth took his along. He had a piece of paper with him, so he wrapped it up and put it in his pocket. When they arrived at an inn, it was a Sunday, and many guests were there. They performed to earn some money. At the end of the day, after the guests had left, they counted how much they had earned. The three of them said to the fourth, that he should also add in his biscuit. The latter said: "The biscuit will not be the worst thing that we received." Then he pulled it out, and it was black and heavy. He scraped at it with his knife, and inside it was nothing but pure gold. His companions were horrified that they had not kept theirs. They went back, but found nothing. Source: J. G. Th. Grässe, Sagenbuch des Preußischen Staats (Glogau: Verlag von Carl Flemming, 1871), vol. 2, pp. 317-318. Johann Prätorius (1630-1680) was originally named Hans Schultze. A prolific writer, he wrote on many subjects, especially popular superstitions of Silesia (a region encompassing southeast Germany, southern Poland, and the northern part of the Czech Republic). He published some 250 legends about the mountain spirit Rübezahl. Because the Rübezahl stories by Prätorius contain many motifs that are found in other folk legends, folklorists believe that they are, for the most part, based on authentic beliefs and legends. For example, the offal turning to gold in story above is similar to a well know legend "Frau Holle and the Peasant," in which wood shavings turn to gold. (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Deutsche Sagen [Berlin, 1816/1818], no. 8.) Return to The top of this document. D. L. Ashliman's Index of Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Legenden vom Rübezahl. Five legends, in the original German, written by Johann Karl August Musäus (1735-1787). Revised April 8, 1997. Runaway Pancake: Folktales of Type 2025 The Runaway Pancake folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 2025 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2019 Contents The Pancake (Norway). The Runaway Pancake (Germany). The Thick, Fat Pancake (Germany). Dathera Dad (England). The Wonderful Cake (Ireland). The Wee Bunnock (Scotland [Ayrshire]). The Wee Bannock (Scotland [Dumfriesshire]). The Wee Bannock (Scotland [Selkirkshire]). The Fox and the Little Bonnach (Scotland). The Gingerbread Boy (USA). The Johnny-Cake (USA). The Little Cakeen (USA). The Devil in the Dough-Pan (Russia). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Pancake Norway Once upon a time there was a good housewife, who had seven hungry children. One day she was busy frying pancakes for them, and this time she had used new milk in the making of them. One was lying in the pan, frizzling away -- ah! so beautiful and thick -- it was a pleasure to look at it. The children were standing round the fire, and the husband sat in the corner and looked on. "Oh, give me a bit of pancake, mother, I am so hungry!" said one child. "Ah, do! dear mother," said the second. "Ah, do! dear, good mother," said the third. "Ah, do! dear, good, kind mother," said the fourth. "Ah, do! dear, good, kind, nice mother," said the fifth. "Ah, do! dear, good, kind, nice, sweet mother," said the sixth. "Ah, do! dear, good, kind, nice, sweet, darling mother," said the seventh. And thus they were all begging for pancakes, the one more prettily than the other, because they were so hungry, and such good little children. "Yes, children dear, wait a bit until it turns itself," she answered -- she ought to have said "until I turn it" -- "and then you shall all have pancakes, beautiful pancakes, made of new milk -- only look how thick and happy it lies there." When the pancake heard this, it got frightened, and all of a sudden, it turned itself and wanted to get out of the pan, but it fell down in it again on the other side, and when it had been fried a little on that side too, it felt a little stronger in the back, jumped out on the floor, and rolled away, like a wheel, right through the door and down the road. "Halloo!" cried the good wife, and away she ran after it, with the frying pan in one hand and the ladle in the other, as fast as she could, and the children behind her, while the husband came limping after, last of all. "Halloo, won't you stop? Catch it, stop it. Halloo there!" they all screamed, the one louder than the other, trying to catch it on the run, but the pancake rolled and rolled, and before long, it was so far ahead, that they could not see it, for the pancake was much smarter on its legs than any of them. When it had rolled a time, it met a man. "Good day, pancake!" said the man. "Well met, Manny Panny," said the pancake. "Dear pancake," said the man, "don't roll so fast, but wait a bit and let me eat you." "When I have run away from Goody Poody and the husband and seven squalling children, I must run away from you too, Manny Panny," said the pancake, and rolled on and on, until it met a hen. "Good day, pancake," said the hen. "Good day, Henny Penny," said the pancake. "My dear pancake, don't roll so fast, but wait a bit and let me eat you," said the hen. "When I have run away from Goody Poody and the husband and seven squalling children, and from Manny Panny, I must run away from you too, Henny Penny," said the pancake, and rolled on like a wheel down the road. Then it met a cock. "Good day, pancake," said the cock. "Good day, Cocky Locky," said the pancake. "My dear pancake, don't roll so fast, but wait a bit and let me eat you," said the cock. "When I have run away from Goody Poody and the husband and seven squalling children, from Manny Panny, and Henny Penny, I must run away from you too, Cocky Locky," said the pancake, and rolled and rolled on as fast as it could. When it had rolled a long time, it met a duck. "Good day, pancake," said the duck. "Good day, Ducky Lucky," said the pancake. "My dear pancake, don't roll so fast, but wait a bit and let me eat you," said the duck. "When I have run away from Goody Poody and the husband and seven squalling children, from Manny Panny, and Henny Penny, and Cocky Locky, I must run away from you too, Ducky Lucky," said the pancake, and with that it fell to rolling and rolling as fast as ever it could. When it had rolled a long, long time, it met a goose. Good day, pancake," said the goose. "Good day, Goosey Poosey," said the pancake. "My dear pancake, don't roll so fast, but wait a bit and let me eat you," said the goose. "When I have run away from Goody Poody and the husband and seven squalling children, from Manny Panny, and Henny Penny, and Cocky Locky, and Ducky Lucky, I must run away from you too, Goosey Poosey," said the pancake, and away it rolled. So when it had rolled a long, very long time, it met a gander. Good day, pancake," said the gander. "Good day, Gander Pander," said the pancake. "My dear pancake, don't roll so fast, but wait a bit and let me eat you," said the gander. "When I have run away from Goody Poody and the husband and seven squalling children, from Manny Panny, and Henny Penny, and Cocky Locky, and Ducky Lucky, and Goosey Poosey, I must run away from you too, Gander Pander," said the pancake, and rolled and rolled as fast as it could. When it had rolled on a long, long time, it met a pig. Good day, pancake," said the pig. "Good day, Piggy Wiggy," said the pancake, and began to roll on faster than ever. Nay, wait a bit," said the pig, "you needn't be in such a hurry-scurry; we two can walk quietly together and keep each other company through the wood, because they say it isn't very safe there." The pancake thought there might be something in that, and so they walked together through the wood; but when they had gone some distance, they came to a brook. The pig was so fat it wasn't much trouble for him to swim across, but the pancake couldn't get over. "Sit on my snout," said the pig, "and I will ferry you over." The pancake did so. "Ouf, ouf," grunted the pig, and swallowed the pancake in one gulp, and as the pancake couldn't get any farther -- well, you see we can't go on with this story any farther, either. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Pannekaken , translated by H. L. Brækstad in Round the Yule Log: Norwegian Folk and Fairy Tales (London: Sampson Sow, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1881), pp. 62-67 . Return to the table of contents . The Runaway Pancake Germany Two women in Jetzschko were baking a pancake, and when it was almost done they began to quarrel, because each one wanted the whole thing. The one woman said, "I get the pancake!" The other one replied, "No, I want all of it!" Before they knew what was happening, the pancake suddenly grew feet, jumped out of the pan, and ran away. He came to a fox, who said to him, "Pancake, pancake, where are you going?" The pancake answered, "I ran away from two old women, and I shall run away from you as well!" Then he met a hare. It too shouted, "Pancake, pancake, where are you going?" The pancake answered, "I ran away from two old women, Reynard the Fox, and I shall run away from you as well. The pancake ran on until he came to some water. A ship full of people was floating on the water. They too cried out to him, "Pancake, pancake, where are you going?" Again he said, "I ran away from two old women, Reynard the Fox, Speedy the Hare, and I shall run away from you as well." Then he came to a large pig. It too shouted to him, "Pancake, pancake, where are you going?" "Oh," he said, "I ran away from two old women, Reynard the Fox, Speedy the Hare, a ship full of people, and I shall run away from you as well." The pig said, "Pancake, I am hard of hearing. You'll have to say it into my ear!" So the pancake went up close, and bam! bam! the pig snatched him and ate him up, and with that the story is ended. Source: Karl Gander, "Der fortgelaufene Eierkuchen," Niederlausitzer Volkssagen, vornehmlich aus dem Stadt- und Landkreise Guben (Berlin: Deutsche Schriftsteller-Genossenschaft, 1894), no. 319, pp. 122-123 . Gander's source: "Oral, from Hanschke, Senior, a cottager and peddler in Ögeln." Freely translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Return to the table of contents . The Thick, Fat Pancake Germany Once upon a time there were three old women who wanted a pancake to eat. The first one brought an egg, the second one milk, and the third one grease and flour. When the thick, fat pancake was done, it pulled itself up in the pan and ran away from the three old women. It ran and ran, steadfastly, steadfastly into the woods. There he came upon a little hare, who cried, "Thick, fat pancake, stop! I want to eat you!" The pancake answered, "I have run away from three old women. Can I not run away from Hoppity Hare as well?" And it ran steadfastly, steadfastly into the woods. Then a wolf came running toward him, and cried, "Thick, fat pancake, stop! I want to eat you!" The pancake answered, "I have run away from three old women and Hoppity Hare. Can I not run away from Waddly Wolf as well?" And it ran steadfastly, steadfastly into the woods. Then a goat came hopping by, and cried, "Thick, fat pancake, stop! I want to eat you!" The pancake answered, "I have run away from three old women, Hoppity Hare, and Waddly Wolf. Can I not run away from Longbeard Goat as well?" And it ran steadfastly, steadfastly into the woods. Then a horse came galloping by, and cried, "Thick, fat pancake, stop! I want to eat you!" The pancake answered, "I have run away from three old women, Hoppity Hare, Waddly Wolf, and Longbeard Goat. Can I not run away from Flatfoot Horse as well?" And it ran steadfastly, steadfastly into the woods. Then a sow came running up, and cried, "Thick, fat pancake, stop! I want to eat you!" The pancake answered, "I have run away from three old women, Hoppity Hare, Waddly Wolf, Longbeard Goat, and Flatfoot Horse. Can I not run away from Oink-Oink Sow as well?" And it ran steadfastly, steadfastly into the woods. Then three children came by. They had neither father nor mother, and they said, "Dear pancake, stop! We have had nothing to eat the entire day!" So the thick, fat pancake jumped into the children's basket and let them eat it up. Source: Carl and Theodor Colshorn, "Vom dicken fetten Pfannekuchen," Märchen und Sagen (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), no. 57, pp. 168-169. The Colshorns' source: "oral, from Salzdahlum." Freely translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. This tale is also contained in Paul Zaunert, Deutsche Märchen seit Grimm , vol. 1 (Jena: Eugen Diederichs Verlag, 1922), pp. 176-77 . Return to the table of contents . Dathera Dad England There was once a farmer's wife who made a pudding and set it on the fire to be boiled. As soon as the water began to boil the pudding jumped, and at last it jumped out upon the floor and rolled about as if it were bewitched. As the pudding was rolling about on the floor a travelling tinker came to the door, and the woman picked the pudding up and gave it to him. So the tinker put it into his budget and slung it over his back. As he trudged along the road the pudding kept rolling about in the budget till at last it broke in pieces, when out came a littlo fairy child who cried, "Take me to my dathera dad, take me to my dathera dad." Source: Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales with Other Traditional Remains: Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby, and Nottingham (London: David Nutt, 1895), no. 7, p. 9 . Addy's source: "From Eyam, in Derbyshire." Return to the table of contents . The Wonderful Cake Ireland A mouse, a rat, and a little red hen once lived together in the same cabin, and one day the little red hen said, "Let us bake a cake and have a feast." "Let us," says the mouse; and "Let us," says the rat. "Who'll go get the wheat ground?" says the hen. "I won't," says the mouse; "I won't," says the rat; "I'll go myself," says the little red hen. "Who'll make the cake? "I won't," says the mouse; "I won't," says the rat; "I will myself," says the little red hen. "Who'll eat the cake?" "I will," says the mouse; "I will," says the rat; "Dickens a bit you shall," says the little red hen. Well, while the hen was putting over her hand to it, magh go brath with it out of the door, and after it with the three housekeepers. When it was running away, it went by a barn full of thrashers, and they asked it where it was running. "Oh," says it, "I'm running away from the mouse, the rat, and the little red hen, and from you too if I can." So they piked away after it with their flails, and it run and it run till it came to a ditch full of ditchers, and they asked it where it was running. "Oh, I'm running away from the mouse, the rat, and the little red hen, and from a barn full of thrashers, and from you too if I can." Well they all ran after it along with the rest till it came to a well full of washers, and they asked the same question, and it returned the same answer, and after it they went. At last it came to a ford where it met with a fox, who asked where it was running. "Oh, I'm running away from the mouse, the rat, and the little red hen, from a barn full of thrashers, a ditch full of ditchers, a well full of washers, a crumply-horned cow, a saddled-backed sow, and from you too if I can." "But you can't cross the ford," says the fox. "And can't you carry me over?" says the cake. "What'll you give me?" says the fox. "A kiss at Christmas, and an egg at Easter," says the cake. "Very well," says the fox." Up with you." So he sat on his currabingo with his nose in the air, and the cake got up by his tail till it sat on his crupper. "Now over with you," says the cake. "You're not high enough." Then it scrambled up on his shoulder. "Up higher still," says he, "you wouldn't be safe there." "Am I right now ?" says the cake, when it was on his head. "Not quite," says he; "you'll be safer on the ridge pole of my nose." "Well," says the cake, "I think I can go no further." "Oh, yes," says he, and he shot it up in the air, caught it in his mouth, and sent it down the red lane. Source: Patrick Kennedy, The Fireside Stories of Ireland (Dublin: M'Glashan and Gill, 1870), pp. 19-20 . Return to the table of contents . The Wee Bunnock Scotland "Grannie, grannie, come tell us the story o' the wee bunnock." "Hout, bairns, ye've heard it a hunner times afore. I needna tell it owre again." "Ah, but, grannie, it's sic a fine ane. Ye maun tell't. Just ance." "Weel, weel, bairns, if ye'll a' promise to be guid, I'll tell ye't again. But I'll tell you a bonny tale about a guid aitmeal bunnock. There lived an auld man and an auld wife at the side o' a burn. They had twa kye, five hens and a cock, a cat and twa kittlins. The auld man lookit after the kye, and the auld wife span on the tow-rock. The kittlins aft grippit at the auld wife's spindle, as it tussled owre the hearth-stane. "Sho, sho," she wad say, "gae wa';" and so it tussled about. Ae day, after parritch time, she thought she wad hae a bunnock. Sae she bakit twa aitmeal bunnocks, and set them to to the fire to harden. After a while, the auld man came in, and sat down aside the fire, and takes ane o' the bunnocks, and snappit it through the middle. When the tither ane sees this, it rins aff as fast as it could, and the auld wife after't, wi' the spindle in the tae hand and the tow-rock in the tither. But the wee bunnock wan awa', and out o' sight, and ran till it came to a guid muckle thack house, and ben it ran boldly to the fireside; and there were three tailors sitting on a muckle table. When they saw the wee bunnock come ben, they jumpit up, and gat in ahint the goodwife, that was cardin' tow ayont the fire. "Hout," quo' she, "be na fleyt; it's but a wee bunnock. Grip it, and I'll gie ye a soup milk till 't." Up she gets wi' the tow-cards, and the tailor wi' the goose, and the twa prentices, the ane wi' the muckle shears, and the tither wi' the lawbrod; but it jinkit them, and ran round about the fire; and ane o' the prentices, thinking to snap it wi' the shears, fell i' the ase-pit. The tailor cuist the goose, and the goodwife the tow-cards; but a' wadna do. The bunnock wan awa', and ran till it came to a wee house at the roadside; and in it rins, and there was a weaver sittin' on the loom, and the wife winnin' a clue o' yarn. "Tibby," quo' he, "what's tat?" "Oh," quo' she, "it's a wee bunnock." "It's weel come," quo' he, "for our sowens were but thin the day. Grip it, my woman; grip it." "Ay," quo' she; "what recks! That's a clever bunnock. Kep, Willie; kep, man." "Hout," quo' Willie, "cast the clue at it." But the bunnock whipit round about, and but the floor, and aff it gaed, and owre the knowe, like a new-tarred sheep or a daft yell cow. And forrit it runs to the niest house, and ben to the fireside; and there was the goodwife kirnin'. "Come awa', wee bunnock," quo' she; "I'se hae ream and bread the day." But the wee bunnock whipit round about the kirn, and the wife after't, and i' the hurry she had near-hand coupit the kirn. And afore she got it set right again, the wee bunnock was aff, and down the brae to the mill; and in it ran. The miller was siftin' meal i' the trough; but, looking up: " Ay," quo' he, "it's a sign o' plenty when ye're rinnin' about, and naebody to look after ye. But I like a bunnock and cheese. Come your wa's ben, and I'll gie ye a night's quarters." But the bunnock wadna trust itsel' wi' the miller and his cheese. Sae it turned and ran its wa's out; but the miller didna fash his head wi't. So it toddled awa', and ran till it came to the smithy; and in it rins, and up to the studdy. The smith was making horse-nails. Quo' he: "I like a bicker o' guid yill and a weel-toastit bunnock. Come your wa's in by here." But the bunnock was frightened when it heard about the yill, and turned and aff as hard as it could, and the smith after't, and cuist the hammer. But it whirlt awa', and out o' sight in a crack, and ran till it came to a farm-house wi' a guid muckle peat-stack at the end o't. Ben it rins to the fireside. The goodman was clovin' lint, and the goodwife hecklin'. "O Janet," quo' he, "there's a wee bunnock; I'se hae the hauf o't." "Weel, John, I'se hae the tither hauf. Hit it owre the back wi' the clove." But the bunnock playt jink-about . "Hout, tout," quo' the wife, and gart the heckle flee at it. But it was owre clever for her. And aff and up the burn it ran to the niest house, and whirlt its wa's ben to the fireside. The goodwife was stirrin' the sowens, and the goodman plettin' sprit-binnings for the kye. "Ho, Jock," quo' the goodwife, "come here. Thou's aye crying about a wee bunnock. Here's ane. Come in, haste ye, and I'1l help thee to grip it." "Ay, mither, whaur is't ?" "See there. Rin owre o' that side." But the bunnock ran in ahint the goodman's chair. Jock fell amang the sprits. The goodman cuist a binning, and the goodwife the spurtle. But it was owre clever for Jock and her baith. It was aff and out o' sight in a crack, and through among the whins, and down the road to the niest house, and in, and ben to the fireside. The folk were just sittin' down to their sowens, and the goodwife scartin' the pat. "Losh," quo' she, "there's a wee bunnock come in to warm itsel' at our fireside." "Steek the door," quo' the goodman, "and we'll try to get a grip o't." When the bunnock heard that, it ran but the house, and they after't wi' their spunes, and the goodman cuist his bunnat. But it whirlt awa', and ran, and better ran, till it came to another house; and when it gaed ben, the folk were just gaun to their beds. The goodman was castin' aff his breeks, and the goodwife rakin' the fire. "What's tat?" quo' he. "O," quo' she, "it's a wee bunnock." Quo' he, "I could eat the hauf o't, for a' the brose I hae suppit." "Grip it," quo' the wife, " and I'll hae a bit too." "Cast your breaks at it -- kep -- kep!" The goodman cuist the breeks, and had near-hand smoor't it . But it warsl't out, and ran, and the goodman after't, wanting the breeks; and there was a clean chase owre the craft park, and up the wunyerd, and in amang the whins; and the goodman lost it, and had to come his wa's trottin' hame hauf-nakit. But now it was grown dark, and the wee bunnock couldna see; but it gaed into the side o' a muckle whin bush, and into a tod's hole. The tod had gotten nae meat for twa days. "O welcome, welcome," quo' the tod, and snappit it in twa i' the middle. And that was the end o' the wee bunnock. Now, be ye lords or commoners, Ye needna laugh nor sneer, For ye'll be a' i' the tod's hole In less than a hunner year. At the conclusion, Grannie would look round upon her little audience, and add the following, by way of moral: "Now, weans, an ye live to grow muckle, be na owre lifted up about onything, nor owre sair cuisten down; for ye see the folk were a' cheated, and the puir tod got the bunnock." Source: Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), pp. 82-85 . Chambers' source: "From the manuscript of an elderly individual, who spent his early years in the parish of Symington, in Ayrshire. It was one of a great store of similar legends possessed by his grandmother, and which she related, upon occasion, for the gratification of himself and other youngsters, as she sat spinning by the fireside, with these youngsters clustered around her. This venerable person was bor n in the year 1704, and died in 1789." A bunnock (usually spelled bannock ) is a small loaf of flat bread. Return to the table of contents . The Wee Bannock Scotland A variation of the story of the Wee Bannock, from Dumfriesshire, is as follows: When cockle shells turned music bells, And turkeys chewed tobacco, And birds biggit their nests in auld men's beards, as hereafter they may do in mine -- There was an auld man and an auld wife. and they lived in a killogie. Quoth the auld man to the auld wife: "Rise, and bake me a bannock." So she rase and bakit a bannock, and set it afore the greeshoch to harden. Quoth the auld wife to the auld man: "Rise and turn the bannock." "Na, na," quoth the bannock, "I'll turn mysel'." And it turned round, and whirl't out at the door. And after it they ran, and the tane flang at it a pot, and the t'other a pan; but baith missed it . And it ran, and it ran, till it came to twa well-washers. "Welcome, welcome, wee bannockie," quo' they; "where came thou fra?" I fore-ran A wee wee wife and a wee wee man; A wee wee pot and a wee wee pan; And sae will I you an I can. And they ran after't, to daud it wi' wat claes. But it ran, and it ran, till it came to twa barn-threshers. "Welcome, welcome, wee bannockie," quo' they; 'where came thou frae?" I fore-ran A wee wee wife and a wee wee man; A wee wee pot and a wee wee pan; Twa well-washers and twa barn-threshers; And sae will I you an I can. And they ran after't wi' their flails. Thus the story goes on through a series of adventures, which are perhaps sufficiently indicated by the answer of the bannock to Tod Lowrie at last: I fore-ran A wee wee wife and a wee wee man; A wee wee pot and a wee wee pan; Twa well-washers and twa barn-threshers; Twa dike-delvers and twa heather-pu'ers; Twa ploughmen, twa harrowers, twa hungry herds; And sae will I you an I can. But the tod snappit it a' up at ae mouthful, and that was an end o' the wee bannock. Source: Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), pp. 85-86 . Return to the table of contents . The Wee Bannock Scotland It may be worth while, in order to shew the extent to which nursery stories are provincially varied, to give the Selkirkshire version of the wee bannock: There was a wife bakin' bannocks, and there was a man cam and wanted ane o' them. And he said to the wife: "Yer bannas is burnin': come awa' and I'1l turn them." And the wife said: "Na, I'll turn them;" and he said: "Na, I'll turn them;" and she said: "Na, I'1l turn them." And as they were threepin', ane o' the bannas got up and ran awa', and they couldna catch't. And it ran and ran or it cam to a sheep, and the sheep wantit it, and it said to the sheep: I've beat a wee wife, And I've beat a wee man, And I'll try and beat ye too if I can. Sae it ran and ran, and beat the sheep. And it cam to a goat, and it said to the goat: I've beat a wee wife, And I've beat a wee man, And I've beat a wee sheep, And I'll try and beat ye too if I can. And it ran and ran, and beat the goat. And it cam to a fox, and it said to the fox: I've beat a wee wife, And I've beat a wee man, And I've beat a wee sheep, And I've beat a wee goat, And I'll try and beat ye too if I can. And the fox said: "Get on my back and I'll carry ye;" and the banna said: "Na, I'll rin mysel'." And the fox said: "Na, get on my back, and I'll carry ye o'er the burn." Sae the banna got on its back, and the fox turned round its head and took a grip o't. And the banna cried: "Oh, ye're nippin's, ye're nippin's, ye're nippin's." And the fox said: "Na, I'm just clawin' mysel'." And it took anither grip, and the banna cried: "Oh, ye're nippin's, ye're nippin's, ye're nippin's." And the fox nippit it a' awa' but a wee bit, and it fell into the burn, and that was the end o' the banna. Source: Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), pp. 86-87 . Return to the table of contents . The Fox and the Little Bonnach Scotland The fox was once going over a loch, and there met him a little bonnach, and the fox asked him where he was going. The little bonnach told him he was going to such a place. "And whence camest thou?" said the fox. "I came from Geeogan, and I came from Cooaigean, and I came from the slab of the bonnach stone, and I came from the eye of the quern, and I will come from thee if I may," quoth the little bonnach. "Well, I myself will take thee over on my back," said the fox. "Thou'lt eat me, thou'lt eat me," quoth the little honnach. "Come then on the tip of my tail," said the fox. "Oh! I will not; thou wilt eat me," said the little bonnach. "Come into my ear," said the fox. "I will not go; thou wilt eat me," said the little bonnach. "Come into my mouth," said the fox. "Thou wilt eat me that time at all events," said the little bonnach. "Oh, I will not eat thee," said the fox. "At the time when I am swimming I cannot eat anything at all." He went into his mouth. "Oh! ho!" said the fox, "I may do my own pleasure to thee now. It is long since it was heard that a hard morsel is good in the mouth of the stomach." The fox ate the little bonnach. Then he went to the house of a gentleman, and he went to a loch, and he caught hold of a duck that was in if, and he ate that. He went up to a hill side, and he began to stroke his sides on the hill. "Oh king! how finely the bullet would spank upon my belly just now." Who was listening but a hunter. "It will be tried upon thee directly," said the hunter. "Bad luck to the place that is here," quoth the fox, "in which a creature dares not say a word in fun that is not taken in earnest." The hunter put a bullet in his gun, and he fired at him and killed him. Source: John Francis Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 3 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1862), pp. 100-101 . Campbell's source: "From Hector Boyd, who learnt it from one John Campbell, who died three yreas ago, at the age of thirty. --Sept. 20, 1860." A bonnach (usually spelled bannock ) is a small loaf of flat bread. Return to the table of contents . The Gingerbread Boy USA Now you shall hear a story that somebody's great-great-grandmother told a little girl ever so many years ago: There was once a little old man and a little old woman, who lived in a little old house in the edge of a wood. They would have been a very happy old couple but for one thing -- they had no little child, and they wished for one very much. One day, when the little old woman was baking gingerbread, she cut a cake in the shape of a little boy, and put it into the oven. Presently she went to the oven to see if it was baked. As soon as the oven door was opened, the little gingerbread boy jumped out, and began to run away as fast as he could go. The little old woman called her husband, and they both ran after him. But they could not catch him. And soon the gingerbread boy came to a barn full of threshers. He called out to them as he went by, saying: I've run away from a little old woman, A little old man, And I can run away from you, I can! Then the barn full of threshers set out to run after him. But, though they ran fast, they could not catch him. And he ran on till he came to a field full of mowers. He called out to them: I've run away from a little old woman, A little old man, A barn full of threshers, And I can run away from you, I can! Then the mowers began to run after him, but they couldn't catch him. And he ran on till he came to a cow. He called out to her: I've run away from a little old woman, A little old man, A barn full of threshers, A field full of mowers, And I can run away from you, I can! But, though the cow started at once, she couldn't catch him. And soon he came to a pig. He called out to the pig: I've run away from a little old woman, A little old man, A barn full of threshers, A field full of mowers, A cow, And I can run away from you, I can! But the pig ran, and couldn't catch him. And he ran till he came across a fox, and to him he called out: I've run away from a little old woman, A little old man, A barn full of threshers, A field full of mowers, A cow and a pig, And I can run away from you, I can! Then the fox set out to run. Now foxes can run very fast, and so the fox soon caught the gingerbread boy and began to eat him up. Presently the gingerbread boy said, "Oh dear! I'm quarter gone!" And then, "Oh, I'm half gone!" And soon, "I'm three-quarters gone!" And at last, "I'm all gone!" and never spoke again. Source: St. Nicholas Magazine , vol. 2, no. 7 (May 1875), pp. 448-49 . Editor's note: The author of the "Gingerbread Boy," in our pages for Little Folks, writes as follows: "The 'Gingerbread Boy' is not strictly original. A servant girl from Maine told it to my children. It interested them so much that I thought it worth preserving. I asked where she found it, and she said an old lady told it to her in her childhood. So it may possibly have been in print, though I have never seen it." -- The Letter-Box, p. 452 . Return to the table of contents . Johnny-Cake USA Once upon a time there was an old man, and an old woman, and a little boy. One morning the old woman made a Johnny-Cake and put it in the oven to bake. "You watch the Johnny-Cake while your father and I go out to work in the garden." So the old man and the old woman went out and began to hoe potatoes and left the little boy to tend the oven. But he didn't watch it all the time, and all of a sudden he heard a noise, and he looked up and the oven door popped open, and out of the oven jumped Johnny-Cake and went rolling along end over end towards the open door of the house. The little boy ran to shut the door, but Johnny-Cake was too quick for him and rolled through the door, down the steps, and out into the road long before the little boy could catch him. The little boy ran after him as fast as he could lip it, crying out to his father and mother, who heard the uproar and threw down their hoes and gave chase too. But Johnny-Cake outran all three a long way, and was soon out of sight, while they had to sit down, all out of breath, on a bank to rest. On went Johnny-Cake, and by and by he came to two well-diggers, who looked up from their work and called out, "Where are you going, Johnny-Cake?" He said, "I have outrun an old man and an old woman and a little boy, and I can outrun you too-o-o!" "Ye can, can ye?" We'll see about that!" said they, and they threw down their picks and ran after him, but couldn't catch up with him, and soon they had to sit down by the roadside to rest. On ran Johnny-Cake, and by and by he came to two ditch-diggers who were digging a ditch. "Where ye going, Johnny-Cake?" said they. He said, "I've outrun an old man and an old woman and a little boy and two well-diggers, and I can outrun you too-o-o!" "Ye can, can ye? We'll see about that!" said they, and they threw down their spades and ran after him too. But Johnny-Cake soon outstripped them also, and seeing they could never catch him, they gave up the chase and sat down to rest. On went Johnny-Cake, and by and by he came to a bear. The bear said, "Where are ye going, Johnny-Cake?" He said, "I've outrun an old man and an old woman and a little boy and two well-diggers and two ditch-diggers, and I can outrun you too-o-o!" "Ye can, can ye?" growled the bear. "We'll see about that!" and trotted as fast as his legs could carry him after Johnny-Cake, who never stopped to look behind him. Before long the bear was left so far behind that he saw he might as well give up the hunt first as last, so he stretched himself out by the roadside to rest. On went Johnny-Cake, and by and by he came to a wolf. The wolf said, "Where ye going, Johnny-Cake?" He said, "I've outrun an old man and an old woman and a little boy and two well-diggers and two ditch-diggers and a bear, an I can outrun you too-o-o!" "Ye can, can ye?" snarled the wolf. "We'll see about that!" And he set into a gallop after Johnny-Cake, who went on and on so fast that the wolf too saw there was no hope of overtaking him, and he too lay down to rest. On went Johnny-Cake, and by and by he came to a fox that lay quietly in a corner of the fence. The fox called out in a sharp voice, but without getting up, "Where ye going, Johnny-Cake?" He said, "I've outrun an old man and an old woman and a little boy and two well-diggers and two ditch-diggers, a bear, and a wolf, and I can outrun you too-o-o!" The fox said, "I can't quite hear you, Johnny-Cake. Won't you come a little closer?" turning his head a little to one side. Johnny-Cake stopped his race for the first time, and went a little closer, and called out in a very loud voice, "I've outrun an old man and an old woman and a little boy and two well-diggers and two ditch-diggers and a bear and a wolf, and I can outrun you too-o-o!" "Can't quite hear you. Won't you come a little closer?" Johnny-Cake came up close, and leaning towards the fox screamed out, "I'VE OUTRUN AN OLD MAN AND AN OLD WOMAN AND A LITTLE BOY AND TWO WELL-DIGGERS AND TWO DITCH-DIGGERS AND A BEAR AND A WOLF, AND I CAN OUTRUN YOU TOO-O-O!" "You can, can you?" yelped the fox, and he snapped up the Johnny-Cake in his sharp teeth in the twinkling of an eye. Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 28, pp. 155-58 . Jacobs' source: American Journal of Folk-Lore , vol. 2, p. 60. Return to the table of contents . The Little Cakeen USA The following story was written down for me in March, 1889, by Miss Frances Perry, of Exeter, N. H., from her recollection of the form in which it was repeated to her by a relative, some fifteen years ago. It is thought to have been derived from an Irish domestic. "The Little Cakeen" is an interesting variant of the tale already printed in the Journal of American Folk-Lore (vol. ii. pp. 60, 217), under the title of " Johnny-Cake ." Once upon a time there was a little maneen and a little womaneen; and the little womaneen made a little cakeen and put it in the oven to bake. And the little maneen stood at one side of the oven, and said the little cakeen was done; and the little womaneen stood at the other side and said it wasn't. And while they were quarrelling about it, the little cakeen jumped out of the oven and ran off; and the little maneen and the little womaneen ran after it. Pretty soon the little cakeen came to a little pusheen [cat?], and the little pusheen said, "Where are you going so fast, little cakeen, on those little legs of yours?" And the little cakeen said: "I'm running away from the little maneen; I'm running away from the little womaneen, and now I'll run away from you!" So the little pusheen ran after it. Then it came to a little dogeen, and the little dogeen said, "Where are you going so fast, little cakeen, on those little legs of yours?" And the little cakeen said: "I'm running away from the little maneen; I'm running away from the little womaneen; I'm running away from the little pusheen, and now I'11 run away from you!" So the little dogeen ran after it (and so on, with coween, heneen, owleen, etc.). Then it came to a little foxeen; and the little foxeen said: "Where are you going so fast, little cakeen, on those little legs of yours?" And the little cakeen answered: "I'm running away from the little maneen; I'm running away from the little womaneen; I'm running away from the little pusheen; I'm running away from the little dogeen; I'm running away from the little coween; I'm running away from the little heneen; I'm running away from the little owleen (etc., etc.), and now I'll run away from you." But the little foxeen said: " Oh! don't do that, little cakeen; I will show you where to hide." So the little cakeen said, " All right!" So the little foxeen said: "Jump upon my tail;" and the little cakeen jumped on his tail. Then the foxeen said: "Jump on my back;" and the little cakeen jumped on his back. Then the little foxeen said: "Jump on my head;" so the little cakeen jumped on his head. Then the little foxeen said: "Now jump in my mouth." So the little cakeen jumped into his mouth, and he ate it all up! Source: George Lyman Kittredge, "English Folk-Tales in America," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 3, no. 11 (October - December 1890), pp. 291-92 . Addendum by George Lyman Kittredge: In an obliging note, Miss Perry adds: "I am not sure but that the maneen, womaneen, etc., came to the fox and asked him if he had seen a little cakeen, and he said that no little cakeen had passed; so they all ran home again." Return to the table of contents . The Devil in the Dough-Pan Russia Once a woman was kneading bread, but had forgotten to say the blessing. So the demon, Potánka, ran up and sat down in it. Then she recollected she had kneaded the dough without saying the blessing, went up to it and crossed herself; and Potánka wanted to escape, but could not anyhow, because of the blessing. So she put the leavened dough through a strainer and threw it out into the street, with Potánka inside. The pigs turned him over and over, and he could not escape for three whole days. At last he tore his way out through a crack in the dough and scampered off without looking behind him. He ran up to his comrades, who asked him, " Where have you been, Potánka?" "May that woman be accursed!" he said. "Who?" "The one who was kneading her dough and had made it without saying the proper blessing; so I ran up and squatted in it. Then she laid hold of me and crossed herself, and after three livelong days I got out, the pigs poking me about and I unable to escape! Never again will I get into a woman's dough." Source: Leonard A. Magnus, Russian Folk-Tales (New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1916), p. 317 . Magnus' source: Alexander Afanasyev . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Links to related sites Aging and Death in Folklore . An essay by D. L. Ashliman, with supporting texts from proverbs, folktales, and myths from around the world. Texts of additional chain tales . Revised October 1, 2019. Saint George and the Dragon: An Index Page Saint George and the Dragon an index page for the legendary saint edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2024 Saint George (St. George) is one of the most durable legendary heroes in the western world. According to tradition, he was born in England in the fourth century and served in the imperial army in Asia Minor. He has been the patron saint of England since the middle ages and is among the greatest saints for the Eastern Orthodox Christian Churches. His famous duel with the dragon is set in various Holy Land locations plus North Africa, Mediterranean Europe, and even northern Europe. Folktales about dragon slayers are classified as Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 300. Contents Mar Jiryis (Saint George) and the Dragon (Palestine). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Mar Jiryis (Saint George) and the Dragon Palestine There was once a great city that depended for its water supply upon a fountain without the walls. A great dragon, possessed and moved by Satan himself, took possession of the fountain and refused to allow water to be taken unless, whenever people came to the spring, a youth or maiden was given to him to devour. The people tried again and again to destroy the monster; but though the flower of the city cheerfully went forth against it, its breath was so pestilential that they used to drop down dead before they came within bow-shot. The terrorized inhabitants were thus obliged to sacrifice their offspring, or die of thirst; till at last all the youth of the place had perished except the king's daughter. So great was the distress of their subjects for want of water that her heart-broken parents could no longer withhold her, and amid the tears of the populace she went out towards the spring, where the dragon lay awaiting her. But just as the noisome monster was going to leap on her, Mar Jiryis appeared, in golden panoply, upon a fine white steed, and spear in hand. Riding full tilt at the dragon, he struck it fair between the eyes and laid it dead. The king, out of gratitude for this unlooked-for succor, gave Mar Jiryis his daughter and half of his kingdom. Source: J. E. Hanauer, Folk-Lore of the Holy Land: Moslem, Christian, and Jewish (London: Duckworth and Company, 1907), pp. 56-57 . Hanauer does not give this tale a title. He has it from Christian sources in Palestine. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Linked sites will open in a new window. Return to this page by closing the targeted window. Dragon Slayers: An Index Page . Saint George , from Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia. The Legend of Saint George , abstracted from The Golden Legend; or, Lives of the Saints . The Legend of Saint George as recorded by S. Baring-Gould. St. George and the Dragon , retold by Horace E. Scudder. Saint George Ballads from Thomas Percy's Reliques of Ancient English Poetry, edited by D. L. Ashliman. Saint George Legends from Northern Europe , translated and edited by D. L. Ashliman. Alpine Dragons , legends from Switzerland, Austria, and Germany. British Dragons , legends from England, Wales, and Scotland. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 5, 2024. Saint George (Golden Legend) The Legend of Saint George abstracted from The Golden Legend; or, Lives of the Saints by D. L. Ashliman Saint George was a knight and born in Cappadocia. One time he came to the city of Silene in the province of Libya. Near this city was a pond, wherein there was a dragon which was poisoning all the country. Whenever he approached the city he poisoned the people with his breath, and therefore the people of the city gave to him every day two sheep to eat, so that he would do no harm to the people. When they ran out of sheep, he was given a man and a sheep. Then an ordinance was made that the children and young people of the town should be chosen by lottery to feed the dragon. Whoever the lot fell upon, wealthy or poor, he or she was delivered to the dragon. One time the lot fell upon the king's daughter, and the sorrowful king said to his people, "For the love of the gods take gold and silver and all that I have, but let me have my daughter." They said, "Sir, you have made the law, and our children are now dead, but you would do the contrary. Your daughter shall be given, or else we shall burn you and your house." Seeing that he could do no more, the king began to weep, and said to his daughter, "Now I shall never see you married." Then he returned to the people and asked for eight days' respite, which they granted to him. When the eight days were passed they came to him and said, "You see that the city is perishing." Then the king had his daughter dressed like a bride, embraced and kissed her, gave her his blessing, then led her to the place where the dragon was. When she was there Saint George passed by, and seeing the lady, he asked her what she was doing there. She said, "Go your way, fair young man, lest you perish as well." Then he said, "Tell me why you are weeping." When she saw that he insisted on knowing, she told him how she had been delivered to the dragon. Then Saint George said, "Fair daughter, doubt not, for I shall help you in the name of Jesus Christ." She said, "For God's sake, good knight, go your way, for you cannot save me." While they were thus talking together the dragon appeared and came running toward them. Saint George, who was on his horse, drew his sword, made the sign of the cross, then rode swiftly toward the dragon. He struck him with his spear, injuring him severely. Then he said to the maid, "Tie your belt around the dragon's neck, and be not afraid." When she had done so the dragon followed her meekly. She led him into the city, and the people fled in fear. Saint George said to them, "Doubt not. Believe in God and Jesus Christ, and be baptized, and I shall slay the dragon." Then the king and all his people were baptized, whereupon Saint George killed the dragon and cut off his head. It took four ox-carts to remove his body from the city. At that time fifteen thousand men were baptized, not counting women and children. The king established a church there in honor of Our Lady and of Saint George, in which there flows to this day a fountain of living water that heals sick people who drink from it. The king offered to Saint George as much money as he could count, but he refused it, asking instead that it be given to poor people for God's sake. Then he made four requests of this king: that he [the king] should have charge of the churches, that he should honor the priests, that he should hear their service diligently, and that he should have pity on the poor people. Then Saint George took leave of the king and departed. Now at this time Diocletian and Maximian were emperors, and under them there was such great persecution of Christians that within a month twenty-two thousand were martyred. For this reason, some were so afraid that they denied God and sacrificed to the idols. Seeing this, Saint George abandoned his knight's raiment, sold all that he had, gave it to the poor, and put on the raiment of a Christian brother. He went into the midst of the pagans and began to cry, "The gods of the pagans and gentiles are devils. My God made the heavens and is the only God." Then the provost, whose name was Dacian, said to him, "How can you say that our gods are devils? Tell us who you are." He answered, "I am named George. I am a gentleman, a knight of Cappadocia, and I have left all in order to serve the God of heaven." The provost attempted with words to convert Saint George to his faith, and failing to do so, had Saint George beaten with iron rods until his body was broken in pieces, then sent to prison. Our Lord appeared to him that same night and comforted him sweetly. Seeing that Saint George would not surrender to his torments, the provost had his sorcerer prepare a powerful poison mixed with wine, which they gave to Saint George. He took it, made the sign of the cross on it, and drank it. It did him no harm. The sorcerer then made an even more powerful poison. Saint George drank this as well, and it did him no harm. The sorcerer then knelt before Saint George and begged him to make him a Christian. Seeing that his own sorcerer had converted to Christianity, the provost cut off his head. The provost had Saint George placed between two wheels mounted with swords, but the wheels broke, and Saint George remained unharmed. Then the provost had him thrown into a caldron filled with molten lead, but Saint George sat there comfortably, as if he were in a warm bath. At last the provost said to Saint George, "Our gods are patient and forgiving. Abandon your folly and make sacrifices to our gods, and great honor will come to you." Saint George replied, "Why did you not say so earlier? I am ready to do as you request." So the provost called all the people together to witness the conversion of their prisoner. Saint George fell to his knees, but instead of worshipping the pagan gods, he called upon the Lord God of heaven to destroy their temple and their idols. Immediately fire descended from heaven, burning the temple, the idols, and their priests. Then the earth opened and swallowed all the cinders and ashes that were left. Then the provost was so angry that he said to his wife, "I shall die of anger if I cannot overcome this man." She replied, "Evil and cruel tyrant! Do you not see the great virtue of the Christian people? I told you that you should not do them any harm, for their God fights for them. Know well that I will become Christian." Much abashed, the provost said to her "You will be a Christian?" Then taking her by the hair, he beat her cruelly. Then she asked Saint George, "What will become of me? I have not yet been baptized." He answered, "Doubt not, fair daughter, for you shall be baptized in your own blood." She began to worship our Lord Jesus Christ, then died and went to heaven. The next morning the provost had Saint George beheaded. This was about the year of our Lord two hundred and eighty-seven. As the provost was returning homeward from the place where Saint George was beheaded, fire fell down from heaven, consuming him and all his servants. Gregory of Tours tells that some who were carrying certain relics of Saint George came into a certain oratory in a hospital. On the morning when they were to depart they could not open the door until they had left there part of their relics. It is also found in the history of Antioch, that when the Christians went to conquer Jerusalem, that a fair young man appeared to a priest and counseled him that he should bear with him some of the relics of Saint George, for he was conductor of the battle. And during the siege of Jerusalem, Saint George with his white armor and red cross led them to victory. Between Jerusalem and the port of Jaffa, near a town called Ramys, is a chapel of Saint George which is now desolate and in ruins. The body of Saint George, but not the head, lies in this chapel. There too lie his father, his mother, and his uncle, not in the chapel but under the wall of the chapel. The caretakers will not allow pilgrims to enter unless they pay two ducats, and therefore only a few come inside, instead making their offerings outside the chapel at an altar. The body of Saint George lies in the middle of the choir of the chapel, and in his tomb is a hole, allowing a man to put his hand inside it. When a mad person is brought there, and if he puts his head into the hole, he shall immediately be made perfectly whole, and again have his understanding. This blessed and holy martyr Saint George is patron of this realm of England and the cry of men of war. The noble Order of the Garter was founded in his worship, and also a noble college in the castle of Windsor, where rests the heart of Saint George, which Sigismund, the Emperor of Germany, brought and gave for a great and a precious relic to King Harry the fifth. Also there is a piece of his head. This college is nobly endowed to the honor and worship of Almighty God and his blessed martyr Saint George. Let us pray unto him that he be special protector and defender of this realm. Source: Abstracted from The Golden Legend; or, Lives of the Saints , compiled by Jacobus de Voragine, Archbishop of Genoa, 1275. First edition published in 1470. Translated into English by William Caxton, first edition 1483. Link to the unabridged text The Golden Legend: St. George , part of the Internet Medieval Sourcebook sponsored by Fordham University. Saint George is often abbreviated as St. George, St George, or S. George. Cappadocia is a historic region in present-day Turkey. Other sources, notably the English ballad The Birth of St. George , claim that George was born in Coventry, England, also known as the home of the legendary Lady Godiva . Return to D. L. Ashliman's index page for Saint George and the Dragon . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 7, 2024. Saint George (Baring-Gould) The Legend of Saint George as recorded by S. Baring-Gould edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2009 George, a tribune, was born in Cappadocia, and came to Libya to the town called Silene, near which was a pond infested by a monster, which had many times driven back an armed host that had come to destroy him. He even approached the walls of the city, and with his exhalations poisoned all who were near. To avoid such visits, he was furnished each day with two sheep, to satisfy his voracity. When the sheep at the disposal of the citizens were exhausted, their sons and daughters were cast to the dragon. The lot fell one day on the princess. The king covered his child with royal robes, and sent her forth to meet the dragon. S. George was riding by, and, seeing the maiden in tears and the monster rising from the marsh to devour her, advanced, spear in hand, to meet the monster, commending himself to God. He transfixed the dragon, and then bade the princess pass her girdle round it, and fear nothing. When this was done the monster followed like a docile hound. When they had brought it into the town the people fled before it; but George recalled them, bidding them put aside all fear. Then the king and all his people, twenty thousand men, without counting women and children, were baptized, and George smote off the head of the monster. Other versions of the story are to the effect that the princess was shut up in a castle, and that all within were perishing for want of water, which could only be obtained from a fountain at the base of the hill, and this was guarded by the dragon, from which S. George delivered them. Source: S. [Sabine] Baring-Gould (1834-1924), The Lives of the Saints , vol. 4 (London: John Hodges, 1873), pp. 304-305 . Baring-Gould's source appears to have been The Golden Legend; or, Lives of the Saints , compiled by Jacobus de Voragine, Archbishop of Genoa, 1275. First edition published in 1470. Translated into English by William Caxton, first edition, 1483. Saint George is often abbreviated as St. George, St George, or S. George. Cappadocia is a historic region in present-day Turkey. Other sources, notably the English ballad The Birth of St. George , claim that George was born in Coventry, England, also known as the home of the legendary Lady Godiva . Return to D. L. Ashliman's index page for Saint George and the Dragon . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 16, 2009. Saint George Ballads Saint George ballads from Reliques of Ancient English Poetry collected by Thomas Percy and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2012 Contents The Birth of St. George . St. George and the Dragon . Return to D. L. Ashliman's index page for Saint George . The Birth of St. George Listen, lords, in bower and hall, I sing the wonderous birth Of brave St. George, whose valorous arm Rid monsters from the earth: Distressed ladies to relieve He travell'd many a day; In honour of the Christian faith, Which shall endure for aye. In Coventry sometime did dwell A knight of worthy fame, High steward of this noble realme; Lord Albert was his name. He had to wife a princely dame, Whose beauty did excell. This virtuous lady, being with child, In sudden sadness fell: For thirty nights no sooner sleep Had clos'd her wakeful eyes, But, lo! a foul and fearful dream Her fancy would surprize: She dreamt a dragon fierce and fell Conceiv'd within her womb; Whose mortal fangs her body rent Ere he to life could come. All woe-begone, and sad was she; She nourisht constant woe: Yet strove to hide it from her lord, Lest he should sorrow know. In vain she strove, her tender lord, Who watch'd her slightest look, Discover'd soon her secret pain, And soon that pain partook. And when to him the fearful cause She weeping did impart, With kindest speech he strove to heal The anguish of her heart. Be comforted, my lady dear, Those pearly drops refrain; Betide me weal, betide me woe, I'll try to ease thy pain. And for this foul and fearful dream, That causeth all thy woe, Trust me I'll travel far away But I'll the meaning knowe. Then giving many a fond embrace, And shedding many a teare, To the weïrd lady of the woods He purpos'd to repaire. To the weïrd lady of the woods, Full long and many a day, Thro' lonely shades, and thickets rough He winds his weary way. At length he reach'd a dreary dell With dismal yews o'erhung; Where cypress spred it's mournful boughs, And pois'nous nightshade sprung. No chearful gleams here pierc'd the gloom, He hears no chearful sound; But shrill night-ravens' yelling scream, And serpents hissing round. The shriek of fiends, and damned ghosts Ran howling thro' his ear: A chilling horror froze his heart, Tho' all unus'd to fear. Three times he strives to win his way, And pierce those sickly dews: Three times to bear his trembling corse His knocking knees refuse. At length upon his beating breast He signs the holy crosse; And, rouzing up his wonted might, He treads th' unhallow'd mosse. Beneath a pendant craggry cliff, All vaulted like a grave, And opening in the solid rock, He found the inchanted cave. An iron gate clos'd up the mouth, All hideous and forlorne; And, fasten'd by a silver chain, Near hung a brazed horne. Then offering up a secret prayer, Three times he blowes amaine: Three times a deepe and hollow sound Did answer him againe. "Sir knight, thy lady beares a son, Who, like a dragon bright, Shall prove most dreadful to his foes, And terrible in fight. His name advanc'd in future times On banners shall be worn: But lo! thy lady's life must passe Before he can be born." All sore opprest with fear and doubt Long time lord Albert stood; At length he winds his doubtful way Back thro' the dreary wood. Eager to clasp his lovely dame Then fast he travels back: But when he reach'd his castle gate, His gate was hung with black. In every court and hall he found A sullen silence reigne; Save where, amid the lonely towers, He heard her maidens' plaine; And bitterly lament and weep, With many a grievous grone: Then sore his bleeding heart misgave, His lady's life was gone. With faultering step he enters in, Yet half affraid to goe; With trembling voice asks why they grieve, Yet fears the cause to knowe. "Three times the sun hath rose and set;" They said, then stopt to weep: "Since heaven hath laid thy lady deare In death's eternal sleep. For, ah! in travel sore she fell, So sore that she must dye; Unless some shrewd and cunning leech Could ease her presentlye. But when a cunning leech was fet, Too soon declared he, She, or her babe must lose its life; Both saved could not be. Now take my life, thy lady said, My little infant save: And 0 commend me to my lord, When I am laid in grave. 0 tell him how that precious babe Cost him a tender wife And teach my son to lisp her name, Who died to save his life. Then calling still upon thy name, And praying still for thee; Without repining or complaint, Her gentle soul did flee." What tongue can paint lord Albret's woe, The bitter tears he shed, The bitter pangs that wrung his heart, To find his lady dead? He beat his breast: he tore his hair; And shedding many a tear, At length he askt to see his son; The son that cost so dear. New sorrowe seiz'd the damsells all: At length they faultering say; "Alas! my lord, how shall we tell? Thy son is stoln away. Fair as the sweetest flower of spring, Such was his infant mien: And on his little body stampt Three wonderous marks were seen: A blood-red cross was on his arm; A dragon on his breast: A little garter all of gold Was round his leg exprest. Three carefull nurses we provide Our little lord to keep: One gave him sucke, one gave him food, And one did lull to sleep. But lo! all in the dead of night, We heard a fearful sound: Loud thunder clapt; the castle shook; And lightning flasht around. Dead with affright at first we lay; But rousing up anon, We ran to see our little lord: Our little lord was gone! But how or where we could not tell; For lying on the ground, In deep and magic slumbers laid, The nurses there we found." "0 grief on grief!" lord Albret said: No more his tongue cou'd say, When falling in a deadly swoone, Long time he lifeless lay. At length restor'd to life and sense He nourisht endless woe, No future joy his heart could taste, No future comfort know. So withers on the mountain top A fair and stately oake, Whose vigorous arms are torne away, By some rude thunder-stroke. At length his castle irksome grew, He loathes his wonted home; His native country he forsakes In foreign lands to roame. There up and downe he wandered far, Clad in a palmer's gown; Till his brown locks grew white as wool, His beard as thistle down. At length, all wearied, down in death He laid his reverend head. Meantime amid the lonely wilds His litttle son was bred. There the weïrd lady of the woods Had borne him far away, And train'd him up in feates of armes, And every martial play. Source: Thomas Percy, Reliques of Ancient English Poetry (1765). Percy's source: Richard Johnson, Seven Champions of Christendome (1597). Return to the table of contents . St. George and the Dragon Of Hector's deeds did Homer sing; And of the sack of stately Troy, What griefs fair Helena did bring, Which was sir Paris' only joy: And by my pen I will recite St. George's deeds, and English knight. Against the Sarazens so rude Fought he full long and many a day, Where many gyants he subdu'd, In honour of the Christian way: And after many adventures past To Egypt land he came at last. Now, as the story plain doth tell, Within that countrey there did rest A dreadful dragon fierce and fell, Whereby they were full sore opprest; Who by his poisonous breath each day, Did many of the city slay. The grief whereof did grow so great Throughout the limits of the land, That they their wise-men did intreat To shew their cunning out of hand; What way they might this fiend destroy, That did the countrey thus annoy. The wise-men all before the king This answer fram'd incontinent; The dragon none to death might bring By any means they could invent: His skin more hard than brass was found, That sword nor spear could pierce nor wound. When this the people understood, They cryed out most piteouslye, The dragon's breath infects their blood, That every day in heaps they dye: Among them such a plague it bred, The living scarce could bury the dead. No means there were, as they could hear, For to appease the dragon's rage, But to present some virgin clear, Whose blood his fury might asswage; Each day he would a maiden eat, For to allay his hunger great. This thing by art the wise-men found, Which truly must observed be; Wherefore throughout the city round A virgin pure of good degree Was by the king's commission still Taken up to serve the dragon's will. Thus did the dragon every day Untimely crop some virgin flowr, Till all the maids were worn away, And none were left him to devour: Saving the king's fair daughter bright, Her father's only heart's delight. Then came the officers to the king That heavy message to declare, Which did his heart with sorrow sting; "She is," quoth he, "my kingdom's heir: 0 let us all be poisoned here, Ere she should die, that is my dear." Then rose the people presently, And to the king in rage they went; They said his daughter dear should dye, The dragon's fury to prevent: "Our daughters all are dead," quoth they, And have been made the dragon's prey: And by their blood we rescued were, And thou hast sav'd thy life thereby; And now in sooth it is but faire, For us thy daughter so should die." "0 save my daughter," said the king; And let ME feel the dragon's' sting." Then fell fair Sabra on her knee, And to her father dear did say, "0 father, strive not thus for me, But let me be the dragon's prey; It may be, for my sake alone This plague upon the land was thrown. Tis better I should dye," she said, Than all your subjects perish quite; Perhaps the dragon here was laid, For my offence to work his spite: And after he hath suckt my gore, Your land shall feel the grief no more." "What hast thou done, my daughter dear, For to deserve this heavy scourge ? It is my fault, as may appear, Which makes the gods our state to purge; Then ought I die, to stint the strife, And to preserve thy happy life." Like mad-men, all the people cried, "Thy death to us can do no good; Our safety only doth abide In making her the dragon's food." "Lo! here I am, I come," quoth she, "Therefore do what you will with me." "Nay stay, dear daughter," quoth the queen, "And as thou art a virgin bright, That hast for vertue famous been, So let me cloath thee all in white; And crown thy head with flowers sweet, An ornament for virgins meet." And when she was attired so, According to her mother's mind, Unto the stake then did she go; To which her tender limbs they bind And being bound to stake a thrall She bade farewell unto them all. "Farewell, my father dear," quoth she, "And my sweet mother meek and mild; Take you no thought nor weep for me, For you may have another child: Since for my.country's good I dye, Death I receive most willinglye." The king and queen and all their train With weeping eyes went then. their way, And let their daughter there remain, To be the hungry dragon's prey: But as she did there weeping lye, Behold St. George came riding by. And seeing there a lady bright So rudely tyed unto a stake, As well became a valiant knight, He straight to her his way did take "Tell me, sweet maiden," then quoth he, "What caitif thus abuseth thee? And, lo! by Christ his cross I vow, Which here is figured on my breast, I will revenge it on his brow, And break my lance upon his chest:" And speaking thus whereas he stood, The dragon issued from the wood. The lady that did first espy The dreadful dragon coming so, Unto St. George aloud did cry, And willed him away to go; "Here comes that cursed fiend," quoth she; "That soon will make an end of me." St. George then looking round about, The fiery dragon soon espy'd, And like a knight of courage stout, Against him did most fiercely ride; And with such blows he did him greet, he fell beneath his horse's feet. For with his launce that was so strong, As he came gaping in his face, In at his mouth he thrust along; For he could pierce no other place: And thus within the lady's view This mighty dragon straight he slew. The savour of his poisoned breath Could do this holy knight no harm. Thus he the lady sav'd from death, And home he led her by the arm; Which when king Ptolemy did see, There was great mirth and melody. When as that valiant champion there Had slain the dragon in the field, To court he brought the lady fair, Which to their hearts much joy did yield. He in the court of Egypt staid Till he most falsely was betray'd. That lady dearly lov'd the knight, He counted her his only joy; But when their love was brought to light It turn'd unto their great annoy: Th' Morocco king was in the court, Who to the orchard did resort, Dayly to take the pleasant air, For pleasure sake he us'd to walk, Under a wall he oft did hear St. George with lady Sabra talk: Their love he shew'd unto the king, Which to St. George great woe did bring. Those kings together did devise To make the Christian knight away, With letters him in curteous wise They straightway sent to Persia: But wrote to the sophy him to kill, And treacherously his blood to spill. Thus they for good did him reward With evil, and most subtilly By much vile meanes they had regard To work his death most cruelly; Who, as through Persia land he rode, With zeal destroy'd each idol god. For which offence he straight was thrown Into a dungeon dark and deep; Where, when he thought his wrongs upon, He bitterly did wail and weep: Yet like a knight of courage stout, At length his way he digged out. Three grooms of the king of Persia By night this valiant champion slew, Though he had fasted many a day; And then away from thence he flew On the best steed the sophy had; Which when he knew he was full mad. Towards Christendom he made his flight, But met a gyant by the way, With whom in combat he did fight Most valiantly a summer's day: Who yet, for all his bats of steel, Was forc'd the sting of death to feel. Back o'er the seas with many bands Of warlike souldiers soon he past, Vowing upon those heathen lands To work revenge; which at the last, Ere thrice three years were gone and spent, He wrought unto his heart's content. Save onely Egypt land he spar'd For Sabra bright her only sake, And, ere for her he had regard, He meant a tryal kind to make: Mean while the king o'ercome in field Unto Saint George did quickly yield. Then straight Morocco's king he slew, And took fair Sabra to his wife, But meant to try if she were true Ere with her he would lead his life: And, tho' he had her in his train, She did a virgin pure remain. Toward England then that lovely dame The brave St. George conducted strait, An eunuch also with them came, Who did upon the lady wait; These three from Egypt went alone. Now mark St. George's valour shown. When as they in a forest were, The lady did desire to rest; Mean while St. George to kill a deer, For their repast did think it best: Leaving her with the eunuch there, Whilst he did go to kill the deer. But lo! all in his absence came Two hungry lyons fierce and fell, And tore the eunuch on the same in pieces small, the truth to tell; Down by the lady then they laid, Whereby they shew'd, she was a maid. But when he came from hunting back, And did behold this heavy chance, Then for his lovely virgin's sake His courage strait he did advance, And came into the lions' sight, Who ran at him with all their might. Their rage did him no whit dismay, Who, like a stout and valiant knight, Did both the hungry lyons slay Within the lady Sabra's sight: Who all this while sad and demure There stood most like a virgin pure. Now when St. George did surely know This lady was a virgin true, His heart was glad, that erst was woe, And all his love did soon renew: He set her on a palfrey steed, And towards England came with speed. Where being in short space arriv'd Unto his native dwelling-place; Therein with his dear love he livd, And fortune did his nuptials grace: They many years of joy did see, And led their lives at Coventry. Source: Thomas Percy, Reliques of Ancient English Poetry (1765). Percy's source: Richard Johnson, Seven Champions of Christendome (1597). Return to the table of contents . Although both the ballads above identify Saint George with the English town of Coventry (whose other legendary inhabitant Lady Godiva is famous for different reasons), other sources, notably the account in The Golden Legend , give as Saint George's birthplace Cappadocia, a historic region in present-day Turkey. Return to: D. L. Ashliman's index page for Saint George . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 12, 2012. Saint George (St. George) Legends from Northern Europe Saint George Legends from Northern Europe translated and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2023 Contents St. Yegóry the Brave (Russia). Lindorm Legend (Mecklenburg). The King's Trophy (Thuringia). The Horseshoe on the Wall of the Saint Nicholas Church in Leipzig (Saxony). Saint George's Banner (Saxony). Saint George (Saxony). The Knight Saint George at Nauhain (Saxony). The Dragon at Nebra and the Knight Saint George (Saxony-Anhalt). The Lindorm in Marktbreit (Lower Franconia). The Lindorm at Frankenstein Castle (Baden-Württenberg). The Dragon (Baden). George's Meadow (Swabia). The Lindorm (Lusatia). Saint George and the Uffington White Horse (England). The Dragon's Well, Brinsop (England). Saint George in Cornwall (England). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. St. Yegóry the Brave Russia St . Yegóry the Brave -- our St . George -- possesses many of the attributes of Perún [the Thunder-God]. He is, however, a purely mythical character, and the extremely ancient religious poems relating to him present the most amusing mixture of Christianity and Greek mythology, as in the following example: In the year 8008 (the old Russian reckoning, like the Jewish, began with the creation of the world), the kingdoms of Sodom, Komor (Gomorrah), and Arabia met their doom. Sodom dropped through the earth, Komor was destroyed by fire, and Arabia was afflicted by a sea-monster which demanded a human victim every day. This victim was selected by lot; and one day the lot fell upon the king; but at the suggestion of the queen, who hated her daughter, Elizabeth the Fair, the girl was sent in his place, under the pretext that she was going to meet her bridegroom. Yegóry the Brave comes to her assistance, as Perseus did to the assistance of Andromeda, but lies down for a nap while awaiting the arrival of the dragon. The beast approaches; Elizabeth dares not awaken Yegóry, but a "burning tear" from her right eye arouses him. He attacks the dragon with his spear, and his "heroic steed" (which is sometimes a white mule) tramples on it, after the fashion with which we are familiar in art. Then he binds Elizabeth's sash, which is "five and forty ells in length," about the dragon's jaws, and bids the maiden have three churches built in honor of her deliverance: one to St. Nicholas and the Holy Trinity, one to the All-Holy Birthgiver of God, and one to Yegóry the Brave. Elizabeth the Fair then returns to town, leading the tamed dragon by her sash, to the terror of the inhabitants and to the disgust of her mother. The three churches are duly built, and Christianity is promptly adopted as the state religion of Arabia. In another ballad, Yegóry is imprisoned for thirty years in a pit under the ground, because he will not accept the "Latin-Mussulman faith." Source (books.google.com): Isabel F. Hapgood, A Survey of Russian Literature, with Selections (New York: The Chautauqua Press, 1902), pp. 16-17 . Source (Internet Archive): Isabel F. Hapgood, A Survey of Russian Literature, with Selections (New York: The Chautauqua Press, 1902), pp. 16-17 . Return to the table of contents . Lindorm Legend Mecklenburg In the vicinity of the main road between Neubrandenburg and Stavenhagen, adjacent to the field belonging to Gevezin and Blankenhof, there are three hills: Blocksberg, Jabsberg, and Lindberg. A long time ago lindorms lived there. When they lay outstretched, they resembled a felled fir tree, and they were feared far and wide. Once a wagon was driving along the road, and not far from the watermill it came to a young lindorm lying across the road asleep in the sun. Thinking that it was a fir log, the driver drove over it. Only after the run-over beast cried out did the driver realize what it was, and he drove away. Hearing the cry, the old lindorm rushed forward and found its young one dead. Enraged, it attacked a wagon loaded with straw headed in the direction of Neubrandenburg. The driver saw it and fled in a gallop. Fortunately, on the far side of the Neuendorf Enclosure he lost his connecting pin, leaving the rear part of the wagon behind with its load of straw, while the driver hurried away all the faster on the front part of the wagon. The lindorm tore about in the straw, but finding no one there, it continued in pursuit of the driver. In order to gain speed, it bit into its tail, then rolled along after the wagon like a hoop. The driver just barely made it to the Brandenburg gate, which was quickly closed behind him, with the lindorm on the outside. The lindorm remained lying just outside the gate, there where Saint George's Church now stands, and no one from Brandenburg dared to go through the gate. Now a foreign prince by the name of George was in the city, and he made the decision to challenge the lindorm. After a difficult battle he succeeded in cutting off the beast's tail, which was the source of its strength, and then he quickly killed it. In commemoration of this event Saint George's Church was built, and the story is depicted on its altar. Source: Karl Bartsch, "Lindwurmsage," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg] , vol. 1 (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), no. 57, pp. 39-40 . A lindorm (also spelled lindworm) is a legless, wingless dragon, similar to the wyvern. The Saint George Chapel still stands near the city wall of Neubrandenburg ("the city of four gates"). Nearby is a hotel also bearing the saint's name, Hotel Sankt Georg . Link to the home page of the City of Neubrandenburg . Link to a folktale from Denmark about a lindorm: King Lindorm . Return to the table of contents . The King's Trophy Germany On the outer wall of the Saint George Church at Mühlhausen one can still see numerous stone monuments that attest to the foundation of the city. Among these is one depicting an amazing legend. Ages ago there was a king in Thüringen. One day while hunting, his hounds jumped around a tree in a thicket and could not be held back. He had one of his servants climb up the tree trunk, which was hollow, to see what was inside causing his pack to bark. A small wild man was inside, and the king's men fetched him out. The king was delighted with this trophy and had him sit next to himself in the coach. He forthwith called an end to the hunt. He named the captured wild man Noah and confined him in a crypt. The king himself waited on him and cared for him. One time when the king had to be away, his son George was playing ball in the castle, and the ball fell down through a hole in the crypt. The little prince called down: "Wild man Noah, give me back my ball!" The wild man answered: "I cannot give you your ball. If I were to throw it out, it would fly so far that you would never find it. Instead, go into your father's chamber, fetch the key, and open the door for me. Then I will give you your ball." The prince fetched the key from his father's chamber, for without the key no one could open the crypt. He opened the crypt, and the wild man came out, gave him his ball, and said: "In my need you have helped me, and if you are ever in need just go into the woods and call for me, and I will help you as well." Soon afterward the king returned home, and his first step was to look after his trophy. How alarmed he was to discover that the crypt was empty, and he immediately suspected that it was his son who had freed the wild man. He summoned him and asked: "George, did you take the key, open the crypt, and let the wild man Noah out?" The little prince honestly confessed to what he had done. The king at once disowned his prince, for his trophy was dearer to him than anything else. The prince sadly left his father's house and wandered aimlessly about in poverty until finally he came upon a shepherd. The shepherd suspected at once that the lad was not from a lower class and took him in. He taught him what he needed to know to help with the herd. George the sheepherder came to know a beautiful girl, and as he was now coming of age, he asked her to marry him. At that time a terrible beast called a lindorm had taken over the region. It demanded a human sacrifice every year. According to ancient belief, this beast was a magical curse. If it did not receive its sacrifice immediately it roared like a thunderstorm, threatening to destroy everything in the land. The time came when the people were called together to draw lots determining who would be the lindorm's next sacrifice. Sheepherder George's bride-to-be drew the losing lot. He remembered what the wild man had promised him. He stepped forward and asked that the sacrifice be delayed, for he intended to kill the lindorm. He quickly ran into the woods and called on the wild man Noah for help and support. The wild man appeared before him and gave him a white horse and a sword, then told him to put on a white robe, mount the white horse, point his sword foreward, and charge against the monster. The monster would hungrily open wide its jaws, and George could penetrate its throat with his sword. And so it happened. Thus George's bride, as well as the entire land, were freed from the monster. The people cheered with joy, happiness ruled throughout the land, and George was dubbed a knight. Everyone now wanted to know more about George's origins. He confessed that he was the king's son and related how he had become a sheepherder. He was told that his father had died, so he could return home safely and assume rule over the kingdom. Thus a king's son became a sheepherder, the sheepherder became a knight, and the knight became a king. Now that George had taken over the kingdom, he traveled throughout the land familiarizing himself with his realm and seeking adventure. He came to a small settlement surrounding a mill. The community had no church. The young king, wanting to give thanks to God, had a church built in this settlement. The church still carries his name, George, as its founder. The builder of the church carved the entire history into a stone monument. And that is how the city of Mühlhausen had its beginning. Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Bechstein, "Des Königs Abenteuer, Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 444, pp. 376-77 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludwig Bechstein, "Des Königs Abenteuer, Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 444, pp. 376-77 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2019. This story combines a type 502 folktale with a Saint George legend . Link to photographs of the church St. Georgii, Mühausen/Türingen . Return to the table of contents . The Horseshoe on Wall of the Saint Nicholas Church in Leipzig Saxony At the time when present-day Leipzig was represented by only a dark grove of shady linden trees, in a high castle in the vicinity there lived an aged king with his daughter. A prosperous village lay at the foot of the mountain. He owned all the surrounding land, as far as the eye could see. He should have been happy, but he had no peace, for a terrible lindorm housed near the village. In order to pacify it they had to give it two sheep every day. After emptying their stalls they were forced to sacrifice a human to it every day. Everyone had to submit to the lottery: rich and poor, old and young, male and female. There were no exceptions. One day the lot fell to the beautiful princess. They were about to lead her out to the dragon, when a handsome youth appeared, mounted high on his horse, wearing silver armour, and carrying richly decorated weaponry. It was the knight Saint George. The dragon confronted him angrily in order to claim its prey, but Saint George drove his lance into its side. This happened near the present-day Saint Thomas Church courtyard. Above the door of a neighboring house one can still see a painted depiction of the knight battling the dragon. The lance was sharp, but it did not kill the monster outright. Bellowing with pain and lashing about with its dreadful tail, it crawled toward the village. The knight pursued, looking for an opportunity to strike a fatal blow. Suddenly his horse shied back, for it had lost a shoe and its hoof was bleeding. This happened at the present-day Ritterstraße [Knight-Street], which was named after Saint George. The knight spurred his horse onward and overtook the dragon in the vicinity of the present-day Georgenhaus [George House], which was also named after him. He leaped from his horse and with his sword slit open the dragon's body. Everyone shouted for joy, and the happy king offered to grant him any wish, but the knight requested only that a farrier come and fit his horse with a new shoe. When this had happened, he rode away. To memorialize this event the king had the lost horseshoe nailed to a linden tree. When the tree was felled at the founding of the city, the horseshoe was moved to the Saint Nicholas Church, where is still on display. Source (books.google.com): Grässe, Johann Georg Theodor, "Das Hufeisen an der Nicolaikirche zu Leipzig," Der Sagenschatz des Kögigreichs Sachsen (Dresden: Verlag von G. Schönfeld's Buchhandlung, 1855), pp. 282-83 (footnote) . Source (Internet Archive): Grässe, Johann Georg Theodor, "Das Hufeisen an der Nicolaikirche zu Leipzig," Der Sagenschatz des Kögigreichs Sachsen (Dresden: Verlag von G. Schönfeld's Buchhandlung, 1855), pp. 282-83 (footnote) . The two churches featured in this legend (German: Nikolaikirche and Thomaskirche ) are today celebrated for their connection with Johann Sebastian Bach. The horseshoe featured in the above legend is imbedded in the eastern wall of the Nikolaikirche. Return to the table of contents . Saint George's Banner Saxony When Count Ludwig of Thüringen went with Emperor Friedrich to Palestine, God sent to him from heaven the banner of the knight Saint George, as a reward for his charity and good works. The banner was brought to the Wartburg, and afterwards to the castle Tharand in Meissen. In 1190 fire broke out in the castle, and many people saw the banner fly out of the fire and through a window. However, no one saw what became of the banner. To commemorate this miracle the Saint George Church was later built in Eisenach. Source (books.google.com): Johann Georg Theodor Grässe, "Das Panier des Ritters St. Georg zu Tharand," Der Sagenschatz des Königreichs Sachsen (Dresden: Verlag von G. Schönfeld's Buchhandlung, 1855), no. 336, p. 187 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Georg Theodor Grässe, "Das Panier des Ritters St. Georg zu Tharand," Der Sagenschatz des Königreichs Sachsen (Dresden: Verlag von G. Schönfeld's Buchhandlung, 1855), no. 336, p. 187 . Return to the table of contents . Saint George Saxony Before there were any Counts of Mansfeld, a knight by the name of George lived in Mansfeld Castle. A lindorm lived on a hill outside the city (in the direction of Eisleben), and even today this hill is called Lindberg. To save their own lives, the inhabitants had to give a maiden to the lindorm every day as a tribute. Soon there were no more virgins to be found in the little city, and the lindorm demanded the knight's daughter. The following morning the knight himself challenged the dragon and slew him, freeing the city. Henceforth he was called Saint George, instead of George. As a memorial the image of him killing the dragon was carved in stone above the Mansfeld church entrance, and can be seen even today. Source: Emil Sommer, "Sankt Georg," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Sachsen und Thüringen , erstes Heft (Halle: Eduard Anton, 1846), pp. 80-81 . Sommer's source: "Oral, from Mansfeld." A lindorm (also spelled lindworm) is a legless, wingless dragon, similar to the wyvern. The coat of arms of the city of Mansfeld depicts Saint George, mounted on a horse and battling a dragon. Return to the table of contents . The Knight Saint George at Nauhain Saxony It is said that the knight Saint George was an ancestor of the counts of Mansfeld. Thus, for ages his image has been depicted on all buildings, columns, wells, weapons, shields, windows, and -- above all -- on the Mansfeld coinage. Furthermore, in the city of Mansfeld a church was built in his honor. After George left home to see the world, he settled for a lengthy sojourn in Cappadocia. At this time a mighty, poisonous dragon was housed in a large lake just outside of the city of Silene in Libya. With its breath it killed many people who had to pass that way. It then devoured them. Whenever the citizens attacked the dragon, it always drove them back in flight. Wanting to make peace, they gave it two sheep every day. When they ran short of sheep, they sacrificed a human, chosen by lottery, whatever their station in life. When the lot fell to the king's only daughter, and she was being led out, the knight Saint George approached, and after learning of the situation, he told her to be of good courage. Mounted on a good horse and with good armour he attacked the dragon, killing it with his lance. For a long time afterward he remained with the king, and was held in great honor. Later he traveled to Meissen and took up residence in Staupitz, situated betweetn Leisnig and Döbeln. However, no record of him remains in these places, except for his name and a few ruins. Furthermore, the large and prosperous farm at Steinau near Hartha is said to have once belonged the the knight Saint George. It happened that one time the knight Saint George was nearly captured by his enemies. He escaped on his horse and fled to the top of the high cliff named Spitzstein. Unable to procede further, he promised in his heart that if God would help him, he in turn would build a suitable memorial. He lept safely from the cliff and made his way to the village of Wesewitz, then escaped across the Mulde River. It is said that before jumping from the cliff, he let fly into the air a sheet of paper fly upon which was written that wherever it might be found, he would have a church built to thank God. This did happen, and he had the Nauhain church [ Georgs-Kapelle ] built. Later it happened that while journeying home he was caught up in the persecution led by Diocletian. He was place in a cask studded with sharp nails and blades and was thrown over a cliff, but he remained unscathed. This angered the despot, who then gave the command to have him beheaded. A long time afterward he was cannonized by the pope and entered into the register of saints. In his honor his portrait is always on displacy in the Nauhain church. Source (books.google.com): Johann Georg Theodor Grässe, "Der Ritter St. Georg zu Nauenhayn," Der Sagenschatz des Königreichs Sachsen (Dresden: Verlag von G. Schönfeld's Buchhandlung, 1855), no. 332, pp. 247-48 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Georg Theodor Grässe, "Der Ritter St. Georg zu Nauenhayn," Der Sagenschatz des Königreichs Sachsen (Dresden: Verlag von G. Schönfeld's Buchhandlung, 1855), no. 332, pp. 247-48 . Grässe's source (books.google.com): Johann Kamprad, Leisnigker Chronica, oder Beschreibung der sehr alten Stadt Leisnigk (Leisnig: Gedruckt bei Gottfried Zimmermannen, 1753), pp. 347-49 . Grässe's source (Internet Archive): Johann Kamprad, Leisnigker Chronica, oder Beschreibung der sehr alten Stadt Leisnigk (Leisnig: Gedruckt bei Gottfried Zimmermannen, 1753), pp. 347-49 . Nauhain is a district within the small town of Hartha in Saxony, Germany. The local church still carries the name St. Georgs-Kapelle . The St.-Georg-Kirche in Mansfeld was built in about 1400. Martin Luther served as an acolyte in this church. Return to the table of contents . The Dragon at Nebra and the Knight Saint George Saxony-Anhalt Once when the castle at Nebra was under seige, its inhabitants were suffering greatly, although they had defended themselves most bravely. The enemy had succeed in taking control of the well adjacent to the castle. When thirst plagued them most seriously the princess of the castle climbed down to a spring that gurgled forth from the foot of the castle hill, there where a bridge now crosses the Unstrut River, across from the tavern Zur Sorge. This spring is now beneath the tavern's dance floor. The princess had barely begun dipping water from the spring when a dragon emerged from a nearby cave and threatened to devour her. However, she was miraculously rescued. The knight Saint George with a large entourage came to her aid from Wendelstein. He killed the dragon and liberated the besieged inhabitants of the castle. Thus the church at Nebra is dedicated to Saint George, and this event is depicted in a stone carving on the church. For the same reason the seal of the town of Nebra portrays Saint George. Source (books.google.com): "Der Drache bei Nebra und Ritter S. Georg," Mansfelder Blätter: Mitteilungen des Vereins für Geschichte und Altertümer der Grafschaft Mansfeld zu Eisleben , edited by Herman Größler, vol. 5 (1891), p. 171 . Source (Internet Archive): "Der Drache bei Nebra und Ritter S. Georg," Mansfelder Blätter: Mitteilungen des Vereins für Geschichte und Altertümer der Grafschaft Mansfeld zu Eisleben , edited by Herman Größler, vol. 5 (1891), p. 171 . Return to the table of contents . Größler's source: "Merchant Rindelhardt in Nebra." The Lindorm in Marktbreit Lower Franconia A statue of the the knight St. George, the town's patron, killing the lindorm, is carved into the corner of the town hall of Marktbreit, a town on the Main River. The lindorm lay in the town moat and demanded a human sacrifice every day. A brave hero slayed it. Source (books.google.com): Friedich Panzer, "Der Lindwurm in Marktbreit in Unterfranken," Bayerische Sagen und Bräuche: Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie , vol. 1 (Munich: Christian Kaiser, 1848), no. 191 p. 165 . Source (Internet Archive): Friedich Panzer, "Der Lindwurm in Marktbreit in Unterfranken," Bayerische Sagen und Bräuche: Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie , vol. 1 (Munich: Christian Kaiser, 1848), no. 191 p. 165 . Panzer's source: "Oral." Although the final sentence in this brief legend does not specifically state that the "brave hero" was St. George, the full context suggests that this was the belief. St. George is the patron saint of Marktbreit, and his image features prominently in the town's coat of arms. Return to the table of contents . The Lindorm at Frankenstein Castle Baden-Württemberg The extensive ruins of Frankenstein Castle lie above the village of Eberstadt, two hours from Darmstadt. There lived there a knight named Hans, although others say his name was George. In the village there flowed a spring from which the peasants drew their water, and water from there was also carried up to the castle. A fearsome lindorm lived next to the spring, and he demanded the sacrifice of a not-too-small animal -- a sheep, a dog, a calf, or a hog, and as long as he had these to eat, anyone could come to the spring. But if these failed, he devoured the people who came to the spring. Finally the Knight of Frankenstein decided to free the village and the region of this dangerous monster. He armed himself and fought with the lindorm, who fiercely defended himself, spitting out as much fire as was possible. Finally the knight struck off the lindorm's head, but the dragon's pointed tail wrapped itself around the knight, sticking him where he was not covered by his armor: in the hollow of his knee. The lindorm's entire body was poisonous -- both inside and outside, and thus the brave Knight of Frankenstein died from the dragon's poison. Afterward he was buried with his forefathers in the church at Niederbeerbach (others say it was at Oberbeerbach), where the Frankensteiners have beautiful grave monuments. There they built a stately monument for the knight, life-sized and equipped with armor, sword, and mace. He is depicted standing on the lindorm, whose tail is pointed at the hollow of the knight's knee. Angels are crowning him: an authentic image of the Christian martyr and saint, the knight Saint George. Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Bechstein, Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 60, p. 53 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludwig Bechstein, Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 60, p. 53 . Frankenstein Castle is thought to have been the inspiration for Mary Shelly's novel Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus (1818). Link to the Wikipedia article on Frankenstein Castle . Return to the table of contents . The Dragon Baden In ancient times a fiery dragon came to the area above the village of Ebringen and disappeared into a cave on the southern slope of Schönberg Mountain. The heathen population revered the dragon as a god, to whom from time to time a human sacrifice had to be presented for its nourishment. Finally the lot fell on the charming and youthful daughter of the prince who resided at Schneeburg Castle. At the same time there lived at the foot of Schönberg Mountain a young knight who had secretly converted to Christianity. When he learned of the horrible fate awaiting the prince's daughter he bravely resolved to kill the all-powerful dragon. Well armored and with a mighty spear in his right hand, he mounted his valiant steed and, trusting in his god, he advanced toward the hellish beast. Greedily awaiting the fearlessly advancing attacker, the monster lay before his cave, his jaws opened and fuming with poison. The proud and foaming steed reared up, but powerful arms swiftly and surely held the reigns and aimed the spear. Hissing, the death-delivering projectile flew into monster's open throat. The prince and the people received the news of the young knight's brave and liberating deed with jubilation. And with jubilation they praised the battle god who had granted such great power to the warrior. To commemorate the deed, stone crosses were erected on the houses in Ebringen, above which the dragon had formerly flown. Some of these stone crosses still exist on gables in the village. The daring knight, whose name was George, was now revered as a saint, and thus the place where he lived was later called Saint George. Until a short time ago, an annual festival was held there every April 23, the saint's day, and peasants from the region would ride their horses around the church three times, asking Saint George's protection for their horses. Source (Internet Archive): J. Waibel and H. Flamm, "Der Drache," Badisches Sagenbuch: Sagen Freiburgs und des Breisgaus (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1899), pp. 74-75 . Return to the table of contents . George's Meadow Swabia East of Immendorf in Swabia, and belonging to that place, is George's Meadow. In the vicinity are George's Spring, George's Acre, and George's Pasture. The church in Immenstadt is dedicated to Saint George, and Saint George's Day is celebrated with dancing, games, and other popular entertainments. In the church there is a wooden statue depicting Saint George killing the lindorm next to one of a kneeling maiden wearing a golden crown and with folded hands. In ancient times a lindorm had his lair on George's Meadow. Every year on a certain day a person, chosen by lot, had to be brought to him to eat. Once the lot fell to a maiden who belonged to the long-time lineage of the Heideckers. However, on this day the lindorm was killed by the knight Saint George, thus rescuing the maiden with his brave deed. On the site where the church now stands was formerly a castle. One can still see there a somewhat elevated place surrounded by the depression of the former moat. Source (books.google.com): Friedrich Panzer, Bayerische Sagen und Bräuche: Beitrag zur Deutschen Mythologie , vol. 2 (Munich: Christian Kaiser, 1855), no. 112, p. 77 . Source (Internet Archive): Friedrich Panzer, Bayerische Sagen und Bräuche: Beitrag zur Deutschen Mythologie , vol. 2 (Munich: Christian Kaiser, 1855), no. 112, p. 77 . Panzer's source: "From my brother Georg." Return to the table of contents . The Lindorm Lusatia According to an old legend, a long, long time ago horrible lindorms and dragons lived in the swamps and lakes of Lower Lusatia. They were like snakes, only much larger, and they breathed smoke and flames. They laid to waste the surrounding land, and they devoured people and animals in large numbers. Near the village of Zilmsdorf [Cielmow] (one of the oldest places in Lusatia) there is a place out in an open field where flames as tall as a man often shoot up from the ground. People call it dragon-fire, and they say that the great dragon killed by Saint George lived there. Next to the old salt road that leads to Sorau [Zary] is a pile of stones. This is where the battle took place, and this is where a stone monument to the saint once stood, depicting him high on his horse, lance in hand, and with the dragon at his feet. This dragon had been eating thirty people every day and laying to waste the farmland far and wide. It also was able to assume human form, in which it caused the downfall of many people. It would rob them of their money and then bury them deep in the woods behind the Forstner Heath. Normally it would fly through the air, and when it did so it had to take a route above Zilmsdorf. A certain man by the name of Wochner lived there who was a well-known exorcist. He had the ability to detain the dragon until a crowing cock from the area caught it by surprise. Every time this happened it would have to drop its gold. Note by Karl Haupt: People made pilgrimages from far and wide to a statue of Saint George near Zilmsdorf. In 1615 the provincial governor Count Promnitz had it rebuilt, namely at the request of Emperor Matthias (given at a dedication ceremony in Sorau in 1611). In about 1710 the stone was still standing there. On the north side was a carving of the knight Saint George on a horse with the lindorm beneath him. The stone was seven yards high and three yards wide. The inscription from the seventeenth century on the west side read: Effigiem Christi dum cernis semper honora Non tamen effigiem sed quem designat honora. Aspice, mortalis, pro te datur hostia talis. Above this, on a stone cross, was an image of Christ made of gilded tin. (Magnus, Geschichte von Sorau , p. 115) Here, in Protestant reinterpretation, the knight is transformed into the Savior himself, who "treads upon the serpent's head." Source: Karl Haupt, "Der Lindwurm ( waka, palowaka )," Sagenbuch der Lausitz , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1862), no. 80, p. 74 . Lusatia (German Lausitz , Sorbian Luzia ) is a historic region crossing present-day eastern Germany and western Poland, with a mixture of German and Slavic cultures. Translator's note: Although the above legend takes place in present-day Poland, I have retained the German place names of my source, giving the Slavic equivalents in square brackets. Return to the table of contents . Saint George and the Uffington White Horse England A manuscript of Bishop Pocock (1757), preserved in the British Museum, tells how that dignitary inspected the Uffington figure, and the hill below, where there was a mound called Dragon Hill. This mound was formerly deemed a barrow, but the idea is now disputed. The bishop found a story current that St. George slew the dragon on this spot, and that the chalk picture commemorated the deed.... And, indeed, the creature itself is almost as much dragon-like as equine. Source: Walter Johnson, Folk-Memory, or the Continuity of British Archaeology (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1908), p. 323 . Johnson's source: Notes and Queries , 6th series, vol. 10 (July - December, 1884), pp. 325-26 . In this article, Bishop Pococke [sic.] is quoted as claiming that in the 1750's common people believed "that the white horse was St. George's steed." The British National Trust describes Dragon Hill near the Uffington White Horse as follows: "A rounded natural chalk outcrop. Some say the 'scar' on its summit is the spot where St. George killed the dragon, spilling its blood and poisoning the soil forever." Link to an article on the Uffington White Horse in Oxfordshire, England, from Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia . Return to the table of contents . The Dragon's Well, Brinsop England The church at Brinsop is dedicated to St. George, and contains a fine tympanum of eleventh century date, representing St. George mounted, in the act of slaying the dragon. The Dragon's Well is in Duck's Pool meadow, on the south side of the church, while on the other side is a field called "Lower Stanks," pointed out by the late parish clerk as the spot where St. George slew the dragon. Source: Ella Mary Leather, The Folk-Lore of Herefordshire: Collected from Oral and Printed Sources (Hereford: Jakeman and Carver; London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1912), p. 11 . Link to an article about Brinsop from Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia . Return to the table of contents . Saint George in Cornwall Cornwall Here [in Cornwall], as in other English counties, Christmas customs are fast disappearing. Two of the favourite sports in Cornwall were a metrical play (exhibiting the successful prowess of St. George exerted against a Mahometan adversary) and a representation of some transactions at a market or fair. In the first, St. George entered, accoutred in complete armour, and exclaimed: Here come I, Saint George, That valiant champion bold, And with my sword and spear I've won three crowns of gold. I slew the dragon, he , And brought him to the slaughter By which I gained fair Sabea, The King of Egypt's daughter. The pagan then entered: Here come I, the Turkish knight, Come from the Turkish land to fight. Some more dialogue then ensued, and a fight took place, when the Turkish knight fell; recovering slowly he raised himself on one knee, and cried out: Oh! pardon me, Saint George; Oh! pardon me, I crave; Oh! give me but my life, And I will be thy slave. St. George again knocked him down, but immediately relenting, he called out, Is there no doctor to be found, To cure a deep and deadly wound? The Doctor now appeared on the scene with a small phial, which contained the juice of some particular plant, capable of recalling any one to life: he tried all his skill to restore the wounded, but failed. At this juncture St. George was supposed to kill the Doctor. Soon after, the Turkish knight appeared perfectly well, and having been fully convinced of his errors by the strength of St. George's arm, he became a Christian; and so the scene closed. Source (books.google.com): Mary Elizabeth Joce Whitcombe (Mrs. Henry Pennell Whitcombe), Bygone Days of Devonshire and Cornwall, with Notes of Existing Superstitions and Customs (London: Richard Bentley and Son, 1874), pp. 192-93 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Targets open in new windows. Saint George (St. George) and the Dragon , an index page for the legendary saint. Dragon Slayers , an index page. British Dragons , legends from England, Wales, and Scotland. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 26, 2023. Love Like Salt Love Like Salt folktales of types 923 and 510 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2013 Contents To Love My Father All (from The Tragedy of King Lear by William Shakespeare). Cap o' Rushes (England). Sugar and Salt (England). The Dirty Shepherdess (France). As Dear as Salt (Germany). The Most Indispensable Thing (Germany). The Necessity of Salt (Austria). The Value of Salt (Italy). Like Good Salt (Italy). Water and Salt (Italy). The King and His Daughters (Pakistan). The Princess Who Loved Her Father Like Salt (India). Link to The Goose-Girl at the Well (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Link to the German text of the above tale: Die Gänsehirtin am Brunnen . Link to a "Love-Like-Salt" variant of "Ass's Skin" (Basque). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. To Love My Father All William Shakespeare Lear Which of you shall we say doth love us most? That we our largest bounty may extend Where nature doth with merit challenge. Goneril, Our eldest-born, speak first. Goneril Sir, I love you more than words can wield the matter, Dearer than eye-sight, space and liberty, Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare, No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour, As much as child e'er loved or father found; A love that makes breath poor and speech unable; Beyond all manner of so much I love you. ... Regan I am made of that self metal as my sister, And prize me at her worth. In my true heart I find she names my very deed of love; Only she comes too short: that I profess Myself an enemy to all other joys Which the most precious square of sense possesses, And find I am alone felicitate In your dear highness' love ... Cordelia I cannot heave My heart into my mouth: I love your majesty According to my bond; nor more nor less. Lear How, how, Cordelia! mend your speech a little, Lest it may mar your fortunes. Cordelia Good my lord, You have begot me, bred me, loved me: I Return those duties back as are right fit, Obey you, love you, and most honour you. Why have my sisters husbands, if they say They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed, That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry Half my love with him half my care and duty: Sure, I shall never marry like my sister, To love my father all. Source: William Shakespeare, The Tragedy of King Lear , act 1, scene 1. Written 1605 or 1606. This story is also told by Geoffrey of Monmouth in his Historia Regum Britanniae , finished about 1136. An on-line edition: The British History of Geoffrey of Monmouth , translated from the Latin by A. Thompson; revised and corrected by J. A. Giles (London: James Bohn, 1842), pp. 32-37 . Return to the table of contents . Cap o' Rushes England Well, there was once a very rich gentleman, and he'd three darters [daughters]. And he thought to see how fond they was of him. So he says to the first, "How much do you love me, my dear?" "Why," says she, "as I love my life." "That's good," says he. So he says to the second, "How much do you love me, my dear?" "Why," says she, "better nor all the world." "That's good," says he. So he says to the third, "How much do you love me, my dear?" "Why," she says, "I love you as fresh meat loves salt," says she. Well, he were that angry. "You don't love me at all," says he, "and in my house you stay no more." So he drove her out there and then, and shut the door in her face. Well, she went away, on and on, till she came to a fen. And there she gathered a lot of rushes, and made them into a cloak kind o', with a hood to cover her from head to foot, and to hide her fine clothes. And then she went on and on till she came to a great house. "Do you want a maid?" says she. "No, we don't," says they. "I hain't nowhere to go," says she, "and I'd ask no wages, and do any sort o' work," says she. "Well," says they, "if you like to wash the pots and scrape the saucepans, you may stay," says they. So she stayed there, and washed the pots and scraped the saucepans, and did all the dirty work. And because she gave no name, they called her Cap o' Rushes. Well, one day there was to be a great dance a little way off, and the servants was let go and look at the grand people. Cap o' Rushes said she was too tired to go, so she stayed at home. But when they was gone, she offed with her cap o' rushes, and cleaned herself, and went to the dance. And no one there was so finely dressed as her. Well, who should be there but her master's son, and what should he do but fall in love with her, the minute he set eyes on her. He wouldn't dance with anyone else. But before the dance were done, Cap o' Rushes she stepped off, and away she went home. And when the other maids was back, she was framin' [pretending] to be asleep with her cap o' rushes on. Well, next morning, they says to her, "You did miss a sight, Cap o' Rushes!" "What was that?" says she. "Why the beautifullest lady you ever see, dressed right gay and ga'. The young master, he never took his eyes off of her." "Well, I should ha' liked to have seen her," says Cap o' Rushes. "Well, there's to be another dance this evening, and perhaps she'll be there." But come the evening, Cap o' Rushes said she was too tired to go with them. Howsumdever, when they was gone, she offed with her cap o' rushes, and cleaned herself, and away she went to the dance. The master's son had been reckoning on seeing her, and he danced with no one else, and never took his eyes off of her. But before the dance was over, she slipped off, and home she went, and when the maids came back, she framed to be asleep with her cap o' rushes on. Next day they says to her again, "Well, Cap o' Rushes, you should ha' been there to see the lady. There she was again, gay an' ga', and the young master he never took his eyes off of her." Well there," says she, "I should ha' liked to ha' seen her." "Well," says they, "there's a dance again this evening, and you must go with us, for she's sure to be there." Well, come the evening, Cap o' Rushes said she was too tired to go, and do what they would, she stayed at home. But when they was gone, she offed with her cap o' rushes, and cleaned herself, and away she went to the dance. The master's son was rarely glad when he saw her. He danced with none but her, and never took his eyes off her. When she wouldn't tell him her name, nor where she came from, he gave her a ring, and told her if he didn't see her again he should die. Well, afore the dance was over, off she slipped, and home she went, and when the maids came home she was framing to be asleep with her cap o' rushes on. Well, next day they says to her, "There, Cap o' Rushes, you didn't come last night, and now you won't see the lady, for there's no more dances." Well, I should ha' rarely liked to ha' seen her," says she. The master's son he tried every way to find out where the lady was gone, but go where he might, and ask whom he might, he never heard nothing about her. And he got worse and worse for the love of her till he had to keep his bed. "Make some gruel for the young master," they says to the cook. "He's dying for love of the lady." The cook she set about making it, when Cap o' Rushes came in. "What are you a' doin' on?" says she. "I'm going to make some gruel for the young master," says the cook, "for he's dying for love of the lady." "Let me make it," says Cap o' Rushes. Well, the cook wouldn't at first, but at last she said "yes," and Cap o' Rushes made the gruel. And when she had made it, she slipped the ring into it on the sly, before the cook took it upstairs. The young man, he drank it, and saw the ring at the bottom. "Send for the cook," says he. So up she comes. "Who made this here gruel?" says he. "I did," says the cook, for she were frightened, and he looked at her. "No, you didn't," says he. "Say who did it, and you shan't be harmed." "Well, then, 'twas Cap o' Rushes," says she. So Cap o' Rushes came. "Did you make the gruel?" says he." "Yes, I did," says she. "Where did you get this ring?" says she. "From him as gave it me," says she. "Who are you then?" says the young man. "I'll show you," says she. And she offed with her cap o' rushes, and there she was in her beautiful clothes. Well, the master's son he got well very soon, and they was to be married in a little time. It was to be a very grand wedding, and everyone was asked, far and near. And Cap o' Rushes' father was asked. But she never told nobody who she was. But afore the wedding she went to the cook, and say she, "I want you to dress every dish without a mite o' salt." "That will be rarely nasty," says the cook. "That don't signify," says she. "Very well," says the cook. Well, the wedding day came, and they was married. And after they was married, all the company sat down to their vittles. When they began to eat the meat, that was so tasteless they couldn't eat it. But Cap o' Rushes father, he tried first one dish and then another, and then he burst out crying. "What's the matter?" said the master's son to him. "Oh!" says he, "I had a daughter. And I asked her how much she loved me. And she said, 'As much as fresh meat loves salt.' And I turned her from my door, for I thought she didn't love me. And now I see she loved me best of all. And she may be dead for aught I know." "No, father, here she is," says Cap o' Rushes. And she goes up to him and puts her arms round him. And so they was happy ever after. Source: Eveline Camilla Gurdon, County Folk-Lore, printed extracts no. 2: Suffolk (Ipswich: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by D. Nutt, 1893), pp. 40-43 . Gurdon's source: A. W. T., "Suffolk Notes and Queries," Ipswich Journal , 1877, (told by an old servant to the writer when a child). Type 510. The episodes following the heroine's exile (her disguise, her mundane work, her appearance at and disappearance from the royal balls, and her ultimate discovery) are reminiscent of tales of type 510B, in which the breach between father and daughter is caused by the father's threats of incest. Link to additional tales of type 510B . Return to the table of contents . Sugar and Salt England Once upon a time there was a father who had two daughters. Calling them to him one day he said to them, "What is the sweetest thing in the world?" "Sugar," said the elder daughter. "Salt," said the younger. The father was angry at this last answer. But his daughter stuck to it, and so her father said to her, "I won't keep a daughter in my house who believes that salt is the sweetest thing in the world. You must leave me and seek another home." So the younger daughter left her father's house and wandered here and there, suffering much hunger and cold, until t last she was befriended by the fairies. As she walked through a wood one day listening to the songs of the birds, a prince came hunting for deer, and when he saw her he fell in love with her at once. She agreed to marry him, and a great banquet was prepared at the prince's house. To this banquet the bride's father was bidden; but he did not know that the bride was his own daughter. Now, at the wish of the bride, all the dishes were prepared without salt. So when the guests began to eat they found that the food was tasteless. At last one of them said, "There is no salt in the meat!" And then all the guests said, "There is no salt in the meat!" And the bride's father spoke the loudest of all. "Truly, salt is the sweetest thing in the world," he said, "though, for saying so, I sent my own daughter away from my house, and shall never see her face again." Then the bride made herself known to her father, and fell on his neck and kissed him. Source: Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales, with Other Traditional Remains Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby and Nottingham (London: David Nutt; Sheffield: Pawson and Brailsford, 1895), no. 50, pp. 48-49 . Similar to type 923. The storyteller has weakened the tale's plot by omitting the comparison between salt and the heroine's love of her father. Return to the table of contents . The Dirty Shepherdess France Once upon a time there lived a king who had two daughters, and he loved them with all his heart. When they grew up, he was suddenly seized with a wish to know if they, on their part, truly loved him, and he made up his mind that he would give his kingdom to whichever best proved her devotion. So he called the elder princess and said to her, "How much do you love me?" "As the apple of my eye!" answered she. "Ah!" exclaimed the king, kissing her tenderly as he spoke, "you are indeed a good daughter." Then he sent for the younger, and asked her how much she loved him. "I look upon you, my father," she answered, "as I look upon salt in my food." But the king did not like her words, and ordered her to quit the court, and never again to appear before him. The poor princess went sadly up to her room and began to cry, but when she was reminded of her father's commands, she dried her eyes, and made a bundle of her jewels and her best dresses and hurriedly left the castle where she was born. She walked straight along the road in front of her, without knowing very well where she was going or what was to become of her, for she had never been shown how to work, and all she had learnt consisted of a few household rules, and receipts of dishes which her mother had taught her long ago. And as she was afraid that no housewife would want to engage a girl with such a pretty face, she determined to make herself as ugly as she could. She therefore took off the dress that she was wearing and put on some horrible old rags belonging to a beggar, all torn and covered with mud. After that she smeared mud all over her hands and face, and shook her hair into a great tangle. Having thus changed her-appearance, she went about offering herself as a goose-girl or shepherdess. But the farmers' wives would have nothing to say to such a dirty maiden, and sent her away with a morsel of bread for charity's sake. After walking for a great many days without being able to find any work, she came to a large farm where they were in want of a shepherdess, and engaged her gladly. One day when she was keeping her sheep in a lonely tract of land, she suddenly felt a wish to dress herself in her robes of splendor. She washed herself carefully in the stream, and as she always carried her bundle with her, it was easy to shake off her rags, and transform herself in a few moments into a great lady. The king's son, who had lost his way out hunting, perceived this lovely damsel a long way off, and wished to look at her closer. But as soon as the girl saw what he was at, she fled into the wood as swiftly as a bird. The prince ran after her, but as he was running he caught his foot in the root of a tree and fell, and when he got up again, she was nowhere to be seen. When she was quite safe, she put on her rags again, and smeared over her face and hands. However the young prince, who was both hot and thirsty, found his way to the farm, to ask for a drink of cider, and he inquired the name of the beautiful lady that kept the sheep. At this everyone began to laugh, for they said that the shepherdess was one of the ugliest and dirtiest creatures under the sun. The prince thought some witchcraft must be at work, and he hastened away before the return of the shepherdess, who became that evening the butt of everybody's jests. But the king's son thought often of the lovely maiden whom he had only seen for a moment, though she seemed to him much more fascinating than any lady of the court. At last he dreamed of nothing else, and grew thinner day by day till his parents inquired what was the matter, promising to do all they could to make him as happy as he once was. He dared not tell them the truth, lest they should laugh at him, so he only said that he should like some bread baked by the kitchen girl in the distant farm. Although the wish appeared rather odd, they hastened to fulfill it, and the farmer was told the request of the king's son. The maiden showed no surprise at receiving such an order, but merely asked for some flour, salt, and water, and also that she might be left alone in a little room adjoining the oven, where the kneading-trough stood. Before beginning her work she washed herself carefully, and even put on her rings; but, while she was baking, one of her rings slid into the dough. When she had finished she dirtied herself again, and let lumps of the dough stick to her fingers, so that she became as ugly as before. The loaf, which was a very little one, was brought to the king's son, who ate it with pleasure. But in cutting it he found the ring of the princess, and declared to his parents that he would marry the girl whom that ring fitted. So the king made a proclamation through his whole kingdom, and ladies came from afar to lay claim to the honor. But the ring was so tiny that even those who had the smallest hands could only get it on their little fingers. In a short time all the maidens of the kingdom, including the peasant girls, had tried on the ring, and the king was just about to announce that their efforts had been in vain, when the prince observed that he had not yet seen the shepherdess. They sent to fetch her, and she arrived covered with rags, but with her hands cleaner than usual, so that she could easily slip on the ring. The king's son declared that he would fulfill his promise, and when his parents mildly remarked that the girl was only a keeper of sheep, and a very ugly one too, the maiden boldly said that she was born a princess, and that, if they would only give her some water and leave her alone in a room for a few minutes, she would show that she could look as well as anyone in fine clothes. They did what she asked, and when she entered in a magnificent dress, she looked so beautiful that all saw she must be a princess in disguise. The king's son recognized the charming damsel of whom he had once caught a glimpse, and, flinging himself at her feet, asked if she would marry him. The princess then told her story, and said that it would be necessary to send an ambassador to her father to ask his consent and to invite him to the wedding. The princess's father, who had never ceased to repent his harshness towards his daughter, had sought her through the land, but as no one could tell him anything of her, he supposed her dead. Therefore it was with great joy he heard that she was living and that a king's son asked her in marriage, and he quitted his kingdom with his elder daughter so as to be present at the ceremony. By the orders of the bride, they only served her father at the wedding breakfast bread without salt, and meat without seasoning. Seeing him make faces, and eat very little, his daughter, who sat beside him, inquired if his dinner was not to his taste. "No," he replied, "the dishes are carefully cooked and sent up, but they are all so dreadfully tasteless." "Did not I tell you, my father, that salt was the best thing in life? And yet, when I compared you to salt, to show how much I loved you, you thought slightingly of me and you chased me from your presence." The king embraced his daughter, and allowed that he had been wrong to misinterpret her words. Then, for the rest of the wedding feast they gave him bread made with salt, and dishes with seasoning, and he said they were the very best he had ever eaten. Source: Andrew Lang, The Green Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1892), pp. 180-85 . Lang's source: Paul Sébillot, "La pouilleuse," Littérature orale de la Haute-Bretagne (Paris: Maisonneuve et Cie., 1881), pp. 45-52 . Sébillot's source: "Told in 1878 by Aimé Pierre, from Liffré, farm worker, aged 19 years." ( page 52 ) Return to the table of contents . As Dear as Salt Germany A king once asked his daughter how dear he was to her. "As dear, as dear -- as salt!" she said. The king thought that this was very little, and he was very unhappy with his child's answer. Soon thereafter he sponsored a great feast. The daughter saw to it that every dish was brought to the table unsalted, and thus nothing tasted good to the king. Finally the daughter explained everything to him. He then recognized how important salt was, and that his daughter had spoken very positively. Thus he loved her again as dearly as before. Source: Ernst Meier, "So lieb wie das Salz," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 27, p. 99 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Type 923. Return to the table of contents . The Most Indispensable Thing Germany Ages ago there lived a king who had three good and beautiful daughters whom he loved very much and who in turn loved him dearly. He had no princes, but in his kingdom it was the custom that the succession of the throne could also pass to women and daughters. Because the king's wife was no longer alive he was free to appoint one of his daughters to the throne, and it did not need to be the oldest one. Because this king loved all of his daughters equally the decision was very difficult for him. He came to the conclusion to select the one who demonstrated the keenest intellect. He shared this determination with his three daughters, declaring that his approaching birthday would be the day of decision. The one who would bring him "the most indispensable thing" would become queen. Each of the princesses thought about what would be the most indispensable thing. When his birthday arrived, the oldest one approached him, carrying a fine purple robe, and said, "The Lord God had mankind come naked into the world, but then he barred them from paradise. Thus robes and clothing are indispensable." The second daughter brought a loaf of fresh bread that she herself had baked. It was lying on top of a filled beaker made of gold. "Food and drink are the most indispensable things for mankind, born from dust, for without these they cannot live. Thus God created the fruits of the field, fruit, berries, and grapes, and taught mankind to make bread and wine, the sacred symbols of his love." The youngest daughter brought a pile of salt on a wooden plate, saying, "My father, I consider salt and wood to be the most indispensable. Ancient peoples paid sacred homage to the trees and considered salt to be holy. The king was very surprised with these gifts. Thinking about them, he said, "Purple is the most indispensable thing for a king, for if he has it, he has everything else. If he loses it, then he is no longer king and is as common as other humans. Because you have perceived this, my oldest and beloved daughter, after me you shall be decorated with royal purple. Come to me and receive my thanks and my blessing!" After kissing and blessing his oldest daughter, he said to the second oldest, "Eating and drinking are not altogether necessary, my good child, and they draw us down entirely too much into commonness. They are a sign of mediocrity and of the masses. I cannot hinder you if you find pleasure therein, nor can I thank you for your poorly chosen gift, but you shall be blessed for your good will." Then the king blessed his daughter, but he did not kiss her. Then he turned to the third princess, who was standing there pale and trembling. After what she had seen and heard, she sensed what was to come. "My daughter, on your wooden plate you may well have some salt, but in your brain you have none," said the king. "You are still alive, and therefore salt is not indispensable. One does not need salt. With your salt you are showing the sense of a peasant, not the sense of a king. And I take no pleasure on that stiff wooden thing. Thus I can neither thank you nor bless you. Go away from me, as far as your feet will carry you. Go to the stupid and coarse people who worship old blocks of wood and tree limbs instead of the living God, and who consider common salt to be sacred." Crying, the youngest princess then turned away from her hard father, and walked far, far away from the court and the royal city, as far as her feet would carry her. She came to an inn and offered her services to the female innkeeper. The innkeeper was touched by her humility, innocence, youth, and beauty, and she took her in as a maid. The princess soon mastered all the household duties, and the innkeeper said, "It would be a pity if the girl did not learn a decent skill. I'll teach her to cook." And thus the princess learned to cook. She grasped everything quickly, and soon could cook some dishes even better and more delicious than the teacher herself. Business improved at the inn because of the good cooking there, and the good cook's reputation -- who was also so young and so beautiful -- spread throughout the entire land. Now it came to pass that this cook's father's oldest daughter was about to be married. A royal wedding was to be held, and it was recommended to bring the famous cook to the court to prepare the feast, for the lords at the royal court, the marshals, the royal wine stewards, the royal dining stewards, the masters of ceremony, the chamberlains, and other excellencies did not share the view that their most gracious lord the king had once expressed, that eating and drinking were not altogether necessary and that they draw us down to commonness. To the contrary, they praised all good food and fine wine and honored -- at least inwardly -- that old and true proverb, "Eating and drinking hold body and soul together." The wedding meal was deliciously prepared, nor was the king's favorite dish lacking, which had been specially ordered by the royal dining steward. The meal was served. There came one dish after the other, and each was highly praised. Finally came the king's favorite dish, and it was served first to him. He tried it and found it completely tasteless. His cheerful mood darkened, and he spoke to the chamberlain standing behind his golden armchair, "This dish is ruined! It is terrible! Stop the platters from being passed around, and summon the cook!" The cook entered the magnificent hall, and the king addressed her, "You have ruined my favorite dish. You have spoiled my pleasure by not putting any salt in my favorite dish!" Then the cook fell at the king's feet, saying with humility, "Have mercy, your majesty, my royal lord, and forgive me! How could I have dared to mix salt into your food? Did I not once hear from a lofty king's own mouth the words, " One does not need salt. Salt is not indispensable. Salt shows only the sense of a peasant, not the sense of a king!" With shame the king recognized these words as his own and the cook as his daughter. Lifting her from the floor where she was kneeling, he drew her to his heart. He then told all the wedding guests her story and had his youngest daughter once again be seated by his side. Then the wedding became doubly joyful, and the king was once again entirely happy with his daughter's love. Salt is holy. Source: Ludwig Bechstein, "Das Unentbehrlichste," Neues Deutsches Märchenbuch (Leipzig: W. Einhorn's Verlag, 1856), no. 24, pp. 171-75 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Bechstein's source: The Necessity of Salt by Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle (1852). Type 923. Although practically unknown outside his homeland, Ludwig Bechstein (1801-1860) was nineteenth century Germany's most popular editor of fairy tales. During his lifetime his fairy tale collections far outsold in Germany those of his compatriots Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. Return to the table of contents . The Necessity of Salt Austria Once upon a time there was a king who had three daughters. Because they were good and beautiful he loved them all sincerely. He did not know which one he should appoint as queen. As his birthday approached he summoned his daughters and said to them, "My dear children, I love all three of you sincerely, and for a long time have not known which one of you I should name to be the heir to my throne. But I have now decided that the one of you shall become queen who brings to me a birthday present that is most necessary in human life. Go and make your plans accordingly and with utmost diligence." The old king's birthday arrived, and the two oldest daughters brought him presents that were very necessary, but at the same time extremely expensive. However, the youngest daughter brought him nothing more than a little pile of salt in a decorated container. When the king saw her present he became very angry, and he drove his daughter out of the castle, forbidding her ever again to let herself be seen by him. With deep sorrow the rejected daughter went out into the unknown world, comforted only by her faith in her own good sense. After walking a good while she came to an inn. There she found a female innkeeper who thoroughly understood cooking. She entered an apprenticeship with her and soon exceeded even the innkeeper in the art of cooking. News spread far and wide of the excellent cook in this inn, and everyone who came this way and who still had a few kreuzers left in his pocket stopped to be served a roast or something even more elegant. The king heard of the cook's reputation, and he hired her as court cook. Now it came to pass that the oldest princess was getting married, and the famous cook was assigned the preparation of the wedding feast, with no expenses to be spared. Thus on the wedding day one elegant dish after the other was served until the table almost cracked. Everything was excellently prepared, and everyone praised the cook. Finally the king's favorite dish arrived. Quickly taking a spoon he tasted it. "This has not been salted!" he cried out angrily. "Have the cook brought before me!" They quickly ran for the cook, who entered the hall undaunted. "Why did you forget to salt my favorite dish, you careless girl?" snapped the king at her. The cook answered, "You drove away your youngest daughter because she thought that salt was so necessary. Perhaps you can now see that your child was not so wrong." When the king heard these words he recognized his daughter, begged her for forgiveness, asked her to be seated at his side, and accepted her once again as his dear child. Then the wedding became doubly joyful. The king lived happily with his children for many years thereafter. Source: Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle, "Notwendigkeit des Salzes," Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1852), no. 31, pp. 189-91 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Type 923. Return to the table of contents . The Value of Salt Italy They say there was a king who had three daughters. He was very anxious to know which of them loved him most; he tried them in various ways, and it always seemed as if the youngest daughter came out best by the test. Yet he was never satisfied, because we has prepossessed with the idea that the elder ones loved him most. One day he thought he would settle the matter once for all, hy asking each separately how much she loved him. So he called the eldest hy herself, and asked her how much she loved him. "As much as the bread we eat," ran her reply; and he said within himself, "She must, as I thought, love me the most of all; for bread is the first necessary of our existence, without which we cannot live. She means, therefore, that she loves me so much she could not live without me." Then he called the second daughter by herself, and said to her, "How much do you love me?" And she answered, "As much as wine!" "That is a good answer too," said the king to himself. "It is true she does not seem to love me quite so much as the eldest; but still, scarcely can one live without wine, so that there is not much difference." Then he called the youngest by herself, and said to her, "And you, how much do you love me?" And she answered, "As much as salt!" Then the king said, "What a contemptible comparison! She only loves me as much as the cheapest and commonest thing that comes to table. This is as much as to say, she doesn't love me at all. I always thought it was so. I will never see her again." Then he ordered that a wing of the palace should be shut up from the rest, where she should be served with everything belonging to her condition in life, but where she should live by herself apart, and never come near him. Here she lived, then, all alone. But though her father fancied she did not care for him, she pined so much at being kept away from him, that at last she was worn out, and could bear it no longer. The room that had been given her had no windows on to the street, that she might not have the amusement of seeing what was going on in the town, but they looked upon an inner courtyard. Here she sometimes saw the cook come out and wash vegetables at the fountain. "Cook! cook!" she called one day, as she saw him pass thus under the window. The cook looked up with a good-natured face, which gave her encouragement. "Don't you think, cook, I must be very lonely and miserable up here all alone?" "Yes, Signorina!" he replied; "I often think I should like to help you to get out; but I dare not think of it, the king would be so angry." "No, I don't want you to do anything to disobey the king," answered the princess; "but would you really do me a favor, which would make me very grateful indeed?" "O! yes, Signorina, anything which I can do without disobeying the king," replied the faithful servant. "Then this is it," said the princess. "Will you just oblige me so far as to cook papa's dinner today without any salt in anything? Not the least grain in anything at all. Let it be as good a dinner as you like, but no salt in anything. Will you do that?" "I see!" replied the cook, with a knowing nod. "Yes, depend on me, I will do it." That day at dinner the king had no salt in the soup, no salt in the boiled meat, no salt in the roast, no salt in the fried. "What is the meaning of this?" said the king, as he pushed dish after dish away from him. "There is not a single thing I can eat today. I don't know what they have done to everything, but there is not a single thing that has got the least taste. Let the cook be called." So the cook came before him. "What have you done to the victuals today?" said the king, sternly. "You have sent up a lot of dishes, and no one alive can tell one from another. They are all of them exactly alike, and there is not one of them can be eaten. Speak!" The cook answered: "Hearing your Majesty say that salt was the commonest thing that comes to table, and altogether so worthless and contemptible, I considered in my mind whether it was a thing that at all deserved to be served up to the table of the king; and judging that it was not worthy, I abolished it from the king's kitchen, and dressed all the meats without it. Barring this, the dishes are the same that are sent every day to the table of the king." Then the king understood the value of salt, and he comprehended how great was the love of his youngest child for him; so he sent and had her apartment opened, and called her to him, never to go away any more. Source: R. H. Busk, Folk-Lore of Rome: Collected by Word of Mouth from the People (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1874), pp. 403-406 . Return to the table of contents . Like Good Salt Italy Once upon a time there was a king, and this king had three daughters. One fine day he took it into his head to call these three daughters, and to ask them, one after another, if they loved him. He calls the eldest, and he says, "Hark ye, do you love me?" Says she, "Yes, daddy, I do." "And how much?" "As much as good bread." The king thinks and thinks, and then he says, "Yes; when you're hungry bread is a good thing." Then he calls the middle daughter, and he says to her, "Hark ye, do you love me?" "Yes, daddy, I do." "And how much?" "As much as good wine." Well, the king thinks and thinks, and then he says, "Yes, yes; wine puts life into a man, therefore it is a good thing." Then he calls the youngest daughter, and he says, "Hark ye, and do you love me too?" "Yes, daddy, I do." "And how much?" "As much as good salt." And the king said, "As much as good salt!" And he began to think and think, and, because salt by itself tastes bad, this answer of the youngest daughter did not please him." The king, having satisfied himself by reflection that to be loved as mnch as good salt is equivalent to not being loved at all, calls his most faithful servant, and orders him to conduct the youngest princess into some desert place, there to kill her, and to bring back her eyes and her heart in proof of the accomplishment of the deed. The faithful servant receives this remarkable order with the utmost calmness, merely replying, "It shall all be done." The princess is conducted into a great meadow, and there informed that her father's commands are that she shall be killed, and her eyes and heart carried back to the palace. Whilst she is begging for her life, she perceives a little dog, and exclaims that heaven has sent it to assist her escape. She persuades the faithful servant to kill the dog, and carry back its eyes and heart instead of her own. He consents; and she is left alone in the great meadow, very much at a loss what to do, and crying bitterly. In the midst of her grief and perplexity she meets with an old woman -- a fairy of course -- who gives her a little wand. When she puts the wand into her bosom her form will change to that of an old woman. She is then to proceed in a certain direction until she finds a palace. In this palace, as the fairy happens to know, tbey are in want of a woman to look after the poultry. The princess is told to ring the bell of the palace and offer herself for the place in her assumed form of an old woman. All which falls out according to the fairy's directions, and the princess is received as hen-woman into the king's service. There not being room for her to sleep in the palace, she is put to lodge in an outhouse hard by. One evening, the queen's son, happening to pass that way, hears the old hen-woman in her chamber sobbing and lamenting in a very piteous manner. He waits until she comes out, and asks her the cause of hor grief. Is she discontented with her master and mistress? No; on the contrary, the hen-woman is most thankful to them, but she is crying over some private misfortunes of her own. But the next evening the young king goes near the outhouse again, ard hears the same lamentations. His curiosity is excited. He makes a hole in the wall with a gimlet, and, peeping through it, he beholds no old hen-woman, but a beautiful young lady; for the princess resumes her proper form in her own chamber every night by the simple process of putting down the fairy's little wand which she carries in her bosom all day. The young king went directly to his mother, and said to her, "Mother, mother, it's no old woman that minds our hens, but the most beautiful girl that eyes ever saw. Come quickly and look, for I have made a hole in the wall, and you can peep through." With that the queen up and went, and looked through the hole, and saw a beautiful girl, crying bitterly. Said the queen, "Well, you're right; she is a most beautiful young woman." The son said, "Mother, I'll have her for my wife." "Very well, we'll go and ask her." They waited until the hen-woman came out, and then the queen said to her, "Why are you always crying so, goody? But, indeed, you're not goody, but a beautiful young girl, and I won't have you stay there any longer." "And if you're content," said the king, "I'll have you for my wife." "Oh, your majesty," said she; "that's not for the like of me!" "No matter for that," said the queen. "Come along with us now, and in a fortnight's time you shall be my son's wife." This arrangement is acceded to by the disguised princess. But she requests as a favor that on the day of her wedding the bridegroom shall invite all the other kings to a banquet; and that, moreover, all the dishes set before one special king, whom she will indicate, shall be dressed entirely without salt, and that the said king shall be seated nest to her. The wedding day came. All the kings who had been invited were there, and among them the king whose dinner was to be served without salt, and he sat next the bride. When the dinner was served, this king began to sup his broth, and found that there was no salt in it, and he gave a great sigh. He looked at the bride who sat beside him, and he kept looking and looking, because she was so exactly like his daughter. Said she to him, "What's the matter, your royal majesty, that you sigh, and don't eat?" He gave another sigh, and looked at her, but said nothing. They brought one dish after another, but he only just tasted them, and then left them, because they were all without salt. The bride began again saying to him, "But whatever is the matter that you keep on sighing so, and eat nothing?" "I sigh because of something that comes into my head." "Oh, but eat now, and don't think of anything else!" Then the king could not hold his peace any longer. The remorse he felt -- the dinner without salt -- the bride who was so like his daughter -- all made his heart so full, that it was ready to burst, and he was obliged to speak. "If you only knew," said he, "what I have done! One fine morning I took it into my head to call all my daughters, and ask them if they loved me. The youngest one said, yes, she did as much as good salt. At the moment it seemed to me that salt was not a good thing; but now I know how good it is, and that we cannot do without it. But at the moment, in a fit of rage, I called my servant, and ordered him to take away my daughter into some desert place, and to kill her, and to bring back her eyes and her heart. And he did it. He took her away, and killed her, and brought me back her eyes and her heart. And when I look at you I seem to see my daughter, you are so like her." "Have you that servant still?" said she. "Yes; I have him still. But it was none of his fault, you know. He only did what I bade him." "And if I were to say to you that I am your daughter, would you believe me? And that the servant, instead of killing me, killed a little dog, and that, instead of taking out my eyes and my heart, he took out the little dog's, and that he left me to my fate?" Then the king, when he heard all this, was ready to faint. He was just going to fall down on his knees, and ask his daughter's pardon; but she said, "You must do nothing of the sort. Let bygones be bygones; you will always be my own daddy, and now let us think of nothing but making merry. Only I should like that everything belonging to me at home should be given to that servant, because it was he who saved my life." The king was so delighted at finding his daughter again, whom he thought was dead, and at being present at her wedding, that he ordered eight days' more feasting at his own expense, and invited all the kings of his acquaintance, and the faithful servant too, and they had a great merry-making, and lived happy ever after. Source: "Venetian Popular Legends," The Cornhill Magazine (July 1875), pp. 80-83 . Editor's note: "This collection has been made con amore by a native Venetian gentleman named Bernoni, who took them down verbatim, as they were told by the comari (old wives, gossips) of Castello or Canaregio. Return to the table of contents . Water and Salt Italy Once upon a time there was a king and three daughters. These three daughters being at table one day, their father said, "Come now, let us see which of you three loves me." The oldest said, "Papa, I love you as much as my eyes." The second answered, "I love you as much as my heart." The youngest said, "I love you as much as water and salt." The king heard her with amazement, "Do you value me like water and salt? Quick! call the executioners, for I will have her killed immediately." The other sisters privately gave the executioners a little dog, and told them to kill it and rend one of the youngest sister's garments, but to leave her in a cave. This they did, and brought back to the king the dog's tongue and the rent garment: "Royal majesty, here is her tongue and garment." And his majesty gave them a reward. The unfortunate princess was found in the forest by a magician, who took her to his house opposite the royal palace. Here the king's son saw her and fell desperately in love with her, and the match was soon agreed upon. Then the magician came and said, "You must kill me the day before the wedding. You must invite three kings, your father the first. You must order the servants to pass water and salt to all the guests except your father." Now let us return to the father of this young girl, who the longer he lived the more his love for her increased, and he was sick of grief. When her received the invitation he said, "And how can I go with this love for my daughter?" And he would not go. Then he thought, "But this king will be offended if I do not go, and will declare war against me some time." He accepted and went. The day before the wedding they killed the magician and quartered him, and put a quarter in each of four rooms, and sprinkled his blood in all the rooms and on the stairway, and the blood and flesh became gold and precious stones. When the three kings came and saw the golden stairs, they did not like to step on them. "Never mind," said the prince, "go up. This is nothing." That evening they were married. The next day they had a banquet. The prince gave orders. "No salt and water to that king." They sat down at table, and the young queen was near her father, but he did not eat. His daughter said, "Royal majesty, why do you not eat. Does not the food please you?" "What an idea! It is very fine." "Why don't you eat then?" "I don't feel very well." The bride and groom helped him to some bits of meat, but the king did not want it, and chewed his food over and over again like a goat (as if he could eat it without salt!). When they finished eating they began to tell stories, and the king told them all about his daughter. She asked him if he could still recognize her, and stepping out of the room put on the same dress she wore when he sent her away to be killed. "You caused me to be killed because I told you I loved you as much as salt and water. Now you have seen what it is to eat without salt and water." Her father could not say a word, but embraced her and begged her pardon. They remained happy and contented, and here we are with nothing. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 23, pp. 333-34 . Crane's source, "L'Acqua e lu Sali," Giuseppe Pitrè, Riabe: Novelle e Racconti (Palermo, 1875), no. 10. Type 923. Return to the table of contents . The King and His Daughters Pakistan There was once a king who had several daughters. To the first he said, "How do you love me?" "I love you as sugar," said she. To the next he said, "And how do you love me?" "I love you as honey," said she. To the third he said, "And how do you love me?" "I love you as sherbet," said she. To the last and youngest he said, "And how do you love me?" "I love you as salt," said she. On hearing the answer of his youngest daughter the king frowned, and, as she persisted in repeating it, he drove her out into the forest. There, when wandering sadly along, she heard the tramping of a horse, and she hid herself in a hollow tree. But the fluttering of her dress betrayed her to the rider, who was a prince, and who instantly fell in love with her and married her. Some time after, the king, her father, who did not know what had become of her, paid her husband a visit. When he sat down to meat, the princess took care that all the dishes presented to him should be made-up sweets, which he either passed by altogether or merely tasted. He was very hungry, and was longing sorely for something which he could eat, when the princess sent him a dish of common spinach, seasoned with salt, such as farmers eat, and the king signified his pleasure by eating it with relish. Then the princess threw off her veil, and, revealing herself to her father, said, "Oh my father, I love you as salt. My love may be homely, but it is true, genuine and lasting, and I entreat your forgiveness." Then the king perceived how great a mistake he had made, and there followed a full reconciliation. Source: Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 27, pp. 78-79 . Type 923. Return to the table of contents . The Princess Who Loved Her Father Like Salt India In a country there lived a king who had seven daughters. One day he called them all to him and said to them, "My daughters, how much do you love me?" The six eldest answered, "Father, we love you as much as sweetmeats and sugar;" but the seventh and youngest daughter said, "Father, I love you as much as salt." The king was much pleased with his six eldest daughters, but very angry with his youngest daughter. "What is this?" he said; "my daughter only loves me as much as she does salt!" Then he called some of his servants, and said to them, "Get a palanquin ready, and carry my youngest daughter away to the jungle." The servants did as they were bid; and when they got to the jungle, they put the palanquin down under a tree and went away. The princess called to them, "Where are you going? Stay here; my father did not tell you to leave me alone in the jungle." "We will come back," said the servants; "we are only going to drink some water." But they returned to her father's palace. The princess waited in the palanquin under the tree, and it was now evening, and the servants had not come back. She was very much frightened and cried bitterly. "The tigers and wild beasts will eat me," she said to herself. At last she went to sleep, and slept for a little while. When she awoke she found in her palanquin some food on a plate, and a little water, that God had sent her while she slept. She ate the food and drank the water, and then she felt happier, for she thought, "God must have sent me this food and water." She decided that as it was now night she had better stay in her palanquin, and go to sleep. "Perhaps the tigers and wild beasts will come and eat me," she thought; "but if they don't, I will try tomorrow to get out of this jungle, and go to another country." The next morning she left her palanquin and set out. She walked on, till, deep in the jungle, she came to a beautiful palace, which did not belong to her father, but to another king. The gate was shut, but she opened it, and went in. She looked all about, and thought, "What a beautiful house this is, and what a pretty garden and tank!" Everything was beautiful, only there were no servants nor anybody else to be seen. She went into the house, and through all the rooms. In one room she saw a dinner ready to be eaten, but there was no one to eat it. At last she came to a room in which was a splendid bed, and on it lay a king's son covered with a shawl. She took the shawl off, and then she saw he was very beautiful, and that he was dead. His body was stuck full of needles. She sat down on the bed, and there she sat for one week, without eating, or drinking, or sleeping, pulling out the needles. Then a man came by who said to her, "I have here a girl I wish to sell." "I have no rupees," said the princess; "but if you will sell her to me for my gold bangles, I will buy her." The man took the bangles, and left the girl with the princess, who was very glad to have her. "Now," she thought, "I shall be no longer alone." All day and all night long the princess sat and pulled out the needles, while the girl went about the palace doing other work. At the end of other two weeks the princess had pulled out all the needles from the king's body, except those in his eyes. Then the king's daughter said to her servant-girl, "For three weeks I have not bathed. Get a bath ready for me, and while I am bathing sit by the king, but do not take the needles out of his eyes. I will pull them out myself." The servant-girl promised not to pull out the needles. Then she got the bath ready; but when the king's daughter had gone to bathe, she sat down on the bed, and pulled the needles out of the king's eyes. As soon as she had done so, he opened his eyes, and sat up. He thanked God for bringing him to life again. Then he looked about, and saw the servant-girl, and said to her, "Who has made me well and pulled all the needles out of my body?" "I have," she answered. Then he thanked her and said she should be his wife. When the princess came from her bath, she found the king alive, and sitting on his bed talking to her servant. When she saw this she was very sad, but she said nothing. The king said to the servant-maid, "Who is this girl?" She answered, "She is one of my servants." And from that moment the princess became a servant-girl, and her servant girl married the king. Every day the king said, "Can this lovely girl be really a servant? She is far more beautiful than my wife." One day the king thought, "I will go to another country to eat the air." So he called the pretended princess, his wife, and told her he was going to eat the air in another country. "What would you like me to bring you when I come back?" She answered, "I should like beautiful saris and clothes, and gold and silver jewels." Then the king said, "Call the servant-girl, and ask her what she would like me to bring her." The real princess came, and the king said to her, "See, I am going to another country to eat the air. What would you like me to bring for you when I return?" "King," she answered, "if you can bring me what I want I will tell you what it is; but if you cannot get it, I will not tell you." "Tell me what it is," said the king. "Whatever it may be I will bring it you." "Good," said the princess. "I want a sun-jewel box." Now the princess knew all about the sun-jewel boxes, and that only fairies had such boxes. And she knew, too, what would be in hers if the king could get one for her, although these boxes contain sometimes one thing and sometimes another. The king had never heard of such a box, and did not know what it was like; so he went to every country asking all the people he met what sort of box was a sun-jewel box, and where he could get it. At last one day, after a fruitless search, he was very sad, for he thought, "I have promised the servant to bring her a sun-jewel box, and now I cannot get one for her; what shall I do?" Then he went to sleep, and had a dream. In it he saw a jungle, and in the jungle a fakir who, when he slept, slept for twelve years, and then was awake for twelve years. The king felt sure this man could give him what he wanted, so when he woke he said to his sepoys and servants, "Stay here in this spot till I return to you; then we will go back to my country." He mounted his horse and set out for the jungle he had seen in his dream. He went on and on till he came to it, and there he saw the fakir lying asleep. He had been asleep for twelve years all but two weeks. Over him were a quantity of leaves, and grass, and a great deal of mud. The king began taking off all the grass, and leaves, and mud, and every day for a fortnight when he got up he cleared them all away from off the fakir. When the fakir awoke at the end of the two weeks, and saw that no mud, or grass, or leaves were upon him, but that he was quite clean, he was very much pleased, and said to the king, "I have slept for twelve years, and yet I am as clean as I was when I went to sleep. When I awoke after my last sleep, I was all covered with dirt and mud, grass and leaves; but this time I am quite clean." The king stayed with the fakir for a week, and waited on him and did everything for him. The fakir was very much pleased with the king, and he told this to him: "You are a very good man." He added, " Why did you come to this jungle? You are such a great king, what can you want from me?" "I want a sun-jewel box," answered the king. "You are such a good man," said the fakir, "that I will give you one." Then the fakir went to a beautiful well, down which he went right to the bottom. There, there was a house in which lived the red fairy. She was called the red fairy not because her skin was red, for it was quite white, but because everything about her was red: her house, her clothes, and her country. She was very glad to see the fakir, and asked him why he had come to see her. "I want you to give me a sun-jewel box," he answered. "Very good," said the fairy, and she brought him one in which were seven small dolls and a little flute. "No one but she who wants this box must open it," said the fairy to the fakir. "She must open it when she is quite alone and at night." Then she told him what was in the box. The fakir thanked her, and took the box to the king, who was delighted and made many salaams to the fakir. The fakir told him none but the person who wished for the box was to open it; but he did not tell him what more the fairy had said. The king set off on his journey now, and when he came to his servants and sepoys, he said to them he would now return to his country, as he had found the box he wanted. When he reached his palace he called the false princess, his wife, and gave her her silks and shawls, and scarfs, and gold and silver jewels. Then he called the servant-girl -- the true princess -- and gave her her sun-jewel box. She took it, and was delighted to have it. She made him many salaams and went away with her box, but did not open it then, for she knew what was in it, and that she must open it at night and alone. That night she took her box and went out all by herself to a wide plain in the jungle, and there opened it. She took the little flute, put it to her lips, and began to play, and instantly out flew the seven little dolls, who were all little fairies, and they took chairs and carpets from the box, and arranged them all in a large tent which appeared at that moment. Then the fairies bathed her, combed and rolled up her hair, put on her grand clothes and lovely slippers. But all the time the princess did nothing but cry. They brought a chair and placed it before the tent, and made her sit in it One of them took the flute and played on it, and all the others danced before the princess, and they sang songs for her. Still she cried and cried. At last, at four o'clock in the morning, one of the fairies said, "Princess, why do you cry?" "I took all the needles out of the king, all but those in his eyes," said the princess, "and while I was bathing, my servant-girl, whom I had bought with my gold bangles, pulled these out She told the king it was she who had pulled out all the other needles and brought him to life, and that I was her servant, and she has taken my place and is treated as the princess, and the king has married her, while I am made to do a servant's work and treated as the servant." "Do not cry," said the fairies. "Everything will be well for you by and by." When it was close on morning, the princess played on the flute, and all the chairs, sofas, and fairies became quite tiny and went into the box, and the tent disappeared. She shut it up, and took it back to the king's palace. The next night she again went out to the jungle-plain, and all happened as on the night before. A wood-cutter was coming home late from his work, and had to pass by the plain. He wondered when he saw the tent. "I went by some time ago," he said to himself, "and I saw no tent here." He climbed up a big tree to see what was going on, and saw the fairies dancing before the princess, who sat outside the tent, and he saw how she cried though the fairies did all they could to amuse her. Then he heard the fairies say, "Princess, why do you cry?" And he heard her tell them how she had cured the king, and how her servant-girl had taken her place and made her a servant. "Never mind, don't cry," said the fairies. "All will be well by and by." Near morning the princess played on her flute, and the fairies went into the box, and the tent disappeared, and the princess went back to the palace. The third night passed as the other two had done. The wood-cutter came to look on, and climbed into the tree to see the fairies and the princess. Again the fairies asked her why she cried, and she gave the same answer. The next day the wood-cutter went to the king. "Last night and the night before," he said, "as I came home from work, I saw a large tent in the jungle, and before the tent there sat a princess who did nothing but cry, while seven fairies danced before her, or played on different instruments, and sang songs to her." The king was very much astonished, and said to the wood-cutter, "Tonight I will go with you, and see the tent, and the princess, and the fairies." When it was night the princess went out softly and opened her box on the plain. The wood-cutter fetched the king, and the two men climbed into a tree, and watched the fairies as they danced and sang. The king saw that the princess who sat and cried was his own servant-girl. He heard her tell the fairies all she had done for him, and all that had happened to her; so he came suddenly down from the tree, and went up to her, and took her hand. "I always thought you were a princess, and no servant-girl," he said. "Will you marry me?" She left off crying, and said, "Yes, I will marry you." She played on her flute, and the tent disappeared, and all the fairies, and sofas, and chairs went into the box. She put her flute in it, as she always did before shutting down the lid, and went home with the king. The servant-girl was very vexed and angry when she found the king knew all that had happened. However, the princess was most good to her, and never treated her unkindly. The princess then sent a letter to her mother, in which she wrote, "I am going to be married to a great king. You and my father must come to my wedding, and must bring my sisters with you." They all came, and her father and mother liked the king very much, and were glad their daughter should marry him. The wedding took place, and they stayed with her for some time. For a whole week she gave their servants and sepoys nice food cooked with salt, but to her father and mother and sisters she only gave food cooked with sugar. At last they got so tired of this sweet food that they could eat it no longer. At the end of the week she gave them a dinner cooked with salt. Then her father said, "My daughter is wise though she is so young, and is the youngest of my daughters. I know now how much she loved me when she said she loved me like salt. People cannot eat their food without salt. If their food is cooked with sugar one day, it must be cooked with salt the next, or they cannot eat it." After this her father and mother and sisters went home, but they often came to see their little daughter and her husband. The princess, the king, and the servant-maid all lived happily together. Source: Maive Stokes, Indian Fairy Tales (London: Ellis and White, 1880), no. 23, pp. 164-72 . Stokes's source: Múniyá, a Hindu and "a very old, white-haired woman." ( page vi ). Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 9, 2013. Why the Sea Is Salty Why the Sea Is Salty folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 565 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2008-2018 Contents Frodi's Mill (Iceland). Why the Sea Is Salt (Norway). The Coffee Mill Which Grinds Salt (Denmark). Why Sea Water Is Salty (Germany). Why the Ocean Is Salty (Philippines). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Frodi's Mill Iceland In that time two millstones were found in Denmark, so great that no one was so strong that he could turn them. The nature of the mill was such that whatsoever he who turned asked for, was ground out by the millstones. This mill was called Grotti. He who gave King Frodi the mill was named Hengikjöptr. King Frodi had the maidservants led to the mill, and bade them grind gold; and they did so. First they ground gold and peace and happiness for Frodi; then he would grant them rest or sleep no longer than the cuckoo held its peace or a song might be sung. It is said that they sang the song which is called the Lay of Grotti, and this is its beginning: Now are we come To the king's house, The two fore-knowing, Fenja and Menja: These are with Frodi Son of Fridleifr, The Mighty Maidens, As maid-thralls held. And before they ceased their singing, they ground out a host against Frodi, so that the sea king called Mysingr came there that same night and slew Frodi, taking much plunder. Then the Peace of Frodi was ended. Mysingr took Grotti with him, and Fenja and Menja also, and bade them grind salt. And at midnight they asked whether Mysingr were not weary of salt. He bade them grind longer. They had ground but a little while, when down sank the ship; and from that time there has been a whirlpool in the sea where the water falls through the hole in the millstone. It was then that the sea became salt. Source: Snorri Sturluson, The Prose Edda , translated by Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur (New York: The American-Scandinavian Foundation, 1916), pp. 162-63 . In the above text I have omitted accent marks from the names Grótti, Fródi, and Mýsingr. Return to the table of contents . Why the Sea Is Salt Norway Once on a time, but it was a long, long time ago, there were two brothers, one rich and one poor. Now, one Christmas eve, the poor one hadn't so much as a crumb in the house, either of meat or bread, so he went to his brother to ask him for something to keep Christmas with, in God's name. It was not the first time his brother had been forced to help him, and you may fancy he wasn't very glad to see his face, but he said, "If you will do what I ask you to do, I'll give you a whole flitch [side] of bacon." So the poor brother said he would do anything, and was full of thanks. "Well, here is the flitch," said the rich brother, "and now go straight to hell." "What I have given my word to do, I must stick to," said the other; so he took the flitch and set off. He walked the whole day, and at dusk he came to a place where he saw a very bright light. "Maybe this is the place," said the man to himself. So he turned aside, and the first thing he saw was an old, old man, with a long white beard, who stood in an outhouse hewing wood for the Christmas fire. "Good even," said the man with the flitch. "The same to you; whither are you going so late?" said the man. "Oh! I'm going to hell, if I only knew the right way," answered the poor man. "Well, you're not far wrong, for this is hell," said the old man. "When you get inside they will be all for buying your flitch, for meat is scarce in hell; but mind, you don't sell it unless you get the hand-quern which stands behind the door for it. When you come out, I'll teach you how to handle the quern, for it's good to grind almost anything." So the man with the flitch thanked the other for his good advice, and gave a great knock at the devil's door. When he got in, everything went just as the old man had said. All the devils, great and small, came swarming up to him like ants round an anthill, and each tried to outbid the other for the flitch. "Well!" said the man, "by rights my old dame and I ought to have this flitch for our Christmas dinner; but since you have all set your hearts on it, I suppose I must give it up to you; but if I sell it at all, I'll have for it that quern behind the door yonder." At first the devil wouldn't hear of such a bargain, and chaffered and haggled with the man; but he stuck to what he said, and at last the devil had to part with his quern. When the man got out into the yard, he asked the old woodcutter how he was to handle the quern; and after he had heard how to use it, he thanked the old man and went off home as fast as he could, but still the clock had struck twelve on Christmas eve before he had reached his own door. "Wherever in the world have you been?" said his old dame. "Here have I sat hour after hour waiting and watching, without so much as two sticks to lay together under the Christmas brose." "Oh!" said the man, "I could not get back before, for I had to go a long way, first for one thing, and then for another; but now you shall see what you shall see." So he put the quern on the table, and bade it first of all grind lights, then a tablecloth, then meat, then ale, and so on till they had got everything that was nice for Christmas fare. He had only to speak the word, and the quern ground out what he wanted. The old dame stood by blessing her stars, and kept on asking where he had got this wonderful quern, but he wouldn't tell her. "It's all one where I got it from; you see the quern is a good one, and the millstream never freezes. That's enough." So he ground meat and drink and dainties enough to last till Twelfth Day, and on the third day he asked all his friends and kin to his house, and gave a great feast. Now, when his rich brother saw all that was on the table, and all that was behind in the larder, he grew quite spiteful and wild, for he couldn't bear that his brother should have anything. "'Twas only on Christmas eve," he said to the rest, "he was in such straits, that he came and asked for a morsel of food in God's name, and now he gives a feast as if he were count or king." And he turned to his brother and said, "But whence, in hell's name, have you got all this wealth?" "From behind the door," answered the owner of the quern, for he didn't care to let the cat out of the bag. But later on the evening, when he had got a drop too much, he could keep his secret no longer, and brought out the quern and said, "There, you see what has gotten me all this wealth." And so he made the quern grind all kind of things. When his brother saw it, he set his heart on having the quern, and, after a deal of coaxing, he got it; but he had to pay three hundred dollars for it, and his brother bargained to keep it till hay harvest, for he thought, if I keep it till then, I can make it grind meat and drink that will last for years. So you may fancy the quern didn't grow rusty for want of work, and when hay harvest came, the rich brother got it, but the other took care not to teach him how to handle it. It was evening when the rich brother got the quern home, and next morning he told his wife to go out into the hayfield and toss, while the mowers cut the grass, and he would stay at home and get the dinner ready. So, when dinnertime drew near, he put the quern on the kitchen table and said, "Grind herrings and broth, and grind them good and fast." So the quern began to grind herrings and broth; first of all, all the dishes full, then all the tubs full, and so on till the kitchen floor was quite covered. Then the man twisted and twirled at the quern to get it to stop, but for all his twisting and fingering the quern went on grinding, and in a little while the broth rose so high that the man was like to drown. So he threw open the kitchen door and ran into the parlor, but it wasn't long before the quern had ground the parlor full too, and it was only at the risk of his life that the man could get hold of the latch of the house door through the stream of broth. When he got the door open, he ran out and set off down the road, with the stream of herrings and broth at his heels, roaring like a waterfall over the whole farm. Now, his old dame, who was in the field tossing hay, thought it a long time to dinner, and at last she said, "Well! though the master doesn't call us home, we may as well go. Maybe he finds it hard work to boil the broth, and will be glad of my help." The men were willing enough, so they sauntered homewards; but just as they had got a little way up the hill, what should they meet but herrings, and broth, and bread, all running, and dashing, and splashing together in a stream, and the master himself running before them for his life, and as he passed them he bawled out, "Would to heaven each of you had a hundred throats! But take care you're not drowned in the broth." Away he went, as though the Evil One were at his heels, to his brother's house, and begged him for God's sake to take back the quern that instant; for, said he, "If it grinds only one hour more, the whole parish will be swallowed up by herrings and broth." But his brother wouldn't hear of taking it back till the other paid him down three hundred dollars more. So the poor brother got both the money and the quern, and it wasn't long before he set up a farmhouse far finer than the one in which his brother lived, and with the quern he ground so much gold that he covered it with plates of gold; and as the farm lay by the seaside, the golden house gleamed and glistened far away over the sea. All who sailed by put ashore to see the rich man in the golden house, and to see the wonderful quern, the fame of which spread far and wide, till there was nobody who hadn't heard tell of it. So one day there came a skipper who wanted to see the quern; and the first thing he asked was if it could grind salt. "Grind salt!" said the owner; "I should just think it could. It can grind anything." When the skipper heard that, he said he must have the quern, cost what it would; for if he only had it, he thought he should be rid of his long voyages across stormy seas for a lading of salt. Well, at first the man wouldn't hear of parting with the quern; but the skipper begged and prayed so hard, that at last he let him have it, but he had to pay many, many thousand dollars for it. Now, when the skipper had got the quern on his back, he soon made off with it, for he was afraid lest the man should change his mind; so he had no time to ask how to handle the quern, but got on board his ship as fast as he could, and set sail. When he had sailed a good way off, he brought the quern on deck and said, "Grind salt, and grind both good and fast." Well, the quern began to grind salt so that it poured out like water; and when the skipper had got the ship full, he wished to stop the quern, but whichever way he turned it, and however much he tried, it was no good; the quern kept grinding on, and the heap of salt grew higher and higher, and at last down sunk the ship. There lies the quern at the bottom of the sea, and grinds away at this very day, and that is the reason why the sea is salt. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1859), pp. 9-15 . Link to the tale in the orignal Norwegian: Kvernen som står og maler på havsens bunn (The Quern that Stands and Grinds at the Bottom of the Sea). Note that Dasent changed the title in his translation. Return to the table of contents . The Coffee Mill Which Grinds Salt Denmark There was once a little boy by the name of Hans. As his parents died while he was very young, his grandmother took care of him and taught him reading and writing, and to be a good boy. When she became very old, and thought she was about to die, she called the little boy to her and said, "I am old, Hans, and may not live long. You were always a good boy, and therefore you shall have my only treasure, a coffee mill which I have always kept at the bottom of my old chest. This coffee mill will grind all that you wish. If you say to it, 'Grind a house, little mill,' it will work away, and there the house will stand. When you say, 'Stop, little mill,' it will cease to grind." Hans thanked his grandmother kindly, and when she died, and he was alone in the world, he opened the chest, took the coffee mill, and went out into the world. When he had walked a long distance, and needed something to eat, he placed the mill on the grass and said, "Grind some bread and butter, little mill." Very soon Hans had all that he needed, and then he bid the mill to stop. The next day he came to a large seaport, and when he saw the many vessels, he thought it would be pleasant to see more of the great world. He therefore boarded one of the ships and offered his service to the sailors. As it just happened that the captain needed a boy of Hans's age, he told him to stay. As soon as the ship was out of port, the sailors commenced abusing Hans. He bore the harsh treatment as well as he could, and when he had nothing to eat the mill ground all that he wished. The bad men wondered how he could always be contented, although they gave him but little to eat. One day one of them peeped through a hole in the cabin door and discovered how the coffee mill served him. Now the sailors offered a large sum of money to Hans if he would sell his treasure. He refused, however, saying that it was all that his good old grandmother had left him. So one day these wicked men threw Hans overboard and seized the mill. As they were in need of some salt, they bid it grind for them. The mill immediately began its work, and soon they had enough. Now they asked it to stop, but as the one who had peeped through the hole into the boy's cabin had not learned the exact command, the mill refused to obey, and before long the ship was filled with salt. The men grew desperate, but none of them was able to find a way out of the difficulty. So at length the ship sank down with the mill, the salt, and all the wicked men. The men were drowned, but the mill is yet standing at the bottom of the sea, grinding away, and for this reason the water in the ocean has and always will have a salt taste. Source: J. Christian Bay, Danish Fairy and Folk Tales (New York and London: Harper and Brothers, 1899), pp. 11-13 . Return to the table of contents . Why Sea Water Is Salty Germany Once upon a time there was a dear, brave boy who had nothing on earth but a blind grandmother and a clear conscience. After finishing school he became a ship's boy and was about to begin his first journey. He saw that all his new comrades were gambling with good money, but he had nothing, not even a penny. This saddened him, and he complained to his grandmother. She thought for a while, then limped into her room and returned with a small mill, which she gave to the boy, saying, "If you say to the mill, 'Mill, mill, grind for me; grind this or that for me at once!' then it will grind for you whatever you want. And when you say, 'Mill, mill, stand still, for I want nothing more!' then it will stop grinding. But say nothing about this, or it will bring you misfortune!" The boy thanked her, said farewell, and boarded his ship. When his comrades again began to gamble with their money, he took his mill into a dark corner and said, "Mill, mill, grind for me; grind golden ducats for me at once!" and the mill ground out ducats of pure gold that fell ringing into his leather cap. When the cap was full he said, "Mill, mill, stand still, for I want nothing more!" and it stopped grinding. He was now the richest of all his comrades. The ship's captain was very miserly, and whenever there was not enough to eat, the boy had only to say, "Mill, mill, grind for me; grind fresh bread for me at once!" and it would grind away until he said the other words. The mill ground out anything for him that he wanted. His comrades often asked him how he got these good things, but he said only that he was not at liberty to tell them. However, they continued to press him, until at last he told them the whole story. It was not long before the evil ship's captain got wind of this, and he immediately hatched a plot. One evening he called the boy into his cabin and said, "Fetch your mill and grind out some fresh chickens for me!" The boy went and brought back a basket full of fresh chickens, but the godless man was not satisfied. He beat the poor boy until he brought the mill to him and told him what he had to say to make it grind. However, the boy did not tell him how to make it stop, and the captain did not think to ask him about this. Afterward when the boy was standing alone on deck, the captain went to him and pushed him into the sea, not thinking at all about how much care and concern his father and mother had given for him, nor how his blind grandmother was hoping for his return. He pushed him into the sea, then said that he accidentally had fallen overboard, thinking that this was the end of the story. Then he went into his cabin and said to the mill, "Mill, mill, grind for me; grind salt for me at once!" and the mill ground out grains of pure white salt. When the bowl was full the ship's captain said, "That is enough!" but the mill continued to grind forth. Whatever the captain said or did, the mill ground away until the entire cabin was full. He took hold of the mill to throw it overboard, but received such a blow that he fell to the floor as though stunned. The mill continued to grind forth until the entire ship was full and was beginning to sink. Finally the ship's captain grabbed his sword and chopped the mill into tiny pieces; but behold, every little piece became a little mill, and all the mills ground out grains of pure white salt. It was soon over for the ship. It sank with man and mouse and all the mills. These are still grinding out grains of pure white salt at the bottom of the sea. And even if you were to shout out the correct command, they are so deep that they would not hear it. And that is why seawater is so salty. Source: Carl and Theodor Colshorn, Märchen und Sagen (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), no. 61, pp. 173-75. The Colshorns' source: "Oral, in Leer and Hannover." Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. Return to the table of contents . Why the Ocean Is Salty Philippines A few years after the creation of the world there lived a tall giant by the name of Ang-ngalo, the only son of the god of building. Ang-ngalo was a wanderer, and a lover of work. He lived in the mountains, where he dug many caves. These caves he protected from the continual anger of Angin, the goddess of the wind, by precipices and sturdy trees. One bright morning, while Ang-ngalo was climbing to his loftiest cave, he spied across the ocean -- the ocean at the time was pure, its water being the accumulated tears of disappointed goddesses -- a beautiful maid. She beckoned to him, and waved her black handkerchief; so Ang-ngalo waded across to her through the water. The deep caverns in the ocean are his footprints. This beautiful maid was Sipgnet, the goddess of the dark. She said to Ang-ngalo, "I am tired of my dark palace in heaven. You are a great builder. What I want you to do for me is to erect a great mansion on this spot. This mansion must be built of bricks as white as snow." Ang-ngalo could not find any bricks as white as snow; the only white thing there was then was salt. So he went for help to Asin, the ruler of the kingdom of Salt. Asin gave him pure bricks of salt, as white as snow. Then Ang-ngalo built hundreds of bamboo bridges across the ocean. Millions of men were employed day and night transporting the white bricks from one side of the ocean to the other. At last the patience of Ocean came to an end; she could not bear to have her deep and quiet slumber disturbed. One day, while the men were busy carrying the salt bricks across the bridges, she sent forth big waves and destroyed them. The brick-carriers and their burden were buried in her deep bosom. In time the salt dissolved, and today the ocean is salty. Source (books.google.com): Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and New York: The American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), pp. 425-26 . Source (Internet Archive): Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and New York: The American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), pp. 425-26 . Fansler's source: "Narrated by José M. Paredes of Bangued, Ilocos Sur. He heard the story from a farmer." Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Targets open in new windows. Sweet Porridge from the Grimm brothers' Children's and Household Tales . The magic pot in this story is similar to the mills in the above tales, except it produces only porridge, not salt. The Sorcerer's Apprentice , folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 325* and migratory legends of Christiansen type 3020. The article Sampo from Wikipedia . In Finnish mythology the Sampo was a magic item that, according to some, bears a strong resemblance to the magic mill in the above tales. Consider, for example, the following description by Francis Peabody Magoun in his appendix to The Kalevala; or: Poems of the Kaleva District, Compiled by Elias Lönnrot (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1963), pp. 400-401: "Sampo ... is a magical object ... pictured as a three-sided mill, one side or face grinding out grain, one salt, and one money, all in unlimited amounts.... It is mentioned in Poems 1, 10, 15, 19, 38, 39, 42, 43, 45." Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 21, 2018. Scandinavia, Finland, and Estonia: A Digital Library of Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales Scandinavia, Finland, and Estonia A Digital Library of Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales assembled by D. L. Ashliman © 2013-2020 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Unless otherwise noted all links lead to books digitized by books.google.com . Andersen, Hans Christian. Wonderful Stories for Children . Translated from the Danish by Mary Howitt. New York: Wiley and Putnam, 1846. Andersen, Hans Christian. The True Story of My Life: A Sketch . Translated by Mary Howitt. London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, 1847. Andersen, Hans Christian. The Sand-Hills of Jutland . London: Richard Bentley, 1860. Andersen, Hans Christian. Stories for the Household . Translated by H. W. Dulcken. With 220 illustrations by A. W. Bayes, engraved by the brothers Dalziel. London: George Routledge and Sons, 1866. Andersen, Hans Christian. Fairy Tales . A new translation. With over 200 illustrations by Harrison Weir, V. Pedersen, M. L. Stone, A. W. Bayes, and others. New York: R. Worthington, Publisher, 1884. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Andersen, Hans Christian. Hans Andersen's Stories . Newly translated. Boston, New York, and Chicago: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1891. Andersen, Hans Christian. Stories for the Household . N.p.: McLoughlin Brothers, 1893. Andersen, Hans Christian. Fairy Tales from Hans Christian Andersen . 3rd edition. London: J. M. Dent and Company; New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1907. Andersen, Hans Christian. Folk-Lore and Fable: Æsop, Grimm, Andersen . The Harvard Classics, vol. 17. Edited by Charles W. Eliot. New York: P. F. Collier and Son Company, 1909. Andersen's Tales are found on pages 219-361. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Andersen, Hans Christian. Fairy Tales and Other Stories . Oxford complete edition. Revised and in part newly translated by W. A. and J. K. Craigie. With 95 illustrations. London: Oxford University Press, 1914. Anonymous. Wonder-World: A Collection of Fairy Tales, Old and New . Translated from the French, German, and Danish. With four coloured illustrations and numerous woodcuts by L. Richter, Oscar Pletsch, and others. London: Geroge Bell and Sons, 1875. Árnason, Jón. Icelandic Legends . Collected by Jón Árnason. Translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkr Magnússon. [1st series]. With 28 illustrations. London: Richard Bentley, 1864. Árnason, Jón. Icelandic Legends . Collected by Jón Árnason. Translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkr Magnússon. 2nd series. With notes and introductory essay. London: Richard Bentley, 1866. Asbjørnsen, Peter Christen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe. Tales from the Norse . A selection from the translation of G. W. Dasent. With illustrations. London, Glasgow, and Dublin: Blackie and Son, 1906. Asbjørnsen, Peter Christen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe. East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon with Other Norwegian Folk Tales . Retold by Gudrun Thorne-Thomsen. Illustrated by Frederick Richardson. Chicago: Row, Peterson and Company, 1912. Asbjørnsen, Peter Christen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe. Popular Tales from the Norse . [Translated] by George Webbe Dasent. With an introductory essay on the origin and diffusion of popular tales. Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859. Asbjørnsen, Peter Christen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe. Select Popular Tales from the Norse . [Translated] by George Webbe Dasent. A new edition, with illustrations. Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1863. Asbjørnsen, Peter Christen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe. Popular Tales from the Norse . [Translated] by George Webbe Dasent. New edition. With a memoir by Arthur Irwin Dasent. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons; Edinburgh: David Douglas, 1912. Asbjørnsen, Peter Christen. Tales from the Fjeld . A Second Series of Popular Tales from the Norse of P. Chr. Asbjørnsen. London: Chapman and Hall, 1874. Asbjørnsen, Peter Christen. Tales from the Fjeld . A Series of Popular Tales from the Norse of P. Chr. Asbjørnsen by Sir George Dasent. A new edition with more than a hundred illustrations by Moya Smith. London: Gibbings and Company; New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1896. Internet Archive. Asbjørnsen, Peter Christen. Round the Yule Log: Norwegian Folk and Fairy Tales . Translated by H. L. Brækstad. With an introduction by Edmund W. Gosse. London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1881. Asbjørnsen, Peter Christen. Folk and Fairy Tales . Translated by H. L. Brækstad. With an introduction by Edmund W. Gosse. New York: A. C. Armstrong and Son, 1883. Asbjørnsen, Peter Christen. Fairy Tales from the Far North . Translated from the Norwegian by H. L. Brækstad. With 95 illustrations by E. Werenskiold, T. Kittelsen, and O. Sinding. Authorised edition. London: David Nutt, 1897. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Bay, Christian. Danish Fairy and Folk Tales: A Collection of Popular Stories and Fairy Tales . From the Danish of Svend Grundtvig, E. T. Kristensen, Ingvor Bondesen, and L. Budde. Profusely illustrated. New York and London: Harmer and Brothers Publishers, 1899. Craigie, William A. Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples . London: Alexander Gardner, 1896. Another copy . Dasent, George Webbe. A Collection of Popular Tales from the Norse and North German . With an introductory essay on the origin and diffusion of popular tales. London, Stockholm, Copenhagen, Berlin, and New York: The Norrœna Society, 1907. Djurklou, Gabriel. Fairy Tales from the Swedish of Baron G. Djurklou . Translated by H. L. Brækstad. With illustrations by Th. Kittelson and Erik Werenskiold and a frontispiece by Carl Larsson. London: William Heinemann, 1901. Fillmore, Parker. Mighty Mikko: A Book of Finnish Fairy Tales and Folk Tales . New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company, 1922. Grundtvig, Sven. Danish Fairy Tales . Translated by J. Grant Cramer. Boston: Richard G. Badger, The Gorham Press, 1912. Grundtvig, Sven. Fairy Tales from Afar . Translated from the Danish Popular Tales of Svend Grundtvig by Jane Mulley. New York: A. Wessels Company, 1902. Hall, Mrs. Angus W. Icelandic Fairy Tales . Translated and edited by Mrs. A. W. Hall. With original illustrations by E. A. Mason. London and New York: Frederick Warne and Company, 1897. Hofberg, Herman. Swedish Fairy Tales . Translated by W. H. Myers. Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890. Kalevala: The Land of Heroes . Translated from the original Finnish by W. F. Kirby. Vol. 1. London: J. M. Dent and Company; New York: E. P. Dutton, [1907]. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Kalevala: The Land of Heroes . Translated from the original Finnish by W. F. Kirby. Vol. 2. London: J. M. Dent and Company; New York: E. P. Dutton, [1907]. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology . Vol. 1. London: William Harrison Ainsworth, 1828. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries . Vol. 2. London: Whittaker, Treacher, and Company, 1833. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries . A new edition, revised and greatly enlarged. London: H. G. Bohn, 1851. Kirby, W. F. The Hero of Esthonia and Other Studies in the Romantic Literature of That Country . Compiled from Esthonian and German Sources. With a Map of Esthonia. In Two Volumes. Volume the First. London: John C. Nimmo, 1895. Kirby, W. F. The Hero of Esthonia and Other Studies in the Romantic Literature of That Country . Compiled from Esthonian and German Sources. With a Map of Esthonia. In Two Volumes. Volume the Second. London: John C. Nimmo, 1895. Nyblom, Helena. Jolly Calle and other Swedish Fairy Tales . Illustrated by Charles Folkard. London: J. M Dent and Sons; New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, [1912]. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Saxo Grammaticus. The Nine Books of The Danish History of Saxo Grammaticus . In two volumes. Translated by Oliver Elton. With some considerations on Saxo's sources, historical methods, and folk-lore. Vol. 1. London, Copenhagen, Stockholm, Berlin, and New York: Norrœna Society, 1906. Saxo Grammaticus. The Nine Books of The Danish History of Saxo Grammaticus . In two volumes. Translated by Oliver Elton. With some considerations on Saxo's sources, historical methods, and folk-lore. Vol. 2. London, Copenhagen, Stockholm, Berlin, and New York: Norrœna Society, 1905. Stephens, George, and H. Cavallius. Old Norse Fairy Tales: Gathered from the Swedish Folk . Translated by Albert Alberg. With numerous illustrations by E. Lundgren. London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, [1882]. Stroebe, Clara. The Danish Fairy Book . Edited by Clara Stroebe. Translated [from the German] by Frederick H. Martens. With six illustrations in colour by George W. Hood. New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1922. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Stroebe, Clara. The Norwegian Fairy Book . Edited by Clara Stroebe. Translated [from the German] by Frederick H. Martens. With six illustrations in colour by George W. Hood. New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1922. Stroebe, Clara. The Swedish Fairy Book . Edited by Clara Stroebe. Translated [from the German] by Frederick H. Martens. With eight illustrations in colour by George W. Hood. New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1921. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Thorpe, Benjamin. Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands . Compiled from original and other sources. Vol. 1: Northern Mythology. London: Edward Lumley, 1851. Thorpe, Benjamin. Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands . Compiled from original and other sources. Vol. 2: Scandinavian Popular Traditions and Superstitions. London: Edward Lumley, 1851. Thorpe, Benjamin. Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands . Compiled from original and other sources. Vol. 3: North German and Netherlandish Popular Traditions and Superstitions. London: Edward Lumley, 1851. Thorpe, Benjamin. Yule-Tide Stories: A Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions from the Swedish, Danish, and German . London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853. Tibbits, Charles John. Folk-Lore and Legends: Scandinavian . Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Company, 1891. Published anonymously. Prefatory note signed by C. J. T. Topelius, Zacharias. Fairy tales from Finland . From the Swedish of Zach. Topelius by Ella R. Christie. Illustrated by Ada Holland. London: T. Risher Unwin, 1896. University of Florida Digital Collections. Topelius, Zacharias. Whisperings in the Wood: Finland Idyls for Children . From the Swedish [ Läsning for barn ] of Zacharias Topelius, by Albert Alberg. London: W. H. Allen and Company, 1881. Wahlenberg, Anna. Swedish Fairy Tales . Translated by Axel Wahlenberg. Illustrated by Helen Maitland Armstrong. Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Company, 1901. Links to related sites England. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from England . Grimm. Grimms' Fairy Tales in English . Ireland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Ireland . Man. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from the Isle of Man . Scotland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Scotland . Slavic. Slavic and Other Eastern European Folk and Fairy Tales . Wales. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Wales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 5, 2020. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Scotland: A Digital Library Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Scotland a digital library assembled by D. L. Ashliman © 2009-2021 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Unless otherwise noted all links lead to books digitized by books.google.com . Anonymous. Folk-Lore and Legends: Scotland . London: W. W. Gibbings, 1889. Anonymous. Scottish Fairy Tales, Folklore, and Legends . Illustrated by Geoffrey Strahan. London: Gibbings and Company, 1902. Bede, Cuthbert [pseudonym for Edward Bradley] . The White Wife: With Other Stories, Supernatural, Romantic, and Legendary . Collected and illustrated by Cuthbert Bede. London: Sampson Low, Son, and Marston, 1865. Black, George Fraser, and Northcote W. Thomas. County Folk-Lore, vol. 3: Examples of Printed Folk-lore Concerning the Orkney and Shetland Islands . London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1901. Bradley, Edward. See Bede, Cuthbert . Brand, John. Observations on the Popular Antiquities of Great Britain: Chiefly Illustrating the Origin of our Vulgar and Provincial Customs, Ceremonies, and Superstitions . Vol. 1. London: George Bell and Sons, 1895. Brand, John. Observations on the Popular Antiquities of Great Britain: Chiefly Illustrating the Origin of our Vulgar and Provincial Customs, Ceremonies, and Superstitions . Vol. 2. London: George Bell and Sons, 1877. Brand, John. Observations on the Popular Antiquities of Great Britain: Chiefly Illustrating the Origin of our Vulgar and Provincial Customs, Ceremonies, and Superstitions . Vol. 3. London: George Bell and Sons, 1901. Buchan, Peter. Ancient Ballads and Songs of the North of Scotland . Vol. 1. Edinburgh: Printed for W. & D. Laing and others, 1828. Buchan, Peter. Ancient Ballads and Songs of the North of Scotland . Vol. 2. Edinburgh: Printed for W. & D. Laing and others, 1828. Buchan, Peter. Ancient Scottish Tales . An unpublished collection made by Peter Buchan, with an introduction by John A. Fairley. Peterhead, 1908. Campbell, Lord Archibald. Records of Argyll: Legends, Traditions, and Recollections of Argyllshire Highlanders . Collected chiefly from the Gaelic. With notes on the antiquity of the dress, clan colours, or tartans, of the highlanders. With etchings by Charles Laurie. Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1885. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Campbell, Lord Archibald. Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition . Argyllshire series, vol. 1. With notes on the war dress of the Celts. London: David Nutt, 1889. Campbell, John Francis [Campbell of Islay]. Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected . Vol. 1. Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860. Campbell, John Francis [Campbell of Islay]. Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected . Vol. 2. Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860. Campbell, John Francis [Campbell of Islay]. Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected . Vol. 3. Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1862. Campbell, John Francis [Campbell of Islay]. Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected . Vol. 4. Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1862. Campbell, John Francis [Campbell of Islay]. Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected . With a translation by the late J. F. Campbell. New edition (under the auspices of the Islay Association). Vol. 1. Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1890. Campbell, John Francis [Campbell of Islay]. Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected . With a translation by the late J. F. Campbell. New edition (under the auspices of the Islay Association). Vol. 2. Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1890. Campbell, John Francis [Campbell of Islay]. Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected . With a translation by the late J. F. Campbell. New edition (under the auspices of the Islay Association). Vol. 3. Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1892. Campbell, John Francis [Campbell of Islay]. Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected . With a translation by the late J. F. Campbell. New edition (under the auspices of the Islay Association). Vol. 4. Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, 1893. Campbell, John Gregorson. Clan Traditions and Popular Tales of the Western Highlands and Islands . Collected from oral sources by the late Rev. John Gregorson Campbell, minister of Tiree. Selected from the author's MS. remains and edited by Jessie Wallace and Duncan MacIsaac. With introduction by Alfred Nutt. Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition, Argyllshire Series, no. 5. London: David Nutt, 1895. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Campbell, John Gregorson. The Fians; or, Stories, Poems, and Traditions of Fionn and His Warrior Band . Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition, Argyllshire Series, no. 4. London: David Nutt, 1891. Campbell, John Gregorson. Superstitions of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland: Collected Entirely from Oral Sources . Glasgow: James MacLehose and Sons, 1900. Campbell, John Gregorson. Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland: Tales and Traditions Collected Entirely from Oral Sources . Glasgow: James MacLehose and Sons, 1902. Carrick, John D. The Laird of Logan; or, Wit of the West: Being a Collection of Anecdotes, Jests, and Comic Tales . Glasgow: David Robertson, 1835. Carrick, John D. The Laird of Logan; or, Anecdotes and Tales Illustrative of the Wit and Humour of Scotland . Glasgow: David Robertson and Company, 1889. Chambers, Robert. The Popular Rhymes of Scotland: With Illustrations, Chiefly Collected from Oral Sources . Edinburgh: William Hunter, 1826. Chambers, Robert. Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition. London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870. [Chambers, Robert]. Scottish Jests and Anecdotes: To Which Are Added a Selection of English and Irish Jests , 2nd edition. Edinburgh: William Tait, 1838. Chambers, Robert. Scottish Jests and Anecdotes . Nuggets for Travellers. Edinburgh: William Paterson, [1887]. Cromek, R. H. Remains of Nithsdale and Galloway Song . Paisley: Alexander Gardner, 1880. First published 1810. Cromek, R. H. Select Scotish Songs: Ancient and Modern . Vol. 1. With critical observations and biographical notices by Robert Burns. London: T. Cadell and W. Davies, 1810. Cunningham, Allan. Traditional Tales of the English and Scottish Peasantry . Vol. 1. London: Taylor and Hessey, 1822. Cunningham, Allan. Traditional Tales of the English and Scottish Peasantry . Vol. 2. London: Taylor and Hessey, 1822. Cunningham, Allan. Traditional Tales of the English and Scottish Peasantry . A new edition. London: F. and W. Kerslake, 1874. Cunningham, Allan. Traditional Tales of the English and Scottish Peasantry . With an introduction by Henry Morley. London: George Routledge and Sons, 1887. Dalyell, John Graham. The Darker Superstitions of Scotland . Glasgow: Richard Griffin and Company, 1835. Dixon, John H. Gairloch in North-West Ross-Shire: Its Records, Traditions, Inhabitants, and Natural History . With a guide to Gairloch and Loch Maree and a map a illustrations. Edinburgh: Co-Operative Printing Company, 1886. Douglas, George Brisbane. Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales . New York: A. L. Burt Company, [ca. 1901]. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Gibson, Alexander Craig. The Folk-Speech of Cumberland and Some Districts Adjacent: Being Short Stories and Rhymes in the Dialects of the West Border Counties . London: John Russell Smith; Carlisle: G. and T. Coward, 1873. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Gilchrist, John. A Collection of Ancient and Modern Scottish Ballads, Tales, and Songs: With Explanatory Notes and Observations Vol. 1. Edinburgh: Printed for William Blackwood, 1815. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Gilchrist, John. A Collection of Ancient and Modern Scottish Ballads, Tales, and Songs: With Explanatory Notes and Observations Vol. 2. Edinburgh: Printed for William Blackwood, 1815. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Glass, Andrew. Tales and Traditions of Ayrshire and Galloway . Glasgow: Dunn and Wright, 1873. Gomme, Alice Bertha. The Traditional Games of England, Scotland, and Ireland . With tunes, singing-rhymes, and methods of playing according to the variants extant and recorded in different parts of the kingdom. Vol. 1: Accroshay - Nuts in May. London: David Nutt, 1894. Goodrich-Freer, A., "More Folklore from the Hebrides," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom . Vol. 13. London: David Nutt, 1902. Pp. 29-62 . [Grant, J]. Legends of the Braes o' Mar . Aberdeen: Lewis and James Smith, 1861. Grant, William. Scottish Anecdotes and Tales . Edinburgh and Toronto: Carswell and Company, 1885. Grassie, James. Legends of the Highlands of Scotland, from Oral Tradition . Inverness: James Smith, 1843. Gregor, Walter. Notes on the Folk-Lore of the North-East of Scotland . London: Folk-Lore Society, 1881. Grierson, Elizabeth W. The Scottish Fairy Book . With illustrations by Morris Meredith Williams. New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1910. Grierson, Elizabeth W. Tales from Scottish Ballads . London: A. and C. Black, 1906. Gunn, Adam, and John Mackay. Sutherland and the Reay Country: History, Antiquities, Folklore, Topography, Regiments, Ecclesiastical Records, Poetry, and Music, etc. With numerous portraits and illustrations. Glasgow: John Mackay, 1897. Gunn, Clement Bryce. The Three Tales of the Three Priests of Peebles . Selkirk: James Lewis, 1894. Henderson, George. The Popular Rhymes, Sayings, and Proverbs of the County of Berwick . With illustrative notes. Newcastle-on-Tyne: Printed for the author by W. S. Crow, 1856. Henderson, William. Notes on the Folk-lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders, with an Appendix on Household Stories by S. Baring-Gould . London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866. Ingoldsby, Thomas. The Life and Letters of the Rev. Richard Harris Barham, Author of The Ingoldsby Legends, with a Selection from His Miscellaneous Poems . Vol. 1. London: Richard Bentley, 1870. Ingoldsby, Thomas. The Life and Letters of the Rev. Richard Harris Barham, Author of The Ingoldsby Legends, with a Selection from His Miscellaneous Poems . Vol. 2. London: Richard Bentley, 1870. Jacobs, Joseph. Celtic Fairy Tales . London: David Nutt, 1892. Jacobs, Joseph. More Celtic Fairy Tales . London: David Nutt, 1894. Jervise, Andrew. The History and Traditions of the Land of the Lindsays in Angus and Mearns, with Notices of Alyth and Meigle , 2nd ed. Edinburgh: David Douglas, 1882. Joyce, P. W. Old Celtic Romances . Translated from the Gaelic. London: C. Kegan Paul and Company, 1879. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology . Vol. 1. London: William Harrison Ainsworth, 1828. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries . Vol. 2. London: Whittaker, Treacher, and Company, 1833. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries . A new edition, revised and greatly enlarged. London: H. G. Bohn, 1851. Kirk, Robert. The Secret Commonwealth of Elves, Fauns, and Fairies . Stirling: Eneas MacKay, 1933. Reprint of the 1893 edition (based on a manuscript written in 1691). This digital version is presented by Forgotten Books . Lang, Andrew. "English and Scotch Fairy Tales," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 1, no. 3 (September 1890), pp. 289-312 . Lowson, Alexander. Tales, Legends, and Traditions of Forfarshire . With sixteen illustrations by John Young. First series. Forfar: John Macdonald; Edinburgh and Glasgow: John Menzies and Company, 1891. MacDougall, James. Folk and Hero Tales . Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition, Argyllshire Series, no. 3. London: David Nutt, 1891. MacDougall, James. Folk Tales and Fairy Lore in Gaelic and English . Collected from oral tradition. Edited with introduction and notes by George Calder. Edinburgh: John Grant, 1910. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . MacInnes, D. Folk and Hero Tales . Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition, Argyllshire Series, no. 2. London: Publications of the Folk-Lore Society, no. 25, 1890. Mackenzie, Alexander. Historical Tales and Legends of the Highlands . Inverness: A. and W. Mackenzie; Edinburgh: Maclachlan and Stewart, 1878. Mackenzie, Donald A. Wonder Tales from Scottish Myth and Legend . With illustrations bhy John Duncan. London: Blackie and Son, [1917]. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Miller, Hugh. Scenes and Legends of the North of Scotland; or, The Traditional History of Cromarty . 2nd edition. London: Johnstone and Hunter, 1850. Miller, Hugh. Scenes and Legends of the North of Scotland; or, The Traditional History of Cromarty . 14th edition. London and Edinburgh: William P. Nimmo, 1876. Napier, James. Folk-Lore; or, Superstitious Beliefs in the West of Scotland within this Century . With an appendix, shewing the probable relation of the modern festivals of Christmas, May Day, St. John's Day, and Halloween to ancient sun and fire worship. Paisley: Alexander Gardner, 1876. Nicholson, Edward W. B. Golspie: Contributions to Its Folklore . London: David Nutt, 1987. Parker, Winifred M. Gaelic Fairy Tales . Glasgow: Archibald Sinclair, 1908. Robertson, William. Historical Tales and Legends of Ayrshire . London: Hamilton, Adams, and Company; Glasgow: Thomas D. Morison, 1889. Scott, Walter. Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft . London: John Murray, 1830. Scott, Walter. Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border: Consisting of Historical and Romantic Ballads, Collected in the Southern Counties of Scotland . Vol. 1. Edinburgh: James Ballantyne, 1803. Scott, Walter. Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border: Consisting of Historical and Romantic Ballads, Collected in the Southern Counties of Scotland . Vol. 2. Edinburgh: James Ballantyne, 1803. Scott, Walter. Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border: Consisting of Historical and Romantic Ballads, Collected in the Southern Counties of Scotland . Vol. 3. Edinburgh: James Ballantyne, 1803. Simpkins, John Ewart. County Folk-Lore, vol. 7: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore concerning Fife, with Some Notes on Clackmannan and Kinross-Shires . London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Sidgwick and Jackson, 1914. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Simpson, Eve Blantyre. Folk Lore in Lowland Scotland . London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1908. Spence, John. Shetland Folk-Lore . Lerwick: Johnson and Greig, 1899. Stewart, Alexander. Nether Lochaber: The Natural History, Legends, and Folk-lore of the West Highlands . Edinburgh: William Patterson, 1883. Stewart, William Grant. The Popular Superstitions and Festive Amusements of the Highlanders of Scotland . Edinburgh: Archibald Constable and Company; London: Hurst, Robinson, and Company, 1823. Wentz, W. Y. The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries . London: Oxford University Press, 1911. Links to related sites England. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from England . Grimm. Grimms' Fairy Tales in English . Ireland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Ireland . Man. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from the Isle of Man . Scandinavia and Finland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Scandinavia and Finland (Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, and Finland). Slavic. Slavic and Other Eastern European Folk and Fairy Tales . Wales. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Wales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 14, 2021. The Scorpion and the Tortoise The Scorpion and the Tortoise and other folktales about unnatural partnerships edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999 Contents The Scorpion and the Tortoise (Bidpai). The Mouse, the Frog, and the Hawk (Aesop). The Frog and the Rat (Jean de La Fontaine). Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. The Scorpion and the Tortoise Bidpai A scorpion and a tortoise became such fast friends that they took a vow that they would never separate. So when it happened that one of them was obliged to leave his native land, the other promised to go with him. They had traveled only a short distance when they came to a wide river. The scorpion was now greatly troubled. "Alas," he said, "you, my friend, can easily swim, but how can a poor scorpion like me ever get across this stream?" "Never fear," replied the tortoise; "only place yourself squarely on my broad back and I will carry you safely over." No sooner was the scorpion settled on the tortoise's broad back, than the tortoise crawled into the water and began to swim. Halfway across he was startled by a strange rapping on his back, which made him ask the scorpion what he was doing. "Doing?" answered the scorpion. "I am whetting my sting to see if it is possible to pierce your hard shell." "Ungrateful friend," responded the tortoise, "it is well that I have it in my power both to save myself and to punish you as you deserve." And straightway he sank his back below the surface and shook off the scorpion into the water. Source: The Tortoise and the Geese and other Fables of Bidpai , retold by Maude Barrows Dutton (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1908), pp. 12-13. Similar to Aarne-Thompson type 278. Return to the table of contents . The Mouse, the Frog, and the Hawk Aesop A mouse and a frog struck up a friendship. They were not well mated, for the mouse lived entirely on land, while the frog was equally at home on land or in the water. In order that they might never be separated, the frog tied himself and the mouse together by the leg with a piece of thread. As long as they kept on dry land all went fairly well; but, coming to the edge of a pool, the frog jumped in, taking the mouse with him, and began swimming about and croaking with pleasure. The unhappy mouse, however, was soon drowned, and floated about on the surface in the wake of the frog. There he was spied by a hawk, who pounced down on him and seized him in his talons. The frog was unable to loose the knot which bound him to the mouse, and thus was carried off along with him and eaten by the hawk. Source: Æsop's Fables , translated by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: W. Heinemann, 1912), p. 57. Aarne-Thompson type 278. Return to the table of contents . The Frog and the Rat Jean de La Fontaine Merlin said well, that those who often cheat Will sometimes cheat themselves -- the phrase is old. I'm sorry that it is, I must repeat, It's full of energy, and sound as gold. But to my story: Once a well fed rat, Rotund and wealthy, plump and fat, Not knowing either Fast or Lent, Lounging beside a marsh pool went. A frog addressed him in the frog's own tongue, And asked him home to dinner civilly. No need to make the invitation long. He spoke, however, of the things he'd see: The pleasant bath, worth curiosity; The novelties along the marsh's shore, The score and score Of spots of beauty, manners of the races, The government of various places, Some day he would recount with glee Unto his youthful progeny. One thing alone the gallant vexed, And his adventurous soul perplexed; He swam but little, and he needed aid. The friendly frog was undismayed; His paw to hers she strongly tied, And then they started side by side. The hostess towed her frightened guest Quick to the bottom of the lake -- Perfidious breach of law of nations -- All promises she faithless breaks, And sinks her friend to make fresh rations. Already did her appetite Dwell on the morsel with delight, Lunch, Scrunch! He prays the gods; she mocks his woe; He struggles up; she pulls below. And while this combat is fought out, A kite that's seeking all about Sees the poor rat that's like to drown; And pounces swift as lightning down. The frog tied to him, by the way, Also became the glad kite's prey; They gave him all that he could wish, A supper both of meat and fish. So oftentimes a base deceit Falls back upon the father cheat; So oftentimes doth perfidy Return with triple usury. Source: Jean de La Fontain, Fables , book 4, number 11. Aarne-Thompson type 278. Return to the table of contents . Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Revised July 13, 1999. Self Did It: Fairy Legends of Type 1137 Self Did It Fairy Legends of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 1137 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009 These legends, for the most part told as true stories connected to specific places, are reminiscent of the encounter between Odysseus (Ulysses) and the Cyclops Polyphemus. Homer's Greek hero claims that his name is Outis (nobody). Later, after having been blinded by Odysseus, Polyphemus shouts to his fellow Cyclops, "Nobody is killing me!" to which they respond by belittling him for making such an uproar over nothing. Contents My Ainsel (Northumberland, England). My Own Self (Sunderland, England). The Miller and the Ourisk (Scotland). The Story of Tam M'Kechan (Scotland). Mysel' i' da Mill (Shetland Islands, Scotland). A Donegal Fairy (Ireland). Legends of the Mill: The Beggar Woman and the Fairy (Norway). Issi Teggi (Self Did It) (Estonia). The Fairy in the House (Basque). Links to additional tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. My Ainsel Northumberland, England A widow and her son, a little boy, lived together in a cottage in or near the village of Rothley, Northumberland. One winter evening, the child refused to go to bed with his mother, as he wished to sit up for a while longer, "for," said he "I am not sleepy." The mother, finding remonstrance in vain, at last told him that if he sat up by himself, the fairies would most certainly come and take him away. The boy laughed as his mother went to bed, leaving him sitting by the fire. He had not been there long, watching the fire and enjoying its cheerful warmth, till a beautiful little figure, about the size of a child's doll, descended the chimney, and alighted on the hearth! The little fellow was somewhat startled at first, but its prepossessing smile as it paced to and fro before him, soon overcame his fears, and he enquired familiarly "What do they ca' thou?" "Ainsel" answered the little thing haughtily, at the same time retorting the question, "And what do they ca' thou? " " My Ainsel," answered the boy; and they commenced playing together like two children newly acquainted. Their gambols continued quite innocently until the fire began to grow dim; the boy then took up the poker to stir it, when a hot cinder accidentally fell upon the foot of his playmate, her tiny voice was instantly raised to a most terrific roar, and the boy had scarcely time to crouch into the bed behind his mother, before the voice of the old fairy mother was heard shouting "Who's done it? Who's done it?" "Oh! It was My Ainsel!" answered the daughter. "Why then," said the mother, as she kicked her up the chimney, "What's all the noise for, there's nyen [no one] to blame." Source: M. A. Richardson, The Local Historian's Table Book of Remarkable Occurrences, Historical Facts, Traditions, Legendary and Descriptive Ballads, etc., etc., Connected with the Counties of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Northumberland, and Durham , vol. 3 (London: J. R. Smith, 1846), pp. 48-49 . This story has been reprinted or retold in many collections, including: Balfour, M. C. County Folk-Lore, vol. 4: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning Northumberland (London: David Nutt, 1904), pp. 15-16 . Clouston, W. A. The Book of Noodles: Stories of Simpletons; or, Fools and Their Follies (New York: A. C. Armstrong and Son, 1888), p. 194 . Hartland, Edwin Sidney, English Fairy and Other Folk Tales (London: Walter Scott Publishing Company, [ca. 1890]), pp. 149-50 . Keightley, Thomas, The Fairy Mythology, Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of various Countries , new edition, revised and greatly enlarged (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), p. 313 . Return to the table of contents . My Own Self Sunderland, England In a tiny house in the North Countrie, far away from any town or village, there lived not long ago, a poor widow all alone with her little son, a six-year-old boy. The house-door opened straight on to the hillside, and all round about were moorlands and huge stones, and swampy hollows; never a house nor a sign of life wherever you might look, for their nearest neighbors were the "ferlies" in the glen below, and the "will-o'-the-wisps" in the long grass along the path-side. And many a tale she could tell of the "good folk" calling to each other in the oak trees, and the twinkling lights hopping on to the very window sill, on dark nights; but in spite of the loneliness, she lived on from year to year in the little house, perhaps because she was never asked to pay any rent for it. But she did not care to sit up late, when the fire burnt low, and no one knew what might be about; so, when they had had their supper she would make up a good fire and go off to bed, so that if anything terrible did happen, she could always hide her head under the bedclothes. This, however, was far too early to please her little son; so when she called him to bed, he would go on playing beside the fire, as if he did not hear her. He had always been bad to do with since the day he was born, and his mother did not often care to cross him; indeed, the more she tried to make him obey her, the less heed he paid to anything she said, so it usually ended by his taking his own way. But one night, just at the fore-end of winter, the widow could not make up her mind to go off to bed, and leave him playing by the fireside; for the wind was tugging at the door, and rattling the windowpanes, and well she knew that on such a night, fairies and such like were bound to be out and about, and bent on mischief. So she tried to coax the boy into going at once to bed. "The safest bed to bide in, such a night as this!" she said; but no, he wouldn't. Then she threatened to "give him the stick," but it was no use. The more she begged and scolded, the more he shook his head; and when at last she lost patience and cried that the fairies would surely come and fetch him away, he only laughed and said he wished they would , for he would like one to play with. At that his mother burst into tears, and went off to bed in despair, certain that after such words something dreadful would happen, while her naughty little son sat on his stool by the fire, not at all put out by her crying. But he had not long been sitting there alone, when he heard a fluttering sound near him in the chimney, and presently down by his side dropped the tiniest wee girl you could think of; she was not a span high, and had hair like spun silver, eyes as green as grass, and cheeks red as June roses. The little boy looked at her with surprise. "Oh!" said he; "what do they call ye?" "My own self," she said in a shrill but sweet little voice, and she looked at him too. "And what do they call ye?" "Just my own self too?" he answered cautiously; and with that they began to play together. She certainly showed him some fine games. She made animals out of the ashes that looked and moved like life; and trees with green leaves waving over tiny houses, with men and women an inch high in them, who, when she breathed on them, fell to walking and talking quite properly. But the fire was getting low, and the light dim, and presently the little boy stirred the coals with a stick, to make them blaze; when out jumped a red-hot cinder, and where should it fall, but on the fairy-child's tiny foot. Thereupon she set up such a squeal, that the boy dropped the stick, and clapped his hands to his ears; but it grew to so shrill a screech, that it was like all the wind in the world, whistling through one tiny keyhole. There was a sound in the chimney again, but this time the little boy did not wait to see what it was, but bolted off to bed, where he hid under the blankets and listened in fear and trembling to what went on. A voice came from the chimney speaking sharply. "Who's there, and what's wrong?" it said. "It's my own self," sobbed the fairy child; "and my foot's burnt sore. O-o-h!" "Who did it?" said the voice angrily; this time it sounded nearer, and the boy, peeping from under the clothes, could see a white face looking out from the chimney opening. "Just my own self too!" said the fairy-child again. "Then if ye did it your own self," cried the elf-mother shrilly, "what's the use o' making all this fash about it?" And with that she stretched out a long thin arm, and caught the creature by its ear, and, shaking it roughly, pulled it after her, out of sight up the chimney. The little boy lay awake a long time, listening, in case the fairy mother should come back after all; and next evening after supper, his mother was surprised to find that he was willing to go to bed whenever she liked. "He's taking a turn for the better at last!" she said to herself; but he was thinking just then that, when next a fairy came to play with him, he might not get off quite so easily as he had done this time. Source: Joseph Jacobs, More English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 16-19 . Jacobs' source: "Told to Mrs. [M. C. ] Balfour by Mrs. W., a native of North Sunderland, who had seen the cottage and heard the tale from persons who had known the widow and her boy, and had got the story direct from them. The title was Me A'an Sel' , which I have altered to My Own Self " ( p. 221 ). Return to the table of contents . The Miller and the Ourisk Scotland The ourisk of the Celts was a creature by no means peculiarly malevolent or formidably powerful, but rather a melancholy spirit, which dwelt in wildernesses far removed from men. If we are to identify him with the Brown Dwarf of the Border moors, the ourisk has a mortal term of life and a hope of salvation, as indeed the same high claim was made by the satyr who appeared to St. Anthony. Moreover, the Highland ourisk was a species of lubber fiend, and capable of being over-reached by those who understood philology. It is related of one of these goblins which frequented a mill near the foot of Loch Lomond, that the miller, desiring to get rid of this meddling spirit, who injured the machinery by setting the water on the wheel when there was no grain to be grinded, contrived to have a meeting with the goblin by watching in his mill till night. The ourisk then entered, and demanded the miller's name, and was informed that he was called Myself ; on which is founded a story almost exactly like that of Outis in The Odyssey , a tale which, though classic, is by no means an elegant or ingenious fiction, but which we are astonished to find in an obscure district, and in the Celtic tongue, seeming to argue some connection or communication between these remote Highlands of Scotland and the readers of Homer in former days, which we cannot account for. After all, perhaps, some churchman more learned than his brethren may have transferred the legend from Sicily to Duncrune, from the shores of the Mediterranean to those of Loch Lomond. Source: Sir Walter Scott, Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft (London: George routledge and Sons, 1884), p. 98 . First published 1831. Return to the table of contents . The Story of Tam M'Kechan Scotland There lived in the adjoining parish of Rosemarkie, when the fame of the mill was at its highest, a wild unsettled fellow, named M'Kechan. Had he been born among the aristocracy of the country, he might have passed for nothing worse than a young man of spirit; and after sowing his wild oats among gentlemen of the turf and of the fancy, he would naturally have settled down into the shrewd political landlord, who, if no builder of churches himself, would he willing enough to exert the privilege of giving clergymen, exclusively of his own choosing, to such churches as had been built already. As a poor man, however, and the son of a poor man, Tam M'Kechan seemed to bid pretty fair for the gallows; nor could he plead ignorance that such was the general opinion. He had been told so when a herd-boy; for it was no unusual matter for his master, a farmer of the parish, to find him stealing peas in the corner of one field, when the whole of his charge were ravaging the crops of another. He had been told so too when a sailor, ere he had broken his indentures and ran away, when once caught among the casks and packages in the hold, ascertaining where the Geneva and the sweetmeats were stowed. And now that be was a drover and a horse-jockey, people, though they no longer told him so, for Tam had become dangerous, seemed as certain of the fact as ever. With all his roguery, however, when not much in liquor he was by no means a very disagreeable companion; few could match him at a song or the bagpipe, and though rather noisy in his cups and somewhat quarrelsome, his company was a good deal courted by the bolder spirits of the parish, and among the rest by the miller. Tam had heard of the piebald horses and their ghostly attendants [fairies that were believed to frequent the area]; but without more knowledge than fell to the share of his neighbors, he was a much greater skeptic, and after rallying the miller on his ingenuity and the prettiness of his fancy, he volunteered to spend a night at the mill, with no other companion than his pipes. Preparatory to the trial the miller invited one of his neighbors, the young farmer of Eathie, that they might pass the early part of the evening with Tam; but when, after an hour's hard drinking, they rose to leave the cottage, the farmer, a kindhearted lad, who was besides warmly attached to the jockey's only sister, would fain have dissuaded him from the undertaking. "I've been thinking, Tam," he said, "that flyte wi' the miller as ye may, ye would better let the good people alone; or stay, sin' ye are sae bent on playing the fule, I'll e'en play it wi' you; rax me my plaid; we'll trim up the fire in the killogie thegether; an' you will keep me in music." "Na, Jock Hossack," said Tam, "I maun keep my good music for the good people ; it's rather late to flinch now; but come to the burn edge wi' me the night, an" to the mill as early in the morning as ye may; an' hark ye, tak a double caulker [dram] wi' you." He wrapt himself up closely in his plaid, took the pipes under his arm, and, accompanied by Jock and the miller, set out for the dell, into which, however, he insisted on descending alone. Before leaving the bank, his companions could see that he had succeeded in lighting up a fire in the mill, which gleamed through every bore and opening, and could hear the shrill notes of a pibroch [a bagpipe tune] mingling with the dash of the cascade. The sun had risen high enough to look aslant into the dell, when Jock and the miller descended to the mill, and found the door lying wide open. All was silent within; the fire had sunk into a heap of white ashes, though there was a bundle of fagots untouched beside it, and the stool on which Tam had been seated lay overturned in front. But there were no traces of Tam, except that the miller picked up, beside the stool, a little flat-edged instrument, used by the unfortunate jockey in concealing the age of his horses by effacing the marks on their teeth, and that Jock Hossack found one of the drones of his pipes among the extinguished embers. Weeks passed away, and there was still nothing heard of Tam; and as everyone seemed to think it would be in vain to seek for him any where but in the place where he had been lost, Jock Hossack, whose marriage was vexatiously delayed in consequence of his strange disappearance, came to the resolution of unraveling the mystery, if possible, by passing a night in the mill. For the first few hours he found the evening wear heavily away; the only sounds that reached him were the loud monotonous dashings of the cascade, and the duller rush of the stream as it swept past the mill-wheel. He piled up fuel on the fire till the flames rose halfway to the ceiling, and every beam and rafter stood out from the smoke as clearly as by day; and then yawning, as he thought how companionable a thing a good fire is, he longed for something to amuse him. A sudden cry rose from the further gable, accompanied by a flutter of wings, and one of the miller's ducks, a fine plump bird, came swooping down among the live embers. "Poor bird!" said Jock, "From the fox to the fire; I had almost forgotten that I wanted my supper." He dashed the duck against the floor -- plucked and emboweled it -- and then, suspending the carcass by a string before the fire, began to twirl it round and round to the heat. The strong odoriferous fume had begun to fill the apartment, and the drippings to hiss and sputter among the embers, when a burst of music rose so suddenly from the green without, that Jock, who had been so engaged with the thoughts of his supper as almost to have forgotten the fames, started half a yard from his seat. "That maun be Tam's pipes," he said ; and giving a twirl to the duck he rose to a window. The moon, only a few days in her wane, was looking aslant into the dell, lighting the huge melancholy cliffs with their birches and hazels, and the white flickering descent of the cascade. The little level green on the margin of the stream lay more in the shade; but Jock could see that it was crowded with figures marvelously diminutive in stature, and that nearly one half of them were engaged in dancing. It was enough for him, however, that the music was none of Tam's making; and, leaving the little creatures to gambol undisturbed, he returned to the fire. He had hardly resumed his seat when a low tap was heard at the door, and shortly after a second and a third. Jock sedulously turned his duck to the heat, and sat still. He had no wish for visitors, and determined on admitting none. The door, however, though firmly bolted, fell open of itself, and there entered one of the strangest-looking creatures he had ever seen. The figure was that of a man, hut it was little more than three feet in height; and though the face was as sallow and wrinkled as that of a person of eighty, the eye had the roguish sparkle and the limbs all the juvenile activity of fourteen. "What's your name, man?" said the little thing coming up to Jock, and peering into his face till its wild elfish features were within a few inches of his. "What's your name?" "Mysel' an Mysel'" -- i. e., myself -- said Jock, with a policy similar to that resorted to by Ulysses in the cave of the giant. "Ah, Mysel' an Mysel'!" rejoined the creature; "Mysel an Mysel'! and what's that you have got there, Mysel' an Mysel'?" touching the duck as it spoke with the tip of its finger, and then transferring part of the scalding gravy to the cheek of Jock. Rather an unwarrantable liberty, thought the poor fellow, for so slight an acquaintance; the creature reiterated the question, and dabbed Jock's other cheek with a larger and still more scalding application of the gravy. "What is it?" he exclaimed, losing in his anger all thought of consequences, and dashing the bird, with the full swing of his arm, against the face of his visitor, "It's that!" The little creature, blinded and miserably burnt, screamed out in pain and terror till the roof rung again; the music ceased in a moment, and Jock Hossack had barely time to cover the fire with a fresh heap of fuel, which for a few seconds reduced the apartment to total darkness, when the crowd without came swarming like wasps to every door and window of the mill. "Who did it, Sanachy -- who did it?" was the query of a thousand voices at once. "Oh, 'twas Mysel' an Mysel'," said the creature; "'twas Mysel' an Mysel'." "And if it was yoursel' and yoursel', who, poor Sanachy," replied his companions, "can help that?" They still, however, clustered round the mill; the flames began to rise in long pointed columns through the smoke, and Jock Hossack had just given himself up for lost, when a cock crew outside the building, and after a sudden breeze had moaned for a few seconds among the cliffs and the bushes, and then stink in the lower recesses of the dell, he found himself alone. He was married shortly after to the sister of the lost jockey, and never again saw the good people , or, what he regretted nearly as little, his unfortunate brother-in-law. There were some, however, who affirmed, that the latter had returned from fairyland seven years after his mysterious disappearance, and supported the assertion by the fact, that there was one Thomas M'Kechan who suffered at Perth for sheep-stealing a few months after the expiry of the seventh year. Source: Hugh Miller, Scenes and Legends of the North of Scotland: The Traditional History of Cromarty , 2nd edition (London: Johnstone and Hunter, 1850), pp. 460-70 . Return to the table of contents . Mysel' i' da Mill Shetland Islands, Scotland A Yell man was grinding corn in the water mill one night. He was alone, and according to custom, was winding floss (common rush) to pass the time. As the grinding was likely to occupy most of the night he set about preparing supper. He had brought a fowl with him which he proceeded to roast, using the klibbi-tengs (fire-tongs made from a bent hoop) as a gridiron. Presently he heard the sound of music and dancing and knew that the trows had come. Shortly afterwards the door was quietly opened. One of them, a young woman, came into the mill and wanted to know the occupant's name. The man knew whom he had to deal with, however, and the answer he gave was a cautious one. "Mysel' i' da mill," he replied. The visitor, however, seemed in no hurry to depart. She went to the fire and touched the fowl, and afterwards approached the man and placed a hand on his shoulder. This rather upset his temper. He resented the familiarity, and seizing the sizzling fowl by its legs, he dashed it full in the woman's face. The latter immediately fled outside screaming with pain and fright. The music ceased, and the merrymakers crowded round their companion, and with anger in their voices, demanded to know how she had come by the injury. "It was mysel' i' da mill," she told them. On hearing this, the trows replied in chorus, "Sel' dö sel' ha'e." The mirth was resumed, and the lone occupant of the mill settled down to his task, well satisfied that his ready wit had saved him. Source: John Nicolson, Some Folk-Tales and Legends of Shetland (Edinburgh: Thomas Allan and Sons, 1920), p. 31. Return to the table of contents . A Donegal Fairy Ireland Ay, it's a bad thing to displeasure the gentry, sure enough -- they can be unfriendly if they're angered, an' they can be the very best o' gude neighbors if they're treated kindly. My mother's sister was her lone in the house one day, wi' a' big pot o' water boiling on the fire, and ane o' the wee folk fell down the chimney, and slipped wi' his leg in the hot water. He let a terrible squeal out o' him, an' in a minute the house was full o' wee crathurs pulling him out o' the pot, an' carrying him across the floor. "Did she scald you?" my aunt heard them saying to him. "Na, na, it was mysel' scalded my ainsel'," quoth the wee fellow. "A weel, a weel," says they. "If it was your ainsel scalded yoursel', we'll say nothing, but if she had scalded you, we'd ha' made her pay." Source: W. B. Yeats, Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry (London: Walter Scott, 1888), p. 46 . Yeats's source: Letitia Maclintock. Return to the table of contents . Legends of the Mill: The Beggar Woman and the Fairy Norway My grandmother used to tell a story about a mill-goblin somewhere up in the country, where no one could get anything ground at the mill, it was so bewitched. But one evening came a beggar-woman, who badly wanted to get a little corn ground, and she asked if she could not get leave to stay there for the night and do it. "Oh, dear no!" said the owner of the mill; "you can't stay there at night; neither you nor the mill would have any peace for the goblin." But the beggar-woman wanted so badly to get her corn ground, for she had not a spoonful of meal to make either soup or porridge for the children at home. Well, at last she got leave to go into the mill and grind her corn at night. When she came there, she made a fire on the hearth, where a big pot of tar was hanging. She started the mill, and sat down by the hearth with her knitting. In a while a girl came into the mill and said "Good evening" to her. "Good evening," answered the beggar-woman, and went on with her knitting. But very soon the strange girl began raking the fire out over the hearth, but the beggar-woman raked it together again. "What's your name?: said the fairy, as you already will have guessed that the strange girl was. "My name is Self!" answered the beggar-woman. "The girl thought that was a strange name, and began raking the fire about again. This made the beggar-woman angry, and she began scolding and raking the fire together. They were thus employed for some time, when the beggar-woman, watching her opportunity, upset the boiling tar over the girl, who began screaming and screeching, and as she ran out of the mill, she cried, "Father, father, Self has burnt me!" "Well, if you have burnt yourself, you have only yourself to blame," said a voice in the hill. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Folk and Fairy Tales , translated by H. L. Brækstad (New York: A. C. Armstrong and Son, 1883), pp. 157-58 . Brækstad's source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, "Kvernsagn," Norske Huldre-Eventyr og Folkesagn , 3rd edition (Christiania [Oslo]: P. F. Steensballe, 1870), pp. 1-10 . Another translation of this story is: "Self Did It," The Norwegian Fairy Book , edited by Clara Stroebe; translated by Frederick H. Martens (New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1922), pp. 81-82 . Return to the table of contents . Issi Teggi (Self Did It) Estonia The Estonians call a farm servant who is in charge of barns and grain a row-man . Such a row-man was once sitting and molding buttons when the devil came up to him, greeted him, and asked, "What are you doing there?" "I am molding eyes." "Eyes? Can you mold me some new ones?" "Oh yes, but right now I do not have any at hand." "But would you do it for me another time?" "I can do that," said the row-man . "When should I come back?" "Whenever you want to." The next day the devil returned to have eyes molded for himself. The row-man said, "Do you want large ones or small ones?" "Very large ones." The man began to melt a large quantity of lead, saying, "I cannot mold for you unless you let me tie you down." He told him to lie down with his back on a bench, then took some thick, strong cords and tied him down securely. After the devil was tightly bound, he asked, "What is your name?" "My name is Issi (self)." "That is a good name. I do not know of a better one." The lead was now molten. The devil opened his eyes wide, thinking to get new ones, and waiting for the cast. "I'm pouring now," said the row-man , then poured the hot lead into the devil's eyes. The devil jumped up, with the bench on his back, and ran away. He ran past some people who were plowing in a field. They asked, "Who did that to you?" The devil answered, " Issi teggi (self did it)." The people laughed and said, "Self done, self have." The devil died of his new eyes, and since then no one has ever seen him again. Source: Jacob Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie , vol. 1, 3rd edition (Göttingen: Dieterichsche Buchhandlung, 1854), pp. 979-80 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. The German word for the farm servant in charge of barns and grain is Riegenkerl , which does not have an easy English equivalent. Another translation of this legend is found in Jacob Grimm, Teutonic Mythology , translated by James Steven Stallybrass, vol. 3 (London: George Bell and Sons, 1883), pp. 1027-28 . Return to the table of contents . The Fairy in the House Basque There was once upon a time a gentleman and lady. And the lady was spinning one evening. There came to her a fairy, and they could not get rid of her; and they gave her every evening some ham to eat, and at last they got very tired of their fairy. One day the lady said to her husband, "I cannot bear this fairy; I wish I could drive her away." And the husband plots to dress himself up in his wife's clothes just as if it was she, and he does so. The wife goes to bed, and the husband remains in the kitchen alone, and the fairy comes as usual. And the husband was spinning. The fairy says to him, "Good-day, madam." "The same to you too; sit down." "Before you made chirm, chirin, but now you make firgilun, fargalun ." [That is, the wife span evenly with a clear steady sound of the wheel, but the man did it unevenly.] The man replies, "Yes, now I am tired." As his wife used to give her ham to eat, the man offers her some also. "Will you take your supper now?" "Yes, if you please," replies the fairy. He puts the frying-pan on the fire with a bit of ham. While that was cooking, and when it was red, red-hot, he throws it right into the fairy's face. The poor fairy begins to cry out, and then come thirty of her friends. "Who has done any harm to you?" "I, to myself; I have hurt myself." "If you have done it yourself, cure it yourself." And all the fairies go off, and since then there came no more fairies to that house. This gentleman and lady were formerly so well off, but since the fairy comes no longer the house little by little goes to ruin, and their life was spent in wretchedness. If they had lived well they would have died well too. Source: Wentworth Webster, Basque Legends (London: Griffith and Farran, 1879), pp. 55-56 . Webster's source: Estefanella Hirigaray. This tale lacks the expected exchange in which the fairy's antagonist claims that his name is "Self," or equivalent. Return to the table of contents . Links to additional tales Briggs, Katherine M, "Masell," A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language: Part A, Folk Narratives (London: Taylor and Francis, 1991), p. 321 . Originally published in London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1970. Kuhn, Adalbert; and Wilhelm Schwartz, "Selbergedån," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 97-98 . In a Low German dialect. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 24, 2009. The Shoemaker and the Elves The Shoemaker and the Elves and similar migratory legends of type 7015 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2018-2020 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Elves (Germany). Shoemaker Jobst and the Elves (Germany). The Shoemaker and the Dwarf (Germany). The Dwarf as a Journeyman Shoemaker (Germany). Mermen (Germany). The Grinding-Mill Elves (Germany). The Underground People at Bernstein (Germany / Poland). The Nisse's New Clothes (Sweden). The Little Washerwoman (Bohemia). The Little Wild Man (Austria). The Dwarfs Depart from Paznaun (Austria). The Herder Dwarf in Muri (Switzerland). Now What a Handsome Man Am I (Switzerland). The Pixies of Devonshire (England). The Pixie and the Washerwoman (England). The Hart Hall Hob (England). The Cauld Lad of Hilton (England). The Pixy's Clothes (England). The Pisky Thrasher (England). The Pixie Thresher (England). The Brownie's New Coat (Scotland). Brownies (Scotland). A Trow Called Broonie (Scotland). The Kildare Pooka (Ireland). The Phouka (Ireland). The Sprite (France). The Fairy Friar (Spain). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Elves Germany A shoemaker, through no fault of his own, had become so poor that he had only leather enough for a single pair of shoes. He cut them out one evening, then went to bed, intending to finish them the next morning. Having a clear conscience, he went to bed peacefully, commended himself to God, and fell asleep. The next morning, after saying his prayers, he was about to return to his work when he found the shoes on his workbench, completely finished. Amazed, he did not know what to say. He picked up the shoes in order to examine them more closely. They were so well made that not a single stitch was out of place, just as if they were intended as a masterpiece. A customer soon came by, and he liked the shoes so much that he paid more than the usual price for them. The shoemaker now had enough money to buy leather for two pairs of shoes. That evening he cut them out, intending to continue his work the next morning with good cheer. But he did not need to do so, because when he got up they were already finished. Customers soon bought them, paying him enough that he now could buy leather for four pairs of shoes. Early the next morning he found the four pairs finished. And so it continued; whatever he cut out in the evening was always finished the following morning. He now had a respectable income and with time became a wealthy man. One evening shortly before Christmas, just before going to bed, and having already cut out a number of shoes, he said to his wife, "Why don't we stay up tonight and see who is giving us this helping hand." His wife agreed to this and lit a candle. Then they hid themselves behind some clothes that were hanging in a corner of the room. At midnight two cute little naked men appeared. Sitting down at the workbench, they picked up the cut-out pieces and worked so unbelievable quickly and nimbly that the amazed shoemaker could not take his eyes from them. They did not stop until they had finished everything. They placed the completed shoes on the workbench, then quickly ran away. The next morning the wife said, "The little men have made us wealthy. We must show them our thanks. They are running around with nothing on, freezing. Do you know what? I want to sew some shirts, jackets, undershirts, and trousers for them, and knit a pair of stockings for each of them, and you should make a pair of shoes for each of them." The husband said, "I agree," and that evening, when everything was finished, they set the presents out instead of the unfinished work. Then they hid themselves in order to see what the little men would do. At midnight they came skipping up, intending to start work immediately. When they saw the little clothes instead of the cut-out leather, they at first seemed puzzled, but then delighted. They quickly put them on, then stroking the beautiful clothes on their bodies they sang: Sind wir nicht Knaben glatt und fein? Was sollen wir länger Schuster sein! Are we not boys, neat and fine? No longer cobblers shall we be! Then they hopped and danced about, jumping over chairs and benches. Finally they danced out of the house. They never returned, but the shoemaker prospered, succeeding in everything that he did. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Wichtelmänner: Erstes Märchen," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm 7th edition, vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 39/1, pp. 205-207 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Wichtelmänner: Erstes Märchen," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm 7th edition, vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 39/1, pp. 205-207 . Return to the table of contents . Shoemaker Jobst and the Elves Germany In Eschwege the people tell about the elves, and especially how they helped poor Shoemaker Jobst in his time of need. One evening Shoemaker Jobst was sitting sadly in his workroom. His wife, burdened with sorrow, had fallen asleep next to their poor children. A cricket was chirping in corner by the stove, and the moon cast its pale light through the old, round window panes onto their pale faces. Jobst thought, "If only I could fall asleep with you, and then wake up to a carefree life with you poor little ones!" Then he prayed to God in heaven and stretched out on his hard bed. Concerns about the next day and new worries kept him awake. As midnight approached he thought that he heard light footsteps in his little cottage. Trip, trap, and a company of elves came inside. They quickly moved to the leather. One of them did the cutting while another one did the stitching. In a short time they had used up all the leather, and beautiful shoes stood there on his workbench. How Jobst now looked forward to the next day. It finally arrived, and when the streets came to life, many people looked in at the shoes. They bought what was there and ordered new shoes as well. Jobst bought more leather, and when midnight came the elves returned. They worked busily, and the next morning his workbench was filled with new shoes. Jobst became famous. Everyone wanted to buy from him. Joy and prosperity now came to his household. Jobst wanted to make his benefactors happy. He counted the elves and had nice clothes made for them, laying them out in a row for them. How this did please the elves! They immediately put on their new clothes. But with this they became proud and no longer wanted to make shoes, saying to themselves: Come now and look at me Why should I a cobbler be? Within the hour they disappeared from Jobst's house, never again to return. Source (books.google.com): Karl Lyncker Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Kassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 85, pp. 53-54 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Lyncker Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Kassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 85, pp. 53-54 . Lyncher's source: "Oral from Eschwege." Return to the table of contents . The Shoemaker and the Dwarf Germany In a village there lived a prosperous shoemaker with his wife. They seldom ate all of their evening meal, and the wife always put the leftovers in a pan on the stove. The following morning the shoemaker noticed that the leftover food had been eaten, and furthermore, the boots and shoes that he had left cut out on his workbench were now completely finished. Seeing how well they had been stitched together, he always cut out even more, and the next morning they were always finished. The shoemaker grew ever more curious and wanted to know who was making the shoes. Therefore he bored a hole in the workroom door. That night he kept watch by looking through the hole. To his great surprise he saw a dwarf enter the room and begin sewing busily; however, the dwarf kept looking up at the hole, which he apparently had noticed. After finishing a few pair of shoes he went to the stove and ate the food that was there, and then disappeared. Observing the same thing for some time, the shoemaker decided to do something for the dwarf, so he laid a suit of clothes on the workbench for him. The next night the dwarf came again and found the clothes. He finished the shoes and put on the clothes. Then he cut out a pair of boots for himself, sewed them up, put them on, and said, "Why do I have to make shoes for peasants. I can now serve the King of the Dwarfs!" With that he disappeared and never returned. Source (books.google.com): Georg Schambach and Wilhelm Müller, Niedersächsische Sagen und Märchen: As dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht's Verlag, 1855), pp. 140-41 . Source (Internet Archive): Georg Schambach and Wilhelm Müller, Niedersächsische Sagen und Märchen: As dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht's Verlag, 1855), pp. 140-41 . Schambach and Mü do not give this story a title. It is number four of a four-part series entitled "Zwerge dienen" ("Dwarfs in Service"). Return to the table of contents . The Dwarf as a Journeyman Shoemaker Germany A dwarf came to shoemaker and offered his services as a journeyman. The shoemaker had a lot of work at the time and was therefore happy to accept the offer. He asked what he expected for wages. The dwarf asked for twenty-four thalers per week. The shoemaker replied that that was a lot of money, and that the dwarf was very small. How much work would he be able to do? "Yes," said the dwarf. It was a lot of money, but his work would be worth it. Each week would be able to make twenty-four pair of tall riding boots. So the shoemaker hired him. The next morning the dwarf did not begin to work but instead made himself comfortable and walked around in the house. The shoemaker reminded him of his promise, and the dwarf answered that he would keep it, but did nothing. Saturday arrived, and this day passed as well with the dwarf doing no work. That night at eleven o'clock there arose a commotion in the house, and suddenly it was full of dwarfs. The shoemaker, who had already gone to bed with his wife, heard the noise and became curious. He looked through the keyhole and saw a roomful of dwarfs. Some were cutting and some were stitching while the journeyman sat comfortably in their midst and smoked. Suddenly one of the dwarfs said, "Master, he's looking!" "Let him look!" was the answer. The dwarf repeated this three times, and the fourth time the answer was, "Then poke his eye out!" With that the dwarf poked out the shoemaker's eye with an awl. The latter went to his wife and told her what he had seen and what had happened to him. His wife advised him to not go back. The dwarfs' work lasted until one o'clock, and then everything was quiet. The next morning the wife got up and gave the journeyman his twenty-four thalers and told him he could go. The latter asked where the master was; he wanted to speak with him. The wife answered that that was not possible, for the master was ill. The dwarf asked, "What is wrong with him?" "I don't know," she answered. The dwarf insisted that she call her husband. Perhaps he could help him. So finally she fetched her husband. The dwarf asked the shoemaker what was wrong with him, and he answered that he had seen the dwarfs at work and told what had happened to him. With that the dwarf blew into his eye, with the words, "Next time don't look!" And in that instant the shoemaker could again see with his eye. Source (books.google.com): Georg Schambach and Wilhelm Müller, Niedersächsische Sagen und Märchen: As dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht's Verlag, 1855), pp. 139-40 . Source (Internet Archive): Georg Schambach and Wilhelm Müller, Niedersächsische Sagen und Märchen: As dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht's Verlag, 1855), pp. 140-41 . Schambach and Mü do not give this story a title. It is number three of a four-part series entitled "Zwerge dienen" ("Dwarfs in Service"). Return to the table of contents . Mermen Germany Mermen formerly lived in the Seeben Pond (also known as Glaswald Lake), which is unfathomably deep. They were the same size as children and formed above like humans and below like fish. They could make themselves invisible. One of them befriended the people at the Seeben Farm (which lies next to a hill three quarters of an hour down from the lake). He would awaken them every morning and stay with them until evening, when he returned to the lake. He did chores for them all day, and was especially helpful with their livestock, which flourished better than ever before. However, whenever they gave him a task they always had to say, "Not too little and not too much!" otherwise he would do too little or too much. Every day at the farmhouse they gave him his breakfast, noon meal, and evening meal, which they placed under the steps, where he sat by himself and ate. Although his clothes, including his floppy hat, were sorely worn out, and his jacket was badly ripped, the farmers at the Seeben Farm refrained from providing him with new clothes. However when winter came they secretly had a new jacket made for him, which they gave to him one evening. To this the merman said, "When one has been paid, then one must leave. From tomorrow onward I'll not come back to you." The farmer tried to assure him that the jacket was a gift and not a loan, but he could not dissuade the merman from his intention. Angered at this, the maid-servant did not give the merman his evening meal, and he went away with an empty stomach. The next morning they found the maid-servant dead in front of the house. She was upside down, her head having been buried in the ground. The merman was never again seen at the Seeben Farm. Source(books.google.com): Bernhard Baader, Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden un den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: Verlag der Herder'schen Buchhandlung, 1851), no. 99, pp. 87-88 . Source(Internet Archive): Bernhard Baader, Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden un den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: Verlag der Herder'schen Buchhandlung, 1851), no. 99, pp. 87-88 . Return to the table of contents . The Grinding-Mill Elves Germany At the time when there were still elves in and around Brotterode, they often gave aid to those who knew how to deal with them. But they were terribly sensitive. If they were offended they immediately disappeared. Once a pair of elves found their way into a grinding-mill near Brotterode, at a place still today called "The Grindstone." Two brothers owned the mill, and however many blades they laid out each evening to be ground and polished, the next morning they were all perfectly finished. This continued for a long time, and the elve's hardworking hands brought them great prosperity. They wanted to thank their little helpers. Having noticed that the elves were very poorly dressed, they had little red jackets and little blue trousers tailored for them, and laid them out next to the blades in the grinding area. The industrious house-sprites soon appeared, ready to work. However, when they saw the clothes they became very sad, saying: Da liegt nun unser Lohn, Jetzt müssen wir auf und davon! Now that we've received our pay, We must up and go away! They picked up the gifts, went away, and were never seen there again. Source (books.google.com): Christian Ludwig Wucke, Sagen der mittleren Werra, nebst den angrenzenden Abhängen des Thüringer Waldes und der Rhön , vol. 1 (Salzungen: Druck und Verlag von L. Scheermesser, 1864), p. 53 . Source (Internet Archive): Christian Ludwig Wucke, Sagen der mittleren Werra, nebst den angrenzenden Abhängen des Thüringer Waldes und der Rhön , vol. 1 (Salzungen: Druck und Verlag von L. Scheermesser, 1864), p. 53 . Brotterode is a town in the German state of Thüringen (Thuringia). Return to the table of contents . The Underground People at Bernstein Germany / Poland There were many dwarfs in the vicinity of the town of Bernstein in Pomerania. The people there called them "the underground people." Once one of them for a long time came to a poor shoemaker and helped him with his work, so that the shoemaker was becoming wealthy. The man decided show his thanks, and he had a very nice new jacket made for the dwarf. However, the underground people cannot tolerate this, and upon receiving the jacket he immediately went away, saying, "Master, you have paid me in full; now I am finished with the work!" And he never returned. Source (books.google.com): J. D. H. Temme, "Die Unterirdischen bei Bernstein," Die Volkssagen von Pommern und Rügen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1840), no. 218, pp. 257-58. . Source (Internet Archive): J. D. H. Temme, "Die Unterirdischen bei Bernstein," Die Volkssagen von Pommern und Rügen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1840), no. 218, pp. 257-58. . Temme's source: "Oral." In 1945 the formerly German town of Bernstein (Polish Pełczyce) became a part of Poland. Return to the table of contents . The Nisse's New Clothes Sweden The nisse always wears gray clothes and a red cap. One place where he was in service, they thought his clothes were very shabby. The landlady gave him a new suit, but after the nisse tried it on, he thought he was too fine a gentleman to work, and he worked no more for them. They would have been wiser to just have given him his porridge and milk every night. Source (books.google.com): Eva Wigström, Folkdiktning: Visor, Sågner, Sagor, Gåtor, Ordspråk, Ringdansar, Lekar och Barnvisor, Samlad och upptecknad i Skåne (Copenhagen: Karl Schönbergs Bokhandel, 1880), pp. 138-39 . Return to the table of contents . The Little Washerwoman Bohemia Every year at hay-harvesting time a group of little women could be seen bathing in a brook beneath the branches of an alder tree. They splashed about noisily and then hung all kinds of rags and cloths onto the branches to dry. The women were no larger than one-year-old children. One could observe them from a distance without their taking notice. However, if one approached them, they would cry out and then hurriedly gather up their rags and cloths and disappear into the water. One day a peasant lad, known to be a skilled bird-catcher, set a trap in the brush at the side of the brook, and -- in truth -- he captured one of the little washerwomen. She was wearing a clean white linen dress that reached beneath her knees. Her neatly combed hair fell loosely to her shoulders. Without resisting, she let the lad carry her to his home, where she carefully looked about with her little black eyes. She had scarcely entered main room when she rolled up her sleeves, tied back her dress, and -- to the amazement and delight of the householders -- began to tidy up the room and to wash the dishes. Then she climbed onto a bench and washed the windows. In short, she worked tirelessly from morning until evening. At twilight a little waterman clung to the wall outside and spoke into the window. The little washerwoman clung to the wall inside and spoke out through the window. They talked intimately, and he asked her to not reveal any of their secrets. When winter approached, the householders thought that they should provide the little washerwoman with some shoes, but she refused to let them measure her foot. Therefore they scattered flour on the floor and measured the little woman's footprints. Well and good. The shoes were finished, and the householders put them on a bench for the little woman so that she could try them on by herself. However, she began sobbing and crying because they had paid her for her service. She picked up the shoes, rolled her sleeves back down, loosened her dress, and rushed away wailing. They never saw her again. This story took place when the mother of a mother was living as a child in her parents' house. Source (books.google.com): Josef Rank, "Das Waschweiberl," Aus dem Böhmerwalde (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Einhorn, 1843), pp. 277-78 . Source (Internet Archive): Josef Rank, "Das Waschweiberl," Aus dem Böhmerwalde (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Einhorn, 1843), pp. 277-78 . Bohemia is a historical region that today includes parts of the Czech Republic, Austria, and Germany. Return to the table of contents . The Little Wild Man Austria Ruzo, the first peasant at Rofen, had a very beautiful little daughter. The girl herded her father's sheep up in the mountains. Often when she was sitting there by herself a poorly dressed little man came to her from a nearby mountain. No one in the valley knew who he was or where he came from. The little fellow would sit by her side and tell her all kinds of curious stories; or he would help her with the herding and bring a lost sheep back to her. He often asked her to go to his house with him, but to no avail, for she was very modest and did not trust her unknown visitor. The little man sometimes came to the girl's father at Rofen, and whenever he did so, he asked for food. Some years later Ruzo's daughter had become a beautiful young woman. She married one of her father's former herders, and they settled in Vent. The little man missed the girl, and he learned from a herder-boy that she had married and moved to Vent. Hearing this he became wild with anger. Repeatedly he frightend the Rofen peasant's herd such that in the evening the poor sheep would return to the stall bleating and hungry. During the night the angry little man would untie one cow but then bind two or three others together such that they mooed loudly and nearly broke apart their bonds. He set the hay afire and laughed cruely at the rising flames. Ruzo tried to capture him, sending his servants after him, but without success. The little man always escaped unhurt. In order to put an end to the angry little fellow's mischief, Ruzo's daughter herself went back out with the herd. Wanting to placate the little man, she brought with her a new suit made of loden for him. He approached her friendlily. However, as soon as he saw the gift he walked away crying, and returned to his mountain. From that hour onward he was never seen again. Ruzo believed that the little man had died, and he named the mountain "Wildes Mannle" (Little Wild Man), and so it is called to this day. Source (books.google.com): Ignaz Vincenz Zingerle, "Das wilde Mannl," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Tirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1859), no. 92, pp. 59-60 . Source (Internet Archive): Ignaz Vincenz Zingerle, "Das wilde Mannl," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Tirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1859), no. 92, pp. 59-60 . Zingerle's source: "Told by Fr. Arnold, Ötztal." Vent is a village in the Austrian state of Tirol (Tyrolia). Link to the German Wikipedia article "Vent." Link to the German Wikipedia article "Rofenhöfe," the farmsteads at Rofen. Link to the German Wikipedia article about the mountain "Wildes Mannle." Return to the table of contents . The Dwarfs Depart from Paznaun Austria The dwarfs in the Paznaun Valley, especially in the vicinity of the little village of See, were very good natured, helping out however they could with housework. They also were happy to herd livestock.... A peasant from See engaged a dwarf as a goatherd. Every day the dwarf collected the goats near the village -- but he never entered the village itself -- and led them out to the pasture. In the evening he brought them back close to the village, then disappeared into the mountains. The peasants sent his noonday meal to him in a very original manner: They tied it to the horns of a billy-goat. The dwarf untied it and ate it with pleasure. He would not touch it if they gave it to him in a different manner. Once the peasants wanted to surprise him, so in the same manner they sent him a handsome red jacket. Seeing the jacket he sadly said to himself: "Now I can no longer herd goats, for they have given me a red jacket." He then went into the mountains and was never again seen in the valley. Similar legends are told in Etschland. Source (books.google.com): Johann Nepomuk Ritter von Alpenburg, "Die Zwerge ziehen aus Paznaun fort," Deutsche Alpensagen (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1861), no. 200, p. 198 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Nepomuk Ritter von Alpenburg, "Die Zwerge ziehen aus Paznaun fort," Deutsche Alpensagen (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1861), no. 200, p. 198 . Return to the table of contents . The Herder Dwarf in Muri Switzerland The great meadow above Muri was formerly worked by resident herders. Often when they went to feed their cattle in the morning they discovered that the day's work already had been done. The stall had been cleaned, milk-buckets washed, strainers and funnels put away. In short, everything was in order and ready for the evening. Of course the herders wanted to know who their secret helpers were, so they hid themselves at all the barn's entrances. It wasn't long before they saw a tiny little man go into the barn. He crept through the feed-opening into the cattle-stall, where he silently busied himself. After finishing his work he quickly went out the same way and disappeared. The herders were delighted with this, but a certain sense of respect told them that they could not thank him with words. Therefore they had a little suit of clothes made for him, which they laid out in the stall. At his next appearance the dwarf tried on the new shirt, then put on the little leather cap, turning it this way and that way. Looking proudly at his new clothes in the little mirror that had been placed there, he called out over and over again, "I am no longer a herder!" From this time onward he was never again seen in Muri; instead, he entered service in the village of Buttwil. One day the peasant there said to his wife, "All the work in the stall and the barn is always done before daybreak. There is never any less hay. The cows are giving the best milk and give birth to the friskiest calves. We ourselves will have to see what is going on there. Let's hide in the barn tonight and see what happens." And they did just that. They heard a rustling in the hayloft above them. Then they heard little footsteps, like those of a child, and a tiny little man jumped down and shook the hay out of his hair. Finally he stood still -- oh dear! -- totally naked in the middle of the threshing-floor. He distributed the hay and brushed down the cows. Everything went lightning-fast. The little man was soon finished, and he instantly disappeared. The peasant's wife was concerned that it was a cold winter, especially at New Year. "Let's have trousers and a jacket made for him," she said. So it happened, and on New Year's Day they laid out the new suit of clothes in the hayloft for the little man. Newly dressed, he walked back and forth on the threshing-floor. Clapping himself on the chest, he called out ernestly, "That a man such as I should be doing a herder's work!" With that he disappeared forever from Buttwil as well. Source (books.google.com): Ernst Ludwig Rochholz, "Der Sennenzwerg in Muri," Schweizersagen aus dem Aargau , vol. 1 (Aarau: Druck und Verlag von H. R. Sauerländer, 1856), pp. 286-87 . Source (Internet Archive): Ernst Ludwig Rochholz, "Der Sennenzwerg in Muri," Schweizersagen aus dem Aargau , vol. 1 (Aarau: Druck und Verlag von H. R. Sauerländer, 1856), pp. 286-87 . Muri is a municipality in the Swiss canton of Aargau. This account merges two independent legends into one narrative. Return to the table of contents . Now What a Handsome Man Am I Switzerland A dwarf once asked for work at the flour mill in Ems. He promised to serve well, even for a small wage, and the miller hired him. The dwarf faithfully kept his word. He worked in the mill from the first cock-crow until late in the evening. He even got up in the night to check on the mill's moving parts. The mill clattered busily away, grinding twice as much grain as usual. Approaching the year's end the miller wanted to give the dwarf a nice present to show his appreciation for his good service. Because the dwarf was dressed in tattered rags, the miller had a beautiful suit of clothes tailored for him from the finest sheep's wool and the color of flour. When he handed the new clothes to the dwarf, the latter hopped away and disappeared into the mill. There he tore off his old rags and threw them into the mill-stream, put on the new clothes, then looked at himself with pleasure, saying: Jetzt bin ich ein schöner Mann, Daß ich nicht mehr mehlen kann! Now what a handsome man am I, So to this mill I say "good-bye!" No longer willing to work in the dusty mill, the dwarf went forth into the wide world without taking leave from his master. The miller hurried after him, but could find him nowhere. Source (books.google.com): Johannes Jegerlehner, Was die Sennen erzählen: Märchen und Sagen aus dem Walles (Bern: Verlag von A. Francke, 1907), pp. 102-103 . Source (Internet Archive): Johannes Jegerlehner, Was die Sennen erzählen: Märchen und Sagen aus dem Walles (Bern: Verlag von A. Francke, 1907), pp. 102-103 . Ems is a municipality in the Swiss canton of Graubünden, Return to the table of contents . The Pixies of Devonshire England The Portunes -- which, according to Gervase, belonged exclusively to England, (although France had her Neptunes of a somewhat similar character) -- resembled the ancient household Spirit of Northern Europe. They joined in the harder labour of the house; and, as their only reward, claimed a share of the warmth from the evening hearth -- at which they would appear as soon as the doors were shut, warming their aged limbs, and eating, meanwhile, little frogs ( ranunculos ), which they drew from their bosoms and toasted on the embers. In the same manner, the Pixies of Dartmoor, notwithstanding their darker character, aided occasionally in household work. A cottage at Belstone, near Oakhampton, is pointed out as having been a favourite scene of their labours. It was common to find great additions made to the "web" of cloth, morning after morning; and the Pixies were frequently heard working at the loom all through the night. Plates of honey and cream, but especially a basin of pure water, must be regularly placed for them in such houses as they frequent; and it is not safe to add a more valuable reward. A washerwoman was one morning greatly surprised on coming down stairs to find all her clothes neatly washed and folded. She watched the next evening, and observed a Pixy in the act of performing this kind office for her; but she was ragged and mean in appearance, and Betty's gratitude was sufficiently great to induce her to prepare a yellow petticoat and a red cap for the obliging Pixy. She placed them, accordingly, by the side of the basin of water; and watched for the result. The Pixy, after putting them on, disappeared through the window, apparently in great delight. But Betty was ever afterwards obliged to wash all her clothes herself. At another farm on the borders of the moor, the inhabitants were disturbed at dead of night by the loud noise of a flail at work in the barn; and in the morning a quantity of corn, which had been left in ear, was found threshed. On the ensuing night, watch was kept by the farmer, who perceived six "sprites," of the smallest imaginable size, enter the barn, and perform the same kind office as before. Their dress, however, was ragged and dirty -- and the farmer had better clothes prepared for them, which he placed where they might readily find them. In the meantime, he told his neighbours of his good luck -- who, less kind-hearted than himself, stationed themselves in the barn with their guns, behind some unthreshed corn. They had not watched long when the Pixies entered; and, delighted with their new clothes, commenced their usual dance all song -- in the midst of which the farmers who were in watch fired on them. But they were to be harmed by no weapon of "middle earth," and they departed for ever, singing as they went: Now the pixies' work is done, We take our clothes and off we run. Source: The Athenæum: Journal of English and Foreign Literature, Science, and the Fine Arts (London: October 24, 1846), p. 1092 . Return to the table of contents . The Pixie and the Washerwoman England Notwithstanding the usual unamiable character given to the pixies of Dartmoor, they are said to aid occasionally in household work. A cottage at Belstone, near Okehampton, is pointed out as having been a favourite scene of their labours. It was common to find great additions made to the "web" of cloth, morning after morning; and the pixies were frequently heard working at the loom all through the night. Plates of honey and cream, but especially a basin of pure water, must be regularly placed for them in such houses as they frequent; and it is not safe to add a more valuable reward. A washerwoman was one morning greatly surprised, on coming down stairs, to find all her clothes neatly washed and folded. She watched the next evening, and observed a pixy in the act of performing this kind office for her; but she was ragged and mean in appearance, and Betty's gratitude was sufficiently great to induce her to prepare a yellow petticoat and a red cap for the obliging pixy. She placed them, accordingly, by the side of the basin of water, and watched for the result. The pixy, after putting them on, disappeared through the window, apparently in great delight. But Betty was ever afterwards obliged to wash all her clothes herself. Source (books.google.com): English Forests and Forest Trees: Historical, Legendary, and Descriptive (London: Ingram, Cooke, and Company, 1853), p. 188 . Source (Internet Archive): English Forests and Forest Trees: Historical, Legendary, and Descriptive (London: Ingram, Cooke, and Company, 1853), p. 188 . The Dartmoor moorland, the town of Okehampton, and the village of Belstone and in the English county of Devon. Return to the table of contents . The Hart Hall Hob England From fairies the old lady got on to recollections of what clearly was a survival of dwarf folklore. For she told me of certain small people who used to dwell in the houes (grave-mounds) that years ago were to be found in the Koxby and Mickleby direction, but which had been dug into and after wards ploughed over, so that the former denizens had clearly been evicted and forced to retire. But it was only imperfect recollections of what she had heard in her own young days that my informant was dealing with now; and the lack of feature and detail consequent on her lack of personal interest in the subject was quite evident. But it was quite different when I began to ask her if in her youth she had had any knowledge of the Hart Hall "Hob." On this topic she was herself again. Why, when she was a bit of a lass, everybody knew about Hart Hall in Glaisdale, and t' Hob there, and the work that he did, and how he came to leave, and all about it. Had she ever seen him, or any of the work he had done? "Seen him, saidst 'ee? Neea, naebody had ever seen him, leastwise, mair nor yance. And that was how he coomed to flit." "How was that?" I asked. "Wheea, everybody kenned at sikan a mak' o' creatur as yon never tholed being spied efter." "And did they spy upon him?" I inquired. "Ay, marry, that did they. Yah moonleeght neeght, when they beared his swipple (the striking part of the flail) gannan' wiv a strange quick bat (stroke) o' t' lathe fleear (on the barn floor) -- ye ken he wad dee mair i' yah neeght than a' t' men o' t' farm cou'd dee iv a deea -- yan o' t' lads gat hissel' croppen oop close anenst lathe-deear, an' leeak'd in thruff a lahtle hole i' t' boards, an' he seen a lahtle brown man, a' covered wi' hair, spangin' about wiv fleeal lahk yan wud (striking around with the flail as if he was beside himself). He'd getten a haill dess 0' shafts (a whole layer of sheaves) doon o' t' fleear, and my wo'd! ommost afore ye cou'd tell ten, he had tonned (turned) oot t' strae, an' sided away t' coorn, and was rife for another dess. He had nae claes on to speak of, and t' lad, he cou'd na see at he had any mak' or mander o' duds by an au'd ragg'd soort ov a sark." And she went on to tell how the lad crept away as quietly as he had gone on his expedition of espial, and on getting indoors, undiscovered by the unconscious Hob, had related what he had seen, and described the marvellous energy of "t' lahtle hairy man, amaist as nakt as when he wur boorn." But the winter nights were cold, and the Hart Hall folks thought he must get strange and warm working "sikan a bat as yon, an' it wad be sair an' cau'd for him, gannan' oot iv lathe wiv nobbut thae au'd rags. Seear, they'd mak' him something to hap hissel' wiv." And so they did. They made it as near like what the boy had described him as wearing a sort of a coarse sark, or shirt, with a belt or girdle to confine it round his middle. And when it was done, it was taken before nightfall and laid in the barn, "gay and handy for t' lahtle chap to notish" when next he came to resume his nocturnal labours. In due course he came, espied the garment, turned it round and round, and -- contrary to the usual termination of such legends, which represents the uncanny, albeit efficient, worker as displeased at the espionage practised upon him -- Hart Hall Hob, more mercenary than punctilious as to considerations of privacy, broke out with the following couplet: Gin Hob mun hae nowght but a hardin' hamp [shirt], He'll coom nae mair, nowther to berry [harvest] nor stamp [thresh]. Source (books.google.com): J. C. Atkinson, Forty Years in a Moorland Parish: Reminiscences and Researches in Danby in Cleveland (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1891), pp. 54-55 . Source (Internet Archive): J. C. Atkinson, Forty Years in a Moorland Parish: Reminiscences and Researches in Danby in Cleveland (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1891), pp. 54-55 . Return to the table of contents . The Cauld Lad of Hilton England This fairy or goblin was seldom seen, but his gambols were heard nightly in the hall of the great house. He overturned everything in the kitchen after the servants had gone to bed, and was, in short, one of the most mischievous sprites you could imagine. One night, however, the kitchen happened to be left in great confusion, and the goblin, who did everything by contraries, set it completely to rights; and the next morning it was in perfect apple-pie order. We may be quite sure that, after this occurrence, the kitchen was not again made orderly by the servants. Notwithstanding, however, the service thus nightly rendered by the Cauld Lad, the servants did not like it. They preferred to do their own work without preter natural agency, and accordingly resolved to do their best to drive him from their haunts. The goblin soon understood what was going on, and he was heard in the dead of night to warble the following lines in a melancholy strain: Wae's me! wae's me! The acorn is not yet Fallen from the tree, That's to grow the wood, That's to make the cradle, That's to rock the bairn, That's to grow to a man, That's to lay me. He was, however, deceived in this prediction; for one night, being colder than usual, he complained in moving verse of his condition. Accordingly, on the following evening, a cloak and hood were placed for him near the fire. The servants had unconsciously accomplished their deliverance, for present gifts to fairies, and they for ever disappear. On the next morning the following lines were found inscribed on the wall: I've taken your cloak, I've taken your hood; The Cauld Lad of Hilton will do no more good! A great variety of stories in which fairies are fright ened away by presents, are still to be heard in the rural districts of England. Another narrative, by Mr. Longstaffe, relates that on one occasion a woman found her washing and ironing regularly performed for her every night by the fairies. In gratitude to the "good people," she placed green mantles for their acceptance, and the next night the fairies departed, exclaiming: Now the pixies' work is done! We take our clothes, and off we run. Mrs. Bray tells a similar story of a Devonshire pixy, who helped an old woman to spin. One evening she spied the fairy jumping out of her door, and observed that it was very raggedly dressed; so the next day she thought to win the services of the elf further by placing some smart new clothes, as big as those made for a doll, by the side of her wheel. The pixy came, put on the clothes, and clapping its hands with delight, vanished, saying these lines: Pixy fine, pixy gay, Pixy now will run away. Source (books.google.com): James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), pp. 189-90 . Source (Internet Archive): James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), pp. 189-90 . Hylton [previously spelled Hilton ] Castle is in the city of Sunderland in northeast England. Return to the table of contents . The Pixy's Clothes England I have heard a story about an old woman in this town [Tavistock], who suspected she received assistance of the above [helpful] nature, and one evening coming suddenly into the room, she spied a ragged little creature, who jumped out at the door. She thought she would try still further to win the services of her elfin friend; and so bought some smart new clothes, as big as those made for a doll. These pretty things she placed by the side of her wheel. The pixy returned and put them on; when clapping her tiny hands in joy, she was heard to exclaim these lines (for pixies are so poetical, they always talk in rhyme): Pixy fine, pixy gay, Pixy now will run away. And off she went; but the ungrateful little creature never spun for the poor old woman after. Source (books.google.com): Anna Eliza Bray, Legends, Superstitions, and Sketches of Devonshire , vol. 1 (London: A. K. Newman and Company, 1844), pp. 175-76. . Source (Internet Archive): Anna Eliza Bray, Legends, Superstitions, and Sketches of Devonshire , vol. 1 (London: A. K. Newman and Company, 1844), pp. 175-76. . Return to the table of contents . The Pisky Thrasher England (Cornwall) On a farm near here, a pisky used to come at night to thrash the farmer's corn. The farmer in payment once put down a new suit for him. When the pisky came and saw it, he put it on, and said: Pisky fine and pisky gay, Pisky now will fly away. And they say he never returned. Source (books.google.com): W. Y. Evans-Wentz The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries (London, New York, Toronto, and Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 1911), p. 172 . Source (Internet Archive): W. Y. Evans-Wentz The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries (London, New York, Toronto, and Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 1911), p. 172 . Evans-Wentz's source: John Wilmet, 78 years old, from the Village of Constantine in Cornwall. Return to the table of contents . The Pixie Thresher England The following story of a fairy in the capacity of the benevolent sprite used to be told in one of the southern counties of England: Once upon a time there was a young woman who married a thresher. Soon he turned out to be a hopeless drunkard; his work was neglected, and starvation stared them in the face. So the woman dressed herself in her husband's clothes, and went to the barn to do the threshing whilst he slept off the effects of his drunkenness. On the morning of the second day she found her pile of threshed corn double what she had left there overnight, and this increase was repeated for three or four nights in succession. She determined to watch one night and discover who was her unknown helper. Presently she beheld a little pixy come into the barn, and set to work vigorously to thresh the corn, and as he swung his flail he sang: Little pixy fair and slim, Without a rag to cover him. Out of pity and gratitude, the woman next day made him a tiny suit of clothes, and hung them up behind the barn door beside his flail. At night when the pixy returned to work, he saw the clothes, and put them on at once. Then, surveying himself with satisfaction, he sang: Pixy fine and Pixy gay, Pixy now must fly away. With that he disappeared, and never came back any more. Source (books.google.com): Elizabeth Mary Wright, Rustic Speech and Folk-Lore (London: Oxford University Press, 1913), p. 209 . Source (Internet Archive): Elizabeth Mary Wright, Rustic Speech and Folk-Lore (London: Oxford University Press, 1913), p. 209 . Return to the table of contents . The Brownie's New Coat Scotland It is told of a Brownie, who haunted a border family, now extinct, that the lady having fallen unexpectedly in labour, and the servant, who was ordered to ride to Jedburgh for the sage femme , shewing no great alertness in setting out, the familiar spirit slipt on the great-coat of the lingering domestic, rode to the town on the laird's best horse, and returned with the midwife en croupe . During the short space of his absence, the Tweed, which they must necessarily ford, rose to a dangerous height. Brownie, who transported his charge with all the rapidity of the ghostly lover of Lenoré , was not to be stopped by this obstacle. He plunged in with the terri?ed old lady, and landed her in safety where her services were wanted. Having put the horse into the stable (where it was afterwards found in a woeful plight), he proceeded to the room of the servant, whose duty he had discharged; and, ?nding him just in the act of drawing on his boots, he administered to him a most merciless drubbing with his own horse-whip. Such an important service excited the gratitude of the laird; who, understanding that Brownie had been heard to express a wish to have a green coat, ordered a vestment of that colour to be made and left in his haunts. Brownie took away the green coat, but was never seen more. We may suppose, that, tired of his domestic drudgery, he went in his new livery to join the fairies. Source (book.google.com): Walter Scott, Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border: Consisting of Historical and Romantic Ballads, Collected in the Southern Counties of Scotland, with a Few of Modern Date, Founded upon Local Traditions , vol. 1, 5th edition (Edinburgh: James Ballantyne, 1812), pp. ciii-civ . Source (Internet Archive): Walter Scott, Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border: Consisting of Historical and Romantic Ballads, Collected in the Southern Counties of Scotland, with a Few of Modern Date, Founded upon Local Traditions , vol. 1, 4th edition (Edinburgh: James Ballantyne, 1810), pp. ci-cii . Scott does not give this tale a title. Return to the table of contents . Brownies Scotland The brownie was a household spirit, of an useful and familiar character. In former times, almost every farmhouse in the south of Scotland was supposed to be haunted by one. He was understood to be a spirit of a somewhat grotesque figure, dwarfish in stature, but endowed with great personal strength, and having a mind of the most disinterested and even exalted sort. It was his humour to be unseen and idle during the whole day, or while the people of the house were a-stir, and only to exert himself while all the rest were asleep. It was customary for the mistress of the house to leave out work for him, such as the supper dishes to be washed, or the churn to be prepared, and he never failed to have the whole done in the morning. This drudgery he performed quite gratuitously. He was a most disinterested spirit. To have offered him wages, or even to present him with an occasional boon, would have insured his anger, and perhaps caused him to abandon the establishment altogether. Numerous stories are told of his resentment in cases of his being thus affronted. For instance, on the goodman of a farmhouse in the parish of Glendevon leaving out some clothes one night for the brownie, he was heard during the night to depart, saying, in a highly offended tone: Gi'e brownie coat, gi'e brownie sark, ye'se get nae mair o' brownie's wark! Source (books.google.com): Robert Chambers The Popular Rhymes of Scotland, with Illustrations: Chiefly Collected from Oral Sources (Edinburgh: William Hunter, 1826), pp. 266-67 . Source (Internet Archive): Robert Chambers The Popular Rhymes of Scotland, with Illustrations: Chiefly Collected from Oral Sources (Edinburgh: William Hunter, 1826), pp. 266-67 . Return to the table of contents . A Trow Called Broonie Scotland There was a trow called Broonie, who was supposed to be the king of Trowland. He showed himself very often; and it was remarked that if he had been seen in a corn-yard all was sure to be right there, but if the visitant was an ordinary trow, mischief ensued. You may be sure folks were glad when Broonie paid them a visit, and they were careful not to go near any of the corn which he had been guarding, as it was observed that he objected to being overlooked, and resented such interference by laying the screws in herda (scattering the corn stacks). Broonie seemed to have taken a whole neighbourhood under his protection, and was seen gliding from yard to yard in the cold evenings, casting his spells upon the crop. The people felt sorry for Broonie, exposed to the chill night air, so they made a cloak and hood for him, and laid it in a yard which he frequented. Broonie took the well-intentioned gi?t as an offence, for he was never seen again. Source (books.google.com): Biot Edmondston and Jessie Margaret Edmondston Saxby, The Home of a Naturalist (London: James Nisbet and Company 1888), pp. 202-203 . Source (Internet Archive): Biot Edmondston and Jessie Margaret Edmondston Saxby, The Home of a Naturalist (London: James Nisbet and Company 1888), pp. 202-203 . This legend was collected in Unst, the northernmost of the Shetland Islands. Return to the table of contents . The Kildare Pooka Ireland The supernatural agent of the next legend will not fit comfortably in any of the divisions of the spiritual world made by Grimm, Croker, Keightley, and others. He would be the Lubber-Fiend of Milton, or the Brownie of Scotland, or the Kobold of the North, but for once having been a "christened man." Everyone up to the mere alphabet of fairy lore, knows that the pooka does not condescend to household drudgery, but his townsfolk would give the sprite in question no other name; and in consequence, the present editor of the tale does not feel entitled to take any liberties with it. A girl of Kilcock thus related the story to us. The Kildare Pooka Mr. H- R-, when he was alive, used to live a good deal in Dublin, and he was once a great while out of the country on account of the "Ninety-eight" business. But the servants kept on in the big house at Rath all the same as if the family was at home. Well, they used to be frightened out of their lives after going to their beds, with the banging of the kitchen door and the clattering of the fire-irons, and the pots, and plates, and dishes. One evening they sat up ever so long, keeping one another in heart with telling stories about ghosts and fetches and that when -- what would you have of it? -- the little scullery boy that used to be sleeping over the horses, and couldn't get room at the fire, crept into the hot hearth, and when he got tired listening to the stories, sorra fear him, but he fell dead asleep. Well and good, after they were all gone, and the fire raked up, he was woke with the noise of the kitchen door opening, and the trampling of an ass on the kitchen floor. He peeped out, and what should he see but a big grey ass, sure enough, sitting on his currabingo, and yawning before the fire. After a little, he looked about him, and began scratching his ears as if he was quite tired, and says he, "I may as well begin first as last." The poor boy's teeth began to chatter in his head, for says he, "Now he's goin' to ate me." But the fellow with the long ears and tail on him, had something else to do. He stirred up the fire, and then he brought in a pail of water from the pump, and filled a big pot, that he put on the fire before he went out. He then put in his hand -- foot, I mean -- into the hot hearth, and pulled out the little boy. He let a roar out of him with the fright, but the pooka only looked at him, and thrust out his lower lip to show how little he valued him, and then he pitched him into his pew again. Well, he then lay down before the fire till he heard the boil coming on the water, and maybe there wasn't a plate, or a dish, or a spoon on the dresser, that he didn't fetch and put into the pot, and wash and dry the whole bilin' of 'em as well as e'er a kitchenmaid from that to Dublin town. He then put all of them up in their places on the shelves, and, if he didn't give a good sweepin' to the kitchen after all, leave it till again. Then he comes and sits fornent the boy, let down one of his ears and cocked up the other, and gave a grin. The poor fellow strove to roar out, but not a dheeg 'ud come out of his throat. The last thing the pooka done was to rake up the fire, and walk out, giving such a slap o' the door that the boy thought the house couldn't help tumbling down. Well, to be sure, if there wasn't a hullabulloo next morning when the poor fellow told his story! They could talk of nothing else the whole day. One said one thing, another said another, but a fat, lazy scullery girl said the wittiest thing of all. "Musha! "says she, "If the pooka does be cleaning up everything that way when we're asleep, what should we be slaving ourselves for, doing his work?" "Sha gu dheine," says another: "them's the wisest words you ever said, Kauth: it's meself won't contradict you." So said so done. Not a bit of a plate or dish saw a drop of water that evening, and not a besom was laid on the floor, and everyone went to bed soon after sundown. Next morning everything was as fine as fire in the kitchen, and the lord mayor might eat his dinner off the flags. It was great ease to the lazy servants, you may depend, and everything went on well till a foolhardy gag of a boy said he would stay up one night and have a chat with the pooka. He was a little daunted when the door was thrown open, and the ass marched up to the fire. He didn't open his mouth till the pot was filled, and the pooka lying snug and sausty before the fire. "Ah then, sir!" says he, at last, picking up courage, "If it isn't taking a liberty, might I ax who you are, and why are you so kind as to do half of the day's work for the girls every night?" "No liberty at all," says the pooka, says he: "I'll tell you, and welcome. I was a servant here in the time of Squire R.'s father, and was the laziest rogue that ever was clothed and fed, and done nothing for it. When my time came for the other world, this is the punishment was laid on me -- to come here, and do all this labour every night, and then go out in the cold. It isn't so bad in the fine weather, but if you only knew what it is to stand with your head between your legs, facing the storm, from midnight to sunrise on a bleak winter night!" "And could we do anything for your comfort, my poor fellow?" says the boy. "Musha, I don't know, "says the pooka; "but I think a good quilted frieze coat would help to keep the life in me, them long nights." "Why then, in throth, we'd be the ungratefulest of people if we didn't feel for you." To make a long story short, the next night but two the boy was there again; and if he didn't delight the poor pooka, holding up a fine warm coat before him, it's no matter! Betune the pooka and the man, his legs were got into the four arms of it, and it was buttoned down his breast and his belly, and he was so pleased, he walked up to the glass to see how he looked. "Well," says he, "it's a long lane that has no turning. I am much obliged to yourself and your fellow-servants. Yous have made me happy at last: good-night to you." So he was walking out, but the other cried, "Och! Sure you're going too soon: what about the washing and sweeping?" "Ah, you may tell the girls that they must now get their turn. My punishment was to last till I was thought worthy of a reward for the way I done my duty. You'll see me no more." And no more they did, and right sorry they were for being in such a hurry to reward the ungrateful pooka. Source (books.google.com): Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 126-29 . Source (Internet Archive): Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 126-29 . Kilcock is a town in County Kildare, Ireland. Rath is a common placename in Ireland. Raths are pre-historic earthworks and popularly thought to be inhabited by fairies. Return to the table of contents . The Phouka Ireland The Phouka is a friendly being, and often helps the farmer at his work if he is treated well and kindly. One day a farmer's son was minding cattle in the field when something rushed past him like the wind; but he was not frightened, for he knew it was the Phouka on his way to the old mill by the moat where the fairies met every night. So he called out, "Phouka, Phouka! show me what you are like, and I'll give you my big coat to keep you warm." Then a young bull came to him lashing his tail like mad; but Phadrig threw the coat over him, and in a moment he was quiet as a lamb, and told the boy to come to the mill that night when the moon was up, and he would have good luck. So Phadrig went, but saw nothing except sacks of corn all lying about on the ground, for the men had fallen asleep, and no work was done. Then he lay down also and slept, for he was very tired; and when he woke up early in the morning there was all the meal ground, though certainly the men had not done it, for they still slept. And this happened for three nights, after which Phadrig determined to keep awake and watch. Now there was an old chest in the mill, and he crept into this to hide, and just looked through the keyhole to see what would happen. And exactly at midnight six little fellows came in, each carrying a sack of corn upon his back; and after them came an old man in tattered rags of clothes, and he bade them turn the mill, and they turned and turned till all was ground. Then Phadrig ran to tell his father, and the miller determined to watch the next night with his son, and both together saw the same thing happen. "Now," said the farmer, "I see it is the Phouka's work, and let him work if it pleases him, for the men are idle and lazy and only sleep. So I'll pack the whole set off tomorrow, and leave the grinding of the corn to this excellent old Phouka." After this the farmer grew so rich that there was no end to his money, for he had no men to pay, and all his corn was ground without his spending a penny. Of course the people wondered much over his riches, but he never told them about the Phouka, or their curiosity would have spoiled the luck. Now Phadrig went often to the mill and hid in the chest that he might watch the fairies at work; but he had great pity for the poor old Phouka in his tattered clothes, who yet directed everything and had hard work of it sometimes keeping the little Phoukas in order. So Phadrig, out of love and gratitude, bought a fine suit of cloth and silk and laid it one night on the floor of the mill just where the old Phouka always stood to give his orders to the little men, and then he crept into the chest to watch. "How is this?" said the Phouka when he saw the clothes. "Are these for me? I shall be turned into a fine gentleman." And he put them on, and then began to walk up and down admiring himself. But suddenly he remembered the corn and went to grind as usual, then stopped and cried out, "No, no. No more work for me. Fine gentlemen don't grind corn. I'll go out and see a little of the world and show my fine clothes." And he kicked away the old rags into a corner, and went out. No corn was ground that night, nor the next, nor the next; all the little Phoukas ran away, and not a sound was heard in the mill. Then Phadrig grew very sorry for the loss of his old friend, and used to go out into the fields and call out, "Phouka, Phouka! come back to me. Let me see your face." But the old Phouka never came back, and all his life long Phadrig never looked on the face of his friend again. However, the farmer had made so much money that he wanted no more help; and he sold the mill, and reared up Phadrig to be a great scholar and a gentleman, who had his own house and land and servants. And in time he married a beautiful lady, so beautiful that the people said she must be daughter to the king of the fairies. A strange thing happened at the wedding, for when they all stood up to drink the bride's health, Phadrig saw beside him a golden cup filled with wine. And no one knew how the golden cup had come to his hand; but Phadrig guessed it was the Phouka's gift, and he drank the wine without fear and made his bride drink also. And ever after their lives were happy and prosperous, and the golden cup was kept as a treasure in the family, and the descendants of Phadrig have it in their possession to this day. Source (books.google.com): Lady Wilde [Jane Francesca Elgee Wilde], Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland (Boston: Ticknor and Company, 1888), pp. 48-49 . Source (Internet Archive): Lady Wilde [Jane Francesca Elgee Wilde], Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland (Boston: Ticknor and Company, 1887), pp. 87-90 . Link to additional Fairy Cup Legends (migratory legends of Christiansen type 6045 and other stories of drinking vessels stolen from or abandoned by fairies). Return to the table of contents . The Sprite France Fully three thousand years ago, our neighbor had a lot of grain in his barn. Every morning he found a part of this grain threshed, with sheaves laid out on the threshing-floor for the next day. He could not explain how this came to be. One evening he hid in a corner of the barn and saw a little man come in and start to thresh the grain. Because the little man was naked, the farmer said to himself, "I have to give him a nice little coat for his labor." He then said to his wife, "It is a little man who comes to thresh our grain; you will have to make him a little coat." The next day, the woman took all kinds of cloth pieces, and made a little suit from them. The farmer placed the suit on the pile of grain. The sprite returned the following night, and, threshing the grain, he found the suit. In his joy he began to skip about, saying, "Whoever serves a good master shall receive a good wage." Then he put on the suit, and found himself very handsome. "I have been paid for my labor, but who will now thresh the grain?" Having said that, he left and never returned. Source (books.google.com): Emmanuel Cosquin, "Le Follet," Contes populaires de Lorraine , vol. 1 (Paris: F. Vieweg, 1886), pp. 82-83 . Source (Internet Archive): Emmanuel Cosquin, "Le Follet," Contes populaires de Lorraine , vol. 1 (Paris: F. Vieweg, 1886), pp. 82-83 . Return to the table of contents . The Fairy Friar Spain Once upon a time there were three little brothers, who supported themselves by kneading a bushel of dough every night. One morning when they got up early as usual, and went to perform their daily task, they were surprised to find the work done for them, and the loaves all ready to put into the oven. And this happened for several days in succession. Wishing to find out who it was that did them such a service, they hid themselves one night and watched. They beheld a very little fairy, dressed like a friar, but with his clothes all old and ragged. So they made a new suit of clothes for him and left it in the kitchen. When the fairy came and saw the new garments placed there for him, he went off with them, singing: The little friar, when his clothes are new, Does not want kneading or baking to do; and never came back any more. This proves, my dear children, that there are many who, like the little friar, are compliant and useful until they receive a benefit, but that when that is once received, they do not return to repay the person whom they are indebted to for it. Source (books.google.com): Fernan Caballero The Bird of Truth and Other Fairy Tales (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, [1883]), pp. 157-58 . Source (Bodleian Libraries, University of Oxford): Fernan Caballero The Bird of Truth and Other Fairy Tales (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, [1883]), pp. 157-58. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 12, 2020. The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces and Other Folktales of Type 306 The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces And Other Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 306 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2008-2022 Contents The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces (Germany, Georg Schambach and Wilhelm Müller). The Princess with the Twelve Pair of Golden Shoes (Denmark, Svend Grundtvig). The Invisible Shepherd Boy (Germany/Hungary). The Midnight Dance (Russia). The Three Girls (Gypsy [Slovak, Moravian, and Bohemian]). The Seven Iron Slippers (Portugal). The Twelve Dancing Princesses (France/Belgium). The Slippers of the Twelve Princesses (Romania). The following type 306 tales do not contain the motif of the worn-out dancing shoes, but they do describe the discovery and interruption of forbidden trysts. Dorani (Punjab). Hildur, the Queen of the Elves (Iceland). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once upon a time there was a king who had twelve daughters, each one more beautiful than the others. Their beds were all together in one room, and when they went to bed, their doors were all locked and barred, but the next morning their shoes were always danced to pieces, and no one knew where they had been or how it had happened. Then the king proclaimed that whoever could discover where they went dancing each night could chose one of them for his wife and become king after his death. However, anyone who attempted this, but failed to make the discovery after three days and nights, would forfeit his life. A prince soon presented himself. He was well received, and escorted to the anteroom to the twelve daughters' bedroom. He was given a bed there, and told to watch where they went and danced. So they would not be able to do anything in secret, or go out to some other place, the door to their room was left open. But the prince fell asleep, and when he awoke the next morning, the twelve had been dancing, for their shoes all had holes in their soles. The same thing happened the second and the third evening, and his head was chopped off. Many others came to try this risky venture, but they too all lost their lives. Now it happened that a poor soldier, who because of his wounds could no longer serve in the army, was making his way to the city where the king lived. He met an old woman who asked him where he was going. "I'm not sure myself," he said. "But I would like to become king and discover where the princesses are dancing their shoes to pieces." "Oh," said the old woman, "that isn't so difficult. Just do not drink the wine that one of them will bring you in the evening." Then she gave him a cloak and said, "Put this on, and you will be invisible, and you can follow the twelve." Having receiving this good advice, the soldier became serious, took heart, went to the king, and announced himself as a suitor. He, like the others, was well received, and was given royal clothes to wear. That evening at bedtime he was escorted to the anteroom. Just as he was going to bed, the oldest princess brought him a goblet of wine, but he secretly poured it out. He lay down, and after a little while began to snore as if he were in the deepest sleep. The twelve princesses heard him and laughed. The oldest one said, "He could have spared his life as well!" Then they got up, opened their wardrobes, chests, and closets, took out their best clothes, and made themselves beautiful in front of their mirrors, all the time jumping about in anticipation of the dance. However, the youngest one said, "I'm not sure. You are all very happy, but I'm afraid that something bad is going to happen!" "You snow goose," said the oldest one. "You are always afraid! Have you forgotten how many princes have been here for nothing. I wouldn't even have had to give this soldier a sleeping potion. He would never have woken up." When they were ready, they first approached the soldier, but he did not move at all, and as soon as they thought it was safe, the oldest one went to her bed and knocked on it. It immediately sank beneath the floor, revealing a trapdoor. The soldier saw how they all climbed down, one after the other, the oldest one leading the way. He jumped up, put on the cloak, and followed immediately after the youngest one. Halfway down the stairs he stepped on her dress. Frightened, she called out, "It's not right! Something is holding my dress." "Don't be so simple," said the oldest one. "You just caught yourself on a hook." They continued until they came to a magnificent walkway between rows of trees. Their leaves were all made of silver, and they shone and glistened. The soldier broke off a twig in order to prove where he had been, and a loud cracking sound came from the tree. The youngest one called out again, "It's not right. Didn't you hear that sound? That has never happened before." The oldest one said, "That is just a joyful salute that they are firing because soon we will have disenchanted our princes." Then they came to a walkway where the tress were all made of gold, and finally to a third one, where they were made of clear diamonds. He broke a twig from each of these. The cracking sound frightened the youngest one each time, but the oldest one insisted that it was only the sounds of joyful salutes. They continued on until they came to a large body of water. Twelve boats were there, and in each boat there was a handsome prince waiting for them. Each prince took a princess into his boat. The soldier sat next to the youngest princess, and her prince said, "I am as strong as ever, but the boat seems to be much heavier. I am rowing as hard as I can." "It must be the warm weather," said the youngest princess. "It's too hot for me as well." On the other side of the water there was a beautiful, brightly illuminated castle. Joyful music, kettle drums, and trumpets sounded forth. They rowed over and went inside. Each prince danced with his princess. The invisible soldier danced along as well, and when a princess held up a goblet of wine, he drank it empty as she lifted it to her mouth. This always frightened the youngest one, but the oldest one silenced her every time. They danced there until three o'clock the next morning when their shoes were danced to pieces and they had to stop. The princes rowed them back across the water. This time the soldier took a seat next to the oldest princess in the lead boat. They took leave from their princes on the bank and promised to come back the next night. When they were on the steps the soldier ran ahead and got into bed. When the twelve tired princesses came in slowly, he was again snoring loudly. "He will be no risk to us," they said. Then they took off their beautiful clothes and put them away, placed their worn out shoes under their beds, and went to bed. The next morning the soldier said nothing, for he wanted to see the amazing thing once again. He went along the second and third nights, and everything happened as before. Each time they danced until their shoes were in pieces. The third time he also took along a goblet as a piece of evidence. The hour came when he was to give his answer, and he brought the three twigs and the goblet before the king. The twelve princesses stood behind the door and listened to what he had to say. The king asked, "Where did my daughters dance their shoes to pieces?" He answered, "in an underground castle with twelve princes." Then he told the whole story and brought forth the pieces of evidence. When they saw that they had been betrayed, and that their denials did no good, they admitted everything. Then the king asked him which one he wanted for a wife. He answered, "I myself am no longer young, so give me the oldest one." Their wedding was held the same day, and the kingdom was promised to him following the king's death. But the princes had as many days added to their curse as they had spent nights dancing with the twelve princesses. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die zertanzten Schuhe," Kinder- und Haus-Märchen , vol. 2 (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1815), no. 47, pp. 239-45. The Grimms' source: Jenny von Droste-Hülshoff. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. This is the first edition of the Grimms' famous collection (two volumes, 1812/1815), best known in the English-speaking world as Grimms' Fairy Tales . In succeeding editions this tale was assigned number 133. This particular tale underwent but few changes (mostly stylistic) between the first and following editions. Link to the German text of the first edition: Die zertanzten Schuhe (1815) . Link to the German text of the final edition: Die zertanzten Schuhe (1857) . Link to an English translation of the final edition: The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces (1857) . Convention varies on translating the German title into English: "The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces" (Margaret Hunt,1884). "The Worn-Out Dancing Slippers" (Francis P. Magoun and Alexander H. Krappe, 1960). "The Shoes That Were Danced Through" (Ralph Manheim, 1977). "The Worn-Out Dancing Shoes" (Jack Zipes, 1987). Return to the table of contents . The Shoes That Were Danced to Pieces Germany A king had six daughters who disappeared every night from their beds without anyone knowing where they went, and every time that they returned the soles were gone from their shoes. The king tried every earthly way to discover what was happening, but he never succeeded. Then he proclaimed that if anyone could reveal to him where his daughters were going every night, he could choose one of them to be his wife. A peasant got news of this and became so engrossed with the thoughts of how he himself might thus win a princess that with time he fell into deep despair. One day while sadly walking along he met a dwarf who asked him why he was so gloomy. At first the peasant did not want to answer, saying that the dwarf would not be able to help him. The dwarf replied, "You cannot know that. Just tell me." So the peasant told him what the king had proclaimed, and how had become discouraged, not knowing how he could discover the secret. To this the dwarf told the peasant to go to a certain meadow just outside the city, describing exactly where it was. There he would find a washhouse, inside of which there was a bed. The peasant should lie down on this bed and pretend to be sound asleep. He should also place a brandy bottle next to him, to make it appear that he was drunk. However, on no account was he to drink anything, but instead was to pay close attention to whatever the princesses did and to follow their every move. The peasant went to the house and did exactly what he had been told to do. That night at eleven o'clock the princesses arrived. They shook him soundly to find out if he was asleep. When he neither stirred nor moved they opened a trapdoor that he had not seen before and climbed down through it. The peasant quickly jumped up and followed after them. As soon as he went through the trapdoor he became invisible, so the princesses, who were walking ahead of him, could not see him. They soon entered a beautiful tree-lined walkway. Then they came to a pear tree loaded with pears of pure gold. The peasant plucked one of them, immediately causing a loud cracking sound. The princesses heard this and were afraid that the peasant in the bed was following them. But seeing no one, they continued on their way. They came to a broad river. A rowboat was on the bank, which the six princesses climbed into, and the peasant as well. On the other side of the river there stood a magnificent castle. They went inside, then entered a large hall with a floor made of golden flax-comb teeth. In the hall six enchanted princes were awaiting the princesses, and they immediately began to dance with them. While they were dancing the peasant broke loose one of the golden flax-comb teeth, again causing a loud cracking sound. The princesses were once again afraid, but seeing no one, they put themselves at ease. After dancing away the hour between eleven and twelve, they hurriedly departed, climbed into the rowboat, and crossed the river. The peasant was with them in the boat, and then he rushed on ahead, lay down on the bed, and pretended to be asleep. Arriving at their castle, the princesses too went to bed and fell asleep. The next day the peasant went to the king, saying that he wanted to reveal where his daughters were going every night, and he told him everything. The king had his daughters come before him one at a time and asked each one, beginning with the oldest, if what the peasant said was true. The five oldest stubbornly denied everything, whereupon the king had each of their heads cut off, one after the other. Only the youngest daughter said that she would confess everything. For five years now they had been dancing with the enchanted princes every night. If they had finished dancing the sixth year with them, they would have been redeemed. They could also be redeemed by allowing their heads to be cut off, like the five sisters. The peasant received the youngest princess for his wife. Source: Georg Schambach and Wilhelm Müller, "Die zertanzten Schuhe," Niedersächsische Sagen und Märchen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht's Verlag, 1855), pp. 283-85 . Return to the table of contents . The Princess with the Twelve Pair of Golden Shoes Denmark There was once a young man who had wandered out into the world to seek his fortune. As he went his way he met an old man who asked him for alms. The lad told him that he had no money; but that he would gladly share with him what food he had, and this the old man gratefully accepted. They seated themselves beneath a tree, and the young man divided the food into two equal parts. When they had eaten he rose to go on his way; but the old man said: "You shared what you had with me, and in return I will give you this stick and this ball, for they will make your fortune. If you raise the stick in the air in front of you, you will become invisible; and if you strike the ball with the stick, it will roll in front of you, and show you the road you should take." The young man thanked him for his gifts, cast the ball to the ground and struck it with the stick. The ball rolled swiftly in advance of him, and kept on rolling, until they came to a large city. Here he saw that the chopped-off heads of human beings had been planted all around the city walls. He asked the first person whom he met why this was, and learned that the whole country grieved because of the princess, who wore out twelve pair of golden shoes every night without anyone knowing how she did so. The old king was weary of it, and had vowed whoever could solve the mystery should receive the princess and half the kingdom beside; but whoever tried and could not solve it would have to lose his life. Now many princes and great lords had come and made the attempt, because the princess was surpassingly lovely; but all of them had had to yield their lives, and the old king was in deep sorrow because of it. When the young man heard of this he had a great mind to undertake the adventure. He at once went to the castle and said he would make the attempt the following night. When the old king saw him, he felt sorry for him, and he advised him to give up the undertaking, since he was certain to have no better luck than his predecessors. But he held to his resolve, and the king said that he should sleep for three nights in the princess' room, and see whether he could discover anything; and if he had not discovered anything by the third day, he would have to take his way to the scaffold. The young man was satisfied to have it so, and in the evening he was led into the princess's room, where a bed had been prepared for him. He leaned his stick against the bed, hung his knapsack on it, and lay down resolved not to close an eye the whole night. He stayed awake for a long time and did not notice anything; but suddenly he fell asleep, and when he woke up it was bright daylight. Then he was very angry with himself, and resolved firmly that he would keep a better watch the following night. But the next night passed just as the first had, and now the young man had but a single night left. When he lay down the third night, he pretended to fall asleep at once; and before long he heard a voice asking the princess whether he were sleeping. The princess answered, ''Yes," and thereupon a maiden clad in white came to his bed and said: ''I will test him, at any rate, to see whether he is really asleep," and she took a golden needle and thrust it into his heel. But he did not move, and she went away and left the needle behind her. Then he saw her, together with the princess, move aside the latter's bed, so that a flight of stairs came to view, and they went down the flight of stairs. He rose quickly, took the needle and put it in his knapsack on his back, and held his stick before him so that he was invisible. Then he followed them down the stairs, and they went on until they reached a forest that was all of silver -- trees, flowers and grass. When they came to the end of the silver forest, he broke a branch from a tree, and put it in his knapsack. The princess heard the trees rustle and turned around; but she could see no one. "Oh, that is only the wind!" said the maiden with her. Then they came to another forest, where all was of gold -- trees, flowers and grass; and when they reached the end of the golden forest, he broke a branch and put it in his knapsack. The princess turned around, and said it seemed as though some one were behind them; but the girl replied again that it was only the wind. Then they came to a forest whose trees, flowers and grass were all of diamond, and when they reached the end of the diamond forest, he broke a branch from a tree and put it in his knapsack. Finally they reached a lake, and there lay a little boat, and the princess and the girl got in. But as they were about to push off, he leaped into the boat, and it rocked so strongly that the princess grew afraid, and cried out that now surely some one was behind them. But the girl replied it was only the wind. They crossed to the opposite shore, and there lay a great castle. An ugly troll came up, received the princess, led her in and asked her why she was so late. Then she told him she had suffered a great fright, and that someone had followed them, though she had seen no one. Then they seated themselves at the table, and the young man stood behind the princess's chair. When she had eaten he took away her golden plate, her golden knife and her golden fork, and put them all in his knapsack. The troll and the princess could not imagine what had become of them; but the troll wasted no more thought on them, for now he wanted to dance. So they began to dance, and the princess danced twelve times with the troll, and each time she danced with him she completely wore out a pair of golden shoes. But when she had danced the last dance and thrown the shoes in the corner, the young man picked them up, and put them in his knapsack. When the dancing was over the troll led her back to the boat, and the young man crossed with them, and was the first to jump ashore and run home swiftly, so that he got there before they did, and could lie down in bed and pretend to be asleep when the princess arrived. In the morning the old king came, and asked whether he had discovered anything; but he said he had fallen asleep, as he had the two nights preceding, and had not noticed anything. This made the old king very sad; but the princess was all the happier, and wished to see him beheaded herself. So the young man was led to the scaffold, and the king and the princess and the whole court went along. And as he stood on the scaffold, he begged permission of the king to tell him a wonderful dream he had dreamt during the night just passed, and the king granted his request. So he told how he had dreamed that a girl clad in white had come to the princess and asked her whether he was asleep; and in order to make certain, the girl in white had thrust a golden needle into his heel. "And I think this is the very needle," he said and drew it forth from his knapsack. "And then I dreamed that they pushed the princess's bed aside, and went down a flight of steps, hidden beneath the bed, and I went after them; and then I dreamed that we came to a forest where the trees, flowers and grass were all of silver, and I broke a branch from one of the trees. Here it is. Then we came to a forest where the trees, flowers and grass were of gold, and I broke a branch from one of those trees. Here it is. Then I dreamed we came to a forest where the trees, flowers and grass were of diamond, and I broke a branch from one of those trees. Here it is. Then I dreamed that we went on and came to a lake, where lay a boat, and the princess and the girl got into the boat. But when I leaped in the princess was frightened, and said that there was some one behind her, though she could not see me. We crossed the lake to a great castle, and there an ugly troll received the princess and led her into the castle, and sat down to dine with, her; and I dreamed that I stood behind her chair, and that after she had eaten, I took her plate, her knife and her fork and put them in my knapsack. Here they are. And then I dreamed that the troll asked the princess to dance with him, and that she danced twelve times, and each time she danced she wore out a pair of golden shoes. But when she had danced the last dance, and flung the shoes aside, I picked them up, put them in my knapsack, and here they are. Then I dreamed the princess came home again; but I reached the castle before she did, and lay down in bed before she arrived." When the old king had heard all this his happiness was beyond bounds; but the princess was half dead with fright, and could not imagine how it had all happened. The king now wished the young man to marry the princess; but he decided to pay the troll a visit first, and asked the princess to lend him her golden thimble. She gave it to him, and the young man descended the stairs, passed through the silver forest, the golden forest and the diamond forest by the lake, and rowed across to the troll's castle. When he found the troll he thrust him through the heart with the golden needle that he had drawn from his heel, and held the princess's thimble beneath it. Three drops of blood fell into it, and the troll died. Then he rowed back, and when he came to the diamond forest, he let one drop of blood fall to the ground, and at once all the trees, flowers and grasses turned into as many men, women and children, who were so happy to be released from their enchantment they begged him to be their king, for they were a whole nation. They followed him to the golden forest, and there he let another drop of blood fall to the ground; and there, too, all the trees, flowers and grasses turned into human beings, enough to people a kingdom. They went with him to the silver forest, and here he let the third drop of blood fall to the ground and all the trees, flowers and grasses likewise became human beings, praised him as their deliverer, and wished to make him their king. They went with him to the old king and told him of their deliverance, and he and the princess were also happy, now that she, too, had been released from her enchantment. Then the wedding was celebrated with great splendor, and he became king over all three kingdoms. Source: Clara Stroebe, ed. The Danish Fairy Book , translated [from the German] by Frederick H. Martens (New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1922), no. 15, pp. 135-42 . Stroebe's source: Svend Grundtvig, "Prindsessen med de tolv Par Guldsko," Danske Folkeminder, Viser, Sagn og Æventyr m.m., levende i Folkemunde (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversens Forlagshandel, 1861), no. 3, pp. 11-15 . This story is from the Danish island of Bornholm. Return to the table of contents . The Invisible Shepherd Boy Germany/Hungary Where was it? Where was it not? Once upon a time there was a poor man who had a very pious son who was a shepherd. One day he was grazing his sheep in a very mountainous area when, like someone whose heart was about to break because of a great wish, he uttered a deep sigh toward heaven. Hearing a quiet sound he looked around and saw Saint Peter as a gray old man walking toward him. "Why are you sighing so, my son?" he asked, "and what is your wish?" "My only wish," he answered respectfully, "is a bag that can never be filled and a pelt that would make me invisible when I wrap myself in it." Peter granted these wishes, and then disappeared. The boy left his shepherd's things lying there and made his way to the capital city. Here he hoped to find his luck, for a king lived here who had twelve daughters, eleven of whom wore out at least six pairs of shoes every night. This angered their father because it was costing him a good part of his income, and furthermore some people were thinking ill of his daughters. But in spite of all his cunning he could not discover how they were doing this. Finally the king promised his youngest daughter to the man who could bring the mystery to the light of day. This promise lured a great many suitors to the capital city, but they were all ridiculed by the girls, and they had to withdraw in shame. The shepherd boy, trusting in his pelt, presented himself as well, and the girls, as usual, measured him with spiteful looks. Night came, and the boy, wrapped in his pelt, lay down before their bedroom door, then quickly slipped inside when they went to bed. At midnight a spirit entered and awoke each girl. There was a flurry of activity: they got dressed, made themselves beautiful, then stuffed a travel bag full of shoes. However, the youngest one did not see what was happening. Therefore the invisible shepherd boy, without being noticed, awoke her as well, which frightened the other sisters. However, because it had already happened, they thought it would be best to tempt her to join them. After some hesitation the girl agreed to do so. When everyone was ready the spirit placed a basin on the table. Each sister rubbed some of its contents onto her shoulders, and wings immediately grew from them. The shepherd boy did the same thing, and when they all flew out the window, he flew after them. After flying a few hours they came to a great copper forest and to a well with a copper railing on which were twelve copper cups. Here they refreshed themselves and drank. The youngest one, who was taking this journey for the first time, looked about fearfully. The boy drank as well, and as they were setting forth again, he put into his bag a cup and some leaves that he pulled from a tree,. The tree rustled noisily, sounding through the entire forest. The littlest girl noticed this and warned her sisters that someone was following them, but thinking they were safe, they only laughed at her. They flew onward, and before long they came to a silver forest and to a well with a silver railing. They drank here as before, and the boy again put a cup and a silver twig into his bag. At the sound of the twig being broken from the tree the smallest sister again warned her sisters, but to no avail. Leaving this forest they arrived at a golden forest, and a well with a golden railing and golden cups. They also stopped here, and the boy put a golden cup and a golden twig into his bag. Hearing the cracking sound, the smallest sister alerted the others, but again they did nothing. After leaving this forest they came to a huge mountain cliff, whose moss-covered summit reached steeply toward heaven. They stopped here, and the spirit struck the cliff with a golden wand, upon which it opened up, and they all went through the opening, the boy as well. They entered a marvelous room which opened into a hall that was decorated with fairy-like splendor. Twelve handsome fairy-youths approached them. Ever more servants appeared and busied themselves making all necessary preparations for a magnificent ball. Magical music sounded forth. The doors opened onto a huge dance hall, and everything was happy and gay. As morning approached they returned home just as they had come (and the shepherd boy was with them). They lay down on their beds as though nothing had happened, which their worn-out shoes disproved, then got up at the normal time. The king was waiting impatiently for any news that the shepherd boy might bring, and in only a few minutes he told him everything that had happened. The girls were summoned, and they denied everything. However, the cups and the twigs testified against them, and the littlest sister spoke against them as well, which was why the shepherd boy had awakened her. The king now fulfilled his promise, but the eleven girls were burned to death as sorceresses. Source: G. Stier, "Der unsichtbare Schäferjunge," Ungarische Sagen und Märchen: Aus der Erdélyischen Sammlung übersetzt (Berlin: Ferd. Dümmler's Buchhandlung, 1850), no. 7, pp. 51-56 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. According to Stier this tale was collected in Hungary from an informant with roots in Münster, Germany. Return to the table of contents . The Midnight Dance Russia Once upon a time there was a king who was a widower. He had twelve daughters: each was fairer than the others. Every night these princesses went where nobody knew. It was only for twenty-four hours, and they always wore out a new pair of shoes. Now the king had no shoes ready for them, and he wanted to know where they went at night and what they did. So he made a feast ready, and he summoned all the kings and korolévichi , all the boyárs , and the merchants and the simple folk, to it, and he asked them, "Can any of you guess this riddle? Whoever guesses it I will give him my beloved daughter as a wife and a half of my kingdom as a dowry." No one was able to find out where the princesses went at night. Only one poor nobleman cried out, "Your kingly majesty, I will find out!" "Very well; go and find out." So then the poor nobleman began pondering and saying to himself, "What have I done? I have undertaken to find out, and I don't know myself. If I don't find out now, possibly the king will put me under arrest." So he went out of the palace beyond the city, and went on and on, and at last he met an old woman on the road who asked him, "What are you thinking of, doughty youth?" And he answered, "How should I, Babushka, not become thoughtful? I have undertaken to discover for the king where his daughters go by night." "Oh, this is a difficult task, but it can be done. Here, I will give you the cap of invisibility; with that you cannot be seen. Now, remember, when you go to sleep the princesses will pour a sleeping draught out for you. You turn to the wall and pour it into the bed and do not drink it." So the poor nobleman thanked the old woman and returned to the palace. Nighttime approached and they gave him a room next to that in which the princesses slept. So he lay on the bed and began to keep watch. Then one of the princesses brought sleeping drugs in wine and asked him to drink her health. He could not refuse, and so he took the goblet, turned to the wall, and poured it into the bed. At midnight the princesses went to look whether he was asleep or not. Then the poor nobleman pretended to be as sound asleep as a log, and himself kept a keen look out for every noise. "Now, sisters, our watchman has gone to sleep. It is time we set out on our promenade. It is time." So they all put on their best clothes, and the elder sister went to her bedside, moved the bed, and an entrance into the subterranean realm instantly opened up beneath, leading to the home of the Accursèd Tsar. They all went down a flight of stairs, and the poor nobleman quietly got off his bed, put on the cap of invisibility, and followed them. He, without noticing, touched the youngest princess's dress. She was frightened and said to her sisters, "O my sisters, somebody has stepped on my dress. This is a foretokening of woe." "Nonsense; it does not mean anything of the sort!" So they all went down the flight of steps into a grove, and in that grove there were golden flowers. Then the poor nobleman broke off and plucked a single sprig, and the entire grove rustled. "Oh, sisters," said the youngest sister, "some unfortunate thing is injuring us. Did you hear how the grove rustled?" "Do not fear; this is the music in the Accursèd Tsar's realm." So they went into the tsar's palace. He, with his lackeys, met them; music sounded; and they began dancing. And they danced until their shoes were worn thin. Then the Tsar bade wine to be served to his guests. The poor nobleman took a single goblet from under his nose, poured out the wine, and put the cup into his pocket. At last the rout was over, and the princesses bade farewell to their cavaliers, promised to come another night, turned back home, undressed and lay down to sleep. Then the king summoned the poor nobleman, and asked him, "Did you keep watch on my daughters?" "Yes, I did, your majesty." "Where did they go?" "Into the subterranean realm, to the Accursèd Tsar, where they danced all night long." So the king summoned his daughters, and began cross examining them. "Where do you go at night?" So the princesses tried a feint: "We have not been anywhere." "Were you not with the Accursèd Tsar? There is this poor nobleman who can turn evidence on you. He is able to convict you." "What do you mean, bátyushka ? He can convict us when all night he slept the sleep of the dead?" Then the poor nobleman brought the golden flower out of his pocket, and the goblet, and said, "There is the testimony." What could they do? The princesses had to acknowledge their guilt, and the king bade the entrance to the subterranean realm be slated up. And he married the poor nobleman to the youngest daughter, and they lived happily ever after. Source: Aleksandr Nikolaevich Afanas'ev, Russian Folk-Tales , translated by Leonard A. Magnus (New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1916), pp. 106-108 . The Russian collector's name is also transliterated as Alexander Nikolayevich Afanasyev. Link to an article on Alexander Nikolayevich Afanasyev from Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia. Return to the table of contents . The Three Girls Gypsy (Slovak, Moravian, and Bohemian) Somewhere there was a king who had three daughters, princesses. Those three sisters used to go to meet the devils, and the father knew not where they went to. But there was one called Jankos; Halenka [a fairy] aided him. The king asks Jankos, "Don't you know where my daughters go? Not one single night are they at home, and they are always wearing out new shoes." Then Jankos lay down in front of the door, and kept watch to see where they went to. But Halenka told him everything; she aided him. "They will, when they come, fling fire on you, and prick you with needles." Halenka told him he must not stir, but be like a corpse. They came, those devils, for the girls, and straightway the girls set out with them to hell. On, on, they walked, but he stuck close to them. As the girls went to hell he followed close behind, but so that they knew it not. He went through the diamond forest; when he came there he cut himself a diamond twig from the forest. He follows; straightway they, those girls, cried, "Jankos is coming behind us." For when he broke it, he made a great noise. The girls heard it. "Jankos is coming behind us." But the devils said, "What does it matter if he is?" Next they went through the forest of glass, and once more he cut off a twig; now he had two tokens. Then they went through the golden forest, and once more he cut off a twig; so now he had three. Then Halenka tells him, "I shall change you into a fly, and when you come into hell, creep under the bed, hide yourself there, and see what will happen." Then the devils danced with the girls, who tore their shoes all to pieces, for they danced upon blades of knives, and so they must tear them. Then they flung the shoes under the bed, where Jankos took them, so that he might show them at home. When the devils had danced with the girls, each of them threw his girl upon the bed and lay with her; thus did they with two of them, but the third would not yield herself. Then Jankos, having got all he wanted, returned home and lay down again in front of the door, "that the girls may know I am lying here." The girls returned after midnight, and went to bed in their room as if nothing had happened. But Jankos knew well what had happened, and straightway he went to their father, the king, and showed him the tokens. "I know where your daughters go: to hell. The three girls must own they were there, in the fire. Isn't it true? weren't you there? And if you believe me not, I will show you the tokens. See, here is one token from the diamond forest; then here is one from the forest of glass; a third from the golden forest; and the fourth is the shoes which you tore dancing with the devils. And two of you lay with the devils, but that third one not, she would not yield herself." Straightway the king seized his rifle, and straightway he shot them dead. Then he seized a knife, and slit up their bellies, and straightway the devils were scattered out from their bellies. Then he buried them in the church, and laid each coffin in front of the altar, and every night a soldier stood guard over them. But every night those two used to rend the soldier in pieces; more than a hundred were rent thus. At last it fell to a new soldier, a recruit, to stand guard; when he went upon guard he was weeping. But a little old man came to him -- it was my God; and Jankos was there with the soldier. And the old man tells him, "When the twelfth hour strikes and they come out of their coffins, straightway jump in and lie down in the coffin, and don't leave the coffin, for if you do they will rend you. So don't you go out, even if they beg you and fling fire on you, for they will beg you hard to come out." Thus then till morning he lay in the coffin. In the morning those two were alive again, and both kneeling in front of the altar. They were lovelier than ever. Then the soldier took one to wife, and Jankos took the other. Then when they came home with them their father was very glad. Then Jankos and the soldier got married, and if they are not dead they are still alive. Source: Francis Hindes Groome, Gypsy Folk-Tales (London: Hurst and Blackett, 1899), no. 41, pp. 141-43 . This imperfectly told story combines a type 306 story with a vampire story (type 307, titled generically "The Princesses in the Coffin"). Return to the table of contents . The Seven Iron Slippers Portugal There lived once together a king and a queen, and a princess who was their daughter. The princess had worn out every evening seven pairs of slippers made of iron; and the king could not make out how that could be, though he was always trying to find out. The king at last issued a decree, that whosoever should be able to find out how the princess managed to wear out seven slippers made of iron in the short space of time between morning and evening, he would give the princess in marriage if he were a man, and if a woman he would marry her to a prince. It happened that a soldier was walking along an open country road carrying on his back a sack of oranges, and he saw two men fighting and giving each other great blows. The soldier went up to them and asked them, "Oh, men, why are you giving each other such blows?" "Why indeed should it be!" they replied. "Because our father is dead, and he has left us this cap, and we both wish to possess it." "Is it possible that for the sake of a cap you should be fighting?" inquired the soldier. The men then said, "The reason is that this cap has a charm, and if any one puts it on and says, 'Cap, cover me so that no one shall see me!' no one can see us." The soldier upon hearing this said to them, "I'll tell you what I can do for you; you let me remain here with the cap whilst I throw this orange to a great distance, and you run after it, and the one that shall pick it up first shall be the possessor of the cap." The men agreed to this, and the soldier threw the orange to a great distance, as far as he possibly could, whilst the men both ran to pick it up. Here the soldier without loss of time put on the cap saying, "Cap, make me invisible." When the men returned with the orange they could see nothing and nobody. The soldier went away with the cap, and further on he met on his road two other men fighting, and he said to them, "Oh, foolish men, why do you give each other such blows?" The men replied, "Indeed, you may well ask why, if it were not that father died and left us this pair of boots, and we, each of us, wish to be the sole possessor of them." The soldier replied, "Is it possible that for the matter of a pair of boots you should be fighting thus?" And they replying said, "It is because these boots are charmed, and when one wishes to go any distance he has only to say, 'Boots take me here or there,' wherever one should wish to go, and instantly they convey one to any place." The soldier said to them, "I will tell you what to do; I will throw an orange to a great distance, and you give me the boots to keep; you run for the orange, and the first who shall pick it up shall have the pair of boots." He threw the orange to a great distance and both men ran to catch it. Upon this the soldier said, "Cap, make me invisible, boots take me to the city!" and when the men returned they missed the boots, and the soldier, for he had gone away. He arrived at the capital and heard the decree read which the king had promulgated, and he began to consider what he had better do in this case. "With this cap, and with these boots I can surely find out what the princess does to wear out seven pairs of slippers made of iron in one night." He went and presented himself at the palace. When the king saw him he said, "Do you really know a way of finding out how the princess, my daughter, can wear out seven slippers in one night?" The soldier replied, "I only ask you to let me try." "But you must remember," said the king, "that if at the end of three days you have not found out the mystery, I shall order you to be put to death." The soldier to this replied that he was prepared to take the consequences. The king ordered him to remain in the palace. Every attention was paid to all his wants and wishes, he had his meals with the king at the same table, and slept in the princess's room. But what did the princess do? She took him a beverage to his bedside and gave it to him to drink. This beverage was a sleeping draught which she gave him to make him sleep all night. Next morning the soldier had not seen the princess do anything, for he had slept very soundly the whole night. When he appeared at breakfast the king asked him, "Well, did you see anything?" "Your majesty must know that I have seen nothing whatever." The king said, "Look well what you are at, for now there only remains two days more for you, or else you die!" The soldier replied, "I have not the least misgivings." Night came on and the princess acted as before. Next morning the king asked him again at breakfast, "Well, have you seen anything last night?" The soldier replied, "Your majesty must know that I have seen nothing whatever." "Be careful, then, what you do, only one day more and you die!" The soldier replied, "I have no misgivings." He then began to think it over. "It is very curious that I should sleep all night -- it cannot be from anything else but from drinking the beverage which the princess gives me. Leave me alone, I know what I shall do; when the princess brings me the cup I shall pretend to drink, but shall throw away the beverage." The night came and the princess did not fail to bring him the beverage to drink to his bedside. The soldier made a pretence to drink it, but instead threw it away, and feigned sleep though he was awake. In the middle of the night he saw the princess rise up, prepare to go out, and advance towards the door to leave. What did he do then? He put on the cap, drew on the boots, and said, "Cap make me invisible, boots take me wherever the princess goes." The princess entered a carriage, and the soldier followed her into the carriage and accompanied her. He saw the carriage stop at the seashore. The princess then embarked on board a vessel decked with flags. The soldier on seeing this said, "Cap, cover me, that I may be invisible," and embarked with the princess. She reached the land of giants, and when on passing the first sentinel, he challenged her with "Who's there?" "The Princess of Harmony," she replied. The sentinel rejoined, "Pass with your suite." The princess looked behind her, and not seeing any one following her she said to herself, "The sentinel cannot be in his sound mind; he said 'pass with your suite.' I do not see any one." She reached the second sentinel, who cried out at the top of his voice, "Who's there?" "The Princess of Harmony," replied the princess. "Pass with your suite," said the sentinel. The princess was each time more and more astonished. She came to the third sentinel, who challenged her as the others had done, "Who's there?" "The Princess of Harmony." "Pass on with your suite," rejoined the sentinel. The princess as before wondered what the man could mean. After journeying for a long time the soldier who followed her closely saw the princess arrive at a beautiful palace, enter in, and go into a hall for dancing, where he saw many giants. The princess sat upon a seat by the side of her lover who was a giant. The soldier hid himself under their seat. The band struck up, and she rose to dance with the giant, and when she finished the dance she had her iron slippers all in pieces. She took them off and pushed them under her seat. The soldier immediately took possession of them and put them inside his sack. The princess again sat down to converse with her lover. The band again struck up some dance music and the princess rose to dance. When she finished this dance another of her slippers had worn out. She took them off and left them under her seat. The soldier put these also into his sack. Finally, she danced seven times, and each time she danced she tore a pair of slippers made of iron. The soldier kept them all in his sack. After the ball the princess sat down to converse with her lover; and what did the soldier do? He turned their chairs over and threw them both on the middle of the floor. They were very much surprised and they searched everywhere and through all the houses and could find no one. The giants then looked out for a book of fates they had, wherein could be seen the course of the winds and other auguries peculiar to their race. They called in a black servant to read in the book and find out what was the matter. The soldier rose up from where he was and said, "Cap, make me invisible." He then gave the negro a slap on the face, the negro fell to the ground, while he took possession of the book and kept it. The time was approaching when the princess must depart and return home, and not being able to stay longer she went away. The soldier followed her and she returned by the same way she came. She went on board and when she reached the city the carriage was already waiting for her. The soldier then said, "Boots take me to the palace," and he arrived there, took off his clothes, and went to bed. When the princess arrived she found everything in her chamber just as she left it, and even found the soldier fast asleep. In the morning the king said, "Well, soldier, did you see anything remarkable last night?" "Be it known to your majesty that I saw nothing whatever last night," replied the soldier. The king then said, "According to what you say, I do not know if you are aware that you must die today." The soldier replied, "If it is so I must have patience, what else can I do?" When the princess heard this she rejoiced much. The king then ordered that everything for the execution should be prepared before the palace windows. When the soldier was proceeding to execution he asked the king to grant him a favor for the last time and to send for the princess so that she should be present. The king gave the desired permission, and the princess was present, when he said to her, "Is it true to say that the princess went out at midnight?" "It is not true," replied the princess. "Is it true to say," again asked the soldier, "that the princess entered a carriage, and afterwards went on board a vessel and proceeded to a ball given in the kingdom of the giants?" The princess replied, "It is not true." The soldier yet asked her another question, "Is it true that the princess tore seven pair of slippers during the seven times she danced?" and then he showed her the slippers. "There is no truth in all this," replied the princess. The soldier at last said to her, "Is it true to say that the princess at the end of the ball fell on the floor from her seat, and the giants had a book brought to them to see what bewitchery and magic pervaded and had taken possession of the house, and which book is here?" The princess now said, "It is so." The king was delighted at the discovery and happy ending of this affair, and the soldier came to live in the palace and married the princess. Source: Consiglieri Pedroso, Portuguese Folk-Tales (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by E. Stock, 1882), pp. 85-90 . The episode depicting the fight over the magic cap and the magic boots is classified as a type 518 folktale, titled generically "Men Fight over Magic Objects." Return to the table of contents . The Twelve Dancing Princesses France I. Once upon a time there lived in the village of Montignies-sur-Roc a little cow-boy, without either father or mother. His real name was Michael, but he was always called the Star Gazer, because when he drove his cows over the commons to seek for pasture, he went along with his head in the air, gaping at nothing. As he had a white skin, blue eyes, and hair that curled all over his head, the village girls used to cry after him, "Well, Star Gazer, what are you doing? " and Michael would answer, "Oh, nothing," and go on his way without even turning to look at them. The fact was he thought them very ugly, with their sun-burnt necks, their great red hands, their coarse petticoats and their wooden shoes. He had heard that somewhere in the world there were girls whose necks were white and whose hands were small, who were always dressed in the finest silks and laces, and were called princesses, and while his companions round the fire saw nothing in the flames but common everyday fancies, he dreamed that he had the happiness to marry a princess. II. One morning about the middle of August, just at mid-day when the sun was hottest, Michael ate his dinner of a piece of dry bread, and went to sleep under an oak. And while he slept he dreamt that there appeared before him a beautiful lady, dressed in a robe of cloth of gold, who said to him, "Go to the castle of Beloeil, and there you shall marry a princess." That evening the little cow-boy, who had been thinking a great deal about the advice of the lady in the golden dress, told his dream to the farm people. But, as was natural, they only laughed at the Star Gazer. The next day at the same hour he went to sleep again under the same tree. The lady appeared to him a second time, and said, "Go to the castle of Beloeil, and you shall marry a princess." In the evening Michael told his friends that he had dreamed the same dream again, but they only laughed at him more than before. "Never mind," he thought to himself; "if the lady appears to me a third time, I will do as she tells me." The following day, to the great astonishment of all the village, about two o'clock in the afternoon a voice was heard singing: Raleô, raleô, How the cattle go! It was the little cow-boy driving his herd back to the byre. The farmer began to scold him furiously, but he answered quietly, "I am going away," made his clothes into a bundle, said good-bye to all his friends, and boldly set out to seek his fortunes. There was great excitement through all the village, and on the top of the hill the people stood holding their sides with laughing, as they watched the Star Gazer trudging bravely along the valley with his bundle at the end of his stick. It was enough to make anyone laugh, certainly. III. It was well known for full twenty miles round that there lived in the castle of Beloeil twelve princesses of wonderful beauty, and as proud as they were beautiful, and who were besides so very sensitive and of such truly royal blood, that they would have felt at once the presence of a pea in their beds, even if the mattresses had been laid over it. It was whispered about that they led exactly the lives that princesses ought to lead, sleeping far into the morning, and never getting up till midday. They had twelve beds all in the same room, but what was very extraordinary was the fact that though they were locked in by triple bolts, every morning their satin shoes were found worn into holes. When they were asked what they had been doing all night, they always answered that they had been asleep; and, indeed, no noise was ever heard in the room, yet the shoes could not wear themselves out alone! At last the Duke of Beloeil ordered the trumpet to be sounded, and a proclamation to be made that whoever could discover how his daughters wore out their shoes should choose one of them for his wife. On hearing the proclamation a number of princes arrived at the castle to try their luck. They watched all night behind the open door of the princesses, but when the morning came they had all disappeared, and no one could tell what had become of them. IV. When he reached the castle, Michael went straight to the gardener and offered his services. Now it happened that the garden boy had just been sent away, and though the Star Gazer did not look very sturdy, the gardener agreed to take him, as he thought that his pretty face and golden curls would please the princesses. The first thing he was told was that when the princesses got up he was to present each one with a bouquet, and Michael thought that if he had nothing more unpleasant to do than that he should get on very well. Accordingly he placed himself behind the door of the princesses' room, with the twelve bouquets in a basket. He gave one to each of the sisters, and they took them without even deigning to look at the lad, except Lina the youngest, who fixed her large black eyes as soft as velvet on him, and exclaimed, "Oh, how pretty he is -- our new flower boy!" The rest all burst out laughing, and the eldest pointed out that a princess ought never to lower herself by looking at a garden boy. Now Michael knew quite well what had happened to all the princes, but notwithstanding, the beautiful eyes of the princess Lina inspired him with a violent longing to try his fate. Unhappily he did not dare to come forward, being afraid that he should only be jeered at, or even turned away from the castle on account of his impudence. V. Nevertheless, the Star Gazer had another dream. The lady in the golden dress appeared to him once more, holding in one hand two young laurel trees, a cherry laurel and a rose laurel, and in the other hand a little golden rake, a little golden bucket, and a silken towel. She thus addressed him, "Plant these two laurels in two large pots, rake them over with the rake, water them with the bucket, and wipe them with the towel. When they have grown as tall as a girl of fifteen, say to each of them, 'My beautiful laurel, with the golden rake I have raked you, with the golden bucket I have watered you, with the silken towel I have wiped you.' Then after that ask anything you choose, and the laurels will give it to you." Michael thanked the lady in the golden dress, and when he woke he found the two laurel bushes beside him. So he carefully obeyed the orders he had been given by the lady. The trees grew very fast, and when they were as tall as a girl of fifteen he said to the cherry laurel, "My lovely cherry laurel, with the golden rake I have raked thee, with the golden bucket I have watered thee, with the silken towel I have wiped thee. Teach me how to become invisible." Then there instantly appeared on the laurel a pretty white flower, which Michael gathered and stuck into his buttonhole. VI. That evening, when the princesses went upstairs to bed, he followed them barefoot, so that he might make no noise, and hid himself under one of the twelve beds, so as not to take up much room. The princesses began at once to open their wardrobes and boxes. They took out of them the most magnificent dresses, which they put on before their mirrors, and when they had finished, turned themselves all round to admire their appearances. Michael could see nothing from his hiding place, but he could hear everything, and he listened to the princesses laughing and jumping with pleasure. At last the eldest said, "Be quick, my sisters, our partners will be impatient." At the end of an hour, when the Star Gazer heard no more noise, he peeped out and saw the twelve sisters in splendid garments, with their satin shoes on their feet, and in their hands the bouquets he had brought them. "Are you ready?" asked the eldest. "Yes," replied the other eleven in chorus, and they took their places one by one behind her. Then the eldest princess clapped her hands three times and a trap door opened. All the princesses disappeared down a secret staircase, and Michael hastily followed them. As he was following on the steps of the princess Lina, he carelessly trod on her dress. "There is somebody behind me," cried the princess; "they are holding my dress." "You foolish thing," said her eldest sister, "you are always afraid of something. It is only a nail which caught you." VII. They went down, down, down, till at last they came to a passage with a door at one end, which was only fastened with a latch. The eldest princess opened it, and they found themselves immediately in a lovely little wood, where the leaves were spangled with drops of silver which shone in the brilliant light of the moon. They next crossed another wood where the leaves were sprinkled with gold, and after that another still, where the leaves glittered with diamonds. At last the Star Gazer perceived a large lake, and on the shores of the lake twelve little boats with awnings, in which were seated twelve princes, who, grasping their oars, awaited the princesses. Each princess entered one of the boats, and Michael slipped into that which held the youngest. The boats glided along rapidly, but Lina's, from being heavier, was always behind the rest. "We never went so slowly before," said the princess; "what can be the reason?" "I don't know," answered the prince. "I assure you I am rowing as hard as I can." On the other side of the lake the garden boy saw a beautiful castle splendidly illuminated, whence came the lively music of fiddles, kettledrums, and trumpets. In a moment they touched land, and the company jumped out of the boats; and the princes, after having securely fastened their barks, gave their arms to the princesses and conducted them to the castle. VIII. Michael followed, and entered the ballroom in their train. Everywhere were mirrors, lights, flowers, and damask hangings. The Star Gazer was quite bewildered at the magnificence of the sight. He placed himself out of the way in a corner, admiring the grace and beauty of the princesses. Their loveliness was of every kind. Some were fair and some were dark; some had chestnut hair, or curls darker still, and some had golden locks. Never were so many beautiful princesses seen together at one time, but the one whom the cow-boy thought the most beautiful and the most fascinating was the little princess with the velvet eyes. With what eagerness she danced! Leaning on her partner's shoulder she swept by like a whirlwind. Her cheeks flushed, her eyes sparkled, and it was plain that she loved dancing better than anything else. The poor boy envied those handsome young men with whom she danced so gracefully, but he did not know how little reason he had to be jealous of them. The young men were really the princes who, to the number of fifty at least, had tried to steal the princesses' secret. The princesses had made them drink something of a philter, which froze the heart and left nothing but the love of dancing. IX. They danced on till the shoes of the princesses were worn into holes. When the cock crowed the third time the fiddles stopped, and a delicious supper was served by negro boys, consisting of sugared orange flowers, crystallized rose leaves, powdered violets, cracknels, wafers, and other dishes, which are, as everyone knows, the favorite food of princesses. After supper, the dancers all went back to their boats, and this time the Star Gazer entered that of the eldest princess. They crossed again the wood with the diamond-spangled leaves, the wood with gold-sprinkled leaves, and the wood whose leaves glittered with drops of silver, and as a proof of what he had seen, the boy broke a small branch from a tree in the last wood. Lina turned as she heard the noise made by the breaking of the branch. "What was that noise?" she said. "It was nothing," replied her eldest sister; "it was only the screech of the barn owl that roosts in one of the turrets of the castle." While she was speaking Michael managed to slip in front, and running up the staircase, he reached the princesses' room first. He flung open the window, and sliding down the vine which climbed up the wall, found himself in the garden just as the sun was beginning to rise, and it was time for him to set to his work. X. That day, when he made up the bouquets, Michael hid the branch with the silver drops in the nosegay intended for the youngest princess. When Lina discovered it she was much surprised. However, she said nothing to her sisters, but as she met the boy by accident while she was walking under the shade of the elms, she suddenly stopped as if to speak to him; then, altering her mind, went on her way. The same evening the twelve sisters went again to the ball, and the Star Gazer again followed them and crossed the lake in Lina's boat. This time it was the prince who complained that the boat seemed very heavy. "It is the heat," replied the princess. "I, too, have been feeling very warm." During the ball she looked everywhere for the gardener's boy, but she never saw him. As they came back, Michael gathered a branch from the wood with the gold-spangled leaves, and now it was the eldest princess who heard the noise that it made in breaking. "It is nothing," said Lina; "only the cry of the owl which roosts in the turrets of the castle." XI. As soon as she got up she found the branch in her bouquet. When the sisters went down she stayed a little behind and said to the cow-boy, "Where does this branch come from?" "Your Royal Highness knows well enough," answered Michael. "So you have followed us?" "Yes, princess." "How did you manage it? We never saw you." "I hid myself," replied the Star Gazer quietly. The princess was silent a moment, and then said, "You know our secret! Keep it. Here is the reward of your discretion." And she flung the boy a purse of gold. "I do not sell my silence," answered Michael, and he went away without picking up the purse. For three nights Lina neither saw nor heard anything extraordinary; on the fourth she heard a rustling among the diamond-spangled leaves of the wood. That day there was a branch of the trees in her bouquet. She took the Star Gazer aside, and said to him in a harsh voice, "You know what price my father has promised to pay for our secret?" "I know, princess," answered Michael. "Don't you mean to tell him?" "That is not my intention." "Are you afraid?" "No, princess." "What makes you so discreet, then?" But Michael was silent. XII. Lina's sisters had seen her talking to the little garden boy, and jeered at her for it. "What prevents your marrying him?" asked the eldest. "You would become a gardener too; it is a charming profession. You could live in a cottage at the end of the park, and help your husband to draw up water from the well, and when we get up you could bring us our bouquets." The princess Lina was very angry, and when the Star Gazer presented her bouquet, she received it in a disdainful manner. Michael behaved most respectfully. He never raised his eyes to her, but nearly all day she felt him at her side without ever seeing him. One day she made up her mind to tell everything to her eldest sister. "What!" said she, "this rogue knows our secret, and you never told me! I must lose no time in getting rid of him." "But how?" "Why, by having him taken to the tower with the dungeons, of course." For this was the way that in old times beautiful princesses got rid of people who knew too much. But the astonishing part of it was that the youngest sister did not seem at all to relish this method of stopping the mouth of the gardener's boy, who, after all, had said nothing to their father. XIII. It was agreed that the question should be submitted to the other ten sisters. All were on the side of the eldest. Then the youngest sister declared that if they laid a finger on the little garden boy, she would herself go and tell their father the secret of the holes in their shoes. At last it was decided that Michael should be put to the test; that they would take him to the ball, and at the end of supper would give him the philter which was to enchant him like the rest. They sent for the Star Gazer, and asked him how he had contrived to learn their secret; but still he remained silent. Then, in commanding tones, the eldest sister gave him the order they had agreed upon. He only answered, " I will obey." He had really been present, invisible, at the council of princesses, and had heard all; but he had make up his mind to drink of the philter, and sacrifice himself to the happiness of her he loved. Not wishing, however, to cut a poor figure at the ball by the side of the other dancers, he went at once to the laurels, and said, "My lovely rose laurel, with the golden rake I have raked thee, with the golden bucket I have watered thee, with a silken towel I have dried thee. Dress me like a prince." A beautiful pink flower appeared. Michael gathered it, and found himself in a moment clothed in velvet, which was as black as the eyes of the little princess, with a cap to match, a diamond aigrette, and a blossom of the rose laurel in his buttonhole. Thus dressed, he presented himself that evening before the Duke of Beloeil, and obtained leave to try and discover his daughters' secret. He looked so distinguished that hardly anyone would have known who he was. XIV. The twelve princesses went upstairs to bed. Michael followed them, and waited behind the open door till they gave the signal for departure. This time he did not cross in Lina's boat. He gave his arm to the eldest sister, danced with each in turn, and was so graceful that everyone was delighted with him. At last the time came for him o dance with the little princess. She found him the best partner in the world, but he did not dare to speak a single word to her. When he was taking her back to her place she said to him in a mocking voice, "Here you are at the summit of your wishes. You are being treated like a prince." "Don't be afraid," replied the Star Gazer gently. "You shall never be a gardener's wife." The little princess stared at him with a frightened face, and he left her without waiting for an answer. When the satin slippers were worn through the fiddles stopped, and the negro boys set the table. Michael was placed next to the eldest sister, and opposite to the youngest. They gave him the most exquisite dishes to eat, and the most delicate wines to drink; and in order to turn his head more completely, compliments and flattery were heaped on him from every side. But he took care not to be intoxicated, either by the wine or the compliments. XV. At last the eldest sister made a sign, and one of the black pages brought in a large golden cup. "The enchanted castle has no more secrets for you," she said to the Star Gazer. "Let us drink to your triumph." He cast a lingering glance at the little princess, and without hesitation lifted the cup. "Don't drink!" suddenly cried out the little princess; "I would rather marry a gardener." And she burst into tears. Michael flung the contents .of the cup behind him, sprang over the table, and fell at Lina's feet. The rest of the princes fell likewise at the knees of the princesses, each of whom chose a husband and raised him to her side. The charm was broken. The twelve couples embarked in the boats, which crossed back many times in order to carry over the other princes. Then they all went through the three woods, and when they had passed the door of the underground passage a great noise was heard, as if the enchanted castle was crumbling to the earth. They went straight to the room of the Duke of Beloeil, who had just awoke. Michael held in his hand the golden cup, and he revealed the secret of the holes in the shoes. "Choose, then," said the duke, "whichever you prefer." "My choice is already made," replied the garden boy, and he offered his hand to the youngest princess, who blushed and lowered her eyes. XVI. The princess Lina did not become a gardener's wife; on the contrary, it was the Star Gazer who became a prince. But before the marriage ceremony the princess insisted that her lover should tell her how he came to discover the secret. So he showed her the two laurels which had helped him, and she, like a prudent girl, thinking they gave him too much advantage over his wife, cut them off at the root and threw them in the fire. And this is why the country girls go about singing: Nous n'irons plus au bois, Les lauriers sont coupés, and dancing in summer by the light of the moon. Source: Andrew Lang, The Red Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1895), pp. 1-12 . Lang does not identify the specific source of this story. However, in his preface to the collection he notes that some of the tales were "adapted" from the long stories of Madame d'Aulnoy. Marie-Catherine d'Aulnoy (ca. 1650-1705) was a prolific writer of literary fairy tales. The current tale's literary style, Belgian place names, and French-language verses offer strong evidence that Lang used one of d'Aulnoy's longer works as a basis for this retelling. Note also that the following story, "The Slippers of the Twelve Princesses," collected in Romania, bears a very strong resemblance to the current one. This should be no surprise, as d'Aulnoy's stories were read and retold across Europe. The motif of the princess sleeping on a pea, covered by twenty mattresses, is best known in Hans Christian Andersen's tale The Princess on the Pea (type 704). Return to the table of contents . The Slippers of the Twelve Princesses Romania I. Once on a time, in the good old times, there lived a cow-herd, who had neither father nor mother. He was called Jonica, that is to say Johnnie, but people had given him the name of Gura Casca (open mouth) because when he led his cows to pasture, he bellowed at every thing which he met on the way. Otherwise he was really a very pretty boy, his face was fair, and his, eyes as blue as a morsel of the sky, with hair curling, and as yellow as the rays of the sun. The young girls of the village teased him sadly. "Hé! Hé! Jonica, where are you going with your open mouth?" "What does that matter to you?" he would reply tranquilly, and pass on his way. Though only a cow-herd, he was sufficiently proud of his good looks, and he knew quite well the difference between beauty and ugliness, so the young peasant girls with their faces and throats tanned by the sun, their large hands red and cracked, their feet shod in "opinci" (a rough sort of sandal) or other common leather, were not at all to his mind. He had heard tell, that, down there, a long way off, in the towns, the young girls were quite different; that they had throats as white as alabaster, pink cheeks, delicate and soft hands, their small feet covered by satin slippers, that in short they were clad in robes of silk and gold, and were called princesses. So that, while his comrades only sought to please some rustic villager, he dreamed, neither more nor less, that he should marry a princess II. One noon-day in the middle of August, when the sun was so scorching that even the flies did not know where to put themselves, Jonica sat down under the shadow of an oak to eat his mammaliga (thick Indian meal porridge) and a morsel of sheep's milk cheese; seeing that his flock was lying peaceably about, he stretched himself at full length, and was soon asleep. He had a charming dream! A zina , a fairy, appeared to him, beautiful as the day, fresh as a rose, and clad in a robe sparkling with diamonds. She said to him, "There is a country where precious stones grow; go to the court of the emperor who reigns there, and you will marry a princess." In the evening, when he took his cows back to the stable, Jonica recounted his dream to several of his friends, who freely laughed at him. But the words of the zina had such an influence on him, that he laughed himself at the ridicule of which he was the object. The next day, at the same hour, and the same place, our cow-herd came to take his siesta. He had the same dream; and the same fairy, more radiant than ever, appeared again to him, and repeated, "There is a country where precious stones grow; go to the court of the emperor who reigns there and you will marry a princess." Jonica again repeated his dream, and it was again turned into ridicule. "What does it matter to me," said Jonica, "if they laugh? I know one thing, that if that fairy appears again to me, I'll follow her advice." On the following day he had the same dream, he got up joyfully, and in the evening they heard him in the village singing, "I quit the cows and calves, or I am going to marry the daughter of an emperor." His master, who overheard him, became thoughtful, but Jonica said to him, "You may do, and think as you like, but it is decided! I am going away!" He began to make his preparations, and in the morning he left. The people of the village held their sides with laughing, when they saw him with his little bundle on a stick, slung across his shoulder, descend the hill, traverse the plain, and then slowly disappear, in the dim distance. III. In those days, people did say that there was really a country where precious stones grew, as grass, plants, and flowers grow in other places. It was said that the emperor of these parts had twelve daughters: twelve princesses, the one prettier than the other, but all as proud as they were beautiful. It was said also, that they only went to sleep at sunrise, and got up at midday. They lived altogether in one large room of the palace, and slept in beds of gold, encrusted with flowers of diamonds and emeralds. When the princesses retired in the evening, the nine doors of their apartment were locked outside with nine padlocks. It was impossible for them to get out, and yet each night something very extraordinary took place. The satin slippers of the twelve princesses, were literally worn out each morning. One might have thought that the daughters of the emperor had danced all night. When they were questioned, they declared that they knew nothing, and could understand nothing about it. No one could explain this strange fact, for, notwithstanding the greatest watchfulness, not the least noise had ever been heard in the chamber of the princesses, after they had retired to rest. The emperor, their father, was most perplexed, and determined, at any price, to penetrate this mystery. He had a trumpet sounded, and it was published throughout all the country, that if any one succeeded in finding out, by what means his daughters, the princesses, wore out their slippers in a single night, he might choose from amongst them, his wife. At this news, a great number of emperors' sons, and kings' sons, presented themselves to explore this adventure. They hid themselves behind a great curtain in the chamber of the princesses. But once there, no one ever heard any more of them, and they never reappeared. Our Jonica, who arrived just then at the court of the emperor, heard talk of all these matters, and succeeded in being taken into the service of one of the imperial gardeners, who had been obliged to send away one of his best helps. His new master did not find him very intelligent, but he was convinced that his curling light hair and good looks, would make him acceptable to the princesses. Thus his daily duty, then, was each morning to present a bouquet to the daughters of the emperor. Jonica posted himself at their door, at the hour of their awakening, and as each came forth, he presented her with a bouquet. They found the flowers very beautiful, but disdained to cast a look or smile on poor Jonica, who remained there more than ever, Gura Casca , open-mouthed. Lina, alone, the youngest, the most graceful, and the prettiest of the princesses, let fall by hazard on him, a look as soft as velvet. Ah! my sisters," cried she, "how good looking our young gardener is!" They burst into mocking laughter, and the eldest remarked to Lina, that it was unbecoming a princess to lower her eyes to a valet. Nevertheless, Jonica intoxicated by the looks and the beauty of Lina, thought of the promise of the emperor, and it entered into his head to try and discover the mystery of the slippers. He did not mention it to any one though, for he was afraid that the emperor might hear of it, be angry, and have him driven away from court, as a punishment for his audacity. IV. While these thoughts were passing through his brain, Jonica dreamed again of the fairy with the sparkling robe. She held in her right hand two small laurel branches, one was as red as a cherry, and the other like a rose; in her left hand was a little golden spade, a watering can of the same metal, and a silken veil. She gave all these to Jonica, saying, "Plant these two laurels in large boxes, turn over the earth with this spade, water them with this watering can, and wipe them with this silken veil. When they have grown three feet high, say to each separately, 'Beautiful laurels, with a golden spade I have dug you, with a golden watering can I have watered you, and with a silken veil I have wiped you.' This said, you can ask anything you wish, and it will be accorded you." When Jonica awoke he found the two laurels and the other objects on the table, and fell on his knees to thank the good fairy. He at once began to carry out her instructions. The shrubs grew rapidly, and when they had attained the necessary height, he went to the cherry laurel, and said, "Beautiful cherry laurel, with a golden spade I have dug you, with a golden can I have watered you, with a silken veil I have wiped you; grant me in exchange, the gift of becoming invisible whenever I desire." Immediately he saw grow out from the laurel, a beautiful white flower. He gathered it, placed it in his buttonhole, and at once became invisible. When night arrived, the princesses went up to their bedroom, and Jonica, barefooted, so as to make no noise, glided up behind them, and hid himself underneath one of the twelve beds. Then, instead of preparing themselves to go to bed, each of the princesses opened a wardrobe, and took out their richest dresses and finest jewels. Each assisting the other, they dressed en grande toilette . Jonica could see nothing from his hiding place, but he heard them laugh, and dance with joy. The eldest, who seemed to have great authority over them, hurried them, and kept exclaiming, "Be quick, my sisters, our dancers are dying of impatience." At the end of an hour, the. laughing and talking ceased. Jonica carefully put out his head, and saw that the princesses were dressed like fairies. They wore quite new satin slippers, and held in their hands the bouquets which he had offered to them in the morning. They placed themselves one behind the other, and the eldest who was at the head, struck three blows in a peculiar manner, on a certain part of the wall. A door quite invisible opened, and the princesses disappeared. Jonica followed them noiselessly, but by accident he placed his foot on the train of the princess Lina. "There is someone behind me," she cried. "Someone trod on my dress." The eldest turned round quickly, but seeing no one, exclaimed, "How foolish you are Lina, you must have caught it against a nail." The twelve daughters of the emperor, descended, and descended, and descended until they arrived at an underground passage, at the end of which was an iron door with a strong bolt. The eldest opened this, and then they found themselves in an enchanted bower, where the leaves of the trees were in silver, and sparkled in the moonlight. They walked on until they came to a second bower, and here the trees had golden leaves; still on, and then a third bower, where the leaves were of emeralds and rubies and diamonds, and their rays were so bright that one might have thought it was full daylight. The princesses continued their walk, and (Jonica still following), arrived soon on the borders of a large lake. On this lake were twelve boats, and in each boat one of the lost sons of an emperor, who, oar in hand, each waited for a princess. Jonica took his place in the boat of the princess Lina. The boat, being more heavily laden, could not float so quickly as the others, and so was always behind. "I do not know," said Lina to her cavalier, "why we do not go so quickly as at other times, what can be the matter?" "I do not understand it either," said the emperor's son, "for I row with all my force." On the other side of the lake the little gardener perceived a beautiful palace, illuminated a giorno , and heard harmonious sounds of violins, trumpets and cymbals. The emperors' sons each having a princess on his arm entered the palace, and after them came Jonica into a saloon lighted by ten lustres. The walls were immense mirrors, in gold frames set with precious stones. On a centre table a massive golden vase contained an enormous bouquet of flowers which gave forth an exquisite perfume. Poor Jonica was literally dazed and petrified by the sight of so much splendor. When able to look at, and admire the princesses in the midst of this dazzling light, he lost his wits completely, and looked so ardently with his eyes, that one would have thought that he wished to taste them also with his mouth. Some were fair, some were brown, and nearly all of them had let fall their beautiful hair down their pretty white shoulders. Never, even in his dreams, had the poor boy seen such enchantresses. But amongst them all, and above all, it was Lina, who seemed to him the most graceful, the most beautiful, the most intoxicating, with her dark eyes and long hair -- the shade of a raven's wing. And with what fire she danced! Leaning on the shoulder of her cavalier, Lina turned as light as a spindle. Her face was flushed, her eyes shone like two stars, and it was evident that dancing was her great delight. Poor Jonica let fall envious looks on the emperors' sons, and heartily regretted not to be on the same footing, so that he also might have had the right to be cavalier to such beautiful young creatures. All these dancers, to the number of fifty, were emperors' sons who had tried to discover the secret of the princesses. These latter had enticed them to a midnight expedition, and had given them to drink at table, an enchanted beverage, which had frozen their blood, killed in them every sentiment of love, every remembrance, or worldly desire, leaving them only the ardent pleasure of the dance, in the bosom of this splendid palace, become henceforth their eternal habitation. VI. The princesses danced until their white satin slippers were in holes, until the cock had crowed three times. Then the music ceased, black slaves arranged a princely table, which was instantaneously filled with the most succulent meats, and the rarest and most exquisite wines. Each one took his place, and ate and drank at his ease, excepting our poor Gura Casca , who had to content himself with feasting his eyes alone. When the repast was over, the princesses reentered their boat, and Jonica who followed them step by step, arrived with them in the wood with the silver leaves. There, to prove to himself, and to prove also to others, that what he had seen was no dream, Jonica broke off a branch of the tree with the beautiful leaves. The noise which he made, caused Lina to turn round. "What can that be?" said she to her sisters. "Probably," said the eldest, "it is the rustling amongst the branches of some bird, that has its nest in one of the towers of the palace." Jonica then got in advance of the princesses, and mounted rapidly to their chamber, opened the window, and glided silently along the trellis which covered the wall, and began his daily work. While preparing the flowers for the princesses, he hid the branch of silver leaves in the bouquet destined for Lina. Great was the astonishment of the young girl, who asked herself, in vain, how it was possible that the branch could have come there. Without saying anything to her sisters, she went down into the garden, and there, under the shade of a large chestnut tree, she found the gardener. She had for the moment, a great mind to speak to him, but on reflection, thought it better to wait a little, and so passed on her way. When evening arrived, the princesses again returned to the ball, Jonica followed them, and a second time entered Lina's boat. Again the emperor's son complained of the labor required in rowing. "No doubt it is the heat which you feel," replied Lina. All passed as on the previous evening, but this time, on returning, Jonica broke off a branch of the golden leaves. When the daily bouquets were distributed, the princess Lina found, concealed in hers, the golden branch. Remaining a little behind her sisters, and showing the golden branch to Jonica, she asked, "From whence, hadst thou these leaves?" "Your highness knows quite well." "So thou hast followed us?" "Yes, highness." "And how didst thou manage that?" "It is a secret." "We did not see thee." "I was invisible." "At any rate, I see that thou hast penetrated the mystery. Speak of it to no one, and take this purse as the price of thy silence," and she threw to the poor boy, a purse of gold. "I do not sell my silence," said Jonica, with a haughtiness which astonished the princess. "I know how to hold my tongue, without being paid for it." And he walked away, leaving the purse on the ground. The three succeeding days, Lina neither saw nor heard anything particular, during their nocturnal excursions; but the fourth night, there was a distinct rustling in the wood of diamond leaves, and the next morning she found a diamond branch, hidden in her bouquet. Then she was fully convinced that the young gardener knew all their escapades, and calling him to her, she asked "Dost thou know the price, which the emperor, our father, offers for the discovery of our secret?" "I know it, highness." "Then why dost thou not go to him, and betray it?" "I do not wish." "Art thou afraid?" "No, highness." "Then, why wilt thou not speak?" Jonica looked up at her, his eyes full of expression, but did not reply. VII. While Lina was talking with the youth, her sisters were laughing at her, and when she came back they still went on with their ridicule, until she became quite red with anger. "Thou canst marry him," said her sisters, "there is nothing to prevent; thou wilt be the gardener's wife, and thou wilt live in the cottage at the bottom of the garden. Thou canst help thy husband to draw the water from the fountain, and thou canst offer us our daily nosegays." Lina became still more angry, and the weight of her anger fell on poor Jonica. When he again presented her with flowers, she took them with supreme indifference, and treated him with the greatest disdain. The poor fellow could not understand it, for he was always most respectful. He never dared to look her full in the face, and yet she felt he was present with her all day long. At length, she came to the resolution to confide to her sisters all that she knew. "What!" cried they, "this stupid boy has learned our secret, and thou hast kept it from us! We must, at once, absolutely get rid of him." "By what means?" "Have him stabbed, and thrown into a cave." This was the usual way by which troublesome people were disposed of. But Lina would not hear of this, saying that the poor boy had committed no fault. "If you touch a hair of his head," she said, "I will go and confess all to our father the emperor." To tranquilize Lina, it was decided to get Jonica to go again to the ball, and to make him drink the enchanted beverage, which would put him in the same state as the other cavaliers. So they called the young gardener to them, and the eldest sister asked him by what means he had discovered their secret? but he would give them no answer. Then they informed him of the decision which they had come to respecting him. He replied, that he accepted it, and that he would drink willingly the enchanted beverage, so as to become the cavalier of her whom he loved. On the day fixed, wishing to have as fine clothes, and to be able to make as handsome presents as the emperors' sons, Jonica went to the rose laurel, and said "my beautiful laurel, I have dug you with a golden spade, I have watered you with a golden watering can, I have wiped you with a silken veil, grant that, in one moment, I may be as richly dressed as an emperor's son." Immediately he saw a beautiful flower expand, and gathering it, he was at once clad in velvet as dark and soft as Lina's eyes, a toque to match, with an agraffe of diamonds, and a flower in his buttonhole. From being tanned and brown, his complexion became fair and fresh as an infant's and his beauty was marvelous. Even his common, vulgar manner changed completely, and any one might have thought him really an emperor's son. Thus metamorphosed, he presented himself before the emperor, to ask his authority to try in his turn, to unravel the secret of the princesses. He was so changed that the emperor did not recognize him. When the princesses went back to their bedroom, Jonica was waiting for them behind the door After their usual excursion, Jonica gave his arm to the eldest princess, and afterwards danced with each of the sisters successively, and with so much dignity and grace, that they were all enchanted. When it was Lina's turn, he was in raptures; but he did not address a single word to her. While conducting her to her place, the princess said to him, jokingly, "Being treated like an emperor's son, thou must be in blissful happiness." "Never fear, princess," replied he, "you shall not be a gardener's wife." Lina looked at him, half frightened, but he walked away, without waiting for her answer. When the princesses had once more danced until their slippers were in holes, the music ceased, the black slaves prepared the table as usual, and Jonica was placed at the right hand of the eldest princess, and facing Lina. He was served with the most delicate meats, the choicest wines; compliments and praises were showered on him, but he was neither intoxicated by their wines, nor by their flatteries. Presently the eldest princess made a sign, and one of the slaves came forward bearing a massive golden cup. "This enchanted palace has no longer any secrets for thee," cried the princess to Jonica. "Let us drink to your triumph!" The young man casting a tender glance at Lina, raised the cup to his lips. "Do not drink it," she cried impetuously. "Do not drink it, I would rather be a gardener's wife," and she began to weep. Jonica threw the enchanted beverage over his shoulder, cleared the table, and fell on his knees at the feet of the princess Lina. All the other emperors' sons fell each at the feet of their respective princesses, who choosing them for their husbands, held out their hands and raised them from the ground. The charm was broken! The twelve couples crossed the lake in boats, traversed the forests, passed through the cellar, and arrived at the emperor's chamber. Jonica, with the golden cup in his hand, explained to him the mystery of the worn-out slippers. "God give thee life, young man," said the emperor. "Take thy choice from amongst my daughters." "My choice has been made for a long time," said he, taking by the hand the princess Lina, who blushed and could not look up. IX. The princess Lina did not become a gardener's wife, for Jonica became a prince. Before their marriage took place, Lina enquired of him, how he had discovered their secret. Jonica showed her the two laurels. Lina, like an intelligent woman, thought that Jonica would have too great an advantage over her, if he enjoyed the power which was given to him by possessing these shrubs, so she tore the laurels up by their roots and flung them into the fire. A short time afterwards, the marriage took place with imperial splendor. It was followed by festivities which lasted three days and three nights, and the young people lived very happily together, to a good old age. Source: [E. B. Mawer], Roumanian Fairy tales and Legends (London: H. K. Lewis, 1881), pp. 1-20 . Note the strong similarity between this story and the preceding tale "The Twelve Dancing Princesses." The sections are misnumbered in the original. Numbers V and VIII are missing. Return to the table of contents . Dorani Punjab Once upon a time there lived in a city of Hindustan a seller of scents and essences, who had a very beautiful daughter named Dorani. This maiden had a friend who was a fairy, and the two were high in favor with Indra, the king of fairyland, because they were able to sing so sweetly and dance so deftly that no one in the kingdom could equal them for grace and beauty. Dorani had the most lovely hair in the world, for it was like spun gold, and the smell of it was like the smell of fresh roses. But her locks were so long and thick that the weight of it was often unbearable, and one day she cut off a shining tress, and wrapping it in a large leaf, threw it in the river which ran just below her window. Now it happened that the king's son was out hunting, and had gone down to the river to drink, when there floated towards him a folded leaf, from which came a perfume of roses. The prince, with idle curiosity, took a step into the water and caught the leaf as it was sailing by. He opened it, and within he found a lock of hair like spun gold, and from which came a faint, exquisite odor. When the prince reached home that day he looked so sad and was so quiet that his father wondered if any ill had befallen him, and asked what was the matter. Then the youth took from his breast the tress of hair which he had found in the river, and holding it up to the light, replied, "See, my father, was ever hair like this? Unless I may win and marry the maiden that owns that lock I must die!" So the king immediately sent heralds throughout all his dominions to search for the damsel with hair like spun gold; and at last he learned that she was the daughter of the scent-seller. The object of the herald's mission was quickly noised abroad, and Dorani heard of it with the rest; and, one day, she said to her father, "If the hair is mine, and the king requires me to marry his son, I must do so; but, remember, you must tell him that if, after the wedding, I stay all day at the palace, every night will be spent in my old home." The old man listened to her with amazement, but answered nothing, as he knew she was wiser than he. Of course the hair was Dorani's, and heralds soon returned and informed the king, their master, who summoned the scent-seller, and told him that he wished for his daughter to be given in marriage to the prince. The father bowed his head three times to the ground, and replied, "Your highness is our lord, and all that you bid us we will do. The maiden asks this only -- that if, after the wedding, she stays all day at the palace, she may go back each night to her father's house." The king thought this a very strange request; but said to himself it was, after all, his son's affair, and the girl would surely soon get tired of going to and fro. So he made no difficulty, and everything was speedily arranged and the wedding was celebrated with great rejoicings. At first, the condition attaching to his wedding with the lovely Dorani troubled the prince very little, for he thought that he would at least see his bride all day. But, to his dismay, he found that she would do nothing but sit the whole time upon a stool with her head bowed forward upon her knees, and he could never persuade her to say a single word. Each evening she was carried in a palanquin to her father's house, and each morning she vas brought back soon after daybreak; and yet never a sound passed her lips, nor did she show by any sign that she saw, or heard, or heeded her husband. One evening the prince, very unhappy and troubled, was wandering in an old and beautiful garden near the palace. The gardener was a very aged man, who had served the prince's great grandfather; and when he saw the prince he came and bowed himself to him, and said, "Child! child! why do you look so sad? Is aught the matter?" Then the prince replied, "I am sad, old friend, because I have married a wife as lovely as the stars, but she will not speak to me, and I know not what to do. Night after night she leaves me for her father's house, and day after day she sits in mine as though turned to stone, and utters no word, whatever I may do or say." The old man stood thinking for a moment, and then he hobbled off to his own cottage. A little later he came back to the prince with five or six small packets, which he placed in his hands and said, "Tomorrow, when your bride leaves the palace, sprinkle the powder from one of these packets upon your body, and while seeing clearly, you will become yourself invisible. More I cannot do for you, but may all go well!" And the prince thanked him, and put the packets carefully away in his turban. The next night, when Dorani left for her father's house in her palanquin, the prince took out a packet of the magic powder and sprinkled it over himself, and then hurried after her. He soon found that, as the old man had promised, he was invisible to everyone, although he felt as usual, and could see all that passed. He speedily overtook the palanquin and walked beside it to the scent-seller's dwelling. There it was set down, and, when his bride, closely veiled, left it and entered the house, he, too, entered unperceived. At the first door Dorani removed one veil; then she entered another doorway at the end of a passage where she removed another veil; next she mounted the stairs, and at the door of the women's quarters removed a third veil. After this she proceeded to her own room where were set two large basins, one of attar of roses and one of water; in these she washed herself, and afterwards called for food. A servant brought her a bowl of curds, which she ate hastily, and then arrayed herself in a robe of silver, and wound about her strings of pearls, while a wreath of roses crowned her hair. When fully dressed, she seated herself upon a four-legged stool over which was a canopy with silken curtains, these she drew around her, and then called out, "Fly, stool, to the palace of rajah Indra." Instantly the stool rose in the air, and the invisible prince, who had watched all these proceedings with great wonder, seized it by one leg as it flew away, and found himself being borne through the air at a rapid rate. In a short while they arrived at the house of the fairy who, as I told you before, was the favorite friend of Dorani. The fairy stood waiting on the threshold, as beautifully dressed as Dorani herself was, and when the stool stopped at her door she cried in astonishment, "Why, the stool is flying all crooked today! What is the reason of that, I wonder? I suspect that you have been talking to your husband, and so it will not fly straight." But Dorani declared that she had not spoken one word to him, and she couldn't think why the stool flew as if weighed down at one side. The fairy still looked doubtful, but made no answer, and took her seat beside Dorani, the prince again holding tightly one leg. Then the stool flew on through the air until it came to the palace of Indra the rajah. All through the night the women sang and danced before the rajah Indra, whilst a magic lute played of itself the most bewitching music; till the prince, who sat watching it all, was quite entranced. Just before dawn the rajah gave the signal to cease; and again the two women seated themselves on the stool, and, with the prince clinging to the leg, it flew back to earth, and bore Dorani and her husband safely to the scent-seller's shop. Here the prince hurried away by himself past Dorani's palanquin with its sleepy bearers, straight on to the palace; and, as he passed the threshold of his own rooms he became visible again. Then he lay down upon a couch and waited for Dorani's arrival. As soon as she arrived she took a seat and As soon as she arrived she took a seat and remained as silent as usual, with her head bowed on her knees. For a while not a sound was heard, but presently the prince said, "I dreamed a curious dream last night, and as it was all about you I am going to tell it you, although you heed nothing." The girl, indeed, took no notice of his words, but in spite of that he proceeded to relate every single thing that had happened the evening before, leaving out no detail of all that he had seen or heard. And when he praised her singing -- and his voice shook a little -- Dorani just looked at him; but she said naught, though, in her own mind, she was filled with wonder. "What a dream!" she thought. "Could it have been a dream? How could he have learnt in a dream all she had done or said?" Still she kept silent; only she looked that once at the prince, and then remained all day as before, with her head bowed upon her knees. When night came the prince again made himself invisible and followed her. The same things happened again as had happened before, but Dorani sang better than ever. In the morning the prince a second time told Dorani all that she had done, pretending that he had dreamt of it. Directly he had finished Dorani gazed at him, and said, "Is it true that you dreamt this, or were you really there?" "I was there," answered the prince. "But why do you follow me?" asked the girl. "Because," replied the prince, "I love you, and to be with you is happiness." This time Dorani's eyelids quivered; but she said no more, and was silent the rest of the day. However, in the evening, just as she was stepping into her palanquin, she said to the prince, "If you love me, prove it by not following me tonight." And so the prince did as she wished, and stayed at home. That evening the magic stool flew so unsteadily that they could hardly keep their seats, and at last the fairy exclaimed, "There is only one reason that it should jerk like this! You have been talking to your husband!" And Dorani replied, "Yes, I have spoken; oh, yes, I have spoken!" But no more would she say. That night Dorani sang so marvelously that at the end the rajah Indra rose up and vowed that she might ask what she would and he would give it to her. At first she was silent; but, when he pressed her, she answered, "Give me the magic lute." The rajah, when he heard this, was displeased with himself for having made so rash a promise, because this lute he valued above all his possessions. But as he had promised, so he must perform, and with an ill grace he handed it to her. "You must never come here again," said he, "for, once having asked so much, how will you in future be content with smaller gifts?" Dorani bowed her head silently as she took the lute, and passed with the fairy out of the great gate, where the stool awaited them. More unsteadily than before, it flew back to earth. When Dorani got to the palace that morning she asked the prince whether he had dreamt again. He laughed with happiness, for this time she had spoken to him of her own free will; and he replied, "No; but I begin to dream now -- not of what has happened in the past, but of what may happen in the future." That day Dorani sat very quietly, but she answered the prince when he spoke to her; and when evening fell, and with it the time for her departure, she still sat on. Then the prince came close to her and said softly, "Are you not going to your house, Dorani?" At that she rose and threw herself weeping into his arms, whispering gently, "Never again, my lord, never again would I leave thee!" So the prince won his beautiful bride; and though they neither of them dealt any further with fairies and their magic, they learnt more daily of the magic of Love, which one may still learn, although fairy magic has fled away. Source: Andrew Lang, The Olive Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1907), pp. 188-97 . Lang's source: "Major Campbell, Feroshepore." The Punjab region is today divided between Pakistan (65%) and India (35%). Return to the table of contents . Hildur, the Queen of the Elves Iceland Once, in a mountainous district, there lived a certain farmer, whose name and that of his farm have not been handed down to us; so we cannot tell them. He was unmarried, and had a housekeeper named Hildur, concerning whose family and descent he knew nothing whatever. She had all the indoor affairs of the farm under her charge, and managed them wondrous well. All the inmates of the house, the farmer himself to boot, were fond of her, as she was clean and thrifty in her habits, and kind and gentle in speech. Everything about the place flourished exceedingly, but the farmer always found the greatest difficulty in hiring a herdsman; a very important matter, as the well-being of the farm depended not a little on the care taken of the sheep. This difficulty did not arise from any fault of the farmer's own, or from neglect on the part of the housekeeper to the comforts of the servants, but from the fact, that no herdsman who entered his service lived more than a year, each one being without fail found dead in his bed, on the morning of Christmas Day. No wonder, therefore, the farmer found herdsmen scarce. In those times it was the custom of the country to spend the night of Christmas Eve at church, and this occasion for service was looked upon as a very solemn one. But so far was this farm from the church, that the herdsmen, who did not return from their flocks till late in the evening, were unable to go to it on that night until long after the usual time; and as for Hildur, she always remained behind to take care of the house, and always had so much to do in the way of cleaning the rooms and dealing out the rations for the servants, that the family used to come home from church and go to bed long before she had finished her work, and was able to go to bed herself. The more the reports of the death of herdsman after herdsman, on the night of Christmas Eve, were spread abroad, the greater became the difficulty the farmer found in hiring one, although it was never supposed for an instant that violence was used towards the men, as no mark had ever been found on their bodies; and as, moreover, there was no one to suspect. At length the farmer declared that his conscience would no longer let him thus hire men only in order that they might die, so he determined in future to let luck take care of his sheep, or the sheep take care of themselves. Not long after he had made this determination, a bold and hardy-looking man came to him and made him a proffer of his services. The farmer said, "My good friend, I am not in so great need of your services as to hire you." Then the man asked him, "Have you, then, taken a herdsman for this winter?" The farmer said, "No; for I suppose you know what a terrible fate has hitherto befallen every one I have hired." "I have heard of it," said the other, "but the fear of it shall neither trouble me nor prevent my keeping your sheep this winter for you, if you will but make up your mind to take me." But the farmer would not hear of it at first. "For," said he, "it is a pity, indeed, that so fine a fellow as you should lose your chance of life. Begone, if you are wise, and get work elsewhere." Yet still the man declared, again and again, that he cared not a whit for the terrors of Christmas Eve, and still urged the farmer to hire him. At length the farmer consented, in answer to the man's urgent prayer, to take him as herdsman; and very well they agreed together. For everyone, both high and low, liked the man, as he was honest and open, zealous in everything he laid his hands to, and willing to do anyone a good turn, if need were. On Christmas Eve, towards nightfall, the farmer and all his family went (as has been before declared to be the custom) to church, except Hildur, who remained behind to look after household matters, and the herdsman, who could not leave his sheep in time. Late in the evening, the latter as usual returned home, and after having eaten his supper, went to bed. As soon as he was well between the sheets, the remembrance struck him of what had befallen fallen all the former herdsmen in his position on the same evening, and he thought it would be the best plan for him to he awake and thus to be ready for any accident, though he was mighty little troubled with fear. Quite late at night, he heard the farmer and his family return from church, enter the house, and having taken supper, go to bed. Still, nothing happened, except that whenever he closed his eyes for a moment, a strange and deadly faintness stole over him, which only acted as one reason the more for his doing his best to keep awake. Shortly after he had become aware of these feelings, he heard someone creep stealthily up to the side of his bed, and looking through the gloom at the figure, fancied he recognized Hildur the housekeeper. So he feigned to be fast asleep, and felt her place something in his mouth, which he knew instantly to be the bit of a magic bridle, but yet allowed her to fix it on him, without moving. When she had fastened the bridle, she dragged him from his bed with it, and out of the farmhouse, without his being either able or willing to make the least resistance. Then mounting on his back, she made him rise from the ground as if on wings, and rode him through the air, till they arrived at a huge and awful precipice, which yawned, like a great well, down into the earth. She dismounted at a large stone, and fastening the reins to it, leaped into the precipice. But the herdsman, objecting strongly to being tied to this stone all night, and thinking to himself that it would be no bad thing to know what became of the woman, tried to escape, bridle and all, from the stone. This he found, however, to be impossible, for as long as the bit was in his mouth, he was quite powerless to get away. So he managed, after a short struggle, to get the bridle off his head, and having so done, leapt into the precipice, down which he had seen Hildur disappear. After sinking for a long, long time, he caught a glimpse of Hildur beneath him, and at last they came to some beautiful green meadows. From all this, the man guessed that Hildur was by no means a common mortal, as she had before made believe to be, and feared if he were to follow her along these green fields, and she turn round and catch sight of him, he might, not unlikely, pay for his curiosity with his life. So he took a magic stone which he always carried about him, the nature of which was to make him invisible when he held it in his palm, and placing it in the hollow of his hand, ran after her with all his strength. When they had gone some way along the meadows, a splendid palace rose before them, with the way to which Hildur seemed perfectly well acquainted. At her approach a great crowd of people came forth from the doors, and saluted Hildur with respect and joy. Foremost of these walked a man of kingly and noble aspect, whose salutation seemed to be that of a lover or a husband. All the rest bowed to her as if she were their queen. This man was accompanied by two children, who ran up to Hildur, calling her mother, and embraced her. After the people had welcomed their queen, they all returned to the palace, where they dressed her in royal robes, and loaded her hands with costly rings and bracelets. The herdsman followed the crowd, and posted himself where he would be least in the way of the company, but where he could catch sight easily of all that passed, and lose nothing. So gorgeous and dazzling were the hangings of the hall, and the silver and golden vessels on the table, that he thought he had never, in all his life before, seen the like; not to mention the wonderful dishes and wines which seemed plentiful there, and which, only by the look of them, filled his mouth with water, while he would much rather have filled it with something else. After he had waited a little time, Hildur appeared in the hall, and all the assembled guests were begged to take their seats, while Hildur sat on her throne beside the king; after which all the people of the court ranged themselves on each side of the royal couple, and the feast commenced. When it was concluded, the various guests amused themselves, some by dancing, some by singing, others by drinking and revel; but the king and queen talked together, and seemed to the herdsman to be very sad. While they were thus conversing, three children, younger than those the man had seen before, ran in, and clung round the neck of their mother. Hildur received them with all a mother's love, and, as the youngest was restless, put it on the ground and gave it one of her rings to play with. After the little one had played a while with the ring he lost it, and it rolled along the floor towards the herdsman, who, being invisible, picked it up without being perceived, and put it carefully into his pocket. Of course all search for it by the guests was in vain. When the night was far advanced, Hildur made preparations for departure, at which all the people assembled showed great sorrow, and begged her to remain longer. The herdsman had observed, that in one corner of the hall sat an old and ugly woman, who had neither received the queen with joy nor pressed her to stay longer. As soon as the king perceived that Hildur addressed herself to her journey, and that neither his entreaties nor those of the assembly could induce her to stay, he went up to the old woman, and said to her. "Mother, rid us now of thy curse; cause no longer my queen to live apart and afar from me. Surely her short and rare visits are more pain to me than joy." The old woman answered him with a wrathful face. "Never will I depart from what I have said. My words shall hold true in all their force, and on no condition will I abolish my curse." On this the king turned from her, and going up to his wife, entreated her in the fondest and most loving terms not to depart from him. The queen answered, "The infernal power of thy mother's curse forces me to go, and perchance this may be the last time that I shall see thee. For lying, as I do, under this horrible ban, it is not possible that my constant murders can remain much longer secret, and then I must suffer the full penalty of crimes which I have committed against my will." While she was thus speaking the herdsman sped from the palace and across the fields to the precipice, up which he mounted as rapidly as he had come down, thanks to the magic stone. When he arrived at the rock he put the stone into his pocket, and the bridle over his head again, and awaited the coming of the elf queen. He had not long to wait, for very soon afterwards Hildur came up through the abyss, and mounted on his back, and off they flew again to the farmhouse, where Hildur, taking the bridle from his head, placed him again in his bed, and retired to her own. The herdsman, who by this time was well tired out, now considered it safe to go to sleep, which he did, so soundly as not to wake till quite late on Christmas morning. Early that same day the farmer rose, agitated and filled with the fear that, instead of passing Christmas in joy, he should assuredly, as he so often had before, find his herdsman dead, and pass it in sorrow and mourning. So he and all the rest of the family went to the bedside of the herdsman. When the farmer had looked at him and found him breathing, he praised God aloud for his mercy in preserving the man from death. Not long afterwards the man himself awoke and got up. Wondering at his strange preservation the farmer asked him how he had passed the night, and whether he had seen or heard anything. The man replied, "No; but I have had a very curious dream." "What was it?" asked the farmer. Upon which the man related everything that had passed in the night, circumstance for circumstance, and word for word, as well as he could remember. When he had finished his story everyone was silent for wonder, except Hildur, who went up to him and said, "I declare you to be a liar in all that you have said, unless you can prove it by sure evidence." Not in the least abashed, the herdsman took from his pocket the ring which he had picked up on the floor of the hall in Elf-Land, and showing it to her said, "Though my dream needs no proof, yet here is one you will not doubtless deem other than a sure one; for is not this your gold ring, Queen Hildur?" Hildur answered, "It is, no doubt, my ring. Happy man! may you prosper in all you undertake, for you have released me from the awful yoke which my mother-in-law laid, in her wrath, upon me, and from the curse of a yearly murder." And then Hildur told them the story of her life as follows: I was born of an obscure family among the elves. Our king fell in love with me and married me, in spite of the strong disapproval of his mother. She swore eternal hatred to me in her anger against her son, and said to him, "Short shall be your joy with this fair wife of yours, for you shall see her but once a year, and that only at the expense of a murder. This is my curse upon her, and it shall be carried out to the letter. She shall go and serve in the upper world, this queen, and every Christmas Eve shall ride a man, one of her fellow servants, with this magic bridle, to the confines of Elf-Land, where she shall pass a few hours with you, and then ride him back again till his very heart breaks with toil, and his very life leaves him. Let her thus enjoy her queenship." And this horrible fate was to cling to me. until I should either have these murders brought home to me, and be condemned to death, or should meet with a gallant man, like this herdsman, who should have nerve and courage to follow me down into Elf-Land, and be able to prove afterwards that he had been there with me, and seen the customs of my people. And now I must confess that all the former herdsmen were slain by me, but no penalty shall touch me for their murders, as I committed them against my will. And as for you, O courageous man, who have dared, the first of human beings, to explore the realms of Elf-Land, and have freed me from the yoke of this awful curse, I will reward you in times to come, but not now. A deep longing for my home and my loved ones impels me hence. Farewell! With these words Hildur vanished from the sight of the astonished people, and was never seen again. But our friend the herdsman, leaving the service of the farmer, built a farm for himself, and prospered, and became one of the chief men in the country, and always ascribed, with grateful thanks, his prosperity to Hildur, Queen of the Elves. Source: Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 85-95 . This account differs from most type 306 tales in that here the woman who makes the nocturnal trips to a magical realm is herself a supernatural being. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 4, 2022. The Silence Wager: Folktales of Type 1351 The Silence Wager folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 1351 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2021 Contents The Husband and the Wife Who Made a Wager as to Who Would Eat the Pancake (India / China). The Beggar and the Five Muffins (India). Story of the Third Brahman (India). The Farmer, His Wife, and the Open Door (Pakistan). The Silent Couple (Syria). The Opium Eaters and the Open Gate (Turkey). The Hashish Eater and His Bride (Egypt). Sennuccio and Bedovina (Italy). The Wager (Italy). The Porridge Pot (Flanders). The First One to Speak (Denmark). Johnie Blunt (Scotland, Robert Burns). The Barring of the Door (Scotland). Gutmann und Gutweib (Johann Wolfgang von Goethe -- in German ). Link to an article from W. A. Clouston, Popular Tales and Fictions: Their Migrations and Transformations (Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1887), vol. 2, pp. 15-26: The Silent Couple . Link to an article from the American Journal of Philology (1922): The Silence Wager Stories: Their Origin and Diffusion . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Husband and the Wife Who Made a Wager as to Who Would Eat the Pancake India / China A man and his wife had three pancakes. Each ate one, but not being willing to divide the third they agreed that whichever spoke first should forfeit it to the other. Soon after, thieves entered the house; but though the couple saw them neither would make an outcry. The thieves collected their booty and then, emboldened by the house owner's unaccountable silence, picked up the woman to carry her away also. Still the husband made no sign, but the woman could stand it no longer. "Stop, thief!" she cried, then, rebuking her husband, "What a fool you are that for the sake of a pancake you watch these thieves without a sound!" But the husband clapped his hands and said laughing, "Aha! wife, I win the pancake." Source: W. Norman Brown, "The Silence Wager Stories: Their Origin and Their Diffusion," American Journal of Philology , vol. 43 (1922), pp. 295-96 . Source: Brown's source: Édouard Chavannes, "Le mari et sa femme qui avaient fait une convention au sujet d'une galette à manger," Cinq cents contes et apologues extraits du Tripitaka chinois , vol. 2 (Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1911), no. 303, p. 209 . According to Brown, this is the oldest datable version of the "Silence Wager" story. It is from the Book of the Hundred Apologues , carried to China from India by a Buddhist monk named Gunavrddhi in 492 A.D. According to Chavannes, it was composed in India by a monk named Samghasena, probably about 450 A.D. Return to the table of contents . The Beggar and the Five Muffins India In a certain village there lived a poor beggar and his wife. The man used to go out every morning with a clean vessel in his hand, return home with rice enough for the day's meal, and thus they lived on in extreme poverty. One day a poor Mádhava Brahmin invited the pair to a feast, and among Mádhavas muffins ( tôsai ) are always a part of the good things on festive occasions. So during the feast the beggar and his wife had their fill of muffins. They were so pleased with them, that the woman was extremely anxious to prepare some muffins in her own house, and began to save a little rice every day from what her husband brought her for the purpose. When enough had been thus collected she begged a poor neighbor's wife to give her a little black pulse, which the latter -- praised be her charity -- readily did. The faces of the beggar and his wife literally glowed with joy that day, for were they not to taste the long-desired muffins for a second time? The woman soon turned the rice she had been saving, and the black pulse she had obtained form her neighbor into a paste, and mixing it well with a little salt, green chilies, coriander seed, and curds, set it in a pan on the fire. And with her mouth watering all the while, prepared five muffins. By the time her husband had returned from his collection of alms, she was just turning out of the pan the fifth muffin. And when she placed the whole five muffins before him, his mouth, too, began to water. He kept two for himself and two he place before his wife. But what was to be done with the fifth? He did not understand the way out of this difficulty. That half and half made one, and that each could take two and a half muffins was a question too hard for him to solve. The beloved muffins must not be torn in pieces. So he said to his wife that either he or she must take the remaining one. But how were they to decide which should be the lucky one? Proposed the husband, "Let us both shut our eyes and stretch ourselves as if in sleep, each on a verandah on either side of the kitchen. Whoever opens an eye and speaks first gets only two muffins, and the other gets three." So great was the desire of each to get the three muffins, that they both abided by the agreement, and the woman, though her mouth watered for the muffins, resolved to go through the ordeal. She placed the five cakes in a pan and covered it over with another pan. She then carefully bolted the door inside, and asking her husband to go into the east verandah, she lay down in the west one. Sleep she had none, and with closed eyes kept guard over her husband, for if he spoke first, he would have only two muffins, and the other three would come to her share. Equally watchful was her husband over her. Thus passed one whole day -- two -- three! The house was never opened. No beggar came to receive the morning dole. The whole village began to inquire after the missing beggar. What had become of him? What had become of his wife? "See whether his house is locked on the outside and whether he has left us to go to some other village," spoke the gray-heads. So the village watchman came and tried to push the door open, but it would not open. "Surely," said they, "it is locked on the inside! Some great calamity must have happened. Perhaps thieves have entered the house, and after plundering their property, murdered the inmates." "But what property is a beggar likely to have?" thought the village assembly, and not liking to waste time in idle speculations, they sent two watchmen to climb the roof and open the latch from the inside. Meanwhile the whole village -- men, women, and children -- stood outside the beggar's house to see what had taken place inside. The watchmen jumped into the house, and to their horror found the beggar and his wife stretched on opposite verandahs like two corpses. They opened the door, and the whole village rushed in. They too saw the beggar and his wife lying so still that they thought them to be dead. And though the beggar pair had heard everything that passed around them, neither would open an eye or speak, for whoever did it first would get only two muffins! At the public expense of the village, two green litters of bamboo and coconut leaves were prepared on which to remove the unfortunate pair to the cremation ground. "How loving they must have been to have died together like this!" said some gray-beards of the village. In time the cremation ground was reached, and village watchmen had collected a score of dried cow-dung cakes and a bundle of firewood from each house for the funeral pyre. From these charitable contributions two pyres had been prepared, one for the man and one for the woman. The pyre was then lighted, and when the fire approached his leg, the man thought it time to give up the ordeal and to be satisfied with only two muffins. So while the villagers were still continuing the funeral rites, they suddenly heard a voice, "I shall be satisfied with two muffins!" Immediately another voice replied from the woman's pyre, "I have gained the day. Let me have the three!" The villagers were amazed and ran away. One bold man alone stood face to face with the supposed dead husband and wife. He was a bold man, indeed, for when a dead man or a man supposed to have died comes to life, village people consider him to be a ghost. However, this bold villager questioned the beggars until he came to know their story. He then went after the runaways and related to them the whole story of the five muffins, to their great amazement. But what was to be done to the people who had thus voluntarily faced death out of love for muffins? Persons who had ascended the green litter and slept on the funeral pyre could never come back to the village! If they did the whole village would perish. So the elders built a small hut in a deserted meadow outside the village and made the beggar and his wife live there. Ever after that memorable day, our hero and his wife were called the muffin beggar and the muffin beggar's wife, and many old ladies and young children from the village used to bring them muffins in the morning and evening, out of pity for them, for had they not loved muffins so much that they underwent death in life? Source: Mrs. Howard [Georgiana Wolff] Kingscote and Natêsá Sástrî, Tales of the Sun; or, Folklore of Southern India (London: W. H. Allen and Company, 1890), no. 25, pp. 280-84 . Return to the table of contents . Story of the Third Brahman India My name was originally Anantya; now all the world call me Betel Anantya, and I will tell you how this nickname arose. My wife, having been long detained at her father's house, on account of her youth, had cohabited with me but about a month when, going to bed one evening, I happened to say (carelessly, I believe), that all women were babblers. She retorted, that she knew men who were not less babblers than women. I perceived at once that she alluded to myself; and being somewhat piqued at the sharpness of her retort, I said, "Now let us see which of us shall speak first." "Agreed," quoth she; "but what shall be the forfeit?" "A leaf of betel," said I. Our wager being thus made, we both addressed ourselves to sleep, without speaking another word. Next morning, as we did not appear at our usual hour, after some interval, they called us, but got no answer. They again called, and then roared stoutly at the door, but with no success. The alarm began to spread in the house. They began to fear that we had died suddenly. The carpenter was called with his tools. The door of our room was forced open, and when they got in they were not a little surprised to find both of us wide awake, in good health, and at our ease, though without the faculty of speech. My mother was greatly alarmed, and gave loud vent to her grief. All the Brahmans in the village, of both sexes, assembled, to the number of one hundred; and after close examination, every one drew his own conclusion on the accident which was supposed to have befallen us. The greater number were of opinion that it could have arisen only from the malevolence of some enemy who had availed himself of magical incantations to injure us. For this reason, a famous magician was called, to counteract the effects of the witchcraft, and to remove it. As soon as he came, after steadfastly contemplating us for some time, he began to try our pulses, by putting his finger on our wrists, on our temples, on the heart, and on various other parts of the body; and after a great variety of grimaces, the remembrance of which excites my laughter, as often as I think of him, he decided that our malady arose wholly from the effect of malevolence. He even gave the name of the particular devil that possessed my wife and me and rendered us dumb. He added that the devil was very stubborn and difficult to allay, and that it would cost three or four pagodas for the offerings necessary for compelling him to fly. My relations, who were not very opulent, were astonished at the grievous imposition which the magician had laid on them. Yet, rather than we should continue dumb, they consented to give him whatsoever should be necessary for the expense of his sacrifice; and they farther promised that they would reward him for his trouble as soon as the demon by whom we were possessed should be expelled. He was on the point of commencing his magical operations, when a Brahman, one of our friends, who was present, maintained, in opposition to the opinion of the magician and his assistants, that our malady was not at all the effect of witchcraft, but arose from some simple and ordinary cause, of which he had seen several instances, and he undertook to cure us without any expense. He took a chafing-dish filled with burning charcoal, and heated a small bar of gold very hot. This he took up with pincers, and applied to the soles of my feet, then to my elbows, and the crown of my head. I endured these cruel operations without showing the least symptom of pain, or making any complaint; being determined to bear anything, and to die, if necessary, rather than lose the wager I had laid. "Let us try the effect on the woman," said the doctor, astonished at my resolution and apparent insensibility. And immediately taking the bit of gold, well heated, he applied it to the sole of her foot. She was not able to endure the pain for a moment, but instantly screamed out, "Enough!" and turning to me, "I have lost my wager," she said; "there is your leaf of betel." "Did I not tell you," said I, taking the leaf, "that you would be the first to speak out, and that you would prove by your own conduct that I was right in saying yesterday, when we went to bed, that women are babblers?" Everyone was surprised at the proceeding; nor could any of them comprehend the meaning of what was passing between my wife and me; until I explained the kind of wager we had made overnight, before going to sleep. "What!" they exclaimed. "Was it for a leaf of betel that you have spread this alarm through your own house and the whole village? For a leaf of betel that you showed such constancy, and suffered burning from the feet to the head upwards? Never in the world was there seen such folly!" And so, from that time, I have been constantly known by the name of Betel Anantya. Source: W. A. Clouston, The Book of Noodles; or, Fools and the Follies: Stories of Simpletons (London: Elliot Stock, 1888), pp. 181-85 . Link to an earlier printed version of this tale: Betel Anantya ( The Tatler , December 31, 1830, p. 406). Return to the table of contents . The Farmer, His Wife, and the Open Door Pakistan Once upon a time a poor farmer and his wife, having finished their day's labor and eaten their frugal supper, were sitting by the fire, when a dispute arose between them as to who should shut the door, which had been blown open by a gust of wind. "Wife, shut the door!" said the man. "Husband, shut it yourself!" said the woman. "I will not shut it, and you shall not shut it," said the husband; "but let the one who speaks the first word shut it." This proposal pleased the wife exceedingly, and so the old couple, well satisfied, retired in silence to bed. In the middle of the night they heard a noise, and, peering out, they perceived that a wild dog had entered the room, and that he was busy devouring their little store of food. Not a word, however, would either of these silly people utter, and the dog, having sniffed at everything, and having eaten as much as he wanted, went out of the house. The next morning the woman took some grain to the house of a neighbor in order to have it ground into flour. In her absence the barber entered, and said to the husband, "How is it you are sitting here all alone?" The farmer answered never a word. The barber then shaved his head, but still he did not speak; then he shaved off half his beard and half his mustache, but even then the man refrained from uttering a syllable. Then the barber covered him all over with a hideous coating of lampblack, but the stolid farmer remained as dumb as a mute. "The man is bewitched!" cried the barber, and he hastily quitted the house. He had hardly gone when the wife returned from the mill. She, seeing her husband in such a ghastly plight, began to tremble, and exclaimed, "Ah! wretch, what have you been doing?" "You spoke the first word," said the farmer, "so begone, woman, and shut the door." Source: Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 11, pp. 14-15 . Return to the table of contents . The Silent Couple Syria A man of infamous character, one night told his wife to make haste and get supper ready; she accordingly brought to table some dry stale bread. "Why my dear," said he, "who the devil can eat such dry, hard bread as that?" "Get up and moisten it," said she. "No, do you," returned the husband. "I'll be hanged if I do," replied the wife." I'm fatigued, and won't stir an inch." Thus they went on, each growing more and more obstinate, till at length it was determined by the consent of both, that whoever should speak the ?rs word, should instantly get up and moisten the bread. In this interesting situation they remained for a considerable time, when one of the neighbors accidentally came in, who had a sneaking attachment to the lady. They both looked at him attentively, but said nothing. "Good evening," said the visitor. They said nothing. "What's the matter," continued he. Why are you silent?" They said nothing. Whence he conjectured that they had laid a wager to preserve silence. "You are a man," said he to the husband. Why don't you speak?" He said nothing. He kissed his wife, but the man said nothing. He disgraced her, but the man said nothing. His facetious neighbor gave him a blow on the cheek, but the man said nothing. Irritated, he at length went to the justice and complained that he could, not make the man speak. He was committed to prison. Still he said nothing. The next morning he was again brought before the judge, but still said nothing. The judge ordered him to be hanged for contumacy. When the sentence was on the point of being executed, the wife appeared, and in a most pitiable tone exclaimed, " Alas my unfortunate husband!" "You devil," said he, "go home and moisten the bread." Source: William Beloe, Miscellanies: Consisting of Poems, Classical Extracts and Oriental Apologues , vol. 3 (London: F. and C. Rivington, 1795), pp. 54-56 . Beloe's source, as stated in the preface : I became possessed of these tales in the following manner. My friend Dr. Russel brought with him a small volume from Aleppo [Syria], from which, he at different times recited to me so much, that I became impatient to hear more. My importunity finally prevailed, and at various intervals his kindness induced him to dictate, in the best manner he could, from the Arabic, whilst I performed the humble office of scribe. (p. ix) Return to the table of contents . The Opium Eaters and the Open Gate Turkey Certain opium eaters, while walking about, found a sequin. They said, "Let us go to a cook and buy food and eat." So they went and entered a cook shop and said, "Master, give us a sequin's worth of food." The cook prepared all manner of foods and loaded a porter with them. And the opium eaters took him outside the city where there was a tomb [enclosed by four walls]. They entered and sat down, and the porter laid down the food and went away. The opium eaters fell to eating the food, when suddenly one of them said, "The gate is open. Stop, one of you shut the gate, or else other opium eaters will come and trouble us. Even though they be friends, they will do the deeds of foes." One of them replied, "You go and shut the gate," and they began to quarrel. At length one said, "Come, let us agree that the one of us who first speaks shall get up and fasten the gate." They all agreed to this proposal, and left the food and sat quite still. Suddenly a she-dog and fifteen dogs came in. Not one of the opium eaters stirred or spoke, for if one spoke, he would need to get up and shut the gate, so no one spoke. The dogs made an end of the food and ate it all up. Just then another dog leaped in from outside, but no food remained. Now one of the opium eaters had partaken of everything, and some of the food remained about his mouth and on his beard. The newly arrived dog licked up the morsels of food that were on the opium eater's breast, and while he was licking up those about his mouth he took his lip for a piece of meat and bit it. The opium eater did not stir, for he said to himself, "They will ask me to shut the gate," but to ease his soul, he muttered "Ouch!" inwardly cursing the dog. When the other opium eaters heard him make that noise they said, "Get up and fasten the gate!" He replied, "Caution follows loss. Now that the food is gone and my lip is wounded, what need is there to shut the gate? Through negligence and folly you have let these very good things slip from your hands." And crying "Woe! Alas!" they went each in a different direction. Source: Sheykh-Zada, "The Lady's Fourteenth Story," The History of the Forty Vezirs; or, The Story of the Forty Morns and Eves , translated by E. J. W. Gibb (London: George Redway, 1886), pp. 171-72 . Title provided and language cautiously modernized by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Hashish Eater and His Bride Egypt No longer ago than a week ... I had a house filled with every comfort, plenty of money, and a wife who was a miracle of beauty. One day this charming better half of myself, after having passed all the day in the bath, returned from it looking so clean, fresh, and rosy, that my head, where the hashish which I had been taking for the last hour and a half was breeding disorder, became on fire and was lost. My eyes grew intoxicated with my wife, as if I had then beheld her beauty for the first time, and my heart bounded like the holy waves of the Nile during a storm. "Dear cousin," I cried, for she was my cousin as well as my wife, "how captivating you are today! I am over head and ears in love with you again!" At this instant the hashish suggested to me to divorce her immediately in order to contract a new marriage and taste again the bliss of a first union. No sooner said than done; I pronounced the prescribed phrase, and the next day I celebrated a new marriage with her. When the festivities were over, I conducted my relations and guests to the door, which, from absence of mind, I had forgotten to shut. "Dear cousin," said my wife to me when we were alone, "go and shut the street door." "It would be strange indeed if I did," I replied. "Am I just made a bridegroom, clothed in silk, wearing a shawl and a dagger set with diamonds, and am I to go and shut the door? Why, my dear, you are crazy; go and shut it yourself!" "Oh indeed!" she exclaimed; "am I, young, robed in a satin dress, with lace and precious stones, am I to go and shut the courtyard door? No, indeed, it is you who have become crazy, and not I. Come, let us make a bargain," she continued; "and let the first who speaks get up and bar the door." "Agreed," I replied, and straightway I became mute, and she too was silent, while we both sat down, dressed as we were in our nuptial attire, looking at each other, and seated on opposite sofas. We remained thus for one -- two -- hours. During this time thieves happening to pass by, and seeing the door open, entered and laid hold of whatever came to their hand. We heard footsteps in the house, but opened not our mouths; the robbers came even into our room, and saw us seated, motionless and indifferent to all that took place. They continued therefore their pillage, collecting together everything valuable, and even dragging away the carpets from beneath us; they then laid hands on our own persons, which they despoiled of every article worth taking, while we, in the fear of losing our wager, said not a word. Having thus cleared the house, the thieves departed quietly, but we remained on our seats, saying not a syllable. Towards morning a police officer came round on his tour of inspection, and, seeing our door opened, walked in. Having searched all the rooms and found no one, he entered the apartment where we were seated, and inquired the meaning of what he saw. Neither my wife nor I would condescend to reply. The officer became angry, and ordered our heads to be cut off. The executioner's sword was just about to perform its office, when my wife cried out, "Sir, he is my husband, spare him!" "Oh, oh!" I exclaimed, overjoyed and clapping my hands, "you have lost the wager; go, shut the door." Source: Julia Pardoe, "Soliman Bey and the Three Storytellers: The Third Storyteller," The Thousand and One Days: A Companion to the "Arabian Nights" (London: William Lay, 1857), pp. 55-57 . Return to the table of contents . Sennuccio and Bedovina Italy One evening Sennuccio and his wife Bedovina were seated near the door of the house to take the air a little, for the season was very warm. Said Sennuccio to his wife, "Bedovina, shut the door, for now it is time for us to get to bed." To this request she made reply that he might shut the door himself; and as they went on thus disputing, without either one consenting to shut the door, Sennuccio said,"Bedovina, let us make a bargain, that the one who shall speak first shall shut the door." The wife, who was both lazy by nature and obstinate by habit, agreed to this; so Sennuccio and Bedovina sat on, lazy wretches as they were, neither one daring to speak for fear of incurring the penalty of having to shut the door. The good woman, however, soon began to weary of the sport, and growing heavy with sleep she left her husband sitting on a bench, and, having taken off her clothes, went to bed. A short time after this there passed through the street the serving-man of a certain gentleman, who was going back to his house. At this moment it chanced that the candle in the lantern which he carried went out, and, observing that Sennuccio's house was yet open, he went in and said, "Ho, there! is anyone within? Give me a light for my candle." But no one answered him. The servant, having gone a little further into the house, observed Sennuccio, who was sitting with his eyes wide open upon the bench, and made bold to ask him for a light, but the lazy fellow vouchsafed not a word in reply. Whereupon the servant, deeming that Sennuccio was fast asleep, took him by the hand and began to jog him, saying, "Good brother, what ails you? Answer me quick." But Sennuccio was not asleep, and only held his tongue through fear of being amerced in the penalty of having to shut the door, so he kept silent. Then the servant went on a little further, and remarked a faint light on a hearth where the embers were yet alive, and when he entered the inner room he found no one there save only Bedovina, who was lying alone in the bed. He called to her and shook her roughly more than once, but she, like her husband, in order not to incur the penalty of having to shut the door, would neither speak nor stir. The servant, having taken a good look at her, found her comely, though miserly of her words, so he laid himself softly down beside her, and though not over well furnished for the task he undertook, contrived to accomplish it, Bedovina keeping dead silence all the while and quietly allowing him to do what he would with her, though her husband saw all that went on. And when the young man had gone his way Bedovina got out of bed, and, going to the door, found there her husband, who was yet awake, and by way of chiding him thus spake: "A fine husband you are, certes! You have left me lying all night with the door wide open, giving thereby free course for any lewd fellows to come into the house, and never lifting your hand to keep them back. You of a truth ought to be made to drink out of a shoe with a hole in it." Whereupon the lazy rascal rose to his feet and gave answer to her in this wise: "Now go and shut the door, little fool that you are! Now I am equal with you. You, forsooth, thought you were going to make me shut the door, and you find yourself properly tricked. This is the way headstrong folk are always punished." Bedovina, seeing that she had indeed lost the wager she had made, and at the same time enjoyed a merry night, shut the door forthwith, and went to bed with her cuckoldly knave of a husband. Source: Giovanni Francesco Straparola, The Facetious Nights of Straparola , vol. 3 (London: Privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901), pp. 101-105 . This episode is part of a longer tale ( night 8, story 1 ) from Straparola's famous collection, first published between 1550 and 1553. Return to the table of contents . The Wager Italy There was once a husband and a wife. The former said one day to the latter, "Let us have some fritters." She replied, "What shall we do for a frying pan?" "Go and borrow one from my godmother." "You go and get it; it is only a little way off." "Go yourself; I will take it back when we are done with it." So she went and borrowed the pan, and when she returned said to her husband, "Here is the pan, but you must carry it back." So they cooked the fritters, and after they had eaten, the husband said, "Now let us go to work, both of us, and the one who speaks first shall carry back the pan." Then she began to spin and he to draw his thread -- for he was a shoemaker -- and all the time keeping silence, except that when he drew his thread he said, " Leulerò, leulerò ;" and she, spinning, answered, " Piciciì, picicì, piciciò ." And they said not another word. Now there happened to pass that way a soldier with a horse, and he asked a woman if there was any shoemaker in that street. She said that there was one nearby, and took him to the house. The soldier asked the shoemaker to come and cut his horse a girth, and he would pay him. The latter made no answer but, " Leulerò, leulerò ;" and his wife, " Piciciì, picicì, piciciò ." Then the soldier said, "Come and cut my horse a girth, or I will cut your head off!" The shoemaker only answered, " Leulerò, leulerò ;" and his wife, " Piciciì, picicì, piciciò ." Then the soldier began to grow angry, and seized his sword and said to the shoemaker, "Either come and cut my horse a girth, or I will cut your head off!" But to no purpose. The shoemaker did not wish to be the first one to speak, and only replied, " Leulerò, leulerò ;" and his wife, " Piciciì, picicì, piciciò ." Then the soldier got mad in good earnest, seized the shoemaker's head, and was going to cut it off. When his wife saw that, she cried out, "Ah! don't, for mercy's sake!" "Good!" exclaimed her husband. "Now you go and carry the pan back to my godmother, and I will go and cut the horse's girth." And so he did, and won the wager. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 95, pp. 284-85 . Return to the table of contents . The Porridge Pot Flanders Once upon a time there were a man and a woman. One evening they did not know what to eat. Finally the man spoke, "Wife, let us eat porridge." "No," said the woman, "for then tomorrow I would have to wash out the porridge pot, and I won't do that." "I won't do it either," said the man, and they fell to quarreling who would have to wash out the porridge pot. Finally they agreed that the first one of them to speak would have to wash it out. They ate their porridge and went to bed. The next morning neither of them said anything about getting up. Seven o'clock came, eight o'clock, even twelve o'clock, and the two still lay in bed. The neighbors were concerned and said to one another, "Robbers must have come and murdered both of them." So they broke down the door, entered the bedroom, and told them to get up, but received no answer. Then one of the neighbors said, "Wait, let's fetch the priest so they can say their confessions." The priest came, but they refused to say their confessions, remaining as still as mice. The priest went home, and the two remained lying there until evening, and neither said a word. Then the priest returned and asked, "Have they said anything yet?" "No," replied the neighbors. "Then stay here and care for them!" said the priest. "Yes, and who is going to pay us for it?" asked the neighbors. The priest answered, "You'll be paid. There is a good coat hanging on the wall over there. Take it and sell it, and then you'll have your money." With that the woman cried out with anger, "What? You want to take my coat? Take your own things, but leave other people's things to them." "Aha," said the man. "Now go and wash out the porridge pot!" And so the woman had to wash out the porridge pot. Source: Johannes Wilhelm Wolf, Deutsche Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1843), no. 40, pp. 158-59 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The First One to Speak Denmark There was a shoemaker who was very fond of pancakes. One day he asked his wife if she would make pancakes for dinner. Yes, she probably could do that, but she did not have a pan to cook them in, and so he himself would have to go and borrow one. He did just that, and his wife made the pancakes. When they had finished eating, the shoemaker told his wife that she should take the pan back. She said no. She did not want to take the borrowed pan back. That was his task. They argued about this, and at last they agreed to proceed with their work, and that the one who spoke first would have to take the pan back. So the shoemaker sat at his bench and sewed at some bellows, and the wife span so furiously that she almost set the spinning wheel on fire. Neither of them said a word. In the meantime, a gentleman came driving by. He lived a little way from the shoemaker's shop and had a pair of boots there to be repaired. He said to his coachman: "Ah, just jump inside and see if my boots are ready, now that we are here right at his door!" The coachman went inside and said: "Good-day. My master says hello and wants to know if his boots are finished." But no one answered. The shoemaker just sat there sewing while whistling: "Whyt! Whyt!" Nothing else happened. The coachman stood there and looked at him, and then he turned to the wife and said: "Listen, my good woman! Why is it that that your husband won't say anything or answer me?" But she just sat there and sang: "Tralalalala! Tralalalala," spinning as fast as she could, so he got no answer from her either. "Then I'll have to go back to my master and tell him what is going on in here." "Well, weren't the boots finished?" "I don't know whether they were finished or not, because there were some crazy people inside: One was whistling, and the other one was singing. Neither of them would answer a word." So the gentleman had to go in there himself. He could probably find out what was going on inside. "I'll teach them to talk," he said. "We'll see what's happening." He came through the door and said: "Good day, cobbler!" Have you finished my boots?" But no, it was just the same: The shoemaker paid no attention to the gentleman. He whistled and sewed and sewed and whistled. It was impossible to know why he was doing this. Then the gentleman turned to the wife, but she just sang " Tralalalala!" at the top of her voice, while her foot was working the treadle. Then the gentleman thought: "This will probably get your mouth going," and with that he took hold of the wife and dragged her from the spinning wheel to the bed. The shoemaker looked at them from the corner of his eye. When he saw that the gentleman was taking her to bed, he became very angry. He jumped up from his stool and shouted: "What do you want with my wife? Can't you leave her alone!" "Now, my dear, you must carry the pan back, because you spoke first!" cried the wife, probably very pleased, because now they both could talk. The gentleman was told what had caused the problem, but whether his boots were finished I do not know. The shoemaker went away with the pan, but that wasn't so bad after all, because he was so very fond of pancakes. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Den der snakkede først," Æventyr fra Jylland, samlede af Folkemunde , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: Karl Schønbergs Boghandel, 1884), no. 24, pp. 182-83 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Den der snakkede først," Æventyr fra Jylland, samlede af Folkemunde , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: Karl Schønbergs Boghandel, 1884), no. 24, pp. 182-83 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2023. Link to an expurgated version of this tale (books.google.com): J. Christian Bay, "The Obstinate Shoemaker," Danish Fairy and Folk Tales (New York and London: Harper and Brothers, 1899), pp. 199-201 . Return to the table of contents . Johnie Blunt Scotland, Robert Burns There liv'd a man in yonder glen, And John Blunt was his name, O; He maks gude maut, and he brews gude ale, And he bears a wondrous fame, O. The wind blew in the hallan ae night, Fu' snell out o'er the moor, O; "Rise up, rise up, auld Luckie," he says, "Rise up and bar the door, O." They made a paction tween them twa, They made it firm and sure, O, Whae'er sud speak the foremost word, Should rise and bar the door, O. Three travellers that had tint their gate, As thro' the hills they foor, O, They airted by the line o' light Fu' straight to Johnie Blunt's door, O. They haurl'd auld Luckie out o' her bed, And laid her on the floor, O; But never a word auld Luckie wad say, For barrin o' the door, O. "Ye've eaten my bread, ye hae druken my ale, And ye'll mak my auld wife a whore, O." "Aha Johnie Blunt! ye hae spoke the first word, Get up and bar the door, O." Source: James Johnson, The Scotish Musical Museum: Consisting of upwards of Six Hundred Songs , now accompanied with copious notes and illustrations of the lyric poetry and music of Scotland by the late William Stenhouse, vol. 4 (Edinburgh: William Blackwood and Sons; London: Thomas Cadell, 1834), no. 365, p. 376 . Return to the table of contents . The Barring of the Door Scotland It fell about the Martinmas time, And a gay time it was then; When our gudewife gat puddings to make, And she's boiled them in the pan. The wind sae cauld blew south and north, And blew intil the floor; Quoth our gudeman to our gudewife, "Get up and bar the door." "My hand is in my hussyskep, Gudeman, as ye may see, An it shouldna be barr'd this hundred year, It's no be barr'd for me!" They made a paction 'tween them twa, They made it firm and sure; That wha should speak the foremost word Should rise and bar the door. Then by there came twa gentlemen At twelve o'clock at night, And they could neither see house nor hall, Nor coal nor candle-light. "Now, whether is this a rich man's house, Or whether is it a poor?" But never a word would ane o' them speak, For barring of the door. And first they ate the white puddings, And then they ate the black; Though muckle thought the gudewife to hersel, Yet ne'er a word she spak. Then said the one unto the other, "Here, man, tak ye my knife, Do ye tak aff the auld man's beard, And I'll kiss the gudewife!" "But there's nae water in the house, And what shall we do then?" "What ails ye at the puddin' broo, That boils into the pan?" 0 up then started our gudeman, And an angry man was he; "Will ye kiss my wife before my e'en, And scaud me wi' puddin' bree?" Then up and started our gudewife, Gied three skips on the floor; "Gudeman! ye've spoke the foremost word -- Get up and bar the door!" Source: William Edmondstoune Aytoun, The Ballads of Scotland , vol. 2 (Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1858), pp. 171-72 . Francis James Child, in his English and Scottish Popular Ballads , vol. 5, part 1 (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1894) gives a background of this ballad, and lists several variants ( no. 275, pp. 96-99 ). Return to the table of contents . Gutmann und Gutweib Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Und morgen fällt St. Martins Fest, Gutweib liebt ihren Mann; Da knetet sie ihm Puddings ein Und bäckt sie in der Pfann'. Im Bette liegen beide nun, Da saust ein wilder West; Und Gutmann spricht zur guten Frau: "Du, riegle die Türe fest." -- "Bin kaum erholt und halb erwarmt, Wie käm' ich da zu Ruh; Und klapperte sie einhundert Jahr, Ich riegelte sie nicht zu." Drauf eine Wette schlossen sie Ganz leise sich ins Ohr: So wer das erste Wörtlein spräch', Der schöbe den Riegel vor. Zwei Wanderer kommen um Mitternacht Und wissen nicht, wo sie stehn, Die Lampe losch, der Herd verglomm, Zu hören ist nichts, zu sehn. "Was ist das für ein Hexen-Ort? Da bricht uns die Geduld!" Doch hörten sie kein Sterbenswort, Des war die Türe schuld. Den weißen Pudding speisten sie, Den schwarzen ganz vertraut; Und Gutweib sagte sich selber viel, Doch keine Silbe laut. Zum andern sprach der eine dann: "Wie trocken ist mir der Hals! Der Schrank, der klafft, und geistig riecht's, Da findet sich's allenfalls. "Ein Fläschchen Schnaps ergreif' ich da, Das trifft sich doch geschickt! Ich bring' es dir, du bringst es mir, Und bald sind wir erquickt." Doch Gutmann sprang so heftig auf Und fuhr sie drohend an: "Bezahlen soll mit teurem Geld, Wer mir den Schnaps verthan!" Und Gutweib sprang auch froh heran, Drei Sprünge, als wär' sie reich: "Du Gutmann sprachst das erste Wort, Nun riegle die Türe gleich!" Source: Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Sämtliche Werke , vol. 1 (Stuttgart: J. G. Cotta, 1893), pp. 151-52 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 20, 2023. The Singing Bone The Singing Bone and other tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 780 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2019 Contents The Singing Bone (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Blue Lily (Spain). The Singing Bones (French Louisiana). Under the Green Old Oak-Tree (Antigua). The Griffin (Italy). The Dead Girl's Bone (Switzerland). The Little Bone (Switzerland). Binnorie (England). Murder Will Out (Iceland). The Silver Plate and the Transparent Apple (Russia). Little Anklebone (Pakistan). The Magic Fiddle (India). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Singing Bone Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm A wild boar was wreaking havoc throughout the country. No one dared venture into the forest where it ran about. With its tusks it ripped to pieces anyone who was bold enough to pursue it and attempt to kill it. Then the king proclaimed that anyone who could kill the boar would receive his daughter for a wife. There were three brothers in the kingdom. The oldest was sly and clever; the second was of ordinary intelligence; but the third and youngest was innocent and slow witted. They wanted to win the princess, so they set forth to seek out the wild boar and kill it. The two oldest ones went together, while the youngest one went by himself. When he entered the woods an old man approached him. He was holding a black lance in his hand, and said to him, "Take this lance and fearlessly attack the boar with it, and you will kill it." And that is what happened. He struck the boar with the lance, and it fell dead to the earth. Then he lifted it onto his shoulder, and cheerfully set off toward home. On the way he came to a house where his brothers were making merry and drinking wine. When they saw him with the boar on his back, they called to him, "Come in and have a drink with us. You must be tired." The innocent simpleton, not thinking about any danger, went inside and told them how he had killed the boar with the black lance, and rejoiced in his good fortune. That evening they returned home together. The two oldest ones plotted to kill their brother. They let him walk ahead of them, and when they came to a bridge just outside the city, they attacked him, striking him dead. They buried him beneath the bridge. Then the oldest one took the boar, carried it to the king, claimed that he had killed it, and received the princess for a wife. Many years passed, but it was not to remain hidden. One day a shepherd was crossing the bridge when he saw a little bone beneath him in the sand. It was so pure and snow-white that he wanted it to make a mouthpiece from, so he climbed down and picked it up. Afterward he made a mouthpiece from it for his horn, and when he put it to his lips to play, the little bone began to sing by itself: Oh, dear shepherd You are blowing on my bone. My brothers struck me dead, And buried me beneath the bridge, To get the wild boar For the daughter of the king. The shepherd took the horn to the king, and once again it sang the same words. After hearing this, the king had his people dig under the bridge, and they soon uncovered the skeleton. The two wicked brothers confessed their crime and were thrown into the water. The murdered brother's bones were laid to rest in a beautiful grave in the churchyard. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Der singende Knochen , Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 1st ed., vol. 1 (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 28, pp. 119-22. In 1819, with the second edition of their Kinder- und Hausmärchen , the Grimms introduced numerous stylistic changes to "The Singing Bone" and reduced the number of brothers in the tale to two. Link to an English translation of the final version of "The Singing Bone." Link to the final version in the original German: "Der singende Knochen," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 7th edition, vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 28, pp. 149-51 . Return to the table of contents . The Blue Lily Spain Valencian Version Once upon a time there was a king who had three sons, to whom he said that he would bequeath his crown to the one that brought him the Blue Lily. Then each of the three princes started off a different way in search of it. The youngest son found the flower, and hid it in his bosom, so that if he met his brothers they should not see it. But they met him in the bed of a dried-up stream, and knowing that he had the flower with him, one said to the other: "What shall we do to get the Lily from him, and so gain the crown?" And the other replied : "Let us kill him." And they did so, burying him in the sand. As they were two, and there was only one flower, they cast lots for it, and the elder gained it. So he went home very delighted, and when he arrived, gave the Lily to his father the king, who proclaimed him heir to the crown. But it happened that a shepherd passed by the spot where the youngest prince had been buried, and he saw a white reed projecting from the ground, so he cut it off and made a flute with it. When he played it, it sang: Play, play, good shepherd; For the Blue Lily's blossom They took my life away, and Hid me in the river's bosom. Then the shepherd went on playing this until he passed before the palace; and the king, hearing the flute, went forth and called the shepherd, and said to him: "Play thy flute before me; I should like to hear it." Then the shepherd entered the palace, and played the flute, and it repeated its song. So the king commanded his sons to be called, and said to the shepherd that he must show them where he had obtained that flute. And the shepherd took them to the place where he had found the white reed, and the king said to his sons: "Have you murdered your brother?" But they declared they had not. Then the king, their father, commanded them to dig at that spot, and they found the lad alive and well, but wanting a finger that he had had when buried, but which had served to make the flute. Then the king punished his two wicked sons, and left the crown to the youngest, who lived and reigned many years, but always without one of his fingers. Source (books.google.com): Fernan Caballero, The Bird of Truth and Other Fairy Tales , translated by J. H. Ingram (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, [1883]), pp. 77-79 . Fernan Caballero was the pseudonym used by Cecilia Francisca Josefa Böhl de Fabe (1796-1877). Return to the table of contents . The Singing Bones French Louisiana Once upon a time there lived a man and a woman who had twenty-five children. They were very poor. The man was good, the woman was bad. Every day when the husband returned from his work the wife served his dinner, but always meat without bones. "How is it that this meat has no bones?" "Because bones are heavy, and meat is cheaper without bones. They give us more for the money." The husband ate, and said nothing. "How is it you don't eat meat?" "You forget that I have no teeth. How do you expect me to eat meat without teeth?" "That is true," said the husband, and he said nothing more, because he was afraid to grieve his wife, who was as wicked as she was ugly. When one has twenty-five children one cannot think of them all the time, and one does not see if one or two are missing. One day, after his dinner, the husband asked for his children. When they were by him he counted them, and found only fifteen. He asked his wife where were the ten others. She answered that they were at their grandmother's, and every day she would send one more for them to get a change of air. That was true, every day there was one that was missing. One day the husband was at the threshold of his house, in front of a large stone which was there. He was thinking of his children, and he wanted to go and get them at their grandmother's, when he heard voices that were saying: Our mother killed us, Our father ate us. We are not in a coffin, We are not in the cemetery. At first he did not understand what that meant, but he raised the stone and saw a great quantity of bones, which began to sing again. He then understood that it was the bones of his children, whom his wife had killed, and whom he had eaten. Then he was so angry that he killed his wife, buried his children's bones in the cemetery, and stayed alone at his house. From that time he never ate meat, because he believed it would always be his children that he would eat. Source: Alcée Fortier, Louisiana Folk-Tales in French Dialect and English Translation (Boston and New York: Published for the American Folk-Lore Society by Houghton, Mifflin and Company, 1895), no. 17, p. 61 . Fortier's source: "Informant, old negress, 77 Esplanade Avenue [New Orleans]." Return to the table of contents . Link to additional folktales about multiple births . Under the Green Old Oak-Tree Antigua Dis a nice little story. Der woman had two chil'ren. One was a boy, an' der oder was a girl. De fader a dese chil'ren die. Moder decide to marry again. She marry to anoder man. Each day dese chil'ren did go to de mountain to get flowers. Dey went on dis day. Girl had a better bucket den what de broder got. Dey comin' wid de flowers. On his way home, de boy stop wid de gal. He t'inkin' some evil plan. Want dis bucket which was his sister. She would not consent to gi' him dis bucket. He t'ink it best to kill der sister. He kill de sister. He kill dis girl near to a big oak-tree. An' he hide her dere. After he kill her, he go home. Can't give no account a he sister. Dey all went to search for de girl, but none can find her. Der broder stay home. Month gone. Shepherd-boy dat is comin' down de mountain meet a big bone like a flute. He pick dis bone under dat same tree. He took up de bone an' play. Comin' home wid de flock, he play on de bone. It play a sweet tune: My broder has killed me in de woods, an' den he buryth me. My broder has killed me in de woods, an' den he buryth me Under de green ol' oak-tree, an' den he buryth me. Dat's all it could play. It play sweet, you know. Comin' home, all dat hear dis tune beg de boy for a play on it. He give dem a play. Now he way down de mountain. Mos' to where de moder is livin'. He meet de moder. She ask him for a play. He give her a play. As quick as she play, t'ing say: My dear moder, my dear moder, it my dead bone you play. My dear moder, my dear moder, it my dead bone you play. She drop an' faint, but never die. All de people was lookin' for de girl. Dis broder meet de boy. He ask him for a play. Take de bone an' start. T'ing say: My broder, it is you dat has killed me. My broder, it is you dat has killed me. An' dere he faints an' dies. Dat is de end a da green ol' oak-tree. Source: John H. Johnson, "Folk-Lore from Antigua, British West Indies," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 34 (1921), no. 27, pp. 70-71 . Johnson's source: George W. Edwards, 50 years old, a native of Greenbay, Antigua. Return to the table of contents . The Griffin Italy There was once a king who had three sons. His eyes were diseased, and he called in a physician who said that to cure them he needed a feather of the griffin. Then the kind said to his sons, "He who finds this feather for me shall have my crown." The sons set out in search of it. The youngest met an old man, who asked him what he was doing. He replied, "Papa is ill. To cure him a feather of the griffin in necessary. And papa has said that whoever finds the feather shall have his crown." The old man said, "Well, here is some corn. When you reach a certain place, put it in your hat. The griffin will come and eat it. Seize him, pull out a feather, and carry it to papa." The youth did so, and for fear that someone should steal it from him, he put it into his shoe, and started all joyful to carry it to his father. On his way he met his brothers, who asked him if he had found the feather. He said, "No," but his brothers did not believe him, and wanted to search him. They looked everywhere, but did not find it. Finally they looked in his shoe and got it. Then they killed the youngest brother and buried him, and took the feather to their father, saying that they had found it. The king healed his eyes with it. A shepherd one day, while feeding his sheep, saw that his dog was always digging in the same place, and went to see what it was, and found a bone. He put it into his mouth, and saw that it sounded and said, "Shepherd, keep me in your mouth, hold me tight, and do not let me go! For a feather of the griffin, my brother has played the traitor, my brother has played the traitor." One day the shepherd, with his whistle in his mouth, was passing by the king's palace, and the king heard him, and called him to see what it was. the shepherd told him the story, and how he had found it. The king put it to his mouth, and the whistle said, "Papa! Papa! Keep me in your mouth, hold me tight, and do not let me go. For a feather of the griffin, my brother has played the traitor, my brother has played the traitor." Then the king put it in the mouth of the brother who had killed the youngest, and the whistle said, "Brother! Brother! Keep me in you mouth, hold me fast, and do not let me go. For a feather of the griffin, you have played the traitor, you have played the traitor." Then the king understood the story and had his two sons put to death. And thus they killed their brother and afterwards were killed themselves. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 8, pp. 40-41 . Return to the table of contents . The Dead Girl's Bone Switzerland Once there was a king who died. His wife and two children, a girl and a boy, were still alive. Then one day they asked the mother which of them should someday become king. She said to them, "Dear children, go out into the woods together and look for a certain flower. The first one of you to find it will someday become king." So the two set forth together, and while searching in the woods they separated, and the girl was the first one to find the flower. She thought she would wait for her brother, so she put the flower in her hand, closed it in God's name, and lay down in the shade. Then the boy came to her. He had not found the flower, but when he saw it in his sister's hand, a terrible thought came to him: "I will murder my sister, take the flower home with me, and then I will become king." That is what he thought, and that is what he did. He killed her and buried her in the woods, covering with earth so that no one would know what had happened. Many years later a shepherd boy who was there tending his sheep found one of the girl's bones lying on the ground. He made a few holes in it like a flute, and blew into it. Then the bone began to sing ever so sadly and told the entire story how the girl had been killed by her brother. To hear the song would bring tears to your eyes. One day a knight came by where the boy was playing the flute. He bought the flute and played it wherever he went in the land. Finally the old queen heard the knight and became very sad. She had her son removed from the throne, and she mourned for the rest of her life. Source: Otto Sutermeister, "s'Todtebeindli," Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus der Schweiz (Aarau: H. R. Sauerländer, 1873), no. 39, pp. 119-120 . Return to the table of contents . The Little Bone Switzerland Many years ago a wicked man lived in a pasture hut. Like other herdsmen, he spent the summer there with his cattle. He was quick tempered and arrogant. He had a poor servant boy, whom he tormented in every possible way with hard work, rough words, and cruel blows. One day he gave the boy a task to do which beyond the his strength. He was then overcome by such anger that he grabbed the boy and thrust his head into a a kettle of milk that was being boiled in order to separate it. Thus the boy died, and the herdsman threw his body into a mountain creek. Back at home he said, "The stupid boy must have been carried away by a rockslide. He went off to milk the goats, but never came back." Many years passed, and the boys' bones hung unavenged on a cliffy bank of the mountain creek. From time to time a particularly strong rush of water would pick up one of the little bones, play with it for a while, and then leave it lying on a remote bank. Once it happened that there was a fair in the valley. Everyone was making merry. The wicked herdsman, drugged by the wine, music, and dance, had lost all humility and good sense, and was reveling in his sinfulness. It was too hot for him inside, so he went out to the creek, which, swollen by a heavy, warm rain, was rushing by much stronger than usual. He kneeled down and took off his hat to scoop up some water. He drank the water that had run into his hat, but at the bottom he found a small white bone. He stuck it onto his hat and returned to the hall. Suddenly the little bone began to bleed; and now everyone knew what had happened to the boy. The festivities were quickly brought to a close, and the evildoer was taken forthwith to the place of execution. Source: Otto Sutermeister, "Das Knöchlein," Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus der Schweiz (Aarau: H. R. Sauerländer, 1873), no. 14, pp. 42-43 . It was widely believed in medieval Europe that a murdered corpse (or any of its parts) would bleed in the presence of the murderer. A few examples: The Icelandic legend Murder Will Out , included in the present collection. Siegfried's body bleeds when approached by Hagen, thus providing legal proof of the latter's guilt. ( The Nibelungenlied , chapter 17) A superstition from England recorded in the nineteenth century. The Parent Murderer of Salzwedel , a legend from Germany. Return to the table of contents . Binnorie England Once upon a time there were two king's daughters who lived in a bower near the bonny mill dams of Binnorie. And Sir William came wooing the eldest and won her love, and plighted troth with glove and with ring. But after a time he looked upon the youngest, with her cherry cheeks and golden hair, and his love went out to her until he cared no longer for the eldest one. So she hated her sister for taking away Sir William's love, and day by day her hate grew and grew and she plotted and she planned how to get rid of her. So one fine morning, fair and clear, she said to her sister, "Let us go and see our father's boats come in at the bonny mill stream of Binnorie." So they went there hand in hand. And when they came to the river's bank the youngest got upon a stone to watch for the beaching of the boats. And her sister, coming behind her, caught her round the waist and dashed her into the rushing mill stream of Binnorie. "Oh sister, sister, reach me your hand!" she cried, as she floated away, "and you shall have half of all I've got or shall get." "No, sister, I'll reach you no hand of mine, for I am the heir to all your land. Shame on me if I touch her hand that has come 'twixt me and my own heart's love." "Oh sister, oh sister, then reach me your glove!" she cried, as she floated further away, "and you shall have your William again." "Sink on," cried the cruel princess, "no hand or glove of mine you'll touch. Sweet William will be all mine when you are sunk beneath the bonny mill stream of Binnorie." And she turned and went home to the king's castle. And the princess floated down the mill stream, sometimes swimming and sometimes sinking, until she came near the mill. Now the miller's daughter was cooking that day, and needed water for her cooking. And as she went to draw it from the stream, she saw something floating towards the mill dam, and she called out, "Father! father! draw your dam. There's something white -- a merrymaid or a milk white swan -- coming down the stream." So the miller hastened to the dam and stopped the heavy cruel mill wheels. And then they took out the princess and laid her on the bank. Fair and beautiful she looked as she lay there. In her golden hair were pearls and precious stones; you could not see her waist for her golden girdle, and the golden fringe of her white dress came down over her lily feet. But she was drowned, drowned! And as she lay there in her beauty a famous harper passed by the mill dam of Binnorie, and saw her sweet pale face. And though he traveled on far away he never forgot that face, and after many days he came back to the bonny mill stream of Binnorie. But then all he could find of her where they had put her to rest were her bones and her golden hair. So he made a harp out of her breast bone and her hair, and traveled on up the hill from the mill dam of Binnorie, until he came to the castle of the king her father. That night they were all gathered in the castle hall to hear the great harper: king and queen, their daughter and son, Sir William, and all their court. And first the harper sang to his old harp, making them joy and be glad, or sorrow and weep just as he liked. But while he sang he put the harp he had made that day on a stone in the hall. And presently it began to sing by itself, low and clear, and the harper stopped and all were hushed. And this was what the harp sung: Oh yonder sits my father, the king, Binnorie, oh Binnorie; And yonder sits my mother, the queen; By the bony mill dams o' Binnorie. And yonder stands my brother Hugh, Binnorie, oh Binnorie; And by him, my William, false and true; By the bonny mill dams o' Binnorie. Then they all wondered, and the harper told them how he had seen the princess lying drowned on the bank near the bonny mill dams o' Binnorie, and how he had afterwards made this harp out of her hair and breast bone. Just then the harp began singing again, and this was what it sang out loud and clear: And there sits my sister who drownèd me By the bonny mill dams o' Binnorie. And the harp snapped and broke, and never sang more. Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 9, pp. 44-47 . Return to the table of contents . Murder Will Out Iceland Once upon a time, in a certain churchyard, some people who were digging a grave, found a skull with a knitting-pin stuck through it from temple to temple. The priest took the skull and preserved it until the next Sunday, when he had to perform service. When the day came, the priest waited until all the people were inside the church, and then fastened up the skull to the top of the porch. After the service the priest and his servant left the church first, and stood outside the door, watching carefully everybody that came out. When all the congregation had passed out without anything strange occurring, they looked in to see if there was any one still remaining inside. The only person they saw was a very old woman sitting behind the door, who was so unwilling to leave the church, that they were compelled to force her out. As she passed under the porch, three drops of blood fell from the skull on to her white head-dress, and she exclaimed, "Alas, murder will out at last!" Then she confessed, that having been compelled to marry her first husband against her will, she had killed him with a knitting-pin and married another. She was tried for the murder, though it had happened so many years back, and condemned to death. Source: Jón Árnason, Icelandic Legends (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 155-56 . Return to the table of contents . The Silver Plate and the Transparent Apple Russia There lived once a peasant with his wife and three daughters. Two of these girls were not particularly beautiful, while the third was sweetly pretty. However, as she happened to be a very good girl, as well as simple in her tastes, she was nicknamed Simpleton, and all who knew her called her by that name, though she was in reality far from being one. Her sisters thought of nothing but dress and jewelry. The consequence was that they did not agree with their younger sister. They teased her, mimicked her, and made her do all the hard work. Yet Simpleton never said a word of complaint, but was ready to do anything. She fed the cows and the poultry. If anyone asked her to bring anything, she brought it in a moment. In fact, she was a most obliging young person. One day the peasant had to go to a big fair to sell hay, so he asked his two eldest daughters what he should bring them. "Bring me some red fustian to make myself a sarafan [coat without sleeves]," said the eldest. "Buy me some yards of nankeen to make myself a dress," said the second. Simpleton meanwhile sat in a corner looking at her sisters with great eagerness. Though she was a simpleton, her father found it hard to go away without asking her what she would like him to bring her, so he asked her too. "Bring me, dear father," said she, "a silver plate and a transparent apple to roll about on it." The father was rather astonished, but he said nothing and left. "Whatever made you ask for such rubbish?" asked her sisters laughing. "You will see for yourselves when my father brings them," said Simpleton, as she left the room. The peasant, after having sold his hay, bought his daughters the things they had asked for, and drove home. The two elder girls were delighted with their presents and laughed at Simpleton, waiting to see what she intended doing with the silver plate and transparent apple. Simpleton did not eat the apple, as they at first thought she would, but sat in a corner pronouncing these words, "Roll away, apple, roll away, on this silver plate. Show me different towns, fields, and woods, the seas, the heights of the hills, and the heavens in all their glory." Away rolled the apple, and on the plate became visible, towns, one after another. Ships were seen sailing on the seas. Green fields were seen. The heights of the hills were shown. The beauty of the heavens and the setting of the sun were all displayed most wonderfully. The sisters looked on in amazement. They longed to have it for themselves and wondered how they could best get it from Simpleton, for she took such great care of it, and would take nothing in exchange. At last one day the wicked sisters said coaxingly to Simpleton, "Come with us, dear, into the forest and help us pick strawberries." Simpleton gave the plate and the apple to her father to take care of and joined her sisters. When they arrived at the forest they set to work picking wild strawberries. After some time the two elder sisters suddenly came upon a spade lying on the grass. They seized it, and while Simpleton was not looking they gave her a heavy blow with the spade. She turned ghastly pale, and fell dead on the ground. They took her up quickly, buried her under a birch tree, and went home late to their parents, saying, "Simpleton has run away from us. We looked for her everywhere but cannot find her. She must have been eaten up by some wild beasts while we were not looking." The father, who really had a little love for the girl, became very sad, and actually cried. He took the plate and apple and locked them both up carefully in a glass case. The sisters also cried very much and pretended to be very sorry, though the real reason was that they found out that they were not likely to have the transparent apple and plate after all, but would have to do all the hard work themselves. One day a shepherd, who was minding a flock of sheep, happened to lose one, and went into the forest to look for it, when suddenly he came upon a hillock under a birch tree, round which grew a number of red and blue flowers, and among them a reed. The young shepherd cut off the reed and made himself a pipe. But what was his astonishment when the moment he put the pipe to his mouth, it began to play by itself, saying, "Play, play, little pipe. Comfort my dear parents, and my sisters, who so cruelly misused me, killed me, and buried me for the sake of my silver plate and transparent apple." The shepherd ran into the village greatly alarmed, and a crowd of people soon collected round him asking him what had happened. The shepherd again put the pipe to his mouth, and again the pipe began to play of itself. "Who killed whom, and where, and how?" asked all the people together, crowding round. "Good people," answered the shepherd, "I know no more than you do. All I know is that I lost one of my sheep and went in search of it, when I suddenly came upon a hillock under a birch tree with flowers round it, and among them was a reed, which I cut off and made into a pipe, and the moment I put the thing into my mouth it began to play of itself, and pronounce the words which you have just heard." It so happened that Simpleton's father and sisters were among the crowd and heard what the shepherd said. "Let me try your pipe," said the father, taking it and putting it into his mouth. And immediately it began to repeat the words, "Play, play, little pipe. Comfort my dear parents, and my sisters, who misused, killed, and buried me for the sake of the silver plate and transparent apple." The peasant made the shepherd take him to the hillock at once. When they got to it they began to dig open the hillock, where they found the dead body of the unfortunate girl. The father fell on his knees before it and tried to bring her back to life, but all in vain. The people again began asking who it was that killed and buried her, whereupon the pipe replied, "My sisters took me into the forest and slew me for the silver plate and transparent apple. If you want to wake me from this sound slumber, you must bring me the water of life from the royal fountain." The two miserable sisters turned pale and wanted to run away, whereupon the people seized them, tied them together, and marched them off to a dark cell, where they locked them up until the king should pronounce judgement on them. The peasant went to the palace and was brought before the king's son, and falling upon his knees before the prince, he related the whole story. Whereupon the king's son told him to take as much of the water of life from the royal fountain as he pleased. "When your daughter is well, bring her to me," continued the prince, "and also her evil-minded sisters." The peasant was delighted. He thanked the young prince and ran to the forest with the water of life. After he had sprinkled the body several times with the water, his daughter woke up and stood before him, prettier than ever. They embraced each other tenderly, while the people rejoiced and congratulated the happy man. Next morning the peasant went with his three daughters to the palace and was brought before the king's son. The young prince, when he beheld Simpleton, was greatly struck with her beauty and asked her at once to show him the silver plate and transparent apple. "What would your highness like to see?" asked the girl, bringing forward her treasures. "Would you like to know whether your kingdom is in good order, or if your ships are sailing, or whether there is any curious comet in the heavens?" "Anything you like, sweet maiden." Away rolled the apple round about the plate, on which became visible soldiers of different arms, with muskets and flags, drawn up in battle array. The apple rolled on, and waves rose, and ships were seen sailing about like swans, while flags waved in the air. On rolled the apple, and on the plate the glory of the heavens was displayed. The sun, moon, and stars, and various comets were seen. The king's son was greatly astonished and offered to buy the plate and apple, but Simpleton fell on her knees before him, exclaiming, "Take my silver plate and my apple. I want no money and no gifts for them, if you will only promise to forgive my sisters." The young prince was so moved by her pretty face and her tears that he at once forgave the two wicked girls. Simpleton was so overjoyed that she threw her arms round their necks and tenderly embraced them. The king's son took Simpleton by the hand and said, "Sweet maiden, I am so struck by the great kindness you have shown your sisters after their cruel treatment of you, that I have decided (provided you agree to it) to have you for my wife, and you shall be known henceforth as the Benevolent Queen. " "Your highness does me great honor," said Simpleton, blushing. "But it lies in my parents' hand. If they do not object, I will marry you." It is needless to say that neither parent objected, but gave their consent and blessing. "I have one more request to ask your highness," said Simpleton, "and that is to let my parents and sisters live with us in the palace." The young prince made no objection whatever to this proposal (though most probably he felt sorry for it afterwards; however, the story does not say anything about that). The sisters threw themselves at Simpleton's feet, exclaiming that they did not deserve such kindness after all that they had said and done to her. Next day the marriage was celebrated, and crowds of people ran about everywhere crying out, "Long live our king and queen!" From that day Simpleton was no more, but the BENEVOLENT QUEEN reigned in her stead. Source: Edith M. S. Hodgetts, Tales and Legends from the Land of the Tzar: Collection of Russian Stories , 2nd edition (London: Griffith Farran and Company, 1891), pp. 14-20 . Hodgetts, who was born and raised in Russia, does not give a specific source for this tale. In her introduction she states, with reference to her sources, "Some of these tales were dictated in the original Russian at school, others were related to me by my nurse and other servants of my father's household, while some are translations which I have made from various collections of Russian stories current among the people. (p. vii) Return to the table of contents . Little Anklebone Pakistan Once upon a time there was a little boy who lost his parents; so he went to live with his auntie, and she set him to herd sheep. All day long the little fellow wandered barefoot through the pathless plain, tending his flock, playing his tiny shepherd's pipe from morn till eve. But one day came a great big wolf, and looked hungrily at the small shepherd and his fat sheep, saying, "Little boy! shall I eat you, or your sheep?" Then the little boy answered politely, "I don't know Mr. Wolf; I must ask my auntie." So all day long he piped away on his tiny pipe, and in the evening, when he brought the flock home, he went to his auntie and said, "Auntie dear, a great big wolf asked me today if he should eat me, or your sheep. Which shall it be?" Then his auntie looked at the wee little shepherd, and at the fat flock, and said sharply, "Which shall it be? Why, you, of course!" So next morning the little boy drove his flock out into the pathless plain, and blew away cheerfully on his shepherd's pipe until the great big wolf appeared. Then he laid aside his pipe, and, going up to the savage beast, said, "Oh, if you please, Mr. Wolf, I asked my auntie, and she says you are to eat me." Now the wolf, savage as wolves always are, could not help having just a spark of pity for the tiny barefoot shepherd who played his pipe so sweetly, therefore he said kindly, "Could I do anything for you, little boy, after I've eaten you?" "Thank you!" returned the tiny shepherd. "If you would be so kind, after you've picked the bones, as to thread my ankle-bone on a string and hang it on the tree that weeps over the pond yonder, I shall be much obliged." So the wolf ate the little shepherd, picked the bones, and afterwards hung the ankle-bone by a string to the branches of the tree, where it danced and swung in the sunlight. Now, one day, three robbers, who had just robbed a palace, happening to pass that way, sat down under the tree and began to divide the spoil. Just as they had arranged all the golden dishes and precious jewels and costly stuffs into three heaps, a jackal howled. Now you must know that thieves always use the jackal's cry as a note of warning, so that when at the very same moment Little Anklebone's thread snapped, and he fell plump on the head of the chief robber, the man imagined some one had thrown a pebble at him, and, shouting "Run! run! We are discovered!" he bolted away as hard as he could, followed by his companions, leaving all the treasure behind them. "Now," said Little Anklebone to himself, "I shall lead a fine life!" So he gathered the treasure together, and sat under the tree that drooped over the pond, and played so sweetly on a new shepherd's pipe, that all the beasts of the forest, and the birds of the air, and the fishes of the pond came to listen to him. Then Little Anklebone put marble basins round the pond for the animals to drink out of, and in the evening the does, and the tigresses, and the she-wolves gathered round him to be milked, and when he had drank his fill he milked the rest into the pond, till at last it became a pond of milk. And Little Anklebone sat by the milken pond and piped away on his shepherd's pipe. Now, one day, an old woman, passing by with her jar for water, heard the sweet strains of Little Anklebone's pipe, and following the sound, came upon the pond of milk, and saw the animals, and the birds, and the fishes, listening to the music. She was wonderstruck, especially when Little Anklebone, from his seat under the tree, called out, "Fill your jar, mother! All drink who come hither!" Then the old woman filled her jar with milk, and went on her way rejoicing at her good fortune. But as she journeyed she met with the king of that country, who, having been a-hunting, had lost his way in the pathless plain. "Give me a drink of water, good mother," he cried, seeing the jar; "I am half dead with thirst!" "It is milk, my son," replied the old woman; "I got it yonder from a milken pond." Then she told the king of the wonders she had seen, so that he resolved to have a peep at them himself. And when he saw the milken pond, and all the animals and birds and fishes gathered round, while Little Anklebone played ever so sweetly on his shepherd's pipe, he said "I must have the tiny piper, if I die for it!" No sooner did Little Anklebone hear these words than he set off at a run, and the king after him. Never was there such a chase before or since, for Little Anklebone hid himself amid the thickest briars and thorns, and the king was so determined to have the tiny piper, that he did not care for scratches. At last the king was successful, but no sooner did he take hold of Little Anklebone than it began to thunder and lighten horribly, whilst the little piper himself began to sing these words: Oh why do you thunder and lighten, dark heavens? Your noise is as nothing to what will arise, When the does that are waiting in vain for the milking, Find poor Little Anklebone reft from their eyes! Whereupon the King, seeing that it really was nothing but an ankle-bone after all, let it go. So the little piper went back to his seat under the tree by the pond, and there he sits still, and plays his shepherd's pipe, while all the beasts of the forest, and birds of the air, and fishes of the pond, gather round and listen to his music. And sometimes, people wandering through the pathless plain hear the pipe, and then they say, "That is Little Anklebone, who was eaten by a wolf ages ago!" Source: F. A. Steel and R. C. Temple, Wide-Awake Stories: A Collection of Tales Told by Little Children, Between Sunset and Sunrise, in the Panjab and Kashmir , (Bombay: Education Society's Press; London: Trübner and Company, 1884), pp. 127-31 . Steel's and Temple's source: a small boy from the the wilds of the Gujranwala District in Punjab, Pakistan ( pp. 362-63 ). Return to the table of contents . The Magic Fiddle India Once upon a time there lived seven brothers and a sister. The brothers were married, but their wives did not do the cooking for the family. It was done by their sister, who stopped at home to cook. The wives for this reason bore their sister-in-law much ill will, and at length they combined together to oust her from the office of cook and general provider, so that one of themselves might obtain it. They said, "She does not go out to the fields to work, but remains quietly at home, and yet she has not the meals ready at the proper time." They then called upon their bonga, and vowing vows unto him they secured his goodwill and assistance; then they said to the bonga, "At midday, when our sister-in-law goes to bring water, cause it thus to happen, that on seeing her pitcher, the water shall vanish, and again slowly reappear. In this way she will be delayed. Let the water not flow into her pitcher, and you may keep the maiden as your own." At noon when she went to bring water, it suddenly dried up before her, and she began to weep. Then after a while the water began slowly to rise. When it reached her ankles she tried to fill her pitcher, but it would not go under the water. Being frightened she began to wail and cry to her brother: Oh! my brother, the water reaches to my ankles, Still, Oh! my brother, the pitcher will not dip. The water continued to rise until it reached her knee, when she began to wail again: Oh! my brother, the water reaches to my knee, Still, Oh! my brother, the pitcher will not dip. The water continued to rise, and when it reached her waist, she cried again: Oh! my brother, the water reaches to my waist, Still, Oh! my brother, the pitcher will not dip. The water still rose, and when it reached her neck she kept on crying: Oh! my brother, the water reaches to my neck, Still, Oh! my brother, the pitcher will not dip. At length the water became so deep that she felt herself drowning, then she cried aloud: Oh! my brother, the water measures a man's height, Oh! my brother, the pitcher begins to fill. The pitcher filled with water, and along with it she sank and was drowned. The bonga then transformed her into a bonga like himself, and carried her off. After a time she reappeared as a bamboo growing on the embankment of the tank in which she had been drowned. When the bamboo had grown to an immense size, a jogi, who was in the habit of passing that way, seeing it, said to himself, "This will make a splendid fiddle." So one day he brought an ax to cut it down; but when he was about to begin, the bamboo called out, "Do not cut at the root, cut higher up." When he lifted his ax to cut high up the stem, the bamboo cried out, "Do not cut near the top, cut at the root." When the jogi again prepared himself to cut at the root as requested, the bamboo said, "Do not cut at the root, cut higher up;" and when he was about to cut higher up, it again called out to him, "Do not cut high up, cut at the root." The jogi by this time felt sure that a bonga was trying to frighten him, so becoming angry he cut down the bamboo at the root, and taking it away made a fiddle out of it. The instrument had a superior tone and delighted all who heard it. The jogi carried it with him when he went a begging, and through the influence of its sweet music he returned home every evening with a full wallet. He now and then visited, when on his rounds, the house of the bonga girl's brothers, and the strains of the fiddle affected them greatly. Some of them were moved even to tears, for the fiddle seemed to wail as one in bitter anguish. The elder brother wished to purchase it, and offered to support the jogi for a whole year if he would consent to part with his wonderful instrument. The jogi, however, knew its value, and refused to sell it. It so happened that the jogi some time after went to the house of a village chief, and after playing a tune or two on his fiddle asked for something to eat. They offered to buy his fiddle and promised a high price for it, but he refused to sell it, as his fiddle brought to him his means of livelihood. When they saw that he was not to be prevailed upon, they gave him food and a plentiful supply of liquor. Of the latter he drank so freely that he presently became intoxicated. While he was in this condition, they took away his fiddle, and substituted their own old one for it. When the jogi recovered, he missed his instrument, and suspecting that it had been stolen asked them to return it to him. They denied having taken it, so he had to depart, leaving his fiddle behind him. The chief's son, being a musician, used to play on the jogi's fiddle, and in his hands the music it gave forth delighted the ears of all who heard it. When all the household were absent at their labors in the fields, the bonga girl used to come out of the bamboo fiddle, and prepared the family meal. Having eaten her own share, she placed that of the chief's son under his bed, and covering it up to keep off the dust, reentered the fiddle. This happening every day, the other members of the household thought that some girl friend of theirs was in this manner showing her interest in the young man, so they did not trouble themselves to find out how it came about. The young chief, however, was determined to watch, and see which of his girl friends was so attentive to his comfort. He said in his own mind, "I will catch her today, and give her a sound beating; she is causing me to be ashamed before the others." So saying, he hid himself in a corner in a pile of firewood. In a short time the girl came out of the bamboo fiddle, and began to dress her hair. Having completed her toilet, she cooked the meal of rice as usual, and having eaten some herself, she placed the young man's portion under his bed, as before, and was about to enter the fiddle again, when he, running out from his hiding place, caught her in his arms. The bonga girl exclaimed, "Fie! Fie! You may be a dom, or you may be a hadi of some other caste with whom I cannot marry." He said, "No. But from today, you and I are one." So they began lovingly to hold converse with each other. When the others returned home in the evening, they saw that she was both a human being and a bonga, and they rejoiced exceedingly. Now in course of time the bonga girl's family became very poor, and her brothers on one occasion came to the chief's house on a visit. The bonga girl recognized them at once, but they did not know who she was. She brought them water on their arrival, and afterwards set cooked rice before them. Then sitting down near them, she began in wailing tones to upbraid them on account of the treatment she had been subjected to by their wives. She related all that had befallen her, and wound up by saying, "You must have known it all, and yet you did not interfere to save me." And that was all the revenge she took. Source: Joseph Jacobs, Indian Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1892), no. 6, pp. 40-45 . Jacobs' source: A. Campbell, Santal Folk-Tales (Pokhuria: Santal Mission Press, 1891), pp. 52-56 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 3, 2019. Singing Thieves: Fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 214A Singing Thieves fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 214A and similar tales edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2018 Contents The Musical Donkey (India, The Panchatantra ). The Ass as Singer (Tibet). Tit for Tat (India). The Four Associates (Pakistan). The Turtle and the Lizard (Philippines). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Musical Donkey India ( The Panchatantra ) In a certain town was a donkey named Prig. In the daytime he carried laundry packages, but was at liberty to wander anywhere at night. One night while wandering in the fields he fell in with a jackal and made friends. So the two broke through a hedge into cucumber-beds, and having eaten what they could hold of that comestible, parted at dawn to go home. One night the egotistical donkey, standing among the cucumbers, said to the jackal: "See, nephew! The night is marvelously fine. I will contribute a song. What sentiment shall my song express?" "Don't, uncle," said the jackal. "It might make trouble, seeing that we are on thieves' business. Thieves and lovers should keep very quiet. As the proverb says: No sleepyhead should pilfer fur, No invalid, rich provender, No sneezer should become a thief -- Unless they wish to come to grief. "Besides, your vocal music is not agreeable, since it resembles a blast on a conch-shell. The farmers would hear you from afar, would rise, and would fetter or kill you. Better keep quiet and eat." "Come, come!" said the donkey. "Your remarks prove that you live in the woods and have no musical taste. Did you never hear this? Oh, bliss if murmurs sweet to hear Of music's nectar woo your ear When darkness flees from moonlight clear In autumn, and your love is near." "Very true, uncle," said the jackal. "But your bray is harsh. Why do a thing that defeats your own purpose?" "Fool, fool!" answered the donkey. "Do you think me ignorant of vocal music? Listen to its systematization, as follows: Seven notes, three scales, and twenty-one Are modulations said to be; Of pitches there are forty-nine, Three measures, also pauses three; Caesuras three; and thirty-six Arrangements of the notes, in fine; Six apertures; the languages Are forty; sentiments are nine. One hundred songs and eighty-five Are found in songbooks, perfect, pure, With all accessories complete, Unblemished in their phrasing sure. On earth is nothing nobler found, Nor yet in heaven, than vocal song; The singing Devil soothes the Lord, When quivering strings the sound prolong. "After this, how can you think me lacking in educated taste? How can you try to hinder me?" "Very well, uncle," said the jackal. "I will stay by the gap in the hedge, and look for farmers. You may sing to heart's content." When he had done so, the donkey lifted his neck and began to utter sounds. But the farmers, hearing the bray of a donkey, angrily clenched their teeth, snatched cudgels, rushed in, and beat him so that he fell to the ground. Next they hobbled him by fastening on his neck a mortar with a convenient hole, then went to sleep. Presently the donkey stood up, forgetting the pain as donkeys naturally do. As the verse puts it: With dog, and ass, and horse, And donkey more than most, The pain from beatings is Immediately lost. Then with the mortar on his neck, he trampled the hedge and started to run away. At this moment the jackal, looking on from a safe distance, said with a smile: Well sung, uncle! Why would you Not stop when I told you to? What a necklace! Yes, you wear Music medals rich and rare. "Just so, you would not stop when I advised it." After listening to this, the wheel-bearer said: "O my friend, you are quite right. Yes, there is much wisdom in the verse: He who, lacking wit, does not Harken to a friend, Just like weaver Slow, inclines To a fatal end." Source (Internet Archive): The Panchatantra , translated from the Sanskrit by Arthur W. Ryder (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1925), pp. 446-49 . Source (wikisource): The Panchatantra , translated from the Sanskrit by Arthur W. Ryder (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1925), book 5, pp. 446-49 . Return to the table of contents . The Ass as Singer Tibet When in long-past times the Bodisat, in consequence of his aggregation of merits remaining incomplete, had been born in a herd of horned cattle as a bull, he used to go out of the city in the evenings to a bean-field belonging to the king, and there take his food. But by day he lived in the city. There an ass joined him. It said one day, "O uncle, your flesh and your blood and your hide thrive, and yet I have never seen you change your abode." The bull answered, "O nephew, I feed at eventide in the king's bean-field." The ass said, Uncle, I will go with you too." The bull objected, "O nephew, as you are wont to let your voice resound, we might run a risk." The ass replied, "O uncle, let us go, I will not raise my voice." After they two had broken through the enclosure of the bean-field and reached the interior, the ass uttered no sound until it had eaten its fill. Then it said, "Uncle, shall not I sing a little?" The bull replied, "Wait an instant, until I have gone away. Then do just as you please." The bull ran off, and the ass lifted up its voice. As soon as the king's people heard that, they seized the ass, and in order to punish it, as in their opinion it had devoured the whole produce of the king's bean-field, they cut off its ears, fastened a pestle to its neck, and then set it free. As it wandered to and fro, the bull saw it, and pronounced this verse: "Excellently hast thou sung forsooth, and therefore obtained thy recompense. In consequence of thy song I also well-nigh lost my ears. He who knows not how to keep his word, to him may easily happen some such thing as this; to wander to and fro, adorned with a club and destitute of ears." The ass also gave utterance to a verse: "Keep silence thou with broken teeth, be silent then, O old bull; for three men are searching for thee with clubs in their hands." Source (books.google.com): Tibetan Tales Derived from Indian Sources , translated from the Tibetan of the Kah-Gyur by F. Anton von Schiefner; done into English from the German by W. R. S. Ralston (London: Trübner and Company, 1882), no. 32, pp. 232-24 . Source (Internet Archive): Tibetan Tales Derived from Indian Sources , translated from the Tibetan of the Kah-Gyur by F. Anton von Schiefner; done into English from the German by W. R. S. Ralston (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, and Company, 1906), no. 32, pp. 232-24 . Return to the table of contents . Tit for Tat India There once lived a camel and a jackal who were great friends. One day the jackal said to the camel, "I know that there is a fine field of sugarcane on the other side of the river. If you will take me across I'll show you the place. This plan will suit me as well as you. You will enjoy eating the sugarcane, and I am sure to find many crabs, bones, and bits of fish by the riverside, on which to make a good dinner." The camel consented, and swam across the river, taking the jackal, who could not swim, on his back. When they reached the other side, the camel went to eat the sugarcane, and the jackal ran up and down the riverbank devouring all the crabs, bits of fish, and bones he could find. But being so much smaller an animal, he had made an excellent meal before the camel had eaten more than two or three mouthfuls; and no sooner had he finished his dinner, than he ran round and round the sugarcane field, yelping and howling with all his might. The villagers heard him, and thought, "There is a jackal among the sugarcanes. He will be scratching holes in the ground, and spoiling the roots of the plants." And they went down to the place to drive him away. But when they got there, they found to their surprise not only a jackal, but a camel who was eating the sugarcanes! This made them very angry, and they caught the poor camel, and drove him from the field, and beat him until he was nearly dead. When they had gone, the jackal said to the camel, "We had better go home." And the camel said, "Very well, then, jump upon my back as you did before." So the jackal jumped upon the camel's back, and the camel began to recross the river. When they had got well into the water, the camel said, "This is a pretty way in which you have treated me, friend jackal. No sooner had you finished your own dinner than you must go yelping about the place loud enough to arouse the whole village, and bring all the villagers down to beat me black and blue, and turn me out of the field before I had eaten two mouthfuls! What in the world did you make such a noise for?" "I don't know," said the jackal "It is a custom I have. I always like to sing a little after dinner." The camel waded on through the river. The water reached up to his knees -- then above them -- up, up, up, higher and higher, until he was obliged to swim. Then turning to the jackal, he said, "I feel very anxious to roll." "Oh, pray don't. Why do you wish to do so?" asked the jackal. "I don't know," answered the camel. "It is a custom I have. I always like to have a little roll after dinner." So saying, he rolled over in the water, shaking the jackal off as he did so. And the jackal was drowned, but the camel swam safely ashore. Source (books.google.com): Mary Frere, Old Deccan Days; or, Hindoo Fairy Legends Current in Southern India , (London: John Murray, 1868), no. 13, pp. 195-97 . Source (Internet Archive): Mary Frere, Old Deccan Days; or, Hindoo Fairy Legends Current in Southern India , (London: John Murray, 1868), no. 13, pp. 195-97 . Return to the table of contents . The Four Associates Pakistan Once upon a time a crow, a jackal, a hyena, and a camel swore a friendship, and agreed to seek their food in common. Said the camel to the crow, "Friend, you can fly. Go forth and reconnoiter the country for us." So the crow flew away from tree to tree until he came to a fine field of muskmelons, and then he returned and reported the fact to his companions. "You," said he to the camel, "can eat the leaves, but the fruit must be the share of the jackal, the hyena, and myself." When it was night all four visited the field and began to make a hearty supper. Suddenly the owner woke up and rushed to the rescue. The crow, the jackal, and the hyena easily escaped, but the camel was caught and driven out with cruel blows. Overtaking his comrades, he said, "Pretty partners you are, to leave your friend in the lurch!" Said the jackal, "We were surprised. But cheer up. Tonight we'll stand by you and won't allow you to be thrashed again!" The next day the owner, as a precaution, covered his field with nets and nooses. At midnight the four friends returned again, and began devouring as before. The crow, the jackal, and the hyena soon had eaten their fill, but not so the camel, who had hardly satisfied the cravings of hunger when the jackal suddenly remarked, "Camel, I fell a strong inclination to bark." "For heaven's sake don't," said the camel. "You'll bring up the owner, and then while you all escape I shall be thrashed again." "Bark I must," replied the jackal, who set up a dismal yell. Out from his hut ran the owner. But it happened that while the camel, the crow, and the jackal succeeded in getting away, the stupid hyena was caught in a net. "Friends! Friends!" cried he. "Are you going to abandon me? I shall be killed!" "Obey my directions," said the crow, "and all will be right." "What shall I do?" asked the hyena. "Lie down and pretend to be dead," said the crow, "and the owner will merely throw you out, after which you can run away." He had hardly spoken when the owner came to the spot, and seeing what he believed to be a dead hyena, he seized him by the hind legs and threw him out of the field, when at once the delighted hyena sprang to his feet and trotted away. "Ah!" said the man. "That rascal was not dead after all." When the four associates met again, the camel said to the jackal, "Your barking, friend, might have got me another beating. Never mind. All's well that ends well. Today yours, tomorrow mine." Some time afterwards the camel said, "Jackal, I'm going out for a walk. If you will get on my back I will give you a ride, and you can see the world." The jackal agreed, and, stooping down, the camel allowed him to mount on his back. As they were going along they came to a village, whereupon all the dogs rushed out and began barking furiously at the jackal, whom they eyed on the camel's back. Then said the camel to the jackal, "O jackal, I feel a strong inclination to roll." "For heaven's sake, don't!" pleaded the jackal. "I shall be worried." "Roll I must," replied the camel, and he rolled, while the village dogs fell on the jackal before he could escape, and tore him to pieces. Then the camel returned and reported the traitor's death to his friends, who mightily approved the deed. Source (books.google.com): Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment: Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 12, pp. 15-17 . Source (Internet Archive): Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment: Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 12, pp. 15-17 . The episode of the animal escaping capture by playing dead is categorized Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 33. Return to the table of contents . The Turtle and the Lizard Philippines (Tinguian) A turtle and a big lizard went to the field of Gotgotapa to steal ginger. When they got there the turtle told the lizard he must be very still, but when the lizard tasted the ginger, he exclaimed, "The ginger of Gotgotapa is very good." "Be still," said the turtle, but again the lizard shouted louder than before. Then the man heard and came out of his house to catch the robbers. The turtle could not run fast, so he lay very still, and the man did not see him. But the lizard ran, and the man chased him. When they were very far, the turtle went into the house. Now the man had a coconut shell which he used to sit on, and the turtle hid under it. The man could not catch the lizard, so in a while he came back to his house and sat on the shell. By and by, the turtle called "Kook." Then the man jumped up and looked all around to find where the noise came from, but he could not find out. The turtle called "Kook" again, and the man tried very hard to find what made the noise. The turtle called a third time more loudly, and then the man thought it was his testicles which made the noise, so he took a stone and hit them. Then he died, and the turtle ran away. When the turtle got a long way, he met the lizard again, and they saw some honey on the branch of a tree. "I run first to get," said the turtle; but the big lizard ran fast and seized the honey. Then the bees stung him, and he ran back to the turtle. On the road they saw a bird snare. The turtle said, "That is the paliget [a gold or silver wire worn by women or men about their necks] of my grandfather." Then the lizard ran very fast to get it, but it caught his neck and held him until the man who owned it came and killed him. Then the turtle went away. Source (books.google.com): Fay-Cooper Cole, Traditions of the Tinguians: A Study in Philippine Folk-Lore (Chicago: Field Museum of Natural History, 1915), no. 78, p. 196 . Source (Internet Archive): Fay-Cooper Cole, Traditions of the Tinguians: A Study in Philippine Folk-Lore (Chicago: Field Museum of Natural History, 1915), no. 78, p. 196 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 23, 2018. Slavic and Other Eastern European Folk and Fairy Tales: A Digital Library Slavic and Other Eastern European Folk and Fairy Tales in English translation a digital library assembled by D. L. Ashliman © 2011-2022 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Unless otherwise noted all links lead to books digitized by books.google.com . Afanas'ev, A. N. Russian Folk-Tales . With introduction and notes by Leonard A. Magnus. New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1916. Pages 35-36 missing. The collector's family name is also Anglicized as Afanasyev, Afanasief, or Afanasiev. Afanas'ev, A. N. Russian Folk-Tales . With introduction and notes by Leonard A. Magnus. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, and Company; New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1916. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . The collector's family name is also Anglicized as Afanasyev, Afanasief, or Afanasiev. Bain, R. Nisbet. Russian Fairy Tales from the Skazki of Polevoi . Illustrated by C. M. Gere. 3rd edition. London: A. H. Bullen, 1901. Blumenthal, Verra Xenophontovna Kalamatiano de. Folk Tales from the Russian . Retold. Chicago, New York, and London: Rand McNally and Company, 1903. Boettiger, Louis A. Armenian Legends and Festivals . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 1920. Carrick, Valery [Karrik, Valerian]. More Russian Picture Tales . Translated by Nevill Forbes. New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1920. Carrick, Valery [Karrik, Valerian] . Still More Russian Picture Tales . Translated by Nevill Forbes. New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1922. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Chodzko, Aleksander. Fairy Tales of the Slav Peasants and Herdsmen . From the French of Alex. Chodsko. Translated and illustrated by Emily J. Harding. London: George Allen, 1896. Curtin, Jeremiah. Myths and Folk-Tales of the Russians, Western Slavs, and Magyars . Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1890. Dietrich, Anton. Russian Popular Tales . Translated from the German version of Anton Dietrich, with an introduction by Jacob Grimm. London: Chapman and Hall, 1857. Erben, Karel Jaromir. See Strickland, W. W. Faulkner, Georgene. Old Russian Tales . Retold for children by Georgene Faulkner, the Story Lady. Illustrated by Frederic Richardson. Chicago: Daughaday and Company, 1916. Fillmore, Parker. Czechoslovak Fairy Tales . Retold by Parker Fillmore. With illustrations and decorations by Jan Matulka. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Howe, 1919. Fillmore, Parker. The Laughing Prince: A Book of Jugoslav Fairy Tales and Folk Tales . With illustrations and decorations by Jay Van Everen. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company, 1921. Fillmore, Parker. The Shoemaker's Apron: A Second Book of Czechoslovak Fairy Tales and Folk Tales . Retold by Parker Fillmore. With illustrations and decorations by Jan Matulka. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Howe, 1920. Glinski, A. J. [Antoni Józef]. Polish Fairy Tales . Translated by Maude Ashurst Biggs. London and New York: John Lane, 1920. Hodgetts, Edith M. S. Tales and Legends from the Land of the Tzar: Collection of Russian Stories . 2nd edition. London: Griffith Farran and Company, 1891. Houghton, Louise Seymore. The Russian Grandmother's Wonder Tales . Illustrated by W. T. Benda. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1913. Based on the German collection Tales and Legends of South Slavonia by Friedrich Krauss. Iliowizi, Henry. In the Pale: Stories and Legends of the Russian Jews . Philadelphia: Henry T. Coates and Company, 1900. Jones, W. Henry, and Lewis L. Kropf. The Folk-Tales of the Magyars, Collected by Kriza, Erdélyi, Pap, and Others . Translated and edited, with comparative notes by W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf. London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889. Karrik, Valerian. See Carrick, Valery . Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology . Vol. 1. London: William Harrison Ainsworth, 1828. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries . Vol. 2. London: Whittaker, Treacher, and Company, 1833. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries . A new edition, revised and greatly enlarged. London: H. G. Bohn, 1851. Kirby, W. F. The Hero of Esthonia and Other Studies in the Romantic Literature of That Country . Compiled from Esthonian and German Sources. With a Map of Esthonia. In Two Volumes. Volume the First. London: John C. Nimmo, 1895. Kirby, W. F. The Hero of Esthonia and Other Studies in the Romantic Literature of That Country . Compiled from Esthonian and German Sources. With a Map of Esthonia. In Two Volumes. Volume the Second. London: John C. Nimmo, 1895. Kremnitz, Mite. Roumanian Fairy Tales . Collected by Mite Kremnitz. Adapted and arranged by J. M. Percival. New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1885. Lee, James; and Carey, James T. Silesian Folk Tales (The Book of Rübezahl) . New York, Cincinnati, and Chicago: American Book Company, 1915. Mawer, E. B. Roumanian Fairy Tales and Legends . London: H. K. Lewis, 1881. Mijatovich, Elodie L. Serbian Folk-Lore . Translated from the Serbian by Madame Elodie L. Mijatovich. With an introduction by W. Denton. 2nd edition. London: The Columbus Printing, Publishing and Advertising Company, 1899. Mijatovies, Csedomille. Serbian Folk-Lore: Popular Tales . Selected and translated by Madam Csedomille Mijatovies. Edited, with an introduction by W. Denton. London: W. Isbister and Company, 1874. Muatovich, Elodie L. Serbian Fairy Tales . Translated from the Serbian by Madame Elodie L. Muatovich. Illustrated by Sidney Stanley. New York: Robert M. McBride and Company, 1918. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Mügge, Maximilian. Serbian Folk Songs, Fairy Tales, and Proverbs . London: Drane's, 1916. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Naaké, John T. Slavonic Fairy Tales: Collected and Translated from the Russian, Polish, Servian, and Bohemian . London: Henry S. King and Company, 1874. Petrovitch, Woislav. Hero Tales and Legends of the Serbians . London: George G. Harrap and Company, first published 1914, reprinted 1916 and 1921. Pogány, Nándor. The Hungarian Fairy Book . Illustrations by Willy Pogány. New York: F. A. Stokes Company, [1913]. This digitized book is presented by the HathiTrust Digital Library . Ralston, W. R. S. Krilof [Ivan Andreevich Krylov] and His Fables . London: Strahan and Company, Publishers, 1869. Ralston, W. R. S. Krilof [Ivan Andreevich Krylov] and His Fables . 4th edition. London, Paris, and New York: Cassell and Company, 1883. Ralston, W. R. S. Russian Folk-Tales . London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1873. Ralston, W. R. S. Russian Folk-Tales . New York: R. Worthington, 1880. Ralston, W. R. S. The Songs of the Russian People, as Illustrative of Slavonic Mythology and Russian Social Life . 2nd edition. London: Ellis and Green, 1872. Ransome, Arthur. Old Peter's Russian Tales . New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1916. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Steele, Robert. The Russian Garland, Being Russian Folk Tales: Translated from a Collection of Chapbooks Made in Moscow . Edited by Robert Steele and pictured by J. R. de Rosciszewski. London: A. M. Philpot, [1916?]. This digitized book (available in various formats) is presented by the Internet Archive . Strickland, W. W. Segnuis Irritant; or, Eight Primitive Folk-Lore Stories . Translated and compared, with notes, comments, tables, and two supplementary essays. The eight stories are selected and translated from Karel Jaromir Erben's "A Hundred Genuine Popular Slavonic Fairy Stories in the Original Dialects." London: Robert Forder, 1896. Strickland, W. W. North-West Slav Legends and Fairy Stories: A Sequel to Segnius Irritant . Translated from Karel Jaromir Erben's "A Hundred Genuine Popular Slavonic Fairy Stories in the Original Dialects." London: Robert Forder, 1897. Tibbits, Charles John. Folk-Lore and Legends: Russian and Polish . London: W. W. Gibbings, 1890. No author is given; the foreword is signed "C.J.T." Tolstoy, Leo. Fables for Children; Stories for Children; Natural Science Stories; Popular Education; Decembrists; Moral Tales . Translated by Leo Wiener. London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1904. Another edition (Boston: Dana Estes and Company, 1904). This digitized book is presented by the Internet Archive . Wardrop, Marjory. Georgian Folk Tales . London: David Nutt, 1894. Presented by the Internet Archive . Westall, William. Tales and Legends of Saxony and Lusatia . Illustrations by H. W. Petherick. London: Griffith and Farran; Geneva: The Continental Company, 1877. Wheeler, Post. Russian Wonder Tales . With a foreword on the Russian Skazki. Containing twelve of the famous Bilibin illustrations in color. New York: The Century Company, 1921. Wilson, Richard. The Russian Story Book: Containing Tales from the Song-Cycles of Kiev and Novgorod and Other Early Sources . Retold. With sixteen colored plates and line illustrations from drawings by Frank C. Papé. London: Macmillan and Company, 1916. Wratislaw, A. H. Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources . London: Elliot Stock, 1889. Links to related sites England. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from England . Grimm. Grimms' Fairy Tales in English . Ireland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Ireland . Man. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from the Isle of Man . Scandinavia, Finland, and Estonia. Scandinavia, Finland, and Estonia: A Digital Library of Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales . Scotland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Scotland . Wales. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Wales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 17, 2022. Sleeping Beauty Sleeping Beauty tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 410 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2023 Contents Sun, Moon, and Talia (Giambattista Basile). The Sleeping Beauty in the Wood (Charles Perrault). Little Brier-Rose , version of 1812 (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Link to the German text of the above tale: Dornröschen (1812) . Link to the 1857 version of Little Brier-Rose , translated by D. L. Ashliman. Link to the German-language Dornröschen , version of 1857. Link to another "sleeping beauty" story by the Brothers Grimm, The Glass Coffin , translated by Margaret Hunt. Link to the German text of the above tale: Der gläserne Sarg . Maruzzedda (Italy). The Beautiful Anna (Italy. Sun, Pearl, and Anna (Italy). An Old Story (Ireland). The Enchanted Princess; or, The Magic Tower (Greece). The Ninth Captain's Tale ( 1001 Nights ). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Sun, Moon, and Talia Giambattista Basile There once lived a great lord, who was blessed with the birth of a daughter, whom he named Talia. He sent for the wise men and astrologers in his lands, to predict her future. They met, counseled together, and cast her horoscope, and at length they came to the conclusion that she would incur great danger from a splinter of flax. Her father therefore forbade that any flax, hemp, or any other material of that sort be brought into his house, so that she should escape the predestined danger. One day, when Talia had grown into a young and beautiful lady, she was looking out of a window, when she beheld passing that way an old woman, who was spinning. Talia, never having seen a distaff or a spindle, was pleased to see the twirling spindle, and she was so curious as to what thing it was, that she asked the old woman to come to her. Taking the distaff from her hand, she began to stretch the flax. Unfortunately, Talia ran a splinter of flax under her nail, and she fell dead upon the ground. When the old woman saw this, she became frightened and ran down the stairs, and is running still. As soon as the wretched father heard of the disaster which had taken place, he had them, after having paid for this tub of sour wine with casks of tears, lay her out in one of his country mansions. There they seated her on a velvet throne under a canopy of brocade. Wanting to forget all and to drive from his memory his great misfortune, he closed the doors and abandoned forever the house where he had suffered this great loss. After a time, it happened by chance that a king was out hunting and passed that way. One of his falcons escaped from his hand and flew into the house by way of one of the windows. It did not come when called, so the king had one of his party knock at the door, believing the palace to be inhabited. Although he knocked for a length of time, nobody answered, so the king had them bring a vintner's ladder, for he himself would climb up and search the house, to discover what was inside. Thus he climbed up and entered, and looked in all the rooms, and nooks, and corners, and was amazed to find no living person there. At last he came to the salon, and when the king beheld Talia, who seemed to be enchanted, he believed that she was asleep, and he called her, but she remained unconscious. Crying aloud, he beheld her charms and felt his blood course hotly through his veins. He lifted her in his arms, and carried her to a bed, where he gathered the first fruits of love. Leaving her on the bed, he returned to his own kingdom, where, in the pressing business of his realm, he for a time thought no more about this incident. Now after nine months Talia delivered two beautiful children, one a boy and the other a girl. In them could be seen two rare jewels, and they were attended by two fairies, who came to that palace, and put them at their mother's breasts. Once, however, they sought the nipple, and not finding it, began to suck on Talia's fingers, and they sucked so much that the splinter of flax came out. Talia awoke as if from a long sleep, and seeing beside her two priceless gems, she held them to her breast, and gave them the nipple to suck, and the babies were dearer to her than her own life. Finding herself alone in that palace with two children by her side, she did not know what had happened to her; but she did notice that the table was set, and food and drink were brought in to her, although she did not see any attendants. In the meanwhile the king remembered Talia, and saying that he wanted to go hunting, he returned to the palace, and found her awake, and with two cupids of beauty. He was overjoyed, and he told Talia who he was, and how he had seen her, and what had taken place. When she heard this, their friendship was knitted with tighter bonds, and he remained with her for a few days. After that time he bade her farewell, and promised to return soon, and take her with him to his kingdom. And he went to his realm, but he could not find any rest, and at all hours he had in his mouth the names of Talia, and of Sun and Moon (those were the two children's names), and when he took his rest, he called either one or other of them. Now the king's wife began to suspect that something was wrong from the delay of her husband while hunting, and hearing him name continually Talia, Sun, and Moon, she became hot with another kind of heat than the sun's. Sending for the secretary, she said to him, "Listen to me, my son, you are living between two rocks, between the post and the door, between the poker and the grate. If you will tell me with whom the king your master, and my husband, is in love, I will give you treasures untold; and if you hide the truth from me, you will never be found again, dead or alive." The man was terribly frightened. Greed and fear blinded his eyes to all honor and to all sense of justice, and he related to her all things, calling bread bread, and wine wine. The queen, hearing how matters stood, sent the secretary to Talia, in the name of the king, asking her to send the children, for he wished to see them. Talia, with great joy, did as she was commanded. Then the queen, with a heart of Medea, told the cook to kill them, and to make them into several tasteful dishes for her wretched husband. But the cook was tender hearted and, seeing these two beautiful golden apples, felt pity and compassion for them, and he carried them home to his wife, and had her hide them. In their place he prepared two lambs into a hundred different dishes. When the king came, the queen, with great pleasure, had the food served. The king ate with delight, saying, "By the life of Lanfusa, how tasteful this is"; or, "By the soul of my ancestors, this is good." Each time she replied, "Eat, eat, you are eating of your own." For two or three times the king paid no attention to this repetition, but at last seeing that the music continued, he answered, "I know perfectly well that I am eating of my own, because you have brought nothing into this house"; and growing angry, he got up and went to a villa at some distance from his palace, to solace his soul and alleviate his anger. In the meanwhile the queen, not being satisfied of the evil already done, sent for the secretary and told him to go to the palace and to bring Talia back, saying that the king longed for her presence and was expecting her. Talia departed as soon as she heard these words, believing that she was following the commands of her lord, for she greatly longed to see her light and joy, knowing not what was preparing for her. She was met by the queen, whose face glowed from the fierce fire burning inside her, and looked like the face of Nero. She addressed her thus, "Welcome, Madam Busybody! You are a fine piece of goods, you ill weed, who are enjoying my husband. So you are the lump of filth, the cruel bitch, that has caused my head to spin? Change your ways, for you are welcome in purgatory, where I will compensate you for all the damage you have done to me." Talia, hearing these words, began to excuse herself, saying that it was not her fault, because the king her husband had taken possession of her territory when she was drowned in sleep; but the queen would not listen to her excuses, and had a large fire lit in the courtyard of the palace, and commanded that Talia should be cast into it. The lady, perceiving that matters had taken a bad turn, knelt before the queen, and begged her to allow her at least to take off the garments she wore. The queen, not for pity of the unhappy lady, but to gain also those robes, which were embroidered with gold and pearls, told her to undress, saying, "You can take off your clothes. I agree." Talia began to take them off, and with every item that she removed she uttered a loud scream. Having taken off her robe, her skirt, the bodice, and her shift, she was on the point of removing her last garment, when she uttered a last scream louder than the rest. They dragged her towards the pile, to reduce her to lye ashes which would be used to wash Charon's breeches. The king suddenly appeared, and finding this spectacle, demanded to know what was happening. He asked for his children, and his wife -- reproaching him for his treachery -- told him that she had had them slaughtered and served to him as meat. When the wretched king heard this, he gave himself up to despair, saying, "Alas! Then I, myself, am the wolf of my own sweet lambs. Alas! And why did these my veins know not the fountains of their own blood? You renegade bitch, what evil deed is this which you have done? Begone, you shall get your desert as the stumps, and I will not send such a tyrant-faced one to the Colosseum to do her penance!" So saying, he commanded that the queen should be cast into the fire which she had prepared for Talia, and the secretary with her, because he had been the handle for this bitter play, and weaver of this wicked plot. He was going to do the same with the cook, whom he believed to be the slaughterer of his children, when the man cast himself at his feet, saying, "In truth, my lord, for such a deed, there should be nothing else than a pile of living fire, and no other help than a spear from behind, and no other entertainment than twisting and turning within the blazing fire, and I should seek no other honor than to have my ashes, the ashes of a cook, mixed up with the queen's. But this is not the reward that I expect for having saved the children, in spite of the gall of that bitch, who wanted to kill them and to return to your body that which was of your own body." Hearing these words, the king was beside himself. He thought he was dreaming, and he could not believe what his own ears had heard. Therefore, turning to the cook, he said, "If it is true that you have saved my children, be sure that I will take you away from turning the spit, and I will put you in the kitchen of this breast, to turn and twist as you like all my desires, giving you such a reward as shall enable you to call yourself a happy man in this world." While the king spoke these words, the cook's wife, seeing her husband's need, brought forth the two children, Sun and Moon, before their father. And he never tired at playing the game of three with his wife and children, making a mill wheel of kisses, now with one and then with the other. He gave a generous reward to the cook, he made him a chamberlain. He married Talia to wife; and she enjoyed a long life with her husband and her children, thus experiencing the truth of the proverb: Those whom fortune favors Find good luck even in their sleep. Source (books.google.com): Giambattista Basile, Il Pentamerone; or, The Tale of Tales , translated by Richard F. Burton, vol. 2 (London: Henry and Company, 1893), day 5, tale 5. pp. 518-25 . Source (Internet Archive): Giambattista Basile, Il Pentamerone; or, The Tale of Tales , translated by Richard F. Burton (New York: Horace Liveright, 1927), day five, tale five, pp. 420-25 . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. Giambattista Basile was born about 1575 in Naples and died 1632 in Giugliano, Campania. His Lo cunto de li cunti (The Story of Stories) was published in 1634, and named Il pentamerone because of its similarity to Boccaccio's Decamerone. The framework of Lo cunto de li cunti provides a context for ten women to tell one story each every day for five days. The fifty resulting stories, all based on oral tradition, comprise one of the monumental folktale collections of all time. Return to the table of contents . The Sleeping Beauty in the Wood Charles Perrault There were formerly a king and a queen, who were so sorry that they had no children; so sorry that it cannot be expressed. They went to all the waters in the world; vows, pilgrimages, all ways were tried, and all to no purpose. At last, however, the queen had a daughter. There was a very fine christening; and the princess had for her godmothers all the fairies they could find in the whole kingdom (they found seven), that every one of them might give her a gift, as was the custom of fairies in those days. By this means the princess had all the perfections imaginable. After the ceremonies of the christening were over, all the company returned to the king's palace, where was prepared a great feast for the fairies. There was placed before every one of them a magnificent cover with a case of massive gold, wherein were a spoon, knife, and fork, all of pure gold set with diamonds and rubies. But as they were all sitting down at table they saw come into the hall a very old fairy, whom they had not invited, because it was above fifty years since she had been out of a certain tower, and she was believed to be either dead or enchanted. The king ordered her a cover, but could not furnish her with a case of gold as the others, because they had only seven made for the seven fairies. The old fairy fancied she was slighted, and muttered some threats between her teeth. One of the young fairies who sat by her overheard how she grumbled; and, judging that she might give the little princess some unlucky gift, went, as soon as they rose from table, and hid herself behind the hangings, that she might speak last, and repair, as much as she could, the evil which the old fairy might intend. In the meanwhile all the fairies began to give their gifts to the princess. The youngest gave her for gift that she should be the most beautiful person in the world; the next, that she should have the wit of an angel; the third, that she should have a wonderful grace in everything she did; the fourth, that she should dance perfectly well; the fifth, that she should sing like a nightingale; and the sixth, that she should play all kinds of music to the utmost perfection. The old fairy's turn coming next, with a head shaking more with spite than age, she said that the princess should have her hand pierced with a spindle and die of the wound. This terrible gift made the whole company tremble, and everybody fell a crying. At this very instant the young fairy came out from behind the hangings, and spake these words aloud: "Assure yourselves, O King and Queen, that your daughter shall not die of this disaster. It is true, I have no power to undo entirely what my elder has done. The princess shall indeed pierce her hand with a spindle; but, instead of dying, she shall only fall into a profound sleep, which shall last a hundred years, at the expiration of which a king's son shall come and awake her." The king, to avoid the misfortune foretold by the old fairy, caused immediately proclamation to be made, whereby everybody was forbidden, on pain of death, to spin with a distaff and spindle, or to have so much as any spindle in their houses. About fifteen or sixteen years after, the king and queen being gone to one of their houses of pleasure, the young princess happened one day to divert herself in running up and down the palace; when going up from one apartment to another, she came into a little room on the top of the tower, where a good old woman, alone, was spinning with her spindle. This good woman had never heard of the king's proclamation against spindles. "What are you doing there, goody?" said the princess. "I am spinning, my pretty child," said the old woman, who did not know who she was. "Ha!" said the princess, "this is very pretty; how do you do it? Give it to me, that I may see if I can do so." She had no sooner taken it into her hand than, whether being very hasty at it, somewhat unhandy, or that the decree of the fairy had so ordained it, it ran into her hand, and she fell down in a swoon. The good old woman, not knowing very well what to do in this affair, cried out for help. People came in from every quarter in great numbers; they threw water upon the princess's face, unlaced her, struck her on the palms of her hands, and rubbed her temples with Hungary-water; but nothing would bring her to herself. And now the king, who came up at the noise, bethought himself of the prediction of the fairies, and, judging very well that this must necessarily come to pass, since the fairies had said it, caused the princess to be carried into the finest apartment in his palace, and to be laid upon a bed all embroidered with gold and silver. One would have taken her for a little angel, she was so very beautiful; for her swooning away had not diminished one bit of her complexion; her cheeks were carnation, and her lips were coral; indeed, her eyes were shut, but she was heard to breathe softly, which satisfied those about her that she was not dead. The king commanded that they should not disturb her, but let her sleep quietly till her hour of awaking was come. The good fairy who had saved her life by condemning her to sleep a hundred years was in the kingdom of Matakin, twelve thousand leagues off, when this accident befell the princess; but she was instantly informed of it by a little dwarf, who had boots of seven leagues, that is, boots with which he could tread over seven leagues of ground in one stride. The fairy came away immediately, and she arrived, about an hour after, in a fiery chariot drawn by dragons. The king handed her out of the chariot, and she approved everything he had done, but as she had very great foresight, she thought when the princess should awake she might not know what to do with herself, being all alone in this old palace; and this was what she did: she touched with her wand everything in the palace (except the king and queen) -- governesses, maids of honor, ladies of the bedchamber, gentlemen, officers, stewards, cooks, undercooks, scullions, guards, with their beefeaters, pages, footmen; she likewise touched all the horses which were in the stables, pads as well as others, the great dogs in the outward court and pretty little Mopsey too, the princess's little spaniel, which lay by her on the bed. Immediately upon her touching them they all fell asleep, that they might not awake before their mistress and that they might be ready to wait upon her when she wanted them. The very spits at the fire, as full as they could hold of partridges and pheasants, did fall asleep also. All this was done in a moment. Fairies are not long in doing their business. And now the king and the queen, having kissed their dear child without waking her, went out of the palace and put forth a proclamation that nobody should dare to come near it. This, however, was not necessary, for in a quarter of an hour's time there grew up all round about the park such a vast number of trees, great and small, bushes and brambles, twining one within another, that neither man nor beast could pass through; so that nothing could be seen but the very top of the towers of the palace; and that, too, not unless it was a good way off. Nobody; doubted but the fairy gave herein a very extraordinary sample of her art, that the princess, while she continued sleeping, might have nothing to fear from any curious people. When a hundred years were gone and passed the son of the king then reigning, and who was of another family from that of the sleeping princess, being gone a hunting on that side of the country, asked: What those towers were which he saw in the middle of a great thick wood? Everyone answered according as they had heard. Some said that it was a ruinous old castle, haunted by spirits. Others, that all the sorcerers and witches of the country kept there their sabbath or night's meeting. The common opinion was that an ogre lived there, and that he carried thither all the little children he could catch, that he might eat them up at his leisure, without anybody being able to follow him, as having himself only the power to pass through the wood. The prince was at a stand, not knowing what to believe, when a very good countryman spake to him thus: "May it please your royal highness, it is now about fifty years since I heard from my father, who heard my grandfather say, that there was then in this castle a princess, the most beautiful was ever seen; that she must sleep there a hundred years, and should be waked by a king's son, for whom she was reserved." The young prince was all on fire at these words, believing, without weighing the matter, that he could put an end to this rare adventure; and, pushed on by love and honor, resolved that moment to look into it. Scarce had he advanced toward the wood when all the great trees, the bushes, and brambles gave way of themselves to let him pass through; he walked up to the castle which he saw at the end of a large avenue which he went into; and what a little surprised him was that he saw none of his people could follow him, because the trees closed again as soon as he had passed through them. However, he did not cease from continuing his way; a young and amorous prince is always valiant. He came into a spacious outward court, where everything he saw might have frozen the most fearless person with horror. There reigned all over a most frightful silence; the image of death everywhere showed itself, and there was nothing to be seen but stretched-out bodies of men and animals, all seeming to be dead. He, however, very well knew, by the ruby faces and pimpled noses of the beefeaters, that they were only asleep; and their goblets, wherein still remained some drops of wine, showed plainly that they fell asleep in their cups. He then crossed a court paved with marble, went up the stairs and came into the guard chamber, where guards were standing in their ranks, with their muskets upon their shoulders, and snoring as loud as they could. After that he went through several rooms full of gentlemen and ladies, all asleep, some standing, others sitting. At last he came into a chamber all gilded with gold, where he saw upon a bed, the curtains of which were all open, the finest sight was ever beheld -- a princess, who appeared to be about fifteen or sixteen years of age, and whose bright and, in a manner, resplendent beauty, had somewhat in it divine. He approached with trembling and admiration, and fell down before her upon his knees. And now, as the enchantment was at an end, the princess awaked, and looking on him with eyes more tender than the first view might seem to admit of. "Is it you, my prince?" said she to him. "You have waited a long while." The prince, charmed with these words, and much more with the manner in which they were spoken, knew not how to show his joy and gratitude; he assured her that he loved her better than he did himself; their discourse was not well connected, they did weep more than talk -- little eloquence, a great deal of love. He was more at a loss than she, and we need not wonder at it; she had time to think on what to say to him; for it is very probable (though history mentions nothing of it) that the good fairy, during so long a sleep, had given her very agreeable dreams. In short, they talked four hours together, and yet they said not half what they had to say. In the meanwhile all the palace awaked; everyone thought upon their particular business, and as all of them were not in love they were ready to die for hunger. The chief lady of honor, being as sharp set as other folks, grew very impatient, and told the princess aloud that supper was served up. The prince helped the princess to rise; she was entirely dressed, and very magnificently, but his royal highness took care not to tell her that she was dressed like his great-grandmother, and had a point band peeping over a high collar; she looked not a bit less charming and beautiful for all that. They went into the great hall of looking-glasses, where they supped, and were served by the princess's officers, the violins and hautboys played old tunes, but very excellent, though it was now above a hundred years since they had played; and after supper, without losing any time, the lord almoner married them in the chapel of the castle, and the chief lady of honor drew the curtains. They had but very little sleep -- the princess had no occasion; and the prince left her next morning to return to the city, where his father must needs have been in pain for him. The prince told him that he lost his way in the forest as he was hunting, and that he had lain in the cottage of a charcoal burner, who gave him cheese and brown bread. The king, his father, who was a good man, believed him; but his mother could not be persuaded it was true; and seeing that he went almost every day a hunting, and that he always had some excuse ready for so doing, though he had lain out three or four nights together, she began to suspect that he was married, for he lived with the princess above two whole years, and had by her two children, the eldest of which, who was a daughter, was named Morning , and the youngest, who was a son, they called Day , because he was a great deal handsomer and more beautiful than his sister. The queen spoke several times to her son, to inform herself after what manner he did pass his time, and that in this he ought in duty to satisfy her. But he never dared to trust her with his secret; he feared her, though he loved her, for she was of the race of the ogres, and the king would never have married her had it not been for her vast riches; it was even whispered about the court that she had ogreish inclinations, and that, whenever she saw little children passing by, she had all the difficulty in the world to avoid falling upon them. And so the prince would never tell her one word. But when the king was dead, which happened about two years afterward, and he saw himself lord and master, he openly declared his marriage; and he went in great ceremony to conduct his queen to the palace. They made a magnificent entry into the capital city, she riding between her two children. Soon after, the king went to make war with the Emperor Contalabutte, his neighbor. He left the government of the kingdom to the queen his mother, and earnestly recommended to her care his wife and children. He was obliged to continue his expedition all the summer, and as soon as he departed the queen mother sent her daughter-in-law to a country house among the woods, that she might with the more ease gratify her horrible longing. Some few days afterward she went thither herself, and said to her clerk of the kitchen: "I have a mind to eat little Morning for my dinner tomorrow." "Ah! madam," cried the clerk of the kitchen. "I will have it so," replied the queen (and this she spoke in the tone of an ogress who had a strong desire to eat fresh meat), "and will eat her with a sauce Robert ." The poor man, knowing very well that he must not play tricks with ogresses, took his great knife and went up into little Morning's chamber. She was then four years old, and came up to him jumping and laughing, to take him about the neck, and ask him for some sugar candy. Upon which he began to weep, the great knife fell out of his hand, and he went into the back yard, and killed a little lamb, and dressed it with such good sauce that his mistress assured him that she had never eaten anything so good in her life. He had at the same time taken up little Morning, and carried her to his wife, to conceal her in the lodging he had at the bottom of the courtyard. About eight days afterward the wicked queen said to the clerk of the kitchen, "I will sup on little Day." He answered not a word, being resolved to cheat her as he had done before. He went to find out little Day, and saw him with a little foil in his hand, with which he was fencing with a great monkey, the child being then only three years of age. He took him up in his arms and carried him to his wife, that she might conceal him in her chamber along with his sister, and in the room of little Day cooked up a young kid, very tender, which the ogress found to be wonderfully good. This was hitherto all mighty well; but one evening this wicked queen said to her clerk of the kitchen, "I will eat the queen with the same sauce I had with her children." It was now that the poor clerk of the kitchen despaired of being able to deceive her. The young queen was turned of twenty, not reckoning the hundred years she had been asleep; and how to find in the yard a beast so firm was what puzzled him. He took then a resolution, that he might save his own life, to cut the queen's throat; and going up into her chamber, with intent to do it at once, he put himself into as great fury as he could possibly, and came into the young queen's room with his dagger in his hand. He would not, however, surprise her, but told her, with a great deal of respect, the orders he had received from the queen mother. "Do it; do it" (said she, stretching out her neck). "Execute your orders, and then I shall go and see my children, my poor children, whom I so much and so tenderly loved," for she thought them dead ever since they had been taken away without her knowledge. "No, no, madam" (cried the poor clerk of the kitchen, all in tears); "you shall not die, and yet you shall see your children again; but then you must go home with me to my lodgings, where I have concealed them, and I shall deceive the queen once more, by giving her in your stead a young hind." Upon this he forthwith conducted her to his chamber, where, leaving her to embrace her children, and cry along with them, he went and dressed a young hind, which the queen had for her supper, and devoured it with the same appetite as if it had been the young queen. Exceedingly was she delighted with her cruelty, and she had invented a story to tell the king, at his return, how the mad wolves had eaten up the queen his wife and her two children. One evening, as she was, according to her custom, rambling round about the courts and yards of the palace to see if she could smell any fresh meat, she heard, in a ground room, little Day crying, for his mamma was going to whip him, because he had been naughty; and she heard, at the same time, little Morning begging pardon for her brother. The ogress presently knew the voice of the queen and her children, and being quite mad that she had been thus deceived, she commanded next morning, by break of day (with a most horrible voice, which made everybody tremble), that they should bring into the middle of the great court a large tub, which she caused to be filled with toads, vipers, snakes, and all sorts of serpents, in order to have thrown into it the queen and her children, the clerk of the kitchen, his wife and maid; all whom she had given orders should be brought thither with their hands tied behind them. They were brought out accordingly, and the executioners were just going to throw them into the tub, when the king (who was not so soon expected) entered the court on horseback (for he came post) and asked, with the utmost astonishment, what was the meaning of that horrible spectacle. No one dared to tell him, when the ogress, all enraged to see what had happened, threw herself head foremost into the tub, and was instantly devoured by the ugly creatures she had ordered to be thrown into it for others. The king could not but be very sorry, for she was his mother; but he soon comforted himself with his beautiful wife and his pretty children. MORAL Many a girl has waited long For a husband brave or strong; But I'm sure I never met Any sort of woman yet Who could wait a hundred years, Free from fretting, free from fears. Now, our story seems to show That a century or so, Late or early, matters not; True love comes by fairy-lot. Some old folk will even say It grows better by delay. Yet this good advice, I fear, Helps us neither there nor here. Though philosophers may prate How much wiser 'tis to wait, Maids will be a-sighing still -- Young blood must when young blood will! Source (books.google.com): Andrew Lang, The Blue Fairy Book , 5th ed. (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1891), pp. 54-63 . Source (Internet Archive): Andrew Lang, The Blue Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1889), pp. 54-63 . I have carefully modernized the spelling and punctuation. The translation of the verse moral (omitted by Lang) comes from Perrault's Fairy Tales , translated by S. R. Littlewood (London: Herbert and Daniel, 1911), p. 23 . Lang's source: Charles Perrault, "La belle au bois dormant," Histoires ou contes du temps passé, avec des moralitéz (Paris, 1697). Lang edited a critical edition (in the original French, but with an English title): Perrault's Popular Tales , edited from the original editions, with introduction, etc. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1888). The tale "La belle au bois dormant" is found on pp. 7-19 . Return to the table of contents . Little Brier-Rose Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm A king and queen had no children, although they wanted one very much. Then one day while the queen was sitting in her bath, a crab crept out of the water onto the ground and said, "Your wish will soon be fulfilled, and you will bring a daughter into the world." And that is what happened. The king was so happy about the birth of the princess that he held a great celebration. He also invited the fairies who lived in his kingdom, but because he had only twelve golden plates, one had to be left out, for there were thirteen of them. The fairies came to the celebration, and as it was ending they presented the child with gifts. The one promised her virtue, the second one gave beauty, and so on, each one offering something desirable and magnificent. The eleventh fairy had just presented her gift when the thirteenth fairy walked in. She was very angry that she had not been invited and cried out, "Because you did not invite me, I tell you that in her fifteenth year, your daughter will prick herself with a spindle and fall over dead." The parents were horrified, but the twelfth fairy, who had not yet offered her wish, said, "It shall not be her death. She will only fall into a hundred-year sleep." The king, hoping to rescue his dear child, issued an order that all spindles in the entire kingdom should be destroyed. The princess grew and became a miracle of beauty. One day, when she had just reached her fifteenth year, the king and queen went away, leaving her all alone in the castle. She walked from room to room, following her heart's desire. Finally she came to an old tower. A narrow stairway led up to it. Being curious, she climbed up until she came to a small door. There was a small yellow key in the door. She turned it, and the door sprang open. She found herself in a small room where an old woman sat spinning flax. She was attracted to the old woman, and joked with her, and said that she too would like to try her hand at spinning. She picked up the spindle, but no sooner did she touch it, than she pricked herself with it and then fell down into a deep sleep. At that same moment the king and his attendants returned, and everyone began to fall asleep: the horses in the stalls, the pigeons on the roof, the dogs in the courtyard, the flies on the walls. Even the fire on the hearth flickered, stopped moving, and fell asleep. The roast stopped sizzling. The cook let go of the kitchen boy, whose hair he was about to pull. The maid dropped the chicken that she was plucking. They all slept. And a thorn hedge grew up around the entire castle, growing higher and higher, until nothing at all could be seen of it. Princes, who had heard about the beautiful Brier-Rose, came and tried to free her, but they could not penetrate the hedge. It was as if the thorns were firmly attached to hands. The princes became stuck in them, and they died miserably. And thus it continued for many long years. Then one day a prince was traveling through the land. An old man told him about the belief that there was a castle behind the thorn hedge, with a wonderfully beautiful princess asleep inside with all of her attendants. His grandfather had told him that many princes had tried to penetrate the hedge, but that they had gotten stuck in the thorns and had been pricked to death. "I'm not afraid of that," said the prince. "I shall penetrate the hedge and free the beautiful Brier-Rose." He went forth, but when he came to the thorn hedge, it turned into flowers. They separated, and he walked through, but after he passed, they turned back into thorns. He went into the castle. Horses and colorful hunting dogs were asleep in the courtyard. Pigeons, with their little heads stuck under they wings, were sitting on the roof. As he walked inside, the flies on the wall, the fire in the kitchen, the cook and the maid were all asleep. He walked further. All the attendants were asleep; and still further, the king and the queen. It was so quiet that he could hear his own breath. Finally he came to the old tower where Brier-Rose was lying asleep. The prince was so amazed at her beauty that he bent over and kissed her. At that moment she awoke, and with her the king and the queen, and all the attendants, and the horses and the dogs, and the pigeons on the roof, and the flies on the walls. The fire stood up and flickered, and then finished cooking the food. The roast sizzled away. The cook boxed the kitchen boy's ears. And the maid finished plucking the chicken. Then the prince and Brier-Rose got married, and they lived long and happily until they died. Source (Wikisource): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Dornröschen," Kinder- und Haus-Märchen . Gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 50, pp. 225-29 . Source (Deutsches Textarchiv): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Dornröschen," Kinder- und Haus-Märchen . Gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 50, pp. 225-29 . In some versions (including later Grimm editions ) the harbinger of pregnancy is a frog. Return to the table of contents . Maruzzedda Italy (Sicily) Once upon a time there was a poor shoemaker who had three beautiful daughters. The youngest was the most beautiful. Her name was Maruzzedda [Little Maria]. The older sisters did not like Maruzzedda because she was so extremely beautiful. The shoemaker was poor and often had to go from place to place day after day without earning anything. One day he said to his oldest daughter: "Come with me tomorrow when I go out to look for work. Maybe then I'll have better luck. The oldest daughter went with him, and he earned one tarì. Then he said: "Listen, I am hungry. Let's spend ten grani on food and take ten grani back to the others." They did this, bought themselves something to eat, and gave the others half the money. The next morning the shoemaker took the second daughter with him and earned three carlini. Then he said: "Let us spend 15 graini on food and take 15 graini to the others." That is what they did, and took home half the money. On the third day the shoemaker took the Maruzzedda with him, and this time he earned two tarì. Then he said: "Listen, Maruzzedda, let us spend one tari on food, and just take home one tarì for your sisters." But she answered: "No, father, it would be better for us to go home straight away and eat together." When the father arrived home, he told the two sisters what had happened, and they said: "Just look at this rogue daughter. Shouldn't she always do just what you want?" With such words they incited the father against the innocent Maruzzedda. The next morning he took her with him again and earned three tarì . Once again he said: "Listen, Maruzzedda, let us spend three carlini for our food and take the other three carlini home to your sisters. She answered: "No, dear Father, it would be better to go home straight away. Why shouldn't we all eat together?" When the father came home, once again he told his other daughters what had happened. They spoke even harsher words about the poor sister: "Why do you want to keep that impudent girl in the house any longer? If you drive her away, you'll be rid of her." But the father did not want to do this. Then the sisters said: "Take her with you tomorrow and leave her alone in some lonely place, so that she cannot find her way home." The father was blinded and allowed himself to be deceived by the sisters, and he took Maruzzedda with him the next morning. Traveling far he came to a completely unknown region, and said to her: "Wait for me a moment and rest. I will come back shortly." Maruzzeddda sat down, and the shoemaker went away. She waited and waited, but her father did not come back. The sun was setting, and the father still didn't come. Then she finally thought very sadly: "For sure my father wants to abandon me, so I will just wander out into the wide world." So she walked away, and walked until she was tired, and nightfall was approaching. At first she did not know where to find shelter, but then she saw a magnificent castle in the distance. She walked towards it, went inside and climbed the stairs, but she did not meet anyone. Then she went through the rooms, which were lavishly decorated, and in one of them there was a well-furnished table, but there were no people there. Finally she came to the last room, where she saw a beautiful maiden lying on a bier. She was dead. "There is no one here, so I will just stay here until someone comes and chases me away." She sat down at the table, ate and drank as much as she wanted, and then went to sleep in a beautiful bed. She lived like that for a long time, and no one bothered her. One day it happened that her father came by just as she was looking out the window. When he saw her, he greeted her joyfully, for he was sorry to have left her, and he asked her how she was doing. "Oh, I'm fine," replied Maruzzedda, "I've taken a job here and I am doing well." "May I come up a little?" asked the father. "No, no!" she replied. "My masters are very strict about this. They do not allow me to let anyone in. Farewell, and greet my sisters." The shoemaker went home and told his daughters that he had found Maruzzedda again. Then they misled him again with false words so that he became angry with the innocent Maruzzedda. A few days later the envious sisters baked a cake filled with poison and gave it to their father to take to the poor girl. However, that night while Maruzzedda was asleep, the dead maiden appeared to her in a dream and called to her: "Maruzzedda! Maruzzedda!" "What do you want?" asked Maruzzedda, half asleep and half awake. "Tomorrow your father will bring you a beautiful cake, but be careful not to eat it, because it is poisoned. Instead, first give a piece of it to the cat." With that Maruzzedda woke up and found herself alone. So she thought: "I must have been dreaming," and fell back asleep. The next morning she saw her father coming. She let him come up the steps, but did not want to let him inside. "If my masters see you, they will dismiss me from my job." "Well then, my child," answered the shoemaker, "your sisters send you their greetings, and they send you this cake." "Tell my sisters that the cake is very beautiful," replied Maruzzedda. "I thank them very much for it." "Don't you want to taste a little piece?" asked the father. "No, I can't," she answered, "because now I have work to do. Later, when my work is finished, I'll taste it." Then she gave him some money and told him to go. When he was gone, she gave the cat a piece of the cake, and after a few moments the cat died. Then she realized how truthfully the dead maiden had warned her, and she threw the cake away. The envious sisters had no peace at home and wanted to know what had happened to Maruzzedda. Thus one morning the shoemaker set off again to the castle. When he knocked there, Maruzzedda came to meet him, completely safe and sound. "How are you, dear child?" he asked." "I'm doing quite well, dear father," she replied. "Let me look around the castle," he asked. "What are you thinking?" she said. "That would cost me my job." Then she gave him some money and sent him away. When the father returned to his daughters and told them that Maruzzedda was completely healthy, they hated their poor sister even more than before. Then they made a beautiful hat that was enchanted so that whoever put it on would remain rigid and motionless. The shoemaker was to take this hat to Maruzzedda. That night the dead maiden once again appeared to Maruzzedda in a dream and called to her: "Maruzzedda! Maruzzedda!" "What do you want?" she asked. "Tomorrow morning your father will bring you a beautiful, fine hat," said the dead maiden. But be careful not to put it on, for if you do so, you will become rigid and motionless." The next morning the shoemaker came and brought his daughter the beautiful hat. "Tell my sisters that the hat is very beautiful, and I thank them very much," she said to her father. "Don't you just want to put it on, so I can see how it looks on you?" he asked. "No, no, I have to work now," she answered. "Later, when I go to mass, I will wear it." With that she gave him some money and told him to go. But she put the hat in a box and did not tear it up, as she actually should have done. The sisters were now convinced that Maruzzedda had hurt herself with the hat, and they did not worry about her any further. By God's grace the dead maiden was now allowed to enter heavenly glory. Then she appeared to Maruzzerda for the last time in a dream and said: "God grants me to enter into my peace. I leave this castle and everything in it to you. Live happily and enjoy these riches." With that she disappeared, and the bier remained empty. A long time had now passed when one day Maruzzedda remembered to tidy up her boxes and chests. She picked up the enchanted hat, and because it had been so long, she forgot who had sent it to her and thought: "Oh, what a pretty hat! I will try it on." But as soon as she put the hat on, she became rigid and motionless and could no longer move at all. But in the night the dead maiden appeared, because the Lord had allowed her to come back to earth. She took poor Maruzzedda and put her on the bier, then she flew back to paradise. Now Maruzzedda lay there as if dead; but she neither turned pale nor did she become cold. One day after she had lain there for a long time, the king went hunting and came to the area around the castle. There he saw a beautiful bird, shot at it, and hit it. The bird fell into the room where Maruzzedda was lying on the bier. The king tried to enter the castle, but all the doors were locked, and no one answered his knock, so he had two of his hunters climb in through the window. When they saw the beautiful girl they forgot the bird and the king. All they could do was to look at the dead Maruzzedda. The king became impatient and finally called out: "What are you doing in there? Hurry up!" Then they came to the window and asked the king to come inside, because there was a girl there of such wonderful beauty that they had never seen anything like it. The king climbed into the room through the window, and when he saw Maruzzedda, he could not take his eyes from her. He leaned over her and noticed that she was still warm. He shouted: "The girl is not dead. She has only feinted. Let's try to revive her." So they tried to awaken her. They rubbed her and untied her dress, but it was all in vain. Maruzzedda remained rigid. Then the king finally took off her hat to cool her forehead, and she immediately opened her eyes and woke up from her slumber. Then the king called out: "You shall be my wife," and embraced her. However, the king had a mother who was an evil sorceress. So he was afraid to take Maruzzedda with him to his castle. He said to Maruzzedda: "Stay here. I will come as often as I can." So Maruzzedda lived in the castle and was secretly married to the king. He came and visited her whenever he went hunting. After a year she gave birth to her first son and named him T'amo [I love you]. Another year later she gave birth to her second son and named him T'amai [I loved you]. And yet another year later she had a third son, and she named him T'amerò [I will love you]. Now the old queen had noticed that her son went hunting very often and was absent for a long time. She made many inquiries and finally heard about his marriage. Then she summoned a trusted servant and said: "Go to the castle where the king's wife lives and say to her: 'My lady, the queen will accept you favorably if you will send your eldest son to her today.'" The servant did this, and poor Maruzzedda allowed herself to be deceived and gave him her eldest son. The next day the old queen sent for the second son and then the third. When she had all three children with her, she summoned her cook and said to him: "You must kill these three children and bring me their livers and hearts as proof." Now the cook had children of his own, and his fatherly heart took pity on the poor, innocent little ones, so he did not kill them, but instead took them to his house and hid them there. Then he brought the hearts and livers of three little goats to the queen. At that time the king was sick and was lying in his bed. Then the old queen again sent a messenger to Maruzzedda. He said to her: "Your husband is sick. Come and take care of him." Maruzzedda put on three dresses, one on top of the other, and then she went to the castle. When she entered the courtyard, a big fire was burning there. The old queen stood there and called out: "Throw the slut into the fire!" Then Maruzzedda begged: "Let me first take off my clothes." With that she pulled off the first dress and called out in a loud, piercing voice: "Tamo!" Now the queen had a whole band of musicians lined up in front of the king's door, and they were to play with all their might so that the king could not hear anything that was going on in the courtyard. But he did hear his wife's call, even if only very faintly. "Stop your music!" he shouted, but the musicians continued to play as loudly as they could. Then Maruzzedda pulled off the second dress and shouted even louder: "T'amai!" This time the king heard it better and called out again: "Stop your music!" But the musicians had received orders from the queen not to obey him, and they continued to play. Then Maruzzedda pulled off the third dress, and in the anguish of her heart she cried as loudly as she could: "T'amerò!" The king heard her scream, jumped out of bed, and ran down to the courtyard. When he got there, the servants were about to throw poor Maruzzedda into the fire. He stopped them and ordered them instead to bind the old queen and throw her into the fire. Then he hugged his wife and said: "Now you shall be queen." "Oh," she replied, "but above all else, take me to my children!" "Where are the children?" asked the king. "Why are they not here?" cried the poor mother. "O my children, my dear children!" Then she told the king how his mother had sent for the three children, but no one knew about them, and there was great sadness in the castle. Then the cook called to the king and said to him: "Your Majesty, and you, Madam Queen, take comfort! The little children are safe and sound in my house. The old queen had indeed ordered me to kill them, but my heart took pity on them, and I let them live." Then the three children were brought forth, and their parents hugged them with great joy. Then the king and queen celebrated a lovely feast, and they generously rewarded the faithful cook. Thus they lived joyfully and contentedly, but we came away with nothing. Source (books.google.com): Laura Gonzenbach, "Von Maruzzedda," Sicilianische Märchen: Aus dem Volksmund gesammelt , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1870), no. 3, pp. 7-14 . Source (Internet Archive): Laura Gonzenbach, "Von Maruzzedda," Sicilianische Märchen: Aus dem Volksmund gesammelt , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1870), no. 3, pp. 7-14 . Return to the table of contents . The Beautiful Anna Italy (Sicily) Once upon a time there were three sisters, all three of whom were very beautiful, but the youngest was the most beautiful of all. Her name was Anna. The three girls had neither father nor mother and lived from their handwork. The first spun and coiled the yarn, the second wove the linen, and the youngest sewed shirts and other clothing from it. One day as they were sitting in front of the house door doing their work, the king's son came by on his way to hunting. Seeing the three beautiful girls, he said: "How beautiful is the one who spins, how beautiful is the one who weaves, but the one who sews is the most beautiful of all." The two older sisters became jealous when they heard that the prince liked their sister better than them, and the oldest said: "Tomorrow I will sew, and Anna can spin." But when the next morning the prince rode past again, he said: "How beautiful is the one who sews, how beautiful is the one who weaves, but the one who spins is the most beautiful of all." The sisters became even more jealous, and on the third morning Anna had to weave. But this time the prince said: "How beautiful is the one who sews, how beautiful is the one who spins, but the one who weaves is the most beautiful of all." The sisters could no longer stand poor Anna, and they discussed how they could do away with her. They decided to take her to a wilderness area and leave her there alone so that she could not find her way back home again. So the oldest sister said to Anna: "Anna, come with me. Here is some dirty laundry that we should wash in a stream." Anna agreed to this, and so the two went on their way. When they came to a wilderness area, the sister said: "Oh, Anna, I forgot to bring the soap with me. Wait for me here for a while I go back and get it." The beautiful Anna sat down and waited for her sister, and waited, and waited, but no one came. Then she began to cry bitterly, and thought: "She left me alone on purpose so that I should die. So be it. I will not go back to my sisters, but instead, I'll wander out into the wide world to seek my fortune." So she set forth and wandered until she finally came to a large, beautiful house. She knocked, and a woman opened the door and asked her what she wanted. "Oh, good woman," begged the beautiful Anna, "please let me rest here tonight. I am a poor girl and am all alone in the world." "Oh, you poor child," said the woman, "how did you get here? If my husband finds you, he will eat you. But I feel sorry for you and will try to hide you. Maybe I will be able to dissuade him." So the woman hid the beautiful Anna. Soon afterward her husband came home, grumbling: "I smell human flesh! I smell human flesh!" "So what?" answered the woman. "You always smell human flesh. That's because you've already eaten so many people. Just think, today a girl came by here who was more beautiful than the sun. I believe that if you had seen her, you would have let her live." When she saw that her husband had calmed down, she brought out the beautiful Anna, and she was so beautiful that the ogre loved her with all his heart and did not want to eat her. "Stay with us, you beautiful girl." he said. "We will take good care of you." So the beautiful Anna stayed with the ogre and his wife and was treated like a member of the family. But after a while the ogre died, and soon after him, his wife died as well. The beautiful Anna stayed alone in the big house, and now all the property belonged to her. One day she was standing on the balcony when her oldest sister walked past. She recognized the beautiful Anna straight away and asked how she was doing. "I'm fine," replied Anna, but she did not invite her sister to come inside. "If I had known that I would meet you here, I would have brought you a present," said the sister. "Thank you," replied Anna, "but I don't need anything, and I don't want to receive anything from anyone." The oldest sister went back home and said to the second sister: "Think about it, I have seen our sister Anna. She has become even more beautiful, is dressed finely, and lives in a big house." The hearts of the two sisters were filled with envy, and they planned how they could destroy poor Anna. They took a grape and poisoned it, and the next day the oldest sister set out to see the beautiful Anna. She was sitting on her terrace working. When her sister saw her, she went up and called out in a very friendly way: "Oh, dear little sister, how happy I am to see you again. And how beautiful you have become! Look, I have brought you a beautiful grape. Eat it as a favor to me." "Thank you," replied Anna, "but as you can see, I have the whole garden full of grapes. I don't need yours." But the sister did not stop begging until Anna finally put the grape in her mouth. The grape stuck in her throat, and she fell over as if she were dead. With that the sister left her lying there on the terrace and went home satisfied. Now one day it happened that the prince was out hunting, and he passed by the house. He saw a beautiful bird sitting on the terrace, and he shot it. The bird fell onto the terrace. Then the prince went up the stairs and wandered through all the rooms, but he did not see a human soul. However, when he came to the terrace, there was a beautiful girl lying there, and when he looked at her more closely, it was the beautiful Anna. He began to cry and laid his hands on her and said: "How pretty is this little nose, how pretty is this little mouth, but there is something wrong with this little neck." When he touched her neck the grape popped out, and the beautiful Anna opened her eyes. She was alive again. Then the prince rejoiced and said: "You shall be my wife." Now at home he had an evil mother, so he could not bring the beautiful Anna to his castle. He left her in her own house, and every day when he went out hunting, he came and visited her. A year later, Anna gave birth her first son, and because he was so beautiful she named him "Sun." After another year she gave birth to a beautiful girl and named her "Moon." The children thrived and became more and more beautiful, but their mother was still not allowed to come to the royal castle. But still, the prince came and visited her every day. However, once he became ill, so ill that he had to stay in bed for many days and was not able to go to her. He said over and over again: "Oh my son Sun, oh my daughter Moon, what is my wife Anna doing all alone?" The old queen heard this and immediately summoned her son's trusted servant and said to him: "If you don't tell me straight away who the prince is talking about, I will rip your head off." The servant confessed to her that Anna was the prince's wife and that Sun and Moon were his beautiful children. "Well," said the queen, "Go immediately to Madam Anna and say to her: 'Your husband has confessed everything to his mother, and she now wants to see her little grandchildren.' Then take the children, murder them, and bring me their hearts and tongues for proof." The servant sadly went to the beautiful Anna and told her that the prince had sent him to fetch his children. The beautiful Anna dressed the children in their most beautiful clothes and handed them over to the servant. He led them away, but when he was supposed to murder them, he took pity on the innocent children. He let them live and brought them to his own mother. He took the hearts and tongues of two young goats to the queen. The next morning the queen sent him back to bring the beautiful Anna herself to the castle. Now the beautiful Anna had three dresses that were decorated with little bells, one with silver bells, one with gold bells and one with diamond bells. She put all three of them on: one on top of the other. Then she went to the castle. But in the castle courtyard there was a big fire burning beneath a cauldron with boiling oil. The old queen was standing next to it and ordered that poor Anna should be thrown into the boiling oil. With that the beautiful Anna pulled off her three dresses, at the same time ringing all of her bells. They sounded so sweet and yet so loud that the prince heard them in his room. He jumped up and saw how the servants were about to grab the beautiful Anna and throw her into the boiling oil. "Stop!" he cried, and freed the beautiful Anna from their hands. Instead of her, he had the evil queen thrown into the oil. Full of joy, he embraced his wife, but she cried out: "Oh, where are my dear children whom you sent for yesterday?" "I didn't send for my children," cried the prince, terribly frightened. It was certainly my evil mother. Oh my children! My dear children!" Then the servant came, threw himself at the prince's feet and confessed everything. He told him that the little children were safe and sound with his own mother. When the children were brought forth, they embraced their parents with joy. There were three days of festivities. The prince became king, and the beautiful Anna became queen. They remained happy and content, but we came away with nothing. Source (books.google.com): Laura Gonzenbach, "Von der schönen Anna," Sicilianische Märchen: Aus dem Volksmund gesammelt , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1870), no. 4, pp. 15-19 . Source (Internet Archive): Laura Gonzenbach, "Von der schönen Anna," Sicilianische Märchen: Aus dem Volksmund gesammelt , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1870), no. 4, pp. 15-19 . Return to the table of contents . Sun, Pearl, and Anna Italy (Sicily) Ladies and gentlemen, once upon a time there were a king and a queen. This king and this queen had no children, and from the bottom of their hearts they wanted a son or a daughter. The lord took mercy on them, and the queen became pregnant. At that time there still were astrologers. They summoned an astrologer, and the king said to him: "Tell me, what will the queen have?" The astrologer looked at the king and said: "The queen will have a girl, but . . . " And he remained stuck on the word but. The king said to him: "What do you mean with but ?" "Your majesty, when this girl is thirteen years old, she will touch a spindel, and it will place her under a spell." Upon hearing this, this king said: "We must immediately build an undergound house." In the meantime, the queen made the necessary preparations. The hour approached, and she brought a beautiful girl into the world. Just imagine what joy there was in the palace! They put the little one, together with her nurse, underground, where they could see neither heaven nor earth. To be sure, the little one grew from hour to hour without seeing anything. One day when she was nearly seven years old, the nurse thought that she was asleep. She said: "I'm going to relax a bit." She picked up a spindle and a distaff and began to spin, hoping that the little one was fast asleep. That is what she did, and what happened next? She laid the spindle and the distaff on a chair and went into the next room to drink a glass of water. And who woke up? -- The little one. The little one climbed out of her bed and saw the spindle. That was something new for her. She took hold of it, and she immediately fell under a spell. As for the nurse, when she came back and saw that the little one was under a spell and looked like a corpse, she cried out: "Girl, oh girl, what should I do now?" Her cries were heard up above. The king came down, and then the queen, and they saw the little one, who appeared to have died. The father shed bitter tears, but then, as soon as possible, he had three dresses made for the little girl, each one more beautiful than the other one. He had her dressed in them, saying: "These are the dresses that you were to receive upon your engagement, my daughter." He then had her taken to a little house in the country. He had a beautiful bier made for her, and then locked her inside the house. The house remained closed and locked. Now another king's son was out hunting and was caught by a storm. Not knowing where else to find shelter, the poor fellow ran up to the house. At that time there were ladders made from silk. They threw a silken ladder onto the house, and the young king's servant climbed onto the balcony. Through the balcony window he saw a beautiful maiden, as beautiful as the sun. (This girl had continued to grow since her seventh year.) The king's servant climbed down and said: "Your majesty, this has been a wonderful hunt." They climbed up together. The king stuck his head inside and saw the creature, who -- as we have said -- was still alive. Her face was rosey, and she had a spindle in her hand. In their excitement, no one had thought to to remove the spindle. The king went inside, looked at her, and said: "Oh, my maiden, you look so sad! And what is this thing in your hand?" With that he took the spindle from her hand, and she immediately came back to life. She was frightened, but he said: "Don't be afraid. With us you'll find a father and a brother." He gave her something to eat and drink, and then said to her: "I must go now, but believe me, I'll come back tomorrow." When the young king arrived home, his mother said to him: "Why are you so late?" "Oh mother," he said to her, "I took my time while hunting." The next day he went hunting again. He went to the house, to the young woman, whose name was Anna. "How are you, Anna?" "Very well! And you, my prince?" "I am very well." To make a long story short: Nine months later that young woman was about to give birth to a baby. She had a beautiful boy and named him Sun. Let's go back to the old queen. She was very upset that her son no longer resided in the palace, and had his head who knows where. She made every effort to discover where her son was coming and going from. Learning nothing elsewhere, she said to him: "You must tell me who you have been with." Not knowing who she was, the old queen was very angry with poor Anna. The young king found comfort with his young son, whom he madly adored. Meanwhile, the little boy grew up, and the mother became pregnant once again. Nine months later she gave birth to a beautiful girl, whom she named Pearl. The old queen kept saying: "You faithless son, who knows who you are cavorting with. The entire kingdom is going to ruin." Now it happened that the young king grew ill and could not get out of bed. His mother was tormenting him to death. Not being able to be with Anna made his sickness all the worse. The poor fellow secretly wrote a letter to Anna, telling her to be of good cheer, for his sickness was not worth mentioning. He added: "I want to know how my little ones are doing, for I am very concerned about them." He grew worse and worse. Plagued with fever, he fantasized: Anna, Sun, and Pearl, You take away my heart and soul. When the mother heard him talking like this, she said to herself: "Aha! So she is the Don't-Know-Who and the Don't-Know-How who has ruined my son." Then with many curse words she said: "Be calm my boy, be calm, for this evening you'll share your meal with Sun!" Meanwhile she summoned her son's trusted servant and said to him: "You either tell me the truth, or I shall have your head cut off. Who is my son spending his time with?" He saw how angry she was, and with shaking knees he told her everything from the beginning to the end. "Oh, this miserable hussy," said the queen, "I'll get my hands on her! Today you must bring the boy Sun to me, and if his mother won't give him to you, then tell her that my son wants to have him." The servant dutifully went to the young king's wife. "How is the young king?" she asked the servant. The servant answered: "Somewhat better, but he wants his boy Sun to come to him for today." The mother fetched the boy, dressed him in his best clothes, and turned him over to the servant, with the words: "See here, I am entrusting him to you. Be sure that there is no trickery behind this." This was the poor woman's heart speaking to her. The servant went on his way. When the old woman saw the likeness of the young king, she said to the boy: "You scoundrel! You're more of a scoundrel than your father!" She grabbbed the boy by the arm and said to the cook: "Here, slaughter him and prepare his meat for me." But instead of killing him, the cook took him to his house and hid him. Then he made an ordinary meal for the queen. At noon he brought this dish to the old queen, saying: "Here is Sun!" "Oh, come here, you shall have dinner with your father, because the two of you have been slowly tormenting me to death." Then she went to her son and said: "Here, my son. Eat! This is your Sun!" The next day the villainous queen said to the servant: "You must bring Pearl to me, so that she can eat with her father." The servant went to the young queen, and she said to him: "How is my son Sun?" "He's well." "And my husband?" "Better, but he wants to share a meal with Pearl." The young queen asked: "Is there trickery behind this?" It was as if the poor woman's heart were speaking to her. "Why should there be trickery?" replied the servant. She dressed the little girl. The servant set her into the coach and took her away. When they arrived at the palace, the old woman said: "You scoundrel! You're more of a scoundrel than your father! But now I'm going to have some fun with you!" She summoned the cook: "Here is the little girl. Make a meal of her for me." The cook took the little girl, hid her away, and made an ordinary meal for the queen. She took this meal to her son, who was still fantasizing with fever. "Here," she said, "here is Pearl. Eat with her. Tomorrow I'll let you eat with Anna." The next day she said to the servant: "Tell the young queen that the young king is much better, and that he wants her to come to the palace." The servant went to the young queen and said to her: "Your majesty, they want you to come to the palace. Everyone is well. The young king is half well, and he wants to have you there, and the two of you can have your holy peace." She put on the three dresses that her father had given her, and got into the coach. The old woman was standing at the window keeping her eye on the road. When Anna appeared, the old woman went to her, grabbed hold of her, and pulled her hair, calling her many indecent names, as if Anna were such a person. Continuing to curse, she pulled Anna inside and took her to a room where there was a cauldron with boiling oil. "Get undressed!" Anna took off the first dress, and with a loud voice called out: "Sun!" The dress crackled as if it were covered with little bells. The young king heard the noise and listened further. Anna took off the second dress and called out even more loudly: "Pearl!" And the dress crackled. "Aha!" said the young king. "That is my Anna's voice calling for my children!" While the old woman was making Anna take off the third dress, the young king got up with anger and crawled on all fours to see what was happening. The young queen took off the third dress and cried out with a voice that would rip your soul from your body: "Anna!" The young king rushed on all fours into the room, where he found his mother, who had grabbed Anna and was trying to throw her into the cauldron of oil. Overcome with rage, he grabbed the old woman and threw her into the cauldron. Then he took Anna into his arms and kissed her. They looked for the children, and the cook brought them forth, alive and healthy. With time they made their marriage official. The cook received a large reward. Further: They lived long lives and with good health, And happiness that comes with wealth. Source (books.google.com): Giuseppe Pitrè, "Suli, Perna e Anna," Fiabe, Novelle e Racconti popolari siciliani , vol. 2 (Palermo: Luigi Pedone Lauriel, 1875), no. 58, pp. 46-53 . Source (Internet Archive): Giuseppe Pitrè, "Suli, Perna e Anna," Fiabe, Novelle e Racconti popolari siciliani , vol. 2 (Palermo: Luigi Pedone Lauriel, 1875), no. 58, pp. 46-53 . Pitrè's source: Rosalia Vàrrica, Palermo. Return to the table of contents . An Old Story Ireland Once there was a king and a queen and they had no children. This was the cause of great unhappiness to them, and they always wished that they should have even one child. At last this great wish was granted and a beautiful little girl was born to them. The king and queen agreed that she should have a fairy God-mother and so she had. All the fairies were invited to a great feast that the king was giving, but one old fairy was forgotten, and she was very vexed. When the king heard about the fairy he at once sent for her, and when she did come there was no gold or silver plate for her and she had to do with an ordinary plate, and this made her very vexed. When the feast was over every fairy wished the child some good thing, but when it came to the old fairy's turn, she said that the child should die from a cut that she should get from a spinning-wheel. One of the good fairies had yet to have her wish, so she said that the child should not die but that she should sleep for a hundred years on account of the cut. One day the king and queen were away and the little girl was going about through the house by herself, and she came to a room where a spinning-wheel was, and an old woman asked her to come over and look at it, but as soon as she touched it she fell asleep, and every person and thing about the place fell asleep. They all remained asleep for a hundred [years]. One day at the end of this time a prince was passing by and he saw the castle, and he wondered greatly at it because the hedges were grown up higher than the castle, and the grass was also very high up. He went into the house, and he went to the room where the little girl was. As soon as the prince came to her she awoke and everything about the place awoke also. She told them everything that happened, and he was very sorry for her. Some time shortly after this the prince and the girl were married, and they lived happily afterwards. Collector: Patricia Reilly. Informant: Mrs. Reilly. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Meath >> Wilkinstown, pp. 147-48 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . The Enchanted Princess; or, The Magic Tower Greece Once upon a time there lived a king who was the greatest, richest, and most virtuous of all kings, and because of his good behavior and his good works God loved him very much. Out of piety, the king had decided never to take a wife, but to remain a bachelor. However, he would have liked to have children. One day he sat and wept and lamented greatly that he had none, and that his throne might perhaps pass into evil hands. Then an angel appeared to him and told him not to cry, because he would have a child from his calf. A short time later, one of the king's legs began to swell, and one day, while he was hunting, he pierced himself with a thorn. Then suddenly a beautiful maiden jumped out of his calf. She wore a full coat of armor, complete with lance and helmet. But no sooner was she born than she was carried away by a Lámnissa [a kind of witch] and taken to a large and beautiful tower. Arriving there, she immediately fell into a deep sleep. At the same time there was another king, who had an only son, and this king wanted to find a wife for his son. This prince had heard many rumors about the princess sleeping in the tower, who was said to be the most beautiful of all the maidens in the world, but who could not wake up unless a prince redeemed her. The prince was determined to marry this girl. To find out how he could do this, he went to a sorceress and asked her for help. She told him to take three animals with him: one loaded with meat, the other with grain, and the third with sea lice. He should travel with these three animals until he reached an old gate that was close to collapsing, and above which was written: A calf my mother And a thornbush my midwife. He should say to the gate: "Oh, what a beautiful gate this is," and then he should get off his horse and clean the gate. If he would do this, then the gate would not collapse and kill him. After he had gone through the gate, he would come across some lions who would threaten to eat him, but he should not be afraid, but throw the meat to them. He would then encounter an enormous number of ants, and they would also want to eat him, but he should just throw the grain to them, and they would spare him. Finally, while crossing a river, he would encounter a huge fish that would also threaten to eat him. He should just throw the sea lice at him, and the beast would not harm him. Following these instructions from the sorceress, the prince prepared everything and set forth the next day. He came to the gate, did what the old woman had told him to do, and he went through safely. Then he encountered the lions, who ate the meat that was thrown to them and then said to the prince: "Here are three hairs from our manes. If you need our help, just throw the hairs into the fire, and we'll be with you in an instant." The prince then moved on and came to the ants, who ate the grain that he threw to them, after which they gave him one of their wings and told him the same thing that the lions had said to him. Next he had to cross a river. A huge fish jumped out and wanted to devour him. But immediately the prince threw the sea lice at him, and the fish let him pass by. The fish gave him a scale from his body and told him that if he needed help, he should throw the scale into the fire. The prince arrived at the tower and entered, whereupon the princess immediately woke up. Forty days and nights had just passed since she had fallen asleep. As soon as she woke up, she said to the prince: "Ah, so you are the one who will free me. But you still have a lot to go through. The old woman, the Lámnissa , will lock you in a large room where one half is filled with four thousand cattle, and the other half is filled with wheat, barley, and corn all mixed together. And in a single day you must slaughter the oxen and sort out the entrails, the skins, the stomachs, the meat, and the bones. But you also have to separate out every kind of the scattered grains on the same day. In the evening the old woman will throw a needle into the river, which you have to find within a quarter of an hour." The next morning the prince was locked in the large room. Then he took out of his pocket the three hairs from the lions' manes and threw them into the fire. Immediately the lions were there, and with their teeth and paws they killed the cattle and completed the prescribed work. The prince then threw the wing that he had received from the ants into the fire. They immediately came and arranged all the grain with their mouths. In the evening the old woman came in with the maiden and was astonished to see that everything had been done. Next she led the prince to the river and threw the needle into it. But he had already thrown the fish scales into the fire, and the moment he jumped into the water, the fish rushed over, grabbed the needle and brought it to him. Thus the prince got out of the water with the needle and gave it back to the old woman. Next he took his beloved to the other side of the river, where the ants and the lions were. But the Lámnissa did not want to let the princess go just yet, and she called to the lions and the ants to eat the prince. But in vain! Then she herself chased after the fugitives in order to win back the princess, but the princess threw some hair behind her, and from it a large lake arose, which spread out between the fugitives and the Lámnissa , and forced her to give up the chase. The prince brought his beloved home happily and married her. And God, who loved the girl very much, gave her as a dowry the gift of predicting the future, thus raising her to the status of a goddess. Source (books.google.com): Bernhard Schmidt, "Die verzauberte Königstochter oder der Zauberthurm," Griechische Märchen, Sagen und Volkslieder (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1877), no. 6, pp. 76-79 . Source (Internet Archive): Bernhard Schmidt, "Die verzauberte Königstochter oder der Zauberthurm," Griechische Märchen, Sagen und Volkslieder (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1877), no. 6, pp. 76-79 . This story combines two Aarne-Thompson-Uther tale types: Type 410: "Sleeping Beauty." Type 554: "The Grateful Animals." The birth of a fully armed female from her father's body has an antecedent in Greek mythology with Athena, who was similarly born from the forehead of Zeus. Return to the table of contents . The Ninth Captain's Tale 1001 Nights There was once a woman who could not conceive, for all her husband's assaulting. So one day she prayed to Allah, saying: "Give me a daughter, even if she be not proof against the smell of flax!" In speaking thus of the smell of flax she meant that she would have a daughter, even if the girl were so delicate and sensitive that the anodyne smell of flax would take hold of her throat and kill her. Soon the woman conceived and easily bore a daughter, as fair as the rising moon, as pale and delicate as moonlight. When little Sittukhan, for such they called her, grew to be ten years old, the sultan's son passed beneath her window and saw her and loved her, and went back ailing to the palace. Doctor succeeded doctor fruitlessly beside his bed; but, at last, an old woman, who had been sent by the porter's wife, visited him and said, after close scrutiny: "You are in love, or else you have a friend who loves you." "I am in love," he answered. "Tell me her name," she begged, for I may be a bond between you. "She is the fair Sittukhan," he replied; and she comforted him, saying: "Refresh your eyes and tranquilize your heart, for I will bring you into her presence." Then she departed and sought out the girl, who was taking the air before her mother's door. After compliment and greeting, she said: "Allah protect so much beauty, my daughter! Girls like you, and with such lovely fingers, should learn to spin flax; for there is no more delightful sight than a spindle in spindle fingers." Then she went her way. At once the girl went to her mother, saying: "Mother, take me to the mistress." "What mistress?" asked her mother. "The flax mistress," answered the girl. "Do not say such a thing!" cried the woman. "Flax is a danger to you; its smell is fatal to your breast, a touch of it will kill you." But her daughter reassured her, saying: "I shall not die," and so wept and insisted, that her mother sent her to the flax mistress. The white girl stayed there for a day, learning to spin; and her fellow pupils marvelled at her beauty and the beauty of her fingers. But, when a morsel of flax entered behind one of her nails, she fell swooning to the floor. They thought her dead and sent to her father and mother, saying: "Allah prolong your days! Come and take up your daughter, for she is dead." The man and his wife tore their garments for the loss of their only joy, and went, beaten by the wind of calamity, to bury her. But the old woman met them, and said: "You are rich folk and it would be shame on you to lay so fair a girl in dust." "What shall we do then?" they asked, and she replied: "Build her a pavilion in the midst of the waves of the river and couch her there upon a bed, that you may come to visit her." So they built a pavilion of marble, on columns rising out of the river, and planted a garden about it with green lawns, and set the girl upon an ivory bed, and came there many times to weep. What happened next? The old woman went to the king's son, who still lay sick of love, and said to him: "Come with me to see the maiden. She waits you, couched in a pavilion above the waves of the river." The prince rose up and bade his father's wazir come for a walk with him. The two went forth together and followed the old woman to the pavilion. Then the prince said: "Wait for me outside the door, for I shall not be long." He entered the pavilion and began to weep by the ivory bed, recalling verses in the praise of so much beauty. He took the girl's hand to kiss it, and, as he passed her slim white fingers through his own, noticed the morsel of flax lodged behind one of her nails. He wondered at this and delicately drew it forth. At once the girl came out of her swoon and sat up upon the ivory bed. She smiled at the prince, and whispered: "Where am I?" "You are with me," he answered, as he pressed her all against him. He kissed her and lay with her, and they stayed together for forty days and forty nights. Then the prince took leave of his love, saying: "My wazir is waiting outside the door. I will take him back to the palace and then return." He found the wazir and walked with him across the garden towards the gate, until he was met by white roses growing with jasmin. The sight of these moved him, and he said to his companion: "The roses and the jasmin are white with the pallor of Sittukhan's cheeks! Wait here for three days longer, while I go to look upon the cheeks of Sittukhan." He entered the pavilion again and stayed three days with Sittukhan, admiring the white roses and the jasmin of her cheeks. Then he rejoined the wazir and walked with him across the garden towards the gate, until the carob, with its long black fruit, rose up to meet him. He was moved by the sight of it, and said: "The carobs are long and black like the brows of Sittukhan. O wazir, wait here for three more days, while I go to view Sittukhan's brows." He entered the pavilion again and stayed three days with the girl, admiring her perfect brows, long and black, like carobs hanging two by two. Then he rejoined the wazir and walked with him. towards the gate, until a springing fountain with its solitary jet rose up to meet him. He was moved by this sight and said to the wazir: "The jet of the fountain is as Sittukhan's waist. Wait here for three days longer, while I go to gaze again upon the waist of Sittukhan." He went up into the pavilion and stayed three days with the girl, admiring her waist, for it was as the slim jet of the fountain. Then he rejoined the wazir and walked with him across the garden towards the gate. But Sittukhan, when she saw her lover come again a third time, had said to herself: "What brings him back?" So now she followed him down the stairs of the pavilion, and hid behind the door which gave on the garden to see what she might see. The prince happened to turn and catch sight of her face; he returned towards her, pale and distracted, and said sadly: "Sittukhan, Sittukhan, I shall never see you more, never, never again." Then he departed with the wazir, and his mind was made up that he would not return. Sittukhan wandered in the garden, weeping lonely, and regretting that she was not dead in very truth. As she walked by the water, she saw something sparkle in the grass and, on raising it, found it to be a talismanic ring. She rubbed the engraved carnelian of it, and the ring spoke, saying: "Behold, here am I! What do you wish?" "O ring of Sulayman," answered Sittukhan, "I require a palace next to the palace of the prince who used to love me, and a beauty greater than my own." "Shut your eye and open it!" said the ring; and, when the girl had done so, she found herself in a magnificent palace, next to the palace of the prince. She looked in a mirror which was there, and marvelled at her beauty. Then she leaned at the window until her false love should pass by on his horse. When the prince saw her, he did not know her; but he loved her and hastened to his mother, saying: "Have you not some very beautiful thing which you can take as a present to the lady who dwells in the new palace? And can you not beg her, at the same time, to marry me?" "I have two pieces of royal brocade," answered his mother, "I will take them to her and urge your suit with them." Without losing an hour, the queen visited Sittukhan, and said to her: "My daughter, I pray you to accept this present, and to marry my son." The girl called her negress and gave her the pieces of brocade, bidding her cut them up for floor cloths; so the queen became angry and returned to her own dwelling. When the son learned that the woman of his love had destined the cloth of gold for menial service, he begged his mother to take some richer present, and the queen paid a second visit, carrying a necklace of unflawed emeralds. "Accept this gift, my daughter, and marry my son," she said; and Sittukhan answered: "O lady, your present is accepted." Then she called her slave, saying: "Have the pigeons eaten yet?" "Not yet, mistress," answered the slave. "Take them these green trifles!" said Sittukhan. When she heard this outrageous speech, the queen cried: "You have humbled us, my daughter. Now, at least, tell me plainly whether you wish to marry my son or no." "If you desire me to marry him," answered Sittukhan, "bid him feign death, wrap him in seven winding sheets, carry him in sad procession through the city, and let your people bury him in the garden of my palace." "I will tell him your conditions," said the queen. "What do you think!" cried the mother to her son, when she had returned to him. "If you wish to marry the girl, you must pretend to be dead; you must be wrapped in seven winding sheets; you must be led in sad procession through the city; and you must be buried in her garden!" "Is that all, dear mother?" asked the prince in great delight, "Then tear your clothes and weep, and cry: 'My son is dead!'" The queen rent her garments and cried in a voice shrill with pain: "Calamity and woe! My son is dead!" All the folk of the palace ran to that place and, seeing the prince stretched upon the floor with the queen weeping above him, washed the body and wrapped it in seven winding sheets. Then the old men and the readers of the Koran came together and formed a procession, which went throughout the city, carrying the youth covered with precious shawls. Finally they set down their burden in Sittukhan's garden and went their way. As soon as the last had departed, the girl, who had once died of a morsel of flax, whose cheeks were jasmin and white roses, whose brows were carobs two by two, whose waist was the slim jet of the fountain, went down to the prince and unwrapped the seven winding sheets from about him, one by one. Then "Is it you?" she said. "You are ready to go very far for women; you must be fond of them!" The prince bit his finger in confusion, but Sittukhan reassured him, saying: " It does not matter this time!" And they dwelt together in love delight. Source (books.google.com): E. Powys Mathers, The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night , rendered from the literal and complete version of Dr. J. C. Mardrus, vol. 15 (London: The Casanova Society, 1923), pp. 203-210 . Source (Internet Archive): E. Powys Mathers, The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night , rendered into English from the literal and complete French translation of Dr. J. C. Mardrus, vol. 4 (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1956), pp. 543-49 . Mathers' source: Books.google.com: J. C. Mardrus, "Histoire racontée par le neuvième capitaine de police," Le livre des mille nuits et une nuit , vol. 15 (Paris: Librairie Charpentier et Fasquelle, 1904), pp. 297-305 . Internet Archive: J. C. Mardrus, "Histoire racontée par le neuvième capitaine de police," Le livre des mille nuits et une nuit , vol. 15 (Paris: Librairie Charpentier et Fasquelle, 1904), pp. 297-305 . Another version of this tale (books.google.com): Guillaume Spitta-Bey, "Histoire du prince amoureux," Contes arabes modernes (Leide: E. J. Brill; Paris: Maisonneuve et Compagnie, 1883), pp. 105-111 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Charles Perrault's Mother Goose Tales . La belle au bois dormant par Charles Perrault. Grimm Brothers Home Page . Little Snow-White and other Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 709 tales. These stories also feature "sleeping beauties." Ethna the Bride is an Irish fairy legend featuring a "sleeping beauty." Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Return to the table of contents . Revised November 26, 2023. Sleeping Hero Legends Sleeping Hero Legends folktales of type 766 and migratory legends about heroes who, instead of dying, lie asleep awaiting a time of special need when they will rise up and defeat their nations' enemies, translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2025 Contents Geroldseck (Germany). Frederick Barbarossa in Kyffhäuser Mountain (Germany). Emperor Karl at Nürnberg (Germany). Emperor Karl in Untersberg Mountain (Germany/Austria). King Karl and His Army in Odin's Mountain (Germany). Emperor Heinrich in Sudemer Mountain (Germany). The Three Tells (Switzerland). King Matthias Corvinus (Slovenia / Austria). King Matjaž (Slovenia). Emperor Napoleon Is Still Alive (France). Holger the Dane Under Kronborg (Denmark). Holger Danske (Denmark). King Dan (Denmark / Germany). The Knights of Ållaberg (Sweden). The Sleeping Heroes in Mątwy (Poland). The Sleeping Warriors (England/Wales). Sleeping Warriors (Wales). The Cave of the Young Men of Snowdonia (Wales). The Hunter and His Hounds (England). Some Say That King Arthur Is Not Dead (England). The Passing of Arthur (England). King Arthur at Sewingshields (England). King Arthur in Freebrough Hill (England). Richmond Castle (England). The Wizard of Alderley Edge (England). Then There Are Yet Men in the Isle of Man (Isle of Man). The Enchantment of Gearoidh Iarla (Ireland). Thomas the Rhymer (Thomas of Erceldoune) (Scotland). The Smith's Rock in the Isle of Skye (Scotland). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Geroldseck Germany Years ago many stories were told about Geroldseck, an old castle in Wasgau. The ancient German heroes -- Kings Ariovist, Hermann, Wittekind, Siegfried with the horny skin, and many others -- were seen at this castle at a certain time of the year. When the Germans were in greatest distress and facing defeat they would appear with ancient German peoples and come to their aid. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Deutsche Sagen (1816/1818), no. 21. Link to the German text Geroldseck . Return to the table of contents . Frederick Barbarossa in Kyffhäuser Mountain Germany Many legends are in circulation dealing with this emperor. They say that he is not dead, but that he shall live until the Day of Judgment, and also that no legitimate emperor shall rise up after him. Until that time he will remain hidden in Kyffhäuser Mountain. When he appears he will hang his shield on a dead tree, and leaves will sprout from the tree, and then better times will be at hand. From time to time he speaks to those who find their way into the mountain, and from time to time he makes appearances outside the mountain. Generally he just sits there on a bench at a round stone table, asleep with his head in his hands. He constantly nods his head and blinks his eyes. His beard has grown very long, according to some it has grown through the stone table, according to others it has grown around the table. They say that it must grow around the circumference three times before he awakens. At the present time it has grown around the table twice. In the year 1669 a peasant from the village of Reblingen who was hauling grain to Nordhausen was taken into the mountain by a little dwarf. He was told to empty out his grain and allowed to fill his sacks with gold in its place. He saw the emperor sitting there entirely motionless. In addition, a dwarf led a shepherd into the mountain who had once played a tune on his flute that had pleased the emperor. The emperor stood up and asked: "Are ravens still flying around the mountain?" When the shepherd answered "yes," the Kaiser responded: "Then I must sleep for another hundred years." Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Deutsche Sagen (1816/1818), no. 23. Link to the German text Friedrich Rotbart auf dem Kyffhäuser . Return to the table of contents . Emperor Karl at Nürnberg Germany According to legend, Karl the Great (Charlemagne) condemned himself to remain in the deep well at the castle in Nürnberg. His beard has grown through the stone table at which he is seated. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Deutsche Sagen (1816/1818), no. 22. Link to the German text Kaiser Karl zu Nürnberg . Return to the table of contents . Emperor Karl in Untersberg Mountain Germany/Austria In this marvelous mountain sits Emperor Karl, a golden crown on his head, his scepter in his hand, and accompanied by other princely and noble lords. He went into a trance at Great Walserfeld, and has kept the same form that he had during his mortal life. His beard is grey and long, entirely covering his golden breastplate. On special occasions he divides his beard into two parts, half on his right side and half on his left, each tied with a precious pearl band. The emperor has a keen and profound look, and he is friendly and sociable toward all of his subjects who walk back and forth with him across a beautiful meadow. No one knows why he is there and what he intends to do. These remain mysteries of God. Franz Sartori claims that it is Emperor Karl V., but others say that it is Frederick, who sits at a table around which his beard has grown more than two times. As soon as the the beard has reached the last corner of the table for the third time, the last days of the earth will have arrived. The Antichrist will appear; a battle will be fought on the fields at Wals; angels will sound their trumpets; and Judgment Day will have begun. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Deutsche Sagen (1816/1818), no. 28. Link to the German text Kaiser Karl im Untersberg . Untersberg is a prominent mountain near Salzburg, Austria. It straddles the border between Germany and Austria. Return to the table of contents . King Karl and His Army in Odin's Mountain Germany King Karl fought a great battle at the foot of Odin's Mountain. So much blood was shed that it eroded deep furrows into the ground. These often have been dammed up, but the rain always washes them open again. The floods of blood streamed together and finally poured into the River Besse. Karl fought and prevailed. In the evening the mountain opened up, received him and his exhausted warriors, and then closed its walls. However, the stories about these events contradict one another. According to some, Karl, pursued by the enemy, fled to Odin's Mountain where he beseeched the Godhead to take him and all of his people into the mountain. The mountain opened up, and Karl went inside with his entire army, whereupon the crevice closed behind them. The king rests from all his heroic deeds in this mountain. He has promised to come out every seven or every hundred years. When the time comes, one can hear weapons rattling in the air, the neighing and hoof beats of horses, and the sounds of drums and bugles. Karl the Fifth and his warriors are leaving their underground home. The procession goes to Glis Spring, where the horses drink, and then continues its round and finally returns to the mountain. Sunday's children who were born between two churches have often seen the procession. Most of the soldiers are maimed; the one has lost an arm, another a leg or an ear. Many have gaping wounds. One time some people went to Odin's Mountain and heard the sound of drums but did not see anything. Then a wise man asked them, one after the other, to look through the circle he had made by bending his arm against his body. They did this and saw a band of soldiers drilling with their weapons, coming and going from Odin's Mountain. Inside the mountain they grow oats for their horses. "The Quint" throws out all the oats that he does not need for his horses. Every day the warriors clean and thresh oats and pile up large stores in their chambers. Once a swineherd noticed that one of his sows always ran away from the herd when he brought them to Odin's Mountain, and she always returned fat and full. One day he followed her. She ran through a hole into the mountain where there was a great store of oats. Every seven years the mountain opens up, and anyone who happens to find the opening that leads inside is very fortunate, because great treasures lie within the mountain. But the passageway is only open for a fourth of an hour, and anyone who does not return to the outside before this time is up will have to remain there until the next seven years have passed. However, those whose fate it is to stay there do not grow any older while they are inside the mountain. They remain just as they were at the moment that the mountain closed. Until just a few years ago no one would approach the mountain without shuddering for fear of Karl the Fifth. Children who collected nuts and strawberries there were warned by their parents, "Be careful that the Quint doesn't get you!" Further, mothers disciplined their children with the threat, "The Quint is coming!" Source: Karl Lyncker, Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Kassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 6, pp. 5-7 . Charlemagne, known in German as Karl the Great, born about 742, died 814, was crowned "Emperor of the West" in 800 by Pope Leo III. German Catholics often called him Karl the Fifth, or simply "the Quint." Odin's Mountain (Odenberg) lies near the town of Gudensberg, south of Kassel in central Germany. This is but a short distance from Geismar, the place where Boniface is said to have felled Thor's Oak in the year 723. For more place names related to Odin in this vicinity see "Wuodensberg und Odenberg" in Karl Lyncker, Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Kassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 4, pp. 3-4 . Return to the table of contents . Emperor Heinrich in Sudemer Mountain Germany Emperor Heinrich the Fowler liked to stay at Goslar, which he often did, and many stories are told about him there. Above all they tell about how marvelously beautiful his wife was, and how he could not be consoled when she died. After his grief had subsided somewhat, he revealed to his own daughter, who was almost more beautiful than her mother, his sinful desire to marry her. She appropriately resisted him, finally convincing him to first to travel to the courts of all the kings and counts in Europe in search of a spouse more beautiful than she. He traveled far and wide, but finally returned with the news that a more beautiful woman could not be found anywhere. But still she resisted his pleas and his advances. Finally he set the condition that he would desist from his demands if she could create a blanket upon which all of the earth's animals could be seen. She went into a small chapel in the upper city and fervently prayed to God, but she found no comfort in her prayers, so finally in despair she called upon the devil to come and help her. He appeared immediately, saying that he would bring the blanket to her, if she could remain awake in the chapel for three days and three nights. She brought her little dog into the chapel with her and spent the time ceaselessly praying. However, during the third night, just as morning was breaking, sleep almost overcame her. At that moment the devil approached, and her little dog, seeing him, pulled at her skirt so vigorously that she jumped up. The devil angrily dropped the blanket, furiously threw the little dog against church wall, and disappeared. She took the blanket to her father, who then was overcome by such powerful pain that he lost all will to live. He bewitched himself into the Sudemer Mountain near Goslar, whose watchtower is visible throughout the region. There he sits until the present day, and will return only when Goslar finds itself in great need, or when the Day of Judgment arrives. Others say that the emperor is sitting in Rammel Mountain, and that before his death he had three stones mortared into the Goslar's city wall, saying that he would return when these stones fall out. But no one knows which stones they are. Notes: Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Kaiser Heinrich in Sudemerberg," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 184-85 . Heinrich (Henry) the Fowler was born about 876 and died in 936. His wife Matilda founded many monasteries and is a saint of the Roman Catholic Church. Goslar in Lower Saxony is one of northern Germany's best preserved medieval cities. The incest motif in this legend is reminiscent of the type 510B folktales told thoughout Europe. Link to additional tales of this type: The Father Who Wanted to Marry His Daughter . Return to the table of contents . The Three Tells Switzerland According to the beliefs of the people and the shepherds who live in the wild mountainous region surrounding the Waldstätter Lake in Switzerland there is a cave in a cliff there where the three redeemers -- they are called the three Tells -- are sleeping. Dressed in ancient costume, they will arise, come forth, and rescue their fatherland when the need arises. Only the very lucky have succeeded in finding the entrance to the cave. A shepherd boy told the following story to a traveler: His father, looking for a lost goat among the cliffs, came upon this cave and entered it. As soon as he recognized the three sleeping men as the three Tells, one of them rose up and asked: "What time is it on earth?" The frightened shepherd answered: "It is high noon." The man replied: "It is not yet time for us to come," and went back to sleep. The father returned with his companions to awaken the Tells for the good of the threatened fatherland, but although he looked repeatedly, he never again found the cave. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Deutsche Sagen (1816/1818), no. 298. Link to the German text Die drei Telle . Return to the table of contents . King Matthias Corvinus Slovenia / Austria King Matthias, who fought with unmatched bravery against the Turks, the arch enemy of the Christians, is celebrated in Slovenian songs and legends as the greatest hero, the likes of whom there has never been before. Long after his death the people could not and would not believe that he was dead. He did drive Frederick III out of Austria, took possession of large parts of Styria and Carinthia, and took up his residence in Vienna; but popular legends have recorded these historical events in a fanciful disguise. They tell us that he was once King of Carinthia. Because of his great power the princes of the neighboring countries envied him and waged war against his kingdom. Surrounded on all sides, he lost the battle and withdrew with a few hundred knights to Mount Petzen. Then the mountain opened up and received him and his followers, thus rescuing him from his enemies. He still lives in this cliff dwelling today and sleeps there with his "black army." In the middle of the cave stands a stone table at which the king sits. Everyone is motionless, as if petrified. But every night at midnight he jumps up, pulls his sword from its scabbard and sharpens it. So do his companions. This lasts until one o'clock. Then he puts his sword away, and everyone falls back asleep. This goes on every night, and it will continue like this until his beard has encircled the stone table three times. Then he will awaken and send his servants to the outside. If they return with the right message, he will awaken his knights and gather them under a shady linden tree to fight against the enemies of the Christian faith. Young and old will flock to the defense of the ancient, true faith. In their haste no one will have time to change their clothes. Everyone will come dressed in whatever they just then were wearing. Such a multitude of true-believing Christians will be under arms that the war will not last even long enough to eat three loaves of bread. If, for example, someone were to drop a third loaf to the ground, his neighbor will console him: "Leave it, brother. Let it remain where it is. Your two loaves are enough." In this terrible battle the king will lose his entire army except for seven knights. However, with these, after they have rested, he will subdue the whole earth. Only a select few have found the way to that mountain cave. Among them was a blacksmith who, while gathering wood in the forest below Mount Petzen, saw the entrance into the mountain. Fearlessly, he entered and looked at the warriors lying on the ground. As he walked further, he came to the stone table where the king was sleeping. In front of him lay a quantity of gold and silver coins. The blacksmith took as many as he could carry, and from then on he was a rich man. A woman once entered the mountain. When she went up to the king, he awoke and asked her who now ruled the earth. The woman gave him the requested information, but because it was not yet the appointed time, he immediately fell back asleep. Then the woman returned to the outside. Going away, she looked back at the mountain once more, but she could no longer find the entrance. At home she told the people about the sleeping king, and so it became known among the people that he was still alive. A carter from St. Jakob in the Rosental Valley was once returning home from Hungary with a load of wine. Driving through a large forest below Mount Petzen, he saw a small house half-built into the cliff, the roof of which barely protruded from the mountain. A stately knight, armed with a sword, stood in front of the door and asked the carter: "Friend, you are from our upper regions. Tell me, do pilgrims still climb the three peaks: Mount Christofberg, Mount Magdalensberg, and Mount Ulrichsberg?" "They're still climbing, but less and less." "At home tell everyone that when faith fades to the point that no one climbs these three peaks anymore, then I will appear with my black army. "Who are you?" asked the carter. "I am King Matthias Corvinus. Come closer and go into this house with me, so that you can see for yourself!" The man obeyed, and King Matthias said: "Stand behind me and look over my right shoulder through this window!" He did as he was commanded and saw a long and broad flat floor. It was covered with warriors who slept motionless and silently beside their horses. "That's the black army," said the king to the astonished man. "Look through the window again!" Matthias gently reached for his saber and drew it a little from its scabbard. And lo! The entire army came to life. The warriors raised their heads, the horses shook their manes, neighed, and stamped their hooves. "Well, did you see it?" the king continued. "It won't be long before I rise and draw my saber. Warm breezes will blow and inspire all the people with one thought. My warriors will mount their horses, and then the holy battle for the true faith will begin." The same legend is told about Gumitz Hill in the Rosental Valley. An ancient man with a mighty beard is asleep inside this hill. On a clearing in the woods there, a man from Treffen (near St. Egiden on the Drau [Drava] River) is said to have once seen a troop of soldiers at night, their leader mounted on horseback. Furthermore, anyone who knows how to dig for treasure can find money in the hill. Flickering lights can also be seen there. Finally, in vicinity of Zell the legend is widespread that after a war of nations, the Emperor of Austria will only have as many soldiers left as there is room for in the shade of one linden tree. Then King Matthias and his army will come to his aid, and a victorious final battle will bring the Promised Land to the Emperor. Source (books.google.com): Georg Graber, "Köng Matthias Corvinus," Sagen aus Kärnten (Leipzig: Dieterich'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1914), no. 125, pp. 105-107 . Source (Internet Archive): Georg Graber, "Köng Matthias Corvinus," Sagen aus Kärnten (Leipzig: Dieterich'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1921), no. 125, pp. 105-107 . Matthias Corvinus (1443-1490) was from 1458 to 1490 King of Hungary and Croatia , from 1469 to 1490 King of Bohemia and conqueror of large parts of the Habsburg hereditary lands, which he ruled from Vienna from 1485 to 1490. In Slovenia he is known as Kralj Matjaž . Link to the Wikipedia article on Matthias Corvinus . Mount Petzen (Slovenian: Peca ) lies two thirds in the Austrian state of Carinthia (German: Kärnten ) and one third in Slovenia. Return to the table of contents . King Matjaž Slovenia The legend of King Matjaž tells a story about the good king who ruled during the times of Carantania. He ruled during the golden era in the present-day Carinthia, which other sovereigns didn't like. So, they sent an army to fight the good king. King Matjaž and a hundred of his soldiers retreated to the hidden cave under Mount Peca and sat behind the stone table. The legend says that Matjaž will return and eliminate injustice from the world when his beard wraps around the table nine times and when a linden tree grows in front of the entrance to the cave in winter. Until then, you can explore his kingdom in many different ways. Source: King Matjaž . Accessed November 2025. Return to the table of contents . Emperor Napoleon Is Still Alive France For many years following the death of Emperor Napoleon it was believed in Strasbourg, and indeed throughout Alsace, that he had not died in St. Helena -- that this was a dishonest fabrication of his enemies. The people say that he is still alive and will return with the Moors and the Turks and then in new splendor and with new power ascend to his throne and rule the world. Source (books.google.com): August Stöber, "Kaiser Napoleon lebt noch," Die Sagen des Elsasses, nach der Volksüberlieferung und den Chroniken (St. Gallen: Druck und Verlag von Scheitlin & Zollikofer, 1851), no. 326, p. 441 . Source (Internet Archive): August Stöber, "Kaiser Napoleon lebt noch," Die Sagen des Elsasses, nach der Volksüberlieferung und den Chroniken (St. Gallen: Druck und Verlag von Scheitlin & Zollikofer, 1851), no. 326, p. 441 . Return to the table of contents . Holger the Dane Under Kronborg Denmark Under the castle of Kronborg a clashing of arms was frequently to be heard, for which no one could assign a cause, and in the whole country not one could be found daring enough to descend into its nethermost passages. To a slave, who had forfeited his life, his pardon and freedom were promised, if, by descending as far as the passage admitted, he could bring information of what he there met with. He came at length to a large iron door, which, on his knocking, opened of itself, and he found himself in a deep vault. From the middle of the roof hung a lamp nearly burnt out, and beneath it was an immense stone table, around which sat steel-clad warriors bending down, and resting their heads on their crossed arms. He who sat at the end of the table then arose; it was Holger the Dane; but in lifting his head from his arm, the stone table burst asunder, for his beard had grown into it. "Reach me thy hand!" said he to the slave; but the latter, not venturing to give his hand, held out an iron bar instead, which Holger so squeezed that the marks remained visible. At length letting it go, he exclaimed: "It gladdens me that there are still men in Denmark!" Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), p. 222 . Thorpe's source: J. M. Thiele, "Holger Danske under Kronborg," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 1 (Copenhagen: Universitetsboghandler C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), pp. 18-19 . Kronborg Castle, located at Helsingør, is Hamlet's castle. Click here for a photograph of a statue of Holger Danske. Return to the table of contents . Holger Danske Denmark In Denmark there is an ancient castle by the name of Kronborg. It stands very close to the Øresund, where hundreds of great ships pass every day, ships from England, from Russia, and from Prussia. They greet the ancient castle with canon salutes: "Boom!" And the castle salutes back with its canons: "Boom!" That is how canons say "Good day!" and "Thank you!" The ships don't sail there during the winter, for then everything is frozen solid all the way to the Swedish coast, it is just like a country road. The Danish flag and the Swedish flag are waving there, and the Danes and the Swedes say "Good day!" and "Thank you!" to each other, but not with canons, but rather with a friendly handshake. They take wheat bread and pretzels home with them, because foreign food always tastes better. But the grandest thing to be seen there is the ancient Kronborg. And down deep inside, in a dark cellar where no one ever goes, sits Holger Danske. He is dressed in iron and steel, with his head resting on his strong arms. His long beard hangs over a marble table, into which it has grown. The knight sleeps and dreams, and in his dreams he sees everything that is happening above in Denmark. Every Christmas Eve an Angel of God comes and assures him that what he has dreamed is true, and that he can safely go back to sleep, because Denmark is in no real danger. But if danger ever does come, then old Holger Danske will arise, breaking the table in pieces as he pulls out his beard! And then he will come forward and strike out and be heard in all the lands of the earth. Source: Abstracted from H. C. Andersen, Nye Eventyr (1845). Link to "Holger Danske" på dansk, H. C. Andersen's text, in the original Danish. Kronborg Castle, located at Helsingør, is Hamlet's castle. Click here for a photograph of a statue of Holger Danske. Return to the table of contents . King Dan Denmark / Germany A legend is current in the district of Ditmarschen about the first king of Denmark, named Dan, and after whom Denmark is named. According to this legend he did not live in present-day Denmark but instead in Schleswig. Formerly and for a long time his name was included in the calendar of saints. At his time the land was entirely heathen, and the people cremated their dead and put their ashes in urns which they placed in the giants' mounds (huns' hills). King Dan did not want to be cremated, but instead to be buried seated on his throne and with his sattled horse by his side. And his wish was thus carried out. Not far from Tönningen in Eiderstede is a small earthen hill with a cave. King Dan, like Emperor Friedrich in Kyffhäser, is seated inside with two hundred thousand armed men, and all are asleep. Once a soldier who had been sentenced to die was promised his life if he would go into the cave and and report what he had seen. Upon entering the cave he saw the king seated at a table with his head resting on his arm, and asleep. His beard had grown so long that it hung down beneath the table. The king awoke and asked the soldier, "What do you want?" "My lord and king sent me here to bring back a message from you." "Tell your lord," replied King Dan, "that I will come to his aid, and that he shall rule over the entire world." This time has not yet come, and may well be delayed long into the future. Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Bechstein, "König Dan," Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853)), no. 173, p. 156 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludwig Bechstein, "König Dan," Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853)), no. 173, p. 156 . Return to the table of contents . The Knights of Ållaberg Sweden One time a peasant, en route to Jönköping with a load of rye, came just at dusk to Ållaberg, where he discovered a grand mansion by the way. "Maybe I can sell my rye here," thought he, "and so be spared the journey to Jönköping," and, approaching the door, he knocked for admittance. The door was at once opened by some unseen power, and the peasant entered. Upon entering, he found himself in a grand hall. In the middle of the floor stood a large table and upon the table lay twelve golden helmets, grand beyond the power of description, and scattered around the room, deep in slumber, were twelve knights in glittering armor. The peasant contemplated his beautiful surroundings, but, concluding he could not sell his rye here, went on, coming finally to a large stable, where he found standing twelve most magnificent steeds, bedecked with golden trappings and silver shoes on their hoofs, stamping in their stalls. Curiosity getting the better of him, he took hold of the bridle of one of the horses in order to learn by what art it was made. Hardly had he touched it when he heard a voice call out, "Is it time now?" and another answer, "No, not yet!" The peasant had now seen and heard as much as he desired, and, thoroughly frightened, hastened away. When he came out he found that he had been into the mountain instead of into a mansion, and that he had seen the twelve knight who sleep there until the country shall be in some great danger, when they will awake and help Sweden to defend herself against her foreign enemies. Source: Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago, Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 109-10 . Return to the table of contents . The Sleeping Heroes in Mątwy Poland It is said that many years ago in the vicinity of the village of Mątwy a terrible battle with the Tartars took place in which all the warriors were killed except for their leader. According to legend these warriors are now resting in a deep sleep beneath the church. Their leader is keeping watch over them. In earlier times the cavern in which they are resting was not very deep beneath the earth. Thus once a girl happened to discover the entrance. She went inside and became very frightend when she saw the warriors. The leader told her to fear not, but warned her not to touch the bell hanging in the entrance. The girl disobeyed him and carelessly touched the bell. It began to ring, and the sound of the bell woke the warriors from their sleep. They took up their weapons. The angry leader then sunk himself and his army so deep into the earth that they were never again found. However, if enemies ever threaten the land he himself will awaken them from their sleep and lead them to glorious victories. Source: Otto Knoop, "Die schlafenden Helden in Montwy [Mątwy]," Sagen und Erzählungen aus der Provinz Posen (Posen [Poznań]: Historische Gesellschaft für die Provinz Posen, 1893), p. 64 . Return to the table of contents . The Sleeping Warriors England/Wales A Welshman walking over London Bridge, with a neat hazel staff in his hand, was accosted by an Englishman, who asked him whence he came. "I am from my own country," answered the Welshman, in a churlish tone. "Do not take it amiss, my friend," said the Englishman; "if you will only answer my questions, and take my advice, it will be of greater benefit to you than you imagine. That stick in your hand grew on a spot under which are hid vast treasures of gold and silver; and if you remember the place, and can conduct me to it, I will put you in possession of those treasures." The Welshman soon understood that the stranger was what he called a cunning man, or conjurer, and for some time hesitated, not willing to go with him among devils, from whom this magician must have derived his knowledge; but he was at length persuaded to accompany him into Wales; and going to Craig-y-Dinas, the Welshman pointed out the spot whence he had cut the stick. It was from the stock or root of a large old hazel: this they dug up, and under it found a broad flat stone. This was found to close up the entrance into a very large cavern, down into which they both went. In the middle of the passage hung a bell, and the conjurer earnestly cautioned the Welshman not not touch it. They reached the lower part of the cave, which was very wide, and there saw many thousands of warriors lying down fast asleep in a large circle, their heads outwards, every one clad in bright armour, with their swords, shields, and other weapons lying by them, ready to be laid hold on in an instant, whenever the bell should ring and awake them. All the arms were so highly polished and bright, that they illumined the cavern, as with the light of ten thousand flames of fire. They saw amongst the warriors one greatly distinguished from the rest by his arms, shield, battle-axe, and a crown of gold set with the most precious stones, lying by his side. In the midst of this circle of warriors they saw two very large heaps, one of gold, the other of silver. The magician told the Welshman that he might take as much as he could carry away of either the one or the other, but that he was not to take from both the heaps. The Welshman loaded himself with gold: the conjurer took none, saying that he did not want it, that gold was of no use but to those who wanted knowledge, and that his contempt of gold had enabled him to acquire that superior knowledge and wisdom which he possessed. In their way out he cautioned the Welshman again not to touch the bell, but if unfortunately he should do so, it might be of the most fatal consequence to him as one or more of the warriors would awake, lift up his head, and ask if it was day. "Should this happen," said the cunning man, "you must, without hesitation, answer No, sleep thou on; on hearing which he will again lay down his head and sleep." In their way up, however, the Welshman, overloaded with gold, was not able to pass the bell without touching it -- it rang -- one of the warriors raised up his head, and asked, "Is it day?" "No," answered the Welshman promptly, "it is not, sleep thou on;" so they got out of the cave, laid down the stone over its entrance, and replaced the hazel tree. The cunning man, before he parted from his companion, advised him to be economical in the use of his treasure; observing that he had, with prudence, enough for life: but that if by unforeseen accidents he should be again reduced to poverty, he might repair to the cave for more; repeating the caution, not to touch the bell if possible, but if he should, to give the proper answer, that it was not day, as promptly as possible. He also told him that the distinguished person they had seen was Arthur, and the others his warriors; and they lay there asleep with their arms ready at hand for the dawn of that day when the Black Eagle and the Golden Eagle should go to war, the loud clamor of which would make the earth tremble so much, that the bell would ring loudly, and the warriors awake, take up their arms, and destroy all the enemies of the Cymry, who afterwards should repossess the Island of Britain, re-establish their own king and government at Caerlleon, and be governed with justice, and blessed with peace so long as the world endures. The time came when the Welshman's treasure was all spent: he went to the cave, and as before over-loaded himself. In his way out he touched the bell -- it rang -- a warrior lifted up his head, asking if it was day, but the Welshman, who had covetously overloaded himself, being quite out of breath with labouring under his burden, and withal struck with terror, was not able to give the necessary answer; whereupon some of the warriors got up, took the gold away from him and beat him dreadfully. They afterwards threw him out, and drew the stone after them over the mouth of the cave. The Welshman never recovered the effects of that beating, but remained almost a cripple as long as he lived, and very poor. He often returned with some of his friends to Craig-y-Dinas; but they could never afterwards find the spot, though they dug over, seemingly, every inch of the hill. He lived in this cripled and poor condition very long, a warning to all, of the evils which result from a want of knowledge and prudence, teaching not to be covetous, not to neglect good advice, and never to trust that they can, without danger, give way to their own wishes, except one: the wish to be good. Source: Elijah Waring, ed., Recollections and Anecdotes of Edward Williams (London: Charles Gilpin, 1850), pp. 95-98 . Waring titles this piece "A Popular Tale in Glamorgan, by Iolo Morganwg [Edward Williams, the Bard of Glamorgan]." Link to another version of the above legend: William Elliot Griffis, "King Arthur's Cave," Welsh Fairy Tales (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Company, 1921), no. 16, pp. 133-42 . Return to the table of contents . Sleeping Warriors Wales Various legends of Sleeping Warriors appear in Welsh folklore, in which the dragon is displaced by a shadowy army of slumbering heroes, lying about in a circle, with their swords and shields by their sides, guarding great heaps of gold and silver. Now they are Owen Lawgoch and his men, who lie in their enchanted sleep in a cavern on the northern side of Mynydd Mawr, in Carmarthenshire; again they are Arthur and his warriors, asleep in a secret ogof under Craig-y-Ddinas, waiting for a day when the Briton and the Saxon shall go to war, when the noise of the struggle will awaken them, and they will reconquer the island, reduce London to dust, and re-establish their king at Caerleon, in Monmouthshire. Source: Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions , 2nd edition (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), p. 392 . Return to the table of contents . The Cave of the Young Men of Snowdonia Wales Countless as were the warriors of Arthur in the cave of Craig y Dinas, there is yet another army of them sleeping in Snowdonia. Their resting-place is in the steep cliff which is on the left-hand side near the top of Llyn Llydaw. This is how it was discovered. A sheep fell down to a shelf in this precipice, and the Cwm Dyli shepherd, who was a famous climber, with infinite trouble made his way to the spot to rescue the animal. To his astonishment he found there an opening into the rock, only partially hidden by loose stones and turf. He cleared these away, and saw a vast cave stretching into the bowels of the mountain. There was a bright light within; he looked in and saw a host of warriors without number, all asleep, with white hazel wands in their hands. He watched for a long time to see if they would show any signs of waking, but none stirred. Seeing that they were so fast asleep, he felt a great desire to enter the cave and explore it. But as he was squeezing in he struck his head against a bell suspended just above the entrance inside. It rang so that every corner of the immense cavern rang again. All the warriors woke up, and, springing to their feet, gave forth a terrific shout. This so frightened the shepherd that he made off as quickly as he could, and nearly broke his neck on his way down the face of the precipice. From that time he never enjoyed a day's health, and he died before his time. Nobody has since dared as much as to approach the mouth of the Cave of the Young Men of Snowdonia. Source: W. Jenkyn Thomas, The Welsh Fairy Book (London: T. Risher Unwin, [1907], pp. 140-41. Link to an electronic text provided by Sacred-Texts: W. Jenkyn Thomas, The Welsh Fairy Book (New York: F. A. Stokes, [1908]), pp. 140-41 . Return to the table of contents . The Hunter and His Hounds England Under a grassy swell, which a stranger may know by its being surrounded with a wooden railing, on the outside of Brinkburn Priory, tradition affirms there is a subterraneous passage, of which the entrance remains as yet a secret, leading to an apartment to which access is in like manner denied; and as these visionary dwellings are invariably provided with occupants, it is asserted that a hunter who had in some way offended one of the priors was along with his hounds, by the aid of enchantment, condemned to perpetual slumber in that mysterious abode. Only once was an unenthralled mortal favored with a sight of the place and of those who are there entombed alive. A shepherd, with his dog attending him, was one day listlessly sauntering on this verdant mound, when he felt the ground stirring beneath him, and springing aside he discovered a flat door, where door had never before been seen by man -- yea, that door opening upwards of its own accord on the very spot where he had been standing. Actuated by curiosity he descended a number of steps which appeared beneath him, and on reaching the bottom found himself in a gloomy passage of great extent. Groping along this warily, he at last encountered a door, which opening readily, he along with the dog was suddenly admitted into an apartment illumined so brilliantly that the full light of day seemed to shine there. This abrupt transition from darkness to light for some minutes deprived him of the power of observing objects correctly, but gradually recovering he beheld enough to strike him with astonishment, for on one side at a table, with his head resting on his hand, slept one in the garb of a hunter, while at some distance another figure reclined on the floor with his head lying back, and around him lay many a noble hound, ready as ever to all appearance to renew that fatal chase which consigned them all to the chamber of enchantment. On the table lay a horn and a sword, which, seeing all was quiet, the shepherd stepped forward to examine, and taking up the horn first applied it to his lips to sound it; but the hunter, on whom he kept a watch, showed symptoms of awaking whenever he made the attempt, which alarming him he replaced it, and the figure started no longer. Reassured, he lifts the sword, half draws it, and now both men became restless and made some angry movements, and the hounds began to hustle about, while his own dog, as if agitated by the same uneasiness, slunk towards the door. Alive to the increased commotion and hearing a noise behind him very like the creaking of hinges, he suddenly turned round and found to his dismay that the door was moving to. Without waiting a moment he rushed through the half-closed entrance followed by his dog. He had not fled ton paces when, shaking the vault with the crash, the door shut behind him, and a terrible voice assailed his ears pouring maledictions on him for his temerity. The fugitives traversed the passage at full speed, and gladly hailed the light streaming in at the aperture above. The shepherd quickly ascended the steps, but before he got out the cover had nearly closed. He succeeded, and that was all, in escaping perhaps a worse fate than those victims of monkish thraldom which he had just left; but his poor dog was not so fortunate, for it had just raised its foreparts to come up when the door fastened on it and nipped it through! Source: The Denham Tracts . A collection of folklore by Michael Aislabie Denham and reprinted from the original tracts and pamphlets printed by Mr. Denham between 1846 and 1859, edited by Dr. James Hardy. Vol. 2 (London: The Folklore Society, London, 1895), pp. 125-27 . Return to the table of contents . The Passing of Arthur England So I have told you of the Passing of Arthur, which in all the other histories of those things is told as I have told it. But of that which happened thereafter there are many distinct and separate histories. But that history which hath been accepted of old by the people of England is this: That King Arthur did not die, but that he was taken by Queen Morgana le Fay and by those two other queens to Avalon, and that there he was salved so that he did not die. And that history saith that he lives there yet, and that some day he shall come back to Britain as he promised to do, and that when he thus shall come there, there shall likewise come continual peace and plenty and joy and happiness as he promised. And touching Avalon there is this to say -- that it is the dwelling-place of Queen Morgana le Fay, and that it is a strange and wonderful island that floats forever upon the sea to the westward. And many people declare that they have beheld that land, but always from a distance. For sometimes they call it Fata Morgana, and sometimes they call it Avalon. But always when they see it it is to behold high towers and glittering pinnacles reaching into the sky; and it is to behold the embowerment of trees, both of forest trees and of shade trees; and it is to behold hill and vale of that mysterious country more beautiful than are the hills and vales of the dark and gloomy earth. For Avalon is sometimes called the Vale of Avalon and sometimes it is called Avalon the Beautiful. There in that pleasant country is no snow and no ice; neither is there the scorching heats and droughts of summer, but all forever and for aye is the tepid warmth of vernal springtime. And the people of Avalon are always happy, for never do they weep and never do they bear enmity to one another, but all live in peace and tranquillity watching their flocks, which are as white as snow, and their herds, whose breath smelleth of wild thyme and parsley. There, people believe, yet liveth King Arthur, and he is not dead nor is he yet awake, but ever he lyeth sleeping as in peace. But it is believed by many that the time shall come when he will awake again. Then he will return once more to this earth, and all shall be peace and concord amongst men. And many believe that this time is now nigh at hand. For less and less is there war within the world, and more and more is there peace and concord and good will amongst men. Wherefore, let every man live at peace with other men, and wish them well and do them well, and then will King Arthur awake from his sleep. Then will his dreadful wound be healed and then will he return unto his own again. Of such was the passing of Arthur. Source (books.google.com): Howard Pyle, The Story of the Grail and the Passing of Arthur (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1913), pp. 245-46 . Source (Internet Archive): Howard Pyle, The Story of the Grail and the Passing of Arthur (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1910), pp. 245-46 . Return to the table of contents . Some Say That King Arthur Is Not Dead England Some men say in many parts of England that King Arthur is not dead, but had by the will of our Lord Jesu into another place; and men say that he shall come again, and he shall win the holy cross. I will not say it shall be so, but rather I will say: here in this world he changed his life. But many men say that there is written upon his tomb this verse: Hic jacet Arthurus, Rex quondam, Rexque futurus. [Here lies Arthur, the once and future king.] Source (books.google.com): Thomas Malory, Le Morte Darthur , vol. 4 (London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1905), book 21, chapter 7, p. 287 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Malory, Le Morte Darthur , vol. 4 (London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1898), book 21, chapter 7, p. 287 . Return to the table of contents . King Arthur at Sewingshields England Sewingshields lies between the Roman Wall and the military road, near the twenty-eighth milestone from Newcastle, and at the western extremity of Warden Parish. Of Sewingshields Castle, Mr. Hodgson informs us that in his time a square, low, lumpy mass of ruins, overgrown with nettles, still remained. "Its site is on the end of a dry ridge and overlooked from the south by the basaltic cliffs, along the brow of which the Roman Wall was built. There are also some traces of trenches near it." [Hodgson's History of Northumberland, part ii, vol. iii. (Note in original)] This is the castle referred to by Sir Walter Scott in the sixth canto of Harold the Dauntless as the "castle of the seven shields." In reference to its present condition Dr. Bruce remarks: ... No towers are seen On the wild heath, but those that Fancy builds. And save a fosse that tracks the moor with green, Is nought remains to tell of what may there have been. [ Wallet-Book of the Roman Wall, p. 109. (Note in original. This book is Denham's source of the legend that follows.)] It stood in the center of the only patch of ground in "the moss," which is now subjected to the plow. The walls have been uprooted and the vaults removed, but the following tradition relating to it will not readily perish: Immemorial tradition has asserted that King Arthur, his queen Guinevere, his court of lords and ladies, and his hounds, were enchanted in some cave of the crags, or in a hall below the Castle of Sewingshields, and would continue entranced there till someone should first blow a bugle-horn that lay on a table near the entrance of the hall, and then, with "the sword of the stone," cut a garter also placed there beside it. But none had ever heard where the entrance to this enchanted hall was till the farmer at Sewingshields, about fifty years since, was sitting knitting on the ruins of the castle and his clew fell and ran downwards through a rush of briars and nettles, as he supposed, into a deep subterranean passage. Full in the faith that the entrance into King Arthur's hall was now discovered, he cleared the briary portal of its weeds and rubbish, and, entering a vaulted passage, followed, in his darkling way, the thread of his clew. The floor was infested with toads and lizards; and the dark wings of bats, disturbed by his unhallowed intrusion, flitted fearfully around him. At length his sinking courage was strengthened by a dim, distant light, which as he advanced grew gradually brighter, till at once he entered a vast and vaulted hall, in the center of which a fire without fuel, from a broad crevice in the floor, blazed with a high and lambent flame that showed all the carved walls and fretted roof, and the monarch and his queen and court reposing around in a theater of thrones and costly couches. On the floor, beyond the fire, lay the faithful and deep-toned pack of thirty couple of hounds; and on a table before it the spell-dispelling horn, sword and garter. The shepherd reverently but firmly grasped the sword, and as he drew it leisurely from its rusty scabbard the eyes of the monarch, and his courtiers began to open, and they rose till they sat upright. He cut the garter; and as the sword was being slowly sheathed the spell assumed its ancient power, and they all gradually sank to rest; but not before the monarch had lifted up his eyes and hands and exclaimed: O woe betide that evil day On which the witless wight was born, Who drew the sword -- the garter cut, But never blew the bugle-horn. Of this favorite tradition the most remarkable variation is respecting the place where the farmer descended. Some say that after the king's denunciation, terror brought on a loss of memory, and he was unable to give any correct account of his adventure or the place where it occurred. But all agree that Mrs. Spearman, the wife of another and more recent occupier of the estate, had a dream in which she saw a rich hoard of treasure among the ruins of the castle, and that for many days together she stood over workmen employed in searching for it, but without success. Source: The Denham Tracts . A collection of folklore by Michael Aislabie Denham and reprinted from the original tracts and pamphlets printed by Mr. Denham between 1846 and 1859, edited by Dr. James Hardy. Vol. 2 (London: The Folklore Society, London, 1895), pp. 125-27 . Return to the table of contents . King Arthur in Freebrough Hill England 1. The scenery to the north of Castleton is wild, but not so picturesque as that to the south. A walk of five miles across the moor conducts to a remarkable circular elevation, Freebrough Hill, within which, it is asserted, King Arthur and his knights lie. 2. Freebrough Hill (five miles south of Castleton) is a remarkable circular elevation, like a gigantic tumulus. An almost extinct piece of folk-lore asserts that Arthur and his knights lie within the hill, like the great Emperor Frederick Barbarossa in the vaults of Kifhäuser [Kyffhäuser], ready to start forth in their appointed season. Source (1): Horne's Guide to Whitby , 5th edition (Horne and Son, 1897), p. 80 . Source (2): Eliza Gutch, County Folk-Lore, vol. 2: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the North Riding of Yorkshire, York, and the Ainsty (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1901), p. 1 . Return to the table of contents . Richmond Castle England On the south side of the river [Swale, near Richmond], is the remarkable circular hill called the Round Howe, near a large natural cave called Arthur's Oven. And hereupon comes to mind a Richmond legend, parallel with various other stories told of King Arthur in the north. A person walking round Richmond castle, was arrested by a "man," who took him into a strange vault beneath the fortress, where a multitude of people were lying on the ground, as if in a deep slumber. In this chamber a horn and a sword were presented to him, for the usual purpose of releasing the sleepers of other days from their long listnessness. But when he drew the sword half out of its sheath, a stir among them all terrified him to such a degree, that he let the blade fall back to its place and an indignant voice instantly cried: Potter, Potter Thompson! If thou had either drawn The sword or blown that horn, Thou'd been the luckiest man That ever [yet] was born. The tradition adds, that no opportunity of breaking the enchantment will again be afforded before a definite time has elapsed. Source: Eliza Gutch, County Folk-Lore, vol. 2: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the North Riding of Yorkshire, York, and the Ainsty (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1901), pp 406-407 . Return to the table of contents . Gutch's source: W. Hylton Longstaffe, Richmondshire: Its Ancient Lords and Edifices (London: George Bell, 1852), pp. 115-16. The Wizard of Alderley Edge England Connected with Alderley Edge there is a curious tradition which preserves a very ancient fragment of mythological belief, and is, therefore, worthy of notice. The legend of the wizard of Alderley Edge first appeared in print in the Manchester Mail of 1805, by a correspondent who obtained it from the narration of a servant of the Stanleys, whose proper name was Thomas Broadhurst, but who was better known as "Old Daddy." According to this veteran the tradition says that once upon a time a farmer from Mobberley, mounted on a milk-white horse, was crossing the Edge on his way to Macclesfield to sell the animal. He had reached a spot known as the Thieves' Hole, and, as he slowly rode along thinking of the profitable bargain which he hoped to make, was startled by the sudden appearance of an old man, tall and strangely clad in a deep flowing garment. The old man ordered him to stop, told him that he knew the errand upon which the rider was bent, and offered a sum of money for the horse. The farmer, however, refused the offer, not thinking it sufficient. "Go, then, to Macclesfield," said the old man, "but mark my words, you will not sell the horse. Should you find my words come true, meet me this evening, and I will buy your horse." The farmer laughed at such a prophecy, and went on his way. To his great surprise, and greater disappointment, nobody would buy, though all admired his beautiful horse. He was, therefore, compelled to return. On approaching the Edge he saw the old man again. Checking his horse's pace, he began to consider how far it might be prudent to deal with a perfect stranger in so lonely a place. However, while he was considering what to do, the old man commanded him, "Follow me!" Silently the old man led him by the Seven Firs, the Golden Stone, by Stormy Point, and Saddle Boll. Just as the farmer was beginning to think he had gone far enough he fancied that he heard a horse neighing underground. Again he heard it. Stretching forth his arm the old man touched a rock with a wand, and immediately the farmer saw a ponderous pair of iron gates, which, with a sound like thunder, flew open. The horse reared bolt upright, and the terrified farmer fell on his knees praying that his life might be spared. "Fear nothing," spoke the Wizard, "and behold a sight which no mortal eye has ever looked upon." They went into the cave. In a long succession of caverns the farmer saw a countless number of men and horses, the latter milk-white, and all fast asleep. In the innermost cavern heaps of treasure were piled up on the ground. From these glittering heaps the old man bade the farmer take the price he desired for his horse, and thus addressed him, "You see these men and horses; the number was not complete. Your horse was wanted to make it complete. Remember my words, there will come a day when these men and these horses, awakening from their enchanted slumber, will descend into the plain, decide the fate of a great battle, and save their country. This shall be when George the son of George shall reign. Go home in safety. Leave your horse with me. No harm will befall you; but henceforward no mortal eye will ever look upon the iron gates. Begone!" The farmer lost no time in obeying. He heard the iron gates close with the same fearful sounds with which they were opened, and made the best of his way to Mobberley. Source: William E. A. Axon, Cheshire Gleanings (Manchester: Tubbs, Brook, and Chrystal, 1884), pp. 56-58 . Axon continues this chapter ( pp. 58-68 ) with a discussion of additional legends of this type. Return to the table of contents . Then There Are Yet Men in the Isle of Man Isle of Man Castle Rushen has long been famous for its subterranean passages, and there are individuals amongst the islanders who still firmly believe that they lead to a beautiful country underground, inhabited by giants. Amongst the many tales they relate is one, that, several attempts being made to explore the passages, which in general proved unsuccessful, a number of daring fellows agreed to attempt the enterprise in company. Having armed themselves with staves, etc., etc., and procuring torches, they descended. After proceeding a little way, they found an old man, of great size, with a long beard, and blind, sitting on a rock as if fixed there. He, hearing them approach, enquired of them as to the state of the island, and at last asked one to put forth his hand, on which one of them gave him a plowshare which he had, when the old giant squeezed the iron together with the greatest ease, explaining at the same time: "Then there are yet men in the Isle of Man." Source: James Hardy, ed., The Denham Tracts . A collection of folklore by Michael Aislabie Denham and reprinted from the original tracts and pamphlets printed by Mr. Denham between 1846 and 1859, vol. 1 (London: The Folklore Society, 1892), pp. 197-98 . Return to the table of contents . The Enchantment of Gearoidh Iarla Ireland In old times in Ireland there was a great man of the Fitzgeralds. The name on him was Gerald, but the Irish, that always had a great liking for the family, called him Gearoidh Iarla (Earl Gerald). He had a great castle or rath at Mullaghmast, and whenever the English government were striving to put some wrong on the country, he was always the man that stood up for it. Along with being a great leader in a fight, and very skilful at all weapons, he was deep in the black art, and could change himself into whatever shape he pleased. His lady knew that he had this power, and often asked him to let her into some of his secrets, but he never would gratify her. She wanted particularly to see him in some strange shape, but he put her off and off on one pretence or other. But she wouldn't be a woman if she hadn't perseverance; and so at last he let her know that if she took the least fright while he'd be out of his natural form, he would never recover it till many generations of men would be under the mould. Oh! she wouldn't be a fit wife for Gearoidh Iarla if she could be easily frightened. Let him but gratify her in this whim, and he'd see what a hero she was! So one beautiful summer evening, as they were sitting in their grand drawing room, he turned his face away from her, and muttered some words, and while you'd wink he was clever and clean out of sight, and a lovely goldfinch was flying about the room. The lady, as courageous as she thought herself, was a little startled, but she held her own pretty well, especially when he came and perched on her shoulder, and shook his wings, and put his little beak to her lips, and whistled the delightfullest tune you ever heard. Well, he flew in circles round the room, and played hide and go seek with his lady, and flew out into the garden, and flew back again, and lay down in her lap as if he was asleep, and jumped up again. Well, when the thing had lasted long enough to satisfy both, he took one flight more into the open air; but by my work he was soon on his return. He flew right into his lady's bosom, and the next moment a fierce hawk was after him. The wife gave one loud scream, though there was no need, for the wild bird came in like an arrow, and stuck against a table with such force that the life was dashed out of him. She turned her eyes from his quivering body to where she saw the goldfinch an instant before, but neither goldfinch nor Earl Garrett did she ever lay eyes on again. Once every seven years the Earl rides round the Curragh of Kildare on a steed, whose silver shoes were half an inch thick the time he disappeared; and when these shoes are worn as thin as a cat's ear, he will be restored to the society of living men, fight a great battle with the English, and reign King of Ireland for two score years. Himself and his warriors are now sleeping in a long cavern under the Rath of Mullaghmast. There is a table running along through the middle of the cave. The Earl is sitting at the head, and his troopers down along in complete armor both sides of the table, and their heads resting on it. Their horses, saddled and bridled, are standing behind their masters in their stalls at each side. And when the day comes, the miller's son that's to be born with six fingers on each hand will blow his trumpet, and the horses will stamp and whinny, and the knights awake and mount their steeds, and go forth to battle. Some night that happens once in every seven years, while the Earl is riding round the Curragh, the entrance may be seen by anyone chancing to pass by. About a hundred years ago, a horse dealer that was late abroad and a little drunk, saw the lighted cavern, and went in. The lights, and the stillness, and the sight of the men in armor cowed him a good deal, and he became sober. His hands began to tremble, and he let fall a bridle on the pavement. The sound of the bit echoed through the long cave, and one of the warriors that was next him lifted his head a little, and said in a deep hoarse voice, "Is it time yet?" He had the wit to say, "Not yet, but soon will," and the heavy helmet sunk down on the table. The horse dealer made the best of his way out, and I never heard of any other one getting the same opportunity. Source: Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 172-74 . Kennedy's note concerning his source for this tale: What we heard from Mrs. K. in 1816, or thereabouts, is here given to the reader most conscientiously (p. 171). Return to the table of contents . Thomas the Rhymer Scotland [Following his departure from Fairyland,] Thomas remained several years in his own tower near Erceldoune, and enjoyed the fame of his predictions, several of which are current among the country people to this day. At length, as the prophet was entertaining the Earl of March in his dwelling, a cry of astonishment arose in the village, on the appearance of a hart and hind, which left the forest, and, contrary to their shy nature, came quietly onward, traversing the village towards the dwelling of Thomas. The prophet instantly rose from the board; and, acknowledging the prodigy as the summons of his fate, he accompanied the hart and hind into the forest, and though occasionally seen by individuals to whom he has chosen to show himself, has never again mixed familiarly with mankind. Thomas of Erceldoune, during his retirement, has been supposed, from time to time, to be levying forces to take the field in some crisis of his country's fate. The story has often been told, of a daring horse-jockey having sold a black horse to a man of venerable and antique appearance, who appointed the remarkable hillock upon Eildon hills, called the Lucken-hare, as the place where, at twelve o'clock at night, he should receive the price. He came, his money was paid in ancient coin, and he was invited by his customer to view his residence. The trader in horses followed his guide in the deepest astonishment through several long ranges of stalls, in each of which a horse stood motionless, while an armed warrior lay equally still at the charger's feet. "All these men," said the wizard, in a whisper, "will awaken at the battle of Sheriffmoor." At the extremity of this extraordinary depot hung a sword and a horn, which the prophet pointed out to the horse-dealer as containing the means of dissolving the spell. The man in confusion took the horn, and attempted to wind it. The horses instantly started in their stalls, stamped, and shook their bridles, the men arose and clashed their armour, and the mortal, terrified at the tumult he had excited, dropped the horn from his hand. A voice like that of a giant, louder even than the tumult around, pronounced these words: Woe to the coward that ever he was born, That did not draw the sword before he blew the horn! A whirlwind expelled the horse-dealer from the cavern, the entrance to which he could never again find. A moral might be perhaps extracted from the legend, namely, that it is best to be armed against danger before bidding it defiance. Source: Sir Walter Scott, Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft (London: John Murray, 1830), pp. 136-37 . Return to the table of contents . The Smith's Rock in the Isle of Skye Scotland There was a report that the Fians (Fingalians) were asleep in this rock, and that if anyone would enter it a blow the wooden crier (whistle), which lay beside Finn, three times, they would rise up alive and well as they formerly were. A smith who lived in the island heard the report, and resolved that he would attempt to enter the rock. He reached the place where it was; and, having formed a good idea of the keyhole, he returned to the smithy, and made a key which fitted the hole. He then went back to the rock, and, as soon as he turned the key in the hole, the door opened, and he saw a very great and wide place before him, and exceedingly big men lying on the floor. One man, bigger than the rest, was lying in their midst, having a large hollow baton of wood lying beside him. He thought that this was the wooden crier (whistle), but it was so large that he was afraid that he could not lift it, much less blow it. He stood for a time looking at it, but he at last said to himself that, as he came so far, he would try at any rate. He laid hold of the wooden crier, and with difficulty raised its end up to his mouth. He blew it with all his might, and so loud was the sound it produced that he thought the rock and all that was over it came down on the top of him. The huge unwieldy men who lay on the floor shook from the tops of their heads to the soles of their feet. He gave another blast on the wooden crier, and with one spring they turned on their elbows. Their fingers were like the prongs of wooden grapes [large forks used in sea harvesting], and their arms like beams of bog oak. Their size and the terrible appearance they had put him in such fear that he threw the wooden crier from him, and sprang out. They were then crying after him, "Worse have you left us than as you found us." But he looked not behind him until he got outside and shut the door. He then drew the key out of the hole, and threw it out into the lake which is near the rock, and which is called to this day the Lake of the Smith's Rock. Source: James MacDougall, Folk and Hero Tales , Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition, Argyllshire Series, no. 3 (London: David Nutt, 1891), no. 5, pp. 73-74 . The same tale in Gaelic is printed on pp. 74-75 . MacDougall's note on the source of the tales in this book: The following tales were collected in the district of Duror between the summer of 1889 and the spring of 1890. They were obtained from Alexander Cameron, a native of Ardnamurchan, who was then roadman between Duror and Ballachulish. Cameron learned them from Donald McPhie and other old men whom he had known in his boyhood, but who died many years ago. (p. ix) Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites The Seven Sleepers of Ephesus , a chapter from: Sabine Baring-Gould, Curious Myths of the Middle Ages , new impression (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1914), pp. 93-112 . The Seven Sleepers of Ephesus , retold by Horace E. Scudder. Kralj Matjaž . An article in Wikipedia about a legendary king from Slovenia. The Twelve Apostles . A legend by the Grimm brothers about the three-hundred-year magic sleep of twelve brothers who became the apostles of Jesus. The Galar Mor -- The Great Disease . A legend from Scotland about a castle destroyed the plague. Many years later a ghost-like company of soldiers was discovered in an underground chamber. Auf einer Burg , a poem, in the original German, by Joseph von Eichendorff. Return to: Sleeping Heroes: Table of Contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 12, 2025. The Person Swallowed a Snake (or Similar Dangerous Creature The Person Who Swallowed a Snake (or Similar Dangerous Creature) Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 285B* translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2022 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Snake in the Prince's Belly (India). The Man with the Snake (Denmark). The Alp-Luachra (Ireland). The Islay Doctor (Scotland / Norway). Ananzi and Baboon (Africa / West Indies). The Snake in the Stomach (USA). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Snake in the Prince's Belly India In a certain city dwelt a king whose name was Godlike. He had a son who wasted daily in every limb because of a snake that used his belly as a home instead of an ant-hill. So the prince became dejected and went to another country. In a city of that country he begged alms, spending his time in a great temple. Now in that city was a king named Gift, who had two daughters in early womanhood. One of these bowed daily at her father's feet with the greeting: "Victory, O King," while the other said: "Your deserts, O King." At this the king grew angry, and said: "See, counselors. This young lady speaks malevolently. Give her to some foreigner. Let her have her own deserts." To this the counselors agreed, and gave the princess, with very few maid-servants, to the prince who made his home in the temple. And she was delighted, accepted her husband like a god, and went with him to a far country. There by the edge of a tank in a distant city she left the prince to look after the house while she went with her maids to buy butter, oil, salt, rice, and other supplies. When her shopping was done, she returned and found the prince with his head resting on an ant-hill. And from his mouth issued the head of a hooded snake, taking the air. Likewise another snake crawled from the ant-hill, also to take the air. When these two saw each other, their eyes grew red with anger, and the ant-hill snake said: "You villain! How can you torment in this way a prince who is so perfectly handsome?" And the snake in the prince's mouth said: "Villain yourself! How can you bemire those two pots full of gold?" In this fashion each laid bare the other's weakness. Then the ant-hill snake continued: "You villain! Doesn't anybody know the simple remedy of drinking black mustard and so destroying you?" And the belly-snake retorted: "And doesn't anybody know the simple way to destroy you, by pouring in hot water?" Now the princess, hiding behind a branch, overheard their conversation, and did just as they suggested. So she made her husband sound and well, and acquired vast wealth. When she returned to her own country, she was highly honored by father, mother, and relatives, and lived happily. For she had her deserts. Source (Internet Archive): The Panchatantra , translated from the sanskrit by Arthur W. Ryder (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1925), book 3, pp. 346-48 . Source (Wikisource): The Panchatantra , translated from the sanskrit by Arthur W. Ryder (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1925), book 3, pp. 346-48 . Source (Columbia University): The Panchatantra , translated from the sanskrit by Arthur W. Ryder (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1925), book 3, pp. 346-48 . Return to the table of contents . The Man with the Snake Denmark Once two farmhands were cutting hay in the meadow near Borresjø. After finishing their midday meal, they lay down for a midday sleep. Before long one of them woke up with the most horrible pains in his stomach. The pains lasted for a long time, and no one could get him relief. Little by little the pain subsided somewhat until he was able to carry out his work with considerable difficulty. A year later he was again working in the same place. After their midday meal, they once again lay down, when he said to his companion: "It was here in this place that I got my illness last year. Maybe this time I can get rid of it here." They then fell fast asleep. His companion woke up first and saw two snakes coming toward them, one white and one black. Seeing that the snakes were heading straight for the sleeping sick man, he shook him to awaken him. The sick man woke up and was perfectly alert. There had been a snake in him since he had lain there last year. Feeling that it was now near its old home, the snake had crawled out to find its old mate. It had found its new abode good; but this time it was prevented from returning there. It had lost its natural color in the man's bowels and had turned completely white. Source (books.google.com): J. P. Møller, "Manden med Snogen," Folkesagn og andre mundtlige Minder fra Bornholm (Copenhagen: F. H. Eibes Forlag, 1867), pp. 45-46 . Return to the table of contents . The Alp-Luachra Ireland There was once a wealthy farmer in Connacht, and he had plenty of substance and a fine family, and there was nothing putting grief nor trouble on him, and you would say yourself that it's he was the comfortable, satisfied man, and that the luck was on him as well as on e'er a man alive. He was that way, without mishap or misfortune, for many years, in good health and without sickness or sorrow on himself or his children, until there came a fine day in the harvest, when he was looking at his men making hay in the meadow that was near his own house, and as the day was very hot he drank a drink of buttermilk, and stretched himself back on the fresh cut hay, and as he was tired with the heat of the day and the work that he was doing, he soon fell asleep, and he remained that way for three or four hours, until the hay was all gathered in and his work people gone away out of the field. When he awoke then, he sat up, and he did not know at first where he was, till he remembered at last that it was in the field at the back of his own house he was lying. He rose up then and returned to his house, and he felt like a pain or a stitch in his side. He made nothing of it, sat down at the fire and began warm ing himself. "Where were you?" says the daughter to him. "I was asleep a while," says he, "on the fresh grass in the field where they were making hay." "What happened to you, then?" says she, "for you don't look well." "Muirya ["Oh, Mary," or "by Mary"], musha, then," says he, "I don't know; but it's queer the feeling I have. I never was like it before; but I'll be better when I get a good sleep." He went to his bed, lay down, and fell asleep, and never awoke until the sun was high. He rose up then and his wife said to him: "What was on you that you slept that long?" "I don't know," says he. He went down to the fire where the daughter was making a cake for the breakfast, and she said to him: "How are you today, father; are you anything better?" "I got a good sleep," said he, "but I'm not a taste better than I was last night; and indeed, if you'd believe me, I think there's something inside of me running back and forwards." "Arrah, that can't be," says the daughter, "but it's a cold you got and you lying out on the fresh grass; and if you're not better in the evening we'll send for the doctor." He was saying then that there was a pain on him, but that he did not know rightly what place the pain was in. He was in the same way in the evening, and they had to send for the doctor, and when the doctor was not coming quickly there was great fright on him. The people of the house were doing all they could to put courage in him. The doctor came at last, and he asked what was on him, and he said again that there was something like a birdeen leaping in his stomach. The doctor stripped him and examined him well, but saw nothing out of the way with him. He put his ear to his side and to his back, but he heard nothing, though the poor man himself was calling out: "Now! now! don't you hear it? Now, aren't you listening to it jumping?" But the doctor could perceive nothing at all, and he thought at last that the man was out of his senses, and that there was nothing the mattter with him. He said to the woman of the house when he came out, that there was nothing on her husband, but that he believed himself to be sick, and that he would send her medicine the next day for him, that would give him a good sleep and settle the heat of his body. He did that, and the poor man swallowed all the medicines and got another great sleep, but when he awoke in the morning he was worse than ever, but he said he did not hear the thing jumping inside him any longer. They sent for the doctor again, and he came; but he was able to do nothing. He left other medicines with them, and said he would come again at the end of a week to see him. The poor man got no relief from all that the doctor left with him, and when he came again he found him to be worse than before; but he was not able to do anything, and he did not know what sort of sickness was on him. "I won't be taking your money from you any more," says he to the woman of the house, "because I can do nothing in this case, and as I don't understand what's on him, I won't let on to be understanding it. I'll come to see him from time to time, but I'll take no money from you." The woman of the house could hardly keep in her anger. Scarcely ever was the doctor gone till she gathered the people of the house round her and they took counsel. "That doctor braduch ," says she, "he's not worth a traneen ; do you know what he said that he wouldn't take any money from me any more, and he said himself he knew nothing about anything; suf on him, the behoonuch , he'll cross this threshold no more; we'll go to the other doctor; if he's farther from us, itself, I don't mind that, we must get him." Everybody in the house was on one word with her, and they sent for the other doctor; but when he came he had no better knowledge than the first one had, only that he had knowledge enough to take their money. He came often to see the sick man, and every time he would come he would have every name longer than another to give his sickness; names he did not understand himself, nor no one else but he had them to frighten the people. They remained that way for two months, without anyone knowing what was on the poor man; and when that doctor was doing him no good they got another doctor, and then another doctor, until there was not a doctor in the county, at last, that they had not got, and they lost a power of money over them, and they had to sell a portion of their cattle to get money to pay them. They were that way for half a year, keeping doctors with him, and the doctors giving him medicines, and the poor man that was stout and well-fed before, getting bare and thin, until at last there was not an ounce of flesh on him, but the skin and the bones only. He was so bad at last that it was scarcely he was able to walk. His appetite went from him, and it was a great trouble to him to swallow a piece of soft bread or to drink a sup of new milk, and everyone was saying that he was better to die, and that was no wonder, for there was not in him but like a shadow in a bottle. One day that he was sitting on a chair in the door of the house, sunning himself in the heat, and the people of the house all gone out but himself, there came up to the door a poor old man that used to be asking alms from place to place, and he recognised the man of the house sitting in the chair, but he was so changed and so worn that it was hardly he knew him. "I'm here again, asking alms in the name of God," said the poor man; "but, glory be to God, master, what happened to you, for you're not the same man I saw when I was here half a year ago; may God relieve you!" "Arrah, Shamus," said the sick man, "it's I that can't tell you what happened to me; but I know one thing, that I won't be long in this world." "But I'm grieved to see you how you are," said the beggarman. "Tell me how it began with you, and what the doctors say." "The doctors, is it?" says the sick man, "My curse on them; but I oughtn't to be cursing and I so near the grave; suf on them, they know nothing." "Perhaps," says the beggerman, "I could find you a relief myself, if you were to tell me what's on you. They say that I be knowledgable about diseases and the herbs to cure them." The sick man smiled, and he said: "There isn't a medicine man in the county that I hadn't in this house with me, and isn't half the cattle I had on the farm sold to pay them. I never got a relief no matter how small, from a man of them; but I'll tell you how it happened to me first." Then he gave him an account of everything he felt and of everything the doctors had ordered. The beggarman listened to him carefully, and when he had finished all his story, he asked him: "What sort of field was it you fell asleep in?" "A meadow that was in it that time," says the sick man; "but it was just after being cut." "Was it wet?" says the beggarman. "It was not," said he. "Was there a little stream or a brook of water running through it?" said the beggarman. "There was," says he. "Can I see the field?" "You can, indeed, and I'll show it to you." He rose off his chair, and as bad as he was, he pulled himself along until he came to the place where he lay down to sleep that evening. The beggarman examined the place for a long time, and then he stooped down over the grass and went backwards and forwards with his body bent, and his head down, groping among the herbs and weeds that were growing thickly in it. He rose at last and said: "It is as I thought," and he stooped himself down again and began searching as before. He raised his head a second time, and he had a little green herb in his hand. "Do you see this?" said he. "Any place in Ireland that this herb grows, there be's an alt-pluachra near it, and you have swallowed an alt-pluachra." "How do you know that?" said the sick man. "If that was so, sure the doctors would tell it to me before now." "The doctors!" said the beggarman. "Ah ! God give you sense, sure they're only a flock of omadawns. I tell you again, and believe me, that it's an alt-pluachra you swallowed. Didn't you say yourself that you felt some thing leaping in your stomach the first day after you being sick? That was the alt-pluachra; and as the place he was in was strange to him at first, he was uneasy in it, moving backwards and forwards, but when he was a couple of days there, he settled himself, and he found the place comfortable, and that's the reason you're keeping so thin, for every bit you're eating the alt-pluachra is getting the good out of it, and you said yourself that one side of you was swelled; that's the place where the nasty thing is living." The sick man would not believe him at first, but the beggarman kept on talking and proving on him that it was the truth he was saying, and when his wife and daughter came back again to the house, the beggarman told them the same things, and they were ready enough to believe him. The sick man put no faith in it himself, but they were all talking to him about it until they prevailed on him at last to call in three doctors together until he should tell them this new story. The three came together, and when they heard all the boccuch ( beggarman ) was saying, and all the talk of the women, it is what they laughed, and said they were fools altogether, and that it was some thing else entirely that was the matter with the man of the house, and every name they had on his sickness this time was twice -- three times -- as long as ever before. They left the poor man a bottle or two to drink, and they went away, and they humbugging the women for saying that he had swallowed an alt-pluachra. The boccuch said when they were gone away: "I don't wonder at all that you're not getting better, if it's fools like those you have with you. There's not a doctor or a medicine-man in Ireland now that'll do you any good, but only one man, and that's Mac Dermott the Prince of Coolavin, on the brink of Lough Gara, the best doctor in Connacht or the five provinces." "Where is Lough Gara?" said the poor man. "Down in the County Sligo," says he; "it's a big lake, and the prince is living on the brink of it; and if you'll take my advice you'll go there, for it's the last hope you have; and you, Mistress," said he, turning to the woman of the house, "ought to make him go, if you wish your man to be alive." "Musha!" says the woman, "I'd do anything that would cure him." "If so, send him to the Prince of Coolavin," says he. "I'd do anything at all to cure myself," says the sick man, "for I know I haven't long to live on this world if I don't get some relief, or without something to be done for me." "Then go to the Prince of Coolavin," says the beggar man. "Anything that you think would do yourself good, you ought to do it father," says the daughter. "There's nothing will do him good but to go to the Prince of Coolavin, " said the beggarman. So they were arguing and striving until the night came, and the beggarman got a bed of straw in the barn, and he began arguing again in the morning that he ought to go to the prince, and the wife and daughter were on one word with him; and they prevailed at last on the sick man, and he said that he would go, and the daughter said that she would go with him to take care of him, and the boccuch said that he would go with them to show them the road. "And I'll be on the pinch of death, for ye, with anxiety," said the wife, "until ye come back again. " They harnessed the horse, and they put him under the cart, and they took a week's provision with them -- bread, and bacon, and eggs, and they went off. They could not go very far the first day, for the sick man was so weak, that he was not able to bear the shaking he was getting in the cart; but he was better the second day, and they all passed the night in a farmer's house on the side of the road, and they went on again in the morning; but on the third day, in the evening, they came to the dwelling of the prince. He had a nice house, on the brink of the lake, with a straw roof, in among the trees. They left the horse and the cart in a little village near the prince's place, and they all walked together, until they came to the house. They went into the kitchen, and asked, "Couldn't they see the prince?" The servant said that he was eating his meal, but that he would come, perhaps, when he was ready. The prince himself came in at that moment, and asked what it was they wanted. The sick man rose up and told him, that it was looking for assistance from his honour he was, and he told him his whole story. "And now can your honour help me?" he said, when he had finished it. "I hope I can," said the prince; "anyhow, I'll do my best for you, as you came so far to see me. I'd have a bad right not to do my best. Come up into the parlour with me. The thing that old man told you is true. You swallowed an alt-pluachra, or something else. Come up to the parlour with me." He brought him up to the parlour with him, and it happened that the meal he had that day was a big piece of salted beef. He cut a large slice off it, and put it on a plate, and gave it to the poor man to eat. "Oro! what is your honour doing there?" says the poor man; "I didn't swallow as much as the size of an egg of meat this quarter, and I can't eat anything." "Be silent, man," says the prince; "eat that, when I tell you." The poor man eat as much as he was able, but when he left the knife and fork out of his hand, the Prince made him take them up again, and begin out of the new (over again). He kept him there eating until he was ready to burst, and at last he was not able to swallow another bit, if he were to get a hundred pounds. When the Prince saw that he would not be able to swallow any more, he brought him out of the house, and he said to the daughter and the old beggarman to follow them, and he brought the man out with him to a fine green meadow that was forenent [over against] the house, and a little stream of water running through it. He brought him to the brink of the stream, and told him to lie down on his stomach over the stream, and to hold his face over the water, to open his mouth as wide as he could, and to keep it nearly touching the water, and "wait there quiet and easy," says he; "and for your life don't stir, till you see what will happen to you." The poor man promised that he would be quiet, and he stretched his body on the grass, and held his mouth open, over the stream of water, and remained there without stirring. The prince went backwards, about five yards, and drew the daughter and the old man with him, and the last word he said to the sick man was: "Be certain, and for your life, don't put a stir out of you, whatever thing at all happens to you." The sick man was not lying like that more than a quarter of an hour, when something began moving inside of him, and he felt something coming up in his throat, and going back again. It came up and went back three or four times after other. At last it came to the mouth, stood on the tip of his tongue, but frightened, and ran back again. However, at the end of a little space, it rose up a second time, and stood on his tongue. and at last jumped down into the water. The prince was observing him closely, and just as the man was going to rise, he called out: "Don't stir yet." The poor man had to open his mouth again, and he waited the same way as before; and he was not there a minute until the second one came up the same way as the last, and went back and came up two or three times, as if it got frightened; but at last, it also, like the first one, came up to the mouth, stood on the tongue, and when it felt the smell of the water below it, leaped down into the little stream. The prince said in a whisper: "Now the thirst's coming on them; the salt that was in the beef is working them; now they'll come out." And before the word had left his mouth, the third one fell, with a plop, into the water; and a moment after that, another one jumped down, and then another, until he counted five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve. "There's a dozen of them now," said the prince; "that's the clutch; the old mother didn't come yet." The poor sick man was getting up again, but the prince called to him: "Stay as you are; the mother didn't come up." He remained as he was, but no other one came out, though he stayed there more than a quarter of an hour. The prince himself was getting uneasy for fear the old alt-pluachra might not stir at all. The poor man was so tired and so weak that he wished to get up; and, in spite of all the prince told him, he was trying to stand on his feet, when the Prince caught him by one leg, and the boccuch by the other, and they held him down in spite of him. They remained another quarter of an hour without speaking a word, or making a sound, and at the end of that time the poor man felt something stirring again in his side, but seven times worse than before; and it's scarcely he could keep himself from screeching. That thing kept moving for a good while, and he thought the side was being torn out of himself with it. Then it began coming up, and it reached the mouth, and went back again. At last it came up so far that the poor man put the two fingers to his mouth and thought to catch hold of it. But if he put in his fingers quick, the old alt-pluachra went back quicker. " Oh, you behoonach! " cried the prince, " what made you do that? Didn't I tell you not to let a stir out of you? Remain quiet if she comes up again. " They had to remain there for half an hour, because the old mother of the alt-pluachras was scared, and she was afraid to come out. But she came up at last, perhaps, because there was too much thirst on her to let her stand the smell of the water that was tempting her, or perhaps she was lonesome after her children going from her. Anyhow, she came up to his mouth, and stood there while you would be counting about four score; and when she saw nothing, and nothing frightened her, she gave a jump down into the water, like her clutch before her; and the plop of her into the water was seven times heavier than theirs. The prince and the other two had been watching the whole, and they scarcely dared to breathe, for fear of startling the horrid beast. As soon as ever she jumped down into the water, they pulled back the man, and put him standing again on his two feet. He was for three hours before he could speak a word; but the first thing he said was: "I'm a new man." The prince kept him in his own house for a fortnight, and gave him great care and good feeding. He allowed him to go then, and the daughter and the boccuch with him; and he refused to take as much as a penny from them. "I'm better pleased than ten pounds on my own hand," said he, "that my cure turned out so well; and I'd be long sorry to take a farthing from you; you lost plenty with doctors before." They came home safely, and he became healthy and fat. He was so thankful to the poor boccuch that he kept him in his own house till his death. As long as he was alive he never lay down on green grass again; and another thing, if there was any sickness or ill-health on him, it isn't the doctors he used to call in to him. That was small wonder! Source (books.google.com): Douglas Hyde, Beside the Fire: A Collection of Irish Gaelic Folk Stories (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 47-73 . Source (Internet Archive): Douglas Hyde, Beside the Fire: A Collection of Irish Gaelic Folk Stories (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 47-73 . Note by Hyde: "This legend of the alp-luachra is widely disseminated, and I have found traces of it in all parts of Ireland. The alp-luachra is really a newt, not a lizard, as is usually supposed. . . . The alt-pluachra of the text is a mispronunciation of the proper name, alp-luachra." ( p. 183 ) Return to the table of contents . The Islay Doctor Scotland / Norway There were three brothers of the name of Beaton, natives of Islay, famed for their skill in medicine. One of the brothers, called John, went to Mull, and was known as the Olladh Muilleach , or Mull doctor. His tomb is to be seen in Iona. Another called Fergus remained in Islay, and was known as the Olladh Ileach. The third, Gilleadha , was in the end the most famed of the three; he was the herbalist, and employed by his brother Fergus to gather herbs and prepare them for use. When boiling a cauldron of herbs, in which a white snake had been put, in stirring, it bubbled up and spattered on his hand, this he licked off, and at once he got such a view of his profession as to make him unrivalled. He was summoned to attend one of the Scotch Kings, who was cured by him; but through the jealousy of other doctors, he never returned to Islay, having been poisoned. (So far the Islay tradition very nearly accords with the Sutherland account of Farquhar Leech). He was called to see a young lady, daughter of Mackay of Kilmahumaig, near Crinan. When approaching the house, attended by servant, the latter remarked a sweet female voice which he heard singing a song: "Sweet is that head's voice," said the lad; "Sweet," said the doctor, above a Toad." The poor young woman had an enormous appetite, which could not be satisfied, but she was reduced to a skeleton. The doctor, on hearing her voice, knew what her disease was, and ordered a sheep to be killed and roasted. The lady was prevented from getting any food, from which she was in great agony. She was made to sit by the sheep while it was being roasted, and the flavour of the meat tempted the toad she had swallowed to come up her throat and out of her mouth, when she was completely cured. The reptile she had swallowed was called Lon Craois . Now, something very like this part was told me in Norway as a fact by a Norwegian, the travelling interpeter of an English companion. My old friend Juil has since become a flourishing contractor. He had seen a young woman on board a steamer going with her friends to Christiania for advice. She had been reaping, and had fallen asleep on a sheaf of corn in the field. She slept with her mouth open, and a serpent had run down her throat. She had been in a state of terror and horror ever since, and they were taking her to the capital. "I saw her myself," said my informant. "I heard that the doctors could not cure her at Christiania, and that she went to Copenhagen. There all the great doctors were beat; but a young doctor made them put her in a dark room, lying on her side on the floor, with a saucer of milk before her. Serpents are very fond of milk, you see. The first time they opened the door the serpent had only put his head up, and he drew it in again when he heard the noise. The second time they moved the saucer a little further away, and he came out altogether, and the young doctor killed the serpent and shewed it to the young woman, and thus she got quite well. And that is quite true." Every word of it might be true, if we suppose a clever man and a woman possessed with an idea which had to be coaxed out of her; but the question is, when did that clever man live, and where? -- in Copenhagen -- in the West Highlands -- or in Africa, where the creature swallowed was a baboon, and the bait a banana skilfully administered by a doctor to Anansi (Dasent, Norse Tales , p. 502); or in London, where a clever doctor tempted a serpent out of a patient with a mutton chop, according to a story told to a friend of mine in his childhood; or have there been many doctors and patients who have gone through the same adventure? Source (books.google.com): J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 365-67 . Source (Internet Archive): J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 365-67 . Return to the table of contents . Ananzi and Baboon Africa / West Indies Ananzi and Baboon were disputing one day which was fattest. Ananzi said he was sure he was fat, but Baboon declared he was fatter. Then Ananzi proposed that they should prove it; so they made a fire, and agreed that they should hang up before it, and see which would drop most fat. Then Baboon hung up Ananzi first, but no fat dropped. Then Ananzi hung up Baboon, and very soon the fat began to drop, which smelt so good that Ananzi cut a slice out of Baboon, and said, "Oh! brother Baboon, you're fat for true." But Baboon didn't speak. So Ananzi said, "Well, speak or not speak, I'll eat you every bit today," which he really did. But when he had eaten up all of Baboon, the bits joined themselves together in his stomach, and began to pull him about so much that he had no rest, and was obliged to go to a doctor. The doctor told him not to eat anything for some days, then he was to get a ripe banana, and hold it to his mouth; when the Baboon, who would be hungry, smelt the banana, he would be sure to run up to eat it, and so he would run out of his mouth. So Anansi starved himself, and got the banana, and did as the doctor told him; but when he put the banana to his mouth, he was so hungry he couldn't help eating it. So he didn't get rid of the Baboon, which went on pulling him about till he was obliged to go back to the doctor, who told him he would soon cure him; and he took the banana, and held it to Ananzi's mouth, and very soon the Baboon jumped up to catch it, and ran out of his mouth; and Ananzi was very glad to get rid of him. And Baboons to this very day like bananas. Source (books.google.com): George Webbe Dasent, Popular Tales from the Norse (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), pp. 502-503 . Source (Internet Archive): George Webbe Dasent, Popular Tales from the Norse (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), pp. 502-503 . Return to the table of contents . The Snake in the Stomach USA Ah, the very brooks seem fuller of reflections than they were! Ah, such provoking sibylline sentences they are! The shallowest is all at once unfathomable. How can that depth be fathomed where a man may see himself reflected? The rill I stopped to drink at I drink in more than I expected. I satisfy and still provoke the thirst of thirsts. Nut Meadow Brook where it crosses the road beyond Jenny Dugan's that was. I do not drink in vain. I mark that brook as if I had swallowed a water-snake that would live in my stomach. I have swallowed something worth the while. The day is not what it was before I stooped to drink. Ah, I shall hear from that draught! It is not in vain that I have drunk. I have drunk an arrowhead. It flows from where all fountains rise. How many ova have I swallowed? Who knows what will be hatched within me? There were some seeds of thought, methinks, floating in that water, which are expanding in me. The man must not drink of the running streams, the living waters, who is not prepared to have all nature reborn in him, -- to suckle monsters. The snake in my stomach lifts his head to my mouth at the sound of running water. When was it that I swallowed a snake? I have got rid of the snake in my stomach. I drank of stagnant waters once. That accounts for it. I caught him by the throat and drew him out, and had a well day after all. Is there not such a thing as getting rid of the snake which you have swallowed when young, when thoughtless you stooped and drank at stagnant waters, which has worried you in your waking hours and in your sleep ever since, and appropriated the life that was yours? Will he not ascend into your mouth at the sound of running water? Then catch him boldly by the head and draw him out, though you may think his tail be curled about your vitals. Source (books.google.com): Henry David Thoreau, The writings of Henry David thoreau: Journal , vol. 2 (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1906), (August 17, 1851), pp. 392-93 . Source (Internet Archive): Henry David Thoreau, The writings of Henry David thoreau: Journal , vol. 2 (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1906), (August 17, 1851), pp. 392-93 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 21, 2022. Snake and Serpent Husbands: Folktales of Type 433C Snake and Serpent Husbands folktales of type 433C and related stories translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2022 Contents The Enchanted Brahman's Son (India, The Panchatantra ). Muchie-Lal (India, Mary Frere). The Snake Prince (India, Andrew Lang). The Caterpillar Boy (India, Cecil Hanry Bompas). The River Snake (India, Cecil Henry Bompas). The Snake Who Became the King's Son-in-Law (Romanian-Gypsy, Francis Hindes Groome). The Serpent (Italy, Giambattista Basile). The Water Snake (Russia, A. A. Erlenvein). Transformation into a Nightingale and a Cuckoo (Russia, P. Kulish). The Snake and the Princess (Russia, P. Kulish). The Girl and the Snake (Sweden). The Snake and the Little Girl (Denmark, Svend Grundtvig). King Lindorm (Denmark, Svend Grundtvig). The Silk Spinster (Germany, A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz). The Snake (Germany, Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle). The Serpent (Germany, Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle). Oda and the Snake (Germany, Ludwig Bechstein). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Enchanted Brahman's Son India. The Panchatantra In the city of Radschagriha there lived a Brahman by the name of Devasarman. His childless wife wept bitterly whenever she saw the neighbors' children. One day the Brahman said to her, "Dear one, stop your grieving. Behold, I was offering a sacrifice for the birth of a son when an invisible being said to me in the clearest words, 'Brahman, you shall be granted this son, and he shall surpass all men in beauty and virtue, and good fortune shall be his.'" After hearing this, the Brahman's wife was overjoyed, and she said, "Such promises must come true." In the course of time she became pregnant and gave birth to a snake. When her attendants saw it, they all cried out, "Throw it away!" However, she paid no attention to them, but instead picked it up, had it bathed, and -- filled with a mother's love toward her son -- laid it in a large, clean container, fed it milk, fresh butter, and the like, so that within a few days it had reached its full growth. Once when the Brahman's wife witnessed the wedding feast of a neighbor's son, her eyes clouded over with tears, and she said to her husband, "You treat me with contempt, because you are not making any effort at all to arrange a wedding for my dear child!" When he heard this, the Brahman said, "Honored one! To achieve that I would have to go to the depths of hell and beseech Pasuki, the King of Snakes, for who else, you fool, would give his daughter in marriage to a snake?" Having said this, he looked at his wife with her exceedingly sad face, and -- for the sake of her love and in order to pacify her -- he took some travel provisions and departed for a foreign land. After traveling about for several months he came to a place by the name of Kukutanagara. There, as evening fell, he was received by an acquaintance, a member of his caste. He was given a bath, food, and every necessity, and he spent the night there. The next morning he took leave and was preparing to set forth once again, when his host said, "What brought you to this place, and where are you going now?" The Brahman answered, "I have come to seek an appropriate bride for my son." After hearing this, the host said, "If that is the case, then I have a very appropriate daughter. I have only respect for you. Take her for your son!" Acting upon these words, the Brahman took the girl, together with her servants, and returned to his home city. However, when the inhabitants of this region saw the girl, who was beautiful, gifted, and charming beyond comparison, they opened their eyes wide with love for her, and said to her attendants, "How could you deliver such a jewel of a girl to a snake?" After hearing this, all of her companions were horrified, and they said, "She must be rescued from the murderer set up by this old Brahman." Hearing this, the maiden said, "Spare me from such deception, for behold: Kings speak but once. The virtuous speak but once. A girl is promised in marriage but once. These three things happen but once. And further: Not even wise men and gods can change the decrees of fate. And moreover, my father shall not be reproached for his daughter's falseness." Having said that, and with the permission of her attendants, she married the snake. She showed him proper respect, and served him milk and similar things. One night the snake left his large basket, which was kept in the bedroom, and climbed into his wife's bed. She cried out, "Who is this creature, shaped like a man?" Thinking it was a strange man, she jumped up. Shaking all over, she tore open the door and wanted to rush away, when the snake said, "Dear one! Stay here! I am your husband!" To convince her of this, he once again entered the body that he had left in the basket, then left it again. He was wearing a magnificent diadem, rings, bands, and bracelets on his upper and lower arms. His wife fell at his feet. Then together they partook of the joys of love. His father, the Brahman, had arisen earlier than his son, and saw everything. He took the snake skin, which was lying in the basket, and burned it in the fire, saying, "He shall not enter it again." Later that morning, filled with joy, he presented his son to his family. Vitalized by unending love, he became an ideal son. Source: "Der verzauberte Brahmanensohn," Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen , vol. 2, translated from the Sanskrit into German by Theodor Benfey, (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), appendix to book 1, story 8, pp. 144-48 . Translation © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. India's most influential contribution to world literature, the Panchatantra (also spelled Pañcatantra or Pañca-tantra ) consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled, in their current form, between the third and fifth centuries AD. It is believed that even then the stories were already ancient. The tales' self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes the Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai, which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of the Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced medieval writers of fables. Return to the table of contents . Muchie-Lal India Once upon a time there were a rajah [king] and ranee [queen] who had no children. Long had they wished and prayed that the gods would send them a son, but it was all in vain; their prayers were not granted. One day a number of fish were brought into the royal kitchen to be cooked for the rajah's dinner, and amongst them was one little fish that was not dead; but all the rest were dead. One of the palace maid-servants seeing this, took the little fish and put him in a basin of water. Shortly afterwards the ranee saw him, and thinking him very pretty, kept him as a pet; and because she had no children she lavished all her affection on the fish, and loved him as a son; and the people called him Muchie-Rajah (the fish prince). In a little while Muchie-Rajah had grown too long to live in the small basin, so they put him in a larger one; and then (when he grew too long for that) into a big tub. In time, however, Muchie-Rajah became too large for even the big tub to hold him; so the ranee had a tank made for him in which he lived very happily, and twice a day she fed him with boiled rice. Now, though the people fancied Muchie-Rajah was only a fish, this was not the case. He was, in truth, a young rajah who had angered the gods, and been by them turned into a fish and thrown into the river, as a punishment. One morning, when the ranee brought him his daily meal of boiled rice, Muchie-Rajah called out to her and said, "Queen Mother, Queen Mother, I am so lonely here all by myself. Cannot you get me a wife?" The ranee promised to try, and sent messengers to all the people she knew, to ask if they would allow one of their children to marry her son, the fish prince. But they all answered, "We cannot give one of our dear little daughters to be devoured by a great fish, even though he is the Muchie-Rajah, and so high in your majesty's favor." At news of this the ranee did not know what to do. She was so foolishly fond of Muchie-Rajah, however, that she resolved to get him a wife at any cost. Again she sent out messengers; but this time she gave them a great bag containing a lac [100,000] of gold mohurs, and said to them, "Go into every land until you find a wife for my Muchie-Rajah, and to whoever will give you a child to be the Muchie-Ranee, you shall give this bag of gold mohurs." The messengers started on their search, but for some time they were unsuccessful; not even the beggars were to be tempted to sell their children, fearing the great fish would devour them. At last one day the messengers came to a village where there lived a fakir, who had lost his first wife and married again. His first wife had had one little daughter, and his second wife also had a daughter. As it happened, the fakir's second wife hated her little stepdaughter, always gave her the hardest work to do, and the least food to eat, and tried by every means in her power to get her out of the way, in order that the child might not rival her own daughter. When she heard of the errand on which the messengers had come, she sent for them when the fakir was out, and said to them, "Give me the bag of gold mohurs and you shall take my little daughter to marry the Muchie-Rajah" (for, she thought to herself, "The great fish will certainly eat the girl, and she will thus trouble us no more"). Then, turning to her stepdaughter, she said, "Go down to the river and wash your sari, that you may be fit to go with these people, who will take you to the ranee's court." At these words the poor girl went down to the river very sorrowful, for she saw no hope of escape, as her father was from home. As she knelt by the riverside, washing her sari and crying bitterly, some of her tears fell into the hole of an old seven-headed cobra, who lived in the river bank. This cobra was a very wise animal, and seeing the maiden, he put his head out of his hole, and said to her, "Little girl, why do you cry?" "Oh, sir," she answered, "I am very unhappy, for my father is from home, and my stepmother has sold me to the ranee's people to be the wife of the Muchie-Rajah, that great fish, and I know he will eat me up." "Do not be afraid, my daughter," said the cobra, "but take with you these three stones and tie them up in the corner of your sari," and so saying he gave her three little round pebbles. "The Muchie-Rajah, whose wife you are to be, is not really a fish, but a rajah who has been enchanted. Your home will be a little room which the ranee has had built in the tank wall. When you are taken there, wait, and be sure you don't go to sleep, or the Muchie-Rajah will certainly come and eat you up. But as you hear him coming rushing through the water, be prepared, and as soon as you see him throw this first stone at him; he will then sink to the bottom of the tank. The second time he comes, throw the second stone, when the same thing will happen. The third time he comes, throw this third stone, and he will immediately resume his human shape." So saying, the old cobra dived down again into his hole. The fakir's daughter took the stones, and determined to do as the cobra had told her, though she hardly believed it would have the desired effect. When she reached the palace, the ranee spoke kindly to her, and said to the messengers, "You have done your errand well -- this is a dear little girl." Then she ordered that she should be let down the side of the tank in a basket, to a little room which had been prepared for her. When the fakir's daughter got there, she thought she had never seen such a pretty place in her life (for the ranee had caused the little room to be very nicely decorated for the wife of her favorite), and she would have felt very happy away from her cruel stepmother and all the hard work she had been made to do, had it not been for the dark water that lay black and unfathomable below the door, and the fear of the terrible Muchie-Rajah. After waiting some time she heard a rushing sound, and little waves came dashing against the threshold; faster they came and faster, and the noise got louder and louder, until she saw a great fish's head above the water -- the Muchie-Rajah was coming towards her open-mouthed. The fakir's daughter seized one of the stones that the cobra had given her, and threw it at him, and down he sank to the bottom of the tank; a second time he rose and came towards her, and she threw the second stone at him, and he again sank down; a third time he came more fiercely than before, when, seizing the third stone she threw it with all her force. No sooner did it touch him than the spell was broken, and there, instead of a fish, stood a handsome young prince. The poor little fakir's daughter was so startled that she began to cry. But the prince said to her, "Pretty maiden, do not be frightened. You have rescued me from a horrible thralldom, and I can never thank you enough; but if you will be the Muchie-Ranee, we will be married tomorrow." Then he sat down on the doorstep, thinking over his strange fate, and watching for the dawn. Next morning early, several inquisitive people came to see if the Muchie-Rajah had eaten up his poor little wife, as they feared he would; what was their astonishment, on looking over the tank wall, to see, not the Muchie Rajah, but a magnificent prince! The news soon spread to the palace. Down came the rajah, down came the ranee, down came all their attendants and dragged Muchie-Rajah and the fakir's daughter up the side of the tank in a basket; and when they heard their story, there were great and unparalleled rejoicings. The ranee said, "So I have indeed found a son at last." And the people were so delighted, so happy, and proud of the new prince and princess, that they covered all their path with damask from the tank to the palace, and cried to their fellows, "Come and see our new prince and princess. Were ever any so divinely beautiful? Come; see a right royal couple! A pair of mortals like the gods!" And when they reached the palace the prince was married to the fakir's daughter. There they lived very happily for some time. The Muchie-Ranee's stepmother, hearing what had happened, came often to see her stepdaughter, and pretended to be delighted at her good fortune; and the ranee was so good that she quite forgave all her stepmother's former cruelty, and always received her very kindly. At last, one day, the Muchie-Ranee said to her husband, "It is a weary while since I saw my father. If you will give me leave, I should much like to visit my native village and see him again." "Very well," he replied, "you may go. But do not stay away long; for there can be no happiness for me till you return." So she went, and her father was delighted to see her; but her stepmother, though she pretended to be very kind, was, in reality, only glad to think she had got the ranee into her power, and determined, if possible, never to allow her to return to the palace again. One day, therefore, she said to her own daughter, "It is hard that your stepsister should have become ranee of all the land, instead of being eaten up by the great fish, while we gained no more than a lac of gold mohurs. Do now as I bid you, that you may become ranee in her stead." She then went on to instruct her how that she must invite the ranee down to the river bank, and there beg her to let you try on her jewels, and whilst putting them on, give her a push and drown her in the river. The girl consented, and standing by the river bank said to her stepsister, "Sister, may I try on your jewels -- how pretty they are." "Yes," said the ranee, "and we shall be able to see in the river how they look." So, undoing her necklaces she clasped them round the other's neck; but whilst she was doing so, her stepsister gave her a push, and she fell backwards into the water. The girl watched to see that the body did not rise, and then running back, said to her mother, "Mother, here are all the jewels; and she will trouble us no more." But it happened that just when her stepsister pushed the ranee into the river, her old friend the seven-headed cobra chanced to be swimming across it, and seeing the little ranee like to be drowned, he carried her on his back until he reached his hole, into which he took her safely. Now this hole, in which the cobra and his wife, and all his little ones lived, had two entrances -- the one under water, and leading to the river, and the other above water, leading out into the open fields. To this upper end of his hole the cobra took the Muchie-Ranee, and there he and his wife took care of her; and there she lived with them for some time. Meanwhile, the wicked fakir's wife, having dressed up her own daughter in all the ranee's jewels, took her to the palace, and said to the Muchie-Rajah, "See, I have brought your wife, my dear daughter, back safe and well." The rajah looked at her, and thought, "This does not look like my wife." However, the room was dark, and the girl was cleverly disguised, and he thought he might be mistaken. Next day he said again, "My wife must be sadly changed, or this cannot be she; for she was always bright and cheerful. She had pretty loving ways and merry words; while this woman never opens her lips." Still, he did not like to seem to mistrust his wife, and comforted himself by saying, "Perhaps she is tired with the long journey." On the third day, however, he could bear the un certainty no longer, and tearing off her jewels, saw, not the face of his own little wife, but another woman. Then he was very angry, and turned her out of doors, saying, "Be gone; since you are but the wretched tool of others, I spare your life." But of the fakir's wife he said to his guards, "Fetch that woman here instantly; for unless she can tell me where my wife is, I will have her hanged." It chanced, however, that the fakir's wife had heard of the Muchie-Rajah having turned her daughter out of doors; so, fearing his anger, she hid herself, and was not to be found. Meantime, the Muchie-Ranee, not knowing how to get home, continued to live in the great seven-headed cobra's hole, and he and his wife and all his family were very kind to her, and loved her as if she had been one of them; and there her little son was born, and she called him Muchie-Lal [little ruby fish], after the Muchie-Rajah, his father. Muchie-Lal was a lovely child, merry and brave, and his playmates all day long were the young cobras. When he was about three years old, a bangle-seller came by that way, and the Muchie-Ranee bought some bangles from him and put them on her boy's wrists and ankles; but by next day, in playing, he had broken them all. Then, seeing the bangle-seller, the ranee called him again and bought some more, and so on, every day, until the bangle-seller got quite rich from selling so many bangles for the Muchie-Lal; for the cobra's hole was full of treasure, and he gave the Muchie-Ranee as much money to spend every day as she liked. There was nothing she wished for he did not give her, only he would not let her try to get home to her husband, which she wished more than all. When she asked him he would say, "No, I will not let you go. If your husband comes here and fetches you, it is well; but I will not allow you to wander in search of him through the land alone." And so she was obliged to stay where she was. All this time the poor Muchie-Rajah was hunting in every part of the country for his wife, but he could learn no tidings of her. For grief and sorrow at losing her he had gone well nigh distracted, and did nothing but wander from place to place crying, "She is gone! She is gone!" Then, when he had long inquired without avail of all the people in her native village about her, he one day met a bangle-seller, and said to him, "Whence do you come?" The bangle-seller answered, "I have just been selling bangles to some people who live in a cobra's hole in the river bank." "People! What people?" asked the rajah. "Why," answered the bangle-seller, "a woman and a child -- the child is the most beautiful I ever saw. He is about three years old, and, of course, running about, is always breaking his bangles, and his mother buys him new ones every day." "Do you know what the child's name is?" said the rajah. "Yes," answered the bangle-seller carelessly, "for the lady always calls him her Muchie-Lal." "Ah," thought the Muchie-Rajah, "this must be my wife." Then he said to him again, "Good bangle-seller, I would see these strange people of whom you speak; cannot you take me there?" "Not tonight," replied the bangle-seller; "daylight has gone, and we should only frighten them; but I shall be going there again tomorrow, and then you may come too. Meanwhile, come and rest at my house for the night, for you look faint and weary." The rajah consented. Next morning, however, very early, he woke the bangle-seller, saying, "Pray let us go now and see the people you spoke about yesterday." "Stay," said the bangle-seller; "it is much too early. I never go till after breakfast." So the rajah had to wait till the bangle-seller was ready to go. At last they started off, and when they reached the cobra's hole, the first thing the rajah saw was a fine little boy playing with the young cobras. As the bangle-seller came along, jingling his bangles, a gentle voice from inside the hole called out, "Come here, my Muchie-Lal, and try on your bangles." Then the Muchie-Rajah, kneeling down at the mouth of the hole, said, "Oh, lady, show your beautiful face to me." At the sound of his voice the ranee ran out, crying, "Husband, husband! Have you found me again?" And she told him how her sister had tried to drown her, and how the good cobra had saved her life, and taken care of her and her child. Then he said, "And will you now come home with me?" And she told him how the cobra would never let her go, and said, "I will first tell him of your coming; for he has been as a father to me." So she called out, " Father Cobra, Father Cobra, my husband has come to fetch me; will you let me go?" "Yes," he said, "if your husband has come to fetch you, you may go." And his wife said, "Farewell, dear lady, we are loth to lose you, for we have loved you as a daughter." And all the little cobras were very sorrowful to think that they must lose their playfellow, the young prince. Then the cobra gave the Muchie-Rajah and the Muchie-Ranee, and Muchie-Lal, all the most costly gifts he could find in his treasure-house; and so they went home, where they lived very happy ever after, and so may you be happy too. Source: M. Frere, Old Deccan Days; or, Hindoo Fairy Legends Current in Southern India (London: John Murray, 1868), no. 19, pp. 238-48 . This tale combines type 433B (marriage with a snake) with type 403C (substituted bride). Return to the table of contents . The Snake Prince India Once upon a time there lived by herself, in a city, an old woman who was desperately poor. One day she found that she had only a handful of flour left in the house, and no money to buy more nor hope of earning it. Carrying her little brass pot, very sadly she made her way down to the river to bathe and to obtain some water, thinking afterwards to come home and to make herself an unleavened cake of what flour she had left; and after that she did not know what was to become of her. Whilst she was bathing she left her little brass pot on the river bank covered with a cloth, to keep the inside nice and clean; but when she came up out of the river and took the cloth off to fill the pot with water, she saw inside it the glittering folds of a deadly snake. At once she popped the cloth again into the mouth of the pot and held it there; and then she said to herself: "Ah, kind death! I will take thee home to my house, and there I will shake thee out of my pot and thou shalt bite me and I will die, and then all my troubles will be ended." With these sad thoughts in her mind the poor old woman hurried home, holding her cloth carefully in the mouth of the pot; and when she got home she shut all the doors and windows, and took away the cloth, and turned the pot upside down upon her hearthstone. What was her surprise to find that, instead of the deadly snake which she expected to see fall out of it, there fell out with a rattle and a clang a most magnificent necklace of flashing jewels! For a few minutes she could hardly think or speak, but stood staring; and then with trembling hands she picked the necklace up, and folding it in the corner of her out her veil, she hurried off to the king's hall of public audience. "A petition, O king!" she said. "A petition for thy private ear alone!" And when her prayer had been granted, and she found herself alone with the king, she shook out her veil at his feet, and there fell from it in glittering coils the splendid necklace. As soon as the king saw it he was filled with amazement and delight; and the more he looked at it the more he felt that he must possess it at once. So he gave the old woman five hundred silver pieces for it, and put it straightway into his pocket. Away she went full of happiness; for the money that the king had given her was enough to keep her for the rest of her life. As soon as he could leave his business the king hurried off and showed his wife his prize, with which she was as pleased as he, if not more so; and, as soon as they had finished admiring the wonderful necklace, they locked it up in the great chest where the queen's jewelry was kept, the key of which hung always round the king's neck. A short while afterwards, a neighboring king sent a message to say that a most lovely girl baby had been born to him; and he invited his neighbors to come to a great feast in honor of the occasion. The queen told her husband that of course they must be present at the banquet, and she would wear the new necklace which he had given her. They had only a short time to prepare for the journey, and at the last moment the king went to the jewel chest to take out the necklace for his wife to wear, but he could see no necklace at all, only, in its place, a fat little boy baby crowing and shouting. The king was so astonished that he nearly fell backwards, but presently he found his voice, and called for his wife so loudly that she came running, thinking that the necklace must at least have been stolen. "Look here! look!" cried the king, "haven't we always longed for a son? And now heaven has sent us one!" "What do you mean?" cried the queen. "Are you mad?" "Mad? no, I hope not," shouted the king, dancing in excitement round the open chest. "Come here, and look! Look what we've got instead of that necklace!" Just then the baby let out a great crow of joy, as though he would like to jump up and dance with the king; and the queen gave a cry of surprise, and ran up and looked into the chest. "Oh!" she gasped, as she looked at the baby, "what a darling! Where could he have come from?" "I'm sure I can't say," said the king; "all I know is that we locked up a necklace in the chest, and when I unlocked it just now there was no necklace, but a baby, and as fine a baby as ever was seen." By this time the queen had the baby in her arms. "Oh, the blessed one!" she cried, "fairer ornament for the bosom of a queen than any necklace that ever was wrought. Write," she continued, "write to our neighbor and say that we cannot come to his feast, for we have a feast of our own, and a baby of our own! Oh, happy day!" So the visit was given up; and, in honor of the new baby, the bells of the city, and its guns, and its trumpets, and its people, small and great, had hardly any rest for a week; there was such a ringing, and banging, and blaring, and such fireworks, and feasting, and rejoicing, and merrymaking, as had never been seen before. A few years went by; and, as the king's boy baby and his neighbor's girl baby grew and throve, the two kings arranged that as soon as they were old enough they should marry; and so, with much signing of papers and agreements, and wagging of wise heads, and stroking of grey beards, the compact was made, and signed, and sealed, and lay waiting for its fulfilment. And this too came to pass; for, as soon as the prince and princess were eighteen years of age, the kings agreed that it was time for the wedding; and the young prince journeyed away to the neighboring kingdom for his bride, and was there married to her with great and renewed rejoicings. Now, I must tell you that the old woman who had sold the king the necklace had been called in by him to be the nurse of the young prince; and although she loved her charge dearly, and was a most faithful servant, she could not help talking just a little, and so, by-and-by, it began to be rumored that there was some magic about the young prince's birth; and the rumor of course had come in due time to the ears of the parents of the princess. So now that she was going to be the wife of the prince, her mother (who was curious, as many other people are) said to her daughter on the eve of the ceremony: "Remember that the first thing you must do is to find out what this story is about the prince. And in order to do it, you must not speak a word to him whatever he says until he asks you why you are silent; then you must ask him what the truth is about his magic birth; and until he tells you, you must not speak to him again." And the princess promised that she would follow her mother's advice. Therefore when they were married, and the prince spoke to his bride, she did not answer him. He could not think what was the matter, but even about her old home she would not utter a word. At last he asked why she would not speak; and then she said: "Tell me the secret of your birth." Then the prince was very sad and displeased, and although she pressed him sorely he would not tell her, but always reply: "If I tell you, you will repent that ever you asked me." For several months they lived together; and it was not such a happy time for either as it ought to have been, for the secret was still a secret, and lay between them like a cloud between the sun and the earth, making what should be fair, dull and sad. At length the prince could bear it no longer; so he said to his wife one day: "At midnight I will tell you my secret if you still wish it; but you will repent it all your life." However, the princess was overjoyed that she had succeeded, and paid no attention to his warnings. That night the prince ordered horses to be ready for the princess and himself a little before midnight. He placed her on one, and mounted the other himself, and they rode together down to the river to the place where the old woman had first found the snake in her brass pot. There the prince drew rein and said sadly: "Do you still insist that I should tell you my secret?" And the princess answered "Yes." "If I do," answered the prince, "remember that you will regret it all your life." But the princess only replied "Tell me!" "Then," said the prince, "know that I am the son of the king of a far country, but by enchantment I was turned into a snake." The word "snake" was hardly out of his lips when he disappeared, and the princess heard a rustle and saw a ripple on the water; and in the faint moonlight she beheld a snake swimming into the river. Soon it disappeared and she was left alone. In vain she waited with beating heart for something to happen, and for the prince to come back to her. Nothing happened and no one came; only the wind mourned through the trees on the river bank, and the night birds cried, and a jackal howled in the distance, and the river flowed black and silent beneath her. In the morning they found her, weeping and disheveled, on the river bank; but no word could they learn from her or from anyone as to the fate of her husband. At her wish they built on the river bank a little house of black stone; and there she lived in mourning, with a few servants and guards to watch over her. A long, long time passed by, and still the princess lived in mourning for her prince, and saw no one, and went nowhere away from her house on the river bank and the garden that surrounded it. One morning, when she woke up, she found a stain of fresh mud upon the carpet. She sent for the guards, who watched outside the house day and night, and asked them who had entered her room while she was asleep. They declared that no one could have entered, for they kept such careful watch that not even a bird could fly in without their knowledge; but none of them could explain the stain of mud. The next morning, again, the princess found another stain of wet mud, and she questioned everyone most carefully; but none could say how the mud came there. The third night the princess determined to lie awake herself and watch; and, for fear that she might fall asleep, she cut her finger with a penknife and rubbed salt into the cut, that the pain of it might keep her from sleeping. So she lay awake, and at midnight she saw a snake come wriggling along the ground with some mud from the river in its mouth; and when it came near the bed, it reared up its head and dropped its muddy head on the bedclothes. She was very frightened, but tried to control her fear, and called out: "Who are you, and what do you here?" And the snake answered: "I am the prince, your husband, and I am come to visit you." Then the princess began to weep; and the snake continued: "Alas! did I not say that if I told you my secret you would repent it? and have you not repented?" "Oh, indeed!" cried the poor princess, "I have repented it, and shall repent it all my life! Is there nothing I can do?" And the snake answered: "Yes, there is one thing, if you dared to do it." "Only tell me," said the princess, "and I will do anything! " "Then," replied the snake, "on a certain night you must put a large bowl of milk and sugar in each of the four corners of this room. All the snakes in the river will come out to drink the milk, and the one that leads the way will be the queen of the snakes. You must stand in her way at the door, and say: 'Oh, Queen of Snakes, Queen of Snakes, give me back my husband!' and perhaps she will do it. But if you are frightened, and do not stop her, you will never see me again." And he glided away. On the night of which the snake had told her, the princess got four large bowls of milk and sugar, and put one in each corner of the room, and stood in the doorway waiting. At midnight there was a great hissing and rustling from the direction of the river, and presently the ground appeared to be alive with horrible writhing forms of snakes, whose eyes glittered and forked tongues quivered as they moved on in the direction of the princess's house. Foremost among them was a huge, repulsive scaly creature that led the dreadful procession. The guards were so terrified that they all ran away; but the princess stood in the doorway, as white as the snakes raised their horrid heads and swayed them to and fro, and looked at her with wicked beady eyes, while their breath seemed to poison the very air. Still the princess stood firm, and, when the leading snake was within a few feet of her, she cried: "Oh, Queen of Snakes, Queen of Snakes, give me back my husband!" Then all the rustling, writhing crowd of snakes seemed to whisper to one another "Her husband? her husband?" But the queen of snakes moved on until her head was almost in the princess's face, and her little eyes seemed to flash fire. And still the princess stood in the doorway and never moved, but cried again: "Oh, Queen of Snakes, Queen of Snakes, give me back my husband!" Then the queen of snakes replied: "Tomorrow you shall have him -- tomorrow!" When she heard these words and knew that she had conquered, the princess staggered from the door, and sank upon her bed and fainted. As in a dream, she saw that her room was full of snakes, all jostling and squabbling over the bowls of milk until it was finished. And then they went away. In the morning the princess was up early, and took off the mourning dress which she had worn for five whole years, and put on gay and beautiful clothes. And she swept the house and cleaned it, and adorned it with garlands and nosegays of sweet flowers and ferns, and prepared it as though she were making ready for her wedding. And when night fell she lit up the woods and gardens with lanterns, and spread a table as for a feast, and lit in the house a thousand wax candles. Then she waited for her husband, not knowing in what shape he would appear. And at midnight there came striding from the river the prince, laughing, but with tears in his eyes; and she ran to meet him, and threw herself into his arms, crying and laughing too. So the prince came home; and the next day they two went back to the palace, and the old king wept with joy to see them. And the bells, so long silent, were set a-ringing again, and the guns firing, and the trumpets blaring, and there was fresh feasting and rejoicing. And the old woman who had been the prince's nurse became nurse to the prince's children -- at least she was called so; though she was far too old to do anything for them but love them. Yet she still thought that she was useful, and knew that she was happy. And happy, indeed, were the prince and princess, who in due time became king and queen, and lived and ruled long and prosperously. Source: Andrew Lang, The Olive Fairy Book (New York, London, Bombay, and Calcutta: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1907), pp. 247-55 . Lang's source: "Major Campbell, Feroshepore." Return to the table of contents . The Caterpillar Boy India Once there was an old woman who lived on the grain she could collect from other people's threshing floors. One day as she swept up a threshing floor she found a caterpillar among the paddy; she threw it away but it came crawling back again. She threw it away again, but it said, "Do not throw me away, take me home with you and you will prosper." So she let it stay and that day she found that she collected a whole basketful of rice; at this she was delighted, and put the caterpillar on the top of her basket and took it home. There she asked the caterpillar what work it would do, and it said that it would watch the paddy, when it was spread out to dry after being boiled, and prevent the fowls and pigs from eating it. So the caterpillar used to watch the paddy while the old woman went out looking for food; and every day she brought back a full basket of rice, and so she soon became rich. It got whispered about that the old woman was so prosperous; because she had a caterpillar boy in her house. One day the caterpillar said that he wanted to go and bathe, so he went to the river and took off his caterpillar skin, and bathed, and as he rubbed his head, one or two hairs came out, and these he wrapped up in a leaf and set the packet to float down the stream. Lower down the stream a princess was bathing and when she saw the packet come floating down, she had it fished out, and when she opened it she saw the hairs inside and she measured them and found them to be twelve fathoms long; then the princess vowed that she would not eat rice, till she found the man to whom the hairs belonged. And she went home and shut herself in her room and refused to eat. At this her father and mother were much distressed, and when they heard what had happened the raja said, "Well she wants a husband, I will find him for her." And he sent a notice throughout his kingdom saying that he would give his daughter and half his kingdom to the man who had hair twelve fathoms long. Everyone who heard this came with his sons and the princess was told to look at them and choose whom she liked; but none had hair twelve fathoms long, and she would take none of them. Then the raja asked whether everyone in the kingdom had come, and he was told that there was a caterpillar boy, who lived with an old woman, who had not come, so the raja sent to fetch him, but he said that he had no arms or legs and could not go; so they sent a palki for him and he was brought in that. And when the palki was set on the ground, the caterpillar boy rolled out and the princess said that he should be her husband. At this her father and mother were much ashamed and remonstrated with her, but she persisted in her fancy, so the marriage took place. They sent the newly married pair to live in a house at the outskirts of the village and only one maidservant accompanied the princess. Every night the caterpillar boy used to take off his skin and go out to dance, and one night the maidservant saw him and told her mistress. And they agreed to watch him, so the next night they pretended to go to sleep, but when the caterpillar boy went out, they took his skin and burnt it on the fire; and when he came back, he looked for it, but could not find it. Then the princess got up and caught him in her arms, and he retained his human form, and he was as handsome as a god. In the morning the caterpillar boy and his wife stayed inside the house, and the raja sent some children to see what had happened, and the children brought back word that there was a being in the house, but whether human or divine they could not say. Then the raja went and fetched his son-in-law to the palace, but the caterpillar was not pleased and said to his wife, "They treat me very well now that they see that I am a man, but what did they do before?" However he stayed in his father-in-law's palace. Presently the raja said that his kingdom was too small to give half of it to his son-in-law, so he proposed that they should go and conquer fresh territory, and carve out a kingdom for the caterpillar boy. So they went to war and attacked another raja, but they were defeated and their army cut to pieces. Then the son-in-law said that he would fight himself; so he drew his sword and brandished it and it flashed like lightning and dazzled the eyes of the enemy and his shield clanged on his thigh with a noise like thunder; and he defeated the other raja and took his kingdom and carried off all his wealth. But the raja thought that as his son-in-law was so strong, he would one day kill him also and take his kingdom, so he resolved to find a means to kill him. On their way back from the war they found no water on the road and were distressed with thirst. One day they came to a large tank and found it dry. So they made a sacrifice in the hopes that water would flow. First they sacrificed goats and sang: Tank, we are giving goats Trickle out water! Tank, we are giving goats Flow, water! But no water came. Then in succession they sacrificed sheep, and oxen and buffaloes, and horses and elephants, but all in vain; and after each failure the raja said, "Son-in-law, it is your turn," and at last his son-in-law said, "Well, let it be me;" and he armed himself and mounted his horse and went and stood in the middle of the tank, and he sang: Up to my knees the water, father, The water, father, has oozed out. And the raja answered, "Do you, my son, remain standing there." And as he sang the water welled out up to his horse's knee and then to its belly; and he still sang and the water rose to the horse's back and then to his own waist, and to his chest, and he still sang, and it reached his mouth and then he was completely submerged and the tank was full. Then they all drank their fill and the raja said to his men, "We have sacrificed this Saru Prince. I will kill any of you who tells my daughter what has happened" and they promised not to tell, but they forgot that there were two dogs with them. And when they got home each man's wife brought out water and welcomed him and the princess asked where her husband, the Saru Prince, was, and no one answered; then she sang: Oh Father, my father; How far away Is the Saru Prince, the Gindu Raja? And the raja answered, "My daughter, my darling, the Saru Prince, the Gindu Raja is very far away, amusing himself with hunting." And she sang to them all, but no one told her anything, and then she sang to the two dogs, who were named Chaura and Bhaura: Oh Chaura, oh Bhaura, How far away Is the Saru Prince, the Gindu Raja?" And they answered: Oh sister, oh Rani! Your father has sacrificed him In the big tank. Thereupon she began to cry, and every day she sat and cried on the bank of the tank. Now the two daughters of the Snake King and Queen had received the Saru Prince as he disappeared under the water, and when they heard the princess crying every day they had pity on her; she used to sing: Oh husband! Oh raja! My father has sacrificed you In the big tank. Oh husband! Oh raja, Take me with you too. So the daughters of the Snake King and Queen took pity on her and told their frog chowkidar [watchman or gatekeeper] to restore the Saru Prince to his wife; and the prince and his wife went home together. When the raja and his wife saw their son-in-law again, they were terrified, but he said nothing to reproach them. The princess however could not forgive them for trying to kill her husband and always looked angrily at them; then the raja and the rani took counsel together and agreed that they had done wrong to the prince, and that he must be a magician; and they thought that their daughter must also be a magician, as she had recognized the prince when he was a caterpillar, and she could not even see his long hair; so they were afraid and thought it best to make over the kingdom to their son-in-law, and they abdicated in his favor, and he took the kingdom. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), , no. 75, pp. 227-32 . Return to the table of contents . The River Snake India, Cecil Henry Bompas Once upon a time a certain woman had been on a visit to a distant village. As she was going home she reached the bank of a flooded river. She tried to wade across but soon found that the water was too deep and the current too strong. She looked about but could see no signs of a boat or any means of crossing. It began to grow dark, and the woman was in great distress at the thought that she would not be able to reach her home. While she thus stood in doubt, suddenly out of the river came a great snake and said to her, "Woman, what will you give me if I ferry you across the river?" She answered, "Snake, I have nothing to give you." The snake said, "I cannot take you across the river unless you promise to give me something." Now the woman at the time was pregnant and not knowing what else to do, she promised that when her child was born, if it were a daughter she would marry her to the river snake, and if it were a son that, when the boy grew up he should become the juri or "name friend" of the snake. The woman swore to do this with an oath, and the snake took her on his back and bore her safely across the flooded stream. The woman safely reached her home, and in a little time a daughter was born to her. Years passed away, and the woman forgot all about the snake and her oath. One day she went to the river to fetch water, and the snake came out of the stream and said to her, "Woman, where is the wife whom you promised to me?" The woman then remembered her oath, and going back to her house she returned to the river with her daughter. When the girl came to the bank of the river, the snake seized her and drew her underneath the water, and her mother saw her no more. The girl lived with the snake at the bottom of the river, and in the course of years bore him four snake sons. Afterwards the girl remembered her home, and one day she went to visit her mother. Her brothers when they came home were astonished to see her and said, "Sister, we thought that you were drowned in the river." She answered, "No, I was not drowned, but I am married and have children." The brothers said, "Where is this brother-in-law of ours?" Their sister said, "Go to the river and call him." So they went to the river and called, and the snake came up out of the water and went to their house with them. Then they welcomed the snake and gave him great quantities of rice beer to drink. After drinking this the snake became sleepy and coiling himself in great coils went to sleep. Then the brothers who did not like a snake brother-in-law took their axes and cut off the head of the snake while he slept, and afterwards their sister lived in their house. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), pp. 452-53 . Return to the table of contents . The Snake Who Became the King's Son-in-Law Romanian-Gypsy There were an old man and an old woman. From their youth up to their old age they had never had any, children (lit. "made any children of their bones"). So the old women was always scolding with the old man -- what can they do, for there they are old, old people? The old woman said, "Who will look after us when we grow older still?" "Well, what am I to do, old woman?" "Go you, old man, and find a son for us." So the old man arose in the morning, and took his axe in his hand, and departed and journeyed till midday, and came into a forest, and sought three days and found nothing. Then the old man could do no more for hunger. He set out to return home. So as he was coming back, he found a little snake and put it in a handkerchief, and carried it home. And he brought up the snake on sweet milk. The snake grew a week and two days, and he put it in a jar. The time came when the snake grew as big as the jar. The snake talked with his father, "My time has come to marry me. Go, father, to the king, and ask his daughter for me." When the old man heard that the snake wants the king's daughter, he smote himself with his hands. "Woe is me, darling! How can I go to the king? For the king will kill me." What said he? "Go, father, and fear not. For what he wants of you, that will I give him." The old man went to the king. "All hail, O king!" "Thank you, old man." "King, I am come to form an alliance by marriage." "An alliance by marriage!" said the king. "You are a peasant, and I am a king." "That matters not, O king. If you will give me your daughter, I will give you whatever you want." What said the king? "Old man, if that be so, see this great forest. Fell it all, and make it a level field; and plough it for me, and break up all the earth; and sow it with millet by tomorrow. And mark well what I tell you: you must bring me a cake made with sweet milk. Then will I give you the maiden." Said the old man, "All right, O king." The old man went weeping to the snake. When the snake saw his father weeping he said, "Why weepest thou, father?" "How should I not weep, darling? For see what the king said, that I must fell this great forest, and sow millet; and it must grow up by tomorrow, and be ripe. And I must make a cake with sweet milk and give it him. Then he will give me his daughter." What said the snake? "Father, don't fear for that, for I will do what you have told me." The old man: "All right, darling, if you can manage it." The old man went off to bed. What did the snake? He arose and made the forest a level plain, and sowed millet, and thought and thought, and it was grown up by daybreak. When the old man got up, he finds a sack of millet, and he made a cake with sweet milk. The old man took the cake and went to the king. "Here, O king, I have done your bidding." When the king saw that, he marveled. "My old fellow, hearken to me. I have one thing more for you to do. Make me a golden bridge from my palace to your house, and let golden apple trees and pear trees grow on the side of this bridge. Then will I give you my daughter." When the old man heard that, he began to weep, and went home. What said the snake? "Why weepest thou, father?" The old man said, "I am weeping, darling, for the miseries which God sends me. The king wants a golden bridge from his palace to our house, and apple and pear trees on the side of this bridge." The snake said, "Fear not, father, for I will do as the king said." Then the snake thought and thought, and the golden bridge was made as the king had said. The snake did that in the nighttime. The king arose at midnight; he thought the sun was at meat ( i.e. it was noon). He scolded the servants for not having called him in the morning. The servants said, "King, it is night, not day"; and, seeing that, the king marveled. In the morning the old man came. "Good-day, father-in- law." "Thank you, father-in-law. Go, father-in-law, and bring your son, that we may hold the wedding." He, when he went, said, "Hearken, what says the king? You are to go there for the king to see you." What said the snake? "My father, if that be so, fetch the cart, and put in the horses, and I will get into it to go to the king." No sooner said, no sooner done. He got into the cart and drove to the king. When the king saw him, he trembled with all his lords. One lord older than the rest, said, "Fly not, O king, it were not well of you. For he did what you told him; and shall not you do what you promised? He will kill us all. Give him your daughter, and hold the marriage as you promised." What said the king?" My old man, here is the maiden whom you demand. Take her to you." And he gave him also a house by itself for her to live in with her husband. She, the bride, trembled at him. The snake said, "Fear not, my wife, for I am no snake as you see me. Behold me as I am." He turned a somersault, and became a golden youth, in armor clad; he had but to wish to get anything. The maiden, when she saw that, took him in her arms and kissed him, and said, "Live, my king, many years. I thought you would eat me." The king sent a man to see how it fares with his daughter. When the king's servant came, what does he see? The maiden fairer, lovelier than before. He went back to the king. "O king, your daughter is safe and sound." "As God wills with her," said the king. Then he called many people and held the marriage; and they kept it up three days and three nights, and the marriage was consummated. And I came away and told the story. Source: Francis Hindes Groome Gypsy Folk-Tales (London: Hurst and Blackett, 1899), no. 7, pp. 21-24 . Return to the table of contents . The Serpent Italy There was once upon a time a poor woman who would have given all she possessed for a child, but she hadn't one. Now it happened one day that her husband went to the wood to collect brushwood, and when he had brought it home, he discovered a pretty little snake among the twigs. When Sabatella, for that was the name of the peasant's wife, saw the little beast, she sighed deeply and said, "Even the snakes have their brood; I alone am unfortunate and have no children." No sooner had she said these words than, to her intense surprise, the little snake looked up into her face and spoke: "Since you have no children, be a mother to me instead, and I promise you will never repent it, for I will love you as if I were your own son." At first Sabatella was frightened to death at hearing a snake speak, but plucking up her courage, she replied, "If it weren't for any other reason than your kindly thought, I would agree to what you say, and I will love you and look after you like a mother." So she gave the snake a little hole in the house for its bed, fed it with all the nicest food she could think of, and seemed as if she never could show it enough kindness. Day by day it grew bigger and fatter, and at last one morning it said to Cola-Mattheo, the peasant, whom it always regarded as its father, "Dear papa, I am now of a suitable age and wish to marry." "I'm quite agreeable," answered Mattheo, "and I'll do my best to find another snake like yourself and arrange a match between you." "Why, if you do that," replied the snake, "we shall be no better than the vipers and reptiles, and that's not what I want at all. No; I'd much prefer to marry the king's daughter; therefore I pray you go without further delay, and demand an audience of the king, and tell him a snake wishes to marry his daughter." Cola-Mattheo, who was rather a simpleton, went as he was desired to the king, and having obtained an audience, he said, "Your Majesty, I have often heard that people lose nothing by asking, so I have come to inform you that a snake wants to marry your daughter, and I'd be glad to know if you are willing to mate a dove with a serpent?" The king, who saw at once that the man was a fool, said, in order to get quit of him, "Go home and tell your friend the snake that if he can turn this palace into ivory, inlaid with gold and silver, before tomorrow at noon, I will let him marry my daughter." And with a hearty laugh he dismissed the peasant. When Cola-Mattheo brought this answer back to the snake, the little creature didn't seem the least put out, but said, "Tomorrow morning, before sunrise, you must go to the wood and gather a bunch of green herbs, and then rub the threshold of the palace with them, and you'll see what will happen." Cola-Mattheo, who was, as I have said before, a great simpleton, made no reply; but before sunrise next morning he went to the wood and gathered a bunch of St. John's wort, and rosemary, and suchlike herbs, and rubbed them, as he had been told, on the floor of the palace. Hardly had he done so than the walls immediately turned into ivory, so richly inlaid with gold and silver that they dazzled the eyes of all beholders. The king, when he rose and saw the miracle that had been performed, was beside himself with amazement, and didn't know what in the world he was to do. But when Cola-Mattheo came next day, and, in the name of the snake, demanded the hand of the princess, the king replied, "Don't be in such a hurry; if the snake really wants to marry my daughter, he must do some more things first, and one of these is to turn all the paths and walls of my garden into pure gold before noon tomorrow." When the snake was told of this new condition, he replied, "Tomorrow morning, early, you must go and collect all the odds and ends of rubbish you can find in the streets, and then take them and throw them on the paths and walls of the garden, and you'll see then if we won't be more than a match for the old king." So Cola-Mattheo rose at cock-crow, took a large basket under his arm, and carefully collected all the broken fragments of pots and pans, and jugs and lamps, and other trash of that sort. No sooner had he scattered them over the paths and walls of the king's garden than they became one blaze of glittering gold, so that everyone's eyes were dazzled with the brilliancy, and everyone's soul was filled with wonder. The king, too, was amazed at the sight, but still he couldn't make up his mind to part with his daughter, so when Cola-Mattheo came to remind him of his promise he replied, "I have still a third demand to make. If the snake can turn all the trees and fruit of my garden into precious stones, then I promise him my daughter in marriage." When the peasant informed the snake what the king had said, he replied, "Tomorrow morning, early, you must go to the market and buy all the fruit you see there, and then sow all the stones and seeds in the palace garden, and, if I'm not mistaken, the king will be satisfied with the result." Cola-Mattheo rose at dawn, and taking a basket on his arm, he went to the market, and bought all the pomegranates, apricots, cherries, and other fruit he could find there, and sowed the seeds and stones in the palace garden. In one moment, the trees were all ablaze with rubies, emeralds, diamonds, and every other precious stone you can think of. This time the king felt obliged to keep his promise, and calling his daughter to him, he said, "My dear Grannonia," for that was the princess's name, "more as a joke than anything else, I demanded what seemed to me impossibilities from your bridegroom, but now that he has done all I required, I am bound to stick to my part of the bargain. Be a good child, and as you love me, do not force me to break my word, but give yourself up with as good grace as you can to a most unhappy fate." "Do with me what you like, my lord and father, for your will is my law," answered Grannonia. When the king heard this, he told Cola-Mattheo to bring the snake to the palace, and said that he was prepared to receive the creature as his son-in-law. The snake arrived at court in a carriage made of gold and drawn by six white elephants; but wherever it appeared on the way, the people fled in terror at the sight of the fearful reptile. When the snake reached the palace, all the courtiers shook and trembled with fear down to the very scullion, and the king and queen were in such a state of nervous collapse that they hid themselves in a faraway turret. Grannonia alone kept her presence of mind, and although both her father and mother implored her to fly for her life, she wouldn't move a step, saying, "I'm certainly not going to fly from the man you have chosen for my husband." As soon as the snake saw Grannonia, it wound its tail round her and kissed her. Then, leading her into a room, it shut the door, and throwing off its skin, it changed into a beautiful young man with golden locks, and flashing eyes, who embraced Grannonia tenderly, and said all sorts of pretty things to her. [In the original: "Embracing his bride he gathered the first fruits of his love."] When the king saw the snake shut itself into a room with his daughter, he said to his wife, "Heaven be merciful to our child, for I fear it is all over with her now. This cursed snake has most likely swallowed her up." Then they put their eyes to the keyhole to see what had happened. Their amazement knew no bounds when they saw a beautiful youth standing before their daughter, with the snake's skin lying on the floor beside him. In their excitement they burst open the door, and seizing the skin they threw it into the fire. [In the original: "The king ... looked through the keyhole to see what had happened. But when, instead of beholding what he expected, he saw a youth of such extraordinary charm, with the skin lyin on the floor, he kicked down the door and entered the room with the queen. They went straight to the skin, picked it up, and threw it on the fire."] But no sooner had they done this than the young man called out, "Oh, wretched people! what have you done?" and before they had time to look round he had changed himself into a dove, and dashing against the window he broke a pane of glass, and flew away from their sight. But Grannonia, who in one and the same moment saw herself merry and sad, cheerful and despairing, rich and beggared, complained bitterly over this robbery of her happiness, this poisoning of her cup of joy, this unlucky stroke of fortune, and laid all the blame on her parents, though they assured her that they had meant no harm. But the princess refused to be comforted, and at night, when all the inhabitants of the palace were asleep, she stole out by a back door, disguised as a peasant woman, determined to seek for her lost happiness till she found it. When she got to the outskirts of the town, led by the light of the moon, she met a fox, who offered to accompany her, an offer which Grannonia gladly accepted, saying "You are most heartily welcome, for I don't know my way at all about the neighborhood." So they went on their way together, and came at last to a wood, where, being tired with walking, they paused to rest under the shade of a tree, where a spring of water sported with the tender grass, refreshing it with its crystal spray. They laid themselves down on the green carpet and soon fell fast asleep, and did not waken again till the sun was high in the heavens. They rose up and stood for some time listening to the birds singing, because Grannonia delighted in their songs. When the fox perceived this, he said: "If you only understood, as I do, what these little birds are saying, your pleasure would be even greater." Provoked by his words -- for we all know that curiosity is as deeply inborn in every woman as even the love of talking -- Grannonia implored the fox to tell her what the birds had said. At first the wily fox refused to tell her what he had gathered from the conversation of the birds, but at last he gave way to her entreaties, and told her that they had spoken of the misfortunes of a beautiful young prince, whom a wicked enchantress had turned into a snake for the period of seven years. At the end of this time he had fallen in love with a charming princess, but that when he had shut himself up into a room with her, and had thrown off his snake's skin, her parents had forced their way into the room and had burnt the skin, whereupon the prince, changed into the likeness of a dove, had broken a pane of glass in trying to fly out of the window, and had wounded himself so badly that the doctors despaired of his life. Grannonia, when she learnt that they were talking of her lover, asked at once whose son he was, and if there was any hope of his recovery; to which the fox made answer that the birds had said he was the son of the king of Vallone Grosso, and that the only thing that could cure him was to rub the wounds on his head with the blood of the very birds who had told the tale. Then Grannonia knelt down before the fox, and begged him in her sweetest way to catch the birds for her and procure their blood, promising at the same time to reward him richly. "All right," said the fox, "only don't be in such a hurry; let's wait till night, when the little birds have gone to roost, then I'll climb up and catch them all for you." So they passed the day, talking now of the beauty of the prince now of the father of the princess, and then of the misfortune that had happened. At last the night arrived, and all the little birds were asleep high up on the branches of a big tree. The fox climbed up stealthily and caught the little creatures with his paws one after the other; and when he had killed them all he put their blood into a little bottle which he wore at his side, and returned with it to Grannonia, who was beside herself with joy at the result of the fox's raid. But the fox said, "My dear daughter, your joy is in vain, because, let me tell you, this blood is of no earthly use to you unless you add some of mine to it," and with these words he took to his heels. Grannonia, who saw her hopes dashed to the ground in this cruel way, had recourse to flattery and cunning, weapons which have often stood the sex in good stead, and called out after the fox, "Father Fox, you would be quite right to save your skin, if, in the first place, I didn't feel I owed so much to you, and if, in the second, there weren't other foxes in the world; but as you know how grateful I feel to you, and as there are heaps of other foxes about, you can trust yourself to me. Don't behave like the cow that kicks the pail over after it has filled it with milk, but continue your journey with me, and when we get to the capital you can sell me to the king as a servant girl." It never entered the fox's head that even foxes can be outwitted, so after a bit he consented to go with her; but he hadn't gone far before the cunning girl seized a stick, and gave him such a blow with it on the head, that he dropped down dead on the spot. Then Grannonia took some of his blood and poured it into her little bottle, and went on her way as fast as she could to Vallone Grosso. When she arrived there she went straight to the royal palace, and let the king be told she had come to cure the young prince. The king commanded her to be brought before him at once, and was much astonished when he saw that it was a girl who under took to do what all the cleverest doctors of his kingdom had failed in. As an attempt hurts no one, he willingly consented that she should do what she could. "All I ask," said Grannonia, "is that, should I succeed in what you desire, you will give me your son in marriage." The king, who had given up all hopes of his son's recovery, replied: "Only restore him to life and health and he shall be yours. It is only fair to give her a husband who gives me a son." And so they went into the prince's room. The moment Grannonia had rubbed the blood on his wounds the illness left him, and he was as sound and well as ever. When the king saw his son thus marvelously restored to life and health, he turned to him and said : "My dear son, I thought of you as dead, and now, to my great joy and amazement, you are alive again. I promised this young woman that if she should cure you, to bestow your hand and heart on her, and seeing that heaven has been gracious, you must fulfil the promise I made her; for gratitude alone forces me to pay this debt." But the prince answered: "My lord and father, I would that my will were as free as my love for you is great. But as I have plighted my word to another maiden, you will see yourself, and so will this young woman, that I cannot go back from my word, and be faithless to her whom I love." When Grannonia heard these words, and saw how deeply rooted the prince's love for her was, she felt very happy, and blushing rosy red, she said: "But should I get the other lady to give up her rights, would you then consent to marry me?" "Far be it from me," replied the prince, "to banish the beautiful picture of my love from my heart. Whatever she may say, my heart and desire will remain the same, and though I were to lose my life for it, I couldn't consent to this exchange." Grannonia could keep silence no longer, and throwing off her peasant's disguise, she discovered herself to the prince, who was nearly beside himself with joy when he recognized his fair lady-love. He then told his father at once who she was, and what she had done and suffered for his sake. Then they invited the king and queen of Starza-Longa to their court, and had a great wedding feast, and proved once more that there is no better seasoning for the joys of true love than a few pangs of grief. Source: Google Books: Andrew Lang The Green Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1892), pp. 186-93 . Internet Archive: Andrew Lang The Green Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1892), pp. 186-93 . Lang's source: Giambattista Basile, "Lo Serpe," Lo Cunto de li Cunti: Il Pentamerone , day 2, tale 5. Lang titles this story "The Enchanted Snake," and he does not credit Basile with its authorship. I have noted the more important diversions from the original text by citing N. M. Penzer's translation: The Pentamerone of Biambattista Basile (New York: Dutton, 1932). Link to another translation of this tale: " The Serpent ," Il Pentamerone; or, The Tale of Tales , translated by Richard Burton, vol. 1 (London: Henry and Company, 1893), day 2, tale 5, pp. 170-80 . This tale combines type 433B (marriage with a snake) with type 425 (search for the lost husband). Return to the table of contents . The Water Snake Russia, A. A. Erlenvein There was once an old woman who had a daughter; and her daughter went down to the pond one day to bathe with the other girls. They all stripped off their shifts, and went into the water. Then there came a snake out of the water, and glided on to the daughter's shift. After a time the girls all came out, and began to put on their shifts, and the old woman's daughter wanted to put on hers, but there was the snake lying on it. She tried to drive him away, but there he stuck and would not move. Then the snake said, "If you'll marry me, I'll give you back your shift." Now she wasn't at all inclined to marry him, but the other girls said, "As if it were possible for you to be married to him! Say you will!" So she said, "Very well, I will." Then the snake glided off from the shift, and went straight into the water. The girl dressed and went home. And as soon as she got there, she said to her mother, "Mammie, mammie, thus and thus, a snake got upon my shift, and says he, 'Marry me or I won't let you have your shift;' and I said, 'I will.'" "What nonsense are you talking, you little fool! as if one could marry a snake!" And so they remained just as they were, and forgot all about the matter. A week passed by, and one day they saw ever so many snakes, a huge troop of them, wriggling up to their cottage. "Ah, mammie, save me, save me!" cried the girl, and her mother slammed the door and barred the entrance as quickly as possible. The snakes would have rushed in at the door, but the door was shut; they would have rushed into the passage, but the passage was closed. Then in a moment they rolled themselves into a ball, flung themselves at the window, smashed it to pieces, and glided in a body into the room. The girl got upon the stove, but they followed her, pulled her down, and bore her out of the room and out of doors. Her mother accompanied her, crying like anything. They took the girl down to the pond, and dived right into the water with her. And there they turned into men and women. The mother remained for some time on the dike, wailed a little, and then went home. Three years went by. The girl lived down there, and had two children, a son and a daughter. Now she often entreated her husband to let her go to see her mother. So at last one day he took her up to the surface of the water, and brought her ashore. But she asked him before leaving him, "What am I to call out when I want you?" "Call out to me, 'Osip, [Joseph] Osip, come here!' and I will come," he replied. Then he dived under water again, and she went to her mother's carrying her little girl on one arm, and leading her boy by the hand. Out came her mother to meet her. She was so delighted to see her! "Good day, mother!" said the daughter. "Have you been doing well while you were living down there?" asked her mother. "Very well indeed, mother. My life there is better than yours here." They sat down for a bit and chatted. Her mother got dinner ready for her, and she dined. "What's your husband's name?" asked her mother. "Osip," she replied. "And how are you to get home?" "I shall go to the dike, and call out, 'Osip, Osip, come here!' and he'll come." "Lie down, daughter, and rest a bit," said the mother. So the daughter lay down and went to sleep. The mother immediately took an axe and sharpened it, and went down to the dike with it. And when she came to the dike, she began calling out, "Osip, Osip, come here!" No sooner had Osip shown his head than the old woman lifted her axe and chopped it off. And the water in the pond became dark with blood. The old woman went home. And when she got home her daughter awoke. "Ah! mother," says she, "I'm getting tired of being here; I'll go home." "Do sleep here tonight, daughter; perhaps you won't have another chance of being with me." So the daughter stayed and spent the night there. In the morning she got up and her mother got breakfast ready for her; she breakfasted, and then she said good-bye to her mother and went away, carrying her little girl in her arms, while her boy followed behind her. She came to the dike, and called out, "Osip, Osip, come here!" She called and called, but he did not come. Then she looked into the water, and there she saw a head floating about. Then she guessed what had happened. "Alas! my mother has killed him!" she cried. There on the bank she wept and wailed. And then to her girl she cried, "Fly about as a wren, henceforth and evermore!" And to her boy she cried, "Fly about as a nightingale, my boy, henceforth and evermore!" "But I," she said, "will fly about as a cuckoo, crying 'Cuckoo!' henceforth and evermore!" Source: W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder and Company, 1873), pp. 116-18 . Ralston's source: A. A. Erlenvein. Return to the table of contents . Transformation into a Nightingale and a Cuckoo Russia A damsel fell in love with a snake, and was also beloved by him. He took her to wife. His dwelling was of pure glass, all crystal. This dwelling was situated underground, in a kind of mound, or something of the sort. Well, it is said that her old mother at first grieved over her. How could she help doing so? Well, when the time came, the snake's wife became the mother of twins, a boy and a girl. They looked, as they lay by their mother, as if they were made of wax. And she was herself as beautiful as a flower. Well, God having given her children, she said, "Now, then, since they have been born as human beings, let us christen them among human beings." She took her seat in a golden carriage, laid the children on her knees, and drove off to the village to the pope [orthodox priest]. The carriage had not got into the open country, when sadness was brought to the mother. The old woman had made an outcry in the whole village, seized a sickle, and rushed into the country. She [the young mother] saw she had manifest death before her, when she called to her children, and went on to say, "Fly, my children, as birds about the world. You, my little son, as a nightingale, and you, my daughter, as a cuckoo." Out flew a nightingale from the carriage by the right-hand, and a cuckoo by the left-hand window. What became of the carriage and horses and all, nobody knows. Nor did their mistress remain, only a dead nettle sprang up by the roadside. A. H. Wratislaw, Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources (London: Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 30, pp. 160-61 . Wratislaw's source: P. Kulish. Return to the table of contents . The Snake and the Princess Russia There was an emperor and empress who had three daughters. The emperor fell ill, and sent his eldest daughter for water. She went to fetch it, when a snake said, "Come! Will you marry me?" The princess replied, "No, I won't." "Then," said he, "I won't give you any water." Then the second daughter said, "I'll go. He'll give me some." She went. The snake said to her, "Come! Will you marry me?" "No," she said, "I won't." He gave her no water. She returned and said, "He gave me no water. He said, 'If you will marry me I will give it.'" The youngest said, "I will go. He will give me some." She went, and the snake said to her, "Come! Will you marry me?" "I will," she said. Then he drew her water from the very bottom, cold and fresh. She brought it home, gave it her father to drink, and her father recovered. Then on Sunday a carriage came, and those with it said: Open the door, Princess! Why did the dear one love? Why draw water from the ford, Princess? She was terrified, wept, and went and opened the door. Then they said again: Open the door, Princess! Why did the dear one love? Why draw water from the ford, Princess? Then they came into the house and placed the snake in a plate on the table. There he lay, just as if he were of gold! They went out of the house, and said: Sit in the carriage, Princess! Why did the dear one love? Why draw water from the ford, Princess? They drove off with her to the snake's abode. There they lived, and had a daughter born to them. They also took a godmother to live with them, but she was a wicked woman. The child soon died, and the mother died soon after it. The godmother went in the night to the place where she was buried, and cut off her hands. Then she came home, and heated water-gruel, scalded the hands, and took off the gold rings. Then the princess -- such was the ordinance of God -- came to her for the hands, and said: The fowls are asleep, the geese are asleep, Only my godmother does not sleep. She scalds white hands in water-gruel, She takes off golden rings. The godmother concealed herself under the stove. She said again: The fowls are asleep, the geese are asleep, Only my godmother does not sleep. She scalds white hands in water-gruel, She takes off golden rings. The next day they came and found the godmother dead under the stove. They didn't give her proper burial, but threw her into a hole. A. H. Wratislaw, Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources (London: Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 29, pp. 159-60 . Wratislaw's source: P. Kulish. Type 433C, with strong similarities to type 440. Link to additional tales of type 440, Frog Kings: Folktales about Slimy Suitors . Return to the table of contents . The Girl and the Snake Sweden Once upon a time there was a girl who was supposed to go into the woods and bring home the cattle, but she could not find the herd. She got lost and came to a large mountain with gates and doors. She went inside. A table was standing there, set with all kinds of things to eat. There was also a bed there, and a large snake was lying on it. It said to the girl, "Have a seat, if you want to. Come and lie down in this bed, if you want to! But if you don't want to, it's all right!" The girl did not do any of this. Finally the snake said, "People are coming now who want to dance with you, but don't go with them." Soon afterward people did come, and they wanted to dance with the girl, but she would have nothing to do with them. Then they began to eat and drink. The girl left the mountain and went home again. The next day she went into the woods again to look for her herd, but she could not find what she was looking for. Instead, she got lost again and came to the same mountain. She went inside again and found everything the same as the first time: a set table and the bed with the snake. It said to her, as the time before, "Have a seat, if you want to! Eat, if you want to! Come and lie down in this bed, if you want to! But if you don't want to, it's all right. Now a lot more people are coming who want to dance with you, but do not go with them." The snake had barely finished talking when a lot more people came, and they began to dance and to eat and drink. The girl had nothing to do with them, but instead left the mountain and went home. On the third day she went into the woods again, and the same thing happened to her as on the previous days. The snake invited her to eat and drink, which she did with a good appetite. After that the snake asked her to lie down next to it, and the girl did that as well. Then the snake said, "Hold me in your arm!" She did it. "Kiss me!" said the snake. "If you are afraid, just put your apron between us!" The girl did it, and in that instant the snake turned into a handsome young man. In reality he was a prince who had been bewitched into this form through magic, but the girl's courage had saved him. Of course, the two of them went away, and since then they have never been heard from again. Source: Translated from Klara Stroebe, "Das Mädchen und die Schlange," Nordische Volksmärchen: Teil 1, Dänemark / Schweden (Jena: E. Diederichs, 1915), pp. 215-16 . First published in this German version, 1915. © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. Link to another translation of this tale: The Girl and the Snake . Return to the table of contents . The Snake and the Little Girl Denmark (Bornholm) There was once a little girl who was to bring food out to her father, who was plowing in the field. When she came to him with the food, he asked her to pick up his jacket, which he had put under a tree. The girl went to get it; but when she got there, she saw a terribly large snake lying on the jacket. She took a stick and wanted to chase it away, but the snake remained lying there. She begged it to go away so she could get the jacket for her father. "Yes," said the snake, "you can get it, if you will come back to me and sit on my back." The girl said yes to that, and then pushed the snake away from the jacket, then took it to her father. She came back immediately and sat down on the snake's back. It immediately ran off into the woods and kept running deeper into the woods. When it had run a long time, it said: "Little girl, stand up on my back and see if you see anything!" The girl stood up on its back and said: "I see something shining like clear silver." "Yes, it is my mother's castle," said the snake. "We still have a long way to go." The snake ran further into the woods, and then it said again: "Little girl, stand up on my back and see if you see anything!" "Yes," said the girl, "I see something that shines like pure Gold." "Yes, that is my father's castle," said the snake. "We still have a long way to go." It went a long way further, and then said the third time: "Little girl, stand up on my back and see if you see anything!" "Yes," said the girl, "now I see something that shines like a diamond." "Yes, then we will be there right away," said the Snake. It now ran until it came to a lovely castle. The snake lay down by the gate, and said to the girl: "Now stand up on my back and ring the bell! When the porter comes and asks what you want, then say that you want to enter into service at the castle, and he will probably welcome you." The girl did as the snake said, and when the porter came and asked what she wanted, she said that she had come to seek work at the castle. He asked what she could do, and she replied that she could sweep the floor and carry water and help in the kitchen. "Yes, she could gladly come in, for that is exactly what they needed," he said. He followed her into the castle and showed her the room where she was to sleep. She then went down to the kitchen and helped with everything, and the people liked her because she was so helpful. In the evening, when she was in her bedroom, she heard someone knocking on the door. She asked who it was. "Well, it's me," said the snake. "It's cold out here, and I'm freezing. May I not come in and lie in your room?" The girl thought it was a pity that it should lie out there and freeze, and so she let it in. But as soon as it had come in, it wanted to kiss her. The girl held an apron between them, but it kissed her anyway. Immediately the most beautiful prince was standing there before her. He thanked her for freeing him, and told her that he was a king's son, and that this was his own castle where they now were. The prince and the girl now held their wedding with great joy. They then traveled first to his father and then to his mother, and from there to the little girl's parents, whom they brought to the castle, where they lived in joy and happiness. Source (books.google.com): Svend Grundtvig, "Slangen og den lille Pige," Gamle danske Minder i Folkemunde: Folkeæventyr, Folkeviser, Folkesagn , 3rd collection (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversens Forlagshandel, 1861), pp. 15-17 . Source (Internet Archive): Svend Grundtvig, "Slangen og den lille Pige," Gamle danske Minder i Folkemunde: Folkeæventyr, Folkeviser, Folkesagn , 3rd collection (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversens Forlagshandel, 1861), pp. 15-17 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2022. Return to the table of contents . King Lindorm Denmark, Svend Grundtvig Once upon a time there was a king who had a beautiful queen. On the first night of their marriage, nothing was written on their bed when they retired, but when they got up the next day, they read there that they would have no children. The king was very sad about this, and the queen even more so. She found it most unfortunate that there would be no heir for their kingdom. One day, while deep in thought, she wandered to a remote spot. There she met an old woman who asked her why she was so sad. The queen looked up and said, "Oh, telling you will do no good. You can't help me." "But perhaps I can," said the old woman, and asked the queen to tell her story. So the queen agreed, and told how on their wedding night a message had appeared on their bed that they would have no children. This was why she was so sad. The old woman told her that she could help her have children. That evening at sunset she should place a platter upside down in the northwest corner of the garden. The next morning at sunrise she should take it away. Beneath it she would find two roses, a red one and a white one. "Take the red one and eat it, and you shall have a boy; take the white one and it will be a girl. But do not eat them both," said the old woman. The queen returned home and did what the old woman had told her to do. The next morning, just as the sun was coming up, she went to the garden and picked up the platter. There were two roses, a red one and a white one. Now she did not know which of the two she should take. If it were the red one, she would have a boy, and he might have to go to war and be killed, and then again she would have no child. So she decided to take the white one; then it would be a girl who would stay at home with her, and then get married and become queen in another kingdom. Thus she picked up the white rose and ate it. But it tasted so good that she picked up the red rose and ate it as well. Now it so happened that at this time the king was away at war. When the queen noticed that she was pregnant she wrote to him to let him know, and he was very pleased. When the time for her delivery came, she gave birth to a lindorm. As soon as he was born, he crawled under the bed in the bedroom, and stayed there. Sometime later a letter arrived from the king announcing that he soon would return home. When his carriage pulled up in front of the castle and the queen came out to receive him, the lindorm came too and wanted to greet him. He jumped up into the carriage, calling out, "Welcome home, father!" "What!," said the king. "Am I your father?" "Yes, and if you will not be my father, I shall destroy you and the castle as well!" The king had to agree. They went into the castle together, and the queen had to confess what had happened between her and the old woman. Some days later the council and all the important people in the kingdom assembled to welcome the king back home and to congratulate him on the victory over his enemies. The lindorm came as well and said, "Father, it is time for me to get married!" "What are you thinking? Who would have you?" said the king. "If you do not find a wife for me, be she young or old, large or small, rich or poor, then I shall destroy you and the entire castle as well." So the king wrote to all the kingdoms, asking if someone would not marry his son. A beautiful princess responded, but it seemed strange to her that she was not allowed to see her future husband before entering the hall where the wedding was to take place. Only then did the lindorm make his appearance, taking his place beside her. The wedding day came to an end, and it was time for them to retire to the bedroom. They were scarcely inside, when he ate her alive. Sometime later, the king's birthday arrived. They were all seated at the dinner table when the lindorm appeared and said, "Father, I want to get married!" "What kind of a woman would have you?" asked the king. "If you do not find a wife for me, whoever she may be, I shall eat you up, and the entire castle as well!" So the king wrote to all the kingdoms, asking if someone would not marry his son. Once again a beautiful princess came from far away. She too was not allowed to see her groom until she was in the hall where they were to be married. The lindorm entered and took his place beside her. When the wedding day was over and they went into the bedroom, the lindorm killed her. Sometime later, on the queen's birthday, they were all seated at the dinner table when the lindorm came in and said once again, "Father, I want to get married!" "I cannot get you another wife," answered the king. "The two kings whose daughters I gave to you are now waging war against me. What am I to do?" "Just let them come! As long as I am on your side, just let them come, and even if there were ten of them! But if you do not find a wife for me, be she young or old, large or small, rich or poor, then I shall destroy you and the castle as well!" The king had to give in, but he was not happy about it. Now one of the king's shepherds, an old man who lived in a little house in the woods, had a daughter. The king went to him and said, "Listen, my dear man. Won't you give your daughter in marriage to my son?" "No, I can't do that. I have only the one child to care for me when I am older, and further, if the prince can't take care of beautiful princesses he will not take care of my daughter, and that would be a sin." But the king insisted on having her, and the old man had to give in. The old shepherd went home and told his daughter everything. She became very sad and, deep in thought, took a walk in the woods. There she met an old woman who had gone into the woods to pick berries and wild apples. She was wearing a red skirt and a blue jacket. "Why are you so sad?" she asked. "I have every reason to be sad, but there is no purpose in my telling you about it, because you can't help me." "But perhaps I can," she said. "Just tell me!" "Well, I am supposed to marry the king's son, but he is a lindorm and has already killed two princesses, and I know for sure that he will kill me as well." "If you just listen to me, I can help you," said the old woman. The girl was eager to hear her advice. "When you go to the bedroom following the ceremony, you must have ten nightshirts on. If you don't have that many, then you must borrow some. Ask for a bucketful of lye water, a bucketful of sweet milk, and an armful of switches. All these things must be taken to the bedroom. When he comes in, he will say, 'Beautiful maiden, take off your nightshirt!' Then you must say, 'King Lindorm, take off your skin!' You will say that to each other until you have taken off nine nightshirts and he has taken off nine skins. By then he will not have another skin, but you will still have on a nightshirt. Then you must take hold of him. He will be nothing more than a clump of bloody meat. Dip the switches into the lye water and beat him with them until he has almost fallen to pieces. Then you must bathe him in the sweet milk, wrap him in the nine nightshirts, and hold him on your arm. You will then fall asleep, but only for a short time." The girl thanked her for the good advice, but she was still afraid, for this was indeed a dangerous undertaking with such a sinister animal. The wedding day arrived. A large and splendid carriage brought two ladies who prepared the girl for the wedding. Then she was taken to the castle and led into the hall. The lindorm appeared, took his place next to her, and they were married. When evening arrived, and it was time for them to go to bed, the bride asked for a bucketful of lye water, a bucketful of sweet milk, and an armful of switches. The men all laughed at her, saying that it was some kind of a peasant superstition and all in her imagination. But the king said that she should have what she asked for, and they brought it to her. Before going into the bedroom, she put nine nightshirts over the one she was already wearing. When they both were in the bedroom the lindorm said, "Beautiful maiden, take off your nightshirt!" She answered, "King Lindorm, take off your skin!" And thus it continued until she had taken off nine nightshirts and he had taken off nine skins. She found new courage, for he was now lying and the floor with blood flowing freely from him and barely able to move. Then she took the switches, dipped them into the lye water, and beat him as hard as she could until there was scarcely a twig left among the sticks. Then she dipped him into the sweet milk and laid him on her arm. She fell asleep, for it was late, and when she awoke, she was lying in the arms of a handsome prince. Morning came, and no one dared to look into the bedroom, because they all believed that the same thing had happened to her as to the two others. Finally the king wanted to look, and as he opened the door she called out, "Do come in! Everything is all right!" He went in and was filled with joy. He fetched the queen and the others, and there was a great celebration about the bridal bed unlike any that had ever been seen before. The bridal couple got up and went into another room where they got dressed, because the bedroom was in a horrible mess. Then the wedding was celebrated anew with pomp and joy. The king and queen liked the young queen very much. They could not treat her too well, for she had redeemed their lindorm. Sometime later she became pregnant. There was another war, and the old king and King Lindorm had gone to the battlefield. Her time arrived, and she gave birth to two beautiful boys. At this time the Red Knight was at court. They asked him to take the king a letter announcing the birth of the two beautiful boys. He rode away a short distance and opened the letter, then changed it to read that she had given birth to two young dogs. The king received the letter and was very sad. He found it unbelievable that she had given birth to young dogs, although it would have not surprised him if it had been a lindorm or something like that. He wrote back that the creatures should be allowed to live until he returned home, that is if they could be kept alive at all. The Red Knight was to deliver this letter, but a short distance away he opened it as well and wrote that the queen and her children were to be burned alive. The old queen was greatly saddened by this letter, for she liked the young queen very much. Soon thereafter another letter arrived, announcing the king's return home. The queen became frightened and did not know what to do. She could not bring herself to have them burned. She sent the two children to live with a wet nurse, for she hoped that the king might change his mind once he was back home. She gave the young queen some money and food and sent her into the forest. She wandered about in the woods for two days and was in great need. She came to a high mountain, which she climbed without stopping. At the top there were three benches. She sat down on the middle one and squeezed the milk from her breasts, for she was in great distress, not having her children with her. Then two large birds, a swan and a crane, flew down and sat on either side of her, and she pressed her milk into their beaks. They were that close to her. And even as they sat there, they turned into the two most handsome princes that one can imagine, and the mountain turned into the most beautiful royal castle, with servants and animals and gold and silver and everything that there should be. They had been enchanted, and the spell would never have been broken if they had not drunk the milk from a queen who had just given birth to two boys. She went with them, with King Swan and King Crane. Each one wanted to marry her, for she had redeemed them both. Meanwhile King Lindorm arrived home and asked about the queen. "Indeed!" Said the old queen. "You should be asking about her! Who do you think that you are! You paid no attention to the fact that she redeemed you from your curse. You just went ahead and wrote to me that she and the children should be burned alive. For shame!" "No!" answered King Lindorm. "You wrote to me that she had given birth to two young dogs. And I wrote back that you should let the creatures live until I returned home." They talked back and forth for a long time and finally realized that the Red Knight had been behind the treachery. He was captured, and he had to confess. They locked him in a barrel studded with nails, hitched it to four horses, and they ran with him over mountains and valleys. The king was full of despair about his wife and children, when he discovered that they were two beautiful boys. The old queen said to him, "Don't worry, the boys are well cared for. They are staying with wet nurses, but I do not know how she is faring. I gave her some food and money and sent her into the woods, but since then we have heard nothing from her." The king ordered that the children be brought back. Then he took some food and some money and went into the woods to look for her. He wandered about for two, then three days looking for her, but he could not find her. Finally he came to the castle in the woods. He asked if the people there had not seen a strange maiden in the woods, but they had not seen anyone. Then he wanted to enter the castle to see what kind of royalty lived there. He went inside. Just as he entered he saw her, but she was afraid, for she thought that he had come to burn her alive, and she ran away. The two princes came in. They talked together and became good friends. They invited him to stay for dinner. He mentioned the beautiful maiden and asked where she was from. They answered that she was a lovely person and that she had freed them both. He wanted to know what she had freed them from, and they told him the entire story. Then he said that he liked her very much and asked them if they could not come to an agreement concerning her. He proposed that her dinner should be over salted, and that the person she would ask to drink to her health should receive her. The princes agreed to this arrangement, for this would enable them to determine which of the two of them would have her, for they did not believe that she would ask a stranger to drink to her health. They went to dinner, and she said: The food is too salty for me, King Swan sits next to me, King Crane is good to me, King Lindorm drinks with me. He picked up the silver tankard and drank to her health. The others drank to their own health, but then they had to drink to her health as well, even though they were not satisfied with the outcome. Then King Lindorm told how she had redeemed him before she had redeemed them. Therefore he was the closest one to her. After hearing this, the two princes stated that if he had told them this in the first place, they would have given her to him. But he said that he could not have known that for sure. Then King Lindorm returned home with the queen. Meanwhile the children had also been taken back home. King Swan kept the castle in the woods and married a princess from another kingdom. And King Crane went to a different country where he got married. Thus each one of them had something. King Lindorm and his queen stood in high honor as long as they lived. They were very happy and had many children. When I was there the last time, they offered me a tin sandwich in a sieve. Source: Klara Stroebe, "König Lindwurm," Nordische Volksmärchen: Teil 1, Dänemark / Schweden (Jena: E. Diederichs, 1915), pp. 3-11 . First published in this German translation, 1915. Stroebe's source: Svend Grundtvig, "Kong Lindorm," Gamle danske Minder i Folkemunde (Copenhagen: C. G. Eversens Forlag, 1854), no. 216, pp. 172-80 . Grundtvig's source: Maren Mathisdatter, 67 years of age. English translation © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. A lindorm (also spelled lindworm) was a mythological beast much feared in ancient northern Europe. It is depicted variously as a giant snake or a wingless dragon. The name derives from an Old Norse word for "serpent." Return to the table of contents . The Silk Spinster Germany, A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz Once upon a time there was a peasant. He worked in the woods and took his oldest daughter along to help him. When the day grew hot he took off his jacket and laid it in the grass. When his work was finished, he asked his daughter to fetch it for him. She went to it, but there was a worm lying on it. She did not want to pick it up, so she ran back to her father and asked him what she should do. He told her not to be afraid of the worm. She should just throw it aside and bring him his jacket. She did this, and they went home. The next day the peasant again went to work in the woods, taking his second daughter along. Everything happened as before, and in the end she threw the worm aside, and she and her father returned home together. On the third day, the first daughter was to go along again, but the third daughter asked the father to take her. She wanted to help out like the others. They laughed at her, and asked her just how she would be able to help. They had a low opinion of her and kept her at home like a Cinderella. But she begged her father so earnestly, that he finally said she might come along. When it was time to go home, her father told her to fetch his jacket. She went to it and found the worm on it. But she said to it, "Dear little worm, would you like a soft place to lie?" The worm looked at her with bright and friendly eyes, as though it wanted to say "yes!" Therefore she gathered together some moss and made him a nice soft nest. As soon as she laid him in it, the worm began to speak, and asked her, "Would you like to enter my service? All you have to do is carry me about a few hours each day. For this you will receive a good wage and food and drink as well. If you do this for three years, I will be redeemed, because I am an enchanted prince, and then I will marry you!" The girl said that she would do it, and the worm said, "Then come here tomorrow at the same time." After that she went home with her father. Then she said, "I have lived at home long enough. I am going try my luck out in the world." They all laughed at her, saying, "You, Cinderella, who would have any use for you?" The girl replied, "I already have a position," and asked her father to allow her to leave. He did not want to give his permission, because even if she did not understand very much, she was still a good worker. Finally he gave in to her begging, and the next day she set forth. She went into the woods and soon found the worm. He was very pleased that she had come, and he told her that she should now carry him around a little. That she did, and when the time was up, a splendid castle suddenly appeared. In the castle there was a great hall with a large table all decked out with food and drink, more beautiful than anything she had ever seen in her entire lifetime. She ate and drank her fill, and then went to bed. Every day she carried the worm about for an hour or two and then went to the castle, where everything was prepared for her, and where she was splendidly provided for. After a year had passed she asked the worm for permission to visit her father. He agreed on the condition that she return promptly. She took gold and other precious things for her father and her sisters and went home. When she arrived with her treasures, her sisters wanted to know where she had gotten it all, and who her master was. But she told them nothing, for the worm had forbidden her to do so. They beat her and scolded her, but she said nothing. The next day she went back into the woods to the worm, and again carried it about for an hour or two each day. At the end of the second year she once again visited her father and her sisters, and also at the end of the third year. When she left the worm, he ordered her also this last time to return promptly, and she promised to do so. Her father and her sisters insisted that she tell them who her master was and where she worked, and they refused to let her go. Finally she tore herself away with force. When she returned to the woods, it was too late. The worm was no longer there. Sadly she looked everywhere, but that castle had disappeared, and the worm as well, for while she was away, his spell had lapsed, and he had turned back into a king, and he was now back at home in his own kingdom. The girl decided to search for him throughout the world. On her way she came to a hut in the forest where an old woman lived, whom she asked for shelter for the night. The old woman received her in a friendly manner, and the next morning when she was about the leave, she gave her three apples. She told her there was a golden spindle in the first one, a golden yarn reel in the second one, and a golden spinning wheel in the third one, and told her whom she would meet and what she should do. The girl kindly thanked the friendly old woman and set forth. Many days later and after she had walked a great distance, she came to a glass mountain. She did not know how she could cross over it, because it was so smooth that she always slid back down. Finally she saw a smithy not far away. She went there and had horseshoes attached to her hands and knees, and climbed over the mountain. She came to a great city. This was where the king lived who had been the worm that she had carried about every day. He was already married. He had a beautiful wife and had long since forgotten the girl. She disguised herself and went to the castle where she hired herself out as a silk spinster. On the first day she opened the first apple that the old woman in the woods had given her. She took out the golden spindle. When the queen saw it, she liked it very much and wanted to buy it from the girl. "No," she said. "It is not for sale, but I will give it to you if you will let me sleep with the king one night." "Why not?," thought the queen, and gave her promise. As evening approached she gave the king a sleeping potion, and when he was fast asleep, she sent for the silk spinster and led her into the king's bedroom. She sat next to his bed and cried bitterly, "Now I know that thanklessness is the way of the world," she said. "Three years I carried you about as a worm. For your sake I received blows and harsh words from my father and sisters. I had horseshoes attached to my hands and knees in order to climb over the glass mountain. Now you have forgotten everything and taken another wife." But the king was so fast asleep that he did not understand a thing. At dawn the queen came and led the silk spinster out again. Sadly she took the second apple, broke it open, and took out the golden yarn reel. When the queen saw it, she admired it greatly and asked the girl to sell it to her. Once again she said that it was not for sale, but it could be earned if she were allowed to sleep with the king for another night. The queen gave her promise, and everything happened as during the first night. The king lay in knee-deep sleep, and no amount of crying and complaining could awaken him. However, one of the king's servants had seen the queen bring the spinster into the king's bedroom. He was curious, and listened to everything that the silk spinster said. The next day he told the king what he had seen and heard. But that morning the queen had once again led the silk spinster out of the king's bedroom. In desperation, the girl opened her last apple, the one with the golden spinning wheel. When the queen saw it, she said she would let her sleep with the king yet another night, if she would give her the golden spinning wheel. The girl agreed, and that evening the queen once again gave her husband a sleeping potion, but he only pretended to drink it. He secretly poured it out, then lay down and pretended to be asleep. Then the queen fetched the silk spinster and led her into the king's bedroom. The girl sat sadly next to the king's bed and cried bitterly, "Now I know that thanklessness is the way of the world," she said. "Three years I carried you about as a worm. For your sake I received blows and harsh words from my father and sisters. I had horseshoes attached to my hands and knees in order to climb over the glass mountain. And you have forgotten everything and taken another wife." The king listened silently to every word, but pretended to be asleep. The next day he ordered a large festive meal, and he invited the silk spinster to take her place at his right side. When everyone was seated, he said, "I want to present all of you with a question, and ask for your honest and open answer. Many years ago I lost the key to my chest, and therefore had a new one made. But now I have found the old one. Which one should I use from now on?" "The old one," they all said as with one voice. "The old one always fits better." "Now," said the king, "the silk spinster who is sitting here at my right side took care of me for three years while I was an enchanted worm. She suffered greatly on my behalf. Therefore, I would like to leave my wife for as long as the first one is alive, and marry her." And that is what he did. And thus the silk spinster became queen. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Die Seidenspinnerin," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 347-52 . Translation © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. Types 433C and 425. Return to the table of contents . The Snake Germany, Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle In olden times, when the castle was still standing on the hill over there, a count lived there with his wife. They had possessions in abundance, and they would have been the happiest couple, if they had had a child and domestic peace. From the earliest morning until late in the evening the count and the countess quarreled and squabbled, and he never called his wife anything but a slimy snake. Thus it continued for many long years, and the count became worse than ever, until his wife unexpectedly became pregnant. Then the cruel lord turned more friendly and rejoiced in his future heir. This continued for several weeks, and everyone thought that peace had come to the castle forever, but then it turned worse than ever, for when the countess's time came, she gave birth to a snake. When the count saw his sweet hopes thus shattered he became angrier than ever. He ranted and raged like a wild animal, accused his wife of being a wicked witch in league with the devil, and wanted to kill the snake without further ado. The countess pled so long and fervently that her child be allowed to live at least long enough to see what would become of it, that he finally relented, and did not kill the snake. But he remained angry from then on, and finally went his own way, paying no more heed to his wife or his child. The countess, on the other hand, loved the snake as much as if it had been the most beautiful boy and stood next to its cradle day and night. The worm grew and grew, and the countess loved it more and more, caring for it like her own child. Thus it continued for twenty years, and the snake had not yet left its room. After turning twenty years of age, and with the countess seated next to it in its room, the snake one evening suddenly opened its mouth and began to speak. "My dear mother," it said, "I am now twenty years old and would like to get married. I therefore ask you to find me a bride." The countess was very surprised to hear her child speak, and even more so to hear what it had said. She promised to fulfill its wish and began seeking a bride for her snake. But that was a difficult match, for even the most marriage-crazy girls wanted nothing to do with such an arrangement. The snake repeated its wish every day, and the countess looked ever more frantically for a bride for her child, but she could not find one. Finally she thought of the hen girl, who was a sweet and obedient child. The countess thought she certainly would accept the proposal and consider it a stroke of good luck to thus become a countess. But the mother calculated badly, because the hen girl wanted nothing at all to do with the proposal when it was presented to her. The girl thought that if she behaved well she would get along in the world, and that she could never love a snake. She would rather remain a poor hen girl and eat black bread than to lead the richest life at the side of such an uncanny animal. Upon hearing this the countess grew angry with the poor girl and said, "If you reject your good fortune, I'll find someone else." But that was not to be, for the countess came away with a long face from every place that she sought a bride for her child. Recognizing the situation she returned to the dear, pious hen girl and addressed her with sweet and kind words. "Please don't stupidly stand in the way of your own happiness," she said. "If you marry my child you will become countess and will be taken care of as long as you live. What opportunities will you have if you remain as you are now? You will have to feed the hens and will remain a lowly servant. But if you follow my advice, honor and wealth will smile upon you." Thus argued the countess until the poor girl felt like she had a mill wheel turning back and forth in her head, and she did not know what she should do. Seeing the girl's indecision, the countess pressed still harder, until finally the girl -- in order to free herself from the noblewoman -- asked for three days' time to think about it. The countess was satisfied with this and left the child alone. However, she returned the very next day and asked the child for her decision. She did the same thing the second day. The child did not know how to help herself and thought, "If heaven does not advise me, I do not know what to do. If I do not marry the snake, I'll never have any peace, for this woman is so persistent, but I do not want to marry it." Burdened with these doubts the girl went out into the castle passageway where there stood in the corner a beautiful statue of the Mother of God. The pious girl had a special devotion to this statue and had often found solace there on other occasions. Therefore every time she passed it she said an Ave Maria and always felt better and stronger. This time she knelt down before the Mother of God and prayed most fervently for advice as to what she should do in this case. After praying for a long time, the girl thought that the Mother of God should either nod a yes or shake a no, when the miraculous statue suddenly began to speak, saying, "Your prayer has been heard. Marry the countess's child, for you have been chosen to redeem it. It is a snake because of the sinful life of its parents, but you can give it a human form. So listen to me! On your wedding night when you and the snake are alone in the bridal chamber it will say to you, 'Get undressed!' Then you must answer, 'You get undressed first,' and the snake will take off a skin. Then it will say again, 'Get undressed,' and you must again answer him, 'You get undressed first.' Then the snake will take off another skin. This must happen seven times, and when you say for the seventh time, 'You get undressed first,' the snake will take off its seventh skin, and the count's son will be redeemed and will stand before you as a handsome youth." Thus spoke the statue, and then remained silent. The distressed girl was now much relieved, and she felt at peace with herself. Thanking heaven for helping her, she went to the countess and told her that she wanted to marry the snake. The countess was overjoyed. She called the hen girl her daughter and hugged her. Then she went to her child and introduced his bride to him. Fearing that the girl might change her mind, the countess wanted to see the couple married that very day. Thus she gave the bride jewelry and clothing and told her to dress herself festively. As soon as the girl came back into the room -- now washed, dressed, and bejeweled -- the countess sent for the chaplain, who married the couple. The countess was very happy and wished the bridal couple good luck. The snake too was in good spirits, caressing the bride in a manner that made one wonder. In the meanwhile evening came, and the stars appeared in the sky. The countess took leave of her children and left them alone. As soon as the snake saw that it was alone in the room with its bride it said, "Get undressed." The bride replied, "You get undressed first." The snake seemed to be happy with this answer and immediately peeled off a skin. Then it said again, "Get undressed." The bride replied, "You get undressed first," and the snake pulled off another skin. Then it said again, "Get undressed." Once again the bride answered as she had the first two times. And thus it continued seven times, and when the bride said for the seventh time, "You get undressed first," the snake pulled off its seventh and last skin, and behold, instead of a snake, there stood before her a marvelously handsome youth, better looking than any knight she had ever seen. He rushed toward her, embraced her and caressed her and called her his dearly beloved bride and his redeemer. Then they climbed into the high bridal bed and slept blissfully until morning dawned and people began scurrying about the courtyard. After daybreak when the handsome couple came out of the bedroom, the countess was already standing at their door, for she was very curious how their wedding night had progressed. To her great surprise she saw the most handsome man there instead of an ugly snake. At first she could almost not believe her eyes. But when the handsome knight called her mother and kissed her hand she recognized that he was indeed her transformed son, and her joy knew no bounds. The wedding was now celebrated with jubilation and joy like in the next life. But their happiness did not last forever. When the old countess looked at her son and saw how handsome he was, it seemed to her that he was too good for the hen girl, and she was envious of her daughter-in-law for her husband. She became ever more out of sorts and jealous, and she tried to talk her son into rejecting his wife. The young count, however, loved his wife tenderly. He did not listen to his mother's advice and remained true to his wife. When his mother again reproached him and tried to convince him to reject his wife, he said, "I have my wife to thank for my redemption. Therefore I will always be thankful and true to her." After hearing this the countess recognized that her attempts were in vain, and she put a good face on her evil game. And the young couple lived happily for a long, long time. (Orally from Absam) Source: Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle, "Die Schlange," Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus Süddeutschland (Regensburg: Papier, Druck und Verlag von Friedrich Pustet, 1854), pp. 173-79 . Translation © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Serpent Germany, Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle Once upon a time there was a hunter who had a wife and many children, but only a meager existence. He had many difficulties with his work. He would have gladly done all the men's work both at home and away from home, but he was not able to, so although he had only a small income, he still had to hire a helper. He had about the same luck at hunting that others have. Today he got something, tomorrow nothing, and many an evening he came home with an empty bag after spending the whole day traipsing himself tired. Not far from his house there was a high mountain. This was his favorite place to hunt, and he went there often, for this was the easiest place to spot game. One day while hunting on this mountain he saw a human lying in the footpath. His dog ran ahead then raced around the person who was lying there, all the time barking loudly. The dog was so wild that it seemed he wanted to tear the person to pieces. With difficulty the hunter held him back. It was strange that the dog was attacking this person with such fury, because normally he would do no harm to anyone. With the dog barking at him, the person lying there raised himself a little and said to the hunter, "Be so good as to sell this dog to me." "No," said the hunter, "I need this dog myself and cannot give him to you. But I have another one at home that you can have, if what you want is a dog." "That's good," said the man lying there. "Let my buy the other one. But you must bring it here at exactly this time tomorrow, and we will close the deal. Did you hear? Exactly at this time." The hunter gave his word, went away with his dog, and hunted awhile longer on the mountain. Finding no game, he gave up his traipsing about and made his way toward home. He arrived home, and after greeting his wife he told her that he had sold the dog that he never took hunting. The wife was glad to hear this and said, "You should have sold the other one as well. We would be better off giving the bread to our children that we use feeding the dogs." The next day, as the appointed time approached, the hunter said, "I have to leave now with the dog, for the man might not wait, and then the deal would be broken." He lured the promised dog to come to him and was about to leave when his thirteen-year-old daughter came up to him and cried out, "Oh, father, let me come along too!" "Why do want to go with me today?" asked the hunter. The girl did not have an answer, but still would not cease asking to be allowed to go with her father. In the meantime the hunter's wife came by and took the girl's side, so in the end the father gave in and allowed her to go. They went to the mountain, coming finally to the path where the person had been lying the day before. But today a wild serpent was lying there. The frightened hunter immediately realized that there had been something uncanny about the person whom the dog had barked at the day before. Taking his daughter by the hand, he said, "Let's go. We have to turn back. Yesterday I knew there was something not right about that man, and now today there is a serpent lying there in his place." The girl too was afraid, took his hand, and wanted to go. Then the dragon moved, shot toward the girl, wrapped his tail around her, and disappeared into the mountain with her. The hunter, paralyzed with fear, stared after the monster. Now he was sorry that he had not brought his rifle. If he had been armed he at least could have peppered the dragon's skin a bit. However, staring after them did no good, and finally he had to decide to go home and report the sad news. Upon his arrival, his wife saw his distorted face and said immediately, "Where did you leave the girl? Why isn't she with you?" Tears came to the hunter's eyes and, crying, he told her what had happened. After hearing this the hunter's wife was horrified and ran about crying, "We did not bless the child enough, otherwise this evil would not have happened to her." The next day the hunter returned to the mountain and combed back and forth and up and down hoping to find some trace of his child. But he did not find as much as a scrap of her clothing, and that evening he had to return home empty-handed. Undaunted, he returned often, looking in every corner and hole. His thoughts were always with his daughter, even while hunting game. But his searching was all in vain, and seven years passed without his discovering even the slightest trace of the girl. After the seven years had passed it happened one day that the hunter and his helper went to the mountain to hunt. They saw a beautiful game animal and began to track it, thinking it would soon be theirs. However, the animal stayed just far enough ahead of them so they could not get a shot at it, although they never lost it completely from their eyes. They were determined to get the animal, whatever it might do. Thus they pursued it long and hard, but all for naught, and did not notice that it was getting dark. They did not stop until night had fallen, and finally the hunter said to his helper, "It is late. Night has come, and we are not going to make it back home." "I don't care," said the helper. "It isn't cold, and we can sleep here on the ground just as well as at home in bed." "No, said the hunter, "I am not going to lie on the ground here. It is exactly seven years since the serpent carried my daughter away, and if we were to lie down on the ground here it could also happen to us that a serpent or some other beast might attack us and tear us to pieces." "Wait a bit," answered the helper. "I'll climb a tree and look around to see if there is a house nearby." The hunter laughed at him, saying, "Yes indeed, a house nearby! I know this entire mountain from top to bottom and know for certain that there is no house nearby." But the helper would not be dissuaded, and he climbed the tree and looked around. "Look!" he suddenly called out. "I can see a light just a little above us. There is certainly a house up there where we can spend the night." The hunter did not know what to think of this, because he knew full well that no one lived around here far and wide. The helper climbed quickly down the tree and said, "Let's go up to the light and see if there are people there who will give us shelter." The hunter had no desire to go along, but the helper would not give in, and ridiculed him, so he finally agreed to go, and the two of them climbed up the mountain. They had not gone far when a light glistened brightly through the tree branches, and the hunter saw that the helper had been right. But he was all the more fearful, for he knew that there never had been a house around here. His fear became even greater when, after advancing a few paces, there appeared before them a magnificent castle, from which the light was beaming. The helper stopped and said, "Now you can see which of us was right. I knew right away that if there was a light on the mountain there must be a house there as well. Let's go in and ask the people for shelter." The hunter cautioned him, saying, "I have been at this spot many times, but never in my lifetime has there been a castle standing here. Believe you me, there is something not right about this. We would be better off to turn back and spend the night in a tree." But the helper would not be dissuaded, and he said that he would go inside, come what may. "Then I'll have to go too," thought the hunter to himself, and climbed up to the door with his helper. They went inside, with the helper bravely leading the way and the hunter timidly following. A most beautiful maiden came up to them and asked them what they wanted. The servant spoke first, saying, "Nightfall caught us in the woods and we were not able to make our way home. May we ask you for shelter for the night?" "Oh, yes," replied the maiden. "You can spend the night here, but I have to tell you one thing: You must show neither fear nor disgust." "If there is nothing more than that," said the helper, "then we can well spend the night here, for we never show fear nor disgust." The helper was speaking for himself, for the hunter thought something quite different, but he kept his mouth shut and surrendered himself to fate. The maiden led the two up to a room. Inviting them to be seated, she went into the kitchen and brought them something to eat. They ate heartily and felt no disgust. While they were eating, the maiden fetched a tub and placed it in the room. Then she went for water, and carried water inside until the tub was full. The two did not know why she was doing this, and the hunter was still secretly afraid. Then suddenly a disgusting serpent came in the door and fell into the tub, splashing the water high. The hunter was now even more frightened, because as far as he could determine, this was the same serpent that seven years earlier had abducted his daughter. The maiden then went to the tub and began vigorously to wash the serpent. The longer she washed, the redder the water became, until finally it was so red that there appeared to be nothing but blood in the container. The two at the table had to take hold of themselves to keep their hearts from fluttering like a lamb's tail. After the maiden had washed the serpent clean she helped him out of the tub. Then he began to speak, saying, "Maiden, would you not like to marry me?" "No," she said, "I cannot do that. You are a serpent and I am a human." He asked her again, "Maiden, won't you marry me?" She said again, "No, I cannot do that. You are a serpent and I am a human." Then he asked for the third time, "Maiden, are you sure that you won't marry me?" She could no longer refuse him. She felt sorry for him and said, "Because you won't give in, I will accept you. I have been washing you for seven years, so for a while I will continue to be able to wash you." She had hardly said this when the serpent disappeared, and a wonderfully handsome youth stood there in its place. As her bridegroom he extended his hand to her and said, "You have now redeemed me. As thanks for this I will indeed take you as my wife and secure a happy life for you. In this castle we have possessions enough, and the castle itself will no longer be enchanted, as it was until now." The he led the maiden to the hunter and asked him, "Do you know her?" "Why should I know her?" said the hunter. "Look at her carefully," said the youth, and tell me if this is not your daughter. I was banished seven years before she was born. Then I had to wait thirteen years before bringing her to my castle. For seven years she has had to wash me every day. Now the magic has been broken, and I will take her to be my wife. The rest of you no longer must suffer from poverty. My wealth would be sufficient to care for you even if you had more children than you actually have." The hunter did not know what was happening to him as he heard this. He looked first at the maiden and then at the youth, and could not fully believe that the woman was his child and the man his future son-in-law. But if he could trust in his own eyes then he had to believe that this was really his daughter standing before him, and he did not know why he should not believe the youth. Beside himself with joy, he jumped up and embraced them both, and then for a long time expressed thanks that everything had concluded so well. The next day they all went together to the hunter's house and introduced themselves to the hunter's wife, telling her the whole story. It cannot be stated how happy she was, and she hurriedly began preparations for the wedding. When everything was ready the wedding was celebrated with great splendor. From this time forth the hunter's family had the best possible life with the daughter's husband. And they all lived happily together until the end of their lives. (Heard in Meran) Source: Ignaz und Joseph Zingerle, "Der Wurm," Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus Süddeutschland (Regensburg: Papier, Druck und Verlag von Friedrich Pustet, 1854), pp. 311-19 . The German title of this story is "Der Wurm." The German word Wurm (like its English cognate worm ) can signify either small earthworm-type creatures, or much larger dragon-like serpents. Translation © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . Oda and the Snake Germany Once upon a time there was a man who had three daughters. The youngest one was named Oda. One day the father wanted to go the market, and he asked his daughters what he should bring back to them. The oldest asked for a golden spinning wheel, the second for a golden ring, but Oda said, "Bring me that which runs away from beneath your carriage when you are about to return." At the market the father bought what the older girls had wished for themselves, then set off toward home, and behold, a snake ran from beneath his carriage. The man caught it and brought it along for Oda. He threw it into the bottom of his carriage, then afterward in front of the house door, and left it lying there. When Oda entered the door the snake began speaking, "Oda! Dear Oda! Can't I come inside?" "What?" said Oda. "My father brought you up to the front door, and now you want to come inside?" But she gave in. Then Oda went to her bedroom, and the snake called after her, "Oda, dear Oda! Can't I rest in front of your bedroom door?" "Look here," said Oda. "My father brought you up to the front door, and I let you come inside, and now you want to lie in front of my bedroom door? Well, let it be so." When Oda was about to enter her bedroom and opened the bedroom door, the snake called out again, "Oh, Oda, dear Oda! Can't I come into your bedroom?" "What," called Oda, "Didn't my father bring you up to the font door? Didn't I let you come inside and up to my bedroom door? And now you want to come into my bedroom with me? -- All right, if you will now be satisfied, come inside, but you must lie here quietly, I'm telling you!" With that Oda let the snake come inside, and she began to get undressed. She was about to climb into her bed when the snake called out again, "Oh Oda, dearest Oda! Can't I get into bed with you?" "This is too much!" cried Oda angrily. "My father brought you up to the front door, and I allowed you into my room, and now you want to get into bed with me? But you are freezing! All right, come here and get warm, you poor worm!" Then good Oda stuck out her soft, warm hand and picked up the cold snake, who had been enchanted for a long time and who could only be redeemed if everything could happen just as it had now happened. He was transformed into a handsome young prince, and he immediately took Oda as his wife. Source: Ludwig Bechstein, "Oda und die Schlange," Ludwig Bechsteins Märchenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), pp. 134-35 . Bechstein's source: Karl Müllenhoff, "Ode und de Slang'," Sagen, Märchen und Lieder der Herzogthümer Schleswig, Holstein und Lauenburg (Kiel: Schwersche Buchhandlung, 1845), book 4, no. 1, p. 383 . Translation © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. Types 433C and 425, with strong similarities to type 440. Link to additional tales of type 440, Frog Kings: Folktales about Slimy Suitors . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised July 12, 2022. The Snow Child: Folktales of Type 1362 The Snow Child foltales of type 1362 and related stories about questionable paternity translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2010-16 Contents The Snow Child (Europe). Link to Modus Liebinc , in Latin, the oldest European version of the "Snow Child" story, from a tenth-century manuscript. Opens in a new window. The Child of Snow (France, Les cent nouvelles nouvelles ). The Ice Child (Germany, Johannes Pauli). Link to Der Eyszapf , in German, by the Meistersinger Hans Sachs (1494-1576). Opens in a new window. The Snow Child (England, Thomas North). A Poor Mariner of Gaeta (Italy, Poggio Bracciolini). A Twelve-Month Child (Italy, Poggio Bracciolini). Ten Cradles (England, John Taylor). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Snow Child Europe A merchant lived with his wife in their cottage by the shore. Their's was not an easy life, for his voyages kept him away from home many months at a time. One homecoming following a particularly long and arduous voyage, the merchant was greeted by his wife and an infant child. He was surprised, but not especially pleased, to see the newborn baby, as he had been at sea for nearly a year. The wife countered the husband's inquiring look with an explanation. "No, it is not your son," she admitted. "It's a miracle boy, a Snow Child!" She continued, "One winter's day while returning home from church I slipped on the ice and fell into a snow bank. Nine months later I gave birth to our Snow Child. Is he not a wonder!" The husband had to admit that the child was a wonder, for he had no color. His hair and his skin were a bleached white. The merchant seemed to accept the new family member. Many voyages and seasons later, it was on a hot summer's day, the merchant, announced to his wife that he would be going to market in the next village. "I'll take the Snow Child along for an outing," he said. The merchant arrived back home that evening, but he was alone. "Where is our son?" asked the anxious mother. "Something terrible happened," responded the husband. "We were walking across a broad meadow in the hot sun, and he ...," the husband faltered. "And he melted." Source: Retold from various sources, including those reprinted in: Lutz Röhrich, Erzählungen des späten Mittelalters und ihr Weiterleben in Literatur und Volksdichtung bis zur Gegenwart (Bern and Munich: Francke Verlag, 1962), v. 1, pp. 204-298. This story was very popular among the writers of medieval and renaissance jest books, both in Latin and in vernacular languages. Return to the table of contents . The Child of Snow France, Les cent nouvelles nouvelles Of an English merchant whose wife had a child in his absence, and told him that it was his; and how he cleverly got rid of the child -- for his wife having asserted that it was born of the snow, he declared it had been melted by the sun. Moved by a strong desire to see and know foreign countries, and to meet with adventures, a worthy and rich merchant of London left his fair and good wife, his children, relations, friends, estates, and the greater part of his possessions, and quitted the kingdom, well furnished with money and great abundance of merchandise, such as England can supply to foreign countries, and with many other things which, for the sake of brevity, I do not mention here. On this first voyage, the good merchant wandered about for a space of five years, during which time his good wife looked after his property, disposed of much merchandise profitably, and managed so well that her husband, when he returned at the end of five years, greatly praised her, and loved her more than ever. The merchant, not content with the many strange and wonderful things he had seen, or with the large fortune he had made, four or five months after his return, again set forth in quest of adventures in foreign lands, both Christian and pagan, and stayed there so long that ten years passed before his wife again saw him, but he often wrote to her, that she might know that he was still alive. She was young and lusty, and wanted not any of the goods that God could give, except the presence of her husband. His long absence constrained her to provide herself with a lover, by whom shortly she had a fine boy. This son was nourished and brought up with the others, his half-brothers, and, when the merchant returned, was about seven years old. Great were the rejoicings between husband and wife when he came back, and whilst they were conversing pleasantly, the good woman, at the demand of her husband, caused to be brought all their children, not omitting the one who had been born during the absence of him whose name she bore. The worthy merchant seeing all these children, and remembering perfectly how many there should be, found one over and above; at which he was much astonished and surprised, and he inquired of his wife who was this fair son, the youngest of their children? "Who is he?" said she; "On my word, husband, he is our son! Who else should he be?" "I do not know," he replied, "but, as I have never seen him before, is it strange that I should ask?" "No, by St. John," said she; "but he is our son." "How can that be?" said her husband. "You were not pregnant when I left." "Truly I was not, so far as I know," she replied, "but I can swear that the child is yours, and that no other man but you has ever lain with me." "I never said so," he answered, "but, at any rate, it is ten years since I left, and this child does not appear more than seven. How then can it be mine? Did you carry him longer than you did the others?" "By my oath, I know not!" she said; "but what I tell you is true. Whether I carried it longer than the others I know not, and if you did not make it before you left, I do not know how it could have come, unless it was that, not long after your departure, I was one day in our garden, when suddenly there came upon me a longing and desire to eat a leaf of sorrel, which at that time was thickly covered with snow. I chose a large and fine leaf, as I thought, and ate it, but it was only a white and hard piece of snow. And no sooner had I eaten it than I felt myself to be in the same condition as I was before each of my other children was born. In fact, a certain time afterwards, I bore you this fair son." The merchant saw at once that he was being fooled, but he pretended to believe the story his wife had told him, and replied; "My dear, though what you tell me is hardly possible, and has never happened to anyone else, let God be praised for what He has sent us. If He has given us a child by a miracle, or by some secret method of which we are ignorant, He has not forgotten to provide us with the wherewithal to keep it." When the good woman saw that her husband was willing to believe the tale she told him, she was greatly pleased. The merchant, who was both wise and prudent, stayed at home the next ten years, without making any other voyages, and in all that time breathed not a word to his wife to make her suspect he knew aught of her doings, so virtuous and patient was he. But he was not yet tired of travelling, and wished to begin again. He told his wife, who was very dissatisfied thereat. "Be at ease," he said, "and, if God and St. George so will, I will return shortly. And as our son, who was born during my last voyage, is now grown up, and capable of seeing and learning, I will, if it seem good to you, take him with me." "On my word", said she "I hope you will, and you will do well." "It shall be done," he said, and thereupon he started, and took with him the young man, of whom he was not the father, and for whom he felt no affection. They had a good wind, and came to the port of Alexandria, where the good merchant sold the greater part of his merchandise very well. But he was not so foolish as to keep at his charge a child his wife had had by some other man, and who, after his death, would inherit like the other children, so he sold the youth as a slave, for good money paid down, and as the lad was young and strong, nearly a hundred ducats was paid for him. When this was done, the merchant returned to London, safe and sound, thank God. And it need not be told how pleased his wife was to see him in good health, but when she saw her son was not there, she knew not what to think. She could not conceal her feelings, and asked her husband what had become of their son? "Ah, my dear," said he, "I will not conceal from you that a great misfortune has befallen him." "Alas, what?" she asked. "Is he drowned?" "No; but the truth is that the wind and waves wafted us to a country that was so hot that we nearly died from the great heat of the sun. And one day when we had all left the ship, in order that we each might dig a hole in which to shield ourselves from the heat, -- our dear son, who, as you know was made of snow, began to melt in the sun, and in our presence was turned into water, and ere you could have said one of the seven psalms, there was nothing left of him. Thus strangely did he come into the world, and thus suddenly did he leave it. I both was, and am, greatly vexed, and not one of all the marvels I have ever seen astonished me so greatly." "Well!" said she. "Since it has pleased God to give and to take away, His name be praised." As to whether she suspected anything or not, the history is silent and makes no mention, but perhaps she learned that her husband was not to be hoodwinked. Source: One Hundred Merrie and Delightsome Stories, Right Pleasante to Relate in All Goodly Companie by Way of Joyance and Jollity: Les Cent Nouvelles Nouvelles , now first done into the english tongue by Robert B. Douglas (Paris: Charles Carrington, 1899), no. 19. Les cent nouvelles nouvelles is a collection of one hundred stories assembled in the mid-fifteenth century by Antoine de la Sale [also spelled de La Salle ] (1385/6 - 1460/1). The purported author of the nineteenth story is Philippe Vignier. Link to a French-language edition of this story: L'Enfant de neige . Return to the table of contents . The Ice Child Germany, Johannes Pauli In Venice there was a merchant whose journeys kept him away from home for one or three years at a time. Once upon returning he found a good-looking boy running around in his house. The man asked, "Whose good-looking boy is this?" His wife said, "Husband, he is mine. Let me tell you how I came to have this child. In the winter I was walking in the garden, thinking about you with longing. Just then a ice cycle fell from the roof. I ate it, and the child grew out of it. As a sign of this, his name is Glacies." The good man said nothing, not wanting to make to much of the situation, for if a man scolds his wife, he is only scolding himself. Furthermore, he thought, if you had been with her, this probably would not have happened. Just as you have broken foreign jugs while abroad, she has broken some pots here at home. Glacies grew up and became large. One day the man said to his wife, "What do you think if I took our Glacies with me, so he could learn the art of buying and selling, so in the future he will know whether or not he wants to become a merchant." His wife said, "But you must take care of him." The man took him along, and sold him overseas. A long time later he returned home, but did not bring the child with him. The woman said, "What have you done with our child Glacies?" The man said, "A strange thing happened to him. One day while we were sailing on the sea it was terribly hot. I told him not to sit there bare-headed, but he did so anyway. The sun was so hot on hi head that he melted and ran into the sea. Just as he came from water, he became water once again. Source: Johannes Pauli, "Das Eiskind," Sinnreiche und unterhaltende Geschichten aus Frater Johannes Pauli's Schimpf und Ernst . Edited by Gustav Jördens (Leipzig: Wilhelm Lauffer, 1822), no. 7, pp. 14-17 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2010. Link to this tale, as recorded in a 1597 edition of Schimpf und Ernst : Eines Kauffmans Weib ward schwanger von einem Eißschmarren . Johannes Pauli was born about 1455 and died after 1530. Return to the table of contents . The Snow Child England, Thomas North In Terra Stolida, in a place called Vallona, it is reported there dwelled a rich farmer, whose substance lay most in great cattle; and at certain times he drove them into other countries to pasture, where he abode with them many months. His wife, that remained at home, was good and square, and plumb of body, her brawn as hard as a board, and that had her face before her as other women; so that a great rich man also of that country cast his eyes upon her, and entertained her in that time of vacation. And she that delighted not to be kept at the rack and manger, suffered her receipt to run at large, to fare more daintily. In so much as at the last (sinning in gluttony) her breasts grew big, and her belly rose, so when time came, she brought forth a goodly babe, which she carefully put forth to nurse and thus it grew; and in fine as her own in deed she brought it home and fostered it. Her husband being come home that had been long absent, glad to see his wife and she (in seeming also) no less glad of his coming, (but Lord, what feast and joy in outward show between them) they sweetly kissed, and with loving words embraced each other. "Oh my Conye, welcome," quoth she. "Oh my dear Musse," said he, "gramercy to thee." All wedlock ceremonies duly accomplished; her husband, casting his eyes about and seeing this fair little boy running about the house, "Musse," quoth he, "I pray thee whence is this little knave?" "What knowest thou not, Conye," said she? "It is mine." (And this she told him as she that could cunningly handle him in his kind), and so followed on, preventing his tale: "Doest thou not remember that three years ago there fell a great snow. (Jesus, how cold it was), and at the same time I remember the ravens and crows fell down stark dead in the streets, and the little fish died in the wells. Oh what a cold it was, and I took it, in deed (God knoweth) with throwing of snowballs, the young maids of the country and I together; and I cannot tell how, I handled so many, but well I know, I came home fair with child, and I am sure it was no other but the snow, and that is seen by the boy, that is as fair and white as snow itself, and therefore I called his name White. And, because I know well enough ye men are of such metal, that even strait ye think all the evil of us poor women that can be, and for that I would not put any jealousy or toy in thy head, I sent him out of the doors to nurse, thinking afterwards at leisure, when thou hadst known thy good wife, to send for him, and so to have told thee even plainly from point to point how the matter went, and how I came by this good, pretty, sweet, fair, well-favored boy." Her husband, though indeed he was but an ass and a dreamish fool, was not moved a whit at her ill-favored tale, nor once hung down his head for the matter, and made as though he believed her; but he knew strait the knavery of the foolish invention of his wife. Howbeit what for the love he bare her (because she was worth the looking on ywis [for certain]), and for that he was but a rude fellow to behold, and thought himself scant worthy of her, and that he had married her, pining away for her sake; he thought it better to carry such things in his breast than in his head, and the rather peradventure because he doubted false measure, fearing his partner's ill will that farmed his ground at halves with him; in fine, he was contented to bite it in for the time, determining not to be at charges with other men's children. So one day spying time and place, he carried out of the doors with him this little boy White; and such was his walk that the boy was never more heard of, nor seen after that. The woman looked and looked again to see her son return with her husband. But seeing her husband come home without him, "Come," sayth she to him, "I pray thee, what hast thou done with my boy?" Her husband that had bought his wit so dear, answered her: "A sweet Musse, the other day unadvisedly (I confess it) I carried him abroad with me, and we walked a great while in the sun together, and thou knowest how hot it was two days ago (alack that I should tell it thee); the heat of the sun hath quite dissolved him. And then I found thy words true which before I hardly believed. Alas, poor wretch, he suddenly turned all into water, that woe is me." His Musse, hearing this, in a rage flung her away, and left Conye all alone, so he never after saw her. Source: Joseph Jacobs, The Earliest English version of the Fables of Bidpai: "The Morall Philosophie of Doni," by Sir Thomas North (London: David Nutt, 1888), pp. 203-206 . Title added and spelling cautiously modernized by D. L. Ashliman. North's The Morall Philosophie of Doni [Bidpai] was first published in 1569 or 1570. Although North attributes this version of the "Snow Child" story to the legendary Indian philosopher Bidpai, it is demonstrably of European, not Oriental, origin. Return to the table of contents . A Poor Mariner of Gaeta Italy, Poggio Bracciolini The generality of the common people of Gaeta get their living on the sea. One of them, an extremely poor mariner, after wandering here and there to make a little money, came home after nearly five years absence; he had left behind a very young wife and a most humble stock of furniture. So soon as he had set foot on land, he rushed home to see his wife, who, in the interval, despairing of his re turn, had taken to living with another man. On crossing the threshold, he notices that his house has been partly put in good repair, beautified and enlarged; wondering, he enquires of his wife how it has come to pass that their cottage, formerly so ugly, has become tidy and neat. "By the grace of God, who gives assistance to all men," replies the woman. "God be blessed," quoth the man, "for such kindness conferred upon us!" He next sees the bedroom, an elegant couch, and other furniture above his wife's condition, and again enquires where it all comes from. "The grace of God," says she. He returns anew thanks to the Lord for his great bounty. Other things meet his eyes, that are novel and unusual in his house; they also are the gift of God. He is at last feeling surprised at such favors lavished upon him, when a pretty little boy comes forward, more than three years old, who, infant-like, caresses his mother. The husband looking at the child and inquiring whose it is, the wife answers it is hers. Amazed, he asks how he can have come by that offspring whilst away; his wife asserts that it is also by the grace of God. Indignant at this superabundance of divine grace, which has gone the length of giving him heirs, "Indeed," says he, "I am under great obligations to God, who has taken such care of my interests!" It seemed to him that God had been rather too considerate in providing him with children during his absence. Source (books.google.com): Poggio Bracciolini, The Facetiae or Jocose Tales , volume 1 (Paris: Isidore Liseux, 1879), no. 1, pp. 7-10 . Return to the table of contents . A Twelve-Month Child Italy, Poggio Bracciolini A woman's humorous answer to a man's enquiry whether his wife could be confined at the end of a twelve-month. A Florentine, who had been abroad, came home after one year's absence, and found his wife in labor. He did not like it, suspecting some conjugal disloyalty. However, not being sure of the thing, he sought the advice of a neighbor, a clever gentlewoman, and asked her if a child could be born to him after twelve months. The lady, seeing his silliness, at once comforted him: "To be sure," said she," for, if on the day she conceived, your wife happened to see a donkey, she will have borne a whole year, as asses do." The husband took those words for gospel, and thanking God for having rid him of an ugly suspicion, and his wife of a grievous exposure, he acknowledged the child as his own. Source: Poggio Bracciolini, The Facetiae or Jocose Tales , volume 2 (Paris: Isidore Liseux, 1879), no. 72, pp. 2-3 . Poggio Bracciolini was born in 1380 and died in 1459. Return to the table of contents . Ten Cradles England, John Taylor A fellow, having been married but five weeks, perceived his wife to be great with child, wherefore she desired him to buy a cradle. Shortly after he went to a fair and bought ten cradles; and being demanded why he bought so many, he answered, that his wife would have use for them all in one year. Source: W. Carew Hazlitt, Shakespeare Jest-Books (London: Willis and Sotheran, 1864), Taylor's Wit and Mirth , no. 92, p. 57 . Spelling modernized by D. L. Ashliman. Hazlitt's source: John Taylor, Wit and Mirth: Being 113 Pleasant Tales and Witty Jests (London, 1635). John Taylor, "the water poet," was born between 1577 and 1580, and died in 1653. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 21, 2016. The Snow Maiden: Folktales of Type 703* The Snow Maiden foltales of type 703* edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2010 Contents The Snow Maiden (Russia). Links to additional translations of this story (sites open in new windows): The Snow Child . John T. Naaké, Slavonic Fairy Tales: Collected and Translated from the Russian, Polish, Servian, and Bohemian (London: Henry S. King and Company, 1874), pp. 9-16. Snyegurka . C. J. T. [Charles John Tibbits]. Folk-Lore and Legends: Russian and Polish (London: W. W. Gibbings, 1890), pp. 22-27. Snowflake . Andrew Lang, The Pink Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1897), pp. 143-47. The Snow Maiden . Georgene Faulkner, Old Russian Tales: Retold for Children (Chicago: Daughaday and Company, 1916), pp. 62-74. The Snow Image: A Childish Miracle (Nathaniel Hawthorne). This link leads to an external site, which opens in a new window. The Snow Daughter and the Fire Son (Bukovina). Yuki-Onna (Japan). Link to a Wikipedia article about The Snow Maiden: A Spring Fairy Tale , an opera by Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov. Link to Frosty the Snowman (as sung by Gene Autry; lyrics by Walter "Jack" Rollins and Steve Nelson). This link leads to an external site, which opens in a new window. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Snow Maiden Russia Many years ago, in a distant Russian village, there lived a peasant, by name Akem, with his wife Masha; they lived in a small wooden hut, where they spent their days in love and harmony; but children had they none. This was a very sore point with both of them, they used to sit by the window or at the door of their little hut looking at their neighbours' children playing about, and wished that they had some of their own; but finding that it was no use wishing, they at last became sad in their old age. One cold winter's day, when the snow lay thick upon the uneven country roads, and the little village boys were running about throwing snowballs to keep themselves warm, and making snowmen and women, old Akem and Masha sat by their window looking at them in silence. Suddenly Akem looked up at his wife, and said, laughing, "Masha, what do you say to coming out into the road and making ourselves a snowman or woman, like those little boys yonder?" Masha laughed, too, it seemed such a queer thing to do at their time of life! "Yes, if you like," she replied; "let us go, it may cheer us up a bit; but I don't see why we should make a snowman or woman, let us rather make a child out of snow, as Providence does not seem to wish us to have a real one!" "I do believe you are getting quite clever in your old age, Masha! Come along, then, and let us set to work." Off went the old couple, laughing at themselves all the while, and sure enough they commenced making a snow child! They made the legs, arms, hands, feet, and a snowball for the head. "What, in the name of wonder, are you up to?" exclaimed a passerby, stopping suddenly in front of the two old people. "A snow child!" laughed Masha, as she began to explain everything to the stranger. "May the saints help you!" said he, as he went his way. When they had got the legs, arms, hands, feet, and head fixed up together, Akem began making the nose, two holes for the eyes, and was just drawing a small line for the mouth, when he suddenly, much to his surprise, felt warm breath come out of it. He took his hand away quickly, and on looking up at the two holes made for the eyes, beheld two real, beautiful blue eyes; the lips became full and rosy, and as for the nose, it was the dearest little nose ever seen. "Good heavens! what does this mean? Is it a temptation of the Evil One?" cried Akem, crossing himself several times, while the snow child threw her arms round his neck, and kissed him as though she were alive. "O Akem! Akem!" cried Masha, trembling with joy, "Providence has at last taken pity on us, and sent us this child to cheer us in our old age." She was about to throw her arms around the snow child and embrace it, when, to the astonishment of both the old man and woman, the snow fell off, and left in Masha's arms a beautiful little girl. "Oh, my little Snow Maiden! my little darling!" cried the happy Masha, as she led the lovely child into their hut. Meanwhile, Akem could not get over his wonder. He rubbed his head, and felt sorely puzzled; he did not know whether he was asleep or awake, but felt almost sure that something had gone wrong with him somewhere. But to return to the Snow Maiden (as Masha was pleased to call her). She grew very rapidly -- not only daily but hourly -- into a tall, beautiful, and graceful girl; the peasants were delighted with her -- Akem had come to the conclusion that it was all right -- their hut was now always in constant mirth. The village girls and boys were frequent visitors to it; they played, read, and sang with the Snow Maiden, who understood it all thoroughly, and did her best to amuse all around her. She talked, laughed, and was altogether so cheerful and good natured, that everybody loved her dearly, and tried to please her in every possible way, -- at the same time a better and more obedient daughter never was. She had the most lovely white skin, just like snow; her eyes were like forget-me-nots, her lips and cheeks like roses; in fact, she was the very picture of health and beauty; with her lovely golden hair hanging down her back, she looked just like a girl of seventeen, though she was only a few days old. "Akem," said Masha, one day to her husband, "how good Providence has been to us; how Snow Maiden has brightened us, in these few days, and how wicked we were to grumble as we did." "Yes, Masha," returned Akem, "we ought to thank Providence for all that He has done for us, and thank Him that we have mirth instead of gloom, in our little home." Winter passed, the heavens rejoiced, the spring sun came out, the swallows began to fly about, and the grass and trees became green once more. The lovely Russian peasant girls gathered themselves together, and met their young cavaliers under the trees in the forest, where they danced and sang their pretty Russian songs. But the Snow Maiden was dull. "What is the matter with you, my darling?" asked Masha; "are you ill? You are always so bright and cheerful as a rule, and now you are so dull all at once. Has any bad man thrown a spell over you?" "No, mother mine; nothing is the matter with me, darling," the Snow Maiden replied, but still she continued to be dull, and by degrees she lost her beautiful colour, and began to droop sadly, greatly to the alarm of those around her. The last snow had now vanished, the gardens began to bloom, the rivers and lakes rippled, the birds sang merrily; in fact all the wide world seemed happy; yet our little Snow Maiden drooped and looked sad. She sat with her hands folded in the coolest part of the hut. She loved the cold winter, it was her best friend, but this horrid heat she hated. She was glad when it rained a little, there was no broiling sun then. She did not mind the winter sun, but the summer sun was her enemy; and quite natural, too, poor thing, when she was born in the winter in the snow! At last the great summer feast arrived, the village youths and maidens came to the Snow Maiden and asked her to join them in a romp through the woods, and begged Masha to let her go with them. At first Masha refused, but the girls begged so hard that at last, on thinking it over, she consented, for she thought it might cheer Snow Maiden up. "But," said she, "take care of her, for she is the apple of my eye, and if anything happens to her, I don't know what I shall do!" "All right! all right! we shall take care of her, she is just as dear to us! "cried the young people, as they took Snow Maiden and ran off with her into the forest, where the girls wove themselves wreaths, while the young men gathered sticks, which they piled up high; and at sunset they set fire to them, and then they arranged themselves all in a row one after another, boys and girls, and prepared to jump over the burning heap. Our Snow Maiden was the last in the row. " Mind," said the girls to her, " don't stay behind but jump after us." One! two! three ! and away they went, jumping over the flames in great delight. Suddenly they heard a piercing scream, and on looking round discovered that Snow Maiden was missing. " Ah," cried they, laughing, "she is up to one of her tricks again, and has most likely gone and hidden herself somewhere. Come, let us go and search for her." They all ran off in pairs in different directions, but nowhere could they find their missing companion. Their happy young faces soon turned very grave, and their joy gave place to sorrow and alarm. They met at last in the road outside the forest, and began asking each other what they had best do. "Perhaps she has run home," said one. This seemed a happy thought; so they ran to the hut, but no Snow Maiden was there. They looked for her all through the next day and night, and on the third, and fourth. They sought her in the village, hut after hut, and in the forest, tree after tree, bush after bush; but all in vain, nowhere could they find her. As for poor Akem and Masha, it is needless to say, that their grief was too great for words, no one could comfort them. Day after day, night after night, did poor Masha wander into the forest, calling like the cuckoo, "Oh, my little Snow Maiden! Oh, my little darling." But there was no answer to her call, not one word from that sweet voice did Masha get in reply. Snow Maiden was not to be found, that was certain, but how had she vanished, and whither had she gone? Had the wild beasts of the forest eaten her up? or had the robber-bird carried her off to the blue sea? No, it was not the wild beasts, nor was it the robber-bird, but -- as our little friend was jumping over the flames after her companions she evaporated into a thin cloud, and flew to the heights of the heavens. Source: Edith M. S. Hodgetts, Tales and Legends from the Land of the Tzar: Collection of Russian Stories , 2nd edition (London: Griffith Farran and Company, 1891), pp. 46-52 . Return to the table of contents . The Snow Daughter and the Fire Son Bukovina There was once upon a time a man and his wife, and they had no children, which was a great grief to them. One winter's day, when the sun was shining brightly, the couple were standing outside their cottage, and the woman was looking at all the little icicles which hung from the roof. She sighed, and turning to her husband said, "I wish I had as many children as there are icicles hanging there." "Nothing would please me more either," replied her husband. Then a tiny icicle detached itself from the roof, and dropped into the woman's mouth, who swallowed it with a smile, and said, "Perhaps I shall give birth to a snow child now!" Her husband laughed at his wife's strange idea, and they went back into the house. But after a short time the woman gave birth to a little girl, who was as white as snow and as cold as ice. If they brought the child anywhere near the fire, it screamed loudly till they put it back into some cool place. The little maid throve wonderfully, and in a few months she could run about and speak. But she was not altogether easy to bring up, and gave her parents much trouble and anxiety, for all summer she insisted on spending in the cellar, and in the winter she would sleep outside in the snow, and the colder it was the happier she seemed to be. Her father and mother called her simply "Our Snow Daughter," and this name stuck to her all her life. One day her parents sat by the fire, talking over the extraordinary behaviour of their daughter, who was disporting herself in the snowstorm that raged outside. The woman sighed deeply and said, "I wish I had given birth to a Fire Son!" As she said these words, a spark from the big wood fire flew into the woman's lap, and she said with a laugh, "Now perhaps I shall give birth to a Fire Son!" The man laughed at his wife's words, and thought it was a good joke. But he ceased to think it a joke when his wife shortly afterwards gave birth to a boy, who screamed lustily till he was put quite close to the fire, and who nearly yelled himself into a fit if the Snow Daughter came anywhere near him. The Snow Daughter herself avoided him as much as she could, and always crept into a corner as far away from him as possible. The parents called the boy simply "Our Fire Son," a name which stuck to him all his life. They had a great deal of trouble and worry with him too; but he throve and grew very quickly, and before he was a year old he could run about and talk. He was as red as fire, and as hot to touch, and he always sat on the hearth quite close to the fire, and complained of the cold; if his sister were in the room he almost crept into the flames, while the girl on her part always complained of the great heat if her brother were anywhere near. In summer the boy always lay out in the sun, while the girl hid herself in the cellar: so it happened that the brother and sister came very little into contact with each other -- in fact, they carefully avoided it. Just as the girl grew up into a beautiful woman, her father and mother both died one after the other. Then the Fire Son, who had grown up in the meantime into a fine, strong young man, said to his sister, "I am going out into the world, for what is the use of remaining on here?" "I shall go with you," she answered, "for, except you, I have no one in the world, and I have a feeling that if we set out together we shall be lucky." The Fire Son said, "I love you with all my heart, but at the same time I always freeze if you are near me, and you nearly die of heat if I approach you! How shall we travel about together without being odious the one to the other?" "Don't worry about that," replied the girl, "for I've thought it all over, and have settled on a plan which will make us each able to bear with the other! See, I have had a fur cloak made for each of us, and if we put them on I shall not feel the heat so much nor you the cold." So they put on the fur cloaks, and set out cheerfully on their way, and for the first time in their lives quite happy in each other's company. For a long time the Fire Son and the Snow Daughter wandered through the world, and when at the beginning of winter they came to a big wood they determined to stay there till spring. The Fire Son built himself a hut where he always kept up a huge fire, while his sister with very few clothes on stayed outside night and day. Now it happened one day that the king of the land held a hunt in this wood, and saw the Snow Daughter wandering about in the open air. He wondered very much who the beautiful girl clad in such garments could be, and he stopped and spoke to her. He soon learnt that she could not stand heat, and that her brother could not endure cold. The king was so charmed by the Snow Daughter, that he asked her to be his wife. The girl consented, and the wedding was held with much state. The king had a huge house of ice made for his wife underground, so that even in summer it did not melt. But for his brother-in-law he had a house built with huge ovens all round it, that were kept heated all day and night. The Fire Son was delighted, but the perpetual heat in which he lived made his body so hot, that it was dangerous to go too close to him. One day the king gave a great feast, and asked his brother-in-law among the other guests. The Fire Son did not appear till everyone had assembled, and when he did, everyone fled outside to the open air, so intense was the heat he gave forth. Then the king was very angry and said, "If I had known what a lot of trouble you would have been, I would never have taken you into my house." Then the Fire Son replied with a laugh, "Don't be angry, dear brother! I love heat and my sister loves cold. Come here and let me embrace you, and then I'll go home at once." And before the king had time to reply, the Fire Son seized him in a tight embrace. The king screamed aloud in agony, and when his wife, the Snow Daughter, who had taken refuge from her brother in the next room, hurried to him, the king lay dead on the ground burnt to a cinder. When the Snow Daughter saw this she turned on her brother and flew at him. Then a fight began, the like of which had never been seen on earth. When the people, attracted by the noise, hurried to the spot, they saw the Snow Daughter melting into water and the Fire Son burn to a cinder. And so ended the unhappy brother and sister. Source: Andrew Lang, The Yellow Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1906), pp. 206-208 . Bukovina is a historic region now split between Romania and Bulgaria. Return to the table of contents . Yuki-Onna Japan In a village of Musashi Province, there lived two woodcutters: Mosaku and Minokichi. At the time of which I am speaking, Mosaku was an old man; and Minokichi, his apprentice, was a lad of eighteen years. Every day they went together to a forest situated about five miles from their village. On the way to that forest there is a wide river to cross; and there is a ferry-boat. Several times a bridge was built where the ferry is; but the bridge was each time carried away by a flood. No common bridge can resist the current there when the river rises. Mosaku and Minokichi were on their way home, one very cold evening, when a great snowstorm overtook them. They reached the ferry; and they found that the boatman had gone away, leaving his boat on the other side of the river. It was no day for swimming; and the woodcutters took shelter in the ferryman's hut, thinking themselves lucky to find any shelter at all. There was no brazier in the hut, nor any place in which to make a fire: it was only a two-mat hut, with a single door, but no window. Mosaku and Minokichi fastened the door, and lay down to rest, with their straw raincoats over them. At first they did not feel very cold; and they thought that the storm would soon be over. The old man almost immediately fell asleep; but the boy, Minokichi, lay awake a long time, listening to the awful wind, and the continual slashing of the snow against the door. The river was roaring; and the hut swayed and creaked like a junk at sea. It was a terrible storm; and the air was every moment becoming colder; and Minokichi shivered under his rain-coat. But at last, in spite of the cold, he too fell asleep. He was awakened by a showering of snow in his face. The door of the hut had been forced open; and, by the snow-light (yuki-akan), he saw a woman in the room, a woman all in white. She was bending above Mosaku, and blowing her breath upon him; and her breath was like a bright white smoke. Almost in the same moment she turned to Minokichi, and stooped over him. He tried to cry out, but found that he could not utter any sound. The white woman bent down over him, lower and lower, until her face almost touched him; and he saw that she was very beautiful, though her eyes made him afraid. For a little time she continued to look at him; then she smiled, and she whispered, "I intended to treat you like the other man. But I cannot help feelng some pity for you, because you are so young. . . . You are a pretty boy, Minokichi; and I will not hurt you now. But, if you ever tell anybody -- even your own mother -- about what you have seen this night, I shall know it; and then I will kill you. . . . Remember what I say!" With these words, she turned from him, and passed through the doorway. Then he found himself able to move; and he sprang up, and looked out. But the woman was nowhere to be seen; and the snow was driving furiously into the hut. Minokichi closed the door, and secured it by fixing several billets of wood against it. He wondered if the wind had blown it open; he thought that he might have been only dreaming, and might have mistaken the gleam of the snow-light in the doorway for the figure of a white woman: but he could not be sure. He called to Mosaku, and was frightened because the old man did not answer. He put out his hand in the dark, and touched Mosaku's face, and found that it was ice! Mosaku was stark and dead. . . . By dawn the storm was over; and when the ferry-man returned to his station, a little after sunrise, he found Minokichi lying senseless beside the frozen body of Mosaku. Minokichi was promptly cared for, and soon came to himself; but he remained a long time ill from the effects of the cold of that terrible night. He had been greatly frightened also by the old man's death; but he said nothing about the vision of the woman in white. As soon as he got well again, he returned to his calling, going alone every morning to the forest, and coming back at nightfall with his bundles of wood, which his mother helped him to sell. One evening, in the winter of the following year, as he was on his way home, he overtook a girl who happened to be travelling by the same road. She was a tall, slim girl, very good-looking; and she answered Minokichi's greeting in a voice as pleasant to the ear as the voice of a song-bird. Then he walked beside her; and they began to talk. The girl said that her name was 0-Yuki [this name, signifying Snow , is not uncommon]; that she had lately lost both of her parents; and that she was going to Yedo, where she happened to have some poor relations, who might help her to find a situation as servant. Minokichi soon felt charmed by this strange girl; and the more that he looked at her, the handsomer she appeared to be. He asked her whether she was yet betrothed; and she answered, laughingly, that she was free. Then, in her turn, she asked Minokichi whether he was married, or pledged to marry; and he told her that, although he had only a widowed mother to support, the question of an "honourable daughter-in-law" had not yet been considered, as he was very young. . . . After these confidences, they walked on for a long while without speaking; but, as the proverb declares, Ki ga aréba, mé mo kuchi hodo ni mono wo iu : "When the wish is there, the eyes can say as much as the mouth." By the time they reached the village, they had become very much pleased with each other; and then Minokichi asked 0-Yuki to rest awhile at his house. After some shy hesitation, she went there with him; and his mother made her welcome, and prepared a warm meal for her. 0-Yuki behaved so nicely that Minokichi's mother took a sudden fancy to her, and persuaded her to delay her journey to Yedo. And the natural end of the matter was that 0-Yuki never went to Yedo at all. She re- mained in the house, as an "honourable daughter-in-law." 0-Yuki proved a very good daughter-in-law. When Minokichi's mother came to die, some five years later, her last words were words of affection and praise for the wife of her son. And 0-Yuki bore Minokichi ten children, boys and girls, handsome children all of them, and very fair of skin. The country-folk thought 0-Yuki a wonderful person, by nature different from themselves. Most of the peasant women age early; but 0-Yuki, even after having become the mother of ten children, looked as young and fresh as on the day when she had first come to the village. One night, after the children had gone to sleep, 0-Yuki was sewing by the light of a paper lamp; and Minokichi, watching her, said, "To see you sewing there, with the light on your face, makes me think of a strange thing that happened when I was a lad of eighteen. I then saw somebody as beautiful and white as you are now; indeed, she was very like you." . . . Without lifting her eyes from her work, 0-Yuki responded, "Tell me about her. . . . Where did you see her?" Then Minokichi told her about the terrible night in the ferryman's hut, and about the White Woman that had stooped above him, smiling and whispering, and about the silent death of old Mosaku. And he said, "Asleep or awake, that was the only time that I saw a being as beautiful as you. Of course, she was not a human being; and I was afraid of her, very much afraid; but she was so white! . . . Indeed, I have never been sure whether it was a dream that I saw, or the Woman of the Snow." . . . 0-Yuki flung down her sewing, and arose, and bowed above Minokichi where he sat, and shrieked into his face, "It was I -- I -- I! 0-Yuki it was! And I told you then that I would kill you if you ever said one word about it! . . . But for those children asleep there, I would kill you this moment! And now you had better take very, very good care of them; for if ever they have reason to complain of you, I will treat you as you deserve!" . . . Even as she screamed, her voice became thin, like a crying of wind; then she melted into a bright white mist that spired to the roof-beams, and shuddered away through the smoke-hole. . . . Never again was she seen. Source: Lafcadio Hearn, Kwaidan: Stories and Studies of Strange Things (Leipzig: Bernhard Tauchnitz, 1907), pp. 123-32 . A note by Hearn, concerning his source of this tale: "Yuki-Onna," was told me by a farmer of Chofu, Nishitamagori, in Musashi province, as a legend of his native village. Whether it has ever been written in Japanese I do not know; but the extraordinary belief which it records used certainly to exist in most parts of Japan, and in many curious forms. ( p. 9 ) Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised July 14, 2010. The Snow, the Crow, and the Blood: A Folktale from Donegal, Ireland The Snow, the Crow, and the Blood A Folktale from Donegal, Ireland told by Seumas MacManus and edited by D. L. Ashliman Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts The Plaisham. A folktale from Donegal, Ireland, told by Seumas MacManus. One day in the dead of winter, when the snow lay like a linen tablecloth over the world, Jack, the King of Ireland's son, went out to shoot. He saw a crow, and he shot it, and it fell down on the snow. Jack went up to it, and he thought he never saw anything blacker than that crow, or redder than its blood, nor anything whiter than the snow round about. He said to himself: "I'll never rest till I get a wife whose hair is as black as that crow, whose cheeks are as red as that blood, and whose skin is as white as that snow." So he went home, and told his father and mother this. He said he was going to set off before him and look for such a girl. The King and Queen told Jack that it would be impossible ever to get a girl that would answer that description, and tried to persuade Jack from setting out, but Jack wouldn't be persuaded. He started off with his father's and his mother's blessing, and a hundred guineas that his father had given him in his pocket. He traveled away and away very far, and about the middle of the day on the second day out, passing a graveyard, he saw a crowd there wrangling over a corpse. He went in and inquired what was the matter, and he found there were bailiffs wanting to seize the corpse for a debt of a hundred guineas. Jack was sorry for the poor corpse, so he put his hand in his pocket, took out the hundred guineas, and paid them down; and then the friends of the corpse thanked him heartily and buried the body. That very same evening Jack was overtaken by a little red man who asked him where he was going. Says Jack: "I'm going in search of a wife." "Well," says the little red man, "such a handsome young fellow as you won't have to go far." "Far enough," says Jack, "because the girl I want must have hair as black as the blackest crow, cheeks as red as the reddest blood, and skin as white as the whitest snow." "Then," said the little red man, "there's only one such woman in the world, and she is the Princess of the East. There's many a brave young man went there before you to court her, but none of them ever came back alive again." "For life or for death," says Jack, "I'll never rest until I reach the Princess of the East and court her." "Well," said the little red man, "you'll want a boy with you. Let me be your boy." "But I have no money to pay you," says Jack. "That will be all right," says the little red man. "I'll go with you." That night late they reached a great castle. "This castle," says the little red man, "is the castle of the Giant of the Cloak of Darkness." "Oh," says Jack, "I've heard of that terrible giant. We'll pass on, and look for somewhere else to stop." "No other place we'll stop than here," says the little red man, knocking at the gates. Jack was too brave to run away, so he stood by the little red man till a great and terrible giant came to the gates and opened them, and asked them what they wanted. "We want supper and a bed for the night," says the red fellow. "That's good," says the giant. "I want supper and bed too. I'll make my supper off you both, and my bed on your bones." And then he let a terrible laugh out of him that made the hair stand up on poor Jack's head. But in a flash, the wee red fellow whips out his sword and struck out at the giant, and the giant then pulled out his, and struck out at the wee red man. Both of them fell to it hard and fast, and they fought a terrible fight for a long time; but in the end the wee red man ran the giant through the heart and killed him. Then he took Jack in, and they spread for themselves a grand supper with the best of everything eatable and drinkable, and had a good sleep, and in the morning they started off, the wee red fellow taking with him the Cloak of Darkness belonging to the giant he had killed. They traveled on and on that day, and at night they reached another castle. "What castle is this?" says Jack. "This," says the wee red man, "is the castle of the Giant of the Purse of Plenty." "Then," says Jack, "I've heard of that terrible giant. We'll push on and look for somewhere else to stop tonight." "Nowhere else than here we'll stop," says the wee red man. "No danger ever frightened me in all my life before, and it's too late to begin to learn fright now." And before Jack could say anything he had knocked at the gates, and a giant with two heads came out roaring, and asked them what they wanted and what brought them there. "We don't want much," says the little red man, "only what every traveler expects -- a sweet supper and a soft bed." "I want both myself, too," says the giant, "and I'll make a sweet supper off you both, and a soft bed of your bones." Then he laughed an awful laugh that shook the castle and made the hair stand up on poor Jack's head. But that minute the wee red man whipped out his sword and made at him, and the giant whipped out his and made at the wee red man; and both of them fell to and had a fight long and hard, but at length the wee red man ran his sword through the giant's heart and killed him. Then they went in, and spread for themselves a grand supper and a fine bed, in which they slept soundly till morning. And in the morning they went off, the little red man taking with him the Purse of Plenty. All that day they traveled on before them, and when night fell they came to another great castle. "What castle is this?" says Jack. "This," says the little red man, "is the castle of the Giant of the Sword of Light." "Oh," says Jack, "I've heard of that terrible giant and his awful sword, and," he says, "I want to get out of his neighborhood as fast as possible." "Fear never made me turn my back on man or mortal yet," says the little red man, "and I don't think I'll begin this late in life. As we're here, we'll lodge here this night." So on the gates he rattled, and out came a frightful giant, with three great heads on him, and he roared so that the hills shook; and he asked them what they were doing here and what they wanted. "We are two poor travelers on a journey," says the little red man, "and as night fell on us we thought we would ask you to give us bed and board for the night." "Ha! Ha!" says the giant, laughing a terrible laugh. "I'll board myself on you two this night, and I'll bed me on your bones." And at that he drew from his scabbard the terrible Sword of Light, whose flash traveled thrice round the world every time it was drawn, and whose lightest stroke killed any being, natural or enchanted. But that instant the little red man drew around him the Cloak of Darkness, so that he should disappear from the giant's eyes, and drawing his own sword he began whacking and hacking, hewing and cutting the giant, while the giant couldn't see him to strike him in return, and in two minutes the wee red man had run his sword through the giant's heart and killed him. He and Jack went into the castle, and they made a hearty supper and slept soundly in the softest beds they could get, and in the morning they went off again, the wee red man taking with him the Sword of Light. Having the Purse of Plenty, they could not know want from this forward. So they went on their journey right merrily. They traveled far and long until at length they came into the East, and pushed on for the castle of the Princess. And when they came to where the Princess lived, they took their horses (for they were now riding two beautiful steeds) to a blacksmith's forge and had them shod with gold. And when they had had them shod, they rode up to the castle. By the wee red fellow's order, they didn't wait to knock at any gates, but put their golden spurs to their horses and leaped them over the castle walls. When the servants and soldiers saw the pair come bounding over the castle walls upon horses shod with gold, they ran out in wonder. From the Purse of Plenty the red fellow, as Jack's servant, pulled out handfuls and handfuls of silver and of gold and scattered them among the crowd. Then the servants quickly brought word to the Princess of the East of the beautiful and rich gentleman who had come, with his servant, to court her. They told her how they had both leaped the castle walls on horses shod with gold, and that they threw away their gold in handfuls. She sent word for Jack to be brought to her, and when Jack came into her presence, he was enchanted with the look of her; for her hair was so black, her cheeks and lips were so red, and her skin was so white, he had never seen in all his life anyone so beautiful. "I understand you have come to court me," says she. "That I have," says Jack. "Well," says she, "to everyone that comes to court me, I give three tasks. If anyone performs the three tasks I give him he will win me; but if he fails in any one of the three, he will lose his head. Are you willing to try on such conditions?" says she. "I'll try," says Jack, "upon any conditions." She took him out then into the Garden of Heads, and showed him three hundred and sixty-five rose bushes, and for every flower there was a man's head on every one of three hundred and sixty-four of the bushes. "There's one bush without a flower yet, Jack," says she, "but in less than three days I hope to see your head flowering on it." Then she took him into the castle again, and treated him to a fine supper. And when they had finished supper and drunk their wine and chatted, she got up to bid him good-night. She took out of her hair a gold comb, and showed it to him. "Now," she says, "I will wear that golden comb all night, and I'll spend this night from midnight to cockcrow neither on the earth nor under the earth. Yet you must have that comb for me in the morning, and it must be taken from my head between midnight and cockcrow." Then she stuck the comb into her hair again and went off. Poor Jack acknowledged to himself that he had a task before him which he couldn't do. He wandered down the stairs and out of the castle, and went meandering into the garden in low spirits. The wee red man soon came to him and asked him what was the matter. "Oh, matter enough," says Jack, and commenced telling him all. "Keep up your heart," says the wee red man, "and I'll see what I can do for you." So the little red man went and got his Cloak of Darkness, and then watched till midnight outside the Princess's door. Just one second before the stroke of midnight, the Princess came out of her room with the golden comb in her hair, and went off to Hell. The little red man threw his Cloak of Darkness around him, and followed her. She didn't stop till she came to Hell, where she went in, and the little red man went in after her. The Devil was very glad to see her, and he kissed her, and the two sat down side by side and began to chat. And as they couldn't see the wee red man for his Cloak of Darkness, he came up behind and snatched the gold comb out of her hair, and went off with it; and when he came to earth, he gave the comb to Jack. In the morning when the Princess of the East appeared at breakfast, Jack handed her her gold comb across the table. She was furious, and the eyes of her flashed fire. That night she showed him a diamond ring on her finger, and she said she would not be on earth or under the earth between midnight and cockcrow, yet he must get that ring between those two times, and have it for her in the morning. And when she went away, Jack went down to the garden, and was wandering about there when the wee red man came up to him and asked him what was the matter, and he told the wee red man. "Well," says the wee red man, "I'll try what I can do." And so he took his Cloak of Darkness and watched for her that night again, and just before midnight, she came out and went off. He followed her, and she didn't stop till she was in Hell, where the Devil was very glad to see her and kissed her, and they sat down side by side to chat. The little red fellow, with his Cloak of Darkness, came up beside her and waited, and the first opportunity he got, he snatched the ring off her finger, and went off and gave it to Jack. So when she came down to breakfast the next morning Jack handed her over the table her diamond ring; and this morning she was doubly as furious as on the morning before. "Well," she said, "you've done two of the tasks, but the third you never will do." So that night she told him: "I will spend all the time between midnight and cockcrow neither on the earth nor under the earth; and I want you to have for me in the morning the lips I shall have kissed while I have been away. Your head I'll surely have now, for the sword was never yet made by mortal man that can cut those lips." Then she went away. Poor Jack, he wandered out into the garden very down-hearted at this, and sure and certain that he would lose his head in the morning. The little red man came up to him and asked him what was the matter. Jack told him, and the red fellow said: "Keep up your heart, and I'll see what can be done." And he reminded Jack that he had the Sword of Light, which was never made by mortal man. He threw his Cloak of Darkness about him, took the Sword of Light with him, and watched by the Princess's door. Just before midnight she came out and went off, and he followed her to Hell, where the Devil welcomed her with a kiss, and as he did so the little red man raised the Sword of Light and cut the lips off of him and went off as fast as he could. So in the morning Jack handed them across the table to the Princess, who was shaking with rage, and then he demanded her hand in marriage. And she had to consent. As soon as they were married, the little red man said to Jack: "I have a wedding present for you." So he have him ten blackthorns and told him to break one of these blackthorns on his wife every morning for ten mornings, and if he followed out his instructions faithfully, he would have a good wife on the tenth day. Seeing the little man had been such a good friend to him, Jack consented to do this. He broke a blackthorn on her every morning for ten mornings, and for every blackthorn he broke on her she was dispossessed of a devil. And on the tenth day she had lost all her rage and all her fury and all the devils, and she was the best and most perfect girl, as well as the most beautiful one in all the world. Source: "The Snow, the Crow, and the Blood," Seumas MacManus, Donegal Fairy Stories (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1900), pp. 153-174. This story contains motifs typically included in the following folktale types: Type 506, "The Grateful Dead Man Helps Save the Princess." Type 502, "The Wild Man as Helper." Type 519, "Brunhilde, the Strong Bride." Type 306, "The Shoes that Were Danced to Pieces." Revised November 27, 1997. Snow-White and other tales of type 709 Snow-White and other tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 709 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2022 Contents Little Snow-White , version of 1812 (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Link to the 1857 version of the Grimm Brothers' Little Snow-White , translated by D. L. Ashliman. Link to the German-language Sneewittchen (version of 1857). Link to the first translation of "Sneewittchen" into English, done by Edgar Taylor in 1823, here presented in an edition of 1874: Snow-Drop . In his translation, Taylor not only changes the Grimms' title, but softens their content as well. Link to a Europe-wide "reconstruction" of the Grimms' tale, done by Joseph Jacobs in his Europa's Fairy Book (1916): Snowwhite . Gold-Tree and Silver-Tree (Scotland). The Young Slave (Italy, Giambattista Basile). Maria, the Wicked Stepmother, and the Seven Robbers (Italy). The Crystal Casket (Italy). Link to Death of the Seven Dwarfs , a folk legend from Switzerland. Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Little Snow-White Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once upon a time in mid winter, when the snowflakes were falling like feathers from heaven, a beautiful queen sat sewing at her window, which had a frame of black ebony wood. As she sewed, she looked up at the snow and pricked her finger with her needle. Three drops of blood fell into the snow. The red on the white looked so beautiful, that she thought, "If only I had a child as white as snow, as red as blood, and as black as this frame." Soon afterward she had a little daughter that was as white as snow, as red as blood, and as black as ebony wood, and therefore they called her Little Snow-White. Now the queen was the most beautiful woman in all the land, and very proud of her beauty. She had a mirror, which she stood in front of every morning, and asked: Mirror, mirror, on the wall, Who in this land is fairest of all? And the mirror always said: You, my queen, are fairest of all. And then she knew for certain that no one in the world was more beautiful than she. Now Snow-White grew up, and when she was seven years old, she was so beautiful, that she surpassed even the queen herself. Now when the queen asked her mirror: Mirror, mirror, on the wall, Who in this land is fairest of all? The mirror said: You, my queen, are fair; it is true. But Little Snow-White is still A thousand times fairer than you. When the queen heard the mirror say this, she became pale with envy, and from that hour on, she hated Snow-White. Whenever she looked at her, she thought that Snow-White was to blame that she was no longer the most beautiful woman in the world. This turned her heart around. Her jealousy gave her no peace. Finally she summoned a huntsman and said to him, "Take Snow-White out into the woods to a remote spot, and stab her to death. As proof that she is dead bring her lungs and her liver back to me. I shall cook them with salt and eat them." The huntsman took Snow-White into the woods. When he took out his hunting knife to stab her, she began to cry, and begged fervently that he might spare her life, promising to run away into the woods and never return. The huntsman took pity on her because she was so beautiful, and he thought, "The wild animals will soon devour her anyway. I'm glad that I don't have to kill her." Just then a young boar came running by. He killed it, cut out its lungs and liver, and took them back to the queen as proof of Snow-White's death. She cooked them with salt and ate them, supposing that she had eaten Snow-White's lungs and liver. Snow-White was now all alone in the great forest. She was terribly afraid, and began to run. She ran over sharp stones and through thorns the entire day. Finally, just as the sun was about to set, she came to a little house. The house belonged to seven dwarfs. They were working in a mine, and not at home. Snow-White went inside and found everything to be small, but neat and orderly. There was a little table with seven little plates, seven little spoons, seven little knives and forks, seven little mugs, and against the wall there were seven little beds, all freshly made. Snow-White was hungry and thirsty, so she ate a few vegetables and a little bread from each little plate, and from each little glass she drank a drop of wine. Because she was so tired, she wanted to lie down and go to sleep. She tried each of the seven little beds, one after the other, but none felt right until she came to the seventh one, and she lay down in it and fell asleep. When night came, the seven dwarfs returned home from the work. They lit their seven little candles, and saw that someone had been in their house. The first one said, "Who has been sitting in my chair?" The second one, "Who has been eating from my plate?" The third one, "Who has been eating my bread?" The fourth one, "Who has been eating my vegetables?" The fifth one, "Who has been sticking with my fork?" The sixth one, "Who has been cutting with my knife?" The seventh one, "Who has been drinking from my mug?" Then the first one said, "Who stepped on my bed?" The second one, "And someone has been lying in my bed." And so forth until the seventh one, and when he looked at his bed, he found Snow-White lying there, fast asleep. The seven dwarfs all came running, and they cried out with amazement. They fetched their seven candles and looked at Snow-White. "Good heaven! Good heaven!" they cried. "She is so beautiful!" They liked her very much. They did not wake her up, but let her lie there in the bed. The seventh dwarf had to sleep with his companions, one hour with each one, and then the night was done. When Snow-White woke up, they asked her who she was and how she had found her way to their house. She told them how her mother had tried to kill her, how the huntsman had spared her life, how she had run the entire day, finally coming to their house. The dwarfs pitied her and said, "If you will keep house for us, and cook, sew, make beds, wash, and knit, and keep everything clean and orderly, then you can stay here, and you'll have everything that you want. We come home in the evening, and supper must be ready by then, but we spend the days digging for gold in the mine. You will be alone then. Watch out for the queen, and do not let anyone in." The queen thought that she was again the most beautiful woman in the land, and the next morning she stepped before the mirror and asked: Mirror, mirror, on the wall, Who in this land is fairest of all? The mirror answered once again: You, my queen, are fair; it is true. But Little Snow-White beyond the seven mountains Is a thousand times fairer than you. It startled the queen to hear this, and she knew that she had been deceived, that the huntsman had not killed Snow-White. Because only the seven dwarfs lived in the seven mountains, she knew at once that they must have rescued her. She began to plan immediately how she might kill her, because she would have no peace until the mirror once again said that she was the most beautiful woman in the land. At last she thought of something to do. She disguised herself as an old peddler woman and colored her face, so that no one would recognize her, and went to the dwarf's house. Knocking on the door she called out, "Open up. Open up. I'm the old peddler woman with good wares for sale." Snow-White peered out the window, "What do you have?" "Bodice laces, dear child," said the old woman, and held one up. It was braided from yellow, red, and blue silk. "Would you like this one?" "Oh, yes," said Snow-White, thinking, "I can let the old woman come in. She means well." She unbolted the door and bargained for the bodice laces. "You are not laced up properly," said the old woman. "Come here, I'll do it better." Snow-White stood before her, and she took hold of the laces and pulled them so tight that Snow-White could not breathe, and she fell down as if she were dead. Then the old woman was satisfied, and she went away. Nightfall soon came, and the seven dwarfs returned home. They were horrified to find their dear Snow-White lying on the ground as if she were dead. They lifted her up and saw that she was laced up too tightly. They cut the bodice laces in two, and then she could breathe, and she came back to life. "It must have been the queen who tried to kill you," they said. "Take care and do not let anyone in again." The queen asked her mirror: Mirror, mirror, on the wall, Who in this land is fairest of all? The mirror answered once again: You, my queen, are fair; it is true. But Little Snow-White with the seven dwarfs Is a thousand times fairer than you. She was so horrified that the blood all ran to her heart, because she knew that Snow-White had come back to life. Then for an entire day and a night she planned how she might catch her. She made a poisoned comb, disguised herself differently, and went out again. She knocked on the door, but Snow-White called out, "I am not allowed to let anyone in." Then she pulled out the comb, and when Snow-White saw how it glistened, and noted that the woman was a complete stranger, she opened the door, and bought the comb from her. "Come, let me comb your hair," said the peddler woman. She had barely stuck the comb into Snow-White's hair, before the girl fell down and was dead. "That will keep you lying there," said the queen. And she went home with a light heart. The dwarfs came home just in time. They saw what had happened and pulled the poisoned comb from her hair. Snow-White opened her eyes and came back to life. She promised the dwarfs not to let anyone in again. The queen stepped before her mirror: Mirror, mirror, on the wall, Who in this land is fairest of all? The mirror answered: You, my queen, are fair; it is true. But Little Snow-White with the seven dwarfs Is a thousand times fairer than you. When the queen heard this, she shook and trembled with anger, "Snow-White will die, if it costs me my life!" Then she went into her most secret room -- no one else was allowed inside -- and she made a poisoned, poisoned apple. From the outside it was red and beautiful, and anyone who saw it would want it. Then she disguised herself as a peasant woman, went to the dwarfs' house and knocked on the door. Snow-White peeped out and said, "I'm not allowed to let anyone in. The dwarfs have forbidden it most severely." "If you don't want to, I can't force you," said the peasant woman. "I am selling these apples, and I will give you one to taste." "No, I can't accept anything. The dwarfs don't want me to." "If you are afraid, then I will cut the apple in two and eat half of it. Here, you eat the half with the beautiful red cheek!" Now the apple had been so artfully made that only the red half was poisoned. When Snow-White saw that the peasant woman was eating part of the apple, her desire for it grew stronger, so she finally let the woman hand her the other half through the window. She bit into it, but she barely had the bite in her mouth when she fell to the ground dead. The queen was happy, went home, and asked her mirror: Mirror, mirror, on the wall, Who in this land is fairest of all? And it answered: You, my queen, are fairest of all. "Now I'll have some peace," she said, "because once again I'm the most beautiful woman in the land. Snow-White will remain dead this time." That evening the dwarfs returned home from the mines. Snow-White was lying on the floor, and she was dead. They loosened her laces and looked in her hair for something poisonous, but nothing helped. They could not bring her back to life. They laid her on a bier, and all seven sat next to her and cried and cried for three days. They were going to bury her, but they saw that she remained fresh. She did not look at all like a dead person, and she still had beautiful red cheeks. They had a glass coffin made for her, and laid her inside, so that she could be seen easily. They wrote her name and her ancestry on it in gold letters, and one of them always stayed at home and kept watch over her. Snow-White lay there in the coffin a long, long time, and she did not decay. She was still as white as snow and as red as blood, and if she had been able to open her eyes, they still would have been as black as ebony wood. She lay there as if she were asleep. One day a young prince came to the dwarfs' house and wanted shelter for the night. When he came into their parlor and saw Snow-White lying there in a glass coffin, illuminated so beautifully by seven little candles, he could not get enough of her beauty. He read the golden inscription and saw that she was the daughter of a king. He asked the dwarfs to sell him the coffin with the dead Snow-White, but they would not do this for any amount of gold. Then he asked them to give her to him, for he could not live without being able to see her, and he would keep her, and honor her as his most cherished thing on earth. Then the dwarfs took pity on him and gave him the coffin. The prince had it carried to his castle, and had it placed in a room where he sat by it the whole day, never taking his eyes from it. Whenever he had to go out and was unable to see Snow-White, he became sad. And he could not eat a bite, unless the coffin was standing next to him. Now the servants who always had to carry the coffin to and fro became angry about this. One time one of them opened the coffin, lifted Snow-White upright, and said, "We are plagued the whole day long, just because of such a dead girl," and he hit her in the back with his hand. Then the terrible piece of apple that she had bitten off came out of her throat, and Snow-White came back to life. She walked up to the prince, who was beside himself with joy to see his beloved Snow-White alive. They sat down together at the table and ate with joy. Their wedding was set for the next day, and Snow-White's godless mother was invited as well. That morning she stepped before the mirror and said: Mirror, mirror, on the wall, Who in this land is fairest of all? The mirror answered: You, my queen, are fair; it is true. But the young queen Is a thousand times fairer than you. She was horrified to hear this, and so overtaken with fear that she could not say anything. Still, her jealousy drove her to go to the wedding and see the young queen. When she arrived she saw that it was Snow-White. Then they put a pair of iron shoes into the fire until they glowed, and she had to put them on and dance in them. Her feet were terribly burned, and she could not stop until she had danced herself to death. Source: Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 1st ed. (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), v. 1, no. 53, pp. 238-50. Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 1998-2002. A note about the Grimms' name "Sneewittchen": Both elements of this compound word are in Low German, although the tale itself was recorded in High German. The High German form of the heroine's name would be Schneeweißchen. The Grimms used both forms in their first edition, titling the story "Sneewittchen (Schneeweißchen)." Some differences between the edition of 1812 and later versions: Beginning with the edition of 1819, the Grimms add the statement that Snow-White's mother died during childbirth, and that her father remarried. Note that in the first edition, presumably the version closest to its oral sources, Snow-White's jealous antagonist is her own mother, not a stepmother. Beginning with the edition of 1819, the poisoned apple is dislodged when a servant accidentally stumbles while carrying the coffin to the prince's castle. Link to the Grimm Brothers Home Page Return to the table of contents . Gold-Tree and Silver-Tree Scotland Once upon a time there was a king who had a wife, whose name was Silver-Tree, and a daughter, whose name was Gold-Tree. On a certain day of the days, Gold-Tree and Silver-Tree went to a glen, where there was a well, and in it there was a trout. Said Silver-Tree, "Troutie, bonny little fellow, am not I the most beautiful queen in the world?" "Oh! indeed you are not." "Who then?" "Why, Gold-Tree, your daughter." Silver-Tree went home, blind with rage. She lay down on the bed, and vowed she would never be well until she could get the heart and the liver of Gold-Tree, her daughter, to eat. At nightfall the king came home, and it was told him that Silver-Tree, his wife, was very ill. He went where she was, and asked her what was wrong with her. "Oh! only a thing which you may heal if you like." "Oh! indeed there is nothing at all which I could do for you that I would not do." "If I get the heart and the liver of Gold-Tree, my daughter, to eat, I shall be well." Now it happened about this time that the son of a great king had come from abroad to ask Gold-Tree for marrying. The king now agreed to this, and they went abroad. The king then went and sent his lads to the hunting hill for a he goat, and he gave its heart and its liver to his wife to eat; and she rose well and healthy. A year after this Silver-Tree went to the glen, where there was the well in which there was the trout. "Troutie, bonny little fellow," said she, "am not I the most beautiful queen in the world?" "Oh! indeed you are not." "Who then?" "Why, Gold-Tree, your daughter." "Oh! well, it is long since she was living. It is a year since I ate her heart and liver." "Oh! indeed she is not dead. She is married to a great prince abroad." Silver-Tree went home, and begged the king to put the long-ship in order, and said, "I am going to see my dear Gold-Tree, for it is so long since I saw her." The long-ship was put in order, and they went away. It was Silver-Tree herself that was at the helm, and she steered the ship so well that they were not long at all before they arrived. The prince was out hunting on the hills. Gold-Tree knew the long-ship of her father coming. "Oh!" said she to the servants, "my mother is coming, and she will kill me." "She shall not kill you at all; we will lock you in a room where she cannot get near you." This is how it was done; and when Silver-Tree came ashore, she began to cry out, "Come to meet your own mother, when she comes to see you." Gold-Tree said that she could not, that she was locked in the room, and that she could not get out of it. "Will you not put out," said Silver-Tree, "your little finger through the keyhole, so that your own mother may give a kiss to it?" She put out her little finger, and Silver-Tree went and put a poisoned stab in it, and Gold-Tree fell dead. When the prince came home, and found Gold-Tree dead, he was in great sorrow, and when he saw how beautiful she was, he did not bury her at all, but he locked her in a room where nobody would get near her. In the course of time he married again, and the whole house was under the hand of this wife but one room, and he himself always kept the key of that room. On a certain day of the days he forgot to take the key with him, and the second wife got into the room. What did she see there but the most beautiful woman that she ever saw. She began to turn and try to wake her, and she noticed the poisoned stab in her finger. She took the stab out, and Gold-Tree rose alive, as beautiful as she was ever. At the fall of night the prince came home from the hunting hill, looking very downcast. "What gift," said his wife, "would you give me that I could make you laugh?" "Oh! indeed, nothing could make me laugh, except Gold-Tree were to come alive again." "Well, you'll find her alive down there in the room." When the prince saw Gold-Tree alive her made great rejoicings, and he began to kiss her, and kiss her, and kiss her. Said the second wife, "Since she is the first one you had it is better for you to stick to her, and I will go away." "Oh! indeed you shall not go away, but I shall have both of you." At the end of the year, Silver-Tree went to the glen, where there was the well, in which there was the trout. "Troutie, bonny little fellow," said she, "am not I the most beautiful queen in the world?" "Oh! indeed you are not." "Who then?" "Why Gold-Tree, your daughter." "Oh! well, she is not alive. It is a year since I put the poisoned stab into her finger." "Oh! indeed she is not dead at all, at all." Silver-Tree went home, and begged the king to put the long-ship in order, for that she was going to see her dear Gold-Tree, as it was so long since she saw her. The long-ship was put in order, and they went away. It was Silver-Tree herself that was at the helm, and she steered the ship so well that they were not long at all before they arrived. The prince was out hunting on the hills. Gold-Tree knew her father's ship coming. "Oh!" said she, "my mother is coming, and she will kill me." "Not at all," said the second wife; "we will go down to meet her." Silver-Tree came ashore. "Come down, Gold tree, love," said she, "for your own mother has come to you with a precious drink." "It is a custom in this country," said the second wife, "that the person who offers a drink takes a draught out of it first." Silver-Tree put her mouth to it, and the second wife went and struck it so that some of it went down her throat, and she fell dead. they had only to carry her home a dead corpse and bury her. The prince and his two wives were long alive after this, pleased and peaceful. I left them there. Source: Joseph Jacobs, Celtic Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1892), no. 11, pp. 88-92 . Jacobs' source: Kenneth Macleod, Celtic Magazine , vol. 13 (1888), pp. 213-18 . Remarks by Joseph Jacobs: It is unlikely, I should say impossible, that this tale, with the incident of the dormant heroine, should have arisen independently in the Highlands; it is not likely an importation from abroad. Yet in it occurs a most "primitive" incident, the bigamous household of the hero.... On the "survival" method of investigation this would possibly be used as evidence for polygamy in the Highlands. Yet if, as is probably, the story came from abroad, this trait may have come with it, and only implies polygamy in the original home of the tale. Return to the table of contents . The Young Slave Italy, Giambattista Basile, Il Pentamerone Lisa is born from a rose-leaf, and dieth through a fairy's curse; her mother layeth her in a chamber and biddeth her brother not to open the door. But his wife being very jealous, wishing to see what is shut therein, openeth the door, and findeth Lisa well and alive, and attiring her in slave raiments, treateth her with cruelty. Lisa being at last recognised by her uncle, he sendeth his wife home to her relations, and giveth his niece in marriage. In days of yore, and in times long gone before, there lived a baron of Serva-Scura, and he had a young sister, a damsel of uncommon beauty, who often fared to the gardens in company of other young damsels of her age. One day of the days they went as usual, and beheld a rose-tree which had a beautiful fully opened rose upon it, and they agreed to wager that whosoever should jump clear above the tree without damaging the rose would win so much. Then the damsels began to jump one after the other, but none could clear the tree; till it coming to Cilia's turn (thus was the baron's sister hight), she took a little longer distance, and ran quickly, and jumped, and cleared the tree without touching the rose, and only a single leaf fell to the ground. She quickly picked it up, and swallowed it before any of the others perceived aught, and thus won the wager. Three days had hardly passed, when she felt that she was with child, and finding that such was the case she nearly died with grief, well wotting that she had done naught to bring such a catastrophe upon her, and she could not suppose in any way how this had occurred. Therefore she ran to the house of some fairies, her friends, and relating to them her case, they told her that there was no doubt but that she was with child of the leaf she had swallowed. Cilia hearing this hid her state as long as it was possible, but the time came at length for her delivery, and she gave birth secretly to a beauteous woman-child, her face like a moon in her fourteenth night, and she named her Lisa, and sent her to the fairies to be brought up. Now each of the fairies gave to the child a charm; but the last of them, wanting to run and see her, in so doing twisted the foot, and for the anguish of pain she felt cursed her, saying that when she should reach her seventh year, her mother in combing her hair would forget the comb sticking in the hair on her head, and this would cause her to die. And years went by till the time came, and the mishap took place, and the wretched mother was in despair at this great misfortune, and after weeping and wailing, ordered seven crystal chests one within the other, and had her child put within them, and then the chest was laid in a distant chamber in the palace; and she kept the key in her pocket. But daily after this her health failed, her cark and care bringing her to the last step of her life; and when she felt her end drawing near, she sent for her brother, and said to him, "O my brother, I feel death slowly and surely come upon me, therefore I leave to thee all my belongings. Be thou the only lord and master; only must thou take a solemn oath that thou wilt never open the furtherest chamber in this palace, of which I consign to thee the key, which thou wilt keep within thy desk." Her brother, who loved her dearly, gave her the required promise, and she bade him farewell and died. After a year had passed the baron took to himself a wife, and being one day invited to a hunt by some of his friends, he gave the palace in charge to his wife, begging her not to open the forbidden chamber, whose key was in his desk. But no sooner had he left the palace than dire suspicion entered in her mind, and turned by jealousy, and fired by curiosity (the first dower of womankind), she took the key, and opened the door, and beheld the seven crystal chests, through which she could perceive a beauteous child, lying as it were in a deep sleep. And she had grown as any other child of her age would, and the chests had lengthened with her. The jealous woman, sighting this charming creature, cried, "Bravo my priest; key in waistband, and ram within; this is the reason why I was so earnestly begged not to open this door, so that I should not behold Mohammed, whom he worshippeth within these chests." Thus saying, she pulled her out by the hair of her head; and whilst so doing the comb which her mother had left on her head fell off, and she came again to life, and cried out, "O mother mine, O mother mine." Answered the baroness,"I'll give thee mamma and papa;" and embittered as a slave, and an-angered as a bitch keeping watch on her young, and with poison full as an asp, she at once cut off the damsel's hair, and gave her a good drubbing, and arrayed her in rags. Every day she beat her on her head, and gave her black eyes, and scratched her face and made her mouth to bleed just as if she had eaten raw pigeons. But when her husband came back and saw this child so badly treated, he asked the reason of such cruelty; and she answered that she was a slave-girl sent her by her aunt, so wicked and perverse that it was necessary to beat her so as to keep her in order. After a time the baron had occasion to go to a country fair, and he, being a very noble and kind-hearted lord, asked of all his household people from the highest to the lowest not leaving out even the cats, what thing they would like him to bring for them, and one bade him buy one thing, and another another, till at the last he came to the young slave-girl. But his wife did not act as a Christian should, and said, "Put this slave in the dozen, and let us do all things within the rule, as we all should like to make water in the same pot; leave her alone and let us not fill her with presumption." But the lord, being by nature kind, would ask the young slave what she should like him to bring her, and she replied, "I should like to have a doll, a knife, and some pumice stone; and if thou shouldst forget it, mayst thou be unable to pass the river which will be in thy way." And the baron fared forth, and bought all the gifts he had promised to bring, but he forgot that which his niece had bade him bring; and when the lord on his way home came to the river, the river threw up stones, and carried away the trees from the mountain to the shore, and thus cast the basis of fear, and uplifted the wall of wonderment, so that it was impossible for the lord to pass that way; and he at last remembered the curse of the young slave, and turning back, bought her the three things, and then returned home, and gave to each the gifts he had brought. And he gave to Lisa also what pertained to her. As soon as she had her gifts in her possession, she retired in the kitchen, and putting the doll before her, she began to weep, and wail, and lament, telling that inanimate piece of wood the story of her travails, speaking as she would have done to a living being; and perceiving that the doll answered not, she took up the knife and sharpening it on the pumice stone, said, "If thou wilt not answer me, I shall kill myself, and thus will end the feast;" and the doll swelled up as a bagpipe, and at last answered, "Yes, I did hear thee, I am not deaf." Now this went on for several days, till one day the baron, who had one of his portraits hung up near the kitchen, heard all this weeping and talking of the young slave-girl, and wanting to see to whom she spake, he put his eye to the keyhole, and beheld Lisa with the doll before her, to whom she related how her mother had jumped over the rose-tree, how she had swallowed the leaf, how herself had been born, how the fairies had each given her a charm, how the youngest fairy had cursed her, how the comb had been left on her head by her mother, how she had been put within seven crystal chests and shut up in a distant chamber, how her mother had died, and how she had left the key to her brother. Then she spoke of his going a-hunting, and the wife's jealousy, how she disobeyed her husband's behest and entered within the chamber, and how she had cut her hair, and how she treated her like a slave and beat her cruelly, and she wept and lamented saying, "Answer me, O my doll; if not, I shall kill myself with this knife;" and sharpening it on the pumice stone, she was going to slay herself, when the baron kicked down the door, and snatched the knife out of her hands, and bade her relate to him the story. When she had ended, he embraced her as his own niece, and led her out of his palace to the house of a relative, where he commanded that she should be well entreated so that she should become cheerful in mind and healthy of body, as owing to the ill treatment she had endured she had lost all strength and healthful hue. And Lisa, receiving kindly treatment, in a few months became as beautiful as a goddess, and her uncle sent for her to come to his palace, and gave a great banquet in her honour, and presented her to his guests as his niece, and bade Lisa relate to them the story of her past troubles. Hearing the cruelty with which she had been entreated by his wife, all the guests wept. And he bade his wife return to her family, as for her jealousy and unseemly behaviour she was not worthy to be his mate; and after a time gave to his niece a handsome and worthy husband whom she loved; which touched the level that: When a man least goods of any kind expecteth, The heavens will pour upon him every grace. Source: Giambattista Basile, Il Pentamerone; or, The Tale of Tales , translated by Richard Burton, vol. 1 (London: Henry and Company, 1893), day 2, tale 8, pp. 205-210 . This story combines elements of Snow White (type 709) and Sleeping Beauty (type 410) tales. Giambattista Basile was born about 1575 in Naples and died 1632 in Giugliano, Campania. His Lo cunto de li cunti (The Story of Stories) was published in 1634, and named Il pentamerone by an editor because of its similarity to Boccaccio's Decamerone. The framework of Lo cunto de li cunti provides a context for ten women to tell one story each every day for five days. The fifty resulting stories, all based on oral tradition, comprise one of the monumental folktale collections of all time. Return to the table of contents . Maria, the Wicked Stepmother, and the Seven Robbers Italy Once upon a time there was a man whose wife died, and he had only a little daughter, whose name was Maria. Maria went to school to a woman who taught her sewing and knitting. In the evening when she left for home the woman would always say to her, "Give your father my kindest greetings." Because of these friendly greetings the man thought, "She would be a wife for me," and he married the woman. After they were married, the woman became very unfriendly toward poor Maria, for stepmothers have always been that way, and with time she could not stand her at all. Then she said to her husband, "The girl eats too much of our bread. We will have to get rid of her." But the man said, "I cannot kill my child!" Then the woman said, "Tomorrow take her with you out into the country and leave her there alone, so that she will not be able to find her way back home." The next day the man called his daughter and said to her, "We are going out into the country. We will take something to eat with us." Then he got a large loaf of bread, and they set forth. However, Maria was clever, and she filled her pockets with bran. As she walked along behind her father, from time to time she threw down a little pile of bran onto the pathway. After walking for many hours they came to the top of a steep cliff. Her father dropped the loaf of bread over the cliff, then cried out, "Oh, Maria, our bread fell down there!" "Father," said Maria, "I will climb down and get it." So she climbed down the cliff and got the bread, but by the time she had climbed back up to the top, her father had gone away, and Maria was all alone. She started to cry, for she was very far from home, and in a strange place. But then she thought about the bran and took courage. Following the bran, she finally arrived home again, late that night. "Oh, father," she said, "why did you leave me alone?" The man comforted her and talked to her until he had reassured her. The stepmother was very angry that Maria had found the way back, and some time later she again told her husband that he should take Maria out into the country and abandon her in the woods. The next morning the man called his daughter once again, and they set forth. The father again carried a loaf of bread, but Maria forgot to take the bran with her. In the woods they came to an even steeper and higher cliff. The father again dropped the bread over the edge, and Maria had to climb down to get it. When she arrived back at the top, her father had gone away, and she was alone. She began to cry bitterly, and she ran one way and the other for a long time, only to find herself even deeper in the dark woods. Evening came, and suddenly she saw a light. She walked toward it and came to a little house. Inside she found a set table and seven beds, but no people were there. The house belonged to seven robbers. Maria hid behind a dough trough, and soon the seven robbers returned home. They ate and drank, and then went to bed. The next morning they left, but the youngest brother remained at home in order to cook the food and clean the house. After they had left, the youngest brother went out to buy food. Then Maria came out from behind the dough trough, swept and cleaned the house, and then put the kettle on the fire in order to cook the beans. Then once again she hid behind the dough trough. When the youngest brother returned home he was amazed to see everything so clean, and when his brothers came back, he told them what had happened. They were all astonished and could not imagine how it had happened. The next day the second brother remained at home alone. He pretended that he too was going away, but he returned at once and saw Maria, who had come out once again to clean up the house. Maria was frightened when she saw the robber. "Oh," she begged, " for heaven's sake, do not kill me!" "Who are you?" asked the robber. Then she told him about her wicked stepmother, and how her father had abandoned her in the woods, and how for two days she had been hiding behind the dough trough. "You don't have to be afraid of us," said the robber. "Stay here with us and be our sister, and cook, sew, and wash for us." When the other brothers returned home, they were satisfied with this, so Maria stayed with the seven robbers, did their housekeeping, and was always quiet and diligent. One day as she was sitting by the window sewing, a poor old woman came by and asked for alms. "Oh," said Maria, "I don't have much, for I myself am a poor, unhappy girl, but I will give you what I have." "Why are you so unhappy?" asked the beggar woman. Then Maria told her how she had left home and had come here. The poor woman went forth and told the wicked stepmother that Maria was still alive. When the stepmother heard this she was very angry, and she gave the beggar woman a ring that she was to take to poor Maria. The ring was a magic ring. Eight days later the poor woman came again to Maria to beg for alms, and when Maria gave her something, she said, "Look, my child, I have here a beautiful ring. Because you have been so good to me, I want to give it to you." Suspecting nothing, Maria took the ring, but when she put it on her finger she fell down dead. When the robbers returned home and found Maria on the floor, they were very sad, and they cried bitterly for her. Then they made a beautiful coffin and laid Maria inside it, after having adorned her with the most beautiful jewelry. They also put a large amount of gold in the coffin, which they then set on an oxcart. They drove the oxcart into the city. When they came to the king's castle they saw that the stall door was wide open. They drove the oxen inside, in order to bring the cart into the stall. This caused the horses to become very uneasy, and they began rearing up and making noise. Hearing the noise, the king sent someone down to ask the stall-master what had happened. The stall-master answered that a cart had been driven into the stall. No one was with the cart, but on it there was a beautiful coffin. The king ordered that the coffin be brought to his room, and there he had it opened. When he saw the beautiful dead girl inside, he began to cry bitterly, and he could not leave her. He had four large wax candles brought and had them placed at the four corners of the coffin and lit. Then he sent everyone out of the room, barred the door, fell onto his knees before the coffin, and wept hot tears. When it was time to eat, his mother sent for him, asking him to come. He did not answer at once, but instead wept all the more fervently. Then the old queen herself came and knocked on the door and asked him to open it, but he did not answer. She looked through the keyhole, and when she saw that her son was kneeling next to a corpse, she had the door broken down. However, when she saw the beautiful girl, she herself was very moved, and she leaned over Maria and took her hand. Seeing the beautiful ring, she thought that it would be a shame to let it be buried along with the corpse, so she pulled it off. Then all at once the dead Maria came to life again. The young king said joyfully to his mother, "This girl shall be my wife!" The old queen answered, "Yes, so shall it be!" and she embraced Maria. Thus Maria became the king's wife, and the queen. They lived joyfully and in splendor until they died. Source: Laura Gonzenbach, "Maria, die böse Stiefmutter und die sieben Räuber," Sicilianische Märchen, aus dem Volksmund gesammelt , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1870), no. 2, pp. 4-7 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002. Return to the table of contents . The Crystal Casket Italy There was once a widower who had a daughter. This daughter was between ten and twelve years old. Her father sent her to school, and as she was all alone in the world commended her always to her teacher. Now, the teacher, seeing that the child had no mother, fell in love with the father, and kept saying to the girl, "Ask your father if he would like me for a wife." This she said to her every day, and at last the girl said, "Papa, the school-mistress is always asking me if you will marry her." The father said, "Eh! my daughter, if I take another wife, you will have great troubles." But the girl persisted, and finally the father was persuaded to go one evening to the school-mistress' house. When she saw him she was well pleased, and they settled the marriage in a few days. Poor child! How bitterly she had to repent having found a stepmother so ungrateful and cruel to her! She sent her every day out on a terrace to water a pot of basil, and it was so dangerous that if she fell she would go into a large river. One day there came by a large eagle, and said to her, "What are you doing her?" She was weeping because she saw how great the danger was of falling into the stream. The eagle said to her, "Get on my back, and I will carry you away, and you will be happier than with your new mamma." After a long journey they reached a great plain, where they found a beautiful palace all of crystal; the eagle knocked at the door and said, "Open, my ladies, open! for I have brought you a pretty girl." When the people in the palace opened the door, and saw that lovely girl, they were amazed, and kissed and caressed her. Meanwhile the door was closed, and they remained peaceful and contended. Let us return to the eagle, who thought she was doing a spite to the stepmother. One day the eagle flew away to the terrace where the stepmother was watering the basil. "Where is your daughter?" asked the eagle. "Eh!" she replied, "perhaps she fell from this terrace and went into the river; I have not heard from her in ten days." The eagle answered, "What a fool you are! I carried her away; seeing that you treated her so harshly I carried her away to my fairies, and she is very well." Then the eagle flew away. The stepmother, filled with rage and jealousy, called a witch from the city, and said to her, "You see my daughter is alive, and is in the house of some fairies of an eagle which often comes upon my terrace; now you must do me the favor to find some way to kill this stepdaughter of mine, for I am afraid that some day or other she will return, and my husband, discovering this matter, will certainly kill me." The witch answered, "Oh, you need not be afraid of that; leave it to me." What did the witch do? She had made a little basketful of sweetmeats, in which she put a charm; then she wrote a letter, pretending that it was her father, who, having learned where she was, wished to make her this present, and the letter pretended that her father was so glad to hear that she was with the fairies. Let us leave the witch who is arranging all this deception, and return to Ermellina (for so the young girl was named). The fairies had said to her, "See, Ermellina, we are going away, and shall be absent four days; now in this time take good care not to open the door to anyone, for some treachery is being prepared for you by your stepmother." She promised to open the door to no one: "Do not be anxious, I am well off, and my stepmother has nothing to do with me." But it was not so. The fairies went away, and the next day when Ermellina was alone, she heard a knocking at the door, and said to herself, "Knock away! I don't open to anyone." But meanwhile the blows redoubled, and curiosity forced her to look out of the window. What did she see? She saw one the servant girls of her own home (for the witch had disguised herself as one of her father's servants). "O my dear Ermellina," she said, "your father is shedding tears of sorrow for you, because he really believed you were dead, but the eagle which carried you off came and told him the good news that you were here with the fairies. Meanwhile your father, not knowing what civility to show you, for he understands very well that you are in need of nothing, has thought to send you this little basket of sweetmeats." Ermellina had not yet opened the door; the servant begged her to come down and take the basket and the letter, but she said, "No, I wish nothing!" but finally, since women, and especially young girls, are fond of sweetmeats, she descended and opened the door. When the witch had given her the basket, she said, "Eat this," and broke off for her a piece of the sweetmeats which she had poisoned. When Ermellina took the first mouthful the old woman disappeared. Ermellina had scarcely time to close the door, when she fell down on the stairs. When the fairies returned they knocked at the door, but no one opened it for them; then they perceived that there had been some treachery, and began to weep. Then the chief of the fairies said, "We must break open the door," and so they did, and saw Ermellina dead on the stairs. Her other friends who loved her so dearly begged the chief of the fairies to bring her to life, but she would not, "for," she said, "she has disobeyed me." But one and the other asked her until she consented; she opened Ermellina's mouth, took out a piece of the sweetmeat which she had not yet swallowed, raised her up, and Ermellina came to life again. We can imagine what a pleasure it was for her fiends; but the chief of the fairies reproved her for her disobedience, and she promised not to do so again. Once more the fairies were obliged to depart. Their chief said, "Remember, Ermellina: The first time I cured you, but the second I will have nothing to do with you." Ermellina said they need not worry, that she would not open to anyone. But it was not so; for the eagle, thinking to increase her stepmother's anger, told her again that Ermellina was alive. The stepmother denied it all to the eagle, but she summoned anew the witch, and told her that her stepdaughter was still alive, saying, "Either you will really kill her, or I will be avenged on you." The old woman, finding herself caught, told her to buy a very handsome dress, one of the handsomest she could find, and transformed herself into a tailoress belonging to the family, took the dress, departed, went to poor Ermellina, knocked at the door and said, "Open, open, for I am your tailoress." Ermellina looked out of the window and saw her tailoress; and was, in truth, a little confused (indeed, anyone would have been so). The tailoress said, "Come down, I must fit a dress on you." She replied, "No, no; for I have been deceived once." "But I am not the old woman," replied the tailoress, "you know me, for I have always made your dresses." Poor Ermellina was persuaded, and descended the stairs; the tailoress took to flight while Ermellina was yet buttoning up the dress, and disappeared. Ermellina closed the door, and was mounting the stairs; but it was not permitted her to go up, for she fell down dead. Let us return to the fairies, who came home and knocked at the door; but what good did it do to knock! There was no longer anyone there. They began to weep. The chief of the fairies said, "I told you that she would betray me again; but now I will have nothing more to do with her." So they broke open the door, and saw the poor girl with the beautiful dress on; but she was dead. They all wept, because they really loved her. But there was nothing to do; the chief struck her enchanted wand, and commanded a beautiful rich casket all covered with diamonds and other precious stones to appear; then the others made a beautiful garland of flowers and gold, put it on the young girl, and then laid her in the casket, which was so rich and beautiful that it was marvelous to behold. Then the old fairy struck her wand as usual and commanded a handsome horse, the like of which not even the king possessed. Then they took the casket, put it on the horse's back, and led him into the public square of the city, and the chief of the fairies said, "Go, and do not stop until you find someone who says to you, 'Stop, for pity's sake, for I have lost my horse for you.'" Now let us leave the afflicted fairies, and turn our attention to the horse, which ran away at full speed. Who happened to pass at that moment? The son of a king (the name of this king is not known); and saw this horse with that wonder on its back. Then the king began to spur his horse, and rode him so hard that he killed him, and had to leave him dead in the road; but the king kept running after the other horse. The poor king could endure it no longer; he saw himself lost, and exclaimed, "Stop, for pity's sake, for I have lost my horse for you!" Then the horse stopped (for those were the words). When the king saw that beautiful girl dead in the casket, he thought no more about his own horse, but took the other to the city. The king's mother knew that her son had gone hunting; when she saw him returning with this loaded horse, she did not know what to think. The son had no father, wherefore he was all powerful. He reached the palace, had the horse unloaded, and the casket carried to his chamber; then he called his mother and said, "Mother, I went hunting, but I have found a wife." "But what is it? A doll? A dead woman?" "Mother," replied her son, "don't trouble yourself about what it is, it is my wife." His mother began to laugh, and withdrew to her own room (what could she do, poor mother?). Now this poor king no longer went hunting, took no diversion, did not even go to the table, but ate in his own room. By a fatality it happened that war was declared against him, and he was obliged to depart. He called his mother, and said, "Mother, I wish two careful chambermaids, whose business it shall be to guard this casket; for if on my return I find that anything has happened to my casket, I shall have the chambermaids killed." His mother, who loved him, said, "Go, my son, fear nothing, for I myself will watch over your casket." He wept several days at being obliged to abandon this treasure of his, but there was no help for it, he had to go. After his departure he did nothing but commend his wife (so he called her) to his mother in his letters. Let us return to the mother, who no longer thought about the matter, not even to have the casket dusted; but all at once there came a letter which informed her that the king had been victorious, and should return to his palace in a few days. The mother called the chambermaids, and said to them, "Girls, we are ruined." They replied, "Why, Highness?" "Because my son will be back in a few days, and how have we taken care of the doll?" They answered, "True, true; now let us go and wash the doll's face." They went to the king's room and saw that the doll's face and hands were covered with dust and fly specks, so they took a sponge and washed her face, but some drops of water fell on her dress and spotted it. The poor chambermaids began to weep, and went to the queen for advice. The queen said, "Do you know what to do! Call a tailoress, and have a dress precisely like this bought, and take off this one before my son comes." They did so, and the chambermaids went to the room and began to unbutton the dress. The moment that they took off the first sleeve, Ermellina opened her eyes. The poor chambermaids sprang up in terror, but one of the most courageous said, "I am a woman, and so is this one; she will not eat me." To cut the matter short, she took off thee dress, and when it was removed Ermellina began to get out of the casket to walk about and see where she was. The chambermaids fell on their knees before her and begged her to tell them who she was. She, poor girl, told them the whole story. Then she said, "I wish to know where I am." Then the chambermaids called the king's mother to explain it to her. The mother did not fail to tell her everything, and she, poor girl, did nothing but weep penitently, thinking of what the fairies had done for her. The king was on the point of arriving, and his mother said to the doll, "Come her; put on one of my best dresses." In short, she arrayed her like a queen. Then came her son. They shut the doll up in a small room, so that she could not be seen. The king came with great joy, with trumpets blowing, and banners flying for the victory. But he took no interest in all this, and ran at once to his room to see the doll; the chambermaids fell on their knees before him saying that the doll smelled so badly that they could not stay in the palace, and were obliged to bury her. The king would not listen to this excuse, but at once called two of the palace servants to erect the gallows. His mother comforted him in vain: "My son, it was a dead woman." "No, no, I will not listen to any reasons; dead or alive, you should have left it for me." Finally, when his mother saw that he was in earnest about the gallows, she rang a little bell, and there cam forth no longer the doll, but a very beautiful girl, whose like was never seen. The king was amazed, and said, "What is this!" Then his mother, the chambermaids, and Ermellina were obliged to tell him all that had happened. He said, "Mother, since I adored her when dead, and called her my wife, now I mean her to be my wife in truth." "Yes, my son," replied his mother, "do so, for I am willing." They arranged the wedding, and in a few days were man and wife. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 21, pp. 326-31 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Grimm Brothers Home Page Sleeping Beauty . More tales about heroines caught up in a death-like sleep Snow White by Kay E. Vandergrift, Rutgers University. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 23, 2022. The Sorcerer's Apprentice The Sorcerer's Apprentice folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 325* and migratory legends of Christiansen type 3020 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2008 Contents Eucrates and Pancrates, the Egyptian Miracle Worker (Assyria, Lucian). Link to Goethe's ballad "Der Zauberlehrling." The original German text with English translations. Magic Book (Germany). The Book of Magic (Russia). The Master and His Pupil (England). The Schoolmaster at Bury (England). The Farmer's Wife of Deloraine (Scotland). Mass John Scott (Scotland). The Magic Whistle (Iceland). Links to related sites. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Eucrates and Pancrates, the Egyptian Miracle Worker Lucian "I will tell you," [said Eucrates,] "another incident derived from my own experience, not from hearsay. Perhaps even you, Tychiades, when you have heard it, may be convinced of the truth of the story." When I was living in Egypt during my youth (my father had sent me traveling for the purpose of completing my education), I took it into my head to sail up to Koptos and go from there to the statue of Memnon in order to hear it sound that marvelous salutation to the rising sun. Well, what I heard from it was not a meaningless voice, as in the general experience of common people; Memnon himself actually opened his mouth and delivered me an oracle in seven verses, and if it were not too much of a digression, I would have repeated the very verses for you. But on the voyage up, there chanced to be sailing with us a man from Memphis, one of the scribes of the temple, wonderfully learned, familiar with all the culture of the Egyptians. He was said to have lived underground for twenty-three years in their sanctuaries, learning magic from Isis. "You mean Pancrates," said Arignotus, "my own teacher, a holy man, clean shaven, in white linen, always deep in thought, speaking imperfect Greek, tall, flat-nosed, with protruding lips and thinnish legs." That self-same Pancrates, and at first I did not know who he was, but when I saw him working all sorts of wonders whenever we anchored the boat, particularly riding on crocodiles and swimming in company with the beasts, while they fawned and wagged their tails, I recognized that he was a holy man, and by degrees, through my friendly behavior, I became his companion and associate, so that he shared all his secret knowledge with me. At last he persuaded me to leave all my servants behind in Memphis and to go with him quite alone, for we should not lack people to wait upon us; and thereafter we got on in that way. But whenever we came to a stopping place, the man would take either the bar of the door or the broom or even the pestle, put clothes upon it, say a certain spell over it, and make it walk, appearing to everyone else to be a man. It would go off and draw water and buy provisions and prepare meals and in every way deftly serve and wait upon us. Then, when he was through with its services, he would again make the broom a broom or the pestle a pestle by saying another spell over it. Though I was very keen to learn this from him, I could not do so, for he was jealous, although most ready to oblige in everything else. But one day I secretly overheard the spell -- it was just three syllables -- by taking my stand in a dark place. He went off to the square after telling the pestle what it had to do, and on the next day, while he was transacting some business in the square, I took the pestle, dressed it up in the same way, said the syllables over it, and told it to carry water. When it had filled and brought in the jar, I said, "Stop! Don't carry any more water. Be a pestle again!" But it would not obey me now; it kept straight on carrying until it filled the house with water for us by pouring it in! At my wit's end over the thing, for I feared that Pancrates might come back and be angry, as was indeed the case, I took an axe and cut the pestle in two; but each part took a jar and began to carry water, with the result that instead of one servant I had now two. Meanwhile Pancrates appeared on the scene, and comprehending what had happened, turned them into wood again, just as they were before the spell, and then for his own part left me to my own devices without warning, taking himself off out of sight somewhere. "Then you still know how to turn the pestle into a man?" said Deinomachus. "Yes," said he. "Only half way, however, for I cannot bring it back to its original form if it once becomes a water carrier, but we shall be obliged to let the house be flooded with the water that is poured in!" "Will you never stop telling such buncombe, old men as you are? " said I. " If you will not, at least for the sake of these lads put your amazing and fearful tales off to some other time, so that they may not be filled up with terrors and strange figments before we realise it. You ought to be easy with them and not accustom them to hear things like this which will abide with them and annoy them their lives long and will make them afraid of every sound by filling them with all sorts of superstition." Source: A. M. Harmon, translator, Lucian , vol. 3 (London: William Heinemann; New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1921), pp. 371-77 . English and Greek on opposite pages. This episode (untitled in the original) is taken from the dialogue The Lover of Lies . Lucian of Samasota (ca. A.D. 125 - ca, A.D. 180) was an Assyrian satirist who wrote in the Greek language. His purpose in The Lover of Lies was to belittle belief in supernatural tales of the type presented here. This tale is the basis of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe's famous ballad " Der Zauberlehrling " ("The Sorcerer's Apprentice," 1797), which in turn inspired the symphonic poem L'apprenti sorcier (1897) by Paul Dukas. This story and music feature prominently in Walt Disney's animated film Fantasia (1940, 2000), with Mickey Mouse playing the role of the hapless sorcerer's apprentice. Return to the table of contents . Magic Book Germany A pastor at Krailsheim had old large books secured with chains to the walls and ceilings of a vaulted room. One time a servant girl was alone in this room, and out of curiosity she opened one of the books and read aloud a passage from it. Suddenly the entire room was crawling with mice, causing the servant girl to cry for help. At her cry the pastor the pastor came to her, and she hurriedly told him what had happened. He then read the passage from end to beginning, upon which the mice all disappeared. Source: Bernhard Baader, "Zauberbuch," Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: Verlag der Herder'schen Buchhandlung, 1851), no. 281, p. 266 . Return to the table of contents . The Book of Magic Russia A soldier was quartered in a certain town. He had taken to study the black art, and had got possession of books which dealt therewith. One day, during his absence from his quarters, one of his comrades came to see him. Not finding him at home, the visitor took up one of the soldier's books, and for want of other occupation began to read it. It was in the evening, and he read by the light of a lamp. The book was full of names and nothing else. He had read about half of the names when he raised his head, and looking around him, saw that the room was full of diabolical looking beings. The soldier was struck with terror, and not knowing what to do, began again to read the book. After reading for some little time, he again looked round him; the number of spirits had increased. Again he read, and having finished the book, looked again around him. By this time the number of demons had so much increased that there was barely space for them in the room. They sat upon each other's shoulders, and pressed continually forward round the reader. The soldier saw that the situation was serious; he shut the book, closed his eyes, and anxiously awaited his comrade. The spirits pressed closer and closer upon him, crying, "Give us work to do -- quick!" The soldier reflected awhile, and then said, "Fill up the cisterns of all the baths in the town with water brought thither in a sieve." The demons flew away. In two minutes they returned and said, "It is done! Give us some more work to do -- quick!" " Pull the Voivode's [governor's] house down, brick by brick -- but take care you do not touch or disturb the inmates; then build it up again as it was before." The goblins disappeared, but in two minutes returned. "It is done!" they cried. "Give us more work -- quick!" "Go," said the soldier," and count the grains of sand that lie at the bottom of the Volga, the number of drops of water that are in the river, and of the fish that swim in it, from its source to its mouth." The spirits flew away; but in another minute they returned, having executed their task. Thus, before the soldier could think of some new labor to be done, the old one was completed, and the demons were again at his side demanding more work. When he began to think what he should give them, they pressed round him, and threatened him with instant death if he did not give them something to do. The soldier was becoming exhausted, and there was yet no sign of his comrade's return. What course should he take? How deliver himself from the evil spirits? The soldier thought to himself, "While I was reading the book, not one of the demons came near me. Let me try to read it again; perhaps that will keep them off." Again he began to read the book of magic, but he soon observed that as he read, the number of phantoms increased, so that soon such a host of the spirit world surrounded him that the very lamp was scarcely visible. When the soldier hesitated at a word, or paused to rest himself, the goblins became more restless and violent, demanding, "Give us work to do! Give us work!" The soldier was almost worn out, and unhappily knew not how to help himself. Suddenly a thought occurred to him, "The spirits appeared when I read the book from the beginning; let me now read it from the end, perhaps this well send them way." He turned the book round and began to read it from the end. After reading for some time he observed that the number of spirits decreased; the lamp began again to burn brightly, and there was an empty space around him. The soldier was delighted, and continued his reading. He read and read until he had read them all away. And thus he saved himself from the demons. His comrade came in soon afterwards. The soldier told him what had happened. "It is fortunate for you," said his comrade, "that you began to read the book backwards in time. Had you not thus read them away by midnight they would have devoured you." Source: John T. Naaké, Slavonic Fairy Tales: Collected and translated from the Russian, Polish, Servian, and Bohemian (London: Henry S. King and Company, 1874), pp. 190-93 . Return to the table of contents . The Master and His Pupil England There was once a very learned man in the north country who knew all the languages under the sun, and who was acquainted with all the mysteries of creation. He had one big book bound in black calf and clasped with iron, and with iron corners, and chained to a table which was made fast to the floor; and when he read out of this book, he unlocked it with an iron key, and none but he read from it, for it contained all the secrets of the spiritual world. It told how many angels there were in heaven, and now they marched in their ranks, and sang in their quires, and what were their several functions, and what was the name of each great angel of might. And it told of the devils of hell, how many of them there were, and what were their several powers, and their labors, and their names, and how they might be summoned, and how tasks might be imposed on them, and how they might be chained to be as slaves to man. Now the master had a pupil who was but a foolish lad, and he acted as servant to the great master, but never was he suffered to look into the black book, hardly to enter the private room. One day the master was out, and then the lad, impelled by curiosity, hurried to the chamber where his master kept his wondrous apparatus for changing copper into gold, and lead into silver, and where was his mirror in which he could see all that was passing in the world, and where was the shell which when held to the ear whispered all the words that were being spoken by anyone the master desired to know about. The lad tried in vain with the crucibles to turn copper and lead into gold and silver -- he looked long and vainly into the mirror; smoke and clouds fleeted over it, but he saw nothing plain, and the shell to his ear produced only indistinct mutterings, like the breaking of distant seas on an unknown shore. "I can do nothing," he said, "as I know not the right words to utter, and they are locked up in yon book." He looked round, and, see! the book was unfastened; the master had forgotten to lock it before he went out. The boy rushed to it, and unclosed the volume. It was written with red and black ink, and much therein he could not understand; but he put his finger on a line, and spelled it through. At once the room was darkened, and the house trembled; a clap of thunder rolled through the passage of the old mansion, and there stood before the terrified youth a horrible form, breathing fire, and with eyes like burning lamps. It was the Evil One, Beelzebub, whom he had called up to serve him. "Set me a task!" said a voice, like the roaring of an iron furnace. The boy only trembled, and his hair stood up. "Set me a task, or I shall strangle thee!" But the lad could not speak. Then the evil spirit stepped towards him, and putting forth his hands touched his throat. The fingers burned his flesh. "Set me a task." "Water yon flower," cried the boy in despair, pointing to a geranium which stood in a pot on the floor. Instantly the spirit left the room, but in another instant he returned with a barrel on his back, and poured its contents over the flower; and again and again he went and came, and poured more and more water, till the floor of the room was ankle-deep. "Enough, enough!" gasped the lad; but the Evil One heeded him not; the lad knew not the words by which to dismiss him, and still he fetched water. It rose to the boy's knees, and still more water was poured. It mounted to his waist, and Beelzebub ceased not bringing barrels full. It rose to his armpits, and he scrambled to the tabletop. And now the water stood up to the window and washed against the glass, and swirled around his feet on the table. It still rose; it reached his breast. In vain he cried; the evil spirit would not be dismissed, and to this day he would have been pouring water, and would have drowned all Yorkshire, had not the master remembered on his journey that he had not locked his book, and had therefore returned, and at the moment when the water was bubbling about the pupil's chin, spoken the words which cast Beelzebub back into his fiery home. Source: S. Baring-Gould, appendix to William Henderson, Notes on the Folk Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866), pp. 343-44 . This story is reprinted in Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), pp. 73-76 . Return to the table of contents . The Schoolmaster at Bury England Old Mr. Hodgson, master of the grammar school at Bury, was enjoying his midday meal, when his wooden trencher began to turn round, and he was immediately convinced that something very wrong was going on in the schoolhouse. So he hastened thither, and found the boys in great consternation, for by means of saying the Lord's Prayer backwards they had raised the devil, and they could not lay him again. Mr. Hodgson knew that the only way to get rid of him would be to give him a task which he could not perform, and that, if in three trials they could not hit upon such a task, the case would be hopeless. Mr. Hodgson first desired him to count the blades of grass in the castle croft. This task the devil performed directly. He was next ordered to count the grains of sand on the school brow. This gave him no more trouble than the former feat. Only one chance was left. A happy thought occurred to Mr. Hodgson. He commanded the devil to count the letters in the large Bible in the parish church. In an instant the devil descended to the lower regions through the floor of the school, leaving a great crack on the hearthstone where he passed through, to attest the truth of this story to future generations. Source: Charlotte S. Burne, " Reminiscences of Lancashire and Cheshire When George IV. Was King ," Folklore , vol. 20, no. 2 (June 30, 1909), p. 205. Burne's source: The dictation of an aunt on June 8, 1890. The aunt gave it as "from the relation of Anne Bentham," a housemaid, "circa 1825." Burne does not give this episode a title. Return to the table of contents . The Farmer's Wife of Deloraine Scotland Witchcraft is not named in the next story, but we can scarcely be wrong in assuming it to be the agent at work in it. We must premise that it was, perhaps still is, customary in the Lowlands of Scotland, as in other secluded districts, for tailors to leave their workshops and go into the farmhouses of the neighborhood to work by the day. The farmer's wife of Deloraine thus engaged a tailor with his workmen and apprentices for the day, begging them to come in good time in the morning. They did so, and partook of the family breakfast of porridge and milk. During the meal, one of the apprentices observed that the milk jug was almost empty, on which the mistress slipped out of the back door with a basin in her hand to get a fresh supply. The lad's curiosity was roused, for he had heard there was no more milk in the house; so he crept after her, hid himself behind the door, and saw her turn a pin in the wall, on which a stream of pure milk flowed into the basin. She twirled the pin, and the milk stopped. Coming back, she presented the tailors with the bowl of milk, and they gladly washed down the rest of their porridge with it. About noon, while our tailors were busily engaged with the gudeman's wardrobe, one of them complained of thirst, and wished for a bowl of milk like the morning's. "Is that a'?" said the apprentice; "ye'se get that." The mistress was out of the way, so he left his work, found his way to the spot he had marked in the morning, twirled the pin, and quickly filled a basin. But, alas! he could not then stay the stream. Twist the pin as he would, the milk still continued to flow. He called the other lads, and implored them to come and help him; but they could only bring such tubs and buckets as they found in the kitchen, and these were soon filled. When the confusion was at its height, the mistress appeared among them, looking as black as thunder; while she called out, in a mocking voice, "A'ye loons! Ye hae drawn a' the milk fra every coo between the head o' Yarrow an' the foot o't. This day ne'er a coo will gie her maister a drop o' milk, though he war gawing to starve." The tailors slunk away abashed, and from that day forward the wives of Deloraine have fed their tailors on nothing but chappit 'taties and kale. Source: William Henderson, Notes on the Folk Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866), pp. 159-61 . Henderson does not give this story a title. Return to the table of contents . Mass John Scott Scotland A Mass John Scott, minister of Peebles, is reported to have been the last renowned exorciser, and to have lost his life in a contest with an obstinate spirit. This was owing to the conceited rashness of a young clergyman, who commenced the ceremony of laying the ghost before the arrival of Mass John. It is the nature, it seems, of spirits disembodied, as well as embodied, to increase in strength and presumption, in proportion to the advantages which they may gain over the opponent. The young clergyman losing courage, the horrors of the scene were increased to such a degree, that, as Mass John approached the house in which it passed, he beheld the slates and tiles flying from the roof, as if dispersed with a whirlwind. At his entry, be perceived all the wax tapers (the most essential instruments or conjuration) extinguished, except one, which already burned blue in the socket. The arrival of the experienced sage changed the scene: he brought the spirit to reason; but unfortunately, while addressing a word or advice or censure to his rash brother, he permitted the ghost to obtain the last word, a circumstance which, in all colloquies of this nature, is strictly to be guarded against. This fatal oversight occasioned his falling into a lingering disorder, of which be never recovered. Source: Sir Walter Scott, The Poetical Works of Sir Walter Scott; containing Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border, Sir Tristrem, and Dramatic Pieces (Paris: Baudry's European Library, 1838), p. 30, footnote 4 . Scott does not give this story a title. Return to the table of contents . The Magic Whistle Iceland Sæmund the Wise owned a whistle that would sommon one or more imps, and they would have to serve the person who had blown the whistle. One day a servant girl discovered the whistle, which Sæmund had hidden in his bed. Her curiousity led her to pick it up and blow it. Immediately an imp appeared and demanded a task from her. Now ten of Sæmund's sheep had been slaughtered that day, and their fleeces were lying outside. The girl told the imp to count the hairs on all the fleeces, and that if he could do so before she finished making the bed, she would belong to him. The imp hurried away and began his task, but the girl was even faster. He still had one fleece left to count when she had finished making the bed, so he lost the bargain. Later Sæmund asked the girl if she had found anything in the bed. She told him everything, and he was pleased with her presence of mind. Extracted from Jacqueline Simpson, Scandinavian Folktales (London: Penguin Books, 1988), p. 130. © 1988 by Jacqueline Simpson. Simpson's source: Jón Árnason, Islenzkar Þjoðsögur og Æfintýri , vol. 1 (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs, 1862), pp. 495-96 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Targets open in new windows. The Black School . Migratory legends of type 3000, in which a wizard in training escapes from his satanic teacher, albeit with the loss of his shadow. Faust Legends . Stories about mortals who enter into contracts with the demonic powers. Foolish Wishes . Tales of type 750A and other stories about the foolish use of magic wishes. Goethe's ballad "Der Zauberlehrling." The original German text with English translations. Magic Books . Why the Sea Is Salty . Folktales of type 565. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 11, 2008. Name of the Helper The Name of the Helper Folktales of type 500, and related tales, in which a mysterious and threatening helper is defeated when the hero or heroine discovers his name translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2022 Contents Rumpelstiltskin , version of 1812 (Germany). Link to the version of 1857: Rumpelstiltskin . Link to the Rumpelstilzchen von den Brüdern Grimm , ein Vergleich der Fassungen von 1810, 1812 und 1819. Link to the German-language version of 1857: Rumpelstilzchen . Doubleturk (Germany). Mistress Beautiful (Germany). Dwarf Holzrührlein Bonneführlein (Germany). Nägendümer (Germany). Kugerl (Germany). Hoppetînken (Germany). Zirkzirk (Germany). Purzinigele (Austria). Tarandandò (Italy). Winterkölbl (Hungary). Kruzimugeli (Austria). Hottetejlil (Denmark). Gundeli (Denmark). The Girl Who Could Spin Gold from Clay and Long Straw (Sweden). Tom Tit Tot (England). Duffy and the Devil (England). Whuppity Stoorie (Scotland). Peerie Fool [Peerifool] (Orkney Islands). Gwarwyn-a-throt (Wales). Penelop (Wales). Silly go Dwt (Wales). The Rival Kempers (Ireland). Tríopla Trúpla (Ireland). Kinkach Martinko (A Slav Folktale). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Rumpelstiltskin Germany Once upon a time there was a miller who was poor, but who had a beautiful daughter. Now it happened that he got into a conversation with the king and said to him: "I have a daughter who knows the art of turning straw into gold." So the king immediately sent for the miller's daughter and ordered her to turn a whole room full of straw into gold in one night. And if she could not do it, she would have to die. She was locked in the room, and she sat there and cried, because for her life she did not know how the straw would turn into gold. Then suddenly a little man appeared before her, and said: "What will you give me, if I turn this all into gold?" She took off her necklace and gave it to the little man, and he did what he had promised. The next morning the king found the room filled with gold, and his heart became even more greedy. He put the miller's daughter into an even larger room filled with straw, and told her to turn it into gold. The little man came again. She gave him a ring from her hand, and he turned it all into gold. The third night the king had her locked in a third room, which was larger than the first two, and entirely filled with straw. "If you succeed this time, I'll make you my wife," he said. Then the little man came and said, "I'll do it again, but you must promise me the first child that you have with the king." In her distress she made the promise, and when the king saw that this straw too had been turned into gold, he took the miller's daughter as his wife. Soon thereafter the queen delivered a child. Then the little man appeared before her and demanded the child that had been promised him. The queen begged him to let her keep the child, offering him great riches in its place. Finally he said, "I'll be back to get the child in three days. But if by then you know my name, you can keep the child!" For two days the queen pondered what the little man's name might be, but she could not think of anything, and became very sad. On the third day the king came home from a hunt and told her how, two days earlier, while hunting deep in a dark forest, he had come upon a little house. A comical little man was there, jumping about as if on one leg, and crying out: Today I'll bake; tomorrow I'll brew. Then I'll fetch the queen's new child. It is good that no one knows Rumpelstiltskin is my name. The queen was overjoyed to hear this. Then the dangerous little man arrived and asked: "Your majesty, what is my name?" "Is your name Conrad?" "No." "Is your name Heinrich?" "No." "Then could your name be Rumpelstiltskin?" "The devil told you that!" shouted the little man. He ran away angrily, and never came back. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Rumpelstilzchen," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, 1st ed. (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), v. 1, no. 55, pp. 253-55. The Grimms dressed this tale up considerably in succeeding editions. The most notable change is the introduction of the spinning wheel as a device for turning straw into gold. Further, in later editions the queen discovers the dwarf's name through a messenger whom she herself sends forth to collect strange names, not through her husband's chance meeting with the little man. Link to the German-language version of 1857 (the Grimms' last version): Rumpelstilzchen . Link to an English translation of the version of 1857: Rumpelstiltskin . Return to the table of contents . Mistress Beautiful Germany In a city there was a wonderfully beautiful but poor girl. A merchant fell in love with her and asked her to marry him. However, because merchants expect a rich dowry, before the wedding she gave herself over to the devil. Thus the devil brought her great wealth under the condition that she would have to discover his name within one year, otherwise the devil would take her. The year's end was approaching, and she still did not know the devil's name. One night a shepherd was lying in his hut just outside the city when he saw a fire not far away. Walking toward the fire, he came to a hill. There he saw various beings dancing around. One of them was particularly cheerful as he jumped around the fire, singing: It is good; it is good, That Mistress Beautiful does not know, That my name is Hipche, Hipche. The next day the shepherd want to the merchant's wife and told her what he had seen and heard. She took note of the name, and when the year had come to an end, the devil appeared before her, and she stated the name: Hipche. Thus the devil was defeated, and Mistress Beautiful lived happily and prosperously with her merchant. With the money that she had received from the devil, their trade expanded across the land and over the sea. Source(books.google.com): Heinrich Pröhle, "Jungfer Schön," Kinder- und Volksmärchen (Leipzig: Avenarius und Mendelssohn, 1853), no. 23, p. 76 . Source (Internet Archive): Heinrich Pröhle, "Jungfer Schön," Kinder- und Volksmärchen (Leipzig: Avenarius und Mendelssohn, 1853), no. 23, p. 76 . Return to the table of contents . Doubleturk Germany Once a prominent dwarf fell in love with a beautiful girl and wanted to force her to marry him. To be sure, the girl had a great aversion toward him because he was so small and not at all good looking, and she would not agree to marry him. However, he won over her father by offering him much money and land, so she finally had to accept his proposal. Nevertheless, he agreed to release her from her promise and to leave her alone if she could succeed in discovering his name. The girl searched a long time, but to no avail. However, in the end fate came to her aid. One night a fish dealer was traveling along the road to Greifswald. Coming to a place where he saw a large number of dwarfs joyfully dancing and jumping about in the moonlight, he stopped with amazement. Then he suddenly heard one of the dwarfs call out with joy, "If my bride knew that my name is Doubleturk, she wouldn't take me!" The next day the fish dealer related this experience in a tavern in Greifswald. The bride heard about it from the tavern keeper's daughter. She immediately assumed that it had been her lover, and when he came to her, she called him Doubleturk. Then the dwarf disappeared in great anger, and that was the end of their courtship. Source: J. D. H. Temme, Die Erdgeister in Greifswald , Die Volkssagen von Pommern und Rügen (Berlin: In der Nikolaischen Buchhandlung, 1840), no. 216, pp. 255-256. Temme does not give this tale a title. It is part of a larger section entitled "The Earth Spirits in Greifswald." Temme's source: "Oral." Greifswald, a city in northeast Germany, lies near the mouth of the Ryck River, which empties into Greifswalder Bay on the Baltic Sea. Return to the table of contents . Dwarf Holzrührlein Bonneführlein Germany In a great forest there once lived a cowherd and a shepherd, and they helped one another in times of need. The cowherd had a daughter and the shepherd a son. From their childhood on they were inseparable, and the older they became the fonder they grew of each other. Thus, when they came of age the shepherd's son proposed to the shepherd's daughter, and she was promised to him in marriage. Some time later an ugly dwarf approached the cowherd and asked for the daughter's hand in marriage. He brought many valuable presents for the mother and the daughter. The daughter could not stand the dwarf, because he was so ugly, and she did not want to marry a dwarf in any event. The mother did not like him either, but that did not stop her from accepting his presents. One day he returned, again with many costly things, but this time the mother said, "You are not going to get my daughter, no matter how many presents you bring." The daughter added, "I do not want your presents at all, and I want you even less!" Then the dwarf became very angry, threw the costly things on the floor, and replied to the mother, "It's not that simple to get rid of me! Earlier you accepted my presents, and I want to be paid for them. I will return tomorrow at noon. If by then you know my name, then you may keep your daughter, otherwise I will take her by force!" With that the dwarf disappeared. Great concern now ruled the cowherd's household. Now the shepherd's son, while watching over his sheep in the forest, had often seen the dwarf, but every time he had approached him, the dwarf had disappeared. On this day he was watching over his sheep in the vicinity of a cave, and this was the dwarf's cave. The shepherd stood there, leaning on his staff, when suddenly the dwarf came by, as though he were being driven through the forest by a windstorm, and he disappeared into the cave. At the cave's entrance there was a yellow flower that the shepherd's son had often admired because of its unusual color and shape. Before entering the cave, the dwarf had touched the flower. A loud sound came from within the cave. The shepherd's son listened, and he heard the dwarf sing: Here I sit, Carving gold, My name is Holzrührlein Bonneführlein. If the mother knew that, She could keep her daughter. The shepherd's son took note of the name, because it seemed so very unusual to him. That evening when he visited his sweetheart, and noticed her concern, he told her everything that had happened, and comforted her. The mother repeated the name over and over again until it came easily to her, and now they were no longer fearful about the dwarf's return. The next day at noon he appeared as announced. He stepped up to the mother and said sarcastically, "Now my dear lady, do you know my name?" The mother pretended to be afraid and answered, "Oh, what could your name be? Are you not called Mäuserich?" The dwarf laughed and said, "Not even close!" "Is your name perhaps Ruppsteert?" "Wrong again!" laughed the dwarf. "Oh, what are you called then? Your name wouldn't be Holzrührlein Bonneführlein, now would it?" The dwarf disappeared in an instant, and he was never heard from nor seen again. The shepherd's son married the cowherd's daughter, and they lived long and happy lives together. Source: Carl and Theodor Colshorn, Zwerg Holzrührlein Bonneführlein , Märchen und Sagen aus Hannover (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), no. 29, pp. 88-89. Return to the table of contents . Nägendümer Germany Once upon a time there was a girl whose task it was to spin a certain quantity of flax every day. However, she could never complete her work. Then one day a man came to her who promised her that he would spin the flax for her every day if she could guess his name. But the girl could not guess his name. Then the man went away and turned himself into a bird. Flying happily back and forth it cried out: God is dat, god is dat, Dat de Diern nich weet, Dat ick Nägendümer heet. It is good, it is good, That the girl does not know That my name is Nägendümer. A shepherd who was herding his flock nearby heard this, and he told it to the girl. Sometime later the man returned to the girl and repeated his offer. She said to him, "Your name is Nägendümer!" The man answered, "A bad person told you that!" But he kept his promise, and from then on he spun all her flax every day. Source: A. Haas, "Nägendümer," Rügensche Sagen und Märchen (Stettin: Johs. Burmeister's Buchhandlung, 1903), no. 223, pp. 221-222. Haas's source: "Received from Putbus by O. Haas." Return to the table of contents . Kugerl Germany A long time ago near Sandbühl there lived an elf. He was scarcely three spans tall. He often ran around dressed in only a shirt, which angered the people, but otherwise he did not get in their way. On the contrary did them many favors. He cut straw for them, tended their cows, and helped them with work at home and in the field. He also provided the sick with healing herbs and rescued many children from death. One time a beautiful peasant girl was gored by a steer. She screamed aloud and called for help. The friendly elf came immediately, comforted her, and promised to help and rescue her, if she would marry him and go with him to the elf kingdom. She had no choice but to say yes, and upon her agreement the elf rescued her. Now she was supposed to go with the dwarf into the mountain, but she did not at all want to. She therefore asked the elf if he would not release her, promising him a beautiful red jacket if he would do so. The dwarf said, "I can easily get a red jacket. However, if you can guess my name within three days, you shall be released from you promise." The girl was satisfied with this answer, and she went home. She thought the entire night about the dwarf's name, but it did not come to her. The next day the girl went out to the sand hill where the elf stayed. She said all kinds of names, but none was the right one, and the dwarf said, "Go home and think about it some more." The girl returned home and thought day and night about what the little man's name might be. The following day she went out to the sand hill again, where she found the dwarf. Then she said many, many names, but none was the right one. The dwarf said, "Go home and think about it better, or tomorrow you will be my wife." So the girl, with her head hanging, returned home sad and dejected. She had given up hope of guessing the dwarf's name. But where the need is greatest, there help will come the soonest. A peasant boy was working near the sand hill, and at noontime he lay down behind the brush to rest. The elf came out of his hole in the ground, and thinking that no one was there, he clapped his hands and danced around in his little shirt while singing, Gott sei Lob und Dank, Daß meine Braut nicht weiß, Daß ich Kugerl heiß. Praise and thanks to God, That my bride does not know, That I am called Kugerl. Then he jumped up, shouted for joy, and sang anew, Gott sei Lob und Dank, Daß meine Braut nicht weiß, Daß ich Kugerl heiß. Praise and thanks to God, That my bride does not know, That I am called Kugerl. The peasant boy was amused by the dwarf's antics, and that evening when he went to the girl's house to visit, he laughingly told her what he had seen and heard that day in the meadow near Sandbühl. The girl was now happy beyond measure and no longer had any fears or concerns. Early in the morning of the following day she went up to the sand hill. She took a red jacket for the dwarf, for she wanted to give him something for rescuing her. When the tiny little man saw her coming he was filled with joy, and said, "Now tell me, what is my name?" The girl said, "Putzli." Then the dwarf laughed and asked her once again. The girl said, "Nudi." Then the elf laughed until he shook, and said, "Guess once again!" Then the girl answered, "Would your name be Kugerl?" and gave him the red jacket. Then the dwarf began to cry and to moan, and carrying the jacket he went out into the woods. Since that hour he has not been seen again, and no one knows where he went. Source: Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle, Kugerl , Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus Süddeutschland (Regensburg: Verlag von Friedrich Pustet, 1854), pp. 278-280. The Zingerles' source: "Oral, in Höttingen." Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . Hoppetînken Germany They tell the story in Iserlohn that once a mine-dwarf (Bergmännchen) helped a spinning girl do her work in the most miraculous manner, in return for which he demanded the young girl's hand in marriage. The girl agreed to this proposal, thinking that he was not serious. One evening she called out to her fiancé, who had just arrived, "Look, is your name not Hoppetînken." Turning red with anger, the dwarf said, "The devil told you that." From that time onward he abandoned the spinning girl, and never again helped her. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen , vol. 1 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), no. 154, p. 151. Iserlohn is a city in the German province Nordrhein-Westfalen. Return to the table of contents . Zirkzirk Germany Once there was a woman who did not want to do any spinning. Her husband often scolded her for not accomplishing anything. Saddened by this, she was walking along thinking about her situation when suddenly a dwarf appeared before her. He asked her what was wrong with her and if he could not help her. She told him everything, and the dwarf said that he would help her if she would give him what she was carrying under her apron. However, if she could guess his name then she would not need to give him anything. The woman did not think about this very long before saying yes, for she did not believe that she had anything under her apron. From that time onward she always had yarn enough, and every Saturday when her husband came to see what she had done, there was always an abundance. She was happy and satisfied, but before long all this changed, for she was about to deliver a child, and she now realized what the dwarf had meant. Filled with grief, she told her husband everything. One day when he was walking over a mountain he heard the humming of a spinning wheel from within the mountain, and a dwarf singing: Dat is gaut dat de gnädige Frû nich weit dat ik Zirkzirk heit. It is good that the honorable lady does not know that Zirkzirk is my name. He joyfully returned home and reported this to his wife. After she delivered her child the dwarf appeared to her, in order to collect that which had been promised to him. She told him what his name was, and he never again returned. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen , vol. 1 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), no. 337, pp. 298-299. Kuhn's source: a shepherd from Bardenhagen, a village in northern Germany situated between Lüneburg and Uelzen. Return to the table of contents . Purzinigele Austria Ages ago, in olden times, there lived a powerful count. All the lands far and wide belonged to him, and he had everything that his heart desired. He shared his wealth and his happiness with a good wife, who was as beautiful as the day and as dear as an angel. They had lived together happily together for several months, and the days seemed to them to be as short as minutes. One day the count was out hunting and went deeper and deeper into the forest. In the heat of the hunt he went further than ever before, and he became separated a good distance from the rest of his party. As he stood there alone in the forest, a dwarf suddenly appeared before him. The little forest dweller was only three feet tall, and his full beard reached his knees. Angrily he rolled his fiery red eyes and said, "What are you doing here? This is my realm, and you must pay a penalty to me. If you do not give me your wife, you shall not leave this forest alive." The count was considerably frightened by the dwarf's appearance and his angry words, for he had often heard all kinds of spooky stories about strength and the wickedness of the little man of the forest. His old nurse had told him these stories when he was but a child. What was he to do? This was a critical situation. The frightened count did not know how to escape other than to try to beg and talk his way out. "Forgive me," said the count, "that I have trespassed upon your realm. I did not know that it was yours, and I will certainly never do it again." But the wild dwarf would not be pacified, and he said, "What I have said to you must happen. Either you or she." "Demand what else you will, and I shall give it to you," said the count, "but do not insist upon this." Then the little man appeared to reconsider, and he said, "If must be so, then I will place your fate in your wife's hands. I will give you both one month's time. If she is able, in three attempts, to guess my name then she shall be yours and free -- otherwise she shall belong to me." The count was somewhat comforted with this, but still his heart was burdened. He made his way toward home, accompanied by the little man of the forest. Both were serious, and neither spoke a word. After they had gone some distance they came to an ancient gray-bearded fir tree. The dwarf stopped here and said, "This is the boundary of my realm. I will await your wife here at this fir tree, which is nine times older than the other trees. Three times she may have three guesses! But if you do not keep your word it will go badly for both of you." The count now walked slowly homeward, for his heart was heavy, and the closer he came to his castle, the gloomier and sadder he became. As he approached the gate, the countess, who had seen him from her window, came out to meet him. She was filled with joy and happiness, for her husband was home again. But she soon noticed that he was not happy, as he usually was, but instead looked like seven days of rainy weather. This made her sad and concerned, and she asked the count what was wrong with him. As soon as they entered the castle and were in the sitting room, the tired and sad count told her how he had met the dwarf and how he had wanted take the countess, and what conditions he had at last agreed to. When the countess heard this, she became as pale as a corpse, and her beautiful, fine cheeks were wet with tears. Happiness and joy had now disappeared from the castle, and everyone there became silent and sad. The countess most often sat in an alcove thinking and thinking how short her happiness had been, or she went to the castle chapel where she prayed and cried. The count no longer went out hunting nor to the jousting matches but sat instead on his old chair, richly decorated with carvings, on which his ancestors had also sat. Supporting his head with his right hand, he contemplated, but he himself did not know about what. Thus passed day after day and week after week, until finally there were three days left in the month. The count and countess went out into the forest, then further and further until they could see the old gray-bearded fir tree in the distance. The count stayed behind, and the countess proceeded alone. Otherwise it was beautiful in the forest. The birds were singing; the squirrels were jumping about or sitting there splitting pine cones; and the wild roses were blossoming so beautifully white and red. But the countess had a heavy heart as never before, and she sadly walked on until she came to the fir tree. The dwarf, beautifully dressed in green and red, was waiting for her. A mischievous pleasure overcame him when he saw the countess, for she pleased him greatly. "Now guess my name, Lady Countess!" he said quickly, as though he hardly expected her to do so. Then the countess guessed, "Fir, Spruce, Pine," because she thought that for living in the forest he would certainly have the name of a tree. The dwarf had hardly heard this when he broke out laughing and rejoicing until the entire forest resounded. "You have not guessed it!" he said gleefully. "See if you can do any better tomorrow than you did today. Otherwise you will become my wife!" The countess, sadder still, walked away from the fir tree with downcast eyes. The dwarf stood there and smiled at her, taking pleasure in her grief. She soon found her husband, and told him how she had guessed so badly. They returned to their castle even sadder than they had left. The rest of the day passed too fast, although it was a sad one. Evening was soon there, and night followed quickly. It was a sad and hopeless night, and neither sleep nor dreams entered the count's room. When the first larks began to sing the next morning, the count and countess were already up and concerned about their plight. They went to the castle chapel to pray, and afterward went out into the dark green forest, then further and deeper until they saw the old gray-bearded fir tree in the distance. The count stayed behind and the countess proceeded alone. Otherwise it was beautiful out there in the forest. The birds were singing; the flowers were laughing and giving off their sweet scent; the squirrels were standing up like little men. But the countess had a heavy heart as never before, and with tears in her eyes she walked on until she came to the fir tree. She had scarcely arrived there when the little man of the forest walked up, dressed beautifully in blue and red. A mischievous pleasure overcame him when he saw the countess, for she pleased him greatly. "Now guess my name, Lady Countess!" he said quickly, and smiled. Then the countess guessed, "Oat, Buckwheat, Maize," for she thought that he might have the name of a grain. The little elf had hardly heard this when he broke out laughing and rejoicing until the entire forest resounded. "You have not guessed it!" he said gleefully. "You must do better tomorrow, or you will belong to me, and tomorrow will be my wedding." The countess, sadder than ever before, walked away from the fir tree with wet eyes. The dwarf stood there impishly smiling at her. She soon found her husband, and told him how badly she had done. They returned to their castle even more gloomily than they had left. The rest of the day passed under a shadow of sorrow. Evening was there before they realized it, and the dark night followed quickly. It was again a sad night, in which neither the count nor the countess closed their eyes. As morning dawned, the count and countess were already up. They went to the castle chapel and prayed fervently. Then they went out into the beautiful green forest. It was still early, early in the morning, and many of the birds were still lying asleep in their nests. Only the brooks were rustling and murmuring, and the morning breezes were whispering through the tree branches. Otherwise it was quiet -- as quiet as in a church. The count and countess walked until they saw the old gray-bearded fir tree in the distance. There the count kissed his beautiful countess, and a tear dropped onto his beard, for he did not know if he would ever see her again. The countess, however was more composed today, and her heart was not beating as quickly as it had done on the earlier occasions. She said good-bye to her husband and walked toward the fir tree. All soul alone, she stood there next to the old tree, but the dwarf was nowhere to be seen. On either side there were wild rosebushes, and they made a beautiful fence. She walked along the path and soon came to a beautiful little valley. The most beautiful flowers were there, with vineyards and fig trees growing on the hillsides. In the middle of the field stood a neat little cottage. Its little windows glistened happily in the morning sunshine. Blue smoke curled upward from the little chimney, and a song sounded from within. The countess forgot her pain and grief when she saw the little valley and the cottage. She crept up and, on tip-toes, looked inside the window to see if it was as beautiful inside as it was outside. She saw a lovely little kitchen, with things cooking and frying in pots and pans. The little man of the forest was standing at the hearth, first tending to one thing and then to another, at the same time singing with a smiling mouth: Boil my oats, bubble my cabbage; It is good that Lady Countess does not know That Purzinigele is my name. The countess had heard enough. She crept away and hurried back to the fir tree, so that the dwarf would not overtake her. Joyfully standing there, she could almost not wait for the dwarf to arrive. It was not long before the little man arrived. Today he was dressed even more beautifully than before. His clothing was embroidered with red and gold, and it glistened like a sunrise. "Guess now for the last time," said the little elf to the countess, as though he had wanted to say, "This bird will not escape from my trap." The countess started to say "Pur," while carefully observing her questioner. "Not right! You have two guesses left!" said the little man. "Goat," replied the countess. With that the dwarf blushed a little and seemed to pause and think. Then he said, "Guess quickly! You have one more chance." "Purzinigele!" cried out the countess, filled with joy. Upon hearing his name, the dwarf angrily rolled his fiery red eyes, clenched his fists tightly, then grumbling disappeared into the thicket. The freed countess hurried back to the place where the count was impatiently waiting for her. There was such joy when the two found one another again. To the joy of their people, the count and countess returned to their castle. They lived there many, many years as the happiest couple that anyone ever knew. And what became of Purzinigele? He was so angry that he ran away, and was never seen again. Source: Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle, Purzinigele , Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1852), no. 36, pp. 225-232. Concerning the countess's second guess on her last day: The word for goat in German is "Ziege," which approximates the second part of Purzinigele's name. This explains why he blushes and pauses to think after hearing the countess's first two guesses on the last day. Return to the table of contents . Tarandandò Italy Once upon a time there was a mother who had but one daughter. She was not an ugly girl, but she had the flaw that she was always too smart for her own good and that she would rather eat and be lazy than work. Such daughters bring little joy to their mothers, and so it was here as well. The daughter could do nothing right for her mother, who for an entire year never stopped scolding her. Once the mother left early for the field, telling the daughter, who was still in bed, "Near noontime cook some soup and put a couple of kernels of rice in it so there will be something for me to eat when I get home. Now "a couple" was a common way of saying "not too much and not too little," but the girl did not understand that. She put a kettle of water on the fire, picked out two kernels of rice and threw them in. What a soup that was when the mother arrived home! She scolded, but to no avail. She had to pour out the water and make her own soup, if she wanted anything to eat. Another time the mother went away again, and said, "Boil some meat for our noon meal." "How much should I use?" asked the girl. "Whatever is honest!" replied the mother, and left. "Just what is honest?" thought the girl over and over. Then it occurred to her that their donkey, standing in the stall, was named Honest. "Yes, indeed, mother meant him," she cried. "To be sure, he is old and is no longer worth much. I'll not get a scolding this time." So she went to the stall, struck the poor donkey dead, and chopped him up in pieces. Then she put a large washtub on the fire, threw the pieces into the water, and let it boil until it was hissing and bubbling. When the mother arrived home and saw what had happened she was beside herself and began to hit at her daughter with both fists. But that did not bring the poor donkey back to life. And his meat was so tough that it could not be eaten. So she threw it out to the dogs, and they were only able to eat it only because they were bitterly hungry and had sharp teeth. Later the mother went away again and told the daughter, "For our noon meal cook some mush, but do it right." The daughter cooked a lot of mush, and she herself ate seven dishes full. The eighth dish, the smallest one, she saved for her mother. When she came home and learned that the girl had already eaten seven dishes of mush, she became angry and began to scold loudly and intensely. At that same moment a distinguished gentleman passed by the house, heard the scolding, and entered. "Why are you scolding this poor girl so?" he asked. The mother was ashamed and quickly replied, "I am scolding her because she works too much. Today she has spun seven spindles full, and I do not want her to overtire herself." "Can she really spin so well?" asked the gentleman. "There is no one far and wide in the entire country who can spin as well as my daughter," answered the mother. Then the gentleman said, "If that is so, then you can give her to me for my wife. I want to have a wife who works well, and I shall never find one who is better or more industrious." Mother and daughter agreed happily. The wedding took place, and the gentleman took his young wife home with him. A few days later he had a large pile of flax brought in and said, "Listen, wife, I will be out hunting the entire day. By tomorrow evening you are to have spun this flax." She made a sour face and said, "Husband, my lord, that is not possible." Then he became angry and repeated to her, "Do you think that I took you for a wife so you would not have to work? If you want to be lazy then you can go back to your own house." With that he went forth to hunt. The wife was beside herself. The pile of flax was so large that even with a hundred maids she would not have been able to spin it in two days. While she was standing there in desperation, a dwarf crept up to her. He was dressed in red and wore a little crown on his head. He said, "Why are you so sad? What will you give me if I spin the flax?" The wife did not answer, and the red dwarf continued, "I will spin the flax, but only under the condition that you guess my name within three tries. If you fail to do so, you will be mine and must come with me." In her desperation the wife said yes, and immediately there appeared countless little dwarfs, and they carried all the flax away until not a single strand was left behind. That evening the gentleman returned home from hunting. Seeing his wife quiet and still, he thought that she must be tired from spinning. Before they went to bed he told her, "Just think about what happened to me today. When I was up on the mountain and it was just getting dark, I came to a split in the earth. I looked down and saw beneath me a large room where many hundreds of little devils were hurriedly spinning flax. It was a joy to watch them. In the middle there stood a throne, and on it sat a dwarf dressed in red and wearing a little crown on his head. He was continuously clicking his tongue and crying out: What will she do, what will she say, When tomorrow we take it to her? Then she will guess so and so. But my name is Tarandandò. Then the wife became happy once again, and said, "Dear husband, my lord, what did the crazy dwarf say?" And when he repeated it, she secretly wrote down the name and went to bed feeling relieved. The next morning the gentleman went hunting again. Then the red dwarf arrived with hundreds of little devils, who were carrying the flax, all finely and neatly spun, and not even a hair of it was missing. Then the red dwarf approached the wife and said with a scornful smile, "Here is the flax. Now guess what my name is." Pretending to be at a loss for words, the wife said, "Is your name perhaps Peter?" "No," cried the dwarf, laughing. With an even sadder face she asked, "Is you name perhaps Toni?" "No," repeated the dwarf and laughed even more scornfully. Then she pretended to be thinking deeply and to have fallen into despair. But finally she said, "Is your name perhaps -- Tarandandò?" "Curses!" cried the red dwarf, as though he had been stung by a viper. He slapped her hard on the cheek, and then he and his little devils departed into the air with such a sound of whistling and rushing that it was like a windstorm in the fall swirling the dry leaves about and blowing them through the woods. When the gentleman arrived home that evening, his wife showed him the spun flax, and he was uncommonly satisfied. "But why is your cheek so swollen?" he asked. "Oh, dear husband, my lord," she said, "that comes from spinning." Soon afterward he had an even larger pile of flax brought in and ordered his wife to spin it within a few days. She was beside herself, but then it occurred to her that she had an aunt who was an uncommonly sly and clever woman who had helped many a relative out of difficulty. She went to her and told her of her troubles. "Just let me deal with it," said the aunt. "Go home, and this evening when your husband is at home I shall come and pay you a visit. Then you'll see." When it was evening she took a dead hen, filled it with blood and grease, put it under her arm between her skin and her undershirt, and went to her niece. She entered the room where the husband and wife were, and the latter approached her, saying, "Greetings, dear aunt. It is so good that you can visit us." "Yes, yes, I have been looking forward to this for a long time," said the aunt, and pressed her arm against her body until the blood and grease ran out onto the floor, while she stood there all bent over. "Oh, good woman, what are you doing there?" said the gentleman. The sly woman looked casually at the blood drops on the floor, then complained loudly, "Oh, my ailment! My old ailment! I have a large boil under my arm. That's where the blood is coming from." "How did you get such an ailment?" asked the gentleman with sympathy. "Do you know, my lord," she replied, "when I was young and beautiful I always had to spin, and that is what brought on my ailment. How it grieved my dear departed husband. I believe it was the cause of his early death." When the gentleman heard this he turned to his wife and said, "Listen, wife, you shall never touch another spindle. I can no longer stand spinning!" That was fine with her. From that time forth she had the best and the most comfortable life, and if she hasn't died, she is still living lazily forth. Source: Christian Schneller, "Tarandandò," Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1867), no. 55, pp. 158-162. This story is from South Tyrol, an alpine region in northern Italy but with historical and cultural ties to Austria. This tale combines elements of three Aarne-Thompson types: The opening episodes where the girl follows her mother's orders literally, much to the mother's regrets, are reminiscent of type 1000 tales, where a master and a servant engage in similar conflicts. The main body of the story, where the heroine gains control over a supernatural helper by discovering his name, is a type 500 tale. The concluding episode, where a cunning old aunt convinces the heroine's husband that spinning will damage his wife's beauty, belongs to type 501 . Return to the table of contents . Winterkölbl German Hungary A poor woodcutter once lived on the edge of a great forest with his wife and his small daughter. He often did not know how he might still their hunger, and so he decided to lead his daughter into the forest and abandon her there. When he once again had nothing for himself or for his family to eat, and he could find no work, he took his child with him into the woods and left her in a beautiful forest meadow with the promise to return soon. To deceive the child he tied a piece of wood to a tree with a string in such a way that the wind swung it back and forth. Hitting against the tree, it made a sound like someone chopping wood with an axe. The child was thus deceived. She looked for strawberries, played with flowers, and after a while fell asleep -- tired from all the running about. When she awoke the moon was already high in the sky, and her father had not yet come. The child began to cry fervently, then ran deeper into the forest looking for her father. Suddenly she saw a little fire with a number of little pot-shaped containers standing nearby. Curiously, she ran up to them, laid some dry twigs on the fire, which was about to go out, and blew with all her strength in order to make it burn. Turning around, she saw a little man who was smiling at her good naturedly. He was entirely gray, and his white beard, which stuck out from his gray jacket in a strange manner, reached down over his chest. The little girl was afraid and was about to run away, but the dwarf called her back. The child reluctantly obeyed. The old man stroked her cheeks and spoke in such a friendly manner that she lost all fear, and helped him with his cooking. The gray man asked her her name and who her father was. With tears in her eyes she told him, and he comforted her and told her she should stay with him and become his daughter. The child accepted, and the old man led her into his home. It was in a large hollow tree. A pile of leaves served as his bed. The little man prepared a second bed so that the tired child could lie down and rest. The next morning the dwarf wakened the girl and said that he had to go away. She was to take care of the house -- as he called the tree -- while he was away. He returned soon and showed her everything, teaching her to cook and to do the other household chores. Thus the day passed quickly, and night was there before she knew it. They lived several years happily and contentedly, and the girl had grown up so much that was now nearly a head taller than her foster father. Then one evening he told her that it was now time for him to make preparations for her future. "The queen," he said, "who lives in the area needs a faithful servant. I was there and recommended you to her, and she is inclined to take you on." He added that if she would behave properly it would go well with her the rest of her life. The next morning they went together to the castle. The maiden was introduced to the queen, and accepted by her. She cordially took leave of her foster father, and he promised to visit her every Sunday. She had not worked there long before the young king, who had been waging war against another king, returned home victoriously. The young king was attracted to the girl and wanted to marry her. His mother, who also liked the maiden, gave her approval. When the Gray Man -- as they called him at the castle -- came again to visit his daughter, the queen told him that her son would like to marry his daughter, that she had given her approval, and that it thus now up to him to express his wishes. The old man said sourly, "The king can marry my little daughter if and only if he can guess my name." With that he left the castle and returned to the woods. As usual, he made a fire and began to cook. While he was cooking he hopped around the fire singing: Boil, pot, boil, So the king will not know That my name is Winterkölbl. The king was very concerned, and he sent out a servant to discover the old man's name. The servant overheard the old man and rushed back to the castle. He told the name and was rewarded with many gold pieces. When the dwarf returned the king greeted him with the words "Welcome, Father Winterkölbl!" The old man saw that he had been outsmarted and gave his consent. The wedding was festively celebrated, and even Winterkölbl was there. But he could not be talked into moving into the castle, and he continued to live, as before, in his tree. Source: Theodor Vernaleken, Winterkölbl , Kinder- und Hausmärchen, dem Volke treu nacherzählt (Vienna and Leipzig: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1896), no. 2, pp. 6-8. This story combines elements of type 500 tales with those of type 327A (Hansel and Gretel) and type 709 (Snow-White). Return to the table of contents . Kruzimugeli Lower Austria There was once a king who wanted to marry, but he had decided to take no woman for a wife who did not have pitch-black hair and eyes of the same color. It made no difference to him whether she was of high or low birth. Thus he had proclaimed throughout the entire country that all girls with these qualities should report to him. Many presented themselves, but in some instances the blackness did not reach the degree desired by the king, in other instances the hair was wrong, and -- in short -- there was a problem with each and every one. A charcoal burner was walking along the path with his daughter. Seeing the crowd of people before the king's castle, she asked her father what it meant. He told her how the king wanted to marry someone with black hair and black eyes, but that he could not find anyone who had them to his satisfaction. The charcoal burner's daughter had both. Therefore she said to her father, "May I go there?" He replied, "Are you so stupid that you think the king would take you for his wife?" She told him that she would like to go and just look around the palace a little. He gave his permission, and she walked toward the palace. On the way she met a little man, who called out to her, "Hey, girl, what will you give me if you become queen?" She answered, "Hey, little man, what can I give you? I have nothing." The little man continued, "You will become queen, but in three years you must still remember that my name is Kruzimugeli. If you don't know that, then you'll be mine." "If that's all you want from me, I'll remember it," replied the charcoal burner's daughter, and ran to the castle. She took no more heed of the little man who stared after her, rubbing his hands together with satisfaction. As soon as the king saw the charcoal burner's daughter he decided to marry her, for her hair glistened and her eyes sparked with blackness. So she married the king and lived happily together with him. In her happiness she almost failed to notice that the three years were coming to an end, and -- oh fright! -- she had forgotten the little man's name. Now she was always sad and spent every day crying. The king, who loved her dearly, attempted to cheer her up with festivities, but all to no avail. Whenever he asked her why she was so sad, she always answered that she could not tell him. One day the royal forester was out in the woods in search of game for the king's table. Going deeper into the woods, he saw a little man who had made a fire and was jumping over it with spiteful joy, singing the whole time: How good it is That the young queen doesn't know That my name is Kruzimugeli. The hunter listened to this and then went back home. He met the queen in the palace garden, where -- filled with sorrow -- she was taking a walk. He told her immediately about the event in the woods, and as soon as she heard the name Kruzimugeli she was almost beside herself with joy. The next day was the last day of the third year, and the little man would be coming to ask the queen for his name. The little man did indeed come the next day, and he asked the queen, "Now, Your Highness, do you still know my name? You may guess three times, and if you are not right, then you belong to me." The queen answered, "I think your name is Steffel." Hearing this, the little man jumped into the air with joy, and shouted with all his might, "Not right!" The queen then said, "Then your name must be Veitl." The little man made another leap, and called out once more, "Not right!" Now the queen said very quietly, "Then your name must be Kruzimugeli." Hearing this, and without answering, the little man jumped with a roar through the wall to the outside. All attempts to repair the hole that he made in the wall remained fruitless. But the queen and her husband lived happily and contentedly for a long time. Source: Theodor Vernaleken, Kruzimugeli , Kinder- und Hausmärchen, dem Volke treu nacherzählt (Vienna and Leipzig: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1896), no. 3, pp. 9-11. Return to the table of contents . Hottetejlil Denmark In the Mols hills east of Knebel near the farm road there is a dolmen. A circular area about twenty steps across on average is surrounded by twenty-two large boulders. In the middle is a burial chamber, consisting of six large stones with a huge capstone. A dozen adults can probably stand upright inside the burial chamber. Once it must have been covered by a mound, and a troll family lived inside the mound. The wife from the farm Poskjær farm in Knebel once went to the troll wife and asked her to spin wool for her. The troll wife agreed to do this, and if the Poskjær wife could guess or find out what her name was before she returned the spinning wheel, she would not have to pay anything for the work. The Poskær wife told this to her husband. One evening he went out to the hill, and he heard the troll wife rocking and singing to her child. It was a verse she sang, and in the verse was the name he wanted to know: Hottetejlil. A few days later the troll wife came with the spinning wheel. "Good day," she said. "Good day, Hottetejlil!" replied the Poskjær wife. When the troll wife heard her name mentioned, she hurried back to the hill and got no more work from Poskjær. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Sagn (Aarhus: Folkeblads Trykkeri, 1892-1901), no. 259, pp. 58-59 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Sagn (Aarhus: Folkeblads Trykkeri, 1892), no. 259, pp. 58-59 . Kristensen's source: J. Grönborg Pedersen. Return to the table of contents . Gundeli Denmark Once upon a time there were two young people who had not been married very long. One day the husband said to his wife: "Now it's probably best that you get some cloth made, so that I can have some new clothes!" The wife was so lazy that she didn't want to do anything but lie in bed from morning to night. She didn't know what she was supposed to do in order to finish the cloth. She then became so sick with grief that she couldn't manage to get anything done. Then one day an ugly troll woman came to her. The wife was lying in bed as usual. The troll woman said that she had heard that the wife should have some cloth made, and that she could do this for her. "You'll not have to pay anything for the cloth, but when I bring it to you, you must guess my name, and if you cannot do this, then you must follow me and always belong to me." The wife turned a few times in bed, did not know what to do, but at last agreed to the troll woman's offer. It was decided that in three weeks the troll woman should come with the cloth. Then the troll woman went away. The lazy wife lay in bed and listed all the names she could think of, but she only got so far. The appointed time was approaching, and the wife could neither eat nor drink. The husband was very worried. He could not understand what was wrong with his wife. One day he was hunting up in the mountains when he heard a song coming from the ground below him. He listened and heard someone singing while she wove: "Hi-e, hi-e, ha-e, a, that farmer's wife doesn't know my name, but my name is Gundeli." The man looked around and then discovered a crack in the ground. He thought about this strange thing. Then with a piece of chalk he wrote on his coat what he had heard, so that he could remember it. The lazy woman grew sicker and sicker as the day approached when she was to guess the troll woman's name. The day before the troll woman was to come, the man asked his wife if she didn't want to tell him what she had done wrong, She then told him what had happened. The man immediately remembered what he had heard the day he was hunting, grabbed his hunting coat and read the name. The wife was so happy that she immediately jumped out of bed and was now completely well again. The next day the troll woman came and stepped on the ground so hard that it practically shook. She had hardly entered the room before the lazy woman shouted: "Gundeli!" The troll woman let out a scream that shook the house, and then immediately disappeared into the ground. Since that day the wife was no longer lazy. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Sagn (Aarhus: Folkeblads Trykkeri, 1892-1901), no. 261, pp. 59-60 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Sagn (Aarhus: Folkeblads Trykkeri, 1892), no. 261, pp. 59-60 . Kristensen's source: Recorded in Kragelund. Jens Jensen, Refshalegård. Return to the table of contents . The Girl Who Could Spin Gold from Clay and Long Straw Sweden (Upland) There was once an old woman who had an only daughter. The lass was good and amiable, and also extremely beautiful, but at the same time so indolent that she would hardly turn her hand to any work. This was a cause of great grief to the mother, who tried all sorts of ways to cure her daughter of so lamentable a failing. But there was no help. The old woman then thought no better plan could be devised than to set her daughter to spin on the roof of their cottage, in order that all the world might be witness of her sloth. But her plan brought her no nearer the mark. The girl continued as useless as before. One day, as the king's son was going to the chase, he rode by the cottage where the old woman dwelt with her daughter. On seeing the fair spinner on the roof, he stopped and inquired why she sat spinning in such an unusual place. The old woman answered, "Aye, she sits there to let all the world see how clever she is. She is so clever that she can spin gold out of clay and long straw." At these words the prince was struck with wonder, for it never occurred to him that the old woman was ironically alluding to her daughter's sloth. He therefore said, "If what you say is true, that the young maiden can spin gold from clay and long straw, she shall no longer sit there, but shall accompany me to my palace and be my consort." The daughter thereupon descended from the roof and accompanied the prince to the royal residence, where, seated in her maiden-bower, she received a pail full of clay and a bundle of straw, by way of trial, whether she were so skillful as her mother had said. The poor girl now found herself in a very uncomfortable state, knowing but too well that she could not spin flax, much less gold. So, sitting in her chamber, with her head resting on her hand, she wept bitterly. While she was thus sitting, the door was opened, and in walked a very little old man, who was both ugly and deformed. The old man greeted her in a friendly tone, and asked why she sat so lonely and afflicted. "I may well be sorrowful," answered the girl. "The king's son has commanded me to spin gold from clay and long straw, and if it be not done before tomorrow's dawn, my life is at stake." The old man then said, "Fair maiden, weep not, I will help you. Here is a pair of gloves. When you have then on you will be able to spin gold. Tomorrow night I will return, when, if you have not found out my name, you shall accompany me home and be my wife." In her despair she agreed to the old man's condition, who then went his way. The maiden now sat and span, and by dawn she had already spun up all the clay and straw, which had become the finest gold it was possible to see. Great was the joy throughout the whole palace, that the king's son had got a bride who was so skillful and, at the same time, so fair. But the young maiden did nothing but weep, and the more the time advanced the more she wept, for she thought of the frightful dwarf who was to come and fetch her. When evening drew nigh, the king's son returned from the chase, and went to converse with his bride. Observing that she appeared sorrowful, he strove to divert her in all sorts of ways, and said he would tell her of a curious adventure, provided only she would be cheerful. The girl entreated him to let her hear it. Then said the prince, "While rambling about in the forest today I witness an odd sort of thing. I saw a very, very little old man dancing round a juniper bush and singing a singular song." "What did he sing?" asked the maiden inquisitively, for she felt sure that the prince had met with the dwarf. "He sang these words, answered the prince, I dag skall jag maltet mala, I morgon skall mitt bröllopp vara. Och jungfrun sitter i buren och gråter; Hon ver inte havad jag heter. Jag heter Titteli Ture. Jag heter Titteli Ture. Today I the malt shall grind, Tomorrow my wedding shall be. And the maiden sits in her bower and weeps; She knows not what I am called. I am called Titteli Ture. I am called Titteli Ture. Was not the maiden now glad? She begged the prince to tell her over and over again what the dwarf had sung. He then repeated the wonderful song, until she had imprinted the old man's name firmly in her memory. She then conversed lovingly with her betrothed, and the prince could not sufficiently praise his young bride's beauty and understanding. But he wondered why she was so overjoyed, being like everyone else, ignorant of the cause of her past sorrow. When it was night, and the maiden was sitting alone in her chamber, the door was opened, and the hideous dwarf again entered. On beholding him the girl sprang up, and said, "Titteli Ture! Titteli Ture! Here are your gloves." When the dwarf heard his name pronounced, he was furiously angry, and hastened away through the air, taking with him the whole roof of the house. The fair maiden now laughed to herself and was joyful beyond measure. She then lay down to sleep, and slept till the sun shone. The following day her marriage with the young prince was solemnized, and nothing more was ever heard of Titteli Ture. Source (books.google.com): Benjamin Thorpe, Yule-Tide Stories: A Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions, from the Swedish, Danish, and German (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853), pp. 168-70 . Source (Internet Archive): Benjamin Thorpe, Yule-Tide Stories: A Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions, from the Swedish, Danish, and German (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1853), pp. 168-70 . Language cautiously modernized by D. L. Ashliman. Thorpe's source: Books.google.com: Gunnar Olof Hyltén-Cavallius and George Stephens, "Flickan, som kunde spinna guld utaf Ler och Lång-Halm," Svenska Folk-Sagor och Äfventyr (Stockholm: A. Bohlins Förlag, 1844), no. 10, pp. 169-72 . Internet Archive: Gunnar Olof Hyltén-Cavallius and George Stephens, "Flickan, som kunde spinna guld utaf Ler och Lång-Halm," Svenska Folk-Sagor och Äfventyr (Stockholm: A. Bohlins Förlag, 1844), no. 10, pp. 169-72 . Return to the table of contents . Tom Tit Tot England Once upon a time there was a woman, and she baked five pies. And when they came out of the oven, they were that overbaked the crusts were too hard to eat. So she says to her daughter: "Darter," says she, "put you them there pies on the shelf, and leave 'em there a little, and they'll come again." -- She meant, you know, the crust would get soft. But the girl, she says to herself: "Well, if they'll come again, I'll eat 'em now." And she set to work and ate 'em all, first and last. Well, come supper-time the woman said: "Go you, and get one o' them there pies. I dare say they've come again now." The girl went and she looked, and there was nothing but the dishes. so back she came, and says she: "Noo, they ain't come again." "Not one of 'em?" says the mother. "Not one of 'em," says she. "Well, come again, or not come again," said the woman, "I'll have one for supper." "But you can't, if they ain't come," said the girl. "But I can," says she. "Go you, and bring the best of 'em." Best or worst," says the girl, "I've ate 'em all, and you can't have one till that's come again." Well, the woman she was done, and she took her spinning to the door to spin, and as she span she sang: My darter ha' ate five, five pies today. My darter ha' ate five, five pies today. The king was coming down the street, and he heard her sing, but what she sang he couldn't hear, so he stopped and said: "What was that you were singing, my good woman?" The woman was ashamed to let him hear what her daughter had been doing, so she sang, instead of that: My darter ha' spun five, five skeins today. My darter ha' spun five, five skeins today. "Stars o' mine!" said the king, "I never heard tell of anyone that could do that." Then he said: "Look you here, I want a wife, and I'll marry your daughter. But look you here," says he, "eleven months out of the year she shall have all she likes to eat, and all the gowns she likes to get, and all the company she likes to keep; but the last month of the year she'll have to spin five skeins every day, and if she don't, I shall kill her." "All right," says the woman; for she thought what a grand marriage that was. And as for the five skeins, when the time came, there'd be plenty of ways of getting out of it, and likeliest, he'd have forgotten all about it. Well, so they were married. And for eleven months the girl had all she liked to eat, and all the gowns she liked to get, and all the company she liked to keep. But when the time was getting over, she began to think about the skeins and to wonder if he had 'em in mind. But not one word did he say about 'em, and she thought he'd wholly forgotten 'em. However, the last day of the last month he takes her to a room she'd never set eyes on before. There was nothing in it but a spinning wheel and a stool And says he: "Now, my dear, here you'll be shut in tomorrow with some victuals and some flax, and if you haven't spun five skeins by the night, your head'll go off." And away he went about his business. Well, she was that frightened, she'd always been such a gatless [careless] girl, that she didn't so much as know how to spin, and what was she to do tomorrow with no one to come nigh her to help her? She sat down on a stool in the kitchen, and law! how she did cry! However, all of a sudden she heard a sort of a knocking low down on the door. She upped and oped it, and what should she see but a small little black thing with a long tail. That looked up at her right curious, and that said: "What are you a-crying for?" "What's that to you?:" says she. "Never you mind," that said, "but tell me what you're a-crying for." "That won't do me no good if I do," says she. "You don't know that," that said, and twirled that's tail round. "well," says she, "that won't do no harm, if that don't do no good," and she upped and told about the pies, and the skeins, and everything. "This is what I'll do," says the little black thing, "I'll come to your window every morning and take the flax and bring it spun at night." "What's your pay?" says she. That looked out the corner of that's eyes, and that said: "I'll give you three guesses every night to guess my name, and if you haven't guessed it before the month's up, you shall be mine. Well, she thought she'd be sure to guess that's name before the month was up. "All right," says she, "I agree." "All right," that says, and law! how that twirled that's tail. Well, the next day, her husband took her into the room, and there was the flax and the day's food. "Now there's the flax," says he, and if that ain't spun up this night, off goes your head." And then he went out and locked the door. He'd hardly gone, when there was a knocking against the window. She upped and she oped it, and there sure enough was the little old thing sitting on the ledge. "Where's the flax?" says he. "Here it be," says she. And she gave it to him. Well, come the evening a knocking came again to the window. She upped and she oped it, and there was the little old thing with five skeins of flax on his arm. "Here it be," says he, and he have it to her. "Now, what's my name" says he. What, is that Bill?" says she. "Noo, that ain't," says he, and he twirled his tail. "Is that Ned?" says she. "Noo, that ain't," says he, and he twirled his tail. "Well, is that Mark?" says she. "Noo, that ain't," says he, and he twirled his tail harder, and away he flew. Well, when her husband came in, there were the five skeins ready for him. "I see I shan't have to kill you tonight, my dear," says her; "you'll have your food and your flax in the morning," says he, and away he goes. Well every day the flax and the food were brought, and every day that there little black impet used to come mornings and evenings. And all the day the girl sate trying to think of names to say to it what it came at night. But she never hit on the right one. And as it got towards the end of the month, the impet began to look so maliceful, and that twirled that's tail faster and faster each time she gave a guess. At last it came to the last day but one. The impet came at night along with the five skeins, and that said: "What, ain't you got my name yet?" "Is that Nicodemus?" says she. "Noo, 'tain't," that says. "Is that Sammle?" says she. "Noo, 'tain't," that says. "A-well, is that Methusalem?" says she. "Noo, 'tain't that neither," that says. Then that looks at her with that's eyes like a coal o' fire, and that says: "Woman, there's only tomorrow night, and then you'll be mine?" And away it flew. Well, she felt that horrid. However, she heard the king coming along the passage. In he came, and when he sees the five skeins, he says, says he: "Well, my dear," says he. "I don't see but what you'll have your skeins ready tomorrow night as well, and as I reckon I shan't have to kill you, I'll have supper in here tonight." So they brought supper, and another stool for him, and down the two sate. Well, he hadn't eaten but a mouthful or so, when he stops and begins to laugh. "What is it?" says she. "A-why," says he, I was out a-hunting today, and I got away to a place in the wood I'd never seen before. And there was an old chalk pit. And I heard a kind of a sort of a humming. So I got off my hobby, and I went right quiet to the pit, and I looked down. Well, what should there be but the funniest little black thing you ever set eyes on. And what was that doing but that had a little spinning wheel, and that was spinning wonderful fast, and twirling that's tail. And as that span that sang: Nimmy nimmy not My name's Tom Tit Tot. Well, when the girl heard this, she felt as if she could have jumped out her skin for joy, but she didn't say a word. Next day that there little thing looked so maliceful when he came for the flax. And when night came, she heard that knocking against the window panes. She oped the window, and that come right in on the ledge. That was grinning from ear to ear, and Oo! that's tail was twirling round so fast. "What's my name?" that says, as that gave her the skeins. "Is that Solomon?" she says, pretending to be afeard. "Noo, 'tain't," that says, and that come further into the room. "Well, is that Zebedee?" says she again. "Noo, 'tain't," says the impet. And then that laughed and twirled that's tail till you couldn't hardly see it. "Take time, woman," that says; "next guess, and you're mine." And that stretched out that's black hands at her. Well, she backed a step or two, and she looked at it, and then she laughed out, and says she, pointing her finger at it: Nimmy nimmy not Your name's Tom Tit Tot. Well, when that heard her, that gave an awful shriek and away that flew into the dark, and she never saw it any more. Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1898), pp. 1-8. Jacobs' note on his source: Contributed by Mrs. Walter-Thomas (née Fison) to the "Suffolk Notes and Queries" of the Ipswich Journal, 1877, and reprinted by Mr. E. Clodd in a paper on "The Philosophy of Rumpelstiltskin" in Folk-Lore Journal, vii [1889], 138-43. I have reduced the Suffolk dialect.... One of the best folk-tales that have ever been collected, far superior to any of the continental variants of this tale with which I am acquainted. Mr. Clodd sees in the class of name-guessing stories, a "survival" of the superstition that to know a man's name gives you power over him, for which reason savages object to tell their names. Return to the table of contents . Duffy and the Devil England (Cornwall) Many of the superstitions of our ancestors are preserved in quaint, irregular rhymes, the recitation of which was the amusement of the people in the long nights of winter. These were sung, or rather said, in a monotone, by the professional drolls, who doubtless added such things as they fancied would increase the interest of the story to the listeners. Especially were they fond of introducing known characters on the scene, and of mixing up events which had occurred within the memory of the old people, with the more ancient legend. The following story, or rather parts of it, formed the subject of one of the Cornish Christmas plays. When I was a boy, I well remember being much delighted with the coarse acting of a set of Christmas players, who exhibited in the "great hall" of a farmhouse at which I was visiting, and who gave us the principal incidents of Duffy and the Devil Terrytop; one of the company doing the part of Chorus, and filling up by rude descriptions -- often in rhyme -- the parts which the players could not represent. It was cider-making time. Squire Lovel of Trove, or more correctly, Trewoof, rode up to Burian Churchtown to procure help. Boys and maidens were in request, some to gather the apples from the trees, others to carry them to the cider mill. Passing along the village as hastily as the dignity of a squire would allow him, his attention was drawn to a great noise -- scolding in a shrill treble voice, and crying -- proceeding from Janey Chygwin's door. The squire rode up to the cottage, and he saw the old woman beating her stepdaughter Duffy about the head with the skirt of her swing-tail gown, in which she had been carrying out the ashes. She made such a dust, that the squire was nearly choked and almost blinded with the wood ashes. "What cheer, Janey?" cries the squire. "What's the to-do with you and Duffy?" "Oh, the lazy hussy!" shouts Janey, "is all her time courseying and courranting [running and chasing] with the boys! She will never stay in to boil the porridge, knit the stockings, or spin the yarn." "Don't believe her, your honor," exclaims Duffy. "My knitting and spinning is the best in the parish." The war of tongues continued in this strain for some time, the old squire looking calmly on, and resolving in his mind to take Duffy home with him to Trove, her appearance evidently pleasing him greatly. Squire Lovel left the old and young woman to do the best they could, and went round the village to complete his hiring. When he returned, peace had been declared between them, but when Lovel expressed his desire to take Duffy home to his house to help the housekeeper to do the spinning, "A pretty spinner she is!" shouted old Janey at the top of her voice. "Try me, your honor," said Duffy, curtsying very low. "My yarns are the best in the parish." "We'll soon try that," said the squire. "Janey will be glad to get quits of thee, I see, and thou'lt be nothing loath to leave her. So jump up behind me, Duffy." No sooner said than done. The maid Duffy, without ceremony, mounted behind the squire on the horse, and they jogged silently down to Trove. Squire Lovel's old housekeeper was almost blind -- one eye had been put out by an angry old wizard, and through sympathy she was rapidly losing the power of seeing with the other. This old dame was consequently very glad of someone to help her in spinning and knitting. The introduction over, the housekeeper takes Duffy up into the garret where the wool was kept, and where the spinning was done in the summer, and requests her to commence her work. The truth must be told. Duffy was an idle slut. She could neither knit nor spin. Well, here she was left along, and, of course, expected to produce a good specimen of her work. The garret was piled from the floor to the key-beams with fleeces of wool. Duffy looked despairingly at them, and then sat herself down on the "turn" -- the spinning wheel -- and cried out, "Curse the spinning and knitting! The devil may spin and knit for the squire for what I care." Scarcely had Duffy spoken these words than she heard a rustling noise behind some wool-packs, and forth walked a queer-looking little man, with a remarkable pair of eyes, which seemed to send out flashes of light. There was something uncommonly knowing in the twist of his mouth, and his curved nose had an air of curious intelligence. He was dressed in black, and moved towards Duffy with a jaunty air, knocking something against the floor at every step he took. "Duffy dear," said this little gentleman, "I'll do all the spinning and knitting for thee." "Thank 'e," says Duffy, quite astonished. "Duffy dear, a lady shall you be." "Thank 'e, your honor," smiled Duffy. "But, Duffy dear, remember," coaxingly said the queer little man, "remember, that for all this, at the end of three years, you must go with me, unless you can find out my name." Duffy was not the least bit frightened, nor did she hesitate long, but presently struck a bargain with her kind but unknown friend, who told her she had only to wish, and her every wish should be fulfilled. And as for the spinning and knitting, she would find all she required under the black ram's fleece. He then departed. How, Duffy could not tell, but in a moment the queer little gentleman was gone. Duffy sung in idleness, and slept until it was time for her to make her appearance. So she wished for some yarns, and looking under the black fleece she found them. Those were shown by the housekeeper to the squire, and both declared they had never seen such beautiful yarns. The next day Duffy was to knit this yarn into stockings. Duffy idled, as only professed idlers can idle. But in due time, as if she had been excessively industrious, she produced a pair of stockings for the old squire. If the yarn was beautiful, the stocking were beyond all praise. They were as fine as silk, and as strong as leather. Squire Lovel soon gave them a trial; and when he came home at night after hunting, he declared he would never wear any other than Duffy's stocking. He had wandered all day through brake and briar, furze and brambles. There was not a scratch on his legs, and he was as dry as a bone. There was no end to his praise of Duffy's stockings. Duffy had a rare time of it now. She could do what she pleased and rove where she willed. She was dancing on the mill-bed half the day with all the gossiping women who brought their grist to be ground. In those "good old times" the ladies of the parish would take their corn to mill, and serge the flour themselves. When a few of them met together, they would either tell stories or dance whilst the corn was grinding. Sometimes the dance would be on the mill-bed, sometimes out on the green. On some occasions the miller's fiddle would be in request, at others the "crowd" [a sieve covered with sheepskin] was made to do the duty of a tambourine. So Duffy was always finding excuses to go to mill, and many "a round" would she dance with the best people in the parish. Old Bet, the miller's wife, was a witch, and she found out who did Duffy's work for her. Duffy and old Bet were always the best of friends, and she never told anyone about Duffy's knitting friend, nor did she ever say a word about the stockings being unfinished. There was always a stitch down. On Sundays the people went to Burian Church from all parts to look at the squire's stockings. And the old squire would stop at the cross, proud enough to show them. He could hunt Through brambles and furze in all sorts of weather; His old shanks were as sound as if bound up in leather. Duffy was now sought after by all the young men of the country; and at last the squire, fearing to lose a pretty girl, and one who was so useful to him, married her himself, and she became, according to the fashion of the time and place, Lady Lovel. But she was commonly known by her neighbors as the Duffy Lady. Lady Lovel kept the devil hard at work. Stockings, all sorts of fine underclothing, bedding, and much ornamental work, the like of which was never seen, was produced at command and passed off as her own. Duffy passed a merry time of it, but somehow or other she was never happy when she was compelled to play the lady. She passed much more of her time with the old crone at the mill than in the drawing room at Trove. The squire sported and drank, and cared little about Duffy, so long as she provided him with knitted garments. The three years were nearly at an end. Duffy had tried every plan to find out the devil's name, but had failed in all. She began to fear that she should have to go off with her queer friend, and Duffy became melancholy. Old Bet endeavored to rouse her, persuading her that she could, from her long experience and many dealings with the imps of darkness, at the last moment put her in the way of escaping her doom. Duffy went day after day to her garret, and there each day was the devil gibing and jeering till she was almost mad. There was but another day. Bet was seriously consulted now, and -- as good as her word -- she promised to use her power. Duffy Lady was to bring down to the mill that very evening a jack [leather jug] of the strongest beer she had in the cellar. She was not to go to bed until the squire returned from hunting, no matter how late, and she was to make no remark in reply to anything the squire might tell her. The jack of beer was duly carried to the mill, and Duffy returned home very melancholy to wait up for the squire. No sooner had Lady Lovel left the mill than old Bet came out with the "crowd" over her shoulders, and the blackjack [tar-coated leather jug] in her hand. She shut the door, and turned the water off the mill-wheel, threw her red cloak about her, and away. She was seen by her neighbors going towards Boleit. A man saw the old woman trudging past the Pipers, and through the Dawnse Main into the downs, but there he lost sight of her, and no one could tell where old Bet was gone to at that time of night. Duffy waited long and anxiously. By and by the dogs came home alone. They were covered with foam, their tongues were hanging out of their mouths, and all the servants said they must have met the devil's hounds without heads. Duffy was seriously alarmed. Midnight came but no squire. At last he arrived, but like a crazy, crack-brained man, he kept singing: Here's to the devil, With his wooden pick and shovel. He was neither drunk nor frightened, but wild with some strange excitement. After a long time Squire Lovel sat down, and began, "My dear Duffy, you haven't smiled this long time. But now I'll tell 'e something that would make ye laugh if ye're dying. If you'd seen what I've seen tonight, ha, ha, ha! Here's to the devil, With his wooden pick and shovel." True to her orders, Duffy said not a word, but allowed the squire to ramble on as he pleased. At length he told her the following story of his adventures, with interruptions which have not been retained, and with numerous coarse expressions which are best forgotten: The squire's story of the meeting of the witches in the Fugoe Hole: Duffy dear, I left home at break of day this morning. I hunted all the moors from Trove to Trevider, and never started a hare all the livelong day. I determined to hunt all night, but that I'd have a brace to bring home. So, at nightfall I went down Lemorna Bottoms, then up Brene Downses, and as we passed the Dawnse Main up started a hare, as fine a hare as ever was seen. She passed the Pipers, down through the Reens, in the mouth of the dogs half the time, yet they couldn't catch her at all. As fine a chase as ever was seen, until she took into the Fugoe Hole. In went the dogs after her, and I followed, the owls and bats flying round my head. On we went, through water and mud, a mile or more, I'm quite certain. I didn't know the place was so long before. At last we came to a broad pool of water, when the dogs lost the scent and ran back past me howling and jowling, terrified almost to death! A little farther on I turned round a corner, and saw a glimmering fire on the other side the water, and there were St. Leven witches in scores. Some were riding on ragwort, some on brooms, some were floating on their three-legged stools, and some, who had been milking the little good cows in Wales, had come back astride of the largest leeks they could find. Amongst the rest there was our Bet of the mill, with her "crowd" in her hand, and my own blackjack slung across her shoulders. In a short time the witches gathered round the fire, and blowed it up, after a strange fashion, till it burned up into a brilliant blue flame. Then I saw amongst the rest a queer little man in black, with a long forked tail, which he held high in the air, and twirled around. Bet struck her "crowd" as soon as he appeared, and beat up the tune: Here's to the devil, With his wooden pick and shovel, Digging tin by the bushel, With his tail cock'd up! Then the queer little devil and all danced like the wind, and went faster and faster, making such a clatter, "as if they had on each foot a pewter platter." Every time the man in black came round by old Bet, he took a good pull from my own blackjack, till at last, as if he had been drinking my best beer, he seemed to have lost his head, when he jumped up and down, turned round and round, and roaring with laughter, sung: Duffy, my lady, you'll never know -- what? -- That my name is Terrytop, Terrytop -- top! When the squire sung those lines, he stopped suddenly, thinking that Duffy was going to die. She turned pale, and red, and pale again. However, Duffy said nothing, and the squire proceeded: After the dance, all the witches made a ring around the fire, and again blew it up, until the blue flames reached the top of the Zawn [a cavernous gorge]. Then the devil danced through and through the fire, and springing ever and anon amongst the witches, kicked them soundly. At last -- I was shaking with laughter at the fun -- I shouted, "Go it, Old Nick!" and lo, the lights went out, and I had to fly with all my speed, for every one of the witches were after me. I scampered home somehow, and here I am. Why don't you laugh, Duffy? Duffy did laugh, and laugh right heartily now, and when tired of their fun, the squire and the lady went to bed. The three years were up within an hour. Duffy had willed for an abundant supply of knitted things, and filled every chest in the house. She was in the best chamber trying to cram some more stockings into a big chest, when the queer little man in black appeared before her. "Well, Duffy, my dear," said he, "I have been true to my word and served you truly for three years as we agreed, so now I hope you will go with me, and make no objection." He bowed very obsequiously, almost to the ground, and regarded Duffy Lady with a very offensive leer. "I fear," smiled Duffy, "that your country is rather warm, and might spoil my fair complexion." "It is not so hot as some people say, Duffy," was his reply. "But come along. I've kept my word, and of course a lady of your standing will keep your word also. Can you tell me my name?" Duffy curtsied, and smilingly said, "You have behaved like a true gentleman, yet I wouldn't like to go so far." The devil frowned and approached as if he would lay forcible hands upon her. "Maybe your name is Lucifer?" He stamped his foot and grinned horridly. "Lucifer! Lucifer! He's no other than a servant to me in my own country." Suddenly calming again, he said, quietly, "Lucifer! I would scarcely be seen speaking to him at court. But come along. When I spin for ladies I expect honorable treatment at their hands. You've two guesses more. But they're of little use. My name is not generally known on earth." "Perhaps," smiled Duffy again, "my lord's name is Beelzebub?" How he grinned, and his sides shook with convulsive joy. "Beelzebub!" says he. "I believe he's some sort of a cousin -- a Cornish cousin you know." "I hope your honor," curtsied Duffy, "will not take offence. Impute my mistake to ignorance." Our demon was rampant with joy. He danced around Duffy with delight, and was, seeing that she hesitated, about to seize her somewhat roughly. "Stop! Stop!" shouts Duffy. "Perhaps you will be honest enough to admit that your name is Terrytop." The gentleman in black looked at Duffy, and she steadily looked him in the face. "Terrytop! Deny it if you dare," says she. "A gentleman never denies his name," replied Terrytop, drawing himself up with much dignity. "I did not expect to be beaten by a young minx like you, Duffy. But the pleasure of your company is merely postponed." With this Terrytop departed in fire and smoke, and all the devil's knitting suddenly turned to ashes. Squire Lovel was out hunting, away far on the moors. The day was cold and the winds piercing. Suddenly the stockings dropped from his legs and the homespun from his back, so that he came home with nothing on but his shirt and his shoes, almost dead with cold. All this was attributed by the squire to the influence of old Bet, who, he thought, had punished him for pursuing her with his dogs when she had assumed the form of a hare. The story, as told by the drolls, now rambles on. Duffy cannot furnish stockings. The squire is very wroth. There are many quarrels -- mutual recriminations. Duffy's old sweetheart is called in to beat the squire, and eventually peace is procured, by a stratagem of old Bet's, which would rather shock the sense of propriety in these our days. Source: Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall (London: John Camden Hotten, 1871), pp. 239-247. A footnote by Hunt concerning the Fugoe Hole: There is a tradition, firmly believed on the lower side of the Burian, that the Fugoe Hole extends from the cliffs underground so far that the end of it is under the parlor of the Tremewen's house in Trove, which is the only remaining portion of the old mansion of the Lovels. Here the witches were in the habit of meeting the devil, and holding their Sabbath. Often his dark highness has been heard piping while the witches danced to his music. A pool of water some distance from the entrance prevents any adventurer from exploring the "Hole" to its termination. Hares often take refuge in the Fugoe Hole, from which they have never been known to return. Return to the table of contents . Whuppity Stoorie Scotland I see that you are fond of talks about fairies, children; and a story about a fairy and the goodwife of Kittlerumpit has just come into my mind; but I can't very well tell you now whereabouts Kittlerumpit lies. I think it is somewhere in the Debatable Ground. Anyway, I shall not pretend to know more than I do, like everybody nowadays. I wish they would remember the ballad we used to sing long ago: Mony ane sings the gerss, the gerss, And mony ane sings the corn; And mony ane clatters o' bold Robin Hood, Ne'er kent where he was born. But howsoever about Kittlerumpit. The goodman was a rambling sort of body; and he went to a fair one day, and not only never came home again, but nevermore was heard of. Some said he 'listed, and others that the tiresome press-gang snatched him up, though he was furnished with a wife and a child to boot. Alas! that wretched press-gang! They went about the country like roaring lions, seeking whom they might devour. Well do I remember how my eldest brother Sandy was all but smothered in the meal-chest, hiding from those rascals. After they were gone, we pulled him out from among the meal, puffing and crying, and as white as any corpse. My mother had to pick the meal out of his mouth with the shank of a horn spoon. Ah well, when the goodman of Kittlerumpit was gone, the goodwife was left with small means. Little resources had she, and a baby boy at her breast. All said they were sorry for her; but nobody helped her -- which is a common case, sirs. Howsoever, the goodwife had a sow, and that was her only consolation; for the sow was soon to farrow, and she hoped for a good litter. But we all know hope is fallacious. One day the woman goes to the sty to fill the sow's trough; and what does she find but the sow lying on her back, grunting and groaning, and ready to give up the ghost. I trow [trust, believe] this was a new pang to the goodwife's heart; so she sat down on the knocking stone [a stone with a hollow in it for pounding grain, so as to separate the husks from the kernels], with her bairn [child] on her knee, and cried sorer than ever she did for the loss of her own goodman. Now I premise that the cottage of Kittlerumpit was built on a brae [hillside], with a large fir wood behind it, of which you may hear more ere we go far on. So the goodwife, when she was wiping her eyes, chances to look down the brae; and what does she see but an old woman almost like a lady, coming slowly up the road. She was dressed in green, all but a short white apron and a black velvet hood, and a steeple-crowned beaver hat on her head. She had a long walking staff, as long as herself, in her hand -- the sort of staff that old men and old women helped themselves with long ago. I see no such staffs now, sirs. Ah well, when the goodwife saw the green gentlewoman near her, she rose and made a curtsy; and "Madam," quoth she, weeping, "I am one of the most misfortunate women alive." "I don't wish to hear pipers' news and fiddlers' tales, goodwife," quoth the green woman. "I know you have lost your goodman -- we had worse losses at the Sheriff Muir [a common saying, in response to a complaint about a trifle]; and I know that your sow is unco [strangely, extremely] sick. Now what will you give me if I cure her?" "Anything your ladyship's madam likes," quoth the witless goodwife, never guessing whom she had to deal with. "Let us wet thumbs on that bargain," quoth the green woman; so thumbs were wetted, I warrant you; and into the sty madam marches. She looks at the sow with a long stare, and then began to mutter to herself what the goodwife couldn't well understand; but she said it sounded like Pitter patter, Holy water. Then she took out of her pocket a wee bottle, with something like oil in it; and she rubs the sow with it above the snout, behind the ears, and on the tip of the tail. "Get up, beast," quoth the green woman. No sooner said than done. Up jumps the sow with a grunt, and away to her trough for her breakfast. The goodwife of Kittlerumpit was a joyful goodwife now, and would have kissed the very hem of the green woman's gown-tail, but she wouldn't let her. "I am not so fond of ceremonies," quoth she; "but now that I have righted your sick beast, let us end our settled bargain. You will not find me an unreasonable, greedy body. I like ever to do a good turn for a small reward. All I ask, and will have, is that baby boy in your bosom." The goodwife of Kittlerumpit, who now knew her customer, gave a shrill cry like a stuck swine. The green woman was a fairy, no doubt; so she prays, and cries, and begs, and scolds; but all wouldn't do. "You may spare your din," quoth the fairy, "screaming as if I was as deaf as a doornail. But this I'll let you know: I cannot, by the law we live under, take your bairn till the third day; and not then, if you can tell me my right name." So madam goes away round the pigsty end; and the goodwife falls down in a swoon behind the knocking stone. Ah well, the goodwife of Kittlerumpit could not sleep any that night for crying, and all the next day the same, cuddling her bairn till she nearly squeezed its breath out. But the second day she thinks of taking a walk in the wood I told you of. And so with the bairn in her arms, she sets out, and goes far in among the trees, where was an old quarry hole, grown over with grass, and a bonny spring well in the middle of it. Before she came very near, she hears the whirring of a flax wheel, and a voice singing a song; so the woman creeps quietly among the bushes, and peeps over the brow of the quarry; and what does she see but the green fairy tearing away at her wheel, and singing like any precentor: Little kens [knows] our guid dame at hame, That Whuppity Stoorie is my name. "Ha, ha!" thinks the woman, "I've got the mason's word at last. The devil give them joy that told it!" So she went home far lighter than she came out, as you may well guess -- laughing like a madcap with the thought of cheating the old green fairy. Ah well, you must know that this goodwife was a jocose woman, and ever merry when her heart was not very sorely overladen. So she thinks to have some sport with the fairy; and at the appointed time she puts the bairn behind the knocking stone, and sits on the stone herself. Then she pulls her cap over her left ear and twists her mouth on the other side, as if she were weeping; and an ugly face she made, you may be sure. She hadn't long to wait, for up the brae climbs the green fairy, neither lame nor lazy; and long ere she got near the knocking stone she screams out, "Goodwife of Kittlerumpit, you know well what I come for. Stand and deliver!" The woman pretends to cry harder than before, and wrings her hands, and falls on her knees with "Och, sweet madam mistress, spare my only bairn, and take the wretched sow!" "The devil take the sow, for my part," quoth the fairy. "I come not here for swine's flesh. Don't be contramawcious, huzzy, but give me the child instantly!" "Ochone, dear lady mine," quoth the crying goodwife; "forgo my poor bairn, and take me myself!" "The devil is in the daft jade," quoth the fairy, looking like the far end of a fiddle. "I'll bet she is clean demented. Who in all the earthly world, with half an eye in his head, would ever meddle with the likes of thee?" I trow this set up the woman of Kittlerumpit's bristle, for though she had two blear eyes and a long red nose besides, she thought herself as bonny as the best of them. So she springs off her knees, sets the top of her cap straight, and with her two hands folded before her, she makes a curtsy down to the ground, and, "In troth, fair madam," quoth she, "I might have had the wit to know that the likes of me is not fit to tie the worst shoestrings of the high and mighty princess, Whuppity Stoorie ." If a flash of gunpowder had come out of the ground it couldn't have made the fairy leap higher than she did. Then down she came again plump on her shoe-heels; and whirling round, she ran down the brae, screeching for rage, like an owl chased by the witches. The goodwife of Kittlerumpit laughed till she was like to split; then she takes up her bairn, and goes into her house, singing to it all the way: A goo and a gitty, my bonny wee tyke, Ye'se noo ha'e your four-oories; Sin' we've gien Nick a bane to pyke, Wi' his wheels and his Whuppity Stoories. Source: John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1901), vol. 2, pp. 585-590. Rhys's source: Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland (Edinburgh, 1858), pp. 221-115. Rhys normalizes the Scottish dialect, with the following comment: "The Scotch is so broad, that I think it advisable, at the risk of some havoc to the local coloring, to southronize it somewhat." Return to the table of contents . Peerie Fool [Peerifool] Orkney Islands There was once a king and queen in Rousay who had three daughters. The king died, and the queen was living in a small house with her daughters. They kept a cow and a kale yard. They found their cabbage was all being taken away. The eldest daughter said to the queen, she would take a blanket about her and would sit and watch what was going away with the kale. So when the night came, she went out to watch. In a short time a very big giant came into the yard. He began to cut the kale and throw it in a big cubby [straw basket]. So he cut till he had it well filled. The princess was always asking why he was taking her mother's kale. He was saying to her, if she was not quiet he would take her too. As soon as he had filled his cubby, he took her by a leg and an arm and threw her on the top of his cubby of kale, and away home he went with her. When he got home he told her what work she had to do. She had to milk the cow and put her up to the hills called Bloodfield, and then she had to take wool, and wash and tease it, and comb and card, and spin and make claith [cloth]. When the giant went out she milked the cow and put her to the hills. Then she put on the pot and made porridge to herself. As she was supping it, a great many peerie [little] yellow-headed folk came running, calling out to give them some. She said, Little for one, and less for two, And never a grain have I for you. When she came to work the wool , none of that work could she do at all. The giant came home at night and found she had not done her work. He took her and began at her head, and peeled the skin off all the way down her back and over her feet. Then he threw her on the couples [rafters] among the hens. The same adventure befell the second girl. If her sister could do little with the wool, she could do less. When the giant came home he found her work not done. He began at the crown of her head and peeled a strip of skin all down her back and over her feet, and threw her on the couples beside her sister. They lay there and could not speak nor come down. The next night the youngest princess said she would take a blanket about her and go to watch what had gone away with her sisters. Ere long, in came a giant with a big cubby, and began to cut the kale. She was asking why he was taking her mother's kale. He was saying, if she was not quiet he would take her too. He took her by a leg and an arm and threw her on the top of his cubby and carried her away. Next morning he gave her the same work as he had given her sisters. When he was gone out, she milked the cow and put her to the high hills. Then she put on the pot and made porridge to herself. When the peerie yellow-headed folk came asking for some, she told them to get something to sup with. Some got heather cows [brooms made from twigs of heather] and some got broken dishes. Some got one thing, and some another, and they all got some of her porridge. After they were all gone, a peerie yellow-headed boy came in and asked her if she had any work to do; he could do any work with wool. She said she had plenty, but would never be able to pay him for it. He said all he was asking for it was to tell him his name. She thought that would be easy to do, and gave him the wool. When it was getting dark, an old woman came in and asked her for lodging. The princess said she could not give her that, but asked her if she had any news. But the old woman had none, and went away to lie out. There is a high knowe [knoll] near the place, and the old woman sat under it for shelter. She found it very warm. She was always climbing up, and when she came to the top, she heard someone inside saying, Tease, teasers, tease; Card, carders, card; Spin, spinners spin, For Peerie Fool is my name There was a crack in the knowe, and light coming out. She looked in and saw a great many peerie folk working, and a peerie yellow-headed boy running around them, calling out that. The old woman thought she would get lodging if she went to give this news, so she came back and told the princess the whole of it. The princess went on saying, "Peerie Fool, Peerie Fool," till the yellow-headed boy came with all the wool made into claith. He asked what was his name, and she guessed names, and he jumped about and said, "No." At last she said, "Peerie Fool is your name." He threw down the wool and ran off very angry. As the giant was coming home he met a great many peerie yellow-headed folk, some with their eyes hanging on their breasts. He asked them what was the matter. They told him it was working so hard, pulling wool so fine. He said he had a good wife at home, and if she was safe, never would he allow her to do any work again. When he came home she was all safe, and had a great many webs lying all ready, and he was very kind to her. Next day when he went out, she found her sisters and took them down from the couples. She put the skin on their backs again, and she put her eldest sister in a cazy [straw basket], and put all the fine things she could find with her, and grass on the top. When the giant came home, she asked him to take the cazy to her mother with some food for her cow. He was so pleased with her, he would do anything for her, and took it away. Next day she did the same with her other sister. She told him she would have the last of the food she had to send her mother for the cow ready next night. She told him she was going a bit from home, and would leave it ready for him. She got into the cazy with all the fine things she could find, and covered herself with grass. He took the cazy and carried it the queen's house. She and her daughters had a big boiler of boiling water ready. They couped [overturned, emptied] it about him when he was under the window, and that was the end of the giant. Source: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney and Shetland Islands , collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas: County Folk-Lore , vol. 3, printed extracts, no. 5 (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1903), pp. 222-226. Black's source: "Taken down from the recitation of an Orkney woman by Mr. D. J. Robertson. Printed in Longman's Magazine , vol. 14, pp. 331-334." This tale combines folktale type 500 (The Name of the Helper) with type 311 (The Heroine Rescues Herself and Her Sisters). Return to the table of contents . Gwarwyn-a-throt Wales Long ago there was in service at a Monmouthshire farm a young woman who was merry and strong. Who she was or whence she came nobody knew, but many believed that she belonged to the old breed of Bendith y Mamau . Some time after she had come to the farm, the rumor spread that the house was sorely troubled by a spirit. But the girl and the elf understood one another well, and they became the best of friends. So the elf proved very useful to the maid, for he did everything for her -- washing, ironing, spinning, and twisting wool. In fact, they say that he was remarkably handy at the spinning wheel. Moreover, he expected only a bowlful of sweet milk and wheat bread, or some flummery, for his work. So she took care to place the bowl with his food at the bottom of the stairs every night as she went to bed. It ought to have been mentioned that she was never allowed to catch a sight of him, for he always did his work in the dark. Nor did anybody know when he ate his food. She used to leave the bowl there at night, and it would be empty by the time when she got up in the morning, the bwca having cleared it. But one night, by way of cursedness, what did she do but fill the bowl with some stale urine which they used in dyeing wool and other things about the house. But heavens! it would have been better for her not to have done it, for when she got up next morning what should he do but suddenly spring from some corner and seized her by the neck! He began to beat her and kick her from one end of the house to the other, while he shouted at the top of his voice at every kick: Y faidan din dwmp-- Yn rhoi bara haið a thrwnc I'r bwca! The idea that the thick-buttocked lass Should give barley bread and p-- To the bogie! Meanwhile she screamed for help, but none came for some time. When, however, he heard the servant men getting up, he took to his heels as hard as he could; and nothing was heard of him for some time. But at the end of two years he was found to be at another farm in the neighborhood, called Hafod yr Ynys, where he at once became great friends with the servant girl, for she fed him like a young chicken by giving him a little bread and milk all the time. So he worked willingly and well for her in return for his favorite food. More especially, he used to spin and wind the yarn for her; but she wished him in time to show his face, or to tell her his name. He would by no means do either. One evening, however, when all the men were out, and when he was spinning hard at the wheel, she deceived him by telling him that she was also going out. He believed her; and when he heard the door shutting, he began to sing as he plied the wheel: Hi warða'n iawn pe gypa hi, Taw Gwarwyn-a-throt yw'm enw i. How she would laugh, did she know that Gwarwyn-a-throt is my name! "Ha! ha!" said the maid at the bottom of the stairs. "I know thy name now." "What is it, then?" he asked. She replied, "Gwarwyn-a-throt"; and as soon as she uttered the words he left the wheel where it was, and off he went. Source: John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1901), vol. 2, pp. 593-595. Return to the table of contents . Penelop Wales In the northwest corner of the parish of Beddgelert there is a place which used to be called by the old inhabitants the Land of the Fairies , and it reaches from Cwm Hafod Ruffydd along the slope of the mountain of Drws y Coed as far as Llyn y Dywarchen. The old people of former times used to find much pleasure and amusement in this district in listening every moonlight night to the charming music of the fair family, and in looking at their dancing and their mirthful sports. One on a time, a long while ago, there lived at upper Drws y Coed a youth, who was joyous and active, brave and determined of heart. This young man amused himself every night by looking on and listening to them. One night they had come to a field near the house, near the shore of Llyn y Dywarchen, to pass a merry night. He went, as usual, to look at them, when his glances at once fell on one of the ladies, who possessed such beauty as he had never seen in a human being. Her appearance was like that of alabaster; her voice was as agreeable as the nightingale's, and as unruffled as the zephyr in a flower garden at the noon of a long summer's day; and her gait was pretty and aristocratic; her feet moved in the dance as lightly on the grass as the rays of the sun had a few hours before on the lake hard by. He fell in love with her over head and ears, and in the strength of that passion -- for what is stronger than love! -- he rushed, when the bustle was at its height, into the midst of the fair crowd, and snatched the graceful damsel in his arms, and ran instantly with her to the house. When the fair family saw the violence used by a mortal, they broke up the dance and ran after her toward the house; but, when they arrived, the door had been bolted with iron, wherefore they could not get near her or touch her in any way; and the damsel had been placed securely in a chamber. The youth, having her now under his roof, as is the saying, endeavored, with all his talent, to win her affection and to induce her to wed. But at first she would on no account hear of it. On seeing his persistence, however, and on finding that he would not let her go to return to her people, she consented to be his servant if he could find out her name; but she would not be married to him. As he thought that was not impossible, he half agreed to the condition; but, after bothering his head with all the names known in that neighborhood, he found himself no nearer his point, though he was not willing to give up the search hurriedly. One night, as he was going home from Carnarvon market, he saw a number of the fair folks in a turbary not far from his path. They seemed to him to be engaged in an important deliberation, and it struck him that they were planning how to recover their abducted sister. He thought, moreover, that if he could secretly get within hearing, he might possibly find her name out. On looking carefully around, he saw that a ditch ran through the turbary and passed near the spot where they stood. So he made his way round to the ditch, and crept, on all fours, along it until he was within hearing of the family. After listening a little, he found that their deliberation was as to the fate of the lady he had carried away, and he heard one of them crying, piteously, "O Penelop, O Penelop, my sister, why didst thou run away with a mortal!" "Penelop," said the young man to himself, "that must be the name of my beloved; that is enough." At once he began to creep back quietly, and he returned home safely without having been seen by the fairies. When he got into the house, he called out to the girl, saying, "Penelop, my beloved one, come here!" and she came forward and asked, in astonishment, "O mortal, who has betrayed my name to thee?" Then, lifting up her tiny folded hands, she exclaimed, "Alas, my fate, my fate!" But she grew contented with her fate, and took to her work in earnest. Everything in the house and on the farm prospered under her charge. There was no better or cleanlier housewife in the neighborhood around, or one that was more provident than she. The young man, however, was not satisfied that she should be a servant to him, and, after he had long and persistently sought it, she consented to be married, on the one condition, that, if ever he should touch her with iron, she would be free to leave him and return to her family. He agreed to that condition, since he believed that such a thing would never happen at his hands. So they were marred, and lived several years happily and comfortably together. Two children where born to them, a boy and a girl, the picture of their mother and the idols of their father. But one morning, when the husband wanted to go to the fair at Carnarvon, he went out to catch a filly that was grazing in the field by the house; but for the life of him he could not catch her, and he called to his wife to come to assist him. She came without delay, and they managed to drive the filly to a secure corner, as they thought; but, as the man approached to catch her, she rushed past him. In his excitement, he threw the bridle after her; but who should be running in the direction of it, but his wife! The iron bit struck her on the cheek, and she vanished out of sight on the spot. Her husband never saw her any more; but one cold frosty night, a long time after this event, he was awakened from his sleep by somebody rubbing the glass of his window, and, after he had given a response, he recognized the gentle and tender voice of his wife saying to him: Lest my son should find it cold, Place on him his father's coat; Lest the fair one find it cold, Place on her my petticoat. It is said that the descendants of this family still continue in these neighborhoods, and that they are easy to be recognized by their light and fair complexion. Source: John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1901), vol. 1, pp. 86-89. Return to the table of contents . Silly go Dwt Wales A farmer's wife who lived at the Nant, in the parish of Llaniestin, was frequently visited by a fairy who used to borrow paddett a gradett [a round flat iron and a pan used for baking] from her. These she used to get, and she returned them with a loaf borne on her head in acknowledgement. But one day she came to ask for the loan of her troett bach , or wheel for spinning flax. When handing her this, the farmer's wife wished to know her name, as she came so often, but she refused to tell her. However, she was watched at her spinning, and overheard singing to the whir of the wheel: Bychan a wyða' hi Mai Sili go Dwt Yw f'enw i. Little did she know That Silly go Dwt Is my name. Source: John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1901), v. 1, pp. 229-230. Rhys's source: Evan Williams, a smith who lived at Yr Arð Las on Rhos Hirwaen. Return to the table of contents . The Rival Kempers Ireland In the north of Ireland there are spinning meetings of unmarried females frequently held at the houses of farmers, called kemps . Every young woman who has got the reputation of being a quick and expert spinner attends where the kemp is to be held, at an hour usually before daylight, and on these occasions she is accompanied by her sweetheart or some male relative, who carries her wheel, and conducts her safely across the fields or along the road, as the case may be. A kemp is, indeed, an animated and joyous scene, and one, besides which is calculated to promote industry and decent pride. Scarcely anything can be more cheering and agreeable than to hear at a distance, breaking the silence of morning, the light-hearted voices of many girls either in mirth or song, the humming sound of the busy wheels -- jarred upon a little, it is true, by the stridulous noise and checkings of the reels, and the voices of the reelers, as they call aloud the checks, together with the name of the girl and the quantity she has spun up to that period; for the contest is generally commenced two or three hours before daybreak. This mirthful spirit is also sustained by the prospect of a dance -- with which, by the way, every kemp closes; and when the fair victor is declared, she is to be looked upon as the queen of the meeting, and treated with the necessary respect. But to our tale. Everyone knew Shaun Buie M'Gaveran to be the cleanest, best-conducted boy, and the most industrious too, in the whole parish of Faugh-a-ballagh. Hard was it to find a young fellow who could handle a flail, spade, or reaping-hook in better style, or who could go through his day's work in a more creditable or workmanlike manner. In addition to this, he was a fine, well-built, handsome young man as you could meet in a fair; and so, sign was on it, maybe the pretty girls weren't likely to pull each other's caps about him Shaun, however, was as prudent as he was good looking; and although he wanted a wife, yet the sorrow one of him but preferred taking a well-handed, smart girl, who was known to be well behaved and industrious, like himself. Here, however, was where the puzzle lay on him; for instead of one girl of that kind, there were in the neighborhood no less than a dozen of them -- all equally fit and willing to become his wife, and all equally good looking. There were two, however, whom he thought a trifle above the rest; but so nicely balanced were Biddy Corrigan and Sally Gorman, that for the life of him he could not make up his mind to decide between them. Each of them had won her kemp; and it was currently said by them who ought to know, that neither of them could overmatch the other. No two girls in the parish were better respected, or deserved to be so; and the consequence was, they had everyone's good word and good wish. Now it so happened that Shaun had been pulling a cord with each; and as he knew not how to decide between, he thought he would allow them to do that themselves if they could. He accordingly gave out to the neighbors that he would hold a kemp on that day week, and he told Biddy and Sally especially that he had made up his mind to marry whichever of them won the kemp, for he knew right well, as did all the parish, that on of them must. The girls agreed to this very good-humoredly, Biddy telling Sally that she (Sally) would surely win it; and Sally not to be outdone in civility, telling the same thing to her. Well, the week was nearly past, there being but two days till that of the kemp, when, about three o'clock, there walks into the house of old Paddy Corrigan a little woman dressed in high-heeled shoes and a short red cloak. There was no one in the house but Biddy at the time, who rose up and placed a chair near the fire, and asked the little red woman to sit down and rest herself. She accordingly did so, and in a short time a lively chat commenced between them. "So," said the strange woman, "there's to be a great kemp in Shaun Buie M'Gaveran's?" "Indeed there is that, good woman," replied Biddy, smiling and blushing to back of that again, because she knew her own fate depended on it. "And," continued the little woman, "whoever wins the kemp wins a husband?" "Aye, so it seems." "Well, whoever gets Shaun will be a happy woman, for he's the moral of a good boy." "That's nothing but the truth, anyhow," replied Biddy, sighing, for fear, you may be sure, that she herself might lose him; and indeed a young woman might sigh from many a worse reason. "But," said she, changing the subject, "you appear to be tired, honest woman, an' I think you had better eat a bit, an' take a good drink of buinnhe ramwher (thick milk) to help you on you journey." "Thank you kindly, a colleen," said the woman; "I'll take a bit, of you plase, hopin', at the same time, that you won't be the poorer of it this day twelve months." "Sure," said the girl, "you know that what we give from kindness ever an' always leaves a blessing behind it." "Yes, acushla, when it is given from kindness." She accordingly helped herself to the food that Biddy placed before her, and appeared, after eating, to be very much refreshed. "Now," said she, rising up, "you're a very good girl, an' if you are able to find out my name before Tuesday, the kemp-day, I tell you that you'll win it, and gain the husband." "Why," said Biddy, "I never saw you before. I don't know who you are, nor where you live; how then can I ever find out your name?" "You never saw me before, sure enough," said the old woman, "an' I tell you that you never will see me again but once; an' yet if you have not my name for me at the close of the kemp, you'll lose all, an' that will leave you a sore heart, for well I know you love Shaun Buie." So saying, she went away, and left poor Biddy quite cast down at what she had said, for, to tell the truth, she loved Shaun very much, and had no hopes of being able to find out the name of the little woman, on which, it appeared, so much to her depended. It was very near the same hour of the same day that Sally Gorman was sitting alone in her father's house, thinking of the kemp, when who should walk in to her but our friend the little red woman. "God save you, honest woman," said Sally, "this is a fine day that's in it, the Lord be praised!" "It is," said the woman, "as fine a day as one could wish for; indeed it is." "Have you no news on your travels?" asked Sally. "The only news in the neighborhood," replied the other, "is this great kemp that's to take place a Shaun Buie B'Gaveran's. They say you're either to win him or lose him then," she added, looking closely at Sally as she spoke. "I'm not very much afraid of that," said Sally, with confidence; "but even if I do lose him, I may get as good." "It's not easy gettin' as good," rejoined the old woman, "an' you ought to be very glad to win him, if you can." "Let me alone for that," said Sally. "Biddy's a good girl, I allow; but as for spinnin', she never saw the day she could leave me behind her. Won't you sit an' rest you?" she added; "maybe you're tired." "It's time for you to think of it," thought the woman, but she spoke nothing; "but," she added to herself on reflection, "it's better late than never -- I'll sit awhile, till I see a little closer what she's made of." She accordingly sat down and chatted upon several subjects such as young women like to talk about, for about half an hour; after which she arose, and taking her little staff in hand, she bade Sally good-bye, and went her way. After passing a little from the house she looked back, and could not help speaking to herself as follows: She's smooth and smart, But she wants the heart; She's tight and neat, But she gave no meat. Poor Biddy now made all possible inquiries about the old woman, but to no purpose. Not a soul she spoke to about her had ever seen or heard of such a woman. She felt very dispirited, and began to lose heart, for there is no doubt that if she missed Shaun it would have cost her many a sorrowful day. She knew she would never get his equal, or at least anyone that she loved so well. At last the kemp day came, and with it all the pretty girls of the neighborhood to Shaun Buie's. Among the rest, the two that were to decide their right to him were doubtless the handsomest pair by far, and everyone admired them. To be sure, it was a blithe and merry place, and many a light laugh and sweet song rang out from pretty lips that day. Biddy and Sally, as everyone expected were far ahead of the rest, but so even in their spinning that the reelers could not for the life of them declare which was the better. It was neck-and-neck and head-and-head between the pretty creatures, and all who were at the kemp felt themselves would up to the highest pitch of interest and curiosity to know which of them would be successful. The day was now more than half gone, and no difference was between them, when, to the surprise and sorrow of everyone present, Biddy Corrigan's heck broke in two, and so to all appearance ended the contest in favor of her rival; and what added to her mortification, she was ignorant of the little red woman's name as ever. What was to be done? All that could be done was done. Her brother, a boy of about fourteen years of age, happened to be present when the accident took place, having been sent by his father and mother to bring them word how the match went on between the rival spinsters. Johnny Corrigan was accordingly dispatched with all speed to Donnel M'Cusker's, the wheelwright, in order to get the heck mended, that being Biddy's last but hopeless chance. Johnny's anxiety that his sister should win was of course very great, and in order to lose as little time as possible he struck across the country, passing through, or rather close by, Kilrudden forth, a place celebrated as a resort of the fairies. What was his astonishment, however, as he passed a white-thorn tree, to hear a female voice singing, in accompaniment to the sound of a spinning wheel, the following words: There's a girl in this town doesn't know my name; But my name's Even Trot -- Even Trot. "There's a girl in this town," said the lad, "who's in great distress, for she has broken her heck, and lost a husband. I'm now goin' to Donnel M'Cusker's to get it mended." "What's her name?" said the little red woman. "Biddy Corrigan." The little woman immediately whipped out the heck from her own wheel, and giving it to the boy, desired him to take it to his sister, and never mind Donnel M'Cusker. "You have little time to lose," she added, "so go back and give her this; but don't tell her how you got it, nor, above all things, that it was Even Trot that gave it to you." The lad returned, and after giving the heck to his sister, as a matter of course told her that it was a little red woman called Even Trot that sent it to her, a circumstance which made tears of delight start to Biddy's eyes, for she know now that Even Trot was the name of the old woman, and having know that she felt that something good would happen to her. She now resumed her spinning, and never did human fingers let down the thread so rapidly. The whole kemp were amazed at the quantity which from time to time filled her pirn. The hearts of her friends began to rise, and those of Sally's party to sink, as hour after hour she was fast approaching her rival, who now spun if possible with double speed on finding Biddy coming up with her. At length they were again even, and just at that moment in came her friend the little red woman, and asked aloud, "Is there anyone in this kemp that knows my name?" This question she asked three times before Biddy could pluck up courage to answer her. She at last said: There's a girl in this town does know my name -- Your name is Even Trot -- Even Trot. "Aye," said the old woman, "and so it is; and let that name be your guide and your husband's through life. Go steadily along, but let your step be even; stop little; keep always advancing; and you'll never have cause to rue the day that you first saw Even Trot." We need scarcely add that Biddy won the kemp and the husband, and that she and Shaun lived long and happily together; and I have only now to wish, kind reader, that you and I may live longer and more happily still. Source: W. B. Yeats, Irish Fairy Tales (1892). Yeats's source: William Carleton, The Traits and Stories of the Irish Peasantry . Return to the table of contents . Tríopla Trúpla Ireland A Story There was a woman there long ago and the one fault she had was laziness. She was married to a farmer. She had a lot of flax but she was too lazy to spin it. One day she was inside alone, when, who should come into her but a woman, who said she would spin all her linen for her if she could tell her name, but if the woman of the house could not tell the stranger's name she should go away with her the following day. The woman of the house was satisfied and she gave the flax to the stranger, who went off. The same evening the man of the house was taking his horses to the well, for a drink. He heard some noise in a fort which was near the well. When he looked, what should he see but a woman and she spinning flax at her full best and she humming "If Mrs. Lazybones knew that Tríopla Trúpla, was my name it is fine she would sleep to night and I finishing the flax for her." The man opened his mouth in amazement but he did not speak a word or interfere with the work. He went home and the first question he asked his wife was, "Where is the flax?" The wife confessed that she gave it to a woman who came to the house the previous day, and "I must go away with her tomorrow if I do not know her name." He said, "Tríopla Trúpla is her name, my dear." The stranger came the following day, and when the woman of the house saw her, she said, "Welcome, Tríopla Trúpla." On hearing these words the other woman threw the linen on the floor. She raised her two claws, let an awful scream out of her, and went off like the wind. Collector: Noreen Keane Address: Ballydehob, Co. Cork. Informant: Mr. P. Donovan Address: Ballydehob, Co. Cork. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Cork >> Béal Átha an Dá Chab, pp. 243-44 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Kinkach Martinko A Slav Folktale Once upon a time there was a poor woman who had an only daughter, named Helen, a very lazy girl. One day when she had refused to do a single thing, her mother took her down to the banks of a stream and began to strike her fingers with a flat stone, just as you do in beating linen to wash it. The girl cried a good deal. A prince, Lord of the Red Castle, happened at that moment to pass by, and inquired as to the cause of such treatment, for it horrified him that a mother should so ill-use her child. "Why should I not punish her?" answered the woman. "The idle girl can do nothing but spin hemp into gold thread." "Really?" cried he. "Does she really know how to spin gold thread out of hemp? If that be so, sell her to me." "Willingly; how much will you give me for her?" "Half a measure of gold." "Take her," said the mother; and she gave him her daughter as soon as the money was paid. The prince placed the girl behind him on the saddle, put spurs to his horse, and took her home. On reaching the Red Castle, the prince led Helen into a room filled from floor to ceiling with hemp, and having supplied her with distaff and spinning wheel, said, "When you have spun all this hemp into gold thread I will make you my wife." Then he went out, locking the door after him. On finding herself a prisoner, the poor girl wept as if her heart would break. Suddenly she saw a very odd looking little man seated on the window sill. He wore a red cap, and his boots were made of some strange sort of material. "Why do you weep so?" he asked. "I cannot help it," she replied, "I am but a miserable slave. I have been ordered to spin all this hemp into gold thread, but it is impossible, I can never do it, and I know not what will become of me." I will do it for you in three days, on condition that at the end of that time you guess my right name, and tell me what the boots I am wearing now are made of." Without for one moment reflecting as to whether she would be able to guess aright she consented. The uncanny little man burst out laughing, and taking her distaff set to work at once. All day as the distaff moved the hemp grew visibly less, while the skein of gold thread became larger and larger. The little man spun all the time, and, without stopping an instant, explained to Helen how to make thread of pure gold. As night drew on he tied up the skein, saying to the girl, "Well, do you know my name yet? Can you tell me what my boots are made of?" Helen replied that she could not, upon which he grinned and disappeared through the window. She then sat and looked at the sky, and thought, and thought, and thought, and lost herself in conjecturing as to what the little man's name might be, and in trying to guess what was the stuff his boots were made of. Were they of leather? or perhaps plaited rushes? or straw? or cast iron? No, they did not look like anything of that sort. And as to his name -- that was a still more difficult problem to solve. "What shall I call him?" said she to herself -- "John? Or Henry? Who knows? perhaps it is Paul or Joseph." These thoughts so filled her mind that she forgot to eat her dinner. Her meditations were interrupted by cries and groans from outside, where she saw an old man with white hair sitting under the castle wall. "Miserable old man that I am," cried he; "I die of hunger and thirst, but no one pities my sufferings." Helen hastened to give him her dinner, and told him to come next day, which he promised to do. After again thinking for some time what answers she should give the little old man, she fell asleep on the hemp. The little old man did not fail to make his appearance the first thing next morning, and remained all day spinning the gold thread. The work progressed before their eyes, and it was only when evening came that he repeated his questions. Not receiving a satisfactory answer, he vanished in a fit of mocking laughter. Helen sat down by the window to think; but think as she might, no answer to these puzzling questions occurred to her. While thus wondering the hungry old man again came by, and she gave him her dinner. She was heart-sick and her eyes were full of tears, for she thought she would never guess the spinner's name, nor of what stuff his boots were made, unless perhaps God would help her. "Why are you so sad?" asked the old man when he had eaten and drunk; "tell me the cause of you grief, dear lady." For a long time she would not tell him, thinking it would be useless; but at last, yielding to his entreaties, she gave a full account of the conditions under which the gold thread was made, explaining that unless she could answer the little old man's questions satisfactorily she feared some great misfortune would befall her. The old man listened attentively, then, nodding his head, he said: "In coming through the forest today I passed close to a large pile of burning wood, round which were placed nine iron pots. A little man in a red cap was running round and jumping over them, singing these words: My sweet friend, fair Helen, at the Red Castle near, Two days and two nights seeks my name to divine, She'll never find out, so the third night 'tis clear My sweet friend, fair Helen, can't fail to be mine. Hurrah! for my name is Kinkach Martinko, Hurrah! for my boots are of doggies' skin O! "Now that is exactly what you want to know, my dear girl; so do not forget, and you are saved." And with these words the old man vanished. Helen was greatly astonished, but she took care to fix in her memory all that the good fellow had told her, and then went to sleep, feeling that she could face tomorrow without fear. One the third day, very early in the morning, the little old man appeared and set busily to work, for he knew that all the hemp must be spun before sunset, and that then he should be able to claim his rights. When evening came all the hemp was gone, and the room shone with the brightness of the golden thread. As soon as his work was done, the queer little old man with the red cap drew himself up with a great deal of assurance, and with his hand in his pockets strutted up and down before Helen, ordering her to tell him his right name and to say of what stuff the boots were made; but he felt certain that she would not be able to answer aright. "Your name is Kinkach Martinko, and your boots are made of dogskin," she replied without the slightest hesitation. At these words he spun round on the floor like a bobbin, tore out his hair and beat his breast with rage, roaring so that the very walls trembled. "It is lucky for you that you have guessed. If you had not, I should have torn you to pieces on this very spot:" so saying he rushed out of the window like a whirlwind. Helen felt deeply grateful towards the old man who had told her the answers, and hoped to be able to thank him in person. But he never appeared again. The Prince of the Red Castle was very pleased with her for having accomplished her task so punctually and perfectly, and he married her as he had promised. Helen was truly thankful to have escaped the dangers that had threatened her, and her happiness as a princess was greater than she had dared hope. She had, too, such a good stock of gold thread that she never had occasion to spin any more all her life long. Source: Alex. Chodsko, Fairy Tales of the Slav Peasants and Herdsmen, translated by Emily J. Harding (New York: Dodd Mead & Co., and London: George Allen, 1896), pp. 325-332. Return to the table of contents . Links to Related Sites King Olaf and the Giant. In this legend from Norway and Sweden, King Olaf gains control over a sinister giant by discovering that his name was Wind and Weather. In some variants of this legend the giant's (or troll's) name is Skaane, Tvester, Bläster, or Slätt. Esbern Snare and the Kalundborg Church. This legend from Denmark is similar to the Norwegian story above, but here the demonic being is a troll named Fin. The Werewolf of Vietlübbe (Germany). A farmer gains control over a werewolf by calling out his human name (Irnst Jacobs) three times. A Witch as Werewolf (Germany). A man suspected that his wife had transformed herself into a wolf. He called out "Marie, Marie, what are you doing here?" and before his eyes she turned herself back into her human form. The Werewolf: Another Legend (Germany). A woman provided meat for every meal by hunting as a werewolf. On one of her hunts she was attacked by dogs, and her husband -- observing from a short distance away -- cried out her name "Margaret!" With that the wolf disappeared, and the woman was left standing naked in the field. The Black Dog (Shetland Islands). A witch transforms herself into a black dog in order to do mischief. A neighbor recognizes her and calls out her name "Minnie Merran," strikes her with a pair of tongs, and drives her away. The Mårt . Superstitions from northern Germany about the supernatural beings that cause bad dreams. Note items 9 and 10, each of which state that the demon must retreat if you call it by name. Tapai and the Brahman (India). A Brahman gains control over a demon by discovering his ancestors' names. The Hippopotamus and the Tortoise . A folktale from Nigeria in which a hippopotamus offers to give a big feast to anyone who can guess his name. Return to: Table of Contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 14, 2024 Specter Bridegrooms Specter Bridegrooms folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 365 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2022 Contents Sweet William's Ghost (Thomas Percy, Reliques of Ancient English Poetry ). The Specter Bridegroom (England). The Lovers of Porthangwartha (England). The Deacon of Myrká (Iceland). The Abbess and the Devil (from the unpublished papers of Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). A Ghost as Husband (Netherlands). The Pale Lover (Austria). The Lover at the Bedroom Window (Austria). The Lover's Ghost (Hungary). The Girls and Their Suitors (Lithuania). Siegfried and Chriemhilt (German-American). The Ghost Husband (Native American). Notes and Bibliography (including sources for additional versions of this folktale type in the English and the German languages). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Sweet William's Ghost Scotland There came a ghost to Margaret's door, With many a grievous grone, And ay he tirled at the pin; But answer made she none. Is this my father Philip? Or is't my brother John? Or is't my true love Willie, From Scotland new come home? Tis not thy father Philip; Nor yet thy brother John: But tis thy true love Willie From Scotland new come home, O sweet Margret! O dear Margret! I pray thee speak to mee: Give me my faith and troth, Margret, As I gave it to thee. Thy faith and troth thou'se nevir get, Of me shalt nevir win, Till that thou come within my bower, And kiss my cheek and chin. If I should come within thy bower, I am no earthly man: And should I kiss thy rosy lipp, Thy days will not be lang. O sweet Margret, O dear Margret, I pray thee speak to mee: Give me my faith and troth, Margret, As I gave it to thee. Thy faith and troth thou'se nevir get, Of me shalt nevir win, Till thou take me to yon kirk yard, And wed me with a ring. My bones are buried in a kirk yard Afar beyond the sea, And it is but my sprite, Margret, That's speaking now to thee. She stretched out her lilly-white hand, As for to do her best: Hae there your faith and troth, Willie, God send your soul good rest. Now she has kilted her robes of green, A piece below her knee: And a' the live-lang winter night The dead corps followed shee. Is there any room at you head, Willie? Or any room at your feet? Or any room at your side, Willie, Wherein that I may creep? There's nae room at my head, Margret, There's nae room at my feet, There's no room at my side, Margret, My coffin is made so meet. Then up and crew the red red cock, And up then crew the gray: Tis time, tis time, my dear Margret, That I were gane away. No more the ghost to Margret said, But, with a grievous grone, Evanish'd in a cloud of mist, And left her all alone. O stay, my only true love, stay, The constant Margret cried: Wan grew her cheeks, she clos'd her een, Stretch'd her saft limbs, and died. Source: Thomas Percy, Reliques of Ancient English Poetry , vol. 3 (London: Swan Sonnenschein, Lowrey, and Company, 1887), book 2, no. 6, pp. 130-13 . Percy's monumental collection of "old heroic ballads, songs, and other pieces of our earlier poets" was first published in London in 1765. Return to the table of contents . The Specter Bridegroom England Long, long ago a farmer named Lenine lived in Boscean. He had but one son, Frank Lenine, who was indulged into waywardness by both his parents. In addition to the farm servants, there was one, a young girl, Nancy Trenoweth, who especially assisted Mrs. Lenine in all the various duties of a small farmhouse. Nancy Trenoweth was very pretty, and although perfectly uneducated, in the sense in which we now employ the term education, she possessed many native graces, and she had acquired much knowledge, really useful to one whose aspirations would probably never rise higher than to be mistress of a farm of a few acres. Frank Lenine and Nancy were thrown as much together as if they had been brother and sister. Although it was evident to all the parish that Frank and Nancy were seriously devoted to each other, the young man's parents were blind to it, and were taken by surprise when one day Frank asked his father and mother to consent to his marrying Nancy. The old man felt it would be a degradation for a Lenine to marry a Trenoweth, and, in the most unreasoning manner, he resolved it should never be. The first act was to send Nancy home to Alsia Mill, where her parents resided; the next was an imperious command to his son never again to see the girl. The commands of the old are generally powerless upon the young where the affairs of the heart are concerned. So were they upon Frank. He, who was rarely seen of an evening beyond the garden of his father's cottage, was now as constantly absent from his home. Rarely an evening passed that did not find Nancy and Frank together in some retired nook. The Holy Well was a favorite meeting place, and here the most solemn vows were made. Locks of hair were exchanged; a wedding ring, taken from the finger of a corpse, was broken, when they vowed that they would be united either dead or alive; and they even climbed at night the granite pile at Treryn, and swore by the Logan Rock the same strong vow. Time passed onward thus unhappily, and, as the result of the endeavors to quench out the passion by force, it grew stronger under the repressing power, and, like imprisoned steam, eventually burst through all restraint. Nancy's parents discovered at length that moonlight meetings between two untrained, impulsive youths, had a natural result, and they were now doubly earnest in their endeavors to compel Frank to marry their daughter. The elder Lenine could not be brought to consent to this, and he firmly resolved to remove his son entirely from what he considered the hateful influences of the Trenoweths. He resolved to send him away to sea, hoping thus to wean him from this love madness. Frank, poor fellow, with the best intentions, was not capable of any sustained effort, and consequently he at length succumbed to his father; and, to escape his persecution, he entered a ship bound for India, and bade adieu to his native land. Frank could not write, and this happened in days when letters could be forwarded only with extreme difficulty, consequently Nancy never heard from her lover. A baby had been born into a troublesome world, and the infant became a real solace to the young mother. Young Nancy lived for her child, and on the memory of its father. She felt that no distance could separate their souls, that no time could be long enough to destroy the bond between them. The winter was coming on, and nearly three years had passed away since Frank Lenine left his country. It was Allhallows Eve, and two of Nancy's companions persuaded her--no very difficult task--to go with them and sow hemp seed. At midnight the three maidens stole out unperceived into Kimyall town place to perform their incantation. Nancy was the first to sow, the others being less bold than she. Boldly she advanced, saying, as she scattered the seed: Hemp seed I sow thee, Hemp seed grow thee; And he who will my true love be, Come after me And shaw thee. This was repeated three times, when looking back over her left shoulder, she saw Lenine; but he looked so angry that she shrieked with fear, and broke the spell. One of the other girls, however, resolved now to make trial of the spell, and the result of her labors was the vision of a white coffin. Fear now fell on all, and they went home sorrowful, to spend each one a sleepless night. November came with its storms, and during one terrific night a large vessel was thrown upon the rocks in Bernowhall Cliff, and, beaten by the impetuous waves, she was soon in pieces. Amongst the bodies of the crew washed ashore, nearly all of whom had perished, was Frank Lenine. He was not dead when found, but the only words he lived to speak were begging the people to send for Nancy Trenoweth, that he might make her his wife before he died. Rapidly sinking, Frank was borne by his friends on a litter to Boscean, but he died as he reached the town place. His parents, overwhelmed in their own sorrows, thought nothing of Nancy, and without her knowing that Lenine had returned, the poor fellow was laid in his last bed, in Burian Churchyard. On the night of the funeral, Nancy went, as was her custom, to lock the door of the house, and as was her custom too, she looked out into the night. At this instant a horseman rode up in hot haste, called her by name, and hailed her in a voice that made her blood boil. The voice was the voice of Lenine. She could never forget that; and the horse she now saw was her sweetheart's favorite colt, on which he had often ridden at night to Alsia. The rider was imperfectly seen; but he looked very sorrowful, and deadly pale, still Nancy knew him to be Frank Lenine. He told her that he had just arrived home, and that the first moment he was at liberty he had taken horse to fetch his loved one, and to make her his bride. Nancy's excitement was so great, that she was easily persuaded to spring on the horse behind him, that they might reach his home before the morning. When she took Lenine's hand a cold shiver passed through her, and as she grasped his waist to secure herself in her seat, her arm became as stiff as ice. She lost all power of speech, and suffered deep fear, yet she know not why. The moon had arisen, and now burst out in a full flood of light, through the heavy clouds which had obscured it. The horse pursued its journey with great rapidity, and whenever in weariness it slackened its speed, the peculiar voice of the rider aroused its drooping energies. Beyond this no word was spoken since Nancy had mounted behind her lover. They now came to Trove Bottom, where there was no bridge at that time; they dashed into the river. The moon shone full in their faces. Nancy looked into the stream, and saw that the rider was in a shroud and other grave clothes. She now knew that she was being carried away by a spirit, yet she had no power to save herself; indeed, the inclination to do so did not exist. On went the horse at a furious pace, until they came to the blacksmith's shop near Burian Church-town, when she knew by the light from the forge fire thrown across the road that the smith was still at his labors. She now recovered speech. "Save me! Save me! Save me!" she cried with all her might. The smith sprang from the door of the smithy, with a red-hot iron in his hand, and as the horse rushed by, caught the woman's dress and pulled her to the ground. The spirit, however, also seized Nancy's dress in one hand, and his grasp was like that of a vice. The horse passed like the wind, and Nancy and the smith were pulled down as far as the old Almshouses, near the churchyard. Here the horse for a moment stopped. The smith seized that moment, and with his hot iron burned off the dress from the rider's hand, thus saving Nancy, more dead than alive; while the rider passed over the wall of the churchyard, and vanished on the grave in which Lenine had been laid but a few hours before. The smith took Nancy into his shop, and he soon aroused some of his neighbors, who took the poor girl back to Alsia. Her parents laid her on her bed. She spoke no word, but to ask for her child, to request her mother to give up her child to Lenine's parents, and her desire to be buried in his grave. Before the morning light fell on the world, Nancy had breathed her last breath. A horse was seen that night to pass through the Church-town like a ball from a musket, and in the morning Lenine's colt was found dead in Bernowhall Cliff, covered with foam, its eyes forced from its head, and its swollen tongue hanging out of its mouth. On Lenine's grave was found the piece of Nancy's dress which was left in the spirit's hand when the smith burnt her from his grasp. It is said that one or two of the sailors who survived the wreck related after the funeral, how, on the 30th of October, at night, Lenine was like one mad; they could scarcely keep him in the ship. He seemed more asleep than awake, and, after great excitement, he fell as if dead upon the deck, and lay so for hours. When he came to himself, he told them that he had been taken to the village of Kimyall, and that if he ever married the woman who had cast the spell, he would make her suffer the longest day she had to live for drawing his soul out of his body. Poor Nancy was buried in Lenine's grave, and her companion in sowing hemp seed, who saw the white coffin, slept beside her within the year. Source: Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , 1st series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 265-72 . Slightly abridged. Return to the table of contents . The Lovers of Porthangwartha England The names of the youth and maiden who fixed the term of the Lover's Cove upon this retired spot have passed from the memory of man. A simple story, however, remains, the mere fragment, without doubt, of a longer and more ancient tale. The course of love with this humble pair did not run smooth. On one side or the other the parents were decidedly opposed to the intimacy which existed, and by their persecutions, they so far succeeded, that the young man was compelled to emigrate to some far distant land. In this cove the lovers met for the last time in life, and vowed under the light of the full moon, that living or dead they would meet at the end of three years. The young woman remained with her friends -- the young man went to the Indies. Time passed on, and the three years, which had been years of melancholy to both, were expiring. One moonlight night, when the sea was tranquil as a mirror, an old crone sat on the edge of the cliff "making her charms." She saw a figure--she was sure it was a spirit, very like the village maiden--descend into the cove, and seat herself upon a rock, around two-thirds of which the light waves were rippling. On this rock sat the maiden, looking anxiously out over the sea, until, from the rising of the tide, she was completely surrounded. The old woman called; but in vain--the maiden was unconscious of any voice. There she sat, and the tide was rising rapidly around her. The old woman, now seeing the danger in which she was, resolved to go down into the cove, and, if possible, awaken the maiden to a sense of her danger. To do this, it was necessary to go round a projecting pile of rocks. While doing this, she lost sight of the object of her interest, and much was her surprise, when she again saw the maiden, to perceive a young sailor by her side, with his arm around her waist. Conceiving that help had arrived, the old woman sat herself down on the slope of the descending path, and resolved patiently to await the arrival of the pair on shore, and then to rate the girl soundly. She sat watching this loving and lovely pair, lighted as they were on the black rock by a full flood of moonshine. There they sat, and the tide rose and washed around them. Never were boy and girl so made, and at last the terrified old woman shrieked with excitement. Suddenly they appeared to float off upon the waters. She thought she heard their voices; but there was no sound of terror. Instead of it a tranquil murmuring music, like the voice of doves, singing: I am thine Thou art mine, Beyond control; In the wave Be the grave Of heart and soul. Down, down into the sea passed the lovers. Awestruck, the old woman looked on, until, as she said, "At last they turned round, looked me full in the face, smiling like angels, and, kissing each other, sank to rise no more." They tell us that the body of the young woman was found a day or two after in a neighboring cove, and that intelligence eventually reached England that the young man had been killed on this very night. Source: Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , 1st series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 284-86 . Return to the table of contents . The Deacon of Myrká Iceland A long time ago a deacon lived at Myrká, in Egafjördur. He was in love with a girl named Gudrún, who dwelt in a farm on the opposite side of the valley, separated from his house by a river. The deacon had a horse with a gray mane, which he was always in the habit of riding, and which he called Faxi. A short time before Christmas, the deacon rode to the farm at which his betrothed lived and invited her to join in the Christmas festivities at Myrká, promising to fetch her on Christmas Eve. Some time before he had started out on this ride there had been heavy snow and frost, but this very day there came so rapid a thaw that the river over which the deacon had safely ridden, trusting to the firmness of the ice, became impassable during the short time he spent with his betrothed. The floods rose, and huge masses of drift ice were whirled down the stream. When the deacon had left the farm, he rode on to the river, and being deep in thought did not perceive at first the change that had taken place. As soon, however, as he saw in what state the stream was, he rode up the banks until he came to a bridge of ice, on to which he spurred his horse. But when he arrived at the middle of the bridge, it broke beneath him, and he was drowned in the flood. Next morning, a neighboring farmer saw the deacon's horse grazing in a field, but could discover nothing of its owner, whom he had seen the day before cross the river, but not return. He at once suspected what had occurred, and going down to the river, found the corpse of the deacon, which had drifted to the bank, with all the flesh torn off the back of his head, and the bare white skull visible. So he brought the body back to Myrká, where it was buried a week before Christmas. Up to Christmas Eve the river continued so swollen that no communication could take place between the dwellers on the opposite banks, but that morning it subsided, and Gudrún, utterly ignorant of the deacon's death, looked forward with joy to the festivities to which she had been invited by him. In the afternoon Gudrún began to dress in her best clothes, but before she had quite finished, she heard a knock at the door of the farm. One of the maidservants opened the door, but seeing nobody there, thought it was because the night was not sufficiently light, for the moon was hidden for the time by clouds. So saying, "Wait there till I bring a light," went back into the house. But she had no sooner shut the outer door behind her, than the knock was repeated, and Gudrún cried out from her room, "It is someone waiting for me." As she had by this time finished dressing, she slipped only one sleeve of her winter cloak on, and threw the rest over her shoulders hurriedly. When she opened the door, she saw the well known Faxi standing outside, and by him a man whom she knew to be the deacon. Without a word he placed Gudrún on the horse, and mounted in front of her himself, and off they rode. When they came to the river it was frozen over, all except the current in the middle, which the frost had not yet hardened. The horse walked onto the ice, and leaped over the black and rapid stream which flowed in the middle. At the same moment the head of the deacon nodded forward, so that his hat fell over his eyes, and Gudrún saw the large patch of bare skull gleam white in the midst of his hair. Directly afterwards, a cloud moved from before the moon, and the deacon said, The moon glides, Death rides, Seest thou not the white place In the back of my head Garún, Garún? Not a word more was spoken till they came to Myrká, where they dismounted. Then the man said, Wait here for me, Garún, Garún, While I am taking Faxi, Faxi, Outside the hedges, the hedges! When he had gone, Gudrún saw near her in the churchyard, where she was standing, an open grave, and half sick with horror, ran to the church porch, and seizing the rope, tolled the bells with all her strength. But as she began to ring them, she felt someone grasp her and pull so fiercely at her cloak that it was torn off her, leaving only the one sleeve into which she had thrust her arm before starting from home. Then turning round, she saw the deacon jump headlong into the yawning grave, with the tattered cloak in his hand, and the heaps of earth on both sides fall in over him, and close the grave up to the brink. Gudrún knew now that it was the deacon's ghost with whom she had had to do, and continued ringing the bells till she roused all the farm servants at Myrká. That same night, after Gudrún had got shelter at Myrká and was in bed, the deacon came again from his grave and endeavored to drag her away, so that no one could sleep for the noise of their struggle. This was repeated every night for a fortnight, and Gudrún could never be left alone for a single instant, lest the goblin deacon should get the better of her. From time to time, also, a neighboring priest came and sat on the edge of the bed, reading the Psalms of David to protect her against this ghostly persecution. But nothing availed, till they sent for a man from the north country, skilled in witchcraft, who dug up a large stone from the field, and placed it in the middle of the guest room at Myrká. When the deacon rose that night from his grave and came into the house to torment Gudrún, this man seized him, and by uttering potent spells over him, forced him beneath the stone, and exorcised the passionate demon that possessed him, so that there he lies in peace to this day. Source: Jón Arnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 173-77 . Return to the table of contents . The Abbess and the Devil Germany About a hundred years ago [in the eighteenth century] a noblewoman from Oberland was engaged to marry a very handsome officer. Shortly before their marriage he was called to the field of battle, where he remained. The noblewoman was so beside herself that in her despair she cursed God. In the night the devil came to her in the form of her beloved, and he called upon her to pledge her soul to him. In return he would accompany her, in this form, as long as she lived. Further, he would give her great magic power. She agreed to this, and the devil remained with her. He was not exactly invisible, but still secret, and no one knew about him. After a while he advised her to enter a convent, which she did. She would now lock herself in her cell with her beloved, while her phantom form was praying in the church. She gained the reputation of great piety, and soon afterward became the abbess. From this time forward miraculous events began to occur in the convent. Most prominently, from time to time several nuns were attacked with long-lasting and unknown ailments, which she was able to cure through her apparent intercession. Thus her holy reputation grew ever greater. The first suspicion came from several children who often visited the convent. The abbess, who loved children, would show them magic tricks whenever she was alone with them. She told others about this, although she had strictly forbidden them to do so. Above all, the abbess would ask the children if they would like her to make some little mice for them, whereupon the table would immediately be crawling with small, tame mice. The children were too young for one to give much credibility to their talk, but once a young nun, on her way to church, passed by the abbess's cell and heard the abbess whispering lightly with a man's voice. Curious, she looked through the keyhole and saw the abbess and an officer. But when she entered the church she saw the abbess's form praying there before the altar, and she feinted with fright. Afterward she reported what she had seen. The abbess was arrested in her bed that night. She very forward, saying that she would get up and go along with them if they would just reach her stick to her. Someone standing there threw the first stick to her that came to hand, but she refused it, asking for a specific other one. They took note of this and refused to give it to her, in spite of her cunning pretenses. Even after she was put in jail, she continued to try to get hold of the stick through all kinds of tricks, but to no avail. She finally lost her daring, and shortly before she was executed, she confessed. If she had gotten hold of the stick, no power on earth would have been able to restrain her. She was finally burned to death, after having confessed many things. Source: Jacob und Wilhelm Grimm, Märchen aus dem Nachlaß , edited by Heinz Rölleke (Bonn: Bouvier Verlag Herbert Grundmann, 1979), Nr. 26, pp. 66-67. Rölleke's source: Unpublished papers of Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Staatsbibliothek Berlin. This story combines elements of type 365 tales with Faust and witchcraft traditions. Click below for links to legends of these latter two types: Faust legends. Witchraft legends. Return to the table of contents . A Ghost as Husband Netherlands In North Holland at Bobeldijk, across from the Berkhout Church, the following took place: On June 25, 1616, a ghost appeared to a well-known woman. It was in the form of her husband Cornelius Theuniss. She asked: "Who is there?" He answered: "It's me, your husband." She said: "He cannot be here. He is at sea." "I was too late," he replied. "The ship had already sailed." "How did you get into the house," asked the woman. "Very easily," he said, and lay down with his arms on the bed cover. He was wearing a broad-brimmed felt hat. She bent back the wide brim several times in order to see if it really was her husband. Both from his form and from his voice she determined that it could only be her husband, so she told him to come to bed, which he did. Still in doubt, she paid close attention as he took off his stockings, in order to see if he had such thick feet as her husband, and she saw no difference. When he lay down next to her, she felt him, and he was as cold as ice, even though it was in the middle of summer. This frightened her, and from the bottom of her heart she called upon God for help and support. With this the ghost disappeared and never returned. Source (books.google.com): Johannes Wilhelm Wolf, "Gespenst als Ehemann," Deutsche Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1845), no. 135, pp. 240-41 . Source (Internet Archive): Johannes Wilhelm Wolf, "Gespenst als Ehemann," Deutsche Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1845), no. 135, pp. 240-41 . Return to the table of contents . The Pale Lover Austria With the beginning of spring, many men and boys from Paznaun [in Tyrol] go to neighboring Switzerland to find work, primarily as masons. Once such young lad said fond farewells to his dear friends and relatives and set forth on foot. His beloved walked with him some distance, carrying his bag. The two of them made arrangements to meet later at a certain place. In the summer, especially at Pentecost, it was not unusual for the relatives and girlfriends to make a pilgrimage to nearby Einsiedeln, where they met their dear friends. Late one evening, after a long delay, the girl mentioned above met her beloved at the pre-arranged place. He seemed to her to be very pale, tired, and sad; and he spoke very little. They walked together for some distance. They came to a churchyard, and the lad told his beloved to wait for him while he went into the church to pray. It was already night, and the moon shone brightly. Considerable time passed, and her beloved did not return to her from the church. Perplexed, the girl went to the sexton who lived nearby and told him of her concern. He said to her: "My dear girl, the man you are talking about died a short time ago and is buried here. Go right now to the graveyard, pull down your underskirt and leave it lying there. Then hurry back here, or something evil will befall you." The girl did what she had been told to do. Early the next morning the scraps of her tattered underskirt were seen hanging on the grave crosses. Source (books.google.com): Christian Hauser, "Der blasse Geliebte," Sagen aus dem Paznaun und dessen Nachbarschaft (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1894), no. 73, pp. 102-103 . Source (Internet Archive): Christian Hauser, "Der blasse Geliebte," Sagen aus dem Paznaun und dessen Nachbarschaft (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1894), no. 73, pp. 102-103 . Return to the table of contents . The Lover at the Bedroom Window Austria Two unmarried people were in love with each other. In the evening the lad often visited the girl who lived some distance from him. Once when he had not come for a longer time the girl grew sad and anxious, thinking that he had abandoned her. One night the moon shone very brightly, and her beloved appeared at the girl's bedroom window, awakening her. As she sat up in bed, he called out: The bright moon lights the sky, The dead ride quickly by! Darling, are you not afraid? When the girl replied "No," he grabbed her and ripped her to pieces. Her beloved had died during his longer absence. Source (books.google.com): Christian Hauser, "Der Geliebte am Kammerfenster," Sagen aus dem Paznaun und dessen Nachbarschaft (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1894), no. 74, pp. 103-104 . Source (Internet Archive): Christian Hauser, "Der Geliebte am Kammerfenster," Sagen aus dem Paznaun und dessen Nachbarschaft (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1894), no. 74, pp. 103-104 . Return to the table of contents . The Lover's Ghost Hungary Somewhere, I don't know where, even beyond the Operencian Seas, there was once a maid. She had lost her father and mother, but she loved the handsomest lad in the village where she lived. They were as happy together as a pair of turtle-doves in the wood. They fixed the day of the wedding at a not very distant date, and invited their most intimate friends to it; the girl, her godmother -- the lad, a dear old friend of his. Time went on, and the wedding would have taken place in another week, but in the meantime war broke out in the country. The king called out all his fighting-men to march against the enemy. The sabres were sharpened, and gallant fellows, on fine, gaily-caparisoned horses, swarmed to the banners of the king, like bees. John, our hero, too, took leave of his pretty fiancée ; he led out his grey charger, mounted, and said to his young bride, "I shall be back in three years, my dove; wait until then, and don't be afraid; I promise to bring you back my love and remain faithful to you, even were I tempted by the beauty of a thousand other girls." The lass accompanied him as far as the frontier, and before parting solemnly promised to him, amidst a shower of tears, that all the treasures of the whole world should not tempt her to marry another, even if she had to wait ten years for her John. The war lasted two years, and then peace was concluded between the belligerents. The girl was highly pleased with the news, because she expected to see her lover return with the others. She grew impatient, and would sally forth on the road by which he was expected to return, to meet him. She would go out often ten times a day, but as yet she had no tidings of her John. Three years elapsed; four years had gone by, and the bridegroom had not yet returned. The girl could not wait any longer, but went to see her godmother, and asked for her advice, who (I must tell you, between ourselves) was a witch. The old hag received her well, and gave her the following direction: "As it will be full moon tomorrow night, go into the cemetery, my dear girl, and ask the gravedigger to give you a human skull. If he should refuse, tell him that it is I who sent you. Then bring the skull home to me, and we shall place it in a huge earthenware pot, and boil it with some millet, for, say, two hours. You may be sure it will let you know whether your lover is alive yet or dead, and perchance it will entice him here." The girl thanked her for her good advice, and went to the cemetery next night. She found the gravedigger enjoying his pipe in front of the gate. "Good evening to you, dear old father." "Good evening, my lass! What are you doing here at this hour of the night?" "I have come to you to ask you to grant me a favour." "Let me hear what it is; and, if I can, I will comply with your request." "Well, then, give me a human skull!" "With pleasure; but what do you intend to do with it?" "I don't know exactly, myself; my godmother has sent me for it." "Well and good; here is one, take it." The girl carefully wrapped up the skull, and ran home with it. Having arrived at home, she put it in a huge earthenware pot with some millet, and at once placed it on the fire. The millet soon began to boil and throw up bubbles as big as two fists. The girl was eagerly watching it and wondering what would happen. When, all of a sudden, a huge bubble formed on the surface of the boiling mass, and went off with a loud report like a musket. The next moment the girl saw the skull balanced on the rim of the pot. "He has started," it said in a vicious tone. The girl waited a little longer, when two more loud reports came from the pot, and the skull said, "He has got halfway." Another few moments elapsed, when the pot gave three very loud reports, and the skull was heard to say, "He has arrived outside in the yard." The maid thereupon rushed out, and found her lover standing close to the threshold. His charger was snow-white, and he himself was clad entirely in white, including his helmet and boots. As soon as he caught sight of the girl, he asked, "Will you come to the country where I dwell?" "To be sure, my dear Jack; to the very end of the world." "Then come up into my saddle." The girl mounted into the saddle, and they embraced and kissed one another ever so many times. "And is the country where you live very far from here?" "Yes, my love, it is very far; but in spite of the distance it will not take us long to get there." Then they started on their journey. When they got outside the village, they saw ten mounted men rush past, all clad in spotless white, like to the finest wheat flour. As soon as they vanished, another ten appeared, and could be very well seen in the moonlight, when suddenly John said: How beautifully shines the moon, the moon; How beautifully march past the dead. Are you afraid, my love, my little Judith?" "I am not afraid while I can see you, my dear Jack." As they proceeded, the girl saw a hundred mounted men; they rode past in beautiful military order, like soldiers. So soon as the hundred vanished another hundred appeared and followed the others. Again her lover said: How beautifully shines the moon, the moon; How beautifully march past the dead. Are you afraid, my love, my little Judith? "I am not afraid while I can see you, my darling Jack." And as they proceeded the mounted men appeared in fast increasing numbers, so that she could not count them; some rode past so close that they nearly brushed against her. Again her lover said: How beautifully shines the moon, the moon; How beautifully march past the dead. Are you afraid, my love, my little Judith?" "I am not afraid while I see you, Jack, my darling." "You are a brave and good girl, my dove; I see that you would do anything for me. As a reward, you shall have everything that your heart can wish when we get to my new country." They went along till they came to an old burial-ground, which was inclosed by a black wall. John stopped here and said to his sweetheart, "This is our country, my little Judith, we shall soon come to our house." The house to which John alluded was an open grave, at the bottom of which an empty coffin could be seen with the lid off. "Go in, my darling," said the lad. "You had better go first, my love Jack," replied the girl. "You know the way." Thereupon the lad descended into the grave and laid down in the coffin; but the lass, instead of following him, ran away as fast as her feet would carry her, and took refuge in a mansion that was situated a couple of miles from the cemetery. When she had reached the mansion she shook every door, but none of them would open to her entreaties, except one that led to a long corridor, at the end of which there was a dead body laid out in state in a coffin. The lass secreted herself in a dark corner of the fireplace. As soon as John discovered that his bride had run away he jumped out of the grave and pursued the lass, but in spite of all his exertions could not overtake her. When he reached the door at the end of the corridor he knocked and exclaimed, "Dead man, open the door to a fellow dead man." The corpse inside began to tremble at the sound of these words. Again said Jack, "Dead man, open the door to a fellow dead man." Now the corpse sat up in the coffin, and as Jack repeated a third time the words "Dead man, open the door to a fellow dead man," the corpse walked to the door and opened it. "Is my bride here?" "Yes, there she is, hiding in the corner of the fireplace." "Come and let us tear her in pieces." And with this intention they both approached the girl, but just as they were about to lay hands upon her the cock in the loft began to crow, and announced daybreak, and the two dead men disappeared. The next moment a most richly attired gentleman entered from one of the neighbouring rooms. Judging by his appearance one would have believed it was the king himself, who at once approached the girl and overwhelmed her with his embraces and kisses. "Thank you so much. The corpse that you saw here laid out in state was my brother. I have already had him buried three hundred and sixty-five times with the greatest pomp, but he has returned each time. As you have relieved me of him, my sweet, pretty darling, you shall become mine and I yours; not even the hoe and the spade shall separate us from one another!" The girl consented to the proposal of the rich gentleman, and they got married and celebrated their wedding feast during the same winter. This is how far the tale goes. This is the end of it. Source: W. Henry Jones and Lewis L. Kropf, The Folk-Tales of the Magyars (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1889), pp. 278-82 . Return to the table of contents . The Girls and Their Suitors Lithuania A girl had a suitor, and the suitor died. After she had mourned for a few weeks she went to a dance with one of her girlfriends whose fiancé also had died. On their way they passed by the graveyard. Standing there, they said, "Get up, you brothers. Who else will take us to the dance?" After they had walked on the two dead ones arose and followed after them. The girls had scarcely entered the room where people were dancing when the two suitors came inside as well and danced with them. While dancing the girls stepped on their partners' feet, and they noticed that their boots were empty, so they knew that they were dancing with dead men. The dead men swung the girls about so hard that they almost danced them to death. The girls asked for permission to go outside and get some fresh air, but their partners did not want them to leave. The girls finally said, "We'll hang our keys at the doorway, and when you hear them rattling, you'll know that we've come back inside," so the men agreed to let them go outside. The men heard the keys rattling, but the girls did not return. Instead they they ran and ran and ran until they came to a spinning room. They ran inside and hid behind the stove. An old woman was in the spinning room drying flachs. The girls begged her that if anyone came she should not let them in. After the dead men had waited a long time for the girls they took after them, following their footsteps. They came to the spinning room and said, "Good evening! Did two girls come in here?" The old woman said "No." The two said, "They ran to this place. They must be here." The old woman said, "Sit down, my sons. I'll tell you about how flachs suffers." The two sat down and listened. She told them how flachs was sown, harvested, carded, spun, woven, bleached, sewn, worn, patched, and finally how the ragman collected it and made paper from the scraps. When the old woman finally came to the end of her speech the rooster crowed, and the two dead men had to leave. As they departed they said, "It is your luck that with her speech the woman kept us from following you." With that they disappeared from sight, and the two girls remained alive. Source (books.google.com): August Schleicher, "Vom Mädchen und ihrem Freier," Litauische Märchen, Sprichworte, Rätsel und Lieder (Weimar: Hermann Böhlau, 1857), pp. 34-35 . Source (Internet Archive): August Schleicher, "Vom Mädchen und ihrem Freier," Litauische Märchen, Sprichworte, Rätsel und Lieder (Weimar: Hermann Böhlau, 1857), pp. 34-35 . Return to the table of contents . Siegfried and Chriemhilt German-American A youth of the name of Siegfried, having paid a visit to his promised bride, rather singularly called Chriemhilt, crossed the mountains during a thunderstorm and disappeared. Sixty-five years, a month, and a fortnight later the bride, now grown to an old woman and still unmarried, received a visit from this lover, who appeared on horseback, still wearing the costume habitual in the time when he had been lost to knowledge. This interview took place, according to the tale, in the presence of children. The old woman afterwards explained that she had been accosted by her lover, who was under the impression that he had remained only a few hours in the mountains with the spirits, whose splendid palaces and golden streets he described, and who were able to pass at will and in a moment from one end of the mountains to the other. The woman refused to accompany him, and one of the spirits of the mountain appeared, who claimed the suitor as his captive. At the prayer of Chriemhilt, however, he consented that after her death the prisoner should be released, and reunion effected in heaven. Such is the folktale, obtained from the relation of one of the children present at the advent of the suitor, and who in after days narrated the incident. Source (JSTORE): W. W. Newell, "Tales of the Blue Mountains in Pennsylvania," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 11, no. 40 (January - March 1898), p. 77 . Return to the table of contents . The Ghost Husband Native American A young Lakota died just before marrying a young girl whom he loved. The girl mourned his death, so she cut her hair here and there with a dull knife, and gashed her limbs, just as if she had been an old woman. The ghost returned and took her for his wife. Whenever the tribe camped for the night the ghost's wife pitched her tent at some distance from the others, and when the people removed their camp the woman and her husband kept some distance behind the main body. The ghost always told the woman what to do; and he brought game to her regularly, which the wife gave to the people in exchange for other articles. The people could neither see nor hear the ghost, but they heard his wife address him. He always sent word to the tribe when there was to be a high wind or heavy rain. He could read the thoughts of his wife, so that she need not speak a word to him, and when she felt a desire for anything he soon obtained it for her. Source (books.google.com): J. Owen Dorsey, "Teton Folk-Lore," The American Anthropologist , vol. 2 (1889), p. 148 . Return to the table of contents . Notes and Bibliography Aarne-Thompson-Uther folktale type 365 "Specter Bridegroom" stories are classified as type 365 in the Aarne-Thompson-Uther folktale classification system. For more information about folktale types see: Aarne, Antti, and Thompson, Stith. The Types of the Folktale: A Classification and Bibliography . FF Communications, no. 184. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 1961. Ashliman, D. L. A Guide to Folktales in the English Language . New York; Westport Connecticut; and London: Greenwood Press, 1987. Uther, Hans-Jörg. The Types of International Folktales: A Classification and Bibliography Based on the System of Antti Aarne and Stith Thompson . 3 vols. FF Communications nos. 284-86. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 2004. Bibliography of Type 365 Folktales Texts in the English Language "The Deacon of Myrká," Jón Arnason, Icelandic Legends , translated by George E. J. Powell and Eiríkur Magnússon (London: Richard Bentley, 1864), pp. 173-177. "The Deacon of Myrka," Jacqueline Simpson, Icelandic Folktales and Legends (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972), pp. 132-136. "The Dead Bridegroom," John Lindow, Swedish Legends and Folktales (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978), no. 98, pp. 191-193. "The Drowned Sailor of Saint Levan" Tony Deane and Tony Shaw, Folklore of Cornwall , The Folklore of the British Isles (Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman and Littlefield, 1975), pp. 108-109. "The Execution and Wedding," Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall (London: John Camden Hotten, 1871), pp. 256-258. "The Fair Maid of Clifton," Katherine M. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1971), pt. B, v. 1, pp. 449-450. "Grey Is My Skull, Garun, Garun!" Jacqueline Simpson, Scandinavian Folktales , Penguin Folklore Library (London: Penguin Books, 1988), pp. 107-109. "The Gypsy Girl and Her Dead Fiancé," Lone Thygesen Blecher and George Blecher, Swedish Folktales and Legends , The Pantheon Fairy Tale and Folklore Library (New York: Pantheon Books, 1993), pp. 43-45. "The Lovers of Porthangwartha," Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall (London: John Camden Hotten, 1871), pp. 247-248. "The Lovers of Porthangwartha," Katherine M. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1971), pt. B, v. 1, pp. 526-527. "Pleasant and Delightful," Tony Deane and Tony Shaw, Folklore of Cornwall , The Folklore of the British Isles (Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman and Littlefield, 1975), pp. 81-82. "Seven Bones," Ruth Ann Musick, Green Hills of Magic: West Virginia Folktales from Europe (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1970), no. 20. "Shakespeare's Ghost," Tristram P. Coffin and Hennig Cohen, Folklore in America , (Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Books, 1970), pp. 37-38. "The Spectre Bridegroom," Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall (London: John Camden Hotten, 1871), pp. 233-239. "The Spectre Bridegroom: A Traveller's Tale," Washington Irving, The Sketch Book . "The Spectre Bridegroom," Katherine M. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1971), pt. B, v. 1, pp. 577-578. "The Suffolk Miracle," Katherine M. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1971), pt. B, v. 1, pp. 586-589. "Yorkshire Jack, an Execution and a Wedding," Katherine M. Briggs, A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1971), pt. B, v. 1, pp. 603-604. "The Young Gypsy Girl and the Forest Guard," (Latvia), Diane Tong, Gypsy Folk Tales , (San Diego, New York, and London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1989), pp. 197-199. Texts in the German Language (Texte in deutscher Sprache) "Costandini und Garentina", Martin Camaj und Uta Schier-Oberdorffer, Albanische Märchen , Die Märchen der Weltliteratur (Düsseldorf: Eugen Diederichs Verlag, 1974), Nr. 44, S. 168-170. "Der tote Bräutigam", Karoly Gaál, Die Volksmärchen der Magyaren im südlichen Burgenland (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co., 1970), Nr. 14. "Die Äbtissin und der Teufel", Jacob und Wilhelm Grimm, Märchen aus dem Nachlaß , herausgegeben und erläutert von Heinz Rölleke (Bonn: Bouvier Verlag Herbert Grundmann, 1979), Nr. 26. "Garun, Garun, fahl ist mir der Schädel", Kurt Schier, Märchen aus Island , Die Märchen der Weltliteratur (Köln: Eugen Diederichs Verlag, 1983), Nr. 35, S. 182-183. "Lenore" [3 Erzählungen], Kurt Ranke, Schleswig-Holsteinische Volksmärchen , Veröffentlichungen der Schleswig-Holsteinischen Universitätsgesellschaft (Kiel: Ferdinand Hirt , 1962), Bd. 1, S. 276-278. "Lenore", Achim von Arnim und Clemens Brentano, Des Knaben Wunderhorn : Alte deutsche Lieder (Heidelberg: Mohr und Zimmer, 1808), Bd. 2, S. 19. Unterschift zu diesem Gedicht: "Bürger hörte dieses Lied Nachts in einem Nebenzimmer." "Lenore", Ulrich Benzel und Walter Kniepert, Sudetendeutsche Volkserzählungen , Schriften des Volkskunde-Archivs Marburg, Bd. 10 (Marburg: N. G. Elwert, 1962), Nr. 134. "Lenore", Gottfried August Bürger. Entstanden 1773. Erster Druck: Göttinger Musenalmanach , 1774. "Sehnsucht nach dem Gatten", Karoly Gaál, Die Volksmärchen der Magyaren im südlichen Burgenland (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co., 1970), Nr. 15. "Wilhelms Geist" [Übersetzung von Percys "Sweet William's Ghost"], Johann Gottfried von Herder, Von deutscher Art und Kunst , 1773. Return to: Table of Contents D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 23, 2022. Stages of Life: Folktales of Type 173 Stages of Life folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 173 plus a Greek riddle, a Rabinnic treatise, a Sanskrit Sataka , a Shakespeare monologue, and a jest about Nasreddin Hodja, translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2023 Contents The Riddle of the Sphinx (Greece). The Man, the Horse, the Ox, and the Dog (Aesop). The Duration of Life (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Animals and the Man (Germany, Ludwig Aurbacher). The Ages of Life (Germany, Ulrich Jahn). The Story of Man and His Years (Romania, M. Gaster). The Seven Ages (Rabbinic literature, Kohelet Rabbah ). Old Age Threatens Our Body Like a Tiger (India, Bhartrihari). The Seven Ages of Man (William Shakespeare). There Is No Difference between Youth and Old Age (Attributed to Nasreddin Hodja). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Riddle of the Sphinx Greece The city of Thebes was afflicted with a monster which infested the high-road. It was called the Sphinx. It had the body of a lion, and the upper part of a woman. It lay crouched on the top of a rock, and arrested all travellers who came that way, proposing to them a riddle, with the condition that those who could solve it should pass safe, but those who failed should be killed. Not one had yet succeeded in solving it, and all had been slain. Oedipus was not daunted by these alarming accounts, but boldly advanced to the trial. The Sphinx asked him, "What animal is that which in the morning goes on four feet, at noon on two, and in the evening upon three?" Oedipus replied, "Man, who in childhood creeps on hands and knees, in manhood walks erect, and in old age with the aid of a staff." The Sphinx was so mortified at the solving of her riddle that she cast herself down from the rock and perished. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Bulfinch, The Age of Fable; Or, Stories of Gods and Heroes , 2nd edition (Boston: Sanborn, Carter, and Bazin, 1856), p. 172 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Bulfinch, The Age of Fable; Or, Stories of Gods and Heroes , (Boston: Sanborn, Carter, and Bazin, 1855), p. 172 . Return to the table of contents . The Man, the Horse, the Ox, and the Dog Aesop One winter's day, during a severe storm, a horse, an ox, and a dog came and begged for shelter in the house of a man. He readily admitted them, and, as they were cold and wet, he lit a fire for their comfort; and he put oats before the horse, and hay before the ox, while he fed the dog with the remains of his own dinner. When the storm abated, and they were about to depart, they determined to show their gratitude in the following way. They divided the life of man among them, and each endowed one part of it with the qualities which were peculiarly his own. The horse took youth, and hence young men are high mettled and impatient of restraint; the ox took middle age, and accordingly men in middle life are steady and hard working; while the dog took old age, which is the reason why old men are so often peevish and ill tempered, and, like dogs, attached chiefly to those who look to their comfort, while they are disposed to snap at those who are unfamiliar or distasteful to them. Source (Internet Archive): Æsop's Fables , translated by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: W. Heinemann, 1916), pp. 188-89 . Other sources for this fable: C. Halm, ed., Fabulae Aesopicae Collectae (Leipzig: Teubner, 1852), no. 173 . Ben Edwin Perry, Babrius and Phaedrus (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1984), pp. 90-93 (Babrius, no. 74). Perry titles this fable "Man's Years." Lloyd W. Daly, Aesop without Morals (New York and London: Thomas Yoseloff, 1961), no. 105, pp. 138-139. Daly titles this fable "Man's Years." Return to the table of contents . The Duration of Life Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm When God created the world and was about to determine the duration of life for all the creatures, the donkey came and asked, "Lord, how long am I to live?" "Thirty years," answered God. "Is that all right with you?" "Oh, Lord," replied the donkey, "that is a long time. Think of my tiresome existence carrying heavy loads from morning until night, dragging bags of grain to the mill so that others might eat bread, only to be cheered along and refreshed with kicks and blows! Spare me part of this long time." So God had mercy and gave him eighteen years. The donkey went away satisfied, and the dog made his appearance. "How long do you want to live?" said God to him. "Thirty years was too much for the donkey, but you will be satisfied with that long." "Lord," answered the dog. "Is that your will? Just think how much I have to run. My feet will not hold out so long. And what can I do but growl and run from one corner to another after I have lost my voice for barking and my teeth for biting?" God saw that he was right, and he took away twelve years. Then came the monkey. "Surely you would like to live thirty years," said the Lord to him. "You do not need to work like the donkey and the dog, and are always having fun." "Oh, Lord," he answered, "so it appears, but it is different. When it rains porridge, I don't have a spoon. I am always supposed to be playing funny tricks and making faces so people will laugh, but when they give me an apple and I bite into it, it is always sour. How often is sorrow hidden behind a joke. I cannot put up with all that for thirty years!" God had mercy and gave him ten years. Finally man made his appearance. Cheerful, healthy, and refreshed, he asked God to determine the duration of his life. "You shall live thirty years," spoke the Lord. "Is that enough for you?" "What a short time!" cried the man. "When I have built a house and a fire is burning on my own hearth, when I have planted trees that blossom and bear fruit, and am just beginning to enjoy life, then I am to die. Oh, Lord, extend my time." "I will add the donkey's eighteen years," said God. "That is not enough," replied the man. "You shall also have the dog's twelve years." "Still too little." "Well, then," said God, "I will give you the monkey's ten years as well, but you shall receive no more." The man went away, but he was not satisfied. Thus man lives seventy years. The first thirty are his human years, and they quickly disappear. Here he is healthy and happy; he works with pleasure, and enjoys his existence. The donkey's eighteen years follow. Here one burden after the other is laid on him; he carries the grain that feeds others, and his faithful service is rewarded with kicks and blows. Then come the dog's twelve years, and he lies in the corner growling, no longer having teeth with which to bite. And when this time is past, the monkey's ten years conclude. Now man is weak headed and foolish; he does silly things and becomes a laughingstock for children. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Lebenszeit," Kinder- und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , 7th edition, vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 176, pp. 354-55 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Lebenszeit," Kinder- und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , 7th edition, vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 176, pp. 354-55 . The Grimms' source: Carl Friedrich Münscher (1808-1873), who learned the tale in 1838 from an unnamed peasant in his field at Zwehrn near Kassel. The Grimms first published this tale in the fourth edition (1840) of their Kinder- und Hausmärchen. Link to a file containing only this tale: The Duration of Life by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. Return to the table of contents . The Animals and the Man Germany A pagan fable relates: After the supreme god Jupiter had created the animals and finally the man, the donkey stepped before his throne and asked him: How long he had to live and what he would do? Jupiter answered: "Your life shall last thirty years, and your destiny shall be to bear burdens, suffer from hunger and thirst, and, if you are idle you shall receive blows as well." The donkey sighed deeply and said: "Oh, just God! If I must lead such a miserable life, at least shorten my years from twenty to ten." Jupiter granted him this, and the donkey went away in peace. Then the dog appeared, and he too asked how long he had to live and what he would do. Jupiter answered: "Your life shall be thirty years. You shall guard man and his belongings day and night, and frighten away the thieves by growling, barking, and biting." This did not please the dog, who wanted to enjoy freedom, and he begged Jupiter that, if he must be born into slavery, his years would be shortened to ten. Jupiter granted this wish, and the grateful dog departed. After this the monkey appeared, and he too asked how long he was to live and what he would have to do. Jupiter answered: Your life shall be thirty years, and your destiny shall be that in your misshapen form you will have to perform for men and be a laughingstock for children." This made the monkey angry, to which he said: "If that is all that I am to be in this world, then at least shorten my years to ten." Jupiter agreed to do this. Finally man appeared before Jupiter's throne, and he asked the god how long was to live. Jupiter replied: "Your life shall last thirty years." "What?" asked the man. "Only thirty years? Is such a short lifetime worthy of the most perfect being that came from your hand?" Then Jupiter said: "Very well. I will add to you the twenty years that I took from the donkey, the twenty that I took from the dog, and the twenty that I took from the monkey. But these shall be your destiny and hardships: From your thirtieth year to your fiftieth you shall carry, sweat, go without, and endure, like the donkey. From your fiftieth to your seventieth you shall anxiously look after belongings, growling and grumbling like a dog. And finally: For the next twenty years, up to your ninetieth, no longer able to do anything useful, you shall be a laughingstock for children, like the monkey. And thus it came to be, relates the pagan fable. We see this daily from people who, like animals, only value and seek that which is earthly. Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Aurbacher, "Die Thiere und der Mensch," Ein Volksbüchlein (München: In der literarisch=artistischen Anstalt, 1835), no. 12, pp. 72-74 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludwig Aurbacher, "Die Thiere und der Mensch," Ein Volksbüchlein (München: In der literarisch=artistischen Anstalt, 1835), no. 12, pp. 72-74 . Return to the table of contents . The Ages of Life Germany When the Lord God created the world, he set thirty years for man and donkey, and twenty years for dog and monkey. In this amount of time they were to enjoy life. Before very long man came and wanted a longer period of time. While he was still begging, the donkey came before God's throne and said: "Dear Lord, take twenty years off my life. The burden will be too great for me, with all the work and so little food!" "Take the twenty years from him and give them to me!" cried the man, and our Lord God granted both of their wishes. After the donkey, the dog also appeared and complained: "Lord, just look at how I am mistreated. With little to eat I have to guard people's belongings in snow and rain. Take half my life from me! If I live ten years, I shall live long enough." "Give them to me!" the man asked, and the Lord God took half the dog's years from his life and gave them to the man. Last but not least, the monkey also showed up and also wanted to lose half his life. "I have to climb and jump," he said, "and make faces and jokes so that people can laugh at me. Twenty years is too long, my Lord, take half from me!" "Give them to me!" begged the dissatisfied man for the third time. He begged and complained until the Lord God took the ten years from the monkey and added them to his life. Thus man got twenty donkey years, ten dog years, and ten monkey years added to his own life, and he has kept them to this day. Up to the age of thirty he lives easily. After this he has to use the donkey's twenty years and work with the sweat of his brow and almost collapse under his burden. From the fiftieth year onwards the life of a dog begins, and man jealously guards, like a dog, what he has brought together and acquired in his donkey years. The dog years are followed by the monkey years, from the sixtieth to the seventieth. Here people are like monkeys with little grandchildren, jumping and dancing in front of them and making faces and making fools of themselves so that the little ones laugh about it. In the end they become quite childish and soil themselves while eating and drinking. That is what man got from being dissatisfied with our Lord God's original plan for him. To this day if he lives beyond thirty years, he must be treated like a donkey, a dog, and a monkey. Source (Wikisource): Ulrich Jahn, "Die Lebensalter," Schwänke und Schnurren aus Bauern Mund (Berlin: Mayer und Müller, 1890), pp. 42-44 . Source (zeno.org): Ulrich Jahn, "Das Lebensalter," Schwänke und Schnurren aus Bauern Mund (Berlin: Mayer und Müller, 1890), pp. 42-44 . Return to the table of contents . The Story of Man and His Years Romania When God had created the world, he called all his creatures together to grant them their span of life, and to tell them how long they would live and what manner of life they would lead. The first to appear before God was man. And God said to him, "You, man, shall be king of the world, walking erect upon your feet and looking up to heaven. I give you a noble countenance. The power of thought and judgment shall be yours, and the capacity of disclosing your innermost thoughts by means of speech. All that lives and moves and goes about the earth shall be under your rule, the winged birds and the creeping things shall obey you. Yours shall be all the fruits of the tree and land, and your life shall be thirty years." Then man turned away dissatisfied and grumbling. "What is the good of living in pleasure and in might, if all the years of my life are to be thirty only?" So did man speak and grumble, especially when he heard of the years granted to other animals. The turn came to the donkey. He stepped forward to hear what God had decreed for him. The Creator said, "You shall work hard; you shall carry heavy burdens and be constantly beaten. You shall always be scolded and have very little rest. Your food shall be a poor one of thistles and thorns, and your life shall be fifty years." When the donkey heard what God had decreed for him he fell upon his knees and cried, "All merciful Creator, am I indeed to lead such a miserable life, and am I to have such poor food as thistles and thorns. Am I to work so hard and carry such heavy burdens and then live on for fifty years in such misery? Have pity on me and take off twenty years." Then man, greedy of long life, stepped forward and begged for himself these twenty years which the donkey had rejected. And the Lord granted them to him. Then came the dog. To him the Creator said, "You shall guard the house and the property of your master. You shall cling to them as if you were afraid of losing them. You shall bark even at the shadow of the moon, and for all your trouble you shall gnaw bones and eat raw meat, and your life shall be forty years." "All merciful Creator," cried the dog, "if my life is to be of worry and trouble, and if I am to live on bones and raw stuff, take off, I pray, twenty years." Again man, greedy of life, stepped forward and begged the Creator to give him the twenty years rejected by the dog. And the Creator again granted his request. Now it was the turn of the monkey. The creator said, "You shall only have the likeness of man, but not be man. You shall be stupid and childish. Your back shall be bent. You shall be an object of mockery to the children and a laughingstock of fools, and your life shall be sixty years." When the monkey heard what was decreed for him, he fell upon his knees and said, "All merciful God, in your wisdom you have decided that I should be a man and not a man, that my back shall be bent, that I shall be a laughing stock for young and fools and I shall be stupid. Take, in mercy, thirty years off my life." And God, the all merciful, granted his request. And again, man, whose greed can never be satisfied, stepped forward and asked also for these thirty years which the monkey had rejected. And again God gave them to him. Then God dismissed all the animals and all his creatures, and each one went to his appointed station and to the life that has been granted to him. And as man had asked, so has it come to pass. Man lives as a king and ruler over all creatures for the thirty years which the Lord had given to him, in joy and in happiness, without care and without trouble. Then come the years from thirty to fifty, which are the years of the donkey; they are full of hard work, heavy burdens, and little food, for man is anxious to gather and to lay up something for the years to come. It could not be otherwise, for were not these the years which he had taken over from the donkey? Then come the years from fifty to seventy, when man sits at home and guards with great trembling and fear the little that he possesses, fearful of every shadow, eating little, always keeping others away lest they rob him of that which he has gathered, and barking at everyone whom he suspects of wanting to take away what belongs to him. And no wonder that he behaves like that, for these are the dog's years, which man had asked for himself. And if a man lives beyond seventy, then his back gets bent, his face changes, his mind gets clouded, he becomes childish, a laughingstock for children, an amusement for the fool, and these are the years which man had taken over from the monkey. Source (books.google.com): M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 116, pp. 336-38 . Source (Internet Archive): M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 116, pp. 336-38 . Gaster's source: "some old Rumanian manuscripts." Return to the table of contents . The Seven Ages Kohelet Rabbah Seven times in one verse (said Rabbi Simon, the son of Eliezer), did the author of Ecclesiastes make use of the word vanity *, in allusion to the seven stages of human life. The first commences in the first year of human existence, when the infant lies like a king on a soft couch, with numerous attendants about him, -- all ready to serve him, and eager to testify their love and attachment by kisses and embraces. The second commences about the age of two or three years, when the darling child is permitted to crawl on the ground, and, like an unclean animal, delights in dirt and filth. Then at the age of ten, the thoughtless boy , without reflecting on the past or caring for the future, jumps and skips about like a young kid on the enameled green, contented to enjoy the present moment. The fourth stage begins about the age of twenty, when the young man , full of vanity and pride, begins to set off his person by dress; and, like a young unbroken horse, prances and gallops about in search of a wife. Then comes the matrimonial state , when the poor man , like a patient ass, is obliged, however reluctantly, to toil and labor for a living. Behold him now in the parental state , when surrounded by helpless children craving his support and looking to him for bread. He is as bold, as vigilant -- and as fawning too -- as the faithful dog; guarding his little flock, and snatching at everything that comes in his way, in order to provide for his offspring. At last comes the final stage, when the decrepit old man , like the unwieldy though most sagacious elephant , becomes grave, sedate, and distrustful. He then begins to hang down his head towards the ground, as if surveying the place where all his vast schemes must terminate, and where ambition and vanity are finally humbled to the dust. Medrash Koheloth. Footnote: *Eccles. i. 2. The word occurs twice in the plural, which the Rabbi considered as equivalent to four, and three times in the singular, making together seven . Source (books.google.com): Hyman Hurwitz, Hebrew Tales (London: Morrison and Watt, 1826), ch. 17, pp. 50-51 . Source (Internet Archive): Hyman Hurwitz, Hebrew Tales (London: Morrison and Watt, 1826), ch. 17, pp. 50-51 . Return to the table of contents . Old Age Threatens Our Body Like a Tiger India Old age threatens our body like a tiger, and sickness finally carries it off. Life ebbs away like water from a cracked jar, and nevertheless man is able to lead a wicked existence in this world. And this is indeed wonderful. The Creator makes a man a jewel, a man of virtue, an ornament to the whole earth -- and then in a single instant he destroys him. Alas! what a lack of knowledge the Creator displays! What innumerable evils are attached to old age! The body becomes bent with years; the steps grow more and more hesitating; the teeth fall out; the eyes become dim; deafness is more and more evident; saliva dribbles from the mouth; servants no longer obey orders; one's wife is not submissive, and even one's son becomes an enemy. For a single instant one is a child, and for a single instant again one is a passionate youth. At one moment wealth lies about us in abundance, and the next it is no longer to be seen. A man reaches the end of his span of life, and then with his limbs worn out by old age and covered with wrinkles, he enters the abode of death as an actor at the close of the play makes his exit behind the curtain. Source (Internet Archive): Bhartrihari, "The Vairagya Sataka," The Satakas or Wise Sayings of Bhartrihari , translated from the Sanskrit by J. M. Kennedy (London: T. Werner Laurie, 1913), pp. 125-26 . Bhartrihari was a Hindu philosopher who lived in the fifth century CE. Return to the table of contents . The Seven Ages of Man William Shakespeare All the world's a stage, And all the men and women merely players. They have their exits and their entrances, And one man in his time plays many parts, His acts being seven ages. At first the infant, Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms. Then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel And shining morning face, creeping like snail Unwillingly to school. And then the lover, Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier, Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard, Jealous in honor, sudden and quick in quarrel, Seeking the bubble reputation Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice, In fair round belly with good capon lined, With eyes severe and beard of formal cut, Full of wise saws and modern instances; And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts Into the lean and slippered pantaloon, With spectacles on nose and pouch on side, His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice, Turning again toward childish treble, pipes And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all, That ends this strange eventful history, Is second childishness and mere oblivion, Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything. Source (The Folger Shakespeare): As You Like It, act 2, scene 7, lines 146-73 . This passage is spoken by Jaques. As You Like It was written about 1599. Return to the table of contents . There Is No Difference between Youth and Old Age Nasreddin Hodja One day the Hodja said, "There is no difference between youth and old age." Someone asked him, "How so?" He answered, "In front of our door there is a stone so heavy that only a few people are able to lift it. In my youth I attempted to do so, but was unable to. Later, now that I am an old man, I remembered this, and attempted once again, but was still unable to lift it. This experience is why I say that there is no difference between youth and old age." Source (books.google.com): Albert Wesselski, Der Hodscha Nasreddin , vol. 1 (Weimar: Alexander Duncker Verlag, 1911), no. 240, p. 144 . Source (Internet Archive): Albert Wesselski, Der Hodscha Nasreddin , vol. 1 (Weimar: Alexander Duncker Verlag, 1911), no. 240, p. 144 . Link to additional tales about Nasreddin Hodja . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. See also Aging and Death in Folklore . An essay by D. L. Ashliman, with supporting texts from proverbs, folktales, and myths from around the world. Revised January 10, 2023. Stone Monument Legends Stone Monument Legends edited and/or translated by D. L. Ashliman. University of Pittsburgh © 1998-2019 Contents The Standing Stones of Stenhouse (Orkney Islands, Sir Walter Scott). The Stone of Odin (Orkney Islands, G. F. Black). The Temple of the Moon, the Temple of the Sun, and Wodden's Stone (Orkney Islands, G. F. Black). Druidical Circles and Monoliths (Scotland, Walter Gregor). Olav's Mound and the Raised Stone at Slugan (Scotland, Lord Archibald Campbell). The Gnoll Fairy Stone (Wales, J. O. Westwood). Merlin Transports the Giant's Dance [Stonehenge] from Ireland to England (England, Geoffrey of Monmouth). The White Cow of Mitchell's Fold (England, Charlotte Sophia Burne and Georgina F. Jackson). The Merry Maidens (England, Daniel Bowen Craigue). Rollright (England, James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps). Legend of the Rollright Stones (England, Thomas Wright). Table-Mên: The Saxon Kings' Visit to the Land's-End (England, Robert Hunt). King Arthur's Stone (England, Robert Hunt). The Witches of the Logan Stone (England, Robert Hunt). How to Become a Witch (England, Robert Hunt). Giants in Denmark (Saxo Grammaticus). Gloshed's Altar (Sweden, Herman Hofberg). The Frau Holle Stone (Germany, J. W. Wolf). The Giant's Stone near Züschen (Germany, Karl Lyncker). The Stone of Stolzenhagen (Germany, J. D. H. Temme). The Seven Stones of Morin (Germany, J. D. H. Temme). The Adam's Dance of Wirchow (Germany, J. D. H. Temme). The Hun Graves at Züssow (Germany, J. D. H. Temme). Runestones and Picture Stones from Scandinavia (a selection of photographs). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Standing Stones of Stenhouse Orkney Islands The most stately monument of this sort [circles of detached stones] in Scotland, and probably inferior to none in England, excepting Stonehenge, is formed by what are called the Standing Stones of Stenhouse, in the island of Pomona in the Orkneys, where it can scarcely be supposed that Druids ever penetrated. At least, it is certain, that the common people now consider it as a Scandinavian monument; and, according to an ancient custom, a couple who are desirous to attach themselves by more than an ordinary vow of fidelity, join hands through the round hole which is in one of the stones. This they call the promise of Odin. Source: Sir Walter Scott , "Essay on Border Antiquities." This article formed the introduction to a two-volume work, first published in 1814, under the title Border Antiquities of England and Scotland: Comprising Specimens of Architecture and Sculpture , vol. 1 (London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, 1814), p. xiii, footnote . Return to the table of contents . The Stone of Odin Orkney Islands A young man had seduced a girl under promise of marriage, and she proving with child, was deserted by him: The young man was called before session; the elders were particularly severe. Being asked by the minister the cause of so much rigor, they answered, "You do not know what a bad man this is; he has broke the promise of Odin." Being further asked what they meant by the promise of Odin, they put him in mind of the stone at Stenhouse, with the round hole in it; and added, that it was customary, when promises were made, for the contracting parties to join hands through this hole, and the promises so made were called the promises of Odin. It was said that a child passed through the hole when young would never shake with palsy in old age. Up to the time of its destruction, it was customary to leave some offering on visiting the stone, such as a piece of bread, or cheese, or a rag, or even a stone. The Odin stone, long the favorite trysting-place in summer twilights of Orkney lovers, was demolished in 1814 by a sacrilegious farmer, who used its material to assist him in the erection of a cowhouse. this misguided man was a Ferry-Louper (the name formerly given to strangers from the south), and his wanton destruction of the consecrated stone stirred so strongly the resentment of the peasantry in the district that various unsuccessful attempts were made to burn his house and holdings about his ears. Source: County Folk-Lore , vol. 3: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands , collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1903), p. 2 . Black's sources: Principal Gordon of the Scots College at Paris, "Remarks Made in a Journey to the Orkney Islands," Archæologia Scotica; or, Transaction of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland , vol. 1 (Edinburgh: Printed for the Society, 1792), p. 263 . Capt. F. W. L. Thomas in Archæologia, , vol. 34, p. 101. Daniel Gorrie, Summers and Winters in the Orkneys , 2nd ed. (London: Simpkin, Marshall and Company, 1869), pp. 142-43 . Return to the table of contents . The Temple of the Moon, The Temple of the Sun, and Wodden's Stone Orkney Islands There was a custom among the lower class of people in this country which has entirely subsided within these twenty or thirty years. Upon the first day of every new year the common people, from all parts of the country, met at the Kirk of Stainhouse (Stennis), each person having provision for four or five days; they continued there for that time dancing and feasting in the kirk. This meeting gave the young people an opportunity of seeing each other, which seldom failed in making four or five marriages every year; and to secure each other's love, till an opportunity of celebrating their nuptials, they had resource to the following solemn engagements: The parties agreed stole from the rest of their companions, and went to the Temple of the Moon, where the woman, in presence of the man, fell down on her knees and prayed the god Wodden (for such was the name of the god they addressed upon this occasion) that he would enable her to perform all the promises and obligations she had and was to make to the young man present, after which they both went to the Temple of the Sun, where the man prayed in like manner before the woman, then they repaired from this to the stone [known as Wodden's or Odin's Stone], and the man being on one side and the woman on the other, they took hold of each other's right hand through the hole, and there swore to be constant and faithful to each other. This ceremony was held so very sacred in those times that the person who dared to break the engagement made here was counted infamous, and excluded all society. Source: County Folk-Lore , vol. 3: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney & Shetland Islands, collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1903), pp. 212-213. Black's source: George Low, A Tour through the Islands of Orkney and Schetland, containing Hints Relative to Their Ancient, Modern, and Natural History, Collected in 1774 (Kirkwall: William Peace and Son, 1879), p. xxvi . The "Temple of the Moon" is a circle of standing stones also known as the "Ring of Stennis." The "Temple of the Sun" is a circle of standing stones also known as the "Ring of Brogar." Return to the table of contents . Druidical Circles and Monoliths Scotland Druidical circles and monoliths were looked upon with awe; and there were few that would have dared to remove them. Here is a tradition of a monolith on the farm of Achorrachin in Glenlivet. The farmer was building a steading, and took the stone as a lintel to a byre door. Disease fell upon the cattle, and most unearthly noises were heard during the night all round the steading. There was no peace for man or beast. By the advice of a friend, the stone was taken from the wall and thrown into the river that ran past the farm. Still there was no peace. The stone was at last put into its old place in the middle of a field. Things then returned to their usual course. The stone stands to the present day in the middle of the field, and in some of its crevices were seen, not many years ago, small pieces of mortar. Source: Walter Gregor, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the North-East of Scotland (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1881), p. 115 . Return to the table of contents . Olav's Mound and the Raised Stone at Slugan Scotland The Norwegians once made a sudden descent from their ships on the lower end of Craignish. The inhabitants, taken by surprise, fled in terror to the upper end of the district, and halted not until they reached the Slugan (gorge) of Gleann-Domhuinn , or the Deep Glen. There, however, they rallied under a brave young man, who threw himself at their head, and slew, either with a spear or an arrow, the leader of the invaders. This inspired the Craignish men with such courage that they soon drove back their disheartened enemies across Barbreck river. The latter, in retreating, carried off the body of their fallen leader, and buried it afterwards on a place on Barbreck farm, which is still called Dùnan-Amhlaidh, or Olav's Mound. The Craignish men also raised a stone at Slugan to mark the spot where Olav fell. Source: Lord Archibald Campbell, Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition , Argyllshire Series, vol. 1 (London: David Nutt, 1889), pp. 11-12. Campbell's title for this piece is "The Battle between the Craignish People and the Lochluinnich Norwegians at Slugan." Return to the table of contents . The Gnoll Fairy Stone Wales Fairies were constantly seen on a fine evening by Clwyda'r Banwan (the Banwan Gates), dancing within the rings; but since the wonderful stone (on which was written fairy language in their characters, for nobody had ever understood them) had been removed from the center of the largest circle to Gnoll gardens, nobody had ever seen the fairies. But they had their revenge; for no sooner had the grotto, which cost Lady Mackworth thousands of pounds, been finished, than one evening -- oh! I shall never forget it! -- there was thunder and lightning and rain, such as was never seen or heard before; and next morning the grotto had disappeared, for the hill behind it fell over it, and has hidden it forever; and woe betide the man that will dare to clear away the earth. When the storm abated we all heard the fairies laughing heartily. Source: J. O. Westwood, "Early Inscribed Stones of Wales," Archaeologia Cambrensis , series 3, vol. 11 (1865), pp. 60-61. This account was given by a gardener who claimed to have personally experienced the event. In about 1835 the stone (according to modern scholars a Roman grave marker) was removed from its original site and placed in a garden grotto at the Gnoll, an estate overlooking Neath, a town in south Wales. Soon afterward, the grotto was buried beneath a landslide, giving rise to the tradition that fairies had taken their revenge for the stone's removal. In spite of the gardener's warning, the stone was recovered and since 1922 has been on display in the Swansea Museum. The "fairy language" mentioned above is a badly weathered Latin inscription. Return to the table of contents . Merlin Transports the Giant's Dance [Stonehenge] from Ireland to England England The enemies [Saxons] being now entirely reduced, the king [Aurelius] summoned the consuls and princes of the kingdom together at York, where he gave orders for the restoration of the churches, which the Saxons had destroyed.... From hence he went to Winchester, to repair the ruins of it, as he did of other cities; and when the work was finished there, he went, at the instance of Bishop Eldad, to the monastery near Kaercaradoc, now Salisbury, where the consuls and princes, whom the wicked Hengist [an Anglo-Saxon chieftain] had treacherously murdered, lay buried. At this place was a convent that maintained three hundred friars, situated on the mountain of Ambrius, who, as is reported, had been the founder of it. The sight of the place where the dead lay, made the king, who was of a compassionate temper, shed tears, and at last enter upon thoughts, what kind of monument to erect upon it. For he thought something ought to be done to perpetuate the memory of that piece of ground, which was honored with the bodies of so many noble patriots, that died for their country. For this purpose he summoned together several carpenters and masons, and commanded them to employ the utmost of their art, in contriving some new structure, for a lasting monument to those great men. But they, in diffidence of their own skill, refusing to undertake it, Tremounus, archbishop of the City of Legions, went to the king, and said, "If any one living is able to execute your commands, Merlin, the prophet of Vortegirn, is the man. In my opinion there is not in all your kingdom a person of a brighter genius, either in predicting future events, or in mechanical contrivances. Order him to come to you, and exercise his skill in the work which you design." Whereupon Aurelius, after he had asked a great many questions concerning him, despatched several messengers into the countries to find him out, and bring him to him. After passing through several provinces, they found him in the country of the Gewisseans, at the fountain of Galabes, which he frequently resorted to. As soon as they had delivered their message to him, they conducted him to the king, who received him with joy, and, being curious to hear some of his wonderful speeches, commanded him to prophesy. Merlin made answer: "Mysteries of this kind are not to be revealed but when there is the greatest necessity for it. If I should pretend to utter them either for ostentation or diversion, the spirit that instructs me would be silent, and would leave me when I should have occasion for it." When he had made the same refusal to all the rest present, the king would not urge him any longer about his predictions, but spoke to him concerning the monument which he designed. "If you are desirous," said Merlin, " to honor the burying-place of these men with an everlasting monument, send for the Giant's Dance [Stonehenge], which is in Killaraus, a mountain in Ireland. For there is a structure of stones there, which none of this age could raise, without a profound knowledge of the mechanical arts. They are stones of a vast magnitude and wonderful quality; and if they can be placed here, as they are there, round this spot of ground, they will stand forever." At these words of Merlin, Aurelius burst into laughter, and said, "How is it possible to remove such vast stones from so distant a country, as if Britain was not furnished with stones fit for the work?" Merlin replied: "I entreat your majesty to forbear vain laughter; for what I say is without vanity. They are mystical stones, and of a medicinal virtue. The giants of old brought them from the farthest coasts of Africa, and placed them in Ireland, while they inhabited that country. Their design in this was to make baths in them, when they should be taken with any illness. For their method was to wash the stones, and put their sick into the water, which infallibly cured them. With the like success they cured wounds also, adding only the application of some herbs. There is not a stone there which has not some healing virtue." When the Britons heard this, they resolved to send for the stones, and to make war upon the people of Ireland if they should offer to detain them. And to accomplish this business, they made choice of Uther Pendragon, who was to be attended with fifteen thousand men. They chose also Merlin himself, by whose direction the whole affair was to be managed. A fleet being therefore got ready, they set sail, and with a fair wind arrived in Ireland. At that time Gillomanius, a youth of wonderful valor, reigned in Ireland; who, upon the news of the arrival of the Britons in his kingdom, levied a vast army, and marched out against them. And when he had learned the occasion of their coming, he smiled, and said to those about him, "No wonder a cowardly race of people were able to make so great devastation in the island of Britain, when the Britons are such brutes and fools. Was ever the like folly heard of? What are the stones of Ireland better than those of Britain, that our kingdom must be put to this disturbance for them? To arms, soldiers, and defend your country; while I have life they shall not take from us the least stone of the Giant's Dance." Uther, seeing them prepared for a battle, attacked them; nor was it long ere the Britons had the advantage, who, having dispersed and killed the Irish, forced Gillomanius to flee. After the victory they went to the mountain Killaraus, and arrived at the structure of stones, the sight of which filled them both with joy and admiration. And while they were all standing round them, Merlin came up to them, and said, "Now try your forces, young men, and see whether strength or art can do the most towards taking down these stones." At this word they all set to their engines with one accord, and attempted the removing of the Giant's Dance. Some prepared cables, others small ropes, others ladders for the work, but all to no purpose. Merlin laughed at their vain efforts, and then began his own contrivances. When he had placed in order the engines that were necessary, he took down the stones with an incredible facility, and gave directions for carrying them to the ships, and placing them therein. This done, they with joy set sail again, to return to Britain; where they arrived with a fair gale, and repaired to the burying-place with the stones. When Aurelius had notice of it, he sent messengers to all parts of Britain, to summon the clergy and people together to the mount of Ambrius, in order to celebrate with joy and honor the erection of the monument. Upon this summons appeared the bishops, abbots, and people of all other orders and qualities; and upon the day and place appointed for their general meeting, Aurelius placed the crown upon his head, and with royal pomp celebrated the feast of Pentecost, the solemnity whereof he continued the three following days. In the meantime, all places of honor that were vacant, he bestowed upon his domestics, as rewards for their good services. At that time the two metropolitan sees of York and Legions were vacant; and with the general consent of the people, whom he was willing to please in this choice, he granted York to Sanxo, a man of great quality, and much celebrated for his piety; and the City of Legions to Dubricius, whom Divine Providence had pointed out as a most useful pastor in that place. As soon as he had settled these and other affairs in the kingdom, he ordered Merlin to set up the stones brought over from Ireland, about the sepulcher; which he accordingly did, and placed them in the same manner as they had been in the mountain Killaraus, and thereby gave a manifest proof of the prevalence of art above strength. Source: The British History of Geoffrey of Monmouth , translated from the Latin by A. Thompson, a new edition, revised and corrected by J. A. Giles (London: James Bohn, 1842), chs. 9-12 (pp. 156-60) . Geoffrey of Monmouth , a British clergyman, lived between about 1100 and 1155. His Historia Regum Britanniae ( History of the Kings of Britain ) was written about 1136. Edmund Spenser, in his The Faerie Queene (variously spelled, first published in two installments, 1590 and 1596), mentions Stonehenge as a monument constructed in honor of Britons killed by Saxons, adding that afterward it also served as a burying place for British heroes ( book 2, canto 10, sections 62-67 ). Return to the table of contents . The White Cow of Mitchell's Fold England On the Corndon Hill, a bare moorland in the extreme west of Shropshire, stands a half-ruined stone circle known as Mitchell's Fold. And thereto hangs a tale. In times gone by, before anyone now living can remember, there was once a dreadful famine all about this country, and the people had like to have been clemmed [nearly starved to death]. There were many more living in this part then, than what there are now, and times were very bad indeed. And all they had to depend upon was, that there used to come a fairy cow upon the hill, up at Mitchell's Fold, night and morning, to be milked. A beautiful pure white cow she was, and no matter how many came to milk her, there was always enough for all, so long as everyone that came only took one pailful. It was in this way: If anyone was to milk her dry, she would go away and never come again; but so long as everyone took only a pailful apiece, she never would be dry. They might take whatever sort of vessel they liked, to milk her into, so long as it was only one apiece, she would always fill it. Well, and at last there came an old witch, Mitchell her name was. A bad old woman she was, and did a deal of harm, and had a spite against everybody. And she brought a riddle [sieve], and milked the cow into that, and of course the poor thing couldn't fill it. And the old woman milked her, and milked her, and at last she milked her dry, and the cow was never seen there again, not after. Folks say she went off into Warwickshire like a crazy thing, and turned into the wild dun cow that Guy Earl of Warwick killed; but anyhow they say she was sadly missed in this country, and many died after she was gone, and there's never been so many living about here, not since. But the old woman got her punishment. She was turned into one of those stones on the hillside, and all the other stones were put up round her to keep her in, and that's how the place came to be called Mitchell's Fold, because her name was Mitchell, you see. There used to be more stones than there are now, but they have been taken away at one time or another. It's best not to meddle with such places. There was a farmer lived by there, and he blew up some of them and took away the pieces to put round his horse pond, but he never did no good after. Source: Shropshire Folk-Lore: A Sheaf of Gleanings , edited by Charlotte Sophia Burne from the collections of Georgina F. Jackson (London: Trübner and Company, 1883), pp. 39-40 . Return to the table of contents . The Merry Maidens England (Cornwall) Everyone in Cornwall knows the story of the Merry Maidens. It is said that long ago some twenty maidens, accompanied by two pipers, were dancing and making merry on a Sunday, and as punishment for this sacrilege the lot of them were turned to stone: the maidens were petrified in a perfect circle with the two pipers standing by themselves a little way off. Now I cannot believe this legend, because according to it the stone circle would come from Christian times, but it has to be much older. When I was a lad I heard another explanation for the stones. I cannot remember any of the details, but I am sure it was much closer to the truth. It has something to do with the ley lines that run through here. In fact, a ley line connects the Blind Fiddler standing stone just up the road from here with my garden. Tomorrow I'll demonstrate its energy for you with a dowsing rod. Yes, there is a story about the Blind Fiddler, but I don't remember it either. However, I do know a story about the Merry Maidens, and it is a true story. In 1907 an emmet (that's a Cornish word for outsider) from England bought the farm where the Merry Maidens stone circle stands. Thinking that the stones lessened the value of the field, the new owner ordered one of his workers to pull them down and add them to the stone walls surrounding the meadow. The worker, a Cornishman, protested, but the Englishman insisted: "This is my field, and I'll do with it what I please, and you'll do as I say!" Next day the Cornishman hitched up three shire horses to a chain and began the task. (You know shire horses, don't you? They're big one-ton draft horses.) Anyway, while pulling over the first stone the lead horse panicked, reared up, then fell over dead. Reporting this to his master, the Cornishman asked if he should fetch another horse for the task. "No," said the landowner. "Set the stone back upright. We'll pull the lot of them down later." But the stone circle was left undisturbed, and remains so to this day. Source: Daniel Bowen Craigue, a retired electrician about 65 years of age, and life-long resident of Cornwall, currently residing at Catchall, Burlyas Bridge, near Penzance. Danny, as he likes to be called, narrated this account to D. L. and Patricia Ashliman on the evening of May 20, 2002. The Merry Maidens stone circle, also called Dawn's Men (a corruption of Dans Maen [Stone Dance] in Cornish) or the Dancing Stones, consists of 19 evenly spaced stones set in a circle with a diameter of 75 feet. The two pipers, standing stones 13.5 feet and 15 feet high, are one fourth mile away. Link to a photograph of the Merry Maidens . This page is part of the excellent Stone Pages site. The Blind Fiddler is also called the Tregonebris Stone. There is widespread (but, from my perspective, uncritical) belief in Great Britain in the natural energy of so-called ley lines. Return to the table of contents . Rollright England The "Druidical" Stones at Rollright, Oxfordshire, are said to have been originally a general and his army who were transformed into stones by a magician. The tradition runs that there was a prophecy or oracle which told the general,-- If Long Compton thou canst see, King of England thou shalt be. He was within a few yard of the spot whence that town could be observed, when his progress was stopped by the magician's transformation,-- Sink down man, and rise up stone! King of England thou shalt be none. The general was transformed into a large stone which stands on a spot from which Long Compton is not visible, but on ascending a slight rise close to it, the town is revealed to view. Roger Gale, writing in 1719, says that whoever dared to contradict this story was regarded "as a most audacious freethinker." It is said that no man could ever count these stones, and that a baker once attempted it by placing a penny loaf on each of them, but somehow or other he failed in counting his own bread. A similar tale is related of Stonehenge. Source: James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), pp. 193-94 . Link to a photograph of the Rollright Stone Circle . This page is part of the excellent Stone Pages site. Return to the table of contents . Legend of the Rollright Stones England Not far from the borders of Gloucestershire and Oxfordshire, and within the latter county, is the pretty village of Rollright and near the village, up a hill, stands a circle of small stones, and one larger stone, such as our Celtic antiquaries say were raised by the Druids. As soon as the Druids left them, the fairies, who never failed to take possession of their deserted shrines, seemed to have had an especial care over these stones, and anyone who ventures to meddle with them is sure to meet with some very great misfortune. The old people of the village, however, who generally know most about these matters, say the stones were once a king and his knights, who were going to make war on the King of England. And they assert that, according to old prophecies, had they ever reached Long Compton, the King of England must inevitably have been dethroned, and this king would have reigned in his place. But when they came to the village of Rollright they were suddenly turned into stones in the place where they now stand. Be this as it may, there was once a farmer in the village who wanted a large stone to put in a particular position in an outhouse he was building in his farmyard, and he thought that one of the old knights would be just the thing for him. In spite of all the warnings of his neighbors he determined to have the stone he wanted, and he put four horses to his best wagon and proceeded up the hill. With much labor he succeeded in getting the stone into his wagon, and though the road lay down hill, it was so heavy that his wagon was broken and his horses were killed by the labor of drawing it home. Nothing daunted by all these mishaps, the farmer raised the stone to the place it was to occupy in his new building. From this moment everything went wrong with him. His crops failed year after year. His cattle died one after another. He was obliged to mortgage his land and to sell his wagons and horses, till at last he had left only one poor broken-down horse which nobody would buy, and one old crazy cart. Suddenly the thought came into his head that all his misfortunes might be owing to the identical stone which he had brought from the circle at the top of the hill. He thought he would try to get it back again, and his only horse was put to the cart. To his surprise he got the stone down and lifted it into the cart with very little trouble, and, as soon as it was in, the horse, which could scarcely bear along its own limbs, now drew it up the hill of its own accord with as little trouble as another horse would draw an empty cart on level ground, until it came to the very spot where the stone had formerly stood beside its companions. The stone was soon in its place, and the horse and cart returned home, and from that moment the farmer's affairs began to improve, till in a short time he was a richer and more substantial man than he had ever been before. Footnote: The old rhyme runs -- If Long Compton thou can'st see, Then King of England thou shalt be. See Hutchinson's History of Cumberland , i. 230. Source: William J. Thoms, "Four Transcripts by the Late Thomas Wright," The Folk-Lore Record , vol. 2 (London: The Folk-Lore Society, 1879), pp. 177-78 . This account was also published by Edwin Sidney Hartland, in his English Fairy and Other Folk Tales (London and New York: Walter Scott Publishing Co., ca. 1890), pp. 151-52 . Link to a photograph of the Rollright Stone Circle . This page is part of the excellent Stone Pages site. Return to the table of contents . Table-Mên: The Saxon Kings' Visit to the Land's-End England (Cornwall) At a short distance from Sennen church, and near the end of a cottage, is a block of granite, nearly eight feet long, and about three feet high. This rock is known as the Table-mên, or Table- main , which appears to signify the stone-table. At Bosavern, in St. Just, is a somewhat similar flat stone; and the same story attaches to each. It is to the effect that some Saxon Kings used the stone as a dining table. The number has been variously stated; some traditions fixing on three kings, others on seven. Hals is far more explicit; for, as he says, on the authority of the chronicle of Samuel Daniell; they were -- Ethelbert, 5th king of Kent; Cissa, 2d king of the South Saxons; Kingills, 6th king of the West Saxons; Sebert, 3d king of the East Saxons; Ethelfred, 7th king of the Northumbers; Penda, 5th king of the Mercians; Sigebert, 5th king of the East Angles, -- all who flourished about the year 600. At a point where the four parishes of Zennor, Morvah, Gulval, and Madron meet, is a flat stone with a cross cut on it. The Saxon kings are also said to have dined on this. The only tradition which is known amongst the peasantry of Sennen is, that Prince Arthur and the Kings who aided him against the Danes, in the great battle fought near Vellan-Drucher, dined on the Table-mên, after which they defeated the Danes. Source: Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , first series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 197-98 . Return to the table of contents . King Arthur's Stone England (Cornwall) In the western part of Cornwall, all the marks of any peculiar kind found on the rocks are referred either to the giants or the devil. In the eastern part of the county such markings are almost always attributed to Arthur. Not far from the Devil's Coit in St. Columb, on the edge of the Gossmoor, there is a large stone upon which are deeply impressed marks, which a little fancy may convert into the marks of four horseshoes. This is "King Arthur's Stone," and these marks were made by the horse upon which the British king rode when he resided at Castle Denis, and hunted on these moors. King Arthur's bed, and chair, and caves, are frequently to be met with. The Giant's Coits, -- and many traditions of these will be found in the section devoted to the giant romances -- are probably monuments of the earliest types of rock mythology. Those of Arthur belong to the period when the Britons were so far advanced in civilization as to war under experienced rulers; and those which are appropriated by the devil are evidently instances of the influence of priestcraft [Roman Catholicism] on the minds of an impressible people. Source: Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , first series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), p. 204 . Return to the table of contents . The Witches of the Logan Stone England Who that has traveled into Cornwall but has visited the Logan Stone? Numerous Logan rocks exist on the granite hills of the county, but that remarkable mass which is poised on the cubical masses forming its Cyclopean support, at Trereen, is beyond all others "The Logan Stone." A more sublime spot could not have been chosen by the Bardic priesthood for any ordeal connected with their worship; and even admitting that nature may have disposed the huge mass to wear away, so as to rest delicately poised on a pivot, it is highly probable that the wild worship of the untrained tribes, who had passed to those islands from the shores of the Mediterranean Sea, may have led them to believe that some superhuman power belonged to such a strangely balanced mass of rock. Nothing can be more certain than that through all time, passing on from father to son, there has been a wild reverence of this mass of rock; and long after the days when the Druid ceased to be there is every reason for believing that the Christian priests, if they did not encourage, did not forbid, the use of this and similar rocks to be used as places of ordeal by the uneducated and superstitious people around. Hence the mass of rock on which is poised the Logan Stone has ever been connected with the supernatural. To the south of the Logan Rock is a high peak of granite, towering above the other rocks; this is known as the Castle Peak. No one can say for how long a period, but most certainly for ages, this peak has been the midnight rendezvous for witches. Many a man, and woman too, now sleeping quietly in the churchyard of St. Levan, would, had they the power, attest to have seen the witches flying into the Castle Peak on moonlight nights mounted on the stems of the ragwort ( Senécio Jacobæa Linn. ), and bringing with them the things necessary to make their charms potent and strong. This place was long noted as the gathering place of the army of witches who took their departure for Wales, where they would luxuriate at the most favored seasons of the year upon the milk of the Welshmen's cows. From this peak many a struggling ship has been watched by a malignant crone, while she has been brewing the tempest to destroy it; and many a rejoicing chorus has been echoed, in horror, by the cliffs around, when the witches have been croaking their miserable delight over the perishing crews, as they have watched man, woman, and child drowning, whom they were presently to rob of the treasures they were bringing home from other lands. Upon the rocks behind the Logan Rock it would appear that every kind of mischief which can befall man or beast was once brewed by the St. Levan witches. Source: Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , second series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 94-96 . A logan stone, also known as a rocking stone , is a large delicately balanced rock. Return to the table of contents . How to Become a Witch England Touch a Logan stone nine times at midnight, and any woman will become a witch. A more certain plan is said to be to get on the Giant's Rock at Zennor Church-town nine times without shaking it. Seeing that this rock was at one time a very sensitive Logan stone, the task was somewhat difficult. Source: Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , second series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), p. 83 . A logan stone, also known as a rocking stone , is a large delicately balanced rock. Return to the table of contents . Giants in Denmark Saxo Grammaticus That the country of Denmark was once cultivated and worked by giants, is attested by the enormous stones attached to the barrows and caves of the ancients. Should any man question that this is accomplished by superhuman force, let him look up at the tops of certain mountains and say, if he knows, what man has carried such immense boulders up to their crests. For anyone considering this marvel will mark that it is inconceivable how a mass, hardly at all or but with difficulty movable upon a level, could have been raised to so mighty a peak of so lofty a mountain by mere human effort, or by the ordinary exertion of human strength. But as to whether, after the deluge went forth, there existed giants who could do such deeds, or men endowed beyond others with bodily force, there is scant tradition to tell us. But, as our countrymen assert, even today there are those who dwell in that rugged and inaccessible region to the north who, by the transformable nature of their bodies, are granted the power of being near or distant, and of appearing and vanishing in turn. The approach to this region, whose position and name are unknown, and which lacks all civilization, but teems with peoples of monstrous strangeness, is beset with perils of a fearful kind, and has seldom granted to those who attempted it an unscathed return. Source: The First Nine Books of the Danish History of Saxo Grammaticus [ Gesta Danorum ], translated by Oliver Elton (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 13-14 . Slightly revised. Saxo's Gesta Danorum (The Deeds of the Danes) was written ca. 1208. Enormous stones, similar to those described by Saxo, can still be seen in the many dolmens still extant in Denmark. Return to the table of contents . Gloshed's Altar Sweden South of Thorsby Church, among the mountains, lies a shattered rock called Gloshed's Altar, concerning which there is an old tradition still living upon the lips of the people, as follows: A long time ago a man from the parish of Säfve went upon a Hollandish ship, on a whaling cruise. After the vessel had been tossed about the sea for some time, land was one day sighted, and upon the land was seen a fire which continued to burn many days. It was determined that some of the ship's crew should go ashore, in the hope that shelter might be found, and among those who went ashore was our hero. When the strand was reached they found there an old man sitting by a fire of logs, endeavoring to warm himself. "Where did you come from?" asked the old man. "From Holland!" answered the sailors. "But where were you born?" to our hero. "In Hisingen, in the parish of Säfve," he answered. "Are you acquainted in Thorsby?" "Yes, indeed!" "Do you know where Ulfve Mountain lies?" "I have often passed it, as the road from Göteborg to Marstrand over Hisingen and through Thorsby goes past there." "Do the large stones and hills remain undisturbed?" asked the old man. "Yes, except one stone, which, if I remember correctly, is toppling over," said the Hisinger. "That is too bad!" But do you know where Gloshed's Altar is, and does it remain sound?" "Upon that point," said the sailor, "I have no knowledge." Finally the old man continued, "If you will say to those who now live in Thorsby and Torrebräcka that they shall not destroy the stones and elevations at the foot of Ulfve Mount, and, above all, to take care of Gloshed's Altar, you shall have fair winds for the rest of your voyage." The Hisinger promised to deliver the message when he arrived home, whereupon he asked the old man his name, and how he, living so far from Thorsby, was so well acquainted with matters there. "I'll tell you," said he. "My name is Thore Brock, and I at one time lived there, but was banished. All my relations are buried at Ulfve Mountain, and at Gloshed's Altar we were wont to do homage to our gods and to make our offerings." Hereupon they separated. When the man from Hisinger returned home he went about the fulfillment of his promise, and, without knowing how, he soon became one of the principal farmers in the parish. Source: Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago, Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 95-96 . Footnote in the original: In Bohusländ and in Dalland the belief is quite general that the giants, leaving those regions, settled upon Dovre in Norway, or upon some uninhabited island in the North Sea, and that travelers are eagerly questioned about their former home. Return to the table of contents . The Frau Holle Stone Germany In the forest near Fulda there is a stone with many furrows. It was there that Frau Holle cried such bitter tears over her husband that it softened the hard stone. Source: J. W. Wolf, Hessische Sagen (Göttingen and Leipzig: Dieterichsche Buchhandlung, 1853), no. 12, p. 10 . Return to the table of contents . The Giant's Stone near Züschen Germany The inhabitants of the little town of Naumburg, near the border of the Waldeck District, built a church for the praise of God and and the salvation of their souls, for there was not yet one at that place. The devil, from a vantage point on a mountain near Züschen watched angrily as the pious work progressed from day to day. Finally he could no longer contain his anger; he picked up a huge stone, wanting to throw it at Naumburg. However, it got caught on his sleeve and fell into a field between Züschen and Naumburg. The Evil One went there, sat down on the stone, and wept bloody tears because of his failed throw. The stone is still there, and is known by the name Riesenstein (Giant's Stone). You can still see where the devil sat and the three red stains which are said to have come from his bloody tears. Source: Karl Lyncker, Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Kassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 356, p. 263 . Naumburg and Züschen lie about 30 km west of Kassel in central Germany. Return to the table of contents . The Stone of Stolzenhagen Germany Stolzenhagen Field is under the jurisdiction of Müllenbeck in Mittelmark and is not far at all from Lake Wandelitz. In this field there is an enormous stone which extends several feet beneath the earth and which has the imprint on its top of a very large and powerful man's hand. The five fingers can still be recognized clearly and distinctly. The people of Wandelitz relate that in ancient times this stone lay on the other side of Lake Wandelitz. An enormous giant lived there, and in order to prove his strength he picked up the stone, pressed his five fingers into it -- leaving their imprint -- and then threw it across the lake. Source: J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen der Altmark. Mit einem Anhange von Sagen aus den übrigen Marken und aus dem Magdeburgischen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhundlung, 1839), p. 99 . Return to the table of contents . The Seven Stones of Morin Germany Not far from the town of Morin in Neumark there are seven stones standing together in a field. They are called simply "the Seven Stones." According to legend they are seven young men who wantonly moistened their bread and cheese there in an indecent manner. As punishment for this wickedness, they were immediately turned into stones. Source: J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen der Altmark. Mit einem Anhange von Sagen aus den übrigen Marken und aus dem Magdeburgischen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhundlung, 1839), pp. 99-100 . Return to the table of contents . The Adam's Dance of Wirchow Germany Near Wirchow in Neumark there is a circle of eighteen large stones. Fourteen of them are between two and two and a half feet high, and they stand in pairs, forming a large circle around two other stones, which stand in the middle of the circle. These two are more than two yards high. Two additional stones, still somewhat taller, stand outside the circle some distance removed. About the origin of these stones it is related that at this place several hundred years ago a number of people gathered on Holy Whitsunday to carry out a naked dance. As special punishment for their wicked behavior they were turned into stones. Thus the stones are called "the Adam's Dance," or "the Stone Dance." The fourteen stones in the circle were the male and female dancers. The two in the middle were the beer servers, and the two outside the circle were the musicians. One can still see violins on these latter ones. Source: J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen der Altmark. Mit einem Anhange von Sagen aus den übrigen Marken und aus dem Magdeburgischen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhundlung, 1839), p. 100 . Whitsunday (Pentecost) is the seventh Sunday after Easter, and marks the close of Eastertide. Numerous non-Christian springtime rituals, superstitions, and practices have attached themselves to Whitsuntide. Return to the table of contents . The Hun Graves at Züssow Germany Ages ago there were two large, ancient Hun Graves on the Buggenhagen Estate at Züssow. In the year 1594 the people of Greifswald needed stones for a building, and upon their request the Buggenhagens gave them permission to take the stones from the two Hun graves. After the Greifswald stonemasons had cut up the large stones they became curious about what might be buried in the earth beneath them. They therefore began to dig into one of the graves, where they found many human corpses. They were completely preserved and enormously large. They measured between eleven and sixteen feet in length, and they all lay in a row. Between each one there was a jar filled with earth. When they began digging into the second grave they heard a great commotion beneath the earth, as though people were dancing and rattling bunches of keys. This so frightened them that they ceased their digging. Source: J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen von Pommern und Rügen (Berlin, In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1840), no. 173, p. 213 . North Germans refer to the giants that formerly occupied their land as Hünen, a word that is etymologically related to the Hunnen (Huns), of central Asia. Greifswald is in northeast Germany. Return to the table of contents . Runestones and Picture Stones from Scandinavia A Selection of Photographs Picture stone discovered at Stora Hammars, Lärbro, Gotland, Sweden. It is now kept at the Statens Historiska Museet at Navavagen, Sweden. The scenes on the stone cannot be identified with certainty. Picture stone found at Tjängvide on the Swedish island of Gotland. This stone is now kept at the Statens Historiska Museet at Navavagen, Sweden. The top scene shows Odin astride his eight-legged horse Sleipnir approaching Valhalla. The bottom scene depicts a Viking warship. Runestone at Altuna, Uppland, Sweden. The scene at the bottom of the stone's narrow face depicts Thor, his feet protruding from a boat, capturing the Midgard Serpent. The Sigurd Runestone at Ramsundsberget, Jäder, Södermanland, Sweden. This famous runestone illustrates the story of how Sigurd kills the dragon Fafnir and his treacherous companion Regin. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Stonehenge . Information about Europe's most famous ancient stone monument. Sponsored by English Heritage . Wikipedia article on Stonehenge . Stone Pages , an excellent resource (from a server in Italy) organized by Paola Arosio and Diego Meozzi and describing megalithic monuments and other archaeological sites in England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, France, and Italy. Dolmens in Denmark, a collection of photographs. Return to Table of Contents D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 8, 2019. Dolmens in Denmark Dolmens in Denmark Return to: D. L. Ashliman's index of Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Links to sites dealing with Germanic Myths, Legends, and Sagas. Stone Monuments, legends about pre-Christian graves and monuments. A woman wearing clothing in the style of the early bronze age (ca. 1400 BC) and standing at the entrance of a typical Danish dolmen. Photograph copyright by the National Museum of Denmark. A neolithic dolmen near Grøfte on the island of Sjælland (Zealand). Photograph copyright by the National Museum of Denmark. A neolithic dolmen near Stenvad in Jylland (Jutland). Photograph copyright by the National Museum of Denmark. Return to: The top of this document. D. L. Ashliman's index of Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Links to sites dealing with Germanic Myths, Legends, and Sagas. Stone Monuments, legends about pre-Christian graves and monuments. Revised February 4, 2000. Stone Soup: Folktales of Type 1548 Stone Soup folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1548 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2022 Contents Boil Stones in Butter (English proverb). Stone Soup (Europe). The Fryr and the Whet-stone (England). The Clever Pilgrim (Switzerland/Germany). Pebble Soup (Germany). The Story of Pebble Soup (France). Pebble Soup (France). The Old Woman and the Tramp (Sweden). A Receipt to Make Stone Soup (Ireland). Limestone Broth (Ireland). Link to A Pot of Broth (A one-act play by W. B. Yeats). Stone Soup (United States of America). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Boil Stones in Butter English Proverb Boil stones in butter, and you may sip the broth. Source: Wolfgang Mieder, The Prentice-Hall Encyclopedia of World Proverbs (New York: MJF Books, 1986), p. 457, no. 15,151. Return to the table of contents . Stone Soup Europe A tramp knocked at the farmhouse door. "I can't let you in, for my husband is not at home," said the woman of the house. "And I haven't a thing to offer you," she added. Her voice showed unmasked scorn for the man she held to be a beggar. "Then you could make use of my soup stone," he replied, pulling from his pocket what appeared to be an ordinary stone. "Soup stone?" said she, suddenly showing interest in the tattered stranger. "Oh yes," he said. "If I just had a potful of water and a fire, I'd show you how it works. This stone and boiling water make the best soup you've ever eaten. Your husband would thank you for the good supper, if you'd just let me in and put my stone to use over your fire." The woman's suspicions yielded to her desire for an easy meal, and she opened the door. A pot of water was soon brought to a boil. The tramp dropped in his stone, then tasted the watery gruel. "It needs salt, and a bit of barley," he said. "And some butter, too, if you can spare it." The woman obliged him by adding the requested ingredients. He tasted it again. "Much better!" he said. "But a good soup needs vegetables and potatoes. Are there none in your cellar?" "Oh yes," she said, her enthusiasm for the miracle soup growing, and she quickly found a generous portion of potatoes, turnips, carrots, and beans. After the mixture had boiled awhile, the man tasted it again. "It's almost soup," he said. "The stone has not failed us. But some chicken broth and chunks of meat would do it well." The woman, recognizing the truth of his claim, ran to the chicken yard, returning soon with a freshly slaughtered fowl. "Soup stone, do your thing!" she said, adding the chicken to the stew. When their noses told them that the soup was done, the woman dished up a healthy portion for her guest and for herself. They ate their fill, and -- thanks to the magic stone -- there was still a modest bowlful left over for her husband's supper. "My thanks for the use of your pot and your fire," said the tramp as evening approached, and he sensed that the husband soon would be arriving home. He fished his stone from the bottom of the pot, licked it clean, and put it back into his pocket. "Do come again," said the thankful woman. "I will indeed," said the tramp, and disappeared into the woods. Reconstructed from various European sources. © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Fryr and the Whet-Stone England There was a Fryer in London, which did use often to the House of an old Woman, but ever when he came to her House, she hid all the Meat she had. On a time this Fryer came to her House (bringing certain Company with him) and demanded of the Wife if she had any Meat. And she said, Nay. Well, quoth the Fryer, Have you not a Whet-stone? Yea, (quoth the Woman); what will you do with it? Marry, quoth he, I would make Meat thereof. Then she brought as Whet-stone. He asked her likewise, if she had not a Frying-pan? Yes said she, but what will ye do therewith? Marry (said the Fryer) you shal see by and by what I wil do with it. And when he had the Pan, he set it on the Fire, and put the Whet-stone therein. Oh! oh! said the Woman, you will burn the Pan. No no, quoth the Fryer, if you will give me some Eggs, it will not burn at all. But she would have had the Pan from him, when that she saw it was in danger, yet he would not let her, but still urged her to fetch him some Eggs, which she did. Tush, said the Fryer, here are not enough, fetch ten or twelve. So the good Wife was constrained to fetch more, for fear lest the Pan should burn: And when he had them he put them in the Pan. Now quoth he, if you have no Butter, the Pan will burn and the Eggs too. So the good Wife, being very loath to have her Pan burnt, and her Eggs lost, she fetcht him a dish of Butter, the which he put into the Pan, and made good Meat thereof, and brought it to the table saying: Much good may it do you, my masters; now you you say, you have eaten of a buttered Whet-stone, whereat all the Company laughed, but the Woman was exceeding angry, because the Fryer had subtilly beguiled her of her Meat. Source (books.google.com): The Sack Ful of News with a Stone-weight of Recreation (ca. 1700), pp. 2-3 . Return to the table of contents . The Clever Pilgrim Switzerland/Germany A number of years ago a tramp was making his way through the country. He claimed to be a pious pilgrim on his way from Paderborn to the Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem. In Müllheim he asked at the Post Tavern, "How far is it to Jerusalem?" He was told, "Seven hundred hours, but if you go by way of Mauchen, taking the footpath, then you will save a quarter of an hour." So in order to save the quarter of an hour he went by way of Mauchen. And that was not a bad thing. If you don't take advantage of little benefits you will never get any large ones. We more often have the opportunity to save or to earn a Batzen [a small German coin] than a florin, but fifteen Batzen make one florin. And if someone on a journey of seven hundred hours could save a quarter of an hour every five hours, how much would he save during the whole trip? Who wants to figure it out? In any event, none of this was very interesting to our disguised pilgrim. He was pursuing only leisure and good food, so he really did not care at all where he was. As the old proverb says, a beggar can never take a wrong turn. It would be a bad village indeed if he couldn't recover more there than what he used up on his soles getting there, even if were going barefoot. But still, our pilgrim did want to get back on the high road as soon as possible, where there were wealthy houses and good cooking. This rascal, unlike a genuine pilgrim, was not interested in common nourishment extended to him by a pious and sympathetic hand, but wanted to eat nothing but nourishing pebble soup. Whenever he came to a good tavern by the side of the road, for example the Posthaus in Krozingen, or the Baselstab in Schliengen, he would go inside and ask -- hungrily, humbly, and in God's name -- for some water soup with pebbles, adding that he had no money. When the sympathetic waitress said to him, "Pious pilgrim, the pebbles are going to lie hard in your belly," he said, "Right! That's why I choose them. Pebbles last longer than bread, and it is a long way to Jerusalem. But if you could give me a little glass of wine with them, in God's name, then of course I could digest them more easily." Then when the waitress said, "But, pious pilgrim, such a soup can surely give you no strength," he answered, "Indeed, if you would use meat broth instead of water it would of course be more nourishing." When the waitress brought him such a soup, saying, "The sops haven't softened up yet," he said, "You are right, and the soup does seem to be quite thin. Wouldn't you have a few forkfuls of vegetables, or a little piece of meat, or both?" Then when the sympathetic waitress put some vegetables and meat into the dish, he said, "God bless you. Now just give me some bread, and I'll eat the soup." With that he pulled back the sleeves of his pilgrim's robe and attacked the work with pleasure. And when he had consumed the last crumb, strand, and drop, of the bread, wine, meat, vegetables, and meat broth, he said, "Waitress, your soup has filled me up so much that I can't eat the wonderful pebbles. That is too bad, but do save them. When I return I shall bring you a holy mussel from Askalon or a rose from Jericho." Source (books.google.com): Johann Peter Hebel, "Der schlaue Pilgrim," Sämmtliche Werke , neue Ausgabe, vol. 3 (Karlsruhe: Verlag der Chr. Fr. Müller'schen Hofbuchhandlung, 1838), pp. 22-24 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Peter Hebel, "Der schlaue Pilgrim," Sämmtliche Werke , vol. 3 (Karlsruhe: Verlag der Chr. Fr. Müller'schen Hofbuchhandlung, 1832), pp. 22-24 . Hebel's tale first appeared in the almanac Der Rheinländische Hausfreund; oder, Neuer Calender auf das Jahr 1808. Hebel's source: "Die Jesuiten in Wien," Schweizerbote , v. 1, no. 38 (September 21, 1804), pp. 302 ff. Return to the table of contents . Pebble Soup Germany Two poor students from the University of Tübingen were traveling homeward without a penny. They stopped at a farmhouse around midday and asked for a modest meal to revitalize themselves on their journey. When peasant's wife refused them, the wittier one said to her: "Don't send us away hungry. Just permit us to cook some pebble soup." "What? Pebble soup?" she asked in astonishment. "Certainly," replied the student, "and I will teach you yourself how to cook it: Put a pot of clean water on the fire and stir in a little flour with bacon, while I fish some clean pebbles out of the brook." The farmer's wife gladly did what she was told to do. The clever cook threw the pebbles into the simmering pot, and then asked for some salt, saying also that a few eggs, some white bread, and caraway seeds would improve the soup. The curious housewife did everything she was asked to do. The student finally separated the stones from the the soup, and the peasant's wife thought that it tasted very good indeed. However, the hungry travelers enjoyed it even more. And thus they tricked the simple-minded housewife, who had not even noticed that she had been deceived. Source (books.google.com): Joseph Anton Moshamer, The Erdball und der Mensch (Vienna: Anton Mausberger, 1844), p. 293 . Return to the table of contents . The Story of Pebble Soup France Nothing is as simple as the following history of religions. . . . The big books of [Charles-François] Dupuis, so stupid and so tiring, Voltaire's Essai sur les mœurs , Voltaire himself, and all the Encyclopédistes will never teach you as much on this subject as the story of pebble soup: A long time ago, before Muhammad, before Clovis, before Saint Peter, a peasant and his wife went out early in the morning to work the land. "Take care," they said to their children, "and open the door to no one. If some soldier says to you: 'Open to me,' answer: 'We have no wine.' If it's a traveler, say to him: 'Go on your way.' If it's a beggar, cry out: 'God help you!' Just be quiet until we return." The children promised to be very good and to not open the door. The parents left reassured. Some soldiers came to the cottage door, and the children said: "We have no wine." Some travelers came, and they say said: "Go on your way, travelers." Some beggars came, and they said: "God help you!" They did not open the door for any of them. Then a monk came by, and they had not been told what to say to a monk, so they said to him: "We have no wine! Go your way! God help you!" And they did not open the door. "I am sorry about all that," said the monk to the children. "Before continuing on my journey, I would have liked to make some soup with this pebble." He returned his pebble to his bag, and put his bag on his back. The children had never seen soup made with a pebble, so they called the monk back and shouted to him through the window: "What do you need?" "I would need an earthen pot," said the monk. The children gave him an earthen pot through the window. The monk carefully placed his pebble in it. He knelt down before the pot, and pretended to fan the fire with a vigorous breath, which caught the children's interest. "If I had some water in this pot," continued the monk, "my pebble would cook more quickly." So the children filled the pot with water. "My children," said the monk a moment later, my water would be boiling much sooner if you would allow me to put this pot on your fire." So they opened the door for him, and he placed the pot on the fire which the children had just rekindled. The monk waited until the water was boiling. "Now, my dear little ones," he said to his hosts, "my pebble is cooked to perfection. My soup will soon be ready. Will you give me a little salt for seasoning?" The children gave him some salt. "And you, my pretty blue-eyed girl, won't you cut a little sorrel for me from your garden? Then my broth would be much better." The young girl brought him some sorrel from the garden. "And you, my big boy," said the monk, addressing the youngest of the family, who was opening his eyes wide, waiting for the pebble to be cooked, "could you give me a little piece of bacon? When the bacon is in the pot, my pebble will be cooked, and, my children, my soup will be ready. You will see some white foam rising at the edges. Then you will give me a piece of bread to dip into my soup. They gave him a piece of bread which he cut up into a wooden bowl. The broth was foaming in the pot, and he poured this over the bread in the bowl. A good smell of cooking filled the cottage. "That is certainly a good soup that he made with the pebble," said the hungry children, eagerly smelling the broth. The monk sat down to the table and ate the soup. "Oh, my children!" said the monk. "This soup is so good! And I was so hungry!" The children would have liked to taste it. They had given their daily bread and bacon to make it; but the monk emptied the bowl in the twinkling of an eye. When he had finished eating and had rested well, he said: "Children, your parents were wrong to tell you to not open the door for a poor monk like myself. To reward you for your good deed I am giving you the pebble that made me such good soup." And he walked away, looked upon as a saint by the children who were in no hurry than to replace their pebble, as the best of all ingredients for soup. That, my friend, is the story of pebble soup. It's pretty much the story of all the powers in this world, altar or throne, earth or heaven. Source (books.google.com): Jules Gabriel Janin, "L'histoire de la soupe aux cailloux," La confession (Paris: Alexandre Mesnier, 1830), ch. 31, pp. 65-73 . Source (Internet Archive): Jules Gabriel Janin, "L'histoire de la soupe aux cailloux," La confession (Paris: Michel Lévy Frères, 1830==61), ch. 31, pp. 181-86 . Return to the table of contents . Pebble Soup France Two monks passing through a village in Normandy entered a peasant's house at dinner time. They found no food there. The father and mother were in the fields, and the children who were keeping house could not be of much help to these monks. They did light a fire for them and offered them some cider, but that was not enough for the monks, who wanted to eat. In order to not frighten the small peasants, the monks did not at first ask for what they wanted. Instead, at first they only requested some soup. The children answered that they had nothing to make it with. "What?" said the monks "Don't you know that we make our soup with a pebble?" "A pebble," replied these poor children "That is very strange." "Yes, indeed," said the monks. "It is very strange, but if you want, we will teach you our secret. All you have to do is to give us some water and a clean pebble." Said and done. The monks were brought pebbles to choose from; and after they had washed one well, they put it into a pot full of water. Then they put the pot on the fire and sat down to wait for the pebble to be cooked. The pot boiled vigorously, but the pebble did not cook. The children continued to look at it with the best faith in the world. Finally our monks, pressed by hunger, began to grow impatient. They blamed the water for the delay, and said that it must not have been good. This could only be remedied by putting salt into it. The salt was given to them, but to no effect. So the monks said it would be advisable to add some butter as well. The children paid close attention to this new way of making soup, and they gave the monks everything that was asked of them. Thus, after having obtained the salt and the butter, the monks sent them to the garden to pick cabbages, onions, and all kinds of vegetables, which were cooked with the pebble. "That's enough," they finally said. "This is only way to prepare the soup." They were brought bread. They had made an excellent soup. The pebble was served on top as a sop, but it was a little hard indeed: "So don't touch it." The monks told the children to carefully put the pebble away, for one could still make another soup out of it. To the great astonishment of the poor children, this one had worked very well. They paid no attention to the salt, the butter, or the cabbages they had brought to cook the stone. Some people will laugh at the simplicity of these children, but like the children, they too will allow themselves to be tricked by the first rogue who comes their way. Source (books.google.com): "Soupe au Caillou," Le musée des variétés littéraires , vol. 3 (London: Samuel Leigh; Paris: Treuttel et Würtz, 1823), pp. 278-79 . Source (Internet Archive): "Soupe au Caillou," Le musée des variétés littéraires , vol. 3 (London: Samuel Leigh; Paris: Treuttel et Würtz, 1823), pp. 278-79 . Return to the table of contents . The Old Woman and the Tramp Sweden There was once a tramp, who went plodding his way through a forest. The distance between the houses was so great that he had little hope of finding a shelter before the night set in. But all of a sudden he saw some lights between the trees. He then discovered a cottage, where there was a fire burning on the hearth. "How nice it would be to roast one's self before that fire, and to get a bite of something," he thought; and so he dragged himself towards the cottage. Just then an old woman came towards him. "Good evening, and well met!" said the tramp. "Good evening," said the woman. "Where do you come from?" "South of the sun, and east of the moon," said the tramp, "and now I am on the way home again, for I have been all over the world with the exception of this parish," he said. "You must be a great traveler, then," said the woman. "What may be your business here?" "Oh, I want a shelter for the night," he said. "I thought as much," said the woman; "but you may as well get away from here at once, for my husband is not at home, and my place is not an inn," she said. "My good woman," said the tramp, "you must not be so cross and hardhearted, for we are both human beings, and should help one another, it is written." "Help one another?" said the woman. "Help? Did you ever hear such a thing? Who'll help me, do you think? I haven't got a morsel in the house! No, you'll have to look for quarters elsewhere," she said. But the tramp was like the rest of his kind. He did not consider himself beaten at the first rebuff. Although the old woman grumbled and complained as much as she could, he was just as persistent as ever, and went on begging and praying like a starved dog, until at last she gave in, and he got permission to lie on the floor for the night. That was very kind, he thought, and he thanked her for it. "Better on the floor without sleep, than suffer cold in the forest deep," he said, for he was a merry fellow, this tramp, and was always ready with a rhyme. When he came into the room he could see that the woman was not so badly off as she had pretended. But she was a greedy and stingy woman of the worst sort, and was always complaining and grumbling. He now made himself very agreeable, of course, and asked her in his most insinuating manner for something to eat. "Where am I to get it from?" said the woman. "I haven't tasted a morsel myself the whole day." But the tramp was a cunning fellow, he was. "Poor old granny, you must be starving," he said, "Well, well, I suppose I shall have to ask you to have something with me, then." "Have something with you!" said the woman. "You don't look as if you could ask anyone to have anything! What have you got to offer one, I should like to know?" "He who far and wide does roam sees many things not known at home; and he who many things has seen has wits about him and senses keen," said the tramp. "Better dead than lose one's head! Lend me a pot, granny!" The old woman now became very inquisitive, as you may guess, and so she let him have a pot. He filled it with water and put it on the fire, and then he blew with all his might till the fire was burning fiercely all round it Then he took a four-inch nail from his pocket, turned it three times in his hand and put it into the pot. The woman stared with all her might. "What's this going to be?" she asked. "Nail broth," said the tramp. The old woman had seen and heard a good deal in her time, but that anybody could have made broth with a nail, well, she had never heard the like before. "That's something for poor people to know," she said, "and I should like to learn how to make it." "That which is not worth having, will always go a-begging," said the tramp. But if she wanted to learn how to make it she had only to watch him, he said, and went on stirring the broth. The old woman squatted on the ground, her hands clasping her knees, and her eyes following his hand as he stirred the broth. "This generally makes good broth," he said, "but this time it will very likely be rather thin, for I have been making broth the whole week with the same nail. If one only had a handful of sifted oatmeal to put in, that would make it all right," he said. "But what one has to go without, it's no use thinking more about," and so he stirred the broth again. "Well, I think I have a scrap of flour somewhere," said the old woman, and went out to fetch some, and it was both good and fine. The tramp began putting the flour into the broth, and went on stirring, while the woman sat staring now at him and then at the pot until her eyes nearly burst their sockets. "This broth would be good enough for company," he said, putting in one handful of flour after another. "If I had only a bit of salted beef and a few potatoes to put in, it would be fit for gentlefolks, however particular they might be," he said. "But what one has to go without, it's no use thinking more about." When the old woman really began to think it over, she thought she had some potatoes, and perhaps a bit of beef as well, and these she gave the tramp, who went on stirring, while she sat and stared as hard as ever. "This will be grand enough for the best in the land," he said. "Well, I never!" said the woman, "and just fancy -- all with a nail!" He was really a wonderful man, that tramp! He could do more than drink a sup and turn the tankard up, he could. "If one had only a little barley and a drop of milk, we could ask the king himself to have some of it," he said, "for this is what he has every blessed evening -- that I know, for I have been in service under the king's cook" he said. "Dear me! Ask the king to have some! Well, I never!" exclaimed the woman, slapping her knees. She was quite awestruck at the tramp and his grand connections. "But what one has to go without, it's no use thinking more about." And then she remembered she had a little barley; and as for milk, well, she wasn't quite out of that, she said, for her best cow had just calved. And then she went to fetch both the one and the other. The tramp went on stirring, and the woman sat staring, one moment at him and the next at the pot. Then all at once the tramp took out the nail. "Now it's ready, and now we'll have a real good feast," he said. "But to this kind of soup the king and the queen always take a dram or two, and one sandwich at least. And then they always have a cloth on the table when they eat," he said. "But what one has to go without, it's no use thinking more about." But by this time the old woman herself had begun to feel quite grand and fine, I can tell you. And if that was all that was wanted to make it just as the king had it, she thought it would be nice to have it just the same way for once, and play at being king and queen with the tramp. She went straight to a cupboard and brought out the brandy bottle, dram glasses, butter and cheese, smoked beef and veal, until at last the table looked as if it were decked out for company. Never in her life had the old woman had such a grand feast, and never had she tasted such broth, and just fancy, made only with a nail! She was in such a good and merry humor at having learnt such an economical way of making broth that she did not know how to make enough of the tramp who had taught her such a useful thing. So they ate and drank, and drank and ate, until they become both tired and sleepy. The tramp was now going to lie down on the floor. But that would never do, thought the old woman. No, that was impossible. "Such a grand person must have a bed to lie in," she said. He did not need much pressing. "It's just like the sweet Christmastime," he said, "and a nicer woman I never came across. Ah, well! Happy are they who meet with such good people," said he, and he lay down on the bed and went asleep. And next morning when he woke, the first thing he got was coffee and a dram. When he was going, the old woman gave him a bright dollar piece. "And thanks, many thanks, for what you have taught me," she said. "Now I shall live in comfort, since I have learnt how to make broth with a nail." "Well it isn't very difficult, if one only has something good to add to it," said the tramp as he went on his way. The woman stood at the door staring after him. "Such people don't grow on every bush," she said. Source: Gabriel Djurklou, Fairy Tales from the Swedish , translated by H. L. Brækstad (London: William Heinemann, 1901), pp. 33-41 . This tale in the original Swedish dialect: Books.google.com: Nils Gabriel Djurklou, "Fanten å käringa," Sagor och äfventyr (Stockholm: Gernandts Boktryckeri-Aktiebolag, 1883), pp. 231-37 . Internet Archive: Nils Gabriel Djurklou, "Fanten å käringa," Sagor och äfventyr (Stockholm: C. E. Fritze's K. Hofbokhandel, 1883), pp. 231-37 . Return to the table of contents . A Receipt to Make Stone Soup Ireland Take a large stone, put it into a sufficient quantity of water; properly seasonit with pepper and salt; add three or four pounds of good beef, a handful of pot-herbs, some onions, a cabbage, and three or four carrots; when the soup is made, the stone may be thrown away. Source (books.google.com): The Spirit of Irish Wit (London: Thomas Tegg, 1812), p. 333 . Return to the table of contents . Limestone Broth Ireland The making of "limestone broth" was a device employed by wandering beggars to secure a good supper without seeming to ask for it. The beggar, making his way into one of the cabins which had always their doors hospitably open for poor vagrants would ask the vanithee (or woman of the house) to lend him a small pot, and allow him to cook his supper upon her fire. Permission was, of course, granted, and the pot was produced. He then took from his wallet two substantial pieces of freshly cut limestone, which he placed in the pot, and, covering them with water, put the pot upon the fire to boil. The vanithee , looking on with interest, exclaimed, "What are yez goin' to make, me good man?" "Limestone broth, ma'am," replied the beggar. "Glory be to God, look at that now!" exclaimed the amazed housewife. When the boiling had proceeded for some time the beggar-man tasted the contents, and remarked "it would be grately improved by a pinch o' salt." The "pinch o' salt " was given him, and by-and-by he suggested that all the "broth" wanted was just a couple of spoonfuls of "male" to thicken it. Next came a request for a few slices of turnips, potatoes, and onions, to give it a little substance, all of which the good woman, who continued watching the proceedings with the keenest interest, kindly supplied; nor did she refuse "a knuckle of bacon," just to give the broth "the laste taste in the world of the flavour of mate." And when, at the conclusion of the operation, she was invited to try the "limestone broth," she pronounced it "quite as good as any mate broth she ever tasted in her life." Source (books.google.com): Machael MacDonagh, Irish Life and Character (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1898), pp. 322-23 . Source (Internet Archive): Michael MacDonagh, Irish Life and Caracter (New York: Thomas Wittaker, 1898), pp. 322-23 . MacDonagh does not give this episode a title. Link to another version of this tale, also from Ireland: Gerald Griffin, The Collegians; or, The Colleen Bawn, a Tale of Garryowen (New York: The Century Company, 1906), pp. 247-48 . Return to the table of contents . Stone Soup United States of America There lived not far from Gordonsville [Virginia] a widow who was noted for her niggardliness and extreme parsimony; so stingy and mean was she that a placard was nailed on her gate, under her own direction, with the inscription: "No soldier fed or housed here." The best foragers of the brigade met their match in the old woman, and returned defeated from the field; at last she was left in undisturbed possession of the place, and no hungry soldiers were ever fed at her table. But one day a famished-looking, lank, angular specimen of the genus Reb appeared at her farmhouse and knocked at her door. When the animated figure of War and Famine combined stalked into her yard, the old lady was speechless with wrath; she opened the door, prepared for immediate hostilities, but the sad-faced defender of the soil was asking in a humble voice and with a deprecatory manner, "Please, marm, lend me your iron pot." "Man, I have no iron pot for you!" This was snappily jerked out, while an evident determination was shown to shut the door in his face. "Please, marm, I won't hurt it." "You do not suppose," she began in angry tones, "you do not for one moment suppose I am going to lend you my pot to carry to camp, do you? If I were fool enough, I would never see it again, so don't think that you are going to get it. Go over there to Mrs. Hanger's, she will lend you hers; one thing is certain, I won't! " "Marm," he still pleaded, "I will bring your pot back, hope I may die if I don't! If you don't believe me I won't take it out of the yard but will kindle a fire just here; please, marm." "What do you want with it?" asked the old woman, who was beginning to feel that she would be none the worse in pocket by granting the request, but might, on the contrary, be gainer in some way. "I want to bile some stone soup," answered the soldier, looking pitifully at his questioner. "Stone soup! What's stone soup?" and the old lady's curiosity began to rise. "How do you make it, and what for?" "Marm," replied the mournful infantryman, "ever since the war began the rations have become scarcer and scarcer, until now they have stopped entirely and we-uns have to live on stone soup to keep from starving." "Stone soup," mused the woman, "I never heard of it before, must be something new; one of these newfangled things; cheap, too; well, how do you say you make it ?" "Please, marm, you get a pot with some water and I will show you; we biles the stone." The ancient dame trotted off full of wonder and inquisitiveness to get the article. Yes, it was worth knowing the recipe; fully worth the use of the pot, besides she would make her dinner off that soup and save that much! So, very much mollified, she returned and found the soldier had already kindled his fire; placing the kettle over it he waited for the water to boil, in the meanwhile selecting a rock about the size of his head, which he washed clean and put in the pot; then he said to the old woman, who had been peering into the pot through her spectacles, "Marm, please give me a leetle piece of bacon about the size of your hand to give the soup a relish." The old lady trotted off and got it for him; another five minutes passed. "Is it done?" she inquired. "It's mos' done, but please, marm, give me half a head o' cabbage just to make it taste right." Without a word the cabbage was brought; and ten minutes slipped away. "Is it not done by this time?" again she asked. "Mos' done," with a brightening look, and then as if a new idea had just occurred to him, "Please, marm, can't you give me a half a dozen potatoes just to give it a nice flavor like." "All right," answered the widow, who by this time had become deeply absorbed in the operation. The potatoes followed the meat and cabbage, and another ten minutes followed that. "Isn't it done yet? 'Pears to me that it's a long time cooking," she said, getting somewhat impatient. "Mos' done, marm, mos' done," insinuatingly. "Jest get me a small handful of flour, a little pepper and some termartusses and it will be all right then." The things were duly added from the widow's stores and bubbled in the pot a while; then the soup was pronounced done and lifted from the fire. The soldier pulled out his knife with spoon attachment and commenced to eat; he lost no time between mouthfuls; the economical widow hastened in, and returned with a plate, which she filled; on tasting the first spoonful she exclaimed, "Why, man, this is nothing but common meat and vegetable soup!" "So it is, marm," responded the soldier after a while, for there was not a minute to spare for talking; "so it is, marm, but we call it stone soup." The old lady carried the pot back into the house, but not before the man had emptied it, learning for the first time how a soldier's ingenuity could compass anything and outwit even herself. She said, "They have Old Nick on their side," and tradition adds, she even kept that stone and swore by it. Source (books.google.com): Alexander Hunter, Johnny Reb and Billy Yank (New York and Washington: The Neale Publishing Company, 1905), pp. 284-86 . Source (Internet Archive): Alexander Hunter, Johnny Reb and Billy Yank (New York and Washington: The Neale Publishing Company, 1905), pp. 284-86 . Hunter does not give this episode a title. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 29, 2022. Straightening a Curly Hair: Folktales of type 1175 Straightening a Curly Hair folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1175 in which a demon is defeated because he cannot straighten a curly hair Edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2021 Contents The Brahmarâkshas and the Hair (India) Tapai and the Brahman (India) The Devil and the Farmer (England) The Deceived Devil (Germany) Related links Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Brahmarâkshas and the Hair India In a certain village there lived a very rich landlord who owned several villages, but was such a great miser that no tenant would willingly cultivate his lands, and those he had gave him not a little trouble. He was indeed so vexed with them that he left all his lands untilled, and his tanks and irrigation channels dried up. All this, of course, made him poorer and poorer day by day. Nevertheless, he never liked the idea of freely opening his purse to his tenants and obtaining their good will. While he was in this frame of mind a learned Sanayâsi [holy man] paid him a visit, and on his representing his case to him, he said, "My dear son, I know an incantation (mantra) in which I can instruct you. If you repeat it for three months day and night, a Brahmarâkshas will appear before you on the first day of the fourth month. Make him your servant, and then you can set at naught all your petty troubles with your tenants. The Brahmarâkshas will obey all your orders, and you will find him equal to one hundred servants." Our hero fell at his feet and begged to be instructed at once. The sage then sat facing the east and his disciple the landlord facing the west, and in this position formal instruction was given, after which the Sanayâsi went his way. The landlord, mightily pleased at what he had learnt, went on practicing the incantation, till, on the first day of the fourth month, the great Brahmarâkshas stood before him. "What do you want, sir, for my hands?" said he. "What is the object of your having propitiated me for these three months?" The landlord was thunderstruck at the huge monster who now stood before him and still more so at his terrible voice, but nevertheless said, "I want you to become my servant and obey all my commands." "Agreed," answered the Brahmarâkshas in a very mild tone, for it was his duty to leave off his impertinent ways when anyone who had performed the required penance wanted him to become his servant. "Agreed. But you must always give me work to do. When one job is finished you must at once give me a second, and so on. If you fail, I shall kill you." The landlord, thinking that he would have work for several such Brahmarâkshasas, was pleased to see that his demoniacal servant was so eager to help him. He at once took him to a big tank, which had been dried up for several years, and pointing it out spoke as follows, "You see this big tank; you must make it as deep as the height of two palmyra trees and repair the embankment wherever it is broken." "Yes, my master, your orders shall be obeyed," humbly replied the servant and fell to work. The landlord, thinking that it would take several months, if not years, to do the work in the tank, for it was two kos long and one kos broad, returned delighted to his home, where his people were awaiting him with a sumptuous dinner. When evening was approaching, the Brahmarâkshas came to inform his master that he had finished his work in the tank. He was indeed astonished and feared for his own life. "What! Finished the work in one day which I thought would occupy him for months and years. If he goes on at this rate, how shall I keep him employed. And when I cannot find it for him he will kill me!" Thus he thought and began to weep. His wife wiped the tears that ran down his face, and said, "My dearest husband, you must not lose courage. Get out of the Brahmarâkshas all the work you can and then let me know. I'll give him something that will keep him engaged for a very very long time, and then he'll trouble us no more." But her husband only thought her words to be meaningless and followed the Brahmarâkshas to see what he had done. Sure enough the thing was as complete as could be, so he asked him to plow all his lands, which extended over twenty villages! This was done in two ghatikas ! The landlord now grew hopeless. "What more work have you for me?" roared the Brahmarâkshas, as he found that his master had nothing for him to do, and that the time for his eating him up was approaching. "My dear friend," said he, "my wife says she has a little job to give you. Do it please now. I think that is the last thing I can give you to do, and after it, in obedience to the conditions under which you took service with me, I must become your prey! At this moment his wife came to them, holding in her left hand a long hair, which she had just pulled out from her head, and said, "Well Brahmarâkshas, I have only a very light job for you. Take this hair, and when you have made it straight, bring it back to me." The Brahmarâkshas calmly took it, and sat in a pîpal tree to make it straight. He rolled it several times on his thigh and lifted it up to see if it became straight; but no, it would still bend! Just then it occurred to him that goldsmiths, when they want to make their metal wires straight, have them heated in fire; so he went to a fire and placed the hair over it, and of course it frizzled up with a nasty smell! He was horrified! "What will my master's wife say if I do not produce the hair she gave me?" So he became mightily afraid, and ran away. This story is told to explain the modern custom of nailing a handful of hair to a tree in which devils are supposed to dwell, to drive them away. Source (books.google.com): Georgiana Kingscote and Natêsá Sástrî, Tales of the Sun; or, Folklore of Southern India (London and Calcutta: W. H. Allen and Company, 1890), no. 26, pp. 285-89 . Source (Internet Archive): Georgiana Kingscote and Natêsá Sástrî, Tales of the Sun; or, Folklore of Southern India (London and Calcutta: W. H. Allen and Company, 1890), no. 26, pp. 285-89 . The sentence above that begins "When evening was approaching..." reads in the original publication "When enemies were approaching...." I have taken the liberty to correct this apparent typographical error. --DLA. Return to the table of contents . Tapai and the Brahman India A middle-aged Brahman, one cold winter's night, was crossing a wide plain on his way home. The wind blew shrill and chill, and the wayfarer, Sibu by name, trembled in every limb. Suddenly, on the left of his path, he saw a fire blazing cheerily, and round it a number of people enjoying its warmth. What a temptation to warm himself in good company before continuing his homeward journey! He came near, and feeling the genial influence of the flame from afar, incautiously shouted " Tapai, tapai ," meaning "I am warmed, I am warmed." Alas, the creatures round the fire were maleficent ghosts, hideous, distorted, grinning, sworn enemies of mankind, shouting obscene words with the nasal utterance which marks their race. Moreover, one of them was named Tapai, and the ghostly assemblage were mightily vexed at a mortal's familiar use of their comrade's name. They threatened him with instant death. The Brahman, in terror, felt for his sacred thread, but it had slipped down. He strove to repeat the holy names of the gods, but his memory was paralyzed with fear. But finally the thread came into his hand, and taking heart, he boldly asserted that he knew Tapai quite well, seeing that Tapai and his ancestors for three generations had been the slaves of his family. "Well," cried Tapai, "if he can tell me the names of my ancestors, I will become his bond servant." To which the keen-witted priest replied, "How can I be expected to know the names of all the slaves of my ancestors? But I have them recorded in a ledger at home." On which he was allowed to depart on condition that he returned on the third day to answer to Tapai's challenge. Otherwise not only he but his family would perish at the hands of the man-eating bhutas . The Brahman went home, saved for the moment, indeed, but filled with despair for the future. For two miserable days the wretched priest could neither eat nor sleep, and his wife and daughter and infant son shared his anxiety. The third night, when his family slept, the miserable man went forth to hang himself in the jungle rather than face his ghostly foes. But on the very tree he chose for his suicide were two dark forms. He shuddered, he stood still, but he listened. It was Tapai and his wife, and the latter, with true feminine curiosity, was asking her husband the names of his forebears. Of course Tapai had to tell, as every husband does when his wife presses him. He recited the following verse: Haramu, And his son Chharamu, And his son Apai, And his son Tapai. Such was the verse which the Brahman committed to memory, and groping his way home through the dark forest, faced life with a new confidence. Next evening he went to the ghostly rendezvous, and the unlucky Tapai followed him home, his submissive slave. But there was one condition. Tapai would perform all tasks given to him from dawn till nightfall. But he must be kept occupied all the time. At first the condition seemed easy to fulfil. The bhuta was ordered to build a palace, raise a noble temple, dig a tank, procure a bridegroom for the Brahman's daughter, etc., etc. But there are limits to human desires and human inventiveness, and even the Brahman was, in spite of all the luxury with which he was now surrounded, a harassed and perplexed mortal. He was like to die of sheer worry and anxious thought, when his wife came to his rescue. She plucked a curly hair from her husband's eyebrow. "Give that to the creature," she said, "and tell him to straighten it." The poor demon, for once, was at his wit's end. He pulled the hair, and pressed it, and wetted it. But all in vain. The moment it was released, it curled up again. Finally, at nightfall, the good Brahman released Tapai, as Prospero released Ariel, and then he and his family lived happily afterwards! Source (JSTOR): J. D. Anderson, book review in Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 31 (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1920), pp. 258-60 . Anderson retells this story in his review of the book Sajher Bhog by Rai Sahib Dinesh Chandra Sen (Calcutta: Sisir Publishing House, 1919). Title added by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Devil and the Farmer England The devil once called on a farmer and asked him if he could give him a job. "What can you do?" said the farmer. "Oh! anything about a farm," said the devil. "Well, I want a man to help me thresh a mow of wheat," says the farmer. "All right," says the devil, "I'm your man." When they got to the barn, the farmer said to the devil, "Which do you want to do, thresh or throw down?" "Thresh," said the devil. So the farmer got on top of the mow and began to throw down the sheaves of wheat onto the barn floor, but as fast as he could throw them down, the devil with one stroke of his flail knocked all the grain out of them and sent the sheaves flying out of the barn door. The farmer thought he had got a queer sort of a thresher man; and as he couldn't throw down fast enough for him, he says to him, "Will you come and throw down?" "All right," says the devil. So the farmer gets down off the mow by the ladder, but the devil, he just gives a leap up from the barn floor to the top of the mow without waiting to go up the ladder. "Are you ready?" says the devil. "Yes," says the farmer. With that the devil sticks his fork into as many sheaves as would cover the barn floor and throws them down. "That'll do for a bit," says the farmer. So the devil sat down and waited till the farmer had threshed that lot, and when he was ready again, he threw another floor full; and before night they'd finished threshing the whole mow of wheat. The farmer couldn't help thinking a good deal about his new man, for he'd never seen such a one before. (He didn't know it was the devil, you know, because he took care not to let the farmer see his cloven foot.) So in the morning he got up early and went and spoke to a cunning man about it. The cunning man said it must be the devil that had come to him, and as he had asked him in, he couldn't get rid of him unless he could give him a job that he couldn't do. Soon after the farmer got home again, his new man wanted to know what he was to do that day, and the farmer thought he'd give him a teaser, so he says, "Go into the barn, look, and count the number of grains there are in that pile of wheat that we threshed out yesterday." "All right," says old Nick, and off he went. In a few minutes he comes back and says, "Master, there are so many" (naming ever so many thousand or millions and odd, I don't know how many). "Are you sure you counted them all?" says the farmer. "Every grain," says Satan. Then the farmer ordered him to go and fill a hogshead barrel full of water with a sieve. So off he shoots again, but soon comes back and tells the farmer he'd done it; and sure enough he had. And every job the farmer set him to do was the same. The poor farmer didn't know what to make of it, for though he was getting his work done up so quick, he didn't like his new man's company. However, the farmer thought he'd have another try to trick him, and told the devil he wanted him to go with him mowing next morning. "All right," says the old one. "I'll be there, master." But as soon as it was night, the farmer went to the field, and in the part the devil was to mow, he drove a lot of harrow tines into the ground amongst the grass. In the morning they got to the field in smart time, and began to mow. The farmer he took his side, and told the devil to begin on the other, where he'd stuck in the harrow tines, you know. Well, at it went the devil, who but he, and soon got in among the stuck-up harrow tines, but they made no odds. His scythe went through them all, and the only notice on them he took was to say to the farmer every time he'd cut one of them through, "a burdock, master," and kept on just the same. The poor farmer, he got so frightened at last, he threw down his scythe and left the devil to finish the field. As luck would have it, soon after he got home, a Gypsy woman called at the farm house, and seeing the farmer was in trouble, asked him what was the matter. So he up and told her all about it. "Ah, master," she says to him when he had told her all about it, "you have got the devil in your house sure enough, and you can only get rid of him by giving him something to do that he can't manage." "Well, woman," says the farmer, "what's the use of telling me that? I tried everything I can think of, but darned if I can find him any job that he can't do." "I'll tell you what to do," says the Gypsy woman, "When he comes home, you get the missus to give him one of her curly hairs, and then send him to the blacksmith's shop to straighten it on the blacksmith's anvil. He'll find he can't do that, and he'll get so wild over it, that he'll never come back to you again." The farmer was very thankful to the Gypsy woman and said he'd try her plan. So by and by in comes the old fellow, and says, "I have finished the mowing, master. What else have you got for me to do?" "Well, I can't think of another job just now," says the farmer, "but I think the missus has got a little job for you." So he called the missus, and she gave the devil a curly hair lapped up in a bit of paper, and told him to go to the blacksmith's shop and hammer that there hair straight; and when it was straight to bring it back to her. "All right, missus," the devil says, and off he shot. When he got to the blacksmith's shop, he hammered and hammered at that there hair on the anvil, but the more he hammered the crookeder the hair got; so at last he threw down the hammer and the hair, and bolted, and never went back to the farmer again. Source (books.google.com): Jesse Salisbury, A Glossary of Words and Phrases Used in South-East Worcestershire (London: English Dialect Society, 1893), pp. 72-75 . Source (Internet Archive): Jesse Salisbury, A Glossary of Words and Phrases Used in South-East Worcestershire (London: English Dialect Society, 1893), pp. 72-75 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Deceived Devil Germany A young man made the following contract with the devil: The devil was to provide the man with money. In return, at a predetermined time the man was to give the devil work that would keep him busy an entire day. If the man were able to do this, then the devil would have given him the money for nothing. If he were not able to do this, then the man would belong to the devil, and the latter would be able to take him away. It came to pass that the time lapsed just as the man was celebrating his wedding. A boy came up to him and told him that a strange gentleman was outside who wanted to speak with him. The man immediately remembered the devil and did not go. The boy returned and called for him again, but still he did not go. Then the devil came inside personally and demanded either a task or the man himself. The man showed him a field of clover and told him to mow it. This would have taken a single man several days, but the devil finished it in an instant and demanded another task. Then the man took a bushel of clover seeds, scattered them over the field, and told the devil to gather them back up. It was a simple matter for him, and he was finished in a half hour. The man became terrified when the devil asked for yet another task. Then the man's bride noticed her husband's concern and said, "What is the matter? Why do you keep running in and out?" The man confessed everything to her and told her of the danger that he now faced. The bride said, "I will help you. You should have told me about it earlier!" Plucking out one of her short curly hairs, she gave it to her husband and said, "Take this to the devil and demand that he straighten it!" The man did this. The devil made an ugly face, then picked and pulled and bent away at the hair. He even placed it on an anvil and tried to pound it straight with a hammer, but it was all for nothing. The devil was not able to complete this task that day. The hair remained curly and crooked, and he was tricked out of his prize. Source (books.google.com): Ernst Meier, "Der angeführte Teufel," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 33, pp. 120-22 . Source (Internet Archive): Ernst Meier, "Der angeführte Teufel," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 33, pp. 120-22 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . Related links Additional folktales about mortals who enter into reckless contracts with demonic helpers: Crop Division between Man and Ogre , folktales of type 1030. Deceiving the Devil with a Rope of Sand , folktales of type 1174. Deceiving the Devil by Breaking Wind , folktales of type 1176. Faust Legends . The Name of the Helper , folktales of type 500, in which a mysterious and threatening helper is defeated when the hero or heroine discovers his name. Master-Builders and Their Supernatural Helpers , migratory legends of type 7065. Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Table of Contents Revised March 23, 2021. Straw, Coal, and Bean: Folktales of Type 295 Straw, Coal, and Bean and other fables of Aarne-Thompson type 295 translated and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2001 Contents Straw, Coal, and Bean Go Traveling (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, 1812). Straw, Coal, and Bean (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, 1837). Mouse, You Go First! (Switzerland). Someone's Misfortune, Someone's Ridicule (Poland). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Straw, Coal, and Bean Go Traveling Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm (1812) A straw, a coal, and a bean formed a group in order to take a long trip together. They had already gone through many lands when they came to a brook with no bridge, and they could not get across. Finally Straw came upon a good idea. He would lay himself over the water, and the others would walk across him, first Coal and then Bean. Coal walked ahead, and Bean came tripping after. But when Coal reached the middle of the straw, it caught fire and burned through. Coal fell into the water hissing, and died. Straw floated away in two pieces. Bean, who had lagged behind, also slid in, but he managed to keep barely afloat by swimming. However, he swallowed so much water that he burst, and in this condition drifted ashore. Fortunately a tailor was sitting there, resting from his travels. He had needle and thread at hand, and he sewed Bean back together. And from that time forth, all beans have had a seam. According to another story, it was the bean who first walked across the straw. He got across safely, and from the opposite bank watched the coal attempt to cross. Midway the coal burned the straw in two, and fell into the water hissing. When the bean saw this, he laughed so loudly that he burst. The tailor, who was sitting on the bank, sewed him back together, but he had only black thread, and for this reason all beans have a black seam. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Strohhalm, Kohle und Bohne auf der Reise," Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales), 1st ed. (Berlin: Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), v. 1, no. 18. The Grimms' source: Dorothea Catharina Wild (1752-1813). With the third edition of their Kinder- und Hausmärchen (1837), the Grimms replaced the above tale with a somewhat longer version entitled Straw, Coal, and Bean , translated below. Return to the table of contents . Straw, Coal, and Bean Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, 1837 An old woman lived in a village. She had gathered a serving of beans and wanted to cook them, so she prepared a fire in her fireplace. To make it burn faster she lit it with a handful of straw. While she was pouring the beans into the pot, one of them fell unnoticed to the floor, coming to rest next to a piece of straw. Soon afterward a glowing coal jumped out of the fireplace and landed next to them. The straw said, "Dear friends, where do you come from?" The coal answered, "I jumped from the fireplace, to my good fortune. If I had not forced my way out, I surely would have died. I would have burned to ash." The bean said, "I too saved my skin. If the old woman had gotten me into the pot I would have been cooked to mush without mercy, just like my comrades." "Would my fate have been any better?" said the straw. "The old woman sent all my brothers up in fire and smoke. She grabbed sixty at once and killed them. Fortunately I slipped through her fingers." "What should we do now?" asked the coal. "Because we have so fortunately escaped death," answered the bean, "I think that we should join together as comrades. To prevent some new misfortune from befalling us here, let us together make our way to another land." This proposal pleased the other two, and they set forth all together. They soon came to a small brook, and because there was neither a bridge nor a walkway there, they did not know how they would get across it. Then the straw had a good idea, and said, "I will lay myself across it, and you can walk across me like on a bridge." So the straw stretched himself from one bank to the other. The coal, who was a hot-headed fellow, stepped brashly onto the newly constructed bridge, but when he got to the middle and heard the water rushing beneath him, he took fright, stopped, and did not dare to go any further. Then the straw caught fire, broke into two pieces, and fell into the brook. The coal slid after him, hissed as he fell into the water, and gave up the ghost. The bean who had cautiously stayed behind on the bank had to laugh at the event. He could not stop, and he laughed so fiercely that he burst. Now he too would have died, but fortunately a wandering tailor was there, resting near the brook. Having a compassionate heart, he got out a needle and thread and sewed the bean back together. The bean thanked him most kindly. However, because he had used black thread, since that time all beans have had a black seam. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Strohhalm, Kohle und Bohne , Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales), 7th ed. (Berlin, 1857), no. 18. The Grimms' source: Burkard Waldis, Esopus (1548). The version translated above was added to the Grimms' collection with the third edition (1837). Translator's note: The Grimms use the grammatical genders of the main characters. I have arbitrarily assigned masculine gender to them. The version of 1837 replaced a shorter version, included since the first edition (1812) and entitled "Strohhalm, Kohle und Bohne auf der Reise" ( Straw, Coal, and Bean Go Traveling ). Return to the table of contents . Mouse, You Go First! Switzerland A mouse and a coal once went walking together. They came to a brook and wanted to get across, but there was neither a bridge nor a walkway, but only a piece of straw lying nearby. They would have to walk across the straw, if they wanted to get to the other side. Then the coal said to the mouse, "You go first! You can jump better than I can." But the mouse said, "No, you cross first. You must light the way for me." In the end, after they had quarreled enough, the coal went on ahead, but when he got to the middle of the brook, the straw caught fire and burned in two. The coal fell into the water and died, just like coals always die when they fall into water. In his fear he cried out. "Hsssss," he said. When the mouse saw and heard this, he began to laugh, and he laughed and laughed until he split his fur coat. His joy in someone else's misfortune did not do him any good! "What can I do now?" he thought. "I must see how I can mend my coat." Then the mouse went to the shoemaker and said, "Give me some thread, so I can mend my coat." The shoemaker said, "If you will bring me some bristles, I will give you some thread, so you can mend your coat." Then the mouse went to the sow and said, "Give me some bristles, so I can take the bristles to the shoemaker, so the shoemaker will give me some thread, so I can mend my coat." The sow said, "Give me some bran, then I will give you some bristles, so you can take the bristles to the shoemaker, so the shoemaker will give you some thread, so you can mend your coat." Then the mouse went to the miller and said, "Give me some bran, so I can take the bran to the sow, so the sow will give me some bristles, so I can take the bristles to the shoemaker, so the shoemaker will give me some thread, so I can mend my coat." The miller said, "Give me some grain, then I will give you some bran, so you can take the bran to the sow, so the sow will give you some bristles, so you can take the bristles to the shoemaker, so the shoemaker will give you some thread, so you can mend your coat." Then the mouse went to the field and said, "Give me some grain, so I can take the grain to the miller, so the miller will give me some bran, so I can take the bran to the sow, so the sow will give me some bristles, so I can take the bristles to the shoemaker, so the shoemaker will give me some thread, so I can mend my coat." The field said, "Give me some manure, then I will give you some grain, so you can take the grain to the miller, so the miller will give you some bran, so you can take the bran to the sow, so the sow will give you some bristles, so you can take the bristles to the shoemaker, so the shoemaker will give you some thread, so you can mend your coat." Then the mouse went to the cow and said, "Give me some manure, so I can take the manure to the field, so the field will give me some grain, so I can take the grain to the miller, so the miller will give me some bran, so I can take the bran to the sow, so the sow will give me some bristles, so I can take the bristles to the shoemaker, so the shoemaker will give me some thread, so I can mend my coat." The cow said, "Give me some grass, then I will give you some manure, so you can take the manure to the field, so the field will give you some grain, so you can take the grain to the miller, so the miller will give you some bran, so you can take the bran to the sow, so the sow will give you some bristles, so you can take the bristles to the shoemaker, so the shoemaker will give you some thread, so you can mend your coat." Then the mouse went to the meadow and said, "Give me some grass, so I can take the grass to the cow, so the cow will give me some manure, so I can take the manure to the field, so the field will give me some grain, so I can take the grain to the miller, so the miller will give me some bran, so I can take the bran to the sow, so the sow will give me some bristles, so I can take the bristles to the shoemaker, so the shoemaker will give me some thread, so I can mend my coat." The meadow said, "Give me some water, then I will give you some grass, so you can take the grass to the cow, so the cow will give you some manure, so you can take the manure to the field, so the field will give you some grain, so you can take the grain to the miller, so the miller will give you some bran, so you can take the bran to the sow, so the sow will give you some bristles, so you can take the bristles to the shoemaker, so the shoemaker will give you some thread, so you can mend your coat." Then the mouse went to the brook and diverted it onto the meadow, then the meadow gave him some grass, then he took the grass to the cow, then the cow gave him some manure, then he took the manure to the field, then the field gave him some grain, then he took the grain to the miller, then the miller gave him some bran, then he took the bran to the sow, then the sow gave him some bristles, then he took the bristles to the shoemaker, then the shoemaker gave him some thread, and then the mouse was able to mend his coat. Source: Otto Sutermeister, "Müsli gang du zerst!," Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus der Schweiz , second edition, (Aarau: Druck und Verlag von H. R. Sauerländer, 1873), no. 5, pp. 11-12. First edition, 1869. The chain tale appended to the first episode is classified as an Aarne-Thompson type 2029. Return to the table of contents . Someone's Misfortune, Someone's Ridicule Poland Three good comrades, a coal, a bladder, and a straw, had set forth together to another land. On their way they came to a horse's hoofprint filled with water, and they did not know how to get across this ocean. Finally they decided that the straw should lay himself across it, and the others would walk across the ocean on him. The coal went first. When he got to the middle of the straw, he stopped to look around, thus burning through the straw, and they both drowned. This seemed very funny to the bladder, and he began to laugh so hard that he burst. A stone that saw everything said, "Yes, indeed, someone's misfortune, someone's ridicule!" But in the end, those who ridicule also meet with misfortune themselves. Source: Karl Haupt, "Jemandes Schaden, Jemandes Spott," Sagenbuch der Lausitz (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1862), v. 2, no. 309, p. 204. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales). The Grimm Brothers' Home Page . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 23, 2001. The Strong Boy: Folktales of Type 650A The Strong Boy folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 650A translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2011-2022 Contents The Young Giant (Germany). The Hairy Boy (Switzerland). Benedict (France). The She-Donkey's Son (Italy). Fourteen (Basque). The Dwarf Who Grew Up (Ireland). Strong Jack (Wales -- Romani). The Bear's Son (Serbia). The Strong Man (India). The Story of Carancal (Philippines). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Young Giant Germany A peasant had a son who was only as big as a thumb and did not grow any larger. In several years he did not grow even the width of a hair. One day the peasant wanted to go to the field and plow, and the little one said, "Father, I want to go out with you." "No," said the father, "you have to stay here. There's nothing that you could do to help me, and besides that you might get lost." Then the thumbling began to cry and was not going to give the father any peace until he took him along. So the father put him in his pocket and carried him to the field, where he placed him in a fresh furrow. While he was sitting there a large giant came over the mountain towards them. "Do you see that bogeyman?" said the father, in order to frighten the little one into being good. "He's coming to get you." Now the giant had very long legs, and he reached the furrow in only a few steps, picked up the little thumbling, and walked away with him. The father stood there so frightened that he could not speak a word. He believed that his child was lost, and that he would never see him again as long as he lived. The giant took the child home and let him suckle at his breast, and the thumbling grew large and strong like a giant. After two years had passed, the old giant took him into the woods in order to test him. He said, "Pull out a switch from over there." The boy was so strong already that a pulled a young tree up by the roots. The giant thought that he could do better and took him back home and suckled him for two more years. When he took him into the woods to test him this time, he pulled up a much larger tree. This was still not good enough for the giant, and he suckled him for yet another two years, took him into the woods, and said, "Now pull out a decent switch for once." This time the boy pulled the thickest oak tree out of the ground. He cracked it and laughed. When the old giant saw this, he said, "That's good enough. You've passed the test." And he took him back to the field where he found him. The father was plowing again, and the young giant walked up to him and said, "Father, see what has become of me. I am your son." The peasant was frightened and said, "No, you are not my son. Get away from me." "Of course I am your son. Just let me plow. I can do it just as well as you can." "No, you are not my son. You can't plow. Get away from me." He was so afraid of the large man that he let go of the plow and walked to the edge of the field. The boy picked up the handle to plow, but he pushed so hard with his one hand that the plow sank deep into the earth. The peasant could not watch this, and called to him, "If you insist on plowing, then don't push down so hard, or you will ruin the field." Then the boy hitched himself in front of the plow and said, "Go on home and tell mother that she should cook up a big plate of something to eat. In the meantime, I'll tear around the field." The peasant went home and told his wife to fix something to eat, and she cooked up a large dinner, and the boy plowed the field: two full acres all by himself. Then he hitched himself to the harrow and harrowed the entire thing, pulling two harrows at the same time. When he was finished he went into the woods, pulled up two oak trees, laid them on his shoulders, then put a harrow on each end and a horse on each end as well, and carried the whole thing home like a bundle of straw. When he walked into the farmyard, his mother did not recognize him and asked, "Who is this terrible large man?" The peasant said, "This is our son." She said, "No, this could never be our son. We did not have such a large child. Ours was a little thing. Go away. We don't want you." The boy said nothing. He pulled his horses into the stall, gave them oats and hay, and put everything in order. When he was finished he went into the house, sat down on the bench, and said, "Mother, I'd like to eat. Will it be ready soon?" She said, "Yes," and did not dare to contradict him. She brought in two very large plates, more than she and her husband could have eaten in an entire week. He ate it all and asked if they didn't have more. "No," she said. "That's all that we have." "That was only a taste. I have to have more." Then she went out and filled a large hog cauldron and put it on the fire, and when it was done she brought it in. "That's a nice little bit," he said, and ate the whole thing, but it still wasn't enough. Then he said, "Father, I see that I'll never be full if I stay here with you. If you can get me an iron rod that is so strong I can't break it against my knees, then I'll go away again." The peasant was happy to hear this. He hitched his two horses to his wagon and drove to the blacksmith and got a rod so large and thick that the two horses could barely pull it. The boy held it against his knees and -- crash! -- he broke it in two like a bean pole. Then the peasant hitched up four horses and brought back a rod that was so large and thick that the four horses could barely pull it. The son picked up this one as well, cracked it in two against his knee, tossed it aside, and said, "Father, this one is of no use to me. Hitch up more horses and get me a stronger staff." So the father hitched up eight horses and fetched one so large and thick that the eight horses could barely pull it. When the son received this one, he broke a little piece from the top of it and said, "Father, I see that you can't get me a proper staff, so I'll just go away anyhow." So he went on his way, claiming to be a journeyman blacksmith. He came to a village where a smith lived who was a real cheapskate. He would never give anything to anyone, and always wanted everything for himself. The young giant walked into his smithy and asked him if he could use a journeyman. "Yes," answered the smith, looking at him and thinking what a strong fellow he was, someone who could really earn his keep. "What kind of wages do you want?" "I don't want any wages at all," said the young giant. "But at the end of every two weeks when the other journeymen receive their pay, just let me hit you twice. And you'll have to be able to take it." The cheapskate was only too happy with this arrangement, for he thought that it would save him a lot of money. The next morning the new journeyman was to have the first turn at the anvil. The master brought out a glowing rod, and the young giant knocked it into two pieces with his first blow, at the same time driving the anvil so deep into the ground that they could not get it back out again. This made the cheapskate angry, and he said, "I can't use you here. Your blows are too rough. What do you need for pay?" The young giant said, "Just a little kick, nothing more." He lifted up his foot and gave him a kick that sent him flying over four loads of hay. Then he took the thickest rod from the smithy to use as a walking stick, and went on his way. Sometime later he came to an estate and asked the overseer if he could use a chief farmhand. "Yes," said the overseer. "You look like a strong fellow who knows how to work. What kind of yearly wage do you want." The young giant replied that the only pay he wanted was to be able to give the overseer three blows, and that he would have to be able to stand them. The overseer was satisfied with this, for he too was a cheapskate. The next morning the workers were supposed to go to work in the woods. The others were already up, but the young giant was still lying in bed. One of them shouted to him, "Get up now. It's time to go to the woods, and you have to come along too." He replied, coarsely and sarcastically, "Go on without me. I'll be finished before any of you." The others reported to the overseer that the new chief farmhand was still lying in bed and would not go to the woods with them. The overseer told them to wake him up again and tell him to harness the horses. The young giant answered the same as before, "Go on without me. I'll be finished before any of you." He slept two more hours, then finally got out of bed, got two shovels full of peas from the barn, cooked them, ate them at his leisure, and when he had finished all this, he harnessed the horses and drove them to the woods. Just before the woods, the road passed through a hollow. He drove his wagon through the hollow, but then filled it in with such a pile of trees and branches that no horse would ever be able to get through. He had just arrived in the woods when he met the others on their way home with their loaded wagons. He said to them, "Drive on. I'll be home before you are." He drove a little further into the woods, ripped two of the largest trees out of the ground, loaded them onto his wagon, and turned around. When he came to the pile of trees and branches, the others were just standing there, unable to get through. He said, "See, if you had stayed with me, you could have gone straight home, and you'd be able to sleep an extra hour." He started to drive through, but his four horses couldn't make it, so he unhitched them, hitched himself to the wagon, and pulled it through as easily as if it had been loaded with feathers. When he was on the other side of the rubble he called out, "See, I got through before you did," and he drove off, leaving them standing there. When he arrived at the farmyard he picked up a tree with one hand, showed it to the overseer, and said, "How is this for a measuring stick?" Then the overseer said to his wife, "This chief farmhand is all right. Even when he sleeps in, he arrives home before the others." He worked for the overseer for one year. When the year had passed and the other workers received their wages, he said that it was also time for his payment. The overseer became frightened that he was going to have to receive his blows, and he asked him to spare him. If he would do so, the overseer himself would become chief farmhand, and the young giant could become overseer. "No," replied the young giant. "I do not want to be overseer. I am chief farmhand and will remain chief farmhand. I only want to deliver what was promised me." The overseer offered to give him anything that he asked for, but there was no way out. The chief farmhand insisted on the original agreement. The overseer did not know what else to do, so he asked for an extension of two weeks, and then called all of his clerks together and asked for their advice. They thought for a long time, and finally concluded that the chief farmhand would have to die. He would be asked to bring a load of large millstones to the edge of the well in the farmyard, then he would be sent down into the well to clean it, and while he was down there, they would throw the millstones onto his head. The overseer was delighted with this plan. Everything was prepared. The largest millstones were brought in. As soon as the chief farmhand was down in the well, they rolled the stones in on top of him. They fell with a great splash. Everyone thought that they had crushed his head, but he called out, "Chase the chickens away from the well. They are scratching in the sand, and throwing little grains into my eyes until I can't see." The overseer called out, "Shoo! Shoo!" as though he were chasing the chickens away. When the chief farmhand was finished, he climbed out and said, "Look at this nice necklace." He was wearing the millstones around his neck. When the overseer saw that he again became frightened again, because the chief farmhand wanted to give him his wages, so he asked for another extension of fourteen days. He summoned the clerks, and they advised him to send the farmhand to the haunted mill to grind grain during the night. No human had ever come from there alive. This advice pleased the overseer, and that same evening he summoned the farmhand and told him to haul eight bushels of grain to the mill and to grind it during the night. They were in need of it. So the chief farmhand went to the loft and put two bushels in his right pocket and two bushels in his left pocket. Then he loaded four bushels in a large sack which he carried over his shoulder. He took all this to the haunted mill. The miller told him that during the daytime he could grind the grain very well, but at nighttime the mill was haunted and anyone who went inside during the night was found dead the next morning. The farmhand said, "I will do all right. Just leave me alone and go to bed now." Then he went inside the mill and dumped out the grain. When it began to strike eleven he went into the sitting area and sat on a bench. He had just eaten a little when the door opened and a large table came inside. On the table were wine, roasted meat, and many good things to eat. Everything was by itself; no one had carried it in. Then the chairs moved themselves into place, but no one was there. Suddenly he saw fingers handling the knives and forks and placing food onto the plates, but he could see nothing else. He was hungry, and he could see food, so he sat down and ate alongside the unseen ones, and everything tasted very good. He was full, and the others had cleaned off their plates as well, when suddenly all the lights were blown out. He heard this very distinctly. Sitting there in total darkness, something gave him a slap in the face. He said, "If you do that again, I'll give the same thing back to you." He received a second slap, and he struck back. Thus it continued the entire night, but he was never afraid, always striking back fiercely. At daybreak everything ceased. When the miller got up, he looked in on the farmhand to see how he was, and was amazed to see that he was still alive. The farmhand said, "I received some slaps, but I also gave out some slaps, and had plenty to eat." The miller was delighted and said that the mill was now freed of its curse, and he offered him a large sum of money as a reward. But the farmhand said, "I don't want any money; I have enough." Then he loaded his flour onto his back and returned home. He told the overseer he had completed the task and now wanted the wages that they had agreed upon. The overseer, beside himself with fear, walked back and forth in his room until sweat dripped from his face. He opened the window for some fresh air. Before he knew what had happened, the young giant kicked him from behind. He flew so far through the air, that no one has seen him since. Then the young giant turned to the overseer's wife and said that she would have to receive the next blow. "No, I'd never be able to withstand it," she said, and opened a window, because of the sweat dripping from her face. He gave her a kick as well, and she flew even higher than her husband. "Come to me," he called to her. "No, you come to me," she called back. "I can't come to you." And they soared through the air, neither of them able to get to the other one. I do not know if they are still soaring. But as for the young giant, he picked up his iron rod and went on his way. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der junge Riese," Kinder- und Hausmärchen [Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales], 7th ed., vol. 2, (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 90, pp. 20-28 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2009. The Grimms' source: Georg August Friedrich Goldmann from Hannover. Link to the text of this tale in a single file: The Young Giant . Return to the table of contents . The Hairy Boy Switzerland Once upon a time a king was out hunting when he came upon a hollow tree that his dogs would not pass by. They barked and jumped about and could not be brought to move on. Taking a closer look, the king discovered a beautiful maiden sitting in the hollow trunk. She was entirely naked and looked at him with terror. He threw his coat over her, and whistled to his servants. They came immediately, and he showed them the maiden, saying, "See what a beautiful animal I have captured!" Then he whistled again, and his coach came. He placed the maiden inside, rode home with her to his castle, and married her. The old queen, the king's mother, still lived in the castle, and she did not like the young queen and did everything to make her life miserable. With time the king had to go off to war, and while he was away his wife gave birth to a son. The old queen cooked up a brew and gave it to the newborn, which caused hair to grow all over his body. Then the wicked old woman wrote to the king, "Your wife has given birth to a hairy animal. We do not know whether it is a dog or a cat." This news greatly angered the king, and he commanded that the newborn be tied to his wife's back, and that they both be driven away. Thus the young queen and her hairy son were put out of the castle, and she returned to the hollow tree where the king had first seen her. She lived there as before. However, life in the woods was so good for the hairy boy that he grew a foot every day, and soon there was not enough room in the hollow tree. One day he went out and pulled up a bundle of large fir trees. He broke them over his knee and built a comfortable cabin for himself and his mother. Soon afterward he said to his mother, "Now tell me once and for all, who is my father?" "Alas," answered the mother, "your father is the king, but you will never see him as long as you live." "But I want to see him right now!" said the hairy boy, and he ripped a fir tree out of the ground, roots and all. He set forth carrying it, and did not rest until he had found the royal castle. The king had just sat down to eat and had a great quantity of expensive food before him. The hairy boy acted as if he were right at home, walked up to the king and said to him, "I am here too. I am your son, and I want to eat at your table with you." The king was terrified and wanted to stop him, but the hairy boy continued without hindrance, reaching his hairy hands into the king's plates and dishes. No one dared say a thing, for the king's people were all terrified and stood by helplessly. After the hairy boy had eaten every last morsel from the table, he said to the king, "I am going now, but I will be back tomorrow." "Wait," thought the king, "I'll see that you do not come back." He quickly summoned five hundred soldiers, and placed them immediately before the castle with the command to shoot at the hairy boy on sight. The next day when the hairy boy returned carrying his fir tree the soldiers all fired at him. But the hairy boy calmly plucked the bullets from his body and threw them, fifty at a time, back at the soldiers, until he had killed them all. He entered the castle just as the king was again sitting down to eat. The hairy boy said to him, "But father, what are you up to? Your soldiers are all lying dead outside, struck down by their own bullets. I am your son, and I want to eat at your table with you." And once again he reached his hairy hands into the king's plates and dishes, and did not stop eating until every last morsel had disappeared from the table. "I am going now," he said at last, "but I will be back tomorrow, and I am bringing my mother along." "Stop!" thought the king, "That you will not do!" He immediately called up ten hundred soldiers and positioned them before the castle, half in the courtyard and half surrounding the castle, commanding them by their very lives to not let the hairy boy inside. The next day the hairy boy returned, leading his mother by her hand. When soldiers shot at him, he placed himself in front of his mother. He again plucked the bullets from his body and threw them back, one hundred at a time, until all the soldiers lay dead on the ground. Then he walked into the castle and approached his father, saying, "But father, what are you up to again? Your soldiers are all dead as doornails, struck down by their own bullets! Go and see for yourself!" Then he took him by the hand and threw him into the courtyard below. He took him by the hand a second time and threw him back inside through the window. He threw him to the floor a third time, and the king was dead. The old queen hurried in, and the hairy boy threatened to kill her if she did not treat him well, and she had to promise to rid his body of the ugly hair. Once again she cooked up a brew, and it removed the hair from his body and hands. From this hour on he had no more power than ordinary people. But the kingdom was now his, and he ruled with his mother in peace and splendor. Source: Otto Sutermeister, "Der Haarige," Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus der Schweiz , 2nd edition (Aarau: H. R. Sauerländer, 1873), no. 52, pp. 160-63 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2011. Return to the table of contents . Benedict France (Lorraine) Once there lived poor people who had a son named Benedict. He was eighteen years old, but he had not yet gotten out of bed. One day his father said to him: "Benedict, get up. It's finally time you think about work." Benedict got up and hired himself out as a servant to a nearby farmer. As wages he agreed to a load of grain, which he was to receive at the end of one year. He further demanded that he never would have to get up before five o'clock, and that he could eat as much as he wanted. The farmer agreed to these conditions. The next morning, everyone in the house had to get up at two o'clock to bring oak trees from the forest. The master also called Benedict, but he pretended to be deaf, and he got up not a minute earlier or later than the time agreed to. The farmer's wife called Benedict to eat his soup and presented him with a large pot full of soup. "What?" cried Benedict. "Is that all? I need a tub of soup and four loaves of bread." The farmer's wife cried out, but her husband had promised the servant that he could eat until he was no longer hungry, so she had to serve him whatever he wanted. After Benedict had eaten, the farmer ordered him to get the five best horses out of the stable, hitch them to a big wagon, and go to the forest to look for the other servants. Benedict took the best horses and rode into the forest, but he didn't bother to look for the others. He took four oak logs, put them on his wagon, and wanted to go home, but the horses were unable to move the wagon. "What? You don't want to pull!" cried Benedict. He loaded another oak log and then another, and then lashed out at the team. But shouting and hitting didn't help. The horses wouldn't move. He unhitched them, loaded them onto the wagon and pulled it himself to the farmhouse. The other servants, who had already gone out before Benedict, came home long after him, because they were stopped by a mighty cliff. The farmer was frightened that such a strong man was in his service. He sent Benedict to cut down a ten-acre forest. He was to be finished before evening, otherwise he would be thrown out. Benedict went into the forest and sat down at the foot of a tree. Around noon when a maid brought him his tub of soup, she found him asleep. "What? Haven't you started work yet?" she asked him. "Mind the kitchen, but not me," he answered her. When she brought him his afternoon snack he still hadn't started, but before evening the whole forest was cut down, and Benedict had returned home. His master couldn't help but be amazed. The next day he ordered Benedict to spend the night in a mill that was haunted by ghosts, and from which no one had returned. Benedict went to the mill in the evening and made himself at home in its kitchen. At midnight he heard the rattling of chains. A devil was just coming down the chimney. "What do you want here?" asked Benedict. Without waiting for an answer, he killed the devil. The next morning he returned to the farmhouse. Not knowing how to get rid of Benedict, the master sent him with a letter to his son, who was the captain of Besançon. It was thirty miles away. Benedict took a horse, carried it on his shoulders for fifteen miles, then mounted it and rode the remaining fifteen miles. Arriving in Besançon, he handed the farmer's letter to the captain. The letter said that the bearer should be given a warm welcome, that he should be given as much food as he wanted, but that he should be killed when the opportunity arose. One day, as Benedict was taking a walk, the captain shot at him. But Benedict just shook himself and calmly continued on his way. "How are you, Benedict?" asked the captain. "Quite well, except for the flies. They bother me, but they're not dangerous." The captain then had cannonballs fired at him, but with the same effect. Tired of the fight, he sent him back to the farmer. The farmer now ordered Benedict to clean out a well five hundred feet deep, which had been buried for five hundred years. Benedict was soon done with that. While he was still in the well, a thousand-pound millstone was thrown down on him to kill him. The millstone had a hole in the middle, and it fell on his shoulders, forming a kind of collar. However, Benedict did not feel it in the slightest. A bell weighing twenty thousand pounds was then thrown down, and it fell on his head. Everyone thought he was dead, but soon he came up from the bottom of the well, tore the bell from his head and said: "Here is my nightcap, do not soil it for me." Then he took down the millstone and cried: "This is my collar, I must save it for next Sunday. But, dear sir, the one year is over, isn't it?" "Yes," replied the farmer. "Then give me my load of grain." They gave him two sacks full. "What do you mean?" cried Benedict. "I can carry more." Another eight sacks were brought. "I'll carry that with my little finger." Thirty-two sacks were brought. "That's just for two fingers." The farmer now explained to him that he could not give him more than a hundred sacks. Satisfied with this, Benedict loaded up the sacks and returned to his parents. Source (books.google.com): E. K. Blümml, "Bénédicité," Schnurren und Schwänke des französischen Bauernvolkes (Leipzig: Deutsche Verlagsactiengesellschaft, 1906), no. 60, pp. 176-79 . Source (Internet Archive): E. K. Blümml, "Bénédicité," Schnurren und Schwänke des französischen Bauernvolkes (Leipzig: Deutsche Verlagsactiengesellschaft, 1906), no. 60, pp. 176-79 . Return to the table of contents . Fourteen Basque Like many others in the world, there was a mother and her son. The lad was as strong as fourteen men together, but he was also obliged to eat as much as fourteen men. They were poor, and on that account he often suffered from hunger. He said one day to his mother, that it would be better for him to try and go somewhere else to see if he could be any better off; that he could not bear it any longer like this; that he was pained to see how much it cost her to feed him. The mother with regret allows him to depart. He goes off then far, far, far away, and comes to a large house. He asks if they want a servant there, and they answer that they will speak to the master. The master himself comes and says to him, "I employ experienced laborers generally, but I will take you nevertheless." The lad answers, "I must forewarn you, that I eat as much as fourteen men, but I do work in proportion." He asks him, "What do you know how to do?" He says to him, "I know a little of everything." The next day the master takes him into a field, and says to him, "You must mow all this meadow." He says to him, "Yes." The master goes away. At eight o'clock the servant comes with the breakfast. She had a basket full of provisions; there were six loaves, half a ham, and six bottles of wine. Our lad was delighted. The servant was astonished to see that all the meadow was mown, and she goes and tells it to the master. He too was pleased to see that he had such a valuable servant. He tells him to go and cut another meadow. Before midday he had it all down. The servant comes with the dinner, and was astonished to see how much work he had done. She brought him seven loaves, seven bottles of wine, and ever so much ham, but he cleared it all off. The master gives him again another field of grass to cut. Before night he had done it easily. Our master was delighted at it, and gave him plenty to eat. The servant too was highly pleased. As long as he had work the master said nothing, but afterwards, when he saw that all the harvest served only for the servant to eat, he did not know how to get rid of him. He sends him to a forest in which he knew that there were terrible beasts, and told him to bring wood from there. As soon as he has arrived a bear attacks him. He takes him by the nostrils and throws him on the ground, and twists his neck. He keeps pulling up all the young trees, and again a wolf attacks him; he takes him like the bear by the nostrils, throws him down, and twists his neck. In the evening he arrives at the house, and the master is astonished to see him return. He gave him a good supper; but he was not pleased, because he had torn up all the young trees. At night the master turns over in his head what he could do with his servant, and he determines to send him into a still more terrible forest, in the hope that some animal will devour him. Our lad goes off again. He tears up many large trees, when a lion attacks him. He kills him in a moment. There comes against him another terrible animal, and he finishes him off too. In the evening, when he comes home, he said to himself, "Why does my master send me into the forest? Perhaps he is tired of me." And he resolves to tell him that he will leave the house. When he arrives his master receives him well, but cannot understand how it is that he comes back. He gives him a good supper, and our lad says to him, "It is better for me to go off somewhere. There is no more work for me here." You may reckon how pleased the master was. He gives him his wages at once, and he goes away. He goes off, far, far, far away; but soon his money is exhausted, and he does not know what is to become of him. He sees two men standing on the bank of a river. He went up to them, and the men ask him if he will cross them over to the other side of the water. He answers, "Yes," and takes them both at once on his back; and these men were our Lord and St. Peter. Our Lord says to him in the middle of the stream, "I am heavy." "I will throw you into the water if you do not keep quiet, for I have quite enough to do." When they had come to the other side, the Lord said to him, "What must I give you as a reward?" "Whatever you like; only give it quickly, for I am very hungry." He gives him a sack, and says to him, "Whatever you wish for will come into this sack." And he goes off, far away. He comes to a town, and passing before a baker's shop he smells an odor of very good hot loaves, and he says to them, "Get into my sack," and his sack is quite full of them. He goes off to a corner of a forest, and there he lives by his sack. He returns again into the town, and passes before a pork butcher's. There were there black puddings, sausages, hams, and plenty of good things. He says, "Come into my sack," and as soon as he has said it the sack is full. He goes again to empty it as he had done with the loaves, and he returns into the town. In front of an inn he says, "Come into my sack." There were there bottles of good wine and of liqueurs, and to all these good things he says, "Come into my sack," and his sack was filled. He goes off to his corner of the forest, and there he had provision for some days; and, when he had well stuffed himself, he went out for a walk. One day he saw some young girls weeping, and he asks them, "What is the matter with you?" They answer that their father is very ill. He asks if he can see him. They tell him, "Yes." He goes there then, and the poor man tells him how he has given his soul to the devil, and that he was expecting him that very day, and he was trembling even then. Our Fourteen asks if he will let him be on a corner of the bed, that he might see the devil. He tells him, "Yes." He then hides himself with his sack. A moment after the devil arrives, and our lad says to him, "Come into my sack." And as soon as he had said it, in goes the devil. Judge of the joy of our man! Our lad goes off to some stonebreakers, and says to them, "Hit hard! the devil is in this sack." They went at it, blow upon blow, stroke upon stroke, and the devil went, "Ay! ay! ay! Let me out! Let me go! Ay! ay! ay!" The lad said, "You shall bring me, then, a paper, signed by all the devils of hell, that you have no rights over this man." The devil agrees, and he lets him go. In a moment he comes back with the paper, and the lad makes him go into the sack again, and has him beaten by the stonebreakers, while he carries the precious paper to the former man; and think how happy they were in that house! Our man goes off, walking, walking, on, and on, and always on, and he grew tired of this world. He said to himself, " I should like to go to heaven." He goes on, and on, and on, but he comes to hell; but as soon as ever the devils saw that it was Fourteen they shut all the gates. He goes off again, far, far, very far, and comes to heaven. There the gates are shut against him. What does Fourteen do? He put his sack in through the keyhole, and says to himself, "Go into the sack." As soon as he has said it he finds himself inside, and he is there still behind the door; and when you go to heaven, look about well, and you will see him there. Source: Wentworth Webster, Basque Legends (London: Griffith and Farran, 1879), pp. 195-99 . The episode of the hero carrying Christ across a river is similar to the famous Saint Christopher legend (type 768). The episode describing the magic sack and its use in tricking one's way into heaven is a type 330 folktale. Return to the table of contents . The Dwarf Who Grew Up Ireland There was once a little boy who was growing old, but he was not growing up. When he was four years he could go into a thimble, and when he was six he was no bigger than a daisy. His poor parents did not know what to do with him. They used to say, "Poor Tom Thumb." At last a kind giant who lived a long way off got to hear of Tom Thumb. The giant was so tall that he hid the light of the sun, and whenever he passed by, the people thought the night had come. The big giant said "Come along Tom, you will soon be as big as your father." He caught poor Tom up, put him sitting on his ear and carried him off. Tom stayed with the giant for twelve years and lived on giant's food. By this time he was as big as his father but by far stronger. The giant's food had given him a giant's strength. "You may go off now," said the giant at the end of twelve years. "You are as big as your father and as strong as myself. You may go off now and seek your fortune." Tom's father or mother did not know him when he came back, and he did not tell them who he was. The two old people were living together in a tiny little house, and they were as poor as could be. Their farm had been taken from them by a cruel blacksmith. When Tom Thumb heard this he went to the blacksmith and asked for work. "What wages do you want?" said the smith. "I want no wages at all," said Tom. "All I want is that you let me give you a few taps on the shoulder every evening." "You can do that," said the smith. So Tom started to work. The first blow he struck broke the anvil into many pieces, and the second knocked the roof off the forge. "Stop," said the smith, "you'll work here no longer." "I'll have my day's wages then," said Tom. He struck the blacksmith a blow on the shoulder and put him over a cock of hay. "That's one half of my wages paid," said Tom. "Shall I take the other half?" "Don't strike me again," said the smith. I'll give you anything you ask if you leave me alone," said the smith. "All right," said Tom Thumb. "Give me my father's farm and a purse of gold." Tom got the gold and build a big house for his father and mother. They lived comfortably again as long as they lived. Informant: Máire Ní Chuinneagáin Age: 21. Occupation: Domestic worker. Address: Kilgill, Co. Galway. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Galway >> Corr an Droma, pp. 403-405 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Strong Jack Wales (Romani) The' was wonst an owld woman what had only but one son, an' his name was Jack. An' she kept him in bed till he was twenty-one years of age. Whatsumever, about a month afoare, she sent for the tailor, an' had him measured for a suit o' clothes. On the day when he is twenty-one his owld mother calls Jack early, an' tells him he is to get up, which he does. He finds a new suit o' clothes put ready for him, so he dresses hisself, an' a'ter when he has dressed he has a good look at hisself in the glass. He looks fine, he thinks. Of course he'd never had a suit o' clothes on in his life afoare. Then he goes downstairs, an' has his breakfast wid his owld mother. An' when he thinks of hisself sat up to the table wid his mother he can't help but laugh: it seems so funny to him what has never been out 'n bed afoare. Now a'ter when they'd finished breakfast his owld mother says to him: "Jack," she says, "I wants you now to go to the farm over there, an' bring me some straw for the pig to lie on. "The farmer," she says, "has gi'ed me leave to get some." "Right," says Jack. "I'll go, mother. But, mother," he axes, "what rope shall I take?" "Oh! I got only but one rope," she tells him. "Well, where is it?" he axes. "Hanging up in the kitchen," she says. So Jack goes an' gets the rope -- a t'emendous big thick rope it was, as thick as my arm -- an' then off he sets to the farm. Whatever to you, on the road he meets wid the farmer hisself. "Hello! my lad, " says the farmer. "Where may you be come from?" "Out 'n bed," Jack tells him. "My mother," he says, "has kept me in bed for twenty-one years, an' I'm only just now got up. An' being as she has done so much for me," he says, "I wants to be a help to her now, so I was just a-going," he says, "to fatch her that straw for the pig, what you gi'ed her the promise on." "Very good, my lad," says the farmer, "you can go an' get as much as ever you can carry." Jack thanks him, an' bids him good morning, an' goes on now till he comes to the stackyard. He takes the rope, an' he throws it round the whole 'n one stack -- an' it wa'n't the littlest neither -- an' he lifts an' he pulls till he gets the stack fair an' square onto his back. Then he goes off home wid it, an' when he gets it there he sets it down in the front garden. "There, mother." he says, "that'll last you a long while, I'll lay it will." An' a'ter when he has done this he goes off into the back garden to dig her up a few 'tatoes. So whatever to you, the farmer soon comes to the owld woman's cottage to see what's gotten his stack, an' there he finds it in front 'n the house in the front garden. "Morning, missis," he says. "Is that son o' yours at home?" "Yes," she tells him. "He's in the back garden digging up a few 'tatoes for the dinner." "I'll just go an' have a word wid him," says the farmer. "Well aye," she says, "do." So the farmer goes through into the back garden. "Hello! young fellow," he says. "What the hangment do you mean by taking the whole 'n one o' my stacks?" "Well," says Jack, "you said as I was to have as much straw as ever I could carry, didn't you? That's all I've ta'en, master. An' besides," he says, "it'll be a good thing for my poor owld mother, for it'll last her a long time." "I da'say it will," says the farmer. "But never mind, we'll say no moare about it." Now the farmer gets a-gate talking wid Jack, an' a'ter a bit he axes him what work he can do "Oh, annythink," says Jack, "as I knows how to." "An' you wants work, Jack?" he axes. "Yes," says Jack, an' he was very pleased at the thoughts o' getting a job. "I'd be glad of anny work," he says, "for now I wants to keep my owld mother, being as she has kept me for twenty-one years." "Do you think you could manage to carry water?" the farmer axes him. "Yes," says Jack, "I could do that first class." "Very well then, my lad," says the farmer. "Come to my house tomorrow morning early: it's washing day." "Right you are," says Jack. "I'll be there." Next morning, when Jack goes, the farmer gi'es him two buckets an' tells him to go across the field -- a very big field it was -- to the well, an' fatch enough water to fill the boiler for washing. Away Jack goes, an' he fatches two bucketfuls, an' pours 'em into the boiler, an' then he fatches two moare, an' two moare agen; an' he goes on this way, aye for three or four hours, an' yet he can't see the boiler getting not the leastest little bit fuller. "Dang it," he says. "I will fill it." So whatever should he do now, but the' is a big barrel -- a t'emendous big cask -- stood close by to the boiler; well, he gets this, an' puts it onto his back, an' then off he goes to the well agen wid this big barrel on his back, an' the two buckets in his hands. He fills this barrel, an' the two buckets, an' brings the three 'n they, an' empties the lot into the boiler. He does this two or three times moare, an' then the farmer comes to see how he's getting on. "Stop, Jack," he says. "That 'll do. You've fatched too much." Whatsumever to you, as Jack was going home that night from the farmer's who should he meet wid but a sowldier. "Hello! my fine fellow," the sowldier calls out to him. "Are you looking for work?" "Yes," Jack tells him. "My mother," he says, ' has kept me in bed for twenty-one years, an' now I wants to earn a bit o' money to keep her." "Well, what can you do?" the sowldier axes him. "Oh! annythink," says Jack, "as I knows how to." "Will you 'list?" says the sowldier. "Yes," says Jack. So Jack 'lists, an' they puts him in a cavalry rigiment. Now it wa'n't above a month a'ter Jack had 'listed but what a big war breaks out, an' of course he is sent to the front. Soon he's right in the thick 'n it. He shoots down scoares an' scoares 'n the enemy till his ammonition is all used up, an' then he lays about him wid the butt end 'n his rifle, an' kills scoares and scoares more that way. At last poor Jack's horse was shot down from under him. But that wa'n't the end -- oh! no. What does he do but catch howld 'n his horse by the tail, an' walk right into the middle 'n the enemy, swinging it round an' round his head, an' i' that way he wiped out 'most all the lot 'n the tother side. Now a'ter when the war is over, an' Jack comes back home agen, the king gi'es him his own da'ghter for winning the battle for him. So Jack gets married to her, an' they goes to live in a grand palace, an' they lives happy together ever a'ter. Source (Internet Archive): Journal of the Gypsy Lore Society , new series, vol. 8 (1914-1915), pp. 213-16 . Romani informant: Noah Lock. Return to the table of contents . The Bear's Son Serbia Once upon a time a bear married a woman, and they had one son. When the boy was yet a little fellow he begged very hard to be allowed to leave the bear's cave, and to go out into the world to see what was in it. His father, however, the bear, would not consent to this, saying, "You are too young yet, and not strong enough. In the world there are multitudes of wicked beasts, called men, who will kill you." So the boy was quieted for a while, and remained in the cave. But, after some time, the boy prayed so earnestly that the bear, his father, would let him go into the world, that the bear brought him into the wood, and showed him a beech tree, saying, "If you can pull up that beech by the roots, I will let you go; but if you cannot, then this is a proof that you are still too weak, and must remain with me." The boy tried to pull up the tree, but, after long trying, had to give it up, and go home again to the cave. Again some time passed, and he then begged again to be allowed to go into the world, and his father told him, as before, if he could pull up the beech tree he might go out into the world. This time the boy pulled up the tree, so the bear consented to let him go, first, however, making him cut away the branches from the beech, so that he might use the trunk for a club. The boy now started on his journey, carrying the trunk of the beech over his shoulder. One day as the bear's son was journeying, he came to a field where he found hundreds of plowmen working for their master. He asked them to give him something to eat, and they told him to wait a bit till their dinner was brought them, when he should have some -- for, they said, "Where so many are dining one mouth more or less matters but little." Whilst they were speaking there came carts, horses, mules, and asses, all carrying the dinner. But when the meats were spread out the bear's son declared he could eat all that up himself. The workmen wondered greatly at his words, not believing it possible that one man could consume as great a quantity of victuals as would satisfy several hundred men. This, however, the bear's son persisted in affirming he could do, and offered to bet with them that he would do this. He proposed that the stakes should be all the iron of their plowshares and other agricultural implements. To this they assented. No sooner had they made the wager than he fell upon the provisions, and in a short time consumed the whole. Not a fragment was left. Hereupon the laborers, in accordance with their wager, gave him all the iron which they possessed. When the bear's son had collected all the iron, he tore up a young birch tree, twisted it into a band and tied up the iron into a bundle, which he hung at the end of his staff, and throwing it across his shoulder, trudged off from the astonished and affrighted laborers. Going on a short distance, he arrived at a forge in which a smith was employed making a plowshare. This man he requested to make him a mace with the iron which he was carrying. This, the smith undertook to do; but putting aside half the iron, he made of the rest a small, coarsely finished mace. Bear's son saw at a glance that he had been cheated by the smith. Moreover, he was disgusted at the roughness of the workmanship. He however took it, and declared his intention of testing it. Then fastening it to the end of his club and throwing it into the air high above the clouds he stood still and allowed it to fall on his shoulder. It had no sooner struck him than the mace shivered into fragments, some of which fell on and destroyed the forge. Taking up his staff, bear's son reproached the smith for his dishonesty, and killed him on the spot. Having collected the whole of the iron, the bear's son went to another smithy, and desired the smith whom he found there to make him a mace, saying to him, "Please play no tricks on me. I bring you these fragments of iron for you to use in making a mace. Beware that you do not attempt to cheat me as I was cheated before!" As the smith had heard what had happened to the other one, he collected his work-people, threw all the iron on his fire, and welded the whole together and made a large mace of perfect workmanship. When it was fastened on the head of his club the bear's son, to prove it, threw it up high, and caught it on his back. This time the mace did not break, but rebounded. Then the bear's son got up and said, "This work is well done!" and, putting it on his shoulder, walked away. A little farther on he came to a field wherein a man was plowing with two oxen, and he went up to him and asked for something to eat. The man said, "I expect every moment my daughter to come with my dinner, then we shall see what God has given us!" The bear's son told him how he had eaten up all the dinner prepared for many hundreds of plowmen, and asked, "From a dinner prepared for one person how much can come to me or to you?" Meanwhile the girl brought the dinner. The moment she put it down, bear's son stretched out his hand to begin to eat, but the man stopped him. "No!" said he, "you must first say grace, as I do!" The bear's son, hungry as he was, obeyed, and, having said grace, they both began to eat. The bear's son, looking at the girl who brought the dinner (she was a tall, strong, beautiful girl), became very fond of her, and said to the father, "Will you give me your daughter for a wife?" The man answered, "I would give her to you very gladly but I have promised her already to the Moustached." The bear's son exclaimed, "What do I care for Moustachio? I have my mace for him!" But the man answered, "Hush! hush! Moustachio is also somebody! You will see him here soon." Shortly after a noise was heard afar off, and lo! behind a hill a moustache showed itself, and in it were three hundred and sixty-five bird's nests. Shortly after appeared the other moustache, and then came Moustachio himself. Having reached them, he lay down on the ground immediately, to rest. He put his head on the girl's knee and told her to scratch his head a little. The girl obeyed him, and the bear's son, getting up, struck him with his club over the head. Whereupon Moustachio, pointing to the place with his finger, said," Something bit me here!" The bear's son struck with his mace on another spot, and Moustachio again pointed to the place, saying to the girl, "Something has bitten me here!" When he was struck a third time, he said to the girl angrily, "Look you! Something bites me here!" Then the girl said, "Nothing has bitten you; a man struck you!" When Moustachio heard that he jumped up, but bear's son had thrown away his mace and ran away. Moustachio pursued him, and though the bear's son was lighter than he, and had gotten the start of him a considerable distance, he would not give up pursuing him. At length the bear's son, in the course of his flight, came to a wide river, and found, near it, some men threshing corn. "Help me, my brothers, help -- for God's sake!" he cried; "Help! Moustachio is pursuing me! What shall I do? How can I get across the river?" One of the men stretched out his shovel, saying, "Here! Sit down on it, and I will throw you over the river!" The bear's son sat on the shovel, and the man threw him over the water to the other shore. Soon after Moustachio came up, and asked, "Has any one passed here?" The threshers replied that a man had passed. Moustachio demanded, "How did he cross the river?" They answered, "He sprang over." Then Moustachio went back a little to take a start, and with a hop he sprang to the other side, and continued to pursue the bear's son. Meanwhile this last, running hastily up a hill, got very tired. At the top of the hill he found a man sowing, and the sack with seeds was hanging on his neck. After every handful of seed sown in the ground, the man put a handful in his mouth and eat them. The bear's son shouted to him, "Help, brother, help! -- for God's sake! Moustachio is following me, and will soon catch me! Hide me somewhere!" Then the man said, "Indeed, it is no joke to have Moustachio pursuing you. But I have nowhere to hide you, unless in this sack among the seeds." So he put him in the sack. When Moustachio came up to the sower he asked him it he had seen the bear's son anywhere? The man replied, "Yes, he passed by long ago, and God knows where he has got before this!" Then Moustachio went back again. By-and-by the sower forgot that bear's son was in his sack, and he took him out with a handful of seeds, and put him in his mouth. Then bear's son was afraid of being swallowed, so he looked round the mouth quickly, and, seeing a hollow tooth, hid himself in it. When the sower returned home in the evening, he called to his sisters-in-law, "Children, give me my toothpick! There is something in my broken tooth." The sisters-in-law brought him two iron picks, and, standing one on each side, they poked about with the two picks in his tooth till the bear's son jumped out. Then the man remembered him, and said, "What bad luck you have! I had very nearly swallowed you." After they had taken supper they talked about many different things, till at last the bear's son asked what had happened to break that one tooth, whilst the others were all strong and healthy. Then the man told me in these words: Once on a time ten of us started with thirty horses to the sea-shore to buy some salt. We found a girl in a field watching sheep, and she asked us where we were going. We said we were going to the sea-shore to buy salt. She said, "Why go so far? I have in the bag in my hand here some salt which remained over after feeding the sheep. I think it will be enough for you." So we settled about the price, and then she took the salt from her bag, whilst we took the sacks from the thirty horses, and we weighed the salt and filled the sacks with it till all the thirty sacks were full. We then paid the girl, and returned home. It was a very fine autumn day; but as we were crossing a high mountain, the sky became very cloudy and it began to snow, and there was a cold north wind, so we could not see our path and wandered about here and there. At last, by good luck, one of us shouted, "Here, brothers! Here is a dry place!" So we went in one after the other till we were all, with the thirty horses, under shelter. Then we took the sacks from the horses, made a good fire, and passed the night there as if it were a house. Next morning, just think what we saw! We were all in one man's head, which lay in the midst of some vineyards; and whilst we were yet wondering and loading our horses, the keeper of the vineyards came and picked the head up. He put it in a sling and slinging it about several times, threw it over his head, and cast it far away over the vines to frighten the starlings away from his grapes. So we rolled down a hill, and it was then that I broke my tooth. Source: Csedomille Mijatovies, Serbian Folk-Lore , edited by W. Denton (London: W. Isbister and Company, 1874), pp. 24-31 . The conclusion of this tale, involving many contradictions and extremes, is classified as a folktale of type 2014. Return to the table of contents . The Strong Man India There was once a strong man but no one knew of his strength. He was in the service of a farmer who made him headman over all his laborers. In those days much of the country was still covered with jungle. One day the farmer chose a piece of forest land which he thought suitable for cultivation and told his laborers to set to work and clear it, and as usual after giving his orders he troubled himself no more about the matter, as he could fully rely on the strong man. The next morning, the strong man set the other laborers to work plowing a field and then said that he would go and have a look at the jungle which his master wanted cleared. So he went off alone with only a stick in his hand. When he reached the place, he walked all round it, and saw how much could be made into good arable land, and then he began to clear it. He pulled up the trees by the roots and piled them into a heap and he took the rocks and threw them to one side and made the ground quite clear and smooth, and then went back to the house. On being asked why he had been so long away, he answered that he had been pulling up a few bushes at the place which was to be cleared. The following morning the strong man told the farm laborers to take their plows to the clearing and begin to plow it. When the farmer heard this, he was puzzled to think how the land could be ready for plowing so soon, and went to see it and to his amazement found the whole land cleared, every tree pulled up by the roots and all the rocks removed. Then he asked the strong man whether he had done the work by himself. The strong man answered "no," a number of people had volunteered to help him and so the work had been finished in a day. The farmer said nothing but he did not believe the story and saw that his servant must really be a man of marvellous strength. Neither he nor the farm laborers let any one else know what had happened, they kept it to themselves. Now the strong man's wages were twelve measures of rice a year. After working for four years he made up his mind to leave his master and start farming on his own account. So he told the farmer that he wished to leave but offered to finish any work there was to do before he went, that no one might be able to say that he had gone away, leaving his work half done. The farmer assured him that there was nothing for him to do and gave him rice equal to his four years' wages. The rice made two big bandis , each more than an ordinary man could lift, but the strong man slung them onto a bamboo and carried them off over his shoulder. After he had gone a little way, it struck the farmer that it would not do to let him display his strength in this way and that it would be better if he took the rice away at night. So he had the strong man called back and told him that there was one job which he had forgotten to finish; he had put two bundles of sabai grass into the trough to steep and had forgotten to twist it into string. Without a word the strong man went and picked the sabai out of the water and began to twist it, but he could tell at once by the feel that the sabai had only just been placed in the water and he charged the farmer with playing a trick on him. The farmer swore that there was no trick and, rather than quarrel, the strong man went on with the work. While he was so engaged the farmer offered him some tobacco, and the strong man took it without washing and wiping his hands. Now no one should prepare or chew tobacco while twisting sabai ; if one does not first wash and dry one's hands one's strength will go. The strong man knew this, but he was so angry at being called back on false pretences that he forgot all about it. But when he had finished the string and the farmer said that he might go, he essayed to take up the two bandis of rice as before. To his sorrow he found that he could not lift them. Then he saw the mistake that he had made. He had to leave one bandi behind and divide the other into two halves and sling them on the bamboo and carry them off with him. The strong man's cultivation did not prosper, and after three or four years he found himself at the end of his means and had again to take service with a farmer. One day when field work was in full swing the strong man had a quarrel with his new master. So when he had finished the morning's plowing he pulled the iron point of the plowshare out of its socket and snapped it in two. Then he took the pieces to his master and explained that it had caught on the stump of a tree and got broken. The master took the broken share to the blacksmith and had it mended. The next day the strong man went through the same performance and his master had again to go the blacksmith. The same thing happened several days running, till at last the farmer decided to keep watch and see what really happened. So he hid himself and saw the strong man snap the plowshare in two; but in view of such a display of strength he was much too frightened to let his servant know that he had found out the trick that was being played on him. He took the pieces to the blacksmith as usual and at the smithy he found some of his friends and told them what had happened. They advised him to set the strong man to twisting sabai string and then by some pretext induce him to take tobacco. The farmer did as they advised and in about a fortnight the strong man lost all his strength and became as other men. Then his master dismissed him and he had to go back to his house and his strength never returned to him. Source (Internet Archive): Cecil Henry Bompas Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 56, pp. 176-79 . Return to the table of contents . The Story of Carancal Philippines Once upon a time there lived a couple who had long been married, but had no child. Every Sunday they went to church and begged God to give them a son. They even asked the witches in their town why God would not give them a child. The witches told them that they would have one after a year, but that when born he would be no longer than a span. Nevertheless the couple gave thanks. After a year a son was born to them. He was very small, as the witches had foretold, but he was stronger than any one would expect such a small child to be. "It is strange," said a neighbor. "Why, he eats more food than his stomach can hold." The boy grew larger and larger, and the amount of food he ate became greater and greater. When he became four feet tall, his daily requirements were a cavan [about 75 quarts] of rice and twenty-five pounds of meat and fish. "I can't imagine how so small a person can eat so much food," said his mother to her husband. "He is like a grasshopper: he eats all the time." Carancal, as the boy was called, was very strong and very kind-hearted. He was the leader of the other boys of the town, for he could beat all of them in wrestling. After a few years the family's property had all been sold to buy food for the boy. Day after day they became poorer and poorer, for Carancal's father had no other business but fishing. So one day when Carancal was away playing, the wife said to her husband, "What shall we do with Carancal? He will make us as poor as rats. It is better for us to tell him to go earn his living, for he is old enough to work." "No, it is a shame to send him off," said the father, "for we asked God for him. I will take him to the forest and there kill him; and if the neighbors ask how he died, we will say that an accident befell him while cutting trees." Early the next morning his father led Carancal to the forest, and they began to cut down a very big tree. When the tree was about to fall, Carancal's father ordered the son to stand where the tree inclined; so that when it fell, Carancal was entirely buried. The father immediately went home, thinking that his son had surely been killed; but when he and his wife were talking, Carancal came home with the big tree on his shoulders. "Father, father, why did you leave me alone in the forest?" said the obedient boy. The father could not move or speak, for shame of himself. He only helped his son unload the heavy burden. The mother could not speak either, for fear Carancal might suspect their bad intentions toward him. Accordingly she and her husband planned another scheme. The next day Carancal was invited by his father to go fishing. They rowed and rowed until they were far out into the blue sea. Then they put their net into the water. "Carancal, dive down and see that our net is sound," said the father. Carancal obeyed. In about a minute the water became red and began to foam. This made the old man think that his son had been devoured by a big fish, so he rowed homeward. When he reached home, his wife anxiously asked if Carancal was dead; and the husband said, "Yes." They then cooked their meal and began to eat. But their supper was not half finished when Carancal came in, carrying a big alligator. He again asked his father why he had left him alone to bring such a big load. The father said, "I thought you had been killed by a large fish." Carancal then asked his mother to cook him a cavan of rice, for he was tired from swimming such a long distance. The couple were now discouraged; they could not think of any way by which to get rid of Carancal. At last the impatient woman said, "Carancal, you had better go out into the world to see what you can do toward earning your own living. You know that we are becoming poorer and poorer...." "Mother," interrupted the boy, "I really did not wish to go away from you; but, now that you drive me as if I were not your son, I cannot stay." He paused for a moment to wipe the tears from his cheeks. "You know that I love you; but you, in turn, hate me. What shall I do? I am your son, and so I must not disobey you. But before I depart, father and mother, please give me a bolo [a cutlass-like knife], a big bolo, to protect myself in case of danger." The parents willingly promised that he should have one. and after two days an enormous bolo five yards long was finished. Carancal took it, kissed the hands of his parents, and then went away with a heavy heart. When he had left his little village behind, he did not know which way to go. He was like a ship without a rudder. He walked and walked until he came to a forest, where he met Bugtongpalasan. [This name literally means, "only one palasan (a large plant of liana)." The hero was so called because he was the strongest man in his town.] Carancal asked him where he was going; and Bugtongpalasan said, "I am wandering, but I do not know where to go. I have lost my parents, and they have left me nothing to inherit." "Do you want to go with me?" said Carancal. "Yes," said Bugtongpalasan. "Let us wrestle first, and the loser will carry my bolo," said Carancal as a challenge. They wrestled; and Bugtongpalasan was defeated, so he had to carry the big bolo. Then they continued their journey until they met Tunkodbola [so called because he used as a cane (Tagalog tungkod ) the large cylindrical piece of iron used for crushing sugar-cane (Tagalog bold )], whom Carancal also challenged to a wrestling match. Tunkodbola laughed at Carancal, and said, "Look at this!" He twisted up a tree near by, and hurled it out of sight. "That is all right. Let us wrestle, and we will see if you can twist me," said Carancal scornfully. So they wrestled. The earth trembled, trees were uprooted, large stones rolled about; but Tunkodbola was defeated. "Here, take this bolo and carry it!" said Carancal triumphantly; and they continued their journey. When they reached the top of a mountain, they saw a big man. This was Macabuhalbundok [literally, "one who can overturn a mountain"]. Carancal challenged him; but Macabuhalbundok only laughed, and pushed up a hill. As the hill fell, he said, "Look at this hill! I gave it only a little push, and it was overthrown." "Well, I am not a hill," said Carancal. "I can balance myself." They wrestled together, and Carancal was once more the winner. The four companions now walked on together. They were all wandering about, not knowing where to go. When they were in the midst of a thick wood, they became hungry; so Carancal, their captain, ordered one of them to climb a tall tree and see if any house was nigh. Bugtongpalasan did so, and he saw a big house near the edge of the forest. They all went to the house to see if they might not beg some food. It was a very large house; but all the windows were closed, and it seemed to be uninhabited. They knocked at the door, but no one answered. Then they went in, and found a table covered with delicious food; and as they were almost famished, they lost no time in devouring what seemed to have been prepared for them. After all had eaten, three of them went hunting, leaving Bugtongpalasan behind to cook more food for them against their return. While Bugtongpalasan was cooking, he felt the earth tremble, and in a short time he saw a big giant ascending the stairs of the house, saying, " Ho, bajo tao cainco ," which means "I smell a man whom I will eat." Bugtongpalasan faced him, but what could a man do to a big giant? The monster pulled a hair out of his head and tied Bugtongpalasan to a post. Then he cooked his own meal. After eating, he went away, leaving his prisoner in the house. When the three arrived, they were very angry with Bugtongpalasan because no food had been prepared for them; but they untied him, and made him get the meal. Tunkodbola was the next one left behind as cook while the others went hunting, but he had the same experience as Bugtongpalasan. Then Macabuhalbondok; but the same thing happened to him too. It was now the turn of Carancal to try his wit, strength, and luck. Before the three left, he had them shave his head. When the giant came and saw that Carancal's head was white, he laughed. "It is a very fine thing to have a white head," said the giant. "Make my head white, too." "Your head must be shaved to be white," said Carancal, "and it is a very difficult thing to shave a head." "Never mind that! I want to have my head shaved," said the giant impatiently. Carancal then got some ropes and wax. He tied the giant tightly to a post, and then smeared his body with wax. He next took a match and set the giant's body on fire. Thus the giant was destroyed, and the four lived in the house as if it were their own. Not long afterwards a rumor reached their ears. It was to this effect: that in a certain kingdom on the other side of the sea lived a king who wanted to have a huge stone removed from its place. This stone was so big that it covered much ground. The prize that would be given to the one who could remove it was the hand of the king's prettiest daughter. The four set out to try their strength. At that time there were no boats for them to sail on, so they had to swim. After three weeks' swimming, they landed on an island-like place in the sea, to rest. It was smooth and slippery, which made them wonder what it could be. Carancal, accordingly, drew his bolo and thrust it into the island. How fast the island moved after the stroke! It was not really an island, but a very big fish. Fortunately the fish carried the travelers near the shores of the kingdom they were seeking. When the four arrived, they immediately presented themselves to the king, and told him that they would try to move the stone. The king ordered one of his soldiers to show them the stone. There a big crowd of people collected to watch the four strong men. The first to try was Bugtongpalasan. He could hardly budge it. Then Tunkodbola tried, but moved it only a few yards. When Macabuhalbundok's turn came, he moved the great stone half a mile; but the king said that it was not satisfactory. Carancal then took hold of the rope tied to the stone, and gave a swing. In a minute the great stone was out of sight. The king was very much pleased, and asked Carancal to choose a princess for his wife. "I am not old enough to marry, my lord," said Carancal sadly. "I will marry one of my companions to your daughter, however, if you are willing." The king agreed, and Bugtongpalasan was made a prince. The three unmarried men lived with Bugtongpalasan. By this time they were known not only throughout the whole kingdom where they were, but also in other countries. They had not enjoyed a year's hospitality in Bugtongpalasan's home when a letter addressed to the four men came. It was as follows: I have heard that you have superhuman strength, which I now greatly need. About a week ago a monster fish floated up to the shore of my town. It is decaying, and has a most offensive odor. My men in vain have tried to drag the fish out into the middle of the sea. I write to inform you that if you can rid us of it, I will let one of you marry my prettiest daughter. King Walangtacut [literally, "without fear, fearless"] After Carancal had read the letter, he instantly remembered the fish that had helped them in traveling. The three companions made themselves ready, bade Bugtongpalasan good-bye, and set out for Walangtacut's kingdom. They traveled on foot, for the place was not very far away. In every town they passed through, the people cried, "Hurrah for the strong men!" The king received them with a banquet, and all the houses of the town were decorated with flags. In a word, every one welcomed them. After the banquet was over, the three men marched with the king and all his counsellors, knights, dukes, and the common people to where the decaying fish lay. In this test, too, Carancal was the only successful one. Again he refused to marry; but as the princess was very anxious to have a strong man for her husband, Tunkodbola was chosen by Carancal, and he became her husband. The fame of the strong men was now nearly universal. All the surrounding kings sent congratulations. The heroes received offers of marriage from many beautiful ladies of the neighboring kingdoms. One day when Carancal and Macabuhalbundok were talking together, one of them suggested that they go on another journey. The other agreed, and both of them made preparations. But when they were about to start, a letter from another king came, addressed to Carancal. The king said in his letter that a great stone had fallen in his park. "It is so big that I thought it was the sky that fell," he wrote. "I am willing to marry you to my youngest daughter if you can remove it from its present place," said the king. The two friends accepted the invitation, and immediately began their journey. They traveled by land and sea for many a day. At last they reached the place. There they found the same stone which they had removed before. As he knew that he could not move it far enough, Macabuhalbundok did not make any attempt: Carancal was again the one who did the work. Once more Carancal refused to marry. "I am too young yet to marry," he said to the king. "In my place I will put my companion." So Macabuhalbundok was married. Carancal remained a bachelor, for he did not wish to have a wife. The three princes considered him as their father, though he was younger than any of them. For a long time Carancal lived with each of them a year in rotation. Not long after the marriage of Macabuhalbundok, the father-in-law of Bugtongpalasan died, and so Bugtongpalasan became the king. Then the following year Tunkodbola's father-in-law died, and Tunkodbola became also a king. After many years the fatherin-law of Macabuhalbundok died, and Macabuhalbundok succeeded to the throne. Thus Carancal was the benefactor of three kings. One day Carancal thought of visiting his cruel parents and of living with them. So he set out, carrying with him plenty of money, which the three kings had given him. This time his parents did not drive him away, for he had much wealth. Carancal lived once more with his parents, and had three kings under him. Source: Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 3, pp. 17-23 . Fansler's source: José P. Caedo, a Tagalog from Batangas, Batangas. The episodes featuring Carancal's three strong friends fit into a cycle of tales classified as type 513 ( The Extraordinary Companions ). The episode describing the burning of the giant is classified as a type 8 folktale ( False Beauty Treatment ). Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 28, 2022. Entrapped Suitors: Folktales of Type 1730 The Entrapped Suitors folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 1730 retold by D. L. Ashliman © 2001 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Lady and Her Five Suitors (1001 Nights). The Entrapped Suitors (Europe). The Lady and Her Five Suitors 1001 Nights A beautiful woman, whose husband had traveled abroad, fell in love with a handsome young man, who in turn came into difficulty with the law. Claiming that the young man was her brother, she asked the wali to support his case, and he acceded, but only if she would be his lover. She consented, giving him her address and setting a time for their tryst. She next petitioned a qadi. He too agreed to intercede on her brother's behalf, in return for her love, and she set the same time for his arrival that had been reserved for the wali. Then she went to a vizier, who, like the others, pledged his help, in exchange for her promise of intimacy, and his appointment was set for the same time as his predecessors. Next she took her petition to the king, and he too guaranteed a good outcome for her brother's case, if she would accept him as a lover. The arrangements were quickly made. The woman then went to a carpenter and ordered from him a cabinet with four compartments, one above the other. "My price is four dinars or your affection" he said. "Let it be the latter," she replied. "But only if you make a cabinet with five compartments, instead of four." The carpenter consented. The work was soon finished, and she told him when to return for his promised reward. The appointed trysting day came. The qadi was the first to arrive, and she asked him to take off his clothes and put on a brightly colored, strangely cut robe. He had scarcely done so when there was a knock at the door. "It is my husband!" she cried. "Hide in the cabinet!" And she locked him in the lowermost compartment. So it went with the wali, the vizier, and the king. The carpenter was the last to arrive. She lured him into the cabinet's top compartment by complaining that, contrary to her instructions, it had been built too narrow to hold a man. "Not so," said the carpenter, and climbed inside to prove his claim. The woman locked the door on her final suitor, and then abandoned the place, departing with her young lover for another city. Three days passed, and the carpenter, unable to hold his water any longer, relieved himself on the man beneath him. Each captive did the same, turning the cabinet into a sewer of filth. With time the neighbors entered the woman's lodgings and freed the befouled and strangely costumed suitors. Thus ends the story of the woman who tricked her five suitors. Source: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night , translated by Richard F. Burton (Privately printed, 1885), v. 6, pp. 172-179. Revised and abridged by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Entrapped Suitors Europe An honest sculptor and his beautiful wife lived in a renowned city with a great cathedral. His work was always in demand, because there were many convents, monasteries, and churches in the city. The sculptor and his wife would have been ever so happy, but for one problem. Her exquisite beauty caught the eye of many men, some of whom became increasingly bold in their attempts to gain her favor. Three men in particular -- a bishop, a priest, and a sexton -- were so open and so forceful in their solicitations that life became quite unbearable for the sculptor and his faithful wife. The sculptor, you see, feared that if any one of these three influential men would turn against him it could ruin his thriving trade. And his wife, an honorable and pious woman, was quite naturally offended by their overtures. Finally the husband and wife devised a plan that would, they hoped, put an end to the unseemly advances and propositions. The next time that the bishop approached the sculptor's wife, instead of giving her usual cool reply, she responded warmly, "Yes, it would be good if we could get to know one another better. My husband will be out this afternoon. Why don't you come by at three o'clock for tea?" The bishop, who could scarcely hide his eagerness and joy, accepted the invitation and left. Then came the priest, and he too was delighted when his solicitation received an unexpectedly warm response. He too received an invitation for tea, but he was to come at half past three. The sexton came last, and he too was invited, but for four o'clock. Three o'clock arrived and the bishop, true to his word, was as punctual as a church bell. "You must be very uncomfortable in that heavy, scratchy robe," purred the sculptor's wife, as they drank their tea. "Do make yourself at ease." He needed no further encouragement, and began to take off his clothes. Just as the last item fell, there came a knock at the door. "Heaven help us!" cried the woman. "It's my husband! Quick, hide in the closet." The bishop, naked as a fish, fled to the closet. The woman regained her composure and went to the door. It was, of course, the priest, as punctual as a church bell. A half hour later he too, having been encouraged by the sculptor's wife, had removed his clothes, just in time to hear a knock at the door. The previous scene repeated itself, and within seconds the naked priest had joined the naked bishop in the closet. The sexton did not fare any better. He too, in grand anticipation, took off his clothes, only to be interrupted by a knock at the door. And he joined his two naked brethren in the closet. This time it was indeed the husband returning home, and he had with him three nuns, worthy sisters from a nearby convent who had ordered statues of the three wise men for their sanctuary. "I have just what you want," said the sculptor, leading the nuns to the closet holding the three entrapped suitors. "These will fit perfectly in the sanctuary," he added, opening the door with a flourish. The three suitors stood breathless, as if made from stone as the nuns came closer to examine the workmanship. First there was only silence, but then the senior sister said, hesitatingly, "Well, uh, we did have a somewhat different style in mind, perhaps something with a little less detail." "No problem!" exclaimed the sculptor. I can remove the excess details at once!" He approached the three suitors, hammer in one hand, chisel in the other. And behold, the three statues suddenly came to life, bolted through the room, and disappeared out the door. The three nuns returned to their convent without any statues. The good sisters there still give witness to the legend of the three stone saints that miraculously came to life. Retold from a variety of European sources. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 25, 2001. Sun, Moon, and Star Legends Sun, Moon, and Star Legends Translated and edited by D. L. Ashliman Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Germanic Myths, Legends, and Sagas. Contents The Night Raven or Eternal Teamster (Germany). The Night Raven or Eternal Teamster Germany During the night the night raven can be heard calling out with its "caw, caw." This bird is much larger than an ordinary raven, even as large as an old hen. It is also called the eternal teamster. They say that for his portion of the Kingdom of Heaven he desired to be underway forever and ever. Thus he will be driving for all eternity, seated on the middle horse of Heaven's Wagon. The four large stars to the rear are the great wheels. The three stars in front, standing in a crooked line, are three horses. The small star above the middle one of these is the eternal teamster. He steers the horses, and because the wagon always goes in a circle, they are not in a straight line, but in a crooked one, for they are always making a turn. Before midnight, it is said, he drives outward, and the wagon-tongue bends upward; after midnight he drives homeward, and it bends downward. Notes: Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 199-200. The constellation described in this legend is, of course, the Big Dipper or Ursa Major (the Great Bear). According the Jacob Grimm ( Deutsche Mythologie ), Ursa Major was also called "Odin's Wagon" in ancient northern Europe. The above legend reinforces this view, for Odin was associated with ravens. Revised February 10, 1997. Superstitions from Europe Superstitions from Europe translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2011 Contents Animism Cures, Charms, and Curses Holidays and Holy Days Witchcraft Male and Female Whores Courtship and Marriage Husband and Wife Pregnancy, Childbirth, and Postnatal Care Child Care Work Child Labor Aging and Death Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Animism Germany Whoever harms or kills a cat shall meet with great misfortune. (68) It is not good to kill spiders. (76) If a stork builds its nest on your roof or chimney, you will live long and be wealthy. (108) Return to the table of contents . Cures, Charms, and Curses Germany Should it rain in the morning, then the afternoon will have better weather if old women clear their throats. (826) Rainwater found on tombstones will remove freckles. (1025) Hairs that have been combed out must be burned, for if a bird carries them to its nest, one will get headaches; if a starling carries them to its nest, one will go blind with cataracts. (1027) If it rains in sunshine, then poison will fall from the sky. (1030) Return to the table of contents . Holidays and Holy Days Germany If a girl does not finish her spinning on Saturday, then the leftover flax or tow will not become good yarn and will never bleach. (130) Clothing sewn with thread spun on Christmas Eve repels insects and vermin. (333) A shirt, sewn with thread that was spun during the twelve days of Christmas, is good for many things. (419) Those who spin on Saturday night, will not rest in their graves. (680) If one leaves Saturday's yarn Saturday on the the spinning wheel all day on Sunday then it will turn into a hopeless snarl. (891) No wood may be chopped during the "evil crescent" (the increasing moon). Firewood felled during the new moon goes out quickly. Wood cut during a decreasing moon burns better. (973) Should a girl not spin her distaff clean by Sunday, then that thread can never be bleached white. (1005) If you bathe in cold water on the first day of Easter, you will have good health for the rest of the year. (1014) Return to the table of contents . Witchcraft Germany Do not answer a witch's question, or else she can take something from you. (59) Old women often cut out a foot-long piece of sod that their enemy has just walked over, and hang it in the chimney. Then their enemy will waste away. (524) He who carries the tooth of a harrow found on the street will always recognize a witch. (539. Compare 636) Whoever carries a harrow tooth found on a Sunday will see witches in the church with pails on their heads, but must leave the church before the 5 o'clock bells ring, or they will tear him apart. (636) Return to the table of contents . Male and Female Germany It is not good if one goes out in the morning and encounters an old woman. (58. Compare 380) Hens that crow like roosters are a sign of misfortune. (83) If, while riding a horse overland, a man should come upon a woman spinning, then that is a very bad sign; he should turn around and take another way. (135) When maids burn tinder, they must use pieces from men's shirts; the tinder will not catch fire if women's clothes are used. (152) If you walk under a chicken roost, and a hen lets loose on you, it will bring you bad luck, if a rooster, good luck. (230) He who walks between two old women early in the morning shall have only bad luck the rest of the day. (380. Compare 58) To meet old women first thing in the morning means bad luck; young people, good luck. (791) Many men would rather let themselves be beaten to death, than to walk between two old women. (938) If an old woman greets you early in the morning, you must answer back, "The same to you!" (976) It is unlucky to meet an old woman while going to an important event, but lucky to meet a young girl. (1015) Return to the table of contents . Whores Germany If a man comes across a virgin or a priest early in the morning, it means bad luck; a whore, good luck. (177) Whores' children are happier than those of married people. (221) He, whose first godchild belongs to a whore, shall marry well. (304) Return to the table of contents . Courtship and Marriage Germany Unmarried women who desire husbands should, on the night before Saint Andrew's day, naked, call on this saint, and their loved ones will appear to them in their sleep. (100) If a girl wishes to know what kind of hair her loved one has, on Christmas Eve she should reach backwards out the door, and she shall hold the hair in her hand. (102) To learn if she shall marry within the next year, a virgin should knock on the chicken coop on Christmas Eve or at midnight. If a rooster cackles she will, if a hen cackles she won't. (105. Compare 230) To discover if her lover will be upright or crooked, a girl must stand against a cord or a stack of wood on Christmas Eve and pull a log out backwards; her lover will be like the log. (109) Christmas Eve between 11 and 12 o'clock all single girls wake up. To learn whether or not they will marry in the next year, they take off all their clothes, stick their heads into the kitchen kettle and watch the bubbling water. (506) If the groom buckles the bride's left shoe on their wedding day, she will take control of the marriage. (715) Girls should pay attention to where the dogs bark on Saint Andrew's Eve. Her groom will come from this area. (964) When the bride takes her clothes off, she must give one of her stockings to a bridesmaid, who will then throw it onto the gathered wedding guests. On whomever the stocking lands, he or she shall be the next to marry. (1106) At the end of the wedding celebration, the bride and groom are to sit down on the marriage bed, fully dressed, except for their shoes and stockings. One of the bridesmaids takes off the groom's stocking, sits down on the floor with her back against the bed and throws it with her left hand over her right shoulder, aiming for the face of the groom. All the bridesmaids then repeat this, and the ones who succeed will soon be married. The the bride's stocking is then removed by the young men and thrown in the same fashion, thereby determining which of them will be next. (1107) England If a young woman goes into the barn at midnight on Hallowe'en and turns the corn riddles (sieves) round, three times, she will see her future husband when she comes out. ( M'Gonigle ) On the eve of St. Valentine's Day it is an old custom to pin bay leaves to your pillow, one at each corner and one in the middle. You will then dream of your future lover, or the man you are to marry. ( Rudkin ) The bride cake is composed of many rich and aromatic ingredients, and crowned with an icing made of white sugar and bitter almonds, emblematical of the fluctuations of pleasure and pain which are incidental to the marriage state. On this day the important ceremony of passing small portions of bride cake through the wedding ring is ritually performed. The just execution of this idolatrous ceremony is attended to with the most scrupulous exactness. The bride holds the ring between the forefinger and thumb of her right hand, through which the groom passes each portion of the cake nine times, previously cut by other individuals of the party into disposable pieces for the purpose. These he delivers in succession to the bridesmaids, who seal them up carefully, each in an envelope of fair writing-paper. As amulets of inestimable value, they are distributed amongst the friends of the bride, who seldom neglect to make a trial of their virtues. Various are the methods of augury to which they are applied, one only of which shall be mentioned here. If the fair idolatress deposit one of these amulets in the foot of her left stocking, when she goes to bed, and place lit under her pillow, she will dream of the person who is destined by fate to be her partner for life. ( Gutch and Peacock ) If on midsummer-eve a young woman takes off the shift which she was been wearing, and, having washed it, turns its wrong side out, and hangs it in silence over the back of a chair, near the fire, she will see, about midnight, her future husband, who deliberately turns the garment. If a young lady will, on midsummer-eve, walk backwards into the garden and gather a rose, she has the means of knowing who is to be her husband. The rose must be cautiously sewn up in a paper bag, and put aside in a dark drawer, there to remain until Christmas-day. On the morning of the Nativity the bag must be carefully opened in silence, and the rose placed by the lady in her bosom. Thus she must wear it to church. Some young man will either ask for the rose, or take it from her without asking. That young man is destined to become eventually the lady's husband. At eve last midsummer no sleep I sought, But to the field a bag of hemp-seed brought; I scatter'd round the seed on every side, And three times in a trembling accent cried, -- "This hemp-seed with my virgin hands I sow, Who shall my true love be, the crop shall mow." I straight look'd back, and, if my eyes speak truth, With his keen scythe behind me came the youth. ( Gay's Pastorals ) The practice of sowing hemp-seed on midsummer-eve is not especially a Cornish superstition, yet it was at one time a favorite practice with young women to try the experiment. Many a strange story have I been told as to the result of the sowing, and many a trick could I tell of, which has been played off by young men who had become acquainted with the secret intention of some maidens. I believe there is but little difference in the rude rhyme used on the occasion, -- Hemp-seed I sow, Hemp-seed I hoe, (the action of sowing the seed and of hoeing it in, must be deliberately gone through); -- And he Who will my true love be Come after me and mow. A phantom of the true lover will now appear, and of course the maid or maidens retire in wild affright. If a young unmarried woman stands at midnight on midsummer-eve in the porch of the parish church, she will see, passing by in procession, every one who will die in the parish during the year. This is so serious an affair that it is not, I believe, often tried. I have, however, heard of young women who have made the experiment. But every one of the stories relates that, coming last in the procession, they have seen shadows of themselves; that from that day forward they have pined, and ere midsummer has again come round, that they have been laid to rest in the village graveyard. ( Hunt ) Return to the table of contents . Husband and Wife Germany If a stranger looks into the parlor on a Monday morning, he will cause the husband to beat his wife. (79) If a woman or a girl loses her garter on the street, then her husband or suitor has been unfaithful. (124) When a woman's neck or throat itches, then she will soon go to a baptism; if her head itches it means she will be beaten. (141) If a dog runs between a woman's legs, her husband will beat her. (206) For as long as the food continues to boil or simmer on the table, the cook will be beaten by her husband. (323) Return to the table of contents . Pregnancy, Childbirth, and Postnatal Care Germany If a woman walks over a garden bed or a field within six weeks of having given birth, then nothing will grow on it in the next few years, or everything will perish. (35) A pregnant woman should never crawl under a coach pole, otherwise she will go over her (expected) time. (179) If a pregnant woman walks over a grave, her child will die. (293) If pregnant women go to the place where cloth is being bleached, they will have pale children. (455) If a woman sticks pins or needles into curtains during the first six weeks after childbirth, her child will have bad teeth. (458) If a pregnant woman ties a rope instead of a belt around herself, her child will be hanged. (459) If a pregnant woman walks behind or crosses the path of a poor sinner who is to be put to death, her child will later die the same death. (465) Women may never be left alone during the first six weeks following childbirth, for the devil then has more power over them. (509) During the first six weeks following childbirth, mothers may not go to sleep until someone has come to watch the child. If mothers are overcome by sleep, changelings are often laid in the cradle. To prevent this one should lay a pair of men's pants over the cradle. (510) Neither fire, salt nor bread may be given away from the house of a woman during the first six weeks following childbirth. (538) A pregnant woman after doing the wash should immediately turn over the tub she used, and she will have an easy delivery. (561) The first medicine which a woman receives following childbirth should be taken from her husband's spoon; taken thus it will be more effective. (672) A woman in labor should put on her husband's slippers. (673) One may not pierce the bread of a pregnant woman with a knife or fork, or else the child's eyes will be poked out. (702) If he ties her garters, she will give birth easily. (716) A woman recovering from childbirth may not look out of the window for six weeks, or else every wagon that passes will take a bit of luck with it. (782) If a woman walks without shoes during the six weeks following childbirth, then her child will take a dangerous fall when it is learning to walk. (797) A woman may not enter a stranger's house for six weeks following the birth of her child. If she does so, she should first buy something in another village, or she will bring misfortune into the house. (844) A woman may not draw water from any well for six weeks following the birth of her child, or the well will dry up for seven years. (845) Return to the table of contents . Child Care Germany Anyone who carries a basket into the room of a woman recovering from childbirth must break a splinter from it, and place it in the cradle, otherwise he will carry away the mother's or child's peace and quiet. (1) A newborn child should not be first laid to the left side, or it will grow up to be clumsy. (137) A small child will not grow properly if you call it a little worm or a dummy. (289) It is not good to hit an animal with the same whip that one used to discipline a child. (377) When you see a child's first tooth, immediately slap his face, and he will teethe easier. (751) If a woman nurses her baby while sitting on the boundary stone at a fork in the road, it will never get toothaches. (1008) Return to the table of contents . Work Germany Men should not stay in the house when women are filling beds with feathers, otherwise the feathers will poke through the ticking. (17) It is not good to sew or patch something while still wearing it. (42) Those who work in the woods will never be rich. (46) If you get up from a spinning wheel without loosening the string, then an elf will come and spin on it. You cannot see it, but you can hear the spool turning by itself. (993) If you go to bed without clearing the table, the youngest in the house cannot sleep. (1004) Return to the table of contents . Child Labor Germany A shirt woven from thread spun by a girl under seven years of age will bring its wearer good luck. (115) A shirt, spun by a girl between five and seven years of age, protects against magic. (656) Whoever wears a shirt spun by a five year old girl, and appears before court, will receive justice in all proceedings. (708) Return to the table of contents . Aging and Death Germany If a deathly ill person cannot die, then one should move the table out of its place, or turn over a shingle on the roof. (439) If a sick man wishes to die, then one should open all the windows, fill any object in the house which is empty and turn it over, so that the soul is free to leave and cannot stay anywhere. One should also take the vinegar away, so that it does not sit around; hang the bird cage somewhere else, tie the cattle up differently, and move the beehives. (664) If a deceased man's clothes are not soon washed, he cannot rest. (681) If someone has trouble dying, then one may lift up just three tiles on the roof. (721) The moment that someone dies, the crops in the storehouse should be shoveled and the wine in the cellar shaken, otherwise the grain, when planted, will not grow, and the wine will go sour. (898) If one has difficulty dying, then he should be lain in the corridor, and he shall have an easy death. (1053) England Excessive Grief for the Dead. An old woman still living (1854) in Piersebridge, who mourned with inordinate grief for a length of time the loss of a favorite daughter, asserts that she was visited by the spirit of her departed child, and earnestly exhorted not to disturb her peaceful repose by unnecessary lamentations and repinings at the will of God; and from that time she never grieved more. Events of this kind were common a century ago. The vulgar superstition which is common to all people of a Germanic origin, of the corpse of a murdered person bleeding on being touched by the murderer is still maintained. Touching the Dead. Doubtless this custom is of corresponding quality with one previously noted on touching the body of a murdered person, and is equally to prove (though without the resting suspicion) that you are entirely guiltless of the death of the deceased, not in act alone, but also in prayer. ( Denham ) The wounds of a murdered person will bleed afresh, on the body being touched, ever so lightly, in any part, by the murderer. ( Grose ) Lady Anne, speaking to Richard, Duke of Gloucester, who has murdered her husband King Henry VI (William Shakespeare, The Tragedy of King Richard III , act 1, scene 2): O, gentlemen, see, see! dead Henry's wounds Open their congeal'd mouths and bleed afresh. Blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity; For 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood From cold and empty veins, where no blood swells; Thy deed, inhuman and unnatural, Provokes this deluge most unnatural. Return to the table of contents . Sources: All German superstitions were taken from Jacob Grimm , Deutsche Mythologie, vol. 3 (1835). The numbers in parentheses correspond to Grimm's original paragraph numbers. Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. K. M'Gonigle, compiler, "Scraps of English Folklore," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review, v. 35 (1924), p. 254. Ethel H. Rudkin, "Lincolnshire Folklore," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review, v. 44 (1933), p. 280. Eliza Gutch and Mabel Peacock, County Folk-Lore, vol. 5: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning Lincolnshire (London: Folk-Fore Society, 1908), p. 231. The Denham Tracts. A collection of folklore by Michael Aislabie Denham, and reprinted from the original tracts and pamphlets printed by Mr. Denham between 1846 and 1859 (London: Folklore Society, 1892, 1895), vol. 2, pp. 49, 58-60. Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall (London: John Camden Hotten, 1871), pp. 384-385. Hunt's source: John Gay (1685-1732), The Shepherd's Week, in Six Pastorals, first published in London, 1714. Francis Grose, A Provincial Glossary: With a Collection of Local Proverbs, and Popular Superstitions (London: S. Hooper, 1787), p. 59 . Return to: The table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised July 15, 2011. Swan Maidens Swan Maidens Folktales of Type 400 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2008 The myth of the Swan Maiden is one of the most widely distributed and at the same time one of the most beautiful stories ever evolved from the mind of man. -- Edwin Sidney Hartland Contents The Swan Maidens (reconstructed from various European sources by Joseph Jacobs). The Swan Maiden (Sweden, Herman Hofberg). The Three Swans (Germany, Ernst Meier). The Story of the Swan Maiden and the King (Romania, M. Gaster). The Golden Apple Tree and the Nine Peahens (Serbia, Csedomille Mijatovies). The Feathery Robe (Japan, David Brauns). Prince Bairâm and the Fairy Bride (Pakistan, Charles Swynnerton). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Swan Maidens Joseph Jacobs There was once a hunter who used often to spend the whole night stalking the deer or setting traps for game. Now it happened one night that he was watching in a clump of bushes near the lake for some wild ducks that he wished to trap. Suddenly he heard, high up in the air, a whirring of wings and thought the ducks were coming; and he strung his bow and got ready his arrows. But instead of ducks there appeared seven maidens all clad in robes made of feathers, and they alighted on the banks of the lake, and taking off their robes plunged into the waters and bathed and sported in the lake. They were all beautiful, but of them all the youngest and smallest pleased most the hunter's eye, and he crept forward from the bushes and seized her dress of plumage and took it back with him into the bushes. After the swan maidens had bathed and sported to their heart's delight, they came back to the bank wishing to put on their feather robes again; and the six eldest found theirs, but the youngest could not find hers. They searched and they searched until at last the dawn began to appear, and the six sisters called out to her, "We must away; 'tis the dawn; you meet your fate whatever it be." And with that they donned their robes and flew away, and away, and away. When the hunter saw them fly away he came forward with the feather robe in his hand; and the swan maiden begged and begged that he would give her back her robe. He gave her his cloak but would not give her her robe, feeling that she would fly away. And he made her promise to marry him, and took her home, and hid her feather robe where she could not find it. So they were married and lived happily together and had two fine children, a boy and a girl, who grew up strong and beautiful; and their mother loved them with all her heart. One day her little daughter was playing at hide-and-seek with her brother, and she went behind the wainscoting to hide herself, and found there a robe all made of feathers, and took it to her mother. As soon as she saw it she put it on and said to her daughter, "Tell father that if he wishes to see me again he must find me in the Land East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon;" and with that she flew away. When the hunter came home next morning his little daughter told him what had happened and what her mother said. So he set out to find his wife in the Land East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon. And he wandered for many days until he came across an old man who had fallen on the ground, and he lifted him up and helped him to a seat and tended him until he felt better. Then the old man asked him what he was doing and where he was going. And he told him all about the swan maidens and his wife, and he asked the old man if he had heard of the Land East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon. And the old man said, "No, but I can ask." Then he uttered a shrill whistle and soon all the plain in front of them was filled with all of the beasts of the world, for the old man was no less than the King of the Beasts. And he called out to them, "Who is there here that knows where the Land is East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon?" But none of the beasts knew. Then the old man said to the hunter, "You must go seek my brother who is the King of the Birds," and told him how to find his brother. And after a time he found the King of the Birds, and told him what he wanted. So the King of the Birds whistled loud and shrill, and soon the sky was darkened with all the birds of the air, who came around him. Then he asked, "Which of you knows where is the Land East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon?" And none answered, and the King of the Birds said, "Then you must consult my brother the King of the Fishes," and he told him how to find him. And the hunter went on, and he went on, and he went on, until he came to the King of the Fishes, and he told him what he wanted. And the King of the Fishes went to the shore of the sea and summoned all the fishes of the sea. And when they came around him he called out, "Which of you knows where is the Land East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon?" And none of them answered, until at last a dolphin that had come late called out, "I have heard that at the top of the Crystal Mountain lies the Land East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon; but how to get there I know not save that it is near the Wild Forest." So the hunter thanked the King of the Fishes and went to the Wild Forest. And as he got near there he found two men quarrelling, and as he came near they came towards him and asked him to settle their dispute. "Now what is it?" said the hunter. "Our father has just died and he has left but two things, this cap which, whenever you wear it, nobody can see you, and these shoes, which will carry you through the air to whatever place you will. Now I being the elder claim the right of choice, which of these two I shall have; and he declares that, as the younger, he has the right to the shoes. Which do you think is right?" So the hunter thought and thought, and at last he said, "It is difficult to decide, but the best thing I can think of is for you to race from here to that tree yonder, and whoever gets back to me first I will hand him either the shoes or the cap, whichever he wishes." So he took the shoes in one hand and the cap in the other, and waited until they had started off running towards the tree. And as soon as they had started running towards the tree he put on the shoes of swiftness and placed the invisible cap on his head and wished himself in the Land East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon. And he flew, and he flew, and he flew, over seven Bends, and seven Glens, and seven Mountain Moors, until at last he came to the Crystal Mountain. And on the top of that, as the dolphin had said, there was the Land East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon. Now when he got there he took off his invisible cap and shoes of swiftness and asked who ruled over the Land; and he was told that there was a king who had seven daughters who dressed in swans' feathers and flew wherever they wished. Then the hunter knew that he had come to the Land of his wife. And he went boldly to the king and said, "Hail, oh king, I have come to seek my wife." And the king said, "Who is she?" And the hunter said, "Your youngest daughter." Then he told him how he had won her. Then the king said, "If you can tell her from her sisters then I know that what you say is true." And he summoned his seven daughters to him, and there they all were, dressed in their robes of feathers and looking each like all the rest. So the hunter said, "If I may take each of them by the hand I will surely know my wife"; for when she had dwelt with him she had sewn the little shifts and dresses of her children, and the forefinger of her right hand had the marks of the needle. And when he had taken the hand of each of the swan maidens he soon found which was his wife and claimed her for his own. Then the king gave them great gifts and sent them by a sure way down the Crystal Mountain. And after a while they reached home, and lived happily together ever afterwards. Source: Joseph Jacobs, Europa's Fairy Book [also published under the title European Folk and Fairy Tales ] (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), no. 12, pp. 98-105 . Return to the table of contents . The Swan Maiden Sweden A young peasant in the parish of Mellby [in Blekinge], who often amused himself with hunting, saw one day three swans flying toward him, which settled down upon the strand of a sound nearby. Approaching the place, he was astonished at seeing the three swans divest themselves of their feathery attire, which they threw into the grass, and three maidens of dazzling beauty step forth and spring into the water. After sporting in the waves awhile they returned to the land, where they resumed their former garb and shape and flew away in the same direction from which they came. One of them, the youngest and fairest, had, in the meantime, so smitten the young hunter that neither night nor day could he tear his thoughts from the bright image. His mother, noticing that something was wrong with her son, and that the chase, which had formerly been his favorite pleasure, had lost its attractions, asked him finally the cause of his melancholy, whereupon he related to her what he had seen, and declared that there was no longer any happiness in this life for him if he could not possess the fair swan maiden. "Nothing is easier," said the mother. "Go at sunset next Thursday evening to the place where you last saw her. When the three swans come, give attention to where your chosen one lays her feathery garb, take it, and hasten away." The young man listened to his mother's instructions, and, betaking himself, the following Thursday evening, to a convenient hiding place near the sound, he waited, with impatience, the coming of the swans. The sun was just sinking behind the trees when the young man's ears were greeted by a whizzing in the air, and the three swans settled down upon the beach, as on their former visit. As soon as they had laid off their swan attire they were again transformed into the most beautiful maidens, and, springing out upon the white sand, they were soon enjoying themselves in the water. From his hiding place the young hunter had taken careful note of where his enchantress had laid her swan feathers. Stealing softly forth, he took them and returned to his place of concealment in the surrounding foliage. Soon thereafter two of the swans were heard to fly away, but the third, in search of her clothes, discovered the young man, before whom, believing him responsible for their disappearance, she fell upon her knees and prayed that her swan attire might be returned to her. The hunter was, however, unwilling to yield the beautiful prize, and, casting a cloak around her shoulders, carried her home. Preparations were soon made for a magnificent wedding, which took place in due form, and the young couple dwelt lovingly and contentedly together. One Thursday evening, seven years later, the hunter related to her how he had sought and won his wife. He brought forth and showed her, also, the white swan feathers of her former days. No sooner were they placed in her hands than she was transformed once more into a swan, and instantly took flight through the open window. In breathless astonishment, the man stared wildly after his rapidly vanishing wife, and before a year and a day had passed, he was laid, with his longings and sorrows, in his allotted place in the village churchyard. Source: Herman Hofberg, Swedish Fairy Tales , translated by W. H. Myers (Chicago, Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 35-38 . This tale is from the province of Blekinge. Return to the table of contents . The Three Swans Germany Once upon a time there was a hunter. He was very despondent because his wife had died. He often wandered about in the forest entirely alone, thinking about whether or not he would ever find a second wife whom he could love as much as he had the first one. One day he wandered ever deeper into the woods, with his gun at his side and not knowing where he wanted to go. At last he came to a straw hut. Stepping inside, he found there an old man with a crucifix lying before him. He greeted the man, who received him in a friendly manner and asked him what had led him to this forest hut. The hunter told him of his sorrows: that he had lost his wife, that he now lived by himself, and that he did not know if he would ever be happy again. The old man said to him, "There is help. Three swans will come here soon. Look at them carefully! After they have flown to the pond, you must secretly go there without letting them see you. Take one of their dresses and immediately return here with it." As soon as the old man had spoken, three snow-white swans flew toward the hut. After the hunter saw them, they flew further to a nearby pond. The hunter crept up and secretly took a dress that one of the swans had taken off and laid on the bank. Then he returned with it to the old man's hut. When the swans wanted to get dressed again, one of them had only a shift. As a beautiful maiden she came to the hunter, who had her dress, and moved into his house, and became his dear wife. Before the hunter left the old man, the latter said to him, "You must carefully hide the swan-dress from your wife so that she cannot find it again." The hunter did this, and he lived with his second wife for fifteen years. She bore him several children, and the married couple were very happy together. Then it happened that one morning the man left, saying to his wife, "I shall be back at noon to eat." After he had left, the woman watched him until he disappeared into the woods. Then she went to the attic, which the man had not locked this time, opened the chest containing the swan-dress, put it on, and as a swan flew far, far away. When the man came home to eat, his wife had disappeared. Not even the children could say where she was, for they had not seen her. Then the hunter returned to the old man in the woods and told him of his misfortune: that once again he had lost his wife, and that he did not know where she had gone. The old man said, "You did not put the dress away carefully. She found it and has flown away with it." "Oh," said the hunter sadly, "is it not possible for me to find her again?" "It is possible," said the old man, "but now it is dangerous, and it could cost you your life." The hunter wanted to do everything for his wife, and so the old man said to him, "First you must attempt to get into the castle where your wife now lives. That will best happen as follows: She has donkeys that carry flour from a miller every day. Go to the miller and ask him to hide you in a flour sack. The rest you will learn from your wife." With that the hunter found his way to the miller and talked him into hiding him in a sack. A donkey carried him a great distance to a splendid castle. After arriving there he immediately found his wife, and no one could have been happier than was she, and she thanked her husband from the bottom of her heart for coming to redeem her. But then she said to him, "Before we can be happy and live together, you must fight with three dragons who are here. They will come to you on three days and in different forms. They will torment and plague you for one hour each day, and if you withstand this without uttering a sound then they cannot further harm you, and I will be free. But if you speak a single word, they will kill you." Then the hunter promised that he would surely redeem her. On the first day three great snakes came and wrapped themselves around the hunter's feet until he could not move, and they tormented him for an entire hour. Because he endured this in silence they went away without harming him. The next day the dragons appeared as turtles and shot balls of fire at the hunter, until he could no longer withstand it, but he withstood it nonetheless, and he uttered not a sound, so after one hour they left him. On the third day they came again as gigantic snakes and took the hunter whole into their jaws. He was deathly afraid and thought that he would have to cry out, and that he would no longer be able to withstand it, but out of love for his wife, he withstood it nonetheless. When the three hours had passed, there suddenly stood before him -- instead of the three snakes -- three noblewomen. These were the three enchanted swans, whom he had now redeemed. And they remained with him and with his wife in the castle, and they all lived together in peace and happiness, and if they have not died, then they must be still alive. Source: Ernst Meier, Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 7, pp. 39-42 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. ©1998. Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Swan Maiden and the King Romania Once upon a time a king went out hunting, and after he had been hunting in the forest for a long time without finding anything, he found himself suddenly in an open plain, in which there was a huge lake, and in the midst of the lake he saw there a bird swimming about, the like of which he had never seen before. It was a swan. Drawing his bow, he wanted to shoot it. To his surprise it spoke to him in a human voice, and said, "Do not kill me." So he tried his best to catch it, and succeeded. Pleased with the capture of the bird, he carried it home alive, and gave it to the cook to kill it to make a meal of it for him. The cook was a Gypsy. She whetted her knife and went to the bird to cut its throat, when, to her astonishment, the bird turned three somersaults, and there stood before her a most beautiful maiden, more beautiful than she had ever seen before. So she ran to the king and told him what had happened. The king, who first thought that the cook was trying to play some trickery with him, did not listen to her, but when she persisted in her tale, the king, driven by curiosity, went into the kitchen, and there he saw a girl more beautiful than any that he had ever yet set his eyes upon. He asked her who she was, and she said she was the swan who was swimming on the lake, that she had willfully gone away from her mother, who lived in the land of fairies, and that she had left two sisters behind. So the king took her into the palace and married her. The Gypsy, who was a pretty wench, had thought that the king would marry her, and when she saw what had happened, she was very angry. But she managed to conceal her anger, and tried to be kind to the new queen, biding her time all the while. The king and queen lived on for a while in complete happiness, and after a time a child was born unto her. It so happened that the king had to go on a long journey, leaving the wife and child in the care of the Gypsy. One day the Gypsy came to the queen, and said to her, "Why do you always sit in the palace? Come, let us walk a little in the garden, to hear the birds singing, and to see the beautiful flowers." The queen, who had no suspicion, took the advice of the Gypsy, and went with her for a walk into the garden. In the middle of the garden there was a deep well, and the Gypsy said artfully to the young queen, "Just bend over the well, and look into the water below, and see whether your face has remained so beautiful as it was on the first day when you turned into a maiden from being a swan." The queen bent over the well to look down into the depths, and that was what the Gypsy was waiting for, for no sooner did the queen bend over the well, than, getting hold of her by her legs, she threw her down head foremost into the well and drowned her. When the king came home and did not find the queen, he asked what had happened, and where she was. The Gypsy, who had meanwhile taken charge of the child, and looked after it very carefully, said to the king that the young queen, pining for her old home, had turned again into a swan and flown away. The king was deeply grieved when he heard this, but believing what the Gypsy had told him, he thought that nothing could be done, and resigned himself to the loss of his wife. They Gypsy woman looked after the child with great care, hoping thereby that she might win the king's love, and that he would marry her. A month, a year passed, and nothing was heard of the wife. And the king, seeing the apparent affection of the Gypsy for the child, decided at last to marry her, and fixed the day of the wedding. Out of the fountain into which the queen had been thrown, there grew a willow tree with three branches, one stem in the middle and two branching out right and left. Not far from the garden there lived a man who had a large flock of sheep. One day he sent his boy to lead the sheep to the field. On his way the boy passed the king's garden with the well in the middle of it. As the boy had left his flute at home, when he saw the willow he thought he would cut one of the branches and make a flute. Going into the garden, he cut the middle stem, and made a flute of it. When he put it to his lips, the flute by itself began to play as follows, "O boy, do not blow too hard, for my heart is aching for my little babe which I left behind in the cradle, and to suckle at the black breast of a Gypsy." When the boy heard what the flute was playing, not understanding what it meant, he was greatly astonished, and ran home to tell his father what had happened with the flute. The father, angry that he had left the sheep alone, scolded him, and took away the flute. Then he tried to see whether the boy had told the truth. As soon as he put it to his mouth the flute started playing the same tune as when the boy had tried to play it. The father said nothing, and wondering at the meaning of the words he hid the flute away in a cupboard. When the king's wedding day drew near, all the musicians of the kingdom were invited to come and play at the banquet. Some of them passed the old man's house, and hearing from them that they were going to play at the king's banquet, he remembered the marvelous flute, and asked whether he could not go also, as he could play the flute so wonderfully well. His son -- the young boy -- had meanwhile gone into the garden in the hope of getting another flute, as the willow had three branches. So he cut one of the branches and made a flute of it. Now this flute did not play at all. When the old man came to the palace, there was much rejoicing and singing. At last his turn came to play. As soon as he put the flute to his lips, the flute sang, "O man, do not blow so hard, for my heart aches for my little babe left in the cradle to be suckled by a black Gypsy." The Gypsy, who was the king's bride and sat at the head of the table, at once understood the saying of the flute, although she did not know what the flute had to do with the queen whom she had killed. The king, who marveled greatly at the flute and at the tune which it was singing, took a gold piece and gave it to the man for the flute, and when he started blowing it, the flute began to sing, "O my dear husband, do not blow so hard, for my heart aches for our little babe whom I left in the cradle to be sucked by the black Gypsy. Quickly, quickly, do away with this cruel Gypsy, as otherwise you will lose your wife." The guests who were present marveled at the song, and no one understood its meaning. The Gypsy, however, who understood full well what it meant, turning to the king, said, "Illustrious king, do not blow this flute and make yourself ridiculous before your guests. Throw it into the fire." But the king, who felt offended by the words of the Gypsy, made her take up the flute and blow. With great difficulty she submitted to the order of the king, and she was quite justified in refusing to play it, for no sooner had she put the flute to her lips when it sang, "You enemy of mine, do not blow hard, for my heart aches for my little babe left in the cradle to be suckled by you, you evil-minded Gypsy. You have thrown me into the well, and there put an end to my life, but God had pity on me, and he has preserved me to be again the true wife of this illustrious king." Furious at these words, the Gypsy threw the flute away with so much force that she thought it would break into thousands of splinters. But it was not to be as she thought, for by this very throw the flute was changed into a beautiful woman, more beautiful, indeed, than any had ever seen before. She was the very queen whom the Gypsy had thrown into the well. When the king saw her, he embraced her and kissed her, and asked her where she had been such a long time. She told him that she had slept at the bottom of the well, into which she had been thrown by the Gypsy, who had hoped to become the queen, and this would have come to pass had it not been for the boy cutting a flute out of the stem of the willow tree. "And now, punish the Gypsy as she deserves, otherwise your wife must leave you." When the king heard these words, he called the boy and asked him whether he had cut himself a flute from the stem of the willow tree which had grown out of the well in the garden. "It is so, O illustrious king," said the boy, "and may I be forgiven for the audacity of going into the king's garden. I went and cut for myself a flute from the stem of the willow tree, and when I began to blow it, it played, 'Do not blow so hard, O boy, for my heart is aching within me,' etc." Then he told him he had gone back to his father, who instead of praising him for the marvelous flute, gave him a good shaking. He had then gone a second time into the garden, and had cut off one of the branches to make a flute, but this did not play like the first one. The king gave the boy a very rich gift, and he ordered the Gypsy to be killed. Some time afterwards, the queen came to the king and asked leave to go to her mother to tell her all that had happened to her, and to say good-bye for ever now, as she henceforth would live among human beings. The king reluctantly gave way. She then made three somersaults, and again became a swan, as she had been when the king found her for the first time on the waters of the lake. Spreading her wings she flew far away until she reached the house of her mother, who was quite alone. Her two sisters were not there. They had left her some time ago and no one knew whither they had gone. The young queen did not go into the house. She was probably afraid lest her mother would not let her go back again, so she settled on the roof, and there she sang, "Remain in health, good mother mine, as the joy is no longer granted you to have me with you in your house, for you will only see me again when I lose my kingdom, dear mother mine, not before, and not till then." And without waiting for the answer of her mother she returned back again to her husband. Sitting on the window sill, she sang again, "Rise up, O husband, open the doors, wake up the servants and let them be a witness of my faithfulness to you, for since I have married you I have left my mother, and my sisters have gone away from me, and from a swan I have become a true wife to live in happiness with you. Henceforth I shall no longer be a swan, but you must take care of me that I do not go hence from you. I do not know whether my fate will be a better one by being a queen in this world. O sweet water, how I long to bathe in you! And my white feathers, they will belong to my sisters. Since I am to leave them forever, and my mother with them, O Lord, what have I done? Shall I be able to live upon the earth, and shall I keep the kingdom? Thou, O Lord, O merciful, hearken unto me and grant that this kingdom may not be in vain." And turning again head over heals, she became a woman as before, and entering the palace she lived there with her husband -- the king -- and if they have not died since, they are still alive. Source: M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 83, pp. 249-254. This remarkable story combines type 400 (The Swan Maiden) with type 780 (The Singing Bone). Link to additional type 780 tales: Singing Bones . Return to the table of contents . The Golden Apple Tree and the Nine Peahens Serbia Once upon a time there lived a king who had three sons. Now, before the king's palace grew a golden apple tree, which in one and the same night blossomed, bore fruit, and lost all its fruit, though no one could tell who took the apples. One day the king, speaking to his eldest son, said, "I should like to know who takes the fruit from our apple tree!" And the son said, "I will keep guard tonight, and will see who gathers the apples." So when the evening came he went and laid himself down, under the apple tree, upon the ground to watch. Just, however, as the apples ripened, he fell asleep, and when he awoke in the morning, there was not a single one left on the tree. Whereupon he went and told his father what had happened. Then the second son offered to keep watch by the tree, but he had no better success than his eldest brother. So the turn came to the king's youngest son to keep guard. He made his preparations, brought his bed under the tree, and immediately went to sleep. Before midnight he awoke and looked up at the tree, and saw how the apples ripened, and how the whole palace was lit up by their shining. At that minute nine peahens flew towards the tree, and eight of them settled on its branches, but the ninth alighted near him and turned instantly into a beautiful girl -- so beautiful, indeed, that the whole kingdom could not produce one who could in any way compare with her. She stayed, conversing kindly with him, till after midnight, then thanking him for the golden apples, she prepared to depart. But, as he begged she would leave him one, she gave him two, one for himself and one for the king his father. Then the girl turned again into a peahen, and flew away with the other eight. Next morning, the king's son took the two apples to his father, and the king was much pleased, and praised his son. When the evening came, the king's youngest son took his place again under the apple tree to keep guard over it. He again conversed as he had done the night before with the beautiful girl, and brought to his father, the next morning, two apples as before. But, after he had succeeded so well several nights, his two elder brothers grew envious because he had been able to do what they could not. At length they found an old woman, who promised to discover how the youngest brother had succeeded in saving the two apples. So, as the evening came, the old woman stole softly under the bed which stood under the apple tree, and hid herself. And after a while, came also the king's son, and laid himself down as usual to sleep. When it was near midnight the nine peahens flew up as before, and eight of them settled on the branches, and the ninth stood by his bed, and turned into a most beautiful girl. Then the old woman slowly took hold of one of the girl's curls, and cut it off, and the girl immediately rose up, changed again into a peahen and flew away, and the other peahens followed her, and so they all disappeared. Then the king's son jumped up, and cried out, "What is that?" and, looking under the bed, he saw the old woman, and drew her out. Next morning he order her to be tied to a horse's tail, and so torn to pieces. But the peahens never came back, so the king's son was very sad for a long time, and wept at his loss. At length he resolved to go and look after his peahen; resolving never to come back again unless he should find her. When he told the king his father of his intention, the king begged him not do go away, and told him that he would find him another beautiful girl, and that he might choose out of the whole kingdom. But all the king's persuasions were useless, so his son went into the world -- taking only one servant to serve him -- to search everywhere for his peahen. After many travels he came one day to a lake. Now by the lake stood a large and beautiful palace. In the palace lived an old woman as queen, and with the queen lived a girl, her daughter. He said to the old woman, "For heaven's sake, grandmother, do you know anything about nine golden peahens?" And the old woman answered, "Oh, my son, I know all about them. They come every midday to bathe in the lake. But what do you want with them? Let them be. Think nothing about them. Here is my daughter. Such a beautiful girl! And such an heiress! All my wealth will remain to you if you marry her." But he, burning with desire to see the peahens, would not listen to what the old woman spoke about her daughter. Next morning, when day dawned, the prince prepared to go down to the lake to wait for the peahens. Then the old queen bribed the servant and gave him a little pair of bellows, and said, "Do you see these bellows? When you come to the lake you must blow secretly with them behind his neck, and then he will fall asleep, and not be able to speak to the peahens." The mischievous servant did as the old woman told him. When he went with his master down to the lake, he took occasion to blow with the bellows behind his neck, and the poor prince fell asleep just as though he were dead. Shortly after, the nine peahens came flying, and eight of them alighted by the lake, but the ninth flew towards him as he sat on horseback, and caressed him, and tried to awaken him. "Awake my darling! Awake, my heart! Awake, my soul!" But for all that he knew nothing, just as if he were dead. After they had bathed, all the peahens flew away together, and after they were gone the prince woke up, and said to his servant, "What has happened? Did they not come?" The servant told him they had been there, and that eight of them had bathed, but the ninth had sat by him on his horse, and caressed and tried to awaken him. Then the king's son was so angry that he almost killed himself in his rage. Next morning he went down again to the shore to wait for the peahens, and rode about a long time till the servant again found an opportunity of blowing with the bellows behind his neck, so that he again fell asleep as though dead. Hardly had he fallen asleep before the nine peahens came flying, and eight of them alighted by the water, but the ninth settled down by the side of his horse and caressed him, and cried out to awaken him, "Arise, my darling! Arise, my heart! Arise my soul!" But it was of no use. The prince slept on as if he were dead. Then she said to the servant, "Tell your master, tomorrow he can see us here again, but nevermore." With these words the peahens flew away. Immediately after, the king's son woke up and asked his servant, "Have they not been here?" And the man answered, "Yes, they have been, and say that you can see them again tomorrow, at this place, but after that they will not return again." When the unhappy prince heard that, he knew not what to do with himself, and in his great trouble and misery tore the hair from his head. The third day he went down again to the shore, but, fearing to fall asleep, instead of riding slowly, galloped along the shore. His servant, however, found an opportunity of blowing with the bellows behind his neck, and again the prince fell asleep. A moment after came the nine peahens, and the eight alighted on the lake and the ninth by him on his horse, and sought to awaken him, caressing him. "Arise, my darling! Arise, my heart! Arise, my soul!" But it was of no use. He slept on as if dead. Then the peahen said to the servant, "When your master awakens tell him he ought to strike off the head of the nail from the lower part, and then he will find me." Thereupon all the peahens fled away. Immediately the king's son awoke and said to his servant, "Have they been here?" And the servant answered, "They have been, and the one which alighted on your horse, ordered me to tell you to strike off the head of the nail from the lower part, and then you will find her." When the prince heard that, he drew his sword and cut off his servant's head. After that he traveled alone about the world, and, after long traveling, came to a mountain and remained all night there with a hermit, whom he asked if he knew anything about nine golden peahens. The hermit said, "Eh! My son, you are lucky. God has led you in the right path. From this place it is only a half a day's walk. But you must go straight on, then you will come to a large gate, which you must pass through. And, after that, you must keep always to the right hand, and so you will come to the peahens' city, and there find their palace." So next morning the king's son arose, and prepared to go. He thanked the hermit, and went as he had told him. After a while he came to the great gate, and, having passed it, turned to the right, so that at midday he saw the city, and beholding how white it shone, rejoiced very much. When he came into the city he found the palace where lived the nine golden peahens. But at the gate he was stopped by the guard, who demanded who he was, and whence he came. After he had answered these questions, the guards went to announce him to the queen. When the queen heard who he was, she came running out to the gate and took him by the hand to lead him into the palace. She was a young and beautiful maiden, and so there was a great rejoicing when, after a few days, he married her and remained there with her. One day, some time after their marriage, the queen went out to walk, and the king's son remained in the palace. Before going out, however, the queen gave him the keys of twelve cellars, telling him, "You may go down into all the cellars except the twelfth -- that must on no account open, or it will cost you your head." She then went away. The king's son whilst remaining in the palace began to wonder what there could be in the twelfth cellar, and soon commenced opening one cellar after the other. When he came to the twelfth he would not at first open it, but again began to wonder very much why he was forbidden to go into it. "What can be in this cellar?" he exclaimed to himself. At last he opened it. In the middle of the cellar lay a big barrel with an open bung-hole, but bound fast round with three iron hoops. Out of the barrel came a voice, saying, "For God's sake, my brother, I am dying with thirst. Please give me a cup of water!" Then the king's son took a cup and filled it with water, and emptied it into the barrel. Immediately he had done so, one of the hoops burst asunder. Again came the voice from the barrel, "For God's sake, my brother, I am dying of thirst. Please give me a cup of water!" The king's son again filled the cup, and took it, and emptied it into the barrel, and instantly another hoop burst asunder. The third time the voice came out of the barrel, "For God's sake, my brother, I am dying of thirst. Please give me a cup of water!" The king's son again took the cup and filled it, and poured the water into the barrel, and the third hoop burst. Then the barrel fell to pieces, and a dragon flew out of the cellar, and caught the queen on the road and carried her away. Then the servant, who went out with the queen, came back quickly, and told the king's son what had happened, and the poor prince knew not what to do with himself, so desperate was he, and full of self reproaches. At length, however, he resolved to set out and travel through the world in search of her. After long journeying, one day he came to a lake, and near it, in a little hole, he saw a little fish jumping about. When the fish saw the king's son, she began to beg pitifully, "For God's sake, be my brother, and throw me into the water. Some day I may be of use to you, so take now a little scale from me, and when you need me, rub it gently." Then the king's son lifted the little fish from the hole and threw her into the water, after he had taken one small scale, which he wrapped up carefully in a handkerchief. Some time afterwards, as he traveled about the world, he came upon a fox, caught in an iron trap. When the fox saw the prince, he spoke, "In God's name, be a brother to me, and help me to get out of this trap. One day you will need me, so take just one hair from my tail, and when you want me, rub it gently." Then the king's son took a hair from the tail of the fox, and let him free. Again, as he crossed a mountain, he found a wolf fast in a trap; and when the wolf saw him, it spoke, "Be a brother to me. In God's name, set me free, and one day I will help you. Only take a hair from me, and when you need me, rub it gently." So he took a hair, and let the wolf free. After that, the king's son traveled about a very long time, till one day he met a man, to whom he said, "For God's sake, brother, have you ever heard anyone say where is the palace of the dragon king?" The man gave him very particular directions which way to take, and in what length of time he could get there. Then the king's son thanked him and continued his journey until he came to the city where the dragon lived. When there, he went into the palace and found therein his wife, and both of them were exceedingly pleased to meet each other, and began to take counsel how they could escape. They resolved to run away, and prepared hastily for the journey. When all was ready they mounted on horseback and galloped away. As soon as they were gone, the dragon came home, also on horseback, and, entering his palace, found that the queen had gone away. Then he said to his horse, "What shall we do now? Shall we eat and drink, or go at once after them?" The horse answered, "Let us eat and drink first. We shall anyway catch them. Do not be anxious." After the dragon had dined, he mounted his horse, and in a few moments came up with the runaways. Then he took the queen from the king's son and said to him, "Go now, in God's name! This time I forgive you, because you gave me water in the cellar. But if your life is dear to you, do not come back here any more!" The unhappy young prince went on his way a little, but could not long resist, so he came back next day to the dragon's palace, and found the queen sitting alone and weeping. Then they began again to consult how they could get away. And the prince said, "When the dragon comes, ask him where he got that horse, and then you will tell me so that I can look for such another one; perhaps in this way we can escape." He then went away, lest the dragon should come and find him with the queen. By and by the dragon came home, and the queen began to pet him, and speak lovingly to him about many things, till at last she said, "Ah! what a fine horse you have! Where did you get such a splendid horse?" And he answered, "Eh! Where I got it everyone cannot get one! In such and such a mountain lives an old woman who has twelve horses in her stable, and no one can say which is the finest, they are all so beautiful. But in one corner of the stable stands a horse which looks as if he were leprous, but, in truth, he is the very best horse in the whole world. He is the brother of my horse, and whoever gets him may ride to the sky. But whoever wishes to get a horse from that old woman, must serve her three days and three nights. She has a mare with a foal, and whoever during three nights guards and keeps for her this mare and this foal, has a right to claim the best horse from the old woman's stable. But whoever engages to keep watch over the mare and does not, must lose his head!" Next day, when the dragon went out, the king's son came, and the queen told him all she had learned from the dragon. Then the king's son went away to the mountain and found the old woman, and entered her house, greeting, "God help you too, my son! What do you wish?" "I should like to serve you," said the king's son. Then the old woman said, "Well, my son, if you keep my mare safe for three days and three nights, I will give you the best horse, and you can choose him yourself. But if you do not keep the mare safe, you shall lose your head." Then she led him into the courtyard, where all around stakes were ranged. Each of them had on it a man's head, except one stake, which had no head on it, and shouted incessantly, "Oh, grandmother, give me a head!" The old woman showed all this to the prince, and said, "Look here! All these were heads of those who tried to keep my mare, and they have lost their heads for their pains!" But the prince was not a bit afraid, so he stayed to serve the old woman. When the evening came he mounted the mare and rode her into the field, and the foal followed. He sat still on her back, having made up his mind not to dismount, that he might be sure of her. But before midnight he slumbered a little, and when he awoke he found himself sitting on a rail and holding the bridle in his hand. Then he was greatly alarmed, and went instantly to look about to find the mare, and whilst looking for her, he came to a piece of water. When he saw the water he remembered the little fish, and took the scale from the handkerchief and rubbed it a little. Then immediately the little fish appeared and said, "What is the matter, my half-brother?" And he replied, "The mare of the old woman ran away whilst under my charge, and now I do not know where she is!" And the fish answered, "Here she is, turned to a fish, and the foal to a smaller one. But strike once upon the water with the bridle and cry out, 'Hey! mare of the old woman!'" The prince did as he was told, and immediately the mare came, with the foal, out of the water to the shore. Then he put on her the bridle and mounted and rode away to the old woman's house, and the foal followed. When he got there the old woman gave him his breakfast. She, however, took the mare into the stable and beat her with a poker, saying, "Why did you not go down among the fishes, you cursed mare?" And the mare answered, "I have been down to the fishes, but the fish are his friends, and they told him about me." Then the old woman said, "Then go among the foxes!" When evening came the king's son mounted the mare and rode to the field, and the foal followed the mare. Again he sat on the mare's back until near midnight, when he fell asleep as before. When he awoke, he found himself riding on the rail and holding the bridle in his hand. So he was much frightened, and went to look after the mare. As he went, he remembered the words the old woman had said to the mare, and he took from the handkerchief the fox's hair and rubbed it a little between his fingers. All at once the fox stood before him, and asked, "What is the matter, half-brother?" And he said, "The old woman's mare has run away, and I do not know where she can be." Then the fox answered, "Here she is with us. She has turned into a fox, and the foal into a cub. But strike once with the bridle on the earth and cry out, 'Hey! you old woman's mare!'" So the king's son struck with the bridle on the earth and cried, "Hey! old woman's mare!" and the mare came and stood, with her foal, near him. He put on the bridle, and mounted and rode off home, and the foal followed the mare. When he arrived the old woman gave him his breakfast, but took the mare into the stable and beat her with the poker, crying, "To the foxes, cursed one! To the foxes!" And the mare answered, "I have been with the foxes, but they are his friends, and told him I was there!" Then the old woman cried, "If that is so, you must go among the wolves!" When it grew dark again, the king's son mounted the mare and rode out to the field, and the foal galloped by the side of the mare. Again he sat still on the mare's back till about midnight, when he grew very sleepy and fell into a slumber, as on the former evenings, and when he awoke he found himself riding on the rail, holding the bridle in his hand, just as before. Then, as before, he went in a hurry to look after the mare. As he went, he remembered the words the old woman had said to the mare, and took the wolf's hair from the handkerchief and rubbed it a little. Then the wolf came up to him and asked, "What is the matter, half-brother?" And he answered, "The old woman's mare has run away, and I cannot tell where she is." The wolf said, "Here she is with us. She has turned herself into a wolf, and the foal into a wolf's cub. Strike once with the bridle on the earth and cry out, 'Hey! old woman's mare!'" And the king's son did so, and instantly the mare came again and stood with the foal beside him. So he bridled her, and galloped home, and the foal followed. When he arrived the old woman gave him his breakfast, but she led the mare into the stable and beat her with the poker, crying, "To the wolves, I said, miserable one!" And the mare answered, "I have been to the wolves, but they are his friends, and told him all about me!" Then the old woman came out of the stable, and the king's son said to her, "Eh! grandmother, I have served you honestly. Now give me what you promised me." And the old woman answered, "My son, what is promised must be fulfilled. So look here. Here are the twelve horses. Choose which you like!" And the prince said, "Why should I be too particular? Give me only that leprous horse in the corner! Fine horses are not fitting for me!" But the old woman tried to persuade him to choose another horse, saying, "How can you be so foolish as to choose that leprous thing whilst there are such very fine horses here?" But he remained firm by his first choice, and said to the old woman, "You ought to give me which I choose, for so you promised." So, when the old woman found she could not make him change his mind, she gave him the scabby horse, and he took leave of her, and went away, leading the horse by the halter. When he came to a forest he curried and rubbed down the horse, when it shone as bright as gold. He then mounted, and the horse flew as quickly as a bird, and in a few seconds brought him to the dragon's palace. The king's son went in and said to the queen, "Get ready as soon as possible!" She was soon ready, when they both mounted the horse, and began their journey home. Soon after, the dragon came home, and when he saw the queen had disappeared, said to his horse, "What shall we do? Shall we eat and drink first, or shall we pursue them at once?" The horse answered, "Whether we eat and drink or not, it is all one. We shall never reach them." When the dragon heard that, he got quickly on his horse and galloped after them. When they saw the dragon following them, they pushed on quicker, but their horse said, "Do not be afraid! There is no need to run away." In a very few moments the dragon came very near to them, and his horse said to their horse, "For God's sake, my brother, wait a moment! I shall kill myself running after you!" Their horse answered, "Why are you so stupid as to carry that monster? Fling your heels up and throw him off, and come along with me!" When the dragon's horse heard that, he shook his head angrily and flung his feet high in the air, so that the dragon fell off and brake in pieces, and his horse came up to them. Then the queen mounted him and returned with the king's son happily to her kingdom, where they reigned together in great prosperity until the day of their death. Source: Csedomille Mijatovies, Serbian Folk-Lore: Popular Tales (London: W.Isbister and Company, 1874), pp. 43-58 . Link to another version of this tale: Andrew Lang, "The Nine Pea-Hens and the Golden Apples," The Violet Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1901), pp. 55-69 . Return to the table of contents . The Feathery Robe Japan On the coast of Suruga, at Miwo, there once lived a fisherman by the name of Hakurioo. One day when he was resting from his work on the bank in the sunshine he saw a brightly glistening white robe lying before him, delicate and translucent and entirely woven from feathers. At the place where the shoulders would fit on the wonderful robe there hung two wings. He eagerly picked it up, wanting to take it home and carefully put it away, when a beautiful girl appeared before him. She sobbed aloud and demanded the return of her robe. Hakurioo was at first not at all willing to give up his find. But then the girl said, amidst endless sobs and tears, that she was a heavenly goddess, and that she would have to remain miserably on earth as long as she did not have her feathery robe, that she had taken off while bathing, and which had thus wrongly come into his hands. Moved by compassion, the fisherman said, "Very well, I will give your robe back to you, if in return you will dance the heavenly dance for me with which you daughters of heaven soar through the clouds." The maiden replied, "Yes, give me my robe, and you shall behold the most beautiful dance that I am able to dance." The fisherman considered for a moment and said, "No, dance first, and then I will give you your robe." With this the heavenly maiden grew angry and said, "Shame on you, that you doubt the words of a goddess! Quickly, give me my robe, for without it I am not able to dance. You will not regret it. That I promise you!" Thereupon Hakurioo handed her the feathery robe. She immediately put it on and rose into the air. True to her words, before the fisherman's amazed eyes she performed the most magnificent dance that one can imagine, at the same time singing the most beautiful, sensuous melodies, until Hakurioo did not know what was happening to him. In more and more beautiful loops she rose higher and higher, but it was a long time before she disappeared from the enchanted fisherman's view, soaring into a light cloud that was drifting toward Fujiyama's summit, with the last sounds of her godly song sounding in his ears. Source: David Brauns, Japanische Märchen und Sagen (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Friedrich, 1885), pp. 349-50 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. Return to the table of contents . Prince Bairâm and the Fairy Bride Pakistan Once upon a time the king of the giants from the mountains of Kôh Kâf came to visit the kingdoms of men. His name was Safeyd. As he was wandering over the earth he entered a forest, and there he saw a merry company of huntsmen chasing the deer. Their leader was a young prince named Bairâm, and the beauty of this youth was so striking and so unusual that the giant Safeyd felt that he loved him, and that he would never again know happiness or contentment unless he became possessed of him. So he turned himself into a fine horse, with a skin like snow and a neigh like thunder, and in that form repeatedly crossed the path of the prince to attract his attention. The prince was enchanted when he saw so noble a steed, and gave orders that he should be caught. Safeyd was only too glad to permit himself to be saddled and bridled, and to suffer the prince of whom he was enamoured to vault onto his back. No sooner did he feel him safely seated, however, than he galloped away, and never stopped until he had arrived at his own palace in the mountains which girdle the earth. There he heaped on him every favor, loaded him with gold and precious stones, gave him splendid steeds and hundreds of attendants, clothed him in the richest apparel, and lodged him in a magnificent palace. After eight days the giant Safeyd came to Bairâm and said, "I shall now leave you for eight days. I must go to my brother's wedding. You, however, will remain here. But take this key, which will admit you into an inner garden, which hitherto no one has entered but myself. When you go, go alone, and remember to lock the door again when you return." So the giant gave the prince the key, and at once set off for the kingdom of his brother. That very evening Bairâm went to the garden, which surpassed all he had ever imagined. There stood within it a wonderful pavilion of jasper, set with precious stones. Fountains played on all sides, and the trees, instead of fruit, were laden with rubies, emeralds, and sapphires. Sitting down, he watched the fountains throwing up golden spray and the reflections mirrored in the beautiful pools. Just then four milk-white doves flew onto a tree, and then settled in the shape of four fairies by the edge of a tank of clear crystal water. Their beauty seemed to dazzle his eyes. Having unrobed, they entered the water and began to bathe. And as they were bathing, one of the said to the others, "I have had a dream, and by my dream I can tell that one of us shall be parted from the rest." They then stepped one by one out of the water and began to dress. But the most beautiful fairy of all could not find her clothes. Meanwhile, the others, having finished dressing, turned once more into milk-white doves and flew away, the fourth fairy, whose name was Ghulâb Bâno, exclaiming as she bade them farewell, "It is my kismet. Some different destiny awaits me here, and we shall never meet again." She then looked towards the steps and saw the prince. At once her heart escaped from her body, and she fell in love with him. Now, it was the prince himself who had stolen the fairy's clothes and hidden them, and, as he knew that if she recovered them she would change into a milk-white dove again, he now brought out another suit, and she clothed herself, and the two lovers remained in the garden. When eight days had passed, the giant Safeyd returned once more to his house. And when Bairâm saw the huge chains which encircled his waist he began to tremble with fear, but the giant reassured him saying, "Fear not. Are you not master of all I possess?" And he ordered music to play and dancing girls to assemble in numbers to beguile and cheer his spirits, but they were all invisible. "To you see them?" asked the giant. "No," answered the prince. "I see nothing, but I hear the music and the tinkling of anklets." "I will give you some of King Solomon's antimony," said the giant. "Touch your eyes with it." And when Prince Bairâm had touch his eyes with King Solomon's antimony he saw the whole place filled with troops of exquisite damsels, dancing to the music of viol and drum. Now, the beautiful fairy whom the prince had captured in the garden was one of the wives of the giant, and the giant knew all that had passed. But his love for Bairâm was so great that he said to him, "Take not only Ghulâb Bâno, but all I possess you can take as well." One day the fairy grew sad and said, "Give me leave to visit my father and mother and to return." So the prince brought out her fairy clothes, and she changed into a milk-white dove, and away she flew. But her parents, when they heard the news, were angry that she had married a mortal, and they imprisoned her in a gloomy subterranean city. Therefore she did not return. And as time went on, and still she came not, Prince Bairâm began to pine and droop from sorrow, and for his sake, too, the giant grew sad and melancholy. At last the prince cried, "I must follow her, and never come back till I find her." "Are you quite resolved to go?" asked the giant. "I can no longer live," said he, "without her." Then the giant gave him three things: his invisible cap, some of King Solomon's antimony, and one of his own hairs. So the prince set out, and after many days he came to the subterranean city. But because it was all in darkness, and he could not see his way, he rubbed his eyes with the antimony, which made everything plain and clear before him. Then he inquired, and found that the fairy Ghulâb Bâno was imprisoned in a lofty tower of one hundred iron doors. And when he found himself before the tower he put on his magic cap, which rendered him invisible, and which also compelled all the doors to fly wide open. He then entered, and when he saw the fairy princess he took off his cap and rushed into her arms, and with her he remained for many days. A woman can never keep a secret. It was not long before Ghulâb Bâno began to whisper to some of her favorite maids, and to tell her intimate friends the good fortune which had smiled on her in the midst of her banishment. Then the news spread until it reached the ears of her father. He collected his giants together, and, going to the tower, they found the prince with the princess. They were horrified, and cried, "Come, let us kill him!" Immediately the prince awoke, and, seeing his peril, he put on his magic cap, which made him invisible. Then he took the giant Safeyd's hair, and held it in the flame of the lamp. And as the smoke rose a thousand squadrons of giants at once assembled. There was a great battle. The enemy were routed, and the enraged father compelled to surrender his daughter to Prince Bairâm. After this Safeyd and the prince and the fairy returned in triumph to their beautiful home. By and by, when some years had now elapsed, the prince began to long for his own kingdom; and his longing grew so great that at last he determined to go. The giant became very sad, but on account of his love for him he allowed him leave. Then Ghulâb Bâno changed herself into an enormous bird, and the prince mounted between her wings, and in a moment they alighted close to the capital. There the prince disguised himself as a poor fakir, while his wife became a milk-white dove. Then he entered the city and called on his old nurse, who at once recognized him, and told him that his vizier had seized the kingdom and was reigning in his stead. "And where are my wives?" asked Bairâm. "Three of your wives," answered she, "he took to be his wives; but the fourth defied him, and because of her fidelity he imprisoned her in a pit. There a son was born, and there the mother and the babe still remain, and he feeds them with the leavings of his hounds." For a time the prince lodged with his nurse, the fairy having resumed her own shape, but one day when he was out, news was taken to the false king that a woman surpassing in beauty all the women of the earth had been seen at the house of the old woman. So the false king rushed to the spot, seized Ghulâb Bâno by the arm, and cried, "Come along with me!" "O king," answered she, "let me first go in and change my clothes." So she left him waiting at the door, but having entered her chamber, she put on her fairy suit, and, at once changing into a milk-white dove, flew out of the window, and sped far away, but the false king went back to the palace vexed and defeated. When Bairâm returned, the first thing he said was, "Where is my wife?" "She has gone to the vizier's," said the old woman. "He came and carried her off." So the prince took out the giant's hair and held it again in the flame, when instantly there rushed to his help thousands of giants with clubs and swords, and the city was taken, the vizier and the three false wives were slaughtered, while the faithful wife was delivered from the pit and restored to the palace as queen once more. With her Prince Bairâm lived for some time, being always kind and good to her; but he sighed for the fairy princess, who had flown back to her father's house and had never returned. By degrees his melancholy increased more and more, until, becoming mad he wandered about the city and the palace and the forest, seeking in vain for his lost love. Meanwhile the giant Safeyd grew melancholy also, and at last he could bear his grief no longer. So he set out for the kingdom of his friend Bairâm, and, having found him, he carried him away and restored him again to his fairy queen. With her he recovered his health, and his whole after-life was spent in happiness and delight, sometimes with Ghulâb Bâno among the mountains of Kôh Kâf, and sometimes with his faithful wife in the capital of his own kingdom. But at last he left his wife for good and never returned again. Source: Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 82, pp. 342-47 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Targeted sites open in new windows. Sabine Baring-Gould, "Swan-Maidens," Curious Myths of the Middle Ages , new edition (London: Rivingtons, 1873), no. 21, pp. 561-78 . Edwin Sidney Hartland, "Swan-Maidens," The Science of Fairy Tales: An Inquiry into Fairy Mythology (London: Walter Scott, 1891), pp. 255-332 . "The History of Hasan of Basssorah," The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night , translated from the Arabic by Captain Sir R. F. Burton, reprinted from the original edition and edited by Leonard C. Smithers, vol. 6 (London: H. S. Nichols and Company, 1894), pp. 166-296 . The swan-maiden episode begins on page 188 . The Mermaid Wife and other legends of Christiansen type 4080. Here, as in the "Swan Maiden" stories, a man gains control over a female from another realm by stealing her covering. The following tales contain the motif of forcing a female into marriage by stealing an item of her clothing, which is also commonly included in the "Swan Maiden" and "Mermaid Wife" tales: The Monkey Boy (India). The Monkey Husband (India). Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 22, 2013. The Tail-Fisher: Folktales of Type 2 The Tail-Fisher Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 2 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009-2011 Contents Why the Bear Is Stumpy-Tailed (Norway). How the Wolf Lost His Tail (Scotland). Reynard and Bruin (Europe). Why the Bear Has a Stumpy Tail (Flanders). The Hare and the Fox (Germany). The Wolf's Unfortunate Fishing Trip (Germany/Poland). How Mr. Rabbit Lost His Fine Bushy Tail (USA). The Frozen Tail (USA). Fox and Wolf (American Indian). Why Rabbit Has a Short Tail (Antigua). Links to additional tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Why the Bear Is Stumpy-Tailed Norway One day the bear met the fox, who came slinking along with a string of fish he had stolen. "Whence did you get those from?" asked the bear. "Oh! my Lord Bruin, I've been out fishing and caught them," said the fox. So the bear had a mind to learn to fish too, and bade the fox tell him how he was to set about it. "Oh! it's an easy craft for you," answered the fox, and soon learnt. You've only got to go upon the ice, and cut a hole and stick your tail down into it; and so you must go on holding it there as long as you can. You're not to mind if your tail smarts a little; that's when the fish bite. The longer you hold it there the more fish you'll get; and then all at once out with it, with a cross pull sideways, and with a strong pull too." Yes; the bear did as the fox had said, and held his tail a long, long time down in the hole, till it was fast frozen in. Then he pulled it out with a cross pull, and it snapped short off. That's why Bruin goes about with a stumpy tail this very day. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1859), no. 20, p. 155 . Return to the table of contents . How the Wolf Lost His Tail Scotland One day the wolf and the fox were out together, and they stole a dish of crowdie. Now the wolf was the biggest beast of the two, and he had a long tail like a greyhound, and great teeth. The fox was afraid of him, and did not dare to say a word when the wolf ate the most of the crowdie, and left only a little at the bottom of the dish for him, but he determined to punish him for it; so the next night when they were out together the fox said, "I smell a very nice cheese, and (pointing to the moonshine on the ice) there it is too." "And how will you get it?" said the wolf. "Well, stop you here till I see if the farmer is asleep, and if you keep your tail on it, nobody will see you or know that it is there. Keep it steady. I may be some time coming back." So the wolf lay down and laid his tail on the moonshine in the ice, and kept it for an hour till it was fast. Then the fox, who had been watching him, ran in to the farmer and said, "The wolf is there; he will eat up the children -- the wolf! the wolf!" Then the farmer and his wife came out with sticks to kill the wolf, but the wolf ran off leaving his tail behind him, and that's why the wolf is stumpy tailed to this day, though the fox has a long brush. Source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 1 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 272-73. . Campbell's source: "C. D." Note by Campbell: This is manifestly the same as the Norse story "Why the Bear Is Stumpy-Tailed," and it errs in ascribing a stumpy tail to the wolf. There was not time for the "Norse Tales" to become known to the people who told the story, so perhaps this may be a Norse tradition transferred from the bear to the wolf. The motif of the moon's reflection in the ice is reminiscent of the following tales: "The Wolf Dives into the Water for Reflected Cheese" (type 34). "Catching the Moon" ( type 1335A ). Return to the table of contents . Reynard and Bruin Europe You must know that once upon a time Reynard the Fox and Bruin the Bear went into partnership and kept house together. Would you like to know the reason? Well, Reynard knew that Bruin had a beehive full of honeycomb, and that was what he wanted; but Bruin kept so close a guard upon his honey that Master Reynard didn't know how to get away from him and get hold of the honey. So one day he said to Bruin, "Pardner, I have to go and be gossip -- that means godfather, you know -- to one of my old friends." "Why, certainly," said Bruin. So off Reynard goes into the woods, and after a time he crept back and uncovered the beehive and had such a feast of honey. Then he went back to Bruin, who asked him what name had been given to the child. Reynard had forgotten all about the christening and could only say, "Just-begun." "What a funny name," said Master Bruin. A little while after Reynard thought he would like another feast of honey. So he told Bruin that he had to go to another christening; and off he went. And when he came back and Bruin asked him what was the name given to the child Reynard said, "Half-eaten." The third time the same thing occurred, and this time the name given by Reynard to the child that didn't exist was "All-gone." You can guess why. A short time afterwards Master Bruin thought he would like to eat up some of his honey and asked Reynard to come and join him in the feast. When they got to the beehive Bruin was so surprised to find that there was no honey left; and he turned round to Reynard and said, "Just-begun, Half- eaten, All-gone -- so that is what you meant; you have eaten my honey." "Why no," said Reynard, "how could that be? I have never stirred from your side except when I went a-gossiping, and then I was far away from here. You must have eaten the honey yourself, perhaps when you were asleep; at any rate we can easily tell; let us lie down here in the sunshine, and if either of us has eaten the honey, the sun will soon sweat it out of us." No sooner said than done, and the two lay side by side in the sunshine. Soon Master Bruin commenced to doze, and Mr. Reynard took some honey from the hive and smeared it round Bruin's snout; then he woke him up and said, "See, the honey is oozing out of your snout; you must have eaten it when you were asleep." Some time after this Reynard saw a man driving a cart full of fish, which made his mouth water. So he ran and he ran and he ran till he got far away in front of the cart and lay down in the road as still as if he were dead. When the man came up to him and saw him lying there dead, as he thought, he said to himself, "Why, that will make a beautiful red fox scarf and muff for my wife Ann." And he got down and seized hold of Reynard and threw him into the cart all along with the fish, and then he went driving on as before. Reynard began to throw the fish out till there were none left, and then he jumped out himself without the man noticing it, who drove up to his door and called out, "Ann, Ann, see what I have brought you." And when his wife came to the door she looked into the cart and said, "Why, there is nothing there." Reynard in the meantime had brought all his fish together and began eating some when up comes Bruin and asked for a share. "No, no," said Reynard, "we only share food when we have shared work. I fished for these, you go and fish for others." "Why, how could you fish for these? The water is all frozen over," said Bruin. "I'll soon show you," said Reynard, and brought him down to the bank of the river, and pointed to a hole in the ice and said, "I put my tail in that, and the fish were so hungry I couldn't draw them up quick enough. Why do you not do the same?" So Bruin put his tail down and waited and waited but no fish came. "Have patience, man," said Reynard; "as soon as one fish comes the rest will follow." "Ah, I feel a bite," said Bruin, as the water commenced to freeze round his tail and caught it in the ice. "Better wait till two or three have been caught and then you can catch three at a time. I'll go back and finish my lunch." And with that Master Reynard trotted up to the man's wife and said to her, "Ma'am, there's a big black bear caught by the tail in the ice; you can do what you like with him." So the woman called her husband and they took big sticks and went down to the river and commenced whacking Bruin who, by this time, was fast in the ice. He pulled and he pulled and he pulled, till at last he got away leaving three quarters of his tail in the ice, and that is why bears have such short tails up to the present day. Meanwhile Master Reynard was having a great time in the man's house, golloping everything he could find till the man and his wife came back and found him with his nose in the cream jug. As soon as he heard them come in he tried to get away, but not before the man had seized hold of the cream jug and thrown it at him, just catching him on the tail, and that is the reason why the tips of foxes' tails are cream white to this very day. Well, Reynard crept home and found Bruin in such a state, who commenced to grumble and complain that it was all Reynard's fault that he had lost his tail. So Reynard pointed to his own tail and said, "Why, that's nothing; see my tail; they hit me so hard upon the head my brains fell out upon my tail. Oh, how bad I feel; won't you carry me to my little bed." So Bruin, who was a good-hearted soul, took him upon his back and rolled with him towards the house. And as he went on Reynard kept saying, "The sick carries the sound, the sick carries the sound." "What's that you are saying?" asked Bruin. "Oh, I have no brains left, I do not know what I am saying," said Reynard but kept on singing, "The sick carries the sound, ha, ha, the sick carries the sound." Then Bruin knew that he had been done and threw Reynard down upon the ground, and would have eaten him up but that the fox slunk away and rushed into a briar bush. Bruin followed him closely into the briar bush and caught Reynard's hind leg in his mouth. Then Reynard called out, "That's right, you fool, bite the briar root, bite the briar root." Bruin thinking that he was biting the briar root, let go Reynard's foot and snapped at the nearest briar root. "That's right, now you've got me, don't hurt me too much," called out Reynard, and slunk away. "Don't hurt me too much, don't hurt me too much." When Bruin heard Reynard's voice dying away in the distance he knew that he had been done again, and that was the end of their partnership. Some time after this a man was plowing in the field with his two oxen, who were very lazy that day. So the man called out at them, "Get a move on or I'll give you to the bear"; and when they didn't quicken their pace he tried to frighten them by calling out, "Bear, Bear, come and take these lazy oxen." Sure enough, Bruin heard him and came out of the woods and said, "Here I am, give me the oxen, or else it'll be worse for you." The man was in despair but said, "Yes, yes, of course they are yours, but please let me finish my morning's plowing so I may finish this acre." Bruin could not say "No" to that, and sat down licking his chops and waiting for the oxen. The man went on plowing, thinking what he should do, when just at the corner of the field Reynard came up to him and said, "If you will give me two geese, I'll help you out of this fix and deliver the bear into your hands." The man agreed and he told him what to do and went away into the woods. Soon after, the bear and the man heard a noise like "bow-wow, bow-wow"; and the Bear came to the man and said, "What's that?" "Oh, that must be the lord's hounds out hunting for bears." "Hide me, hide me," said Bruin, "and I will let you off the oxen." Then Reynard called out from the wood, "What's that black thing you've got there?" And the Bear said, "Say it's the stump of a tree." So when the man had called this out to the fox, Reynard called out, "Put it in the cart; fix it with the chain; cut off the boughs, and drive your axe into the stump." Then the bear said to the man, "Pretend to do what he bids you; heave me into the cart; bind me with the chain; pretend to cut off the boughs, and drive the axe into the stump." So the man lifted Bruin into the cart, bound him with the chain, then cut off his limbs and buried the axe in his head. Then Reynard came forward and asked for his reward, and the man went back to his house to get the pair of geese that he had promised. "Wife, wife," he called out, as he neared the house, "get me a pair of geese, which I have promised the fox for ridding me of the bear." "I can do better than that," said his wife Ann, and brought him out a bag with two struggling animals in it. "Give these to Master Reynard," said she; "they will be geese enough for him." So the man took the bag and went down to the field and gave the bag to Reynard, but when he opened it out sprang two hounds, and he had great trouble in running away from them to his den. When he got to his den the fox asked each of his limbs, how they had helped him in his flight. His nose said, "I smelt the hounds"; his eyes said, "We looked for the shortest way"; his ears said, "We listened for the breathing of the hounds"; and his legs said, "We ran away with you." Then he asked his tail what it had done, and it said, "Why, I got caught in the bushes or made your leg stumble; that is all I could do." So, as a punishment, the fox stuck his tail out of his den, and the hounds saw it and caught hold of it, and dragged the fox out of his den by it and ate him all up. So that was the end of Master Reynard, and well he deserved it. Don't you think so? Source: Joseph Jacobs, Europa's Fairy Book [also published under the title European Folk and Fairy Tales ], (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), pp. 42-50 . This composite tale (restored from various sources and retold by Joseph Jacobs) consists of the following tale types: "The Theft of Food by Playing Godfather" ( type 15 ). "The Theft of Fish" (type 1). "The Tail-Fisher" (type 2). "Sick Animal Carries the Healthy One" (type 4). "Biting the Tree Root" (type 5). "The Fox and His Members" ( type 154 ). Return to the table of contents . Why the Bear Has a Stumpy Tail Flanders One very cold winter, when the ground was covered with snow and the ponds and rivers were frozen hard, Reynard the Fox and all the other animals went out to enjoy themselves by sliding and skating on the ice. After a time Reynard began to feel hungry, so he wandered off by himself in search of something to eat. He nosed about here, and he nosed about there; he lay in wait behind bushes in the hope of being able to catch a bird; he lurked by the walls of farmhouses ready to spring out upon any unsuspecting chicken that might show itself, but all in vain. The birds were wary, and the fowls were all safe in the hen houses. Disappointed with his lack of success Reynard betook himself to the river, now covered with a glistening sheet of ice, and there, under the shelter of a bank, he found a hole in the ice which had not been frozen over. He sat down to watch the hole, and presently a little fish popped up its head for a breath of air. Reynard's paw darted, and the next moment the unfortunate creature lay gasping on the ice. Fish after fish the fox caught in this way, and when he had quite satisfied his hunger he strung the remainder on a stick and took his departure, not forgetting first of all to offer up a prayer for the repose of his victims. He had not gone far before he met Mrs. Bruin, who had also come out in search of something to eat. When she saw Reynard with his fine catch of fish, she opened her eyes, I can tell you, and said, "Wherever did you get all those fine fishes from, cousin? They make my mouth water! I am so hungry that I could bite the head off an iron nail!" "Ah," said Reynard slyly, "wouldn't you just like to know!" "It is what I'm asking you," said Mrs. Bruin. "You would surely not be so mean as to keep the good news to yourself!" "I don't know so much about that," answered Reynard, "but I have a certain fondness for you, cousin, so come along with me and I will show you the place where I caught the fish." Nothing loath, the bear followed, and presently they came to the hole in the ice. "Do you see that hole, cousin?" said Reynard. "That is where the fish come up to breathe. All you have to do is to sit on the ice and let your tail hang down into the water. After a time the fish will come to bite at it, but don't you move. Sit quite still until the evening; then you will find a score of fishes on your tail and you can pull them out all together." Mrs. Bruin was delighted with the plan and immediately sat down and dipped her tail into the water. "That's the way," said Reynard. "Now I'll just be walking home to see to my dinner, but I'll be back presently. Be careful to keep quite still, or you ll spoil everything!" So for the next three hours Mrs. Bruin sat on the ice with her tail in the water, and very cold it was, but she consoled herself with the thought of the delicious meal she would have when the fish were landed. Reynard returned. " Well, cousin," siad he, "how do you feel?" "Very cold," said Mrs. Bruin, with her teeth chattering. "My tail is so numb that I hardly know I've got one!" "Doe it feel heavy?" asked Reynard anxiously. "Very heavy," said Mrs. Bruin. "There mus be hundreds of fish on it!" said Reynard. He left the bank and walked round the bear, observing that the water in the hole had frozen over, and the Mrs. Bruin's tail was hel firmly in the ice. "I think you may safely pull up now," he went on, "but you must be careful to land all the fish together. There is only one way to do that: you must give a strong, sharp, sudden pull and take them by surprise. Now then, are you ready? One, two, three . . . !" At the word three Mrs. Bruin rose on her hind legs and gave a mighty jerk, but her tail was so firmly embedded in the ice that it would not come out. "My word," cried Reynard, "you have caught the whole river-full. Persevere, cousin now then, a long pull and a strong pull!" "Ouf!" grunted Mrs. Bruin, "ouf, ouf . . . ah!" And then she suddenly tumbled head over heels on the ice, as with one mighty jerk, she snapped her beautiful bushy tail clean off close to the roots. When she had gathered her scattered wits together well enough to understand what had happened, she went to look for Reynard, but he had suddenly remembered an important engagement elsewhere, and was not to be found. And from that time down to this every bear has been born with a little stumpy tail. Source: Jean de Bosschčre, Folk Tales of Flanders (New York: Dodd, Mean and Company, 1918), pp. 168-72 . Flanders is the northern part of Belgium, where the native language is Flemish (Dutch). Return to the table of contents . The Hare and the Fox Germany A hare and a fox were traveling together. It was wintertime. Nothing green was growing, and neither mice nor lice were creeping afield. "This is hungry weather," said the fox to the hare. "My insides are all knotted together." "Yes, indeed," answered the hare. "There are hard times everywhere. I would eat my own ears if I could get them into my mouth." Thus they marched hungrily onward together. Then in the distance they saw a peasant girl approaching them. She was carrying a basket, and the fox and the hare sensed a pleasant smell coming from the basket, the smell of fresh bread rolls. "Do you know what!" said the fox. "Lie down and pretend to be dead. The girl will set her basket down and pick you up for your poor pelt, because hare pelts can be made into gloves. Meanwhile I'll make off with the basket of rolls, all for our benefit." The hare did what the fox suggested: he fell down and pretended to be dead. The fox hid behind a snowdrift. The girl came and saw the hare with all four legs stretched out. She set down the basket, and bent over the hare. The fox quickly snatched up the basket and ran off across the field. The hare immediately came to life and hurried after his companion. However, the fox showed no sign of sharing the rolls, but instead made it clear that he intended to eat all of them by himself. This did not please the hare at all. They were approaching a small pond, and the hare said to the fox, "Why don't we catch some fish for our meal? Then we could have fish with white bread, just like grand gentlemen! Just lower your tail into the water, then the fish, who themselves don't have much to eat these days, will grab onto it. But you'd better hurry, before the pond freezes over." The fox thought that this was a good plan, so he went to the pond, which was just about to freeze over, and hung his tail into the water. In a short time the fox's tail was frozen tightly in the ice. Then the hare took the basket of rolls and slowly ate them, one after the other, before the fox's eyes. Finally he said to the fox, "Just wait until it thaws! Just wait until springtime! Just wait until it thaws!" And then he ran away, leaving the fox yelping after him, yelping like an angry dog on a chain. Source: Ludwig Bechstein, "Der Hase und der Fuchs," Ludwig Bechstein's Märchenbuch , illustrated by Ludwig Richter. 32nd edition (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1879), pp. 120-22 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. Ludwig Bechstein (1801-1860), was a popular collector and editor of folktales. This story combines two tale types: "The Theft of Fish" (type 1). "The Tail-Fisher" (type 2). Return to the table of contents . The Wolf's Unfortunate Fishing Trip Germany/Poland The wolf and the fox were traveling together. It was very cold. The fox said, "I have a good pelt, but I am still freezing." The wolf said, "I have always heard that it is warm where the girls hang out. Let's go to the spinning room." The fox said, "For all I care." So they went there, and the wolf began flirting with the girls, while the fox made himself comfortable next to the stove. He had a great appetite for something delicious. He crept around here and there, but couldn't sniff up anything. So he went outside, intending to take a boat ride. Someone was just passing by with a wagonload of herrings. The fox jumped onto the wagon, opened a tub, and threw out most of the herrings that were in it. Then he jumped down and ate up all the herrings, except for one. He was about to bite into this last one when the wolf came up and said, "What are you eating?" The fox said, "Fish. Do you want a taste?" He gave the wolf half a herring, and it tasted very good to the wolf. He said, "Where did you catch such a fish?" The fox answered, "Here in the pond." The wolf said, "I would like to catch some." The fox said, "Just hang your tail down into the water." However, it had turned cold, and the water stung the wolf's tail. After a while he wanted to pull his tail out, but the fox said, "Test its weight!" The wolf said, "I don't notice anything." The fox said, "Then it's too soon." Some time later he again wanted to pull his tail out, and the fox said, "Test its weight!" The wolf said, "It seems that something is taking hold of it." The fox said, "It's still too soon. Those are only little fish." By now the tail was nearly completely frozen into the ice. Some time later the wolf once again wanted to pull his tail out, and the fox said, "Test its weight!" The wolf said, "I seem to have caught a very large fish." His tail was completely frozen into the ice. The fox said, "Pull!" But however hard he pulled, he couldn't pull it out. The fox said, "Push with your feet! Push with your feet!" And he went on his way. The wolf pulled and pulled, and tugged and tugged, until finally he tore off his tail. This angered him greatly, and from that time onward he was always an enemy of the fox. Source: Karl Haupt, "Des Wolfes unglücklicher Fischfang," Sagenbuch der Lausitz , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1863), no. 312, pp. 208-209 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. Return to the table of contents . How Mr. Rabbit Lost His Fine Bushy Tail Joel Chandler Harris "One time," said Uncle Remus, sighing heavily and settling himself back in his seat with an air of melancholy resignation --" one time Brer Rabbit wuz gwine 'long down de road shakin' his big bushy tail, en feelin' des ez scrumpshus ez a bee-martin wid a fresh bug." Here the old man paused and glanced at the little boy, but it was evident that the youngster had become so accustomed to the marvelous developments of Uncle Remus's stories, that the extraordinary statement made no unusual impression upon him. Therefore the old man began again, and this time in a louder arid more insinuating tone: "One time ole man Rabbit, he wuz gwine 'long down de road shakin' his long, bushy tail, en feelin' mighty biggity." This was effective. "Great goodness, Uncle Remus!" exclaimed the little boy in open-eyed wonder, "everybody knows that rabbits haven't got long, bushy tails." The old man shifted his position in his chair and allowed his venerable head to drop forward until his whole appearance was suggestive of the deepest dejection; and this was intensified by a groan that seemed to be the result of great mental agony. Finally he spoke, but not as addressing himself to the little boy. "I notices dat dem fokes w'at makes a great 'miration 'bout w'at dey knows is des de fokes w'ich you can't put no 'pennunce in w'en de 'cashun come up. Yer one un urn now, en he done come en excuse me er 'lowin' dat rabbits is got long, bushy tails, w'ich goodness knows ef I'd a dremp' it, I'd a whirl in en on dremp it" "Well, but Uncle Remus, you said rabbits had long, bushy tails," replied the little boy. "Now you know you did." "Ef I ain't fergit it off'n my mine, I say dat ole Brer Rabbit wuz gwine down de big road shakin' his long, bushy tail. Dat w'at I say, en dat I stan's by." The little boy looked puzzled, but he didn't say anything. After a while the old man continued: "Now, den, ef dat's 'greed ter, I'm gwine on, en ef tain't 'greed ter, den I'm gwineter pick up my cane an look atter my own intrust. I go wuk lyin' roun' yer dat's des natally gittin' moldy." The little boy still remained quiet, and Uncle mus proceeded: "One day Brer Rabbit wuz gwine down de road shakin' his long, bushy tail, w'en who should he strike up wid but ole Brer Fox gwine amblin' long wid a big string er fish! W'en dey pass de time er day wid wunner nudder, Brer Rabbit, he open up de confab, he did, en he ax Brer Fox whar he git dat nice string er fish, en Brer Fox, he up'n 'spon' dat he kotch um, en Brer Rabbit, he saw whar'bouts, en Brer Fox, he say down at de babtizin' creek, en Brer Rabbit he ax how, kaze in dem days dey wuz monstus fon' er minners, en Brer Fox, he sot down on a log, he did, en he up'n tell Brer Rabbit dat all he gotter do fer ter git er big mess er minners is ter go ter de creek atter sun down, en drap his tail in de water en set dar twel daylight, en den draw up a whole armful er fishes, en dem w'at he don't want, he kin fling back. Right dar's whar Brer Rabbit drap his watermillion, kaze he tuck'n sot out dat night en went a fishin'. De wedder wuz sorter cole, en Brer Rabbit, he got 'im a bottle er dram en put out fer de creek, en w'en he git dar he pick out a good place, en he sorter squot down, he did, en let his tail hang in de water. He sot dar, en he sot dar, en he drunk his dram, en he think he gwineter freeze, but bimeby day come, en dar he wuz. He make a pull, en he feel like he comin' in two, en he fetch nudder jerk, en lo en beholes, whar wuz his tail?" There was a long pause. "Did it come off, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy, presently. "She did dat!" replied the old man with unction. "She did dat, and dat w'at make all deze yer bob-tail rabbits w'at you see hoppin' en skaddlin' thoo de woods." "Are they all that way just becaue the old Rabbit lost his tail in the creek?" asked the little boy. "Dat's it, honey," replied the old man. "Dat's w'at dey tells me. Look like dey er bleedzd ter take atter der pa." Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus: His Songs and His Sayings (New York and London: D. Appleton and Company, 1928), no. 25, pp. 120-24 . © 1880, 1895, 1908, 1921. Return to the table of contents . The Frozen Tail USA Once there was a fox an' a rabbit. They was in partnership. The rabbit used to go fishing a lot. The rabbit told the fox he could show him where there was a nice lot of fish. The rabbit said, "Don't pull up until you feel your tail getting stiff an' heavy." After a while the fox said, "My tail getting heavy, can I pull up?" Rabbit said, "No, don't pull up yet. Wait till you get a few more on. Pull up now! You got a nice bunch on." His tail stuck, was froze. "That's just what I wanted, Mr. Fox, you treated me so dirty." Source: Elsie Clews Parsons, "Tales from Maryland and Pennsylvania," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 30, no. 116, (April - June, 1917), pp. 214-215 . Parsons' source: Mary Smith of Lincoln, Pennsylvania. Return to the table of contents . Fox and Wolf American Indian Very long ago there were two men living together, and making maple sugar. They made one mokok ("bark box") of sugar, and then they cached it away, burying it, and said to each other, "We will let it remain here until we are very hungry." The younger man was a Fox, and he was a good hunter. Every time he went out, he brought home chickens or small wild game. The other man was a greedy Wolf, and he never killed anything, or brought anything home: so Fox thought he would play a trick on his chum for being lazy. "You ought to go over to that house," said Fox to Wolf. "Maybe they will give you something to eat. When I went over there, they gave me a chicken." So Wolf went over as he was told. When he got to the house, he did not hide himself, but went in open sight. The owner of the house saw the Wolf coming up, so he set his dogs on him to drive him away; and Wolf escaped only by running into the river. "So it is this one that takes off our chickens!" said the man. When Wolf arrived at his home, he told his younger brother, Fox, "Why, I hardly escaped from that man!" "Why!" said Fox to him. "They did not recognize you; that's why." But Wolf made no answer. While they were in the house together, Fox went outside, and cried, " He! " to deceive Wolf. "What's the matter with you?" asked Wolf. "Oh! they have come after me to give a name to a child." "Then you'd better go over. Maybe they will give you something to eat." Instead of going, however, Fox went to their cache of maple sugar, and ate some of it. When he returned, Wolf asked him, "What did you name the baby?" " Mokimon ," replied Fox; and this word means to "reveal" or "dig out" something you have hidden. At another time, while they were sitting together, Fox said, " He! " and "Oh, yes!" "What's that?" inquired Wolf. "Oh! I am called to give a name to a newborn baby." "Well, then, go. Maybe they will give you something to eat." So Fox went and returned. "What's the name of the child?" asked Wolf. This time, Fox answered, " Wapiton "; and this word means "to commence to eat." At another time, Fox cried out, " He! " and "All right!" as though some one had called to him, "I'll come." "What's that?" asked Wolf. "They want me to go over and name their child." "Well, then, go," says Wolf. "You always get something to eat every time they want you." So Fox went, and soon returned. Wolf asked him again, "What name did you give it?" " Hapata kiton ," answered Fox; that is to say, "half eaten." Then another time Fox cried " He! " as if in answer to some one speaking to him, and then, as though some one called from the distance, " Hau! " Wolf, as he did not quite hear, asked Fox what the matter was. "Oh, nothing!" replied Fox, "only they want me to come over and name their child." "Well, then, you'd better go. Maybe you'll get a chance to eat; maybe you'll fetch me something too." So Fox started out, and soon returned home. "Well, what name did you give this time?" asked Wolf. " Noskwaton ," said Fox; and this means "all licked up." Then Wolf caught on. "Maybe you are eating our stored maple sugar!" he cried. But Fox sat still and laughed at him. Then Wolf went over and looked at their cache. Sure enough, he found the empty box with its contents all gone, and pretty well licked up. Meantime Fox skipped out, and soon found a large tree by the river, leaning out over the water. He climbed into its branches and hid there. Presently the angry Wolf returned home, and, not finding Fox, tracked him to the tree. Wolf climbed part way to Fox without seeing him, as he was on the branches. Then Wolf was afraid, and while he was hesitating, he happened to look at the water, and there he saw the reflection of Fox laughing at him on the surface. The Wolf, in a fury, plunged into the bottom of the stream, but of course failed to catch Fox. He tried four times, and after the fourth attempt he was tired, and quit jumping in for a while. While he was resting, he looked up and saw Fox laughing at him. Then Wolf said to Fox, "Let's go home and make up"; for he thought in his heart that anyway Fox was feeding him all the time. By and by it became winter. Fox frequently went out, and returned with abundance of fish. "How do you manage to get so many?" asked Wolf. "You'd better go out and try for yourself," said Fox. "The way I do, when I am fishing, is to cut a hole in the ice. I put my tail in, instead of a line, and I remain there until I feel bites. I move ahead a little to let the fish string on my tail; but I stay a long time, until I get a great many fish on my tail. When it feels pretty heavy, I jerk it out, and catch all I want." Fox was in hopes that he could get Wolf frozen to death in the ice, and so avoid the necessity of feeding him any longer. So he took Wolf out, and cut five holes in the ice, -- one for his tail, and one for each paw, -- telling him he could catch more fish that way. Wolf staid there to fish all night. Every once in a while he would move his feet or tail a little, and they felt so heavy, he was sure he was getting a tremendous load; and he staid a little longer. In the mean time he was freezing fast in the ice. When he found out the predicament he was in, he jerked backwards and forwards again and again, until all the hair wore off his tail, and there he was. He thought he had let too many fish on his tail and feet to haul them out, and he worked hard to free himself. At last he wore his tail out at the surface of the ice, and pulled off his claws and the bottoms of his feet. Fox told him he had caught too many fish, and that they had bitten his tail and feet; and Wolf believed it. Another time, Fox found a wasp's nest in a tree: so he went home and told Wolf that there was honey in it, and persuaded him to try and jump up and get it, on the plea that Wolf could jump higher than he could. As soon as Wolf set out to try, Fox ran away, and Wolf was nearly stung to death. Fox fled over a wagon-road to conceal his tracks, and as he travelled, he met a negro with a team, hauling a load of bread. Fox, cunning as he was, lay down on the side of the road and pretended that he was dead. The negro saw him lying there, and picked him up and put him in his wagon behind his load. Fox very presently came to, and, waiting for his chance, he would throw off a loaf of bread every now and then, till he had gotten rid of a good many. Then he jumped off, and carried the loaves to a secret place, where he built him a shelter, and prepared to live for a time. In the meantime, Wolf came along, half starved, and crippled from his meddling with a live wasp's nest and from his fishing experience. Fox fed him on his arrival, and said, "You ought to do the way I did. It's easy to get bread. I got mine by playing dead on the road. Tomorrow the negro will pass by with another load; and you can watch for him and do as I did, and steal his bread." Next morning, Wolf started out to watch the road, and pretty soon he saw the negro coming with a big load of bread: so he lay down beside the road, where the darky could see him, and played dead. The darky did see him, sure enough; and he stopped his team, and got off and got a big stick, and knocked Wolf over the head, and killed him dead for sure. "I will not get fooled this time!" he said, "for yesterday I lost too many loaves of bread for putting a dead Fox in my wagon without examining him." So he did take the Wolf home dead. That ended him, and since then Fox has eaten alone. Source: Alanson Skinner, "European Folk-Tales Collected among the Menominee Indians The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 26, no. 99 (January - March, 1913), pp. 72-75 . This story combines the following tale types: "The Theft of Food by Playing Godfather" ( type 15 ). "The Tail-Fisher" (type 2). Return to the table of contents . Why Rabbit Has a Short Tail Antigua Dis was how dis come, Rabbit once have a tail long like dem oder an'mals. Not short all de time. On dis occasion Rabbit was goin' about, an' he was hot. Dis was summer, an' everyt'ing was hot. Rabbit he had run all over, was feelin' warm. By an by he come to where Bro' Barricuter (fish) was. When Bro' Rabbit come near to de water, Bro' Barricuter speak to him. Say, "Why is it dat you so warm, Bro' Rabbit?" Rabbit tell him dat is so warm 'round here, an' dat he been runnin' all 'bout. He not able to stay cool. Den Bro' Barricuter fool Rabbit. An' Rabbit is a smart one. Bro' Barricuter say, "Bro' Rabbit, Ah will tell you which way you can get cool." Rabbit he glad for dat, an' ask de Barricuter to please do dis. Bro' Barricuter say dat Rabbit must come up to dis piece of wood what is over de water, an' let he tail hang down into de water. "In dis way, Bro' Rabbit, de cool from de water will go up from you' tail, an' you will not be warm." Rabbit not against dis, an' he come. Now, when Rabbit come up to dis piece a wood, he drop his tail to de water. Den Bro' Barricuter drap up to Rabbit tail, an' he bit it off. Dat how Barricuter fool Rabbit, an' is why Rabbit has dat short tail. Finish. Source: John H. Johnson, "Folk-Lore from Antigua, British West Indies," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 34, no. 131 (January - March, 1921), p. 22 . Return to the table of contents . Links to additional stories English-Language Texts Joseph Jacobs, "The Russet Dog," More Celtic Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894 ), pp. 125-34 . Andrew Lang, "The Fox and the Lapp" (Lapland), The Brown Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1904), pp. 245-55 . German-Language Texts -- Texte in deutscher Sprache Alexander N. Afanassjew [Afanas'ev, Afanasyev], "Die Füchsin und der Wolf," Russische Volksmärchen , Deutsch von Anna Meyer (Wien: C. W. Stern, 1906), S. 1-11 . J. C. Poestion, "Der Fuchs und der Bär," Lappländische Märchen, Volkssagen, Räthsel und Sprichwörter: Nach lappländischen, norwegischen und schwedischen Quellen , mit Beiträgen von Felix Liebrecht (Wien: Druck und Verlag von Carl Gerold's Sohn, 1886), Nr. 1, S. 7-15 . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 28, 2011. The Tailor in Heaven: Folktales of Type 800 The Tailor in Heaven Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 800 translated and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009 Contents How a Tailor Came to Heaven and Threw Our Lord God's Footstool at an Old Woman (Germany, Jörg Wickram). The Tailor in Heaven (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Tailor in Heaven (Germany, Ernst Meier). A Spanish Cavalryman (Switzerland, Otto Sutermeister). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. How a Tailor Came to Heaven and Threw Our Lord God's Footstool at an Old Woman Germany It happened that one beautiful day our Lord God wanted to take a walk, and he took all of his apostles and saints with him, leaving only Saint Peter at home in heaven. Warning Saint Peter not to allow anyone into heaven while he was away, the Lord God left. A tailor approached heaven and knocked at the gate. Saint Peter asked who was there and what he wanted. The tailor said, "I am a tailor, and I very much wanted to get into heaven." Saint Peter said, "I am not allowed to let anyone enter, for our Lord God is not at home, and he told me to be careful to not permit anyone inside while he is away. But the tailor did not cease begging for admission, until finally Saint Peter gave in and allowed him to come in, but with the condition that he was to sit quietly and politely in a corner until our Lord God returned, so that no one would notice him and get angry. The tailor promised to do this. He sat down in a corner behind the door, but as soon as Saint Peter left, he got up and began walking from one corner of heaven to another, looking at everything. Finally he came to some beautiful, expensive chairs surrounding a special chair set with many precious jewels. It stood much higher than the others. In front of it was a golden footstool. This was the chair where our Lord God sits when he is at home. For a good while the tailor stood quietly before the chair, constantly looking at it, for he liked it better than any of the others. Finally he sat down on the chair. Seated there he could look down on the earth and see everything that was happening there. Among other things he saw an old woman who was stealing a hank of yarn from her neighbor. This so angered the tailor that he picked up the golden footstool and threw it at the old woman down on earth. No longer able to reach the footstool, the tailor crept down from the chair and returned to his old corner, remaining there as if he had gone nowhere else. When our Lord God returned home he did not notice the tailor, but when he sat down in his chair he saw that the footstool was missing. He asked Saint Peter where his footstool was, and Saint Peter replied that he did not know. "Who has been here? Did you allow anyone inside?" he asked further. "I do not know of anyone who has been here, except for a tailor who is sitting over there behind the door." Then our Lord God asked the tailor, "What did you do with my footstool? Have you seen it?" The frightened tailor answered with fear and trembling, "I was sitting in your chair when I saw an old woman down on earth stealing a hank of yarn from her neighbor. This made me so angry that I threw the footstool at her." Our Lord God became angry at the tailor, and he said, "Hey, you rogue, if I had thrown a footstool at you every time that you cut off too much cloth and kept it for yourself, there would not be any chairs or benches left in heaven." Thus the tailor, his own shortcomings and misdeeds having been revealed, was forced to leave heaven. We should learn from this not to prosecute and punish the small sins of others, while we ourselves are guilty of much larger ones. Source: Jörg Wickram, Rollwagenbüchlein , edited by Heinrich Kurz (Leipzig: Verlagsbuchhandlung von J. J. Weber, 1865), no. 110, pp. 185-87 . Jörg [also spelled Georg] Wickram was born about 1505 in Colmar, Alsace (now France), and died before 1562 in Burkheim am Rhein, Germany. His Das Rollwagenbüchlein , a collection of jests and anecdotes, was first published in 1555. Return to the table of contents . The Tailor in Heaven Germany It came to pass that one beautiful day God wished to take a stroll in the heavenly garden, and took all the apostles and saints with him, leaving no one in heaven but Saint Peter. The Lord had commanded him to allow no one to enter during his absence, so Peter stood by the gate and kept watch. Before long someone knocked. Peter asked who was there, and what he wanted. "I am a poor, honest tailor who is requesting admission," replied a pleasant voice. "Honest indeed," said Peter. "Like the thief on the gallows. You have been sticky-fingered and have robbed people of their cloth. You will not get into heaven. The Lord has forbidden me to let anyone in as long he is out." "Oh, please be merciful," cried the tailor. "Little scraps that fall off the table by themselves are not stolen, and are not worth mentioning. See here, I am limping and have blisters on my feet from walking here. I cannot possibly go back again. Just let me in, and I will do all the dirty work. I will tend the children, wash their diapers, wipe off and clean the benches on which they have been playing, and patch all their torn clothes." Saint Peter let himself be moved by pity and opened heaven's gate just wide enough for the lame tailor to slip his lean body inside. He had to take a seat in a corner behind the door, and was told to stay there quietly and peacefully, so that the Lord would not notice him when he returned, and become angry. The tailor obeyed, but one time when Saint Peter stepped outside the door, he got up, and full of curiosity, looked into every corner of heaven, seeing what was there. Finally he came to a place where there were many beautiful and costly chairs. At their center was a seat made entirely of gold and set with glistening precious stones. It stood much higher than the other chairs, and a golden footstool stood in front of it. This was the seat on which the Lord sat when he was at home, and from which he could see everything that was happening on earth. The tailor stood still, and looked at the seat for a long time, for he liked it better than all the rest. Finally he could control his curiosity no longer, and he climbed up and sat down on it. From there he saw everything that was happening on earth. He noticed an ugly old woman who was standing beside a stream doing the laundry. She secretly set two scarves aside. Seeing this made the tailor so angry that he took hold of the golden footstool and threw it at the old thief, through heaven down to earth. Unable to bring the stool back again, he quietly sneaked down from the seat, sat back down in his place behind the door, and pretended that he had done nothing at all. When the Lord and Master returned with his heavenly attendants, he did not notice the tailor behind the door, but when he sat down on his seat, the footstool was missing. He asked Saint Peter what had become of the footstool, but he did not know. Then he asked if he had admitted anyone. "I know of no one who has been here," answered Peter, "except for a lame tailor, who is still sitting behind the door." Then the Lord had the tailor brought before him, and asked him if he had taken the footstool, and where he had put it. "Oh, Lord," answered the tailor joyously, "In my anger I threw it down to earth at an old woman whom I saw stealing two scarves while doing the laundry." "Oh, you scoundrel," said the Lord, "if I were to judge as you judge, how would it have gone with you? I would have long since had no chairs, benches, seats, no, not even a stove-poker, but would have thrown everything down at the sinners. You can no longer stay in heaven, but must go outside the gate again. From there watch where you are going. Here no one metes out punishment, except for me alone, the Lord." Peter had to take the tailor out of heaven again, and because his shoes were worn out and his feet were covered with blisters, he took a stick in his hand and went to Wait-a-While, where the good soldiers sit and make merry. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Der Schneider im Himmel , Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales), 7th ed. (Berlin, 1857), no. 35. The Grimms knew this story from a number of renaissance anecdote collections, including Jörg [Georg] Wickram, Rollwagenbüchlein (ca. 1555); Jakob Frey, Gartengesellschaft (1556); and Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof, Wendunmuth (1563 ff.). This story first appeared in the second edition (1819) of the Grimms' Kinder- und Hausmärchen. The story was slightly modified in the fourth edition (1840). Return to the table of contents . The Tailor in Heaven Germany When the first tailor was admitted into heaven everyone there was very happy, because such an event was so rare and unexpected. Therefore God sponsored a festive procession in the tailor's honor. Because tailors are an unusual type, and are especially vain, our tailor felt himself too good to participate in the procession; instead he remained at home and looked around heaven. He came to the divine throne, climbed onto it, and sat down. At the side he noticed a window, which he opened and looked down onto earth. From here he could see everything that was happening on earth. There he saw another tailor seated at his window who was just about to steal a small hank of yarn. This angered our tailor so much that he broke off the leg of a chair and threw it at the tailor's head. When God returned and saw the broken chair he asked the tailor what he had done, to which the tailor eagerly described everything he had seen. But then God said, "If I had acted this way every time that you stole something, throwing a chair leg at your head, there would not be another one here at all." Then the tailor was forced out of heaven, and -- so they say -- another one has never been admitted. I would like to know if that is true. Source: Ernst Meier, Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 35, pp. 123-24 . Return to the table of contents . A Spanish Cavalryman Switzerland On earth people have to die; otherwise there would not be enough room for the young ones. It is no wonder then that once a little tailor got sick and died. So the tailor died, and just like a needle pulling a thread, his soul went straight toward heaven. He found the door and knocked ever so politely. After he had knocked a while the window opened, and Saint Peter asked who was there. The needle-hero said, "Hey, it is little tailor, who -- with permission -- would like to enter heaven, Mr. Peter." "A little tailor?" said the latter. "An ironing-board finch? We can't use the likes of you in heaven." And with that Peter shut the window. While the tailor was standing there just outside of heaven, sorrowing and complaining, he saw an old woman who had also been told that they could not use her in heaven. The two comforted one another while seated outside there in the darkness. Meanwhile a mighty hussar approached and called out that he would like admission to heaven. Saint Peter did not make him wait long, because the latter had told someone that he was a Spanish cavalryman. The little tailor took note of this, quickly ran over to the little old woman, and said to her, "How would it be, my friend, if the two of us were to smuggle ourselves into heaven? Not a bad idea, I believe. Quick now, little woman, I have a clever plan. I will be a Spanish cavalryman, and you will carry me up to heaven's door. I'll take care of the rest. The important thing is that we will both get into heaven!" No sooner said than done. The needle-knight climbed onto the little woman just outside of Saint Peter's gate. "Who is there?" the person with the keycalled out from inside. "A Spanish cavalryman!" shouted the little tailor with all his might. The door opened, and our Spanish knight proudly rode in and took his place with the other people in heaven. So that is what the tailor did, And everyone laughed at him, And had a good time all around, And they never had to leave again. Source: Otto Sutermeister, Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus der Schweiz (Aarau: Druck und Verlag von H. R. Sauerländer, 1873), no. 15, pp. 44-45 . Sutermeister's source: Ernst Ludwig Rochholz, "Es Mærli vom æ Schniderli, wu en spanische Chasseur gspielt het," Schweizersagen aus dem Aargau (Aarau: Druck und Verlag von H. R. Sauerländer, 1856), vol. 2, pp. 305-306 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 29, 2009. Tall Tales: The Big Freeze. Folktales of Type 1967 Tall Tales: The Big Freeze Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 1967 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2022 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Frozen in the Saddle (Germany). Baron Munchhausen in Poland (England / Germany). Paul Bunyan and the Winter of the Deep Snow (North America). Keeping Paul Bunyan's Bunk Houses Warm (North America). The Winter of the Blue Snow (North America). A Big Snow (Idaho). The Great Snowfall (Native American -- Alaska / British Columbia). Link to Tall Tales: Frozen Sounds. Folktales of type 1889F . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Frozen in the Saddle Germany A locksmith at Cannstatt told how when he was a young journeyman a nobleman had given him a horse that he was to ride to Hohenurach. It was Saint Nicholas' Day [December 6] and bone-chilling cold. Almost no one had ventured out into the frost. Arriving at Hohenrauch, the locksmith attempted to dismount at the stables, but he was frozen fast in the saddle. He could neither separate himself from the saddle nor step out of the stirrups. Finally the servants decided to pick up him and the saddle together, carry them inside, and set them behind the stove to thaw out, so that he would be able to return home on foot. He sat in the saddle with his feet in the stirrups behind the stove for more than five hours before he had thawed out. Only then was he able to return to Stuttgart where he related what had happened to him. Source (books.google.com): Jakob Frey, "Von einem Schlosser, der in den Sattel gefroren was," Jakob Freys Gartengesellschaft (1556) , edited by Johannes Bolte (Tübingen: Gedruckt für den Litterarischen Verein in Stuttgart, 1896), ch. 119, p. 135 . Source (Internet Archive): Jakob Frey, "Von einem Schlosser, der in den Sattel gefroren was," Jakob Freys Gartengesellschaft (1556) , edited by Johannes Bolte (Tübingen: Gedruckt für den Litterarischen Verein in Stuttgart, 1896), ch. 119, p. 135 . Cannstatt (now called Bad Cannstatt) is a district of the city of Stuttgart in Baden-Wüttemberg, Germany. Hohenurach is a castle (now in ruins) about 50 km south of Stuttgart. Return to the table of contents . Baron Munchausen in Poland England / Germany I set off from home on my journey to Russia, in the midst of winter, from a just notion that frost and snow must of course mend the roads, which every traveller had described, as uncommonly bad through the northern parts of Germany, Poland, Courland, and Livonia. I went on horseback, which, provided mare and rider are in order, is the most convenient manner of travelling. I was but lightly cloathed, of this, I felt the inconvenience, the the more I advanced northeast. What must not a poor old man have suffered in that severe weather and climate, whom I saw on a bleak common, in Poland, lying on the road, helpless, shivering, and hardly having wherewithall to cover his nakedness. I pitied the poor soul. Though I felt exceedingly cold myself, I threw my mantle over him and immediately I heard a voice from the heavens, blessing me for that piece of charity, saying, "I'll be damned my son if I do not reward it in time." I went on: Night and darkness overtook me. No village was to be seen. The country was covered with snow, and I was unacquainted with the roads. Tired I alighted at last, and fastened my horse to something of a pointed stump of a tree, which appeared above the snow. For the sake of safety I took my pistols under my arm, and lay down in the snow, not far off, where I slept so soundly, that I did not open my eyes till it was full daylight. Great was my astonishment now, to find myself in the midst of a village, lying in the church-yard. Nor was my horse to be seen, but I heard him soon after neigh, somewhere above me. On looking upwards I beheld him tied and hanging to the weather-cock of the steeple. Matters were now very plain to me: The village had been covered with snow that night; a sudden change of weather had taken place; I had sunk down to the church-yard whilst asleep, gently, and in the same proportion as the snow had melted away, and what in the dark I had taken to be a stump of a little tree appearing above the snow, to which I had tied my horse, proved to have been the cross or weather-cock of the steeple. Without long consideration I took one of my pistols, shot off the halter, brought down the horse and proceeded on my journey. Source (books.google.com): Rudolf Erich Raspe, Baron Munchausen's Narrative of His Marvellous Travels and Campaigns in Russia (Oxford, 1786), pp. 5-9 . Rudolf Erich Raspe (1736-1794) was a German expatriate who left Germany in 1775, spending the rest of his life in England, Scotland, and Ireland. Wikipedia article about Baron Munchhausen . Return to the table of contents . Paul Bunyan and the Winter of the Deep Snow North America The Winter of the Deep Snow everything was buried. Paul had to dig down to find the tops of the tallest White Pines. He had the snow dug away around them and lowered his sawyers down to the base of the trees. When the tree was cut off he hauled it to the surface with a long parbuckle chain to which Babe, mounted on snowshoes, was hitched. It was impossible to get enough stove pipe to reach to the top of the snow, so Paul had Big Ole make stovepipe by boring out logs with a long six-inch auger. The year of the Two Winters they had winter all summer and then in the fall it turned colder. One day Big Joe set the boiling coffeepot on the stove and it froze so quick that the ice was hot. That was right after Paul had built the Great Lakes and that winter they froze clear to the bottom. They never would have thawed out if Paul had not chopped out the ice and hauled it out on shore for the sun to melt. He finally got all the ice thawed but he had to put in all new fish. Source (books.google.com): W. B. Laughead [pseudonym], The Marvelous Exploits of Paul Bunyan as Told in the Camps of the White Pine Lumbermen for Generations (Minneapolis: Red River Lumber Company, 1922), p. 20 . Source (Internet Archive): W. B. Laughead [pseudonym], The Marvelous Exploits of Paul Bunyan as Told in the Camps of the White Pine Lumbermen for Generations (Minneapolis: Red River Lumber Company, 1922), p. 20 . Return to the table of contents . Keeping Paul Bunyan's Bunk Houses Warm North America It was a large and irksome task to keep the bunk houses warm. The main house took 36 cords of wood to heat it for a day. Paul had his efficiency expert, Copper Boilerson, study the problem. One cold night he hit on a plan that saved Paul from worry the rest of the year as far as the heating problem was concerned. He fired up the stoves and got them red hot. Then he froze them that way and thus preserved them red hot for the entire winter. This new scheme pleased Paul very much. He decided to use it in another way. One night when it was very cold he went out and gave the commands for the spring drive. The words froze as they left his mouth, and when the spring came and it came time for the drive there was no need of giving any commands for the drive. The words that Paul had repeated in the winter were thawed out, and the men heard them as clearly as when Paul gave them himself. Source (books.google.com): C. Prout, "A Night with Paul Bunyan," The Ames Forester , vol. 7, (Ames, Iowa: Forestry Club of the Iowa State College, 1924), p. 68 . Return to the table of contents . The Winter of the Blue Snow North America One of the worst winters I ever put in with Paul -- or anywhere, for that matter -- was the winter of the Blue Snow. It was so cold that winter that the loggers all swore blue streaks, and the snow all turned blue -- came down blue in the first place, and then turned bluer after it touched the ground, too. The women down in the settlements used to use a little of it for blue in their blue-water, and whenever cows happened to get some of it along with the dry grass they was eatin', they gave blue milk. It was sure a pretty sight too, though you couldn't hardly forget the cold long enough to stop and look at it. Blue, blue everywhere, as far as the eye could see, stretchin' along to the west in the open places, and in the woods around the trees, a little mound around each one with just a little hole in the middle around where the tree was. The two Joe Murphys -- brothers -- one of 'em named Pete -- had the job of holdin' up the skylines in camp that winter, and I used to help 'em sometimes -- so I seen a good deal of the snow -- more'n my share, likely. It was a hard job we had, for the snow was so nearly the same color as the sky, that you couldn't hardly tell sometimes where one left off and the other begun -- like the time we was layin' out the ice-road round a big hill in order to get away from the grade. We'd been workin' for about a week or so, and then all of a sudden one mornin' we come out and the hill was all gone, and all it'd been was a big cloud we'd been tryin' to work around. And that way it was hard all right, and walkin' around in it up over our shoes and rubbers every day wasn't what you might call comfortable neither. And there was the snow-snakes -- that was the worst of it that winter. All over the ground, no matter where you went, there was them snakes crawlin' around, and you couldn't hardly get away from them, for they'd coil up and jump at you if you wasn't careful and a bite was almost always sure death. Freeze to death, naturally -- and then the only thing that could save you was a good drink of whisky if that happened to be handy. Otherwise you was done for and you had to learn to be more careful another time. And the little pesky frost-biters up in the hills was pretty bad, too, though not quite so bad as the snakes -- but they'd worry you a lot more. It was sure cold that winter. It was so cold that the words froze in our mouths when we tried to talk and Paul had to send to England for a frozen word interpreter. Some of the combinations that come out that spring when they begun to thaw out -- I tell you, you'd know then what somebody thought of you, all right. One fellow that talked an awful lot the words froze so thick around him that Paul finally had to get the Blue Ox to haul him out at last. And the green bull-cooks froze in their tracks every time Paul spoke to 'em. Yes, and it was cold inside, in the cook-shanty and the bunkhouse, too. If I had 'em here, I could get twenty men to swear if I could get one, that the coffee that was served in camp that winter used to be froze stone cold before the flunkies could get half way down the tables with it. Though, for that matter, that wasn't no uncommon thing other winters. And the icicles on the beards used to be pretty near as long some of the other winters, too -- it wasn't so very different in that respect. One mornin' Paul was goin' to town and he went to make him some hot coffee before he started out, and I'll be blamed if he didn't find the coffee-pot froze solid to the back of the stove, and even Paul couldn't budge it. Ice froze so fast that winter, it froze warm and was too hot to handle. And Lake Superior froze solid to the bottom. In the spring Paul had to haul the ice all up on the shore to thaw it out, and then he had to re-stock the lake with new fish. I know myself -- just to show how cold it was -- from actual experience; I was sittin' by the stove one evenin' takin' off my shoes. When I went to get up to hang up my socks, I wasn't able to make it without the bench I had been sittin' on follerin' me stuck tight. And what'd happened was, somebody'd spilled water on it before I sat down, and it had froze solid to the seat of my pants, and stuck there till I could get some of the boys to pry it off of me. That's how cold it was in the bunkhouse actually that winter. And all that time I'd been sittin' right up close to the stove as close as I could get, and pretty near roastin' on the front of me; for there was a big fire burnin' so the stove-pipe was red up to the roof pretty near. We had to have a lot of whisky in camp that winter of the Blue Snow, naturally, for, like I said, that was the only remedy that would help in case of a bite from the snow-snakes. And you'd have to get it quick too -- you couldn't stand to stand around and wait for it very long. And so Paul -- he was pretty nice about anythin' like that and tried to take good care of his men always -- had a big trough put up, and that was kept full all the time, and a dipper hangin' by always handy, but even that wasn't enough. There used to be so many around all the time, and then besides it was hard to get the supply to fill the barrel, and Paul didn't hardly know what to do. "I don't know where to get any more from," he says. But then finally something happened one day that helped him out. You see there was a fellow in camp that time called Sour-Face Murphy. And he was sour -- sour enough to turn anythin'. And one day one of the cookees was peelin' a mess of spuds in the sink. He was pretty near through and was just goin' to take 'em out, when he seen all of a sudden the whole mess of peelin's turnin' sour. And he looked up to see what had happened, and there was Sour-Face Murphy standin' in the door, and that's what'd done it. Well, he fished the peelin's all out, and there in the bottom of the sink was twenty gallons of whisky as good as you'd ever want to get. And so Sam, the cook, went and told Paul about it, and Paul, who'd been wantin' to get some whisky from some wheres, and anyway was always lookin' for new and better improvements to use in camp, took Sour-Face off the load gang right away and turned him into camp distillery, and so we had all the whisky we ever wanted or had any kind of use for after that. And then the snow-snake trouble was better too, so there wasn't any more casualties that I know of, the last part of the winter. One way that the men protected themselves from the cold was by raisin' long beards. Good growths of beard was pretty generally the style in the loggin' camps any time, but that winter of the Blue Snow they was extra long. They was so long that they covered the men pretty near all the way from the chin to the toes. The ends the men tucked in their boots, one half in each felt boot, sittin' generally on the edge of their bunks to do it. Some of 'em got 'em in too tight and then there was danger of makin' themselves humpbacked, but that wasn't dangerous to most, because they was too long, the beards, I mean. Out in the woods the wind used to whistle through 'em, so you couldn't hardly tell whether it was the beards or the tops of the pine trees that made that singin' that you heard. In the spring when the weather got warm and they didn't need their beards for protection no more, and they was gettin' in the way anyway, the men had 'em all cut off. We used our axes for the first few cuts -- course they had to be sharpened up good -- and that way they could do it for each other -- and then to finish up the job we went at it the reggelar way with razors. Of course that don't mean Paul. He couldn't never use a common size razor, naturally -- a good sharp scythe is what he always used. The whiskers that was cut off was all stacked up in haystacks, and Paul sent down for somebody to come up and make him a price, and one of the McAdam Mattress Company's men come up and dickered for and bought the whole lot. I don't know why the whiskers growed so good that winter unless it was the cold. Fur animals always has thicker fur in cold winters than in mild ones. And then the whisky the men drunk might of done somethin' to it -- they naturally always spilled a good deal. Well, that was the Winter of the Blue Snow, but I mustn't forget the Spring of the Deep Mud that come after it, for where the snow'd been six foot deep that winter, the mud, that spring, was sixty times six foot, like the Good Book says. And the ice-roads stood up twenty foot out of a lake of mud a on each side. That's the way them ice-roads was, though, generally. Built of solid ice that way and packed down good, they wouldn't melt down near so fast as the snow on the sides, and in the spring pretty near always they'd be standin' up high that way, long after most of the other snow and sleddin' was all gone. A warm day come about the middle of April that year and the soft snow melted away in just about a single day. There'd been a crust up on top of it -- a January thaw we'd had, and then a stiff freeze right after it so the crust'd formed, and most of the skiddin' that winter had been done up on that crust. And so when it melted away quick like that in the spring, in the places where the snow'd been deepest, the skid sleds was standin' right up in the treetops the next mornin'. And then it kept right on thawin' the next few days and I tell you the mud there got to be along that loggin' road was somethin' awful. By one of the crossin's, especially. One of the teamsters was comin' by there with a load just about dark one evenin' and he slipped in right by the crossin', and it wasn't but a minute or two till he was all covered over way up to the cattle's noses. Another teamster, about two miles further back on the road, heard their last bellow that they made, and so hurried up to help 'em. This teamster pried the cattle's head out of the mud and got a chain around one of 'em's horns and hitched onto that and started to haul. "Hold on there, Ed," he hollered, "I can get you out all right." But of course you might know what happened was, when he was tryin' to haul crosswise that way, and the road slippery like it was, he slid off into the mud hole on the other side. But that automatically helped the first one out, of course, and he started to haul the other fellow out, but then he slipped in again a second time, naturally, and I don't know how long that would of kept up and they might be goin' yet, see-sawin' back and forth that way, but Brimstone Bill happened to come along just then leadin' the Blue Ox, and he hitched onto the chain halfway between the two other yokes of cattle, and so hauled ' em both down the loggin ' road and into camp. Source (books.google.com): Esther Shephard, Paul Bunyan (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company, 1924), pp. 99-108 . Source (Internet Archive): Esther Shephard, Paul Bunyan (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company, 1924), pp. 99-108 . Return to the table of contents . A Big Snow USA (Idaho) There have been deep winters in Idaho. In one, many years ago, some shepherds pitched camp for the night after rounding their sheep into a group, and awoke the next morning to discover that it had snowed foot upon foot. To their consternation the sheep were gone. "But look," said one, pointing to a thousand small mounds over the landscape. And so it was: the sheep had all been snowed under and now seemed to be about the size of pillows under the snow. Source (books.google.com): Vardis Fisher, Idaho Lore , prepared by the Federal Writers' Project of the Work Projects Administration (Caldwell, Idaho: Caxton Printers, 1939), pp. 123-24 . Return to the table of contents . The Great Snowfall Native American (Alaska / British Columbia) Once upon a time a number of families of the wolf clan and of the eagle clan lived in a village at Sqamgō'ns, in Portland Channel. Near by there was a village of grizzly bear men. [These were men. It is not quite clear if they were men of a grizzly bear clan, or if the story happened at the time when all animals were still men.] They attacked the village, and killed everybody with the exception of one boy and one girl of each of the two clans. They were crying all the time when they saw their relatives killed. Then one of the grizzly bear men went to their hut, and threatened to kill them if they should not stop crying. But one of the boys took his bow and arrow and shot the man in the chest, thus killing him. After this had happened, they dug a deep ditch in their hut, and buried all their relatives who had been killed. They left the place of these misfortunes and went down the mountains. After some time they reached a house, in which they found an old, old man who had been left by his friends to die alone. He said to them: "Stay here until I die, my grandchildren, and bury me when I am dead." They stayed, and he asked them why they had left their country. When they had told him, he asked them to return, because salmon were nowhere as plentiful as in the river on which their house had stood. He also warned them, saying: "The sky is full of feathers. Take good care to provide yourself with plenty of meat, and build a strong house." He was a great shaman, and was able to foresee the future. After two days he died. The young people buried him. Then they started to return to their home in obedience to what the shaman had told them. They followed a river, and when they were near its source they saw an immense herd of mountain goats coming down towards them. They did not stop to shoot them, but ran right up to them and dispatched them, cutting their throats with their knives. Then they went back to the camp in which they had left the girls, taking along only a kid that they had killed. They threw some of its meat and tallow into the fire, as a sacrifice to the dead shaman who had directed them to return home. On the following day they moved their camp to a hill which was located in the midst of three lakes. There they built a strong hut as directed by the shaman. The two girls went out to fetch the meat of the mountain goats. While they were drying it, the boys strengthened the poles of the house, joined them with stout thongs, and thus prepared for a heavy snowfall. They put the meat into the house. On the following day the snow began to fall. They lived on the meat of the mountain goats, but they sacrificed as much to the dead shaman as they ate. It continued to snow for two months. They could not go out to gather wood for their fire, but they had to burn the bones and the tallow of the goats. The smoke kept a hole open in the roof of their hut; and, when looking up, they could see no more than a very small speck of light. But after two months they saw the blue sky through this hole. The sun was shining again. Then they dug a hole towards the surface of the snow and came out. Nothing but snow was to be seen. The rocks of the mountains and the trees were all covered. Gradually the snow began to melt a little, and the tops of the trees reappeared. One day they saw a bear near the top of a tree. When they approached, it crawled back to its lair at the foot of the tree. Now they started on their way to their old home. After a long and difficult march, they reached it just at the time when the olachen were coming. They caught a plentiful supply and were well provided with provisions. In summer there were salmon in the river. They caught them and dried and split them. They married and had many children. They were the only people who were saved from the heavy snow, and from them descended the present generations of people. They multiplied very rapidly, for they married very young, as dogs do. At the end of the first summer, only a small part of the snow had melted. A few rocks appeared in the mountains, but in the fall new snow began to fall. In the spring of the following year it began to melt again. The trees were gradually freed from snow, but some of it has always remained on the mountains, where it forms the glaciers. The two couples who had been saved from the snow grew to be very old. Their hair was white, and they were bent with old age. One day the young men climbed the mountains to hunt mountain goat. One of the old men accompanied them, but he was left behind, as he could not walk as fast as the young men did. When he had reached a meadow high up the side of the mountain he heard a voice from the interior of the rocks saying: "Here is the man who killed all our friends." When he looked up he saw a number of mountain goats above. He did not know how to reach them, since his legs were weak. He took two sticks and tied one to each of his legs in order to steady and to strengthen them. Thus he was enabled to climb. He reached the mountain goats and cut their necks. He killed thirty. Among these was a kid. He took out its tallow and put it on his head; he cut off its head and took it under his arm to carry it home. He had stayed away so long that his friends had given him up for lost. He told them of his adventure. He roasted the kid's head and ate it. On the following morning he was dead. Source (books.google.com): Franz Boas, "Traditions of the Ts'ets'ā'ut [Tsetsaut]," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 10, no. 36 (January - March, 1897), pp. 35-37 . Source (Internet Archive): Franz Boas, "Traditions of the Ts'ets'ā'ut," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 10, no. 36 (January - March, 1897), pp. 35-37 . Return to the table of contents . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 29, 2022. Tall Tales: Frozen Sounds. Folktales of type 1889F Tall Tales: Frozen Sounds Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 1889F edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2022 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Frozen Words (Plutarch). An Italian Merchant in Poland (Italy). Unfrozen Words (France). Frozen Words (England). Baron Munchausen in Russia (England / Germany). The Post Horn (Germany). Paul Bunyan and the Year of the Hard Winter (North America). Voices in the Frying Pan (African American -- Mississippi). Link to Tall Tales: The Big Freeze. Folktales of type 1967 . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Frozen Words Plutarch Applicable here is that saying of Antiphanes, which some one applied to Plato's pupils. Antiphanes said playfully that in a certain city words were frozen directly they were spoken, owing to the great cold, and were thawed again in the summer, so that one could then hear what had been said in the winter. So he said of the words which were spoken by Plato to young men, that most of them only understood them late in life when they were become old men. Source (books.google.com): Plutarch's Complete Works: Essays and Miscellanies , vol. 2 (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell and Company, 1909), p. 122 . Source (Internet Archive): Plutarch's Complete Works: Essays and Miscellanies , vol. 2 (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell and Company, 1909), p. 122 . Plutarch was a Greek philosopher and historian. He was born about 46 CE and died after 119 CE. Return to the table of contents . An Italian Merchant in Poland Italy "You all are familiar with those splendid lies so well composed that they move to laughter. A very excellent one was but lately told me by a friend of ours who never suffers us to be without them." Then the Magnifico Giuliano said: "Be that as it may, it cannot be more excellent or more ingenious than one with a fellow-Tuscan of ours, a merchant of Lucca, affirmed the other day as a positive fact." "Tell it to us," added my lady Duchess. The Magnifico Giuliano replied, laughing: This merchant, so he tells the story, once finding himself in Poland, decided to buy a quantity of sables with the intention of carrying them into Italy and making great profit thereby. And after much effort, being unable to enter Muscovy himself (by reason of the war that was then waging between the King of Poland and the Duke of Muscovy), he arranged with the help of some people of the country, that on an appointed day certain Muscovite merchants should come with their sables to the frontier of Poland, and he promised to be there in order to strike the bargain. Accordingly, proceeding with his companions towards Muscovy, the man of Lucca reached the Dnieper, which he found all frozen as hard as marble, and saw that the Muscovites (who on account of the war were themselves suspicious of the Poles) were already on the other bank, but approached no nearer than the width of the river. So, having recognized each other, the Muscovites after some signalling began to speak with a loud voice, and to ask the price that they wished for their sables; but such was the extreme cold that they were not heard, for before reaching the other bank (where the man of Lucca and his interpreters were) the words froze in the air, and remained there frozen and caught in such manner that the Poles, who knew the custom, set about making a great fire in the very middle of the river; because to their thinking that was the limit reached by the warm voice before it was stopped by freezing, and the river was quite solid enough to bear the fire easily. So, when this was done, the words (which had remained frozen for the space of an hour) in due course began to melt and to fall in a murmur, like snow from the mountains in May; and thus they were at once heard very well, although the men had already gone. But as the merchant thought that the words asked too high a price for the sables, he would not accept the offer and so returned without them. Source (books.google.com): Baldessare Castiglione, The Book of the Courtier by Count Baldesar Castiglione (1528) (New York: Carles Scribner's Sons, 1903), book 2, pp. 132-33 . Source (Internet Archive): Baldessare Castiglione, The Book of the Courtier by Count Baldesar Castiglione (1528) (New York: Carles Scribner's Sons, 1903), book 2, pp. 132-33 . Link to this tale in Italian: Baldassarre Castiglione, Il libro del Cortegiano (1538), libro secondo . This tale is retold by the German baroque author Hans Wilhelm Kirchof (1525-1605): "Erzehlung wol lachens werht," Wendunmuth (Stuttgart: Für den Litterarischen Verein, 1869), book 3, no. 141, pp. 415-16 . Baldassare Castiglione (1478-1529) was an Italian courtier and Renaissance author. Return to the table of contents . Unfrozen Words France How Pantagruel, being at Sea, heard various unfrozen Words When we were at Sea, Junketing, Tipling, Discoursing, and telling Stories, Pantagruel rose and stood up to look out; then ask'd us, Do you hear nothing, Gentlemen? Methinks I hear some People talking in the Air; yet I can see no body; Hark! According to his Command we listened, and with full Ears suck'd in the Air, as some of you suck Oysters, to find if we could hear some Sound scattered through the Sky; and to lose none of it, like the Emperor Antoninus, some of us laid their Hands hollow next to their Ears: But all this wou'd not do, nor cou'd we hear any Voice. Yet Pantagruel continued to assure us he heard various Voices in the Air, some of Men, and some of Women. At last we began to fancy that we also heard something, or at least that our Ears tingled; and the more we listened, the plainer we discerned the Voices, so as to distinguish Articulate Sounds. This mightily frighted us, and not without cause, since we could see nothing, yet heard such various Sounds and Voices of Men, Women, Children, Horses, etc. insomuch that Panurge cry'd out, Cods Belly, there's no fooling with the Devil; we are all beshit; let's fly. There is some Ambuscado hereabouts. Fryar Jhon, Art thou here, my Love? I prithee stay by me, old Boy: Hast thou got thy swindging Tool? See that it do not stick in the Scabbard; thou never scour'st it half as it should be. We are undone. Hark! They are Guns, Gad judge me; Let's fly, I do not say with Hands and Feet, as Brutus said at the Battle of Pharsalia, I say with Sails and Oars; Let's whip it away, I never find my self to have a bit of Courage at Sea : In Cellars and elsewhere I have more than enough: Let 's fly, and save our Bacon. I do not say this, for any Fear that I have; for I dread nothing but Danger, that I don't: I always say it, that shouldn't. The Free Archer of Baignolet said as much. Let's hazard nothing therefore, I say, lest we come off' bluely. Tack about! Helm a Lee! thou Son of a Batchelor. Wou'd I were now well in Quinquenois, tho' I were never to Marry. Haste away; let 's make all the Sail we can, they'll be too hard for us, we are not able to cope with them; they are ten to our one, I'll warrant you; nay, and they are on their Dunghil, while we do not know the Country. They'll be the death of us. We'll lose no Honour by flying; Demosthenes saith, That the Man that runs away, may fight another time. At least, let us retreat to the Lee-ward. Helm a Lee! Bring the Main-tack aboard! Hawl the Bowlins! Hoist the Top-gallants! We are all dead Men : Get off', in the Devil's Name, get off'. Pantagruel, hearing the sad Outcry which Panurge made, said, Who talks of Flying? Let's first see who they are; perhaps they may be Friends: I can discover no body yet, tho' I can see a hundred Miles round me: But let's consider a little; I have read, that a Philosopher, nam'd Perron, was of Opinion, that there were several Worlds that touch'd each other in an Equilateral Triangle; in whose Centre, he said, was the Dwelling of Truth; and that the words, Ideas, Copies and Images of all things past and to come, resided there; round which was the Age, and that with Success of Time part of them us'd to fall on Mankind like Rheums and Mildews, just as the Dew fell on Gideon's Fleece, till the Age was fulfilled. I also remember, continu'd he, that Aristotle affirms Homer's Words to be flying, moving, and consequently animated. Besides, Antiphanes said, that Plato's Philosophy was like Words which being spoken in some Country during a hard Winter, are immediately congeal'd, frozen up, and not heard; for what Plato taught young Lads, could hardly be understood by them when they were grown old: Now, continu'd he, we should Philosophise and Search whether this be not the Place where those Words are thawed. You 'd wonder very much, should this be the Head and Lyre of Orpheus. When the Thracian Women had torn him to pieces, they threw his Head and Lyre into the River Hebrus; down which they floated to the Euxine Sea, as far as the Island of Lesbos, the Head continually uttering a doleful Song, as it were, lamenting the Death of Orpheus, and the Lyre, with the Wind's impulse, moving its Strings, and harmoniously Accompanying the Voice. Let's see if we cannot discover them hereabouts. How among the Frozen Words, Pantagruel found some Odd ones. The Skipper made answer; Be not afraid, my Lord, we are on the Confines of the Frozen Sea, on which, about the beginning of last Winter, happened a great and bloody Fight between the Arimaspians and the Nephelibates. Then the Words and Cries of Men and Women, the hacking, slashing and hewing of Battle-axes, the shocking, knocking and joulting of Armours and Harnesses, the neighing of Horses, and all other Martial Din and Noise, froze in the Air: And now the Rigour of the Winter being over, by the succeeding Serenity and Warmth of the Weather, they melt, and are heard. By jingo, quoth Panurge, the Man talks somewhat like; I believe him; but couldn't we see some of 'em? Methinks I have read, that on the edge of the Mountain on which Moses received the Judaic Law, the People saw the Voices sensibly. Here, here, said Pantagruel, here are some that are not yet thaw'd. He then throw'd us on the Deck whole handfuls of frozen Words, which seem'd to us like your rough Sugar-Plumbs, of many Colours, like those us'd in Heraldry, some Words Gules , (This means also Jests and merry Sayings) some Vert , some Azure , some Black , some Or , (This means also fair Words;) and when we had somewhat warm'd them between our Hands, they melted like Snow, and we really heard them, but cou'd not understand them, for it was a Barbarous Gibberish; one of them only that was pretty big, having been warm'd between Fryar Jhon's Hands, gave a sound much like that of Chesnuts when they are thrown into the Fire without being first cut, which made us all start. This was the Report of a Field-piece in its time, cry'd Fryar Jhon. Panurge pray'd Pantagruel to give him some more; but Pantagruel told him, that to give Words, was the Part of a Lover. Sell me some then, I pray you, cry'd Panurge. That's the Part of a Lawyer, return'd Pantagruel; I wou'd sooner sell you Silence, tho' at a dearer Rate, as Demosthenes formerly sold it, by the means of his Argentangina or Silver Squinsey. However, he threw three or four handfulls of them on the Deck, among which I perceiv'd some very sharp Words, and some bloody Words, which, the Pilot said, us'd sometimes to go back and recoil to the Place whence they came, but 'twas with a slit Wesand; we also saw some terrible Words, and some others not very pleasant to the Eye. When they had been all melted together, we heard a strange Noise, Hin, hin, hin, hin, his, tick, tock, taack, brededin, brededack, frr, frr, frr, bou, bou, bou, bou, bou, bou, bou, bou, track, track, trr, trr, trr, trrr, trrrrrr, on, on, on, on, on, on, ououououon, gog, magog, and I do not know what other barbarous Words, which, the Pilot said, were the Noise made by the Charging Squadrons, the Shock and Neighing of Horses. Then we heard some large ones go off like Drums and Fifes, and others like Clarions and Trumpets. Believe me, we had very good Sport with them. I wou'd fain have sav'd some merry Odd Words, and have preserv'd them in Oil, as Ice and Snow are kept, and between clean Straw: But Pantagruel would not let me, saying, that 'tis a folly to hoard up what we are never like to want, or have always at hand, odd, quaint, merry and fat Words of Gules never being scarce among all good and jovial Pantagruelists. Panurge somewhat vex'd Fryar Jhon, and put him in the Pouts; for he took him at his Word, while he dreamt of nothing less. This caus'd the Fryar to threaten him with such a piece of Revenge as was put upon G. Jousseaume, who having taken the merry Patelin at his Word, when he had overbid himself in some Cloth, was afterwards fairly taken by the Horns like a Bullock, by his jovial Chapman whom he took at his Word like a Man. Panurge well knowing that threatened Folks live long, bobb'd, and made mouths at him, in token of Derision; then cry'd, Wou'd I had here the Word of the Holy Bottle, without being thus obliged to go farther in Pilgrimage to her. Source (books.google.com): François Rabelais, Gargantua and Pantagruel , vol. 3, translated into English by Sir Thomas Urquhart and Peter le Motteux, annis 1653-1694 (London: David Nutt, 1900), book 4, pp. 200-204 . Source (Internet Archive): François Rabelais, Gargantua and Pantagruel , vol. 3, translated into English by Sir Thomas Urquhart and Peter le Motteux, annis 1653-1694 (London: David Nutt, 1900), book 4, pp. 200-204 . Link to this tale in French: Les cinq livres de F. Rabelais -- Livre IV: Pantagruel (Paris: Libraire des Bibliophiles, 1876), chapters 15-16, pp. 236-42 . François Rabelais, the French Renaissance writer, was born between 1483 and 1494, and died in 1553. His five books of La vie de Gargantua et de Pantagruel were written between about 1532 and 1564. Return to the table of contents . Frozen Words England There are no books which I more delight in than in travels, especially those that describe remote countries, and give the writer an opportunity of shewing his parts without incurring any danger of being examined or contradicted. Among all the authors of this kind, our renowned countryman. Sir John Mandevile has distinguished himself, by the copiousness of his invention, and the greatness of his genius. The second to Sir John I take to have been, Ferdinand Mendez Pinto, a person of infinite adventure, and unbounded imagination. One reads the voyages of these two great wits, with as much astonishment as the travels of Ulysses in Homer, or of the Red-Cross Knight in Spenser. All is enchanted ground, and fairy-land. I have got into my hands, by great chance, several manuscripts of these two eminent authors, which are filled with greater wonders than any of those they have communicated to the public; and indeed, were they not so well attested, they would appear altogether improbable. I am apt to think the ingenious authors did not publish them with the rest of their works, lest they should pass for fictions and fables: a caution not unnecessary, when the reputation of their veracity was not yet established in the world. But as this reason has now no farther weight, I shall make the publick a present of these curious pieces, at such times as I shall find myself unprovided with other subjects. The present paper I intend to fill with an extract from Sir John's Journal, in which that learned and worthy knight gives an account of the freezing and thawing of several short speeches, which he made in the territories of Nova Zembla. I need not inform my reader, that the author of Hudibras alludes to this strange quality in that cold climate, when, speaking of abstracted notions cloathed in a visible shape, he adds that apt simile, "Like words congeal'd in northern air." Not to keep my reader any longer in suspense, the relation put into modem language, is as follows: We were separated by a storm in the latitude of seventy-three, insomuch, that only the ship which I was in, with a Dutch and French vessel, got safe into a creek of Nova Zembla, We landed, in order to refit our vessels, and store ourselves with provisions. The crew of each vessel made themselves a cabin of turf and wood, at some distance from each other, to fence themselves against the inclemencies of the weather, which was severe beyond imagination. We soon observed, that in talking to one another we lost several of our words, and could not hear one another at above two yards distance, and that too when we sat very near the fire. After much perplexity, I found that our words froze in the air, before they could reach the ears of the persons to whom they were spoken. I was soon confirmed in this conjecture, when, upon the increase of the cold, the whole company grew dumb, or rather deaf; for every man was sensible, as we afterwards found, that he spoke as well as ever; but the sounds no sooner took air than they were condensed and lost. It was now a miserable spectacle to see us nodding and gaping at one another, every man talking, and no man heard. One might observe a seaman that could hail a ship at a league's distance, beckoning with his hand, straining his lungs, and tearing his throat; but all in vain: Nee vox nee verba sequuntur. Nor voice, nor words ensued. We continued here three weeks in this dismal plight. At length, upon a turn of wind, the air about us began to thaw. Our cabin was immediately filled with a dry clattering sound, which I afterwards found to be the crackling of consonants that broke above our heads, and were often mixed with a gentle hissing, which I imputed to the letter s, that occurs so frequently in the English tongue. I soon after felt a breeze of whispers rushing by my ear; for those, being of a soft and gentle substance, immediately, liquefied in the warm wind that blew across our cabin. These were soon followed by syllables and short words, and at length by entire sentences, that melted sooner or later, as they were more or less congealed; so that we now heard every thing that had been spoken during the whole three weeks that we had been silent , if I may use that expression. It was now very early in the morning, and yet, to my surprise, I heard somebody say, "Sir John, it is midnight, and time for the ship's crew to go to-bed." This I knew to be the pilot's voice; and, upon recollecting myself, I concluded that he had spoken these words to me some days before, though I could not hear them until the present thaw. My reader will easily imagine how the whole crew was amazed to hear every man talking, and see no man opening his mouth. In the midst of this great surprise we were all in, we heard a volley of oaths and curses, lasting for a long while, and uttered in a very hoarse voice, which I knew belonged to the boatswain, who was a very choleric fellow, and had taken his opportunity of cursing and swearing at me, when he thought I could not hear him; for I had several times given him the strappado on that account, as I did not fail to repeat it for these his pious soliloquies, when I got him on ship-board. I must not omit the names of several beauties in Wapping, which were heard every now and then, in the midst of a long sigh that accompanied them; as, "Dear Kate!" "Pretty Mrs. Peggy!" "When shall I see my Sue again!" This betrayed several amours which had been concealed until that time, and furnished us with a great deal of mirth in our return to England. When this confusion of voices was pretty well over, though I was afraid to offer at speaking, as fearing I should not be heard, I proposed a visit to the Dutch cabin, which lay about a mile farther up in the country. My crew were extremely rejoiced to find they had again recovered their hearing; though every man uttered his voice with the same apprehensions that I had done, Et timidè verba intermissa retentat. And try'd his tongue, his silence softly broke. At about half-a-mile's distance from our cabin we heard the groanings of a bear, which at first startled us; but, upon enquiry, we were informed by some of our company, that he was dead, and now lay in salt, having been killed upon that very spot about a fortnight before, in the time of the frost. Not far from the same place, we were likewise entertained with some posthumous snarls, and barkings of a fox. We at length arrived at the little Dutch settlement; and, upon entering the room, found it filled with sighs that smelt of brandy, and several other unsavoury sounds, that were altogether inarticulate. My valet, who was an Irishman, fell into so great a rage at what he heard, that he drew his sword; but not knowing where to lay the blame, he put it up again. We were stunned with these confused noises, but did not hear a single word until about half-an-hour after; which I ascribed to the harsh and obdurate sounds of that language, which wanted more time than ours to melt, and become audible. After having here met with a very hearty welcome, we went to the cabin of the French, who, to make amends for their three weeks silence, were talking and disputing with greater rapidity and confusion than I ever heard in an assembly, even of that nation. Their language, as I found, upon the first giving of the weather, fell asunder and dissolved. I was here convinced of an error, into which I had before fallen; for I fancied, that for the freezing of the sound, it was necessary for it to be wrapped up, and, as it were, preserved in breath: but I found my mistake when I heard the sound of a kit playing a minuet over our heads. I asked the occasion of it; upon which one of the company told me that it would play there above a week longer; "for," says he, "finding ourselves bereft of speech, we prevailed upon one of the company, who had his musical instrument about him, to play to us from morning to night; all which time was employed in dancing in order to dissipate our chagrin, á tuer le temps. " Here Sir John gives very good philosophical reason, why the kit could not be heard during the frost; but, as they are something prolix, I pass them over in silence, and shall only observe, that the honourable author seems, by his quotations, to have been well versed in the antient poets, which perhaps raised his fancy above the ordinary pitch of historians, and very much contributed to the embellishment of his writings. Source (books.google.com): Alex. Charles Ewald, The Tatler: Selected Essays (London and New York: Frederick Warne and Company, 1888), pp. 432-36 . Source (Internet Archive): Alex. Charles Ewald, The Tatler: Selected Essays (London and New York: Frederick Warne and Company, 1888), pp. 432-36 . Ewald's source: Joseph Addison, "Frozen Words," The Tatler , no. 254 (November 23, 1710). Wikipedia article on John Mandeville, the supposed author of The Travels of Sir John Mandeville . Link to Addison's quotation form Hudibras by Samuel Butler: " Like words congeal'd in northern air. " Return to the table of contents . Baron Munchausen in Russia England / Germany I left St. Petersburgh at the time of that singlular revolution when the emperor in his cradle, his mother, the Duke of Brunswick, her father, Field-Marshal Munich, and many others were sent to Siberia. The winter was then so uncommonly severe all over Europe, that ever since the sun seems to be frost-bitten. At my return to this place, I felt on the road greater inconveniencies than those I had experienced in my setting out. One effect of the frost which I then observed, is rather an object for philosophical speculation. I travelled post day and night, and finding myself engaged in a narrow lane, I bid the postilion give a signal with his horn, that other travellers might not meet or stop us in the narrow passage. He blew with all his might, but all his endeavours were in vain. He could not make the horn speak, which, as he pretended to be a good performer, was as unaccountable to him, as to me, and rather unfortunately, for soon after we found ourselves in the presence of another coach coming the other way. It was very troublesome for both parties in this horrid weather, for there was no proceeding either way, without taking the carriages to pieces and putting them together again, past each other. My poor postilion and every body was almost froze to death. we reached the much-looked-for inn at the end of our stage, without further accident, and well pleased and happy in our minds, we all of us hastened to warm and refresh ourselves. The postilion hung his great coat and horn on a peg and sat down near the kitchen fire, to forget and drown his cares. I sat down on the other side doing the same. Suddenly we heard a Tereng! tereng, teng, teng! We looked round, and now found the reason, why the po?tilion had not been able to sound his horn. His tunes were frozen up in the horn, and came out now by thawing, plain enough, and much to the credit of the driver, so that the honest fellow entertained us for some time with a variety of tunes , without putting his mouth to the horn. The king of Prusia's march -- Over the hill and over the dale -- An evening hymn, and many other favourite tunes came out, and the thawing entertainment concluded, as I shall this short account of my Russian travels with God bless Great George our King. Source (books.google.com): Rudolf Erich Raspe, Baron Munchausen's Narrative of his Marvellous Travels and Campaigns in Russia (Oxford, 1786), pp. 45-49 . Source (Internet Archive): Rudolph Erich Raspe, The Surprising Adventures of Baron Munchausen (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell and Company, 1902), pp. 33-36 . Rudolf Erich Raspe (1736-1794) was a German expatriate who left Germany in 1775, spending the rest of his life in England, Scotland, and Ireland. Wikipedia article about Baron Munchhausen . Return to the table of contents . The Post Horn Germany There was once a very cold winter; and a coachman driving through a ravine in the Black Forest saw a carriage approaching him. He picked up his horn, wanting to give the other driver a signal to stop and let him pass by, but however hard the coachman blew, he could not get a single sound from the horn. The other carriage came deeper and deeper into the ravine, and because neither of them could give way the coachman drove straight toward the other carriage, narrowly passing it by. To avoid any further unpleasantries, he took up his horn again and blew all the tunes into it that he knew, for he guessed that the horn was frozen, and he wanted to thaw it out with his warm breath. But it was all to no avail; it was so cold that no sound at all came forth. Finally that evening the coachman arrived at the village where his horses were unhitched, and he was relieved by another fellow. He ordered a pint of wine to warm himself with, and because a wedding was being celebrated at the inn and the dining room was filled with guests, he took his wine into the kitchen, seated himself near the warm stove, hung his horn on a nail on the wall, and chatted with the cook. -- But he was suddenly startled when the post horn began to play by itself. First of all it played several times the signal that coachmen usually use when someone is supposed to give way, and then it played all the tunes that he had blown into it on the way, and that had frozen inside, but on the warm wall were all thawing out and sounding forth, one after the other, for example: "You're Barely Thirty Years of Age," "You, You Lie Next to My Heart," "Tug, Tug, Tug, Little Girl," and other prankster songs. It ended with the chorale "All the Woods Are Quiet Now," for that was the last tune that the coachman had blown into his horn. Source (books.google.com): Ernst Meier, "Das Posthorn," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), pp. 67-68 . Source (Internet Archive): Ernst Meier, "Das Posthorn," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), pp. 67-68 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2022. Return to the table of contents . Paul Bunyan and the Year of the Hard Winter North America Now, this was the year which is mentioned in history as the Year of the Hard Winter. But the bitterest cold could not now chill the blood of Paul Bunyan's He-Men. They had never been so jolly as they were this Christmas, and they jigged and chortled when Paul Bunyan gave each of them a knife devised especially for pants-stagging. The great leader had cut out thousands of these excellent presents from two of Babe's old ox shoes. This was the merriest holiday season the camp had ever known, and even the in credible cold of New Year's Day did not lessen the noisy bunkhouse gayety. On the last night of the old year the mercury in the great thermometer which hung on the camp office had dropped to four hundred degrees below zero. Then the tube burst, and no one could tell the temperature, but it got appreciably colder. The next morning the boiling coffee froze on the stove, despite the desperate stoking of the kitchen firemen, and the loggers had to drink hot brown ice for their morning's breakfast. But they tramped cheerfully to work, nevertheless, cracking their mittened hands together and stamping the ground as they went along. They worked so hard to keep warm on this day that they talked and swore but little. This was fortunate. For on this incomparable New Year's Day every spoken word froze solidly in the air as soon as it was uttered. The next day the temperature rose, but the words remained frozen, and many a logger bumped his mouth by walking into the HELLOS and DAMNS which were solid in the air. But the hardy victims only laughed through their split lips at such accidents. These words all thawed out at once on a warmer day; they melted in one long-drawn-out, mournful echoing shout so unhumanly humorous in sound that the loggers rolled with laughter to hear it. Source (books.google.com): James Stevens, Paul Bunyan (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1928), pp. 214-15 . Source (Internet Archive): James Stevens, Paul Bunyan (New York: Garden City Publishing Company, 1925), pp. 214-15 . Return to the table of contents . Voices in the Frying Pan African American (Mississippi) I have been so far up north until I couldn't understand anything anybody said. I got a gang of fryin' pans an' everybody I would meet I would hold it in front of them an' ketch their voices. The voices froze in the fryin' pan an' said, "Good morning." Source (Internet Archive): Arthur Huff Fauset, "Negro Folk Tales from the South," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 40, no. 157 (July - September, 1927), p. 261 . Source (JSTOR): Arthur Huff Fauset, "Negro Folk Tales from the South," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 40, no. 157 (July - September, 1927), p. 261 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 2, 2022. Tall Tales: Turning an Animal Inside Out Tall Tale: Turning an Animal Inside Out Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 1889B translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2021 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents The Smith of Cannstatt and the Wolf (Germany). Baron Munchausen and the Wolf (England / Germany). Cougar Tamers (USA -- Idaho). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Smith of Cannstatt and the Wolf Germany The smith of Cannstatt was going through the woods when a wolf leapt toward him. His jaws were wide open, as though he wanted to swallow the smith whole. To protect himself, the smith pushed his right hand through the wolf's throat and into his body. He grabbed his tail and turned the wolf inside out, just like a cobbler does with a shoe. Source (books.google.com): Heinrich Bebel, Schwänke , edited by Albert Wesselski, vol. 2, (Munich and Leipzig: Georg Müller, 1907), p. 51 . Source (Internet Archive): Heinrich Bebel, Schwänke , edited by Albert Wesselski, vol. 2, (Munich and Leipzig: Georg Müller, 1907), p. 51 . This tale was also recorded by Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof: Wendunmuth. Darinnen fünff hundert und fünffzig höflicher, züchtiger und lustigen Historien, Schimpffreden und Gleichnüssen begriffen und gezogen seyn auß alten und jetzigen Scribenten (Frankfurt: Georg Raben, 1565), no. 257, p. 263 . Heinrich Bebel (1472-1518) was German humanist. He is best known today for his Facetiae (1506), a collection of anecdotes recorded in Latin. The above tale comes from this work. Return to the table of contents . Baron Munchausen and the Wolf England / Germany The fiercest and most dangerous animals generally came upon me when defenceless, as if they had a notion or foresight of it by way of instinct. Thus a frightful wolf rushed upon me so suddenly, and so close that I could do nothing but follow mechanical instinct, and thrust my fist into his open mouth. For safety's sake I pushed on, and on, till my arm was fairly in, up to the shoulder. How should I disengage myself? I was not much pleased with my awkward situation -- with a wolf face to face -- our ogling was not of the most pleasant kind. If I withdrew my arm, then the animal would fly the more furiously upon me; that I saw in his flaming eyes. In short, I laid hold of his intrails, turned him inside out like a glove, and flung him to the ground, where I left him. Source (books.google.com): Rudolf Erich Raspe, Baron Munchausen's Narrative of His Marvellous Travels and Campaigns in Russia (Oxford, 1786), pp. 24-26 . Rudolf Erich Raspe (1736-1794) was a German expatriate who left Germany in 1775, spending the rest of his life in England, Scotland, and Ireland. Return to the table of contents . Cougar Tamers USA (Idaho) Yup, we usta have quite a bit of trouble with cougars and we wuz pretty keerful to have a gun with us when we ambled out. One time though, I plumb forgot my gun and I had a narrow squeak with one of them-there varmints. 'Twas over to that place I usta have in the valley. I goes out after supper to bring the cows home and I was right dog-eared busy when I happened to look up. There was a cougar comun down the hill after me, and me without a gun. I had to think right smart about it. When the varmint got up to me with wide open mouth I just reached in and grabbed his tail and turned him wrong side out quickern a flash. Of course, he was headed in the wrong direction then, and so doggone surprised that he went lickety-split right back up the hill and out of sight. Source (books.google.com): Vardis Fisher, Idaho Lore , prepared by the Federal Writers' Project of the Work Projects Administration (Caldwell, Idaho: The Caxton Printers, 1939), p. 121 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 2, 2022. Taming a Shrewish Wife: Folktales of Type 900 Taming a Shrewish Wife: The Proud Princess folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 900 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2025 Contents Cannetella (Italy, Giambattista Basile). The Crumb in the Beard (Italy, Thomas Frederick Crane). King Thrushbeard (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Three Balls (Germany, Adalbert Kuhn). The Princess of Portugal and the Prince of England (Germany, Heinrich Pröhle). Haaken Grizzlebeard (Norway, Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe). Greyfoot (Denmark, J. Christian Bay). The Proud Princess (Denmark, Evald Tang Kristensen). Peter Redhat (Denmark, Evald Tang Kristensen). The Swineherd (Denmark, Hans Christian Andersen). The Haughty Princess (Ireland, Patrick Kennedy). An Old Story (Ireland, The Schools' Collection ). The Haughty Princess (Belgium, Victor de Meyere). The Son of the King of France (France, Paul Sébillot). The Princess of England (France, Emmanuel Cosquin). The Count of Paris (Portugal, Francisco Adolpho Coelho). The Hunchback (Spain, Fernan Caballero). Blanca the Haughty (Spain, Rachel Harriette Busk). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Cannetella Italy, Giambattista Basile, Il Pentamerone There was once upon a time a king who reigned over a country called Bello Puojo, He was very rich and powerful, and had everything in the world he could desire except a child. But at last, after he had been married for many years, and was quite an old man, his wife Renzolla presented him with a fine daughter, whom they called Cannetella. She grew up into a beautiful girl, and was as tall and straight as a young fir tree. When she was eighteen years old her father called her to him and said, "You are of an age now, my daughter, to marry and settle down; but as I love you more than anything else in the world, and desire nothing but your happiness, I am determined to leave the choice of a husband to yourself. Choose a man after your own heart, and you are sure to satisfy me." Cannetella thanked her father very much for his kindness and consideration, but told him that she had not the slightest wish to marry, and was quite determined to remain single. The king, who felt himself growing old and feeble, and longed to see an heir to the throne before he died, was very unhappy at her words, and begged her earnestly not to disappoint him. When Cannetella saw that the king had set his heart on her marriage, she said, "Very well, dear father, I will marry to please you, for I do not wish to appear ungrateful for all your love and kindness; but you must find me a husband handsomer, cleverer, and more charming than anyone else in the world." The king was overjoyed by her words, and from early in the morning till late at night he sat at the window and looked carefully at all the passers-by, in the hopes of finding a son-in-law among them. One day, seeing a very good-looking man crossing the street, the king called his daughter and said, "Come quickly, dear Cannetella, and look at this man, for I think he might suit you as a husband." They called the young man into the palace, and set a sumptuous feast before him, with every sort of delicacy you can imagine. In the middle of the meal the youth let an almond fall out of his mouth, which, however, he picked up again very quickly and hid under the tablecloth. When the feast was over the stranger went away, and the king asked Cannetella, "Well, what did you think of the youth?" "I think he was a clumsy wretch," replied Cannetella. "Fancy a man of his age letting an almond fall out of his mouth!" When the king heard her answer he returned to his watch at the window, and shortly afterwards a very handsome young man passed by. The king instantly called his daughter to come and see what she thought of the newcomer. "Call him in," said Cannetella, "that we may see him close." Another splendid feast was prepared, and when the stranger had eaten and drunk as much as he was able, and had taken his departure, the king asked Cannetella how she liked him. "Not at all," replied his daughter; "what could you do with a man who requires at least two servants to help him on with his cloak, because he is too awkward to put it on properly himself?" "If that's all you have against him," said the king, "I see how the land lies. You are determined not to have a husband at all; but marry someone you shall, for I do not mean my name and house to die out." "Well, then, my dear parent," said Cannetella, "I must tell you at once that you had better not count upon me, for I never mean to marry unless I can find a man with a gold head and gold teeth." The king was very angry at finding his daughter so obstinate; but as he always gave the girl her own way in everything, he issued a proclamation to the effect that any man with a gold head and gold teeth might come forward and claim the princess as his bride, and the kingdom of Bello Puojo as a wedding gift. Now the king had a deadly enemy called Scioravante, who was a very powerful magician. No sooner had this man heard of the proclamation than he summoned his attendant spirits and commanded them to gild his head and teeth. The spirits said, at first, that the task was beyond their powers, and suggested that a pair of golden horns attached to his forehead would both be easier to make and more comfortable to wear; but Scioravante would allow no compromise, and insisted on having a head and teeth made of the finest gold. When it was fixed on his shoulders he went for a stroll in front of the palace. And the king, seeing the very man he was in search of, called his daughter, and said. "Just look out of the window, and you will find exactly what you want." Then, as Scioravante was hurrying past, the king shouted out to him, "Just stop a minute, brother, and don't be in such desperate haste. If you will step in here you shall have my daughter for a wife, and I will send attendants with her, and as many horses and servants as you wish." "A thousand thanks," returned Scioravante; "I shall be delighted to marry your daughter, but it is quite unnecessary to send anyone to accompany her. Give me a horse and I will carry off the princess in front of my saddle, and will bring her to my own kingdom, where there is no lack of courtiers or servants, or, indeed, of anything your daughter can desire." At first the king was very much against Cannetella's departing in this fashion; but finally Scioravante got his way, and placing the princess before him on his horse, he set out for his own country. Towards evening he dismounted, and entering a stable he placed Cannetella in the same stall as his horse, and said to her, "Now listen to what I have to say. I am going to my home now, and that is a seven years' journey from here; you must wait for me in this stable, and never move from the spot, or let yourself be seen by a living soul. If you disobey my commands, it will be the worse for you." The princess answered meekly, "Sir, I am your servant, and will do exactly as you bid me; but I should like to know what I am to live on till you come back?" "You can take what the horses leave," was Scioravante's reply. When the magician had left her Cannetella felt very miserable, and bitterly cursed the day she was born. She spent all her time weeping and bemoaning the cruel fate that had driven her from a palace into a stable, from soft down cushions to a bed of straw, and from the dainties of her father's table to the food that the horses left. She led this wretched life for a few months, and during that time she never saw who fed and watered the horses, for it was all done by invisible hands. One day, when she was more than usually unhappy, she perceived a little crack in the wall, through which she could see a beautiful garden, with all manner of delicious fruits and flowers growing in it. The sight and smell of such delicacies were too much for poor Cannetella, and she said to herself, "I will slip quietly out, and pick a few oranges and grapes, and I don't care what happens. Who is there to tell my husband what I do? And even if he should hear of my disobedience, he cannot make my life more miserable than it is already." So she slipped out and refreshed her poor, starved body with the fruit she plucked in the garden. But a short time afterwards her husband returned unexpectedly, and one of the horses instantly told him that Cannetella had gone into the garden, in his absence, and had stolen some oranges and grapes. Scioravante was furious when he heard this, and seizing a huge knife from his pocket he threatened to kill his wife for her disobedience. But Cannetella threw herself at his feet and implored him to spare her life, saying that hunger drove even the wolf from the wood. At last she succeeded in so far softening her husband's heart that he said, "I will forgive you this time, and spare your life; but if you disobey me again, and I hear, on my return, that you have as much as moved out of the stall, I will certainly kill you. So, beware; for I am going away once more, and shall be absent for seven years." With these words he took his departure, and Cannetella burst into a flood of tears, and, wringing her hands, she moaned, "Why was I ever born to such a hard fate? Oh! father, how miserable you have made your poor daughter! But, why should I blame my father? For I have only myself to thank for all my sufferings. I got the cursed head of gold, and it has brought all this misery on me. I am indeed punished for not doing as my father wished!" When a year had gone by, it chanced, one day, that the king's cooper passed the stables where Cannetella was kept prisoner. She recognised the man, and called him to come in. At first he did not know the poor princess, and could not make out who it was that called him by name. But when he heard Cannetella's tale of woe, he hid her in a big empty barrel he had with him, partly because he was sorry for the poor girl, and, even more, because he wished to gain the king's favor. Then he slung the barrel on a mule's back, and in this way the princess was carried to her own home. They arrived at the palace about four o'clock in the morning, and the cooper knocked loudly at the door. When the servants came in haste and saw only the cooper standing at the gate, they were very indignant, and scolded him soundly for coming at such an hour and waking them all out of their sleep. The king hearing the noise and the cause of it, sent for the cooper, for he felt certain the man must have some important business, to have come and disturbed the whole palace at such an early hour. The cooper asked permission to unload his mule, and Cannetella crept out of the barrel. At first the king refused to believe that it was really his daughter, for she had changed so terribly in a few years, and had grown so thin and pale, that it was pitiful to see her. At last the princess showed her father a mole she had on her light arm, and then he saw that the poor girl was indeed his long-lost Cannetella. He kissed her a thousand times, and instantly had the choicest food and drink set before her. After she had satisfied her hunger, the king said to her, "Who would have thought, my dear daughter, to have found you in such a state? What, may I ask, has brought you to this pass?" Cannetella replied, "That wicked man with the gold head and teeth treated me worse than a dog, and many a time, since I left you, have I longed to die. But I couldn't tell you all that I have suffered, for you would never believe me. It is enough that I am once more with you, and I shall never leave you again, for I would rather be a slave in your house than queen in any other." In the meantime Scioravante had returned to the stables, and one of the horses told him that Cannetella had been taken away by a cooper in a barrel. When the wicked magician heard this he was beside himself with rage, and, hastening to the kingdom of Bello Puojo, he went straight to an old woman who lived exactly opposite the royal palace, and said to her, "If you will let me see the king's daughter, I will give you whatever reward you like to ask for." The woman demanded a hundred ducats of gold, and Scioravante counted them out of his purse and gave them to her without a murmur. Then the old woman led him to the roof of the house, where he could see Cannetella combing out her long hair in a room in the top story of the palace. The princess happened to look out of the window, and when she saw her husband gazing at her, she got such a fright that she flew downstairs to the king, and said, " My lord and father, unless you shut me up instantly in a room with seven iron doors, I am lost." "If that's all," said the king, "it shall be done at once." And he gave orders for the doors to be closed on the spot. When Scioravante saw this he returned to the old woman, and said, "I will give you whatever you like if you will go into the palace, hide under the princess's bed, and slip this little piece of paper beneath her pillow, saying, as you do so, "May everyone in the palace, except the princess, fall into a sound sleep." " The old woman demanded another hundred golden ducats, and then proceeded to carry out the magician's wishes. No sooner had she slipped the piece of paper under Cannetella's pillow, than all the people in the palace fell fast asleep, and only the princess remained awake. Then Scioravante hurried to the seven doors and opened them one after the other. Cannetella screamed with terror when she saw her husband, but no one came to her help, for all in the palace lay as if they were dead. The magician seized her in the bed on which she lay, and was going to carry her off with him, when the little piece of paper which the old woman had placed under her pillow fell on the floor. In an instant all the people in the palace woke up, and as Cannetella was still screaming for help, they rushed to her rescue. They seized Scioravante and put him to death; so he was caught in the trap which he had laid for the princess -- and, as is so often the case in this world, the biter himself was bit. Source (books.google.com): Andrew Lang, The Grey Fairy Book , (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1900), pp. 332-43 . Source (Internet Archive): Andrew Lang, The Grey Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1900), pp. 332-43 . Lang's source: Hermann Kletke, "Cannetella," Märchensaal: Märchen aller Völker für Jung und Alt , vol. 1 (Berlin: Verlag von Carl Reimarus, 1845), no. 12, pp. 48-53 . Kletke's source: Giambattista Basile, Lo cunto de li cunti overo lo trattenemiento de peccerille [Il Pentamerone] , day 3, tale 1. This work was first published in two volumes in 1634 and 1636. Link to Basile's "Cannetella" in an English translation by Richard Burton: Il Pentamerone; or, The Tale of Tales , vol. 1 (London: Henry and Company, 1893), pp. 239-48 . Return to the table of contents . The Crumb in the Beard Italy There was once a king who had a daughter whose name was Stella. She was indescribably beautiful, but was so whimsical and hard to please that she drove her father to despair. There had been princes and kings who had sought her in marriage, but she had found defects in them all and would have none of them. She kept advancing in years, and her father began to despair of knowing to whom he should leave his crown. So he summoned his council, and discussed the matter, and was advised to give a great banquet, to which he should invite all the princes and kings of the surrounding countries, for, as they said, there cannot fail to be among so many, someone who should please the princess, who was to hide behind a door, so that she could examine them all as she pleased. When the kind heard this advice, he gave the order necessary for the banquet, and then called his daughter, and said, "Listen, my little Stella, I have thought to do so and so, to see if I can find anyone to please you. Behold, my daughter, my hair is white, and I must have someone to leave my crown to." Stella bowed her head, saying that she would take care to please him. Princes and kings then began to arrive at the court, and when it was time for the banquet, they all seated themselves at the table. You can imagine what sort of a banquet that was, and how the hall was adorned: Gold and silver shone from all their necks. In the four corners of the room were four fountains, which continually sent forth wine and the most exquisite perfumes. While the gentlemen were eating, Stella was behind a door, as has been said, and one of her maids, who was nearby, pointed out to her now this one, now that one. "See, your majesty, what a handsome youth that is there." "Yes, but he has too large a nose." "And the one near your father?" "He has eyes that look like saucers." "And that other at the head of the table?" "He has too large a mouth. He looks as if he liked to eat." In short, she found fault with all but one, who, she said, pleased her, but that he must be a very dirty fellow, for he had a crumb on his beard after eating. The youth heard her say this, and swore vengeance. You must know that he was the son of the King of the Green Hill, and the handsomest youth that could be seen. When the banquet was finished and the guests had departed, the king called Stella and asked, "What news have you, my child?" She replied, that the only one who pleased her was the one with the crumb in his beard, but that she believed him to be a dirty fellow and did not want him. "Take care, my daughter, you will repent it," answered her father, and turned away. You must know that Stella's chamber looked into a courtyard into which opened the shop of a baker. One night, while she was preparing to retire, she heard, in the room where they sifted the meal, someone singing so well and with so much grace that it went to her heart. She ran to the window and listened until he finished. Then she began to ask her maid who the person with the beautiful voice could be, saying she would like to know. "Leave it to me, your majesty," said the maid. "I will inform you tomorrow." Stella could not wait for the next day; and, indeed, early the next day she learned that the one who sang was the sifter. That evening she heard him sing again, and stood by the window until everything became quiet. But that voice had so touched her heart that she told her maid that the next day she would try and see who had that fine voice. In the morning she placed herself by the window, and soon saw the youth come forth. She was enchanted his beauty as soon as she saw him, and fell desperately in love with him. Now you must know that this was none other than the prince who was at the banquet, and whom Stella had called "dirty." So he had disguised himself in such a way that she could not recognize him, and was meanwhile preparing his revenge. After he had seen her once or twice he began to take off his had and salute her. She smiled at him, and appeared at the window every moment. Then they began to exchange words, and in the evening he sang under her window. In short, they began to make love in good earnest, and when he learned that she was free, he began to talk about marrying her. She consented at once, but asked him what he had to live on. "I haven't a penny," said he. "The little I earn is hardly enough to feed me." Stella encourage him, saying she would give him all the money and things he wanted. To punish Stella for her pride, her father and the prince's father had an understanding, and pretended not to know about this love affair, and let her carry away from palace all she owned. During the day Stella did nothing but make a great bundle of clothes, of silver, and of money, and at night the disguised prince came under the balcony, and she threw it down to him. Things went on in this manner some time, and finally one evening he said to her, "Listen. The time has come to elope." Stella could not wait for the hour, and the next night she quietly tied a cord about her and let herself down from the window. The prince aided her to the ground, and then took her arm and hastened away. He led her a long ways to another city, where he turned down a street and opened the first door he met. They went down a long passage. Finally they reached a little door, which he opened, and they found themselves in a hole of a place which had only one window, high up. The furniture consisted of a straw bed, a bench, and a dirty table. You can imagine that when Stella saw herself in this place she thought she should die. When the prince saw her so amazed, he said, "What is the matter? Does the house not please you? Do you not know that I am a poor man? Have you been deceived?" "What have you done with all the things I gave you?" "Oh, I had many debts, and I have paid them, and then I have done with the rest what seemed good to me. You must make up your mind to work and gain your bread as I have done. You must know that I am a porter of the king of this city, and I often go and work at the palace. Tomorrow, they have told me, the washing is to be done, so you must rise early and go with me there. I will set you to work with the other women, and when it is time for them to go home to dinner, you will say that you are not hungry, and while you are alone, steal two shirts, conceal them under your skirt, and carry them home to me." Poor Stella wept bitterly, saying it was impossible for her to do that. But her husband replied, "Do what I say, or I shall beat you." The next morning her husband rose with the dawn, and made her get up, too. He had bought her a striped skirt and a pair of coarse shoes, which he made her put on, and then took her to the palace with him, conducted her to the laundry and left her, after he had introduced her as his wife, saying that she should remember what awaited her at home. Meanwhile poor Stella did as her husband had commanded, and stole the shirts. As she was leaving the palace, she met the king, who said, "Pretty girl, you are the porter's wife, are you not?" Then he asked her what she had under her skirt, and shook her until the shirts dropped out, and the king cried, "See there! The porter's wife is a thief. She has stolen some shirts." Poor Stella ran home in tears, and her husband followed her when he had put on his disqu8ise again. When he reached home Stella told him all that had happened and begged him not to send her to the palace again. But he told her that the next day they were to bake, and she must go into the kitchen and help, and steal a piece of dough. Everything happened as on the previous day. Stella's theft was discovered, and when her husband returned he found her crying like a condemned soul, and swearing that she had rather be killed than go the palace again. He told her, however, that the king's son was to be married the next day, and that there was to be a great banquet, and she must go into the kitchen and wash the dishes. He added that when she had the chance she must steal a pot of broth and hide it about her so that no one should see it. She had to do as she was told, and had scarcely concealed the pot when the king's son came into the kitchen and told his wife she must come to the ball that had followed the banquet. She did not wish to go, but he took her by the arm and led her into the midst of the festival. Imagine how the poor woman felt at the ball, dressed as she was, and with the pot of broth! The king began to poke his sword at her in jest, until he hit the pot, and all the broth ran on the floor. Then all began to jeer her and laugh, until poor Stella fainted away from shame, and they had to go and get some vinegar to revive her. At last the king's mother came forward and said, "Enough. You have revenged yourself sufficiently." Then turning to Stella, "Know that this is your mother, and that he has done this to correct your pride and to be avenged on you for calling him dirty." Then she took her by the arm and led her to another room, where her maids dressed her as a queen. her father and mother then appeared and kissed and embraced her. Her husband begged her pardon for what he had done, and they made peace and always lived in harmony. From that day on she was never haughty, and had learned to her cost that pride is the greatest fault. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales , (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 29, pp. 110-14 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), , no. 29, pp. 110-14 . Return to the table of contents . King Thrushbeard Germany A king had a daughter who was beautiful beyond all measure, but at the same time so proud and arrogant that no suitor was good enough for her. She rejected one after the other, ridiculing them as well. Once the king sponsored a great feast and invited from far and near all the men wanting to get married. They were all placed in a row according to their rank and standing. First came the kings, then the grand dukes, then the princes, the earls, the barons, and the aristocracy. Then the king's daughter was led through the ranks, but she objected to something about each one. One was too fat: "The wine barrel," she said. Another was too tall: "Thin and tall, no good at all." The third was too short: "Short and thick is never quick." The fourth was too pale: "As pale as death." The fifth too red: "A prize rooster." The sixth was not straight enough: "Green wood, dried behind the stove." And thus she had some objection to each one, but she ridiculed especially one good king who stood at the very top of the row, and whose chin had grown a little crooked. "Look!" she cried out, laughing, "He has a chin like a thrush's beak." And from that time he was called Thrushbeard . Now the old king, seeing that his daughter did nothing but ridicule the people, making fun of all the suitors who were gathered there, became very angry, and he swore that she should have for her husband the very first beggar to come to his door. A few days later a minstrel came and sang beneath the window, trying to earn a small handout. When the king heard him he said, "Let him come up." So the minstrel, in his dirty, ragged clothes, came in and sang before the king and his daughter, and when he was finished he asked for a small gift. The king said, "I liked your song so much that I will give you my daughter for a wife." The king's daughter took fright, but the king said, "I have taken an oath to give you to the very first beggar, and I will keep it." Her protests did not help. The priest was called in, and she had to marry the minstrel at once. After that had happened the king said, "It is not proper for you, a beggar's wife, to stay in my palace any longer. All you can do now is to go away with your husband." The beggar led her out by the hand, and she had to leave with him, walking on foot. They came to a large forest, and she asked, "Who owns this beautiful forest?" "It belongs to King Thrushbeard. If you had taken him, it would be yours." "Oh, I am a miserable thing; If only I'd taken the Thrushbeard King." Afterwards they crossed a meadow, and she asked again, "Who owns this beautiful green meadow?" "It belongs to king Thrushbeard. If you had taken him, it would be yours." "Oh, I am a miserable thing; If only I'd taken the Thrushbeard King." Then they walked through a large town, and she asked again, "Who owns this beautiful large town?" "It belongs to king Thrushbeard. If you had taken him, it would be yours." "Oh, I am a miserable thing; If only I'd taken the Thrushbeard King." "I do not like you to always be wishing for another husband," said the minstrel. "Am I not good enough for you?" At last they came to a very little hut, and she said, "Oh goodness. What a small house. Who owns this miserable tiny hut?" The minstrel answered, "This is my house and yours, where we shall live together." She had to stoop in order to get in the low door. "Where are the servants?" said the king's daughter. "What servants?" answered the beggar. "You must do for yourself what you want to have done. Now make a fire at once, put some water on to boil, so you can cook me something to eat. I am very tired." But the king's daughter knew nothing about lighting fires or cooking, and the beggar had to lend a hand himself to get anything done at all. When they had finished their scanty meal they went to bed. But he made her get up very early the next morning in order to do the housework. For a few days they lived in this way, as well as they could, but they finally came to the end of their provisions. Then the man said, "Wife, we cannot go on any longer eating and drinking here and earning nothing. You must weave baskets." He went out, cut some willows, and brought them home. Then she began to weave baskets, but the hard willows cut into her delicate hands. "I see that this will not do," said the man. "You had better spin. Perhaps you can do that better." She sat down and tried to spin, but the hard thread soon cut into her soft fingers until they bled. "See," said the man. "You are not good for any sort of work. I made a bad bargain with you. Now I will try to start a business with pots and earthenware. You must sit in the marketplace and sell them." "Oh!" she thought. "If people from my father's kingdom come to the market and see me sitting there selling things, how they will ridicule me!" But her protests did not help. She had to do what her husband demanded, unless she wanted to die of hunger. At first it went well. People bought the woman's wares because she was beautiful, and they paid her whatever she asked. Many even gave her the money and let her keep the pots. So they lived on what she earned as long as it lasted. Then the husband bought a lot of new pottery. She sat down with this at the corner of the marketplace and set it around her for sale. But suddenly there came a drunken hussar galloping along, and he rode right into the pots, breaking them into a thousand pieces. She began to cry, and was so afraid that she did not know what to do. "Oh! What will happen to me?" she cried. "What will my husband say about this?" She ran home and told him of the misfortune. "Who would sit at the corner of the marketplace with earthenware?" said the man. "Now stop crying. I see very well that you are not fit for any ordinary work. Now I was at our king's palace and asked if they couldn't use a kitchen maid. They promised me to take you. In return you will get free food." The king's daughter now became a kitchen maid, and had to be available to the cook, and to do the dirtiest work. In each of her pockets she fastened a little jar, in which she took home her share of the leftovers. And this is what they lived on. It happened that the wedding of the king's eldest son was to be celebrated, so the poor woman went up and stood near the door of the hall to look on. When all the lights were lit, and people, each more beautiful than the other, entered, and all was full of pomp and splendor, she thought about her plight with a sad heart, and cursed the pride and haughtiness which had humbled her and brought her to such great poverty. The smell of the delicious dishes which were being taken in and out reached her, and now and then the servants threw her a few scraps, which she put in her jar to take home. Then suddenly the king's son entered, clothed in velvet and silk, with gold chains around his neck. When he saw the beautiful woman standing by the door he took her by the hand and wanted danced with her. But she refused and took fright, for she saw that he was King Thrushbeard, the suitor whom she had rejected with scorn. Her struggles did not help. He pulled her into the hall. But the string that tied up her pockets broke, and the pots fell to the floor. The soup ran out, and the scraps flew everywhere. When the people saw this, everyone laughed and ridiculed her. She was so ashamed that she would rather have been a thousand fathoms beneath the ground. She jumped out the door and wanted to run away, but a man overtook her on the stairs and brought her back. And when she looked at him, it was King Thrushbeard again. He said to her kindly, "Don't be afraid. I and the minstrel who has been living with you in that miserable hut are one and the same. For the love of you I disguised myself. And I was also the hussar who broke your pottery to pieces. All this was done to humble your proud spirit and to punish you for the arrogance with which you ridiculed me." Then she cried bitterly and said, "I was terribly wrong, and am not worthy to be your wife." But he said, "Be comforted. The evil days are past. Now we will celebrate our wedding." Then the maids-in-waiting came and dressed her in the most splendid clothing, and her father and his whole court came and wished her happiness in her marriage with King Thrushbeard, and their true happiness began only now. I wish that you and I had been there as well. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "König Drosselbart," Kinder und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 52, pp. 258-63 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "König Drosselbart," Kinder und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 52, pp. 258-63 . I have referred to and used some phrases from the translation of Margaret Hunt, Grimm's Household Tales , vol. 1 (London: George Bell and Sons, 1884), no. 52, pp. 203-207 . Earlier editions of this tale: 1812 : Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "König Droßelbart," Kinder- und Haus-Märchen: Gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm (Berlin: In der Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 52, pp. 233-38 . 1819 : Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "König Droßelbart," Kinder- und Haus-Märchen: Gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm (Berlin: Gedruckt und verlegt bei G. Reimer, 1819), no. 52, pp. 257-62 . 1856 : Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "König Drosselbart," Kinder und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , vol. 3 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterich'schen Buchhandlung, 1856), no. 52, pp. 86-87 . Link to a collection of illustrations for this tale . A separate file containing only King Thrushbeard by the Grimm brothers. The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Grimms' Fairy Tales). Return to the table of contents . The Three Balls Germany Once upon a time there was a German king who heard that the king in England had a very beautiful daughter. He therefore asked his son to marry the princess. The prince sent a messenger to her and asked her to be his wife. But the beauty told him: "I don't like any German; I would rather have a swineherd." It is easy to imagine how this answer angered the prince. He did not give up his desire to win the proud princess, but he decided to punish her for the insult. He had three balls made, one silver, one gold, and one diamond. He then supplied himself with money and travelled to England. When he arrived at the princess's castle he was at a loss as to what to do next. Just then the swineherd was driving the pigs out. The prince said to him: "What would you take to let me tend the pigs today and for two more days?" The shepherd thought at first that the prince was joking. But when the latter assured him that he was completely serious, they soon agreed on an ample reward. The prince put on a coarse smock, looked after the pigs in the morning, and at midday played in the sunshine with his beautiful silver ball in front of the princess's window. She watched him and soon sent a messenger to him to ask how much he wanted for the ball. He replied: "I will not sell the ball for any price, but the princess can have it if she shares her bed with me for one night." The princess agreed to this offer, but she sent a chambermaid to sleep with the supposed swineherd instead of going herself. The prince noticed this immediately, but gave up the ball the next morning. He then went back to tend the pigs, but at midday he was seen playing with a golden ball under the beautiful girl's window. She wanted to buy this too, and received it on the same condition. The supposed swineherd was then deceived in the same way. But when he played with the diamond ball on the third afternoon, and the princess wanted to have that too, he declared: "She has deceived me twice; she will not get this ball unless she herself sleeps with me for one night." At first she did not want to agree to it, but her chambermaid said: "Just do it, Princess! It makes no difference whether you have this man in your bed or a block of wood" The princess then agreed, kept her word, and received the ball. The swineherd now received the promised gift. But the princess had not acquired the expensive ball as cheaply as she had thought. The prince soon found out about her condition from the real swineherd, for she had asked him for information about his supposed helper. The prince then went to her and asked her to let him take her to his homeland in secret. She agreed. She gathered together some money and jewels, and he secretly provided for carriages and horses. Then they set off without her father's knowledge and travelled across the water to Germany. When they arrived in the first town, the prince joined a card game and gambled all of his goods away, but not those of this wife. When he told his wife that the carriage, horses and money were gone, she began to weep bitterly. They had to continue their journey on foot and find somewhere to stay. They came to an inn that evening and stayed there for a few weeks. When they wanted to leave again, the innkeeper demanded payment. The prince explained that he did not have that much. The innkeeper became rude and kept her things as collateral. Thus the princess lost her three balls, her jewels, and her best clothes. They finally reached the vicinity of a royal castle, and the prince said: "I am healthy and strong; I will see if I can get some work here." In the evening he came back and brought some money. "The royal treasurer gave me this in advance," he said. "Now I'll have to work a half year for it." He added that he had planned this so that they could run a business and start a small trade in earthenware. Then she sighed and said to herself: "Why must such a fate befall me?" For a while things went well with the business and trade. She was happy about that. Then one day some royal soldiers came and asked for the best of everything, but then they wanted to leave without paying. When the woman told them that they had to pay, they became very angry, smashed her things, and still didn't pay. Then she sat down on the broken pieces and wept. When the prince returned in the evening and saw the destruction, he said: "I see that it will not work like this. But at the castle they need a skilled cook. You can serve there and feed yourself and our child." Soon afterwards the word spread throughout the country that the prince had returned home from a long journey and wanted to get married. The evening before the wedding the prince said to his wife: "You must not be absent from the kitchen; that way you will have the opportunity to sneak some good food for us as well." The next day the king's head cook said to the cook: "Take this dish to the prince! As the youngest cook you must do the first dance with him." At first she refused, but they finally forced her to go into the banquet hall. She immediately recognized the prince as her husband and fainted. When she regained consciousness, everything had changed. She found herself dressed and honored like a princess, and she heard from the mouth of the man to whom she had once sent such a rude rejection that all this had happened to her in order to cure her of her proud arrogance. Source (books.google.com): Adalbert Kuhn, "Die drei Bälle," Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen , vol. 2 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), pp. 251-55 . Source (Internet Archive): Adalbert Kuhn, "Die drei Bälle," Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen , vol. 2 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), pp. 251-55 . Return to the table of contents . The Princess of Portugal and the Prince of England Germany There was once a Prince of England, the youngest of many brothers, who proposed marriage to the Princess of Portugal. But she said no, because he was a pound too light for her and a pound too young. So he went away and told his father, the King of England, what had happened, adding that even if their whole kingdom were to be lost, he must have the Princess of Portugal. He asked the king to have three bells cast for him: one of bell metal, one of silver, and one of gold. Then he would see what do with the bells to attract the princess. So the King of England had the three precious bells cast for him. The prince then took the bells to Portugal, but the princess did not recognize him. On the first day in Portugal he rang the bell made of ordinary metal. The princess found this very amusing. (Bells must have been rare at that time, especially in Portugal.) She asked her father to buy the bell for her. He replied that she should go and ask the man if he would sell it, and gave her great treasures. When she arrived there, the prince said that she could have the bell for a kiss, but not otherwise. At first the princess objected. That's how women are! In short, the princess finally said yes, and she received the bell. However, she changed her mind, and at dusk she sent her lady-in-waiting to the Prince of England. Although it was twilight, the Prince of England recognized that this was not the Princess of Portugal. He left the lady-in-waiting standing there, and did not kiss her. The next day he rang the silver bell. The princess said to her father that he should buy her the silver bell as well. That would make her very happy. However, her father did not agree to the purchase. She did not give up. She went back to the prince, whom she did not recognize, and asked if he would sell the silver bell. Well, he said, he would be willing to sell it for a kiss from the Princess of Portugal, but nothing else. So the princess got the bell, took the treasures that the king had finally given her to buy the bell with, and promised to come back that evening at dusk to kiss him. But she sent another chambermaid, and once again the prince left the chambermaid standing there, paying no attention to her. Now the Prince of England only had the golden bell left, so he had to stake everything on one card. Thus he decided to make the princess kiss him before he would give her the golden bell. Thus she would not be able to cheat him again. He started to ring the golden bell, and the Princess of Portugal wanted it so badly that she did not know what to do. She had heard from her maids that the prince had left them standing there, and she could well imagine that he would be more careful this time. So she approached the bell ringer who was playing the golden bell and asked timidly how much the golden bell cost. The Prince of England said that this bell could not be had for any price. It was far too valuable for him, and he could only give it away as a reward if the Princess of Portugal would first give him a kiss. The princess turned blood red in the face and promised to come to him in the evening at dusk and give him the kiss. This time the princess herself went to the bell ringer, kissed him, and received the golden bell in return. But when she was about to leave, she kissed the bell ringer once more, and returned to him every day at the same hour, although he no longer had any bells to sell, for she now had fallen in love with him with all her heart. The Prince of England had well thought that the proud Princess of Portugal would fall in love with him if he came to her without purple and ermine. The princess had given him the scornful answer that he was still a pound too light and a pound too young, because at that time Portugal and England were not on good terms with each other. The prince himself knew that he was still somewhat flighty and rather young in years, but by no means unattractive in stature. Now there is an old saying that no fire in the world burns as hot as secret love, love that no one knows about. This applies to the people of Portugal too, and that is why the Prince of England found an audience with the Princess of Portugal when they were once together again. He said to her that they could never fully belong to each other here in Portugal. Thus she should flee with him to England, where he would marry her and support her with the bricklayer's trade, which he had actually learned. Before the journey, however, the princess put some money in her pocket, thinking that she would be able to live well with it in England with the bricklayer. However, when they reached the high seas, the prince took the princess's money and threw it at the mermaids as a joke. Thus the Princess of Portugal now had no money. Now she was very poor, and when they landed in England, he told her that they had to cut back, because they had run out of money. She now had nothing left but her expensive clothes. But in the inn the prince had the landlord take away her royal clothes that night. The landlord said that she had been robbed overnight, and she had to thank him when the he gave her an old woman's skirt to wear. In the next village they had to go begging. The prince, whose servants were waiting for him as soon as they landed, and who had been expecting every secret sign from him without the princess noticing, always sent word beforehand that no one should give her anything. When she then came out of a house without having anything, he always treated her harshly. She had barely received enough to go to London with the prince. Here he rented her a room, but he went to the castle, saying that the castle was being beautifully renovated, and that he could work there as a mason. He bought her a spinning wheel, and she was to spin flax. However, that didn't work, because her hands were too delicate, so she had to become a cantine server. She stood on the parade ground with food and drink. The soldiers were told that after they eaten and drunk with her, they were spur their horses and run off without paying her. Then her sweetheart rode up to her in a general's uniform and asked for a drink. She did not recognize him. Because she looked so sad, he asked her what was wrong. She answered that she had a fiancé who treated her very badly, and that this is how things went with her in the military as well. She believed that the general would reimburse her for the money owed to her, but then he ran off and left her standing there. In the evening he came to her disquised as a bricklayer and asked whether she had earned much. She answered no, that the soldiers had taken everything and paid nothing. Her fiancé became angry and could hardly calm down enough not to grab her by the hair and beat her. Finally, he said that since she was of no use as a camp follower, he wanted to try something else with her; she should stand in the market with pottery. The next day, the Princess of Portugal stood in the market with pottery, with nothing but plates and pots lying around her on the ground. But now all the soldiers were ordered to ride through the pottery, breaking everything into a thousand pieces. Then her sweetheart came back disguised as a general and asked her what had happened to her and why she looked so sad. She told him again how the soldiers had treated her and asked him to pay her what he himself owed her from the day before; but he just laughed, turned his horse around, and rode off. She really dreaded going home in the evening. The bricklayer came right away, acted very angry, and finally said that he wanted to put her through a final test, and if she didn't pass it, he couldn't marry her. There was a great gala at the castle, and she was to be there as a laundress, and she was to hide three silver spoons in her bag. She absolutely did not want to agree to this, but out of fear she tied her bag around her neck and secretly put the three silver spoons in it. Then the king and the princes suddenly came up with the idea of dancing with the laundress. She was led in with great fear that the three silver spoons in her bag would also start dancing and ringing. So first the old King of England danced a slow waltz with her, but there was no ringing. Then the older princes came and the dancing with them went off very smoothly, to the princess's own surprise. Then the youngest prince, the one who was engaged to her, came and ordered a quick hop. She absolutely did not want to dance the hop, but had to, and the prince danced with her too furiously. Then there was a ringing sound, and the spoons fell out of her bag. She collapsed unconscious in the hall. Then she was carried into the next room, and there they dressed her in royal clothing. When she came to, she was brought back into the hall, and the youngest Prince of England revealed himself to her as her bridegroom, but asked her whether he was still a pound too light and a pound too young. No, she said, and threw her arms around his neck; and the wedding was immediately arranged; and there was great joy in England. Source (Internet Archive): Heinrich Pröhle, "Die Prinzessin von Portugal und der Prinz von Engeland," Kinder- und Volksmärchen (Leipzig: Avenarius und Mendelssohn, 1853), no. 2, pp. 5-10 . Source (Zeno.org): Heinrich Pröhle, "Die Prinzessin von Portugal und der Prinz von Engeland," Kinder- und Volksmärchen (Leipzig: Avenarius und Mendelssohn, 1853), no. 2, pp. 5-10 . Return to the table of contents . Haaken Grizzlebeard Norway Once upon a time there was a princess who was so haughty and proud that no suitor was good enough for her. She made fun of them all, and sent them about their business, one after the other. But in spite of this, new suitors kept on coming to the palace, for she was a beauty, the wicked hussy! One day a prince came to woo her, and his name was Haaken Grizzlebeard. The first night he was there, the princess commanded the king's jester to cut off the ears of one of the prince's horses, and to slit the jaws of the other up to the ears. The next day when the prince went out for a ride, the princess stood on the porch and watched him. "Well!" she cried,"I never saw the like of this in all my life; the sharp north wind that blows here has taken the ears off one of your horses, while the other stood by gaping at what was going on until his jaws split right up to his ears." With that she broke into a roar of laughter, ran in, slammed the door, and let him drive off. He returned home; but as he went, he thought to himself that he would pay her off one day. After a bit, he put on a great beard of moss, threw a large fur cloak over his clothes, and dressed himself up like a beggar. He went to a goldsmith and bought a golden spinning wheel, and sat down with it under the princess's window and began to file away at his spinning wheel, and to turn it this way and that, for it wasn't quite in order, and besides, it did not have a stand. So when the princess got up in the morning, she came to the window and opened it, and asked the beggar if he would sell his golden spinning wheel. "No, it isn't for sale," said Haaken Grizzlebeard; "but if I may sleep outside your bedroom door tonight, I'll give it you." The princess thought that that was a good bargain; there could be no danger in letting him sleep outside her door. So she got the wheel and that night Haaken Grizzlebeard lay down outside her bedroom. But as the night wore on he began to freeze. "Huttetuttetuttetu! It is so cold; let me in," he cried. "I think that you're out of your mind," said the princess. "Oh, Huttetuttetuttetu! It is so bitter cold, please let me in," said Haaken Grizzlebeard again. "Be quiet! Hold your tongue!" said the princess. "If my father were to know that there was a man in the house, I should be in serious trouble." "Oh, Huttetuttetuttetu! I'm almost frozen to death. Just let me come inside and lie on the floor," said Haaken Grizzlebeard. There was nothing she could do about it. She had to let him in, and when he was inside, he lay on the ground and fell sound asleep. Some time afterward, Haaken came again with the stand to the spinning wheel and sat down under the princess's window, and began to file at it, for it was not quite in order. When she heard him filing, she opened the window and began to talk to him, and to ask what he had. "Oh, only the stand to that spinning wheel which your royal highness bought. I thought that because you had the wheel you might like to have the stand as well." "What do you want for it?" asked the princess. It was not for sale any more than the wheel had been, but she might have it if she would let him sleep on the floor of her bedroom the next night. She agreed, but only if he would to be sure to lie still, and not to shiver and call out "huttetu," or any such stuff. Haaken Grizzlebeard promised fair enough, but as the night wore on he began to shiver and shake, and to ask whether he might not come nearer, and lie on the floor alongside the princess's bed. She couldn't do anything about it; she had to let him, or the king would hear the noise he was making. So Haaken Grizzlebeard lay alongside the princess's bed, and fell sound asleep. It was a long while before Haaken Grizzlebeard came again, this time with him a golden yarn reel, and he sat down and began to file away at it under the princess's window. Then came the old story over again. When the princess heard what was going on, she came to the window and asked him how he was, and whether he would sell the golden yarn reel? "It is not to be had for money; but I'll give it to you for nothing, if you'll let me sleep in your bedroom tonight, with my head on your bedstead." She agreed, but only if he would give his word to be quiet and make no noise. He said he would do his best to be still; but as the night wore on he again began to shiver and shake until his teeth chattered. "Huttetuttetuttetu! It is so bitter cold! Do let me get into bed and warm myself a little," said Haaken Grizzlebeard. "Get into bed!" said the princess; "why, you must be out of your mind." "Huttetuttetuttetu!" said Haaken; "do let me get into bed. Huttetuttetuttetu!" "Hush! Hush! For God's sake, be quiet!" said the princess. "If father knows there is a man in here, I shall be in serious trouble. I'm sure he'll kill me on the spot." "Huttetuttetuttetu! Let me get into bed," said Haaken Grizzlebeard, who kept on shivering so that the whole room shook. Well, there was nothing she could do about it. She had to let him get into bed. He slept soundly and gently, but a little while later the princess gave birth to a child. The king grew so wild with rage that he very nearly made an end of both mother and baby. Just after this happened, Haaken Grizzlebeard came tramping that way once more, as if by chance, and took his seat down in the kitchen, like any other beggar. When the princess came out and saw him, she cried, "Ah, God have mercy on me, for the bad luck you have brought me. Father is ready to fly into a rage. Let me go home with you." "You're too well bred to follow me," said Haaken, "for I have nothing but a log hut to live in; and I don't know how I would ever feed you, for it's all I can do just to find food for myself." "I don't care how you get it, or whether you get it at all," she said; "only let me be with you, for if I stay here any longer, my father will surely kill me." So she got permission to go with the beggar, as she called him, and they walked a long, long way, even though she was not a good walker. When she left her father's land and entered into another, she asked whose it was? "Oh! This is Haaken Grizzlebeard's, if you must know," he said. "Indeed!" said the princess. "I could have married him if I had wanted to, and then I would not have had to walk about like a beggar's wife." They came to grand castles, and woods, and parks, and when she asked whose they were, the beggar's answer was always the same, "Oh! They are Haaken Grizzlebeard's." The princess was very sad that she had not chosen the man who had such broad lands. Last of all they came to a palace, where he said he was known, and where he thought he could get work for her, so that they might have something to live on. He built a cabin at the edge of the woods for them to live in. Every day he went to the king's palace, as he said, to chop wood and draw water for the cook, and when he came back he brought a few scraps of food; but they did not go very far. One day, when he came home from the palace, he said, "Tomorrow I will stay at home and look after the baby, but you must get ready to go to the palace, for the prince said you were to come and try your hand at baking." "Bake!" said the princess; "I can't bake, for I never did such a thing in my life." "Well, you must go," said Haaken, "since the prince has said it. If you can't bake, you can learn; you have only got to look how the rest bake; and as you leave, you must steal some bread for me." "I can't steal," said the princess. "You can learn that too," said Haaken; "you know that we are very short of food. But take care that the prince doesn't see you, for he has eyes everywhere." When she was on her way, Haaken ran by a shortcut and reached the palace long before her, and took off his rags and beard, and put on his princely robes. The princess took her turn in the bakehouse, and did as Haaken had asked her, for she stole bread until her pockets were crammed full. That evening, when she was about to go home, the prince said, "We don't know very much about this old vagabond woman. I think we'd best see if she is taking anything away with her." He thrust his hand into all her pockets, and felt her all over, and when he found the bread, he became very angry, and raised a great stir. She began to moan and cry, and said, "The beggar made me do it, and I couldn't help it." "Well," said the prince at last, "it ought to have gone hard with you; but for the beggar's sake I will forgive you this time." When she was on her way home, he took off his robes, put on his skin cloak, and his false beard, and reached the cabin before her. When she came home, he was busy tending the baby. "You made me go against my own conscience. Today was the first time I ever stole, and it will be the last;" and with that she told him how it had gone with her, and what the prince had said. A few days later, Haaken Grizzlebeard came home in the evening and said, "Tomorrow I will stay at home and tend the baby, for they are going to kill a pig at the palace, and you must help them make sausages." "I make sausages!" said the princess; "I can't do any such thing. I have eaten sausages often enough, but I have never made one in my life." But there was nothing that she could do about it; the prince had said it, and she had to go. As for not knowing how, she only had to do what the others did, and at the same time Haaken asked her to steal some sausages for him. "No, I can't steal," she said; "you know how it went last time." "Well, you can learn to steal. Who knows? You may have better luck this time," said Haaken Grizzlebeard. When she was on her way, Haaken ran by a shortcut, reached the palace long before her, took off his skin cloak and false beard, and stood in the kitchen with his royal robes as she came in. So the princess stood by when the pig was killed. She made sausages with the others, and she did as Haaken had told her to, and stuffed her pockets full of sausages. That evening, when she was about to go home, the prince said, "This beggar's wife was long fingered last time; we had better see that she isn't carrying anything off." So he began to thrust his hands into her pockets, and when he found the sausages he was again very angry, and made a great to do, threatening to send for the constable and have her thrown into jail. "Oh, God bless your royal highness; do let me off! The beggar made me do it," she said, and cried bitterly. "Well," said Haaken,"you ought to be punished for it; but for the beggar's sake I forgive you." When she was gone, he changed his clothes again, ran by the shortcut, and when she reached the cabin, there he was before her. She told him the whole story, and swore it was the last time he would get her to do such a thing. Now a little later the man came home from the palace and said, "Our prince is going to be married, but the bride is sick, so the tailor can't measure her for her wedding gown. The prince wants you to go to the palace and be measured instead of the bride; for he says that you are just the same height and shape. But after you have been measured, don't just leave. You can stand about, and when the tailor cuts out the gown, you can pick up the largest scraps, and bring them home for a vest for me." "No, I can't steal," she said; "besides, you know how it went last time." "You can learn then," said Haaken, "and you may have better luck this time." She thought it bad, but still she went and did as she was told. She stood by while the tailor was cutting out the gown, and she swept up all the biggest scraps, and stuffed them into her pockets; and when she was on her way out, the prince said, "We may as well see if this old girl has not been long fingered this time too." So he began to feel and search her pockets, and when he found the pieces he became very angry, and began to stamp and scold furiously, while she cried and said, "Please forgive me; the beggar made me do it, and I couldn't help it." "Well, you ought to be punished for it," said Haaken; "but for the beggar's sake I forgive you." So it went now just as it had gone before, and when she got back to the cabin, the beggar was there before her. "Oh, Heaven help me," she said; "you will be the death of me by making me wicked. The prince was so angry that he threatened me both with the constable and jail." One evening, some time later, Haaken came home to the cabin and said, "The prince wants you to go up to the palace and stand in for the bride, for the bride is still sick in bed. He won't put off the wedding, and he says, that you are so like her, that no one could tell one from the other; so tomorrow you must get ready to go to the palace." "I think that you are out of your mind, both you and the prince," she said. "Do you think I look fit to stand in the bride's place? Look at me! Can any beggar's wench look worse than I?" "Well, the prince said you were to go, and so you have to go," said Haaken Grizzlebeard. There was nothing that she could do about it. She had to go; and when she reached the palace, they dressed her out so finely that no princess ever looked so beautiful. The bridal procession went to church, where she stood in for the bride, and when they came back, there was dancing and merriment in the palace. But just as she was dancing with the prince, she saw a gleam of light through the window, and behold, the cabin at the edge of the woods was all one bright flame. "Oh! The beggar, and the baby, and the cabin," she screamed out, and was just about to faint. "Here is the beggar, and there is the baby, and so let the cabin burn away," said Haaken Grizzlebeard. She recognized him again, and then the joy and celebration began for real. Since that time, I have heard nothing more about them. Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jøgen Moe, "Hacon Grizzelbeard," Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), pp. 45-55 . Source (Internet Archive): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jøgen Moe, "Hacon Grizzelbeard," Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1859), pp. 29-39 . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. The original Norwegian: Books.google.com: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jøgen Moe, "Haaken Borkenskjæg," Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiania [Oslo]: Johan Dahl, 1844), no. 46, pp. 24-34 . Internet Archive: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jøgen Moe, "Haaken Borkenskjæg," Norske Folke-Eventyr (Kristiania [Oslo]: H. Aschehoug, 1904), no. 11, pp. 70-79 . Return to the table of contents . Greyfoot Denmark There was once a king of England whose daughter was very famous. She was the most beautiful princess ever seen or heard of. But she had one great fault -- namely, that she was haughty and proud. Of course she had many suitors, but all were refused, and as she possessed a sharp tongue, she moreover scorned them, giving nicknames to everyone who was bold enough to woo her. At that time there was a young prince in Denmark. The fame of her beauty had reached him, and he sent word, asking for her hand in marriage. The princess answered, however, that she would rather earn her bread by spinning all her life than marry such a poor and miserable prince. The messengers were obliged to return with this unfavorable response. The young prince had determined, however, that he would win her. He dispatched fresh messengers with letters, and sent her a gift consisting of six beautiful horses, white as milk, with pink muzzles, gold shoes, and scarlet rugs. Such horses had never been seen in England before, hence the king put in a good word for the Danish prince: He who could send such a gift of betrothal must by all means be considered her equal. But the beautiful princess ordered the grooms to cut off the manes and tails of the six steeds, to soil them with dirt, and turn them over to the messengers, whom she instructed to tell the prince that rather than be married to him would she sit in the street and sell earthenware. When the messengers returned, relating all that the princess had said and done, the Danish king became so incensed that he wanted to put to sea with all his ships and revenge this insult. His son asked him, however, to desist from any such action; he wished to attempt once more, by fair means. If he were unsuccessful, he would himself know how to take revenge. To this his father assented. The prince now built a ship, so beautiful and costly that its like had never been. The gunwale was artistically carved with all sorts of animals; deer, dragons, and lions were seen jumping about, and the stem and stern were richly gilded. The masts were mounted with gold, the sails made of silk, every second canvas being red, and the remainder white. This ship was manned with the handsomest lads in the country, and the prince gave them a letter to the king of England and his proud daughter, the princess, asking her to accept him, and receive the ship as his gift of betrothment. The gorgeous ship rapidly crossed the sea and stopped immediately outside of the royal palace. It commanded general attention, no one having seen such a magnificent vessel before. The couriers landed and delivered their message. Now the king used his best efforts to persuade his daughter. A suitor so wealthy and munificent, so true and devoted as this prince, certainly deserved a favorable answer. The princess graciously listened to his entreaties, feigning an intention to think the matter over until the next day. But at night she gave orders to sink the ship, and in the morning she told the couriers to return as best they could; that she would rather beg her food at the doors than call their poor fellow of a Danish prince her husband. The couriers returned to Denmark with this disdainful answer, and with the tidings of the fate of the king's ship, which was now, with its gilded masts and its silken sails, at the bottom of the sea. Upon hearing this, the king at once determined to man his fleet and take a bloody revenge. The prince dissuaded him, however, vowing solemnly that he would make the haughty princess repent the disdain with which she had treated him. Upon this he left Denmark quite alone, and reached England, no one knowing him. Disguised, as he was, in an old hat, dingy clothes, and wooden shoes, he arrived at the palace towards evening and asked the herdsman for a bite of bread and a couch. He obtained both, and during the night kept company with the cows in the stable. The next morning the beggar -- Greyfoot, so he called himself -- sought and obtained permission to help in driving the cattle to their watering place. The latter happened to be situated exactly outside of the windows occupied by the princess. Greyfoot now opened a bundle which he had brought with him, and produced a golden spindle which he proceeded to use in driving forth the cows. The princess, who was standing at one of the windows, saw the spindle, and taking at once a great fancy to it, she sent some one down to inquire whether the beggar were willing to sell it. Greyfoot answered that he did not care to sell it for money; the price he asked was permission to sleep outside of her door the following night. "No," said the princess; she could not think of such a price. "Very well," answered Greyfoot; "that settles the matter, and I keep my spindle." The princess had taken it into her head, however, that she must possess the beggar's treasure, but as she did not like any one to know that such a poor-looking man was admitted to the palace, she sent a secret message by one of her maids, telling him to come late at night, and to be gone early in the morning. This he did. When the princess looked out of the window the next morning, she noticed Greyfoot chasing the cows with a golden reel, and at once sent one of her maids down to inquire whether it could be bought. "Yes," said Greyfoot, "and the price is the same as yesterday." When the princess heard this she was not a little astonished by the audacity of the beggar, but as the treasure could be obtained in no other way, she assented, and everything passed as on the previous night. The third morning Greyfoot drove the cattle to the watering place, as usual, but this time he was using a weaver's shuttle of pure gold. She sent for him, and when he appeared in her presence she said, "Now, Greyfoot, how much do you ask for this treasure of yours? Will you take a hundred dollars for it?" "No," answered Greyfoot, "it cannot be bought for money. If you will permit me to sleep inside the door of your room tonight, you may have it." "I think you are mad," said the princess. "No, I cannot hear of any such price. But I am willing to pay you two hundred dollars." "No," said Greyfoot again; "it must be as I say. If you want the shuttle, you must pay the price which I ask. Otherwise, I will keep the treasure myself." The princess looked at her maids, and they looked back at her, and all looked at the magnificent shuttle. She must possess it, whispered the maids. They would sit in a circle around her, keeping guard the whole night. Finally the princess told Greyfoot that he might come late at night; they would let him in. He must be careful, however, and tell no one, since they were all running a great risk. When it grew late, and the princess was about to fall asleep, the maids were all sitting around her, each one holding a lighted candle in her hands. Greyfoot entered, and quietly stretched himself on a rug near the door. But as the maids were not accustomed to much waking, one by one they became drowsy, and very soon everyone in the room was soundly asleep. As the ladies had rested little during the two previous nights, it was no wonder that the sun did not wake them very early the next morning. The king, who was accustomed to see his daughter at the breakfast table, became alarmed when she did not appear as usual, and hastened to her rooms. Imagine his surprise when he found, outside of her door an old hat and a pair of well-worn wooden shoes. Opening the door quietly, he stole into the room. There the princess was, fast asleep, with all her maids; and so was Greyfoot, on the rug inside the door. Usually the king was a very amicable and quiet man, but when this spectacle met his eyes he became angry. He controlled himself, however, and called his daughter's name aloud. She awoke, and so did the maids, who at once escaped in all directions. But the king turned to his daughter and said, "I now see what kind of company you prefer, and although it is in my power to let this fellow hang and have you buried alive, I will allow you to keep each other. The minister shall unite you in marriage, whereupon you will both be sent away. I will never bear the sight of you again." The king left them, and shortly afterwards the minister appeared with two witnesses. The haughty princess was married to Greyfoot, the beggar. Then the couple were at liberty to go whither they desired. When they passed the barn door Greyfoot turned to the princess, saying, "We cannot walk on the highroad in this style; you must change your clothes before we depart!" So they paid a visit to the herdsman's wife, who gave the princess -- now Greyfoot's wife -- a gown of linsey-woolsey, a woolen jacket, a cape, and a pair of heavy shoes. "That fits better," said Greyfoot, and they walked away. At first they walked each on his own side of the road, without speaking; but in a little while the princess raised her eyes to look at the man who was now her rightful husband. To her astonishment she observed that he was neither old nor ugly, but really a handsome young man, in spite of his old and dingy clothes. Being not accustomed to walk very far, especially with such heavy footwear, the princess soon felt exhausted, and said, "Dear Greyfoot, do not walk so fast!" "No," he returned, "as I have now been burdened with you, I suppose I cannot leave you on the open road." So he entered the next house and hired an old carriage, the bottom of which was covered with straw. They now drove on, until at length they arrived at a seaport. Greyfoot immediately sought and obtained passage for himself and his wife, as servants, and the princess felt much relieved when at last they were out of her father's domains, although she had no idea of their destination. The voyage ended in Denmark, and when they had safely landed, Greyfoot proceeded to rent a small hut in the neighborhood of the royal palace. It consisted of only one little room with a stone floor and an open fireplace, where she must prepare their frugal meals. In a little while Greyfoot went out, and returned with an old spinning wheel and a large bundle of tow, of the meanest quality. "While you work with this," he said, " I must try to find some occupation, as best I can. Neither of us can afford to be idle." Thus time passed slowly and quietly. Greyfoot had secured work at the palace as a woodcutter, and returned every evening with a loaf of bread and a few pennies. His wife was spinning until her fingertips were scorched, and her knees shaking under her. One evening Greyfoot brought home a wheelbarrow filled with earthenware. This he had bought on credit, he said, and she was in duty bound to go to town the next day and sell the things. She of course made no objections. The next day Greyfoot went to his work, as usual, and his wife set out for the town with her earthenware. But when she had just managed to sell a few of them, a troop of stately knights came galloping down the street. One of the horses became wild and rushed in among her articles, which went into a thousand pieces under the heavy hoofs which trampled upon them. The riders pursued their way; but the poor princess returned to the hut, and, sitting down, wept bitterly. In the evening, when Greyfoot returned, she told him of her misfortune. "Now we are utterly unfortunate," said he, "for I have no money with which to pay for these articles. You will now have to sew a wallet, go from door to door, and beg for victuals and pennies, until our debts have been paid." The princess did as he bid her, and was glad that her husband did not scold her for her ill fortune. She begged at everyone's door, bringing home, at length, several pieces of bread and some pennies. "That will not bring us very far," said Greyfoot, when the princess had displayed the contents of the wallet. "I have now found a good place for you at the palace. They are preparing for a wedding, and tomorrow you are to lend a hand in the kitchen. Do your best and make yourself useful; maybe they will keep you and pay you good wages. Tomorrow you will obtain your meals and twenty pennies." The next morning, before Greyfoot's wife went away, her husband said, " Today I must stay at home; I have felt an illness coming upon me, so I will rest and try to get better." She burst into tears, and told him that when he was ill she could not think of leaving him. When he answered, however, that she was expected, and necessarily must go, she kissed him good-bye, hoping that he would soon feel better, and promising to return as speedily as possible. "The haughty princess" spent the whole day among the pots and pans in the royal kitchen. When she returned to the hut, Greyfoot told her that he felt better, and further related how an order had been issued announcing that the Prince of Denmark was to be married to a Russian princess. Her costly bridal gown had arrived, but the princess herself, having been detained by wind and waves, was unable to arrive in due time for the ceremony, and on the following day every girl and woman was to present herself at the palace and be measured. She who filled the measure would be selected as the bride's deputy. "And you," concluded Greyfoot, "you must put in an appearance. If you are fortunate, your wages may be sufficient for paying our debts." In the morning Greyfoot declared that he felt worse than on the day before, but would not keep her from going. She hesitated, but as he insisted, she threw her arms around him, kissed him, and left. The royal measurer was busy among the many women assembled in the courtyard, and it seemed impossible to find anyone who was the right measure. But when at length he reached Greyfoot's wife, he declared that she was the very person they wanted. Now she was taken into the palace, and attired in the gorgeous gown, the bridal veil, and a pair of exquisite slippers. When finally the crown was placed on her head, everyone declared that the real princess could hardly be prettier. In a little while a beautiful carriage drawn by six milk-white horses was seen at the door, and Greyfoot's wife was asked to enter. The prince was already seated in the carriage; she had never seen him, but remembered having heard of him in past days. They drove along the road until they came to Greyfoot's hut. Seeing already at a distance that it was afire, the poor woman in the carriage uttered a piercing shriek, and cried, "My husband! save him, for heaven's sake! He was ill when I left him, and may not have escaped." The prince now spoke to her for the first time, and said, "If that ugly woodcutter is your husband, you had better leave him; he is no husband for you." But she answered, "He is my husband, and was always good and kind to me. How could I leave him? Even if you offered me the place which I am now occupying for your real bride, I would refuse it, and gladly return to the hut where I have lived the happiest part of my life!" The prince smilingly answered, "You are my real bride, and kept your word when you said that rather than marry me would you earn your bread by spinning, or by selling earthenware, or beg for it at the doors." Now she recognized him, and throwing her arms around him, she said that her sufferings had been of great benefit to her, and that she would now stay with him forever. Thus "the haughty princess of England" became queen of Denmark. This happened so long ago, however, that hardly any one remembers having seen her. But the story is true, nevertheless. Source (books.google.com): J. Christian Bay, Danish Fairy and Folk Tales (New York and London: Harper and Brothers, 1899), pp. 35-46 . Source (Internet Archive): J. Christian Bay, Danish Fairy and Folk Tales (New York and London: Harper and Brothers, 1899), pp. 35-46 . Return to the table of contents . The Proud Princess Denmark There was a king in Denmark. He was not handsome; kings in Denmark are not usually like that. They often have long and crooked noses. He had a son, and he was not handsome either. The king often told his son that he should marry. "No," he answered. He was tired of women and did not want a wife. However, one day he saw a portrait of the proud princess in England. He took a fancy to her and went over to woo her, although many predicted ill for him. She had rejected many princes with scorn and would probably do the same to him. He began to court her, and her father, the King of England, thought she should say yes, but she said no. She even added: "He is even uglier than my father's shoe brush." After being treated like this, he wanted to leave immediately. However, her father asked him to wait a little while. Maybe she would change her mind. No, he didn't want to, and he left. After being at home for a while, he decided to leave once again. They asked him to stay in Denmark, but no, he wanted to leave. Yes, then he should tell them where he wanted to go. But he didn't want to do that either. However, he did promise to come back home soon. He returned to the king's court in England, but not in royal attire. He had a beautiful gold ring, but otherwise he was simply dressed. He pretended to be a hairdresser. He then got to do the princess's hair. She liked his style, and she had him come every day. She admired his gold ring, and one day she asked him what he wanted for it. No, he did not want to sell it. But she tormented and pestered him until he said that the princess could have the gold ring if he could sit on her bedpost for one night. "Yes," she said, "but there must be others in the bedroom." Her lady-in-waiting must be there as well. That evening the princess went to bed, and he was allowed to sit on her bedpost, and the lady-in-waiting was there keeping watch. However, later that night the princess said that the lady-in-waiting could go to bed. The prince sat there quietly and properly until the lady-in-waiting left, but then he got into the bed and was allowed to lie there until daybreak. In the morning she got the gold ring, and they parted. Some time later he came back. She was angry, because she had been wronged. "I can't help you," he said. "I must go back to my own home now." "Then I will go with you," she said. "I dare not stay here until my father comes and sees how I am." "I have always heard," he said, "that princesses are good for nothing when they go outside their father's castle." She kept begging him to take her with him, and then they ran away at night. He promised to take food with him, but in reality he only had sand and stones. She brought a bundle of clothes. She had to carry the so-called food bag -- which had only sand and stones in it. After walking a little, she could go no further, and she told him so. "Yes, I have always known," he said, "that you are no good for anything. If you can't carry it, you will have to throw it away, because I don't want to carry it." Yes, she threw it away. After walking for a while, she began to complain that she was hungry. "Yes," he said, "you wouldn't carry the food, so it's only fair that you should starve. But I can give you some advice: We'll soon come to a large garden. You can go in there and steal some fruit and satisfy your hunger." No, she can't; she's never stolen. "Well, I don't know what else to do. You just go, I'll wait for you here for a long time." Well, she had to go into the garden. He went ahead and reported her to the owners, but said to them: "Just scold her, but don't do anything to her." Then he went out on the road again and waited for her. "Well, did you get anything?" he asked when she came back. "No, I didn't get anything, but I was scolded." "Now he knew no other way but that she should go into the big city they would soon reach and beg. No, she had never begged either, but it was better than starving. He waited for her while she begged in the city. "Well, did you get anything to eat?" he asked when she came back. No, she had only been given a little. Most people had said that she did not seem to need anything. So they kept walking, and it was a difficult walk for the proud princess. One day he said to her: "Now we are in my homeland. You should do something to earn you keep, but I'm afraid you are no good. Can you tend an inn?" Yes, she probably thought so. "Then here is an inn that belongs to my father. You must manage it, but be careful to serve skillfully." So she stayed at the inn, but he went home to the capital, which was nearby, and was received with joy. He then told some of the king's servants that they should go out to such and such an inn and have a good time at his expense. They did not need to be careful around the woman who kept the inn. The next day he saw her, and she complained pitifully: The king's servants spilled much more than what they paid for. That was simply wrong. "Yes, I told you you were no good for anything." That was all the consolation she got. "But," he added, "there is to be a great feast at the king's castle. I will see to it that you get a place in the kitchen. You must be able to help with something." Then she was taken to the castle, and the prince said to the servants in the kitchen: "Can you teach her to do something." She didn't know who he was yet. So she had to toil, carry water, sweep, and do everything the others didn't want to. In the evening the servants were allowed to go in and watch the dance at the castle. She wanted to stand outside, but they pushed her into the hall. There stood the prince in his finery, and then she knew that it was he who had traveled with her. He walked up to the others and asked: "Who do you think she looks like? I think she looks like my father's shoe brush." "But," he said to her, "now you have been humiliated. But now you will be good to my subjects. You will become the Queen of Denmark." And then everything was ready for the wedding. Told by Stine Roldborg in the parish of Trans. Submitted by M. A. S. Lund, pastor in Vium. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Den stolte prinsesse," Efterslæt ti "Skattegraveren" (Kolding: Sjodt & Weiss, 1890), no. 112, pp. 152-55 . Source (Internet Archive): ): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Den stolte prinsesse," Efterslæt ti "Skattegraveren" (Kolding: Sjodt & Weiss, 1890), no. 112, pp. 152-55 . Return to the table of contents . Peter Redhat Denmark There was once a princess, yonder in England, who was so beautiful that none might compare to her, and she actually had it printed in the papers but at the same time she was so haughty that she scarcely recognized herself. The king, here in Denmark, had a son, who also had a good opinion of himself, and it occurred to him to set forth and sue for the princess's hand. So he took ship and set sail with a great retinue. When he reached London, he went to the castle and told the king of his intentions. The king said he had no objection, save that the princess must have a free hand in the matter, and so they called her. But when the prince made his proposal, she threw back her head, and said she no more wished to have any dealings with him than with her father's blacking-brush or blacking. And with that he was at liberty to march off. Now he decided that he would play a trick on her in payment for her answer. So he went back to his ship, and had his things brought ashore and placed in a room which he had hired, and instructed his people to sail home and tell his father he would not be back for the present. Then he told his servant to go to town, find the shabbiest vagabond to be met with, and change clothes with him. The servant went up and down the streets, and there saw many a poor devil; but it was his task to find the most wretched-looking of all. At last he heard voices in a cellar and went down. There sat a fellow called Peter Redhat, and he was the raggedest the servant had seen thus far. The servant asked whether he would change clothes with him. But Peter Redhat grew furious, because he thought the other wished to make a fool of him. Yet he was quite in earnest, and so the change was made. Peter had an enormously large, broad-brimmed hat, known throughout the city; and this the servant obtained as well. Back he went to the prince with these clothes, and all was satisfactory. In the meantime the prince had visited a goldsmith, and had ordered a golden distaff, a golden spindle, and a golden yarn-reel, and when they were ready he put on Peter Redhat's clothes and went with his golden distaff to the king's garden. There he sat down and began to spin beneath the princess's windows. When she awoke and saw Peter Redhat sitting there, spinning with a golden distaff, she sent down one of her maids to him, with the princess's compliments, to ask whether she could not buy the distaff from him. Yes, it could be done, but he wished to speak to her himself. She did not much care to do so, yet she had never seen anything quite so handsome as the distaff, and she wanted it so much that she made up her mind to go down to Peter. Then she asked him what he asked for the distaff. All he wanted was permission to sit in her room for a night. The princess was half inclined to be angry, and turned on her heel with the words: "No! Fie, for shame, that such a pig should sit in my room! That cannot be." But that was the only way she could obtain the distaff, said he, for he would not sell it for money. The princess looked at the distaff, and her wish to possess it grew stronger, and the longer she looked the more she wanted it; till she felt that she simply could not go on living without the distaff. So she discussed with her ladies-in-waiting whether the matter might be arranged. They decided that it might, if he were willing to promise to remain seated in one and the same place, and they remained on guard in the room overnight. So she received the distaff, and at evening Peter Redhat came and sat him down on a chair near a little table. There he sat all night long, and did not move from the spot. In the morning he had to leave, so he went down and took his golden spindle. The princess slept late, and when she awoke she saw Peter Redhat sitting in the garden, reeling the yarn that he had spun the day before. When the princess saw the spindle she sent down one of her maids, with her compliments, to ask whether she could not buy the spindle from him. Yes, the princess could buy it, but he wished to talk to her himself. So she came down to him, for she wanted the spindle very much, and it seemed to her that it must be joined to the distaff. "What does it cost?" she asked him. It cost no more than the permission to sit over-night by the side of her bed. "Fie, for shame! Peter Redhat sitting beside my bed," cried she, "that would never do!" But she could get the spindle no other way. So she went in to her ladies-in-waiting, and asked whether they did not think that he might be allowed to sit beside her bed, if all twelve of them sat there too, and three or four lights were placed on the table, because she had such a desire to obtain the spindle. And they decided that if they put the table, with five lights on it, close to the bed, and then stationed themselves around the table, close to the bed, it might answer. So she got the spindle, and Peter Redhat came that evening and sat down in a chair beside the bed in which she lay. But the princess did not sleep much that night, because Peter Redhat sat there and looked at her the whole night through. When day dawned he had to leave again, and this time he went home and took the golden bobbin, for now he had to wind the yarn that he had reeled the day before. The princess slept somewhat late; but when she awoke and came to the window, there sat Peter Redhat, diligently winding yarn. She at once fell in love with the bobbin, for she had never yet seen one so beautiful, and if she could obtain it she would have the complete spinning-set. She sent down one of her ladies, with her compliments, to ask whether she could not buy the bobbin. Yes, surely she could buy the bobbin, but he himself wished to talk to her. So she had to come down to Peter for the third time. "What does the bobbin cost?" she asked him. No more than permission to lie at the foot of the princess's bed that night. Fie, for shame, that Peter Redhat should lie at the foot of her bed! That could never be! And she grew angry. But there was no other way of getting the bobbin, and so she consulted her ladies-in-waiting about it. They thought that if she placed twelve chairs along the sides of the bed, and one of them were to sit on each chair with a lighted candle, it might be done, for, of course, they knew what the princess wanted. The princess received the bobbin, and at evening, when she had gone to bed, Peter Redhat came. She lay as close as she could to the wall, and he was ordered to lie as closely as lie could against the foot of the bed. Then he began to undress, and he flung one garment here and another there, and his big red hat he threw in front of the door. Then he lay down and at once began to snore, so that the walls shook. Now the ladies-in-waiting had been on guard for two nights in succession and, one after another, they fell asleep, and the candles fell from their hands, and went out and at last there was only a single light left burning -- all the other ladies were sleeping. Then the princess said that since he was sleeping so very soundly, the light might be put out, if only the ladies would be ready to come should she call them. But the ladies were not called, and all of them slept so very late, right into the next forenoon, that the king himself came to wake his daughter. But when he opened the door he could not get in, because of Peter's hat, which he first had to shove aside. The king recognized the hat at once, and became furiously angry. Peter Redhat had to get up, into his clothes and be off as soon as possible; and then came his daughter's turn. She was banished from the country and had to leave that very day So she had to make the best of it and see that she got away. Some money was given her, but it was far too little, since she now had to look out for herself, and was not used to traveling alone. When she drove off, Peter Redhat sat up behind, and when she stopped at an inn to remain overnight, Peter Redhat stopped there too. She saw to it that she had the best of everything, but Peter Redhat lived as simply as possible. On the following day she drove on, and so it went for several days; while Peter always saw to it that he kept pace with her. In the course of time the princess's money came to an end, and she had to go a-foot. Peter took a couple of good sandwiches with him and when the princess started out, he started out at the same time. He passed her and said good-day, but she did not answer him, and would not even glance at the side of the road on which he walked. In the evening they reached an inn, and she was given the best room, while Peter had to be satisfied with one less than second-best. On the following day he passed her again, and when he said good-day to her, she was at last able to look around and thank him. Then he asked her whether she would not like to have a sandwich. Yes, she would, for her money was going fast; soon she would be unable to pay for a night's lodging. Then Peter said he would pay for her. They came to an inn and left it again the following morning. Then he told her that he could not keep on paying her way because his money was also coming to an end. They came to a river and had to cross, and Peter paid for both. When they had crossed, it was evening, and again they had to look for a place where they might spend the night. They were in the prince's own country by this time, and they came to a forest close to his father's castle. Now the princess had to thank God that she had Peter Redhat; for there was no one else upon whom she could lean, and they found a tiny hut in the woods, where they stayed. "What shall we do now? We have not a single shilling left!" She did not know what to suggest. "Then there is nothing left for us to do," said he, "but wander about and beg; for, of course, we cannot steal." So they agreed to meet at the hut once or twice a day. She made a little bag to hold meal, and grits and bread-crusts, and then they separated and each went his way for the day. Of course the prince went home to the castle, and brought back a large purse of gold in his pocket; but she wandered about and gathered such scraps as the people gave her, and in the evening they met in the hut. He asked her what she had taken in, and she showed him: a few pieces of bread, a little meal and grits, and a few bits of meat. "Oh," said he, "you do not bring back much when you go a-begging! Just see what I have!" And he drew the big purse with all the money in it from his pocket, and said that it was what he had collected that day. "But it would be best for us to take service somewhere." Yes, she was willing, was her answer. "Well, what work can you do?" he asked her. She would prefer to find a place as a seamstress. He did not know whether she could manage to get a place as a seamstress, but he did know where they would take her in to wash dishes. The fact was that the following day there was to be a great banquet at court, because the prince had returned and, to judge by what the people said, there would be a wedding. Then he made her believe that he had found employment at the castle as a wood-chopper, and so he would be able to have her out in the kitchen. "But could you not arrange to bring me a pot of soup at dinner-time from what is left on the table?" "Yes, but how am I to manage to carry it to you without attracting attention?" said she. "You can tie a cord around your waist, under your apron, and hang the pot on it." She thought she could manage this, and he told her which way to go in order to meet him. In the morning she went up to the castle and began her work. They gave her a pair of old kettles to scour, and she nearly scoured them to pieces; but the prince had told the cook in advance that a girl would put in an appearance at a certain time, and that he was to give her plenty to do, but she was not to be otherwise molested, and they were not to push, beat or handle her ungently. When the court had eaten dinner, the kitchen-maid asked permission to go to town for a while; and filling a little pot with soup and meat, she tied it under her apron, and started out to find Peter Redhat. She had to pass several doors at which guards were standing, who invited her to come in and dance with them; for on that day whoever wished to was allowed to enter the great hall and dance. But she excused herself, saying that she had no time to spare. At last she saw the door through which Peter had told her to pass, and there someone seized her, and dragged her into the hall where the banquet was in progress. The prince came up at once, and led her out to dance, and she had to yield, willy-nilly. But she did not recognize him, for he was wearing his princely clothes. The music began, and the prince danced with her so lustily that the dumplings and scraps fairly rolled all around the floor. Everyone wanted to know whose they were, because a number of others were also dancing. But she at once admitted that she was guilty. She had a sweetheart, she said, who was employed in the castle, and she had been on her way to him with a little pot of soup. Then the king asked her which way she had been told to take. Her sweetheart had told her she should pass through the door at the right-hand side of the castle gate. Then the king asked her again whether she would recognize the man again if she saw him. Indeed she would recognize him, for they had traveled many miles together. "Then pick him out," said the king, "for here are all the people who are employed in the castle." No, he was not among them, said she. But the king kept on talking to her, and meanwhile the prince stole out of the room, put on the old clothes he had worn while they had been together, went outside and walked past the window at which she stood. Then she pointed him out and said: "That is my sweetheart walking there." Thereupon he came in to them, and the king himself could hardly recognize him as he now appeared. He said to the princess: "Do you not think it might have been better for you had you taken the king's son out of Denmark, of whom you made so much fun?" "Ah, do not speak of it," said she, "I have trouble enough as it is." "Yes, but if he is still willing to take you, do you think he would be good enough for you?" "It would be wonderful, no doubt, but that opportunity will never recur." "And yet it might," said he, "if you promise me that you will never again be ruled by arrogance and haughtiness." Then he told his father and guests that this was the princess for whose sake he had traveled to England; and that he had played a trick upon her because she had been so arrogant when he had sought her out the first time, and had not been willing to so much as look at him. But now he was convinced that she had changed, and that the time had come when she should know who he really was, and be raised from her low estate. So they brought her garments, and he laid aside Peter Redhat's rags, and the wedding was held at once. Since he was the crown-prince of the land, he became king after his father's death and she, as was no more than right, became queen. But her parents always held a grudge against him because he had humiliated her. Source (Internet Archive): Klara Stroebe, Danish Fairy Book , translated from the German by Frederick H. Martens (New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1922), no. 13, pp. 110-21 . The original Danish: Books.google.com: Evald Tang Kristensen, "Per Rødhat," Æventyr fra Jylland (Copenhagen: Karl Schønbergs Boghandel, 1881), no. 13, pp. 96-104 . Internet Archive: Evald Tang Kristensen, "Per Rødhat," Æventyr fra Jylland (Copenhagen: Karl Schønbergs Boghandel, 1881), no. 13, pp. 96-104 . Return to the table of contents . The Swineherd Denmark, Hans Christian Andersen There was once a poor prince; he had only quite a tiny kingdom, but it was big enough to allow him to marry, and he was bent upon marrying. Now, it certainly was rather bold of him to say to the emperor's daughter, "Will you have me?" He did, however, venture to say so, for his name was known far and wide; and there were hundreds of princesses who would have said "Yes," and "Thank you, kindly," but see if she would! Just let us hear about it. A rose tree grew on the grave of the prince's father. It was such a beautiful rose tree. It only bloomed every fifth year, and then only bore one blossom; but what a rose that was! By merely smelling it one forgot all one's cares and sorrows. Then he had a nightingale which sang as if every lovely melody in the world dwelt in her little throat. This rose and this nightingale were to be given to the princess, so they were put into great silver caskets and sent to her. The emperor had them carried before him into the great hall where the princess was playing at "visiting" with her ladies-in-waiting; they had nothing else to do. When she saw the caskets with the gifts she clapped her hands with delight! "If only it were a little pussy cat!" said she, -- but there was the lovely rose. "Oh, how exquisitely it is made!" said all the ladies-in-waiting. "It is more than beautiful," said the emperor. "It is neat." But the princess touched it, and then she was ready to cry. "Fie, papa!" she said. "It is not artificial; it is a real one!" "Fie," said all the ladies-in-waiting. "It is a real one!" "Well, let us see what there is in the other casket, before we get angry," said the emperor, and out came the nightingale. It sang so beautifully that at first no one could find anything to say against it. " Superbe! Charmant! " said the ladies-in-waiting, for they all had a smattering of French, one spoke it worse than the other. "How that bird reminds me of our lamented empress's musical box," said an old courtier. "Ah, yes, they are the same tunes, and the same beautiful execution." "So they are," said the emperor, and he cried like a little child. "I should hardly think it could be a real one," said the princess. "Yes, it is a real one," said those who had brought it. "Oh, let that bird fly away then," said the princess, and she would not hear of allowing the prince to come. But he was not to be crushed. He stained his face brown and black, and, pressing his cap over his eyes, he knocked at the door. "Good morning, emperor," said he. "Can I be taken into service in the palace?" "Well, there are so many wishing to do that," said the emperor; "but let me see! -- Yes, I need somebody to look after the pigs, for we have so many of them." So the prince was made imperial swineherd. A horrid little room was given him near the pig-sties, and here he had to live. He sat busily at work all day, and by the evening he had made a beautiful little cooking pot. It had bells all round it and when the pot boiled they tinkled delightfully and played the old tune: Ach du lieber Augustin, Alles ist weg, weg, weg! But the greatest charm of all about it was, that by holding one's finger in the steam one could immediately smell all the dinners that were being cooked at every stove in the town. Now this was a very different matter from a rose. The princess came walking along with all her ladies-in-waiting, and when she heard the tune she stopped and looked pleased for she could play "Ach du lieber Augustin" herself. It was her only tune, and she could only play it with one finger. "Why, that is my tune," she said. "This must be a cultivated swineherd. Go and ask him what the instrument costs." So one of the ladies-in-waiting had to go into his room, but she put pattens on first. "How much do you want for the pot," she asked. "I must have ten kisses from the princess," said the swineherd. "Heaven preserve us!" said the lady. "I won't take less," said the swineherd. "Well, what does he say?" asked the princess. "I really cannot tell you," said the lady-in-waiting, "it is so shocking." "Then you must whisper it." And she whispered it. "He is a wretch!" said the princess, and went away at once. But she had only gone a little way when she heard the bells tinkling beautifully : Ach du lieber Augustin. "Go and ask him if he will take ten kisses from the ladies-in-waiting." "No, thank you," said the swineherd. "Ten kisses from the princess, or I keep my pot." "How tiresome it is," said the princess. "Then you will have to stand round me, so that no one may see." So the ladies-in-waiting stood round her and spread out their skirts while the swineherd took his ten kisses, and then the pot was hers. What a delight it was to them. The pot was kept on the boil day and night. They knew what was cooking on every stove in the town, from the chamberlain's to the shoemaker's. The ladies-in-waiting danced about and clapped their hands. "We know who has sweet soup and pancakes for dinner, and who has cutlets. How amusing it is." "Highly interesting," said the mistress of the robes. "Yes, but hold your tongues, for I am the emperor's daughter." "Heaven preserve us!" they all said. The swineherd -- that is to say, the prince, only nobody knew that he was not a real swineherd -- did not let the day pass in idleness, and he now constructed a rattle. When it was swung round it played all the waltzes, galops, and jig tunes which have ever been heard since the creation of the world. "But this is superbe !" said the princess, as she walked by. "I have never heard finer compositions. Go and ask him what the instrument costs, but let us have no more kissing." "He wants a hundred kisses from the princess!" said the lady-in-waiting. "I think he is mad!" said the princess, and she went away, but she had not gone far when she stopped. "One must encourage art," she said. "I am the emperor's daughter. Tell him he can have ten kisses, the same as yesterday, and he can take the others from the ladies-in-waiting." "But we don't like that at all," said the ladies. "Oh, nonsense! If I can kiss him you can do the same. Remember that I pay your wages as well as give you board and lodging." So the lady-in-waiting had to go again. "A hundred kisses from the princess, or let each keep his own." "Stand in front of me," said she, and all the ladies stood round, while he kissed her. "Whatever is the meaning of that crowd round the pig-sties?" said the emperor as he stepped out on to the verandah. He rubbed his eyes and put on his spectacles. "Why it is the ladies-in-waiting. What game are they up to? I must go and see!" So he pulled up the heels of his slippers for they were shoes which he had trodden down. Bless us, what a hurry he was in! When he got into the yard, he walked very softly and the ladies were so busy counting the kisses, so that there should be fair play, and neither too few nor too many kisses, that they never heard the emperor. He stood on tiptoe. "What is all this?" he said when he saw what was going on, and he hit them on the head with his slipper just as the swineherd was taking the eighty-sixth kiss. "Out you go!" said the emperor, for he was furious, and both the princess and the prince were put out of his realm. There she stood crying, and the swineherd scolded, and the rain poured down in torrents. "Oh, miserable creature that I am! If only I had accepted the handsome prince. Oh, how unhappy I am!" The swineherd went behind a tree, wiped the black and brown stain from his face, and threw away his ugly clothes. Then he stepped out dressed as a prince, he was so handsome that the princess could not help curtseying to him. "I am come to despise thee," he said. "Thou wouldst not have an honourable prince, thou couldst not prize the rose or the nightingale, but thou wouldst kiss the swineherd for a trumpery musical box! As thou hast made thy bed, so must thou lie upon it!" Then he went back into his own little kingdom and shut and locked, the door. So she had to stand outside and sing in earnest: Ach du lieber Augustin Alles ist weg, weg, weg! Source (books.google.com): Hans Christian Andersen, Fairy Tales from Hans Christian Andersen (London: J. M. Dent and Company; New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1907), pp. 355-60 . Source (Internet Archive): Hans Christian Andersen, Fairy Tales from Hans Christian Andersen (London: J. M. Dent and Company; New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1907), pp. 355-60 . The original Danish: Books.google.com: Hans Christian Andersen, "Svinedrengen," Eventyr (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzel, 1850), pp. 13-19 . Internet Archive: Hans Christian Andersen, "Svinedrengen," Eventyr og Historier (Copenhagen: Gyldendalske Boghandel Nordisk Forlag, 1913), pp. 326-35 . Andersen's comment on the background of this tale: "The Swineherd" has certain features in common with an old Danish folktale. However, the version that I heard as a child would be quite unprintable. ( Eventyr og Historier , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1863), p. 420 . Return to the table of contents . The Haughty Princess Ireland There was once a very worthy king, whose daughter was the greatest beauty that could be seen far or near, but she was as proud as Lucifer, and no king or prince would she agree to marry. Her father was tired out at last, and invited every king and prince, and duke, and earl that he knew or didn't know to come to his court to give her one trial more. They all came, and next day after breakfast they stood in a row in the lawn, and the princess walked along in the front of them to make her choice. One was fat, and says she, "I won't have you, Beer-barrel!" One was tall and thin, and to him she said, "I won't have you, Ramrod!" To a white-faced man she said, "I won't have you, Pale Death!" and to a red-cheeked man she said, "I won't have you, Cockscomb!" She stopped a little before the last of all, for he was a fine man in face and form. She wanted to find some defect in him, but he had nothing remarkable but a ring of brown curling hair under his chin. She admired him a little, and then carried it off with, "I won't have you, Whiskers!" So all went away, and the king was so vexed he said to her, "Now to punish your impedence , I'll give you to the first beggar man or singing sthronshuch [lazy thing] that calls." And, as sure as the hearth-money, a fellow all over rags, and hair that came to his shoulders, and a bushy red beard all over his face, came next morning, and began to sing before the parlor window. When the song was over, the hall door was opened, the singer asked in, the priest brought, and the princess married to Beardy. She roared and she bawled, but her father didn't mind her. "There," says he to the bridegroom," is five guineas for you. Take your wife out of my sight, and never let me lay eyes on you or her again." Off he led her, and dismal enough she was. The only thing that gave her relief was the tones of her husband's voice and his genteel manners. "Whose wood is this?" said she, as they were going through one. "It belongs to the king you called Whiskers yesterday." He gave her the same answer about meadows and cornfields, and at last a fine city. "Ah, what a fool I was!" said she to herself. "He was a fine man, and I might have him for a husband." At last they were coming up to a poor cabin. "Why are you bringing me here?" says the poor lady. "This was my house," said he, "and now it's yours." She began to cry, but she was tired and hungry, and went in with him. Ovoch! There was neither a table laid out, nor a fire burning, and she was obliged to help her husband to light it, and boil their dinner, and clean up the place after; and next day he made her put on a stuff gown and a cotton handkerchief. When she had her house redded up, and no business to keep her employed, he brought home sallies [willows], peeled them, and showed her how to make baskets. But the hard twigs bruised her delicate fingers, and she began to cry. Well, then he asked her to mend their clothes, but the needle drew blood from her fingers, and she cried again. He couldn't bear to see her tears, so he bought a creel of earthenware, and sent her to the market to sell them. This was the hardest trial of all, but she looked so handsome and sorrowful, and had such a nice air about her, that all her pans, and jugs, and plates, and dishes were gone before noon, and the only mark of her old pride she showed was a slap she gave a buckeen across the face when he axed her to go in an' take share of a quart. Well, her husband was so glad, he sent her with another creel the next day; but faith! her luck was after deserting her. A drunken huntsman came up riding, and his beast got in among her ware, and made brishe [broken pieces] of every mother's son of 'em. She went home cryin', and her husband wasn't at all pleased. "I see," said he, "you're not fit for business. Come along, I'll get you a kitchen maid's place in the palace. I know the cook." So the poor thing was obliged to stifle her pride once more. She was kept very busy, and the footman and the butler would be very impudent about looking for a kiss, but she let a screech out of her the first attempt was made, and the cook gave the fellow such a lambasting with the besom that he made no second offer. She went home to her husband every night, and she carried broken victuals wrapped in papers in her side pockets. A week after she got service there was great bustle in the kitchen. The king was going to be married, but no one knew who the bride was to be. Well, in the evening the cook filled the princess's pockets with cold meat and puddings, and, says she, "Before you go, let us have a look at the great doings in the big parlor." So they came near the door to get a peep, and who should come out but the king himself, as handsome as you please, and no other but King Whiskers himself. "Your handsome helper must pay for her peeping," said he to the cook, "and dance a jig with me." Whether she would or no, he held her hand and brought her into the parlor. The fiddlers struck up, and away went him with her. But they hadn't danced two steps when the meat and the puddens flew out of her pockets. Everyone roared out, and she flew to the door, crying piteously. But she was soon caught by the king, and taken into the back parlor. "Don't you know me, my darling?" said he. "I'm both King Whiskers, your husband the ballad singer, and the drunken huntsman. Your father knew me well enough when he gave you to me, and all was to drive your pride out of you." Well, she didn't know how she was with fright, and shame, and joy. Love was uppermost anyhow, for she laid her head on her husband's breast and cried like a child. The maids-of-honor soon had her away and dressed her as fine as hands and pins could do it; and there were her mother and father, too; and while the company were wondering what end of the handsome girl and the king, he and his queen, who they didn't know in her fine clothes, and the other king and queen, came in, and such rejoicings and fine doings as there was, none of us will ever see, any way. Source (books.google.com): Patrick Kennedy, The Fireside Stories of Ireland (Dublin: M'Glashan and Gill, 1870), pp. 114-16 . Source (Internet Archive): Patrick Kennedy, The Fireside Stories of Ireland (Dublin: M'Glashan and Gill, 1870), pp. 114-16 . This story is also printed in: W. B. Yeats, Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry (London: Walter Scott, 1888), pp. 290-93 . Justin McCarthy and others, eds., Irish Literature , vol. 5 (Philadelphia: John D. Morris and Company, 1904), pp. 1793-96 . Return to the table of contents . An Old Story Ireland Once upon a time there lived a very wealthy king in the east, and he had one daughter who was very beautiful. It was about time for her to marry, but any one who would ask her to marry she would only laugh and make fun of them. Once the king held a feast and all the kings, princes, dukes, earls, barons, and knights were invited. Soon they were all seated in a row and in came the princess and looked at them all. Then she began to examine them. The first was too fat, the second too thin, the third too straight, and the fourth too humpy, and she called him Green Stick that would be put into a baker's oven, the fifth was too pale, and she called him Wallface. The sixth was too red and she called him Corcomb. The seventh had a beard, and she said it was like a mop and she called him King Grizzelbeard. Her father was annoyed for insulting his guests, and he said that the next man that would come to the door she would have to marry him, whether she liked it or not. The day after the poor fiddler came to the door, and the king brought him in and asked him to sing and play for him. When he had the song finished the king called the daughter and said she would have to marry him. She started to cry, but it was of no use, as he said he was not going to break his promise. She had to marry him at once, and he hunted her out of the palace. As they were going along to the fiddler's house, they passed some beautiful fields. She asked him whose were the fields and he told her that they were King Grizzle's, and she said, "Wasn't I the fool that I didn't marry him." Then they passed a noble city. She asked him who did it belong to, and he said King Grizzle, and she said, "Wasn't I the fool that did not marry him." The next thing they came to was a small hut, and she asked him who did that dirty black hut belong to. He said, "That is mine," and they went in, and she told him to call the servants, and he said, "What do we want servants for?" and she was obliged to work. The next morning he put her to the market selling pots and pans. The next day he went to his own palace, and when he came home he told her that they wanted a maid in the big house over the road, and when she would be coming home they would give her something. One evening as she was going home she had meat in a basket. She met King Grizzle, and when she was passing him the cover fell off her basket, and King Grizzle made fun of her with the meat. Then she went to the palace with him and lived there. The poor fiddler that came to the door was King Grizzle. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Clare >> An Páirtín, pp. 519-22 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Link to additional type 900 stories from the Irish Schools' Collection. Return to the table of contents . The Haughty Princess Belgium Once upon a time there was a princess who was the most beautiful in the whole country, but also the most proud. Because she was so beautiful, many princes from the country, and even from foreign lands, had asked her to marry them. But out of pride she would not accept any one. She had to have a prince for her husband that did not exist: handsome and wealthy beyond measure, and magnificently dressed from head to toe. And once again a prince presented himself, handsome in body and limb, wealthy beyond measure, and dressed in red velvet and red brocade. "A velvet prince," said the princess. "I do not want him, however handsome and wealthy he is." And the next day a new prince came to ask her hand. He was handsome and wealthy -- oh, unspeakably wealthy -- and he was dressed in silver, entirely in silver. "A silver prince? I do not want him either!" And the next day a prince of gold offered himself. He was handsome and well-to-do like the others, but wealthy, wealthy: No one was as wealthy. He was so wealthy that he wore clothes of gold and everything he possessed in his house was of gold, of pure gold. And the princess married the golden prince at once. A golden carriage approached with horses of gold to take the prince and the princess to an underground palace, a hundred miles beneath the sea. And when the princess got there, she stared at everything. It was all so beautiful and splendid, and everything was made of the purest gold. Her only task was to walk through all the halls and admire them. From all the seeing and admiring she became hungry and thirsty, and she told her husband, who immediately ordered his servants to bring the necessary food and drink. But the food and drink that was set before her was all of pure gold. Thus she could neither eat nor drink, and because she could not escape from the underground palace, she was doomed to perish of hunger and thirst as a just punishment for her pride. Told in 1917, by Maria V. P., maid, daughter of a fairground traveller, Kiel, Antwerp. Source (books.google.com): Victor de Meyere, "De hooveerdige Prinses," Nederländsch Tijdschrift voor Volkskunde , vol. 30 (1925), no. 58, pp. 168-69 . This story is reminiscent of the Greek myth of King Midas . Return to the table of contents . The Son of the King of France France There was once a prince who wanted to get married. He sent an ambassador to the daughter of a neighboring king who was renowned for her beauty, with a letter asking her to marry him, and a quantity of breast-pins, according to custom. But the princess, who had been very spoiled by her parents, and who believed herself above everyone else, received the ambassador very badly; she refused the presents he brought her on behalf of his master, and told him that she would not even want the prince to clean her shoes. The prince was very displeased and very much offended when he heard this rude answer. He swore that he would take revenge on this proud girl. He left his father's castle, disguised himself as a servant, and offered himself to serve in the palace of the princess's father, where his services were accepted. He was a very handsome lad and knew the art of pleasing women, so he soon got into the good graces of the princess, who was never so pleased as when he was nearby. Little by little her love of him increased to such an extent, that she proposed to run away with him. He answered that he would not do so great an insult to her father's majesty. However, she insisted, saying that she would rather be a beggar with him, than a princess with someone else. He then consented to what she wanted, and they both fled from the palace. When they had gone a little way, the prince, still disguised as a servant, told the princess to take off her beautiful clothes and sell them, because if they were seen so well dressed, no one would give them bread at the farms that they passed by. She took off her silk clothes and dressed like a poor woman. The prince made her hold out her hand to passers-by, and he sent her to the farms to ask for a handout. When there were big dogs in the area that barked and threatened to bite, he told her to go forth by herself and beg if someone would give her something. If she got as little as a buckwheat pancake she was very happy. When she returned to her companion, he asked her: "Did the dog bite you?" "No, but he barked and showed his fangs, and I was very afraid." "Ah!" he said. "You should have hit his mouth with your little stick when he came too close." Sometimes he made her dance, while he sang: Rags for sale, Scraps for sale. And while dancing, she repeated in a softer voice: Rags for sale, Scraps for sale. Walking ever onward, and living from their begging, they finally arrived in the city where the prince's father lived, and the prince said to her: "You must do something to earn your living. If you like, you can be a shoe cleaner. You will work on your own while I go out and work elsewhere. I will be able to earn thirty sous a day, and in the evening I will come back to you." The princess obeyed without a murmur. The prince bought her some shoe polish and brushes, and told her to stand at a street corner and wait for customers. However, the shoe polish he bought her damaged the leather of the shoes, and this it soon became known, so the customers did not come back. Thus she remained there without seeing anyone. When her husband came home in the evening and learned that she had earned nothing, he scolded her for her clumsiness. Sometimes the prince came out of the palace during the day dressed as a lord, and she did not recognize him. He made her clean his shoes, and when she had finished he gave her five francs. Then in the evening he came back dressed as a workman and asked her if she had had a good day. "Ah! yes," she replied. "A handsome gentleman came and gave me five francs for my trouble. He also recommended that I buy some good shoe polish and clean his shoes well." The prince complained that she still was not earning enough. One day he told her that the palace was asking for someone to help in the kitchen, and he advised her to go and present herself there. She agreed, and he told her to try to get a job when there was to be a big feast. On the feast day, he told her that she must bring back some stew with sauce for their dinner. "How do you want me to bring you some sauce?" she asked. "I have nothing to put it in, and it will run all over my clothes." "Well then! I will make you two leather pouches that you can hide under your apron. You can put the sauce in them." The princess did not want to take these bags, but in order to obey her husband she did so anyway. She went to the palace, and during the meal she took advantage of a moment when she was alone in the kitchen and filled the little bags with food and sauce. Towards evening, the prince said that a dance was to be held for the cooks and servants, and that he wanted everyone to take part. She did not want to dance for fear of spilling her sauce, but they forced her to take her place among the others. Soon the sauce began to spill out of the leather pouches, and everyone noticed it. It was discovered that she had taken the sauce and also some of the leftovers from the dinner. They scolded her, called her a thief, and even threatened to put in prison. However, because she wept so pitifully, for the time being they contented themselves with driving her out of the palace. The prince quickly disguised himself as a workman and returned home. He arrived before her, and when she came in, he said to her: "Well! Did you bring us some stew?" "Alas! no. I managed to take some, and to put some sauce in my little bags. But then I was forced to dance, and the sauce ran out over my clothes. Then I was chased away and treated like a thief." "You are a fool to have consented to dance. But since you can no longer return to the palace, you must think of doing something else to earn your living. My boss is willing to advance me a sum of money. I will rent you a shop and fill it with earthenware that you can sell." She established herself in a shop, where she did very good business, and every evening she told her husband how happy she was to earn some money. Some time later, the prince ordered his father's guards to mount their horses and go to the pottery shop, to enter on horseback and break all the goods. But he told them to take great care not to harm the woman, swearing that anyone who touched her would be punished with death. The horsemen entered the shop, and despite the tears of the princess everything was broken. When her husband returned, he found her in tears, and he, seeing the damage, began to scold her. "What is this?" he said. "Everything is broken in the shop!" She told him what had happened, how some horsemen had come, and deliberately and maliciously had broken all the earthenware to pieces. "What!" he said. "You did nothing to prevent them from coming in here? Really, you are a very clumsy person. Since you can't succeed in anything, I will leave you and go away, and you will never see me again." She wanted to hold him back, but he let her cry, and returned to the palace where he dressed himself in his beautiful clothes, and ordered a number of beautiful dresses to be made for her. He got into the carriage, and when he stopped in front of her shop, he found the princess in extreme grief. "Do you recognize me?" he asked her. "No, sir," she replied, crying. "Well! I am your husband. It was for me that you left your father's castle. I was the one whose breast-pins you refused, after having said insulting words to my ambassador. You claimed that I was not even good enough to clean your shoes, and without knowing it you cleaned mine. But now you have been unhappy long enough. Far from wanting to make you more miserable, I now want to make you happy." So saying, he embraced her, and when she had put on the beautiful clothes that had been brought to her, he took her to the palace. He sent for her father and mother, who were very pleased to have such a pretty daughter-in-law. And there were such such a great celebration the next day, that all of the streets and roads were filled with guests. Told by Rose Renaud, from Saint-Cast, 1879; under the title "The Son of the King of France." In the vicinity of Moncontour I collected a version of this tale whose episodes are very different, but whose starting point and ending are the same. Source (books.google.com): Paul Sébillot, "La dédaigneuse punie," Contes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne (Paris: G. Charpentier, 1880), no. 23, pp. 156-61 . Source (Internet Archive): Paul Sébillot, "La dédaigneuse punie," Contes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne (Paris: G. Charpentier, 1880), no. 23, pp. 156-61 . Return to the table of contents . The Princess of England France Once upon a time there was a princess, the daughter of the King of England. The Prince of France sent ambassadors to ask for her hand, but she replied that he was not worthy to untie the laces of her shoes. The prince then went to England in disguise and announced himself at the palace as a skilled hairdresser from Paris. The princess wanted to see him, and the supposed hairdresser treated her so cleverly that she soon married him in secret. When the king learned what had happened he flew into a great rage and threw them both out of the palace. The hairdresser took his wife to Paris and stayed with her in a cheap inn. "Alas!" thought the princess, "Why did I refuse the Prince of France only to find myself the wife of a hairdresser!" One day her husband said to her: "My wife, tomorrow you must go and sell brandy in the square." She obeyed and sat in the square with her pitchers. Soon soldiers arrived, who asked her for a drink. They gave her five sous, drank all the brandy, then broke the pitchers and glasses. The poor princess did not dare to go back home in the inn. She did not suspect that it was the Prince of France, her husband, who had sent all these soldiers. So she stood outside the door. Her husband said to her: "My wife, why don't you come in?" "I dare not," replied the princess. "How much did you earn today?" "I earned five sous." "That's good for you, my wife. I earned three louis as a hairdresser in the palace." "Good!" said the princess. "Our business is going well! We can pay the innkeeper and go elsewhere." The next day, the hairdresser said to his wife: "You must go and stand on the main bridge and clean the shoes of the passers-by." The princess went there. She had hardly got there when the king, her father-in-law, passed by and had his shoes cleaned. He gave her one louis. Then the queen came, and she gave her three louis. Then all the lords of the court came one after the other; and at the end of the day she had earned sixty louis. When evening came, she returned to the inn. But when she reached the door she stopped. "Well! my wife," said her husband. "Why aren't you coming in?" "I dare not." "How much did you earn today, my wife?" "I earned sixty louis." "And I, my wife, earned thirty by shaving at the palace." "Good!" said the princess. "Our business is going well! We can pay the innkeeper and go elsewhere.' Another time, the hairdresser sent her to sell earthenware in the square. She had barely settled in when soldiers arrived and broke all her merchandise. It was the Prince of France who had given them the order. The poor woman told her husband about her misfortune and asked him if they could not have these people punished. "I will speak to the king about it," he said, "but what do you want us to do to them?" "Alas!" thought the princess. "Why did I refuse the Prince of France and now find myself the wife of a barber! "As for me," replied the husband, "I earned twelve louis today." "Good!" said the princess. "Our business is going well! We can pay the innkeeper and go elsewhere." One day the hairdresser said to his wife: "The king is going to give a great feast, as I am well regarded at the palace, I will ask that you be employed to serve at the table. I will have leather pouches made for you to put in the leftovers that you are given." He had leather pouches made for her; but these pouches were attached with cords so weak that the slightest movement would break them. So the princess went and served at the tables. At the beginning of the meal, she found nothing to put in her pouches. From each dish there came back hardly more than a little sauce. Later, she was able to put a few good morsels in them. As she was carrying a stack of plates, she slipped and fell; the cords broke, and the contents of the pockets spilled on the floor. The poor princess did not know what to do. Then the king, her father-in-law, came up to her and said: "My daughter, do not be so ashamed. It is not a hairdresser that you have married; it is my son, the Prince of France." "Ah! my father," said the prince, "you should not have told her this so soon. She said that I was not worthy to untie the laces of her shoes. Well! mademoiselle, you have untied them for many others." From that moment on there was nothing left to do but rejoice, and a magnificent wedding was held. Source (books.google.com): Emmanuel Cosquin, "La princesse d'Angleterre," Contes populaires de Lorraine , vol. 2 (Paris: F. Vieweg, 1886), no. 44, pp. 98-101 . Source (Internet Archive): Emmanuel Cosquin, "La princesse d'Angleterre," Contes populaires de Lorraine , vol. 2 (Paris: F. Vieweg, 1886), no. 44, pp. 98-101 . Return to the table of contents . The Count of Paris Portugal A king, who lived in the good old days of romance, had a daughter, and when she came of age he arranged a marriage for her with the great Count of Paris, but in order that the young people might know each other before they were formally engaged, he invited the count to his court. The young man accordingly came, escorted by a noble train of attendants, bringing presents to the king and the princess which were worthy of their magnificence. In compliment to the royal guest, the king gave a grand sumptuous feast, of more than usual richness and variety, to which were invited all his nobles and the count's retinue. During the repast, the princess looked very happy, and the count was evidently charmed and captivated with her loveliness, her sweet face, and beautiful simplicity, while the king was joyful and merry, and so were the general company, who kept up an animated conversation, the general topic being the approaching marriage and the festivities that would follow on the great occasion to which all were looking forward with much pleasure. At dessert the count partook, among other fruits and sweets, of a pomegranate, and while he did so a seed fell on his long flowing beard, which he removed with his fork, and then put it into his mouth. The young princess, who had been watching every movement of the count with shy but scrutinizing eyes, and saw what he had done, was much disgusted at the unseemly act, and, with evident displeasure in her angry eyes, she said that she would not have for her husband a man that could behave so disgustingly at table. He should have wiped the pomegranate seed off his beard with the table napkin and left it there. The count was startled by her words and her change of manner towards him; he rose from table mortified and hurt, and said he was astonished to find that for so slight a fault she should discard him and put him to shame before all present. But he promised he would be revenged for the insult offered him. A day should come when she would be thankful to eat pilgrims' dry hard bread, drink out of a ditch, and take her meals off straw. The count then left the palace with his attendants, and returned home. A few days after this untoward incident, a negro came to the palace and offered himself to the king as gardener, and obtained the situation. Whenever the princess walked in the garden and palace grounds, the negro endeavoured by all manner of devices to attract her notice, and draw her into conversation. He made beautiful nosegays, which he presented to her with much courtly grace, and by all manner of attentions insinuated himself into her good graces. The princess was captivated by his charming manner, and before long fell in love with him, to which sentiment the negro eagerly responded; and as she dared not tell the king the state of affairs, they agreed to elope, and get away from the palace as secretly as possible. There is no record left of how they travelled -- whether in a royal carriage or on horseback; the latter supposition is the most likely. However, after travelling day and night on a solitary road, the princess, fatigued and feeling the pangs of hunger, asked the negro where they could get something to eat; to which he replied that as there were no houses near, or any means of getting food, she had better go and beg a spare crust of bread of the pilgrim, whom he pointed out to her trudging along the road. She did so, and having obtained a piece of dry coarse bread from the good pilgrim, she ate it, and then cried in a troubled voice, "Oh, Count of Paris, your prophetic words are indeed fulfilled!" The negro, hearing her words, said to her, "Why would you not love him, then, and have him for your husband?" As they continued their journey the princess complained of thirst, saying she would be glad to find a spring of water to drink from. The negro replied that there was a ditch by the roadside, from which she could drink if she was so parched, as there was no sign of any other water near. The princess drank from the muddy ditch, and again cried, "Oh, Count of Paris, Count of Paris, your words have come true!" and the negro repeated his question, "Why would you not love him then?" As they journeyed along, the negro said that as they must do something to gain their livelihood, he would go to the Count of Paris and ask him to take them into his service; and, if he could do nothing better for them, to admit them into his stables for the night. On arriving at the palace travel-worn and exhausted, they were told they might take shelter in the hay-loft, and there rest and recruit their strength -- of which the wretched princess stood so much in need that she was thankful to get even so mean a shelter. The negro after a while left her alone, and did not return until late at night, when he brought her a mess of meal in a common cup, and said that he had had a difficulty to get what he brought from the palace people, who as a great favour allowed him to cook it; but that he had promised to return the cup immediately to the kitchen, and as he could not wait for her to finish her meal, she could pour it out on some of the clean straw. The princess asked how she was to take it to her mouth, as she had no spoon; but the negro harshly replied, "Help yourself to it with your hands if you like." The wretched and truly humbled lady being half-famished -- for she had not tasted a morsel of food that day -- meekly, and without another word, took the food that was set before her as best she could. "What a change," thought she, "this is from my usual life in my father's palace!" And then she remembered the count's threat, and how everything was turning out as he in his rage and mortification had said it would, and how different her position would now be if she had not behaved towards him as she had done for so slight a fault. She felt that all that was befalling her was through her own fault. There in the loft, left alone to herself all night -- for the negro did not return -- she had ample time to reflect upon her foolish acts, and to repent of them. What worlds she would give to be the count's wife then! Next morning the negro came to her and said that, as she must do something for her living, she could go and help to knead the bread; but he told her to be sure and steal some of the flour, as the food they would give her would not be half enough to satisfy her. The princess went as she was bid, and helped to knead the bread, and very reluctantly stole some flour, which she hid in the ample folds of her dress. She feared the negro, and had no alternative but to do what he told her. She was in his power! As she was returning to her only shelter, the loft, she met the count, who was very handsomely dressed, and he said to her that as some flour had been stolen by some of the women, she, like the rest, must be searched. The wretched lady trembled at this, and shortly after, the housekeeper came to her, and on searching her person, found the flour; for which she was ignominiously turned out of the palace, much to her shame and humiliation; but she was allowed to return to the loft. When the negro came back to her she related to him all that had happened to her through his bad advice and command. To this the negro replied that if she had not the sense to do things more cleverly, she must bear the consequences. The negro next day told her that a dress was to be embroidered for the princess whom the count was going to marry, and that as she knew so well how to embroider, she might, he thought, undertake the task, and receive very good wages for it. The princess obtained the task, and embroidered the dress most cleverly and beautifully. Next day, as she was crying bitterly, thinking in great distress of her altered position, the negro came with a number of attendants and pages in their best livery, bringing embroidered towels and basins made of pure gold and silver, which the negro said were for her use, as the count's mother wished to see the dress she had embroidered for the bride tried first on her to see if it fitted, and how it looked on her, as she was about the same height and the same figure as the future countess. Two maids of honour came to help her to dress, and the negro disappeared. When she had finished dressing, the count himself appeared, dressed most magnificently and glittering with jewels; he then told her that he was the negro, for he had disguised himself as such, and all he had done to her was for her good, on account of the great love he bore her. He told her that when he returned to his own palace after she had discarded him he felt so miserable he knew he could not live without her, or be happy with anyone else. The princess, all in tears, knelt at his feet and kissed them, saying she was his slave then, but was ready and most happy to be his wife for the future. The count raised her and embraced her. The marriage took place the same day. From the loft she was conducted in state to the church, where everything had been prepared beforehand for the ceremony. The princess, now Countess of Paris, had learnt wisdom by her trials. The count was the kindest of husbands, and they lived happily ever after. Coimbra. Source (books.google.com): Francisco Adolpho Coelho, Tales of Old Lusitania from the Folk-Lore of Portugal , translated by Henriqueta Monteiro (London: Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1888), pp. 33-39 . Return to the table of contents . The Hunchback Spain Once upon a time there was a certain king who had an only daughter, whom he greatly wished to see married; but the girl had been completely spoilt, and was very self-willed: she would not marry. If her father had wished her to keep single, then she would have determined to marry at once. One day, as she came out of church, she met a beggar, very old, ugly, hunchbacked, and so persevering, that she was annoyed and would not give him any alms. The poor man, in order to revenge himself, put a flea on her; the princess, who had never seen one of these nasty little insects before, took it to the palace with her, and put it into a small bottle; she fed it with drops of milk, so that it became too fat for its prison. Then the princess ordered it to be killed, dried its skin, and out of it had a small drum made and put into a bracelet. One day when her father came in to urge her to marry, she replied that she would only marry the man who could tell what the little drum in her bracelet was made of. "Very well," said her father, "let it be so; but on my faith as a king, and an old Christian, I swear that you shall marry the person who ascertains it, let him be who he may." Proclamation was accordingly made that the princess was ready to marry whoever could tell what the drum in her bracelet was made of; and from all the four parts of the world came kings, princes, dukes, counts, and gentlemen of good estate, and all to see the flea's skin, though not one could say what it was. The most extraordinary thing about it was, that whenever it was struck, the sound the little drum gave forth was similar to that uttered by beggars when they solicit alms. Then the king ordered that everybody, rich or poor, who came should be allowed to see the drum in order to try and ascertain what it was made of. Among the princes who came there happened to be one who was very handsome, and for whom the princess took a desperate liking; so, when she was in her balcony and saw him passing, she cried out: A flea's skin My bracelet is in. The prince did not hear her voice; but she was heard by the horrible old beggar to whom she had denied alms. The old fellow at once comprehended what the words she said signified, for he was very cunning; so he at once entered the palace and said that he had come to see what was in the bracelet of the king's daughter. Scarcely had he seen it, than he said: A flea's skin The bracelet is in! There was no escape from it: the princess would have objected, but she was given by her father to the dirty old beggar, for he had guessed the enigma she herself had insisted upon. "Go away at once with your husband," said the king, "and I do not wish you ever again to remember that you have a father." Weeping and ashamed, the princess had to go off with the hunchback, and they traveled farther and farther, until they came to a river through which they had to wade. "Take me on your shoulders and carry me across the river, because that is my wife's duty," said the old man to her. The princess did what her husband commanded; but when they were in the middle of the stream, she began shaking herself in order to shake him off, and he began falling off in fragments, first his head, then his arms and legs, and at last, all but his hump, which remained stuck fast on the princess's shoulders. When she had crossed the river, she inquired the way; and whenever she spoke the hump on her back mimicked her voice and repeated what she said, as if, instead of a hump on her back, she had an echoing stone there. Some of the folks she met laughed, and others were angry, thinking that she was mocking them, so that at last there was nothing to be done but to pretend to be mute. In this state she went on her way begging, until she arrived at a city that belonged to the prince for whom she had taken so great a liking. She went to the palace to ask them to employ her, and she was taken on as a maidservant. The prince saw her, and was so struck with her beauty that he said: "That girl has such a beautiful face that if she were not a hunchback and mute, I would marry her." The prince's marriage with a foreign princess was much talked about, so the pain and jealousy of the hunchback, who became every day more enamoured of the heir to the kingdom, may be well imagined. At last the matrimonial contract was arranged with another princess, who was as upright as a dart and as talkative as a magpie. The prince went forth with a grand retinue to bring her home, and great preparations were made in the palace for the wedding. The supposed mute had to fry some cakes; and as she was frying them she said to her hump: "Dear little hump, would you like a nice little cake?" The hump, which was that of an old man very fond of sweet things, replied that it would like it. "Then look into my pocket," said she. The hump made a leap off her back to her pocket, when the princess, who was already prepared with the tongs in her hand, seized the hump and popped it into the boiling oil, where it quickly melted into a lump of lard. As soon as the princess found herself freed from the hump, she went to her room, and dressed, and adorned herself with a robe of green and gold. When the prince arrived he was delighted to see the mute girl without her hump, and so well and magnificently attired. The bride, who noticed this, said: Behold the mute in her new array Upon her mistress's bridal day! To which the princess haughtily replied: And then behold the shamelessness Of her who'd be master before she's mistress. As soon as the prince found that the mute could speak, and that there was no trace left of her hump, he gave up the other princess and married her, and they had many children, and lived happily ever afterwards. Source: Fernan Cabellero [Cecilia Francisca J. Arrom de Ayala], The Bird of Truth and Other Fairy Tales , translated by J. H. Ingram (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, [1883]). pp. 141-46 . Return to the table of contents . Blanca the Haughty Spain The Count of Tolosa had a beautiful daughter called Blanca, and he had promised her in marriage to the son of the Count of Barcelona. Both were young, and rich, and noble; and all the people from both provinces gathered together to celebrate the wedding with every testimony of interest in their happiness. But Blanca was very self-willed; she had always had every thing her own way -- a noble palace in the midst of an enchanting country, plenty of servitors to do her bidding, many knights to contend for her favour; and she seemed to fancy that the whole earth and all who lived in it were made for her, and that all must conform themselves to her desires. Nothing was ever good enough to please her. Her father had thought she would grow out of these foolish ways as she became older and wiser, and had never duly corrected her; and she, meanwhile, became more practised in them, and chose the occasion of her marriage-fête for the wildest of all her pranks. While all were seated in the great hall of the castle at the high banquet, and all lips were overflowing with praises, perhaps also with envy at her happiness, the young count, offering her a basket of rich fruits, proposed to divide with her a fine pomegranate. Blanca condescended to give him permission to do so, but the count with all his dexterity could not avoid letting one of the luscious ruby pips fall upon the table; then, as if afraid of leaving a spot before her eyes as a testimony of his awkwardness, he hastily took up the pip, and put it to his mouth. Blanca, who had all the morning been on the look out in vain for some captious pretext on which to found a quarrel, and show off her haughty, petulant airs, immediately caught at this one, and exclaimed, she would never be bound to such a parsimonious husband; it was an act unworthy of a noble; a man who was afraid of losing the value of a pomegranate pip must be a sorry mate indeed. He would not do for her! It was vain, the young count tried to pacify her by explaining how utterly false was the view she had taken. Equally vain, that her father reasoned with her on the childishness of her conduct, or that her companions pleaded in favour of the disconcerted bridegroom. Blanca would not listen to reason, and the poor young count found himself at last left alone, an object of derision, or at least of pity, to the whole assembly. He really loved Blanca, and had before this day put up with many caprices out of his affection for her; but this was not only a tax on his patience and good temper, it was an affront on his name and lineage which must not be borne. And yet he loved Blanca too much to resort to any act of hostility which might put a further barrier between them. Uncertain how to act, he went out and rode away, spurring his horse, not caring whither he went, so that he could go far away from the face of his fellow-men and muse over his grief. But all the time there ran ringing in his head: No more a noble count, I trow, A humble shepherd seem I now! though he could not think what the lines meant, yet he went on till he had got far away into a distant forest, where all was savage and wild, and where there was nothing to remind him of the scenes he had passed through. There he alighted from his good steed, and threw himself on the hard ground. The sword which he had been wont to raise so bravely against the enemies of his country clanked listlessly by his side, the sharp rocks cut his cheeks, and his noble blood flowed from the rents, while he felt them not, for his heart bled with other and deeper wounds; but all the time there ran in his head the lines: No more a noble count, I trow, A humble shepherd seem I now! After he had lain there some time, and the passion of his sorrow had so far cooled down that he began to take notice of the objects around him, he observed two milk-white doves perched lovingly side by side on the branches over his head, yet fluttering full of fear and trouble. Full of his own recent suffering, he felt singular compassion for the two frightened birds; and searching for the cause of their distress, he perceived a great hawk hovering in the air above, in evernearing circles, and with glaring eyes preparing to pounce on his luckless prey. The count at once understood their danger, and picking up a stone, threw it with such force and dexterous aim, that it brought down the greedy hawk dead upon the ground. The doves no sooner found themselves delivered from their pursuer, than they gave every token of gladness and delight, hopping from branch to branch, fluttering away and pursuing each other, and then again loving each other in the gentlest way. The count could not bear to see their happiness, it reminded him of his loss; so he got up and wandered on into a dark cave where he could see nothing, and there laid him down; and the lines running in his head lulled him to sleep: No more a noble count, I trow, A humble shepherd seem I now! Then in his dream he saw one of the fair doves appear to him in the form of a beautiful woman; her face was of the softest pink and white, like the face of the sky at sunrise, and her eyes were so bright and lustrous that they illumined the whole cave. " Caballero, caballero! " said the bright vision; "you do not recognize me, I fear; nevertheless, I am indeed one of those poor doves whose lives you saved from the wicked hawk but now; and if I and my mate live in love of each other, it is to you we owe the boon. I am come to pay the debt I owe you, and I know there is only one way in which I can do it, and that is by telling you how to get for your mate Blanca, for whose sake you are now so sad. I promise you that in a very little time you shall have it all your own way with her, and she shall become as humble as she now is haughty. Meanwhile, take this ring, which I have enchanted on purpose for you, and whatever you ask of it, you will find that it will do it for you." Then the beautiful vision disappeared, and the cave immediately became dark and gloomy as before. The moment the count woke, the memory of his vision rose up before him, and he lost no time in feeling whether he had the ring safe. There it was all right on his finger; and when he felt it, he put his confidence in the promise of the vision, and hastened to go back out of the cave and set to work. He had no sooner found his way again into daylight, than he took off his ring, and thus addressed it: " Aniellico, aniellico! [Dear little ring] now is the time come to show your devotion to me. You know how Blanca has scorned me, and how I fear to go near her again, lest she should put some fresh affront in her wilfulness upon me, and yet I cannot bear to stay away from her. Tell me, ring, what I shall do." "Attend, attend," answered the ring; "watch now what you see passing before your eyes." As the ring spoke, the count saw a moor-hen scudding away across the plain, and a cock as fast as he could following after her. The hen seemed determined to have nothing to say to the cock; but the cock was so persevering that he came up to her, and made her stand still and listen to him, and then he first knocked her about a good deal, and then soothed her down, and at last they both went off together quite amicably; and the ring sang: The cock o'ercomes, though somewhat rough, So man, no less, the coy rebuff Of woman! "I see," said the count, "what you mean; but I do not at all see how you mean me to carry out your plan." "Leave that to me," said the ring; "only do as I advise you, and according to the instructions of my lady the dove, I will give you all you wish. And now, in the first instance, you must take off all this fine armour, and all your noble dress, and put on this disguise of a shepherd; and then take this loom, as if you were going, like the poor shepherd, to weave the wool of your flock; and now come along." Then, as they went along together, the ring told him all that he was to do, and what to say, and it had hardly completed its instructions when they arrived at the gate of the gardens of the Count of Tolosa, every now and then interrupting its discourse to sing: The cock o'ercomes, though somewhat rough, So man, no less, the coy rebuff Of woman! A gruff old gardener came out to see who called; and when he saw it was only a country bumpkin of a shepherd, he was gruffer than ever, and bid him begone. "Gardener, gardener!" said the disguised count in his most insinuating accents. "Don't you think, now, if you were to let me come in and help you, you would get through your work much more easily? You have a hard time of it, and get little rest. I am young and strong, and should soon accomplish what you have to do, and then you need not turn out so early in the morning, nor sit up so late at night watching this gate." " Pastorcillo, pastorcillo! [Good little shepherd]" rejoined the old gardener, quite tamed by this appeal, "I cannot say Nay to such an offer; so come in." The count lost no time in obeying; and at once began fulfilling his promise, by taking the sheep out of the fold and leading them out to pasture. In doing this, he took care to direct them straight towards the windows of the palace. Arrived there, he sat down and placed his loom, and began weaving away diligently after the manner of poor shepherds, and singing the while: The cock o'ercomes, though somewhat rough, So man, no less, the coy rebuff Of woman! He had not been sitting there long, before he observed a postern in the wall which separated the castle-keep from the private gardens, open. How his heart beat! Might it not be Blanca coming out for a walk? No, it was only one of her attendants, who had come to see what the shepherd was weaving. "Tell me, Don Villano, [Sir Country-Bumpkin]" she cried, as she came near him, "what wondrous kind of stuff, is that you are weaving? Is it a heavenly or an earthly texture?" "It is a stuff much too fine for such as you. It is such a stuff as has not its like in all the world, and cannot be bartered for cloth of gold; for whoever wears this stuff, however old they may be, immediately appears young, and if already young, it makes them beautiful too." And then he went on weaving, without paying any attention to her, any more than if he had not seen her, nor seeming to hear any of her questions or entreaties, and singing the while: The cock o'ercomes, though somewhat rough, So man, no less, the coy rebuff Of woman! When the dueña found she could make no impression on him she ran off at last to call Blanca, who was not yet out of bed, crying long before she got within hearing: " Infantina, Infantina! [Little princess] get up and come down quickly, for here in your gardens is a shepherd who is weaving a stuff which cannot be matched in all the world, and cannot be bartered for cloth of gold; for whoever puts on a garment made of it will instantly appear young, how old soever they may have been before; and if they are already young and beautiful, it will make them much more so." Now the waiting-maid, it must be observed, was neither young nor pretty, and she was most desirous to get possession of the stuff; and as the shepherd would not give it to her, she was dying to make her young mistress get it from him. Blanca's curiosity was sufficiently whetted by the description, to get up in all haste and come down, and see the strange shepherd herself. The count's heart beat indeed, as she came near; and she looked so handsome, and so haughty, that the sight brought back the memory of all her cruelty, so that he was divided between the inclination to throw himself at her feet and beg her to come and be reasonable, and the resolve to follow the advice of the ring, and give her a lesson that should make her a good wife. But the ring adjured him to keep quite quiet, and not even look up at her. "God be with you, this morning, villano! " she exclaimed, rather loud, with a little sharp cough, to attract his attention. "May he have you in his good keeping, niña [child]!" rejoined the disguised shepherd, without looking up from his loom. Blanca was not accustomed to be treated in this way; and she felt very much inclined to call some of the servants to chastise the supposed shepherd for his rudeness. Nevertheless, there was something about his manner that both awed as well as interested her to an unaccountable degree, and far too much to let her give up diving farther into the mystery that surrounded him without another attempt. " Villano, villano! " she said, at last, "tell me, I pray, the tissue you are weaving, who taught you to weave it?" "Seven fairies, lady," replied the feigned shepherd, who live in seven towers, and who never sleep or dine; but are constantly weaving and singing this refrain, which I sing continually too, lest I should forget it: The cock o'ercomes, though somewhat rough, So man, no less, the coy rebuff Of woman!" And with that he went on working away as before. "I suppose you want to sell it, don't you, villano ," continued Blanca, trying not to look vexed. "Now if you like, I'll buy it of you, and you may ask what you like; money, or jewels, or whatever you will, and I will pay the price." And when she had said that, she thought such a bait would be sufficient to make him obsequious. But far from this, he drew himself up proudly, and told her that all her money and jewels were useless to him; that whoever makes up his mind to contemn riches is richer than all the world; and he who is content with the food and raiment earned by his daily toil cannot be bribed by gold. "But," he continued, speaking a little lower and more softly, "there is one condition on which I part with my fine weft, and only one. The woman I give it to must be my wife! " and then he resumed his indifferent manner again, and went on weaving, and singing the while: The cock o'ercomes, though somewhat rough, So man, no less, the coy rebuff Of woman! Blanca seemed riveted to the spot. She had long mourned -- quite in secret and in silence, the loss of her fond admirer, the Count of Barcelona, and often her heart was quite in secret and in silence -- cut to the quick with the thought, "Suppose he should never come back to me!" Though she appeared outwardly gay and haughty as before, this care was continually preying on her mind; she treasured up, quite in secret and in silence, every little thing that could remind her of him; and whenever a stranger came to her father's castle, though she pretended scarcely to look at him, she scrutinized him through and through, to see if he could be bearer of any tidings from the absent count. Now there was something about the shepherd that re-awakened all her sorrows, and all her hopes. She did not know what it was. She was too agitated to suspect that it was he himself, and yet she felt so drawn towards him, she could not tear herself away. The audacity of such words was great, however, coming from one in his humble garb; and she felt she must administer some strong reproof; so, assuming a show of all the indignation she could call to her aid, she half turned away, exclaiming, "Begone, villano! nor dare to approach me. If you come but one step nearer, I will call my father's men to kill you!" " Soperbica, soperbica! [Proud little thing]" replied the shepherd, with most provoking coolness. "You are very proud now; but I swear to you that you will not always take that tone. You will talk to me very differently some day. For so the seven fairies promised me when they taught me the song: The cock o'ercomes, though somewhat rough, So man, no less, the coy rebuff Of woman! The dueña , who had been standing by, watching this scene with the greatest anxiety, intent only on getting a chance of possessing some of the weft which was to make her young and beautiful, was driven beyond endurance by the turn matters were now taking. So she called her young mistress aside and descanted so earnestly on the incomparable powers of the cloth and the little probability of ever meeting with such a chance again if she neglected this one, and threw in, too, such clever hints about easy ways of getting over the difficulty, that the simple shepherd could easily be deceived, that she could pretend she was going to listen to his attentions, though it need only be pretence, and in the meantime she would get his priceless treasure out of him, that poor little Blanca was quite bewildered. She was, indeed, so anxious to see more of the mysterious shepherd, and so possessed with the vague fancy that there was some connexion between him and the Count of Barcelona, that it was no very difficult matter to overcome her scruples, particularly as the dueña promised to smooth the way a little for her. The count, who had also been a little frightened, lest he had spoken too abruptly, was also willing to receive the dueña's mediation, and in a very little time Blanca had obtained possession of the texture; but the count had also played his game so successfully, that Blanca was quite under his influence, and could think and dream of nothing else, nor rest till she had an opportunity of meeting him again. Of course this was not difficult, and the dueña was ready enough to assist her, as she thought the shepherd might have some other precious gift to impart. Nor was she mistaken. The count consulted his ring as to what he should do next, and the ring gave him a fowl which laid pearls for eggs, and the chickens that came out of them had feathers like gold. When Blanca saw this, she could not forbear coming down into the garden to ask for the beautiful fowl. The shepherd was feeding her with gold corn, and he went on throwing down the grains without taking any notice of her approach, but singing: My fair begins to yield; I'm safe to win the field! " Pastorcillo! listen," repeated the poor child sadly, for though she did not recognize the count, he had so enthralled her, that she felt towards the supposed shepherd as she had never felt towards any but him. "Oh, cease that horrid song, and speak to me," she said at last, and so humbly, that the count thought it was time to put in a word. "Will you come away with me? because other wise it is no use talking," he said, somewhat abruptly. "Never!" retorted Blanca, indignantly; "and you had better take care, and not talk so loud, for if my father overheard you, he would send and have you strung up." But the shepherd did not care a bit, he had in the meantime spoken to her father, and told him what his plan was; and received from him the hearty approval of his scheme for bringing his incorrigible daughter to reason; so he sang out louder than before: My fair begins to yield; I'm safe to win the field! Blanca had never been treated in this way, and did not know what to make of it. She turned to go away, but then the dread stole over her, suppose the shepherd should go away as mysteriously as he had come, and then there would be no one left to remind her of the count. She could not bear to think of it/ She turned, and said faintly: " Pastorcillo! give me the beautiful fowl; you must give it me." "I am going away, Blanca," he replied, but less sternly than before. It was the first time he had called her by her name, and it seemed as if she heard the count speaking. "Going away!" she exclaimed, in blank despair. "Oh, you must take me with you!" "Take you with me!" repeated the shepherd. "No, you said you wouldn't come." "Oh, but I did not know what I was saying!" "It's too late now," replied the count. "Oh, but I shall come, whether you will or no," she said pertly; for every time he spoke his words seemed to rivet more firmly the chain which bound her to her affianced husband, it seemed as if he was his spectre come to avenge him. "I cannot help it, if you choose to do that ," was all his answer, and he turned to go. "Take me, Pastorcillo! " she said once more. "You would not like to come where I have to go," answered the supposed shepherd. "My dwelling is a dark cave, where no light ever enters. My bed is the sharp rock, which cuts through to the bones. My drink is water, muddy and cold; and my meat is grief and mourning. No companions are there where I live, for all men and women hold my way of living in dread." When Blanca heard this, she turned pale; nevertheless, she could not see him go without her, and still asked to go. The shepherd walked on without saying a word. Blanca followed him as if drawn by magic. Away they went, sad and silent: far, far away; over rocks and declivities, through streams and torrents, past briars and brakes. For months they went on thus; the count going on before, Blanca, sad and silent, after him. They never entered any town; and their only food was the berries they found in the wood, and the water of the brooks they crossed. Blanca's fair soft skin was burnt brown by the sun and parched up by the wind; her hands were torn by the thorns, and her feet bleeding from the unevennesses of the way. At last a day came when she could go no farther. She sank down fainting on the earth, but she was so humble now, she did not so much as proffer a word of complaint. "What is the matter, Blanca?" inquired the count. "Do you give up following me any farther?" " Pastorcillo! mock me not. You see I would follow you gladly, but you see too my strength is at an end; I can go no farther;" and with that her senses failed. When the count saw her in this condition, he took pity on her, and, lifting her up in his arms, carried her to a shepherd's hut at no great distance along the moor, and there the good wife attended to her, putting her in her poor bed, and gently trying to bring her to again. But it was all of no use, she continued in the swoon, and the poor peasant's restoratives were of no avail. When the count saw this, he was in despair, and sitting down under shadow of a rock, he took out his ring to ask it what was to be done, now being almost ready to reproach it for having led him to be so cruel. But the ring told him to be of good heart, and all the promises of the milk-white dove would be fulfilled: "Blanca has now learnt a lesson, and acquired a habit of submission which she will not forget all through her life. And besides, after she has given such strong proofs of love and devotion towards you, she will have no inclination to resume the provoking ways with which she tormented you before, so you may safely discover yourself to her now." Then the good ring suddenly pronounced some words near the peasant's hut, and it became a fine palace, and the bed on which Blanca was lying became covered with beautiful embroidered coverlets, and all around were clothes fit for a countess to wear. The count, too, was provided with a shining suit of armour and a prancing charger, and by its side a palfrey for his bride, and a train of noble knights and dames to attend them. Over Blanca, too, the ring said some words, and her consciousness came back to her, and when she saw the count standing by her side, looking just as he did the day he dropped the pomegranate pip, it seemed as if she had never seen him in any other garb, only that he kept singing a verse the ring had taught him: She spurned me, bridegroom, in her pride! Then with a shepherd would abide; Yet loved me still, for I have tried Her love, as gold is purified! till she begged him not to sing it, but so gently and submissively, that he could not resist. So he lifted her on to her palfrey, and the whole noble train moved on towards his father's palace, where she lived by his side all her life, a model of a devoted wife. Source (books.google.com): Rachel Harriette Busk, Patrañas: Or Spanish Stories, Legendary and Traditional (London: Griffith and Farran, 1870), pp. 303-322 . Source (Internet Archive): Rachel Harriette Busk, Patrañas: Or Spanish Stories, Legendary and Traditional (London: Griffith and Farran, 1870), pp. 303-322 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites The Taming of the Shrew by William Shakespeare (Folger Shakespeare Library). The Taming of the Shrew , an article from Wikipedia . Taming of the Shrew: The Disobedient Wife , folktales of type 901. The Contrary Wife , folktales of types 1365A, 1365B, and 1365C. Wives Rules Over Their Husbands , folktales of type 1375. The Wife Who Could Not Keep a Secret , folktales of type 1381. The Silence Wager , folktales of type 1351, in which stubborn individuals (typically husband and wife) attempt to settle a dispute by seeing who can go the longest without speaking. The Language of Animals , folktales of type 670 about wife beating. Sharing Joy and Sorrow a tale about wife beating from the Grimm brothers' collection. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 24, 2025. Taming of the Shrew: Folktales of Type 901 Taming of the Shrew: The Disobedient Wife Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 901 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2025 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents What Happened to a Young Man on His Wedding Day (Spain). Anger-Flesh (Germany). Two Brothers and Their Wives (Italy). A Wicked Maiden Becomes a Very Pious Wife (Germany). The Ill-Natured Lady (France / England). The Most Obedient Wife (1) (Denmark). The Most Obedient Wife (2) (Denmark). A Story (Ireland). Banke Chhail and His Wife (India). Related Sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. What Happened to a Young Man on His Wedding Day Spain One day Count Lucanor was talking to Patronio his counsellor, and said to him, "Patronio, one of my dependants tells me he can make a very advantageous marriage with a woman much richer and more honourable than himself; but there is one difficulty in the way, which is this, he tells me he has been informed that she is of a very violent and impetuous temper. Now I beg you to counsel me whether I should allow him to marry this woman, knowing such to be her disposition, or whether I should forbid it." "Count Lucanor," replied Patronio, "if the man is like the son of a good man, a Moor, advise the marriage by all means; but if such be not the case, forbid it." The Count begged of him to relate the narrative. "There lived in a city," said Patronio, "a Moor who was much respected, and who had a son, the most promising youth in the world; but, not being rich enough to accomplish the great deeds which he felt in his heart equal to, he was greatly troubled, having the will and not the power. Now in the same town there lived another Moor, who held a higher position, and was very much richer than his father, and who had an only daughter, the very reverse in character and appearance of the young man, she being of so very violent a temper that no one could be found willing to marry such a virago. One day the young man came to his father, and said, "You know that your means will not allow you to put me in a position to live honourably," adding that, as he desired to live an easy and quiet life, he thought it better to seek to enrich himself by an advantageous marriage, or to leave that part of the country. The father told him that he would be very happy if he could succeed in such a union. On this, the son proposed, if it were agreeable to his father, to seek the daughter of their neighbour in marriage. Hearing this, the father was much astonished, and asked how he could think of such a thing, when he knew that no man, however poor, could be induced to marry her. Nevertheless, the son insisted; and, although the father thought it a strange whim, in the end he gave his consent. The good man then visited his neighbour, telling him the wish of his son. When the good man heard what his friend said, he answered, "By heaven, my friend, were I to do such a thing I should prove myself a very false friend, for you have a worthy son, and it would be base in me to consent to his injury or death; and I know for certain that, were he to live with my daughter, he would soon die, or death, at least, would be preferable to life. Do not think I say this from any objection to your alliance, for I should only be too grateful to any man who would take her out of my house." The young man's father was much pleased at this, as his son was so intent on the marriage. All being ultimately arranged, they were in the end married, and the bride taken home, according to the Moorish fashion, to the house of her husband, and left to supper; the friends and relations returning to their respective homes, waiting anxiously for the following day, when they feared to find the bridegroom either dead or seriously injured. Now, being left alone, the young couple sat down to supper, when the bridegroom, looking behind him, saw his mastiff and said to him, "Bring me water wherewith to wash my hands." The dog, naturally taking no notice of this command, the young man became irritated, and ordered the animal more angrily to bring him water for his hands, which the latter not heeding, the young man arose in a great rage, and, drawing his sword, commenced a savage attack on the dog, who, to avoid him ran away; but, finding no retreat, jumped on the table, then to the fireplace, his master still pursuing him, who, having caught him, first cut off his head, then his paws, hewing him to pieces, covering everything with blood. Thus furious and blood-stained, he returned to the table, and, looking round, saw a cat. "Bring me water for my hands," said he to him. The animal not noticing the command, the master cried out, "How, false traitor, did you not see how I treated the mastiff for disobeying me? If you do not do as I tell you this instant you shall share his fate." The poor little harmless cat continuing motionless, the master seized him by the paws and dashed him to pieces against the wall. His fury increasing, he again placed himself at the table, looking about on all sides as if for something to attack next. His wife, seeing this, and supposing he had lost his senses, held her peace. At length he espied his horse, the only one he had, and called to him fiercely to bring him water to wash his hands. The animal not obeying, he cried out in a rage, "How is this? Think you that because you are the only horse I have that you dare thus to disobey my orders? Know then that your fate shall be the same as the others, and that anyone living who dares to disobey me shall not escape my vengeance." Saying this, he seized the horse, cut off his head, and hacked him to pieces. And when the wife saw this, and knowing he had no other horse, felt that he was really in earnest, she became dreadfully alarmed. He again sat down to table, raging and all bloody as he was, swearing he would kill a thousand horses, or even men or women, if they dared to disobey him. Holding at the same time his bloody sword in his hand, he looked around with glaring eyes until, fixing them on his wife, he ordered her to bring him water to wash his hands. The wife, expecting no other fate than to be cut to pieces if she demurred, immediately arose and brought him the water. "Ha! thank God you have done so." said he. "Otherwise, I am so irritated by these senseless brutes that I should have done by you as by them." He afterwards commanded her to help him to meat. She complied; but he told her, in a fearful tone of voice, to beware, as he felt as if he was going mad. Thus passed the night; she not daring to speak, but strictly obeying all his orders. After letting her sleep for a short time, he said to her, "Get up, I have been so annoyed that I cannot sleep; take care that nothing disturbs me, and in the meanwhile prepare me a good and substantial meal." While it was yet early the following morning, the fathers, mothers, and other relatives came stealthily to the door of the young people, and, hearing no movement, feared the bridegroom was either dead or wounded; and, seeing the bride approach the door alone, were still more alarmed. She, seeing them, went cautiously and tremblingly towards them, and exclaimed: "Traitors, what are you doing? How dare you approach this gate? Speak not. Be silent, or all of us, you as well as I, are dead." When they heard this they were much astonished, and, on learning what had taken place the night previous, they esteemed the young man very much who had made so good a commencement in the management of his household; and from that day forward his wife became tractable and complaisant, so that they led a very happy life. A few days later, his father-in-law, wishing to follow the example of his son, likewise killed a horse in order to intimidate his wife, but she said to him, "My friend, it is too late to begin now; it would not avail you to kill a hundred horses. We know each other too well." And you, Count Lucanor, if your dependant wishes to marry such a woman, if he be like this young man, advise him that he may do it with safety, for he will know how to rule his house: but if he be not likely to act with resolute determination at the beginning, and to sustain his position in his household, advise him to have nothing to do with her. As also I would counsel you in all cases where you have dealings with men to act with that decision which will leave them no room to think that you can be imposed upon. The Count thought this a very good example, and Don Juan had it written in this book, and made these lines, saying : Who would not for life be a henpeck'd fool Must show, from the first, that he means to rule. Source (books.google.com): Juan Manuel, Count Lucanor; or, The Fifty Pleasant Stories of Patronio (London: Pickering and Chatto, 1888), ch. 44, pp. 200-207 . Source (Internet Archive): Juan Manuel, Count Lucanor; or, The Fifty Pleasant Stories of Patronio (London: Gibbings and Company, 1899), ch. 44, pp. 200-207 . Don Juan Manuel (1282-1348) was a Spanish writer. Return to the table of contents . Anger-Flesh Germany Summary of an old German rhymed tale, in the Baron von Lassberg's Lieder-Saal There was once a knight who, in addition to much money and property, had an evil wife whom he could never control. There was hardly a worse woman to be found on earth, but he was honorable and gentle. They had an only daughter, and her mother raised her in her own evil ways and according to her type, so that she too became wicked, stingy, spiteful, and malicious. Nevertheless, God had made the girl into a beautiful maiden, so that whoever saw her perceived a picture full of loving kindness, but whoever got to know her better soon noticed her evilness, and then avoided her entirely. When the maiden turned eighteen years old she wanted to take a husband, but no one came who would marry her. This greatly distressed the father, and one day he said to her: "Daughter, your mother's example and her bad advice mean that you will remain without a husband, or if someone takes you who has no desire to patiently endure evil womanly tricks like I put up with your mother, you will be beaten more often than you can count, and you will regret that you have followed your mother's example and advice." The pious knight's daughter was very unhappy to hear this and said angrily: "Well, father! You can say what you will! You have always preached to my mother, but she does not thank you. Do you know what? Do what you think is best for yourself, and let me do as I please for myself. If a suitor comes tomorrow and marries me, I will indeed be the dominant one in our marriage." "Oh, my daughter," answered the knight, "I don't think it's right that you have such thoughts. You should think of being better than your wicked mother, otherwise you might get a husband who is so honest and pious that he will conquer you, and afterwards you will have to give in with shame and disgrace." The daughter replied with such nasty and mocking remarks to her father, that he cried out angrily: "You wicked hussy! If you will not follow your father's advice, your back will be full of blows! Whoever marries you, be he a knight or a servant, shall take control of you and make you follow his will!" "Or I will make him follow my will!" replied the daughter defiantly, and continued her tirade until they were no longer speaking to each other. Now about three miles from the castle of this good knight lived another knight who was rich in money and property, and who had thoughts of getting married. He was also good looking and polite in manners. He heard that his neighbor's daughter was both beautiful and mean-spirited, and he thought: "I trust that I can turn her mind to virtue and make her good. But if I fail in this then I will take her for better or for worse because of her beauty." He then rode with his friends to the maiden's father and asked him for his daughter. The father warned the young suitor about his daughter's bad behavior, and the latter said: "I have heard about her, but just give her to me as my wife! God willing that we live together for just one year, and you will see how good she becomes!" "With that his future father-in-law answered: "May God protect you from her evil ways! Beware, for if she follows after her mother, you will never have a good day with her, as long as she lives." But the suitor stuck to his decision, and an agreement was made, and arrangements were made that when the young knight returned, he should take the maiden back home with him as his bride. The mother knew nothing about this negotiation. In fact, she did not know at all that her daughter was engaged to a man, and when she found out, she became very angry. She called her daughter and said: "Daughter, know that my curse will fall on you if you do not resist your husband, just as I resist your father with blows and harsh words always and everywhere. Listen to what I tell you: I was a little girl when I came to your father, much smaller than you, for you are now fully grown. For three weeks your father beat me every day until I became ill, and he gave me only water water to refresh me. But nonetheless, I won the battle and have always maintained my rights from that time onward!" "Mother," answered the daughter, "I tell you, come what may, I shall make a fool of my husband." Meanwhile the day came when the knight returned. He came on a beautiful horse of great value, also leading a slender greyhound and carrying a well-trained falcon in his hand. He received the maiden without further ado and placed her behind him on his horse, sent all his servants ahead so that none of them rode with the two, and then immediately took leave from his bride's father. The father said a moving farewell: "May God's goodness be with you, oh daughter! May he grant you contentment, happiness, and a more peaceful heart than I have found in my wife!" Hardly had this speech been spoken when the mother raised a fuss and shouted after her daughter: "Listen to my words too! You shall submit to your husband all the days of your life, just as I have taught you!" With that the daughter called back: "Very well, my mother, I shall indeed follow your example." Thus the two rode together by themselves. However, to test his bride's obedience, the knight avoided the main road, instead riding along an uncomfortable steep and narrow side path. After they had gone about a half mile they came to a bushy swamp, and the falcon began to flap its wings, because it wanted to pursue some herons. The knight said: "Stop flapping your feathers, or I'll rip your head off." Soon afterwards the falcon saw a crow flying, and it wanted to follow it. The knight said again: "You are deceiving only yourself, if you think that you can disobey me. It serves you right that you must die!" And he strangled the falcon like a chicken. The maiden was frightened by this speech and the deadly deed, and she began to fear the knight. The path became narrower, stonier, and thornier. The greyhound's feet hurt, and he could no longer keep to the horse's side as before. The knight, who was leading him by a leash, had to keep pulling him along, which was inconvenient for the knight, and he scolded the greyhound: "You wicked rascal! Beware, it will be a disaster for you if you keep pulling my arm like that!" The poor dog could not obey, and the knight drew his sword and struck him dead. The maiden suppressed a cry of anger, but her heart was terrified in her breast. She felt pain, and she thought: "Lord God, what a madman this man is! Did the devil bring me to him?" The knight kept the naked sword in his hand and began to scold his horse: "Why are you snorting? Why don't you run at a trot or a pace? You only want to amble as though you were on level ground! You must die!" As the poor horse could not run at a pace, which gait it had never been taught, the knight said: "Woman, dismount!" She said: "I will do what you tell me to do." The knight dismounted as well, and then cut off the horse's head, saying: "If you had followed my instructions, you would not have died. Woman, you can see what has happened. I came to dislike the horse, as well as the Greyhound and the Falcon. But I am not accustomed to walking. It would be difficult for me, as I have had no practice, so now I will ride you!" With that he began to put the reins on her and was about to buckle the saddle on her, when she said: "Sir, with you alone I'll be carrying enough. Leave the saddle and the reins, my dear sir. I can carry you more gently and better without them." "Oh, woman, how could I ride you without a saddle and reins?" asked the knight fiercely. "You have bad habits, daring thus to speak against my will!" Then she consented, and he saddled her and bridled her like a horse, and put the bridle and bit in her mouth, and gave her the stirrups to hold tight. He mounted her and rode her for a little while, about three spear-lengths, until she fainted from the heavy burden. Then the knight dismounted from her and said: "Woman, are you gasping for air?" "No, sir!" she answered. He continued: "This is a smooth field, so you can now go at a walking gait." She said, crawling on on her hands and feet: "I will gladly do it. There are many horses on my father's farm, and I have learned the walking gait from them." "Then will you do everything that I want?" asked the knight. She replied: "And if I were to live a thousand years, I would always do what you want me to do!" With that he told her to get up, took her by the hand, and led her home to his castle, where his friends were gathered. They greeted her respectfully and led her to her room. This was done with great joy, and the wife was the most lovely woman, honorable and well-bred, without lust or deceit, faithful, calm, and gentle; not a virtue was lacking in her. She received her guests in a friendly and cheerful manner, and without meanness or resentment. As a true wife should, she fulfilled her husband's wishes. When six weeks had passed, the young woman's father and mother went to see their daughter to see how she was faring and how she was behaving. Soon enough the mother found out what had happened and how her daughter was obeying her husband. Hearing this, she angrily scolded her daughter: "Oh, you wretched woman! What I see and hear makes me doubt that you are my child. What? You let your husband be your master?" The wicked mother hit her daughter in the face and on her body. She tore at her hair, then continued to beat her and scold her. The young woman wept and cried out: "If you have come here to scold me, then wait until you can find the reason! I have the very best husband, and he is good and honest, but if you do not do his will, he will kill you straight away. Therefore, mother, have a wise mind and beware of saying anything bad about him, for he is so wrathful that he angrily judges and destroys everything that is contrary to his will." "Hoho! Tomorrow is another day!" mocked the mother. "Your husband's anger doesn't bother me in the slightest! I don't care a bit about him! You silly goose! The devil must be going through your head that you dare to threaten me, your mother, with your husband!" "Mother, I am not threatening you!" the daughter defended herself. "I am only telling you the truth. I advise you to greet my husband warmly, for if you were to do to him what you did to my father, he would turn your back black and blue. You do not have much hair left, but it is still enough that he will tear it out!" "That would be a crowning achievement," replied the mother angrily. "I would not be afraid of him, even if he were as big as a mountain. I am no more and no less afraid of him than I am of your father! What has he done to me these twenty years? But even today I will not yield to him one bit!" While the older woman was thus rambling on, her son-in-law and her husband stood in a secret place where they could hear every word. The older man spoke quietly to his son-in-law: "I am very glad that you have conquered my daughter's stubbornness, and I will gladly leave you and her all that I own when I go the way of all flesh." The son-in-law thanked his father-in-law for his kind attitude, who then said to him: "Please advise me what I should do to your mother-in-law, who always opposes me and makes my life so bitter! If only she could at least stop being so harsh a year before she dies, I would have the greatest joy, and all my suffering would end!" The son-in-law then promised to reform his mother-in-law in his own way, if his father-in-law would allow him to do so. The father-in-law replied: "I will not forbid you anything. Boil her or roast her, and I will bring the wood for the fuel." The knight immediately took four nimble, strong servants, let his anger grow, and went into the parlor, where the old woman was still sitting, and constantly berating him and her daughter. When she saw him coming, she greeted him mockingly: "God's blessing to you, Mr. Angel!" "Thank you very much, Mrs. Demon!" was was his return greeting. Then he firmly stepped up to her and said: "Woman, I beg you, stop your bad behavior towards your master and my master. He should give you countless blows on your back with an oak yardstick until you hurt so badly that you become a good wife." "Well," she said, "I hear that you have killed many people like that, dear Mr. Googoo! But I have kept my skin and hair so far, and hope to keep it for a long time to come! Just what have I done to you?" "You scold my master, your husband, every day, and you harm him in his own house!" answered the young knight. She quickly replied: "In my house they call me Mistress Shrew! I can be my husband's master there, just as I am my own master. Otherwise God grant him not a single good day for as long as I am alive!" "And if God lets me succeed," said the son-in-law, "I will take care that before we part, you shall give up your evil schemes and tricks." "I wish you good luck!" she cried. "Otherwise, you will gain only shame and ridicule!" "I know what makes you so mad and confused and angry," the knight replied. "You have two pieces of anger-flesh, one on each hip. That is why you have such bad habits. If they were cut out of you, that would be a great blessing, for then you would be happier than any woman has ever been, and it would be equally good for your husband." "Ah! I am glad that you are such a good doctor. Teach your art to my daughter!" was her answer. "Do you also have medical herbs for sale? Do you mix mugwort into a healing potion?" "Hey! Your mockery is great!" cried the knight; "but it will soon be spoiled for you. As soon as we take out your pieces of anger-flesh then you will be better and more pious than a child!" "Enough of your barking, you loudmouth!" scolded the woman. But then, at the knight's signal, the servants took hold of her, threw her down. Then her daughter's husband honed a large, sharp knife, which he then held against her hip and cut a long, deep wound through her clothing. With that, her scornful laughter completely disappeared. Then he said, throwing a piece of flesh into a vessel: "Look, woman, you have been a wicked woman for many years, and this piece of anger-flesh was to blame for that. I cannot let you keep it any longer." She lay there sad and screaming: "I did not know that myself, but I do know what devil is telling you what to do to me!" "Yes, you still have a piece of anger-flesh on your other leg," said the knight, "That one must come out as well!" "Oh," she complained, almost crying, "that one is very small. It won't do me much harm! Help me, God! The piece that you have already cut out was to blame for all the damage. Now I am free of all anger and will be quiet. Just leave the other one uncut." Then the daughter said cheerfully to her husband: "Think carefully what you are doing. I fear that if the other piece of anger-flesh does not come out too, the great work on the first one will be lost, and in the end the other piece will multiply, if you do not cut it out as well." "No, no, dear daughter!" cried the mother. "Tell him to leave me unharmed. I'll be good!" "Mother," answered the young woman, "you advised me to fight against my husband and not to be subject to him. For that reason and for the fact that she treated my father so badly, just cut out her other piece of anger-flesh!" And then the knight attacked the other leg, but the woman cried out, "No, no! That is more than enough! Daughter, remember that I carried you in my womb. Make peace for me with your husband! I swear that I will live a good life, and that the kind and just God will protect me from anger. The knight has already taken away my the large piece of anger-flesh. The small one is not worth paying any attention to!" "Well," said the knight, "if she desires peace, I will leave her alone. But let her promise right now that if she does not avoid anger, she will allow herself to be cut." With that she was lifted up, and her wound was bandaged. The woman then cast all anger and strife behind herself. She became a good-natured woman, gave up her evil temper. The next day she and her husband took leave of their son-in-law, and he wished for her that God would protect her from all evil. If afterward she sometimes would a word or two to her husband that he found annoying and displeasing, he would only reply: "I can't help it; I must send for our daughter's husband." She would blush with fear and say: "It is not necessary; his coming would not be beneficial to me. I have the courage and the will to do what you like, and I advise all women to say to their husbands what I say to mine, if they want to live in peace." This ends the tale, and every man and woman can use it to their own advantage. Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Bechstein, "Vom Zornbraten," Deutsches Märchenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1847), pp. 46-54 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludwig Bechstein, "Vom Zornbraten," Deutsches Märchenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1847), pp. 46-54 . Bechstein's source: Books.google.com: Joseph Maria Christoph Freiherr von Lassberg, "Vom Zornbraten," Lieder Saal, das ist: Sammelung altteutscher Gedichte aus ungedrukten Quellen , vol. 2 (1822), , no. 148, pp. 499-531 . Internet Archive: Joseph Maria Christoph Freiherr von Lassberg, "Vom Zornbraten," Lieder Saal, das ist: Sammelung altteutscher Gedichte aus ungedrukten Quellen , vol. 2 (1822), , no. 148, pp. 499-531 . Lassberg's source: A manuscript from the 14th century. Return to the table of contents . Two Brothers and Their Wives Italy Two brothers who are soldiers take to wife two sisters. One makes much of his wife, and is ill-rewarded by her disobedience. The other mishandles his, and she does his will. The former inquires of the latter how he may gain his wife's obedience, and is duly instructed thereanent. Whereupon he threatens his wife with punishment, and she laughs in his face, and ultimately makes scoff at him. The learned and prudent physician, when he foresees that a certain disease will manifest itself in the human body, adopts those remedies which in his estimation promise fairest to preserve life, without waiting for the distemper to make itself apparent, because a new wound heals more readily than an old one. And a husband when he takes to himself a wife -- I must here crave forgiveness of the ladies -- should act in precisely the same fashion, that is, never to let her get the upper hand, lest, when some time afterwards he may wish to keep her in order, he may find such task beyond his powers, and be forced to follow in her wake for the rest of his life. Such in sooth was the case of a certain soldier, who, wishing to induce his wife to mend her ways, after he had too long delayed to assert himself, had to put up with the consequences of this failing of his to the day of his death. No great time ago there lived in Corneto, a village near Rome, situated in the patrimony of St. Peter, two men who were sworn brothers; indeed, the love between them was just as great as it would have been supposing they had been born of the same womb. Of these one was called Pisardo and the other Silverio, and both one and the other followed the calling of arms, and were in the pay of the pope; wherefore a great love and friendship sprang up between them though they did not dwell in the same house. Silverio, who was the younger in years and was under no family restraint, took to wife a certain Spinella, the daughter of a tailor, a very fair and lovely maiden, but somewhat over-flighty in humour. After the wedding was over and the bride brought home, Silverio found himself so completely inflamed and dominated by the power of her beauty that it seemed to him she must be beyond comparison, and straightway he fulfilled any demand that she might make upon him. Thus it came to pass that Spinella grew so arrantly haughty and masterful that she took little or no reck of her husband. And in time the doting fool fell into such a state that if he should ask his wife to do one thing, she would forthwith do something else, and whenever he told her to come here, she went there, and laughed at everything he said. Because the foolish fellow saw nothing except through his own foolish eyes, he could not pluck up heart of grace enough to reprove her, nor seek a remedy for his mistake, but let her go her own way, and work her own will in everything, according to her pleasure. Before another year had passed away Pisardo took to wife Fiorella, the other daughter of the tailor, a damsel no less comely of person than Spinella, nor less sprightly in her disposition. When the wedding-feast was over, and the wife taken home to her husband's house, Pisardo brought forth a pair of men's breeches and two stout sticks, and said: "Fiorella, you see here this pair of men's breeches. Now you take hold of one of these sticks and I will take hold of the other, and we will have a struggle over the breeches as to who shall wear them. Which one of us shall get the better of the other in this trial shall be the wearer, and the one who loses shall henceforth yield obedience to the winner." When Fiorela heard this speech of her husband's, she answered without aught of hesitation in a gentle voice: "Ah, my husband! what do you mean by such words as these? What is it you say? Are not you the husband, and I the wife, and ought not the wife always to bear herself obediently towards her husband? And, moreover, how could I ever bring myself to do such a foolish trick as this? Wear the breeches yourself, for assuredly they will become you much better than they will become me." "I, then," said Pisardo, "am to wear the breeches and to be the husband, and you, as my dearly-beloved wife, will always hold yourself obedient to me. But take good care that you keep the same mind and do not hanker after taking the husband's part for yourself, and giving me the wife's, for such licence you will never get from me." Fiorella, who was a very prudent woman, confirmed all that she had hitherto said, and the husband, on his part, handed over to her the entire governance of his house, and committed all his chattels to her keeping, making known to her the order he desired to have observed in his household. A little time after this Pisardo said to his wife: "Fiorella, come with me. I wish to show you my horses, and to point out to you the right way to train them in case you should at any time have to put your hand to such work." And when they were come into the stable he said, "Now, Fiorella, what do you think of these horses of mine? Are they not handsome? Are they not finely tended?" And to this Fiorella replied that they were. "But now see," said Pisardo, "how docile and handy they are." Then picking up a whip he gave a touch now to this and now to that, saying. "Go over there; come here." And then the horses, putting their tails between their legs, went all together into a group obedient to their master's word. Now Pisardo had amongst his other horses a certain one, very beautiful to look upon, but at the same time vicious and lazy -- a beast upon which he set but little store. He went up to this horse, and dealing it a sharp cut with the whip, cried out, "Come here; go over there;" but the beast, sluggish and sullen by nature, took no heed of the whip, and refused to do anything his master ordered, lashing out vigorously now with one leg, now with the other, and now with both together. Whereupon Pisardo, remarking the brute's stubborn humour, took a tough, stout stick, and began to baste its hide therewith so vigorously that he was soon out of breath with fatigue. However, the horse, now more stubborn than ever, let Pisardo lay on as he would and refused to budge an inch; so Pisardo, seeing how persistent was the obstinacy of the brute, flew into a violent rage, and grasping the sword which he wore by his side he slew it forthwith. Fiorella, when she saw what her husband had done, was mightily moved with pity for the horse, and cried out, "Alas, my husband! Why have you killed your horse, seeing that he was so shapely to look upon? Surely it is a great pity to have slain him thus." To this Pisardo replied, with his face strongly moved by passion, "Know then that all those who eat my bread and refuse to do my will must look to be paid in exactly the same coin." Fiorella, when she heard this speech, was greatly distressed, and said to herself, "Alas? What a wretched miserable woman I am! What an evil day it was for me when I met this man! I believed I had chosen a man of good sense for my husband, and lo! I have become the prey of this brutal fellow. Behold how, for little or no fault, he has killed this beautiful horse!" And thus she went on, grieving sorely to herself, for she knew not to what end her husband had spoken in this wise. On account of what had passed Fiorella fell into such a taking of fear and terror of her husband that she would tremble all over at the very sound of his footstep, and whenever he might demand any service of her she would carry out his wishes straightway. Indeed, she would understand his meaning almost before he might open his mouth, and never a cross word passed between them. Silverio, who, on account of the friendship he felt for Pisardo, would often visit the house of the latter, and dine and sup there, remarked the manners and carriage of Fiorella, and, being much astonished thereat, said to himself: "Great God! Why was it not my lot to have Fiorella for my wife, as is the good luck of my brother Pisardo? See how deftly she manages the house, and goes about her business without any uproar! See how obedient she is to her husband, and how she carries out every wish of his! But my wife, miserable wight that I am, does everything to annoy me, and uses me in as vile a fashion as possible." One day it chanced that Silverio and Pisardo were in company together, talking of various things, when the former spake thus: "Pisardo, my brother, you are aware of the love that there is between us. Now, on this account, I would gladly learn what is the method you have followed in the training of your wife, seeing that she is altogether obedient to you, and treats you in such loving wise. Now I, however gently I may ask Spinella to do anything, find that she always stubbornly refuses to answer me, and, beyond this, does the exact opposite to what I ask her to do." Whereupon Pisardo, smiling, set forth word by word the plan and the means he had adopted when first he brought his wife home, and counselled his friend to go and do likewise, and to see whether he might not also succeed, adding that in case this remedy should not be found efficient, he would not know what other course to recommend. Silverio was much pleased with this excellent counsel, and having taken his leave he went his way. When he reached his house he called his wife at once, and brought out a pair of his breeches and two sticks, following exactly the same course as Pisardo had recommended. When Spinella saw what he was doing, she cried out: "What new freak is this of yours? Silverio, what are you about? What ridiculous fancy has got into your head? Surely you are gone stark mad! Don't you think everybody knows that men, and not women, should wear the breeches? And what need is there now to set about doing things which are beside all purpose?" But Silverio made no answer and went on with the task he had begun, laying down all sorts of rules for the regulation of his household. Spinella, altogether astonished at this humour of her husband, said in a mocking way: "Peradventure, Silverio, it seems to you that I know not how to manage a house rightly, since you make all this ado about letting your meaning be known?" But still the husband kept silence, and having taken his wife with him into the stable, he did with the horses everything which Pisardo had done, and in the end slew one of them, Spinella, when she saw this fool's work, was convinced in her own mind that her husband had in truth lost his wits, and spake thus: "By your faith, tell me, husband, what crazy humours are these that have risen to your head? What is the true meaning of all this foolishness you are doing without thinking of the issue? Perhaps it is your evil fate to have gone mad." Then answered Silverio: "I am not mad, but I have made up my mind that anyone who lives at my charges and will not obey me shall be treated in such fashion as you have seen me use this morning towards my horses." Whereupon Spinella, when she perceived the drift of her besotted husband's brutal deed, said: "Ah, you wretched dolt! It must be clear enough to you that your horse was nothing but a poor beast to allow himself to be killed in this manner. What is the full meaning of this whim of yours? Perhaps you think you can deal with me as you have dealt with the horse? Certes, if such is your belief, you are hugely mistaken, and you put your hand much too late to the task of setting things in order after the fashion you desire. The bone is become too hard, the sore is now all ulcerated, and there is no cure at hand. You should have been more prompt in compassing the righting of these curious wrongs of yours. You fool! You brainless idiot! Do you not see what damage and disgrace must come upon you through these doltish deeds out of number of which you have been guilty? And what profit do you deem you will get from them? None, as I am a living woman." Silverio, when he listened to the words of his shrewd wife, knew in his heart that his effort, through the doting affection he had hitherto spent on Spinella, had miserably failed; so he made up his mind, greatly to his chagrin, to put up patiently with his wretched lot till death should come to release him. And Spinella, when she perceived how little her husband's plan had turned out to his advantage, resolved that if in the past she had worked her own will with a finger she would henceforth work it with an arm; for a woman headstrong by nature would sooner die a thousand times than go aside aught from the path which she has deliberately marked out for herself. Source (books.google.com): Giovanni Francesco Straparola, The Facetious Nights of Straparola , translated by W. G. Waters, vol. 3 (London: Privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901), night 8, tale 2, pp. 108-121 . Source (Internet Archive): Giovanni Francesco Straparola, The Facetious Nights of Straparola , translated by W. G. Waters, vol. 3 (London: Privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901), night 8, tale 2, pp. 108-121 . Giovanni Francesco Straparola (ca. 1485-1558) was an Italian writer and collector of folktales. Return to the table of contents . A Wicked Maiden Becomes a Very Pious Wife Germany Let it be understood that some women are really evil, who absolutely refused to be tamed. On the other hand, there are also those who know how to change their rebellious dog's nature into the patience of a pious lamb, like that evil maiden, of whose story I know. A rich merchant had an only daughter who was so known for her wickedness that no one wanted to marry her. A captain returning from battle war who had lost his fortune in the war heard that this maiden was extremely wicked, but also very rich and quite beautiful. He took no heed of her wickedness, but went straight to the merchant and asked for his wicked daughter's hand in marriage. Her parents were happy that someone was willing take her off their hands. So that they could get rid of the wicked raven-carrion for once and all, they immediately said yes. The daughter was impressed by his sword, boots, and spurs, so everything went smoothly, and the wedding took place. The day immediately after the wedding, the captain persuaded his sweetheart to go hunting with him, taking a dog and a falcon with him. When the two of them had ridden some distance from the town, the captain thought it was time to test his sweetheart's wickedness. He began in this way: Firstly, when the falcon pecked his finger several times, he said (acting very angry) to the falcon: "If you do that to me again, see how I'll do to you." As was its custom, the falcon pecked again, and with that the captain dashed out its brains against a tree. Seeing the dead falcon, the sweetheart started to scold her husband, but he said to her: "That is what I always do." Then it came to the dog. It was always running far ahead, and the captain called to it to stay behind the horse. The dog ran ahead again, whereupon the captain he took his pistol and shot it dead. Then it came to his horse It stumbled once, and the captain said: "If you do that again, I'll shoot you down like I did the dog." Shortly afterwards the horse took a wrong step and stumbled, almost falling to the ground with the captain. With that he immediately took the other pistol, put it to the horse's head, and shot it dead, so that both he and the horse fell to the ground. When his wife saw this, she again wanted to scold him. He answered briefly: "This is how I treat everyone who refuses to obey me." She wanted to complain further and said: "How will you ride home now, and who will carry the saddle and the gear?" He answered: "That is what you shall do. Get off your horse and let me ride. meanwhile take the saddle and put it on your head and carry it home." This seemed very strange to the wife, and she did not want to do it. He immediately asked her angrily: "Are you refusing me?" With fear and trembling she cried out: "As you say, sir! As you say, sir!" With that she dismounted from her horse so quickly that she fell to the ground. "Get up right now!" he continued. "Put the saddle on your head, or I'll push you down!" "Yes, sir! Yes, sir!" she said. With that he took the holsters with the pistols from the dead horse and put them on the living one, while talking to himself. She had to run along beside him with the saddle and gear on her head. From time to time she angrily mumble aloud. When he heard this, he said to her: "Shut up or I'll shoot you like a dog." When, true to her nature, refused to remain silent, he took the pistol and shot at the saddle on her head. She fell down in terror, thinking that she had been wounded. He then angrily took the other pistol and aimed it at her as if he wanted to shoot again, because the first shot had not hit her. Seeing this, she cried out loudly: "Oh, sir, stop! I will gladly do anything you want." "Then get up quickly. Pick up the saddle again, and don't make any noise, or I will shoot you down, however much you beg." "Yes, sir! Yes, sir!" she replied. She carried the saddle to the gate in silence, and did whatever he wanted her to. When they were at the gate, he dismounted, took the saddle and gear from her, and gave it to the guard for safekeeping. He then said kindly to her: "Now come, my darling, and kiss me. If you follow my wishes, I will love you." But she stubbornly began to cry and did not want to kiss him. The captain, angry again, swore that if she did not kiss him immediately and stop crying, she would have to carry the saddle through the whole town into the house. She, now recognizing his resolve, went up to him, kissed him, and made peace with herself. Then the captain put his beloved behind him on horseback and they rode home. Arriving at home, she stubbornly locked herself in a room (as also she had done at her parents' house). When it was time to eat, he sent for her to come to the table. She said she did not want to eat. He left it at that, to see what her plans were. That evening, when they were about to go to bed, he thought she would come to bed with him. However, she not only stubbornly stayed in her room that night, but for three more days and nights, without food or drink. Finally he went upstairs himself and asked her to open the door. She refused to answer him, so he locked the door securely on the outside. He then forbade the servants from listening to her or going to her, even though she called for them several times. In the meantime he went to her parents and told them what had happened and how he hoped to soon put her right, begging them to take no notice of her and to sit out on the sidelines. If she were to go to them, she should always to be sent back to him without food or drink. Her parents told him how they had done this often, and if they had not given her food she would have starved herself to death. They promised to do his bidding in all things. Meanwhile, our evil one, found herself locked up from the outside. Her husband was showing off. Starving, hunger was also getting to her. She cried out all the louder and tried to break down the door, but all in vain. Finally, when her cries became silent, he sent the maid to look through the keyhole to see what she was doing. As soon as she noticed that someone was there, she called out, saying they should open up or she would die. The maid, following her master's orders said: "Oh, young lady, I must tell you in secret that our master has decided to let you starve to death. Furthermore, he has sworn to kill us if we come to you when you call. If he knew that I was up here with, he would shoot me immediately." She ordered the maid to tell the master that if he did not let her out, she would kill herself. The maid, pretending to be afraid to do so, at first refused, but finally, after the wife repeatedly insisted, she promised to risk it with the master. The maid reported everything to the master, who immediately put a ladder against the window and sent in a rope and a drawn sword, saying if that is what the lady wanted to do, she should now choose the rope or the dagger, and finish the act as soon as possible. Thus he would not have to murder her. The wife, seeing how serious he was, and that all her scolding, banging, and starving would not help, thought better of it and begged the master to do it, saying that otherwise she would be forced to starve herself to death. After much pleading by the wife, the master had the maid open the room. As soon as she was released, she went to the pantry to satisfy her hunger, but she found it locked and was told by the maid that the master had the key. She would have to ask him for it, but she did not want to ask him for anything. Instead she hurried to her parents, hoping to eat with them. But her parents did not let her in, and they would not give her anything. They sent her back to her master. Thus she returned home, asked her master for forgiveness, and promised to obey him in everything from now on, if only he would let her have some food to satisfy her great hunger. Thus, in a short time, this extremely wicked maiden became a very pious and humble woman. Source (books.google.com): "Eine gantz böse Jungfrau wird eine gar fromme Frau," Gepflückte Finken, oder: Studenten-Confect (Hanss Broders Erben, 1667), no. 170, pp. 198-204 . Return to the table of contents . The Ill-Natured Lady France / England There was a lady so very ill-natured that no servant could live with her. She even used to beat her children; and made them so unhappy, that both they and her husband broke their hearts. Though this lady was still young, mistress of a great fortune, and very rich, yet she was so generally hated, that no one offered to be her second husband. At last it was the misfortune of a neighbouring gentleman to fall in love with her, and he proposed a match. As he was a very worthy man, he was pitied by all; and one of his friends represented, that he was going to play the fool in the most extravagant manner by marrying a fury, who would certainly break his heart. "Be easy," answered the gentleman. "Before a month be over, I will make this termagant as mild as a lamb." The marriage was celebrated at the lady's seat at four o'clock in the morning. As they came out of the chapel, she offered to go to her chamber and dress herself; for she expected a great deal of company that she had invited to dinner. She was not a little surprised, when her husband told her that she need not dress, for he was determined to carry her to dine at his seat about twelve miles off. "Indeed, Sir," said the lady, "one would think you out of your senses. Have you forgot that we expect company here today?" "I am not bound to give you an account of what I do," said her husband. "Learn, Madam, to obey me without disputing the case. I am so passionate, that I fear you would have too much reason to repent your contradiction to my will. So, without more ade, get on horseback this moment." The lady in a rage, answered, that he might go by himself; she would not stir a foot. The gentleman, without any emotion, calls four tall footman he had brought. "Here," said he, if your lady will not get on horseback by fair means, take her by force, and tie her on." The lady was extremely irritated; and being sensible that she could not resist, got on her horse, and vented her passion in a thousand curses and injurious language against her husband, who seemed to turn the deaf ear to all the said. Meanwhile, a little favourite dog he was very fond of, came fawning on him. "Begone," said he. "I am not in a playing humour." The poor animal did not understand him, and came a second time to fawn upon him. "Oh," said he, "I hate to be contradicted," and taking a horse-pistol, shot the poor creature through the head. When the lady saw this, she was under the greatest terror, and gave over railing. "This furious man," said she to herself, "may serve me in the same manner." They travelled nine miles without exchanging a single word, when the lady's horse started at a tree in the way, and would not go forwards. The husband ordered her to alight. "I will teach thee to obey," said he to the horse; and taking a pistol shot him dead on the spot, with all the coolness possible. "Good God have pity on me!" said the wife in secret. "What will become of me, left alone with this madman? He will dispatch me on the first occasion." "I have changed my mind," said the gentleman. "Let us go back, I'll walk my horse easily, that you may follow on foot. But the saddle on the dead horse must not be lost. Please take it off, and carry it on your shoulders." The lady, more dead than alive, took up the saddle without any words, and came at last to her seat, dropping with sweat. In her absence the servants had been discharged; and she found others, all strangers to her, and who frightened her with their looks. She would willingly have run away from her mansion house; but such a thing was not to be thought on. She dined and supped with her husband against her will, and without any appetite; and she gave herself up for a dead woman, when he told her, she might go up to her room, and that he would go to bed. At the same time he took his pistols with him. When he came into the room, which the lady looked upon as her grave, he placed himself in an easy chair, and ordered her to pull off his shoes and stockings. She obeyed without saying a word. Her husband bid her sit down in the same chair, and did the same for her. "It is very just," said he, "that I should return the same good office that you have done to me; that is my way. As people do by me, I do by them. You may take your measures accordingly. You may be assured, that for every ill-natured thing you shall do to me, I shall return it amply; but on the other side, every the least instance of good temper and complaisance to me, shall be repaid with interest, and I will never be behind-hand. Your behaviour shall be the rule of mine; and it will entirely depend upon you to be the happiest of women. But remember, that if you are for playing the same pranks with me that you did with your former husband, I will not only be even with you but outdo you in malice and ill-nature." "It is enough, Sir," said the wife. "Keep your word. I am satisfied, that if my behaviour is to be the rule of your's, which I own is but just, I shall never find you the man you have been today." In effect, the lady made serious reflections on her former conduct; and being thoroughly convinced that the had met with one that could outdo her in her own way, the resolved to amend; and succeeded to the admiration of all that knew her; insomuch, that there never was a more happy marriage. Source (books.google.com): Jeanne-Marie Leprince de Beaumont, Magazin des Enfans; or, The Young Misses Mazazine: Containing Dialogues between a Governess and Several Young Ladies of Quality Her Scholars , translated from the French, vol. 3 (London: Printed for S. Field, W. Ware, and T. Johnson, 1765), dialogue 23, day 21, pp. 86-89 . Source (Internet Archive): Jeanne-Marie Leprince de Beaumont, The Young Misses Mazazine , ed. 5, vol. 2 (London: F. Wingrave, 1793), dialogue 23, day 21, pp. 114-18 . Links to the original French: Books.google.com: Jeanne-Marie Leprince de Beaumont, Magasin des enfants , vol. 3 (Brussels: B. Le Franco, 1789), pp. 138-43 . Internet Archive: Jeanne-Marie Leprince de Beaumont, Magasin des enfants , vol. 3 (London: F. Wingrave, 1792), pp. 128-32 . Jeanne-Marie Leprince de Beaumont (1711-1780) was a French author, best known for her version of the fairy tale La Belle et la Bête ( Beauty and the Beast ), first published in 1757. She lived in London between 1746 and 1763. Return to the table of contents . The Most Obedient Wife (1) Denmark Long ago there was a rich farmer who had three daughters, all grown up and marriageable, and all three very pretty. The eldest of them was the prettiest, and she was also the cleverest, but she was so quarrelsome and obstinate, that there was never any peace in the house. She constantly contradicted her father, who was a kind, peace-loving man, and she quarrelled with her sisters, although they were very good-natured girls. Many wooers came to the farm, and one of them wished to marry the eldest daughter. The farmer said that he had no objection to him as a son-in-law, but at the same time he thought it his duty to tell the suitor the truth. Accordingly, he warned him that his eldest daughter was so violent and strong-minded that no one could live in peace with her. As some compensation for these faults, she would receive three hundred pounds more in her dowry than would her two sisters. That was, of course, very attractive, but the young man thought over the matter and, after he had been visiting the house for some time, he altered his mind and asked for the hand of the second daughter. The daughter accepted him, and, as her father was willing, the two became man and wife and lived very happily together. Then came another wooer, from another part of the country, and he also wanted to marry the eldest daughter. The father warned him, as he had cautioned the first wooer; telling him that she would receive three hundred pounds more than her youngest sister, but that he must be careful, for she was so stubborn and quarrelsome that nobody could live in peace with her. So the second wooer changed his mind and asked for the hand of the youngest daughter. They married shortly after and lived happily and peacefully together. The eldest sister was now alone with her father, but she did not treat him any better than before, and grew even more ill-humoured because her two sisters had found favour in the eyes of the first two wooers. She was obstinate and quarrelsome, violent and bad-tempered, and she grew more so from day to day. At last another wooer came, and he was neither from their own district nor even from their country, but from a distant land. He went to the farmer and asked for the hand of his eldest daughter. "I do not want her to marry at all," said the father. "It would be a shame to allow her to do so; she is so ill-tempered and violent that no human being could live in peace with her, and I do not want to be the cause of such unhappiness." But the wooer remained firm; he wanted her, he said, whatever her faults might be. At length the father yielded, provided that his daughter were willing to marry the young man, for, after all, he would be glad to get rid of her, and as he had told the suitor the whole truth about her, his conscience was clear. Accordingly the young man wooed the girl, and she did not hesitate long, but accepted the offer, for she was tired of sitting at home, a despised and spurned spinster. The wooer said that he had no time to remain with them just then, as he must return home at once, and, as soon as the wedding-day was fixed, he rode away. He also told them not to wait for him at the farm on the day of the wedding, he would appear in good time at the church. When the day came the farmer drove with his daughter to the church, where a great company of wedding guests had assembled; the bride's sisters and brothers-in-law were there, and all the village people arrived in their Sunday clothes. The bridegroom was there also, but in ordinary travelling garments; and so the couple walked up to the altar and were married. As soon as the ceremony was over, the bridegroom took his young wife by the hand and led her out of the church. He sent a message to his father-in-law asking him to excuse their absence from the marriage feast, as they had no time to waste. He had not driven in a coach, as is the custom at weddings, but travelled on horseback, on a fine big grey horse, with an ordinary saddle, and a couple of pistols in the saddlebags. He had brought no friends or relations with him, only a big dog, that lay beside the horse during the ceremony. The bridegroom lifted his bride on to the pommel, as if she had been a feather, jumped into the saddle, put the spurs to his horse, and rode off with the dog trotting behind. The marriage party standing at the church door looked after them, and shook their heads in amazement. Then they got into their carriages, drove back to the house, and partook of the marriage feast without bride or bridegroom. The bride did not like this at all, but as she did not want to quarrel with her bridegroom so soon, she held her tongue for a time; but as he did not speak either, she at last broke the ice and said that it was a very fine horse they were riding. "Yes," he replied; "I have seven other horses at home in my stables, but this is my favourite; it is the most valuable of all, and I like it best." Then she remarked that she liked the beautiful dog also. "It is indeed a jewel of a dog," he said, "and has cost me a lot of money." After a while they came to a forest, where the bridegroom sprang from his horse and cut a thin switch from a willow-tree. This he wound three times round his finger, then tied it with a thread and gave it to his bride, saying: "This is my wedding gift to you. Take good care of it, and carry it about you always! You will not repent it." She thought it a strange wedding gift, but put it in her pocket, and they rode on again. Presently the bride dropped her glove, and the bridegroom said to the dog: "Pick it up, Fido!" But the dog took no notice, and left the glove on the ground. Then his master drew his pistol from the holster, shot the dog, and rode on, leaving it lying dead. "How could you be so cruel?" said his bride. "I never say a thing twice," was the reply, and they journeyed on in silence. After some time they came to a running stream that they had to cross. There being only a ford, and no bridge, the man said to his horse: "Take good care! Not a drop must soil my bride's dress!" When they had crossed, however, the dress was badly soiled, and the husband lifted his bride from the horse, drew out the other pistol and shot the horse, so that it fell dead to the ground. "Oh, the poor horse!" cried the bride. "Yes, but I never say a thing twice," answered her husband. Then he took saddle, bridle, and cover from the horse; bridle and cover he carried himself, but the saddle he gave to his young wife, and said: "You can carry that; we shall soon be home." He walked on in silence, and the bride quickly put the saddle on her back and followed him; she had no desire to make him say it twice. Soon they arrived at his dwelling place, a very fine farm. The menservants and maidservants rushed to the door and received them, and the husband said to them: "See, this is my wife and your mistress. Whatever she tells you, you are to do, just as if I had ordered it." Then he led her indoors and showed her everything -- living-rooms and bedrooms, kitchen and cellar, brewhouse, and dairy -- and said to her: "You will look after everything indoors, I attend to everything out-of-doors," and then they sat down to supper, and soon after went to bed. Days, weeks, and months passed; the young wife attended to all household matters while her busband looked after the farm, and not a single angry word passed between them. The servants had been accustomed to obey their master implicitly, and now they obeyed their mistress likewise, and so six months passed without there having arisen any necessity for the husband to say the same thing twice to his wife. He was always kind and polite to her, and she was always gentle and obedient. One day he said to her: "Would you not like to visit your relations?" "Yes, dear husband, I should like to do so very much, if it is convenient," she replied. "It is quite convenient," he said, "but you have never mentioned it. It shall be done at once; get ready, while I have the horses put to the carriage." He went to the stable and saw to everything, while his wife ran upstairs to dress as quickly as possible for the journey. The husband drove up, cracked his whip and asked: "Are you ready?" "Yes, dear," came the reply, and she came running out and entered the carriage. She had not quite finished dressing and carried some of her things in her hand, and these she put on in the carriage. Then they started. When they had driven nearly half the distance, they saw a great flock of ravens flying across the road. "What beautiful white birds!" said the husband. "No, they are black, dear!" said his wife. "I think it is going to rain," he said, turned the horses, and drove home again. She understood perfectly why he had done so; it was the first time that she had contradicted him, but she showed no resentment, and the two conversed in quite a friendly fashion all the way home. The horses were put into the stable -- and it did not rain. When a month had passed, the husband said one morning: "I believe it is going to be fine today. Would you not like to visit your relations?" She wished to do so very much indeed, and she hastened a little more than the last time, so that when her husband drove up and cracked his whip, she was quite ready and mounted the carriage beside him. They had driven considerably more than half the distance, when they met a large flock of sheep and lambs. "What a fine pack of wolves!" said the husband. "You mean sheep, dear!" said the wife. "I think it will rain before evening," said the husband, looking up at the sky. "It will be better for us to drive home again." With these words he turned the horses and drove back home. They conversed in a friendly manner until they reached home; but it did not rain. When another month had passed, the husband said one morning to his wife: "We really must see whether we cannot manage to visit your relations. What do you say to our driving across today? It looks as though the day would be fine." His wife thought so too; she was ready very soon, and they set out. They had not travelled far when they saw a great flock of swans flying along over their heads. "That was a fine flock of storks," said the husband. "Yes, so it was, dear," said his wife, and they drove on. There was no change in the weather that day, so that they reached her father's farm in due course. He received them joyfully and sent at once for his two other daughters and their husbands, and a very merry family meeting it was. The three married sisters went into the kitchen together, because they could talk more freely there, and they had a great deal to tell each other; the two younger ones in particular had many questions to ask their elder sister, because they had not seen her for a very long time. Then they helped to prepare the dinner: it goes without saying that nothing was too good for this festive occasion. The three brothers-in-law sat meanwhile with their father-in-law in the sitting-room and they, too, had much to tell and ask each other. Then said the old farmer: "This is the first time that you have all three been gathered together under my roof, and I should like to ask you frankly how you are pleased with your wives." The husbands who had married the two younger, good-tempered sisters said at once that they were perfectly satisfied and lived very happily. "But how do you get on with yours?" the father-in-law asked the husband of the eldest sister. "Nobody ever married a better wife than I did," was the reply. "Well, I should like to see which of you has the most obedient wife," said the father-in-law. And then he fetched a heavy silver jug and filled it to the top with gold and silver coins. This he placed in the middle of the table before the three men, and said that he would give it to him who had the most obedient wife. They put the matter to the test at once. The husband who had married the youngest sister went to the kitchen door and called: "Will you come here a moment, Gerda, please; as quickly as possible!" "All right, I am coming," she answered, but it was some time before she came, because as she explained, she had first to talk about something with one of her sisters. "What do you want with me?" she asked. The husband made some excuse, and she went out again. Now it was the turn of the man who had married the middle sister. "Please come here a moment, Margaret!" he called. She also answered: "Yes, I am coming at once," but it was a good while before she came; she had had something in her hands and was compelled to put it down first. The husband invented some excuse, and she went out again. Then the third husband went to the kitchen door, opened it slightly and just said: "Christine!" "Yes!" she answered, as she stood there with a large dish of food in her hands. "Take this from me!" she said quickly to her sisters, but they looked at her in amazement and did not take the dish. Bang! she dropped it right on the middle of the kitchen floor, rushed into the room and asked: "What do you wish, dear?" "Oh, I only wanted to see you," he said, "but since you are here, you may as well take that jug standing on the table; it is yours, with all that is in it. You might also show us what you got from me as a marriage gift on our wedding day." "Yes, dear, here it is," she said, and drew the willow ring from her bosom, where she had kept it ever since. The husband handed it to his father- in-law and asked: "Can you put that ring straight?" No, that was impossible without breaking it. "Well, you see now," said the husband; "if I had not bent the twig when it was green, I could not have made it into this shape." After that they sat down to a merry meal, then the husband of the oldest sister returned home with her, and they lived for many years very happily together. Source (books.google.com): Svend Grundtvig, Danish Fairy Tales , translated by Gustav Hein (London: George G. Harrap and Company, 1914), pp. 175-83 . Source (Internet Archive): Svend Grundtvig, Danish Fairy Tales , translated by Gustav Hein (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Company, 1914), pp. 175-83 . Links to the original Danish: Books.google.com: Svend Grundtvig, "Den lydigste Kone," Danske Folkeæventyr , ny Samling (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1878), no. 14, pp. 177-86 . Internet Archive: : Svend Grundtvig, "Den lydigste Kone," Danske Folkeæventyr , ny Samling (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1878), no. 14, pp. 177-86 . Svend Grundtvig (1824-1883) was a Danish folklorist. Return to the table of contents . The Most Obedient Wife (2) Denmark There was a man who had three daughters, and they were all so bad that it was terrible. The two eldest married first, but their husbands were very unhappy with them, because the wives themselves wanted to rule and be in charge of everything. The father decided that he did not want the youngest to marry. He was always hearing bad things about the others, and now he did not want to hear such things from a third husband as well. Then someone came and courted her. But the father said "No." He had heard bad things about the other two marriages, and that would be enough. He did not want to hear such bad things about his last daughter. However, the girl wanted the suitor, and so they became engaged, and the wedding day was set. But then the bridegroom said that on the wedding day they should go to the church ahead of him, because it was possible that he would not come until the last moment. Then he added that she must know that he did not want any opposition in his house. Well, the day came, and the bride's people were ready, but no bridegroom came. So they set off for church, and then he arrived on horseback. After the ceremony the parents and the guests wanted the bridegroom to go home with them. But no, he wanted to return directly to his own house. The bride was to sit behind him on the horse. She would have preferred to go to her parents' house, but he did not want any contradiction. They come to a ford they were to cross. There he told his horse that it must not rear at either him or his wife, or he would shoot it. They started to cross, and the horse reared. What did he do? He took a pistol out of his pocket and shot the horse. "But what about the saddle?" asked the bride. Yes, if she wanted it, she could take it. So she picked it up and carried it the rest of the way. They now had to continue onward on foot. They went to the bridegroom's mother, who had prepared an apartment for them. She was as fair towards them as one could imagine. When she had been there for some time, he asked her one day if she would like to go home and visit to her family. Yes, she would like to do so. They set forth one day with good weather. When they had gone a little way from the farm, two pigeons came flying by. He said that they should not continue onward, because when two such ravens came towards them it meant bad luck. "But after all, those were pigeons, after all, not ravens." He did not want to be contradicted. Then he cut off a branch with some twigs on it, and he braided them one over the other. He gave the branch to her and said she should always keep it in her pocket and give it back to him when he asked for it. With that they turned around and went back home. The next day they set forth again. Then two ravens come flying by. "Today we will have good luck," he said. "There are two doves approaching us." "Yes," she said, because she did not dare to say anything else. Then they drove on and arrived at her parents' farm. They were very happy to see her. They longed for her greatly, because she had left them so suddenly. They wanted to know how she was doing. Yes, she was as well off as she could wish, she said. Then the parents invited the other two daughters to come home as well. They wanted to host a feast, now that she had come. That evening, while the men were sitting and talking, all three sisters went downstairs to bed. Now the father had a very beautiful silver bowl, which, he said, he would give to the son-in-law who had the most obedient wife. "I have the most obedient wife," said the man who had married the youngest sister. So they arranged a test. First off, the one who had married the oldest sister would call for his wife. He sent a messenger, telling her that he wanted to talk to her. But she did not want to go up where they were sitting and talking. Then they sent a messenger to the second wife, but she did not want to bother the men in their conversation. So she didn't go either. "I will assure you," said the third man, the one who had married the youngest sister, "that my wife will come when I send for her." So he too sent someone down with the same message, that she should come upstairs, for he wanted speak to her. She got out of bed at once. The others made fun of her, but she said they had not carried the saddle. So she went up there and sat quietly beside him. Then he asked if she had what he had given her. Yes, and she gave him the branch. "Now you can see," said he, "one must bend the branch when it is green." He had done just that, and now had such a lovely wife. Then the father said: "You shall have the silver bowl," and he got it. Mette Marie Jensdatter, Sundby Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Den lydigste Kone," Æventur fra Jylland , vol. 4 (Aarhus: Jacob Zeuners Bogtrykkeri, 1897), no. 2, pp. 8-10 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Den lydigste Kone," Æventur fra Jylland , vol. 4 (Aarhus: Jacob Zeuners Bogtrykkeri, 1897), no. 2, pp. 8-10 . Evald Tang Kristensen (1843-1929) was a Danish folklorist. Return to the table of contents . A Story Ireland There is one story which was told to me by my Grandfather about a farmer and his three daughters. There once lived in Kerry a rich farmer who had three daughters; one of them was very bold and the other two were very gentle. One day a man asked the farmer for his eldest daughter in marriage. The farmer said she was too bold, but to marry the second one. So he married her and took her away to his own home. Another man asked him for his eldest daughter and the same thing happened; she was too bold, and to marry the youngest. A third man came and asked him for his eldest daughter, but the farmer said she was too bold, but the man said it made no difference. She may be the best of them yet. They married, and he was taking her on horse-back to his own home, but before they reached the house one thing happened. His dog was running after birds, and as he didn't come back when he called him, he drew his gun and shot him. The horse was getting tired and slow, so when he could not go fast, he also shot him. She asked him why did he do that. So he said, "nything that is disobedient to me, he will get the same." A year passed by and the farmer invited his three daughters and three husbands to his house, as he was giving a party. He called his three sons-in-law into a private room and said, "I will give £300 to the man who has the most obedient wife." "I have," said the first man that married. So he called his wife, but it took a long time from her before she came to him. She said she had to finish her game of cards. The second man called his wife and the same thing happened. The third man called his wife who was the bold one. The minute she was called she threw down her cards, and she was by his side in a minute. He said, "You have £300 won, and I always knew you were the best of your sisters." If they didn't live happily since, That we may. And when they be drinking pratey water. That we may be drinking tay. This is the way my grandfather used to finish the story. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Kerry >> Na Corráin, pp. 189-91 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . Banke Chhail and His Wife India There was once a Musalman whose wife was such a shrew that every morning she used to give him a sound beating with her slipper. She had a daughter, and when she grew up her parents were on the lookout for a husband for her; but the temper of her mother was so well known that no one would dare to marry into such a family. Finally one day a notorious character, who was known as Banke Chhail, or "the cunning rascal," came and proposed for the girl, and her father was so glad to settle her in life that he agreed to the match at once and they were married. Before the ceremony took place Banke Chhail bought a parrot, a cat, and a dog, and when he was taking his bride home he brought his animals with him. On the way the pair sat down at a well to rest, and a number of village curs came out and began to bark at Banke Chhail's dog. His dog barked at them in return and his master, drawing his sword, cut off his head at a single stroke. "You rascal," said he, "do you dare to bark without my leave?" This astonished his wife; but they went on a little farther, and as the morning broke the birds in the trees began to sing, and when the parrot heard them it too commenced to chatter. Banke Chhail at once pulled it out of the cage and wrung its neck. "You fool," said he, "you did not remember that you belonged to Banke Chhail and you dared to open your mouth without his orders." His wife was still more surprised, but she said nothing, and they went on. They sat down to rest in a garden and soon a rat appeared. Banke Chhail called to his cat and said: "Catch me that rat." The cat at once obeyed his orders and killed it. When his wife saw this she began to think to herself, "What a terrible husband I have got. It would be well for me to obey him." And when they reached home she found it to be her interest to obey him in all things and became a very loving and obedient wife; so much so that when some time after her father came to pay him a visit, she looked out through a chink in the door and was afraid to admit him without the leave of her husband. By and by Banke Chhail came home and said to her: "Your respected father his waiting at the door. Why did you not let him in?" "How could I do so without your leave?" she answered. Then Banke Chhail went out and brought the old man in. When he saw how changed his daughter, was, he said to his son-in-law: "You know what a life my wife leads me. I wish you would tell me how you have succeeded in reducing your wife to order. Perhaps I may be able to deal with my wife in the same way." Said Banke Chhail: "Good, Sir, bring a brick and some moist clay and make me a lamp saucer out of each. "It is easy" quoth the old man to mould the soft clay, but when the clay gets hard no power on earth would mould it." "In short," said Banke Chhail, "your wife's character is fixed and cannot be mended. I dealt with my wife in season, and you see the result." The old man went home sorrowful. Told by Madho Prashad, Khattri, of Mirzapur. Source (books.google.com): North Indian Notes and Queries , vol. 5, no. 2 (May 1895), p. 33 . Source (Internet Archive): North Indian Notes and Queries , vol. 5, no. 2 (May 1895), p. 33 . Return to the table of contents . Related Sites The Taming of the Shrew by William Shakespeare (Folger Shakespeare Library). The Taming of the Shrew , an article from Wikipedia . Taming of the Shrew: The Proud Princess , folktales of type 900. The Contrary Wife , folktales of types 1365A, 1365B, and 1365C. Wives Rules Over Their Husbands , folktales of type 1375. The Wife Who Could Not Keep a Secret , folktales of type 1381. The Silence Wager , folktales of type 1351, in which stubborn individuals (typically husband and wife) attempt to settle a dispute by seeing who can go the longest without speaking. The Language of Animals , folktales of type 670 about wife beating. Sharing Joy and Sorrow a tale about wife beating from the Grimm brothers' collection. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 24, 2025. Tannhäuser Tannhäuser A German Legend translated and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1996-2011 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Noble Tannhäuser, a German knight, had traveled through many lands. He even visited the beautiful women of the Mountain of Lady Venus, hoping to see what great miracles occurred there. After sojourning there for a while, with joy and contentment, his conscience finally directed him to return to the world, and he asked to take leave. Lady Venus, however, tempted him with whatever it might take to make him change his mind. She offered him one of her comrades for a wife, pointing out her red lips that never ceased smiling. Tannhäuser answered that he desired no woman other than the one he was now thinking of, nor did he want to burn forever in hell. He was not interested in the red lips. He did not want to stay here any longer, for to do so would destroy his life. Then the she-devil tried to lure him into her room, tempting him with love, but the noble night cursed her loudly, calling upon the Heavenly Virgin to help him escape. Filled with remorse, he set forth toward Rome in order to confess his sins to Pope Urban, and thus do penance to save his soul. However, after he confessed that he had remained an entire year with Lady Venus in her mountain, the Pope said: "Not until leaves begin to grow on this dry stick that I am holding in my hand, will your sins will be forgiven!" Tannhäuser said: "Had I but had only one more year to live, I would have shown remorse and done penance such that God would have taken mercy on me." Grieving that the Pope had cursed him, he left the city and returned to the demonic mountain, intending to stay there forever and ever. Lady Venus welcomed him as one welcomes a long absent lover. Three days later leaves began to grow on the stick, and the Pope sent messengers throughout the country, attempting to discover where Tannhäuser had gone. But it was too late. He was inside the mountain and had chosen a lover. There he will remain until Judgment Day, at which time God may send him to a different place. And a priest should never discourage a sinner but should forgive all who present themselves with remorse and penance. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Tannhäuser," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: in der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 170, pp. 246-47 . In later editions this legend is given the number 171. A second volume of German legends followed in 1818. The historical Tannhäuser (ca. 1205-1267) was a knight, a poet, and a minstrel. Tannhäuser's exploits as a crusader and as a lover are featured in numerous ballads and legends, including Richard Wagner's opera Tannhäuser und der Sängerkrieg auf Wartburg (composed between 1842 and 1845). Urban IV served as Pope between 1261 and 1264. Link to related folktales about Forgiveness and Redemption . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 9, 2011. The Tar-Baby: Folktales of Types 175 and 1310A The Tar-Baby Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Types 175 and 1310A edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2014-2018 Contents The Wonderful Tar-Baby Story (USA, Joel Chandler Harris). How Mr. Rabbit Was Too Sharp for Mr. Fox (USA, Joel Chandler Harris). Buh Wolf, Buh Rabbit, an de Tar-Baby (USA). Playing Godfather: Tar-Baby: Mock Plea (USA). The Rabbit and the Frenchman (Native American, Biloxi). Coyote and Pitch (Native American, Shasta). B' Rabby an' B' Tar-Baby (Bahamas). The Story of a Dam (South Africa, Hottentot). The Dance for Water; or, Rabbit's Triumph (South Africa). How Prince Five-Weapons Fought the Ogre Hairy-Grip (India, Jataka Tales ). The Demon with the Matted Hair (India, Jataka Tales , retold by Joseph Jacobs). The Jackal and the Chickens (India). The Farmer, the Crocodile, and the Jackal (Pakistan). King Robin (Spain/Portugal). The Monkey and Juan Puson Tambi-Tambi (Philippines). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Wonderful Tar-Baby Story USA, Joel Chandler Harris "Didn't the fox never catch the rabbit, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy the next evening. He come mighty nigh it, honey, sho's you bawn -- Brer Fox did. One day, atter Brer Rabbit fool 'im wid dat calamus root, Brer Fox went ter wuk en got 'im some tar, en mix it wid some turkentime, en fix up a contrapshun wat he call a Tar-Baby, en he tuck dish yer Tar-Baby en he sot 'er in de big road, en den he lay off in de bushes fer ter see wat de news wuz gwineter be. En he didn't hatter wait long, nuddor, kaze bimeby here come Brer Rabbit pacin' down de road -- lippity-clippity, clippity-lippity -- dez ez sassy ez a jay-bird. Brer Fox, he lay low. Brer Rab bit come prancin' 'long twel he spy de Tar-Baby, en den he fotch up on his behime legs like he wuz 'stonished. De Tar-Baby, she sot dar, she did, en Brer Fox, he lay low. "'Mawnin!' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee -- 'nice wedder dis mawnin',' sezee. "Tar-Baby ain't sayin' nuthin', en Brer Fox, he lay low. 'How duz yo' sym'tums seem ter segashuate? ' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee. Brer Fox, he wink his eye slow, en lay low, en de Tar-Baby, she ain't sayin' nuthin'. "How you come on, den? Is you deaf?" sez Brer Rabbit, sezee. "Kaze if you is, I kin holler louder," sezee. Tar-Baby stay still, en Brer Fox, he lay low. "Youer stuck up, dat's what you is," says Brer Rabbit, sezee, en I'm gwineter kyore you, dat's w'at I'm a gwineter do," sezee. Brer Fox, he sorter chuckle in his stummuck, he did, but Tar-Baby ain't sayin' nuthin'. "I'm gwineter lam you howter talk ter 'specttubble fokes ef hit's de las' ack," sez Brer Rabbit, sezee. "Ef you don't take off dat hat en tell me howdy, I'm gwineter bus' you wide open," sezee. Tar-Baby stay still, en Brer Fox, he lay low. Brer Rabbit keep on axin' 'im, en de Tar-Baby, she keep on sayin' nuthin', twel present'y Brer Rabbit draw back wid his fis', he did, en blip he tuck 'er side er de head. Right dar's whar he broke his merlasses jug. His fis' stuck, en he can't pull loose. De tar hilt 'im. But Tar-Baby, she stay still, en Brer Fox, he lay low. "Ef you don't lemme loose, I'll knock you agin," sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, en wid dat he fotch 'er a wipe wid de udder han', en dat stuck. Tar-Baby, she ain't sayin' nuthin', en Brer Fox, he lay low. "Tu'n me loose, fo' I kick de natal stuffin' outen you," sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, but de Tar-Baby, she ain't sayin' nuthin'. She des hilt on, en den Brer Rabbit lose de use er his feet in de same way. Brer Fox, he lay low. Den Brer Rabbit squall out dat ef de Tar-Baby don't tu'n 'im loose he butt 'er cranksided. En den he butted, en his head got stuck. Den Brer Fox, he sa'ntered fort', lookin' des ez innercent ez wunner yo' mammy's mockin'-birds. "Howdy, Brer Rabbit," sez Brer Fox, sezee. "You look sorter stuck up dis mawnin'," sezee, en den he rolled on de groun', en laft en laft twel he couldn't laff no mo'. "I speck you'll take dinner wid me dis time, Brer Rabbit. I done laid in some calamus root, en I ain't gwineter take no skuse," sez Brer Fox, sezee. Here Uncle Remus paused, and drew a two-pound yam out of the ashes. "Did the fox eat the rabbit?" asked the little boy to whom the story had been told. "Dat's all de fur de tale goes," replied the old man. "He mout, en den agin he moutent. Some say Jedge B'ar come 'long en loosed 'im -- some say he didn't. I hear Miss Sally callin'. You better run 'long." Source (books.google.com): Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus: His Songs and His Sayings: The Folk-Lore of the Old Plantation (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1881), no. 2, pp. 23-25 . Source (Internet Archive): Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus: His Songs and His Sayings: The Folk-Lore of the Old Plantation (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1881), no. 2, pp. 23-25 . Return to the table of contents . How Mr. Rabbit Was Too Sharp for Mr. Fox USA, Joel Chandler Harris "Uncle Remus," said the little boy one evening, "when he had found the old man with little or nothing to do, "did the fox kill and eat the rabbit when he caught him with the Tar-Baby?" "Law, honey, ain't I tell you 'bout dat?" replied the old darkey, chuckling slyly. "I 'clar ter grashus I ought er tole you dat, but ole man Nod wuz ridin' on my eyeleds 'twel a leetle mo'n I'd a dis'member'd my own name, en den on to dat here come yo' mammy hollerin' after you. Wat I tell you w'en I fus' begin? I tole you Brer Rabbit wuz a monstus soon beas'; leas'ways dat's w'at I laid out fer ter tell you. Well, den, honey, don't you go en make no udder kalkalashuns, kaze in dem days Brer Rabbit en his fambly wuz at de head er de gang w'en enny racket wuz on han', en dar dey stayed. 'Fo' you begins fer ter wipe yo' eyes 'bout Brer Rabbit, you wait en see whar'bouts Brer Rabbit gwineter fetch up at. But dat's needer yer ner dar." Wen Brer Fox fine Brer Rabbit mixt up wid de Tar-Baby, he feel mighty good, en he roll on de groun' en laff. Bimeby he up'n say, sezee: "Well, I speck I got you dis time, Brer Rabbit," sezee; "maybe I ain't, but I speck I is. "You been runnin' roun' here sassin' atter me a mighty long time, but I speck you done come ter de een' er de row. You bin cuttin' up yo' capers en bouncin' 'roun' in dis naberhood ontwel you come ter b'leeve yo'se'f de boss er de whole gang. En den youer allers some'rs whar you got no bizness," sez Brer Fox, sezee. "Who ax you fer ter come en strike up a 'quaintence wid dish yer Tar-Baby? En who stuck you up dar whar you iz? Nobody in de roun' worril. You des tuck en jam yo'se'f on dat Tar-Baby widout waitin' fer enny invite," sez Brer Fox, sezee, "en dar you is, en dar you'll stay twel I fixes up a bresh-pile and fires her up, kaze I'm gwineter bobbycue you dis day, sho," sez Brer Fox, sezee. Den Brer Rabbit talk mighty 'umble. "I don't keer w'at you do wid me, Brer Fox," sezee, "so you don't fling me in dat brier-patch. Roas' me, Brer Fox," sezee, "but don't fling me in dat brier-patch," sezee. "Hit's so much trouble fer ter kindle a fier," sez Brer Fox, sezee, "dat I speck I'll hatter hang you," sezee. "Hang me des ez high as you please, Brer Fox," sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, "but do fer de Lord's sake don't fling me in dat brier-patch," sezee. "I ain't got no string," sez Brer Fox, sezee, "en now I speck I'll hatter drown you," sezee. "Drown me des ez deep ez you please, Brer Fox," sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'but do don't fling me in dat brier-patch," sezee. "Dey ain't no water nigh," sez Brer Fox, sezee, "en now I speck I'll hatter skin you," sezee. "Skin me, Brer Fox," sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, "snatch out my eyeballs, tar out my years by de roots, en cut off my legs," sezee, "but do please, Brer Fox, don't fling me in dat brier-patch," sezee. Co'se Brer Fox wanter hurt Brer Rabbit bad ez he kin, so he cotch 'im by de behime legs en slung 'im right in de middle er de brier-patch. Dar wuz a considerbul flutter whar Brer Rabbit struck de bushes, en Brer Fox sorter hang 'roun' fer ter see w'at wuz gwineter happen. Bimeby he hear somebody call 'im, en way up de hill he see Brer Rabbit settin' cross-legged on a chinkapin log koamin' de pitch outen his har wid a chip. Den Brer Fox know dat he bin swop off mighty bad. Brer Rabbit wuz bleedzed fer ter fling back some er his sass, en he holler out: "Bred en bawn in a brier-patch, Brer Fox -- bred en bawn in a brier-patch!" en wid dat he skip out des ez lively ez a cricket in de embers. Source (books.google.com): Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus: His Songs and His Sayings: The Folk-Lore of the Old Plantation (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1881), no. 4, pp. 29-31 . Source (Internet Archive): Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus: His Songs and His Sayings: The Folk-Lore of the Old Plantation (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1881), no. 4, pp. 29-31 . Return to the table of contents . Buh Wolf, Buh Rabbit, an de Tar-Baby USA Buh Wolf and Buh Kabbit, dem bin lib nabur. De dry drout come. Ebry ting stew up. Water scace. Buh Wolf dig one spring fuh him fuh git water. Buh Rabbit, him too lazy an too scheemy fuh wuk fuh isself. Eh pen pon lib off tarruh people. Ebry day, wen Buh Wolf yent duh watch um, eh slip to Buh Wolf spring, an eh full him calabash long water an cah um to eh house fuh cook long and fuh drink. Buh Wolf see Buh Rabbit track, but eh couldnt ketch um duh tief de water. One day eh meet Buh Rabbit in de big road, an eh ax um how eh mek out fur water. Buh Rabbit say him no casion fuh hunt water: him lib off de jew on de grass. Buh Wolf quire: "Enty you blan tek water outer me spring?" Buh Rabbit say: "Me yent." Buh Wolf say: "You yis, enty me see you track?" Buh Rabbit mek answer: "Yent me gone to you spring. Must be some edder rabbit. Me nebber bin nigh you spring. Me dunno way you spring day." Buh Wolf no question um no mo: but eh know say eh bin Buh Rabbit fuh true, an eh fix plan fuh ketch um. De same ebenin eh mek Tar-Baby, an eh gone an set um right in de middle er de trail wuh lead to de spring, an dist in front er de spring. Soon a mornin Buh Rabbit rise an tun in fuh cook eh bittle. Eh pot biggin fuh bun. Buh Rabbit say: "Hey! me pot duh bun. Lemme slip to Buh Wolf spring an git some water fuh cool um." So eh tek eh calabash an hop off fuh de spring. Wen eh ketch de spring, eh see de Tar-Baby duh tan dist een front er de spring. Eh stonish. Eh stop. Eh come close. Eh look at um. Eh wait fur um fuh mobe. De Tar-Baby yent notice um. Eh yent wink eh yeye. Eh yent say nuttne. Eh yent mobe. Buh Rabbit, him say: "Hey titter, enty you guine tan one side an lemme git some water?" De Tar-Baby no answer. Den Buh Rabbit say: "Leely gal, mobe, me tell you, so me kin dip some water outer de spring long me calabash." De Tar-Baby wunt mobe. Buh Rabbit say: "Enty you know me pot duh bun? Enty you know me hurry? Enty you yeddy me tell you fuh mobe? You see dis han? Ef you dont go long and lemme git some water, me guine slap you ober." De Tar-Baby stan day. Bull Rabbit haul off an slap um side de head. Eh han fastne. Buh Rabbit try fuh pull eh hand back, an eh say: "Wuh you hole me han fuh? Lemme go. Ef you dont loose me, me guine box de life outer you wid dis tarruh han." De Tar-Baby yent crack eh teet. Buh Rabbit hit um, bim, wid eh tarruh han. Dat han fastne too same luk tudder. Buh Rabbit say: "Wuh you up teh? Tun me loose. Ef you dont leggo me right off, me guine knee you." De Tar-Baby hole um fas. Buh Rabbit skade an bex too. Eh faid Buh Wolf come ketch um. Wen eh fine eh cant loosne eh han, eh kick de Tar-Baby wid eh knee. Eh knee fastne. Yuh de big trouble now. Buh Rabbit skade den wus den nebber. Eh try fuh skade de Tar-Baby. Eh say: "Leely gal, you better mine who you duh fool long. Me tell you, fuh de las time, tun me loose. Ef you dont loosne me han an me knee right off, me guine bus you wide open wid dis head." De Tar-Baby hole um fas. Eh yent say one wud. Den Buh Rabbit butt de Tar-Baby een eh face. Eh head fastne same fashion luk eh han an eh knee. Yuh de ting now. Po Buh Rabbit done fuh. Eh fastne all side. Eh cant pull loose. Eh gib up. Eh bague. Eh cry. Eh holler. Buh Wolf yeddy um. Eh run day. Eh hail Buh Rabbit : "Hey, Budder! wuh de trouble? Enty you tell me you no blan wisit me spring fuh git water? Who calabash dis? Wuh you duh do yuh anyhow?" Buh Rabbit so condemn eh yent hab one wud fuh talk. Buh Wolf, him say: "Nummine, I done ketch you dis day. I guine lick you now." Buh Rabbit bague. Eh bague. Eh prommus nebber fuh trouble Buh Wolf spring no mo. Buh Wolf laugh at um. Den eh tek an loose Buh Rabbit from de Tar-Baby, an eh tie um teh one spakleberry bush, an eh git switch an eh lick um tel eh tired. All de time Buh Rab bit bin a bague an a holler. Buh Wolf yent duh listne ter um, but eh keep on duh pit de lick ter um. At las Buh Rabbit tell Buh Wolf: "Dont lick me no mo. Kill me one time. Mek fire an bun me up. Knock me brains out gin de tree." Buh Wolf mek answer: "Ef I bun you up, ef I knock you brains out, you guine dead too quick. Me guine trow you in de brier patch, so de brier kin cratch you life out." Buh Rabbit say: "Do Buh Wolf, bun me: broke me neck, but dont trow me in de brier patch. Lemme dead one time. Dont tarrify me no mo." Buh Wolf yent bin know wuh Buh Rabbit up teh. Eh tink eh bin guine tare Buh Rabbit hide off. So, wuh eh do? Eh loose Buh Rabbit from de spakleberry bush, an eh tek um by de hine leg, and eh swing um roun, an eh trow um way in de tick brier patch fuh tare eh hide an cratch eh yeye out. De minnit Buh Rabbit drap in de brier patch, eh cock up eh tail, eh jump, an eh holler back to Buh Wolf: "Good bye, Budder! Dis de place me mammy fotch me up, -- dis de place me mammy fotch me up." An eh gone befo Buh Wolf kin ketch um. Buh Rabbit too scheemy. Source: Charles C. Jones, Negro Myths from the Georgia Coast: Told in the Vernacular (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1888), no. 4, pp. 7-11 . Return to the table of contents . Playing Godfather: Tar-Baby: Mock Plea USA A fox once hired a rabbit to help him work on his farm, and the fox's wife had to cook for them. They began work early in the morning, while Mrs. Fox was cooking pease, of which the rabbit was very fond. He would work to get to the end of the row before Mr. Fox, and answer as if some one had called him. Mr. Fox would say, "Who is that?" The rabbit would say, "Your wife called me, I don't know what she wants." Mr. Fox would say, "Go see what she wants." The rabbit would go to the house and say, "Mrs. Fox, Mr. Fox says give me a plate of pease, please." "All right!" said Mrs. Fox, "Tell him there are only two more left." When Mr. Rabbit began work, he would run to the end of the row and back, and answer again. Mr. Fox would say, "Who is that?" The rabbit would say, "Your wife called me again. I don't know what she wants." "Go and see what she wants," said the fox. Then Mr. Rabbit would go, and say to Mrs. Fox, "Mr. Fox says give me another plate of pease." "Please tell him there's only one more left." Mr. Rabbit ate the pease and went back the third time. At noon Mr. Fox said, "Come, Mr. Rabbit! we'll go and get our dinner." The rabbit said, "Oh, no, Mr. Fox! I don't care for any dinner." "I don't want anybody to work for me without eating," said Mr. Fox. Mr. Rabbit went, but would not keep up with Mr. Fox. Mrs. Fox met Mr. Fox in the yard, and asked where he was going, and also told him there was no dinner because he had sent Mr. Rabbit to eat all the pease. Mr. Fox said, "Never mind, never mind! I'll catch you. Go in the dairy and bring me that butter." The rabbit went in and stuck his front paw in the butter, but it stuck fast. He said, "Never mind, never mind! I have another paw here." He stuck it in, and it stuck fast. "Never mind, never mind! I still have another one here." He stuck that one in, and it stuck fast. "Never mind, never mind! got one more here," and that stuck fast. "Never mind, never mind! I got a mouth here." He put his mouth in, and it stuck fast. Then Mr. Fox came upon him, and said, "Now I have you! I am going to kill you; I am going to throw you in a pile of briers." The rabbit said, "Please don't throw me in the briers! You may burn me, you may roast me, but please don't throw me in the briers! You will tear my face and eyes to pieces." Then Mr. Fox took him, and threw him in the briers. The rabbit laughed, "Ha, ha, ha! you threw me to my home in bamboo-briers. I was bred and born in a brier-patch." Source: A. M. Bacon and E. C. Parsons, "Folk-Lore from Elizabeth City County, Virginia," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , volume 35 (1922), pp. 259-60 . Bacon's and Parsons' source: "Written by Nellie Virginia Hudgins." Bacon and Parsons mistake this tale's first episode with a type 15 folktale ("Playing Godfather"). Actually it more closely resembles a type 1563 tale, in which a farm laborer tricks his master into approving a liaison between his (the master's) wife and the laborer. Return to the table of contents . The Rabbit and the Frenchman Native American (Biloxi) During January and February of this year [1892], I was in the central part of Louisiana, where I found the survivors of the Biloxi tribe. These Indians belong to the Siouan linguistic family, their language being closely related to those of the Tutelo of Canada, the Hidatsa of North Dakota, and the Kwapa of Indian Territory. In order to record any of the texts in the original Biloxi, it was necessary to have present not only the aged woman who told the myths to the others, but also her daughter and son-in-law, as only the last could be induced to dictate the myths sentence by sentence and in an audible voice, the others prompting him from time to time. The first myth which I shall present is one entitled "The Rabbit and the Frenchman." The rabbit and the Frenchman were two friends. The rabbit aided the Frenchman, agreeing to work a piece of land on shares. The first season they planted potatoes. The rabbit, having been told to select his share of the crop, chose the potato vines, and devoured them all. The next season they planted corn. This year the rabbit said, "I will eat the roots." So he pulled up all the corn by the roots, but he found nothing to satisfy his hunger. Then the Frenchman said, "Let us dig a well." But the rabbit did not wish to work any longer with his friend. Said he to the Frenchman, "If you wish to dig a well, I shall not help you." "Oho," said the Frenchman, "you shall not drink any of the water from the well." "That does not matter," replied the rabbit, "I am accustomed to licking the dew from the ground." The Frenchman, suspecting mischief, made a tar-baby, which he stood up close to the well. The rabbit approached the well, carrying a long piece of cane and a tin bucket. On reaching the well he addressed the tar-baby, who remained silent. "Friend, what is the matter? Are you angry?" said the rabbit. Still the tar-baby said nothing. So the rabbit hit him with one forepaw, which stuck there. "Let me go or I will hit you on the other side," exclaimed the rabbit. And when he found that the tar-baby paid no attention to him, he hit him with his other fore paw, which stuck to the tar-baby. "I will kick you," said the rabbit. But when he kicked the tar-baby, the hind foot stuck. "I will kick you with the other foot," said the rabbit. And when he did so, that foot, too, stuck to the tar baby. Then the rabbit resembled a ball, because his feet were sticking to the tar baby, and he could neither stand nor recline. Just at this time the Frenchman approached. He tied the legs of the rabbit together, laid him down and scolded him. Then the rabbit pretended to be in great fear of a brier patch. "As you are in such fear of a brier patch," said the Frenchman, "I will throw you into one." "Oh, no," replied the rabbit. "I will throw you into the brier patch," responded the Frenchman. "I am much afraid of it," said the rabbit. "As you are in such dread of it," said the Frenchman, "I will throw you into it." So he seized the rabbit, and threw him into the brier patch. The rabbit fell at some distance from the Frenchman. But instead of being injured, he sprang up and ran off laughing at the trick which he had played on the Frenchman. Source: J. Owen Dorsey, "Two Biloxi Tales Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 6, no. 20 (January - March, 1893), pp. 48-49 . This tale's first episode describing the sharing of above-ground and underground crops is a corruption of the international folktale type 1030, Crop Division between Man and Ogre . Return to the table of contents . Coyote and Pitch Native American (Shasta) One day Coyote heard that Pitch, the bad man, was coming. He went out to meet him, and said, "I can whip you, no matter who you are." Pitch answered, "I can't fight with my hands." Thereupon Coyote struck him with his fist; but the fist stuck fast. Then Coyote said, "If I strike you with my left hand, I'll kill you." "Go ahead, do it!" answered Pitch. Coyote hit him, and his left hand stuck fast. "I'll kick you," said Coyote; and Pitch replied, "All right, kick!" Coyote kicked, and his foot stuck fast. "If I kick you with my left foot," threatened Coyote, "I'll surely kill you." "Do it!" mocked Pitch. Coyote kicked again, and his left foot stuck fast. "I will lash you with my tail!" shouted Coyote, whereupon his tail stuck fast. Then Coyote became angry, and threatened to kill Pitch with his ear; but his ear, too, stuck fast. Finally Coyote hit him with his head. The same thing happened. His head stuck fast. Now Coyote was stuck to Pitch, and could not pry himself loose. After a while his friend Spider came there, and saw Coyote's predicament. "How can I help you?" inquired he. "Cut my hand away, but do not cut it," said Coyote. "It will be easier to burn it away," suggested Spider. "No!" said Coyote, "scrape it away!" Spider did so, and after a while Coyote became free. Source: "Shasta and Athapascan Myths from Oregon" (Collected by Livingston Farrans; edited by Leo J. Frachtenberg), Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 28, no. 59 (July - September, 1915), p. 218 . Return to the table of contents . B' Rabby an' B' Tar-Baby Bahamas Once it vwas a time, a very good time, De monkey chewed tobacco, an' 'e spit white lime. So dis day B' Rabby, B' Bouki, B' Tiger, B' Lizard, B' Helephant, B' Goat, B' Sheep, B' Rat, B'Cricket, all o' de creatures, all kind; -- so now dey say, "B' Rabby, you goin' help dig vwell?" B' Rabby say, "No!" Dey say, "Vw'en you vwan' vwater, how you goin' manage?" 'E say, "Get it an' drink it." Dey say, "B' Rabby, you goin' help cut fiel'?" B' Rabby say, "No!" Dey say, "Vw'en you 'r' hungry, how you goin' manage?" "Get it an' eat it." So all on 'em gone to work. Dey vwen'; dey dig vwell first. Nex' dey cut fiel'. Now dis day B' Rabby come. Dey leave B' Lizard home to min' de vwell. So now B' Rabby say, "B' Lizard, you vwant to see who can make de mostest noise in de trash?" B' Lizard say, "Yes!" B' Rabby say, "You go in dat big heap o' trash dere an' I go in dat over dere." (B' Rabby did vwant to get his vwater now!) B' Lizard gone in de trash; 'e kick up. Vw'ile 'e vwas makin' noise in de trash, B' Rabby dip 'e bucket full o' vwater. 'E gone! So now vw'en B' Helephant come, an' hall de hother animals come out de fiel', B' Helephant say, "B' Lizard, you goin' let B' Rabby come here today an' take dat vwater?" B' Lizard say, "I could n't help it!" 'e say. "'E tell me to go in de trash to see who could make de mostest noise." Now de nex' day dey leave B' Bouki home to min' de vwell. Now B' Rabby come. 'E say, "B' Bouki, you vwan' to see who can run de fastes'?" B' Bouki say, "Yes." 'E say, "You go dat side, an' le' me go dis side." Good! B' Bouki break off; 'e gone a runnin'. Soon as B' Bouki git out o' sight B' Rabby dip 'e bucket; 'e gone. So now vw'en B' Helephan' an' 'im come dey say, "B' Bouki, you let B' Rabby come 'ere again today and take our vwater?" 'E say, "'E tell me who could run de fastes', an' soon 's I git a little vays 'e take de vwater an' gone. So B' Helephan' say, "I know how to ketch him!" Dey gone; hall on 'em in de pine yard. Dey make one big tarbaby. Dey stick 'im up to de vwell. B' Rabby come. 'E say, "Hun! dey leave my dear home to min' de vwell today." B' Rabby say, "Come, my dear, le' me kiss you!" Soon as 'e kiss 'er 'e lip stick fas'. B' Rabby say, "Min' you better le' go;" 'e say. "You see dis biggy, biggy han' here;" 'e say, "'f I slap you wid dat I kill you." Now vw'en B' Rabby fire, so, 'e han' stick. B' Rabby say, "Min' you better le' go me;" 'e say. "You see dis biggy, biggy han' here; 'f I slap you wid dat I kill you." Soon as B' Rabby slap wid de hudder han', so, 'e stick. B' Rabby say, "You see dis biggy, biggy foot here. My pa say, 'f I kick anybody wid my biggy, biggy foot I kill 'em." Soon as 'e fire his foot, so, it stick. B' Rabby say, "Min' you better le' go me." Good! soon as 'e fire his foot, so, it stick. Now B' Rabby jus' vwas hangin'; hangin' on de Tar-baby. B' Bouki come runnin' out firs'. 'E say, "Ha! vwe got 'im to day! vwe got 'im to-day!" 'E gone back to de fiel'; 'e tell B' Helephan'; 'e say, "Ha! B' Helephan', vwe got 'im today!" Vw'en all on 'em gone out now dey ketch B' Rabby. Now dey did vwan' to kill B' Rabby; dey did n' know whey to t'row 'im. B' Rabby say, "'f you t'row me in de sea" (you know 'f dey had t'row B'Rabby in de sea, dey 'd a kill 'im), -- B' Rabby say, "'f you t'row me in de sea you won' hurt me a bit." B' Rabby say, "'f you t'row me in de fine grass, you kill me an' all my family." Dey take B' Rabby. Dey t'row 'im in de fine grass. B' Rabby jump up; 'e put off a runnin'. So now B' Rabby say, "Hey! ketch me 'f you could." All on 'em gone now. Now dis day dey vwas all sittin' down heatin'. Dey had one big house; de house vwas full o' hall kin' o' hanimals. B' Rabby gone; 'e git hup on top de house; 'e make one big hole in de roof o' de house. B' Rabby sing hout, "Now, John Fire, go hout!" B' Rabby let go a barrel o' mud; let it run right down inside de house. Vw'en 'e let go de barrel o' mud, so, every one on 'em take to de bush, right vwil'; gone right hover in de bush. B' Rabby make all on 'em vwent vwil', till dis day you see hall de hanimals vwil'. E bo ban, my story 's en', If you doan' believe my story 's true, Hax my captain an my crew, Vw'en I die bury me in a pot o' candle grease. Source: Charles L. Edwards, Bahama Songs and Stories: A Contribution to Folk-Lore (Boston and New York: Published for the American Folk-Lore Society by Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1895), no. 12pp. 73-75 . Return to the table of contents . The Story of a Dam South Africa (Hottentot) There was a great drought in the land; and the lion called together a number of animals, so that they might devise a plan for retaining water when the rains fell. The animals which attended to the lion's summons were the baboon, the leopard, the hyena, the jackal, the hare, and the mountain tortoise. It was agreed that they should scratch a large hole m some suitable place to hold water; and the next day they all began to work, with the exception of the jackal, who continually hovered about in that locality, and was overheard to mutter that he was not going to scratch his nails off in making waterholes. When the dam was finished, the rains fell, and it was soon filled with water, to the great delight of those who had worked so hard at it. The first one, however, to come and drink there, was the jackal, who not only drank, but filled his clay pot with water, and then proceeded to swim in the rest of the water, making it as muddy and dirty as he could. This was brought to the knowledge of the lion, who was very angry, and ordered the baboon to guard the water the next day, armed with a huge knobkirrie. The baboon was concealed in a bush close to the water; but the jackal soon became aware of his presence there, and guessed its cause. Knowing the fondness of baboons for honey, the jackal at once hit upon a plan, and marching to and fro, every now and then dipped his lingers into his clay pot, and licked them with an expression of intense relish, saying, in a low voice, to himself, "I don't want any of their dirty water, when I have a pot full of delicious honey." This was too much for the poor baboon, whose mouth began to water. He soon began to beg the jackal to give him a little honey, as he had been watching for several hours, and was very hungry and tired. After taking no notice of the baboon at first, the jackal looked round, and said, in a patronizing manner, that he pitied such an unfortunate creature, and would give, him some honey, on certain conditions, viz., that the baboon should give up his knobkirrie and allow himself to be bound by the jackal. He foolishly agreed; and was soon tied in such a manner that he could not move hand or foot. The jackal now proceeded to drink of the water, to fill his pot, and to swim, in the sight of the baboon; from time to time telling him what a foolish fellow he had been to be so easily duped, and that he (the jackal) had no honey or anything else to give him, excepting a good blow on the head every now and then with his own knobkirrie. The animals soon appeared, and found the poor baboon in this sorry plight; looking the picture of misery. The lion was so exasperated that he caused the baboon to be severely punished, and to be denounced as a fool. The tortoise hereupon stepped forward, and offered his services for the capture of the jackal. It was at first thought that he was merely joking; but, when he explained in what manner he proposed to catch him, his plan was considered so feasible that his offer was accepted. He proposed that a thick coating of bijenwerk (a kind of sticky black substance found on bee-hives, i.e. , bee-glue) should be spread fill over him, and that he should then go and stand at the entrance of the dam, on the water level, so that the jackal might tread upon him, and stick fast. This was accordingly done, and the tortoise posted there. The next day, when the jackal came, he approached the water very cautiously, and wondered to find no one there. He then ventured to the entrance of the water, and remarked how kind they had been in placing there a large black stepping-stone for him. As soon, however, as he trod upon the supposed stone, he stuck fast, and saw that he had been tricked; for the tortoise now put his head out, and began to move. The jackal's hind feet being still free, he threatened to smash the tortoise with them if he did not let him go. The tortoise merely answered, "Do as you like." The jackal thereupon made a violent jump, and found, with horror, that his hind foot were now also fast. "Tortoise," said he, " I have still my mouth and teeth left, and will eat you alive, if you do not let me go," "Do as you like," the tortoise again replied. The jackal, in his endeavors to free himself, at last made a desperate bite at the tortoise, and found himself fixed, both head and feet. The tortoise, feeling proud of his successful capture, now marched quietly up to the top of the bank with the jackal on his back, so that he could easily be seen by the animals as they came to the water. They were indeed astonished to find how cleverly the crafty jackal had been caught; and the tortoise was much praised, while the unhappy baboon was again reminded of his misconduct when set to guard the water. The jackal was at once condemned to death by the lion; and the hyena was to execute the sentence. The jackal pleaded hard for mercy, but, finding this useless, he made a last request to the lion (always, as he said, so fair and just in his dealings) that he should not have to suffer a lingering death. The lion inquired of him in what manner he wished to die; and he asked that his tail might be shaved and rubbed with a little fat, and that the hyena might then swing him round twice, and dash his brains out upon a stone. This, being considered sufficiently fair by the lion, was ordered by him to be carried out in his presence. When the jackal's tail had been shaved and greased, the hyena caught hold of him with great force, and before he had fairly lifted him from the ground, the cunning jackal had slipped away from the hyena's grasp, and was running for his life, pursued by all the animals. The lion was the foremost pursuer, and, after a great chase, the jackal got under an overhanging precipice, and, standing on his hind legs with his shoulders pressed against the rock, called loudly lo the lion to help him, as the rock was falling, and would crush them both. The lion put his shoulders to the rock, and exerted himself to the utmost. After some little time, the jackal proposed that he should creep slowly out, and fetch a large pole to prop up the rock, so that the lion could get out and save his life. The jackal did creep out, and left the lion there to starve, and die. Source: Thomas Bain, Folk-Lore Journal [of South Africa] , vol. 1, part 4 (July 1879), pp. 69-73 . Return to the table of contents . The Dance for Water; or, Rabbit's Triumph South Africa There was a frightful drought. The rivers after a while dried up and even the springs gave no water. The animals wandered around seeking drink, but to no avail. Nowhere was water to be found. A great gathering of animals was held: Lion, Tiger, Wolf, Jackal, Elephant, all of them came together. What was to be done? That was the question. One had this plan, and another had that; but no plan seemed of value. Finally one of them suggested: "Come, let all of us go to the dry riverbed and dance; in that way we can tread out the water." Good! Everyone was satisfied and ready to begin instantly, excepting Rabbit, who said, "I will not go and dance. All of you are mad to attempt to get water from the ground by dancing." The other animals danced and danced, and ultimately danced the water to the surface. How glad they were. Everyone drank as much as he could, but Rabbit did not dance with them. So it was decided that Rabbit should have no water. He laughed at them: "I will nevertheless drink some of your water." That evening he proceeded leisurely to the riverbed where the dance had been, and drank as much as he wanted. The following morning the animals saw the footprints of Rabbit in the ground, and Rabbit shouted to them: "Aha! I did have some of the water, and it was most refreshing and tasted fine." Quickly all the animals were called together. What were they to do? How were they to get Rabbit in their hands? All had some means to propose; the one suggested this, and the other that. Finally old Tortoise moved slowly forward, foot by foot: "I will catch Rabbit." "You? How? What do you think of yourself?" shouted the others in unison. "Rub my shell with pitch [black beeswax], and I will go to the edge of the water and lie down. I will then resemble a stone, so that when Rabbit steps on me his feet will stick fast." "Yes! Yes! That's good." And in a one, two, three, Tortoise's shell was covered with pitch, and foot by foot he moved away to the river. At the edge, close to the water, he lay down and drew his head into his shell. Rabbit during the evening came to get a drink. "Ha!" he chuckled sarcastically, "they are, after all, quite decent. Here they have placed a stone, so now I need not unnecessarily wet my feet." Rabbit trod with his left foot on the stone, and there it stuck. Tortoise then put his head out. "Ha! old Tortoise! And it's you, is it, that's holding me. But here I still have another foot. I'll give you a good clout." Rabbit gave Tortoise what he said he would with his right forefoot, hard and straight; and there his foot remained. "I have yet a hind foot, and with it I'll kick you." Rabbit drove his hind foot down. This also rested on Tortoise where it struck. "But still another foot remains, and now I'll tread you." He stamped his foot down, but it stuck like the others. He used his head to hammer Tortoise, and his tail as a whip, but both met the same fate as his feet, so there he was tight and fast down to the pitch. Tortoise now slowly turned himself round and foot by foot started for the other animals, with Rabbit on his back. "Ha! ha! ha! Rabbit! How does it look now? Insolence does not pay after all," shouted the animals. Now advice was sought. What should they do with Rabbit? He certainly must die. But how? One said, "Behead him"; another, "Some severe penalty." "Rabbit, how are we to kill you?" "It does not affect me," Rabbit said. "Only a shameful death please do not pronounce." "And what is that?" they all shouted. "To take me by my tail and dash my head against a stone; that I pray and beseech you don't do." "No, but just so you'll die. That is decided." It was decided Rabbit should die by taking him by his tail and dashing his head to pieces against some stone. But who is to do it? Lion, because he is the most powerful one. Good! Lion should do it. He stood up, walked to the front, and poor Rabbit was brought to him. Rabbit pleaded and beseeched that he couldn't die such a miserable death. Lion took Rabbit firmly by the tail and swung him around. The white skin slipped off from Rabbit, and there Lion stood with the white bit of skin and hair in his paw. Rabbit was free. Source (books.google.com): James A. Honeÿ, South-African Folk-Tales (New York: the Baker & Taylor Company, 1910), pp. 79-83 . Source (Internet Archive): James A. Honeÿ, South-African Folk-Tales (New York: the Baker & Taylor Company, 1910), pp. 79-83 . Return to the table of contents . How Prince Five-Weapons Fought the Ogre Hairy-Grip India, Jataka Tales Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, it was as his queen's child that the Bodhisatta came to life once more. On the day when he was to be named, the parents enquired as to their child's destiny from eight hundred brahmins, to whom they gave their hearts' desire in all pleasures of sense. Marking the promise which he showed of a glorious destiny, these clever soothsaying brahmins foretold that, coming to the throne at the king's death, the child should be a mighty king endowed with every virtue; famed and renowned for his exploits with five weapons, he should stand peerless in all Jambudipa. And because of this prophecy of the brahmins, the parents named their son Prince Five-weapons. Now, when the prince was come to years of discretion, and was sixteen years old, the king bade him go away and study. "With whom, sire, am I to study?" asked the prince. "With the world-famed teacher in the town of Takkasila in the Gandhara country. Here is his fee," said the king, handing his son a thousand pieces. So the prince went to Takkasila and was taught there. When he was leaving, his master gave him a set of five weapons, armed with which, after bidding adieu to his old master, the prince set out from Takkasila for Benares. On his way he came to a forest haunted by an ogre named Hairy-Grip; and, at the entrance to the forest, men who met him tried to stop him, saying: "Young brahmin, do not go through that forest; it is the haunt of the ogre Hairy-Grip, and he kills every one he meets." But, bold as a lion, the self-reliant Bodhisatta pressed on, till in the heart of the forest he came on the ogre. The monster made himself appear in stature as tall as a palm-tree, with a head as big as an arbor and huge eyes like bowls, with two tusks like turnips and the beak of a hawk; his belly was blotched with purple; and the palms of his hands and the soles of his feet were blue-black! "Whither away?" cried the monster. "Halt! you are my prey." "Ogre," answered the Bodhisatta, "I knew what I was doing when entering this forest. You will be ill-advised to come near me. For with a poisoned arrow I will slay you where you stand." And with this defiance, he fitted to his bow an arrow dipped in deadliest poison and shot it at the ogre. But it only stuck on to the monster's shaggy coat. Then he shot another and another, till fifty were spent, all of which merely stuck on to the ogre's shaggy coat. Hereon the ogre, shaking the arrows off so that they fell at his feet, came at the Bodhisatta; and the latter, again shouting defiance, drew his sword and struck at the ogre. But, like the arrows, his sword, which was thirty-three inches long, merely stuck fast in the shaggy hair. Next the Bodhisatta hurled his spear, and that stuck fast also. Seeing this, he smote the ogre with his club; but, like his other weapons, that too stuck fast. And thereupon the Bodhisatta shouted, "Ogre, you never heard yet of me, Prince Five-Weapons. When I ventured into this forest, I put my trust not in my bow and other weapons, but in myself! Now will 1 strike you a blow which shall crush you into dust." So saying, the Bodhisatta smote the ogre with his right hand; but the hand stuck fast upon the hair. Then, in turn, with his left hand and with his right and left feet, he struck at the monster, but hand and feet alike clave to the hide. Again shouting "I will crush you into dust!" he butted the ogre with his head, and that too stuck fast. Yet even when thus caught and snared in fivefold wise, the Bodhisatta, as he hung upon the ogre, was still fearless, still undaunted. And the monster thought to himself, "This is a very lion among men, a hero without a peer, and no mere man. Though he is caught in the clutches of an ogre like me, yet not so much as a tremor will he exhibit. Never, since I first took to slaying travelers upon this road, have I seen a man to equal him. How comes it that he is not frightened?" Not daring to devour the Bodhisatta offhand, he said, "How is it, young brahmin, that you have no fear of death?" "Why should?" answered the Bodhisatta. "Each life must surely have its destined death. Moreover, within my body is a sword of adamant, which you will never digest, if you eat me. It will chop your inwards into mincemeat, and my death will involve yours too. Therefore it is that I have no fear." (By this, it is said, the Bodhisatta meant the Sword of Knowledge, which was within him.) Hereon, the ogre fell a-thinking. "This young brahmin is speaking the truth and nothing but the truth," thought he. "Not a morsel so big as a pea could I digest of such a hero. I'll let him go." And so, in fear of his life, he let the Bodhisatta go free, saying, "Young brahmin, you are a lion among men; I will not eat you. Go forth from my hand, even as the moon from the jaws of Rahu, and return to gladden the hearts of your kinsfolk, your friends, and your country." "As for myself, ogre," answered the Bodhisatta," I will go. As for you, it was your sins in bygone days that caused you to be reborn a ravening, murderous, flesh-eating ogre; and, if you continue in sin in this existence, you will go on from darkness to darkness. But, having seen me, you will be unable thenceforth to sin any more. Know that to destroy life is to ensure re-birth either in hell or as a brute or as a ghost or among the fallen spirits. Or, if the re-birth be into the world of men, then such sin cuts short the days of a man's life." In this and other ways the Bodhisatta showed the evil consequences of the five bad courses, and the blessing that comes of the five good courses; and so wrought in divers ways upon that ogre's fears that by his teaching he converted the monster, imbuing him with self-denial and establishing him in the Five Commandments. Then making the ogre the fairy of that forest, with a right to levy dues, and charging him to remain stedfast, the Bodhisatta went his way, making known the change in the ogre's mood as he issued from the forest. And in the end he came, armed with the five weapons, to the city of Benares, and presented himself before his parents. In later days, when king, he was a righteous ruler; and after a life spent in charity and other good works he passed away to fare there after according to his deserts. This lesson ended, the Master, as Buddha, recited this stanza: When no attachment hampers heart or mind, When righteousness is practised peace to win, He who so walks, shall gain the victory And all the Fetters utterly destroy. When he had thus led his teaching up to Arahatship as its crowning point, the Master went on to preach the Four Truths, at the close whereof that Brother won Arahatship. Also, the Master shewed the connexion, and identified the Birth by saying, "Angulimala was the ogre of those days, and I myself Prince Five-Weapons." Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , vol. 1, translated by Robert Chalmers (Cambridge: At the University Press, 1895), no. 55, pp. 137-39 . Return to the table of contents . The Demon with the Matted Hair India, Jataka Tales , retold by Joseph Jacobs Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was King of Benares, the Bodhisatta was born as son of his chief queen. On his name-day they asked 800 Brahmans, having satisfied them with all their desires, about his lucky marks. The Brahmans who had skill in divining from such marks beheld the excellence of his, and made answer: "Full of goodness, great King, is your son, and when you die he will become king; he shall be famous and renowned for his skill with the five weapons, and shall be the chief man in all India." On hearing what the Brahmans had to say, they gave him the name of the Prince of the Five Weapons, sword, spear, bow, battle-axe, and shield. When he came to years of discretion, and had attained the measure of sixteen years, the King said to him: "My son, go and complete your education." "Who shall be my teacher?" the lad asked. "Go, my son; in the kingdom of Candahar, in the city of Takkasila, is a far-famed teacher from whom I wish you to learn. Take this, and give it him for a fee." With that he gave him a thousand pieces of money, and dismissed him. The lad departed, and was educated by this teacher; he received the Five Weapons from him as a gift, bade him farewell, and leaving Takkasila, he began his journey to Benares, armed with the Five Weapons. On his way he came to a forest inhabited by the Demon with the Matted Hair. At the entering in of the forest some men saw him, and cried out: "Hullo, young sir, keep clear of that wood! There's a Demon in it called he of the Matted Hair. He kills every man he sees!" And they tried to stop him. But the Bodhisatta, having confidence in himself, went straight on, fearless as a maned lion. When he reached mid-forest the Demon showed himself. He made himself as tall as a palm tree; his head was the size of a pagoda, his eyes as big as saucers, and he had two tusks all over knobs and bulbs; he had the face of a hawk, a variegated belly, and blue hands and feet. "Where are you going?" he shouted. "Stop! You'll make a meal for me!" Said the Bodhisatta: "Demon, I came here trusting in myself. I advise you to be careful how you come near me. Here's a poisoned arrow, which I'll shoot at you and knock you down!" With this menace, he fitted to his bow an arrow dipped in deadly poison, and let fly. The arrow stuck fast in the Demon's hair. Then he shot and shot, till he had shot away fifty arrows; and they all stuck in the Demon's hair. The Demon snapped them all off short, and threw them down at his feet; then came up to the Bodhisatta, who drew his sword and struck the Demon, threatening him the while. His sword -- it was three-and-thirty inches long -- stuck in the Demon's hair! The Bodhisatta struck him with his spear that stuck too! He struck him with his club and that stuck too! When the Bodhisatta saw that this had stuck fast, he addressed the Demon. "You, Demon!'' said he, "did you never hear of me before the Prince of the Five Weapons? When I came into the forest which you live in I did not trust to my bow and other weapons. This day will I pound you and grind you to powder!" Thus did he declare his resolve, and with, a shout he hit at the Demon with his right hand. It stuck fast in his hair! He hit him with his left hand that stuck too! With his right foot he kicked him that stuck too; then with his left and that stuck too! Then he butted at him with his head, crying, "I'll pound you to powder!" and his head stuck fast like the rest. Thus the Bodhisatta was five times snared, caught fast in five places, hanging suspended: yet he felt no fear was not even nervous. Thought the Demon to himself: "Here's a lion of a man! A noble man! More than man is he! Here he is, caught by a Demon like me; yet he will not fear a bit. Since I have ravaged this road, I never saw such a man. Now, why is it that he does not fear?" He was powerless to eat the man, but asked him: "Why is it, young sir, that you are not frightened to death?" "Why should I fear, Demon?" replied he. "In one life a man can die but once. Besides, in my belly is a thunderbolt; if you eat me, you will never be able to digest it; this will tear your inwards into little bits, and kill you: so we shall both perish. That is why I fear nothing." (By this, the Bodhisatta meant the weapon of knowledge which he had within him.) When he heard this, the Demon thought: "This young man speaks the truth. A piece of the flesh of such a lion-man as he would be too much for me to digest, if it were no bigger than a kidney-bean. I'll let him go!" So, being frightened to death, he let go the Bodhisatta, saying: "Young sir, you are a lion of a man! I will not eat you up. I set you free from my hands, as the moon is disgorged from the jaws of Rahu after the eclipse. Go back to the company of your friends and relations!" And the Bodhisatta said: "Demon, I will go, as you say. You were born a Demon, cruel, blood-bibbing, devourer of the flesh and gore of others, because you did wickedly in former lives. If you still go on doing wickedly, you will go from darkness to darkness. But now that you have seen me you will find it impossible to do wickedly. Taking the life of living creatures causes birth, as an animal, in the world of Petas, or in the body of an Asura, or, if one is reborn as a man, it makes his life short." With this and the like monition he told him the disadvantage of the five kinds of wickedness, and the profit of the five kinds of virtue, and frightened the Demon in various ways, discoursing to him until he subdued him and made him self-denying, and established him in the five kinds of virtue; he made him worship the deity to whom offerings were made in that wood; and having carefully admonished him, departed out of it. At the entrance of the forest he told all to the people thereabout; and went on to Benares, armed with his five weapons. Afterwards he became king, and ruled righteously; and after giving alms and doing good he passed away according to his deeds. And the Teacher, when this tale was ended, became perfectly enlightened, and repeated this verse: Whose mind and heart from all desire is free, Who seeks for peace by living virtuously, He in due time will sever all the bonds That bind him fast to life, and cease to be. Thus the Teacher reached the summit, through sainthood and the teaching of the law, and thereupon he declared the Four Truths. At the end of the declaring of the Truths, this Brother also attained to sainthood. Then the Teacher made the connection, and gave the key to the birth-tale, saying: "At that time Angulimala was the Demon, but the Prince of the Five Weapons was I myself." Source: Joseph Jacobs Indian Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1892), pp. 194-98 . Return to the table of contents . The Jackal and the Chickens India Once upon a time a jackal and a hen were great friends and regarded each other as brother and sister; and they agreed to have a feast to celebrate their friendship; so they both brewed rice beer and they first drank at the jackal's house and then went to the hen's house; and there they drank so much that the hen got blind drunk, and while she lay intoxicated the jackal ate her up. The jackal found the flesh so nice that he made up his mind to eat the hen's chickens too; so the next day he went to their house and found them all crying "Cheep, cheep," and he asked what was the matter; they said that they had lost their mother; he told them to cheer up and asked where they slept; they told him, "on the shelf in the wall." Then he went away; but the chickens saw that he meant to come and eat them at night, so they did not go to sleep on the shelf but filled it with razors and knives and when the jackal came at night and felt about the shelf he got badly cut and ran away screaming. But a few day later he paid another visit to the chickens, and condoled with them on the loss of their mother and again asked where they slept, and they told him, "in the fireplace." Directly the jackal was gone, they filled the stove with live embers and covered them up with ashes; and went to sleep themselves inside a drum. At night the jackal came and put his paws into the fireplace; but he only scraped the hot embers up against his belly and got burnt; this made him scream and the chickens burst out laughing. The jackal heard them and said, "You have got me burnt; now I am going to eat you." They said, "Yes, uncle, but please eat us outside the house; you did not eat our mother in her own house; take us to yonder flat rock." So the jackal took up the drum but when he got to the rock he accidentally let it fall and it broke and the chickens ran away in all directions; but the chicken that had been at the bottom of the drum had got covered with the droppings of the others and could not fly away; so the jackal thought, "Well it is the will of heaven that I should have only one chicken; it is doubtless for the best!" The chicken said to the jackal, "I see that you will eat me, but you cannot eat me in this state; wash me clean first." So the jackal took the chicken to a pool and washed it; then the chicken asked to be allowed to get a little dry; but the jackal said that if it got dry it would fly away. "Then," said the chicken, "rub me dry with your snout and I will myself tell you when I am ready to be eaten;" so the jackal rubbed it dry and then proceeded to eat it; but directly the jackal got it in his mouth it voided there, so the jackal spat it out and it flew away. The jackal thought that it had gone into a hole in a white ant-hill, but really it had hidden elsewhere; however the jackal felt for it in the hole and then tried in vain to scrape the hole larger; as he could not get into the hole he determined to sit and wait till hunger or suffocation forced the chicken to come out. So he sat and watched, and he sat so long that the white ants ate off his hind quarters; at last he gave up and went off to the rice fields to look for fish and crabs. There he saw an old woman catching fish, and he asked to be allowed to help her. So the old woman sat on the bank and the jackal jumped and twisted about in the water and presently he caught a potha fish which he ate; but as the jackal had no hind quarters the fish passed through him none the worse. Soon the jackal caught the same fish over again, and he laughed at the old woman because she had caught none. She told him that he was catching the same fish over and over again, and when he would not believe her she told him to mark with a thorn the next one which he caught; he did so and then found that he really was catching and eating the same fish over and over again. At this he was much upset and asked what he should do. The old woman advised him to go to a cobbler and get patched up; so he went and killed a fowl and took it to a cobbler and offered it to him if he would put him to rights; so the cobbler sewed on a leather patch with a long leather tail which rapped on the ground as the jackal went along. Then the jackal went to a village to steal fowls and he danced along with his tail tapping, and sang: Now the Moghul cavalry are coming And the Koenda Rajas. Run away or they will utterly destroy you. And when the villagers heard this they all ran away and the jackal entered the village and killed as many fowls as he wanted. A few days later he went again to the village and frightened away the villagers as before; but one old woman was too feeble to run away and she hid in a pigsty, and one fowl that the jackal chased, ran into this sty and the jackal followed it, and when he saw the old woman, he told her to catch the fowl for him or he would knock her teeth out; but she told him to catch it himself; so he caught and ate it. Then he said to the old woman. Say "Toyo" (jackal) and she said "Toyo"; then he took a curry pounder and knocked all her teeth out and told her again to say "Toyo"; but as she had no teeth she said "Hoyo." This amused the jackal immensely and he went away laughing. When the villagers returned, the old woman told them that it was only a jackal who had attacked the village, so they decided to kill him; but one man said "You won't be able to catch him; let us make an image of this old woman and cover it with birdlime and set it up at the end of the village street; he will stop and abuse her, and we shall know where he is." So they did this, and the next morning, when the jackal came singing along the road, they hid inside their houses. When the jackal reached the village, he saw the figure of the old woman with its arms stretched out, and he said to it, "What are you blocking my road for? get out of the way; I knocked your teeth out yesterday: aren't you afraid? Get out of the way or I will kick you out." As the figure did not move he gave it a kick and his leg was caught in the birdlime. Then he said, "Let me go, you old hag, or I will give you a slap." Then he gave it a slap and his front paw was stuck fast; then he slapped at it with his other paw and that stuck. Then he tried to bite the figure and his jaws got caught also; and when he was thus helpless the villagers came out and beat him to death and that was the end of the jackal. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 112, pp. 322-25 . Return to the table of contents . The Farmer, the Crocodile, and the Jackal Pakistan There was once a wily old crocodile who dwelt in a tank [pond] hard by a village, and he was sometimes so ferocious that he would seize children who used to go for water there, then drown and eat them. He had become, in fact, the terror of the place. One year there was a very great drought, and the tank by degrees began to dry up, and at last it got quite dry, and the crocodile was to be seen grilling and roasting in the sun. He used to call out to the passers-by, "Oh! pray take pity upon me and show me where I can go for water, for I am dying in this heat." "No, indeed! they all said. "We are glad to see you suffering, for have you not often made us suffer by taking our goats, and sometimes even our children? We shall not help you in any way." At last an old man passed by, and the crocodile appealed to him, and at first he replied as the others did, but afterwards he relented and said, "Well, if you will follow me I will take you to a tank which is never dry." So the crocodile followed him, and he showed him a tank no great distance off, which was filled with water. The old man went first into the tank himself, and calling to the crocodile, he said, "See here, how deep it is!" No sooner had the crocodile had a good drink, than he made a grab at the old man's leg. "Ah-ho! Ah-ho!" said the old man. "What are you doing?" "Well," replied the crocodile, "I have had a good drink, thanks to you, and as I have had no food for many days, I am going to make a meal of you. That is what I am going to do." "You wretched and ungrateful brute!" said the old man. "Is this the way you reward me?" At that moment a jackal hove in sight, coming for a drink (the jackals, we know, are the most cunning of all animals), and the old man said, "I will put my case before him, and if he says you are to eat me, very good, so you shall." The old man then beckoned to the jackal to come close up to the tank, and told him all the facts of the case. The jackal said, "You know I am always a just judge, and if you want me to decide, you must show me the place from whence you brought the crocodile." So they all three wended their way back to the tank near the village, and the jackal said, "Show me the exact spot where you first found the crocodile," and when they got there the jackal said, "Now I am going to give you my judgment, so prepare to listen." Then turning to the old man, he said quietly, "You silly old idiot! What made you ever help a crocodile? Now, you run one way, and I will run the other." The jackal gave a skip, and was soon off out of sight, and the old man took to his heels also, and soon got away. The wily old crocodile, now balked of his prey, said to himself, "I know my way back to that water tank, and I will someday have my revenge on that jackal, for he is sure to come there to lap water." So back he went, and as there were many trees near the tank, some of whose roots went beneath the water, the crocodile lay in ambush there. By and by the jackal came to drink water, and the crocodile made a sudden snap at his leg, and held it. "Oh, you foolish crocodile!" the jackal said, "you think you have got hold of my leg, do you? But it is only the root of a tree." Hearing this, the crocodile released his hold, and the jackal jumped off in high glee out of his reach. The crocodile then determined that he would try some other plan of entrapping him. So, as there were great numbers of a small fruit falling from one of the trees, which he knew the jackal came to eat, he one night piled up a heap and hid himself beneath it, leaving only his eyes uncovered. Presently the jackal came prowling along, and noticing the pile of fruit he felt inclined to partake of some, but he drew near very cautiously, and in a moment he caught sight of the two eyes of the crocodile glistening in the moonlight, when he called out, "Oh, I see you!" and scampered off. After this, the crocodile saw that it was no use to try himself to catch the jackal, "for," said he, "he is too cunning for me. I must employ someone who comes to get water here." So one day he saw a farmer, and said to him, "If you will catch a jackal for me, I will make you a rich man, for I will give you several jewels which people have dropped in this tank for years and years, and they are lying here at the bottom." "Oh!" replied the farmer, "that is easily done." So that very night he went into the jungle and lay down as if dead. Presently the jackal made his appearance, and smelling along he came close up to the body. Then he hesitated and said, "I wonder if this is really a dead body or not." He then called out audibly, "If it is really dead it will shake its leg, and if it is alive it won't do so." This he said so quickly and so artfully that the farmer was taken aback, and to make him believe he was dead he at once stupidly shook his leg, and off skipped the jackal, saying, "I caught you there," and was lost to view in an instant. The farmer, who was very avaricious, and wanted the jewels badly, made up his mind that he would by hook or by crook make sure of the jackal on the next occasion. So this time he prepared of the softest wax a doll the size of a child, and digging a small grave and covering it over with leaves and mud, he waited in hiding to see the result. Shortly after sunset the jackal began to prowl about as usual, and coming on the new grave he said to himself, "Ah! This is someone lately buried. I will try my luck here." He then began to scratch with his paw, and presently one paw got caught in the wax, and in trying to get that away, all four became stuck with the wax, when in a moment out came the farmer from his hiding place and said, "Ah! At last I have got you, and you are my prisoner!" The jackal yelled and howled, and endeavored to escape, but was hindered by the wax on his feet. So then he took to frightening the farmer, and said, "If you do not get me out of this scrape I will call all the jackals in a moment of time, and they will destroy you forever, for do you not know that I am the king of the jackals?" "What am I to do?" asked the farmer. "Go!" he said. "Go and get some oil, and rub it all over me. Then get a fowl, and tie it about fifty yards away, and bring two men with hatchets to stand over me, so that if I attempt to get away they may chop me to pieces!" This being done by the farmer, the jackal while being held in his hands sought his opportunity, and being well greased all over, he made a violent spring and so got clear of the farmer. Then he dashed between the legs of the men with hatchets, when they made a plunge at him, but they only succeeded in hurting their own legs. So the jackal got finally off, and picking up the fowl, he was soon lost to view, and so won the day. Source: J. F. A. McNair and Thomas Lambert Barlow Oral Tradition from the Indus (Brighton: Cranbourne Printing Works, 1908), pp. 54-60. Return to the table of contents . King Robin Spain/Portugal There was once a little boy called Sigli, who, I am sorry to say, took great pleasure in catching and killing little birds. His father was a notorious robber, so it was not surprising that Sigli gave way to acts of cruelty. His mother died when he was little more than a year old, and he did not know any other relation. In the north of Portugal, bands of robbers used to frequent the roads, and some of them lived in strong castles, and had a large retinue of followers. In time of war these robber-chiefs would side with the king's party, because after the war was over they received large grants of land for the assistance they had rendered the sovereign. Sometimes when the neighboring kings of Spain invaded Portugal, these robbers proved of great advantage in repelling the invaders; but in following up their victories they would despoil all the churches in the enemy's country of the gold and silver idols, which the priests had caused to be made in order to get the ignorant peasantry to make offerings of money, corn, and oil, in exchange for which the priests, in the name of the idols, offered all those who gave, pardon of their sins. Now, Sigli's father had on many occasions robbed gold and silver idols, and had murdered a few brethren of the Holy Inquisition, who, in their turn, were well known for the wicked deeds they had committed, such as burning Christian men and women who did not, and could not, profess the popish faith. But in course of time the Jesuits, for so they were called, made common cause against these robbers, and either put them to death, or obliged them to leave off robbing churches and take to cheating the peasantry. Sigli, as I said before, was a very cruel boy, and he was the terror of all the birds and beasts. He would lay traps for them, and when he had caught them he would take pleasure in tormenting them, which clearly proved that he was not a Christian, nor possessed of any refinement. But he took more pleasure in catching robin-redbreasts than in anything else, and for this purpose he used bird-lime. He had caught and killed so many that at last King Robin of Birdland issued invitations to all his feathered subjects and to the beasts of the field, asking them to a meeting at which they might discuss the best means of putting Sigli to death, or punishing him in some other way, for the cruelty of which he was guilty towards them. Among the many who accepted the invitation was an old fox, the first of the Reynards, and when it came to his turn to speak, he said that as Sigli was so fond of catching redbreasts with bird-lime, he (Mr. Reynard) would propose catching Sigli in the same manner; and when caught they might discuss how they should punish him, either by pecking and biting him, or by getting the wolves to eat him. In order to carry out this idea, he suggested that the monkeys should be asked to prepare the bird-lime, which they might use with safety by oiling their hands, and then gradually make a man of bird-lime close to the robber chief's castle. Sigli would probably take it for some poor man, and hit it, and then he would not be able to get away. This idea was accepted by all in general, and by Mrs. Queen Bee in particular, who owed Sigli and his father a grudge for destroying her hive; and the monkeys cheerfully set to work, while King Robin watched the putting together of the figure, and was very useful in giving it most of the artistic merit it possessed when finished. The making took one whole night, and next morning, almost opposite the castle, stood the bird-lime figure about the size of a man. Sigli, seeing it from his dressing-room window, and taking it for a beggar, was so enraged that he ran out without his shoes and stockings, and, without waiting to look at the man, he struck at him with his right hand so that it stuck firmly to the figure. "Let go," he cried, "or I will kick you!" And as the figure did not let go he kicked it, so that his foot was glued. "Let go my foot," he cried out, "or I will kick you with the other;" and, doing so, both his legs were glued to it. Then he knocked up against the figure, and the more he did so the more firmly he was glued. Then his father, hearing his cries, rushed out, and said: "Oh, you bad man! I will squeeze you to death for hurting my dear Sigli!" No sooner said than done, and the robber chief was glued on to the bird-lime figure. The screams of the two attracted the attention of the servants, who, seeing their robber master, as they thought, murdering his little boy, ran away and never came back again. King Robin was now master of the situation, and he directed ten thousand bees under General Bumble, and another ten thousand wasps under Colonel Hornet, to fall on the robber and cruel Sigli and sting them to death. But this was hardly necessary, as the wriggling of their bodies so fixed them to the figure that they died of suffocation. Then King Robin ordered the wolves to dig a large grave, into which the monkeys rolled Sigli, his father, and the bird-lime figure; and after covering it up, they all took charge of the castle, and lived there for many years undisturbed, acknowledging King Robin as their king; and if the Jesuits did not turn them out, I am certain they are still there. Source: Charles Sellers, Tales from the Lands of Nuts and Grapes: Spanish and Portuguese Folklore (London: Field and Tuer; Simpkin, Marshall and Company, 1888), pp. 112-16 . Return to the table of contents . The Monkey and Juan Puson Tambi-Tambi Philippines Tiring-Tirang was a barrio in the town of Tang-Tang, situated at the foot of a hill which was called "La Campana" because of its shape. Around the hill, about a mile from the barrio, flowed the Malogo River, in which the people of the town used to bathe. It so happened that one time an epidemic broke out in the community, killing off all the inhabitants except one couple. This couple had an only son named Juan Pusong Tambi-Tambi. When Juan had reached his twelfth year, his father died; consequently the boy had to go to work to earn money for the support of himself and his mother. At first Juan followed the occupation of his father, that of fisherman; but, seeing that he made little money from this, he decided to become a farmer. His mother had now reached the age of seventy(!), and was often sick. Juan frequently had to neglect his farm in order to take care of her. One day Juan went to Pit-Pit to buy medicine for his mother. On his way to the town he saw a flock of crows eating up his corn. He paid no attention to the birds; but on his way back, when he saw these same birds still eating his corn, he became angry. He picked up a stone about the size of his fist, and crept into a bush near by. He had hardly hidden himself when the birds heard a rustling, and began to fly off. Juan jumped up, and hurled his stone with such accuracy and force that one of the crows fell dead to the ground. He tied the dead crow to a bamboo pole, and planted it in the middle of his corn field. No sooner was he out of sight than the crows flew back to the field again; but when they saw their dead companion, they flew off, and never troubled Juan again. For six months Juan had no trouble from birds. He did not know, however, that not far from his field there was a monkey ( chongo ) living in a large tree. This monkey used to come to his field every day and steal two or three ears of corn. One day, as Juan was walking across his field, he saw many dead cornstalks. He said to himself, "I wonder who it is that comes here and steals my corn! I am no longer troubled by birds; and yet I find here many husks." He went home and made an image of a crooked old man like himself. This he covered with sticky wax. He placed it in the middle of the field. The next morning, when the sun was shining very brightly, the monkey felt hungry, so he ran towards the field to steal some corn to eat. There he saw the statue. Thinking that it was Juan, he decided to ask permission before he took any corn. "Good-morning, Juan!" said the monkey in a courteous tone; but the image made no reply. "You are too proud to bend your neck, Juan," continued the monkey. "I have only come to ask you for three or four ears of corn. I have not eaten since yesterday, you know; and if you deny me this request, I shall die before morning." The waxen statue still stood motionless. "Do you hear me, Juan?" said the monkey impatiently. Still the statue made no reply. "Since you are too proud to answer me, I will soon give you some presents. Look out!" he cried, and with his right paw he slapped the statue which he thought was Juan; but his paw stuck to the wax, and he could not get free. "Let my hand loose!" the monkey shouted, "or you will get another present." Then he slapped the statue with his left paw, and, as before, stuck fast. "You are foolish, Juan. If you do not let me go this very moment, I'll kick you." He did so, first with one foot, and then with the other. At last he could no longer move, and he began to curse the statue. Juan, who had been hiding in a bush near by, now presented himself, and said to the monkey, "Now I have caught you, you thief!" He would have killed the monkey at once, had not the monkey begged for mercy, and promised that he would at some future time repay him for his kindness if he would only spare his life. So Juan set the monkey free. Source: Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 48a, pp. 326-27 . The story continues in the tradtion of a type 545B folktale ("Puss in Boots"), with the monkey enabling his benefactor Juan to become the ruler of two kingdoms. Note by Fansler: Narrated by Encarnacion Gonzaga, a Visayan from Jaro, Iloilo. She says that she has often heard this story; that it was very popular among the "inhabitants of yesterday," and that even now many are fond of it. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 21, 2018. Tatterhood Tatterhood Norway Once upon a time there was a king and a queen who had no children, and that made the queen very sad. She seldom had a happy hour. She was always crying and complaining, and saying how dull and lonesome it was in the palace. "If we had children there would be life enough," she said. Wherever she went in all her realm she found God's blessing in children, even in the poorest hut. And wherever she went she heard women scolding their children, and saying how they had done this and that wrong. The queen heard all this, and thought it would be so nice to do as other women did. At last the king and queen took into their palace an adopted girl to raise, that they might always have her with them, to love her if she did well, and scold her if she did wrong, like their own child. One day the little girl whom they had taken as their own, ran down into the palace yard, and was playing with a golden apple. Just then an old beggar woman came by, who had a little girl with her, and it wasn't long before the little girl and the beggar's child were great friends, and began to play together, and to toss the golden apple about between them. When the queen saw this, as she sat at a window in the palace, she tapped on the pane for her foster daughter to come up. She went at once, but the beggar girl went up too; and as they went into the queen's apartment, each held the other by the hand. Then the queen began to scold the little lady, and to say, "You ought to be above running about and playing with a tattered beggar's brat." And she started to drive the girl down the stairs. "If the queen only knew my mother's power, she'd not drive me out," said the little girl; and when the queen asked what she meant more plainly, she told her how her mother could get her children if she chose. The queen wouldn't believe it, but the girl insisted, and said that every word of it was true, and asked the queen only to try and make her mother do it. So the queen sent the girl down to fetch up her mother. "Do you know what your daughter says?" asked the queen of the old woman, as soon as ever she came into the room. No, the beggar woman knew nothing about it. "Well, she says you can get me children if you will," answered the queen. "Queens shouldn't listen to beggar girls' silly stories," said the old woman, and walked out of the room. Then the queen got angry, and wanted again to drive out the little girl; but she declared it was true every word that she had said. "Let the queen only give my mother something to drink," said the girl; "when she gets tipsy she'll soon find out a way to help you." The queen was ready to try this; so the beggar woman was fetched up again, and treated with as much wine and mead as she wanted; and so it was not long before her tongue began to wag. Then the queen came out again with the same question she had asked before. "Perhaps I know one way to help you," said the beggar woman. "Your majesty must make them bring in two pails of water some evening before you go to bed. Wash yourself in each of them, and afterwards throw the water under your bed. When you look under your bed the next morning, two flowers will have sprung up, a beautiful one and an ugly one. Eat the beautiful one but leave the ugly alone. Be careful not to forget this last bit of advice." That was what the beggar woman said. Yes, the queen did what the beggar woman advised her to do; she had the water brought up in two pails, washed herself in them, and emptied them under the bed; and when she looked under the bed the next morning, there stood two flowers; one was ugly and foul, and had black leaves; but the other was so bright, and fair, and lovely, she had never seen anything like it, so she ate it up at once. But the pretty flower tasted so sweet, that she couldn't help herself. She ate the other one too, for, she thought, "I'm sure that it can't hurt or help me much either way." Well, sure enough, after a while the queen was brought to bed. First of all, she had a girl who had a wooden spoon in her hand, and rode upon a goat. She was disgusting and ugly, and the very moment she came into the world she bawled out "Mamma." "If I'm your mamma," said the queen, "God give me grace to mend my ways." "Oh, don't be sorry," said the girl on the goat, "for one will soon come after me who is better looking." After a while, the queen had another girl, who was so beautiful and sweet that no one had ever set eyes on such a lovely child. You may be sure that the queen was very well pleased. The elder twin they called "Tatterhood," because she was always so ugly and ragged, and because she had a hood which hung about her ears in tatters. The queen could hardly bear to look at her. The nurses tried to shut her up in a room by herself, but it did no good. She always had to be where the younger twin was, and no one could ever keep them apart. One Christmas eve, when they were half grown up, there arose a frightful noise and clatter in the hallway outside the queen's apartment. Tatterhood asked what it was that was making such a noise outside. "Oh," said the queen, "it isn't worth asking about." But Tatterhood wouldn't give in until she found out all about it; and so the queen told her it was a pack of trolls and witches who had come there to celebrate Christmas. So Tatterhood said that she would just go out and drive them away. In spite of all they could say, and however much they begged and asked her to leave the trolls alone, she just had to go out and drive the witches off. She begged the queen to be careful and keep all the doors shut tight, so that not one of them would open the least bit. Having said this, off she went with her wooden spoon, and began to hunt out and drive away the hags. All the while there was such a commotion out in the gallery that the like of it had never before been heard. The whole palace creaked and groaned as if every joint and beam were going to be torn out of its place. Now I can't say exactly what happened; but somehow or other one door did open a little bit, and her twin sister just peeped out to see how things were going with Tatterhood, and put her head a tiny bit through the opening. But, pop! up came an old witch, and whipped off her head, and stuck a calf's head on her shoulders instead; and so the princess ran back into the room on all fours, and began to "moo" like a calf. When Tatterhood came back and saw her sister, she scolded them all, and was very angry because they hadn't kept better watch, and asked them what they thought of their carelessness now that her sister had been turned into a calf. "But I'll see if I can't set her free," she said. Then she asked the king for a ship with a full set of sails and good load of stores, but she would not have a captain or any sailors. No; she would sail away with her sister all alone. There was no holding her back, and at last they let her have her own way. Tatterhood sailed off, and steered her ship right up to the land where the witches lived. When she came to the landing place, she told her sister to stay quite still on board the ship; but she herself rode on her goat up to the witches' castle. When she got there, one of the windows in the gallery was open, and there she saw her sister's head hung up on the window frame; so she jumped her goat through the window into the gallery, snapped up the head, and set off with it. The witches came after her to try to get the head back. They flocked around her as thick as a swarm of bees or a nest of ants. The goat snorted and puffed, and butted with his horns, and Tatterhood beat and banged them about with her wooden spoon; and so the pack of witches had to give up. So Tatterhood got back to her ship, took the calf's head off her sister, and put her own on again, and then she became a girl as she had been before. After that she sailed a long, long way, to a strange king's realm. Now the king of this land was a widower, and had an only son. When he saw the strange sail, he sent messengers down to the beach to find out where it came from, and who owned it; but when the king's men came down there, the only person they saw on board was Tatterhood, and there she was, riding around and around the deck on her goat at full speed, until her strands of hair streamed in the wind. The men from the palace were all amazed at this sight, and asked if more people were not on board. Yes, there were; she had a sister with her, said Tatterhood. They wanted to see too, but Tatterhood said no. "No one shall see her, unless the king comes himself," she said; and so she began to gallop about on her goat until the deck thundered again. When the servants got back to the palace, and told what they had seen and heard down at the ship, the king wanted to set out at once to see the girl that rode on the goat. When he arrived there, Tatterhood brought out her sister, and she was so beautiful and gentle that the king immediately fell head over heels in love with her. He brought them both back with him to the palace, and wanted to have the sister for his queen; but Tatterhood said "No," the king couldn't have her in any way, unless the king's son would take Tatterhood. That, as you may guess, the prince did not want to do at all, because Tatterhood was such an ugly hussy. However, at last the king and all the others in the palace talked him into it, and he gave in, promising to take her for his queen; but it went sore against his grain, and he was a very sad man. Now they began making preparations for the wedding, both with brewing and baking; and when all was ready, they went to church. The prince thought it the worst church service he had ever been to in all his life. The king left first with his bride, and she was so lovely and so grand, all the people stopped to look at her along the road, and they stared at her until she was out of sight. After them came the prince on horseback by the side of Tatterhood, who trotted along on her goat with her wooden spoon in her fist. To look at him, he was not going to a wedding, but to a burial, and his own at that. He seemed so sad, and did not speak a word. "Why don't you talk?" asked Tatterhood, when they had ridden a bit. "Why, what should I talk about?" answered the prince. "Well, you might at least ask me why I ride upon this ugly goat," said Tatterhood. "Why do you ride on that ugly goat?" asked the prince. "Is it an ugly goat? Why, it's the most beautiful horse that a bride ever rode," answered Tatterhood; and in an instant the goat became a horse, the finest that the prince had ever seen. They rode on a bit further, but the prince was just as sad as before, and couldn't say a word. So Tatterhood asked him again why he didn't talk, and when the prince answered, he didn't know what to talk about, she said, "Well, you can ask me why I ride with this ugly spoon in my fist." "Why do you ride with that ugly spoon?" asked the prince. "Is it an ugly spoon? Why, it's the loveliest silver fan that a bride ever carried," said Tatterhood; and in an instant it became a silver fan, so bright that it glistened. They rode a little way further, but the prince was still just as sad, and did not say a word. In a little while Tatterhood asked him again why he didn't talk, and told him to ask why she wore the ugly gray hood on her head. "Why do you wear that ugly gray hood on your head?" asked the prince. "Is it an ugly hood? Why, it's the brightest golden crown that a bride ever wore," answered Tatterhood, and it became a crown at once. Now they rode a long way further, and the prince was so sad, that he sat without making a sound or uttering a word, just as before. So his bride asked him again why he didn't talk, and told him to ask now why her face was so ugly and gray? "Yes," asked the prince, "why is your face so ugly and gray?" "Am I ugly? You think my sister beautiful, but I am ten times more beautiful," said the bride, and when the prince looked at her, she was so beautiful, he thought that she was the most beautiful woman in the world. After that it was no wonder that the prince found his tongue, and no longer rode along with his head hanging down. So they drank the bridal cup both deep and long, and, after that, both prince and king set out with their brides to the princesses' palace, and there they had another bridal feast, and drank once more, both deep and long. There was no end to the celebration. Now run quickly to the king's palace, and there will still be a drop of the bridal ale left for you. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Lurvehette , Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiania [Oslo], 1842-1852), translated by George Webb Dasent (1859). Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman . © 2001. Aarne-Thompson type 711, The Beautiful and the Ugly Twin . Related links Ricky of the Tuft by Charles Perrault, another tale of type 711. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised October 29, 2003. Thangbrand the Priest Goes to Iceland Thangbrand the Priest Goes to Iceland When King Olaf Trygvason had been two years king of Norway (A.D. 997), there was a Saxon priest in his house who was called Thangbrand, a passionate, ungovernable man, and a great man-slayer; but he was a good scholar, and a clever man. The king would not have him in his house upon account of his misdeeds; but gave him the errand to go to Iceland, and bring that land to the Christian faith. The king gave him a merchant vessel: and, as far as we know of this voyage of his, he landed first in Iceland at Austfjord in the southern Alptfjord, and passed the winter in the house of Hal of Sida. Thangbrand proclaimed Christianity in Iceland, and on his persuasion Hal and all his house people, and many other chiefs, allowed themselves to be baptized; but there were many more who spoke against it. Thorvald Veile and Veterlide the skald composed a satire about Thangbrand; but he killed them both outright. Thangbrand was two years in Iceland, and was the death of three men before he left it. Source: Snorri Sturluson, King Olaf Trygvason's Saga , part II, section 80. Click here for the entire text of the Heimskringla, the larger work from which this piece is taken. The conversion of Iceland to Christianity is described in substantial detail in Njal's Saga, chapters 100-105. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow composed a ballad describing the mission to Iceland of Thangbrand the Priest. Return to D. L. Ashliman's Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts Germanic Myths, Legends, and Sagas Revised March 10, 1997. Thor and the Midgard Serpent THOR and the MIDGARD SERPENT Edited by D. L. Ashliman. @copy; 1997. The picture on the left depicts the Midgard Serpant preparing to take Thor's bait, the head of Hymir's ox Sky-Bellower. This illustration is from a seventeenth-century Icelandic manuscript, currently housed at Det Arnamagnaenske Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark. The picture on the right is a detail from a runestone or picture stone at Altuna, Uppland, Sweden. Thor, hammer in hand and with his feet protruding from a boat, has captured the Midgard Serpent, whose body winds about the bottom of the carving. Click here to see the entire stone. Return to: Germanic Myths, Legends, and Sagas D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Thor's Home Page . From The Prose Edda of Snorri Sturlason Thor went out of Asgard disguised as a youth and came in the evening to a giant called Hymir. Thor stayed there that night. At daybreak Hymir got up and dressed and prepared to go sea-fishing in a rowboat. Thor sprang up and asked Hymir to let him go rowing with him. Hymir said that he would not be much help, as he was such a scrap of a young fellow: "You'll catch cold if I sit as long and as far out to sea as I usually do." Thor, however, said he would be able to row a long way out from the shore, and that it wasn't certain that he would be the first to demand to be rowed back. He became so angry with the giant that he was ready to set the hammer ringing on his head. He controlled himself, however, as he intended to try his strength in another place. He asked Hymir what they were to take as bait, but Hymir told him to get his own. Then Thor turned away to where he saw a herd of oxen belonging to Hymir. He selected the biggest ox, one called Sky-Bellower, and struck off its head. Thor took the ox-head on board, sat down in the stern, and rowed. Hymir thought they made rapid progress from his rowing. Hymir sat in the bow, and together they rowed until they came to the place where Hymir was accustomed to sit and catch flat fish. Thor said he wanted row much farther out, and they had another bout of fast rowing. Then Hymir said that they had come so far out that it would be dangerous to sit there on account of the Midgard Serpent. Thor, however, declared his intention of rowing for a bit yet, and did so, and Hymir was not at all pleased at that. When Thor shipped his oars, he made ready a very strong line and a large hook. He baited the hook with the ox-head and flung it overboard. The Midgard Serpent snapped at the ox-head, and the hook stuck fast in the roof of its mouth. It jerked away so hard that both Thor's fists knocked against the gunwale. Then Thor grew angry and, exerting all his divine strength, dug in his heels so hard that both legs went through the boat until he was digging his heels in on the sea bottom. He drew the serpent up on board, staring straight at it. The serpent glared back, belching poison. The giant Hymir turned pale with fear when he saw the serpent and the sea trembling in and out of the vessel too. At the very moment that Thor gripped his hammer and raised it aloft, the giant fumbled for his bait knife and cut Thor's line off at the gunwale. The serpent sank back into the sea. Thor flung his hammer after it and people say that this struck its head off in the waves; but the truth is that the Midgard Serpent is still alive and is lying in the ocean. Thor clenched his fist and gave Hymir a box on the ear so that he fell overboard head first, but Thor himself waded ashore. Source: Abstracted from The Prose Edda of Snorri Sturluson, translated by Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur (New York: American-Scandinavian Foundation, 1916), pp. 68-70 . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 23, 2013. Thor's Hammer in the Alps Thor's Hammer in the Alps Joh. Adolf Heyl Translated by D. L. Ashliman A "T" has been inscribed above the front door of several houses in Unterinn [in the South Tyrolian Alps] for protection against evils of all kinds, especially storms. Formerly this custom could be observed on nearly every house. (Is this symbol based on Thor's hammer?) Source: Joh. Adolf Heyl, Volkssagen, Bräuche und Meinungen aus Tirol (Brixen: Verlag der Buchhandlung des Kath.-polit. Pressvereins, 1897), p. 804. Additional keywords: Donar Donner thunder lightning Germanic Norse mythology folklore superstition Austria Italy Return to: The index of Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Thor's Home Page. Revised September 18, 1996. Three Billy Goats Gruff Three Billy Goats Gruff folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 122E translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000 Contents The Three Billy Goats Gruff (Norway). The Three Goats (Poland/Germany). How the Goats Came to Hessen (Germany). Related links . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Three Billy Goats Gruff Norway Once upon a time there were three billy goats, who were to go up to the hillside to make themselves fat, and the name of all three was "Gruff." On the way up was a bridge over a cascading stream they had to cross; and under the bridge lived a great ugly troll , with eyes as big as saucers, and a nose as long as a poker. So first of all came the youngest Billy Goat Gruff to cross the bridge. "Trip, trap, trip, trap! " went the bridge. "Who's that tripping over my bridge?" roared the troll . "Oh, it is only I, the tiniest Billy Goat Gruff , and I'm going up to the hillside to make myself fat," said the billy goat, with such a small voice. "Now, I'm coming to gobble you up," said the troll. "Oh, no! pray don't take me. I'm too little, that I am," said the billy goat. "Wait a bit till the second Billy Goat Gruff comes. He's much bigger." "Well, be off with you," said the troll. A little while after came the second Billy Goat Gruff to cross the bridge. Trip, trap, trip, trap, trip, trap, went the bridge. "Who's that tripping over my bridge?" roared the troll. "Oh, it's the second Billy Goat Gruff , and I'm going up to the hillside to make myself fat," said the billy goat, who hadn't such a small voice. "Now I'm coming to gobble you up," said the troll. "Oh, no! Don't take me. Wait a little till the big Billy Goat Gruff comes. He's much bigger." "Very well! Be off with you," said the troll. But just then up came the big Billy Goat Gruff . Trip, trap, trip, trap, trip, trap! went the bridge, for the billy goat was so heavy that the bridge creaked and groaned under him. "Who's that tramping over my bridge?" roared the troll. "It's I! The big Billy Goat Gruff ," said the billy goat, who had an ugly hoarse voice of his own. "Now I 'm coming to gobble you up," roared the troll. Well, come along! I've got two spears, And I'll poke your eyeballs out at your ears; I've got besides two curling-stones, And I'll crush you to bits, body and bones. That was what the big billy goat said. And then he flew at the troll, and poked his eyes out with his horns, and crushed him to bits, body and bones, and tossed him out into the cascade, and after that he went up to the hillside. There the billy goats got so fat they were scarcely able to walk home again. And if the fat hasn't fallen off them, why, they're still fat; and so, Snip, snap, snout. This tale's told out. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, De tre bukkene Bruse som skulle gå til seters og gjøre seg fete , Norske Folkeeventyr , translated by George Webbe Dasent in Popular Tales from the Norse , 2nd edition (London: George Routledge and Sons, n.d.), no. 37, pp. 275-276. Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Three Goats Poland/Germany Three goats went into a grove to eat leaves. The first had one little belly, the second had two little bellies, and the third had three little bellies. The one with one little belly was soon full and was the first to go home. But a wolf laid himself across the narrow mountain path and said, "Run! Run, or I'll eat you up!" The goat said, "Don't eat me up. I am very skinny, but a goat will soon come who has two little bellies. He will fill you up." And the wolf let him go. Then came the second goat, the one with two little bellies, and who was now full. The wolf said to him as well, "Run! Run, or I'll eat you up!" He said, "Don't eat me up. I am only half meat, but a goat will soon come who has three little bellies, and who will fill you up completely." And the wolf let him go as well. Then came the third goat, the one with three little bellies. He had finally gotten full. The wolf said to him, "Run! Run, or I'll eat you up!" This goat said nothing in return, but instead, brave and forward as he was, lowered his horns and gave the wolf such a blow that he fell from the cliff into the chasm below and broke his right leg. And there the poor rascal lay. He wanted the biggest and fattest mouthfull, but instead got nothing -- but pain. Source: Karl Haupt, "Die drei Ziegen," Sagenbuch der Lausitz , v. 2 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1863), no. 320, p. 222. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. The original text does not identify the goats' natural (as opposed to grammatical) gender. I have arbitrarily made them masculine. This fable is from Lusatia (German Lausitz , which historically was centred on the Neisse and upper Spree rivers, and contained a mixed Slavic and German population. The eastern part of Lusatia now belongs to Poland, the western part to Germany. Return to the table of contents . How the Goats Came to Hessen Germany In olden, olden times, the land of Hessen was surrounded by great forests which were inhabited by many wolves. Many a family of goats attempted to enter the land, but were torn apart by the bloodthirsty beasts. One day a weak little kid goat was making his way toward Hessen. He had hardly entered the forest before a wolf confronted him and wanted to tear him to pieces. Filled with fear, the little kid said, "My mother is coming too." The wolf thought, "Don't spoil your appetite. The mother will be a better meal for my hungry stomach." And he let the little animal pass in peace. Sure enough, soon afterward the mother goat appeared. The wolf was about to pounce on her, when she -- filled with fear -- said, "My husband is coming too." "Stop!" thought the wolf. "Her husband is larger and will be a better meal for you. Wait to eat until he comes." Finally the ram goat approached. The wolf's heart laughed inside his body when he saw the stately fellow. He was about to spring on him and grab him by the throat when two things caught his attention: the ram's spikes and his bag. "Tell me, ram," what are those big spikes on your head, and what is that bag for between your legs?" "Oh," replied the ram, "the spikes are a pair of pistols, and the bag is where I carry my powder and lead." In that moment, as such animals often do, the ram rubbed his left horn against his flank. The wolf thought that he was loading his pistol, and he took to flight. Thus the first family of goats arrived happily in the land of Hessen. Their descendents have multiplied so much that Hessen now provides the neighboring lands with its surplus every year. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, "Wie die Ziegen nach Hessen gekommen sind," Sagen Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen und einigen andern, besonders den angrenzenden Gegenden Norddeutschlands (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), v. 2, pp. 250-251. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Hessen (also called Hesse ) is in west-central Germany. This story is from the town of Hemer. Return to the table of contents . Related links Eat Me When I'm Fatter , folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 122F. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised Groundhog Day, 2000 Three Little Pigs and other Folktales of Type 124 Three Little Pigs and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 124 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2008 Contents The Story of the Three Little Pigs (England). The Three Little Pigs (England). The Fox and the Pixies (England). The Fox and the Geese (England). The Awful Fate of Mr. Wolf (African-American, Joel Chandler Harris). The Story of the Pigs (African-American, Joel Chandler Harris). How Come the Pigs Can See the Wind (North Carolina, USA). Little Pig and Wolf (Virginia, USA). The Three Goslings (Italy). Links to related tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Story of the Three Little Pigs England Once upon a time when pigs spoke rhyme And monkeys chewed tobacco, And hens took snuff to make them tough, And ducks went quack, quack, quack, O! There was an old sow with three little pigs, and as she had not enough to keep them, she sent them out to seek their fortune. The first that went off met a man with a bundle of straw, and said to him, "Please, man, give me that straw to build me a house." Which the man did, and the little pig built a house with it. Presently came along a wolf, and knocked at the door, and said, "Little pig, little pig, let me come in." To which the pig answered, "No, no, by the hair of my chiny chin chin." The wolf then answered to that, "Then I'll huff, and I'll puff, and I'll blow your house in." So he huffed, and he puffed, and he blew his house in, and ate up the little pig. The second little pig met a man with a bundle of furze [sticks], and said, "Please, man, give me that furze to build a house." Which the man did, and the pig built his house. Then along came the wolf, and said, "Little pig, little pig, let me come in." "No, no, by the hair of my chiny chin chin." "Then I'll puff, and I'll huff, and I'll blow your house in." So he huffed, and he puffed, and he puffed, and he huffed, and at last he blew the house down, and he ate up the little pig. The third little pig met a man with a load of bricks, and said, "Please, man, give me those bricks to build a house with." So the man gave him the bricks, and he built his house with them. So the wolf came, as he did to the other little pigs, and said, "Little pig, little pig, let me come in." "No, no, by the hair of my chiny chin chin." "Then I'll huff, and I'll puff, and I'll blow your house in." Well, he huffed, and he puffed, and he huffed and he puffed, and he puffed and huffed; but he could not get the house down. When he found that he could not, with all his huffing and puffing, blow the house down, he said, "Little pig, I know where there is a nice field of turnips." "Where?" said the little pig. "Oh, in Mr. Smith's home field, and if you will be ready tomorrow morning I will call for you, and we will go together and get some for dinner." "Very well," said the little pig, "I will be ready. What time do you mean to go?" "Oh, at six o'clock." Well, the little pig got up at five, and got the turnips before the wolf came (which he did about six) and who said, "Little pig, are you ready?" The little pig said, "Ready! I have been and come back again, and got a nice potful for dinner." The wolf felt very angry at this, but thought that he would be up to the little pig somehow or other, so he said, "Little pig, I know where there is a nice apple tree." "Where?" said the pig. "Down at Merry Garden," replied the wolf, "and if you will not deceive me I will come for you, at five o'clock tomorrow and get some apples." Well, the little pig bustled up the next morning at four o'clock, and went off for the apples, hoping to get back before the wolf came; but he had further to go, and had to climb the tree, so that just as he was coming down from it, he saw the wolf coming, which, as you may suppose, frightened him very much. When the wolf came up he said, "Little pig, what! Are you here before me? Are they nice apples?" "Yes, very," said the little pig. "I will throw you down one." And he threw it so far, that, while the wolf was gone to pick it up, the little pig jumped down and ran home. The next day the wolf came again, and said to the little pig, "Little pig, there is a fair at Shanklin this afternoon. Will you go?" "Oh yes," said the pig, "I will go. What time shall you be ready?" "At three," said the wolf. So the little pig went off before the time as usual, and got to the fair, and bought a butter churn, which he was going home with, when he saw the wolf coming. Then he could not tell what to do. So he got into the churn to hide, and by so doing turned it around, and it rolled down the hill with the pig in it, which frightened the wolf so much, that he ran home without going to the fair. He went to the pig's house, and told him how frightened he had been by a great round thing which came down the hill past him. Then the little pig said, "Ha, I frightened you, then. I had been to the fair and bought a butter churn, and when I saw you, I got into it, and rolled down the hill." Then the wolf was very angry indeed, and declared he would eat up the little pig, and that he would get down the chimney after him. When the little pig saw what he was about, he hung on the pot full of water, and made up a blazing fire, and, just as the wolf was coming down, took off the cover, and in fell the wolf; so the little pig put on the cover again in an instant, boiled him up, and ate him for supper, and lived happily ever afterwards. Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 14, pp. 68-72 . Jacobs' source: An earlier edition of James Orchard Halliwell, The Nursery Rhymes of England (London and New York: Frederick Warne and Company, 1886), pp. 37-41 . This author is also known by the name James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps. Return to the table of contents . The Three Little Pigs England There was once upon a time a pig who lived with her three children on a large, comfortable, old-fashioned farmyard. The eldest of the little pigs was called Browny, the second Whitey, and the youngest and best looking Blacky. Now Browny was a very dirty little pig, and, I am sorry to say, spent most of his time rolling and wallowing about in the mud. He was never so happy as on a wet day, when the mud in the farmyard got soft, and thick, and slab. Then he would steal away from his mother's side, and finding the muddiest place in the yard, would roll about in it and thoroughly enjoy himself. His mother often found fault with him for this, and would shake her head sadly and say, "Ah, Browny! Some day you will be sorry that you did not obey your old mother." But no words of advice or warning could cure Browny of his bad habits. Whitey was quite a clever little pig, but she was greedy. She was always thinking of her food, and looking forward to her dinner. And when the farm girl was seen carrying the pails across the yard, she would rise up on her hind legs and dance and caper with excitement. As soon as the food was poured into the trough she jostled Blacky and Browny out of the way in her eagerness to get the best and biggest bits for herself. Her mother often scolded her for her selfishness, and told her that someday she would suffer for being so greedy and grabbing. Blacky was a good, nice little pig, neither dirty nor greedy. He had nice dainty ways (for a pig), and his skin was always as smooth and shining as black satin. He was much cleverer than Browny and Whitey, and his mother's heart used to swell with pride when she heard the farmer's friends say to each other that someday the little black fellow would be a prize pig. Now the time came when the mother pig felt old and feeble and near her end. One day she called the three little pigs round her and said, "My children, I feel that I am growing old and weak, and that I shall not live long. Before I die I should like to build a house for each of you, as this dear old sty in which we have lived so happily will be given to a new family of pigs, and you will have to turn out. Now, Browny, what sort of a house would you like to have?" "A house of mud," replied Browny, looking longingly at a wet puddle in the corner of the yard. "And you, Whitey?" said the mother pig in rather a sad voice, for she was disappointed that Browny had made so foolish a choice. "A house of cabbage," answered Whitey, with a mouth full, and scarcely raising her snout out of the trough in which she was grubbing for some potato parings. "Foolish, foolish child!" said the mother pig, looking quite distressed. "And you, Blacky?" turning to her youngest son. "What sort of a house shall I order for you?" "A house of brick, please mother, as it will be warm in winter and cool in summer, and safe all the year round." "That is a sensible little pig," replied his mother, looking fondly at him. "I will see that the three houses are got ready at once. And now one last piece of advice. You have heard me talk of our old enemy the fox. When he hears that I am dead, he is sure to try and get hold of you, to carry you off to his den. He is very sly and will no doubt disguise himself, and pretend to be a friend, but you must promise me not to let him enter your houses on any pretext whatever." And the little pigs readily promised, for they had always had a great fear of the fox, of whom they had heard many terrible tales. A short time afterwards the old pig died, and the little pigs went to live in their own houses. Browny was quite delighted with his soft mud walls and with the clay floor, which soon looked like nothing but a big mud pie. But that was what Browny enjoyed, and he was as happy as possible, rolling about all day and making himself in such a mess. One day, as he was lying half asleep in the mud, he heard a soft knock at his door, and a gentle voice said, "May I come in, Master Browny? I want to see your beautiful new house." "Who are you?" said Browny, starting up in great fright, for though the voice sounded gentle, he felt sure it was a feigned voice, and he feared it was the fox. "I am a friend come to call on you," answered the voice. "No, no," replied Browny, "I don't believe you are a friend. You are the wicked fox, against whom our mother warned us. I won't let you in." "Oho! Is that the way you answer me?" said the fox, speaking very roughly in his natural voice. "We shall soon see who is master here," and with his paws he set to work and scraped a large hole in the soft mud walls. A moment later he had jumped through it, and catching Browny by the neck, flung him on his shoulders and trotted off with him to his den. The next day, as Whitey was munching a few leaves of cabbage out of the corner of her house, the fox stole up to her door, determined to carry her off to join her brother in his den. He began speaking to her in the same feigned gentle voice in which he had spoken to Browny. But it frightend her very much when he said, "I am a friend come to visit you, and to have some of your good cabbage for my dinner." "Please don't touch it," cried Whitey in great distress. "The cabbages are the walls of my house, and if you eat them you will make a hole, and the wind and rain will come in and give me a cold. Do go away. I am sure you are not a friend, but our wicked enemy the fox." And poor Whitey began to whine and to whimper, and to wish that she had not been such a greedy little pig, and had chosen a more solid material than cabbages for her house. But it was too late now, and in another minute the fox had eaten his way through the cabbage walls, and had caught the trembling, shivering Whitey and carried her off to his den. The next day the fox started off for Blacky's house, because he had made up his mind that he would get the three little pigs together in his den, and then kill them, and invite all his friends to a feast. But when he reached the brick house, he found that the door was bolted and barred, so in his sly manner he began, "Do let me in, dear Blacky. I have brought you a present of some eggs that I picked up in a farmyard on my way here." "No, no, Mister Fox," replied Blacky. "I am not gong to open my door to you. I know your cunning ways. You have carried off poor Browny and Whitey, but you are not going to get me." At this the fox was so angry that he dashed with all his force against the wall, and tried to knock it down. But it was too strong and well built. And though the fox scraped and tore at the bricks with his paws, he only hurt himself, and at last he had to give it up, and limp away with his forepaws all bleeding and sore. "Never mind!" he cried angrily as he went off. "I'll catch you another day, see if I don't, and won't I grind your bones to powder when I have got you in my den!" And he snarled fiercely and showed his teeth. Next day Blacky had to go into the neighboring town to do some marketing and to buy a big kettle. As he was walking home with it slung over his shoulder, he heard a sound of steps stealthily creeping after him. For a moment his heart stood still with fear, and then a happy thought came to him. He had just reached the top of a hill, and could see his own little house nestling at the foot of it among the trees. In a moment he had snatched the lid off the kettle and had jumped in himself. Coiling himself round, he lay quite snug in the bottom of the kettle, while with his foreleg he managed to put the lid on, so that he was entirely hidden. With a little kick from the inside, he started the kettle off, and down the hill it rolled full tilt. And when the fox came up, all that he saw was a large black kettle spinning over the ground at a great pace. Very much disappointed, he was just going to turn away, when he saw the kettle stop close to the little brick house, and a moment later, Blacky jumped out of it and escaped with the kettle into the housed, when he barred and bolted the door, and put the shutter up over the window. "Oho!" exclaimed the fox to himself. "You think you will escape me that way, do you? We shall soon see about that, my friend." And very quietly and stealthily he prowled round the house looking for some way to climb onto the roof. In the meantime Blacky had filled the kettle with water, and having put it on the fire, sat down quietly waiting for it to boil. Just as the kettle was beginning to sing, and steam to come out of the spout, he heard a sound like a soft, muffled step, patter, patter, patter overhead, and the next moment the fox's head and forepaws were seen coming down the chimney. But Blacky very wisely had not put the lid on the kettle, and, with a yelp of pain, the fox fell into the boiling water, and before he could escape, Blacky had popped the lid on, and the fox was scalded to death. As soon as he was sure that their wicked enemy was really dead, and could do them no further harm, Blacky started off to rescue Browny and Whitey. As he approached the den he heard piteous grunts and squeals from his poor little brother and sister who lived in constant terror of the fox killing and eating them. But when they saw Blacky appear at the entrance to the den, their joy knew no bounds. He quickly found a sharp stone and cut the cords by which they were tied to a stake in the ground, and then all three started off together for Blacky's house, where they lived happily ever after. And Browny quite gave up rolling in the mud, and Whitey ceased to be greedy, for they never forgot how nearly these faults had brought them to an untimely end. Source: Andrew Lang, The Green Fairy Book , 7th impression (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1906), pp. 100-105 . This book first appeared ca. 1892. Lang does not give his source, but this version appears to be a revision of the Halliwell story reproduced above, rewritten to meet the didactic expectations of Victorian England (and America). Return to the table of contents . The Fox and the Pixies England Another singular story is told on Dartmoor: There was once a fox, who, prowling by night in search of prey, came unexpectedly on a colony of pixies. Each pixy had a separate house. The first he came to was a wooden house. "Let me in, let me in," said the fox. "I won't," was the pixy's answer; "and the door is fastened." Upon this the fox climbed to the top of the house; and having pawed it down, made a meal of the unfortunate pixy. The next was a "stonen" house. "Let me in," said the fox. "The door is fastened," answered the pixy. Again was the house pulled down, and its inmate eaten. The third was an iron house. The fox again craved admittance, and was again refused. "But I bring you good news," said the fox. "No, no," replied the pixy; "I know what you want; you shall not come in here tonight." That house the fox in vain attempted to destroy. It was too strong for him, and he went away in despair. But he returned the next night, and exerted all his fox-like qualities in the hope of deceiving the pixy. For some time he tried in vain ; until at last he mentioned a tempting field of turnips in the neighborhood, to which he offered to conduct his intended victim. They agreed to meet the next morning at four o'clock. But the pixy outwitted the fox; for he found his way to the field, and returned laden with his turnips long before the fox was astir. The fox was greatly vexed, and was long unable to devise another scheme, until he bethought himself of a great fair about to be held a short way off, and proposed to the pixy that they should set off for it at three in the morning. The pixy agreed. But the fox was again outwitted; for he was only up in time to meet the pixy returning home with his fairings: a clock, a crock, and a frying pan. The pixy, who saw the fox coming, got into the crock and rolled himself down the hill ; and the fox, unable to find him, abandoned the scent and went his way. The fox returned the next morning; and finding the door open went in, when he caught the pixy in bed, put him into a box, and locked him in. "Let me out," said the pixy, " and I will tell you a wonderful secret." The fox was after a time persuaded to lift the cover; and the pixy, coming out, threw such a charm upon him that he was compelled to enter the box in his turn; and there at last he died. Source: English Forests and Forest Trees: Historical, Legendary, and Descriptive (London: Ingram, Cooke, and Company, 1853), pp. 189-90 . The anonymous author of this account does not give it a title. Katherine M. Briggs includes a version of this story in her A Dictionary of British Folk-Tales in the English Language , part A, vol. 2 (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1970), pp. 528-30. Return to the table of contents . The Fox and the Geese England There was once a Goose at the point of death, So she called her three daughters near, And desired them all, with her latest breath, Her last dying words to hear. "There's a Mr. Fox," said she, "that I know, Who lives in a covert hard by, To our race he has proved a deadly foe, So beware of his treachery." Build houses, ere long, of stone or of bricks, And get tiles for your roofs, I pray; For I know, of old, Mr. Reynard's tricks, And I fear he may come any day." Thus saying, she died, and her daughters fair, -- Gobble, Goosey, and Ganderee, -- Agreed together, that they would beware Of Mr. Fox, their enemy. But Gobble, the youngest, I grieve to say, Soon came to a very bad end, Because she preferred her own silly way, And would not to her mother attend. For she made, with some boards, an open nest, For a roof took the lid of a box; Then quietly laid herself down to rest, And thought she was safe from the Fox. But Reynard, in taking an evening run, Soon scented the goose near the pond; Thought he, " Now I'll have some supper and fun, For of both I am really fond." Then on to the box he sprang in a trice, And roused Mrs. Gobble from bed; She only had time to hiss once or twice Ere he snapped off her lily-white head. Her sisters at home felt anxious and low When poor Gobble did not appear, And Goosey, determined her fate to know, Went and sought all the field far and near. At last she descried poor Gobble's head, And some feathers not far apart, So she told Ganderee she had found her dead, And they both felt quite sad at heart. Now Goosey was pretty, but liked her own way, Like Gobble, and some other birds." 'Tis no matter," said she, "if I only obey A part of my mother's last words." So her house she soon built of nice red brick, But she only thatched it with straw; And she thought that, however the fox might kick, He could not get e'en a paw. So she went to sleep, and at dead of night She heard at the door a low scratch; And presently Reynard, with all his might, Attempted to jump on the thatch. But he tumbled back, and against the wall Grazed his nose in a fearful way, Then, almost mad with the pain of his fall, He barked, and ran slowly away. So Goosey laughed, and felt quite o'erjoyed To have thus escaped from all harm; But had she known how the Fox was employed, She would have felt dreadful alarm; For Gobble had been his last dainty meat, So hungry he really did feel, -- And resolved in his mind to accomplish this feat, And have the young goose for a meal. So he slyly lighted a bundle of straws, And made no more noise than a mouse, Then lifted himself up on his hind paws, And quickly set fire to the house. 'Twas soon in a blaze, and Goosey awoke, With fright almost ready to die, And, nearly smothered with heat and with smoke, Up the chimney was forced to fly. The Fox was rejoiced to witness her flight, And, heedless of all her sad groans, He chased her until he saw her alight, Then eat her up all but her bones. Poor Ganderee's heart was ready to break When the sad news reached her ear. "'Twas that villain the Fox," said good Mr. Drake, Who lived in a pond very near. "Now listen to me, I pray you," he said, "And roof your new house with some tiles, Or you, like your sisters, will soon be dead, -- A prey to your enemy's wiles." So she took the advice of her mother and friend, And made her house very secure, Then she said, -- "Now, whatever may be my end, The Fox cannot catch me, I'm sure." He called at her door the very next day, And loudly and long did he knock, But she said to him, -- "Leave my house, I pray, For the door I will not unlock; "For you've killed my sisters I know full well, And you wish that I too were dead." "Oh dear," said the Fox, " I can't really tell Who put such a thought in your head: "For I've always liked geese more than other birds, And you of your race I've loved best." But the Goose ne'er heeded his flattering words, So hungry he went to his rest. Next week she beheld him again appear, "Let me in very quick," he cried, "For the news I've to tell you'll be charmed to hear, And 'tis rude to keep me outside." But the Goose only opened one window-pane, And popped out her pretty red bill, Said she, "Your fair words are all in vain, But talk to me here if you will." "Tomorrow," he cried, " there will be a fair, All the birds and the beasts will go; So allow me, I pray, to escort you there, For you will be quite charmed I know." "Many thanks for your news," said Ganderee, "But I had rather not go with you; I care not for any gay sight to see," -- So the window she closed, and withdrew. In the morning, howe'er, her mind she changed, And she thought she would go to the fair; So her numerous feathers she nicely arranged, And cleaned her red bill with much care. She went, I believe, before it was light, For of Reynard she felt much fear; So quickly she thought she would see each sight, And return ere he should appear. When the Goose arrived she began to laugh At the wondrous creatures she saw; There were dancing bears, and a tall giraffe, And a beautiful red macaw. A monkey was weighing out apples and roots; An ostrich, too, sold by retail; There were bees and butterflies tasting the fruits, And a pig drinking out of a pail. Ganderee went into an elephant's shop, And quickly she bought a new churn; For, as it grew late, she feared to stop, As in safety she wished to return. Ere, however, she got about half the way, She saw approaching her foe; And now she hissed with fear and dismay, For she knew not which way to go. But at last of a capital plan she bethought, Of a place where she safely might hide; She got into the churn that she had just bought, And then fastened the lid inside. The churn was placed on the brow of a hill, And with Ganderee's weight down it rolled, Passing the Fox, who stood perfectly still, Quite alarmed, though he was very bold. For the Goose's wings flapped strangely about, And the noise was fearful to hear; And so bruised she felt she was glad to get out, When she thought that the coast was clear. So safely she reached her own home at noon, And the Fox ne'er saw her that day; But after the fair he came very soon, And cried out in a terrible way, -- "Quick, quick, let me in! oh, for once be kind, For the huntsman's horn I hear; Oh, hide me in any snug place you can find, For the hunters and hounds draw near." So the Goose looked out in order to see Whether Reynard was only in jest; Then, knowing that he in her power would be, She opened the door to her guest. "I'll hide you," she said, " in my nice new churn." "That will do very well," said he; "And thank you for doing me this good turn, Most friendly and kind Ganderee." Then into the churn the Fox quickly got; But, ere the Goose put on the top, A kettle she brought of water quite hot, And poured in every drop. Then the Fox cried out, "O! I burn, I burn, And I feel in a pitiful plight;" But the Goose held fast the lid of the churn, So Reynard he died that night. Moral Mankind have an enemy whom they well know, Who tempts them in every way; But they, too, at length shall o'ercome this foe, If wisdom's right law they obey. Source: A Treasury of Pleasure Books for Young People , [edited by J. Cundall] (London: Sampson, Low, and Son, 1856), no. 11 . Each story in this collection is paginated separately. Return to the table of contents . The Awful Fate of Mr. Wolf African-American Brer Rabbit could never get any peace. He couldn't leave home without Brer Wolf making a raid and toting off some of the family. Brer Rabbit built himself a straw house, and it was torn down. Then a made a house out of pine tops, and that went the same way. Then he made himself a bark house, and it was raided. And every time he lost a house, he lost one of his children. At last Brer Rabbit got mad, he did, and cussed, and then he went off, he did, and got some carpenters, and they built him a plank house with a rock foundation. After that he could have some peace and quiet. He could go out and pass the time of day with his neighbors, and come back and sit by the fire and smoke his pipe and read the newspapers the same as any man who has a family. He made a hole, he did, in the cellar where the little rabbits could hide out when there was much of a racket in the neighborhood, and the latch of the front door caught on the inside. Brer Wolf, he saw the lay of the land, he did, and he laid low. The little rabbits were mighty skittish, but it got so that cold chills didn't run up Brer Rabbit's back any more when he heard Brer Wolf go galloping by. By and by, one day when Brer Rabbit was fixing to call on Miss Coon, he heard a monstrous fuss and clatter up the big road, and almost before he could fix his ears to listen, Brer Wolf ran in the door. The little rabbits, they went into the hole in the cellar, they did, like blowing out a candle. Brer Wolf was fairly covered with mud, and mighty well nigh out of wind. "Oh, do pray save me, Brer Rabbit!" said Brer Wolf. "Do please, Brer Rabbit! The dogs are after me, and they'll tear me up. Don't you hear them coming? O, do please save me, Brer Rabbit! Hide me somewhere the dogs won't get me." No quicker said than done. "Jump in that chest there, Brer Wolf," said Brer Rabbit. "Jump in there and make yourself at home." In jumped Brer Wolf, down came the lid, and into the hasp went the hook, and there Mr. Wolf was. Then Brer Rabbit went to the looking-glass, he did, and winked at himself. And then he pulled the rocking chair in front of the fire, he did, and took a big chew of tobacco. Then Brer Rabbit sat there a long time, he did, turning his mind over and working his thinking machine. By and by he got up and sort of stirred around. Then Brer Wolf opened up, "Are the dogs all gone, Brer Rabbit?" "It seems like I hear one of them smelling around the chimney corner just now." Then Brer Rabbit got the kettle and filled it full of water and put it on the fire. "What are you doing now, Brer Rabbit?" "I'm fixing to make you a nice cup of tea, Brer Wolf." Then Brer Rabbit went to the cupboard and got the gimlet, and commenced to bore little holes in the chest lid. "What are you doing now, Brer Rabbit?" "I'm boring little holes so you can breathe, Brer Wolf." Then Brer Rabbit went out and got some more wood, and flung it on the fire. "What are you doing now, Brer Rabbit?" "I'm chunking up the fire so you won't get cold, Brer Wolf." Then Brer Rabbit went down into the cellar and fetched out all his children. "What are you doing now, Brer Rabbit?" "I'm telling my children what a nice man you are, Brer Wolf." And the children, they had to put their hands on their mouth to keep from laughing. Then Brer Rabbit, he got the kettle and commenced to pour the hot water onto the chest lid. "What's that I hear, Brer Rabbit?" "You hear the wind a-blowing, Brer Wolf." Then the water began to sift through. "What's that I feel, Brer Rabbit?" "You feel the fleas a-biting, Brer Wolf." "They are biting might hard, Brer Rabbit." "Turn over on the other side, Brer Wolf." "What's that I feel now, Brer Rabbit?" "You still feel the fleas, Brer Wolf." "They are eating me up, Brer Rabbit." And those were the last words of Brer Wolf, because the scalding water did the business. Then Brer Rabbit called in his neighbors, he did, and they held a regular jubilee. And if you go to Brer Rabbit's house right now, I don't know but what you'll find Brer Wolf's hide hanging in the back porch, and all because he was so busy with other folks's doings. Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus: His Songs and His Sayings (New York: McKinlay, Stone, and Mackenzie, 1908) no. 13, pp. 62-68 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Return to the table of contents . The Story of the Pigs African-American One time, away back yonder, the old sow and her children were all living longer than the other creatures. It seems to me that the old sow was a widow-woman, and if I am not mistaken, that that she had five children. Let me see, there was Big Pig, and there was Little Pig, and there was Speckled Pig, and there was Blunt, and last and lonesome, there was Runt. One day this here pig mother, she knew that she was going to kick the bucket, and she took and called up all her children and told them that the time had come when they had to look out for themselves. And then she up and told them as good as she could, although her breath was mighty scant, about what a bad man old Brer Wolf was. She said that if they could escape from old Brer Wolf, they'd be doing monstrously well. Big Pig allowed that she wasn't afraid. Speckled Pig allowed that she wasn't afraid. Blunt, he said that he was almost as big a man as Brer Wolf himself. And Runt, she just took and rooted around in the straw and grunted. But old Widow Sow, she lay there, she did, and kept on telling them that they had better keep their eyes on Brer Wolf, because he was a very mean and deceitful man. Not long after that, sure enough, old Miss Sow lay down and died, and all of those children of hers were flung back on themselves, and they whirled in, they did, and each one built himself a house to live in. Big Pig, she took and built herself a house out of brush. Little Pig, she took and built a stick house. Speckled Pig, she took and built a mud house. Blunt, he took and built a plank house. And Runt, she didn't make any great to-do, and no great brags, but she went to work, she did, and built a rock house. By and by, when they had everything fixed up, and matters were sort of settled, early one morning here came old Brer Wolf licking his chops and shaking his tail. The first house he came to was Big Pig's house. Brer Wolf walked up to the door, he did, and he knocked sort of softly, blim! blim! blim! Nobody answered. Then he knocked loudly, blam! blam! blam! This woke up Big Pig, and she came to the door, and she asked who it was. Brer Wolf allowed it was a friend, and he sang out: If you'll open the door and let me in, I'll warm my hands and go home again. Big Pig asked again who it was, and then Brer Wolf up and said, "How's your ma?" "My ma is dead," she said, "and before she died, she told me to keep my eyes on Brer Wolf. I see you through the crack in the door, and you look mighty like Brer Wolf." Then old Brer Wolf, he drew a long breath, like he felt very bad, and then he up and said, "I don't know what changed her mind, unless she was out of her head. I heard tell that old Miss Sow was sick, and I said to myself that I'd ought to drop around and see how the old lady is, and fetch her this here bag of roasting ears. I know might well that if your ma was here right now, in her right mind, she'd take the roasting ears and be glad to get them, and more than that, she'd ask me in by the fire to warm my hands," said old Brer Wolf. The talk about the roasting ears made Big Pig's mouth water, and by and by, after some more palaver, she opened the door and let Brer Wolf in, and bless your soul, that was the last of Big Pig. She didn't have time to squeal, or to grunt either, before Brer Wolf gobbled her up. The next day old Brer Wolf put up the same game on Little Pig. He went and sang his song, and Little Pig, she took and let him in, and then Brer Wolf, he took and returned the compliments and let Little Pig in. Little Pig, she let Brer Wolf in, and Brer Wolf, he let Little Pig in, and what more can you ask than that? The next time Brer Wolf paid a call, he dropped in on Speckled Pig, and rapped at the door, and sang his song: If you'll open the door and let me in, I'll warm my hands and go home again. But Speckled Pig, she kind of suspected something, and she refused to open the door. Yet Brer Wolf was a mighty deceitful man, and he talked mighty soft, and he talked mighty sweet. By and by, he got his nose in the crack of the door, and he said to Speckled Pig, to just let him get one paw in, and then he won't go any further. He got the paw in, and then he begged to get the other paw in, and then when he got that in, he begged to get his head in, and then when he got his head in, and his paws in, of course all he had to do was to shove the door open and walk right in. And when matters stood that way, it wasn't long before he made fresh meat of Speckled Pig. The next day, he did away with Blunt, and the day after that he allowed that he would make a pass at Runt. Now then, right there is where old Brer Wolf slipped up. He is like some folks I know. He'd have been mighty smart, if he hadn't been too smart. Runt was the littlest one of the whole gang, yet all the same, the news was out that she was pestered with sense like grown folks. Brer Wolf, he crept up to Runt's house, and he got underneath the window, he did, and he sang out: If you'll open the door and let me in, I'll warm my hands and go home again. But all the same, Brer Wolf couldn't coax Runt to open the door, neither could he break in, because the house was made of rock. By and by Brer Wolf made out like he'd gone off, and after a while he came back and knocked at the door, blam, blam, blam! Runt, she sat by the fire, she did, and sort of scratched her ear, and hollered out, "Who's that?" "It's Speckled Pig," said old Brer Wolf, between a snort and a grunt. "I fetched you some peas for your dinner!" Runt, she took and laughed, she did, and hollered back, "Sis Speckled Pit never talked through that many teeth." Brer Wolf went off again, and by and by he came back and knocked. Runt, she sat on a rock and hollered out, "Who's that?" "Big Pig," said Brer Wolf. I fetched some sweet corn for your supper." Runt, she looked through the crack underneath the door, and laughed, and said, "Sis Big Pig didn't ever have any hair on her hooves. Then old Brer Wolf, he got mad, he did, and he said he was going to come down the chimney. And Runt, she said that that was the only way that he could get in. And then when she heard Brer Wolf climbing up on the outside of the chimney, she took and piled up a whole lot of broom straw in front of the hearth, and when she heard him climbing down on the inside, she took the tongs and shoved the straw onto the fire, and the smoke made Brer Wolf's head swim, and he dropped down, and before he knew it, he was burned to a crackling. And that was the last of old Brer Wolf. At least it was the last of that Brer Wolf. Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Nights with Uncle Remus: Myths and Legends of the Old Plantation (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1883), no. 8, pp. 38-43 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Return to the table of contents . How Come the Pigs Can See the Wind North Carolina, USA Did you done hear how come that old Sis Pig can see the wind? Well, to be sure, ain't you never hear that? Well, don't you take noticement, many and many a time, how unrestful, and 'stracted like, the pigs is, when the wind blows, and how they squeal, and run this yer way and that yer way, like they's 'stracted? Well, sah, all dat gwine on is along of the fact that they can see the wind. One time the old sow, she have five little pigs, -- four black and one white one. Now old Brer Wolf, he have a mighty good mouth for pig meat, and he go every night and walk round and round Miss Pig's house, but Sis Pig, she have the door lock fast. One night, he dress up just like he was a man, and he put a tall hat on he head, and shoes on he foots; he take a sack of corn, and he walk hard, and make a mighty fuss on the brick walk, right up to the door, and he knock loud on the door in a great haste, and Sis Pig, she say, "Who there?" And Brer Wolf say up, loud and powerful, Brer Wolf did, "Quit your fooling, old woman, I is the master, come for to put my mark on the new pigs; turn 'em loose here lively." And old Sis Pig, she mighty skeered, but she feared not to turn 'em out; so she crack the door, and turn out the four black pigs, but the little white pig, he am her eyeballs, the little white pig was, and when he turn come, she just shut the door and hold it fast. And Brer Wolf, he turn down the corn, and just pick up the four little pigs and tote 'em off home; but when they done gone, he mouth hone for the little pig, but Sis Pig, she keep him mighty close. One night Brer Wolf was wandering up and down the woods, and he meet up with old Satan, and he ax Brer Wolf, old Satan did, can he help him, and Brer Wolf he just tell him what on he mind, and old Satan told him to lead on to Miss Pig's house, and he help him out. So Brer Wolf he lead on, and directly there Sis Pig's house, and old Satan, he 'gin to puff and blow, and puff and blow, till Brer Wolf he that skeered, Brer Wolf is, that he hair fairly stand on end; and Miss Pig she done hear the mighty wind, and the house a-cracking, and they hear her inside down on her knees, just calling on God A'mighty for mercy; but old Satan, he puff and blow, and puff and blow, and the house crack and tremble, and he say, old Satan did, "You hear this yer mighty wind, Sis Pig, but if you look this yer way you can see it." And Sis Pig, she that skeered, she crack the door and look out, and there she see old Satan's breath, like red smoke, blowing on the house, and from that day the pigs can see the wind, and it look red, the wind look red, sah. How we know that? I tell you how we know that, sah: if anybody miss a pig and take the milk, then they can see the wind, and they done tell it was red. Source: Emma M. Backus, " Animal Tales from North Carolina ," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 11, no. 43 (October - December, 1898), pp. 284-92. This tale is no. 7 (pp. 290-92) in Backus' collection. Return to the table of contents . Little Pig and Wolf Virginia, USA Version A Once there lived a little pig in a very close little room. A wolf would come by every day and try to fool the little pig out, so he could eat him. One morning the wolf called, but the pig did not answer him. The wolf was very sure the little pig was in there: so he said, "I know where a plenty of grapes. You better come and go with me." When the wolf was gone, the little pig put out for the grapevine. By that time the wolf came to the pig's home and called him again. He did not receive any answer. Then he put out to the grape tree too. When the pig saw the wolf, he hid in some moss on the tree. The wolf saw the pig before he got there; and when he got there, he called the pig, but he did not get any answer. By that time the wolf started to climb the tree. When he got to the little pig, the little pig ran out and jumped and ran away, and got home before the wolf caught him. By the time the little pig jumped in his door and shut it, the wolf had his head in the door, and it caught his head. He said to the pig, "Let me go! I will not hurt you." The pig opened the do' a little, and the wolf jumped in. The pig caught him by the leg, but he was afeard: so he said, "Yonder come de dogs." "Let me in! Let me in! Hide me in the box! The dogs will catch me!" said the wolf. The pig did so, but he got angry and began to put holes in the box. "What are you doing? " said the wolf. "Putting holes so you can get air," said the pig. "Oh, indeed!" said the wolf. When the pig got the holes in the box, he put on some water. When it was very hot, he said, "Don't you want some cool water poured on yo' to mek yo' feel good?" "Yes," said the wolf. So the pig po'ed hot water on him and killed him. Version B A long time ago Brer Wolf and Brer Rabbit were good friends, but for some reason or other they became deadly enemies. Brer Wolf decided to do Brer Rabbit harm. Brer Rabbit staid in his house most of the time, so Brer Wolf couldn't get at him. Wolf, however, thought of a way to get him out by stratagem. He knew that Brer Rabbit liked fruit: so he went to Brer Rabbit's door one night, and told him he knew where some fine large apples grew, and asked him if he would like to go and get some. Brer Rabbit very politely accepted the invitation, and agreed to go for the apples next morning at five o'clock. Brer Wolf trotted off home to dream of the sweet revenge he was going to have on Brer Rabbit, but Brer Rabbit was on to his tricks. Promptly at three o'clock he went after his apples, and was back quite a while before five o'clock. As the clocks struck five, Brer Wolf tapped on the door. "Are you ready to go for dem apples, Brer Rabbit?" says 'e. Brer Rabbit says, "La', Brer Wolf, my watch said five o'clock long 'go, and I thought you wasn't comin', so Ise done been." Brer Wolf was so mad he couldn't stand still; but he did not give up his hope for revenge, so he told Brer Rabbit 'bout some peaches which were farther away from Brer Rabbit's house than the apples. Brer Rabbit gladly consented to go, this time at four o'clock; but when Brer Wolf came after him next morning, he had been fooled again, and Brer Rabbit was inside enjoying his peaches. This time Brer Wolf was so mad dat his har turned gray, but he wouldn't give up. He decided to send Brer Rabbit on a fool's errand: so he told him about some fine pears. They grew on a distant hill very far away. There wa'n't no pears dere at all. Brer Wolf jest want to get Brer Rabbit out of his house one more time. They agreed to go at three o'clock this time. Brer Rabbit started out ahead of time, as usual; but Brer Wolf, who had caught on to him, started out early too. He first caught sight of Brer Rabbit sittin' on de hill resting, den he kinder laughed up his sleeve when he thought how tired he must be from walking so far, an' how mad he must be for bein' fooled. After waiting a while, so's to catch his wind, he started out as if to speak to Brer Rabbit. Brer Rabbit knew there was trouble in the wind: so, as soon as he saw Brer Wolf comin', he made a break for home. Right down de hill he went, and Brer Wolf started right behind him. It was a race for life; and Brer Rabbit did his level best, while old Brer Wolf was equal to the occasion. They ran through cornfields, through woods and across fields, 'til they got in sight of Brer Rabbit's house. The sight of the house gave Brer Rabbit new courage and strength; so that he made a final break, and got in the house and locked the door just as Brer Wolf rushed 'ginst it. Brer Wolf tried all of his force to open the door; and as he failed, he decided to come down the chimney. Brer Rabbit had no intention of letting any one come down the chimney after him: so he just set a big kettle of boiling water right under the chimney; and when Brer Wolf dropped down, he went smack into the kettle. Den Brer Rabbit slapped on de cover, and he had Brer Wolf just where he wanted him. Brer Wolf make all kinds of whining entreaties for Brer Rabbit to let him out, but it wasn't no better for him. Brer Rabbit made a fine stew of Brer Wolf, and eat applesauce and peaches along with him. After this he went after fruit whenever he got ready, without fear of being caught by Brer Wolf. Source: A. M. Bacon and E. C. Parsons, " Folk-Lore from Elizabeth City County, Virginia ," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 35, no. 137 (July - September, 1922), pp. 250-327. This tale is no. 17 (pp. 267-69) in Bacon's and Parsons' collection. Return to the table of contents . The Three Goslings Italy Once upon a time there were three goslings who were greatly afraid of the wolf, for if he found them he would eat them. One day the largest said to the other two, "Do you know what I think? I think we had better build a little house, so that the wolf shall not eat us, and meanwhile let us go and look for something to build the house with." Then the other two said, "Yes, yes, yes! Good! Let us go!" So they went and found a man who had a load of straw and said to him, "Good man, do us the favor to give us a little of that straw to make a house of, so that the wolf shall not eat us." The man said, "Take it, take it!" And he gave them as much as they wanted. The goslings thanked the man and took the straw and went away to a meadow, and there they built a lovely little house, with a door, and balconies, and kitchen, with everything, in short. When it was finished, the largest gosling said, "Now I want to see whether one is comfortable in this house." So she went in and said, "Oh! How comfortable it is in the house! Just wait!" She went and locked the door with a padlock, and went out on the balcony and said to the other two goslings, "I am very comfortable alone here. Go away, for I want nothing to do with you." The two poor little goslings began to cry and beg their sister to open the door and let them in. If she did not, the wolf would eat them. But she would not listen to them. Then the two goslings went away and found a man who had a load of hay. They said to him, "Good man, do us the kindness to give us a little of that hay to build a house with, so that the wolf shall not eat us!" "Yes, yes, yes! Take some, take some!" And he gave them as much as they wanted. The goslings, well pleased, thanked the man and carried the hay to a meadow and built a very pretty little house, prettier than the other. The middle-sized gosling said the smallest, "Listen. I am going now to see whether one is comfortable in this house. But I will not act like our sister, you know!" She entered the house and said to herself, "Oh! How comfortable it is here! I don't want my sister! I am very comfortable here alone." So she went and fastened the door with a padlock, and went out on the balcony and said to her sister, "Oh! How comfortable it is in this house! I don't want you here! Go away, go away!" The gosling began to weep and beg her sister to open to her, for she was alone, and did not know where to go, and if the wolf found her he would eat her. But it did no good. She shut the balcony and stayed in the house. Then the gosling, full of fear, went away and found a man who had a load of iron and stones and said to him, "Good man, do me the favor to give me a few of those stones and a little of that iron to build me a house with, so that the wolf shall not eat me!" The man pitied the gosling so much that he said, "Yes, yes, good gosling, or rather I will build your house for you." Then they went away to a meadow, and the man built a very pretty house, with a garden and everything necessary, and very strong, for it was lined with iron, and the balcony and door of iron also. The gosling, well pleased, thanked the man and went into the house and remained there. Now let us go to the wolf. The wolf looked everywhere for these goslings, but could not find them. After a time he learned that they had built three houses. "Good, good! he said. "Wait until I find you!" Then he started out and journeyed and journeyed until he came to the meadow where the first house was. He knocked at the door, and the gosling said, "Who is knocking at the door?" "Come, come," said the wolf. "Open up, for it is I." "The gosling said, "I will not open for you, because you will eat me." "Open, open! I will not eat you. Be not afraid. Very well, " said the wolf, "if you will not open the door, I will blow down your house." And indeed, he did blow down the house and ate up the gosling. "Now that I have eaten one," he said, "I will eat the others too." Then he went away and came at last to the house of the second gosling, and everything happened as to the first. The wolf blew down the house and ate the gosling. Then he went in search of the third, and when he found her he knocked at the door, but she would not let him in. Then he tried to blow the house down, but could not. Then he climbed on the roof and tried to trample the house down, but in vain. "Very well," he said to himself. "In one way or another I will eat you." Then he came down from the roof and said to the gosling, "Listen, gosling. Do you wish us to make peace? I don't want to quarrel with you who are so good, and I have thought that tomorrow we will cook some macaroni, and I will bring the butter and cheese, and you will furnish the flour." "Very good," said the gosling. "Bring them then." The wolf, well satisfied, saluted the gosling and went away. The next day the gosling got up early and went and bought the meal and then returned home and shut the house. A little later the wolf came and knocked at the door and said, "Come, gosling, open the door, for I have brought you the butter and cheese!" "Very well, give it to me here by the balcony." "No indeed, open the door!" "I will open when all is ready." Then the wolf gave her the things by the balcony and went away. While he was gone the gosling prepared the macaroni, and put it on the fire to cook in a kettle full of water. When it was two o'clock the wolf came and said, "Come, gosling, open the door." "No, I will not open, for when I am busy I don't want anyone in the way. When it is cooked, I will open, and you may come in and eat it." A little while after, the gosling said to the wolf, "Would you like to try a bit of macaroni to see whether it is well cooked?" "Open the door! That is the better way." "No, no. Don't think you are coming in. Put your mouth to the hole in the shelf, and I will pour the macaroni down." The wolf, all greedy as he was, put his mouth to the hole, and then the gosling took the kettle of boiling water and poured the boiling water instead of the macaroni through the hole into the wolf's mouth. And the wolf was scalded and killed. Then the gosling took a knife and cut open the wolf's stomach, and out jumped the other goslings, who were still alive, for the wolf was so greedy that he had swallowed them whole. Then there goslings begged their sister's pardon for the mean way in which they had treated her, and she, because she was kindhearted, forgave them and took them into her house, and there they ate their macaroni and lived together happy and contented. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 86, pp. 267-270 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related tales The Wolf and the Seven Young Kids (Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm), a folktale of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 123. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 23, 2008. Three Magic Gifts: Folktales of type 563 Three Magic Gifts tales of Aarne-Thompson type 563 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999 Contents The Story of the Ogre (Italy, Giambattista Basile). The Ass That Lays Money (Italy). Table-Be-Set, Gold-Donkey, and Cudgel-out-of-the-Sack (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Lad Who Went to the North Wind (Norway, Peter Christian Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe). The Wish Rag, the Gold-Goat, and the Hat Soldiers (Austria). The Good-for-Nothing (Georgia). The Adventures of Juan (Philippines). Return to D. L. Ashliman's index of folklore and mythology electronic texts . The Story of the Ogre Italy, Giambattista Basile Antuono of Marigliano is turned out by his mother for being the prince of fools, and enters the service of an ogre. On wishing to return home he several times receives from this latter different presents, of which he always lets an innkeeper rob him. But at last, receiving a stick which punishes his inexperience, he makes the innkeeper pay for all the tricks he played him, and enriches his home. They relate that once in the town of Marigliano there was a respectable woman named Masella, who, besides possessing six marriageable daughters, like six poles, had an only son so churlish and ignorant that he was no good even at the snow game [that is to say, at the simplest of games, like that of throwing snowballs]; so that she was like a sow with a headache in her mouth, and not a day passed without her saying, "What are you doing in this house, cursed good-for-nothing? Out with you, you great rascal! Clear off, Maccabeus! Vanish, bringer of bad luck! Out of my sight, chestnut eater! Would you had been changed in your cradle and instead of a little boy, of a pretty child, of a fine little lad, I had had a fine great pig!" But with all that, Masella spoke, and he only whistled. Seeing that there was no hope of Antuono (for so was the child called) turning his mind to any good purpose, one fine day she began to wash his head without soap, and seizing a rolling pin started to take the measure of his jacket. Antuono, when he least expected it, finding himself well staked, combed, and lined, took to his heels as soon as he could escape from her hands. So long did he journey that after twenty-four hours, when the little lamps began to illuminate the shops of Cinzia, he arrived at the foot of a mountain so high that it hit the clouds. There, by the roots of a poplar tree, near a grotto worked in pumice stone, was sitting an ogre. Gracious! How hideous he was! His body was dwarfed and deformed with a head bigger than an Indian pumpkin, a forehead full of bumps, eyebrows knitted, squint eyes, a flat nose as big as a millstone, from which came two tusks that reached his ankles, a hairy chest, arms like turning-frames, bandy-legged and broad-footed like a goose. Altogether he resembled a devil, a fiend, a hideous beggar, and an evil spirit incarnate that would have scared an Orlando, alarmed a Scannarebecco, and made the most able swordsman fall into a swoon. But Antuono, who had not moved a sling's throw, nodded to him, and said, "Good-bye, sir! What's doing? How are you? Don't you want anything? How far is it from here to where I'm going?" The ogre, hearing these ridiculous questions, began to laugh, and as he liked the look of the blockhead, said to him, "Do you want a master?" Antuono replied, "How much do you want a month?" And the ogre, "See that you serve me properly, and we shall come to terms, and you will live like a lord." So having made this agreement, Antuono entered the service of the ogre, in whose house the food was thrown at you, and as to work, one lived like a sluggard. Thus in four days he got as fat as a Turk, as round as an ox, as bold as a cock, as red as a lobster, as green as garlic, and as large as a whale, and so sturdy and with his skin so stretched that he could hardly open his eyes. Two years had not yet passed when all this abundance began to weary him, and there was born in him a wish and strong urge to pay a visit to Marigliano. And in pining for his little home he wasted away and nearly took on his former appearance. The ogre, who saw into his very entrails and knew of the itch which made him go about like an unsatisfied bride, called him aside and said, "Antuono, my boy, I know you have a great longing to see your own flesh and blood again. And therefore, as I love you like the apple of my eye, I am well content that you should make this trip and satisfy your wish. Take, therefore, this ass, which will spare you the fatigue of the journey, but by careful not to say 'Hey! Void!' or by the soul of my grandfather, you will be sorry for it." Antuono took the ass, and without even saying, "good night" jumped on it and went off at a gallop. He had not gone more than a hundred yards, however, before he dismounted from the beast and cried, "Hey! Void!" No sooner had he opened his mouth than the little beast began to relieve itself of pearls, rubies, emeralds, sapphires, and diamonds, each as big as a walnut. Antuono stood with his mouth open a palm's breadth, gazing at this fine discharge, this superb flux, this magnificently rich dysentery of the ass. Then with great rejoicing he filled a wallet with these jewels, climbed once more into the saddle, and setting off with great energy, arrived at an inn. On dismounting, the first thing he said to the innkeeper was, "Tie up this ass to the manger. Give it plenty to eat; but be careful not to say 'Hey! Void!' or you will regret it. And keep these trifles in a safe place." The innkeeper, who was one of the "four of the craft" [the head of a trade corporation], and a master in cunning, when he heard this unexpected warning and saw the jewels worth millions, became curious to learn what effect these words would have. He therefore placed before Antuono an excellent dinner and gave him as much to drink as he could carry, and then had him thrust in between a straw mattress and a rough quilt. As soon as he saw him close his eyes and heard him snoring with all his might, he ran to the stable and said to the ass, "Hey! Void!" And the ass, with the medicine of these words, carried out the usual operation, relieving itself of a flux of gold and purging of jewels. At the sight of this precious discharge, the innkeeper planned to change asses and gull that idiot of an Antuono, thinking it an easy matter to blind, deceive, bamboozle, perplex, hoodwink, throw dust in the eyes, confound, and fool a hog, blunderer, booby, dolt, simpleton such as was this fellow he had to deal with. Antuono woke up next morning when Aurora went to empty the chamber pot of her old man, full of fine red sand, at the eastern window, and rubbing his eyes with his fists and stretching his arms for half an hour with threescore yawnings and farts by way of accompaniment, called the innkeeper, saying, "Come here, my friend: a short account and a long friendship. Friends we shall be, and war to the purses. Make out the bill and pay yourself." Thus with so much for the bread, so much for the wine, this for the broth, that for the meat, five for the stabling, ten for the bed, and fifteen for the tip, he laid out the money. Then taking the false ass with a pouch of pumice stone in place of the precious jewels, he left at a good trot for his own town. Arriving at Marigliano, before setting foot inside his house, he started to cry out, as if stung by nettles, "Run, mother, run, for we are rich! Unfold towels, spread out sheets, lay down coverlets, for you will now see treasures!" The mother, full of joy, opened the chest where she kept her daughters' trousseaux and took out sheets so fine that they blew away if you but breathed, cloths of sweet-scented linen, coverlets of colors that catch the eye, and made a fine spread. Antuono led in the ass and started so sing out, "Hey! Void!" But for all the "Hey! Voids!" he said, the ass took as much notice as of the strains of the lyre. However, he continued to repeat these words two or three times, and as they were all thrown to the winds he took up a heavy club and began to belabor the ill-starred beast. He flogged and thrashed the poor animal so much till its body began to loosen, and it emitted a fine yellow discharge on the white sheets. At this sight the unfortunate Masella, who had hoped fundamentally to alleviate her poverty, and now found instead another kind of fundament so liberal that it scented the whole house, took up a stick and without giving Antuono time to show her the pumice stone, administered to him a sound thrashing. He fled as fast as he could in the direction of the ogre. The ogre saw him coming more at a trot than walking and, being a magician, knew what had happened. So he gave him a good scolding for letting himself be cheated by an innkeeper, calling him feeble minded, only fit to be tied to his mother's apron strings, idiot, dunce, fool, ninny, boor, who in exchange for an ass rich in treasure had accepted a beast prolific of ordinary excrement. Antuono swallowed the pill, and swore that never never again would he let himself be mocked or cheated by any living soul. After a year, however, there was renewed in him the same painful longing, and he languished with the desire to see his people again. The ogre, who was ugly of face but kindly of heart, gave him leave this time too, and made him a present of a fine napkin, saying, "Take this to your mother, but mind now, don't behave like a dolt as you did about the ass. And until you reach home don't say either 'Open' or 'Shut, napkin,' for if some misfortune befalls you, it will be your own fault. Now go, and good luck go with you. Come back soon." Antuono departed, but he had not gone far from the grotto before he put the napkin on the ground, and said, "Open, napkin!" And it opened, and at once there appeared a whole heap of costly objects, finery, and precious things of all kinds, the most beautiful and wonderful imaginable. Antuono then exclaimed, "Shut, napkin!" and folding everything up in it, he made his way to the same inn as the time before. Arriving there, he said to the innkeeper, "Take this napkin and look after it for me, but be careful not to say 'Open' or 'Shut, napkin.'" The latter, who was a sly knave, answered, "Leave it to me," and having given him plenty to eat and making him catch the monkey by the tail [getting him drunk], sent him off to sleep. Then he took the napkin and uttering the words found himself looking at enough precious things to amaze him. He therefore found another napkin so alike as to appear exactly the same, and made the exchange. Antuono, having woken up, set off at a good trot and arrived as his mother's house, where he started to cry out, "Now at last we shall be able to laugh at the whole of beggardom! Now shall we put an end to our wants, our rags and tatters!" and spreading the napkin on the ground, said, "Open, napkin!" But he could go on repeating it from today till tomorrow, for, as it gave not the slightest sign of opening, it was all a waste of time. Then, seeing that things were going wrong, he said to his mother, "May the heavens be blessed! The innkeeper has done me again. But let it be, for he and I make two. Better for him that he had never been born. Better that he had fallen under cart wheels. May I lose my greatest treasure if the next time I pass his inn I don't smash his glasses, plates, and dishes to atoms to pay for his having stolen my ass and jewels." But his mother, hearing these fresh stupidities, flamed up in anger, crying, "Go, break you neck, accursed son! Fracture your collarbone! Away, out of my sight! for I see my entrails, and I can stand you no longer, as my gorge rises each time you come near me! Be off with you, and may this house burn you like fire! I wash my hands of you, and think of you as if I had never brought you into the world." The unfortunate Antuono, seeing the lightning, had no wish to wait for the thunder. And like one who has stolen clothes from a heap of washing, lowering his head and raising his heels, he vanished in the direction of the ogre. When the ogre saw him creeping in slowly as slowly and softly as softly he gave him another good dressing down, saying, "I don't know what keeps me from tearing out your eyes, gasbag, windy mouth, lump of putrid flesh, hen's arse, tattle, trumpet of the Vicaria [a town crier], noising every blessed thing abroad, vomiting whatever is in you without ever being able to retain the husks! If you had kept quiet at the inn, all this would not have happened to you. But you've got a tongue like the sail of a windmill, and now you've crushed the prosperity that was once yours." The miserable Antuono put his tail between his legs and swallowed the music, and for over three years remained quietly in the service of the ogre, thinking no more of his home than of becoming a lord. However, after this period, he was seized with another attack of tertian fever, with a longing to return home, and begged the ogre to give him leave. And the ogre, overruled by his importunities, consented to let him go and gave him a finely worked club with the warning, "Take this club in memory of me. But remember not to say, 'Up, stick!' or 'Down stick!' for my only wish is to share things with you." Antuono, taking it, replied, "Enough, for now I have grown my wisdom teeth and know how many pairs make three oxen. I am a boy no longer, and anyone who wants to cheat Antuono must kiss his own elbow first." The ogre answered, "The work praises the worker. Words are women and deeds are men. We shall see! You have heard me more than a deaf man. A man forewarned is a man half saved!" The ogre was still talking when Antuono hurried off to his home. He had not gone half a mile before he cried, "Up, stick!" It was not mere word but a magic charm! The club, as if it had an imp in its marrow, started to work at once like a turner's lathe about the shoulders of the unhappy Antuono. The blows fell from an open sky one after the other without stopping. The poor fellow, seeing himself drubbed and beaten like a Cordovan hide, cried out, "Down, stick!" and the club stopped playing its counterpoint on the staff-lines of his spine. So, having learnt at his own expense, he said, "Bad luck to anyone that flies! I won't let it escape me this time! The one that's in for a bad time hasn't gone to bed yet!" With these thoughts he arrived at the same inn and was received with the best welcome in the world, for the innkeeper knew what sauce was to be had from that pigskin. Antuono said to him, "Here, keep this stick for me, but be careful not to say 'Up, stick!' or it will be the worse for you. Take heed. Don't complain any more of Antuono, for I warn you, and make the bed beforehand." The innkeeper, well content as this third piece of good luck, crammed him full of soup and made him see the bottom of the pitcher. And as soon as he had put him to bed, half asleep already, he ran to take the stick, calling to his wife to come and see the show. "Up, stick!" he cried, and at once it began to test the ballast of the innkeepers, with a whack here and a whack there, administering a sound beating of the first order. Finally, finding themselves in such a bad way, the husband and wife, pursued by the stick, ran off to wake Antuono and beg him for mercy. Antuono, who saw that the affair had been a huge success, that the macaroni had fallen into the cheese and the broccoli into the lard, said, "There's no way of stopping it! You'll be beaten to death with blows unless you return my things to me." The innkeeper, who was a mass of bruises, cried, "Take everything I have, only deliver me from this cursed plague on my shoulders." And in order to prove his words, he had all the things fetched that he had stolen from him. When Antuono had go the lot, he cried "Down, stick!" and it lay quietly on one side. Then taking with him the donkey and the other things, Antuono returned to his mother's house, where he made a right royal trial of the ass's backside and a sure test of the napkin. He amassed a pile of money, married off his sisters, enriched his mother, and proved the truth of the saying: God helps boys and madmen. Source: Giambattista Basile, The Pentamerone , day 1, tale 1. I have used the following edition: The Pentamerone of Giambattista Basile , translated from the Italian of Benedetto Croce and edited by N. M. Penzer (New York: Dutton, 1932), v. 1, pp. 17-23. Giambattista Basile was born about 1575 in Naples and died 1632 in Giugliano, Campania. His Lo cunto de li cunti (The Story of Stories) was published between 1634 and 1636, and named Il pentamerone because of its similarity to Boccaccio's Decamerone . The framework of Lo cunto de li cunti provides a context for ten women to tell one story each every day for five days. The fifty resulting stories, all based on oral tradition, comprise one of the monumental folktale collections of all time. Return to the table of contents . The Ass That Lays Money Italy There was once a poor widow with an only son, and whose brother-in-law was a steward. One day she said to her child, "Go to your uncle and ask him to give you something to keep you from starving." The boy went to the farm and asked his uncle to help him a little. "We are dying of hunger, uncle. My mother earns a little by weaving, and I am too small to find anything. Be charitable to us, for we are your relatives." The steward answered, "Why not? You should have come sooner, and I would have helped you the sooner. But now I will give you something to support you always, without need of anything more. I will give you this little ass that lays money. You have only to put a cloth under him, and he will fill it for you with handsome coins. But take care! Don't tell it, and don't leave this animal with anyone." The youth departed in joy, and after he had traveled a long way, he stopped at an inn to sleep, for his house was distant. He said to the landlord, "Give me a lodging, but look! my ass spends the night with me." "What!" said the landlord. "What are you thinking about! It cannot be." The youth replied, "Yes it can be, because my ass does not leave my side." They disputed a while, but the landlord finally consented. But he had some suspicions; and when the boy and his beast were shut in the room, he looked through the keyhole, and saw that wonder of an ass that laid money in abundance. "Bless me!" cried the host. "I should be a fool, indeed, if I let this piece of good fortune escape my hands!" He at once looked for another ass of the same color and size, and while the lad was asleep, exchanged them. In the morning the boy paid his bill and departed, but on the way, the ass no longer laid any money. The stupefied child did not know what to think at first, but afterward examining it more closely, it appeared to him that the ass was not his, and straightway he returned to the innkeeper, to complain of his deception. The landlord cried out, "I wonder at your saying such a thing! We are all honest people here, and don't steal anything from anybody. Go away, blockhead, or you will find something to remember a while." The child, weeping, had to depart with his ass, and he went back to his uncle's farm, and told him what had happened. The uncle said, "If you had not stopped at the innkeeper's, you could not have met with this misfortune. However, I have another present to help you and you mother. But take care! Do not mention it to anyone, and take good care of it. Here it is. I give you a tablecloth, and whenever you say, 'Tablecloth, make ready,' after having spread it out, you will see a fine repast at your pleasure." The youth took the tablecloth in delight, thanked his uncle, and departed. But like the fool he was, he stopped again at the same inn. He said to the landlord, "Give you a room, and you need not prepare anything to eat. I have all I want with me." The crafty innkeeper suspected that there was something beneath this, and when the lad was in his room, he looked through the keyhole, and saw the tablecloth preparing the supper. The host exclaimed, "What good luck for my inn! I will not let it escape me." He quickly looked for another tablecloth like this one, with the same embroidery and fringe, and while the child was sleeping, he exchanged it for the magic one, so that in the morning the lad did not perceive the knavery. Not until he had reached a forest where he was hungry, did he want to make use of the tablecloth. But it was in vain that he spread it out and cried, "Tablecloth, make ready." The tablecloth was not the same one, and made nothing ready for him. In despair the boy went back to the innkeeper to complain, and the landlord would have thrashed him if he had not run away, and he ran until he reached his uncle's. His uncle, when he saw him in such a plight, said, "Oh! What is the matter?" "Uncle!" said the boy, "the same innkeeper has changed the tablecloth, too, for me." The uncle was on the point of giving the dunce a good thrashing; but afterward, seeing that it was a child, he calmed his anger, and said, "I understand. But I will give you a remedy by which you can get back everything from that thief of a landlord. Here it is! It is a stick. Hide it under your bolster, and if anyone comes to rob you of it, say to it, in a low voice, 'Beat, beat!' and it will continue to do so until you say to it, 'Stop.'" Imagine how joyfully the boy took the stick! It was a handsome polished stick, with a gold handle, and delighted one only to see it. So the boy thanked his uncle for his kindness, and after he had journeyed a while, he came to the same inn. He said, "Landlord, I wish to lodge here tonight." The landlord at once drew his conclusions about the stick, which the boy carried openly in his hands, and at night when the lad appeared to be sound asleep, but really was on the watch, the landlord felt softly under the bolster and drew out the stick. The boy, although it was dark, perceived the theft, and said in a low voice, "Beat, beat, beat!" Suddenly blows were rained down without mercy; everything broken to pieces, the chest of drawers, the looking glass, all the chairs, the glass in the windows; and the landlord, and those that came at the noise, beaten nearly to death. The landlord screamed to split his throat, "Save me, boy, I am dead!" The boy answered, "What! I will not deliver you, if you do not give me back my property -- the ass that lays gold and the tablecloth that prepares dinner." And if the landlord did not want to die of the blows, he had to consent to the boy's wishes. When he had his things back, the boy went home to his mother and told her what had happened to him, and then said, "Now we do not need anything more. I have an ass that lays money, a tablecloth that prepares food at my will, and a stick to defend me from whoever annoys me." So that woman and her son, who, from want had become rich enough to cause everyone envy, wished from pride to invite their relatives to a banquet, to make them acquainted with their wealth. On the appointed day the relatives came to the woman's new house. But noon strikes, and one o'clock strikes. It is almost two, and in the kitchen the fire is seen extinguished, and there were no provisions anywhere. "Are they playing a joke on us?" said the relatives. "We shall have to depart with dry teeth." At that moment, however, the clock struck two, and the lad, after spreading the cloth on the table, commanded, "Tablecloth, prepare a grand banquet." In short, those people had a fine dinner and many presents in money, and the boy and his mother remained in triumph and joy. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company, 1885), no. 32, pp. 123-127. Return to the table of contents . Table-Be-Set, Gold-Donkey, and Cudgel-out-of-the-Sack Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm There was once upon a time a tailor who had three sons, and only one goat. But as the goat supported all of them with her milk, she was obliged to have good food, and to be taken every day to pasture. The sons did this, in turn. Once the eldest took her to the churchyard, where the finest herbs were to be found, and let her eat and run about there. At night when it was time to go home he asked, "Goat, have you had enough?" The goat answered, I have eaten so much, Not a leaf more I'll touch; Meh, meh! "Come home, then," said the youth, and took hold of the cord around her neck, led her into the stable, and tied her up securely. "Well," said the old tailor, "has the goat had as much food as she ought?" "Oh," answered the son, "she has eaten so much, not a leaf more she'll touch." But the father wished to satisfy himself, and went down to the stable, stroked the dear animal, and asked, "Goat, are you satisfied?" The goat answered, How should I be satisfied? Among the ditches I leapt about, Found no leaf, so went without; Meh, meh! "What do I hear?" cried the tailor, and ran upstairs and said to the youth, "Hey, you liar, you said the goat had had enough, and have let her hunger." And in his anger he took the yardstick from the wall, and drove him out with blows. Next day it was the turn of the second son, who sought a place next to the garden hedge where nothing but good herbs grew, and the goat gobbled them all up. At night when he wanted to go home, he asked, "Goat, are you satisfied?" I have eaten so much, Not a leaf more I'll touch; Meh, meh! "Come home then," said the youth, and led her home, and tied her up in the stable. "Well," said the old tailor, "has the goat had as much food as she ought?" "Oh," answered the son, "she has eaten so much, not a leaf more she'll touch." The tailor would not rely on this, but went down to the stable and said, "Goat, have you had enough?" The goat answered, How should I be satisfied? Among the ditches I leapt about, Found no leaf, so went without; Meh, meh! "The godless wretch!" cried the tailor, to let such a good animal hunger, and he ran up and drove the youth out of doors with the yardstick. Now came the turn of the third son, who wanted to do his duty well, and sought out some bushes with the finest leaves, and let the goat devour them. In the evening when he wanted to go home, he asked, "Goat, have you had enough?" The goat answered, I have eaten so much, Not a leaf more I'll touch; Meh, meh! "Come home then," said the youth, and led her into the stable, and tied her up. "Well," said the old tailor, "has the goat had her full share of food?" "She has eaten so much, not a leaf more she'll touch." The tailor was distrustful, went down, and asked, "Goat, have you had enough?" The wicked beast answered, How should I be satisfied? Among the ditches I leapt about, Found no leaf, so went without; Meh, meh! "Oh, the brood of liars!" cried the tailor, "Each as wicked and forgetful of his duty as the other. You shall no longer make a fool of me!" And quite beside himself with anger, he ran upstairs and tanned the poor young fellow's back so vigorously with the yardstick that he leaped out of the house. The old tailor was now alone with his goat. Next morning he went down into the stable, stroked the goat and said, "Come, my dear little animal, I myself will take you to feed." He took her by the rope and led her to green hedges, and amongst yarrow and whatever else goats like to eat. "Here you may for once eat to your heart's content," he said to her, and let her browse till evening. Then he asked, "Goat, are you satisfied?" She answered, I have eaten so much, Not a leaf more I'll touch; Meh, meh! "Come home then," said the tailor, and led her into the stable, and tied her fast. When he was going away, he turned around again and said, "Well, are you satisfied for once?" But the goat behaved no better for him, and cried, How should I be satisfied? Among the ditches I leapt about, Found no leaf, so went without; Meh, meh! When the tailor heard that, he was shocked, and saw clearly that he had driven away his three sons without cause. "Wait, you ungrateful creature," he cried, "it is not enough to drive you away, I will brand you so that you will no more dare to show yourself amongst honest tailors." He quickly ran upstairs, fetched his razor, lathered the goat's head, and shaved her as clean as the palm of his hand. And as the yardstick would have been too honorable for her, he grabbed a whip, and gave her such blows with it that she bounded away with tremendous leaps. When the tailor was thus left quite alone in his house he fell into great grief, and would gladly have had his sons back again, but no one knew where they were gone. The eldest had apprenticed himself to a joiner, and learned industriously and tirelessly, and when the time came for him to be on his way, his master presented him with a little table which was not particularly beautiful, and was made of common wood, but which had one good property. If anyone set it out, and said, "table be set," the good little table was at once covered with a clean little cloth, and a plate was there, and a knife and fork beside it, and dishes with boiled meats and roasted meats, as many as there was room for, and a great glass of red wine shone, so that it made the heart glad. The young journeyman thought, "With this you have enough for your whole life," and went joyously about the world and never troubled himself at all whether an inn was good or bad, or if anything was to be found in it or not. When it suited him, he did not enter an inn at all, but either on the plain, in a wood, a meadow, or wherever he fancied, he took his little table off his back, set it down before him, and said, "table be set," and then everything appeared that his heart desired. At length he took it into his head to go back to his father, whose anger would now be appeased, and who would now willingly receive him with his magic table. It came to pass that on his way home, he came one evening to an inn which was filled with guests. They bade him welcome, and invited him to sit and eat with them, for otherwise he would have difficulty in getting anything. "No," answered the joiner, "I will not take the few morsels out of your mouths. Rather than that, you shall be my guests." They laughed, and thought he was jesting with them. He but placed his wooden table in the middle of the room, and said, "Table be set." Instantly it was covered with food, so good that the host could never have procured it, and the smell of it ascended pleasantly to the nostrils of the guests. "Fall to, dear friends," said the joiner, and the guests when they saw that he meant it, did not need to be asked twice, but drew near, pulled out their knives and attacked it valiantly. And what surprised them the most was that when a dish became empty, a full one instantly took its place of its own accord. The innkeeper stood in one corner and watched the affair. He did not at all know what to say, but thought, "You could easily find a use for such a cook as that in your household." The joiner and his comrades made merry until late into the night. At length they lay down to sleep, and the young journeyman also went to bed, and set his magic table against the wall. The host's thoughts, however, let him have no rest. It occurred to him that there was a little old table in his backroom which looked just like the journeyman's and he brought it out, and carefully exchanged it for the wishing table. Next morning the joiner paid for his bed, took up his table, never thinking that he had got a false one, and went his way. At midday he reached his father, who received him with great joy. "Well, my dear son, what have you learned?" he said to him. "Father, I have become a joiner." "A good trade," replied the old man. "But what have you brought back with you from your apprenticeship?" "Father, the best thing which I have brought back with me is this little table." The tailor inspected it on all sides and said, "You did not make a masterpiece when you made this. It is a bad old table." "But it is a table-be-set," replied the son. "When I set it out, and tell it to set itself, the most beautiful dishes immediately appear on it, and wine also, which gladdens the heart. Just invite all our relatives and friends. They shall refresh and enjoy themselves for once, for the table will fill them all." When the company was assembled, he put his table in the middle of the room and said, "Table be set," but the little table did not move, and remained just as bare as any other table which does not understand language. Then the poor journeyman became aware that his table had been changed, and was ashamed at having to stand there like a liar. The relatives, however, mocked him, and were forced to go home without having eaten or drunk. The father brought out his scraps again, and went on tailoring, but the son found work with a master joiner. The second son had gone to a miller and had apprenticed himself to him. When his years were over, the master said, "As you have conducted yourself so well, I give you a donkey of a peculiar kind, which neither draws a cart nor carries a sack." "What good is he then?" asked the young journeyman. "He spews forth gold," answered the miller. "If you set him on a cloth and say 'Bricklebrit,' the good animal will spew forth gold pieces for you from back and front." "That is a fine thing," said the journeyman, and thanked the master, and went out into the world. When he had need of gold, he had only to say "Bricklebrit" to his donkey, and it rained gold pieces, and he had nothing to do but pick them off the ground. Wherever he went, the best of everything was good enough for him, and the more expensive the better, for he had always a full purse. When he had looked about the world for some time, he thought, "You must seek out your father. If you go to him with the gold-donkey he will forget his anger, and receive you well." It came to pass that he came to the same inn in which his brother's table had been exchanged. He led his donkey by the bridle, and the host was about to take the animal from him and tie him up, but the young journeyman said, "Don't trouble yourself, I will take my nag into the stable, and tie him up myself too, for I must know where he is." This struck the host as odd, and he thought that a man who was forced to look after his donkey himself, could not have much to spend. But when the stranger put his hand in his pocket and brought out two gold pieces, and said he was to provide something good for him, the host opened his eyes wide, and ran and sought out the best he could muster. After dinner the guest asked what he owed. The innkeeper did not see why he should not double the bill, and said the journeyman must give two more gold pieces. He felt in his pocket, but his gold was just at an end. "Wait an instant, sir," said he, "I will go and fetch some money." But he took the tablecloth with him. The innkeeper could not imagine what this meant, and being curious, stole after him, and as the guest bolted the stable door, he peeped through a hole left by a knot in the wood. The stranger spread out the cloth under the animal and cried, "Bricklebrit," and immediately the beast began to let gold pieces fall from back and front, so that it fairly rained down money onto the ground. "Eh, my word," said the innkeeper. "Ducats are quickly coined there. A purse like that is not bad." The guest paid his bill and went to bed, but in the night the innkeeper stole down into the stable, led away the master of the mint, and tied up another donkey in his place. Early next morning the journeyman traveled away with his donkey, and thought that he had his gold-donkey. At midday he reached his father, who rejoiced to see him again, and gladly took him in. "What have you made of yourself, my son?" asked the old man. "A miller, dear father," he answered. "What have you brought back with you from your travels." "Nothing else but a donkey." "There are donkeys enough here," said the father, "I would rather have had a good goat." "Yes," replied the son, "but it is no common donkey, but a gold-donkey. When I say 'Bricklebrit' the good beast spews forth a whole sheetful of gold pieces. Just summon all our relatives here, and I will make them rich folks." "That suits me well," said the tailor, "for then I shall have no need to torment myself any longer with the needle," and he himself ran out and called the relatives together. As soon as they were assembled, the miller bade them make way, spread out his cloth, and brought the donkey into the room. "Now watch," said he, and cried, "Bricklebrit," but what fell were not gold pieces, and it was clear that the animal knew nothing of the art, for not every donkey attains such perfection. Then the poor miller made a long face, saw that he had been betrayed, and begged pardon of the relatives, who went home as poor as they came. There was no help for it, the old man had to take up his needle once more, and the youth hired himself to a miller. The third brother had apprenticed himself to a turner, and as that is skilled labor, he was the longest in learning. His brothers, however, told him in a letter how badly things had gone with them, and how the innkeeper had cheated them of their beautiful wishing gifts on the last evening before they reached home. When the turner had served his time, and was about to set forth, as he had conducted himself so well, his master presented him with a sack saying, "There is a cudgel in it." "I can take the sack with me," said he, "and it may serve me well, but why should the cudgel be in it. It only makes it heavy." "I will tell you why," replied the master. "If anyone has done anything to injure you, do but say, 'Cudgel out of the sack,' and the cudgel will leap forth among the people, and play such a dance on their backs that they will not be able to stir or move for a week. And it will not quit until you say, 'Cudgel into the sack.'" The journeyman thanked him, and put the sack on his back, and when anyone came too near him and wished to attack him, he said, "Cudgel out of the sack," and instantly the cudgel sprang out and beat the dust out of their coats and jackets, right on their backs, not waiting until they had taken them off, and it was done so quickly, that before anyone was aware, it was already his own turn. In the evening the young turner reached the inn where his brothers had been cheated. He laid his sack on the table before him, and began to talk of all the wonderful things which he had seen in the world. "Yes," said he, "table-be-sets, gold-donkeys, and things of that kind -- extremely good things which I by no means despise -- but these are nothing in comparison with the treasure which I have obtained and am carrying about with me here in my sack." The innkeeper pricked up his ears. "What in the world can that be?" he thought. "The sack must be filled with nothing but jewels. I ought to get them cheap too, for all good things come in threes." When it was time for sleep, the guest stretched himself out on the bench, laying his sack beneath him for a pillow. When the innkeeper thought his guest was lying in a sound sleep, he went to him and pushed and pulled quite gently and carefully at the sack to see if he could possibly take it away and lay another in its place. The turner, however, had been waiting for this for a long time, and now just as the innkeeper was about to give a hearty tug, he cried, "Cudgel out of the sack!" Instantly the little cudgel came forth, and falling on the innkeeper gave him a sound thrashing. The innkeeper cried for mercy, but the louder he cried, the harder the cudgel beat the time on his back, until at length he fell to the ground exhausted. Then the turner said, "If you do not give back the table-be-set and the gold-donkey, the dance shall start again from the beginning." "Oh, no!" cried the innkeeper, quite humbly, "I will gladly give everything back, only make the accursed kobold creep back into the sack." Then the journeyman said, "I will let mercy take the place of justice, but beware of getting into mischief again" Then he cried, "Cudgel into the sack," and let him rest. Next morning the turner went home to his father with the table-be-set, and the gold-donkey. The tailor rejoiced when he saw him once more, and asked him likewise what he had learned in foreign parts. "Dear father," said he, "I have become a turner." "A skilled trade," said the father. "What have you brought back with you from your travels?" "A precious thing, dear father," replied the son, "a cudgel in the sack." "What!" cried the father, "A cudgel! That's worth your trouble! From every tree you can cut yourself one." "But not one like this, dear father. If I say, 'Cudgel out of the sack,' the cudgel springs out and leads anyone ill-disposed toward me a weary dance, and never stops until he lies on the ground and prays for fair weather. Look you, with this cudgel have I rescued the table-be-set and the gold-donkey which the thievish innkeeper took away from my brothers. Now let them both be sent for, and invite all our relatives. I will give them to eat and to drink, and will fill their pockets with gold as well." The old tailor had not much confidence. Nevertheless he summoned the relatives together. Then the turner spread a cloth in the room and led in the gold-donkey, and said to his brother, "Now, dear brother, speak to him." The miller said, "Bricklebrit," and instantly the gold pieces rained down on the cloth like a cloudburst, and the donkey did not stop until every one of them had so much that he could carry no more. (I can see by your face that you would have liked to be there as well.) Then the turner brought out the little table and said, "Now, dear brother, speak to it." And scarcely had the joiner said, "Table be set," than it was spread and amply covered with the most exquisite dishes. Then such a meal took place as the good tailor had never yet known in his house, and the whole party of relatives stayed together until after nightfall, and were all merry and glad. The tailor locked his needle and thread and yardstick and pressing iron into a chest, and lived with his three sons in joy and splendor. What, however, happened to the goat who was to blame for the tailor driving out his three sons? That I will tell you. She was ashamed that she had a bald head, and ran to a fox's hole and crept into it. When the fox came home, he was met by two great eyes shining out of the darkness, and was terrified and ran away. A bear met him, and as the fox looked quite disturbed, he said, "What is the matter with you, Brother Fox, why do you look like that?" "Ah," answered Redskin, "a fierce beast is in my cave and stared at me with its fiery eyes." "We will soon drive him out," said the bear, and went with him to the cave and looked in, but when he saw the fiery eyes, fear seized on him likewise. He would have nothing to do with the furious beast, and took to his heels. The bee met him, and as she saw that he was ill at ease, she said, "Bear, you are really pulling a very pitiful face. What has become of all your cheerfulness?" "It is all very well for you to talk," replied the bear. "A furious beast with staring eyes is in Redskin's house, and we can't drive him out." The bee said, "Bear, I pity you. I am a poor weak creature whom you would not turn aside to look at, but still, I believe I can help you." She flew into the fox's cave, lit on the goat's smoothly shorn head, and stung her so violently, that she sprang up, crying "meh, meh," and ran forth into the world as if mad, and to this hour no one knows where she has gone. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Tischchendeckdich, Goldesel und Knüppel aus dem Sack , Kinder- und Hausmärchen , (1812), no. 36. This popular tale was included in the first edition (1812) of the Grimms' collection. They received it from Jeannette Hassenpflug in Kassel, who based her story on a narrative by "Old Mamsell Storch, who worked for the Henschel family." The above English text is based on the translation of Margaret Hunt, revised and corrected by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. The episode of the lying goat is classified as an Aarne-Thompson type 212 tale. Return to the table of contents . The Lad Who Went to the North Wind Norway, Peter Christian Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe Once upon a time there was an old widow who had one son; and as she was poorly and weak, her son had to go up into the storehouse to fetch meal for cooking; but when he got outside the storehouse, and was just going down the steps, there came the North Wind, puffing and blowing, caught up the meal, and so away with it through the air. Then the lad went back into the storehouse for more; but when he came out again on the steps, if the North Wind didn't come again and carry off the meal with a puff; and more than that, he did so the third time. At this the lad got very angry; and as he thought it hard that the North Wind should behave so, he thought he'd just look him up, and ask him to give up his meal. So off he went, but the way was long, and he walked and walked; but at last he came to the North Wind's house. "Good day!" said the lad, and "Thank you for coming to see us yesterday." "Good day!" answered the North Wind, for his voice was loud and gruff, "and thanks for coming to see me. What do you want?" "Oh!" answered the lad, "I only wished to ask you to be so good as to let me have back that meal you took from me on the storehouse steps, for we haven't much to live on; and if you're to go on snapping up the morsel we have there'll be nothing for it but to starve." "I haven't got your meal," said the North Wind; "but if you are in such need, I'll give you a cloth which will get you everything you want, if you only say, 'Cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kind of good dishes!'" With this the lad was well content. But, as the way was so long he couldn't get home in one day, so he turned into an inn on the way; and when they were going to sit down to supper, he laid the cloth on a table which stood in the corner and said, "Cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kinds of good dishes." He had scarce said so before the cloth did as it was bid; and all who stood by thought it a fine thing, but most of all the landlady. So, when all were fast asleep, at dead of night, she took the lad's cloth, and put another in its stead, just like the one he had got from the North Wind, but which couldn't so much as serve up a bit of dry bread. So, when the lad woke, he took his cloth and went off with it, and that day he got home to his mother. "Now," said he, "I've been to the North Wind's house, and a good fellow he is, for he gave me this cloth, and when I only say to it, 'Cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kind of good dishes,' I get any sort of food I please." "All very true, I daresay," said his mother; "but seeing is believing, and I shan't believe it till I see it." So the lad made haste, drew out a table, laid the cloth on it, and said, "Cloth, spread yourself, and serve up all kind of good dishes." But never a bit of dry bread did the cloth serve up. "Well," said the lad, "there's no help for it but to go to the North Wind again," and away he went. So he came to where the North Wind lived late in the afternoon. "Good evening!" said the lad. "Good evening!" said the North Wind. "I want my rights for that meal of ours which you took," said the lad; "for as for that cloth I got, it isn't worth a penny." "I've got no meal," said the North Wind; "but yonder you have a ram which coins nothing but golden ducats as soon as you say to it, 'Ram, ram, make money!'" So the lad thought this a fine thing; but as it was too far to get home that day, he turned in for the night to the same inn where he had slept before. Before he called for anything, he tried the truth of what the North Wind had said of the ram, and found it all right; but when the landlord saw that, he thought it was a famous ram, and, when the lad had fallen asleep, he took another which couldn't coin gold ducats, and changed the two. Next morning off went the lad, and when he got home to his mother, he said, "After all, the North Wind is a jolly fellow; for now he has given me a ram which can coin golden ducats if I only say, 'Ram, ram, make money!'" "All very true, I daresay," said his mother, "but I shan't believe any such stuff until I see the ducats made." "Ram, ram, make money!" said the lad; but if the ram made anything it wasn't money. So the lad went back again to the North Wind, and blew him up, and said the ram was worth nothing, and he must have his rights for the meal. "Well," said the North Wind, "I've nothing else to give you but that old stick in the corner yonder; but it's a stick of that kind that if you say, 'Stick, stick, lay on!' it lays on till you say, 'Stick, stick, now stop!'" So, as the way was long, the lad turned in this night too to the landlord; but as he could pretty well guess how things stood as to the cloth and the ram, he lay down at once on the bench and began to snore, as if he were asleep. Now the landlord, who easily saw that the stick must be worth something, hunted up one which was like it, and when he heard the lad snore, he was going to change the two, but just as the landlord was about to take it, the lad bawled out, "Stick, stick, lay on!" So the stick began to beat the landlord, till he jumped over chairs and tables and benches, and roared, "Oh my! Oh my! Bid the stick be still, else it will beat me to death, and you shall have back both your cloth and your ram." When the lad thought the landlord had got enough, he said, "Stick, stick, now stop!" Then he took the cloth and put it into his pocket, and went home with his stick in his hand, leading the ram by a cord around its horns, and so he got his rights for the meal he had lost. Source: Peter Christian Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Gutten som gikk til nordenvinden og krevde igjen melet , translated by George Webbe Dasent as "The Lad Who Went to the North Wind," and published in Popular Tales from the Norse (Edinburgh: David Douglas, 1888), pp. 228-232. Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Return to the table of contents . The Wish Rag, the Gold-Goat, and the Hat Soldiers Austria Once upon a time there was a cobbler who was very poor, having nothing but a wife and an old goat. Unable to earn anything in his homeland, he decided to travel elsewhere. "Listen, dear wife," he said one day to her, "you see that I can earn nothing here. Therefore I am ready to leave tomorrow for somewhere else. Slaughter our goat so I can have something to eat on my way." The next day the goat was slaughtered. The cobbler took a portion of it with him and set forth. He walked the entire day, but was able to reach neither a village nor a town. Exhausted, the poor man sat down to rest a while beneath a statue that stood at the end of the path. He was about to unpack his meat when the statue began to speak, asking the cobbler, "Tell me, what do you have in your bundle?" "A piece of goat meat," was the startled man's answer. "My dear man, do you see the little wooden hut at the end of the path?" "Yes, I see it," he answered. "Go there and throw your meat inside. The devils have their workshop there. When they ask you what you demand in return, answer them, 'that old rag that is lying on the bed.'" The cobbler immediately went to the hut, threw his meat inside, and demanded in return the rag described by the statue. Only after much arguing back and forth did they give it to him. The cobbler went away with it. Examining his reward, he saw that it was substantially worse than any he had at home. Returning to the statue, the cobbler expressed his displeasure at its advice. But the statue said, "Take this little stick from my hand and strike the rag three times with it." The cobbler did what he was told to do, and the finest foods appeared on the rag. Thus the cobbler, who for a very long time had not had such fare, was able to eat a delicious meal. When the feast was over, he thanked the statue, took the rag, and decided to return home. On the way he spent the night at an inn, where he demonstrated his magic item to the other guests. The innkeeper and the innkeeper's wife were amazed, and they secretly desired to possess such a rag themselves. That night the innkeeper stole the cobbler's rag, putting another one in its place near his bed. The next day the deceived man paid his bill and set off for home with the rag he presumed was genuine. Immediately after his arrival, he invited all of his relatives to a joyous feast. The guests all appeared and were awaiting the food that was to be served. The cobbler entered, the rag in his hand, and told everyone what had happened during the past few days. Then the cobbler brought forth the little stick and slowly struck the rag three times. But no food appeared. The cobbler struck repeatedly, and more and more vigorously, but the rag lay there dead, and the hungry guests went away unsatisfied. The poor man thought that the statue was the cause of his misfortune. Soon afterward the cobbler set forth a second time, again taking with him a portion of his goat. Again he came to the statue, who told him to once more give his meat to the devils and to demand in return the old goat that was hanging on the door. The cobbler did this, and received the old goat, which was much worse off than the one he had slaughtered before his journey. Returning to the statue, he complained to it about the old animal he had received. But the statue placed a little stick in his hand and told the man to strike the goat on the back with it. The cobbler did what he was told, and to his amazement gold pieces fell from the goat's ears. How happy our man was when he saw the gold! Quickly thanking the statue, he hurried homeward with the old goat. On his way he felt hungry and thirsty, so he turned in at the same inn where he had previously spent the night. After eating and drinking he wanted to pay his bill, but he had no money. In order to get some, he led the goat into the room, and with the little stick he hit it on the back three times. It shook gold out of its ears, with which the cobbler paid his bill. The innkeeper had scarcely seen this happen before he began to make plans to take possession of the goat. Now the innkeeper owned a goat that looked exactly like the one in question. Therefore he decided to exchange his goat with the cobbler's goat during the night. And the plot was soon realized. He exchanged the goats. The cobbler awoke the next morning and went on his way in good cheer, for he had no idea about the exchange. Upon his arrival home, he sent his wife to get a pork roast for a delicious midday meal, saying that he would provide the money for it. After they had eaten the meal, our cobbler wanted to try his magic trick. He led the goat into the room and struck it three times on the back with his little stick. But no one saw any gold fall out. The cobbler struck more and more vigorously, but without success. The mysterious silence was broken only by the poor animal's weak bleating. All attempts were for nothing. To be sure, the animal sadly shook its head, but no money fell from its ears. The poor cobbler saw that he had been cheated once again, and he set forth for the third and final time. Again he returned to the statue, which once more advised him to give the goat meat to the devils, and this time to demand in return an old hat that was lying next to the bed. The cobbler did as he was told, and did indeed receive the old hat, which -- however -- was in very poor condition. The cobbler returned to the statue, which gave him a little stick. He was to strike the hat three times with it. The man did this, and to his amazement, an entire regiment of soldiers emerged from it. He did not tire of looking at the little army, but he struck the hat once again, and all the soldiers took their places inside. The statue then explained to the cobbler how the innkeeper where he had spent the night had stolen the magic items he had previously won. The cobbler resolved to gain them back, and, after thanking the statue, he left for the inn. Arriving there, he demanded his rag and his goat from the innkeeper, but the innkeeper refused to give them back. Then the cobbler struck his hat, and immediately the entire room was filled to overflowing with soldiers, who threatened the innkeeper with death if he did not give back the magic items. Filled with fear, he gave back the items, and the cobbler returned home as a wealthy man. After arriving home he immediately invited the king of the land to visit him, promising to show him all kinds of interesting things. The king came and saw the goat and the rag, and the food served by it tasted wonderful to him. However, as he was leaving, he ordered his servants to steal the rag as well as the goat. And they did so. The cobbler demanded the return of his property, but to no avail. The king only laughed at him. Then the cobbler, trusting in his hat, declared war against the king. The latter received the declaration with a laugh. Together they decided on a place and a time for the battle. When the day arrived, the cobbler was the first one on the battlefield. Soon the king arrived with ten of his best soldiers. When the cobbler saw them he had his army march out of the hat, ordering them to capture the king and the others. The king was amazed at the army and attempted to flee, for he felt that he was too weak. However, the opposing horde had already surrounded him. He had to surrender, and he was brought before the cobbler, who promised him freedom as soon as he gave back his goat and his rag. Thus even a king was once defeated by a cobbler. Source: Theodor Vernaleken, "Der Wunschfetzen, die Goldziege, die Hutsoldaten," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, dem Volke treu nacherzählt (Vienna and Leipzig: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1896), no. 11, pp. 40-44. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. This tale is from Lower Austria (Niederösterreich). Return to the table of contents . The Good-for-Nothing Georgia There was once a good-for-nothing man, who had a shrewish wife. This wife would give him no rest. She importuned him, saying, "You must go away, travel forth and seek for something. You see how poor we are." At last the husband could no longer bear her reproaches, so he arose and went. He went forth. He himself knew not whither he was going. He traveled on, and when he had ascended the ninth mountain from where he started, he saw a large house, and in this house devis dwelt. He came near and saw in the middle of the room a fire, round which the devis were sitting, warming their hands. He went in and spoke in a friendly manner to them, and sat down by the fire. The devis treated him well, for he had spoken them fair. He stayed with them by day and by night. He ate with them. He drank with them. He slept with the. He was like their youngest brother. These devis possessed a wishing stone. When they were assembled together, they took out the stone. If they wished for dinner, dinner appeared. If they wanted supper, they wished for supper, and lo! what they wished for heartily appeared before their eyes. They lived thus without care. They had no kind of sorrow, and this was just what our good-for-nothing liked. He approved of this life and wanted to steal the wishing stone. Once when the devis were in a deep sleep, the good-for-nothing silently stole out of the bedroom, took the wishing stone, and came to the door. He wished the door to open, and sure enough it began to creak. It creaked and called out, "The guest has stolen the wishing stone." The good-for-nothing turned back, put the stone in its place, went into the bedroom, and pretended to be asleep. The creaking of the door awoke the devis . They jumped up and looked. They found the wishing stone in its place and the good-for-nothing in a sweet slumber. They rejoiced, closed the door, and went to sleep again. When they had fallen into a profound sleep, the good-for-nothing rose up, took the stone, came to the door, and, when he wished it to open, it began to creak out, "The guest has stolen the wishing stone." The good-for-nothing turned back, again put the wishing stone in its place, went into the bedroom, and began to snore as if he were asleep. The devis awoke and looked, but the stone was in its place, and the good-for-nothing did this trick over and over again. The devis were angry and furiously jumped up, pulled down the door, and put it in the fire. When the door was burned, and the devis slept again, the good-for-nothing rose up, put the wishing stone in his pocket, and left the house. The next morning, when the devis awoke, they saw that neither the good-for-nothing nor the wishing stone was there any longer. They looked everywhere, but could not tell whether heaven or earth had swallowed them, so they learned nothing. The good-for-nothing went on his way joyfully. He no longer had any care or thought. He rejoiced that now he could live without trouble. He went on, and met on the road a man with a big stick. This man said, "Brother, give me something to eat." The good-for-nothing put his hand in his pocket, and took out the wishing stone. He wished, and there appeared before them everything ready for eating. When they had finished their meal, the man with the stick said, "Come, I will exchange my stick with you for this stone." "What is the use of your stick?" inquired the good-for-nothing. "If anyone stretches out his hand and calls, "Out, stick!" the stick will fall upon the person in front of its master." The good-for-nothing made the exchange and went away a short distance. Then he said, "Out, stick!" and stretched it out towards its former master. It struck him until all his bones were made soft. When he had been well beaten, the good-for-nothing came, took his stone, and went on his way with the stick. He went on and saw a man with a sword, who said, "Brother, give me something to eat." The good-for-nothing took out his wishing stone, and immediately meat and drink appeared before them. When he had eaten sufficiently, the man said, "Come, I will give you this sword in exchange for the stone." "What is the use of your sword?" inquired the good-for-nothing." "Whoever possesses it can, if he choose, cut off a hundred thousand heads." He exchanged his wishing stone for the sword, and went away. After waiting a short time, he said, "Out, stick!" and pointed to the former owner of the sword. The stick approached and beat the man mercilessly. Then the good-for-nothing took the wishing stone and went away. He went on again until he met a man with a piece of felt, who said, "Brother, give me something to eat." The good-for-nothing took out his wishing stone, wished, and immediately a delicious repast appeared. When he had eaten all he wanted, the man said, "Come, I will give you my felt in exchange for this stone." "What is the use of your felt?" inquired the good-for-nothing. "If a man's head is cut off, one only has to take a piece of this felt and apply it. His head will stick on again, and he will live." The good-for-nothing gave him the stone, took the felt, and went away. When he had gone a little way, he said, "Out, stick!" and the stick beat the man till he was like a wrinkled quince. The good-for-nothing took his stone and traveled on. At last he came to his home. He placed the stick behind the door, greeted his wife and spoke thus, "Wife, see what I have brought," and showed her the sword, felt, and wishing stone. His wife looked on him with contempt, opened her mouth, and cast all the dirt in the world on his head. The good-for-nothing bore it till he could bear it no longer, so he called, "Out, stick!" The stick beat her woefully. Then he made his little children sit down, took out his wishing stone, wished the table to be laid, and the rarest delicacies were placed on the cloth. They enjoyed their dinner, while the beaten wife silently looked down and sulked. She bore it for a time, but at last she could bear it no longer and came and embraced her husband's knees. Her husband forgave her, and they caressed one another lovingly. After some time, this wishing stone made him quite rich, so that all their dishes were made of gold. Once the wife said to her husband, "You must invite the king and give him a great banquet." Her husband said, "Do you not know, the king is an envious man. When he sees these things, he will take them from us and put us in prison." His wife pleaded and whined until her husband consented. They invited the king and made ready a magnificent banquet. When the feast was finished, the king demanded the wishing stone. The good-for-nothing said he could not spare it. The king was enraged and sent his whole army to take it away by force. "This will not do at all," said the good-for-nothing to himself. "Since they are going to try and force me, I shall show my strength." While he spoke, he pointed the sword at the army, and the stick at the king. The heads of all the army were cut off, and the stick beat the envious king. The king begged and prayed for mercy, "Only bring my soldiers back to life again, and I swear I will leave you in peace." Then the good-for-nothing arose, took the felt and laid a piece on the neck of each soldier, and the army was restored to life. The king no longer dared to show his enmity, the good-for-nothing's wife obeyed him in everything, and they lived happily ever afterwards. Source: Marjory Wardrop, Georgian Folk Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 11-15. I have slightly modernized Wardrop's translation by changing "thee" and its associated forms to "you," "your," etc. Return to the table of contents . The Adventures of Juan Philippines (Tagalog) Juan was always getting into trouble. He was a lazy boy, and more than that, he did not have good sense. When he tried to do things, he made such dreadful mistakes that he might better not have tried. His family grew very impatient with him, scolding and beating him whenever he did anything wrong. One day his mother, who was almost discouraged with him, gave him a bolo [a long knife] and sent him to the forest, for she thought he could at least cut firewood. Juan walked leisurely along, contemplating some means of escape. At last he came to a tree that seemed easy to cut, and then he drew his long knife and prepared to work. Now it happened that this was a magic tree, and it said to Juan, "If you do not cut me I will give you a goat that shakes silver from its whiskers." This pleased Juan wonderfully, both because he was curious to see the goat, and because he would not have to chop the wood. He agreed at once to spare the tree, whereupon the bark separated, and a goat stepped out. Juan commanded it to shake its whiskers, and when the money began to drop, he was so delighted that he took the animal and started home to show his treasure to his mother. On the way he met a friend who was more cunning than Juan, and when he heard of the boy's rich goat he decided to rob him. Knowing Juan's fondness for tuba [fermented coconut juice], he persuaded him to drink, and while he was drunk, the friend substituted another goat for the magic one. As soon as he was sober again, Juan hastened home with the goat and told his people of the wonderful tree, but when he commanded the animal to shake its whiskers, no money fell out. The family, believing it to be another of Juan's tricks, beat and scolded the poor boy. He went back to the tree and threatened to cut it down for lying to him, but the tree said, "No, do not cut me down, and I will give you a net which you may cast on dry ground, or even in the treetops, and it will return full of fish." So Juan spared the tree and started home with his precious net, but on the way he met the same friend who again persuaded him to drink tuba. While he was drunk, the friend replaced the magic net with a common one, so that when Juan reached home and tried to show his power, he was again the subject of ridicule. Once more Juan went to his tree, this time determined to cut it down. But the offer of a magic pot, always full of rice, and spoons which provided whatever he wished to eat with his rice, dissuaded him, and he started home happier than ever. Before reaching home, however, he met with the same fate as before, and his folks, who were becoming tired of his pranks, beat him harder than ever. Thoroughly angered, Juan sought the tree a fourth time and was on the point of cutting it down when once more it arrested his attention. After some discussion, he consented to accept a stick to which he had only to say, "Boombye, Boomba," and it would beat and kill anything he wished. When he met his friend on this trip, he was asked what he had, and he replied, "Oh, it is only a stick, but if I say 'Boombye, Boomba' it will beat you to death." At the sound of the magic words the stick leaped from his hands and began beating his friend until he cried, "Oh, stop it, and I will give back everything that I stole from you." Juan ordered the stick to stop, and then he compelled the man to lead the goat and to carry the net and the jar and spoons to his home. There Juan commanded the goat, and it shook its whiskers until his mother and brothers had all the silver they could carry. Then they ate from the magic jar and spoons until they were filled. And this time Juan was not scolded. After they had finished Juan said, "You have beaten me and scolded me all my life, and now you are glad to accept my good things. I am going to show you something else, 'Boombye, Boomba.'" Immediately the stick leaped out and beat them all until they begged for mercy and promised that Juan should ever after be head of the house. From that time Juan was rich and powerful, but he never went anywhere without his stick. One night, when some thieves came to his house, he would have been robbed and killed had it not been for the magic words "Boombye, Boomba," which caused the death of all the robbers. Some time after this he married a beautiful princess, and because of the kindness of the magic tree they always lived happily. Source: Mabel Cook, Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Company, 1916), pp. 196-199. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's index of folklore and mythology electronic texts . Revised March 22, 2013. The Three-Ring Parable: Tales of Type 972 The Three-Ring Parable tales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 920E edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2008 Contents Melchizedek Avoids a Trap (abstracted from Giovanni Boccaccio's Decameron ). Of the Triple State of the World ( Gesta Romanorum ). The Parable of the Three Rings (abstracted from Nathan der Weise , a drama by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing). Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Melchizedek Avoids a Trap Giovanni Boccaccio Through acts of generosity and the costs of waging war, Saladin depleted his treasury. Caught by a sudden need for money, he thought of a wealthy Jew, Melchizedek by name, who lived in Alexandria. But Melchizedek had a reputation for miserliness, and he would never voluntarily surrender the vast sum needed by Saladin, nor was the Sultan prepared to take the money by force. At last Saladin devised a plan whereby he would embarrass the wealthy Jew, who would then redeem himself with money. Accordingly, Saladin summoned Melchizedek to his palace, then stated, "Men speak highly of your wisdom. What conclusion have you reached concerning the ways of God? Which of the three great religions is the truly authentic one? Judaism, Christianity, or Islam?" Sensing that with this question Saladin was seeking to lead him into an unwinnable quarrel and thus gain advantage over him, Melchizedek answered, "That is an excellent question, my lord. I can best explain my views on the subject with the following story:" I have heard that there was once a wealthy man whose most prized possession was a precious ring. He bequeathed this ring to one of his sons, and by this sign, the latter was known as the head of family. Succeeding generations followed this tradition, with the principal heir always inheriting the cherished ring from his father. But, to make a long story short, the ring finally came into the possession of a man who had three sons, each the equal of the others in obedience, virtue, and worthiness. Unwilling to favor one son over the others, the father had a master artisan make two copies of the valued ring, and he bequeathed a ring to each son. Following the father's death, each son laid claim to the deceased man's title and estate, showing the inherited ring as proof. However, a careful inspection of the three rings could not reveal which of them was the authentic one, so the three sons' claims remain unresolved. The same is true with the three great religions, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. The adherents of each religion consider themselves to be the legitimate heirs of God's truth. But as was the case with the rings, their claims too remain unresolved. Saladin, recognizing that the Jew had escaped his trap, decided to ask him directly for a loan. Melchizedek gladly provided him with the sum he needed. The Sultan later repaid the debt in full, and Saladin and Melchizedek remained friends as long as they lived. Source: Giovanni Boccaccio, The Decameron , day 1, tale 3. Retold and shortened. © 1999 by D. L. Ashliman. The Decameron (Il Decamerone) was written between 1350 and 1355. Saladin (born 1137 or 1138, died 1193), Sultan of Egypt, Syria, Yemen, and Palestine, was the greatest Muslim hero of the middle ages. Return to the table of contents . Of the Triple State of the World Gesta Romanorum A certain knight had three sons, and on his deathbed he bequeathed the inheritance to his firstborn; to the second, his treasury; and to the third, a very valuable ring, of more worth indeed than all he had left to the others. But the two former had also rings, and they were all apparently the same. After their father's death the first son said, "I possess that precious ring of my father." The second said, "You have it not -- I have." To this the third son answered, "That is not true. The elder of us has the estate, the second the treasure, and therefore it is but meet that I should have the most valuable ring." The first son answered, "Let us prove, then, whose claims to it have the preeminence." They agreed, and several sick men were made to resort to them for the purpose. The two first rings had no effect, but the last cured all their infirmities. Application: My beloved, the knight is Christ. The three sons are the Jews, Saracens [Muslims], and Christians. The most valuable ring is faith, which is the property of the younger, that is, of the Christians Source: Gesta Romanorum . I have used the following edition: Gesta Romanorum; or, Entertaining Moral Stories , translated from the Latin by Charles Swan (London: George Bell and Sons, 1877), tale 89, pp. 161-162. Translation slightly revised. The Gesta Romanorum or Deeds of the Romans was compiled in Latin in the early fourteenth century by an English cleric. It was first published about 1473. Its title notwithstanding, only a few of the work's some 283 stories deal with the Romans. Instead, the work presents a mixture of anecdotes, legends, and fables, gleaned from many sources and presented in a context appropriate for incorporation into Christian sermons. Return to the table of contents . The Parable of the Three Rings Gotthold Ephraim Lessing An uneasy peace ruled in Jerusalem. Saladin's victory against the Crusaders had cost the Muslims dearly, both in the loss of troops and in the depletion of the royal treasury. Saladin was resolved to rule with civilized humanity as far as possible. But it was an uneasy peace, with Jews, Christians, and the newly victorious Muslims all suspicious of one another. Thus when Saladin requested an audience with Nathan, a leading Jewish merchant, the latter was very apprehensive about the Sultan's motivation. Nathan was known far and wide not only for his successes in commerce, but also for his skills in diplomacy and negotiation. Jews, Christians, and Muslims alike called him Nathan the Wise. Nathan's suspicions were well founded, for Saladin was indeed looking to replenish his exhausted coffers with a loan or a gift from his wealthy Jewish subject. Too civil to openly demand such a tribute from the peace-loving Nathan, the Sultan instead masked his request in the form of a theological question. "Your reputation for wisdom is great," said the Sultan. "You must have studied the great religions. Tell me, which is the best, Judaism, Islam, or Christianity?" "Sultan, I am a Jew," replied Nathan. "And I a Muslim," interrupted Saladin, "and between us stands the Christian. But the three faiths contradict one another. They cannot all be true. Tell me the results of your own wise deliberations. Which religion is best?" Nathan recognized the trap at once. Any answer except "Islam" would offend Saladin the Muslim, whereas any answer except "Judaism" would place his own integrity under question. Thus, instead of giving a direct answer, Nathan responded by relating a parable to Saladin: In the Orient in ancient times there lived a man who possessed a ring of inestimable worth. Its stone was an opal that emitted a hundred colors, but its real value lay in its ability to make its wearer beloved of God and man. The ring passed from father to most favored son for many generations, until finally its owner was a father with three sons, all equally deserving. Unable to decide which of the three sons was most worthy, the father commissioned a master artisan to make two exact copies of the ring, then gave each son a ring, and each son believed that he alone had inherited the original and true ring. But instead of harmony, the father's plan brought only discord to his heirs. Shortly after the father died, each of the sons claimed to be the sole ruler of the father's house, each basing his claim to authority on the ring given to him by the father. The discord grew even stronger and more hateful when a close examination of the rings failed to disclose any differences. "But wait," interrupted Saladin, "surely you do not mean to tell me that there are no differences between Islam, Judaism, and Christianity!" "You are right, Sultan," replied Nathan. "Their teachings and practices differ in ways that can be seen by all. However, in each case, the teachings and practices are based on beliefs and faith, beliefs and faith that at their roots are the same. Which of us can prove that our beliefs and our faith are more reliable than those of others?" "I understand," said Saladin. "Now continue with your tale." "The story is nearly at its end," replied Nathan. The dispute among the brothers grew until their case was finally brought before a judge. After hearing the history of the original ring and its miraculous powers, the judge pronounced his conclusion: "The authentic ring," he said, "had the power to make its owner beloved of God and man, but each of your rings has brought only hatred and strife. None of you is loved by others; each loves only himself. Therefore I must conclude that none of you has the original ring. Your father must have lost it, then attempted to hide his loss by having three counterfeit rings made, and these are the rings that cause you so much grief." The judge continued: "Or it may be that your father, weary of the tyranny of a single ring, made duplicates, which he gave to you. Let each of you demonstrate his belief in the power of his ring by conducting his life in such a manner that he fully merits -- as anciently promised -- the love of God and man. "Marvelous! Marvelous!" exclaimed Saladin. "Your tale has set my mind at rest. You may go." "Sultan, was there nothing else you wished from me?" asked Nathan. "No. Nothing." "Then may I take the liberty to make a request of you. My trade of late has brought me unexpected wealth, and in these uncertain times I need a secure repository. Would you be willing to accept my recent earnings as loan or deposit?" The Sultan gladly acceded to Nathan's wish. And thus Saladin gained from his wise Jewish subject both material and spiritual benefit, and Nathan the Wise found a safe haven for his wealth and earned the respect of the Islamic Sultan. Source: Abstracted from Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, Nathan der Weise , a drama in five acts (1779). Events leading up to Nathan's telling of the parable are depicted in act 3, scenes 4-7. The parable itself is contained in act 3, scene 7. © 1999 by D. L. Ashliman. Link to the text of the entire play (in German): Nathan der Weise . Note that in Lessing's version of the three-ring parable, unlike its precedents, all three rings are deemed to be false. Saladin (born 1137 or 1138, died 1193), Sultan of Egypt, Syria, Yemen, and Palestine, was the greatest Muslim hero of the middle ages. Return to the table of contents . Return to: Table of Contents. Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Revised March 19, 2013. The Lay of Thrym The Lay of Thrym from the Poetic Edda retold in English prose by D. L. Ashliman © 2009 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Lay of Thrym Thor awoke with a start. His hammer, the mighty Mjöllnir, was missing. He shook his shaggy head, and his beard bristled with anger as he groped around him. He shouted to Loki, "My hammer has been stolen! No one in heaven or on earth can know what a loss this is for me!" Forthwith they rushed to Freyja's shining halls. "Freyja," said Thor, "will you lend me your feathered coat to help me seek my hammer?" Freyja said, "I would lend it to you even if it were made of gold or silver." Then Loki put on the feathered coat and, leaving Asgard, winged his way to Jotunheim, the world of giants. Thrym, the lord of giants, sat upon a mound, smoothing his horses' manes and twisting golden halters for his hounds. He said, "How are the Æsir? How are the elves? Why have you come to Jotunheim?" Loki said, "It is ill with the Æsir; it is ill with the elves. Tell me, have you hidden the Thunderer's hammer?" Thrym said, "Yes, I have hidden Thor's hammer eight leagues deep in the earth. No one can win it back from me, unless he brings to me fair Freyja as a bride." Loki flew away, the feathered coat rustling. He left behind the world of giants and winged his way back to the world of the gods. Thor met him there in the middle court. He said, "Were your labors successful? Tell me the tidings before you land. Sitting causes one to forget, and lying causes one to lie." Loki said, "Yes, my labors met with success. Thrym, the lord of giants, has your hammer; but no one can win Mjöllnir from him, unless he brings to him fair Freyja as a bride." Forthwith they rushed to find fair Freyja. "Dress yourself in bridal linen," said Thor. "You and I are on our way to the world of giants." At this Freyja foamed with rage. The halls of Asgard shook with her anger. The necklace of the Brisings broke apart. "You may call me man-crazy, if I go with you to Jotunheim," she said. Straight away all the gods and goddesses gathered to discuss how they could recover Thor's hammer. Heimdall, the fairest of the gods, like all the Vanir could see into the future. "Let us dress Thor in bridal linen," he said, "and let him wear the necklace of the Brisings. Tie housewife's keys about his waist, and pin bridal jewels upon his breast. Let him wear women's clothes, with a dainty hood on his head." The Thunderer, mightiest of gods, replied, "The gods will call me womanish if I put on bridal linen." Then Loki, son of Laufey, said, "Thor, be still! With such foolish words the giants will soon be living here in Asgard if you do not get your hammer from them." So they dressed Thor in bridal linen, tied the necklace of Brisings around his neck and housewife's keys about his waist. They pinned bridal jewels upon his breast, and dressed him in women's clothes, with a dainty hood on his head. Then Loki, son of Laufey, said, "I will accompany you as your maid-servant. Together we shall go to Jotunheim." Forthwith the goats were driven home to be harnessed. The mountains trembled, and the earth burned with fire as Odin's son rode to Jotunheim. Thrym, the lord of giants, said to his kin, "Stand up, you Jotuns, and put straw on the benches. They are bringing fair Freyja, daughter of Njord from Noatun, to be my bride. I have golden-horned cattle grazing in my yard. They are pure-black oxen, a joy to giants. I have treasures aplenty and rule over great riches. Freyja is the only thing that I lack." Day soon became evening, and ale was brought to the giants' table. There Thor ate an ox and eight whole salmons, in addition to all the dainties that were served to the women. Furthermore, he drank three measures of mead. Thrym, the lord of giants, said, "Have you ever seen a bride eat and drink so heartily?" The maid-servant wisely answered thus: "Freyja was so eager to come to Jotunheim that she has eaten nothing for eight nights." Thrym stooped beneath his bride's veil, wanting to kiss her, then jumped back the whole length of the hall. "Why are Freyja's eyes so fearful?" he said. "I think that fire is flaming from her eyes." The maid-servant wisely answered the giant thus: "Freyja was so eager to come to Jotunheim that she has not slept for eight nights." Then a poor sister of one of the giants came in and dared to beg a gift from the bride. "If you want my love and friendship then give me the gold rings from your fingers," she said. Then Thrym, the lord of giants, said, "Bring me the hammer to bless the bride. Lay Mjöllnir on the maiden's lap, let the two of us thus be hallowed in the name of Vor, goddess of vows!" When Thor saw the hammer his heart laughed within him, and he took courage. He first slew Thrym, the lord of giants, then he crushed all the giant's kin. Finally he slew the old giantess who had begged for a bridal gift. Instead of coins she got the crack of the hammer. Instead of rings she received the mark of Mjöllnir. Thus Thor won back his hammer. I have used the following editing, which includes both the original Old Norse text and an English translation: The Elder or Poetic Edda, Commonly Known as Sæmund's Edda, part 1: The Mythological Poems , edited and translated by Olive Bray (London: The Viking Club, 1908), pp. 126-37. Links to related sites Hávamál: The Words of Odin the High One from the Poetic Edda. Rígsþula: The Lay of Rig from the Poetic Edda. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 20, 2009. Thunderbolts Thunderbolts Translated by D. L. Ashliman Thunderbolts and Toadstones A. Haas Belemnites, remnants from pre-flood cuttle-fish, are very common on the island of Rügen, especially in the stone rubble on chalk beaches. In common language they are called "thunderbolts," "thunder-arrows," or sometimes "devil-fingers." It is believed that during thunderstorms they are hurled to the earth with lightning. A person killed by lightning is struck by a thunderbolt carried by the lightning. Another belief is that a thunderbolt is created when lightning strikes the earth. Thus thunderbolts are only found in places where lightning has struck the earth. Thunderbolts are collected with enthusiasm and then kept at home, for it is believed that a thunder-arrow protects a house from lightning. People especially like to keep them in their milk rooms. Stomach-aches can be cured by scraping off and swallowing a little of the thunderbolt. The toadstone, a fossilized sea-urchin, is also considered to be a proven protective agent against lightning, and is therefore kept at home, especially in milk rooms. The farmers of Rügen often place in their swine troughs the ball-shaped stone kernels of the sea-urchin (ananchytes ovatus) that are often found in chalk. These presumably aid in the fattening of the swine and also protect the animals from red murrain. Toadstones are also called "cross-stones" or "star-stones," the latter name coming from the belief that they fall from heaven or from the stars. Cross-stones are placed in the milk room to protect the milk from "getting something." However, if the milk has already been bewitched, then the stones are placed in a milk sieve. Belemnites, according to modern science, are the fossilized internal shells of any of numerous extinct cephalopods. Thunderbolts are also known as thunderstones, elf-bolts, and fairy-arrows. There is ample evidence that they were valued as magic talismans in ancient times, often in association with Thor worship. Source: A. Haas, Rügensche Sagen und Märchen (Stettin: Johs. Burmeister's Buchhandlung, 1903), no. 185, pp. 166-167. Revised January 31, 1997. Tikki Tikki Tembo Tikki Tikki Tembo a chain tale from China recalled by D. L. Ashliman Once upon a time in faraway China there lived two brothers, one named Sam, and one named Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako. Now one day the two brothers were playing near the well in their garden when Sam fell into the well, and Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako ran to his mother, shouting, "Quick, Sam has fallen into the well. What shall we do?" "What?" cried the mother, "Sam has fallen into the well? Run and tell father!" Together they ran to the father and cried, "Quick, Sam has fallen into the well. What shall we do?" "Sam has fallen into the well?" cried the father. "Run and tell the gardner!" Then they all ran to the gardner and shouted, "Quick, Sam has fallen into the well. What shall we do?" "Sam has fallen into the well?" cried the gardner, and then he quickly fetched a ladder and pulled the poor boy from the well, who was wet and cold and frightened, and ever so happy to still be alive. Some time afterward the two brothers were again playing near the well, and this time Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako fell into the well, and Sam ran to his mother, shouting, "Quick, Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako has fallen into the well. What shall we do?" "What?" cried the mother, "Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako has fallen into the well? Run and tell father!" Together they ran to the father and cried, "Quick, Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako has fallen into the well. What shall we do?" "Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako has fallen into the well?" cried the father. "Run and tell the gardner!" Then they all ran to the gardner and shouted, "Quick, Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako has fallen into the well. What shall we do?" "Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako has fallen into the well?" cried the gardner, and then he quickly fetched a ladder and pulled Tikki Tikki Tembo No Sarimbo Hari Kari Bushkie Perry Pem Do Hai Kai Pom Pom Nikki No Meeno Dom Barako from the well, but the poor boy had been in the water so long that he had drowned. And from that time forth, the Chinese have given their children short names. Source: I heard this story in the 1940's from my mother, Elgarda Zobell Ashliman, who learned it about 1927 in Rigby, Idaho, from Ruth Harper, a schoolteacher. I do not know whether Ruth Harper learned the story from a published book or from oral tradition. A more recent retelling of this Chinese folktale is Tikki Tikki Tembo , retold by Arlene Mosel, illustrated by Blair Lent (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1968). This tale follows the pattern of the traditional chain story "The Death of the Little Hen," in which a chicken chokes on a nut, then dies while its partner is seeking help from first one source and then another (Aarne-Thompson type 2021A). Link to additional chain tales . Return to Folktales from China , edited by D. L. Ashliman. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 18, 2002. Tom Thumb: Folktales of type 700 Tom Thumb Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 700 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2021-2023 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents I Had a Little Husband (England). The Famous History of Tom Thumb (England, 1775). The Comical and Merry Tricks of Tom Thumb (Scotland, ca. 1820). Tom Thumb (Ireland). A Story (Ireland). New History of the Life and Adventures of Tom Thumb (USA -- Connecticut). Thomas of the Thumb (Scotland). Thumthick (Germany). Thumbling's Travels (Germany). A Story about Palecek, "Little Thumb" ) (Czech Republic). Thumbikin (Norway). Svend Tomling (Denmark). Little Lasse (Finland). John Bit-of-a-Man (France). Little Thumb (France). Little Blue Riding Hood (France). Jean des Pois Verts (France). Little Chick-Pea (Italy). Robber Nut (Albania). The Little Spirit, or Boy-Man (Native American). The Transformation of Issunboshi (Japan). A Man Who Was Only a Finger and a Half in Stature (Bangladesh / India). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. I Had a Little Husband England I had a little husband, No bigger than my thumb, I put him in a pint pot, And there I bade him drum. I bought a little horse, That galloped up and down; I bridled him, and saddled him, And sent him out of town. I gave him some garters, To garter up his hose, And a little handkerchief, To wipe his pretty nose. Source (books.google.com): James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, The Nursery Rhymes of England: Collected Chiefly from Oral Tradition (London: John Russell Smith, 1846), no. 341, p. 155 . Source (Internet Archive): James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, The Nursery Rhymes of England (London and New York: Frederick Warne and Company, 1886), no. 474, p. 240 . Return to the table of contents . The Famous History of Tom Thumb England, 1775 Of the Parentage, Birth, and Education of Tom Thumb; with all the merry Pranks he played in his Childhood In Arthur's court Tom Thumb did live, A man of miccle might, Who was the best of the table round, And eke a worthy knight. In stature but an inch in height, Or quarter of a span, How think you that this worthy knight Was prov'd a valiant man? His father was a ploughman plain; His mother milk'd the cow, And yet the way to get a son This couple knew not how. Until the time the good old man To learned Merlin goes, And there to him in deep distress, In secret manner shews, How in his heart he'd wish to have A child in time to come, To be his heir, tho' it might be No bigger than his thumb. Of this old Merlin then foretold How he his wish should have, And a son of stature small, This charm unto him gave: No blood nor bones in him should be, His shape, at being such, That he should hear him speak, but not His wandering shadow touch. But unseen to overcome, Whereas it pleased him, Begat and born in half an hour, For to fit his father's will. And is four minutes grew so fast, When he became as tall, As was the ploughman's thumb in length, And so she did him call Tom thumb, the which the fair queen Did give him to his name, Who with her train of goblins grim, Unto the christening came. When they cloathed him so fine and gay, In garments rich and fair, All which did serve him many years, In seemly sort to wear. His hat made of an oaken loaf, His shirt a spider's web, Both light and soft for his fine limbs, Which were so smally bred. His hose and doublet thistle down, Together weav'd full fine, And stockings of the apple green, Made out of the outer rhine. His garters were two little hairs, Pluck'd from his mother's eye, His shoes made of a mouse's skin, And tann'd most curiously. Thus like a valiant gallant, he Did venture forth to go, With other children in the street; His pretty pranks to shew. Where for counters, pins, and points, And cherry stones did play, Till he amongst the gamesters young Had lost his stock away. Yet he could not the same renew, When as most nimbly he, Would dive into their cherry bags, So their partakers be. Unseen or felt by any one, Until a scholar shut The nimble youth into a box, Wherein his pins were put. Of whom to be reveng'd he took, In mirth and pleasant game, Black pots and glasses, which he hung Upon a light sun beam. The other boys did do the same, In pieces tore him quite, For which they were severely whipt, For which he laugh'd outright. And so Tom Thumb restrained was From this his sport and play, And by his mother after that Compell'd at home to stay. Where about Christmas time His mother a hog had kill'd, And Tom would see the pudding made, For fear it fhould be spoil'd. Of Tom's falling into the Pudding Bowl, and his Escape out of the Tinker's Budget He set the candle for to light Upon the pudding bowl, Of which there is unto this day A pretty story told. For Tom fell in, and could not be For some time after found, For in the blood and batter he Was lost, and almost drown'd. And she not knowing of the same, Directly after that, Into the pudding stir'd her son, Instead of minced fat, Now this pudding of the largest size, Into the kettle thrown, Made all the rest to jump about, As with a whirlwind blown. Bue it so tumbled up and down, Within the liquor there, As if the devil had been boil'd, Such was the mother's fear. That up she took the pudding strait, And gave it at the door Unto a tinker, which from thence He in his budget bore. But as the Tinker climb'd the stile, He chanc'd to let a crack, How! good old man, cry'd Tom Thumb, Still hanging at his back. At which the tinker began to run, He would no longer stay, But cast both bag and pudding too Over the hedge way. From whence poor Tom got loose at last, He home return'd again, And from great dangers long In safety did remain. Until fuch time his mother went A milking of her kine, Where Tom unto a thistle fast She linked with a line. Of Tom Thumb's being tied to a Thistle, and of his Mother's Cow eating him up; with his strange Deliverance out of the Cow's Belly A thread that held him to the same, For fear the blustring wind Would blow him thence, so as she might Her son in safety find. But mark the hap, a cow came by, And up the thistle eat, Poor Tom withal, who on a dock, Was made the red cow's meat. But being miss'd his mother went, Calling him every where, Where art thou Tom, where art thou? Quoth he, here mother, here; In the red cow's belly here, Your son is swallow'd up, All which within her fearful heart Much woeful dolar put. Mean time the cow was troubl'd sore In this her rumbling womb, All which within her fearful heart Had backwards cast Tom Thumb. Now all besmeared as he was, His mother took him up, Now home to bear him hence, poor lad, She in her apron put. Tom Thumb is carried away by a Raven, and swallowed up by a Giant, with several other strange Things that befel him. Now after this, in sowing time, His father would him have Into the field to drive the plough And therewithal him gave A whip made of a barley straw, For to drive the cattle on, There in a furrow'd land new sown, Poor Tom was lost and gone. Now by a raven of great strength Away poor Tom was born, And carried in a carrion's beak, Just like a grain of corn, Unto a giant's castle top, Whereon he let him fall, And soon the giant swallow'd up His body, cloaths, and all. But in his belly did Tom Thumb So great a rumbling make, That neither night nor day he could The smallest quiet take, Until the giant him had spew'd Full three miles in the sea, Where a large fish soon took him up, And bore him thence away. The lusty fish was after caught, So to King Arthur sent, Where Tom was kept, being a dwarf, Until his time was spent. Long time he liv'd in jollity, Beloved of the court, And none like Tom was so esteem'd Among the better sort. Tom Thumb, by the Command of King Arthur, dances a Galliard upon the Queen's left Hand. Among the deeds of courtship done His highness did command, That he should dance a galliard brave, Upon the queen's left hand. All which he did, and for the same, Our king his signet gave, Which Tom about his middle wore, Long time a girdle brave. Behold it was a rich reward, And given by the King, Which to his praise and worthiness Did lasting honour bring. For while he lived in the court, His pleasant pranks were seen, And he, according to report, Was favour'd by the queen. Tom rides a hunting with the King. Now after that the King he would Abroad for pleasure go, Yet still Tom Thumb must be with him, Plac'd on his saddle bow. And on a time when as it rain'd, Tom Thumb most nimbly crept Into his button-hole, where He in his bosom slept. And being near his Highness's heart, Did crave a wealthy boon, A noble gift, the which the King Commanded should be done. For to relieve his father's wants, And mother's, being old, It was as much of silver coin As well his arms could hold. And so away goes lusty Tom, With three pence at his back, A heavy burthen, which did make His very bones to crack. So travelling two days and nights, In labour and great pain, He came unto the house whereat His parents did remain.. Which was but half a mile in space From good King Arthur's court, All this in eight and forty hours He went in weary sort. But coming to his father's door, He there such entrance had, As made his both rejoice, And he thereat was glad. So his mother in her apron put Her gentle son in haste, And by the fire side within A wallnut shell him plac'd. And then they feasted him three days Upon a hazel nut, On which he rioted long, And them to charges put. And thereupon grew wonderous sick, In eating so much meat, That was sufficient for a month For this great man to eat. So when his business call'd him forth, King Arthur's court to see, From which no longer Tom, 'tis said. He could a stranger be. But a few moist April drops, That settled on the way, His long and weary journey Did hinder and so stay, Until this careful mother took A birding trunk in sport, And with one blaft blew this her son Into King Arthur's court. Of Tom's running a Tilt, with other Exercises performed by him. Thus he at tilt and tournament Was entertained so, That all the rest of Arthur's knights Did him much pleasure shew. And good Sir Launcelot du Lake, Sir Tristram and Sir Guy, Yet none compar'd to brave Tom Thumb, In acts of cavalry In honour of which noble day, And for his Lady's sake, A challenge in King Arthur's court Tom Thumb did bravely make. Gainst whom the noble knights did run, Sir Kihon and the rest, But yet Tom Thumb with all his might Did bear away the best. Sir Launcelot du Lake at last In manly sort came in, So with this stout and hardy knight A battle did begin. Which made the courtiers all aghaft, For there this valiant man, Thro' Lancelot's steed, before them all, With nimble manner ran. Yea horse and all, with spear and shield, As hardly e'er was seen, Bur only by King Arthur's self, And his beloved Queen, Who from her finger took a ring, Thro' which he did make away. Not touching it in simple sort, As it had been in play. He also cleft the smallest hair, From the fair lady's head, From hurting her whose even hand Him lasting honours bred. Such were his deeds, and noble acts In Arthur's court were shewn, The like in all the world beside Before was never seen. Tom is taken Sick, and dies. Thus at his sports Tom toil'd himself, That he a Sickness took, Thro' all which manly exercise His strength had him forsook. Where lying on a bed sore sick, King Arthur's doctors came, By cunning skill and physic's art, To ease and cure the same. He being both slender and tall, The cunning doctors took A fine perspective glass, with which They took a careful look, Into his sickly body down, And there they saw that death Stood ready in his wasted guts, To seize his vital breath. His arms and legs consum'd as small As was a spider's web, Thro' which his dying hours flew, And all his limbs were dead. His face no bigger than an ant's, Which hardly could be seen, The loss of this renowned knight Much griev'd the king and Queen. And so with grief and quietness He left the earth below, And up into the fairy land, His fading ghost did go. Where the fairy queen receiv'd With heavy mournful cheer, The body of this valiant Knight, Whom she esteem'd so dear. For with her flying nymphs in green, She took him from his bed, With music sweet and melody, As soon as life was fled. For whom King Arthur and his Knights Full forty years did mourn, In the remembrance of his name, That strangely thus was born. He built a tomb of marble grey, And year by year did come, To celebrate the mournful day, And burial of Tom Thumb. Whose fame lives here in England still, Amongst the country sort, Of whom the wives and children dear Tell pretty tales in sport. But here's a wonder come at last, Which some will scarce believe, After two hundred years were past, He did new life receive. The fair Queen she lov'd him so, As you shall understand, That once again she let him go Down from the fairy land. The very time that he return'd Unto the court again, It was, as we are well assur'd, In good King Arthur's reign. Where in the presence of the King He many wonders wrought, Recited in the Second Part, Which now is to be bought In Long-lane, Smithfield, They sell fine Histories many, With pleasant tales as e'er were told, For purchase of One Penny. Source (books.google.com): The Famous History of Tom Thumb, Wherein Is Declared His Marvellous Acts of Manhood: Full of Wonderful Merriment , Part the First (London, 1775). Links to books two and three in this series: The Famous History of Tom Thumb. Wherein is declared, His Marvellous Acts of Manhood Full of wonderful Merriment. Performed after his first Return from Fairy Land , Part the Second (London, 1775). The History of Tom Thumb. Wherein is declared His Marvellous Acts of Manhood, Full of Wonder and Merriment. Performed after his second Return from Fairy Land , Part the Third (London, 1775). Return to the table of contents . The Comical and Merry Tricks of Tom Thumb Scotland, 1820 This is an amusing little history, abounding with so many ludicrous incidents, that it almost never fails to excite the merriment and risible faculties of the young reader. Tales of enchantments and transformations by fairies and magicians, being mere chimeras of the brain, are believed by no one; and although the wonderful achievements of the renowned Tom Thumb are of this description, yet the many laughable adventures which our hero goes through makes the story be eagerly sought after and greedily devoured by juvenile readers of both sexes. It is said, that in the days of the celebrated Prince Arthur, who was king of Britain in the year 516, there lived a great magician, called Merlin, the most learned and skilful enchanter in the world at that time. This famous magician, who could assume any form he pleased, was travelling in the disguise of a poor beggar, and being very much fatigued, he stopped at the cottage of an honest ploughman to rest himself, and asked for some refreshment. The countryman gave him a hearty welcome, and his wife, who was a very good-hearted, hospitable woman, soon brought him some milk in a wooden bowl, and some coarse brown bread on a platter. Merlin was much pleased with this homely repast, and the kindesss of the ploughman and his wife; but he could not help observing, that though every thing was neat and comfortable in the cottage, they seemed both to be very dispirited and unhappy. He therefore questioned them on the cause of their melancholy, and learned that they were miserable, because they had no children. The poor woman declared, with tears in her eyes, that she should be the happiest creature in the world, if she had a son; and although he was no bigger than her husband's thumb, she would be quite satisfied. Merlin was so much amused with the idea of a boy no bigger than a man's thumb, that he determined to pay a visit to the queen of the fairies, and request her to gratify the wishes of the poor woman. When he had accomplished his journey, Merlin thought on the kind treatment he had received at the cottage, and the comical whim of the little man again suggested itself; and, being on an intimate footing with Queen Mab, he told her the purpose of his visit, and requested her to grant the desire of the countryman's wife. The droll fancy of such a little personage among the human race pleased the queen of the fairies exceedingly and she told Merlin that the wish of the poor woman should be granted. Accordingly, in a short time after, the ploughman's wife was safely delivered of a son, who, wonderful to relate! was not a bit bigger than his father's thumb. The fairy queen, who had taken an interest in the little fellow, came in at the window while the mother was sitting up in the bed admiring him. The queen kissed the child, and, giving it the name of Tom Thumb, sent for some of the fairies, who dressed her little favourite according to the instructions she gave them: An oak-leaf hat he had for his crown; His shirt of web by spiders spun; With jacket wove of thistle's down; His trowsers were of feathers done. His stockings, of apple-rind, they tie With eyelash from his mother's eye: His shoes were made of mouse's skin, Tann'd, with the downy hair, within. It is remarkable, that Tom never grew any larger than his father's thumb, which was only of an ordinary size; but as he got older he became very cunning, and full of tricks. When he was old enough to play with the boys, and had lost all his own cherry-stones, he used to creep into the bags of his playfellows, fill his pockets and, getting out unobserved, would again join in the game. One day, however, as he was coming out of a bag of cherry-stones, where he had been pilfering as usual, the boy to whom it belonged chanced to see him. "Ah, ha! my little Tommy," said the boy, "so I have caught you stealing my cherry-stones at last, and you shall be rewarded for your thievish tricks." On saying this, he drew the string tight round his neck, and gave the bag such a hearty shake, that poor little Tom's legs, thighs and body, were sadly bruised. He roared out with pain, and begged to be let out, promising never to be guilty of such bad practices again. A short time afterwards, his mother was making a batter-pudding, and Tom, being very anxious to see how it was made, climbed up to the edge of the bowl; but, unfortunately, his foot slipped, and he plumped over head and ears into the batter, unobserved by his mother, who stirred him into the pudding bag, and put him in the pot to boil. The batter had filled Tom's mouth, and prevented him from crying; but, on feeling the hot water, he kicked and struggled so much in the pot, that his mother thought that the pudding was bewitched, and, instantly pulling it out of the pot, she threw it to the door. A poor tinker, who was passing by, lifted up the pudding, and, putting it into his budget, he then walked off. As Tom had now got his mouth cleared of the batter, he then began to cry aloud, which so frightened the tinker, that he flung down the pudding, and ran away. The pudding being broke to pieces by the fall, Tom crept out covered over with the batter, and with difficulty walked home. His mother, who was very sorry to see her darling in such a woful state, put him into a tea-cup, and soon washed off the batter; after which she kissed him, and laid him in bed. Soon after the adventure of the pudding, Tom's mother went to milk her cow in the meadow, and she took him along with her. As the wind was very high, for fear of being blown away, she tied him to a thistle with a piece of fine thread. The cow soon observed the oak-leaf hat, and, liking the appearance of it, took poor Tom and the thistle at one mouthful. While the cow was chewing the thistle, Tom was afraid of her great teeth, which threatened to crush him in pieces, and he roared out as loud as he could, "Mother, mother!" "Where are you, Tommy, my dear Tommy?" said his mother. "Here, mother," replied he, "in the red cow's mouth." His mother began to cry and wring her hands; but the cow, surprised at the odd noise in her throat, opened her mouth, and let Tom drop out. Fortunately his mother caught him in her apron as he was falling to the ground, or he would have been dreadfully hurt. She then put Tom in her bosom and ran home with him. Tom's father made him a whip of a barley-straw to drive the cattle with, and having one day gone into the fields, he slipped a foot and rolled into the furrow. A raven, which was flying over, picked him up, and flew with him to the top of a giant's castle that was near the sea-side, and there left him. Tom was in a dreadful state, and did not know what to do; but he was soon more dreadfully frightened; for old Grumbo the giant came up to walk on the terrace, and observing Tom, he took him up and swallowed him like a pill. The giant had no sooner swallowed Tom, than he began to repent what he had done; for Tom began to kick and jump about so much, that he felt very uncomfortable, and at last threw him up again into the sea. A large fish swallowed Tom the moment he fell into the sea, which was soon after caught, and bought for the table of King Arthur. When they opened the fish in order to cook it, every one was astonished at finding such a little boy, and Tom was quite delighted at regaining his liberty. They carried him to the king, who made Tom his dwarf, and he soon grew a great favourite at court; for, by his tricks and gambols, he not only amused the king and queen, but also all the knights of the Round Table. It is said, that when the king rode out on horseback, he frequently took Tom along with him; and if a shower came on, he used to creep into his majesty's waistcoat-pocket, where he slept till the rain was over. King Arthur one day interrogated Tom about his parents, wishing to know if they were as small as him, and what circumstances they were in. Tom told the king that his father and mother were as tall as any of the persons about court, but in rather poor circumstances. On hearing this, the king carried Tom to his, treasury, the place where he kept all bis money, and told him to take as much money as he could carry home to his parents, which made the poor little fellow caper with joy. Tom went immediately to procure a purse, which was made of a water-bubble, and then returned to the treasury, where he received a silver threepenny-piece to put into it. Our little hero had some difficulty in lifting the burden upon his back; but he at last succeeded in getting it placed to his mind, and set forward on his journey. However, without meeting with any accident, and after resting himself more than a hundred times by the way, in two days and two nights he reached his father's house in safety. Tom had travelled forty-eight hours with a huge silver piece on his back, and was almost tired to death, when his mother ran out to meet him, and carried him in to the house. Tom's parents were both happy to see him, and the more so, as he had brought such an amazing sum of money with him; but the poor little fellow was excessively wearied, having travelled half a mile in forty-eight hours, with a huge silver threepenny-piece on his back. His mother, in order to recover him from the fatigue he bad undergone, placed him in a walnut-shell by the fireside, and feasted him for three days on a hazel-nut, which made him very sick; for a whole nut used to serve him a month. Tom soon recovered; but as there had been a fall of rain, and the ground very wet, he could not travel back to King Arthur's court; therefore his mother, one day when the wind was blowing in that direction, made a little parasol of cambric paper, and tying Tom to it, she gave him a puff into the air with her mouth, which soon carried him to the king's palace. The king, queen, and all the nobility, were happy to see Tom again at court, where he delighted them by his dexterity at tilts and tournaments; but his exertions to please them cost him very dear, and brought on such a severe fit of illness that his life was despaired of. However, the queen of the fairies, hearing of his indisposition came to court in a chariot drawn by flying mice, and placing Tom by her side, drove through the air without stopping till they arrived at her palace. After restoring him to health and permitting him to enjoy all the gay diversion of Fairy-Land, the queen commanded a strong current of air to arise, on which she placed Tom, who floated upon it like a cork in the water, and sent him instantly to the royal palace of King Arthur. Just at the time when Tom came flying across the court-yard of the palace; the cook happened to be passing with the king's great bowl of furmenty, which was a dish his majesty was very fond of; but unfortunately the poor little fellow fell plump into the middle of it and splashed the hot furmenty about the cook's face. The cook, who was an ill-natured fellow, being in a terrable rage at Tom for frightening and scalding him with the furmenty, went straight to the king, and represented that Tom had jumped into the royal furmenty, and thrown it down out of mere mischief. The king was so enraged when he heard this, that he ordered. Tom to be seized and tried for ligh treason; and there being no person who dared to plead for him, he was condemned to be beheaded immediately. On hearing this dreadful sentence pronounced, poor Tom fell a-trembling with fear, but, seeing no means of escape, and observing a miller close to him gaping with his great mouth, as country boobies do at a fair, he took a leap, and fairly jumped down his throat. This exploit was done with such activity, that not one person present saw it, and even the miller did not know the trick which Tom had played upon him. Now, as Tom had disappeared, the court broke up, and the miller went home to his mill. When To? heard the mill at work, he knew he was clear of the court, and therefore he began to tumble and roll about, so that the poor miller could get no rest, thinking he was bewitched; so he sent for a doctor. When the doctor came, Tom began to dance and sing; and the doctor being as much frightened as the miller, sent in haste for five other doctors and twenty learned men. When they were debating upon the cause of this extraordinary occurrence, the miller happened to yawn, when Tom embracing the opportunity, made another jump, and alighted safely upon his feet on the middle of the table. The miller, who was very much provoked at being tormented by such a little pigmy creature, fell into a terrible rage, and, laying hold of Tom, he then opened she window, and threw him into the river. At the moment the miller let Tom drop a large salmon, swimming along at the time, saw him fall, and snapped him up in a minute. A fisherman caught the salmon, and sold it in the market to the steward of a great lord. The nobleman, on seeing the fish, thought it so uncommonly fine, that he made a present of it to King Arthur, who ordered it to be dressed immediately. When the cook cut open the fish, he found poor Tom, and run to the king with him; but his majesty being engaged with state affairs, ordered him to be taken away, and kept in custody till he sent for him. The cook was determined that Tom should not slip out of his hands this time, so he put him into a mousetrap, and left him to peep through the wires. Tom had remained in the trap a whole week, when he was sent for by King Arthur, who pardoned him for throwing down the furmenty, and took him again into favour. On account of his wonderful feats of activity Tom was knighted by the king, and went under the name of the renowned Sir Thomas Thumb. As Tom's clothes had suffered much in the batter-pudding, the furmenty, and the insides of the giant, miller, and fishes, his majesty ordered him a new suit of clothes, and to be mounted as a knight: Of butterfly's wings his shirt was made, His boots of chicken's hide; And by a nimble fairy blade, Well learned in the tailoring trade, His clothing was supplied. -- A needle dangled by his side; A dapper mouse he used to ride, Thus strutted Tom in stately pride! It was certainly very diverting to see Tom in this dress, and mounted on the mouse, as he rode out a hunting with the king and nobility, who were all ready to expire with laughter at Tom and his fine prancing charger. One day, as they were riding by a farm-house, a large cat, which was lurking about the door, made a spring, and seized both Tom and his mouse. She then ran up a tree with them, and was beginning to devour the mouse; but Tom boldly drew his sword, and attacked the cat so fiercely, that she let them both fall, when one of the nobles caught him in his hat, and laid him on a bed of down, in a little ivory cabinet. The queen of the fairies came soon after to pay Tom a visit, and carried him back to Fairy-Land, where he remained several years. During his residence there, King Arthur, and all the persons who knew Tom, had died; and as he was desirous of being again at court, the fairy queen, after dressing him in a suit of clothes, sent him flying through the air to the palace, in the days of King Thunstone, the successor of Arthur. Every one flocked round to see him, and being carried to the king, he was asked who he was -- whence he came -- and where he lived? Tom answered: My name is Tom Thumb, From the fairies I've come. When King Arthur, shone, This court was my home. In me he delighted, By him I was knighted; Did you never hear of Sir Thomas Thumb? The king was so charmed with this address, that he ordered a little chair to be made, in order that Tom might sit upon his table, and also a palace of gold, a span high, with a door an inch wide, to live in. He also gave him a coach, drawn by six small mice. The queen was so enraged at the honours conferred on Sir Thomas, that she resolved to ruin him, and told the king that the little knight had been saucy to her. The king sent for Tom in great haste but being fully aware of the danger of royal anger, he crept into an empty snail shell, where he lay for a considerable time, until he was almost starved with hunger; but at last he ventured to peep out, and perceiving a fine large butterfly on the ground, near the place of his concealment, he approached very cautiously, and getting himself placed astride on it, was immediately carried up into the air. The butterfly few with him from tree to tree and from field to field, and at last returned to the court, where the king and nobility all strove to catch him; but at last Tom fell from his seat into a wateringpot, in which he was almost drowned. When the queen, saw him, she was in a rage, and said he should be beheaded; and he was again put into a mousetrap until the time of his execution. However, a cat observing something alive in the trap, patted it about till the wires broke, and set Thomas at liberty. The king received Tom again into favour, which he did not live to enjoy; for a large spider one day attacked him, and although he drew his sword and fought well, yet the spider's poisonous breath at last overcame him: He fell dead on the ground where he stood, And the spider suck'd every drop of his blood. King Thunstone and his whole court where so sorry at the loss of their little favourite, that they went into mourning, and raised a fine white marble monument over his grave, with the following epitaph: Here lyes Tom Thrimb, King Arthur's knight, Who died by a spider's cruel bite. He was well known in Arthur's court, Where he afforded gallant sport; He rode at tilt and tournament, And on a mouse a hunting went. Alive he filled the court with mirth; His death to sorrow soon gave birth. Wipe, wipe your eyes, and shake your head, And cry, -- Alas! Tom Thumb is dead! FINIS Source (books.google.com): The Comical and Merry Tricks of Tom Thumb, the Wonderful (Paisley: G. Caldwell, [ca. 1810]). Return to the table of contents . Tom Thumb Ireland A long time ago there lived a poor farmer and his wife. They had a little boy who was strong and healthy but who was no bigger than your thumb. Because of his tiny size they called him "Tom Thumb." One day Tom's mother was making a pudding and to see how she mixed it Tom climbed up on the edge of the bowl. His foot slipped and he fell into the batter. His mother not noticing this stirred him into the pudding and put it into the oven. Tom soon grew hotter and hotter until he could stand it no longer, and began to yell and jump up and down. When Tom's mother saw the pudding behave in such a strange manner, she thought it was bewitched and flung it out of the window. The pudding being broken to pieces by the fall, Tom was released and walked in to his mother. Another day a crow saw him and picked him up and flew with him to the top of a giant's castle. The giant saw him and picked him up and put him in his mouth to eat him. Tom tickled his tongue so that the giant took him out and threw him into the river. A large fish then swallowed him. The fish was soon caught for the king. When it was cut open there was Tom. Everybody was delighted with the little fellow. The king liked him so much that he made him his dwarf and Tom became the favourite of the whole court. One day Tom was jumping off a wall when the cook was passing with a bowl of hot milk for the king. Poor Tom jumped into the middle of it and it splashed into the cook's eyes. Down went the bowl to the ground. The cook who was very cross swore to the king that Tom had done it out of mischief. So Tom was tried and sentenced to be put in jail. When the little fellow heard this he felt very bad. With one spring he jumped down the throat of a miller who stood by. Tom being lost the court broke up and the miller went back to his mill. But when he got there Tom did not leave him long at rest. He began to roll and tumble about so that the miller soon had to have a doctor. When the doctor came Tom began to dance and sing and the doctor was as much frightened as the miller was. He sent in great haste for six more doctors; while all those doctors were talking about what they should do the miller yawned and Tom gave a jump and landed in the middle of the table. Then he turned around and made a low bow to each and went home to the king. Tom did not live very long after to enjoy the king's favour. He was always ready to help others in trouble. One day, after trying to rescue a fly from a spiders web, the spider attacked him fiercely and he was so badly wounded that he died soon afterwards. The king and his court missed the cheerful little fellow. In his memory they erected a beautiful monument on which was recorded all the wonderful deeds of Tom Thumb. Patrick Brogan, Lettermore N. S. , Drimagra, Frosses, Inver, Co. Donegal. 21-9-1938. I read this story in a little book that I got a long time ago. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Donegal >> Leitir Mhór, pp. 119-32 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . A Story Ireland Once upon a time there lived a little boy name Micklen, who was only the size of my thumb. One evening his mother sent him for the cows. It made a shower of rain and he sat under a thistle for shade. One of the cows came along and ate Micklen and the thistle. His mother was very uneasy about him, but one day when she was milking the cows she heard Micklen whistling within in the cow, so the cow had to be opened to let him out. A few days later he was walking along the sea-shore when a blast of wind blew him into the sea. A fish came along and ate Micklen. About a week later his mother bought fish and when she opened the fish who lepped out but Micklen. Got from: My father Mick, age 53 years, Benmore, Bullaun. By: Nellie Wade, same address, on the 11 July 1938. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Galway >> Bullán, p. 100 . The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. Return to the table of contents . New History of the Life and Adventures of Tom Thumb USA -- Connecticut His shirt was made of a butterfly's wing, His boots were made of a mouse's skin, His coat was wove of thistle down, An oak-leaf hat he had for his crwn, A tailor's needle hung by his side, And a mouse for a horse he used to ride. When I was a little boy, children's books were not quite as plenty, or as cheap, or as good as they are now. In those days, children did not often have a present of a pretty book with beautiful pictures; but when they did get one, it was highly prized. We had Cock Robin, and Jack the Giant Killer, and Blue Beard, and The Forty Thieves, and many other amusing but not very instructive tales. Tom Thumb was one of the number, and was a favorite book of mine, although I knew the story was not true, and that there were no such beings as magicians and fairies. Perhaps my little readers would like to know what kind of stories we old folks read when we were such little bodies as you are now. I think I remember enough of Tom Thumb to be able to tell you the story. Once on a time, Merlin, a famous magician, was traveling, and beincr weary, he stopped at a plowman's cottage to ask for some refreshment. The plowman's wife kindly brought him a bowl of milk, and a wooden plate of good brown bread, which she urged him to partake of. Merlin could not help seeing, that the honest couple looked quite sad and sorrowful; so he asked the cause, and learned that they had no children; the wife declaring, with tears in her eyes, that she should be happy if she had a son, even if he were no bigger than his father's thumb! Merlin was much amused with the idea of a boy no bigger than a man's thumb, and sending for the queen of the fairies, he told her of the desire of the plowman's wife. The queen was no less pleased than Merlin, and she said the wish should be granted. Accordingly, the plowman's wife had a son, who was just the size of his father's thumb, and was named by the queen, Tom Thumb. One dav his mother was making a pudding, and that he might see how it w r as made, Tom climbed on the top of the bowl; but his foot happening to slip, he fell over head and ears into it, and his mother not seeing him, she stirred him into the batter, and then popped the whole into the pot. The hot water made Tom kick and struggle, and his mother, seeing the pudding jump up and down in the pot, thought it w r as bewitched. A pedlar going by at that moment, she gave him the pudding, which he put in his pack and then walked on. As soon as Tom could get the batter out of his mouth, he began to cry out. This so frightened the pedler that he flung the pudding over a fence, and took to his heels. The pudding was broken by the fall, and poor Tom crawled out and ran home. Tom never was any bigger; but as he grew older be grew cunning and sly. When he played with boys for cherry-stones, and had lost his own, he used to creep into his playmates' bags, fill his pockets, and come out to play again. One day, as he was doing this, the owner chanced to see him. "Ah, ha, my little Tom," said he, "I have caught you at last; now I will punish you for stealing." So he drew the bag-string tight about his neck, and then shaking the bag, Tom's legs and thighs were so sadly bruised, that he was thrown into a raging fever. Just at this time the queen of the faires came in a coach drawn by six flying mice, and placing Tom by her side, drove through the air to her palace in fairy land, where she kept him till he was restored to health. Then, taking advantage of a fair wind, she blew him straight to the court of King Arthur. But just as Tom was about to land in the palace-yard, the king's cook happened to pass with a huge bowl of soup, into which Tom fell plump, and splashed the hot soup all in the cook's face and eyes. "Oh, dear! Oh, dear!" cried Tom, half scalded and half drowned in his hot bath. "Murder! murder! murder!" bellowed the cook, who was a cross, red-faced old fellow, and supposed Tom had done all this mischief on purpose. Determined to be revenged on the little fellow for the imaginary insult, he urged his brother, who was a miller, and as cross and cruel as himself, to take little Tom home with him, and put him where he could do no more mischief. Accordingly, the miller pocketed Tom, and carrying him to his mill, dropped him from a window into the river. But Tom was not born to be drowned. A large salmon swimming by at that moment, caught him in its mouth and swallowed him without any trouble. The salmon was soon caught, and being a fine large fish, was presented to the king, who ordered it to be dressed immediately. When it was cut open, every body was delighted to see little Tom Thumb step out. He soon became the favorite of the king, who knighted him, and gave him a little golden palace to live in, and also a tiny coach, which was drawn by six white mice. King Arthur one day questioned Tom about his parents, and Tom informed his majesty that they were worthy people, but very poor. Then the king led him into his treasury, and showing him the piles of gold and silver, told him he might pay his parents a visit, and take with him as much money as he could carry! Accordingly, Tom procured a little purse, and putting a sixpence into it, he with much labor and difficulty got the purse upon his back and started for home. His mother met him at the door, where he arrived almost tired to death, having traveled nearly half a mile, with a huge sixpence on his back. His parents were delighted to see him, especially as he brought such an amazing sum of money. Tom remained at home for some time; but at last getting weary of his humble life, he watched for an opportunity to reach King Arthur's court again. One day he sauntered out into the fields, and seeing a butterfly seated on the ground, he ventured to get astride of him. The butterfly soon took wing, and mounting into the air with Tom on his back, flew from field to field, till at last he reached the king's court. The king, queen, and nobles, all tried to catch the butterfly, but could not. At last poor Tom, having no saddle or bridle, slipped off and tumbled into a watering-pot, where he was nearly drowned before he could be taken out. But he soon recovered from this mishap, and once more became the pride and ornament of King Arthur's court. At last, a huge spider one day attacked him, and though he drew his sword and fought well, yet the spider's poisonous breath at last overcame him. King Arthur and his whole court went into mourning for little Tom Thumb. They buried him under a rose-bush, and raised a white marble monument over his grave, with this epitaph on it, in letters of gold: Here lies Tom Thumb, a gallant knight, Who died by a cruel spider's bite. He was well known in King Arthur's court, Where he afforded pleasant sport; He rode at tilt and tournament, And on a mouse a hunting went. Alive, he filled the court with mirth; His death to general grief gave birth. Good people, tears of sorrow shed, And cry, Alas! Sir Tom is dead! Now, my little readers, which do you like best, -- true stories, moral and instructive stories, or stories like the wonderful adventures of TOM THUMB? Source (Internet Archive): Sidney Babcock, New History of the Life and Adventures of Tom Thumb (New Haven: S. Babcock, 1849). Return to the table of contents . Thomas of the Thumb Scotland There was one before now whose name was Tómas na h òrdaig, and he was no bigger than the thumb of a stalwart man. Tómas went once to take a walk, and there came a coarse shower of hailstones, and Tómas went in under a dock leaf; and there came a great drove of cattle past, and there was a great brindled bull amongst them, and he was eating about the docken, and he ate Tómas of the Thumb. His mother and his father missed him, and they went to seek him. They were going past the brindled bull, and quoth Tómas na h òrdaig" Ye are there a seeking me, Through smooth places, and moss places; And here am I a lonely one, Within the brindled bull. Then they killed the brindled bull, and they sought Tómas na h òrdaig amongst the paunches and entrails of the bull, but they threw away the great gut in which he was. There came a carlin the way, and she took the great gut, and as she was going along she went over a bog. Tómas said something to her, and the old wife threw away the great gut from her in a fright. There came a fox the way, and he took with him the gut, and Tómas shouted: "Bies taileù! the fox. Bis taileù! the fox." Then the dogs ran after the fox, and they caught him, and they ate him; and though they ate the gut they did not touch Tómas na h òrdaig. Tómas went home, where his mother and his father were, and he it was indeed that had the queer story for them. This varies from the book adventures of our old friend Tom Thumb, who is now supposed to have been the dwarf of King Arthur. The story comes from Glenfalloch, which is not far from Dumbarton, which was, according to family tradition, the birth-place of King Arthur's son. It was told to Dewar by a girl who took charge of him when a child, and it is known to one other man whom I know. I used to hear the adventures of "Comhaoise Ordaig" (Thumb's co-temporary), from my piper nurse myself, but I was so young at the time that I have forgotten all but the name. The cry of "bis taileu" may still be heard in the mouths of herd laddies addressing their collies, and it maybe the same as "tally-ho!" for which a French derivation has been sought and found --"tallis hors." I would rather imagine King Arthur, and his knights, and his dwarf, shouting an old Celtic hunting cry, and red-coated sportsmen keeping it up till now, than trace it to Norman-French; but in any case, here is something like tally-ho in the mouth of Tom Thumb, and in a glen where tally-ho has never been heard. Source (books.google.com): J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands , vol. 3 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1862), no. 59, pp. 114-15 . Source (Internet Archive): J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands , vol. 3 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1862), no. 59, pp. 114-15 . Campbell's source: "From Catherine Macfarlane in 1809. John Dewar." Return to the table of contents . Thumbthick Germany Once there was a poor peasant who would sit at the hearth poking the fire every evening, while his wife sat nearby spinning. Once he said, "It is sad that we have no children. It is so quiet here, while it is so loud and cheerful in other houses." "Yes," answered the wife with a sigh, and said, "I would be satisfied even if there were just one, and even if it were ever so small -- no larger than a thumb. We would still love it." And then it happened that the wife took ill, and seven months later she gave birth to a child. All of his parts were perfectly formed, but he was no larger than a thumb. Then they said, "Yes, he is what we asked for. He will be our dear child." And because of his size they named him Thumbthick. They gave him good things to eat, but the child still did not grow any larger, remaining just as he had been in his first hour. But he had an intelligent look in his eyes, and he soon proved to be a clever and quick little thing, succeeding in everything that he undertook. One day while the peasant was making preparations to go into the forest to cut wood, he said to himself, "I wish that I had someone to follow me up with the wagon." "Oh, father," shouted Thumbthick, "I'll take care of that. The wagon will be in the forest whenever you say." The man laughed and said, "How can that be? You are much too small to guide the horse with the reigns." "That doesn't matter, father. If mother will hitch up the horse, I'll sit in his ear and tell him which way to go." "Well," said the father, "we can try it once." When the time came, the mother hitched the horse to the wagon and set Thumbthick in his ear. The little one shouted which way the horse was to go, "Gee! Haw! Giddap! Whoa!" Everything went as it should, and they followed the right trail into the forest. Now it happened that just as they were rounding a bend, with the little one shouting, "Haw! Haw!" Two strange men came by. "What is that?" said the one. "There is a wagon with a driver calling to the horse, but there is no one to be seen!" "That can't be," said the other. "Let's follow the cart and see where it stops." The wagon continued on into the forest to the place where the wood was being cut. When Thumbthick saw his father, he called out, "See, father, I'm here with the wagon. Lift me down." The father held the horse with his left arm, and with his right arm lifted his little son down from the ear, who then cheerfully sat down on a piece of straw. When the two strangers saw Thumbthick, they were so amazed that they didn't know what to say. The one took the other one aside and said, "Listen, that little fellow could be our fortune, if we could just get him to a big city where there is money. Let's buy him." They went to the peasant and said, "Sell us the little man. He'll be well off with us." "No," answered the father. "My pride and joy is not for sale at any price." However, when Thumbthick heard what was going on, he climbed up the crease in his father's jacket and onto his shoulder, then said into his ear, "Father, let me go. I'll come right back to you." So, for a pretty piece of money, the father let the two men have him. "Where do you want to sit?" they asked him. "Oh, put me on the brim of your hat so I can walk back and forth like on a balcony and observe the scenery." They did as he asked, and as soon as Thumbthick had taken leave from his father, they set forth with him. They walked on until evening, and as it was getting dark the little one said, "Put me down. I have to go." "Just stay up there," said the man whose head he was sitting on. "It doesn't matter to me. The birds let things drop on me from time to time too." "No," said Thumbthick. "I know what's proper. Lift me down right now." The man took off his hat and set the little one in a field next to the path. He jumped and crawled back and forth between the clods, and then slipped down a mouse hole that he found. "Good evening, gentlemen," he called out, "you no longer have me!" They ran up and poked sticks into the opening, but it was wasted effort. Thumbthick crawled further and further back until it was pitch dark. Full of anger, but with empty purses, the two men made their way home. When Thumbthick saw that they had gone, he crawled from the underground passageway. "It is dangerous to walk across this field in the dark," he said. "I could easily break my neck and a leg!" Fortunately he came upon an empty snail shell. "Praise God! Here is a safe place to spend the night!" and he crawled inside. A little later, just as he was about to fall asleep, he heard two men passing by. One said to the other, "How are we going to get that rich priest's gold and silver?" "I could tell you how," interrupted Thumbthick. "What was that!" cried out the one thief, frightened, "I heard someone talking." They stopped and listened, and Thumbthick spoke up again, "Take me along, and I'll help you." "Where are you?" "Just look here on the ground, and you'll see where the voice is coming from," he answered. The thieves finally found him and picked him up. "You little rascal, how can you help us?" they said. "Look," he answered, "I'll crawl between the iron bars into the priest's storeroom and reach out to you everything that you want." "Well," they said, "let's see what you can do." They went to the rectory, and Thumbthick crept into the storeroom, then shouted out with all his might, "Do you want everything that's here?" The frightened thieves said, "Speak softly, and don't wake anyone up." Thumbthick, pretending that he didn't understand them, yelled out, "What do you want? Do you want everything that's here?" The cook, who was sleeping in the next room, sat up in bed and listened. The frightened thieves, who had run a little way off, gathered their courage, thinking that the little fellow was teasing them, and came back and whispered to him, "Be serious now, and reach something out to us." Then Thumbthick again shouted as loudly as he could, "I'll give you everything. Just reach your hands inside." The maid, who was listening carefully, heard this very clearly, jumped out of bed, and staggered in through the door. The thieves took off as though they were running from a fire, while the maid went to light a candle, because she could not see a thing. She came back with a light, but Thumbthick made his way out into the barn without being seen. The maid, after having searched in every corner without finding anything, finally went back to bed, thinking that she had been dreaming with open eyes and ears. Thumbthick climbed about in the hay and found a good place to sleep. He wanted to rest until morning and then return to his parents, but what happened to him instead? Yes, there is so much suffering and need in the world! As usual, the maid got up at dawn to feed the cattle. First off she went to the barn and gathered up an armful of hay, and precisely that bundle of hay where Thumbthick was lying fast asleep. He was sleeping so soundly, that he was not aware of anything, and he did not wake up until he was in the mouth of the cow that had eaten him with the hay. "Oh, God," he cried, "how did I fall into the fulling mill?" But soon he discovered where he was. He took care to not be crushed by her teeth, but he could not escape sliding down into her stomach. "They forgot the windows," he said. "The sun does not shine here at all. I wish that I had a light." He did not like these quarters at all. The worst thing was that more and more fresh hay was coming in at the door, and there was less and less space for him. Finally he shouted out with fear and as loudly as he could, "Don't bring me anything more to eat! Don't bring me anything more to eat!" The maid was just milking the cow when she heard someone talking without seeing anyone. It was the same voice that she had heard in the night, and it so frightened her, that she fell off her stool and spilled the milk. She ran with great haste to her master, and said, "Oh God, father, the cow is talking." The priest answered the maid, "You are crazy!" and then went to the barn to see for himself what was the matter. He had scarcely set his foot inside when Thumbthick shouted anew, "Don't bring me anything more to eat! Don't bring me anything more to eat!" The terrified priest thought that it must be an evil spirit, and ordered that the cow be killed. So the cow was slaughtered. The stomach with Thumbthick inside was thrown onto the manure pile. Thumbthick attempted to free himself, but it was not easy. Finally he succeeded in making a little room for himself, but just as he was about to stick his little head out, a wolf came by and downed the entire stomach with a single hungry gulp. Thumbthick did not lose his courage. "Perhaps," he thought, "I can talk to the wolf," and he called to him from inside his paunch, "Wolf, I know where you can get a great feast." "Where?" said the wolf. "In thus and such a house. You can get in through the drain hole, and there you will find cakes and bacon, and sausage, as much as you can eat." He exactly described his father's house. The wolf did not have to be told twice. That night he squeezed his way through the drain hole into the storage room, and ate to his heart's content. When he was full, he wanted to leave, but he had become so fat that he could not get back out the same way. Thumbthick had counted on this, and now he began to make a mighty noise from within the wolf's body. He stormed and shouted as loudly as he could. "Be quiet!" said the wolf. "You'll wake the people up." "So what?" answered the little one. "You've eaten your fill, and now I want to have a good time too!" He began anew to scream with all his strength. This woke up his father and mother. They ran to the storage room and peered in through a crack. When they saw that a wolf was inside, they were horrified. The man fetched an ax and the woman a scythe. "Stay behind me," said the man, as they stepped into the room. "I'll hit him first, but if that doesn't kill him, you cut him to pieces." Then Thumbthick heard his father's voice and called out, "Father dear, here I am. I'm inside the wolf!" The father spoke with joy, "Praise God! Our dearest child has found his way back!" He told his wife to put the scythe away, in order not to injure him. Then he struck the wolf a blow to the head, and he fell down dead. They found a knife and scissors, cut open his belly, and pulled out their dear child. "Oh," said the father, "we were so worried about you!" "Yes, father, I've seen a lot of the world now, and thank God that once again I can get a breath of fresh air." "Where all have you been?" "Oh, father, I was in a mouse hole, in a cow's belly, and in a wolf's paunch, and now I am going to stay here with you." "And we will never again sell you, not for all the riches in the world." Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Daumesdick," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 37, pp. 194-200 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Daumesdick," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 37, pp. 194-200 . A fulling mill is a mill where wool was beaten and boiled as a part of the felt-making process. Link to a copy of this tale in a separate file: Thumbthick . Return to the table of contents . Thumbling's Travels Germany A tailor had a son who was small, no bigger than a thumb. For that reason he was called Thumbling. He was, however, quite brave, and he said to his father, "Father, I want to and must go out into the world." "That's right, my son," said the old man. He took a long darning-needle and with a candle made a knob of sealing-wax on it. "Here is a sword to take with you on your way." The little tailor wanted to have one more meal with at home, so he hopped into the kitchen to see what his mother had cooked for the last time. The meal was ready to eat, and in a dish on the hearth. He said, " Mother, what is there to eat today?" "See for yourself," said his mother. So Thumbling jumped onto the hearth, and looked into the dish. However, he stretched his neck too far out, and the steam from the food caught hold of him and carried him up the chimney. He rode about on the steam for a while in the air, until at last he sank down to the ground again. The little tailor was now outside in the wide world. He traveled about, finally finding work with a master tailor. However, the food was not good enough for him. "Mistress," said Thumbling to the master's wife, "if you don't give me better food, I'll go away, and early tomorrow morning I'll write with chalk on your front door: 'Too much potatoes, too little meat! Good-bye, Potato-King.'" "Just what do you want, grasshopper?" said the master's wife. She grew angry, picked up a rag, and was about to hit him with it. However, my little tailor slipped nimbly under a thimble, peeked out from beneath it, and stuck his tongue out at the master's wife. She picked up the thimble and tried to get hold of him, but little Thumbling jumped into the rag. The master's wife untangled the rag, looking for him, but he escaped into a crack in the table. "Ho, ho, lady mistress," he shouted, sticking his head out. When she began to hit him, he jumped down into a drawer. But she finally caught hold of him and drove out of the house. The little tailor journeyed onward and came to a great forest where he happened onto a band of thieves. They were planning to steal the king's treasure. Seing the little tailor, they thought, "A little fellow like that can crawl through a keyhole be a picklock for us." "Hey there," cried one of them, "you giant Goliath, do you want to go to the treasure chamber with us? You can slip in and throw out the money." Thumbling reflected for a while, and finally said "yes." He then went the treasure chamber with them. He looked at the door from top to bottom to see if there was any crack in it. He soon found a crack wide enough to let him through. He was about slip in when one of the two guards standing there observed him. He and said to the other guard, "What kind of an ugly spider is that? I'll step on it and kill it." "Leave the poor creature alone," said the other. "It has never done you any harm." Thus Thumbling got safely through the crack and into the treasure chamber. He opened the window beneath which the thieves were standing, and threw one taler after another down to them. The little tailor was in the middle of his work when he heard the king coming to inspect his treasure chamber. He quickly hid himself. The king noticed that several talers were missing, but he could not perceive who could have stolen them, for the locks and bolts were in good condition, and everything seemed to be well protected. He went away again, saying to the guards, "Be on the alert! Someone is after the money." When Thumbling resumed his work the guards heard the money being moved about with sound of clink, clank, clink, clank. They swiftly ran in to capture the thief, but the little tailor heard them coming and was swifter than they were. He jumped into a corner and covered himself with a taler, so that nothing could be seen of him. Then he began teasing the guards, crying out, "Here I am!" The guards ran toward him, but when they got there, he had already jumped into another corner under a taler, and was shouting, "Hey! I'm over here!" The guards hurred there, but Thumbling had long long since hidden himself in a third corner, and was shouting, "Hey! I'm over here!" Thus he made fools of them. He drove them to and fro about the treasure chamber so long that they grew tired and went away. Then one at a time he threw all the talers out. He tossed the last one with all his might, hopped nimbly onto it, and flew down with it through the window. The thieves praised him heartily. "You are a great hero," they said. "Do you want to be our captain?" Thumbling thanked them, but said he wanted to see the world first. They divided the loot, but the little tailor asked for only one kreuzer because he could not carry any more. He buckled on his sword once again, said farewell to the robbers, and went on his way. At first he apprenticed himself to a few different masters, but did not like the work, so finally he hired himself out as a servant in an inn. However, the maids did not like him, for he saw all that they did secretly, without their seeing him. He he told their master and mistress what they had stolen off the plates and from the cellar, carrying it off for their own use. They said, "Just wait! We'll get even with you!" Together the plotted to play a trick on him. Soon afterwards one of the maids was cutting grass in the garden when she saw Thumbling jumping about and creeping up and down among the plants. She quickly gathered him up with the cut grass, tied it all in a large cloth, and secretly threw it to the cows. One of the cows was a large black one, who swallowed him down with the grass without hurting him. He did not like it down below, for it was quite dark, with not so much as a burning candle. When the cow was being milked he cried out: Strip, strap, strull. Will the bucket soon be full? The sound of milking kept him from being understood. Afterward the master of the house came into the cow-barn and said, "That cow there shall be slaughtered tomorrow." This so frightened Thumbling that he cried out in a clear voice, "First let me out! I'm here inside." The master heard that quite well, but he did not know where the voice came from. "Where are you?" he asked. "In the black one," answered Thumbling, but the master did not understand what that meant, and went away. The cow was slaughtered the next morning. Fortunately Thumbling escaped being hit as the meat was being sliced and chopped. But he ended up in the sausage meat. The butcher came in and began his work, and Thumbling cried out with all his might, "Don't chop too deep, don't chop too deep. I'm stuck inside here." No one heard him because of the noise of the chopping knife. Now poor Thumbling was in danger, but danger leads to speed, and he jumped about so quickly between the blows that none of them touched him, and he escaped unharmed. But he still could not get away. He had to let himself be pushed into a blood sausage with bits of fat. His quarters there were very tight, and furthermore he was hung up in the chimney to be smoked. This was a terribly dreary and cramped situation. He was finally taken down in winter, because the blood sausage was to be served to a guest. When the hostess was cutting it into slices, he was careful not to stretch his head too far out, or it could have been cut off. He finally saw his opportunity, cleared a way for himself, and jumped out. The little tailor did not want to stay any longer in a house where he had been so badly treated, so once again he set forth on his travels. His feedom did not last long. In an open field he met up with a fox who, without thinking, snapped him up. "Hey there, Mr. Fox," cried the little tailor, "I'm stuck in your throat. Set me free again." "You're quite right," answered the fox. "You are nothing at all for me, but if you will promise me the chickens in your father's barnyard I'll let you go." "With all my heart," replied Thumbling. "I promise that you shall have all the chickens." Then the fox released Thumbling, and even carried him home. When the father saw his dear son once again, he gladly gave the fox all the chickens that he had. "For this I am bringing you a goodly sum of money," said Thumbling, and gave his father the kreuzer that he had earned on his travels. "But why did the fox get the poor chickens to eat?" "Oh, you goose, your father would surely love his child more than the chickens in his barnyard!" Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Daumerlings Wanderschaft," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 45, pp. 223-27 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Daumerlings Wanderschaft," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 45, pp. 223-27 . Link to a copy of this tale in a separate file: Thumbling's Travels . Return to the table of contents . A Story about Palecek, "Little Thumb" Czech Republic Once upon a time, there was a man and his wife, who had no children. They were very lonely and unhappy. Then they determined to pray to God for a little son. Perhaps He would hear them, if they prayed with all their hearts. "Dear God," they prayed, "You know how much we long for a little boy to be the joy and comfort of our old age. We pray you to have pity on us and send us a son." The man felt sure that God would listen and went to his work in a contented frame of mind. One day the man went off to the fields to plow. While he was away, a little son was born, no larger than a thumb. His mother called him "Little Thumb." Hardly had he been born, before he was all over the house, hopping, skipping and running. He was full of joy and singing all the time. What was the mother's surprise when the little fellow said that noon, "Mother, give me father's dinner, so that I can take it to him in the field." The mother made the sign of the cross. She was superstitious and did not know what to make of the boy. She had never in all her life ever heard of a boy like him. Really she was afraid to give him the basket, heavy with the father's dinner, for he was such a tiny mite. He insisted and insisted. Amused at his funny antics, as he gave her no peace, she packed the dinner in the basket and gave it to the boy. Wonder of wonders! He took the basket on his head and ran with it to the fields. He could not be seen for the basket which covered him completely. It was such a funny sight to see this basket go along all by itself, as it were. The dust in the road was as high as his waist and almost smothered the little man, but do you think that he would give up? No sir! He trudged along, sneezing and puffing like a little engine. After a while he came to the brook over which there was no bridge. Now what was he going to do? He was a wise, clever little chap and remembered that there was a big wooden spoon in the basket, so he reached for it and placing it on the water, it bacame a little boat on which he gaily crossed over, towing the basket after him. When he came to the field where his father was plowing, he bagan to call from far off, "Father, father, here I am with your dinner." But the father did not hear the thin little voice. Besides he did not even know that a son had been born to him that morning, and then he would not have believed that a newly born son could take his father's dinner to him that same day. Palecek kept on calling. When he stood at his father's feet, the father turned to see where that buzzing sound came from. Then he saw the basket behind him, but did not see Palecek. The father stared at the wonderful basket that had come to the field all alone, as he thought. Then for the first time, he saw a little boy no bigger than a thumb. Imagine his surprise to see such a little boy. Had anybody ever seen one like him before? And then to hear him talk. It was such a cunning sound. He could not believe his ears when Palecek said, "I am your son!" "Born this morning and bringing my dinner! You are a wonder, a very miracle of a son," laughed the father, as sitting down he began to eat his dinner. While his father was eating, Palecek said that he would like to plow a bit for him. He also asked for the whip to drive the oxen. "How can you drive the oxen, my little son, when you can't even carry the whip?" laughed the father, "I will make them go without a whip," answered the boy, as with one bound, he jumped on the nearest ox and crept into his ear. As he did so, he cried as loud as he could, "Hoi! Heiso! Hwi!" The boy's voice sounded like thunder in the ear of that ox, as he started off in a mad race, dragging his mate with him. The oxen ran up and down, over that field so fast, that Palecek plowed more that noon than the father had the whole morning. Around the field where Palecek was plowing, wound the main road. About that time a rich merchant, who had been to market, was on his way home. When he saw the oxen plowing alone, he was greatly astonished. He could hardly believe his eyes and went up closer to see what it all meant. Then for the first time, he heard the voice of Little Thumb urging them on. With amazement he listened to see where the voice came from. Then he heard it say, "Here I am in the ear of the ox." Looking in the ear of the ox, there he spied Palecek. He was delighted with the little chap and wished that he might have him for his own. "Ha, ha," he said, "that's the lad for me. He's so small that he won't eat very much." That suited him, for he was a very stingy man. "Will you enter my service," he asked Little Thumb? "Why not, if my father is willing," he replied. Then he sprang like a shot from the ear of the ox, and running to his father, whispered, "Father, the merchant wants to hire me, but don't let him have me too cheap. Have no fear for me. I shall return to you very soon, but you must be sure to follow us as soon as he takes me." When the merchant came to the father to ask if he could hire the clever little chap, the father asked, "How much will you pay?" "How much do you want?" "Twenty-one ducats is the wages," said the father. The merchant at once consented and paid the price. Then he caught up Palecek carefully and put him in his pocket and off they went. The father followed them afar off, as Palecek had urged. He soon learned why, for all along the road he found one piece of money after another that had fallen from the merchant's pockets. Little Thumb, as soon as the merchant had put him so carefully in his pocket, had bitten a hole in it, so that all the money ran out. Then he slipped through the hole himself and hurrying on to meet his father, they went home rejoicing. The merchant arriving home, called out to his wife before he had readied the gate, "Come and see the marvel I have brought you!" "What is it?" she said, as she ran out to meet him." "A wonderful little man, who can do magic work for us. He is worth much gold." The wife looked around, wondering where he could be. Not seeing any one, "Where is he?" she asked. Then the merchant thrusting his hand in his pocket to pull out Palecek, found alas, no Little Thumb, nothing but a great big hole! Not only was Palecek gone, but all his money too. Then the merchant knew that Palecek had outwitted him. Source (Internet Archive): Božena Němcová, The Disobedient Kids and Other Czecho-Slovak Fairy Tales (Prague: B. Kočí, 1921), unpaginated . Link to the story in the original Czech: Božena Němcová, "Pohádka o Palečkovi," Slovenské Pohádky a Pověsti , vols. 1-3 (Litomsyšl and Prague: Antonína Augusty, 1863), pp. 339-41 . Return to the table of contents . Thumbikin Norway Once on a time there was a woman who had an only son, and he was no taller than your thumb; and so they called him Thumbikin. Now, when he had come to be old enough to know right and wrong, his mother told him to go out and woo him a bride, for now she said it was high time he thought about getting a wife. When Thumbikin heard that, he was very glad; so they got their driving gear in order and set off, and his mother put him into her bosom. Now they were going to a palace where there was such an awfully big princess, but when they had gone a bit of the way, Thumbikin was lost and gone. His mother hunted for him everywhere, and bawled to him, and wept because he was lost, and she couldn't find him again. " Pip, Pip, " said Thumbikin, "here I am;" and he had hidden himself in the horse's mane. So he came out, and had to give his word to his mother that he wouldn't do so any more. But when they had driven a bit farther on, Thumbikin was lost again. His mother hunted for him, and called him and wept; but gone he was, and gone he stayed. " Pip, Pip, " said Thumbikin at last; and then she heard how he laughed and tittered, but she couldn't find him at all for the life of her. " Pip, Pip, why, here I am now!" said Thumbikin, and came out of the horse's ear. So he had to give his word that he wouldn't hide himself again; but they had scarce driven a bit farther before he was gone again. He couldn't help it. As for his mother, she hunted, and wept, and called him by name; but gone he was, and gone he stayed; and the more she hunted, the less she could find him in any way. " Pip, Pip, here I am then," said Thumbikin. But she couldn't make out at all where he was, his voice sounded so dull and muffled. So she hunted, and he kept on saying, " Pip, here I am," and laughed and chuckled, that she couldn't find him; but all at once the horse snorted, and it snorted Thumbikin out, for he had crept up one of his nostrils. Then his mother took him and put him into a bag; she knew no other way, for she saw well enough he couldn't help hiding himself. So, when they came to the palace the match was soon made, for the princess thought him a pretty little chap, and it wasn't long before the wedding came on too. Now, when they were going to sit down to the wedding-feast, Thumbikin sat at the table by the princess's side; but he had worse than no seat, for when he was to eat he couldn't reacli up, to the table; and so, if the princess hadn't helped him up on to it, he wouldn't have got a bit to eat. Now it went good and well so long as he had to eat off a plate, but then there came a great bowl of porridge -- that he couldn't reach up to; but Thumbikn soon found out a way to help himself; he climbed up and sat on the lip of the bowl. But then there was a pat of melting butter right in the middle of the bowl, and that he couldn't reach to dip his porridge into it, and so he went on and took his seat at the edge of the melting butter; but just then who should come but the princess, with a great spoonful of porridge to dip it into the butter; and, alas! she went too near to Thumbikin, and tipped him over; and so he fell over head and ears, and was drowned in the melted butter. Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , 2nd edition, enlarged, translated by George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), pp. 429-31 . Source (Internet Archive): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , 2nd edition, enlarged, translated by George Webbe Dasent (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), pp. 429-31 . Norwegian version (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, "Tommeliden," Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiania [Oslo]: Johan Dahls Forlag, 1852), no. 44, pp. 267-69 . Norwegian version (Internet Archive): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Engebretsen Moe, "Tommeliden," Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiania [Oslo]: Johan Dahls Forlag, 1852), no. 44, pp. 267-69 . Return to the table of contents . Svend Tomling Denmark There was a couple here in Jutland who had a good farm, but they had no children. The wife was very distressed about this. She thought it was terrible that in their old age she and her husband should be cared for by outsiders. One day a beggarwoman came and said, "I think that you are troubled. What is wrong with you?" "Oh, I'm very concerned, because we have no children." "I'll give you some good advice," said the beggarwoman. "You should cut off your big toe, wrap it in cotton, and put it in a black pot, and then tomorrow you shall have a son. He will stay very small, but small and clever is much better than a big and stupid." The strange woman went away, and the next day the couple had a little son. He was very small, and his mother gave him the name Svend Tomling. When the child was eight days old, his mother was making pancakes for her husband who was out in the field plowing. "May I take the pancakes out to my father?" asked Svend from his bed. "What! Can you talk, my boy? You've learned to talk very early; but no, you're still too little to go out to the field." But it was no use. Svend wanted to go out. He took the pancakes and a bottle of beer in his hand and walked out to the field to his father. The man was very surprised when he saw his son coming with food. "You stay here in the grass until I go home," he said, "because you are too little to come into the plowed furrows. You would get completely lost in the soil." "No, I want to sit up in the horse's ear. That is a good place for me," said Svend Tomling. Then he got up there and shouted, "Giddyup, giddyup! Forward!" A fine gentleman came driving by on the road, and he had his driver stop. He asked the plowman about the strange horse he had that was able to talk. "It's not the horse," said the man. "It's my little son. He's sitting in the horse's ear." "Can I buy that son?" asked the gentleman. "No, I want to keep him." "Sell me, father! Sell me, father!" shouted Svend. So his father sold him, and he got a good price for him. Svend sat in the back of the carriage on a chest that was filled with money. As they drove on, he began to throw the money out of the chest, one coin after the other, and Svend's father ran behind and picked them up. When there was no more money in the chest, Svend jumped out of it onto the road. He could not find his way home, so he just lay there on the road. That night some thieves came by, talking about how they wanted to steal some cheese from the deacon. "Take me with you! Take me with you!" shouted Svend. The thieves were startled, but then they found him, and one thief picked him up and put him in his vest pocket. When they got to the deacon's, Svend went up into the loft to take the cheeses down. "Do you want them hard or soft, sour or sweet?" shouted Svend Tomling. The shouting awakened the deacon. He came out, and the thieves ran away. The deacon went up into the loft, and Svend was also frightened. He hid in a bundle of straw. The next morning the deacon took the bundle of straw where Svend was hiding, and fed it to the cow. Later, the deacon's maidservent was milking the cow, but she came running in saying that there was a ghost in the cow, because it could talk. The deacon could not believe this, and said that he himself would milk the cow. When the deacon started milking, Svend Tomling shouted, "Steady now, steady now! Keep trying, and the bucket will soon be full!" This startled the deacon, and he swore that the cow should be slaughtered. This was done, and the entrails were thrown out onto the manure pile. That night a fox came and started to eat the entrails. "Will you soon be finished, Reynard?" cried Svend. This scared the fox, and it ran away. Then a mangy old dog came by and began to drag off the entrails. Svend shouted again, "Keep trying, you old snowman." This frightend the dog, and it dropped the entrails. And then Svend ran home to his father. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, ed., "Svend Tomling," Skattegraveren: Et Tidsskrift , no. 22 (November 15, 1889), no. 682, pp. 165-67 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, ed., "Svend Tomling," Skattegraveren: Et Tidsskrift , no. 22 (November 15, 1889), no. 682, pp. 165-67 . Kristensen's source: S. P. Jensen. Return to the table of contents . Little Lasse Finland There was once upon a time a boy named Lars, and because he was so very little he was called "Little Lasse." He was a plucky boy, for once he travelled all round the world in a pea-pod boat. It was Summer-time, when the peas grew green and tall in the garden. Little Lasse crept into the pea-bed between the rows of peas, where the pea-stalks reached high above his cap, and broke off seventeen large pods, the biggest and straightest he could possibly have wished for. Little Lasse thought that no one saw him, and that was stupid, for God's eyes for God's eyes are every where. Then the Gardener came past with his gun upon his shoulder and heard some thing rustle among the peas. "I think it must be Sparrows," he called out. "'Sh! 'sh!" but no Sparrow flew out, for Little Lasse had no wings, only two little legs. "Stop a a moment; I shall load my gun and shoot the Sparrows, " said the Gardener. Then Little Lasse got frightened and crept out from the rows of peas. "I am so sorry, Gardener, dear," he said; "I was only seeking some nice boats." "That excuse may do for this time, " said the Gardener, " but in future Little Lasse must ask leave if he wishes to search for ships in the pea-beds." "I'll do that," answered Lasse, and off he was to the shore. There he split up his pods with a pin, slit them quite evenly, and broke up some small twigs for rowing benches. Then he took the peas which had been in the pods, and laid them as cargo in the boats. Some of the pods broke, some remained whole, and when all were ready Little Lasse had twelve boats, but they were they were never boats, they were large war-vessels. He had three ships of the line, three frigates, three brigs, and three schooners. The biggest ship of the line was called Hercules , and the smallest schooner was called The Flea . Little Lasse placed all twelve in the water, and they floated in such a stately manner that no real ship ever danced more proudly on the ocean's billows. Now the ships were to travel round the world. The big island far away there was Asia; the large stone was Africa; the little island was America; the small stones were Polynesia, and the shore from where the ships sailed was Europe. The whole fleet started and floated slowly away to the different parts of the world. The ships of the line sailed straight for Asia; the frigates sailed to Africa, the brigs to America, and the schooners to Polynesia. Little Lasse remained behind in Europe and threw small stones into the world's ocean. On the shore of Europe there was a real boat, papa's own, beautiful, white painted boat, and Little Lasse climbed into it. The pea-boats had sailed so far away, that to the eye they seemed like mere stalks of grass on the water. Little Lasse suddenly conceived a desire to row out into the world. That Papa and Mamma had certainly forbidden, but he never thought of that. "I shall row a little bit -- just a little bit out," thought he. "I shall catch up the ship Hercules near the coast of Asia, and then row back to Europe again." Little Lasse only shook the chain by which the boat was attached, so it was rather a wonder that it became unloosed. "Ritsch, ratsch, a man is a man," and Little Lasse shot out the boat. Now he had to row, and row he could, for he had rowed so often on the stair at home, with the stair for a boat and Papa's big stick as an oar. But when little Lasse wished to row he found there were no oars in the boat; these were kept in the boat-house, and Little Lasse had never noticed that the boat was empty. It is not so easy as one may think to row to Asia without oars. What was Little Lasse to do? The boat was now some distance out on the water, and the wind which blew from the shore was always driving it further. Little Lasse got frightened and began to cry; no one was on the shore, so no one heard him. Only a big crow sat by himself in the big birch-tree, beneath which crept the Gardener's black cat and lay in wait for the crow. No one was in the least concerned about Little Lasse, who was drifting out to sea. Ah, how sorry Little Lasse now was that he had been disobedient and got into the boat, doing what his Father and Mother had so often forbidden! Now it is too late! He will never reach land again; perhaps he may perish in the vast sea. What was he to do? When he had cried himself hoarse, and no one heard him, he clasped his little hands and said: "Good God, do not be angry with Little Lasse!" and then he slept. In spite of the fact that it was now broad daylight, old Nukki Matti sat on the shore of Featherbed Island fishing with his long net for little children. He heard the soft words which Little Lasse had uttered; quickly he drew the boat towards him, and laid Little Lasse to sleep upon the rose-leaf beds, saying to one of his Dreamers: "Play with Little Lasse that he may not weary!" This was addressed to a little Dream-boy, so very, very little that he was less than Lasse himself. He had blue eyes, fair hair, a red cap with silver band, and a white jacket with a pearl-trimmed collar. He came to Lasse, and said: "Would you like to travel all round the world?" "Yes," said Lasse in his sleep; "certainly I would." "Come then, " said the Dream-boy, "let us sail in your pea-ships. You shall sail in Hercules , and I'll travel on The Flea ." So they sailed away from Featherbed Island, and in a short time Hercules and The Flea were on the shores of Asia, far away at the end of the world, where the White Sea flows through Behring Straits and joins the Pacific Ocean. Far away through the winter fogs, Nordenskiold is seen, with the steamship Vega trying to find a passage through the ice. Here it was very, very cold; the mighty icebergs glistened so marvellously, the big whales were housed beneath them and tried in vain to make holes in the ice with their clumsy heads. All around the bleak shores was snow as far as the eye could reach; upon it little grey men walked about, clad in skins and drove in small sledges through the drifts, and dogs were harnessed to the sledges. "Shall we land here?" asked the Dream-boy. "No," said Lasse. "I am afraid of being swallowed up by the big whales, and the big dogs might bite us. Let us rather travel to another part of the world." "All right," said the Dream-boy with the red cap and silver band; "we are not far from America," -- and at that moment they were there. The sun shone, and it was very hot. Tall palm-trees stood in long rows on the shore, bearing cocoanuts on their tops. Men as red as copper rode at a gallop across the vast green plains and threw their spears at buffaloes, which turned on them with their sharp horns. An enormous boaconstrictor had crept up the highest palm and threw itself down on a llama which was eating grass at the foot of the palm. In a twinkling it was all over with the little deer. "Shall we land here?" asked the Dream-boy. "No," said Lasse. "I am so afraid of being gored by the big buffaloes; and the big snake might swallow us up. Let us go to some other part of the world." "All right," said the Dream-boy in the white jacket. "We are only a short way from Polynesia" -- and as he said so, they were there. Here it was still hotter -- as hot as a Russian bath, when water has just been poured upon the stone. Here there grew upon the shore the richest spices, pepper trees, cinnamon, ginger, saffron, coffee and tea shrubs. Brown men, with long ears and thick lips and their faces hideously painted, hunted a yellow-spotted tiger among the tall bamboos on the shore, and the tiger turned round and planted its claws in one of the brown men. Then all took to flight. "Are we going to land here?" asked the Dream-boy. "No," said Little Lasse. "Don't you see the tiger over there among the pepper trees? Let us go to another part of the world." "That's not difficult to do," said the Dream-boy with the blue eyes. "We are not far from Africa" -- and as he said that they were there. They anchored at the mouth of a large river, whose banks were as green as the greenest velvet. A short distance from the river there stretched a vast sandy desert. The air was yellow, the sun burned as fiercely as if it were going to burn the earth to ashes, and the inhabitants were as black as the blackest ink. They rode on tall camels through the desert, the lions panted with thirst, and huge crocodiles with their big lizard-like heads gaped with their sharp white teeth out of the river. "Shall we land here?" asked the Dream-boy. "No," said Little Lasse. "The sun would burn us up, and the lions and crocodiles hurt us. Let us go to another part of the world." "We must just sail back again to Europe," said the Dream-boy with the light hair -- and at that moment they were there. They reached a shore; it was all so cool, so familiar, so homelike. There stood the tall birch with its drooping leaves. On the top of it sat the old crow, and at the foot of it crept the Gardener's black cat. Not far off was a house which Lasse had seen before. Beside the house was a garden, and in the garden grew some rows of peas with long pea-pods. There was the old Gardener with his gardener's green hat, and he wondered if the cucumbers were ripe. There was Fylax barking on the steps, and when he saw Lasse he wagged his tail. There was old Stina milking the cows in the farmyard. There was a well-known lady, in her checked woollen shawl, watching the linen webs bleach on the green grass. There was an equally well-known gentleman in a yellow summer coat, with a long pipe in his mouth, watching the harvest workers reap the rye in the fields. There were a boy and girl jumping about on the shore, and calling out: "Little Lasse! Little Lasse! Come in and have bread and butter!" "Shall we land here?" asked the Dream-boy, winking so roguishly with his blue eyes. "Come with me, and I'll ask Mamma to give you a piece of bread and butter and a glass of milk, " said Little Lasse. "Wait a bit," said the Dream-boy. And now Little Lasse saw that the kitchen door stood open, and through it there issued a soft delightful hissing, as if one were pouring yellow batter from a spoon into a hot frying-pan. "Perhaps we should return to Polynesia," whispered the merry Dream-boy. "No, the pancakes are frying in Europe," said Little Lasse, trying to jump ashore, but could not, for the Dream-boy had bound him with fetters of flowers, so that to move was impossible. And now all the little Dreams surrounded him -- thousands and thousands of tiny children -- and they formed a circle round him, singing this little song: The world is so big a place, Bairnie, wee bairnie, Far bigger than thy thoughts can trace, Bairnie, wee bairnie. There are countries warm and cold, Bairnie, wee bairnie; God all things doth safely hold, Bairnie, wee bairnie. People live there, great and small, Bairnie, wee bairnie, Those dear to God are happy all, Bairnie, wee bairnie. If God's angel thee do guide, Bairnie, wee bairnie, No harm can ever thee betide, Bairnie, wee bairnie. Say, where would'st thou like to rest, Bairnie, wee bairnie? The world is fair, but home is best, Bairnie, wee bairnie. When the Dreams had finished their song, they all hopped off, and Nukki Matti carried Little Lasse back to the boat. For a long time he lay quite still, and seemed to hear the pancakes frizzling over the fire at home. The frizzling became more distinct; Little Lasse seemed to hear it just beside him -- and then he awoke and opened his eyes. Then he lay in the boat, where he had fallen asleep The wind had changed, and while the boat was drifted out with one wind, it was blown back to shore with the other, while Little Lasse was sleeping. What Lasse had imagined to be the frying of pancakes was in reality the gentle ripple of the waves as they lapped against the pebbly beach. Little Lasse rubbed his sleepy eyes, and looked around him. All was as before the crow in the birch, the cat upon the grass, and the pea-pod fleet by the shore. Some of the ships had been wrecked, and some had drifted back to land. Hercules had arrived with his cargo from Asia; The Flea had returned from Polynesia, and all the divisions of the world were precisely where they were before. Little Lasse never knew exactly how it all happened. He had been so often to Featherbed Island, and yet he never knew how playful Dreams can be. He never troubled his head further to find out, but gathered his boats together, and marched up to the house. His brothers and sisters came to meet him, calling out at a dis tance: "Where have you been all this time, Lasse? Come in and get bread and butter!" But the kitchen door stood open, and he heard a mysterious frying. The Gardener stood at the gate giving an evening watering to the parsley, dill, carrots, and turnips. "Well," said he, "where have you been all this time?" Little Lasse tossed his head, looked dignified, and answered "I have sailed all round the world in a pea-pod boat." "Oh ho," said the Gardener. As for him, he had forgotten all about Featherbed Islands! But you haven't forgotten them; you know that they exist; you know their shining grotto. The glittering walls never rust, the shimmering diamonds never lose their lustre, and never does music sound so sweet as that which is heard in the grotto in the balmy evening twilight. As the bright stars never grow old, neither do the light airy Dreams in the halls of Feather bed Island. Perhaps you have caught a glimpse of their delicate wings as they flew around your pillow? Perhaps you have met the same Dream-boy with the blue eyes and the fair hair, he who wears a red cap with silver band, and the white jacket with pearls on the collar? Perhaps he has also shown you the different countries and peoples in the world, the chilly wastes and burning deserts, the many-coloured men and wild animals in forest and sea, so that you may learn something; but return gladly to your home? Yes, who knows? Perhaps you also have travelled all round the world in a pea-pod boat? Source (books.google.com): Zacharias Topelius, Fairy Tales from Finland (London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1896), pp. 95-113 . Source (University of Florida Digital Collections): Zacharias Topelius, Fairy Tales from Finland (London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1896), pp. 95-113. Links to this story in the original Swedish: Books.google.com: Zacharias Topelius, "Lasse liten," Läsning för barn , book 1 (Stockholm: Albert Bonniers Förlag, 1906), pp. 255-63 . Internet Archive: Zacharias Topelius, "Lasse liten," Läsning för barn , book 1 (Helsingfors: G. W. Edlunds Förlagsaktiebolag, 1906), pp. 255-63 . Return to the table of contents . John Bit-of-a-Man France A Story of the District of Metz Once there was a woman who had a little son who was extremely small; so very small that she named him John Bit-of-a-Man. One day she called him to her and said, "Come, take this to your father who is working down there in the fields, and when you get to him, say: 'See father! here is your buttered roll!'" "I will, mother," said John Bit-of-a-Man; and all along the way he repeated the words so as not to forget them: "See, father! here is your buttered roll; see, father! here is your buttered roll!" When he reached his father who was occupied in repairing the ditches, he took up his refrain: "See, father! here is your buttered roll." The good man, hearing some one speak, looked around him on every side, but saw no one; at last, however, he spied little John Bit-of- a-man in the grass at his feet. "Ah!" said he, "it is you, is it? What do you want?" "I have brought you a buttered roll," said John Bit-of-a-Man. "You are very good, my child, to bring me this buttered roll;" and taking it in his hands he ate it all up, without offering John Bit-of-a-Man a mite. "The glutton! he did not give me any! The glutton! he did not give me any!" groaned John Bit-of-a-Man. Some time after that, a lord passed by. He called to the laborer, "You have a pretty little boy; will you sell him to me?" "I will, gladly." "How much will you take?" "A hundred crowns." "A hundred crowns you shall have." The bargain concluded, the lord put John Bit-of-a-Man in his pocket and went on his way. At the end of an hour, the child put his head out of the pocket and begged his master to put him down on the ground for a moment as he felt faint. The lord was good enough to listen to him, and in a moment John Bit-of-a-Man glided under a heap of leaves and his master could not find him. John Bit-of-a-Man being free once more, went back to his father. A few days after that, the lord again passed by the laborer, who was still repairing the ditches. "You have a pretty little boy there," said he; "will you sell him to me?" "I will, gladly." "How much will you take?" "A hundred crowns." "A hundred crowns you shall have." The bargain concluded, the lord clapped John Bit-of-a-Man into his pocket. At the end of an hour the child put his head out of the pocket and begged his master to put him down on the ground awhile as he felt cramped. "Well, stay in my pocket and be cramped!" said the lord, who remembered how he had been caught before. When he reached his castle, he took John Bit-of-a-Man out of his pocket and put him in a basket which he suspended from the kitchen ceiling, and told him to watch everything he saw going on, and tell him faithfully all that he saw. John Bit-of-a-Man agreed to do this, and each day he told his master all that he saw and heard. One day our hero leaned his little head over the edge of the basket, so he could see around him, and a servant saw him and said to him, "So it is you who watch us, you little wretch! It is you who tell the master all that happens! Very well! You shall pay for it!" Amid the applause of his companions, the servant took down the basket, seized the poor little fellow by the hair, and threw him into the horse-trough. That same day an ox went there to drink, and swallowed him whole. At the end of a week, the lord had the ox killed for a great feast that he made; the entrails were thrown out into the road. An old woman passing by saw the entrails. "Oh! what splendid entrails! What a pity to throw them away!" and so saying, she clapped them into the basket which she carried on her back. She had not taken many steps, when she heard a noise that came from her basket saying: Toc! toc! The devil's imp is in your basket! Toc! toc! The devil's imp is in your basket! The old woman threw down her basket, and ran away frightened. A hungry wolf came along who seized on the entrails with avidity, and John Bit-of-a-Man was once more swallowed alive. As the wolf was crossing the plain, he heard a voice which came from the inside of his body cry out, "Help! shepherd! help! Here is the wolf that devours your sheep." "Be quiet! you cursed stomach; be quiet! cursed stomach!" said the wolf in desperation. "I will not hold my tongue until you have put me down at my father's door," answered John Bit-of-a-Man. "Very well; I will go there," said the wolf. When they got there, John Bit-of-a-Man got out of the wolf's stomach, and ran quickly into the house, passing by the cat's hole; at the same moment, seizing the wolf by the tail, he cried, "Come, father, come, I have got the wolf by the tail." His father ran to him, killed the wolf with one stroke of his axe, and sold his skin. Restored to his home again, John Bit-of-a-Man lived ever after happy and peaceful. Source (books.google.com): Martha Ward Carey, Fairy Legends of the French Provinces (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell and Company, 1887), pp. 61-65 . Source (Internet Archive): Martha Ward Carey, Fairy Legends of the French Provinces (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell and Company, 1887), pp. 61-65 . Carey's source: Nérée Quépat. "Told Told by Madam Richet, aged 77, at Woippy, near Metz." Return to the table of contents . Little Thumb France Once there was a couple who had many children. One of them was a little boy who was no taller than a thumb. He was called Little Thumb. One day his mother said to him, "I am going to the meadow. You will stay here and take care of house. "Mom," he said, "I want to go with you." "No, our Thumb, you must stay here." Little Thumb pretended to obey; but, when his mother left, he followed her without her noticing. When he reached the meadow, he hid himself in the first armful of grass that his mother had cut. She unwittingly put him in her basket. The grass was given to the cow, and thus Little Thumb was swallowed. That evening, the mother wanted to milk the cow. "Turn around, Blackie." "No, I'll not turn around." The astonished woman ran to fetch her husband. "Turn around, Blackie." "No, I'll not turn around." Tired of this battle, they called the butcher, who said that the beast should be slaughtered. Thus the cow was therefore killed and butchered. The stomach was thrown into the street, where an old woman picked it up and put it in her basket. On leaving the village she had too much to carry and had to stop halfway up a hill. She left the cow's stomach on the road. A hungry wolf came by and swallowed the stomach together with Little Thumb. The wolf continued to prowl and came to a flock of sheep. Little Thumb cried out, "Shepherd, look out for your flock! Shepherd, look out for your flock!" This frightened the wolf ---- and Little Thumb suddenly found himself on the ground. He cleaned himself as best he could and went back to his parents. His mother said to him, "There you are, our Thumb!" I thought that you were lost." "I was in the grass, but you didn't see me." "No, I didn't. I really thought that you were lost." "Well, mom! I'm here now." Source (books.google.com): Emmanuel Cosquin, "Le petit poucet," Contes populaires de Lorraine , vol. 2 (Paris: F. Vieweg, 1886), no. 53, pp. 147-48 . Source (Internet Archive): Emmanuel Cosquin, "Le petit poucet," Contes populaires de Lorraine , vol. 2 (Paris: F. Vieweg, 1886), no. 53, pp. 147-48 . Return to the table of contents . Little Blue Riding Hood France One day a farmer and his wife went out to harvest. They left their little boy at home, telling him to come to the field at noon to bring them their soup. The boy was called Little Blue Riding Hood because he always wore a hood of that color. As noon approached the little boy poured the soup into a pot and proceeded to take it to his parents. As he passed by the barn he saw that the cow had nothing to eat. He set his pot next to her and went to get some fodder. Unfortunately the cow kicked the pot, and all the soup spilled on the floor. This upset the boy greatly, so he hid himself in a haystack. When he did not arrive at the parents, they returned home. They called to him and looked everywhere for him, but Little Blue Riding Hood was nowhere. The hungry cow began to bellow, and they gave her the hay where the boy was hiding. The cow swallowed the child with the hay. A little later they wanted to renew the litter, but the cow would not move aside. They pushed her and hit her, but nothing helped. "Move cow, move!" "I will not move!" Hearing the cow speak, people were astonished to hear the cow speak and believed that she was bewitched. They did not know that it was Little Blue Riding Hood who answered for her. They ran and fetched the mayor. "Move cow, move!" "I will not move!" Finally they fetched the parish priest, who said to the cow in French, "Move cow, move!" "I don't understand French; I will not move!" Not knowing what else to do, the farmer sent for the butcher. The beast was killed and butchered. The stomach was thrown out and picked up by an old woman, who carried it away in her basket. She was scarcely outside the village when the little boy began to sing: "Walk on, walk on, old fool! I'm here in your basket." The frightened old woman walked on faster without daring to look behind her. She passed a flock of sheep, and the little boy shouted out, "Shepherd, shepherd, look out for your sheep! Here comes a wolf." The old woman, half mad with fear, felt herself and said: "I am not a wolf! What can that mean?" When she got home, she closed the door, put her basket on the floor, and slit open the cow's stomach. As soon as she turned her head, the little boy came out of his prison and hid behind the cupboard. The old woman prepared the tripe for her supper. She was just beginning to recover from her fright and thought only of enjoying herself, when suddenly the little boy began to cry out "Bon appétit, old woman!" This time the poor woman thought that the devil was there with her, and she began to tremble in all over. "Listen up," the little boy said to her then without leaving his hiding place. "Promise me not to tell anyone where you found me and to take me where I tell you. I'll then gladly leave you alone, and you won't be sorry to be rid of me." The old woman promised everything, and Little Blue Riding Hood showed himself to her. She took him back to his parents, who were very happy to see him again. Source (books.google.com): Emmanuel Cosquin, "Le petit chaperon bleu", Contes populaires de Lorraine (Paris: F. Vieweg, 1886), no. 53 (variant), pp. 148-49 . Source (Internet Archive): Emmanuel Cosquin, "Le petit chaperon bleu", Contes populaires de Lorraine (Paris: F. Vieweg, 1886), no. 53 (variant), pp. 148-49 . Return to the table of contents . Jean des Pois Verts France A woman had no children. One day she heard one of her neighbors say that one could have children by planting peas in soil prepared in a certain way. "If I tried," she said to herself, "maybe I could get one! I'll plant a bushel of peas." She dug a patch in her garden and planted the peas in it. She watered them every day until she saw thousands of little children's heads appearing above the ground. The next day little boys, at most half an inch tall, were running around. The peasant woman was embarrassed. She decided to go see a fairy, her godmother, to ask for her advice. The fairy took all the children except one and turned them into elves who flew off in all directions. This is why there are so many goblins, gremlins, sprites, and imps. They are jealous of not being human and thus have no greater pleasure than to mislead travelers and play all kinds of tricks on them. The little child kept was called Jean des Pois Verts [Jean of the Green Peas]. He always remained very small. The fairy presented him with a carriage and magnificent clothes. The carriage was made of a ladybug wing; the horses were two dragonflies; the driver, a little wasp; and the footmen, two black ants. His dress coat was a spider's web, and his garters were two strands of gossamer. He was living happily with his mother when thieves attacked the house. They were about to kill him when their chief stopped them, telling them that he would be useful to them in a burglary that he was planning. They let Jean live, but he was taken prisoner. The brigands then went to plunder a church. The door was locked. Jean was forced to enter through the keyhole and pull back the bolts. The bandits grabbed the gold and precious items and fled into the countryside. Jean des Pois Verts was placed in the chief's pocket, who did not worry about him any longer. The child sneaked out, hid in the undergrowth, and kept his eye on the thieves. He watched them deposit their loot in a cave, and then set out again for a new expedition. Jean des Pois Verts entered the cave and carried away all the riches. Before long he arrived at his house. His mother opened the door and received her son with joy. They were now rich and and led happy lives. When Jean des Pois Verts died, the fairy carried him to heaven on a thistle blossom. Source (books.google.com): E. Henry Carnoy, "Jean des Pois Verts," Contes français (Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1885), pp. 245-47 . Source (Internet Archive): E. Henry Carnoy, "Jean des Pois Verts," Contes français (Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1885), pp. 245-47 . Carnoy's source: "Told in January 1878 by A. Haboury, d'Acheux (Somme)." Return to the table of contents . Little Chick-Pea Italy Once upon a time there was a husband and wife who had no children. The husband was a carpenter, and when he came home from his shop he did nothing but scold his wife because she had no children, and the poor woman was constantly weeping and despairing. She was charitable, and had festivals celebrated in the church; but no children. One day a woman knocked at her door and asked for alms; but the carpenter's wife answered: "I will not give you any, for I have given alms and had masses said, and festivals celebrated for a long time, and have no son." "Give me alms and you will have children." "Good! in that case I will do all you wish." "You must give me a whole loaf of bread, and I will give you something that will bring you children." "If you will, I will give you two loaves." "No, no! now, I want only one; you can give me the other when you have the children." So she gave her a loaf, and the woman said: "Now I will go home and give my children something to eat, and then I will bring you what will make you have children." "Very well." The woman went home, fed her children, and then took a little bag, filled it with chick-peas, and carried it to the carpenter's wife, and said: "This is a bag of peas; put them in the kneading-trough, and tomorrow they will be as many sons as there are peas." There were a hundred peas, and the carpenter's wife said: "How can a hundred peas become a hundred sons?" "You will see tomorrow." The carpenter's wife said to herself: "I had better say nothing about it to my husband, because if by any mischance the children should not come, he would give me a fine scolding." Her husband returned at night and began to grumble as usual; but his wife said not a word and went to bed repeating to herself: "Tomorrow you will see!" The next morning the hundred peas had become a hundred sons. One cried: "Papa, I want to drink." Another said: "Papa, I want to eat." Another: "Papa, take me up." He, in the midst of all this tumult, took a stick and went to the trough and began to beat, and killed them all. One fell out (imagine how small they were!) and ran quickly into the bedroom and hid himself on the handle of the pitcher. After the carpenter had gone to his shop his wife said: "What a rascal! He has grumbled so long about my not having children and now he has killed them all!" Then the son who had escaped said: ''Mamma, has papa gone?" She said: "Yes, my son. How did you manage to escape? Where are you?" "Hush! I am in the handle of the pitcher; tell me: has papa gone?" "Yes, yes, yes, come out!" Then the child who had escaped came out and his mamma exclaimed: "Oh! how pretty you are! How shall I call you?" The child answered: "Cecino [Little Chick-Pea]." "Very well, bravo, my Cecino! Do you know, Cecino, you must go and carry your papa's dinner to him at the shop." "Yes, you must put the little basket on my head, and I will go and carry it to papa." The carpenter's wife, when it was time, put the basket on Cecino's head and sent him to carry her husband's dinner to him. When Cecino was near the shop, he began to cry: "O papa! come and meet me; I am bringing you your dinner." The carpenter said to himself: "Oh! did I kill them all, or are there any left?" He went to meet Cecino and said: "O my good boy! how did you escape my blows?" "I fell down, ran into the room, and hid myself on the handle of the pitcher." "Bravo, Cecino! Listen. You must go around among the country people and hear whether they have anything broken to mend." "Yes." So the carpenter put Cecino in his pocket, and while he went along the way did nothing but chatter; so that every one said he was mad, because they did not know that he had his son in his pocket. When he saw some countrymen he asked: "Have you anything to mend?" "Yes, there are some things about the oxen broken, but we cannot let you mend them, for you are mad." "What do you mean by calling me mad? I am wiser than you. Why do you say I am mad?" "Because you do nothing but talk to yourself on the road." "I was talking with my son." "And where do you keep your son?" "In my pocket." "That is a pretty place to keep your son." "Very well, I will show him to you;" and he pulls out Cecino, who was so small that he stood on one of his father's fingers. "Oh, what a pretty child! You must sell him to us." "What are you thinking about! I sell you my son who is so valuable to me!" "Well, then, don't sell him to us." What does he do then? He takes Cecino and puts him on the horn of an ox and says: "Stay there, for now I am going to get the things to mend." "Yes, yes, don't be afraid; I will stay on my horn." So the carpenter went to get the things to mend. Meanwhile two thieves passed by, and seeing the oxen, one said: "See those two oxen there alone. Come, let us go and steal them." When they drew near, Cecino cried out: "Papa, look out! There are thieves here! They are stealing your oxen!" "Ah! where does that voice come from?" And they approached nearer to see; and Cecino, the nearer he saw them come, the more he called out: "Look out for your oxen, papa; the thieves are stealing them!" When the carpenter came the thieves said to him: "Good man, where does that voice come from?" "It is my son." "If he is not here, where is he?" "Don't you see? There he is, up on the horn of one of the oxen." When he showed him to them, they said: "You must sell him to us; we will give you as much money as you wish." "What are you thinking about! I might sell him to you, but who knows how much my wife would grumble about it! " "Do you know what you must tell her? That he died on the way." They tempted him so much that at last he gave him to them for two sacks of money. They took their Cecino, put him in one of their pockets, and went away. On their journey they saw the king's stable. "Let us take a look at the king's stable and see whether we can steal a pair of horses." "Very good." They said to Cecino: "Don't betray us." "Don't be afraid, I will not betray you." So they went into the stable and stole three horses, which they took home and put in their own stable. Afterwards they went and said to Cecino: "Listen. We are so tired! save us the trouble, go down and give the horses some oats." Cecino went to do so, but fell asleep on the halter and one of the horses swallowed him. When he did not return, the thieves said: "He must have fallen asleep in the stable." So they went there and looked for him and called: "Cecino, where are you? " "Inside of the black horse." Then they killed the black horse; but Cecino was not there. " Cecino, where are you?" "In the bay horse." So they killed the bay horse; but Cecino was not there. "Cecino, where are you?" But Cecino answered no longer. Then they said: "What a pity! that child who was so useful to us is lost." Then they dragged out into the fields the two horses that they had cut open. A famished wolf passed that way and saw the dead horses. "Now I will eat my fill of horse," and he ate and ate until he had finished and had swallowed Cecino.* [*It appears from this that Cecino had been in one of the horses all the time, but the thieves had not seen him because he was so small.] Then the wolf went off until it became hungry again and said: "Let us go and eat a goat." When Cecino heard the wolf talk about eating a goat, he cried out: "Goat-herd, the wolf is coming to eat your goats!" [The wolf supposes that it has swallowed some wind that forms these words, hits itself against a stone, and after several trials gets rid of the wind and Cecino, who hides himself under a stone, so that he shall not be seen.] Three robbers passed that way with a bag of money. One of them said: "Now I will count the money, and you others be quiet or I will kill you!" You can imagine whether they kept still! for they did not want to die. So he began to count: "One, two, three, four, and five." And Cecino: "One, two, three, four, and five." (Do you understand? He repeats the robber's words.) "I hear you! You will not keep still. Well, I will kill you; we shall see whether you will speak again." He began to count the money again: "One, two, three, four, and five." Cecino repeats: "One, two, three, four, and five." "Then you will not keep quiet! now I will kill you!" and he killed one of them. "Now we shall see whether you will talk; if you do I will kill you too." He began to count: "One, two, three, four, and five." Cecino repeats: "One, two, three, four, and five." "Take care, if I have to tell you again I will kill you!" "Do you think I want to speak? I don't wish to be killed." He begins to count: "One, two, three, four, and five." Cecino repeats: "One, two, three, four, and five." "You will not keep quiet either; now I will kill you!" and he killed him. "Now I am alone and can count by myself and no one will repeat it." So he began agin to count: "One, two, three, four, and five." And Cecino: "One, two, three, four, and five." Then the robber said: "There is some one hidden here; I had better run away or he will kill me." So he ran away and left behind the sack of money. When Cecino perceived that there was no one there, he came out, put the bag of money on his head, and started for home. When he drew near his parents' house he cried: ''Oh, mamma, come and meet me; I have brought you a bag of money!" When his mother heard him she went to meet him and took the money and said: "Take care you don't drown yourself in these puddles of rain-water." The mother went home, and turned back to look for Cecino, but he was not to be seen. She told her husband what Cecino had done, and they went and searched everywhere for him, and at last found him drowned in a puddle. Source (books.google.com): Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company), no. 77, pp. 242-47 . Source (Internet Archive): Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company), no. 77, pp. 242-47 . Return to the table of contents . Robber Nut Albania Once upon a time there lived an old man and an old woman to whom God had given no children. They asked about this here and there, and finally someone said to them: "If you want to have children there is no other way but to take a bladder and blow into it for twenty days and twenty nights. If you do so, you will find a child in the bladder." They did just that, and after twenty days they found a boy in the bladder. He was just as large as a nut. They took him out, dressed him, and fed him, but he did not grow any larger. At the age of fifteen he was still the size of a nut. One day they sent him out to the field to plow with the oxen. He jumped onto the front of the plow and steered the oxen. Three robbers came by. Thinking that the oxen were unattended (for they didn't see the boy), they began to remove their yoke. The boy hit their hands with his goad. At first they were frightened, but then they paid closer attention and saw him sitting on the plow. They took him with them and went to steal the priest's oxen. Arriving at the priest's house they let the boy through a crack in the door, for he was only as large as a nut. Once inside he opened the door for them. They took the oxen and escaped. He too became a robber, and no other robber was his equal. He was called Robber Nut, and the whole world was afraid of him. However, in the end he drowned in a river. Source (books.google.com): Johann Georg von Hahn, "Der Räuber Nuß," Griechische und albanesische Märchen , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1864), no. 99, pp. 115-16 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Georg von Hahn, "Der Räuber Nuß," Griechische und albanesische Märchen , vol. 2 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1864), no. 99, pp. 115-16 . Return to the table of contents . The Little Spirit, or Boy-Man Native American In a little lodge at a beautiful spot on a lake shore, alone with his sister, lived a boy remarkable for the smallness of his stature. Many large rocks were scattered around their habitation, and it had a very wild and out-of-the-way look. The boy grew no larger as he advanced in years, and yet, small as he was, he had a big spirit of his own, and loved dearly to play the master in the lodge. One day in winter he told his sister to make him a ball to play with, as he meant to have some sport along the shore on the clear ice. When she handed him the ball, his sister cautioned him not to go too far. He laughed at her, and posted off in high glee, throwing his ball before him and running after it at full speed, and he went as fast as his ball. At last his ball flew to a great distance; he followed as fast as he could. After he had run forward for some time, he saw what seemed four dark spots upon the ice, straight before him. When he came up to the shore he was surprised to see four large, tall men, lying on the ice, spearing fish. They were four brothers, who looked exactly alike. As the little boy-man approached them, the nearest looked up, and in his turn he was surprised to see such a tiny being, and turning to his brothers, he said: "Tia! look! see what a little fellow is here." The three others thereupon looked up too, and seeing these four faces, as if they had been one, the little spirit or boy-man said to himself: "Four in one! What a time they must have in choosing their hunting-shirts!" After they had all stared for a moment at the boy, they covered their heads, intent in searching for fish. The boy thought to himself: "These four-faces fancy that I am to be put off without notice because I am so little, and they are so broad and long. They shall find out. I may find a way to teach them that I am not to be treated so lightly." After they were covered up, the boy-man, looking sharply about, saw that among them they had caught one large trout, which was lying just by their side. Stealing along, he slyly seized it, and placing his fingers in the gills, and tossing his ball before him, he ran off at full speed. They heard the pattering of his little steps upon the ice, and when the four looked up all together, they saw their fine trout sliding away, as if of itself, at a great rate, the boy being so small that he could not be distinguished from the fish. "See!" they cried out, "our fish is running away on the dry land!" When they stood up they could just see, over the fish's head, that it was the boy-man who was carrying it off. The little spirit reached the lodge, and having left the trout at the door, he told his sister to go out and bring in the fish he had brought home. She exclaimed, "Where could you have got it? I hope you have not stolen it." "Oh," he replied, "I found it on the ice. It was caught in our lake. Have we no right to a little lake of our own? I shall claim all the fish that come out of its waters." "How," the sister asked again," could you have got it there?" "No matter," said the boy; go and cook it." It was as much as the girl could do to drag the great trout within doors. She cooked it, and its flavor was so delicious that she asked no more questions as to how he had come by it. The next morning the little spirit or boy-man set off as he had the day before. He made all sorts of sport with his ball as he frolicked along -- high over his head he would toss it, straight up into the air; then far before him, and again, in mere merriment of spirit, he would send it bounding back, as if he had plenty of speed and enough to spare in running back after it. And the ball leaped and bounded about, and glided through the air as if it were a live thing, and enjoyed the sport as much as the boy-man himself. When he came within hail of the four large men, who were fishing there every day, he cast his ball with such force that it rolled into the ice-hole about which they were busy. The boy, standing on the shore of the lake, called out: "Four-in-One, pray hand me my ball. "No, indeed," they answered, setting up a grim laugh which curdled their four dark faces all at once, "we shall not;" and with their fishing-spears they thrust the ball under the ice. "Good!" said the boy-man, "we shall see." Saying which he rushed upon the four brothers and thrust them at one push into the water. His ball bounded back to the surface, and, picking it up, he ran off, tossing it before him in his own sportive way. Outstripping it in speed he soon reached home, and remained within till the next morning. The four brothers, rising up from the water at the same time, dripping and wroth, roared out in one voice a terrible threat of vengeance, which they promised to execute the next day. They knew the boy's speed, and that they could by no means overtake him. By times in the morning, the four brothers were stirring in their lodge, and getting ready to look after their revenge. Their old mother, who lived with them, begged them not to go. "Better," said she, "now that your clothes are dry, to think no more of the ducking than to go and all four of you get your heads broken, as you surely will, for that boy is a monedo or he could not perform such feats as he does." But her sons paid no heed to this wise advice, and, raising a great war-cry, which frightened the birds overhead nearly out of their feathers, they started for the boy's lodge among the rocks. The little spirit or boy-man heard them roaring forth their threats as they approached, but he did not appear to be disquieted in the least. His sister as yet had heard nothing; after a while she thought she could distinguish the noise of snow-shoes on the snow, at a distance, but rapidly advancing. She looked out, and seeing the four large men coming straight to their lodge she was in great fear, and running in, exclaimed: "He is coming, four times as strong as ever!" for she supposed that the one man whom her brother had offended had become so angry as to make four of himself in order to wreak his vengeance. The boy-man said, "Why do you mind them? Give me something to eat." "How can you think of eating at such a time?" she replied. "Do as I request you, and be quick." She then gave little spirit his dish, and he commenced eating Just then the brothers came to the door. "See!" cried the sister, "the man with four heads!" The brothers were about to lift the curtain at the door, when the boy-man turned his dish upside down, and immediately the door was closed with a stone; upon which the four brothers set to work and hammered with their clubs with great fury, until at length they succeeded in making a slight opening. One of the brothers presented his face at this little window, and rolled his eye about at the boy-man in a very threatening way. The little spirit, who, when he had closed the door, had returned to his meal, which he was quietly eating, took up his bow and arrow which lay by his side, and let fly the shaft, which, striking the man in the head, he fell back. The boy-man merely called out "Number one" as he fell, and went on with his meal. In a moment a second face, just like the first, presented itself; and as he raised his bow, his sister said to him: "What is the use? You have killed that man already." Little spirit fired his arrow -- the man fell -- he called out "Number two," and continued his meal. The two others of the four brothers were dispatched in the same quiet way, and counted off as "Number three" and "Number four." After they were all well disposed of in this way, the boy-man directed his sister to go out and see them. She presently ran back, saying: There are four of them." "Of course," the boy-man answered, "and there always shall be four of them." Going out himself, the boy-man raised the brothers to their feet, and giving each a push, one with his face to the East, another to the West, a third to the South, and the last to the North, he sent them off to wander about the earth; and whenever you see four men just alike, they are the four brothers whom the little spirit or boy-man dispatched upon their travels. But this was not the last display of the boy-man's power. When spring came on, and the lake began to sparkle in the morning sun, the boy-man said to his sister: "Make me a new set of arrows, and a bow." Although he provided for their support, the little spirit never performed household or hard work of any kind, and his sister obeyed. When she had made the weapons, which, though they were very small, were beautifully wrought and of the best stuff the field and wood could furnish, she again cautioned him not to shoot into the lake. "She thinks," said the boy-man to himself, "I can see no further into the water than she. My sister shall learn better." Regardless of her warnings, he on purpose discharged a shaft into the lake, waded out into the water till he got into its depth, and paddled about for his arrow, so as to call the attention of his sister, and as if to show that he hardily braved her advice. She hurried to the shore, calling on him to return; but instead of heeding her, he cried out: "You of the red fins, come and swallow me!" Although his sister did not clearly understand whom her brother was addressing, she too called out: "Don't mind the foolish boy!" The boy-man's order seemed to be best attended to, for immediately a monstrous fish came and swallowed him. Before disappearing entirely, catching a glimpse of his sister standing in despair upon the shore, the boy-man hallooed out to her: "Me-zush-ke-zin-ance!" She wondered what he meant. At last it occurred to her that it must be an old moccasin. She accordingly ran to the lodge, and bringing one, she tied it to a string attached to a tree, and cast it into the water. The great fish said to the boy-man under water: "What is that floating?" To which the boy-man replied: "Go, take hold of it, swallow it as fast as you can; it is a great delicacy." The fish darted toward the old shoe and swallowed it, making of it a mere mouthful. The boy-man laughed in himself, but said nothing, till the fish was fairly caught, when he took hold of the line and began to pull himself in his fish-carriage ashore. The sister, who was watching all this time, opened wide her eyes as the huge fish came up and up upon the shore; and she opened them still more when the fish seemed to speak, and she heard from within a voice, saying, "Make haste and release me from this nasty place." It was her brother's voice, which she was accustomed to obey; and she made haste with her knife to open a door in the side of the fish, from which the boy-man presently leaped forth. He lost no time in ordering her to cut it up and dry it; telling her that their spring supply of meat was now provided. The sister now began to believe that her brother was an extraordinary boy; yet she was not altogether satisfied in her mind that he was greater than the rest of the world. They sat, one evening, in the lodge, musing with each other in the dark, by the light of each other's eyes -- for they had no other of any kind -- when the sister said, "My brother, it is strange that you, who can do so much, are no wiser than the Ko-Ko, who gets all his light from the moon; which shines or not, as it pleases." "And is not that light enough?" asked the little spirit. "Quite enough," the sister replied. "If it would but come within the lodge and not sojourn out in the tree-tops and among the clouds." "We will have a light of our own, sister," said the boy-man; and, casting himself upon a mat by the door, he commenced singing: Fire-fly, fire-fly, bright little thing, Light me to bed and my song I will sing; Give me your light, as you fly o'er my head, That I may merrily go to my bed. Give me your light o'er the grass as you creep, That I may joyfully go to my sleep; Come, little fire-fly, come little beast, Come! and I'll make you tomorrow a feast. Come, little candle, that flies as I sing, Bright little fairy-bug, night's little king; Come and I'll dream as you guide me along; Come and I'll pay you, my bug, with a song. As the boy-man chanted this call, they came in at first one by one, then in couples, till at last, swarming in little armies, the fire-flies lit up the little lodge with a thousand sparkling lamps, just as the stars were lighting the mighty hollow of the sky without. The faces of the sister and brother shone upon each other, from their opposite sides of the lodge, with a kindly gleam of mutual trustfulness; and never more from that hour did a doubt of each other darken their little household. Source (books.google.com): Henry Rowe Schoolcraft and Cornelius Mathews, The Indian Fairy Book: From the Original Legends (New York: Pubished by Mason Brothers, 1856), no. 15, pp. 179-89 . Source (Internet Archive): Henry Rowe Schoolcraft and Cornelius Mathews, The Indian Fairy Book: From the Original Legends (New York: Pubished by Mason Brothers, 1856), no. 15, pp. 179-89 . Return to the table of contents . The Transformation of Issunboshi Japan A Prayer to the Empress Jingo An old married couple went to the shrine of the deified Empress Jingo, and prayed that they might be blessed with a child, even if it were no bigger than one of their fingers. A voice was heard from behind the bamboo curtain of the shrine, and the old people were informed that their wish would be granted. In due time the old woman gave birth to a child, and when she and her husband discovered that this miniature piece of humanity was no bigger than a little finger, they became extremely angry, and thought that the Empress Jingo had treated them very meanly indeed, though, as a matter of fact, she had fulfilled their prayer to the letter. "One-Inch Priest" The little fellow was called Issunboshi ("One-Inch Priest"), and every day his parents expected to see him suddenly grow up as other boys; but at thirteen years of age he still remained the same size as when he was born. Gradually his parents became exasperated, for it wounded their vanity to hear the neighbours describe their son as Little Finger, or Grain-of-Corn. They were so much annoyed that at last they determined to send Issunboshi away. The little fellow did not complain. He requested his mother to give him a needle, a small soup-bowl, and a chop-stick, and with these things he set off on his adventures. Issunboshi becomes a Page His soup-bowl served as a boat, which he propelled along the river with his chop-stick. In this fashion he finally reached Kyoto. Issunboshi wandered about this city until he saw a large roofed gate. Without the least hesitation he walked in, and having reached the porch of a house, he cried out in a very minute voice: "I beg an honourable inquiry!" Prince Sanjo himself heard the little voice, and it was some time before he could discover where it came from. When he did so he was delighted with his discovery, and on the little fellow begging that he might live in the prince's house, his request was readily granted. The boy became a great favourite, and was at once made the Princess Sanjo's page. In this capacity he accompanied his mistress everywhere, and though so very small, he fully appreciated the honour and dignity of his position. An Encounter with Oni One day the Princess Sanjo and her page went to the Temple of Kwannon, the Goddess of Mercy, "under whose feet are dragons of the elements and the lotuses of purity" As they were leaving the temple two oni (evil spirits) sprang upon them. Issunboshi took out his needle-sword from its hollow straw, and loudly denouncing the oni, he flourished his small weapon in their evil-looking faces. One of the creatures laughed. "Why," said he scornfully, "I could swallow you, as a cormorant swallows a trout, and what is more, my funny little bean-seed, I will do so." The oni opened his mouth, and Issunboshi found himself slipping down a huge throat until he finally stood in the creature's great dark stomach. Issunboshi, nothing daunted, began boring away with his needle-sword. This made the evil spirit cry out and give a great cough, which sent the little fellow into the sunny world again. The second oni, who had witnessed his companion's distress, was extremely angry, and tried to swallow the remarkable little page, but was not successful. This time Issunboshi climbed up the creature's nostril, and when he had reached the end of what seemed to him to be a very long and gloomy tunnel, he began piercing the oni's eyes. The creature, savage with pain, ran off as fast as he could, followed by his yelling companion. Needless to say, the princess was delighted with her page's bravery, and told him that she was sure her father would reward him when he was told about the terrible encounter. The Magic Mallet On their way home the princess happened to pick up a small wooden mallet. "Oh!" said she, "this must have been dropped by the wicked oni, and it is none other than a lucky mallet. You have only to wish and then tap it upon the ground, and your wish, no matter what, is always granted. My brave Issunboshi, tell me what you would most desire, and I will tap the mallet on the ground." After a pause the little fellow said: "Honourable Princess, I should like to be as big as other people." The princess tapped the mallet on the ground, calling aloud the wish of her page. In a moment Issunboshi was transformed from a bijou creature to a lad just like other youths of his age. These wonderful happenings excited the curiosity of the emperor, and Issunboshi was summoned to his presence. The emperor was so delighted with the youth that he gave him many gifts and made him a high official. Finally, Issunboshi became a great lord and married Prince Sanjo's youngest daughter. Source (Internet Archive): F. Hadland Davis, Myths and Legends of Japan (London: George G. Harrap and Company, 1912), pp. 364-67 . Return to the table of contents . A Man Who Was Only a Finger and a Half in Stature Bangladesh / India There was once a certain wood-cutter, the barrenness of whose wife was a constant source of distress to him, the more so as all the neighbours pointed at the couple as especially cursed by Heaven. The husband and wife made the richest presents and the sincerest vows to the goddess Shoshti , the giver of children; and she one day appeared before the wood-cutter in the shape of an old lady, and gave him a cucumber, saying that his wife should eat it entire, without leaving the skin even, on the seventh day from that day. The wood-cutter gave it to his wife with these instructions, but she, in her impatience, ate it up the very next day, even forgetting Shoshti's instructions as to the skin. After the usual period of conception, a male child was born; but the mother was well punished for her disobedience to the goddess. There was hardly anything natural about the child. It was born as a fully developed man, but was only a finger and a half tall, with a tuft of hair behind its head three fingers in length. He could talk and walk from his very birth; and when not even an hour old he started in search of his father, who had gone out woodcutting. He passed through many thoroughfares and through the forest, dispersing at one stroke of his feet the grasshoppers and other insects that waylaid him, till he reached a palace gate, where his father was toiling with great drops of perspiration on the forehead. The boy asked him to go home but he said that having witnessed his child's birth and seen what had happened, he had left home in disgust, and sold himself to the king as a slave, and that therefore it was impossible for him to leave his work. At this, the son went to the king, and asked him to liberate his father. The king was annoyed at the diminutive figure before him, and said that the wood-cutter could be set free only on the payment of cowries (money) as his ransom. Mr. "One-Finger-and-Half," as his name was, ran out like a ball set in motion to procure the cowries, and in the course of his journey came to a canal which to him seemed impassable. He was thinking how to cross it, when he felt someone pulling from behind at his tuft of hair. By one jerk he freed it from the stranger's grasp, and looking behind saw a frog, which, being interrogated, said that it had for its father the king of frogs, and that its name was Rung Soondar . At this the wood-cutter's son burst into a laugh of scorn, and was about to punish the young frog by dismembering it, when it said, "By certain mystical powers I know you to be a wood-cutter's son. Now it does not look well for you to be without an axe. You will get one from a blacksmith yonder, on paying a single cowrie." To which the young man answered, "O brother, I am a child, where shall I get a cowrie? For want of cowries I could not liberate my father. I have nothing in the world, and shall ever remain obliged if you can lend me something." The frog, startled at the request, said he had only a single cowrie, and that one with a hole in it. The suggestion of possessing himself of an axe was pleasing to the dwarf, and thinking little of the impediment, he directed his steps towards the blacksmith's, whom he found to be a man of the stature of two fingers and a half, and with a beard longer by half a finger. He was making an axe and a sickle, each half a finger in length. The boy, without the required cowrie, did not at first know how to proceed. But he hit off a clever plan. He approached the smith with stealthy steps, and, unperceived, tied the tuft of hair on his own head to the beard of the latter. Then he jumped on the smith's back. The latter, taken by surprise, called on his gods, wondering if he were in the clutches of a ghost or hobgoblin. His aggressor, with sides bursting with laughter, got down, and introduced himself as his best friend. But soft words were useless. The smith in a rage asked if the cowrie, the usual fee for admission into the house, had been brought, and being answered in the negative, clutched his antagonist by the throat, and was on the point of throttling him, when one of the hairs of the latter, still tied to the beard of the former, was torn. The wood-cutter's son threw himself on this account into a frenzy, and demanded of the smith the restoration of the hair, threatening him, in case of refusal, with a legal process. The smith, agitated with great terror, pleaded for mercy, which was granted on his consenting to give up the axe and the sickle when finished. A lasting friendship was then contracted between the parties, and the boy left the place. He came back to the young frog, and was asked by it to cut with his axe a young tamarind tree in the hollow of which its mate was shut up. He complied with the request; but the frog inside, having lost, through long want of exercise, the use of its legs, could not leave the hollow. Master "One-Finger-and-a-Half," with admirable presence of mind, put his tuft of hair into the hole and drew the frog out. Rung Soondar out of gratitude presented him with the one cowrie it possessed, which it said would suffice to liberate his father; and its mate gave him a few drops of its spittle, saying that with them he could heal the blindness of the daughter of the king whose slave his father was, and so gain her for his wife. He accordingly left the frogs, and journeyed towards the country where his father was. The cowrie the frog had given him multiplied on the way into as many cowries as would amount to a round sum of money, and he went to the king and insolently demanded of him the liberty of his father. The king, counting the cowries and satisfied with their value, promised to meet the demand, but not omitting to give the impertinent upstart a few slaps on the cheek, and a violent pull at his tuft of hair. But he was not one to be so easily disposed of. He persisted in remaining in the king's presence, and boldly asked him if he had a blind daughter, and if he would marry her to him. The king replied that for certain reasons she could not be married, save in the presence of the corpses of seven thieves separated from his kingdom by thirteen rivers. The dwarf, leaving his father behind, started for the country of the thieves, and after many adventures, reached an ant-hill near it. He could proceed no further, and tired with the long journey, and worn out with hunger and thirst, he fell asleep by the ant-hill. Midnight came, and the thieves of whom he had come in search were out on a pilfering expedition. One of them stumbled upon him, and being awakened, he asked them who they were and where they were going. They told him that they were thieves, and that their present object was to break into the house of his old friend the blacksmith. Anxious for his friend's safety, and for the furtherance of his own ends, he suggested that they would find it more profitable to present themselves before the king living across the thirteen rivers flowing by their country, who intended to give one of them his daughter as wife with a fit dowry. They yielded to the deception, and full of anticipation at the prospect before them, they followed the dwarf as their leader. The thirteen rivers were crossed; and the thieves when about to get down from the last ferry-boat stole some cowries lying hid in one corner of it. The ferry-man and the wood-cutter's son both saw the theft committed, but winked at it for the time being, though in nods and low whispers they communicated to each other their desire for revenge later on. No sooner had the dwarf reached the palace with the thieves, than the ferry-man presented himself before the king and prosecuted them for the theft of his cowries. They were convicted of the offence, and executed. Whereupon master "One-Finger-and-a-Half" urged his claims to the hand of the blind princess. The king, the queen, and the princess herself were loud in their lamentations at the demand of this deformed creature; but the matter could not be helped. The king, according to the conditions he himself laid down, was bound to give away his daughter to that ugly little specimen of humanity. All he could do was to put off the wedding day. It was within a short time after this that the friends of the seven thieves, getting intelligence of their execution, in a swarm besieged the kingdom, and plundered not only the palace, but all the other houses, reducing the king to the direst poverty imaginable. The dwarf who had enticed their friends into the kingdom and had had them executed, was the object of their keenest search, but he hid himself in a dense patch of grass, and came out only when the coast was clear. He again urged his suit for the princess's hand, and was again put off till the extermination of the race of thieves had been accomplished. For the achievement of this object the dwarf rode away, mounted on a tom-cat, into their country. On the way he made friends with hornets, wasps, and bees, with whom he began an attack which lasted continually for three days, until the thieves, smarting under the poisonous stings of the insects, left the country for good, taking with them their wives and children. Triumphantly returning to the king, he asked him for his father's release and for the hand of the princess. The king could not say "no" any longer, and the dwarf was re-named Pingal Kumara . His father was brought into the palace on a decorated chariot with flowers, and he himself was rewarded with the princess's hand, whose sight he restored with the help of the frog's spittle. The wood-cutter's wife was brought into the palace, and lived there as happily as the day was long. Years passed over their heads, until at last the king retired into the forest to prepare himself for death, leaving his dominions to his worthy son-in-law. Source (books.google.com): F. B. Bradley-Birt, Bengal Fairy Tales (London and New York: John Lane Company, 1920), no. 11, pp. 200-204 . Source (Internet Archive): F. B. Bradley-Birt, Bengal Fairy Tales (London and New York: John Lane Company, 1920), no. 11, pp. 200-204 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 20, 2023. The Tongue-Cut Sparrow: A Fairy Tale from Japan The Tongue-Cut Sparrow A Fairy Tale from Japan of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 480 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2008-2015 Contents "The Tongue-Cut Sparrow," as translated or retold by: William Elliot Griffis (1880). A. B. Mitford (1890). Yei Theodora Ozaki (1903). Teresa Peirce Williston (1904). Lafcadio Hearn (1918). David Brauns (1885). External link to Der Sperling mit der durchschnittenen Zunge , a German translation of this tale. Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Tongue-Cut Sparrow Japan, William Elliot Griffis There was once an old man who had a wife with a very bad temper. She had never borne him any children, and would not take the trouble to adopt a son. So for a little pet he kept a tiny sparrow, and fed it with great care. The old dame, not satisfied with scolding her husband, hated the sparrow. Now the old woman's temper was especially bad on wash days, when her old back and knees were well strained over the low tub, which rested on the ground. It happened once that she had made some starch, and set it in a red wooden bowl to cool. While her back was turned, the sparrow hopped down on the edge of the bowl, and pecked at some of the starch. In a rage the old hag seized a pair of scissors and cut the sparrow's tongue out. Flinging the bird in the air she cried out, "Now be off." So the poor sparrow, all bleeding, flew away. When the old man came back and found his pet gone, he made a great ado. He asked his wife, and she told him what she had done and why. The sorrowful old man grieved sorely for his pet, and after looking in every place and calling it by name, gave it up as lost. Long after this, old man while wandering on the mountains met his old friend the sparrow. They both cried "Ohio!" (good morning) to each other, and bowing low offered many mutual congratulations and inquiries as to health, etc. Then the sparrow begged the old man to visit his humble abode, promising to introduce his wife and two daughters. The old man went in and found a nice little house with a bamboo garden, tiny waterfall, stepping stone, and everything complete. Then Mrs. Sparrow brought in slices of sugar-jelly, rock-candy, sweet potato custard, and a bowl of hot starch sprinkled with sugar, and a pair of chopsticks on a tray. Miss Suzumi, the elder daughter brought the tea caddy and teapot, and in a snap of the fingers had a good cup of tea ready, which she offered on a tray, kneeling. "Please take up and help yourself. The refreshments are very poor, but I hope you will excuse our plainness," said Mother Sparrow. The delighted old man, wondering in himself at such a polite family of sparrows, ate heartily, and drank several cups of tea. Finally, on being pressed he remained all night. For several days the old man enjoyed himself at the sparrow's home. He looked at the landscapes and the moonlight, feasted to his heart's content, and played go (the game of 360 checkers) with Ko-Suzumi the little daughter. In the evening Mrs. Sparrow would bring out the refreshments and the wine, and seat the old man on a silken cushion, while she played the guitar. Mr. Sparrow and his two daughters danced, sung, and made merry. The delighted old man leaning on the velvet armrest forgot his cares, his old limbs, and his wife's tongue, and felt like a youth again. On the fifth day the old man said he must go home. Then the sparrow brought out two baskets made of plaited rattan, such as are used in traveling and carried on men's shoulders. Placing them before their guest, the sparrow said, "Please accept a parting gift." Now one basket was very heavy, and the other very light. The old man, not being greedy, said he would take the lighter one. So with many thanks and bows and good-byes, he set off homewards. He reached his hut safely, but instead of a kind welcome the old hag began to scold him for being away so long. He begged her to be quiet, and telling of his visit to the sparrows, opened the basket, while the scowling old woman held her tongue, out of sheer curiosity. Oh, what a splendid sight! There were gold and silver coin, and gems, and coral, and crystal, and amber, and the never-failing bag of money, and the invisible coat and hat, and rolls of books, and all manner of precious things. At the sight of so much wealth, the old hag's scowl changed to a smile of greedy joy. "I'll go right off and get a present from the sparrows," said she. So binding on her straw sandals, and tucking up her skirts, and adjusting her girdle, tying the bow in front, she seized her staff and set off on the road. Arriving at the sparrow's house she began to flatter Mr. Sparrow by soft speeches. Of course the polite sparrow invited her into his house, but nothing but a cup of tea was offered her, and wife and daughters kept away. Seeing she was not going to get any good-bye gift, the brazen hussy asked for one. The sparrow then brought out and set before her two baskets, one heavy and the other light. Taking the heavier one without so much as saying "thank you," she carried it back with her. Then she opened it, expecting all kinds of riches. She took off the lid, when a horrible cuttlefish rushed at her, and a horned oni snapped his tusks at her, a skeleton poked his bony fingers in her face, and finally a long, hairy serpent, with a big head and lolling tongue, sprang out and coiled around her, cracking her bones, and squeezing out her breath, till she died. After the good old man had buried his wife, he adopted a son to comfort his old age, and with his treasures lived at ease all his days. Source: William Elliot Griffis, Japanese Fairy World: Stories from the Wonder-Lore of Japan (Schenectady: James H. Barhyte, 1880), no. 4, pp. 30-36 . Return to the table of contents . The Tongue-Cut Sparrow Japan, A. B. Mitford Once upon a time there lived an old man and an old woman. The old man, who had a kind heart, kept a young sparrow, which he tenderly nurtured. But the dame was a cross-grained old thing; and one day, when the sparrow had pecked at some paste with which she was going to starch her linen, she flew into a great rage, and cut the sparrow's tongue and let it loose. When the old man came home from the hills and found that the bird had flown, he asked what had become of it; so the old woman answered that she had cut its tongue and let it go, because it had stolen her starching paste. Now the old man, hearing this cruel tale, was sorely grieved, and thought to himself, "Alas! Where can my bird be gone? Poor thing! Poor little tongue-cut sparrow! Where is your home now?" and he wandered far and wide, seeking for his pet, and crying, "Mr. Sparrow! Mr. Sparrow! Where are you living?" One day, at the foot of a certain mountain, the old man fell in with the lost bird; and when they had congratulated one another on their mutual safety, the sparrow led the old man to his home, and, having introduced him to his wife and chicks, set before him all sorts of dainties, and entertained him hospitably. "Please partake of our humble fare," said the sparrow."Poor as it is, you are very welcome." "What a polite sparrow!" answered the old man, who remained for a long time as the sparrow's guest, and was daily feasted right royally. At last the old man said that he must take his leave and return home; and the bird, offering him him two wicker baskets, begged him to carry them with him as a parting present. One of the baskets was heavy, and the other was light; so the old man, saying that as he was feeble and stricken in years he would only accept the light one, shouldered it, and trudged off home, leaving the sparrow family disconsolate at parting from him. When the old man got home, the dame grew very angry, and began to scold him, saying, "Well, and pray where have you been this many a day? A pretty thing, indeed, to be gadding about at your time of life!" "Oh!" replied he, "I have been on a visit to the sparrows; and when I came away, they gave me this wicker basket as a parting gift." Then they opened the basket to see what was inside, and, lo and behold! it was full of gold and silver and precious things. When the old woman, who was as greedy as she was cross, saw all the riches displayed before her, she changed her scolding strain, and could not contain herself for joy. "I'll go and call upon the sparrows, too," said she, "and get a pretty present." So she asked the old man the way to the sparrows' house, and set forth on her journey. Following his directions, she at last met the tongue-cut sparrow, and exclaimed, "Well met! well met! Mr. Sparrow. I have been looking forward to the pleasure of seeing you." So she tried to natter and cajole the sparrow by soft speeches. The bird could not but invite the dame to its home; but it took no pains to feast her, and said nothing about a parting gift. She, however, was not to be put off; so she asked for something to carry away with her in remembrance of her visit. The sparrow accordingly produced two baskets, as before, and the greedy old woman, choosing the heavier of the two, carried it off with her. But when she opened the basket to see what was inside, all sorts of hobgoblins and elves sprang out of it, and began to torment her. But the old man adopted a son, and his family grew rich and prosperous. What a happy old man! Source: A. B. Mitford, Tales of Old Japan (London: Macmillan and Company, 1890), pp. 173-74 . Return to the table of contents . The Tongue-Cut Sparrow Japan, Yei Theodora Ozaki Long, long ago in Japan there lived an old man and his wife. The old man was a good, kindhearted, hardworking old fellow, but his wife was a regular crosspatch, who spoilt the happiness of her home by her scolding tongue. She was always grumbling about something from morning to night. The old man had for a long time ceased to take any notice of her crossness. He was out most of the day at work in the fields, and as he had no child, for his amusement when he came home, he kept a tame sparrow. He loved the little bird just as much as if she had been his child. When he came back at night after his hard day's work in the open air it was his only pleasure to pet the sparrow, to talk to her and to teach her little tricks, which she learned very quickly. The old man would open her cage and let her fly about the room, and they would play together. Then when suppertime came, he always saved some tit-bits from his meal with which to feed his little bird. Now one day the old man went out to chop wood in the forest, and the old woman stopped at home to wash clothes. The day before, she had made some starch, and now when she came to look for it, it was all gone; the bowl which she had filled full yesterday was quite empty. While she was wondering who could have used or stolen the starch, down flew the pet sparrow, and bowing her little feathered head -- a trick which she had been taught by her master -- the pretty bird chirped and said, "It is I who have taken the starch. I thought it was some food put out for me in that basin, and I ate it all. If I have made a mistake I beg you to forgive me! Tweet, tweet, tweet!" You see from this that the sparrow was a truthful bird, and the old woman ought to have been willing to forgive her at once when she asked her pardon so nicely. But not so. The old woman had never loved the sparrow, and had often quarreled with her husband for keeping what she called a dirty bird about the house, saying that it only made extra work for her. Now she was only too delighted to have some cause of complaint against the pet. She scolded and even cursed the poor little bird for her bad behavior, and not content with using these harsh, unfeeling words, in a fit of rage she seized the sparrow -- who all this time had spread out her wings and bowed her head before the old woman, to show how sorry she was -- and fetched the scissors and cut off the poor little bird's tongue. "I suppose you took my starch with that tongue! Now you may see what it is like to go without it!" And with these dreadful words she drove the bird away, not caring in the least what might happen to it and without the smallest pity for its suffering, so unkind was she! The old woman, after she had driven the sparrow away, made some more rice paste, grumbling all the time at the trouble, and after starching all her clothes, spread the things on boards to dry in the sun, instead of ironing them as they do in England. In the evening the old man came home. As usual, on the way back he looked forward to the time when he should reach his gate and see his pet come flying and chirping to meet him, ruffling out her feathers to show her joy, and at last coming to rest on his shoulder. But tonight the old man was very disappointed, for not even the shadow of his dear sparrow was to be seen. He quickened his steps, hastily drew off his straw sandals, and stepped on to the verandah. Still no sparrow was to be seen. He now felt sure that his wife, in one of her cross tempers, had shut the sparrow up in its cage. So he called her and said anxiously, "Where is Suzume San (Miss Sparrow) today?" The old woman pretended not to know at first, and answered, "Your sparrow? I am sure I don't know. Now I come to think of it, I haven't seen her all the afternoon. I shouldn't wonder if the ungrateful bird had flown away and left you after all your petting!" But at last, when the old man gave her no peace, but asked her again and again, insisting that she must know what had happened to his pet, she confessed all. She told him crossly how the sparrow had eaten the rice paste she had specially made for starching her clothes, and how when the sparrow had confessed to what she had done, in great anger she had taken her scissors and cut out her tongue, and how finally she had driven the bird away and forbidden her to return to the house again. Then the old woman showed her husband the sparrow's tongue, saying, "Here is the tongue I cut off! Horrid little bird, why did it eat all my starch? " "How could you be so cruel? Oh! how could you be so cruel?" was all that the old man could answer. He was too kind-hearted to punish his shrew of a wife, but he was terribly distressed at what had happened to his poor little sparrow. "What a dreadful misfortune for my poor Suzume San to lose her tongue!" he said to himself. "She won't be able to chirp any more, and surely the pain of the cutting of it out in that rough way must have made her ill! Is there nothing to be done?" The old man shed many tears after his cross wife had gone to sleep. While he wiped away the tears with the sleeve of his cotton robe, a bright thought comforted him: he would go and look for the sparrow on the morrow. Having decided this he was able to go to sleep at last. The next morning he rose early, as soon as ever the day broke, and snatching a hasty breakfast, started out over the hills and through the woods, stopping at every clump of bamboos to cry, "Where, oh where does my tongue-cut sparrow stay? Where, oh where, does my tongue-cut sparrow stay?" He never stopped to rest for his noonday meal, and it was far on in the afternoon when he found himself near a large bamboo wood. Bamboo groves are the favorite haunts of sparrows, and there sure enough at the edge of the wood he saw his own dear sparrow waiting to welcome him. He could hardly believe his eyes for joy, and ran forward quickly to greet her. She bowed her little head and went through a number of the tricks her master had taught her, to show her pleasure at seeing her old friend again, and, wonderful to relate, she could talk as of old. The old man told her how sorry he was for all that had happened, and inquired after her tongue, wondering how she could speak so well without it. Then the sparrow opened her beak and showed him that a new tongue had grown in place of the old one, and begged him not to think any more about the past, for she was quite well now. Then the old man knew that his sparrow was a fairy, and no common bird. It would be difficult to exaggerate the old man's rejoicing now. He forgot all his troubles, he forgot even how tired he was, for he had found his lost sparrow, and instead of being ill and without a tongue as he had feared and expected to find her, she was well and happy and with a new tongue, and without a sign of the ill treatment she had received from his wife. And above all she was a fairy. The sparrow asked him to follow her, and flying before him she led him to a beautiful house in the heart of the bamboo grove. The old man was utterly astonished when he entered the house to find what a beautiful place it was. It was built of the whitest wood, the soft cream-colored mats which took the place of carpets were the finest he had ever seen, and the cushions that the sparrow brought out for him to sit on were made of the finest silk and crape. Beautiful vases and lacquer boxes adorned the tokonoma [alcove] of every room. The sparrow led the old man to the place of honor, and then, taking her place at a humble distance, she thanked him with many polite bows for all the kindness he had shown her for many long years. Then the Lady Sparrow, as we will now call her, introduced all her family to the old man. This done, her daughters, robed in dainty crape gowns, brought in on beautiful old-fashioned trays a feast of all kinds of delicious foods, till the old man began to think he must be dreaming. In the middle of the dinner some of the sparrow's daughters performed a wonderful dance, called the suzume-odori or the "sparrow's dance," to amuse the guest. Never had the old man enjoyed himself so much. The hours flew by too quickly in this lovely spot, with all these fairy sparrows to wait upon him and to feast him and to dance before him. But the night came on and the darkness reminded him that he had a long way to go and must think about taking his leave and return home. He thanked his kind hostess for her splendid entertainment, and begged her for his sake to forget all she had suffered at the hands of his cross old wife. He told the Lady Sparrow that it was a great comfort and happiness to him to find her in such a beautiful home and to know that she wanted for nothing. It was his anxiety to know how she fared and what had really happened to her that had led him to seek her. Now he knew that all was well he could return home with a light heart. If ever she wanted him for anything she had only to send for him and he would come at once. The Lady Sparrow begged him to stay and rest several days and enjoy the change, but the old man said that he must return to his old wife -- who would probably be cross at his not coming home at the usual time -- and to his work, and therefore, much as he wished to do so, he could not accept her kind invitation. But now that he knew where the Lady Sparrow lived he would come to see her whenever he had the time. When the Lady Sparrow saw that she could not persuade the old man to stay longer, she gave an order to some of her servants, and they at once brought in two boxes, one large and the other small. These were placed before the old man, and the Lady Sparrow asked him to choose whichever he liked for a present, which she wished to give him. The old man could not refuse this kind proposal, and he chose the smaller box, saying, "I am now too old and feeble to carry the big and heavy box. As you are so kind as to say that I may take whichever I like, I will choose the small one, which will be easier for me to carry." Then the sparrows all helped him put it on his back and went to the gate to see him off, bidding him good-bye with many bows and entreating him to come again whenever he had the time. Thus the old man and his pet sparrow separated quite happily, the sparrow showing not the least ill-will for all the unkindness she had suffered at the hands of the old wife. Indeed, she only felt sorrow for the old man who had to put up with it all his life. When the old man reached home he found his wife even crosser than usual, for it was late on in the night and she had been waiting up for him for a long time. "Where have you been all this time?" she asked in a big voice. "Why do you come back so late?" The old man tried to pacify her by showing her the box of presents he had brought back with him, and then he told her of all that had happened to him, and how wonderfully he had been entertained at the sparrow's house. "Now let us see what is in the box," said the old man, not giving her time to grumble again. "You must help me open it." And they both sat down before the box and opened it. To their utter astonishment they found the box filled to the brim with gold and silver coins and many other precious things. The mats of their little cottage fairly glittered as they took out the things one by one and put them down and handled them over and over again. The old man was overjoyed at the sight of the riches that were now his. Beyond his brightest expectations was the sparrow's gift, which would enable him to give up work and live in ease and comfort the rest of his days. He said, "Thanks to my good little sparrow! Thanks to my good little sparrow!" many times. But the old woman, after the first moments of surprise and satisfaction at the sight of the gold and silver were over, could not suppress the greed of her wicked nature. She now began to reproach the old man for not having brought home the big box of presents, for in the innocence of his heart he had told her how he had refused the large box of presents which the sparrows had offered him, preferring the smaller one because it was light and easy to carry home. "You silly old man," said she, "why did you not bring the large box? Just think what we have lost. We might have had twice as much silver and gold as this. You are certainly an old fool!" she screamed, and then went to bed as angry as she could be. The old man now wished that he had said nothing about the big box, but it was too late; the greedy old woman, not contented with the good luck which had so unexpectedly befallen them and which she so little deserved, made up her mind, if possible, to get more. Early the next morning she got up a made the old man describe the way to the sparrow's house. When he saw what was in her mind he tried to keep her from going, but it was useless. She would not listen to one word he said. It is strange that the old woman did not feel ashamed of going to see the sparrow after the cruel way she had treated her in cutting off her tongue in a fit of rage. But her greed to get the big box made her forget everything else. It did not even enter her thoughts that the sparrows might be angry with her -- as, indeed, they were -- and might punish her for what she had done. Ever since the Lady Sparrow had returned home in the sad plight in which they had first found her, weeping and bleeding from the mouth, her whole family and relations had done little else but speak of the cruelty of the old woman. "How could she," they asked each other, "inflict such a heavy punishment for such a trifling offence as that of eating some rice paste by mistake?" They all loved the old man who was so kind and good and patient under all his troubles, but the old woman they hated, and they determined, if ever they had the chance, to punish her as she deserved. They had not long to wait. After walking for some hours the old woman had at last found the bamboo grove which she had made her husband carefully describe, and now she stood before it crying out, "Where is the tongue-cut sparrow's house? Where is the tongue-cut sparrow's house?" At last she saw the eaves of the house peeping out from amongst the bamboo foliage. She hastened to the door and knocked loudly. When the servants told the Lady Sparrow that her old mistress was at the door asking to see her, she was somewhat surprised at the unexpected visit, after all that had taken place, and she wondered not a little at the boldness of the old woman in venturing to come to the house. The Lady Sparrow, however, was a polite bird, and so she went out to greet the old woman, remembering that she had once been her mistress. The old woman intended, however, to waste no time in words, she went right to the point, without the least shame, and said, "You need not trouble to entertain me as you did my old man. I have come myself to get the box which he so stupidly left behind. I shall soon take my leave if you will give me the big box. That is all I want!" The Lady Sparrow at once consented, and told her servants to bring out the big box. The old woman eagerly seized it and hoisted it on her back, and without even stopping to thank the Lady Sparrow began to hurry homewards. The box was so heavy that she could not walk fast, much less run, as she would have liked to do, so anxious was she to get home and see what was inside the box, but she had often to sit down and rest herself by the way. While she was staggering along under the heavy load, her desire to open the box became too great to be resisted. She could wait no longer, for she supposed this big box to be full of gold and silver and precious jewels like the small one her husband had received. At last this greedy and selfish old woman put down the box by the wayside and opened it carefully, expecting to gloat her eyes on a mine of wealth. What she saw, however, so terrified her that she nearly lost her senses. As soon as she lifted the lid, a number of horrible and frightful looking demons bounced out of the box and surrounded her as if they intended to kill her. Not even in nightmares had she ever seen such horrible creatures as her much-coveted box contained. A demon with one huge eye right in the middle of its forehead came and glared at her, monsters with gaping mouths looked as if they would devour her, a huge snake coiled and hissed about her, and a big frog hopped and croaked towards her. The old woman had never been so frightened in her life, and ran from the spot as fast as her quaking legs would carry her, glad to escape alive. When she reached home she fell to the floor and told her husband with tears all that had happened to her, and how she had been nearly killed by the demons in the box. Then she began to blame the sparrow, but the old man stopped her at once, saying, "Don't blame the sparrow, it is your wickedness which has at last met with its reward. I only hope this may be a lesson to you in the future!" The old woman said nothing more, and from that day she repented of her cross, unkind ways, and by degrees became a good old woman, so that her husband hardly knew her to be the same person, and they spent their last days together happily, free from want or care, spending carefully the treasure the old man had received from his pet, the tongue-cut sparrow. Source: Yei Theodora Ozaki, The Japanese Fairy Book (Westminster: Archibald Constable and Company, 1903), pp. 12-25 . Return to the table of contents . The Tongue-Cut Sparrow Japan, Teresa Peirce Williston In a little old house in a little old village in Japan lived a little old man and his little old wife. One morning when the old woman slid open the screens which form the sides of all Japanese houses, she saw, on the doorstep, a poor little sparrow. She took him up gently and fed him. Then she held him in the bright morning sunshine until the cold dew was dried from his wings. Afterward she let him go, so that he might fly home to his nest, but he stayed to thank her with his songs. Each morning, when the pink on the mountain tops told that the sun was near, the sparrow perched on the roof of the house and sang out his joy. The old man and woman thanked the sparrow for this, for they liked to be up early and at work. But near them there lived a cross old woman who did not like to be awakened so early. At last she became so angry that she caught the sparrow and cut his tongue. Then the poor little sparrow flew away to his home, but he could never sing again. When the kind woman knew what had happened to her pet she was very sad. She said to her husband, "Let us go and find our poor little sparrow." So they started together, and asked of each bird by the wayside, "Do you know where the tongue-cut sparrow lives? Do you know where the tongue-cut sparrow went?" In this way they followed until they came to a bridge. They did not know which way to turn, and at first could see no one to ask. At last they saw a bat hanging head downward, taking his daytime nap. "Oh, friend bat, do you know where the tongue-cut sparrow went?" they asked. "Yes. Over the bridge and up the mountain," said the bat. Then he blinked sleepy eyes and was fast asleep again. They went over the bridge and up the mountain, but again they found two roads and did not know which one to take. A little field mouse peeped through the leaves and grass, so they asked him, "Do you know where the tongue-cut sparrow went?" "Yes. Down the mountain and through the woods," said the field mouse. Down the mountain and through the woods they went, and at last came to the home of their little friend. When he saw them coming the poor little sparrow was very happy indeed. He and his wife and children all came and bowed their heads down to the ground to show their respect. Then the sparrow rose and led the old man and the old woman into his house, while his wife and children hastened to bring them boiled rice, fish, cress, and saké. After they had feasted, the sparrow wished to please them still more, so he danced for them what is called the "sparrow dance." When the sun began to sink, the old man and woman started for home. The sparrow brought out two baskets. "I would like to give you one of these," he said. "Which will you take?" One basket was large and looked very full, while the other one seemed very small and light. The old people so thought they would not take the large basket, for that might have all the sparrow's treasure in it, so they said, "The way is long and we are very old, so please let us take the smaller one." They took it and walked home over the mountain and across the bridge, happy and contented. When they reached their own home they decided to open the basket and see what the sparrow had given them. Within the basket they found many rolls of silk and piles of gold, enough to make them rich, so they were more grateful than ever to the sparrow. The cross old woman who had cut the sparrow's tongue was peering in through the screen when they opened their basket. She saw the rolls of silk and the piles of gold, and planned how she might get some for herself. The next morning she went to the kind woman and said, "I am so sorry that I cut the tongue of your sparrow. Please tell me the way to his home so that I may go to him and tell him I am sorry." The kind woman told her the way and she set out. She went across the bridge, over the mountain, and through the woods. At last she came to the home of the little sparrow. He was not so glad to see this old woman, yet he was very kind to her and did everything to make her feel welcome. They made a feast for her, and when she started home the sparrow brought out two baskets as before. Of course the woman chose the large basket, for she thought that would have even more wealth than the other one. It was very heavy, and caught on the trees as she was going through the wood. She could hardly pull it up the mountain with her, and she was all out of breath when she reached the top. She did not get to the bridge until it was dark. Then she was so afraid of dropping the basket into the river that she scarcely dared to step. When at last she reached home she was so tired that she was half dead, but she pulled the screens close shut, so that no one could look in, and opened her treasure. Treasure indeed! A whole swarm of horrible creatures burst from the basket the moment she opened it. They stung her and bit her, they pushed her and pulled her, they scratched her and laughed at her screams. At last she crawled to the edge of the room and slid aside the screen to get away from the pests. The moment the door was opened they swooped down upon her, picked her up, and flew away with her. Since then nothing has ever been heard of the old woman. Source: Teresa Peirce Williston, Japanese Fairy Tales (Chicago, New York, and London: Rand McNally and Company, 1904), pp. 56-64 . Return to the table of contents . The Tongue-Cut Sparrow Japan, Lafcadio 'Tis said that once upon a time a cross old woman laid some starch in a basin intending to put it in the clothes in her washtub; but a sparrow that a woman, her neighbor, kept as a pet ate it up. Seeing this, the cross old woman seized the sparrow and, saying, "You hateful thing!" cut its tongue and let it go. When the neighbor woman heard that her pet sparrow had got its tongue cut for its offense, she was greatly grieved, and set out with her husband over mountains and plains to find where it had gone, crying, "Where does the tongue-cut sparrow stay? Where does the tongue-cut sparrow stay?" At last they found its home. When the sparrow saw that its old master and mistress had come to see it, it rejoiced and brought them into its house and thanked them for their kindness in old times and spread a table for them, and loaded it with saké and fish till there was no more room, and made its wife and children and grandchildren all serve the table. At last, throwing away its drinking cup, it danced a jig called the "sparrow's dance." Thus they spent the day. When it began to grow dark, and they began to talk of going home, the sparrow brought out two wicker baskets and said, "Will you take the heavy one, or shall I give you the light one?" The old people replied, "We are old, so give us the light one. It will be easier to carry it." The sparrow then gave them the light basket and they returned with it to their home. "Let us open and see what is in it," they said. And when they had opened it and looked they found gold and silver and jewels and rolls of silk. They never expected anything like this. The more they took out the more they found inside. The supply was inexhaustible. So that house at once became rich and prosperous. When the cross old woman who had cut the sparrow's tongue out saw this, she was filled with envy, and went and asked her neighbor where the sparrow lived, and all about the way. "I will go too," she said, and at once set out on her search. Again the sparrow brought out two wicker baskets and asked as before, "Will you take the heavy one, or shall I give you the light one?" Thinking the treasure would be great in proportion to the weight of the basket, the old woman replied, "Let me have the heavy one." Receiving this, she started home with it on her back; the sparrows laughing at her as she went. It was as heavy as a stone and hard to carry; but at last she got back with it to her house. Then when she took off the lid and looked in, a whole troop of frightful devils came bouncing out from the inside and at once tore the old woman to pieces. Source: Lafcadio Hearn, Japanese Fairy Tales (New York: Boni and Liveright, 1918), pp. 77-79 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites . Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Japan . A digital library. Japanese Folktales . A selection. Japanese Legends about Supernatural Sweethearts . The Kind and the Unkind Girls . Folktales of Type 480. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised April 5, 2015. The Tortoise That Wanted to Fly: Folktales of Types 225 and 225A The Tortoise That Wanted to Fly and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 225 and 225A edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2013 Contents Type 225 An Eagle and a Tortoise (Æsop or Anianus). The Tortoise and the Eagle (Æsop). The Turtle and the Eagle (Tolstoy). When Mr. Terrapin Went Riding in the Clouds (USA). Type 225A The Talkative Tortoise (India, The Jataka Tales). The Disobedient Tortoise (India, The Panchatantra). The Tortoise and the Two Swans (India, The Kathá Sarit Ságara). The Tortoise and the Birds (Aesop). The Tortoise and the Two Ducks (France, Jean de La Fontaine). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Type 225 An Eagle and a Tortoise Æsop or Anianus A tortoise was thinking with himself, how irksome a sort of life it was, so spend all his days in a hole, with a house upon his head, when so many other creatures had the liberty to divert themselves in the free, fresh air, and to ramble about at pleasure. So that the humor took him one day, and he must needs get an eagle to teach him to fly. The eagle would fain have put him off, and told him 'twas a thing against nature, and common sense; but (according to the freak of the wilful part of the world) the more that one was against it, the more the other was for it. And when the eagle saw that the tortoise would not be said Nay , she took him up a matter of steeple-high into the air, and there turn'd him loose th shift for himself. That is to say: She dropt him down, Squash upon a rock, that dash'd him to pieces. The Moral: Nothing can be either safe, or easy, that's unnatural. Source: Sir Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists: With Morals and Reflexions , (London, 1692), no. 220, pp. 192-93 . L'Estrange attributes this fable to Anianus, although most editors attribute it to Æsop. Return to the table of contents . The Tortoise and the Eagle Æsop A tortoise, discontented with his lowly life, and envious of the birds he saw disporting themselves in the air, begged an eagle to teach him to fly. The eagle protested that it was idle for him to try, as nature had not providfed him with wings; but the tortoise pressed him with entreaties and promises of treasure, insisting that it could only be a question of learning the craft of the air. So at length the eagle consented to do the best he could for him, and picked him up in his talons. Soaring with him to a great height in the sky he then let him go, and the wretched tortoise fell headlong and was dashed to pieces on a rock. Source: Æsop's Fables , a new translation by V. S. Vernon Jones (London William Heinemann, 1916), p. 67 . Return to the table of contents . The Turtle and the Eagle Leo Tolstoy (after Æsop) A turtle asked an eagle to teach her how to fly. The eagle advised her not to try, as she was not fit for it; but she insister. The eagle took her in his claws, raised her up, and dropped her; she fell on stones and broke to pieces. Source: Count Lev N. Tolstóy, Fables for Children,... (Boston: Dana Estes and Company, 1904), p. 3 . Return to the table of contents . When Mr. Terrapin Went Riding on the Clouds USA (North Carolina) Have they done tell you 'bout ole Mr. Grumble Terrapin? Well, one day ole Brer Terrapin was mighty bad, and making up a poor mouth, and a-grumbling and a-fussing, 'cause he have to creep on the ground. When he meet Brer Rabbit, he grumble 'cause he can't run like Brer Rabbit, an' when he meet Brer Buzzard he grumble 'cause he can't fly in the clouds like Brer Buzzard, and so grumble, grumble, constant. Well, the folkses stand it till they nigh 'bout wore out, and so they 'gree amongst theyselves, the folkses did, and they 'gree how they gwine take Brer Terrapin up in the clouds and drop him. So one day, when Brer Terrapin grumble to Miss Crow he can't fly in the clouds, Miss Crow she say, she did, "Brer Terrapin, go get on my back, and I give you a ride in the clouds." So Brer Terrapin, he mighty set up in he mind, and he get on Miss Crow's back, and they sail off fine, and they sails this yer way, and they sails that yer way. Brer Terrapin; he look down on all he friends, and he feel that proudful he don't take no noticement when they take off they hats to hisself. But presently Miss Crow she get tired, and so she say, old Miss Crow did, "This yer just as high as I can go, Brer Terrapin, but here come Brer Buzzard; he can fly heap higher than what I can, Brer Buzzard can, and you just get on his back, and he sail you heap higher." So Brer Terrapin, he get on Brer Buzzard back, and they sail up higher and higher, till Brer Terrapin can't make out he friends when they take off they hats to hisself, and he say that the bestest day of his life, Brer Terrapin do, and they sails over the woods, and they sails over the waters. Then Brer Buzzard, he get broke down a-toting Brer Terrapin, and he 'low: "This here just as high as I can go, Brer Terrapin, but there come Miss Hawk; she can go a heap higher than what I can," and Miss Hawk she say she be delighted to take Brer Terrapin to ride, -- that just what Miss Hawk done tell Brer Terrapin. So Brer Terrapin, he get on Miss Hawk's back, and they go higher and higher, and Brer Terrapin he 'joy it fine, and he say to hisself, "I'se getting up in the clouds now, sure 'nough." But directly here come King Eagle, and he say, "Oho, Brer Terrapin, you don't call this yer sailing. Oho, Sis Hawk, if you gwine sail Brer Terrapin, why don't you take him up where he can get a sight?" But Miss Hawk, she 'bliged to 'low that just as high as she can go. Then King Eagle say, "Well, just get on my back, and get a sure 'nough ride." So Brer Terrapin, he get on King Eagle's back, and they go up and up, till ole Brer Terrapin he get skeered, and he beg King Eagle to get down; but King Eagle, he just laugh and sail higher and higher, till old Brer Terrapin say to hisself he wish he neber study 'bout flying in the clouds, and he say, Brer Terrapin did: "Oh please, King Eagle, take me down; I that skeered, I 'se 'bout to drop," and he fault hisself cause he was such a grumbling fool, and he say to hisself, if he ever get on he own foots once more, he never grumble 'cause he can't fly in the clouds, but King Eagle, he just make like he gwine up higher and higher, and poor old Brer Terrapin, he dat skeered, he can't hold on much more, and he 'bout lose he hold. Just den he think how he got a spool of thread in he pocket, what Miss Terrapin done send him to fetch home from the store that day, and he tie the end to King Eagle's leg, unbeknownst to him, Brer Terrapin did, and then he drop de spool, and he take hold of the thread, and hold it fast in he hands, and he slip down to the ground, and you never hear old Brer Terrapin grumble 'cause he can't run or fly, 'cause the old man he done fly that yer day to satisfy hisself, that he did, sure's yer born, he did fly that yer day. Source: Emma M. Backus, "Animal Tales from North Carolina," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 11, no. 43 (Oct. - Dec., 1898), pp. 285-86. Return to the table of contents . Type 225A The Talkative Tortoise The Jataka Tales Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the future Buddha was born in a minister's family; and when he grew up, he became the king's adviser in things temporal and spiritual. Now this king was very talkative; while he was speaking, others had no opportunity for a word. And the future Buddha, wanting to cure this talkativeness of his, was constantly seeking for some means of doing so. At that time there was living, in a pond in the Himalayan Mountains, a tortoise. Two young wild ducks who came to feed there made friends with him. And one day, when they had become very intimate with him, they said to the tortoise, "Friend tortoise, the place where we live, at the Golden Cave on Mount Beautiful in the Himalayan country, is a delightful spot. Will you come there with us?" "But how can I get there?" "We can take you, if you can only hold your tongue, and will say nothing to anybody." "Oh, that I can do. Take me with you." "That's right," said they. And making the tortoise bite hold of a stick, they themselves took the two ends in their teeth, and flew up into the air. Seeing him thus carried by the ducks, some villagers called out, "Two wild ducks are carrying a tortoise along on a stick!" Whereupon the tortoise wanted to say, "If my friends choose to carry me, what is that to you, you wretched slaves?" So just as the swift flight of the wild ducks had brought him over the king's palace in the city of Benares, he let go of the stick he was biting, and falling in the open courtyard, split in two! And there arose a universal cry, "A tortoise has fallen in the open courtyard, and has split in two!" The king, taking the future Buddha, went to the place, surrounded by his courtiers, and looking at the tortoise, he asked the Bodisat, "Teacher, how has it possible that he has fallen here?" The future Buddha thought to himself, "Long expecting, wishing to admonish the king, I have sought for some means of doing so. This tortoise must have made friends with the wild ducks; and they must have made him bite hold of the stick, and have flown up into the air to take him to the hills. But he, being unable to hold his tongue when he hears anyone else talk, must have wanted to say something, and let go of the stick; and so must have fallen down from the sky, and thus lost his life." And saying, "Truly, oh king, those who are called chatterboxes -- people whose words have no end -- come to grief like this," he uttered these verses: Verily, the tortoise killed himself While uttering his voice; Though he was holding tight to stick, By a word he slew himself. Behold him then, oh excellent by strength! And speak wise words, not out of season. You see how, by his talking overmuch, The tortoise fell into this wretched plight! The king saw that he was himself referred to, and said, "Oh teacher, are you speaking of us?" And the Bodisat spoke openly, and said, "Oh great king, be it you, or be it any other, whoever talks beyond measure meets with some mishap like this." And the king henceforth refrained himself, and became a man of few words. Source: Buddhist Birth-Stories; or, Jataka Tales , edited by V. Fausbøll and translated by T. W. Rhys Davids (London: Trübner and Company, 1880), pp. viii-x . Part of the canon of sacred Buddhist literature, this collection of some 550 anecdotes and fables depicts earlier incarnations -- sometimes as an animal, sometimes as a human -- of the being who would become Siddhartha Gautama, the future Buddha. Traditional birth and death dates of Gautama are 563-483 BC. The Jataka tales are dated between 300 BC and 400 AD. In spite of the collection's sacred and didactic nature, it nonetheless includes elements -- obviously derived from ancient folktales -- whose primary function is entertainment. Now called Varanasi, Benares is a city in north central India on the Ganges River. One of the world's oldest cities, Varanasi is the most sacred place for Hindus. Buddhists and Muslims also have important religious sites nearby. According to tradition, Buddha began his teaching at Sarnath a short distance from the city. Return to the table of contents . The Disobedient Tortoise The Panchatantra In a certain pond there once lived a tortoise by the name of Kamburgriva (Shell-Neck). He had two friends who belonged to the goose family and who had grown very fond of him. One was named Sankata (Small) and the other Vikata (Large). They regularly came to the pond's bank where they told one another many stories about the wise ones among the gods, Brahmans, and kings. At sunset they would return to their nests. However, in the course of time the pond began to dry up, due to the lack of rain. Pained by this misfortune, the two said, "Alas, friend, this pond has become nothing but mud. How will you stay alive? Our hearts are saddened." Hearing this, Kamburgriva said, "I cannot live without water. Let us think of a solution! For it is said, 'The wise always rush to aid their relatives and friends in time of need.' Therefore fetch a strong stick and seek a pond that still contains much water. I shall grasp the stick which you will carry in your teeth from both ends and thus take me to the pond." "Friend, that we will do!" the two replied, "but you must remain as speechless as a saint who has taken an oath of silence, lest you fall from the stick and break into pieces." The tortoise said, "For certain. I promise to say nothing from now until we have landed at the pond." They proceeded as planned, and from his flight Kamburgriva looked down upon the city beneath him, whose startled inhabitants were shouting, "Look! Look! Two birds are carrying something like a carriage!" Hearing their cries, Kamburgriva began to speak. He wanted to say, "What are you shouting about?" but before he had half uttered the words, he fell earthward and was torn into pieces by the city's inhabitants. Source: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen , vol. 2, translated from Sanskrit into German by Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), book 1, story 13 (pp. 90-91) . Translated from German by D. L. Ashliman, © 1999. India's most influential contribution to world literature, the Panchatantra consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled, in their current form, between the third and fifth centuries AD. It is believed that even then the stories were already ancient. The tales' self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes the Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai, which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of the Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced medieval writers of fables. Return to the table of contents . The Tortoise and the Two Swans The Kathá Sarit Ságara; or, Ocean of the Streams of Story There was in a certain lake a tortoise, named Kambugríva, and he had two swans for friends, Vikata and Sankata. Once on a time the lake was dried up by drought, and they wanted to go to another lake; so the tortoise said to them, "Take me also to the lake you are desirous of going to." When the two swans heard this, they said to their friend the tortoise, "The lake to which we wish to go is a tremendous distance off; but, if you wish to go there too, you must do what we tell you. You must take in your teeth a stick held by us, and while traveling through the air, you must remain perfectly silent, otherwise you will fall and be killed." The tortoise agreed, and took the stick in his teeth, and the two swans flew up into the air, holding the two ends of it. And gradually the two swans, carrying the tortoise, drew near that lake, and were seen by some men living in a town below; and the thoughtless tortoise heard them making a chattering, while they were discussing with one another, what the strange thing could be that the swans were carrying. So the tortoise asked the swans what the chattering below was about, and in so doing let go the stick from its mouth, and falling down to the earth, was there killed by the men. Source: Somadeva, The Kathá Sarit Ságara; or, Ocean of the Streams of Story , translated from the original Sanskrit by C. H. Tawney, vol. 2 (Calcutta [Kolkata]: J. W. Thomas, 1884), p. 37 . Return to the table of contents . The Tortoise and the Birds Aesop A tortoise desired to change its place of residence, so he asked an eagle to carry him to his new home, promising her a rich reward for her trouble. The eagle agreed, and seizing the tortoise by the shell with her talons, soared aloft. On their way they met a crow, who said to the eagle, "Tortoise is good eating." "The shell is too hard," said the eagle in reply. "The rocks will soon crack the shell," was the crow's answer; and the eagle, let fall the tortoise on a sharp rock, and the two birds made a hearty meal off the tortoise. Never soar aloft on an enemy's pinions. Source: Joseph Jacobs, The Fables of Aesop (London: Macmillan and Company, 1894), no. 47, pp. 111-12 . Return to the table of contents . The Tortoise and the Two Ducks Jean de La Fontaine A tortoise once, with an empty head, Great sick of her safe but monotonous home, Resolved on some distant shore to tread; It is ever the cripple that loves to roam. Two Ducks, to whom our friend repaired To gossip o'er her bold intent, Their full approval straight declared; And, pointing to the firmament, Said, "By that road -- 'tis broad and ample -- We'll seek Columbia's mighty range, See peoples, laws, and manners strange; Ulysses shall be our example." (Ulysses would have been astounded At being with this scheme confounded.) The tortoise liking much this plan, Straightway the friendly ducks began To see how one for flight unfitted Might through the realms of air be flitted At length within her jaws they fitted A trusty stick, and seizing each an end, With many a warning cry -- "Hold fast! hold fast!" Bore up to heaven their adventurous friend. The people wondered as the cortege passed, And truly it was droll to see A tortoise and her house in the Ducks' company. "A miracle!" the wondering mob surprises: "Behold, on clouds the great Queen Tortoise rises!" "A queen!" the tortoise answered; "yes, forsooth; Make no mistake -- I am -- in honest truth." Alas! why did she speak? She was a chattering dunce: For as her jaws unclose, the stick slips out at once, And down amidst the gaping crowds she sank, A wretched victim to her claims to rank. Self-pride, a love of idle speaking, And wish to be for ever seeking A power that nature ne'er intended, Are follies close allied, and from one stock descended. Source: Jean de La Fontaine, Fables , translated into English verse by Walter Thornbury, book 10, (1868), fable 3. Like his contemporary Charles Perrault (1628-1703), Jean de La Fontaine (1621-95) was a member of the Académie Française and a leading intellectual of his time. La Fontaine's 245 fables, published in twelve books between 1668 and 1694, exemplify the grace and wit of his age. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's index of folklore and mythology electronic texts . Revised March 21, 2013. The Tortoise and the Hare, and Other Races between Unequal Contestants The Tortoise and the Hare and other races between unequal contestants folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 275, 275A, 275B, 275C, 275C*, and 1074 from around the world translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2011 Contents A Hare and a Tortoise (Aesop, translated by Sir Roger L'Estrange). The Hare and the Tortoise (Aesop, translated by Samuel Croxall). The Hare and the Tortoise (Aesop, translated by George Fyler Townsend). The Hare and the Tortoise (Aesop, retold by Joseph Jacobs). The Hare and the Tortoise (Aesop, retold by William Alexander Clouston). The Hare and the Tortoise (Aesop, translated by V. S. Vernon Jones). The Hare and Tortoise (France, Jean de La Fontaine). The Fox and the Snail (Switzerland, Otto Sutermeister). The Frog and the Snail (Netherlands, G. J. Boekenoogen). The Hare and the Hedgehog (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Why Does the Buffalo Walk Slowly and Tread Gently? The Race of the Buffalo and the Hare (Romania, M. Gaster). How the Hedgehog Ran the Devil to Death (England, Ella M. Leather). Mister Rabbit Finds His Match at Last (African American, Joel Chandler Harris). Keeping Pace (African American, Elsie Clews Parsons). The Race (African American, Elsie Clews Parsons). Two Fast Runners (American Indian -- Blackfeet). The Race (American Indian -- Pueblo). Turtle's Race (American Indian -- Ojibwa). Turtle's Race, Second Version (American Indian -- Ojibwa). The Race Between Turtle and Frog (American Indian -- Sanpoil). The Tortoise and the Stag (Brazil, Andrew Lang). The Snail and the Deer (Philippines, W. H. Millington and Berton L. Maxfield). Carabao and the Shell (Philippines, Mabel Cook Cole). An Unequal Match; Or, Why the Carabao's Hoof Is Split (Philippines, Dean S. Fansler). The Crane and the Crab (Fiji, Constance Frederica Gordon Cumming). The Butterfly and the Crane (Fiji, Constance Frederica Gordon Cumming). The King Crow and the Water Snail (Malaya, Walter Skeat). The Frog and the Wild Hog (Madagascar, James Sibree). Tortoise in a Race (West Africa, Robert H. Nassau). The Elephant and the Ants (India, Cecil Henry Bompas). Old Nick and the Girl (Sweden, Gabriel Djurklou). The Hare and the Tortoise [1] (USA, Ambrose Bierce). The Hare and the Tortoise [2] (USA, Ambrose Bierce). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. A Hare and a Tortoise Aesop (translated by Sir Roger L'Estrange) What a dull heavy Creature (says a Hare ) is this same Tortoise! And yet (says the Tortoise ) I'll run with you for a Wager. 'Twas done and done , and the Fox , by Consent, was to be the Judge. They started together, and the Tortoise kept jogging on still till he came to the End of the Course. The Hare laid himself down about Midway, and took a Nap; for, says he, I can fetch up the tortoise when I please: But he over-slept himself, it seems, for when he came to wake, though he scudded away as fast as 'twas possible, the Tortoise got to the Post before him, and won the Wager. The Moral Up and be doing, is an edifying Text; for Action is the Business of Life, and there's no Thought of ever coming to the end of our Journey in time, if we sleep by the way. REFLECTION UNNECESSARY Delays in all pressing Affairs are but just so much time lost, beside the hazard of intervening Contingencies that may endanger a total Disappointment. Let not the Work of to Day be put off till to Morrow: For the future is uncertain; and he that lies down to sleep in the middle of Business that requires Action, does not know whether he shall live to wake again: Or with the Hare in the Fable here, out-sleep his Opportunity. a plodding Diligence brings us sooner to our Journey's End, than a fluttering Way of advancing by Starts and by Stops; for 'tis Perseverance alone that can carry us thorough-stitch. Source: Sir Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and other Eminent Mythologists: With Morals and Reflections , 8th edition corrected (London: Printed for A. Bettesworth, C. Hitch, G. Strahan, R. Gosling, R. Ware, J. Osborn, S. Birt, B. Motte, C. Bathurst, D. Browne, and J. Hodges, 1738), no. 133, pp. 149-50 . Type 275A. Return to the table of contents . The Hare and The Tortoise Aesop (translated by Samuel Croxall) A hare insulted the tortoise upon account of his slowness, and vainly boasted of her great speed in running. "Let us make a match," replied the tortoise. "I will run with you five miles for five pounds, and the fox yonder shall be umpire of the race." The hare agreed, and away they both started together. But the hare, by reason of her exceeding swiftness, outran the tortoise to such a degree, that she made a jest of the matter; and finding herself a little tired squatted in a tuft of fern, that grew by the way, and took a nap; thinking that if the tortoise went by, she could at any time fetch him up, with all the ease imaginable. In the meanwhile, the tortoise came jogging on, with a slow but continued motion; and the hare, out of a too great security and confidence of victory, oversleeping herself, the tortoise arrived at the end of the race first. THE APPLICATION Industry and application to business makes amends for the want of a quick and ready wit. Hence it is, that the victory is not always to the strong, nor the race to the swift. Men of fine parts are apt to despise the drudgery of business; but by affecting to show the superiority of their genius, upon many occasions, they run into too great an extreme the other way; and the administration of their affairs is ruined through idleness and neglect. What advantage has a man from the fertility of his invention, and the vivacity of his imagination, unless his resolutions are executed with a suitable and uninterrupted rapidity? In short, your men of wit and fire, as they are called, are often times sots, slovens, and lazy fellows; they are generally proud and conceited to the last degree; and in the main, not the fittest persons for either conversation or business. -- Such is their vanity, they think the sprightliness of their humor inconsistent with a plain sober way of thinking and speaking, and able to atone for all the little neglects of their business and person. But the world will not be thus imposed upon: the man who would gain the esteem of others, and make his own fortune, must be one that carries his point effectually, and finishes his course without swerving and loitering. Men of dull parts, and slow apprehension, assisted by a continued diligence, are more likely to attain this, than your brisk retailers of wit, with their affected spleen and indolence. And, if business be but well done, no matter whether it be done by the sallies of a refined wit, or the considering head of a plain plodding man. Source: Samuel Croxall, Fables of Æsop and Others: Translated into English, with Instructive Applications , (Philadelphia: Simon Probasco, 1831), no. 154, pp. 287-88 . Type 275A. Return to the table of contents . The Hare and the Tortoise Aesop (translated by George Fyler Townsend) A hare one day ridiculed the short feet and slow pace of the tortoise. The latter, laughing, said, "Though you be swift as the wind, I will beat you in a race." The hare, deeming her assertion to be simply impossible, assented to the proposal; and they agreed that the fox should choose the course, and fix the goal. On the day appointed for the race they started together. The tortoise never for a moment stopped, but went on with a slow but steady pace straight to the end of the course. The hare, trusting to his native swiftness, cared little about the race, and lying down by the wayside, fell fast asleep. At last waking up, and moving as fast as he could, he saw the tortoise had reached the goal, and was comfortably dozing after her fatigue. Source: George Fyler Townsend, Three Hundred Æesop's Fables: Literally Translated from the Greek (London: George Routledge and Sons, 1867), pp. 9-10 . Type 275A. Return to the table of contents . The Hare and the Tortoise Aesop (retold by Joseph Jacobs) The hare was once boasting of his speed before the other animals. "I have never yet been beaten," said he, "when I put forth my full speed. I challenge anyone here to race with me." The tortoise said quietly, "I accept your challenge." "That is a good joke," said the hare. "I could dance around you all the way." "Keep your boasting until you've beaten," answered the tortoise. "Shall we race?" So a course was fixed and a start was made. The hare darted almost out of sight at once, but soon stopped and, to show his contempt for the tortoise, lay down to have a nap. The tortoise plodded on and plodded on, and when the hare awoke from his nap, he saw the tortoise nearing the finish line, and he could not catch up in time to save the race. Moral: Plodding wins the race. Source: Joseph Jacobs, The Fables of Aesop (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1902), no. 68, pp. 162-63 . First published 1894. Type 275A. Return to the table of contents . The Hare and the Tortoise Aesop (retold by William Alexander Clouston) A hare insulted a tortoise on account of his slowness, and vainly boasted of her own great speed in running. "Let us make a match," replied the tortoise. "I'll run you five miles for five pounds, and the fox yonder shall be umpire of the race." The hare agreed, and away they both started together; but the hare, by reason of her exceeding swiftness, outran the tortoise to such a degree that she made a jest of the matter, and finding herself a little tired, squatted in a tuft of fern that grew by the way, and took a nap, thinking that if the tortoise went by, she could at any time fetch him up with all the ease imaginable. In the meanwhile the tortoise came jogging along at a slow but continued pace, and the hare, out of too great security and confidence of victory, oversleeping herself, the tortoise arrived at the end of the race first. Source: William Alexander Clouston, Popular Tales and Fictions: Their Migrations and Transformations , vol. 1 , (Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1887), pp. 266-67 . Type 275A. Return to the table of contents . The Hare and The Tortoise Aesop (translated by V. S. Vernon Jones) A hare was one day making fun of a tortoise for being so slow upon his feet. "Wait a bit," said the tortoise. "I'll run a race with you, and I'll wager that I win." "Oh, well," replied the hare, who was much amused at the idea, "let's try and see." And it was soon agreed that the fox should set a course for them and be the judge. When the time came both started off together, but the hare was soon so far ahead that he thought he might as well have a rest. So down he lay and fell fast asleep. Meanwhile the tortoise kept plodding on, and in time reached the goal. At last the hare woke up with a start and dashed on at his fastest, but only to find that the tortoise had already won the race. Slow and steady wins the race. Source: Aesop's Fables , translated by V. S. Vernon Jones (New York: Barnes and Noble, 2003), no. 117, pp. 113-14 . Based on the edition London: W. Heinemann, 1912. Type 275A. Return to the table of contents . The Hare and Tortoise Jean de La Fontaine To run is nothing; we must timely start. The hare and tortoise here shall teach the art. "Let's bet," the tortoise said, "my clever spark, Which, you or I, the first shall gain that mark." "The first? What, are you mad?" the hare replied, "Take hellebore and purge; your talk is wide." "Well, mad or not, I'll bet!" the tortoise cried. -- The stakes accordingly were paid, And near the winning-post were laid. What were the stakes we won't say in this place, Nor who it was that judged the race. The hare had scarce four jumps to make, Of such as, nearly caught, he's wont to take; Leaving the hounds behind, who then may wait For the Greek Kalends, roaming until late. Taking his time, to feast at ease, And list and sniff whence comes the breeze, The hare lets now the tortoise go, Like a grave bishop pacing slow. And now behold the tortoise gone, Toiling, hastening slowly on. The hare the bet but little priced, And such a victory despised; He thought, in his great pride of heart, 'Twas yet too soon for him to start. So, browsing, resting at his ease, Oblivious of his bet, he sees The tortoise the wished goal about to gain, He sprang like lightning, but he sprang in vain. The tortoise won just as the hare took flight. "Well," she exclaimed, "good runner, was I right? What means your swiftness, yielding thus to me? And if you bore your house, what would it be?" Source: Jean de La Fontaine, The Fables of La Fontaine , translated by Robert Thomson (London: J. C. Nimmo and Bain, 1884), book 6, fable 10, p. 127 . Link to the original French text "Le Lièvre et la Tortue." Type 275A. Return to the table of contents . The Fox and the Snail Switzerland One warm summer's day Master Fox was resting at Schwäg Meadow. He saw a snail next to him and immediately proposed a wager as to which of them could run faster to St. Gallen. "You're on!" said the snail, and set forth immediately -- a little slowly to be sure, for he was carrying his house with him on his back, as was his custom. The fox, in contrast, continued his rest, intending to start off in the cool of the evening, and he dozed off. The snail took advantage of this circumstance and secretly crept into the fox's thick bushy tail. As evening approached, the fox took off and was surprised that the snail was nowhere to be seen. He presumed that he had covered a little bit of the course already. When he reached St. Gallen's gate and could still see nothing of the snail, he turned around proudly and called out tauntingly, "Snail, are you coming soon?" "I'm already here!" answered the snail, for without being seen, he had removed himself from the fox's tail and crept through the bottom of the gate. Thus the proud fox had to admit that he had lost. Source: Otto Sutermeister, "Der Fuchs und die Schnecke," Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus der Schweiz (Aarau: H. R. Sauerländer, 1873), no. 60, p. 188 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Type 275B. Return to the table of contents . The Frog and the Snail Netherlands A frog entered into a wager with a snail as to which of them would be the first to reach the city. The frog, of course, believed that he would win the wager because he could travel so much faster than the snail. As they started out the frog made fun of the snail, saying, "Don't crawl along so. Instead hop like I do; otherwise you will never win the wager." Then away he hopped. However, arriving at the city, he found that the gate was closed, and thus he had to wait until the next morning when the gate would be opened. In the meantime the snail crawled steadily onward, and she too finally arrived at the city. Of course, she also found the gate closed, but for her that was no obstacle. She simply crawled over it, and thus won the wager. Source: G. J. Boekenoogen, Volkskunde , vol. 15 (1903), p. 75. Boekenoogen recorded the story in 1894 in southern Holland. Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002. Type 275C*. The genders used in the story are grammatical, not necessarily biological. Return to the table of contents . The Hare and the Hedgehog Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm This story was actually made up, young ones, but it really is true, for my grandfather, who told it to me, always said whenever he told it, "it must be true, my son, otherwise it couldn't be told." Anyway, this is how the story goes: It was on a Sunday morning at harvest time, just when the buckwheat was in bloom. The sun was shining bright in the heaven, the morning wind was blowing warmly across the stubble, the larks were singing in the air, the bees were buzzing in the buckwheat, and the people in their Sunday best were on their way to church, and all the creatures were happy, including the hedgehog. The hedgehog was standing before his door with his arms crossed, humming a little song to himself, neither better nor worse than hedgehogs usually sing on a nice Sunday morning. Singing there to himself, half silently, it suddenly occurred to him that while his wife was washing and drying the children, he could take a little walk into the field and see how his turnips were doing. The turnips were close by his house, and he and his family were accustomed to eating them, so he considered them his own. No sooner said than done. The hedgehog closed the house door behind him and started down the path to the field. He hadn't gone very far away from his house at all, only as far as the blackthorn bush which stands at the front of the field, near the turnip patch, when he met up with the hare, who had gone out for a similar purpose, namely to examine his cabbage. When the hedgehog saw the hare, he wished him a friendly good morning. The hare, however, who was in his own way a distinguished gentleman, and terribly arrogant about it, did not answer the hedgehog's greeting, but instead said to the hedgehog, in a terribly sarcastic manner, "How is it that you are running around in the field so early in the morning?" "I'm taking a walk," said the hedgehog. "Taking a walk?" laughed the hare. "I should think that you could better use your legs for other purposes." This answer made the hedgehog terribly angry, for he could stand anything except remarks about his legs, for by nature they were crooked. "Do you imagine," said the hedgehog to the hare, "that you can accomplish more with your legs?" "I should think so," said the hare. "That would depend on the situation," said the hedgehog. "I bet, if we were to run a race, I'd pass you up." "That is a laugh! You with your crooked legs!" said the hare. "But for all I care, let it be, if you are so eager. What will we wager?" "A gold louis d'or and a bottle of brandy," said the hedgehog. "Accepted," said the hare. "Shake hands, and we can take right off." "No, I'm not in such a hurry," said the hedgehog. "I'm very hungry. First I want to go home and eat a little breakfast. I'll be back here at this spot in a half hour." The hare was agreeable with this, and the hedgehog left. On his way home the hedgehog thought to himself, "The hare is relying on his long legs, but I'll still beat him. He may well be a distinguished gentleman, but he's still a fool, and he'll be the one to pay." Arriving home, he said to his wife, "Wife, get dressed quickly. You've got to go out to the field with me." "What's the matter?" said his wife. "I bet a gold louis d'or and a bottle of brandy with the hare that I could beat him in a race, and you should be there too." "My God, man," the hedgehog's wife began to cry, "are you mad? Have you entirely lost your mind? How can you agree to run a race with the hare?" "Hold your mouth, woman," said the hedgehog. "This is my affair. Don't get mixed up in men's business. Hurry up now, get dressed, and come with me." What was the hedgehog's wife to do? She had to obey, whether she wanted to or not. As they walked toward the field together, the hedgehog said to his wife, "Now pay attention to what I tell you. You see, we are going to run the race down the long field. The hare will run in one furrow and I in another one. We'll begin running from up there. All you have to do is to stand here in the furrow, and when the hare approaches from the other side, just call out to him, 'I'm already here.'" With that they arrived at the field, the hedgehog showed his wife her place, then he went to the top of the field. When he arrived the hare was already there. "Can we start?" said the hare. "Yes, indeed," said the hedgehog. "On your mark!" And each one took his place in his furrow. The hare counted "One, two, three," and he tore down the field like a windstorm. But the hedgehog ran only about three steps and then ducked down in the furrow and remained there sitting quietly. When the hare, in full run, arrived at the bottom of the field, the hedgehog's wife called out to him, "I'm already here!" The hare, startled and bewildered, thought it was the hedgehog himself, for as everyone knows, a hedgehog's wife looks just like her husband. The hare thought, "Something's not right here." He called out, "Let's run back again!" And he took off again like a windstorm, with his ears flying from his head. But the hedgehog's wife remained quietly in place. When the hare arrived at the top, the hedgehog called out to him, "I'm already here!" The hare, beside himself with excitement, shouted, "Let's run back again!" "It's all right with me," answered the hedgehog. "For all I care, as often as you want." So the hare ran seventy-three more times, and the hedgehog always kept up with him. Each time the hare arrived at the top or the bottom of the field, the hedgehog or his wife said, "I am already here!" But the hare did not complete the seventy-fourth time. In the middle of the field, with blood flowing from his neck, he fell dead to the ground. The hedgehog took the gold louis d'or and the bottle of brandy he had won, called his wife from her furrow, and happily they went back home. And if they have not died, then they are still alive. Thus it happened that the hedgehog ran the hare to death on the Buxtehude Heath, and since that time no hare has agreed to enter a race with a hedgehog. The moral of this story is, first, that no one, however distinguished he thinks himself, should make fun of a lesser man, even if this man is a hedgehog. And second, when a man marries, it is recommended that he take a wife from his own class, one who looks just like him. In other words, a hedgehog should always take care that his wife is also a hedgehog, and so forth. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, " Der Hase und der Igel ," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , no. 187. The Grimms added this tale to the fifth edition of their collection (1853). The Grimms received this tale in 1840 from Karl Georg Firnhaber, a professor in Kassel. Firnhaber apparently copied the Low German text almost verbatim from a fable written by Wilhelm Christian Schröder and published anonymously in the Hannoversches Volksblatt , no. 51 (April 26, 1840). Translated from Low German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Type 275C. Link to The Hare and the Hedgehog in a separate file. Return to the table of contents . Why Does the Buffalo Walk Slowly and Tread Gently? The Race of the Buffalo and the Hare. Romania In olden times, so we are told by those who know best, there was constant strife between the hares and the buffaloes. Each of them contended for the honor of being the most swift footed. Both did run very fast, and neither would give in to the other. So it went on year after year, and there seemed to be no end to the strife. Tired of this constant fight, one day the hare said to the buffalo, "Let us try a race together and settle this quarrel once for all." The buffalo was well contented with the proposal, and they agreed to race one another. When the day came, the hare, putting his ears back, started the race. He ran so fast that you might have said he was flying upon the ground. But the buffalo was a match for him. He went thundering away, his hoofs splashing the mud and raising seas of mire. The earth shook at his furious tread. He soon overtook the breathless hare which was running, panting as fast as its little legs could carry it. Then a thought struck the hare, and he cried to the buffalo, "Ho, friend! Take heed how you are thundering along. The earth is shaking, and if you are not careful, the earth will give way under you. See how it is rocking under your feet." When the buffalo heard the hare's story, he stopped still for a while bewildered, and then, being frightened, lest the earth should give way under him and he sink beneath, he checked his pace and began to walk slowly and tread gently. That was just what the hare had wanted, and pulling a long nose at the buffalo, he ran swiftly by, leaving the buffalo a long way behind. Thus he won the race, and there was no longer any strife between the hares and the buffaloes. But ever since the buffalo walks slowly and treads lightly upon the ground. Source: M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: The Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 107, pp. 315-16. Type 275. Return to the table of contents . How the Hedgehog Ran the Devil to Death England The following variant of a well-known folktale was obtained from the Rev. T. H. Philpott, of Hedge End, Botley, who learned it from his mother in Worcestershire: A hedgehog made a wager with the devil to run him a race, the hedgehog to have the choice of time and place. He chose to run up and down a ditch at night. When the time came the hedgehog rolled himself up at one end of the ditch, and got a friend to roll himself up at the other; then he started the devil off. At the other end of the ditch, the friend said to the devil, "Now we go off again." Each hedgehog kept repeating this formula at his own end of the ditch, while the devil ran up and down between them, until they ran him to death. This story would be introduced by the remark, "Now we go off again, as the hedgehog said to the devil." Ella M. Leather, Folk-Lore , vol. 23, no. 3 (September 1912), p. 357. Type 275C or type 1074. In type 275C the contest is between animals; in type 1074 it is between an ogre or devil and humans. Return to the table of contents . Mister Rabbit Finds His Match at Last Joel Chandler Harris One day when Brer Rabbit was going lippity-clippiting down the road, he meets up with old Brer Terrapin, and after they pass the time of day with one another, they keep on talking, they did, until by and by they got to disputing about which was the swiftest. Brer Rabbit, he says he can outrun Brer Terrapin, and Brer Terrapin, he just vows that he can outrun Brer Rabbit. Up and down they had it, until first thing you know, Brer Terrapin says he has a fifty-dollar bill in the chink of his chimney at home, and that bill done told him that he could beat Brer Rabbit in a fair race. Then Brer Rabbit says he has a fifty-dollar bill that says that he can leave Brer Terrapin so far behind that he could sow barley as he went along, and it would be ripe enough to cut by the time Brer Terrapin passed that way. Anyhow, they make the bet and put up the money, and old Brer Turkey Buzzard, he was summoned to be the judge and the stakeholder. And it wasn't long before all the arrangements were made. The race was a five-mile heat, and the ground was measured off, and at the end of every mile a post was stuck up. Brer Rabbit was to run down the big road, and Brer Terrapin, he says he'd gallop through the woods. Folks told him he could get along faster in the road, but old Brer Terrapin, he knows what he's doing. Miss Meadows and the gals and most all the neighbors got wind of the fun, and when the day was set, they were determined to be on hand. Brer Rabbit, he trains himself every day, and he skips over the ground just as gaily as a June cricket. Old Brer Terrapin, he lies low in the swamp. He had a wife and three children, old Brer Terrapin did, and they were all the very spitting image of the old man. Anybody who knew one from the other had to take a spyglass, and then they were liable to get fooled. That's the way matters stand until the day of the race, and on that day old Brer Terrapin and his old woman and his three children, they got up before sun-up and went to the place. The old woman, she took her stand near the first milepost, she did, and the children near the others, up to the last, and there old Brer Terrapin, he took his stand. By and by, here come the folks. Judge Buzzard, he comes, and Miss Meadows and the gals, they come, and then here comes Brer Rabbit with ribbons tied around his neck and streaming from his ears. The folks all went to the other end of the track to see how they would come out. When the time comes, Judge Buzzard struts around and pulls out his watch and hollers out, "Gents, are you ready?" Brer Rabbit, he says "yes," and old Miss Terrapin hollers "go" from the edge of the woods. Brer Rabbit, he lit out on the race, and old Miss Terrapin, she put out for home. Judge Buzzard arose and skimmed along to see that the race was run fair. When Brer Rabbit got to the first milepost, one of the terrapin children crawls out of the woods, he does, and makes for the place. Brer Rabbit, he hollers out, "Where are you, Brer Terrapin?" "Here I come a-bulging," says the terrapin. Brer Rabbit is so glad he's ahead that he puts out harder than ever, and the Terrapin, he makes for home. When he comes to the next post, another terrapin crawls out of the woods. "Where are you, Brer Terrapin?" says Brer Rabbit. "Here I come a-boiling," says the terrapin. Brer Rabbit, he lit out, he did, and comes to the next post, and there was the terrapin. Then he comes to the next, and there was the terrapin. Then he had one more mile to run, and he's wheezing and puffing. By and by old Brer Terrapin looks way off down the road, and he sees Judge Buzzard sailing along, and he knows it's time for him to be up. So he scrambles out of the wood and rolls across the ditch and shuffles through the crowd of folks and gets to the milepost and crawls behind it. By and by, first thing you know, here comes Brer Rabbit. He looks around and he don't see Brer Terrapin, and he squalls out, "Give me the money, Brer Buzzard, give me the money!" Then Miss Meadows and the gals, they holler and laugh fit to kill themselves, and old Brer Terrapin, he rises up from behind the post and says, "If you'll give me time to catch my breath, gents and ladies, one and all, I suspect I'll finger that money myself," he says, and sure enough, Brer Terrapin ties the purse around his neck and scaddles off home. Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus and His Legends of the Old Plantation (London: D. David Bogue, 1881), no. 18, pp. 96-101 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Type 275C. A terrapin is any of several north American turtles. The word is of Algonquian origin. Return to the table of contents . Keeping Pace African American Once upon a time there was a fox and a lion. They were going to have a race. The lion said that he could beat all the fox racin'. The fox said that he couldn't beat him racin'. So they got under the mark. They both started out the same time. The lion was runnin' so fast that the fox couldn't keep up with him. So he jumped on the lion back. And when they got to the place, the fox was there too. So that the way it ended out. Source: Elsie Clews Parsons, "Tales from Maryland and Pennsylvania," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 30, no. 116 (April - June 1917), p. 209. Parsons' informant: Georgie Welden of Wayne, Pennsylvania. Type 275B. Return to the table of contents . The Race African American Once upon a time there was a tortoise and a rabbit lived in a forest together. So the rabbit says to the tortoise, "How slow you walk!" So there was a river not far away, where water lilies grew. So the tortoise said to the rabbit, "I'll run a race with you." So the rabbit laughed at the tortoise. So the rabbit asked where he wanted to run a race to. The tortoise said, "Down to the river, where the water lilies grew." And the rabbit said, "You'll grow old and die before you get there." But the turtle said to the rabbit, "Who shall we have for a judge to this race?" An' the rabbit said, "We'll get Mr. Wolf for a judge." So they said, one, two, three, an' away they went. So the rabbit ran right fast till he got in sight of the river where the water lilies grew. And he lay down in the shade to rest. While he was resting, he fell fast asleep. And when he awoke again, it was the next day at dinnertime. So he was very hungry; and he ran into a near field an' eat some clover, an' he didn't know that the tortoise had passed him while he was asleep. So after he had ate his dinner, he ran right fast to the goal. But who should he find when he got there, waiting for him, but the tortoise who he had laughed at the day before. Source: Elsie Clews Parsons, "Tales from Maryland and Pennsylvania," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 30, no. 116 (April - June 1917), p. 214. Parsons' informant: Mary Smith of Lincoln, Pennsylvania. Type 275A. Return to the table of contents . Two Fast Runners American Indian (Blackfeet) Once, a long time ago, the antelope and the deer happened to meet on the prairie. They spoke together, giving each other the news, each telling what he had seen and done. After they had talked for a time the antelope told the deer how fast he could run, and the deer said that he could run fast too, and before long each began to say that he could run faster than the other. So they agreed that they would have a race to decide which could run the faster, and on this race they bet their galls. When they started, the antelope ran ahead of the deer from the very start and won the race and so took the deer's gall. But the deer began to grumble and said, "Well, it is true that out here on the prairie you have beaten me, but this is not where I live. I only come out here once in a while to feed or to cross the prairie when I am going somewhere. It would be fairer if we had a race in the timber. That is my home, and there I can run faster than you. I am sure of it." The antelope felt so glad and proud that he had beaten the deer in the race that he was sure that wherever they might run he could beat him, so he said, "All right, I will run you a race in the timber. I have beaten you out here on the flat and I can beat you there." On this race they bet their dew-claws. They started and ran this race through the thick timber, among the bushes, and over fallen logs, and this time the antelope ran slowly, for he was afraid of hitting himself against the trees or of falling over the logs. You see, he was not used to this kind of traveling. So the deer easily beat him and took his dew-claws. Since that time the deer has had no gall and the antelope no dew-claws. Source: George Bird Grinnell, Blackfeet Indian Stories (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1913), pp. 1-2 . Type 275. Return to the table of contents . The Race American Indian (Pueblo) Long, long ago at Matsakya some of the people had been running stick races [ tikwane ] and losing. "Let us have Mole [ yei ] and Hawk [ anelaue ] run against each other!" said the people of Matsakya. On the side of Hawk were to be those who had been winning the races; on the side of Mole, those who had been losing. The bow priests [ apilashiwanni ] of the winners went over to see Hawk. They said to him, "We wish to have a race. We wish you and Mole to run against each other." Hawk said, "When is the race to be run?" They said, "We wish to have it tomorrow." Hawk said, "No, we cannot have it tomorrow. You must wait four days." The bow priest of the losers went to Mole. He said, "We want to have a race between you and Hawk." Mole said, "When is the race to be run?" "We wish to have it tomorrow." Mole said, "No, we cannot have it tomorrow. You must wait four days." The day before the race they collected the stakes: beads, red and white, and turquoise. The night before, Mole went to the houses of the others (i.e., the other moles), and told them at different places, as Hawk should come along, to stick out their heads. Mole said, "About that time urinate and wet yourselves, so that, when Hawk comes up and sees you, he will think you are sweating." Mole went to his house and stayed there all night. Hawk staid in his house all night. The next day they brought the stakes into the plaza. When they had finished laying the bets, Mole said to Hawk, "Which direction shall we take? I will go under ground, and you above ground." Hawk said, "Let us go by Matsakya, Tsililiima, Tekiapoi, Awiela, Alihemula, Kopachia, Telaluwaiela, Akiapoella, Kushinolko, Matsakya." As soon as they started off, Mole went into his hole and staid in it. Hawk flew on to Tsililiima. There a mole poked out his head, and called out, "Keep on! We are running together. Keep on as you are!" Then he went back underground. Hawk flew on to Tekiapoi. There another mole poked out his head, and called out, "Keep on! We are running together. Keep on as you are!" Meanwhile Mole, he who made the bet, prayed to his father the sun, and the clouds began to gather. By the time Kopachia was reached and the mole there looked out of the hole, Hawk was behind. The mole waited. He said, "If you don't make haste, I shall leave you behind." By that time the rain was falling fast. When Hawk reached Telaluwaiela, he was wet through. At Akiapoella, Hawk was wobbling, he was drenched. The mole there said, "You best make haste, I am leaving you far behind. I had to wait here for you a long time." Hawk could hardly fly. At Matsakya, Mole jumped out where the things were piled, and said, "That is the way to win a race." Mole won everything: the beads, the turquoise. He took them all to his house. Hawk lost everything. He was so muddy he could scarcely fly. Source: Elsie Clews Parsons, "Pueblo-Indian Folk-Tales, Probably of Spanish Provenience," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 31 (Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1918), pp. 221-22 . Type 275C. Return to the table of contents . Turtle's Race American Indian (Ojibwa) Once a Turtle lived in an inland lake, but stayed on the shore most of the time. The Turtle always believed that there was no one who could fool him. One day Nanbush was walking along the shore, when he saw a pike in the water, which he decided to catch. He jumped in but missed the fish, so he thought he would wash his hands and make some soup. He went on and saw someone else in the water. He called out, "Well, my brother, is this where you live?" "Yes," the stranger answered, "This is where I live, and I am the chief." Whereupon Nanbush said, "I never saw you before." Then the Turtle-chief said, "Tomorrow I expect to take part in a race and I am betting my life on it." Nanbush asked him, "Whom are you going to race?" "I am going to race an elk," said the chief, "and now I am going to get ready." He placed other turtles around the lake and told them what to do, and then he was ready for the race. Nanbush saw the elk the next morning, and it looked very fat and good to eat. He said to himself, "The Turtle will probably give a feast after the race. I will be there and see who will win." Soon they were ready to start. By means of his brother turtles, the chief won and the elk was beaten. Then the Turtle killed the elk. Nanbush stayed, hoping to get some of this meat, but the Turtle said, "I am going to feed all my children and there will not be enough meat to go around." Whereupon Nanbush proposed that he should carry the meat home for them. The Turtle agreed to this and went home to wait for Nanbush. Nanbush, however, took the meat to his own home and there ate it all. Source: Paul Radin, Some Myths and Tales of the Ojibwa of Southeastern Ontario (Ottawa: Government Printing Bureau, 1914), pp. 43-44 . Radin's source: "Told by George Fisher, Muncie." Type 275C. Return to the table of contents . Turtle's Race, Second Version American Indian (Ojibwa) Once a Turtle was resting itself on the surface of a lake, when he saw something strange coming towards him. Not knowing what it could possibly be, he went out to meet it, and when he came close to it, he found that it was a boat. When the men in the boat saw the Turtle, they stopped and asked if he knew of anyone who would race them around the lake. They said that they would pay anyone who would beat them. The Turtle said, "I know one who would beat you." "Would you go and get him?" said the men. The Turtle said, "I am the one." So the men challenged him, but he would only race on one condition, and that was that he might run under the water and go around the lake close to the shore, and in order that they might know where he was he would tie a red ribbon around his neck. The men then asked the Turtle what he would bet for the race, and the Turtle answered, "My life." Then the men said, "Well, tomorrow morning you get ready and come around with that ribbon around your neck, and we will race you." During the night the Turtle called together some of his brothers, and tied a red ribbon round each of their necks. Then he placed them a distance apart all around the lake. In the morning the Turtle went to the place which they had picked out as their starting point, and found the men already there. When the word "go" was given, the boat started off and the Turtle dropped underneath the surface of the water. When the Turtle rose to the surface again, the boat was right abreast of him, and when the Turtle rose a second time, the boat people noticed that the Turtle was gaining on them. When finally, the last Turtle rose, the boat was only half way round. The Turtle won the race and got the reward. Source: Paul Radin, Some Myths and Tales of the Ojibwa of Southeastern Ontario (Ottawa: Government Printing Bureau, 1914), p. 44 . Radin's source: "Told by John Henry, Kettle Point." Type 275C. Return to the table of contents . The Race Between Turtle and Frog American Indian (Sanpoil) At one time there was a race proposed between Turtle and Frog. All the people bet that Frog would win. Mud-Turtle asked for three days to let his friends know about the race. The race-course was very uneven: low and high ground, rolling meadow. Turtle bet his back against Frog's tail. On the third day Turtle was given head start. Frog stood there taking more bets. Finally he started, and ahead in a low place he saw Turtle going out of sight. Each time he looked ahead he saw Turtle going out of sight. He hurried faster and faster, but did not overtake him. Just as he crossed the last low ground he saw Turtle over the line. He had to give up his tail. It took six turtles to beat him, but he lost the race. Now the pollywogs have to lose their tails before they can become frogs. Source: Marian K. Gould, "Sanpoil Tales." In: Franz Boas, editor, Folk-Tales of Salishan and Sahaptin Tribes , collected by James A. Teit, Livingston Farrand, Marian K. Gould, and Herbert J. Spinden (Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1917), p. 111 . Type 275C. Return to the table of contents . The Tortoise and the Stag Brazil One day, when the tortoise was basking in the sun, a stag passed by, and stopped for a little conversation. "Would you care to see which of us can run fastest?" asked the tortoise, after some talk. The stag thought the question so silly that he only shrugged his shoulders. "Of course, the victor would have the right to kill the other," went on the tortoise. "Oh, on that condition I agree," answered the deer, "but I am afraid that you are a dead man." "It is no use trying to frighten me," replied the tortoise. "But I should like three days for training; then I shall be ready to start when the sun strikes on the big tree at the edge of the great clearing." The first thing the tortoise did was to call his brothers and his cousins together, and he posted them carefully under ferns all along the line of the great clearing, making a sort of ladder which stretched for many miles. This done to his satisfaction, he went back to the starting place. The stag was quite punctual, and as soon as the sun's rays struck the trunk of the tree the stag started off, and was soon far out of the sight of the tortoise. Every now and then he would turn his head as he ran, and call out, "How are you getting on?" and the tortoise who happened to be nearest at the moment would answer, "All right, I am close up to you." Full of astonishment, the stag would redouble his efforts, but it was no use. Each time he asked, "Are you there?" the answer would come, "Yes, of course, where else should I be?" And the stag ran, and ran, and ran, till he could run no more, and dropped down dead on the grass. And the tortoise, when he thinks about it, laughs still. Source: Andrew Lang, The Brown Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1904), pp. 330-31 . This story is one episode from the longer account entitled "Tale of a Tortoise and of a Mischievous Monkey" ( pp. 327-42 ). Type 275C. Return to the table of contents . The Snail and the Deer Philippines (Visayan) The deer made fun of the snail because of his slowness, so the latter challenged the former to a race. "We will race to the well on the other side of the plaza," said the snail. "All right," replied the deer. On the day of the race the deer ran swiftly to the well, and when he got there he called, "Mr. Snail, where are you?" "Here I am," said the snail, sticking his head up out of the well. The deer was very much surprised, so he said, "I will race you to the next well." "Agreed," replied the snail. When the deer arrived at the next well, he called as before, "Mr. Snail, where are you?" "Here I am," answered the snail. "Why have you been so slow? I have been here a long time waiting for you." The deer tried again and again, but always with the same result; until the deer in disgust dashed his head against a tree and broke his neck. Now the first snail had not moved from his place, but he had many cousins in each of the wells of the town and each exactly resembled the other. Having heard the crows talking of the proposed race, as they perched on the edge of the wells to drink, they determined to help their cousin to win it, and so, as the deer came to each well, there was always a snail ready to stick his head out and answer "Here I am" to the deer's inquiry. Source: W. H. Millington and Berton L. Maxfield, "Visayan Folk-Tales III," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 20, no. 79 (October-December 1907), p. 315. Type 275C. Return to the table of contents . The Carabao and the Shell Philippines (Tinguian) One very hot day, when a carabao went into the river to bathe, he met a shell and they began talking together. "You are very slow," said the carabao to the shell. "Oh, no," replied the shell. "I can beat you in a race." "Then let us try and see," said the carabao. So they went out on the bank and started to run. After the carabao had gone a long distance he stopped and called, "Shell!" And another shell lying by the river answered, "Here I am!" Then the carabao, thinking that it was the same shell with which he was racing, ran on. By and by he stopped again and called, "Shell!" And another shell answered, "Here I am!" The carabao was surprised that the shell could keep up with him. But he ran on and on, and every time he stopped to call, another shell answered him. But he was determined that the shell should not beat him, so he ran until he dropped dead. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg, 1916), p. 89 . Note by Cole: "Another version of this tale is found in the British North Borneo in the story of the plandok and the crab." Type 275C. Return to the table of contents . An Unequal Match; Or, Why the Carabao's Hoof Is Split Philippines (Tagalog) Once a carabao and a turtle met on a road. They walked in the woods, and had a fine talk together. The turtle was a sort of humorist, and was constantly giving exhibitions of his dexterity in getting food by trickery. But he was especially anxious to win the friendship of the carabao; for he thought that, if they were friendly, this big fellow would help him whenever he got into trouble. So he said to the carabao, "Let us live together and hunt our food together! thus we shall break the monotony of our solitary lives." But the carabao snorted when he heard this proposal; and he replied, "You slow thing! You ought to live with the drones, not with a swift and powerful person like me." The turtle was very much offended, and to get even he challenged the carabao to a race. At first the carabao refused to accept the challenge, for he thought it would be a disgrace for him to run against a turtle. The turtle said to the carabao, "If you will not race with me, I will go to all the forests, woods, and mountains, and tell all your companions and all my friends and all the animal kingdom that you are a coward." Now the carabao was persuaded; and he said, "All right, only give me three days to get ready for the race." The turtle was only too glad to have the contest put off for three days, for then he too would have a chance to prepare his plans. The agreement between the turtle and the carabao was that the race should extend over seven hills. The turtle at once set out to visit seven of his friends; and, by telling them that if he could win this race it would be to the glory of the turtle kingdom, he got them to promise to help him. So the next day he stationed a turtle on the top of each hill, after giving them all instructions. The third day came. Early the next morning the turtle and the carabao met at the appointed hill. At a given signal the race began, and soon the runners lost sight of each other. When the carabao reached the second hill, he was astonished to see the turtle ahead of him, shouting, "Here I am!" After giving this yell, the turtle at once disappeared. And at every hill the carabao found his enemy ahead of him. When the carabao was convinced at the seventh hill that he had been defeated, he became so angry that he kicked the turtle. On account of the hardness of its shell, the turtle was uninjured; but the hoof of the carabao was split in two, because of the force of the blow. And even today, the carabaos still bear the mark which an unjust action on the part of their ancestor against one whom he knew was far inferior to him in strength produced on himself. Source: Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921), no. 82, pp. 428-29 . Fansler's informant: Godofredo Rivera, a Tagalog from Pagsanjan, La Laguna. Type 275C. Return to the table of contents . The Crane and the Crab Fiji The crane and quarreled as to their powers of racing. The crab said he would go the fastest, and that the crane might fly across from point to point, while he went round by the shore. The crane flew off, and the crab stayed quietly in his hole, trusting to the multitude of his brethren to deceive the crane. The crane flew to the first point, and seeing a crab hole, put down his ear, and heard a buzzing noise. "That slave is here before me," said he, and flew on to the next point. Here the same thing happened, till at last, on reaching a point above Serua, the crane fell exhausted, and was drowned in the sea. Source: Constance Frederica Gordon Cumming, At Home in Fiji (New York: A. C. Armstrong and Son, 1883), p. 346 . Type 275C. Return to the table of contents . The Butterfly and the Crane Fiji The butterfly challenged the crane to fly to Tonga, tempting him to do so by asking if he was fond of shrimps. The butterfly kept resting on the crane's back, without the crane knowing it, and whenever the bird looked round and said to himself, "That lowborn fellow is gone. I can rest and fly slowly now, without fear of his overtaking me." The butterfly would leave his back and fly a little way ahead, saying, "Here I am, cousin," till the poor bird died exhausted; and the butterfly, who had no longer his back to rest on, perished also. Source: Constance Frederica Gordon Cumming, At Home in Fiji (New York: A. C. Armstrong and Son, 1883), p. 346 . Type 275B. Return to the table of contents . The The King Crow and the Water Snail Malaya A water snail was coming upstream from the lower reaches, when a king crow heard it. Said the king crow to himself, "Who can it be coming upstream, that exclaims so loudly at the rapids? One might say it was a man, but that there is nothing to be seen." So the king crow settled on a tree to watch, but as he could see nothing from his perch on the tree he flew down to the ground, and walked along by the waterside. And when he thought to see some man exclaiming, he caught sight of the water snail. "Hullo, you there," said he, "where do you come from?" "I come from the eddy below the rapids," said the water snail, "and I only want to get as far as the headwaters of this river." Said the king crow, "Wait a bit. Suppose you go down to the river mouth as quickly as you can, and we will have a wager on it." (Now rivers are the water snail's domain, in which he has many comrades.) "What is to be the stake?" asked the water snail. "If I am beaten I will be your slave, and look after your aroids and wild caladiums (on which the water snails feed). Then the king crow asked, "And what will you stake?" The water snail replied, "If I am beaten the river shall be handed over to you, and you shall be king of the river." But the water snail begged for a delay of twice seven days, saying that he felt knocked up after ascending the rapids. And the delay was granted accordingly. Meanwhile however the water snail hunted up a great number of his friends and instructed them to conceal themselves in each of the higher reaches of the river, and to reply immediately when the king crow challenged them. The day arrived, and the king crow flew off, and in each of the higher reaches the water snail's friends replied to the challenge. And at the river mouth the water snail replied in person. So the king crow was defeated and has ever since remained the slave of the water snail. Source: Walter Skeat, Fables and Folk-Tales from an Eastern Forest (Cambridge: University Press, 1901), pp. 33-35 . Type 275C. Return to the table of contents . The Frog and the Wild Hog Madagascar Once upon a time it was agreed between a frog and a wild hog that they should race to the top of a hill. But just as the hog commenced to run, the frog leaped upon his neck, and the hog knew nothing about it, for he did not feel him at all, being big in the neck, while the frog was so light that his weight did not ruffle a hair. So the wild hog ran, and raced, and galloped, and fumed; and just when he arrived at the goal, the frog leaped off, but the wild hog did not see him, and so he was forced to say, "Why, you fellow, you have done it." Then he proposed that they should see which of them could leap best. "Just as you please," replied the frog. "Do your best, for if you don't exert yourself you will regret it, so don't have a stomachache for nothing." So the two came to the waterside to try who could leap farthest. And when they came there, and the wild hog was just about to do his best, the frog jumped again upon his neck. And again the stupid fellow knew nothing about it, for what good is it to be big if one has no sense? And so, when they were just at the goal, the frog leaped off again, and so he was first, upon which the wild hog foamed at the mouth, and his eyes turned red. And again he was astonished to see the frog take it so easily, and said, "There is no getting the better of you, you rascal!" Source: William Alexander Clouston, Popular Tales and Fictions: Their Migrations and Transformations , vol. 1 , (Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1887), pp. 268-69 . Clouston's source: James Sibree, "Malagasy Folk-Tales," Folk-Lore Journal , vol. 2, no. 3 (March 1884), pp. 80-81. Type 275B. Return to the table of contents . Tortoise in a Race West Africa Persons Kudu (Tortoise) Mbalanga (Antelope) Note Discussions about seniority are common causes of quarrel in Africa. The reason assigned why tortoises are so spread everywhere is that the antelope tribe, in public meeting, recognized their superiority. At Batanga, Gaboon, Ogowe, and everywhere on the equatorial west coast, there are tortoises even in places where there are no other animals. On account of this, the tortoise is given many names; and has many nicknames in the native tribes, e. g., "Manyima," and "Evosolo." Tortoise had formerly lived in the same town with several other animals. But, after awhile, they had decided to separate, and each built his own village. One day, Tortoise decided to roam. So he started, and went on an excursion; leaving his wife and two children in the village. On his way, he came to the village of Antelope. The latter welcomed him, killed a fowl, and prepared food for him; and they sat at the table, eating. When they had finished eating, Antelope asked, "Kudu! My friend, what is your journey for?" Tortoise answered, "I have come to inquire of you, as to you and me, which is the elder?" Antelope replied, "Kudu! I am older than you!" But Tortoise responded, "No! I am the elder!" Then Antelope said, "Show me the reason why you are older than I!" Tortoise said, continuing the discussion, "I will show you a sign of seniority. Let us have a race, as a test of speed." Antelope replied derisively, "Aiye! how shall I know to test speed with Kudu? Does Kudu race?" However, he agreed, and said, "Well! in three days the race shall be made." Tortoise spoke audaciously, "You, Mbalanga, cannot surpass me in a race!" Antelope laughed, having accepted the challenge; while Tortoise pretended to sneer, and said, "I am the one who will overcome!" The course chosen, beginning on the beach south of Batanga, was more than seventy miles from the Campo River northward to the Balimba Country. Then Tortoise went away, going everywhere to give directions, and returned to his village. He sent word secretly to all the Tortoise Tribe to call them. When they had come very many of them together, he told them, "I have called my friend Mbalanga for a race. I know that he can surpass me in this race, unless you all help me in my plan. He will follow the sea-beach. You all must line yourselves among the bushes at the top of the beach along the entire route all the way from Campo to Balimba. When Mbalanga, coming along, at any point, looks around to see whether I am following, and calls out, 'Kudu! where are you?' the one of you who is nearest that spot must step out from his place, and answer for me, 'Here!'" Thus he located all the other tortoises in the bushes on the entire route. Also, he placed a colored mark on all the tortoises, making the face of every one alike. He stationed them clear on to the place where he expected that Antelope would be exhausted. Then he ended, taking his own place there. Antelope also arranged for himself, and said, to his wife, "My wife! make me food; for, Kudu and I have agreed on a race; and it begins at seven o'clock in the morning." When all was ready, Antelope said, to (the one whom he supposed was) Kudu, "Come! let us race!" They started. Antelope ran on and on, and came as far as about ten miles to the town of Ubenji, among the Igara people. At various spots on the way Tortoise apparently was lost behind; but as constantly he seemed to reappear, saying, "I'm here!" At once, Antelope raced forward rapidly, pu! pu! pu! to a town named Ipenyenye. Then he looked around and said, "Where is Kudu?" A tortoise stepped out of the bushes, saying "Here I am! You haven't raced." Antelope raced on until he reached the town of Beya. Again looking around, he said, "Where is Kudu?" A tortoise stepped out, replying, "I'm here!" Antelope again raced, until he reached the town Lolabe. Again he asked, "Where is Kudu?" A tortoise saying to himself, "He hasn't heard anything," replied, "Here I am!" Again Antelope raced on as far as from there to a rocky point by the sea named Ilale-ja-moto; and then he called, "Wherever is Kudu?" A tortoise ready answered, "Here I am!" From thence, he came on in the race another stretch of about tea miles, clear to the town of Bongaheli of the Batanga people. At each place on the route, when Antelope, losing sight of Tortoise, called, "Kudu! where are you?" promptly the tortoise on guard at that spot replied, "I'm here!" Then on he went, steadily going, going, another stretch of about twenty miles to Plantation Beach. Still the prompt reply to Antelope's call, "Kudu, where are you?" was, "I'm here!" As he started away from Plantation, the wearied Antelope began to feel his legs tired. However, he pressed on to Small Batanga, hoping for victory over his despised contestant. But, on his reaching the edge of Balimba, the tortoise was there ready with his, "I'm here!" Finally, on reaching the end of the Balimba settlement, Antelope fell down, dying, froth coming from his mouth, and lay dead, being utterly exhausted with running. But, when Tortoise arrived, he took a magic medicine, and restored Antelope to life; and then exulted over him by beating him, and saying, "Don't you show me your audacity another day by daring to run with me! I have surpassed you!" So, they returned separately to their homes on the Campo River. Tortoise called together the Tortoise Tribe; and Antelope called all the Antelope Tribe. And they met in a Council of all the Animals. Then Tortoise rose and spoke, "All you Kudu Tribe! Mbalanga said I would not surpass him in a race. But, this day I have surpassed!" So the Antelope Tribe had to acknowledge, "Yes, you, Kudu, have surpassed our champion. It's a great shame to us; for, we had not supposed that a slow fellow such as we thought you to be, could possibly do it, or be able to outrun a Mbalanga." So the Council decided that, of all the tribes of animals, Tortoise was to be held as greatest; for, that it had outrun Antelope. And the Animals gave Tortoise the power to rule. Source: Robert H. Nassau: Where Animals Talk: West African Folk Lore Tales (London: Duckworth and Company, 1914), pp. 95-98 . Type 275C. Return to the table of contents . The Elephant and the Ants India In the days of old there was a great deal more jungle than there is now, and wild elephants were very numerous; once upon a time a red ant and a black ant were burrowing in the ground, when a wild elephant appeared and said, "Why are you burrowing here; I will trample all your work to pieces." The ants answered, "Why do you talk like this; do not despise us because we are small; perhaps we are better than you in some ways." The elephant said, "Do not talk nonsense. There is nothing at which you could beat me. I am in all ways the largest and most powerful animal on the face of the earth." Then the ants said, "Well, let us run a race and see who will win, unless you win we will not admit that you are supreme." At this the elephant got into a rage and shouted, "Well, come we will start at once," and it set off to run with all its might and when it got tired it looked down at the ground and there were two ants. So it started off again and when it stopped and looked down, there on the ground were two ants. So it ran on again, but wherever it stopped it saw the ants, and at last it ran so far that it dropped down dead from exhaustion. Now it is a saying that ants are more numerous in this world than any other kind of living creature; and what happened was that the two ants never ran at all, but stayed where they were; but whenever the elephant looked at the ground, it saw some ants running about and thought that they were the first two, and so ran itself to death. This story teaches us not to despise the poor man, because one day he may have an opportunity to put us to shame. From this story of the elephant we should learn this lesson; the Creator knows why He made some animals big and some small and why He made some men fools; so we should neither bully nor cheat men who happen to be born stupid. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 115, pp. 328-29. Type 275C. Return to the table of contents . Old Nick and the Girl Sweden There was once a girl who was so mad about dancing that she nearly went out of her mind whenever she heard a fiddle strike up. She was a very clever dancer, and a smarter girl to whirl round in a dance or kick her heels was not easily to be found, although she only had shoes made of birch bark, and knitted leggings on her feet. She swept past at such a rate that the air whistled round her like a humming top. She might have whirled round still more quickly and lightly, of course, if she had had leather shoes. But how was she to get them, when she had no money to pay for them? For she was very poor, this girl, and could ill afford them. So one day, when the fair was being held at Amberg Heath, whom should she meet but Old Nick [the devil]! He was going to see the fun of the fair, as you may guess, for all sorts of tramps and vagabonds and watch dealers and rogues go there. And where such gentry are to be found, others of the same feather are sure to flock together. "What are you thinking about?" asked Old Nick, who knew well enough how matters stood. "I am wondering how I shall be able to get a pair of leather shoes to dance in," said the girl, "for I haven't any money to pay for them," she said. "Is that all? We'll soon get over that," said Old Nick, and produced a pair of leather shoes, which he showed her. "Do you like these?" he asked. The girl stood staring at the shoes. She could never have believed that there were such fine, splendid shoes, for they were not common ones sewn with pitched thread, but real German shoes with welted soles, and looked as French as one could wish. "Is there a spring in them as well?" she asked. "Yes, that you may be sure of," said Old Nick. "Do you want them?" Yes, that she did. There could be no doubt about that. And so they began bargaining and higgling about the payment, till at last they came to terms. She was to have the shoes for a whole year for nothing, if only she would dance in his interest, and afterwards she should belong to him. She did not exactly make a good bargain, but Old Nick is not a person one can bargain with. But there was to be such a spring in them that no human being would be able to swing round quicker in a dance or kick higher than she did. And if they did not satisfy her, he would take them back for nothing, and she should be free. With this they parted. And now the girl seemed to wake up thoroughly. She thought of nothing else but going to dances, wherever they might be, night after night. Well, she danced and danced, and before she knew it the year came to an end, and Old Nick came and asked for his due. "They were a rubbishy pair of shoes you gave me," said the girl. "There was no spring at all in them," she said. "Wasn't there any spring in the shoes? That's very strange," said Old Nick "No, there wasn't!" said the girl. "Why, my bark shoes are far better, and I can get on much faster in them than in these wretched things." "You twist about as if you were dancing," said Old Nick. "But now I think you will have to dance away with me after all." "Well, if you don't believe my words, I suppose you'll believe your eyes," she said. "Put on these grand shoes of yours, and try them yourself," she said. "And I'll put on my bark shoes, and then we'll have a race, so that you can see what they are good for," she said. Well, that was reasonable enough, he thought, and, no doubt, he felt there was very little danger in trying it. So they agreed to race to the end of Lake Fryken and back, on each side of the lake, which, as you know, is a very long one indeed. If she came in first she was to be free, but if she came in last she was to belong to him. But the girl had to run home first of all, for she had a roll of cloth for the parson, which she must deliver before she tried her speed with Old Nick. Very well, that she might, for he went in fear of the parson. But the race should take place on the third day afterwards. Now, as bad luck would have it for Old Nick, it so happened that the girl had a sister, who was so like her that it was impossible to know one from the other, for they were twins, the two girls. But the sister was not mad about dancing, so Old Nick had not got scent of her. The girl now asked her sister to place herself at Frykstad, the south end of the lake, and she herself took up her position at Fryksend, the north end of it. She had the bark shoes on, and Old Nick the leather ones. And so they set off, each on their side of the lake. The girl did not run very far, for she knew well enough how little running she need do. But Old Nick set off at full speed, much faster than one can ride on the railway. But when he came to Frykstad he found the girl already there. And when he came back to Fryksend there she was too. "Well, you see now?" said the girl. "Of course I see," said Old Nick, but he was not the man to give in at once. "One time is no time, that you know," he said. "Well, let's have another try," said the girl. Yes, that he would, for the soles of his shoes were almost worn out, and then he knew what state the bark shoes would be in. They set off for the second time, and Old Nick ran so fast that the air whistled round the corners of the houses in Sonne and Emtervik parishes. But when he came to Frykstad, the girl was already there, and when he got back to Fryksend, she was there before him this time also. "Can you see now who comes in first?" she said. "Yes, of course I can," said Old Nick, and began to dry the perspiration off his face, thinking all the time what a wonderful runner that girl must be. "But you know," he said, "twice is hardly half a time! It's the third time that counts." "Let's have another try, then," said the girl. Yes, that he would, for Old Nick is very sly, you know, for when the leather shoes were so torn to pieces that his feet were bleeding, he knew well enough what state the bark shoes would be in. And so they set off again. Old Nick went at a terrible speed. It was just like a regular north-wester rushing past, for now he was furious. He rushed onwards, so that the roofs were swept away and the fences creaked and groaned all the way through Sonne and Emtervik parishes. But when he got to Frykstad the girl war there, and when he got back to Fryksend then she was there too. His feet were now in such a plight that the flesh hung in pieces from them, and he was so out of breath, and groaned so hard, that the sound echoed in the mountains. The girl almost pitied the old creature, disgusting as he was. "Do you see, now," she said, "that there's a better spring in my bark shoes than in your leather ones? There's nothing left of yours, while mine will hold out for another run, if you would like to try," she said. No. Old Nick had now to acknowledge himself beaten, and so she was free. "I've never seen the like of such a woman," he said, "but if you go on dancing and jumping about like that all your days we are sure to meet once more," he said. "Oh, no!" said the girl. And since then she has never danced again, for it is not every time that you can succeed in getting away from Old Nick. Source: Gabriel Djurklou, Fairy Tales from the Swedish , translated by H. L. Brækstad (London: William Heinemann, 1901), pp. 87-95 . Type 1074. Return to the table of contents . The Hare and the Tortoise [1] USA, Ambrose Bierce A hare having ridiculed the slow movements of a tortoise, was challenged by the latter to run a race, a fox to go to the goal and be the judge. They got off well together, the hare at the top of her speed, the tortoise, who had no other intention than making his antagonist exert herself, going very leisurely. After sauntering along for some time he discovered the hare by the wayside, apparently asleep, and seeing a chance to win pushed on as fast as he could, arriving at the goal hours afterward, suffering from extreme fatigue and claiming the victory. "Not so," said the fox; "the hare was here long ago, and went back to cheer you on your way." Source: Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), pp. 176-77 . Return to the table of contents . A parody of type 275A. The Hare and the Tortoise [2] USA, Ambrose Bierce Of two writers one was brilliant but indolent; the other though dull, industrious. They set out for the goal of fame with equal opportunities. Before they died the brilliant one was detected in seventy languages as the author of but two or three books of fiction and poetry, while the other was honored in the Bureau of Statistics of his native land as the compiler of sixteen volumes of tabulated information relating to the domestic hog. Source: Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), p. 191 . Return to the table of contents . A parody of type 275A. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 23, 2013. Trading Away One's Fortune: folktales of type 1415 Trading Away One's Fortune folktales of type 1415 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999 Contents Hans in Luck (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Story of Mr. Vinegar (England, James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps). Gudbrand on the Hillside (Norway, Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe). What the Old Man Does Is Always Right (Denmark, Hans Christian Andersen). Return to D. L. Ashliman's index of folklore and mythology electronic texts . Hans in Luck Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Hans had served his master for seven years, so he said to him, "Master, my time is up, now I would like to go back home to my mother. Give me my wages." The master answered, "You have served me faithfully and honestly. As the service was, so shall the reward be." And he gave Hans a piece of gold as big as his head. Hans pulled his handkerchief out of his pocket, wrapped up the lump in it, put it on his shoulder, and set out on the way home. As he went on, always putting one leg before the other, he saw a horseman trotting quickly and merrily by on a lively horse. "Ah," said Hans quite loud, "what a fine thing it is to ride. There you sit as on a chair, never stumbling over a stone, saving your shoes, and making your way without even knowing it." The rider, who had heard him, stopped and called out, "Hey there, Hans, then why are you going on foot?" "I must," answered he, "for I have this lump to carry home. It is true that it is gold, but I cannot hold my head straight for it, and it hurts my shoulder." "I will tell you what," said the rider. "Let's trade. I will give you my horse, and you can give me your lump." "With all my heart," said Hans. "But I can tell you, you will be dragging along with it." The rider got down, took the gold, and helped Hans up, then gave him the bridle tight in his hands and said, "If you want to go fast, you must click your tongue and call out, 'jup, jup.'" Hans was heartily delighted as he sat upon the horse and rode away so bold and free. After a little while he thought that it ought to go faster, and he began to click with his tongue and call out, "jup, jup." The horse started a fast trot, and before Hans knew where he was, he was thrown off and lying in a ditch which separated the fields from the highway. The horse would have escaped if it had not been stopped by a peasant, who was coming along the road and driving a cow before him. Hans pulled himself together and stood up on his legs again, but he was vexed, and said to the peasant, "It is a poor joke, this riding, especially when one gets hold of a mare like this, that kicks and throws one off, so that one has a chance of breaking one's neck. Never again will I mount it. Now I like your cow, for one can walk quietly behind her, and moreover have one's milk, butter, and cheese every day without fail. What would I not give to have such a cow?" "Well," said the peasant, "if it would give you so much pleasure, I do not mind trading the cow for the horse." Hans agreed with the greatest delight, and the peasant jumped upon the horse and rode quickly away. Hans drove his cow quietly before him, and thought over his lucky bargain. "If only I have a morsel of bread -- and that can hardly fail me -- I can eat butter and cheese with it as often as I like. If I am thirsty, I can milk my cow and drink the milk. My goodness, what more can I want?" When he came to an inn he stopped, and to celebrate his good fortune, he ate up everything he had with him -- his dinner and supper -- and all he had, and with his last few farthings had half a glass of beer. Then he drove his cow onwards in the direction of his mother's village. As noon approached, the heat grew more oppressive, and Hans found himself upon a moor which would take at least another hour to cross. He felt very hot, and his tongue stuck to the roof of his mouth with thirst. "I can find a cure for this," thought Hans. "I will milk the cow now and refresh myself with the milk." He tied her to a withered tree, and as he had no pail, he put his leather cap underneath, but try as he would, not a drop of milk came. And because he was working in a clumsy way, the impatient beast at last gave him such a blow on his head with its hind foot, that he fell to the ground, and for a long time did not know where he was. By good fortune a butcher just then came along the road with a pushcart, in which lay a young pig. "What sort of a trick is this?" he cried, and helped good Hans up. Hans told him what had happened. The butcher gave him his flask and said, "Take a drink and refresh yourself. The cow will certainly give no milk. It is an old beast. At the best it is only fit for the plow, or for the butcher." "Well, well," said Hans, as he stroked his hair down on his head. "Who would have thought it? Certainly it is a fine thing when one can slaughter a beast like that for oneself. What meat one has! But I do not care much for beef, it is not juicy enough for me. But to have a young pig like that! It tastes quite different, and there are sausages as well." "Listen, Hans," said the butcher. "To do you a favor, I will trade, and will let you have the pig for the cow." "God reward you for your kindness," said Hans as he gave up the cow. The pig was unbound from the cart, and the cord by which it was tied was put in his hand. Hans went on, thinking to himself how everything was going just as he wished. If anything troublesome happened to him, it was immediately set right. Presently he was joined by a lad who was carrying a fine white goose under his arm. They greeted one another, and Hans began to tell of his good luck, and how he had always made such good trades. The boy told him that he was taking the goose to a christening feast. "Just heft her," he added, taking hold of her by the wings. "Feel how heavy she is. She has been fattened up for the last eight weeks. Anyone who bites into her after she has been roasted will have to wipe the fat from both sides of his mouth." "Yes," said Hans, hefting her with one hand, "she weighs a lot, but my pig is not so bad either." Meanwhile the lad looked suspiciously from one side to the other, and shook his head. "Look here, he said at last. "It may not be all right with your pig. In the village through which I passed, the mayor himself had just had one stolen out of its sty. I fear -- I fear that you have got hold of it there. They have sent out some people and it would be a bad business if they caught you with the pig. At the very least, you would be shut up in the dark hole. Good Hans was terrified. "For goodness' sake," he said. "help me out of this fix. You know more about this place than I do. Take my pig and leave me your goose." "I am taking a risk," answered the lad, "but I do not want to be the cause of your getting into trouble." So he took the cord in his hand, and quickly drove the pig down a bypath. Good Hans, free from care, went homewards with the goose under his arm. "When I think about it properly," he said to himself, "I have even gained by the trade. First there is the good roast meat, then the quantity of fat which will drip from it, and which will give me goose fat for my bread for a quarter of a year, and lastly the beautiful white feathers. I will have my pillow stuffed with them, and then indeed I shall go to sleep without being rocked. How glad my mother will be!" As he was going through the last village, there stood a scissors grinder with his cart, as his wheel whirred he sang, I sharpen scissors and quickly grind, My coat blows out in the wind behind. Hans stood still and looked at him. At last he spoke to him and said, "All's well with you, as you are so merry with your grinding." "Yes," answered the scissors grinder, "this trade has a golden foundation. A real grinder is a man who as often as he puts his hand into his pocket finds gold in it. But where did you buy that fine goose?" "I did not buy it, but traded my pig for it." "And the pig?" " I got it for a cow." "And the cow?" "I got it for a horse." "And the horse?" "For that I gave a lump of gold as big as my head." "And the gold?" "Well, that was my wages for seven years' service." "You have known how to look after yourself each time," said the grinder. "If you can only get on so far as to hear the money jingle in your pocket whenever you stand up, you will have made your fortune." "How shall I manage that?" said Hans. "You must become a grinder, as I am. Nothing particular is needed for it but a grindstone. Everything else takes care of itself. I have one here. It is certainly a little worn, but you need not give me anything for it but your goose. Will you do it?" "How can you ask?" answered Hans. "I shall be the luckiest fellow on earth. If I have money whenever I put my hand in my pocket, why should I ever worry again?" And he handed him the goose and received the grindstone in exchange. "Now," said the grinder, picking up an ordinary heavy stone that lay nearby, "here is another good stone for you as well, which you can use to hammer on and straighten your old nails. Carry it along with you and take good care of it." Hans loaded himself with the stones, and went on with a contented heart, his eyes shining with joy. "I must have been born with lucky skin," he cried. "Everything I want happens to me just as if I were a Sunday's child." Meanwhile, as he had been on his legs since daybreak, he began to feel tired. Hunger also tormented him, for in his joy at the bargain by which he got the cow he had eaten up all his store of food at once. At last he could only go on with great difficulty, and was forced to stop every minute. The stones, too, weighed him down dreadfully, and he could not help thinking how nice it would be if he would not have to carry them just then. He crept like a snail until he came to a well in a field, where he thought that he would rest and refresh himself with a cool drink of water. In order that he might not damage the stones in sitting down, he laid them carefully by his side on the edge of the well. Then he sat down on it, and was about to bend over and drink, when he slipped, pushed against the stones, and both of them fell into the water. When Hans saw them with his own eyes sinking to the bottom, he jumped for joy, and then knelt down, and with tears in his eyes thanked God for having shown him this favor also, and delivered him in so good a way, and without his having any need to reproach himself, from those heavy stones which had been the only things that troubled him. "No one under the sun is as fortunate as I am," he cried out. With a light heart and free from every burden he now ran on until he was at home with his mother. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Hans im Glück , Kinder- und Hausmärchen , no. 83. This tale was not included in the first edition of the Grimms' collection (two volumes, 1812, 1815), but was added to the second edition (1819). Translated by Margaret Hunt. Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Story of Mr. Vinegar England, James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps Mr. and Mrs. Vinegar lived in a vinegar bottle. Now one day, when Mr. Vinegar was away from home, Mrs. Vinegar, who was a very good housewife, was busily sweeping her house, when an unlucky thump of the broom brought the whole house clitter-clatter, clitter-clatter, about her ears. In a paroxysm of grief she rushed forth to meet her husband. On seeing him she exclaimed, "Oh, Mr. Vinegar, Mr. Vinegar, we are ruined, we are ruined. I have knocked the house down, and it is all to pieces!" Mr. Vinegar then said, "My dear, let us see what can be done. Here is the door; I will take it on my back, and we will go forth to seek our fortune." They walked all that day, and at nightfall entered a thick forest. They were both excessively tired, and Mr. Vinegar said, "My love, I will climb up into a tree, drag up the door, and you shall follow." He according did so, and they both stretched their weary limbs on the door, and fell fast asleep. In the middle of the night Mr. Vinegar was disturbed by the sound of voices beneath, and to his inexpressible dismay perceived that a party of thieves were wet to divide their booty. "Here, Jack," said one, "here's five pounds for you. Here, Bill, here's ten pounds for you. Here, Bob, here's three pounds for you." Mr. Vinegar could listen no longer. His terror was so intense that he trembled most violently, and shook down the door on their heads. Away scampered the thieves, but Mr. Vinegar dared not quit his retreat till broad daylight. He then scrambled out of the tree, and went to lift up the door. What did he behold but a number of golden guineas! "Come down, Mrs. Vinegar," he cried. "Come down, I say. Our fortune's made, our fortune's made! Come down, I say." Mrs. Vinegar got down as fast as she could, and saw the money with equal delight. "Now, my dear," said she, "I'll tell you what you shall do. There is a fair at the neighboring town. You shall take these forty guineas and buy a cow. I can make butter and cheese, which you shall sell at market, and we shall then be able to live very comfortably." Mr. Vinegar joyfully assents, takes the money, and goes off to the fair. When he arrived, he walked up and down, and at length saw a beautiful red cow. It was an excellent milker, and perfect in every respect. "Oh!" thought Mr. Vinegar, "If I had but that cow I should be the happiest man alive." So he offers the forty guineas for the cow, and the owner declaring that, as he was a friend, he'd oblige him, the bargain was made. Proud of his purchase, he drove the cow backwards and forwards to show it. By and by he saw a man playing the bagpipes, tweedle-dum, tweedle-dee. The children followed him about, and he appeared to be pocketing money on all sides. "Well," thought Mr. Vinegar, "if I had but that beautiful instrument I should be the happiest man alive. My fortune would be made." So he went up to the man, "Friend," says he, "what a beautiful instrument that is, and what a deal of money you must make." "Why, yes," said the man, "I make a great deal of money, to be sure, and it is a wonderful instrument." "Oh!" cried Mr. Vinegar, "how I should like to possess it!" "Well," said the man, "as you are a friend, I don't much mind parting with it. You shall have it for that red cow." "Done," said the delighted Mr. Vinegar. So the beautiful red cow was given for the bagpipes. He walked up and down with his purchase, but in vain he attempted to play a tune, and instead of pocketing pence, the boys followed him hooting, laughing, and pelting. Poor Mr. Vinegar, his fingers grew very cold, and, heartily ashamed and mortified, he was leaving the town, when he met a man with a fine thick pair of gloves. "Oh, my fingers are so very cold," said Mr. Vinegar to himself. "If I had but those beautiful gloves I should be the happiest man alive." He went up to the man, and said to him, "Friend, you seem to have a capital pair of gloves there." "Yes, truly," cried the man; "and my hands are as warm as possible this cold November day." "Well," said Mr. Vinegar, "I should like to have them." "What will you give?" said the man. "As you are a friend, I don't much mind letting you have them for those bagpipes." "Done," cried Mr. Vinegar. He put on the gloves, and felt perfectly happy as he trudged homewards. At last he grew very tired, when he saw a man coming towards him with a good stout stick in his hand. "Oh," said Mr. Vinegar, "that I had but that stick! I should then be the happiest man alive." He accosted the man, "Friend! What a rare good stick you have got." "Yes," said the man, "I have used it for many a long mile, and a good friend it has been, but if you have a fancy for it, as you are a friend, I don't mind giving it to you for that pair of gloves." Mr. Vinegar's hands were so warm, and his legs so tired, that he gladly exchanged. As he drew near to the wood where he had left his wife, he heard a parrot on a tree calling out his name, "Mr. Vinegar, you foolish man, you blockhead, you simpleton; you went to the fair and laid out all your money in buying a cow. Not content with that, you changed it for bagpipes on which you could not play, and which were not worth one tenth of the money. You fool, you -- you had no sooner got the bagpipes than you changed them for the gloves, which were not worth one quarter of the money; and when you had got the gloves, you changed them for a poor miserable stick; and now for your forty guineas, cow, bagpipes, and gloves, you have nothing to show but that poor miserable stick, which you might have cut in any hedge." On this the bird laughed immoderately, and Mr. Vinegar, falling into a violent rage, threw the stick at its head. The stick lodged in the tree, and he returned to his wife without money, cow, bagpipes, gloves, or stick, and she instantly gave him such a sound cudgeling that she almost broke every bone in his skin. Source: James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), pp. 26-29. The episodes of leaving home, carrying one's own front door, and then frightening away a band of thieves from beneath a tree are integral to many European tales about fools. Respectively these episodes are classified as tale types 1009 and 1653 in the Aarne-Thompson system. Return to the table of contents . Gudbrand on the Hillside Norway, Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe Once upon a time there was a man whose name was Gudbrand. He had a farm which lay far, far away upon a hillside, and so they called him Gudbrand on the Hillside. Now, you must know that this man and his wife lived so happily together, and understood one another so well, that all the husband did the wife thought so well done, that there was nothing like it in the world, and she was always glad whatever he turned his hand to. The farm was their own land, and they had a hundred dollars lying at the bottom of their chest, and two cows tethered up in a stall in their farmyard. So one day his wife said to Gudbrand, "Do you know, dear, I think we ought to take one of our cows into town and sell it. That's what I think, for then we shall have some money in hand, and such well-to-do people as we ought to have ready money like the rest of the world. As for the hundred dollars at the bottom of the chest over there, we can't make a hole in them, and I'm sure I don't know what we want with more than one cow. Besides, we shall gain a little in another way, for then I shall get off with only looking after one cow, instead of having, as now, to feed and litter and water two." Well, Gudbrand thought his wife talked right good sense, so he set off at once with the cow on his way to town to sell her. But when he got to the town, there was no one who would buy his cow. "Well, well! Never mind," said Gudbrand. "At the worst, I can only go back home again with my cow. I've both stable and tether for her, I should think, and the road is no farther out than in," and with that he began to toddle home with his cow. But when he had gone a bit of the way, a man met him who had a horse to sell, so Gudbrand thought it was better to have a horse than a cow, so he swapped with the man. A little farther on he met a man walking along and driving a fat pig before him, and he thought it better to have a fat pig than a horse, so he swapped with the man. After that he went a little farther, and a man met him with a goat; so he thought it better to have a goat than a pig, and he swapped with the man that owned the goat. Then he went on a good bit till he met a man who had a sheep, and he swapped with him too, for he thought it always better to have a sheep than a goat. After a while he met a man with a goose, and he swapped away the sheep for the goose. And when he had walked a long, long time, he met a man with a rooster, and he swapped with him, for he thought in this wise, "It is surely better to have a rooster than a goose." Then he went on till the day was far spent, and he began to get very hungry, so he sold the rooster for a shilling, and bought food with the money, for, thought Gudbrand on the Hillside, "It is always better to save one's life than to have a rooster." After that he went on toward home till he reached his nearest neighbor's house, where he turned in. "Well," said the owner of the house, "how did things go with you in town?" "Rather so so," said Gudbrand. "I can't praise my luck, nor do I blame it either," and with that he told the whole story from first to last. "Ah!" said his friend, "you'll get nicely called over the coals, that one can see, when you get home to your wife. Heaven help you. I wouldn't stand in your shoes for anything." "Well," said Gudbrand on the Hillside, "I think things might have gone much worse with me. But now, whether I have done wrong or not, I have so kind a wife, she never has a word to say against anything that I do." "Oh!" answered his neighbor, "I hear what you say, but I don't believe it for all that." "Shall we lay a bet upon it?" asked Gudbrand on the Hillside. "I have a hundred dollars at the bottom of my chest at home. Will you lay as many against them?" Yes, the friend was ready to bet, so Gudbrand stayed there till evening, when it began to get dark, and then they went together to his house, and the neighbor was to stand outside the door and listen, while the man went in to see his wife. "Good evening!" said Gudbrand on the Hillside. "Good evening!" said the wife. "Oh, is that you? Now God be praised." Yes, it was he. So the wife asked how things had gone with him in town. "Oh, only so so," answered Gudbrand. "Not much to brag of. When I got to town there was no one who would buy the cow, so you must know I swapped it away for a horse." "For a horse," said his wife. "Well, that is good of you. Thanks with all my heart. We are so well-to-do that we may drive to church just as well as other people, and if we choose to have a horse, we have a right to get one, I should think. So run out, child, and put up the horse." "Ah!" said Gudbrand, "but you see, I've not got the horse after all, for when I got a bit farther down the road, I swapped it away for a pig." "Think of that, now!" said the wife. "You did just as I should have done myself. A thousand thanks! Now I can have a bit of bacon in the house to set before people when they come to see me, that I can. What do we want with a horse? People would only say we had got so proud that we couldn't walk to church. Go out, child, and put up the pig in the sty." "But I've not got the pig either," said Gudbrand, "for when I got a little farther on I swapped it away for a milk goat." "Bless us!" cried his wife, "How well you manage everything! Now I think it over, what should I do with a pig? People would only point at us and say, 'Yonder they eat up all they have got.' No! Now I have got a goat, and I shall have milk and cheese, and keep the goat too. Run out, child, and put up the goat." "No, but I haven't got the goat either," said Gudbrand, "for a little farther on I swapped it away, and got a fine sheep instead." "You don't say so!" cried his wife. "Why, you do everything to please me, just as if I had been with you. What do we want with a goat? If I had it I should lose half my time in climbing up the hills to bring it in. No! If I have a sheep, I shall have both wool and clothing, and fresh meat in the house. Run out, child, and put up the sheep." "But I haven't got the sheep any more than the rest," said Gudbrand, "for when I had gone a bit farther I swapped it away for a goose." "Thank you! Thank you, with all my heart!" cried his wife. "What should I do with a sheep? I have no spinning wheel nor carding comb, nor should I care to worry myself with cutting, and shaping, and sewing clothes. We can buy clothes now, as we have always done; and now I shall have roast goose, which I have longed for so often; and, besides, down to stuff my little pillow with. Run out, child, and put up the goose." "Ah!" said Gudbrand, "but I haven't the goose either, for when I had gone a bit farther I swapped it away for a rooster." "Dear me!" cried his wife. "How you think of everything! Just as I should have done myself. A rooster! Think of that! Why it's as good as an eight-day clock, for every morning the rooster crows at four o'clock, and we shall be able to stir ourselves in good time. What should we do with a goose? I don't know how to cook it, and as for my pillow, I can stuff it with grass. Run out, child, and put up the rooster." "But after all I haven't got the rooster," said Gudbrand, "for when I had gone a bit farther, I got as hungry as a hunter, so I was forced to sell the rooster for a shilling, for fear I should starve." "Now, God be praised that you did so!" cried his wife. "Whatever you do, you do it always just after my own heart. What should we do with the rooster? We are our own masters, I should think, and can lie in bed in the morning as long as we like. Heaven be thanked that I have got you safely back again, you who do everything so well that I want neither rooster nor goose, neither pigs nor cows." Then Gudbrand opened the door and said, "Well, what do you say now? Have I won the hundred dollars?" And his neighbor was forced to admit that he had. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Gudbrand i Lia , Norske Folkeeventyr . I have used the translation of George Webbe Dasent in Popular Tales from the Norse (Edinburgh: Douglas, 1888), pp. 149-154, cautiously modernizing Dasent's idiom and spelling. Return to the table of contents . What the Old Man Does Is Always Right Denmark, Hans Christian Andersen I will tell you a story that was told me when I was a little boy. Every time I thought of this story, it seemed to me more and more charming; for it is with stories as it is with many people -- they become better as they grow older. I have no doubt that you have been in the country, and seen a very old farmhouse, with a thatched roof, and moss and small plants growing wild upon it. There is a stork's nest on the ridge of the gable, for we cannot do without the stork. The walls of the house are sloping, and the windows are low, and only one of them is made to open. The baking oven sticks out of the wall like a great knob. An elder tree hangs over the fence; and beneath its branches, at the foot of the fence, is a pool of water with a few ducks. There is a watchdog too, who barks at everyone. Just such a farmhouse as this stood in a country lane; and in it lived an old couple, a peasant and his wife. Small as their possessions were, they had one article they could not do without, and that was a horse, which contrived to live upon the grass that it found by the side of the highroad. The old peasant rode into the town upon this horse, and his neighbors often borrowed it from him, and paid for the loan of it by rendering some service to the old couple. After a time they thought it would be as well to sell the horse, or exchange it for something which might be more useful to them. But what might this something be? "You'll know best, old man," said the wife. "It is market day today; so ride into town, and get rid of the horse for money, or make a good exchange; whichever you do will be right to me, so ride to the market." And she fastened his neckerchief for him; for she could do that better than he could, and she could also tie it very prettily in a double bow. She also smoothed his hat round and round with the palm of her hand, and gave him a kiss. Then he rode away upon the horse that was to be sold or bartered for something else. Yes, the old man knew what he was about. The sun shone with great heat, and not a cloud was to be seen in the sky. The road was very dusty; for a number of people, all going to market, were driving, riding, or walking upon it. There was no shelter anywhere from the hot sunshine. Among the rest a man came trudging along, and driving a cow to the fair. The cow was as beautiful a creature as any cow could be. "She gives good milk, I am certain," said the peasant to himself. "That would be a very good exchange: the cow for the horse. Hallo there! you with the cow," he said. "I tell you what; I dare say a horse is of more value than a cow; but I don't care for that. A cow will be more useful to me; so, if you like, we'll exchange." "To be sure I will," said the man. Accordingly the exchange was made; and as the matter was settled, the peasant might have turned back; for he had done the business he came to do. But, having made up his mind to go to market, he determined to do so, if only to have a look at it; so on he went to the town with his cow. Leading the animal, he strode on sturdily, and, after a short time, overtook a man who was driving a sheep. It was a good fat sheep, with fine fleece on its back. "I should like to have that fellow," said the peasant to himself. "There is plenty of grass for him by our fence, and in the winter we could keep him in the room with us. Perhaps it would be more profitable to have a sheep than a cow. Shall I exchange?" The man with the sheep was quite ready, and the bargain was quickly made. And then our peasant continued his way on the highroad with his sheep. Soon after this, he overtook another man, who had come onto the road from a field, and was carrying a large goose under his arm. "What a heavy creature you have there!" said the peasant; "it has plenty of feathers and plenty of fat, and would look well tied to a string, or paddling in the water at our place. That would be very useful to my old woman. She could make all sorts of profits out of it. How often she has said, 'If now we only had a goose!' Now here is an opportunity, and, if possible, I will get it for her. Shall we exchange? I will give you my sheep for your goose, and thanks into the bargain." The other had not the least objection, and accordingly the exchange was made, and our peasant became possessor of the goose. By this time he had arrived very near the town. The crowd on the highroad had been gradually increasing, and there was quite a rush of men and cattle. The cattle walked on the path and by the fence, and at the turnpike gate they even walked into the gatekeeper's potato field, where a chicken was strutting about with a string tied to its leg, for fear it should take fright at the crowd, and run away and get lost. The chicken's tail feathers were very short, and it winked with both its eyes, and looked very cunning, as it said "cluck, cluck." What were the thoughts of the chicken as it said this I cannot tell you; but as soon as our good man saw it, he thought, "Why that's the finest chicken I ever saw in my life; it's finer than our parson's brood hen, upon my word. I should like to have that chicken. Chickens can always pick up a few grains that lie about, and almost keep themselves. I think it would be a good exchange if I could get it for my goose. Shall we exchange?" he asked the gatekeeper. "Exchange," repeated the man; "well, it would not be a bad thing." And so they made an exchange. The gatekeeper at the turnpike gate kept the goose, and the peasant carried off the chicken. Now he had really done a great deal of business on his way to market, and he was hot and tired. He wanted something to eat, and a glass of ale to refresh himself; so he turned his steps to an inn. He was just about to enter when the innkeeper came out, and they met at the door. The innkeeper was carrying a sack. "What have you in that sack?" asked the peasant. "Rotten apples," answered the innkeeper; "a whole sackful of them. They will do to feed the pigs with." "Why that will be terrible waste," he replied; "I should like to take them home to my old woman. Last year the old apple tree by the grass plot only bore one apple, and we kept it in the cupboard till it was quite withered and rotten. It was always property, my old woman said; and here she would see a great deal of property -- a whole sackful; I should like to show them to her." "What will you give me for the sackful?" asked the innkeeper. "What will I give? Well, I will give you my chicken in exchange." So he gave up the chicken, and received the apples, which he carried into the inn parlor. He leaned the sack carefully against the stove, and then went to the table. But the stove was hot, and he had not thought of that. Many guests were present -- horse dealers, cattle drovers, and two Englishmen. The Englishmen were so rich that their pockets quite bulged out and seemed ready to burst; and they could bet too, as you shall hear. "Hiss-s-s, hiss-s-s." What could that be by the stove? The apples were beginning to roast. "What is that?" asked one. "Why, do you know" -- said our peasant. And then he told them the whole story of the horse, which he had exchanged for a cow, and all the rest of it, down to the apples. "Well, your old woman will give it you well when you get home," said one of the Englishmen. "Won't there be a noise?" "What! Give me what?" said the peasant. "Why, she will kiss me, and say, 'what the old man does is always right.'" "Let us lay a wager on it," said the Englishmen. "We'll wager you a ton of coined gold, a hundred pounds to the hundredweight." "No; a bushel will be enough," replied the peasant. "I can only set a bushel of apples against it, and I'll throw myself and my old woman into the bargain; that will pile up the measure, I fancy." "Done! taken!" and so the bet was made. Then the landlord's coach came to the door, and the two Englishmen and the peasant got in, and away they drove, and soon arrived and stopped at the peasant's hut. "Good evening, old woman." "Good evening, old man." "I've made the exchange." "Ah, well, you understand what you're about," said the woman. Then she embraced him, and paid no attention to the strangers, nor did she notice the sack. "I got a cow in exchange for the horse." "Thank Heaven," said she. "Now we shall have plenty of milk, and butter, and cheese on the table. That was a capital exchange." "Yes, but I changed the cow for a sheep." "Ah, better still!" cried the wife. "You always think of everything; we have just enough pasture for a sheep. Ewe's milk and cheese, woolen jackets and stockings! The cow could not give all these, and her hair only falls off. How you think of everything!" "But I changed away the sheep for a goose." "Then we shall have roast goose to eat this year. You dear old man, you are always thinking of something to please me. This is delightful. We can let the goose walk about with a string tied to her leg, so she will be fatter still before we roast her." "But I gave away the goose for a chicken." "A chicken! Well, that was a good exchange," replied the woman. "The chicken will lay eggs and hatch them, and we shall have chicks; we shall soon have a poultry yard. Oh, this is just what I was wishing for." "Yes, but I exchanged the chicken for a sack of shriveled apples." "What! I really must give you a kiss for that!" exclaimed the wife. "My dear, good husband, now I'll tell you something. Do you know, almost as soon as you left me this morning, I began to think of what I could give you nice for supper this evening, and then I thought of fried eggs and bacon, with sweet herbs. I had eggs and bacon, but I lacked the herbs, so I went over to the schoolmaster's. I knew they had plenty of herbs, but the schoolmistress is very mean, although she can smile so sweetly. I begged her to lend me a handful of herbs. 'Lend!' she exclaimed, 'I have nothing to lend. Nothing at all grows in our garden, not even a shriveled apple. I could not even lend you a shriveled apple, my dear woman. But now I can lend her ten, or a whole sackful, which I'm very glad of. It makes me laugh to think about it." And then she gave him a hearty kiss. "Well, I like all this," said both the Englishmen; "always going down the hill, and yet always merry; it's worth the money to see it." So they paid a hundredweight of gold to the peasant, who, whatever he did, was not scolded but kissed. Yes, it always pays best when the wife sees and maintains that her husband knows best, and whatever he does is right. That is a story which I heard when I was a child; and now you have heard it too, and know that "what the old man does is always right." Source: Hans Christian Andersen, Hvad fatter gør, det er altid det rigtige , first published 1861. Andersen himself called this story one of his best tales. Translated by Mrs. Paull, 1872. Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's index of folklore and mythology electronic texts . Revised Summer Solstice 2000. Trading Places: Folktales of Types 85 and 1408 Trading Places folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 85 and 1408 in which family members exchange jobs with disastrous results translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2023 Contents Tales of Type 85 The Mouse, the Bird, and the Sausage (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Little Mouse and Little Sausage (East Prussia, Elisabeth Lemke). Mouse, Sausage, and Pea (Denmark, Evald Tang Kristensen). Tales of Type 1408 The Husband Who Was to Mind the House (Norway, Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe). The Husband at Home (Denmark, Svend Grundtvig). Nature's Order (Germany, Karl Simrock). There Was an Old Man, Who Lived in a Wood (England, James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps). The Old Man Who Lived in a Wood (England, Sarah Hewett). A Change of Work (Ireland, The Schools' Collection ). Bibliography of related tales Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Mouse, the Bird, and the Sausage Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once upon a time a mouse, a bird, and a sausage formed a partnership. They kept house together, and for a long time they lived in peace and prosperity, acquiring many possessions. The bird's task was to fly into the forest every day to fetch wood. The mouse carried water, made the fire, and set the table. The sausage did the cooking. Whoever is too well off always wants to try something different! Thus one day the bird chanced to meet another bird, who boasted to him of his own situation. This bird criticized him for working so hard while the other two enjoyed themselves at home. For after the mouse had made the fire and carried the water, she could sit in the parlor and rest until it was time for her to set the table. The sausage had only to stay by the pot watching the food cook. When mealtime approached, she would slither through the porridge or the vegetables, and thus everything was greased and salted and ready to eat. The bird would bring his load of wood home. They would eat their meal, and then sleep soundly until the next morning. It was a great life. The next day, because of his friend's advice, the bird refused to go to the forest, saying that he had been their servant long enough. He was no longer going to be a fool for them. Everyone should try a different task for a change. The mouse and the sausage argued against this, but the bird was the master, and he insisted that they give it a try. The sausage was to fetch wood, the mouse became the cook, and the bird was to carry water. And what was the result? The sausage trudged off toward the forest; the bird made the fire; and the mouse put on the pot and waited for the sausage to return with wood for the next day. However, the sausage stayed out so long that the other two feared that something bad had happened. The bird flew off to see if he could find her. A short distance away he came upon a dog that had seized the sausage as free booty and was making off with her. The bird complained bitterly to the dog about this brazen abduction, but he claimed that he had discovered forged letters on the sausage, and that she would thus have to forfeit her life to him. Filled with sorrow, the bird carried the wood home himself and told the mouse what he had seen and heard. They were very sad, but were determined to stay together and make the best of it. The bird set the table while the mouse prepared the food. She jumped into the pot, as the sausage had always done, in order to slither and weave in and about the vegetables and grease them, but before she reached the middle, her hair and skin were scalded off, and she perished. When the bird wanted to eat, no cook was there. Beside himself, he threw the wood this way and that, called out, looked everywhere, but no cook was to be found. Because of his carelessness, the scattered wood caught fire, and the entire house was soon aflame. The bird rushed to fetch water, but the bucket fell into the well, carrying him with it, and he drowned. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Von dem Mäuschen, Vögelchen und der Bratwurst," Kinder- und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 23, pp. 131-32 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Von dem Mäuschen, Vögelchen und der Bratwurst," Kinder- und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 23, pp. 131-32 . The Grimms' source: Hans Michael Moscherosch, Gesichte Philanders von Sittewald , part 2 (Strassburg: Bey Johan-Philipp Müber und Josias Städeln, 1650), vision 7, pp. 927-30 and unspecified oral sources. The Grimms included this tale in their manuscript collection of 1810 and in the first edition (1812) of their Kinder- und Hausmärchen . With minor stylistic changes, it was included in all seven editions published during the Grimms' lifetime (1812, 1819, 1837, 1840, 1843, 1850, 1857). Return to the table of contents . Little Mouse and Little Sausage East Prussia Once upon a time there were a little mouse and a little sausage. They lived in a little house. Every Sunday one of them went to church while the other cooked the cabbage for dinner. Now it came about that the cabbage always tasted better when the little sausage had cooked it. The little mouse decided to spy on the little sausage while she was doing the cooking. The next Sunday it was the little mouse's turn to go to church. She put on her fur coat and said: "Adieu, dear little sausage, just cook the cabbage very nicely!" Now the little little mouse did not go to church at all, but instead hid behind the door. Then, when the cabbage was at a full boil, he saw how the little sausage jumped into the pot and allowed a little fat to boil off. "Aha," thought the little mouse. "That's why her cabbage always tastes so good. I'll do the same thing." When the little sausage went to church the following Sunday, she tenderly said goodbye to the little mouse: "Adieu, dear little mouse, just cook the cabbage very nicely!" The little mouse closely watched the pot, and when the cabbage began to boil, he nimbly jumped in. But alas, he scalded himself to death. The little sausage came home from church and was surprised that she could not find the little mouse. Finally, being hungry, she sat down at the table and scooped up the cabbage. Her dead little mouse fell onto her plate. The little sausage cried bitterly. She immediately decided to organize a grand funeral for the little mouse. Four large rats were harnessed to the hearse. In deep mourning the little sausage walked behind the carriage, followed by innumerable mice. The rooster led the procession as the preacher, always crowing so loudly so that he could be heard far and wide. And thus they buried the little mouse. Source (books.google.com): Elisabeth Lemke, "Mauschen und Wurstchen," Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde , edited by Johannes Bolte, vol. 15 (1905), pp. 344-45 . Translator's note: From the German-language original it is impossible to determine the natural genders of the mouse and the sausage. I have arbitrarily made the deceased mouse a male and the grieving sausage a female. This tale is from East Prussia, formerly a part of Germany, now included in Poland. Return to the table of contents . Mouse, Sausage, and Pea Denmark Once upon a time there were a mouse, a sausage, and a pea who lived together and took turns cooking cabbage on Sundays. The sausage always cooked the best cabbage, and when the mouse once asked you how she could make such good cabbage, the sausage replied that when the pot started to boil, she jumped into the pot. The mouse thought: "Good, I will try the same thing." The next Sunday, when the sausage and the pea had gone to church, the mouse was to cook the cabbage. When the pot started to boil he jumped into it and drowned. When the sausage came home and was about to eat her dinner, the mouse was gone. The sausage thought that the mouse had gone out, so she started to scoop up the cabbage. She found the mouse, and when she saw that he was dead, the sausage went out and sat down in the doorway and cried. A dog came running by, and when he saw the sausage crying, he asked what was the matter. The sausage replied: "I have enough reason to be crying. The mouse is in the pot and has drowned." The dog said: "Then I will give myself to howling." The dog came to a fence, and the fence asked him why he was howling like that. The dog answered: "The mouse has drowned in the cabbage pot, and the sausage is sitting in the doorway and crying. Why shouldn't I howl?" Then the fence said: "Then I will fall over." And it fell over onto a tree that was standing there. The tree asked why the fence had fallen over on it. The fence answered: "The mouse has drowned in the cabbage pot, the sausage is sitting in the doorway crying, and the dog is howling. Why should I not fall over?" Then the tree said: "Then I will let all my leaves fall off," and the leaves fell into a well. The well asked the tree why it had let all its leaves fall off. The tree answered: "The mouse has drowned in the cabbage pot, the sausage is sitting in the door crying, the dog is howling, and the fence has fallen over on me. Why should I not let my leaves fall off?" Then the well said: "Then I will go dry." Then the girl came out to get water. She saw that the well was dry, and asked why that was so. The well answered: "The mouse has drowned in the cabbage pot, the sausage is sitting in the doorway crying, the dog is howling, the fence has fallen over, and the tree has let all of its leaves fall. Why should I not be dry?" Then the girl said: "Then I will smash my buckets." She did so, and then the man came and asked why she had broken her buckets to pieces. The girl answered: "The mouse has drowned in the cabbage pot, the sausage is sitting in the doorway crying, the dog is howing, the fence has fallen over, the tree has let all of its leaves fall down, and the well has gone dry. Why should I not break my buckets to pieces?" Then the man said: "Then I will beat my boy." He did so, and the boy asked: "Why should I be beaten like this?" The man answered: "The mouse has drowned in the cabbage pot, the sausage is sitting in the doorway crying, the dog is howling, the fence has fallen over, the tree has dropped all of its leaves, the well has gone dry, and the girl has broken her buckets. Why should I not beat you? Then the boy said: "Then I will to run to the ends of the world," and with that he ran away. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Mus, Pølse og Ært," Dyrefabler og Kjæderemser (Aarhus: Jacob Zeuners Bogtrykkeri, 1896), no. 149, pp. 85-86 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, "Mus, Pølse og Ært," Dyrefabler og Kjæderemser (Aarhus: Jacob Zeuners Bogtrykkeri, 1896), no. 149, pp. 85-86 . Tang Kristensen's source: Maren Graversen, Gjellerup. The opening episode in this fable is a type 85 folktale; the story continues as a type 2022 chain tale. Return to the table of contents . The Husband Who Was to Mind the House Norway, Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe Once upon a time there was a man who was so bad tempered and cross that he never thought his wife did anything right in the house. One evening, in hay-making time, he came home, scolding and swearing, and showing his teeth and making a commotion. "Dear love, don't be so angry; that's a good man," said his wife; "tomorrow let's change jobs. I'll go out with the mowers and mow, and you can mind the house at home." Yes, the husband thought that would do very well. He was quite willing, he said. So early the next morning, his wife took a scythe over her neck, and went out into the hay field with the mowers and began to mow; but the man was to mind the house, and do the work at home. First of all he wanted to churn the butter; but when he had churned awhile, he got thirsty, and went down to the cellar to tap a barrel of ale. He had just knocked in the bung, and was putting in the tap, when he heard the pig come into the kitchen above. As as fast as he could, he ran up the cellar steps, with the tap in his hand, to keep the pig from upsetting the churn; but when he got there, he saw that the pig had already knocked the churn over, and was standing there, routing and grunting in the cream which was running all over the floor. He got so angry that he quite forgot the ale barrel, and ran at the pig as hard as he could. He caught it, too, just as it ran out of doors, and gave it such a powerful kick that he killed it on the spot. Then he remembered he had the tap in his hand; but when he got down to the cellar, all the ale had run out of the barrel. Then he went into the milk shed and found enough cream left to fill the churn again, and so he began to churn, for they had to have butter at dinner. When he had churned a bit, he remembered that their milk cow was still shut up in the barn, and hadn't had a bit to eat or a drop to drink all morning, although the sun was high. It occurred to him that it was too far to take her down to the meadow, so he'd just get her up on the roof, for it was a sod roof, and a fine crop of grass was growing there. The house was close against a steep hill, and he thought if he laid a plank across to the back of the roof he'd easily get the cow up. But he couldn't leave the churn, for his little baby was crawling about on the floor. "If I leave it," he thought, "the child will tip it over." So he took the churn on his back, and went out with it; but then he thought he'd better first water the cow before he put her on the roof; so he picked up a bucket to draw water out of the well; but, as he stooped over the edge of the well, all the cream ran out of the churn over his shoulder, and down into the well. Now it was near dinner time, and he hadn't even got the butter yet; so he thought he'd best boil the porridge, and filled the pot with water, and hung it over the fire. When he had done that, it occurred to him that the cow might fall off the roof and break her legs or her neck. So he climbed up on the house to tie her up. He tied one end of the rope to the cow's neck. He slipped the other end down the chimney and tied it around his own leg. Then he had to hurry, for the water was now boiling in the pot, and he had still to grind the oatmeal. He began to grind away; but while he was hard at it, the cow fell off the roof, dragging the man up the chimney by the rope. There he stuck fast; and as for the cow, she hung halfway down the wall, swinging between heaven and earth, for she could neither get down nor up. Now the wife waited seven lengths and seven breadths for her husband to come and call her home to dinner; but he never came. At last she thought she'd waited long enough, and went home. But when she got home and saw the cow hanging there, she ran up and cut the rope with her scythe. When she did this, her husband fell down from within the chimney. When the old woman came inside, she found him with his head in the porridge pot. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Mannen som skulle stelle hjemme , Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiania [Oslo], 1842-1852), translated by George Webb Dasent (1859). Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Husband at Home Denmark Many years ago there lived a husband and a wife in a small village. The two people were never satisfied, because the husband thought that his wife had it too easy, and she in turn thought that he had it too easy. Then one day they decided to exchange work for that day: She was to work in the field, and he was to stay at home and churn, cook porridge, and look after the cow. She went to the field, and he began to churn. When he had churned a little he became thirsty and went down into the cellar to get something to drink. He had just taken the tap from the beer barrel when he heard a horrid noise upstairs in the kitchen. He ran up to see what it was; but in his fright he forgot to put the tap back into the barrel. All the beer ran out onto the floor. In the kitchen he saw that the sow had gotten in there and had tipped the churn over, so that all the cream had spilled out onto the floor. He now had to go and skim off some more cream and begin to churn once again. He then thought that it was time to cook some poridge for dinner. He did not dare to leave the churn standing in the kitchen while he fetched water for the porridge, so he tied the churn firmly behind his back and went out for water. When he bent over to pull the bucket out of the the well, all of the cream ran out of the churn and over his head into the well. Now he had no more cream. He went back to the kitchen and had just put the porridge over the fire when he remembered that he had not yet taken the cow out. He ran and got her out of the stable, but he did not know where he should take her. He noticed that there was some grass growing on top of the house, so he pulled the cow up there. Then it occurred to him that the cow might fall off the roof, so he threw the rope down the chimney, then ran into the kitchen, and tied the rope around his leg. Thus he would know if the cow fell. He had just begun to stir the porridge when the cow fell off the roof and pulled him up the chimney. The man was hanging a little way up in the chimney and the cow a little way up from the ground, when the wife came home from the field for her dinner. She saw the cow hanging there, then ran over and cut the rope, for she did not know that her husband was hanging from the other end. The rope gave way, and the man fell on his head into the pot, killing him. She was terribly saddened by that, and since that day they never traded again. Source (books.google.com): Svend Grundtvig, "Manden i Huset," Gamler danske minder i Folkemunde: Folkeæventyr, Folkeviser, Folkesagn , ny Samling (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversen, 1857), no. 319, pp. 209-210 . From Als, an island east of the Jutland peninsula. Return to the table of contents . Nature's Order Germany A man and a woman lived in a run-down cottage. Every day the man went out and worked in the field while the woman stayed at home and cooked. One day after breakfast the man said to the woman: "You have it very easy with your little bit of cooking, while I have to work myself to the bone in the field." "Do you want to trade?" asked the woman. "If so, I'll go out to the field and you can stay and home and cook." "I'd be happy with that," said the man. So they traded roles: The woman took the hoe over her shoulder and went out to the field while the man, wooden spoon in hand, stayed at home. His first question was, what should he cook? Then it occurred to him that whoever has the cross should bless himself with it: "I'll cook my favorite dish, rice porridge." He brought in kindling and wood and made a fire, and then he heard the cow bellowing. "Just bellow away," said the man. "First I have to fetch water or else the fire will burn away for nothing at all." He took the bucket and went to the well to fetch water, which he poured into the pot and set on onto the fire. Then the cow bellowed again. "Just bellow away," he said. "It's not your turn yet. First I must put the rice into the pot so it will soften. He ran and fetched the rice, shook it into the pot and stirred it with the spoon. Then the cow bellowed a third time. "Yes," said the man, "now it's your turn." He went to the stall only to discover that there was no fodder there for her. "Curses!" he thought. "If have to get fodder for her now the water will get hot, and the rice will boil over and spoil my favorite dish." So he led the cow to the hill behind the cottage, and then onto his thatched roof that was covered with moss, saying: "You can graze here." Back in the kitchen he poured off the boiling water and poured fresh water onto the rice. Then he thought: "If the cow falls off the roof she could break her neck and a leg. That would not do." So he ran out onto the roof and tied a rope around the cow's neck and dropped the rope's other end down the chimney into the kitchen. Back in the kitchen he tied the rope onto his leg, thinking: "Now I can tend to the rice porridge in peace." Soon he poured the boiling water off the rice, replaced it with milk, then put it back onto the fire, stirring it vigorously with the wooden spoon so that it would not burn. Meanwhile the cow was grazing on the roof's narrow peak, carefully setting one foot in front of another like a tight-rope walker, until she came to the edge of the house. She stretched he neck to one side to reach a few green bites, then lost her balance and fell. The short rope left her hanging there above the ground. She was heavy enough to pull up the man tied to the other end of the rope. And there he hung in the chimney, between heaven and earth just above the rice porridge. When the woman returned home she saw the cow hanging there, its tongue sticking out of its throat. Fortunately she had her cheese knife in her pocket. She opened it, and holding the rope with her right hand she cut it in two with her left hand, then gently lowered the cow to the ground. She ran into the kitchen to scold the man. She found him stuck upside down with his head the porridge pot. The woman had to get him back onto his feet. But she couldn't scold him yet, for his eyes and ears were full of porridge. So she washed his head and was about to begin her scolding sermon, when he said: "Be quiet. You've already washed my head. In the future you'll stay at home and I'll work in the field." It is not right to undo nature's order. Source (books.google.com): Karl Simrock, "Die Ordnung der Natur," Deutsche Märchen (Stuttgart: Verlag der J. G. Cottaschen Buchhandlung, 1864), pp. 1-3 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Simrock, "Die Ordnung der Natur," Deutsche Märchen (Stuttgart: Verlag der J. G. Cottaschen Buchhandlung, 1864), pp. 1-3 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2017. Return to the table of contents . There Was an Old Man, Who Lived in a Wood England There was an old man, who lived in a wood, As you may plainly see; He said he could do as much work in a day, As his wife could do in three. With all my heart, the old woman said, If that you will allow, Tomorrow you'll stay at home in my stead, And I'll go drive the plough. But you must milk the Tidy cow, For fear that she go dry; And you must feed the little pigs That are within the sty; And you must mind the speckled hen, For fear she lay away; And you must reel the spool of yarn That I spun yesterday. The old woman took a staff in her hand, And went to drive the plough; The old man took a pail in his hand, And went to milk the cow: But Tidy hinched, and Tidy flinched, And Tidy broke his nose, And Tidy gave him such a blow, That the blood ran down to his toes! High! Tidy! Ho! Tidy! High! Tidy! do stand still, If ever I milk you, Tidy, again, 'Twill be sore against my will! He went to feed the little pigs, That were within the sty; He hit his head against the beam, And he made the blood to fly. He went to mind the speckled hen, For fear she'd lay astray; And he forgot the spool of yarn His wife spun yesterday. So he swore by the sun, the moon, and the stars, And the green leaves on the tree, If his wife didn't do a day's work in her life, She should ne'er be rul'd by he. Source: James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, The Nursery Rhymes of England: Obtained Principally from Oral Tradition , 2nd edition (London: John Russell Smith, 1843), no. 62, pp. 43-45 . Return to the table of contents . The Old Man Who Lived in a Wood England There was an old man who lived in a wood, As you may plainly see, He said he could work more in a day, Than his wife could do in three. "If that be the case," the old woman said, "If that be the case," said she, "The you shall stay at home today, And I'll go and drive the plow. But mind you, milk the cherry cow, For fear that she'd go dry, And mind you, tend the suckling pigs That lie in yonder sty. And mind you, watch the speckled hen, For fear that she would stray, And mind you, wind the worsted yarn, That I spun yesterday." The old woman took the whip in hand, And went to drive the plow; The old man took the milking pail, And went to milk the cow. But Cherry, she kicked, and Cherry, she flung, And Cherry, she wouldn't be quiet, She gave the old man a kick in the leg, Which made him kick up a riot. He went to watch the speckled hen, For fear that she should stray, But he forgot to wind the yarn His wife spun yesterday. Then he swore by the sun, the moon, and the stars, And all that was in heaven, That his wife could do more work in a day, Than he could do in seven. Source: Sarah Hewett, Nummits and Crummits: Devonshire Customs, Characteristics, and Folk-Lore (London: Thomas Burleigh, 1900), pp. 200-201 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . A Change of Work Ireland There was once a married man who was continually complaining about the hard work he had to do in the field toward what his wife had to do inside. One day when his wife was tired listening to him she told him she would exchange with him. He agreed and stayed inside. The work he had to do was, to churn the cream, bring water from the well, boil a pot of soup, let out the cow in the field and a mind the baby. When he had made the butter he thought of the fine half barrel of ale that was in the parlour and he went down for a cup full. When he had taken the cork from the barrel he heard a great noise in the kitchen and he rushed up to see what was wrong and took the cup and cork in his hand. When he went into the kitchen the hens had upset the dish of butter and he did his best to gather it up as clean as he could. Then he returned to the parlour and found the ale all over the floor and the carpets were all destroyed. So he was getting tired of house-keeping. Then he went to the well and fearing the baby would fall into the churn of butter-milk, he tied the churn on his back and went off. On stooping down at the well, the butter-milk spilled on his head, and he was at the loss of all the milk. When he came home with the water he put the pot of soup on the fire. Then he thought he had everything done, but late in the evening he thought about the cow. He thought it was too late to take her to the field, so he thought of a plan. He knew there was grass growing on the roof of the house, so he put a plank from a hill that was beside the house on to the roof of the house. He drove the cow up the hill and he put a rope around her neck. Then he drove her across the plank on to the house. He then tied the other end of the rope to the chimney but soon the cow slipped down. Then he went up on the house and put the rope around his own body and he began to pull back the cow, but he over balanced and fell down the chimney. He was on one end of the rope and the cow balancing him on the other. When his wife came in and saw the cow she ran to get something to cut the rope. She released the cow, but when she cut the rope the man fell down the chimney into the pot of soup. When his wife came in the second time she could see nothing but his two legs. When she saw all the harm he had done she was disgusted. She asked him which was house work or farm work the harder, and he said that he would never house-keep again, not even if he were paid. So she stayed inside ever since, and that finished the man with house-keeping. Source: dúchas.ie >> The Schools' Collection >> Co. Kilkenny >> Clochar na Toirbhirte, Caisleán an Chomair, pp. 310-313 . Collector: Sarah Brennan, Aghamucky, Co. Kilkenny. Informant: Mr. Richard Ryan, Aghamucky, Co. Kilkenny. The material on this site is made available under the CC BY-NC 4.0 licence . The Schools' Collection is a manuscript collection of folklore compiled by schoolchildren in Ireland in the 1930s. This site includes a total of twenty-seven tales of type 1408 , some in English and some in Irish. Return to the table of contents . Bibliography of Related Tales Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 85 Tales in English Little Sausage and the Little Mouse, The. Ranke, Folktales of Germany, no. 6. Mouse and Sausage. Barrick, German-American Folklore, p. 111. Mouse, the Bird, and the Sausage, The. Grimm, Tales, no. 23. Mouse, the Bird, and the Sausage, The (Grimm, 1st ed.). Ashliman, Voices from the Past, p. 454. Mouse, the Sausage, and the Bird, The. Dorson, Buying the Wind, p. 258. Six People's Duties. Folk Tales from China, series 2, p. 21. Tales in German Das Hühnchen und das Würstchen. Mykytiuk, Ukrainische Märchen, Nr. 58. Die Geschichte vom Mauserl und vom Würschterl. Moser-Rath, Deutsche Volksmärchen, Nr. 73. Die Hochzeit des Herrn Laus und Frau Floh. Karlinger und Pögl, Katalanische Märchen, Nr. 25. Gvotter Meisl un Gvotter Leberwurschtl. Benzel, Sudetendeutsche Volkserzählungen, Nr. 145. Von dem Mäuschen, Vögelchen und der Bratwurst. Grimm, KHM, Nr. 23. Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1408 Tales in English Cow on the Roof, The (Wales). Clarkson and Cross, World Folktales, no. 8. Cow on the Roof, The (Wales). Cole, Best-Loved Folktales, no. 68. Husband Who Hatched Eggs, The. Afanasyev, Russian Secret Tales, p. 45. Husband Who Was to Mind the House, The. Asbjørnsen and Moe, East o' the Sun, p. 269. Husband Who Was to Mind the House, The (Norway). Ashliman, Voices from the Past, p. 455. Man and Woman Who Changed Jobs, The. Blecher, Swedish Folktales and Legends, p. 267. Man Does a Woman's Work, A. Afanasyev, Erotic Tales, p. 79. Old Man and Woman Who Switched Jobs, The (Sweden). Yolen, Favorite Folktales, p. 178. Old Man in a Wood, The. Briggs, Dictionary of British Folk-Tales, pt. A, v. 2, p. 208. Old Man Who Lived in a Wood, The. Briggs, Dictionary of British Folk-Tales, pt. A, v. 2, p. 209. Pär and Bengta. Blecher, Swedish Folktales and Legends, p. 261. Peasant Hatches Eggs, A. Afanasyev, Erotic Tales, p. 83. Peasant Who Did His Wife's Work, The. Afanasyev, Russian Secret Tales, p. 50. Simple John and His Twelve Misfortunes. Briggs, Dictionary of British Folk-Tales, pt. A, v. 2, p. 269. Simple Simon's Misfortunes. Briggs, Dictionary of British Folk-Tales, pt. A, v. 2, p. 270. Too-Submissive Husband, The. Pourrat, Treasury of French Tales, p. 148 Tales in German Der Schulmeister und die Kuh. Haiding, Märchen aus Oberösterreich, Nr. 129. Ein Bauer macht Weiberarbeit. Afanasjew, Erotische Märchen aus Rußland, S. 25. Hans und Grete. Henssen, Volksmärchen aus Rheinland und Westfalen, Nr. 5. Mann on Fru tuschde mit Oarbeit. Grannas, Volk aus Preußen erzählt, Nr. 8. Mann und Frau tauschen ihre Arbeit. Schier, Schwedische Volksmärchen, Nr. 80. Wer hat schwerer zu arbeiten? Mykytiuk, Ukrainische Märchen, Nr. 53. Return to the table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 5, 2023. Trading Up (1): Folktales of Type 170A Trading Up (1) folktales of Aarne-Thompson 170A edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000 Contents The Rat's Wedding (Northern India). The Monkey with the Tom-Tom (Southern India). The Story of a Monkey (Philippines). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Rat's Wedding Northern India Once upon a time a fat sleek rat was caught in a shower of rain, and being far from shelter he set to work and soon dug a nice hole in the ground, in which he sat as dry as a bone while the raindrops splashed outside, making little puddles on the road. Now in the course of his digging he came upon a fine bit of root, quite dry and fit for fuel, which he set aside carefully -- for the rat is an economical creature -- in order to take it home with him. So when the shower was over, he set off with the dry root in his mouth. As he went along, daintily picking his way through the puddles, he saw a poor man vainly trying to light a fire, while a little circle of children stood by, and cried piteously. "Goodness gracious!" exclaimed the rat, who was both soft-hearted and curious, "what a dreadful noise to make! What is the matter?" "The bairns [children] are hungry," answered the man; "they are crying for their breakfast, but the sticks are damp, the fire won't burn, and so I can't bake the cakes." "If that is all your trouble, perhaps I can help you," said the good-natured rat; "you are welcome to this dry root, and I'll warrant it will soon make a fine blaze." The poor man, with a thousand thanks, took the dry root, and in his turn presented the rat with a morsel of dough, as a reward for his kindness and generosity. "What a remarkably lucky fellow I am!" thought the rat, as he trotted off gaily with his prize, "and clever too! Fancy making a bargain like that: food enough to last me five days in return for a rotten old stick! Wah! wah! wah! What it is to have brains!" Going along, hugging his good fortune in this way, he came presently to a potter's yard, where the potter, leaving his wheel to spin round by itself, was trying to pacify his three little children, who were screaming and crying as if they would burst. "My gracious!" cried the rat, stopping his ears, "what a noise! Do tell me what it is all about." "I suppose they are hungry," replied the potter ruefully. "Their mother has gone to get flour in the bazaar, for there is none in the house. In the meantime I can neither work nor rest because of them." "Is that all!" answered the officious rat. "Then I can help you. Take this dough, cook it quickly, and stop their mouths with food." The potter overwhelmed the rat with thanks for his obliging kindness, and choosing out a nice well-burnt pipkin, [an earthen pot], insisted on his accepting it as a remembrance. The rat was delighted at the exchange, and though the pipkin was just a trifle awkward for him to manage, he succeeded after infinite trouble in balancing it on his head, and went away gingerly, tink-a-tink , tink-a-tink , down the road, with his tail over his arm for fear he should trip on it. And all the time he kept saying to himself, "What a lucky fellow I am! and clever too! Such a hand at a bargain!" By and by he came to where some neatherds [herdsmen] were herding their cattle. One of them was milking a buffalo, and having no pail he used his shoes instead. "Oh fie! oh fie!" cried the cleanly rat, quite shocked at the sight. "What a nasty dirty trick! Why don't you use a pail?" "For the best of all reasons: We haven't got one!" growled the neatherd, who did not see why the rat should put his finger in the pie. "If that is all," replied the dainty rat, "oblige me by using this pipkin, for I cannot bear dirt!" The neatherd, nothing loath, took the pipkin, and milked away until it was brimming over. Then turning to the rat, who stood looking on, said, "Here, little fellow, you may have a drink, in payment." But if the rat was good-natured he was also shrewd. "No, no, my friend," said he, "that will not do! As if I could drink the worth of my pipkin at a draught! My dear sir, I couldn't hold it! Besides, I never make a bad bargain, so I expect you at least to give me the buffalo that gave the milk." "Nonsense!" cried the neatherd. "A buffalo for a pipkin! Who ever heard of such a price? And what on earth could you do with a buffalo when you got it? Why, the pipkin was about as much as you could manage." At this the rat drew himself up with dignity, for he did not like allusions to his size. "That is my affair, not yours," he retorted. "Your business is to hand over the buffalo." So just for the fun of the thing, and to amuse themselves at the rat's expense, the neatherds loosed the buffalo's halter and began to tie it to the little animal's tail. "No! no!" he called, in a great hurry. "If the beast pulled, the skin of my tail would come off, and then where should I be? Tie it round my neck, if you please." So with much laughter the neatherds tied the halter round the rat's neck, and he, after a polite leave-taking, set off gaily towards home with his prize; that is to say, he set off with the rope , for no sooner did he come to the end of the tether than he was brought up with a round turn. The buffalo, nose down grazing away, would not budge until it had finished its tuft of grass, and then seeing another in a different direction marched off towards it, while the rat, to avoid being dragged, had to trot humbly behind, willy-nilly. He was too proud to confess the truth, of course, and, nodding his head knowingly to the neatherds, said, "Ta-ta, good people! I am going home this way. It may be a little longer, but it's much shadier." And when the neatherds roared with laughter he took no notice, but trotted on, looking as dignified as possible. "After all," he reasoned to himself, "when one keeps a buffalo one has to look after its grazing. A beast must get a good bellyful of grass if it is to give any milk, and I have plenty of time at my disposal." So all day long he trotted about after the buffalo, making believe. But by evening he was dead tired, and felt truly thankful when the great big beast, having eaten enough, lay down under a tree to chew the cud. Just then a bridal party came by. The bridegroom and his friends had evidently gone on to the next village, leaving the bride's palanquin [litter] to follow; so the palanquin bearers, being lazy fellows and seeing a nice shady tree, put down their burden, and began to cook some food. "What detestable meanness!" grumbled one. "A grand wedding, and nothing but plain rice pottage to eat! Not a scrap of meat in it, neither sweet nor salt! It would serve the skinflints right if we upset the bride into a ditch!" "Dear me!" cried the rat at once, seeing a way out of his difficulty, "that is a shame! I sympathize with your feelings so entirely that if you will allow me I'll give you my buffalo. You can kill it, and cook it." " Your buffalo!" returned the discontented bearers, "what rubbish! Whoever heard of a rat owning a buffalo?" "Not often, I admit," replied the rat with conscious pride; "but look for yourselves. Can you not see that I am leading the beast by a string?" "Oh, never mind the string!" cried a great big hungry bearer. "Master or no master, I mean to have meat to my dinner!" Whereupon they killed the buffalo, and, cooking its flesh, ate their dinner with relish. Then, offering the remains to the rat, said carelessly, "Here, little Rat-Skin, that is for you!" "Now look here!" cried the rat hotly; "I'll have none of your pottage, nor your sauce either. You don't suppose I am going to give my best buffalo, that gave quarts and quarts of milk -- the buffalo I have been feeding all day -- for a wee bit of rice? No! I got a loaf for a bit of stick. I got a pipkin for a little loaf. I got a buffalo for a pipkin. And now I'll have the bride for my buffalo -- the bride, and nothing else!" By this time the servants, having satisfied their hunger, began to reflect on what they had done, and becoming alarmed at the consequences, arrived at the conclusion it would be wisest to make their escape whilst they could. So, leaving the bride in her palanquin, they took to their heels in various directions. The rat, being as it were left in possession, advanced to the palanquin, and drawing aside the curtain, with the sweetest of voices and best of bows begged the bride to descend. She hardly knew whether to laugh or to cry, but as any company, even a rat's, was better than being quite alone in the wilderness, she did as she was bidden, and followed the lead of her guide, who set off as fast as he could for his hole. As he trotted along beside the lovely young bride, who, by her rich dress and glittering jewels, seemed to be some king's daughter, he kept saying to himself, "How clever I am! What bargains I do make, to be sure!" When they arrived at his hole, the rat stepped forward with the greatest politeness, and said, "Welcome, madam, to my humble abode! Pray step in, or if you will allow me, and as the passage is somewhat dark, I will show you the way." Whereupon he ran in first, but after a time, finding the bride did not follow, he put his nose out again, saying testily, "Well, madam, why don't you follow? Don't you know it's rude to keep your husband waiting?" "My good sir," laughed the handsome young bride, "I can't squeeze into that little hole!" The rat coughed. Then after a moment's thought he replied, "There is some truth in your remark. You are overgrown, and I suppose I shall have to build you a thatch somewhere. For tonight you can rest under that wild plum-tree." "But I am so hungry!" said the bride ruefully. "Dear, dear! everybody seems hungry today!" returned the rat pettishly; "however, that's easily settled. I'll fetch you some supper in a trice." So he ran into his hole, returning immediately with an ear of millet and a dry pea. "There!" said he, triumphantly, "isn't that a fine meal?" "I can't eat that!" whimpered the bride. "It isn't a mouthful; and I want rice pottage, and cakes; and sweet eggs, and sugar-drops. I shall die if I don't get them!" "Oh dear me!" cried the rat in a rage, "what a nuisance a bride is, to be sure! Why don't you eat the wild plums?" "I can't live on wild plums!" retorted the weeping bride. "Nobody could. Besides, they are only half ripe, and I can't reach them." "Rubbish!" cried the rat. "Ripe or unripe, they must do you for tonight, and tomorrow you can gather a basketful, sell them in the city, and buy sugar-drops and sweet eggs to your heart's content!" So the next morning the rat climbed up into the plum-tree, and nibbled away at the stalks till the fruit fell down into the bride's veil. Then, unripe as they were, she carried them into the city, calling out through the streets: Green plums I sell! green plums I sell! Princess am I, rat's bride as well! As she passed by the palace, her mother the queen heard her voice, and, running out, recognized her daughter. Great were the rejoicings, for everyone thought the poor bride had been eaten by wild beasts. In the midst of the feasting and merriment, the rat, who had followed the princess at a distance, and had become alarmed at her long absence, arrived at the door, against which he beat with a big knobby stick, calling out fiercely, "Give me my wife! give me my wife! She is mine by fair bargain. I gave a stick and I got a loaf. I gave a loaf and I got a pipkin. I gave a pipkin and I got a buffalo. I gave a buffalo and I got a bride. Give me my wife! Give me my wife!" "La! son-in-law! what a fuss you do make!" said the wily old queen, through the door, "and all about nothing! Who wants to run away with your wife? On the contrary, we are proud to see you, and I only keep you waiting at the door till we can spread the carpets, and receive you in style." Hearing this, the rat was mollified, and waited patiently outside whilst the cunning old queen prepared for his reception, which she did by cutting a hole in the very middle of a stool, putting a red-hot stone underneath, covering it over with a stew-pan lid, and then spreading a beautiful embroidered cloth over all. Then she went to the door, and receiving the rat with the greatest respect, led him to the stool, praying him to be seated. "Dear! dear! how clever I am! What bargains I do make, to be sure!" said he to himself as he climbed onto the stool. "Here I am, son-in-law to a real live queen! What will the neighbors say?" At first he sat down on the edge of the stool, but even there it was warm, and after a while he began to fidget, saying, "Dear me, mother-in-law! how hot your house is! Everything I touch seems burning!" "You are out of the wind there, my son," replied the cunning old queen; "sit more in the middle of the stool, and then you will feel the breeze and get cooler." But he didn't! for the stew-pan lid by this time had become so hot, that the rat fairly frizzled when he sat down on it; and it was not until he had left all his tail, half his hair, and a large piece of his skin behind him, that he managed to escape, howling with pain, and vowing that never, never, never again would he make a bargain! Source: Steel, Flora Annie, Tales of the Punjab: Told by the People (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), pp. 13-23. Return to the table of contents . The Monkey with the Tom-Tom Southern India In a remote wood there lived a monkey, and one day while he was eating wood-apples, a sharp thorn from the tree ran into the tip of his tail. He tried his best to get it out, but could not. So he proceeded to the nearest village, and calling the barber, asked him to oblige him by removing the thorn. "Friend barber," said the monkey, "a thorn has run into my tail. Kindly remove it, and I will reward you." The barber took up his razor and began to examine the tail. But as he was cutting out the thorn, he cut off the tip of the tail. The monkey was greatly enraged and said, "Friend barber, give me back my tail. If you cannot do that, give me your razor." The barber was now in a difficulty, and as he could not replace the tip of the tail, he had to give up his razor to the monkey. The monkey went back to the wood with his razor thus trickishly acquired. On the way he met an old woman who was cutting fuel from a dried-up tree. "Grandmother, grandmother," said the monkey, "the tree is very hard. You had better use this sharp razor, and you will cut your fuel easily." The poor woman was very pleased, and took the razor from the monkey. In cutting the wood she, of course, blunted the razor, and the monkey, seeing his razor thus spoiled, said, "Grandmother, you have spoiled my razor, so you must either give me your fuel or get me a better razor." The woman was not able to procure another razor, so she gave the monkey her fuel and returned to her house bearing no load that day. The roguish monkey now put the bundle of dry fuel on his head and proceeded to a village to sell it. There he met an old woman seated by the roadside and making puddings. Said the monkey to her, "Grandmother, grandmother, you are making puddings and your fuel is already exhausted. Use mine also and make more cakes." The old lady thanked him for his kindness and used his fuel for her puddings. the cunning monkey waited till the last stick of his fuel was burnt up, and then he said to the old woman, " Grandmother, grandmother, return me my fuel or give me all your puddings." She was unable to return him the fuel, and so had to give him all her puddings. The monkey with the basket of puddings on his head walked and walked till he met a Pariah [member of a low caste] coming with his tom-tom towards him. "Brother Pariah," said the monkey, "I have a basketful of puddings to give you. Will you, in return, present me with your tom-tom?" The Pariah gladly agreed, as he was then very hungry, and had nothing with him to eat. The monkey now ascended with the tom-tom to the topmost branch of a big tree and there beat his drum most triumphantly, saying in honor of his several tricks: I lost my tail and got a razor; dum, dum. I lost my razor and got a bundle of fuel; dum, dum. I lost my fuel and got a basket of puddings; dum, dum. I lost my puddings and got a tom-tom; dum, dum. Thus there are rogues in this innocent world, who live to glory over their wicked tricks. Source: Mrs Howard [Georgiana Wolff] Kingscote, and Natêsá Sástrî, Tales of the Sun; or, Folklore of Southern India (London: W. H. Allen and Company, 1890), no. 14, pp. 187-189. The word pariah , taken from the caste of the same name, comes from the Tamil work paraiyan, which literally means drummer . Return to the table of contents . The Story of a Monkey Philippines (Ilocano) One day when a monkey was climbing a tree in the forest in which he lived, he ran a thorn into his tail. Try as he would, he could not get it out, so he went to a barber in the town and said, "Friend barber, I have a thorn in the end of my tail. Pull it out, and I will pay you well." The barber tried to pull out the thorn with his razor, but in doing so he cut off the end of the tail. The monkey was very angry and cried, "Barber, barber, give me back my tail, or give me your razor!" The barber could not put back the end of the monkey's tail, so he gave him his razor. On the way home the monkey met an old woman who was cutting wood for fuel, and he said to her, "Grandmother, grandmother, that is very hard. Use this razor and then it will cut easily." The old woman was very pleased with the offer and began to cut with the razor, but before she had used it long it broke. Then the monkey cried, "Grandmother, grandmother, you have broken my razor! You must get a new one for me or else give me all the firewood." The old woman could not get a new razor, so she gave him the firewood. The monkey took the wood and was going back to town to sell it, when he saw a woman sitting beside the road making cakes. "Grandmother, grandmother," said he, "your wood is most gone. Take this of mine and bake more cakes." The woman took the wood and thanked him for his kindness, but when the last stick was burned, the monkey cried out, "Grandmother, grandmother, you have burned up all my wood! Now you must give me all your cakes to pay for it." The old woman could not cut more dry wood at once, so she gave him all the cakes. The monkey took the cakes and the town, but on the way he met a dog which bit him so that he died. And the dog ate all the cakes. Source: Mabel Cook Cole, Philippine Folk Tales (Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Company, 1916), pp. 183-184. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Trading Up (2) , folktales of type 1655. These stories are similar to the type 170A tales featured above, except that the trickster "heroes" are humans instead of animals. Trading Away One's Fortune , folktales of type 1415. In these stories the naive "hero," in a series of foolish exchanges, reduces his fortune to nothing. The best-known of these tales is Hans-in-Luck , by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Return to the table of contents . Revised November 11, 2000. Trading Up (2): Folktales of Type 1655 Trading Up (2) folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1655 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2022 Contents The Dead Mouse ( The Jataka ). All Change (Europe). The Sexton's Nose (Italy). With One Centavo Juan Marries a Princess (Philippines). How the King Recruited His Army (African-American). The Boy Who Was Called Thick-Head (Native American). The Pea That Made a Fortune (Jamaica). The Story of Hlakanyana (Kaffir -- South Africa). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Dead Mouse The Jataka Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares in Kāsi, the Bodhisatta was born into the Treasurer's family, and growing up, was made Treasurer, being called Treasurer Little. A wise and clever man was he, with a keen eye for signs and omens. One day on his way to wait upon the king, he came on a dead mouse lying on the road; and, taking note of the position of the stars at that moment, he said, "Any decent young fellow with his wits about him has only to pick that mouse up, and he might start a business and keep a wife." His words were overheard by a young man of good family but reduced circumstances, who said to himself, "That's a man who has always got a reason for what he says." And accordingly he picked up the mouse, which he sold for a farthing at a tavern for their cat. With the farthing he got molasses and took drinking water in a waterpot. Coming on flower gatherers returning from the forest, he gave each a tiny quantity of the molasses and ladled the water out to them. Each of them gave him a handful of flowers, with the proceeds of which, next day, he came back again to the flower grounds provided with more molasses and a pot of water. That day the flower gatherers, before they went, gave him flowering plants with half the flowers left on them; and thus in a little while he obtained eight pennies. Later, one rainy and windy day, the wind blew down a quantity of rotten branches and boughs and leaves in the king's pleasaunce, and the gardener did not see how to clear them away. Then up came the young man with an offer to remove the lot, if the wood and leaves might be his. The gardener closed with the offer on the spot. Then this apt pupil of Treasurer Little repaired to the children's playground and in a very little while had got them by bribes of molasses to collect every stick and leaf in the place into a heap at the entrance to the pleasaunce. Just then the king's potter was on the look out for fuel to fire bowls for the palace, and coming on this heap, took the lot off his hands. The sale of his wood brought in sixteen pennies to this pupil of Treasurer Little, as well as five bowls and other vessels. Having now twenty-four pennies in all, a plan occurred to him. He went to the vicinity of the city gate with a jar full of water and supplied 500 mowers with water to drink. Said they, "You've done us a good turn, friend. What can we do for you?" "Oh, I'll tell you when I want your aid," said he; and as he went about, he struck up an intimacy with a land trader and a sea trader. Said the former to him, "Tomorrow there will come to town a horse dealer with 500 horses to sell." On hearing this piece of news, he said to the mowers, "I want each of you today to give me a bundle of grass and not to sell your own grass till mine is sold." "Certainly," said they, and delivered the 500 bundles of grass at his house. Unable to get grass for his horses elsewhere, the dealer purchased our friend's grass for a thousand pieces. Only a few days later his sea-trading friend brought him news of the arrival of a large ship in port; and another plan struck him. He hired for eight pence a well appointed carriage which plied for hire by the hour, and went in great style down to the port. Having bought the ship on credit and deposited his signet ring as security, he had a pavilion pitched hard by and said to his people as he took his seat inside, "When merchants are being shewn in, let them be passed on by three successive ushers into my presence." Hearing that a ship had arrived in port, about a hundred merchants came down to buy the cargo; only to he told that they could not have it as a great merchant had already made a payment on account. So away they all went to the young man; and the footmen duly announced them by three successive ushers, as had been arranged beforehand. Each man of the hundred severally gave him a thousand pieces to buy a share in the ship and then a further thousand each to buy him out altogether. So it was with 200,000 pieces that this pupil of Treasurer Little returned to Benares. Actuated by a desire to shew his gratitude, he went with one hundred thousand pieces to call on Treasurer Little. "How did you come by all this wealth?" asked the Treasurer. "In four short months, simply by following your advice," replied the young man; and he told him the whole story, starting with the dead mouse. Thought Lord High Treasurer Little, on hearing all this, "I must see that a young fellow of these parts does not fall into anybody else's hands." So he married him to his own grownup daughter and settled all the family estates on the young man. And at the Treasurer's death, he became Treasurer in that city. And the Bodhisatta passed away to fare according to his deserts. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell, vol. 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895), no. 4, pp. 19-20 . This tale is labeled "Cullaka-Setthi-Jataka." I have provided the more descriptive title, "The Dead Mouse." Return to the table of contents . All Change Europe There was once a man who was the laziest man in all the world. He wouldn't take off his clothes when he went to bed because he didn't want to have to put them on again. He wouldn't raise his cup to his lips but went down and sucked up his tea without carrying the cup. He wouldn't play any sports because he said they made him sweat. And he wouldn't work with his hands for the same reason. But at last he found that he couldn't get anything to eat unless he did some work for it. So he hired himself out to a farmer for the season. But all through the harvest he ate as much and worked as little as he could. And when the fall came and he went to get his wages from his master all he got was a single pea. "What do you mean by giving me this?" he said to his master. "Why, that is all that your labor is worth," was the reply. "You have eaten as much as you have earned." "None of your lip," said the man. "Give me my pea. At any rate I have earned that." So when he got it he went to an inn by the roadside and said to the landlady, "Can you give me lodging for the night, me and my pea?" "Well, no," said the landlady, "I haven't got a bed free, but I can take care of your pea for you." No sooner said than done. The pea was lodged with the landlady, and the laziest man went and lay in a barn nearby. The landlady put the pea upon a dresser and left it there, and a chicken wandering by saw it and jumped up on the dresser and ate it. So when the laziest man called the next day and asked for his pea the landlady couldn't find it. She said, "The chicken must have swallowed it." "Well, I want my pea," said the man. "You had better give me the chicken." "Why, what, when, how?" stammered the landlady. "The chicken is worth thousands of your pea." "I don't care for that. It has got my pea inside it, and the only way I can get my pea is to have that which holds the pea." "What, give you my chicken for a single pea? Nonsense!" "Well, if you don't, I'll summon you before the justice." "Ah, well, take the chicken and my bad wishes with it." So off went the man and sauntered along all day, till that night he came to another inn, and asked the landlord if he and his chicken could stop there. He said, "No, no, we have no room for you, but we can put your chicken in the stable if you like." So the man said yes and went off for the night. But there was a savage sow in the stable, and during the night she ate up the poor chicken. And when the man came the next morning he said to the landlord, "Please give me my chicken." "I am awfully sorry, sir," said he, "but my sow has eaten it up." The laziest man said, "Then give me your sow." "What, a sow for your chicken? Nonsense! Go away, my man." "Then if you don't do that, I'll have you before the justice." "Ah, well, take the sow and my curses with it," said the landlord. And the man took the sow and followed it along the road till he came to another inn, and said to the landlady, "Have you room for me and my sow?" "I have not," said the landlady, "but I can put your sow up." So the sow was put in the stable, and the man off to lie in the barn for the night. Now the sow went roaming about the stable, and coming too near the hoofs of the mare, was hit in the forehead and killed by the mare's hoofs. So when the man came in the morning and asked for his sow the landlady said, "I'm very sorry, sir, but an accident has occurred. My mare has hit your sow in the skull, and she is dead." "What, the mare?" "No, your sow." "Then give me the mare." "What, my mare for your sow? Nonsense!" "Well, if you don't I'll take you before the justice. You'll see if it's nonsense." So after some time the landlady agreed to give the man her mare in exchange for the dead sow. Then the man followed on in the steps of the mare till he came to another inn, and asked the landlord if he could put him up for the night, him and his mare. The landlord said, "All our beds are full, but you can put the mare up in the stable if you will." "Very well," said the man, and tied the halter of the mare into the ring of the stable. Next morning early the landlord's daughter said to her father, "That poor mare has had nothing to drink. I'll go and lead it to the river." "That is none of your business," said the landlord. "Let the man do it himself." "Ah, but the poor thing has had nothing to drink. I'll bring it back soon." So the girl took the mare to the river brink and let it drink the water. But, by chance, the mare slipped into the stream, which was so strong that it carried the mare away. And the young girl ran back to her mother and said, "Oh mother, the mare fell into the stream and it was carried quite away What shall we do? What shall we do?" When the man came round that morning he said, "Please give me my mare." "I'm very sorry indeed, sir, but my daughter -- that one there -- wanted to give the poor thing a drink and took it down to the river and it fell in and was carried away by the stream. I'm very sorry indeed." "Your sorrow won't pay my loss," said the man. "The least you can do is to give me your daughter." "What, my daughter to you because of the mare!" "Well, if you don't, I will take you before the justice." Now the landlord didn't like going before the justice. So after much haggling he agreed to let his daughter go with the man. And they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till at last they came to another inn, which was kept by the girl's aunt, though the man didn't know it. So he went in and said, "Can you give me beds for me and my girl here?" So the landlady looked at the girl, who said nothing, and said, "Well, I haven't got a bed for you but I have a bed for her. But perhaps she'll run away." "Oh, I will manage that," said the man. And he went a got a sack and put the girl in it and tied her up. And then he went off. As soon as he was gone the girl's aunt opened the bag and said, "What has happened, my dear?" And she told the whole story. So the aunt took a big dog and put it in the sack. And when the man came the next morning, he said, "Where's my girl?" "There she is, so far as I know." So he took the sack and put it on his shoulder and went on his was for a time. Then as the sun grew high he sat down under the shade of a tree and thought he would speak to the girl. And when he opened the sack, the big dog flew out at him, and he fell back, and that's the last I heard of him. Source: Joseph Jacobs, Europa's Fairy Book (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), no. 2, pp. 13-18 . Jacobs, in this collection, has "restored and retold" some twenty-five traditional tales from various European sources. Return to the table of contents . The Sexton's Nose Italy A sexton, one day in sweeping the church, found a piece of money (it was a fifth of a cent) and deliberated with himself as to what he would buy with it. If he bought nuts or almonds, he was afraid of the mice; so at last he bought some roasted peas, and ate all but the last pea. This he took to a bakery nearby, and asked the mistress to keep it for him. She told him to leave it on a bench, and she would take care of it. When she went to get it, she found that the cock had eaten it. The next day the sexton came for the roast pea, and when he heard what had become of it, he said they must either return the roast pea or give him the cock. This they did, and the sexton, not having anyplace to keep it, took it to a miller's wife, who promised to keep it for him. Now she had a pig, which managed to kill the cock. The next day the sexton came for the cock, and on finding it dead, demanded the pig, and the woman had to give it to him. The pig he left with a friend of his, a pastry cook, whose daughter was to be married the next day. The woman was mean and sly, and killed the pig for her daughter's wedding, meaning to tell the sexton that the pig had run away. The sexton, however, when he heard it, made a great fuss, and declared that she must give him back his pig or her daughter. At last she had to give him her daughter, whom he put in a bag and carried away. He took the bag to a woman who kept a shop, and asked her to keep for him this bag, which he said contained bran. The woman by chance kept chickens, and she thought she would take some of the sexton's bran and feed them. When she opened the bag she found the young girl, who told her how she came there. The woman took her out of the sack, and put in her stead a dog. The next day the sexton came for his bag, and putting it on his shoulder, started for the seashore, intending to throw the young girl in the sea. When he reached the shore, he opened the bag, and the furious dog flew out and bit his nose. The sexton was in great agony, and cried out, while the blood ran down his face in torrents, "Dog, dog, give me a hair to put in my nose, and heal the bite." The dog answered, "Do you want a hair? Give me some bread." The sexton ran to a bakery, and said to the baker, "Baker, give me some bread to give the dog. The dog will give a hair. The hair I will put in my nose, and cure the bite." The baker said, "Do you want bread? Give me some wood." The sexton ran to the woodman. "Woodman, give me wood to give the baker. The baker will give me bread. The bread I will give to the dog. The dog will give me a hair. The hair I will put in my nose, and heal the bite." The woodman said, "Do you want wood? Give me a mattock." The sexton ran to a smith. "Smith, give me a mattock to give the woodman. The woodman will give me wood. I will carry the wood to the baker. The baker will give me bread. I will give the bread to the dog. The dog will give me a hair. The hair I will put in my nose, and heal the bite." The smith said, "Do you want a mattock? Give me some coals." The sexton ran to the collier. "Collier, give me some coals to give the smith. The smith will give me a mattock. The mattock I will give the woodman. The woodman will give me some wood. The wood I will give the baker. The baker will give me bread. The bread I will give the dog. The dog will give me a hair. The hair I will put in my nose, and heal the bite." "Do you want coals? Give me a cart." The sexton ran to the wagon maker. "Wagon maker, give me a cart to give the collier. The collier will give me some coals. The coals I will carry to the smith. The smith will give me a mattock. The mattock I will give the woodman. The woodman will give me some wood. The wood I will give the baker. The baker will give me bread. The bread I will give to the dog. The dog will give me a hair. The hair I will put in my nose, and heal the bite." The wagon maker, seeing the sexton's great lamentation, is moved to compassion, and gives him the cart. The sexton, well pleased, takes the cart and goes away to the collier. The collier gives him the coals. The coals he takes to the smith. The smith gives him the mattock. The mattock he takes to the woodman. The woodman gives him wood. The wood he carries to the baker. The baker gives him bread. The bread he carries to the dog. The dog gives him a hair. The hair he puts in his nose, and heals the bite. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 79, pp. 250-52 . In this version a chain tale of type 2032 is appended to the type 1655 tale about profitable exchanges. Link to additional chain tales of type 2032 . Treating a dog bite by applying to it the hair of the dog that inflicted the wound is a widespread folk cure. Return to the table of contents . With One Centavo Juan Marries a Princess Philippines In ancient times, in the age of foolishness and nonsense, there lived a poor gambler. He was all alone in the world: he had no parents, relatives, wife, or children. What little money he had he spent on cards or cock-fighting. Every time he played, he lost. So he would often pass whole days without eating. He would then go around the town begging like a tramp. At last he determined to leave the village to find his fortune. One day, without a single cent in his pockets, he set out on his journey. As he was lazily wandering along the road, he found a centavo, and picked it up. When he came to the next village, he bought with his coin a small native cake. He ate only a part of the cake; the rest he wrapped in a piece of paper and put in his pocket. Then he took a walk around the village; but, soon becoming tired, he sat down by a little shop to rest. While resting, he fell asleep. As he was lying on the bench asleep, a chicken came along, and, seeing the cake projecting from his pocket, the chicken pecked at it and ate it up. Tickled by the bird's beak, the tramp woke up and immediately seized the poor creature. The owner claimed the chicken; but Juan would not give it up, on the ground that it had eaten his cake. Indeed, he argued so well, that he was allowed to walk away, taking the chicken with him. Scarcely had he gone a mile when he came to another village. There he took a rest in a barber-shop. He fell asleep again, and soon a dog came in and began to devour his chicken. Awakened by the poor bird's squawking, Juan jumped up and caught the dog still munching its prey. In spite of the barber's protest and his refusal to give up his dog, Juan seized it and carried it away with him. He proceeded on his journey until he came to another village. As he was passing by a small house, he felt thirsty: so he decided to go in and ask for a drink. He tied his dog to the gate and went in. When he came out again, he found his dog lying dead, the iron gate on top of him. Evidently, in its struggles to get loose, the animal had pulled the gate over. Without a word Juan pulled off one of the iron bars from the gate and took it away with him. When the owner shouted after him, Juan said, "The bar belongs to me, for your gate killed my dog." When Juan came to a wide river, he sat down on the bank to rest. While he was sitting there, he began to play with his iron bar, tossing it up into the air, and catching it as it fell. Once he missed, and the bar fell into the river and was lost. "Now, river," said Juan, "since you have taken my iron bar, you belong to me. You will have to pay for it." So he sat there all day, watching for people to come along and bathe. It happened by chance that not long after, the princess came to take her bath. When she came out of the water, Juan approached her, and said, "Princess, don't you know that this river is mine? And, since you have touched the water, I have the right to claim you." "How does it happen that you own this river?" said the astonished princess. "Well, princess, it would tire you out to hear the story of how I acquired this river; but I insist that you are mine." Juan persisted so strongly, that at last the princess said that she was willing to leave the matter to her father's decision. On hearing Juan's story, and after having asked him question after question, the king was greatly impressed with his wonderful reasoning and wit; and, as he was unable to offer any refutation for Juan's argument, he willingly married his daughter to Juan. Source: Dean S. Fansler, Filipino Popular Tales (Lancaster, PA: American Folk-lore Society, 1921), no. 32, pp. 262-65 . Fansler's source: "Narrated by Gregorio Frondoso, a Bicol, who heard the story from another Bicol student. The latter said that the story was traditional among the Bicols, and that he had heard it from his grandfather." Return to the table of contents . How the King Recruited His Army African-American One time there was a boy named Tinktum Tidy, and this boy was mighty smart. He was like a slick three-cent piece: little but old. I don't know what they called him in those times, but in these days we'd call him a runt, and laugh at him. Well, this boy had a head on him. He looked like he was all dried up, but never mind that. Those who got ahead of him had to get up long before day, and if they didn't take care, they'd find him up before them. One season, when the blackberries were ripe, he went around and told the folks that if they'd take their baskets and their buckets and go out and get the blackberries, he'd give them half of what they picked. It was so seldom that the folks got a chance to make any extra money that they were mighty glad to have the chance to pick blackberries. So they all went out and picked and picked until they picked two wagonloads of them. Well, this shrunk-up boy, who looked like he scarcely had any sense, he divided fair, there are no two ways about that. He took half and gave them their half back. There was no disputing about it. But then when the folks got their half, they asked themselves what they were going to do with them. They wanted to sell them to Tinktum Tidy, but he said that he had more blackberries than he knew what to do with. After a while the folks said that if they couldn't sell their share of the blackberries, they might just as well put them in Tinktum Tidy's pile, and that is what they did. And then he took the two wagonloads to town and sold them for cash money. By and by some of the longer-headed folks sat down and got to studying about it, and they asked themselves how come they got to go out and pick blackberries for that little bit of a shrunk-up chap. They studied and studied, but the more they studied, the more foolish they felt. Well, the tale got out, and it traveled around and around until the king got wind of it, and he took and sent for Tinktum Tidy. This made the folks that picked the blackberries mighty glad, because they got the idea that the king was going to put the little shrunk-up chap in the calaboose for fooling them. But Tinktum Tidy wasn't scared. He wrapped up a change of clothes in his handkerchief, and put out to where the king stayed. Some of the folks went along to see what was going to come of the little shrunk-up chap that had fooled them. By and by they got to where the king lived, and Tinktum Tidy just marched right in and told them that the king had sent for him. They took him into a big room where there was a whole passel of other folks, and told him to wait there until the king came. Everybody looked at him hard, he was so shrunk-up and puny, and he looked right back at them, just like he was someone of quality. After a while, here came the king. By the time he got settled on the platform, his eye dropped on Tinktum Tidy, and he asked what that runt was doing there. They up and told the king that that was the chap who was making folks pick so many blackberries. When the king heard this, he lay back and laughed fit to kill himself. He called Tinktum Tidy up and asked him all about how he was doing, and then he said, the king did, that Tinktum Tidy must be mighty smart. But Tinktum tidy said that he wasn't the one who was smart. It was the folks who picked the blackberries, because folks than can pick so many in so little time must be smart. Then king put his hand into his pocket and pulled out eleven grains of corn. He said, "Take this corn and do what you please with it, but what I want from it are eleven strong men to put in my army." Tinktum Tidy took the corn and tied it up in one corner of his handkerchief. He said, "Not counting hurricanes and high water, I'll be back in a fortnight. If eleven strong men were as easy to pick as blackberries, I'd send some other folks, but I'll have to go after these men myself." With that he made his bow, he did, and took his foot in his hand and put out. He traveled all that day, and about night he come to a tavern, and there he stopped. The man asked him where he came from, what his name was, and where he was going. He said he came from Chuckerluckertown, and he name was Tinktum Tidy, and he was going on a long journey. When bedtime came, he called the man into the room and showed him the corn. He said, "Here are the eleven grains of corn the that king gave me. I'll lay it on the table. I'm afraid the big gander is going to eat it." The man said he would shut the door so the big gander couldn't get it. Then they all went to bed. Tinktum Tidy waited until everybody was still, and then he got up and dropped the corn through a crack in the floor. Then he went to sleep. The next morning he woke up early and alarmed the neighborhood. He hollered out, "I told you so! I told you so! The big gander ate the eleven grains of corn that the king gave me! The big gander ate the eleven grains of corn that the king gave me!" Tinktum Tidy hollered so loud and so long that he scared the man. Then the man's old woman stuck her head out of the window and set up a squall. She said, "Take the big gander and go away from here! Take him and go!" Tinktum Tidy took the big gander under his arm and went poling down the big road. He traveled all that day until night, and he came to another town, and he went and put up at the tavern. When bedtime came, he tied the gander by the leg to the bedstead, and then he called the man. "Here is the big gander that ate the eleven grains of corn that the king gave me. I'll tie him here, because I'm afraid the bah-bah black sheep will kill him." The man said, "The black sheep can't get him here." In the middle of the night Tinktum Tidy got up and broke the big gander's neck and flung him out into the barnyard. The next morning he got up early and began to holler. He said, "I told you so! I told you so! Bah-bah black sheep has killed the big gander that ate the eleven grains of corn that the king gave me!" When the man heard him talk of the king, he got scared. It made him shake in his shoes. He said, "Take bah-bah black sheep and go along! You have fetched me bad luck!" Then Tinktum Tidy fastened bah-bah black sheep with a rope and led him off down the big road. By and by he came to where there was another town, and he went and put up at the tavern. When bedtime came, he called the man. He said, "Here is the bah-bah black sheep that killed the big gander that ate the eleven grains of corn that the king gave me. I'll tie him here to the bedstead because I'm afraid the brindle cow will hook him." The man said, "The brindle cow can't get him in here." Between midnight and day, Tinktum Tidy got up and killed the black sheep and put him in the lot with the brindle cow. Then he got up early in the morning and began to holler. He said, "I told you so! I told you so! The brindle cow has killed the bah-bah black sheep that killed the big gander that ate the eleven grains of corn the king gave me!" This made the man feel scared. He said, "Take the brindle cow and go!" Tinktum Tidy led the brindle cow off down the road and made his way to the next town. He got there by the time night came, and put up at the tavern. When bedtime came he took and called the man. He said, "Here is the brindle cow that killed the bah-bah black sheep that killed the big gander that ate the eleven grains of corn that the king gave me. I'll tie her here by the chimney where the roan horse can't get her." The man said, "I know mighty well the roan horse can't get her here." Just before day Tinktum Tidy took the brindle cow into the stable and made away with her. Then when daylight came he began to holler. He said, "I told you so! I told you so! The roan horse has killed the brindle cow that killed the bah-bah black sheep that killed the big gander that ate the eleven grains of corn that the king gave me." The man got scared when he heard the name of the king, and he said, "Take the roan horse and go on where you are going!" Tinktum Tidy got on the roan horse and went trotting down the big road. He went on and went on, he did, until he came a place where he had to cross a creek. Close by the road he saw an old man sitting. He looked at the old man, and the old man looked an him. By and by the old man said, "Howdy, son!" Tinktum Tidy said, "Howdy, grandsir!" The man said, "Son, come wipe my eyes!" Tinktum Tidy said, "I'll wife them, grandsir, if it will do you any good." Then he got down off the roan horse and wiped the old man's eyes. The old man said, "Thank you, son! Thank you!" Tinktum Tidy said, "You are more than welcome, grandsir!" Then he got on the roan hors and was about to ride off. The old man said, "Son, come scratch my head!" Tinktum Tidy said, "I'll scratch your head, grandsir, if it will do you any good." Then he got down off the roan horse and scratched the old man's head. The old man said, "Thank you, son! Thank you!" Tinktum Tidy said, "You are more than welcome, grandsir!" Then he started to ride off again, but the old man said, "Son, come help me up!" Tinktum Tidy said, "I'll help you up, Grandsir, if it will do you any good!" So he went and helped him up, and it seemed like that when the old man got on his feet he strength came back. He straightened up, he did, and looked lots younger than what he had. He said, "Son I have been sitting here going on ten years, and you the only one that ever did what I asked him. Some laughed at me and some cussed at me, but all went on their way, and everyone that passed fell in with the eleven robbers that live down the road a piece, and got robbed. Now beings you did what I asked you, I'm more than willing to do what you ask of me." With that Tinktum Tidy up and told the old man how come he was going along there, and about how the kind wanted him to fetch back eleven strong men to go into the army. The man said, "Son, they are waiting for you right down the road. Keep right on until you come to where there's a big white house. Ride around that house seven times one way and seven time the other way, and say the words that come into your head. Don't get scared, because I won't be so might far off." Tinktum Tidy road off down the road, he did, and went on until he came to the big white house. Then he rode around it seven times one way and seven times the other way. He said, "This is the roan horse that killed the brindle cow that killed the bah-bah black sheep that killed the big gander that ate the eleven grains of corn that the king gave me. I want eleven strong men for the king's army." And the door of the big white house flew open, and eleven strong men came marching out. By that time the old man had come up, and they asked him what they were to do. He said, "Mount your horses, sons, and go join the king's army!" So they went, and the king was mighty proud. He looked around at everybody and said, "I told you so! and He fixed it up so that Tinktum Tidy had just as much as he could eat and mighty little work to do all the rest of his days. Source: Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus and His Friends: Old Plantation Stories, Songs, and Ballads with Sketches of Negro Character (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin and Company, 1892), no. 24, pp. 176-89 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. The three-cent piece mentioned in the storie's opening paragraph is a very small silver American coin minted in the nineteenth century. Return to the table of contents . The Boy Who Was Called Thick-Head Native American Three brothers lived with their old Indian mother in the forest near the sea. Their father had long been dead. At his death he had little of the world's goods to his credit and his widow and her sons were very poor. In the place where they dwelt, game was not plentiful, and to get food enough to keep them from want they had often to go far into the forest. The youngest boy was smaller and weaker than the others, and when the two older sons went far away to hunt, they always left him behind, for although he always wished to accompany them they would never allow him to go. He had to do all the work about the house, and all day long he gathered wood in the forest and carried water from the stream. And even when his brothers went out in the springtime to draw sap from the maple trees he was never permitted to go with them. He was always making mistakes and doing foolish things. His brothers called him Thick-Head, and all the people round about said he was a simpleton because of his slow and queer ways. His mother alone was kind to him and she always said, "They may laugh at you and call you fool, but you will prove to be wiser than all of them yet, for so it was told me by a forest fairy at your birth." The chief of the people had a beautiful daughter who had many suitors. But her father spurned them all from his door and said, "My daughter is not yet of age to marry; and when her time of marriage comes, she will only marry the man who can make great profit from hunting." The two older sons of the old woman decided that one of them must win the girl. So they prepared to set out on a great hunting expedition far away in the northern forest, for it was now autumn, and the hunter's moon had come. The youngest boy wanted to go with them, for he had never been away from home and he wished to see the world. And his mother said he might go. His brothers were very angry when they heard his request, and they said, "Much good Thick-Head can do us in the chase. He will only bring us bad luck. He is not a hunter but a scullion and a drudge fit only for the fireside." But his mother commanded them to grant the boy's wish and they had to obey. So the three brothers set out for the north country, the two older brothers grumbling loudly because they were accompanied by the boy they thought a fool. The two older brothers had good success in the chase and they killed many animals deer and rabbits and otters and beavers. And they came home bearing a great quantity of dried meat and skins. They each thought, "Now we have begun to prove our prowess to the chief, and if we succeed as well next year when the hunter's moon comes again, one of us will surely win his daughter when she is old enough to marry." But all the youngest boy brought home as a result of his journey into the game country was a large earth-worm as thick as his finger and as long as his arm. It was the biggest earth-worm he had ever seen. He thought it a great curiosity as well as a great discovery, and he was so busy watching it each day that he had no time to hunt. When he brought it home in a box, his brothers said to their mother, "What did we tell you about Thick-Head? He has now surely proved himself a fool. He has caught only a fat earth-worm in all these weeks." And they noised it abroad in the village and all the people laughed loudly at the simpleton, until "Thick-Head's hunt" became a by-word in all the land. But the boy's mother only smiled and said, "He will surprise them all yet." The boy kept the earth-worm in a tiny pen just outside the door of his home. One day a large duck came waddling along, and sticking her bill over the little fence of the pen she quickly gobbled up the worm. The boy was very angry and he went to the man who owned the duck, and said, "Your duck ate up my pet worm. I want my worm." The man offered to pay him whatever price he asked, but the boy said, " I do not want your price. I want my worm." But the man said, " How can I give you your worm when my duck has eaten it up? It is gone forever." And the boy said, "It is not gone. It is in the duck's belly. So I must have the duck." Then to avoid further trouble the man gave Thick-Head the duck, for he thought to himself, "What is the use of arguing with a fool?" The boy took the duck home and kept it in a little pen near his home with a low fence around it. And he tied a great weight to its foot so that it could not fly away. He was quite happy again, for he thought, "Now I have both my worm and the duck." But one day a fox came prowling along looking for food. He saw the fat duck tied by the foot in the little pen. And he said, "What good fortune! There is a choice meal for me," and in a twinkling he was over the fence. The duck quacked and made a great noise, but she was soon silenced. The fox had just finished eating up the duck when the boy, who had heard the quacking, came running out of the house. The fox was smacking his lips after his good meal, and he was too slow in getting away. The boy fell to beating him with a stout club and soon killed him and threw his body into the yard behind the house. And he thought, "That is not so bad. Now I have my worm and the duck and the fox." That night an old wolf came through the forest in search of food. He was very hungry, and in the bright moonlight he saw the dead fox lying in the yard. He pounced upon it greedily and devoured it until not a trace of it was left. But the boy saw him before he could get away, and he came stealthily upon him and killed him with a blow of his axe. "I am surely in good luck," he thought, "for now I have the worm and the duck and the fox and the wolf." But the next day when he told his brothers of his good fortune and his great skill, they laughed at him loudly and said, "Much good a dead wolf will do you. Before two days have passed it will be but an evil-smelling thing and we shall have to bury it deep. You are indeed a great fool." The boy pondered for a long time over what they had said, and he thought, "Perhaps they are right. The dead wolf cannot last long. I will save the skin." So he skinned the wolf and dried the skin and made a drum from it. For the drum was one of the few musical instruments of the Indians in those old times, and they beat it loudly at all their dances and festivals. The boy beat the drum each evening, and made a great noise, and he was very proud because he had the only drum in the whole village. One day the chief sent for him and said to him, "I want to borrow your drum for this evening. I am having a great gathering to announce to all the land that my daughter is now of age to marry and that suitors may now seek her hand in marriage. But we have no musical instruments and I want your drum, and I myself will beat it at the dance." So Thick-Head brought his drum to the chief's house, but he was not very well pleased, because he was not invited to the feast, while his brothers were among the favored guests. And he said to the chief, "Be very careful. Do not tear the skin of my drum, for I can never get another like it. My worm and my duck and my fox and my wolf have all helped to make it." The next day he went for his drum. But the chief had struck it too hard and had split it open so that it would now make no sound and it was ruined beyond repair. He offered to pay the boy a great price for it, but the boy said, "I do not want your price. I want my drum. Give me back my drum, for my worm and the duck and the fox and the wolf are all in it." The chief said, "How can I give you back your drum when it is broken? It is gone forever. I will give you anything you desire in exchange for it. Since you do not like the price I offer, you may name your own price and you shall have it." And the boy thought to himself, "Here is a chance for good fortune. Now I shall surprise my brothers." And he said, "Since you cannot give me my drum, I will take your daughter in marriage in exchange." The chief was much perplexed, but he had to be true to his word. So he gave his daughter to Thick-Head, and they were married, and the girl brought him much treasure and they lived very happily. And his brothers were much amazed and angered because they had failed. But his mother said, "I told you he was wiser than you and that he would outwit you yet although you called him Thick-Head and fool. For the forest fairy said it to me at his birth." Source: Cyrus Macmillan, Canadian Fairy Tales (Toronto: S. B. Gundy; London: John Lane, 1922), pp. 40-46 . Return to the table of contents . The Pea That Made a Fortune Jamaica One day an old lady was traveling on the road and she picked up a green pea and she planted it. And after it grew, her goat ate it off. She cried upon the goat and told it that she wanted the peas. The goat said that he didn't have anything to give her, but she could take one of his horns. She took the horn and went to the river-side to wash it. The river took it away from her. She cried upon the river, and the river said it didn't have anything to give her but a fish. She went further. She met a man who was very hungry. She gave the man the fish. After the man ate it, she cried upon the man. The man gave her a moreen. She went a little further and saw a cow-boy. She gave him the moreen. After he had worn it out, she cried upon him for it. He said he didn't have anything to give her but his whip. She went a little further and saw a man driving cows. She gave the whip to the man. After the man had lashed it out, she cried upon him, so he gave her a cow; and from the cow she made her riches. Source (Internet Archive): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 63, p. 69 . Source (Sacred Texts): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 63, p. 69 . Beckwith's informant: Etheline Samuels, Claremont, St. Ann. Return to the table of contents . The Story of Hlakanyana Kaffir (South Africa) Hlakanyana met a boy tending some goats. The boy had a digging-stick with him. Hlakanyana proposed that they should pursue after birds, and the boy agreed. They pursued birds the whole day. In the evening, when the sun set, Hlakanyana said, "It is time now to roast our birds." The place was on the bank of a river. Hlakanyana said, "We must go under the water and see who will come out last." They went under the water, and Hlakanyana came out last. The cunning fellow said, "Let us try again." They boy agreed to that. They went under the water. Hlakanyana came out quickly and ate all the birds. He left the heads only. Then he went under the water again. The boy came out while he was still under the water. When Hlakanyana came out he said, "Let us go now and eat our birds." They found all the birds eaten. Hlakanyana said, "You have eaten them, because you came out of the water first, and you have left me the heads only." The boy denied having done so, but Hlakanyana said, "You must pay for my birds with that digging-stick." The boy gave the digging-stick, and Hlakanyana went on his way. He saw some people making pots of clay. He said to them, "Why do you not ask me to lend you this digging-stick, instead of digging with your hands?" They said, "Lend it to us." Hlakanyana lent them the digging-stick. Just the first time they stuck it in the clay it broke. He said, "You have broken my digging-stick, the digging-stick that I received from my companion, my companion who ate my birds and left me with the heads." They gave him a pot. Hlakanyana carried the pot till he came to some boys who were herding goats. He said to them, "You foolish boys, you only suck the goats. You don't milk them in any vessel. Why don't you ask me to lend you this pot?" The boys said, "Lend it to us." Hlakanyana lent them the pot. While the boys were milking, the pot broke. Hlakanyana said, "You have broken my pot, the pot that I received from the people who make pots, the people who broke my digging-stick, the digging-stick that I received from my companion, my companion who ate my birds and left me with the heads." The boys gave him a goat. Hlakanyana came to the keepers of calves said, "Allow us to suck this goat." Hlakanyana gave the goat into their hands. While they were sucking, the goat died. Hlakanyana said, "You have killed my goat, the goat that I received from the boys that were tending goats, the boys that broke my pot, the pot that I received from the people who make pots, the people who broke my digging-stick, the digging-stick that I received from my companion, my companion who ate my birds and left me with the heads." They gave him a calf. Hlakanyana came to the keepers of cows. He said to them, "You only suck the cows without letting the calf suck first. Why don't you ask me to lend you this calf, what the cows may be induced to give their milk freely?" They said, "Lend us the calf." Hlakanyana permitted them to take the calf. While the calf was in their hands it died. Hlakanyana said, "You have killed my calf, the calf that I received from the keepers of calves, the keepers of calves that killed my goat, the goat that I received from the boys that were tending goats, the boys that broke my pot, the pot that I received from the people who make pots, the people who broke my digging-stick, the digging-stick that I received from my companion, my companion who ate my birds and left me with the heads." They gave him a cow. Hlakanyana continued on his journey. Source: George McCall Theal, Kaffir Folk-Lore: A Selection from the Traditional Tales Current among the People Living on the Eastern Border of the Cape Colony (London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, n.d. [preface dated January 1882]), pp. 95-98 . This epsisode is but one of numerous exploits recounted in "The Story of Hlakanyana," in Theal's collection ( pp. 84-110 ). The name Hlakanyana means "the little deceiver." Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Trading Up (1) , folktales of type 170A. These stories are similar to the type 1655 tales featured above, except that the trickster "heroes" are animals instead of humans. Trading Away One's Fortune , folktales of type 1415. In these stories the naive "hero," in a series of foolish exchanges, reduces his fortune to nothing. The best-known of these tales is Hans-in-Luck , by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Return to the table of contents . Revised January 27, 2022. Folktales for Travelers Folktales for Travelers Edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1997-2009 All people, black, white, brown, red, and yellow, are like each other when they tell stories. --Andrew Lang, preface to The Brown Fairy Book, 1904 Contents The Traveler and the Farmer (North America). The Two Travelers and the Farmer (North America). The Two Frogs (Japan). The Talkative Tortoise (The Jataka Tales, India). The Tortoise That Refused to Leave Home (The Jataka Tales, India). The Dog That Went Abroad (The Panchatantra, India). The Man Who Became Rich through a Dream (1001 Nights). The Pedlar of Swaffham (England). The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse (Aesop). The Town Mouse and the Field Mouse (Romania). The Citizen of the World (Jewish). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Traveler and the Farmer North America A traveler came upon an old farmer hoeing in his field beside the road. The wanderer hailed the countryman, who looked up from his work. "How long will it take me to get to the next town?" asked the stranger. "I can't rightly say," was the farmer's curt reply. Insulted, the traveler strode off. "About an hour," shouted the farmer after him. "Why didn't you say so when I first asked?" "Because I didn't know how fast you were walking." Source: Personal recollection, Idaho, about 1950. Return to the table of contents . The Two Travelers and the Farmer North America A traveler came upon an old farmer hoeing in his field beside the road. Eager to rest his feet, the wanderer hailed the countryman, who seemed happy enough to straighten his back and talk for a moment. "What sort of people live in the next town?" asked the stranger. "What were the people like where you've come from?" replied the farmer, answering the question with another question. "They were a bad lot. Troublemakers all, and lazy too. The most selfish people in the world, and not a one of them to be trusted. I'm happy to be leaving the scoundrels." "Is that so?" replied the old farmer. "Well, I'm afraid that you'll find the same sort in the next town. Disappointed, the traveler trudged on his way, and the farmer returned to his work. Some time later another stranger, coming from the same direction, hailed the farmer, and they stopped to talk. "What sort of people live in the next town?" he asked. "What were the people like where you've come from?" replied the farmer once again. "They were the best people in the world. Hard working, honest, and friendly. I'm sorry to be leaving them." "Fear not," said the farmer. "You'll find the same sort in the next town." Source: Personal recollection, Idaho, about 1950. Return to the table of contents . The Two Frogs Japan Once upon a time in the country of Japan there lived two frogs, one of whom made his home in a ditch near the town of Osaka, on the sea coast, while the other dwelt in a clear little stream which ran through the city of Kyoto. At such a great distance apart, they had never even heard of each other; but, funnily enough, the idea came into both their heads at once that they should like to see a little of the world, and the frog who lived at Kyoto wanted to visit Osaka, and the frog who lived at Osaka wished to go to Kyoto, where the great Mikado had his palace. So one fine morning in the spring they both set out along the road that led from Kyoto to Osaka, one from one end and the other from the other. The journey was more tiring than they expected, for they did not know much about traveling, and halfway between the two towns there arose a mountain which had to be climbed. It took them a long time and a great many hops to reach the top, but there they were at last, and what was the surprise of each to see another frog before him! They looked at each other for a moment without speaking, and then fell into conversation, explaining the cause of their meeting so far from their homes. It was delightful to find that they both felt the same wish--to learn a little more of their native country--and as there was no sort of hurry they stretched themselves out in a cool, damp place, and agreed that they would have a good rest before they parted to go their ways. "What a pity we are not bigger," said the Osaka frog; "for then we could see both towns from here, and tell if it is worth our while going on." "Oh, that is easily managed," returned the Kyoto frog. "We have only got to stand up on our hind legs, and hold onto each other, and then we can each look at the town he is traveling to." This idea pleased the Osaka frog so much that he at once jumped up and put his front paws on the shoulder of his friend, who had risen also. There they both stood, stretching themselves as high as they could, and holding each other tightly, so that they might not fall down. The Kyoto frog turned his nose towards Osaka, and the Osaka frog turned his nose towards Kyoto; but the foolish things forgot that when they stood up their great eyes lay in the backs of their heads, and that though their noses might point to the places to which they wanted to go, their eyes beheld the places from which they had come. "Dear me!" cried the Osaka frog, "Kyoto is exactly like Osaka. It is certainly not worth such a long journey. I shall go home!" "If I had had any idea that Osaka was only a copy of Kyoto I should never have traveled all this way," exclaimed the frog from Kyoto, and as he spoke he took his hands from his friend's shoulders, and they both fell down on the grass. Then they took a polite farewell of each other, and set off for home again, and to the end of their lives they believed that Osaka and Kyoto, which are as different to look at as two towns can be, were as alike as two peas. Source: Andrew Lang, The Violet Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green and Co., 1901), pp. 125-126. Return to the table of contents . The Talkative Tortoise The Jataka Tales Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the future Buddha was born in a minister's family; and when he grew up, he became the king's adviser in things temporal and spiritual. Now this king was very talkative; while he was speaking, others had no opportunity for a word. And the future Buddha, wanting to cure this talkativeness of his, was constantly seeking for some means of doing so. At that time there was living, in a pond in the Himalayan Mountains, a tortoise. Two young wild ducks who came to feed there made friends with him. And one day, when they had become very intimate with him, they said to the tortoise, "Friend tortoise, the place where we live, at the Golden Cave on Mount Beautiful in the Himalayan country, is a delightful spot. Will you come there with us?" "But how can I get there?" "We can take you, if you can only hold your tongue, and will say nothing to anybody." "Oh, that I can do. Take me with you." "That's right," said they. And making the tortoise bite hold of a stick, they themselves took the two ends in their teeth, and flew up into the air. Seeing him thus carried by the ducks, some villagers called out, "Two wild ducks are carrying a tortoise along on a stick!" Whereupon the tortoise wanted to say, "If my friends choose to carry me, what is that to you, you wretched slaves?" So just as the swift flight of the wild ducks had brought him over the king's palace in the city of Benares, he let go of the stick he was biting, and falling in the open courtyard, split in two! And there arose a universal cry, "A tortoise has fallen in the open courtyard, and has split in two!" The king, taking the future Buddha, went to the place, surrounded by his courtiers, and looking at the tortoise, he asked the Bodisat, "Teacher, how has it possible that he has fallen here?" The future Buddha thought to himself, "Long expecting, wishing to admonish the king, I have sought for some means of doing so. This tortoise must have made friends with the wild ducks; and they must have made him bite hold of the stick, and have flown up into the air to take him to the hills. But he, being unable to hold his tongue when he hears anyone else talk, must have wanted to say something, and let go of the stick; and so must have fallen down from the sky, and thus lost his life." And saying, "Truly, oh king, those who are called chatterboxes--people whose words have no end--come to grief like this," he uttered these verses: Verily, the tortoise killed himself While uttering his voice; Though he was holding tight to stick, By a word he slew himself. Behold him then, oh excellent by strength! And speak wise words, not out of season. You see how, by his talking overmuch, The tortoise fell into this wretched plight! The king saw that he was himself referred to, and said, "Oh teacher, are you speaking of us?" And the Bodisat spoke openly, and said, "Oh great king, be it you, or be it any other, whoever talks beyond measure meets with some mishap like this." And the king henceforth refrained himself, and became a man of few words. Type 225A. Source: Buddhist Birth-Stories; or, Jataka Tales , translated by T. W. Rhys Davids (London: Trübner, 1880), pp. viii-x . Additionally, this ancient story is found in fable collections throughout India, the Mid East, and Europe. La Fontaine's version from seventeenth century France has the ill-fated tortoise meet his end when he tries to fly to America. Although most versions stress the value of keeping one's mouth shut, two additional teachings also emerge: "Poverty at home is better than death on the road," and, "If God had intended turtles to fly, he would have given them wings." Return to the table of contents . The Tortoise That Refused to Leave Home The Jataka Tales Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta was born in a village as a potter's son. He plied the potter's trade, and had a wife and family to support. At that time there lay a great natural lake close by the great river of Benares. When there was much water, river and lake were one; but when the water was low, they were apart. Now fish and tortoises know by instinct when the year will be rainy and when there will be a drought. So at the time of our story the fish and tortoises which lived in that lake knew there would be a drought; and when the two were one water, they swam out of the lake into the river. But there was one tortoise that would not go into the river, because, said he, "here I was born, and here I have grown up, and here is my parents' home. Leave it I cannot!" Then in the hot season the water all dried up. He dug a hole and buried himself, just in the place where the Bodhisatta was used to come for clay. There the Bodhisatta came to get some clay. With a big spade he dug down, until he cracked the tortoise's shell, turning him out on the ground as though he were a large piece of clay. In his agony the creature thought, "Here I am, dying, all because I was too fond of my home to leave it!" And in the words of these following verses, he made his moan: Here was I born, and here I lived; my refuge was the clay; And now the clay has played me false in a most grievous way; Thee, thee I call, oh Bhaggava; hear what I have to say! Go where thou canst find happiness, where'er the place may be; Forest or village, there the wise both home and birthplace see; Go where there's life; nor stay at home for death to master thee. So he went on and on, talking to the Bodhisatta, until he died. The Bodhisatta picked him up, and collecting all the villagers addressed them thus: "Look at this tortoise. When the other fish and tortoises went into the great river, he was too fond of home to go with them, and buried himself in the place where I get my clay. Then as I was digging for clay, I broke his shell with my big spade, and turned him out on the ground in the belief that he was a large lump of clay. Then he called to mind what he had done, lamented his fate in two verses of poetry, and expired. So you see he came to his end because he was too fond of his home. Take care not to be like this tortoise. Don't say to yourselves, 'I have sight, I have hearing, I have smell, I have taste, I have touch, I have a son, I have a daughter, I have numbers of men and maids for my service, I have precious gold.' Do not cleave to these things with craving and desire. Each being passes through three stages of existence." Thus did he exhort the crowd with all a Buddha's skill. The discourse was bruited abroad all over India, and for full seven thousand years it was remembered. All the crowd abode by his exhortation, and gave alms, and did good until at last they went to swell the hosts of heaven. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births, edited by E. B. Cowell (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1895), book 2, no. 178. Part of the canon of sacred Buddhist literature, this collection of some 550 anecdotes and fables depicts earlier incarnations--sometimes as an animal, sometimes as a human--of the being who would become Siddhartha Gautama, the future Buddha. Traditional birth and death dates of Gautama are 563-483 BC. The Jataka tales are dated between 300 BC and 400 AD. Now called Varanasi, Benares is a city in north central India on the Ganges River. One of the world's oldest cities, Varanasi is the most sacred place for Hindus. Buddhists and Muslims also have important religious sites nearby. According to tradition, Buddha began his teaching at Sarnath a short distance from the city. Return to the table of contents . The Dog That Went Abroad The Panchatantra In a certain place there once lived a dog by the name of Tschitranga, which means "having a spotted body." A lengthy famine set in. Because they had no food, the dogs and other animals began to leave their families. Tschitranga, whose throat was emaciated with hunger, was driven by fear to another country. There in a certain city he went to a certain house day after day where, due to the carelessness of the housekeeper, many good things to eat were left lying about, and he ate his fill. However, upon leaving the house, other vicious dogs surrounded him on all sides and tore into him on all parts of his body with their teeth. Then he reconsidered his situation, and said, "It is better at home. Even during a famine you can live there in peace, and no one bites you to pieces. I will return to my own city." Having thus thought it through, set forth to his own city. When he arrived there, all of his relatives asked him, "Tschitranga, tell us about where you have been. What is the country like? How do the people behave? What do they eat? What do they do?" He answered, "How can I explain to you the essence of a foreign place? There are good things to eat in great variety, and housekeepers who do not keep watch! There is only one evil in a foreign country: You will be hated there because of who you are!" Similar to type 112 (The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse). Source: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen, translated into German by Theodor Benfey (Leipzig: Brockhaus, 1859), v. 2, book 4, story 11. Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. India's most influential contribution to world literature, the Panchatantra consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled, in their current form, between the third and fifth centuries AD. It is believed that even then the stories were already ancient. The tales' self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes the Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai, which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of the Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced medieval writers of fables. Return to the table of contents . The Man Who Became Rich through a Dream 1001 Nights Once there lived in Baghdad a wealthy man who lost all his means and was thus forced to earn his living by hard labor. One night a man came to him in a dream, saying, "Your fortune is in Cairo; go there and seek it." So he set out for Cairo. He arrived there after dark and took shelter for the night in a mosque. As Allah would have it, a band of thieves entered the mosque in order to break into an adjoining house. The noise awakened the owners, who called for help. The Chief of Police and his men came to their aid. The robbers escaped, but when the police entered the mosque they found the man from Baghdad asleep there. They laid hold of him and beat him with palm rods until he was nearly dead, then threw him into jail. Three days later the Chief of Police sent for him and asked, "Where do you come from?" "From Baghdad," he answered. "And what brought you to Cairo?" "A man came to me in a dream and told me to come to Cairo to find my fortune," answered the man from Baghdad "But when I came here, the promised fortune proved to be the palm rods you so generously gave to me." "You fool," said the Chief of Police, laughing until his wisdom teeth showed. "A man has come to me three times in a dream and has described a house in Baghdad where a great sum of money is supposedly buried beneath a fountain in the garden. He told me to go there and take it, but I stayed here. You, however, have foolishly journeyed from place to place on the faith of a dream which was nothing more than a meaningless hallucination." He then gave him some money saying, "This will help you return to your own country." The man took the money. He realized that the Chief of Police had just described his own house in Baghdad, so he forthwith returned home, where he discovered a great treasure beneath the fountain in his garden. Thus Allah gave him abundant fortune and brought the dream's prediction to fulfillment. Type 1645. Source: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night, translated by Richard F. Burton (London: The Burton Club, 1885), vol. 4, pp. 289-90. Revised by D. L. Ashliman. Link to additional tales of type 1645: The Man Who Became Rich through a Dream . Since its first translation into a European language between 1704 and 1717, The Thousand and One Nights, also known as The Arabian Nights, has been recognized as a universal classic of fantasy narrative. It is, of course, a much older work and one with a complicated genealogy. Based on Indian, Persian, and Arab folklore, this work dates back at least 1000 years as a unified collection, with many of its individual stories undoubtedly being even older. One of the collection's forebears is a book of Persian tales, likely of Indian origin, titled A Thousand Legends. These stories were translated into Arabic about 850, and at least one reference from about the year 950 calls them The Thousand and One Nights. Arabic stories, primarily from Baghdad and Cairo were added to the ever evolving collection, which by the early 1500's had assumed its more-or-less final form. Return to the table of contents . The Pedlar of Swaffham England Constant tradition says that there lived in former times in Soffham (Swaffham), alias Sopham, in Norfolk, a certain pedlar, who dreamed that if he went to London Bridge, and stood there, he should hear very joyful news, which he at first slighted, but afterwards, his dream being doubled and trebled upon him, he resolved to try the issue of it, and accordingly went to London, and stood on the bridge there two or three days, looking about him, but heard nothing that might yield him any comfort. At last it happened that a shopkeeper there, hard by, having noted his fruitless standing, seeing that he neither sold any wares nor asked any alms, went to him and most earnestly begged to know what he wanted there, or what his business was; to which the pedlar honestly answered that he had dreamed that if he came to London and stood there upon the bridge he should hear good news; at which the shopkeeper laughed heartily, asking him if he was such a fool as to take a journey on such a silly errand, adding, "I'll tell you, country fellow, last night I dreamed that I was at Sopham, in Norfolk, a place utterly unknown to me where I thought that behind a pedlar's house in a certain orchard, and under a great oak tree, if I dug I should find a vast treasure! Now think you," says he, "that I am such a fool to take such a long journey upon me upon the instigation of a silly dream? No, no. I'm wiser. Therefore, good fellow, learn wit from me, and get you home, and mind your business." The pedlar observing his words, what he had said he dreamed, and knowing they concerned him, glad of such joyful news, went speedily home, and dug and found a prodigious great treasure, with which he grew exceeding rich; and Soffham (Church) being for the most part fallen down, he set on workmen and rectified it most sumptuously, at his own charges; and to this day there is his statue therein, but in stone, with his pack at his back and his dog at his heels; and his memory is also preserved by the same form or picture in most of the old glass windows, taverns, and alehouses of that town unto this day. Type 1645. Source: Edwin Sidney Hartland, English Fairy and Other Folk Tales (London, ca. 1890), pp. 76-77. Hartland's source is the diary of Abraham de la Pryme, Nov. 10, 1699. Link to additional tales of type 1645: The Man Who Became Rich through a Dream . This story was brought to Europe by crusaders during the middle ages, where it took root and flourished, always with a local setting. Cf. Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Deutsche Sagen (Berlin, 1816/1818), no. 212. Return to the table of contents . The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse Aesop Now you must know that a town mouse once upon a time went on a visit to his cousin in the country. He was rough and ready, this cousin, but he loved his town friend and made him heartily welcome. Beans and bacon, cheese and bread, were all he had to offer, but he offered them freely. The town mouse rather turned up his long nose at this country fare, and said, "I cannot understand, cousin, how you can put up with such poor food as this, but of course you cannot expect anything better in the country; come you with me and I will show you how to live. When you have been in town a week you will wonder how you could ever have stood a country life." No sooner said than done: the two mice set off for the town and arrived at the town mouse's residence late at night. "You will want some refreshment after our long journey," said the polite town mouse, and took his friend into the grand dining room. There they found the remains of a fine feast, and soon the two mice were eating up jellies and cakes and all that was nice. Suddenly they heard growling and barking. "What is that?" said the country mouse. "It is only the dogs of the house," answered the other. "Only!" said the country mouse." I do not like that music at my dinner." Just at that moment the door flew open, in came two huge mastiffs, and the two mice had to scamper down and run off." Good-bye, cousin," said the country mouse. "What! Going so soon?" said the other. "Yes," he replied. "Better beans and bacon in peace than cakes and ale in fear." Type 112. Source: Joseph Jacobs, The Fables of Aesop (London: Macmillan, 1894), pp. 15-17. The name "Aesop" has been inseparably connected to the fable genre for two and a half millenia now, although it cannot be proven conclusively that he even existed. There is some truth to the gag that Aesop's fables were not written by him at all, but rather by someone else with the same name. The most reliable authority concerning Aesop's life is the Greek historian Herodotus. Writing in the mid fifth century BC, Herodotus places Aesop in the previous century and suggests that he was a slave from Asia Minor belonging to a certain Iadmon, a citizen of the island of Samos. Most importantly, Herodotus implies that Aesop was widely known. In any event, from that time forth, Aesop has not only been known as an important maker of animal tales, but more frequently as the original author of all European fables. However, this latter position is demonstrably not true. Although from the fifth century BC onwards numerous Greek and Latin writers (including Aristophanes, Plato, Aristotle, and Horace--to mention some of the most prominent names) alluded to Aesop and his fables, but for several centuries the genre apparently belonged primarily to the oral tradition, with obvious roots in India. In fact, Aesop himself was likely an illiterate teller of stories and not an author in the traditional sense of the word. Return to the table of contents . The Town Mouse and the Field Mouse Romania A mouse living in the town one day met a mouse which lived in the field. "Where do you come from?" asked the latter when she saw the town mouse. "I come from yonder town," replied the first mouse. "How is life going there with you?" "Very well, indeed. I am living in the lap of luxury. Whatever I want of sweets or any other good things is to be found in abundance in my master's house. But how are you living?" "I have nothing to complain of. You just come and see my stores. I have grain and nuts, and all the fruits of the tree and field in my storehouse." The town mouse did not quite believe the story of her new friend, and, driven by curiosity, went with her to the latter's house. How great was her surprise when she found that the field mouse had spoken the truth; her garner was full of nuts and grain and other stores, and her mouth watered when she saw all the riches which were stored up there. Then she turned to the field mouse and said, "Oh, yes, you have here a nice snug place and something to live upon, but you should come to my house and see what I have there. Your stock is as nothing compared with the riches which are mine." The field mouse, who was rather simple by nature and trusted her new friend, went with her into the town to see what better things the other could have. She had never been into the town and did not know what her friend could mean when she boasted of her greater riches. So they went together, and the town mouse took her friend to her master's house. He was a grocer, and there were boxes and sacks full of every good thing the heart of a mouse could desire. When she saw all these riches, the field mouse said she could never have believed it, had she not seen it with her own eyes. While they were talking together, who should come in but the cat. As soon as the town mouse saw the cat, she slipped quietly behind a box and hid herself. Her friend, who had never yet seen a cat, turned to her and asked her who that gentleman was who had come in so quietly. "Do you not know who he is? Why, he is our priest, and he has come to see me. You must go and pay your respects to him and kiss his hand. See what a beautiful glossy coat he has on, and how his eyes sparkle, and how demurely he keeps his hands in the sleeves of his coat." Not suspecting anything, the field mouse did as she was told and went up to the cat. He gave her at once his blessing, and the mouse had no need of another after that. The cat gave her extreme unction there and then. That was just what the town mouse had intended. When she saw how well stored the home of the field mouse was, she made up her mind to trap her and to kill her, so that she might take possession of all that the field mouse had gathered up. She had learned the ways of the townspeople and had acted accordingly. Type 112. Source: M. Gaster, Rumanian Bird and Beast Stories (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1915), no. 105. Return to the table of contents . The Citizen of the World Jewish The Holy One gathered the dust for the creation of the first man from the four corners of the earth, The Spirit of Life asked God why did He do this. The Holy One replied, "If a man should chance to come from the East to the West, or from the West to the East or to any place on the face of the earth, and his time comes to depart from this world, then the dust of the earth which is in that place where he dies shall not say to him: 'The dust of thy body is not mine. Thou wast not born here in this land. Return to the place whence thy dust was gathered at thy birth.' It is for this reason that I have taken the dust to form man from the four corners of the earth. Every place on earth is man's home. Wheresoever he happens to be when he dies there is the resting-place for the dust of his body and there it returns to Mother-Earth." The Spirit of Life praised the Lord whose mercies are over all His works. Source: Gerald Friedlander, The Jewish Fairy Book (New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1920), p. 136 . Friedlander's source: " Chapters of Rabbi Eliezer , xi." Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. travelers have visited this site. Tabulation by WebCounter . Revised April 15, 2013. Treasure Finders Murder One Another: Folktales of type 763 Treasure Finders Murder One Another folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 763 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2014 Contents Vedabbha-Jataka: Misguided Effort ( The Jataka ). The Reward of Covetousness (India). The Punishment of Avarice (Tibet). Jesus and the Three Blocks of Gold (Arabic). Story of the Three Men and Our Lord Jesus ( 1001 Nights ). The Merchant and the Two Sharpers ( 1001 Nights ). The Pardoner's Tale (abstracted from The Canterbury Tales by Geoffrey Chaucer). The Hermit and the Three Ruffians (Italy). The Three Crosses (Germany). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Vedabbha-Jataka: Misguided Effort The Jataka This story was told by the Master while at Jetavana about a self-willed Brother. Said the Master to that Brother, "This is not the first time, Brother, that you have been self-willed; you were of just the same disposition in bygone times also; and therefore it was that, as you would not follow the advice of the wise and good, you came to be cut in two by a sharp sword and were flung on the highway; and you were the sole cause why a thousand men met their end." And so saying, he told this story of the past. Once on a time when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, there was a brahmin in a village who knew the charm called Vedabbha. Now this charm, so they say, was precious beyond all price. For, if at a certain conjunction of the planets the charm was repeated and the gaze bent upwards to the skies, straightway from the heavens there rained the Seven Things of Price: gold, silver, pearl, coral, catseye, ruby, and diamond. In those days the Bodhisatta was a pupil of this brahmin; and one day his master left the village on some business or other, and came with the Bodhisatta to the country of Ceti. In a forest by the way dwelt five hundred robbers -- known as "the Despatchers" -- who made the way impassable. And these caught the Bodhisatta and the Vedabbha-brahmin. (Why, you ask, were they called the Despatchers? -- Well, the story goes that of every two prisoners they made they used to despatch one to fetch the ransom; and that's why they were called the Despatchers. If they captured a father and a son, they told the father to go for the ransom to free his son; if they caught a mother and her daughter, they sent the mother for the money; if they caught two brothers, they let the elder go; and so too, if they caught a teacher and his pupil, it was the pupil they set free. In this case, therefore, they kept the Vedabbha-brahmin, and sent the Bodhisatta for the ransom.) And the Bodhisatta said with a bow to his master, "In a day or two I shall surely come back; have no fear; only fail not to do as I shall say. Today will come to pass the conjunction of the planets which brings about the rain of the Things of Price. Take heed lest, yielding to this mishap, you repeat the charm and call down the precious shower. For, if you do, calamity will certainly befall both you and this band of robbers." With this warning to his master, the Bodhisatta went his way in quest of the ransom. At sunset the robbers bound the brahmin and laid him by the heels. Just at this moment the full moon rose over the eastern horizon, and the brahmin, studying the heavens, knew that the great conjunction was taking place. "Why," thought he, "should I suffer this misery? By repeating the charm I will call down the precious rain, pay the robbers the ransom, and go free." So he called out to the robbers, "Friends, why do you take me a prisoner?" "To get a ransom, reverend sir," said they. "Well, if that is all you want," said the brahmin, "make haste and untie me; have my head bathed, and new clothes put on me; and let me be perfumed and decked with flowers. Then leave me to myself." The robbers did as he bade them. And the brahmin, marking the conjunction of the planets, repeated his charm with eyes uplifted to the heavens. Forthwith the Things of Price poured down from the skies! The robbers picked them all up, wrapping their booty into bundles with their cloaks. Then with their brethren they marched away; and the brahmin followed in the rear. But, as luck would have it, the party was captured by a second band of five hundred robbers! "Why do you seize us?" said the first to the second band. "For booty," was the answer. "If booty is what you want, seize on that brahmin, who by simply gazing up at the skies brought down riches as rain. It was he who gave us all that we have got." So the second band of robbers let the first band go, aud seized on the brahmin, crying, "Give us riches too!" "It would give me great pleasure," said the brahmin; "but it will be a year before the requisite conjunction of the planets takes place again. If you will only be so good as to wait till then, I will invoke the precious shower for you." "Rascally brahmin!" cried the angry robbers, "you made the other band rich off-hand, but want us to wait a whole year!" And they cut him in two with a sharp sword, and flung his body in the middle of the road. Then hurrying after the first band of robbers, they killed every man of them too in hand-to-hand fight, and seized the booty. Next, they divided into two companies and fought among themselves, company against company, till two hundred and fifty men were slain. And so they went on killing one another, till only two were left alive. Thus did those thousand men come to destruction. Now, when the two survivors had managed to carry off the treasure they hid it in the jungle near a village; and one of them sat there, sword in hand, to guard it, whilst the other went into the village to get rice and have it cooked for supper. "Covetousness is the root of ruin!" mused he that stopped by the treasure. "When my mate comes back, he'll want half of this. Suppose I kill him the moment he gets back." So he drew his sword and sat waiting for his comrade's return. Meanwhile, the other had equally reflected that the booty had to be halved, and thought to himself, "Suppose I poison the rice, and give it him to eat and so kill him, and have the whole of the treasure to myself." Accordingly, when the rice was boiled, he first ate his own share, and then put poison in the rest, which he carried back with him to the jungle. But scarce had he set it down, when the other robber cut him in two with his sword, and hid the body away in a secluded spot. Then he ate the poisoned rice, and died then and there. Thus, by reason of the treasure, not only the brahmin but all the robbers came to destruction. Howbeit, after a day or two the Bodhisatta came back with the ransom. Not finding his master where he had left him, but seeing treasure strewn all round about, his heart misgave him that, in spite of his advice, his master must have called down a shower of treasure from the skies, and that all must have perished in consequence; and he proceeded along the road. On his way he came to where his master's body lay cloven in twain upon the way. "Alas!" he cried, "he is dead through not heeding my warning." Then with gathered sticks he made a pyre and burnt his master's body, making an offering of wild flowers. Further along the road, he came upon the five hundred "Despatchers," and further still upon the two hundred and fifty, and so on by degrees until at last he came to where lay only two corpses. Marking how of the thousand all but two had perished, and feeling sure that there must be two survivors, and that these could not refrain from strife, he pressed on to see where they had gone. So on he went till he found the path by which with the treasure they had turned into the jungle ; and there he found the heap of bundles of treasure, and one robber lying dead with his rice-bowl overturned at his side. Realising the whole story at a glance, the Bodhisatta set himself to search for the missing man, and at last found his body in the secret spot where it had been flung "And thus," mused the Bodhisatta, "through not following my counsel my master in his self-will has been the means of destroying not himself only but a thousand others also. Truly, they that seek their own gain by mistaken and misguided means shall reap ruin, even as my master." And he repeated this stanza: Misguided effort leads to loss, not gain; Thieves killed Vedabbha and themselves were slain. Thus spake the Bodhisatta, and he went on to say, "And even as my master's misguided and misplaced effort in causing the rain of treasure to fall from heaven wrought both his own death and the destruction of others with him, even so shall every other man who by mistaken means seeks to compass his own advantage, utterly perish and involve others in his destruction." With these words did the Bodhisatta make the forest ring; and in this stanza did he preach the Truth, whilst the Tree-fairies shouted applause. The treasure he contrived to carry off to his own home, where he lived out his term of life in the exercise of almsgiving and other good works. And when his life closed, he departed to the heaven he had won. Source: The Jataka; or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births , edited by E. B. Cowell; translated by Robert Chalmers, vol. 1 (Cambridge: University Press, 1895), no. 48, pp. 121-24 . Return to the table of contents . The Reward of Covetousness India Four men determined to leave Kashmir for another country, where they might be able to obtain greater wealth than it seemed possible for them to amass in "the Happy Valley." On a certain day they started all together, taking with them four thousand rupees, wherewith to trade. Each of the little company had an equal share in this sum of money, and they set forth with light hearts, full of hope that they would prosper and become exceeding rich. On the way it came to pass that the great deity, according to his mighty power and wisdom, caused a full-grown golden tree to spring up suddenly, and to bring forth before their very eyes rich clusters of gold. Seeing this magnificent and valuable tree the four travelers became as men in a trance. They did not believe their own eyes. At length, however, seeing that it was so, and that there was no doubt about it, they changed their minds about traveling into a foreign country, and resolved to return back to their homes as soon as possible, taking with them the tree of gold. They reminded one another of their own Kashmiri proverb: If God intends to give, he will give at the door; but if he will not give, then what is the good of going a thousand kos (in search of money)? "We cannot contest the will of God," they said. "Therefore, since we have happed upon this golden tree, let us appropriate it and be glad forever." This was all very easy to decide, but how were they to arrange it? The tree was high and large and heavy. It must first be felled and cut up into bundles which they could carry. But how were they to perform all these without implements? Accordingly it was determined that two of the party should go to the nearest village and procure axes and saws and ropes, etc., while the other two remained behind to guard the treasure. Presently the two men appointed to go left for the tools. The remaining two meanwhile took counsel together as to how they could kill their partners. "We will mix poison with their food," said one, "and then when they are disposed of we shall each have a double share of the gold." And they did so. Now it happened that the other two who were walking to the village for the tools and other neccessaries had also covenanted together by the way to slay the two partners who were left behind. "We will slay them with one stroke of the axe," said one, "and then we shall obtain twice the quantity of treasure." In the course of a few hours they returned from the village with saws and axes, and at once, on arrival at the tree slew both of their partners. Each slew one with one stroke of his axe. They then commenced hewing down the tree; and this done, they soon cut up the branches; and then, thoroughly wearied with their great exertions, they sat down to rest and eat. Alas! They ate of the poisoned bread. In a little while a most overpowering sleep came upon both of them, a sleep from which they never awoke. A short time afterwards some other travelers passing by that way found the four corpses lying stretched out cold and stinking beneath the golden tree. Source: J. Hinton Knowles, "The Reward of Covetousness," The Orientalist: A Monthly Journal of Oriental Literature, Arts and Sciences, Folklore, etc. , vol. 1, part 11 (November 1884), pp. 260-61 . Knowles's source: "A tale that I heard the other day from a Pandit youth in Srinagar City [Kashmir]. Return to the table of contents . The Punishment of Avarice Tibet In long past times a hunter wounded an elephant with a poisoned arrow. Perceiving that he had hit it, he followed after the arrow and killed the elephant. Five hundred robbers who had plundered a hill-town were led by an evil star to that spot, where they perceived the elephant. As it was just then a time of hunger with them, they said, "Now that we have found this meat, let two hundred and fifty of us cut the flesh off the elephant and roast it, while two hundred and fifty go to fetch water." Then those among them who had cut the flesh off the elephant and cooked it, said among themselves, "Honored sirs, now that we have accomplished such a task and collected so much stolen property, wherefore should we give away part of it to the others?" Let us eat as much of the meat as we please, and then poison the rest. The others will eat the poisoned meat and die, and then the stolen goods will be ours." So after they had eaten their fill of the meat, they poisoned what remained over. Those who had gone to fetch water, likewise, when they had drunk as much water as they wanted, poisoned what was left. So when they came back, and those who had eaten the flesh drank the water, and those who had drunk the water ate the flesh, they all of them died. Now there came to that spot a jackal, fettered by the ties of time, and it saw all those dead bodies. With a joy that sprang from greediness it thought, "As an extremely large amount of booty as accrued to me, I will take each part of it in its turn." So it seized the bow with its jaws, and began to gnaw at the knots of the bowstring. The string snapped, and the end of the bow struck the jackal in the roof of the mouth so hard, that it died. The jackal uttered this proverb: "It is good to accumulate, but not to accumulate immoderately. See how the jackal, infatuated by greed after the accumulated, was killed by the bow." Source: Tibetan Tales Derived from Indian Sources , translated from the Tibetan of the Kah-gyur [also spelled Kanjur ] by F. Anton von Schiefner and from the German into English by W. R. S. Ralston (London: Trübner and Company, 1882), no. 19, pp. 286-87 . This tale combines type 763 (treasure finders murder one another) with type 180 (the rebounding bow). Return to the table of contents . Jesus and the Three Blocks of Gold Arabic Jesus, it is said, was once going on a journey, and as he was proceeding a Jew came up to him and went with him. . . . They came to a lonely place, where Jesus made three heaps of earth, and by his word turned them into three blocks of massive gold. . . . The Jew then endeavored to take away the blocks of gold, but found them too heavy to be moved. When he was thus wasting his strength in trying to move them, Jesus returned to the spot, and said to the Jew, "Have nothing to do with these heaps of gold. They will cause the death of three men. Leave them and follow me." The man obeyed, and leaving the gold where it lay, went away with Jesus. Three travelers then happened to pass that way, and were delighted to find the gold. They agreed that each should take one. Finding it, however, a matter of impossibility to remove them, they resolved that one of them should go to the city for carts and food for them to eat, whilst the other two should watch the treasure. So one of the travelers set out for the city, leaving the other two to guard the gold. During his absence the thoughts of the two travelers were engrossed in projecting some means whereby they could become the sole sharers of the gold to the exclusion of the one who had gone to the city. They finally came to the diabolical resolution to kill their companion on his return. The same murderous design had entered the mind of the latter in reference to his two companions. He bought food and mixed poison with it; and then returned to the spot to offer it to them. No sooner had he arrived there, than without a word of warning his companions fell upon him, and belabored him to death. They then began to eat the food which was in its turn to destroy them; and so as they were partaking of this poisoned repast, they fell down, and expired in the struggles of death. A little while after, Jesus and the Jew were returning from their journey along that road, and seeing the three men lying dead amidst the gold, Jesus exclaimed, "This will be the end of the covetous, who love gold." He then raised the three men to life, and elicited from them a confession of their guilt. They repented of their sin, and thence forward became disciples of Jesus. Nothing, however, could make the Jew overcome his avarice. He persisted in his desire to be come the possessor of the gold; but, whilst he was struggling to carry away the blocks, the earth opened and swallowed him up and the gold with him. Source: Muhammad Casim Siddi Lebbe, An Account of the Virgin Mary and Jesus As Given by Arabic Writers," The Orientalist: A Monthly Journal of Oriental Literature, Arts and Sciences, Folklore, etc., etc., etc. , vol 1, part 2 (February 1884), p. 47 . Lebbe does not provide a source for this account. Return to the table of contents . Story of the Three Men and Our Lord Jesus 1001 Nights Three men once went out in quest of riches and came upon a block of gold, weighing a hundred pounds. When they saw it, they took it up on their shoulders and fared on with it, till they drew near a certain city, when one of them said, "Let us sit in the mosque, whilst one of us goes and buys us what we may eat." So they sat down in the mosque and one of them arose and entered the city. When he came therein, his soul prompted him to play his fellows false and get the gold for himself alone. So he bought food and poisoned it; but, when he returned to his comrades, they fell upon him and slew him, so they might enjoy the gold without him. Then they ate of the [poisoned] food and died, and the gold abode cast down over against them. Presently, Jesus, son of Mary (on whom be peace!), passed by and seeing this, besought God the Most High for tidings of their case; so He told him what had betided them, whereat great was his wonderment and he related to his disciples what he had seen. Source: Tales from the Arabic of the Breslau and Calcutta (1814-18) Editions of the Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night Not Occurring in the Other Printed Texts of the Work , translated by John Payne, vol. 1 (London: Printed for Subscribers Only, 1901), pp. 282-83 . Return to the table of contents . The Merchant and the Two Sharpers 1001 Nights There was once in a city called Sendeh a very wealthy merchant, who made ready merchandise and set out with it for such a city, thinking to sell it there. There followed him two sharpers, who had made up into bales what goods they could get and giving out to him that they also were merchants, companied with him by the way. At the first halting-place, they agreed to play him false and take his goods; but, at the same time, each purposed inwardly foul play to the other, saying in himself, "If I can cheat my comrade, it will be well for me and I shall have all to myself." So each took food and putting therein poison, brought it to his fellow; and they both ate of the poisoned mess and died. Now they had been sitting talking with the merchant; so when they left him and were long absent from him, he sought for them and found them both dead; whereby he knew that they were sharpers, who had plotted to play him foul, but their treachery had recoiled upon themselves; so the merchant was preserved and took what they had. Source: The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night , translated from the Arabic by Captain Sir R. F. Burton, vol. 2 (London: H. S. Nichols, 1897), pp. 379-80 . Return to the table of contents . The Pardoner's Tale Geoffrey Chaucer In Flanders there was a group of young folks who lived for gaming, eating, drinking, and merrymaking. They made these follies and excesses even worse with their wanton and blasphemous curses and oaths. As my story begins, three of these riotous fellows were drinking in a tavern when from the street they heard the sound of a bell accompanying a coffin to its grave. "Go and ask whose corpse is passing by," said one of them to a servant boy. "I already know who it is," replied the boy. "He was an old friend of yours. Last night he was suddenly slain while seated dead drunk on his bench. The silent thief who struck him down is the one named Death, the same Death who has taken so many people in our country of late. Be on guard yourselves lest this adversary take you as well!" "The boy is right," added the tavern keeper. "In a village only a mile from here Death has taken man, woman, child, and servant. He must be nearby. Take care, or he will do you harm!" "Would meeting him be such a peril?" interjected one of the drinkers, then swore an oath on God's sacred bones that he would seek him out. "Listen, friends," he added, "We three have always been as one. Let each of us now hold up his hand and swear an oath of brotherhood. Together we will slay this traitor Death!" And thus with a blasphemous curse, they swore to live and die for each other and together to seek out and challenge Death before the next nightfall. In a drunken rage they set forth toward the village of which the tavern keeper had spoken, swearing grisly oaths as they went. They had not gone a half mile before they met a poor old man. He greeted them humbly, "God be with you, my lords." The proudest of these unruly men replied, "Hey, old man, why are you still hanging onto life at your great age?" The old man looked him in the face and said, "Because wherever I have wandered, no one will exchange his youth for my age. Thus I must keep my age for as long as it is God's will. Alas, not even Death wants my life." At the sound of Death's name, one of the gamblers interrupted. "You mention that traitor Death, the one who is killing all our friends. Are you his spy? Are you one of his servants, sent to slay us young folks? Tell us where he is, or pay the price!" "Well, sirs," he said, "If what you want is to find Death, just turn up this crooked path. I left him sitting under a tree in a grove. He'll still be there. You'll find him." The three unruly men ran until they came to the tree, and there they found a pile of golden florins, well nigh onto eight bushels of them, they thought. The sight of all the bright and beautiful florins quickly caused them to abandon their search for Death, and their thoughts turned to how they might best protect their newly found treasure. The worst of them spoke the first word, "Brothers," he said, "Fortune has given us this great treasure, but if we carry it home by light of day, people will call us thieves, and our own treasure will send us to the gallows. We must take it home by night, and then with utmost prudence and caution. Let us draw lots to see which one of us should run to town and secretly bring back bread and wine. The other two will stay here and guard the treasure. Then in the night we will carry the treasure to wherever we think is best." The lot fell to the youngest, and he immediately departed for the town. He had no sooner left when the one said to the other, "You are my sworn brother, and I will tell you what will profit you the most. You know our friend has gone. There is gold here aplenty, but our shares will be much greater if we divide it by two than if we divide it by three. "That's true, said the other, "but what can we do?" The first one answered, "The two of us are stronger than the one of him. You engage him in a playful wrestling game, and I will run my dagger through his back. Then you do the same thing with your dagger, and all this gold will be for you and me alone." Now the youngest, while walking toward the town, thought over and over again about the bright new florins. "If only I could have this treasure to myself," he said, "then I would be the happiest man alive!" The Fiend, our Adversary, put into his heart the thought that he might buy poison and thus kill his two friends. And so, arriving in the town, he sought out an apothecary whom he asked for a poison to kill rats and also a polecat that was in his yard. The apothecary answered, "Here is a mixture that will kill any creature, even if it were to eat an amount no larger than a kernel of grain." Carrying this poison in a box, he ran to the next street where he borrowed three bottles. He poured poison into two of them, keeping the third one clean for his own drink. Then he filled all three bottles with wine and returned to his friends. But why make a sermon of it? They killed him, just as they had planned, and when the deed was done, one of them said, "Now let us sit and drink and make merry. Afterward we will bury his body." And while still talking, he drank from the poisoned bottle, and his friend drank as well, and thus the two of them died. Source: Geoffrey Chaucer, The Canterbury Tales , "The Pardoner's Tale." Retold and shortened. © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. Link to a Middle English text of The Pardoneres Tale . Chaucer was born about the year 1340 and died in 1400. He began writing The Canterbury Tales in about 1386. The great work remained unfinished. Return to the table of contents . The Hermit and the Three Ruffians Italy A hermit, walking one day in a desert place, found a very large cave, which was much hidden from view, and retiring thither for sleep (for he was very weary), saw, as soon as he entered the cave, something shining in a certain place very brightly; for much gold was there. And no sooner had he perceived it than he incontinently departed and began to run through the desert as fast as he could go. Thus running, the hermit met with three great ruffians, who haunted that wild place ( foresta ), to rob whoever passed thereby. Nor were they ever aware this gold was there. Now seeing, as they lay hid, this man flee without a soul behind to chase him, they were somewhat afraid, but yet stopped him, to know what he was fleeing for, because at this they marveled much. And he replied and said, "My brothers, I am fleeing from Death, who comes after me in chase." They, seeing neither man nor beast that chased him, said, "Show us what is chasing thee, and lead us unto where it is." Then said the hermit to them, "Come with me and I will show it to you"; beseeching them all the time not to go to it, for he himself was fleeing for that reason. And they, desiring to find it, to see what manner of thing it was, demanded of him nothing else. The hermit seeing that he could do no more, and fearing them, led them to the cave, whence he had departed, and said to them, "Here is Death, which was chasing me"; and showed them the gold that was there; and they began to mightily congratulate themselves, and to have great fun together. Then they dismissed that good man, and he went away about his own affairs; and they began to say one to the other, how simple a person that was. These three ruffians remained all three together, to guard this wealth, and began to consider what they must do. Replied one and said, "Meseems that God has given us this so high fortune, that we should not depart from here until we carry away all this property." And another said, "Let us not do so. Let one of us take somewhat thereof and go to the city and sell it, and buy bread and wine, and whatsoever we need; and in that let him do his best, so that we be furnished." To this they all agree. The devil, who is crafty and bad enough to contrive to do whatever evil he can, put in this one's heart to go to the city for supplies. "When I am in the city," said he to himself, "I will eat and drink what I want, and then provide me with certain things whereof I have need at the present time; and then I will poison what I bring to my comrades, so that when the pair of them are dead I shall then be lord of all this property; and, as it seems to me, it is so much that I shall be the richest man of all this country for possessions." And as it came into his thought, so he did. He took for himself as much victual as he needed, and then poisoned the rest, and so he brought it to those his companions. But while he went to the city, as we have said, if he thought and contrived ill, to slay his companions, that every thing should remain for him, they, on their part, thought no better of him than he of them, and said one to the other, "As soon as this our comrade shall return with the bread and the wine and the other things we need, we will kill him, and then eat as much as we desire, and then all this great wealth shall be between us two. And the less in number we are the more shall each of us have." Now came he who had gone to the city to buy the things they needed. The moment his companions saw he had returned, they were upon him with lances and knives and killed him. When they had made a dead man of him, they ate of what he had brought; and so soon as they were satisfied both fell dead. And so died all three; for the one slew the other, as ye have heard, and had not the wealth. And thus may the Lord God requite traitors; for they went seeking death, and in this manner they found it, and in a way which they deserved. And the sage wisely fled it, and the gold abode free as at first. Source: William Alexander Clouston, Popular Tales and Fictions: Their Migrations and transformations , vol. 2 (Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood and Sons, 1887), pp. 383-85 . Clouston's source: Libro di Novelle, et di bel Parlar Gentile (Florence, 1572), no. 62. Clouston does not give this story a title. Return to the table of contents . The Three Crosses Germany Near a hill next to the military road in the so-called Kurrel , on a rise overgrown with trees where a side-road turns off toward Nemden, there are three stone crosses commemorating a bloody event. This place formerly belonged to the Holter borderland and was covered with woods for a great distance. At a later time the Kurrel took on a sinister reputation. Many years ago three Jews are said to have committed a robbery there. Afterward they began quarreling with one another over the loot. One of them left to bring back food and drink, and during his absence the other two plotted to murder him. This they did, but when they partook of the food that he had brought back, they died of poisoning, for their murdered comrade had had the same plan. Source: Otto von Pestel, "Die drei Kreuze," Mittheilungen des Historischen Vereins zu Osnabrück , vol. 3 (1853), pp. 222-23 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 25, 2014. Trickster Wives: Folktales of Type 1741 Trickster Wives and Maids folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1741 D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2022 Contents The Woman Who Humored Her Lover at Her Husband's Expense ( 1001 Nights ). Clever Gretel (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Clever Molly (Jamaica). The Good Husband and the Bad Wife (India). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. mythology electronic texts . The Woman Who Humored Her Lover at Her Husband's Expense 1001 Nights There was a man in Cairo, and he had a wife who never stopped boasting of her gentle blood, her obedience, her docility, and her fear of the Lord. Now she happened to have in the house a pair of fatted geese, and she also had a lover whom she kept in the background. One day the lover came to visit her and seeing beside her the plump birds, he felt his appetite sharpened by them, so he said to her, "My dear, you must cook these two geese with the best of stuffing so that we may make merry over them, for my mind is set upon eating goose flesh." She said, "That is easily done, my darling. I will slaughter them and stuff them, and you can take them home with you and eat them, and my pimp of a husband shall neither taste of them nor even smell them." "How can you do that?" he asked. She answered, "I will serve him a trick, and then give the geese to you, for no one is dearer to me than you are, and my pandering mate shall not get a single bite." Upon this agreement the lover went away. When her husband returned that evening she said to him, "How can you call yourself a man when you never invite anyone to your house? People surely will talk about you, saying that you are a miser and know nothing of generosity." "Woman," he said, "I can easily do this. Tomorrow morning I will buy meat and rice which you can cook for our dinner or supper, and I will invite one of my friends." She said to him, "No, instead of that buy a pound of mincemeat, then slaughter the two geese, and I will stuff them and fry them. Nothing is more savory than that to offer guests." He said, "I will do so for sure!" Early the next morning he slaughtered the geese, then went forth and bought a pound of meat, which he minced, plus rice and hot spices, and everything else that would be required. He carried these home to his wife, saying, "Finish your cooking before midday when I will bring my guest," and he went away. She cleaned out the geese, stuffed them with minced meat and a portion of rice and almonds and raisins, and fried them until they were well cooked; after which she sent for her lover. Upon his arrival they made merry together, then she gave him the geese, and he left her. At noon her husband came home accompanied by a friend. She admitted them, asking, "Why have you brought only one man? Go back out and fetch two or three more." "Good," he said, and went off to do as she had asked. Then the woman accosted the guest, crying out, "Oh the pity of it! By Allah, you are lost, and what a shame that you have no children." Now when the man heard these words he was struck with fear, and exclaimed, "Woman, what are you saying?" She replied, "In truth, my husband brought you here with the intention of gelding you to a castrato. I pity you, whether you live or die." Hearing this, the guest rushed out the door, just as the husband was returning with two more friends. The wife met him at the entrance, and said to him, "O man! Why did you bring home a fellow who is a thief and a ne'er-do-well?" "How so?" he asked. She answered, "The man stole the two geese and ran away." Hearing this, the husband went out and caught sight of the guest running off. He shouted to him, "Come back! Come back! At least give me one, and you can keep the other." The man cried in reply, "If you catch me you'll take both of them!" The housemaster meant the two geese, but the man who was running away thought only of himself, saying to himself, "He means that he will take only one of my testes and leave me the other." So the guest kept running, with the husband following after him. Unable to catch him, he returned to his guests, and served them a simple meal of bread and such. All the while the woman kept blaming him and nagging about the matter of the geese, which she said his friend had carried off, but which in truth she had given to her lover. Source: Richard F. Burton, The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night: Supplemental Nights , vol. 11 (London: H. S. Nichols and Company, 1894), pp. 397-400 . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. © 2013. Return to the table of contents . Clever Gretel Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm There was a cook whose name was Gretel. She wore shoes with red heels, and whenever she went out she would turn this way and that way, and was very cheerful, and thought, "You are a beautiful girl!" Then after returning home, because she was so happy, she drank a swallow of wine, and the wine gave her an appetite, so she tasted the best of what she had cooked, until she was quite full, and then said, "The cook has to know how the food tastes." One day her master said to her, "Gretel, this evening a guest is coming. Prepare two chickens for me, the best way that you can." "Yes indeed, my lord," answered Gretel. She killed the chickens, scalded them, plucked them, stuck them on the spit, and then, as evening approached, put them over the fire to roast. The chickens began to brown, and were nearly done, but the guest had not yet arrived. Gretel called to her master, "If the guest doesn't come, I'll have to take the chickens from the fire. And it will be a crying shame if they're not eaten soon, because they're at their juicy best right now." The master answered, "You're right. I'll run and fetch the guest myself." As soon as the master had turned his back, Gretel set the spit and the chickens aside and thought, "Standing here by the fire has made me sweaty and thirsty. Who knows when they will be back. I'll just run down into the cellar and take a swallow. So she ran down, lifted a jug to her lips, "God bless you, Gretel!" and took a healthy drink. "Wine belongs together," she said to herself. It's not good to keep it apart." Then she went back upstairs and placed the chickens over the fire again, basted them with butter, and cheerfully turned the spit. Because the roasting chicken smelled so good, she thought, "It could be lacking something. I'd better taste it!" She tested them with her fingers, and said, "My, these chickens are good! It's a sin and a shame that they won't be eaten at once!" She ran to the window, to see if her master and his guest were arriving, but she saw no one. Returning to the chickens, she said, "That one wing is burning. I'd better just eat it." So she cut it off and ate it, and it tasted so good, and when she had finished it, she thought, "I'd better eat the other one too, or the master will see that something is missing." When both wings had been eaten, she once again looked for her master, but could not see him. Then it occurred to her, "who knows, perhaps they've gone somewhere else and aren't coming here at all." Then she said, "Well, Gretel, be of good cheer! The one has already been cut into. Have another drink and eat the rest of it. When it's gone, you can rest! Why should this gift of God go to waste?" So she ran to the cellar once again, downed a noble drink, and finished off the first chicken with pleasure. When it was gone, and still the master had not yet returned, she looked at the other chicken and said, "Where the one is, the other should follow. The two belong together. What is right for the one, can't be wrong for the other. I believe that if I have another drink, it will do me no harm." So she took another drink, and sent the second chicken running after the first one. Just as she was making the most of it, her master returned, calling out, "Gretel, hurry up, the guest is right behind me." "Yes, master, I'm getting it ready," answered Gretel. The master saw that the table was set, and he picked up the large knife that he wanted to carve the chickens with, and stood in the hallway sharpening it. The guest arrived and knocked politely on the door. Gretel ran to see who it was, and when she saw that it was the guest, she held a finger before her mouth, and said, "Be quiet! Hurry and get away from here. If my master catches you, you'll be sorry. Yes, he invited you for an evening meal, but all he really wants is to cut off both of your ears. Listen, he's sharpening his knife for it right now." The guest heard the whetting and ran down the steps as fast as he could. Then Gretel, who was not a bit lazy, ran to her master, crying, "Just what kind of a guest did you invite?" "What do you mean, Gretel?" "Why," she said, "he took both of the chickens off the platter, just as I was about to carry them out, and then ran away with them." "Now that's a fine tune!" said the master, feeling sorry about the loss of the good chickens. "At the least, he could have left one of them, so I would have something to eat." He called out to him to stop, but the guest pretended not to hear. Therefore he ran after him, the knife still in his hand, shouting, "Just one! Just one!" But the guest thought that he wanted him to give up just one of his ears, so he ran as though there were a fire burning beneath him, in order to get home with both ears. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Das kluge Grethel," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 7th ed., vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 77, pp. 395-97 . Return to the table of contents . Clever Molly May Jamaica Once Anansi went out to invite a friend to dinner. Little Molly May was his servant, so he left her to roast a turkey for dinner. Anansi filled the wine-jug, laid the table, put on his frock coat and his top hat, took his walking-stick and went out for his friend. Molly May roasted the turkey. Seeing that it looked so nice and charming, she thought that she would take a piece; so she did, and it tasted so nice she took another piece. That tasted so nice she took a next piece and a sip of the wine, and she sipped and tasted till at last she had eaten up the whole turkey and drunk the whole of the wine. She saw the master coming; so she ran in swift haste, took up the bones, fixed them nicely in the dish, covered the dish, and carried it and laid it on the table. When the master came, he sent the visitor into the house and said to Molly May, "Hullo, deh! everyt'ing all right?" She said, "Yes, sah! all is right." So the master took up the carving-knife and went outside to sharpen it. Molly ran inside and told the visitor that the master was sharpening the knife to cut off one of his hands; the visitor in swift haste left the house. Then Molly went outside and told the master that the visitor had eaten all the turkey and drunk the wine. The master ran through one door and, seeing all the bones on the table, went through the other. The visitor was running for his life and Anansi went running after him, calling "Leave one! leave one!" He meant leave one (side of) the turkey, but the visitor thought he meant one of his hands, so he ran for his life. Source (Internet Archive): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 130, p. 162 . Source (Sacred Texts): Martha Warren Beckwith, Jamaica Anansi Stories (New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1924), no. 130, p. 162 . Beckwith's informant: Emily Alexander, Mandeville. Return to the table of contents . The Good Husband and the Bad Wife India In a remote village there lived a Brahman whose good nature and charitable disposition were proverbial. Equally proverbial also were the ill nature and uncharitable disposition of the Brahmani, his wife. But as Paramêsvara (God) had joined them in matrimony, they had to live together as husband and wife, though their temperaments were so incompatible. Every day the Brahman had a taste of his wife's ill temper, and if any other Brahman was invited to dinner by him, his wife, somehow or other, would manage to drive him away. One fine summer morning a rather stupid Brahman friend of his came to visit our hero and was at once invited to dinner. He told his wife to have dinner ready earlier than usual, and went off to the river to bathe. His friend, not feeling very well that day, wanted a hot bath at the house, and so did not follow him to the river, but remained sitting in the outer verandah. If any other guest had come, the wife would have accused him of greediness to his face and sent him away, but this visitor seemed to be a special friend of her lord, so she did not like to say anything; but she devised a plan to make him go away of his own accord. She proceeded to smear the ground before her husband's friend with cow dung, and placed in the midst of it a long pestle, supporting one end of it against the wall. She next approached the pestle most solemnly and performed worship ( pûjâ ) to it. The guest did not in the least understand what she was doing, and respectfully asked her what it all meant. "This is what is called pestle worship," she replied. "I do it as a daily duty, and this pestle is intended to break the head of some human being in honor of a goddess, whose feet are most devoutly worshipped by my husband. Every day as soon as he returns from his bath in the river, he takes this pestle, which I am ordered to keep ready for him before his return, and with it breaks the head of any human being whom he has managed to get hold of by inviting him to a meal. This is his tribute ( dakshinâ ) to the goddess; today you are the victim." The guest was much alarmed. "What! break the head of a guest! I at any rate shall not be deceived today," thought he, and prepared to run away. The Brahman's wife appeared to sympathize with his sad plight, and said, "Really, I do pity you. But there is one thing you can do now to save yourself. If you go out by the front door and walk down the street my husband may follow you, so you had better go out by the back door." To this plan the guest most thankfully agreed, and hastily ran off by the back door. Almost immediately our hero returned from his bath, but before he could arrive his wife had cleaned up the place she had prepared for the pestle worship, and when the Brahman, not finding his friend in the house, inquired of her as to what had become of him, she said in seeming anger, "The greedy brute! he wanted me to give him this pestle -- this very pestle which I brought forty years ago as a dowry from my mother's house, and when I refused he ran away by the back yard in haste." But her kind-hearted lord observed that he would rather lose the pestle than his guest, even though it was a part of his wife's dowry, and more than forty years old. So he ran off with the pestle in his hand after his friend, crying out, "Oh Brahman! Oh Brahman! Stop please, and take the pestle." But the story told by the old woman now seemed all the more true to the guest when he saw her husband running after him, and so he said, "You and your pestle may go where you please. Never more will you catch me in your house," and ran away. Source: Georgiana Kingscote and Pandit Natesa Sástrî, Tales of the Sun; or, Folklore of Southern India (London: W. H. Allen, 1890), no. 11, pp. 131-34 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 27, 2022. Tristan and Isolde Tristan and Isolde a Celtic legend as recorded in the medieval epics of Gottfried von Strassburg and Thomas of Britain and retold by D. L. Ashliman © 2003-2013 Before now many have told the love story of Tristan and Isolde, but none have done so more faithfully than Thomas, and it is primarily his authentic version that I, Gottfried, follow in presenting to all noble hearts the following tale of love, sacred yet forbidden, healing yet destructive, fulfilling yet frustrating, tyrannical yet benevolent. All with noble hearts will understand. May this tale enhance their minds, enrich their lives, and fortify their love. In Parmenie, a domain in Brittany, there lived a noble lord named Rivalin. Wishing to gain the experience and learning that can only be obtained by foreign travel, Rivalin set sail for the mighty castle Tintagel in Cornwall, where he wished to join the court of King Mark, whose chivalry, polish, and courtly grace were known well beyond his double realm of Cornwall and England. Rivalin participated in a great jousting festival held by King Mark, where he proved himself both a paragon of courtly charm and a champion of knightly skills. Hence he was well received by King Mark's royal court, and very cordially welcomed by King Mark's beautiful sister Princess Blancheflor. During Rivalin's stay at Tintagel an enemy invaded Cornwall. Noble Rivalin joined his host in defending his realm. He fought bravely, but while repelling the invaders he was severely wounded. King Mark's men carried him, half dead, back to Tintagel. The beautiful Princess Blancheflor, hearing that the strange knight lay nearly dead, disguised herself has a medicine woman and thus gained entry to his quarters. Seeing her beloved lying there more dead than alive caused her to swoon, and she fell down beside him, her cheek against his. Slowly regaining consciousness, she took him into her arms and kissed him repeatedly. Her kisses revived him, and as God willed it, they consummated their love, and she conceived a child. Thus it came to pass that Rivalin recovered completely from his battle wound, although he never would recover from the sweet wound of Blanchefor's love, and that was as it should be. Not long afterward Rivalin learned that an old enemy was threatening his own realm, Parmenie. "I must sail home," he said to Blancheflor," and explained the necessity of his sudden departure. Knowing that his absence would put the beautiful princess in grave danger, because of her strict guardian and brother King Mark, Rivalin arranged for her to sneak away in the dead of night and join his retinue. They arrived safely in Parmenie, where they were received by Rivalin's faithful marshal Rual. Rivalin's and Blancheflor's first act upon arriving home was to have their union sealed according to Christian rite. Soon afterward he had to leave his new bride to defend his realm. A fierce battle ensued, and on both sides many brave knights were killed. Tragically, good and noble Rivalin was among the dead. The terrible message was carried to fair Blancheflor, and upon hearing the grievous news, she fell to the ground, twisting and turning with grief and with the pangs of childbirth. On that tragic day Blancheflor bore a healthy little son, but she herself did not recover. Faithful Rual and his good wife adopted the orphaned boy as one of their own, thus hiding him from his deceased father's enemies. Because of the events surrounding his birth they named him Tristan from the word "triste," which stands for sorrow. Tristan was taught all the arts of chivalry: foreign languages, music, horsemanship, athletics, tournament skills, and courtly pastimes. He proved himself an able learner, soon surpassing even his tutors in these arts and skills, and many more. One day -- Tristan was now fourteen years old -- a merchant ship from Norway pulled ashore not far from the castle where Tristan lived with Rual and his family. Curious about the traders' offerings, Tristan and his two brothers (as he supposed Rual's sons to be) approached the ship. Tristan's attention immediately turned to a chess board and a set of beautifully carved pieces. "Do you play chess?" he asked the merchants in perfect Norwegian. One of them accepted his challenge, and they sat down to play. Fascinated by his grace, skill, and good looks, the Norwegians hatched a plot to kidnap him. Keeping him engaged with the chess game, they weighed anchor and set sail. But by God's will a fierce storm arose, and the Norwegians feared that they would all perish. Sensing that their wicked act had brought about the tempest, they avowed that they would immediately release their captive if the storm would only abate. The wind and waves immediately slackened, and in keeping with their promise, they set the boy free on the nearest shore, which, as fate would have it, was on the coast of Cornwall. Tristan, sole alone, wandered through the wilderness until he came to a forest trail. This led to a wider path, which in turn brought him to a country road. On this road he met two pilgrims. "Dear child," they asked, "who are you, and what has brought you to this wild place?" Tristan cautiously told them a pretty tale. "I was born in this land," he said in perfect Cornish. "I came out hunting with some of my countrymen early today, but somehow I have become separated from them." The pious pilgrims took him under their care and continued their journey. Not long afterward they heard the sound of horns, horses, and hounds, and Tristan said, "That will be my hunting companions. Thank you for your company. I must leave you now and rejoin my party." And with that he walked in the direction of the sounds. The huntsmen had just killed a stag and were about to dress it out when Tristan approached them. "No!" he shouted with authority. "You are doing it all wrong." And then with confidence and style he showed them how a stag should be dressed out, with all the ceremony befitting a royal hunting party. Accompanied by their newly found companion and tutor, the huntsmen returned to Tintagel, for they did indeed belong to King Mark's court. Impressed with the stranger's grace and skill, King Mark immediately appointed the boy (who unbeknownst to him was his own nephew, and the rightful heir to his throne) as his chief huntsman. Hunting, of course, was not Tristan's only skill. He soon had opportunity to demonstrate the other courtly arts that he had learned, especially the art of music. His abilities on the harp, the lyre, and the fiddle -- indeed on all stringed instruments -- were unmatched by any minstrel in the kingdom. "A fourteen-year-old boy has mastered all the arts there are!" said his astounded admirers." King Mark soon made him his principal companion, confidant, and courtier. Let us now return to Parmenie and poor Rual. Upon discovering that his foster son had been abducted, he immediately set sail in pursuit of the Norwegian merchants. He followed them for four long years, finally discovering where they had cast their prisoner ashore. He made his way to Cornwall, and in spite of his ragged and unkempt appearance was recognized by Tristan, now a person of power and influence. Rual revealed everything that he knew of Tristan's background both to his foster son and to King Mark. Elated to learn that the boy whom he had grown to respect and admire was his own nephew, King Mark announced to his court that Tristan was the heir to his kingdom and vowed that to protect Tristan's inheritance and succession to the throne he, King Mark, would never marry. Soon afterward, Tristan, in a regal ceremony, was invested with full knighthood. Our story now takes us to Ireland, then ruled by King Gurmun and Queen Isolde. King Gurmun, through Queen Isolde's brother Morold, was in those years successfully extracting a tribute from Cornwall and England. Morold, a giant, collected the tribute, which grew more oppressive every year, but because of his great strength and skill, no one in King Mark's court dared challenge him. Tristan determined to bring this oppression to an end and challenged Morold to a duel. "With right on my side I cannot fail!" he declared. A small island off the coast of Cornwall, in good view of the mainland, was chosen for the battleground. Some say that this duel was a battle between two champions. In truth, it was a battle of eight. Morold had the strength of four men, but fighting on Tristan's side were God, Right, and a Willing Heart. Each warrior betook himself to the island in a small boat, Morold first, followed by Tristan. Immediately upon landing, Tristan set his own boat adrift. "Why have you set your boat adrift?" asked the giant. "Only one of us shall return from this island," answered Tristan. "And your boat will be quite large enough for me." The battle ensued with fury, and Morold was the first to draw blood, striking Tristan in the thigh with his sword. "What now?" he gloated. "I have proven your cause unjust. You are wounded by a poisoned sword, and my sister, Queen Isolde, is the only person alive who might cure you. If you will accept your liability for tribute, I will take you to her; otherwise you are doomed." Tristan answered by charging his horse against Morold's steed, bowling it over and upsetting the rider. Morold tried to remount, but Tristan caught him with one foot in the stirrup and the other on the ground. With one mighty blow Tristan cut off one of the giant's arms, and with a second blow he split his opponent's head, leaving a splinter from his sword embedded in the dying man's skull. "What now? he shouted. "You seem to be rather seriously wounded yourself! You are in a bad way! You too could use your sister's doctoring!" With that he cut off the giant's head, and then triumphantly returned to the mainland, applauded by cheering onlookers. Morold had spoken the truth, and as time passed, Tristan's wound grew ever more serious. Knowing that without Queen Isolde's help he would soon perish, he called for a few trustworthy men, and they set sail for Ireland. They dropped anchor offshore from Dublin, and Tristan had himself put in a small boat with a little food and water and his harp. Near death, but still able to play exquisitely on the harp, Tristan lay in the bottom of the boat playing. Soon some Dubliners heard the sweet music coming from the drifting boat and went to investigate. The wounded man claimed to be a court minstrel who had been kidnapped and injured by pirates, then set adrift to perish at sea. The dying stranger, whose charm and musical ability impressed everyone, was taken to the queen, whose healing skill was unequalled near and far. "You poor minstrel," she said, "you have a poisoned wound." "Is that true?" replied Tristan. "I place myself in God's hands. May he reward anyone who might help me." "I can help you, good minstrel," replied the queen. "What is your name?" "Tantris," he replied. "My countrymen, the ones who rescued you, claim that you play the harp most beautifully. Is that so?" The minstrel responded by playing a few strains, which so impressed the queen that she said, "I will cure you if you will become my daughter's tutor." Tristan promised to do so. The queen began her cure forthwith, and the minstrel was soon able to begin tutoring the princess, whose name was also Isolde, and whose beauty knew no equal. Isolde the Fair proved to be an eager and gifted pupil, playing the harp exquisitely under Tristan's tutelage and singing most beautifully with his accompaniment. Indeed, her singing was so magical that it could well be compared to that of the sirens. By now Tristan had fully recovered, and he wished to return to his home in Cornwall. Knowing that Queen Isolde would not readily give him leave to go, Tristan told her that he had left a beloved wife at home, to whom he owed his first loyalty. The good queen, not wanting to violate the vows of holy wedlock and the bonds of marital love, wished Tristan farewell and gave him his leave. Tristan arrived safely in Cornwall, where he was joyously welcomed by King Mark, but jealously received by the king's barons, who found it unseemly that their king was foregoing marriage in order to protect a nephew's inheritance. They sought at every turn to discredit Tristan, and to make Mark renounce his vow to never marry. Now some say that at this juncture a swallow brought a single hair of Princess Isolde's from Ireland to Cornwall, and that this hair was so imbued with the princess's beauty that King Mark fell in love with it at once, then insisted on marrying its former owner. But this tale is pure fantasy, and whoever tells the story thusly is talking nonsense! The truth of the matter is that Tristan, in reporting how he had tricked the Irish queen into healing him, gave all deserved praise to the beauty and courtly charm of Princess Isolde. In this manner did King Mark decide that if he were to marry at all, Princess Isolde of Ireland, and she alone, would be his bride. Not only would she be a beautiful and royal bride, but their marriage would bring him a powerful ally in the Kingdom of Ireland. But how could he, the mortal enemy of her mother and father, hope to woo her? Tristan volunteered to be his uncle's spokesman and once again set sail for Ireland. He knew that Ireland was being plagued by a fierce dragon, and that the king had offered the hand of his daughter to whomsoever could kill the grisly serpent. Armed with faith and hope, plus a spear and a sword, he sought out the dragon and attacked it bravely. A fierce battle ensued. The serpent defended itself with smoke and fire, then counterattacked with teeth and claws, but in the end Tristan was victorious. The dragon lay dead before him. With great effort he pried open its great jaws, cut out its tongue, put it into his shirt as a trophy, then walked away. Exhausted from the fight and poisoned by the tongue inside his shirt, Tristan nearly lost consciousness. He kept himself alive by dragging himself into a cool pond, where he lay with only his head above water. Meanwhile, the king's chief steward, who had long made unseemly advances toward Princess Isolde, but whom she had always refused, came upon the dead dragon. Seizing the opportunity, he brought back friends to witness that he had killed the dragon, thus claiming the right to marry the princess. They cut off the dragon's head and carried it to the castle as proof of his deed. Princess Isolde was beside herself in anguish when she learned who was claiming the right to marry her, and she shared her grief with her mother, the queen. Now Queen Isolde was well versed in the arts of magic, and a vision came to her in a dream, a vision that showed her a handsome stranger pursuing the dragon, killing it, then falling exhausted and ill to the ground. Mother and daughter together ran to the spot where the dragon had been killed, hoping against hope to find the hero who had actually defeated the serpent. Their hopes were realized when they discovered Tristan, again more dead than alive, lying in the pool of water. Seeking to revive him, they discovered and removed the poisonous dragon's tongue, then Princess Isolde recognized him. "This is Tantris the minstrel!" she cried. "Are you Tantris?" asked the queen. "Yes, I am," answered Tristan, already somewhat recovered. "And what brings you back to Ireland?" asked the queen. "I have come in the company of a group of merchants," he claimed. "But we were ill received by your countrymen. I knew that a dragon was laying waste to your land, so I sought to kill it in order to gain her majesty's favor and protection, thus enabling us to trade at peace with your people." The queen accepted this story and replied, "Tantris, you have done us a great service, and you have my word of honor that no harm shall befall you in Ireland. And furthermore, I will use my medical abilities to bring you back to health." And so it came to pass that Tristan became Queen Isolde's patient for a second time. The princess aided her mother in nursing the sick man, and she found herself repeatedly looking at him, scanning his body, his hands, and his face. What she saw pleased her very well -- very well, indeed. One day he was in his bath when Isolde quietly stole in. She looked at him, then at his clothing and weapons which lay nearby, then at him again, then at his sword. There was a nick in his sword. She studied it carefully. "Heaven help me!" she said to herself. "I recognize that nick. I have seen the missing piece. It is the piece that was taken from my Uncle Morold's skull!" She immediately picked up the sword and held it threateningly over the defenseless Tristan. "Who are you?" she shouted. "How did this sword come into your possession? This is the sword that the Cornish knight Tristan used to kill my Uncle Morold!" "I am Tantris the minstrel," said he. "Tan-tris, Tris-tan, Tan-tris, Tris-tan," she said speaking the syllables forward and backward. "Tantris and Tristan are one and the same, and they both shall die with this sword!" She raised the sword ready to strike, but just then her mother the queen entered the room. "Are you out of your senses?" she asked. Without relaxing her grip on the sword, Isolde the Fair quickly explained her suspicions to her mother. The mother replied, "Be he Tantris the minstrel or Tristan the knight, I have given him my oath of protection, and that oath must be honored!" Tristan took advantage of this reprieve and said, "Listen, dear ladies. I admit that I have caused you severe grief in the past, but it was only under great duress. I can and will make amends to you. I know that Princess Isolde is being claimed by an unworthy man whom she loathes. I promise to you both that I will put an end to his unwarranted claim, and at the same time arrange for the princess to marry a noble and powerful king." Mother and daughter accepted his offer, and Tristan finished his bath in peace. The first part of Tristan's offer was easily fulfilled. At a public ceremony the steward presented the dragon's head to the king and insisted that he be given the princess, as promised. Tristan made his appearance. "Did the dragon have a tongue when you killed it?" he asked. "But of course. What sort of dragon would have no tongue?" "A dead dragon. One whose tongue had already been cut out by the person who actually killed it." So saying, Tristan pried open the dragon's jaws and revealed to all that the tongue was missing. He then produced the tongue, which fitted perfectly into the open space. "You killed a dead dragon," continued Tristan, gloating. "It was already dead, for I myself killed it, and I have the tongue as proof." The steward had no response, and retreated from the hall, pursued by the mocking jeers of all those assembled there. The second part of Tristan's promise -- to arrange a marriage between Princess Isolde and a worthy king -- was also quickly fulfilled, for King Mark had already entered into such an agreement before Tristan had set forth on his wooing expedition. Arrangements were quickly made for Princess Isolde to sail to Cornwall to become King Mark's bride. To assure the couple's marital happiness, Queen Isolde prepared a love potion that she secretly gave to Brangaene, the younger Isolde's female companion and confidante. "Guard this bottle with your life," she said, "and see to it that Princess Isolde and King Mark drink this potion together. It will make them love one another, and only one another, forever." The passage to Cornwall was not a smooth one. Not only was there personal conflict between Tristan and Isolde, but there was stormy weather as well. The passengers and crew members were so beset with seasickness that Tristan ordered that the ship be brought to land at the earliest opportunity so they could walk about on firm ground and regain their well-being. Everyone went ashore except for Isolde, who chose to remain in her cabin, and Tristan, who stayed behind to console her. They talked for a while about this and about that, and then Tristan asked if she did not have something to drink. They found a small bottle that they thought to be wine, then drank from it together. That moment Brangaene returned. Recognizing the fateful bottle, she grabbed it from their hands and flung it into the raging sea. "Woe is me!" she cried. "My honor is finished! This drink will be your death!" In an instant the enmity between Tristan and Isolde was gone. Isolde's hatred vanished, and Tristan's suspicions disappeared. They now knew only love and felt only desire for one another. They feasted on each other's eyes. Each one resigned body and soul to the other. This was the beginning of a love that would never die. The weather turned fair, and once again the ship set sail for Tintagel. All the while Tristan and Isolde reveled in their intimacy, as was good and proper. However, their joy was not without concern. Isolde was King Mark's promised bride, and she was no longer a virgin. What could be done? There is no need to make a long story of it. In short, Brangaene was asked to be a substitute bride for the wedding night, and she knew not how to refuse. Yes, King Mark married Princess Isolde with great pomp and ceremony, but under cover of darkness and disguise, it was fair Brangaene whom he took to bed that first night. Isolde was of gold. Brangaene was of brass. King Mark was satisfied with brass. Time went by. Tristan enjoyed, as before, King Mark's complete trust and confidence. He also enjoyed King Mark's new queen. There are many stories about trysts and escapes. The king's marshals and councilors, who always had been envious of young Tristan, suspected much, but could prove nothing. Not only were Tristan and Isolde clever, but they were lucky as well. It sometimes seemed that heaven itself had blessed their union, forbidden by some, but promoted and protected by fate. Mark, incited by his councilors, set one trap after another, but somehow Tristan and Isolde always escaped. With time, however, Mark's suspicion grew so intense that Isolde came to realize that only dramatic proof would establish her innocence. Comfortable with the self-assurance that she was in the right, she agreed to undergo the ordeal of the red-hot iron. Yes, God would protect her and allow her to carry a red-hot iron without injury. While the clerical arrangements were being made, Isolde secretly communicated her plan to Tristan. Isolde and her party traveled by ship to the appointed site of the ordeal. They landed, but the water was too deep to allow Isolde to go ashore without getting wet. A pilgrim stood on the bank looking on. (Actually it was Tristan, in disguise, following Isolde's instructions.) Isolde had the pilgrim summoned to carry her ashore. He did as commanded, and she whispered into his ear to stumble and drop her as he climbed onto the bank. He did so, and the two of them fell together, lying next to one another on the ground. Her servants began to belabor the poor man with sticks, but she begged them to forgive him, as he was an innocent old holy man. All was ready for the ordeal. The iron had been duly blessed and heated red hot. A priest received Isolde's oath: "I do solemnly swear, by all that is holy, and before these witnesses, that I have never lain with a man except for my husband King Mark and this holy pilgrim, as you all have just seen." This oath being the sacred truth, God protected Isolde, and she carried the red-hot iron without injury. No one could now doubt her innocence, and Tristan and Isolde safely returned to their secret meetings. Nonetheless, suspicions were quickly reborn and rumors rekindled. King Mark, in order to protect his honor, now saw no other option but to banish his nephew and his wife from his kingdom. Gathering together a few necessities, Tristan and Isolde retreated into the woods where they found refuge in a cave, a cave that had been cut into a mountain as a place of refuge and love-making in heathen times. This cave became their temple of love. Its altar was a bed made of crystal. Tristan and Isolde lived together in this cave for many days, sustaining themselves, some say from hunting, but others say from love alone. One day their solitude was interrupted by the sound of a hunting party: horses, hounds, and horns. Suspecting that the huntsmen might discover them, Tristan drew his sword, then placed it naked between himself and Isolde as they lay there on their crystal bed. King Mark himself was in the hunting party, and just as Tristan had suspected, one of the huntsmen discovered the cave and peeped in through an opening. Observing the two lying on their bed, separated by a naked sword, the huntsman ran to King Mark and reported what he had seen. Mark came and saw for himself his wife and his nephew separated by a sword, and he assumed that this could only be a sign of their fidelity and loyalty toward him: her fidelity as a wife and his loyalty as an honorable knight. So thinking, he brought them back to his court, restoring each to his or her former position. But once again suspicions were reborn and rumors rekindled, and King Mark's jealous watch over his wife became ever more secure. With time the two lovers, frustrated with their increasingly unsuccessful attempts to be alone with each other, decided to separate. Tristan would seek his fortune in another land. With fond memories and tender kisses they sorrowfully wished one another happiness for the future, each one knowing that it could not be so. Isolde gave Tristan a ring, a sign of her undying love, and Tristan departed in deep sorrow, boarding the first ship for Normandy. For some time he sought distraction on the battlefield, seeking out wars and conflicts in foreign lands. Finally he settled on an island called Arundel between England and Brittany, where he offered his services to a knight named Kaedin, who had a beautiful unmarried sister. She was called Isolde of the White Hands. Living in Kaedin's castle, Tristan frequently came into contact with Isolde of the White Hands, and with time he found himself becoming more and more attracted to her. He himself did not know why. Was it her beauty? Or was it her name? Was it the person? Or was it a phantom memory of times past that could never be relived? Was it the essence of love itself? He did not know. Gottfried's account breaks off at this point, but the story, as told by Thomas of Britain and others, continues: Tristan's feelings had no center. His frustration and confusion found no satisfaction. He could not surrender to his desires, for he did not know what he wanted. Finally he did what others expected him to do. He married Isolde of the White Hands. On their wedding night he did not sleep close to her, although it was obvious that she desired him. "I have an old wound," he explained, "and tonight it is giving me much pain. I fear that any extra exertion will spread its poison throughout my whole body." She accepted his explanation, and they fell asleep, together in one bed, but still apart. Some time later Isolde of the White Hands was riding a horse in the company of her brother when they came to a pool of water. "Just ride through it," shouted Kaedin. And so she did, but when the water grew so deep that it splashed against her thighs, she let out a cry and a strange burst of laughter. Later her brother asked her the meaning of this strange laugh. She replied, "I laughed out loud because that bold water came higher on my thighs than my husband has ever done." This confession troubled Kaedin greatly, and he confronted his friend Tristan for an explanation. No longer willing to run away from the truth, Tristan told Kaedin everything: about the love potion, his love affair with Isolde the Fair, and his unsuccessful attempt to start life anew without her. The conclusion of this tale is told in many ways, but I, Thomas, will tell you what I consider to be the true and authentic version. While in the service of Kaedin Tristan was wounded by a poisoned spear. With great difficulty he made it back home. Knowing that only Isolde the Fair had the ability to cure him, he sent Kaedin to England, where Isolde now resided, hoping to convince her to return with him. "Outfit your ship with a black sail and a white sail," instructed Tristan. "If she will return with you, then use the white sail, otherwise hoist the black sail. In this manner I will be able to know my fate before your ship lands." Accepting these instructions and taking with him the ring that Isolde the Fair had given Tristan on his departure, Kaedin set sail for London. Unbeknown to Tristan and Kaedin, Isolde of the White Hands had overheard their conversation, so she knew the purpose of her brother's mission and the code by which he was to report his success or failure. Kaedin's mission was a success. As soon as she saw the ring, Isolde the Fair knew it had come from her beloved Tristan, and she joined Kaedin for the return trip. As instructed, Kaedin hoisted the white sail. Tristan, lying on his sickbed, asked his wife if she could see a ship approaching. "Yes, indeed," she replied, "there is one just a little way off." "What color is its sail?" asked Tristan. "It is a black one," she lied. "Solid black." "God save you, Isolde!" was his only reply. "Dearest Isolde, dearest Isolde, dearest Isolde." Then, on the fourth repetition of "dearest Isolde" he closed his eyes and died. A short time later the ship landed, and Isolde the Fair came running to the spot where Tristan lay dead. She took him into her arms and lay next to him, with her cheek against his. "You have given up your life because of me," she cried, "and now, as a true lover, I shall die for you." These were her last words. The lovers' bodies were buried side by side. From his grave grew a vine and from her grave grew a rosebush. As they reached toward heaven the vine's and the rosebush's branches intertwined with one another, showing that in the end love conquers all. I have used the following translation: Gottfried von Strassburg, Tristan , with the surviving of fragments of the Tristran of Thomas, translated by A. T. Hatto (Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books, 1960). Medieval sources include Thomas of Britain (ca. 1160), Eilhart von Oberge (ca. 1170), Béroul (ca. 1200), Gottfried von Strassburg (ca. 1210), and Brother Robert of Norway (ca 1260). Variant spellings of the hero's and heroine's names include Tristan, Tristran, Tristram, Tristrem, Isolde, Iseult, Isolt, Isot, Yseult, and Ysolt. Richard Wagner's opera Tristan und Isolde was first performed in 1865. Link to the Middle High German text of Gottfried's Tristan , from the Bibliotheca Augustana at the University of Augsburg. Link to Dragon Slayers: An Index Page . Link to a Scottish folk legend that includes a "love-death" episode similar to the tragic conclusion of Tristan and Isolde : The Tragedy of Isle Maree . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 13, 2013. Twigmuntus, Cowbelliantus, Perchnosius Twigmuntus, Cowbelliantus, Perchnosius the story of a simple lad who confounds a group of scholars by pretending to know Latin a Swedish folktale of Aarne-Thompson type 1641C edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999 Contents Twigmuntus, Cowbelliantus, Perchnosius (Sweden). Links to related tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's index of folklore and mythology electronic texts . Twigmuntus, Cowbelliantus, Perchnosius Sweden Once upon a time there was a king who was so very learned that no parson in the whole world could surpass him. In fact, he was so learned that ordinary folks could hardly understand what he said, nor could he understand them either. But in order to have someone to talk with, he procured seven wise professors, who were not quite so learned as himself, but who were just able to interpret his learned sayings, so that people could apprehend them, and who could twist and turn about the talk of ordinary folk so that it became sufficiently learned and complicated for the king to understand it. The king had no son, but he had a daughter, and in order that she should be happily married, and the country governed according to the fundamental principles of his learning, he issued an edict that he who was so learned as to put the king and his professors to silence should have his daughter and half the kingdom there and then. But anyone who attempted the task and did not succeed, should lose his head for having dared to exchange words with the king. That was no joke. But the princess was so fair and beautiful that it was no joke to gaze at her either. And the king did not keep her caged up, for anyone who wished could see her. There came princes and counts and barons and parsons and doctors, and learned persons from all quarters of the world. And no sooner did they see the princess than they one and all wanted to try their luck. But, however learned they were, their learning never proved sufficient, and every one of them lost his head. Over in a corner of the kingdom there lived a farmer, who had a son. This lad was not stupid. He was quick of apprehension and sharp-witted, and he was not afraid of anything. When the king's edict came to this out-of-the-way place, and the parson had read it from the pulpit, the lad wanted to try his luck. "He who nothing risks, nothing wins," thought the lad. And so he went to the parson and told him that if he would give him lessons in the evenings, he would work for the parson in the daytime, but he wanted to become so learned that he could try a bout with the king and his professors. "Whoever means to compete with them must be able to do something more than munch bread," said the parson. "That may be," said the lad, "but I'll try my luck." The parson thought, of course, that he was mad, but when he could get such a clever hand to work for him only for his keep, he thought he could not very well say no. And so the lad got what he wanted. He worked for the parson in the daytime, and the parson read with him in the evening. And in this way they went on for some time, but at last the lad grew tired of his book. "I am not going to sit here and read and grind away, and lose what few wits I have," he said. "And it won't be of much help either, for if you are lucky things will come right of themselves, and if you are not lucky you'll never make a silk purse out of a sow's ear." And with this he pitched the books on the shelf and went his way. All at once he came to a large forest, where the trees and bushes were so thick that it was with difficulty he could get along. While he was thus pushing his way through, he began wondering what he should say when he came to the king's palace, and how best he could make use of the learning he had picked up from the parson. All of a sudden the twig of a tree struck him across his mouth, so that his teeth rattled. "That is Twigmuntus," he said. A little while after he came to a meadow, where a cow was standing, bellowing so furiously that it almost deafened him. "That is Cowbelliantus," he said. He then came to a river, but as there was neither bridge nor planks across it, he had to put his clothes on his head and swim across. While he was swimming a perch came and bit him on the nose. "That is Perchnosius," he said. At last he came to the king's palace, where things did not look at all pleasant, for there were men's heads stuck on long stakes round about, and they grinned so horribly that they were enough to frighten anyone out of his wits. But the lad was not easily frightened. "God's peace!" he said, and raised his cap. "There you stick and grin at me. but who knows if I may not be keeping you company before the day is over, and be grinning with you at others? But if I happen to be alive, you shall not stick there any longer gaping at people," he said. So he went up to the palace and knocked at the gate. The guard came out and asked what he wanted. "I have come to try my luck with the princess," said the lad. "You?" said the guard. "Well, you're a likely one, you are! Have you lost your senses? There have been princes and counts and barons and parsons and doctors and learned persons here, and all of them have had to pay with their heads for that pleasure; and yet you think you'll succeed!" he said. "I should say it is no concern of yours," said the lad. "Just open the gate, and you'll see one who's not afraid of anything." But the guard would not let him in. "Do as I tell you," said the lad, "or there'll be a fine to-do!" But the guard would not. The lad then seized him by the collar and flung him against the wall, so that it creaked. And then he walked straight in to the king, who sat in his parlor with all his seven professors about him. Their faces were long and thin, and they looked like puny sickly persons about to die. They were sitting with their heads on one side meditating and staring at the floor. Then one of them, who looked up, asked the lad in ordinary language, "Who are you?" "A suitor," said the lad. "Do you want to try for the princess's hand?" "Well, that's about it!" said the lad. "Have you lost your wits? There have been princes and counts and barons and parsons and doctors and learned persons here, and all of them have gone headless away. So you had better turn about and get away while your head is on your shoulders," he said. "Don't trouble yourself on that account, but rather think of the head on your own shoulders," said the lad. "You look after yours, and I'll take care of mine! So just begin, and let me hear how much wit you have got, for I don't think you look so very clever," he said. The first professor then began a long harangue of gibberish. And when he had finished the second went on. And then the third. And in this way they continued till at length it was the turn of the seventh. The lad did not understand a single word of it all, but he didn't lose courage for all that. He only nodded his approval to all of it. When the last had finished his harangue he asked, "Can you reply to that?" "That's easy enough," said the lad. "Why, when I was in my cradle and in my go-cart I could twist my mouth about and prate and jabber like you," he said. "But since you are so terribly learned, I'll put a question to you, and that shall not be a long one: Twigmuntus, Cowbelliantus, Perchnosius? Can you give me an answer to that?" And now you should have seen how they stretched their necks and strained their ears. They put on their spectacles and began to look into their books and turn over the leaves. But while they were searching and meditating, the lad put his hands in his trouser pockets, and looked so frank and fearless that they could not help admiring him, and wondering that one who was so young could be so learned and yet look just like other people. "Well, how are you getting on?" said the lad. "Cannot all your learning help you to open your mouths, so that I can have an answer to my question?" he said. Then they began to ponder and meditate, and then they glanced at the ceiling, and then they stared at the walls, and then they fixed their eyes upon the floor. But they could not give him any answer, nor could the king himself, although he was much more learned than all the others together. They had to give it up, and the lad got the princess and half the kingdom. This he ruled in his own way, and if it did not fare better, it did not fare worse for him than for the king with all his fundamental principles. Source: G. Djurklo, Fairy Tales from the Swedish , translated by H. L. Brækstad (Philadelphia and New York: J. B. Lippincott Company, 1901), pp. 78-84. Return to the table of contents . Links to related tales Doctor Know-All and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 1641. The Emperor's New Clothes and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 1620. Return to The table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's index of folklore and mythology electronic texts . Revised November 11, 1999. The Two Travelers: Truth and Falsehood The Two Travelers: Truth and Falsehood folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 613 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2008-2014 Contents Dharmabuddhi and Pâpabuddhi (India). The Two Peasants (Sri Lanka). The Two Brothers (Tibet). The Heathen and the Jew (Jewish). True and Untrue (Norway). The Two Travelers (Germany). Right Always Remains Right (Upper Lusatia [Germany/Poland]). The Travels of Truth and Falsehood (Hungary). The Grateful Beasts (Hungary). Honesty and Dishonesty (Russia). Justice or Injustice? Which Is Best? (Serbia). The Two Brothers (Slavic). The Two Brothers (Georgia). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Dharmabuddhi and Pâpabuddhi The Panchatantra In a certain place there lived two friends, Dharmabuddhi, which means "having a just heart" and Pâpabuddhi, which means "having an unjust heart." One day Pâpabuddhi thought to himself, "I am a simpleton, plagued with poverty. I am going to travel abroad with Dharmabuddhi, and earn money with his help. Then I will cheat him out of it and thus gain a good situation for myself." One day he said to Dharmabuddhi, "Listen, friend! When you are old, which of your deeds will you be able to remember? You have never seen a foreign country, so what will you be able to tell the young people? After all, don't they say: His birth has borne no fruit, who knows not foreign lands, many languages, customs, and the like. And also: One never properly grasps knowledge, wealth, and art, until joyfully one has wandered from one land to another. " Dharmabuddhi, as soon as he had heard these words, took leave from his parents with a joyful heart, and one happy day set forth for foreign lands. Through their diligence and skill, Dharmabuddhi and Pâpabuddhi acquired great wealth on their travels. Happy, but also filled with longing, they turned homeward with their great treasure. For it is also said: For those who gain wisdom, art, and wealth in foreign lands, the absence of one hour has the length of hundreds. As they approached their city, Pâpabuddhi said to Dharmabuddhi, "Friend, it is not prudent for us to return home with our entire treasure, for our families and relatives will want part of it. Therefore let us bury it somewhere here in the thick of the forest and take only a small part home with us. When the need arises, we can come back and get as much as we need from here. For they also say: A smart man does not show off his money, not even in small amounts, for the sight of gold will agitate even a good heart. And also: Like meat is devoured in the water by fish, on land by wild animals, and in the air by birds, he who owns money is everywhere at risk. " Upon hearing this, Dharmabuddhi said, "Yes, my friend, that is what we will do!" After having thus buried their treasure, they both returned home and lived happily together. However, one day at midnight Pâpabuddhi went back into the forest, took the entire treasure, refilled the hole, and returned home. Then he went to Dharmabuddhi and said to him, "Friend, each of us has a large family, and we are suffering because we have no money. Therefore, let us go to that place and get some money." Dharmabuddhi answered, "Yes, my friend, let us do it!" They went there and dug up the container, but it was empty. Then Pâpabuddhi struck himself on the head and cried out, "Aha! Dharmabuddhi! You and only you have taken the money, for the hole has been filled in again. Give me my half of what you have hidden, or I will bring action against you at the king's court." Dharmabuddhi said, "Do not speak like that, you evildoer. I am in truth Dharmabuddhi, the one with a just heart! I would not commit such an act of thievery. After all, it is said: The person with a just heart treats another man's wife like his own mother, another man's property like a clod of earth, and all beings like himself. " Quarreling thus, they proceeded to the court where they told their stories and brought action against one another. The top judges decreed that they submit to an Ordeal of God, but Pâpabuddhi said, "No! Such an ordeal is not just. After all, it is written: In a legal action one should seek documents. If there are no documents, then one should seek witnesses. If there are no witnesses, then wise men should prescribe an Ordeal of God. In this matter the goddess of the tree will serve as my witness. She will declare which one of us is a thief and which one an honest man." To this they all replied, "What you say is right, for it is also written: An Ordeal of God is inappropriate where there is a witness, be he even a man of the lowest caste, to say nothing of the case where he is a god. We too are very curious about this case. Tomorrow morning we shall go with you to that place in the forest." In the meanwhile, Pâpabuddhi returned home and said to his father, "Father! I have stolen this money from Dharmabuddhi, and one word from you will secure it for us. Without your word, we shall lose it, and I shall lose my life as well." The father said, "Child, just tell what I have to say in order to secure it!" Pâpabuddhi said, "Father, in thus and such a place there is a large mimosa tree. It has a hollow trunk. Go hide yourself in it. When I swear an oath there tomorrow morning, then you must reply that Dharmabuddhi is the thief." Having made these arrangements, the next morning Pâpabuddhi bathed himself, put on a clean shirt, and went to the mimosa tree with Dharmabuddhi and the judges. Once there, he spoke with a piercing voice, "Sun and moon, wind and fire, heaven and earth, heart and mind, day and night, sunrise and sunset, all of these, like dharma, know a man's deeds. Sublime goddess of the forest, reveal which of us is the thief!" Then Pâpabuddhi's father, who was standing in the hollow trunk of the mimosa tree, said, "Listen! Listen! The money was taken away by Dharmabuddhi!" Having heard this, the king's servants, their eyes opened wide with amazement, searched in their law books for an appropriate punishment for Dharmabuddhi's theft of the money. While they were thus engaged, Dharmabuddhi himself surrounded the tree's opening with flammable material, and set it on fire. When it was well ablaze, Pâpabuddhi's father emerged from the hollow tree. His eyes streaming, he cried out bitterly. "What is this?" they asked him. He confessed everything, and then died. The king's servants forthwith hanged Pâpabuddhi from a branch of the mimosa tree, but they had only words of praise for Dharmabuddhi. Source: Pantschatantra: Fünf Bücher indischer Fabeln, Märchen und Erzählungen , translated from the Sanskrit into German by Theodor Benfey, vol. 2 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), book 1, story 19, pp. 114-18 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. One of India's most influential contributions to world literature, the Panchatantra (also spelled Pañcatantra or Pañca-tantra ) consists of five books of animal fables and magic tales (some 87 stories in all) that were compiled, in their current form, between the third and fifth centuries AD. It is believed that even then the stories were already ancient. The tales' self-proclaimed purpose is to educate the sons of royalty. Although the original author's or compiler's name is unknown, an Arabic translation from about 750 AD attributes the Panchatantra to a wise man called Bidpai, which is probably a Sanskrit word meaning "court scholar." The fables of the Panchatantra found their way to Europe through oral folklore channels and by way of Persian and Arabic translations. They substantially influenced medieval writers of fables. Link to additional selections from the Panchatantra . Return to the table of contents . The Two Peasants Sri Lanka In a certain village there once lived two peasants, who, being very poor, and having no means of earning a livelihood, sold the little possessions they had, and left their village in the hope of finding better fortune elsewhere. At the outset, one of them said to his companion: "Friend, if you provide out of your own purse for both of us, I will do likewise when your money is over." The other readily agreed to this proposal, and from thenceforth when he cooked his meals he always gave his friend half of it. The peasant who first began to spend soon exhausted his little stock of money, and when the other had prepared his meals, he coolly began to eat it without inviting his companion to join him. Surprised at this proceeding he inquired why his share was not given him. "You were a fool to spend for both of us," replied the other. "I am not going to imitate you, and waste my money on you." The poor peasant had to starve that day, and for three days more, until he could bear it no longer. When his companion had cooked his rice as usual, he begged so hard for some, that at length he was promised a spoonful, if only he should allow one of his eyes to be plucked out. He was in such an extremity of hunger that he agreed to this condition. A spoonful of rice was then given him, and with the handle of the same spoon which conveyed the rice to his leaf one of his eyes was pierced through. The rice that he had then obtained helped to keep him up for another three days. At the end of that time he was again so hungry that he could not but beg for another spoonful, which he received on the same condition as before. Being now blind of both eyes, he was looked upon by his friend as a useless encumbrance, and he therefore determined to get rid of him. He thought he could do this by walking away as fast as he could, but the blind man was not to be got rid of so easily. Listening attentively to his treacherous companion's footsteps, he managed to grope his way in the direction in which the other went. As they were passing through a deep forest, the wicked peasant took his helpless companion, and, after binding him firmly, left him under a tree to the tender mercies of the wild beasts, and went his way. The blind man had not been very long under the tree, when he overheard the conversation of some Raksasas , who were resting on the tree at the time. One of them said: "All are not aware of the rare qualities of this tree. Any blind man will have his sight restored to him, if he will only rub his eyes with a little of the juice of this tree." "That is not all," said another, "if a man should eat one of these leaves, he would not be hungry for seven days and seven nights." "More than that," said the third, "if a man eat the fruit that grows on the summit of this tree, he will become a king within seven days." When the Raksasas had gone away the man raised himself with difficulty, and contrived to injure the bark of the tree, and thus obtained a little of its juice, which he at once applied to his eyes, and he immediately recovered his sight. His next care was to free himself, and to eat one of the leaves of the tree. When he had eaten the leaf, he felt quite strong and able to climb the tree, which he did, and ate the fruit that was on its summit with the firm conviction that he would become a king within seven days. He set off, and wandering about reached a town on the seventh day, and during all that time he did not once feel the pangs of hunger. He arrived at the city tired and dusty and entered an ambalama (rest-house), but it had already been occupied by some men, who, not caring to have in their company so dirty and ragged a man, drove him out. Being quite exhausted he sat down outside the ambalama . [To make the story plain it is necessary to mention that amongst most of the eastern nations, when a king died, the choice of his successor lay wholly with the elephant on which the deceased king was accustomed to ride. The animal was decked in all its splendid coverings, and led along the streets of the town, and before whomsoever the elephant knelt that fortunate individual was chosen king.] Now it happened that the king of that country had just died, and the royal elephant was led along the streets to select its next rider. Seeing our friend, the peasant, outside the ambalama , the elephant at once knelt down before him; and he was crowned king. The treacherous friend of the new king had already arrived in the same city and married the daughter of the king's prime minister. One day the prime minister was called away to some distant country, and as he expected to be away for some days, he appointed his son-in-law to act for him. No sooner did the acting prime minister see the new king than he was struck with the resemblance he bore to his quondam companion. But he reassured himself that it could not be he, for, thought he, "how could a blind man regain his sight?" But the more he saw of the new king the more uneasy he began to be. At length he became quite anxious to ascertain whether this was his old friend or not. Fearing to ask the king a direct question, he sat to work in a roundabout way to get at the truth. In the prime minister the king at once recognised his base friend, but he betrayed no signs whatever of recognition. One day the prime minister said to the king, "Sire! is it possible for a blind man by any means in the world to regain his sight?" The king answered: "It is not an impossibility. If a man only sought it he would find a remedy even for blindness." The acting prime minister was now quite convinced that the king was his former companion. His ambition was roused, for, thought he, "If this man, whom I had left so helpless in the forest had become a king, why should I not be able to do the same? If only I could get some one to treat me as I treated my companion, then the result must be the same." Thus deluding himself, he set out from the city with his wife, having instructed her how to act. First the man provided food for both, and and when his stock of money was over his wife treated him in the same way he had treated his friend, and finally left him firmly bound under a tree. Before parting she told him where he would find her when he became king. The woman went on till she came to a shepherd's hut. The shepherd's wife was alone at home, and the future king's wife explained to her their prospects and obtained leave to stay with her for seven days, when, she said, her husband, the king, would come to fetch her. In the evening when the shepherd's wife saw her husband coming home, she ran up to him and told him: "We have a royal guest under our roof, and it is not becoming that you should go into her presence in that state. Go, wash yourself and put on clean clothes before you enter into her presence." She then explained to him how in seven days the king was expected. Seven days elapsed but there was no sign of the coming king, and the shepherd began to doubt the woman's tale. Another seven days, and he lost all patience. At last he got the true story from the woman, how she had left her husband blinded and bound under a tree in a thick jungle. The shepherd repaired to the spot to find out what had really happened to the man. When he reached the place he found the unfortunate man's carcass surrounded by eagles and other ravenous birds and animals. When the shepherd returned home, the would-be queen eagerly questioned him as to the fate of her husband, and asked him whether he had indeed been crowned king. "Oh, yes," replied the man, "I found him surrounded by so many of his subjects that I could not exchange one word with him, and tell him of your welfare, but now you can go and see for yourself." So saying he drove her out of his house as an adventuress. Source: S. Jane Goonetilleke, "Sinhalese Folklore," The Orientalist: A Journal of Oriental Literature, Arts and Sciences, Folklore, etc., etc., etc. , vol. 2 (1885-86), pp. 150-52 . Return to the table of contents . The Two Brothers Tibet In long past times, a king came to the throne in the palace of a country well provided with riches, prosperity, good harvests, and numerous inhabitants. Some time afterwards his wife became with child, and, after the lapse of eight or nine months, gave birth to a very handsome boy, complete in limbs and joints, whose skin was the color of gold, whose head stood out like a canopy, and who had long arms, a broad forehead, interlacing eyebrows, and a high-arched nose. At his birth there occurred many thousands of happy events. When his birth-feast was held, and the question arose as to giving him a name, the ministers said, "O king, as many thousands of happy events have taken place at his birth, let him be called Kshemankara [promoting well-being]." This name was given to him, and he was entrusted to eight nurses: two to carry him, two to suckle him, two to cleanse him, and two to play with him. These nurses brought him up on various milk products and other excellent forms of nourishment, so that he shot up like a lotus in a pool. The king's wife again became with child, and after the lapse of eight or nine months a boy was born, at whose birth many thousands of unfortunate events took place, on which account there was given to him the name of Papankara [the opposite of Kshemankara, from papa , bad]. He also thrived apace and grew up. The young Kshemankara, who was of a friendly and merciful nature, and compassionate towards all living creatures, loved to give, taking his delight in bestowing, and conferred gifts upon the Sramanas and Brahmans, the poor and the needy who begged of him. His father said to him, "O son, do not be constantly making presents. If you give away so freely, where are we to find the necessary riches?" Now, in accordance with the nature of things, many men take delight in gifts and giving, and when they thus delight themselves their fame is extolled in words and verses, and celebrated in all parts of the world. The king of another country, who had heard of the great virtues of the prince, wished to give him his daughter. The prince's father was highly pleased, and wanted to go to meet her. But Kshemankara said, "Until I have acquired wealth I will not marry. Allow me, O father, to go to sea." He replied, "Do so." When he set forth for the sea with his merchandise, his brother, Papankara, said to himself, "As he is now liked and loved by many men, he will be still more liked and loved by many men when he shall have equipped a sea-ship and have returned home. And as there will be an opportunity of his being invested with the regal power during our father's lifetime, therefore I, too, instead of remaining here to see whose turn will come, will go to sea along with him, and will take away his life out there, and then I shall be invested with the heirship even against my father's will." With these thoughts in his mind he went to his father, and said to him, "O father, as Kshemankara is going to sea I will go with him." His father said, "Do so." Now Kshemankara ordered proclamation to be made throughout the land as follows: "Listen, O honorable merchants inhabiting the city. As Prince Kshemankara is going to sea with merchandise, and as he among you who is inclined to go to sea under Prince Kshemankara's guidance will be freed from tolls, taxes, and freight-money, therefore get ready the goods which are to be taken to sea." Many hundreds of merchants got ready goods to be taken to the sea. Then Kshemankara, as the leading trader, accompanied by his brother Papankara, after performing ceremonies for the sake of obtaining a successful result, surrounded by many hundreds of merchants, taking with him in wagons, carts, chests, and hampers, and on camels, oxen, and asses, quantities of goods to be transported by sea, set out on his way. Visiting lands, towns, villages, commercial emporiums, and estates, he came by degrees to the sea-coast. There he purchased a ship for five hundred karshapanas, and after making proclamation three times, set out on the ocean, taking with him five hundred servants, diggers, cleansers, fishermen, mariners, and pilots. When on board ship he said to his brother Papankara, "Should a shipwreck take place in the middle of the ocean, then throw your arms round my neck without hesitation." Papankara replied, "Good, I will do so." After a time the ship arrived with a favorable wind at the Island of Jewels, and the steersman said, "Listen, O honorable merchants of Jambudvipa! As ye have heard that the Island of Jewels is a mine of diamonds, lapis lazuli, turquoises, emeralds, and divers other precious stones, therefore have we come hither. Now then, take yourselves as many jewels as ye wish." They searched for them with joy and desire, and they filled the ship full, as though with rice, peas, sesame, and the like. Now, as Bodisats are wise and sharp-witted, Prince Kshemankara made fast to his girdle some large jewels of great value. On the way back, when not far from shore, the ship was rendered useless in consequence of an injury inflicted by a sea monster. Therefore Papankara threw his arms round the neck of Kshemankara, who by great exertions brought him ashore. Exhausted by the burden, Kshemankara fell asleep. As he lay sleeping, Papankara caught sight of the jewels fastened to his girdle, and thought, "Ought I to return with empty hands while he comes back with such jewels?" Then he took away the jewels from his soundly sleeping brother, put both his eyes out with a thorn, and left him sightless on the ocean shore. By a fortunate chance some oxherds who were tending their cattle came to that spot. When they saw the prince, they said, "Ho, friend, who are you?" He told them everything that had occurred. When they had heard his story they were filled with compassion, and they led him to the house of the chief herdsman. There he took to playing on the lute. The chief herdsman's wife, who was charmed by his youth and beauty, heard the sound of his lute and tried to allure him. But he, thinking of a course of life acquired by good deeds, closed his ears and did not stir. As there is nothing which they may not do who are seized by desire, she said to her husband, "This blind man is trying to tempt me, will you put up with such people?" The prince reflected that, of all kinds of anger, the worst is the anger of a wife, and perceived that there was nothing left for him, in order not to be smitten thereby, but to go away. So he left the house, and along all manner of streets, market places, and by-roads, he gained himself a living by his music. On the death of his father his brother, Papankara, came to the throne. And after a time he himself arrived at the town of that neighboring king who had formerly wished to give him his daughter in marriage. She had by this time grown up, but when there came to woo her the sons of kings, ministers, and purohitas, dwelling in many lands, her father said, "O daughter, Prince Kshemankara, for whom I had intended you, went to sea and there died in consequence of a misfortune. As suitors have now arrived, and as those who do not obtain you will be discontented, the question arises, what is to be done?" She replied, "O father, if this be the case, let orders be given to have the city swept and garnished; I will choose a husband for myself." Then the king ordered proclamation to be made in the different lands and cities that his daughter was going to choose herself a husband. He also gave orders that his own city should be cleared of stones, potsherds, and rubble, sprinkled with sandalwood water, and perfumed with odors, and that canopies, standards, and flags, should be set up, and numerous silken hangings displayed, together with flowers of many kinds, giving the appearance of a grove of the gods, and that joy-inspiring proclamation should be made to this effect: "O honorable dwellers in town and country, and crowds of men assembled from various lands, give ear! Tomorrow the king's daughter will choose herself a husband. So do ye assemble as is fitting." Next morning the king's daughter, adorned with many ornaments and surrounded by numerous maidens, came to a grove made bright with flowers by the deity of the grove, rendered extremely beautiful by the dispensation of great good fortune. And when several thousand men had assembled in the midst of the city, she came into the assembly in order to choose herself a husband. Somewhat removed sat Kshemankara playing on the lute. As men by their deeds are reciprocally connected, and the force of effect is constrained by the great power of cause, so it came to pass that the king's daughter, when her feelings were moved by the sound of the lute, became closely attached to Kshemankara's playing, and she threw him the crown of flowers, crying, "This man is my husband." The assembled people were discontented, and some of them in bitterness of heart began to find fault with her, saying, "What sense is there in this, that the royal princess, who has so much beauty, and who is so supremely young and accomplished, should slight the sons of kings, ministers, and purohitas, who have come from many lands, besides excellent householders, and should choose a blind man to be her husband?" With reluctance and discontent did the officials convey the tidings to the king, saying, "O king, the princess has completed the choice of a husband." The king said, "What manner of man has she chosen?" They replied, "O king, a blind man." The king also was displeased when he heard this, and he sent for his daughter and said, "O daughter, wherefore have you chosen such a man as your husband, in spite of there being extremely young, rich and handsome sons of kings, proprietors, merchants, caravan leaders, ministers, and purohitas?" She replied, "O father, this is the man I want." The king said, "O daughter, if that be so, then go to him. Wherefore do you delay?" She went to him and said, "I have chosen you as my husband." He replied, "Therein you have not acted well. Perhaps you have thought, 'as such is the case and this man is blind, I can give myself to another.'" She replied, "I am not one who does such things." He said, "What proof is there of this?" She replied, commencing an asseveration: "If it be true, and my asseveration is righteous, that I have been in love only with Prince Kshemankara and with you, but with none else, then through the power of this truth and my asseveration shall one of your two eyes become sound as before." So soon as this asseveration was uttered, one of his eyes came again just as it was before. Then he said, "I am Kshemankara. My brother Papankara reduced me to the state I was in." She said, "What proof is there that you are Prince Kshemankara?" Then he too began to asseverate, saying, "If it be true, and my asseveration righteous, that although Papankara put out my eyes, I do not in the least bear him malice, then in consequence of the truth and affirmation may my other eye become sound as before." So soon as he had pronounced this asseveration, his other eye also became as it had been originally. Then the royal princess betook herself to the king, along with Kshemankara, who was no longer imperfect in any part of his body, and said, "O father, this is Kshemankara himself." As the king was incredulous, she told him how everything had come about. The king was exceedingly astonished, but with great joy did he give his daughter to Kshemankara as his wife. Then he set forth with a great army for that city, and drove Papankara from power, and set Kshemankara as king upon his father's throne. Source: F. Anton von Schiefner, Tibetan Tales: Derived from Indian Sources , translated from the Tibetan of the Kah-gyur [ Kanjur ] by F. anton von Schiefner; done into English from the German by W. R. S. Ralston (London: Trübner and Company, 1882), no. 18, pp. 279-85 . The episode of the faithless wife's attempt to seduce the virtuous hero is classified as a type 318 folktale. Traditional examples include the ancient Egyptian story of "Anpu and Bata" and the biblical story of "Joseph and Potiphar's Wife" ( Genesis 39:7-23). Return to the table of contents . The Heathen and the Jew Jewish Once a heathen and a Jew were walking along together, when the heathen remarked to the Jew, "My religion is better than yours." "Not so," replied the Jew; "on the contrary, mine is better than yours, as it is said: What nation is there so great that has statutes and judgments so righteous as all this law. " The heathen then said, "Supposing it is decided my religion is better than yours, then I will take your money; but if it be decided that your religion is better than mine, then you shall take my money." The Jew replied, "I agree to accept this condition." As they were walking along, Satan appeared to them in the form of an old man. They thereupon asked him the question as to whose religion was the better; and he replied, "That of the heathen is the better." After they had proceeded a little farther, Satan appeared to them again, in the form of a young man. They put the same question, and they received the same reply. When they had walked a little farther, he appeared to them again in the form of another old man. On asking the same question again, the identical reply was once more given. The heathen therefore took the Israelite's money. The Israelite then journeyed on in fear of his life, and lodged in the open. When a third of the night had gone by, he heard some spirits speaking to each other. Two of them asked a third, "Where have you been today?" to which he replied, "I met a Jew and an Aramean, I laughed at them and gave evidence in favor of the heathen." Then they asked another, "Where have you been today?" to which he replied, "I prevented the daughter of an emperor from giving birth, after she had suffered the pains of travail for seven days. But if they had taken some green leaves of the tree overhanging their throne, and had squeezed them upon her nose, she would have given birth immediately." They again addressed a third spirit, "Where have you been?" He replied, "I stopped up the well of a certain province. But if they had taken a black ox and had slaughtered it over the water, the well would have been open again." The Jew gave great heed to their conversation; and, rising up early in the morning, he went to the country of the emperor spoken of, and found his daughter in travail. He then told one to take some green leaves of the tree overhanging their throne, and to squeeze them upon her nose. This was done, and she immediately gave birth. The king thereupon presented the Jew with a large sum of money, because this was the only child he had. The Jew then journeyed to the country in which the stopped wells were to be found, and told the people to take a black ox and slaughter it over the well, after which the water would flow as usual. They did so, and the water flowed. The inhabitants thereupon presented him with a large sum of money. On the morrow he met the heathen who had taken his money, and the heathen expressed his surprise by saying, "Have I not already taken all your money from you; how is it that you are such a rich man?" He then related to him what had happened. "Then I will also go," he said, "and inquire of the people of that place." He therefore journeyed on and lodged in that field; but the three spirits came and killed him, for it is said: The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead (Proverbs, 11:8). Source: M. Gaster, "Fairy Tales from Inedited Hebrew MSS. of the Ninth and Twelfth Centuries," Folk-Lore: Transactions of the Folk-Lore Society , vol. 7, no. 3 (September 1896), pp. 231-32. Return to the table of contents . True and Untrue Norway Once upon a time there were two brothers; one was called True, and the other Untrue. True was always upright and good towards all, but Untrue was bad and full of lies, so that no one could believe what he said. Their mother was a widow, and did not have much to live on; so when her sons had grown up, she was forced to send them away, that they might earn their bread in the world. Each received a little knapsack with some food in it, and then they went their way. They walked until evening and then sat down by a windfall in the woods, and took out their knapsacks, for they were hungry after walking the whole day, and thought that a bit of food would taste good. "I think that you'll agree with me," said Untrue, "that we should eat out of your knapsack as long as there is anything in it, and after that we can eat from mine." Yes, True was in agreement with this, so they started to eat, but Untrue stuffed himself with all the best things, while True got only the burnt crusts. The next morning they had their breakfast from True's food, and they ate dinner from it too, and then there was nothing left in his knapsack. They had walked until late that night, and when they were ready to eat again, True wanted to eat out from his brother's knapsack, but Untrue said "No," that this food was his, and that he had only enough for himself. "Wait! You know that you ate from my knapsack as long as there was anything in it," said True. "That is all well and good," answered Untrue; "but if you are such a fool to let others eat up your food right in front of you, then you must make the best of it. All you can do now is to sit here and starve." "Very well," said True, "you're Untrue by name and untrue by nature. You have always been that way, and so you will be all the rest of your life." Now when Untrue heard this, he flew into a rage, rushed at his brother, and plucked out both of his eyes. "Now, try to see whether people are untrue or not, you blind buzzard!" So saying, he ran away and left him. Poor True! There he went walking along and feeling his way through the thick wood. Blind and alone, he barely knew which way to turn, when all at once he caught hold of the trunk of a great bushy linden tree. He thought, for fear of the wild beasts, that he would climb the tree and sit there until the night was over. "When the birds begin to sing," he said to himself, "I shall know it is day, and I can try to grope my way farther on." So he climbed up into the linden tree. After he had sat there a little while, he heard how someone came and began to make a stir and clatter under the tree, and soon afterward others came. When they began to greet each other, he found out it was Bruin the bear, Graylegs the wolf, Slyboots the fox, and Longears the hare, all of whom had come to celebrate St. John's Eve under the tree. They began to eat, drink, and be merry. When they were finished eating, they started to talk together. At last the fox said, "Let each of us tell a little story while we sit here." The others had nothing against that. It would be good fun, they said, and the bear began; for he was the leader. "The King of England," said Bruin, "has such bad eyesight, he can barely see a yard in front of him. If he would only come to this linden tree in the morning, while the dew is still on the leaves, and would rub his eyes with the dew, he would get back his sight as good as ever." "Very true!" said Graylegs. "And the King of England has a daughter who is deaf and dumb. If he only knew what I know, he could soon cure her. Last year she went to communion. She let a crumb of the bread fall out of her mouth, and a large toad came and swallowed it down. If they would just dig up the chapel floor, they would find the toad sitting right under the altar, with the bread still sticking in his throat. If they were to cut the toad open, and give the bread to the princess, she would be able to hear and to speak again, just like other people." "That's all very well," said the fox, "but if the King of England knew what I know, he would not be so badly off for water in his palace. Under the large stone in his palace yard there is a spring of the clearest water one could wish for, if he only knew to dig for it there." "Ah!" said the hare in a small voice; "the King of England has the finest orchard in the whole land, but it does not bear so much as a green apple, for a heavy gold chain is buried, circling the orchard three times. If he would have it dug up, there would not be a garden like it in all his kingdom." "Very true, I dare say," said the fox, "but now it's getting very late, and we should all go home." So they all went away together. After they were gone, True fell asleep, sitting there in the tree. When the birds began to sing at dawn, he woke up, and took the dew from the leaves, and rubbed his eyes with it, and thus he got his sight back as good as it was before Untrue plucked his eyes out. Then he went straight to the King of England's palace, and begged for work, and got it on the spot. One day the king came out into the palace yard, and when he had walked about a bit, he wanted to drink out of his pump; for you must know the day was hot, and the king very thirsty; but when they poured him out a glass, it was so muddy, and nasty, and foul, that the king got quite upset. "I don't think there's ever a man in my whole kingdom who has such bad water in his yard as I, and yet I bring it in pipes from far, over hill and dale," cried out the king. "True enough, your majesty;" said True, "but if you would let me have some men to help me dig up this large stone which lies here in the middle of your yard, you would soon see good water, and plenty of it." The king was willing enough. They barely had the stone out, and dug under it a while, before a jet of water sprang out high up into the air, as clear and full as if it came out of a conduit, and clearer water was not to be found in all England. A little while after, the king was out in his palace yard again, and there came a great hawk flying after his chicken, and all the king's men began to clap their hands and bawl out, "There he flies! There he flies!" The king picked up his gun and tried to shoot the hawk, but he couldn't see that far, so he became very upset. "Would to Heaven," he said, "there was anyone who could tell me a cure for my eyes; for I think I shall soon go quite blind!" "I can tell you one soon enough," said True, and he told the king what he had done to cure his own eyes. The king set off that very afternoon to the linden tree, and his eyes were quite cured as soon as he rubbed them with the dew which was on the leaves in the morning. From that time forth there was no one whom the king held so dear as True, and he had to be with him wherever he went, both at home and abroad. One day they were walking together in the orchard, and the king said, "I don't know why, that I don't, but there isn't a man in England who spends as much on his orchard as I, and yet I can't get one of the trees to bear as much as a green apple." "Well," said True, "if I may have what is buried twisted three times around your orchard, and men to dig it up, your orchard will bear well enough." Yes, the king was quite willing, so True got men and began to dig, and at last he dug up the whole gold chain. Now True was a rich man, far richer indeed than the king himself, but still the king was well pleased, for his orchard now bore so that the limbs of the trees hung down to the ground heavy with apples and pears sweeter than anyone had ever tasted. The king and True were walking about and talking together on another day, when the princess passed them, and the king became quite downcast when he saw her. "Isn't it a pity, now, that so lovely a princess as mine should not be able to speak or hear?" he said to True. "Yes, but there is a cure for that," said True. When the king heard that, he was so glad that he promised him the princess's hand in marriage, and half his kingdom as well, if he could cure her. So True took a few men, and went into the church, and dug up the toad which sat under the altar. Then he cut open the toad, took out the bread, and gave it to the king's daughter; and from that hour she got back her speech, and could talk like other people. Now True was to have the princess, and they got ready for the bridal feast, and such a feast had never been seen before. It was the talk of the whole land. Just as they were dancing the bridal dance, in came a beggar lad, and begged for a morsel of food, and he was so ragged and wretched that they all crossed themselves when they looked at him. True knew him at once, and saw that it was Untrue, his brother. "Do you recognize me?" asked True. "Where would a person like me ever have seen so great a lord?" answered Untrue. "You have seen me before," said True. "I was the one whose eyes you plucked out a year ago this very day. Untrue by name, and untrue by nature. I said it before, and I am saying it now. But you are still my brother, and so you shall have some food. After that, you may go to the linden tree where I sat last year. If you hear anything that can do you good, you will be lucky." Untrue did not wait to be told twice. "If True has got so much good by sitting in the linden tree, that in one year he has come to be king over half England, what good may I get?" he thought. So he set off and climbed up into the linden tree. He had not sat there long, before all the beasts came as before, and ate and drank, and celebrated St. John's eve under the tree. When they were finished eating, the fox wished that they should begin to tell stories. Untrue got ready to listen with all his might, until his ears almost fell off. But Bruin the bear was cross. He growled and said, "Someone has been chattering about what we said last year, and so this time we will hold our tongues about what we know." With that the beasts wished each other a good night, and parted. Untrue was just as wise as he was before, and the reason was, that his name was Untrue, and his nature untrue too. Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse , translated by George Webbe Dasent (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1859), pp. 1-8 . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. © 2008. Link to this tale in the original Norwegian: Tro og Utro from the collection Norske Folkeeventyr by Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe (first published in individual booklets 1841-44). St. John's Eve is evening of June 23, leading to Midsummer Day, June 24, is an assimilation of the summer solstice into popular Christian practice, and throughout northern Europe a time traditionally associated with witchcraft, elf-lore, and all manner of supernatural happenings. Return to the table of contents . The Two Travelers Germany Mountain and valley do not meet, but the children of men do, both good and bad. Thus a shoemaker and a tailor once met on their travels. The tailor was a handsome little fellow who was always cheerful and satisfied. He saw the shoemaker approaching him from the other side, and, observing from his bag what is trade was, he sang a mocking little song to him: Sew me the seam, Pull me the thread, Left and right, spread it with pitch, Pound, pound the nail on the head. The shoemaker, however, could not take a joke. He pulled a face as if he had drunk vinegar, and made a gesture as if he were about to seize the tailor by the collar. With that the little fellow began to laugh, offered him his bottle, saying, "No harm was meant. Take a drink, and swallow your anger." The shoemaker took a mighty drink, and the storm on his face began to clear away. He gave the bottle back to the tailor, and said, "I took a hearty gulp. They have a lot to say about heavy drinking, but not much about great thirst. Shall we travel together?" "All right," answered the tailor, "but only if only it suits you to go to a big town where there is no lack of work." "That is just where I wanted to go," answered the shoemaker. "In a small place there is nothing to be earned, and in the country people prefer to go barefoot." Thus they traveled on together, always setting one foot before the other like a weasel in the snow. Both of them had time enough, but little to eat. When they reached a town they went about looking for work, and because the tailor looked so lively and merry, and had such fine red cheeks, every one gave him work willingly, and if he was lucky, the master's daughter gave him a kiss as well. Whenever he met up with the shoemaker, the tailor always had the most in his bundle. The ill-tempered shoemaker would make a sour face, thinking, "The greater the rascal, the better the luck." But the tailor would begin to laugh and to sing, and shared everything he had with his comrade. If a couple of pennies jingled in his pockets, he ordered drinks, then cheerfully thumped the table until the glasses danced. His motto was "Easy come, easy go." After they had traveled for some time, they came to a great forest through which passed the way to the capital. Two footpaths led through it, one of which was a seven days' journey and the other only two, but neither of them knew which way was the shorter one. They sat down beneath an oak tree and discussed together what preparations to make, and for how many days they should provide themselves with bread. The shoemaker said, "One must plan ahead for the unexpected. I will take with me bread for a week." "What?" said the tailor. "Haul bread for seven days on one's back like a beast of burden and not be able to look about? I shall trust in God, and not trouble myself about anything. The money I have in my pocket is as good in summer as in winter, but in hot weather bread dries out and gets moldy on top of that. Even my coat reaches only to my ankles. Why shouldn't we find the right way? Bread for two days, and that's enough." Therefore each person bought his own bread, and then they tried their luck in the forest. It was as quiet there as in a church. No wind stirred, no brook murmured, no bird sang, and no sunbeam found its way through the thickly leaved branches. The shoemaker did not speak a word. The bread weighed so heavily on his back that the sweat streamed down his cross and gloomy face. The tailor, however, was quite merry. Walking on with a spring in each step, he whistled on a leaf, or sang a song, and thought to himself, "God in heaven must be pleased that I am so happy." This lasted two days, but on the third there was still no end to the forest, and the tailor had eaten up all his bread. Thus his heart sank down a yard deeper. Nevertheless, he did not lose courage, but relied on God and on his luck. On the evening of the third day he lay down hungry under a tree, and rose again the next morning still hungry. The fourth day was the same, and when the shoemaker seated himself on a fallen tree and devoured his dinner the tailor was only a spectator. If he begged for a little piece of bread, the other laughed mockingly, and said, "You have always been so merry. Now you can see for once what it is like to be sad. Birds that sing too early in the morning are caught by the hawk in the evening." In short, he was merciless. On the fifth morning the poor tailor could no longer stand up and was hardly able to utter one word for weakness. His cheeks were white, and his eyes were red. Then the shoemaker said to him, "I will give you a bit of bread today, but in return for it, I will put out your right eye." The unhappy tailor, who still wished to save his life, had to submit. He wept once more with both eyes, and then held them out, and the shoemaker, who had a heart of stone, put out his right eye with a sharp knife. The tailor remembered what his mother had once said to him when he had been snacking in the pantry: "Eat whatever you can, and suffer whatever you must." After eating his dearly bought bread, he got on his legs again, forgot his misery, and comforted himself with the thought that he could always see enough with one eye. But on the sixth day, hunger made itself felt again, almost consuming his heart. That evening he fell down by a tree, and on the seventh morning he was too weak to get up, and death was close at hand. Then the shoemaker said, "I will show mercy and give you bread once more, but you shall not have it for nothing. I shall put out your other eye for it." And now the tailor felt how careless his life had been, prayed to God for forgiveness, and said, "Do what you will. I will bear what I must, but remember that our Lord God does not always look on passively, and that an hour will come when the evil deed which you have done to me, and which I have not deserved of you, will be requited. When times were good with me I shared what I had with you. My trade is such that one stitch must follow another. If I no longer have my eyes and can sew no more, I must go begging. At any rate do not leave me here alone when I am blind, or I shall die of hunger." The shoemaker, however, who had driven God out of his heart, took the knife and put out his left eye. Then he gave him a bit of bread to eat, held out a stick to him, and led him on behind him. At sunset, they got out of the forest, and before them in an open field stood the gallows. The shoemaker led the blind tailor there, and then went on his way, leaving him there alone. Weariness, pain, and hunger made the wretched man fall asleep, and he slept the whole night. He awoke at dawn, not knowing where he was. Two poor sinners were hanging on the gallows, with a crow sat on the head of each of them. Then one of the men who had been hanged began to speak, and said, "Brother, are you awake?" "Yes, I am awake," answered the second. "Then I will tell you something," said the first. "The dew that this night has fallen down over us from the gallows gives everyone who washes himself with it his eyes again. If the blind knew this, how many would regain their sight who do not believe that to be possible?" Hearing this the tailor took his handkerchief, pressed it on the grass, and when it was moist with dew, washed the sockets of his eyes with it. Immediately what the man on the gallows had said came true, and a pair of healthy new eyes filled the sockets. It was not long before the tailor saw the sun rise from behind the mountains. In the plain before him lay the great royal city with its magnificent gates and hundred towers, and the golden balls and crosses on the spires began to shine. He could distinguish every leaf on the trees, saw the birds flying past, and the gnats dancing in the air. He took a needle out of his pocket, and as he could thread it as well as ever he had done, his heart danced with delight. He threw himself on his knees, thanked God for the mercy he had shown him, and said his morning prayer, not forgetting to pray for the poor sinners who were hanging there swinging against each other in the wind like the pendulums of clocks. Then he took his bundle on his back and soon forgot the sorrow he had endured, and went on his way singing and whistling. The first thing he came to was a brown foal freely running about the field. He caught it by the mane, and wanted to mount it and ride into the town. The foal, however, begged for its freedom. "I am still too young," it said. "Even a light tailor such as you are would break my back in two. Let me go until I have grown strong. Perhaps a time may come when I can reward you for it." "Run off," said the tailor. "I see that you are still only a whippersnapper." He gave it a touch on its back with a switch, whereupon it kicked up its hind legs for joy, jumped over hedges and ditches, and galloped away into the open country. The little tailor had eaten nothing since the day before. "The sun fills my eyes," he said, "but bread does not fill my mouth. The first thing that comes my way and is even half edible will have to suffer for it." In the meantime a stork stepped solemnly over the meadow towards him. "Stop, stop," cried the tailor, and seized him by the leg. "I don't know if you are good to eat or not, but my hunger leaves me no great choice. I must cut your head off, and roast you." "Don't do that," replied the stork. "I am a sacred bird that brings mankind great profit, and no one harms me. If you spare my life I will be able do you good in some other way." "Then be off, cousin longlegs," said the tailor. The stork rose up, let its long legs hang down, and flew gently away. "What's to be the end of this?" said the tailor to himself at last. "My hunger grows greater and greater, and my stomach more and more empty. Whatever comes in my way now is lost." Then he saw a couple of young ducks which were on a pond come swimming towards him. "You come just at the right moment," said he, and laid hold of one of them and was about to wring its neck. With this an old duck which was hidden among the reeds, began to squawk loudly. She swam to him with open beak, begging him urgently to spare her dear children. "Can you not imagine," said she, "how your mother would mourn if someone wanted to carry you off, and do an end to you." "Quiet down," said the good-natured tailor. "You shall keep your children," and he set the captured one back into the water. When he turned around, he was standing in front of an old tree which was partly hollow, and saw some wild bees flying in and out of it. "There I shall find the reward of my good deed," said the tailor. "The honey will refresh me." But the queen bee came out and threatened him, saying, "If you touch my people and destroy my nest our stings shall pierce your skin like ten thousand red-hot needles. But if you leave us in peace and go your way we will do you a service for it another time." The little tailor saw that here also nothing was to be done. Three dishes empty and nothing on the fourth is a bad dinner. He dragged himself therefore with his starved-out stomach into the town, and as it was just striking twelve, all was ready-cooked for him in the inn, and he was able to sit down at once to dinner. When he was satisfied he said, "Now I will get to work." He went around the town, sought a master, and soon found a good situation. Because he already had thoroughly learned his trade, it was not long before he became famous, and everyone wanted to have a new coat made by the little tailor. His reputation grew day by day. "I can go no further in skill," said he, "and yet things improve every day." At last the king appointed him court tailor. But strange things do happen in the world. On that very same day his former comrade the shoemaker also became court shoemaker. When the latter caught sight of the tailor, and saw that he once more had two healthy eyes, his conscience troubled him. "Before he takes revenge on me," he thought to himself, "I must dig a pit for him." He, however, who digs a pit for another, falls into it himself. In the evening when work was over and it was growing dark, he sneaked to the king and said, "Your majesty, the tailor is an arrogant fellow and has boasted that he will get the golden crown back again that was lost ages ago." "That would please me," said the king, and the next morning he had the tailor brought before him, and ordered him to get the crown back again, or to leave the city forever. "Aha," thought the tailor. "A rogue gives more than he has. If the bad-tempered king wants me to do what no one else can do, I will not wait until morning, but will leave town at once." Therefore he tied up his bundle, but once outside the gate he could not help being sorry to give up his good fortune and turn his back on the city in which all had gone so well for him. He came to the pond where he had made the acquaintance of the ducks. At that very moment the old one whose young ones he had spared was sitting there by the shore, preening herself with her beak. She knew him again instantly, and asked why he was hanging his head so. "You will not be surprised when you hear what has happened to me," replied the tailor, and told her his fate. "If that is all," said the duck, "we can help you. The crown fell into the water, and it lies down below at the bottom. We will soon bring it up again for you. In the meantime just spread out your handkerchief on the bank." She dived down with her twelve young ones, and in five minutes she was up again with the crown resting on her wings. The twelve young ones were swimming round about with their beaks under it, helping to carry it. They swam to the shore and put the crown on the handkerchief. No one can imagine how magnificent the crown was. When the sun shone on it, it gleamed like a hundred thousand carbuncles. The tailor tied his handkerchief together by the four corners and carried it to the king, who was full of joy, and hung a gold chain around the tailor's neck. When the shoemaker saw that the one trick had failed, he contrived a second, and went to the king and said, "Your majesty, the tailor has become insolent again. He boasts that he can copy in wax the whole of the royal palace, with everything that pertains to it, movable or immovable, inside and out." The king sent for the tailor and ordered him to copy in wax the whole of the royal palace, with everything that pertained to it, movable or immovable, inside and out. And failing this, or if so much as one nail on the wall were missing, he should be imprisoned underground for the rest of his life. The tailor thought, "It gets worse and worse. No one can endure this," and he threw his bundle on his back, and went forth. When he came to the hollow tree, he sat down and hung his head. The bees came flying out, and the queen bee asked him if he had a stiff neck, since he hung his head so. "Oh no," answered the tailor, "something quite different weighs me down," and he told her what the king had demanded of him. The bees began to buzz and hum amongst themselves, and the queen bee said, "Just go home again, but come back tomorrow at this time, and bring a large cloth with you, and then all will be well." So he turned back again, but the bees flew to the royal palace and straight into it through the open windows, crept into every corner, and inspected everything most carefully. Then they hurried back and modeled the palace in wax so quickly that anyone looking on would have thought it was growing before his eyes. By the evening all was ready, and when the tailor came the next morning, the whole splendid building was there, and not one nail in the wall or tile on the roof was missing. And at the same time it was delicate and white as snow, and smelled sweet as honey. The tailor wrapped it carefully in his cloth and took it to the king, who could not admire it enough, placed it in his largest hall, and in return for it presented the tailor with a large stone house. The shoemaker, however, did not give up, but went for the third time to the king and said, "Your majesty, the tailor has heard that no water will spring up in the castle's courtyard, but he has boasted that he can create a fountain in the middle of the courtyard as tall as a man and as clear as crystal." Then the king ordered the tailor to be brought before him and said, "If a stream of water does not rise in my courtyard by tomorrow as you have promised, in that very place the executioner shall make you shorter by a head." The poor tailor did not take long to think about it, but hurried out to the gate, and because this time it was a matter of life and death to him, tears rolled down his face. While he was thus sorrowfully going forth, the foal to which he had formerly given its liberty, and which had now become a beautiful chestnut horse, came leaping towards him. "The time has come," it said to the tailor, "when I can repay you for your good deed. I already know what you need, and you shall soon have help. Climb on; my back can carry two of you." The tailor's courage came back to him. He jumped up in one bound, and the horse went full speed into the city, and immediately to the castle's courtyard. It galloped as quick as lightning three times around it, the third time falling down. At that instant there was a terrific clap of thunder, a fragment of earth in the middle of the courtyard sprang like a cannonball into the air and over the castle. Directly afterward a jet of water rose as high as a man on horseback, and the water was as pure as crystal, and the sunbeams began to dance on it. When the king saw this he arose in amazement, and went and embraced the tailor in the sight of all men. But good fortune did not last long. The king had daughters aplenty, each one more beautiful than the others, but he had no son. So the malicious shoemaker went to the king a fourth time, and said, "Your majesty, the tailor has not given up his arrogance. He has now boasted that if he liked, he could cause a son to be brought to his majesty through the air." The king summoned the tailor and said, "If you cause a son to be brought to me within nine days, you shall have my eldest daughter to wife." "The reward is indeed great," thought the little tailor. "One would willingly do something for it, but the cherries grow too high for me. If I climb for them, the branch will break beneath me, and I shall fall." He went home, seated himself cross-legged on his worktable, and thought over what was to be done. "It can't be managed," he cried at last. "I will go away after all. I cannot live in peace here." He tied up his bundle and hurried away to the gate. When he got to the meadow, he perceived his old friend the stork, who was walking backwards and forwards like a philosopher. Sometimes he stood still, looking closely at a frog, than finally swallowing it down. The stork came to him and greeted him. "I see," he began, "that you have your pack on your back. Why are you leaving town?" The tailor told him what the king had required of him, and how he could not perform it, and lamented his misfortune. "Don't let that turn your hair gray," said the stork, "I will help you out of your difficulty. For a long time now, I have been carrying infant children into the city, so this time, I can fetch a little prince out of the well. Go home and take it easy. Nine days from now go to the royal palace, and I will arrive there as well." The little tailor went home, and at the appointed time was at the castle. Not long afterward the stork flew up and tapped at the window. The tailor opened it, and cousin longlegs came in carefully and walked with solemn steps over the smooth marble pavement. In his beak he had a baby that was as lovely as an angel, and who stretched out his little hands to the queen. The stork laid him in her lap, and she caressed him and kissed him, and was beside herself with delight. Before flying away, the stork took his traveling bag off his back and handed it to the queen. In it there were little paper parcels with colored sweets, and they were divided amongst the little princesses. The eldest, however, received none of them, but instead got the merry tailor for a husband. "It seems to me," he said, "that I have won the highest prize. My mother was right after all. She always said that whoever trusts in God and has only good luck can never fail." The shoemaker had to make the shoes in which the little tailor danced at the wedding festival, after which he was commanded to quit the town for ever. The road to the forest led him to the gallows. Worn out with anger, rage, and the heat of the day, he threw himself down. When he had closed his eyes and was about to sleep, the two crows flew down from the heads of the men who were hanging there and pecked his eyes out. In his madness he ran into the forest and must have died there of hunger, for no one has seen him or heard of him again. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Die beiden Wanderer , Kinder- und Hausmärchen , no. 107. Translated by Margaret Hunt (1884). Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman, © 2008. Link to additional stories from the Grimm brothers' collection Childrens' and Household Tales . Return to the table of contents . Right Always Remains Right Upper Lusatia (Germany/Poland) There was once upon a time a huntsman, who had a son, who was also a huntsman. He sent his son into a foreign land, to look about him and learn something additional. Here he went into a tavern, where he found a stranger, with whom he entered into conversation. They told each other all the news, till they also began to talk about right and wrong. The stranger asserted that the greatest wrong could be made right for money. But the huntsman opined that right always remained right, and offered to bet three hundred dollars upon it, if the stranger would do the same. [Footnote: This surely ought, from what transpires later in the story, to have run thus: "To stake his life against three hundred dollars to be staked by the stranger."] The stranger was content therewith, and they agreed to ask three advocates the question at once. They went to the first advocate, and he said that it was possible to make wrong right for money. They then went to another. He also asserted that wrong could be made right for money. Finally, they went to a third. He also told them that wrong could be made right for money. They then went back again, and as they had been going about the whole day, it wasn't till late in the evening that they got to their tavern. The stranger then asked the huntsman whether he still disbelieved that the greatest wrong could be made right for money, and the huntsman replied that he should soon be obliged to believe it on the assertion of the three advocates, although he was very unwilling to do so. The stranger was willing to grant him his life if he consented to pay three hundred dollars; but as they were talking about it, in came a man who over-persuaded the stranger that he must needs abide by what they had previously agreed upon. He did not, however, do this, but only, with a red-hot iron, took his eyesight from him, and told him at the same time, that he would then and then only believe that right remained right in the world, when the huntsman regained his sight. The huntsman entreated the host of the tavern to put him on the right road to the town. He put him on the road to the gallows, and went his way. When the huntsman had gone a little further, there was the end of the road, and he heard it strike eleven. He couldn't go any further, and remained lying where he was in hope that perhaps somebody would come there in the morning. After a short time he heard a clatter, and soon somebody came up; nor was it long before a second and a third arrived. These were three evil spirits, who quitted their bodies in the night time, and perpetrated all manner of villainy in the world. They began to talk together, and one said, "Today it is a year and a day since we were here together and related the good deeds that we had done during the year before. A year has again elapsed, and it is therefore time that we should ascertain which of us has done the best action during the past year." The first spoke, and said, "I have deprived the inhabitants of the city of Ramul of their water supply; they can only be helped if somebody finds out what it is that stops up the spring." "What's that?" said the second; and the first replied, "I have placed a great toad on the spring out of which the water at other times flowed; if that be removed, the water will spring up again as before." The second said, "I have caused the beauty of the princess of Sarahawsky to disappear, and herself to fade away to skin and bones; she cannot be helped until the silver nail, which hangs above her bed, be pulled out." The third said, "Yesterday I caused a person to be deprived of his eyesight with a red hot iron; he can only be helped by washing his eyes with the water that is in the well not far from this gallows." It then struck twelve in the town, and the three disappeared at once, but the huntsman remembered all that he had heard, and rejoiced that it was in his power to regain his eyesight. Early on the morrow he heard somebody passing by, and begged him to send him people from the town, to tell where the healing spring was. Then all manner of people came to him, but no one could show him the spring, save at length one old woman. He caused himself to be led thither, and as soon as he had washed his eyes in it, he immediately obtained his eyesight again. He now asked the way to the city of Ramul, and went thither. As soon as he arrived, he told the town council that he would restore them their water. But plenty of people had been there already, and the city had spent a great deal of money upon them, yet no one had effected aught, so, as it had been all in vain, they intended to have nothing more to do with the matter. Well, he said that he would do it all for nothing, only they must give him some laborers to help him. It was done. When they had dug as far as the place where the pipes, through which the water used to flow, were laid into the spring, he sent all the workmen away and dug a little further himself, and behold! a toad, like a boiler, was sitting on the spring. He removed it, and immediately the water began to flow, and ere long all the fountains were filled with water. The citizens got up a grand banquet in his honor, and paid him a large sum of money for what he had done. He then went on and came to Sarahawsky. Then in a short time he learnt that the princess was ill, just as he had heard, and that no physician was able to help her; moreover that the king had promised that the person who could cure her malady should obtain her to wife. He therefore equipped himself very handsomely, went to the king's palace, and there declared that he had come from a far country, and would cure the princess. The king replied to him that he had scarce any hope left, but would nevertheless make the experiment with him. The huntsman said that he would fetch his medicine. He went out and bought all manner of sweet comfits, and then went to the princess. He gave her a first dose, and looked about to see in what part of her bed's head the silver nail was sticking. Early on the second day he came again, gave her again some of his medicine, took the opportunity of laying hold of the nail, and pulled it till it began to move. In the afternoon the princess felt that she was better. The third day he came again, and while the princess was taking the medicine, pulled again at the bed's head, pulled the nail clean out, and put it secretly into his pocket. At noon the princess was so far recovered, that she wanted to have her dinner, and the king invited the huntsman to a grand banquet. They settled when the wedding was to take place, but the huntsman considered that he must first go home. And when he had got home, he went again to the tavern where he had lost the sight of his eyes, and the stranger was there also. They began to tell each other all the news, and the huntsman related what he had heard under the gallows; how he had discovered the water, and finally how he had regained the sight of his eyes, and said that the stranger must now believe that in the world right always remained right. The stranger marveled exceedingly, and said that he would believe it. After this the huntsman went on and came to his princess, and they had a grand wedding festival, which lasted a whole week. The stranger bethought himself that he, too, would go under the gallows; peradventure he might also hear some such things as the huntsman had heard, and might in consequence also obtain a princess to wife. And when the year had elapsed, he also went there. He heard it strike one, and in a short time he heard a clatter; then up came somebody again, and it wasn't long before a second and third arrived. They began to talk together, and one said, "It cannot but be, that some one overheard us last year, and through that everything that we have done is ruined. Let us, therefore, make a careful search before we again recount to each other what we have done." They immediately began to search, and found the stranger. They tore him into three pieces and hung them up on the three corners of the gallows. When the old king died they took the huntsman for king, and if he has not died, he is reigning still at the present day, and firmly believes that in his realm right will always remain right. Source: Albert Henry Wratislaw, Sixty Folk-Tales from Exclusively Slavonic Sources (London:Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 14, pp. 92-97 . Return to the table of contents . The Travels of Truth and Falsehood Hungary A long time ago -- I don't exactly remember the day -- Truth started, with her bag well filled, on a journey to see the world. On she went over hill and dale, and through village and town, till one day she met Falsehood. "Good day, countrywoman," said Truth; "where are you bound for? Where do you intend going?" "I'm going to travel all over the world," said Falsehood. "That's right," said Truth; "and as I'm bound in the same direction let's travel together." "All right," replied Falsehood; "but you know that fellow travelers must live in harmony, so let's divide our provisions and finish yours first." Truth handed over her provisions, upon which the two lived till every morsel was consumed; then it was Falsehood's turn to provide. "Let me gouge out one of your eyes," said Falsehood to Truth, "and then I'll let you have some food." Poor Truth couldn't help herself; for she was very hungry and didn't know what to do. So she had one of her eyes gouged out, and she got some food. Next time she wanted food she had the other eye gouged out, and then both her arms cut off. After all this Falsehood told her to go away. Truth implored not to be left thus helpless in the wilds, and asked that she might be taken to the gate of the next town and left there to get her living by begging. Falsehood led her, not to where she wanted to go, but near a pair of gallows and left her there. Truth was very much surprised that she heard no one pass, and thought that all the folks in that town must be dead. As she was thus reasoning with herself and trembling with fear she fell asleep. When she awoke she heard some people talking above her head, and soon discovered that they were devils. The eldest of them said to the rest, "Tell me what you have heard and what you have been doing." One said, "I have today killed a learned physician, who has discovered a medicine with which he cured all crippled, maimed, or blind." "Well, you're a smart fellow!" said the old devil; "What may the medicine be? " "It consists simply of this," replied the other, "that tonight is Friday night, and there will be a new moon. The cripples have to roll about and the blind to wash their eyes in the dew that has fallen during the night; the cripples will be healed of their infirmities and the blind will see." "That is very good," said the old devil. "And now what have you done, and what do you know?" he asked the others. "I," said another, "have just finished a little job of mine; I have cut off the water supply and will thus kill the whole of the population of the country town not far from here." "What is your secret?" asked the old devil. "It is this," replied he. "I have placed a stone on the spring which is situated at the eastern corner of the town at a depth of three fathoms. By this means the spring will be blocked up, and not one drop of water will flow. As for me, I can go everywhere without fear, because no one will ever find out my secret, and all will happen just as I planned it." The poor crippled Truth listened attentively to all these things. Several other devils spoke; but poor Truth either did not understand them or did not listen to what they said, as it did not concern her. Having finished all, the devils disappeared as the cock crew announcing the break of day. Truth thought she would try the remedies she had heard, and at night rolled about on the dewy ground, when to her great relief her arms grew again. Wishing to be completely cured, she groped about and plucked every weed she could find, and rubbed the dew into the cavities of her eyes. As day broke she saw light once more. She then gave hearty thanks to the God of Truth that he had not left her, his faithful follower, to perish. Being hungry she set off in search of food. So she hurried off to the nearest town, not only for food, but also because she remembered what she had heard the devils say about cutting off the water supply. She hurried on, so as not to be longer than she could help in giving them her aid in their distress. She soon got there, and found everyone in mourning. Off she went straight to the king, and told him all she knew. He was delighted when he was told that the thirst of the people might be quenched. She also told the king how she had been maimed and blinded, and the king believed all she said. They commenced at once with great energy to dig up the stone that blocked the spring. The work was soon done ; the stone reached, lifted out, and the spring flowed once more. The king was full of joy and so was the whole town, and there were great festivities and a general holiday was held. The king would not allow Truth to leave, but gave her all she needed, and treated her as his most confidential friend, placing her in a position of great wealth and happiness. In the meantime Falsehood's provisions came to an end, and she was obliged to beg for food. As only very few houses gave her anything she was almost starving when she met her old travelling companion again. She cried to Truth for a piece of bread. "Yes, you can have it," said Truth, "but you must have an eye gouged out;" and Falsehood was in such a fix that she had either to submit or starve. Then the other eye was taken out, and after that her arms were cut off, in exchange for dry crusts of bread. Nor could she help it, for no one else would give her anything. Having lost her eyes and her arms she asked Truth to lead her under the same gallows as she had been led to. At night the devils came; and, as the eldest began questioning the others as to what they had been doing and what they knew, one of them proposed that search be made, just to see whether there were any listeners to their conversation, as someone must have been eavesdropping the other night, else it would never have been found out how the springs of the town were plugged up. To this they all agreed, and search was made ; and soon they found Falsehood, whom they instantly tore to pieces, coiled up her bowels into knots, burnt her, and dispersed her ashes to the winds. But even her dust was so malignant that it was carried all over the world; and that is the reason that wherever men exist there Falsehood must be. Source: János Kriza, The Folk-Tales of the Magyars (London: Published for the Folk-Lore society by Elliot Stock, 1889), no. 8, pp. 36-39 . Return to the table of contents . The Grateful Beasts Hungary There was once upon a time a man and woman who had three fine-looking sons, but they were so poor that they had hardly enough food for themselves, let alone their children. So the sons determined to set out into the world and to try their luck. Before starting their mother gave them each a loaf of bread and her blessing, and having taken a tender farewell of her and their father the three set forth on their travels. The youngest of the three brothers, whose name was Ferko, was a beautiful youth, with a splendid figure, blue eyes, fair hair, and a complexion like milk and roses. His two brothers were as jealous of him as they could be, for they thought that with his good looks he would be sure to be more fortunate than they would ever be. One day all the three were sitting resting under a tree, for the sun was hot and they were tired of walking. Ferko fell fast asleep, but the other two remained awake, and the eldest said to the second brother, "What do you say to doing our brother Ferko some harm? He is so beautiful that everyone takes a fancy to him, which is more than they do to us. If we could only get him out of the way we might succeed better." "I quite agree with you," answered the second brother, "and my advice is to eat up his loaf of bread, and then to refuse to give him a bit of ours until he has promised to let us put out his eyes or break his legs." His eldest brother was delighted with this proposal, and the two wicked wretches seized Ferko's loaf and ate it all up, while the poor boy was still asleep. When he did awake he felt very hungry and turned to eat his bread, but his brothers cried out, "You ate your loaf in your sleep, you glutton, and you may starve as long as you like, but you won't get a scrap of ours." Ferko was at a loss to understand how he could have eaten in his sleep, but he said nothing, and fasted all that day and the next night. But on the following morning he was so hungry that he burst into tears, and implored his brothers to give him a little bit of their bread. Then the cruel creatures laughed, and repeated what they had said the day before; but when Ferko continued to beg and beseech them, the eldest said at last, "If you will let us put out one of your eyes and break one of your legs, then we will give you a bit of our bread." At these words poor Ferko wept more bitterly than before, and bore the torments of hunger till the sun was high in the heavens; then he could stand it no longer, and he consented to allow his left eye to be put out and his left leg to be broken. When this was done he stretched out his hand eagerly for the piece of bread, but his brothers gave him such a tiny scrap that the starving youth finished it in a moment and besought them for a second bit. But the more Ferko wept and told his brothers that he was dying of hunger, the more they laughed and scolded him for his greed. So he endured the pangs of starvation all that day, but when night came his endurance gave way, and he let his right eye be put out and his right leg broken for a second piece of bread. After his brothers had thus successfully maimed and disfigured him for life, they left him groaning on the ground and continued their journey without him. Poor Ferko ate up the scrap of bread they had left him and wept bitterly, but no one heard him or came to his help. Night came on, and the poor blind youth had no eyes to close, and could only crawl along the ground, not knowing in the least where he was going. But when the sun was once more high in the heavens, Ferko felt the blazing heat scorch him, and sought for some cool shady place to rest his aching limbs. He climbed to the top of a hill and lay down in the grass, and as he thought under the shadow of a big tree. But it was no tree he leant against, but a gallows on which two ravens were seated. The one was saying to the other as the weary youth lay down, "Is there anything the least wonderful or remarkable about this neighborhood?" "I should just think there was," replied the other; "many things that don't exist anywhere else in the world. There is a lake down there below us, and anyone who bathes in it, though he were at death's door, becomes sound and well on the spot, and those who wash their eyes with the dew on this hill become as sharp-sighted as the eagle, even if they have been blind from their youth." "Well," answered the first raven, "my eyes are in no want of this healing bath, for, Heaven be praised, they are as good as ever they were; but my wing has been very feeble and weak ever since it was shot by an arrow many years ago, so let us fly at once to the lake that I may be restored to health and strength again." And so they flew away. Their words rejoiced Ferko's heart, and he waited impatiently till evening should come and he could rub the precious dew on his sightless eyes. At last it began to grow dusk, and the sun sank behind the mountains; gradually it became cooler on the hill, and the grass grew wet with dew. Then Ferko buried his face in the ground till his eyes were damp with dewdrops, and in a moment he saw clearer than he had ever done in his life before. The moon was shining brightly, and lighted him to the lake where he could bathe his poor broken legs. Then Ferko crawled to the edge of the lake and dipped his limbs in the water. No sooner had he done so than his legs felt as sound and strong as they had been before, and Ferko thanked the kind fate that had led him to the hill where he had overheard the ravens' conversation. He filled a bottle with the healing water, and then continued his journey in the best of spirits. He had not gone far before he met a wolf, who was limping disconsolately along on three legs, and who on perceiving Ferko began to howl dismally. "My good friend," said the youth, "be of good cheer, for I can soon heal your leg," and with these words he poured some of the precious water over the wolf's paw, and in a minute the animal was springing about sound and well on all fours. The grateful creature thanked his benefactor warmly, and promised Ferko to do him a good turn if he should ever need it. Ferko continued his way till he came to a ploughed field. Here he noticed a little mouse creeping wearily along on its hind paws, for its front paws had both been broken in a trap. Ferko felt so sorry for the little beast that he spoke to it in the most friendly manner, and washed its small paws with the healing water. In a moment the mouse was sound and whole, and after thanking the kind physician it scampered away over the ploughed furrows. Ferko again proceeded on his journey, but he hadn't gone far before a queen bee flew against him, trailing one wing behind her, which had been cruelly torn in two by a big bird. Ferko was no less willing to help her than he had been to help the wolf and the mouse, so he poured some healing drops over the wounded wing. On the spot the queen bee was cured, and turning to Ferko she said, "I am most grateful for your kindness, and shall reward you some day." And with these words she flew away humming, gaily. Then Ferko wandered on for many a long day, and at length reached a strange kingdom. Here, he thought to himself, he might as well go straight to the palace and offer his services to the king of the country, for he had heard that the king's daughter was as beautiful as the day. So he went to the royal palace, and as he entered the door the first people he saw were his two brothers who had so shamefully ill-treated him. They had managed to obtain places in the king's service, and when they recognized Ferko with his eyes and legs sound and well they were frightened to death, for they feared he would tell the king of their conduct, and that they would be hung. No sooner had Ferko entered the palace than all eyes were turned on the handsome youth, and the king's daughter herself was lost in admiration, for she had never seen anyone so handsome in her life before. His brothers noticed this, and envy and jealousy were added to their fear, so much so that they determined once more to destroy him. They went to the king and told him that Ferko was a wicked magician, who had come to the palace with the intention of carrying off the princess. Then the king had Ferko brought before him, and said, "You are accused of being a magician who wishes to rob me of my daughter, and I condemn you to death; but if you can fulfill three tasks which I shall set you to do your life shall be spared, on condition you leave the country; but if you cannot perform what I demand you shall be hung on the nearest tree." And turning to the two wicked brothers he said, "Suggest something for him to do; no matter how difficult, he must succeed in it or die." They did not think long, but replied, "Let him build your Majesty in one day a more beautiful palace than this, and if he fails in the attempt let him be hung." The king was pleased with this proposal, and commanded Ferko to set to work on the following day. The two brothers were delighted, for they thought they had now got rid of Ferko forever. The poor youth himself was heart-broken, and cursed the hour he had crossed the boundary of the king's domain. As he was wandering disconsolately about the meadows round the palace, wondering how he could escape being put to death, a little bee flew past, and settling on his shoulder whispered in his ear, "What is troubling you, my kind benefactor? Can I be of any help to you? I am the bee whose wing you healed, and would like to show my gratitude in some way." Ferko recognized the queen bee, and said, "Alas! how could you help me? for I have been set to do a task which no one in the whole world could do, let him be ever such a genius! Tomorrow I must build a palace more beautiful than the king's, and it must be finished before evening." "Is that all?" answered the bee, "then you may comfort yourself; for before the sun goes down tomorrow night a palace shall be built unlike any that king has dwelt in before. Just stay here till I come again and tell you that it is finished." Having said this she flew merrily away, and Ferko, reassured by her words, lay down on the grass and slept peacefully till the next morning. Early on the following day the whole town was on its feet, and everyone wondered how and where the stranger would build the wonderful palace. The princess alone was silent and sorrowful, and had cried all night till her pillow was wet, so much did she take the fate of the beautiful youth to heart. Ferko spent the whole day in the meadows waiting the return of the bee. And when evening was come the queen bee flew by, and perching on his shoulder she said, "The wonderful palace is ready. Be of good cheer, and lead the king to the hill just outside the city walls." And humming gaily she flew away again. Ferko went at once to the king and told him the palace was finished. The whole court went out to see the wonder, and their astonishment was great at the sight which met their eyes. A splendid palace reared itself on the hill just outside the walls of the city, made of the most exquisite flowers that ever grew in mortal garden. The roof was all of crimson roses, the windows of lilies, the walls of white carnations, the floors of glowing auriculas and violets, the doors of gorgeous tulips and narcissi with sunflowers for knockers, and all round hyacinths and other sweet-smelling flowers bloomed in masses, so that the air was perfumed far and near and enchanted all who were present. This splendid palace had been built by the grateful queen bee, who had summoned all the other bees in the kingdom to help her. The king's amazement knew no bounds, and the princess's eyes beamed with delight as she turned them from the wonderful building on the delighted Ferko. But the two brothers had grown quite green with envy, and only declared the more that Ferko was nothing but a wicked magician. The king, although he had been surprised and astonished at the way his commands had been carried out, was very vexed that the stranger should escape with his life, and turning to the two brothers he said, "He has certainly accomplished the first task, with the aid no doubt of his diabolical magic; but what shall we give him to do now? Let us make it as difficult as possible, and if he fails he shall die." Then the eldest brother replied, "The corn has all been cut, but it has not yet been put into barns; let the knave collect all the grain in the kingdom into one big heap before tomorrow night, and if as much as a stalk of corn is left let him be put to death." The princess grew white with terror when she heard these words; but Ferko felt much more cheerful than he had done the first time, and wandered out into the meadows again, wondering how he was to get out of the difficulty. But he could think of no way of escape. The sun sank to rest and night came on, when a little mouse started out of the grass at Ferko's feet, and said to him, "I'm delighted to see you, my kind benefactor; but why are you looking so sad? Can I be of any help to you, and thus repay your great kindness to me?" Then Ferko recognized the mouse whose front paws he had healed, and replied, "Alas I how can you help me in a matter that is beyond any human power! Before tomorrow night all the grain in the kingdom has to be gathered into one big heap, and if as much as a stalk of corn is wanting I must pay for it with my life." "Is that all?" answered the mouse; "that needn't distress you much. Just trust in me, and before the sun sets again you shall hear that your task is done." And with these words the little creature scampered away into the fields. Ferko, who never doubted that the mouse would be as good as its word, lay down comforted on the soft grass and slept soundly till next morning. The day passed slowly, and with the evening came the little mouse and said, "Now there is not a single stalk of corn left in any field; they are all collected in one big heap on the hill out there." Then Ferko went joyfully to the king and told him that all he demanded had been done. And the whole Court went out to see the wonder, and were no less astonished than they had been the first time. For in a heap higher than the king's palace lay all the grain of the country, and not a single stalk of corn had been left behind in any of the fields. And how had all this been done? The little mouse had summoned every other mouse in the land to its help, and together they had collected all the grain in the kingdom. The king could not hide his amazement, but at the same time his wrath increased, and he was more ready than ever to believe the two brothers, who kept on repeating that Ferko was nothing more nor less than a wicked magician. Only the beautiful princess rejoiced over Ferko's success, and looked on him with friendly glances, which the youth returned. The more the cruel king gazed on the wonder before him, the more angry he became, for he could not, in the face of his promise, put the stranger to death. He turned once more to the two brothers and said, "His diabolical magic has helped him again, but now what third task shall we set him to do? No matter how impossible it is, he must do it or die." The eldest answered quickly, "Let him drive all the wolves of the kingdom on to this hill before tomorrow night. If he does this he may go free; if not he shall be hung as you have said." At these words the princess burst into tears, and when the king saw this he ordered her to be shut up in a high tower and carefully guarded till the dangerous magician should either have left the kingdom or been hung on the nearest tree. Ferko wandered out into the fields again, and sat down on the stump of a tree wondering what he should do next. Suddenly a big wolf ran up to him, and standing still said, "I'm very glad to see you again, my kind benefactor. What are you thinking about all alone by yourself? If I can help you in any way only say the word, for I would like to give you a proof of my gratitude." Ferko at once recognized the wolf whose broken leg he had healed, and told him what he had to do the following day if he wished to escape with his life. "But how in the world," he added, "am I to collect all the wolves of the kingdom on to that hill over there?" "If that's all you want done," answered the wolf, "you needn't worry yourself. I'll undertake the task, and you'll hear from me again before sunset tomorrow. Keep your spirits up." And with these words he trotted quickly away. Then the youth rejoiced greatly, for now he felt that his life was safe; but he grew very sad when he thought of the beautiful princess, and that he would never see her again if he left the country. He lay down once more on the grass and soon fell fast asleep. All the next day he spent wandering about the fields, and toward evening the wolf came running to him in a great hurry and said, "I have collected together all the wolves in the kingdom, and they are waiting for you in the wood. Go quickly to the king, and tell him to go to the hill that he may see the wonder you have done with his own eyes. Then return at once to me and get on my back, and I will help you to drive all the wolves together." Then Ferko went straight to the palace and told the king that he was ready to perform the third task if he would come to the hill and see it done. Ferko himself returned to the fields, and mounting on the wolf's back he rode to the wood close by. Quick as lightning the wolf flew round the wood, and in a minute many hundred wolves rose up before him, increasing in number every moment, till they could be counted by thousands. He drove them all before him on to the hill, where the king and his whole Court and Ferko's two brothers were standing. Only the lovely princess was not present, for she was shut up in her tower weeping bitterly. The wicked brothers stamped and foamed with rage when they saw the failure of their wicked designs. But the king was overcome by a sudden terror when he saw the enormous pack of wolves approaching nearer and nearer, and calling out to Ferko he said, "Enough, enough, we don't want any more." But the wolf on whose back Ferko sat, said to its rider, "Go on! go on!" and at the same moment many more wolves ran up the hill, howling horribly and showing their white teeth. The king in his terror called out, "Stop a moment; I will give you half my kingdom if you will drive all the wolves away." But Ferko pretended not to hear, and drove some more thousands before him, so that everyone quaked with horror and fear. Then the king raised his voice again and called out, "Stop! you shall have my whole kingdom, if you will only drive these wolves back to the places they came from." But the wolf kept on encouraging Ferko, and said, "Go on! go on!" So he led the wolves on, till at last they fell on the king and on the wicked brothers, and ate them and the whole Court up in a moment. Then Ferko went straight to the palace and set the princess free, and on the same day he married her and was crowned king of the country. And the wolves all went peacefully back to their own homes, and Ferko and his bride lived for many years in peace and happiness together, and were much beloved by great and small in the land. Source: Andrew Lang, The Yellow Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1906), pp. 64-74 . First published 1894. Return to the table of contents . Honesty and Dishonesty Russia One day two peasants were conversing; one of them was boastful and untruthful, the other famed for truthfulness and honesty. The one was saying that it was better to live, telling lies and cheating everybody, and be rich; while the other replied that it was far better to live in poverty, as long as you were honest and truthful. So they began to dispute and quarrel, neither of them wishing to give in. They at last decided to go out into the village high-road, and ask the opinion of the very first person they met. They walked and walked, and soon saw a peasant plowing in a field close to the road; they went up to him, and said, "Good man, judge our quarrel: how is it better to live in the wide world -- honestly or dishonestly? -- telling the truth or by telling lies?" "Ah, my brothers, you cannot possibly live honestly in this world all your life! You must tell a lie now and then! Besides, an honest and truthful man must walk about all his life in straw shoes, while a liar and a dishonest man can walk in handsome boots. Take us, for example, our masters unjustly take our days from us, leaving no time for us to work in. [Footnote: The serfs were allowed three days in the week to work for themselves, while the other three days belonged to their masters.] We therefore have to pretend that we are overcome by sickness, and during that time go wood-cutting in the forest; if wood-cutting is forbidden by day, we go at night. We have always to dodge about in this world, my friends. We could not possibly get on otherwise." "Do you hear that?" said the liar to the honest man. "What I told you was perfectly true!" But his companion would not be convinced, so they walked on farther, till they came across a merchant driving a wagon. "Stop for a moment, good sir!" they cried. "We want you to do us a favor, if you will not resent it, and promise not to be angry with us." "What is it?" "We want you to decide our quarrel, and tell us whether it is better to live honestly in this world or dishonestly?" "Ah, my children! it is difficult to live honestly. For my part, I think it is best to be dishonest; people cheat us , so why should we not cheat them?" "You hear!" cried the liar to his companion. "This good man is of my opinion, like the other." Still the truthful man would not listen to his friend, so they went on farther and met a noble coming along the road. They stopped him, and said, "Kindly judge our quarrel for us; how is it best to live in this world, honestly or dishonestly?" "Well, you certainly have found something to quarrel about. You must have been very hard pressed for conversation. Of course, being dishonest is the only way to get on. What honesty and truthfulness is there in this world? You get sent to Siberia if you are honest and tell the truth!" "You see, my friend, I am right after all!" said the liar." Everyone thinks as I do, that it is better to live dishonestly." "No," said the truthful man, " it is not better, and I do not intend to live dishonestly, to please any one. If any misfortunes happen to me -- well, let them!" After this the two men went off in search of work; they journeyed on together for some time. The dishonest man always knowing how to adapt himself to the company he was in, wherever he went he had plenty to eat and drink and nothing to pay; while the honest man had to work for every drop of water and morsel of bread he got -- yet he did not grumble; he was perfectly satisfied. The dishonest man meanwhile laughed to himself as he watched his companion. When they had at last passed the village and reached the open country, where there were no inns or houses of any kind, the honest man became very hungry, and asked his companion to give him a morsel of bread, for he had plenty. "But what will you give me for the bread?" "Take whatever you like, though I have not much to lose." "Well, then, let me put out your eye!" "Very well, put it out!" The horrid man did so, and gave him a very small piece of bread in return. They went on and on, until the honest man again became hungry, and asked his friend for another piece of bread. "Very well, on condition that you let me knock out your other eye!" "But if you do that, brother, I shall be blind!" "Well, what matters, you are an honest, truthful man, you ought not to mind!" "Well, if it must be so, it must! One cannot put up with hunger. If you are not afraid of committing the sin, knock out my eye and be happy." The wretch did so, and giving his unfortunate companion a still smaller piece of bread than the first, left him in the middle of the deserted country road, and said, "Go, find your way by yourself. I am not going to lead a blind man about!" After having eaten his piece of bread, the blind man felt his way along. "Perhaps," thought he, "I may manage to find my way to the next village." But he soon lost his way, and did not know where to go. He stopped, and throwing himself on his knees, began to pray to the saints to help him. "Do not forsake me, miserable sinner that I am!" he cried. He prayed and prayed for a long time, and then heard a voice quite close to him saying, "Turn to your right, good man, and you will come to a forest where you will hear the murmur of a fountain; feel your way to it, bathe your eyes in the clear water, and your eyesight will be restored. You will then see a large oak tree, climb up into it, and stop there through the night." The blind man turned to the right, and with some difficulty reached the forest. He crawled along a path which soon brought him up to the murmuring fountain, and dipping his hands into the water, he began bathing his eyes. No sooner had he done so when his eyesight returned, and he was able to look about him once more. Not very far from the fountain stood an old oak tree, under which the grass seemed to have been greatly trampled down, and the earth around was dug up here and there and scattered about everywhere. He climbed up into the tree and waited until nightfall. At about midnight a number of evil spirits came flying down from all sides on to the trampled grass, and began boasting about what they had done and where they had been. One little devil said, "I went to the beautiful princess, the king's daughter, and tormented her all day. I have gone on tormenting her for over ten years, and no one can cast me out, though many a handsome prince has tried, but all in vain; and, between ourselves, no one will ever succeed unless some fellow obtains that large image of the Virgin Mary, which is in the possession of a certain wealthy merchant; but then no one would ever think of that, and besides, if they did, the merchant would never part with it." In the morning when all the devils had flown away, our friend the truthful man, who had heard the whole of the conversation, came down from his hiding place in the tree and went in search of the rich merchant. After inquiring everywhere, he at last found the merchant, and asked him to take him as a workman, saying, "I will work hard for you for a whole year, but I want no wages. All I ask for is to have the famous image of the Virgin Mary which is in your possession." The merchant consented, and the man worked away night and day, without a moment's rest, for he was very anxious to please his master. When the year was over he came to the merchant and asked for his reward. "I am more than pleased with your work," the merchant said; "but I do not wish to part with the picture. Would not money do as well? You could have as much of it as you pleased, if that would satisfy you." "No; money would be of no use to me. Give me what you promised, and what you agreed upon when you took me." "It is hard for me to part with that picture; in fact, I don't know what I should do without it! Still, if you will work another year for me, I will give it to you." There was no help for it, and the truthful man was obliged to consent. When the year was over, the merchant was again loath to part with the picture. "I would rather reward you with all possible treasures," the merchant said, "than part with the picture; but if you are determined to have it, you must stop with me and work for another year." It was difficult to argue with such a rich and influential man as the merchant; besides, it would not have been wise, under the circumstances. So our friend stayed and worked for his master another whole year, better and harder, if possible, than before. At the end of the third year the merchant actually took down the picture from the wall, and gave it to the man, saying, "Take it, my good fellow, for you have worked so hard and so well, without ever grumbling, that I cannot refuse you this time; take it, and may the saints bless you." The truthful man thanked the merchant, and taking the picture went to the king's palace, where the devil was tormenting the princess. "I can cure the princess," he said to the servants and people at court. When they heard this they seized him by the hands and brought him before the king, who was sitting on his throne, looking the picture of misery. The king at once had him taken to the room where the afflicted princess was kept. The man then asked for a large bowl of fresh water, into which he dipped the picture three times, and then bringing the water to the beautiful princess made her bathe her face in it. Hardly had she done so, when out sprang the demon, writhing until he became lifeless. When the enemy had expired, the lovely damsel became quite well and bright again. The king and queen were delighted, and did not know how they could best reward the good man who had proved such an excellent doctor. They wanted to ennoble him; they wanted to give him a quantity of all kinds of treasures and good things; but no, he would have nothing. "I don't want anything," he said. "I shall marry him," the princess whispered to her father, "if he would care to have me!" "Very well!" replied the king. As for our friend he did not object in the least, but was delighted. The wedding was then prepared, and the news immediately spread all over the kingdom, so that when the great day arrived there was quite a crowd to see the bride and bridegroom. From that day forth our friend, the truthful man, lived in the palace, was clad in royal garments, and dined at the king's table. Time passed, and our friend asked the king and queen to let him go and have a look at his own country. "I have an old mother living in the village from which I come, and I want to see her again." "Let us go together," said the princess. So they drove off in a lovely carriage and pair belonging to the king. They drove and drove, and on their way they met the wretch who had knocked out our friend's eyes. When the king's son-in-law saw him he stopped the carriage, and called out, "How are you, my brother? Have you forgotten me? Do you not remember the quarrel we had together about honesty and dishonesty? and you knocking my eyes out because I did not agree with you." The wretch began to tremble and did not know what to do or what to say. "Do not be afraid, my friend," said the other. " I am not angry with you." And then he began to explain everything to the dishonest man; how he had gone to the forest, and what he had heard there, and how he had worked three years for the rich merchant, and then received the picture of the Virgin Mary, and had at last married the king's beautiful daughter. When the dishonest man heard this, he thought he would also go into the forest and climb up the old oak tree. "Perhaps," said he to himself, "I shall be just as fortunate as my friend!" So he went to the forest, found the murmuring fountain and the old oak tree, into which he climbed and waited until nightfall. At midnight the evil spirits again flew down from all sides on to the grass below; but this time they looked up, and seeing the dishonest man hiding in the tree, they seized him and tore him into a number of very small pieces. Source: Edith M. S. Hodgetts, Tales and Legends from the Land of the Tzar: Collection of Russian Stories , second edition (London: Griffith Farran and Company, 1891), pp. 233-41 . Return to the table of contents . Justice or Injustice? Which Is Best? Serbia A king had two sons; of these, one was cunning and unjust, the other, just and gentle. After the death of the father the elder son said to the younger, "Depart; I will not live with you any longer. Here are three hundred ducats and a horse: this is your portion of our father's property. Take it, for I owe you nothing more than this." The younger son took the money and the horse which were offered him, and said, "Thank God! See only how much of the kingdom has fallen to me!" Some time afterwards the two brothers, both of whom were riding, met by chance in a road. The younger brother greeted the elder one, saying, "God help thee, brother!" And the elder answered, "Why do you speak always about God? Nowadays injustice is better than justice." The younger brother, however, said to him, "I will wager with you that injustice is not, as you say, better than justice." So they betted one hundred golden zechins, and it was arranged that they should leave the decision to the first man they met in the road. Riding together a little farther they met with Satan, who had disguised himself as a monk, and they asked him to decide which was better, justice or injustice? Satan answered, "Injustice!" And the good brother paid the bad one the hundred golden zechins which he had wagered. Then they betted for another hundred zechins, and again a third time for a third hundred, and each time Satan -- who managed to disguise himself in different ways and meet them -- decided that injustice was better than justice. Thus the younger brother lost all his money, and his horse into the bargain. Then he said, "Thank God! I have no more money, but I have eyes, and I wager my eyes that justice is better than injustice." Thereupon the unjust brother, without waiting for any one's decision, drew his knife and cut both his brother's eyes out, saying, "Now you have no eyes, let justice help you." But the younger brother in his trouble only thanked God and said, "I have lost my eyes for the sake of God's justice, but I pray you, my brother, give me a little water in some vessel to wash my wounds and wet my mouth, and bring me away from this place to the pine tree just about the spring, before you leave me." The unjust brother did so, gave him water, and left him alone under the pine tree near the spring of water. There the unfortunate remained, sitting on the ground. Late, however, in the night, some fairies came to the spring to bathe, and one of them came to the spring to bathe, and one of them said to the others, "Do you know, my sisters, that the king's daughter has got the leprosy? The king has summoned all the physicians, but no one can possibly help her. But if the king only knew, he would take a little of this water in which we are bathing, and wash his daughter therewith; and then in a day and a night she would recover completely from her leprosy. Just as any one deaf, or dumb, or blind, could be cured by this same water." Then, as the cocks began to crow, the fairies hurried away. As soon as they were gone, the unfortunate man felt his way slowly with his outstretched hands till he came to the spring of water. There he bathed his eyes, and in an instant recovered his sight. After that he filled the vessel with water, and hurried away to the king, whose daughter was leprous, and said to the servants, "I am come to cure the king's daughter, if he will only let me try. I guarantee that she will become healthy in a day and night." When the king heard that, he ordered him to be led into the room where the girl was, and made her immediately bathe in the water. After a day and a night the girl came out pure and healthy. Then the king was greatly pleased, and gave the young prince the half of his kingdom, and also his daughter for a wife, so that he became the king's son-in-law, and the first man after him in the kingdom. The tidings of this great event spread all over the world, and so came to the ears of the unjust brother. He guessed directly that his blind brother must have met with good fortune under the pine tree, so he went himself to try to find it also. He carried with him a vessel full of water, and then carved out his own eyes with his knife. When it was dark the fairies came again, and, as they bathed, spoke about the recovery of the king's daughter. "It cannot be otherwise," they said; "someone must have been listening to our last conversation here. Perhaps someone is listening now. Let us see." So they searched all around, and when they came to the pine tree they found there the unjust brother who had come to seek after good fortune, and who declared always that injustice was better than justice. They immediately caught him, and tore him into four parts. And so, at the last, his wickedness did not help him, and he found to his cost that justice is better than injustice. Source: Csedomille Mijatovies, Serbian Folk-Lore: Popular Tales , edited by W. Denton (London: W. Isbister and Company, 1874), pp. 83-86 . Link to another translation of this story: John T. Naaké, "Right and Wrong," Slavonic Fairy Tales: Collected and Translated from the Russian, Polish, Servian, and Bohemian (London: Henry S. King and Company, 1874), pp. 130-34 . Return to the table of contents . The Two Brothers Slavic Once upon a time there were two brothers whose father had left them but a small fortune. The eldest grew very rich, but at the same time cruel and wicked, whereas there was nowhere a more honest or kinder man than the younger. But he remained poor, and had many children, so that at times they could scarcely get bread to eat. At last, one day there was not even this in the house, so he went to his rich brother and asked him for a loaf of bread. Waste of time! His rich brother only called him beggar and vagabond, and slammed the door in his face. The poor fellow, after this brutal reception, did not know which way to turn. Hungry, scantily clad, shivering with cold, his legs could scarcely carry him along. He had not the heart to go home, with nothing for the children, so he went towards the mountain forest. But all he found there were some wild pears that had fallen to the ground. He had to content himself with eating these, though they set his teeth on edge. But what was he to do to warm himself, for the east wind with its chill blast pierced him through and through. "Where shall I go?" he said; "what will become of us in the cottage? There is neither food nor fire, and my brother has driven me from his door." It was just then he remembered having heard that the top of the mountain in front of him was made of crystal, and had a fire forever burning upon it. "I will try and find it," he said, "and then I may be able to warm myself a little." So he went on climbing higher and higher till he reached the top, when he was startled to see twelve strange beings sitting round a huge fire. He stopped for a moment, but then said to himself, "What have I to lose? Why should I fear? God is with me. Courage!" So he advanced towards the fire, and bowing respectfully, said, "Good people, take pity on my distress. I am very poor, no one cares for me, I have not even a fire in my cottage; will you let me warm myself at yours?" They all looked kindly at him, and one of them said, "My son, come sit down with us and warm yourself." So he sat down, and felt warm directly he was near them. But he dared not speak while they were silent. What astonished him most was that they changed seats one after another, and in such a way that each one passed round the fire and came back to his own place. When he drew near the fire an old man with long white beard and bald head arose from the flames and spoke to him thus, "Man, waste not thy life here; return to thy cottage, work, and live honestly. Take as many embers as thou wilt, we have more than we need." And having said this he disappeared. Then the twelve filled a large sack with embers, and, putting it on the poor man's shoulders, advised him to hasten home. Humbly thanking them, he set off. As he went he wondered why the embers did not feel hot, and why they should weigh no more than a sack of paper. He was thankful that he should be able to have a fire, but imagine his astonishment when on arriving home he found the sack to contain as many gold pieces as there had been embers; he almost went out of his mind with joy at the possession of so much money. With all his heart he thanked those who had been so ready to help him in his need. He was now rich, and rejoiced to be able to provide for his family. Being curious to find out how many gold pieces there were, and not knowing how to count, he sent his wife to his rich brother for the loan of a quart measure. This time the brother was in a better temper, so he lent what was asked of him, but said mockingly, "What can such beggars as you have to measure?" The wife replied, "Our neighbor owes us some wheat; we want to be sure he returns us the right quantity." The rich brother was puzzled, and suspecting something he, unknown to his sister-in-law, put some grease inside the measure. The trick succeeded, for on getting it back he found a piece of gold sticking to it. Filled with astonishment, he could only suppose his brother had joined a band of robbers; so he hurried to his brother's cottage, and threatened to bring him before the Justice of the Peace if he did not confess where the gold came from. The poor man was troubled, and, dreading to offend his brother, told the story of his journey to the Crystal Mountain. Now the elder brother had plenty of money for himself, yet he was envious of the brother's good fortune, and became greatly displeased when he found that his brother won every one's esteem by the good use he made of his wealth. At last he determined to visit the Crystal Mountain himself. "I may meet with as good luck as my brother," said he to himself. Upon reaching the Crystal Mountain he found the twelve seated round the fire as before, and thus addressed them, "I beg of you, good people, to let me warm myself, for it is bitterly cold, and I am poor and homeless." But one of them replied, "My son, the hour of thy birth was favorable; thou art rich, but a miser; thou art wicked, for thou hast dared to lie to us. Well dost thou deserve thy punishment." Amazed and terrified he stood silent, not daring to speak. Meanwhile the twelve changed places one after another, each at last returning to his own seat. Then from the midst of the flames arose the white-bearded old man and spoke thus sternly to the rich man, "Woe unto the wilful! Thy brother is virtuous, therefore have I blessed him. As for thee, thou art wicked, and so shall not escape our vengeance." At these words the twelve arose. The first seized the unfortunate man, struck him, and passed him on to the second; the second also struck him and passed him on to the third; and so did they all in their turn, until he was given up to the old man, who disappeared with him into the fire. Days, weeks, months went by, but the rich man never returned, and none knew what had become of him. I think, between you and me, the younger brother had his suspicions but he very wisely kept them to himself. Source: Alexander Chodsko, Fairy Tales of the Alav Peasants and Herdsmen , from the French of Alex. Chodsko; translated and illustrated by Emily J. Harding (London: George Allen, 1896), pp. 3-9 . Return to the table of contents . The Two Brothers Georgia Once upon a time there were two brothers. Each of them possessed ten loaves of bread; and they said, "Let us go and seek our fortune." So they arose and went forth. When they had gone a little way they were hungry. One brother said to the other, "Come, let us eat thy bread first, then we can eat mine." And he agreed, and they took of his loaves and did eat, and they afterwards went on their way. And they travelled for some time in this manner. At last, when these ten loaves were finished, the brother who had first spoken said, "Now, my brother, thou canst go thy way and I shall go mine. Thou hast no loaves left, and I will not let thee eat my bread." So saying, he left him to continue his journey alone. He went on and on, and came to a mill in a thick forest. He saw the miller and said, "For the love of God, let me stay here tonight." The miller answered, "Brother, it is a very terrible thing to be here at night; as thou seest, even I go elsewhere. Presently wild beasts will assemble in the wood, and probably come here." "Have no fear for me; I shall stay here. The beasts cannot kill me," answered the boy. The miller tried to persuade him not to endanger his life, but when he found his arguments were of no avail he rose and went home. The boy crept inside the hopper of the mill. There appeared, from no one knows where, a big bear; he was followed by a wolf, then a jackal; and they all made a great noise in the mill. They leaped and bounded just as if they were having a dance. He was terrified, and, trembling from fear, he lay down, quaking all over, in the hopper. At last the bear said, "Come, let each of us tell something he has seen or heard." "We shall tell our tales, but you must begin," cried his companions. The bear said, "Well, on a hill that I know dwells a mouse. This mouse has a great heap of money, which it spreads out when the sun shines. If anyone knew of this mouse's hole, and went there on a sunny day, when the money is spread out, and struck the mouse with a twig, and killed it, he would become possessed of great wealth." "That is not wonderful!" said the wolf. "I know a certain town where there is no water, and every mouthful has to be carried a great distance, and an enormous price is paid for it! The inhabitants do not know that in the center of their town, under a certain stone, is beautiful, pure water. Now, if any one knew of this, and would roll away that stone, he would obtain great wealth." "That is nothing," said the jackal. "I know of a king who has one only daughter, and she has been an invalid for three years. Quite a simple remedy would cure her: if she were bathed in a bath of beech leaves she would be healed. You have no idea what a fortune any one would get if he only knew this." When they had spoken thus, day began to dawn. The bear, the wolf, and the jackal went away into the wood. The boy came out of the hopper, gave thanks to God, and went to the mouse's hole, of which the bear had spoken. He arrived, and saw that the story was true. There was the mouse with the money spread out. He stole up noiselessly, and, taking twigs in his hand, he struck the mouse until he had killed it, and then gathered up the money. Then he went to the waterless town, rolled away the stone, and behold! streams of water flowed forth. He received a reward for this, and set out for the kingdom of which the jackal had spoken. He arrived, and enquired of the king, "What wilt thou give me if I cure thy daughter?" The king replied, "If thou canst do this I will give thee my daughter to wife." The youth prepared the remedy, made the princess bathe in it, and she was cured. The king rejoiced greatly, gave him the maiden in marriage, and appointed him heir to the kingdom. This story reached the ears of the youth's brother. He went on and on, and it came to pass that he found his brother. He asked him, "How and by what cunning has this happened?" The fortunate youth told him all in detail. "I also shall go and stay at that mill a night or two." His brother used many entreaties to dissuade him, and when he would not listen, said, "Well, go if thou wilt, but I warn thee again it is very dangerous." However, he would not be persuaded, and went away. He crept into the hopper, and was there all night. From some place or other arrived the former guests -- the bear, the wolf, and the jackal. The bear said, "That day when I told you my story the mouse was killed, and the money all taken away." The wolf said, "And the stone was rolled away in the waterless town of which I spoke." "And the king's daughter was cured," added the jackal. "Then perhaps someone was listening when we talked here," said the bear. "Perhaps someone is here now," shrieked his companions. "Then let us go and look; certainly no one shall listen again," said the three; and they looked in all the corners. They sought and sought everywhere. At last the bear looked into the hopper, and saw the trembling boy. He dragged him out and tore him to pieces. Source: Marjory Wardrop, Georgian Folk Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), no. 9, pp. 49-52 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 23, 2014. Underground People Disturbed by Farm or Household Waste Underground People Disturbed by Farm or Household Waste Migratory Legends of Christiansen Type 5075 edited and/or translated by D. L. Ashliman © 2008-2019 Contents Raginal (Denmark). The Young Lady of Hellerup (Sweden). Sir Godfrey Macculloch and the Fairies (Scotland). The Tulman (Scotland). Why Deunant Has the Front Door in the Back (Wales). Why the Back Door Was Front (Wales). The Underground People in Stocksee (Germany). The Stallion and the Underground People (Germany). Underground People beneath the Horse Stall (Germany). The Underground People (Germany). A Horse Stall Is Moved (Germany). Return to folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Raginal Denmark A farmer fell into poverty because he could not keep any cows in his stalls, the necks of all having been broken one after another. He therefore left the farm, which was sold to another. When the new proprietor came into the cowshed one evening and saw that everything was in a dubious state, he exclaimed, "Good evening, Raginal!" Whereupon a voice answered, "What? Do you know me?" "Yes, I have known you for many a year!" "If," said the troll, who dwelled beneath, "you will move your cowshed to some other place, you shall become a wealthy man. I have my habitation under the cows, and their filth falls down on my table every day, so that I have been obliged to break their necks." The man removed the cowshed, and thrived from that time. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology: Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), vol. 2, p. 150 . Translation revised by D. L. Ashliman. Thorpe's source: J. M. Thiele, Danmarks Folkesagn (Copenhagen: Universitetsboghandler C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), vol. 2, p. 242 . Return to the table of contents . The Young Lady of Hellerup Sweden Upon the estate of Hellerup, in the parish of Ljungby, there lived, many years ago, a gentleman of rank, who had a daughter renowned for her gentleness as well as for her beauty and intelligence. One night, while lying awake in her bed, watching the moonbeams dancing upon her chamber floor, her door was opened and a little fairy, clad in a gray jacket and red cap, tripped lightly in and toward her bed. "Do not be afraid, gracious lady!" said he, and looked her in the eye in a friendly manner. "I have come to ask a favor from you." "Willingly, if I can," answered the young lady, who began to recover from her fear. "Oh! it will not be difficult," said the fairy. "I and mine have, for many years, lived under the floor in the kitchen, just where the water tank stands, which has become old and leaky, so that we are continually annoyed by the dripping of water, and the maids spill water upon the floor, which drips through, so that it is never dry in our home." "That shall be seen to in the morning," promised the lady, and the fairy, making an elegant bow, disappeared as noiselessly as he came. The next day, at the girl's request, the cask was moved, and the gratitude of the fairies was soon manifested. Never thereafter was a glass or plate broken, and if the servants had work to do that required early rising, they were always awake at the appointed hour. Sometime later the fairy again stood at the young lady's bedside. "Now I have another request which, in your generosity, you will certainly not refuse to grant." "What is it, then?" asked the young lady. "That you will honor me and my house, and tonight stand at the christening of my newly born daughter." The young lady arose and clad herself, and followed her unknown conductor through many passages and rooms which she had never before been aware existed, until she finally came to the kitchen. Here she found a host of small folk and priest and father, whereupon the little child was baptized in the usual Christian manner. When the young lady was about to go the fairy begged permission to put a memento in her apron. Though what she received looked like a stick and some shavings, she appeared very thankful, and was conducted again through the winding passages back to her room. Just as the fairy stood ready to leave her, he said, "If we should meet again, and that is probable, bear well in mind not to laugh at me or any of mine. We esteem you for your modesty and goodness, but if you laugh at us, we shall never see each other again." With these words he left the room. When he had gone the young woman threw her present into the stove and laid herself down to sleep, and the following morning, when the maid went to build the fire, she found in the ashes jewelry of the purest gold and finest workmanship, such as had never before been seen. Some years later the young woman was about to marry, and preparations were made for a day of pomp and splendor. For many weeks there was great bustle in the kitchen and bridal chamber. During the day all was quiet under the floor in the kitchen, but through the night one who slept lightly could hear the sounds of work as through the day. At length the wedding hour arrived. Decked with laurels and crown, the bride was conducted to the hall where the guests were gathered. During the ceremonies she chanced to cast a glance toward the fireplace in the corner of the hall, where she saw the fairies gathered for a like feast. The bridegroom was a little fairy and the bride her goddaughter, and everything was conducted in the same manner as in the hall. None of the guests saw what was going on in their vicinity, but it was observed that the bride could not take her eyes from the fireplace. Later in the evening, when she again saw the strange bridal feast, she saw one of the fairies who was acting as waiter stumble and fall over a twig. Unmindful of the caution she had received, she burst out into a hearty laugh. Instantly the scene vanished, and from that time no fairies have been seen at Hellerup. Source: W. H. Myers, Swedish Fairy Tales (Chicago: Belford-Clarke Company, 1890), pp. 80-83 . The second episode in this tale is a migratory legend of Christiansen type 5070, Midwife (or Godmother or Nurse) for the Elves . Return to the table of contents . Sir Godfrey Macculloch and the Fairies Scotland The Scottish Fairies, in like manner, sometimes reside in subterranean abodes, in the vicinity of human habitations, or, according to the popular phrase, under the "door-stane," or threshold; in which situation, they sometimes establish an intercourse with men, by borrowing and lending, and other kindly offices. In this capacity they are termed "the good neighbors," from supplying privately the wants of their friends, and assisting them in all their transactions, while their favors are concealed. Of this the traditionary story of Sir Godfrey Macculloch forms a curious example. As this Gallovidian gentleman was taking the air on horseback, near his own house, he was suddenly accosted by a little old man, arrayed in green, and mounted upon a white palfrey. After mutual salutation, the old man gave Sir Godfrey to understand, that he resided under his habitation, and that he had great reason to complain of the direction of a drain, or common sewer, which emptied itself directly into his chamber of dais.* Sir Godfrey Macculloch was a good deal startled at this extraordinary complaint; but, guessing the nature of the being he had to deal with, he assured the old man, with great courtesy, that the direction of the drain should be altered; and caused it to be done accordingly. Many years afterwards, Sir Godfrey had the misfortune to kill, in a fray, a gentleman of the neighborhood. He was apprehended, tried, and condemned.† The scaffold, upon which his head was to be struck off, was erected on the Castle-Hill of Edinburgh; but hardly had he reached the fatal spot, when the old man, upon his white palfrey, pressed through the crowd, with the rapidity of lightning. Sir Godfrey, at his command, sprung on behind him ; the "good neighbor" spurred his horse down the steep bank, and neither he nor the criminal were ever again seen. Source: Walter Scott, Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border: Consisting of Historical and Romantic Romantic Balladsz , 5th ed. (Edinburgh: Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, 1821), vol. 2, pp. 169-71 . Scott's notes: * The best chamber was thus currently denominated in Scotland, from the French dais , signifying that part of the ancient halls which was elevated above the rest, and covered with a canopy. The turf-seats, which occupy thc sunny side of a cottage wall, are also termed the dais . † In this particular, tradition coincides with the real fact; the trial took place in 1697. Return to the table of contents . The Tulman Scotland There was a woman in Baile Thangusdail, and she was out seeking a couple of calves; and the night and lateness caught her, and there came rain and tempest, and she was seeking shelter. She went to a knoll with the couple of calves, and she was striking a tether-peg into it. The knoll opened. She heard a gleegashing as if a pot-hook were clashing beside a pot. She took wonder, and she stopped striking the tether-peg. A woman put out her head and all above her middle, and she said, "What business hast thou to be troubling this tulman in which I make my dwelling?" "I am taking care of this couple of calves, and I am but weak. Where shall I go with them?" "Thou shalt go with them to that breast down yonder. Thou wilt see a tuft of grass. If thy couple of calves eat that tuft of grass, thou wilt not be a day without a milk cow as long as thou art alive, because thou hast taken my counsel." As she said, she never was without a milk cow after that, and she was alive fourscore and fifteen years after the night that was there. Source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands , new edition, vol. 2 (Paisley and London: Alexander Gardner, [1890], no. 24, p. 49 . Campbell's source: "From Alexander M'Donald, tenant, and others, Barra. July 1859." Return to the table of contents . Why Deunant Has the Front Door in the Back Wales The cattle of the farmer living at Deunant, close to Aberdaron, were grievously afflicted with the "short disease," which is the malady known in English as the black quarter. Naturally, he thought they were bewitched. Old Beti'r Bont, whose character was by no means above suspicion -- she was thought to earn her living by stealing babies for the fairies -- had called at Deunant when they were feathering geese and had begged much for one, but she had been refused, and the farmer concluded she was taking her revenge by harassing his stock. So he went to old Beti and told her that he would tie her hands and feet and throw her into a river unless she removed the charm. She vehemently denied possessing any magical powers, and repeated the Lord's Prayer correctly in proof of her innocence. The farmer was not altogether convinced even by this, and made her say, "Rhad Duw ar y da," "God's blessing be on the cattle." Now, if this is spoken over bewitched animals, they are always freed from their disease, but the farmer's stock was no better even after his invocation, and he was at his wits' end. One night before going to bed he was standing a few steps in front of his house, meditating over his trouble. "I cannot imagine why the cattle do not get better," said he out loud to himself. "I will tell you," said a squeaky little voice close by him. The farmer turned in the direction of the sound and saw a tiny little man, looking very angrily at him. "It is," continued the manikin, "because your family keeps on annoying mine so much." "How is that?" asked the farmer, surprised and puzzled. "They are always throwing the slops from your house down the chimney of my house," said the little man. "That cannot be," retorted the farmer. "There is no house within a mile of mine." "Put your foot on mine," said the small stranger, "and you will see that what I say is true." The farmer, complying, put his foot on the other's foot, and he could clearly see that all the slops thrown out of his house went down the chimney of the other's house, which stood far below in a street he had never seen before. Directly he took his foot off the other's, however, there was no sign of house or chimney. "Well, indeed, I am very sorry," said the farmer. "What can I do to make up for the annoyance which my family has caused you?" The tiny little man was satisfied by the farmer's apology, and he said, "You had better wall up the door on this side of your house and make another in the other side. If you do that, your slops will no longer be a nuisance to my family and myself." Having said this he vanished in the dusk of the night. The farmer obeyed, and his cattle recovered. Ever after he was a most prosperous man, and nobody was so successful as he in rearing stock in all Lleyn. Unless they have pulled it down to build a new one, you can see the house with the front door at the back. W. Jenkyn Thomas. The Welsh Fairy Book (London: Unwin, [1908]), pp. 159-62. Aberdaron is a fishing village located at the tip of the Lleyn Peninsula in northern Wales. Return to the table of contents . Why the Back Door Was Front Wales In the days when were no books, or writing, and folk tales were the only ones told, there was an old woman, who had a bad reputation. She pretended to be very poor, so as not to attract or tempt robbers. Yet those who knew her best, knew also, as a subject of common talk, that she was always counting out her coins. Besides this, she lived in a nice house, and it was believed that she made a living by stealing babies out of their cradles to sell to the bad fairies. It was matter of rumor that she would, for an extra large sum, take a wicked fairy's ugly brat, and put it in place of a mother's darling. In addition to these horrid charges against her, it was rumored that she laid a spell, or charm, on the cattle of people whom she did not like, in order to take revenge on them. The old woman denied all this, and declared it was only silly gossip of envious people who wanted her money. She lived so comfortably, she averred, because her son, who was a stone mason, who made much money by building chimneys, which had then first come into fashion. When he brought to her the profits of his jobs, she counted the coins, and because of this, some people were jealous, and told bad stories about her. She declared she was thrifty, but neither a miser, nor a kidnaper, nor a witch. One day, this old woman wanted more feathers to stuff into her bed, to make it softer and feel pleasanter for her old bones to rest upon, for what she slept on was nearly worn through. So she went to a farm, where they were plucking geese, and asked for a few handfuls of feathers. But the rich farmer's people refused and ordered her out of the farm yard. Shortly after this event, the cows of this farmer, who was opposed to chimneys, and did not like her or her son, suffered dreadfully from the disease called the black quarter. As they had no horse doctors or professors of animal economy, or veterinaries in those days, many of the cows died. The rich farmer lost much money, for he had now no milk or beef to sell. At once, he suspected that his cattle were bewitched, and that the old woman had cast a spell on them. In those days, it was very easy to think so. So the angry man went one day to the old crone, when she was alone, and her stout son was away on a distant job. He told her to remove the charm, which she had laid on his beasts, or he would tie her arms and legs together, and pitch her into the river. The old woman denied vehemently that she possessed any such powers, or had ever practiced such black arts. To make sure of it, the farmer made her say out loud, "The Blessing of God be upon your cattle!" To clinch the matter, he compelled her to repeat the Lord's Prayer, which she was able to do, without missing one syllable. She used the form of words which are not found in the prayer book, but are in the Bible, and was very earnest, when she prayed "Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors." But after all that trouble, and the rough way which the rich farmer took to save his cattle, his efforts were in vain. In spite of that kind of religion which he professed -- which was shown by bullying a poor old woman -- his cattle were still sick, with no sign of improvement. He was at his wits' end to know what to do next. Now, as we have said, this was about the time that chimneys came into fashion. In very old days, the Cymric house was a round hut, with a thatched roof, without glass windows, and the smoke got out through the door and holes in the walls, in the best way it could. The only tapestry in the hut was in the shape of long festoons of soot, that hung from the roof or rafters. These, when the wind blew, or the fire was lively, would swing or dance or whirl, and often fall on the heads, or into the food, while the folks were eating. When the children cried, or made wry faces at the black stuff, their daddy only laughed, and said it was healthy, or was for good luck. But by and by, the carpenters and masons made much improvement, especially when, instead of flint hatchets, they had iron axes and tools. Then they hewed down trees, that had thick cross branches and set up columns in the center, and made timber walls and rafters. Then the house was square or oblong. In other words, the Cymric folks squared the circle. Now they began to have lattices, and, much later, even glass windows. They removed the fireplace from the middle of the floor and set it at the end of the house, opposite the door, and built chimneys. Then they set the beds at the side, and made sleeping rooms. This was done by stretching curtains between partitions. They had also a loft, in which to keep odds and ends. They hung up the bacon and hams, and strings of onions, and made a mantle piece over the fireplace. They even began to decorate the walls with pictures and to set pewter dishes, china cats, and Dresden shepherds in rows on the shelves for ornaments. Now people wore shoes and the floor, instead of being muddy, or dusty, with pools and puddles of water in the time of rainy weather and with the pigs and chickens running in and out, was of clay, beaten down flat and hard, and neatly whitewashed at the edges. Outside, in front, were laid nice flat flagstones, that made a pleasant path to the front door. Flowers, inside and out, added to the beauty of the home and made perfume for those who loved them. The rich farmer had just left his old round hut and now lived in one of the new and better kind of houses. He was very proud of his chimney, which he had built higher than any of his neighbors, but he could not be happy, while so many of his cows were sick or dying. Besides, he was envious of other people's prosperity and cared nothing, when they, too, suffered. One night, while he was standing in front of his fine house and wondering why he must be vexed with so many troubles, he talked to himself and, speaking out loud, said, "Why don't my cows get well?" "I'll tell you," said a voice behind him. It seemed half way between a squeak and a growl. He turned round and there he saw a little, angry man. He was dressed in red, and stood hardly as high as the farmer's knee. The little old man glared at the big fellow and cried out in a high tone of voice, "You must change your habits of disposing of your garbage, for other people have chimneys besides you." "What has that to do with sickness among my cows?" "Much indeed. Your family is the cause of your troubles, for they throw all their slops down my chimney and put out my fire." The farmer was puzzled beyond the telling, for he owned all the land within a mile, and knew of no house in sight. "Put your foot on mine, and then you will have the power of vision, to see clearly." The farmer's big boot was at once placed on the little man's slipper, and when he looked down he almost laughed at the contrast in size. What was his real surprise, when he saw that the slops thrown out of his house, did actually fall down; and, besides, the contents of the full bucket, when emptied, kept on dripping into the chimney of a house which stood far below, but which he had never seen before. But as soon as he took his foot off that of the tiny little man, he saw nothing. Everything like a building vanished as in a dream. "I see that my family have done wrong and injured yours. Pray forgive me. I'll do what I can to make amends for it." "It's no matter now, if you only do as I ask you. Shut up your front door, build a wall in its place, and then my family will not suffer from yours." The rich farmer thought all this was very funny, and he had a hearty laugh over it all. Yet he did exactly as the little man in the red cloak had so politely asked him. He walled up the old door at the front, and built another at the back of the house, which opened out into the garden. Then he made the path, on which to go in from the roadway to the threshold, around the corners and over a longer line of flagstones. Then he removed the fireplace and chimney to what had been the front side of the house, but was now the back. For the next thing, he had a copper doorsill nailed down, which his housemaid polished, until it shone as bright as gold. Yet long before this, his cows had got well, and they now gave more and richer milk than ever. He became the wealthiest man in the district. His children all grew up to be fine looking men and women. His grandsons were famous engineers and introduced paving and drainage in the towns so that today, for both man and beast, Wales is one of the healthiest of countries. Source: William Elliot Griffis, Welsh Fairy Tales (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Company, 1921), no. 21, pp. 177-183 . Return to the table of contents . The Underground People in Stocksee Germany There are no longer any underground people; the wild huntsman would not leave them in peace. Finally they engaged a ferryman in Lübek to take them across the great water (the Baltic). One of them made the arrangements, and before the ferryman knew what was happening his entire ship was overloaded with underground people, for all of them wanted to go. They paid very well, and the man's family still has wealth from that time. When they were still active here at a certain house in Stocksee no one could raise calves to maturity. They always died in their first days. Then once, after they had lost another one, a tiny little woman appeared to them and said, "People, you cannot raise calves here, because my bed is directly beneath their stall. Whenever its manure drips down, the calf has to die." Then the people moved the stall and the misfortune ceased. Source: Karl Müllenhoff, "Noch etwas von den Untereerschen," Sagen, Märchen und Lieder der Herzogthümer Schleswig Holstein und Lauenburg (Kiel: Schwersche Buchhandlung, 1845), no. DXC (590), p. 575 . The episode describing the departure of the underground people by water is classified as a Christiansen type 5020 migratory legend. Return to the table of contents . The Stallion and the Underground People Germany In the vicinity of Neustadt-Gödens there was a peasant who had a stallion that he had brought in from the marshland for breeding. He put him into the stall. One day his wife was alone in the house when suddenly an underground man came forth and said that they could not stand it any longer with the stallion above them. Its place was right over their quarters, and he was dropping filth onto them in the most disgusting manner. Therefore she should see to it that he be taken away, otherwise bad things would happen to her. After saying this, he disappeared. In all haste the people moved the stallion to a different stall. Source: Adalbert Kuhn and Wilhelm Schwartz, "Der Hengst und die Unterirdischen," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 329, p. 293 . Return to the table of contents . Underground People beneath the Horse Stall Germany Oral, from Bergkirchen The chief steward of a farm in the vicinity of Bergkirchen had been plagued with misfortune for some time. Many horses were dying, and no one knew why. One day his wife was standing at the hearth baking a pancake when a little man approached her and said that their horse stall, which was directly above the dwelling of the underground people, was causing the misfortune. If they would move it, everything would go well with them. The chief steward immediately moved the horses to another location. To thank him, the underground people invited him to stand as godparent [for one of their children]. Arriving underground, he was shown the place where the drippings from his manure pile formerly had fallen onto their table, and they thanked him that he now had moved it. In parting they gave him a few handfuls of floor sweepings. When he returned above ground they turned into pure gold. Source: Adalbert Kuhn and Wilhelm Schwartz, "Unterirdische unter dem Pferdestall," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 363, p. 313 . The concluding episode in this tale is of Christiansen type 5070, Midwife (or Godmother or Nurse) for the Elves . Return to the table of contents . The Underground People Germany On a farm at Dankmarkshausen the horses were dying, one after another, and no one knew why. Then it happened that late one evening the owner was walking across the kitchen floor when he saw a faint light and heard soft voices coming from beneath an upside-down tub. He saw that four underground people were there, kneading dough that had been left out overnight to rise. One said to the others: "Knead away; knead away." Seeing that they had been discovered, they did not flee, but instead addressed the farmer who was observing the little men with amazement: "Since you are here, we want to tell you why your horses are dying. We live beneath your stall, and we cannot stand your animals. Put them someplace else, and they no longer will be harmed." The farmer did what they told him to do, and from that time onward none of his horses died. There is an excellent horse stall at the castle in Gerstungen. But no horses can be held there, not even if they are tied up with double chains. Horses brought inside tear everything apart. They foam, go crazy, and kick about until they are taken out. It is said that underground people live beneath the stall, and that the horses hate them as much as they hate the horses. Source (books.google.com): Edmund Heusinger, "Die Wichtelmänner," Sage und Geschichte aus den Sachsenländern (Leipzig: Ch. E. Kullmann, 1856), p. 337 . Source (Internet Archive): Edmund Heusinger, "Die Wichtelmänner," Sage und Geschichte aus den Sachsenländern (Leipzig: Ch. E. Kullmann, 1856), p. 337 . Return to the table of contents . A Horse Stall Is Moved Germany An Old Man's Tale In olden times there were dwarfs in Hagenburg on Lake Steinhudersee. They lived near a man who had his horse stall directly above their dwelling. One day they came to him and asked him to take his horses away, because "their manure falls onto our heads." Furthermore, they said that if he would do so his horses would thrive. The man did this, and afterward his horses were the best ones in all of Hagenburg. He prospered and became a wealthy man. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, "Pferdestall verlegt," Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen und einigen andern, besonders den angrenzenden Gegenden Norddeutschlands (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), no. 330, p. 285 . Return to the table of contents . Return to folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 16, 2019. Unfinished and Endless Stories Unfinished and Endless Stories folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 2250, 2251, 2260, 2271, 2300, and 2301 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2010 Contents Three Wise Men of Gotham (England). The Tail (Scotland). The Chest With Something Rare In It (Norway). The Little Story (Poland). The Golden Key (Germany). Jack a Nory (England). Mary Morey (USA). The King and His Storyteller (Petrus Alphonsi, Disciplina Clericalis ). The Narrow Bridge (Germany). The Story That Never Ends (Czechoslavakia). A Storyteller of Messer Azzolino (Italy). The Treasure (Italy). The Shepherd (Italy). The Endless Tale (England). Sancho's Story from Cervantes' Don Quixote (book 2, chapter 20). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Three Wise Men of Gotham England Three wise men of Gotham, Went to sea in a bowl: And if the bowl had been stronger, My song would had been longer. Source: James Orchard Halliwell, The Nursery Rhymes of England: Obtained Principally from Oral Tradition , 2nd edition (London: John Russell Smith, 1843), no. 39, p. 27 . Type 2250. Return to the table of contents . The Tail Scotland There was a shepherd once who went out to the hill to look after his sheep. It was misty and cold, and he had much trouble to find them. At last he had them all but one; and after much searching he found that one too in a peat hag [bog] half drowned. So he took off his plaid, and bent down and took hold of the sheep's tail, and he pulled! The sheep was heavy with water, and he could not lift her, so he took off his coat, and he pulled!! But it was too much for him, and he spit on his hands, and took a good hold of the tail and he PULLED!! And the tail broke! And if it had not been for that, this tale would have been a great deal longer. Source: J. F. Campbell, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), no. 57, p. 477 . Campbell's source: "Told about thirty years ago by John Campbell, piper, to his pupil, J. F. Campbell." Type 2251. Return to the table of contents . The Chest With Something Rare In It Norway Once upon a time a little boy was walking down a road. After he had gone a piece he found a chest. "For sure there is something rare in this chest," he said to himself. But however he examined it, he found no way to open it. "That is very strange," he thought. When he had gone on a piece he found a little key. So he stopped and sat down, and he thought it would be good if the key fit the chest, for there was a little keyhole in it. So he put the little key into his pocket. First he blew into the key's shaft. Then he blew into the keyhole. Then he put the key into the keyhole and turned it around. "Snap!" went the lock. And then he took hold of the lock, and the chest opened. And can you guess what was in the chest? -- It was a calf's tail. And if the calf's tail had been longer, this tale would have been longer as well. Source: Peter Christian Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Skrinet med det rare i , Norske Folkeeventyr . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. This tale combines elements of Type 2260 (the boy finds a chest and a key) with type 2251 (if the tail had been longer,...). Return to the table of contents . The Little Story Poland A peasant plowed once around, and he found nothing at all. Then he plowed around again, and he found a chest. Then he plowed around once again, and he found a key to the chest. He opened the chest and found nothing but mouse tails in it. And if the mouse tails had been longer, my story would have been longer. Source: Otto Knoop, "Die kleine Geschichte," Ostmärkische Sagen, Märchen und Erzählungen (Lissa: Oskar Eulitz' Verlag, 1909), no. 90, p. 193. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. This tale combines elements of type 2260 (the boy finds a chest and a key) with type 2251 (if the tale had been longer,...). Return to the table of contents . The Golden Key Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once in the wintertime when the snow was very deep, a poor boy had to go out and fetch wood on a sled. After he had gathered it together and loaded it, he did not want to go straight home, because he was so frozen, but instead to make a fire and warm himself a little first. So he scraped the snow away, and while he was thus clearing the ground he found a small golden key. Now he believed that where there was a key, there must also be a lock, so he dug in the ground and found a little iron chest. "If only the key fits!" he thought. "Certainly there are valuable things in the chest." He looked, but there was no keyhole. Finally he found one, but so small that it could scarcely be seen. He tried the key, and fortunately it fitted. Then he turned it once, and now we must wait until he has finished unlocking it and has opened the lid. Then we shall find out what kind of wonderful things there were in the little chest. Source: Der goldene Schlüssel , Kinder- und Hausmärchen , no. 200. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. This story was added to the Grimms' collection as no. 161 (the final tale) of their second edition (1819). Their immediate source was a Hessian story told to them by family friend Marie Hassenpflug. From the second edition onward this story has occupied the last position in the collection (excluding the appendix of ten Children's Legends ). By closing their collection with this enigmatic tale without an end, the Grimms seem to be saying that folktales, too, are endless. There is no final word. Type 2260. Return to the table of contents . Jack a Nory England I'll tell you a story About Jack a Nory, And now my story's begun. I'll tell you another About Jack and his brother, And now my story is done. Source: Personal recollection, Idaho, 1940's. My mother, Elgarda Zobell Ashliman (1915-2004) told this story to indicate that storytime was over. The same verse, with nearly identical wording, is found in James Orchard Halliwell, The Nursery Rhymes of England: Obtained Principally from Oral Tradition , 2nd edition (London: John Russell Smith, 1843), no. 44, p. 32 . Jackanory was a popular British television series between 1965 and 1996. It featured celebrities reading stories (often traditional fairy tales) aloud. Type 2271. Return to the table of contents . Mary Morey USA I'll tell you a story About Mary Morey, And now my story's begun. I'll tell you another About her brother, And now my story's done. Source: The Only True Mother Goose Melodies: An Exact Reproduction of the Text and Illustrations of the Original Edition Published and Copyrighted in Boston in the Year 1833 by Munroe and Francis (Boston: Lothrop, Lee, and Shepard Company, 1905), p. 28 . Type 2271. Return to the table of contents . The King and His Storyteller Petruse Alphonsi, Disciplina Clericalis A certain king had a storyteller who told him five stories every night. It happened once that the king, oppressed by cares of state, was unable to sleep, and asked for more than the usual number of stories. The storyteller related three short ones. The king wished for more still, and when the story-teller demurred, said, "You have told me several very short ones. I want something long, and then you may go to sleep." The storyteller yielded, and began thus: "Once upon a time there was a certain countryman who went to market and bought two thousand sheep. On his way home a great inundation took place, so that he was unable to cross a certain river by the ford or bridge. After anxiously seeking some means of getting across with his flock, he found at length a little boat in which he could convey two sheep over." After the storyteller had got thus far he went to sleep. The king roused him and ordered him to finish the story he had begun. The storyteller answered, "The flood is great, the boat small, and the flock innumerable; let the aforesaid countryman get his sheep over, and I will finish the story I have begun." Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), p. 155 . Link to another translation of this story: The Disciplina Clericalis of Petrus Alfonsi . Translated [into German] and edited bhy Eberhard Hermes. Translated into English by P. R. Quarrie. (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, n.d. [This translation © Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1977]), p. 123 . Type 2300. Petrus Alphonsi (also spelled Alfonsi) was born a Jew in Muslim Spain in the eleventh century. He converted to Christianity and was baptized in 1106. His principal work, the Disciplina Clericalis (Training School for the Clergy), comprised thirty-three tales from Oriental sources, plus commentary. Return to the table of contents . The Narrow Bridge Germany Once upon a time there was a shepherd who had a large, large herd of sheep which he was moving over hill and dale, far out into the world. They came to a deep body of water, over which there was fortunately a bridge. However, the bridge was tiny and narrow, so that only a single sheep could go across it. And another sheep could not even step onto the bridge until the sheep in front was all the way across, or the bridge certainly would have broken. Just think how long it will take until all of the many, many sheep have crossed over. So, you see, we must wait until they are all on the other side with the shepherd, and that will take a while yet, and then I will continue with my story about the shepherd and his large, large herd of sheep. Source: Ernst Meier, "Die schmale Brücke," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus Schwaben: Aus dem Munde des Volks gesammelt (Stuttgart: C. P. Scheitlin's Verlagshandlung, 1852), no. 90, p. 297 . Meier's source: "Oral, from Bühl." Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Type 2300. Return to the table of contents . The Story That Never Ends Czechoslovakia (To be told very seriously) Once upon a time there was a shepherd who had a great flock of sheep. He used to pasture them in a meadow on the other side of a brook. One day the sun had already set before he started home. Recent rains had swollen the brook so that he and the sheep had to cross on a little footbridge. The bridge was so narrow that the sheep had to pass over one by one. Now we'll wait until he drives them all over. Then I'll go on with my story. (When children grow impatient and beg for a continuation of the story, they are told that there are many sheep and that up to this time only a few have crossed. A little later when their impatience again breaks out, they are told that the sheep are still crossing. And so on, indefinitely. In conclusion:) In fact there were so many sheep that when morning came they were still crossing, and then it was time for the shepherd to turn around and drive them back again to pasture! Source: Parker Fillmore, Czechoslovak Fairy Tales (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company, 1919), p. 243 . Czechoslovakia existed as a sovereign state from 1918, when it separated from the Austro-Hungarian Empire, until January 1, 1993, when it divided into the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic. Return to the table of contents . A Storyteller of Messer Azzolino Italy Messer Azzolino had a storyteller whom he made tell him tales during the long nights of winter. It happened that one night the storyteller had a great desire to sleep, while Azzolino urged him to tell tales. The storyteller began a tale of a countryman who had a hundred byzantines [ancient coins] of his own which he took with him to the market to buy sheep at the price of two per byzantine. Returning with his sheep he came to a river he had passed before much swollen with the rains which had recently fallen. Standing on the bank, he saw a poor fisherman with a boat, but of so small a size that there was only room for the countryman and one sheep at a time. Then the countryman began to cross over with one sheep, and he began to row. The river was wide. He rowed and passed over. And here the storyteller ceased his tale. Azzolino said, "Go on!" And the storyteller replied, "Let the sheep cross over, and then I will tell you the tale." Since the sheep would not have crossed in a year, he could meanwhile sleep at his ease. Il Novellino: The Hundred Tales , translated by Edward Storer (London: George Routledge and Sons, n.d.), no. 31, pp. 95-96. The Hundred Old Tales (Italian title: Cento Novelle Antiche , or Novellino ) were compiled by an anonymous writer (probably a court minstrel) toward the end of the thirteenth century. The collection was first published in 1525 as Le ciento novelle antike. Azzolino or Ezzelino da Romano was born in 1194 and died in 1259. Similar episodes are contained in Cervantes' Don Quixote , part 1, chapter 20, and in the Disciplina Clericalis . Type 2300. Link to this story in Italian: Le Cento Novelle Antiche (Milano: Per Cura di Paolo Antonio Tosi, 1825), no. 31, p. 50 . Return to the table of contents . The Treasure Italy Once upon a time there was a prince who studied and racked his brains so much that he learned magic and the art of finding hidden treasures. One day he discovered a treasure in a bank, let us say the bank of Ddisisa: "Oh," he says, "now I am going to get it out." But to get it out it was necessary that ten million million ants should cross one by one the river Gianquadara (let us suppose it was that one) in a bark made of the half shell of a nut. The prince puts the bark in the river and begins to make the ants pass over. One, two, three, and he is still doing it. Here the person who is telling the story pauses and says, "We will finish this story when the ants have finished passing over." Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 39, p. 156 . Type 2300. Return to the table of contents . The Shepherd Italy Once upon a time there was a shepherd who went to feed his sheep in the fields, and he had to cross a stream, and he took the sheep up one by one to carry them over.... What then? Go on! When the sheep are over, I will finish the story. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 40, p. 156 . Type 2300. Return to the table of contents . The Endless Tale England (Nottinghamshire) Once upon a time there was a king who had a very beautiful daughter. Many princes wished to marry her, but the king said she should marry the one who could tell him an endless tale, and those lovers that could not tell an endless tale should be beheaded. Many young men came, and tried to tell such a story, but they could not tell it, and were beheaded. But one day a poor man who had heard of what the king had said came to the court and said he would try his luck. The king agreed, and the poor man began his tale in this way: "There was once a man who built a barn that covered many acres, and that reached almost to the sky. He left just one little hole in the top, through which there was only room for one locust to creep in at a time, and then he filled the barn full of corn to the very top. When he had filled the barn there came a locust through the hole in the top and fetched one grain of corn, and then another locust came and fetched another grain of corn." And so the poor man went on saying, "Then another locust came and fetched another grain of corn," for a long time, so that in the end the king grew very weary, and said the tale was endless, and told the poor man he might marry his daughter. Source: Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales with Other Traditional Remains: Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby, and Nottingham (London: David Nutt, 1895), no. 14, p. 15 . Type 2301. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised July 13, 2010. Undead: Vampires and Ghosts Vampire and Ghost Stories from Russia edited by D. L. Ashliman Return to: Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Contents The Coffin Lid The Two Corpses The Soldier and the Vampire The Shroud The Dog and the Corpse Links to related sites The Coffin Lid A moujik was driving along one night with a load of pots. His horse grew tired, and all of a sudden it came to a stand-still alongside of a graveyard. The moujik unharnessed his horse and set it free to graze; meanwhile he laid himself down on one of the graves. But somehow he didn't go to sleep. He remained lying there some time. Suddenly the grave began to open beneath him: he felt the movement and sprang to his feet. The grave opened, and out of it came a corpse -- wrapped in a white shroud, and holding a coffin lid -- came out and ran to the church, laid the coffin-lid at the door, and then set off for the village. The moujik was a daring fellow. He picked up the coffin-lid and remained standing beside his cart, waiting to see what would happen. After a short delay the dead man came back, and was going to snatch up his coffin-lid -- but it was not to be seen. Then the corpse began to track it out, traced it up to the moujik, and said: "Give me my lid: if you don't, I'll tear you to bits!" "And my hatchet, how about that?" answers the moujik. "Why, it's I who'll be chopping you into small pieces!" "Do give it back to me, good man!" begs the corpse. "I'll give it when you tell me where you've been and what you've done." "Well, I've been in the village, and there I've killed a couple of youngsters." "Well then, now tell me how they can be brought back to life." The corpse reluctantly made answer: "Cut off the left skirt of my shroud, and take it with you. When you come into the house where the youngsters were killed, pour some live coals into a pot and put the piece of the shroud in with them, and then lock the door. The lads will be revived by the smoke immediately." The moujik cut off the left skirt of the shroud, and gave up the coffin-lid. The corpse went to its grave -- the grave opened. But just as the dead man was descending into it, all of a sudden the cocks began to crow, and he hadn't time to get properly covered over. One end of the coffin-lid remained sticking out of the ground. The moujik saw all this and made a note of it. The day began to dawn; he harnessed his horse and drove into the village. In one of the houses he heard cries and wailing. In he went -- there lay two dead lads. "Don't cry," says he, "I can bring them to life!" "Do bring them to life, kinsman," say their relatives. "We'll give you half of all we possess." The moujik did everything as the corpse had instructed him, and the lads came back to life. Their relatives were delighted, but they immediately seized the moujik and bound him with cords, saying: "No, no, trickster! We'll hand you over to the authorities. Since you knew how to bring them back to life, maybe it was you who killed them!" "What are you thinking about, true believers! Have the fear of God before your eyes!" cried the moujik. Then he told them everything that had happened during the night. Well, they spread the news through the village; the whole population assembled and swarmed into the graveyard. They found out the grave from which the dead man had come out, they tore it open, and they drove an aspen stake right into the heart of the corpse, so that it might no more rise up and slay. But they rewarded the moujik richly, and sent him away home with great honor. Source: W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder and Co., 1873), pp. 309-311. Ralston's source: Aleksandr Afanasyev, v., pp. 142-144. "From the Tambof Government." The Two Corpses A soldier had obtained leave to go home on furlough -- to pray to the holy images, and to bow down before his parents. And as he was going his way, at a time when the sun had long set, and all was dark around, it chanced that he had to pass by a graveyard. Just then he heard that some one was running after him, and crying: "Stop! You can't escape!" He looked back and there was a corpse running and gnashing its teeth. The soldier sprang on one side with all his might to get away from it, caught sight of a little chapel, and bolted straight into it. There wasn't a soul in the chapel, but stretched out on a table there lay another corpse, with tapers burning in front of it. The soldier hid himself in a corner, and remained there hardly knowing whether he was alive or dead, but waiting to see what would happen. Presently up ran the first corpse -- the one that had chased the soldier -- and dashed into the chapel. Thereupon one that was lying on the table jumped up, and cried to it: "What hast thou come here for?" "I've chased a soldier in here, so I'm going to eat him." Come now, brother! He's run into my house. I shall eat him myself." "No, I shall!" "No, I shall!" And they set to work fighting; the dust flew like anything. They'd have gone on fighting ever so much longer, only the cocks began to crow. Then both the corpses fell lifeless to the ground, and the soldier went on his way homeward in peace, saying: "Glory be to Thee. O Lord! I am saved from the wizards!" Source: W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder and Co., 1873), p. 312. Ralston's source: Aleksandr Afanasyev, vi., pp. 324-325. The Soldier and the Vampire A certain soldier was allowed to go home on furlough. Well, he walked and walked, and after a time he began to draw near to his native village. Not far off from that village lived a miller in his mill. In old times the soldier had been very intimate with him: why shouldn't he go and see his friend? He went. The miller received him cordially, and at once brought out liquor; and the two began drinking, and chattering about their ways and doings. All this took place towards nightfall, and the soldier stopped so long at the miller's that it grew quite dark. When he proposed to start for his village, his host exclaimed: "Spend the night here, trooper! It's very late now, and perhaps you might run into mischief." "How so?" "God is punishing us! A terrible warlock has died among us, and by night he rises from his grave, wanders through the village, and does such things as bring fear upon the very boldest! How could even you help being afraid of him?" "Not a bit of it! A soldier is a man who belongs to the crown, and 'crown property cannot be drowned in water nor burnt in fire.' I'll be off: I'm tremendously anxious to see my people as soon as possible." Off he set. His road lay in front of a graveyard. On one of the graves he saw a great fire blazing. "What's that?" thinks he. "Let's have a look." When he drew near, he saw that the warlock was sitting by the fire, sewing boots. "Hail, brother!" calls out the soldier. The warlock looked up and said: "What have you come here for?" "Why, I wanted to see what you're doing." The warlock threw his work aside and invited the soldier to a wedding. "Come along, brother," says he, "let's enjoy ourselves. There's a wedding going on in the village." "Come along!" says the soldier. They came to where the wedding was; there they were given drink, and treated with the utmost hospitality. The warlock drank and drank, reveled and reveled, and then grew angry. He chased all the guests and relatives out of the house, threw the wedded pair into a slumber, took out two phials and an awl, pierced the hands of the bride and bridegroom with the awl, and began drawing off their blood. Having done this, he said to the soldier: "Now let's be off." Well, they went off. On the way the soldier said: "Tell me; why did you draw off their blood in those phials?" "Why, in order that the bride and bridegroom might die. Tomorrow morning no one will be able to wake them. I alone know how to bring them back to life." "How's that managed?" "The bride and bridegroom must have cuts made in their heels, and some of their own blood must then be poured back into those wounds. I've got the bridegroom's blood stowed away in my right-hand pocket, and the bride's in my left." The soldier listened to this without letting a single word escape him. Then the warlock began boasting again. "Whatever I wish," says he, "That I can do!" "I suppose it's quite impossible to get the better of you?" says the soldier. "Why impossible? If any one were to make a pyre of aspen boughs, a hundred loads of them, and were to burn me on that pyre, then he'd be able to get the better of me. Only he'd have to look out sharp in burning me; for snakes and worms and different kinds of reptiles would creep out of my inside, and crows and magpies and jackdaws would come flying up. All these must be caught and flung on the pyre. If so much as a single maggot were to escape, then there'd be no help for it; in that maggot I should slip away!" The soldier listened to all this and did not forget it. He and the warlock talked and talked, and at last they arrived at the grave. "Well, brother," said the warlock, "now I'll tear you to pieces. Otherwise you'd be telling all this." "What are you talking about? Don't you deceive yourself; I serve God and the Emperor." The warlock gnashed his teeth, howled aloud, and sprang at the soldier -- who drew his sword and began laying about him with sweeping blows. They struggled and struggled; the soldier was all but at the end of his strength. "Ah!" thinks he, "I'm a lost man -- and all for nothing!" Suddenly the cocks began to crow. The warlock fell lifeless to the ground. The soldier took the phials of blood out of the warlock's pockets, and went on to the house of his own people. When he had got there, and had exchanged greetings with his relatives, they said: "Did you see any disturbance, soldier?" "No, I saw none." "There now! Why we've a terrible piece of work going on in the village. A warlock has taken to haunting it!" After talking awhile, they lay down to sleep. Next morning the soldier awoke, and began asking: "I'm told you've got a wedding going on somewhere here?" "There was a wedding in the house of a rich moujik," replied his relative, "but the bride and bridegroom have died this very night -- what from, nobody knows." They showed him the house. Thither he went without speaking a word. When he got there, he found the whole family in tears. "What are you mourning about?" says he. "Such and such is the state of things soldier," say they. "I can bring your young people to life again. What will you give me if I do?" "Take what you like, even were it half of what we've got!" The soldier did as the warlock had instructed him, and brought the young people back to life. Instead of weeping there began to be happiness and rejoicing; the soldier was hospitably treated and well rewarded. Then -- left about, face! off he marched to the Starosta, and told him to call the peasants together and to get ready a hundred loads of aspen wood. Well, they took the wood into the graveyard, dragged the warlock out of his grave, placed him on the pyre, and set it alight -- the people all standing round in a circle with brooms, shovels, and fire-irons. The pyre became wrapped in flames, the warlock began to burn. His corpse burst, and out of it crept snakes, worms, and all sorts of reptiles, and up came flying crows, magpies, and jackdaws. The peasants knocked them down and flung them into the fire, not allowing so much as a single maggot to creep away! And so the warlock was thoroughly consumed, and the soldier collected his ashes and strewed them to the winds. From that time forth there was peace in the village. The soldier received the thanks of the whole community. He stayed at home some time, enjoying himself thoroughly. Then he want back to the czar's service with money in his pocket. When he had served his time, he retired from the army, and began to live at his ease. Source: W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder and Co., 1873), pp. 314-318. Ralston's source: Aleksandr Afanasyev, v., pp. 144-147. "From the Tambof Government." The Shroud In a certain village there was a girl who was lazy and slothful, hated working, but would gossip and chatter away like anything! Well, she took it into her head to invite the other girls to a spinning party. For in the villages, as every one knows, it is the lazybones who gives the spinning-feast, and the sweet-toothed are those who go to it. Well, on the appointed night she got her spinners together. They span for her, and she fed them and feasted them. Among other things they chatted about was this -- which of them all was the boldest? Says the lazybones: "I'm not afraid of anything!" "Well then," say the spinners, "if you're not afraid, go past the graveyard to the church, take down the holy picture from the door, and bring it here." "Good, I'll bring it; only each of you must spin me a distaff-full." That was just her sort of notion: to do nothing herself, but to get others to do it for her. Well, she went, took down the picture, and brought it home with her. Her friends all saw that sure enough it was the picture from the church. But the picture had to be taken back again, and it was now the midnight hour. Who was to take it? At length the lazybones said: "You girls go on spinning. I'll take it back myself. I'm not afraid of anything!" So she went and put the picture back in its place. As she was passing the graveyard on her return, she saw a corpse in a white shroud, seated on a tomb. It was a moonlight night; everything was visible. She went up to the corpse, and drew away its shroud from it. The corpse held its peace, not uttering a word; no doubt the time for it to speak had not come yet. Well, she took the shroud and went home. "There!" says she, "I've taken back the picture and put it in its place; and, what's more, here's a shroud I took away from a corpse." Some of the girls were horrified; others didn't believe what she said, and laughed at her. But after they had supped and lain down to sleep, all of a sudden the corpse tapped at the window and said: "Give me my shroud! Give me my shroud!" The girls were so frightened they didn't know whether they were alive or dead. But the lazybones took the shroud, went to the window, opened it, and said: "There, take it." "No," replied the corpse, "restore it to the place you took it from." Just then the cocks suddenly began to crow. The corpse disappeared. Next night, when the spinners had all gone home to their own houses, at the very same hour as before, the corpse came, tapped at the window, and cried: "Give me my shroud!" Well, the girl's father and mother opened the window and offered him his shroud. "No," says he, "let her take it back to the place she took it from." "Really now, how could one go to a graveyard with a corpse? What a horrible idea!" she replied. Just then the cocks crew. The corpse disappeared. Next day the girl's father and mother sent for the priest, told him the whole story, and entreated him to help them in their trouble. "Couldn't a service be performed?" they said. The priest reflected awhile; then he replied: "Please tell her to come to church tomorrow." Next day the lazybones went to church. The service began, numbers of people came to it. But just as they were going to sing the cherubim song, there suddenly arose, goodness knows whence, so terrible a whirlwind that all the congregation fell flat on their faces. And it caught up that girl, and then flung her down on the ground. The girl disappeared from sight; nothing was left of her but her back hair. Source: W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder and Co., 1873), pp. 307-309. Ralston's source: Aleksandr Afanasyev, v. no. 30a, pp. 140-142. "From the Voroneje Government." Ralston's footnote concerning "her back hair": "The kosa or single braid in which Russian girls wear their hair." This is a folktale of Aarne-Thompson type 366. The Dog and the Corpse A moujik went out in pursuit of game one day, and took a favorite dog with him. He walked and walked through woods and bogs, but got nothing for his pains. At last the darkness of night surprised him. At an uncanny hour he passed by a graveyard, and there, at a place where two roads met, he saw standing a corpse in a white shroud. The moujik was horrified, and knew not which way to go -- whether to keep on or to turn back. "Well, whatever happens, I'll go on," he thought; and on he went, his dog running at his heels. When the corpse perceived him, it came to meet him; not touching the earth with its feet, but keeping about a foot above it -- the shroud fluttering after it. When it had come up with the sportsman, it made a rush at him; but the dog seized hold of it by its bare calves, and began a tussle with it. When the moujik saw his dog and the corpse grappling with each other, he was delighted that things had turned out so well for himself, and he set off running home with all his might. The dog kept up the struggle until cock-crow, when the corpse fell motionless to the ground. Then the dog ran off in pursuit of its master, caught him up just as he reached home, and rushed at him, furiously trying to bite and to rend him. So savage was it, and so persistent, that it was as much as the people of the house could do to beat it off. "Whatever has come over the dog?" asked the moujik's old mother. "Why should it hate its master so?" The moujik told her all that had happened. "A bad piece of work, my son!" said the old woman. "The dog was disgusted at your not helping it. There it was fighting with the corpse -- and you deserted it, and thought only of saving yourself! Now it will owe you a grudge for ever so long." Next morning, while the family were going about the farmyard, the dog was perfectly quiet. But the moment its master made his appearance, it began to growl like anything. They fastened it to a chain; for a whole year they kept it chained up. But in spite of that, it never forgot how its master had offended it. One day it got loose, flew straight at him, and began trying to throttle him. So they had to kill it. Source: W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder and Co., 1873), pp. 313-314. Ralston's source: Aleksandr Afanasyev, vi., pp. 321-322. Links to related sites Table of Contents Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Indo-European Folk and Fairy Tales. Yahoo!: Society and Culture: Mythology and Folklore: Fabulous Creatures: Vampires. Revised December 6, 1997 The Saga of the Volsungs: A Summary in English The Saga of the Volsungs a summary in English by D. L. Ashliman © 2010-2012 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. 1. Sigi and Rerir The saga begins with a man named Sigi, who, it is said, was a son of Odin. Sigi went hunting with a thrall named Bredi. When Bredi returned with a greater kill, Sigi grew angry and killed him, then buried the body in a snowdrift. Because he had attempted to hide the body, Bredi's act was decreed murder, and he was declared an outlaw [a person living outside the protection of the law]. Since that time every large snowdrift has been called a "Bredi's drift." Following Sigi's condemnation as an outlaw, Odin guided him to a place where many warships lay and provided him with troops. Through his successful raids, Sigi became a powerful king, ruling over Hunland. [According to Snorri Sturluson, Sigi ruled over Frakkland (France).] Sigi's wife bore him a son named Rerir, who with time became an even more powerful king. Rerir took for himself a wife, but for a long time she bore him no children. They prayed fervently to the gods, asking for offspring. It is said that Frigg [Odin's wife] heard their prayers and conveyed the wish to Odin, who in turn gave one of his wish-maidens an apple, telling her to give it to Rerir. The wish maiden assumed the shape of a crow, then dropped the apple onto King Rerir's lap. Sensing its purpose, he visited the queen and ate some of the apple. 2. The Birth of Volsung Soon afterward the queen discovered that she was with child. King Rerir died a short time later. The queen's pregnancy continued for six years. Recognizing that she herself could not live much longer, she asked that the child be cut from her body. This was done. The child, already well grown kissed his mother, and she died. The son was named Volsung, and he became King of Hunland. Volsung married Hljod, and together they had ten sons and one daughter. The eldest son was named Sigmund, and he had a twin sister named Signy. It is said that King Volsung had an excellent palace built with a large tree growing from the main hall, its branches stretching through the roof. The tree was named "Barnstock" [child-trunk]. 3. The Sword in the Tree A king named Siggeir ruled in Gautland [in Sweden], and he came to King Volsung to ask for the hand of Princess Signy. Although Signy opposed this match, her father promised her to King Siggeir. It is told that one evening a stranger [probably Odin] came into the hall. He wore a hooded cape. He was very tall and had only one eye. He approached the tree Barnstock, then drew a sword and thrust it up to the hilt into the trunk, saying, "I give this sword to whoever can pull it from the tree." With this he turned and walked away. No one knew who he was or where he went. Many noble men were present there, and one after another they tried to pull the sword from the tree, all without success, until Sigmund came forward. He easily pulled the sword from the trunk. Everyone marveled at the sword's excellent quality, and Siggeir offered to give Sigmund three times the sword's weight in gold for the weapon. Sigmund refused, saying, "You could have pulled the sword from the tree as easily as I did, if it were meant to be yours, but you were not able to do so." These words greatly angered Siggeir, and he resolved to gain revenge against his future brother-in-law. 4. Siggeir's Departure The next day Siggeir announced his intention to return forthwith to his own country. Signy did not want to go with him, but her father insisted, claiming that there was insufficient cause to break the marriage contract already agreed to. Before leaving, Siggeir invited King Volsung, with all his sons, to visit him in Gautland, and a date for the reunion was set. 5. Volsung's Death King Volsung and his sons journeyed to Gautland in three ships. Signy met them upon their arrival, and warned them that King Siggeir planned to ambush them. "Return at once to your own kingdom and come back with a large army," she implored her father. He replied, "It will not be said of me that I lack courage. You must return to your husband, and I will face whatever danger comes my way." Signy returned home. The next morning, just as Signy had warned, King Siggeir attacked King Volsung. In the battle that followed King Volsung and all his men were killed. Only his ten sons survived, and they were taken prisoner. Learning the fate of her father and her brothers, Signy proposed to her husband that her brothers be put into stocks rather than being killed immediately. "Let them suffer before they die," she said, hoping to thus rescue one or more of them. King Siggeir had a large tree trunk fashioned into stocks, and the ten brothers were imprisoned by their feet somewhere in the woods. Each night a she-wolf attacked one of them, killing him and eating him, until only Sigmund remained alive. Through a trusted servant Signy learned the fate of her brothers. She gave the servant some honey, instructing him to smear it on Sigmund's face, and to put some of it in his mouth. That night, the wolf approached Sigmund, then started to lick the honey from his face and mouth. The wolf reached her tongue into Sigmund's mouth, and Sigmund bit down hard. The wolf jerked back in pain, pulling so hard that she split the tree trunk apart, and Sigmund escaped. 6. Tests of Courage With the help of Signy and a few trusted servants, Sigmund built an underground dwelling in the woods, where he now lived as a free man. King Siggeir thought that his revenge was complete, that all the Volsungs, save his wife Signy, were dead. King Siggeir had two sons by his wife Signy, and Signy thought that they might help her avenge the death of her father and brothers. When the elder one was ten years old she sent him to visit Sigmund in his underground dwelling. Before sending him out, she tested his courage by sewing shut the cuffs of his shirt, with the stitches going through his flesh and skin. He withstood this ordeal poorly, and cried out in pain. As a further test, Sigmund handed him a sack of flour containing snakes, and asked him to make some bread. The boy refused, stating, "There is something alive in the flour." Sigmund reported this incident to his sister the next time that they met. "The boy lacks courage," said Signy. "Take him out and kill him." Sigmund did as his sister requested. A year later much the same events transpired with Signy's younger son. He too was found lacking in courage, and he too was killed at his mother's bidding. 7. Sinfjotli Signy knew a sorceress, skilled in all magic arts. She said to the sorceress, "I want the two of us to exchange shapes." The sorceress was able to do this, and that night she, in Signy's shape, slept with King Siggeir, who was not aware of the exchange. Signy, in the sorceress's shape, went into the woods to Sigmund's dwelling. "I have lost my way," she told him. Sigmund gave her shelter. She was very beautiful, and they shared the same bed. After three nights she returned home and exchanged shapes again with the sorceress. Some time later Signy gave birth to a son who was named Sinfjotli. He grew large and strong, very much like the Volsung stock. When he was not quite ten years old she sent him to his father Sigmund in the underground shelter. As she had done previously, she tested his ability to withstand pain by stitching his shirt cuffs to his skin. He did not flinch. After arriving at the underground shelter, Sinfjotli was given snake-infested flour to make bread with. "There was something in the flour," he later reported to Sigmund, "but I kneaded it into the bread, whatever it was." 8. Magic Wolf Skins Sigmund thought that Sinfjotli was still too young to exact revenge against King Siggeir. Further, Sigmund thought that Sinfjotli was the son of Siggeir, and might be unwilling to kill his own father. To harden the boy, Sigmund roamed with him through the woods, killing men for booty. One time Sigmund and Sinfjotli came to a house where two men were asleep under a spell. A wolf skin hung over each man which could be shed only every tenth day. Sigmund and Sinfjotli put on the skins, and they could not get them off. Now they howled like wolves and ran off into the forest, killing many men. One time they quarreled with each other, and Sigmund bit Sinfjotli in the windpipe, nearly killing him. A raven [from Odin?] flew by with a leaf, which Sigmund applied to Sinfjotli's wound, bringing him back to full health. When they were next able to remover the wolf skins, they burned them in a fire. Sinfjotli was now fully grown and tested. With his help Sigmund would now avenge the death of his father and his brothers. The two of them went to King Siggeir's estate and hid themselves in an outer room. Queen Signy saw them there, and together they planned the act of revenge. Signy and Siggeir had two young children. That evening one of the children saw Sigmund and Sinfjotli hiding in the outer room, and he told his father about the strangers. Signy overheard this, and took the two children to Sigmund and Sinfjotli, saying, "These children have betrayed you. I advise you to kill them." Sigmund replied, "I will not kill your children," but Sinfjotli had no such qualms. Without hesitating he drew his sword and killed the two children, then threw down their bodies before King Siggeir. A great battle ensued. Sigmund and Sinfjotli fought valiantly, but the king's soldiers finally overpowered them. Wanting to subject them to the slowest death possible, King Siggeir had Sigmund and Sinfjotli buried alive inside a large stone mound. As the mound was being closed, Signy approached, carrying a bundle of straw, which she threw into the mound. Inside the straw was Sigmund's sword, and that night he used the sword to saw an opening in the rock mound. Sigmund and Sinfjotli were now free. They carried wood into the king's hall, where the men were all asleep. Then they set it afire. The king, surrounded by flames, asked who had done this deed, and Sigmund answered, "I, Sigmund, and my sister's son Sinfjotli have done this deed! Know this, that not all the Volsungs are dead!" Signy could have saved herself from the flames, but chose otherwise. "I married King Siggeir against my will," she said, "but now that my father's and my brothers' deaths have been avenged, I die with him willingly." So saying, she wished Sigmund and Sinfjotli farewell and walked into the flames. Sigmund now returned with Sinfjotli to his homeland, and he regained the kingship that had once belonged to Volsung. Sigmund married a woman named Borghild, and they had two sons, one named Helgi and one named Hamund. At Helgi's birth the Norns [supernatural beings who control fate] said of him that he was destined to become the most famous of all kings. 9. Helgi and Sigrun While out raiding, Helgi came upon a woman named Sigrun, who had been promised in marriage to a man named Hodbrodd. "I would sooner marry a young crow than Hodbrodd," said Sigrun to Helgi. "Fight him with your army, then take me home with you," she continued. "There is no king anywhere, whom I would prefer to you." Acting on Sigrun's wish, Helgi assembled a large convoy of men and ships just off King Hodbrodd's coast. Many of Hodbrodd's men, including his brother and his father, approached the strangers to asses their strength and their intentions. Sinfjotli, who was with Helgi, was a man who knew how to speak to kings, and he shouted to the men on shore, "After you have fed your pigs and kissed your bondwomen, inform Hodbrodd that Helgi is here to do battle with him." Hodbrodd's father answered, "You lie about noble men. It is obvious that you know nothing of ancient lore! You are one who sucks the blood from cold corpses killed by wolves." Sinfjotli replied, "You should know something of wolves. I am the one who sired nine wolves by you. I was the father of your wolf-children. Hodbrodd's father answered, "You lie again. You could not father anything, because the giant's daughters gelded you at Thrasness." Sinfjotli responded, "Have you forgotten that you were a mare to the stallion Grani? Then afterward you served as the giant Golnir's goatherd." Hodbrodd's father answered, "I'll not stand here quarrelling with you any longer. Instead, I'll feed your corpse to the birds," and with that he rode back to King Hodbrodd, reporting that King Helgi was preparing to attack their land with thousands of men. King Hodbrodd assembled his own troops, and a savage battle ensued. In the midst of the furor a large band of shield-maidens [Valkyries?] appeared. Helgi's troops were victorious, and Hodbrodd was killed. Helgi took possession of his kingdom and married Sigrun. He is now out of the saga. 10. The Volsungs Sinfjotli continued with his raiding, and was always victorious in battle. During one of his raids he saw a beautiful woman whom he desired to have. The brother of King Sigmund's wife Borghild was also seeking the hand of this woman, and it came to pass that he and Sinfjotli fought a duel over her. Sinfjotli prevailed, killing Borghild's brother. Borghild asked her husband Sigmund to exile Sinfjotli from the kingdom, but Sigmund refused to do this. To avenge her brother's death, Borghild prepared a poisonous drink for Sinfjotli, her stepson. Upon drinking it, Sinfjotli fell dead to the ground. Sigmund, overcome with sorrow, picked up the body and carried it toward a fjord, where he saw a man [Odin?] in a small boat. The man asked if he wanted to be ferried across the fjord, to which Sigmund answered, "Yes." The boat was too small for all three, so the stranger took Sinfjotli's body, leaving Sigmund alone on the shore. Sigmund walked alongside the boat for some distance, and then the boat disappeared before his eyes. Sigmund returned home and drove out Borghild. She died a short time afterward. Sigmund continued to rule, and it is said that he was the greatest king in ancient times. 11. Sigmund and Hjordis Some time later King Sigmund sought the hand in marriage of Hjordis, a wise and beautiful princess, the daughter of King Eylimi. Lyngvi, another king, also wanted to marry Hjordis, so her father let her choose between the two suitors. "King Sigmund is very old," she said, "but he is the most famous of all kings. I choose him." King Lyngvi did not accept this loss easily, and he attacked Sigmund's forces with a large army. At the peak of the battle a strange man [Odin] entered the fray. He had but one eye, wore a hooded cloak, and was armed with a spear. Raising his spear, he came up against Sigmund, who struck hard at the spear with his sword. The sword, which he had pulled from the tree Barnstock, and which had served him so excellently in countless earlier skirmishes, now broke in two. The tide turned against Sigmund and his men, and he no longer sought to protect himself. 12. Hjordis and Alf That night Hjordis came to the wounded Sigmund. "Odin no longer wants me to wield this sword," said Sigmund to her, looking at the broken pieces. "You are carrying our son," he continued, "and this sword is meant for him. It will be called Gram, and will serve him well. Hjordis sat with Sigmund until he died, then she ran into the woods with a faithful bondwoman. A large troop of Vikings had observed the carnage from their ships, and they also saw the women fleeing into the woods. They pursued the women and brought them to their leader, a king named Alf, who recognized the royalty of Hjordis. Upon hearing her story, Alf agreed to marry Hjordis forthwith and to care for her unborn son. 13. Sigurd Hjordis gave birth to a son who was named Sigurd. When the most famous heroes of the ancient sagas are named, Sigurd must be counted first in valor, strength, and accomplishments. In keeping with tradition, Sigurd was placed under the care of a foster father, Regin, the son of Hreidmar. Regin taught him runes, sports, chess, and languages. One day Sigurd went into the woods, where he came upon an old man with a long beard. The man, who was none other than Odin, offered Sigurd a horse, saying, "Raise this horse carefully, for it is descended from Sleipnir." Sigurd named this horse Grani. One day Regin said to Sigurd, "You have too little wealth. Let me tell you where a great treasure lies. If you could take possession of it, it would bring you great glory. It lies but a short distance from here at a placed called Gnitaheath, and is guarded by a serpent named Fafnir." Then Regin related to Sigurd the story of how Fafnir came to control the great treasure. 14. Regin's Story: The Otter's Ransom My father Hreidmar was a wealthy man. He had three sons: Fafnir, Otr, and myself. Fafnir was the largest and fiercest of us. Otr was a fisherman by trade, and was very successful, for by day he assumed the shape of an otter and was able to catch many fish. And I, I became a smith, working in iron, silver, and gold. One day Odin, Loki, and Hoenir approached a waterfall where my brother Otr (in the shape of an otter) had just caught a salmon. Loki killed the otter with a stone, and together the Aesir skinned him. Fafnir and I seized them and forced them to agree to pay compensation for the death of our brother. The amount agreed upon was the otter's skin filled with gold. Loki coerced a dwarf named Andvari into providing the gold. At first Andvari tried to hold back one golden ring, but finally he gave this up as well, saying, "This ring [known henceforth as Andvaranaut], and indeed the entire treasure, will be the death of whoever owns it." This treasure should have been shared by Otr's surviving brothers and father, but Fafnir killed his father, then absconded with the treasure. 15. Regin the Smith "I will kill this dragon," said Sigurd to Regin, "if you will make me a sword." Regin agreed, and made a sword for Sigurd. "Let me test your ability as a smith," said Sigurd, then struck the anvil with the sword, breaking the blade. "Forge me another one," demanded Sigurd. Regin did so, but it too broke when struck against the anvil. Sigurd then went to his mother, and said, "Is it true that you have the pieces of the broken sword Gram, once owned by my father King Sigmund?" She affirmed his query, then gave him the pieces. Sigurd took the fragments to Regin, demanding that he forge a new sword from them. When the sword was finished Sigurd tested its strength by striking the anvil with it. The anvil split in two, but the blade remained undamaged. He then tested the sword's sharpness by throwing a tuft of wool into the river, then holding the blade against it as the current carried it downstream . The blade cut the wool asunder, and Sigurd was satisfied. "I have done my part," said Regin, "now you must help me avenge the death of my father by killing the dragon Fafnir." 16. Gripir the Fortuneteller Sigurd had an uncle (his mother's brother) who could foretell the future. Sigurd asked him if he should attempt to kill the dragon Fafnir. "Do as you have promised," advised Gripir, the uncle, "but first you must avenge the death of your own father." 17. Sigurd Kills Lyngvi Following his uncle's advice, Sigurd prepared a large force of dragon ships and attacked Lyngvi. The battle was long and fierce, but Sigurd prevailed, returning home with great wealth and glory. Regin greeted him, saying, "You have avenged your father's death. Now you must keep your vow and help me avenge the death of my father." Sigurd replied, "I shall do as I have promised." 18. Sigurd and Fafnir Sigurd and Regin rode together to the heath where Fafnir was known to dwell. There they found a well-worn track where the dragon crawled to get water. "Dig a trench within the track and hide in it," advised Regin. "Then you can stab the serpent from beneath when he crawls for water." So saying, Regin ran off in fear. Sigurd began to dig the trench when he was approached by an old man with a long beard [Odin], who asked what he was doing. On hearing Sigurd's plan, the man said, "You must dig more than one trench, one to hide in, and others to carry away the serpent's blood." Then the man disappeared. Sigurd did as the old man had advised. Some time later serpent crawled along his track for water, causing the earth to shake. When he passed above Sigurd, the hero plunged his sword upward through the serpent's heart. Then he leaped from the trench to safety. The dying creature thrashed about fiercely, thundering, "Who are you who dares to attack me?" "I am Sigurd, the son of Sigmund," answered the hero. "Upon my death you may well take my treasure," replied Fafnir, "but you shall receive little benefit from it. It will be your death. I advise you to ride away from here while you still can." Then Fafnir died. 19. Fafnir's Blood Soon afterward Regin returned. While congratulating himself and Sigurd for their victory, Regin drank Fafnir's blood. Then he made one additional request of Sigurd, "Roast Fafnir's heart and let me eat it." Sigurd cut out the serpent's heart and began to roast it over a fire. When the juice foamed out of it, he tested it with his finger to see if it was done, then put his finger into his mouth. As soon as the serpent's blood touched his tongue he could understand the language of birds. 20. What the Birds Said Some nuthatches were chirping in a nearby bush. "If Sigurd would eat Fafnir's heart, he would become the wisest of men," said the one. "He should beware of Regin," said a second, "who intends to betray him." "Yes," said a third, "Sigurd should strike off Regin's head immediately, then take possession of the gold." "Then he should ride to Hindarfell, where the fair Brynhild lies asleep," said a fourth. Sigurd understood all this, and acted accordingly. He cut off Regin's head with the sword Gram, then ate part of Fafnir's heart, saving the rest for later. Following the serpent's track, he came to the lair where a great hoard of gold was hidden. This he loaded into two large chests. 21. Sigurd and Brynhild With his newly acquired riches he rode off in the direction of Hindarfell, then turned south toward Frakkland, finally arriving at a mountain that appeared to be ablaze with fire. Before him was a rampart made of shields, with a warrior dressed in full armor lying on the rampart. Taking off the warrior's helmet, he discovered that this was a sleeping woman, not a man. She was dressed in chainmail that was so tight it seemed to have grown into her skin. With the sword Gram he cut though the armor, awakening the woman. "Is this Sigurd, son of Sigmund who awakens me?" she asked, "And is this sword that cuts so easily through my armor the sword Gram, Fafnir's bane?" "It is so," answered Sigurd. "I am a descendent of Volsung. I understand that you are Brynhild, the daughter of a famous king, and yourself famous for your beauty and wisdom." Brynhild replied that two kings had fought. Odin favored the one, but she had granted victory to the other. Angered, Odin had stabbed her with a sleeping thorn. 22. Brynhild's Wisdom Brynhild taught Sigurd many runes: wave-runes, battle-runes, healing-runes, speech-runes, and mind-runes. Impressed by her beauty, wisdom, and strength, he promised to marry her, and they sealed this agreement with mutual vows. 23. Sigurd's Departure Sigurd now rode away. He was a man of great height. His sword Gram was seven spans long, and when he girded it about him, then walked through a field of full-grown rye, its tip grazed the top of the standing grain. He excelled in eloquence and courtesy. He understood the language of birds. He was a master of all combat skills: swordsmanship, archery, spear throwing, and horsemanship. 24. Sigurd's Arrival at Heimir's Estate Sigurd rode until he came to large estate owned by Heimir, who was married to Brynhild's sister Bekkhild. By now the news that Sigurd had killed the dragon had spread throughout all lands. He was received with great honor, and he stayed there a long time. 25. Brynhild's Arrival at Heimir's Estate Brynhild had now returned to Heimir's estate, and she stayed in a tower embroidering a tapestry that celebrated Sigurd's noble deeds. One day one of Sigurd's falcon's flew to a tower. When Sigurd pursued it he saw a beautiful woman inside the window, embroidering a tapestry. One of his companions said, "That is Brynhild, the daughter of Budli. She arrived here a short time ago." He then added the warning that Sigurd should not attempt to gain her favor. "She does not allow any man near her," he said. "Her only interest is to go warring." Nonetheless, Sigurd did visit her in her chamber, and she invited him to drink with her. He put his arms around her and kissed her, saying, "You are the fairest of all women." She replied, "We are not destined to live together. I am a shield-maiden, and I must ride with warrior kings. You are destined to marry Gudrun, the daughter of Gjuki." "I shall marry you, or no other woman," replied Sigurd. He then gave her a gold ring, and they swore their oaths anew. 26. Gjuki and His Sons There was a powerful king named Gjuki whose kingdom was south of the Rhine. His three sons were named Gunnar, Hogni, and Guttorm; his daughter was named Gudrun. Gjuki's wife was named Grimhild, and she was skilled at magic. There was an even more powerful king named Budli. His daughter was Brynhild, and his son was Atli [Attila the Hun]. One night Gudrun dreamed that she had a handsome hawk on her hand, a hawk with feathers of gold." A woman told Gudrun, "Your dream means that you will marry a noble king." "But I do not know who this king is," said Gudrun. "I shall visit Brynhild. She will know." 27. Brynhild Interprets Gudrun's Dreams Gudrun went to Brynhild and told about her dreams. "I dreamed," she related "that a group of us came upon a beautiful stag with golden hair. Everyone wanted to catch it, and I succeeded in doing so. But just as I took hold of it, you killed it. Then you gave me a wolf's cub, and it spattered me with the blood of my brothers." Brynhild explained: "Sigurd, the man whom I have chosen for a husband, will come to you. Your mother Grimhild will give him a magic potion which will bring grief to all of us. You will marry him, but quickly lose him. Then you will marry King Atli. Afterward you will lose all your brothers, and in the end you will kill King Atli." Gudrun replied, "I am overcome with grief because of the knowledge of these things to come." 28. The Ale of Forgetfulness Sigurd rode away with Fafnir's treasure, arriving finally at King Gjuki's hall. "He must be one of the gods," said one of the king's men, noting Sigurd's height, bearing, and wealth. He was received with respect and honor. Grimhild knew that Sigurd loved Brynhild, but she thought it would be better if he were to marry her daughter Gudrun. She prepared a magic drink for him, which caused him to forget his love for Brynhild. Sigurd stayed at this court for five seasons. He married Gudrun, and swore an oath of brotherhood with her brothers. He and Gudrun had a son, whom they named Sigmund [after Sigurd's grandfather]. One day Grimhild approached Gunnar, saying, "All is well with you, except for one thing: you are still unmarried. You should ask for Brynhild's hand in marriage." 29. Sigurd Courts Brynhild for Gunnar Sigurd accompanied Gunnar on his journey to King Budli to ask for Brynhild's hand in marriage. "She is very proud," answered King Budli. "She will marry only a man of her own choosing." Furthermore, Sigurd and Gunnar learned that Brynhild had sequestered herself in a castle behind a wall of flames, and that she would marry only the man who could ride to her through the flames. They found the castle, but Gunnar's horse would not carry him through the fiery wall. "Take my horse Grani," offered Sigurd, and the two men exchanged horses. However, Grani also would not pass through the flames with Gunnar on his back. Finally Sigurd and Gunnar exchanged shapes, as Grimhild had taught them. Grani, with Sigurd on his back, passed through the flames unhindered. Sigurd, disguised as Gunnar, entered the hall and found Brynhild. She received him well, and they spent three nights together, sharing the same bed. However, each night Sigurd lay the unsheathed sword Gram between himself and Brynhild. One night he took from her the ring Andvaranaut, which he had previously given her, giving her another ring in its place. After three nights Sigurd returned to Gunnar, and they once again assumed their own shapes. Some time later Brynhild returned to her father King Budli, and told him how a brave king named Gunnar had ridden through the wall of flames to court her. Soon afterward Gunnar and Brynhild were married. 30. Two Queens Quarrel Now two queens lived in one household: Brynhild the wife of King Gunnar and Gudrun, the wife of King Sigurd. One day while bathing in the Rhine, the two women began quarreling as to the valor of their husbands. Brynhild praised Gunnar and found fault with Sigurd, but Gudrun had the last word: "It was my husband Sigurd who killed Fafnir, and furthermore, it was Sigurd -- not Gunnar, as you had been led to believe -- who rode through the wall of flames to court you." To clinch her argument, she showed Brynhild the ring Andvaranaut that Sigurd had taken from here at that time. Brynhild recognized the ring, and was overcome with grief and anger. 31. Brynhild's Grief Increases Brynhild was beside herself with rage, feeling herself betrayed not only by her husband Gunnar, but also by her former lover Sigurd. "This betrayal," she said to her husband, "shall lead to Sigurd's death, or to yours, or to mine." 32. The Betrayal of Sigurd Brynhild said to Gunnar, "If you do not kill Sigurd you shall lose everything: your power, your wealth, your family, and me." This grieved Gunnar greatly, for he was bound to Sigurd by an oath of brotherhood. Brynhild was most dear to him, but he did not dare to violate his oath. He took his brother Hogni into his confidence, but he too was bound by the oath and would not harm Sigurd. Together they decided to convince their youngest brother Guttorm to kill Sigurd. Guttorm was young and was not bound by the oath of brotherhood. They prepared a stew of snake and wolf flesh and fed it to Guttorm, which made him violent and fierce. They sent Guttorm to the room where Sigurd was asleep, and Guttorm drove his sword through the sleeping man's body, then turned to run away. Sigurd, mortally wounded, threw his sword Gram at the fleeing assassin. The sword struck him in the back and cut him into two. Gudrun, who had been asleep with Sigurd, awoke, drenched in her dying husband's blood. She let out a tormented scream. Brynhild, hearing Gudrun's scream, laughed aloud. However, her laughter soon turned to tears, and -- now overcome with grief and guilt -- she stabbed herself with a sword. 33. Brynhild's Final Request. The dying Brynhild requested that she and Sigurd be burned together on the same funeral pyre. This request was honored. 34. Gudrun Disappears Gudrun made her way to Denmark where she sojourned seven seasons at the hall of King Half. There she wove a great tapestry depicting the deeds of Sigurd. Grimhild discovered where Gudrun had settled, and she and her sons traveled there, offering Gudrun great wealth in compensation for her grievous loss. However, she did not trust them. In the end Grimhild announced to Gudrun: "It is arranged that soon you shall marry the powerful King Atli [Attila the Hun]. This marriage will bring you great wealth, but you must never abandon your kinsmen." Gudrun replied, "I shall marry King Atli only against my will. This union will bring only grief to all concerned!" Nonetheless, Gudrun proceeded with the wedding arrangements. She and her party traveled seven days on horseback, then seven days by ship, then finally another seven days overland before reaching Atli's kingdom [Hungary?]. The wedding was celebrated with a great festival, but there was little affection between the king and his new queen. 35. Gudrun Carves Runes Atli pondered about the great treasure that Sigurd had acquired by killing Fafnir. Gudrun's brothers Gunnar and Hogni must now have possession of it, he concluded. He resolved to invite the brothers to a great feast, hoping thus to gain control of the treasure himself. Gudrun, sensing her husband's treachery, carved a message in runes to her brothers, warning them of the danger. The messenger read the warning, and changed the runes, turning them into a friendly invitation for her brothers to visit her in her new kingdom. When Hogni's wife Kostbera saw the message, she recognized at once that the runes had been altered, and she warned Hogni of the deception. 36. Kostbera's Dreams Furthermore, Kostbera related to Hogni a series of dreams she had had in which dangers seemed to threaten their family: a flood damaged their hall; their bedclothes caught fire; a bear attacked them; and an eagle flew through their hall, splashing them with blood. To Kostbera, these were all warnings of imminent dangers, but Hogni found an innocent interpretation for each dream. 37. The Brothers Depart In spite of Kosbera's dreams and other premonitions of disaster, Gunnar, Hogni, and a few brave knights set forth for Atli's kingdom. Arriving at his dwelling, they heard inside the clash of arms and the clamor of warriors. "Let it not be said of us that we shrink from battle," said Hogni, and they entered the stronghold. 38. The Battle Atli met the brothers with a greeting and with a threat: "You are welcome here," he said. "Now give to me the treasure that is rightfully mine by way of my wife Gudrun: the gold that Sigurd acquired from the dragon, and that he by law and tradition bequeathed to his widow Gudrun." When the brothers refused to turn over the treasure, or to reveal its location, a fierce battle broke out. Seeing that the fight was going against her brothers, Gudrun put on a coat of armor and fought beside them. 39. Hogni and Gunnar Are Captured In the end Hogni and Gunnar were the only two members of their army left standing, and they too were captured. Atli had Hogni killed by cutting out his heart. This done, Gunnar said to Atli, "Now you shall never know the location of the treasure, for I am the only person still alive who knows, and I shall never tell. The Rhine shall retain control over the gold; it shall never decorate the arms of Huns like you." Then Atli had Gunnar placed in a snake-pit, with his hands and arms securely bound. Gudrun sent him a harp, which Gunnar played with his feet, thus charming the snakes and keeping them from biting him. However, with time one large adder did bite him, causing the death of a valiant man. 40. Atli and Gudrun King Atli reveled in the defeat of his enemies, and Gudrun gave him further cause to rejoice. "I accept my lot," she said. "You have killed my brothers, and you now have control over me." Placated, Atli made preparations for a feast celebrating his victories. His joy, however, was short lived. At the first opportunity, Gudrun killed the two sons that she and Atli had had together. She mixed their blood with the wine that was served to Atli, and roasted their hearts for Atli's feast. When Atli asked where their sons were, she answered, "You have drunk their blood and eaten their hearts." Then they exchanged many harsh words. One son of Hogni had survived the great battle, a man named Niflung [Low German for Nibelung]. Together Niflung and Gudrun planned their final act of revenge. In the evening when Atli was asleep with drunkenness, Gudrun, with Niflung's help, thrust a sword into Atli's chest. The dying Atli asked that a splendid burial site be prepared for him. This Gudrun promised to do, then she set fire to Atli's great hall. This was the end of Atli and all his retainers. It is said that the Volsungs [Sigurd's family] and the Gjukungs [Gudrun's family] were the greatest people of ancient times. This ends their saga. In creating this summary I have used the following edition: The Saga of the Volsungs: The Norse Epic of Sigurd the Dragon Slayer , translated by Jesse L. Byock (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1990). © 1990 by the Regents of the University of California. This work, based on earlier oral sources, was written down in Iceland sometime between about 1200 and 1270. Link to photographs of the Sigurd Runestone at Ramsundsberget, Jäder, Södermanland, Sweden. Link to photographs of the Sigurd Portal at Hylestad, Setesdal, Norway. Link to another Icelandic version of the same mythological material: The Treasure of the Niflungs , an excerpt from the Prose Edda of Snorri Sturluson. Link to Dragon Slayers: An Index Page . Link to a German/Austrian version of these legendary events, composed in about 1200: The Nibelungenlied . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 15, 2012. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Wales: A Digital Library Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Wales a digital library assembled by D. L. Ashliman © 2010-2021 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Unless otherwise noted all links lead to books digitized by books.google.com . Baring-Gould, Sabine. A Book of North Wales . London: Methuen and Company, 1903. Baring-Gould, Sabine. A Book of South Wales . London: Methuen and Company, 1905. Emerson, P. H. Welsh Fairy-Tales and Other Stories . London: D. Nutt, 1894. Evans-Wentz, W. Y. The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries . London: H. Frowde, Oxford University Press, 1911. This digital text is presented by the Internet Archive . Griffis, William Elliot. Welsh Fairy Tales . New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Company, 1921. Howells, W. Cambrian Superstitions, comprising Ghosts, Omens, Witchcraft, Traditions, &c. To Which Are Added a Concise View of the Manners and Customs of the Principality, and Some Fugitive Pieces . Tiption: Printed by Thomas Danks, Published & Sold by Longman & Co., London, 1831. Jacobs, Joseph. Celtic Fairy Tales . London: David Nutt, 1892. Jacobs, Joseph. More Celtic Fairy Tales . London: David Nutt, 1894. Jenkins, David Erwyd. Bedd Gelert, Its Facts, Fairies, and Folk-Lore . With translations of poetry by H. Elvet Lewis, and an introduction by John Rhys. Portmadox: Llewelyn Jenkins, 1899. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology . Vol. 1. London: William Harrison Ainsworth, 1828. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries . Vol. 2. London: Whittaker, Treacher, and Company, 1833. Keightley, Thomas. The Fairy Mythology: Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries . A new edition, revised and greatly enlarged. London: H. G. Bohn, 1851. Owen, Elias. Welsh Folk-Lore: A Collection of the Folk-Tales and Legends of North Wales, Being the Prize Essay of the National Eisteddfod, 1887 . Revised and enlarged by the author. Owestry and Wrexham: Woodall, Minshall, and Company, 1896. This digital text is presented by the Internet Archive . Rhys, John. "Welsh Fairy Tales." Y Cymmrodor . Vol. 4 (1881), pp. 163-216. Rhys, John. "Welsh Fairy Tales." Y Cymmrodor . Vol. 5 (1882), pp. 49-143. Rhys, John. Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx . Vol. 1. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1901. Rhys, John. Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx . Vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1901. Sikes, Wirt. British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions . With illustrations by T. H. Thomas. 2nd edition. London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880. Thomas, W. Jenkyn. The Welsh Fairy Book . With one hundred illustrations by Willy Pogány. London: T. Fisher Unwin, [1907]. This digital text is presented by HathiTrust Digital Library . Thomas, W. Jenkyn. The Welsh Fairy Book . Illustrations by Willy Pogány. New York: F. A. Stokes, [1908]. This digital text is presented by Sacred Texts . Wentz, W. Y. Evans. See Evans-Wentz, W. Y. Links to related sites England. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from England . Grimm. Grimms' Fairy Tales in English . Ireland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Ireland. Man. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from the Isle of Man . Scandinavia and Finland. Scandinavia and Finland: A Digital Library of Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales. . Scotland. Folklore, Folktales, and Fairy Tales from Scotland . Slavic. Slavic and Other Eastern European Folk and Fairy Tales . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised Ides of March, 2021. The Wandering Jew The Wandering Jew legends of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 777 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2001-2021 Contents Of the Jew Who Is Still Alive (Roger of Wendover). The Wandering Jew (A ballad from Reliques of Ancient English Poetry ). The Wandering Jew (retold by Horace E. Scudder). Shoemakers Are a Poor Slobbering Race (England). The Mysterious Stranger (England). The Eternal Jew (Belgium). The Jerusalem Shoemaker, or Wandering Jew, in Jutland (Denmark). The Story of Judas (Italy). Malchus at the Column (Italy). Buttadeu (Italy). The Eternal Jew in Vogtland (Germany / Czech Republic). Wodan as the Wandering Jew (Germany). The Lost Jew (Germany). The Eternal Jew on the Matterhorn (Switzerland). The Wandering Jew on the Grimsel Pass (Switzerland). The Wandering Jew in New York City (USA). The Wandering Jew in Harts Corners, New York (USA). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Of the Jew Joseph Who Is Still Alive Awaiting the Last Coming of Christ Roger of Wendover In this year [1228] a certain archbishop of Armenia Major came on a pilgrimage to England to see the relics of the saints, and visit the sacred places in this kingdom, as he had done in others; he also produced letters of recommendation from his holiness the pope to the religious men and prelates of the churches, in which they were enjoined to receive and entertain him with due reverence and honour. On his arrival he went to St. Alban's, where he was received with all respect by the abbat and monks; at this place, being fatigued with his journey, he remained some days to rest himself and his followers, and a conversation was commenced between him and the inhabitants of the convent by means of their interpreters, during which he made many inquiries concerning the religion and religious observances of this country, and related many strange things concerning eastern countries. In the course of conversation he was asked whether he had ever seen or heard anything of Joseph, a man of whom there was much talk in the world, who, when our Lord suffered, was present and spoke to him, and who is still alive in evidence of the Christian faith, in reply to which a knight in his retinue, who was his interpreter, replied, speaking in French, "My lord well knows that man, and a little before he took his way to the western countries the said Joseph ate at the table of my lord the archbishop in Armenia, and he had often seen and held converse with him." He was then asked about what had passed between Christ and the same Joseph, to which he replied: At the time of the suffering of Jesus Christ, he was seized by the Jews and led into the hall of judgment, before Pilate the governor, that he might be judged by him on the accusation of the Jews, and Pilate finding no cause for adjudging him to death, said to them, "Take him and judge him according to your law." The shouts of the Jews, however, increasing, he, at their request, released unto them Barabbas, and delivered Jesus to them to be crucified. When therefore the Jews were dragging Jesus forth, and had reached the door, Cartaphilus, a porter of the hall in Pilate's service, as Jesus was going out of the door, impiously struck him on the back with his hand, and said in mockery, "Go quicker, Jesus, go quicker, why do you loiter?" And Jesus looking back on him with a severe countenance said to him, "I am going, and you will wait till I return." And according as our Lord said, this Cartaphilus is still awaiting his return; at the time of our Lord's suffering he was thirty years old, and when he attains the age of a hundred years, he always returns to the same age as he was when our Lord suffered. After Christ's death, when the Catholic faith gained ground, this Cartaphilus was baptized by Ananias (who also baptized the apostle Paul), and was called Joseph. He often dwells in both divisions of Armenia, and other eastern countries, passing his time amidst the bishops and other prelates of the church. He is a man of holy conversation and religious, a man of few words and circumspect in his behaviour, for he does not speak at all unless when questioned by the bishops and religious men; and then he tells of the events of old times, and of the events which occurred at the suffering and resurrection of our Lord, and of the witnesses of the resurrection, namely those who rose with Christ, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto men; he also tells of the creed of the apostles, and of their separation and preaching; and all this he relates without smiling or levity of conversation, as one who is well practised in sorrow and the fear of God, always looking forward with fear to the coming of Jesus Christ, lest at the last judgment he should find him in anger, whom, when on his way to death, he had provoked to just vengeance. Numbers come to him from different parts of the world, enjoying his society and conversation, and to them, if they are men of authority, he explains all doubts on the matters on which he is questioned. He refuses all gifts that are offered to him, being content with slight food and clothing. He places his hope of salvation on the fact that he sinned through ignorance, for the Lord when suffering prayed for his enemies in these words, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." Source (books.google.com): Roger of Wendover's Flowers of History: Comprising the History of England from the Descent of the Saxons to A.D. 1235 , formerly ascribed to Matthew Paris. Translated from the Latin by J. A. Giles. Vol. 2 (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1849), pp. 512-514 . Source (Internet Archive): Roger of Wendover's Flowers of History: Comprising the History of England from the Descent of the Saxons to A.D. 1235 , formerly ascribed to Matthew Paris. Translated from the Latin by J. A. Giles. Vol. 2 (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1849), pp. 512-514 . The English chronicler Roger of Wendover died in 1236. Return to the table of contents . The Wandering Jew England/Germany The story of the Wandering Jew is of considerable antiquity: it had obtained full credit in this part of the world before the year 1228, as we learn from Mat. Paris. For in that year, it seems, there came an Armenian archbishop into England, to visit the shrines and reliques preserved in our churches; who, being entertained at the monastery of St. Albans, was asked several questions relating to his country, &c. Among the rest a monk, who sat near him, inquired if he had ever seen or heard of the famous person named Joseph, that was so much talked of; who was present at our Lord's crucifixion and conversed with him, and who was still alive in confirmation of the Christian faith. The archbishop answered, that the fact was true. And afterwards one of his train, who was well known to a servant of the abbot's, interpreting his master's words, told them in French, that his lord knew the person they spoke of very well: that he had dined at his table but a little while before he left the East: that he had been Pontius Pilate's porter, by name Cartaphilus; who, when they were dragging Jesus out of the door of the Judgment-hall, struck him with his fist on the back, saying, "Go faster, Jesus, go faster; why dost thou linger?" Upon which Jesus looked at him with a frown and said, "I indeed am going, but thou shalt tarry till I come." Soon after he was converted, and baptized by the name of Joseph. He lives for ever, but at the end of every hundred years falls into an incurable illness, and at length into a fit or ecstasy, out of which when he recovers, he returns to the same state of youth he was in when Jesus suffered, being then about 30 years of age. He remembers all the circumstances of the death and resurrection of Christ, the saints that arose with him, the composing of the Apostles' creed, their preaching, and dispersion; and is himself a very grave and holy person. This is the substance of Matthew Paris's account, who was himself a monk of St. Albans, and was living at the time when this Armenian archbishop made the above relation. Since his time several impostors have appeared at intervals under the name and character of the Wandering Jew; whose several histories may be seen in Calmet's dictionary of the Bible. See also The Turkish Spy , vol. II. book 3, let. 1. The story that is copied in the following ballad is of one, who appeared at Hamburg in 1547, and pretended he had been a Jewish shoemaker at the time of Christ's crucifixion. The ballad however seems to be of later date. It is preserved in black-letter in the Pepys collection. Footnote: We need hardly recount the numerous fictions, or poems, which have since been founded on this story, such as Shelley's "Ahasuerus"; a novel by John Gait; a tale in an early work of Lord John Russell's, entitled, "Essays by a Gentleman who had left his Lodgings"; and Cioly's splendid romance of "Salathiel," which the literary world would like to see completed. -- Ed. When as in faire Jerusalem Our Saviour Christ did live, And for the sins of all the worlde His own deare life did give; The wicked Jewes with scoffes and scornes Did dailye him molest, That never till he left his life, Our Saviour could not rest. When they had crown'd his head with thornes, And scourg'd him to disgrace, In scornfull sort they led him forthe Unto his dying place; Where thousand thousands in the streete Beheld him passe along, Yet not one gentle heart was there, That pityed this his wrong. Both old and young reviled him, As in the streete he wente, And nought he found but churlish tauntes, By every ones consente: His owne deare crosse he bore himselfe, A burthen far too great, Which made him in the street to fainte, With blood and water sweat. Being weary thus, he sought for rest, To ease his burthened soule, Upon a stone; the which a wretch Did churlishly controule; And sayd, "Awaye, thou king of Jewes, Thou shalt not rest thee here; Pass on; thy execution place Thou seest nowe draweth neare." And thereupon he thrust him thence; At which our Saviour sayd, I sure will rest, but thou shalt walke, And have no journey stayed." With that this cursed shoemaker, For offering Christ this wrong, Left wife and children, house and all, And went from thence along. Where after he had seene the bloude Of Jesus Christ thus shed, And to the crosse his bodye nail'd, Awaye with speed he fled Without returning backe againe Unto his dwelling place, And wandred up and downe the worlde, A runnagate most base. No resting could he finde at all, No ease, nor hearts content; Bo No house, nor home, nor biding place: But wandring forth he went From towne to towne in foreigne landes, With grieved conscience still, Repenting for the heinous guilt Of his fore-passed ill. Thus after some fewe ages past In wandring up and downe; He much again desired to see Jerusalems renowne, But finding it all quite destroyd, He wandred thence with woe, Our Saviour's wordes, which he had spoke, To verifie and showe. "I'll rest," sayd hee, "but thou shalt walke, So doth this wandring Jew From place to place, but cannot rest For seeing countries newe; Declaring still the power of him, Whereas he comes or goes, And of all things done in the east, Since Christ his death, he showes. The world he hath still compast round And seene those nations strange, That hearing of the name of Christ, Their idol gods doe change: To whom he hath told wondrous thinges Of time forepast, and gone, And to the princes of the worlde Declares his cause of moane: Desiring still to be dissolved, And yeild his mortal breath; But, if the Lord hath thus decreed, He shall not yet see death. For neither lookes he old nor young, But as he did those times, When Christ did suffer on the crosse For mortall sinners crimes. He hath past through many a foreigne place, Arabia, Egypt, Africa, Grecia, Syria, and great Thrace, And throughout all Hungaria; Where Paul and Peter preached Christ, Those blest apostles deare; There he hath told our Saviours wordes, In countries far, and neare. And lately in Bohemia, With many a German towne; And now in Flanders, as tis thought, He wandreth up and downe: Where learned men with him conferre Of those his lingering dayes, And wonder much to heare him tell His journeyes, and his wayes. If people give this Jew an almes, The most that he will take Is not above a groat a time: Which he, for Jesus' sake, Will kindlye give unto the poore, And thereof make no spare, Affirming still that Jesus Christ Of him hath dailye care. He ne'er was seene to laugh nor smile, But weepe and make great moane; Lamenting still his miseries, And dayes forepast and gone: If he heare any one blaspheme, Or take God's name in vaine, He telles them that they crucifie Their Saviour Christe againe. "If you had seene his death," saith he, "As these mine eyes have done, Ten thousand thousand times would yee His torments think upon: And suffer for his sake all paine Of torments, and all woes." These are his wordes and eke his life Whereas he comes or goes. Source: Thomas Percy, Reliques of Ancient English Poetry , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: James Nichol, 1858), book 2, no. 3, pp. 236-42 . This collection was first published in 1765. Return to the table of contents . The Wandering Jew Retold by Horace E. Scudder When our Saviour was passing out of Jerusalem to the place where he was to be crucified, he was made to carry the heavy cross on his shoulders. Many people followed him, and others stood in the doorways of the houses he passed, or looked out of the windows. One of these who looked on was a shoemaker, Ahasuerus by name. He did not believe in Christ. He had been present when Pilate pronounced the sentence of death, and, knowing that Christ would be dragged past his house, he ran home and called his household to see this person, who, he said, had been deceiving the Jews. Ahasuerus stood in the doorway, holding his little child on his arm. Presently the crowd came by and Jesus in the midst, bearing his cross. The load was heavy, and Jesus stood a moment, as if he would rest in the doorway. But the Jew, willing to gain favor with the crowd, roughly bade him go forward. Jesus obeyed, but, as he moved away, he turned and looked on the shoemaker and said: "I shall at last rest, but thou shalt go on till the last day." Ahasuerus heard him. Stirred by some im pulse, he knew not what, he set his child down, and followed the crowd to the place of crucifixion. There he stayed till the end. And when the people turned back, he turned back with them, and went to his house, but not to stay. He bade his wife and children farewell. "Go on!" a voice said to him, and on that day he began his wanderings. Years afterward he came back, but Jerusalem was a heap of ruins. The city had been destroyed, and he knew that his wife and children had long since been dead. "Go on!" he heard, and he wandered forth, begging his way from house to house, from town to town, from one country to another. He wandered from Judaea to Greece, from Greece to Rome. He grew old, and his face was like leather, but his eyes were bright, and he never lost his vigor. He went through storms and the cold of winter, he endured the dry heat of summer, but no sickness overtook him. He joined armies that were going forth to battle, but death never came his way, though men fell by his side. He was never seen to laugh. Now and then, some learned man would draw him into talk, not knowing who he was, and would find him familiar with great events in history. It was not as if he had learned these in books. He talked as if he himself had been present. Then the learned man would shake his head, and say to himself, "Poor man, he is mad," and only after the old wanderer had left would the thought suddenly come, "Why, that must have been the Wandering Jew." Where is he now? No one knows. Wandering, weary, he moves from place to place. Sometimes he is driven off by the people, he looks so uncanny. When war breaks out, he says to himself, "Perhaps now at last the end of the world is coming." But though wars have lasted a hundred years, they cease at last, and still the Wandering Jew goes on, on. Source: Horace E. Scudder, The Book of Legends: Told Over Again (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1899), pp. 28-30 . Return to the table of contents . Shoemakers Are a Poor Slobbering Race England An old woman of the North Riding once asked a friend of mine whether it was wrong to wash on Good Friday. "I used to do so," she said, "and thought no harm of it, till once, when I was hanging out my clothes, a young woman passed by (a dressmaker she was, and a Methodist); and she reproved me, and told me this story. While our Lord Jesus was being led to Calvary they took Him past a woman who was washing, and the woman "blirted" the thing she was washing in His face; on which He said, "Cursed be every one who hereafter shall wash on this day!" "And never again," added the old woman, "have I washed on Good Friday." Now it is said in Cleveland that clothes washed and hung out to dry on Good Friday will become spotted with blood; but the Methodist girl's wild legend reminds me more of one which a relation of mine elicited from a poor Devonshire shoemaker. She was remonstrating with him for his indolence and want of spirit, when he astonished her by replying, "Dont'ee be hard on me. We shoemakers are a poor slobbering race, and so have been ever since the curse that Jesus Christ laid on us." "And what was that?" she asked. "Why," said he, "when they were carrying Him to the cross they passed a shoemaker's bench, and the man looked up and spat at Him; and the Lord turned and said, 'A poor slobbering fellow shalt thou be, and all shoemakers after thee, for what thou hast done to Me.'" Footnote: This curse is suggested, I presume, by the legend of the Wandering Jew; Cartaphilus or Ahasuerns, whichever was his name, having been a shoemaker, and cursed, it is said, by Our Lord, for refusing to allow Him to rest on the doorstep of his shop. -- S. B. G. [Sabine Baring-Gould] Source: William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders , a new edition with many additional notes (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by W. Satchell, Peyton, and Company, 1879), p. 82 . Return to the table of contents . The Mysterious Stranger England Anno 165_. At _ _in the Moorlands in Staffordshire, lived a poor old man, who had been a long time lame. One Sunday, in the afternoon, he being alone, one knocked at his door; he bade him open it, and come in. The stranger desired a cup of beer; the lame man desired him to take a dish and draw some, for he was not able to do it himself. The stranger asked the poor old man how long he had been ill. The poor man told him. Said the stranger, "I can cure you. Take two or three balm leaves steeped in your beer for a fortnight or three weeks, and you will be restored to your health; but constantly and zealously serve God." The poor man did so, and became perfectly well. This stranger was in a purple-shag gown, such as was not seen or known in those parts. And nobody in the street after evensong did see any one in such a colored habit. Doctor Gilbert Sheldon, since Archbishop of Canterbury, was then in the Moorlands, and justified the truth of this to Elias Ashmole, Esq., from whom I had this account, and he hath inserted it in some of his memoirs, which are in the [Ashmolean] Museum at Oxford. Source: John Aubrey, Miscellanies upon Various Subjects , 5th edition (London: Reeves and Turner, 1890), pp. 83-84 . Although the mysterious stranger in this account is not identified as the "Wandering Jew," this legend does show similarities to other stories in this group. Return to the table of contents . The Eternal Jew Belgium In about 1640 two citizens of Brussels who lived in the Rue des Tanneurs saw a grey, old man in the Sonian Forest. His clothing was in terrible condition, and of an ancient style. They invited him to go into a tavern with them, and he did so. However, he did not sit down, but rather drank while standing on his feet. When they were about to leave, he had much to say to them, mostly about things that had happened many centuries earlier. From this the two citizens realized that their companion was Isaac Laquedem, the Jew who had sent our Lord away from his door, and they departed from him in great fear. Source (books.google.com): Johann Wilhelm Wolf, "Der ewige Jude," Niederländische Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1843), no. 534, p. 625 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann Wilhelm Wolf, "Der ewige Jude" Niederländische Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1843), no. 534, p. 625 . Return to the table of contents . The Jerusalem Shoemaker, or Wandering Jew, in Jutland Denmark It is now very long since there was seen in Jutland a man mean and lowly in his garments, riding on a little white horse, with stirrups made of wood. When any one asked him whence he came and whither he was directing his course, he was wont to answer: "From Vendsyssel over Himmelsyssel southwards." He foretold, and said of a stone in Mae: "A thorn shall grow through the fissure in the stone, and in the thorn a magpie shall build her nest, hatch her young, and afterwards fly away with them." And this came to pass as he had said. He further foretold that when the magpie was flown, there should be a great battle in Vendsyssel, and the greater part of the people perish. Afterwards the women should acquire the courage and heart of men and slay the enemy. But when he was asked what further should happen, he answered: "Let the end follow." In Aalborg he foretold something to the town magistrate, which did not particularly please him, and for which he caused him to be scourged. He then foretold again, that like as his blood was running down his back, so should the magistrate's blood run over the streets of Aalborg. And it happened as he had said; for in a quarrel which arose in the town, the townsmen slew the magistrate in the street. Of Haseriisaa, which at that time did not flow through Aalborg, he foretold that a time should come when it should run through the town; which also took place as he had predicted. Coming one day to Bolstrup, and having according to his custom taken up his quarters in a kiln, he rode the next day to the public assembly (Ting), where the judge of the district asked him: "How will it fare with me?" and got for answer: "Thou shalt die in a kiln." Nor did he fare better; for coming to poverty, he had at last no other place of shelter. Once when some boys scoffed at him, and one among them threw a cask stave after him, he said, that a stave should be the boy's death; and the same boy, some time after, fell from a tree and struck a stave into his body. Of alms he accepted only so much as he required for the moment, and thus traveled from place to place. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), pp. 212-13 . Thorpe's source: J. M. Thiele, "Jerusalems Skomager i Jylland," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: Universitetsboghandler C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), pp. 311-13 . Comment by Thorpe: "The story of the shoemaker of Jerusalem is generally known. When Jesus passed by his house, bending under the weight of the cross, he would rest an instant at his door; but the miscreant came out, and with imprecations drove the Savior away, for the sake of gaining the favor of his enemies. The shoemaker, whose name was Ahasuerus, then drew on himself the curse ever to be a wanderer and never to find rest until doomsday." Return to the table of contents . The Story of Judas Italy You must know that Judas was the one who betrayed Jesus Christ. Now when Judas betrayed him, his Master said: "Repent, Judas, for I pardon you." But Judas, not at all! He departed with his bag of money, in despair and cursing heaven and earth. What did he do? While he was going along thus desperate he came across a tamarind tree. (You must know that the tamarind was formerly a large tree, like the olive and walnut.) When he saw this tamarind a wild thought entered his mind, remembering the treason he had committed. He made a noose in a rope and hung himself to the tamarind. And hence it is (because this traitor Judas was cursed by God) that the tamarind tree dried up, and from that time on it ceased growing up into a tree and became a short, twisted, and tangled bush; and its wood is good for nothing, neither to burn, nor to make anything out of, and all on account of Judas, who hanged himself on it. Some say that the soul of Judas went to the lowest hell, to suffer the most painful torments; but I have heard, from older persons who can know, that Judas's soul has a severer sentence. They say that it is in the air, always wandering about the world, without being able to rise higher or fall lower; and every day, on all the tamarind shrubs that it meets, it sees its body hanging and torn by the dogs and birds of prey. They say that the pain he suffers cannot be told, and that it makes the flesh creep to think of it. And thus Jesus Christ condemned him for his great treason. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 56, pp. 195-96 . Return to the table of contents . Malchus at the Column Italy Malchus was the head of the Jews who killed our Lord. The Lord pardoned them all, and likewise the good thief, but he never pardoned Malchus, because it was he who gave the Madonna a blow. He is confined under a mountain, and condemned to walk around a column, without resting, as long as the world lasts. Every time that he walks about the column he gives it a blow in memory of the blow he gave the mother of our Lord. He has walked around the column so long that he has sunk into the ground. He is now up to his neck. When he is under, head and all, the world will come to an end, and God will then send him to the place prepared for him. He asks all those who go to see him (for there are such) whether children are yet born; and when they say yes, he gives a deep sigh and resumes his walk, saying: "The time is not yet!" for before the world comes to an end there will be no children born for seven years. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 58, p. 197 . Return to the table of contents . Buttadeu Italy It was in winter, and my good father was at Sacalone, in the warehouse, warming himself at the fire, when he saw a man enter, dressed differently from the people of that region, with breeches striped in yellow, red, and black, and his cap the same way. My good father was frightened. "Oh!" he said, "what is this person?" "Do not be afraid," the man said. "I am called Buttadeu." "Oh!" said my father, "I have heard you mentioned. Be pleased to sit down a while a tell me something." "I cannot sit, for I am condemned by my God always to walk." And while he was speaking he was always walking up and down and had no rest. Then he said: "Listen. I am going away; I leave you, in memory of me, this, that you must say a credo at the right hand of our Lord, and five other credos at his left, and a salve regina to the Virgin, for the grief I suffer on account of her son. I salute you." "Farewell." "Farewell, my name is Buttadeu." Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 59, pp. 197-98 . This story was reported by the daughter of a certain Antonino Caseio, a peasant of Salaparuta. The name Buttadeu comes from buttari, to thrust away, and deu, God; or, in popular terms, "the Jew who repulsed Jesus Christ." Return to the table of contents . The Eternal Jew in Vogtland Germany / Czech Republic The Eternal Jew was once seen on a cloudy day in the Schildbach Forest. He was tall and sinister looking with an ice-gray beard and hair. He was wrapped in a grayish-brown, tattered cloak which almost covered his sinister-looking and deeply furrowed face. With a rough and foreign-sounding voice he asked an old birdcatcher about this and that: about families and villages that were no longer there, but that according to legend had existed in earlier centuries. Then he pointed out some unknown qualities of birds that were hanging there, as well as some healing herbs that grew just outside of the forest hut. With all this, however, he kept a good distance from the crossbill finch. The old birdcatcher grew uneasy about his guest. When he asked how a good Christian could know all of these things, the stranger stood up and walked away without saying anything. Looking after the departing stranger, the birdcatcher noticed from his tracks that each of his soles was imbedded with five large-headed nails forming the shape of a cross. Thus with every step the wanderer struck this holy symbol into the ground. Then the birdcatcher knew who this ancient wanderer was, and how he knew all about the region from many centuries ago. Source (books.google.com): Johann August Ernst Köhler, "Der ewige Jude im Voigtlande," Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte Ueberlieferungen im Voigtlande (Leipzig: Verlag von Fr. Fleischer, 1867), no. 186, p. 568 . Source (Internet Archive): Johann August Ernst Köhler, "Der ewige Jude im Voigtlande," Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte Ueberlieferungen im Voigtlande (Leipzig: Verlag von Fr. Fleischer, 1867), no. 186, p. 568 . Vogtland is a historical region in present-day eastern Germany and the western Czech Republic. According to legend, the crossbill finch damaged its beak trying to pull the nails from Jesus on the cross. Return to the table of contents . Wodan as the Wandering Jew Germany At the introduction of Christianity we find a new development of the ancient myths. Wodan becomes the foul fiend, then the godless Hunter, and the Wandering Jew. In the Black Forest the Eternal Hunter and the Eternal Jew are regarded as the same person. They both always carry a groschen in the pocket. In some parts of Germany the harrows are placed in the fields with the teeth together, that the wanderer may rest himself. According to some authorities, he may only rest Christmas night, and then only when he finds a plough in the field; only on that may he sit down. Every seven years the Huntsman passes over the seven mining towns of the Harz, and woe to him who calls after him. According to one legend, the Wild Huntsman met Christ at a river where He sought to quench His thirst, and would not permit Him to drink; he also drove Him from a cattle trough, and when the Saviour found water in a horse's foot-print, and would drink there, he drove Him away. As a punishment, he is doomed to wander for ever, and eat only horse-flesh. This is the pagan legend Christianized. In West and South Germany we find the Wild Army. Odin, or Wodan, was the god, too, of armies, and always went out from Walhalla at the head of his ghostly array, while his nine Walküren [Valkyries] conducted the fallen heroes back to Walhalla [Valhalla]. Source: Toofie Lauder, Legends and Tales of the Harz Mountains (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1881), pp. 125-26 . Lauder does not give this account a separate title. Return to the table of contents . The Lost Jew Germany Eighty-one year old Frau Bandow from Fünfeichen narrated: Once in my life I saw the lost Jew. One afternoon I was home alone when a youthful Jewish man entered my house. He wanted neither to buy nor to sell anything, but with his Jewish accent asked me for a bite of bread. I said to him, "You won't like our coarse peasant bread," to which he replied, "I will like it, if the lady would just give me some." I then asked him, "Have you come a long way?" He answered, "My way is long! I must travel forever throughout the world!" With that he left, but a short time later he returned and asked again for a bite of bread. I immediately said to myself, "Today you have seen the lost Jew," but to make sure I asked the preacher. He listened to my story and said that he could not prove it, but that the belief was there. This answer only strengthened the woman's opinion, which was further verified through an innkeeper's wife from a neighboring village, where the Jew had stayed overnight. She reported that he had eaten nothing and that he had not slept. She had prepared a place for him to lie down, but he paced back and forth in the sitting room the entire night. Even in her old age, the woman who told this story took great pleasure that she had had the good fortune to have seen the lost Jew. Source: Karl Gander, "Der verlorene Jude," Niederlausitzer Volkssagen, vornehmlich aus dem Stadt- und Landkreis Guben (Berlin: Deutsche Schriftsteller-Genossenschaft, 1894), no. 41, pp. 14-15 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . The Eternal Jew on the Matterhorn Switzerland Mount Matter beneath the Matterhorn in Valais is a high glacier from which the Vispa River flows. According to popular legend, an imposing city existed there ages ago. The Wandering Jew (as many Swiss call the Eternal Jew) came there once and said: "When I pass this way a second time there will be nothing but trees and rocks where you now see houses and streets. And when my path leads me here a third time, there will be nothing but snow and ice." And now nothing can be seen there but snow and ice. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der ewige Jud auf dem Matterhorn," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 1 (Berlin: in der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 343, pp. 443-44 . In later editions this legend is numbered 344. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. The Grimms' source: "Oral, from Oberwallis." Return to the table of contents . The Wandering Jew on the Grimsel Pass Switzerland On the way from Meiringen to the famous Rhône glacier, one sees some of the most beautiful and varied scenery in the world. After passing charming points too numerous to mention, the road, which rises rapidly, leads over the barren Grimsel Pass, where stands a famous refuge for poor travellers, the well-known Grimsel Hospice. A legend claims that in olden times this region blossomed like the rose, and that the highest mountains were as fertile as any valley nestling in a sheltered location at their foot. When Our Lord bade the Wandering Jew [footnote: See the author's Legends of the Virgin and Christ . ] begin the never-ending journey for which he is so noted, he immediately set out, and tramping incessantly, started to cross the Alps at the Grimsel. Although constantly urged along by a power he could not resist, Ahasuerus, the Jew, marked the happy people dwelling on the banks of the Aare and the Rhône, and marvelled at the extreme fertility of the pass, where grapes and figs grew in abundance, where no barren spot could be seen, and where mighty oaks covered the tops of mountains now crowned by eternal snows. The air was mild and balmy, even at the greatest altitude; and hosts of birds in bright plumage flitted about, twittering and singing in the merriest way. Ahasuerus also noticed that the people were gentle and hospitable, for wherever he asked for food or drink it was quickly granted, and he was warmly invited to tarry with them and rest his weary limbs. This invitation, however, he could not accept; but hurried on, unconscious of the fact that a blight fell over every place through which he passed; for the curse laid upon him not only condemned him to move on for ever, but enhanced his punishment by making cold, want, and pestilence follow in his train. Many years passed by before the Wandering Jew again found himself near the Alps; but weary as he was, he somewhat quickened his footsteps, hoping to feast his eyes upon the landscape which had so charmed him the first time, and to meet again the warm-hearted people who had been so kind to him once before. As he drew near the mountains, however, sad forebodings wrung his heart, for they were enveloped in a dense fog, which seemed to him particularly cold and clammy. Hurrying on up the pass, he eagerly looked from side to side, yet saw nothing but dark pines wildly tossing their sombre branches against a gray sky, while ravens and owls flew past him, croaking and hooting. Vines, figs, and oaks had vanished, and the happy people, driven away by the constant windstorms which swept the mountains, had taken refuge in the sheltered valleys. But although all else was changed, the spirit of hospitality still lingered on the heights, for the charcoal-burners gladly shared their meagre supply of coarse food with the Wandering Jew, and warmly invited him to be seated at their campfire. The Jew, however, had to hasten on; and many long years elapsed before he again trod the Grimsel Pass. For a while he still perceived dark firs and smouldering fires, but it seemed to him that they were much nearer the foot of the mountain than they had been at his second visit. As he climbed upward he also noticed that the path was much more rugged than before, for rocks and stones had fallen down upon it from above, making it almost impassable in certain places. As no obstacle could stop this involuntary traveller, he went on over rolling stones and jagged rocks, and nearing the top of the pass discovered that every trace of vegetation had vanished, and that the place formerly so fertile was now covered with barren rocks and vast fields of snow. Raising his eyes to the peaks all around him he perceived that oaks, beeches, and pines had all vanished, and that the steep mountain sides were heavily coated with ice, which ran far down into the valleys in great frozen streams. The sight of all this desolation, which had taken the place of such luxuriant vegetation, proved too much for poor Ahasuerus, who sank down on a rock by the wayside and burst into tears. There he sat and sobbed, as he realised for the first time the blighting effect of his passage. His tears flowed so freely that they trickled down into a rocky basin, and when he rose to pursue his way down into the Hasli Valley, he left a little lake behind him. In spite of the masses of snow and ice all around, and of the cold winds which constantly sweep over that region, the waters of the lake still remain as warm as the tears which fell from Ahasuerus's eyes; and no fish are ever found in this pool. Still, notwithstanding the desolate landscape, Ahasuerus found the spirit of hospitality not quite dead, for far up on the pass rose a shelter for weary travellers, where they were carefully tended by pious monks. But even here he could not rest, and as he passed along down the mountain, he heard the thunder of falling avalanches behind him. It is during this last journey that he is supposed to have lost the queer old shoe which was long treasured in one of the vaults of the Bern Library. It is also said that when pausing at one of the huts in the Hasli Valley, he sorrowfully foretold that when fate brought him there for the fourth and last time, the whole fruitful valley, from the top of the mountains down to the Lake of Brienz, would be transformed into a huge unbroken field of ice, where he would wander alone in quest of the final resting-place which until now has been denied him, although Eugene Field claims he found it in the New World. [Footnote: See "The Holy Cross" by Eugene Field.] This account of the passage of the Wandering Jew is told with slight variations of all the passes between Switzerland and Italy. Every particularly barren spot in the former country is supposed to have been blighted because he passed through there, or because mortals sinned so grievously that they brought a curse down upon it. Source: H. A. Guerber, Legends of Switzerland (New York: Dodd, Mead, and Company, 1905), pp. 126-31 . Return to the table of contents . The Wandering Jew in New York City USA A sensation was created in William street, on Thursday morning, by the appearance of a man on the pave with a long floating beard, and dressed in loose pantaloons, with a turban on his head. He carried in his hand a little manuscript Hebrew book, out of which he read to the crowd which gathered around him. He represented himself as the veritable Wandering Jew. Nobody knows who he is or where he came from. A learned Jewish rabbi was sent to converse with him, which they did in the Hebrew language, and the stranger was found to be perfect in his knowledge of that most difficult tongue. The Rabbi tested him in the Arabic, the Phenician, and in the Sanscrit, but soon found that the aged stranger far surpassed him in intimacy with them all. The Rabbi invited him to his house; but, said the stranger, "nay, I cannot stop. The Crucified of Calvary has pronounced the edict, and I must not rest. I must move on -- ever on!" He was last seen on Thursday, but to where he has departed no one can tell. Source: The Deseret News (Salt Lake City, June 10, 1857). Return to the table of contents . The Wandering Jew in Harts Corners, New York USA Quite an excitement, it is reported, was recently caused in the village of Harts Corners, a few miles from New York, by the appearance of the veritable "Wandering Jew!" Now an ordinary wandering Jew would not be at all likely to create any surprise, seeing that they are to be met with in every quarter; but the case would be quite contrary -- even in a community of beer and tobacco loving Dutchmen, the very embodiment of all that is imperturbable, if the genuine Ahaseurus -- condemned by the Great Teacher to walk the earth until the day of judgment -- were to make his appearance in their midst. So nobody can wonder at the excitement displayed by the people of Harts Corners on the appearance of this very notorious and venerable character in their midst! The discovery was made under the following circumstances: On the 2nd instant, as two little boys were going a fishing, their attention was arrested by deep groans, which seemed to emanate from an old shanty they passed on their way. The boys entered the shanty and there beheld a venerable looking individual with a long white beard, dressed in black flowing garments, seated in one corner, apparently in pain. They manifested a desire to assist him, but were frightened off by the old fellow lifting his staff in a threatening manner. The youngsters retreated and soon returned with a number of the villagers, who, on entering the shanty saw an individual with a large hooked nose, larger ears, and finger nails about an inch long -- there was no tail, visible at least. They asked what ailed him, and he replied that he had fallen on a stone and severely hurt his leg. In the course of conversation he also informed them he had no home, and that his last friend had departed this life long before the light of heaven illumined the soul of any amongst them, and that the voice of the only one he loved was silent in the tomb before printing was invented, or America had ever echoed to the cry of liberty. Exclamations of "cracked" escaped several of the crowd, which aroused the indignation of the Jew, who asked them why they came there if they did not believe him. They replied they came because they had heard there was a man in trouble and they wished to assist him. To this he replied "man can not and Heaven will not." He then gave a short account of his recent travels from Siberia to America via Behrings Straits, through the wilds of Alaska, etc., saying the first kind word he had heard during the whole journey was from the party whom he was then addressing. He then bade them adieu and departed. In his hasty departure on this occasion as he is said to have done on many others, he left a memento by which his identity was fully proven. This time it was an old volume of extracts from the Babylonion Talmud, in the Hebrew character. On a fly leaf was a short account of his birth, parentage, the sentence of the Savior and his subsequent wanderings, all clearly proving that he was the identical bona fide Wandering Jew. This remarkable book, proving the identity of poor Ahaseurus, is now in the possession of one Michael O'Grady, a switch tender and farmer living a short distance from the place where the Jew was discovered. By applying to him, any one sufficiently interested may doubtless obtain further details in relation to this -- the very "last sensation;" of course they may! Source: The Deseret News (Salt Lake City, September 23, 1868). Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Wandering Jew , from Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia. Sabine Baring-Gould, "The Wandering Jew," Curious Myths of the Middle Ages , new edition (London: Rivingtons, 1873), pp. 1-31 . Moncure Daniel Conway, The Wandering Jew (London: Chatto and Windus, 1881). Gustave Doré, La légende du Juif errant: Compositions et dessins (Paris: Garnier Frères, 1859). Gustave Doré, The Legend of the Wandering Jew: A Series of Twelve Designs (Philadelphia: George Gerbie, 1873). Anti-Semitic Legends . Wild Huntsman Legends . Accounts of other individuals condemned to wander endlessly on earth. The Flying Dutchman . Legends about a ghostly ship cursed to sail on forever. Sleeping Hero Legends , folktales of type 766 and migratory legends about heroes who, instead of dying, lie asleep awaiting a time of special need when they will rise up and defeat their nations' enemies. The Three Nephites . Deathless saints from Mormon folklore. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised January 13, 2021. War between Wild Animals and Domestic Animals: Folktales of Type 103 War between Wild Animals and Domestic Animals folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 103 (formerly classified as Aarne-Thompson type 104) translated and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2008 Contents Old Sultan (Germany). The Dog and the Wolf (Bohemia). Related Links . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Old Sultan Germany A farmer had a faithful dog named Sultan, who had grown old and lost all his teeth, and could no longer hold onto anything. One day the farmer was standing with his wife before the house door, and said, "Tomorrow I intend to shoot Old Sultan. He is no longer of any use." His wife, who felt pity for the faithful animal, answered, "He has served us so long, and been so faithful, that we might well give him his keep." "What?" said the man. "You are not very bright. He doesn't have a tooth left in his mouth, and no thief is afraid of him. He can go now. If he has served us, he has eaten well for it." The poor dog, who was lying stretched out in the sun not far off, heard everything, and was sorry that tomorrow was to be his last day. He had a good friend, the wolf, and he crept out in the evening into the forest to him, and complained of the fate that awaited him. "Listen, kinsman," said the wolf, "be of good cheer. I will help you out of your trouble. I have thought of something. Tomorrow, early in the morning, your master is going with his wife to make hay, and they will take their little child with them, for no one will be left behind in the house. While they are at work they lay the child behind the hedge in the shade. You lie down there too, just as if you wanted to guard it. Then I will come out of the woods, and carry off the child. You must run swiftly after me, as if you would take it away from me. I will let it fall, and you will take it back to its parents, who will think that you have rescued it, and will be far too grateful to do you any harm. On the contrary, you will be treated royally, and they will never let you want for anything again." This idea pleased the dog, and it was carried out just as planned. The father screamed when he saw the wolf running across the field with his child, but when Old Sultan brought it back, he was full of joy, and stroked him and said, "Not a hair of yours shall be hurt. You shall eat free bread as long as you live." And to his wife he said, "Go home at once and make Old Sultan some bread soup that he will not have to bite. And bring the pillow from my bed. I will give it to him to lie on. From then on Old Sultan was as well off as he could possibly wish. Soon afterwards the wolf visited him, and was pleased that everything had succeeded so well. "But, kinsman," he said, "you will just close one eye if, when I have a chance, I carry off one of your master's fat sheep." "Don't count on that," answered the dog. "I will remain true to my master. I cannot agree to that." The wolf thought that this was not spoken in earnest, and he crept up in the night to take away the sheep. But the farmer, to whom the faithful Sultan had told the wolf's plan, was waiting for him and combed his hair cruelly with a flail. The wolf had to flee, but he cried out to the dog, "Just wait, you scoundrel. You'll regret this." The next morning the wolf sent the boar to challenge the dog to come out into the forest and settle the affair. Old Sultan could find no one to be his second but a cat with only three legs, and as they went out together the poor cat limped along, stretching its tail upward with pain. The wolf and his friend were already at the appointed place, but when they saw their enemy coming, they thought that he was bringing a saber with him, for they mistook the cat's outstretched tail for one. And when the poor animal hopped on three legs, they thought that each time it was picking up a stone to throw at them. Then they took fright. The wild boar crept into the underbrush and the wolf jumped up a tree. As the dog and the cat approached, they wondered why no one was to be seen. The wild boar, however, had not been able to hide himself completely in the leaves. His ears were still sticking out. While the cat was looking cautiously about, the boar wiggled his ears, and the cat, who thought it was a mouse, jumped on it and bit down hard. The boar jumped up screaming loudly, "The guilty one is up in the tree." The dog and cat looked up and saw the wolf, who was ashamed for having shown such fear, and who then made peace with the dog. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Der alte Sultan , Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Children's and Household Tales -- Grimms' Fairy Tales), no. 48. The Grimms' source: Johann Friedrich Krause, from the town of Hof in Hessen. Translated Margaret Hunt (1884). Translation revised and corrected by D. L. Ashliman . © 2000. This tale, in a somewhat simpler form, was included in the first edition of Kinder- und Hausmärchen (1812). It was rewritten in its present form for the second edition (1819). The separate episodes are classified as follows: The old dog rescues the child, Aarne-Thompson type 101. Wild animals hide from an unfamiliar animal, Aarne-Thompson type 103. The war between the village animals and the forest animals, Aarne-Thompson type 104. (Hans-Jörg Uther combines types 103 and 104 under the number 103.) The Dog and the Wolf Bohemia Once upon a time there was a peasant family who had a watchdog named Sultan among their household animals. The dog grew old, and, thinking that he could no longer properly attend to to his duties, the peasant chased him away. Dejected and with his head hanging low, the dog left the village, complaining to himself, "So this is my reward for loyalty at a difficult job. After using up my youthful and energetic years at work, they chase me away and grant me no rest now that I am old and weak." He sadly went his way, wandering aimlessly about for many days without finding any tolerable shelter. Emaciated and weak from his long journey, he came to a forest. A wolf came out of the forest, ran up to the poor dog, and cried, "Stop, old fellow! Beware, you are now in my power." Hearing the wolf speak in this manner, the frightened old Sultan said, "Dear friend, just take a good look at me, and your appetite for me will disappear. I would make the worst roast you have ever had, for I am nothing but skin and bones. But I do have some advice for you." The wolf said, "I don't need any advice from you, you miserable creature. I know what you will say even before you speak, namely that I should let you live. No, I won't change my mind. The long and the short of it is that I am going to eat you." To this the dog answered, "I wouldn't think of asking that of you, for I do not want to live any longer. Bite away as long as you want to. But I still have good advice for you. Wouldn't it be better to fatten me up before eating me? You wouldn't loose anything on the feed, because you would get it all back on me. Then I'd make a decent roast. What do you think, Brother Wolf?" The wolf spoke, "I'll do it, if the feeding doesn't take too long. Follow me to my hut." The dog did this, and together they went deeper into the woods. Arriving at the hut, Sultan crept inside, while the wolf went forth to hunt some game for the weak dog. When he returned, he threw his capture to Sultan, who ate it with relish. The next day the wolf came and spoke to the dog, "Yesterday you ate. Today I will eat." The dog replied, "What are you thinking of, dear wolf? I scarcely felt yesterday's food in my stomach." To be sure, this irritated the wolf, but he had to be happy with going into the woods again to hunt game for the dog. With similar responses, our Sultan put off the wolf as long as he was not strong enough to take on the wolf. The wolf continued to hunt and to bring the dog whatever he captured, eating little or nothing himself so that Sultan would have enough. Thus the dog grew ever stronger, while the opposite was true for the wolf. On the sixth day the wolf came to the dog and spoke, "I believe that you are ready now." Sultan answered, "Yes indeed. To be sure, I feel so well that I will take you on unless you set me free." The wolf spoke, "You are joking! Just think, I have been feeding you for six days now, while eating nothing myself. Now am I to go away with nothing? That will never do!" To this Sultan responded, "You are partially right, but does that give you the right to eat me up?" "That is the right of the strong over the weak," answered the wolf. "Right on!" replied the dog. "And thus you have pronounced judgment on yourself." With these words he made a daring leap, and before the wolf knew it, he was lying on the ground, overpowered by Sultan. "Because you allowed me to live, I will not kill you immediately, but rather submit your life to fate. Choose two companions, and I will do the same. Tomorrow come to this place in the woods with them, and we will settle our dispute." The two separated to seek out their fellow warriors. Angrily, the wolf went deeper into the woods. The dog hurried to the nearest village. After much pleading, the wolf got an ill-tempered, grumbling bear and a sly fox to be his comrades. Our Sultan ran first to the parsonage, where he talked a large gray cat into going with him. Then he went to the town judge's barnyard where he found a brave rooster as a second fellow warrior. It was just getting light, and the dog was already underway with his two companions. They had what they needed. He might even surprise his enemies while they were still deep in sleep. The wolf was the first one to awaken. He woke his comrades, then said to the bear, "You can climb trees, can't you? Be so good as to climb that tall fir tree and see if you can't get a glimpse of our enemies." The bear did this, and from the top of the tree he cried down, "Flee! Our enemies are very near, and what powerful enemies they are! One of them is riding proudly along, carrying many sharp sabers. They glisten strongly in the morning sun. Another one is walking stealthily after him, pulling a long iron rod behind. Woe unto us!" The fox was so frightened at these words, that he decided it would be advisable to make himself scarce. The bear hurriedly climbed down from the tree and crept into some thick brush, so that only the tip of his tail was showing. The enemy was now at hand. The wolf, seeing that his friends had deserted him, tried to get away, but Sultan confronted him. One leap, and the dog had the wolf by the back of his neck, and he finished him off. Meanwhile, the cat noticed the tip of the bear's tail moving in the brush. Hoping to catch a mouse, she snapped at it. Terrified, the bear jumped from his hiding place and fled in all haste up a tree, where he thought he would be safe from the enemy. But he was wrong, because the rooster was there as well. Seeing the bear in the tree, the rooster jumped from one branch to the next, always going higher and higher. The bear was beside himself. Terrified, he fell from the tree and lay there stone dead. And thus the battle ended. The news of the brave deeds of Sultan and his companions spread far and wide, also to the village where Sultan had formerly served. As a consequence, the peasant family took back their loyal watchdog and cared for him. Source: Theodor Vernaleken, "Der Hund und der Wolf," Österreichische Kinder- und Hausmärchen (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1864), no. 9, pp. 39-43 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Bohemia is in today's Czech Republic. Return to the table of contents . Related Links D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Aging and Death in Folklore . An essay by D. L. Ashliman, with supporting texts from proverbs, folktales, and myths from around the world. Old Dogs Learn New Tricks , fables of type 101, in which an aging animal fakes the rescue of a child, thus endearing himself to his master. Revised May 12, 2008. Water Spirit Legends 1 Water Spirit Legends 1 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1997-2024 Contents Yorkshire Legends and Traditions of Wells (England). Water Demons (Scotland). Holy Lake near Neuhoff (Germany). Brother Nickel (Germany). Water Nixes, The Water-Man, and His Wife (Poland/Germany). The Merrow (Ireland). The Water Snake (Russia). Melusina . Legends about mermaids, water sprites, and forest nymphs and their sensuous relationships with mortal men. This link leads to a separate file. The Mermaid Wife and other migratory legends of Christiansen type 4080. This link leads to a separate file. Links to Related Texts . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Yorkshire Legends and Traditions of Wells England Springs and wells of water have, in all lands and in all ages, been greatly valued, and in some regarded with a feeling of veneration little, if at all, short of worship. They have yielded their treasure to the sustenance and refreshment of man and beast, as age after age of the world's history has passed along, and have been centers around which village story and gossip have gathered for generation after generation. Little wonder, therefore, is it that legends and traditions abound concerning them. These are often extremely local, and therefore little known. The names alone, however, suggest much. The memory of the mythical gods, satyrs, and nymphs of the ancient heathen times lingers in a few, as in Thors-kil or Thors-well, in the parish of Burnsall; and in the almost universal declaration -- by which not over-wise parents seek to deter children from playing in dangerous proximity to a well -- that at the bottom, under the water, dwells a mysterious being, usually named Jenny Green-teeth or Peg-o'-the-Well, who will certainly drag into the water any child who approaches too near to it. The tokens of medieval reverence for wells are abundant. The names of the saints to whom the wells were dedicated yet cling to them. "There is scarcely a well of consequence in the United Kingdom," says the editor of Lancashire Folk-lore , "which has not been solemnly dedicated to some saint in the Roman calendar." Thus in Yorkshire we have Our Lady's Well or Lady Well, St. Helen's Well (very numerous), St. Margaret's Well at Burnsall, St. Bridget's Well near Ripon, St. Mungo's Well at Copgrove, St. John's Well at Beverley, St. Alkelda's Well at Middleham, etc. Dr. Whitaker remarks that the wells of Craven, which bear the names of saints, are invariably presided over by females, as was the case with wells under the pagan ritual, in which nymphs exclusively enjoyed the same honor. Source: Thomas Parkinson, Yorkshire Legends and Traditions (London: Elliot Stock, 1888), pp. 202-203 . Return to the table of contents . Water Demons Scotland In many of the deep pools of the streams and rivers guardian-demons were believed to reside, and it was dangerous to bathe in them. Sometimes, when a castle or mansion was being sacked, a faithful servant or two contrived to rescue the plate chest, and to cast it into a deep pool in the nearest stream. On one occasion a diver was got to got to the bottom of such a pool to fetch up the plate of the neighboring castle. He dived, saw the plate chest, and was preparing to lift it, when the demon ordered him to go to the surface at once, and not to come back. At the same time the demon warned him that, if he did come back, he would forfeit his life. The diver obeyed. When he reached the bank he told what he had seen, and what he had heard. By dint of threats and promises of large reward, he dived again. In a moment or two afterwards his heart and lungs rose and floated on the surface of the water. They had been torn out by the demon of the pool. Source: Walter Gregor, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the North-East of Scotland (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by Elliot Stock, 1881), p. 67 . Return to the table of contents . Holy Lake near Neuhoff Germany There is a lake known as Holy Lake near the village of Neuhoff not far from the Elbe River in the district of Wolmirstedt. At the time of Burkhard, the twenty-seventh archbishop of Magdeburg, who served from the year 1295 to the year 1304, this lake was filled with spirits and ghosts. They often frightened the fishermen and boatsmen, and caused them much harm, drowning and causing the miserable death of many a man. When Archbishop Burkhard, a very pious and God-fearing man, heard of this, he went to the lake with great sincerity, and blessed the place, driving the evil spirits away, and they have never been seen there again. From that time until the present day the lake has been known as Holy Lake. Source: J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen der Altmark, mit einem Anhange von Sagen aus den übrigen Marken und aus dem Mageburgischen (Berlin: in der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1839), pp. 145-46 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. Return to the table of contents . Brother Nickel Germany On the Island of Rügen, in a thick forest, there is a deep lake. It is rich with fish, but its water is cloudy, and one cannot fish there. Nonetheless, many long years ago a number of fishermen attempted to do so, and brought their boat to the lake. The next day they returned home for their nets, and when they came back, their boat had disappeared. Then one of the fishermen looked around and discovered the vessel stuck in the top of a tall beech tree. He cried out: "Who in the devil put my boat up the tree?" They saw no one, but a voice from nearby answered, saying, "The devils did not do it. I did it together with my brother Nickel!" Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Bruder Nickel," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 55, p. 70 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. Return to the table of contents . Water Nixes, The Water-Man, and His Wife Poland/Germany The water-man (Wendish wodny muz ), also called the nix (Wendish nykus), as well as his spouse the water-woman ( wodna zona ), lives in the rivers, lakes, and ponds of Lusatia. He tempts passers-by to go bathing, in order to drown them. This he does to everyone who trespass into his domain while bathing. Blue spots on a drowned person's body are a sign that the nixes caused the drowning. In appearance a nix cannot be distinguished from a human. On dry land he is powerless, and can be taken prisoner and forced into servitude. He produces children with his wife, and these interact with human children. They even associate with humans at dances and fall in love with pretty girls and young men. The daughter of a water-man can always be recognized by the wet hem on her skirt. The water-man usually wears a red cap on his head, and the water-woman red stockings on her feet. Further, in the towns of Upper Lusatia it has been observed that if a man wearing a linen jacket with a wet bottom hem comes to the weekly market and buys grain at above the market price, then grain will become more expensive. However, if he sells grain at a better price than others, the price of grain will fall. This man is the water-man. His wife is often seen sitting on a bank in her red stockings spinning or bleaching her laundry. In this last instance it means there will be rainy weather or high water. Just as the water-man bargains with grain, she bargains with butter, thus giving an indication of future prices. In the region around Zittau during the moon's first and last quarters, the water-man sits on riverbanks where the water is slow and deep and makes no sound. His appearance is ugly, with a very pale face and long black hair that hangs down to his shoulders. He is dressed from head to foot in brownish-yellow leather that has been put together entirely from little scraps. By moonlight he counts them aloud, at the same time slapping his legs with his hands. He can be recognized by this sound. Curiosity seekers and daredevils, lured by this sound, have seen him sitting there on an overhanging bank and have attempted to interrupt him by counting and clapping. He slipped into the murmuring water, and nothing happened to them, but then they had the unpleasant experience of hearing clapping and counting in front of their house every night. This continued until fear and anger finally caused them to join in with the counting, upon which they heard loud laughter, and were then no longer disturbed in their rest. Source: Karl Haupt, "Die Wassernixen, der Wassermann und seine Frau," Sagenbuch der Lausitz , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1862), no. 44, pp. 46-47 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. Lusatia (German Lausitz ) is a region centered on the Neisse and Spree rivers with a historically mixed culture of Slavs (known as Wends or Sorbs) and Germans. The western portions are now part of Germany; the eastern portions belong to Poland. Note by Karl Haupt: The Slavic woda (water) and wodny (nix) have been associated with the Germanic Wodan. The Scandinavian Odin is, of course, also a nix (or Nichus, a personification of Odin's). However, the German Wuothan appears foremost as the ruler of the air, as a god of wind and storm, whose breath [German Odem ] blows in the woods and around the mountain summits. It is possible, of course, that the Slavs transformed the air god into a water god. Slavs have a great affinity for water. They practice water oracles, water sacrifices, and sacred ablutions in the manner of Oriental custom. The musical nix of the Wends is just as significant for the Slavic perspective as are the dwarfs and the wild huntsman -- who live within the mountains and in the air -- for the perspective of the Germans. Just as the music of a storm is more magnificent, simpler, and at the same time more spiritual than the more artful but smaller splashing of waves, so do the two nations differ from each other. Lusatia shows both tendencies. Its religious views differ as greatly as do the Germanic mountain forests of the south and the Slavic water forest (along the River Spree) of the north. But concerning the similarity of the words, their meaning can well reflect the view that water plays the same role for the Slavs that air does for the Germans, thus indicating a common linguistic root. Link to addition information about the Germanic god Wodan or Odin: Odin's Home Page . Return to the table of contents . The Merrow Ireland The Merrow, or if you write it in the Irish, Moruadh or Murrúghach, from muir, sea, and oigh, a maid, is not uncommon, they say, on the wilder coasts. The fishermen do not like to see them, for it always means coming gales. The male Merrows (if you can use such a phrase -- I have never heard the masculine of Merrow) have green teeth, green hair, pig's eyes, and red noses; duck-like scale between their fingers. Sometimes they prefer, small blame to them, good-looking fishermen to their sea lovers. Near Bantry in the last century, there is said to have been a woman covered all over with scales like a fish, who was descended from such a marriage. Sometimes they come out of the sea, and wander about the shore in the shape of little hornless cows. They have, when in their own shape, a red cap, called a cohullen druith, usually covered with feathers. If this is stolen, they cannot again go down under the waves. Red is the color of magic in every country, and has been so from the very earliest times. The caps of fairies and magicians are well-nigh always red. Source: W. B. Yeats, Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry (London: Walter Scott, 1888), p. 61 . Compare Yeats's etymology with the following words, all of which mean, respectively, sea-woman (or maid) and sea-man: Danish: havfrue, havmand. English: mermaid, merman. German: Meerfrau, Meermann. Return to the table of contents . The Water Snake Russia There was once an old woman who had a daughter; and her daughter went down to the pond one day to bathe with the other girls. They all stripped off their shifts, and went into the water. Then there came a snake out of the water, and glided on to the daughter's shift. After a time the girls all came out, and began to put on their shifts, and the old woman's daughter wanted to put on hers, but there was the snake lying on it. She tried to drive him away, but there he stuck and would not move. Then the snake said, "If you'll marry me, I'll give you back your shift." Now she wasn't at all inclined to marry him, but the other girls said, "As if it were possible for you to be married to him! Say you will!" So she said, "Very well, I will." Then the snake glided off from the shift, and went straight into the water. The girl dressed and went home. And as soon as she got there, she said to her mother, "Mammie, mammie, thus and thus, a snake got upon my shift, and says he, 'Marry me or I won't let you have your shift;' and I said, 'I will.'" "What nonsense are you talking, you little fool! as if one could marry a snake!" And so they remained just as they were, and forgot all about the matter. A week passed by, and one day they saw ever so many snakes, a huge troop of them, wriggling up to their cottage. "Ah, mammie, save me, save me!" cried the girl, and her mother slammed the door and barred the entrance as quickly as possible. The snakes would have rushed in at the door, but the door was shut; they would have rushed into the passage, but the passage was closed. Then in a moment they rolled themselves into a ball, flung themselves at the window, smashed it to pieces, and glided in a body into the room. The girl got upon the stove, but they followed her, pulled her down, and bore her out of the room and out of doors. Her mother accompanied her, crying like anything. They took the girl down to the pond, and dived right into the water with her. And there they turned into men and women. The mother remained for some time on the dike, wailed a little, and then went home. Three years went by. The girl lived down there, and had two children, a son and a daughter. Now she often entreated her husband to let her go to see her mother. So at last one day he took her up to the surface of the water, and brought her ashore. But she asked him before leaving him, "What am I to call out when I want you?" "Call out to me, 'Osip, [Joseph] Osip, come here!" and I will come," he replied. Then he dived under water again, and she went to her mother's carrying her little girl on one arm, and leading her boy by the hand. Out came her mother to meet her. She was so delighted to see her! "Good day, mother!" said the daughter. "Have you been doing well while you were living down there?" asked her mother. "Very well indeed, mother. My life there is better than yours here." They sat down for a bit and chatted. Her mother got dinner ready for her, and she dined. "What's your husband's name?" asked her mother. "Osip," she replied. "And how are you to get home?" "I shall go to the dike, and call out, 'Osip, Osip, come here!' and he'll come." "Lie down, daughter, and rest a bit," said the mother. So the daughter lay down and went to sleep. The mother immediately took an axe and sharpened it, and went down to the dike with it. And when she came to the dike, she began calling out, "Osip, Osip, come here!" No sooner had Osip shown his head than the old woman lifted her axe and chopped it off. And the water in the pond became dark with blood. The old woman went home. And when she got home her daughter awoke. "Ah! mother," says she, "I'm getting tired of being here; I'll go home." "Do sleep here tonight, daughter; perhaps you won't have another chance of being with me." So the daughter stayed and spent the night there. In the morning she got up and her mother got breakfast ready for her; she breakfasted, and then she said good-bye to her mother and went away, carrying her little girl in her arms, while her boy followed behind her. She came to the dike, and called out, "Osip, Osip, come here!" She called and called, but he did not come. Then she looked into the water, and there she saw a head floating about. Then she guessed what had happened. "Alas! my mother has killed him!" she cried. There on the bank she wept and wailed. And then to her girl she cried, "Fly about as a wren, henceforth and evermore!" And to her boy she cried, "Fly about as a nightingale, my boy, henceforth and evermore!" "But I," she said, "will fly about as a cuckoo, crying 'Cuckoo!' henceforth and evermore!" Source: W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1873), pp. 116-18 . Ralston's source: A. A. Erlenvein. This is a type 433 folktale. Return to the table of contents . Links to related texts Targets open in new windows. Water Spirit Legends 2: The Hour Is Come but the Man Is Not . Lorelei . Legends and ballads about the Rhine River nymph. The Nixie Changelings from the Saal River (Germany, Jacob and Wilelm Grimm). Changelings in the Water (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Nickert (Germany, A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz). The Sea Nymph (Sweden, Herman Hofberg). The Three Chests: The Story of the Wicked Old Man of the Sea (Finland). The Njugl (Shetland Islands, John Nicolson). Return to: Water Spirit Legends 1: Table of Contents. D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised June 15, 2024. Water Spirit Legends 2: The Hour Is Come but the Man Is Not Water Spirit Legends 2 The Hour Is Come but the Man Is Not folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 934K (also categorized as Christiansen migratory legends type 4050) translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2008-2023 Contents The Hour Is Come but the Man Is Not (Wales). The Man with the Green Weeds (Wales). The Doomed Rider (Scotland). The Ryå River in Vendsyssel (Denmark). The Hour Is Come but Not the Man (Denmark). The Hour Is Here (1) (Germany). The Hour Is Here (2) (Germany). Water Will Have Its Sacrifice (Germany). Time Is Up (Austria/Italy). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Hour Is Come but the Man Is Not Wales I was moreover much interested to discover at Llanegryn a scrap of kelpie story, which runs as follows, concerning Llyn Gwernen, situated close to the old road between Dolgelley and Llanegryn: As a man from the village of Llanegryn was returning in the dusk of the evening across the mountain from Dolgettey, he heard, when hard by Llyn Gwernen, a voice crying out from the water: Daeth yr awr ond ni ðaelh y dyn! The hour is come but the man is not! As the villager went on his way a little distance, what should meet him but a man of insane appearance, and with nothing on but his shirt. As he saw the man making full pelt for the waters of the lake, he rushed at him to prevent him from proceeding any further. But as to the sequel there is some doubt: one version makes the villager conduct the man back about a mile from the lake to a farm house called Dyffrydan, which was on the former's way home. Others seem to think that the man in his shirt rushed irresistibly into the lake, and this I have no doubt comes nearer the end of the story in its original form. Lately I have heard a part of a similar story about Llyn Cynnwch, which has already been mentioned, p. 135, above. My informant is Miss Lucy Griffith, of Glynmalden, near Dolgettey, a lady deeply interested in Welsh folklore and Welsh antiquities generally. She obtained her information from a Dolgettey ostler, formerly engaged at the Ship Hotel, to the effect that on Gwyl Galan, '"the eve of New Year's Day," a person is seen walking backwards and forwards on the strand of Cynnwch Lake, crying out: Mae'r awr wedi dyfod a'r ifyn heb ðyfod! The hour is come while the man is not! The ostler stated also that lights are to be seen on Cader Idris on the eve of New Year's Day, whatever that statement may mean. The two lake stories seem to suggest that the Lake Spirit was entitled to a victim once a year, whether the sacrifice was regarded as the result of accident or design. By way of comparison, one may mention the notion, not yet extinct, that certain rivers in various parts of the kingdom regularly claim so many victims. For some instances at random see an article by Mr. J. M. Mackinlay, on "Traces of River Worship in Scottish Folklore," a paper published in the Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland , 1895-96, pp. 69-76. Take for example the following rhyme: Blood-thirsty Dee Each year needs three; But bonny Don She needs none. Or this: Tweed said to Till, "What gars ye rin sae still?" Till said to Tweed, "Though ye rin wi' speed An' I rin slaw, Yet whar ye droon ae man I droon twa." John Rhys, Celtic Folklore: Welsh and Manx , vol. 1 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1901), pp. 243-44). Return to the table of contents . The Man with the Green Weeds Wales Llyn Gwernen is by the side of the old road leading from Dolgellau to Llanegryn, at the foot of Cader Idris. A number of the farmers of Llanegryn were once hurrying home from a fair at Dolgellau (they were hungry, because the men who sold food at Dolgellau fairs in the olden time used to serve it up so hot that no one could touch it. The farmers were so busy that they could not wait for the dishes to cool, and so it was very little they had for their money). They saw a great man, with green water weeds entwined in his hair, and naked save for a girdle of green weeds, walking round the lake and crying in a querulous tone, "The hour is come but the man is not, the hour is come but the man is not," over and over again. The farmers were frightened and ran home. Others also who returned home later than they saw and heard him, and it was afterwards found out that the great man with the green water weeds kept on complaining, "The hour is come but the man is not," from ten o'clock at night until five o'clock in the morning. Some days after the body of an Englishman was found floating, swollen and horrible, on the surface of the lake. He had caused a great stir in the regions round about Cader Idris by sitting all night in the chair in which the astronomer Idris used in early days to watch the stars. (Idris was of more than ordinary stature. One day in walking he felt something in his shoe hurting him; he pulled it off and shook out three stones, which are still to be seen by the Lake of the Three Pebbles, Llyn y Tri Graienyn. One of them is twenty-four feet long, eighteen feet broad, and twelve feet high.) His object was to test the truth of the saying that anyone who spent a night in the chair would by morning be either mad, or a poet, or a corpse. So far from being a poet by the next day, he was not even a bard, and he certainly was not dead then. It was therefore concluded that his intellect was deranged thereby, and he had in this state fallen into the clutches of the man with the green weeds, who had dragged him into the depths of the lake. The objection to that idea was that he must have been mad beforehand, because his chief delight was to climb to the summits of mountains. The folk who dwell at the feet of such mountains as Cader Idris and Snowdon make it a boast that they are much too sensible to attempt anything so silly. Source: W. Jenkyn Thomas: The Welsh Fairy Book (London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1908), pp. 210-11. Return to the table of contents . The Doomed Rider Scotland The Conan is as bonny a river as we hae in a' the north country. There 's mony a sweet sunny spot on its banks, an' mony a time an' aft hae I waded through its shallows, whan a boy, to set my little scautling-line for the trouts an' the eels, or to gather the big pearl-mussels that lie sae thick in the fords. But its bonny wooded banks are places for enjoying the day in -- no for passing the nicht. I kenna how it is; it 's nane o' your wild streams that wander desolate through a desert country, like the Aven, or that come rushing down in foam and thunder, ower broken rocks, like the Foyers, or that wallow in darkness, deep, deep in the bowels o' the earth, like the fearfu' Auldgraunt; an' yet no ane o' these rivers has mair or frightfuller stories connected wi' it than the Conan. Ane can hardly saunter ower half-a-mile in its course, frae where it leaves Coutin till where it enters the sea, without passing ower the scene o' some frightful auld legend o' the kelpie or the waterwraith. And ane o' the most frightful looking o' these places is to be found among the woods of Conan House. Ye enter a swampy meadow that waves wi' flags an' rushes like a corn-field in harvest, an' see a hillock covered wi' willows rising like an island in the midst. There are thick mirk-woods on ilka side; the river, dark an' awesome, an' whirling round an' round in mossy eddies, sweeps away behind it; an' there is an auld burying-ground, wi' the broken ruins o' an auld Papist kirk, on the tap. Ane can see amang the rougher stanes the rose-wrought mullions of an arched window, an' the trough that ance held the holy water. About twa hunder years ago -- a wee mair maybe, or a wee less, for ane canna be very sure o' the date o' thae old stories -- the building was entire; an' a spot near it, whar the wood now grows thickest, was laid out in a corn-field. The marks o' the furrows may still be seen amang the trees. A party o' Highlanders were busily engaged, ae day in harvest, in cutting down the corn o' that field; an' just aboot noon, when the sun shone brightest an' they were busiest in the work, they heard a voice frae the river exclaim, "The hour but not the man has come." Sure enough, on looking round, there was the kelpie stan'in' in what they ca' a fause ford, just foment the auld kirk. There is a deep black pool baith aboon an' below, but i' the ford there 's a bonny ripple, that shows, as ane might think, but little depth o' water; an' just i' the middle o' that, in a place where a horse might swim, stood the kelpie. An' it again repeated its words, "The hour but not the man has come," an' then flashing through the water like a drake, it disappeared in the lower pool. When the folk stood wondering what the creature might mean, they saw a man on horseback come spurring down the hill in hot haste, making straight for the fause ford. They could then understand her words at ance; an' four o' the stoutest o' them sprang oot frae amang the corn to warn him o' his danger, an' keep him back. An' sae they tauld him what they had seen an' heard, an' urged him either to turn back an' tak' anither road, or stay for an hour or sae where he was. But he just wadna hear them, for he was baith unbelieving an' in haste, an' wauld hae taen the ford for a' they could say, hadna the Highlanders, determined on saving him whether he would or no, gathered round him an' pulled him frae his horse, an' then, to mak' sure o' him, locked him up in the auld kirk. Weel, when the hour had gone by -- the fatal hour o' the kelpie -- they flung open the door, an' cried to him that he might noo gang on his journey. Ah ! but there was nae answer, though; an' sae they cried a second time, an' there was nae answer still; an' then they went in, an' found him lying stiff an' cauld on the floor, wi' his face buried in the water o' the very stone trough that we may still see amang the ruins. His hour had come, an' he had fallen in a fit, as 'twould seem, head-foremost amang the water o' the trough, where he had been smothered, -- an' sae ye see, the prophecy o' the kelpie availed naething. Source: Folk-Lore and Legends: Scotland (London: W. W. Gibbings, 1889), 39-42 . Return to the table of contents . The Ryå River in Vendsyssel Denmark 1 The Ryå River in Vendsyssel takes a person every year, and when it demands one it shouts: "The time and the hour have come, but the man has not yet come." When people hear this voice coming from the river, they must be careful not to get too close to it, because if they do so, they will have an irresistible urge to jump into it, and they will never come up again. There must be many who have heard the river shout those words. Among others, there was a girl who was walking alongside it with a dog. When she heard the river cry, she shouted: "Not me, but the dog!" And immediately the dog jumped in and drowned. She also saw a small little man with a big beard running in the river. He was a nøkk , and probably the one who had shouted. The fact that the river takes a person like this every year is widely known and is believed by many to this day. Mothers often warn their children against getting too close to this bad river, not only to prevent their children from falling into it, but also because they themselves believe that it has the power to make people want to jump into it. A legend tells the following about the creation of the river: The people of Vendsyssel needed a canal to divert the water from the swampy marshes that were formed by the Store Vildmose ("Great Wild Bog") and other bogs in southern Vendsyssel. They entered into an agreement with a man that he should dig such a canal. However, this man was a disgusting troll, or perhaps he was the nøkk who was running in the river. This man knew what to do, for he simply took his spade and dragged it behind himself, and where he dragged it, the river formed in the same shape that it still has. When the man demanded the promised payment, the people of Vendsyssel refused to give it to him. Because it had been such an easy task for him, they gave him nothing. At this the man became angry and said: "From now on, every year the river will take a human life." It probably has done just that, and is still doing so. A. E. Jakobsen. 2 The Ryå River is very deep, and once every year it must shout: "The time has come, but the man has not yet come," and then someone must drown. Once no one had drowned for twelve years, but then it happened that twelve threshers all drowned at once. They had spent the winter at Birkelse and went home each the evening. If no one is claimed for a year or more, then the river takes whatever is still due to it all at once. Jens Mark, Vokslev. 3 The Ryå's water, without being muddy, has a blackish appearance, which perhaps stems from its marshy bed. From time immemorial it has demanded a sacrifice every year, either when someone is bathing or when someone crosses over in a small sailboat. For six years there was no accident, but in the seventh year seven young people drowned all at once in the river. A voice from the river says: "The time and the hour are here, but the man is not." J. D. Jensen, Vindblæs. Source (books.google.com): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Sagn (Aarhus: Jacob Zeuners Bogtrykkeri, 1893), nos. 38, 40, 41; pp. 156-57 . Source (Internet Archive): Evald Tang Kristensen, Danske Sagn (Aarhus: Jacob Zeuners Bogtrykkeri, 1893), nos. 38, 40, 41; pp. 156-57 . Vendsyssel is the northernmost part of Jutland, Denmark. Return to the table of contents . The Hour Is Come but Not the Man Denmark It was the Nök , or another water-troll, who late one evening shouted from the lake beside Hvide-sö Parsonage, "The time is come, but not the man." As soon as the priest heard of this, he gave orders to watch the first man who came with intent to cross the lake, and stop him from going further. Immediately after this, there came a man in hot haste, and asked for a boat. The priest begged him to put off his journey, but as neither entreaties nor threats had any effect, the priest made them use force to prevent his crossing. The stranger became quite helpless, and remained lying so, until the priest had some water brought from the lake from which the cry came, and gave him it to drink. Scarcely had he drunk the water, when he gave up the ghost. In southern Vend-syssel in Denmark the river-man is also known as the Nök . The river Ry there takes one person every year, and when it demands them, it calls, "The time and the hour are come, but the man is not yet come." When this cry is heard from the river, folk must beware of going too near it, for if they do so, they are seized by an irresistible desire to spring into it, and then they never come up again. There are many who are said to have heard the cry, among others a girl who was going along its bank with a dog by her side. When she heard the call, she cried out, "Not me, but the dog," which immediately sprang into the stream and was drowned. She also saw a little man with a large beard running about in the river; this was the Nök , from whom the cry no doubt came. In Odense river there is also a river-man, who requires his victim every year, and if one year passes without any one being drowned there, he takes good care to have two in the year following. It is said that two little boys were once playing on the bank, when one of them fell into the water. The other tried to help him out, but just as he got hold of his comrade's hand, a voice was heard out of the river, "No, I shall have both of you; I got no one last year," and with that this boy also slipped into the water and both were drowned. Some men, who were witnesses of the accident from the opposite bank, hurried with a boat to lend their aid, but came too late. The bodies were never found either; the river-man had kept them. Source: William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples (London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), pp. 243-45 . Return to the table of contents . The Hour Is Here (1) Germany In the vicinity of Schöneiche not far from Rüdersdorf a group of people were making merry on the bank of a small pond when suddenly they heard someone clapping his hands and a voice calling from the water, "The hour is here, and the person is not here yet!" This was repeated several times. A short time later an apprentice came along the path, then hurried to the bank of the pond to quench his thirst. One of the merrymakers went to him and held him away from the water, telling him what they had heard. Thus the apprentice changed his mind and went with the merrymakers to a tavern in Schöneiche, where he ordered a glass of beer. He had scarcely brought it to his lips when he collapsed on the floor and died. A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Die Stunde is da!" Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 80-81 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "Oral from Friedrichshagen near Köpenick." Return to the table of contents . The Hour Is Here (2) Germany In the vicinity of Rothenburg some people were in a field busy with the harvest when they heard a voice calling loudly and clearly from a nearby pond, "The hour is here, but the man is not yet here." That same moment they saw a rider galloping toward them. Although they waved and shouted that he should keep his distance, he directed his horse toward the pond, jumping directly into the water. His horse soon emerged, but the rider had disappeared and was never seen again. A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Die Stunde is da" Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen: Aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), p. 271 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "Oral from Rothenburg." Return to the table of contents . Water Will Have Its Sacrifice Germany The Leine demands ten sacrifices every year ( de Leine fret alle jâr teine ), and if these do not drown then they die in some other manner. Thus one hot summer a servant girl was bringing their meal to some household servants who were working in a field near Hollenstedt. She was very thirsty and asked if they had something to drink in their jug. They had drunk everything and told her to go the Leine, which was here very shallow, and get a drink from the river. The girl went to the bank and drank, but she never stood up again, for she was dead. A boy insisted on approaching the water, but he was not allowed to do so. They held him back from the water, but he died soon thereafter anyway. There are three bridges on the Pfingst Meadow near Hollenstedt. Once a cavalryman en route to Stöckheim was riding across the meadow. Near the middle bridge he heard a voice cry out loudly, "If he is not here yet, then he is not coming," and in the same instant a boy came running toward him. Thinking that the child might drown (if he were pulled into the water) he quickly dropped his leather glove and asked the boy to pick it up and hand it to him. As the boy was reaching the glove toward him, he grabbed him by the hand and pulled him up onto the horse. However, the boy died immediately while seated before him on the horse. Source: Georg Schambach and Wilhelm Müller, "Das Wasser will sein Opfer haben ," Niedersächsische Sagen und Märchen (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht's Verlag, 1855), no. 84, p. 62 . Return to the table of contents . Time Is Up Austria/Italy A teamster driving along Brenner Lake heard a voice calling out from the water, "Time is up, and the person is not here yet." He paid little heed to the voice and drove his horses onward. Then he met a fisherman who was walking down to the lake to fish. The teamster warned him and told him what he had heard. Following the teamster's advice, the fisherman changed his plans and accompanied the teamster to the Brenner tavern. However, the fisherman had scarcely taken the first bite of bread into his mouth when he collapsed dead onto the floor. Source: Ignaz Vinzenz Zingerle, "Die Zeit ist aus," Sagen aus Tirol (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1891), no. 321, p. 193 . Zingerle's sources: Sterzing and Flaas, villages in South Tyrol, now part of Italy. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Targets open in new windows. Water Spirit Legends 1 . Another collection of tales, including stories of mermaids. Melusina . Legends about mermaids, water sprites, and forest nymphs who marry mortal men, not always with happy endings. The Mermaid Wife . Fairies' Hope for Christian Salvation . Migratory legends of type 5050. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 7, 2023. Weather and Climate Legends Weather and Climate Legends Translated by D. L. Ashliman . Copyright 1997. Return to: D. L. Ashliman's index of Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Contents The Thousand Years of Cold Are Coming (Italy/Austria, Joh. Adolf Heyl). The Eternal Jew on the Matterhorn (Switzerland, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Aid and Punishment (Switzerland, Rudolf Müller). The Thousand Years of Cold are Coming Italy/Austria Northeast from Welschnofen [in the South Tyrolian Alps] there are woods, pastures and meadows, but only a few planted fields. According to legend, the oldest farmyards in that region are on land that was formerly covered by vineyards. The people at the Hagner farm, for example, claim that the walled steps of old vineyard terraces can still be seen there. They say that ages ago there was no snow there, not even frost. Then suddenly it began to get cold. Frost began to fall, and the Hagner farmer said, "Children, we must move down into the valley, for the thousand years of cold are coming." That was the end of wine culture there, and it became colder and colder. Now they can scarcely get rye and oats to ripen up there. Source: Joh. Adolf Heyl, Volkssagen, Bräuche und Meinungen aus Tirol (Brixen: Verlag der Buchhandlung des Kath.-polit. Pressvereins, 1897), p. 354. A similar legend about a previous age of warm climate in the high Alps is found on page 233 of the same collection. The Eternal Jew on the Matterhorn Switzerland Mount Matter beneath the Matterhorn in Valais is a high glacier from which the Vispa River flows. According to popular legend, an imposing city existed there ages ago. The Wandering Jew (as many Swiss call the Eternal Jew) came there once and said: "When I pass this way a second time there will be nothing but trees and rocks where you now see houses and streets. And when my path leads me here a third time, there will be nothing but snow and ice." And now nothing can be seen there but snow and ice. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Deutsche Sagen, no. 344. Aid and Punishment Switzerland On the side of Mount Pilatus is a place name the Kastler-Alp, now covered with stones and rubble, but which once was verdant and fertile. The cause of the change was as follows: The land there was formerly occupied by a farmer, a churlish, unfeeling man, who, though wealthy, let his only sister struggle with the greatest poverty in the valley beneath. The poor woman at length having fallen sick, and seeing no other resource, resolved to apply to her hard-hearted brother for the means of employing a doctor. She sent her daughter to him; but all the prayers and tears of the poor girl failed to move him, and he told her he would sooner than give her anything, see the Alp covered with stones and rubble. She departed, and as she went along, a dwarf suddenly appeared to her. She would have fled, but he gently detained her, and telling her he had heard all that had passed, gave her a parcel of herbs, which he assured her would cure her mother, and a little cheese, which he said would last them a long time. On trial, the herbs quickly produced the promised effect; and when they went to cut the cheese they found the knife would not penetrate it, and no wonder, for it was pure gold. There also came a sudden storm on the mountain, and the Kastler-Alp was reduced to its present condition. Notes: Source: Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology, Illustrative of the Romance and Superstition of Various Countries (London: H. G. Bohn, 1850), p. 277. I have slightly revised Keightley's translation. Keightley's source: Rudolf Müller, Bilder und Sagen aus der Schweiz (Glarus, 1842). Revised May 12, 1997. The Women of Weinsberg (The Wives of Weinsberg): Folktales of Type 875* The Women of Weinsberg and other legends of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 875* translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009-2011 Contents The Women of Weinsberg (Germany). Weibertreue Castle (Germany). A City Is Captured, from Which the Women Carry Their Husbands and Children (Germany) The Siege of Gelsterburg Castle (Germany). The Siege of Weidelburg Castle (Germany). The Most Precious Thing in the World (Jewish). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Women of Weinsberg Germany When King Conrad III defeated the Duke of Welf (in the year 1140) and placed Weinsberg under siege, the wives of the besieged castle negotiated a surrender which granted them the right to leave with whatever they could carry on their shoulders. The king allowed them that much. Leaving everything else aside, each woman took her own husband on her shoulders and carried him out. When the king's people saw what was happening, many of them said that that was not what had been meant and wanted to put a stop to it. But the king laughed and accepted the women's clever trick. "A king" he said, "should always stand by his word." Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Weiber zu Weinsperg," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 2 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung,1818), no. 481, p. 180 . In later editions this legend is numbered 493. Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2001. Link to a separate file containing only this legend: The Women of Weinsberg . Weinsberg is a town near Heilbronn in southwest Germany. The castle above Weinsberg is called "Burg Weibertreu," which translates roughly as "Castle Women's (or Wives') Faithfulness." Return to the table of contents . Weibertreue Castle Germany At Weinsberg, in Würtemberg, are still shown on the summit of a hill the ruins of a castle, which is also known by the name of "Weibertreue," or "Woman's Faith." During the Guelph and Ghibelline wars the castle was in 1140 besieged by the Emperor Conrad III., who, in his exasperation at the protracted resistance made by the garrison, vowed to put all the men to the sword, but promised to spare the lives of the women, with the engagement, moreover, that each should be permitted to carry out along with her her choicest treasure. The offer was accepted, and each woman marched out with her husband on her shoulders. The tale is probably not much more authentic than that of Lady Godiva's self-abnegation, and is related of other places in Germany besides Weinsberg. A picture in the principal church, painted in the seventeenth century, represents the circumstances recorded in the legend; and about fifty years ago a society was instituted in the place with the double object of commemorating the heroic astuteness of the Weinsberg ladies in the olden time, and affording relief to poor women who had distinguished themselves by fidelity and self-denial. Source: Notes and Queries , series 4, vol. 9, May 25, 1872, p. 427 . Return to the table of contents . A City Is Captured, from Which the Women Carry Their Husbands and Children Germany We read in a chronicle that there was once a city, whose name I have forgotten, that was captured after a long seige. Now the lord who had captured the city was so angry that he gave only the women freedom to leave, carrying whatever they wanted, after which he intended to burn the city with everything in it. The good women were beside themselves with sorrow that their husbands and children were to be burned alive. Therefore they took counsel with one another and decided that each woman would take her husband and children onto her back and carry them outside the city. They did just that; each woman took her husband onto her back and her children under her arms and carried them outside the city. Now the chronicle tells us that when the conquering lord saw this tears came to his eyes, and he spared the lives of everyone and set the city free as well. This is a wonderful example of women showing great virtue and practicing friendship toward their husbands. What did they achieve with this? This is what they achieved: All lives were spared, and not only were their lives spared, but all their possessions were restored to them undamaged. This is a good example of the faithfulness that all women owe their husbands. Source: Martin Montanus, "Ein statt würt gewunnen, daraus die weyber ihre mann und kinder tragen," Schwankbücher (1557-1566) , edited by Johannes Bolte (Tübingen: Gedruckt für den litterarischen Verein in Stuttgart, 1899), no. 80, pp. 341-42 . Martin Montanus was born after 1537 in Strasbourg (Strassburg) and died after 1566. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. Return to the table of contents . The Siege of Gelsterburg Castle Germany Gelsterburg Castle once stood on a steep hill not far from the village of Trubenhausen above the Gelster River, which flows into the Werra River near Witzenhausen. Now only its moat and embankment remain. Once this castle was besieged, and neither weapons nor blockade could defeat it. A secret passageway led from the castle to the outside, and the lord of the castle rode out through it whenever he wanted to, but always taking care to reverse the horseshoes on his horse. Nonetheless, the passageway was finally discovered, and now the besieged occupants were faced with starvation or surrender. Then the knight's beautiful wife dared to present herself to besieging soldiers and ask them for mercy for herself. The woman's tears touched the enemy's heart, and she was granted mercy. Then she asked for permission to remove from the castle whatever she could carry in her apron. This too was granted to her. She rushed back into the castle and sewed for herself a large apron, in which she carried her husband to safety, thus rescuing his freedom and saving his life. To this day the boundary stone can be seen where she stopped to rest with her heavy burden. Source: Karl Lyncker, "Die Belagerung der Gelsterburg," Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Kassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 232, pp. 161-62 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. Return to the table of contents . The Siege of Weidelburg Castle Germany Reinhard von Dalwigk the Unborn, was a brave and proud knight. He lived like a small prince. His violence and eternal feuds, as well as the robbery and plundering that he was accused of, brought him the enmity of his prince, Count Ludwig the Peaceful, who then had his vassals besiege the knight in his Castle Weidelburg. After a long siege the knight finally recognized that there was no chance for a good outcome. Then his wife, the beautiful Agnes went down to the enemy camp and had herself brought before the landgrave. Crying, she fell to his feet and begged for mercy. The angry count insisted that the knight surrender, but he was touched by the woman's tears, and said that although he had at first intended to not even allow a dog to escape death in the castle, he would now permit her and her maidservants, each carrying what was dear to her, to go free. But the men would have to remain in the castle, awaiting further decisions. The count gave his noble pledge to honor this promise. She hurried back to the castle. Her maidservants loaded themselves with her best clothes and jewelry. She then took her husband onto her back, and thus they departed. When the count saw them, he stated that the knight's departure had not been a part of his promise. Agnes replied, "But what else would be of value to me, if I were leaving my husband behind in mortal danger? You promised that I could take my most precious belongings with me; therefore I choose my most valuable treasure." This loyalty and love broke the count's anger, and he let them go. Source: Karl Lyncker, "Die Belagerung der Weidelburg," Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen (Kassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), nos. 234-35, pp. 163-64 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2009. Lyncker gives two versions of this legend. I have combined them into one account. Reinhard von Dalwigk the Unborn, so called because he was born through a Caesarian section, was born about 1400. The ruins of Castle Weidelburg (also spelled Weidelsburg) lie between Naumburg and Ippinghausen near the larger city of Kassel. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites German literary treatments of the legend "The Women of Weinsberg" include: Gottfried August Bürger, Die Weiber von Weinsberg . English translation: The Wives of Weinsberg . Adalbert von Chamisso, Die Weiber von Winsperg . English translation: The Wives of Weinsberg . Bertolt Brecht, "Die Weiber von Weinsperg" (Kalendergeschichte). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 19, 2013. Werewolf Legends from Germany Werewolf Legends from Germany translated and edited by D. L. Ashliman University of Pittsburgh © 1997-2010. Contents Anonymous. The Morbach Monster . Asmus, F. and Knoop, O. The Werewolf . A Woman Transforms Herself into a Werewolf . The Werewolf of Alt-Marrin . Bartsch, Karl. Fox Hill near Dodow . Werewolves . The Werewolf of Klein-Krams . The Werewolf of Vietlübbe . A Witch as Werewolf . Boren, George (London Chapbook of 1590) The Damnable Life and Death of Stubbe Peeter . Colshorn, Carl and Theodor. The Werewolf . Grimm, Jacob and Wilhelm. Werewolves . Werewolf Rock . The Werewolves Advance . Haas, A. The Werewolf of Jarnitz . Kuhn, Adalbert. Werewolf . Kuhn, A., and Schwartz, W. The Böxenwolf . The Werewolf Belt . The Werewolf Wife . Lyncker, Karl. The Werewolf . The Werewolf: Another Legend . The Peasant and the Werewolf . The Böxenwolf . Müllenhoff, Karl. The Werewolf of Hüsby . Schöppner, Alexander. The Wolf Stone . Temme, J. D. H. The Werewolves in Greifswald . The Werewolf near Zarnow . Werewolves in Pomerania . The Werewolf in Hindenburg . Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Morbach Monster Anonymous Have you ever heard of the Morbach Monster? I first learned of the legend while I was stationed at Hahn Airforce Base, Germany. Morbach was a munitions site just outside of the villiage of Wittlich. Supposedly Wittlich is the last town where a werewolf was killed. There is a shrine just outside of town where a candle always burns. Legend has it that if the candle ever goes out the werewolf will return. One night a group of security policemen were on the way to their post at Morbach, when they noticed that the candle was out at the shrine, and all joked about the monster. Later that night alarms were received from a fence-line sensor. When the security policemen investigated the call one of them saw a huge "dog-like" animal stand up on its back legs, look at him, and jump over the 7 1/2 foot chain-link fence. A military working dog was brought to the area where the creature was last seen, and the dog went nuts, not wanting anything to do with tracking the creature. This occured around 1988. There have always been "ghost" stories dreamed up by bored security policemen, but this is one I have heard over and over again. Thought you might find it interesting. Source: E-mail, dated October 6, 1997, to D. L. Ashliman from a respondent who wishes to remain anonymous. Another eye-witness account reads as follows: "I was stationed at Hahn Air Base, Germany, from May 1986 to August 1989 as a security policeman, and it was my group that witnessed the Morbach Werewolf. Whoever told you the story about the monster that you put on your website had very accurate information. The creature that we saw was definitely an animal and definitely dog or wolf like. It was about seven to eight feet tall, and it jumped a twelve-foot security fence after taking three long leaping steps." (From an e-mail received by D. L. Ashliman November 16, 1998) Return to the table of contents. The Werewolf F. Asmus and O. Knoop By using a so-called wolf strap, any person could transform himself into a werewolf. Whoever fastened such a strap around himself would turn into a wolf. If someone called out the name of a person who had turned himself into a wolf, that person would regain his human form. In earlier times there were a great many such straps, but today, along with the wolves, they seem to have been banned to Russia. A wolf strap was a gift from the devil. A person who possessed such a strap could not get rid of it, however much he wanted to. Anyone who accepted a wolf strap also had entered into brotherhood with the devil, surrendering body and soul to him. If real wolves were feared in earlier times, werewolves were feared all the more. A real wolf could be shot dead or lured into a so-called wolf pit, where it would perish from hunger. However, a werewolf could not be brought down with a rifle bullet, nor would it ever fall into a wolf pit. The reader will perhaps ask, "What is the use of running around as a werewolf?" This was not done for no good reason. When the pantries and meat containers were empty, one would only have to fasten on the wolf strap, run off as a wolf, seek out a fat sheep that was wandering off toward the edge of the woods, creep towards it, seize it, and drag it into the woods. In the evening one could bring it home without anyone noticing. Or the werewolf would know when a peasant was going through the woods with a lot of money. He would ambush him, rob him, then run off across the field with the booty. In earlier times, after the horses had been unhitched from a wagon or a plow, they would be driven out to a community pasture where they would be watched until morning by two herdsmen. Even colts were put out for the night. People took turns watching after them. Now once it happened that one of the two herdsmen had a wolf strap. After both herdsmen had kept watch for several hours they got sleepy and laid their heads down. The first one, however, who had heard that his companion possessed a wolf strap, only pretended to be asleep, and the other one thought that he was indeed sleeping. He quickly fastened the strap around himself and ran off as a wolf. The other one got up and saw how his companion ran up to a colt, attacked it, and devoured it. After this had happened, the wolf man came back and lay down to sleep. Toward morning they both awoke. The werewolf man was rolling around on the ground and groaning loudly. The other one asked him what was wrong. He said that he had a horrible stomach ache. To this the first one said, "The devil himself would have a stomach ache if he had eaten an entire colt at one time." The werewolf asked him to say nothing about what had happened. He kept silent about it for a long time, but later he did tell me about it, and now I too feel free to tell about it, because both men have been dead for a long time. Source: F. Asmus and O. Knoop, "Der Werwolf," Sagen und Erzählungen aus dem Kreise Kolberg-Körlin (Kolberg: Druck und Verlag der C. F. Post'schen Buchhandlung und Buchdruckerei, 1898), pp. 40-41. Asmus's and Knoop's source: "Told by Herr W. Rexilius, a carpenter." The Kolberg-Körlin district is on the Baltic Sea, in present-day Poland. Return to the table of contents . A Woman Transforms Herself into a Werewolf F. Asmus and O. Knoop In a village there lived a woman whose first name was Trine. Her husband had been dead for a long time. The woman lived in impoverished circumstances, but nonetheless, she was always able to offer fresh meat to those who visited her. One time a male relative came to visit her, and she offered him good fresh meat. The man said to her, "Tell me, Trine, where did you get this nice mutton?" Trine answered, "I'll show you. Just climb up onto the roof with the ladder that is leaning against the back of the house." The man did what Trine asked him to do. In the distance he saw a herd of sheep. Suddenly a wolf came out of the brush, ran into the midst of the sheep, and was about to run away with one of them. The shepherd saw this in time, and with his dog took off after the wolf in order to rescue the sheep. The wolf defended itself. The man on the roof, knowing what kind of wolf it was, called out, "Trine, watch out!" Suddenly Trine was standing there in her true form. Then the shepherd began striking out at her with renewed vigor, and Trine was scarcely able to drag herself back home. Source: F. Asmus and O. Knoop, "Eine Frau verwandelt sich in einen Werwolf," Sagen und Erzählungen aus dem Kreise Kolberg-Körlin (Kolberg: Druck und Verlag der C. F. Post'schen Buchhandlung und Buchdruckerei, 1898), pp. 41-42. Asmus's and Knoop's source: "Told by Herr W. Rexilius, a carpenter." The Kolberg-Körlin district is on the Baltic Sea, in present-day Poland. Return to the table of contents . The Werewolf of Alt-Marrin F. Asmus and O. Knoop About sixty years ago in Alt-Marrin there lived a man by the name of Gust K. He too possessed a wolf strap, with which he brought about much damage and misery. Finally the strap was taken from him, and it was to be burned. Three times the baking oven was heated up, and three times the strap was thrown into the glowing fire, but each time it jumped back out of the flames. Nor would water damage the strap. It always returned. However, the pastor from Fritzow finally burned it up. When Gust K. died, the pastor at Alt-Marrin could not finish the Lord's Prayer, and they called on the pastor from Fritzow. The latter said, "Away, away with it!" When they tried to lower him into the earth, the grave opening was too small, so the pallbearers had to trample him down with their feet. For a long time afterward there was always a hole in his grave mound, but it will have closed up by now, for grass has been growing over the story of Gust K. for a long time now. Source: F. Asmus and O. Knoop, "Der Werwolf zu Alt-Merrin," Sagen und Erzählungen aus dem Kreise Kolberg-Körlin (Kolberg: Druck und Verlag der C. F. Post'schen Buchhandlung und Buchdruckerei, 1898), p. 42. Asmus's and Knoop's source: "Told by Herr W. Rexilius, a carpenter." The Kolberg-Körlin district is on the Baltic Sea, in present-day Poland. Return to the table of contents . Fox Hill near Dodow Karl Bartsch In the village of Dodow near Wittenburg there lived an old woman who possessed a fox strap. With its help she could transform herself into a fox, and thus her table never lacked for geese, ducks, and all kinds of poultry. Her grandchild knew about it, and one day when the schoolmaster was talking about magic in the school, the child told about the fox strap, and the next day brought it to school. The schoolmaster took it into his hand and unintentionally approached his head with it. Suddenly he was standing before the children, transformed into a fox. They broke out with a deafening noise. This so frightened the little schoolmaster that he jumped out the window with a single leap. He ran to the hill that lay near the village and there built himself a den. One day a great hunt was organized, and our fox was among those pursued by the huntsmen. A bullet hit him, and suddenly a schoolmaster was lying there before the bewildered huntsman. The bullet had struck the fox strap and ripped it apart. In memory of this event the people of Dodow gave the name Fox Hill to the place where their schoolmaster had lived. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (Wien: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), v. 1, no. 181, p. 146. Return to the table of contents. Werewolves Karl Bartsch Werewolf legends are well known. According to them, many people possessed the power to transform themselves into wolves by putting on a wolf belt. They would then roam about at night attacking their enemies or their enemies' cattle. In Fahrenholz in the year 1682 a number of people were accused of being able to transform themselves into wolves and were put on trial. Only thirty years ago [in the 1840's] numerous examples of this kind of magic were related in all children's rooms, although there have been no wolves in Mecklenburg for more than one hundred years. This proves how widespread these legends formerly must have been. Beyer, in the Meklenburgische Jahrbücher (20, 161), states that "So far as I remember, in my youth I only heard of male werewolves, never females. However, in other regions gender makes no difference." 1. A man possessed a wolf belt, that is, he had the ability to transform himself into a wolf (werewolf). Once the huntsmen organized a fox hunt and had placed a dead horse in the woods as bait for the foxes. The werewolf went there and was eating from the horse. The huntsmen surprised him and shot at him. He fled, and when they went to the house of the man they suspected of being a werewolf, they found him in bed with a bullet wound. 2. A young woman whose husband was often unexplainably absent came to the suspicion that he was a werewolf. One day both were working in the field. The man again left his wife. Suddenly a wolf came forth from the bushes, ran toward her, grabbed her red woolen skirt with its teeth and shook her back and forth. With screams and blows from her hay fork she drove him away. Soon afterward her husband emerged from the same bushes into which the wolf had disappeared. She told him of her frightening experience. He laughed, thereby revealing the red woolen threads from her skirt that were stuck between his teeth. She reported him to the judge, and he was burned to death. 3. A woodcutter was working in the forest with his brother. The latter went away, and soon thereafter a wolf came out of the nearby bushes. The woodcutter wounded him on his right front leg with his ax, and the wolf retreated howling. That evening when the woodcutter returned home he found his brother in bed with his right arm hidden beneath the covers. Only after repeated threats would he reveal his arm, and on it was the same wound that the woodcutter had given to the wolf. He reported his brother, who was burned to death. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (Wien: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), v. 1, no. 182, pp. 147-148. Bartsch's source for legend 1 is a master builder named Langfeld from Rostock. Legends 2 and 3 are from Hagenow, and were told to Bartsch by Fräulein A. Krüger of Rostock. Return to the table of contents. The Werewolf of Klein-Krams Karl Bartsch In the vicinity of Klein-Krams near Ludwigslust in former times there were extensive forests that were so rich with game that the dukes often came to this region to hold their great hunts. During these hunts they almost always saw a wolf who -- even though he came within shooting distance -- could never be killed by a huntsman. Indeed, they even had to watch as he took a piece of game before their very eyes and -- something that was most remarkable to them -- ran with it into the village. Now once it happened that a hussar from Ludwigslust was traveling through the village and just happened to enter the house of a man named Feeg. When he entered the house a flock of children stormed out of the house with a loud cry and hurried out into the yard. When he asked them about their wild behavior, they told him that except for a small boy, no one from the Feeg family was at home, and that he -- as was his custom when no one was at home -- had transformed himself into a werewolf, and that they were running away from him, because otherwise he would bite them. Soon afterward the feared wolf appeared, but by now he had laid aside his wolf form. The hussar turned to the Feeg child and tried to learn more about the wolf game, but the child would say nothing. However, the stranger would not give up, and he finally succeeded in making the child talk. The child told him that his grandmother had a strap, and that if he put it on he would instantly become a wolf. The hussar kindly asked the boy to make an appearance as a werewolf. At first the boy refused, but finally he agreed to do it, if the strange man would first climb into the loft, so that he would be safe from him. The hussar agreed to this, and to be sure pulled up the ladder with which he had climbed into the loft. As soon as this had happened the boy ran into the main room, and soon came out again as a young wolf and chased away all those who standing in the entryway. After the wolf had run back into the main room and come back out as a boy, the hussar climbed down and had the Feeg child show him the magic belt, but he could not discover anything unusual about it. Afterward the hussar went to a forester in the vicinity of Klein-Krams and told him what he had experienced in the Feeg house. Upon hearing this story, the forester, who had always been present at the great hunts near Klein-Krams, immediately thought about the werewolf who could not be wounded. He now thought that he would be able to kill the werewolf. At the next hunt he said to his friends, as he rammed a bullet of inherited silver into the barrel of his rifle, "Today the werewolf will not escape from me!" His companions looked at him in amazement, but he said nothing further. The hunt soon began, and it did not take long before the wolf showed himself once again. Many of the huntsmen shot at him, but he remained unwounded. Finally he approached the forester, who brought him to the ground. Everyone could see that the wolf was wounded, but soon he jumped up again and ran into the village. The huntsmen followed him, but the werewolf outran them and disappeared into the Feeg farmyard. In their search, the huntsmen came into the house, where they found the wolf in the grandmother's bed. They recognized it from the tail that was sticking out from under the covers. The werewolf was no one other than Feeg's grandmother. In her pain she had forgotten to take off the strap, and thus she herself revealed the secret. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (Wien: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), v. 1, no. 183, pp. 148-150. Bartsch's source is G. Diehn, a seminary student. For a German-language version of this legend, click here: Der Werwolf von Klein-Krams . Return to the table of contents . The Werewolf of Vietlübbe Karl Bartsch A rich farmer by the name of Schlüntz lived a long time ago in Vietlübbe. One day he had gone to Lübz and was returning home in the evening. Upon entering a grove of fir trees, his horse refused to proceed. The farmer suddenly saw a wolf jump from the bushes and begin snapping at the horse. The horse ran off in a gallop, not stopping until it had run out of breath. The wolf caught up and jumped at it. The farmer knew that a neighbor of his had the reputation of being a sorcerer, and just as the wolf was about to grab his horse by the neck, he called out: "Irnst Jacobs, is that you? Let me say something to you. Irnst Jacobs, listen to me, Irnst Jacobs!" And as he spoke the name the third time, his neighbor stood there before him, begging him to high heaven not to reveal him. The farmer let him go. It had been the neighbor who had taken on the form of a werewolf. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (Wien: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), v. 1, no. 183, p. 150. Bartsch's source is Pastor K. Bassewitz from Brütz, who heard this story about 1844 from an old cowherd from Siggelkow. Return to the table of contents . A Witch as Werewolf Karl Bartsch Once a witch was crossing a field in the form of a werewolf in order to bewitch a farmer's cows. Her husband came upon her, and when he saw the wolf, he was afraid that it might be his wife, so he called out, "Marie, Marie, what are you doing here?" This frightened the woman, who turned herself back into her human form. But even as the man approached her, long red hair was still hanging from her neck and breast, and her eyes were still glowing like wolf's eyes. Source: Karl Bartsch, Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg (Wien: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), v. 1, no. 185, pp. 150-151. Bartsch's source is a "Frau H." from Wustrow. Return to the table of contents. The Damnable Life and Death of Stubbe Peeter George Bores (London Chapbook of 1590) A true Discourse. Declaring the damnable life and death of one Stubbe Peeter, a most wicked Sorcerer, who in the likeness of a Wolf committed many murders, continuing this devilish practice 25 Years, killing and de- vouring Men, Women, and Children. Who for the same fact was ta- ken and executed the 31st of October last past in the town of Bedbur [Bedburg] near the City of Collin [Cologne, Köln] in Germany. Truly translated out of the high Dutch, according to the copy printed in Collin, brought over into England by George Bores ordinary post, the 11th day of this present month of June 1590, who did both see and hear the same. AT LONDON Printed for Edward Venge, and are to be sold in Fleet Street at the sign of the Vine. A most true discourse, declaring the life and death of one Stubbe Peeter, being a most wicker sorcerer. Those whom the Lord doth leave to follow the imagination of their own hearts, despising his proffered grace, in the end through the hardness of heart and contempt of his fatherly mercy, they enter the right path to perdition and destruction of body and soul for ever: as in this present history in perfect sort may be seen, the strangeness whereof, together with the cruelties committed, and the long time therein continued, may drive many in doubt whether the same be truth or no, and the rather fore that sundry false and fabulous matters have heretofore passed in print, which hath wrought much incredulity in the hearts of all men generally, insomuch that now of days few things do escape be it never so certain, but that it is embased by the term of a lie or false report. In the reading of this story, therefore I do first request reformation of opinion, next patience to peruse it, because it is published for example's sake, and lastly to censure thereof as reason and wisdom doth think convenient, considering the subtlety that Satan useth to work the soul's destruction, and the great matters which the accursed practice of sorcery doth effect, the fruits whereof is death and destruction for ever, and yet in all ages practiced by the reprobate and wicked of the earth, some in one sort and some in another even as the Devil giveth promise to perform. But of all other that ever lived, none was comparable unto this Hell hound, whose tyranny and cruelty did well declare he was of his father the devil, who was a murderer from the beginning, whose life and death and most bloody practices the discourse doth make just report. In the towns of Cperadt and Bedbur near Collin in high Germany, there was continually brought up and nourished one Stubbe Peeter, who from his youth was greatly inclined to evil and the practicing of wicked arts even from twelve years of age till twenty, and so forwards till his dying day, insomuch that surfeiting in the damnable desire of magic, necromancy, and sorcery, acquainting himself with many infernal spirits and fiends, insomuch tat forgetting the God that made him, and that Savior that shed his blood man man's redemption: In the end, careless of salvation gave both soul and body to the Devil for ever, for small carnal pleasure in this life, that he might be famous and spoken of on earth, though he lost heaven thereby. The Devil, who hath a ready ear to listen to the lewd motions of cursed men, promised to give him whatsoever his heart desired during his mortal life: whereupon this vile wretch neither desired riches nor promotion, nor was his fancy satisfied with any external or outward pleasure, but having a tyrannous heart and a most cruel bloody mind, requested that at his pleasure he might work his malice on men, women, and children, in the shape of some beast, whereby he might live without dread or danger of life, and unknown to be the executor of any bloody enterprise which he meant to commit. The Devil, who saw him a fit instrument to perform mischief as a wicked fiend pleased with the desire of wrong and destruction, gave unto him a girdle which, being put around him, he was straight transformed into the likeness of a greedy, devouring wolf, strong and mighty, with eyes great and large, which in the night sparkled like unto brands of fire, a mouth great and wide, with most sharp and cruel teeth, a huge body and mighty paws. And no sooner should he put off the same girdle, but presently he should appear in his former shape, according to the proportion of a man, as if he had never been changed. Stubbe Peeter herewith was exceedingly well pleased, and the shape fitted his fancy and agreed best with his nature, being inclined to blood and cruelty. Therefore, satisfied with this strange and devilish gift, for that it was not troublesome nor great in carriage, but that it might be hidden in a small room, he proceeded to the execution of sundry most heinous and vile murders; for if any person displeased him, he would incontinent thirst for revenge, and no sooner should they or any of theirs walk abroad in the fields or about the city, but in the shape of a wolf he would presently encounter them, and never rest till he had plucked out their throats and tear their joints asunder. And after he had gotten a taste hereof, he took such pleasure and delight in shedding of blood, that he would night and day walk the fields and work extreme cruelties. And sundry times he would go through the streets of Collin, Bedbur, and Cperadt, in comely habit, and very civilly, as one well known to all the inhabitants thereabout, and oftentimes was he saluted of those whose friends and children he had butchered, though nothing suspected for the same. In these places, I say, he would walk up and down, and if he could spy either maid, wife, or child that his eyes liked or his heart lusted after, he would wait their issuing out of the city or town. If he could by any means get them alone, he would in the fields ravish them, and after in his wolfish likeness cruelly murder them. Yea, often it came to pass that as he walked abroad in the fields, if he chanced to spy a company of maidens playing together or else a milking their kine, in his wolfish shape he would incontinent run among them, and while the rest escaped by flight, he would be sure to lay hold of one, and after his filthy lust fulfilled, he would murder her presently. Beside, if he had liked or known any of them, look who he had a mind unto, her he would pursue, whether she were before or behind, and take her from the rest, for such was his swiftness of foot while he continued a wolf that he would outrun the swiftest greyhound in that country; and so much he had practiced this wickedness that the whole province was feared by the cruelty of this bloody and devouring wolf. Thus continuing his devilish and damnable deeds within the compass of a few years, he had murdered thirteen young children, and two goodly young women big with child, tearing the children out of their wombs, in most bloody and savage sort, and after ate their hearts panting hot and raw, which he accounted dainty morsels and best agreeing to his appetite. Moreover, he used many times to kill lambs and kids and such like beasts, feeding on the same most usually raw and bloody, as if he had been a natural wolf indeed, so that all men mistrusted nothing less than this his devilish sorcery. He had at that time living a fair young damsel to his daughter, after whom he also lusted must unnaturally, and cruelly committed most wicked incest with her, a most gross and vile sin, far surmounting adultery or fornication, though the least of the three doth drive the soul into hell fire, except hearty repentance, and the great mercy of God. This daughter of his he begot when he was not altogether so wickedly given, who was called by the name of Stubbe Beell, whose beauty and good grace was such as deserved commendations of all those that knew her. And such was his inordinate lust and filthy desire toward her, that he begat a child by her, daily using her as his concubine; but as an insatiate and filthy beast, given over to work evil, with greediness he also lay by his own sister, frequenting her company long time, even according as the wickedness of his heart led him. Moreover, being on a time sent for to a gossip of his there to make merry and good cheer, ere he thence departed he so won the woman by his fair and flattering speech, and so much prevailed, that ere he departed the house, he lay by her, and ever after had her company at his command. This woman had to name Katherine Trompin, a woman of tall and comely stature of exceeding good favor and one that was well esteemed among her neighbors. But his lewd and inordinate lust being not satisfied with the company of many concubines, nor his wicked fancy contented with the beauty of any woman, at length the Devil sent unto him a wicked spirit in the similitude and likeness of a woman, so fair of face and comely of personage, that she resembled rather some heavenly Helfin than any mortal creature, so far her beauty exceeded the choicest sort of women; and with her, as with his heart's delight, he kept company the space of seven years, though in the end she proved and was found indeed no other than a she-Devil. Notwithstanding, this lewd sin of lechery did not any thing assuage his cruel and bloody mind, but continuing an insatiable bloodsucker, so great was the joy he took therein, that he accounted no day spent in pleasure wherein he had not shed some blood, not respecting so much who he did murder, as how to murder and destroy them, as the matter ensuing doth manifest, which may stand for a special note of a cruel and hard heart. For, having a proper youth to his son, begotten in the flower and strength of his age, the first fruit of his body, in whom he took such joy that he did commonly call him his heart's ease, yet so far his delight in murder exceeded the joy he took in his son, that thirsting after his blood, on a time he enticed him into the fields, and from thence into a forest hard by, where, making excuse to stay about the necessaries of nature, while the young man went forward, incontinent in the shape and likeness of a wolf he encountered his own son and there most cruelly slew him, which done, he presently ate the brains out of his head as a most savory and dainty delicious mean to staunch his greedy appetite: the most monstrous act that ever man heard of, for never was known a wretch from nature so far degenerate. Long time he continued his vile and villainous life, sometime in the likeness of a wolf, sometime in the habit of a man, sometime in the towns and cities, and sometimes in the woods and thickets to them adjoining, whereas the Dutch copy maketh mention, he on a time met with two men and one woman, whom he greatly desired to murder, and the better to bring his devilish purpose to effect, doubting by them to be overmatched and knowing one of them by name, he used this policy to bring them to their end. In subtle sort he conveyed himself far before them in their way and craftily couched out of the sight; but as soon as they approached near the place where he lay, he called one of them by his name. The party, hearing himself called once or twice by his name, supposing it was some familiar friend that in jesting sort stood out of his sight, went from his company toward the place from whence the voice proceeded, of purpose to see who it was; but he was no sooner entered within the danger of this transformed man, but incontinent he was murdered in the place; the rest of his company staying for him, expecting still his return, but finding his stay over long, the other man left the woman and went to look him, by which means the second man was also murdered. The woman then seeing neither of both return again, in heart suspected that some evil had fallen upon them, and therefore, with all the power she had, she sought to save herself by flight, though it nothing prevailed, for, good soul, she was also soon overtaken by this light-footed wolf, whom, when he had first deflowered, he after most cruelly murdered. The men were after found mangled in the wood, but the woman's body was never after seen, for she the caitiff had most ravenously devoured, whose flesh he esteemed both sweet and dainty in taste. Thus this damnable Stubbe Peeter lived the term of five and twenty years, unsuspected to be author of so many cruel and unnatural murders, in which time he had destroyed and spoiled an unknown number of men, women, and children, sheep, lambs, and goats, and other cattle; for, when he could not through the wariness of people draw men, women, or children in his danger, then, like a cruel and tyrannous beast, he would work his cruelty on brute beasts in most savage sort, and did act more mischief and cruelty than would be credible, although high Germany hath been forced to taste the truth thereof. By which means the inhabitants of Collin, Bedbur, and Cperadt, seeing themselves so grievously endangered, plagued, and molested by this greedy and cruel wolf, who wrought continual harm and mischief, insomuch that few or none durst travel to or from those places without good provision of defense, and all for fear of this devouring and fierce wolf, for oftentimes the inhabitants found the arms and legs of dead men, women, and children scattered up and down the fields, to their great grief and vexation of heart, knowing the same to be done by that strange and cruel wolf, whom by no means they could take or overcome, so that if any man or woman missed their child, they were out of hope ever to see it again alive, mistrusting straight that the wolf had destroyed it. And here is to be noted a most strange thing which setteth forth the great power and merciful providence of God to the comfort of each Christian heart. There were not long ago certain small children playing in a meadow together hard by the town, where also some store of kine were feeding, many of them having young calves sucking upon them. And suddenly among these children comes this vile wolf running and caught a pretty fine girl by the collar, with intent to pull out her throat; but such was the will of God, that the wolf could not pierce the collar of the child's coat, being high and very well stiffened and close clasped about her neck; and therewithal the sudden great cry of the rest of the children which escaped so amazed the cattle feeding by, that being fearful to be robbed of their young, they altogether came running against the wolf with such force that he was presently compelled to let go his hold and to run away to escape the danger of their horns; by which means the child was preserved from death, and, God be thanked, remains living at this day. An that this thing is true, Master Tice Artine, a brewer dwelling at Puddlewharfe in London, being a man of that country born, and one of good reputation and account, is able to justify, who is near kinsman to this child, and hath from thence twice received letters concerning the same; and for that the first letter did rather drive him into wondering at the act then yielding credit thereunto, he had shortly after, at request of his writing, another letter sent him, whereby he was more fully satisfied; and divers other persons of great credit in London hath in like sort received letters from their friends to the like effect. Likewise in the town of Germany aforesaid continual prayer was used unto God that it would please Him to deliver them from the danger of this greedy wolf. And, although they had practiced all the means that men could devise to take this ravenous beast, yet until the Lord had determined his fall, they could not in any wise prevail: notwithstanding, they daily continued their purpose, and daily sought to entrap him, and for that intent continually maintained great mastiffs and dogs of much strength to hunt and chase the beast. In the end, it pleased God, as they were in readiness and provided to meet with him, that they should espy him in his wolfish likeness at what time they beset him round about, and most circumspectly set their dogs upon him, in such sort that there was no means of escape, at which advantage they never could get him before; but as the Lord delivered Goliath into the hands of David, so was this wolf brought in danger of these men, who seeing, as I said before, no way to escape the imminent danger, being hardly pursued at the heels, presently slipped his girdle from about him, whereby the shape of a wolf clean avoided, and he appeared presently in his true shape and likeness, having in his hand a staff as one walking toward the city. But the hunters, whose eyes were steadfastly bent upon the beast, and seeing him in the same place metamorphosed contrary to their expectation, it wrought a wonderful amazement to their minds; and, had it not been that they knew the man so soon as they saw him, they had surely taken the same to have been some Devil in a man's likeness; but for as much as they knew him to be an ancient dweller in the town, they came unto him, and talking with him, they brought him by communication home to his own house, and finding him to be the man indeed, and no delusion or fantastical motion, they had him incontinent before the magistrates to be examined. Thus being apprehended, he was shortly after put to the rack in the town of Bedbur, but fearing the torture, he voluntarily confessed his whole life, and made known the villainies which he had committed for the space of 25 years; also he confessed how by sorcery he procured of the Devil a girdle, which being put on, he forthwith became a wolf, which girdle at his apprehension he confessed he cast it off in a certain valley and there left it, which, when the magistrates heard, they sent to the valley for it, but at their coming found nothing at all, for it may be supposed that it was gone to the Devil from whence it came, so that it was not to be found. For the Devil having brought the wretch to all the shame he could, left him to endure the torments which his deeds deserved. After he had some space been imprisoned, the magistrates found out through due examination of the matter, that his daughter Stubbe Beell and his gossip Katherine Trompin were both accessory to divers murders committed, who for the same as also for their lewd life otherwise committed, was arraigned, and with Stubbe Peeter condemned, and their several judgments pronounced the 28 of October 1589, in this manner, that is to say: Stubbe Peeter as principal malefactor, was judged first to have his body laid on a wheel, and with red hot burning pincers in ten several places to have the flesh pulled off from the bones, after that, his legs and arms to be broken with a wooden ax or hatchet, afterward to have his head struck from his body, then to have his carcass burned to ashes. Also his daughter and his gossip were judged to be burned quick to ashes, the same time and day with the carcass of the aforesaid Stubbe Peeter. And on the 31st of the same month, they suffered death accordingly in the town of Bedbur in the presence of many peers and princes of Germany. This, Gentle Reader, have I set down the true discourse of this wicked man Stub Peeter, which I desire to be a warning to all sorcerers and witches, which unlawfully follow their own devilish imagination to the utter ruin and destruction of their souls eternally, from which wicked and damnable practice, I beseech God keep all good men, and from the cruelty of their wicked hearts. Amen After the execution, there was by the advice of the magistrates of the town of Bedbur a high pole set up and strongly framed, which first went through the wheel whereon he was broken, whereunto also it was fastened; after that a little above the wheel the likeness of a wolf was framed in wood, to show unto all men the shape wherein he executed those cruelties. Over that on the top of the stake the sorcerer's head itself was set up, and round about the wheel there hung as it were sixteen pieces of wood about a yard in length with represented the sixteen persons that was perfectly known to be murdered by him. And the same ordained to stand there for a continual monument to all ensu- ing ages, what murders by Stub Pee- ter was committed, with the or- der of his judgment, as this picture doth more plainly ex- press. Witnesses that this is true: Tyse Artyne. William Brewar. Adolf Staedt. George Bores. With divers others that have seen the same. Source: Montague Summers, The Werewolf (New York: E. P. Dutton & Company, 1934), pp. 253-259. I have modernized the spelling, but have left unchanged various grammatical inconsistencies. Summers' source is a black-letter pamphlet printed in London in 1590. Only two copies of this pamphlet are known to exist, one in the British Museum and one in the Lambeth Library. Peeter (also spelled Peter) Stubbe's family name is variously recorded as Stub, Stubbe, Stube, Stump, or Stumpf. Important link: "The Damnable Life and Death of Stubbe Peeter" combines the tradition of werewolves with that of Faust legends. Return to the table of contents. The Werewolf Carl and Theodor Colshorn Three workmen were mowing a meadow. Noon came, but no one had brought them their meal yet, so they agreed to mow one more round and then to lie down beneath a bush until the food arrived. And that is what they did. Two of them fell asleep immediately, because one never sleeps better than when one is tired, and there is no softer bed than one made from flowers and grass. The third workman, however, tied a wolf strap around his waist and crept up to a herd of horses that was grazing there. The best foal was just right for him. He grabbed it and killed it. The remaining horses and the herder ran off. The other harvesters saw what had happened, but they wisely pretended to be asleep, for they were frightened and horrified. After the werewolf had satisfied his hunger, he took off the strap, came back, and lay down to rest. Their food soon arrived: a large pot full of porridge and for each man six boiled eggs plus some bread and salt. As the two harvesters were helping themselves with their wooden spoons, the werewolf said, "Earlier I was terribly hungry, but for some reason I don't feel like eating now." The two others said nothing. The one harvester complained the entire afternoon about cramps and a stomach ache, and often went to the brook to quench his burning thirst. The two others said nothing. That evening, as they were on their way home, he said once again that he had never felt so stuffed, to which one of the harvesters replied that it could happen to anyone. When they arrived at the town gate, and he was still complaining, the other workman said, "A person who eats an entire foal should not be surprised to feel stuffed and have stomach cramps. To that he replied, "If you had said that earlier, you would not now be walking home on your own legs." He then threw his scythe away, tied the strap around his waist, turned into a wolf, and was never again seen in that place. Source: Carl and Theodor Colshorn, Märchen und Sagen (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), pp. 58-59. Return to the table of contents. Werewolves Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm 1. A soldier related the following story, which is said to have happened to his grandfather. The latter, the grandfather, had gone into the forest to cut wood with a kinsman and a third man. People suspected that there was something not quite right about this third man, although no one could say exactly what it was. The three finished their work and were tired, whereupon the third man suggested that they sleep a little. And that is what they did. They all laid down on the ground, but the grandfather only pretended to sleep, keeping his eyes open a crack. The third man looked around to see if the others were asleep, and when he believed this to be so, he took off his belt (or, as others tell the story, put on a belt) and turned into a wolf. However, such a werewolf does not look exactly like a natural wolf, but somewhat different. Then he ran to a nearby meadow where a young foal was grazing, attacked it, and ate it, including skin and hair. Afterward he returned, put his belt back on (or took it off), and laid down, as before, in human form. A little later they all got up together and made their way toward home. Just as they reached the town gate, the third man complained that he had a stomachache. The grandfather secretly whispered in his ear: "That I can well believe, for someone who has a horse, complete with skin and hair, in his belly." The third man replied: "If you had said that to me in the forest, you would not be saying it to me now." 2. A woman had taken on the form of a werewolf and had attacked the herd of a shepherd, whom she hated, causing great damage. However, the shepherd wounded the wolf in the hip with an ax blow, and it crawled into the brush. The shepherd followed, thinking that he could finish it off, but there he found a woman using a piece of cloth torn from her dress to stop the blood gushing from a wound. 3. At Lüttich in the year 1610 two sorcerers were executed because they had turned themselves into werewolves and had killed many children. With them they had a boy of twelve years whom the devil turned into a raven whenever they were tearing apart and eating their prey. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Wärwolf," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 213, pp. 293-94 . In subsequent editions this legend is numbered 214. Return to the table of contents. Werewolf Rock Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm In the meadow facing Seehausen near the Magdeburg village of Eggenstedt, not far from Sommerschenburg and Schöningen, there is a large rock, called "Wolf Rock" or "Werewolf Rock." A long, long time ago a stranger sojourned near the Brandsleber Forest, which belonged to the Hackel and the Harz districts. No one knew who he was, nor where he came from. Known everywhere by the name "the Old Man," he would often show up without notice in the villages and offer his services, which he performed to the satisfaction of the country people. He was most often engaged to herd sheep. It happened that a cute spotted lamb was born in a herd belonging to a shepherd named Melle from Neindorf. The stranger asked the shepherd repeatedly and fervently to give it to him, but the shepherd refused. On shearing day Melle engaged the Old Man to help out. When he returned he found everything in order; all the work had been done, but neither the Old Man nor the spotted lamb were there. For a long time no one heard anything about the Old Man. Finally one day he unexpectedly appeared before Melle, who was grazing his sheep in the Katten Valley. He called out sneeringly: "Good day, Melle, your spotted lamb sends his greetings!" Angered, the shepherd grabbed his crook in order to avenge himself. Then suddenly the stranger changed shape and sprang at him as a werewolf. The shepherd took fright, but his dogs attacked the wolf with fury. The wolf fled. Pursued, it ran through forest and valley until it reached the vicinity of Eggenstedt. Here the dogs surrounded him. The shepherd called out: "Now you will die!" Then the Old Man, again in human form, begged to be spared, offering to do anything. But the shepherd furiously attacked him with his stick, when suddenly a sprouting thorn bush stood before him. But the vengeful shepherd did not spare him, hacking away at the branches instead. The stranger once again turned himself into a human and begged for his life. But hard-hearted Melle remained unmoved. Then the stranger attempted to make his escape as a werewolf, but a blow from Melle brought him dead to the earth. A rocky cliff marks the spot where he fell and was buried, and will be named after him for all eternity. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Wärwolf-Stein," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 213, pp. 295-96 . In subsequent editions this legend is numbered 215. Return to the table of contents. The Werewolves Advance Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm In Livland there is the following legend: When Christmas Day is over a boy who limps with one leg goes around calling together all those who have yielded to the Evil One -- and there is a large number of them -- bidding them to follow him. If any one of these resists or hesitates, then a large tall man is also there who hits at them with a whip braided from iron wire and little chains, driving them along with force. It is said that he whips at the people so cruelly that a long time later marks and scars can still be seen on their bodies, and they are in great pain. As soon as they begin to follow him, it appears as though they lose their former shape and turn into wolves. Several thousand of them come together. Their leader, with the iron whip in his hand, leads the way. When they have been led into a field, they cruelly attack the cattle, ripping every animal to pieces that they can catch, thus doing great damage. However, they are not able to harm humans. When they come to a body of water, their leader strikes at it with his switch or whip, and it divides, allowing them to cross over with dry feet. After twelve days have passed, they abandon their werewolf form and become humans once again. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Wärwölfe ziehen aus," Deutsche Sagen , vol. 1 (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 215, pp. 296-97 . In subsequent editions this legend is numbered 216. Livland, also known as Livonia, is a region on the Baltic Sea that comprises present Estonia and parts of Latvia. Return to the table of contents. The Werewolf of Jarnitz A. Haas In the vicinity of Jarnitz there lived a werewolf who had the ability to transform himself into all kinds of different shapes. This werewolf spent the nights stealing sheep from their enclosures, for in those days the sheep were kept at night in enclosures in the open fields. For several nights in a row the shepherd, armed with a loaded gun, had kept watch for the night robber. He had already hit the werewolf several times, as he had clearly seen, but the bullets seemed to have done him no harm, and he had escaped with his booty every time. Then the shepherd loaded his gun with bullets made of inherited silver, which never fail. Thus this time he would be successful. Following his custom, the werewolf appeared again that night. But as he was approaching the enclosure, he immediately sensed that this time the shepherd might do him in. Therefore he quickly turned himself into a human, walked up to the shepherd, and said to him in a familiar tone, "You don't have to shoot me dead!" That so unsettled the shepherd that he lowered his gun, which he had been aiming at the intruder. The werewolf never again dared to steel sheep from the Jarnitz enclosures. Source: A. Haas, Rügensche Sagen und Märchen (Stettin, 1903), pp. 98-99. Jarnitz (Germany) is a town on the island of Rügen in the Baltic Sea. Return to the table of contents. Werewolf Adalbert Kuhn There were formerly werewolves. One could transform oneself into a werewolf by putting on a belt. A servant understood how to do this, and while the others were asleep at noontime he ate an entire foal. One of the men just pretended to be asleep and observed everything. From Glane near Iburg. If you throw a piece of iron or steel over a hare that is a transformed human, or over a werewolf, then the human will immediately appear before you completely naked. They call that "making blank" the witch, the wolf, and so forth. The werewolf's pelt bursts crosswise at its forehead, and the naked human emerges from this opening. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen und einigen andern, besonders den angrenzenden Gegenden Norddeutschlands (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), v. 2, pp. 25, 31. Return to the table of contents. The Böxenwolf A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz In the entire region between the Deister River and the Weser River they tell about the böxenwolf who at nighttime preys upon travelers, making them carry him part of the way. Such a böxenwolf is actually a human who transforms himself and gains superhuman strength by putting on a strap. Late one evening two peasants were returning home from a mill not far from Rinteln. Each was carrying a sack of flour. A böxenwolf confronted one of them. He immediately called out for help to his companion, who threw down his sack and attacked the böxenwolf so furiously with his stick, that the böxenwolf turned and fled. The next day they went to another peasant. They had long suspected him, because was rich, but no one knew the source of his wealth. He was lying in bed, deathly ill. He had the surgeon come and bind his wounds. Thus they discovered who had been the böxenwolf. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), p. 245. Kuhn's and Schwartz's source is an "oral tradition." Return to the table of contents. The Werewolf Belt A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz Formerly there were people who could turn themselves into wolves by putting on a certain belt. A man in the vicinity of Steina had such a belt, and once he went away without locking it up, as was his custom. His young son came upon it and buckled the thing about himself. Instantly he became a werewolf. He had the appearance of a stack of pea straw and lumbered away heavily like a bear. When the people in the room saw what had happened they ran quickly and brought back the father. He arrived barely in time and undid the strap before the boy could do any damage. Afterward the boy said that as soon as he put the belt on, he become so terribly hungry that he would have torn anything apart that might have gotten in his way. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), p. 232. Kuhn's and Schwartz's source is an "oral tradition from Steina." Return to the table of contents. The Werewolf Wife A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz In Caseburg on the island of Usedom a man and his wife were cutting hay in a meadow. After a while the woman told the man that she was uneasy and could not stay there any longer, and she went away. Earlier she had told him that if a wild animal were to come upon him he should throw his hat toward it and run away, and then no harm would come to him. The man had promised her that he would do this. After the woman had been away for a while, a wolf swam across the Swina and approached the harvesters. The man threw his hat at it, which the beast immediately ripped into small pieces. Meanwhile one of the workers crept up to the wolf with a pitchfork and stabbed it to death from behind. Instantly it was transformed. They were all astounded to see that it was the farmer's wife that the worker had killed. Today the island of Usedom lies mostly in German, partly in Polish territory. The straight of Swina separates the Polish portion of Usedom from mainland Poland. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 22, pp. 18-19. Return to the table of contents. The Werewolf Karl Lyncker The Hessian farmer knows and fears the ravenous werewolf even today [1854]. This is a human whose shape has been transformed by putting on a belt. The werewolf attacks everything that gets in his way, and is especially dangerous for the herds. However, there is a way to destroy the belt's magic power: If one throws a knife -- a piece of shiny steel -- over the werewolf, he will instantly be transformed into his true human form and stand there completely naked. In the vicinity of Wolfhagen there was a well-to-do woman of good parentage who almost every night would leave her house and roam the fields as a werewolf. Once a shepherd bravely approached the werewolf, as it crept into an alder thicket, its appetite sated. The shepherd, who had long pursued the werewolf, hoped to capture it. He threw his pocketknife over its head and neck, and immediately the woman was standing naked there before him. She implored him to have mercy with her and to not tell the story to anyone. The shepherd was highly surprised to see the well known woman before him, and he promised to keep the event a secret. Nonetheless, within a few days everyone knew about it. Source: Karl Lyncker, Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen, (Cassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 162, pp. 106-107. Return to the table of contents. The Werewolf: Another Legend Karl Lyncker A married couple in Hessen lived in poverty. To the husband's amazement, the wife nevertheless was able to serve meat for every meal. For a long time she kept it a secret where she got the meat, but finally she promised to reveal it to him, under the condition that he not call out her name as it was happening. Together they went to a field where a herd of sheep was grazing. The woman walked toward the sheep, and as she approached them, she threw a ring over herself and instantly turned into a werewolf. She fell upon the sheep, seized one of them, and fled. The man stood there as though petrified. However, when he saw the shepherd and the dogs running after the werewolf, thus endangering his wife, he forgot his promise and called out: "Margaret!" With that the wolf disappeared, and the woman was left standing naked in the field. Source: Karl Lyncker, Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen, (Cassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 163, pp. 107-108. Return to the table of contents. The Peasant and the Werewolf Karl Lyncker One night a werewolf came upon a peasant who was driving his wagon overland. In order to break its magic, the level-headed man unhesitatingly tied his fire steel to his whip and threw it over the wolf's head, keeping the whip in his hand. However, the wolf seized the steel, and the peasant had to flee in order to save his life. Source: Karl Lyncker, Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen, (Cassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 164, p. 108. Return to the table of contents. The Böxenwolf Karl Lyncker In the Schaumburg region a werewolf is called a böxenwolf. Böxenwolves are humans who are in league with the devil and who can assume the form of animals by buckling a strap about themselves. Then they cunningly attack and torment other people. They can be exposed by throwing a piece of steel over them. There is not a single village in which someone has not been seized in the back of the neck by a böxenwolf and has had to drag it, gasping for breath, for some distance. Source: Karl Lyncker, Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen, (Cassel: Verlag von Oswald Bertram, 1854), no. 165, p. 108. Lyncker spells the creature's name "Böchsenwolf," and provides the following etymology: Böchse, Buchse = Hose [trousers]. Return to the table of contents . The Werewolf of Hüsby Karl Müllenhoff In Hüsby near Schleswig there lived an old, stingy woman. She offered her farm hands but little to eat, although there was fresh meat every Sunday. The household wondered about this, because the old woman never bought any meat. A young farm hand wanted to discover the woman's trick, so one day he hid himself in the hayloft instead of going to church with the rest of the household. Suddenly he noticed how the woman pulled out a wolf strap and put it around herself. She immediately became a wolf, ran out into the field, and soon came back with a sheep. "If she can get meat that easily," thought the boy, "then she can be more generous with us. As the woman put meat into the pot, she sighed and said, as was her custom, "Oh, dear God, if only I were with you!" The boy, pretending to be God, answered, "You'll not come to me for all eternity." "Why not, dear God?" "Because you put too little into the pot for your people." "Then I'll do better." "Yes, that's my advice to you." From now on she put a much larger piece of meat into the pot. But the boy could not remain silent, and in the village he talked about what had happened. When on a Sunday morning the woman again turned herself into a wolf, the people were on guard. However, no bullet could harm her until they finally loaded a flintlock with a silver bullet. From that time to the end of her life the woman had an open wound that no doctor could heal. She never again showed herself as a werewolf. Source: Karl Müllenhoff, Sagen, Märchen und Lieder der Herzogtümer Schleswig, Holstein und Lauenburg, neue Ausgabe von Otto Mensing (Schleswig, 1921), no. 370. For a German-language text of this legend, click here: Der Werwolf von Hüsby . This legend was also published under the title "Die Frau mit dem Wolfsriemen" in Gundula Hubrich-Messow, Sagen und Märchen aus Schleswig (Husum: Husum Druck- und Verlagsgesellschaft, 1994), no. 14, p. 15. Return to the table of contents. The Wolf Stone Alexander Schöppner In a valley in the Fichtel Mountains a shepherd tended his flock in a green meadow. Several times it happened that after driving his herd home he discovered that one of the animals was missing. All searching was in vain. They were lost and they remained lost. Watching more carefully, he saw a large wolf creep out of the forest thicket and seize a lamb. Angrily he chased after him, but the enemy was too fleet. Before he could do anything about it, the wolf had disappeared with the lamb. The next time he took an expert marksman with him. The wolf approached, but the marksman's bullets bounced off him. Then it occurred to the hunter to load his weapon with the dried pith from an elder bush. The next day he got off a shot, and the robber ran howling into the woods. The next morning the shepherd met an old neighbor woman with whom he was not on the best of terms. Noticing that she was limping, he asked her: "Neighbor, what is wrong with your leg? It does not want to go along with you." "What business is it of yours?" she answered, hurrying away. The shepherd took note of this. This woman had long been suspected of practicing evil magic. People claimed to have seen her on the Heuberg in Swabia, the Köterberg, and also on the Hui near Halberstadt. He reported her. She was arrested, interrogated, and flogged with rod of alder wood, with which others suspected of magic, but who had denied the charges, had been punished. She was then locked up in chains. But suddenly the woman disappeared from the prison, and no one knew where she had gone. Some time later the poor, unsuspecting shepherd saw the hated wolf break out of the forest once again. However, this time it had not come to attack his herd, but the shepherd himself. There was a furious struggle. The shepherd gathered all of his strength together against the teeth and claws of the ferocious beast. It would have been his death if a hunter had not come by in the knick of time. In vain he fired a shot at the wolf, and then struck it down with his knife. The instant that blood began to flow from the wolf's side, the old woman from the village appeared in the field before them, writhing and twisting terribly. They finished killing her and buried her twenty feet beneath the earth. At the place where they buried the woman they erected a large stone cross, which they named the "Wolf Stone" in memory of these events. It was never peaceful and orderly in the vicinity of the stone. The Malicious Messenger (der Tückebote) or the Burning Man (der brennende Mann), in the language of the people, still goes about his dangerous business here. Source: Hans Sponholz, Der verwunschene Rehbock: Sagen aus Bayern um Wald, Wild und Jagd (Hof [Saale]: Oberfränkische Verlagsanstalt und Druckerei GmbH, 1981), pp. 56-57. Sponholz's source: Alexander Schöppner, Sagenbuch der bayerischen Lande: Aus dem Munde des Volkes, der Chronik und der Dichter (München, 1874), II/165f. Return to the table of contents. The Werewolves in Greifswald J. D. H. Temme Two hundred years ago for a time there was a frightfully large number of werewolves in the city of Greifswald. They were especially prevelant in Rokover Street. From there they attacked anyone who appeared outside of their houses after eight o'clock in the evening. At that time there were a lot of venturesome students in Greifswald. They banded together and one night set forth against the monsters. At first they were powerless against them, until finally the students brought together all of the silver buttons that they had inherited, and with these they killed the werewolves. Source: J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen von Pommern und Rügen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1840), no. 259, p. 308. Return to the table of contents. The Werewolf near Zarnow J. D. H. Temme In the vicinity of Zarnow a few years ago a terrible wolf was on the loose and was causing great harm to humans and cattle. Once he even ripped a child to pieces. Then all the peasants of the region banded together and pursued him, finally surrounding him in some brush. They were about to kill him when suddenly a large strange man with a club appeared before them. Then they knew that they had a werewolf before them. This happened in the year 1831. Source: J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen von Pommern und Rügen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1840), no. 260, p. 308. Return to the table of contents. Werewolves in Pomerania J. D. H. Temme The belief in werewolves is common throughout all of Pomerania. One can transform oneself into a werewolf by girding oneself with a strap that has been cut from the back of a man who has been hanged. Werewolves are especially fond of attacking horses. In the village of Bork not far from Stargard for a long time a man made his entire living by walking around the horse pasture in the village every night and whispering mysterious words by which he protected the horses against werewolves and other wolves, and this in spite of the fact that wolves had long not been seen in that region. Source: J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen von Pommern und Rügen (Berlin: In der Nikolaischen Buchhandlung, 1840), pp. 340-341. Temme does not give this tale a title. It is part of a larger section entitled "Superstitious Beliefs and Practices in Pomerania and Rügen." Temme's source: "Oral." Pomerania (German Pommern , Polish Pomorze ) is a historic region in northeastern Europe on the Baltic coastal plain between the Oder and the Vistula rivers. Formerly of mixed German and Slavic population, Pomerania's western part now belongs to Germany, the eastern portion to Poland. Stargard is the German name for Stargard Szczecinski, a city in northwestern Poland. Return to the table of contents . The Werewolf in Hindenburg J. D. H. Temme One still believes in werewolves in the Altmark. Even today in the village of Hindenburg they tell about a man who could turn himself into a wolf, and there are people still alive who knew him during their childhood. He had a strip of leather made from wolf skin which still had its hair. Whenever he tied it around his body, he turned into a wolf. Then he had such extraordinary strength that he could pull an entire load of hay by himself or grab a whole ox in his mouth and carry it away. In this state he had the nature of a wolf. He strangled cattle and even ate humans. He once pursued one of his neighbors, who narrowly escaped from him. But however furious he became, he did spare his wife. She knew a magic charm that brought him under control, a charm that he himself had taught her. Then she would take off the leather strip, and he would become a reasonable human once again. The Altmark is a district in northeastern Germany. Source: J. D. H. Temme, Die Volkssagen der Altmark (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1839), no. 63, pp. 56-57. This legend is also recorded by J. G. Th. Grässe in his Sagenbuch des Preußischen Staats (Glogau: Verlag von Carl Flemming, 1868), v. 1, no. 244, p. 215. Return to the table of contents. Links to related sites Kelly, Walter K. "The Werewolf," Curiosities of Indo-European Tradition and Folk-Lore (London: Chapman and Hall, 1863), pp. 242-65 . The She-Wolf A werewolf story from Croatia. The Werewolf's Daughter . A werewolf story from Slovakia. The Werewolf of Bettembourg . A werewolf story from Luxembourg. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Tabulation by WebCounter . Revised February 27, 2010. Werewolf's Daughter The Werewolf's Daughter A folktale from Slovakia edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000 Contents The Werewolf's Daughter (Slovakia). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Werewolf's Daughter Slovakia There was once a father who had nine daughters, and they were all marriageable, but the youngest was the most beautiful. The father was a werewolf. One day it came into his head, "What is the good of having to support so many girls?" So he determined to put them all out of the way. He went accordingly into the forest to hew wood, and he ordered his daughters to let one of them bring him his dinner. It was the eldest who brought it. "Why, how come you so early with the food?" asked the woodcutter. "Truly, father, I wished to strengthen you, lest you should fall upon us, if famished!" "A good lass! Sit down whilst I eat." He ate, and whilst he ate he thought of a scheme. He rose and said, "My girl, come, and I will show you a pit I have been digging." "And what is the pit for?" "That we may be buried in it when we die, for poor folk will not be cared for much after they are dead and gone." So the girl went with him to the side of the deep pit. "Now hear," said the werewolf. "You must die and be cast in there." She begged for her life, but all in vain. So he laid hold of her and cast her into the grave. Then he took a great stone and flung it in upon her and crushed her head, so the poor thing breathed out her soul. When the werewolf had done this he went back to his work, and as dusk came on, the second daughter arrived, bringing him food. He told her of the pit, and brought her to it, and cast her in, and killed her as the first. And so he dealt with all his girls, up to the last. The youngest knew well that her father was a werewolf, and she was grieved that her sisters did not return. She thought, "Now where can they be? Has my father kept them for companionship, or to help him in his work?" So she made the food which she was to take him, and crept cautiously through the wood. When she came near the place where her father worked, she heard his strokes felling timber, and smelt smoke. She saw presently a large fire and two human heads roasting at it. Turning from the fire, she went in the direction of the ax strokes and found her father. "See, said she. "Father, I have brought you food." "That is a good lass," said he. "Now stack the wood for me whilst I eat." "But where are my sisters?" she asked. "Down in yon valley drawing wood," he replied. "Follow me, and I will bring you to them." They came to the pit. Then he told her that he had dug it for a grave. "Now," said he, "you must die, and be cast into the pit with your sisters." "Turn aside," father, she asked, "whilst I strip off my clothes, and then slay me if you will." He turned aside as she requested, and then -- tchich! she gave him a push, and he tumbled headlong into the hole he had dug for her. She fled for her life, for the werewolf was not injured, and he soon would scramble out of the pit. Now she hears his howls resounding through the gloomy alleys of the forest, and swift as the wind she runs. She hears the tramp of his approaching feet, and the snuffle of his breath. Then she casts behind her her handkerchief. The werewolf seizes this with teeth and nails, and rends it till it is reduced to tiny ribands. In another moment he is again in pursuit foaming at the mouth, and howling dismally, whilst his red eyes gleam like burning coals. As he gains on her, she casts behind her her gown, and bids him tear that. He seizes the gown and rives it to shreds, then again he pursues. This time she casts behind her her apron, next her petticoat, then her shift, and at last runs much in the condition in which she was born. Again the werewolf approaches. She bounds out of the forest into a hayfield and hides herself in the smallest heap of hay. Her father enters the field, runs howling about it in search of her, cannot find her, and begins to upset the different haycocks, all the while growling and gnashing his gleaming white fangs in his rage at her having escaped him. The foam flakes drop at every step from his mouth, and his skin is reeking with sweat. Before he has reached the smallest bundle of hay his strength leaves him. He feels exhaustion begin to creep over him, and he retires to the forest. The king goes out hunting every day. One of his dogs carries food to the hayfield, which has most unaccountably been neglected by the haymakers for three days. The king, following the dog, discovers the fair damsel, not exactly "in the straw," but up to her neck in hay. She is carried, hay and all, to the palace, where she becomes his wife, making only one stipulation before becoming his bride, and that is, that no beggar shall be permitted to enter the palace. After some years a beggar does get in, the beggar being, of course, none other than her werewolf father. He steals upstairs, enters the nursery, cuts the throats of the two children borne by the queen to her lord, and lays the knife under her pillow. In the morning, the king, supposing his wife to be the murderess, drives her from home, with the dead princes hung about her neck. A hermit comes to the rescue, and restores the babies to life. The king finds out his mistake, is reunited to the lady out of the hay, and the werewolf is cast off a high cliff into the sea, and that is the end of him. The king, the queen, and the princes live happily, and may be living yet, for no notice of their death has appeared in the newspaper. Source: Sabine Baring-Gould, The Book of Werewolves: Being an Account of a Terrible Superstition (London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1865), pp. 124-128. Baring-Gould titles this story "The Daughter of the Vlkolak." Barin-Gould's source: T. T. Hanush, Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie , v. 3. Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites Werewolf Legends from Germany . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised Saint Patrick's Day, 2000. What Should I Have Said (or Done)? Folktales of Type 1696 What Should I Have Said (or Done)? folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 1696 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2010 Contents Going Traveling (Germany). What You Deserve (Germany). Silly Matt (Norway). Stupid's Mistaken Cries (England). The Forgetful Boy (England/USA). Lazy Jack (England). Jock and His Mother (Scotland). I'll Be Wiser the Next Time (Ireland). The Fool's Good Fortune (Georgia). A Stupid Boy (Kashmir). Links to related sites . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Going Traveling Germany Once upon a time there was a poor woman who had a son who wanted very much to travel. His mother said, "How can you travel? We have no money at all for you to take with you." Then the son said, "I will take care of myself. I will always say, 'Not much, not much, not much.'" So he walked for a long time, always saying, "Not much, not much, not much." Then he came to a group of fishermen, and said, "God be with you. Not much, not much, not much." "What do you say, fellow? Not much?" And when they pulled up their net, they had not caught many fish. So one of them fell on the boy with a stick, saying, "Have you ever seen me thrash?" "What should I say, then?" asked the boy. "You should say, "Catch a lot. Catch a lot." Then he again walked a long time, saying, "Catch a lot. Catch a lot," until he came to a gallows, where they were about to hang a poor sinner. Then said he, "Good morning. Catch a lot. Catch a lot." "What do you say, fellow? Catch a lot? Should there be even more wicked people in the world? Isn't this enough?" And he again got it on his back. "What should I say, then?" he asked. "You should say, "May God comfort the poor soul." Again the boy walked on for a long while, saying, "May God comfort the poor soul." Then he came to a ditch where a knacker was skinning a horse. The boy said, "Good morning. May God comfort the poor soul." "What do you say, you disgusting fellow?" said the knacker, hitting him about the ears with his skinning hook until he could not see out of his eyes. "What should I say, then?" "You should say, 'Lie in the ditch, you carcass.'" So he walked on, saying, "Lie in the ditch, you carcass. Lie in the ditch, you carcass." He came to a coach filled with people, and said, "Lie in the ditch, you carcass." Then the coach tipped over into the ditch, and the driver took his whip and beat the boy until he had to crawl back to his mother, and as long as he lived he never went traveling again. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Up Reisen gohn," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , vol. 2, (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 143, pp. 262-63 . Translated from the Low German by D. L. Ashliman . © 2000. The Grimms' source: The Haxthausen family. This tale was added to the Grimms' Kinder- und Hausmärchen with the second edition (1819). Link to a file containing only Going Traveling by the Grimm brothers. Return to the table of contents . What You Deserve Germany Once upon a time there was a widow who had a son named Michel. One day she said to him, "Michel, I can no longer provide for you. You must go to the village. And when you get there, you must say, 'A hundred every day! A hundred every day!'" Michel said, "I will do that." Upon his arrival in the village a funeral coach came his way, and he cried out, "A hundred every day! A hundred every day!" Then the pallbearers came and gave him a beating. Michel returned home and said to his mother, "Mother, I got beaten up." His mother asked, "Why?" Michel replied, "When I arrived in the village a funeral coach came my way, and I cried out, "A hundred every day! A hundred every day! Then the pallbearers came and gave me a beating." "You did a bad thing," responded his mother. "You should have cried and wrung your hands." "I can still do that," replied Michel. When he arrived in the village again, a wedding coach came his way, so Michel sat down and cried and wrung his hands. Then the members of the wedding party came and gave him a beating. Michel returned home again and said to his mother, "I got beaten up again!" "Why this time?" asked his mother. "Well," said Michel, "when I arrived in the village a wedding coach came my way, so I sat down and cried and wrung my hands. Then the members of the wedding party came and gave me a beating." "You did a bad thing," responded the mother. "You should have danced and shouted, 'Happiness and joy! Happiness and joy!'" "I can still do that," replied Michel. When he arrived in the village this time, there was a house on fire. He ran up to it, dancing and shouting, "Happiness and joy! Happiness and joy!" Then the men came and gave him a beating. Michel returned home again and said to his mother, "I got beaten up again!" "Why this time?" asked his mother. Michel said, "When I arrived in the village, there was a house on fire. I ran up to it dancing and shouting, 'Happiness and joy! Happiness and joy!' Then the men came and gave me a beating." "You did a bad thing," responded the mother. "You should have thrown a bucket of water on it." "I can still do that," replied Michel. When he arrived in the village this time, there was a wagon standing there filled with beehives, so he took a bucket of water and poured in on the bees. Then the beekeeper came and gave him a beating. Michel returned home again and said to his mother, "I got beaten up again!" "Oh, why this time?" asked his mother. Michel answered, "When I arrived in the village, there was a wagon standing there filled with beehives, so I took a bucket of water and poured in on the bees. Then the beekeeper came and gave me a beating. "You did a bad thing," responded the mother. "You should have said, 'Give me a sweet treat for my mother! Give me a sweet treat for my mother!'" "I can still do that," replied Michel. When he arrived in the village this time, a manure wagon was just being unloaded. Michel went up to it and said, "Give me a sweet treat for my mother! Give me a sweet treat for my mother!" "Gladly!" said the workers. "Just hold out your cap." Then they filled his cap full to the top. Then Michel went home and shouted, "Mother, mother, see what I've got here! Mother, mother, see what I've got here!" Then the mother took hold of him and gave him a beating. Source: Carl and Theodor Colshorn, "Wurst wider Wurst," Märchen und Sagen aus Hannover (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), no. 19, pp. 62-63). Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2000. Return to the table of contents . Silly Matt Norway Once on a time there was a goody who had a son called Matthew, but he was so stupid that he had no sense for anything, nor would he do much either; and the little he did was always topsy-turvy and never right, and so they never called him anything but "Silly Matt." All this the goody thought bad; and it was still worse she thought that her son idled about and never turned his hand to anything else than yawning and stretching himself between the four walls. Now close to where they lived ran a great river, and the stream was strong and bad to cross. So, one day, the goody said to the lad, there was no lack of timber there, for it grew almost up to the cottage-wall; he must cut some down and drag it to the bank and try to build a bridge over the river and take toll, and then he would both have something to do and something to live upon besides. Yes! Matt thought so too, for his mother had said it; what she begged him do, he would do. That was safe and sure he said, for what she said must be so and not otherwise. So he hewed down timber and dragged it down and built a bridge. It didn't go so awfully fast with the work, but at any rate he had his hands full while it went on. When the bridge was ready, the lad was to stand down at its end and take toll of those who wanted to cross, and his mother bade him be sure not to let any one over unless they paid the toll. It was all the same, she said, if it were not always in money. Goods and wares were just as good pay. So the first day came three chaps with each his load of hay, and wanted to cross the bridge. "No! no!" said the lad; "you can't go over till I've taken the toll." "We've nothing to pay it with," they said. "Well, then! you can't cross; but it's all the same, if it isn't money. Goods will do just as well." So they gave him each a wisp of hay, and he had as much as would go on a little hand-sledge, and then they had leave to pass over the bridge. Next came a pedlar with his pack, who sold needles and thread, and such like small wares, and he wanted to cross. "You can't cross, till you have paid the toll," said the lad. "I've nothing to pay it with," said the pedlar. "You have wares, at any rate." "So the pedlar took out two needles and gave them him, and then he had leave to cross the bridge. As for the needles, the lad stuck them into the hay, and soon set off home. So when he got home, he said, "Now, I have taken the toll, and got something to live on." "What did you get?" asked the goody. "Oh!" said he, "there came three chaps, each with his load of hay. They each gave me a wisp of hay, so that I got a little sledge-load; and next, I got two needles from a pedlar. "What did you do with the hay?" asked the goody. "I tried it between my teeth; but it tasted only of grass, so I threw into the river." "You ought to have spread it out on the byre-floor," said the goody. "Well! I'll do that next time, mother," he said. "And what then did you do with the needles?" said the goody. "I stuck them in the hay!" "Ah!" said his mother. "You are a born fool. You should have stuck them in and out of your cap." "Well! don't say another word, mother, and I'll be sure to do so next time." Next day, when the lad stood down at the foot of the bridge again, there came a man from the mill with a sack of meal, and wanted to cross. "You can't cross till you pay the toll," said the lad. "I've no pence to pay it with," said the man. "Well! You can't cross," said the lad; "but goods are good pay." So he got a pound of meal, and the man had leave to cross. Not long after came a smith, with a horse-pack of smith's work, and wanted to cross; but it was still the same. "You mustn't cross till you've paid the toll," said the lad. But he too had no money either; so he gave the lad a gimlet, and then he had leave to cross. So when the lad got home to his mother, the toll was the first thing she asked about. "What did you take for toll today?" "Oh! there came a man from the mill with a sack of meal, and he gave me a pound of meal; and then came a smith, with a horse-load of smith's-work, and he gave me a gimlet." "And pray what did you do with the gimlet?" asked the goody. "I did as you bade me, mother," said the lad. "I stuck it in and out of my cap." "Oh! but that was silly," said the goody; "you oughtn't to have stuck it out and in your cap; but you should have stuck it up your shirt-sleeve." "Ay! ay! only be still, mother; and I'll be sure to do it next time." "And what did you do with the meal, I'd like to know?" said the goody. "Oh! I did as you bade me, mother. I spread it over the byre-floor." "Never heard anything so silly in my born days," said the goody; "why, you ought to have gone home for a pail and put it into it." "Well! well! only be still, mother," said the lad; "and I'll be sure to do it next time." Next day the lad was down at the foot of the bridge to take toll, and so there came a man with a horse-load of brandy, and wanted to cross. "You can't cross till you pay the toll," said the lad. "I've got no money," said the man. "Well, then, you can't cross; but you have goods, of course," said the lad. Yes; so he got half a quart of brandy, and that he poured up his shirt-sleeve. A while after came a man with a drove of goats, and wanted to cross the bridge. "You can't cross till you pay the toll," said the lad. Well! he was no richer than the rest. He had no money; but still he gave the lad a little billy-goat, and he got over with his drove. But the lad took the goat and trod it down into a bucket he had brought with him. So when he got home, the goody asked again, "What did you take today?" "Oh! there came a man with a load of brandy, and from him I got a pint of brandy." "And what did you do with it!" "I did as you bade me, mother; I poured it up my shirt-sleeve." "Ay! but that was silly, my son; you should have come home to fetch a bottle and poured it into it." "Well! well! be still this time, mother, and I'll be sure to do what you say next time," and then he went on. "Next came a man with a drove of goats, and he gave me a little billy-goat, and that I trod down into the bucket." "Dear me!" said his mother, "that was silly, and sillier than silly, my son; you should have twisted a withy round its neck, and led the billy-goat home by it." "Well! be still, mother, and see if I don't do as you say next time." Next day he set oft for the bridge again to take toll, and so a man came with a load of butter, and wanted to cross. But the lad said he couldn't cross unless he paid toll. "I've nothing to pay it with," said the man. "Well! then you can't cross," said the lad; "but you have goods, and I'll take them instead of money." So the man gave him a pat of butter, and then he had eave to cross the bridge, and the lad strode off to a grove of willows and twisted a withy, and twined it round the butter, and dragged it home along the road; but so long as he went he left some of the butter behind him, and when he got home there was none left. "And what did you take today?" asked his mother. "There came a man with a load of butter, and he gave a pat." "Butter!" said the goody, "Where is it?" "I did as you bade me, mother," said the lad. "I tied a withy round the pat and led it home; but it was all lost by the way." "Oh!" said the goody, "You were born a fool, and you'll die a fool. Now you are not one bit better off for all your toil; but had you been like other folk, you might have had both meat and brandy, and both hay and tools. If you don't know better how to behave, I don't know what's to be done with you. Maybe, you might be more like the rest of the world, and get some sense into you if you were married to some one who could settle things for you, and so I think you had better set off and see about finding a brave lass; but you must be sure you know how to behave well on the way and to greet folk prettily when you meet them." "And pray what shall I say to them?" asked the lad. "To think of your asking that," said his mother. "Why, of course, you must bid them 'God's Peace,' Don't you know that?" "Yes! yes! I'll do as you bid," said the lad; and so he set off on his way to woo him a wife. So, when he had gone a bit of the way, he met Greylegs, the wolf, with her seven cubs; and when he got so far as to be alongside them, he stood still and greeted them with "God's Peace!" and when he had said that, he went home again. "I said it all as you bade me, mother," said Matt. "And what was that?" asked his mother. "God's Peace," said Matt. "And pray whom did you meet?" "A she wolf with seven cubs; that was all I met," said Matt. "Ay! ay! You are like yourself," said his mother. "So it was, and so it will ever be. Why in the world did you say 'God's Peace' to a wolf. You should have clapped your hands and said, 'Huf! huf! you jade of a she-wolf!' That's what you ought to have said." "Well! well! be still, mother," he said. I'll be sure to say so another time." And with that he strode off from the farm, and when he had gone a bit on the way, he met a bridal train. So he stood still when he had got well up to the bride and bridegroom, and clapped his hands and said, "Huf! huf! you jade of a she-wolf!" After that he went home to his mother and said, "I did as you bade me mother; but I got a good thrashing for it, that I did." "What was it you did?" she asked. "Oh! I clapped my hands and called out, 'Huf! huf! you jade of a she-wolf!'" "And what was it you met?" "I met a bridal train." "Ah! you are a fool, and always will be a fool," said his mother. "Why should you say such things to a bridal train. You should have said, 'Ride happily, bride and bridegroom.'" "Well! well! See if I don't say so next time," said the lad, and off he went again. So he met a bear, who was taking a ride on a horse, and Matt waited till he came alongside him, and then he said, "A happy ride to you, bride and bridegroom," and then he went back to his mother and told her how he had said what she bade him. "And pray! what was it you said?" she asked. "I said, 'A happy ride to you both, bride and bridegroom.'" "And whom did you meet?" "I met a bear taking a ride on a horse," said Matt. "My goodness! what a fool you are," said his mother. "You ought to have said, 'To the de'il with you.' That's what you ought to have said." "Well! well! mother, I'll be sure to say so next time." So he set off again, and this time he met a funeral; and when he had come well up to the coffin, he greeted it and said, "To the de'il with you!" and then he ran home to his mother, and told her he had said what she bade him. "And what was that?" she asked. "Oh! I said, 'To the de'il with you.'" "And what was it you met?" "I met a funeral," said Matt; "but I got more kicks than halfpence!" "You didn't get half enough," said the goody. "Why, of course, you ought to have said, 'May your poor soul have mercy.' That's what you ought to have said." "Ay! ay! mother! so I will next time, only be still," said Matt, and off he went again. So when he had gone a bit of the way he fell on two ugly Gypsies who were skinning a dog. So when he came up to them he greeted them and said, "May your poor soul have mercy," and when he had said so he went home and told his mother he had said what she bade him; but all he got was such a drubbing he could scarce drag one leg after the other. "But what was it you said?" asked the goody. "'May your poor soul have mercy,' that was what I said." "And whom did you meet?" "A pair of Gypsies skinning a dog," he said. "Well! well!" said the goody. "There's no hope of your changing. You'll always be a shame and sorrow to us wherever you go. I never heard such shocking words. But now, you must set out and take no notice of any one you meet, for you must be off to woo a wife, and see if you can get some one who knows more of the ways of the world and has a better head on her shoulders than yours. And now you must behave like other folk, and if all goes well you may bless your stars, and bawl out, "Hurrah!" Yes, the lad did all that his mother bade him. He set off and wooed a lass, and she thought he couldn't be so bad a fellow after all; and so she said, "Yes," she would have him. When the lad got home the goody wanted to know what his sweetheart's name was; but he did not know. So the goody got angry and said, he must just set off again, for she would know what the girl's name was. So when Matt was going home again he had sense enough to ask her what she was called. "Well," she said, "my name is Solvy; but I thought you knew it already." So Matt ran off home, and as he went he mumbled to himself, Solvy, Solvy, Is my darling! Solvy, Solvy, Is my darling? But just as he was running as hard as he could to reach home before he forgot it, he tripped over a tuft of grass, and forgot the name again. So when he got on his feet again he began to search all round the hillock, but all he could find was a spade. So he seized it and began to dig and search as hard as he could, and as he was hard at it up came an old man. "What are you digging for?" said the man. "Have you lost anything here?" "Oh yes! oh yes! I have lost my sweetheart's name, and I can't find it again." "I think her name is Solvy," said the man. "Oh yes, that's it," said Matt, and away he ran with the spade in his hand, bawling out, Solvy, Solvy, Is my darling! But when he had gone a little way he called to mind that he had taken the spade, and so he threw it behind him, right onto the man's leg. Then the man began to roar and bemoan himself as though he had a knife stuck in him, and then Matt forgot the name again, and ran home as fast as he could, and when he got there, the first thing his mother asked was, "What's your sweetheart's name?" But Matt was just as wise as when he set out, for he did not know the name any better the last than the first time. "You are the same big fool, that you are," said the goody. "You won't do any better this time either. But now I'll just set off myself and fetch the girl home, and get you married. Meanwhile you must fetch water up to the fifth plank all round the room, and wash it, and then you must take a little fat and a little lean, and the greenest thing you can find in the cabbage garden, and boil them all up together; and when you have done that you must put yourself into fine feather, and look smart when your lassie comes, and then you may sit down on the dresser." Yes, all that Matt thought he could do very well. He fetched water and dashed it about the room in floods, but he couldn't get it to stand above the fourth plank, for when it rose higher it ran out. So he had to leave off that work. But now you must know, they had a dog whose name was Fat, and a cat whose name was Lean. Both these he took and put into the soup-kettle. As for the greenest thing in the garden, it was a green gown which the goody had meant for her daughter-in-law; that he cut up into little bits, and away it went into the pot; but their little pig, which was called All, he cooked by himself in the brewing tub. And when Matt had done all this he laid hands on a pot of treacle and a feather pillow. Then he first of all rubbed himself all over with the treacle, and then he tore open the pillow and rolled himself in the feathers, and then he sat down on the dresser out in the kitchen, till his mother and the lassie came. Now the first thing the goody missed when she came to her house was the dog, for it always used to meet her out of doors. The next thing was the cat, for it always met her in the porch, and when the weather was right down good and the sun shone, she even came out into the yard, and met her at the garden gate. Nor could she see the green gown she had meant for her daughter-in-law either, and her piggy-wiggy, which followed her grunting wherever she went, he was not there either. So she went in to see about all this; but as soon as ever she lifted the latch, out poured the water through the doorway like a waterfall, so that they were almost borne away by the flood, both the goody and the lassie. So they had to go round by the back door, and when they got inside the kitchen there sat that figure of fun all befeathered. "What have you done?" said the goody. "I did just as you bade me, mother," said Matt. "I tried to get the water up to the fifth plank, but as fast as ever I poured it in it ran out again, and so I could only get up as high as the fourth plank." "Well! well! but Fat and Lean," said the goody, who wished to turn it off; "what have you done with them?" "I did as you bade me, mother," said Matt. "I took and put them into the soup-kettle. They both scratched and bit, and they mewed and whined, and Fat was strong and kicked against it; but he had to go in at last all the same; and as for All, he's cooking by himself in the brewing tub in the brew-house, for there wasn't room for him in the soup-kettle." "But what have you done with that new green gown I meant for my daughter-in-law?" said the goody, trying to hide his silliness. "Oh! I did as you bade me, mother. It hung out in the cabbage-garden, and as it was the greatest thing there, I took it and cut it up small, and yonder it boils in the soup." "Away ran the goody to the chimney-corner, tore off the pot and turned it upside down with all that was in it. Then she filled it anew and put it on to boil. But when she had time to look at Matt she was quite shocked. "Why is it you are such a figure?" she cried. "I did as you bade me, mother," said Matt. "First I rubbed myself all over with treacle to make myself sweet for my bride, and then I tore open the pillow and put myself into fine feathers." Well, the goody turned it off as well as she could, and picked off the feathers from her son, and washed him clean, and put fresh clothes on him. So at last they were to have the wedding, but first Matt was to go to the town and sell a cow to buy things for the bridal. The goody had told him what he was to do, and the beginning and end of what she said was, he was to be sure to get something for the cow. So when he got to the market with the cow, and they asked what he was to have for her, they could get no other answer out of him than that he was to have something for her. So at last came a butcher, who begged him to take the cow and follow him home, and he'd be sure to give him something for her. Yes, Matt went off with the cow, and when he got to the butcher's house the butcher spat into the palm of Matt's hand, and said, "There, you have something for your cow, but look sharp after it." So off went Matt as carefully as if he trode on eggs, holding his hand shut; but when he had got about as far as the cross-road, which led to their farm, he met the parson, who came driving along. "Open the gate for me, my lad," said the parson. So the lad hastened to open the gate, but in doing so he forgot what he had in his palm, and took the gate by both hands, so that what he got for the cow was left sticking on the gate. So when he saw it was gone he got cross, and said, his reverence had taken something from him. But when the parson asked him if he had lost his wits, and said he had taken nothing from him, Matt got so wrath he killed the parson at a blow, and buried him in a bog by the wayside. So when he got home he told his mother all about it, and she slaughtered a billy-goat, and laid it where Matt had laid the parson, but she buried the parson in another place. And when she had done that she hung over the fire a pot of brose, and when it was cooked she made Matt sit down in the ingle and split matches. Meantime she went up on the roof with the pot and poured the brose down the chimney, so that it streamed over her son. Next day came the sheriff. So when the sheriff asked him, Matt did not gainsay that he had slain the parson, and more, he was quite ready to show the sheriff where he had laid his reverence. But when the sheriff asked on what day it happened, Matt said, "It was the day when it rained brose over the whole world." So when he got to the spot where he had buried the parson the sheriff pulled out the billy-goat, and asked, "Had your parson horns?" Now when the judges heard the story, they made up their minds that the lad was quite out of his wits, and so he got off scot free. So after all the bridal was to stand, and the goody had a long talk with her son, and bade him be sure to behave prettily when they sat at table. He was not to look too much at the bride, but to cast an eye at her now and then. Peas he might eat by himself, but he must share the eggs with her, and he was not to lay the leg bones by his side on the table, but to place them tidily on his plate. Yes, Matt would do all that, and he did it well; yes, he did all that his mother bade him, and nothing else. First, he stole out to the sheepfold, and plucked the eyes out of all the sheep and goats he could find, and took them with him. So when they went to dinner he sat with his back to his bride; but all at once he cast a sheep's eye at her so that it hit her full in her face; and a little while after he cast another, and so he went on. As for the eggs he ate them all up to his own cheek, so that the lassie did not get a taste, but when the peas came he shared them with her. And when they had eaten a while Matt put his feet together, and up on his plate went his legs. At night, when they were to go to bed, the lassie was tired and weary, for she thought it no good to have such a fool for her husband. So she said she had forgotten something and must go out a little; but she could not get Matt's leave; he would follow her, for to tell the truth, he was afraid she would never come back. "No! no! lie still, I say," said the bride. "See, here's a long hair-rope; tie it round me, and I'll leave the door ajar. So if you think I'm too long away you have only to pull the rope and then you'll drag me in again." Yes, Matt was content with that; but as soon as the lassie got out into the yard she caught a billy-goat and untied the rope and tied it round him. So when Matt thought she was too long out of doors he began to haul in the rope, and so he dragged the billy-goat up into bed to him. But when he had lain a while, he bawled out, "Mother! mother! my bride has horns like a billygoat!" "Stuff! silly boy to lie and bewail yourself." said his mother. "It's only her hair-plaits, poor thing, I'm sure." In a little while Matt called out again, "Mother! mother! my bride has a beard like a goat." "Stuff! silly boy to lie there and rave," said the goody. But there was no rest in that house that night, for in a little while Matt screeched out that his bride was like a billy-goat all over. So when it grew towards morning the goody said, "Jump up, my son, and make a fire." So Matt climbed up to a shelf under the roof, and set fire to some straw and chips, and other rubbish that lay there. But then such a smoke rose, that he couldn't bear it any longer indoors. He was forced to go out, and just then the day broke. As for the goody, she too had to make a start of it, and when they got out the house was on fire, so that the flames came right out at the roof. "Good luck! good luck! Hip, hip, hurrah!" roared out Matt, for he thought it fine fun to have such an ending to his bridal feast. Source: Peter Christen Asbjřrnsen, Tales from the Fjeld: A Second Series of Popular Tales , translated by George Webbe Dasent (London: Chapman and Hall, 1874), pp. 335-52 . Link to the Norwegian text of this tale: Gale-Mattis . The episode of the mother protecting her half-witted son by pouring porridge down the chimney is classified as a type 1381B folktale. The episode of the mother protecting her half-witted son by substituting an animal's body for a human corpse is a type 1600 folktale. The episode of casting eyes is classified as a type 1006 folktale. Return to the table of contents . Stupid's Mistaken Cries England As told in Essex about the year 1800 There was once a little boy, and his mother sent him to buy a sheep's head and pluck; afraid he should forget it, the lad kept saying all the way along: Sheep's head and pluck! Sheep's head and pluck! Trudging along, he came to a stile; but in getting over he fell and hurt himself, and, beginning to blubber, forgot what he was sent for. So he stood a little while to consider; at last he thought he recollected it, and began to repeat: Liver and lights [lungs] and gall and all! Liver and lights and gall and all! Away he went again, and came to where a man was sick, bawling out: Liver and lights and gall and all! Liver and lights and gall and all! Whereon the man laid hold of him and beat him, bidding him say: Pray God send no more up! Pray God send no more up! The youngster strode along, uttering these words, till he reached a field where a hind [farm servant] was sowing wheat: Pray God send no more up! Pray God send no more up! This was all his cry. So the sower began to thrash him, and charged him to repeat: Pray God send plenty more! Pray God send plenty more! Off the child scampered with these words in his mouth till he reached a churchyard and met a funeral, but he went on with his: Pray God send plenty more! Pray God send plenty more! The chief mourner seized and punished him, and bade him repeat: Pray God send the soul to heaven! Pray God send the soul to heaven! Away went the boy, and met a dog and a bitch going to be hung, but his cry rang out: Pray God send the soul to heaven! Pray God send the soul to heaven! The good folk nearly were furious, seized and struck him, charging him to say: A dog and a bitch a-going to be hung! A dog and a bitch a-going to be hung! This the poor fellow did, till he overtook a man and a woman going to be married. "Oh! oh!" he shouted: A dog and a bitch a-going to be hung! A dog and a bitch a-going to be hung! The man was enraged, as we may well think, gave him many a thump, and ordered him to repeat: I wish you much joy! I wish you much joy! This he did, jogging along, till he came to two labourers who had fallen into a ditch. The lad kept bawling out: I wish you much joy! I wish you much joy! This vexed one of the folk so sorely that he used all his strength, scrambled out, beat the crier, and told him to say: The one is out, I wish the other was! The one is out, I wish the other was! On went young 'un till he found a fellow with only one eye; but he kept up his song: The one is out, I wish the other was! The one is out, I wish the other was! This was too much for Master One-eye, who grabbed him and chastised him, bidding him call: The one side gives good light, I wish the other did! The one side gives good light, I wish the other did! So he did, to be sure, till he came to a house, one side of which was on fire. The people here thought it was he who had set the place a-blazing, and straightway put him in prison. The end was, the judge put on his black cap and condemned him to die. Source: George Stephens, "Two English Folk-Tales," The Folk-Lore Record , vol. 3, part 2 (London: Printed for the Folk-Lore Society by Messrs. Nichols and Sons, 1881), pp. 153-55 . The first episode of this tale is classified as a type 1687 folktale, The Forgotten Word . Public domain reprints of this story include: Edwin Sidney Hartland, "Stupid's Mistaken Cries," English Fairy and Other Folk Tales (London: Walter Scott Publishing Company, [1890]), pp. 257-59 . Joseph Jacobs, "Stupid's Cries, More English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 195-97 . Jacobs modified this version somewhat, making it conform more closely to the standards of Victorian children's literature. Return to the table of contents . The Forgetful Boy USA A man had a boy who when he was sent of errands would forget what he was sent for. So one day, when he sent him to the butcher's to get a sheep's pluck, to make him remember he told him to keep a saying, "Heart, liver, and lights [lungs]." So the boy started, saying, "Heart, liver, 'n' lights! Heart, liver, 'n' lights!" By and by he came across a man puking. He took him and gave him a whipping, and said, "You want I should puke up my heart, liver, and lights, do you?" "No," said the boy; "what shall I say ?" and the man told him to say, "I wish they may never come up!" So the boy went on, saying, "Wish 'ey may never come up! Wish 'ey may never come up!" By and by he came across a man planting beans, and he took and whipped him and said, "You wish my beans should never come up, do you?" The boy said, "No, what shall I say?" "Say, 'I wish fifty-fold this year and a hundred-fold next.'" So the boy went on, saying, " Wish fifty-fold this year, 'n' a hundred-fold next! Wish fifty-fold this year 'n' a hundred-fold next!" By and by he came across a funeral, and they took and whipped him, and said, "You wish fifty-fold to die this year and a hundred-fold next, do you?" The boy said, "No, what shall I say?" "Say, 'I wish they may never die!'" So the boy went on, saying, " Wish 'ey may never die! Wish 'ey may never die!" By and by he came across a man who was trying to kill two dogs, and he took and whipped him and said, "You wish the dogs should never die, do you?" The boy said, "No, what shall I say?" "Say, 'The dog and the bitch are going to be hanged!'" So the boy went on, saying, "The dog 'n' the bitch are gon ter be hanged! The dog 'n' the bitch are gon ter be hanged!" By and by he came across a wedding party, and they took and whipped him and said, "You call us dog and bitch, do you?" The boy said, "No, what shall I say?" "Say, 'I wish you may live happily together!'" So the boy went on, saying, "Wish y' may live happily together! Wish y' may live happily together!" By and by he came across two men who had fallen into a pit, and one of them had got out and was trying to get the other out. And he took and whipped him and said, "You wish we may live happily together in this pit, do you?" The boy said, "No, what shall I say?" "Say, 'One's out and I wish the other was out!'" So the boy went on, saying, "One's out 'n' I wish t' other w's out! One's out 'n' I wish t' other w's out!" By and by he came across a man with only one eye, and he took and whipped him till he killed him. Source: George Lyman Kittredge, "English Folk-Tales in America," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 3, no. 22 (October - December 1890), pp. 292-93 . Kittredge's note on his source: To the editor of The Journal of American Folk-Lore : Dear Sir, Inclosed you will find a copy of one of the old stories I used to hear when I was a boy, as near as I can reproduce it by the aid of a cousin who used to hear it with me. My grandmother heard it in childhood at North Bridgewater, now Brockton. You will see that I have tried to give the exact words as they sounded to me, as nearly as I can represent them. I doubt this having any real value in the line of "folk-lore," but you can judge better than I. I don't remember any application that was made of the story then, but in repeating it now it seems to me it was told for a warning to forgetful boys. The exact form of expression in one or two places we cannot now recall, but have given it as nearly as possible. I have never met the story or any semblance of it in print or in conversation. I should be glad to know if it survives anywhere, and if so, whether coming from the same source, and with what variations. I have fragments of others, some of which are certainly allied to the celebrated world-wide stories like Cinderella. Yours very truly, Silvanus Hayward. The first episode of this tale is classified as a type 1687 folktale, The Forgotten Word . Return to the table of contents . Lazy Jack England Once upon a time there was a boy whose name was Jack, and he lived with his mother on a common. They were very poor, and the old woman got her living by spinning, but Jack was so lazy that he would do nothing but bask in the sun in the hot weather, and sit by the corner of the hearth in the wintertime. So they called him Lazy Jack. His mother could not get him to do anything for her, and at last told him, one Monday, that if he did not begin to work for his porridge she would turn him out to get his living as he could. This roused Jack, and he went out and hired himself for the next day to a neighboring farmer for a penny. But as he was coming home, never having had any money before, he lost it in passing over a brook. "You stupid boy," said his mother, "you should have put it in your pocket." "I'll do so another time," replied Jack. On Wednesday, Jack went out again and hired himself to a cow-keeper, who gave him a jar of milk for his day's work. Jack took the jar and put it into the large pocket of his jacket, spilling it all, long before he got home. "Dear me!" said the old woman. "You should have carried it on your head." "I'll do so another time," said Jack. So on Thursday, Jack hired himself again to a farmer who agreed to give him a cream cheese for his services. In the evening Jack took the cheese, and went home with it on his head. By the time he got home the cheese was all spoiled, part of it being lost, and part matted with his hair. "You stupid lout," said his mother, "you should have carried it very carefully in your hands." "I'll do another time," replied Jack. On Friday Lazy Jack again went out, and hired himself to a baker, who would give him nothing for his work but a large tomcat. Jack took the cat, and began carrying it very carefully in his hands, but in a short time pussy scratched him so much that he was compelled to let it go. When he got home, his mother said to him, "You silly fellow, you should have tied it with a string, and dragged it along after you." "I'll do so another time," said Jack. So on Saturday Jack hired himself to a butcher, who rewarded him by the handsome present of a shoulder of mutton. Jack took the mutton, tied it to a string and trailed it along after him in the dirt, so that by the time he had got home the meat was completely spoiled. His mother was this time quite out of patience with him, for the next day was Sunday, and she was obliged to do with cabbage for her dinner. "You ninny-hammer," said she to her son, "you should have carried it on your shoulder." "I'll do so another time," replied Jack. On the next Monday Lazy Jack went once more, and hired himself to a cattle-keeper, who gave him a donkey for his trouble. Jack found it hard to hoist the donkey on his shoulders, but at last he did it, and began walking slowly home with his prize. Now it happened that in the course of his journey there lived a rich man with his only daughter, a beautiful girl, but deaf and dumb. Now she had never laughed in her life, and the doctors said she would never speak till somebody made her laugh. This young lady happened to be looking out of the window when jack was passing with the donkey on his shoulders, with the legs sticking up in the air, and the sight was so comical and strange that she burst out into a great fit of laughter, and immediately recovered her speech and hearing. Her father was overjoyed, and fulfilled his promise by marrying her to Lazy Jack, who was thus made a rich gentleman. They lived in a large house, and Jack's mother lived with them in great happiness until she died. Source: Joseph Jacobs, English Fairy Tales (London: David Nutt, 1890), no. 27, pp.152-54 . Jacobs' source: James Orchard Halliwell-Phillips, Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales: A Sequel to the Nursery Rhymes of England (London: John Russell Smith, 1849), pp. 37-39 . Return to the table of contents . Jock and His Mother Scotland There was a wife that had a son, and they ca'd him Jock; and she said to him: "You are a lazy fallow; ye maun gang awa' and do something for to help me." "Weel," says Jock, "I'll do that." So awa' he gangs, and fa's in wi' a packman. Says the packman: "If ye carry my pack a' day, I'll gie ye a needle at night." So he carried the pack, and got the needle; and as he was gaun awa' hame to his mither, he cuts a burden o' brakens, and put the needle into the heart o' them. Awa' he gaes hame. Says his mither: "What hae ye made o' yersel' the day?" Says Jock: "I fell in wi' a packman, and carried his pack a' day, and he ga'e me a needle for't; and ye may look for it amang the brakens." "Hout," quo' she, "ye daft gowk, ye should hae stuck it into your bonnet, man." "I'll mind that again," quo' Jock. Next day he fell in wi' a man carrying plough socks. "If ye help me to carry my socks a' day, I'll gie ye ane to yersel' at night." "I'll do that," quo' Jock. Jock carries them a' day, and gets a sock, which he sticks in his bonnet. On the way hame, Jock was dry, and gaed awa' to tak a drink out o' the burn; and wi' the weight o' the sock, it fell into the river, and gaed out o' sight. He gaed hame, and his mother says: "Weel, Jock, what hae ye been doing a' day?" And then he tells her. "Hout," quo' she, "ye should hae tied a string to it, and trailed it behind you." "Weel," quo' Jock, "I'll mind that again. Awa' he sets, and he fa's in wi' a flesher. "Weel," says the flesher, "if ye'll be my servant a' day, I'll gie ye a leg o' mutton at night." "I'll be that," quo' Jock. He gets a leg o' mutton at night; he ties a string to it, and trails it behind him the hale road hame. "What hae ye been doing?" said his mither. He tells her. "Hout, ye fool, ye should hae carried it on your shouther." "I'll mind that again," quo' Jock. Awa' he goes next day, and meets a horse-dealer. He says: "If ye will help me wi' my horses a' day, I'll gie ye ane to yersel' at night." "I'll do that," quo' Jock. So he served him, and got his horse, and he ties its feet; but as he was not able to carry it on his back, he left it lying on the roadside. Hame he comes, and tells his mother. "Hout, ye daft gowk, ye'll ne'er turn wise! Could ye no hae loupen on it, and ridden it?" "I'll mind that again," quo' Jock. Aweel, there was a grand gentleman, wha had a daughter wha was very subject to melancholy; and her father gave out that whaever should make her laugh would get her in marriage. So it happened that she was sitting at the window ae day, musing in her melancholy state, when Jock, according to the advice o' his mither, came flying up on the cow's back, wi' the tail owre his shouther. And she burst out into a fit o' laughter. When they made inquiry wha made her laugh, it was found to be Jock riding on the cow. Accordingly, Jock is sent for to get his bride. Weel, Jock is married to her, and there was a great supper prepared. Amongst the rest o' the things there was some honey, which Jock was very fond o'. After supper, they were bedded, and the auld priest that married them sat up a' night by the fireside. So Jock waukens in the night-time, and says: "O wad ye gie me some o' yon nice sweet honey that we got to our supper last night?" "O ay," says his wife; "rise and gang into the press, and ye'll get a pig fou o't." Jock rises, and thrusts his hand into the honey-pig for a nievefu' o't; and he could not get it out. So he came awa' wi' the pig on his hand, like a mason's mell, and says: "Oh, I canna get my hand out." "Hout," quo' she, "gang awa' and break it on the cheek-stane." By this time the fire was dark, and the auld priest was lying snoring wi' his head against the chimney-piece, wi' a huge white wig on. Jock gaes awa', and ga'e him a whack wi' the honey-pig on the head, thinking it was the cheek-stane, and knocks it a' in bits. The auld priest roars out "Murder!" Jock taks down the stair as hard as he can bicker, and hides himsel' amang the bees' skeps. That night, as luck wad have it, some thieves came to steal the bees' skeps, and in the hurry o' tumbling them into a large gray plaid, they tumbled Jock in alang wi' them. So aff they set, wi' Jock and the skeps on their backs. On the way, they had to cross the burn where Jock lost his bannet. Ane o' the thieves cries: "O I hae fand a bannet!" and Jock, on hearing that, cries out: "O that's mine!" They thocht they had got the deil on their backs. So they let a' fa' in the burn; and Jock, being tied in the plaid, couldna get out; so he and the bees were a' drowned thegither. If a' tales be true, that's nae lee. Source: Robert Chambers, Popular Rhymes of Scotland , new edition (London and Edinburgh: W. and R. Chambers, 1870), pp. 101-103 . Return to the table of contents . I'll Be Wiser the Next Time Ireland Jack was twenty years old before he done any good for his family. So at last his mother said it was high time for him to begin to be of some use. So the next market day she sent him to Bunclody (Newtownbarry), to buy a billhook to cut the furze. When he was coming back he kep' cutting gaaches with it round his head, till at last it flew out of his hand, and killed a lamb that a neighbour was bringing home. Well, if he did, so sure was his mother obliged to pay for it, and Jack was in disgrace. "Musha, you fool," says she, "couldn't you lay the billhook in a car, or stick it into a bundle of hay or straw that any of the neighbours would be bringing home?" "Well, mother," said he, "it can't be helped now; I'll be wiser next time." "Now, Jack," says she, the next Saturday, "you behaved like a fool the last time; have some wit about you now, and don't get us into a hobble. Here is a fi'penny bit, and buy me a good pair (set) of knitting needles, and fetch 'em home safe." "Never fear, mother." When Jack was outside the town, coming back, he overtook a neighbour sitting on the side-lace of his car, and there was a big bundle of hay in the bottom of it. "Just the safe thing," says Jack, sticking the needles into it. When he came home he looked quite proud out of his good management. "Well, Jack," says his mother, "where's the needles?" "Oh, faith ! they're safe enough. Send any one down to Jem Doyle's, and he'll find them in the bundle of hay that's in the car." "Musha, purshuin to you, Jack! why couldn't you stick them in the band o' your hat? What searching there will be for them in the hay!" "Sure you said I ought to put any things I was bringing home in a car, or stick 'em in hay or straw. Anyhow I'll be wiser next time." Next week Jack was sent to a neighbour's house about a mile away, for some of her nice fresh butter. The day was hot, and Jack remembering his mother's words, stuck the cabbage leaf that held the butter between his hat and the band. He was luckier this turn than the other turns, for he brought his errand safe in his hair and down along his clothes. There's no pleasing some people, however, and his mother was so vexed that she was ready to beat him. There was so little respect for Jack's gumption in the whole village after this, that he wasn't let go to market for a fortnight. Then his mother trusted him with a pair of young fowl. "Now don't be too eager to snap at the first offer you'll get; wait for the second any way, and above all things keep your wits about you." Jack got to the market safe. "How do you sell them fowl, honest boy?" My mother bid me ax three shillings for 'em, but sure herself said I wouldn't get it." "She never said a truer word. Will you have eighteen pence?" "In throth an' I won't; she ordhered me to wait for a second offer." "And very wisely she acted; here is a shilling." "Well now, I think it would be wiser to take the eighteen pence, but it is better for me at any rate to go by her bidding, and then she can't blame me." Jack was in disgrace for three weeks after making that bargain; and some of the neighbours went so far as to say that Jack's mother didn't show much more wit than Jack himself." She had to send him, however, next market day to sell a young sheep, and says she to him, "Jack, I'll have your life if you don't get the highest penny in the market for that baste." "Oh, won't I!" says Jack. Well, when he was standing in the market, up comes a jobber, and asks him what he'd take for the sheep. "My mother won't be satisfied," says Jack, "if I don't bring her home the highest penny in the market." "Will a guinea note do you?" says the other. "Is it the highest penny in the market?" says Jack. "No, but here's the highest penny in the market," says a sleeveen that was listenin', getting up on a high ladder that was restin' again' the market house. "Here's the highest penny, and the sheep is mine." Well, if the poor mother wasn't heart-scalded this time it's no matter. She said she'd never lose more than a shilling a turn by him again while she lived; but she had to send him for some groceries next Saturday for all that, for it was Christmas eve. "Now, Jack," says she, "I want some cinnamon, mace, and cloves, and half a pound of raisins; will you be able to think of 'em?" "Able, indeed! I'll be repatin' 'em every inch o' the way, and that won't let me forget them." So he never stopped as he ran along, saying "cinnamon, mace, and cloves, and half a pound of raisins;" and this time he'd have come home in glory, only he struck his foot again' a stone, and fell down, and hurt himself. At last he got up, and as he went limping on he strove to remember his errand, but it was changed in his mind to "pitch, and tar, and turpentine, and half a yard of sacking. Pitch, and tar, and turpentine, and half a yard of sacking." These did not help the Christmas dinner much, and his mother was so tired of minding him that she sent him along with a clever black man (matchmaker), up to the county Carlow, to get a wife to take care of him. Well, the black man never let him open his mouth all the time the coortin' was goin' on; and at last the whole party -- his friends, and her friends, were gathered into the priest's parlour. The black man staid close to him for 'fraid he'd do a bull; and when Jack was married half a year, if he thought his life was bad enough before, he thought it ten times worse now; and told his mother if she'd send his wife back to her father, he'd never make a mistake again going to fair or market. But the wife cock-crowed over the mother as well as over Jack; and if they didn't live happy, THAT WE MAY! Source: Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 39-42 . Return to the table of contents . The Fool's Good Fortune Georgia A certain man died and left three sons. One was altogether a fool, another was fairly intelligent, and the third was rather clever. This being so, it was of course difficult for them to live together. In dividing the inheritance among them, the fool was cheated, and in regard to the cattle he was thus duped: There were three entrances to the pen, two open and one very narrow. The two clever brothers proposed to drive the beasts out of all three at once; those that issued from the small gap were to belong to the fool. In this way the latter's share was only one young bull out of the whole flock. But to his feeble mind the division seemed fair enough, so he contentedly drove his bull out into the forest, and tied it with a stout rope to a young tree, whilst he himself wandered aimlessly about. Three days later, the fool went to see his beast. It had eaten and drunk nothing, but had pulled the tree up by the roots, and laid bare a jar full of old gold coins. The fool was delighted, and played with the money for a time. Then he resolved to take the jar and present it to the king. As he passed along the road, every wayfarer looked into the pot, took out the gold in handfuls, and so that he should not notice their thefts, filled it up with stones and blocks of wood. On reaching the palace, the fool asked for an audience of the king, and it was granted. He emptied out the contents of the jar at the feet of the king. When the courtiers saw the wrath of the king, they took the fool away and beat him. When he had recovered himself he asked why he had been thrashed. One of the bystanders, for fun, cried to him, "You have been beaten because you labor in vain." The fool went his way, muttering the words, "You labor in vain." As he passed a peasant who was reaping, he repeated his phrase again and again, until the peasant grew angry, and thrashed him. The fool asked why he had been beaten, and what he ought to have said. "You ought to have said, 'God give you a good harvest!'" The fool went on, saying "God give you a good harvest!" and met a funeral. Again he was beaten, and again he asked what he should say. They replied that he should have said, "Heaven rest your soul!" He then came to a wedding, and saluted the newly married couple with this funereal phrase. Again he was beaten, and then told that he should say, "Be fruitful and multiply!" His next visit was to a monastery, and he accosted every monk with his new salutation. They too gave him a thrashing, with such vigor that the fool determined to have his revenge by stealing of the bells from their belfry. So he hid himself until the monks had gone to rest, and then carried off a bell of moderate size. He went into the forest, climbed a tree, and hung the bell on the branches, ringing it from time to time, partly to amuse himself and partly to frighten away wild beasts. In the forest there was a gang of robbers, who were assembled to share their booty, and had just ended a merry banquet. Suddenly they heard the sound of the bell, and were much afraid. They took counsel as to what was to be done, and most of them were for flight, but the oldest of the band advised them to send a scout to see what was wrong. The bravest among them was sent to get information, and the rest remained as quiet as possible. The brigand went on tiptoe through the bushes to the tree where the fool was, and respectfully asked, "Who are you? If you are an angel sent by God to punish our wickedness, pray spare us and we shall repent. If you are a devil from hell, come and share with us." The fool was not so stupid that he did not see he had to deal with robbers, so he took out a knife, tolled the bell, and then said with a grave air, "If you wish to know who I am, climb the tree and show me your tongue, so that I may mark on it who I am and what I ask of you." The robber obediently climbed the tree, and put out his tongue as far as he could. The fool cut off his tongue, and kicked him to the ground. The robber, mad with pain, and frightened by his sudden fall, ran off howling. His comrades had come out to meet him, and when they saw the plight he was in, they ran off in terror, leaving their wealth. Next morning the fool found the booty, and without saying anything to anybody, took it home and became much richer than his brothers. The fool built three palaces: one for himself, one for me, and one for you. There is merrymaking in the fool's palace. Come and be one of the guests! Source: Marjory Wardrop, Georgian Folk Tales (London: David Nutt, 1894), pp. 165-167. The episode of the robbers under the tree is categorized as Aarne-Thompson type 1653. Return to the table of contents . A Stupid Boy Kashmir A poor widow's misery was increased by the knowledge that her son, her only son, around whom she had built up many many hopes, was a half-wit. One day she sent him to the bazaar with some cloth and told him to sell it for four rupees. The boy went, and sat down in the most public thoroughfare of the city. "How much do you want for that piece of cloth?" asked a man. "Four rupees," replied the boy. "All right. I'll give you six rupees for it. It is worth it. Here, take the money." "No, no," said the boy. "Its price is four rupees." "You scamp!" exclaimed the man angrily, and went on. He thought the boy was joking with him. On reaching home in the evening he informed his mother of this incident, and she was grieved that he had not taken the money. Another day she sent him to the bazaar, and advised him to salaam everybody, saying that nothing was ever lost by politeness, but, on the contrary, everything was sometimes gained by it. The stupid boy sallied forth, and began making salaams to everybody and everything he met -- a sweeper, a horse, some little children, a house. A number of asses, too, passed by with loads on their backs, and he said "Salaam" to them also. "Hey! You fool! What are you doing?" said the donkey-driver in charge. "Don't you know that we say "Fri fri?" [an exclamation used for urging on donkeys], whereupon the boy commenced saying "Fri fri" to every person and thing. He passed a man who had just spread a snare for a bird that he very much wished to catch, when "Fri fri" shouted the boy, and most effectually frightened away the bird. "You blackguard! What are you doing?" said the man. "You should say "Lag lag" in a very soft tone." Then the boy began to say "Lag lag." He was wandering about crying "Lag lag" when he came across some thieves coming out of a garden, where they had just been stealing the fruit. "What do you mean?" said they. "Be quiet, you fool, or say something else. Go and shout, 'Let go one and take the other.'" So the boy did, and while he was shouting these words a funeral cortege passed by. "Be quiet," said some of the mourners. "Have you so little respect for the dead? Get along home." At length, disappointed and disheartened, not knowing what to do or what to say, the half-wit returned to his mother and told her everything. Source: J. Hinton Knowles, Folk-Tales of Kashmir (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner and Company, 1893), pp. 189-90 . Return to the table of contents . Links to related sites D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Going Traveling . A file containing only this tale by the Grimm brothers. The Grimm Brothers' Home Page . The Grimm Brothers' Children's and Household Tales (Fairy Tales). Return to the table of contents . Revised August 13, 2010. Folklore Ballads of John Greenleaf Whittier Folklore Ballads of John Greenleaf Whittier selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman University of Pittsburgh © 1998-2011 Contents The Norsemen The Brown Dwarf of Rügen The Changeling Kallundborg Church Related Links Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Norsemen From "Narrative and Legendary Poems" by John Greenleaf Whittier In the early part of the present [nineteenth] century, a fragment of a statue, redely chiselled from dark gray stone, was found in the town of Bradford, on the Merrimac. Its origin must be left entirely to conjecture. The fact that the ancient Northmen visited the northeast coast of North America and probably New England, some centuries before the discovery of the western world by Columbus, is now very generally admitted. GIFT from the cold and silent Past! A relic to the present cast, Left on the ever-changing strand Of shifting and unstable sand, Which wastes beneath the steady chime And beating of the waves of Time! Who from its bed of primal rock First wrenched thy dark, unshapely block? Whose hand, of curious skill untaught, Thy rude and savage outline wrought? The waters of my native stream Are glancing in the sun's warm beam; From sail-urged keel and flashing oar The circles widen to its shore; And cultured field and peopled town Slope to its willowed margin down. Yet, while this morning breeze is bringing The home-life sound of school-bells ringing, And rolling wheel, and rapid jar Of the fire-winged and steedless car, And voices from the wayside near Come quick and blended on my ear,-- A spell is in this old gray stone, My thoughts are with the Past alone! A change! -- The steepled town no more Stretches along the sail-thronged shore; Like palace-domes in sunset's cloud, Fade sun-gilt spire and mansion proud: Spectrally rising where they stood, I see the old, primeval wood; Dark, shadow-like, on either hand I see its solemn waste expand; It climbs the green and cultured hill, It arches o'er the valley's rill, And leans from cliff and crag to throw Its wild arms o'er the stream below. Unchanged, alone, the same bright river Flows on, as it will flow forever! I listen, and I hear the low Soft ripple where its water go; I hear behind the panther's cry, The wild-bird's scream goes thrilling by, And shyly on the river's brink The deer is stooping down to drink. But hard! -- from wood and rock flung back, What sound come up the Merrimac? What sea-worn barks are those which throw The light spray from each rushing prow? Have they not in the North Sea's blast Bowed to the waves the straining mast? Their frozen sails the low, pale sun Of Thulë's night has shone upon; Flapped by the sea-wind's gusty sweep Round icy drift, and headland steep. Wild Jutland's wives and Lochlin's daughters Have watched them fading o'er the waters, Lessening through driving mist and spray, Like white-winged sea-birds on their way! Onward they glide, -- and now I view Their iron-armed and stalwart crew; Joy glistens in each wild blue eye, Turned to green earth and summer sky. Each broad, seamed breast has cast aside Its cumbering vest of shaggy hide; Bared to the sun and soft warm air, Streams back the Northmen's yellow hair. I see the gleam of axe and spear, A sound of smitten shields I hear, Keeping a harsh and fitting time To Saga's chant, and Runic rhyme; Such lays as Zetland's Scald has sung, His gray and naked isles among; Or mutter low at midnight hour Round Odin's mossy stone of power. The wolf beneath the Arctic moon Has answered to that startling rune; The Gael has heard its stormy swell, The light Frank knows its summons well; Iona's sable-stoled Culdee Has heard it sounding o'er the sea, And swept, with hoary beard and hair, His altar's foot in trembling prayer! 'T is past, -- the 'wildering vision dies In darkness on my dreaming eyes! The forest vanishes in air, Hill-slope and vale lie starkly bare; I hear the common tread of men, And hum of work-day life again; The mystic relic seems alone A broken mass of common stone; And if it be the chiselled limb Of Berserker or idol grim, A fragment of Valhalla's Thor, The stormy Viking's god of War, Or Praga of the Runic lay, Or love-awakening Siona, I know not, -- for no graven line, Nor Druid mark, nor Runic sign, Is left me here, by which to trace Its name, or origin, or place. Yet, for this vision of the Past, This glance upon its darkness cast, My spirit bows in gratitude Before the Giver of all good, Who fashioned so the human mind, That, from the waste of Time behind, A simple stone, or mound of earth, Can summon the departed forth; Quicken the Past to life again, The Present lose in what hath been, And in their primal freshness show The buried forms of long ago. As if a portion of that Thought By which the Eternal will is wrought, Whose impulse fills anew with breath The frozen solitude of Death, To mortal mind were sometimes lent, To mortal musing sometimes sent, To whisper -- even when it seems But Memory's fantasy of dreams -- Through the mind's waste of woe and sin, Of an immortal origin! Source: John Greenleaf Whittier, The Complete Poetical Works , Cambridge Edition (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1894), pp. 9-11 . For additional information see Vikings in America Return to the table of contents . The Brown Dwarf of Rügen From "Narrative and Legendary Poems" by John Greenleaf Whittier The hint of this ballad is found in Arndt's Märchen , Berlin, 1816. The ballad appeared first in St. Nicholas , whose young readers were advised, while smiling at the absurd superstition, to remember that bad companionship and evil habits, desires, and passions are more to be dreaded now than the Elves and Trolls who frightened the children of past ages. THE pleasant isle of Rügen looks the Baltic water o'er, To the silver-sanded beaches of the Pomeranian shore; And in the town of Rambin a little boy and maid Plucked the meadow-flowers together and in the sea-surf played. Alike were they in beauty if not in their degree: He was the Amptman's first-born, the miller's child was she. Now of old the isle of Rügen was full of Dwarfs and Trolls, The brown-faced little Earth-men, the people without souls; And for every man and woman in Rügen's island found Walking in air and sunshine, a Troll was underground. It chanced the little maiden, one morning, strolled away Among the haunted Nine Hills, where the elves and goblins play. That day, in barley fields below, the harvesters had known Of evil voices in the air, and heard the small horns blown. She came not back; the search for her in field and wood was vain: They cried her east, they cried her west, but she came not again. "She's down among the Brown Dwarfs," said the dream-wives wise and old, And prayers were made, and masses said, and Rambin's church bell tolled. Five years her father mourned her; and then John Deitrich said: "I will find my little playmate, be she alive or dead." He watched among the Nine Hills, he heard the Brown Dwarfs sing, And saw them dance by moonlight merrily in a ring. And when their gay-robed leader tossed up his cap of red, Young Deitrich caught it as it fell, and thrust it on his head. The Troll came crouching at his feet and wept for lack of it. "Oh, give me back my magic cap, for your great head unfit!" "Nay," Deitrich said; "the Dwarf who throws his charmëd cap away, Must serve its finder at his will, and for his folly pay. "You stole my pretty Lisbeth, and hid her in the earth; And you shall ope the door of glass and let me lead her forth." "She will not come; she's one of us; she's mine!" the Brown Dwarf said; "The day is set, the cake is baked, to-morrow we shall wed." "The fell fiend fetch thee!" Deitrich cried, "and keep thy foul tongue still. Quick! open, to thy evil world, the glass door of the hill!" The Dwarf obeyed; and youth and Troll down the long stairway passed, And saw in dim and sunless light a country strange and vast. Weird, rich, and wonderful, he saw the elfin under-land, -- Its palaces of precious stones, its streets of golden sand. He came unto a banquet-hall with tables richly spread, Where a young maiden served to him the red wine and the bread. How fair she seemed among the Trolls so ugly and so wild! Yet pale and very sorrowful, like one who never smiled! Her low, sweet voice, her gold-brown hair, her tender blue eyes seemed Like something he had seen elsewhere or something he had dreamed. He looked; he clasped her in his arms; he knew the long-lost one; "O Lisbeth! See thy playmate -- I am the Amptman's son!" She leaned her fair head on his breast, and through her sobs she spoke: "Oh, take me from this evil place, and from the elfin folk! "And let me tread the grass-green fields and smell the flowers again, And feel the soft wind on my cheek and hear the dropping rain! "And oh, to hear the singing bird, the rustling of the tree, The lowing cows, the bleat of sheep, the voices of the sea; "And oh, upon my father's knee to set beside the door, And hear the bell of vespers ring in Rambin church once more!" He kissed her cheek, he kissed her lips; the Brown Dwarf groaned to see, And tore his tangled hair and ground his long teeth angrily. But Deitrich said: "For five long years this tender Christian maid Has served you in your evil world, and well must she be paid! "Haste! -- hither bring me precious gems, the richest in your store; Then when we pass the gate of glass, you'll take your cap once more." No choice was left the baffled Troll, and, murmuring, he obeyed, And filled the pockets of the youth and apron of the maid. They left the dreadful under-land and passed the gate of glass; They felt the sunshine's warm caress, they trod the soft, green grass. And when, beneath, they saw the Dwarf stretch up to them his brown And crooked claw-like fingers, they tossed his red cap down. Oh, never shone so bright a sun, was never sky so blue, As hand in hand they homeward walked the pleasant meadows through! And never sang the birds so sweet in Rambin's woods before, And never washed the waves so soft along the Baltic shore; And when beneath his door-yard trees the father met his child, The bells rung out their merriest peal, the folks with joy ran wild. And soon from Rambin's holy church the twain came forth as one, The Amptman kissed a daughter, the miller blest a son. John Deitrich's fame went far and wide, and nurse and maid crooned o'er Their cradle song: "Sleep on, sleep well, the Trolls shall come no more!" for in the haunted Nine Hills he set a cross of stone; And Elf and Brown Dwarf sought in vain a door where door was none. The tower he built in Rambin, fair Rügen's pride and boast, Looked o'er the Baltic water to the Pomeranian coast; And, for his worth ennobled, and rich beyond compare, Count Deitrich and his lovely bride dwelt long and happy there. Source: John Greenleaf Whittier, The Complete Poetical Works , Cambridge Edition (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1894), pp. 138-40. Return to the table of contents . The Changeling From "The Tent on the Beach" by John Greenleaf Whittier FOR the fairest maid in Hampton They needed not to search, Who saw young Anna favor Come walking into church,-- Or bringing from the meadows, At set of harvest-day, The frolic of the blackbirds, The sweetness of the hay. Now the weariest of all mothers, The saddest two years' bride, She scowls in the face of her husband, And spurns her child aside. "Rake out the red coals, goodman,-- For there the child shall lie, Till the black witch comes to fetch her And both up chimney fly. "It's never my own little daughter, It's never my own," she said; "The witches have stolen my Anna, And left me an imp instead. "Oh, fair and sweet was my baby, Blue eyes, and hair of gold; But this is ugly and wrinkled, Cross, and cunning, and old. "I hate the touch of her fingers, I hate the feel of her skin; It's not the milk from my bosom, But my blood, that she sucks in. "My face grows sharp with the torment; Look! my arms are skin and bone! Rake open the red coals, goodman, And the witch shall have her own. "She'll come when she hears it crying, In the shape of an owl or bat, And she'll bring us our darling Anna In place of her screeching brat." Then the goodman, Ezra Dalton, Laid his hand upon her head: Thy sorrow is great, O woman! I sorrow with thee," he said. "The paths to trouble are many And never but one sure way Leads out to the light beyond it: My poor wife, let us pray." Then he said to the great All-Father, "Thy daughter is weak and blind; Let her sight come back, and clothe her Once more in her right mind. "Lead her out of this evil shadow, Out of these fancies wild; Let the holy love of the mother Turn again to her child. "Make her lips like the lips of Mary Kissing her blessed Son; Let her hands, like the hands of Jesus, Rest on her little one. "Comfort the soul of thy handmaid, Open her prison-door, And thine shall be all the glory And praise forevermore." Then into the face of its mother The baby looked up and smiled; And the cloud of her soul was lifted, And she knew her little child. A beam of the slant west sunshine Made the wan face almost fair, Lit the blue eyes' patient wonder And the rings of pale gold hair. She kissed it on lip and forehead, She kissed it on cheek and chink And she bared her snow-white bosom To the lips so pale and thin. Oh, fair on her bridal morning Was the maid who blushed and smiled, But fairer to Ezra Dalton Looked the mother of his child. With more than a lover's fondness He stooped to her worn young face, And the nursing child and the mother He folded in one embrace. "Blessed be God!" he murmured. "Blessed be God!" she said; "For I see, who once was blinded,-- I live, who once was dead. "Now mount and ride, my goodman, As thou lovest thy own soul! Woe's me, if my wicked fancies Be the death of Goody Cole!" His horse he saddled and bridled, And into the night rode he, Now through the great black woodland, Now by the white-beached sea. He rode through the silent clearings, He came to the ferry wide, And thrice he called to the boatman Asleep on the other side. He set his horse to the river, He swam to Newbury town, And he called up Justice Sewall In his nightcap and his gown. And the grave and worshipful justice (Upon whose soul be peace!) Set his name to the jailer's warrant For Goodwife Cole's release. Then through the night the hoof-beats Went sounding like a flail; And Goody Cole at cockcrow Came forth from Ipswich jail. Source: John Greenleaf Whittier, The Complete Poetical Works , Cambridge Edition (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1894), pp. 251-53 . For another poetic treatment of this material see The Changeling by James Russell Lowell. Return to the table of contents . Kallundborg Church From "The Tent on the Beach" by John Greenleaf Whittier "Tie stille, barn min! Imorgen kommer Fin, Fa'er din, Og gi'er dich Esbern Snares öine og hjerte at lege med!" Zealand Rhyme. "BUILD at Kallundborg by the sea A church as stately as church may be, And there shalt thou wed my daughter fair," Said the Lord of Nesvek to Esbern Snare. And the Baron laughed. But Esbern said, "Though I lose my soul, I will Helva wed!" And off he strode, in his pride of will, To the Troll who dwelt in Ulshoi hill. "Build, O Troll, a church for me At Kallundborg by the mighty sea; Build it stately, and build it fair, Build it quickly," said Esbern Snare. But the sly Dwarf said, "No work is wrought By Trolls of the Hills, O man, for naught. What wilt thou give for thy church so fair?" "Set thy own price," quoth Esbern Snare. "When Kallundborg church is builded well, Thou must the name of its builder tell, Or thy heart and thy eyes must be my boon." "Build," said Esbern, "and build it soon." By night and by day the Troll wrought on; He hewed the timbers, he piled the stone; But day by day, as the walls rose fair, Darker and sadder grew Esbern Snare. He listened by night, he watched by day, He sought and thought, but he dared not pray; In vain he called on the Elle-maids shy, And the Neck and the Nis gave no reply. Of his evil bargain far and wide A rumor ran through the country-side; And Helva of Nesvek, young and fair, Prayed for the soul of Esbern Snare. And now the church was wellnigh done; One pillar it lacked, and one alone; And the grim Troll muttered, "Fool thou art! To-morrow gives me thy eyes and heart!" By Kallundborg in black despair, Through wood and meadow, walked Esbern Snare, Till, worn and weary, the strong man sank Under the birches on Ulshoi bank. At his last day's work he heard the Troll Hammer and delve in the quarry's hole; Before him the church stood large and fair: "I have builded my tomb," said Esbern Snare. And he closed his eyes the sight to hide, When he heard a light step at his side: "O Esbern Snare! a sweet voice said, "Would I might die now in thy stead!" With a grasp by love and by fear made strong, He held her fast, and he held her long; With the beating heart of a bird afeard, She hid her face in his flame-red beard. "O love!" he cried, "let me look to-day In thine eyes ere mine are plucked away; Let me hold thee close, let me feel thy heart Ere mine by the Troll is torn apart! "I sinned, O Helva, for love of thee! Pray that the Lord Christ pardon me!" But fast as she prayed, and faster still, Hammered the Troll in Ulshoi hill. He knew, as he wrought, that a loving heart Was somehow baffling his evil art; For more than spell of Elf or Troll Is a maiden's prayer for her lover's soul. And Esbern listened, and caught the sound Of a Troll-wife singing underground: "To-morrow comes Fine, father thine: Lie still and hush thee, baby mine! "Lie still, my darling! next sunrise Thou'lt play with Esbern Snare's heart and eyes!" "Ho! ho!" quoth Esbern, "is that your game? Thanks to the Troll-wife, I know his name!" The Troll he heard him, and hurried on To Kallundborg church with the lacking stone. "Too late, Gaffer Fine!" cried Esbern Snare; And Troll and pillar vanished in air! That night the harvesters heard the sound Of a woman sobbing underground, And the voice of the Hill-Troll loud with blame Of the careless singer who told his name. Of the Troll of the Church they sing the rune By the Northern Sea in the harvest moon; And the fishers of Zealand hear him still Scolding his wife in Ulshoi hill. And seaward over its groves of birch Still looks the tower of Kallundborg church Where, first at its altar, a wedded pair, Stood Helva of Nesvek and Esbern Snare! Source: John Greenleaf Whittier, The Complete Poetical Works , Cambridge Edition (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1894), pp. 255-56 . The modern spelling of the Danish city featured in this poem is "Kalundborg." Link to a folk legend about Esbern Snare and the Kalundborg Church . Related Links Changelings: An Essay by D. L. Ashliman . Norse Ballads of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow Vikings in America Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised July 4, 2011. Widows in (short-lived) mourning Widows in (short-lived) mourning folktales of Aarne-Thompson types 65, 1350, 1352*, and 1510 selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2017 Contents The Inconsolable Widow (Italy, Laurentius Abstemius). The Woman and the Farmer (Aesop). Mrs. Fox's Wedding (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Chuang-tzu and His Wife (China). Zadig's Nose (France, Voltaire). The Widow of Ephesus (Rome, Petronius). A Widow Digs Up Her Deceased Husband and Hangs Him on the Gallows (Germany, Conrat Purselt). Wooden Johannes (Germany, Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof). How Long Master Hobson's Daughter Mourned for Her Husband's Death (England). He That's Dead Can Do No Hurt (Ireland, J. M. Synge). Widow and Soldier (USA, Ambrose Bierce). The Devoted Widow (USA, Ambrose Bierce). The Inconsolable Widow (USA, Ambrose Bierce). The Crimson Candle (USA, Ambrose Bierce). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Inconsolable Widow Laurentius Abstemius (L'Estrange, 1692) There was a poor young woman that had brought her self e'en to death's door with grief for her sick husband, but the good man, her father, did all he could to comfort her. "Come, child," says he. "We are all mortal: Pluck up a good heart, my girl; for the worst come to the worst, I have a better husband in store for the, when this is gone." "Alas, sir," says she, "what d'ye talk of lanother husband for? Why you had as good have struck a dagger to my heart. No, no. If ever I think of another husband may -------" Without more ado the man dies, and the woman immediately breaks out into such transports of tearing her hair and beating her breast that every body thought she'd have run stark-mad upon't. But upon second thoughts she wipes her eyes, lifts 'em up, and cries, "Heaven's will be done." And then turns to her father. "Pray, sir," says she, "about t'other husband you were speaking of: Is he here in the house?" The Moral: This fable gives us to understand that a widow's tears are quickly dry'd up, and that it is not impossible for a woman to out-live the death of her husband. And after all the outrages of her funeral sorrow, to propose to her self many a merry hour in the arms of a second spouse. Source (books.google.com): Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and Reflexions (London: Printed for R. Sare, T. Sawbridge, B. Took, M. Gillyflower, A. and J. Churchil, and J. Hindmarsh, 1692), no. 268, pp. 233-34 . Source (Internet Archive): Roger L'Estrange, Fables of Æsop and Other Eminent Mythologists, with Morals and Reflexions (London: Printed for R. Sare, T. Sawbridge, B. Took, M. Gillyflower, A. and J. Churchil, and J. Hindmarsh, 1692), no. 268, pp. 233-34 . L'Estrange attributes this tale to Laurentius Abstemius (ca. 1435 - ca. 1505). Return to the table of contents . The Woman and the Farmer Aesop A woman, who had lately lost her husband, used to go every day to his grave and lament her loss. A farmer, who was engaged in plowing not far from the spot, set eyes upon the woman and desired to have her for his wife. So he left his plow and came and sat by her side, and began to shed tears himself. She asked him why he wept; and he replied, "I have lately lost my wife, who was very dear to me, and tears ease my grief." "And I," said she, "have lost my husband." And so for a while they mourned in silence. Then he said, "Since you and I are in like case, shall we not do well to marry and live together? I shall take the place of your dead husband, and you, that of my dead wife." The woman consented to the plan, which indeed seemed reasonable enough, and they dried their tears. Meanwhile, a thief had come and stolen the oxen which the farmer had left with his plow. On discovering the theft, he beat his breast and loudly bewailed his loss. When the woman heard his cries, she came and said, "Why, are you weeping still?" To which he replied, "Yes, and I mean it this time." Source: Æsop's Fables , a new translation by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: William Heinemann; New York: Doubleday, Page, and Company, 1916), pp. 220-21 . This is number 388 in the Perry Index . Return to the table of contents . Mrs. Fox's Wedding Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm First Tale Once upon a time there was an old fox with nine tails. He did not believe that his wife was faithful to him and wanted to put her to the test. He stretched himself out beneath the bench, did not move a limb, and pretended to be stone dead. Mrs. Fox locked herself in her room, and her maid, Miss Cat, sat on the hearth and cooked. As soon as it became known that the old fox had died, suitors began to appear. The maid heard someone knocking at the front door. She opened it, and there stood a young fox, who said: What are you doing, Miss Cat? Are you asleep, or are you awake? She answered: I'm not asleep; I am awake. Do you want to know what I am doing? I am cooking warm beer with butter in it. Would you like to be my guest? "No thank you, Miss," said the fox. "What is Mrs. Fox doing?" The maid answered: She is sitting in her room Mourning and grieving. She has cried her eyes red, Because old Mr. Fox is dead. "Miss, tell her that a young fox is here who would like to court her." "I'll do that, young man." The cat went upstairs and knocked on the door. "Mrs. Fox, are you there?" "Yes, my dear, yes." "A suitor is outside." "What does he look like? Does he have nine bushy tails like the late Mr. Fox?" "No," answered the cat. "He has but one." "Then I'll not have him." Miss Cat went downstairs and sent the suitor away. Soon afterward there was another knock at the door. Another fox was there who wanted to court Mrs. Fox. He had two tails, but he did not fare any better than the first one. Then others came, each with one additional tail, but all were turned away until finally one came who had nine tails, just like old Mr. Fox. When the widow heard that, she spoke joyfully to the cat: Open up the door And throw old Mr. Fox out. They were just about to celebrate the wedding when beneath the bench old Mr. Fox began to stir. He attacked the entire party with blows and drove them all out of the house, including Mrs. Fox. Second Tale Following the death of old Mr. Fox, the wolf presented himself as a suitor. The cat, who was serving as Mrs. Fox's maid, opened the door. The wolf greeted her, saying: Good day, Mrs. Cat, Why are you sitting alone? What good things are you making there? The cat answered: Bread and milk. Would you like to be my guest? "No thank you, Mrs. Cat." answered the wolf. "Isn't Mrs. Fox at home?" The cat said: She's upstairs in her room Mourning and grieving, Bemoaning her plight, Because old Mr. Fox is dead. The wolf answered: If she wants another man, Just have her come downstairs. The cat ran upstairs To give her the news. She ran to the great room, And knocked on the door With her five golden rings. "Mrs. Fox, are you in there? Do you want another man?" Mrs. Fox asked, "Is the gentleman wearing red breeches, and does he have a pointed little face?" "No," answered the cat. "Then he's of no use to me." After the wolf had been sent away there came a dog, a deer, a hare, a bear, a lion, and all the other animals of the forest, one after the other. But each one lacked one of the good qualities that old Mr. Fox had had, and the cat had to send each of the suitors away. Finally a young fox came. Mrs. Fox asked, "Is the gentleman wearing red breeches, and does he have a pointed little face?" "Yes," said the cat, "that he does." "Then let him come upstairs," said Mrs. Fox, and she told the maid to make preparations for the wedding feast. Cat, sweep out the kitchen, And throw the old fox out the window. He brought home many a big fat mouse, But he ate them all alone, And never gave me a one. Then Mrs. Fox married young Mr. Fox, and everyone danced and celebrated, and if they have not stopped, then they are dancing still. Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die Hochzeit der Frau Füchsin," Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 7th edition, vol. 1 (G&oumlttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 38, pp. 201-204 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. These fables are exemplary versions of Aarne-Thompson type 65 folktales. With small stylistic changes, this pair of stories has been a part of the Grimms' famous collection since their first edition (1812). The indented passages are rhymed verses in the original German. I have made no attempt to recreate the rhymes in my translation. The German word for tail, Schwanz , has a well-known obscene secondary meaning that turns the first story above into a suggestive jest. Link to the Grimm Brothers' Home Page . Return to the table of contents . Chuang-tzu and His Wife China Chuang-tzu saw a young woman in mourning vigorously fanning a newly made grave. On his asking her the reason of this strange conduct, she replied, "I am doing this because my husband begged me to wait until the earth on his tomb was dry before I remarried!" Chuang-tzu offered to help her, and as soon as he waved the fan once, the earth was dry. The young widow thanked him and departed. On his return home, Chuang-tzu related this incident to his wife. She expressed astonishment at such conduct on the part of a wife. "There's nothing to be surprised at," rejoined the husband. "That's how things go in this world." Seeing that he was poking fun at her, she protested angrily. Some time after this Chuang-tzu died. His wife, much grieved, buried him. A few days later a young man named Chu Wang-sun arrived with the intention, as he said, of placing himself under the instruction of Chuang-tzu. When he heard that he was dead he went and performed prostrations before his tomb, and afterward took up his abode in an empty room saying that he wished to study. After half a month had elapsed, the widow asked an old servant who had accompanied Wang-sun if the young man was married. On his replying in the negative, she requested the old servant to propose a match between them. Wang-sun made some objections, saying that people would criticize their conduct. "Since my husband is dead, what can they say?" replied the widow. She then put off her mourning garments and prepared for the wedding. Wang-sun took her to the grave of her husband, and said to her, "The gentleman has returned to life!" She looked at Wang-sun and recognized the features of her husband. She was so overwhelmed with shame that she hanged herself. Chuang-tzu buried her in an empty tomb. Source: E. T. C. Werner, Myths and Legends of China (London: George G. Harrap and Company, 1922), pp. 149-150. This story's leading character, an early philosopher of Taoism, was born about 369 BC and died about 286 BC. Werner gives three variations of his name: Chuang Tzu, Chuang Shêng, and Chuang Chou. I have used the more modern spelling, Chuang-tzu. This legend bears a strong resemblance to western folktales of type 1350, in which a suspicious husband feigns death in order to test his wife's response to widowhood. Return to the table of contents . Zadig's Nose Voltaire Zadig's wife Azora went to console Cosrou, a young widow who only two days earlier had buried her husband. His tomb stood on the bank of a stream, and in her grief the widow had vowed to remain steadfastly beside the tomb until the stream no longer flowed by it. To Azora's dismay, when she arrived at the tomb she discovered that the once faithful widow was now busily digging a new channel to divert the stream away from her husband's tomb. Quick to judge the widow's lapse from loyalty, Azora reported her experience to her husband Zadig. Azora's vehement and self-righteous reproaches led Zadig to distrust her own motivation, and, with the help of a young friend named Cador, he devised a scheme to test her integrity. Feigning death, Zadig had his body laid to rest in the tomb of his ancestors. Azora wept, tore her hair, and vowed to die. That evening Cador, whose youthful good lucks had not gone unnoticed by Azora, came to console her, and they mourned together. The next day they dined together as well. Then Cador informed the widow that Zadig had left most of his fortune to him, but that he would be happy to share it with her. She protested at first, but did not decline his offer. Supper that evening lasted longer than had their dinner, and the two conversed together intimately, until Cador suddenly complained of a violent pain in his spleen. "It is an old malady," he claimed, "and there is but one remedy. I can be cured only by holding against my side the severed nose of a man who has been dead only one or two days." Although the remedy seemed strange to her, she had heard of stranger cures for other maladies. This fact, combined with the obvious merits of the suffering man, brought Azora to the quick decision to sacrifice her deceased husband's nose for the well-being of his young friend. Taking a razor she went to her husband's tomb and approached the body. Zadig rescued his nose only by holding it with one hand while fending off the razor with the other. "Madam," said he, "is not your attempt to cut off my nose as bad as Cosrou's intention of diverting a stream?" Source: Abstracted from Voltaire's Zadig; ou, La destinée. Histoire orientale (1747), ch. 2. Voltaire's title for this chapter is simply "Le nez" (the nose). © 1998 by D. L. Ashliman. This episode from Voltaire's famous novel combines folktales of type 1350 (a man feigns death to test his wife) and type 1352* (a widow mutilates her husband's corpse to please a new suitor). Return to the table of contents . The Widow of Ephesus Petronius There was a married woman in Ephesus of such famous virtue that she drew women even from the neighboring states to gaze upon her. So when she had buried her husband, the common fashion of following the procession with loose hair, and beating the naked breast in front of the crowd, did not satisfy her. She followed the dead man even to his resting place, and began to watch and weep night and day over the body, which was laid in an underground vault in the Greek fashion. Neither her parents nor her relations could divert her from thus torturing herself, and courting death by starvation. The officials were at last rebuffed and left her. Everyone mourned for her as a woman of unique character, and she was now passing her fifth day without food. A devoted maid sat by the failing woman, shed tears in sympathy with her woes, and at the same time filled up the lamp, which was placed in the tomb, whenever it sank. There was but one opinion throughout the city, every class of person admitting this was the one true and brilliant example of chastity and love. At this moment the governor of the province gave orders that some robbers should be crucified near the small building where the lady was bewailing her recent loss. So on the next night, when the soldier who was watching the crosses, to prevent anyone taking down a body for burial, observed a light shining plainly among the tombs, and heard a mourner's groans, a very human weakness made him curious to know who it was and what he was doing. So he went down into the vault, and on seeing a very beautiful woman, at first halted in confusion, as if he had seen a portent or some ghost from the world beneath. But afterwards noticing the dead man lying there, and watching the woman's tears and the marks of her nails on her face, he came to the correct conclusion, that she found her regret for the lost one unendurable. He therefore brought his supper into the tomb, and began to urge the mourner not to persist in useless grief, and break her heart with unprofitable sobs: for all men made the same end and found the same resting place, and so on with the other platitudes which restore wounded spirits to health. But she took no notice of his sympathy, struck and tore her breast more violently than ever, pulled out her hair, and laid it on the dead body. Still the soldier did not retire, but tried to give the poor woman food with similar encouragements, until the maid, who was no doubt seduced by the smell of his wine, first gave in herself, and put out her hand at his kindly invitation, and then, refreshed with food and drink, began to assail her mistress's obstinacy, and say, "What will you gain by all this, if you faint away with hunger, if you bury yourself alive, if you breathe out your undoomed soul before fate calls for it? Believest thou that the ashes or the spirit of the buried dead can feel thy woe? [Virgil, Æneid , iv, 34.] Will you not begin life afresh? Will you not shake off this womanish failing, and enjoy the blessings of the light so long as you are allowed? Your poor dead husband's body here ought to persuade you to keep alive." People are always ready to listen when they are urged to take a meal or to keep alive. So the lady, being thirsty after several days' abstinence, allowed her resolution to be broken down, and filled herself with food as greedily as the maid, who had been the first to yield. Well, you know which temptation generally assails a man on a full stomach. The soldier used the same insinuating phrases which had persuaded the lady to consent to live, to conduct an assault upon her virtue. Her modest eye saw in him a young man, handsome and eloquent. The maid begged her to be gracious, and then said, "Wilt thou fight love even when love pleases thee? Or dost thou never remember in whose lands thou art resting?" [Virgil, Æneid , iv, 38.] I need hide the fact no longer. The lady ceased to hold out, and the conquering hero won her over entire. So they passed not only their wedding night together, but the next and a third, of course shutting the door of the vault, so that any friend or stranger who came to the tomb would imagine that this most virtuous lady had breathed the last over her husband's body. Well, the soldier was delighted with the woman's beauty, and his stolen pleasure. He bought up all the fine things his means permitted, and carried them to the tomb the moment darkness fell. So the parents of one of the crucified, seeing that the watch was ill-kept, took their man down in the dark and administered the last rite to him. The soldier was eluded while he was off duty, and next day, seeing one of the crosses without its corpse, he was in terror of punishment, and explained to the lady what had happened. He declared that he would not wait for a court-martial, but would punish his own neglect with a thrust of his sword. So she had better get ready a place for a dying man, and let the gloomy vault enclose both her husband and her lover. The lady's heart was tender as well as pure. "Heaven forbid," she replied, "that I should look at the same moment on the dead bodies of two men whom I love. No, I would rather make a dead man useful, than send a live man to death." After this speech she ordered her husband's body to be taken out of the coffin and fixed up on the empty cross. The soldier availed himself of this far-seeing woman's device, and the people wondered the next day by what means the dead man had ascended the cross. Source: Petronius, Satyricon , translated by Michael Heseltine, Loeb Classical Library (London: William Heinemann; New York: The Macmillan Company, 1913, ch. 111-112, pp. 229-235. This story is the classic formulation of a type 1510 folktale, in which a widow sacrifices the corpse of her recently deceased husband in order to protect her newly found lover. The reputed author of the Satyricon is identified variously as Gaius Petronius or Titus Petronius. He died in AD 66. Return to the table of contents . A Widow Digs Up Her Deceased Husband and Hangs Him on the Gallows Conrat Purselt Now and then there are widows who are not only happy that their husbands have died, but even those who fail to protect their dead husbands' bodies beneath the earth in order quickly to gain another husband. The story is told of a soldier who -- under penalty of death -- had been ordered to keep watch over the corpse of a distinguished gentleman who had been hanged. The gallows stood near a graveyard where the body of a widow's husband lay buried. Following his burial this woman came to the grave several nights in a row, where she wept and pitifully bemoaned her husband's death. The soldier heard her cries and came to console her. Upon his return, however, he discovered that the hanged man he was supposed to be guarding had been stolen. Bad luck! Quickly he ran back and said, "What can I do, pious woman? While I was consoling you, someone stole my thief from the gallows, and now I'll be hanged in his place." "Be comforted, soldier! Will you marry me if I can solve your problem?" "Of course. You have my promise!" "Then hurry and help me. We will dig up my dead husband and hang him on the gallows in the place of the stolen corpse." With the soldier's help the dead man was dug up, but then the soldier said, "He doesn't look like the stolen corpse. His teeth are too long." "We can fix that," said the widow, whereupon she picked up a stone, knocked out her dead husband's teeth, and then helped hang him up. Afterward she asked the soldier to marry her, as he had promised. "No," said the soldier. "I don't like you, and I won't have you. You can go to the devil. After the way you treated your dead husband, how would you treat me, your living husband?" Source: Freely translated from Conrat Purselt, Fons Aquae Triplici scaturigine salientis in vitam aeternam: Ein Brunn des mit dreyfacher Quellen springenden Wasser ins ewige Leben (Augsburg-Dillingen, 1700-1702) vol. 2, no. 11. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. This story combines folktales of type 1510 (the widow of Ephesus) and type 1352* (a widow mutilates her husband's corpse to please a new suitor). Return to the table of contents . Wooden Johannes Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof A woman so loved her husband that she vowed not to remarry following his death. Thus she had a wooden statue carved and painted that resembled her husband in form, shape, and size. She called it "Wooden Johannes," and it was to serve as her companion in place of her husband if she were to become a widow. Her fears were confirmed, and her husband did indeed die. After she had mourned in earnest for almost half a year, her grief became somewhat easier to bear. One evening she was invited out by her relatives, and she gave her maid orders not to forget to lay Wooden Johannes into her bed as soon as he was warm, and then to come and get her. It was her custom to put Wooden Johannes into her bed every evening before she went to bed. During the day he stood next to the stove. The maid thought that the time was right to look after her own kin, considering that her mistress would be in a good mood following her evening out. Therefore she sent for her brother, who was a well-formed and good-looking young man. She told him her plan and led him to her mistress's bed. She then hid Wooden Johannes somewhere else and went to get her mistress. Arriving back home with her, she lit a candle in the mistress's bedroom, and then went to bed herself. Now this Johannes warmed the mistress so well, that she did not remove him from her bed as soon as he had cooled down, as was her practice with the other one, but kept him by her side until morning. The maid came, as she did every morning, and asked if she should go to the market and buy something. The mistress asked her to look for some good fish to eat. "Gladly," answered the maid, "but if I do get some, I'm sure that there is not enough dry wood in the house to fry them properly." "Oh," said the mistress, "then use Wooden Johannes. He is dry enough. Chop him up and cook with him as long as he lasts." Thus the maid brought her brother to great wealth, for he warmed the mistress so well that she kept him and married him. Source: Freely translated from Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof, "Von einem höltzern Johonnas," Wendunmuth (1563-1603), edited by Hermann Österley (Tübingen: Für den Litterarischen Verein in Stuttgart, gedruckt von H. Laupp, 1869), vol. 1, no. 348, pp. 388-89 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. This story resembles type 1352* (a widow mutilates her husband's corpse to please a new suitor), although here it is her husband's statue and not his corpse that is mutilated. Return to the table of contents . How Long Master Hobson's Daughter Mourned for Her Husband's Death England Master Hobson had a daughter which was a very fair and young woman, the which for her husband that lay a-dying, made great sorrow and lamentation, and would not be comforted by any persuasions, wherefore her father came to her and said, "Daughter, leave of your mourning, for if God take away your husband, I will speedily provide you another of as great a wealth and credit as he is now of, and far more young and lusty." But yet for all this would she not leave mourning, and grew greatly displeased that her father made any motion of another husband, protesting that she would never marry more. But now mark the variable minds of women; her husband was no sooner dead and buried, the charges of his burial paid for, and she with her friends set at supper to comfort her, between sobbing and weeping, she whispered her father in the care and said, "Father, where is the same man, that ye said should bee my husband?" "Thus may you see, quoth Mister Hobson, "the nature of women-kind, and how long they mourn for their husbands after they be dead." These words made the young woman never after to ask her father for a husband. Source (books.google.com): Richard Johnson, The Pleasant Conceits of Old Hobson, the Merry Londoner , edited by James Orchard Halliwell (London: Reprinted for the Percy Society, 1843), pp. 18-19 . Reprinted from the edition of 1607. Spelling and puncuation modernized by D. L. Ashliman. Return to the table of contents . He That's Dead Can Do No Hurt Ireland, J. M. Synge One day I was traveling on foot from Galway to Dublin, and the darkness came on me and I ten miles from the town I was wanting to pass the night in. Then a hard rain began to fall and I was tired walking, so when I saw a sort of a house with no roof on it up against the road, I got in the way the walls would give me shelter. As I was looking round I saw a light in some trees two perches off, and thinking any sort of a house would be better than where I was, I got over a wall and went up to the house to look in at the window. I saw a dead laid man on a table, and candles lighted, and a woman watching him. I was frightened when I saw him, but it was raining hard, and I said to myself, if he was dead he couldn't hurt me. Then I knocked on the door and the woman came and opened it. "Good evening, ma'am," says I. "Good evening kindly, stranger," says she. "Come in out of the rain." Then she took me in and told me her husband was after dying on her, and she was watching him that night. "But it's thirsty you'll be, stranger," says she. "Come into the parlor." Then she took me into the parlor -- and it was a fine clean house -- and she put a cup, with a saucer under it, on the table before me with fine sugar and bread. When I'd had a cup of tea I went back into the kitchen where the dead man was lying, and she gave me a fine new pipe off the table with a drop of spirits. "Stranger," says she, "would you be afeard to be alone with himself?" "Not a bit in the world, ma'am," says I; "he that's dead can do no hurt." Then she said she wanted to go over and tell the neighbors the way her husband was after dying on her, and she went out and locked the door behind her. I smoked one pipe, and I leaned out and took another off the table. I was smoking it with my hand on the back of my chair -- the way you are yourself this minute, God bless you -- and I looking on the dead man, when he opened his eyes as wide as myself and looked at me. "Don't be afeard, stranger," said the dead man; "I'm not dead at all in the world. Come here and help me up and I'll tell you all about it." Well, I went up and took the sheet off of him, and I saw that he had a fine clean shirt on his body, and fine flannel drawers. He sat up then, and says he, "I've got a bad wife, stranger, and I let on to be dead the way I'd catch her goings on." Then he got two fine sticks he had to keep down his wife, and put them at each side of his body, and he laid himself out again as if he was dead. In half and hour his wife came back and a young man along with her. Well, she gave him his tea, and she told him he was tired, and he would do right to go and lie down in the bedroom. The young man went in and the woman sat down to watch by the dead man. A while after she got up and "Stranger," says she, "I'm going in to get the candle out of the room; I'm thinking the young man will be asleep by this time." She went into the bedroom, but the divil a bit of her came back. Then the dead man got up, and took one stick, and he gave the other to myself. We went in and saw them lying together with her head on his arm. The dead man hit him a blow with the stick so that the blood out of him leapt up and hit the gallery. That is my story. Source: J. M. Synge, The Aran Islands (Boston: John W. Luce and Company, 1911), pp. 57-60 . Synge heard this tale from an old storyteller named Pat Durane. John Millington Synge (1871-1909) is one of Ireland's greatest writers of the turn of the century. Between 1898 and 1902 Synge lived in the Aran Islands part of each year, collecting folkloristic material for later use in his creative literature. His one-act play The Shadow of the Glen , written in 1902, is based on the above episode. But the play has a different ending. In the play the husband -- after "coming back to life" -- disowns his wife and sends her out into the stormy night to fend for herself. He then reconciles himself with her young male companion. Synge does not give this story a title. I have provided a title from an expression taken from the tale's text. This is a type 1350 folktale. Return to the table of contents . Widow and Soldier Ambrose Bierce A widow whose husband had been hanged in chains was keeping vigil by the corpse the first night and tearfully beseeching the sentinel who guarded it to let her steal it. "Madam," he said, "I can no longer resist your entreaties; your beauty overcomes my sense of duty. I will deliver the body to you and take its place in the cage, where a stroke of my dagger will baffle justice and give me the happiness of dying for so lovely a lady." "No," said the lady, "I cannot consent to the sacrifice of so noble a life. If indeed you look upon me with favor, assist me and my servants to remove the sacred object to my chateau, where you shall remain in concealment until we can escape from the country." "Nay," said the sentinel, "I should surely be discovered and torn from your arms. In three days you can claim the body of your beloved husband; then you can confer upon an honorable soldier such happiness and distinction as you may think his devotion merits." "Three days!" the lady exclaimed. "That is long for waiting and short for flight. If unencumbered we may reach the frontier. Already the day begins to break -- let us leave the body and set out." Source (books.google.com): Ambrose Bierce The Collected Works of Ambrose Bierce , vol. 6 (New York and Washington: The Neal Publishing Company, 1911), pp. 298-99 . Source (Internet Archive): Ambrose Bierce The Collected Works of Ambrose Bierce , vol. 6 (New York and Washington: The Neal Publishing Company, 1911), pp. 298-99 . Based on a type 1510 folktale. Return to the table of contents . The Devoted Widow Ambrose Bierce A widow weeping on her husband's grave was approached by an engaging gentleman who, in a respectful manner, assured her that he had long entertained for her the most tender feelings. "Wretch!" cried the widow. "Leave me this instant! Is this a time to talk to me of love?" "I assure you, madam, that I had not intended to disclose my affection," the engaging gentleman humbly explained," but the power of your beauty has overcome my discretion." "You should see me when I have not been crying," said the widow. Source (books.google.com): Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), p. 71 . Source (Internet Archive): Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), p. 71 . Return to the table of contents . The Inconsolable Widow Ambrose Bierce A woman in widow's weeds was weeping upon a grave. "Console yourself, madam," said a sympathetic stranger. "Heaven's mercies are infinite. There is another man somewhere, besides your husband, with whom you can still be happy." "There was," she sobbed -- "there was, but this is his grave." Source (books.google.com): Ambrose Bierce, The Collected Works of Ambrose Bierce , vol. 6 (New York and Washington: The Neal Publishing Company, 1911), p. 311 . Source (Internet Archive): Ambrose Bierce, The Collected Works of Ambrose Bierce , vol. 6 (New York and Washington: The Neal Publishing Company, 1911), p. 311 . Return to the table of contents . The Crimson Candle Ambrose Bierce A man lying at the point of death called his wife to his bedside and said: "I am about to leave you forever; give me, therefore, one last proof of your affection and fidelity, for, according to our holy religion, a married man seeking admittance at the gate of Heaven is required to swear that he has never defiled himself with an unworthy woman. In my desk you will find a crimson candle, which has been blessed by the High Priest and has a peculiar mystical significance. Swear to me that while it is in existence you will not remarry." The woman swore and the man died. At the funeral the woman stood at the head of the bier, holding a lighted crimson candle till it was wasted entirely away. Source (books.google.com): Ambrose Bierce Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), pp. 2-3 . Source (Internet Archive): Ambrose Bierce Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), pp. 2-3 . Return to the table of contents . Return to: D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Aging and Death in Folklore , an essay by D. L. Ashliman. Revised January 13, 2017. An Adulterous Wife Locks Her Husband Out of Doors: Folktales of type 1377 An Adulterous Wife Locks Her Husband Out of Doors folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1377 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2013 Contents Dschoha's Wife Locks Him Out (from the Arabic). The Unfaithful Wife (India). The Ancient Knight Who Married a Beautiful Young Wife ( The Seven Wise Masters ). Tofano Shuts His Wife Out of Doors (Giovanni Boccaccio, The Decameron ). A Tyrannical Husband (England). Link to The Well (Petrus Alfonsi, The Disciplina Clericalis ). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Dschoha's Wife Locks Him Out from the Arabic Dschoha's wife was accustomed to go out at night to meet her lover, which caused the neighbors to tease Dschoha. Thus one night he stayed awake until she left, then locked the door, and sat down just inside. Upon returning, she found the door locked. She asked him to have mercy on her and to open the door, but he just scolded her. Having given up hope for a good outcome, she said to him, "If you don't open the door for me, I'll jump into the well." Then she picked up a large stone and threw it into the well. Filled with regret, he ran outside to see what had happened. His wife immediately slipped into the house and locked the door. He made every effort to convince her to let him come inside, but she scolded him incessantly, saying, "This is what you get for staying out all night with your drunken friends!" And thus she succeeded in shaming him in the presence of all their neighbors. Source: Albert Wesselski, Der Hodscha Nasreddin , vol. 2 (Weimar: Alexander Duncker Verlag, 1911), no. 350, p. 8 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2011. Dschoha is a variant of the name Nasreddin Hodja . Return to the table of contents . The Unfaithful Wife India Once upon a time there were two brothers, and as their wives did not get on well together, they lived separately. After a time it came to the ears of the elder brother that the younger brother's wife was carrying on an intrigue with a certain Jugi; so he made up his mind to watch her movements. One night he saw a white figure leave his brother's house and, following it quietly, he saw it go into the Jugi's house, and creeping nearer, he heard his sister-in-law's voice talking inside. He was much grieved at what he had seen, but could not make up his mind to tell his brother. One day the elder brother found that he had no milk in the house, as all his cows had run dry; so he sent a servant to his brother's house to ask for some milk; but the younger brother's wife declined to give any, and sent word that her brother-in-law was quite rich enough to buy milch cows if he wanted milk. The elder brother said nothing at this rebuff, but after a time it happened that the younger brother's cows all became dry, and he in his turn sent to his elder brother for milk. The elder brother's wife was not disposed to give it, but her husband bade her not bear malice and to send the milk. After this the elder brother sent for the other and advised him to watch his wife and see where she went to at night. So that night the younger brother lay awake and watched; and in the middle of the night saw his wife get up very quietly and leave the house. He followed her; as the woman passed down the village street, some Mohammedans, who had been sitting up smoking ganja, saw her and emboldened by the drug set out to see who it was, who was wandering about so late at night. The woman took refuge in a clump of bamboos and pulled down one of the bamboos to conceal herself. The Mohammedans surrounded the clump but when they saw the one bamboo which the woman held shaking, while all the rest were still -- for it was a windless night -- they concluded that it was an evil spirit that they were pursuing and ran away in a panic. When they were gone, the woman came out from the bamboos and went on to the Jugi's house. Her husband who had been watching all that happened followed her, and having seen her enter the Jugi's house hastened home and bolted his door from inside. Presently his wife returned and found the door which she had left ajar, fastened; then she knew that she was discovered. She was however full of resource; she began to beg to be let her in, but her husband only showered abuse upon her and bade her go back to the friend she had left. Then she took a large stone and heaved it into a pool of water near the house. Her husband heard the splash and concluded that she was drowning herself. He did not want to get into trouble with the police, as would surely be the case if his wife were found drowned, so he ran out of the house to the pool of water to try and save her. Seizing this opportunity his wife slipped into the house and in her turn locked the door from inside; so that her husband had to spend the rest of the night out-of-doors. He could not be kept out of the house permanently, and the next day he gave his wife a thrashing and turned her out. At evening however she came back and sat outside in the courtyard, weeping and wailing. The noise made her husband more angry than ever, and he shouted out to her that if she did not keep quiet he would come and cut off her nose. She kept on crying, and the Jugi heard her and sent an old woman to call her to him. She declared that if she went her husband would know and be the more angry with her, but she might go if the old woman would sit in her place and keep on crying, so that her husband might believe her to be still in the courtyard. The old woman agreed and began to weep and wail, while the other went off to the Jugi. She wept to such purpose that the husband at last could not restrain his anger, and rushing out into the darkness with a knife, cut off the nose, as he supposed, of his wife. Presently the wife came back and found the old woman weeping in real earnest over the loss of her nose. "Never mind, I'll find it and fix it on for you," so saying she felt about for the nose till she found it, clapped it onto the old woman's face and told her to hold it tight and it would soon grow again. Then she sat down where she had sat before and began to lament the cruelty of her husband in bringing a false charge against her and challenged him to come out and see the miracle which had occurred to indicate her innocence. She repeated this so often that at last her husband began to wonder what she meant, and took a lamp and went out to see. When he found her sitting on the ground without a blemish on her face, although he had seen her with his own eyes go to the Jugi's house, he could not doubt her virtue and had to receive her back into the house. Thus by her cunning the faithless wife escaped the punishment which she deserved. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Saltal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 102, pp. 302-305 . Return to the table of contents . The Ancient Knight Who Married a Beautiful Young Wife The Seven Wise Masters In the famous city of Mantua lived an ancient knight who married a beautiful young wife, whom he loved above all earthly things; but lest his age not concurring with the expectations of her more vigorous youth, should incline her to incontinence, and encourage her in a lawless flame, he was not wanting to do all in his power to confine her within his house; and every night be locked the gates with his own hands, and secured the keys under his bed head. But notwithstanding all the precautions and care of the old knight, his young wife found means to meet her gallant, and supply his defect, by taking the keys from under his bed's head, when he was fast asleep, and opening the door, went to her paramour; and having enjoyed one another to mutual satisfaction, she returned; and laying the keys where she found them, silently crept into bed to her husband. But after she had frequently thus pursued her unlawsul amours without being discovered, at last her husband happened to awake, when she was gone to prosecute her accustomed delights, and missing his wife, he felt for the keys; but not finding them, he got up, and went to the door, which he found only on the lock; and then bolting it, he returned to his chamber, and looked out of the window to see what time she returned. Now we must observe, that in the same city was a law, that at a certain hour in the night, a bell was rung, after which, if either man or woman was found in the streets, they were detained in prison till the next morning, and then put into the pillory, as objects of shame and derision unto all beholders. When it was very late, or rather early, his wife came from her gallant, but found the door bolted against her; however, she took the boldness to knock. The good old knight, looking out at the window, and seeing it was his wife, reproached her in the following manner: "O thou wicked and unchaste woman!" said he, "Have I found thee out? How often may I conclude thou hast committed adultery, and defiled thy marriage bed? Assure thyself, lascivious creature, that thou shall stand there till the ringing of the bell, that the watch may seize thee, and thou mayest meet with the punishment due to thy abominable perfidiousness and adultery." She answered in an humble, dissembling tone: "Why does my dear lord and husband thus unjustly charge me with a wicked crime, which my known chastity abhors from my soul? God is my witness I am innocent of this grievous accusation; for if you will know the truth, I was sent for by my mother, who was taken dangerously ill; and you being fast asleep, I was loth to awake you, and so with all possible silence I arose, and taking the keys, I opened the door, and went, as my duty obliged me, to my sick mother, whom I found so very ill, that, I fear she cannot live till morning. But for all that, my affection is so great to you tha I came away, and left a dying mother, to return to a dear and loving husband; wherefore, I beseech you, for the love of God, let me in, and do not for my great affection to you, expose me to shame and disgrace." These plausible pretences did not prevail upon the old knight, who justly looked upon her as guilty of adultery and falshood, and therefore he absolutely refused to let her in. Hereupon she reminded him, what a disgrace it would be, were she taken by the watch, not only to herself but to him, and all their relations; using besides, all the arguments her subtle invention could imagine necessary to prevail upon him; but finding all her prayers to no purpose, and that he remained inexorable, she bethought herself of a stratagem, which she prosecuted after the following manner: "My lord," said she, "you know that by this door there is a well. If you let me not in, I will drown myself to avoid the shame that is coming upon me and my friends." As the old gentleman was going about to reprove her further, and to threaten her, in hopes to deter her thereby from the like practices for the future, and then intending to let her in, and out of his great love and good nature, to forgive her, the moon went down, and the night was obscured with a darkness more than usual. Overjoyed at this advantage, she pursued her stratagem, and with an audible voice, and a dismal tone she thus expressed herself: "That I may die like a Christian, I will make my last will; and first I bequeath my soul to heaven, and my body to the earth; but all other worldly goods whatever, I bequeath to my dear husband, for him to dispose of as he shall think convenient." Having thus finished her pretended will, she went to the well, and there finding a great stone, she took it in her arms, and lifting it up, cried out, "Now I drown myself!" and so threw the stone into the well, squealing after it very artfully, to make her husband the more readily believe it was her. This done, she stept softly and hid herself behind the door again. Her stratagem had its desired effect; for the good old knight verily believing that his wife had been as good as her word, ran hastily down to the well, making a lamentable outcry all the way, from his great tenderness to her. Now observe the perfidiousness and crafty contrivance of this wicked woman, to turn the tables upon her too indulgent husband; for though, before she had injured him in the highest degree imaginable, yet now she makes him suffer publicly for her scandalous crimes; and instead of reparation to his abused honour, she by the falsest accusations, and most complicated wickedness procures him to be punished in the pillory as a debauched person, for her adulteries; and thereby at once clear herself, be revenged on her innocent husband for threatening her before, and all this at the price of her reputation and good name. The old knight was no sooner out, but she got in, and having locked the doors, went up into the chamber, and looked out of the window, as he had done before. And having a long while heard the good old man grievously lament for her supposed loss, and condemning himself for too much rigour, laughing all the time at him, for his indulgence and love, she at last, in opprobrious terms, called out to him, reproaching him in the vilest manner imaginable, calling him letcherous dotard, and upbraiding him with slighting her and going continually out on nights after harlots. The old good man was so overjoyed to hear his wife was alive, that he valued not what she said; and desiring her to have a better opinion of him, be begged her to open the door, and passing by all, they would be good friends. But all his prayers and intreaties availed nothing. She vowed he should stay till the watch came, that he might deservedly suffer, as he had threatened her before. The knight, in his own vindication, pleaded that it was an improbable thing, that he should be guilty of such vices, seeing his advanced years rendered him unqualified for the delights of love; alledging further, that out of pure affection to her, he was now in the streets; and therefore desired her not to let him suffer shamefully. She confidently answered, that it was God's goodness that he had given him time to repent; and therefore he ought to be thankful, and suffer patiently. The knight replied, that God was merciful, and required nothing more of a sinner, than that he should repent of his sins past, and amend his life. "Therefore, dear wife," said he, "I beg of you to let me in." She said, "Who the devil made you so good a preacher? But for all that you come not in here." And as he was studying some new persuasions to prevail upon her to let him in; the watch came, and finding him in the streets, demanded what he did there at that unseasonable, time of night, reminding him withal, that he had broke the law of the city, and though he was an ancient inhabitant thereof, that could not excuse him from suffering according to the nature of the offence. His wife hearing these words, cried out to the watchmen, "Now is the time, honest men, for you to avenge me on that foul adulterer, who is so insatiate in his lust, that he never fails at night to forsake my bed, and follow his strumpets. In hopes of reformation, I have patiently forborn him a great while; but nothing will reclaim him, slighting my youth, and continuing still in his wicked whoredoms; therefore now punish him according to his deserts, that he may be made an example to all such doating letchers as he is." Accordingly he was carried to prison; and he, next morning, shamefully stood in the pillory. Source: Roman Stories; or, the History of the Seven Wise Masters of Rome: Containing Seven Days Entertainment, in Many Pleasant and Witty Tales, or Stories (Berwick: W. Phorson, 1785), no. 11, pp. 30-36 . Link to another version of this tale: George Laurence Gomme, ed., The History of the Seven Wise Masters of Rome , printed from the edition of Wynkyn de Worde, 1520 (London: Villon Society, 1885), pp. 37-42 . Wikipedia article on the Seven Wise Masters . Return to the table of contents . Tofano Shuts His Wife Out of Doors Giovanni Boccaccio, The Decameron Tofano shuts his wife one night out of doors; who, not being able to persuade him to let her come in, pretends to throw herself into a well, by throwing a stone in. He runs thither to see, during which she enters, and, locking him out, abuses him well. There lived at Arezzo a certain rich man named Tofano, who had a very handsome woman for his wife, whose name was Madam Ghita, of whom all at once, and without knowing why, he became extremely jealous. This greatly vexed the lady, who would frequently demand of him his reasons for such a suspicion; and he being able to assign none, but such as were general, or nothing to the purpose, she resolved to plague him with the real evil, which hitherto had only been imaginary. And having observed that a certain young gentleman had taken particular notice of her, she encouraged him so far, that they only waited for a favorable opportunity to put their design into execution. Amongst the rest of her husband's bad qualities, he had taken a great delight, she saw, in drinking, which she not only seemed pleased with, but would persuade him to drink more. In this manner she used to make him drunk as often as she could, which afforded the first opportunity of being with her lover, and from that time they met continually by the same means. She depended indeed so much upon this drunken disposition of his, that she would not only bring her lover into her house, but even go and spend the greater part of the night along with him, his residence not being very far off. Continuing this way of life, the husband began to perceive that, whilst she encouraged him to drink in that manner, she scarcely tasted it herself, and from thence to suspect, as was really the case, that she made him drunk with a view only to her own private purposes, during the time of his being asleep. And being willing to have proof of this, he pretended once (without having drunk a drop all that day), both in his words and actions, to be the most disordered creature that could be. Which she perceiving, and thinking that he had then had a dose sufficient, and that he would sleep without any more liquor, straightway put him to bed. This was no sooner done, but she went as usual to her lover's house, where she stayed the best part of the night. Tofano finding his wife did not come to bed, got up, and bolted the door, and then went and sat in the window to wait for her coming home, that she might see he was acquainted with her way of going on; and continued there till her return. She, finding the door bolted, was exceedingly uneasy, and tried several times to force it open. Which after Tofano had suffered for some time, he said, "Madam, you give yourself trouble to no purpose, for here you shall not come; go back, if you please, for you shall enter no more within these doors, till I have showed you that respect, which these ways of yours require, before all your relations and neighbors." She then begged, for Heaven's sake, that he would open the door, saying, that she had not been where he imagined; but (as the evenings were long, and she able neither to sleep all the time, nor to sit up by herself) that she went to see a gentlewoman in the neighborhood. But all was to no purpose, he seemed resolved that the whole town should be witnesses of their shame, when otherwise they would have known nothing of the matter. The lady, finding her entreaties of no effect, had recourse to threats, and said, "Either open the door, or I will make you the most miserable man that ever was born." Tofano replied, "And which way will you do it?" She, whose wits were sharpened by love, continued, "Before I will suffer such a disgrace, as you mean wrongfully to fasten upon me, I will throw myself directly into this well, and being found there afterwards, everybody will conclude that you did it in one of your drunken fits; whence it must unavoidably happen, that you be either obliged to fly your country, and lose all your effects; or else that you be put to death, as having murdered your wife." This, however, had no effect upon him; when she said, "I can no longer bear all your scorn; God forgive you for being the cause of my death!" and the night being so dark that they could scarcely see one another, she ran towards the well, and taking up a great stone that lay by the well-side, and crying aloud, "God forgive this act of mine!" she let it fall into the well. The stone made a great noise when it came to the water, which Tofano hearing, firmly believed that she had thrown herself in, and taking the rope and bucket, he ran out to help her. But she, who stood concealed by the side of the door, seeing him go towards the well, got into the house, and made all fast, whilst she went to the window, and began to say to him, "Why, husband, you should use water whilst you are drinking and not after you have made yourself drunk." Tofano, seeing her laugh at him, returned, and finding the door bolted, begged of her to open it. But she now changed her note, and began to cry out, "You drunken, sorry, troublesome wretch! you shall not come in here tonight; I can no longer bear with your evil practices; I will let all the world know what sort of a person you are, and what hours you keep." Tofano, on the other part, being grievously provoked, used all the bad language he could think of, and made a most terrible mutiny. Upon which the neighbors were all raised out of their beds; and coming to their windows, inquired what was the matter. When she began to lament and say, "It is this wicked man, who is coming home drunk at all hours of the night, which, having endured a long time, and said a great deal to no purpose, I was now willing to try if I could not shame him out of it by locking him out." Tofano, on the contrary, told them how the matter was; and threatened her very much. She then said to the neighbors, "Now you see what sort of a man he is; what would you say if I went in the street, and he within doors, as I am? Then you might think he was in the right. Take notice, I beseech you, how artful he is; he says I have done that which he seems to have done himself, and talks something about the well; but I wish he was in, that he might have some water as well as wine." The neighbors all joined in blaming Tofano, deeming him the person in fault, and giving him many hard words for his usage of his wife; and the thing was noised about the city, till her relations heard of it, who came thither in a body; and inquiring of one neighbor and another neighbor how it was, they took Tofano and beat him very severely. Afterwards they went into the house, and carried the lady away with them, with all that was hers, threatening Tofano with further punishment. Whilst he, finding the ill effects of his jealousy, and still having a regard for his wife, got some friends to intercede with her to come home again, promising never more to be jealous, and giving her leave for the future to do as she would. Thus, like a simple knave, he was glad to purchase peace, after having been to the last degree injured. Source: Giovanni Boccaccio, The Decameron; or, Ten Days Entertainment (Cincinnati: Steward and Kidd Company, 1919); day 7, tale 4, pp. 344-48 . The Decameron was written about 1350. Return to the table of contents . A Tyrannical Husband England A little while ago I cut out of a Sussex newspaper a story purporting to be the relation of a fact which had taken place at a fixed date in Lewes. This was the story. A tyrannical husband locked the door against his wife, who was out having tea with a neighbor, gossiping and scandalmongering; when she applied for admittance, he pretended not to know her. She threatened to jump into the well unless he opened the door. The man, not supposing that she would carry her threat into execution, declined, alleging that he was in bed, and the night was chilly; besides which he entirely disclaimed all acquaintance with the lady who claimed admittance. The wife then flung a log into a well, and secreted herself behind the door. The man, hearing the splash, fancied that his good lady was really in the deeps, and forth he darted in his nocturnal costume, which was of the lightest, to ascertain whether his deliverance was complete. At once the lady darted into the house, locked the door, and, on the husband pleading for admittance, she declared most solemnly from the window that she did not know him. Now, this story, I can positively assert, unless the events of this world move in a circle, did not happen in Lewes, or any other Sussex town. It was told in the Gesta Romanorum six hundred years ago, and it was told, may be, as many hundred years before in India, for it is still to be found in Sanskrit collections of tales. Source: Sabine Baring-Gould, Curious Myths of the Middle Ages (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1904), pp. 142-43 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 4, 2013. The Contrary Wife The Contrary Wife folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther types 1365A, 1365B, and 1365C edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2013 Type 1365A : A man's wife falls into a river, and he seeks her upstream, explaining to the incredulous onlookers that she was too contrary to drift with the current. Type 1365B : A man and his wife have an argument about how something has been cut or broken. She maintains that it was done with scissors, but he does not believe her. Their argument intensifies, and he finally pushes her into a pond. The woman, even while drowning, has the last word; she reaches two fingers above the water and makes the sign of a pair of scissors. Type 1365C : A woman calls her husband a lousy rascal, and he responds by pushing her into a pond, but she still gets the last word by extending her arms above the water and pretending to crack a louse between her thumbnails. Contents Of a Woman Who Persisted in Calling Her Husband Lousy (Italy). Of One Who Sought His Wife Who Had Drowned in a River (Italy). Scissors They Were (Italy). Scissors (Europe). Of Hym That Sought His Wyfe against the Streme (England). How Madde Coomes, When His Wife Was Drowned, Sought Her against the Streame (England). The Woman Who Called Her Husband a Louse-Cracker (Germany). The Woman Drowned (Jean de La Fontaine). The Contrary Woman (Norway). Mary, Mary, So Contrary! [The Pig-Headed Wife] (Finland). Scissors or Knife? (Russia). The Contrary Wife (Spain). The Baneyrwal and His Drowned Wife (Pakistan). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Of a Woman Who Persisted in Calling Her Husband Lousy Italy One day we were discussing the stubbornness of women, that sometimes is so great that they would rather let themselves be killed rather than to give in. One of our group told the following story: A woman from our region constantly contradicted her husband, always disputing everything that he said, and at all times insisting on having the last word. One day she had a vicious argument with her husband, finally calling him a lousy rascal. Attempting to force her to take back her words he struck her with a stick, his feet, and his fists. But the longer he beat her, the more she called him a lousy rascal. When he finally grew tired of beating her, in order to break her of her stubbornness, he tied a rope around her and led her to the well, then threatened to drown her if she did not cease insulting him. But the woman continued with her insults, repeating the word lousy, even as the water reached her chin. With that her husband let her sink entirely underwater so that she could no longer say anything and to see if the threat of death might cure her of her stubbornness. However, nearly drowned and unable to speak, she expressed herself with her fingers. Lifting her hands above her head she pressed her two thumbnails together, and with this gesture showed her husband's lousiness, for it is with these thumbnails that women normally kill lice. Source: Poggio Bracciolini, "Von einer Frau, die dabei blieb, ihren Mann einen Lausekerl zu nennen," Die Facezien des Poggio Fiorentino , translated from the Latin into German by Hanns Floerke (Munich: Georg Müller, 1906), no. 59, pp. 63-64 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2013. Poggio Bracciolini (1380-1459) was an important humanist scholar and writer. Return to the table of contents . Of One Who Sought His Wife Who Had Drowned in a River Italy Another man, whose wife had drowned in a river, sought her corpse against the stream. When someone wondered about this and recommended to him that he search downstream, the man said, "There is no way that she would be found downstream. When she was alive she was so contradictory and self-willed that she was against everything that anyone said or did. In death, as well, she would have only gone against the stream." Source: Poggio Bracciolini, "Von einem, der seine im Fluss ertrunkene Frau suchte," Die Facezien des Poggio Fiorentino , translated from the Latin into German by Hanns Floerke (Munich: Georg Müller, 1906), no. 60, pp. 64-65 . Translated from the German by D. L. Ashliman. © 2013. Poggio Bracciolini (1380-1459) was an important humanist scholar and writer. Return to the table of contents . Scissors Europe Once upon a time, though it was not in my time nor in your time nor in anybody else's time, there lived a cobbler named Tom and his wife named Joan. And they lived fairly happily together, except that whatever Tom did Joan did the opposite, and whatever Joan thought Tom thought quite contrary-wise. When Tom wanted beef for dinner Joan liked pork, and if Joan wanted to have chicken Tom would like to have duck. And so it went on all the time. Now it happened that one day Joan was cleaning up the kitchen and, turning suddenly, she knocked two or three pots and pans together and broke them all. So Tom, who was working in the front room, came and asked Joan, "What's all this? What have you been doing?" Now Joan had got the pair of scissors in her hand, and sooner than tell him what had really happened she said, "I cut these pots and pans into pieces with my scissors." "What?" said Tom, "Cut pottery with your scissors, you nonsensical woman; you can't do it!" "I tell you I did with my scissors!" "You couldn't." "I did." "You couldn't." "I did." "Couldn't." "Did." "Couldn't." "Did." "Couldn't." "Did." At last Tom got so angry that he seized Joan by the shoulders and shoved her out of the house and said, "If you don't tell me how you broke those pots and pans I'll throw you into the river." But Joan kept on saying, "It was with the scissors." And Tom got so enraged that at last he took her to the bank of the river and said, "Now for the last time, will you tell me the truth? How did you break those pots and pans?" "With the scissors." And with that he threw her into the river, and she sank once, and she sank twice, and just before she was about to sink for the third time she put her hand up into the air, out of the water, and made a motion with her first and middle finger as if she were moving the scissors. So Tom saw it was no use to try to persuade her to do anything but what she wanted. So he rushed up the stream and met a neighbor who said, "Tom, Tom, what are you running for?" "Oh, I want to find Joan; she fell into the river just in front of our house, and I am afraid she is going to be drowned." "But," said the neighbor, "you're running up stream." "Well," said Tom, "Joan always went contrary-wise whatever happened." And so he never found her in time to save her. Source: Joseph Jacobs Europa's Fairy Book: Resored and Retold (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916), pp. 31-33 . Return to the table of contents . Scissors They Were Italy Once upon a time there was a husband and a wife. The husband was a tailor; so was the wife, and in addition was a good housekeeper. One day the husband found some things in the kitchen broken, -- pots, glasses, plates. He asked, "How were they broken?" "How do I know?" answered the wife. "What do you mean by saying 'How do I know?' Who broke them?" "Who broke them? I, with the scissors," said the wife, in anger. "With the scissors?" "With the scissors!" "Are you telling the truth? I want to know what you broke them with. If you don't tell me, I will beat you." "With the scissors!" (for she had the scissors in her hand). "Scissors, do you say?" "Scissors they were!" "Ah! What do you mean? Wait a bit; I will make you see whether it was you with the scissors." So he tied a rope around her and began to lower her into the well, saying, "Come, how did you break them? You see I am lowering you into the well." "It was the scissors!" The husband, seeing her so obstinate, lowered her into the well; and she, for all that, did not hold her tongue. "How did you break them?" said the husband. "It was the scissors." Then her husband lowered her more, until she was half way down. "What did you do it with?" "It was the scissors." Then he lowered her until her feet touched the water. "What did you do it with?" "It was the scissors!" Then he let her down into the water to her waist. "What did you do it with?" "It was the scissors!" "Take care!" cried her husband, enraged at seeing her so obstinate. "It will take but little to put you under the water. You had better tell what you did it with; it will be better for you. How is it possible to break pots and dishes with the scissors! What has become of the pieces, if they were cut?" "It was the scissors! The scissors!" Then he let go the rope. Splash! his wife is all under the water. "Are you satisfied now? Do you say any longer that it was with the scissors?" The wife could not speak any more, for she was under the water; but what did she do? She stuck her hand up out of the water, and with her fingers began to make signs as if she were cutting with the scissors. What could the poor husband do? He said, "I am losing my wife, and then I shall have to go after her. I will pull her out now, and she may say that it was the scissors or the shears." Then he pulled her out, and there was no way of making her tell with what she had broken all those things in the kitchen. Source: Thomas Frederick Crane, Italian Popular Tales (London: Macmillan and Company, 1885), no. 96, pp. 285-87 . Return to the table of contents . Of Hym That Sought His Wyfe against the Streme England A man the whose wyfe, as she came over a bridg fell in to the ryver and was drowned: wherfore he wente and sought for her upward against the stream, wherat his neighboures, that wente with hym, marvayled, and sayde he dyd nought, he shulde go seke her downewarde with the streame. "Naye," quod he, I am sure I shall never fynde her that waye: For she was so waywarde and so contrary to every thynge, whyle she lyvedde, that I knowe very well nowe she is deed, she wyll go agaynste the streame." Source: The Hundred Merry Tales; or, Shakspeare's Jest Book (London: J. Chidley, 1831), p. 57 . Return to the table of contents . How Madde Coomes, When His Wife Was Drowned, Sought Her against the Streame England Coomes of Stapforth, hearing that his wife was drowned coming from market, went with certayne of his friends to see if they could find her in the river. He, contrary to all the rest, sought his wife against the streame; which they perceyving, sayd he lookt the wrong way. And why so? (quoth he). Because (quoth they) you should looke downe the steame, and not against it. Nay, zounds (quoth hee), I shall never find her that way; for shee did all things so contrary in her life time, that now she is dead, I am sure she will goe against the streame. Source: W. Carew Hazlitt, Shakespeare Jest-Books (London: Willis and Sotheran, 1864), "Mother Bunches Merriments," p. 27 . Hazlitt's source: Pasquils Jests Mixed with Mother Bunches Merriments (London, 1604). Return to the table of contents . The Woman Who Called Her Husband a Louse-Cracker Germany There was a man who had an evil wife. When she got angry with him she called him a louse-cracker. This irritated him, especially when she did so in the presence of other people. He forbade her to this, under the threat of severe punishment, but this did not stop her. One time she called him thus, so he threw her into the pond in his garden. Drowning, and no longer able to speak, she raised both arms above the water and pressed her two thumbnails together, as though she were cracking lice. What she was not able to say with words she said with actions. Source: Karl Simrock, Schimpf und Ernst nach Johannes Pauli (Heilbronn: Verlag von Gebrüder Henninger, 1876), no. 389, p. 294 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2013. Simrock's source: Johannes Pauli, Von Schimpff unnd ernst, vil weiser höflicher Sprüch, Historien, Exempel und Manung in allem thun und leben der menschen [Frankfurt/Main] 1545. Wikipedia article on Johannes Pauli (ca. 1455 - ca. 1530). Return to the table of contents . The Woman Drowned Jean de La Fontaine I'm none of those who coldly say, "'Tis nothing -- 'tis a woman drowned;" I say 'tis much, and merits grief profound, When one of these is lost who make life gay. Quite a propos is what I've here to tell, A tale of one who in the river fell, And made her melancholy exit there. Her husband for the body looked with care; He thought a handsome funeral her due. It chanced, as near the fatal spot he drew, He met some strollers by the riverside, Who nothing of the matter knew. "Have any of ye seen my wife?" he cried. "No, not a trace of her," said one; "but go, Run with the current, look for her below." "Rather run up," another cried, "good man, As her opposing spirit doubtless ran: All things float down the current, it is true, But she'll float up, be sure, to bother you!" He joked, I think, a little out of season. This female character of contradiction Is true perhaps, perhaps is fiction; I'll not attempt about it here to reason: But she that got it with her early breath. Will keep it even when in death; Her contradiction to the end will go, Ay, and beyond it too, for all I know. Source: Jean de La Fontaine The Fables of La Fontaine (London: J. C. Nimmo and Bain, 1884), book 3, no. 16, pp. 72-73 . Link to this fable in the original French: La femme noyée . Wikipedia article on Jean de La Fontaine (1621-95). Return to the table of contents . The Contrary Woman Norway There was once upon a time a man who had a wife, and she was so contrary and cross-grained that it was not an easy thing at all to get on with her. The husband fared worst of all; whatever he was for, she was always against. So it happened one Sunday in summer that the man and the woman went out to see how the crops looked. When they came to a corn-?eld on the other side of the river the man said, "It's ready for reaping; tomorrow we must begin." "Yes, tomorrow we can begin and clip it," said the woman. "What is it you say? Are we going to clip it? Are we supposed not to reap corn any longer?" said the man. "No, it must be clipped," said the woman. "There is nothing so dangerous as a little knowledge," said the man; "one would think you had lost what little sense you had! Have you ever seen anybody clipping corn?" said he. "Little I know, and less I want to know," said the woman; "but this I do know, that the corn shall be clipped and not reaped." There was no use talking any more about that; clipped it should be. So they walked on wrangling and quarrelling, till they came to the bridge across the river, close to a deep pool. "There's an old saying," said the man, "that good tools make good work; I fancy that'll be a queer harvest which is cut with a pair of shears," said he. "Shall we not settle to reap the corn, after all?" "No, no! It must be clipped, clipped, clipped!" shouted the woman jumping up and clipping her ?ngers under the man's nose. In her passion she forgot to look where she was going, and all at once she stumbled over one of the beams on the bridge and fell into the river. "Old habits are hard to change," thought the man, "but it would be a wonder if I, for once, got my way." He waded out into the pool and got hold of her by the hair, till her head was just out of the water. "Shall we reap the corn then?" he said. "Clip, clip, clip!" screamed the woman. "I'll teach you to clip," thought the man, and ducked her under the water. But that wasn't of much use." They must clip it," she said, as he brought her to the surface again. "I do believe the woman is crazy," said the man to himself. "Many are mad and don't know it, and many have sense and don't use it; but I must try once more, anyhow," said he. But no sooner had he ducked her under again than she held her hand above the water and began to clip with her ?ngers, like a pair of shears. Then the man got furious and kept her under so long that her hand all of a sudden fell under water, and the woman became so heavy that he had to let go his hold. "If you want to drag me down into the pool with you, you may lie there, you wretch!" said the man. And so the woman was drowned. But after a while he thought it wasn't right that she should lie there and not be buried in Christian soil, so he went along the river and searched and dragged for her; but for all his searching and all his dragging he could not ?nd her. He took the people on the farm and others in the neighborhood with him, and they began dragging the river all the way down; but for all the searching they could not ?nd the woman. "Well," said the man, "this is not much use! This woman was a sort by herself; while she was alive she was altogether a contrary one, and it is not likely she'll be different now," he said. "We must search up the river for her, and try above the fall; perhaps she has ?oated upwards." So they went up the river and searched and dragged for her above the fall, and there, sure enough, she lay. That shows what a contrary woman she was! Source: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Fairy Tales from the Far North , translated by H. L. Bræstad (London: David Nutt, 1897), pp. 39-44 . Return to the table of contents . Mary, Mary, So Contrary [The Pig-Headed Wife] Finland There was once a farmer who was married to the most contrary wife in the world. Her name was Maya. If he expected Maya to say, "Yes," she would always say, "No," and if he expected her to say, "No," she would always say, "Yes." If he said the soup was too hot, Maya would instantly insist that it was too cold. She would do nothing that he wanted her to do, and she always insisted on doing everything that he did not want her to do. Like most contrary people Maya was really very stupid and the farmer after he had been married to her for a few years knew exactly how to manage her. For instance at Christmas one year he wanted to make a big feast for his friends and neighbors. Did he tell his wife so? Not he! Instead, a few weeks beforehand he remarked casually: "Christmas is coming and I suppose every one will expect us to have fine white bread. But I don't think we ought to. It's too expensive. Black bread is good enough for us." "Black bread, indeed!" cried Maya. "Not at all! We're going to have white bread and you needn't say any more about it! Black bread at Christmas! To hear you talk people would suppose we are beggars!" The farmer pretended to be grieved and he said: "Well, my dear, have white bread if your heart is set on it, but I hope you don't expect to make any pies." "Not make any pies! Just let me tell you I expect to make all the pies I want!" "Well, now, Maya, if we have pies I don't think we ought to have any wine." "No wine! I like that! Of course we'll have wine on Christmas!" The farmer was much pleased but, still pretending to protest, he said: "Well, if we spend money on wine, we better not expect to buy any coffee." "What! No coffee on Christmas! Who ever heard of such a thing! Of course we'll have coffee!" "Well, I'm not going to quarrel with you! Get a little coffee if you like, but just enough for you and me for I don't think we ought to have any guests." "What! No guests on Christmas! Indeed and you're wrong if you think we're not going to have a houseful of guests!" The farmer was overjoyed but, still pretending to grumble, he said: "If you have the house full of people, you needn't think I'm going to sit at the head of the table, for I'm not!" "You are, too!" screamed his wife. "That's exactly where you are going to sit!" "Maya, Maya, don't get so excited! I will sit there if you insist. But if I do you mustn't expect me to pour the wine." "And why not? It would be a strange thing if you didn't pour the wine at your own table !" "All right, all right, I'll pour it! But you mustn't expect me to taste it beforehand." "Of course you're going to taste it beforehand!" This was exactly what the farmer wanted his wife to say. So you see by pretending to oppose her at every turn he was able to have the big Christmas party that he wanted and he was able to feast to his heart's content with all his friends and relatives and neighbors. Time went by and Maya grew more and more contrary if such a thing were possible. Summer came and the haymaking season. They were going to a distant meadow to toss hay and had to cross an angry little river on a footbridge made of one slender plank. The farmer crossed in safety, then he called back to his wife: "Walk very carefully, Maya, for the plank is not strong!" "I will not walk carefully!" the wife declared. She flung herself on the plank with all her weight and when she got to the middle of the stream she jumped up and down just to show her husband how contrary she could be. Well, the plank broke with a snap, Maya fell into the water, the current carried her off, and she was drowned! Her husband, seeing what had happened, ran madly upstream shouting: "Help! Help!" The haymakers heard him and came running to see what was the matter. "My wife has fallen into the river!" he cried, "and the current has carried her body away!" "What ails you?" the haymakers said. "Are you mad? If the current has carried your wife away, she's floating downstream, not upstream!" "Any other woman would float downstream," the farmer said. "Yes! But you know Maya! She's so contrary she'd float upstream every time!" "That's true," the haymakers said, "she would!" So all afternoon the farmer searched upstream for his wife's body but he never found it. When night came he went home and had a good supper of all the things he liked to eat which Maya would never let him have. Source: Parker Fillmore Mighty Mikko: A Book of Finnish Fairy Tales and Folk Tales (New York: Harcout, Brace, and Company, 1922), pp. 209-13 . Other translators (notably Aili Kolehmainen in Tales from a Finnish Tupa , 1936) give the title of this story as "The Pig-Headed Wife," and name the husband and wife "Matti" and "Liisa." Return to the table of contents . Scissors or Knife? Russia It is only when the joke hinges upon something which is peculiar to a people that it is likely to be found among that people only. But most of the Russian jests turn upon pivots which are familiar to all the world, and have for their themes such common-place topics as the incorrigible folly of man, the inflexible obstinacy of woman. And in their treatment of these subjects they offer very few novel features. It is strange how far a story of this kind may travel, and yet how little alteration it may undergo. Take, for instance, the skits against women which are so universally popular. Far away in outlying districts of Russia we find the same time-honored quips which have so long figured in collections of English facetiae. There is the good old story, for instance, of the dispute between a husband and wife as to whether a certain rope has been cut with a knife or with scissors, resulting in the murder of the scissors-upholding wife, who is pitched into the river by her knife-advocating husband; but not before she has, in her very death agony, testified to her belief in the scissors hypothesis by a movement of her fingers above the surface of the stream. In a Russian form of the story, told in the government of Astrakhan, the quarrel is about the husband's beard. He says he has shaved it, his wife declares he has only cut it off. He flings her into a deep pool, and calls to her to say "shaved." Utterance is impossible to her, but "she lifts one hand above the water and by means of two fingers makes signs to show that it was cut." The story has even settled into a proverb. Of a contradictory woman the Russian peasants affirm that, "If you say 'shaved' she'll say 'cut.'" In the same way another story shows us in Russian garb our old friend the widower who, when looking for his drowned wife -- a woman of a very antagonistic disposition -- went up the river instead of down, saying to his astonished companions, "She always did everything contrary-wise, so now, no doubt, she's gone against the stream." Source: W. R. S. Ralston, Russian Folk-Tales (London: Smith, Elder and Company, 1873), pp. 36-37 . Ralston's source: Alexander Afanasyev (1826-71). Return to the table of contents . The Contrary Wife Spain A tambourinist had so contrary a wife, he never could get her to do anything he asked. One day, on their way to a wedding, at which he was to play, she was riding an ass and carrying his tambourine, and he cried out, as they were fording a river, "Woman, don't play the tambourine, for you'll frighten the ass." No sooner said than she began thrumming. The ass, shying, lost its footing, and threw our dame into the river; while the husband, however much he wished to help her, could do no good. Seeing she was drowned, he went upstream in search of her body. "My good fellow," said a looker-on, "what are you seeking?" "My wife," replied he, "who is drowned." "And you are looking for her upstream, friend?" "Oh, yes, sir, she was always contrary." Source: Susette M. Taylor The Humour of Spain (London: Walter Scott Publishing Company, 1909), p. 40 . Return to the table of contents . The Baneyrwal and His Drowned Wife Pakistan There was once a sudden flood in the Indus, which washed away numbers of people, and, among others, the wife of a certain Baneyrwal. The distracted husband was wandering along the banks of the river, looking for the dead body, when a countryman accosted him thus, "Oh friend, if, as I am informed, your wife has been carried away in the flood, she must have gone down the stream with the rest of the poor creatures; yet you are going up the stream." "Ah, sir," answered the wretched Baneyrwal, "you did not know that wife of mine. She always took an opposite course to everyone else. And even now that she is drowned, I know full well that, if other bodies have floated down the river, hers must have floated up." Source: Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 35, pp. 90-91 . Footnote by Swynnerton: "Baneyrwal -- a Baneyr-walla -- a Baneyr-fellow -- an inhabitant of Baneyr." Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 22, 2013. Wives Rule Over Their Husbands: Folktales of Type 1375 Wives Rule Over Their Husbands Folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther Type 1375 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2024 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Women Desire Sovereignty (England / Arabia). Of a Woman (England). Origin of the Grey Mare's Being the Better Horse (England). The Rule of Women over Their Husbands (Germany). Women's Rule over Their Husbands (Germany). Boots (Italy). Husband and Wife (Denmark). The Hen-Pecked Husband (Italy). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Women Desire Sovereignty England / Arabia The "self-willed" disposition of women is harped upon by many of our old English authors. In a curious 16th century tract entitled The Wyll of the Devyll (Ballad Society Publications) occurs the following bequest: " Item. I give to all women sovereignty, which they most desire, and that they never lack excuse." And, in his Breviary of Health , Andrew Borde says of woman: "She is subject to man, except it be there where the white mare is the better horse; therefore, ut homo non cantet cum cuculo, let every man please his wife in all matters, and displease her not, but let her have her own wyll, for that she wyll have, who so ever say nay; " -- according to the proverbial lines: The man's a fool who thinks by force of skill To stem the torrent of a woman's will; For if she will, she will, you may depend on't, And if she won't, she won't, and there's an end on't. It would appear from the above passage from Borde that the wife who ruled her husband was then called the " white mare" -- in modern times she is termed the " gray mare," and the origin of the expression is thus accounted for: A gentleman, who had "seen the world," one day gave his son a pair of horses, and a basket of eggs, saying, "Do you travel upon the high-road until you come to the first house in which there is a married couple. If you find that the husband is master there, give him one of the horses. If, on the other hand, the wife is ruler, give her an egg. Return at once if you part with a horse, but do not come back so long as you keep both horses, and there is an egg remaining in your basket." Off went the youth, full of his mission, and called at so many houses without finding the husband really master that all his eggs save one were gone, and riding onward he came to a house where he must make his final trial. He alighted and knocked at the door. The good wife opened it for him and curtsied. "Is your husband at home?" "No," but she would call him from the hay-field. In he came, wiping his brows. The young man told them his errand. "Why," said the good wife, simpering and twiddling a corner of her apron. "I always do as John wants me to do; he is my master -- aren't you, John?" To which John replied, "Yes." "Then," said the youth, "I am to give you a horse; which will you take?" Quoth John, "I think we'll have the bay gelding." "If we have a choice, husband," said the wife, "I think the gray mare will suit us better." "No," replied John. "The bay for me; he is more square in the front, and has much better legs." "Now," said the wife, "I don't think so; -- the gray mare is the better horse, and I shall never be contented unless I get that one." "You must take an egg," cried the youth, giving her the only one he had left, and he then returned home, with both horses, to inform his father how he had sped in his mission. There is a similar Arabian story told of the Khalíf Harún er-Rashíd, who figures so often in the Arabian Nights : how he gave one of his favourite companions a great number of donkeys, one of which he was to present to each man whom he found not to be under "petticoat government" -- for it is a mistake to suppose that, although women of a certain class are bought and sold for the harams of Muslims, the actual wife may not sometimes rule her lord very despotically; but on this subject see Lane's Modern Egyptians. The favourite returned without having disposed of a single ass, at which Harún made merry, declaring himself to be the only man in his dominions who was master of his haram, including even his chief wife, Zubaydé. Their conversation happened to take place in a room where they might be overheard by that pious but exceedingly jealous lady, and the favourite saw his opportunity of turning the laugh against the Khalíf himself. So he began to describe in glowing terms the personal charms of a girl he pretended to have seen in the course of his journeyings, upon which Harún, in alarm lest Zubaydé should hear this account of the strange beauty, whispered: "Don't talk quite so loud." This was what the companion expected, so he exclaimed in great glee: "O Commander of the Faithful, it is you who must take a donkey!" Source (books.google.com): F. J. Furnivall, Edmund Brock, and W. A. Clouston, Originals and Analogues of Some of Chaucer's Canterbury Tales (London: N. Trübner and Company, 1887), pp. 523-24 . Source (Internet Archive): F. J. Furnivall, Edmund Brock, and W. A. Clouston, Originals and Analogues of Some of Chaucer's Canterbury Tales (London: N. Trübner and Company, 1887), pp. 523-24 . Return to the table of contents . Of a Woman England She is subject to man, except it be ther wher the white mare is the better horse. Source (Internet Archive): Andrew Borde, The Breviary of Health (London: Thomas Est, 1598), , ch. 242 . Return to the table of contents . Origin of the Grey Mare's Being the Better Horse England I had lately the pleasure of passing a very agreeable evening in a mixed company of both sexes, where the conversation happening to turn upon the propriety of that power which men usually arrogate to themselves of ruling over their wives with despotic sway, a young lady of wit and humour, then present, replied, "it might possibly be so sometimes, but much oftener the grey mare is the better horse! " and very obligingly entertained the company with the following account of the rise of that proverbial saying, which is made use of when a woman governs her husband. A gentleman of a certain county in England having married a young lady of considerable fortune, and with many other charms, yet finding, in a very short time, that she was of a high domineering spirit, and always contending to be mistress of him and his family, he was resolved to part with her. Accordingly, he went to her father, and told him, he found his daughter of such a temper, and he was so heartily tired of her, that if he would take her home again, he would return every penny of her fortune. The old gentleman having inquired into the cause of his complaint, asked him, "why he should be more disquieted at it than any other married man, since it was the common case with them all, and consequently no more than he ought to have expected when he entered into the marriage state?" The young gentleman desired to be excused, if he said he was so far from giving his assent to this assertion, that he thought himself more unhappy than any other man, as his wife had a spirit no way to be quelled; and as most certainly no man, who had a sense of right and wrong, could ever submit to be governed by his wife. "Son (said the old man) you are but little acquainted with the world, if you do not know that all women govern their husbands, though not all, indeed, by the same method: however, to end all disputes between us, I will put what I have said on this proof, if you are willing to try it: I have five horses in my stable; you shall harness these to a cart, in which I shall put a basket containing one hundred eggs; and if, in passing through the county, and making a strict inquiry into the truth or falsehood of my assertion, and leaving a horse at the house of every man who is master of his family himself, and an egg only where the wife governs, you will find your eggs gone before your horses, I hope you will then think your own case not uncommon, but will be contented to go home, and look upon your own wife as no worse than her neighbours. If, on the other hand, your horses are gone first, I will take my daughter home again, and you shall keep her fortune." This proposal was too advantageous to be rejected; our young married man, therefore, set out with great eagerness to get rid, as he thought, of his horses and his wife. At the first house he came to, he heard a woman, with a shrill and angry voice, call to her husband to go to the door. Here he left an egg, you may be sure, without making any further enquiry; at the next he met with something of the same kind; and at every house, in short, until his eggs were almost gone, when he arrived at the seat of a gentleman of family and figure in the county: he knocked at the door, and enquiring for the master of the house, was told by a servant, that his master was not yet stirring, but, if he pleased to walk in, his lady was in the parlour. The lady, with great complaisance, desired him to seat himself, and said, if his business was very urgent, she would wake her husband to let him know it, but had much rather not disturb him. "Why, really, Madam (said he) my business is only to ask a question, which you can resolve as well as your husband, if you will be ingenuous with me: you will, doubtless, think it odd, and it may be deemed impolite for any one, much more a stranger, to ask such a question; but as a very considerable wager depends upon it, and it may be to some advantage to yourself to declare the truth to me; I hope these considerations will plead my excuse. It is, Madam, to desire to be informed, whether you govern your husband, or he rules over you?" "Indeed, sir (replied the lady), this question is somewhat odd; but, as I think no one ought to be ashamed of doing their duty, I shall make no scruple to say, that I have been always proud to obey my husband in all things; but, if a woman's own word is to be suspected in such a case, let him answer for me; for here he comes." The gentleman at that moment entering the room, and, after some apologies, being made acquainted with the business, confirmed every word his obedient wife had reported in her own favour; upon which he was invited to choose which horse in the team he liked best, and to accept of it as a present. A black gelding struck the fancy of the gentleman most; but the lady desired he would choose the grey mare, which she thought would be very fit for her side-saddle; her husband gave substantial reasons why the black horse would be most useful to them; but Madam still persisted in her claim to the grey mare. "What (said she), and will you not take her then? But I say you shall; for I am sure the grey mare is much the better horse. " "Well, my dear (replied the husband), if it must be so." "You must take an egg (replied the gentleman carter), and I must take all my horses back again, and endeavour to live happy with my wife." ZENO Source (books.google.com): The London Magazine , vol. 3, (October 1784), pp. 280-81 . Source (Internet Archive): The London Magazine , vol. 3, (October 1784), pp. 280-81 . Return to the table of contents . The Rule of Women over Their Husbands Germany A man carried a pair of boots all over the world, intending to give them to a man who was not afraid of his wife. He could not find anyone who would take them, until at last one man took them, namely a gawky peasant. To him he said: "But take the grease too and put it into your pocket so that you can treat the boots with it." But the fellow was wearing a freshly washed white shirt, and he said: "No way! My wife would be angry with me if I got grease on my clean shirt." With this the stranger took his boots back, hit the peasant on the head with them, and said: "Go to the gallows! You are afraid of your wife for nothing, and you wanted to deceive me." Thus he continued on his way, and I don't think that he found any husband who deserved the boots. Source (books.google.com): Heinrich Bebel, "Von der Herrschaft der Weiber über die Männer," Heinrich Bebels Schwänke , edited by Albert Wesselski, vol. 1 (Munich and Leipzig: Georg Müller, 1907), p. 56 . Source (Internet Archive): Heinrich Bebel, "Von der Herrschaft der Weiber über die Männer," Heinrich Bebels Schwänke , edited by Albert Wesselski, vol. 1 (Munich and Leipzig: Georg Müller, 1907), p. 56 . Heinrich Bebel (1472-1518) was a German humanist writer. Return to the table of contents . Women's Rule over Their Husbands Germany One cannot find many men who do not allow their wives to rule over them, and furthermore, they are often afraid of them as well. The following story illustrates this point: A man carried a pair of brand new boots through the whole country, intending to give them to any man who was not afraid of his wife. For a long time he could find no such person to give them to. Finally he came to a bulky coarse peasant who claimed to deserve the boots. "Well then," said the man, "take this grease as well, to treat the boots with. You can carry it under your shirt." Now the peasant was wearing a white and freshly washed shirt, so he said: "No way! If I did that and got my shirt dirty, my wife would be angry with me." When the stranger heard that, he took back the boots and hit the peasant on the head with them, saying: "Get lost, you scoundrel. Did you think that you could deceive me like that? You are afraid of your wife in such a small matter. Just what would you do with something more important?" With that he went away with his boots, and -- believe me -- he has not found any husband who deserves to keep them. Source (books.google.com): Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof, "Von der Weiber Herrschafft gegen ire Menner," Wendunmuth (Frankfurt: Georg Raben, 1565), no. 363, pp. 343-343A . Source (Internet Archive): Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof, "Von der Weiber Herrschafft gegen iren Männern," Wendunmuth (Frankfurt am Main: Wolff Richter, 1602), no. 363, pp. 514-15 . Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof (1525-1605) was a German writer and translator. Return to the table of contents . Boots Italy There was a gentleman who had a pair of beautiful new boots, and he offered to give them to any husband who was not afraid of his wife. Having already searched for some time, without finding anyone who would accept them, he finally found a certain peasant, a very backward man, who took them. Handing the boots to the peasant, the gentleman said: "Take this lard as well, so that you can grease your boots with it. Just put it under your shirt. The peasant, who had put on a fresh and clean white shirt that morning, said: "I don't want to do that, because the lard would soil my shirt, and than my wife would yell at me!" Hearing this, the gentleman took back the boots and gave the peasant a blow on the head with them, saying: "Go to to the devil, you villain. You are afraid of your wife for such a trivial matter, and you thought you could cheat me out of the boots. Then the gentleman went on his way, and I do not believe that he has found any husband to give the boots to. Source (books.google.com): Ludovico Domenichi, Facetie, motti, et bvrle di diversi signori et persone private (Venice: Appresso Giacomo Cornetti, 1588), book, 3, p. 171 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludovico Domenichi, Facetie, motti, et bvrle di diversi signori et persone private (Venice: Appresso Giacomo Cornetti, 1588), book, 3, p. 171 . Domenichi does not give this story a title. Lodovico Domenichi (1515-1564) was an Italian writer and translator. Return to the table of contents . Husband and Wife Denmark There was once a man who was traveling about in the world with a string of horses and a wagon full of eggs. He gave an egg to those households where the wife ruled the husband, and he intended to give a horse to any household where the husband ruled the wife. Until now he had given out only eggs. Finally he came to a house where it appeared that the husband was in charge, and he decided to spend the night there. The next morning he wanted to be on his way. He thanked for the lodging and the good hospitality and told the husband to take his pick of two horses, a brown one and a black one. "I'll take the brown one," said the husband. "No, don't be a fool," cried the wife. "The black mare is a better horse." "All right," said the husband. "Little woman, if you say so, I'll take the black one." Then the stranger took an egg from his wagon, gave it to him, and drove off. And the husband and the wife could only gaze longingly after the horses, both the brown ones and the black ones. Source (books.google.com): Svend Grundtvig, "Mand og Kone," Gamle danske Minder i Folkemunde: Folkeæventyr, Folkeviser, Folkesagn: Ny Samling (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversens Forlag, 1856), no. 121, p. 125 . Source (Internet Archive): Svend Grundtvig, "Mand og Kone," Gamle danske Minder i Folkemunde: Folkeæventyr, Folkeviser, Folkesagn: Ny Samling (Copenhagen: C. G. Iversens Forlag, 1856), no. 121, p. 125 . Grundvig's source: Student Nik. Chr. Christensen from Vendsyssel. Return to the table of contents . The Hen-Pecked Husband England There was once a poor husband that was ruled by his wife. One day she tormented him so much that he made up his mind to leave her and go into another country. So he set out on his way, and he had not gone far before he came to a farmhouse which stood by the road side. Just as he was passing the door a cock crowed, and he thought the bird said, "Women are masters here!" He went a few miles further, and came to another farmhouse. As he went by a cock crowed again, and he thought the bird said, "Aye and everywhere!" Then said the husband, "I will go back and live with my wife, for now I am certain that women are the rulers of men." Source (books.google.com): Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales with Other Traditional Remains: Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby, and Nittingham (London: David Nutt; Sheffield: Pawson and Brailsford, 1895), no. 27, p. 27 . Source (Internet Archive): Sidney Oldall Addy, Household Tales with Other Traditional Remains: Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby, and Nittingham (London: David Nutt; Sheffield: Pawson and Brailsford, 1895), no. 27, p. 27 . Note by Addy: "From Norton, in Derbyshire." Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised December 16, 2024. The Falsely Accused Wife The Falsely Accused Wife a folktale of Aarne-Thompson type 882 retold by D. L. Ashliman Once there was a wealthy merchant who lived together in a great manor with his many servants and his beautiful and faithful wife. His trust in her loyalty was always a source of comfort to him on his long voyages to the great ports of the seven seas. But one fateful day a discussion with a friend and fellow merchant brought him cause for concern. "Wives are faithful only until opportunity knocks," claimed the friend, who then added boastfully, "I can charm my way into any woman's bedroom!" "Certainly not into my wife's chambers," replied the merchant. "Her virtue is beyond question." "If you are so sure of her, then let us enter into a wager as to her real fidelity," returned the friend, if we may call him that, for in truth he was a deceitful villain and was setting a cruel trap for the merchant and his wife. The merchant, ever sure of his wife's virtue, struck a wager with the friend. Each placed half his fortune at stake. The friend would win if he could bring evidence that he had seduced the merchant's wife. The merchant would win if the friend's attempts proved fruitless. The bet having been made, the villain bribed one of the merchant's servants to carry a trunk into the mistress's bedroom for safekeeping. "It would need to be there for only one night," explained the devious schemer. He then procured a large trunk, drilled a peephole into one end, hid himself inside, and had his own servants deliver it to the merchant's manor. That night he spied on the merchant's wife as she got ready for bed, observing through the peephole that she had a peculiar birthmark on her hip. When the good woman was sound asleep he lifted the trunk's lid and quietly stole the ring that was lying on the table beside her bed. The next morning his servants, as planned, returned for the trunk and carried him back to his own house. Soon afterward he met with the unsuspecting merchant. "Such a night of lovemaking!" he boasted. "But tell me," doesn't the birthmark on your wife's hip annoy you? It's quite unbecoming of such an otherwise beautiful woman." The merchant was turning red with anger, but the worst was still to come. "As a token of our love," lied the villain further, "your good wife gave me this ring." The merchant, recognizing his wife's wedding ring, stormed from the place with rage. He burst into his manor with fury, accosted his unsuspecting wife, and told her to prepare to die. Her pleas for an explanation went unheeded, nor did her supplications for mercy divert him from his cruel design. The merchant charged his most loyal servant with the dreadful task. He was to take the accused woman into the forest and shoot her, then bring back her liver and lungs as evidence that vengeance had been served. With a heavy heart he led his mistress into the forest, but he could not force himself to perform the wicked deed. Instead, he gave her a set of his own clothes, provided her with what rations he could get together, wished her Godspeed, and let her escape into the woods. He then killed a doe, cut out its liver and lungs, and returned to his heartless master with evidence that the terrible act had been performed. The pitiful woman, dressed in men's clothes, made her way through the forest, arriving at last in the royal city. She applied for a position at the king's court. Her fine manners and elegant speech impressed the officials, and they hired her at once as a clerk. Days turned to weeks and weeks to months. The falsely accused wife proved herself equal to every task that her new position presented. She quickly advanced from one post to the next until she, still disguised as a man, finally became the highest judge in the kingdom. One day two merchants appeared before her bench. Embroiled in a dispute over a wager, they were bringing their case before the highest judge, whose justice and wisdom had rapidly found praise throughout the land. The judge recognized them immediately as her heartless husband and his deceitful friend. She listened carefully as her husband related how he had entered into the fateful wager, only to learn later from his servants about the delivery of the overnight trunk. Rightly sensing that he had been tricked, and was now attempting to recover the half of his fortune that he had lost. The judge heard his story to its end, then arose. Standing proud and tall in her courtly robes she told her own story of cruel betrayal. Her hapless husband, now recognizing the injustice of his wrongful accusation, begged for mercy. The judge, seeking justice, but not revenge, solemnly pronounced her judgment: The two merchants were to be banished from the kingdom forever. The king, in the meanwhile, had quietly entered the courtroom and had listened intently to the proceedings. The admiration and respect that he had felt toward his highest judge turned to love and devotion, now that he knew he was actually a she . Thus, the king gained not only a wise and prudent judge, but also a faithful and loving wife. And they ruled happily together until the end of their days. Aarne-Thompson type 882. This tale is found throughout Europe, both in literary and folkloristic versions. Most often the story concludes with the falsely accused wife returning to her now repentant husband, but I prefer the version given above. Related links D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 25, 2001. The Wife Who Could Not Keep a Secret The Wife Who Could Not Keep a Secret and other folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 1381 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2014 Contents How a Fish Swam in the Air and a Hare in the Water (Ukraine). The Found Money (Netherlands). The Treasure (Denmark). The Iron Chest (Germany). How a Woman Could Not Keep a Secret (India). The Wife Who Could Not Keep a Secret (India). Link to Of Women, Who Not Only Betray Secrets, but Lie Fearfully , a folktale of type 1381D from the Gesta Romanorum. Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. How a Fish Swam in the Air and a Hare in the Water Ukraine Once upon a time an old man and his wife lived together in a little village. They might have been happy if only the old woman had had the sense to hold her tongue at proper times. But anything which might happen indoors, or any bit of news which her husband might bring in when he had been anywhere, had to be told at once to the whole village, and these tales were repeated and altered until it often happened that much mischief was made, and the old man's back paid for it. One day, he drove to the forest. When he reached the edge of it he got out of his cart and walked beside it. Suddenly he stepped on such a soft spot that his foot sank in the earth. "What can this be?" thought he. "I'll dig a bit and see." So he dug and dug, and at last he came on a little pot full of gold and silver. "Oh, what luck! Now, if only I knew how I could take this treasure home with me -- but I can never hope to hide it from my wife, and once she knows of it she'll tell all the world, and then I shall get into trouble." He sat down and thought over the matter a long time, and at last he made a plan. He covered up the pot again with earth and twigs, and drove on into the town, where he bought a live pike and a live hare in the market. Then he drove back to the forest and hung the pike up at the very top of a tree, and tied up the hare in a fishing net and fastened it on the edge of a little stream, not troubling himself to think how unpleasant such a wet spot was likely to be to the hare. Then he got into his cart and trotted merrily home. "Wife!" cried he, the moment he got indoors. "You can't think what a piece of good luck has come our way." "What, what, dear husband? Do tell me all about it at once." "No, no, you'll just go on and tell everyone." "No, indeed! How can you think such things! For shame! If you like I will swear never to -- " "Oh, well! If you are really in earnest then, listen." And he whispered in her ear, "I've found a pot full of gold and silver in the forest! Hush! -- " "And why didn't you bring it back?" "Because we'll drive there together and bring it carefully back between us." So the man and his wife drove to the forest. As they were driving along the man said, "What strange things one hears, wife! I was told only the other day that fish will now live and thrive in the tree tops and that some wild animals spend their time in the water. Well, well! Times are certainly changed." "Why, you must be crazy, husband! Dear, dear, what nonsense people do talk sometimes." "Nonsense, indeed! Why, just look. Bless my soul, if there isn't a fish, a real pike I do believe, up in that tree." "Gracious!" cried his wife. "How did a pike get there? It is a pike -- you needn't attempt to say it's not. Can people have said true -- " But the man only shook his head and shrugged his shoulders and opened his mouth and gaped as if he really could not believe his own eyes. "What are you standing staring at there, stupid?" said his wife. "Climb up the tree quick and catch the pike, and we'll cook it for dinner." The man climbed up the tree and brought down the pike, and they drove on. When they got near the stream he drew up. "What are you staring at again?" asked his wife impatiently. "Drive on, can't you?" "Why, I seem to see something moving in that net I set. I must just go and see what it is." He ran to it, and when he had looked in it he called to his wife, "Just look! Here is actually a four-footed creature caught in the net. I do believe it's a hare." "Good heavens!" cried his wife. "How did the hare get into your net? It is a hare, so you needn't say it isn't. After all, people must have said the truth -- " But her husband only shook his head and shrugged his shoulders as if he could not believe his own eyes. "Now what are you standing there for, stupid?" cried his wife. "Take up the hare. A nice fat hare is a dinner for a feast day." The old man caught up the hare, and they drove on to the place where the treasure was buried. They swept the twigs away, dug up the earth, took out the pot, and drove home again with it. And now the old couple had plenty of money and were cheery and comfortable. But the wife was very foolish. Every day she asked a lot of people to dinner and feasted them, until her husband grew quite impatient. He tried to reason with her, but she would not listen. "You've got no right to lecture me!" said she. "We found the treasure together, and together we will spend it." Her husband took patience, but at length he said to her, "You may do as you please, but I shan't give you another penny." The old woman was very angry. "Oh, what a good-for-nothing fellow to want to spend all the money himself! But just wait a bit and see what I shall do." Off she went to the governor to complain of her husband. "Oh, my lord, protect me from my husband! Ever since he found the treasure there is no bearing him. He only eats and drinks, and won't work, and he keeps all the money to himself." The governor took pity on the woman, and ordered his chief secretary to look into the matter. The secretary called the elders of the village together, and went with them to the man's house. "The governor," said he, "desires you to give all that treasure you found into my care." The man shrugged his shoulders and said, "What treasure? I know nothing about a treasure." "How? You know nothing? Why your wife has complained of you. Don't attempt to tell lies. If you don't hand over all the money at once you will be tried for daring to raise treasure without giving due notice to the governor about it." "Pardon me, your excellency, but what sort of treasure was it supposed to have been? My wife must have dreamt of it, and you gentlemen have listened to her nonsense." "Nonsense, indeed," broke in his wife. "A kettle full of gold and silver, do you call that nonsense?" "You are not in your right mind, dear wife. Sir, I beg your pardon. Ask her how it all happened, and if she convinces you I'll pay for it with my life." "This is how it all happened, Mr. Secretary," cried the wife. "We were driving through the forest, and we saw a pike up in the top of a tree -- " "What, a pike?" shouted the secretary. "Do you think you may joke with me, pray?" "Indeed, I'm not joking, Mr. Secretary! I'm speaking the bare truth." "Now you see, gentlemen," said her husband, "how far you can trust her, when she chatters like this." "Chatter, indeed? I! Perhaps you have forgotten, too, how we found a live hare in the river?" Everyone roared with laughter; even the secretary smiled and stroked his beard, and the man said, "Come, come, wife, everyone is laughing at you. You see for yourself, gentlemen, how far you can believe her." "Yes, indeed," said the village elders, "it is certainly the first time we have heard that hares thrive in the water or fish among the tree tops." The secretary could make nothing of it all, and drove back to the town. The old woman was so laughed at that she had to hold her tongue and obey her husband ever after, and the man bought wares with part of the treasure and moved into the town, where he opened a shop, and prospered, and spent the rest of his days in peace. Source: Andrew Lang, The Violet Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1901), pp. 148-152. Lang does not list his source, but this story appears to be a revised version of a Ukrainian tale first published by P. P. Cubinskij in St. Petersburg in 1878. I know the story in a German translation entitled "Wenn in der Ehe Zwietracht herrscht" and published by Bohdan Mykytiuk, Ukrainische Märchen (Düsseldorf: Eugen Diederichs Verlag, 1979), no. 51, pp. 203-205. Return to the table of contents . The Found Money Netherlands In a small village near Kampen there lived a man and a woman with a few children. They eked out a living by fishing, weaving, and poaching. One evening the man was looking after his salmon weirs [enclosures built in a stream for catching fish] and fox traps when he found a large bag of money on the road. Instead of looking after his traps and weirs, he returned home, wanting for once to give his Grete a pleasant surprise. But when he was almost home he reconsidered and said to himself, "If I tell my wife about this, tomorrow the entire world will know. So he went back and placed the bag of money behind a thick tree and looked into his fox traps and weirs. A fox was sitting in one of them, and a salmon in the other. He killed them both, then put the fox into the weir and the salmon into the trap. Then he went back to his Grete, who was busy weaving. "Oh, Grete!" he called out, "Do come with me. It is so dark that I lost my way." Grete did not think long about it and went with Peter. Their path led them past the courthouse, where a light was still burning late, because people were inside cleaning. "Good gracious, Peter!" said Grete. "There is still a light on in the courthouse, and so late in the evening." "Yes," said Peter, "Tonight the gendarme is settling his account with the devil." "No! Peter! Is that true?" "Of course," said Peter. "Didn't you know that the gendarme settles his account with the devil once each year?" "No, I really did not know that," said Grete. Finally they came to the weir, where they found a fox, and a fat salmon was caught in the fox trap. Then they turned toward home, but on the way Peter said, "Grete, it is raining hard. Let's get under that tree a little while." And the moment they sat down Grete found the large bag of money. "Peter," said Grete, "we had better go home as fast as possible, so no one will notice, and we can't tell anyone about it either." "No, not on our lives," said Peter. But it wasn't long before Grete just had to tell her neighbor Trinchen. She, for sure, would not tell a single soul. But Trinchen told Mariechen, and Mariechen told Hannchen, and then the entire village knew about it. It wasn't long before Peter and Grete were summoned to the courthouse to turn in the money. "We did not find any money," said Peter. "But," said the mayor, "your wife says that you did." "Yes, Lord Mayor," said Peter, "My wife does talk a lot, but she is not all there upstairs." "Is a monkey delousing me? Are you trying to have me declared insane?" cried Grete. "I know exactly when it was. It was the night when the gendarme was settling his account with the devil and when we caught a fox in the weir and a salmon in the fox trap." "So, Lord Mayor, what do you say to that?" said Peter. "I hear you," said the mayor. "Just go back home." Source:G. J. Boekenoogen, "Van het gevonden geld," Volkskunde: Tijdschrift voon Nederlandsche Folklore , vol. 14 (1901-1902), story 18, pp. 115-17 . Boekenoogen's source: A. Smit, who heard the story in Steenwijk. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2014. Return to the table of contents . The Treasure Denmark There was once a poor peasant who tilled a small field that belonged to a rich landowner. One day while he was plowing, his plow struck something so violently that it could not be moved. At first the man thought that it was a stone, but when he looked more carefully he found that it was a large chest full of old coins. It was gold and silver money that had probably been hidden there many hundred years ago in war times. The peasant filled a bag with the money and dragged it home, for he thought that he had as good a right to keep the money as anyone else. The original owner had, of course, died many generations ago. In spite of that, he feared that the landowner would claim and seize the money when he learned that it had been found in his field. So the peasant said nothing to anybody except his wife about the find, and he begged her to keep silent about it. But she could not keep the secret, and had to tell some of her friends about the good fortune. To be sure she asked each one separately not to tell anybody; but as they could not keep the secret either, at last the news of the discovery of the treasure came to the ears of the landowner. Soon after that he rode out to the peasant's cottage, which lay far out on a lonely heath. There was, however, nobody at home except the woman, for her husband had just gone to town to get some money changed. So when the landowner asked the woman about the matter, she told him all that she knew -- that her husband had found a chest full of money out in the field, and that he was not at home now, and that she did not know where he had put the money. The owner then said that he would return another time, and make further inquiry about the money. When the peasant came home, his wife told him all that had happened; nevertheless, he did not reproach her. The next day he took his horses and wagon and asked his wife to accompany him to the town. There he exchanged all his old money for new coins, and invested the proceeds carefully and to good advantage. Then be bought a bushel of little rolls, which he put into a large bag. The man and his wife ate and drank to their hearts content, and towards evening they started on their homeward journey. It was late in the autumn, and it was raining and blowing hard as they drove home in the dark. But the wine she had drunk had gone to the head of the wife, and she slept soundly on the back seat. After they had gone for some distance, she was awakened by a roll that fell on her head, and immediately after that another one fell into her lap; and as soon as she fell asleep, rolls again began to rain down upon her. These her husband was throwing into the air so that they should fall upon her. "But what is happening?" the woman called to her husband, "it seems to me that it is raining rolls." "Yes," said her husband, "that is just what it is doing; we are having terrible weather." As they were passing the landowner's house, the woman was awakened by the braying of a donkey. "What was that?" she exclaimed, feeling very uneasy. "Well, I hardly like to say," replied her husband, "but if I must tell the truth, it was the devil who once loaned our landlord some money, and is now tormenting him because he will not pay the interest; he is thrashing him with a horsewhip." "Hurry up," said the woman, "and get away from here as fast as you can." So the man whipped up his horses, and at last they reached home safe and sound. But when they were home the husband said, "Listen, wife, I heard some bad news when we were in town. The enemy is in our land and this night he will be in our neighborhood. So you must crawl into the potato cellar in order to be out of danger, while I shall stay up stairs and protect our property as well as I can." So the peasant's wife went down into the cellar, while her husband took his gun and went outside, and shot and cried out and made a great noise. This he kept up all night, and towards morning he told his wife that she could come up. "Fortunately," he said, "I was able to hold my own. I shot down many of the enemy, who at last were compelled to retire, taking with them their dead and wounded." "Thank God," she said, "that everything has turned out well; I was frightened nearly to death." A few days after that the landowner rode out and found the peasant standing before his cottage. "Where is the treasure that you found in my field?" he asked him. The man answered that he did not know anything about a treasure. "Oh, nonsense," said the landowner, "it will not do you any good to deny it, for your wife told me all about it herself." "That is quite possible," said the man, "for my wife is sometimes a little queer, and one can not always believe all that she says." And he touched his forehead as he spoke. Then the landowner called the woman and asked whether it were not true that she had confessed to him that her husband had found a chest full of money in the field. "Certainly," she said, "and I was with him in town when he exchanged the old money for new coins." "When was that?" asked the landlord. "Why that was the time we had the frightful storm when it rained bread rolls." "Nonsense," said he; "when was that?" "It was on the day of the great battle that was fought on our field, after the enemy had invaded our country." "What battle, and what enemy?" said the landlord, "I think that the woman is crazy. But tell me at once, when was it that you were in town to exchange the money?" Then the woman wept, and much as she disliked to do so, she had to say it, "It was the same evening that the devil was tormenting you and beating you because you would not pay him what you owed him." "What are you saying?" screamed the landowner, in a rage; "I'll thrash you for your lying nonsense." And with that he gave her a blow with his whip and dashed out of the door and rode away, and never again asked about the treasure. The peasant, however, bought a large farm in another part of the country and lived there happily with his wife. Source: Sven Grundtvig, Danish Fairy Tales , translated by J. Grant Cramer (Boston: Four Seas Company, 1919), pp. 57-60. Return to the table of contents . The Iron Chest Germany Once upon a time there was a poor peasant. One morning before sunrise he rode into the forest to cut wood. There, under an oak tree, he met a very old woman. She was standing before a large iron chest, and she said to him, "You can redeem me and make yourself lucky! This iron chest is filled to the top with hard thalers. Take it home with you, but tell no one a solitary word about it, or it will bring you misfortune." The man was delighted to hear these words, and the old woman was also so friendly as to take hold of the chest and help him load it onto his wagon. He thanked her kindly and rode back home. "Mother," he said as the wagon pulled up to the door, "I'm not supposed to tell anyone, but you are my dear wife, so the promise doesn't apply to you." "That's right, father," said the peasant's wife with curiosity. "I'll be as silent as the grave. What is it then? Why are you coming home so early from the woods?" "That's exactly what it is!" answered the peasant. "I found a large chest full of money under an oak tree. We shall never want again. But be sure to hold your tongue. Now go and fix us something good to eat. I've had no meat for a week now." With that they lifted the chest from the wagon and carried it into the cellar. Then the peasant's wife took a thaler out of the iron chest, bought some meat, and roasted it on the hearth. What joy! However, her neighbor had hardly smelled the delicious odor when she hurried by, sniffed, and said, "Good day, kinswoman, what are you cooking?" "Oh, neighbor," replied the woman, "I can't tell anyone, but of course you can keep a secret. When my husband was driving into the forest to cut wood, he found a large iron chest full of money beneath an oak tree." "That is wonderful," said the kinswoman. "You told the right person, for I won't repeat it to a soul!" Then she ran back to her house. Not long afterward her brother's wife came to visit her from the neighboring farm. "Sister-in-law, do you know what has happened?" she asked her. "But you must be able to hold your tongue!" "Oh, as though I were a blabbermouth!" "I know, and that's why I said that. Our neighbor from over there, the little peasant, while he was cutting wood in the forest he found a large chest of gold under an oak tree." The sister-in-law did indeed hold her tongue and carried the story to the sexton's wife, and before the sun went down it had found its way to the magistrate. He summoned the peasant before him and said, "I know it all! You stole a chest of money, and it is in your cellar. Turn over the money!" "No, my lord," answered the peasant. "That is not true. I am as poor as a church mouse and am an honest fellow. I've stolen nothing." "That will be determined, old friend," replied the magistrate. "Your wife herself said so." "Oh, my lord, my wife is crazy." "Go now! The court meets in two weeks. At that time we will see if your wife is crazy." The peasant did not feel well as he left the magistrate's estate, and he thought of the words the old woman had spoken to him under the oak tree. But he did not loose courage. He hurried home, took a handful of thalers out of the chest, hitched up his wagon, and drove into town. There he bought all the bread rolls that the bakers had in stock, so that he had a good dozen bushels of them to load into his wagon. He drove back home with them and scattered the rolls all about the yard, while his wife was in the kitchen cooking something good. He threw a few pecks of them onto the roof and laid a few of them just outside the gate as well. Then he ran into the kitchen shouting, "Woman, you are just like all the others! No sooner do we get a little money in our pockets than you let the housekeeping float off into the blue! The good Lord let it rain bread rolls outside, and you won't even bend over to pick them up!" "Man, are you stupid?" replied the peasant's wife. "It rained rolls?" "It certainly did. Go see for yourself," the man replied. So the peasant woman looked out the window, and when she saw the many thousands of rolls in the yard she was overjoyed. She ran outside and for the next few hours gathered them, filling three large meat tubs. The next day the peasant said, "Listen, woman, when I was recently in town I learned that our king by mistake has recruited new soldiers with long pointed iron beaks. They especially pick at womenfolk with them, sticking them to death. They are supposed to be coming through our village today. I will tip the washtub over you, and they won't find you. They won't find me either. I'll hide in the attic." Filled with fear, the peasant's wife sat down, and the peasant tipped the washtub over her. Then he went into the chicken coop, caught all the chickens and carried them into the house, then scattered barley all around the washtub and on top of it. Then peck, peck, peck, the chickens ate up all the barley until not a kernel was to be found. Then they all ran back into the yard. Then the peasant picked up the tub and said to his wife, "Mother, they have left the village!" "Oh, father, I was so afraid," said the peasant's wife. "Oh, how they were knocking: peck, peck, peck! with their long iron beaks! But I didn't make a sound, and they didn't find me." "Thank God, they didn't find me either!" said the peasant, and that was that. When the two weeks had passed, the peasant and his wife were summoned to court. The peasant denied everything, but when the judges turned sternly to his wife, she swore by everything good and true that she had told her neighbor the truth. "Don't believe the woman, my lords," cried the peasant. "She is not all there upstairs! -- And, mother, what else happened when I brought home the chest?" "Don't you remember, father? It was the day before the good Lord let it rain bread rolls!" The judges shook their heads, and the peasant said, "Am I not right? She is crazy!" "I am supposed to be crazy?" continued the woman eagerly. "Don't you remember, father? It was two days before our king's new soldiers with the long pointed iron beaks came through the village and to our farm, and peck, peck, peck, knocked on the washtub that you had tipped over on top of me!" "Peasant, you are right!" said the judges. Your wife is not all there. Go home with her and take care that she doesn't cause any harm." Thus peasant was out of trouble, and he went back to his village with his wife. There he let her taste his buckthorn stick, and it was so good for her that she never gossiped again. Little by little they used the money in the iron chest to buy one piece of land after the other next to their farm, and finally became very wealthy. And if they didn't die, they are still alive. Source: Paul Zaunert, "Der eiserne Kasten," Deutsche Märchen seit Grimm (Jena: Eugen Diederichs, 1919), pp. 90-93 . © 1964 by Eugen Diederichs Verlag. Zaunert first published this tale in Deutsche Märchen seit Grimm, vol. 1 (1912). Zaunert's source: Ulrich Jahn, Schwänke und Schnurren aus Bauern Mund (Berlin, 1890), pp. 48ff. Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 1999. Return to the table of contents . How a Woman Could Not Keep a Secret India Once upon a time there was a certain weaver who became so indigent and poor that he went to a grain seller and borrowed forty rupees. "If I do not return within a year," said he, "take my house and all it contains. They are yours." So the weaver wandered off over the hills, and in a lonely place he saw a light, and going to it, he found there a man sitting on the ground. He sat by his side, but the man spoke never a word. At last the weaver said, "Why, man, can't you speak? Say something, at least. Do you not see I am a stranger?" "My fee," answered the man, "is twenty rupees. Hand me twenty rupees, and I will speak." The weaver counted out twenty rupees and gave them to him, eagerly waiting to see the result. But all the man said was, "Friend, when four men give you advice, take it." Said the weaver to himself, "I have only twenty rupees left, and if I venture on another question I shall lose that, too!" But a weaver's curiosity is very great, so he counted out his balance, handed it to the man, and said, "Speak again." Then the man spoke a second time, and what he said was this, "Whatever happens to you -- even if you rob, steal, or murder -- never breathe a word of it to your wife." Soon after, the weaver took up his wallet and trudged along until he came to another desolate place, and there he saw four men sitting on the ground round a corpse. "Whither away?" said they. "I am going to that village across the river," answered he. "Do an act of charity," said they. "We were carrying this body to the river. Take it up, as you are going that way, and throw it in for us." Immediately they laid the corpse on his bare back and started him off. But as he went along he felt the most horrid pricking across his loins. "In the name of God," he cried, "what is this corpse doing? Are these knives or needles?" He could not stop to lay the corpse down, because it was a fat corpse, and he would never have been able to get it up again. So he went on groaning to the river, dropped it on the bank, and began to examine it. What was his surprise to find fastened round the waist of the corpse numbers of little bags filled with diamonds! He at once pounced on them, threw the corpse into the river, and started for home. Arriving in all safety, he paid off the grain seller, presenting him as well with five gold mohurs [coins], bought a handsome mare and a nice saddle, hired servants and took to fine clothes, and lived on roast fowl and rice pudding every day. In the same village the lumbardâr [headman] was a man well-to-do in the world, and he, noticing the style in which his humble friend lived, sent his wife to gossip with the weaver's wife. "Not long ago," she began, "I used to give you cotton to spin for me, and now what a lady you are! However, I am now your friend. Your husband I see has bought a mare and a handsome saddle, and he has a servant to follow him. Where did he get all the money? You might tell me ." "Indeed I don't know," answered the woman. That night the wretched weaver had no rest. "Tell me," said his wife, again and again, "where you went to, and how you got all that money." "No, no," answered he, "I can't tell you. The best thing you can do is not to tease me, as once you know the secret, it will be told everywhere, for women are like sieves." The next morning he went out half dead with worry, and when he returned for his food, he found his wife still asleep, and nothing ready. "Get up, wife," cried he. "Get up, I want my breakfast." "Why should I get up?" said she. "What kind of husband are you, and what kind of wife do you take me for? You treat me like a child, and tell me nothing." "Best for you not to know," replied he. "Yes, but tell me," said she. "Not a word shall pass my lips." "Well," said he, "I was told on my travels that if I drank half a pint of mustard oil in the morning, when I got up, I should see treasure everywhere." In the course of the day in came her friend, and the woman laughs and says, "Oh, I have found out everything! I have found out everything!" "What is it? Quick, tell me!" said the lumbardâr's wife. "My husband said," answered she, "that when he drinks half a pint of mustard oil he sees all the treasures buried by the old kings, so I advise you to give your husband and your six children half a pint each, and drink some yourself, and you will see treasure too." The woman at once ran home, bought some mustard oil, and at night persuades her whole family to drink it, though she took none herself. In the morning she rushes into their rooms and cries, "Get up! Get up, and look for treasure!" But, alack! She finds them all lying dead and stiff. Now, when the king heard of this, he called for her, and all she could say was, "The weaver's wife deceived me, and told me to do it." But the weaver's wife denied it, saying, "I never told her. I expect she is carrying on with some low fellow, and, not to be interfered with, she got rid of her husband and children." So the lumbardâr's wife was hanged, and so ends the story, all the trouble having been caused by a woman who could not keep a secret. Source: Charles Swynnerton, Indian Nights' Entertainment; or, Folk-Tales from the Upper Indus (London: Elliot Stock, 1892), no. 56, pp. 213-216. This type 1381 tale opens with an episode of type 910G, about the man who buys enigmatic advice, which later proves to be useful. Return to the table of contents . The Wife Who Could Not Keep a Secret India Once there was a man of the Goala caste [a caste of cattle herders], who looked after the cattle of a rich farmer. One day a cow dropped a calf in the jungle without the Goala knowing, and at evening the cow came running to join the others, without the calf. When they got home the cow kept on lowing, and the master asked whether she had had a calf. The Goala had to confess that the calf had been left in the jungle. The master scolded him well, so he took a rope and stick and went out into the night. But when he got to the jungle he could not hear the calf, so he decided to wait where he was till the morning. He was too frightened of wild animals to stay on the ground, so he climbed a tree, leaving the stick and rope at the foot of it. Soon a tiger smelt him out and came to the place. Then the stick and the rope took council together as to how they could save their master. The stick saw that it could not see in the dark and so was powerless. So the rope agreed to fight first, and it whirled itself round in the air with a whistling noise, and the tiger, hearing the noise and seeing no one, got frightened, and thought that there was an evil spirit there. So it did not dare to come very near, and in the morning it took itself off. Then the Goala saw the cow come to look for her calf, so he took up the stick and rope and followed her. The cow soon found her calf and asked it whether it had not been very cold and uncomfortable all night. But the calf said, "No, mother, I put my foot in these four pots of rupees, and they kept me warm." The Goala heard this and resolved to see if it were true. So he dug up the earth where the calf had been lying and soon uncovered the rims of four pots full of money. But the Goala did not dare to take the money home for fear his wife should talk about it. He resolved to see first whether his wife could keep a secret. So he went home and told her to cook him some food quickly. She asked why, and he said, "The raja has a tortoise inside him, and I am going to look at him." Then his wife said that she must fetch some water, and she went off with the water pot. On the way she met several women of the village, who asked her why she was fetching water so early, and she said, "Because the raja has a tortoise inside him, and my husband is going off to see it." In less than an hour the village was full of the news, and the rumor spread until it reached the ears of the raja. The raja was very angry and said that he would kill the man who started the report, unless he could prove it to be true. So he sent messengers throughout the country to trace back the rumor to its source. One messenger found out that it was the Goala who had started the story and told him that the raja wanted to give him a present. So he gladly put on his best clothes and went off to the raja's palace. But the raja had him bound with ropes, and then questioned him as to why he had told a false story. The Goala admitted that his story was false, but explained that he had only told it to his wife, in order to see whether she could keep a secret, because he had found four pots of money. The raja asked where the money was, and the Goala said that he would show it, but he wanted to know first how much of it he was to have for himself. The raja promised him half, so the Goala led men to the place, and they dug up the money, and the Goala kept half and became a rich man. Moral : However friendly you are with a man, do not tell him what is in your heart, and never tell your wife the real truth, for one day she will lose her temper and let the matter out. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 77, pp. 235-237. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised November 8, 2014. Of Women, Who Not Only Betray Secrets, but Lie Fearfully Of Women, Who Not Only Betray Secrets, but Lie Fearfully Gesta Romanorum There were two brothers, of whom one was a layman and the other a parson. The former had often heard his brother declare that there never was a woman who could keep a secret. He had a mind to put this maxim to the test in the person of his own wife, and one night he addressed her in the following manner, "My dear wife, I have a secret to communicate to you, if I were certain that you would reveal it to nobody. Should you divulge it, it would cause me the greatest uneasiness and vexation." "My lord," answered his wife, "fear not; we are one body, and your advantage is mine. In like manner, your injury must deeply affect me." "Well, then," said he, "know that, my bowels being oppressed to an extraordinary degree, I fell very sick. My dear wife, what will you think? I actually voided a huge black crow, which instantly took wing, and left me in the greatest trepidation and confusion of mind." "Is it possible?" asked the innocent lady; "but, husband, why should this trouble you? You ought rather to rejoice that you are freed from such a pestilent tenant." Here the conversation closed; in the morning, the wife hurried off to the house of a neighbor. "My best friend," said she, "may I tell you a secret?" "As safely as to your own soul," answered the fair auditor. "Why," replied the other, "a marvelous thing has happened to my poor husband. Being last night extremely sick, he voided two prodigious black crows, feathers and all, which immediately flew away. I am much concerned." The other promised very faithfully -- and immediately told her neighbor that three black crows had taken this most alarming flight. The next edition of the story made it four ; and in this way it spread, until it was very credibly reported that sixty black crows had been evacuated by one unfortunate varlet. But the joke had gone further than he dreamt of; he became much disturbed, and assembling his busy neighbors, explained to them that having wished to prove whether or not his wife could keep a secret, he had made such a communication. Soon after this, his wife, dying, he ended his days in a cloister, where he learned three letters; of which one was black; the second, red; and the third, white. Application: My beloved, the layman is any worldly minded man who, thinking to do one foolish thing without offense, falls into a thousand errors. But he assembles the people -- that is, past and present sins -- and by confession expurgates his conscience. Source: Gesta Romanorum; or, Entertaining Moral Stories , translated by Charles Swan (London: George Bell and Sons, 1877), no. 125, pp. 226-227. Aarne-Thompson type 1381D. Edited by D. L. Ashliman . © 2000. The Gesta Romanorum or Deeds of the Romans was compiled in Latin in the early fourteenth century by an English cleric. It was first published about 1473. Its title notwithstanding, only a few of the work's some 283 stories deal with the Romans. Instead, the collection presents a mixture of anecdotes, legends, and fables, gleaned from many sources and presented in a context appropriate for incorporation into Christian sermons. The spiritual "application" or moral given to this very earthy jest seems, by the secular standards of the twentieth century, to be as strained as the poor man's bowel movement. Swan offers the following explanation of the tale's final sentence: "This seems merely introduced to tell us, in the application, that the black letter is recollection of our sins; the red, Christ's blood; and the white, the desire of heaven." Related links D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Wife Who Could Not Keep a Secret and other folktales of type 1381. A man finds a treasure, but nearly loses it because of his talkative wife. Revised November 6, 2000. Wild Huntsman Legends Wild Huntsman Legends translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1999-2021. Contents King Herla (England). The Wild Huntsman (England). The Devil and His Dandy-Dogs (Cornwall). Dando and His Dogs (Cornwall). The Wild Hunt (Netherlands). The Wild Huntsman's Present (Netherlands). The Eternal Huntsman of Wynendael (Netherlands). Wod, the Wild Huntsman (Germany). The Wild Huntsman and the Mine-Monk (Germany). The Night Huntsman at the Udarser Mill (Germany). Löwenberg: The Wild Hunt (Germany). Odin the Hunter (Denmark). Odin Pursues the Elf-Women (Denmark). The Wild Huntsman on Buller Mountain (Poland). The Wild Huntsman (Bohemia). The Wild Hunt near Schwarzkosteletz (Kostelec nad Černými lesy) (Bohemia). The Headless Horseman of Cumberland Mountain (USA). Links to additional texts . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. King Herla England King Herla had once been to the marriage feast of a dwarf who lived in a mountain. As he left the bridal hall, the host presented him with horses, dogs, and hunting gear; also with a bloodhound, which was set on the saddlebow before the king, and the troop was bidden not to get off their horses till the dog leaped down. On returning to his palace, the king learned that he had been absent for two hundred years, which had passed as one night, whilst he was in the mountain, with the dwarf. Some of the retainers jumped off their horses and fell to dust, but the king and the rest ride on till the bloodhound bounds from the saddle, which will be at the Last Day. Source: Henderson, William. "The Gabriel Hounds" and "The Wild Hunt," Notes on the Folk Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866), pp. 103-104 . Henderson's source is apparently De Nugis Curialium by Walter Map [also spelled Gualteri Mapes], who lived between about 1140 and 1210. Herla is a legendary king of the ancient Britons. Link to an article about Herla in Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia. The motif of the extended stay in fairyland is found in many tales, for example, The Aged Bride from Denmark and the literary version Rip van Winkle by Washington Irving. Return to the table of contents . The Wild Huntsman England While in Oxfordshire last year I met with a localization of the wild huntsman story which may, perhaps, be unknown to your readers. At the village of Noke, a place of some twenty-six houses about five miles from Oxford and one mile from Islip, there lived in the reign of Elizabeth one Benedict Winchcombe. He purchased the manor, and lived in the manor house (now destroyed), dying there in 1623. He was buried in a chapel attached to the church, wherein "a fair altar of black marble," bearing his effigy, was erected; and, leaving no issue, he devised the manor to his nephew, Benedict Hall, son of his only sister Mary. Both monument and chapel are now demolished, though the inscriptions from the former are let into the chancel wall. The story is current in the village, that "old Winchcombe," as they call him, was very fond of hunting, and, as in many other versions of the tale, was not content with six days in the week for his favourite pastime, but devoted Sunday also to the chase; and that after his death he might be heard at night with his hounds, careering over the neighbouring country, until he was finally "laid by twelve parsons." I did not ascertain the date of this last event, but it is significant that the village is on the edge of Otmoor, formerly the haunt of innumerable wild fowl, which of course we know are in many places termed "Gabriel hounds," in their nocturnal flight, from the resemblance of their cry to that of a pack of hounds, and the moor having been (within the last century) drained, they are of course no longer heard. Source: W. Henry Jewitt, "The Wild Huntsman," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 18 (London: David Nutt, 1907), p. 342 . Return to the table of contents . The Devil and His Dandy-Dogs Cornwall A poor herdsman was journeying homeward across the moors one windy night, when he heard at a distance among the tors the baying of hounds, which he soon recognised as the dismal chorus of the dandy-dogs. It was three or four miles to his home; and, very much alarmed, he hurried onward as fast as the treacherous nature of the soil and the uncertainty of the path would allow; but, alas! the melancholy yelping of the hounds, and the dismal halloa of the hunter came nearer and nearer. After a considerable run, they had so gained upon him, that on looking back -- oh, horror! -- he could distinctly see hunter and dogs. The former was terrible to look at, and had the usual complement of saucer-eyes, horns, and tail accorded by common consent to the legendary devil. He was black, of course, and carried in his hand a long hunting-pole. The dogs, a numerous pack, blackened the small patch of moor that was visible; each snorting fire, and uttering a yelp of an indescribably frightful tone. No cottage, rock, or tree was near to give the herdsman shelter, and nothing apparently remained to him but to abandon himself to their fury, when a happy thought suddenly flashed upon him, and suggested a resource. Just as they were about to rush upon him, he fell on his knees in prayer. There was strange power in the holy words he uttered; for immediately, as if resistance had been offered, the hell hounds stood at bay, howling more dismally than ever ; and the hunter shouted "Bo shrove!" "which," says my informant, "means, in the old language, the boy prays ." At which they all drew off on some other pursuit, and disappeared. Source: Thomas Q. Couch, "Folk Lore of a Cornish Village," Choice Notes from "Notes and Queries": Folk Lore (London: Bell and Daldy, 1859), pp. 78-79 . Return to the table of contents . Dando and His Dogs Cornwall In the neighborhood of the lovely village of St. Germans formerly lived a priest, connected with the old priory church of this parish, whose life does not appear to have been quite consistent with his vows. He lived the life of the traditional "jolly friar." He ate and drank of the best the land could give him, or money buy; and it is said that his indulgences extended far beyond the ordinary limits of good living. The priest Dando was, notwithstanding all his vices, a man liked by the people. He was good-natured, and therefore blind to many of their sins. Indeed, he threw a cloak over his own iniquities, which was inscribed "charity," and he freely forgave all those who came to his confessional. As a man increases in years he becomes more deeply dyed with the polluted waters through which he may have waded. It rarely happens that an old sinner is ever a repentant one, until the decay of nature has reduced him to a state of second childhood. As long as health allows him to enjoy the sensualities of life, he continues to gratify his passions, regardless of the cost. He becomes more selfish, and his own gratification is the rule of his existence. So it has ever been, and so was it with Dando. The sinful priest was a capital huntsman, and scoured the country far and near in pursuit of game, which was in those days abundant and varied over this well-wooded district. Dando, in the eagerness of the chase, paid no regard to any kind of property. Many a corn-field has been trampled down, and many a cottage garden destroyed by the horses and dogs which this impetuous hunter would lead unthinkingly over them. Curses deep, though not loud, would follow the old man, as even those who suffered by his excesses were still in fear of his priestly power. Any man may sell his soul to the devil without going through the stereotyped process of signing a deed with his blood. Give up your soul to Satan's darling sins, and he will help you for a season, until he has his chains carefully wound around you, when the links are suddenly closed, and he seizes his victim, who has no power to resist. Dando worshipped the sensual gods which he had created, and his external worship of the God of truth became every year, more and more, a hypocritical lie. The devil looked carefully after his prize. Of course, to catch a dignitary of the church was a thing to cause rejoicings amongst the lost; and Dando was carefully lured to the undoing of his soul. Health and wealth were secured to him, and by and by the measure of his sins was full, and he was left the victim to self-indulgences -- a doomed man. With increasing years, and the immunities he enjoyed, Dando became more reckless. Wine and wassail, a board groaning with dishes which stimulated the sated appetite, and the company of both sexes of dissolute habits, exhausted his nights. His days were devoted to the pursuits of the field; and to maintain the required excitement, ardent drinks were supplied him by his wicked companions. It mattered not to Dando, provided the day was an auspicious one, if the scent would lie on the ground, even on the Sabbath, horses and hounds were ordered out, and the priest would be seen in full cry. One Sabbath morning, Dando and his riotous rout were hunting over the earth estate; game was plenty, and sport first-rate. Exhausted with a long and eager run, Dando called for drink. He had already exhausted the flasks of the attendant hunters. "Drink, I say; give me drink," he cried. "Whence can we get it?" asked one of the gang. "Go to hell for it, if you can't get it on earth," said the priest, with a bitter laugh at his own joke on the earth estate. At the moment, a dashing hunter, who had mingled with the throng unobserved, came forward, and presented a richly mounted flask to Dando, saying, "Here is some choice liquor distilled in the establishment you speak of. It will warm and revive you, I'll warrant. Drink deep, friend, drink." Dando drank deep; the flask appeared to cling to his lips. The strange hunter looked on with a rejoicing yet malignant expression, a wicked smile playing over an other wise tranquil face. By and by Dando fetched a deep sigh, and removed the flask, exclaiming, "By hell! that was a drink indeed. Do the gods drink such nectar?" "Devils do," said the hunter. "An they do, I wish I were one," said Dando, who now rocked to and fro in a state of thorough intoxication, "methinks the drink is very like --" The impious expression died upon his lips. Looking round with a half-idiotic stare, Dando saw that his new friend had appropriated several head of game. Not withstanding his stupid intoxication, his selfishness asserted its power, and he seized the game, exclaiming, in a guttural, half-smothered voice, "None of these are thine." "What I catch I keep," said the hunter. "By all the devils they're mine," stammered Dando. The hunter quietly bowed. Dando's wrath burst at once into a burning flame, uncontrolled by reason. He rolled himself off his horse, and rushed, staggering as he went, at the steed of his unknown friend, uttering most frightful oaths and curses. The strange hunter's horse was a splendid creature, black as night, and its eyes gleamed like the brightest stars, with unnatural luster. The horse was turned adroitly aside, and Dando fell to the earth with much force. The fall appeared to add to his fury, and he roared with rage. Aided by his attendants, he was speedily on his legs, and again at the side of the hunter, who shook with laughter, shaking the game in derision, and quietly uttering, "They're mine." "I'll go to hell after them, but I'll get them from thee," shouted Dando. "So thou shalt," said the hunter; and seizing Dando by the collar, he lifted him from the ground, and placed him, as though he were a child, before him on the horse. With a dash -- the horse passed down the hill, its hoofs striking fire at every tread, and the dogs, barking furiously, followed impetuously. These strange riders reached the banks of the Lynher, and with a terrific leap, the horse and its riders, followed by the hounds, went out far in its waters, disappearing at length in a blaze of fire, which caused the stream to boil for a moment, and then the waters flowed on as tranquilly as ever over the doomed priest. All this happened in the sight of the assembled peasantry. Dando never more was seen, and his fearful death was received as a warning by many, who gave gifts to the church. One amongst them carved a chair for the bishop, and on it he represented Dando and his dogs, that the memory of his wickedness might be always renewed. There, in St. German's church, stands to this day the chair, and all who doubt the truth of this tradition may view the story carved in enduring oak. If they please, they can sit in the chair until their faith is so far quickened that they become true believers. On Sunday mornings early, the dogs of the priest have been often heard as if in eager pursuit of game. Cheney's hounds and the Wish hounds of Dartmoor are but other versions of the same legend. Source: Robert Hunt Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , first series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 247-51 . Return to the table of contents . The Wild Hunt Netherlands The concubine of an ecclesiastic having died, the night after her decease, as a soldier and his comrades were riding through a forest, they were surprised at hearing a woman's voice crying for help. Shortly after they saw the woman running towards them. One of the soldiers then descending from his horse, made a circle round himself on the earth with his sword, into which he drew the woman. Immediately after they heard a fearful noise in the air, like that of many huntsmen and dogs, at which the woman trembled violently. But the soldier, giving his horse to one of his comrades, took hold of the woman's long tresses and wound them round his left arm, while in his right hand he held his sword stretched out before him. When the wild hunt drew nigh, the woman whispered to the soldier, "Ride without me, ride without me, there he comes." The soldier, however, continued holding her fast by the hair, but she tore herself away and fled, leaving her long tresses in his hand. But the huntsman soon caught her and threw her across his saddle, so that her head and arms hung down on one side, and her legs on the other. Next morning, when he entered the town, the soldier related his adventure and showed the hair on his arm. The people at first would not believe him, but went and opened the coffin, and there found the body lying without hair. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 3 (London: Edward Lumley, 1852), pp. 218-19 . Thorpe's source: Johann Wilhelm Wolf, "Die wilde Jagd," Niederländische Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1843), no. 258, pp. 349-50 . Return to the table of contents . The Wild Huntsman's Present Netherlands As two countrymen were coming late one night through the Sonienbusch, one of them quite drunk, the other being a pious, sober man, they suddenly heard at a distance a cracking of whips, barking of dogs, and tramp of horses. "God preserve us, here's the Wild Huntsman!" said the sober countryman; but the drunkard laughed and said, "I would fain know what the foul fiend catches," and then in a loud voice cried, "Holla Sir Hunter, pray give me part of your game." At this the other crossed himself, and they pursued their way home. On the following morning, when the drunkard's wife would go out to fetch water, she found, on opening the door, the hind quarter of an ox that had died in the village about a month before, and had been thrown on the common laystall, and which stank horribly, and was full of worms and maggots. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 3 (London: Edward Lumley, 1852), p. 219 . Thorpe's source: Johann Wilhelm Wolf, "Des wilden Jägers Geschenk," Niederländische Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1843), no. 259, pp. 350-51 . Return to the table of contents . The Eternal Huntsman of Wynendael Netherlands In the neighborhood of the castle of Wynendael, the former palace of the Counts of Flanders, there dwelt a long time ago an aged peasant, who had a son that was entirely devoted to the chase, and instead of plowing and cultivating the fields, was always roaming about the woods and forests. His father had often reproached him for this propensity, but he continued in his old course. When the old peasant at length lay on his deathbed, he had his son called to him, for the purpose of giving him a last Christian exhortation. He came not, but whistling to his dogs, went out into the thicket. At this the old man was struck with terrific despair, and he cursed his son with the appalling words, "Hunt then forever! Aye forever!" He then turned his head and expired. From that time the unhappy son has wandered restless about the woods. At night he is frequently heard crying, "Jacko! Jacko! Jacko!" and then the whole neighborhood re-echoes with the noise of the huntsman and the baying of dogs. Others say that the huntsman was, by his father's malediction, transformed to a bird of prey, and flies about in that form, following and attacking both men and beasts, and constantly crying, "Jacko! Jacko! Jacko!" In these latter years the old woods about Wynendael have been grubbed up, since which time the huntsman has gone further up. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 3 (London: Edward Lumley, 1852), pp. 219-20 . Thorpe's source: Johann Wilhelm Wolf, "Der ewige Jäger zu Wynendael," Niederländische Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1843), no. 260, pp. 351-52 . Return to the table of contents . Wod, the Wild Huntsman Germany The dogs of the air often bark on a dark night on the heath, in the woods, or at a crossroads. Country dwellers know their leader Wod and pity the traveler who has not yet reached home, for Wod is often malicious, seldom kind. The rough huntsman spares only those who remain in the middle of the path. Therefore he often calls out to travelers, "In the middle of the path!" One night a drunk peasant was returning home from town. His path led him through the woods. There he heard the wild hunt with the huntsman shouting at his noisy dogs high in the air. A voice called out, "In the middle of the path! In the middle of the path!" But the peasant paid no attention to it. Suddenly a tall man on a white horse bolted from the clouds and approached him. "How strong are you?" he said. "Let's have a contest. Here is a chain. Take hold of it. Who can pull the hardest?" Undaunted, the peasant took hold of the heavy chain, and the huntsman remounted. Meanwhile the peasant wrapped his end of the chain around a nearby oak tree, and the huntsman pulled in vain. "You wrapped your end around the oak tree," said Wod, dismounting. "No," responded the peasant, quickly undoing the chain. "See, here it is in my hands." "I'll have you in the clouds!" cried the huntsman and remounted. The peasant quickly wrapped the chain around the oak tree once again, and once again Wod pulled in vain. Up above the dogs barked, the wagons rolled, and the horses neighed. The oak tree creaked at its roots and seemed to twist itself sideways. The peasant was terrified, but the oak tree stood. "You have pulled well!" said the huntsman. "Many men have become mine. You are the first who has withstood me. I will reward you." The hunt proceeded noisily, "Halloo! Halloo!" The peasant crept along his way. Then suddenly, from unseen heights, a groaning stag fell before him. Wod appeared and jumped from his white horse. He hurriedly cut up the game. "The blood is yours," he said to the peasant, "and a hind quarter as well." "My lord," said the peasant, "your servant has neither a bucket nor a pot." "Pull off your boot!" cried Wod. He did it. "Now take the blood and the meat to your wife and child." At first his fear lightened the burden, but gradually it became heavier and heavier until he was barely able to carry it. With a crooked back and dripping with sweat he finally reached his hut, and behold, his boot was filled with gold, and the hind quarter was a leather bag filled with silver coins. Source: Carl and Theodor Colshorn, Der wilde Jäger , Märchen und Sagen aus Hannover (Hannover, 1854), pp. 192-193. Slightly abridged. Wod, both in name and in description, is apparently a survival of the chief pre-Christian Germanic deity, known variously as Wodan, Wotan, Oden, or Odin. His name lives on in place names (for example Odense, Denmark) and in the name "Wednesday." As the above story illustrates, it is also possible that his name is etymologically connected to the English word "wood" and the German word "Wut" (fury). Return to the table of contents . The Wild Huntsman and the Mine-Monk Germany Many stories are told about the road between Clausthal and Goslar, including the following one. Many years ago, when the roads around here were very poor, a woman went to Goslar every week to bring back earthenware to sell. She left here early in the morning, often not returning until after nightfall. One time she stayed in Goslar longer than usual, not leaving until it was already half dark. But she knew every step of the way, so she lifted her pack basket filled with earthenware to her back, and proceeded merrily on her way toward Clausthal. It was slow work going uphill, but at last she reached the summit where the Zipollen field is. Tired from her heavy load and the long uphill climb, she decided to sit down and take a decent rest. Suddenly she saw a large fire and noticed some people. Thinking they must be charcoal burners or woodcutters, and being very thirsty, she approached them to ask for some water to drink. But as she came closer, she saw to her great fear that it was a giant huntsman and his companions seated around the fire--a terrifying sight. They were roasting a huge stag on a spit above the fire. But worst of all, some horribly large dogs were running about, and they suddenly chased up to her, jumping at her until she could feel their hot breath, and snapping at her coat as though they wanted to tear her apart. The men just sat there, paying no heed to the terrified woman. Everything was so uncanny, so quiet. She ran as fast as she could to escape from the beasts' claws. She ran, driven by terror, until she at last collapsed and lay there unconscious beneath her pack basket. When she finally awoke she saw a man standing over her. He was wearing a green miner's hat and a black jacket, and was carrying a large torch in his hand. He helped her up and asked her what she needed. She tearfully told him what had happened and that because of her running and her fall her earthenware had probably broken to pieces. She was very poor, and all that she owned was invested in this trade, and today in particular, it was all in this pack basket. Now everything was in pieces, and she did not know what she would do. The juryman, for this is who the woman thought was standing before her, felt sorry for her. He pulled her coat away from her pack basket and looked inside with his torch. He told her that everything was in order. Then wishing her good luck [He uses the expression "Glückauf," a traditional miner's greeting.], he set off in the direction of Goslar. The woman, filled with sorrow and feeling like she had been beaten, continued on her way to Clausthal. It was after daybreak when she arrived home. She went into her little kitchen, set her pack basket on the table, and fell exhausted onto the bench. But she could not resist looking into the pack basket to see what had happened to her earthenware, to see if anything could be salvaged. Looking inside, she was startled to see, instead of broken pieces, or pots and jars, nothing but shiny coins. She immediately ran to her landlady, a clever old woman. After hearing the story, she said, "Those beings by the fire were the wild huntsman with his followers and his dogs. The juryman, however, was the Mine-Monk. Consider yourself lucky that you escaped alive." The woman used the money to buy a small house and a few cows. And from that time forth she never again brought earthenware from Goslar. Source: August Ey, "Der wilde Jäger und der Bergmönch," Harzmärchenbuch; oder, Sagen und Märchen aus dem Oberharze (Stade: Verlag von Fr. Steudel, 1862), pp. 202-204 . The Mine-Monk is one of many named underground spirits found in the various mining regions of Europe. The Mine-Monk gets his name from the old fashioned miners' garb he wears, garb that includes a monk-like hood. The most famous mine spirit in the German language area is Rübezahl. Return to the table of contents . The Night Huntsman at the Udarser Mill Germany It is said that the Night Huntsman haunts the vicinity of the Udarser Mill. Once a mill worker who had spent the night at the mill heard the Night Huntsman passing by with great commotion, shouting "Halloo!" The worker had heard a lot about the Night Huntsman's sinister deeds, and he wanted to know more about him, so he went out onto the mill platform and heartily added his voice to the wild noise. Suddenly he heard a voice calling out: If you want to hunt, You can join the ride! At the same time someone threw a woman's leg at the worker, a woman's leg wearing a red shoe. The worker quickly retreated into the mill. It is said that the next morning he buried the leg beneath the mill platform. Source: A. Haas, "Der Nachtjäger bei der Udarser Mühle," Rügensche Sagen und Märchen , 3rd edition (Stettin: Johs. Burmeister's Buchhandlung, 1903), no. 21, p. 24 . Return to the table of contents . Löwenberg: The Wild Hunt Germany The Löwenberg, another of the Seven Mountains, was once the daily hunting ground of a neighboring knight, who was so fond of the chase that he even hunted on Sundays, and once pursued his quarry to the foot of the altar where a priest was celebrating mass. Outraged by the insolence of the knight, who then and there slew his game, the priest solemnly cursed him. At the same moment the ground opened beneath the hunter's feet, and a pack of hounds from the infernal regions fell upon and tore him to pieces. Ever since then, on stormy nights, this sabbath-breaker's restless ghost hunts wildly through the air, followed by a spectral train of huntsmen and hell hounds, for he can find no rest, though dead, and is condemned to lead the wild hunt forever. This legend, which originated in the myth of Odin, leader of the Raging Host, is told with slight variations of many places along the Rhine, where sudden wind storms, rising during the night, are still considered by the credulous peasantry as the passing of a mysterious heavenly host. Source: Hélène Adeline Guerber, Legends of the Rhine , 3rd edition (New York: A. S. Barnes and Company, 1899), pp. 122-23 . Return to the table of contents . Odin the Hunter Denmark 1 In old days there lived in Hjørring a king, who ruled over Vendsyssel [the northernmost province of Jutland], and was widely known for his wild delight in the chase and his contempt for Christianity. One Sunday, while the people were at church, and King Jon was hunting in its neighborhood, his dogs started and followed a hare, which, to conceal itself, ran into the church, and up before the altar. Both the dogs followed at its heels, and of course greatly disturbed divine service, as the priest was just in the middle of his sermon, but the confusion was made still worse, when King Jon came riding into the church to get hold of his prey, which the hounds had already secured. The priest grew angry at this, and said that he thought it highly unbecoming thus to disturb the service, but the King did not trouble himself for that. "If I may only keep my hunting both here and after my death," said he, "other folk may well keep both divine service and heaven for me." Having by this time got hold of the hare, he turned his horse in front of the altar and trotted out of the church. He died some time after this, but can find rest nowhere, and on clear summer evenings he rides in the air followed by his hounds. The sound of this can often be heard, and it is bad to meet him when one is alone. 2 When three doors with locks stand open in a line with each other, Jon the hunter and his dogs have power to enter, if they are in the neighborhood. In this way he entered a large farm on Hjorte-naes, and asked what they had to spare for Jon the hunter that day. The farmer went out and brought a big ferocious bull, every bit of which they ate up on the floor of the room, for they were thoroughly hungry. When this was done, the hunter told the farmer that in future he should have great luck with his cattle, and so it turned out: his cows often had two calves thereafter. 3 A woman in Svendstrup [Svenstrup?] was up one morning before daybreak to brew the Christmas ale, and had let the two doors of the brew-house stand open. These were right opposite each other, and by and by three hounds came running in and began to lap the ale out of a vessel. She guessed they were Un's hounds, and was afraid, but thought it best to make friends with them, so she went up and patted them, saying, "Poor things." They then ran away again, but it was not for nothing that she had been so friendly with them, for when she went outside after daybreak she found a gold horse-shoe lying outside one of the doors. Source: William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples (London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), pp. 22-23 . Return to the table of contents . Odin Pursues the Elf-Women Denmark 1 Wojens the Hunter is said to have been a king at one time. I am not sure whether it was a berg-woman or an elf-woman that he once came across, and received from her a letter that he several times tried to bury, but could discover no means to get rid of it. Then he wished that from that time forth he might pursue the underground folk so long as the world should last, and so he has done ever since. A man beside Lyngå had gone out early one morning to shift his horses; when he had done this and was about to return home, to his alarm he heard a loud rushing sound in the air. This drew nearer and nearer, and all at once a man on horseback stopped in front of him. "Hold my hounds," he shouted, and the man obeyed. There were three of them, fastened together with a silken leash, and the peasant examined them closely until the hunter returned after a few minutes' absence, having two elf-women, tied together by their long hair, hanging over his horse's back. "Give me my hounds," said he, "and hold out your hand here, till I give you some drink-money." The man did so, and the hunter stuck the points of his three fingers into the peasant's hand, where they left large burned spots behind them. Then he rode off with the same rushing noise, accompanied by the screams of the elf-women and the barking of the dogs. 2 A man was once walking from Ersted to Årestrup, when he saw two elf-women come running towards him as fast as they could. They sat down there on the south side of the village, saying to each other, "He won't catch us yet, for he's not clean." The man continued on his way, until he was met by one on horseback, who was no other than Jons the hunter. "Did no one meet you?" he asked of the man. "Yes," said he, "there came two little things running as hard as they could." "What did they say to each other?" asked the horseman. "They said, 'he won't catch us yet, for he's not clean.'" He took water in his hand and washed himself, and then said to the man, "If you will lie down now and put your fingers in your ears, I shall pay you well for it when I come back again in a little while." The man did so, but began to think the time long, and wanted to take his fingers out of his ears. First he took one finger out, and heard some one fire a shot, though at a considerable distance; he thought it might be as far as Hobro. At this he lay down again for a little, but once more he grew tired of lying like this, and so raised himself from the ground and took the other finger from his ear. Again he heard a shot, but this time as far away as the neighborhood of Horsens. At this he made haste to put his fingers into his ears again, and lay down in his old place. Soon after that the horseman rode up with the two women, tied together by the hair and hung over the horse's back, one on each side, and said to the man, "You shall have good payment, but it should have been better You have taken your fingers out of your ears, and that did me so much damage that I had to ride from Hobro to Horsens to catch the last of them. My horse has lost a shoe on the road there, which you can go and pick up, and that will be payment enough for you." When the man reached the spot and found it, it proved to be of gold. Source: William A. Craigie, Scandinavian Folk-Lore: Illustrations of the Traditional Beliefs of the Northern Peoples (London: Alexander Gardner, 1896), pp. 24-25 . The places named in these legends are in Jutland, Denmark. Return to the table of contents . The Wild Huntsman on Buller Mountain Poland In the Skrzynka Woods, which are part of Wyrth Forest in the Stargardt region, there is a high mountain named Buller Mountain. The Wild Huntsman frequents this mountain on St. Bartholomew's Night [August 24]. Many people have experienced how he rides through the woods with a frightful clamor. One time the head forester of the district was passing through these woods on this night, and he heard the noise. In the belief that he was pursuing some poachers, he followed the sound. Although he exerted himself to the utmost, he was unable to overtake the huntsmen, and he uttered a blasphemous curse. Suddenly there was a frightful commotion above his head. He heard the words "Here is something for you from our hunt!" and a human leg was thrown into his carriage. Source: W. A. J. von Tettau and J. D. H. Temme, "Der wilde Jäger auf dem Bullerberge," Die Volkssagen Ostpreußens, Litauens und Westpreußens , new edition (Berlin: Nicolaische Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1865), no. 260, p. 244 . First published 1837. Return to the table of contents . The Wild Huntsman Bohemia In the falltime when the people around Neubistritz are laying flax in the ponds late at evening they hear the wild hunt. In the woods near the ponds a a terrible commotion commences: trees crack; dogs bark; and everywhere "haho! haho!" sounds forth up and down. Then the people rush homeward from the fields, for anyone who gets caught up in the wild hunt can go no further against the storm and wind. If anyone calls back "haho," that evening the wild huntsman will throw the hind quarter of a horse through his window. It gives off a horrible smell, and one cannot get rid of it. However often one throws it away, it always reappears in the same place. But if one cooks it and buries it beneath the roof drain, it will disappear as soon as raindrops fall on it. (Dr. Ruschko from Neubistritz) Forester Grünwald from Studena tells that he once saw the wild hunt passing over him. Instead of throwing himself to the ground he fired his gun at them. A terrible bang followed, and a large owl fell wounded at his feet. (B. Pick from Studena) In Schönlinde the wild huntsman is called Banditterch (Berndietrich). He is said to conduct his hunt with wood-dogs [wolves] in Schweinsgründen and in Budersdorf. (A. Stellzig from Schönlinde) In the Braunau district he is called the forest huntsman. On certain days he rides around in the wooods with four fiery dogs. Four glowing chickens run ahead of him, which are said to be deceased souls from hell. (F. Kahler from Braunau) In the Riesengebirge Mountains they say that the wild huntsman's followers are Frederick the Great's Prussian soldiers who were killed there. Every year on certain days they are said to rise up and attempt to return through the air to Prussia. However, they cannot find their way out of Bohemia and therefore turn around with horrible shouts. They kill anyone they meet who does not throw himself down with his face to the ground. Source: Josef Virgil Grohmann, "Die wilde Jagd bei Schwarzkosteletz," Sagen-Buch von Böhmen und Mähren. Erster Theil: Sagen aus Böhmen (Prague: Verlag der J. G. Calve'ischen k.k. Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1863), pp. 78-79 . Bohemia is a historic region of mixed ethnicity (German and Slavic), now part of the Czech Republic. I have retained the German place names. Return to the table of contents . The Wild Hunt near Schwarzkosteletz (Kostelec nad Černými lesy) Bohemia In Schwarzkosteletz they tell the legend of the wild hunt as follows: At Christmastime the wild huntsman leads his procession through the air at midnight. He is preceded by an old man who warns the people of the the danger. Then comes a woman on a white horse with neither a saddle nor a bridle. On her right side is the wild huntsman, riding on a fiery horse. Behind them are their followers with howling dogs and shouting loudly. It is said that a peasant was returning home from town at midnight when he suddenly heard hunting cries behind him. Turning around he saw an old man who shouted to him to be careful. The peasant threw himself down with his face to the ground, and the procession passed him by without incident. Another time a tradesman was walking through a forest by night. Suddenly he heard barking dogs and an unusual commotion in the woods. He threw himself down with his face to the ground. Before the procession flew past him he curiously looked up, and from that hour onward he was insane. (O. Hussa) Source: Josef Virgil Grohmann, "Die wilde Jagd bei Schwarzkosteletz," Sagen-Buch von Böhmen und Mähren. Erster Theil: Sagen aus Böhmen (Prague: Verlag der J. G. Calve'ischen k.k. Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1863), pp. 79-80 . Bohemia is a historic region of mixed ethnicity (German and Slavic), now part of the Czech Republic. The city Kostelec nad Černými lesy is near Prague. I have retained the German name Schwarzkosteletz . Return to the table of contents . The Headless Horseman of Cumberland Mountain USA A headless horseman rides upon the road near Indian Fort, in the foothills of Cumberland Mountain. His story is unknown, and this phantom's wanderings are apparently objectless. Nevertheless he is ill to meet, for unlike the same kind of an apparition described by Crofton Croker in the south of Ireland, this brings misfortune, and those who have seen it had reason to regret their encounter. Source (books.google.com): J. Hampden Porter, "Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Mountain Whites of the Alleghanies," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 7, no. 25 (April-June, 1894), p. 111 . Source (JSTOR): J. Hampden Porter, "Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Mountain Whites of the Alleghanies," The Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 7, no. 25 (April-June, 1894), p. 111 . Links to the legend by Crofton Croker mentioned above: Books.google.com: Thomas Crofton Croker, "The Headless Horseman," Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland (London: John Murray, 1834), pp. 229-39 . Internet Archive: Thomas Crofton Croker, "The Headless Horseman," Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland (London: John Murray, 1834), pp. 229-39 . Return to the table of contents . Links to additional texts Baring-Gould, Sabine. "The Wild Huntsman," Iceland: Its Scenes and Sagas (London: Smith, Elder, and Company, 1863), pp. 199-204 . An account of the wild huntsman in various European countries prompted by an Icelandic travel guide's remarks about "the Yule host." Bray, Anna Eliza Kempe Stothard. "A Young Lady and the Hounds," Traditions, Legends, Superstitions, and Sketches of Devonshire on the Borders of the Tamar and the Tavy , vol. 2 (London: John Murray, 1838), pp. 279-81 . Dasent, George Webbe, introduction to Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, Popular Tales from the Norse (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), pp. xliii-xlvi . Guerber, Hélène Adeline. "The Wild Hunt," Myths of Northern Lands: Narrated with Special Reference to Literature and Art (New York: American Book Company, 1895), pp. 30-32 . Henderson, William. "The Gabriel Hounds" and "The Wild Hunt," Notes on the Folk Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1866), pp. 97-106 . Hunt, Robert. "Dando and His Dogs," Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , first series (London: John Camden Hotten, 1865), pp. 247-51 . Kelly, Walter K. "The Wild Hunt -- The Twilight of the Gods," Curiosities of Indo-European Tradition and Folk-Lore (London: Chapman and Hall, 1863), pp. 266-91 . Scott, Sir Walter. "Albania," by an anonymous author, quoted in Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft , 2nd edition (London: John Murray, 1831), p. 42 . Scott, Sir Walter. "The Wild Huntsman," The Last Minstrel, Marmion: Ballads and Songs (Paris: Baudry's European Library, 1838), pp. 344-50 . A poem (with commentary) based on the German ballad "Der wilde Jäger" by Gottfried August Bürger. Thorpe, Benjamin. "Aasgaardsreia (Wild Hunt)," Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), pp. 25-27 . Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia. Wild Hunt . Wolff, Julius. The Wild Huntsman: A Legend of the Hartz , translated from the German by Ralph Davidson, with illustrations after designs by Woldemar Friedrich (New York and London: G. P. Putnams's Sons, 1905). Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 3, 2021. The Wild Man As Helper: Folktales of Type 502 The Wild Man As Helper folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 502 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2017-2023 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Guerrino and the Savage Man (Italy, Giovanni Francesco Straparola). Iron Hans (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). The Iron Man (Germany). The King's Trophy (Germany). The Wild Man of the Marsh (Denmark). The Tsarevich and Dyad'ka (Russia). Story of Bulat the Brave Companion (Russia). The Hairy Man (Hungary). One Good Turn Deserves Another (Serbia). The Wild Man (Greece). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Guerrino and the Savage Man Italy, Giovanni Francesco Straparola Guerrino, only son of Filippomaria, King of Sicily, sets free from his father's prison a certain savage man. His mother, through fear of the king, drives her son into exile, and him the savage man, now humanized, delivers from many and measureless ills. I have heard by report, and likewise gathered from my own experience, most gracious and pleasure-loving ladies, that a kindly service done to another (although at the time the one served may seem in no sense grateful for the boon conferred) will more often than not come back to the doer thereof with abundant usury of benefit. Which thing happened to the son of a king who, having liberated from one of his father's prisons a wild man of the woods, was more than once rescued from a violent death by the captive he had freed. This you will easily understand from the fable which I intend to relate to you, and for the love I bear to all of you I will exhort you never to be backward in aiding others; because, even though you be not repaid by those in whose behalf you have wrought, God himself, the rewarder of all, will assuredly never leave your good deed unrecompensed; nay, on the contrary, he will make you partakers with him of his divine grace. Sicily, my dear ladies (as must be well known to all of you), is an island very fertile and complete in itself, and in antiquity surpassing all the others of which we have knowledge, abounding in towns and villages which render it still more beautiful. In past times the lord of this island was a certain king named Filippomaria, a man wise and amiable and of rare virtue, who had to wife a courteous, winsome, and lovely lady, the mother of his only son, who was called Guerrino. The king took greater delight in following the chase than any other man in the country, and, for the reason that he was of a strong and robust habit of body, this diversion was well suited to him. Now it happened one day that, as he was coming back from hunting in company with divers of his barons and huntsmen, he saw, coming out of a thick wood a wild man, tall and big and so deformed and ugly that they all looked upon him with amazement. In strength of body he seemed no whit inferior to any of them; wherefore the king, having put himself in fighting trim, together with two of the most valiant of his barons, attacked him boldly, and after a long and doughty struggle overcame him and took him a prisoner with his own hands. Then, having bound him, they conveyed him back to the palace, and selected for him a safe lodging, fitted for the purpose, into which they cast him, and there under strong locks he was kept by the king's command closely confined and guarded. And seeing that the king set high store upon his captive, he ordained that the keys of the prison should be held in charge by the queen, and never a day passed when he would not for pastime go to visit him. Before many days had gone by the king once more put himself in array for the chase, and, having furnished himself with all the various things which are necessary thereto, he set forth with a gallant company of courtiers, but before he left he gave into the queen's care the keys of the prison. And during the time that the king was absent on his hunting a great longing came over Guerrino, who was at that season a young lad, to see the wild man of the woods; so having betaken himself all alone, carrying his bow, in which he delighted greatly, to the prison grating, the creature saw him and straight way began to converse with him in decent orderly fashion. And while they talked the boy, dexterously snatched out of his hand the arrow, which was richly ornamented. Whereupon the boy began to weep, and could not keep back his tears, crying out that the savage ought to give him back his arrow. But the wild man said to him: "If you will open the door and let me go free from this prison I will give you back your arrow, but if you refuse I will not let you have it." The boy answered, "How would you that I should open the door for you and set you free, seeing that I have not the means therefor." Then said the wild man, "If indeed you were in the mood to release me and to let me out of this narrow cell, I would soon teach you the way in which it might be done." "But how?" replied Guerrino; "tell me the way." To which the wild man made answer: "Go to the chamber of the queen your mother, and when you see that she is taking her midday sleep, put your hand softly under the pillow upon which she is resting, and take therefrom the keys of the prison in such wise that she shall not notice the theft, and bring them here and open my prison door. When you shall have done this I will give you back your arrow forthwith, and peradventure at some future time I may be able to make you a return for your kindness." Guerrino, wishing beyond everything to get back his gilded dart, did everything that the wild man had told him, and found the keys exactly as he had said, and with these in his hand he returned to the prison, and said to him: "Behold! Here are the keys; but if I let you out of this place you must go so far from hence that not even the scent of you may be known, for if my father, who is a great huntsman, should find you and capture you again, he would of a surety kill you out of hand." "Let not that trouble you, my child," said the captive, "for as soon as ever you shall open the prison and see me a free man, I will give you back your arrow and will get me away into such distant parts that neither your father nor any other man shall ever find me." Guerrino, who had all the strength of a man, worked away at the door, and finally threw open the prison, when the wild man, having given back to him his arrow and thanked him heartily, went his way. Now this wild man had been formerly a very handsome youth, who, through despair at his inability to win the favour of the lady he ardently loved, let go all dreams of love and urbane pursuits, and took up his dwelling amongst beasts of the forest, abiding always in the gloomy woods and bosky thickets, eating grass and drinking water after the fashion of a brute. On this account the wretched man had become covered with a great fell of hair; his skin was hard, his beard thick and tangled and very long, and, through eating herbs and grass, his beard, his hairy covering, and the hair of his head had become so green that they were quite monstrous to behold. As soon as ever the queen awoke from her slumbers she thrust her hand under her pillow to seek for the keys she had put there, and, when she found they were gone, she was terrified amain, and having turned the bed upside down without meeting with any trace of them, she ran straightway like one bereft of wit to the prison, which was standing open. When on searching further she found no sign of the wild man, she was so sore stricken with grief and fear that she was like to die, and, having returned to the palace, she made diligent search in every corner thereof, questioning the while now this courtier and now that as to who the presumptuous and insolent varlet was who had been brazen enough to lay hands upon the keys of the prison without her knowledge. To this questioning they one and all declared that they knew nought of the matter which thus disturbed her. And when Guerrino met his mother, and remarked that she was almost beside herself in a fit of passion, he said to her: "Mother see that you cast no blame on any of these in respect to the opening of the prison door, because if punishment is due to any thereanent it is due to me, for I, and I alone, unlocked it." The queen, when she heard these words, was plunged in deeper sorrow than ever, fearing lest the king, when he should come back from his hunting, might kill his son through sheer anger at the fault he had committed, seeing that he had given into her charge the keys, to guard them as preciously as her own person. Wherefore the queen in her desire to escape the consequences of a venial mistake fell into another error far more weighty, for without the shortest delay she summoned two of her most trusty servants, and her son as well, and, having given to them a great quantity of jewels and much money and divers fine horses, sent him forth to seek his fortune, at the same time begging the servants most earnestly to take the greatest care of Guerrino. A very short time after son had departed from the presence of his mother, the king came back to the palace from following the chase, and as soon as he had alighted from his horse he betook himself straightway to the prison to go and see the wild man, and when he found the door wide open and the captive gone, and no trace of him left behind, he was forthwith inflamed with such violent anger that he determined in his mind to cause to be slain without fail the person who had wrought such a flagrant misdeed. And, having sought out the queen, who was sitting overcome with grief in her chamber, he commanded her to tell him what might be the name of the impudent, rash, and presumptuous varlet who had been bold enough of heart to open the doors of the prison and thereby give opportunity to the wild man of the woods to make his escape. Whereupon the queen, in a meek and trembling voice, made answer to him: "O sire! be not troubled on account of this thing, for Guerrino our son (as he himself has made confession to me) admits that he has done this." And then she told to the king everything that Guerrino had said to her, and he, when he heard her story, was greatly incensed with rage. Next she told him that, on account of the fear she felt lest he should slay his son, she had sent the youth away into a far distant country, accompanied by two of their most faithful servants, and carrying with him rich store of jewels and of money sufficient to serve their needs. The king, when he listened to this speech of the queen, felt one sorrow heaping itself upon another, and he came within an ace of falling to the ground or of losing his wits, and, if it had not been for the courtiers who fell upon him and held him back, he would assuredly have slain his unhappy queen on the spot. Now when the poor king had in some measure recovered his composure and calmed the fit of unbridled rage which had possessed him, he said to the queen: "Alas, my wife! What fancy was this of yours which induced you to send away into some unknown land our son, the fruit of our mutual love? Is it possible that you imagined I should hold this wild man of greater value than one who was my own flesh and blood?" And without awaiting any reply to these remarks of his, he bade a great troop of soldiers mount their horses forthwith, and, after having divided themselves into four companies, to make a close search and endeavour to find the prince. But all their inquest was in vain, seeing that Guerrino and his attendants had made their journey secretly, and had let no one know who they might be. Guerrino, after he had ridden far and traversed divers valleys and mountains and rivers, making a halt now in one spot and now in another, attained at last his sixteenth year, and so fair a youth was he by this time that he resembled nothing so much as a fresh morning rose. But after a short time had passed, the servants who accompanied him were seized with the devilish thought of killing him, and then taking the store of jewels and money and parting it amongst themselves. This wicked plot, however, came to nought, because by the working of divine justice they were not able to agree amongst themselves. For by good fortune it happened that, one day while they were devising this wickedness, there rode by a very fair and graceful youth, mounted upon a superb steed, and accoutred with the utmost magnificence. This youth bowed and graciously saluted Guerrino, and thus addressed him: "Most gracious sir, if it should not prove distasteful to you, I would fain make my journey in your company." And to this Guerrino replied: "Your courtesy in making your request will not permit me to refuse it and the pleasure of your company. Therefore I give you cordial thanks, and I beg you as a special favour that you will accompany us on our road. We are strangers in this country and know but little of its highways, and you may be able of your kindness to direct our paths therein. Moreover, as we ride on together we can discuss the various chances which have befallen us, and thus our journey will be less irksome." Now this young man was no other than the wild man whom Guerrino had set free from the prison of King Filippomaria his father. This youth, after wandering through various countries and strange lands, met one day by chance a very lovely and benignant fairy, who was at that time suffering from a certain distemper. She, when she looked upon him and saw how misshapen and hideous he was, laughed so violently at the sight of his ugliness that she caused to burst an imposthume which had formed in the vicinity of her heart -- an ailment which might well have caused her death by suffocation. And at that very moment she was delivered from all pain and trouble of this infirmity, as if she had never been afflicted therewith in the past, and restored to health. Wherefore the good fairy, in recompense for so great a favour done to her, said to him, not wishing to appear ungrateful to him: "O thou creature, who art now so deformed and filthy, since thou hast been the means of restoring to me my health which I so greatly de sired, go thy ways, and be thou changed from what thou art into the fairest, the wisest, and the most graceful youth that may anywhere be found. And, besides this, I make you the sharer with me of all the power and authority conferred upon me by nature, whereby you will be able to do and to undo whatsoever you will according to your desire." And having presented to him a noble horse endowed with magic powers, she gave him leave to go whithersoever he would. Thus as Guerrino journeyed along with the young man, knowing nothing as to who he might be, but well known of him the while, they came at last to a mighty and strong city called Irlanda, over which at that time ruled King Zifroi. This King Zifroi was the father of two daughters, graceful to look upon, of modest manners, and in beauty surpassing Venus herself, one of them named Potentiana and the other Eleuteria. They were held so dear by the king their father, that he could see by no other eyes than theirs. As soon as Guerrino entered the city of Irlanda with the unknown youth and with his train of servants, he hired a lodging of a certain householder who was the wittiest fellow in the whole of Irlanda, and who treated his guests with cheer of the best. And on the day following, the unknown youth made believe that he must needs depart and travel into another country, and went to take leave of Guerrino, thanking him in hearty wise for the boon of his company and good usage, but Guerrino, who had conceived the strongest love and friendship for him, would on no account let him go, and showed him such strong evidence of his good feeling that in the end the young man agreed to tarry with him. In the country round about Irlanda there lived at this time two very fearful and savage animals, one of which was a wild horse, and the other a mare of like nature, and so ferocious and cruel were these beasts that they not only ravaged and devastated all the fair cultivated fields, but likewise killed all the animals and the men and women dwelling there in. And through the ruin wrought by these beasts the country had come to such piteous condition that no one was found willing to abide there, so that the peasants abandoned their farms and the homes which were dear to them and be took themselves to find dwelling-places in another land. And there was nowhere to be found any man strong and bold enough to face them, much less to fight with them and slay them. Wherefore the king, seeing that the whole country was being made desolate of all victuals, and of cattle, and of human creatures, and not knowing how to devise any remedy for this wretched pass, gave way to dolorous lamentations, and cursed the hard and evil fortune which had befallen him. The two servants of Guerrino, who during the journey had not been able to carry out their wicked intent through want of concord between themselves, and on account of the arrival of the unknown youth, now deliberated how they might compass Guerrino's death and remain possessors of the money and jewels, and said one to the other: "Let us now see and take counsel together how we may easiest take the life of our master." But not being able to find any means thereto which seemed fitting, seeing that they would stand in peril of losing their own lives by the law if they should kill him, they decided to speak privily with their host and to tell him that Guerrino was a youth of great prowess and valour; furthermore, that he had often boasted in their presence that he would be ready to slay this wild horse without incurring any danger to himself. Thus they reasoned with themselves: "Now this saying may easily come to the ears of the king, who, being so keenly set on the destruction of these two animals and on safeguarding the welfare of his country, will straightway command them to bring Guerrino before him, and will then inquire of the youth in what manner he means to accomplish this feat. Then Guerrino, knowing nothing what to say or to do, will at once be put to death by the king, and we shall remain sole masters of the jewels and the money." And they forth with set to work to put this wicked plan of theirs into action. The host, when he listened to this speech, rejoiced amain, and was as glad as any man in all the world, and without losing a moment of time he ran swiftly to the palace, and having knelt down be fore the king and made due reverence, he said to him secretly, "Gracious king, I have come to tell you that there is at present sojourning in my hostel a fair and gallant knight errant, who is called by name Guerrino. Now whilst I was confabulating about divers matters with his servants they told me, amongst other things, how their master was a man of great prowess and well skilled in the use and practice of arms, and that in this our time one might search in vain to find another who could be compared with him. Moreover, they had many and many a time heard him boast that of his strength and valour he could without difficulty overcome and slay the wild horse which is working such dire loss and damage to your kingdom." When King Zifroi heard these words he immediately gave command that Guerrino should be brought before him. Whereupon the innkeeper, obedient to the word of the king, returned at once to his inn and said to Guerrino that he was to betake himself alone into the pres ence of the king, who greatly desired to speak with him. When Guerrino heard this he went straightway to the palace and presented himself to the king, and after saluting him with becoming reverence begged to be told for what reason he had been honoured with the royal commands. To this Zifroi the king made answer: "Guerrino, the reason which has induced me to send for you is that I have heard you are a knight of great valour, and one excelling all the other knights now alive in the world. They tell me, too, that you have many and many a time declared that you are strong and valorous enough to overcome and slay the wild horse which is working such cruel ruin and devastation to this my kingdom, without risk of hurt to yourself or to others. If you can pluck up courage enough to make trial of an emprise so full of honour as this, and prove yourself a conqueror, I promise you by this head of mine to bestow upon you a gift which will make you a happy man for the rest of your days." Guerrino, when he heard this proposition of the king, so grave and weighty, was mightily amazed, and at once denied that he had ever spoken such words as had been attributed to him. The king, who was greatly disconcerted at this answer of Guerrino, thus addressed him: "Guerrino, it is my will that you should without delay undertake this task, and be sure if you refuse and fail to comply with my wishes I will take away your life." The king, having thus spoken, dismissed from his presence Guerrino, who returned to his inn overwhelmed with deep sorrow, which he did not dare to disclose to anyone. Whereupon the unknown youth, marking that Guerrino, contrary to his wont, was plunged in melancholy, inquired the reason why he was so sad and full of grief. Then Guerrino, on account of the brotherly love subsisting between them, and finding himself unable to refuse this just and kind request, told him word for word everything that had happened to him. As soon as the unknown youth heard this, he said, "Be of good cheer, and put aside all doubts and fears, for I will point out to you a way by which you will save your life, and be a conqueror in your enterprise, and fulfil the wishes of the king. Return, therefore, to the king, and beg of him to grant you the service of a skilful blacksmith. Then order this smith to make for you four horseshoes, which must be thicker and broader by the breadth of two fingers than the ordinary measure of horseshoes, well roughed, and each one to be fitted behind with two spikes of a finger's length and sharpened to a point. And when these shoes are prepared, you must have my horse, which is enchanted, shod therewith, and then you need have no further fear of anything." Guerrino, after he had heard these words, returned to the presence of the king, and told him everything as the young man had directed him. The king then caused to be brought before him a well-skilled marshal smith, to whom he gave orders that he should carry out whatever work Guerrino might require of him. When they had gone to the smith's forge, Guerrino instructed him how to make the four horseshoes according to the words of the young stranger, but when the smith understood in what fashion he was required to make these shoes, he mocked at Guerrino, and treated him like a madman, for this way of making shoes was quite strange and unknown to him. When Guerrino saw that the marshal smith was inclined to mock him, and unwilling to serve him as he had been ordered, he went once more to the king, and complained that the smith would not carry out his directions. Wherefore the king bade them bring the marshal before him, and gave him express command that, under pain of his highest displeasure, he should at once carry out the duties which had been imposed upon him, or, failing this, he himself should forthwith make ready to carry out the perilous task which had been assigned to Guerrino. The smith, thus hard pressed by the orders of the king, made the horseshoes in the way described by Guerrino, and shod the horse therewith. When the horse was thus shod and well-accoutred with everything that was necessary for the enterprise, the young stranger addressed Guerrino in these words: "Now mount quickly this my horse, and go in peace, and as soon as you shall hear the neighing of the wild horse dismount at once, and, having taken off from him his saddle and his bridle, let him range at will. You yourself climb up into a high tree, and there await the issue of the enterprise." Guerrino, having been fully instructed by his dear companion in all that he ought to do, took his leave, and departed with a light heart. Already the glorious news had been spread abroad through all the parts of Irlanda how a valiant and handsome young knight had undertaken to subjugate and capture the wild horse and to present him to the king, and for this reason everyone in the city, men and women alike, all flew to their windows to see him go by on his perilous errand. When they marked how handsome and young and gallant he was, their hearts were moved to pity on his account, and they said one to another, "Ah, the poor youth! With what a willing spirit he goes to his death. Of a surety it is a piteous thing that so valiant a youth should thus wretchedly perish." And they could none of them keep back their tears on account of the compassion they felt. But Guerrino, full of manly boldness, went on his way blithely, and when he had come to the spot where the wild horse was wont to abide, and heard the sound of his neigh, he got down from his own horse, and having taken the saddle and bridle therefrom he let him go free, and himself climbed up into the branches of a great oak, and there awaited the fierce and bloody contest. Scarcely had Guerrino climbed up into the tree when the wild horse appeared and forthwith attacked the fairy horse, and then the two beasts engaged in the fiercest struggle that the world had ever seen, for they rushed at one another as if they had been two unchained lions, and they foamed at the mouth as if they had been bristly wild boars pursued by savage and eager hounds. Then, after they had fought for some time with the greatest fury, the fairy horse dealt the wild horse two kicks full on the jaw, which was put out of joint thereby; wherefore the wild horse was at once disabled, and could no longer either fight or defend himself. When Guerrino saw this he rejoiced greatly, and having come down from the oak, he took a halter which he had brought with him and secured the wild horse therewith, and led him with his dislocated jaw back to the city, where he was welcomed by all the people with the greatest joy. According to his promise he presented the horse to the king, who, together with all the inhabitants of the city, held high festival, and rejoiced amain over the gallant deed wrought by Guerrino. But the servants of Guerrino were greatly overcome with grief and confusion, inasmuch as their evil designs had miscarried; wherefore, inflamed with rage and hatred, they once more let it come to the hearing of King Zifroi that Guerrino had vaunted that he could with the greatest ease kill the wild mare also when ever it might please him. When the king heard this he laid exactly the same commands on Guerrino as he had done in the matter of the horse, and because the youth refused to undertake this task, which appeared to him impossible, the king threatened to have him hung up by one foot as a rebel against his crown. After Guerrino had returned to his inn, he told everything to his unknown companion, who smilingly said: "My good brother, fret not yourself because of this, but go and find the marshal smith, and command him to make for you four more horseshoes, as big again as the last, and see that they are duly furnished with good sharp spikes. Then you must follow exactly the same course as you took with the horse, and you will return here covered with greater honour than ever." When therefore he had commanded to be made the sharply-spiked horseshoes, and had caused the valiant fairy horse to be shod therewith, he set forth on his gallant enterprise. As soon as Guerrino had come to the spot where the wild mare was wont to graze, and heard her neighing, he did everything exactly in the same manner as before, and when he had set free the fairy horse, the mare came towards it and attacked it with such fierce and terrible biting that it could with difficulty defend itself against such an attack. But it bore the assault valiantly, and at last succeeded in planting so sharp and dexterous a kick on the mare that she was lamed in her right leg, whereupon Guerrino came down from the high tree into which he had climbed, and having captured her, bound her securely. Then he mounted his own horse and rode back to the palace, where he presented the wild mare to the king, amidst the rejoicings and acclamations of all the people. And everyone, attracted by wonderment and curiosity, ran to see this wild beast, which, on account of the grave injuries she had received in the fight, soon died. And by these means the country was freed from the great plague which had for so long a time vexed it. Now when Guerrino had returned to his hostel, and had betaken himself to repose somewhat on account of the weariness which had come over him, he found that he was unable to get any sleep by reason of a strange noise which he heard somewhere in the chamber. Wherefore, having risen from his couch, he perceived that there was something, I know not what, beating about inside a pot of honey, and not able to get out. So Guerrino opened the honey-pot, and saw within a large hornet, which was struggling with its wings without being able to free itself from the honey around it. Moved by pity, he took hold of the insect and let it go free. Now Zifroi the king had as yet given to Guerrino no reward for the two valiant deeds which he had wrought, but he was conscious in his heart that he would be acting in a very base fashion were he to leave such great valour without a rich guerdon, so he caused Guerrino to be called into his presence, and thus ad dressed him: "Guerrino, by your noble deeds the whole of my kingdom is now free from the scourge, therefore I intend to reward you for the great benefits you have wrought in our behalf; but as I can conceive of no other gift which would be worthy and sufficient for your merits, I have determined to give you one of my two daughters to wife. But you must know that of these two sisters one is called Potentiana, and she has hair braided in such marvellous wise that it shines like golden coils. The other is called Eleuteria, and her tresses are of such texture that they flash brightly like the finest silver. Now if you can guess -- the maidens being closely veiled the while -- which is she of the golden tresses, I will give her to you as your wife, together with a mighty dowry of money; but if you fail in this, I will have your head struck off your shoulders." Guerrino, when he heard this cruel ordeal which was proposed by Zifroi the king, was mightily amazed, and turning to him spake thus: "O gracious sovereign! Is this a worthy guerdon for all the perils and fatigues I have undergone? Is this a reward for the strength I have spent on your behalf? Is this the gratitude you give me for having delivered your country from the scourge by which it was of late laid desolate? Alas! I did not merit this return, which of a truth is not a deed worthy of such a mighty king as yourself. But since this is your pleasure and I am helpless in your hands, you must do with me what pleases you best." "Now go," said Zifroi, "and tarry no longer in my presence. I give you till tomorrow to come to a decision." When Guerrino went out of the king's presence full of sadness, he sought his dear companion, and repeated to him everything that the king had said. The unknown youth when he heard this seemed but little troubled thereanent, and said: "Guerrino, be of good cheer, and do not despair, for I will deliver you from this great danger. Remember how a few days ago you set free the hornet which you found with its wings entangled in the honey. Now this same hornet will be the means of saving you, for to morrow, after the dinner at the palace, when you are put to the test, it will fly three times buzzing and humming round the head of her with the golden hair, and she with her white hands will drive it away. And you, when you shall have marked her do this action three times, may know for certain that this is she who is to be your wife." "Ah me!" cried Guerrino to his companion, "When will the time come when I shall be able to make you some repayment for all the kind offices you have done me? Certes, were I to live for a thousand years, I should never have it in my power to recompense you the very smallest portion thereof. But that one, who is the rewarder of all, will in this matter make up for me in that respect in which I am wanting." To this speech of Guerrino his companion made answer: "Guerrino, my brother, there is in sooth no need for you to trouble yourself about making any return to me for the services I may have wrought you, but assuredly it is now full time that I should reveal to you, and that you should know clearly who I am. For in the same fashion as you delivered me from death, I on my part have desired to render to you the recompense you deserve so highly at my hands. Know, then, that I am the wild man of the woods whom you, with such loving compassion, set free from the prison-house of the king your father, and that I am called by name Rubinetto." And then he went on to tell Guerrino by what means the fairy had brought him back into his former state of a fair young man. Guerrino, when he heard these words, stood like one bemused, and out of the great tenderness and pity he had in his heart he embraced Rubinetto, weeping the while, and kissed him, and claimed him as his own brother. And forasmuch as the day was now approaching for Guerrino to solve the question to be set to him by King Zifroi, the two repaired to the palace, where upon the king gave order that his two beloved daughters, Potentiana and Eleuteria, should be brought into the presence of Guerrino covered from head to foot with white veils, and this was straightway done. When the two daughters had come in so much alike in seeming that it was impossible to tell the one from the other, the king said: "Now which of these two, Guerrino, do you will that I should give you to wife?" But Guerrino stood still in a state of doubt and hesitation, and answered no thing, but the king, who was mightily curious to see how the matter would end, pressed him amain to speak, crying out that time was flying, and that it behoved him to give his answer at once. To this Guerrino made answer: "Most sacred majesty, time forsooth may be flying, but the end is not yet come to this day, which is the limit you have given me for my decision." And all those standing by affirmed that Guerrino only claimed his right. When, therefore, the king and Guerrino and all the others had stood for a long time in expectation, behold! there suddenly appeared a hornet, which at once began to fly and buzz round the head and the fair face of Potentiana of the golden hair. And she, as if she were afeared of the thing, raised her hand to drive it away, and when she had done this three times the hornet flew away out of sight. But even after this sign Guerrino remained uncertain for a short time, although he had full faith in the words of Rubinetto, his well-beloved companion. Then said the king, "How now, Guerrino, what do you say? The time has now come when you must put an end to this delay, and make up your mind." And Guerrino, having looked well first at one and then at the other of the maidens, put his hand on the head of Potentiana, who had been pointed out to him by the hornet, and said, "Gracious king, this one is your daughter of the golden tresses." And when the maiden had raised her veil it was clearly proved that it was indeed she, greatly to the joy of all those who were present, and to the satisfaction of the people of the city. And Zifroi the king gave her to Guerrino as his wife, and they did not depart thence until Rubinetto had wedded the other sister. After this Guerrino declared himself to be the son of Filippomaria, King of Sicily, hearing which Zifroi was greatly rejoiced, and caused the marriages to be celebrated with the greatest pomp and magnificence. When this news came to the father and the mother of Guerrino they felt the greatest joy and contentment, seeing that they had by this time given up their son as lost. When he returned to Sicily with his dear wife and his well-loved brother and sister-in-law, they all received a gracious and loving welcome from his father and mother, and they lived a long time in peace and happiness, and he left behind him fair children as the heirs of his kingdom. This touching story told by Eritrea won the highest praise of all the hearers. Source (books.google.com): Giovanni Francesco Straparola, The Facetious Nights of Straparola , vol. 2, translated by W. G. Waters (London: Privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901), night 5, tale 1, pp. 138-77 . Source (Internet Archive): Giovanni Francesco Straparola, The Facetious Nights of Straparola , vol. 2, translated by W. G. Waters (London: Privately printed for members of the Society of Bibliophiles, 1901), night 5, tale 1, pp. 138-77 . Giovanni Francesco Straparola lived in Italy between about 1485 and 1558. His collection of tales Le Piacevoli Notti ( Facetious Nights ) was published in two volumes in Venice between 1550 and 1553. Link to the Wikipedia article about The Facetious Nights of Straparola . Return to the table of contents . Iron Hans Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once upon a time there was a king who had a great forest near his castle, full of all kinds of wild animals. One day he sent out a huntsman to shoot a deer, but the huntsman did not come back again. "Perhaps he has had an accident," said the king, and the following day he sent out two other huntsmen who were to search for him, but they did not return either. Then on the third day, he summoned all his huntsmen, and said, "Search through the whole forest, and do not give up until you have found all three." But none of these came home again either, nor were any of the hounds from the pack that they had taken with them ever seen again. From that time on, no one dared to go into these woods, and they lay there in deep quiet and solitude, and all that one saw from there was an occasional eagle or hawk flying overhead. This lasted for many years, when an unknown huntsman presented himself to the king seeking a position, and he volunteered to go into the dangerous woods. The king, however, did not want to give his permission, and said, "It is haunted in there. I am afraid that you will do no better than did the others, and that you will never come out again." The huntsman answered, "Sir, I will proceed at my own risk. I know nothing of fear." The huntsman therefore set forth with his dog into the woods. It was not long before the dog picked up a scent and wanted to follow it, but the dog had run only a few steps when it came to a deep pool, and could go no further. Then a naked arm reached out of the water, seized the dog, and pulled it under. When the huntsman saw that, he went back and got three men. They returned with buckets and baled out the water. When they could see to the bottom, there was a wild man lying there. His body was brown like rusty iron, and his hair hung over his face down to his knees. They bound him with cords and led him away to the castle. Everyone was greatly astonished at the wild man. The king had him put into an iron cage in his courtyard, forbidding, on pain of death, that the cage door be opened. The queen herself was to safeguard the key. From this time forth everyone could once again go safely into the woods. The king had a son of eight years. One day he was playing in the courtyard, and during his game his golden ball fell into the cage. The boy ran to the cage and said, "Give me my ball." "Not until you have opened the door for me," answered the man. "No," said the boy, "I will not do that. The king has forbidden it," and he ran away. The next day he came again and demanded his ball. The wild man said, "Open my door," but the boy would not do so. On the third day the king had ridden out hunting, and the boy went once more and said, "Even if I wanted to, I could not open the door. I do not have the key." Then the wild man said, "It is under your mother's pillow. You can get it there." The boy, who wanted to have his ball back, threw all caution to the wind, and got the key. The door opened with difficulty, and the boy pinched his finger. When it was open, the wild man stepped out, gave him the golden ball, and hurried away. The boy became afraid. He cried out and called after him, "Oh, wild man, do not go away, or I shall get a beating." The wild man turned around, picked him up, set him on his shoulders, and ran into the woods. When the king came home he noticed the empty cage and asked the queen how it had happened. She knew nothing about it, and looked for the key, but it was gone. She called the boy, but no one answered. The king sent out people to look for him in the field, but they did not find him. Then he could easily guess what had happened, and great sorrow ruled at the royal court. After the wild man had once more reached the dark woods, he set the boy down from his shoulders, and said to him, "You will never again see your father and mother, but I will keep you with me, for you have set me free, and I have compassion for you. If you do what I tell you, it will go well with you. I have enough treasures and gold, more than anyone in the world." He made a bed of moss for the boy, upon which he fell asleep. The next morning the man took him to a spring and said, "Look, this golden spring is as bright and clear as crystal. You shall sit beside it, and take care that nothing falls into it, otherwise it will be polluted. I shall come every evening to see if you have obeyed my order." The boy sat down at the edge of the spring, and saw how sometimes a golden fish and sometimes a golden snake appeared from within, and took care that nothing fell into it. As he was thus sitting there, his finger hurt him so fiercely that he involuntarily put it into the water. He quickly pulled it out again, but saw that it was completely covered with gold. However hard he tried to wipe the gold off again, it was to no avail. That evening Iron Hans came back, looked at the boy, and said, "What has happened to the spring?" "Nothing, nothing," he answered, holding his finger behind his back, so the man would not be able to see it. But the man said, "You have dipped your finger into the water. This time I will let it go, but be careful that you do not again let anything else fall in." Very early the next morning the boy was already sitting by the spring and keeping watch. His finger hurt him again, and he rubbed it across his head. Then unfortunately a hair fell down into the spring. He quickly pulled it out, but it was already completely covered with gold. Iron Hans came, and already knew what had happened. "You have let a hair fall into the spring," he said. "I will overlook this once more, but if it happens a third time then the spring will be polluted, and you will no longer be able to stay with me." On the third day the boy sat by the spring and did not move his finger, however much it hurt him. But time passed slowly for him, and he looked at the reflection of his face in the water. While doing this he bent down lower and lower, wanting to look straight into his eyes, when his long hair fell from his shoulders down into the water. He quickly straightened himself up, but all the hair on his head was already covered with gold, and glistened like the sun. You can imagine how frightened the poor boy was. He took his handkerchief and tied it around his head, so that the man would not be able to see his hair. When the man came, he already knew everything, and said, "Untie the handkerchief." The golden hair streamed forth, and no excuse that the boy could offer was of any use. "You have failed the test, and you can stay here no longer. Go out into the world. There you will learn what poverty is. But because you are not bad at heart, and because I mean well by you, I will grant you one thing: If you are ever in need, go into the woods and cry out, 'Iron Hans,' and then I will come and help you. My power is great, greater than you think, and I have more than enough gold and silver." Then the prince left the woods, and walked by beaten and unbeaten paths on and on until at last he reached a great city. There he looked for work, but he was not able to find any, because he had not learned a trade by which he could make a living. Finally he went to the castle and asked if they would take him in. The people at court did not at all know how they would be able to use him, but they took a liking to him, and told him to stay. Finally the cook took him into service, saying that he could carry wood and water, and rake up the ashes. Once when no one else was at hand, the cook ordered him to carry the food to the royal table. Because he did not want them to see his golden hair, he kept his cap on. Nothing like this had ever before happened to the king, and he said, "When you approach the royal table you must take your hat off." "Oh, sir," he answered, "I cannot. I have an ugly scab on my head." Then the king summoned the cook and scolded him, asking him how he could take such a boy into his service. The cook was to send him away at once. However, the cook had pity on him, and let him trade places with gardener's boy. Now the boy had to plant and water the garden, hoe and dig, and put up with the wind and bad weather. Once in summer when he was working alone in the garden, the day was so hot that he took his hat off so that the air would cool him. As the sun shone on his hair it glistened and sparkled. The rays fell into the princess's bedroom, and she jumped up to see what it was. She saw the boy and called out to him, "Boy, bring me a bouquet of flowers." He quickly put on his cap, picked some wildflowers, and tied them together. As he was climbing the steps with them, the gardener met him and said, "How can you take the princess a bouquet of such common flowers? Quick! Go and get some other ones, and choose only the most beautiful and the rarest ones." "Oh, no," replied the boy, the wild ones have a stronger scent, and she will like them better." When he got into the room, the princess said, "Take your cap off. It is not polite to keep it on in my presence." He again responded, "I cannot do that. I have a scabby head." She, however, took hold of his cap and pulled it off. His golden hair rolled down onto his shoulders, and it was a magnificent sight. He wanted to run away, but she held him by his arm, and gave him a handful of ducats. He went away with them, but he did not care about the gold. He took the gold pieces to the gardener, saying, "I am giving these things to your children for them to play with." The next day the princess called to him again, asking him to bring her a bouquet of wildflowers. When he went in with it, she immediately grabbed at his cap, and wanted to take it away from him, but he held it firmly with both hands. She again gave him a handful of ducats. He did not want to keep them, giving them instead to the gardener for his children to play with. On the third day it was no different. She was not able to take his cap away from him, and he did not want her gold. Not long afterwards, the country was overrun by war. The king gathered together his people, not knowing whether or not fight back against the enemy, who was more powerful and had a large army. Then the gardener's boy said, "I am grown up, and I want to go to war as well. Just give me a horse." The others laughed and said, "After we have left, then look for one by yourself. We will leave one behind for you in the stable." After they had left, he went into the stable, and led the horse out. It had a lame foot, and it limped higgledy-hop, higgledy-hop. Nevertheless he mounted it, and rode away into the dark woods. When he came to the edge of the woods, he called "Iron Hans" three times so loudly that it sounded through the trees. The wild man appeared immediately, and said, "What do you need?" "I need a strong steed, for I am going to war." "That you shall have, and even more than you are asking for." Then the wild man went back into the woods, and before long a stable-boy came out of the woods leading a horse. It was snorting with its nostrils, and could hardly be restrained. Behind them followed a large army of warriors, outfitted with iron armor, and with their swords flashing in the sun. The youth left his three-legged horse with the stable-boy, mounted the other horse, and rode at the head of the army. When he approached the battlefield, a large number of the king's men had already fallen, and before long the others would have to retreat. Then the youth galloped up with his iron army and attacked the enemies like a storm, beating down all who opposed him. They tried to flee, but the youth was right behind them, and did not stop, until not a single man was left. However, instead of returning to the king, he led his army on a roundabout way back into the woods, and then called for Iron Hans. "What do you need?" asked the wild man. "Take back your steed and your army, and give me my three-legged horse again." It all happened just as he had requested, and he rode home on his three-legged horse. When the king returned to his castle, his daughter went to meet him, and congratulated him for his victory. "I am not the one who earned the victory," he said, "but a strange knight who came to my aid with his army." The daughter wanted to hear who the strange knight was, but the king did not know, and said, "He pursued the enemy, and I did not see him again." She asked the gardener where his boy was, but he laughed and said, "He has just come home on his three-legged horse. The others have been making fun of him and shouting, 'Here comes our higgledy-hop back again.' They also asked him, 'Under what hedge have you been lying asleep all this time?' But he said, 'I did better than anyone else. Without me it would have gone badly.' And then they laughed at him all the more." The king said to his daughter, "I will proclaim a great festival. It shall last for three days, and you shall throw a golden apple. Perhaps the unknown knight will come." When the festival was announced, the youth went out into the woods and called Iron Hans. "What do you need?" he asked. "To catch the princess's golden apple." "It is as good as done," said Iron Hans. "And further, you shall have a suit of red armor and ride on a spirited chestnut horse." When the day came, the youth galloped up, took his place among the knights, and was recognized by no one. The princess came forward and threw a golden apple to the knights. He was the only one who caught it, and as soon as he had it, he galloped away. On the second day Iron Hans had outfitted him as a white knight, and had given him a white horse. Again he was the only one who caught the apple. Without lingering an instant, he galloped away with it. The king grew angry and said, "That is not allowed. He must appear before me and tell me his name." He gave the order that if the knight who caught the apple, were to go away again, they should pursue him, and if he would not come back willingly, they were to strike and stab at him. On the third day, he received from Iron Hans a suit of black armor and a black horse, and he caught the apple again. But when he was galloping away with it, the king's men pursued him, and one of them got so close to him that he wounded the youth's leg with the point of his sword. In spite of this he escaped from them, but his horse jumped so violently that his helmet fell from his head, and they could see that he had golden hair. They rode back and reported everything to the king. The next day the princess asked the gardener about his boy. "He is at work in the garden. The strange fellow has been at the festival too. He came home only yesterday evening. And furthermore, he showed my children three golden apples that he had won." The king had him summoned, and he appeared, again with his cap on his head. But the princess went up to him and took it off. His golden hair fell down over his shoulders, and he was so handsome that everyone was amazed. "Are you the knight who came to the festival every day, each time in a different color, and who caught the three golden apples?" asked the king. "Yes," he answered, "and here are the apples," taking them out of his pocket, and returning them to the king. "If you need more proof, you can see the wound that your men gave me when they were chasing me. But I am also the knight who helped you to your victory over your enemies." "If you can perform deeds like these then you are not a gardener's boy. Tell me, who is your father?" "My father is a powerful king, and I have as much gold as I might need." "I can see," said the king, "that I owe you thanks. Can I do anything for you?" "Yes," he answered. "You can indeed. Give me your daughter for my wife." The maiden laughed and said, "He does not care much for ceremony, but I already had seen from his golden hair that he was not a gardener's boy," and then she went and kissed him. His father and mother came to the wedding, and were filled with joy, for they had given up all hope of ever seeing their dear son again. While they sitting at the wedding feast, the music suddenly stopped, the doors opened, and a proud king came in with a great retinue. He walked up to the youth, embraced him, and said, "I am Iron Hans. I had been transformed into a wild man by a magic spell, but you have broken the spell. All the treasures that I possess shall belong to you." Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Der Eisenhans," Kinder und Hausmärchen gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , 7th edition, vol. 2 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 136, pp. 242-50 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2001. Link to this story in a single file: Iron Hans . Return to the table of contents . The Iron Man Germany There was a king who conducted a great hunt, and on this hunt his shooters captured a man in the shape of ordinary people, but made entirely of iron. The king was overjoyed with this marvel, and in front of his castle he had a cage made with high iron bars. He locked the iron man inside then ordered that on the penalty of death no one should release him. One morning not long afterward it happened that the young prince was playing ball in the courtyard. The iron man came up to the bars and played with a ball that when thrown to the ground bounced much higher than the prince's ball. Furthermore, it was much more beautiful, being made entirely of gold. The boy asked for the ball very politely. The iron man motioned for him to come closer to the bars, then said quietly, "Unlock the gate, and I'll give you the ball." The boy crept quietly up to the gate and opened it. Then the iron man jumped out, gave him the ball, and ran across the field into the woods. When the king discovered that the iron man had escaped he swore an oath that whoever had opened the gate should die. Then his dear little son came to him and admitted that he had released the iron man. The king was shocked that he had sworn an oath to kill his own son, but he would have to keep his word. He sent two huntsmen into the woods with his son, where they were to kill him. However, the huntsmen pitied the beautiful boy, and they set him free, telling him in God's name to run as far as the heaven is blue. Then they shot a wild pig, cut out its eyes and its heart, which they took to the king, telling him they were the eyes and the heart of his son. The boy wandered about the forest the entire day, and when evening came he sat down on a tree stump. Sobbing, he feared that wild animals would eat him come nightfall. Then suddenly the iron man appeared before him, stroked his hair kindly with his iron hand, and said, "Fear not, my boy. You helped me, and I shall help you as well. I shall command the animals in my forest to do you no harm. Tomorrow morning I shall lead you out of these woods to the castle of a mighty king. You are to play with the golden ball before the princess's window, and with time you shall become an even greater king than is your father." Then the boy lay down peacefully on the green moss and fell fast asleep. The golden stars glided quietly across the heaven in order not to awaken him. When the dear sun arose and smiled upon him, he jumped up. The iron man was already there, and together they walked through the woods. Leaving the forest, they came to a magnificent castle. The iron man showed the boy the princess's window, saying, "When the princess sees the golden ball she will want to have it. You must not give it to her until she allows you to sleep for one night in her bedroom. After you have done this, come to me again." And it happened just as the iron man had predicted. The boy had scarcely begun playing with the golden ball before the window when the princess came outside. She was a pretty little girl, and said, "Oh, that is a beautiful ball that you have! Give it to me and I'll do a favor for you." "What I want," said the boy, "is to sleep in your bedroom tonight." "I'll ask my father if I can allow that," said the princess, and ran back into the castle. She came back soon and said, "Father says that I can allow it, if you will behave yourself properly." Then they played with the ball the rest of the day, and in the evening they went into the maiden's bedroom. She lay down on her silken bed, but he lay down on the floor. However, because the floor was so hard, the girl said, "Wait; I'll give you a bed so you can be more comfortable." Then she gave him a bed, keeping one for herself. They said "Good night" and slept quietly until morning. In the morning the boy took leave and went back into the woods, where he told the iron man everything that had happened. He stayed with the iron man an entire year, and every day he grew larger and better looking. At the end of the year the iron man gave him a ball made of transparent crystal. When one threw it into the air and the sun shone through it, it looked like clear water. The iron man told him to return to the castle and to play with it before the princess's window. While he was thus playing with the ball the princess came to her window. She hardly recognized him, because he had grown so much. She was too shy to go to him and ask for the ball, so she asked her father to go to the handsome youth and request that he give the ball to her. However, the father thought, "What does this lost boy want at my castle?" He had the boy captured, gave the ball to his daughter, then sent the prince to the kitchen where for many weeks he had to do hard work as a kitchen boy, until finally he was able to escape. He ran back into the woods and complained to the iron man as to how badly things had gone for him. The iron man comforted him, saying, "Fear not; everything will be all right. A mighty army is advancing against the king. I shall give you a horse and armor. Thus outfitted you are to join the king's army." Then he led him to a hollow mountain wherein there were many thousands of horses and many thousands of battle outfits. With his iron hand he outfitted the youth with armor and weapons, and gave him good advice as well. With this the prince entered a great battle, where he proved himself to be the bravest of all the knights. Through him the battle was won, and he saved the king's life as well. But he too was wounded, and the king bound his wound with his own scarf, then ordered his servants to care for him. However, the prince rode away to the wild man in the woods, who was pleased that everything had gone so well. He gave him a ball, much more beautiful than the other two, and made of red ruby. With this, and dressed in his ordinary clothes, he returned to the princess's window. When she saw the ball she was inconsolable that she could not have it. Meanwhile the king had returned home with his army. The princess ran to him, kissed him repeatedly, then said, "Since you won the great battle and because I love you so much, I want to ask you for something, and you cannot say no." The king promised to do whatever she asked. "The handsome youth is here again," she said. "He has a ball of red ruby, and he'll give it to me if I give him what he wants. You must not do him any harm." However, the youth would not accept any gold or other precious things for the ball, insisting instead that he be allowed to sleep the coming night with the princess in her bedroom. The king agreed to this. However, when the two were asleep the king crept into the bedroom, intending to murder the prince. To his great surprise he saw that his own scarf was wrapped around the prince's arm. He recognized his rescuer, then awakened the two of them and asked if they wanted to become husband and wife. They happily agreed to this and were married the following morning. That evening they went together into the woods to the iron man. They told him of their happiness and asked him to move into the castle with them. However, he told them that he had to remain in his woods and look after his animals. He asked them to visit him often, which they faithfully did. Source (books.google.com): Emil Sommer, "Der eiserne Mann," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräche aus Sachsen und Thüringen , vol. 1 (Halle: Eduard Anton, 1846), pp. 86-91 . Source (Internet Archive): Emil Sommer, "Der eiserne Mann," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräche aus Sachsen und Thüringen , vol. 1 (Halle: Eduard Anton, 1846), pp. 86-91 . Sommer's source: "Oral, from Gutenberg." Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2017. Return to the table of contents . The King's Trophy Germany, Ludwig Bechstein On the outer wall of the Saint George Church at Mühlhausen one can still see numerous stone monuments that attest to the foundation of the city. Among these is one depicting an amazing legend. Ages ago there was a king in Thüringen. One day while hunting, his hounds jumped around a tree in a thicket and could not be held back. He had one of his servants climb up the tree trunk, which was hollow, to see what was inside causing his pack to bark. A small wild man was inside, and the king's men fetched him out. The king was delighted with this trophy and had him sit next to himself in the coach. He forthwith called an end to the hunt. He named the captured wild man Noah and confined him in a crypt. The king himself waited on him and cared for him. One time when the king had to be away, his son George was playing ball in the castle, and the ball fell down through a hole in the crypt. The little prince called down: "Wild man Noah, give me back my ball!" The wild man answered: "I cannot give you your ball. If I were to throw it out, it would fly so far that you would never find it. Instead, go into your father's chamber, fetch the key, and open the door for me. Then I will give you your ball." The prince fetched the key from his father's chamber, for without the key no one could open the crypt. He opened the crypt, and the wild man came out, gave him his ball, and said: "In my need you have helped me, and if you are ever in need just go into the woods and call for me, and I will help you as well." Soon afterward the king returned home, and his first step was to look after his trophy. How alarmed he was to discover that the crypt was empty, and he immediately suspected that it was his son who had freed the wild man. He summoned him and asked: "George, did you take the key, open the crypt, and let the wild man Noah out?" The little prince honestly confessed to what he had done. The king at once disowned his prince, for his trophy was dearer to him than anything else. The prince sadly left his father's house and wandered aimlessly about in poverty until finally he came upon a shepherd. The shepherd suspected at once that the lad was not from a lower class and took him in. He taught him what he needed to know to help with the herd. George the sheepherder came to know a beautiful girl, and as he was now coming of age, he asked her to marry him. At that time a terrible beast called a lindorm had taken over the region. It demanded a human sacrifice every year. According to ancient belief, this beast was a magical curse. If it did not receive its sacrifice immediately it roared like a thunderstorm, threatening to destroy everything in the land. The time came when the people were called together to draw lots determining who would be the lindorm's next sacrifice. Sheepherder George's bride-to-be drew the losing lot. He remembered what the wild man had promised him. He stepped forward and asked that the sacrifice be delayed, for he intended to kill the lindorm. He quickly ran into the woods and called on the wild man Noah for help and support. The wild man appeared before him and gave him a white horse and a sword, then told him to put on a white robe, mount the white horse, point his sword foreward, and charge against the monster. The monster would hungrily open wide its jaws, and George could penetrate its throat with his sword. And so it happened. Thus George's bride, as well as the entire land, were freed from the monster. The people cheered with joy, happiness ruled throughout the land, and George was dubbed a knight. Everyone now wanted to know more about George's origins. He confessed that he was the king's son and related how he had become a sheepherder. He was told that his father had died, so he could return home safely and assume rule over the kingdom. Thus a king's son became a sheepherder, the sheepherder became a knight, and the knight became a king. Now that George had taken over the kingdom, he traveled throughout the land familiarizing himself with his realm and seeking adventure. He came to a small settlement surrounding a mill. The community had no church. The young king, wanting to give thanks to God, had a church built in this settlement. The church still carries his name, George, as its founder. The builder of the church carved the entire history into a stone monument. And that is how the city of Mühlhausen had its beginning. Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Bechstein, "Des Königs Abenteuer, Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 444, pp. 376-77 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludwig Bechstein, "Des Königs Abenteuer, Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 444, pp. 376-77 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman. © 2019. This story combines a type 502 folktale with a Saint George legend . Link to photographs of the church St. Georgii, Mühausen/Türingen . Return to the table of contents . The Wild Man of the Marsh Denmark Once upon a time there lived a King of England who had in his domain a dismal, wild, and pathless swamp. No one would go near the place, for it was said that every living thing, whether man or beast, that ventured to set foot there would surely perish, and that instantly; and folks called it the Wild Marsh. Well, one day the king made up his mind to have this marsh, or swamp, thoroughly explored; so he gave orders for the place to be surrounded by his entire army, and for his soldiers then to pour down into the marsh from all sides. When they had got about halfway through, they came upon a gigantic wild man, lying asleep, and before he could awake they had bound him fast, hand and foot, and then they brought him to the king's castle. He was a strange fellow to look at -- in form like a man, only much, much bigger, and covered with hair from top to toe; and he had but one eye, and that was in the middle of his forehead. The king was very pleased with the capture he had made. He felt certain that the wild man possessed vast hidden treasures, and he longed to have some of them himself. But to all they said the wild man spake never a word in answer. So the king had him put in a big iron cage, which he placed in a tower built of huge blocks of granite. Every day food and drink were thrust through the iron bars of his cage, but the keys of the tower were in the king's own keeping. Now it so fell out that the king had to go away to the wars, to help another king in defending his land, for in those days there were many kings in England. The keys of the tower he gave into the queen's keeping, bidding her take good care of them, for he vowed a solemn vow that if any one, whosoever it might be, let the wild man escape, he should thereby forfeit his own life. So the queen promised she would never let the keys out of her keeping, day or night; and then the king set out. Now this king and queen had an only child, a pretty, clever little fellow of seven years. He was in the garden one day playing ball with a golden apple, and quite by accident he threw the apple so that it fell between the bars of the iron cage in the tower. The boy ran to the cage, and begged the wild man to throw the apple back to him. But the wild man said no, he should not have his apple again unless he came in and fetched it; and then he told him how to steal the keys of the tower from his royal mother. So the prince ran in to the queen, and laid his head in her lap, and said: "Oh, mother, there is something tickling my ear! Do see what it is!" Then the queen looked, and said: "No, there is nothing there." Meanwhile the boy had stolen the keys out of her pocket; and he ran away to the tower, and opened the outer door. "Now give me my golden apple," said he. "No, you must open the next door, too!" replied the wild man. The prince did so, and then asked again for his apple. But the wild man answered: "You must first open the innermost door." And when the prince had done this, he got back his golden apple. But at the same moment the wild man stepped out of his cage; and he gave the prince a little whistle, saying: "If ever you find yourself in trouble, just sound this whistle, and call me. I will come to your assistance." And with that the wild man ran off to the marsh. The prince grew hot with fright when he saw the wild man make off, for he knew what his father had vowed concerning any one who should set the captive free. Then he locked all the doors again, and, running back to the queen, he laid his head in her lap, and said: "Oh, there is something tickling my ear! Do see what it is!" So the queen looked. "Nonsense! there is nothing there," she said. But meanwhile the prince had managed to slip the keys back into his mother's pocket. Next day, when they went to feed the wild man, they found he had gone, and no one could conceive how he had got through the locked doors. The queen was dreadfully frightened, but she had her suspicions as to how it had happened. However, she said nothing, neither to her son nor to any one else, but waited quietly till the king should come home from the wars. The king was furious when he learned that the wild man was gone, and he said what he had sworn that he would hold to, and that the queen, who had had possession of the keys, must answer for what had happened; she must know who had let him out. But the queen said she had not done it, that she had never let any one have the keys, and that she knew nothing whatever about it. Then the king condemned her to pay the forfeit with her life, and she was led away to the place of execution. But now the prince stepped forward, and said that his mother was innocent; that he had stolen the keys out of her pocket, and slipped them in again; and that he had unlocked the doors of the wild man's cage in order to get back his golden apple. So the queen was set free. But now, according to the king's vow, her son must pay the forfeit with his life. His father, however, would not shed his blood, but commanded that he should be immediately conveyed to the wild marsh, and driven down into it, where he would certainly perish, and thus the king's oath would be kept. So the prince was led away to the wild marsh; and he was told that, supposing he made his escape, if he, on any pretext whatever, showed himself outside the marsh, his life would forthwith pay the forfeit. So there was nothing for him to do but to betake himself to the wild marsh, and to try to pick out the driest spots, and to beware of pools and swamps. For a while he continued to make his way through the marsh, which stretched along for many a mile on either side, thickly overgrown with underwood, reeds, and rushes. It was already getting toward evening when the prince was set down in the wild marsh, and by the time he had gone as far as he could find his way it was quite dark; so he set about climbing a tree, that he might remain there till daylight came again. Then he found that something he had about him had caught in a little twig of this tree, and when he looked to see what it might be he saw it was the whistle the wild man had given him. He had never given it a thought before, but now he set to and blew the best he could, and then he shouted at the top of his voice, "Wild man! Wild man!" At the same instant the wild man stood before him, looking at him in the most friendly manner out of the one eye that he had in the middle of his forehead. "Get up on my back," said he. And the boy was not slow to obey, clasping him round the neck with both legs, and holding on to his shaggy locks with both hands. So the wild man ran with him farther into the marsh; and then all at once down they sank, deep down below the earth, for it was there the wild man lived in a grand castle of his own. There the prince was served with a good meal, and a comfortable bed was given him, where he slept soundly all the night through. In the morning the wild man came to the prince, and said: "Here shalt thou live, and here shalt thou stay Till seven long years have passed away, and then by that time you will have learned how to make your own way in the world." Then he took the boy to the stables, and showed him all his horses, and some were brown and some were black and some were white. After that he led him round the outside of the castle. There were meadows and gardens; there were also a fencing court and a racecourse. Every day the prince took lessons in riding and racing, in fighting and fencing; he also learned to swim and to shoot, and how to handle lance and spear. Seven years had passed away thus, and the prince was now fourteen years old; but he might well have passed for eighteen, so tall and so strong, so straight and so slim was he, and handsome and graceful into the bargain. Then the wild man said to him: "Now you must dip your head in this stream." And he did so, and his hair became the colour of the purest gold. After that the wild man presented him with a suit of clothes, very plain and simple in make and material, and told him he must put them on, and then set out to seek his fortune through the wide world. That same evening the wild man took the prince upon his back, and he ran with him all through that night. The youth could not see whether they went over land or water; but they travelled fast, and had gone a very long way by the time the gray dawn broke. Then the wild man set him down, and bade him farewell. "There is a king's castle close by," said he. "You must go and take service there; take what ever you can get, whatever they offer you. Never speak of your home, nor where you come from; and so long as you remain in a lowly station, so long must you keep your hat upon your head, that none may get a glimpse of your golden hair. What else you have to do you will soon find out for yourself. But all that I possess, horses or armour or weapons, you can always obtain by wishing for them, and you can be rid of them again whenever you will. And you need never hesitate to wish." With that the wild man vanished, and the youth went his way to the king's castle, and asked if he might take service there. Yes, he might be the gardener's boy, and learn to dig and hoe, and plant and sow, and to water the royal gardens. He was very pleased at this, and went and presented himself to the head gardener. "Off with your hat when you speak to me," said the head gardener, who was very proud of his position. "I may not take off my hat, for I am bald headed," said the prince. "Ugh! what a misfortune!" cried the head gardener. "Well, I can't have you in my house; but you may sleep in the outhouse!" And the prince was quite content to do so. The gardener's apprentice paid great attention to his duties, and everyone marvelled to see the amount of work he could get through, and how everything prospered that he undertook. And this is how it happened. When he stuck his spade into the earth, he just wished that the piece of ground was all dug up, and that very instant it was all dug! When he stuck a stick into the ground, he just wished it might grow, and so it always came to pass that what he planted in the evening was full-grown by the following morning. The gardener soon perceived this, and he was very well pleased to have such an apprentice. Early one morning, after passing the night as usual in the outhouse, the prince came out and washed himself in the stream, and then he took off his hat, and combed his long golden locks. Now it so happened that the king's youngest daughter (he had three daughters, all young and fair to look upon) had risen very early that morning, and stood at her window, which looked out upon the garden. She saw something shining through the trees, and thought at first it was the sunrise. But on looking again she saw it was the under-gardener's long hair, that shone like the purest gold. She was greatly struck by this, for she had always noticed that on meeting her sisters or herself in the garden the youth had never once lifted his hat -- indeed, he declined to bare his head to royalty as resolutely as he had refused to take off his hat to the head gardener. From that hour she watched him narrowly, and she could not help thinking him the very handsomest serving-man she had ever seen, and she felt sure that he was not what he gave himself out to be. Both her sisters teased her for casting an eye of favour upon a poor bald-headed serving man, for she could not help looking at him when they met him. And once, when she was taking a noonday stroll in the garden with her father and her two sisters, and they came upon the gardener's boy lying asleep on a grassy bank, she even could not refrain from going up to him and lifting his cap. Her sisters laughed at her, and her father rated her soundly for having anything to do with a mere peasant; but she cared not a jot, for she had caught a glimpse of his golden hair. So time passed on. Then the king determined to marry his three daughters to the three most gallant knights who should win the three best prizes in a tournament. The tournament was to last three days, and whoever remained victor, and beat all the other knights out of the lists, he should receive a golden apple from the hand of that princess whose day it was, and he should be her betrothed husband. On the first day the hand of the eldest princess was to be contended for. A great many princes and knights were gathered together from the king's own land and from other lands. Then the gardener's boy went out into the wood, and wished for his brown horse out of the wild man's stables, with accoutrements and coat-of-mail of glittering steel. Springing into the saddle, he galloped off to the spot where the tournament was being held. It was a lance tournament, and they rode and they strove, and many a lance-thrust was given and parried, many a brave knight was thrown from his horse, and many another lost life or limb. But the steel-clad knight on the brown charger was victorious over all, and to him was given the princess's golden apple. Then he galloped off and vanished, none knew whither. But as he went he threw the golden apple to a knight in brave attire who had not entered the lists, having no desire to risk his dainty doublet. The following day they were to strive for the hand of the second princess, and there were no fewer combatants than there had been the day before, for princes and knights from many a land were desirous of winning the prize. Then the gardener's boy went out into the wood again, and he wished for his coal-black steed out of the wild man's stables, with coat-of-mail and accoutrements of shining silver. And he rode and he strove with the other knights till he had conquered them all, and so he won the second golden apple. He gave that to an earl's son, whom he had unhorsed, and then he rode away into the wood, and put on his everyday garments once more. The third day the youngest princess was to be fought for. She was the most beautiful of the three, and there was no less rivalry among the combatants than on the previous days. That day the gardener's boy wished for his milk-white steed out of the wild man's stables, and for a coat-of-mail and accoutrements of purest gold. Then he loosed his golden hair, so that it fell down over his shoulders, and galloped to the courtyard where the tournament was being held; and all who saw him thought he looked more like an angel than a mere man. And he rode and he strove so that none could withstand him. And so he received the golden apple from the hand of the youngest princess. But he did not give that away; he held it fast in his closed hand, and galloped away, none knew whither. However, he only rode as far as the wood, and wished himself back in his old clothes, with his golden hair hidden beneath his fur cap. And now those knights who had won the prizes on the three days were summoned to appear. And the duke's son, who had been so bravely apparelled, and the earl's son, who had been unhorsed, stepped forward with haughty mien, each carrying his golden apple. So they were betrothed each to his princess. But no knight in golden armour made his appearance; no one knew what had become of him. The two eldest princesses were delighted with their betrothed husbands, and they made great fun of their sister, whom "no one would have," they said. "But, after all, you have a lover too!" cried they. "There is your bald-headed gardener's boy; send for him." And they did send for him; and he came in his old clothes and wearing his fur cap, but in his hand was the princess's golden apple. Then the king came to him in haste, and said: "You found that in the courtyard; it does not belong to you." And the gardener's boy answered: "Nay, but I won it in the courtyard, and the princess belongs to me." Then the youngest princess went up to him, and gave him her hand, and said that he who had her golden apple was her true love. The king, however, considered this an absurd and shameful proceeding. He felt convinced that the golden knight had lost the apple, and was even now searching for it; that this was the reason why he had not come, but that he would come, and that would clear up the whole thing. The two elder princesses seemed to find it a most amusing joke to see their sister make herself thus ridiculous, and could not find ways enough to torment and make a mock of her and her peasant lover. But the youngest princess was quite clear in her own mind, for she had recognised in the golden knight the humble serving lad; so she remained calm and cheerful, and was not disturbed even when her father drove him back into the garden, whilst the others betook themselves to the banqueting hall, where the two elder princesses were forthwith betrothed. The day went on, but no golden knight made his appearance. The king was terribly put out, and the sisters taunted the youngest princess, saying: "He would neither win thee nor woo thee, so he threw the apple away and took himself off. But thou hast still thy bald-headed gardener's boy." "Aye, surely I have, and he is good enough for me," said she. When they left the dining hall, the youngest princess went down into the garden and sought out the gardener's boy, and as she came he saw her, and he lifted his cap, and his golden hair rolled down on to his shoulders. He kissed her hand, and he kissed her mouth, and he told her who he was: that, like herself, he was of royal birth, and that he would bring no shame upon her. He told her also that it was he who had won all three golden apples, but that he had given away the two first, as he did not wish to have either of the two elder princesses; he only wanted her whom he had now won, and who had been to him so loving and so true. Not many days hence, he said, they should give him the place of honour at the king's table. The following morning the two high-born lovers rode forth to the hunt, and the two eldest princesses, anxious to carry on their merry jests of yesterday, declared that the third lover must go too. So the gardener's boy was sent for, and they equipped him for the hunt in a style that these laughter-loving princesses deemed appropriate. They gave him a little gray donkey to ride, and, instead of a gun, they fetched a pitchfork from the cow house, and thus equipped he rode out of the courtyard with the two young noblemen, and the two princesses nearly killed themselves with laughter as they watched the party pass. When they had got a little distance from the king's castle they came to two crossroads -- to the right was a beautiful wood, to the left a wild marsh overgrown with brushwood. The two young nobles struck off to the right, but the gardener's boy turned his donkey to the left -- the road leading to the marsh. And when he had gone a little way he wished for his good cross bow from the wild man's castle, and then he wished he might see some hares and stags and foxes and wild boars, and he very soon had bagged as much game as his donkey could carry. So he went back to the place where the crossroads met. Towards evening the two noblemen came riding homewards with a crestfallen air; they had not killed so much as a hare. When they saw the donkey so laden with game, they begged the gardener's boy, with many soft words and civil speeches, to sell it to them. He was quite willing to do this, but they must give him their golden apples in exchange, or they should not have so much as a single hare. And they were obliged to agree to that. Then they shared the game between them, and rode proudly into the castle yard. But the gardener's boy came lumbering after them on his little gray donkey, and with his pitchfork on his shoulder. And this gave the princesses fresh food for laughter. Next day the two noblemen went hunting again, and again the gardener's boy had to go with them, riding his little gray donkey and carrying his pitchfork on his shoulder. The young nobles took the same road as yesterday, hoping for better luck this time, and the gardener's boy went to the marsh as he had done before. And the same thing happened again. In the evening, when the noblemen came to the place where the crossroads met, they were empty handed, whereas the gardener's boy had as much game as his donkey could carry. So they tried to bargain with him again to buy the game of him. But this time he would not sell it unless they each gave him a strip of their skins. "I will cut it off where it won't be seen," said he. And so, as they could make no easier bargain, and wished to be considered as skilful sportsmen as they were gallant knights, they consented to that arrangement. Then the gardener's boy drew from his pocket a rusty old knife, and he cut off a strip from the back of each of the young noblemen, who were all the time in a cold perspiration from fright. But for all that they came riding into the king's castle yard as proudly as ever, and thanks and compliments were showered upon them for their clever sportsmanship; whereas the gardener's boy came hobbling after them, leaning on his pitchfork and dragging the donkey by the reins. The next day there was to be a great banquet given in the king's castle in honour of the betrothal of the two princesses. But that same night came news of an invasion of the king's domains by a horde of sea robbers, who were ravaging the land with fire and sword. So all the king's soldiers set out to meet the enemy, and the two high-born lovers were forced to go too. Then the gardener's boy mounted his little gray donkey, shouldered his two-pronged pitchfork, and rode forth with the rest. The way led along by a great peat marsh, and when they came to a steep bank the two noblemen set upon the gardener's boy and rode him down, so that the donkey stuck fast in the bog; and the more the poor beast struggled to free himself, the deeper he sank into the mire. Then the gardener's boy begged the two noblemen to help him out; but they saw that he would be sure to sink to the bottom, so that no one would ever hear about their golden apples, or about their skin that had been stripped off; so they rode away and left him to sink into his miry grave. As soon as they were out of sight, the gardener's boy wished himself back on dry ground; then he wished for his milk-white steed and for his harness and coat-of-mail, all of purest gold, just as when he had ridden in the tournament for the hand of the youngest princess. And he rode on till he came to the battlefield. There things were going badly for the king's men. The enemy were pressing them hard, and a part of the royal army had already turned to fly, and the two grand lovers, now that their men were running away, were first and foremost in their eagerness to get away too. But the knight in golden armour dashed to the front, cutting his way through the enemy right and left, and roused the sinking courage of the king's soldiers. The fortune of the day turned once more, and the enemy, after the loss of half their numbers, turned and fled back to their ships. All agreed that to the golden knight was due the honour of the victory, and he was invited to return to the king's castle. And the duke's son and the earl's son came and greeted the prince, for they could see at a glance that he was a king's son; so they thanked him for his good services, and bade him beforehand right welcome to the royal castle. They told him they remembered seeing him at the tournament, and how he was going to be their brother-in-law, and of the talk his unaccountable absence during the last three days had given rise to. The youngest princess, whom he had won, was a charming girl, they said, though not so clever as her elder sisters; she was, in fact, somewhat simple, for she had contracted a sort of half engagement with a low-born, bald-headed gardener's boy, who had found the golden apple that the prince must have lost. But when once she saw him, all that nonsense would of course come to an end. More over, they believed that the boy was now lying at the bottom of the peat bog. The prince let them chatter without interruption as he rode with them to the Castle, where the king himself came out to receive him. The news of the battle had already reached him, and he had also been told that the golden knight who had won it was the same who, three days before, had won the youngest princess. And the king now led forth his youngest daughter by the hand, and betrothed her to the unknown prince. Then there was a splendid banquet given, where the golden prince was seated at the head of the table, exactly opposite the king, and every one showed him the deepest respect. During the feast he drew forth the golden apple he had received from his betrothed when he won her in the tournament, and at the same time also the golden apple he had played ball with in his father's castle yard, and upon which his name and crown were engraved; and he presented them both as a betrothal gift to his youthful bride. The king sat there expecting to see the two knights do the same; but they sat on, pretending not to take any notice. So, after a while, the golden prince drew forth another golden apple, and then again another, and gave them to his young bride, saying: "Like seeks like; these two shall also be thine." The king thought he recognised these apples; and when they were given to him to look at, he discovered the names of his two eldest daughters engraved on them, and so he knew they were the same golden apples he had given to the victors on the first and second days of the tournament. He now asked how the prince had come by them. Then the prince told the whole story -- how that he was no other than he whom they had called the low-born, bald-headed gardener's boy, that it was he who had won the three prizes in the tournament, and that he had given away the first two apples to the other two betrothed knights. Then he told them how the knights had sold the apples to him again for the game which he, and not they, had killed, and how at last they had been forced, each of them, to give him a strip of skin. When the king heard this he was furious, and declared that the two good-for-nothings should leave his castle directly, and that they might take their betrothed brides with them. And the princesses did go with them, for they did not care to stop at home any longer now. But the King of England's son was married to the youngest princess, and as long as the king lived he was to rule over half the kingdom, and when the king died he was to have the whole. And so they live there still, in great joy and splendour, he and his true-hearted queen. Source (books.google.com): Svend Grundtvig, Fairy Tales from Afar , translated from the Danish Popular Tales by Jane Mulley (New York: A. Wessels Company, 1902), pp. 122-40 . Mulley's source (books.google.com): Svend Grundtvig, "Vildmanden," Danske Folkeæventyr (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1876), no. 15, pp. 175-92 . Return to the table of contents . The Tsarevich and Dyad'ka Russia Once upon a time, in a certain kingdom, in a city of yore, there was a king who had a dwarf son. The tsarevich was fair to behold, and fair of heart. But his father was not good: he was always tortured with greedy thoughts, how he should derive greater profit from his country and extract heavier taxes. One day he saw an old peasant passing by with sable, marten, beaver, and fox skins; and he asked him: "Old man! whence do you come?" "Out of the village, father. I serve the wood-sprite with the iron hands, the cast-iron head, and the body of bronze." "How do you catch so many animals?" "The wood-sprite lays traps, and the animals are stupid and go into them." "Listen, old man; I will give you gold and wine. Show me where you put the traps." So the old man was persuaded, and he showed the king, who instantly had the wood-sprite arrested and confined in a narrow tower. And in all the wood-sprite's forests the king himself laid traps. The wood-sprite forester sat in his iron tower inside the royal garden, and looked out through the window. One day, the tsarevich, with his nurses and attendants and very many faithful servant-maids, went into the garden to play. He passed the door, and the wood-sprite cried out to him: "Tsarevich, if you will set me free, I will later on help you." "How shall I do this?" "Go to your mother and weep bitterly. Tell her: 'Please, dear Mother, scratch my head.' Lay your head on her lap. Wait for the proper instant, take the key of my tower out of her pocket, and set me free." Ivan Tsarevich did what the wood-sprite had told him, took the key; then he ran into the garden, made an arrow, put the arrow on a catapult, and shot it far away. And all the nurses and serving-maids ran off to find the arrow. Whilst they were all running after the arrow Ivan Tsarevich opened the iron tower and freed the wood-sprite. The wood-sprite escaped and destroyed all the king's traps. Now the king could not catch any more animals, and became angry, and attacked his wife for giving the key away and setting the wood-sprite free. He assembled all the boyars, generals, and senators to pronounce the queen's doom, whether she should have her head cut off, or should be merely banished. So the tsarevich was greatly grieved; he was sorry for his mother, and he acknowledged his guilt to his father. Then the king was very sorry, and didn't know what to do to his son. He asked all the boyars and generals, and said: "Is he to be hanged or to be put into a fortress?" "No, your majesty!" the boyars, and generals, and senators answered in one voice. "The scions of kings are not slain, and are not put in prison; they are sent out into the white world to meet whatever fate God may send them." So Ivan Tsarevich was sent out into the white world, to wander in the four directions, to suffer the midday winds and the stress of the winter and the blasts of the autumn; and was given only a birch-bark wallet and Dyad'ka, his servant. So the king's son set out with his servant into the open fields. They went far and wide over hill and dale. Their way may have been long, and it may have been short; and they at last reached a well. Then the tsarevich said to his servant, "Go and fetch me water." "I will not go!" said the servant. So they went further on, and they once more came to a well. "Go and fetch me water -- I feel thirsty," the tsarevich asked him a second time. "I will not go." Then they went on until they came to a third well. And the servant again would not fetch any water. And the tsarevich had to do it himself. When the tsarevich had gone down into the well the servant shut down the lid, and said: "You be my servant, and I will be the tsarevich; or I will never let you come out!" The tsarevich could not help himself, and was forced to give way; and signed the bond to his servant in his own blood. Then they changed clothes and rode on, and came to another land, where they went to the tsar's court, the servant-man first, and the king's son after. The servant-man sat as a guest with the tsar, ate and drank at his table. One day he said: "Mighty tsar, send my servant into the kitchen!" So they took the tsarevich as scullion, let him draw water and hew wood. But very soon the tsarevich was a far finer cook than all the royal chefs. Then the tsar noticed and began to like his young scullion, and gave him gold. So all the cooks became envious and sought some opportunity of getting rid of the tsarevich. One day he made a cake and put it into the oven, so the cooks put poison in and spread it over the cake. And the tsar sat at table, and the cake was taken up. When the tsar was going to take it, the cook came running up, and cried out: "Your majesty, do not eat it!" And he told all imaginable lies of Ivan Tsarevich. Then the king summoned his favourite hound and gave him a bit of the cake. The dog ate it and died on the spot. So the tsar summoned the prince and cried out to him in a thundering voice: "How dared you bake me a poisoned cake! You shall be instantly tortured to death!" "I know nothing about it; I had no idea of it, your majesty!" the tsarevich answered. "The other cooks were jealous of your rewarding me, and so they have deliberately contrived the plot." Then the tsar pardoned him, and he made him a horse-herd. One day, as the tsarevich was taking his drove to drink, he met the wood-sprite with the iron hands, the cast-iron head, and the body of bronze. "Good-day, tsarevich; come with me, visit me." "I am frightened that the horses will run away." "Fear nothing. Only come." His hut was quite near. The wood-sprite had three daughters, and he asked the eldest: "What will you give Ivan Tsarevich for saving me out of the iron tower?" "I will give him this tablecloth." With the tablecloth Ivan Tsarevich went back to his horses, which were all gathered together, turned it round and asked for any food that he liked, and he was served, and meat and drink appeared at once. Next day he was again driving his horses to the river, and the wood-sprite appeared once more. "Come into my hut!" So he went with him. And the wood-sprite asked his second daughter, "What will you give Ivan Tsarevich for saving me out of the iron tower?" "I will give him this mirror, in which he can see all he will." And on the third day the third daughter gave him a pipe, which he need only put to his lips, and music, and singers, and musicians would appear before him. And it was a merry life that Ivan Tsarevich now led. He had good food and good meat, knew whatever was going on, saw everything, and he had music all day long: no man was better. And the horses! They -- it was really wonderful -- were always well fed, well set up, and shapely. Now, the fair tsarevna had been noticing the horse-herd for a long time, for a very long time, for how could so fair a maiden overlook the beautiful boy? She wanted to know why the horses he kept were always so much shapelier and statelier than those which the other herds looked after. "I will one day go into his room," she said, "and see where the poor devil lives." As everyone knows, a woman's wish is soon her deed. So one day she went into his room, when Ivan Tsarevich was giving his horses drink. And there she saw the mirror, and looking into that she knew everything. She took the magical cloth, the mirror, and the pipe. Just about then there was a great disaster threatening the tsar. The seven-headed monster, Idolishche, was invading his land and demanding his daughter as his wife. "If you will not give her to me willy, I will take her nilly!" he said. And he got ready all his immense army, and the tsar fared ill. And he issued a decree throughout his land, summoned the boyars and knights together, and promised any who would slay the seven-headed monster half of his wealth and half his realm, and also his daughter as his wife. Then all the princes and knights and the boyars assembled together to fight the monster, and amongst them Dyad'ka. The horse-herd sat on a pony and rode behind. Then the wood-sprite came and met him, and said: "Where are you going, Ivan Tsarevich?" "To the war." "On this sorry nag you will not do much, and still less if you go in your present guise. Just come and visit me." He took him into his hut and gave him a glass of vodka. Then the king's son drank it. "Do you feel strong?" asked the wood-sprite. "If there were a log there fifty puds , I could throw it up and allow it to fall on my head without feeling the blow." So he was given a second glass of vodka. "How strong do you feel now?" "If there were a log here one hundred puds , I could throw it higher than the clouds on high." Then he was given a third glass of vodka. "How strong are you now?" "If there were a column stretching from heaven to earth, I should turn the entire universe round." So the wood-sprite took vodka out of another bottle and gave the king's son yet more drink, and his strength was increased sevenfold. They went in front of the house; and he whistled loud, and a black horse rose out of the earth, and the earth trembled under its hoofs. Out of its nostrils it breathed flames, columns of smoke rose from its ears, and as its hoofs struck the ground sparks arose. It ran up to the hut and fell on its knees. "There is a horse!" said the wood-sprite. And he gave Ivan Tsarevich a sword and a silken whip, So Ivan Tsarevich rode out on his black steed against the enemy. On the way he met his servant, who had climbed a birch tree and was trembling for fear. Ivan Tsarevich gave him a couple of blows with his whip, and started out against the hostile host. He slew many people with the sword, and yet more did his horse trample down. And he cut off the seven heads of the monster. Now Marfa Tsarevna was seeing all this, because she kept looking in the glass, and so learned all that was going on. After the battle she rode out to meet Ivan Tsarevich, and asked him: "How can I thank you?" "Give me a kiss, fair maiden!" The tsarevna was not ashamed, pressed him to her very heart, and kissed him so loud that the entire host heard it! Then the king's son struck his horse one blow and vanished. Then he returned to his room, and sat there as though nothing had happened, whilst his servant boasted that he had gone to the battle and slain the foe. So the tsar awarded him great honours, promised him his daughter, and set a great feast. But the tsarevna was not so stupid, and said she had a severe headache. What was the future son-in-law to do? "Father," he said to the tsar, "give me a ship, I will go and get drugs for my bride; and see that your herdsman comes with me, as I am so well accustomed to him." The tsar consented; gave him the ship and the herdsman. So they sailed away, may be far or near. Then the servant had a sack sewn, and the prince put into it, and cast him into the water. But the tsarevna saw the evil thing that had been done, through her magic mirror; and she quickly summoned her carriage and drove to the sea, and on the shore there the wood-sprite sat weaving a great net. "Wood-sprite, help me on my way, for Dyad'ka the servant has drowned the king's son!" "Here, maiden, look, the net is ready. Help me with your white hands." Then the tsarevna threw the net into the deep; fished the king's son up, took him home, and told her father the whole story. So they celebrated a merry wedding and held a great feast. In a tsar's palace mead has not to be brewed or any wine to be drawn; there is always enough ready. Then the servant in the meantime was buying all sorts of drugs, and came back. He came to the palace, was seized, but prayed for mercy. But he was too late, and he was shot in front of the castle gate. The wedding of the king's son was very jolly, and all the inns and all the beerhouses were opened for an entire week, for everybody, without any charge. I was there. I drank honey and mead, which came up to my moustache, but never entered my mouth. Source (books.google.com): Alexander Afanasyef, Russian Folk-Tales , translated by Leonard A. Magnus (New York: E. P. Dutton and Company, 1916), pp. 137-44 . Source (Internet Archive): Alexander Afanasyef, Russian Folk-Tales pp. 137-44 . The pioneering Russian folklorist's name is variously spelled in English, for example: Afanasyev, Afanasief, Afanasiev, or Afanas'ev. Return to the table of contents . Story of Bulat the Brave Companion Russia There was once upon a time a tsar named Chodor, who had an only son, Ivan Tsarevich. Chodor gave him in his youth various masters to teach him the different knightly exercises; and when Ivan was grown up, he begged leave of his father to travel in other countries, in order to see the world. Tsar Chodor consented, and bade him show his skill and valour in foreign lands, and bring renown on his father. Then Ivan Tsarevich went into the royal stables to choose a good steed; and he thought that if he could find one on whose back he could lay his hand, without the horse's going on his knees, it would be just the one to suit him. So he looked in all the stalls, but found no horse to his mind, and he went his way with a heavy heart. Then he took his crossbow and arrows and roved about in the open fields to drive away his sadness. As he was walking thus along, he saw high in the air a swan, and he drew his bow and shot; but he missed the swan, and his arrow vanished from his sight. Then Ivan was sad at losing a favourite arrow, and with tears in his eyes he sought for it the whole field over. At last he came to a little hill, and heard a man's voice calling to him: "Come hither, Ivan Tsarevich!" Ivan wondered to himself not a little at hearing a voice and seeing no one. But the voice called again; and Ivan went toward the spot whence it came, and remarked in the hill a little window, with an iron lattice; and at the window he saw a man, who beckoned to him with the hand. Ivan came up, and the man said to him: "Why are you so sad, my good lad, Ivan Tsarevich?" "How can I help grieving?" replied Ivan; "I have lost my favourite arrow, and can find it nowhere, and my sorrow is the greater because I can not discover a steed to please me." "That is no great matter to grieve for," said the man; "I will get you a good horse, and give you back your arrow since it flew down to me here; but what will you give me for it?" "Anything you ask," replied Ivan, "if you will give me what you promise." "Nay," said the man, "I want nothing more than that you will free me from this place." "And how and by whom were you caged up thus?" "Your father imprisoned me here," replied the man. "I was a famous robber, and was called Bulat the Brave Companion. He was enraged against me, and ordered me to be taken and imprisoned; and here I have been confined for three-and-thirty years." "Hark ye, Bulat, Brave Companion," said Ivan, "I cannot set you free without my father's consent; were he to hear of it he would be wroth." "Fear not," replied Bulat; "your father will hear nothing; for as soon as you set me at liberty I shall go into other lands and not live here." "Well then," said Ivan Tsarevich, "I consent, only on condition that you give me back my arrow and tell me where I can find a trusty steed." "Go into the open fields," said Bulat the Brave Companion, "and there you will see three green oaks; and, on the ground under these oaks, an iron door, with a copper ring. Under the door is a stable, in which stands a good steed, shut in by twelve iron doors with twelve steel locks. Heave up this door, strike off the twelve steel locks, and open the twelve doors; there you will find a horse; mount him and come to me; I will give you back your arrow, and then you will let me out of this prison." When Ivan Tsarevich heard this he went into the open fields, saw the three green oaks, and found the iron door with the copper ring. So he hove up the door, knocked off the twelve locks, and opened the twelve doors, and entered a stable, where he beheld a knightly steed and a suit of armour. Then Ivan Tsarevich laid his hand upon the horse, and the horse fell not upon his knees, but merely bent himself a little. And as soon as the horse saw a knight standing before him, he neighed loudly, and let Ivan saddle and bridle him. Ivan Tsarevich took the steed, the battle-axe, and sword, led the horse out of the stable, leaped into the Tcherkess saddle, and took the silken bridle in his white hand. Then Ivan wished to try his steed, and struck him on the flank: the horse chafed his bit, and rose from the ground, and away he went over the tall forests and under the flying clouds, left hill and dale beneath his feet, covered small streams with his tail, bounded over wide rivers and marshes. And so at last Ivan came to Bulat the Brave Companion, and said with a loud voice: "Now give me back my arrow, Bulat my brave fellow, and I will let you out of your cage." So Bulat instantly gave him back his arrow, and Ivan set him free. "I thank you, Ivan Tsarevich," said Bulat, "for giving me freedom. I will, in return, render you good service; whenever you are in any difficulty, and want me, only say: 'Where is my Bulat, the Brave Companion?' and I will instantly come to you and serve you faithfully in your need." So saying, Bulat cried with a loud voice: Sivka Burka! he! Fox of Spring! Appear! Like a grass blade, here Stand before me! Instantly a steed stood before Bulat the Brave, who crept into his ear, ate and drank his fill, and then crept out at the other ear; and he became such a handsome youth as no one can imagine, no pen can describe, nor story tell. Then Bulat mounted his horse and galloped off, exclaiming: "Farewell, then, for the present, Ivan Tsarevich!" Ivan now mounted his good steed and rode to his father, and with tears in his eyes, took leave of him; then, taking with him his squire, he rode forth into foreign lands. And after they had ridden for some time they came to a wood; the day was bright and hot, and Ivan Tsarevich grew thirsty. So they wandered all about the wood, seeking water, but could find none. At length they found a deep well, in which there was some water; and Ivan said to his squire: "Go down the well and fetch me up some water; I will hold you by a rope to prevent you being drowned." "Nay, Ivan Tsarevich," said the squire, "I am heavier than you, and you cannot hold me up; you had better descend, for I can support you." So Ivan followed his squire's advice, and let himself down into the well. And when Ivan had drunk enough, he told the squire to draw him up; but the squire answered: "Nay, I will not draw you out until you give me your word in writing that you are my servant and I am your master, and that my name is Ivan Tsarevich; if you refuse this I will drown you in the well." "My dear squire," cried Ivan, "do not drown me, but draw me up, and I will do all you desire." "No, I don't believe you," said the squire; "swear me an oath." So Ivan swore that he would be true. Thereupon the squire drew him out, and Ivan Tsarevich took a piece of paper, wrote the writing, and gave it to the squire. Then he took off his own cloak, and exchanged it for the squire's, and they went on their way. After some days they came to the kingdom of the Tsar Panthui. And when the Tsar heard of the arrival of Ivan Tsarevich he went out to meet him; and, greeting the false Tsarevich, he took him by the white hands, conducted him into his marble halls, seated him at his oaken table, and they feasted and made merry. Then Tsar Panthui asked the false tsarevich what had brought him to his kingdom, and he answered: "My gracious lord, I am come to sue for the hand of your daughter, the fair Princess Tseria." "Gladly will I give you my daughter to wife," replied Panthui. In the course of their talk the false Ivan said to the Tsar Panthui: "Let my servant, I pray, do the lowest work in the kitchen, for he has greatly annoyed me on my journey." So the Tsar immediately commanded Ivan to be set to do the most menial work, whilst his squire feasted and made merry with the Tsar. A few days after this an army was seen marching against the kingdom of Panthui, threatening to lay it waste and take the Tsar prisoner. Thereupon Panthui called the false Ivan and said: "My dear future son-in-law, a hostile army has come to attack my dominions: drive the enemy back and I will give you my daughter, but only on this condition." And the squire answered; "Well and good, I will do as you desire; but only by night -- in the day I have no luck in fight." As soon as night drew on and everyone in the castle had gone to rest, the false Ivan went out into the open court, called to him the true Tsarevich, and said: "Ivan Tsarevich, be not angry with me for taking your place; forget it all, do me one service, and drive the enemy from this kingdom." And Ivan answered: "Go and lie down to sleep all shall be accomplished." Then the squire went and lay down to sleep, and Ivan cried with a loud voice: "Where is my Bulat, the Brave Companion?" In an instant Bulat stood before him, and asked: "What service do you require now? 'What is your need? Tell me forthwith." Then Ivan Tsarevich told him his need, and Bulat desired him to saddle his horse and put on his armour; and then cried with a loud voice: Sivka Burka! he! Fox of Spring! Appear! Like a grass blade, here Stand before me! The horse bounded till the ground shook; from his ears rose a column of steam, and from his nostrils issued flames; but when he came up to Bulat he stood still. Then Bulat the Brave Companion mounted the horse, and Ivan Tsarevich seated himself upon his steed, and so they rode forth from the courtyard. Meanwhile the Princess Tseria, who was not yet asleep, was sitting at the window, and overheard all that Ivan Tsarevich had spoken with the squire and Bulat the Brave Companion. As soon as they reached the hostile army, Bulat said to Ivan: "Fall thou upon the enemy on the right, I will attack them on the left." And so they began to mow down this mighty army with the sword, and to trample them down with their horses' hoofs; and in an hour's time they had stretched on the earth a hundred thousand men. Then the hostile King fled with the small remains of his army back into his own kingdom, and Ivan Tsarevich returned with Bulat the Brave Companion to the castle of the Tsar Panthui, unsaddled his steed, led him into the stable, and gave him white wheat to eat. After that he took leave of Bulat the Brave Companion, went back into the kitchen, and lay down to sleep. Early the next morning the Tsar went out on to his balcony, and looked forth over the country where the hostile army lay; and when he saw that it was all cut down and destroyed, he called to him the false Ivan, and thanked him for having saved his kingdom; he rewarded him with a rich present and promised soon to give him his daughter to wife. After a fortnight the same Tsar marched again with a fresh army and besieged the city. And the Tsar Panthui in terror called again upon the false Ivan and said: "My dear friend, Ivan Tsarevich, save me once more from the enemy, and drive them from my kingdom, and I will immediately give you my daughter to wife." And so it all fell out again exactly as before, and the enemy were quite driven away by Ivan and Bulat the Brave. The hostile king, however, soon returned to attack Tsar Panthui a third time, and over and over again he was driven back, until at last he was himself killed. Then Ivan and Bulat the Brave Companion went back, unsaddled their steeds, and put them into the stable. Thereupon Bulat took leave of Ivan Tsarevich, and said: "You will never see me more." With this he mounted his horse and rode forth; and Ivan went into the kitchen and lay down to sleep. Early the next morning the Tsar went again on to his balcony, and looked forth over the country where the hostile army had been; and when he saw that it was all destroyed, he sent for his future son-in-law and said: "Now I will give you my daughter to wife." Then all the preparations were made for the wedding; and a few days after, the squire married the fair Princess Tseria; and when they had returned from church, and were sitting at table, Ivan Tsarevich begged the head cook to let him go into the banquet hall and see his master and his bride seated at the table. So the cook consented, and gave him a change of dress. When Ivan entered the royal hall he stationed himself behind the other guests and gazed at his squire and the fair Tseria. But the princess espied Ivan, and recognised him instantly; then she jumped up from the table, took him by the hand, led him to the Tsar, and said: "This is the true bridegroom and the saviour of your kingdom, and not yon man who was betrothed to me." Then the Tsar Panthui asked his daughter what it all meant, and begged her to explain the mystery. And when the Princess Tsaria had related to him all that had passed, Ivan Tsarevich was placed at the table beside her, and his squire was shot at the gate for his treacherous conduct. Ivan married the Princess, and returned with her to his father's kingdom. Tsar Chodor placed the crown upon his head, and Ivan mounted the throne, and ruled over the kingdom. Source (Wikimedia): Robert Steele, The Russian Garland of Fairy Tales: Being Russian Folk Legends Translated from a Collection of Chap-Books Made in Moscow (New York: Robert M. McBride and Company, 1916), pp. 131-41 . Source (Internet Archive): Robert Steele, The Russian Garland of Fairy Tales: Being Russian Folk Legends Translated from a Collection of Chap-Books Made in Moscow (New York: Robert M. McBride and Company, 1916), pp. 131-41 . Return to the table of contents . The Hairy Man Hungary Somewhere or other, but I don't know where, there lived a king who owned two remarkably fine fields of rape, but every night two of the rape heaps were burnt down in one of the fields. The king was extremely angry at this, and sent out soldiers to catch whoever had set fire to the ricks; but it was all of no use -- not a soul could they see. Then he offered nine hundred crowns to anyone who caught the evildoer, and at the same time ordered that whoever did not keep proper watch over the fields should be killed; but though there were a great many people, none seemed able to protect the fields. The king had already put ninety-nine people to death, when a little swineherd came to him who had two dogs; one was called "Psst," and the other "Hush"; and the boy told the king that he would watch over the ricks. When it grew dark he climbed up on the top of the fourth rick, from where he could see the whole field. About eleven o'clock he thought he saw someone going to a rack and putting a light to it. "Just you wait," thought he, and called out to his dogs: "Hi! Psst, Hush, catch him!" But Psst and Hush had not waited for orders, and in five minutes the man was caught. Next morning he was brought bound before the king, who was so pleased with the boy that he gave him a thousand crowns at once. The prisoner was all covered with hair, almost like an animal; and altogether he was so curious to look at that the king locked him up in a strong room and sent out letters of invitation to all the other kings and princes asking them to come and see this wonder. That was all very well; but the king had a little boy of ten years old who went to look at the hairy man also, and the man begged so hard to be set free that the boy took pity on him. He stole the key of the strong room from his mother and opened the door. Then he took the key back, but the hairy man escaped and went off into the world. Then the kings and princes began to arrive one after another, and all were most anxious to see the hairy man; but he was gone! The king nearly burst with rage and with the shame he felt. He questioned his wife sharply, and told her that if she could not find and bring back the hairy man he would put her in a hut made of rushes and burn her there. The queen declared she had had nothing to do with the matter; if her son had happened to take the key it had not been with her knowledge. So they fetched the little prince and asked him all sorts of questions, and at last he owned that he had let the hairy man out. The king ordered his servants to take the boy into the forest and to kill him there, and to bring back part of his liver and lungs. There was grief all over the palace when the king's command was known, for he was a great favourite. But there was no help for it, and they took the boy out into the forest. But the man was sorry for him, and shot a dog and carried pieces of his lungs and liver to the king, who was satisfied, and did not trouble himself any more. The prince wandered about in the forest and lived as best he could for five years. One day he came upon a poor little cottage in which was an old man. They began to talk, and the prince told his story and sad fate. Then they recognised each other, for the old fellow was no other than the hairy man whom the prince had set free, and who had lived ever since, in the forest. The prince stayed here for two years; then he wished to go further. The old man begged him hard to stay, but he would not, so his hairy friend gave him a golden apple out of which came a horse with a golden mane, and a golden staff with which to guide the horse. The old man also gave him a silver apple out of which came the most beautiful hussars and a silver staff; and a copper apple from which he could draw as many foot soldiers as ever he wished, and a copper staff. He made the prince swear solemnly to take the greatest care of these presents, and then he let him go. The boy wandered on and on till he came to a large town. Here he took service in the king's palace, and as no one troubled themselves about him he lived quietly on. One day news was brought to the king that he must go out to war. He was horribly frightened for he had a very small army, but he had to go all the same. When they had all left, the prince said to the housekeeper: "Give me leave to go to the next village -- I owe a small bill there, and I want to go and pay it"; and as there was nothing to be done in the palace the housekeeper gave him leave. When he got beyond the town he took out his golden apple, and when the horse sprang out he swung himself into the saddle. Then he took the silver and the copper apples, and with all these fine soldiers he joined the king's army. The king saw them approach with fear in his heart, for he did not know if it might not be an enemy; but the prince rode up, and bowed low before him. "I bring your majesty reinforcements," said he. The king was delighted, and all dread of his enemy at once disappeared. The princesses were there too, and they were very friendly with the prince and begged him to get into their carriage so as to talk to them. But he declined, and remained on horseback, as he did not know at what moment the battle might begin; and whilst they were all talking together the youngest princess, who was also the loveliest, took off her ring, and her sister tore her handkerchief in two pieces, and they gave these gifts to the prince. Suddenly the enemy came in sight. The king asked whether his army or the prince's should lead the way; but the prince set off first and with his hussars he fought so bravely that only two of the enemy were left alive, and these two were only spared to act as messengers. The king was overjoyed and so were his daughters at this brilliant victory. As they drove home they begged the prince to join them, but he would not come, and galloped off with his hussars. When he got near the town he packed his soldiers and his fine horse all carefully into the apple again, and then strolled into the town. On his return to the palace he was well scolded by the housekeeper for staying away so long. Well, the whole matter might have ended there; but it so happened that the younger princess had fallen in love with the prince, as he had with her. And as he had no jewels with him, he gave her the copper apple and staff. One day, as the princesses were talking with their father, the younger one asked him whether it might not have been their servant who had helped him so much. The king was quite angry at the idea; but, to satisfy her, he ordered the servant's room to be searched. And there, to everyone's surprise, they found the golden ring and the half of the handkerchief. When these were brought to the king he sent for the prince at once and asked if it had been he who had come to their rescue. "Yes, your majesty, it was I," answered the prince. "But where did you get your army?" "If you wish to see it, I can show it you outside the city walls." And so he did; but first he asked for the copper apple from the younger princess, and when all the soldiers were drawn up there were such numbers that there was barely room for them. The king gave him his daughter and kingdom as a reward for his aid, and when he heard that the prince was himself a king's son his joy knew no bounds. The prince packed all his soldiers carefully up once more, and they went back into the town. Not long after there was a grand wedding; perhaps they may all be alive still, but I don't know. Source (books.google.com): Andrew Lang, The Crimson Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1903), pp. 22-28 . Source (Internet Archive): Andrew Lang, The Crimson Fairy Book (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1903), pp. 22-28 . Return to the table of contents . One Good Turn Deserves Another Serbia It happened once upon a time, many years ago, that a certain king went into his forest to hunt, when instead of the usual game he caught a wild man. This wild man the king had taken to his castle, and locked up, for safety, in a dungeon. This done, he put out a proclamation that whosoever should dare to set the wild man free should be put to death. As luck would have it, the dungeon where the creature was confined was just below the sleeping room of the king's youngest son. Now the wild man cried and groaned incessantly to be set free, and these unceasing lamentations at length so moved the young prince that one night he went down and opened the dungeon door, and let out the prisoner. Next morning the king and all the courtiers and servants were exceedingly astonished to hear no longer the usual sounds of wailing from the dungeon, and the king, suspecting something amiss, went down himself to see what had become of his captive. When he found the den empty he flew into a great passion, and demanded fiercely who had presumed to disobey his commands and let out the wild man. All the courtiers were so terrified at the sight of the king's angry countenance, that not one of them dared speak, not even to assert their innocence. However, the young prince, the king's son, went forward at last and confessed that the pitiful crying of the poor creature had so disturbed him day and night, that at length he himself had opened the door. When the king heard this, it was his turn to be sorry, for he found himself compelled to put his own son to death or give his own proclamation the lie. However, some of his old counselors, seeing how greatly the king was perplexed and troubled, came and assured his majesty that the proclamation would in reality be carried out if the prince, instead of being put to death, was simply banished from the kingdom forever. The king was very glad to find this way of getting out of the dilemma, and so ordered his son to leave the country, and never come back to it. At the same time he gave him many letters of recommendation to the king of a very distant kingdom, and directed one of the court servants to go with the young prince to wait upon him. Then the unhappy young prince and his servant started on their long journey. After traveling some time, the young prince became very thirsty, and, seeing a well not far off, went up to it to drink. However, there happened to be no bucket at the well, nor anything in which to draw water, though the well was pretty full. Seeing this, the young prince said to his servant, "Hold me fast by the heels, and let me down into the pit that I may drink." So saying, he bent over the well, and the servant let him down as he was directed. When the prince had quenched his thirst, and wished to be pulled back, the servant refused, saying, "Now I can let you fall into the pit in a moment, and I shall do so unless you consent at once to change clothes and places with me. I will be the prince henceforth, and you shall be my servant." The king's son, seeing that he had foolishly placed himself in the power of the servant, promised readily everything his servant asked, and begged only to be drawn up. But the faithless servant, without noticing his master's prayers, said roughly, "You must make a solemn oath that you will not speak a word to anyone about the change we are going to make." Of course, since the prince could not help himself, he took the oath at once, and then the servant drew him up, and they changed clothes. Then the wicked servant dressed himself in his master's fine clothes, mounted his master's horse, and rode forward on the journey, whilst the unfortunate prince, disguised in her servant's dress, walked beside him. In this way they went on until they came to the court of the king to which the exiled son had been recommended by his father. Faithful to his promise, the unfortunate prince saw his false servant received at the court with great honors as the son of a great king, whilst he himself all unnoticed, stood in the waiting room with the servants, and was treated by them with all familiarity as their equal. After having some time enjoyed to his heart's content the hospitalities the king lavished upon him, the false servant began to be afraid that his master's patience might be wearied out soon under all the indignities to which he was exposed, and that one day he might be tempted to forget his oath and proclaim himself in his true character. Filled with these misgivings, the wicked man thought over all possible ways by which he could do away with his betrayed master without any danger to himself. One day, he thought he had found out a way to do this, and took the first opportunity to carry out his cruel plan. Now you must know that the king at whose court this unhappy prince and the false servant were staying, kept in his gardens a great number of wild beasts fastened up in large cages. One morning, as the seeming prince was walking in these gardens with the king, he said suddenly, "Your majesty has a large number of very fine wild beasts, and I admire them very much. I think, however, it is a pity that you keep them always fastened up, and spend so much money over their food. Why not send them under a keeper to find their own food in the forest? I dare say your majesty would be very glad if I recommended a man to you who could take them out in the morning and bring them back safely at night?" The king asked, "Do you really think, prince, that you can find me such a man?" "Of course, I can," replied the cruel man unhesitatingly. "Such a man is now in your majesty's court. I mean my own servant. Only call him and threaten that you will have his head cut off if he does not do it, and compel him to accept the task. I dare say he will try to excuse himself, and say the thing is impossible, but only threaten him with the loss of his head whether he refuses or fails. For my part, I am quite willing your majesty should have him put to death, if he disobeys." When the king heard this, he summoned the disguised prince before him, and said, "I hear that you can do wonders, that you are able to drive wild beasts out like cattle to find their own food in the forest, and bring them back safely at night into their cages. Therefore, I order you this morning to drive all my bears into the forest, and to bring them back again in the evening. If you don't do this, your head will pay for it; so beware!" The unlucky prince answered, "I am not able to do this thing, so your majesty had better cut off my head at once." But the king would not listen to him, only saying, "We will wait until evening; then I shall surely have your head cut off unless you bring back all my bears safely to their cages." Now nothing was left for the poor prince to do but open the cage doors and try his luck in driving the bears to the forest. The moment he opened the doors all the bears rushed out wildly, and disappeared quickly among the trees. The prince followed them sadly into the forest, and sat down on a fallen tree to think over his hard fortunes. As he sat thus, he began to weep bitterly, for he saw no better prospect before him than to lose his head at night. As he sat thus crying, a creature in form like a man, but covered all over with thick hair, came out of a neighboring thicket, and asked him what he was crying for. Then the prince told him all that had happened to him, and that as all the bears had run away he expected to be beheaded at night when he returned without them. Hearing this, the wild man gave him a little bell, and said kindly, "Don't be afraid! Only take care of this bell, and when you wish the bears to return, just ring it gently, and they will all come back and follow you quietly into their cages." And having said this he went away. When the sun began to go down, the prince rang the little bell gently, and, to his great joy, all the bears came dancing awkwardly around him, and let him lead them back to the gardens, following him like a flock of sheep, whilst he, pleased with his success, took out a flute and played little airs as he walked before them. In this way he was able to fasten them up again in their dens without the least trouble. Everyone at the court was astonished at this, and the false servant more than all the others, though he concealed his surprise, and said to the king, "Your majesty sees now that I told you the truth. I am quite sure the man can manage the wolves just as well as the bears, if you only threaten him as before." Thereupon, the next morning the king called the poor prince, and ordered him to lead out the wolves to find their food in the forest and to bring them back to their cages at night. "Unless you do this," said his majesty as before, "you will lose your head." The prince pleaded vainly the impossibility of his doing such a thing; but the king would not hear him, only saying, "You may as well try, for whether you refuse or fail, you will certainly lose your head." So the prince was obliged to open the cages of the wolves, and the moment he did this the wild animals sprang past him into the thickets just as the bears had done, and he, following them slowly, went and sat down to bewail his ill luck. Whilst he sat thus weeping, the wild man came out of the wood and asked him, just as he had done the day before, what he was crying for. The prince told him, whereupon the creature gave him another little bell, and said, "When you want the wolves to come back, just ring this bell, and they will all come and follow you." Having said this he went back into the wood, and left the prince alone. Just before it grew dark, the prince rang his bell, and to his great joy all the wolves came rushing up to him from all quarters of the forest, and followed him quietly back to their cages. Seeing this, the false servant advised the king to send out the birds also, and to threaten the disguised prince with the loss of his head if he failed to bring them also back in the evening. Accordingly the next morning the king ordered the prince to let out all the wild doves, and to bring them all safely to their different cages before night set in. The instant the poor young man opened the cage doors the wild doves rose like a cloud into the air, and vanished over the tops of the trees. So the prince went into the forest and sat down again on the fallen tree. As he sat there, thinking how hopeless a task he had now before him he could not help crying aloud and bewailing all his past misfortunes and present miserable fate. Hardly had he begun to lament, however, before the same wild man came from the bushes near him and asked what fresh trouble had befallen him. Then the prince told him. Thereupon the wild man gave him a third bell, saying, "When you wish the wild doves to return to their cages you have only to ring this little bell." And so it indeed happened, for the moment the prince began ringing softly, all the doves came flying about him, and he walked back to the palace gardens and shut them up in their different cages without the least trouble. Now, happily for the prince, the king had just at this time much more important business on his hands than finding his wild beasts and birds in food without paying for it. No less a matter, in fact, began to occupy him than finding a suitable husband for his daughter. For this purpose he sent out a proclamation that he would hold races during three days, and would reward the victor of each day with a golden apple. Whosoever should succeed in winning all three apples should have the young princess for his wife. Now this princess was far more beautiful than any other princess in the world, and an exceedingly great number of knights prepared to try and win her. This, the poor prince, in his servant's dress, watched with great dismay; for he had fallen deeply in love with the fair daughter of the king. So he puzzled himself day and night with plans how he, too, could try his luck in the great race. At last he determined to go into the forest and ask the wild man to help him. When the wild man heard the prince calling, he came out of the thicket, and listened to all he had to say about the matter. Seeing how much the prince was interested in the young princess, who was to be the prize of the victor, the wild man brought out some handsome clothes and a fine horse, and gave them to the prince, saying, "When you start in the race, do not urge your horse too much, but at the end, when you are getting near the goal, spur him, and then you will be sure to win. Don't forget, however, to bring me the golden apple as soon as you receive it." All came to pass just as the wild man had said. The prince won the apples the two first days; but as he disappeared as soon as he received them from the king, no one in the court recognized him in his fine attire, and all wondered greatly who the stranger knight might be. As for the king, he was more perplexed and curious than all the rest, and determined not to let the stranger escape so easily the third day. So he ordered a deep, wide ditch to be dug at the end of the race course, and a high wall built beyond it, thinking thus to stop the victor and find out who he was. The prince, hearing of the king's orders, and guessing the reason of them, went once again into the forest to ask help from his wild friend. The wild man, thereupon, brought out to him a still more beautiful racer, and a suit of splendid clothes; and, thus prepared, the prince took his place as before among the knights who were going to try for the prize. He won the gold apple this third time also; but, to the surprise of the king and the whole court, who hoped now to find out who he was, he made his horse spring lightly over the ditch, and the great wall, and vanished again in the forest. The king tried every way to find out who had won the three golden apples, but all in vain. At last, one day, the princess, walking in the gardens of the palace, met the prince disguised in his servant's dress, and saw the shining of the three apples which he carried in his bosom. Thereupon she ran at once to her father, and told him what she had seen, and the king, wondering very much, called the servant before him. Now the prince thought it time to put an end to all his troubles, and therefore told the king frankly all his misfortunes. He related how he had offended the king, his father, and been exiled for life; how his false servant had betrayed him; and how the wild man he had set free had come to help him out of the fearful snares the wicked servant had spread for him. After hearing all this, the king very gladly gave him the princess for wife, and ordered the false servant to be put to death immediately. As for the prince, he lived with his beautiful princess very happily for many years after this, and when the king, his father-in-law, died, he left to them both the kingdom. Source (books.google.com): Csedomille Mijatovies, Serbian Folk-Lore: Popular Tales , edited, with an introduction by W. Denton. (London: W. Isbister and Company, 1874.), pp. 189-99 . Source (Internet Archive): Csedomille Mijatovies, Serbian Folk-Lore: Popular Tales , edited, with an introduction by W. Denton. (London: W. Isbister and Company, 1874.), pp. 189-99 . Return to the table of contents . The Wild Man Greece Once upon a time there was a king and a queen, and they had an only son. This king was always sorrowful because he foresaw that, as he had neither soldiers nor money, if any other king were at any time to declare war against him, he would take away his kingdom from him. This worm continually gnawed him, and so his lips never smiled; and every day he walked out into the country to dispel the gloom which was in his heart. One day as he was out walking, a monk met him on the road, and, seeing the king so moody, he asked him, "Sir King, what is the matter that thou art so sad? Always moody is your majesty!" "Eh, my good monk," says the king to him, " Every stick has its own smoke, you know. I am moody because one day I shall be undone; they will take from me all my towns, because I have no soldiers." "Oh! Is that why thou art sorrowful, my king? I will tell thee what to do. In a certain place there is a wild man whom all the world fears for his strength. Collect thy soldiers, and send them to seize him; and when thou possessest such a wild man, no king can menace thee." Then the king was somewhat heartened and said, "My good monk, I will give thee whatever thou may'st desire, if only this is accomplished and the wild man brought to me, as thou sayest." And when he returns to the palace, he calls immediately his twelve councillors and tells them what the monk had said to him. The twelve, when they heard his words, rejoiced on the one hand, but looked grave on the other, for how was it possible to bring that wild man? So they said to the king, "O Sir King, thou sayest that in a certain place away in the wilderness is to be found a wild man; but we must see if it is possible to bring him hither. We see no easier way than that he who told thee of this man should himself bring him." The next day, accordingly, very early in the morning, the king gets up and goes to seek the monk; and when he had arrived at the same spot, the monk again presented himself, and said, "Eh, what hast thou done, my king?" Then the king replies, "Alas, my good monk, I have done nothing. For I told my twelve, and they said to me that no other could bring him save he who had given me the tidings." "Very well, Sir King, if thou biddest me, I will bring him to thee. Give me forty thousand soldiers; make me a chain of copper weighing a hundred thousand kantars , and an iron cage each bar of which must be like a column; and then I will bring him to thee, otherwise nothing can be done." "I will gladly make for thee," said the king, "anything thou askest me." And he takes him, and brings him to the palace, and at once gives orders to the Gypsies to collect all the copper in the city for the chain. In a week all is ready. And the monk takes the soldiers, the chain and the cage, and goes for the wild man; and after two or three months' time they arrive at the place where he was to be found. The soldiers immediately set to work and encircled the mountain with the chain, and took every precaution against his escaping at any spot. They did in fact everything the monk told them. And about noontide they felt the mountain tremble, and from that they understood that the wild man was coming forth. They look this way and that, but see nothing; but when they look upwards, they see -- my eyes! -- they see coming down from the summit the wild man, a sight which made them tremble. But the monk encouraged them. "Ah, my pallikars , let us seize the monster! Bring hither the chain!" So then they took a little courage, and began to shout and drag the chain closer, and so approach him. But, as if he had wings, the wild man fled away, and so they could not entangle him. Not to make a long story of it, six months passed, and they had not yet caught him. But about the end of the sixth month the wild man became one day at last weary; and they entangle him in the chain, and bind him, and put him in the cage. Then the monk says to them, "Now, my boys, you may rest, for we have him safe!" They take him and bring him to the king, and put the cage in the courtyard of the palace. You should have seen the king when they brought him! He made great rejoicings, and embraced the monk, and kissed him tenderly, and said to him, "What gift dost thou desire in return for the favour thou hast done me?" "I want nothing," he replied, "but thy love." "No," said the king to him, "am I not able to reward thee?" And he took and gave him many royal gifts, and the monk bade him adieu, and departed. Let us return to the king. Sorrow and care had departed from him since the day on which they brought him the wild man, and he leapt for joy. In a short time, however, his grief returned, and you will see how. Two weeks had not passed when one day the little prince was standing on the steps of the palace, playing with a golden apple. As he played, it slipped from his fingers, and rolled, and rolled, until it got inside the cage where was the wild man, and he picked it up. The boy runs to the cage and asks for his apple. And then, for the first time, the wild man speaks, and says to the prince, "If thou wilt take the key and open the door of the cage that I may take the air a little who have been so long imprisoned, then I will give thee thy golden apple." The prince, like the child that he was, goes and takes the key from the guard-house without anyone seeing him, and opens the door; the wild man gives him back the apple, and then gives him a kick, and -- if you see him, so do I! In a short time the king comes, and as soon as he enters the courtyard, he goes to look at the wild man, as was his custom, for he was his consolation. And when he saw that the cage was open, and the wild man gone, he lost his senses, and drew his sword to kill the guard who kept the key. Just as he was going to cut off his head, this man cried, "Sir King, you kill me unjustly, I have done no wrong! My prince came and took the keys without my knowledge, and went and opened the cage, and the wild man ran away." "Is that true?" asked the king, frantically. "It is true, Affendi! " So he left him and ran to kill his son. But the queen, when she heard of it, seized the prince in her arms, and cried, and besought the king -- "In God's name, my king, do not such a thing as to kill your only son in your anger," she cried, and much more. Then all the people in the palace fell at his feet, and "Forbear, my king! Forbear!" they cried. "Slay not our prince!" And amid the cries and tears, here from the queen, and there from the rest, the boy found means to escape. The king called and sought him, but his nurse had hidden him. After a while, when the king had become a little calmer, he made an oath, and said, "Let him not appear before me, nor let mine eyes see him, for I will not leave life in him so long as I remember how much I spent to bring hither that wild man, and he to let him go! I cannot stomach it! Let the boy go so far away that I cannot hear of him, for he knows what will otherwise happen to him." The poor queen, when she heard such hard words from the mouth of his father, seeks to make her son flee quickly, and goes at once to order him a pair of iron shoes, and puts in each one fifty gold pieces, takes whatever else is necessary for him, and carries them to the place where they had hidden him, and says to him, "My boy, as fate has overshadowed thee, and thou hast done such a deed; and as thy father has made a solemn oath to kill thee if ever again he set eyes on thee, thou must change thy name and thy dress, and go to live in a foreign land until we can see what turn things will take. And one thing only I beg of thee, that in whatever place thou bidest, thou wilt learn letters, because for that purpose I have put in thy shoes a hundred pieces of gold." And then she takes and strips him of his royal garments, and puts on him rustic clothes, gives him all that is necessary, and speeds him with her prayers and her blessing. Let us now leave the king and the queen to their sorrow, and follow the poor prince, who took to the hills without knowing whither he went. He journeys one week, he journeys two, and in about a month's time he comes upon a swineherd who was tending a thousand pigs. "Good day, swineherd!" said he to him. "Well met, my lad, and what art thou seeking here?" "My fortune," replied the prince. "I am a poor boy, and I have come out to find work so that I may earn my own living and help my parents." "Ah, is that it? Eh, what sayest thou? Will thy bones hold good to look after these swine?" "Bravo!" replies the prince. "They will hold good." "Then stay with me, for I am only fifteen days from the end of my time; and come with me in the evening to my master, and I will tell him that I am going away -- for I am weary of this trade, and you can take my place." When God brought the evening, the pair of them took the pigs to the fold, where they found the master. When he saw the youth, he asked the herd, "What is the matter that thou hast brought this lad here with thee?" "Did I not tell thee that when my time was up I should go away? And thou saidst that I could not go unless I brought another in my stead? Well, then, I have brought him!" "Very well," he replied, "let the fifteen days pass, and I will pay thee and thou mayst go about thy business. Only during these fifteen days thou must take him with thee and teach him where and when to go with the pigs, lest perchance he take them to some strange place, and we lose them." But the youth soon found his way into the hearts of his master and mistress. For whenever he went to the house he did not sit with crossed hands, but took at once the broom and swept, lighted the fire, and amused the children until one cried " Tourou! Tourou! " and the other " Niá! Niá! " and he did all the work of the house. In fifteen days he became a better herd than the first. And he brought good luck with him, too. For from the time that the other herd had left, the pigs were bursting with fat, not one got lost, not one fell lame, but they were just like young lions; and the master loved the boy from his heart, for, from the time he had come into the house, everything had prospered. And so well did he love him that he told him he would make him his son-in-law. But the prince remembered his mother's words and how she had told him to go on with his studies, and not to become a mere shepherd. So one evening when he returned home, he pretended to be very melancholy. His master, the apple of whose eye he was, observed his sadness and said, "What ails thee that I see thee sad? If thou hast lost a pig, and art anxious, never mind! It matters not so that thou art well." "How shall I tell you, Affendi? It is not that, but I am melancholy because I must soon leave you. For I have received a letter saying that my mother is dying, and now I must go and receive her blessing." "Stay where thou art, my boy. Who knows if thou wilt find her living?" "No, Affendi , you will give me leave to go and see my mother?" "My boy, if thy longing is so great, thou art free to go; I will not detain thee." And with these wiles he deceived his master, who would not have otherwise allowed him to depart. So again he takes to the road, and tramps, and tramps, and after a time he comes to a town. As he was passing along a street he saw a shoemaker's shop, and stopped before the door. The master, seeing him, asked, "What dost thou want, my boy?" "What do I want? I am a poor lad, and want to learn a trade in order to live, and assist my family," as he had said to the herd. His reply was uttered in such a plaintive tone that the master had pity on him, and said, "Eh, wouldst thou become a shoemaker?" "Oh, that God may dispose thee to such an act of charity!" "Come in then, my boy, for thou art the lucky fellow." And when he was come in, he saw a man polishing a pair of shoes. He seized the brush, and in a moment he had turned them into looking-glasses, while all in the shop wondered at his cleverness. The master then sent him to his house with a jar of water, and when he was come there -- not to repeat it all over again -- he did as he had done with his first master. And everybody was pleased with him, and he was even more beloved than he had been at the swineherd's house. When two or three months had passed, and he saw how fond they were of him, he said one day to the shoemaker, "Master, I would ask you a favour!" "Ask two, my boy," was the reply, "what is thy wish?" "When, Master, I left home, I had learnt a little, but now I have nearly forgotten all I knew; and I shall remain half blind, for it is well said that ' they who are learned have four eyes. '" Perhaps you will say, 'There is no need for thee to study, learn the trade!' and you will be right, Master. But my mother told me that, whatever trade I might learn, it would be necessary for me to have some schooling. And now I pray you, if possible, to find me a teacher, that I may do lessons but two hours a day, and the rest of the time I will work at my trade." "Very good, my dear boy," was the reply. As good luck would have it, his master knew a clever schoolmaster who was one of his customers. And the boy's good luck brought this man past the shop at the very moment they were talking. So the master called, "Schoolmaster! Schoolmaster! Come in! You will do me the favour to give lessons to this youth two hours a day, and I shall be much obliged to you." "If anyone else had asked me, Mástro Ghiorghi " -- for this was the shoemaker's name -- "I should have said 'No'; but I cannot say that to Mástro Ghiorghi. Let him come at noon to my house, and I will examine him, and then I will do my best with him for the two hours, and it shall be as if he studied all day." So at noon, as the schoolmaster had said, the prince goes to his house and asks him how much he must pay him for his lessons. "Bre, my dear boy," he replies, "I see that thou art poor; what can I ask from thee?" "But tell me though, for I can raise the money somehow and pay you." "What shall I say? My trouble may be worth some thirty or forty piastres. But I don't want to gain anything by thee -- give me whatever thou conveniently canst." Then the boy took off his shoe, and took out of it the fifty sequins and gave them to the schoolmaster, who, when he saw them, smiled -- for, as they say, " What is given to Christ is received back again " -- and he said, "Never mind about the money, my boy, if thou pleasest me, I also will content thee." The disguised prince then made the schoolmaster do his best; and in a short time he had finished his studies, and became a lamp of learning. And afterwards he hired another schoolmaster to whom he gave the other fifty sequins, to teach him mathematics; and at the same time he learned to make shoes well. At last the master wanted to make him a bridegroom -- and, in short, he played him the same trick as he had played his former master. And again he takes to the hills and runs and runs, until he meets with a herd who was tending a thousand goats. "Good day, my goatherd!" "Welcome, my boy!" And after they had exchanged a few words the goatherd goes away, and leaves him in charge of the goats. And the goats again, as formerly the pigs, prospered; none ever fell lame, or got lost out of his hand, and his master was delighted with him. One day, as he was driving the goats home to the fold, one she-goat strayed away from the rest, and as he was very unwilling to lose her, he followed after. She crossed one hill ridge, and stopped, and then another, and stopped, and the youth ran after her to catch her. Well, what are you expecting? She crossed seven ridges, and finally stopped content; and when the youth approached her, there appeared before him the wild man who, when he had embraced and kissed him, exclaimed, "My prince, for my sake thou hast suffered this adversity, and art become a shepherd and a shoemaker! But I have been ever near thee, that evil might not befall thee; and now I will make thee the greatest king upon earth! It was I who today enticed away the goat, that I might show myself to thee, and put an end to thy misfortunes. So sit thee down and rest thyself." "No," replied the prince, "I cannot. I must first take back the goat to my master, and then, if thou desire it, I will return, but now I cannot." Go, then, and come back quickly!" So he takes the goat, and goes back, and finds the rest all together, and leads them to his master, and tells him that he cannot remain, as he has received tidings from his parents who bid him come, for they are in trouble. And so he arose and went away to meet the wild man. And when he was come again to the same ridge the wild man appeared before him, and took off his old clothes, and dressed him in royal cloth of gold. He then showed the prince a cave filled with sequins, and said to him, "Seest thou all that? -- For thee have I kept it." Then he took him to another place where was a marble slab with an inscription upon it. And when the wild man had read aloud the inscription he removed the slab, and said to the prince, "Now thou wilt descend three hundred steps, and when thou art at the bottom thou wilt see forty chambers, and in each one of them a Nereid. When thou hast entered the first chamber, the first Nereid will appear before thee, and her first words will be to ask thee to marry her. Thou must reply, 'With all my heart, that is what I am come for!' and she will be pleased, and will bestow on thee a gift; and so thou must deceive them all, and when thou hast gained the forty gifts, escape and come back to me." So the prince descended the three hundred steps, and when he came to the first chamber as the wild man had said, the first Nereid immediately appeared, and asked him, "What seekest thou? Wilt thou marry me?" "Certainly, my lady," he replied. "It is for that I have come." Then she said, "May'st thou shine like the sun!" Then he goes to the next, and she says to him, "May'st thou become a philosopher!" In a word, they endowed him with forty gifts. Then he fled from them, remounted the three hundred steps, and returned to the wild man, who, when he saw him, said, "Well done! Now we are all right, you only lack a beautiful wife. In the nearest city is a beautiful princess who sets a task, and the task is this: She has a ring which is hung on the roof of the tower, and whoso is able to leap up and seize the ring, may marry her; but if he fails she cuts off his head. And already many princes and kings' sons have decorated the tower with their heads, and but one is wanting. So now let us go and fulfill this condition; and if perchance thou art afraid of the leap, do but jump upwards and I will give the ring into thine hand, and we will win the princess. And give no heed to the people who, when they see such a youth as thou art, will say, 'For God's sake, leap not! Lose not so unjustly thy beautiful young life!' but do as I have told thee." Then he presented the prince with a mare all golden from head to foot, and with trappings of diamonds -- a wonder to behold; and she was so swift that she went like the wind. They mounted her, and, as soon as you could wink your eye, they found themselves outside that city, when the wild man disappeared, and the prince was left alone. The people stared and knew not which to admire more, the mare or the prince. When the princess saw such a handsome youth, she lost her senses; and all prayed God that the prince might win, and marry the princess; and on the other hand they pitied his youth, and begged him not to attempt the task. The prince, however, heeded them not, but thought of what the wild man had said to him. And he hastened to the tower, all the crowd following him, weeping and crying, "The poor prince! Ah, the poor, dear prince!" When he arrived at the tower, and saw how high it was, his courage failed; but he was ashamed to show it, and said within himself, "Come, aid me with thy prayers, my mother!" And he took a leap, and found the ring in his hand. Then was their lamentation changed into laughter and joy! And the king decreed that the wedding should take place that very evening. But the wild man presently came and said to the prince, "Do not be married this evening, but betrothed only, for thy father has been dead six months, and another has come forward to claim the kingdom. On the morrow thou must set out, for there is no time to be lost." So the prince told the king that he had such and such business on hand. Then he took the ring which he had won, and gave his own to the princess; and when they had said farewell to each other, he went away. Mounting his mare, he was soon in his native country. But when he alighted at the palace gate and asked for his mother, the servants told him that since the death of the king of blessed memory, the queen had covered herself with seven black veils, and would see no man. "And so," they added, "we cannot tell you where she is." (For how should they know, poor things, after so many years, that he was the prince?) Then he begged them to let him go in because he had a secret to tell the queen, which would do her good to learn. So earnestly did he plead with them that at last they relented, and went to tell the queen. And when the prince was led to the door of his mother's chamber, he rushed in and cried, "Queen! I am thy son!" But his mother, without seeing him at all, replied, "Go, good youth, and good luck go with you! They drive me mad every hour with their news of my son! -- 'Your boy is found, and tomorrow he will be seen on the road!'" "Am I not, mother mine, the prince, whose father of blessed memory sent the monk to find the wild man; and one day I was playing with the golden apple, and it fell into the cage, and I took the key and opened it, and the wild man escaped?" "Those are things that have happened, my boy; and thou hast heard, and repeatest them." "Am I not he whom thou didst embrace and didst save from my father, and didst send to a foreign land, because my father had made an oath to kill me?" "Those are things that have happened, my boy; and thou hast learnt, and repeatest them." "Am I not that prince into whose shoes thou didst put a hundred sequins that I might finish my studies?" When the queen heard these words, she cast off her black coverings, and threw herself on his neck, saying, "Thou art my son! O live, my light! Thou hast come back safely! Thou art my consolation!" and much besides. When it was known in the town that the real prince had come back, the people ran to meet him, and made great rejoicings; and the prince had no concern save for the grief of his mother, who was still sorrowing for the king. After a few days the queen consented to go with him to fetch his bride, who, until he returned, was wasting like a candle, for she thought he did not love her. But when she heard that the prince had arrived with his mother, she was like to burst with joy. And the king ran, and the twelve ran, and small and great ran to welcome the prince, and led them to the palace. In due time they crowned the young couple with the wedding crowns, and again there was staring and wondering! When the wedding ceremonies and the rejoicings at last came to an end, the prince took his mother and the princess, bade adieu to his father-in-law, and returned to his own kingdom. When they arrived, the wild man appeared, and told the prince to give him fifty camels to bring away the treasure from the cave. And he loaded them with treasure, brought them back to the palace, and remained there himself. And the prince at last began to enjoy his life. But, look you, a time comes when the other kings learn that he has wealth and gear, and they envy him; and seven kings and seven princes come against him, and soldiers without number, to fight against him, and to take from him his towns, and his treasures, and his wife. When the prince heard this, he, too, began to prepare for war; but what could he do against so many soldiers? And so his heart quaked with the fear of losing his kingdom. Then the wild man said to him, "Thou hast me, and yet thou art afraid! And not only with regard to this matter, but whatever may happen, let it not even make thine ear sweat! For so long as the wild man lives, thou needest neither raise soldiers, nor do anything but amuse thy sweet one." So the prince took courage, and troubled himself no more as to whether he was at war or not. And when his good wild man knew that the enemy had come quite close to the borders of his kingdom, he arose and went and fell upon them, first on this hand and then on the other, till he had destroyed them all. Then he took the seven kings and the seven princes, and bound them, and brought them before the prince, and said, "Here are thine enemies, do with them as thou wilt, my king!" Then they began to weep, and to beg the prince to spare their lives, and they would pay him tribute every year. Then the prince had pity on them, and said, "Be off then, I give you your lives! But truly ye shall, each one of you, pay me so much tribute every year." Then he released them, and they fell down and did homage to him as their overlord, and each one went about his business. And so the prince became, as the wild man had promised, the greatest king in the world, and feared no one. And so he lived happily, and more than happily. And we more happily still! Source (Internet Archive): Lucy M. J. Garnett, Greek Wonder Tales (London: Adam and Charles Black, 1913), pp. 18-42 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman"s folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised August 21, 2023. Will-o'-the-Wisps Will-o'-the-Wisp Jack-o'-Lantern ignis fatuus (foolish fire) legends about fiery fairies translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2009-2021 Will-o'-the-Wisp is the most common English designation for a family of fairy-beings characterized by their fiery appearance and their tendency to lead nighttime wayfarers astray. The term wisp refers to a twist of straw, used as a torch. Other names for these apparitions include Hobby-Lantern, Jack-o'-Lantern, Jenny-Burnt-Tale, Kitty-Candlestick, Peg-a-Lantern, and many more. Contents The Ignisfatus (England). Jack o' Lantern (Ireland). The Will-o'-the-Wisp (Scotland). Lantern Jack (Wales). The Ellylldan (Wales). The Origin of the Jack-o'-Lantern (Wales). The Jack o' Lantern (Denmark). Will-o-the-Wisps (Netherlands). Jack o' Lanterns Baptized (Netherlands). The Will-o'-the-Wisps (Estonia). The Will-o'-the-Wisp (Germany / Poland). The Cursed Land Surveyors (Germany). The Will-o'-the-Wisp (Germany). Will-o'-the-Wisps with Long Legs (Germany). Will-o'-the-Wisps Banned with a Curse (Germany.) The Heerwisch (Germany. Godorf: The Will-o'-the-Wisp (Germany). Links to additional texts and illustrations . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Ignisfatus England The Ignisfatus, or exhalation termed "Will-with-a-Whisp," or "Jack-with-a-Lanthorn," which is sometimes seen in churchyards, or marshy and fenny places in summer and autumn, was considered by many old inhabitants in this neighbourhood, when the author was in his infancy, to be a kind of device of the evil spirit to draw human beings from the road they were pursuing into some frightful abyss of misery; and there leave them without any hope of regaining the enjoyment of happiness in the land of the living. Source (books.google.com): Richard Parry, The History of Kington (Kington: Charles Humphreys, 1845), pp. 205-206 . Return to the table of contents . Jack o' Lantern Ireland There's a sort of a light on the sea sometimes; some call it a "Jack o' Lantern" and some say it is sent by them to mislead them. Source: Lady Gregory, Visions and Beliefs in the West of Ireland , with two essays and notes by W. B. Yeats, series 1 (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1920), p. 9 . Lady Gregory's source: "A Galway Bay Lobster-Seller." Return to the table of contents . The Will-o'-the-Wisp Scotland The will o' the wisp (called in Gaelic Teine biorach = sharp fire) is said to be of quite modern appearance, at least in South Uist. It was first seen, it is said, in 1812, and is the haunting spirit of a young girl from Benbecula, who frequented the machair , or sandy plain beside the sea, in search of the galium verum , used in the dyeing of the local cloth or tweed. Her sin was that of seeking to get an undue share of a product which should have been equally divided for the common good, and which has at all times to be husbanded as one of the plants which bind the sandy soil together where it has been redeemed from the sea. There is, however, another story as to the origin of the jack o' lantern. The haunting spirit is that of a blacksmith, who could get no admittance even into hell. He was very cold, and begged for a single ember to warm himself, and at last one was given him, and he has gone shivering about with it ever since. A special interest of this story is that it tells against the common Hebridean tradition of a cold hell, a tradition one soon learns to accept in South Uist, the land of cold mist and sweeping winds, and damp, and drafts, and rain, where even the nether regions with a fire in them have a suggestion of comfort. Hell is therefore discouragingly known as "the place of the wind of the cold passages, or the wind of the cold channels." Source: A. Goodrich-Freer, "More Folklore from the Hebrides," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, and Custom , vol. 13 (London: David Nutt, 1902), pp. 43-44 . Return to the table of contents . Lantern Jack Wales This is one of the apparitions of the night, and one of the most mischievous and tricky of the ghostly family. What form or colour he has we know not, as no one has ever clearly seen him; his lantern has been seen, and he has been heard splitting his sides with laughter at his own tricks, and the perplexity of those whom he might have led astray; and people say that his laugh was not unlike the loud sudden neighing of a horse. His light was seen on dark nights like a lighted lantern on the sheep-paths on the hillsides. If he happened to be far off, no one was deceived, as his ungainly movements betrayed him as "Lantern Jack in search of his sheep," and as the saying goes: An ignis fatuus Deceives not many of us. The time when he generally succeeded with his mischief was when he found someone all alone travelling a path on open fields. He would begin by appearing as a small speck of fire, of a clear blue flame, which he moved before the wayfarer along the middle of the path until his attention had been secured; then the flame would gradually grow until its brightness would completely blind him, after which the traveller was entirely at Jack's mercy, and he would lead him where he pleased. Stories are related of men who have been led miles out of their way in this manner, especially young men going to see their sweethearts on dark winter nights. Source: (books.google.com): D. E. Jenkins, Bedd Gelert: Its Facts, Fairies, and Folk-Lore (Portmadoc: Llewelyn Jenkins, 1899), pp. 82-83 . Source: (Internet Archive): D. E. Jenkins, Bedd Gelert: Its Facts, Fairies, and Folk-Lore (Portmadoc: Llewelyn Jenkins, 1899), pp. 82-83 . Return to the table of contents . The Ellylldan Wales The Ellylldan is a species of elf exactly corresponding to the English will-o'-wisp.... Like all goblins of this class, the Ellylldan was, of course, seen dancing about in marshy grounds, into which it led the belated wanderer; but, as a distinguished resident in Wales has wittily said, the poor elf "is now starved to death, and his breath is taken from him; his light is quenched for ever by the improving farmer, who has drained the bog; and, instead of the rank decaying vegetation of the autumn, where bitterns and snipes delighted to secrete themselves, crops of corn and potatoes are grown."... Pwca, or Pooka, is but another name for the Ellylldan, as our Puck is another name for the will-o'-wisp; but in both cases the shorter term has a more poetic flavor and a wider latitude.... The most familiar form of the Pwca story is one which I have encountered in several localities, varying so little in its details that each account would be interchangeable with another by the alteration of local names. This form presents a peasant who is returning home from his work, or from a fair, when he sees a light traveling before him. Looking closer he perceives that it is carried by a dusky little figure, holding a lantern or candle at arm's length over its head. He follows it for several miles, and suddenly finds himself on the brink of a frightful precipice. From far down below, there rises to his ears the sound of a foaming torrent. At the same moment the little goblin with the lantern springs across the chasm, alighting on the opposite side; raises the light again high over its head, utters a loud and malicious laugh, blows out its candle, and disappears up the opposite hill, leaving the awestruck peasant to get home as best he can. Source: Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), pp. 18-24 . Some scholars believe that Shakespeare drew inspiration from the Welsh fairy featured here for his Puck in A Midsummer Night's Dream. Return to the table of contents . The Origin of the Jack-o'-Lantern Wales A popular legend giving the origin of the jack-o'-lantern in Wales deals with the idea of a stupid devil: A long time ago there lived on the hills of Arfon an old man of the name of Sion Dafydd, who used to converse much with one of the children of the bottomless pit. One morning Sion was on his way to Llanfair-Fechan, carrying a flail on his shoulder, for he had corn there, when whom should he meet but his old friend from the pit, with a bag on his back, and in it two little devils like himself. After conversing for some time they began to quarrel, and presently were in the midst of a terrible fight. Sion fell to basting the devils with his flail, until the bag containing the two little ones went all to pieces, and the two tumbling out, fled for their lives to Rhiwgyfylchi, which village is considered to this day a very wicked place from this fact. Sion then went his way rejoicing, and did not for a long time encounter his adversary. Eventually, however, they met, and this time Sion had his gun on his shoulder. "What's that long thing you're carrying?" inquired the devil. "That's my pipe," said Sion. Then the devil asked, "Shall I have a whiff out of it?" "You shall," was Sion's reply, and he placed the mouth of his gun in the devil's throat and drew the trigger. Well; that was the loudest report from a gun that was ever heard on this earth. "Ach! - tw! - tw!" exclaimed the smoker, "your pipe is very foul," and he disappeared in a flame. After a lapse of time, Sion met him again in the guise of a gentleman, but the Welshman knew it was the tempter. This time he made a bargain for which he was ever afterwards sorry, i.e., he sold himself to the devil for a sum down, but with the understanding that whenever he could cling to something the devil should not then control him. One day when Sion was busily gardening, the evil one snatched him away into the air without warning, and Sion was about giving up all hopes of again returning to earth, when he thought to himself, "I'll ask the devil one last favor." The stupid devil listened. "All I want is an apple," said Sion, "to moisten my lips a bit down below; let me go to the top of my apple tree, and I'll pick one." "Is that all?" quoth the diawl, and consented. Of course Sion laid hold of the apple tree, and hung on. The devil had to leave him there. But the old reprobate was too wicked for heaven, and the devil having failed to take him to the other place, he was turned into a fairy, and is now the jack-o'- lantern. Source: Wirt Sikes, British Goblins: Welsh Folk-Lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends, and Traditions (London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington, 1880), pp. 204-205 . The episode of the man tricking an ogre (here the devil) into putting a gun into his mouth is classified as a type 1157 folktale. The motif of a mortal selling his soul to the devil is epitomized in the Faust legends . Return to the table of contents . The Jack o' Lantern Denmark Jack o' lanterns are the spirits of unrighteous men, which by a false glimmer seek to mislead the traveler, and to decoy him into bogs and moors. The best safeguard against them, when they appear, is to turn one's cap inside out. When any one sees a Jack o' lantern, let him take care not to point at him, for he will come if pointed at. It is also said that if any one calls him, he will come and light him who called; but then let him be very cautious. Near Skovby on the isle of Falster there are many Jack o' lanterns. The peasants say they are the souls of land-measurers who in their lifetime had perpetrated injustice in their measurements, and therefore run up Skovby bakke at midnight, which they measure with red hot iron rods, crying, "Here is the clear and right boundary! from here to there!" Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), p. 211 . Return to the table of contents . Will-o-the-Wisps Netherlands Late one evening a man was walking across a field, returning to Gandshoven from Molenbeek. Suddenly three will-o'-the-wisps came running toward him. Because this good man was accustomed to baptizing such, in order to redeem all three, he said, "I baptize you all in the name of the father and the son and the holy ghost." But then it did not go well for him, for in the same instant he saw that he was surrounded by more than a thousand will-o'-the-wisps, all wanting to be baptized. He baptized unceasingly, but ever more of them approached him, and this did not end until the cock crowed. Thus the man had to spend the entire night in the field. Source: Wolf, Johann Wilhelm. Niederländische Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1843), no. 521, pp. 617-17 . Return to the table of contents . Jack o' Lanterns Baptized Netherlands Jack o' Lanterns are, as tradition tells us, the souls of unbaptized children. Because these souls cannot enter heaven, they take their abode in forests, and in dark and desert places, where they mourn over their hard lot. If at night they get sight of any person, they run up to him, and then hasten on before him, to show him the way to some water, that he may baptize them therewith. And that no one should neglect to do, because the poor beings must remain without the gates of paradise until some one takes pity on them. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology, Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 3 (London: Edward Lumley, 1852), p. 220 . Thorpe's source: Johann Wilhelm Wolf, "Irrwische getauft," Niederländische Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1843), no. 262, p. 352 . Return to the table of contents . The Will-o'-the-Wisps Estonia One winter evening a peasant was driving home from the town of Viljandi. While crossing the Parika Moor he noticed that a small blue flame was burning a few steps from the side of the road. The peasant knew to not take such things lightly so he whipped his horse, wanting to quickly pass by the place. The horse refused to advance a single step forwards. It reared up as though it were standing before a ditch. The peasant was now in grave danger. He sat there with his hair standing on end, shivering in fear. What could he do? He climbed down from the sled to see what was the matter. There was no ditch crossing the route, but rather an open pit. Now what? The peasant would have driven around the pit, but he discovered deep water on both sides. Looking around, he saw that the blue light had flamed up as large as a pitch torch. Suddenly a second and a third fire rose up, and then many, many fires were dancing across the moor. "Father, son, and holy ghost! What is happening here tonight?" he called out. Hardly had he said these words when his horse jumped ahead as though it had been stuck with a needle. The peasant was barely able to jump back onto the sled, and away he sped in a furious galop. It is fortunate that the peasant was able to utter the name of God just in time. Source (books.google.com): Harry Jannsen, "Die Irrlichter," Märchen und Sagen des estnischen Volkes , vol. 2 (Riga: A. Kymmel; Leipzig: C. F. Fleischer, 1888), no. 48, p. 145 . Return to the table of contents . The Will-o'-the-Wisp Germany / Poland The will-o'-the-wisp is a mischievous gnome who leads people astray at nighttime or in the fog, causing them to loose their way and end up in a swamp. He does this foremost with inquisitive people who purposely follow him. The best way to avoid him or to render him harmless is to stay away from the footpaths where he has power, and always to keep one foot in a wagon rut. He helps some people who have lost their way by leading them home, if they speak to him kindly and offer him a generous payment. Once a person who had lost his way offered him two silver groschens if he would lead him home safely. The will-o'-the-wisp agreed, and finally they arrived at the lost man's house. Happy that he was no longer in need of help, he thanked his guide; but instead of the promised payment, he gave him only a small copper coin. The will-o'-the-wisp accepted it, then asked if he could now find his way home by himself. He answered, "Yes! I can already see my open front door." But stepping toward it, he fell into some water, for everything he had seen had been only an illusion. The will-o'-the-wisp takes special delight in tormenting drunks making their way homeward from a fair or an evening of drinking. He leads them astray, and when in their drunkenness they can go no further, preferring instead to sleep off their binge out of doors, then he burns them on the soles of their feet. In some regions the people believe that will-o'-the-wisps are the souls of children who died without being baptized. They are seen especially atop graveyard walls. They disappear when one throws a handful of graveyard soil at them. Source: Karl Haupt, "Der Irrwisch," Sagenbuch der Lausitz , vol. 1 (Leipzig: Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, 1862), pp. 58-59 . This legend comes from Lusatia , a historical region now divided between eastern Germany and western Poland. Return to the table of contents . The Cursed Land Surveyors Germany Will-o'-the-Wisps that glide back and forth along river banks and the edges of fields are said to have been land surveyors who dishonestly measured the plot boundaries. After death they are therefore condemned to wander around and keep watch over those very boundaries. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die verwünschten Landmesser," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 284, p. 374 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die verwünschten Landmesser," Deutsche Sagen (Berlin: In der Nicolaischen Buchhandlung, 1816), no. 284, p. 374 . The Grimms' source: "Oral, from Mecklenburg." In later editions this legend is numbered 285. Return to the table of contents . The Will-o'-the-Wisp Germany On the southwest side of the Ihlower Forest there is a large, overgrown swamp. In stormy nights a large will-o'-the-wisp appears there. This is not an ordinary will-o'-the-wisp, but rather a punishment will-o'-the-wisp sent by God. At the place where this light appears there was formerly a pond, and still earlier a hill was there. There was a chapel on this hill (before there was a monastery in the forest). All Christians in the area, including the young girls, would go to this chapel to pray and for confession. The priest there was a crude fellow, and he presented the young maidens with more than just the mass. He defiled them. When his sinfulness became unbearable, the earth opened one terrible night, and he was was swallowed underground, complete with the hill and the chapel. Since that night the will-o'-the-wisp hovers over the area as a sign of God's punishment. Source (books.google.com): Fr. Sundermann, "Das Irrlicht," Sagen und sagenhafte Erzählungen aus Ostfriesland (Aurich: A. H. F. Dunkmann, 1869), p. 18 . Source (Internet Archive): Fr. Sundermann, "Das Irrlicht," Sagen und sagenhafte Erzählungen aus Ostfriesland (Aurich: A. H. F. Dunkmann, 1869), p. 18 . Return to the table of contents . Will-o'-the-Wisps with Long Legs Germany A peasant from Hermsdorf was going home late one evening when he saw a will-o'-the-wisp. Being of a daring nature, he approached it. Without hesitating, the will-o'-the-wisp fled, and the peasant quickly followed after him. Thick on his heels, he saw that it had tremendously long legs, and that its head consisted of tips of glowing fire. However, it instantly disappeared, and the peasant was barely able to find his way home in the dark. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Irrlichter mit langen Beinen," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), p. 84 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "Oral." Return to the table of contents . Will-o'-the-Wisps Banned with a Curse Germany In the vicinity of Storkow a preacher was driving home late one evening with his servant. Arriving at a certain place they saw a will-o'-the-wisp approaching them. It hopped about merrily in front of the horses. Soon there were more of them, and finally there were so many of them that the horses took fright and would not continue onward. The pastor became frightend as well, and therefore he began to pray aloud, but the more he prayed, the more of them came. Finally the servant said, "No. Stop that. You're not making them go away. I'll get rid of them!" With that he shouted, "Go away, in the devil's name!" and they immediately disappeared. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Irrlichter durch Fluch gebannt," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg [Mecklenburg], Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), pp. 84-85 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "Oral." Return to the table of contents . The Heerwisch Germany In the vicinity of the Mountain Highway, and especially in the towns of Lorsch and Hänlein, will-o'-the wisps were formerly called Heerwische . This is still true. If they show themselves, which normally happens only at nighttime, the people there have a ridiculing rhyme: Heerwisch, Heerwisch, hah, hah, hah! You're afire like straw, straw, straw! You can hit me black and blaw! More than one person came to misfortune because of this. More than thirty years ago a young girl was walking by a swamp near Hänlein. She saw a will-o'-the wisp hopping along, and she rudely shouted out the rhyme. The will-o'-the wisp suddenly came fluttering toward her. The girl became frightened and ran as fast as she could toward her parents' house. The will-o'-the wisp was right behind her, beating at her with its fiery wings like a huge swamp-bird. Deathly afraid, she reached the house and slipped inside, but the will-o'-the wisp came in with her, illuminating the entire entryway. He followed her into the main room. He struck with flames at everyone who got in his way, then flew up the chimney. Finally he danced across the rooftops like a fiery dragon. The next day everyone, and the girl most of all, was black and blue from the will-o'-the wisp's blows. It is believed that the will-o'-the wisps and fiery men are dead people who cannot find their eternal rest because of evil deeds that they committed while alive. Above all, they are dishonest land surveyors and those who moved boundary boundary stones, as well as farmers who plowed away land from their neighbors' fields. Everywhere in Germany such sinners are believed to be the fiery men. In northern Germany will-o'-the wisps are believed to be the souls of unbaptized children. In Thuringia [Thüringen] they say to someone who is running very fast, "You are running like a fiery man." Source (books.google.com): Ludwig Bechstein, "Der Heerwisch," Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 57, pp. 50-51 . Source (Internet Archive): Ludwig Bechstein, "Der Heerwisch," Deutsches Sagenbuch (Leipzig: Verlag von Georg Wigand, 1853), no. 57, pp. 50-51 . Return to the table of contents . Godorf: The Will-o'-the-Wisp Germany The marshy peninsula which extends between Godorf and Rodenkirchen is said to be the favorite resort of the sprite known all along the Rhine as the Herwisch , and in England as the will-o'-the-wisp. This mischievous little creature is said to delight in leading unsuspecting travelers astray, and in playing all manner of pranks, but, like most practical jokers, he is quick to resent any attempt to make fun of him. One day a maiden, passing across this stretch of ground at nightfall, began to sing all the songs she knew, to beguile the loneliness of the way and inspire her with courage. Having soon come to the end of her scanty repertoire, she carelessly sang a mocking ditty about the Herwisch , who, enraged at her impudence, came rushing toward her threateningly brandishing his tiny lantern. With a cry of terror, the girl began to run, closely pursued by the sprite, who, in punishment for her derisive song, napped his wings in her face and frightened her so badly that she became an idiot. Since then, the young people of Germany have never dared to sing the mocking refrain, and carefully avoid mentioning the Herwisch's name after nightfall, lest they should in some way arouse his anger. Source: Hélène Adeline Guerber, Legends of the Rhine , 3rd edition (New York: A. S. Barnes and Company, 1899), pp. 80-81 . Return to the table of contents . Links to additional texts and illustrations Burne, Charlotte Sophia. "Legends and Traditions: Will-o'-the-Wisp," Shropshire Folk-Lore: A Sheaf of Gleanings from the Collections of Georgina F. Jackson (London: Trübner and Company, 1883), pp. 33-38 . Dyer, T. F. Thiselton. "The Will-o'-the-Wisp and Its Folk-Lore," The Gentleman's Magazine , vol. 250 (January - June 1881), edited by Sylvanus Urban (London: Chatto and Windus, 1881), pp. 335-46 . Hazlitt, William Carew. "Will o' the Wisp; or, Kit with the Canstick (Candlestick)," Myths and Folklore: A Dictionary of National Beliefs, Superstitions, and Popular Customs, Past and Current, with Their Classical and Foreign Analogues, Described and Illustrated , vol. 2 (London: Reeves and Turner, 1905), pp. 635-38 . Wright, Elizabeth Mary. "Dialect Terms Denoting the Ignis Fatuus , or Will-o'-the-Wisp," Rustic Speech and Folk-Lore (London: Oxford University Press, 1913), pp. 200-201 . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 22, 2021. Wind and Sun: Fables of type 298 Wind and Sun fables of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 298 in which the wind and the sun dispute about which of them is more powerful plus a related African-American tale selected and edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2010 Contents The Wind and the Sun (Aesop). Phœbus and Boreas (Jean de La Fontaine). The Wind and the Sun (India). The North Wind and the Sun (Ambrose Bierce). Brer Rabbit Treats the Creatures to a Race (Joel Chandler Harris). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Wind and the Sun Aesop The Wind and the Sun were disputing which was the stronger. Suddenly they saw a traveller coming down the road, and the Sun said, "I see a way to decide our dispute. Whichever of us can cause that traveller to take off his cloak shall be regarded as the stronger. You begin." So the Sun retired behind a cloud, and the Wind began to blow as hard as it could upon the traveller. But the harder he blew the more closely did the traveller wrap his cloak round him, till at last the Wind had to give up in despair. Then the Sun came out and shone in all his glory upon the traveller, who soon found it too hot to walk with his cloak on. Kindness effects more than severity. Source: Joseph Jacobs, The Fables of Æsop (London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1894), no. 60, pp. 142-43 . Return to the table of contents . Phœbus and Boreas Jean de La Fontaine Old Boreas and the sun, one day Espied a traveller on his way, Whose dress did happily provide Against whatever might betide. The time was autumn, when, indeed, All prudent travellers take heed. The rains that then the sunshine dash, And Iris with her splendid sash, Warn one who does not like to soak To wear abroad a good thick cloak. Our man was therefore well bedight With double mantle, strong and tight. "This fellow," said the wind, "has meant To guard from every ill event; But little does he wot that I Can blow him such a blast That, not a button fast, His cloak shall cleave the sky. Come, here's a pleasant game, Sir Sun! Wilt play?" Said Phœbus, "Done! We'll bet between us here Which first will take the gear From off this cavalier. Begin, and shut away The brightness of my ray." "Enough." Our blower, on the bet, Swell'd out his pursy form With all the stuff for storm -- The thunder, hail, and drenching wet, And all the fury he could muster; Then, with a very demon's bluster, He whistled, whirl'd, and splash'd, And down the torrents dash'd, Full many a roof uptearing He never did before, Full many a vessel bearing To wreck upon the shore, -- And all to doff a single cloak. But vain the furious stroke; The traveller was stout, And kept the tempest out, Defied the hurricane, Defied the pelting rain ; And as the fiercer roar'd the blast, His cloak the tighter held he fast. The sun broke out, to win the bet; He caused the clouds to disappear, Befresh'd and warm'd the cavalier, And through his mantle made him sweat, Till off it came, of course, In less than half an hour; And yet the sun saved half his power. -- So much doth mildness more than force. Source: Jean de La Fontaine, The Fables of La Fontaine , translated from the French by Elizur Wright (London: George Bell and Sons, 1888), book 6, fable 3, pp. 123-24 . Link to the original French: "Phébus et Borée," Œuvres complètes de Jean de La Fontaine (Paris: Firmin Didot Frères, 1840), livre 6, fable 3, p. 52-53 . Return to the table of contents . The Wind and the Sun India Once the Wind and the Sun disputed as to which was the more powerful. And while they were quarreling, a man came by wrapped in a shawl and wearing a big pagri [head cloth or turban]. And they said, "It is no good quarreling. Let us put our power to the test and see who can deprive this man of the shawl he has wrapped round him." Then the Wind asked to be allowed to try first and said, "You will see that I will blow away the blanket in no time," and the Sun said, "All right, you go first." So the Wind began to blow hard, but the man only wrapped his shawl more tightly round him to prevent its being blown away and fastened it round himself with his pagri ; and though the Wind blew fit to blow the man away, it could not snatch the shawl from him. So it gave up, and the Sun had a try. He rose in the sky and blazed with full force, and soon the man began to drip with sweat, and he took off his shawl and hung it on the stick he carried over his shoulder, and the Wind had to admit defeat. Source: Cecil Henry Bompas, Folklore of the Santal Parganas (London: David Nutt, 1909), no. 108, p. 314 . Return to the table of contents . The North Wind and the Sun Ambrose Bierce The Sun and the North Wind disputed which was the more powerful, and agreed that he should be declared victor who could the sooner strip a traveller of his clothes. So they waited until a traveller came by. But the traveller had been indiscreet enough to stay over night at a summer hotel, and had no clothes. Source: Ambrose Bierce, Fantastic Fables (New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1899), p. 181 . Return to the table of contents . Brer Rabbit Treats the Creatures to a Race Joel Chandler Harris One sultry summer day, while the little boy was playing not far from Uncle Remus's cabin, a heavy black cloud made its appearance in the west, and quickly obscured the sky. It sent a brisk gale before it, as if to clear the path of leaves and dust. Presently there was a blinding flash of lightning, a snap and a crash, and, with that, the child took to his heels, and ran to Uncle Remus, who was standing in his door. "There now!" he exclaimed, before the echoes of the thunder had rolled away. That dust and wind and rain puts me in mind of the time when old Brer Rabbit went away off in the woods until he came to the Rainmaker's house. He knocked and went in, and he asked the Rainmaker if he couldn't fix it up so they could have a race between Brer Dust and Cousin Rain, to see which could run the fastest. The Rainmaker growled and grumbled, but by and by he agreed, but he said that if it was anybody but Brer Rabbit, he wouldn't give it but one thought. Well, they fixed the day, they did, and then Brer Rabbit put out to where the creatures were staying and told them the news. They didn't know how Brer Rabbit knew, but they all wanted to see the race. Now, he and the Rainmaker had fixed it up so that the race would be right down the middle of the big road, and when the day came, that's where he made the creatures stand -- Brer Bear at the bend of the road, Brer Wolf a little further off, and Brer Fox at a point where the crossroads were. Brer Coon and Brer Possum and the others he scattered about up and down the road. To them who have to wait, it seems like the sun stops, and all the clocks with him. Brer Bear did some growling, Brer Wolf some howling, and Brer Possum some laughing, but after a while a cloud came up from somewhere. It wasn't such a big cloud, but Brer Rabbit knew that Cousin Rain was in there along with Uncle Wind. The cloud crept up, it did, until it got right over the big road, and then it kind of dropped down a little closer to the ground. It looked like it kind of stopped, like a buggy, for Cousin Rain to get out, so there would be a fair start. Well he got out, because the creatures could see him, and then Uncle Wind, he got out. And then, gentlemen, the race began to commence. Uncle Wind helped them both. He had his bellows with him, and he blew them! Brer Dust got up from where he was lying and came down the road just a-whirling. He struck old Brer Bear first, then Brer Wolf, and then Brer Fox, and after that all the other creatures, and it came mighty near suffocating them! Never in all your born days have you ever heard such coughing and sneezing, such snorting and wheezing! And they all looked like they were painted red. Brer Bear sneezed so hard that he had to lie down in the road, and Brer Dust came mighty near burying him. And it was the same with the other creatures. They got their ears, their noses, and their eyes full. And then Cousin Rain came along pursuing Brer Dust, and he came mighty near drowning them. He left them covered with mud, and they were worse off than before. It was the longest time before they could get the mud out of their eyes and ears. When they got so they could see a little bit, they took notice that Brer Rabbit, instead of being full of mud, was as dry as a chip, if not dryer. It made them so mad that they all put out after him and tried their level best to catch him, but if there was anything in the round world that Brer Rabbit's got, it's supple feet, and it wasn't no time before the other creatures couldn't see hide nor hair of him! All the same, Brer Rabbit hadn't bargained to have two races the same day. "But, Uncle Remus," said the little boy, "which beat, Brother Dust or Cousin Rain?" The old man stirred uneasily in his chair, and rubbed his chin with his hand. "They tell me," he responded cautiously, "that when Cousin Rain couldn't see anything of Brother Dust, he thought he was beaten, but he hollered out, 'Brer Dust, whereabouts are you?' and Brer Dust he hollered back, 'You'll have to excuse me. I fell down in the mud and can't run any more!'" Source: Joel Chandler Harris, "Brer Rabbit Treats the Creeturs to a Race," Uncle Remus and Brer Rabbit (New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1906), pp. n43-n53 . Dialect normalized by D. L. Ashliman. © 1998. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 22, 2010. The Witch That Was Hurt The Witch That Was Hurt Migratory Legends of Type 3055 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 1998-2022 Contents The Miller Boy and the Cat (Austria, Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle). The Witch as Cat (Bohemia, Josef Virgil Grohmann). The Witch (Germany, J. G. Th. Grässe). The Haunted Mill (Germany, Karl Gander). Trudd as Cat (Germany, Karl Reiser). The Girl Who Transformed Herself into a Hare (Germany, A. Haas). Witch as Hare (Germany, Bernhard Baader). Witch as Goose (Germany, Berhnard Baader). Witch as Fox (Germany, Karl Reiser). A Witch Is Recognized (Germany, J. W. Wolf). A Witch Is Recognized (Germany, A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz). A Witch Burnt (Netherlands, Benjamin Thorpe). Witches as Cats in Manternach (Luxembourg, N. Gredt). The Blacksmith's Wife of Yarrowfoot (Scotland, George Douglas). Ridden by a Witch (Scotland, John Francis Campbell). The Witch of Lorn (Scotland, John Gregorson Campbell). The Silver Button (Scotland, John Gregorson Campbell). The Farmer and the Witch (Scotland, Eve Blantyre Simpson). The Black Dog (Shetland Islands, G. F. Black). The Severed Hand (Norway, Peter Christian Asbjørnsen). The Witch and the Hunter (Denmark, J. M. Thiele). A Witch in Hare-Skin (Denmark, Jens Kemp). An Old Witch (England, Anna Eliza Bray). The Weaver's Wife and the Witch (England, Sidney Oldall Addy). The Shot Hare (Wales, D. E. Jenkins). The Two Cat Witches (Wales, William Elliot Griffis). The Witch Hare (Ireland, William Butler Yeats). Witches (Ireland, Patrick Bardan). The Old Hare (Ireland, D. Knox). The Woman-Cat (USA, Elsie Clews Parsons). The Severed Hand (USA, J. Hampden Porter). Related links Return to: Witchcraft Legends . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The table of contents . The Miller Boy and the Cat Austria Once a mill hand came to a miller and asked him for work, saying that he had been underway a long time and wanted to earn a few kreutzers once again. The miller liked the mill hand, for he was a quick and lively fellow. He would have given him work at once if it hadn't been for an unusual concern of his. He scratched himself behind the ears for a while and then slowly expressed his opinion: "Yes, I need a mill hand, and I'm not likely to find a better one than you, but there is another problem." "What sort of one? asked the miller boy hurriedly. "Now you may not believe me, but what I'm going to say is the truth. Every time I have had a mill hand sleep in the mill, the next morning he was discovered dead. I've not been able to find out what is behind this, but that's the way it is." It has never occurred to me that I should be afraid of someone," replied the mill hand, laughing. "Let me have a go at it. I am not by nature a fraidy-cat." "It would be a shame to lose your young life," said the miller. "No one else has escaped alive. You won't be any different." "The long and short of it is that I am not afraid. Give me work, and I'll stay with you." "If you are willing to gamble with your life, then stay. It will serve you right," replied the miller, half pleased and half angry. The new mill hand went into the mill and worked in spite of it all. When night fell he lay down a bit, but he did not let himself fall asleep, looking and looking to see what might be haunting the mill. Suddenly a large, beautiful cat crept up to him, meowed, arched its back, wagged its tail, and continued to creep around the mill hand. It was all he could do to ward off the uncanny animal. When he realized that "Get!" and "Scat!" and such sayings were to no avail, he became angry, grabbed the cat by its tail and hurled it a good distance from him. With that the cat slunk out the door. The mill hand thought to himself, "Just dare to come back!" and lay back down and slept without further disturbance. Early the next morning the miller came, expecting to see the mill hand's corpse. Was he surprised when the boy approached him, singing and whistling, and told him the story of the cat. As evening was approaching the mill hand fetched a little hatchet and hid it in his bed. Night soon came. The boy lay down, and again the cat crept up to him meowing. This time the mill hand did not shoo it away, but was nice to it and attempted to lure it closer and closer to him. When it was standing right next to his bed, he quickly pulled out the hatchet and with a laugh chopped off one of its front paws. With pitiful meows the cat hobbled on three legs out the door. Early the next morning the miller came again to see how the boy had fared. The latter had scarcely come into his master's view when he joyfully cried out, "Just see what the beast left behind! It will never come to me again!" With these words he showed the miller the paw that he had chopped off the cat. The miller had a good laugh and could not have been more pleased with his new mill hand. After laughing his fill, he went about his business, and the morning passed like any other, although the master did wonder why his wife was nowhere to be seen. Noontime came, and there was still no fire in the kitchen. The master finally lost his patience, and he shouted everywhere for his "old woman." But she neither came nor answered. Finally the miller went upstairs to the bedroom where he found his wife still in bed. "What you are doing? It is noontime already, and there is not even a piece of kindling burning yet in the kitchen." "I can't cook today. Something is wrong with me." The miller was curious what was wrong with her, noticing that she was holding her hands in a strange manner. Then he suddenly saw that one of her hands had been cut off. "Aha," he thought to himself, "so that is what's wrong with you!" Angrily he ran down the stairs and told the mill hand what had happened. The mill hand also perceived immediately that the cat had been none other than the master's wife, and that she was a wicked witch. Source: Ignaz and Joseph Zingerle, "Der Müllerbursch und die Katze," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Zingerle (Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Buchhandlung, 1852), no. 39, pp. 251-54 . Return to the table of contents . The Witch as Cat Bohemia At the end of the sixteenth century a miller woman lived in a mill with her six children. No servant could stay in this mill because during the night a cat with six kittens would always come and bite and scratch the worker, sometimes to death. However, one day a journeyman came to the mill who knew black magic. When he asked for a night's lodging the miller woman said that it would not go well with him, because the place was haunted. "That doesn't matter," said the journeyman. "I'm not afraid." That evening he lit a candle, drew a circle around himself with sanctified chalk, then sat down at the table. Near midnight a black cat with her six kittens approached the light, wanting to put it out. The journeyman grabbed a hatchet and cut off one of the cat's paws. She let out a terrible shriek, then all of them ran out the door. The next morning the miller woman was ill, and no one knew what was wrong with her. However, the journeyman knew what it was; that morning instead of a cat's paw he had found a human hand lying on the ground. He reported the event, and the miller woman was burned to death, along with her children, for these too someday would have learned witchcraft. Source: Josef Virgil Grohmann, "Die Hexe als Katze," Sagen-Buch von Böhmen und Mähren. Erster Theil: Sagen aus Böhmen (Prague: Verlag der J. G. Calve'schen k.k. Universitäts-Buchhandlung, 1863), pp. 225-26 . Grohmann's source: "Krolmus II, 453." Bohemia is a historical region, now a part of the Czech Republic. Return to the table of contents . The Witch Germany A miller at a windmill near Wettin was for a long time unable to get a mill hand, because the mill was haunted, and four workers had already died there, one after the other. He finally hired a high-spirited boy. At midnight the boy was shaking out the grain when a small black cat crept up to him. A somewhat larger one followed, and the two of them grinned sinisterly at him. The one said to the other, "I wish the big gray one would come." Soon thereafter a big gray cat arrived. As soon as it saw the boy it jumped at his throat; but with an ax the boy skillfully struck off half its paw, which immediately turned into half of a woman's arm. Then the cats ran away. The next morning the boy waited in vain for his breakfast. He went downstairs and asked the miller why there was nothing to eat. The miller apologized, saying that his wife had turned deathly ill. "Is she perhaps missing half an arm?" asked the boy. "If so, I can lend her one." And in truth one of the woman's arms was only half there, and the severed piece fit onto the stump. Then it was known that she was a witch, and she was burned to death. Source: J. G. Th. Grässe, "Die Hexe," Sagenbuch des Preußischen Staats , vol. 1 (Glogau: Verlag von Carl Flemming, 1868), no. 364, p. 325 . Wettin is a small town in the state of Saxony-Anhalt ( Sachsen-Anhalt ), in Germany. Return to the table of contents . The Haunted Mill Germany In a village there was a mill. The miller could no longer get anyone to work for him, because several workers had died in the mill in a mysterious manner. One day a mill hand came to the miller and asked about work. The miller said that he desperately needed a helper, but he had to tell him that things were not exactly right in his mill. The mill hand was an outgoing fellow, and he asked the master to hire him, saying that he would deal with the spook. The master agreed to this. That night the mill hand went into the mill, taking a sword with him. At the stroke of midnight a wet cat crept through a hole into the mill and sat down next on the stove bench. After it had sat there a while and second cat came, and then a third one, and they took places next to the first cat. And then a miracle! The more they warmed themselves, the larger they grew. Then the first cat said, "Shall we? Shall we?" The next one answered, "Eeow!" And the third one, "Get him!" Then all three, each with a powerful leap, jumped at the mill hand, hissing and spitting, and with angry sparks spraying from their eyes. The mill hand did not stand idly by. With his sword he cut off a leg of the first cat, and it began to cry pitifully. Then all three cats hurriedly slipped out the same hole through which they had entered. He picked up the leg, and it was a human hand with a gold ring on one finger. He wrapped it in a cloth. The next morning he took it to the master and told him of the adventure that he had withstood. The latter was very pleased to hear this, for he hoped that the spook would no longer be interested in returning. At breakfast the master said to his mill hand, "My wife is very ill." The mill hand wanted to see her, claiming that in some regards he knew just as much as a doctor. The miller led him to the room where his wife was lying. The mill worker said, "Show me your right hand!" The woman showed him her left hand. The mill worker said again, "No, show me the right one!" but she refused. Then the mill hand unwrapped the severed hand from the cloth and held it out. The woman began to shake like aspen leaves. Her face became distorted; and with moans and groans she confessed that she was a witch and that she had been the cat. She also named her two accomplices. And then she died a horrible death. Since then nothing unusual has happened at the mill. Source: Karl Gander, "Die unheimliche Mühle," Niederlausitzer Volkssagen, vornehmlich aus dem Stadt- und Landkreise Guben (Berlin: Deutsche Schriftsteller-Genossenschaft, 1894), no. 75, pp. 29-30 . Gander's source: "Oral, from Guben." Guben lies on the Neisse River on the border between Germany and Poland. Return to the table of contents . Trudd as Cat Germany For a long time a mill hand had been plagued every night by Trudd. Then one night, following the advice of an experienced man, he took a sharpened sabre to bed with him and stayed awake looking for what might come. Suddenly a cat crept up to the bed, then positioned itself to jump onto it. It scarcely had its claws on the sideboard of the bedstead when the mill hand struck with the sabre, cutting off the claws at their roots. In the same instant the cat disappeared. The next morning it was reported that the miller's wife was still in bed. It was said that during the night she had fallen down the cellar stairs and badly hurt her hands. In reality, however, all of her fingers had been cut off. Source: Karl Reiser, Sagen, Gebräuche und Sprichwörter des Allgäus, aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Kempten: J. Kosers Verlag, 1895), vol. 1, no. 212, p. 197. Return to the table of contents . The Girl Who Transformed Herself into a Hare Germany In Trent there formerly lived a girl who had inherited a witch's thong from her grandmother. Whenever she tied the thong around herself she would turn into a hare. In this form she often heckled a forester who lived in the vicinity. Whenever he would shoot at her, his bullets just glanced off her pelt. When he came to realize that there was something uncanny going on here, he loaded his flintlock with a coffin nail that he had somehow acquired. The next time he saw the hare, he shot it as it was running away. In an instant the hare disappeared, and the girl stood before him in its place. With tears she asked him for help, for she had a serious wound on her foot. In order to gain his sympathy, she confessed her evil power to the forester, promising never again to make use of it. For a time she kept her promise, but no sooner had her foot healed than she fell back into her old vices. Now her fiancé worked as a herdsman at a nearby estate, and she frequently made use of her thong in order to visit him often and undisturbed. Her fiancé knew nothing of her powers, and one day when she appeared before him as a hare -- for she had not yet had time to assume her human form -- he struck her with a water carrier. As a result she started to bleed profusely, and with tears she confessed to her fiancé what her situation was. He broke off his relationship with her. She remained lame for the rest of her life. It is said that the witch's thong was later buried in the grandmother's grave. Source: A. Haas, "Mädchen in Hasengestalt," Rügensche Sagen und Märchen (Stettin, 1903), no. 105, pp. 92-93 . Trent (Germany) is a town on the island of Rügen in the Baltic Sea. Return to the table of contents . Witch as Hare Germany On two days a hunter from Freiburg saw a hare in Schlossberg Forest and shot at it. Both times it stood still, looked mockingly at the man, only running away when the latter hurried toward it. The hunter presumed that he was dealing with witchcraft, so he loaded his gun with consecrated powder, then used this to shoot at the hare when he saw it a third time. Instead of a hare, a female personage was there, standing on her head and bleeding from a gunshot wound in her breast. When the hunter touched her, she fell to the ground dead. Source: Bernhard Baader, "Hexe als Hase," Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: Verlag der Herder'schen Buchhandlung, 1851), no. 62, p. 50 . Freiburg im Breisgau is a city in Baden-Württemberg, Germany. Return to the table of contents . Witch as Goose Germany Some years ago at two o'clock in the morning the nightwatchman at Wertheim saw a goose walking next to him in the street. He caught it and took it to the guardhouse, where he locked it under a bench. The next morning, instead of the goose, a woman from Wertheim was lying there, which verified, as was already suspected, that she was a witch. Source: Bernhard Baader, "Hexe als Gans," Neugesammelte Volkssagen aus dem Lande Baden und den angrenzenden Gegenden (Karlsruhe: A. Gessner'sche Buchhandlung, 1859), no. 150, p. 112 . Wertheim is a town in Baden-Württemberg, Germany. Return to the table of contents . Witch as Fox Germany A number of hunters from Reutte went on a fox hunt in the "belt" between Reutte and Heiterwang. They did not neglect to load something consecrated into their weapons. After they had waited a long while, a fox finally came into view, and they fired a heavy volley at it. The fox tumbled down, but then it got back on its feet and fled. The hunters followed its tracks, which were clearly visible in the snow. After they had followed the tracks for a good stretch, it suddenly occurred to them that the footprints left by the fox in the snow were getting larger and larger, finally taking the form of human footprints. They could even clearly see that the tracks could have been made only by slippers. They could only imagine what all this had to do with the fox that they had shot at, but they continued to follow the tracks, which led them finally to a house in the upper marketplace in Reutte. An old woman lived in this house, and she was lying in bed with a bullet wound in her body. Source Karl Reiser, Sagen, Gebräuche und Sprichwörter des Allgäus, aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Kempten: J. Kosers Verlag, 1895), vol. 1, no. 207/1, pp. 193-94. Return to the table of contents . A Witch Is Recognized Germany A journeyman cooper found work with an old female master in Binsachsen. Once when he was going out for the evening, the woman asked him if he was not afraid to come home by himself. "No," he said. His way home led him across a meadow, where a large cat approached him and ran along beside him. He took no further notice of it. The next evening he went out again, and his landlady once again asked him if he was not afraid. He told her about the cat, but said that he had no fear of such a dumb animal. This time when he came to the meadow the cat was there again, but now it ran toward him and was about to jump on him. He hit it with a pair of pincers, breaking its left front leg, and it fled screaming. The next morning the master did not get out of bed. The journeyman pulled back her covers and saw that her left arm was broken. Thus it was disclosed that the woman was a witch. Source: J. W. Wolf, Hessische Sagen (Göttingen: Dieterichsche Buchhandlung, 1853), no. 112, pp. 73-74 . Return to the table of contents . A Witch Is Recognized Germany Whenever a certain peasant brewed beer, someone drank it all up during the night. He finally decided to stay up and keep watch throughout the night. He did this, and as he was standing by his vat, a large number of cats approached him. He called out to them: Here kitty, Here cat, Come and warm yourselves! Then they all sat down in a large circle around the fire and warmed themselves. After they had sat there for a little while, he asked them if the water was hot. "It is almost boiling!" they answered, and as soon as they said this, he took the ladle and sprinkled the whole lot of them, whereupon they all disappeared in an instant. The next day his wife had a badly burned face, so he knew who had been drinking up his beer. Source: A. Kuhn and W. Schwartz, "Hexe erkannt," Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg, Pommern, der Mark, Sachsen, Thüringen, Braunschweig, Hannover, Oldenburg und Westfalen, aus dem Munde des Volkes gesammelt (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1848), no. 321, pp. 287-88 . Kuhn's and Schwartz's source: "Oral, from Scharrel." Scharrel is a village in Lower Saxony ( Niedersachsen ), Germany. Return to the table of contents . A Witch Burnt Netherlands The castle of Erendegen was so awfully haunted, that it would not have been possible, with all the gold in the world, to prevail on any one of the peasants of the village to pass a single night in it. At last, however, a man came to the place who was known by the name of bold Jan, who offered to go to the castle, and stay any length of time, requiring only to be furnished with everything necessary for the frying of pancakes. This was promised, and Jan in the evening proceeded to the castle. In one of the best rooms he made a fire and began busily to fry, when the door opened, and in walked a black cat, and sat down before the fire, as if for the purpose of warming herself. She then asked Jan what he was doing. "I am frying pancakes, my little friend," said Jan, and the words were hardly out of his mouth, when seven cats entered at the same time, one of which appeared to be the superior. These likewise asked Jan what he was doing, and Jan again answered, "I am frying pancakes." The cats then taking each other's paw began to dance round and round. Jan now filled the pan with butter, which when melted and scalding hot, he threw over the cats, and in one instant they all vanished. On the following day it was said in the village, that the shoemaker's wife was burnt over her whole body, of which the soldier knew something, and assured the inhabitants that thenceforth the castle would be no more haunted. And so it proved, for the cats never ventured to return. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology: Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 3 (London: Edward Lumley, 1852), pp. 238-39 . Return to the table of contents . Witches as Cats in Manternach Luxembourg Some time ago a woman called Castle Lady and who was thought to be a witch lived in a small hut in Manternach. One night two cats came to the bedroom window of a man and howled pitifully. When the man got up and went outside the one cat ran away. The man grabbed the other one and beat it thoroughly, then threw it down the steps. Nevertheless it returned, and the man beat it until it stuck all four legs up; then he threw it over the wall into the garden. The next morning Castle Lady came to him and complained of pain throughout her entire body. The man said, "So, you old rascal, you are the one who made such a spectacle last night, the one I threw down the steps?" "Yes, I am the one," said the woman miserably. Source: N. Gredt, "Hexen als Katzen zu Manternach," Sagenschatz des Luxemburger Landes (Luxemburg: B. Bück, 1883), no. 209, p. 119 . Gredt's source: Teacher Oswald in Manternach. Manternach is a small town in eastern Luxembourg. Return to the table of contents . The Blacksmith's Wife of Yarrowfoot Scotland Some years back, the blacksmith of Yarrowfoot had for apprentices two brothers, both steady lads, and, when bound to him, fine healthy fellows. After a few months, however, the younger of the two began to grow pale and lean, lose his appetite, and show other marks of declining health. His brother, much concerned, often questioned him as to what ailed him, but to no purpose. At last, however, the poor lad burst into an agony of tears, and confessed that he was quite worn out, and should soon be brought to the grave through the ill-usage of his mistress, who was in truth a witch, though none suspected it. "Every night," he sobbed out, "she comes to my bedside, puts a magic bridle on me, and changes me into a horse. Then, seated on my back, she urges me on for many a mile to the wild moors, where she and I know not what other vile creatures hold their hideous feasts. There she keeps me all night, and at early morning I carry her home. She takes off my bridle, and there I am, but so weary I can ill stand. And thus I pass my nights while you are soundly sleeping." The elder brother at once declared he would take his chance of a night among the witches, so he put the younger one in his own place next to the wall, and lay awake himself till the usual time of the witch-woman's arrival. She came, bridle in hand, and flinging it over the elder brother's head, up sprang a fine hunting horse. The lady leaped on his back, and started for the trysting-place, which on this occasion, as it chanced, was the cellar of a neighboring laird. While she and the rest of the vile crew were regaling themselves with claret and sack, the hunter, who was left in a spare stall of the stable, rubbed and rubbed his head against the wall till he loosened the bridle, and finally got it off, on which he recovered his human form. Holding the bridle firmly in his hand, he concealed himself at the back of the stall till his mistress came within reach, when in an instant he flung the magic bridle over her head, and, behold, a fine gray mare! He mounted her and dashed off, riding through hedge and ditch, till, looking down, he perceived she had lost a shoe from one of her forefeet. He took her to the first smithy that was open, had the shoe replaced, and a new one put on the other forefoot, and then rode her up and down a plowed field till she was nearly worn out. At last he took her home, and pulled the bridle off just in time for her to creep into bed before her husband awoke, and got up for his day's work. The honest blacksmith arose, little thinking what had been going on all night; but his wife complained of being very ill, almost dying, and begged him to send for a doctor. He accordingly aroused his apprentices; the elder one went out, and soon returned with one whom he had chanced to meet already abroad. The doctor wished to feel his patient's pulse, but she resolutely hid her hands, and refused to show them. The village Esculapius was perplexed; but the husband, impatient at her obstinacy, pulled off the bedclothes, and found, to his horror, that horseshoes were tightly nailed to both hands! On further examination, her sides appeared galled with kicks, the same that the apprentice had given her during his ride up and down the plowed field. The brothers now came forward, and related all that had passed. On the following day the witch was tried by the magistrates of Selkirk, and condemned to be burned to death on a stone at the Bullsheugh, a sentence which was promptly carried into effect. It is added that the younger apprentice was at last restored to health by eating butter made from the milk of cows fed in kirkyards, a sovereign remedy for consumption brought on through being witch-ridden. Source: William Henderson, Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by W. Satchell, Peyton, and Company, 1879), pp. 190-92 . Return to the table of contents . Ridden by a Witch Scotland The Macgowans of Grayscroft inTongland,and latterly of Bogra, had the power of witchcraft to a considerable extent, and it descended from one generation to another. At the time we refer to, Abraham Macgowan and his daughter Jenny resided at Grayscroft Jenny had an unlimited power from Old Nick to act as she pleased. The ploughmen at that time in their employ were Harry Dew and Davie Gordon, young men about twenty-two years of age; they had been there for the last twelve months; and conversing one day together, the following took place: Harry: " Losh man, Davie, what makes ye sae drowsy, lazy, and sleepy-like the day, for I am verra sure ye work nae mair than I do; ye eat the same and sleep the same as I do, and yet ye are so thin and wearied and hungry-like, I dinna ken ava what ails ye; are ye weel eneugh, Davie?" "I'm weel eneugh, Harry, but it's a' ye ken about it; sleep a night or twa at the bedside, and maybe you'll no be sae apt to ask me sic questions again." Harry: "The bedside, Davie! What differ will that make? I hae nae mair objections to sleep there than at the wa'." This being agreed to, they exchanged places. Nothing occurred to disturb either of them till the third night, although Harry kept watch; their bed was on the stable loft, when, about midnight, the stable door was opened cautiously, and someone was heard (by Harry only) coming up the ladder and to the bedside, with a quiet step. A bridle was held above the one next the bedside, and the words, "Up horsey," whispered in his ear; in one moment Harry was transformed into a horse at the stable door. The saddle was got on with some kicking and plunging, but Jenny gets mounted, and off they set by the Elfcraigs, Auld Brig o' Tongland, the March Cleughs, and on till they reach the Auld Kirk of Buittle. Harry was tied to the gate along with others. Meg o' Glengap was there on her dairymaid, now a bonny mare, neat in all her proportions. "Tib" o' Criille came on her auld ploughman, rather wind-broken. "Lizzy," frae the Bennan, came on her cot wife, limping with a swelled knee. "Moll o' the Wood" came on a herd callant frae the "How o' Siddick." When all the horses were mustered, there was some snorting and kicking and neighing amongst them. Fairies, witches, brownies, and all met in the kirk and had a blithe holiday, under the patronage of his Satanic majesty, which continued till the crowing of the cock. Wearied with his gallop, Harry, when the charmed bridle was taken off, found himself in his own bed and in his own shape. Harry is determined to be revenged; he finds the charmed bridle in a hole in the kitchen in a week after; he tries it on Jenny, using the same words, when Jenny is transformed into the auld brown mare of the farm; he takes her to the neighbouring smithy, and gets her, after much ado, shod all round, when he returns and leaves her, after securing the wonderful bridle. Next morning Harry is ordered to go for a doctor, as his mistress has taken ill. He goes into the house to ask for her; pulls the bed clothes off her, and discovers there was a horseshoe on each hand and foot, when Harry says, "Jenny, my lass, that did ye." Jenny played many more similar tricks on her neighbour lads and lasses. Source (books.google.com): Campbell, John Francis, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 59-60 . Source (Internet Archive): Campbell, John Francis, Popular Tales of the West Highlands: Orally Collected , vol. 2 (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1860), pp. 59-60 . Campbell does not give this story a title. Return to the table of contents . The Witch of Lorn Scotland In Lorn, a woman came night after night and shook a bridle at the son of a neighbouring farmer. He immediately became a horse, on which she rode to London, etc. A younger brother exchanged beds with him, and when the witches were carousing, secured the magic bridle, converted the witch herself into a horse, rode home, and before taking off the bridle took his horse to a smithy, and put on four shoes. Next day an old woman of the neighbourhood was found with her feet and hands horribly mangled. Source (books.google.com): John Gregorson Campbell, Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland: Tales and Traditions Collected Entirely from Oral Sources (Glasgow: Mames MacLehose and Sons, 1902), p. 49 . Source (Internet Archive): John Gregorson Campbell, Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland: Tales and Traditions Collected Entirely from Oral Sources (Glasgow: Mames MacLehose and Sons, 1902), p. 49 . John Gregorson Campbell does not give this story a title. Return to the table of contents . The Silver Button Scotland Silver fired from a gun will wound a witch, and force her to assume her proper shape. An English sportsman, according to a Perthshire version of an old story, was sitting surrounded by his dogs, in a mountain bothy at the dead hour of night. A cat came in, but the dogs did not move. It sat with its back to the fire, and swelled till it was as large as a yearling calf. The Englishman took a silver button off his clothes, and putting it in the gun, fired at the cat. The brute scampered out at the door. On going to the strath next day, the sportsman being a doctor, was sent for to see a farmer's wife, who had got suddenly ill. He went, and extracted his own silver button from her right breast. John Gregorson Campbell titles this story "Silver Sixpence," although the context suggests that "The Silver Button" would be more fitting. Source (books.google.com): John Gregorson Campbell, Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland: Tales and Traditions Collected Entirely from Oral Sources (Glasgow: Mames MacLehose and Sons, 1902), pp. 49-50 . Source (Internet Archive): John Gregorson Campbell, Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland: Tales and Traditions Collected Entirely from Oral Sources (Glasgow: Mames MacLehose and Sons, 1902), pp. 49-50 . Return to the table of contents . The Farmer and the Witch Scotland In Victoria's reign, to show how belief in witches still dwelt in Scotland (and this is but one authentic illustration among many), a woman was out early one morning. So was a farmer. He fired at what he thought was a hare which was making its way over a field and lamed it. Pursuing it, it disappeared, and he found the woman busy on the other side of the hedge bandaging her leg. Being entreated he promised not to tell, and she went ever after on a crutch, and he firmly believed he had shot her. This same woman cursed a boy who called her names. He died within the year, and she should have rejoiced she did not live in a century earlier, for her sentence would have assuredly been convicta et combusta . Source: Eve Blantyre Simpson, Scottish Fairy and Folk Tales (London: J. M. Dent and Company, 1908), p. 189 . Simpson does not give this account a title. Return to the table of contents . The Black Dog Shetland Islands A witch, desirous of injuring a neighbor, changed herself into a black dog and made her way into the neighbor's ben-end-o'-the-hoose, where she would certainly have created serious disturbance if an old man in the family had not recognized her by a peculiar formation of the eyelids, which, it seems, she could not discard from her canine appearance. Seizing the tongs, the worthy patriarch brought them down upon the black dog's back with might and main. "Tak' doo yon, Minnie Merran (the witch's name), he cried, "an bear doo da weight o' dis auld airm as lang as doo leeves." The dog ran howling and limping out of the house, and when next the witch was seen, she who hitherto had walked upright and with the dignity of a Norna, leant upon a stick, and had a hump upon her back. She said she had fallen from a height, and was afraid her spine was broken. But folk called it "the mark o' auld Jockie's taings." Source: Examples of Printed Folk-Lore Concerning the Orkney and Shetland Islands , collected by G. F. Black and edited by Northcote W. Thomas: County Folk-Lore , vol. 3, printed extracts, no. 5 (London: Published for the Folk-Lore Society by David Nutt, 1903), p. 53 . Return to the table of contents . The Severed Hand Norway There was a farmer whose mill was burnt down on two successive Whitsun-eves. In the third year, just before Whitsuntide, he had a tailor in his house to make holyday clothes. "I wonder how it will go with the mill this time; whether it will be burnt again tonight," said the farmer. "You need not fear that," said the tailor, "give me the key, and I will keep watch in it." This seemed to the farmer both good and highly acceptable; and when it drew towards evening the tailor got the key and went to the mill, which was still empty, having but just been rebuilt. So placing himself in the middle of the floor, he chalked round him a large circle, on the outside of which he wrote the Paternoster; and thus fortified, would not have feared if the arch-enemy himself had made his appearance. In the dead of the night the door suddenly flew open, and there came in such a multitude of black cats, that the place literally swarmed. But a short time had elapsed when they set a large earthen pot in the chimney, and lighted a fire under it, so that it began frying and hissing in the pot as if it were full of boiling pitch and tar. "Oho," thought the tailor, "is that what you are after?" And scarcely had he given utterance to the thought when one of the cats put its paw behind the pot and tried to upset it. "Whisht cat, you'll burn yourself!" cried the tailor. "Whisht cat, you'll burn yourself! the tailor says," said the cat to the other cats, and all ran from the chimney, and began hopping and dancing round the circle; but in the meanwhile the cat again sneaked to the chimney and endeavoured to upset the pot. "Whisht cat, you'll burn yourself!" cried the tailor, and drove it from the chimney. "Whisht cat, you'll burn yourself, the tailor says," said the cat to the other cats, and all began dancing and hopping again, but in a moment the same cat was away trying a third time to overturn the pot. "Whisht cat, you'll burn yourself!" cried the tailor in a rage, and so terrified them that they tumbled one over another, and then began to jump and dance as before. They then formed a circle without the tailor's circle, and began dancing round it with an ever-increasing velocity, till at length it seemed to the tailor that everything was whirling round before him. All this while the cats were staring at him with their large, fierce eyes, as if they would swallow him. While they were in the thick of it, the cat that had tried to upset the pot, put her paw within the circle, as if she felt inclined to seize hold of the tailor, but who seeing her design, drew out his knife and stood on his guard. After a few moments the cat again put her paw within the ring, when the tailor in one instant chopped it off; and all the cats took to their heels, screaming and howling, as speedily they could, and left the tailor in quiet possession of the field. The tailor then lay down in the circle till long after the sun had been shining in upon him. He then rose, locked the mill-door and proceeded to the farmer's house. When he entered the room the farmer and his wife were still in bed, it being Whit-Sunday. "Good morning," said the tailor, giving the farmer his hand. "Good morning," said the farmer in return, and was both glad and surprised to see the tailor again. "Good morning, mother," said he, holding out his hand to the farmer's wife. "Good morning," said she, but appeared pale and sorrowful, and kept her hand under the bed-clothes, but at last offered him her left hand. The tailor now saw how matters stood; but what afterwards took place is not said. Source: Benjamin Thorpe, Northern Mythology: Comprising the Principal Popular Traditions and Superstitions of Scandinavia, North Germany, and the Netherlands , vol. 2 (London: Edward Lumley, 1851), pp. 32-34 . Thorpe's source: Peter Christian Asbjørnsen, Norske Huldreeventyr , vol. 1 (Christiania [Oslo]: W. C. Fabritius, 1845), pp. 11-14 . Return to the table of contents . The Witch and the Hunter Denmark In Østrel, on the road between Aalborg and Thisted, there were once many witches. A hunter who often passed by the Baller farm regularly saw in the vicinity either a hare or a wild duck. Although he was an excellent marksman, he never hit either one of them. Once he saw a duck sitting in the water near the farm and shot at it several times, but it did not get up, as if it had noticed nothing. Neither scatter shot nor a solid ball did anything, so he cut a silver button from his jacket, blessed it three times, and loaded it into his gun. This time he hit the duck, but it flew up out of the water, into the farmyard, and roosted in the hen house. He then ran after it and told the farm people who were seated down to supper what had happened. He asked for the duck that he had shot. The man said that he should go into the kitchen and tell the servant girl to help him get his duck. But when he went into the kitchen there was a disgusting old witch sitting in the fireplace. She had only one shoe on, and blood was running freely down her leg. She said that she had injured herself by falling down. But the hunter immediately knew that this was the witch he had shot at, and he hurried away as fast as he could. Source (books.google.com): J. M. Thiele, "Hexen og Jægeren," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), pp. 103-104 . Source (Internet Archive): J. M. Thiele, "Hexen og Jægeren," Danmarks Folkesagn , vol. 2 (Copenhagen: C. A. Reitzels Forlag, 1843), pp. 103-104 . Return to the table of contents . A Witch in Hare-Skin Denmark One winter a bad hare was was eating the poor people's cabbage from their garden next to the almshouse. A skilled marksman was summoned. He came and sat in a window in the evening to look for the hare. Towards midnight the hare hopped over the fence into the cabbage patch. The hunter sent hail of shot at it, but the hare did not seem to mind. It just stood there calmly eating the cabbage. The marksman loaded his gun again and sent another charge, but to no avail. The hunter then asked his father, who also was a skilled marksman, what he should do. The old man had a silver shilling with a cross on it. He bent it and loaded it into his gun. The next night he went to the almshouse. The hare came as usual, and the old marksman fired at it. The hare immediately jumped up, and in its place there stood an old woman from the town. The silver shilling was lodged in her forehead, and therefore she could no longer bewitch herself. She had to carry this mark with her in her forehead all her days, because she had wanted to eat the poor people's cabbage. Source (books.google.com): Jens Kamp, "En Heks i Hareham," Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R. Nielsens Forlag, 1877), no. 860, p. 262 . Source (Internet Archive): Jens Kamp, "En Heks i Hareham," Danske Folkeminder, Æventyr, Folkesagn, Gaader, Rim og Folketro (Odense: R. Nielsens Forlag, 1877), no. 860, p. 262 . Return to the table of contents . An Old Witch England An old witch, in days of yore, lived in this neighborhood; and whenever she wanted money she would assume the shape of a hare, and would send out her grandson to tell a certain huntsman who lived hard by that he had seen a hare sitting at such a particular spot, for which he always received the reward of sixpence. After this deception had many times been practiced, the dogs turned out, the hare pursued, and often seen but never caught, a sportsman of the party began to suspect, in the language of the tradition, "that the devil was in the dance," and there would be no end to it. The matter was discussed, a justice consulted, and a clergyman to boot; and it was thought that, however clever the devil might be, law and church combined would be more than a match for him. It was therefore agreed that, as the boy was singularly regular in the hour at which he came to announce the sight of the hare, all should be in readiness for a start the instant such information was given; and a neighbor of the witch, nothing friendly to her, promised to let the parties know directly the old woman and her grandson left the cottage and went off together, the one to be hunted, and the other to set on the hunt. The news came, the hounds were unkenneled, and huntsmen and sportsmen set off with surprising speed. The witch, now a hare, and her little colleague in iniquity, did not expect so very speedy a turnout; so that the game was pursued at a desperate rate, and the boy, forgetting himself in a moment of alarm, was heard to exclaim, "Run, Granny, run! Run for your life!" At last the pursuers lost the hare, and she once more got safe into the cottage by a little hole in the door, not large enough to admit a hound in chase. The huntsman and all the squires with their train lent a hand to break open the door, yet could not do it till the parson and the justice came up; but as law and church were certainly designed to break through iniquity, even so did they now succeed in bursting the magic bonds that opposed them. Upstairs they all went. There they found the old hag bleeding, and covered with wounds, and still out of breath. She denied she was a hare, and railed at the whole party. "Call up the hounds," said the huntsman, "and let us see what they take her to be. Maybe we may yet have another hunt." On hearing this the old woman cried quarter. The boy dropped on his knees, and begged hard for mercy -- mercy was granted on condition of its being received together with a good whipping; and the huntsman, having long practiced amongst the hounds, now tried his hand on their game. Thus the old woman escaped a worse fate for the time present; but on being afterwards put on her trial for bewitching a young woman and making her spit pins, the tale just told was given as evidence against her, before a particularly learned judge, and a remarkably sagacious jury, and the old woman finished her days, like a martyr, at the stake. Anna Eliza Bray, "An Old Witch," Traditions, Legends, Superstitions, and Sketches of Devonshire on the Borders of the Tamar and the Tavy , vol. 2 (London: John Murray, 1838), pp. 277-78 . Return to the table of contents . The Weaver's Wife and the Witch England Once upon a time a weaver and his wife lived at lived at Sutton-on-Trent in Nottinghamshire. One day the weaver went to Neward to sell his linen, leaving his children in the house, and his wife, who lay ill in bed. Now at that time there lived at Sutton a witch who had some spite against the weaver's wife. A short time after the weaver had gone one of the children heard a noise as of something pattering up and down stairs. The child opened the door of the bottom stairs, and there she saw a great ugly cat, which she could not catch, try as she would. As she was trying to catch it the cat ran upstairs, sprang upon the bed where the poor woman lay, and clawed her. But the woman roused herself and knocked the cat down. Now when the weaver came back from Newark the children told him about the cat. So he watched all night in an old lumber-room, for the cat came in and went out through a broken pane in the window. One night the cat came in as the weaver was sitting by the fire, so he picked up a fork and struck her on the cheek. He then threw her out of doors, believing that she was dead. But in the morning, when he went to look for the cat's body, he could not find it. But ever after that the witch had her face tied up, and she had no more power to do harm to the weaver or to his family. Source: Sidney Oldall Addy Household Tales with other Traditional Remains: Collected in the Counties of York, Lincoln, Derby, and Nottingham (London: David Nutt, 1895), no. 44, pp. 43-44 . Return to the table of contents . The Shot Hare Wales Beti Ifan was one of the witches of Bedd Gelert. Her fear had fallen upon nearly all the inhabitants, so that she was refused nothing by any one, for she had the reputation of being able to handle ghosts, and to curse people and their possessions. She therefore lived in comfort and ease, doing nothing except keeping her house moderately clean, and leaning on the lower half of her front door knitting and watching passers-by. But there was one man in the village, a cobbler and a skilled poacher, who feared neither Beti Ifan nor any other old hag of the kind. His great hobby was to tease and annoy the old woman by showing her a hare or a wild duck, and asking her if she would like to get it. When she replied she would, he used to hand it almost within her reach and then pull it back, and walk away. She could not do him much harm, as he had a birthmark above his breast; but she contrived a way by which she could have her revenge on him. She used to transform herself into a wild duck or hare, and continually appear before him on the meadows and among the trees whenever he went out poaching, but took good care to keep outside the reach of the gun. He, being a good shot, and finding himself missing so frequently, began to suspect something to be amiss. He knew of a doctor who was a "skilled man" living not far away, so he went to consult him. The doctor told him, "Next time you go out take with you a small branch of mountain ash, and a bit of vervain and place it under the stock of the gun." Then giving him a piece of paper with some writing on, he said, "When you see the hare, or any other creature of which you have some doubt, read this backward, and if it is old Beti you will see her in her own form, though she retain her assumed form; shoot at her legs, but mind you do not shoot her anywhere else." The next day, as he was working his way through a grove near Beti's house, he could see a large hare hopping in front of him. He drew out his paper and read as he was instructed; he then fired at her legs, and the hare ran towards Beti's cottage. He ran after it, and was just in time to see the hare jumping over the lower half of the house door. Going up to the cottage he could hear the old woman groaning; when he went in she was sitting by the fire with blood streaming from her legs. He was never again troubled with the hare-like appearances of old Beti'r Fedw. Source: D. E. Jenkins, Bedd Gellert: Its Facts, Fairies, and Folk-Lore (Portmadox: Llewelyn Jenkins, 1899), pp. 79-80 . Mountain ash (rowan) was known throughout Europe for its protective qualities against witches, fairies, etc. Return to the table of contents . The Two Cat Witches Wales In old days, it was believed that the seventh son, in a family of sons, was a conjurer by nature. That is, he could work wonders like the fairies and excel the doctors in curing diseases. If he were the seventh son of a seventh son, he was himself a wonder of wonders. The story ran that he could even cure the "shingles," which is a very troublesome disease. It is called also by a Latin name, which means a snake, because, as it gets worse, it coils itself around the body. Now the eagle can attack the serpent and conquer and kill this poisonous creature. To secure such power, Hugh, the conjurer, ate the flesh of eagles. When he wished to cure the serpent disease, he uttered words in the form of a charm which acted as a talisman and cure. After wetting the red rash, which had broken out over the sick person's body, he muttered, "He-eagle, she-eagle, I send you over nine seas, and over nine mountains, and over nine acres of moor and fen, where no dog shall bark, no cow low, and no eagle shall higher rise." After that, the patient was sure that he felt better. There was always great rivalry between these conjurers and those who made money from the pilgrims at holy wells and visitors to the relic shrines, but this fellow, named Hugh, and the monks, kept on mutually good terms. They often ate dinner together, for Hugh was a great traveler over the whole country and always had news to tell to the holy brothers who lived in cells. One night, as he was eating supper at an inn, four men came in and sat down at the table with him. By his magical power, Hugh knew that they were robbers and meant to kill him that night, in order to get his money. So, to divert their attention, Hugh made something like a horn to grow up out of the table, and then laid a spell on the robbers, so that they were kept gazing at the curious thing all night long, while he went to bed and slept soundly. When he rose in the morning, he paid his bill and went away, while the robbers were still gazing at the horn. Only when the officers arrived to take them to prison did they come to themselves. Now at Bettws-y-Coed -- that pretty place which has a name that sounds so funny to us Americans and suggests a girl named Betty the Co-ed at college -- there was a hotel, named the "Inn of Three Kegs." The shop sign hung out in front. It was a bunch of grapes gilded and set below three small barrels. This inn was kept by two respectable ladies, who were sisters. Yet in that very hotel, several travelers, while they were asleep, had been robbed of their money. They could not blame anyone nor tell how the mischief was done. With the key in the keyhole, they had kept their doors locked during the night. They were sure that no one had entered the room. There were no signs of men's boots, or of anyone's footsteps in the garden, while nothing was visible on the lock or door, to show that either had been tampered with. Everything was in order as when they went to bed. Some people doubted their stories, but when they applied to Hugh the conjurer, he believed them and volunteered to solve the mystery. His motto was "Go anywhere and everywhere, but catch the thief." When Hugh applied one night for lodging at the inn, nothing could be more agreeable than the welcome, and fine manners of his two hostesses. At supper time, and during the evening, they all chatted together merrily. Hugh, who was never at a loss for news or stories, told about the various kinds of people and the many countries he had visited, in imagination, just as if he had seen them all, though he had never set foot outside of Wales. When he was ready to go to bed, he said to the ladies, "It is my custom to keep a light burning in my room, all night, but I will not ask for candles, for I have enough to last me until sunrise." So saying, he bade them good night. Entering his room and locking the door, he undressed, but laid his clothes near at hand. He drew his trusty sword out of its sheath and laid it upon the bed beside him, where he could quickly grasp it. Then he pretended to be asleep and even snored. It was not long before, peeping between his eyelids, only half closed, he saw two cats come stealthily down the chimney. When in the room, the animals frisked about, and then gamboled and romped in the most lively way. Then they chased each other around the bed, as if they were trying to find out whether Hugh was asleep. Meanwhile, the supposed sleeper kept perfectly motionless. Soon the two cats came over to his clothes and one of them put her paw into the pocket that contained his purse. At this, with one sweep of his sword, Hugh struck at the cat's paw. The beast howled frightfully, and both animals ran for the chimney and disappeared. After that, everything was quiet until breakfast time. At the table, only one of the sisters was present. Hugh politely inquired after the other one. He was told that she was not well, for which Hugh said he was very sorry. After the meal, Hugh declared he must say good-bye to both the sisters, whose company he had so enjoyed the night before. In spite of the other lady's many excuses, he was admitted to the sick lady's room. After polite greetings and mutual compliments, Hugh offered his hand to say "good-by." The sick lady smiled at once and put out her hand, but it was her left one. "Oh, no," said Hugh, with a laugh. "I never in all my life have taken any one's left hand, and, beautiful as yours is, I won't break my habit by beginning now and here." Reluctantly, and as if in pain, the sick lady put out her hand. It was bandaged. The mystery was now cleared up. The two sisters were cats. By the help of bad fairies they had changed their forms and were the real robbers. Hugh seized the hand of the other sister and made a little cut in it, from which a few drops of blood flowed, but the spell was over. "Henceforth," said Hugh, "you are both harmless, and I trust you will both be honest women." And they were. From that day they were like other women, and kept one of the best of those inns -- clean, tidy, comfortable and at modest prices -- for which Wales is, or was, noted. Neither as cats with paws, nor landladies, with soaring bills, did they ever rob travelers again. Source: William Elliot Griffis, Welsh Fairy Tales (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Company, 1921), no. 3, pp. 15-20 . Return to the table of contents . The Witch Hare Ireland I was out thracking hares meeself, and I seen a fine puss of a thing hopping, hopping in the moonlight, and whacking her ears about, now up, now down, and winking her great eyes, and -- "Here goes," says I, and the thing was so close to me that she turned round and looked at me, and then bounced back, as well as to say, do your worst! So I had the least grain in life of blessed powder left, and I put it in the gun -- and bang at her! My jewel, the scritch she gave would frighten a rigment, and a mist, like, came betwixt me and her, and I seen her no more; but when the mist wint off I saw blood on the spot where she had been, and I followed its track, and at last it led me -- whist, whisper -- right up to Katey MacShane's door; and when I was at the thrashold, I heerd a murnin' within, a great murnin', and a groanin', and I opened the door, and there she was herself, sittin' quite content in the shape of a woman, and the black cat that was sittin' by her rose up its back and spit at me; but I went on never heedin', and asked the ould ____ how she was and what ailed her. "Nothing," sis she. "What's that on the floor?" sis I. "Oh," she says, "I was cuttin' a billet of wood," she says, "wid the reaping hook," she says, "an' I've wounded meself in the leg," she says, "and that's drops of my precious blood," she says. Source: William Butler Yeats, Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry (London: Walter Scott, 1888), pp. 154-55 . Yeats's source: Mr. and Mrs. S. C. Hall. Return to the table of contents . Witches Ireland Witches are not popular in Ireland nowadays. They were generally old hags who by the evil power they possessed could charm away butter, or compound love-potions, or at most assume the form of a hare and suck the milk from their neighbor's cows before the sunlight touched the dew. There is a story common to every rural district in Ireland of a witch who was surprised in the act by a huntsman, and on being pursued by the dogs fled to a cabin where, having assumed her natural shape, she was discovered spinning, with the blood streaming from a wound in her side. Source: Patrick Bardan, The Dead-Watchers, and Other Folk-Lore Tales of Westmeath (Mullingar: Printed at the "Westmeath Guardian" office, and published for the author, 1891), p. 83 . Return to the table of contents . The Old Hare Ireland When I was a little girl, 'twas out near Loop Head I live. Well, there was an old woman lived in a small little cabin by herself, and all the neighbors around used to be in dread of her. They said she was chanted [haunted]. No one knew how she lived, for she never left the cabin in the day, but they said she used to go out through the fields at night. Nearly every week some of the neigbors' milk would be gone, and if it wasn't, if they were churning for a month, 'twouldn't make butter. One, a man name of Shawn Teigue Mack, said he would know if 'twas she that was taking the butter. So he watched all night at the cabin, and about twelve o'clock he saw a hare come out of the house. The very minute it saw Shawn, away would it across the field, but Shawn fired, and struck it in the shoulder. Begor, the next morning tracks of blood was seen along the road to the cabin. What did Shawn do, but call to the cabin, and the door was barred from inside. But he shoved in the window, and sure enough, there was the old dame, and all her shoulder wrapped up in calico. She left the place shortly after, for she knew she was found out, and no one ever missed butter or milk after. Source: "Folk-Tales from County Limerick collected by Miss D. Knox," Folk-Lore: A Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition, Institution, & Custom (London: Folk-Lore Society, 1917), v. 28, p. 214. Knox's source: Told by Kate Vasey, Moveen, County Clare. I have revised Knox's spelling, changing "nabors" to "neighbors," "cum," to "come," "minit" to "minute," etc. Return to the table of contents . The Woman-Cat USA (North Carolina) Der was a man owned a mill, an' he couldn't stay at it late. Something would run him away. One day an ol' traveller come along, an' asked him what would he give him to stay dere dat night. He said he would give him mos' anything if he would stay. So he went in, an' takin' his book, his Bible, an' surd [sword], an' sat down an' kimminced a-readin'. It was eight or nine cats came in 'rectly after dark, an' staid there until gettin' late. An' one of them made a drive at de man, an' he up with his surd an' cut his right front foot off. An' dey all left then. Nex' mornin' he went up to de house fur breakfast. An' de miller he was gettin' breakfas'. His wife was not able. He wanted to know what was de trouble. He said she was cuttin' a ham-bone in two an' hurt her han'. He showed the man a ring, an' asked him would he own it. He said he would. He said that was his wife ring he bought him [her] befo' dey was married. So they went in de room an' asked her was dat her ring. She said it was not. Then they looked, an' her right han' was cut off at de wrist. Source: Elsie Clews Parsons, "Tales from Guilford County, North Carolina," The Journal of American Folklore , vol. 30, no. 116, (Apr. - Jun., 1917), pp. 168-200 . This account (no. 54) is found on p. 196. Parson's informant: Lulu Young, about 25. Return to the table of contents . The Severed Hand USA Mr. H___ owned a mill among the Smoky Mountains in Georgia. Three of his millers died successively of some obscure disease that the doctors could not diagnose. All these men were unmarried, and lived in the mill itself. Their illnesses were brief, and it was observed that when attacked they all vainly attempted to make some communication to their friends. This it was supposed had reference to the mysterious cause that hurried them to the grave. People began at once to feel a dread of these premises, and particularly of a long, low room off the entrance, in which these unfortunate men sat of an evening and slept. Nobody could be induced to take the place made vacant, and it seemed as if the establishment was to be abandoned, when one of the neighbors who lived a short distance down the stream volunteered to run the mill. He ground his axe, and came the same evening. While kindling a fire on the hearth a brindled cat glided out of the chimney, and without exciting any special attention on his part at this time, ensconced herself in a dark corner near the door. He soon had a cheerful blaze, and sat down by a table in front of it to read his Bible. But as time passed a feeling of uneasiness, of which he was conscious from the first, grew upon him, and gradually deepened into a kind of horror. It was utterly unconnected with any definite apprehension, or sense of real danger. Then the cat got up and wailed at the door, clawing to be let out. She rubbed against his legs, and looked up at him. Instantly an awful half-recognition of those eyes shot through his brain, and leaping up he seized the axe and struck at her, cutting off one foot. With a wild woman's scream the creature darted up the chimney and disappeared, while he, thoroughly unnerved, hastened home, and found his wife bleeding to death from a severed hand. Source (JSTOR): J. Hampden Porter, "Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Mountain Whites of the Alleghanies," Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 7 (1894), p. 115 . Source (Internet Archive): J. Hampden Porter, "Notes on the Folk-Lore of the Mountain Whites of the Alleghanies," Journal of American Folk-Lore , vol. 7 (1894), p. 115 . Porter does not give this account a title. Return to the table of contents . Related Links Like the above stories, legends about werewolves also frequently describe how demonic shape-shifters suffer injuries which lead to their discovery. For example: Karl Bartsch, Werewolves (stories 1 and 3). Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Werewolves (story 2). Return to: Witchcraft Legends . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology . The table of contents . Revised August 25, 2022. Witchcraft Legends Witchcraft Legends translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2000-2018 Contents The Witches' Revenge (Germany, J. G. Th. Grässe). Frau Trude (Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm). Two Eyes Too Many (Germany, Carl and Theodor Colshorn). The Witch of Treva (England, Robert Hunt). Ridden by a Witch (Germany, August Ey). The Dark Daughter of the Norse King (Scotland, John Gregorson Campbell). The Witches' Excursion (Ireland, Patrick Kennedy). The Trip to the Brocken (Germany, Heinrich Pröhle). The Witch Ride (Germany, Adalbert Kuhn). The Witch That Was Hurt: Migratory Legends of Type 3055 . This link will take you to a separate file. Related links . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Witches' Revenge Germany, J. G. Th. Grässe Many years ago a night watchman in Schwerte was courting two sisters at the same time, but without being serious about marriage. Each of them asked him about this several times, but to no avail. Therefore at last they got together and swore revenge against him. Now both of these sisters were witches. One night when the night watchman was lying in bed there came a knock at his window. When he opened it, the two of them took hold of him, picked him up, and carried him high into the air. At first they wanted to throw him into the Ruhr River, but they reconsidered and set him, entirely naked, at the top of a tall tree where he was found half dead the next day. Source: J. G. Th. Grässe, "Die Hexenrache," Sagenbuch des Preußischen Staats , vol. 1 (Glogau: Verlag von Carl Flemming, 1868), no. 453, p. 727 . Return to the table of contents . Frau Trude Germany, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Once upon a time there was a small girl who was strong willed and forward, and whenever her parents said anything to her, she disobeyed them. How could anything go well with her? One day she said to her parents: "I have heard so much about Frau Trude. Someday I want to go to her place. People say such amazing things are seen there, and such strange things happen there, that I have become very curious. Her parents strictly forbade her, saying: "Frau Trude is a wicked woman who commits godless acts. If you go there, you will no longer be our child. But the girl paid no attention to her parents and went to Frau Trude's place anyway. When she arrived there, Frau Trude asked: "Why are you so pale?" "Oh," she answered, trembling all over, "I saw something that frightened me." "What did you see?" "I saw a black man on your steps." "That was a charcoal burner." "Then I saw a green man." "That was a huntsman." "Then I saw a blood-red man." "That was a butcher." "Oh, Frau Trude, it frightened me when I looked through your window and could not see you, but instead saw the devil with a head of fire." "Aha!" she said. "So you saw the witch properly outfitted. I have been waiting for you and wanting you for a long time. Light the way for me now!" With that she turned to girl into a block of wood and threw it into the fire. When it was thoroughly aglow she sat down next to it, and warmed herself by it, saying: "It gives such a bright light!" Source: Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, Kinder- und Hausmärchen , 7th ed. (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), no. 43, p. 218 . This story was added to the Grimms' collection in the third edition (1837). Return to the table of contents . Two Eyes Too Many Germany, Carl and Theodor Colshorn In Hiddestorf, not too long ago, there lived a widow who every Sunday was miraculously able to cook the most delicious meals. By the time that the servant girls had gone to church in the morning, she had not yet made a fire, had not cleaned the vegetables, and had not even fetched any meat. But by the time church was finished, the best meal was on the table. Because that was not possible with ordinary powers, one Sunday a servant hid himself behind a large barrel in the kitchen in order to spy on the woman. Just about the time the sermon was beginning there was a commotion in the chimney, and the devil came down and began to caress the woman. Afterward he started to fill the pots for her, but he suddenly stood still and said, "Woman, there are two eyes too many in here!" She denied it. "There are two eyes too many in here!" he said again, but when the woman began to make fun of him, he filled the pots and disappeared up the chimney. At noon when everyone was seated at the table, the servant said, "I don't want to eat, because I know that it came from the devil!" He had scarcely spoken when the Black One came in through the window, grabbed the woman by her braid, wrung her neck, and flew out the window with her. Source: Carl and Theodor Colshorn, "Zwei Augen zu viel," Märchen und Sagen (Hannover: Verlag von Carl Rümpler, 1854), no. 51, p. 160 . Hiddestorf is a village south of Hannover in north central Germany. Return to the table of contents . The Witch of Treva England, Robert Hunt Once on a time, long ago, there lived at Treva, a hamlet in Zennor, a wonderful old lady deeply skilled in necromancy. Her charms, spells, and dark incantations made her the terror of the neighborhood. However, this old lady failed to impress her husband with any belief in her supernatural powers, nor did he fail to proclaim his unbelief aloud. One day this skeptic came home to dinner, and found, being exceedingly hungry, to his bitter disappointment, that not only was there no dinner to eat, but that there was no meat in the house. His rage was great, but all he could get from his wife was, "I couldn't get meat out of the stones, could I?" It was in vain to give the reins to passion, the old woman told him, and he must know "that hard words buttered no parsnips." Well, at length he resolved to put his wife's powers to the proof, and he quietly but determinedly told her that he would be the death of her if she did not get him some dinner; but if in half an hour she gave him some good cooked meat, he would believe all she had boasted of her power, and be submissive to her forever. St. Ives, the nearest market town, was five miles off; but nothing doubting, the witch put on her bonnet and cloak, and started. Her husband watched her from their cottage door, down the hill; and at the bottom of the hill, he saw his wife quietly place herself on the ground and disappear. In her place a fine hare ran on at its full speed. He was not a little startled, but he waited, and within the half hour in walked his wife with "good flesh and taties all ready for aiting." There was no longer any doubt, and the poor husband lived in fear of the witch of Treva to the day of her death. This event took place after a few years, and it is said the room was full of evil spirits, and that the old woman's shrieks were awful to hear. Howbeit, peace in the shape of pale-faced death came to her at last, and then a black cloud rested over the house when all the heavens were clear and blue. She was borne to the grave by six aged men, carried, as is the custom, underhand. When they were about half way between the house and the church, a hare started from the roadside and leaped over the coffin. The terrified bearers let the corpse fall to the ground, and ran away. Another lot of men took up the coffin and proceeded. They had not gone far when puss was suddenly seen seated on the coffin, and again the coffin was abandoned. After long consultation, and being persuaded by the parson to carry the old woman very quickly into the churchyard, while he walked before, six others made the attempt, and as the parson never ceased to repeat the Lord's Prayer, all went on quietly. Arrived at the church stile, they rested the corpse, the parson paused to commence the ordinary burial service, and there stood the hare, which, as soon as the clergyman began "I am the resurrection and the life," uttered a diabolical howl, changed into a black, unshapen creature, and disappeared. Source: Robert Hunt, Popular Romances of the West of England; or, The Drolls, Traditions, and Superstitions of Old Cornwall , 3rd edition (London: Chatto and Windus, 1881), pp. 335-36 . Return to the table of contents . Ridden by a Witch Germany, August Ey A miner was always making fun of people who claimed that witches ride to the Brocken on Walpurgis Night. He often said, "If such an old creature ever crosses my path, I will throw her down. What chance would such an old skeleton of a hag made up of nothing but skin and bones have against the likes of me?" "Now, now," an old neighbor woman who lived nearby would say. "It wouldn't be all that easy to throw down such a rider. You should be careful what you say!" "Tomfoolery! Tomfoolery!" he said. "I'd make her forget about riding." To that the old woman said nothing. Walpurgis Night arrived. There was shooting everywhere, as though the enemy were attacking. They were shooting off firecrackers, flintlocks, rifles, and pistols. On that evening everyone was firing his shooting iron, and the louder the noise, the better everyone liked it. About nine o'clock the miner learned that something had gone wrong in the shaft, and he was called upon to report for duty. He got as far as Bremen Hill when he was approached by a swarm of old hags flying through the air. There was such commotion and uproar as though all the devils were on the loose. One of the hags came down, turned the miner over, whether he wanted to or not, and mounted him. Then away they went through the air, following the others to the Brocken. He could barely breathe, and the old hag was so heavy that she nearly broke his bones. She finally climbed off him, and he fell to the ground half dead. The other witches then surrounded him and danced around him, and the devil himself was there with them. Finally they picked him up and asked him if he could remain silent, or if he would like to be boiled in oil. Now no one wants to be boiled in oil, so he said that he would never say anything about the witches. Then the devil said to him that he would be a child of death if he ever uttered a single word. And then the witches did unspeakable things up there on the mountain. As midnight approached, they all gathered together, and one of the witches again took our miner and mounted him, and they swarmed through the air until they reached Bremen Hill near Claustal. They released him at the same spot where the witch had captured him. He lay there for a few hours recovering his strength; then he slowly crept homeward. When he arrived home, his wife was already up and was preparing to go into the woods for a load of wood. "Wife," he said, "stay here. I have had a bad night. Go into the kitchen and put a little wood into the stove. I have been sweating, and I need to change my clothes." She did what he said. He then told the stove what had happened. His wife overheard it all, but said nothing. A half hour later the old neighbor woman came by and said that it was a good thing he had spoken to the stove and not to a person, or he would see how things would go with him. And thus they knew that she was a witch. The wife reported her, and the wicked witch was burned to death, just as she deserved. Source: August Ey, "Der Hexenritt," Harzmärchenbuch; oder, Sagen und Märchen aus dem Oberharze (Stade: Verlag von Fr. Steudel, 1862), pp. 46-48 . The Brocken is the highest summit (elevation 3747 feet, 1142 meters) in the Harz Mountains of central Germany. Witches are said to assemble there for their yearly "Sabbath" on Walpurgis Night, the eve of May 1st. Click here to see the woodcut Witches' Sabbath by the German artist Hans Baldung Grien (1484/85-1545). This illustration comes from the WebMuseum, Paris. Return to the table of contents . The Dark Daughter of the Norse King Scotland When the Norsemen came, and their visits were frequent and numerous, to this country and these islands, to lay claim to and take possession of the land, the fame they gathered for themselves through their indulgence in every manner of cruel spoliation, and slaughter of the people wherever they landed, was that they were a bold, courageous, hardy, rough ("The Norsemen a rough band"), peremptory and unscrupulous race, and more than that, it was attributed to them that they practiced witchcraft, charms, and enchantments, and had much of other unhallowed learning among them. The Norse King's eldest daughter was particularly noted for her knowledge of the "Black Art." There was no accident or mischance that befell friends, or destruction that overtook enemies, or any luck or good fortune that attended either friend or foe, but it was said that she was the cause of it, or had some hand in it. She was famed at home and abroad, far and wide, for her skill among cows and cattle, she was said to possess every variety of dairy knowledge in her father's kingdom. There was no charm or evil eye that fell on any living creature in the fold but she could dispel and avert, nor hurt nor injury they got but she could heal, nor dizziness nor fits into which they fell, from which she could not restore them, until it was said of her that the lowing of cattle, the incoherent cry of calves, and the rough cry of yearlings was to her the sweetest and most soothing music, and that she would answer the call of cattle, though she might be lost in the midst of the northern woods, and the cry from the nethermost part of the farthest off quarter of the universe. She knew the herb that had the property of taking its qualities from milk, as well as she was acquainted with the spells by which its virtues could be restored, and every charm and invocation that was practiced or then esteemed. The flowers of the meadows and woods were as familiar to her as the ridges of corn or a grain on straw, and there was not a leaf on tree, bush, or shrub, with whose properties she was not acquainted. Her father's kingdom was clothed with pine wood, and was then as now famous for the fine quality of the wood from which most of the wealth of the kingdom was obtained. One of those times when the Norsemen came to Scotland to take possession of and sub-divide the land thus taken, they observed that the pine wood of Lochaber was growing so fast, and extending so far, that in time it might supersede the Black Forests of Sweden. But on this occasion the northern forces were driven back. On reaching home they reported the matter to the king, and their opinion, that the increase of the wood must be checked, otherwise his northern woods would be of little esteem. It occurred to the King to consult his daughter on the matter, since she was learned, and to get knowledge from her of the best method of thinning and destroying the Scottish wood. She gave him the desired information, but said that she must be the bearer of the method and must necessarily go to Scotland herself. She obtained the King's permission and made preparations for the journey. From the gifts she possessed, neither sea nor land, air nor earth could hinder her progress until she accomplished her purpose. When she reached Lochaber the method she adopted was to kindle a fire in the selvage of her dress, and she then began to go through the woods, and as she could travel in the clouds as well as on the ground, when she ascended and whirled in the air, the sparks of fire that flew from her dress were blown hither and thither by the wind and set the woods on fire, until the whole country was almost in a blaze, and so darkened by the smoke, that one could hardly see before them; and, from being blackened more than any tree in the forest, by the smoke and soot of the fiery furnace which surrounded her, she was known and spoken of by the name of "Dark, or Pitch Pine." The people gathered to watch her, but from the rapidity of her ascent and the swiftness with which she descended, they could not grasp her any more than they could prevent her, and were at a loss what to do. At last, they sought instruction from a learned man in the place. He advised them to collect a herd of cattle in a fold, wherever she would stand still, and whenever she heard the lowing of the cattle she would descend, and when she was within gun-shot they were to fire at her with a silver bullet, when she would become a faggot of bones. They followed this advice and began to gather cattle and follow after her until the pinfold large and small was full set in the "Center of Kintail." Whenever she heard the cry of the herd she descended and they aimed at her with the silver bullet, as the wise man told them to do, and she fell gently among them. Men lifted the remains and carried them to Lochaber, and to make sure that dead or alive she would do no more injury to them, they buried her in Achnacarry; and the person from whom the story was first heard nine years ago [1880] said that he could put his foot on the place where she was buried. The Norse King was amazed at his daughter not returning, and at his not receiving any account from her. He sent abroad to get tidings of her. When the news of the disaster that happened to her was brought to him, he sent a boat and crew to bring her home, but the Lochaber women by their incantations destroyed those whom he sent. The boat was wrecked, and the men lost, at the entrance to Locheil. The next ships that came were not more successful. The third time the King sent out his most powerful fleet. What they did then was to send and try through spells to dry up the wells of the Fairy Hill of Iona. The virtue of these wells was that wind could be obtained from any desired quarter by emptying them in the direction of the wind wished for. When the ships were seen approaching, the wells began to be emptied, and before the last handful was flung out, the storm was so violent, and the ships so near, that the whole fleet was driven on the beach under the Fairy Hill, and the power and might of the Norsemen was broken and so much weakened that they did not return again to infest the land. Source: Clan Traditions and Popular Tales of the Western Highlands and Islands . Collected from oral sources by the late Rev. John Gregorson Campbell, Minister of Tiree. Selected from the author's MS. remains, and edited by Jessie Wallace and Duncan MacIsaac, with introduction by Alfred Nutt. London: David Nutt, 1895, pp. 101-104 . The story's full title is "The Dark, or Pitch-Pine, Daughter of the Norse King, and How She Thinned the Woods of Lochaber." Return to the table of contents . The Witches' Excursion Ireland, Patrick Kennedy Shemus Rua (Red James) awakened from his sleep one night by noises in his kitchen. Stealing to the door, he saw half-a-dozen old women sitting round the fire, jesting and laughing, his old housekeeper, Madge, quite frisky and gay, helping her sister crones to cheering glasses of punch. He began to admire the impudence and imprudence of Madge, displayed in the invitation and the riot, but recollected on the instant her officiousness in urging him to take a comfortable posset, which she had brought to his bedside just before he fell asleep. Had he drunk it, he would have been just now deaf to the witches' glee. He heard and saw them drink his health in such a mocking style as nearly to tempt him to charge them, besom in hand, but he restrained himself. The jug being emptied, one of them cried out, "Is it time to be gone?" and at the same moment, putting on a red cap, she added -- Hie over to England. Making use of a twig which she held in her hand as a steed, she gracefully soared up the chimney, and was rapidly followed by the rest. But when it came to the housekeeper, Shemus interposed. "By your leave, ma'am," said he, snatching twig and cap. "Ah, you desateful ould crocodile! If I find you here on my return, there'll be wigs on the green-- Hie over to England." The words were not out of his mouth when he was soaring above the ridge pole, and swiftly plowing the air. He was careful to speak no word (being somewhat conversant with witch-lore), as the result would be a tumble, and the immediate return of the expedition. In a very short time they had crossed the Wicklow hills, the Irish Sea, and the Welsh mountains, and were charging, at whirlwind speed, the hall door of a castle. Shemus, only for the company in which he found himself, would have cried out for pardon, expecting to be mummy against the hard oak door in a moment; but, all bewildered, he found himself passing through the keyhole, along a passage, down a flight of steps, and through a cellar-door key-hole before he could form any clear idea of his situation. Waking to the full consciousness of his position, he found himself sitting on a stallion, plenty of lights glimmering round, and he and his companions, with full tumblers of frothing wine in hand, hob-nobbing and drinking healths as jovially and recklessly as if the liquor was honestly come be, and they were sitting in Shemus's own kitchen. The red birredh [cap] has assimilated Shemus's nature for the time being to that of his unholy companions. The heady liquors soon got into their brains, and a period of unconsciousness succeeded the ecstasy, the headache, the turning round of the barrels, and the "scattered sight" of poor Shemus. He woke up under the impression of being roughly seized, and shaken, and dragged upstairs, and subjected to a disagreeable examination by the lord of the castle, in his state parlor. There was much derision among the whole company, gentle and simple, on hearing Shemus's explanation, and, as the thing occurred in the dark ages, the unlucky Leinster man was sentenced to be hung as soon as the gallows could be prepared for the occasion. The poor Hibernian was in the cart proceeding on his last journey, with a label on his back, and another on his breast, announcing him as the remorseless villain who for the last month had been draining the casks in my lord's vault every night. He was surprised to hear himself addressed by his name, and in his native tongue, by an old woman in the crows. "Ach, Shemus, alanna! is it going to die you are in a strange place without your cappen d'yarrag [red cap]? These words infused hope and courage into the poor victim's heart. He turned to the lord and humbly asked leave to die in his red cap, which he supposed had dropped from his head in the vault. A servant was sent for the head-piece, and Shemus felt lively hope warming his heart while placing it on his head. On the platform he was graciously allowed to address the spectators, which he proceeded to do so in the usual formula composed for the benefit of flying stationers -- "Good people all, a warning take by me;" but when he had finished the line, "My parents reared me tenderly," he unexpectedly added -- "By yarrow and rue," etc., and the disappointed spectators saw him shoot up obliquely though the air in the style of a sky-rocket that had missed its aim. It is said that the lord gook the circumstance much to heart, and never afterwards hung a man for twenty-four hours after his offense. Source: W. B. Yeats, Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry (London: Walter Scott, 1888), pp. 168-70 . Yeats's source: Patrick Kennedy, Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts (London: Macmillan and Company, 1866), pp. 166-68 . Return to the table of contents . The Trip to the Brocken Germany Once upon a time there was a young man who was engaged to marry a pretty girl. After a while the bridegroom-to-be became suspicious of his fiancée and her mother. You see, they were both witches. The day came when witches go the Brocken, and the two women climbed into the hayloft, took a small glass, drank from it, and suddenly disappeared. The bridegroom-to-be, who had sneaked after them and observed them, was tempted to take a swallow from the glass. He picked it up and sipped a little from it, and suddenly he was on the Brocken, where he saw how his fiancée and her mother were carrying on with the witches, who were dancing around the devil, who was standing in their midst. After the dance was ended, the devil commanded everyone to take her glass and drink, and immediately afterward they all flew off in the four directions of the wind. The bridegroom-to-be, however, stood there all soul alone on the Brocken, and freezing, for it was a cold night. He hadn't brought a glass with him, so he had to return on foot. After a long, difficult hike he finally came to his fiancée's. However, she was very angry, and her mother scolded him as well, for having drunk from the glass. Mother and daughter finally agreed to turn the bridegroom-to-be into a donkey, and that is what happened. The poor bridegroom-to-be was now a donkey, and he plodded unhappily from one house to the next, crying a sad "ee-ah, ee-ah." A man felt sorry for the donkey, took him into his stall, and gave him some hay. But understandably the donkey did not want to eat, and was driven from the stall with blows. After wandering about for a long time, long-ears finally came back to the house of his fiancée, the witch, and he cried out pitifully. The fiancée saw her former bridegroom-to-be, standing there before her door as a donkey with bowed head and ears hanging down. She regretted what she had done and said to the donkey, "I will help you, but you must do what I tell you. At a child's baptism, place yourself before the church door and let the baptismal water be poured over your back, and then you will be transformed back into a human." The donkey followed his fiancée's advice. The next Sunday, a child was baptized, and the donkey placed himself before the church door. When the baptismal service was over, the sexton wanted to pour out the baptismal water, but the donkey was standing in his way. "Go on, you old donkey!" said the sexton, but the donkey did not yield. Then the sexton became angry and poured the water over the animal's back. Now the donkey was redeemed and was transformed back into a man. He hurried to his fiancee, married her, and lived happily with her from that time forth. Source: Projekt Gutenberg, Die Fahrt nach dem Brocken . Projekt Gutenberg's source: Heinrich Pröhle, Unterharzische Sagen: Mit Anmerkungen und Abhandlungen (Aschersleben: Verlag von Oskar Folke, 1856), no. 314, pp. 120-21 . The Brocken is the highest summit (elevation 3747 feet, 1142 meters) in the Harz Mountains of central Germany. Witches are said to assemble there for their yearly "Sabbath" on Walpurgis Night, the eve of May 1st. Return to the table of contents . The Witch Ride Germany Once there was a wealthy peasant, whose wife -- the people said -- was a witch. This was repeated so often that the peasant himself finally heard the rumor. He wanted to get to the bottom of the matter, and thus one day before May Night he went out and got some turf from the grave of a child who had died without being baptized. He secretly hid the turf then went to bed with his wife. He closed his eyes and pretended to be asleep, although he remained awake and attentive. At the strike of twelve his wife did indeed get up and sneak out the bedroom door. The peasant, taking turf with him, followed her outside the house door, where she suddenly disappeared. He saw nothing but a troop of black horses. But the peasant did not allow himself to be deceived. Quickly placing the turf on his head, he saw -- instead of the black horses -- women and girls of his acquaintance. In their midst was his wife. He also heard them discussing their trip to Block Mountain. He recognized them, because anyone beneath the earth can see witches and spirits in their true form. Angered, the peasant jumped at his wife and swung himself onto her, just as one would climb onto an ordinary horse's back. He also knew witches' magic words and called out: Horse of black, horse so fleet, Do you duty with quick feet. Then she rose up and carried him into the air. She did not tire from the mighty ride, nor did the peasant grow tired. Again and again he called out: Horse of black, horse so fleet, Do you duty with quick feet. But that was his misfortune, because before he knew it, May Night was over. Morning broke across the mountains, and his wife was no longer a black horse. She let out a pitiful scream, and together they fell from high in the air, horribly smashing themselves to pieces. From that time forth they have made this same ride every night, and they will have no rest until the day of judgement. Source: Adalbert Kuhn, "Der Hexenritt," Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen und einigen andern, besonders den angrenzenden Gegenden Norddeutschlands , Erster Theil: Sagen (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1859), no. 419, pp. 373-74 . Kuhn's source: written correspondence from Dr. Boegekamp, a secondary school teacher in Berlin. Block Mountain (Blocksberg) is another name for the Brocken, the highest summit (elevation 3747 feet, 1142 meters) in the Harz Mountains of central Germany. Witches are said to assemble there for their yearly "Sabbath" on Walpurgis Night, the eve of May 1st. Return to the table of contents . Related Links The Witch That Was Hurt: Migratory Legends of Type 3055 . The Witches of the Logan Stone (England). How to Become a Witch (England). Witches' Sabbath , a woodcut by the German artist Hans Baldung Grien (1484/85-1545). This illustration comes from the WebMuseum, Paris. Return to the table of contents . D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised September 3, 2018. Wolves in Aesop's Fables Wolves in Aesop's Fables edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2003 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Wolf and the Lamb A wolf came upon a lamb straying from the flock, and felt some compunction about taking the life of so helpless a creature without some plausible excuse. So he cast about for a grievance and said at last, "Last year, sirrah, you grossly insulted me." "That is impossible, sir," bleated the lamb, "for I wasn't born then." "Well," retorted the wolf, "you feed in my pastures." "That cannot be," replied the lamb, "for I have never yet tasted grass." "You drink from my spring, then," continued the wolf. "Indeed, sir," said the poor lamb, "I have never yet drunk anything but my mother's milk." "Well, anyhow," said the wolf, "I'm not going without my dinner." And he sprang upon the lamb and devoured it without more ado. The Wolf in Sheep's Clothing A wolf resolved to disguise himself in order that he might prey upon a flock of sheep without fear of detection. So he clothed himself in a sheepskin and slipped among the sheep when they were out at pasture. He completely deceived the shepherd, and when the flock was penned for the night he was shut in with the rest. But that very night, as it happened, the shepherd, requiring a supply of mutton for the table, laid hands on the wolf in mistake for a sheep, and killed him with his knife on the spot. The Blind Man and the Cub There was once a blind man who had so fine a sense of touch that when any animal was put into his hands he could tell what it was merely by the feel of it. One day the cub of a wolf was put into his hands, and he was asked what it was. He felt it for some time, and then said, "Indeed, I am not sure whether it is a wolf's cub or a fox's. But this I know: It would never do to trust it in a sheepfold." Evil tendencies are early shown. The Shepherd's Boy and the Wolf A shepherd's boy was tending his flock near a village, and thought it would be great fun to hoax the villagers by pretending that a wolf was attacking the sheep; so he shouted out, "Wolf! Wolf!" and when the people came running up he laughed at them for their pains. He did this more than once, and every time the villagers found they had been hoaxed, for there was no wolf at all. At last a wolf really did come, and the boy cried, "Wolf! Wolf!" as loud as he could. But the people were so used to hearing him call that they took no notice of his cries for help. And so the wolf had it all his own way, and killed off sheep after sheep at his leisure. You cannot believe a liar even when he tells the truth. The Kid on the Housetop A kid climbed up onto the roof of an outhouse, attracted by the grass and other things that grew in the thatch. And as he stood there browsing away he caught sight of a wolf passing below and jeered at him because he couldn't reach him. The wolf only looked up and said, "I hear you, my young friend. But it is not you who mock me, but the roof on which you are standing." The Wolf, the Mother, and Her Child A hungry wolf was prowling about in search of food. By and by, attracted by the cries of a child, he came to a cottage. As he crouched beneath the window, he heard the mother say to the child, "Stop crying, do, or I'll throw you to the wolf!" Thinking she really meant what she said, he waited there a long time in the expectation of satisfying his hunger. In the evening he heard the mother fondling her child and saying, "If the naughty wolf comes, he shan't get my little one. Daddy will kill him." The wolf got up in much disgust and walked away. "As for the people in that house," said he to himself, "you can't believe a word they say." The Wolf and the Lion A wolf stole a lamb from the flock, and was carrying it off to devour it at his leisure when he met a lion, who took his prey away from him and walked off with it. He dared not resist, but when the lion had gone some distance he said, "It is most unjust of you to take what is mine away from me like that." The lion laughed and called out in reply, "It was justly yours, no doubt! The gift of a friend, perhaps, eh?" The Sheep, the Wolf, and the Stag A stag once asked a sheep to lend him a measure of wheat, saying that his friend the wolf would be his surety. The sheep, however, was afraid that they meant to cheat her; so she excused herself, saying, "The wolf is in the habit of seizing what he wants and running off with it without paying, and you, too, can run much faster than I. So how shall I he able to come up with either of you when the debt falls due?" Two blacks do not make a white. The Wolf and the Crane A wolf once got a bone stuck in his throat. So he went to a crane and begged her to put her long bill down his throat and pull it out. "I'll make it worth your while," he added. The crane did as she was asked and got the bone out quite easily. The wolf thanked her warmly and was just turning away, when she cried, "What about that fee of mine?" "Well, what about it?" snapped the wolf, baring his teeth as he spoke. "You can go about boasting that you once put your head into a wolf's mouth and didn't get it bitten off. What more do you want?" The Wolf and the Sheep A wolf was worried and badly bitten by dogs, and lay a long time for dead. By and by he began to revive, and, feeling very hungry, called out to a passing sheep and said, "Would you kindly bring me some water from the stream close by? I can manage about meat, if only I could get something to drink." But this sheep was no fool. "I can quite understand," said he, "that if I brought you the water, you would have no difficulty about the meat. Good morning." The Wolf, the Fox, and the Ape A wolf charged a fox with theft, which he denied, and the case was brought before an ape to be tried. When he had heard the evidence on both sides, the ape gave judgment as follows: "I do not think," he said, "that you, O wolf, ever lost what you claim. But all the same I believe that you, fox, are guilty of the theft, in spite of all your denials." The Wolf and the Shepherd A wolf hung about near a flock of sheep for a long time, but made no attempt to molest them. The shepherd at first kept a sharp eye on him, for he naturally thought he meant mischief. But as time went by, and the wolf showed no inclination to meddle with the flock, he began to look upon him more as a protector than as an enemy; and when one day some errand took him to the city, he felt no uneasiness at leaving the wolf with the sheep. But as soon as his back was turned, the wolf attacked them and killed the greater number. When the shepherd returned and saw the havoc he had wrought, he cried, "It serves me right for trusting my flock to a wolf." The Ass and the Wolf An ass was feeding in a meadow, and, catching sight of his enemy the wolf in the distance, pretended to be very lame and hobbled painfully along. When the wolf came up he asked the ass how he came to be so lame, and the ass replied that in going through a hedge he had trodden on a thorn, and he begged the wolf to pull it out with his teeth, "In case," he said, '"when you eat me, it should stick in your throat and hurt you very much." The wolf said he would, and told the ass to lift up his foot, and gave his whole mind to getting out the thorn. But the ass suddenly let out with his heels and fetched the wolf a fearful kick in the mouth, breaking his teeth; and then he galloped off at full speed. As soon as he could speak the wolf growled to himself, "It serves me right. My father taught me to kill, and I ought to have stuck to that trade instead of attempting to cure." The Wolf and the Boy A wolf, who had just enjoyed a good meal and was in a playful mood, caught sight of a boy lying flat upon the ground, and, realizing that he was trying to hide, and that it was fear of himself that made him do this, he went up to him and said, "Aha, I've found you, you see; but if you can say three things to me, the truth of which cannot be disputed, I will spare your life." The boy plucked up courage and thought for a moment, and then he said, "First, it is a pity you saw me; secondly, I was a fool to let myself be seen; and thirdly, we all hate wolves because they are always making unprovoked attacks upon our flocks." The wolf replied, "Well, what you say is true enough from your point of view; so you may go." The Lamb Chased by a Wolf A wolf was chasing a lamb, which took refuge in a temple. The wolf urged it to come out of the precincts, and said, "If you don't, the priest is sure to catch you and offer you up in sacrifice on the altar." To which the lamb replied, "Thanks, I think I'll stay where I am. I'd rather be sacrificed any day than be eaten up by a wolf." The Wolf and the Goat A wolf caught sight of a goat browsing above him on the scanty herbage that grew on the top of a steep rock; and being unable to get at her, tried to induce her to come lower down. "You are risking your life up there, madam, indeed you are," he called out. "Pray take my advice and come down here, where you will find plenty of better food." The goat turned a knowing eye upon him. "It's little you care whether I get good grass or bad," said she. "What you want is to eat me." The Kingdom of the Lion When the lion reigned over the beasts of the earth he was never cruel or tyrannical, but as gentle and just as a king ought to be. During his reign he called a general assembly of the beasts and drew up a code of laws under which all were to live in perfect equality and harmony. The wolf and the lamb, the tiger and the stag, the leopard and the kid, the dog and the hare, all should dwell side by side in unbroken peace and friendship. The hare said, "Oh! How I have longed for this day when the weak take their place without fear by the side of the strong!" The Kid and the Wolf A kid strayed from the flock and was chased by a wolf. When he saw he must be caught he turned round and said to the wolf, "I know, sir, that I can't escape being eaten by you; and so, as my life is bound to be short, I pray you let it be as merry as may be. Will you not play me a tune to dance to before I die?" The wolf saw no objection to having some music before his dinner; so he took out his pipe and began to play, while the Kid danced before him. Before many minutes were passed the gods who guarded the flock heard the sound and came up to see what was going on. They no sooner clapped eyes on the wolf than they gave chase and drove him away. As he ran off, he turned and said to the Kid, "It's what I thoroughly deserve. My trade is the butcher's, and I had no business to turn piper to please you." The Thief and the Innkeeper A thief hired a room at an inn and stayed there some days on the lookout for something to steal. No opportunity, however, presented itself, till one day, when there was a festival to be celebrated, the innkeeper appeared in a fine new coat and sat down before the door of the inn for an airing. The thief no sooner set eyes upon the coat than he longed to get possession of it. There was no business doing, so he went and took a seat by the side of the innkeeper and began talking to him. They conversed together for some time, and then the thief suddenly yawned and howled like a wolf. The innkeeper asked him in some concern what ailed him. The thief replied, "I will tell you about myself, sir, but first I must beg you to take charge of my clothes for me, for I intend to leave them with you. Why I have these fits of yawning I cannot tell. Maybe they are sent as a punishment for my misdeeds; but, whatever the reason, the facts are that when I have yawned three times I become a ravening wolf and fly at men's throats." As he finished speaking he yawned a second time and howled again as before. The innkeeper, believing every word he said, and terrified at the prospect of being confronted with a wolf, got up hastily and started to run indoors; but the thief caught him by the coat and tried to stop him, crying, "Stay, sir, stay, and take charge of my clothes, or else I shall never see them again." As he spoke he opened his mouth and began to yawn for the third time. The innkeeper, mad with the fear of being eaten by a wolf, slipped out of his coat, which remained in the other's hands, and bolted into the inn and locked the door behind him; and the thief then quietly stole off with his spoil. The Shepherd and the Wolf A shepherd found a wolf's cub straying in the pastures, and took him home and reared him along with his dogs. When the cub grew to his full size, if ever a wolf stole a sheep from the flock, he used to join the dogs in hunting him down. It sometimes happened that the dogs failed to come up with the thief, and, abandoning the pursuit, returned home. The wolf would on such occasions continue the chase by himself, and when he overtook the culprit, would stop and share the feast with him, and then return to the shepherd. But if some time passed without a sheep being carried off by the wolves, he would steal one himself and share his plunder with the dogs. The shepherd's suspicions were aroused, and one day he caught him in the act; and, fastening a rope round his neck, hung him on the nearest tree. What's bred in the bone is sure to come out in the flesh. The Wolf and the Horse A wolf on his rambles came to a field of oats, but, not being able to eat them, he was passing on his way when a horse came along. "Look," said the wolf, "here's a fine field of oats. For your sake I have left it untouched, and I shall greatly enjoy the sound of your teeth munching the ripe grain." But the horse replied, "If wolves could eat oats, my fine friend, you would hardly have indulged your ears at the cost of your belly." There is no virtue in giving to others what is useless to oneself. The Dog and the Wolf A dog was lying in the sun before a farmyard gate when a wolf pounced upon him and was just going to eat him up. But he begged for his life and said, "You see how thin I am and what a wretched meal I should make you now. But if you will only wait a few days, my master is going to give a feast. All the rich scraps and pickings will fall to me, and I shall get nice and fat. Then will be the time for you to eat me." The wolf thought this was a very good plan and went away. Sometime afterwards he came to the farmyard again and found the dog lying out of reach on the stable roof. "Come down," he called, "and be eaten. You remember our agreement?" But the dog said coolly, "My friend, if ever, you catch me lying down by the gate there again, don't you wait for any feast." Once bitten, twice shy. The Wolf and His Shadow A wolf who was roaming about on the plain when the sun was getting low in the sky was much impressed by the size of his shadow, and said to himself, "I had no idea I was so big. Fancy my being afraid of a lion! Why, I, not he, ought to be king of the beasts." And, heedless of danger, he strutted about as if there could be no doubt at all about it. Just then a lion sprang upon him and began to devour him. "Alas," he cried, "had I not lost sight of the facts, I shouldn't have been ruined by my fancies." The Plowman and the Wolf A plowman loosed his oxen from the plow and led them away to the water to drink. While he was absent a half-starved wolf appeared on the scene, and went up to the plow and began chewing the leather straps attached to the yoke. As he gnawed away desperately in the hope of satisfying his craving for food, he somehow got entangled in the harness, and, taking fright, struggled to get free, tugging at the traces as if he would drag the plow along with him. Just then the plowman came back, and seeing what was happening, he cried, "Ah, you old rascal, I wish you would give up thieving for good and take to honest work instead." The Lion, the Wolf, and the Fox A lion, infirm with age, lay sick in his den, and all the beasts of the forest came to inquire after his health, with the exception of the fox. The wolf thought this was a good opportunity for paying off old scores against the fox, so he called the attention of the lion to his absence, and said, "You see, sire, that we have all come to see how you are, except the fox, who hasn't come near you, and doesn't care whether you are well or ill." Just then the fox came in and heard the last words of the wolf. The lion roared at him in deep displeasure, but he begged to be allowed to explain his absence and said, "Not one of them cares for you so much as I, sire, for all the time I have been going round to the doctors and trying to find a cure for your illness." "And may I ask if you have found one?" said the lion. "I have, sire," said the fox, "and it is this. You must flay a wolf and wrap yourself in his skin while it is still warm." The lion accordingly turned to the wolf and struck him dead with one blow of his paw, in order to try the fox's prescription; but the fox laughed and said to himself, "That's what comes of stirring up ill will." The Dog Chasing a Wolf A dog was chasing a wolf, and as he ran he thought what a fine fellow he was, and what strong legs he had, and how quickly they covered the ground. "Now, there's this wolf," he said to himself. "What a poor creature he is. He's no match for me, and he knows it and so he runs away." But the wolf looked round just then and said, "Don't you imagine I'm running away from you, my friend. It's your master I'm afraid of." Source: Aesop's Fables , translated by V. S. Vernon Jones (London: W. Heinemann, 1912). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 22, 2003. An Old Woman as the Devil's Helper: folktales of type 1353 An Old Woman as the Devil's Helper folktales of Aarne-Thompson-Uther type 1353 edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2002-2011 Contents The Devil's Tyranny Against a Married Couple (Germany, Martin Luther). An Old Woman Worse Than the Devil (Germany, Karl Bartsch). Katie Grey (Sweden, G. Djurklo). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. The Devil's Tyranny Against a Married Couple Germany, Martin Luther In stories we read about two young married people who loved one another with all their hearts and got along ever so well together. Now the devil wanted to sow discord between them so they would no longer love one another. He went to an old whore, a wicked woman, and offered her a pair of red shoes if she could sow discord between the married people. The old slut accepted the challenge, then went to the man and said, "Listen, your wife is planning to kill you." The man said, "That cannot be true. I know that my wife loves me sincerely." "No," said the old woman, "she is in love with someone else, and she intends to slit your throat." Thus she succeeded in making the man afraid of his wife. He thought that something horrible might happen to him. Soon afterward the old slut went to the man's wife and said, "Your husband does not love you." When the wife answered, "I have a pious husband, and I know that he loves me," the old slut responded, "No, he wants to take another woman, so you should stop him. Take a razor, put it under his pillow, and kill him." The wife believed the old slut, and the poor, crazy fool became furious with her husband. The husband grew suspicious, and, learning from the old whore that his wife had hidden a razor under his pillow, he waited until his wife was asleep, found the razor, and killed his wife. Then the old woman came to the devil and demanded the pair of red shoes. The devil reached the shoes to her, but he did so on a long pole, for he was afraid of her. He said, "Take them. You are wickeder than I am." Source: Martin Luther, "Von dess Teuffels Tyranney wider die Eheleute," Colloquia; oder, Tischrreden , edited by Johannes Aurifaber (Frankfurt am Main, 1593), pp. 310-11 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002. Return to the table of contents . An Old Woman Worse Than the Devil Karl Bartsch Once upon a time there was a married couple who lived peacefully with each other. This irritated the devil, so he went to an old woman in the village and said to her, "If you can bring discord between these two married people, you shall have a pair of leather slippers." She said, "We shall see." Then she went to the wife when she was home alone and said, "Do you have a good husband, and do you get along well with him?" "Yes," she answered, "I could never find a better husband in my whole life." "Good," said the old woman. "I will tell you a means of guaranteeing that you will never quarrel with him. This evening, after he has gone to bed and fallen asleep, take a knife and cut off a few of the hairs that grow on his Adam's apple. If you do that, you will never quarrel with one another." Then she left the house and went to the husband in the field and said to him, "Do you have a very good wife?" "Yes," said the husband. "Oh," replied the old woman, "I would not trust womenfolk. Don't trust your wife too much. You should know that tonight while you are asleep she intends to slit your throat." The husband took notice of this, and that evening he pretended to be asleep. He did indeed see that his wife was silently approaching him with a knife. Then he jumped up, ripped the knife from her hand, and slit her throat. When the devil brought the red leather slippers to the old woman he held them out to her on a long beanpole. The old woman asked, "Why are you doing that?" "You are much, much worse that I am," said the devil, "and not worthy for me to give you the slippers with my hand." Source: Karl Bartsch, "Alt Weib schlimmer als der Teufel," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg , vol. 1 (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), p. 515 . Translated by D. L. Ashliman . © 2002. Bartsch's source: Sexton Schwarz, Berlin. Return to the table of contents . Katie Grey Sweden, G. Djurklo There were once upon a time a man and a woman who agreed so well together that a harsh word had never passed between them since the beginning of their married life; for whatever the husband did the wife thought right and proper, and everything that she did the husband thought the best that could be done. They had not much to manage with, so they had to be very careful, even with the crumbs. But no matter how black things looked, they were always happy and contented. But envy seems to find her way into every corner, be it ever so humble, and if there is no one else who begrudges people living in peace, Old Nick [the devil] always tries to get his foot inside. So he lay in wait outside their house, wondering how he should be able sow ever so little dissension there. He tried in one way, and he tried in another, and he tried in every way; but although he was always hovering about the house, they kept so well together that he could not find a single chink through which he could slip in, however small he made himself. But what Old Nick himself cannot accomplish, wicked women may manage. In the same neighborhood there lived one called Katie Grey who was one of the right sort. To her he went, and asked if she could set the old couple against each other. That wouldn't be very difficult, she thought; and if only he would give her a new jacket and petticoat with red and green and blue stripes she would be sure to manage it so that Old Nick himself should not be able to do it better. Well, Old Nick agreed to that, and so they parted. Early next morning, as soon as the husband had set out for the forest, Katie Grey rushed off to see the wife. "Good morning, and well met!" she said, making herself as pleasant as possible. "Good morning!" said the wife. "You have a very good husband, you have, haven't you?" said Katie Grey. "Yes, the Lord be praised!" said the wife. "When the first snow falls this autumn it will be six and thirty years since we were married, and never during all these years has a single harsh word fallen from his lips." Katie Grey quite agreed with her, as you may guess. "Yes, he is no doubt one of the best men one can meet in a day's walk," she said. But I know people who have got on just as well as you two, and yet trouble came in the end." "Poor people!" said the wife. "But just as soon will the mouse lie down with the cat, as such things will be heard about us," she said. Well, that might be. Katie Grey was not one to believe all that people said, but "better wise beforehand than hasty afterwards," and "those who remedies know, can well kill illness, I trow." And as she knew of a remedy against such a misfortune, she thought she ought to mention it, for when they had lived together like a pair of turtledoves for six and thirty years it would be both "sin and shame" if they were now to begin to bicker and quarrel. The wife could not say anything to that. "Well, you see," said Katie Grey, for now she thought she had got the better of the wife, "if you take a razor and draw it three times along a strop against the sun, and then cut off six hairs from your husband's beard just under his chin one night when he is asleep, and afterwards burn them, he will never he angry with you." The wife said she did not think she would ever be in need of that remedy, but she thanked her for her good advice all the same. Katie Grey then set out for the forest, where the husband was making osier bands. "Good morning, and well met!" she said. "Good morning to you!" said the man. "What a very kind and good wife you have got!" she said. "That's true enough," said the man. "There isn't a better woman on this side of the sun, nor has there ever been one either." "That may be," said Katie Grey, "but so was Eve also before the Evil One got the better of her." "Yes, that's true; but my wife, you see, is not one of that sort, for she never puts her foot where such wickedness is going on," he said. "Don't be so sure about that, for the Evil One can creep through the eye of a needle," she said, "so that no one is secure against him. Not that I want make any mischief between people -- no one can say that about me -- but those who will run into danger had better be well looked after. 'All is not gold that glitters,' and 'outside mild, inside wild,' often go together," she said. "You talk according to the sense you have," said the man, who began to feel angry. "My wife is no more likely to wish me evil than the sun to shine in the middle of the night -- that I may tell you," he said. "Thinking and believing do no harm to anybody," she said. "But I think you will do a wise thing in not closing your eyes tonight when your wife comes and draws a razor across your throat. But not a word about this to anyone, do you hear?" she said, and off she went. One gets to hear a good deal before one has done with this world -- but did one ever hear the like of this? Could it be possible? The man felt as strange in his head as if he had rolled down the church steeple. But whatever it was that ailed him, there he stood pondering and brooding. Pshaw! She was after all only a wicked woman who wanted to set them against each other. Yes, that was it; and he was very sorry he had not given her a good thrashing for her trouble. But although he worked away and toiled his best with his osiers, he could not get out of his head what Katie Grey had put into it. And when he came home in the evening he was so depressed and silent that his wife had never seen him in such a state before, so strange was he. "Goodness knows, what can be the matter with my husband?" she thought; and then she suddenly recollected what Katie Grey had told her. "I may as well take three hairs from his beard," she thought, "for when you have had a happy home for six and thirty years, it isn't likely you'll let it slip through your fingers all at once." But she did not dare to speak to her husband; she only asked him to lend her his razor. He let her have it, but he sighed and thought to himself, "I wonder if she would do me any harm? I wonder it she really could? Oh, no! That's quite impossible." But he put his axe close to his bed, and then they both lay down to rest. Later on in the night she asked, "Are you asleep, husband?" This startled the man, but he did not say a word, and the wife stole out of bed and lighted a candle. The man's heart began to beat violently. The wife then took the razor and drew it three times along the leather belt of her husband's apron, and went towards the bed. The blood rushed to the man's head, so that he almost lost his senses, but he lay as quiet as a stone, and only moved his hand towards the axe. The wife then came close to the bed to cut the three hairs from his beard. But as she leaned forward, the man suddenly jumped up and seized his axe, with which he struck his wife, who fell down dead on the floor. He felt he had done a very wicked deed, but he had not thought that things would come to this pass. He became much distressed -- for what was he going to do? It was perhaps best he followed his wife, and so he took a knife and cut his throat. Just then he heard someone laughing outside the window, and he looked in that direction. There he saw Katie Grey, and then he died. Katie Grey was now quite proud that she had been able to do more than the Evil One himself. Old Nick was not far off either. He came with a petticoat and a jacket hanging on a long, long pole, which he held out towards her. "Come nearer, so that I may shake hands with you and thank you," she said. "No, keep away from me!" he cried, and kept her back with his pole, which he poked at her. "You call me the Wicked One and the Evil One and such things, but I am not as wicked as you are, at any rate. Look here," he said; "take what belongs to you, so that I can have done with you." And with this he threw the pole and the clothes at her, and took to his heels as fast as ever he could, so afraid was he of her. Katie Grey stood wondering and staring after him. Just then two white pigeons came flying out of the cottage, and flew right up into the clouds above. They were the man and his wife; for though Old Nick had wished them evil, the Lord would take care of them. But what would become of Katie Grey, seeing that the Evil One himself did not dare to go near her? It is not easy to say. Source: Fairy Tales from the Swedish of Baron G. Djurklo , translated by H. L. Brækstad (London: William Heinemann, 1901), pp. 137-47 . Translator's footnote: Under the name of Titta, or Katie Grey, there appears in many Swedish legends a witch of the worst kind, but still perfectly human in form. In her, popular tradition has desired to personify that malice coupled with cunning, which was likely to be found in a wicked woman, while at the same time it has endeavored to show that before such a one even the prince of darkness must tremble. Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised March 22, 2013. The Woman Who Did Not Know Herself: Folktales of Type 1383 The Woman Who Did Not Know Herself folktales of type 1383 translated and/or edited by D. L. Ashliman © 2021 Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Contents Hans's Katie (Germany). Clever Elsie (Germany). Admann and His Wife (Germany). Lazy Catherine (Germany). How the Shoemaker Got Rid of His Hussy (Denmark). All Women Are Alike (Norway). Gidske (Norway). There Was an Old Woman (England). Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Hans's Katie Germany Hans's Katie was lazy and didn't want to do anything. She said to herself, "What should I do? Should I eat? Or should I sleep? Or should I work? -- Oh! I'll eat first!" After she had eaten her fill, she said once again, "What should I do? Should I work, or should I sleep? -- Oh! I want to get some sleep first." Then she lay down and slept, and when she woke up it was night, and she couldn't go out to work. One day Hans came home in the afternoon and once again found Katie lying in the room asleep, so he took his knife and cut off her skirt, up to her knees. Katie woke up and thought, "Now it's time to go out to work." But upon going out she saw how short her skirt was. This frightened her, and she was confused as to whether or not she was really Katie. She asked herself, "Am I me or am I not me?" Not knowing the answer, she just stood there in doubt. Finally she thought, "I'll just go home and ask if it's me. They'll surely know." So she went back home, knocked on the window, and called in, "Is Hans's Katie at home?" The others answered, "Yes, she's lying in the room and is asleep." "Well then I'm not me," said Katie, now convinced. She walked out to the village and never came back. Thus Hans got rid of his Katie. Source (zeno.org): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Hansens Trine," Kinder- und Haus-Märchen: Gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm (Berlin: In der Realschulbuchhandlung, 1812), no. 34, pp. 155-56 . The Grimms' source: Dorothea (Dortchen) Wild , September 29, 1811. Wilhelm Grimm married Dortchen in 1825. She was the source of many tales in the first edition of the Grimms' Kinder- und Hausmärchen . This version was included in only the first edition (1812) of the Grimm brothers' collection. In later editions it was replaced with a longer version titled Clever Elsie . Return to the table of contents . Clever Elsie Germany There was a man who had a daughter who was called Clever Elsie. When she came of age her father said, "We will get her married." "Yes," said the mother, "if only someone would come by who would have her." At length a man named Hans came from afar and wooed her, under the condition that Clever Elsie should prove to be very intelligent. "Oh," said her father, "she has brains in her head." Her mother added, "She even can see the wind running up the street, and hear the flies coughing." "Well," said Hans, "if she is not really intelligent, I won't have her." Later, after they had eaten but were still sitting at the table, the mother said, "Elsie, go down into the cellar and fetch some beer." Clever Elsie took a pitcher and went down into the cellar, loudly clapping the lid to amuse herself. Once in the cellar she set a stool before the barrel so that she that she would not have to bend down and possibly hurt her back or injure herself in some other way. She placed the pitcher before her, and opened the tap. While the beer was running she passed the time by looking up at the wall. She saw a pickax hanging directly above her. The masons accidentally had left it there. Clever Elsie began to cry and said, "If I marry Hans, and we have a child, and he grows big, and we send him into the cellar to draw beer here, then the pickax will fall on his head and kill him." She sat there weeping and crying out with all her strength about the coming misfortune. The people upstairs were waiting for their drink, but Clever Elsie did not come up. Finally the wife said to the maid-servant, "Go down into the cellar and see what is keeping Elsie." The maid-servant went and found her sitting in front of the barrel, screaming loudly. "Elsie, why are you crying?" asked the servant. "Ah," she answered, "why should I not be crying? If I marry Hans, and we have a child, and he grows big, and has to draw beer here, perhaps the pickax will fall on his head, and kill him." Then the maid-servant said, "What a clever Elsie we have!" She sat down next to Elsie, and she too began to cry about the misfortune. After a while, as the maid-servant had not come back, and those upstairs were thirsty for the beer, the husband said to the farmhand, "Go down into the cellar and see what is keeping Elsie and the maid-servant." The farmhand went down, and there sat Clever Elsie and the girl both crying together. He asked, "Why are you two crying?" "Ah," said Elsie, "why should I not be crying? If I marry Hans, and we have a child, and he grows big, and has to draw beer here, the pickax will fall on his head, and kill him." With that the farmhand said, "What a clever Elsie we have!" Then he too sat down and began to wail loudly. Upstairs they waited for the farmhand, but as he still did not return, the husband said to the wife, "Go down into the cellar and see what is keeping Elsie!" The woman went down and found all three sobbing piteously. She asked the cause of their sorrow, and Elsie told her too that her future child would be killed by the pickax, when he grew big and had to draw beer, and the pickax would fall down. Then said the mother likewise, "What a clever Elsie we have!" then she sat down and cried with them. The man upstairs waited a short time, but as his wife did not come back and his thirst grew ever greater, he said, "I myself must go into the cellar and see what is keeping Elsie." But when he got into the cellar, and they were all sitting together crying, and he heard the reason, and that the cause was the child that Elsie might perhaps bring into the world some day. This child might be killed by the pickax if he should happen to be sitting beneath it, drawing beer at the very time when it fell down. Hearing this the father cried out, "Oh, what a clever Elsie!" Then he sat down with the others and cried along with them. The bridegroom stayed upstairs alone for a long time. When no one came back, he thought, "They must be waiting for me; I too must go down and see what they are doing." In the cellar he saw all five of them sitting together, piteously weeping and crying, each one outdoing the others. "What misfortune has happened here?" he asked. "Oh, dear Hans," said Elsie, "if we get married and have a child, and he is big, and we perhaps send him here to draw something to drink, then the pickax that has been left up there might fall down and split his head open. Is that not reason enough for us to be crying?" "Indeed," said Hans, "that is intelligence enough for my household. Because you are such a clever Elsie, I shall marry you." With that he took her by the hand, led her upstairs with him, and married her. After they had been married for some time, Hans said, "Wife, I am going out to work and earn some money for us. You go to the field and harvest the grain so that we can have some bread." "Yes, my dear Hans, I shall do that." After Hans had left, she cooked herself some good porridge and took it to the field with her. Arriving at the field she said to herself, "What shall I do? Shall I harvest first, or shall I eat first? Oh, I will eat first." After eating all of her porridge she was no longer hungry, and once again she said, "What shall I do? Shall I harvest first, or shall I sleep first? Oh, I will sleep first." Then she lay down in the grain field and fell asleep. By now Hans had been at home for a long time, but Elsie did not come home. Finally he said, "What a clever Elsie I have; she is so industrious that she does not even come home to eat." Evening came and Elsie had not yet come home, so Hans went out to see what she had harvested. Nothing had been harvested, and she was lying there asleep in the grain field. Then Hans hurried back home and brought a fowler's net with little bells and hung it around her, but she did not wake up. Then he ran home, locked the front door, and sat down in his chair and worked. When it was quite dark Clever Elsie woke up. She stood up, and there was a jingling all around her. The bells rang with every step that she took. This frightened her, and was not sure whether she really was Clever Elsie or not. She, said "Am I me, or am I not me?" Not knowing the answer, she stood there for a time in doubt. Finally she thought, "I'll just go home and ask if I am me or if I am not me. They'll be sure to know." She ran to the door of her own house, but it was locked. She knocked at the window and cried, "Hans, is Elsie in there?" "Yes," answered Hans, "she is here." Hearing this she was frightened, and said, "Dear God! Then I am not me!" She went to another house; but when the people heard the jingling bells they would not open the door, and no one would let her inside. Then she ran out of the village, and no one has seen her since. Source (books.google.com): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die kluge Else," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , 7th edition, vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), No. 34, pp. 175-78 . Source (Internet Archive): Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, "Die kluge Else," Kinder- und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm , 7th edition, vol. 1 (Göttingen: Verlag der Dieterichschen Buchhandlung, 1857), No. 34, pp. 175-78 . This tale consists of two epidodes: Type 1450, a woman fantasizes about the accidental death of a future child. Type 1383, a woman does not know herself. Return to the table of contents . Admann and His Wife Germany Admann sends his wife out to weed the flax. In the field she asks herself the question, "Should I weed or should I eat?" and decides to do the latter. Then, having refreshed herself with food and drink she asks, "Should I weed or should I sleep?" and once again decides to do the latter. Thus it continues day in and day out. Then one day her husband follows her, and when he discovers her asleep, he cuts off her long skirts. Awakening, she bewilderedly asks herself, "Is this me, or not?" Finally she goes to her house in order to convince herself, knocks on the window, and asks, "Admann, is your wife at home?" When he answers, "yes," she replies, "Then it's not me," and walks away, never to be seen again. Source (books.google.com): Karl Bartsch, "Admann und seine Frau," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg , vol. 1 (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), pp. 507-508 . Source (Internet Archive): Karl Bartsch, "Admann und seine Frau," Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg , vol. 1 (Vienna: Wilhelm Braumüller, 1879), pp. 507-508 . Return to the table of contents . Lazy Catherine Germany Once upon a time there was a woman named Catherine, and she was as lazy as a clump of lead. Every day she went to the vineyard so as not to have to work at home. Here she did nothing at all, but just took her hoe, struck it into the ground, and said, "Dig, hoe!" Then she lay down and slept until dinnertime. Waking up hungry, she sat up a little, ate well, and then turned onto her other side and slept until evening when it was time to go home. She picked up her hoe and went home quickly, pretending to be sweating from hard work. At suppertime she once again ate well. One day her husband secretly followed her to the vineyard to see what she was actually doing. There he saw no sign of her work, nor his wife herself. He finally found her asleep beneath a large nut tree. "Aha," he thought, "perhaps I can rid myself of this lazy beast in a clever way." He silently crept up to her, took out his pruning knife, and cut off her long braid without her noticing it. He then took her hoe and went home. Here he said to his children, who were still young, "If a woman without a braid and without a hoe comes and asks, 'Is your mother at home?' then just say 'Yes!'" With that he went into the mill and closed the door behind him. When the woman in the vineyard woke up around noon, she rubbed her eyes and shook her head. It felt different. She reached for her braid, but it wasn't there. "This must not be me!" she thought. "When I went to sleep I had a braid. But I'll have to convince myself. I had a hoe as well!" When she could not find the hoe, she was stunned and called out, "No! In truth this isn't me! But before I run away I'll have to be sure!" With that she hurried home as quickly as a lazy, half-asleep woman is able to walk. Walking along she said to herself again and again, "Is it me, or not?" Arriving at home she found the door locked, so she went to the window and knocked. The children immediately jumped up and saw the woman without a braid and without a hoe, just as their father had described. When the woman asked, "Is your mother at home?" they said, "Yes, yes!" "So," she said to herself, "it is clear that I am not me. I must go and look for myself. I'll be easy to recognize, I have a long braid and and a hoe in the vineyard, and I am not at home." Thus she went out into the wide world to look for herself. She is still looking to this day, and she cannot find herself. In the evening when her husband came home from the mill and heard that such and such a woman had been there and then left, he said happily, "Praise God, who has redeemed me! I would a thousand times prefer to feed myself and my children by sweat of my own brow, than to have such a rotten carcass in my house any longer." Source (books.google.com): Josef Haltrich, "Die faule Kathrin," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus dem Sachsenlande in Siebenbürgen (Vienna: Verlag von Carl Graeser, 1885), no. 70, pp. 252-53 . Source (Internet Archive): Josef Haltrich, "Die faule Kathrin," Deutsche Volksmärchen aus dem Sachsenlande in Siebenbürgen (Berlin: Verlag von Julius Springer, 1886), no. 67, pp. 252-53 . Return to the table of contents . How the Shoemaker Got Rid of His Hussy Denmark Under the shelter of a low hill, on the edge of a great forest, there stood a wretched hovel, wherein lived a poor shoemaker -- a proper old reprobate! He was as irritable and angry as a demon, and the hussy that he had was just as bad. They lived together like a dog and a cat, as I trow, with constant rows from morning to evening. The hussy was only a little more than half-witted -- "as wise as seven fools," as they say -- and therewithal she was so disgusting and filthy that if a man had thrown her against a wall, she would have stuck to it, and stayed there, hanging. Lately she had got a taste for brandywine, which didn't do much for their domestic life, because when the man sat at his workbench hurling insults and abuse at her, as was his wont, the drunken wench sang ever louder and wilder the worse he scolded. Yea, they led a wretched life! One morning the shoemaker told his hussy: "Listen, Mother Salke, today the hemp shall be pulled, and thou shalt do it!" Sure, that she would. She made a few turns with the broom across the floor, then the house was swept, and when she had turned the eiderdown, the bed was made, and then she left. However, she first took the flask of brandywine and slipped it in her pocket. When she came out to the hemp-patch, she took off the skirt in which the flask was, and began to pull the hemp. It was terribly hot that day, and when she had worked a good while, she thought she was missing something, but she couldn't work out what it was. She therefore set to again, but when she had worked a while longer, a little bird, a wheatear, alighted on a fence beside her, and sang out, as was its wont: Trik-trik-trik! "Faith, to be sure," said the hussy, "'twas a drink [ Drik ] that I was missing. The little bird knew it. Where's my flask now?" She found the flask and took a good swig of it. "Sure, how hot it is on this good Sunday!" exclaimed the hussy, and she took another swig. "So that I do not forget again the remedy for what ails me, I'd better take it all while I'm about it!" she said, and drained the flask completely. She gave herself to the task again, but soon thereafter she became heavy in the head, and collapsed in the hemp-patch and slept like a stone. Back at the house, the shoemaker wondered that she did not come home for dinner, as she did not usually forget, and he had made such a delicious barley-meal porridge for them to have -- it was the only thing he knew how to make! When some time had passed, and she still hadn't come, he thought he must go out and see how far she had got with the hemp. He hobbled out to the hemp-patch, and then he found her where she lay, fast asleep. "Thou jade!" said the shoemaker, "I wish the crows would fly off with thee, rather today than tomorrow!" He shook her, but she couldn't be woken; she slept as if she'd been hired to sleep for a whole week. Then the shoemaker became so angry that he ripped the lower half of her clothing off her, and then he ran home, fetched the shoe-brush and blackened her, to give her a fright, and he left her lying there like that. Late in the afternoon the hussy awoke, with her head completely in a daze, because of both the brandywine and the strong smell of hemp. She rubbed her eyes and stared in horror at herself, half-naked and black as she was. "What the Devil is this!" she exclaimed. "Is this myself, or is it not myself lying here? Faith and begob, it can't be myself, for I wasn't half-naked, and to be sure I'm not after being black." She thought then that it couldn't be herself, but that it must be someone else. She wanted to be sure of her case, however, and therefore she staggered homeward, back to the cabin. When she came near the low hill under whose shelter the house lay, she said: "Now I must take heed whether the cat is sitting on the door-step; for if it is sitting there, then the shoemaker's wife is most likely not at home" -- she was always kicking it -- "and then it may be that I am she; but if the cat's not sitting there, then most likely she is at home, and I must be someone else." No, the cat was not sitting on the door-step, and so she thought that she was probably not the shoemaker's wife after all. She then caught sight of the shoemaker, who was sitting inside the window, pulling on the waxed thread. "He looks as evil as the crucifixion today!" she thought; "If I'm going to find out whether the shoemaker's wife is at home or not, I shall have to ask him very nicely. That way I'll find out, because he will probably give me a civil answer." So she went to the window and asked ever so politely if the shoemaker's wife was at home. "Aye, that she is," replied the shoemaker; "she's sitting by the hearth, eating bread and dripping!" Well, then she knew that she was not the shoemaker's wife, and she said goodbye and thanked him for the good explanation. She kept on walking, wondering continually who she could be. Thus she entered a road, where she met with a certain pack of ruffians, who wandered in the hours of darkness and had no homes. They asked her who she was, and why she looked so queer -- more like a troll than a human being. "Sure, you tell me," she replied, "and I'll tell you!" So they asked her if she would join their band. Yea, she was all for that, and thought that she'd found a good place. Late at night they reached a village, where they thought there might be a good opportunity to steal something. They sneaked around between the houses until they found a place where a hatch down to the cellar was open, and they could smell that there were cheeses down there. Now they discussed which of them should go down and toss the cheeses up to the others, and soon they agreed that she, the black wench who had come to them on the country road, should do so. They got her and put her down through the hatch, telling her only to take the new and soft cheeses, but to leave the old and hard. Sure, she would take care of that. When they had got a whole lot up and soon had the sack full, the hussy down below shouted, so loudly that it echoed: "Now there are no more of the soft cheeses, but if you want some of the hard ones, can you tell me?" "Shut up, bitch!" they replied, but she did not hear them and thought they had not heard her, and so she shouted even louder: "Now there are no more of the soft cheeses, but if you want some of the hard ones, can you tell me?" At that, the ruffians hurried away with what they had, and left her standing down there shouting. The man in the house woke up to all that noise, and he grabbed the swipple of a flail, and came down with a lantern to the cellar, where he found the hussy, still standing there and shouting. He asked her how she had got there. "To be sure, that I can tell thee, darling," she replied; "there were some good lads with whom I came in fellowship, and they helped me to get down here." The man wanted to know what she meant to do there. "Sure, that was to do with those same good lads," she said. "They're awful fond of soft cheeses, and so I'm after throwing a whole sackful of cheeses up to them; but now there are no more of the soft cheeses, begob, and I'm asking if they want some of the hard." But the man did not like that explanation at all; he grabbed hold of her and bashed her with his swipple. Then he locked her in the stable, where he let her lie until the next morning. All the men of the village were called together to decide what to do with her. The council-leader had her brought before him and asked: "Who art thou and whence art thou come?" "Sure, you tell me, and I'll tell you!" she replied. "I thought I was the shoemaker's hussy, but I'm not, for she was sitting at home by the hearth eating bread and dripping." "Well, what shall we do with her?" said the men of the council, looking at each other in uncertainty. "I'll tell you what, men," said the smith, who came forward at once, "I need a scarecrow over yonder in my hemp-patch; she might be good for that." So the smith got her, and he set her up in the middle of his hemp-patch, and if she hasn't flown off with the crows, she may well be standing there even now. Source (books.google.com): Jens Nielsen Kamp, "Hvordan Skomageren slap af med sin Kvinde," Danske Folkeæventyr (Copenhagen: Fr. Wøldikes Forlag, 1879), no. 5, pp. 56-62 . Translated by Joe Revill. © 2021. Return to the table of contents . All Women Are Alike Norway Once upon a time a man and a woman were going to sow, but they had no seed-corn and no money to buy any with either. They had only one cow and this the man was to go to town with and sell to get money for the seed-corn. But when the time came the wife would not let the man go, for she was afraid he would spend the money on drink. So she set off herself with the cow and took with her a hen as well. Close to the town she met a butcher. "Are you going to sell that cow, mother?" he asked. "Yes, that I am," she said. "How much do you want for it then?" "I suppose I must have a shilling for the cow, but the hen you can have for two pounds," she said. "Well," said the butcher, "I haven't any use for the hen, and you can easily get rid of that when you get to the town, but I'll give you a shilling for the cow." She sold the cow and got her shilling, but nobody in the town would give two pounds for a tough, old hen. So she went back to the butcher and said, "I can't get rid of this hen, father. You'll have to take that as well since you took the cow." "We'll soon settle that," said the butcher, and asked her to sit down. He gave her something to eat and so much brandy to drink that she became tipsy and lost her wits. While she slept it off the butcher dipped her into a barrel of tar and then put her in a heap of feathers. When she woke up she found that she was feathered all over and she began to wonder, "Is it me? or is it not me? It must be a strange bird! But what shall I do to find out whether it is me, or whether it isn't me? Now I know -- if the calves will lick me and the dog doesn't bark at me, when I get home, then it is me." The dog no sooner saw such a monster than it began barking with all its might as if there were thieves and vagabonds about the place. "No, surely, it cannot be me," she said. When she came to the cowhouse the calves would not lick her, because they smelt the tar. "No, it cannot be me; it must be a strange bird," she said; and then she climbed up on top of the storehouse and began to flap with her arms as if she had wings and wanted to fly. When the man saw this he came out with his rifle and took aim at her. "Don't shoot, don't shoot," cried his wife;" it is me. "Is it you?" said the man. "Then don't stand there like a goat, but come down and tell me what you have been about." She climbed down again, but found she had not a single penny left, for the shilling she got from the butcher she had lost while she was tipsy. When the man heard this he said, "You are more mad than ever you were," and he became so angry that he said he would go away from everything and never come back if he did not find three women who were just as mad. He set out and when he had got a bit on the way he saw a woman running in and out of a newly built hut with an empty sieve. Every time she ran in she threw her apron over the sieve, as if she had something it, and then she turned it over on the floor. "What are you doing that for, mother?" asked he. "Oh, I only want to carry in a little sun," she answered; "but I don't know how it is, when I am outside I have the sun in the sieve, but when I get inside I have lost it. When I was in my old hut I had plenty of sun, although I never carried in any. If anyone could get me some sun I'd willingly give him three hundred dollars." "Have you an axe?" said the man, "and I'll soon get you some sun." He got an axe and cut out the openings for the windows which the carpenters had forgotten to do. The sun shone into the room at once and he got his three hundred dollars. "That was one of them!" thought the man, and set out again. In a while he came to a house where there was a terrible screaming and shouting going on. He went in and saw a woman, who was beating her husband on the head with a bat; and over his head she had pulled a shirt in which there was no hole for the neck. "Do you want to kill your husband, mother?" he asked. "No," she said, "I only want to make a hole for the neck in his shirt." The man moaned and groaned and said, "Oh dear, oh dear! I pity those who have to try on new shirts. If any one could teach my wife how to make the hole for the neck in a different way, I'd willingly give him three hundred dollars." "I'll soon do that," said the man; "only let me have a pair of scissors." He got a pair and cut the hole, and then he took his money and went his way. "That was the second of them!" he said to himself. After a long while he came to a farm, where he thought he would rest awhile, so he went in. "Where do you come from?" asked the woman. "I come from Ringerige [a district in the south of Norway]," answered the man. "Oh dear, oh dear! Are you from Himmerige [heaven]? Then you must know Peter, my second husband, poor soul!" said the woman. She had been married three times; the first and the last husbands were bad men, so she thought that the second, who had been a good husband, was the only one likely to go to heaven. "Yes, I know him well," said the man. "How is it with him there?" asked the woman. "Oh, things are rather bad with him," said the man. "He knocks about from place to place, and has neither food nor clothes to his back, and as for money ----" "Goodness gracious!" cried the woman, "there's no need that he should go about in such a plight -- he that left so much behind him. Here is a large loft full of clothes, which belonged to him, as well as a big chest of money. If you'll take it all with you you shall have the horse and trap to take it in; and he can keep both horse and trap, so that he can drive about from place to place; for he has no need to walk, I'm sure." The man got a whole cartload of clothes and a chest full of bright silver dollars, and as much food and drink as he wanted. When he had finished he got into the trap and drove off. "That's the third of them!" he said to himself. But the woman's third husband was over in a field plowing, and when he saw a stranger driving off with the horse and trap, he went home and asked his wife who it was who drove away with the horse. "Oh," she said, "that was a man from heaven; he said that Peter, my second, poor dear soul, is so badly off that he walks about there from place to place, and has neither clothes nor money; so I sent him all his old clothes, which have been hanging here ever since, and the old money chest with the silver dollars." The man understood at once what all this meant, and saddled a horse and set off at full gallop. Before long he was close behind the man in the trap; who when he discovered he was pursued, drove the horse and trap into a thick part of the wood, pulled a handful of hair out of the horse's tail, and sprang up a hill, where he tied the horse's hair to a birch-tree, and lay down on his back under it, gaping and staring up into the clouds. "Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear!" he said, as if talking to himself, when the woman's third husband came riding up. "Well, I've never seen anything so wonderful! I've never seen the like of it!" The husband stopped and looked at him for a while and wondered if the man was crazy, or what he was up to. At last he asked him, "What are you staring at?" "Well, I never saw the like!" exclaimed the man. "I've just seen someone driving straight into heaven, horse and all! There, you see part of the horse's tail hanging on the birch tree, and up among the clouds you can see the horse." The husband looked up at the clouds and then at him and said, "I don't see anything but the horse-hair on the birch-tree." "No, of course you can't see it, where you stand," said the man, "but come and lie down here and look straight up; you must not take your eyes away from the clouds." While the husband lay staring into the sky till the water ran from his eyes, the man jumped on the horse and set off, both with that and the horse and trap. When the husband heard the rumbling noise on the road, he jumped up, but was so bewildered because the man had gone off with his horses that he did not think of setting after him till it was too late. He did not feel very proud, as you can imagine, when he came home to his wife, and when she asked him what he had done with the horse he said, "Oh, I told the man he could take that with him as well to Peter, for I did not think it was right that he should jolt about in a trap up there; now he can sell the trap and buy a carriage." "Oh, thank you for that! Never did I think you were such a kind husband," said the woman. When the man who had got the six hundred dollars and the cartload of clothes and money, came home, he saw that all the fields were plowed and sown. The first thing he asked his wife was, where she had got the seed-corn from. "Oh," said she, "I have always heard, that he who sows something gets something. So I sowed the salt which the carrier left here the other day, and if we only get rain soon, I think it will grow up nicely." "Mad you are, and mad you'll be as long as you live," said the man; "but it doesn't much matter, for the others are no better than you." Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Fairy Tales from the Far North , translated by H. L. Brækstad (London: David Nutt, 1897), pp. 69-76 . Source (Internet Archive): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Fairy Tales from the Far North , translated by H. L. Brækstad (London: David Nutt, 1897), pp. 69-76 . The texts in the original Norwegian: Books.google.com: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Joslash;rgen Moe, "Somme kjærringer er slige!" Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiana [Oslo]: Johan Dahls Forlag, 1852), no. 10, pp. 54-60 . Internet Archive: Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Joslash;rgen Moe, "Somme kjærringer er slige!" Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiana [Oslo]: Johan Dahls Forlag, 1852), no. 10, pp. 54-60 . This tale consists of seven episodes, each one representing an international folktale type: Type 1382, the foolish woman at the market. Type 1383, a woman does not know herself. Type 1384, a man seeks someone as foolish as his wife. Type 1245, a simpleton tries to carry sunlight into a windowless house. Type 1285, a simpleton attempts to put on a shirt that has no neck opening. Type 1540, the man from paradise. Type 1200, a simpleton plants salt, expecting it to grow. Footnote by Brækstad: "Himmerige," the Norwegian word for "heaven." The similarity between the two words "Himmerige" and "Ringerige" will easily explain the mistake made by the woman. Return to the table of contents . Gidske Norway Once there was a widower, who had a housekeeper named Gidske. She wanted to have him as a husband, and she begged him night and day to marry her. At last the man grew tired of this, but he did not know how to get rid of her. It was between hay time and the grain harvest. The hemp was ripe, and the two went out to harvest it. Gidske thought herself good-looking, clever, and capable. She worked away at the hemp until she grew giddy from the strong smell of the ripe seeds. At last she lay down on the ground and fell fast asleep among the hemp plants. While she slept, the man got a pair of scissors and cut off her skirts. Then he smeared her all over, first with tallow and then with soot, until she looked worse than the devil himself. When Gidske woke up and saw how ugly she was, she didn't recognize herself. "Can this be me?" she asked. "No! It cannot be me. I have never looked this ugly. I must be the devil himself." Wanting to know the truth, she went off and knocked at her master's door, and asked, "Is your Gidske at home today?" "Yes, our Gidske is safely here at home," said the man, who wanted to be rid of her. "Then I can't be his Gidske," she said to herself and stole away. The man was happy to be rid of her. After she had walked some distance she came to a great forest, where she met two thieves. "I'll join up with those two," thought Gidske, "Since I am the devil, thieves are the right companions for me." But the thieves did not think so. When they saw Gidske, they ran off as fast as they could, for they thought the Evil One had come to capture them. But it did them no good, for Gidske was long-legged and fast on her feet. She caught up with them before they knew it. "If you're going out to stealing things, I'll go with you and help," said Gidske. "I know this area very well." When the thieves heard that, they thought they had found a good mate, and they were no longer afraid of her. They said they were off to steal a sheep, only they didn't know where to get one. "Oh!" said Gidske. "That's easy. I was in service for a long time with a farmer over there beyond the woods. I could find his sheep shed even on the darkest night. The thieves liked to hear this. When they got there, Gidske was to go into the shed and push out a sheep, and they were to take hold of it. Now, the sheep shed lay close to the wall of the house where the farmer was asleep, so Gidske crept in quietly and with caution. But, as soon as she was inside, she shouted out to the thieves, "Do you want a ram or a ewe? There are many to choose from in here!" "Shh! Shh!" said the thieves. "Just take one that is good and fat." "Yes! But but do you want a ram or a ewe? Do you want a ram or a ewe? There are many to choose from in here!" shouted Gidske. "Shh! Shh!" said the thieves again "Just take one that's good and fat. We don't care whether it's a ram or a ewe." "Yes!" insisted Gidske. "But do you want a ram or a ewe -- a ram or a ewe? There are many to choose from in here!" "Shut up!" said the thieves, "and take a good fat one. Ram or ewe, we don't care which." All of this noise woke the farmer, and he came out in his nightshirt to see what was going on. The thieves took to their heels, and Gidske rushed after them, knocking the farmer off his feet as she fled. "Stop, boys! Stop, boys!" she shouted. The farmer, who had only seen the black creature, was so frightened that he could hardly stand upright, for he thought it was the devil himself that had been in his sheep shed. He went indoors, woke up the whole household, and they all began to pray, for the farmer had heard that this was the way to protect oneself from the devil. The next night the thieves planned to go and steal a fat goose. Gidske was to show them the way. When they came to the goose coop, Gidske was to go inside and send one out, for she knew the ways of the place. The thieves were to stand outside and catch it. As soon as she was inside she began to shout, "Do you want a goose or gander? There are plenty to choose from in here!" "Shh! Shh! Just choose a nice fat one," said the thieves. "Yes! But do you want a goose or gander -- goose or gander? There are plenty to choose from in here!" shouted Gidske. "Shh! Shh! Just choose one that's nice and fat. We don't care whether it's a goose or a gander; but do shut up," they said. While Gidske and the thieves were arguing about this, one of the geese began to cackle, and then another cackled, and then the whole flock cackled and hissed. The farmer came out to see what was causing the noise, and the thieves ran off at full speed, with Gidske following after them. This farmer too thought that it was the devil himself fleeing away, for Gidske was long-legged, and she had no skirts to hamper her. "Hold up, boys!" she shouted. "You should have said whether you wanted a goose or a gander!" But the thieves did not stop. As for the farmer, he ran back home and began pleading and praying with all the household, for they all thought that the devil had been there. On the third day at nightfall the thieves and Gidske were so hungry that they did not know what to do. They decided to go to the storehouse of a rich farmer who lived at the edge of the woods, and steal some food. Off they went The thieves did not dare to go inside, so Gidske was to go up the steps into the storehouse, and hand out the food. The others would stand below and take it from her. When Gidske got inside, she saw that the storehouse was full of all sorts of things: beef, pork, sausages, and pea-bread. The thieves begged her to be quiet, and just throw out something to eat. She should remember how everything had gone so wrong on the two previous nights. But Gidske paid no attention to them. "Will you have beef, pork, sausages, or pea-bread? Look at this lovely pea-bread!" she shouted out, until it rang. "You may have whatever you want! There's plenty to choose from here!" All this noise woke up the farmer, and he ran out to see what was the matter. The thieves ran off as fast as they could. Gidske came down from the storehouse, all black and ugly. "Stop, boys! Stop!" she shouted." You can have whatever you want! There's plenty to choose from here!" When the farmer saw that ugly monster, he too thought that the devil was on the loose, for he had heard what had happened to his neighbors the nights before. He too began plead and pray, and every one in the whole parish did the same thing, for they all knew that you could banish the devil with prayers. The next evening was a Saturday, and the thieves wanted to steal a fat ram for their Sunday dinner. The had not eaten for many days, but this time they wouldn't take Gidske with them at any price. Her loud mouth brought them bad luck, they said. On Sunday morning Gidske was walking about waiting for the thieves to return. Having fasted for three days, she was very hungry, so she went into a turnip field and pulled up some turnips to eat. The farmer who owned the turnips went out to the field to see if everything was in order there. When he got there he saw something black walking about in the field and pulling up his turnips. He thought that it was the devil, so he ran home as fast as he could, and said that the devil in his turnip field. This frightened the whole household, so they decided to send for the priest, and get him to restrain the devil. "That won't do," said the famer's wife. "This is Sunday morning. You'll never get the priest to come. He'll still be in bed; or if he's up, he'll be learning his sermon." "Oh!" said the farmer, "I'll promise him a fat loin of veal, and he'll come fast enough." Off he went to the priest's house; but when he got there, sure enough, the priest was still in bed. The maid told the farmer to step into the parlor, then she ran up to the priest, and said, "Farmer So-and-So is downstairs, and wishes to have a word with you." Well! When the priest heard that such an important man was downstairs, he got up at once and came down just as he was, in his slippers and nightcap. So the farmer related how the devil was loose in his turnip field; and if the priest would only come and restrain him, he would give the priest a fat loin of veal. Yes! The priest was willing enough and called out to his groom to saddle his horse, while he dressed himself. "No, no, father!" said the farmer. "The devil won't wait for us. No one knows where we'll find him if we miss him now. Your reverence must come at once, just as you are." So the priest followed him just as he was, in his nightcap and slippers. They came to a swampy area, and it was so wet that the priest couldn't cross it in his slippers. So the farmer took him on his back to carry him over. They made their way from one clump to another, until they got to the middle. Gidske caught sight of them, and thought it was the thieves bringing the ram. "Is he fat?" she screamed. "Is he fat?" and made such a noise that the wood rang again. "The devil knows if he's fat or lean; I'm sure I don't," said the farmer, when he heard her. "But, if you must know, come and see for yourself." Then the farmer became so afraid, he threw the priest head over heels into the swamp, and then ran off. If the priest hasn't gotten out, he must still be lying there. Source (books.google.com): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, "Gidske," Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiana [Oslo]: Johan Dahls Forlag, 1852), no. 32, pp. 176-82. . Source (Internet Archive): Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe, "Gidske," Norske Folkeeventyr (Christiana [Oslo]: Johan Dahls Forlag, 1852), no. 32, pp. 176-82. . In some later editions, the leading character's name is spelled Giske . A classic, but dated, English translation: Books.google.com: George Webbe Dasent, "Goosey Grizzel," Popular Tales from the Norse (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), no. 30, pp. 241-49 . Internet Archive: George Webbe Dasent, "Goosey Grizzel," Popular Tales from the Norse (Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1859), no. 30, pp. 241-49 . This tale consists of three episodes, each one representing an international folktale type: Type 1383, a woman does not know herself. Type 1692, foolish thieves betray themselves. Type 1791, a priest is carried, then dropped. Return to the table of contents . There Was an Old Woman England There was an old woman, as I've heard tell, She went to market her eggs for to sell; She went to market all on a market-day, And she fell asleep on the king's highway. There came by a pedlar whose name was Stout, He cut her petticoats all round about; He cut her petticoats up to the knees, Which made the old woman to shiver and freeze. When this little woman first did wake, She began to shiver and she began to shake, She began to wonder and she began to cry, "Lauk a mercy on me, this is none of I! "But if it be I, as I do hope it be, I've a little dog at home, and he'll know me; If it be I, he'll wag his little tail, And if it be not I, he'll loudly bark and wail." Home went the little woman all in the dark, Up got the little dog, and he began to bark; He began to bark, so she began to cry "Lauk a mercy on me, this is none of I!" Source (books.google.com): James Orchard Halliwell, The Nursery Rhymes of England: Collected Chiefly from Oral Tradition , 4th edition, with illustrations (London: John Russell Smith, 1846), pp. 87-88 . Source (Internet Archive): James Orchard Halliwell, The Nursery Rhymes of England: Obtained Principally from Oral Tradition , 2nd edition (London: John Russell Smith, 1843), pp. 60-61 . Return to the table of contents . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised February 22, 2021. Yggdrasil Yggdrasil H. C. Andersen Under Ygdrasil-Træ var Gudernes Sted, - Træet er dødt og Guderne med! Source: H. C. Andersen, ABC-Bogen (1858). Translation by D. L. Ashliman: Beneath Yggdrasil-Tree was the place of the Gods. The tree is dead, and the Gods as well. Translator's note: Although Andersen spells the tree's name Ygdrasil , the normal spelling is Yggdrasil . Return to D. L. Ashliman's folktexts , a library of folktales, folklore, fairy tales, and mythology. Revised May 11, 2008. D. L. Ashliman's Home Page Professor D. L. Ashliman retired May 1, 2000, from the University of Pittsburgh He now conducts his folklore research from southern Utah. He can be contacted at ashliman at hotmail dot com. (Use traditional e-mail punctuation and spacing.) WWW sites Folklinks: Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites . Folktexts: A Library of Folktales, Folklore, Fairy Tales, and Mythology . Germany Discovers America. An annotated bibliography [in progress] of German-American travel narratives, 1800-1918. Monographs Fairy Lore: A Handbook . Westport (Connecticut), New York, and London: Greenwood Press, 2005. ISBN 0-313-33349-1. 229 pages. Folk and Fairy Tales: A Handbook . Westport (Connecticut), New York, and London: Greenwood Press, 2004. ISBN 0-31332810-2. 256 pages. Aesop's Fables . Edited and with an introduction and notes by D. L. Ashliman. Translated by V. S. Vernon Jones. Illustrations by Arthur Rackham. New York: Barnes & Noble Classics, 2003. ISBN 1-59308-062-X. xxxiv, 269 pp. Voices from the Past: The Cycle of Life in Indo-European Folktales , second edition, expanded and revised. Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company, 1995. ISBN 0-7872-1503-1. 495 pages. First edition 1993. Once upon a Time: The Story of European Folktales . Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh, External Studies Program, 1994. 235 pages. A Guide to Folktales in the English Language: Based on the Aarne-Thompson Classification System . Bibliographies and Indexes in World Literature , vol. 11. Westport (Connecticut), New York, and London: Greenwood Press, 1987. ISBN 0-313-25961-5. xvi, 384 pages. Designated as an "outstanding reference source" by the American Library Association. Ph.D. dissertation: The American West in Nineteenth-Century German Literature . Rutgers University, 1969. Dissertation Abstracts 2959-A. University Microfilms, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Order number 7000572. v, 288 pp. Recent Articles Archetypes and Motifs in Folklore and Literature: a Handbook . Edited by Jane Garry and Hasan El-Shamy. Armonk (New York) and London: M. E. Sharpe, 2005. "Origins of Inequality," pp. 50-56. "Tabu: Forbidden Chambers," pp. 118-21. "Magic Invulnerability," pp. 154-59. "Wishes," pp. 172-77. "Water Spirits," pp. 210-16. "Identity Tests," pp. 235-42. "Contests Won by Deception," pp. 273-77. "Thief Escapes Detection," pp. 278-82. "Entrance into Girl's (Man's) Room (Bed) by Trick," pp. 289-94. "Step Relatives," pp. 362-67. "Cruel Parents," pp. 391-97. "Cruel Spouses," pp. 398-403. "Incest," pp. 432-41. The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Folktales and Fairy Tales . 3 vols. Edited by Donald Haase. Westport (Connecticut) and London: Greenwood Press, 2008. "Age," pp. 20-21. "Brothers," pp. 140-42. "Chain Tale," p. 176. "Clergy," pp. 215-17. "Cumulative Tale," p. 245. "Editing, Editors," p. 288. "Family," pp. 327-29. "Father," pp. 334-36. "Magic Object," pp. 598-99. "Marriage," pp. 605-607. "Nonsense Tale," pp. 679-80. "Prince," pp. 770-71. "Princess," pp. 771-73. "Punishment and Reward," pp. 786-90. "Soldier," pp. 890-91. "Spinning," pp. 912-16. "Tailor," pp. 936-37. "Twins," p. 999. "Unfinished Tale," pp. 1002-1003. Guest Professorships Universität Augsburg , Germany (1992, 1996, 1997, 1998, 2006). Education University of Utah , B.A. Rutgers University , M.A., Ph.D. Georg-August Universität , Göttingen, Germany. Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität , Bonn, Germany. Updated November 3, 2019. Folklinks: Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites Folklinks Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites © 1996-2020 compiled by D. L. Ashliman as a companion to Folk and Fairy Tales: A Handbook Greenwood Press Linked sites will open in a new window. Return to this page by closing the targeted window. Return to Folklore and Mythology Electronic Texts. Contents Search Engines . Encyclopedias and General Reference Works . Research Libraries . Electronic Text Indexes . Directories of Electronic Text Sites (All Subjects) . Directories of Folk and Fairy-Tale Sites . Libraries of Electronic Texts . General Fairy-Tale Sites . Individual Stories and Types . Film and Fairy Tales . Storytelling . For Children, Parents, and Teachers . Organizations and Journals . Foreign-Language Sites . Danish/Norwegian Dutch French German Russian Turkish Search Engines The best tool for Internet research is not a comprehensive list of favorite sites, but rather a repertory of a few efficient search engines and reliable indexes, together with a basic understanding of how to use them. The starting place for almost any Internet search is Google . This site's use of keywords is simple and efficient. Word groups set off by quotation marks are treated as single units. Thus the search term "fairy tales" will find only web sites containing that phrase, but not the same words appearing separately. The keywords "little mermaid" copenhagen will find sites containing Copenhagen and Little Mermaid in any order, but Little Mermaid must appear as an unbroken phrase. Google, like most search engines, is not case sensitive; lower-case letters can substitute for upper-case ones, and vice versa. Although Google is very thorough, one can usually locate further sites by conducting the same search with additional engines. The following are proven performers: Excite . Lycos . Teoma . Webcrawler . Yahoo! . Return to the table of contents . Encyclopedias and General Reference Works Folktale and fairy-tale researchers should not overlook general encyclopedias as sources for basic information about authors, collectors, movements, genres, and the like. The user-generated Internet encyclopedia Wikipedia contains a wealth of information and is generally reliable. Return to the table of contents . Research Libraries Online catalogs of large libraries are excellent sources of bibliographic information about published folktale books. However, please note that these catalogs do not provide access to the books themselves. The following electronic catalogs are well designed and provide information about immense collections: COPAC , a union catalog combining the resources the largest university libraries in the United Kingdom and Ireland plus the British Library. Library of Congress . Of special interest at the Library of Congress is the Folklife Sourcebook . Indiana University Libraries . One of the world's largest folklore collections. Melvyl , the online catalog of the University of California Libraries. Return to the table of contents . Electronic Text Indexes Thousands of books and shorter pieces, many of them relevant to folk and fairy-tale studies, are available gratis on the Internet as electronic texts. The most comprehensive index of such texts in English is the University of Pennsylvania's Online Books , which currently lists over 20,000 titles. It also includes links to numerous foreign-language electronic libraries. To assist in finding a desired text among their thousands of listed titles, Online Books includes a number of search tools. Two hints for browsing: Search for the word fairy, folk, folktale, folktales, tale, or tales in the title field . Note that the search function uses only whole words, so a search for tale will not find a title with the plural form tales. Browse in the subject-matter section under the Library of Congress classification GR , folklore. The Online Books data base is also available through the World eBook Library , which includes links to a large number of reference works (dictionaries, multilingual dictionaries, thesauri, encyclopedias), academic libraries worldwide, and other research tools. The Digital Book Index combines and integrates the free books listed through Online Books with commercial titles available for a fee. The subject-matter search tool is very useful. A search under the category "folklore, myths, legends, fables" yielded over 100 titles. This site requires a sign-on procedure, but its use is without charge. Return to the table of contents . Libraries of Electronic Texts Each of following electronic text libraries contains a substantial collection of works relating to folk and fairy tales. Arthur's Classic Novels includes numerous traditional and literary fairy tales, mostly borrowed from other Internet sites then attractively reformatted. The Baldwin Project , according to its mission statement, brings yesterday's classics to today's children. It currently lists nearly 2,000 stories, many of them folk and fairy tales. The site is indexed by grade level, genre (including fables, fairy tales, and legends), book title, and other categories. The texts are handsomely formatted and easy to read. Bartleby.com is one of the pioneering electronic text sites. Its strong points include a very useful search mechanism, a large collection of integrated reference works, plus a good assortment of carefully edited classics. Bibliomania lists more than 2,000 classic texts. Children's Books Online (the Rosetta Project) is a large collection of illustrated children's books, mostly from the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The books are reproduced as single-page, full-color image files, resulting in accurate and appealing replicas of the originals. An added attraction are the text-file translations of many of the stories into various languages. ClassicReader.com contains books and short stories by more than 200 authors. The children's section includes numerous collections of traditional fairy tales, and the short-story section contains many literary fairy tales. The Electronic Text Center at the University of Virginia is a pioneer in the editing and distribution of electronic texts in various formats. Included in the section for young readers are many folk and fairy-tale related items. Folktexts , compiled and edited by D. L. Ashliman, University of Pittsburgh, offers a variety of folklore and mythology texts, arranged in groups of closely related stories. The Hockliffe Project is centered around the Hockliffe Collection of early British children's books held by De Montfort University in Leicester and Bedford, England. The books are scanned into image files, rather than text files, yielding exact replicas of each page. The Kellscraft Studio specializes in illustrated books from the period 1890-1920, including many fairy-tale collections. Take special notice of two books beautifully illustrated by Blanche McManus: The True Mother Goose and Told in the Twilight. The Perseus Digital Library , sponsored by Tufts University, is an extensive and well-engineered site combining images, texts, and scholarship. The principal fields represented are Greek and Roman civilization and the English Renaissance. Of special interest to students of folktales are the fables of Phaedrus. Project Gutenberg , begun in 1971, is the Internet's oldest producer of free electronic books, and with over 6,000 online books is among the largest. With the help of many volunteers the library is expanding at the rate of about one new book per day. Project Gutenberg's text-only and easily downloadable files are among the most carefully scanned and proof-read digital texts available. Sacred Text Archive . This remarkable site's name does not say it all. In addition to housing the scriptures of many religions, it contains mythology and folklore texts from around the world. Each of the following topics, selected from a list at the lower left side of the site's index page, yields a number of folklore texts: African, Americana, Australia, Buddhism, Celtic, Egyptian, England, Greek/Roman, Hinduism, Judaism, Legends/Sagas (includes the Thousand and One Nights ), Native American, Pacific, and Tolkien. Return to the table of contents . General Fairy-Tale Sites Fairy Tales, Folk Tales, and Mythology WebRing . A collection of sites linked into a ring. SurLaLune Fairy Tale Pages is an attractive, extensive, and well-organized site maintained by Heidi Anne Heiner. Included are essays, illustrations, annotated texts, links to outside sites, and a discussion bulletin board. Return to the table of contents . Individual Stories and Types Cinderella: A Bibliography . A thorough and scholarly annotated bibliography of texts, analogues, criticism, modern versions, parodies -- ranging from ancient folklore through recent popular culture, modern scholarship and pornographic films. Organized by Russell A. Peck, University of Rochester. Cinderella . A selection of folktales of Aarne-Thompson type 510A and related stories about persecuted heroines, edited by D. L. Ashliman. The Annotated Cinderella , from the SurLaLune Fairy Tales by Heidi Anne Heiner. Noodleheads . The wisdom of fools in folktales. Return to the table of contents . Film and Fairy Tales A good place to begin research on the use of fairy-tale topics in film and television is the Internet Movie Database . Tom Davenport is an American filmmaker who has created a successful series of short films placing familiar Grimm fairy tales in settings from the American south. Return to the table of contents . Storytelling Storyteller.net . A center for news, essays, texts, and contacts for storytellers. Return to the table of contents . For Children, Parents, and Teachers Andersen Fairy Tales , in English or French. Animated Tall Tales , featuring the exploits of Paul Bunyan. Grimm Fairy Tales , in English or French. Myths, Folktales, and Fairy Tales , resources for teachers of grades 1-8, sponsored by Scholastic, Inc. Internet Public Library: Story Hour , sponsored by the University of Michigan. Return to the table of contents . Organizations and Journals American Folklife Center . at the Library of Congress. American Folklore Society . Folklore Fellows at the Kalevala Institute of the University of Turku, Finland. An important contribution of this organization is its ongoing monograph series Folklore Fellows' Communications , established in 1910. Folklore Society (UK) . Founded in 1878, this is one of the first organizations in the world devoted to the study of traditional culture. Marvels & Tales , a journal of fairy-tale studies. Modern Language Association of America . Founded in 1883, this organization promotes the study of languages and literature. Return to the table of contents . Foreign-Language Sites Danish/Norwegian H. C. Andersen . Links to Andersen's works in Danish. This site is sponsored by the Royal Library (det Kongelige Bibliotek) of Denmark. H. C. Andersen-Centret . A treasure trove of information from the H. C. Andersen Center in Odense, Denmark. Click the British flag for an English-language version of this site. Norske Folkeeventyr , the Norwegian texts of 152 tales by Asbjørnsen and Moe, sponsored by Project Runeberg. Return to the table of contents . Dutch Vlaamse Volksverhalenbank . A collection of Flemish folk legends. Return to the table of contents . French A la découverte de Jean de La Fontaine . Annotated texts of La Fontaine's fables, plus much supplementary information. Contes de Perrault . Texts of ten fairy tales by Charles Perrault. Il était une fois... Les contes de fées . A very attractive, well engineered, and authoritative fairy-tale study, sponsored by the Bibliothèque nationale de France. Les contes de Madame d'Aulnoy . A biography of Marie-Cathérine le Jumel de Barneville de la Motte, Comtesse d' Aulnoy, plus the texts of twelve of her tales. Return to the table of contents . German Europäische Märchengesellschaft . The European Fairy-Tale Society. Märchenlexikon , edited by Kurt Derungs. Projekt Gutenberg-DE . A massive German-language site sponsored by the news magazine Der Spiegel and containing thousands of electronic texts. Folk and fairy tale collections within the Projekt Gutenberg-DE include: Brüder Grimm . Fabel . Märchen . Sage, Legende, Überlieferung . Sagen.at . A large collection of legends and folktales, mostly from Austria, edited by Wolfgang Morscher, University of Innsbruck. Return to the table of contents . Russian Russian Folklore . Return to the table of contents . Turkish Uysal-Walker Archive of Turkish Oral Narrative , Texas Tech University. An immense collection of Turkish folklore, including many tales translated into English. Return to the table of contents . Revised October 27, 2020.